{\rtf1\ansi\deff0
{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}{\f1\froman Symbol;}}
{\colortbl;\red128\green0\blue0;\red0\green0\blue0;}
{\stylesheet{\fs28 \snext0 Normal;}
}\pard\plain
{\up $}{\footnote\pard\plain{\up $} idh_history}
{\up #}{\footnote\pard\plain{\up #} idh_history}
\pard \b\fs28 
\par \plain\fs28 
\par \pard\qc \b A SHORT HISTORY OF THE FLORA EUROPAEA PROJECT
\par \plain\fs28 
\par \pard It has been suggested to the Editorial Committee that this final volume should include a brief historical account of the Flora Europaea project. So as not to overload the introduction, the main events are outlined here in chronological order.
\par 
\par 1954  July. At the 5 Congr\'e8s Internationale de Botanique, Paris (symposium on Progr\'e8s des Etudes des Flores Europ\'e9ennes) a rapport was given by Professor D.H. Valentine 'Progress of work on the European Flora'. No decision was taken about writing a European Flora. At an informal meeting in a brasserie on the banks of the Seine of several interested botanists including Professor T.G. Tutin (Leicester), Professor A.R. Clapham (Sheffield), Mr J.S.L. Gilmour (Cambridge), Professor N.A. Burges (Liverpool), Professor D.H. Valentine (Durham) and Dr V.H. Heywood (Madrid) a decision was taken that a Flora of Europe could and should be written.
\par \pard 
\par 1955 Informal discussions took place in Britain about the feasibility of writing a European Flora. It was decided in December to hold a meeting of the working group to consider the organization of a Flora project.
\par 
\par 1956  4 January. A meeting to consider the organization of a European Flora was held at the University of Leicester. Present: Professor N.A. Burges (Liverpool), Dr V.H. Heywood (Liverpool), Professor T.G. Tutin (Leicester), Professor D.H. Valentine (Durham) and Professor D.A. Webb (Dublin). The general aim was conceived as the compilation of a Flora of Europe for the use of Universities, professional botanists, biologists, etc. - an educational work rather than a book for amateurs. The total number of species was estimated at about 12,000. An organization consisting of an Editorial Board (later Editorial Committee) with Professor Tutin as Chairman and Dr Heywood as Secretary, a panel of Advisory Editors, and a team of Regional Advisers for most countries or areas of Europe, was to be set up.
\par \pard 
\par 1956   21-22 March. Second meeting of the Committee, at the University of Liverpool. Dr S.M. Waiters was invited to join the Committee. Several sample accounts were prepared and approved.
\par 
\par 1957 An agreement was reached with the Linnean Society of London for them to act as sponsors of the Flora Europaea project. Sample pages and a manifesto were sent to all Botany Departments in the United Kingdom, all Regional Advisers and Advisory Editors and all council members of the International Association for Plant Taxonomy. After extensive consultation a decision was taken to write the Flora in English.
\par \pard           A grant was obtained from the Botanical Research Fund to assist with secretarial expenditure and financial help received from private individuals to keep the project going.
\par           An article was published in Taxon setting out the nature of the project and the methods of preparation being adopted.
\par          A grant of \'a3750 was obtained from The Royal Society. A Leverhulme Research Fellow (Mr P.W. Ball) was appointed at the University of Liverpool to work on the Flora and it was decided to follow Engler's Syllabus, latest edition, for the sequence and circumscription of families. An agreement was reached with Professor W. Rothmaler to publish in Feddes Repertorium special taxonomic and nomenclatural notes arising out of the preparation of the Flora.
\par \pard          An offer by Cambridge University Press to publish Flora Europaea was accepted.
\par           The Presentation of Taxonomic Information. A short Guide for Contributors to Flora Europaea compiled by V.H. Heywood, and later known as the Green Book, was published by Leicester University Press.
\par 
\par 1959   A grant of \'a314,000 for a three-year period was awarded by the UK Department of Scientific and Industrial Research. A grant for secretarial expenses was received from the Instituto de Alta Cultura, Lisbon. Dr P.W. Ball was appointed as a Research Fellow and Miss A.B. Mowat as a Research Assistant.
\par \pard           1-7 April. The first Flora Europaea symposium was held in Vienna at the Naturhistorisches Museum under the local chairmanship of Dr K.H. Rechinger.
\par 
\par 1960 Publication of Problems of Taxonomy and Distribution in the European Flora. Proceedings of the Flora Europaea Round Table Conference held in Vienna, 1-7 April, 1959. Edited by V.H. Heywood and published in Feddes Repertorium 63, Heft 2 ( 1961 ).
\par           A further grant was received from the Instituto de Alta Cultura, Lisbon.
\par \pard           Miss A.B. Mowat resigned. Mr A.O. Chater was appointed as a Research Assistant.
\par           A supplement to the 'Green Book' was published in Portugal and circulated.
\par 
\par 1961   The second Flora Europaea symposium was held in Genoa and Florence under the local chairmanship of Professor R.E.G. Pichi Sermolli.
\par           Flora Europaea, Notulae Systematicae ad Floram Europaeam pertinentes, No. 1, was published in Feddes Repertorium.
\par 
\par 1962   The grant from the Department of Scientific and Industrial Research was extended to 1965 and increased to \'a333,808 for the period 1959-65.
\par \pard 
\par 1963  On 16 January, the manuscript of Volume 1 of Flora Europaea was delivered by the Chairman, the Secretary and Mr A.O. Chater to Cambridge University Press.
\par           The third Flora Europaea symposium was held in Bucharest and Cluj under the local chairmanship of Academician E. Pop and Professor A. Borza.
\par 
\par 1964 Volume 1 of Europaea was published.
\par 
\par 1965 The fourth Flora Europaea symposium was held in Copenhagen and \'c5rhus under the local chairmanship of Professor T.W. B\'f6cher and Professor K. Larsen.
\par \pard           A grant of \'a334,000 was received from the UK Science Research Council for the period 1965-68.
\par           Dr D.M. Moore was appointed a member of the Editorial Committee.
\par 
\par 1966 The first 'Index to European Taxonomic Literature', compiled by Dr R.K. Brummitt, was published under the auspices of the Flora Europaea Organization by the International Bureau for Plant Taxonomy and Nomenclature.
\par           Dr I.K. Ferguson was appointed as Research Assistant.
\par 
\par 1967 The manuscript of Volume 2 was completed and delivered to the Press.
\par \pard           The fifth Flora Europaea symposium was held in Seville and Madrid under the local chairmanship of Professor E. Fern\'e1ndez-Galiano, Professor S. Rivas Goday and Professor F. Bellot Rodr\'edguez.
\par 
\par 1968 Volume 2 of Flora Europaea was published. The Secretariat moved to the University of Reading. Dr I.K. Ferguson resigned to take up an appointment at Kew. Mr I.B.K. Richardson was appointed as a Research Assistant.
\par           A grant of \'a345,236 for the period 1968-72 was received from the UK Science Research Council.
\par \pard 1969  Dr P.W. Ball resigned to take up a post in Canada. Dr R.A. DeFilipps was appointed as a Research Assistant.
\par 
\par 1970 The sixth Flora Europaea symposium was held in Geneva and Nice under the local chairmanship of Professor J. Mi\'e8ge, Professor M. Guinochet and Professor J.-P. Barry.
\par 
\par 1971 The manuscript of Volume 3 was completed and delivered to the Press.
\par           Flora Europaea Notulae No. 8 was published in the Botanical Journal of the Linnean Society, the previous issues having been published in Feddes Repertorium.
\par \pard 
\par 1972 Volume 3 of Flora Europaea was published.
\par           The seventh Flora Europaea symposium was held in Coimbra under the local chairmanship of Professor A. Fernandes.
\par           A grant of \'a314,176 for the period 1972-73 was received from the UK Science Research Council.
\par 
\par 1974 The manuscript of Volume 4 was completed and delivered to the Press.
\par           Grants from several European Science Research Councils were obtained to finance the Flora for one year.
\par 
\par 1975 Dr R.A. DeFilipps resigned on appointment to a post at the Smithsonian Institution, Washington, USA.
\par \pard           The UK Science Research Council agreed to provide a final grant of \'a321,810 to see the Flora completed.
\par 
\par 1976 Volume 4 of Flora Europaea was published.
\par           Mr I.B.K. Richardson resigned on appointment to a post at the Royal Botanic Gardens, Kew.
\par 
\par 1977  Mr A.O. Chater's appointment ended and he went to a post at the British Museum (Natural History).
\par           31 August -4 September. The final Flora Europaea symposium was held in Cambridge.
\par          The manuscript of Volume 5 was completed and delivered to the Press.
\par \pard 
\par 1978 Flora Europaea Notulae Systematicae No. 20 was published in the Botanical Journal of the Linnean Society.
\par 
\par 1980 Flora Europaea Volume 5 is published.
\par 
\par \pard\qc \b ACKNOWLEDGMENTS \plain\fs28 (Volume 1, 2nd ed.)
\par 
\par \pard The Editorial Committee gratefully acknowledges the support of the Linnean Society of London, whose Flora Europaea Trust Fund provided \'a3120,000 towards the cost of revising this volume. It has financed the employment of two full-time Research Officers, J. R. Akeroyd (1983-1988) and M. E. Newton(1990-), and has met other expenses of the Secretariat. This was helped over a difficult period by a loan from the Royal Society's scientific publications fund. Financial assistance in the form of a legacy from the estate of the late Miss M. S. Campbell is also greatly appreciated, having provided an opportunity to commission illustrations for a new series of Notulae.
\par \pard      In undertaking the revision of Volume 1 of \i Flora Europaea\plain\fs28  the Committee has enjoyed continued assistance and encouragement from many colleagues throughout Europe. We wish to thank them for their willing and generous co-operation. Their help has been given in many ways, some of them botanical and others technical, but all of them vital to the success of our project.
\par      We are deeply appreciative of the assistance of R.R. Mill, who compiled and checked the Appendices, and Mrs L. Walters, who transferred synonymy to the text and drew up the index. Our special thanks are due to Mrs M. Hart for typing the manuscript so diligently.
\par \pard      In addition to the authors of individual accounts, we have received advice on particular groups from many people: J.Cullen (\i Alyssum,Aurinia\plain\fs28 ), C.R. Fraser-Jenkins (\i Polypodium\plain\fs28 ), H. Freitag (\i Chenopodiaceae\plain\fs28 ), I.C. Hedge (\i Chenopodiaceae\plain\fs28 ), M. V. Kasakova (\i Schivereckia\plain\fs28 ), R.D. Meikle (Salicaceae), C.N. Page (\i Equisetum\plain\fs28 ), J.R.Press (\i Rumex\plain\fs28 , Subgen. \i Platypodium\plain\fs28 ), C.D. Preston (Aizoaceae), K.H.Rechinger (\i Rumex\plain\fs28 ), T.C.G. Rich (\i Cruciferae\plain\fs28 ), L.-P. Ronse Decraene(\i Polygonum\plain\fs28 ), F.Rose (\i Salicornia\plain\fs28 ), G.D. Rowley (Aizoaceae,Crassulaceae), D.Tzanoudakis (\i Paeonia\plain\fs28 ), P. Uotila (\i Chenopodium\plain\fs28 )and S.D. Webster (\i Ranunculus\plain\fs28 , Subgen.\i Batrachium\plain\fs28 ). P.W. Ball, as well as editing Cruciferae, critically read many of the manuscripts, and A.C. Jermy and Miss A.M. Paul carefully checked Pteridophyta.
\par \pard      More general comment and advice for which we are grateful was received from: H.J.M. Bowen, R.K.Brummitt, G. Buzas, E.J. Clement, D.V. Geltman, A. Hansen, J. Jalas, C.E. Jarvis, S.L. Jury, D.H. Kent, Miss C. Leon, Mrs B.Molesworth Allen, D. Nicolson, Miss E. Powell, R.W. Rutherford, P.D. Sell,C.A. Stace, J. Suominen and M.F. Watson. The Editorial Committee is also most grateful to members of the Committee for Mapping the Flora of Europe for their generosity in allowing us to consult unpublished typescripts from the \i Atlas Florae Europaeae\plain\fs28  project.
\par \pard      The Committee acknowledges a debt of gratitude to the Directors of many Museums and Herbaria. We thank them all but wish particularly to mention the University of Cambridge ; Trinity College, Dublin; the Royal Botanic Garden, Edinburgh; the National Museums & Galleries on Merseyside, Liverpool; the Natural History Museum, London ; and the University of Reading, the institutions whose facilities we have enjoyed for the greater part of our work.
\par 
\par June 1991
\par 
\par 
\par \page
\pard 
\par \page
{\up $}{\footnote\pard\plain{\up $} idh_contributors\'80\'01}
{\up #}{\footnote\pard\plain{\up #} idh_contributors}
\pard\li285 \b 
\par \pard\qc LIST  OF  CONTRIBUTORS
\par \plain\fs28 
\par The following is a list of authors who have contributed
\par  accounts of genera or parts of them.
\par 
\par \pard P. AELLEN, Basel
\par S.A. ALAVI, Wigan, UK
\par P.W. BALL, Liverpool (Toronto)
\par Y.I. BARKOUDAH, Damascus
\par B. BAUM, Ottawa
\par J. BORJA CARBONELL, Madrid
\par L. BOULOS, University of Jordan
\par D. BRAMWELL, Reading
\par J.P.M. BRENAN, Kew
\par C.D. BRICKELL, Wisley, UK
\par K. BROWICZ, K\'a2nik, Poland
\par R.K. BRUMMITT, Liverpool (Kew)
\par N.A. BURGES, Liverpool (Coleraine)
\par J.M. CAMARASA, Barcelona
\par M.S. CAMPBELL, Gen\'e8ve
\par J.F.M. CANNON, London
\par D. CARTIER, Universit\'82 de Paris-Sud
\par A.O. CHATER, Leicester
\par J. CHRTEK, Praha
\par \pard A.R. CLAPHAM, Sheffield
\par G.C.S. CLARKE, London
\par W.D. CLAYTON, Kew
\par C.D.K. COOK, Liverpool (Z\'fcrich)
\par D.E. COOMBE, Cambridge
\par R. COTTON, Preston
\par J.A. CRABBE, London
\par A. CRONQUIST, New York
\par J. CULLEN, Edinburgh (Liverpool)
\par D.M. DALBY, London
\par J. DAMBOLDT, Berlin
\par oJ.E. DANDY, Tring, UK
\par P.H. DAVIS, Edinburgh
\par M. DEYL, Praha
\par I. DINGWALL, Manchester
\par R. DOMAC, Zagreb
\par J. DOSTAL, Olomouc
\par T.R. DUDLEY, Jamaica Plain, Mass.
\par J.M. EDMONDS, Cambridge
\par J.R. EDMONDSON, Edinburgh
\par \pard F. EHRENDORFER, Wien
\par T.T. ELKINGTON, Sheffield
\par D. ERNET, Graz
\par C. FAVARGER, Neuch\'e2tel
\par An. A. FEDOROV, Leningrad
\par N. FEINBRUN, Hebrew University of Jerusalem
\par V. FERAKOVA, Bratislave
\par I.K. FERGUSON, Kew
\par L.F. FERGUSON, London
\par R.B. FERNANDES, Coimbra
\par R.A. de FILIPPS, Reading (Washington)
\par R.A. FINCH, Trumpington, UK
\par J. do AMARAL  FRANCO, Lisboa
\par J.W. FRANKS, Manchester
\par D. FRODIN, Cambridge
\par H.P. FUCHS, Wassenaar
\par W. GAJEWSKI, Warszawa
\par H. GAUSSEN, Toulouse
\par F.M. GETLIFFE, Durban
\par \pard P.E. GIBBS, St Andrews
\par J. GRAU, M\'fcnchen
\par C. GREY-WILSON, Kew
\par E. GUINEA L\'e0PEZ, Madrid
\par W. GUTERMANN, Wien
\par G. HALLIDAY, Leicester (Lancaster)
\par A.P. HAMILTON, London
\par P. HANELT, Berlin
\par A. HANSEN, K\'f8benhavn
\par R.M. HARLEY, Kew
\par J.G. HAWKES, Birmingham
\par S.A. HEATHCOTE, London
\par I.C. HEDGE, Edinburgh
\par R. HENDRYCH, Praha
\par Y. HESLOP- HARRISON, Madison
\par V.H. HEYWOOD, Liverpool (Reading)
\par J. HOLUB, Prahy
\par W.E. HUGHES, Leicester
\par C.J. HUMPHRIES, London
\par D.R. HUNT, Kew
\par R. INGRAM, Dundee
\par \pard R.B. IVIMEY-COOK, Exeter
\par J. JALAS, Helsinki
\par N. JARDINE, Cambridge
\par A.C. JERMY, London
\par B.M.G. JONES, London
\par B. JONSELL, Uppsala
\par Z.E. KARPATI, Budapest
\par Q.O.N. KAY, Swansea
\par I. KLASTERSKA,  Prahy
\par M. KOVANDA,  Prahy
\par S. KOZUHAROV, Sofija
\par F. KRENDL, Wien
\par B. KR\'d6SA, Praha
\par B. KUZMANOV, Sofija
\par A. LAWALREE, Bruxelles
\par P. LEINS, M\'81nchen
\par S. LIPSCHITZ, Leningrad
\par D. L\'99VE,  Colorado
\par J.D. LOVIS, Leeds
\par D. McCLINTOCK, London
\par J. McNEILL, Liverpool (Ottawa)
\par W. MARAIS, Kew
\par F. MARKGRAF, Z\'fcrich
\par \pard I. MARKGRAF-DANNENBERG, Z\'fcrich
\par J.B. MARSHALL, London
\par J.O. MARTINOVSKY, Praha
\par B.F. MATHEW, Kew
\par V.A. MATTHEWS, Edinburgh
\par E. MAYER, Universa Ljubljana
\par R. D. MEIKLE, Kew
\par A. MELDERIS, London
\par H. MERXM\'9aLLER, M\'fcnchen
\par D.M. MOORE, Leicester (Reading)
\par P. MONNIER, Montpellier
\par A.B. MOWAT, Leicester
\par G. NORDBORG, Lund
\par E.J.NYARADY,Cluj
\par D.J. OCKENDON, Cambridge
\par A. PATZAK, Wien
\par S. PAWLOWSKA, Krak\'a2w
\par B. PAWLOWSKI, Krak\'a2w
\par D. PHILCOX, Kew
\par F.H. PERRING, Monks Wood, UK
\par K. PERSSON, G\'f6teborg
\par \pard S. PIGNATTI, Trieste
\par A.R. PINTO da SILVA, Sacav\'82m (Oeiras)
\par J. PONERT, Praha
\par T.N. POPOVA, Leningrad
\par oC.T. PRIME, Warlingham, UK
\par N.M. PRITCHARD, Aberdeen
\par M.C.F. PROCTOR, Exeter
\par C. PUFF,  Wien
\par D. RATCLIFFE,  Leicester
\par J.A. RATTER, Edinburgh
\par P.H. RAVEN, Stanford
\par K.H. RECHINGER, Wien
\par A. REGUIERO, Madrid
\par A.J. RICHARDS, Newcastle-upon-Tyne
\par I.B.K. RICHARDSON, Reading
\par H. RIEDL, Wien
\par E.M. RIX, Cambridge
\par N.K.B. ROBSON, London
\par M. da LUZ da ROCHA AFONSO, Lisboa
\par oW. ROTHMALER, Greifswald
\par \pard W. SAUER, M\'fcnchen
\par A. SCHMIDT, Hamburg
\par H. D. SCHOTSMAN, Paris
\par A. SCHREIBER, M\'fcnchen
\par O. SCHWARZ, Jena
\par P.D. SELL, Cambridge
\par N.H. SINNOTT, Kew
\par V. SKALICKY, Praha
\par A.R. SMITH, Kew
\par P.M. SMITH, Edinburgh
\par B.E. SMYTHIES, Kew
\par S. SNOGERUP, Lund
\par R. de SO\'e0, Budapest
\par C.A. STACE, Manchester
\par W.T. STEARN, London
\par D.C. STUART, Edinburgh
\par P. TAYLOR, Kew
\par A. TERP\'e0, Budapest
\par V.N. TIKHOMIROV, Moskva
\par C.C. TOWNSEND, Kew
\par C. TURNER, Cambridge
\par T.G. TUTIN, Leicester
\par B. VALD\'90S CASTRILL\'e0N, Sevilla
\par \pard D.H. VALENTINE, Durham (Manchester)
\par J. de CARVALHO de VASCONCELLOS, Lisboa
\par T.G. WALKER, Leeds
\par S.M. WALTERS, Cambridge
\par oE.F. W ARBURG, Oxford
\par D.A. WEBB, Dublin
\par G. WEIMARCK, Lund
\par C. WEST, Ditton, Maidstone
\par K. WERNER, Halle-Wittenberg
\par F. WHITEHEAD, London
\par D. WOOD, Edinburgh
\par P.F. YEO, Cambridge
\par D.P. YOUNG, Sanderstead, UK
\par C. ZAHARIADI, Kifisia
\par A. CHRTKOVA-ZERTOVA, Prahy
\par F. ZESIGER, Neuch\'e2tel
\par 
\par 
\par \page
{\up $}{\footnote\pard\plain{\up $} idh_editors\'01}
{\up #}{\footnote\pard\plain{\up #} idh_editors}
\pard 
\par \pard\qc \b EDITED  BY\plain\fs28 
\par \pard 
\par \pard\qc T.G. TUTIN   V.H. HEYWOOD
\par N.A. BURGES  D.M. MOORE   D.H. VALENTINE
\par S.M. WALTERS   D.A. WEBB
\par 
\par with the assistance of
\par 
\par P.W. BALL   A.O. CHATER   R.A. DeFILIPPS
\par I.K. FERGUSON   I.B.K. RICHARDSON
\par 
\par and Indexing by
\par G. HALLIDAY  and  M. BEADLE
\par 
\par \pard 
\par \page
{\up $}{\footnote\pard\plain{\up $} idh_organization\'0e}
{\up #}{\footnote\pard\plain{\up #} idh_organization}
\pard 
\par \pard\qc \b THE  FLORA  EUROPAEA  ORGANIZATION
\par \plain\fs28 
\par \pard SPONSORS  The Linnean Society of London
\par 
\par \pard\qc EDITORIAL  COMMITTEE.
\par \pard T.G. TUTIN,  University of Leicester; Chairman
\par V. H. HEYWOOD, University Of Liverpool (Reading); Secretary
\par N.A. BURGES, University of Liverpool (New University of Ulster)
\par D.M. MOORE, University of Leicester (Reading)
\par D. H. VALENTINE, University Of Durham (Manchester)
\par S. M. WALTERS, University Of Cambridge
\par D. A. WEBB, University Of Dublin (Trinity College)
\par 
\par \pard\qc RESEARCH ASSISTANTS
\par \pard P.W. BALL
\par A.O. CHATER
\par R.A. DeFILIPPS
\par I.K. FERGUSON
\par I.B.K. RICHARDSON
\par 
\par \pard\qc ORGANIZING COMMITTEE
\par \pard The above members and:
\par A. R. CLAPHAM, University of Sheffield
\par R. D. MEIKLE, Royal Botanic Gardens, Kew                           Representatives of the
\par A. MELDERIS, British Museum (Natural History), London         Linnean Society
\par 
\par \pard\qc ADVISORY  EDITORS
\par \pard T. W. B\'d6CHER, Institut for Planteanatomi og Cytologie, K\'f8benhavn
\par A.R. CLAPHAM, University of Sheffield (Lancaster)
\par \'86J. E. DANDY, British Museum (Natural History), London (Tring)
\par J. DOST\'c1L, Palacky's University, Olomouc (Praha)
\par ANDREY A. FEDOROV, Akademija Nauk S.S.S.R., Leningrad
\par \'86P. FONT QUER, Instituto Botanico, Barcelona
\par H.GAUSSEN, Laboratoire de Botanique, Facult\'e9 des Sciences, Toulouse
\par M. GUINOCHET, Universit\'e9 de Paris-Sud
\par \'86N. HYLANDER, Uppsala Universitet
\par W. L\'dcDI, Geobotanisches Forschungs-Institut R\'fcbel, Z\'fcrich
\par \pard H. MERXM\'dcLLER, M\'fcnchen
\par J. MI\'c8GE, Gen\'e8ve
\par K. H. RECHINGER, Naturhistorisches Museum, Wien
\par \'86B. K. SCHISCHKIN, Botaniceskie Institut Akademii Nauk S.S.S.R., Leningrad
\par SIR GEORGE  TAYLOR, Royal Botanic Gardens, Kew
\par 
\par \pard\qc REGIONAL  ADVISERS
\par \pard Albania              F. MARKGRAF, Z\'fcrich
\par                            I. MITRUSHI, Tirana
\par Austria               F. EHRENDORFER, Graz
\par                            E. JANCHEN, Wien
\par                            K. H. RECHINGER, Wien
\par Belgium             A. LAWALR\'c9E, Bruxelles
\par Bulgaria             B. KUZMANOV, Sofija
\par                            \'9cN. STOJANOV, Sofija
\par Czechoslovakia  J. DOST\'c1L, Olomouc (Praha)
\par                            J. HOLUB, Pruhonice u Prahy
\par Denmark            T. W. B\'d6CHER, K\'f8benhavn
\par \pard                            A. HANSEN, K\'f8benhavn
\par Finland               J. JALAS, Helsinki
\par France                P. DUPONT, Nantes
\par                            H. GAUSSEN, Toulouse
\par                            P. JOVET, Paris
\par                            R. de VILMORIN, Orsay
\par Germany            H. MERXM\'dcLLER, M\'fcnchen
\par                            \'9cW. ROTHMALER, Griefswald
\par                            K. WERNER, Halle
\par Greece                W. GREUTER, Gen\'e8ve
\par                            D. PHITOS, Patrai
\par \pard                            K.H. RECHINGER, Wien
\par                            H. RUNEMARK, Lund
\par Hungary             R. de SO\'d3, Budapest
\par                            \'9cS. JAVORKA, Budapest
\par                            \'9cZ.E. K\'c1RP\'c1TI, Budapest
\par Iceland               E. EINARSSON, Reykjavik
\par                             I. \'d3SKARSSON, Reykjavik
\par Italy                    G. MOGGI,Firenze
\par                             R.E.G. PICHI-SERMOLLI, Genova
\par Jugoslavia           V. BLECIC, Beograd
\par \pard                             E. MAYER, Ljubljana
\par Netherlands        S.J. VAN OOSTSTROOM, Leiden
\par Norway               R. NORDHAGEN, Oslo
\par Poland                 A. JASIEWICZ, Krak\'f3w
\par                             B. PAWLOWSKI, Krak\'f3w
\par Portugal               J. do AMARAL FRANCO, Lisboa
\par                                   (assisted by MARIA da LUZ da ROCHA AFONSO)
\par                            A.R. PINTO da SILVA, Sacav\'e9m (Oeiras)
\par Romania             \'9cA. BORZA, Cluj
\par                            G. DIHORU, Bucuresti
\par \pard                            I. MORARIU, Bucuresti
\par                            \'9c E.I.  NY\'c1R\'c1DY, Cluj
\par                             C. ZAHARIADI, Bucuresti
\par Spain                   O. de BOL\'d3S, Barcelona
\par                             E. FERN\'c1NDEZ-GALIANO Sevilla
\par                             E. GUINEA L\'d3PEZ, Madrid
\par Sweden               \'9cN. HYLANDER, Uppsala
\par                             B. JONSELL, Uppsala
\par Switzerland         E. LANDOLT, Z\'fcrich
\par Turkey                P. H. DAVIS, Edinburgh
\par \pard U.S.S.R.              T.V. EGOROVA, Leningrad
\par (Russia)              A.I. POJARKOVA, Leningrad
\par                            \'9cB. K. SCHISCHKIN, Leningrad
\par                            ANDREY A. FEDOROV, Leningrad
\par                             V.N. TIKHOMIROV, Moskva
\par 
\par \pard\qc TECHNICAL  CONSULTANTS
\par \pard \'c1. L\'d6VE, Montreal (Boulder)(San Jos\'e9)
\par \'86W. ROTHMALER, Greifswald
\par 
\par \pard\qc GEOGRAPHICAL   ADVISER
\par \pard  H. MEUSEL, Halle-Wittenberg
\par 
\par \page
{\up $}{\footnote\pard\plain{\up $} synopsisSEL, Hal\'0e}
{\up #}{\footnote\pard\plain{\up #} idh_synopsis}
\pard \b 
\par \pard\qc SYNOPSIS OF FAMILIES
\par \plain\fs28 
\par \b PTERIDOPHYTA\plain\fs28 
\par 
\par PSILOTOPSIDA
\par \pard 1 Psilotaceae
\par 
\par \pard\qc LYCOPSIDA
\par \pard 2 Lycopodiaceae
\par 3 Selaginellaceae
\par 4 Isoetaceae
\par 
\par \pard\qc SPHENOPSIDA
\par \pard 5 Equisetaceae
\par 
\par \pard\qc FILICOPSIDA
\par \pard 6 Ophioglossaceae
\par 7 Osmundaceae
\par 8 Parkeriaceae
\par 9 Adiantaceae (incl. \i Cryptogrammaceae, Gymnogrammaceae, Sinopteridaceae\plain\fs28 )
\par 10 Pteridaceae
\par 11 Hymenophyllaceae 
\par 12 Polypodiaceae
\par 13 Grammitidaceae
\par 14 Dicksoniaceae (incl. \i Cyatheaceae\plain\fs28 )
\par 15 Hypolepidaceae (incl. \i Dennstaedtiaceae\plain\fs28 )
\par 16 Thelypteridaceae
\par 17 Aspleniaceae
\par 18 Woodsiaceae (\i Athyriaceae\plain\fs28 )
\par 19 Dryopteridaceae (\i Aspidiaceae\plain\fs28 )
\par 20 Lomariopsidaceae (\i Elaphoglossaceae\plain\fs28 )
\par 21 Davalliaceae
\par \pard 22 Blechnaceae
\par 23 Marsileaceae
\par 24 Salviniaceae
\par 25 Azollaceae
\par 
\par \pard\qc \b SPERMATOPHYTA\plain\fs28 
\par 
\par \b GYMNOSPERMAE\plain\fs28 
\par 
\par CONIFEROPSIDA
\par Coniferales
\par \pard 26 Pinaceae
\par 27 Taxodiaceae
\par 28 Cupressaceae
\par 
\par \pard\qc TAXOPSIDA
\par Taxales
\par \pard 29 Taxaceae
\par 
\par \pard\qc GNETOPSIDA
\par Gnetales
\par \pard 30 Ephedraceae
\par 
\par \pard\qc \b ANGIOSPERMAE\plain\fs28 
\par 
\par DICOTYLEDONES
\par 
\par Salicales
\par \pard 31 Salicaceae
\par 
\par \pard\qc Myricales
\par \pard 32 Myricaceae
\par 
\par \pard\qc Juglandales
\par \pard 33 Juglandaceae
\par 
\par \pard\qc Fagales
\par \pard 34 Betulaceae
\par 35 Corylaceae
\par 36 Fagaceae
\par \pard\qc 
\par Urticales
\par \pard 37 Ulmaceae
\par 38 Moraceae
\par 39 Cannabaceae
\par 40 Urticaceae
\par 
\par \pard\qc Proteales
\par \pard 41 Proteaceae
\par 
\par \pard\qc Santalales
\par \pard 42 Santalaceae
\par 43 Loranthaceae
\par 
\par \pard\qc Aristolochiales
\par \pard 44 Aristolochiaceae
\par 45 Rafflesiaceae (\i Cytinaceae\plain\fs28 )
\par 
\par \pard\qc Balanophorales
\par \pard 46 Balanophoraceae
\par 
\par \pard\qc Polygonales
\par \pard 47 Polygonaceae
\par 
\par \pard\qc Centrospermae
\par \pard 48 Chenopodiaceae
\par 49 Amaranthaceae
\par 50 Nyctaginaceae
\par 51 Phytolaccaceae
\par 52 Aizoaceae
\par 53 Molluginaceae
\par 54 Tetragoniaceae
\par 55 Portulacaceae
\par 56 Basellaceae
\par 57 Caryophyllaceae
\par 
\par \pard\qc Ranales
\par \pard 58 Nymphaeaceae
\par 59 Nelumbonaceae
\par 60 Ceratophyllaceae
\par 61 Ranunculaceae
\par 62 Paeoniaceae
\par 63 Berberidaceae
\par 64 Magnoliaceae
\par 65 Lauraceae
\par 
\par \pard\qc Rhoeadales
\par \pard 66 Papaveraceae (incl.\i Fumariaceae\plain\fs28 )
\par 67 Capparidaceae
\par 68 Cruciferae
\par 69 Resedaceae
\par 
\par \pard\qc Sarraceniales
\par \pard 70 Sarraceniaceae
\par 71 Droseraceae
\par 
\par \pard\qc Rosales
\par \pard 72 Crassulaceae
\par 73 Saxifragaceae
\par 74 Parnassiaceae
\par 75 Hydrangeaceae
\par 76 Escalloniaceae
\par 77 Grossulariaceae
\par 78 Pittosporaceae
\par 79 Platanaceae
\par 80 Rosaceae
\par 81 Leguminosae
\par 
\par \pard\qc Geraniales
\par \pard 82 Oxalidaceae
\par 83 Geraniaceae
\par 84 Tropaeolaceae
\par 85 Zygophyllaceae
\par 86 Linaceae
\par 87 Euphorbiaceae
\par 
\par \pard\qc Rutales
\par \pard 88 Rutaceae
\par 89 Cneoraceae
\par 90 Simaroubaceae
\par 91 Meliaceae
\par 92 Polygalaceae
\par 
\par \pard\qc Sapindales
\par \pard 93 Coriariaceae
\par 94 Anacardiaceae
\par 95 Aceraceae
\par 96 Sapindaceae
\par 97 Hippocastanaceae
\par 98 Balsaminaceae
\par 
\par \pard\qc Celastrales
\par \pard 99 Aquifoliaceae
\par 100 Celastraceae
\par 101 Staphyleaceae
\par 102 Buxaceae
\par 
\par \pard\qc Rhamnales
\par \pard 103 Rhamnaceae
\par 104 Vitaceae
\par 
\par \pard\qc Malvales
\par \pard 105 Tiliaceae
\par 106 Malvaceae
\par 
\par \pard\qc Thymelaeales
\par \pard 107 Thymelaeaceae
\par 108 Elaeagnaceae
\par \pard\qc 
\par Guttiferales
\par \pard 109 Guttiferae
\par 
\par \pard\qc Violales
\par \pard 110 Violaceae
\par 111 Passifloraceae
\par 112 Cistaceae
\par 113 Tamaricaceae
\par 114 Frankeniaceae
\par 115 Elatinaceae
\par 116 Datiscaceae
\par 
\par \pard\qc Cucurbitales
\par \pard 117 Cucurbitaceae
\par 
\par \pard\qc Cactales
\par \pard 118 Cactaceae
\par 
\par \pard\qc Myrtales
\par \pard 119 Lythraceae
\par 120 Trapaceae
\par 121 Myrtaceae
\par 122 Punicaceae
\par 123 Onagraceae
\par 124 Haloragaceae
\par 125 Theligonaceae
\par 126 Hippuridaceae
\par \pard\qc Umbelliflorae
\par \pard 127 Cornaceae
\par 128 Araliaceae
\par 129 Umbelliferae
\par 
\par \pard\qc Diapensiales
\par \pard 130 Diapensiaceae
\par \pard\qc Ericales
\par \pard 131 Pyrolaceae
\par 132 Ericaceae
\par 133 Empetraceae
\par 
\par \pard\qc Primulales
\par \pard 134 Myrsinaceae
\par 135 Primulaceae
\par \pard\qc 
\par Plumbaginales
\par \pard 136 Plumbaginaceae
\par 
\par \pard\qc Ebenales
\par \pard 137 Ebenaceae
\par 138 Styracaceae
\par 
\par \pard\qc Oleales
\par \pard 139 Oleaceae
\par 
\par \pard\qc Gentianales
\par \pard 140 Gentianaceae
\par 141 Menyanthaceae
\par 142 Apocynaceae
\par 143 Asclepiadaceae
\par 144 Rubiaceae
\par 
\par \pard\qc Tubiflorae
\par \pard 145 Polemoniaceae
\par 146 Convolvulaceae
\par 147 Hydrophyllaceae
\par 148 Boraginaceae
\par 149 Verbenaceae
\par 150 Callitrichaceae
\par 151 Labiatae
\par 152 Solanaceae
\par 153 Buddlejaceae
\par 154 Scrophulariaceae
\par 155 Globulariaceae
\par 156 Acanthaceae
\par 157 Pedaliaceae
\par 158 Martyniaceae
\par 159 Gesneriaceae
\par 160 Orobanchaceae
\par 161 Lentibulariaceae
\par 162 Myoporaceae
\par 
\par \pard\qc Plantaginales
\par \pard 163 Plantaginaceae
\par 
\par \pard\qc Dipsacales
\par \pard 164 Caprifoliaceae
\par 165 Adoxaceae
\par 166 Valerianaceae
\par 167 Dipsacaceae
\par \pard\qc 
\par Campanulales
\par \pard 168 Campanulaceae
\par 169 Compositae
\par 
\par \pard\qc MONOCOTYLEDONES
\par 
\par Helobiae
\par \pard 170 Alismataceae
\par 171 Butomaceae
\par 172 Hydrocharitaceae
\par 173 Scheuchzeriaceae
\par 174 Aponogetonaceae
\par 174 Juncaginaceae
\par 176 Lilaeaceae
\par 177 Potamogetonaceae
\par 178 Ruppiaceae
\par 179 Posidoniaceae
\par 180 Zosteraceae
\par 181 Zannichelliaceae
\par 182 Najadaceae
\par 
\par \pard\qc Liliiflorae
\par \pard 183 Liliaceae
\par 184 Agavaceae
\par 185 Amaryllidaceae
\par 186 Dioscoreaceae
\par 187 Pontederiaceae
\par 188 Iridaceae
\par 
\par \pard\qc Juncales
\par \pard 189 Juncaceae
\par 
\par \pard\qc Bromeliales
\par \pard 190 Bromeliaceae
\par 
\par \pard\qc Commelinales
\par \pard 191 Commelinaceae
\par 192 Eriocaulaceae
\par 
\par \pard\qc Graminales
\par \pard 193 Gramineae
\par 
\par \pard\qc Principes
\par \pard 194 Palmae
\par 
\par \pard\qc Spathiflorae
\par \pard 195 Araceae
\par 196 Lemnaceae
\par 
\par \pard\qc Pandanales
\par \pard 197 Sparganiaceae
\par 198 Typhaceae
\par 
\par \pard\qc Cyperales
\par \pard 199 Cyperaceae
\par 
\par \pard\qc Scitamineae
\par \pard 200 Musaceae
\par 201 Zingiberaceae
\par 202 Cannaceae
\par 
\par \pard\qc Microspermae
\par \pard 203 Orchidaceae
\par 
\par \page
{\up $}{\footnote\pard\plain{\up $} notes}
{\up #}{\footnote\pard\plain{\up #} idh_notes}
\pard \b 
\par \pard\qc \plain\fs28 
\par \b EXPLANATORY NOTES ON THE TEXT\plain\fs28 
\par \pard 
\par \i Signs and abbreviations\plain\fs28 
\par 
\par \i c.\plain\fs28                       \i circa\plain\fs28 , approximately
\par C.                     central
\par cm                    centimetre(s)
\par E.                     eastern, east
\par excl.                 excluding
\par f.                      forma
\par incl.                  including
\par \i loc. cit.\plain\fs28              \i loco citato\plain\fs28 , on the same page in the work cited above
\par m                      metre(s)
\par mm                   millimetre(s)
\par N.                     northern, north
\par \pard \i 2n\plain\fs28                      the somatic chromosome number
\par \i op. cit.\plain\fs28               \i opere citato\plain\fs28 , in the work cited above
\par S.                      southern, south
\par Sect.                 Section
\par sp.                    species
\par spp.                  species
\par Subfam.            Subfamilia
\par Subgen.            Subgenus
\par Subsect.           Subsection
\par subsp.              subspecies
\par subspp.            subspecies
\par var.                  varietas
\par W.                   western west
\par \pard \'b1                      more or less
\par 0                      absent
\par \i \'95\plain\fs28                        endemic to Europe
\par [ ]                     naturalized, or cultivated on a field scale; not native
\par *                       status doubtful; possibly native, possibly naturalized
\par ?                       (before a two-letter geographical abbreviation) occurrence doubtful
\par \'86                       extinct
\par 
\par \i Abbreviations of geographical territories\plain\fs28 
\par (\i For precise definitions of these territories, see map\plain\fs28  I)
\par \pard 
\par Al              Albania
\par Au             Austria
\par Az             A\'e7ores (Azores)
\par Be              Belgium and Luxembourg
\par Bl               Islas Baleares (Balearic Islands)
\par Br               Britain
\par Bu              Bulgaria
\par Co              Corse (Corsica)
\par Cr               Kriti (Crete)
\par Cz              Czechoslovakia
\par Da              Denmark
\par Fa               F\'e6r\'f6er (Faeroes)
\par Fi                Finland
\par Fr                France
\par Ge               Germany
\par Gr               Greece
\par \pard Hb               Ireland
\par He               Switzerland
\par Ho               Netherlands
\par Hs                Spain
\par Hu               Hungary
\par Is                 Iceland
\par It                  Italy
\par Ju                 Jugoslavia
\par Lu                Portugal
\par No                Norway
\par Po                 Poland
\par Rm               Romania
\par Rs                 U.S.S.R. (European part), subdivided thus:
\par                     (N) Northern region
\par                     (B) Baltic region
\par                     (C) Central region
\par \pard                     (W) South-western region
\par                     (K) Krym (Crimea)
\par                     (E) South-eastem region
\par Sa                 Sardegna (Sardinia)
\par Sb                 Svalbard (Spitsbergen)
\par Si                  Sicilia (Sicily)
\par Su                 Sweden
\par Tu                 Turkey (European part)
\par 
\par \i General notes\plain\fs28 
\par 
\par \i The sequence of families\plain\fs28  is that of Melchior in Engler, \i Syllabus  der Pflanzenfamilien\plain\fs28  ed. 12 (1964).
\par \i Descriptions of taxa\plain\fs28  refer only to the European populations of the taxon in question. If extra-European representatives differ substantially, an explanatory note is sometimes added.
\par \pard \i Groups\plain\fs28  of species have been used in some genera where the species are very difficult to separate. These groups have no formal nomenclatural status and are simply a device to enable a partial identification to be made.
\par \i Taxa below the rank of subspecies\plain\fs28  are neither keyed nor described, and varieties are mentioned only when there are special reasons.
\par \i Aliens\plain\fs28  are included only when they appear to be effectively naturalized or when planted in continuous stands on a fairly large scale.
\par \pard \i Hybrids\plain\fs28  are mentioned only when they occur frequently.
\par \i A measurement\plain\fs28  given without qualification refers to length. Two measurements connected by \'d7 indicate length followed by width. Further measurements in parentheses indicate exceptional cases outside the normal range.
\par \i Synonyms\plain\fs28  given in the text are principally those names under which the species or subspecies is described in the Basic Floras listed on p. xix. The index contains (in addition to these) names which occur in any of the Standard Floras (p. xix) or in well-known monographs.
\par \pard \i Chromosome numbers\plain\fs28  are given only when the editors are satisfied that the count has been made on correctly identified material known to be of wild European origin. For naturalized and cultivated species the count is from material which is naturalized or is cultivated in the way which justifies its inclusion in the Flora.
\par \i Ecological information\plain\fs28  is provided only when the habitat-preference of a species is sufficiently uniform over its European range to permit it to be summed up in a short phrase.
\par \pard \i Geographical terms\plain\fs28  such as 'W. Europe', 'Mediterranean region', etc., are to be interpreted as shown on maps IV and V. The statement that a plant occurs in one or more of these regions does not necessarily imply that it occurs throughout the region.
\par \i Extra-European distribution\plain\fs28  is indicated only for those plants whose European range is small and whose range outside Europe is considerably greater, or for species which are not native in Europe.
\par 
\par \page
{\up $}{\footnote\pard\plain{\up $} map_1\'102}
{\up #}{\footnote\pard\plain{\up #} map_1}
\pard \b 
\par \pard\qc GEOGRAPHICAL DISTRIBUTION ABBREVIATIONS
\par \plain\fs28 
\par \pard To illustrate the boundaries of Europe for the purposes of Flora Europaea, and its division into 'territories' which are indicated by two-letter abbreviations after the summary of geographical distribution for each species. These abbreviations are derived from the Latin name of the territory concerned.
\par 
\par Al          Albania
\par Au         Austria, with Liechtenstein
\par Az         A\'e7ores
\par Be         Belgium, with Luxembourg
\par Bl          Islas Baleares
\par Br         Britain, including Orkneys, Zetland and Isle of Man; excluding Channel Islands
\par \pard               and Northern Ireland
\par Bu        Bulgaria
\par Co        Corse
\par Cr         Kriti (Creta), with Karpathos, Kasos and Gavdhos
\par Cz        Czechoslovakia
\par Dk        Denmark (\i Dania\plain\fs28 ), including Bornholm
\par Fa         F\'e6r\'f6er
\par Fe         Finland (\i Fennia\plain\fs28 ), including Ahvenanmaa (Aaland Islands)
\par Ga        France (\i Gallia\plain\fs28 ), with the Channel Islands (\'celes Normandes) and Monaco; excluding Corse
\par Ge        Germany (both eastern and western republics)
\par Gr        Greece, excluding those islands included under Kriti (\i supra\plain\fs28 ) and those
\par \pard                which are outside Europe as defined for\i  Flora Europaea
\par \plain\fs28 Hb        Ireland (\i Hibernia\plain\fs28 ); both the republic and Northern Ireland
\par He        Switzerland (\i Helvetia\plain\fs28 )
\par Ho       Netherlands (\i Hollandia\plain\fs28 )
\par Hs        Spain (\i Hispania\plain\fs28 ), with Gibraltar and Andorra; excluding Islas Baleares
\par Hu       Hungary
\par Is         Iceland (\i Islandia\plain\fs28 )
\par It         Italy, including the Arcipelago Toscano; excluding Sardegna and Sicilia as defined\i  infra
\par \pard \plain\fs28 Ju        Jugoslavia
\par Lu       Portugal (\i Lusitania\plain\fs28 )
\par No      Norway
\par Po       Poland
\par Ro      Romania
\par Rs      U.S.S.R. (Rossia). This has been subdivided as follows, using the floristic
\par                divisions of Komarov's\i  Flora U.R.S.S.\plain\fs28 ; in a few places, however, our
\par                boundaries deviate slightly from those of Komarov.*
\par                Rs (N) \i Northern division\plain\fs28 : Arctic Europe, Karelo-Lapland, Dvina-PeEora
\par                Rs (B) \i Baltic division\plain\fs28 : Estonia, Latvia, Lithuania, Kaliningradskaja Oblast'
\par \pard                Rs (C) \i Central division\plain\fs28 : Ladoga-Ilmen, Upper Volga, Volga-Kama,
\par                Upper Dnepr, Volga-Don, Ural
\par                Rs (W)\i  South-western division\plain\fs28 : Moldavia, Middle Dnepr, Black Sea, Upper Dnestr
\par                Rs (K) \i Krym\plain\fs28  ()
\par                Rs (E) \i South-eastern division\plain\fs28 : Lower Don, Lower Volga, Transvolga
\par                White Russia falls entirely within Rs (C). Ukraine is largely in Rs (W),
\par                but partly in Rs (K ), Rs (C) and Rs (E). The European part of Kazakhstan is in Rs (E)
\par \pard Sa          Sardegna
\par Sb          Svalbard, comprising Spitsbergen, Bj\'f6rn\'f6ya (Bear Island) and Jan Mayen
\par Si           Sicilia, with Pantelleria, Isole Pelagie, Isole Lipari and Ustica; also the Malta archipelago
\par Su          Sweden (\i Suecia\plain\fs28 ), including \'d6land and Gotland
\par Tu          Turkey (European part), including Imroz
\par *             For the relation of these subdivisions to those used in Fedorov's
\par                Partis Europaeae URSS, see Introduction.
\par 
\par \page
{\up #}{\footnote\pard\plain{\up #} 1MGTWR8}
\pard \b\cf1 
\par \pard\qc 
\par \plain\b\fs28 KEY TO THE ABBREVIATIONS OF AUTHORS' NAMES IN VOLS 1(2nd. Ed.), 2, 3, 4, & 5.\plain\fs28 
\par \pard\tx355 
\par \b Abromeit \plain\fs28 \tab   J. Abromeit (1857-1946)
\par \b Acht. \plain\fs28 \tab   B. Achtarov (1885-1959)
\par \b Adamovic \plain\fs28 \tab   L. Adamovic (1864-1935)
\par \b Adamson \plain\fs28 \tab   R.S. Adamson (1885-1965)
\par \b Adams \plain\fs28 \tab   M.F. Adams (J.F. Adam) (1780-1829/32)
\par \b Adanson \plain\fs28 \tab   M. Adanson (1727-1806)
\par \b Ade \plain\fs28 \tab   A. Ade (1876-1968)
\par \b Aellen \plain\fs28 \tab   P. Aellen (1896-1973)
\par \b Afan., C. \plain\fs28 \tab   C.S. Afanasiev (1905-1960)
\par \b Afzelius \plain\fs28 \tab   A. Afzelius (1750-1837)
\par \b Agardh, J. \plain\fs28 \tab   J.G. Agardh (1813-1901)
\par \pard\tx355 \b Agardh \plain\fs28 \tab   C.A. Agardh (1785-1859)
\par \b Aggeenko \plain\fs28 \tab   V.N. Aggeenko (Ageenko) (1860-1907)
\par \b Ahlfvengren \plain\fs28 \tab   F.E. Ahlfvengren (1862-1921)
\par \b Ahti \plain\fs28 \tab   T.T. Ahti (b. 1934)
\par \b Aichele \plain\fs28 \tab   D.E. Aichele (b. 1928)
\par \b Airy Shaw \plain\fs28 \tab   H.K. Airy Shaw (1902-1985)
\par \b Aiton fil. \plain\fs28 \tab   W.T. Aiton (1766-1849)
\par \b Aiton \plain\fs28 \tab   W. Aiton (1731-1793)
\par \b Akeroyd \plain\fs28 \tab   J.R. Akeroyd (b. 1952)
\par \b Alavi \plain\fs28 \tab   S.A. Alavi (b. 1934)
\par \b Albert \plain\fs28 \tab   A. Albert (1836-1909)
\par \pard\tx355 \b Albov \plain\fs28 \tab   N.M. Albov (Alboff) (1866-1897)
\par \b Ald\'e9n \plain\fs28 \tab   B.G. Ald\'e9n (b. 1948)
\par \b Alechin \plain\fs28 \tab   V.V. Alechin (1884-1946)
\par \b Alef. \plain\fs28 \tab   F.G.C. Alefeld (1820-1872)
\par \b Alejandre \plain\fs28 \tab   J.A. Alejandre S\'e1enz (b. 1947)
\par \b Alexeenko \plain\fs28 \tab   M.I. Alexeenko (Alexejenko) (b. 1905)
\par \b Alexeev \plain\fs28 \tab   E.B. Alexeev (b. 1946)
\par \b All. \plain\fs28 \tab   C.L. Allioni (1728-1804)
\par \b Allan \plain\fs28 \tab   H.H.B. Allan (1882-1957)
\par \b Alleiz. \plain\fs28 \tab   C. d'Alleizette (1884-1967)
\par \b Allman \plain\fs28 \tab   G.J. Allman (1812-1898)
\par \pard\tx355 \b Almq. \plain\fs28 \tab   S.O.I. Almquist (1844-1923)
\par \b Alpers \plain\fs28 \tab   F. Alpers (1841-1912)
\par \b Alston \plain\fs28 \tab   A.H.G. Alston (1902-1958)
\par \b Ambrosi \plain\fs28 \tab   F. Ambrosi (1821-1897)
\par \b Ames \plain\fs28 \tab   O. Ames (1875-1950)
\par \b Amich \plain\fs28 \tab   F. Amich Garcia (b. 1953)
\par \b Amo \plain\fs28 \tab   Mariano del Amo y Mora (1820-1896)
\par \b Andersen \plain\fs28 \tab   J.C. Andersen (b. 1873)
\par \b Anderson, E. \plain\fs28 \tab   E.S. Anderson (1897-1969)
\par \b Anderson, G. \plain\fs28 \tab   G.W. Anderson (d. 1817)
\par \b Andersson, I.A. \plain\fs28 \tab   I.A. Andersson (b. 1959)
\par \pard\tx355 \b Andersson, N.J. \plain\fs28 \tab   N.J. Andersson (1821-1880)
\par \b Andrae \plain\fs28 \tab   C.J. Andrae (1816-1885)
\par \b Andreas \plain\fs28 \tab   C.H. Andreas (b. 1898)
\par \b Andrews \plain\fs28 \tab   H.C. Andrews (1794-1830)
\par \b Andrz. \plain\fs28 \tab   A.L. Andrzejowski (1785-1868)
\par \b Andr\'e1sovszky \plain\fs28 \tab   J. Andr\'e1sovszky (1889-1943)
\par \b Angelis, M. \plain\fs28 \tab   M. von Angelis (1805-1894)
\par \b \'c5ngstr\'f6m \plain\fs28 \tab   J. \'c5ngstr\'f6m (1813-1879)
\par \b Antoine \plain\fs28 \tab   F. Antoine (1815-1886)
\par \b Appel \plain\fs28 \tab   O. Appel (1867-1952)
\par \b Arcangeli \plain\fs28 \tab   G. Arcangeli (1840-1921)
\par \pard\tx355 \b Archer-Hind \plain\fs28 \tab   T.H. Archer-Hind (1814-1911)
\par \b Ard. \plain\fs28 \tab   P. Arduino (1728-1805)
\par \b Ardoino \plain\fs28 \tab   H.J. P. Ardoino (1819-1874)
\par \b Arenes, J. \plain\fs28 \tab   J. Arenes (1898-1960)
\par \b Aresch., F. \plain\fs28 \tab    F.W.C.  Areschoug (1830-1908)
\par \b Armstrong \plain\fs28 \tab   J.B. Armstrong (1850-1926)
\par \b Arnold \plain\fs28 \tab   J.F.X. Arnold (possibly a pseudonym; fl. 1780-1785)
\par \b Arnott \plain\fs28 \tab   G.A.W. Arnott (1799-1868)
\par \b Arrh, A. \plain\fs28 \tab   J.I.A. Arrhenius (1858-1950)
\par \b Arrigoni \plain\fs28 \tab   P.V. Arrigoni (b. 1932)
\par \pard\tx355 \b Arrondeau \plain\fs28 \tab   E.T. Arrondeau (d. 1882)
\par \b Artemczuk \plain\fs28 \tab   I.V. Artemczuk (1898-1973)
\par \b Artiush. \plain\fs28 \tab   Z.T. Artiushenko (b. 1916)
\par \b Arvat \plain\fs28 \tab   A. Arvat (1890-1950)
\par \b Arvet-Touvet \plain\fs28 \tab   J.M.C. Arvet-Touvet (1841-1913)
\par \b Ascherson \plain\fs28 \tab   P.F.A. Ascherson (1834-1913)
\par \b Aspegren \plain\fs28 \tab   G. C. Aspegren (1791-1828)
\par \b Assenov \plain\fs28 \tab   I. Assenov (fl. 1966)
\par \b Asso \plain\fs28 \tab   I. J. de Asso y del Rio (1742-1814)
\par \b Aublet \plain\fs28 \tab   J. B.C.F.  Aublet (1720-1778)
\par \pard\tx355 \b Aucher \plain\fs28 \tab   P.M.R. Aucher-Eloy (1792-1838)
\par \b Auquier \plain\fs28 \tab   P. Auquier (b. 1939)
\par \b Ausserdorfer \plain\fs28 \tab   A. Ausserdorfer (1836-1885)
\par \b Avr. \plain\fs28 \tab   N.A. Avrorin (b. 1906)
\par \b Av\'e9-Lall. \plain\fs28 \tab   J.L.E. Av\'e9-Lallemant (1803-1867)
\par \b Aznav. \plain\fs28 \tab   G.V. Aznavour (1861-1920)
\par \b Baag\'f6e \plain\fs28 \tab   J.S. Baag\'f6e (1838-1905)
\par \b Bab. \plain\fs28 \tab   C.C. Babington (1808-1895)
\par \b Babcock \plain\fs28 \tab   E.B. Babcock (1871-1954)
\par \b Backh. \plain\fs28 \tab   J. Backhouse (1825-1890)
\par \b Badaro \plain\fs28 \tab   G.B. Badaro (1793-1831)
\par \pard\tx355 \b Baenitz \plain\fs28 \tab   K.G. Baenitz (1837-1913)
\par \b Baer \plain\fs28 \tab   K.R.E. von Baer (1792-1876)
\par \b Bagnall \plain\fs28 \tab   J.E. Bagnall (1830-1918)
\par \b Bailey, L. \plain\fs28 \tab   H.L.H. Bailey (1858-1954)
\par \b Baillet \plain\fs28 \tab   C. Baillet (fl. 1862)
\par \b Baillon \plain\fs28 \tab   H.E. Baillon (1827-1895)
\par \b Bailly \plain\fs28 \tab   E. Bailly (1829-1894)
\par \b Baker fil. \plain\fs28 \tab   E.G. Baker (1864-1949)
\par \b Baker \plain\fs28 \tab   J.G. Baker (1834-1920)
\par \b Baksay \plain\fs28 \tab   L. Baksay (b. 1915)
\par \b Balansa \plain\fs28 \tab   B. Balansa (1825-1891)
\par \pard\tx355 \b Balbis \plain\fs28 \tab   G.-B. Balbis (1765-1831)
\par \b Bald. \plain\fs28 \tab   A. Baldacci (1867-1950)
\par \b Balf. \plain\fs28 \tab   J.H. Balfour (1808-1884)
\par \b Balk. \plain\fs28 \tab   B.E. Balkovsky (1899-1985)
\par \b Ball, P.W. \plain\fs28 \tab   P.W. Ball (b. 1932)
\par \b Ball \plain\fs28 \tab   J.  Ball (1818-1889)
\par \b Bange \plain\fs28 \tab   A.J. Bange (1896-1950)
\par \b Banks \plain\fs28 \tab   J. Banks (1743-1820)
\par \b Barbarich \plain\fs28 \tab   A.I. Barbarich (b. 1903)
\par \b Barbaz. \plain\fs28 \tab   F.  Barbazita (9. 1826)
\par \b Barbero \plain\fs28 \tab   M. Barbero (b. 1940)
\par \b Barbey, C. \plain\fs28 \tab   C. Barbey-Boissier (1847-1919)
\par \pard\tx355 \b Barbey, W. \plain\fs28 \tab   W. Barbey (later W. Barbey-Boissier) (1842-1914)
\par \b Barc. \plain\fs28 \tab   F. Barcelo y Combis (1820-1889)
\par \b Barkley, F.A. \plain\fs28 \tab   F.A. Barkley (b. 1908)
\par \b Barkoudah \plain\fs28 \tab   Y.I. Barkoudah (b. 1933)
\par \b Barn. \plain\fs28 \tab   F.M. Barneoud (b. 1821)
\par \b Barnades \plain\fs28 \tab   M. Barnades (d. 1771)
\par \b Barrandon \plain\fs28 \tab   A. Barrandon (1814-1897)
\par \b Barratte \plain\fs28 \tab   J.F.G. Barratte (1857-1920)
\par \b Bartal. \plain\fs28 \tab   B. Bartalini (1746-1822)
\par \b Bartl. \plain\fs28 \tab   F.G. Bartling (1798-1875)
\par \pard\tx355 \b Bartlett \plain\fs28 \tab   H.H. Bartlett (1886-1960)
\par \b Bartolo \plain\fs28 \tab   G. Bartolo (b. 1948)
\par \b Barton, W. \plain\fs28 \tab   W.P.G. Barton (1786-1856)
\par \b Basil. \plain\fs28 \tab   N.A. Basilevskaja (Bazilevskaja) (b. 1902)
\par \b Basiner \plain\fs28 \tab   T.F.J. Basiner (1817-1862)
\par \b Bassi \plain\fs28 \tab   F. Bassi (1710-1774)
\par \b B\'e4ssler \plain\fs28 \tab   M. B\'e4ssler (b. 1935)
\par \b Bast. \plain\fs28 \tab   T. Bastard (1784-1846)
\par \b Batsch \plain\fs28 \tab   A.J.G.C. Batsch (1761-1802)
\par \b Batt. \plain\fs28 \tab   J.A. Battandier (1848-1922)
\par \b Baudo \plain\fs28 \tab   F.  Baudo (fl. 1843)
\par \pard\tx355 \b Baumann, E. \plain\fs28 \tab   E. Baumann (1868-1933)
\par \b Baumg. \plain\fs28 \tab   J.C.G. Baumgarten (1765-1843)
\par \b Baum \plain\fs28 \tab   B.R. Baum (b. 1937)
\par \b Baxter \plain\fs28 \tab   W. Baxter (1787-1871)
\par \b Bean \plain\fs28 \tab   W.J. Bean (1863-1947)
\par \b Beauv. \plain\fs28 \tab   A. M. F. J. Palisot de Beauvois (1752-1820)
\par \b Beauverd \plain\fs28 \tab   G. Beauverd (1867-1942)
\par \b Beccari \plain\fs28 \tab   O. Beccari (1843-1920)
\par \b Becherer \plain\fs28 \tab   A. Becherer (1897-1977)
\par \b Bechst. \plain\fs28 \tab   J. M. Bechstein (1757-1822)
\par \b Beck, G. \plain\fs28 \tab   G. Beck von Mannagetta (1856-1931)
\par \pard\tx355 \b Becker, A. \plain\fs28 \tab   A. Becker (1818-1901)
\par \b Becker, J. \plain\fs28 \tab   J. Becker (1769-1833)
\par \b Becker, W. \plain\fs28 \tab   W. Becker (1874-1928)
\par \b Beeby \plain\fs28 \tab   W. H. Beeby (1849-1910)
\par \b Beetle \plain\fs28 \tab   A.A. Beetle (b. 1913)
\par \b Beger \plain\fs28 \tab   H.K.E. Beger (b. 1889)
\par \b B\'e9guinot \plain\fs28 \tab   A. B\'e9guinot (1875-1940)
\par \b Behrendsen \plain\fs28 \tab   W. Behrendsen (d. 1923)
\par \b B\'e9l. \plain\fs28 \tab   C.P. B\'e9langer (1805-1881)
\par \b Beldie \plain\fs28 \tab   A. Beldie (b. 1912)
\par \b Bell Salter \plain\fs28 \tab   T. Bell Salter (1814-1858)
\par \pard\tx355 \b Bellardi \plain\fs28 \tab   C.A.L. Bellardi (1741-1826)
\par \b Belli \plain\fs28 \tab   S.C. Belli (1852-1919)
\par \b Bellot \plain\fs28 \tab    F. Bellot Rodriguez (b. 1911)
\par \b Beltr\'e1n \plain\fs28 \tab   F. Beltr\'e1n Bigorra (1886-1962)
\par \b Benn., A.W. \plain\fs28 \tab   A. W. Bennett (1833-1902)
\par \b Benj. \plain\fs28 \tab   L. Benjamin (b. 1825)
\par \b Benl \plain\fs28 \tab   G. Benl (b. 1910)
\par \b Benn., A.W. \plain\fs28 \tab   A.W. Bennett (1833-1902)
\par \b Benn., Ar. \plain\fs28 \tab   Arthur Bennett (1843-1929)
\par \b Bennert \plain\fs28 \tab   H.W. Bennert (b. 1945)
\par \b Benson, L. \plain\fs28 \tab   L.D. Benson (b. 1909)
\par \pard\tx355 \b Bentham \plain\fs28 \tab   G. Bentham (1800-1884)
\par \b Bentzer \plain\fs28 \tab   B. Bentzer (b. 1942)
\par \b Benz \plain\fs28 \tab   R. Benz von Albkron (1863-1921)
\par \b Berchtold \plain\fs28 \tab   F. von Berchtold (1781-1876)
\par \b Berdau \plain\fs28 \tab   F. Berdau (1826-1895)
\par \b Berger, A. \plain\fs28 \tab   A. Berger (1871-1931)
\par \b Bergeret, G. \plain\fs28 \tab   G. Bergeret (fl. 1909)
\par \b Bergeret, J.P. \plain\fs28 \tab   J.P. Bergeret (1751-1813)
\par \b Berggren, Jakob \plain\fs28 \tab   Jakob Berggren (1790-1868)
\par \b Berggren, S. \plain\fs28 \tab   S. Berggren (1837-1917)
\par \pard\tx355 \b Bergius \plain\fs28 \tab   P.J. Bergius (1730-1790)
\par \b Bergmans \plain\fs28 \tab   J. Bergmans (b. 1892)
\par \b Berlin \plain\fs28 \tab   J.A. Berlin (1851-1910)
\par \b Bernard \plain\fs28 \tab   P.F. Bernard (1749-1825)
\par \b Bernh. \plain\fs28 \tab   J.J. Bernhardi (l774-1850)
\par \b Bernis \plain\fs28 \tab   F. Bernis (fl. 1955)
\par \b Berth. \plain\fs28 \tab   S. Berthelot (1794-1880)
\par \b Bertol. \plain\fs28 \tab   A. Bertoloni (1775-1869)
\par \b Bertram \plain\fs28 \tab   F.W.W. Bertram (1835-1899)
\par \b Bertsch, F. \plain\fs28 \tab   F.  Bertsch (1910-1944)
\par \b Bertsch, K. \plain\fs28 \tab   K. Bertsch (1878-1965)
\par \pard\tx355 \b Besser \plain\fs28 \tab   W.S.J.G. von Besser (1784-1842)
\par \b Besse \plain\fs28 \tab   F.M. Besse (1864-1924)
\par \b Betcke \plain\fs28 \tab   E.F. Betcke (1815-1865)
\par \b Beurl. \plain\fs28 \tab   P.J. Beurling (1800-1866)
\par \b Beyer \plain\fs28 \tab   R. Beyer (1852-1932)
\par \b Beyrich \plain\fs28 \tab   H.C. Beyrich (1796-1834)
\par \b Bianca \plain\fs28 \tab   G. Bianca (1801-1883)
\par \b Biasol. \plain\fs28 \tab   B. Biasoletto (1793-1858)
\par \b Biatzovsky \plain\fs28 \tab   J. Biatzovsky (c. 1802-1863)
\par \b Bicchi \plain\fs28 \tab   C. Bicchi (1822-1906)
\par \b Bich. \plain\fs28 \tab   J.E. Bicheno (1785-1851)
\par \pard\tx355 \b Bicknell, C. \plain\fs28 \tab   C. Bicknell (1842-1918)
\par \b Bicknell, E.P. \plain\fs28 \tab   E.P. Bicknell (1859-1925)
\par \b Bieb. \plain\fs28 \tab   F.  A. Marschall von Bieberstein (1768-1826)
\par \b Bigelow \plain\fs28 \tab   J. Bigelow (1787-1879)
\par \b Bihari \plain\fs28 \tab   G. Bihari (b. 1889)
\par \b Billot \plain\fs28 \tab   P.C. Billot (1796-1863)
\par \b Bilyk \plain\fs28 \tab   G. I. Bilyk (b. 1904)
\par \b Binz \plain\fs28 \tab   A. Binz (1870-1963)
\par \b Biria \plain\fs28 \tab   J.A.J. Biria (b. 1789)
\par \b Biroli \plain\fs28 \tab   G. Biroli (1772-1825)
\par \b Bir \plain\fs28 \tab   S.S. Bir (b. 1929)
\par \pard\tx355 \b Bischoff \plain\fs28 \tab   G.W. Bischoff (1797-1854)
\par \b Bisse \plain\fs28 \tab   J. Bisse (b. 1935)
\par \b Bitter \plain\fs28 \tab   F. A.G. Bitter (1873-1927)
\par \b Biv. fil. \plain\fs28 \tab   A. de Bivona-Bernardi (fl. 1838)
\par \b Biv. \plain\fs28 \tab   A. de Bivona-Bernardi (1774-1837)
\par \b Blaise \plain\fs28 \tab   S. Blaise (fl. 1970)
\par \b Blake, S.F. \plain\fs28 \tab   S.F. Blake (1892-1959)
\par \b Blakelock \plain\fs28 \tab   R.A. Blakelock (1915-1963)
\par \b Blakeslee \plain\fs28 \tab   A.F. Blakeslee (1874-1954)
\par \b Blanc \plain\fs28 \tab  --Blanc (fl. 1866)
\par \b Blanche \plain\fs28 \tab   E. Blanche (1824-1908)
\par \pard\tx355 \b Blanch\'e9, C. \plain\fs28 \tab   C. Blanch\'e9 i Verg\'e9s (b. 1958)
\par \b Blanco \plain\fs28 \tab   F.M. Blanco (1778-1845)
\par \b Blasdell \plain\fs28 \tab   R.F. Blasdell (b. 1929)
\par \b Blecic \plain\fs28 \tab   V. Blecic (b. 1911)
\par \b Blocki \plain\fs28 \tab   B. Blocki (1857-1917)
\par \b Blonski \plain\fs28 \tab   F.  Blonski (1867-1910)
\par \b Bloxam \plain\fs28 \tab   A. Bloxam (1801-1878)
\par \b Bluff \plain\fs28 \tab    M.J. Bluff (1805-1837)
\par \b Blume \plain\fs28 \tab   C.L. von Blume (1796-1862)
\par \b Blytt \plain\fs28 \tab   M.N. Blytt (1789-1862)
\par \b Bobrov \plain\fs28 \tab   E.G. Bobrov (1902-1983)
\par \pard\tx355 \b B\'f6cher \plain\fs28 \tab   T.W. B\'f6cher (b. 1909-1979)
\par \b Bocquet \plain\fs28 \tab   G. Bocquet (1927 1986)
\par \b Bodard \plain\fs28 \tab   P.H.H. Bodard (fl. 1798-1810)
\par \b Boeckeler \plain\fs28 \tab   J.O. Boeckeler (1803-1899)
\par \b Boedijn \plain\fs28 \tab   K.B. Boedijn (b. 1893)
\par \b Boehmer \plain\fs28 \tab   G.R. Boehmer (1723-1803)
\par \b Boenn. \plain\fs28 \tab   C.M.F. von Boenninghausen (1785-1864)
\par \b Bogenh. \plain\fs28 \tab   C. Bogenhard (1811-?1853)
\par \b Boguslaw \plain\fs28 \tab   I.A. Boguslaw (fl. 1846)
\par \b Boiss. \plain\fs28 \tab   P.E. Boissier (1810-1885)
\par \b Boissieu \plain\fs28 \tab   C.V. Boissieu de la Martini\'e9re (1784-1868)
\par \pard\tx355 \b Boisson. \plain\fs28 \tab   J. Boissonade (1831-1897)
\par \b Boivin \plain\fs28 \tab   J.R.B. Boivin (b. 1916)
\par \b Bojko\plain\fs28 \tab  H. Bojko (b. 1892)
\par \b Boll \plain\fs28 \tab   E.F.A. Boll (1817-1868)
\par \b Bolle, C. \plain\fs28 \tab   C.A. Bolle (1821-1909)
\par \b Bolle, F. \plain\fs28 \tab   F. Bolle (b. 1905)
\par \b Bolton \plain\fs28 \tab   J. Bolton (c. 1758-1799)
\par \b Bolus, L. \plain\fs28 \tab   H.M.L. Bolus (L.H.M. Bolus, Mrs F. Bolus)(1877-1970)
\par \b Bol\'f3s, A. \plain\fs28 \tab   A. de Bol\'f3s (Bol\'f2s) y Vayreda (1889-1975)
\par \b Bol\'f3s, O. \plain\fs28 \tab   O. de Bol\'f3s (Bol\'f2s) i Capdevila (b. 1924)
\par \pard\tx355 \b Bong. \plain\fs28 \tab   A.G.H. von Bongard (H.G. Bongard) (1786-1839)
\par \b Bonjean \plain\fs28 \tab   J.L. Bonjean (1780-1846)
\par \b Bonnemaison \plain\fs28 \tab   T. Bonnemaison (1774 1829)
\par \b Bonnet \plain\fs28 \tab   E. Bonnet (1848-1922)
\par \b Bonnier \plain\fs28 \tab   G.E.M. Bonnier (1851--1922)
\par \b Bonpl. \plain\fs28 \tab   A.J.A. Bonpland (1773-1858)
\par \b Boos, J. \plain\fs28 \tab   J. Boos (1794-1879)
\par \b Boott \plain\fs28 \tab   F. Boott (1792-1863)
\par \b Bor \plain\fs28 \tab   N. L. Bor (1893-1972)
\par \b Borb\'e1s \plain\fs28 \tab   V. [von] Borb\'e1s (1844-1905)
\par \b Bord. \plain\fs28 \tab   H. Bord\'e8re (1825-1889)
\par \pard\tx355 \b Bordzil. \plain\fs28 \tab   E.I. Bordzilowski (1875-1949)
\par \b Boreau \plain\fs28 \tab   A. Boreau (1803-1875)
\par \b Borgvall \plain\fs28 \tab   T. Borgvall (b. 1884)
\par \b Borhidi \plain\fs28 \tab   A. Borhidi (b. 1932)
\par \b Boriss. \plain\fs28 \tab   A.G. Borissova-Bekrjaseva (1903-1970)
\par \b Borja \plain\fs28 \tab   J. Borja Carbonell (b. 1903)
\par \b Borkh. \plain\fs28 \tab   M.B. Borkhausen (Borckhausen) (1760-1806)
\par \b Borner \plain\fs28 \tab   C.J.B. Borner (b. 1880)
\par \b Bornm. \plain\fs28 \tab   J.F.N. Bornmuller (1862-1948)
\par \b Boros \plain\fs28 \tab   \'c1. Boros (1900-1973)
\par \pard\tx355 \b Borrer \plain\fs28 \tab   W. Borrer (1781-1862)
\par \b Borrill \plain\fs28 \tab   M. Borrill (b. 1924)
\par \b Borsos \plain\fs28 \tab   O. Borsos (O. Sz.-Borsos) (b. 1926)
\par \b Bory \plain\fs28 \tab   J.B.G.M. Bory de Saint-Vincent (1778-1846)
\par \b Borza \plain\fs28 \tab   A. Borza (1887-1971)
\par \b Borzi \plain\fs28 \tab   A. Borzi (1852-1911)
\par \b Bosc \plain\fs28 \tab   L.A.G. Bosc (1759-1828)
\par \b Bosnjak \plain\fs28 \tab   K. Bosnjak (1866-1953)
\par \b Bosse \plain\fs28 \tab   J.F.W. Bosse (1788-1864)
\par \b Bothmer \plain\fs28 \tab   S.R. von Bothmer (b. 1943)
\par \b Botsch. \plain\fs28 \tab   V.P. Botschantzev (1910-1990)
\par \pard\tx355 \b Boucher \plain\fs28 \tab   J.A.G. Boucher de Cr\'e8vecoeur (1757-1844)
\par \b Bouche \plain\fs28 \tab   C.D. Bouche (1809-1881)
\par \b Boulay \plain\fs28 \tab   N.J. Boulay (1837-1905)
\par \b Bourgeau \plain\fs28 \tab   E. Bourgeau (1813-1877)
\par \b Bout. \plain\fs28 \tab   J.F.D.  Boutigny (1820-1884)
\par \b Boutelou, E. \plain\fs28 \tab   E. Boutelou y Soldevilla (1823-1883)
\par \b Boutelou \plain\fs28 \tab   E. Boutelou (1776-1813)
\par \b Bouvet \plain\fs28 \tab   G. Bouvet (1874-1929)
\par \b Bowden \plain\fs28 \tab   W.M. Bowden (b. 1914)
\par \b Bowdich \plain\fs28 \tab   T.E. Bowdich (1791-1824)
\par \pard\tx355 \b Bowles \plain\fs28 \tab   E.A. Bowles (1865-1954)
\par \b Br., A. \plain\fs28 \tab   A. Brown (1830-1913)
\par \b Br., N.E. \plain\fs28 \tab   N.E. Brown (1849-1934)
\par \b Br., R. \plain\fs28 \tab   R. Brown (1773-1858)
\par \b Br.-Bl. \plain\fs28 \tab   J. Braun-Blanquet (1884-1980)
\par \b Br.-Catt. \plain\fs28 \tab   A.J.B. [Markgraf De Planta-Salis] Brilli-Cattarini (b.1923)
\par \b Brackenr. \plain\fs28 \tab   W.D. Brackenridge (1810-1893)
\par \b Bradshaw, M.E. \plain\fs28 \tab   M.E. Bradshaw (b. 1926)
\par \b Brainerd \plain\fs28 \tab   E. Brainerd (1844-1924)
\par \b Brandt, J.P. \plain\fs28 \tab   J.P. Brandt (1921-1963)
\par \pard\tx355 \b Brandza \plain\fs28 \tab   D. Brandza (1846-1895)
\par \b Brand \plain\fs28 \tab   A. Brand (1863-1931)
\par \b Braun, A. \plain\fs28 \tab   A. C. H. Braun (1805-1877)
\par \b Braun, G. \plain\fs28 \tab   G. Braun (1821-1882)
\par \b Braun, H. \plain\fs28 \tab   H. Braun (1851-1920)
\par \b Braun, J. \plain\fs28 \tab   J. Braun (later J. Braun-Blanquet) (1884-1980)
\par \b Braun \plain\fs28 \tab   C.F.W. ('Friedrich ') Braun (1800-1864)
\par \b Breb. \plain\fs28 \tab   L.A. de Brebisson (1798-1872)
\par \b Breistr. \plain\fs28 \tab   M.A.F. Breistroffer (b. 1910)
\par \b Brenan \plain\fs28 \tab   J.P.M. Brenan (b. 1917)
\par \pard\tx355 \b Brenner \plain\fs28 \tab    M.M.W. Brenner (1843-1930)
\par \b Brewer \plain\fs28 \tab   W.H. Brewer (1828-1910)
\par \b Brickell, C.D. \plain\fs28 \tab   C.D. Brickell (b. 1932)
\par \b Briganti \plain\fs28 \tab   V. Briganti (1766-1836)
\par \b Brign. \plain\fs28 \tab   G. de Brignoli di Brunnhoff (1774-1857)
\par \b Briot \plain\fs28 \tab   P.L.  Briot (1804-1888)
\par \b Briq. \plain\fs28 \tab   J.I. Briquet (1870-1931)
\par \b Britten \plain\fs28 \tab   J. Britten (1846-1924)
\par \b Brittinger \plain\fs28 \tab   C.C. Brittinger (1795-1869)
\par \b Britton, C.E. \plain\fs28 \tab   C. E. Britton (1872-1944)
\par \pard\tx355 \b Britton \plain\fs28 \tab   N.L. Britton (1859-1934)
\par \b Brocchi \plain\fs28 \tab   G.B. Brocchi (1772-1826)
\par \b Broddeson \plain\fs28 \tab   O. E. Broddeson (1880-1957)
\par \b Bromf. \plain\fs28 \tab   W.A. Bromfield (1801-1851)
\par \b Brongn. \plain\fs28 \tab   A.T. Brongniart (1801-1876)
\par \b Brot. \plain\fs28 \tab   F. Avellar Brotero (1744-1828)
\par \b Brot. \plain\fs28 \tab   F. da S. de Avellar Brotero (1744-1828)
\par \b Brouss. \plain\fs28 \tab   P.M.A. Broussonet (1761-1807)
\par \b Browicz \plain\fs28 \tab   K. Browicz (b. 1925)
\par \b Browne \plain\fs28 \tab   P. Browne (1720-1790)
\par \pard\tx355 \b Brownsey \plain\fs28 \tab   P.J. Brownsey (b. 1948)
\par \b Bruhin \plain\fs28 \tab   Pater T. von Aquin Bruhin (1835-1896/1899)
\par \b Brullo \plain\fs28 \tab   S. Brullo (b. 1947)
\par \b Brumh. \plain\fs28 \tab   P. Brumhard (b. 1879)
\par \b Brummitt \plain\fs28 \tab   R.K. Brummitt (b. 1937)
\par \b Brunerye \plain\fs28 \tab   L.J.L. Brunerye (b. 1939)
\par \b Bruno \plain\fs28 \tab   --Bruno (fl. 1760)
\par \b Bruun \plain\fs28 \tab   H.G. Bruun (b. 1897)
\par \b Br\'fcgger \plain\fs28 \tab   C.G. Br\'fcgger (1833-1899)
\par \b Bubani \plain\fs28 \tab   P. Bubani (1806-1888)
\par \b Buch \plain\fs28 \tab  C. L. von Buch (1174 1853)
\par \pard\tx355 \b Buch.-Ham. \plain\fs28 \tab   F. Buchanan-Hamilton (1762-1829)
\par \b Buchanan-White \plain\fs28 \tab   F. Buchanan-White (1842-1894)
\par \b Buchegger \plain\fs28 \tab   J. Buchegger (b. 1886)
\par \b Buchenau \plain\fs28 \tab   F.G.P. Buchenau (1831-1906)
\par \b Buchholz \plain\fs28 \tab   F. Buchholz (1872-1924)
\par \b Buchholz \plain\fs28 \tab   J.T. Buchholz (1888-1951)
\par \b Buchinger \plain\fs28 \tab   J.D. Buchinger (1803-1888)
\par \b Buch \plain\fs28 \tab   C.L.  von Buch (1774-1853)
\par \b Buckn. \plain\fs28 \tab   C. Bucknall (1849-1921)
\par \b Buen \plain\fs28 \tab   O. de Buen y del Cos (1863-1945)
\par \pard\tx355 \b Buffon \plain\fs28 \tab   G.L.L. de Buffon (1707-1788)
\par \b Bug. \plain\fs28 \tab   W. Bugaia (b. 1924)
\par \b Buhse \plain\fs28 \tab   F.A. Buhse (1821-1898)
\par \b Buia \plain\fs28 \tab   A. Buia (1911-1964)
\par \b Bunge \plain\fs28 \tab   A.A. von Bunge (1803-1890)
\par \b Burbidge\plain\fs28 \tab  F. W. T. Burbidge (1847-1905)
\par \b Burdet \plain\fs28 \tab   H.M. Burdet (b. 1939)
\par \b Burgsd. \plain\fs28 \tab   F.A.L. von Burgsdorff (1747-1802)
\par \b Burm. fil. \plain\fs28 \tab   N.L. Burman (N. L. Burmannus) (1734-1793)
\par \b Burnat \plain\fs28 \tab   E. Burnat (1828-1920)
\par \b Burollet \plain\fs28 \tab    P.-A. Burollet (fl. 1927)
\par \pard\tx355 \b Burtt, B.L. \plain\fs28 \tab   B.L. Burtt (b. 1913)
\par \b Busch, N. \plain\fs28 \tab   N.A. Busch (1869-1941)
\par \b Buschm. \plain\fs28 \tab   A. Buschmann (b. 1908)
\par \b Buser \plain\fs28 \tab   R. Buser (1857-1931)
\par \b Bush \plain\fs28 \tab   B.F. Bush (1858-1937)
\par \b Butcher \plain\fs28 \tab   R.W. Butcher (1897-1971)
\par \b Butkov \plain\fs28 \tab   A.Y.  Butkov (b. 1911)
\par \b Buttler \plain\fs28 \tab   K.P. Buttler (b. 1942)
\par \b Caball. \plain\fs28 \tab   A. Caballero Segares (1877-1850)
\par \b Cabrera \plain\fs28 \tab   A.L. Cabrera (b. 1908)
\par \b Cadevall \plain\fs28 \tab   J. Cadevall y Diars (Cadeval i Diars) (1846-1921)
\par \pard\tx355 \b Cajander \plain\fs28 \tab   A.K. Cajander (1879-1943)
\par \b Caldesi \plain\fs28 \tab   L. Caldesi (1821 -1884)
\par \b Calestani \plain\fs28 \tab   V. Calestani (b. 1882)
\par \b Camb. \plain\fs28 \tab   J. Cambess\'e8des (1799-1863)
\par \b Campd. \plain\fs28 \tab   F. Campder\'e1 (Campder\'e0) i Camins (1793-1862)
\par \b Campo \plain\fs28 \tab   P. del Campo (fl. 1855)
\par \b Camus, A. \plain\fs28 \tab   A.A. Camus (1879-1965)
\par \b Camus \plain\fs28 \tab   E.G. Camus (1852-1915)
\par \b Candargy, P. \plain\fs28 \tab   P.C. Candargy (b. 1870)
\par \b Cannon \plain\fs28 \tab   J.F.M. Cannon (b. 1930)
\par \b Cant\'f3 \plain\fs28 \tab   P. Cant\'f3 Ramos (b. 1956)
\par \pard\tx355 \b Capelli \plain\fs28 \tab   C.M. Capelli (1763-1831)
\par \b Cardona \plain\fs28 \tab   M. de los Angeles Cardona y Florit (b. 1940)
\par \b Carey, J. \plain\fs28 \tab   J. Carey (1797-1880)
\par \b Cariot \plain\fs28 \tab   A. Cariot (1820-1883)
\par \b Carlstr\'f6m, A. \plain\fs28 \tab   A.L. Carlstr\'f6m (b. 1957)
\par \b Camb. \plain\fs28 \tab   J. Cambess\'e8des (1799-1863)
\par \b Ca\'f1igueral \plain\fs28 \tab   J. Ca\'f1igueral Cid (b. 1912)
\par \b Carri\'e8re \plain\fs28 \tab   E.A. Carri\'e8re (1818-1896)
\par \b Cartier \plain\fs28 \tab   D. Cartier (b. 1935)
\par \b Cartier \plain\fs28 \tab    T. Caruel (1830-1898)
\par \pard\tx355 \b Caruano Gatto \plain\fs28 \tab   Alfredo Caruano Gatto (b. 1868)
\par \b Caruel \plain\fs28 \tab   T. Caruel (1830-1898)
\par \b Casas \plain\fs28 \tab   F.J. Fernandez Casas (b. 1945)
\par \b Casav. \plain\fs28 \tab   J. Ru\'edz Casaviella (1835-1897)
\par \b Caspary \plain\fs28 \tab  J.X.R. Caspary (1818-1887)
\par \b Casper \plain\fs28 \tab    S.J. Casper (b. 1929)
\par \b Cass. \plain\fs28 \tab   A.H.G. Cassini (1781-1832)
\par \b Cast. \plain\fs28 \tab   J.L.M. Castagne (1785-1858)
\par \b Castroviejo \plain\fs28 \tab   S. Castroviejo Bolibar (b. 1946)
\par \b Cav. \plain\fs28 \tab   A.J. Cavanilles (1745-1804)
\par \pard\tx355 \b Cavara \plain\fs28 \tab   F. Cavara (1857-1929)
\par \b Cavillier \plain\fs28 \tab   F.G. Cavillier (1868-1953)
\par \b Cavol. \plain\fs28 \tab   F. Cavolini (1756-1810)
\par \b Ceballos \plain\fs28 \tab   L. Ceballos Fernandez de Cordoba (1896-1967)
\par \b Celak. \plain\fs28 \tab   L.J. Celakovsky (1834-1902)
\par \b Cernjavski \plain\fs28 \tab   P. Cernjavski (1892-1969)
\par \b Cesati \plain\fs28 \tab   V. de Cesati (1806-1883)
\par \b Ceschm. \plain\fs28 \tab   I.V. Ceshmedziev (Cheshmedjiev, Cheshmejiy\'e9v) (b.1930)
\par \b Chab., P. \plain\fs28 \tab   P. Chabert (1796-1867)
\par \b Chab. \plain\fs28 \tab   A.C.  Chabert (1836-1916)
\par \pard\tx355 \b Chabaud \plain\fs28 \tab   B. Chabaud (1833-1915)
\par \b Chaix \plain\fs28 \tab   D. Chaix (1730/1-1799/1800)
\par \b Cham. \plain\fs28 \tab   L.A. von Chamisso (L.C.A.  Chamisseau de Boncourt)
\par \b Chapp. \plain\fs28 \tab   P. Chappellier (1820-1919)
\par \b Charadze \plain\fs28 \tab   A.L.  Charadze (b. 1905)
\par \b Charrel \plain\fs28 \tab   L. Charrel ('Abd-ur-Rahman-Nadji) (fl. 1888-1890)
\par \b Chase \plain\fs28 \tab   M.A. Chase (1869-1963)
\par \b Chassagne \plain\fs28 \tab   M. Chassagne (fl. 1904-1960)
\par \b Chatel. \plain\fs28 \tab   J.J. Chatelain (1736-1822)
\par \b Chater \plain\fs28 \tab   A.O. Chater (b. 1933)
\par \pard\tx355 \b Chaub. \plain\fs28 \tab   L.A. Chaubard (1781-1854)
\par \b Chaudhri \plain\fs28 \tab   M.N. Chaudhri (b. 1932)
\par \b Chav. \plain\fs28 \tab   E.L. Chavannes (1805-1861)
\par \b Chaytor \plain\fs28 \tab   D.A. Chaytor (fl. 1937)
\par \b Chaz. \plain\fs28 \tab   L.M. Chazelles de Prizy (fl. 1790)
\par \b Chenevard \plain\fs28 \tab   P. Chenevard (1839-1919)
\par \b Cheval., A. \plain\fs28 \tab   A.J.B. Chevalier (1873-1956)
\par \b Cheval., E. \plain\fs28 \tab   E. Chevalier (1826-1914)
\par \b Chevall. \plain\fs28 \tab   F.F. Chevallier (1796-1840)
\par \b Chiaje \plain\fs28 \tab   S. delle Chiaje (1794-1860)
\par \pard\tx355 \b Chiarugi \plain\fs28 \tab   A. Chiarugi (1901-1960)
\par \b Ching, R.-C. \plain\fs28 \tab   Ching Ren-Chang (Ch'in J\'ean-ch'ang, Ren-Chang Ching) (1898-1986)
\par \b Chiov. \plain\fs28 \tab   E. Chiovenda (1871-1940)
\par \b Chitrowo \plain\fs28 \tab   V.N. Chitrowo (1879-1949)
\par \b Chm. \plain\fs28 \tab   L.K.A. von Chamisso (L.C.A. Chamisseau de Boncourt) (1781-1838)
\par \b Chmelitschek \plain\fs28 \tab   H. Chmelitschek (b. 1948)
\par \b Chodat \plain\fs28 \tab   R.H. Chodat (1865-1934)
\par \b Choisy \plain\fs28 \tab   J.D. Choisy (1799-1859)
\par \b Chopinet \plain\fs28 \tab   R. Chopinet (b. 1914)
\par \pard\tx355 \b Chouard \plain\fs28 \tab   P. Chouard (fl. 1921-1970)
\par \b Chowdhuri \plain\fs28 \tab   P.K. Chowdhuri (b. 1923)
\par \b Chr., C. \plain\fs28 \tab   C.F.A. Christensen (1872 1942)
\par \b Christener \plain\fs28 \tab   C. Christener (1810-1812)
\par \b Christiansen, M.P. \plain\fs28 \tab   M.P. Christiansen (b. 1889)
\par \b Christm. \plain\fs28 \tab   G.F. Christmann (b. 1752)
\par \b Christ \plain\fs28 \tab    K.H.H. Christ (1833-1933)
\par \b Christ \plain\fs28 \tab   H. Christ (1833-1933)
\par \b Chrshan. \plain\fs28 \tab   V.G. Chrshanovski (b. 1912)
\par \b Chrtek \plain\fs28 \tab   J. Chrtek (b. 1930)
\par \pard\tx355 \b Chrtkov\'e1 \plain\fs28 \tab   A. Chrtkov\'e1 (formerly A. Zertkov\'e0) (b. 1930)
\par \b Church \plain\fs28 \tab   G.L. Church (b. 1903)
\par \b Ciferri \plain\fs28 \tab  R. Ciferri (1895-1964)
\par \b Claire \plain\fs28 \tab   C. Claire (?1867-1931)
\par \b Clairv. \plain\fs28 \tab   J.P. de Clairville (1742-1830)
\par \b Clapham \plain\fs28 \tab   A.R. Clapham (b. 1904)
\par \b Clarion \plain\fs28 \tab   ?J. Clarion (1776-1844)
\par \b Clarke, C.B. \plain\fs28 \tab   C.B. Clarke (1832-1906)
\par \b Clarke, E.D. \plain\fs28 \tab   E.D. Clarke (1779-1822)
\par \b Clarke, G.C.S. \plain\fs28 \tab   G.C.S. Clarke (b. 1944)
\par \pard\tx355 \b Clauson \plain\fs28 \tab   T. Clauson (1817-1860)
\par \b Claus \plain\fs28 \tab   K.E. Claus (1796-1864)
\par \b Clavaud \plain\fs28 \tab   A. Clavaud (1828-1890)
\par \b Clayton, W.D. \plain\fs28 \tab   W.D. Clayton (b. 1926)
\par \b Cleland \plain\fs28 \tab   R.E. Cleland (1892-1971)
\par \b Clemente, M. \plain\fs28 \tab   M. Clemente Mufioz (b. 1949)
\par \b Clemente \plain\fs28 \tab   S. de Rojas Clemente y Rubio (1777-1827)
\par \b Clementi, G.C. \plain\fs28 \tab   G.C. Clementi (1812-1873)
\par \b Clements \plain\fs28 \tab   F.E. Clements (1874-1945)
\par \b Clerc \plain\fs28 \tab   O.E. Clerc (1845-1920)
\par \pard\tx355 \b Clos \plain\fs28 \tab   D. Clos (1821-1908)
\par \b Cockayne \plain\fs28 \tab   L. Cockayne (1855-1934)
\par \b Coincy \plain\fs28 \tab   A.H.C. de la Fontaine de Coincy (1837--1903)
\par \b Colasante \plain\fs28 \tab   M. A. Colasante (b. 1944)
\par \b Coleman, J.R. \plain\fs28 \tab   J.R. Coleman (b. 1934)
\par \b Coleman \plain\fs28 \tab   W.H. Coleman (?1816-1863)
\par \b Colla \plain\fs28 \tab   L.A. Colla (1766-1848)
\par \b Collett \plain\fs28 \tab   H. Collett (1836-1901)
\par \b Colmeiro \plain\fs28 \tab   M. Colmeiro y Penido (1816-1901)
\par \b Coman \plain\fs28 \tab   A. Coman (1881-1972)
\par \b Commerson \plain\fs28 \tab   P. Commerson (1727-1773)
\par \pard\tx355 \b Comolli \plain\fs28 \tab   G. Comolli (1780-1859)
\par \b Conert \plain\fs28 \tab   H.J. Conert (b. 1929)
\par \b Conr. \plain\fs28 \tab   P. Conrath (b. 1892)
\par \b Conrath \plain\fs28 \tab   P. Conrath (1861-1931)
\par \b Constance \plain\fs28 \tab   L. Constance (b. 1909)
\par \b Contandr. \plain\fs28 \tab   J. Contandriopoulos (b. 1922)
\par \b Contandriopoulos \plain\fs28 \tab   J. Contandriopoulos (b. 1922)
\par \b Conti, P. \plain\fs28 \tab   P. Conti (1874-1898)
\par \b Coode \plain\fs28 \tab   M.J.E. Coode (b. 1937)
\par \b Cook, C.D.K. \plain\fs28 \tab   C.D.K. Cook (b. 1933)
\par \b Coombe, D.E. \plain\fs28 \tab   D.E. Coombe (b. 1927)
\par \pard\tx355 \b Copel. \plain\fs28 \tab   E.B. Copeland (1873-1964)
\par \b Corb. \plain\fs28 \tab   F.M.L. Corbi\'e8re (1850-1941)
\par \b Corley \plain\fs28 \tab   H.V. Corley (b. 1914)
\par \b Cornaz \plain\fs28 \tab   E. Cornaz (1825-1911)
\par \b Corr. \plain\fs28 \tab   C.F.J.E. Correns (1864-1933)
\par \b Cosent. \plain\fs28 \tab   F. Cosentini (1769-1840)
\par \b Cosson \plain\fs28 \tab   E.S.C. Cosson (1819-1889)
\par \b Costa \plain\fs28 \tab   A.C. Costa y Cuxart (1817-1886)
\par \b Coste \plain\fs28 \tab   H.J. Coste (1858-1924)
\par \b Cothenius \plain\fs28 \tab   C.A. von Cothenius (1708-1789)
\par \b Cotton, R. \plain\fs28 \tab   R. Cotton (b. 1948)
\par \pard\tx355 \b Coulter, J.M. \plain\fs28 \tab   J.M. Coulter (1851-1928)
\par \b Coulter \plain\fs28 \tab   T. Coulter (1793-1843)
\par \b Court. \plain\fs28 \tab   R.J. Courtois (1806-1835)
\par \b Coust. \plain\fs28 \tab   P. Cousturier (d. 1921)
\par \b Coutinho \plain\fs28 \tab   A.X. Pereira Coutinho (1851-1939)
\par \b Covas \plain\fs28 \tab   G. Covas (b. 1915)
\par \b Coville \plain\fs28 \tab   F.V. Coville (1867-1937)
\par \b Craib \plain\fs28 \tab   W.G. Craib (1882-1933)
\par \b Crantz \plain\fs28 \tab   H.J.N. von Crantz (1722-1799)
\par \b Crepin \plain\fs28 \tab   F. Crepin (1830-1903)
\par \b Cristofolini \plain\fs28 \tab   G. Cristofolini (b. 1939)
\par \pard\tx355 \b Crome \plain\fs28 \tab   G.E.W. Crome (1780-1813)
\par \b Cronq. \plain\fs28 \tab   A. J. Cronquist (b. 1919)
\par \b Csapody \plain\fs28 \tab   V. Csapody (b. 1890)
\par \b Csuros \plain\fs28 \tab   I. Csuros (b. 1914)
\par \b Cuatrec. \plain\fs28 \tab   J. Cuatrecasas y Arumi (b. 1903)
\par \b Cuf. \plain\fs28 \tab   G. Cufodontis (1896-1974)
\par \b Cugnac \plain\fs28 \tab   A. de Cugnac (b. 1898)
\par \b Cullen \plain\fs28 \tab   J. Cullen (b. 1936)
\par \b Cumino \plain\fs28 \tab   P. Cumino (fl. 1807)
\par \b Cunn., A. \plain\fs28 \tab   A. Cunningham (1791-1839)
\par \b Cunn., R. \plain\fs28 \tab   R. Cunningham (1793-1835)
\par \pard\tx355 \b Curtis, M.A. \plain\fs28 \tab   M.A. Curtis (1808-1872)
\par \b Curtiss \plain\fs28 \tab   C. C. Curtiss (1862-1945)
\par \b Curtis \plain\fs28 \tab   W. Curtis (1746-1799)
\par \b Cusson \plain\fs28 \tab   P. Cusson (1721-1783)
\par \b Custer \plain\fs28 \tab   J. L. Custer (1755-1828)
\par \b Cutanda \plain\fs28 \tab   V. Cutanda y Jarauta (1804-1866)
\par \b Cuvier \plain\fs28 \tab   G.F. Cuvier (1773-1838)
\par \b Cyr. \plain\fs28 \tab   D.M.L. Cirillo (Cyrillus, 'Cyrillo') (1739-1799)
\par \b Czak\'f3 \plain\fs28 \tab   K. Czak\'f3 (1843-1895)
\par \b Czecz. \plain\fs28 \tab   H. Czeczott (1888-1982)
\par \b Czefr. \plain\fs28 \tab   Z.V. Czefranova (b. 1923)
\par \pard\tx355 \b Czerep. \plain\fs28 \tab   S.K. Czerepanov (b. 1921)
\par \b Czern. \plain\fs28 \tab   V.M. Czernajew (Czernjaew) (1796-1871)
\par \b Czerniakovska \plain\fs28 \tab   E.G. Czerniakovska (b. 1892)
\par \b Czernova \plain\fs28 \tab   N.M. Czernova (b. 1901)
\par \b Czernov \plain\fs28 \tab   E.G. Czernov (b. 1908)
\par \b Czetz \plain\fs28 \tab   A. Czetz (1801-1865)
\par \b Damanti \plain\fs28 \tab   P. Damanti (b. 1858)
\par \b Dahl, A.E. \plain\fs28 \tab   A.E. Dahl (b. 1916)
\par \b Dahl, O.C. \plain\fs28 \tab   O.C. Dahl (1862-1940)
\par \b Dahlst. \plain\fs28 \tab   H.G.A. Dahlstedt (1856-1934)
\par \b Dalby \plain\fs28 \tab   D.H. Dalby (b. 1930)
\par \pard\tx355 \b Dalla Torre \plain\fs28 \tab   K.W. von Dalla Torre von Thurnberg-Sternhoff (1850-1928)
\par \b Damanti \plain\fs28 \tab   P. Damanti (b. 1858)
\par \b Damboldt \plain\fs28 \tab   J. Damboldt (b. 1937)
\par \b Dammer \plain\fs28 \tab   C.L.U. Dammer (1860-1920)
\par \b Dandy \plain\fs28 \tab   J.E. Dandy (1903-1976)
\par \b Danesch, E. \plain\fs28 \tab   E. Danesch (b. 1922)
\par \b Danesch, O. \plain\fs28 \tab   O. Danesch (b. 1919)
\par \b Danilov \plain\fs28 \tab   A.D. Danilov (b. 1903)
\par \b Dansereau \plain\fs28 \tab   P. Dansereau (b. 1911)
\par \b Danser \plain\fs28 \tab   B.H. Danser (1891-1943)
\par \pard\tx355 \b Danth \plain\fs28 \tab   ?E. Danthoine (fl. 1788)
\par \b Darlington, W. \plain\fs28 \tab   W. Darlington (1782-1863)
\par \b Darracq \plain\fs28 \tab   U. Darracq (d. 1872)
\par \b Daveau \plain\fs28 \tab   J.A. Daveau (1852-1929)
\par \b Davey \plain\fs28 \tab   F.H. Davey (1868-1915)
\par \b Davidov \plain\fs28 \tab   B. Davidov (1870-1927)
\par \b Davies, E.W. \plain\fs28 \tab   E.W. Davies (b. 1924)
\par \b Davies \plain\fs28 \tab   H. Davies (1739-1821)
\par \b Davis, P.H. \plain\fs28 \tab   P.H. Davis (1918-1992)
\par \b DC. \plain\fs28 \tab   A.P. de Candolle (1778-1841)
\par \b DC., A. \plain\fs28 \tab   A.L.P.P. de Candolle (1806-1893)
\par \pard\tx355 \b DC., C. \plain\fs28 \tab   A.C.P. de Candolle (1836-1918)
\par \b De Bary \plain\fs28 \tab   H.A. de Bary (1831-1888)
\par \b Debeaux \plain\fs28 \tab   J.O. Debeaux (1826-1910)
\par \b Dechy \plain\fs28 \tab   M. Dechy (b. 1851)
\par \b Decken \plain\fs28 \tab   C.C. von der Decken (1833-1865)
\par \b Decker \plain\fs28 \tab   P. Decker (b. 1867)
\par \b Decne \plain\fs28 \tab   J. Decaisne (1807-1882)
\par \b De Filipps \plain\fs28 \tab   R.A. De Filipps (b. 1939)
\par \b Degen \plain\fs28 \tab   A. von Degen (1866-1934)
\par \b Degl. \plain\fs28 \tab   J.V.Y. Degland (1773-1841)
\par \b Dehnh. \plain\fs28 \tab   F. Dehnhardt (1781-1870)
\par \pard\tx355 \b De Langhe \plain\fs28 \tab   J.E. de Langhe (b. 1907)
\par \b De Laramb. \plain\fs28 \tab   de Larambergue
\par \b Delarbre \plain\fs28 \tab   A. Delarbre (1724-1813)
\par \b Delaroche \plain\fs28 \tab   D. Delaroche (1743-1812)
\par \b Delaroche, F. \plain\fs28 \tab   F. Delaroche (1780-1813)
\par \b De la Soie \plain\fs28 \tab   G.A. de la Soie (1818-1877)
\par \b Delastre \plain\fs28 \tab   C.J.L. Delastre (1792-1859)
\par \b Delay \plain\fs28 \tab   J. Delay (fl. 1960- 1981)
\par \b De Lengyel, B. \plain\fs28 \tab  B. de Lengyel (fl. 1936)
\par \b De Lens  \plain\fs28 \tab  A.J. De Lens (fl. 1828)
\par \b Delile \plain\fs28 \tab   A.R. Delile (1778-1850)
\par \pard\tx355 \b Delip. \plain\fs28 \tab   D.D. Delipavlov (b. 1919)
\par \b Delponte \plain\fs28 \tab   G.B. Delponte (1812-1884)
\par \b Dematra \plain\fs28 \tab   Dematra (1742-1824)
\par \b Demjan. \plain\fs28 \tab   O.N. Demjanenko (b. 1894)
\par \b den Nijs \plain\fs28 \tab   J.C.M. den Nijs (b. 1946)
\par \b Dennst. \plain\fs28 \tab   A.W. Dennstedt (1776-1826)
\par \b De No\'e9 \plain\fs28 \tab   F. de No\'e9 (fl. 1855)
\par \b De Not.  \plain\fs28 \tab  G. de Notaris (1805-1877)
\par \b De Retz \plain\fs28 \tab   B.G.G. de Retz (b. 1910)
\par \b Derganc \plain\fs28 \tab   L. Derganc (fl. 1897)
\par \b D\'e9s\'e9glise \plain\fs28 \tab   P.A. D\'e9s\'e9glise (1823-1883)
\par \pard\tx355 \b Des Etangs \plain\fs28 \tab   N.S.C. des Etangs (1801-1876)
\par \b Desf. \plain\fs28 \tab   R.L. Desfontaines (1750-1833)
\par \b Desmoulins \plain\fs28 \tab   C.R.A. Desmoulins (Des Moulins) (1798-1875)
\par \b Desportes \plain\fs28 \tab   N.H.F. Desportes (1776-1856)
\par \b Desr. \plain\fs28 \tab   L.A.J. Desrousseaux (1753-1838)
\par \b Desv. \plain\fs28 \tab   N.A. Desvaux (formerly A.N. Desvaux) (1784-1856)
\par \b Dettm., U. \plain\fs28 \tab   U. Dettmann (b. 1933)
\par \b Deville \plain\fs28 \tab   L. Deville (fl. 1859)
\par \b De Voogd \plain\fs28 \tab   W.B.de Voogd(fl. 1976)
\par \b De Vos \plain\fs28 \tab   M.P. de Vos (b. 1912)
\par \pard\tx355 \b Dewey \plain\fs28 \tab   C. Dewey (1784-1867)
\par \b De Wild. \plain\fs28 \tab   E. de Wildeman (1866-1947)
\par \b De Winter \plain\fs28 \tab   B. de Winter (b. 1924)
\par \b Deyl \plain\fs28 \tab   M. Deyl (b. 1906)
\par \b Deyrolle \plain\fs28 \tab   E. Deyrolle (fl. 1891)
\par \b D'hose \plain\fs28 \tab   R. D'hose (fl. 1976)
\par \b D\'edaz \plain\fs28 \tab   T.E. D\'edaz Gonz\'e1lez (b. 1949)
\par \b Dickson \plain\fs28 \tab   J. Dickson (1738-1822)
\par \b Dictr., A. \plain\fs28 \tab   A. Dietrich (1795-1856)
\par \b Didr. \plain\fs28 \tab   D.F. Didrichsen (1814-1887)
\par \b Diels \plain\fs28 \tab   F.L.E. Diels (1874-1945)
\par \pard\tx355 \b Dierbach \plain\fs28 \tab   J.H. Dierbach (1788-1845)
\par \b Dietr.,A. \plain\fs28 \tab   A.G. Dietrich (1795-1856)
\par \b Dietr.,D. \plain\fs28 \tab   D.N.F. Dietrich (1799-1888)
\par \b Dietr.,F. \plain\fs28 \tab   G.F.G. Dietrich (1768-1850)
\par \b Dietr., W. \plain\fs28 \tab   W. Dietrich (b. 1938)
\par \b Dihoru \plain\fs28 \tab   G. Dihoru (b. 1933)
\par \b Dingler \plain\fs28 \tab   H. Dingler (1846-1935)
\par \b Dingwall \plain\fs28 \tab   I. Dingwall (b. 1945)
\par \b Dippel \plain\fs28 \tab   L. Dippel (1827-1914)
\par \b Dittrich \plain\fs28 \tab   M. Dittrich (b. 1934)
\par \b Dobrescu \plain\fs28 \tab   C. Dobrescu (b. 1912)
\par \pard\tx355 \b Dobrocz. \plain\fs28 \tab   D.N. Dobroczaeva-Kovalczuk (b. 1916)
\par \b Dode \plain\fs28 \tab   L.A. Dode (1875-1943)
\par \b D\'f6ll \plain\fs28 \tab   J.C. D\'f6ll (1808-1885)
\par \b Dolliner \plain\fs28 \tab   G. Dolliner (1794-1872)
\par \b Domac \plain\fs28 \tab   R. Domac (b. 1918)
\par \b Domin \plain\fs28 \tab   K. Domin (1882-1953)
\par \b Domokos \plain\fs28 \tab   J. Domokos (b. 1904)
\par \b Don fil., G. \plain\fs28 \tab   G. Don (1798-1856)
\par \b Don, D. \plain\fs28 \tab   D. Don (1799-1841)
\par \b Don,G. \plain\fs28 \tab   G. Don(1764-1814)
\par \b Donadille \plain\fs28 \tab   P. Donadille (b. 1936)
\par \b Donn \plain\fs28 \tab   J. Donn (1758-1813)
\par \pard\tx355 \b D\'f6rfler \plain\fs28 \tab   I. D\'f6rfler (1866-1950)
\par \b Dorner \plain\fs28 \tab  J. Dorner (1808-1873)
\par \b Dorthes \plain\fs28 \tab   J.A. Dorthes (1759-1794)
\par \b Dost\'e1l \plain\fs28 \tab   J. Dost\'e1l (b. 1903)
\par \b Douglas \plain\fs28 \tab   D. Douglas (1799-1834)
\par \b Downar \plain\fs28 \tab   N.V. Downar (fl. 1855-1862)
\par \b Drejer \plain\fs28 \tab   S.T.N. Drejer (1813-1842)
\par \b Drenk. \plain\fs28 \tab  R. Drenkovski (b. 1932)
\par \b Drenowski \plain\fs28 \tab   A.K. Drenowski (Drenovsky) (1879-1967)
\par \b Dreves \plain\fs28 \tab   J.F.P. Dreves (1772-1816)
\par \b Drobov \plain\fs28 \tab   V.P. Drobov (1885-1956)
\par \pard\tx355 \b Druce \plain\fs28 \tab   G.C. Druce (I850- 1932)
\par \b Drude \plain\fs28 \tab   C.G.O. Drude (1852-1933)
\par \b Dryander \plain\fs28 \tab   J.C. Dryander (1748-1810)
\par \b Duben \plain\fs28 \tab   M.W. von Duben (1814-1845)
\par \b Dubjansky \plain\fs28 \tab   V.A. Dubjansky (1877-1962)
\par \b Dubois, F. \plain\fs28 \tab   F.N.A. Dubois (1752-1824)
\par \b Dubovik \plain\fs28 \tab   O.N. Dubovik (b. 1935)
\par \b Duby \plain\fs28 \tab   J.E. Duby (1798-1885)
\par \b Duchartre \plain\fs28 \tab   P.-E.-S. Duchartre (1811-1894)
\par \b Duchesne \plain\fs28 \tab   A.N. Duchesne (1747-1827)
\par \b Ducommun \plain\fs28 \tab   J.C. Ducommun (fl. 1869)
\par \pard\tx355 \b Ducros \plain\fs28 \tab   - Ducros (fl. ?1828)
\par \b Dudley, T.R. \plain\fs28 \tab   T.R. Dudley (b. 1936)
\par \b Dufour \plain\fs28 \tab   J-M.L. Dufour (1780-1865)
\par \b Dufresne \plain\fs28 \tab   P. Dufresne (1786-1836)
\par \b Duh. \plain\fs28 \tab   H.L. Duhamel du Monceau (1700-1782)
\par \b Dulac \plain\fs28 \tab   J. Dulac (fl. 1867-1885)
\par \b D\'fcll \plain\fs28 \tab   R. D\'fcll (b. 1932)
\par \b Dum.-Courset \plain\fs28 \tab   G.L.M. Dumont de Courset (1746-1824)
\par \b Dumbadze \plain\fs28 \tab   T.A. Dumbadze (b. 1902)
\par \b Dumort. \plain\fs28 \tab   B.C.J. Dumortier (1797-1878)
\par \b Dunal \plain\fs28 \tab   M.F. Dunal (1789-1856)
\par \pard\tx355 \b Duperrey \plain\fs28 \tab   L.-I. Duperrey (1786-1865)
\par \b Dupont \plain\fs28 \tab   --Dupont (fl. 1825)
\par \b Dur.-Duq. \plain\fs28 \tab   J.V. Durand-Duquesney (1785-1862)
\par \b Durand, B. \plain\fs28 \tab   B.M. Durand (b. 1928)
\par \b Durand, E. \plain\fs28 \tab   E.-M. (later E.) Durand (1794-1873)
\par \b Durand, T. \plain\fs28 \tab   T.A. Durand (1855-1912)
\par \b Durande \plain\fs28 \tab   J.F. Durande (1732-1794)
\par \b Durieu \plain\fs28 \tab   M.C. Durieu de Maisonneuve (1796-1878)
\par \b Duroi \plain\fs28 \tab   J.P. Duroi (1741-1785)
\par \b D'Urv. \plain\fs28 \tab   J.S.C.D. d'Urville (1790-1842)
\par \pard\tx355 \b Duthie \plain\fs28 \tab   J.F. Duthie (1845-1922)
\par \b Du Tour \plain\fs28 \tab   --Du Tour de Salvert (fl. 1803-1815)
\par \b Duval-Jouve \plain\fs28 \tab   J. Duval-Jouve (1810-1883)
\par \b Dvor\'e1kov\'e1 \plain\fs28 \tab   M. Dvor\'e1kov\'e1 (b. 1940)
\par \b Dvor\'e1k \plain\fs28 \tab   F. Dvor\'e1k (b. 1921)
\par \b Dyer \plain\fs28 \tab   W.T. Thiselton-Dyer (1843-1928)
\par \b Dykes \plain\fs28 \tab   W.R. Dykes (1877-1925)
\par \b Eaton, A. \plain\fs28 \tab   A. Eaton (1776-1842)
\par \b Ebel \plain\fs28 \tab   P.W.S.E. Ebel (1815-1884)
\par \b Ebrenb. \plain\fs28 \tab   C.G. Ehrenberg (1795-1876)
\par \b Ecklon \plain\fs28 \tab   C.F. Ecklon (1795-1868)
\par \pard\tx355 \b Edgew. \plain\fs28 \tab   M.P. Edgeworth (1812-1881)
\par \b Edmondson, J.R. \plain\fs28 \tab   J.R. Edmondson (b. 1948)
\par \b Edmondston \plain\fs28 \tab   T.B. Edmondston (1825-1846)
\par \b Eggli \plain\fs28 \tab   U. Eggli (b. 1959)
\par \b Egorova \plain\fs28 \tab   T.V. Egorova (fl. 1975)
\par \b Ehrenb. \plain\fs28 \tab   C.G. Ehrenberg (1795-1876)
\par \b Ehrend. \plain\fs28 \tab   F. Ehrendorfer (b. 1927)
\par \b Ehrh. \plain\fs28 \tab   J.F. Ehrhart (1742-1795)
\par \b Eichw. \plain\fs28 \tab   K.E. von Eichwald (1794-1876)
\par \b Eig \plain\fs28 \tab   A. Eig (1894-1938)
\par \b Eklund \plain\fs28 \tab   O.A. Eklund (1899-1946)
\par \pard\tx355 \b Ekman, E.L. \plain\fs28 \tab   E.L. Ekrnan (1883-1931)
\par \b Ekman, Elis. \plain\fs28 \tab   H.M.E.A.E. Ekman (1862-1936)
\par \b Elfstr. \plain\fs28 \tab   M. Elfstrand (1859-1927)
\par \b Elias \plain\fs28 \tab   Frere H. Elias (fl. 1907-1944)
\par \b Elkan \plain\fs28 \tab   L. Elkan (1815-1851)
\par \b Elliott \plain\fs28 \tab   S. Elliott (1771-1830)
\par \b Ellstr. \plain\fs28 \tab   M. Elfstrand (1859-1927)
\par \b Emberger \plain\fs28 \tab   M.L. Emberger (1897-1969)
\par \b Enander \plain\fs28 \tab   S.J. Enander (1847-1928)
\par \b Endl. \plain\fs28 \tab   S.F.L. Endlicher (1804-1849)
\par \b Endtmann \plain\fs28 \tab   J. Endtmann (b. 1938)
\par \pard\tx355 \b Engelm. \plain\fs28 \tab   G. Engelmann (1809-1884)
\par \b Engler, V. \plain\fs28 \tab   V. Engler (1885-1917)
\par \b Engler \plain\fs28 \tab   H.G.A. Engler (1844-1930)
\par \b Ern \plain\fs28 \tab   H. Ern (b. 1935)
\par \b Eschsch \plain\fs28 \tab   J.F.G. von Eschscholz (1793-1831)
\par \b Eshbaugh \plain\fs28 \tab   W.H. Eshbaugh (b. 1936)
\par \b Esteve \plain\fs28 \tab   F. Esteve Chueca (b. 1919)
\par \b Etlinger \plain\fs28 \tab   A.E. Etlinger (fl. 1777)
\par \b Eug\'e8ne \plain\fs28 \tab   R.P. Eug\'e8ne (fl. 1868)
\par \b Evers \plain\fs28 \tab   G. Evers (?1837-?1916)
\par \b Ewart \plain\fs28 \tab   A.J. Ewart (1872-1937)
\par \pard\tx355 \b Exell \plain\fs28 \tab   A.W. Exell (b. 1901)
\par \b Fabr. \plain\fs28 \tab   P.C. Fabricius (1714-1774)
\par \b Fabre \plain\fs28 \tab   E. Fabre (fl. 1850)
\par \b Facch. \plain\fs28 \tab   F. Facchini (1788-1852)
\par \b Farwell \plain\fs28 \tab   O.A. Farwell (1867-1944)
\par \b Fasano \plain\fs28 \tab   A. Fasano (fl. 1787)
\par \b Fauch\'e9 \plain\fs28 \tab   M. Fauch\'e9 (fl. 1832)
\par \b Fauconnet \plain\fs28 \tab   C.I. Fauconnet (1811-1876)
\par \b Favarger \plain\fs28 \tab   C.P.E. Favarger (b. 1913)
\par \b Favrat \plain\fs28 \tab   L. Favrat (1827-1893)
\par \b F\'e9e \plain\fs28 \tab   A.L.A. F\'e9e (1789-1874)
\par \b Fedde \plain\fs28 \tab   F.K.G. Fedde (1873-1942)
\par \pard\tx355 \b Fedorov \plain\fs28 \tab   An. A. Fedorov (b. 1908)
\par \b Fedtsch., B. \plain\fs28 \tab   B.A. Fedtschenko (1872-1947)
\par \b Fedtsch., O. \plain\fs28 \tab   O.A. Fedtschenko (1845-1921)
\par \b Feer \plain\fs28 \tab   H. Feer (1857-1892)
\par \b Feinbrun \plain\fs28 \tab   N. Feinbrun (b. 1900)
\par \b Fenzl \plain\fs28 \tab   E. Fenzl (1808-1879)
\par \b Ferakova \plain\fs28 \tab   V. Ferakova (b. 1938)
\par \b Ferguson, I.K. \plain\fs28 \tab   I.K. Ferguson (b. 1938)
\par \b Fernald \plain\fs28 \tab   M.L. Fernald (1873-1950)
\par \b Fernandes, A. \plain\fs28 \tab   A. Fernandes (b. 1906)
\par \b Fernandes, R. \plain\fs28 \tab   R.M.S.B. Fernandes (b. 1916)
\par \pard\tx355 \b Fern\'e1ndez  \plain\fs28 \tab  Casas F.J. Fern\'e1ndez Casas (b. 1945)
\par \b Fern\'e1ndez, F. \plain\fs28 \tab   F. Fermindez Gonz\'e1lez (b. 1956)
\par \b Fern\'e1ndez Prieto\plain\fs28 \tab   J.A. Fern\'e1ndez Prieto (b. 1950)
\par \b Ferrarini \plain\fs28 \tab   E. Ferrarini (b. 1919)
\par \b Fiala \plain\fs28 \tab   F. Fiala (1861-1898)
\par \b Ficalho \plain\fs28 \tab   F. M. de Mello Breyner de Ficalho (1837-1903)
\par \b Fieber \plain\fs28 \tab   F.X. Fieber (1807-1872)
\par \b Fieschi \plain\fs28 \tab   V. Fieschi (b. c. 1910)
\par \b Figuerola \plain\fs28 \tab   R. Figuerola Lamata (b. 1953)
\par \b Fil. \plain\fs28 \tab   N. Filarszky (1858-1941)
\par \pard\tx355 \b Finch \plain\fs28 \tab   R.A. Finch (b. 1939)
\par \b Fingerh. \plain\fs28 \tab   C.A. Fingerhuth (1798-1876)
\par \b Fingerh \plain\fs28 \tab   K.A. Fingerhuth (1802-1876)
\par \b Finschow \plain\fs28 \tab   G. Finschow (b. 1926)
\par \b Fiori \plain\fs28 \tab   A. Fiori (1865-1950)
\par \b Fischer \plain\fs28 \tab   F.E.L. von Fischer (1782-1854)
\par \b Fischer von Wald. \plain\fs28 \tab   A.A. Fischer von Waldheim (1803-1884)
\par \b Fischer, G. \plain\fs28 \tab   G. Fischer (d. 1941)
\par \b Fischer, M. \plain\fs28 \tab   M. Fischer (b. 1942)
\par \b Fischer \plain\fs28 \tab   F.E.L. von Fischer (1782-1854)
\par \pard\tx355 \b Fisher \plain\fs28 \tab   T.R. Fisher (b. 1921)
\par \b Fitschen \plain\fs28 \tab   J. Fitschen (1869-1947)
\par \b Flaksberger \plain\fs28 \tab   C.A. Flaksberger (1880-1942)
\par \b Flatt \plain\fs28 \tab   K. Flatt von Alfold (K. Alfoldi Flatt) (1853-1906)
\par \b Fleischm. \plain\fs28 \tab   A. Fleischmann (1805-1867)
\par \b Flerow \plain\fs28 \tab   A.F. Flerow (1872-1960)
\par \b Fletcher \plain\fs28 \tab   H.R. Fletcher (b. 1907)
\par \b Flod., B. \plain\fs28 \tab   B.G.O. Floderus (1867-1941)
\par \b Floerke \plain\fs28 \tab   H.-G. Floerke (1764-1835)
\par \b Florstrom  \plain\fs28 \tab  B.L. Florstrom (1879-1914)
\par \pard\tx355 \b Fl\'fcgge \plain\fs28 \tab   J. Fl\'fcgge (1775-1816)
\par \b Focke \plain\fs28 \tab   W.O. Focke (1834-1922)
\par \b Foggitt \plain\fs28 \tab   W. Foggitt (1835-1917)
\par \b Fomin \plain\fs28 \tab   A.V. Fomin (1869-1935)
\par \b Font Quer \plain\fs28 \tab   P.J.M. Font y Quer (Font i Quer) (1888-1964)
\par \b Forest. \plain\fs28 \tab   --de Forestier (fl. 1853)
\par \b Form. \plain\fs28 \tab   E. Form\'e1nek (1845-1900)
\par \b Forrest \plain\fs28 \tab   G. Forrest (1873-1932)
\par \b Forselles \plain\fs28 \tab   J. H. af Forselles (1785-1855)
\par \b Forsk\'e5l \plain\fs28 \tab   P. Forsk\'e5l (Forssk\'e5l, Forskahl) (1732-1763)
\par \pard\tx355 \b Forster, E. \plain\fs28 \tab   E. Forster (1765-1849)
\par \b Forster, G. \plain\fs28 \tab   J.G.A. Forster (1754-1794)
\par \b Forster, J. \plain\fs28 \tab   R.J.R. Forster (1729-1798)
\par \b Forster, T.F. \plain\fs28 \tab   T.F. Forster (1761-1825)
\par \b Fortune \plain\fs28 \tab   R. Fortune (1812-1880)
\par \b Foster \plain\fs28 \tab   M. Foster (1836-1907)
\par \b Fouc. \plain\fs28 \tab   J. Foucaud (1847-1904)
\par \b Foug. \plain\fs28 \tab   A.D. Fougeroux de Bondaroy (1732-1789)
\par \b Fourn., E. \plain\fs28 \tab   E.P.N. Fournier (1834-1884)
\par \b Fourn., P. \plain\fs28 \tab   P.-V. Fournier (1877-1964)
\par \pard\tx355 \b Fourr. \plain\fs28 \tab   J.-P. Fourreau (1844- 1871)
\par \b Fox-Str. \plain\fs28 \tab   W.T.H. Fox-Strangways (1795-1865)
\par \b Franchet \plain\fs28 \tab   A.R. Franchet (1834-1900)
\par \b Franco \plain\fs28 \tab   J.M.A.P. do Amaral Franco (b. 1921)
\par \b Franklin \plain\fs28 \tab   J. Franklin (1786-1847)
\par \b Fraser, Neill \plain\fs28 \tab   P. Neill Fraser (1830-1905)
\par \b Fraser-Jenkins \plain\fs28 \tab   C.R.F. Jenkins (later C.R. Fraser-Jenkins) (b.1948)
\par \b Freitag \plain\fs28 \tab   H. Freitag (b. 1932)
\par \b Fresen. \plain\fs28 \tab   J.B.G.W. Fresenius (1806-1866)
\par \pard\tx355 \b Freyc. \plain\fs28 \tab   H.L.C. de Saulces de Freycinet (1779-1842)
\par \b Freyer \plain\fs28 \tab   H. Freyer (1802-1866)
\par \b Freyn \plain\fs28 \tab   J.F. Freyn (1845-1903)
\par \b Frickh. \plain\fs28 \tab  C. A. Frickhinger (1818-1907)
\par \b Frid. \plain\fs28 \tab   K.N. Friderichsen (1853-1932)
\par \b Friedrichsthal \plain\fs28 \tab   E. von Friedrichsthal (1809-1842)
\par \b Friedrich \plain\fs28 \tab   H.C. Friedrich (b. 1925)
\par \b Fries \plain\fs28 \tab   E.M. Fries (1794-1878)
\par \b Fries, T.C.E. \plain\fs28 \tab   T.C.E. Fries (1886-1930)
\par \b Fries, Th. \plain\fs28 \tab   T.M. Fries (1832-1913)
\par \pard\tx355 \b Fristedt \plain\fs28 \tab   R. F. Fristedt (1832-1893)
\par \b Fritsch \plain\fs28 \tab   K. Fritsch, jr. (1864-1934)
\par \b Fritze \plain\fs28 \tab   R. Fritze (1841-1903)
\par \b Friv. \plain\fs28 \tab   E. Frivaldsky von Frivald (I. Frivaldsky) (1799-1870)
\par \b Frodin \plain\fs28 \tab   D.G. Frodin (b. 1940)
\par \b Froelich \plain\fs28 \tab   J.A. von Froelich (1766-1841)
\par \b Fr\'f6hlich, A. \plain\fs28 \tab   A. Fr\'f6hlich (1882-1969)
\par \b Frohner \plain\fs28 \tab   S.E. Frohner (b. 1941)
\par \b Fryer \plain\fs28 \tab   A. Fryer (1826-1912)
\par \b Fuchs, A. \plain\fs28 \tab   A. Fuchs (1872-1927)
\par \pard\tx355 \b Fuchs, H.P. \plain\fs28 \tab   H.P. Fuchs Eckert (b. 1928)
\par \b Funck \plain\fs28 \tab   H.C. Funck (1771-1839)
\par \b F\'fcrnrohr \plain\fs28 \tab   A. E. F\'fcrnrohr (1804-1861)
\par \b Fuss \plain\fs28 \tab   J.M. Fuss (l814-1883)
\par \b Gaertner fil. \plain\fs28 \tab   C.F. von Gaertner (1772-1850)
\par \b Gaertner, P. \plain\fs28 \tab   P.G. Gaertner (1754-1825)
\par \b Gaertner \plain\fs28 \tab   J. Gaertner (1732-1791)
\par \b Gagnebin \plain\fs28 \tab   A. Gagnebin de la Ferri\'e9re (1707-1800)
\par \b Gaill. \plain\fs28 \tab   C. Gaillardot (1814-1883)
\par \b Gale, S. \plain\fs28 \tab   S. Gale (b. 1915)
\par \pard\tx355 \b Galeotti \plain\fs28 \tab   H.G. Galeotti (1814-1858)
\par \b Galiano \plain\fs28 \tab   E. Fern\'e1ndez-Galiano Fern\'e1ndez (b. 1921)
\par \b Gamajun. \plain\fs28 \tab   A.P. Gamajunova (b. 1904)
\par \b Gamble \plain\fs28 \tab   J.S. Garnble (1847-1925)
\par \b Gamisans \plain\fs28 \tab   J. Gamisans (b. 1944)
\par \b Gams \plain\fs28 \tab   H. Gams (b. 1893)
\par \b Gand. \plain\fs28 \tab   M. Gandoger (1850-1926)
\par \b Ganeschin \plain\fs28 \tab   S.S. Ganeschin (1879-1930)
\par \b Gannajun. \plain\fs28 \tab   A.P. Gamajunova (b. 1904)
\par \b Garbari \plain\fs28 \tab   F. Garbari (b. 1937)
\par \b Garcias Font \plain\fs28 \tab   L. Garcias Font (1885-1975)
\par \pard\tx355 \b Garc\'eda \plain\fs28 \tab   J.G. Garc\'eda (1904-1971)
\par \b Garcke \plain\fs28 \tab   C.A.F. Garcke (1819-1904)
\par \b Gariod \plain\fs28 \tab   C.H. Gariod (1836-1892)
\par \b Gars. \plain\fs28 \tab   F.A.P. de Garsault (1691-1778)
\par \b Gartner, H. \plain\fs28 \tab   H. Gartner (fl. 1939)
\par \b Gaspar. \plain\fs28 \tab   G. Gasparrini (1804-1866)
\par \b Gaterau \plain\fs28 \tab   -- Gaterau (fl. 1789)
\par \b Gauckler \plain\fs28 \tab   K. Gauckler (b. 1898)
\par \b Gaud.-Beaup. \plain\fs28 \tab   C. Gaudichaud-Beaupr\'e9 (1789-1854)
\par \b Gaudin \plain\fs28 \tab   J.F.A.T.G.P. Gaudin (1766-1833)
\par \b Gaussen \plain\fs28 \tab   H.M. Gaussen (1891-1981)
\par \pard\tx355 \b Gaut. \plain\fs28 \tab   G. Gautier (1841-1911)
\par \b Gavioli \plain\fs28 \tab   O. Gavioli (1871-l944)
\par \b Gawlowska \plain\fs28 \tab   M.J. Gawlowska (b. 1910)
\par \b Gay \plain\fs28 \tab   J.E. Gay (1786-1864)
\par \b Gay, C. \plain\fs28 \tab   C. Gay (1800-1873)
\par \b Gay, H. \plain\fs28 \tab   Hippolyte Gay (fl. 1885-1894)
\par \b Gayer \plain\fs28 \tab   G. Gayer (1883-1932)
\par \b Geiger \plain\fs28 \tab   P.L. Geiger (1785-1836)
\par \b Geil. \plain\fs28 \tab   G. Geilinger (1881-1955)
\par \b Gelert \plain\fs28 \tab   O.C.L. Gelert (1862-1899)
\par \b Geltman \plain\fs28 \tab   D.V. Geltman (b. 1957)
\par \pard\tx355 \b Gervais \plain\fs28 \tab   C. Gervais (b. 1933)
\par \b Genev. \plain\fs28 \tab   L.G. Genevier (1830-1880)
\par \b Genn. \plain\fs28 \tab   P. Gennari (1820-1897)
\par \b Genty \plain\fs28 \tab   P.A. Genty (1861-1955)
\par \b Georgescu \plain\fs28 \tab   C.C. Georgescu (1898-1968)
\par \b Georgi \plain\fs28 \tab  J.G. Georgi (1729-1802)
\par \b Georgiadis \plain\fs28 \tab   T. Georgiadis (fl. 1977-1985)
\par \b Georgiev \plain\fs28 \tab   T. Georgiev (b. 1883)
\par \b Georgi \plain\fs28 \tab   J.G. Georgi (1729-1802)
\par \b Gerard \plain\fs28 \tab   L. Gerard (1733-1819)
\par \b Gerbino \plain\fs28 \tab   X. Gerbino (fl. 1845)
\par \pard\tx355 \b Germ. \plain\fs28 \tab   J.N.E. Germain de Saint Pierre (Saint-Pierre)(1815-1882)
\par \b Gerstlauer \plain\fs28 \tab   L. Gerstlauer (1863-1949)
\par \b Getliffe \plain\fs28 \tab   F.M. Getliffe (b. 1941)
\par \b Geuns \plain\fs28 \tab   S.J. van Geuns (1767-1795)
\par \b Gheorghieff \plain\fs28 \tab   S. Gheorghieff (1859-1900)
\par \b Giacomini \plain\fs28 \tab   V. Giacomini (b. 1914)
\par \b Gibbs, P. \plain\fs28 \tab   P.E. Gibbs (b. 1938)
\par \b Gibby \plain\fs28 \tab   M. Gibby (M. Ambrose) (b. 1949)
\par \b Gibelli \plain\fs28 \tab   G. Gibelli (1831-1898)
\par \b Gibson \plain\fs28 \tab   G.S. Gibson (1818-1883)
\par \pard\tx355 \b Gilib. \plain\fs28 \tab   J.E. Gilibert (1741-1814)
\par \b Gill \plain\fs28 \tab   J. Gill (b. 1936)
\par \b Gillet \plain\fs28 \tab   C.C. Gillet (1806-1896)
\par \b Gillies \plain\fs28 \tab   J. Gillies (1792-1834)
\par \b Gilli \plain\fs28 \tab   A. Gilli (b. 1903)
\par \b Gillot \plain\fs28 \tab   F.X. Gillot (1842-1910)
\par \b Gill \plain\fs28 \tab   J. Gill (b. 1936)
\par \b Gilmour \plain\fs28 \tab   J.S.L. Gilmour (b. 1906)
\par \b Gilomen \plain\fs28 \tab   H. Gilomen (fl. 1937)
\par \b Ging. \plain\fs28 \tab   F.C.J. Gingins de Lassaraz (1790-1863)
\par \b Ginzberger \plain\fs28 \tab   A. Ginzberger (1873-1940)
\par \pard\tx355 \b Girard \plain\fs28 \tab   F. de Girard (fl. 1844)
\par \b Giraud. \plain\fs28 \tab   L. Giraudias (1848-1922)
\par \b Giroux \plain\fs28 \tab   M. Giroux (fl. 1933)
\par \b Gled. \plain\fs28 \tab   J.G. Gleditsch (1714-1786)
\par \b Glen \plain\fs28 \tab   H.F. Glen (b. 1950)
\par \b Gloxin \plain\fs28 \tab   B.P. Gloxin (fl. 1785)
\par \b Gluck \plain\fs28 \tab   C.M.H. Gluck (1868-1940)
\par \b Gmelin, C.C. \plain\fs28 \tab   C.C. Gmelin (1762-1837)
\par \b Gmelin, J.F. \plain\fs28 \tab   J.F. Gmelin (1748-1804)
\par \b Gmelin, J.G. \plain\fs28 \tab   J.G. Gmelin (1709-1755)
\par \b Gmelin, S.G. \plain\fs28 \tab   S.G. Gmelin (1744/1745-1774)
\par \pard\tx355 \b Goaty \plain\fs28 \tab   E.L.H. Goaty (1830-1890)
\par \b Gochnat \plain\fs28 \tab   F.C. Gochnat (d. 1816)
\par \b Godet \plain\fs28 \tab   C.H. Godet (1797-1879)
\par \b Godfery \plain\fs28 \tab   M. J. Godfery (1856-1945)
\par \b Godman \plain\fs28 \tab   F. Du Cane Godman (1834-1919)
\par \b Godron \plain\fs28 \tab   D.A. Godron (1807-1880)
\par \b Goebel \plain\fs28 \tab   K.C.T.F. Goebel (1794-1851)
\par \b Goffart \plain\fs28 \tab   J. Goffart (1864-1954)
\par \b Goiran \plain\fs28 \tab   A. Goiran (1835-1909)
\par \b Gola \plain\fs28 \tab   G. Gola (1877-1956)
\par \b Goldb. \plain\fs28 \tab   L. F. Goldbach (1793-1824)
\par \pard\tx355 \b Goldie \plain\fs28 \tab   J. Goldie (1793-1886)
\par \b Golitsin \plain\fs28 \tab   S.V. Golitsin (1897-1968)
\par \b Golz \plain\fs28 \tab   P. Golz (b. 1935)
\par \b Gontsch. \plain\fs28 \tab   N.F. Gontscharov (1900-1942)
\par \b Gonzalez, F. \plain\fs28 \tab   F. Gonzalez (fl. 1877)
\par \b Gonz\'e1lez-Albo \plain\fs28 \tab   J. Gonz\'e1lez-Albo Campillo (1913-1990)
\par \b Good. \plain\fs28 \tab   S. Goodenough (1743-1827)
\par \b Goodding \plain\fs28 \tab   L.N. Goodding (1880-1967)
\par \b Gordon \plain\fs28 \tab   G. Gordon (1806-1879)
\par \b Gornall \plain\fs28 \tab   R.J. Gornall (b. 1951)
\par \b Gorodkov \plain\fs28 \tab   B.N. Gorodkov (1890-1953)
\par \pard\tx355 \b Gorschk. \plain\fs28 \tab   S.G. Gorschkova (1889-1972)
\par \b Gorski \plain\fs28 \tab   S. B. Gorski (1802-1864)
\par \b Gottl.-Tann. \plain\fs28 \tab   P. von Gottlieb-Tannenhain (b. 1879)
\par \b Gouan \plain\fs28 \tab   A. Gouan (1733-1821)
\par \b Gould \plain\fs28 \tab   F.W. Gould (b. 1913)
\par \b Goulimy \plain\fs28 \tab   C.N. Goulimy (Goulimis) (1886-1963)
\par \b Goupil \plain\fs28 \tab   C.J. Goupil (1784-1858)
\par \b Govoruchin \plain\fs28 \tab   V.S. Govoruchin (1903-1970)
\par \b Grab. \plain\fs28 \tab   H.E. Grabowski (1792-1842)
\par \b Gradstein \plain\fs28 \tab  S.R. Gradstein (b. 1943)
\par \pard\tx355 \b Graebner fil. \plain\fs28 \tab   P. Graebner (1900-1978)
\par \b Graebner \plain\fs28 \tab   K.O.R.P.P. Graebner (1871-1933)
\par \b Graells \plain\fs28 \tab   M. de la P. Graells y de la Agiiera (1809-1898)
\par \b Graf \plain\fs28 \tab   ?S. Graf (1801-1838)
\par \b Graham, R.A. \plain\fs28 \tab   R.A. Graham (1915-1958)
\par \b Graham, R.C. \plain\fs28 \tab   R.C. Graham (1786-1845)
\par \b Gram, K. \plain\fs28 \tab   K.J.A. Gram (1897-1961)
\par \b Grande \plain\fs28 \tab   L. Grande (1878-1965)
\par \b Grauer \plain\fs28 \tab   S. Grauer (1758-1820)
\par \b Grau \plain\fs28 \tab   H.R.J. Grau (b. 1937)
\par \pard\tx355 \b Gray, A. \plain\fs28 \tab   A. Gray (1810-1888)
\par \b Gray, S.F. \plain\fs28 \tab   S.F. Gray (1766-1828)
\par \b Grec. \plain\fs28 \tab   D. Grecescu (1841-1910)
\par \b Gredilla \plain\fs28 \tab   A.F. Gredilla y Gauna (1859-1919)
\par \b Greene, E.L. \plain\fs28 \tab   E.L. Greene (1843-1915)
\par \b Greenman \plain\fs28 \tab   J.M. Greenman (1867-1951)
\par \b Gregory, E.S. \plain\fs28 \tab   E.S. Gregory (1840-1932)
\par \b Gremblich \plain\fs28 \tab   J. Gremblich (1851-1905)
\par \b Gremli \plain\fs28 \tab   A. Gremli (1833-1899)
\par \b Gren. \plain\fs28 \tab   J.C.M. Grenier (1808-1875)
\par \b Greuter, W. \plain\fs28 \tab   W.R. Greuter (b. 1938)
\par \pard\tx355 \b Grev. \plain\fs28 \tab   R.K. Greville (1794-1866)
\par \b Griesselich \plain\fs28 \tab   L. Griesselich (1804-1848)
\par \b Grigoriev \plain\fs28 \tab   J.S. Grigoriev (b. 1905)
\par \b Grimm \plain\fs28 \tab   J.F.K. Grimm (1737-1821)
\par \b Grinj \plain\fs28 \tab   F.A. Grinj (F.O. Grynj) (b. 1902)
\par \b Grint., G. \plain\fs28 \tab   G.P. Grintescu (1870-1947)
\par \b Grint., I. \plain\fs28 \tab   I. Grintescu (1874-1964)
\par \b Griseb. \plain\fs28 \tab   A.H.R. Grisebach (1814-1879)
\par \b Grontved \plain\fs28 \tab   J. Grontved (1882-1956)
\par \b Gross, H. \plain\fs28 \tab   H. Gross (b. 1888)
\par \b Grosser \plain\fs28 \tab   W.C.H. Grosser (b. 1869)
\par \pard\tx355 \b Grosset \plain\fs28 \tab   H.E. Grosset (b. 1903)
\par \b Grossh. \plain\fs28 \tab   A.A. Grossheim (1888-1948)
\par \b Groves, J. \plain\fs28 \tab   J. Groves (1858-1933)
\par \b Groves \plain\fs28 \tab   H. Groves (1835-1891)
\par \b Grubov \plain\fs28 \tab   V.I. Grubov (b. 1917)
\par \b Gruner \plain\fs28 \tab   L.F. Gruner (b. 1838)
\par \b Grynj \plain\fs28 \tab   F.A. Grynj (b. 1902)
\par \b Gr\'f6ntved \plain\fs28 \tab   J. Gr\'f6ntved (1882-1956)
\par \b Gubell. \plain\fs28 \tab   L. Gubellini (b. 1954)
\par \b Gueldenst. \plain\fs28 \tab   J.A. von Gueldenstaedt (1745-1781)
\par \b Guersent \plain\fs28 \tab   L.B. Guersent (1776-1848)
\par \pard\tx355 \b Guett. \plain\fs28 \tab  J.E. Guettard (1715-1786)
\par \b Gugler \plain\fs28 \tab    W. Gugler (1874-1909)
\par \b Guicc. \plain\fs28 \tab   G. Guicciardi (fl. 1855)
\par \b Guimar. \plain\fs28 \tab   J. de Ascensao Guimaraes (1862-1922)
\par \b Guimpel \plain\fs28 \tab   F. Guimpel (1774-1839)
\par \b Guinea \plain\fs28 \tab   E. Guinea L\'f3pez (1907-1985)
\par \b Guinier \plain\fs28 \tab   P. Guinier (1876-1962)
\par \b Guinochet \plain\fs28 \tab   M. Guinochet (b. 1909)
\par \b Guirao \plain\fs28 \tab   A. Guirao y Navarro (d. 1890)
\par \b Guittonneau \plain\fs28 \tab   G. Guittonneau (b. 1934)
\par \b Gulia \plain\fs28 \tab   G. Gulia (1835-1889)
\par \pard\tx355 \b Gumprecht \plain\fs28 \tab   R. Gumprecht (b. 1900)
\par \b Gunnarsson \plain\fs28 \tab   J.G. Gunnarsson (1866-1944)
\par \b Gunnerus \plain\fs28 \tab   J.E. Gunnerus (1718-1773)
\par \b G\'fcnther \plain\fs28 \tab   C.C. G\'fcnther (1769-1833)
\par \b Guss. \plain\fs28 \tab   G. Gussone (1787-1866)
\par \b Gustaffson, M. \plain\fs28 \tab   M.\'c5. Gustaffson (b. 1941)
\par \b Gustavsson, L.-\'c5. \plain\fs28 \tab   L.\'c5. Gustavsson (b. 1946)
\par \b Gusuleac \plain\fs28 \tab   M. Gusuleac (1887-1960)
\par \b Guterm. \plain\fs28 \tab   W. Gutermann (b. 1935)
\par \b Guthnick \plain\fs28 \tab   H.J. Guthnick (1800-1870)
\par \pard\tx355 \b Gu\'e9pin \plain\fs28 \tab   J.P. Gu\'e9pin (1779-1858)
\par \b Gu\'e9rin \plain\fs28 \tab   J.X.B. Gu\'e9rin (1775-1850)
\par \b Gyorffy \plain\fs28 \tab   I. Gyorffy (1880-1959)
\par \b G\'e1yer \plain\fs28 \tab   G. G\'e1yer (1883-1932)
\par \b G\'f3mez-Campo \plain\fs28 \tab   C. G\'f3mez-Campo (b. 1933)
\par \b G\'f6rz, R. \plain\fs28 \tab   R. G\'f6rz (1879-1935)
\par \b G\'f6tz \plain\fs28 \tab   E. G\'f6tz (b. 1940)
\par \b G\'fcnther, K. \plain\fs28 \tab   K.-F. G\'fcnther (b. 1941)
\par \b G\'fcrke \plain\fs28 \tab   R.L.A.M. G\'fcrke (1854-1911)
\par \b Habl. \plain\fs28 \tab   C. von Hablitz (1752-1821)
\par \b Hacq. \plain\fs28 \tab   B.A. Hacquet (1739-1815)
\par \pard\tx355 \b Hadac \plain\fs28 \tab   E.F.L. Hadac (1914-1987)
\par \b Haenke \plain\fs28 \tab   T.P.X. Haenke (1761-1816)
\par \b Haenseler \plain\fs28 \tab   F. Haenseler (1766-1841)
\par \b Hagendijk \plain\fs28 \tab   A. Hagendijk (b. 1942)
\par \b Hagerup \plain\fs28 \tab   O. Hagerup (1889-1961)
\par \b Hagl., G. \plain\fs28 \tab   G.E. Haglund (1900-1955)
\par \b Hagstr\'f6m \plain\fs28 \tab   J.O. Hagstr\'f6m (1860-1922)
\par \b Hahne \plain\fs28 \tab   A.H. Hahne (1873-1942)
\par \b Hall, A.D. \plain\fs28 \tab   A.D. Hall (1864-1942)
\par \b Hall, H. \plain\fs28 \tab   M.H.M. Hall (1874-1932)
\par \b Hall, W. \plain\fs28 \tab   W. Hall (1743-1800)
\par \pard\tx355 \b Haller fil. \plain\fs28 \tab   A. von Haller (1758-1823)
\par \b Haller \plain\fs28 \tab   A. von Haller (1708-1777)
\par \b Halliday \plain\fs28 \tab   G. Halliday (b. 1933)
\par \b Hallier \plain\fs28 \tab   E. Hallier (1831-1904)
\par \b Hal\'e1csy \plain\fs28 \tab   E. von Hal\'e1csy (1842-1913)
\par \b H\'e4met-Ahti \plain\fs28 \tab   L. H\'e4met-Ahti (b. 1931)
\par \b Hamet \plain\fs28 \tab   R. Hamet (Raymond-Hamet) (1890-1972)
\par \b Hamilton, A.P. \plain\fs28 \tab   A.P. Hamilton (b. 1939)
\par \b Hammar \plain\fs28 \tab   O.N. Hammar (1821-1875)
\par \b Hammer \plain\fs28 \tab   K. Hammer (b. 1944)
\par \b Hampe \plain\fs28 \tab   G.E.L. Hampe (1795-1880)
\par \pard\tx355 \b Hanb., F.J. \plain\fs28 \tab   F.J. Hanbury (1851-1938)
\par \b Hand.-Mazz. \plain\fs28 \tab   H.F. von Handel-Mazzetti (1882-1940)
\par \b Hanelt \plain\fs28 \tab   P. Hanelt (b. 1930)
\par \b Hanry \plain\fs28 \tab   H. Hanry (1807-1893)
\par \b Hara \plain\fs28 \tab   H. Hara (1911-1986)
\par \b Hard. \plain\fs28 \tab   L. Hardouin (1800-1858)
\par \b Hardy \plain\fs28 \tab   D.S. Hardy (b. 1931)
\par \b Harley \plain\fs28 \tab   R.M. Harley (b. 1936)
\par \b Harms \plain\fs28 \tab   H.A.T. Harms (1870-1942)
\par \b Harrison, H. \plain\fs28 \tab  - J. Heslop-Harrison (b. 1920)
\par \b Hartig \plain\fs28 \tab   H. J.A.R. Hartig (1839-1901)
\par \pard\tx355 \b Hartinger \plain\fs28 \tab   A. Hartinger (1806-1890)
\par \b Hartl \plain\fs28 \tab   D. Hartl (fl. 1955)
\par \b Hartman fil. \plain\fs28 \tab   C. Hartman (1824-1884)
\par \b Hartman, R. \plain\fs28 \tab   R.W. Hartman (1827-1891)
\par \b Hartmann, F.X. \plain\fs28 \tab   F.X. von Hartmann (1737-1791)
\par \b Hartman \plain\fs28 \tab   C.J. Hartman (1790-1849)
\par \b Hartinger \plain\fs28 \tab   A. Hartinger (1806-1890)
\par \b Hartvig \plain\fs28 \tab   P. Hartvig (b. 1941)
\par \b Hartweg \plain\fs28 \tab   C.T. Hartweg (1812-1871)
\par \b Hartwiss \plain\fs28 \tab   N. von Hartwiss (1791-1860)
\par \b Harvey \plain\fs28 \tab   W.H. Harvey (1811-1866)
\par \pard\tx355 \b Harz, C.O. \plain\fs28 \tab   C.O. Harz (1842-1906)
\par \b Hasselq. \plain\fs28 \tab   F. Hasselquist (1722-1752)
\par \b Hassk. \plain\fs28 \tab   J.C. Hasskarl (1811-1894)
\par \b Hauman \plain\fs28 \tab   L. Hauman (1880-1965)
\par \b Hausm. \plain\fs28 \tab   F. von Hausmann (1810-1878)
\par \b Hausskn. \plain\fs28 \tab   H.K. Haussknecht (1838-1903)
\par \b Haw. \plain\fs28 \tab   A.H. Haworth (1768-1833)
\par \b Hawksworth, F.G. \plain\fs28 \tab   F.G. Hawksworth (b. 1926)
\par \b Hayek \plain\fs28 \tab   A. von Hayek (1871-1928)
\par \b Haynald \plain\fs28 \tab   S.F.L. Haynald (1816-1891)
\par \b Hayne \plain\fs28 \tab   F.G. Hayne (1763-1832)
\par \pard\tx355 \b H\'e4yr\'e9n \plain\fs28 \tab   E.F. H\'e4yr\'e9n (1878-1957)
\par \b Hayward \plain\fs28 \tab   W.R. Hayward (fl. 1868-1895)
\par \b Hazsl. \plain\fs28 \tab   F.A. Hazslinszky von Hazslin (1818-1896)
\par \b Hedberg \plain\fs28 \tab   K.O. Hedberg (b. 1923)
\par \b Hedge \plain\fs28 \tab   I.C. Hedge (b. 1928)
\par \b Hedl.,T. \plain\fs28 \tab   J.T. Hedlund (1861-1953)
\par \b Hedley \plain\fs28 \tab   G.W. Hedley (1871-1941)
\par \b Hedwig fil. \plain\fs28 \tab   R.A. Hedwig (1772-1806)
\par \b Heer \plain\fs28 \tab   O. von Heer (1809-1883)
\par \b Hegelm. \plain\fs28 \tab   C.F. Hegelmaier (1834-1906)
\par \b Hegetschw. \plain\fs28 \tab   J.J. Hegetschweiler-Bodmer (1789-1839)
\par \pard\tx355 \b Hegi \plain\fs28 \tab   G. Hegi (1876-1932)
\par \b Heimans \plain\fs28 \tab   J. Heimans (b. 1889)
\par \b Heimerl \plain\fs28 \tab   A. Heimerl (1857-1942)
\par \b Heine, R. \plain\fs28 \tab   O.R. Heine (b. 1920)
\par \b Heister \plain\fs28 \tab   L. Heister (1683-1758)
\par \b Heldr. \plain\fs28 \tab   T.H.H. von Heldreich (1822-1902)
\par \b Heller, A.A. \plain\fs28 \tab   A.A. Heller (1867-l944)
\par \b Heller \plain\fs28 \tab   F.X. Heller (1775-1840)
\par \b Helm \plain\fs28 \tab   G.F. Helm (fl. 1809-1828)
\par \b Hemsley \plain\fs28 \tab   W.B. Hemsley (1843-1924)
\par \b Henckel \plain\fs28 \tab   L.V.F. Henckel von Donnersmarck (1785-1861)
\par \pard\tx355 \b Henderson, A. \plain\fs28 \tab   A. Henderson (fl. 1860)
\par \b Henderson, E.G. \plain\fs28 \tab   E.G. Henderson (1782-1876)
\par \b Hendrych \plain\fs28 \tab   R. Hendrych (b. 1926)
\par \b H\'e9non \plain\fs28 \tab   J. L. H\'e9non (1802-1872)
\par \b Henrard \plain\fs28 \tab   J. T. Henrard (b. 1881)
\par \b Henriq. \plain\fs28 \tab   J. A. Henriques (1838-1928)
\par \b Henry, A.N. \plain\fs28 \tab   A.N. Henry (b. 1936)
\par \b Henry, A. \plain\fs28 \tab   A. Henry (1857-1930)
\par \b Henry, Louis \plain\fs28 \tab   Louis Henry (1853-1913)
\par \b Hepper \plain\fs28 \tab   F.N. Hepper (b. 1929)
\par \b Herbert \plain\fs28 \tab   W. Herbert (1778-1847
\par \pard\tx355 \b Herbich \plain\fs28 \tab   F. Herbich (1791-1865)
\par \b Herder \plain\fs28 \tab   F.G.T.M. von Herder (1828-1896)
\par \b Hermann, F. \plain\fs28 \tab   F. Hermann (1873-1967)
\par \b Hern\'e1ndez-Bermejo, J.E. \plain\fs28 \tab   J.E. Hern\'e1ndez-Bermejo (b. 1949)
\par \b Herrmann, J. \plain\fs28 \tab   J. Herrmann (1738-1800)
\par \b Herter \plain\fs28 \tab   W.G.F. Herter (1884-1958)
\par \b Hertsch \plain\fs28 \tab   H. Hertsch (1819-1856)
\par \b Hervier \plain\fs28 \tab   G.M.J. Hervier-Basson (1846-1900)
\par \b Heslot \plain\fs28 \tab   H. Heslot (fl. 1953)
\par \b Hess, H. \plain\fs28 \tab   H.E. Hess (b. 1920)
\par \pard\tx355 \b Heuffel \plain\fs28 \tab   J.A. Heuffel (1800-1857)
\par \b Heukels \plain\fs28 \tab   H. Heukels (1854-1936)
\par \b Heynh. \plain\fs28 \tab   G. Heynhold (1800-1860)
\par \b Heywood \plain\fs28 \tab   V.H. Heywood (b. 1927)
\par \b Hicken \plain\fs28 \tab   C.M. Hicken (1875-1933)
\par \b Hickman \plain\fs28 \tab   J.C. Hickman (b. 1941)
\par \b Hiern \plain\fs28 \tab   W.P. Hiern (1839-1925)
\par \b Hieron. \plain\fs28 \tab   G.H.E. W. Hieronymus (1846-1921)
\par \b Hiitonen \plain\fs28 \tab   H.I.A. Hiitonen (Hid\'e9n) (1898-1986)
\par \b Hildebr. \plain\fs28 \tab   F.H.G. Hildebrand (1835-1915)
\par \b Hill, A.W. \plain\fs28 \tab   A.W. Hill (1875-1941)
\par \pard\tx355 \b Hill \plain\fs28 \tab   J. Hill (1716-1775)
\par \b Hilliard \plain\fs28 \tab   O.M. Hilliard (b. 1925)
\par \b Hirzel \plain\fs28 \tab   R. Hirzel (fl. 1967-1980)
\par \b Hitchc., A.S. \plain\fs28 \tab   A.S. Hitchcock (1865-1935)
\par \b Hitchc., E. \plain\fs28 \tab   E. Hitchcock (1793-1864)
\par \b Hladnik \plain\fs28 \tab   F. Hladnik (1773-1844)
\par \b Hochreutiner \plain\fs28 \tab   B.P.G. Hochreutiner (1873-1959)
\par \b Hochst. \plain\fs28 \tab   C.F. Hochstetter (1787-1860)
\par \b Hoffm., \plain\fs28 \tab   G.F. Hoffmann (1760-1826)
\par \b Hoffm., O. \plain\fs28 \tab   O. Hoffmann (1853-1909)
\par \pard\tx355 \b Hofmann, E. \plain\fs28 \tab   E. Hofmann (fl. 1839-1856)
\par \b Hofmann, H. \plain\fs28 \tab   H. Hofmann (d. 1923)
\par \b Hoffmanns. \plain\fs28 \tab   J.C. von Hoffmannsegg (1766-1849)
\par \b Hohen. \plain\fs28 \tab   R.F. Hohenacker (1798-1874)
\par \b Holandre \plain\fs28 \tab   J.J.J. Holandre (1773-1857)
\par \b Holl \plain\fs28 \tab   F. Holl (fl. 1820-1850)
\par \b Holm \plain\fs28 \tab   T. Holm (1880-1943)
\par \b Holmberg \plain\fs28 \tab   O.R. Holmberg (1874-1930)
\par \b Holmboe \plain\fs28 \tab   J. Holmboe (1880-1943)
\par \b Holmen \plain\fs28 \tab   K.A. Holmen (1921-1974)
\par \b Holmgren \plain\fs28 \tab   B. Holmgren (1872-1946)
\par \pard\tx355 \b Holmgren \plain\fs28 \tab   N.H. Holmgren (b. 1937)
\par \b Holub, J. \plain\fs28 \tab   J. Holub (b. 1930)
\par \b Holuby \plain\fs28 \tab   J.L. Holuby (1836-1923)
\par \b Holzm. \plain\fs28 \tab   T. Holzmann (b. 1843)
\par \b Honckeny \plain\fs28 \tab   G.A. Honckeny (1724-1805)
\par \b Hooker fil. \plain\fs28 \tab   J.D. Hooker (1817-1911)
\par \b Hooker \plain\fs28 \tab   W.J. Hooker (1785-1865)
\par \b Hope \plain\fs28 \tab   J. Hope (1725-1786)
\par \b Hoppe \plain\fs28 \tab   D.H. Hoppe (1760-1846)
\par \b H\'f6ppner \plain\fs28 \tab   H. H\'f6ppner (1873-1946)
\par \b Horak \plain\fs28 \tab   B. Horak (fl. 1900)
\par \b Horkel \plain\fs28 \tab   J. Horkel (1769-1846)
\par \pard\tx355 \b Hormuzaki \plain\fs28 \tab   K. Hormuzaki (1863-1937)
\par \b Horn af Rantzien \plain\fs28 \tab   H. Horn af Rantzien (1922-1960)
\par \b Hornem. \plain\fs28 \tab   J.W. Hornemann (1770-1841)
\par \b Hornsch. \plain\fs28 \tab   C.F. Hornschuch (1793-1850)
\par \b Hornung \plain\fs28 \tab   E.G. Hornung (1795-1862)
\par \b Horvat, I. \plain\fs28 \tab   I. Horvat (1897-1963)
\par \b Horvat, M. \plain\fs28 \tab   M. Horvat (b. 1909)
\par \b Horvatic \plain\fs28 \tab   S. Horvatic (1899-1975)
\par \b Horv\'e1tovszky \plain\fs28 \tab   S. Horv\'e1tovszky (fl. 1770-1774)
\par \b Hose, J.A.C. \plain\fs28 \tab   J.A.C. Hose (d. 1800)
\par \pard\tx355 \b Hossain \plain\fs28 \tab   M. Hossain (b. 1928)
\par \b Host \plain\fs28 \tab   N.T. Host (1761-1834)
\par \b House \plain\fs28 \tab   H.D. House (1878-1949)
\par \b Houtt. \plain\fs28 \tab   M. Houttuyn (1720-1798)
\par \b Houtzagers \plain\fs28 \tab   G. Houtzagers (1888-1957)
\par \b Howard \plain\fs28 \tab   H.W. Howard (b. 1913)
\par \b Howell \plain\fs28 \tab   T.J. Howell (1842-1912)
\par \b Hruby \plain\fs28 \tab   J. Hruby (1882-1964)
\par \b Hubbard \plain\fs28 \tab   F.T. Hubbard (1875-1962)
\par \b Hubbard, C.E.\plain\fs28 \tab   C.E. Hubbard (b. 1900)
\par \b Hubbard, F.T.\plain\fs28 \tab   F.T. Hubbard (1875-1962)
\par \pard\tx355 \b Huber, H. \plain\fs28 \tab   Hans Huber (b. 1919)
\par \b Huber, J.A. \plain\fs28 \tab   J.A. Huber (b. 1899)
\par \b Huber-Morath \plain\fs28 \tab   A. Huber-Morath (b. 1901)
\par \b Hudson \plain\fs28 \tab   W. Hudson (1730-1793)
\par \b Hudziok \plain\fs28 \tab   G.W. Hudziok (b. 1929)
\par \b Huet \plain\fs28 \tab   A. Huet du Pavillon (1829-1907)
\par \b Hughes, W.E. \plain\fs28 \tab   W.E. Hughes (b. 1948)
\par \b Hull \plain\fs28 \tab   J. Hull (1761-1843)
\par \b H\'fclphers \plain\fs28 \tab   K.A. H\'fclphers (1882-1948)
\par \b H\'fclsen \plain\fs28 \tab   R. H\'fclsen (1837-1912)
\par \b Hult\'e9n \plain\fs28 \tab   O.E.G. Hult\'e9n (1894-1981)
\par \pard\tx355 \b Humb. \plain\fs28 \tab   F.W.H.A. von Humboldt (1769-1859)
\par \b Hunt, P.F. \plain\fs28 \tab   P.F. Hunt (b. 1936)
\par \b Husnot \plain\fs28 \tab   P.T. Husnot (1840-1929)
\par \b Hussenot \plain\fs28 \tab   L.C.S.L. Hussenot (1809-1845)
\par \b Huter \plain\fs28 \tab   R. Huter (1834-1909)
\par \b Huth \plain\fs28 \tab   E. Huth (1845-1897)
\par \b Huxley \plain\fs28 \tab   A.J. Huxley (b. 1920)
\par \b Hyl. \plain\fs28 \tab   N. Hylander (1904-1970)
\par \b Hy \plain\fs28 \tab   F.C.Hy (1853-1918)
\par \b Iatro\'fa \plain\fs28 \tab   G.A. Iatro\'fa (b. 1949)
\par \b Igoshina \plain\fs28 \tab   K.N. Igoshina (b. 1894)
\par \b Ikonn. \plain\fs28 \tab   S.S. Ikonnikov (b. 1931)
\par \pard\tx355 \b Iljinsky, A. \plain\fs28 \tab   A.P. Iljinsky (1885-1945)
\par \b Iljin \plain\fs28 \tab   M.M. Iljin (Il'in, Ilyin) (1889-1967)
\par \b Illarionova \plain\fs28 \tab   N.B. Illarionova (fl. 1957)
\par \b Iltis \plain\fs28 \tab   H.H. Iltis (b. 1925)
\par \b Ingram \plain\fs28 \tab   C. Ingram (b. 1880)
\par \b Irmisch \plain\fs28 \tab   J.F.T. Irmisch (1816-1879)
\par \b Insenga \plain\fs28 \tab   G. Insenga (1815 or 1816-1887)
\par \b Ionescu \plain\fs28 \tab   M.A. Ionescu (b. 1900)
\par \b Iranzo \plain\fs28 \tab   J. Iranzo Reig (b. 1942)
\par \b Irmscher \plain\fs28 \tab   E. Irmscher (1887-1968)
\par \b Itz. \plain\fs28 \tab   H. Itzigsohn (1814-1878)
\par \pard\tx355 \b Ivanina \plain\fs28 \tab   L.I. Ivanina (b. 1917)
\par \b Ivaschin \plain\fs28 \tab   D.S. Ivaschin (b. 1912)
\par \b Iversen \plain\fs28 \tab   J. Iversen (1904-1971)
\par \b Ives \plain\fs28 \tab   E. Ives (1779-1861)
\par \b Iwatsuki \plain\fs28 \tab   K. Iwatsuki (b. 1934)
\par \b Jackson, A.B. \plain\fs28 \tab   A.B. Jackson (1876-1947)
\par \b Jackson, A.K. \plain\fs28 \tab   A.K. Jackson (b. 1914)
\par \b Jackson, B.D. \plain\fs28 \tab   B.D. Jackson (1846-1927)
\par \b Jacq. fil. \plain\fs28 \tab   J.F. von Jacquin (1766-1839)
\par \b Jacq. \plain\fs28 \tab   N.J. von Jacquin (1727-1817)
\par \b Jaeger \plain\fs28 \tab   H. Jaeger (1815-1890)
\par \pard\tx355 \b Jaggi \plain\fs28 \tab   J. Jaggi (1829-1894)
\par \b Jahandiez \plain\fs28 \tab   E. Jahandiez (1876-1938)
\par \b Jakobsen \plain\fs28 \tab   K. Jakobsen (b. 1924)
\par \b Jakowatz \plain\fs28 \tab   A. Jakowatz (b. 1872)
\par \b Jalas \plain\fs28 \tab   A.J.J. Jalas (b. 1920)
\par \b Jalas \plain\fs28 \tab   J. Jalas (b. 1920)
\par \b Jameson \plain\fs28 \tab   W. Jameson (1796-1873)
\par \b Jan \plain\fs28 \tab   G. Jan (1791-1866)
\par \b Janchen \plain\fs28 \tab   E.E.A. Janchen (1882-1970)
\par \b Jancz. \plain\fs28 \tab   E. Janczewski von Glinka (1846-1918)
\par \b Janisch. \plain\fs28 \tab   D.E. Janischewsky (1875-1944)
\par \pard\tx355 \b Janka \plain\fs28 \tab   V. Janka von Bulcs (1837-1890)
\par \b Jansen \plain\fs28 \tab   P. Jansen (1882-1955)
\par \b Jaquet \plain\fs28 \tab   F. Jaquet (1858-1933)
\par \b Jardine, N. \plain\fs28 \tab   N. Jardine (b. 1943)
\par \b Jasiewicz \plain\fs28 \tab   A. Jasiewicz (fl. 1970)
\par \b Jaub. \plain\fs28 \tab   H.F. Jaubert (1798-1874)
\par \b Jeanb. \plain\fs28 \tab   E.-M.-J. Jeanbernat (1835-1888)
\par \b Jeanmonod \plain\fs28 \tab   D. Jeanmonod (b. 1953)
\par \b Jedwabn. \plain\fs28 \tab   Jedwabnick (fl. 1924)
\par \b Jelen. \plain\fs28 \tab   A.G. Jelenevsky (Jelenevsky) (b. 1928)
\par \b Jensen, G. \plain\fs28 \tab   J.G.K. Jensen (1818-1886)
\par \pard\tx355 \b Jermy \plain\fs28 \tab   A.C. Jermy (b. 1932)
\par \b Jessen, K. \plain\fs28 \tab   K. Jessen (1884-1971)
\par \b J\'edlek \plain\fs28 \tab  B. J\'edlek (1905-1972)
\par \b Jir\'e1sek \plain\fs28 \tab   V. Jir\'e1sek (b. 1906)
\par \b Jirasek, J. \plain\fs28 \tab   J. Jirasek (1754-1797)
\par \b Joerg. \plain\fs28 \tab   E. H. Joergensen (1863-1938)
\par \b Joh., K. \plain\fs28 \tab   K. Johansson (1856-1928)
\par \b Johnston, I.M. \plain\fs28 \tab   I.M. Johnston (1898-1960)
\par \b Jones, B.M.G. \plain\fs28 \tab   B.M.G. Jones(b. 1933)
\par \b Jonsell \plain\fs28 \tab   B. Jonsell (b. 1936)
\par \b J\'f3nsson \plain\fs28 \tab   H. J\'f3nsson (1867-1925)
\par \pard\tx355 \b Jordanov \plain\fs28 \tab   D. Jordanov (1893-1978)
\par \b Jordan \plain\fs28 \tab   A. Jordan (1814-1897)
\par \b Jordan \plain\fs28 \tab   C.T.A. Jordan (1814-1897)
\par \b Jovet \plain\fs28 \tab   P.A. Jovet (b. 1896)
\par \b Jundz. \plain\fs28 \tab   S. B. Jundzill (1761-1847)
\par \b Junger \plain\fs28 \tab   E. Junger (fl. 1891)
\par \b Junge \plain\fs28 \tab   P. Junge (1881-1919)
\par \b Juratzka \plain\fs28 \tab   J. Juratzka (1821-1878)
\par \b Jurisic \plain\fs28 \tab   Z.J. Jurisic (1863-1921)
\par \b Jurtzev \plain\fs28 \tab   B.A. Jurtzev (b. 1932)
\par \b Juss. \plain\fs28 \tab   A.L. de Jussieu (1748-1836)
\par \pard\tx355 \b Juss., A. \plain\fs28 \tab   A.H.L. de Jussieu (1797-1853)
\par \b Juxip \plain\fs28 \tab   A.J. Juxip (Uksip) (1886-1966)
\par \b Juz. \plain\fs28 \tab   S.V. Juzepczuk (1893-1959)
\par \b J\'e1v. \plain\fs28 \tab   S.A. J\'e1vorka (1883-1961)
\par \b Kabath \plain\fs28 \tab   H. Kabath (1816-1888)
\par \b Kablik \plain\fs28 \tab   J. Kablik (J. Kablikov\'e1) (1787-1863)
\par \b Kadereit \plain\fs28 \tab   J.W. Kadereit (b. 1956)
\par \b Kaercher \plain\fs28 \tab   W. Kaercher (b. 1933)
\par \b Kaeser \plain\fs28 \tab   F. Kaeser (1853-1915)
\par \b Kalchbr. \plain\fs28 \tab   K. Kalchbrenner (1807-1886)
\par \b Kalela \plain\fs28 \tab   A.A.A. Kalela (1908-1977)
\par \pard\tx355 \b Kalenicz. \plain\fs28 \tab   J.O. Kaleniczenko (1805-1876)
\par \b Kalm \plain\fs28 \tab   P. Kalm (1716-1779)
\par \b Kaltenb. \plain\fs28 \tab   J.H. Kaltenbach (1807-1876)
\par \b Kanitz \plain\fs28 \tab   A. Kanitz (1843-1896)
\par \b Kar. \plain\fs28 \tab   G.S.S. Karelin (1801-1872)
\par \b Karpati \plain\fs28 \tab   Z.E. Karpati (1909-1972)
\par \b Karsch \plain\fs28 \tab   A. Karsch (1822-1892)
\par \b Karsten \plain\fs28 \tab   G.K.W.H. Karsten (1817-1908)
\par \b Karwinski \plain\fs28 \tab   W. F. Karwinski von Karwin (1780-1855)
\par \b Kasakewicz \plain\fs28 \tab   L.I. Kasakewicz (b. 1893)
\par \b Kaschm., B. \plain\fs28 \tab   B.F. Kaschmensky (d. 1909)
\par \pard\tx355 \b Kastner \plain\fs28 \tab   A. Kastner (b. 1936)
\par \b Kato \plain\fs28 \tab   M. Kato (b. 1946)
\par \b Kauffm. \plain\fs28 \tab   N.N. Kauffmann (Kaufman) (1834-1870)
\par \b Kaulfuss \plain\fs28 \tab   G.F. Kaulfuss (1786-1830)
\par \b Kazim. \plain\fs28 \tab   T. Kazimierski (b. 1924)
\par \b Kazmi \plain\fs28 \tab   S.M.A. Kazmi (b. 1926)
\par \b Keissler \plain\fs28 \tab   K. von Keissler (1872-1965)
\par \b Keld \plain\fs28 \tab   E. Keld (1867-1945)
\par \b Kelhofer \plain\fs28 \tab   E. Kelhofer (1877-1917)
\par \b Keller, B.A. \plain\fs28 \tab   B.A. Keller (1874-1945)
\par \b Keller, J.B. \plain\fs28 \tab   J.B. von Keller (1841-1897)
\par \pard\tx355 \b Keller, R. \plain\fs28 \tab   R. Keller (1854-1939)
\par \b Kellerer, J. \plain\fs28 \tab   J. Kellerer (b. 1859)
\par \b Kem.-Nat. \plain\fs28 \tab   L.M. Kemularia-Nathadze (b. 1891)
\par \b Keng \plain\fs28 \tab   Y.L. Keng (b. 1897)
\par \b Kent \plain\fs28 \tab   D.H. Kent (b. 1920)
\par \b Kenyon \plain\fs28 \tab   W. Kenyon (fl. 1847)
\par \b Ker-Gawler \plain\fs28 \tab    J.B. Ker (J. Gawler) (1764-1842)
\par \b Kergu\'e9len, M. \plain\fs28 \tab   M.F-J. Kergu\'e9len (b. 1928)
\par \b Kern \plain\fs28 \tab   J. H. Kern (1903-1974)
\par \b Kerner, A. \plain\fs28 \tab   A.J.R. Kerner von Marilaun (1831-1898)
\par \pard\tx355 \b Kerner, J. \plain\fs28 \tab   J. Kerner (1829-1906)
\par \b Kersten \plain\fs28 \tab   O. Kersten (1839-1900)
\par \b Kiffm. \plain\fs28 \tab   R. Kiffmann (fl. 1952)
\par \b Kihlman \plain\fs28 \tab   A.O. Kihlman (Kairamo) (1858-1938)
\par \b Kindb. \plain\fs28 \tab   N.C. Kindberg (1832-1910)
\par \b Kir. \plain\fs28 \tab   I.P. Kirilow (1821-1842)
\par \b Kirby \plain\fs28 \tab   M. Kirby (1817-1893)
\par \b Kirchner \plain\fs28 \tab   G. Kirchner (1837-1885)
\par \b Kirk \plain\fs28 \tab   T. Kirk (1828-1898)
\par \b Kirp. \plain\fs28 \tab   M.E. Kirpicznikov (b. 1913)
\par \b Kirschleger \plain\fs28 \tab   F.R. Kirschleger (1804-1869)
\par \pard\tx355 \b Kiss \plain\fs28 \tab   \'c1. Kiss (1889-1968)
\par \b Kit. \plain\fs28 \tab   P. Kitaibel (1757-1817)
\par \b Kitagawa \plain\fs28 \tab   M. Kitagawa (b. 1909)
\par \b Kitanov \plain\fs28 \tab   B.P. Kitanov (b. 1912)
\par \b Kittel \plain\fs28 \tab   B.M. Kittel (1798-1885)
\par \b Kl\'e1skov\'e1, A. \plain\fs28 \tab   A. Kl\'e1skov\'e1 (later A. Skalick\'e1) (b. 1932)
\par \b Kl\'e1st. \plain\fs28 \tab   I. Kl\'e1stersk\'fd (b. 1901)
\par \b Klatt \plain\fs28 \tab   F.W. Klatt (1825-1897)
\par \b Klebahn \plain\fs28 \tab   H. Klebahn (1859-1942)
\par \b Kleopow \plain\fs28 \tab   J.D. Kleopow (1902-1942)
\par \b Klett \plain\fs28 \tab   G.T. Klett (d. 1827)
\par \pard\tx355 \b Klika \plain\fs28 \tab   J. Klika (1888-1957)
\par \b Klinge \plain\fs28 \tab   J. C. Klinge (1851-1902)
\par \b Klinggr. \plain\fs28 \tab   C.J.M. von Klinggr\'e4ff (1809-1879)
\par \b Klink. \plain\fs28 \tab   M. Klinkowski (1904-1971)
\par \b Kliphius \plain\fs28 \tab   E.  Kliphius (b. 1924)
\par \b Klokov fil. \plain\fs28 \tab   V.M. Klokov (fl. 1968-1972)
\par \b Klokov \plain\fs28 \tab   M.V. Klokov (1896-1981)
\par \b Klotzsch \plain\fs28 \tab   J.F. Klotzsch (1805-1860)
\par \b Kluk \plain\fs28 \tab   K. Kluk (1739-1796)
\par \b Kl\'e1st. \plain\fs28 \tab   I. Kl\'e1stersky (b. 1901)
\par \b Knaben \plain\fs28 \tab   G. Knaben (b. 1911)
\par \pard\tx355 \b Knaf fil. \plain\fs28 \tab   K. Knaf (1851-1878)
\par \b Knaf \plain\fs28 \tab   J. Knaf (1801-1865)
\par \b Knapp \plain\fs28 \tab   R. Knapp (b. 1917)
\par \b Knerr \plain\fs28 \tab   E.B.  Knerr (1861-1942)
\par \b Kneucker \plain\fs28 \tab   J.A. Kneucker (1862-1946)
\par \b Knight \plain\fs28 \tab    J. Knight (1781-1855)
\par \b Knobl. \plain\fs28 \tab   E.F. Knoblauch (1864-1936)
\par \b Knoche \plain\fs28 \tab   E.L.H. Knoche (1870-1945)
\par \b Knoche \plain\fs28 \tab   H. Knoche (1870-1945)
\par \b Knorring \plain\fs28 \tab   O.E. Knorring (later O.E. Knorring-Neustrujeva)(1887-1977)
\par \b Knowles \plain\fs28 \tab   G.B.  Knowles (fl. 1829-1852)
\par \pard\tx355 \b Knuth, R. \plain\fs28 \tab   R.G.P. Knuth (1874-1957)
\par \b Koch \plain\fs28 \tab   W.D.J. Koch (G.D.I. Koch) (1771-1849)
\par \b Koch, C. \plain\fs28 \tab   K.(C.)H.E. Koch (1809-1879)
\par \b Koch, H.P.G. \plain\fs28 \tab   H.P.G. Koch (1807-1883)
\par \b Koch, L. \plain\fs28 \tab   L.K.A. Koch (b. 1850)
\par \b Koch, Walo \plain\fs28 \tab   Walo Koch (1896-1956)
\par \b Koch \plain\fs28 \tab   W.D.J. Koch (G.D.I. Koch) (1771-1849)
\par \b Koczwara \plain\fs28 \tab   M. Koczwara (1893-1970)
\par \b Koehler \plain\fs28 \tab   J.C.G. Koehler (1759-1833)
\par \b Koehne \plain\fs28 \tab   B.A.E. Koehne (1848-1918)
\par \pard\tx355 \b Koeler \plain\fs28 \tab   G.L. Koeler (1765-1807)
\par \b Koelle \plain\fs28 \tab   J.L.C. Koelle (1763-1797)
\par \b Koelliker \plain\fs28 \tab   R.A. von Koelliker (1817-1905)
\par \b Koenig \plain\fs28 \tab   J.G. Koenig (1728-1785)
\par \b Koernicke \plain\fs28 \tab   F.A. Koernicke (1828-1908)
\par \b Koerte \plain\fs28 \tab   F. Koerte (1782-1845)
\par \b Kohts \plain\fs28 \tab   F. Kohts (1853 -after 1872)
\par \b Koidz. \plain\fs28 \tab   Gen-lti (Gen'ichi) Koidzumi (1883-1953)
\par \b Komarov \plain\fs28 \tab   V.L. Komarov (1869-1945)
\par \b Kondrat. \plain\fs28 \tab   E.N. Kondratjuk (b. 1914)
\par \pard\tx355 \b Konig, C. \plain\fs28 \tab   C. Konig (K.D.E. K\'f6nig) (1774-1851)
\par \b K\'f6nig, D. \plain\fs28 \tab   D. K\'f6nig (b. 1909)
\par \b Korcz. \plain\fs28 \tab   A.A. Korczagin (b. 1900)
\par \b Korsh. \plain\fs28 \tab   S.I. Korshinsky (1861-1900)
\par \b Kos.-Pol. \plain\fs28 \tab   B.M. Koso-Poliansky (1890-1957)
\par \b Kosanin \plain\fs28 \tab   N. Kosanin (1874-1934)
\par \b Koshewn. \plain\fs28 \tab   D.A. Koshewnikow (1858-1882)
\par \b Kossko \plain\fs28 \tab   I. N. Kossko (1924-1956)
\par \b Kossych \plain\fs28 \tab   V.M. Kossych (b. 1931)
\par \b Kostel. \plain\fs28 \tab   V.F. Kosteletzky (1801-1887)
\par \pard\tx355 \b Kotejowa, E. \plain\fs28 \tab   E. Kotejowa (fl. 1963)
\par \b Kotov \plain\fs28 \tab   M.I. Kotov (1896-1978)
\par \b Kotschy \plain\fs28 \tab   C.G.T. Kotschy (1813-1866)
\par \b Kotschy \plain\fs28 \tab   T. Kotschy (1813-1866)
\par \b Kotula, A. \plain\fs28 \tab   A. Kotula (1822-1891)
\par \b Kovacev \plain\fs28 \tab   I.G. Kovacev (Kovacev, Kovatschev) (b. 1927)
\par \b Kovanda \plain\fs28 \tab   M. Kovanda (b. 1936)
\par \b Kov\'e1ts, F. \plain\fs28 \tab   F. Kov\'e1ts (1873-1956)
\par \b Kov\'e1ts \plain\fs28 \tab   J. Kov\'e1ts von Szentlelek (1815-1873)
\par \b Kovatschev \plain\fs28 \tab   I.G. Kovatschev (Kovacev) (b. 1927)
\par \pard\tx355 \b Koyama, T.\plain\fs28 \tab  T.M. Koyama (b. 1933)
\par \b Kozuharov \plain\fs28 \tab   S.I. Kozuharov (b. 1933)
\par \b Krajina \plain\fs28 \tab  V.J. Krajina (b. 1905)
\par \b Kralik \plain\fs28 \tab   J.L. Kralik (1813-1892)
\par \b Krasan \plain\fs28 \tab   F. Krasan (1840-1907)
\par \b Krasch. \plain\fs28 \tab   H.M. Krascheninnikov (1884-1947)
\par \b Krause \plain\fs28 \tab   E. Krause (d. 1858)
\par \b Krause, E.H.L. \plain\fs28 \tab   E.H.L. Krause (1859-1942)
\par \b Krause, K. \plain\fs28 \tab   K. Krause (1883-1963)
\par \b Krecz., V. \plain\fs28 \tab   V.I. Kreczetowicz (1901-1942)
\par \b Krendl \plain\fs28 \tab   F. Krendl (b. 1926)
\par \pard\tx355 \b Kress \plain\fs28 \tab   A.A.H.L. Kress (b. 1932)
\par \b Kreutzer \plain\fs28 \tab   K.J. Kreutzer (1809-1866)
\par \b Kreyer \plain\fs28 \tab  G.K. Kreyer (1887-1942)
\par \b Kr\'edsa \plain\fs28 \tab   B. Kr\'edsa (b. 1936)
\par \b Krocker \plain\fs28 \tab   A.J. Krocker (1744-1823)
\par \b Krok \plain\fs28 \tab   T.O.B.N. Krok (1834-1921)
\par \b Krylov \plain\fs28 \tab   P.N. Krylov (1850-1931)
\par \b Krysht. \plain\fs28 \tab   A. N. Kryshtofovicz (1885-1953)
\par \b Kr\'f6sche \plain\fs28 \tab   E.  Kr\'f6sche (fl. 1912)
\par \b Kucowa \plain\fs28 \tab   I. Kucowa (b. 1912)
\par \b K\'fchlew. \plain\fs28 \tab   P.E. K\'fchlewein (1798-1870)
\par \pard\tx355 \b Kuhn \plain\fs28 \tab   F.A.M. Kuhn (1842-1894)
\par \b K\'fck. \plain\fs28 \tab   G. K\'fckenthal (1864-1955)
\par \b Kukkonen \plain\fs28 \tab   I.T.K. Kukkonen (b. 1926)
\par \b Kulcz. \plain\fs28 \tab   S. Kulczyfiski (1895-1975)
\par \b Kummer \plain\fs28 \tab   F. Kummer (1820-1870)
\par \b K\'fcmmerle \plain\fs28 \tab   J. B. K\'fcmmerle (1876-1931)
\par \b Kunth \plain\fs28 \tab   C.S. Kunth (1788-1850)
\par \b Kuntze, O. \plain\fs28 \tab   K.(C.)E.O. Kuntze (1843-1907)
\par \b Kunz, H. \plain\fs28 \tab   H. Kunz (b. 1904)
\par \b Kunze, G. \plain\fs28 \tab   G. Kunze (1793-1851)
\par \b Kupcsok \plain\fs28 \tab   S. Kupcsok (1850-1914)
\par \pard\tx355 \b Kupffer \plain\fs28 \tab   K.R. Kupffer (1872-1935)
\par \b Kuprian. \plain\fs28 \tab   L.A. Kuprianova (b. 1914)
\par \b K\'fcpfer \plain\fs28 \tab   P. K\'fcpfer (b. 1942)
\par \b Kurata \plain\fs28 \tab   S. Kurata (b. 1922)
\par \b Kurtz, F. \plain\fs28 \tab    F. Kurtz (1854-1920)
\par \b Kurz \plain\fs28 \tab   S. Kurz (1834-1878)
\par \b Kusn. \plain\fs28 \tab   N.I. Kusnezow (Kuznetzov) (1864-1932)
\par \b Kuthath. \plain\fs28 \tab   S.I. Kuthatheladze (b. 1905)
\par \b Kutz. \plain\fs28 \tab   F.T. Kutzing (1807-1893)
\par \b Kuzen. \plain\fs28 \tab   O.I. Kuzeneva (1887-1978)
\par \b Kuzinsky \plain\fs28 \tab   P. A. von Kuzinsky (fl. 1889)
\par \pard\tx355 \b Kuzmanov \plain\fs28 \tab   B.A. Kuzmanov (1934-1991)
\par \b L. \plain\fs28 \tab   C. von Linn\'e9 (C. Linnaeus) (1707-1778)
\par \b L. fil. \plain\fs28 \tab   C. von Linn\'e9 (1741-1783)
\par \b Labill. \plain\fs28 \tab   J.J.H. de Labillardi\'e9re (1755-1834)
\par \b Lacaita \plain\fs28 \tab   C.C. Lacaita (1853-1933)
\par \b Ladizinsky \plain\fs28 \tab   G. Ladizinsky (b. 1936)
\par \b Laest. \plain\fs28 \tab   L.L. Laestadius (1800-1861)
\par \b Laffitte \plain\fs28 \tab   C. Laffitte (1811-1895)
\par \b Lag. \plain\fs28 \tab   M. Lagasca (La Gasca) y Segura (1776-1839)
\par \b Lagerh. \plain\fs28 \tab   N.G. von Lagerheim (1860-1926)
\par \pard\tx355 \b Lagger \plain\fs28 \tab   F.-J. Lagger (1799-1870)
\par \b Lago \plain\fs28 \tab   M.E. Lago Canzobre (b. 1952)
\par \b Lagr\'e8ze-Fossat \plain\fs28 \tab   A.R.A. Lagr\'e8ze-Fossat (1814-1874)
\par \b Laharpe \plain\fs28 \tab   J.J.C. de Laharpe (b. 1802)
\par \b Laicharding \plain\fs28 \tab    J.N. von Laicharding (1754-1797)
\par \b La\'ednz, J.M. \plain\fs28 \tab   J.M. La\'ednz (b. 1900)
\par \b La\'ednz \plain\fs28 \tab   P.M. La\'ednz Gallo (b. 1923)
\par \b Lakon \plain\fs28 \tab   --Lakon (fl. 1907)
\par \b Lam. \plain\fs28 \tab   J.B.A.P. Monnet de Lamarck (la Marck) (1744-1829)
\par \b Lamb. \plain\fs28 \tab   A.B. Lambert (1761-1842)
\par \pard\tx355 \b Lambinon \plain\fs28 \tab   J. Lambinon (b. 1936)
\par \b Lamotte \plain\fs28 \tab   M. Lamotte (I820-l883)
\par \b Landolt \plain\fs28 \tab   E. Landolt (b. 1926)
\par \b L\'e1ng, A.F. \plain\fs28 \tab   A.F. L\'e1ng (1795-1863)
\par \b Lang, K.H. \plain\fs28 \tab   K.H. Lang (1800-1843)
\par \b Lang, O.F. \plain\fs28 \tab   O.F. Lang (1817-1847)
\par \b Lange, Th.  \plain\fs28 \tab  T.A. Lange (1872-1957)
\par \b Lange \plain\fs28 \tab   J.M.C. Lange (1818-1898)
\par \b Langsd. \plain\fs28 \tab   G.H. von Langsdorff (1774-1852)
\par \b Lanza \plain\fs28 \tab   D. Lanza (1868-1940)
\par \b Lapeyr. \plain\fs28 \tab   P. Picot de Lapeyrouse (1744-1818)
\par \pard\tx355 \b Lapierre \plain\fs28 \tab   J.M. Lapierre (1754-1834)
\par \b La Pylaie \plain\fs28 \tab   A.J.M.B. de la Pylaie (1786-1856)
\par \b Larsen, K. \plain\fs28 \tab   K. Larsen (b. 1926)
\par \b Lasch \plain\fs28 \tab   W.G. Lasch (1787-1863)
\par \b Lasebna \plain\fs28 \tab   A.M. Lasebna (b. 1922)
\par \b Laterrade \plain\fs28 \tab   J.F. Laterrade (1784-1858)
\par \b Latour-Marliac \plain\fs28 \tab   J. (B.) Latour-Marliac (b. 1830)
\par \b Latourr. \plain\fs28 \tab   M.A.L. Claret de Latourrette (1729-1793)
\par \b Latzel \plain\fs28 \tab   A. Latzel (1859-1950)
\par \b Lauche \plain\fs28 \tab   F.W.G. Lauche (1827-1883)
\par \pard\tx355 \b Lauche \plain\fs28 \tab   W. Lauche (1827-1882)
\par \b Launert \plain\fs28 \tab   G.O.E. Launert (b. 1926)
\par \b Lausi \plain\fs28 \tab   D. Lausi (b. 1923)
\par \b Lauth, G. \plain\fs28 \tab   G. Lauth (1793-1817)
\par \b Lauth \plain\fs28 \tab   T. Lauth (1758-1826)
\par \b La Valva \plain\fs28 \tab   V. La Valva (b. 1947)
\par \b Lavrenko \plain\fs28 \tab   E.M. Lavrenko (1900-1987)
\par \b Lawalr\'e9e \plain\fs28 \tab   A.G.C. Lawalr\'e9e (b. 1921)
\par \b Lawrance \plain\fs28 \tab   M. Lawrance (fl. 1790-1831)
\par \b Lawrence \plain\fs28 \tab   G.H.M. Lawrence (b. 1910)
\par \b Lawson, C. \plain\fs28 \tab   C. Lawson (1794-1873)
\par \pard\tx355 \b Lawson, P. \plain\fs28 \tab   P. Lawson (d. 1820)
\par \b Laxm. \plain\fs28 \tab   E. Laxman (Laxmann) (1737-1796)
\par \b Layens \plain\fs28 \tab   G. de Layens (1834-1897)
\par \b L\'e1z.-Ibiza \plain\fs28 \tab   Blas L\'e1zaro \'e9 Ibiza (1858-1921)
\par \b Lazar \plain\fs28 \tab   J. Lazar (b. 1903)
\par \b Laza \plain\fs28 \tab   M. Laza Palacios (b. 1901)
\par \b Leadlay \plain\fs28 \tab   E.A. Leadlay (fl. 1990)
\par \b Lebel \plain\fs28 \tab   J.E. Lebel (1801-1878)
\par \b Lecoq \plain\fs28 \tab   H. Lecoq (1802-1871)
\par \b Lecoyer \plain\fs28 \tab   J.-C. Lecoyer (1835-1899)
\par \b Ledeb. \plain\fs28 \tab   C.F. von Ledebour (1785-1851)
\par \pard\tx355 \b Leers \plain\fs28 \tab   J.G.D. Leers (1727-1774)
\par \b Lees \plain\fs28 \tab   E. Lees (1800-1887)
\par \b Lefevre \plain\fs28 \tab   L.V. Lefevre (b. 1810)
\par \b Le Gall \plain\fs28 \tab   N.J.M. le Gall de Kerlinov (1787-1860)
\par \b Legrand \plain\fs28 \tab   A. Legrand (le Grand) (1839-1905)
\par \b Le Grand \plain\fs28 \tab   A. le Grand (1839-1905)
\par \b Lehaie \plain\fs28 \tab   J. Houzeau de Lehaie (1867-1959)
\par \b Lehm., C.B. \plain\fs28 \tab   C.B. Lehmann (1811-1875)
\par \b Lehm., J.F. \plain\fs28 \tab   J.F. Lehmann (fl. 1809)
\par \b Lehm. \plain\fs28 \tab   J.G.C. Lehmann (1792-1860)
\par \pard\tx355 \b Leichtlin \plain\fs28 \tab   M. Leichtlin (1831-1910)
\par \b Leighton, F.M. \plain\fs28 \tab   F.M. Leighton (1909-1936)
\par \b Leins \plain\fs28 \tab   P. Leins (b. 1937)
\par \b Lej. \plain\fs28 \tab   A.L.S. Lejeune (1779-1858)
\par \b Le Jolis \plain\fs28 \tab   A.F. le Jolis (1823-1904)
\par \b Lemaire \plain\fs28 \tab   A.C. Lemaire (1800-1871)
\par \b L\'e9man \plain\fs28 \tab   D.S. L\'e9man (1781 1829)
\par \b Lemke \plain\fs28 \tab   W. Lemke (b. 1893)
\par \b Lemoine \plain\fs28 \tab   V. Lemoine (1823-1911)
\par \b Lems \plain\fs28 \tab   P. Leins (b. 1937)
\par \b Lengyel \plain\fs28 \tab   G. Lengyel (1884-1965)
\par \pard\tx355 \b L\'e9onard, J. \plain\fs28 \tab   J.J.G. L\'e9onard (b. 1920)
\par \b Leonova \plain\fs28 \tab   T.G. Leonova (b. 1930)
\par \b Lepechin \plain\fs28 \tab   I.I. Lepechin (1737-1802)
\par \b Leresche \plain\fs28 \tab   L.F.J.R. Leresche (1808-1885)
\par \b Lesp. \plain\fs28 \tab   J.M.G. Lespinasse (1807-1876)
\par \b Less. \plain\fs28 \tab   C.F. Lessing (1809 1862)
\par \b Lester-Garland \plain\fs28 \tab   L.V. Lester-Garland (1860-1944)
\par \b Lestib. \plain\fs28 \tab   T.G. Lestiboudois (1797-1876)
\par \b Letendre \plain\fs28 \tab   J.B.P. Letendre (1828-1886)
\par \b L\'e9veill\'e9 \plain\fs28 \tab   A.A.H. L\'e9veill\'e9 (1863-1918)
\par \pard\tx355 \b Levier \plain\fs28 \tab   E. Levier (1838-1911)
\par \b Levyns \plain\fs28 \tab   M.R.B. Levyns (b. 1890)
\par \b Lewis, P. \plain\fs28 \tab   P. Lewis (b. 1924)
\par \b Ley, A. \plain\fs28 \tab   A. Ley (1842-1911)
\par \b Leybold \plain\fs28 \tab   F. Leybold (1827-1879)
\par \b Leysser \plain\fs28 \tab   F.W. von Leysser (1731-1815)
\par \b L'Her. \plain\fs28 \tab   C.L.L'Heritier de Brutelle (1746-1800)
\par \b Libert \plain\fs28 \tab   M.A. Libert (1782-1865)
\par \b Lid \plain\fs28 \tab   J. Lid (1886-1971)
\par \b Lid\'e9n \plain\fs28 \tab   M. Lid\'e9n (b. 1951)
\par \b Liebl. \plain\fs28 \tab   F.K. Lieblein (1744-1810)
\par \pard\tx355 \b Liebm. \plain\fs28 \tab   F.M. Liebmann (1813-1856)
\par \b Lightf. \plain\fs28 \tab   J. Lightfoot (1735-1788)
\par \b Liljeblad \plain\fs28 \tab   S. Liljeblad (1761-1815)
\par \b Liljefors \plain\fs28 \tab   A.W. Liljefors (b. 1904)
\par \b Lincz. \plain\fs28 \tab   I.A. Linczevsky (b. 1908)
\par \b Lindb. fil., H. \plain\fs28 \tab   H. Lindberg (1871-1963)
\par \b Lindb., H. \plain\fs28 \tab   H. Lindberg (1871-1963)
\par \b Lindblad \plain\fs28 \tab   M.A. Lindblad (1821-1899)
\par \b Lindblom \plain\fs28 \tab   A.E. Lindblom (1807-1853)
\par \b Lindeb. \plain\fs28 \tab   C. J. Lindeberg (1815-1900)
\par \b Lindem. \plain\fs28 \tab   E. von Lindemann (1825-1900)
\par \pard\tx355 \b Linden, J. \plain\fs28 \tab   J.J. Linden (1817-1898)
\par \b Lindgren \plain\fs28 \tab   S.J. Lindgren (1810-1849)
\par \b Lindley \plain\fs28 \tab   J. Lindley (1799-1865)
\par \b Lindman \plain\fs28 \tab   C.A.M. Lindman (1856--1928)
\par \b Lindquist \plain\fs28 \tab   S.B.G. Lindquist (1904-1963)
\par \b Lindstrom, A. \plain\fs28 \tab   A.A. Lindstrom (1864-1946)
\par \b Lindt. \plain\fs28 \tab   V.H. Lindtner (1904-1965)
\par \b Lingelsh. \plain\fs28 \tab   A. von Lingelsheim (1874-1937)
\par \b Link \plain\fs28 \tab   J.H.F. Link (1767-1851)
\par \b Linton, E.F. \plain\fs28 \tab   E.F. Linton (1848-1928)
\par \pard\tx355 \b Linton, W.R. \plain\fs28 \tab   W.R. Linton (1850-1908)
\par \b Lipsch. \plain\fs28 \tab   S.J. Lipschitz (b. 1905)
\par \b Lipsky \plain\fs28 \tab   V.I. Lipsky (1863-1937)
\par \b Liro \plain\fs28 \tab   J. I. Liro (1872-1943)
\par \b List \plain\fs28 \tab   ?F. L. List (fl. 1828-1837)
\par \b Litard. \plain\fs28 \tab   R.V. de Litardi\'e9re (1888-1957)
\par \b Litv. \plain\fs28 \tab   D.I. Litvinov (Litwinow) (1854-1929)
\par \b Lloyd \plain\fs28 \tab   J. Lloyd (1810-1896)
\par \b Loddiges \plain\fs28 \tab   G. Loddiges (1784-1846)
\par \b Loefl. \plain\fs28 \tab   P. Loefling (1729-1756)
\par \b Loesener fil. \plain\fs28 \tab   O. Loesener (fl. 1927)
\par \pard\tx355 \b Loesener \plain\fs28 \tab   L.E.T. Loesener (1865-1941)
\par \b Loisel, R. \plain\fs28 \tab   R.J. Loisel (b. 1938)
\par \b Loisel. \plain\fs28 \tab   J.L.A. Loiseleur-Deslongchamps (1774--l849)
\par \b Lojac. \plain\fs28 \tab   M. Lojacono-Pojero (1853-1919)
\par \b Lomax \plain\fs28 \tab   A.E. Lomax (1861-1894)
\par \b Lona \plain\fs28 \tab   F. Lona (fl. 1949)
\par \b Londes \plain\fs28 \tab   F.W. Londes (1780-1807)
\par \b Longo, B. \plain\fs28 \tab   B. Longo (1872-1950)
\par \b Long \plain\fs28 \tab   G. Long (b. 1928)
\par \b Lonnr. \plain\fs28 \tab   K.J. Lonnroth (1826-1885)
\par \b Lonsing \plain\fs28 \tab   A. Lonsing (fl. 1939)
\par \pard\tx355 \b L\'f3pez, G. \plain\fs28 \tab   G.A. L\'f3pez Gonz\'e1lez (b. 1950)
\par \b Lorent \plain\fs28 \tab   J.A. Lorent (1812-1884)
\par \b Loret \plain\fs28 \tab   H. Loret (1810-1888)
\par \b Losa \plain\fs28 \tab  T.M. Losa Espa\'f1a (1893-1966)
\par \b Loscos \plain\fs28 \tab   F. Loscos y Bernal (1823-1886)
\par \b Loscos, C. \plain\fs28 \tab   C. Loscos (fl. 1886)
\par \b Losinsk. \plain\fs28 \tab   A.S. Losina-Losinskaya (1903-1958)
\par \b Loudon \plain\fs28 \tab   J.C. Loudon (1783-1843)
\par \b Loudon, J.W. \plain\fs28 \tab   J.W. Loudon (1807-1858)
\par \b Lour. \plain\fs28 \tab   J. de Loureiro (1717-1791)
\par \b L\'f6ve, \'c1. \plain\fs28 \tab   \'c1. L\'f6ve (b. 1916)
\par \pard\tx355 \b L\'f6ve, D. \plain\fs28 \tab   D.B.M. L\'f6ve (b. 1918)
\par \b Lovis \plain\fs28 \tab   J.D. Lovis (b. 1930)
\par \b Lovric \plain\fs28 \tab   A.Z. Lovric (b. 1943)
\par \b Low, U. \plain\fs28 \tab   U. Low (b. 1922)
\par \b Lowe \plain\fs28 \tab   R. T. Lowe (1802-1874)
\par \b Lubeck \plain\fs28 \tab   H.G. Lubeck (1809-1900)
\par \b Lucand \plain\fs28 \tab   J.-L. Lucand (1821-1896)
\par \b Luce \plain\fs28 \tab   J.W.L. von Luce (fl. 1823)
\par \b Luckwill \plain\fs28 \tab   L.C. Luckwill (b. 1914)
\par \b Ludi \plain\fs28 \tab   W. Ludi (1888-1968)
\par \b Ludwig, W. \plain\fs28 \tab   W. Ludwig (b. 1923)
\par \b Ludwig \plain\fs28 \tab   C.G. Ludwig (1709-1773)
\par \pard\tx355 \b Luerssen \plain\fs28 \tab   C. Luerssen (1843-1916)
\par \b Luizet \plain\fs28 \tab   D. Luizet (1851-1930)
\par \b Lumn. \plain\fs28 \tab   S.I. Lumnitzer (1750-1806)
\par \b Lund, N. \plain\fs28 \tab   N. Lund (1814-1847)
\par \b Lundevall \plain\fs28 \tab   C.-F. Lundevall (b. 1921)
\par \b Lundstr\'f6m \plain\fs28 \tab   A. N. Lundstr\'f6m (1847-1905)
\par \b Lundstr\'f6m, E. \plain\fs28 \tab   C.E. Lundstr\'f6m (b. 1882)
\par \b Lusby \plain\fs28 \tab   P.S. Lusby (b. 1953)
\par \b Lyka \plain\fs28 \tab   K. Lyka (1869-1965)
\par \b Lynch \plain\fs28 \tab   R. I. Lynch (1850-1924)
\par \b Lynge \plain\fs28 \tab   B.A. Lynge (1884-1942)
\par \pard\tx355 \b Lyons \plain\fs28 \tab   I. Lyons (1739-1775)
\par \b Maack \plain\fs28 \tab   R. Maack (1825-1886)
\par \b Mabille \plain\fs28 \tab   P. Mabille (1835-1923)
\par \b Macbride \plain\fs28 \tab   J.F. Macbride (b. 1892)
\par \b Macchiati \plain\fs28 \tab   L. Macchiati (1852-1921)
\par \b Macfadyen \plain\fs28 \tab   J. Macfadyen (1798-1850)
\par \b Mach.-Laur. \plain\fs28 \tab   B. Machatschki-Laurich (fl. 1926)
\par \b Machule \plain\fs28 \tab   M. Machule (b. 1899)
\par \b Mackay \plain\fs28 \tab   J.T. Mackay (1775-1862)
\par \b Mackenzie \plain\fs28 \tab   K.K. Mackenzie (1877-1934)
\par \b MacMillan \plain\fs28 \tab   C. MacMillan (1867-1929)
\par \pard\tx355 \b MacOwan \plain\fs28 \tab   P. MacOwan (1830-1909)
\par \b Magne \plain\fs28 \tab   J.H. Magne (1804-1885)
\par \b Magnier \plain\fs28 \tab   C. Magnier (fl. 1883)
\par \b Magnus \plain\fs28 \tab   P.W. Magnus (1844-1914)
\par \b Maguire \plain\fs28 \tab   B. Maguire (b. 1904)
\par \b Maillard \plain\fs28 \tab   P.N. Maillard (1813-1883)
\par \b Maillefer \plain\fs28 \tab   A. Maillefer (b. 1880)
\par \b Maire \plain\fs28 \tab   R.C.J.E. Maire (1878-1949)
\par \b Majevski \plain\fs28 \tab   P. F. Majevski (1851-1892)
\par \b Major \plain\fs28 \tab   C.I.F. Major (C.I. Forsyth-Major) (1843-1923)
\par \b Majovsky \plain\fs28 \tab   J. Majovsky (fl. 1975)
\par \pard\tx355 \b Makino \plain\fs28 \tab   T. Makino (1862-1957)
\par \b Malagarriga \plain\fs28 \tab   T.L.R.M.de P. Malagarriga [i] Heras(1904-1990)
\par \b Malbr. \plain\fs28 \tab   A.F. Malbranche (1818-1888)
\par \b Malinovski \plain\fs28 \tab   E. Malinovski (Malinowski) (1885-1979)
\par \b Malinv. \plain\fs28 \tab   L.J.E. Malinvaud (1836-1913)
\par \b Malladra \plain\fs28 \tab   A. Malladra (1865-1944)
\par \b Malme \plain\fs28 \tab   G.O.A. Malme (1864-1937)
\par \b Malmgren \plain\fs28 \tab   A.J. Malmgren (1834-1897)
\par \b Malte \plain\fs28 \tab   M.O. Malte (1880-1933)
\par \b Maly, F. \plain\fs28 \tab   F. de Paula Maly (1823-1891)
\par \pard\tx355 \b Mal\'fd, K. \plain\fs28 \tab   Karl Mal\'fd (1874-1951)
\par \b Malyschev \plain\fs28 \tab   L.I. Malyschev (b. 1931)
\par \b Malzev \plain\fs28 \tab   A.I. Malzev (1879-1948)
\par \b Manden. \plain\fs28 \tab   I.P. Mandenova (b. 1907)
\par \b Mandon, E. \plain\fs28 \tab   E. Mandon (fl. 1898)
\par \b Mann \plain\fs28 \tab   W.B. Mann (1799-1839)
\par \b Mansfeld \plain\fs28 \tab   R. Mansfeld (1901-1960)
\par \b Manton \plain\fs28 \tab   I. Manton (1904-1988)
\par \b Marais \plain\fs28 \tab   W. Marais (b. 1929)
\par \b Maratti \plain\fs28 \tab   G.F. Maratti (1723-1777)
\par \b Marc. \plain\fs28 \tab   B.B. Marcowicz (V.V. Markovicz) (1865-1942)
\par \pard\tx355 \b Marchesetti \plain\fs28 \tab   C. de Marchesetti (I850- 1926)
\par \b Marcos \plain\fs28 \tab   A. Marcos Pascual (b. 1900)
\par \b Mar\'e8s \plain\fs28 \tab   P. Mar\'e8s (1826-1900)
\par \b Margot \plain\fs28 \tab   H. Margot (1807-1894)
\par \b Marhold \plain\fs28 \tab   K. Marhold (b. 1959)
\par \b Marie-Victorin \plain\fs28 \tab   Fr\'e8re Marie-Victorin (C. Kirouac) (1885-1944)
\par \b Mariz \plain\fs28 \tab   J. de Mariz (1847-1916)
\par \b Marjollet \plain\fs28 \tab   J.M. Marjollet (1823-1894)
\par \b Markgr.-Dannenb. \plain\fs28 \tab   I. Markgraf-Dannenberg (b. 1911)
\par \b Markgraf \plain\fs28 \tab   F. Markgraf (1897-1987)
\par \pard\tx355 \b Marklund \plain\fs28 \tab   G.G. Marklund (1892-1964)
\par \b Marsden-Jones \plain\fs28 \tab   E.M. Marsden-Jones (1887-1960)
\par \b Marshall, E.S. \plain\fs28 \tab   E.S. Marshall (1858-1919)
\par \b Marshall \plain\fs28 \tab   H. Marshall (1722-1801)
\par \b Marsson \plain\fs28 \tab   T.F. Marsson (1816-1892)
\par \b Mart., C.F.P. \plain\fs28 \tab   C.F.P. von Martius (1794-1868)
\par \b Mart., H. \plain\fs28 \tab   H. von Martius (1781-1831)
\par \b Martelli, U. \plain\fs28 \tab   U. Martelli (1860-1934)
\par \b Martens \plain\fs28 \tab   G.M. von Martens (1188-1872)
\par \b Martens, M. \plain\fs28 \tab   M. Martens (1797-1863)
\par \pard\tx355 \b Martin, B. \plain\fs28 \tab   B.A. Martin (1813-1891)
\par \b Martin, F. \plain\fs28 \tab   F. Martin (fl. 1804)
\par \b Martinez-Laborde \plain\fs28 \tab   J.B. Martinez-Laborde (b. 1955)
\par \b Martinez \plain\fs28 \tab   M. Martinez Martinez (1907-1936)
\par \b Martinoli, G. \plain\fs28 \tab   G. Martinoli (1911-1970)
\par \b Martinovsky \plain\fs28 \tab   J.O. Martinovsky (b. 1903)
\par \b Martin \plain\fs28 \tab   B.A. Martin (1813-1897)
\par \b Martrin-Donos \plain\fs28 \tab   J.V. de Martrin-Donos (1801-1870)
\par \b Martyn \plain\fs28 \tab   T. Martyn (1736-1825)
\par \b Marzell \plain\fs28 \tab   H. Marzell (1885-1970)
\par \pard\tx355 \b Masclans \plain\fs28 \tab   F. Masclans [i] Girv\'e9s (b. 1905)
\par \b Massara \plain\fs28 \tab   G.F. Massara (1792-1839)
\par \b Masters \plain\fs28 \tab   M.T. Masters (1833-1907)
\par \b Mateo \plain\fs28 \tab   G. Mateo Sanz (later G. Mateo-Sanz) (b. 1953)
\par \b Mathew \plain\fs28 \tab   B.F. Mathew (b. 1936)
\par \b M\'e1th\'e9 \plain\fs28 \tab   I. M\'e1th\'e9 (b. 1911)
\par \b Matouschek \plain\fs28 \tab   F. Matouschek (b. 1871)
\par \b Mattei \plain\fs28 \tab   G.E. Mattei (1865-1943)
\par \b Mattf. \plain\fs28 \tab   J. Mattfeld (1895-1951)
\par \b Matth\'e4s \plain\fs28 \tab   U. Matth\'e4s (b. 1949)
\par \b Mattir. \plain\fs28 \tab   O. Mattirolo (1856-1947)
\par \pard\tx355 \b Mattuschka \plain\fs28 \tab   H.G. von Mattuschka (1734-1779)
\par \b Matuszk. \plain\fs28 \tab   W. Matuszkiewicz (b. 1921)
\par \b Malladra \plain\fs28 \tab   A. Malladra (1865-1944)
\par \b Maurer \plain\fs28 \tab   W. Maurer (b. 1926)
\par \b Mauricio \plain\fs28 \tab   Fr\'e8re Mauricio (H. Mauricio) (fl. 1933)
\par \b Mauri \plain\fs28 \tab   E. Mauri (1791-1836)
\par \b Maw \plain\fs28 \tab   G. Maw (1832-1912)
\par \b Maxim. \plain\fs28 \tab   K.(C.)J. Maximowicz (1827-1891)
\par \b Maxon \plain\fs28 \tab   W-.R. Maxon (1877-1948)
\par \b Mayer, E. \plain\fs28 \tab   E. Mayer (b. 1920)
\par \b Mayer, J. \plain\fs28 \tab   J.C.A. Mayer (1747-1801)
\par \pard\tx355 \b Mazuc \plain\fs28 \tab   E. Mazuc (fl. 1854)
\par \b Mazzuc. \plain\fs28 \tab   G. Mazzucato (1787-1814)
\par \b McClell. \plain\fs28 \tab   J. McClelland (1805-1883)
\par \b McMillan \plain\fs28 \tab   C. McMillan (1867-1929)
\par \b McNeill \plain\fs28 \tab   J. McNeill (b. 1933)
\par \b Medicus \plain\fs28 \tab   F.C. Medicus (F.K. Medikus) (1736-1808)
\par \b Medv. \plain\fs28 \tab   J.S. Medvedev (1847-1923)
\par \b Meerb. \plain\fs28 \tab   N. Meerburgh (1734-1814)
\par \b Meigen \plain\fs28 \tab   F.C. Meigen (b. 1864)
\par \b Meikle \plain\fs28 \tab   R.D. Meikle (b. 1923)
\par \b Meinsh. \plain\fs28 \tab   K.K. Meinshausen (1819-1899)
\par \pard\tx355 \b Meissner \plain\fs28 \tab   C.F. Meissner (before 1861, Meisner) (1800-1874)
\par \b Mela \plain\fs28 \tab   A.J. Mela (A. J. Malmberg) (1846--1904)
\par \b Melderis \plain\fs28 \tab   A. Melderis (1909-1986)
\par \b Melville \plain\fs28 \tab   R. Melville (1903-1985)
\par \b Melzh. \plain\fs28 \tab   V. Melzheimer (b. 1939)
\par \b Mendes \plain\fs28 \tab   E.J.S.M. Mendes (b. 1924)
\par \b Mendon\'e7a \plain\fs28 \tab   F. de Ascens\'e3o Mendon\'e7a (b. 1889)
\par \b Men\'e9ndez Amor \plain\fs28 \tab   J. Men\'e9ndez Amor (b. 1916)
\par \b Menyh. \plain\fs28 \tab   L. Menyh\'e1rth (1849-1897)
\par \b M\'e9rat \plain\fs28 \tab   F.V. M\'e9rat de Vaumartoise (1780-1851)
\par \pard\tx355 \b Merc. \plain\fs28 \tab   E. Mercier (1802-1863)
\par \b Merino \plain\fs28 \tab   P.B. Merino y Rom\'e1n (1845-1917)
\par \b Merlet \plain\fs28 \tab   G.E. Merlet de la Boulaye (1736-1807)
\par \b Merr. \plain\fs28 \tab   E.D. Merrill (1876-1956)
\par \b Mert. \plain\fs28 \tab   F.K. Mertens (1764-1831)
\par \b Merxm. \plain\fs28 \tab   H. Merxm\'fcller (1920-1988)
\par \b Metsch \plain\fs28 \tab   J.C. Metsch (1796-1856)
\par \b Mett. \plain\fs28 \tab   G.H. Mettenius (1823-1866)
\par \b Metzel. \plain\fs28 \tab   A. Metzelova-Kropacova (b. 1922)
\par \b Metzger \plain\fs28 \tab   J. Metzger (1789-1852)
\par \b Meusel \plain\fs28 \tab   H. Meusel (b. 1909)
\par \pard\tx355 \b Meyen \plain\fs28 \tab   F.J.F. Meyen (1804-1840)
\par \b Meyer, B. \plain\fs28 \tab   B. Meyer (1767-1836)
\par \b Meyer, C.A. \plain\fs28 \tab   C.A. von Meyer (1795-1855)
\par \b Meyer, D.E. \plain\fs28 \tab   D.E. Meyer (1926-1982)
\par \b Meyer, E.H.F. \plain\fs28 \tab   E.H.F. Meyer (1791-1858)
\par \b Meyer, F.K. \plain\fs28 \tab   F.K. Meyer (b. 1926)
\par \b Meyer, G.F. \plain\fs28 \tab   W.G.F.W. Meyer (1782-1856)
\par \b Mez \plain\fs28 \tab   C.C. Mez (1866-1944)
\par \b Micevski \plain\fs28 \tab   K. Micevski (Mitsevski) (b. 1926)
\par \b Michalet \plain\fs28 \tab   E. Michalet (1829-1862)
\par \b Micheletti \plain\fs28 \tab   L. Micheletti (1844-1912)
\par \pard\tx355 \b Micheli, M. \plain\fs28 \tab   M. Micheli (1844-1902)
\par \b Michx \plain\fs28 \tab   A. Michaux (1746 1802)
\par \b Michx fil. \plain\fs28 \tab   F.A. Michaux (1770-1855)
\par \b Michx \plain\fs28 \tab   A. Michaux (1746-1802)
\par \b Middendorff \plain\fs28 \tab   A.T. von Middendorff (1815-1894)
\par \b Mieg \plain\fs28 \tab   A. Mieg (1731-1799)
\par \b Mi\'e9geville \plain\fs28 \tab   J. Mi\'e9geville (1819-1901)
\par \b Miers \plain\fs28 \tab   J. Miers (1789-1879)
\par \b Mikan fil. \plain\fs28 \tab   J.C. Mikan (1769-1844)
\par \b Mikan \plain\fs28 \tab   J.C. Mikan (1743-1814)
\par \b Milde \plain\fs28 \tab   C.A.J. Milde (1824-1871)
\par \pard\tx355 \b Miller, J. \plain\fs28 \tab   J.M. Miller (d. 1796)
\par \b Miller \plain\fs28 \tab   P. Miller (1691-1771)
\par \b Millsp. \plain\fs28 \tab   C.F. Millspaugh (1854-1923)
\par \b Min. \plain\fs28 \tab   N.A. Miniaev (b. 1909)
\par \b Minder. \plain\fs28 \tab   E.V. Minderova (fl. 1957)
\par \b Miq. \plain\fs28 \tab   F.A.W. Miquel (1811-1871)
\par \b Mirbel \plain\fs28 \tab   C.F.B. de Mirbel (1776-1854)
\par \b Miscz. \plain\fs28 \tab   P.I. Misczenko (1869-1938)
\par \b Mitch., D. \plain\fs28 \tab   D.S. Mitchell (b. 1935)
\par \b Mitf. \plain\fs28 \tab   A.B. Freeman-Mitford (1837-1916)
\par \b Mitterp. \plain\fs28 \tab   L. Mitterpacher von Mitterburg (1734-1814)
\par \pard\tx355 \b Moench \plain\fs28 \tab   C. Moench (1744-1805)
\par \b Moessler \plain\fs28 \tab   J.C. Moessler (M\'f6ssler) (fl. 1805-1835)
\par \b Moesz \plain\fs28 \tab   G. Moesz (1873-1946)
\par \b Mohr \plain\fs28 \tab   D.M.H. Mohr (1780-1808)
\par \b Mokry \plain\fs28 \tab   F. Mokry (fl. 1986)
\par \b Moldenke \plain\fs28 \tab   H.N. Moldenke (b. 1909)
\par \b Molero \plain\fs28 \tab   J. Molero Briones (b. 1946)
\par \b Molina \plain\fs28 \tab   J.I. Molina (G.I. Molina) (1737-1829)
\par \b Molinier \plain\fs28 \tab   R. Molinier (b. 1899)
\par \b Moll \plain\fs28 \tab   K.M.E. von Moll (1760-1838)
\par \b Monnard \plain\fs28 \tab   J.P. Monnard (b. 1791)
\par \pard\tx355 \b Monnier, P. \plain\fs28 \tab   P.C.J. Monnier (b. 1922)
\par \b Monnier \plain\fs28 \tab   A. Monnier (fl. 1829)
\par \b Montandon \plain\fs28 \tab   F.J. Montandon (fl. 1856)
\par \b Montbret \plain\fs28 \tab   G. Coquebert de Montbret (1805-1837)
\par \b Montell \plain\fs28 \tab   J.E. Montell (1869-1954)
\par \b Montelucci \plain\fs28 \tab   G. Montelucci (1899-1983)
\par \b Monts., J.M. \plain\fs28 \tab   J.M. Montserrat Martf (b. 1955)
\par \b Monts., P. \plain\fs28 \tab   P. Montserrat Recoder (b. 1918)
\par \b Moore, C. \plain\fs28 \tab   C. Moore (1820-1905)
\par \b Moore, D. Moresby \plain\fs28 \tab   D. Moresby Moore (b. 1933)
\par \pard\tx355 \b Moore, S. \plain\fs28 \tab  S. Le Marchant Moore (1850-1931)
\par \b Moore, T. \plain\fs28 \tab   T. Moore (1821-1887)
\par \b Moq. \plain\fs28 \tab   C.H.B.A. Moquin-Tandon (1804-1863)
\par \b Morais, T.A. \plain\fs28 \tab   A. Taborda de Morais (1900-1959)
\par \b Moraldo \plain\fs28 \tab   B. Moraldo (b. 1938)
\par \b Morariu \plain\fs28 \tab   I. Morariu (b. 1905)
\par \b Moravec \plain\fs28 \tab   J. Moravec (b. 1929)
\par \b Mordant \plain\fs28 \tab   J.C.M. Mordant de Launay (c. 1750-1816)
\par \b More \plain\fs28 \tab   A.G. More (1830-1895)
\par \b Moreno \plain\fs28 \tab   M. Moreno Sanz (b. 1948)
\par \pard\tx355 \b Moretti \plain\fs28 \tab   G.L. Moretti (1782-1853)
\par \b Mori \plain\fs28 \tab   A. Mori (1847-1902)
\par \b Mori, T. \plain\fs28 \tab   T. Mori (1884-1962)
\par \b Moric. \plain\fs28 \tab   M.E. ('Stefano') Moricand (1779-1854)
\par \b Moris \plain\fs28 \tab   G.G. Moris (1796-1869)
\par \b Moritzi \plain\fs28 \tab   A. Moritzi (1806-1850)
\par \b Morot \plain\fs28 \tab   M.L. Morot (fl. 1885)
\par \b Morot \plain\fs28 \tab   L.R.M.F. Morot (1854-1915)
\par \b Morren \plain\fs28 \tab   C.J.E. Morren (1833-1886)
\par \b Morton, C.V. \plain\fs28 \tab   C.V. Morton (1905-1972)
\par \b Moschl \plain\fs28 \tab   W. Moschl (1906-1981)
\par \pard\tx355 \b Mossler \plain\fs28 \tab   J.C. Mossler (fl. 1814-1835)
\par \b Moss \plain\fs28 \tab   C.E. Moss (1870-1930)
\par \b Motelay \plain\fs28 \tab   L. Motelay (1830-1917)
\par \b Mouillefert \plain\fs28 \tab   P. Mouillefert (1845-1903)
\par \b Mueller, F. \plain\fs28 \tab   F.J.H. von Mueller (1825-1896)
\par \b Mueller, O.F. \plain\fs28 \tab   O.F. Mueller (M\'fcller) (1730-1784)
\par \b Mueller, P.J. \plain\fs28 \tab   P.J. Mueller (1832-1889)
\par \b Muenchh. \plain\fs28 \tab   O. von Muenchhausen (1716-1774)
\par \b Mu\'f1oz Garmendia \plain\fs28 \tab  J.F. Mu\'f1oz Garmendia (b. 1949)
\par \b Muhl. \plain\fs28 \tab   G.H.E. Muhlenberg (1753-1815)
\par \pard\tx355 \b M\'fcller Arg. \plain\fs28 \tab   J. M\'fcller of Aargau (Argoviensis) (1828-1896)
\par \b Munby \plain\fs28 \tab   G. Munby (1813-1876)
\par \b M\'fcnch \plain\fs28 \tab   E. M\'fcnch (1876-1946)
\par \b Mu\'f1oz Medina \plain\fs28 \tab   J.M. Mu\'f1oz Medina (b. 1895)
\par \b Munz \plain\fs28 \tab   P.A. Munz (1892-1974)
\par \b Murb. \plain\fs28 \tab   S.S. Murbeck (1859-1946)
\par \b Muret \plain\fs28 \tab   J. Muret (1799-1877)
\par \b Murith \plain\fs28 \tab   L.J. Murith (1742-1816 or 1818)
\par \b Murr, J. \plain\fs28 \tab   J. Murr (1864-1932)
\par \b Murray \plain\fs28 \tab   J.A. Murray (1740-1791)
\par \b Murray, A. \plain\fs28 \tab   A. Murray (1812-1878)
\par \pard\tx355 \b Murray, A. \plain\fs28 \tab   A. Murray (c. 1798-1838)
\par \b Murray, E. \plain\fs28 \tab   A.E. Murray (b. 1935)
\par \b Murray, R.P. \plain\fs28 \tab   R.P. Murray (1842-1908)
\par \b Muschler \plain\fs28 \tab   R. Muschler (b. 1883)
\par \b Mussin \plain\fs28 \tab   A.A. Mussin-Puschkin (1760-1805)
\par \b Mutel \plain\fs28 \tab   A. Mutel (1795-1847)
\par \b Mutel \plain\fs28 \tab   P.A.V. Mutel (1795-1847)
\par \b Mutis \plain\fs28 \tab   J.C.B. Mutis y Bosio (1732-1808)
\par \b Mygind \plain\fs28 \tab   F. Mygind (1710-1789)
\par \b Nadji \plain\fs28 \tab   Abd-Ur-Bahman Nadji (fl. 1892)
\par \b Naegeli \plain\fs28 \tab   C.W. von Naegeli (1817-1891)
\par \pard\tx355 \b Naggi \plain\fs28 \tab   A. Naggi (fl. 1905)
\par \b Nakai \plain\fs28 \tab   T. Nakai (1882-1952)
\par \b Namegata \plain\fs28 \tab   T. Namegata (fl. 1952-1961)
\par \b Nannf. \plain\fs28 \tab  J.A.F. Nannfeldt (b. 1904)
\par \b Nardi \plain\fs28 \tab   E. Nardi (b. 1942)
\par \b Nasarow \plain\fs28 \tab   M.I. Nasarow (1882-1942)
\par \b Nath. \plain\fs28 \tab   A.G. Nathorst (1850-1921)
\par \b Naudin \plain\fs28 \tab   C.V. Naudin (1815-1899)
\par \b Necker \plain\fs28 \tab   N.J. de Necker (1730-1793)
\par \b Nees \plain\fs28 \tab   C.G.D. Nees von Esenbeck (1776-1858)
\par \b Nees, T. \plain\fs28 \tab   T.F.L. Nees von Esenbeck (1787-1837)
\par \pard\tx355 \b Neilr. \plain\fs28 \tab   A. Neilreich (1803-1871)
\par \b Nejc. \plain\fs28 \tab   I. Nejceff (1870-1913)
\par \b Nelmes \plain\fs28 \tab  E. Nelmes (1895-1959)
\par \b Nelson, A. \plain\fs28 \tab   A. Nelson (1859-1952)
\par \b Nelson, E. \plain\fs28 \tab   E. Nelson (b. 1897)
\par \b Nendtvich \plain\fs28 \tab   K.M. Nendtvich (1811-1892)
\par \b Nenukow \plain\fs28 \tab   S.S. Nenukow (1906-1942)
\par \b Nestler, A. \plain\fs28 \tab   A. Nestler (fl. 1812)
\par \b Nestler \plain\fs28 \tab   C.G. Nestler (1778-1832)
\par \b Neumann, A. \plain\fs28 \tab   A. Neumann (1916-1973)
\par \b Neuman \plain\fs28 \tab   L.M. Neuman (1852-1922)
\par \pard\tx355 \b Neumayer, H. \plain\fs28 \tab   H. Neumayer (1887-1945)
\par \b Neves, J. \plain\fs28 \tab   J. de Barros Neves (1914-1982)
\par \b Nevski \plain\fs28 \tab   S.A. Nevski (1908-1938)
\par \b Newbould \plain\fs28 \tab   W.W. Newbould (1819-1886)
\par \b Newman \plain\fs28 \tab   E. Newman (1801-1876)
\par \b Neygenf. \plain\fs28 \tab   F.W. Neygenfind (fl. 1821)
\par \b Nicholson \plain\fs28 \tab   G. Nicholson (1847-1908)
\par \b Nicic \plain\fs28 \tab   D. Nicic (1856-1920)
\par \b Nicotra \plain\fs28 \tab   L. Nicotra (1846-1940)
\par \b Niedenzu \plain\fs28 \tab   F.J. Niedenzu (1857-1937)
\par \b Nieschalk, A. \plain\fs28 \tab   A. Nieschalk (b. 1904)
\par \pard\tx355 \b Nieschalk, C. \plain\fs28 \tab   C. Nieschalk (b. 1913)
\par \b Nikif. \plain\fs28 \tab   N.B. Nikiforova (b. 1912)
\par \b Nikitin, S. \plain\fs28 \tab   S.A. Nikitin (fl. 1937)
\par \b Nitz. \plain\fs28 \tab   T. Nitzelius (b. 1914)
\par \b Nobre \plain\fs28 \tab   A. Nobre (b. 1865)
\par \b Nocca \plain\fs28 \tab   D. Nocca (1758-1841)
\par \b No\'eb \plain\fs28 \tab   W. No\'eb (d. 1858)
\par \b Nogueira \plain\fs28 \tab   I.M.S. Nogueira (b. 1935)
\par \b Nolte \plain\fs28 \tab   E.F. Nolte (1791-1875)
\par \b Nordborg \plain\fs28 \tab   G. Nordborg (b. 1931)
\par \b Nordenstam \plain\fs28 \tab   B. Nordenstam (b. 1936)
\par \pard\tx355 \b Nordh. \plain\fs28 \tab   R. Nordhagen (1894-1979)
\par \b Nordm. \plain\fs28 \tab   A.D. von Nordmann (1803-1866)
\par \b Nordstedt \plain\fs28 \tab   C.F.O. Nordstedt (1838-1924)
\par \b Norlindh, T. \plain\fs28 \tab   T. Norlindh (b. 1906)
\par \b Noronha \plain\fs28 \tab   F. Noronha (c. 1748-1787)
\par \b Norrlin \plain\fs28 \tab   J.P. Norrlin (1842-1917)
\par \b Norton \plain\fs28 \tab   J.B. Norton (1877-1938)
\par \b Not\'f8 \plain\fs28 \tab   A. Not\'f8 (1865-1948)
\par \b Noulet \plain\fs28 \tab   J.B. Noulet (1802-1890)
\par \b Novikov, V. \plain\fs28 \tab   V.S. Novikov (b. 1940)
\par \b Novopokr. \plain\fs28 \tab   I.V. Novopokrovsky (1880-1951)
\par \pard\tx355 \b Nov\'e1k \plain\fs28 \tab   F.A. Nov\'e1k (1892-1964)
\par \b Nowacki \plain\fs28 \tab   E.K. Nowacki (b. 1930)
\par \b Nutt. \plain\fs28 \tab   T. Nuttall (1786-1859)
\par \b Nyl., F. \plain\fs28 \tab   F. Nylander (1820-1880)
\par \b Nyl., W. \plain\fs28 \tab   W. Nylander (1822-1899)
\par \b Nyman \plain\fs28 \tab   C.F. Nyman (1820-1893)
\par \b Ny\'e1r\'e1dy, A. \plain\fs28 \tab   A. Ny\'e1r\'e1dy (b. 1920)
\par \b Ny\'e1r\'e1dy, E.I. \plain\fs28 \tab   E.I. Ny\'e1r\'e1dy (1881-1966)
\par \b Oakes \plain\fs28 \tab  W. Oakes (1799-1848)
\par \b Oberholzer \plain\fs28 \tab   E. Oberholzer (fl. 1886-1950)
\par \b Oborny \plain\fs28 \tab   A. Oborny (1840-1924)
\par \pard\tx355 \b Ockendon \plain\fs28 \tab   D.J. Ockendon (b. 1940)
\par \b Oeder \plain\fs28 \tab   G.C. Oeder (1728-1791)
\par \b Oett. \plain\fs28 \tab  H. von Oettingen (fl. 1925)
\par \b Ohle \plain\fs28 \tab   H. Ohle (b. 1937)
\par \b Ohlsen, R. \plain\fs28 \tab   R. Ohlsen (fl. 1934)
\par \b Ohwi \plain\fs28 \tab   J. Ohwi (1905-1977)
\par \b Oken \plain\fs28 \tab   L. Oken (1779-1851)
\par \b Olin \plain\fs28 \tab   J.H. Olin (1769-1824)
\par \b Oliver \plain\fs28 \tab   D. Oliver (1830-1916)
\par \b Olivier \plain\fs28 \tab   G.A. Olivier (1756-1814)
\par \b Olofsson \plain\fs28 \tab   P. Olofsson (b. 1896)
\par \b Omang \plain\fs28 \tab   S.O.F. Omang (1867-1953)
\par \pard\tx355 \b Omelczuk \plain\fs28 \tab   T.J. Omelczuk (fl. 1962)
\par \b Onno \plain\fs28 \tab   M. Onno (b. 1903)
\par \b Opiz \plain\fs28 \tab   P.M. Opiz (1787-1858)
\par \b Opperman \plain\fs28 \tab   P.A. Opperman (d. 1942)
\par \b Orlova \plain\fs28 \tab   N.I. Orlova (b. 1921)
\par \b Ormonde \plain\fs28 \tab   J.E.M. Ormonde (b. 1943)
\par \b Orph. \plain\fs28 \tab   T.G. Orphanides (1817-1886)
\par \b Orsted \plain\fs28 \tab   A.S. Orsted (1816-1872)
\par \b Ortega \plain\fs28 \tab   C. G\'f3mez de Ortega (1740-1818)
\par \b Ortmann \plain\fs28 \tab   J. Ortmann (1814-1890)
\par \b Osbeck \plain\fs28 \tab   P. Osbeck (1723-1805)
\par \pard\tx355 \b \'d3skarsson \plain\fs28 \tab   I. \'d3skarsson (b. 1892)
\par \b Ostenf. \plain\fs28 \tab   C.E.H. Ostenfeld (1873-1931)
\par \b Osvacil. \plain\fs28 \tab   V. Osvacilova (b. 1924)
\par \b Otth \plain\fs28 \tab   K.A. Otth (1803-1839)
\par \b Otto \plain\fs28 \tab   C.F. Otto (1783-1856)
\par \b Ovcz. \plain\fs28 \tab   P.N. Ovczinnikov (1903-1979)
\par \b Oxner \plain\fs28 \tab   A. N. Oxner (1898-1973)
\par \b \'d6zhatay, N. \plain\fs28 \tab   N. \'d6zhatay (b. 1947)
\par \b Pacher \plain\fs28 \tab   D. Pacher (1816-1902)
\par \b Pacz. \plain\fs28 \tab   I.K. Paczoski (1864-1942)
\par \b Padmore \plain\fs28 \tab   P.A. Padmore (b. 1929)
\par \pard\tx355 \b Paegle \plain\fs28 \tab   B. Paegle (fl. 1927)
\par \b Page, C.N \plain\fs28 \tab  . C.N. Page (b. 1942)
\par \b Paiva \plain\fs28 \tab   J.A. Rodrigues de Paiva (b. 1933)
\par \b Palassou \plain\fs28 \tab   P.B. Palassou (1745-1830)
\par \b Palau \plain\fs28 \tab   P. Palau i Ferrer (1881-1956)
\par \b Palhinha \plain\fs28 \tab   R.T. Palhinha (1871-1957)
\par \b Palitz \plain\fs28 \tab   R. Palitz (fl. 1935)
\par \b Palla \plain\fs28 \tab   E. Palla (186~1922)
\par \b Pallas \plain\fs28 \tab   P.S. Pallas (1741-1811)
\par \b Palmgren \plain\fs28 \tab   A. Palmgren (1880-1960)
\par \b Pamp \plain\fs28 \tab  . R. Pampanini (1875-1949)
\par \pard\tx355 \b Pamukg. \plain\fs28 \tab   A. Pamukluoglu (b. 1929)
\par \b Pancic \plain\fs28 \tab   J. Pancic (1814-1888)
\par \b Pangalo \plain\fs28 \tab   K.I. Pangalo (1883-1965)
\par \b Panizzi \plain\fs28 \tab   F. Panizzi-Savio (1817-1893)
\par \b Panov \plain\fs28 \tab   P.P. Panov (b. 1932)
\par \b Pant. \plain\fs28 \tab   J. Pantocsek (1846-1916)
\par \b Pantu \plain\fs28 \tab   Z. C. Pantu (1866-1934)
\par \b Panzer \plain\fs28 \tab   G.W.F. Panzer (1755-1829)
\par \b Paol. \plain\fs28 \tab   G. Paoletti (1865-1941)
\par \b Papaf. \plain\fs28 \tab   D. Papafava (fl. 1847)
\par \b Papanicolaou \plain\fs28 \tab   K. Papanicolaou (b. 1947)
\par \pard\tx355 \b Pappe \plain\fs28 \tab   K.W.L. Pappe (1803-1862)
\par \b Pardo \plain\fs28 \tab   J. Pardo y Sastr\'f6n (1822-1909)
\par \b Parfenov \plain\fs28 \tab   V.I. Parfenov (b. 1934)
\par \b Parl. \plain\fs28 \tab   F. Parlatore (1816-1877)
\par \b Parnell \plain\fs28 \tab   R. Parnell (1810-1882)
\par \b Parnell, J. \plain\fs28 \tab   J.A.N. Parnell (b. 1954)
\par \b Parodi \plain\fs28 \tab   L.R. Parodi (1895-1966)
\par \b Parris \plain\fs28 \tab   B.S. Parris (b. 1945)
\par \b Parry \plain\fs28 \tab   W.E. Parry (1790-1855)
\par \b Pascher \plain\fs28 \tab   A. A. Pascher (1881-1945)
\par \b Pasquale, C.A. \plain\fs28 \tab   C.(G.)A. Pasquale (1820-1893)
\par \pard\tx355 \b Passer. \plain\fs28 \tab   G. Passerini (1816-1893)
\par \b Patrin \plain\fs28 \tab   E.L.M. Patrin (1742-1815)
\par \b Patzak \plain\fs28 \tab   A. Patzak (b. 1930)
\par \b Patze \plain\fs28 \tab   C.A. Patze (1808-1892)
\par \b Patzke \plain\fs28 \tab   E. Patzke (b. 1929)
\par \b Pauca \plain\fs28 \tab   A.M. Pauca (1907-1963)
\par \b Paul, H. \plain\fs28 \tab   H.K.G. Paul (1876-1964)
\par \b Paulin \plain\fs28 \tab   A. Paulin (1853-1942)
\par \b Paulsen \plain\fs28 \tab   O.V. Paulsen (1874-1947)
\par \b Paun \plain\fs28 \tab   M. Paun (b. 1924)
\par \b Paunero \plain\fs28 \tab   E. Paunero (b. 1906)
\par \b Pauquy \plain\fs28 \tab   C.L.C. Pauquy (1800-1854)
\par \pard\tx355 \b Pau \plain\fs28 \tab   C. Pau y Espa\'f1ol (1857-1937)
\par \b Pavlov \plain\fs28 \tab   N.V. Pavlov (1893-1971)
\par \b Pavone \plain\fs28 \tab   P. Pavone (b. 1948)
\par \b Pav\'f3n \plain\fs28 \tab   J.A. Pav\'f3n y Jim\'e9nez (1754-1844)
\par \b Pawl., S. \plain\fs28 \tab   S. Pawlowska (b. 1905)
\par \b Pawl. \plain\fs28 \tab   B. Pawlowski (1898-1971)
\par \b Paxton \plain\fs28 \tab   J. Paxton (1803-1865)
\par \b Pax \plain\fs28 \tab   F.A. Pax (1858-1942)
\par \b Pedersen, A \plain\fs28 \tab  . A. Pedersen (b. 1920)
\par \b Pedro, G. \plain\fs28 \tab   J. G. Pedro (b. 1915)
\par \b Penev \plain\fs28 \tab   I. N. Penev (b. 1915)
\par \pard\tx355 \b Pennell \plain\fs28 \tab   F.W. Pennell (1886-1952)
\par \b P\'e9nzes \plain\fs28 \tab   A. P\'e9nzes (b. 1895)
\par \b Peola \plain\fs28 \tab   P. Peola (b. 1869)
\par \b P\'e9rard \plain\fs28 \tab  M. P\'e9rard (1835-1887)
\par \b Pereda \plain\fs28 \tab   J.M. de Pereda S\'e1ez (1909-1972)
\par \b P\'e9rez Lara \plain\fs28 \tab   J. M. P\'e9rez Lara (1841-1918)
\par \b Perf. \plain\fs28 \tab   I.A. Perfiljew (1882-1942)
\par \b Pernh. \plain\fs28 \tab   G. von Pernhoffer (1831-1899)
\par \b Perpenti \plain\fs28 \tab   C. Lena-Perpenti (1764-1846)
\par \b Perr. \plain\fs28 \tab   E.P. Perrier de la B\'e2thie (1825-1916)
\par \b Perring \plain\fs28 \tab   F.H. Perring (b. 1927)
\par \pard\tx355 \b Pers. \plain\fs28 \tab   C.H. Persoon (1761-1836)
\par \b Personnat \plain\fs28 \tab   V. Personnat (fl. 1854-1870)
\par \b Persson, H. \plain\fs28 \tab   N.P.H. Persson (b. 1893)
\par \b Persson, K. \plain\fs28 \tab   K.M. Persson (b. 1938)
\par \b Petagna \plain\fs28 \tab   V. Petagna (1734-1810)
\par \b Peteaux \plain\fs28 \tab   J.C.J. Peteaux (1840-1896)
\par \b Peter \plain\fs28 \tab   G.A. Peter (1853-1937)
\par \b P\'e9terfi \plain\fs28 \tab   M. P\'e9terfi (1875-1922)
\par \b Peterm. \plain\fs28 \tab   W.L. Petermann (1806-1855)
\par \b Peter \plain\fs28 \tab   G.A. Peter (1853-1937)
\par \b Petif \plain\fs28 \tab   C. Petif (fl 1830)
\par \pard\tx355 \b Petit \plain\fs28 \tab   A. Petit (d. 1843)
\par \b Petit, E. \plain\fs28 \tab   E.C.N. Petit (1817-1893)
\par \b Petitmengin \plain\fs28 \tab   M.G.C. Petitmengin (1881-1908)
\par \b Petrak \plain\fs28 \tab   F. Petrak (1886-1973)
\par \b Petri \plain\fs28 \tab   F. Petri (1837-1896)
\par \b Petrova \plain\fs28 \tab   A.V. Petrova (fl. 1973 )
\par \b Petrovic \plain\fs28 \tab   S. Petrovic (1839-1889)
\par \b Petrov \plain\fs28 \tab   V.A. Petrov (1896-1955)
\par \b Petunnikov \plain\fs28 \tab   A.N. Petunnikov (1842-1919)
\par \b Petzold \plain\fs28 \tab   C.E.A. Petzold (1815-1891)
\par \b Peyer \plain\fs28 \tab   -- Peyer (fl. 1829)
\par \pard\tx355 \b Philcox \plain\fs28 \tab   D. Philcox (b. 1926)
\par \b Philippe \plain\fs28 \tab   X. Philippe (1802-1866)
\par \b Philippi \plain\fs28 \tab   R.A. Philippi (1808-1904)
\par \b Phillips, E.P. \plain\fs28 \tab   E.P. Phillips (1884-1967)
\par \b Phipps, C.J. \plain\fs28 \tab   C.J. Phipps (1744-1792)
\par \b Phitos \plain\fs28 \tab   D. Phitos (b. 1930)
\par \b Pichi Serm. \plain\fs28 \tab   R.E.G. Pichi Sermolli (b. 1912)
\par \b Pierrat \plain\fs28 \tab   D. Pierrat (1835-1895)
\par \b Pignatti \plain\fs28 \tab   S. Pignatti (b. 1930)
\par \b Pilger \plain\fs28 \tab   R.K.F. Pilger (1876-1953)
\par \b Piller \plain\fs28 \tab   M. Piller (1733-1788)
\par \pard\tx355 \b Pinzger \plain\fs28 \tab   P. Pinzger (fl. 1868)
\par \b Pio \plain\fs28 \tab   G.B. Pio (fl. 1813)
\par \b Piper \plain\fs28 \tab   C.V. Piper (1867-1926)
\par \b Pires de Linna \plain\fs28 \tab   A. Pires de Lima (b. 1886)
\par \b Pirona \plain\fs28 \tab   G.A. Pirona (1882-1895)
\par \b Pir\'e9 \plain\fs28 \tab   L.A.H.J. Pir\'e9 (1827-1887)
\par \b Pissjauk. \plain\fs28 \tab   V.V. Pissjaukowa (b. 1906)
\par \b Pitard \plain\fs28 \tab   C.J. Pitard (1873-1927)
\par \b Planchon \plain\fs28 \tab   J.E. Planchon (1823-1888)
\par \b Planellas \plain\fs28 \tab   J. Planellas Giralt (1821-1888)
\par \b Pleijel \plain\fs28 \tab   C.G.V. Pleijel (1866-1937)
\par \pard\tx355 \b Pobed. \plain\fs28 \tab   E.G. Pobedimova (1898-1973)
\par \b Podl. \plain\fs28 \tab   D. Podlech (b. 1931)
\par \b Podobnik \plain\fs28 \tab   A. Podobnik (fl. 1987)
\par \b Podp. \plain\fs28 \tab   J. Podpera (1878-1954)
\par \b Poech \plain\fs28 \tab   J. Poech (1816-1846)
\par \b Poeppig \plain\fs28 \tab   E.F. Poeppig (1798-1868)
\par \b Poeverlein \plain\fs28 \tab   H. Poeverlein (1874-1957)
\par \b Poggenb. \plain\fs28 \tab   J.F. Poggenburg (l840-i893)
\par \b Pohle \plain\fs28 \tab   R.R. Pohle (1869-1926)
\par \b Pohl \plain\fs28 \tab   J.B.E. Pohl (1782-1834)
\par \b Poiret \plain\fs28 \tab   J.L.M. Poiret (1755-1834)
\par \pard\tx355 \b Poirion \plain\fs28 \tab   L.P. Poirion (b. 1901)
\par \b Poiteau \plain\fs28 \tab   P.A. Poiteau (1766-1854)
\par \b Pojark., H. \plain\fs28 \tab   H.I. Pojarkova (E.I. Pojarkova) (fl. 1965)
\par \b Pojark. \plain\fs28 \tab   A.I. Pojarkova (1897-1980)
\par \b Polatschek \plain\fs28 \tab   A. Polatschek (b. 1932)
\par \b Poldini \plain\fs28 \tab   L. Poldini (b. 1930)
\par \b Polg\'e1r \plain\fs28 \tab   S. Polg\'e1r (1876-1944 or 1945)
\par \b Pollacci \plain\fs28 \tab   --Pollacci (fl. 1908)
\par \b Pollich \plain\fs28 \tab   J.A. Pollich (1740-1780)
\par \b Pollini \plain\fs28 \tab   C. Pollini (1782-1833)
\par \b Polunin \plain\fs28 \tab   N.V. Polunin (b. 1909)
\par \pard\tx355 \b Pomel \plain\fs28 \tab   A.N. Pomel (1821-1898)
\par \b Pons \plain\fs28 \tab   A. Pons (1838-1893)
\par \b Popl. \plain\fs28 \tab   G.I. Poplavskaja (Poplawska) (1885-1956)
\par \b Popov, M. \plain\fs28 \tab   M.G. Popov (1893-1955)
\par \b Popov, T. \plain\fs28 \tab   T.I. Popov (fl. 1927)
\par \b Porc. \plain\fs28 \tab   F. Porcius (1816-1907)
\par \b Porsch \plain\fs28 \tab   O. Porsch (1875-1959)
\par \b Porsild, A. \plain\fs28 \tab   E.A.E. Porsild (b. 1901)
\par \b Porsild \plain\fs28 \tab   M.P. Porsild (1872-1956)
\par \b Porta \plain\fs28 \tab   P. Porta (1832-1923)
\par \b Portenschl. \plain\fs28 \tab   F.E. von Portenschlag-Ledermayer (1772-1822)
\par \pard\tx355 \b Porter \plain\fs28 \tab    T.C. Porter (1822-1901)
\par \b Pospichal \plain\fs28 \tab   E. Pospichal (1838-1905)
\par \b Postr. \plain\fs28 \tab   S.A. Postrigan (b. 1891)
\par \b Post \plain\fs28 \tab   G.E. Post (1838-1909)
\par \b Pott \plain\fs28 \tab   J.F. Pott (1738-1805)
\par \b Potztal \plain\fs28 \tab   E.H.I. Potztal (b. 1924)
\par \b Pourret \plain\fs28 \tab   P.A. Pourret de Figeac (1754-1818)
\par \b Pouzar \plain\fs28 \tab    Z. Pouzar (b. 1932)
\par \b Pouzolz \plain\fs28 \tab   P.C.M. de Pouzolz (1785-1858)
\par \b Pozd. \plain\fs28 \tab   N.G. Pozdeeva (b. 1913)
\par \b Prada \plain\fs28 \tab   M. del Carmen I. Prada Moral (b. 1953)
\par \pard\tx355 \b Praeger \plain\fs28 \tab   R.L. Praeger (1865-1953)
\par \b Prantl \plain\fs28 \tab   K.A.E. Prantl (1849-1893)
\par \b Prat \plain\fs28 \tab   H. Prat (b. 1902)
\par \b Preaubert \plain\fs28 \tab   E. Preaubert (b. 1852)
\par \b Presl, C. \plain\fs28 \tab   C. (K.) B. Presl (1794-1852)
\par \b Presl, J. \plain\fs28 \tab   J.S. Presl (1791-1849)
\par \b Preston, C.D. \plain\fs28 \tab   C.D. Preston (b. 1955)
\par \b Price \plain\fs28 \tab   W.R. Price (1886-1975)
\par \b Prime \plain\fs28 \tab   C.T. Prime (b. 1909)
\par \b Printz \plain\fs28 \tab   K.H.O. Printz (b. 1888)
\par \b Pritchard \plain\fs28 \tab   N.M. Pritchard (b. 1933)
\par \pard\tx355 \b Pritzel, G.A. \plain\fs28 \tab   G.A. Pritzel (1815-1874)
\par \b Privalova \plain\fs28 \tab   L.A. Privalova (b. 1919)
\par \b Proctor, M.C.F. \plain\fs28 \tab   M.C.F. Proctor (b. 1929)
\par \b Prodan \plain\fs28 \tab   J. Prodan (1875-1959)
\par \b Progel \plain\fs28 \tab   A. Progel (1829-1889)
\par \b Prokh. \plain\fs28 \tab   J.I. Prokhanov (1902-1964)
\par \b Prokudin \plain\fs28 \tab   J.N. Prokudin (b. 1911)
\par \b Prolongo \plain\fs28 \tab   P. Prolongo y Garcia (1806-1885)
\par \b Proskorj. \plain\fs28 \tab   E. I. Proskorjakov (b. 1895)
\par \b Puel \plain\fs28 \tab   T. Puel (1812-1890)
\par \b Puget \plain\fs28 \tab   F. Puget (1829-1880)
\par \pard\tx355 \b Pugsley \plain\fs28 \tab   H.W. Pugsley (1868-1947)
\par \b Pulevic \plain\fs28 \tab   V. Pulevic (b. 1938)
\par \b Pulliat \plain\fs28 \tab   V. Pulliat (1827-1866)
\par \b Puolanne \plain\fs28 \tab   M.E. Puolanne (1877-1941)
\par \b Purchas \plain\fs28 \tab   W.H. Purchas (1823-1903)
\par \b Puring \plain\fs28 \tab   N. Puring (1865-1904)
\par \b Purkyne \plain\fs28 \tab   E. Purkyne (1831-1882)
\par \b Pursh \plain\fs28 \tab   F.T. Pursh (1774-1820)
\par \b Putterlick \plain\fs28 \tab   A. Putterlick (1810-1845)
\par \b Qu\'e9zel \plain\fs28 \tab   P. Qu\'e9zel (b. 1926)
\par \b Raab \plain\fs28 \tab   W. Raab (fl. 1819)
\par \pard\tx355 \b Rabenh. \plain\fs28 \tab   G.L. Rabenhorst (1806-1881)
\par \b Racib. \plain\fs28 \tab   M. Raciborski (1864-1917)
\par \b Raddi \plain\fs28 \tab   G. Raddi (1770-1829)
\par \b Radius \plain\fs28 \tab   J.W.M. Radius (1797-1884)
\par \b Raeuschel \plain\fs28 \tab  E.A. Raeuschel (fl. 1772-1197)
\par \b Raffaelli \plain\fs28 \tab   M. Raffaelli (b. 1944)
\par \b Rafin. \plain\fs28 \tab   C.S. Rafinesque-Schmaltz (1783-1840)
\par \b Rafn \plain\fs28 \tab   C.G. Rafn (1769-1808)
\par \b Ramat. \plain\fs28 \tab   T.A.J. d'Audibert de Ramatuelle (1750-1794)
\par \b Ramond \plain\fs28 \tab   L.F.E. de Carbonni\'e9res Ramond (1753-1829)
\par \pard\tx355 \b Rand \plain\fs28 \tab   E.L. Rand (1859-1924)
\par \b Randel \plain\fs28 \tab   LJ. Randel (b. 1941)
\par \b Rapaics \plain\fs28 \tab   R. Rapaics (1885-1953)
\par \b Rapin \plain\fs28 \tab   D. Rapin (1799-1882)
\par \b Rasbach, H. \plain\fs28 \tab   H. Rasbach (b. 1924)
\par \b Rasbach, K. \plain\fs28 \tab   K. Rasbach (b. 1923)
\par \b Rasmussen \plain\fs28 \tab   R. Rasmussen (1871-1962)
\par \b Raspail \plain\fs28 \tab   F.V. Raspail (1794-1878)
\par \b Ratter \plain\fs28 \tab   J.A. Ratter (b. 1934)
\par \b Raulin \plain\fs28 \tab   V.F. Raulin (1815 or 1819-1905)
\par \b Raunk. \plain\fs28 \tab   C.C. Raunki\'e6r (1860-1938)
\par \pard\tx355 \b Rauschel \plain\fs28 \tab   E.A. Rauschel (fl. 1772-1797)
\par \b Rauschert \plain\fs28 \tab   S. Rauschert (1931-1986)
\par \b Rau \plain\fs28 \tab   A. Rau (1784-1830)
\par \b Ravarut \plain\fs28 \tab   M. Ravarut (b. 1907)
\par \b Ravaud \plain\fs28 \tab   L.C.M. Ravaud (1822-1898)
\par \b Raven, J.E. \plain\fs28 \tab   J.E. Raven (b. 1914)
\par \b Raven, P.H. \plain\fs28 \tab   P.H. Raven (b. 1936)
\par \b Ravnik \plain\fs28 \tab   V. Ravnik (b. 1924)
\par \b Raymond \plain\fs28 \tab   L.M. Raymond (1915-1972)
\par \b Rayss \plain\fs28 \tab   T. Rayss (1890-1965)
\par \b Re, G.F. \plain\fs28 \tab   G.F. Re (1772-1833)
\par \pard\tx355 \b Reboul \plain\fs28 \tab   E. de Reboul (1781-1851)
\par \b Rebr. \plain\fs28 \tab   O.V. Rebristaya (b. 1930)
\par \b Rech. fil. \plain\fs28 \tab   K.H. Rechinger (b. 1906)
\par \b Rech. \plain\fs28 \tab   K. Rechinger (1867-1952)
\par \b Redf. \plain\fs28 \tab   J.H. Redfield (1815-1895)
\par \b Redout\'e9 \plain\fs28 \tab   P.J. Redout\'e9 (1759-1840)
\par \b Rees \plain\fs28 \tab   A. Rees (1743-1825)
\par \b Regel, C. \plain\fs28 \tab   C. von Regel (1890-1970)
\par \b Regel \plain\fs28 \tab   E.A. von Regel (1815-1892)
\par \b Rehder \plain\fs28 \tab   A. Rehder (1863-1949)
\par \b Rehmann \plain\fs28 \tab   A. Rehmann (Rehman) (1840-1917)
\par \pard\tx355 \b Reichard \plain\fs28 \tab   J. J. Reichard (1743-1782)
\par \b Reichenb. fil. \plain\fs28 \tab   H.G. Reichenbach (1824-1889)
\par \b Reichenb. \plain\fs28 \tab   H.G.L. Reichenbach (1793-1879)
\par \b Reiche \plain\fs28 \tab   K.F. Reiche (1860-1929)
\par \b Reichstein \plain\fs28 \tab   T. Reichstein (b. 1897)
\par \b Reinhard \plain\fs28 \tab   H.R. Reinhard (b. 1919)
\par \b Rendle \plain\fs28 \tab   A.B. Rendle (1865-1938)
\par \b Renner \plain\fs28 \tab   O. Renner (1883-1960)
\par \b Renz \plain\fs28 \tab   J. Renz (b. 1907)
\par \b Req. \plain\fs28 \tab   E. Requien (1788-1851)
\par \b Resvoll, T. \plain\fs28 \tab   T.R. Resvoll (1871-1948)
\par \pard\tx355 \b Resvoll-Holmsen \plain\fs28 \tab   H. Resvoll-Holmsen (1873-1943)
\par \b Retz. \plain\fs28 \tab   A.J. Retzius (1742-1821)
\par \b Reuss, G. \plain\fs28 \tab   G. Reuss (1818-1861)
\par \b Reuter \plain\fs28 \tab   G.F. Reuter (1805-1872)
\par \b Reveal \plain\fs28 \tab   J.L. Reveal (b. 1941)
\par \b Revel \plain\fs28 \tab   J. Revel (1811-1887)
\par \b Reverchon \plain\fs28 \tab   E. Reverchon (1835-1914)
\par \b Reverdatto \plain\fs28 \tab   V.V. Reverdatto (1891-1969)
\par \b Reyn. \plain\fs28 \tab   A. Reynier (1845-1932)
\par \b Reynolds \plain\fs28 \tab   G.W. Reynolds (c. 1895-1967)
\par \b Ricci, I. \plain\fs28 \tab   I. Ricci (b. 1922)
\par \pard\tx355 \b Ricci \plain\fs28 \tab   A.M. Ricci (1777-1850)
\par \b Richard, A. \plain\fs28 \tab   A. Richard (1794-1852)
\par \b Richard, L.C.M. \plain\fs28 \tab   L.C.M. Richard (1754-1821)
\par \b Richards, A.J. \plain\fs28 \tab   A.J. Richards (b. 1943)
\par \b Richardson, I.B.K. \plain\fs28 \tab   I.B.K. Richardson (b. 1940)
\par \b Richardson \plain\fs28 \tab   J. Richardson (1787-1865)
\par \b Richter, J. \plain\fs28 \tab   J.-A. Richter (1821-1910)
\par \b Richter, K. \plain\fs28 \tab   K. Richter (1855-1891)
\par \b Richter \plain\fs28 \tab   H.E.F. Richter (1808-1876)
\par \b Rico \plain\fs28 \tab   E. Rico Hern\'e1ndez (b. 1953)
\par \pard\tx355 \b Riddelsd. \plain\fs28 \tab   H.J. Riddelsdell (1866-1941)
\par \b Ridley \plain\fs28 \tab  H.N. Ridley (1855-1956)
\par \b Riedl, H. \plain\fs28 \tab   H. Riedl (b. 1936)
\par \b Rigo \plain\fs28 \tab   G. Rigo (1841-1922)
\par \b Rikli \plain\fs28 \tab   M.A. Rikli (1868-1951)
\par \b Rink \plain\fs28 \tab   H.J.Rink (1819-1893)
\par \b Ripart \plain\fs28 \tab   J.B.M.J.S.E. Ripart (1814-1878)
\par \b Risse \plain\fs28 \tab   H. Risse (1948-1989)
\par \b Risso \plain\fs28 \tab   J.A. Risso (1777-1845)
\par \b Rittener \plain\fs28 \tab   T. Rittener (fl. 1887)
\par \b Ritter \plain\fs28 \tab   H. Ritter-Studnicka (b. 1911)
\par \pard\tx355 \b Rivas Martinez \plain\fs28 \tab   S. Rivas Martinez (b. 1935)
\par \b Rivas Ponce \plain\fs28 \tab   M.A. Rivas Ponce (b. 1941)
\par \b Rivas \plain\fs28 \tab   Goday S. Rivas Goday (1905-1981)
\par \b Rivi\'e8re, A. \plain\fs28 \tab   M.A. Rivi\'e8re (1821-1877)
\par \b Rivi\'e8re, C. \plain\fs28 \tab   C.M. Rivi\'e8re (b. 1845)
\par \b Rix \plain\fs28 \tab   E.M. Rix (b. 1943)
\par \b Robert \plain\fs28 \tab   --Robert (fl. 1838)
\par \b Roberts, J. \plain\fs28 \tab   J. Roberts (1912-1960)
\par \b Roberts, R.H. \plain\fs28 \tab   R.H. Roberts (b. 1910)
\par \b Robert \plain\fs28 \tab   G.N. Robert (1776-1857)
\par \b Robill. \plain\fs28 \tab   L.M.A. Robillard d'Argentelle (1777-1828)
\par \pard\tx355 \b Robinson \plain\fs28 \tab   B.L. Robinson (1864-1935)
\par \b Robson, N.K.B. \plain\fs28 \tab   N.K.B. Robson (b. 1928)
\par \b Robson \plain\fs28 \tab   E. Robson (1763-1813)
\par \b Robyns \plain\fs28 \tab   W. Robyns (b. 1901)
\par \b Rocha Afonso \plain\fs28 \tab   M. da Luz de Oliveira Tavares Monteiro da Rocha Afonso (b. 1925)
\par \b Rochel \plain\fs28 \tab   A. Rochel (1770-1847)
\par \b Rodin \plain\fs28 \tab   L.E. Rodin (1907-1966)
\par \b Rodr., J.J. \plain\fs28 \tab   J.J. Rodriguez y Femenias (1839-1905)
\par \b Rodr. \plain\fs28 \tab   J.D. Rodriguez (1780-1846)
\par \b Roemer, M.J. \plain\fs28 \tab   M.J. Roemer (fl. 1835-1846)
\par \pard\tx355 \b Roemer, R. de \plain\fs28 \tab   R.B. de [von] Roemer (fl. 1828-1852)
\par \b Roemer \plain\fs28 \tab   J.J. Roemer (1763-1819)
\par \b Roffey \plain\fs28 \tab   J. Roffey (1860-1927)
\par \b Rogow. \plain\fs28 \tab   A.S. Rogowicz (1812-1878)
\par \b Rohde \plain\fs28 \tab   M. Rohde (1782-1812)
\par \b Rohlena \plain\fs28 \tab   J. Rohlena (1874-1944)
\par \b R\'f6hling \plain\fs28 \tab   J.C. R\'f6hling (1757-1813)
\par \b Rohrb. \plain\fs28 \tab   P. Rohrbach (1847-1871)
\par \b Roman \plain\fs28 \tab   N. Roman (b. 1927)
\par \b Ronniger \plain\fs28 \tab   K. Ronniger (1871-1954)
\par \b Ronning \plain\fs28 \tab   O.I. Ronning (b. 1924)
\par \pard\tx355 \b Rosellini \plain\fs28 \tab   ?F. Rosellini (1817-1873)
\par \b Ros\'e9n \plain\fs28 \tab   J.P. Ros\'e9n (1788-1825 or later)
\par \b Rosenvinge \plain\fs28 \tab   J.L.A.K. Rosenvinge (1858-1939)
\par \b Rose \plain\fs28 \tab   J.N. Rose (1862-1928)
\par \b Roshev. \plain\fs28 \tab   R.J. Roshevitz (1882-1949)
\par \b Ross, J. \plain\fs28 \tab   J. Ross (1777-1856)
\par \b Ross, R. \plain\fs28 \tab   R. Ross (b. 1912)
\par \b Rosser \plain\fs28 \tab   E.M. Rosser (b. 1923)
\par \b Rossi \plain\fs28 \tab   M.L. Rossi (1850-1932)
\par \b R\'f6ssler \plain\fs28 \tab   W. R\'f6ssler (b. 1909)
\par \b Rostanski \plain\fs28 \tab   K. Rostanski (b. 1930)
\par \pard\tx355 \b Rostk. \plain\fs28 \tab   F.W.T. Rostkovius (F.W.G. Rostkov) (1770-1848)
\par \b Rostock \plain\fs28 \tab   M. Rostock (fl. 1884)
\par \b Rostrup \plain\fs28 \tab   F.G.E. Rostrup (1831-1907)
\par \b Rothm. \plain\fs28 \tab   W.H.P. Rothmaler (1908-1962)
\par \b Roth \plain\fs28 \tab   A.W. Roth (1757-1834)
\par \b Rottb. \plain\fs28 \tab   C.F. Rottboell (Rottb\'f8ll) (1727-1797)
\par \b Rouleau \plain\fs28 \tab   J.A.E. Rouleau (1916-1991)
\par \b Roussine \plain\fs28 \tab   N. Roussine (formerly N.A. Schostenko) (1889-1968)
\par \b Rouy \plain\fs28 \tab   G.C.C. Rouy (1851-1924)
\par \b Rowley \plain\fs28 \tab   G.D. Rowley (b. 1921)
\par \pard\tx355 \b Roxb. \plain\fs28 \tab   W. Roxburgh (1751-1815)
\par \b Royle \plain\fs28 \tab   J.F. Royle (1798-1858)
\par \b Rozan. \plain\fs28 \tab   M.A. Rozanova (1885-1957)
\par \b Rozeira \plain\fs28 \tab   A.D.F. Rozeira (b. 1912)
\par \b Rozier \plain\fs28 \tab   F.(J.-F.) Rozier (1734-1793)
\par \b Rubtsov \plain\fs28 \tab   N.I. Rubtsov (Rubtzov) (1907-1988)
\par \b Rudolph, J.H. \plain\fs28 \tab   J.H. Rudolph (1744-1809)
\par \b Rudolphi \plain\fs28 \tab   K.A. Rudolphi (1771-1832)
\par \b Ruhmer \plain\fs28 \tab   G.F. Ruhmer (1853-1883)
\par \b Ruiz Rejon \plain\fs28 \tab   M. Ruiz Rejon (b. 1950)
\par \b Ruiz \plain\fs28 \tab   H. Ruiz L\'f3pez (1754-1816)
\par \pard\tx355 \b Runemark \plain\fs28 \tab   H. Runemark (b. 1927)
\par \b Rune \plain\fs28 \tab   N.O. Rune (b. 1919)
\par \b Ruppert \plain\fs28 \tab   J. Ruppert (1864-1935)
\par \b Rupr. \plain\fs28 \tab   F.J. Ruprecht (1814-1870)
\par \b Russell, A. \plain\fs28 \tab   A. Russell (c. 1715-1768)
\par \b Russell, P. \plain\fs28 \tab   P.G. Russell (1889-1963)
\par \b Ruthe \plain\fs28 \tab   J.F. Ruthe (1788-1859)
\par \b Rydb. \plain\fs28 \tab   P.A. Rydberg (1860-1931)
\par \b Rylands \plain\fs28 \tab   T.G. Rylands (1818-1900)
\par \b Sa'ad \plain\fs28 \tab   F. Sa'ad (b. 1925)
\par \b Saarson \plain\fs28 \tab   B. Saarson (later B. Saarsoo) (1899-1969)
\par \pard\tx355 \b Sabine \plain\fs28 \tab   J. Sabine (1770-1837)
\par \b Sabr. \plain\fs28 \tab   H. Sabransky (1864-1916)
\par \b Sadler \plain\fs28 \tab   J. Sadler (1791-1849)
\par \b Saelan \plain\fs28 \tab   A.T. Saelan (1834-1921)
\par \b Sageret \plain\fs28 \tab   A. Sageret (1763-1851)
\par \b Sagorski \plain\fs28 \tab   E.A. Sagorski (1847-1929)
\par \b Sagredo \plain\fs28 \tab   R. Sagredo (b. 1899)
\par \b Saint-Lager \plain\fs28 \tab   J.B. Saint-Lager (1825-1912)
\par \b Sakalo \plain\fs28 \tab   D.I. Sakalo (1904-1965)
\par \b Salisb. \plain\fs28 \tab   R.A. Salisbury (1761-1829)
\par \b Salis \plain\fs28 \tab   C. Ulysses von Salis-Marschlins (1760-?1818)
\par \pard\tx355 \b Salm-Dyck \plain\fs28 \tab  J.F.M.A.H.I. zu Salm-Reifferscheid-Dyck (1773-1861)
\par \b Salman \plain\fs28 \tab   A.H.P.M. Salman (fl. 1976-1977)
\par \b Salmon \plain\fs28 \tab   C.E. Salmon (1872-1930)
\par \b Salter \plain\fs28 \tab    S.J.A. Salter (1825-1897)
\par \b Saltin \plain\fs28 \tab   H. Saltin (1912-1969)
\par \b Salvo \plain\fs28 \tab   A.E. Salvo Tierra (b. 1957)
\par \b Salzm. \plain\fs28 \tab   P. Salzmann (1781-1851)
\par \b Sam. \plain\fs28 \tab   G. Samuelsson (1885-1944)
\par \b Sambuk \plain\fs28 \tab   F.V. Sambuk (1900-1942)
\par \b Samp. \plain\fs28 \tab   G.A. da Silva Ferreira Sampaio (1865-1937)
\par \pard\tx355 \b Sanadze \plain\fs28 \tab   K.S. Sanadze (fl. 1946)
\par \b Sandor \plain\fs28 \tab   I. Sandor (b. 1853)
\par \b Sandwith \plain\fs28 \tab   N.Y. Sandwith (1901-1965)
\par \b Sanguinetti \plain\fs28 \tab   P. Sanguinetti (1802-1868)
\par \b Santi, G. \plain\fs28 \tab   G. Santi (1746-1822)
\par \b Sapjegin \plain\fs28 \tab   A.A. Sapjegin (1883-1946)
\par \b Sarato \plain\fs28 \tab   C. Sarato (1830-1893)
\par \b Sarg. \plain\fs28 \tab   C.S. Sargent (1841-1927)
\par \b Sarnth. \plain\fs28 \tab   L. von Sarntheim (1861-1914)
\par \b Sart. \plain\fs28 \tab   G.B. SartoreIli (1780-1853)
\par \b Sarvela \plain\fs28 \tab   J. Sarvela (b. 1914)
\par \pard\tx355 \b Sauer \plain\fs28 \tab   F.W.H. Sauer (1803-1873)
\par \b Sauer, W. \plain\fs28 \tab   W. Sauer (b. 1935)
\par \b Saunders \plain\fs28 \tab   W.W. Saunders (1809-1879)
\par \b Sauter \plain\fs28 \tab   A.E. Sauter (1800-1881)
\par \b Sauvage \plain\fs28 \tab   C.P.F. Sauvage (b. 1909)
\par \b Sauz\'e9 \plain\fs28 \tab   C. Sauz\'e9 (1815-1889)
\par \b Sauz\'e9 \plain\fs28 \tab   J.C. Sauz\'e9 (1815-1889)
\par \b Savi fil. \plain\fs28 \tab   P. Savi (1798-1871)
\par \b Savigny \plain\fs28 \tab   M.J.C. Lelorgne de Savigny (1777-1851)
\par \b Savi \plain\fs28 \tab   G. Savi (1769-1844)
\par \b Savul. \plain\fs28 \tab   T. Savulescu (1889-1963)
\par \pard\tx355 \b Scaling \plain\fs28 \tab   W. Scaling (fl. 1863-1882)
\par \b Schaeffer \plain\fs28 \tab   J.C. Schaeffer (1718-1790)
\par \b Schaeftlein \plain\fs28 \tab   H. Schaeftlein (1886-1973)
\par \b Schaffner \plain\fs28 \tab   W. Schaffner (d. 1882)
\par \b Schagerstr\'f6m \plain\fs28 \tab   J.A. Schagerstr\'f6m (1818-1867)
\par \b Schauer \plain\fs28 \tab   J.K. Schauer (1813-1848)
\par \b Schchian \plain\fs28 \tab   A.S. Schchian (b. 1905)
\par \b Scheele \plain\fs28 \tab   G.H.A. Scheele (1808-1864)
\par \b Scheffer, J. \plain\fs28 \tab   J. Scheffer (1903-1949)
\par \b Schelkownikow \plain\fs28 \tab   A.B. Schelkownikow (Schelkovnikov) (1870-1933)
\par \pard\tx355 \b Schellm. \plain\fs28 \tab   C. Schellmann (fl. 1938)
\par \b Schenk, E. \plain\fs28 \tab   E. Schenk (b. 1880)
\par \b Schenk \plain\fs28 \tab   J.A. Schenk (1815-1891)
\par \b Scherb. \plain\fs28 \tab   J. Scherbius (1769-1813)
\par \b Scheutz \plain\fs28 \tab   N.J.W. Scheutz (1836-1889)
\par \b Schiede \plain\fs28 \tab   C.J.W. Schiede (1798-1836)
\par \b Schieman \plain\fs28 \tab   E. Schieman (1881-1972)
\par \b Schiffner \plain\fs28 \tab   V.F. Schiffner (1862-1944)
\par \b Schimper, C. \plain\fs28 \tab   C.F. Schimper (1803-1867)
\par \b Schimper \plain\fs28 \tab   G.H.W. Schimper (1804-1878)
\par \b Schindler \plain\fs28 \tab   J. Schindler (b. 1881)
\par \pard\tx355 \b Schinz \plain\fs28 \tab   H. Schinz (1858-1941)
\par \b Schipcz. \plain\fs28 \tab   N.V. Schipczinski (1886-1955)
\par \b Schischkin \plain\fs28 \tab   B.K. Schischkin (1886-1963)
\par \b Schkuhr \plain\fs28 \tab   C. Schkuhr (1741-1811)
\par \b Schlecht. \plain\fs28 \tab   D.F.L. von Schlechtendal (1794-1866)
\par \b Schlechter \plain\fs28 \tab   F.R.R. Schlechter (1872-1925)
\par \b Schleicher \plain\fs28 \tab   J.C. Schleicher (1768-1834)
\par \b Schleiden \plain\fs28 \tab   M.J. Schleiden (1804-1881)
\par \b Schlickum \plain\fs28 \tab   A. Schlickum (b. 1867)
\par \b Schljakov \plain\fs28 \tab   R.N. Schljakov (b. 1912)
\par \pard\tx355 \b Schlosser \plain\fs28 \tab    J.C. Schlosser von Klekovski (1808-1882)
\par \b Schlosser \plain\fs28 \tab   J.C. Schlosser (1808-1882)
\par \b Schmalh. \plain\fs28 \tab   J.T. Schmalhausen (I. F. Schmal'hausen) (1849-1894)
\par \b Schmeil \plain\fs28 \tab   O. Schmeil (1860-1943)
\par \b Schmid, E. \plain\fs28 \tab   Emil Schmid (b. 1891)
\par \b Schmidely \plain\fs28 \tab   A.I.S. Schmidely (1838-1918)
\par \b Schmidel \plain\fs28 \tab   C.C. Schmidel (1718-1792)
\par \b Schmidt Petrop., Friedrich \plain\fs28 \tab    Friedrich [Karl] Schmidt of St Petersburg (1832-1908)
\par \b Schmidt, A. \plain\fs28 \tab   A. Schmidt (b. 1932)
\par \pard\tx355 \b Schmidt, F. \plain\fs28 \tab   W. Franz Willibald Schmidt (1764-1796)
\par \b Schmidt, Franz \plain\fs28 \tab   Franz Schmidt (1751-1834)
\par \b Schmidt, W.L.E. \plain\fs28 \tab   W.L.E. Schmidt (1804-1843)
\par \b Schneider, C.K. \plain\fs28 \tab   C.K. Schneider (1876-1951)
\par \b Schneider, G. \plain\fs28 \tab   G. Schneider (1834-1900)
\par \b Schneider, U. \plain\fs28 \tab   U. Schneider (b. 1936)
\par \b Schnittspahn \plain\fs28 \tab   G.F. Schnittspahn (1810-1865)
\par \b Schnizlein \plain\fs28 \tab   A.C.F.H.C. Schnizlein (1814-1868)
\par \b Scholander \plain\fs28 \tab   P.F. Scholander (b. 1905)
\par \pard\tx355 \b Scholler \plain\fs28 \tab   F.A. Scholler (1718-1785)
\par \b Scholz, H. \plain\fs28 \tab   H. Scholz (b. 1928)
\par \b Scholz, J.B. \plain\fs28 \tab   J.B. Scholz (1858-1915)
\par \b Schonheit \plain\fs28 \tab   F.C.H. Schonheit (1789-1870)
\par \b Schonl. \plain\fs28 \tab   S. Schonland (1860-1940)
\par \b Schost. \plain\fs28 \tab   N.A. Schostenko (Desjatova-Schostenko)
\par \b Schotsman \plain\fs28 \tab   H.D. Schotsman (b. 1921)
\par \b Schott \plain\fs28 \tab   H.W. Schott (1794-1865)
\par \b Schousboe \plain\fs28 \tab   P.K.A. Schousboe (1766-1832)
\par \b Schouw \plain\fs28 \tab   J.F. Schouw (1789-1852)
\par \pard\tx355 \b Schrader \plain\fs28 \tab    H.A. Schrader (1767-1836)
\par \b Schrank \plain\fs28 \tab   F. von Paula von Schrank (1747-1835)
\par \b Schreber \plain\fs28 \tab   J.C.D. von Schreber (1739-1810)
\par \b Schreider, U. \plain\fs28 \tab   U. Schneider (b. 1936)
\par \b Schrenk \plain\fs28 \tab   A.G. von Schrenk (1816-1876)
\par \b Schrodinger \plain\fs28 \tab   R. Schrodinger (1857-1919)
\par \b Schroeter \plain\fs28 \tab   C. Schroeter (1855-1939)
\par \b Schr\'f6dinger \plain\fs28 \tab   R. Schr\'f6dinger (1857-1919)
\par \b Schubler \plain\fs28 \tab   G. Schubler (1787-1834)
\par \b Schuk, O.E. \plain\fs28 \tab   O.E. Schulz (1874-1936)
\par \pard\tx355 \b Schultes fil. \plain\fs28 \tab   J.H. Schultes (1804-1840)
\par \b Schultes \plain\fs28 \tab   J.A. Schultes (1773-1831)
\par \b Schultz Bip. \plain\fs28 \tab   C.H. Schultz (Schultz Bipontinus) (1805-1867)
\par \b Schultz, C.F. \plain\fs28 \tab   C.F. Schultz (1765/6-1837)
\par \b Schultz, F.W. \plain\fs28 \tab   F.W. Schultz (1804-1876)
\par \b Schultz, G.E. \plain\fs28 \tab   G.E. Schultz (fl. 1960)
\par \b Schultze, W. \plain\fs28 \tab   W. Schultze (fl. 1894)
\par \b Schultze-Motel \plain\fs28 \tab   W. Schultze-Motel (b. 1934)
\par \b Schulz, A. \plain\fs28 \tab   A.A.H. Schulz (1862-1922)
\par \pard\tx355 \b Schulz, O.E. \plain\fs28 \tab   O.E. Schulz (1874-1936)
\par \b Schulz, R. \plain\fs28 \tab   R. Schulz (b. 1904)
\par \b Schulze, M. \plain\fs28 \tab   C.T.M. Schulze (1841-1915)
\par \b Schum., K. \plain\fs28 \tab   K.M. Schumann (1851-1904)
\par \b Schumacher \plain\fs28 \tab   H.C.F. Schumacher (1757-1830)
\par \b Schumacher \plain\fs28 \tab   A. Schumacher (1893-1975)
\par \b Schummel \plain\fs28 \tab   T.E. Schummel (1785-1848)
\par \b Schunz \plain\fs28 \tab   H. Schinz (1858-1941)
\par \b Schur \plain\fs28 \tab   P.J.F. Schur (1799-1878)
\par \b Schuster \plain\fs28 \tab   R. Schuster (b. 1935)
\par \b Schwantes \plain\fs28 \tab   G. Schwantes (1881-1960)
\par \pard\tx355 \b Schwantes \plain\fs28 \tab   M.H.G. Schwantes (1881-1960)
\par \b Schwarz, A. \plain\fs28 \tab   A.F. Schwarz (1852-1915)
\par \b Schwarz, O. \plain\fs28 \tab   O. Schwarz (1900-1983)
\par \b Schwarzov\'e1 \plain\fs28 \tab   T. Schwarzov\'e1 (b. 1938)
\par \b Schwegler \plain\fs28 \tab   H.W. Schwegler (b. 1929)
\par \b Schweigger \plain\fs28 \tab   A.F. Schweigger (1783-1821)
\par \b Schweinf. \plain\fs28 \tab   G.A. Schweinfurth (1836-1925)
\par \b Schweinitz \plain\fs28 \tab   L.D. von Schweinitz (1780-1834)
\par \b Schwertscl. \plain\fs28 \tab   J. Schwertschleger (1853-1924)
\par \b Schwimmer \plain\fs28 \tab    J. Schwimmer (1879-1959)
\par \pard\tx355 \b Sch\'f3nl. \plain\fs28 \tab   S. Sch\'f3nland (Schonland) (1860-1940)
\par \b Scop. \plain\fs28 \tab   J.(G.)A. Scopoli (1723-1788)
\par \b Scott, A.J. \plain\fs28 \tab   A.J. Scott (b. 1950)
\par \b Scribner \plain\fs28 \tab   F.L. Scribner (1851-1938)
\par \b Sealy \plain\fs28 \tab   J.R. Sealy (b. 1907)
\par \b Sebastiani \plain\fs28 \tab   F.-A Sebastiani (1782-1821)
\par \b Sebe\'f3k \plain\fs28 \tab   A. Sebe\'f3k de Szent-Mikl\'f3s (fl. 1779-1780)
\par \b Seem. \plain\fs28 \tab   B.C. Seemann (1825-1871)
\par \b Seemen \plain\fs28 \tab   K.O. von Seemen (1838-1910)
\par \b Seenus \plain\fs28 \tab   J. von Seenus (fl. 1805)
\par \pard\tx355 \b S\'e9guier \plain\fs28 \tab   J.F. S\'e9guier (1703-1784)
\par \b Seidl \plain\fs28 \tab   W.B. Seidl (1773-1842)
\par \b Seitz, W. \plain\fs28 \tab   W. Seitz (b. 1940)
\par \b Selander \plain\fs28 \tab   N.S.E. Selander (1891-1957)
\par \b Selin \plain\fs28 \tab   G. Selin (1813-1862)
\par \b Sell, P.D. \plain\fs28 \tab   P.D. Sell (b. 1929)
\par \b Semen., N. \plain\fs28 \tab   N.Z. Semenova-Tjan-Schanskaja (1906-1960)
\par \b Semler \plain\fs28 \tab   C. Semler (1875-1955)
\par \b Sendtner \plain\fs28 \tab   O. Sendtner (1813-1859)
\par \b Senghas \plain\fs28 \tab   K. Senghas (b. 1928)
\par \b Senjan.-Korcz. \plain\fs28 \tab   M.V. Senjaninova-Korczagina (190~1966)
\par \pard\tx355 \b Sennen \plain\fs28 \tab   Fr\'e9re Sennen (E.M. Grenier-Blanc) (1861-1937)
\par \b Ser. \plain\fs28 \tab   N.C. Seringe (1776-1858)
\par \b Serbanescu \plain\fs28 \tab  I. Serbanescu (b. 1903)
\par \b Serg, E. \plain\fs28 \tab   E.V. Sergievskaja (C.V. Sergievskaja) (b. 1926)
\par \b Serg. \plain\fs28 \tab   L.P. Sergievskaja (1897-1970)
\par \b Semander \plain\fs28 \tab   J.R. Semander (1866-1944)
\par \b Semler \plain\fs28 \tab   C. Semler (1875-1955)
\par \b Serres \plain\fs28 \tab   J.J. Serres (1790-1858)
\par \b Sesler \plain\fs28 \tab    L. Sesler (d. 1785)
\par \b Seub. \plain\fs28 \tab   M.A. Seubert (1818-1878)
\par \pard\tx355 \b Seymann \plain\fs28 \tab   W. Seymann (1887-1915)
\par \b Sheppard \plain\fs28 \tab  -- Sheppard (fl. ?1824)
\par \b Sherff \plain\fs28 \tab   E.E. Sherff (1886-1966)
\par \b Shibata \plain\fs28 \tab   K. Shibata (1877-1949)
\par \b Shinners \plain\fs28 \tab   L.H. Shinners (1918-1971)
\par \b Shivas \plain\fs28 \tab   M.G. Shivas (b. 1926)
\par \b Shull \plain\fs28 \tab   G.H. Shull (1874-1954)
\par \b Shuttlew., R.J. \plain\fs28 \tab   R.J. Shuttleworth (1810-1874)
\par \b Sibth. \plain\fs28 \tab   J. Sibthorp (1758-1796)
\par \b Siebert \plain\fs28 \tab   A. Siebert (1854-1923)
\par \b Sieber \plain\fs28 \tab   F.W. Sieber (1789-1844)
\par \pard\tx355 \b Siebold \plain\fs28 \tab   P.F. von Siebold (1796-1866)
\par \b Siegfr. \plain\fs28 \tab   H. Siegfried (1837-1903)
\par \b Sievers \plain\fs28 \tab    J. Sievers (d. 1795)
\par \b Signorello \plain\fs28 \tab   P. Signorello (b. 1939)
\par \b Sikura \plain\fs28 \tab   J.J. Sikura (b. 1932)
\par \b Silliman \plain\fs28 \tab   B. Silliman (1779-1864)
\par \b Silva, M. \plain\fs28 \tab   M. da Silva (b. 1916)
\par \b Silva, P. \plain\fs28 \tab   A.R. Pinto da Silva (b. 1912)
\par \b Sim, R. \plain\fs28 \tab   R. Sim (1791-1878)
\par \b Simkovics \plain\fs28 \tab   L. Simkovics (later L. von Simonkai) (1851-1910)
\par \pard\tx355 \b Simmler \plain\fs28 \tab   G. Simmler (b. 1884)
\par \b Simmons \plain\fs28 \tab   H. G. Simmons (1866-1943)
\par \b Simon primus, E. \plain\fs28 \tab   E. Simon (1848-1924)
\par \b Simon secundus, E. \plain\fs28 \tab   E. Simon (1871-1967)
\par \b Simon, T. \plain\fs28 \tab   T. Simon (b. 1926)
\par \b Simon-Louis \plain\fs28 \tab   L.L. Simon-Louis (1834-1913)
\par \b Simonet \plain\fs28 \tab   M. Simonet (1899-1965)
\par \b Simonkai \plain\fs28 \tab   L. von Simonkai (L.P. Simkovics) (1851-1910)
\par \b Sims \plain\fs28 \tab   J. Sims (1749-1831)
\par \b Sint. \plain\fs28 \tab   P.E.E. Sintenis (1847-1907)
\par \pard\tx355 \b Sipliv. \plain\fs28 \tab   V.N. Siplivinskij (b. 1937)
\par \b Sirj. \plain\fs28 \tab   G.I. Sirjaev (Schirjaev) (1882-1954)
\par \b Sjostrand \plain\fs28 \tab   M. G. Sjostrand (1807-1880)
\par \b Skalicka \plain\fs28 \tab   A. Skalicka (b. 1932)
\par \b Skalick\'fd \plain\fs28 \tab   V. Skalick\'fd (b. 1930)
\par \b Skalinska \plain\fs28 \tab   M. Skalinska (b. 1890)
\par \b Skeels \plain\fs28 \tab   H.C. Skeels (1873-1934)
\par \b Skvortsov, A. \plain\fs28 \tab   A.K. Skvortsov (b. 1920)
\par \b Slavikova \plain\fs28 \tab   Z. Slavikova (b. 1935)
\par \b Slav\'edkov\'e1 \plain\fs28 \tab    Z. Slav\'edkov\'e1 (b. 1935)
\par \b Sljussarenko \plain\fs28 \tab   L.P. Sljussarenko (fl. 1963)
\par \pard\tx355 \b Sloboda \plain\fs28 \tab   D. Sloboda (1809-1888)
\par \b Slosson \plain\fs28 \tab   M. Slosson (b. 1872)
\par \b Sm. \plain\fs28 \tab   J.E. Smith (1759-1828)
\par \b Sm., A.R. \plain\fs28 \tab   A.R. Smith (b. 1938)
\par \b Sm., C. \plain\fs28 \tab   C. Smith (1785-1816)
\par \b Sm., G.E. \plain\fs28 \tab   G.E. Smith (1805-1881)
\par \b Sm., H. \plain\fs28 \tab   K.A.H. Smith (b. 1889)
\par \b Sm., J. \plain\fs28 \tab   John Smith (1798-1888)
\par \b Sm., K.A.H. \plain\fs28 \tab   K.A.H. ('Harry') Smith (1889-1971)
\par \b Sm., M.C. \plain\fs28 \tab   M.C.C. Smith (1933-1984)
\par \b Sm., P.M. \plain\fs28 \tab   P.M. Smith (b. 1941)
\par \pard\tx355 \b Sm., W.W. \plain\fs28 \tab   W.W. Smith (1875-1956)
\par \b Small \plain\fs28 \tab   J.K. Small (1869-1938)
\par \b Smejkal \plain\fs28 \tab   M. Smejkal (b. 1927)
\par \b Smirnov \plain\fs28 \tab   P.A. Smirnov (1896-1980)
\par \b Smolj. \plain\fs28 \tab   L.A. Smoljaninova (b. 1904)
\par \b Smythies \plain\fs28 \tab   B.E. Smythies (b. 1912)
\par \b Snogerup \plain\fs28 \tab   S.E. Snogerup (b. 1939)
\par \b Sobol. \plain\fs28 \tab   G.F. Sobolewski (1741-1807)
\par \b Soczava \plain\fs28 \tab   V.B. Soczava (b. 1905)
\par \b Sojak \plain\fs28 \tab   J. Sojak (b. 1936)
\par \b Solac. \plain\fs28 \tab   T. Solacolu (1876-1940)
\par \pard\tx355 \b Solander \plain\fs28 \tab   D.C. Solander (1733-1782)
\par \b Solemacher \plain\fs28 \tab   J.V.L.A.G. Solemacher-Antweiler (b. 1889)
\par \b Soler \plain\fs28 \tab   A. Soler Hernando (b. 1940)
\par \b Sole \plain\fs28 \tab   W. Sole (c. 1739-1802)
\par \b Solms-Laub. \plain\fs28 \tab   H.M.C.L.F. zu Solms-Laubach (1842-1915)
\par \b Soltok. \plain\fs28 \tab   M. Soltokovic (fl. 1901)
\par \b Sommer. \plain\fs28 \tab   I. Sommerauer (d. 1854)
\par \b Sommerf. \plain\fs28 \tab   S.C. Sommerfelt (1794-1838)
\par \b Sommier \plain\fs28 \tab   C.P.S. Sommier (1848-1922)
\par \b Sonder \plain\fs28 \tab    O.W. Sonder (1812-1881)
\par \pard\tx355 \b Song. \plain\fs28 \tab   A. Songeon (1826-1905)
\par \b Soska \plain\fs28 \tab   T. Soska (1876-1948)
\par \b Sosn., D. \plain\fs28 \tab   D.I. Sosnowsky (1886-1952)
\par \b Souli\'e9 \plain\fs28 \tab   J.A.L. Souli\'e9 (1868-1930)
\par \b Sourek \plain\fs28 \tab   J. Sourek (1891-1968)
\par \b Sowerby \plain\fs28 \tab   J. Sowerby (1757-1822)
\par \b Soyer-Willemet \plain\fs28 \tab   H.F. Soyer-Willemet (1791-1867)
\par \b So\'f3 \plain\fs28 \tab   K.R. So\'f3 von Bere (1903-1980)
\par \b Spach \plain\fs28 \tab   E. Spach (1801-1879)
\par \b Spampinato \plain\fs28 \tab   G. Spampinato (b. 1958)
\par \b Speg. \plain\fs28 \tab   C.L. Spegazzini (1858-1926)
\par \pard\tx355 \b Spenner \plain\fs28 \tab   F.C.(K.)L. Spenner (1798-1841)
\par \b Speta \plain\fs28 \tab   F. Speta (b. 1941)
\par \b Spitzner \plain\fs28 \tab   V. Spitzner (1852-1907)
\par \b Sprague \plain\fs28 \tab   T.A. Sprague (1877-1958)
\par \b Spreitz. \plain\fs28 \tab   G.C. Spreitzenhofer (d. 1883)
\par \b Sprengel \plain\fs28 \tab   K.P.J. Sprengel (1766-1833)
\par \b Spribille \plain\fs28 \tab   F. J. Spribille (1841-1921)
\par \b Spring \plain\fs28 \tab   A.F. Spring (1814-1872)
\par \b Spruner \plain\fs28 \tab   W. von Spruner (1805-1874)
\par \b Sprygin \plain\fs28 \tab   I.I. Sprygin (1873-1942)
\par \b St John \plain\fs28 \tab   H. St John (b. 1892)
\par \pard\tx355 \b St-Amans \plain\fs28 \tab   J.F.B. de Saint-Amans (1748-1831)
\par \b St-Hil. \plain\fs28 \tab   A.C.F.P. de Saint-Hilaire (1779-1853)
\par \b St-Lager \plain\fs28 \tab   J.B. Saint-Lager (1825-1912)
\par \b St-Yves \plain\fs28 \tab   A. St-Yves (1855-1933)
\par \b Stace \plain\fs28 \tab   C.A. Stace (b. 1938)
\par \b Stadlm. \plain\fs28 \tab   J. Stadlmann (b. 1881)
\par \b Standley \plain\fs28 \tab   P.C. Standley (1884-1963)
\par \b Stankov \plain\fs28 \tab   S.S. Stankov (1892-1962)
\par \b Stapf \plain\fs28 \tab   O. Stapf (1857-1933)
\par \b Stearn \plain\fs28 \tab   W.T. Stearn (b. 1911)
\par \b Stebbins \plain\fs28 \tab   G.L. Stebbins (b. 1906)
\par \pard\tx355 \b Stebler \plain\fs28 \tab   F.G. Stebler (b. 1852)
\par \b Stechm. \plain\fs28 \tab   J.P. Stechmann (fl. 1775)
\par \b Steele \plain\fs28 \tab   W.E. Steele (1816-1883)
\par \b Stefani \plain\fs28 \tab   C. de Stefani (1851-1924)
\par \b Stefanov \plain\fs28 \tab   B. Stefanov (Stefanofl) (1894-1979)
\par \b Stefansson \plain\fs28 \tab   S. Stefansson (1863-1921)
\par \b Steifelhagen \plain\fs28 \tab   H. Steifelhagen (fl. 1910)
\par \b Steinb., C. \plain\fs28 \tab   C.H. Steinberg (1923-1981)
\par \b Steinb. \plain\fs28 \tab   E.I. Steinberg (1884-1963)
\par \b Steinh. \plain\fs28 \tab   A. Steinheil (1810-1839)
\par \pard\tx355 \b Steinunger \plain\fs28 \tab   H. Steininger (1856-1891)
\par \b Stenstr\'f6m \plain\fs28 \tab   K.O.E. Stenstr\'f6m (1858-1901)
\par \b Stephan \plain\fs28 \tab   C.F. Stephan (1757-1814)
\par \b Stephenson, T.A. \plain\fs28 \tab   T.A. Stephenson (1898-1961)
\par \b Stern, F.C. \plain\fs28 \tab   F.C. Stern (1884-1967)
\par \b Sternb. \plain\fs28 \tab   K.(C.)M. von Sternberg (1761-1838)
\par \b Sterneck \plain\fs28 \tab   J. von Sterneck (1864-1941)
\par \b Sterner \plain\fs28 \tab   K.R. Sterner (1891-1956)
\par \b Sterns, E.E. \plain\fs28 \tab   E.E. Sterns (1846-1926)
\par \b Steudel \plain\fs28 \tab   E.G. von Steudel (1783-1856)
\par \pard\tx355 \b Steven \plain\fs28 \tab   C. Steven (1781-1863)
\par \b Steven \plain\fs28 \tab   C.C. von Steven (1781-1863)
\par \b Stiefelhagen \plain\fs28 \tab   H. Stiefelhagen (fl. 1910)
\par \b Stocks \plain\fs28 \tab   J.E. Stocks (1822-1854)
\par \b Stocks \plain\fs28 \tab   J. E. Stocks (1822-1854)
\par \b Stohr \plain\fs28 \tab   G. Stohr (b. 1928)
\par \b Stoj. \plain\fs28 \tab   N.A. Stojanov (1883-1968)
\par \b Stoker \plain\fs28 \tab   F. Stoker (1878-1943)
\par \b Stokes \plain\fs28 \tab   J. Stokes (1755-1831)
\par \b Stork, A.L. \plain\fs28 \tab   A.L. Stork (b. 1937)
\par \b Stork \plain\fs28 \tab   A. Stork (1741-1803)
\par \pard\tx355 \b Strail \plain\fs28 \tab   C.A. Strail (1808-1893)
\par \b Strempel \plain\fs28 \tab   J.C.(K.)F. Strempel (1800-1872)
\par \b Strgar \plain\fs28 \tab   V. Strgar (fl. 1971)
\par \b Strid \plain\fs28 \tab   P.A.K. Strid (b. 1943)
\par \b Strobl \plain\fs28 \tab   P.G. Strobl (1846-1925)
\par \b Stroh \plain\fs28 \tab   G. Stroh (b. 1864)
\par \b Stromfelt \plain\fs28 \tab    H.F.G. Stromfelt (1861-1890)
\par \b Sturm \plain\fs28 \tab   J. Sturm (1771-1848)
\par \b Stur \plain\fs28 \tab   D.R.J. Stur (1827-1893)
\par \b St\'f6rck \plain\fs28 \tab   A. von St\'f6rck (1731-1803)
\par \b Suard \plain\fs28 \tab   V. Suard (fl. 1839)
\par \pard\tx355 \b Suckow, G. \plain\fs28 \tab   G.A. Suckow (1751-1813)
\par \b Sudre \plain\fs28 \tab   H. Sudre (1862-1918)
\par \b Sudworth \plain\fs28 \tab   G.B. Sudworth (1864-1927)
\par \b Suess. \plain\fs28 \tab   K. Suessenguth (1893-1955)
\par \b Suffren \plain\fs28 \tab   F.P. de Suffren (1753-1824)
\par \b Suk. \plain\fs28 \tab   V.N. Sukaczev (Sukatschew) (1880-1967)
\par \b Suksdorf \plain\fs28 \tab   W.N. Suksdorf (1850-1932)
\par \b Summerhayes \plain\fs28 \tab   V.S. Summerhayes (1897-1974)
\par \b Sumnev. \plain\fs28 \tab   G.P. Sumnevicz (1909-1947)
\par \b Sund. \plain\fs28 \tab   F. Sundermann (1864-1946)
\par \pard\tx355 \b Sundermann \plain\fs28 \tab    H. Sundermann (fl. 1973)
\par \b Suominen \plain\fs28 \tab   J. Suominen (b. 1936)
\par \b Suter \plain\fs28 \tab    J.R. Suter (1766-1827)
\par \b Sutton \plain\fs28 \tab   C. Sutton (1756-1846)
\par \b Sutulov \plain\fs28 \tab   A.N. Sutulov (fl. 1914)
\par \b Suza \plain\fs28 \tab    J. Suza (1890-1951)
\par \b Svob. \plain\fs28 \tab   P. Svoboda (1908-1978)
\par \b Swallen \plain\fs28 \tab   J.R. Swallen (b. 1903)
\par \b Swartz \plain\fs28 \tab   O.P. Swartz (1760-1818)
\par \b Sweet \plain\fs28 \tab   R. Sweet (1783-1835)
\par \b Swingle \plain\fs28 \tab   W.T. Swingle (1871-1952)
\par \b Syme \plain\fs28 \tab   J.T.I. Boswell Syme (formerly Boswell) (1822-1888)
\par \pard\tx355 \b Symons \plain\fs28 \tab   J. Symons (1778-1851)
\par \b Syreistschikov \plain\fs28 \tab   D.P. Syreistschikov (1868-1932)
\par \b Szab\'f3 \plain\fs28 \tab   Z. Szab\'f3 (1882-1944)
\par \b Szafer \plain\fs28 \tab   W. Szafer (1886-1970)
\par \b Szov. \plain\fs28 \tab   A.J. Szovits (d. 1830)
\par \b Szysz. \plain\fs28 \tab   I. von Szyszylowicz (1857-1910)
\par \b S\'e1nchez \plain\fs28 \tab   J. S\'e1nchez S\'e1nchez (b. 1942)
\par \b S\'e1ndor \plain\fs28 \tab   I. S\'e1ndor (b. 1853)
\par \b S\'e9guier \plain\fs28 \tab   J.F. S\'e9guier (1703-1784)
\par \b S\'f8rensen \plain\fs28 \tab   T.J. S\'f8rensen (1902-1973)
\par \b S\'fcnd. \plain\fs28 \tab   F. S\'fcndermann (1864-1946)
\par \pard\tx355 \b Tab. Mor. \plain\fs28 \tab   A.A. Taborda de Morais (1900-1959)
\par \b Tacik, T. \plain\fs28 \tab   T. Tacik (b. 1926)
\par \b Takht. \plain\fs28 \tab   A.L. Takhtajan (Takhtadzhan) (b. 1910)
\par \b Talavera \plain\fs28 \tab   S. Talavera Lozano (b. 1945)
\par \b Talbot \plain\fs28 \tab   W.H.F. Talbot (1800-1877)
\par \b Taliev \plain\fs28 \tab   V.I. Taliev (1872-1932)
\par \b Tamamsch. \plain\fs28 \tab   S.G. Tamamschian (b. 1900)
\par \b Tanfani \plain\fs28 \tab   E. Tanfani (1848-1892)                      .
\par \b Tappeiner \plain\fs28 \tab   F. von Tappeiner (1816-1902)
\par \b Tarasov \plain\fs28 \tab   ?R. P. Tarasov
\par \pard\tx355 \b Tardieu-Blot \plain\fs28 \tab   M.-L. Tardieu-Blot (M.L. Tardieu) (b. 1902)
\par \b Targ.-Tozz. \plain\fs28 \tab   O. Targioni-Tozzetti (1755-1829)
\par \b Taranto \plain\fs28 \tab   E. Taranto Rosso (fl. 1845)
\par \b Taschereau \plain\fs28 \tab   P.M. Taschereau (b. 1939)
\par \b Taubert \plain\fs28 \tab   P.H.W. Taubert (1862-1897)
\par \b Tausch \plain\fs28 \tab   I.F. Tausch (1793-1848)
\par \b Tavel \plain\fs28 \tab   R.F. von Tavel (1863-1941)
\par \b Taylor, G. \plain\fs28 \tab   G. Taylor (b. 1904)
\par \b Taylor, P. \plain\fs28 \tab   P.G. Taylor (b. 1926)
\par \b Temesy \plain\fs28 \tab   E. Temesy (E. Sch\'f3nbeck-Temesy) (b. 1930)
\par \pard\tx355 \b Ten. \plain\fs28 \tab   M. Tenore (1780-1861)
\par \b Tepl. \plain\fs28 \tab   F.A. Teplouchow (1845-1905)
\par \b Terechov \plain\fs28 \tab   A.F. Terechov (l890-l974)
\par \b Terp\'f3 \plain\fs28 \tab   A. Terp\'f3 (b. 1925)
\par \b Terracc., A. \plain\fs28 \tab   A. Terracciano (1862-1917)
\par \b Terracc., N. \plain\fs28 \tab   N. Terracciano (Terraciano) (1837-1921)
\par \b Teschner \plain\fs28 \tab    W.P. Teschner (b. 1927)
\par \b Tesseron \plain\fs28 \tab   Y.-A. Tesseron (1831-1925)
\par \b Texidor \plain\fs28 \tab   J. Texidor y Cos (1836-1885)
\par \b Teyber \plain\fs28 \tab   A. Teyber (1846-1913)
\par \b 't Hart \plain\fs28 \tab   H.'t Hart (b. 1944)
\par \pard\tx355 \b Thaisz \plain\fs28 \tab   L. de Thaisz (L. von Thaisz) (1867-1937)
\par \b Thell. \plain\fs28 \tab   A. Thellung (1881-1928)
\par \b Thev. \plain\fs28 \tab   A.V. Theveneau (1815-1876)
\par \b Thib. \plain\fs28 \tab   ?E. Thibaud (fl. 1785)
\par \b Thieb., J. \plain\fs28 \tab    M.-J. Thiebaut (fl. 1921-1955)
\par \b Thielens \plain\fs28 \tab   A. Thielens (1833-1874)
\par \b Thomas, C. \plain\fs28 \tab    C. Thomas (fl. 1938-1973)
\par \b Thomas \plain\fs28 \tab   A.L.E. Thomas (1788-1859)
\par \b Thomas \plain\fs28 \tab   E. Thomas (1788-1859)
\par \b Thommen \plain\fs28 \tab   E. Thommen (1880-1961)
\par \b Thompson, Z. \plain\fs28 \tab   Z. Thompson (1796-1856)
\par \pard\tx355 \b Thomson \plain\fs28 \tab   T. Thomson (1817-1878)
\par \b Thore \plain\fs28 \tab   J. Thore (1762-1823)
\par \b Thouars \plain\fs28 \tab   L.M.A. Aubert du Petit-Thouars (1758-1831)
\par \b Thouin \plain\fs28 \tab   A. Thouin (1747-1824)
\par \b Thuill. \plain\fs28 \tab   J.L. Thuillier (1757-1822)
\par \b Thunb. \plain\fs28 \tab   C.P. Thunberg (1743-1828)
\par \b Thuret \plain\fs28 \tab   G.A. Thuret (1817-1875)
\par \b Thwaites \plain\fs28 \tab    G.H.K. Thwaites (1812-1882)
\par \b Th\'e9v. \plain\fs28 \tab   A.V. Th\'e9venau (1815-1876)
\par \b Timb.-Lagr. \plain\fs28 \tab   P.M.E. Timbal-Lagrave (1819-1888)
\par \pard\tx355 \b Timm \plain\fs28 \tab   J.C. Timm (1734-1805)
\par \b Tineo \plain\fs28 \tab   V. Tineo (1791-1856)
\par \b Tiss. \plain\fs28 \tab   P.G. Tissi\'e9re (1828-1868)
\par \b Titz \plain\fs28 \tab   W. Titz (b. 1941)
\par \b Tocl \plain\fs28 \tab   K.(C.) Tocl (1870-1910)
\par \b Tod. \plain\fs28 \tab   A. Todaro (1818-1892)
\par \b Tolm. \plain\fs28 \tab   A.I. Tolmatchev (Tolmachev) (1903-1979)
\par \b Toman, J. \plain\fs28 \tab   J. Toman (b. 1933)
\par \b Tommasini \plain\fs28 \tab   M.G.S. de Tommasini (1794-1879)
\par \b Top. \plain\fs28 \tab   S. Topali (1901- 1944)
\par \b Topa \plain\fs28 \tab   E. Topa (1900-1987)
\par \b Topitz \plain\fs28 \tab   A. Topitz (b. 1857)
\par \pard\tx355 \b Torges \plain\fs28 \tab   K.E.W. Torges (1831-1917)
\par \b Torrey \plain\fs28 \tab   J. Torrey (1796-1873)
\par \b Tourlet \plain\fs28 \tab   E.-H. Tourlet (1843-1907)
\par \b Tournay \plain\fs28 \tab    R.L.J.A. Tournay (1925-1972)
\par \b Touton \plain\fs28 \tab   K. Touton (1858-1934)
\par \b Townsend \plain\fs28 \tab   F. Townsend (1822-1905)
\par \b Trabut \plain\fs28 \tab   L.C. Trabut (1853-1929)
\par \b Tracey \plain\fs28 \tab   R. Tracey (R. Schreiner) (b. 1951)
\par \b Tratt. \plain\fs28 \tab   L. Trattinick (1764-1849)
\par \b Traub \plain\fs28 \tab   H.P. Traub (b. 1890)
\par \b Trautv. \plain\fs28 \tab   E.R. von Trautvetter (1809-1889)
\par \pard\tx355 \b Travis \plain\fs28 \tab   W.G. Travis (1877-1958)
\par \b Trelease \plain\fs28 \tab   W. Trelease (1857-1945)
\par \b Trev. \plain\fs28 \tab   L.C. Treviranus (1779-1864)
\par \b Trevisan \plain\fs28 \tab   V.B.A. Trevisan de Saint-Leon (1817-1897)
\par \b Trew \plain\fs28 \tab   C.J. Trew (1695-1769)
\par \b Trimen \plain\fs28 \tab   H. Trimen (1843-1896)
\par \b Trin. \plain\fs28 \tab   K.B. von Trinius (1778-1844)
\par \b Tropea \plain\fs28 \tab   C. Tropea (fl. 1910)
\par \b Trotter \plain\fs28 \tab   A. Trotter (1874-1967)
\par \b Trotzky \plain\fs28 \tab   P. Kornuch-Trotzky (1803-1877)
\par \b Truchaleva \plain\fs28 \tab   N.A. Truchaleva (b. 1927)
\par \pard\tx355 \b Tryon jun., R.M. \plain\fs28 \tab   R.M. Tryon jun. (b. 1916)
\par \b Tubilla \plain\fs28 \tab   T. Andr\'e9s y Tubilla (1859-1882)
\par \b Tuckerman \plain\fs28 \tab   E. Tuckerman (1811-1886)
\par \b Tuntas \plain\fs28 \tab   B. Tuntas (b. 1871)
\par \b Turcz. \plain\fs28 \tab   N.S. Turczaninow (1796-1864)
\par \b Turesson \plain\fs28 \tab   G.W. Turesson (1892-1970)
\par \b Turner, D. \plain\fs28 \tab   D. Turner (1775-1858)
\par \b Turpin \plain\fs28 \tab   P.J.F. Turpin (1775-1840)
\par \b Turra \plain\fs28 \tab   A. Turra (1730-1796)
\par \b Turrill \plain\fs28 \tab   W.B. Turrill (1890-1961)
\par \b Tutin \plain\fs28 \tab   T.G. Tutin (1908-1987)
\par \pard\tx355 \b Tuzson \plain\fs28 \tab   J. Tuzson (1870-1943)
\par \b Tzanoudakis \plain\fs28 \tab   D.B. Tzanoudakis (b. 1950)
\par \b Tzvelev \plain\fs28 \tab   N.N. Tzvelev (b. 1925)
\par \b Ucria \plain\fs28 \tab   Bernadino da Ucria (Michelangelo Aurifici) (1739-1796)
\par \b Uechtr. \plain\fs28 \tab   R.K.F. von Uechtritz (1838-1886)
\par \b Ugr. \plain\fs28 \tab   K.A. Ugrinsky (fl. 1920)
\par \b Uhrova \plain\fs28 \tab   A. Hrabetova-Uhrova (b. 1900)
\par \b Ujhelyi \plain\fs28 \tab   J. Ujhelyi (b. 1910)
\par \b Ulbr. \plain\fs28 \tab   E. Ulbrich (1879-1952)
\par \b Ulbr. \plain\fs28 \tab   O.E. Ulbrich (1879-1952)
\par \pard\tx355 \b Underw. \plain\fs28 \tab   J. Underwood (d. 1834)
\par \b Underw. \plain\fs28 \tab   L.M. Underwood (1853-1907)
\par \b Ung.-Sternb. \plain\fs28 \tab   F. Ungern-Sternberg (1808-1885)
\par \b Unger \plain\fs28 \tab   F.J.A.N. Unger (1800-1870)
\par \b Uotila \plain\fs28 \tab   P.J. Uotila (b. 1943)
\par \b Urban \plain\fs28 \tab   I. Urban (1848-1931)
\par \b Uribe-Echebarria \plain\fs28 \tab   P.M. Uribe-Echebarria Diaz (b. 1953)
\par \b Urum. \plain\fs28 \tab   I.K. Urumoff (1857-1937)
\par \b Utinet \plain\fs28 \tab  -- Utinet (fl. 1839)
\par \b Utkin \plain\fs28 \tab   L.A. Utkin (b. 1884)
\par \b Vaarama \plain\fs28 \tab   O.A. Vaararna (1912-1975)
\par \pard\tx355 \b Vacc. \plain\fs28 \tab   L. Vaccari (1873-1951)
\par \b Vahl, J. \plain\fs28 \tab    J.L.M. Vahl (1796-1854)
\par \b Vahl \plain\fs28 \tab   M.H. Vahl (1749-1804)
\par \b Valck.-Suringar \plain\fs28 \tab   J. Valckenier-Suringar (1864-1932)
\par \b Vald\'e9s-Bermejo \plain\fs28 \tab   E. Vald\'e9s-Bermejo (b. 1945)
\par \b Vald\'e9s \plain\fs28 \tab   B. Vald\'e9s Castrill\'f3n (b. 1942)
\par \b Valentine \plain\fs28 \tab   D.H. Valentine (1912-1987)
\par \b Valev \plain\fs28 \tab   S.T. Valev (1910-1974)
\par \b Valsecchi \plain\fs28 \tab   F. Valsecchi (b. 1931)
\par \b Van den Bosch \plain\fs28 \tab   R.B. van den Bosch (1810-1862)
\par \pard\tx355 \b Van Hall \plain\fs28 \tab   H.C. van Hall (1801-1874)
\par \b Van Houtte \plain\fs28 \tab   L.B. van Houtte (1810-1876)
\par \b Van Omm. \plain\fs28 \tab   G. van Ommering (fl. 1976-1977)
\par \b Van Ooststr. \plain\fs28 \tab   S.J. van Ooststroom (b. 1906)
\par \b Van Soest \plain\fs28 \tab   J. L. van Soest (b. 1898)
\par \b Vandas \plain\fs28 \tab   K. Vandas (1861-1923)
\par \b Vandelli \plain\fs28 \tab   D. Vandelli (1735-1816)
\par \b Vaniot \plain\fs28 \tab   E. Vaniot (d. 1913)
\par \b Vanucchi \plain\fs28 \tab   --Vanucchi (fl. 1838)
\par \b Vargas \plain\fs28 \tab   P. Vargas (fl. 1987)
\par \b Vasc. \plain\fs28 \tab   J. de Carvalho e Vasconcellos (1897-1972)
\par \pard\tx355 \b Vasinger \plain\fs28 \tab   A.V. Vasinger (1892- c.1944)
\par \b Vassil., V. \plain\fs28 \tab   V.N. Vassiliev (b. 1890)
\par \b Vassilcz. \plain\fs28 \tab   I.T. Vassilczenko (b. 1903)
\par \b Vatke \plain\fs28 \tab   G.K.W. Vatke (1849-1889)
\par \b Vaucher \plain\fs28 \tab   J.P.E. Vaucher (1763-1841)
\par \b Vavilov \plain\fs28 \tab   N.I. Vavilov (1887-1943)
\par \b Vayr. \plain\fs28 \tab   E. Vayreda y Vila (1848-1901)
\par \b Velen. \plain\fs28 \tab   J. Velenovsky (1858-1949)
\par \b Velloso \plain\fs28 \tab   J.M. de Concei\'e7ao Velloso (Vellozo) (1742-1811)
\par \b Vendr. \plain\fs28 \tab   X. Vendrely (fl. 1895)
\par \pard\tx355 \b Vent, W. \plain\fs28 \tab   W. Vent (b. 1920)
\par \b Vent. \plain\fs28 \tab   E.P. Ventenat (1757-1808)
\par \b Verdcourt \plain\fs28 \tab   B. Verdcourt (b. 1925)
\par \b Verguin \plain\fs28 \tab   L. Verguin (1868-1936)
\par \b Verlot, B. \plain\fs28 \tab   P.B.L. Verlot (1836-1897)
\par \b Verlot \plain\fs28 \tab   J.-B. Verlot (1825-1891)
\par \b Vermeulen \plain\fs28 \tab   P. Vermeulen (b. 1899)
\par \b Vestergren \plain\fs28 \tab   J.T.C. Vestergren (1875-1930)
\par \b Vest \plain\fs28 \tab   L.C. von Vest (1776-1840)
\par \b Vetter \plain\fs28 \tab   J.J. Vetter (1865-1913)
\par \b Viane \plain\fs28 \tab   R.L.L. Viane (b. 1951)
\par \pard\tx355 \b Vicioso, B. \plain\fs28 \tab   B. Vicioso (1850-1929)
\par \b Vicioso, C. \plain\fs28 \tab   M.C. Vicioso Mart\'ednez (1897-1968)
\par \b Vidal \plain\fs28 \tab   L.M. Vidal
\par \b Vida \plain\fs28 \tab   G. Vida (b. 1935)
\par \b Vierh. \plain\fs28 \tab   F.K.M. Vierhapper (1876-1932)
\par \b Vig. \plain\fs28 \tab   L.G.A. Viguier (1790-1867)
\par \b Vigineix \plain\fs28 \tab   G. Vigineix (d. 1877)
\par \b Vigo \plain\fs28 \tab   J. Vigo Bonada (b. 1937)
\par \b Vill. \plain\fs28 \tab   D. Villars (Villar) (1745-1814)
\par \b Villar, H. \plain\fs28 \tab   del E. Huguet del Villar y Serratac\'f3 (1871-1951)
\par \b Villar, L. \plain\fs28 \tab   L. Villar Per\'e9z (b. 1946)
\par \pard\tx355 \b Vilmorin, R. de \plain\fs28 \tab   R.-P.-V. de Vilmorin (b. 1905)
\par \b Vilmorin \plain\fs28 \tab   P.L.F.L. de Vilmorin (1816-1860)
\par \b Vindt \plain\fs28 \tab   J. Vindt (b. 1915)
\par \b Vines \plain\fs28 \tab   S.H. Vines (1849-1934)
\par \b Vis. \plain\fs28 \tab   R. de Visiani (1800-1878)
\par \b Vitman \plain\fs28 \tab   F. Vitman (1728-1806)
\par \b Viv. \plain\fs28 \tab   D. Viviani (1772-1840)
\par \b Vivant \plain\fs28 \tab   J. Vivant (fl. 1948-1981)
\par \b Vogel, T. \plain\fs28 \tab   J.R.T. Vogel (1812-1841)
\par \b Vogel \plain\fs28 \tab   B.C. Vogel (1745-1825)
\par \b Vogler \plain\fs28 \tab   J.A. Vogler (1746-1816)
\par \pard\tx355 \b Vogt \plain\fs28 \tab   R.M. Vogt (b. 1957)
\par \b Voigt \plain\fs28 \tab   J.O. Voigt (1798-1843)
\par \b Volk. \plain\fs28 \tab   A. Volkart (1873-1951)
\par \b Volkens \plain\fs28 \tab   G.L.A. Volkens (1855-1917)
\par \b Vollmann \plain\fs28 \tab   F. Vollmann (1858-1917)
\par \b Vorosch. \plain\fs28 \tab   V.N. Voroschilov (b. 1908)
\par \b Voss \plain\fs28 \tab   A. Voss (1857-1924)
\par \b Vuk. \plain\fs28 \tab   L. von F. Vukotinovic (1813-1893)
\par \b Vved. \plain\fs28 \tab   A.I. Vvedensky (b. 1898)
\par \b Wachter \plain\fs28 \tab  W.H. Wachter (1882-1946)
\par \b Wagenitz \plain\fs28 \tab   G. Wagenitz (b. 1927)
\par \pard\tx355 \b Wagner, H. \plain\fs28 \tab   J. Wagner (H. Wagner) (1870-1955)
\par \b Wagner, R. \plain\fs28 \tab   R. Wagner (fl. 1887)
\par \b Wahlberg \plain\fs28 \tab   P.F. Wahlberg (1800-1877)
\par \b Wahlenb. \plain\fs28 \tab   G. Wahlenberg (1780-1851)
\par \b Wainio \plain\fs28 \tab   E.A. Wainio (later Vainio) (1853-1929)
\par \b Waisb. \plain\fs28 \tab   A. Waisbecker (1835-1916)
\par \b Waldst. \plain\fs28 \tab   F. de P.A. von Waldstein-Wartemberg (1759-1823)
\par \b Wale \plain\fs28 \tab   R.S. Wale (d. 1952)
\par \b Walker, S. \plain\fs28 \tab   S. Walker (1924-1985)
\par \b Wall. \plain\fs28 \tab   N. Wallich (1786-1854)
\par \pard\tx355 \b Wallr. \plain\fs28 \tab   C.(K.)F.W. Wallroth (1792-1857)
\par \b Walpers \plain\fs28 \tab   W.G. Walpers (1816-1853)
\par \b Walsh \plain\fs28 \tab   R. Walsh (1772-1852)
\par \b Walters \plain\fs28 \tab   S.M. Walters (b. 1920)
\par \b Walter \plain\fs28 \tab   T. Walter (1740-1789)
\par \b Walther \plain\fs28 \tab   E. Walther (b. 1912)
\par \b Wangenh. \plain\fs28 \tab   F.A.J. von Wangenheim (1749-1800)
\par \b Wangerin \plain\fs28 \tab   W.L. Wangerin (1884-1938)
\par \b Warburg, E.F. \plain\fs28 \tab   E.F. Warburg (1908-1966)
\par \b Warburg \plain\fs28 \tab   O. Warburg (1859-1938)
\par \b Warming \plain\fs28 \tab   J.E.B. Warming (1841-1924)
\par \pard\tx355 \b Warncke \plain\fs28 \tab   K. Warncke (b. 1937)
\par \b Wartm. \plain\fs28 \tab   F.B. Wartmann (1830-1902)
\par \b Watson, H.C. \plain\fs28 \tab   H.C. Watson (1804-1881)
\par \b Watson, S. \plain\fs28 \tab   S. Watson (1826-1892)
\par \b Watson, W.C.R. \plain\fs28 \tab   W.C.R. Watson (1885-1954)
\par \b Watt \plain\fs28 \tab   D.A.P. Watt (1830-1917)
\par \b Watzl \plain\fs28 \tab   B. Watzl (b. 1886)
\par \b Weatherby \plain\fs28 \tab   C.A. Weatherby (1875-1949)
\par \b Webb, D.A. \plain\fs28 \tab   D.A. Webb (b. 1912)
\par \b Webb \plain\fs28 \tab   P.B. Webb (1793-1854)
\par \b Weber \plain\fs28 \tab   G.H. Weber (1752-1828)
\par \pard\tx355 \b Weber fil. \plain\fs28 \tab   F. Weber (1781-1823)
\par \b Weberling \plain\fs28 \tab   F. Weberling (b. 1926)
\par \b Webster \plain\fs28 \tab   A.D. Webster (fl. 1886 1920)
\par \b Webster, S. \plain\fs28 \tab   S.D. Webster (b. 1959)
\par \b Weddell \plain\fs28 \tab   H.A. Weddell (1819-1877)
\par \b Weevers \plain\fs28 \tab   T. Weevers (1875-1952)
\par \b Wehrli \plain\fs28 \tab  -- Wehrli
\par \b Weigel \plain\fs28 \tab   C.E. von Weigel (1748-1831)
\par \b Weihe \plain\fs28 \tab   C.(K.)E.A. Weihe (1779-1834)
\par \b Weiller \plain\fs28 \tab   M. Weiller (1880-1945)
\par \b Weim., G. \plain\fs28 \tab   K.G.H. Weimarck (b. 1936)
\par \pard\tx355 \b Weimn. \plain\fs28 \tab   J.A. Weinmann (1782-1858)
\par \b Wein, K. \plain\fs28 \tab   K. Wein (1883-1968)
\par \b Weinm. \plain\fs28 \tab   J.A. Weinmann (1782-1858)
\par \b Weiss \plain\fs28 \tab   E. Weiss (1837-1870)
\par \b Welden \plain\fs28 \tab   F.L. von Welden (1782-1853)
\par \b Welw. \plain\fs28 \tab   F. Welwitsch (1806-1872)
\par \b Welw. \plain\fs28 \tab   F.M.J. Welwitsch (1806-1872)
\par \b Wendelberger \plain\fs28 \tab   G. Wendelberger (b. 1915)
\par \b Wendelbo \plain\fs28 \tab   P.E.B. Wendelbo (b. 1927)
\par \b Wenderoth \plain\fs28 \tab   G.W.F. Wenderoth (1774-1861)
\par \b Wendl. fil. \plain\fs28 \tab   H.L. Wendland (1792-1869)
\par \pard\tx355 \b Wendl., H.A. \plain\fs28 \tab   H.A. Wendland (1825-1903)
\par \b Wendl. \plain\fs28 \tab   J.C. Wendland (1755-1828)
\par \b Wenzig \plain\fs28 \tab   T. Wenzig (1824-1892)
\par \b Werner \plain\fs28 \tab   H. Werner (b. 1839)
\par \b Werner, K. \plain\fs28 \tab   K. Werner (b. 1928)
\par \b Werner \plain\fs28 \tab   K. Werner (b. 1928)
\par \b Wesmael, A. \plain\fs28 \tab   A. Wesmael (1832-1905)
\par \b Wessely \plain\fs28 \tab   I. Wessely (fl. 1960)
\par \b West, C. \plain\fs28 \tab   C. West (b. 1887)
\par \b Westcott \plain\fs28 \tab   F. Westcott (d 1861)
\par \b Weston \plain\fs28 \tab   R. Weston (1733-1806)
\par \b Wettst., F. \plain\fs28 \tab   F. von Wettstein (1895-1945)
\par \pard\tx355 \b Wettst., W. \plain\fs28 \tab   W. Wettstein (fl. 1952)
\par \b Wettst. \plain\fs28 \tab   R. Wettstein von Westersheim (1863--1931)
\par \b Wheldon \plain\fs28 \tab   J. A. Wheldon (1862-1924)
\par \b Whitehead \plain\fs28 \tab   F.H. Whitehead (b. 1913)
\par \b White \plain\fs28 \tab   J. White (c. 1750-1832)
\par \b Wibel \plain\fs28 \tab   A.W.E.C. Wibel (1775-1814)
\par \b Wibiral \plain\fs28 \tab   E. Wibiral (1878-1950)
\par \b Wichura \plain\fs28 \tab   M.E. Wichura (1817-1866)
\par \b Wickens \plain\fs28 \tab   G.E. Wickens (b. 1927)
\par \b Widder \plain\fs28 \tab   F.J. Widder (1892-1974)
\par \b Widmer \plain\fs28 \tab   E. Widmer (1862-1952)
\par \pard\tx355 \b Wieg. \plain\fs28 \tab   K.McK. Wiegand (1873-1942)
\par \b Wiens \plain\fs28 \tab   D. Wiens (b. 1932)
\par \b Wierzb. \plain\fs28 \tab   P.P. Wierzbicki (1794-1847)
\par \b Wiesb. \plain\fs28 \tab   J.B. Wiesbaur (1836-1906)
\par \b Wiggers \plain\fs28 \tab   F.H. Wiggers (1746-1811)
\par \b Wight \plain\fs28 \tab   R. Wight (1796-1872)
\par \b Wiinst. \plain\fs28 \tab   K.J.F. Wiinstedt (1818-1964)
\par \b Wikstr. \plain\fs28 \tab   J.E. Wikstrom (1789-1856)
\par \b Wikstr\'f6m \plain\fs28 \tab   J.E. Wikstr\'f6m (1789-1856)
\par \b Wilce \plain\fs28 \tab   J.H. Wilce (b. 1931)
\par \b Wilczek \plain\fs28 \tab   E. Wilczek (1867-1948)
\par \pard\tx355 \b Wildhaber \plain\fs28 \tab   O.J. Wildhaber (1908-1976)
\par \b Wilensky \plain\fs28 \tab   D.G. Wilensky (1892-1959)
\par \b Willd. \plain\fs28 \tab   C.L. Willdenow (1765-1812)
\par \b Willemet \plain\fs28 \tab  P. R. Willemet (1735-1807)
\par \b Williams, F.N. \plain\fs28 \tab   F.N. Williams (1862-1923)
\par \b Willk. \plain\fs28 \tab   H.M. Willkomm (1821-1895)
\par \b Wilmot-Dear \plain\fs28 \tab   C.M. Wilmot-Dear (b. 1952)
\par \b Wilmott \plain\fs28 \tab   A.J. Wilmott (1888-1950)
\par \b Wilson, E.H. \plain\fs28 \tab   E.H. Wilson (1876-1930)
\par \b Wilson, W.M. \plain\fs28 \tab   W.M. Wilson (1799-1871)
\par \pard\tx355 \b Wimmer \plain\fs28 \tab   C.F.H. Wimmer (1803-1868)
\par \b Winge \plain\fs28 \tab   \'d8. Winge (1886-1964)
\par \b Winkler \plain\fs28 \tab   M. Winkler (1812-1889)
\par \b Winter, F. \plain\fs28 \tab   F.B. Winter (1795-1869)
\par \b Winter, N. \plain\fs28 \tab   N.A. Winter (1898-1934)
\par \b Winterl \plain\fs28 \tab   J.J. Winterl (1739-1809)
\par \b Wirsing \plain\fs28 \tab   A.L. Wirsing (1734-1797)
\par \b Wirtgen \plain\fs28 \tab   P.W. Wirtgen (1806-1870)
\par \b Wissjul. \plain\fs28 \tab   E.D. Wissjulina (1898-1972)
\par \b Witasek \plain\fs28 \tab   J. Witasek (1865-1910)
\par \b With. \plain\fs28 \tab   W. Withering (1741-1799)
\par \pard\tx355 \b Wittm. \plain\fs28 \tab   M.C.L. Wittmack (1839-1929)
\par \b Wittrock \plain\fs28 \tab   V.B. Wittrock (1839-1914)
\par \b Wohlf. \plain\fs28 \tab   R. Wohlfahrt (1830-1888)
\par \b Wolf \plain\fs28 \tab   -- Wolf (1743 or 1744-1825)
\par \b Wolf, F.O. \plain\fs28 \tab   F.O. Wolf (1838-1905)
\par \b Wolf, N.M. \plain\fs28 \tab   N.M. von Wolf (1724-1784)
\par \b Wolf, T. \plain\fs28 \tab   F.T. Wolf (1841-1921)
\par \b Wolff, D. \plain\fs28 \tab    (\i recte\plain\fs28  J. P. Wolff) 
\par \b Wolff, D. \plain\fs28 \tab   D. Wolff (fl. ?1809)
\par \b Wolff, H. \plain\fs28 \tab   K.F.A.H. Wolff (1866-1929)
\par \b Wolff, J.P. \plain\fs28 \tab   J.P. Wolff (Wolf, Wolfius, Wolffius) (c. 1743-1825)
\par \pard\tx355 \b Wolfg. \plain\fs28 \tab  J.F. Wolfgang (1776-1859)
\par \b Wolfner \plain\fs28 \tab   W. Wolfner (fl. 1858)
\par \b Wollaston \plain\fs28 \tab   G.B. Wollaston (1814-1899)
\par \b Wolley-Dod \plain\fs28 \tab   A.H. Wolley-Dod (1861-1948)
\par \b Wolny \plain\fs28 \tab   A.R. Wolny (d. ?1829)
\par \b Woloszczak \plain\fs28 \tab   E. Woloszczak (1835-1918)
\par \b Wood, D. \plain\fs28 \tab   D. Wood (b. 1939)
\par \b Wood, W. \plain\fs28 \tab   W. Wood (1745-1808)
\par \b Woods, J. \plain\fs28 \tab   J. Woods (1776-1864)
\par \b Woodson \plain\fs28 \tab   R.E. Woodson (1904-1963)
\par \b Wormsk. \plain\fs28 \tab   M. Wormskiold (1783-1845)
\par \pard\tx355 \b Woronow \plain\fs28 \tab   J.N. Woronow (Voronov) (1874-1931)
\par \b Woynar \plain\fs28 \tab   H.K. Woynar (1865-1917)
\par \b Wrigley \plain\fs28 \tab   F.A. Wrigley (b. 1936)
\par \b Wulfen \plain\fs28 \tab   F.X. von Wulfen (1728-1805)
\par \b Wulf \plain\fs28 \tab   E.V. Wulf (E.W. Wulff, E. V. Vul'f) (1885-1941)
\par \b W\'fcnsche \plain\fs28 \tab   J.G. W\'fcnsche (fl. 1804)
\par \b Wyse Jackson, M.B. \plain\fs28 \tab   M.B. Wyse Jackson (b. 1962)
\par \b Wyse Jackson, P.S. \plain\fs28 \tab   P.S. Wyse Jackson (b. 1955)
\par \b W\'fcnsche \plain\fs28 \tab   F.O. W\'fcnsche (1839-1905)
\par \b Yavin \plain\fs28 \tab   Z. Ovadiahu-Yavin (b. 1936)
\par \pard\tx355 \b Yeo \plain\fs28 \tab   P.F. Yeo (b. 1929)
\par \b Young, D.P. \plain\fs28 \tab   D.P. Young (1917-1972)
\par \b Yuncker \plain\fs28 \tab   T.G. Yuncker (1891-1964)
\par \b Zabel \plain\fs28 \tab   H. Zabel (1832-1912)
\par \b Zaborsky \plain\fs28 \tab   J. Zaborsky (b. 1928)
\par \b Zadoks \plain\fs28 \tab  J. C. Zadoks (fl. 1955)
\par \b Zaffran \plain\fs28 \tab   J. Zaffran (b. 1935)
\par \b Zahar. \plain\fs28 \tab   C. Zahariadi (b. 1901)
\par \b Zahlbr. \plain\fs28 \tab   J. Zahlbruckner (1782-1851)
\par \b Zahn \plain\fs28 \tab   K.H. Zahn (1865-1940)
\par \b Zalessky \plain\fs28 \tab   K.M. Zalessky (b. 1890)
\par \b Zamels \plain\fs28 \tab   A. Zamels (from 1928, Zamelis) (1897-1943)
\par \pard\tx355 \b Zanted. \plain\fs28 \tab   G. Zantedeschi (1773-1846)
\par \b Zapal. \plain\fs28 \tab   H. Zapalowicz (1852-1917)
\par \b Zauschner \plain\fs28 \tab   J.B.J. Zauschner (1737-1799)
\par \b Zawadzki \plain\fs28 \tab   A. Zawadzki (1798-1868)
\par \b Zefirov \plain\fs28 \tab   B.M. Zefirov (1915-1957)
\par \b Zelen. \plain\fs28 \tab   N.M. Zelenetzky (1859-1923)
\par \b Zenari \plain\fs28 \tab   S. Zenari (1895-1956)
\par \b Zerafa \plain\fs28 \tab   S. Zerafa (Zerapha) (1791-1871)
\par \b Zerov \plain\fs28 \tab   D.K. Zerov (1895-1971)
\par \b Zertova \plain\fs28 \tab   A. Chrtkova-Zertova (b. 1930)
\par \b Zett., J.W. \plain\fs28 \tab   J.W. Zetterstedt (1785-1874)
\par \pard\tx355 \b Zevenbergen \plain\fs28 \tab   H.A. Zevenbergen (b. 1943)
\par \b Zeyher \plain\fs28 \tab   C.L.P. Zeyher (1799-1858)
\par \b Zielinski \plain\fs28 \tab   J. Zielinski (b. 1943)
\par \b Zimm. \plain\fs28 \tab   W.M. Zimmermann (1892-1980)
\par \b Zimmeter \plain\fs28 \tab   A. Zimmeter (1848-1897)
\par \b Zinger, N. \plain\fs28 \tab   N.W. Zinger (1866-1923)
\par \b Zinger, V. \plain\fs28 \tab   V.J. Zinger (1836-1907)
\par \b Zinn \plain\fs28 \tab   J.G. Zinn (1727-1759)
\par \b Zinserl. \plain\fs28 \tab   Y.D Zinserling (1894-1938)
\par \b Ziz \plain\fs28 \tab   J.B. Ziz (1779-1829)
\par \b Zodda \plain\fs28 \tab   G. Zodda (1877-1968)
\par \pard\tx355 \b Zoega \plain\fs28 \tab   J. Zoega (1742-1788)
\par \b Zohary \plain\fs28 \tab   M. Zohary (1898-1983)
\par \b Zotov \plain\fs28 \tab   V.D. Zotov (1908-1977)
\par \b Zoz \plain\fs28 \tab   I.G. Zoz (b. 1903)
\par \b Zs\'e1k \plain\fs28 \tab   Z. Zs\'e1k (1880-1966)
\par \b Zucc. \plain\fs28 \tab   J.G. Zuccarini (1797-1848)
\par \b Zuccagni \plain\fs28 \tab   A. Zuccagni (1754-1807)
\par \b Zumagl. \plain\fs28 \tab   A.M. Zumaglini (1804-1865)
\par \b Z\'e1borsky \plain\fs28 \tab   J. Z\'e1borsky (b. 1928)
\par 
\par 
\par \page
{\up #}{\footnote\pard\plain{\up #} 4Y1X_AX}
\pard \cf2 Click here to bring up the key .
\par Click on a character to continue the identification\i . 
\par \plain\fs28\cf2 In the couplet hold down <\i Ctrl>\plain\fs28\cf2  and the \i left mouse-button\plain\fs28\cf2  then stroke over a term to show its definition.
\par \page
{\up #}{\footnote\pard\plain{\up #} 4Y1X_B1}
\pard Click here to show the description of the taxon in \i Flora Europaea\plain\fs28\cf2  .
\par \page
{\up #}{\footnote\pard\plain{\up #} 4Y1X_B2}
\pard This panel lists the characters selected so far. 
\par Click on a character to follow a different route through the key. 
\par The \i family\plain\fs28\cf2  and \i genus\plain\fs28\cf2  names appear above.
\par \i Note:\plain\fs28\cf2  The above two panels (\i Family\plain\fs28\cf2  and \i Genus\plain\fs28\cf2 ) are only updated when a new end-point has been reached.
\par \page
\pard {\up #}{\footnote\pard\plain{\up #} 4Y1X_B4}
\plain\fs28 A click here resets the key to the first couplet in the key of the Family.
\par \page
{\up #}{\footnote\pard\plain{\up #} 4Y1X_B5}
\pard A click here resets the key to the first couplet in the key of the Genus.
\par \page
{\up #}{\footnote\pard\plain{\up #} 7JIKY3}
\pard The \i Families\plain\fs28  and \i Genera\plain\fs28  contained in \i Flora Europaea\plain\fs28 .
\par Type in all or part of a name to locate it in the index.
\par Select by clicking on an item in the list. If you now click the \i Keys\plain\fs28  button at the bottom of the page, the \i Identification Screen\plain\fs28  appears with the name of the selected taxon- click on the taxon name to display the first couplet of characters in its key.
\par If, instead, you click \i All Species\plain\fs28 , a list of species for the genus selected is displayed (if you selected a family, just the family name appears). From there you can click on a species name and then on the book icon to go to the page in \i Flora Europaea\plain\fs28  with the description of the taxon.
\par \page
{\up #}{\footnote\pard\plain{\up #} 7JIKY4}
\pard Click here to show the \i species\plain\fs28  of the \i genus\plain\fs28  selected in the \i Families and Genera\plain\fs28  index
\par \page
{\up #}{\footnote\pard\plain{\up #} ZF8DUB}
\pard Click in the Index to select.
\par \page
{\up #}{\footnote\pard\plain{\up #} 7JIKY6}
\pard Click to show the \i Identification Screen\plain\fs28  .
\par \page
{\up #}{\footnote\pard\plain{\up #} 7JIKY7}
\pard This takes you to the \i General Search\plain\fs28  window.
\par \page
{\up #}{\footnote\pard\plain{\up #} 9GN1TW}
\pard Click\i  \plain\fs28 in the list to select . 
\par Click on \i Listing of Characters\plain\fs28  to show the path through the key.
\par \page
{\up #}{\footnote\pard\plain{\up #} 9GN1TX}
\pard Produces a scroll-down list of the taxa from the above panel.
\par Click in the list to select.
\par \page
\pard 
\par \page
{\up #}{\footnote\pard\plain{\up #} 9GN1TZ}
\pard Click to show the route through the key leading to the selected taxon\i .
\par \page
{\up #}{\footnote\pard\plain{\up #} 3JK3ZHU}
\pard \plain\fs28 The path through the key leading to\i  \plain\fs28 the taxon\i .\plain\fs28 
\par \page
{\up #}{\footnote\pard\plain{\up #} _CMNZM}
\pard The page from\i  Flora Europaea\plain\fs28  with the taxon name highlighted.
\par Clicking with the \i right mouse-button\plain\fs28  shows all instances of the taxon on the page.
\par \i Stroke \plain\fs28 over a term to show its definition.
\par \page
{\up #}{\footnote\pard\plain{\up #} _CMNZO}
\pard This takes you to the \i Index of Families and Genera\plain\fs28 .
\par \page
{\up #}{\footnote\pard\plain{\up #} 12_FEV2}
\pard This takes you to the \i General Search\plain\fs28 .
\par \page
{\up #}{\footnote\pard\plain{\up #} _CMNZP}
\pard \i Previous \plain\fs28 page.
\par \page
{\up #}{\footnote\pard\plain{\up #} _CMNZQ}
\pard \i Next\plain\fs28  page.
\par \page
{\up #}{\footnote\pard\plain{\up #} 1ET9_PI}
\pard Click to toggle between \i case-sensitive\plain\fs28  or \i case-insensitive\plain\fs28  search.
\par \page
{\up #}{\footnote\pard\plain{\up #} 1ET9_PJ}
\pard Type in item to find and click to select. 
\par If more than one item is searched for, \i Search in Paragraph\plain\fs28  is automatically selected.
\par \page
{\up #}{\footnote\pard\plain{\up #} 1ET9_PK}
\pard Select this option to search for the item(s) within a paragraph (usually describing a species).
\par \page
{\up #}{\footnote\pard\plain{\up #} 1ET9_PL}
\pard Select this option to search for the item within a page.
\par \page
{\up #}{\footnote\pard\plain{\up #} 1ET9_PM}
\pard Start searching.
\par \page
{\up #}{\footnote\pard\plain{\up #} 1ET9_PN}
\pard Generates the results listing.
\par \page
{\up #}{\footnote\pard\plain{\up #} 1ET9_PP}
\pard For \i Search in Paragraph\plain\fs28  , this panel shows the results of the search referred to by case number. Click on a number to show the page with the paragraph containing the search-item(s) highlighted.
\par For \i Search in Page\plain\fs28  , this panel lists the item satisfying the search criterion. Click to go to the page in Flora Europaea.
\par \page
{\up #}{\footnote\pard\plain{\up #} .NSPXM}
\pard Page from \i Flora Europaea\plain\fs28 . 
\par Click the right mouse button in the page to find further occurrences of the search-item. 
\par \i Stroke\plain\fs28  over a term to show its definition.
\par \page
\pard 
\par \pard\qc {\up #}{\footnote\pard\plain{\up #} .NSPXS}
\b  \fs24 Constructing a Boolean search\fs28 .
\par \pard 
\par \plain\fs24 Operators: \b  \plain\fs24 for AND use \b ;\plain\fs24  for OR use \b ,\plain\fs24  for NOT use \b ~,\plain\fs24  for Followed By use \b #\plain\fs24 
\par To search for the exact phrase, enclose the items in quotation marks e.g. \b "20 m"\plain\fs24 
\par To exclude characters from the search (N.B. this only works in case-sensitive search), place them in \b [ ]\plain\fs24  preceded by \b ^ \plain\fs24 For instance,\b  "20 m[^m]"\plain\fs24  will find 20 m but not 20 mm
\par .          \b  [^s-z]\plain\fs24  excludes all letters from s to z
\par             \b [0-5]\plain\fs24  represents any digit from 0 to 5
\par \pard             \b [a-z]\plain\fs24  represents any lower case character
\par             \b [a-z]+\plain\fs24  represents a string of lower case characters of any length
\par             Characters in \b [ ]\plain\fs24  read like OR so that \b [dD]amp\plain\fs24  finds damp or Damp.
\par             Use \b \{\- \'7d\plain\fs24  for combinations of operators.
\par             A \b \'91.\'92\plain\fs24  represents any character: thus \b Z.rich\plain\fs24  finds Z\'fcrich, for example.
\par Examples\b  \plain\fs24 with case-sensitive search:
\par \b  [tT]ree;Gr;\'942[0-5] m[^m]\'94;~It\plain\fs24  finds trees in Greece but not in Italy with height between 20 and 25 m. A case-insensitive search (to avoid [tT]) would, of course, throw up the words with gr and it as well.
\par \pard \b \{\-apple,pear\'7d;banana;~orange\plain\fs24  finds all occurrences that have apple OR pear AND banana AND NOT orange.
\par \b [Bb]erry#"10-1[1-6] mm"#\{\-red,redd[a-z]+\'7d \plain\fs24 finds occurrences with Berry OR berry followed by size between 10 and 16 mm, followed by red OR reddish. 
\par \page
{\up #}{\footnote\pard\plain{\up #} 1_8X7X7}
\pard \i\fs28 Click\plain\fs28  to show the first couplet in the key for this taxon.
\par \page
{\up #}{\footnote\pard\plain{\up #} 13F6FJN}
\pard Holding down <\i Ctrl\plain\fs28 > and \i Left Mouse Button\plain\fs28  stroke over a term to show its definition in the \i Glossary
\par \page
{\up #}{\footnote\pard\plain{\up #} 2_1HZSQ}
\pard\qc \plain\b\fs28 APPENDIX  II\plain\fs28 
\par \pard 
\par \pard\qc \b KEY TO THE ABBREVIATIONS OF TITLES OF BOOKS CITED IN VOLUMES 1, 2, 3, 4 & 5.\plain\fs28 
\par \pard 
\par \b Aiton\plain\fs28 , \i\b Hort. Kew\plain\fs28 .
\par    W. Aiton,\i  Hortus kewensis, or a Catalogue of the Plants cultivated in the Royal Botanic Garden at Kew\plain\fs28 . Ed. 1. London. 1789. (\b 1-3\plain\fs28  in 1789.) Ed. 2, by W.T. Aiton. London. 1810-1813. (\b 1\plain\fs28  in 1810; \b 2 & 3\plain\fs28  in 1811; \b 4\plain\fs28  in 1812; \b 5\plain\fs28  in 1813. Cf. C. E. Britton,\i  Jour. Bot.\plain\fs28  (\i London\plain\fs28 )\b  50\plain\fs28 ,  suppl. 3, 1-16 (1912) and F.A. Stafleu, \i Taxon\plain\b\fs28  12\plain\fs28 :  53(1963). Cf. F.A. Stafleu & R.S. Cowan, \i Taxonomic Literature\plain\fs28  ed. 2, \b 1\plain\fs28 : 25-26 (1976).)
\par \pard \b Aiton fil.\plain\fs28 , \i\b Epit. Hort. Kew\plain\fs28 .
\par      W.T. Aiton, \i An Epitome of the second Edition of Hortus kewensis for the use of practical Gardeners\plain\fs28 . London. 1814.
\par \b Albert & Reyn.\plain\fs28 , \i\b Coup d'Oeil Fl. Toulon Hyeres\plain\fs28 
\par     A. Albert & A. Reynier, \i Coup d'Oeil sur la Flore de Toulon et d'Hyeres\plain\fs28 . Draguignan. 1891.
\par \b All.\plain\fs28 , \i\b Auct. Fl. Pedem\plain\fs28 .
\par     C. Allioni,\i  Auctuarium ad Floram pedemontanam cum Notis et Emendationibus\plain\fs28 .  Augustae Taurinorum. 1789. 
\par \pard \b All.\plain\fs28 , \i\b Auct. Syn. Stirp. Horti Taur\plain\fs28 .
\par    C. Allioni, \i Auctuarium ad Synopsim methodicam Stirpium Horti regii taurinensis.\plain\fs28   [Torino.] 1773. (Preprint from \i M\'e9langes Philos.-Mat. Soc. Roy. Turin\plain\fs28  \b 5\plain\fs28 (1770 -1773): 53-96 (1774). Allioni in \i Fl.Pedem\plain\fs28 .  always refers to the page numbers of the\i  journal\plain\fs28  ; the preprint was independently paginated. Cf. J.E. Dandy. \i Taxon\plain\fs28  \b 19\plain\fs28 : 617-626 (1970) and F.A. Stafleu & R.S.  Cowan, \i Taxonomic Literature.\plain\fs28  ed. 2, \b 1\plain\fs28 : 35 (1976).) 
\par \pard \b All.\plain\fs28 , \i\b  Fl. Pedem.\plain\fs28  
\par    C. Allioni, \i Flora pedemontana, sive Enumeratio methodica Stirpium indigenarum Pedemontii.\plain\fs28  Augustae Taurinorum. 1785. (\b 1-3\plain\fs28  in 1785.)
\par \b Almq\plain\fs28 .,\i\b  Stud. Hier\plain\fs28 .
\par     S.O.I. Almquist, \i Studier of ver Slagtet Hieracium\plain\fs28 . Stockholm. 1881.
\par \b Alpers, \i  Verz. Gef\'e4sspfl. Landdr. Stade\plain\fs28  
\par    F. Alpers, \i Verzeichniss der Gef\'e4sspflanzen der Landdrostei Stade.\plain\fs28   Stade. 1875. 
\par \b  Ambrosi\plain\fs28 , \i\b Fl. Tirolo Mer.\plain\fs28 
\par \pard     F. Ambrosi, \i Flora del Tirolo meridionale\plain\fs28  (\i Flora Tiroliae australis\plain\fs28 ). Padova. 1854-1857. (\b 1\plain\fs28  in 1854 -?; \b 2\plain\fs28  in 1857-?. Published in parts; precise dates unknown. Cf. F.A. Stafleu & R.S. Cowan, \i Taxonomic Literature\plain\fs28  ed. 2, \b 1\plain\fs28 : 40-41 (1976).)
\par \b Ames\plain\fs28 , \i\b Orchidaceae\plain\fs28 
\par     O. Ames, \i Orchidaceae: Illustrations and Studies of the Family Orchidaceae\plain\fs28 . Boston & New York. 1905-1922. (\b 1\plain\fs28  & \b 2\plain\fs28 , Boston & New York; \b 3-7\plain\fs28 , Boston. \b 1\plain\fs28  in 1905; \b 2\plain\fs28  &\b  3\plain\fs28  in 1908; \b 4\plain\fs28  in 1910; \b 5\plain\fs28  in 1915; \b 6\plain\fs28  in 1920; \b 7\plain\fs28  in 1922).
\par \pard \b Amo\plain\fs28 ,\i\b  Fl. Iber.\plain\fs28 
\par    Mariano del Amo y Mora, \i Flora fanerog\'e1mica de la Pen\'ednsula ib\'e9rica\plain\fs28 . Granada. 1871-1873. (\b 1\plain\fs28  & \b 2\plain\fs28  in 1871 ; \b 3 & 4\plain\fs28  in  1872;\b  5\plain\fs28  & \b 6\plain\fs28  in 1873.)
\par \b Andersson, N. J\plain\fs28 .,\i\b  Gram. Scand\plain\fs28 .
\par      N.J. Andesson, \i Gramineae Scandinaviae in Dania, Suecia, Norvegia et Fennia sponte crescentes, descriptae et delineatae\plain\fs28 . Holmiae. 1852. (Comprises \i Fasciculus secundus\plain\fs28  of N. J. Andersson, \i Plantae Scandinaviae Descriptionibus et Figuris analyticis adumbratae\plain\fs28 . Holmiae. 1849-1852.)
\par \pard \b Andrews\plain\fs28 , \i\b Bot. Reposit\plain\fs28 .
\par      H.C. Andrews, \i The Botanist's Repository\plain\fs28 . Ed. 1. London. 1797-1815. (\b 1-10\plain\fs28 . For dates cf. F.A. Stafleu & R.S. Cowan, \i Taxonomic Literature\plain\fs28  ed. 2, \b 1\plain\fs28 : 50-51 (1976).) Ed. 2. London. 1816.
\par \b Andrz\plain\fs28 .,\i\b  Enum. Pl. Podol\plain\fs28 .
\par      A. L. Andrzejowski, ********** ******** ********** ******** * ******** ** *** **** [\i Iscislenie Rastenij Podol'skoj Gubernii i smeznikh s neju Mest\plain\fs28 ]. /\i  Enumeratio Plantarum sponte in Gubernico Podolico et Locis adjacentibus crescentium\plain\fs28 . Kiev. 1860-1862.
\par \pard \b Antoine\plain\fs28 , \i\b Kupress.-Gatt\plain\fs28 .
\par     F. Antoine, \i Die Kupressineengattungen\plain\fs28  Arceuthos, Juniperus, \i und\plain\fs28  Sabina. Wien. 1857-1860.
\par \b  Arcangeli,\i   Comp. Fl. Ital.\plain\fs28  
\par     G. Arcangeli, \i Compendio della Flora italiana, ossia Manuale per la Determinazione delle Piante che trovansi selvatiche od inselvatichite nell'Italia e nelle Isole adiacenti.\plain\fs28   Ed. 1. Torino. 1882.   Ed. 2. Torino & Roma. 1894. 
\par \b Ardoino\plain\fs28 ,\i\b  Fl. Alp. Marit\plain\fs28 .
\par      H.J.P. Ardoino,\i  Flore analytique du D\'e9partement des Alpes-maritimes.\plain\fs28  Ed. 1. Menton. 1867. Ed. 2. Menton & Nice. 1879.
\par \pard \b Ard.\plain\fs28 , \i\b Animadv. Bot. Spec. Alt.\plain\fs28 
\par     P. Arduino, \i Animadversionum botanicarum Specimen alterum\plain\fs28 . Venetiis. 1763.
\par \b  Arnold\plain\fs28 , \i\b Reise Mariazell\plain\fs28 
\par    J.F.X. Arnold, \i Reise nach Mariazell in Steyermark\plain\fs28 . Wien. 1785. (For author's initials cf. J.H. Barnhart, \i Bibliographic Notes upon Botanists\plain\b\fs28 1\plain\fs28 : 77 (1965) and Castroviejo et al., \i Flora Iber\plain\fs28 . \b 2\plain\fs28 : 727 (1990), but possibly a pseudonym.)
\par \b Arvet-Touvet\plain\fs28 , \i\b Addit. Monogr. Hier\plain\fs28 .
\par \pard     J.M.C. Arvet-Touvet,\i  Additions a la Monographie des \plain\fs28 Pilosella\i  & des \plain\fs28 Hieracium\i  du Dauphin\'e9\plain\fs28 . Grenoble. 1879.
\par \b Arvet-Touvet,\i   Ess. Pl. Dauph.\plain\fs28  
\par     J.M.C. Arvet-Touvet, \i  Essai sur les Plantes du Dauphin\'e9\plain\fs28 . Grenoble. 1871. 
\par \b Arvet-Touvet\plain\fs28 , \i\b Hier. Alpes Fr\plain\fs28 .
\par     J.M.C. Arvet-Touvet, \i Les \plain\fs28 Hieracium \i des Alpes fran\'e7aises\plain\fs28 . Lyon, Gen\'e8ve, B\'e2le & Paris. 1888.
\par \b Arvet-Touvet\plain\fs28 , \i\b Hier. Gall. Hisp. Cat\plain\fs28 .
\par \pard     J.M.C. Arvet-Touvet, \i Hieraciorum praesertim Galliae et Hispaniae Catalogus systematicus\plain\fs28 . Paris. 1913.
\par \b Arvet-Touvet\plain\fs28 , \i\b Monogr. Hier\plain\fs28 .
\par     J.M.C. Arvet-Touvet, \i Monographie des\plain\fs28  Pilosella\i  et des \plain\fs28 Hieracium\i  du Dauphin\'e9\plain\fs28 . Grenoble. 1873.
\par \b Arvet-Touvet\plain\fs28 , \i\b Not. Pl. Alpes\plain\fs28 
\par     J.M.C. Arvet-Touvet,\i  Notes sur quelques Plantes des Alpes\plain\fs28 . Grenoble. 1883.\i\b  Suppl.\plain\fs28 , \i Suppl\'e9ment\plain\fs28 . Grenoble. 1883.
\par \b Arvet-Touvet\plain\fs28 , \i\b Spicil. Rar. Nov. Hier\plain\fs28 .
\par \pard     J.M.C. Arvet-Touvet,\i  Spicilegium rariorum vel novorum Hieraciorum\plain\fs28 . Grenoble. 1881. \i\b Suppl\plain\fs28 .,\i  Supplementum\plain\fs28  \b 1\plain\fs28  & \b 2\plain\fs28  Grenoble. 1886.
\par \b Arvet-Touvet\plain\fs28 , \i\b Suppl. Monogr. Hier\plain\fs28 .
\par     J.M.C. Arvet-Touvet, \i Suppl\'e9ment a la Monographie des\plain\fs28  Pilosella\i  & des\plain\fs28  Hieracium \i du Dauphin\'e9\plain\fs28 . Grenoble. 1876.
\par \b Arvet-Touvet & Gaut.\plain\fs28 ,\i\b  Hier. Gall. Hisp\plain\fs28 . (\i\b Exsicc\plain\fs28 .)
\par     J.M.C. Arvet-Touvet & G. Gautier,\i  Hieraciotheca gallica et hispanica\plain\fs28 . Narbonne. 1897-1908. (\b 1\plain\fs28  & \b 2\plain\fs28  in 1897; \b 3-5\plain\fs28  in 1898;\b  6-8\plain\fs28  in 1899;\b  9\plain\fs28  in 1899 or 1900; \b 10\plain\fs28  & \b 11\plain\fs28  in 1900; \b 12\plain\fs28  in 1901; \b 13\plain\fs28  &\b 14\plain\fs28  in 1902;\b 15\plain\fs28  &\b 16\plain\fs28  in 1903; \b 17\plain\fs28  & \b 18\plain\fs28 in 1906; \b 19\plain\fs28  & \b 20\plain\fs28  in 1908.)
\par \pard \b  Ascherson\plain\fs28 , \i\b Fl. Brandenb.\plain\fs28 
\par     P. F. A. Ascherson, \i Flora der Provinz Brandenburg, der Altmark und des Herzogthums Magdeburg\plain\fs28 . Berlin. 1859-1864. (\b 1\plain\fs28 : pp. 1-320 in 1860; pp. i-xxii, 321-1034, 1-146 in 1864; \b 2 & 3\plain\fs28  in 1859. Cf. F.A. Stafleu & R.S. Cowan, \i Taxonomic Literature\plain\fs28  ed. 2,\b  1\plain\fs28 : 73-74 (1976).) For Ed. 2, cf. Ascherson & Graebner, \i Fl. Nordostd. Flachl.\plain\fs28 
\par \b  Ascherson &  Graebner\plain\fs28 , \i\b  Fl. Nordostd. Flachl\plain\fs28 .
\par \pard     P.F.A. Ascherson & K.O.P.P. Graebner, \i Flora des nordostdeutschen Flachlandes\plain\fs28  (\i ausser Ostpreussen\plain\fs28 ). Berlin. 1898-1899. (Pp. 1-480 in 1898; pp. 481-875 in 1899.) This is Ed. 2 of Ascherson, \i Fl. Brandenb.\plain\fs28 
\par \b  Ascherson & Graebner,\i   Syn. Mitteleur. Fl.\plain\fs28  
\par    P.F.A. Ascherson & K.O.P.P. Graebner,  \i Synopsis der rmitteleurop\'e4ischen Flora.\plain\fs28   Ed. 1. Leipzig. 1896-1938. ( For dates cf. F.A. Stafleu & R.S. Cowan, \i Taxonomic Literature\plain\fs28  ed. 2, \b 1\plain\fs28 : 75-77 (1976).)  Ed. 2.  Leipzig. 1912-1920. (\b 1\plain\fs28 : pp. 1-480 in 1912; pp. 481-630 in 1913;\b  2\plain\fs28 (\b 1\plain\fs28 ): pp. 1-80 in 1919; pp. 81-160 in 1920.) 
\par \pard \b Aspegen,\i   F\'f6rs. Blek. Fl.\plain\fs28  
\par      G.C. Aspegren, \i  F\'f6rs\'f6k till en blekingsk Flora.\plain\fs28  Carlskrona. 1823. 
\par \b Asso\plain\fs28 ,\i\b  Enum. Stirp. Arag\plain\fs28 .
\par      I.J. de Asso y del Rio,\i  Enumeratio Stirpium in Aragonu noviter detectarum\plain\fs28 . Aragoniae. 1784.
\par \b Asso\plain\fs28 , \i\b Intr. Oryctogr. Arag\plain\fs28 .
\par      I.J. de Asso y del Rio,\i  Introductio in Oryctographiam, et Zoologiam Aragoniae\plain\fs28 . [Madrid.] 1784.
\par \b Asso\plain\fs28 , \i\b Syn. Stirp. Arag.\plain\fs28 
\par     I. J. de Asso y del Rio, \i Synopsis Stirpium indigenarum Aragoniae\plain\fs28 . Massiliae. 1779.
\par \pard \i Av\'e9-Lall.\plain\fs28 , \b  Ind. Sem. Horti Petrop.\plain\fs28 
\par     Cf. Fischer & C.A. Meyer, \i  Ind. Sem. Horti Petrop.\plain\fs28  
\par \b Bab.\plain\fs28 , \i\b Man. Brit. Bot.\plain\fs28 
\par    C.C. Babington, \i Manual of British Botany\plain\fs28 . Ed. 1. London. 1843. Ed. 2. London. 1847. Ed. 3. London.  1851. Ed. 4. London. 1856. Ed. 5. London. 1862. Ed. 6. London. 1867. Ed. 7. London. 1874. Ed. 8. London. 1881-1882. (Pp. i-xlviii, 1-485, [2, err.] in 1881 ; pp. [2], Addenda in 1883.) Ed. 9. London. 1904. Ed. 10, edit. A.J. Wilmott. London. 1922.
\par \pard \b Backh.\plain\fs28 , \i\b Monogr. Brit. Hier\plain\fs28 .
\par     J. Backhouse, \i A Monograph of the British Hieracia\plain\fs28 . York. 1856.
\par \b Baenitz\plain\fs28 ,\i\b  Herb. Eur. Prosp\plain\fs28 .
\par     K.G. Baenitz,\i  Herbarium europaeum. Prospect\plain\fs28 . Konigsberg i. Pr. 1868-1892. Published in annual parts, each without pagination or with separate pagination.
\par \b Bailey, L. H.\plain\fs28 ,\i\b  Man. Cult. Pl\plain\fs28 .
\par      L.H. Bailey,\i  Manual of cultivated Plants\plain\fs28 . Ed. 1. New York. 1924. Ed. 2. New York. 1949.
\par \pard \b Baillon\plain\fs28 ,\i\b  Hist. Pl.\plain\fs28 
\par      H.E. Baillon,\i  Histoire des Plantes\plain\fs28 . Paris. 1866-1895. (\b 1\plain\fs28 : pp. 1-88 in 1866; pp. 89-288 in 1868; pp. 289-488, i-xi in 1869; \b 2\plain\fs28 : pp. 1-71 in 1869; pp. 73-428 in 1870; pp. 429-512 in 1872; \b 3\plain\fs28 : pp.1-292 in 1871; pp. 293-545 in 1872; \b 4\plain\fs28 : pp. 1-264 in 1872; pp. 265-520 in 1873;\b  5\plain\fs28 : pp. 1-256 in 1874; pp. 257-516 in 1874 or 1875;\b  6\plain\fs28 : pp. 1-92 in 1875; pp. 93-216 in 1875 or 1876; pp. 217-304 in 1876; pp. 305-523 in 1877; \b 7\plain\fs28 : pp. 1-256 in 1879; pp. 257-546 in 1880;\b  8\plain\fs28 : pp. 1-316 in 1882; pp. 317-515 in 1885; \b 9\plain\fs28 : pp. 1-80 in 1886; pp. 81-224 in 1887; pp. 225-491 in 1888;\b  10\plain\fs28 : pp. 1-112 in 1888; pp. 113-220 in 1889; pp. 221-402 in 1890; pp. 403 476 in 1891; \b 11\plain\fs28 : pp.1-304 in 1891; pp.305 494 in 1892;\b 12\plain\fs28 : pp. 1-134 in 1892; pp. 135-334 in 1893; pp. 335-611 in 1894; \b 13\plain\fs28 : pp.1-244 in 1894; pp. 245-523 in 1895. Cf. F.A. Stafleu & R.S. Cowan, \i Taxonomic Literature\plain\fs28  ed. 2, \b 1\plain\fs28 : 97-99 (1976).)
\par \pard \b Baker\plain\fs28 , \i\b Handb. Amaryll\plain\fs28 .
\par       J.G. Baker, \i Handbook of the Amaryllideae, including the Alstroemeriae and Agaveae\plain\fs28 . London.1888.
\par \b  Balbis\plain\fs28 , \i\b Cat. Stirp. Hort. Bat. Taur\plain\fs28 .
\par    G.B. Balbis, \i Catalogus Stirpium Horti botanici taurinensis\plain\fs28 . Taurini. 1807. Ed. 1810, titled \i Catalogus Plantarum...ad Annum 1810\plain\fs28 . Taurini. 1810. Ed. 1812, titled \i Catalogus Stirpium...ad Annum mdcccxii\plain\fs28 . Taurini. 1812. Ed. 1813, titled \i Catalogus Stirpium ...ad Annum mdcccxiii\plain\fs28 . Taurini. 1813. \i\b App\plain\fs28 ., \i Ad Catalogum Stirpium Horti academici taurinensis editum Anno mdcccxiii Appendix prima\plain\fs28 . Taurini. 1814. (Cf. F.A. Stafleu & R.S.  Cowan, \i Taxonomic Literature\plain\fs28  ed.  2, \b 1\plain\fs28  : 108 (1976).)
\par \pard \b Balbis\plain\fs28 ,\i\b  Elenco\plain\fs28 
\par      G.B. Balbis, \i Elenco delle Piante crescenti ne' Contorni di Torino\plain\fs28 . Torino. 1801. (This includes (pp. 83-102)\i  Additamentum ad Floram pedemontanam.\plain\fs28 )
\par \b Balbis,\i  Horti Acad Taur. Stirp\plain\fs28 .
\par     G.B. Balbis,\i  Horti academici taurinensis Stirpium minus cognitarum aut forte novarum Icones et Descriptiones\plain\fs28 . Torino. 1810.
\par \b Barbarich\plain\fs28 , \i\b Vyzn. Rosl. Ukr\plain\fs28 .
\par      A. Barbarich, ********* ****** ******* [ \i Vyznacnyk Roslyn Ukrajiny\plain\fs28 ]. Ed. 1. Kyjiv. 1950. Ed. 2, by D. K. Zerov et al. (edit.). Kyjiv. 1965.
\par \pard \b  Barbey, W\plain\fs28 ., \i\b Fl. Sard. Comp\plain\fs28 .
\par     W. Barbey-Boissier, \i Florae Sardoae Compendium. Catalogue raisonn\'e9 des V\'e9g\'e9taux observ\'e9s dans l' \'cele de Sardaigne\plain\fs28 . Lausanne. 1885. (Possibly in parts, 1884-1885; cf. internal evidence and F.A. Stafleu & R.S. Cowan, \i Taxonomic Literature\plain\fs28  ed. 2,\b  1\plain\fs28 : 119 (1976).)
\par \b Barbey, C. & W.\plain\fs28 ,\i\b  Herb. Levant\plain\fs28 
\par C. & W. Barbey-Boissier, \i Herborisations au Levant\plain\fs28 . Lausanne. 1882.
\par \b Bartal.\plain\fs28 , \i\b  Cat. Piante Siena\plain\fs28  
\par \pard      B. Bartalini, \i  Catalogo delle Piante che nascono spontaneamente intorno alla Citt\'e0 di Siena\plain\fs28 .  Siena. 1876. 
\par \b  Bartl\plain\fs28 ., \i\b Cat. Sem. Horti Gotting\plain\fs28 .
\par     F.G.  Bartling, \i Catalogus Seminum Horti gottingensis.\plain\fs28 G\'f6ttingen. 1838-1841, 1843, 1848, 1850. (Descriptions of new species reprinted as follows: \b 1838\plain\fs28  as \i Index Seminum Horti academici gottingensis\plain\fs28  in \i Linnaea\plain\b\fs28 13\plain\fs28 : \i Litt.-Ber\plain\fs28 . 95-96 (1839); \b 1839\plain\fs28  in \i op. cit.\plain\b\fs28 14\plain\fs28 : \i Litt.-Ber\plain\fs28 . 123-126 (1840); \b 1840\plain\fs28  in \i op. cit.\plain\b\fs28 15\plain\fs28 : \i Litt.-Ber.\plain\fs28  93 (1841); \b 1841\plain\fs28  in\i  op. cit.\plain\b\fs28  16\plain\fs28 : \i Litt.-Ber\plain\fs28 . 102-103 (1842); \b 1843\plain\fs28  in \i op. cit\plain\fs28 . \b 17\plain\fs28 : 158 (1844); \b l848\plain\fs28  in \i Ann.Sci. Nat.\plain\fs28  ser. 3,\b  ll\plain\fs28 : 254 (1849); \b 1850\plain\fs28  in Linnaea \b  24\plain\fs28 : 201-208 (1851).)
\par \pard \b Barton, W.\plain\fs28 , \i\b Veg. Mat. U.S\plain\fs28 .
\par     W.P.G. Barton, \i Vegetable Materia medica of the United States\plain\fs28 . Philadelphia. 1817-1819. (\b 1\plain\fs28 (\b 1\plain\fs28  & \b 2\plain\fs28 ): pp. 1-148, tt. 1-12 in 1817; \b 1\plain\fs28 (\b 3\plain\fs28  & \b 4\plain\fs28 ): pp. 149-273, tt. 13-24 in 1818; \b 2\plain\fs28 (\b 1\plain\fs28 ): pp. 1-74, tt. 25-30 in 1818; \b 2\plain\fs28 (\b 2\plain\fs28 ): pp. 75-239, tt. 31-50 in 1819. Cf. F.A. Stafleu, \i Taxonomic Literature\plain\fs28  15 (1967).)
\par \b Bast.\plain\fs28 , \i\b Essai Fl. Maine Loire\plain\fs28  
\par \pard      T. Bastard, \i  Essai sur la Flore du D\'e9partement de Maine et Loire\plain\fs28 . Angers. 1809. 
\par \b Batt. & Tarbut,\plain\fs28   \i\b Fl. Alg\'e9r\plain\fs28 . 
\par      J.A. Battandier & L. Trabut, \i  Flore de l 'Alg\'e9rie. Ancienne Flore d'Alger transform\'e9e, contenant la Description de toutes les   Plantes signal\'e9es jusqu'a ce Jour comme spontan\'e9es en Alg\'e9rie\plain\fs28 . \i\b Dicot.\plain\fs28 , \i Dicotyl\'e9dones\plain\fs28  by  J.A. Battandier. Alger & Paris. 1888-1890. (Pp. 1-184 in 1888; pp. 185-576 in 1889; pp. 577-825 in 1890. Cf. W.T. Stearn, \i Jour. Soc. Bibl. Nat. Hist.\plain\fs28  \b 1\plain\fs28 :  145 (1938).) \i\b  Monocot\plain\fs28 .,\i  Monocotyl\'e9dones\plain\fs28   by J.A. Battandier &   L. Trabut. Alger & Paris. 1895.  (Cf. W.T.  Stearn,  \i Jour. Soc. Bibl. Nat. Hist\plain\fs28 . \b 1\plain\fs28 : 145 (1938) and F.A. Stafleu & R.S. Cowan, \i Taxonomic Literature\plain\fs28  ed. 2, \b 1\plain\fs28 : 142 (1976).)
\par \pard \b  Batt. & Trabut\plain\fs28 ,  \i\b Fl. Alg\'e9r. Tunisie\plain\fs28 
\par     J.A. Battandier & L. Trabut,\i  Flore analytique et synoptique de l' Alg\'e9rie et de la Tunisie\plain\fs28 . Alger. 1905.
\par \b Baum\plain\fs28 ,\i\b  Monogr. Rev. Tamarix\plain\fs28  
\par      B. Baum, \i Monographic Revision of the Genus\plain\fs28   Tamarix.   Jerusalem. 1966. 
\par \b Baumg\plain\fs28 .,\i\b  Enum. Stirp. Transs\plain\fs28 .
\par     J.C.G. Baumgarten,\i  Enumeratio Stirpium magno Transsilvaniae Principatui praeprimis indigenarum\plain\fs28 . Vindobonae & Cibinii. 1816-1846. (\b 1\plain\fs28  & \b 2\plain\fs28 , Vindobonae in 1816 ; \b 3\plain\fs28 , Vindobonae in 1817 ;\b  4\plain\fs28 , edit. M. Fuss, Cibinii in 1846).\i\b Mant\plain\fs28 ., \b Mantissa\plain\fs28 , by M. Fuss. Cibinii. 1846.\i  Indices\plain\fs28 , by M. Fuss. Cibinii. 1846. (Cf. F. A. Stafleu & R.S. Cowan,\i  Taxonomic Literature\plain\fs28 ed. 2, \b 1\plain\fs28 : 151 (1976).)
\par \pard \b Beauv.\plain\fs28 , \i\b Agrost\plain\fs28 .
\par      A.M.F.J. Palisot de Beauvois,\i  Essai d'une nouvelle Agrostographie\plain\fs28 . Paris. 1812.
\par \b  Beauv\plain\fs28 .,\i\b  Prodr. Aeth\'e9og\plain\fs28 .
\par    A.M.F.J. Palisot  de Beauvois,\i  Prodrome des cinqui\'e8me et sixi\'e8me Families de l' Aeth\'e9ogamie. Les Mousses. Les Lycopodes\plain\fs28 . Paris. 1805. (Part of text previously published in \i Mag. Encycl.\plain\fs28  9" Ann\'e9e \b 5\plain\fs28 : 289-339, 471-483 (1804).)
\par \b Becherer\plain\fs28 ,\i\b  Beitr. Pflanzengeogr. Nordschweiz\plain\fs28 
\par \pard      A. Becherer,\i  Beitr\'e4ge zur Pflanzengeographie der Nordschweiz, mit besonderer Ber\'fccksichtigung der oberrheinischen Florenstrahlungen\plain\fs28 . Colmar. 1925.
\par \b  Beck, G.\plain\fs28 ,\i\b  Fl. Bosn. Herceg\plain\fs28 .
\par    G. Beck von Mannagetta, \i Flora Bosne, Hercegovine i Novipazarskog Sandzaka\plain\fs28 . Beograd & Sarajevo. 1903-1950. (\i Pteridophyta\plain\fs28  in \i Glasn. Muz. Bosni Herceg\plain\fs28 .\b  28\plain\fs28 : 311-336 (1916).\i  Embryophyta siphonogama\plain\fs28 : \b 1\plain\fs28  as \i op. cit\plain\fs28 . \b 15\plain\fs28 : 1-48, 185-230 (1903); \b 2\plain\fs28 (\b 1\plain\fs28 ) as \i op. cit\plain\fs28 . \b 18\plain\fs28 : 69-81 (1906); \b 2\plain\fs28 (\b 2\plain\fs28 ) as \i op. cit\plain\fs28 . \b 18\plain\fs28 : 137-150 (1906); \b 2\plain\fs28 (\b 3\plain\fs28 ) as \i op. cit\plain\fs28 . \b 18\plain\fs28 : 469-495 (1906); \b 2\plain\fs28 (\b 4\plain\fs28 ) as \i op. cit\plain\fs28 . \b 19\plain\fs28 : 15-29 (1907); \b 2\plain\fs28 (\b 5\plain\fs28 ) as\i  op. cit\plain\fs28 . \b 21\plain\fs28 : 135-165 (1909); \b 2\plain\fs28 (\b 6\plain\fs28 ) as\i  op. cit\plain\fs28 .\b  26\plain\fs28 : 451-475 (1914); \b 2\plain\fs28 (\b 7\plain\fs28 ) as \i op. cit\plain\fs28 . \b 28\plain\fs28 : 41-168 (1916); \b 2\plain\fs28 (\b 8\plain\fs28 ) as\i  op. cit\plain\fs28 . \b 30\plain\fs28 : 177-217 (1918);\b  2\plain\fs28 (\b 9\plain\fs28 ) as \i op. cit\plain\fs28 . \b 32\plain\fs28 : 83-127 (1920); \b 2\plain\fs28 (\b l0\plain\fs28 ) as\i  op. cit\plain\fs28 . \b 33\plain\fs28 : 1-17 (1921); \b 2\plain\fs28 (\b 11\plain\fs28 ) as\i  op. cit\plain\fs28 . \b 35\plain\fs28 : 49-74 (1923); \b 3\plain\fs28 , titled \i Flora Bosnae Hercegovinae et Regionis Novipazar\plain\fs28 . / ***** *****, *********** * ******* ****** ***** [Flora Bosne, Hercegovine i Oblasti Novoga Pazara], Beograd & Sarajevo in 1927 ; \b 4\plain\fs28 (\b 1\plain\fs28 ), titled\i  Flora Bosnae et Hercegovinae\plain\fs28 , by G. Beck von Mannagetta & K. Mal\'fd, Sarajevo in 1950;\b  4\plain\fs28 (\b 2\plain\fs28 ), by Z. Bjelcic, Z. Slavnic & P. Fukarek, Sarajevo in 1967.)\i  Pteridophyta\plain\fs28  (pp. 1-26), and \b 1\plain\fs28  & \b 2\plain\fs28  ( with continuous pagination, pp. 1-484) also reprinted separately with double pagination. Cf. F.A. Stafleu & R.S. Cowan, Taxonomic Literature ed. 2, \b 1\plain\fs28 : 158-159 (1976).)
\par \pard \b Beck, G.\plain\fs28 , \i\b  Fl. Nieder-\'d6sterr\plain\fs28 . 
\par      G. Beck von Mannagetta, \i Flora von Nieder-\'d6sterreich.\plain\fs28  Wien. 1890-1893. (\b 1\plain\fs28 : pp. 1-430 in 1890; \b 2\plain\fs28 (\b 1\plain\fs28 ): pp. 431-[884] in 1892; \b 2\plain\fs28 (\b 2\plain\fs28 ): \i Allgem. Th\plain\fs28 .  pp. 1-74 & 895-1396 in 1893.) 
\par \b Becker, J.\plain\fs28 , \i\b Fl. Frankfurt\plain\fs28 
\par     J. Becker,\i  Flora der Gegend um Frankfurt am Main\plain\fs28 . Frankfurt a. M. 1828. (\b 1\plain\fs28  & \b 2\plain\fs28  in 1828.)
\par \b Beldie\plain\fs28 , \i\b Fl. Veg. Munt. Bucegi\plain\fs28 
\par \pard     A. Beldie,\i  Flora si Vegetatia Muntilor Bucegi\plain\fs28 . Bucuresti. 1967.
\par \b  Bellardi\plain\fs28 , \i\b App. Fl. Pedem\plain\fs28 .
\par     C.A.L. Bellardi, \i Appendix Ludovici Bellardi ad Floram pedemontanam\plain\fs28 . Augustae Taurinorum. 1792. (Reprinted as \i M\'e9m. Acad. Sci.\plain\fs28  (\i Turin\plain\fs28 )\b  10\plain\fs28 : 209-286 (1793).)
\par \b Bentham\plain\fs28 , \i\b Cat. Pl. Pyr. Bas-Languedoc\plain\fs28 
\par    G. Bentham, \i Catalogue des Plantes indig\'e8nes des Pyr\'e9n\'e9es et du Bas-Languedoc, avec des Notes et Observations sur les Esp\'e8ces nouvelles ou peu connues; pr\'e9c\'e9d\'e9s d'une Notice sur un Voyage botanique fait dans les Pyr\'e9n\'e9es pendant  l' \'c9t\'e9 de 1825\plain\fs28 . Paris. 1826. 
\par \pard \b Bentham\plain\fs28 , \i\b  Fl. Austral\plain\fs28 . 
\par      G. Bentham,  \i Flora australiensis.\plain\fs28   London. 1863-1878. (\b 1\plain\fs28  in 1863;\b  2\plain\fs28  in 1864; \b 3\plain\fs28  in 1867; \b 4\plain\fs28  in 1868;\b  5\plain\fs28  in 1870; \b 6\plain\fs28  in 1873; \b 7\plain\fs28  in 1878. Cf. H. W. Rickett & F. A. Stafleu,  \i Taxon\plain\fs28   \b 10\plain\fs28 : 74 (1961).) 
\par \b Bentham\plain\fs28 ,\i\b  Lab. Gen. Sp\plain\fs28 .
\par      G. Bentham, \i Labiatarum Genera et Species\plain\fs28 . London. 1832-1836. (Pp. 1-60 in 1832, pp. 61-322 in 1833; pp. 323-644 in 1834; pp. 645-783, i-lxviii in 1835; Preface in 1836. Cf. F.A. Stafleu, \i Taxonomic Literature\plain\fs28  26-27 (1967).)
\par \pard \b Bentham & Hooker fil.\plain\fs28 ,\i\b  Gen. Pl.\plain\fs28 
\par     G. Bentham & J.D. Hooker, \i Genera Plantarum\plain\fs28 . Londini. 1862-1883. (\b 1\plain\fs28 : pp. 1-454, i-xii in 1862; pp. 433-735 in 1865; pp. 721-1040, i-xv in 1867; \b 2\plain\fs28 : pp. 1-554 in 1873; pp. 533-1279, i-viii in 1876;\b  3\plain\fs28 : pp. 1-459, i-vii in 1880; pp. 447-1258 in 1883. Cf. F.A. Stafleu, \i Taxonomic Literature\plain\fs28  28 (1967).)
\par \b Berchtold & Opiz\plain\fs28 , \i\b \'d6kon.-Techn. Fl. B\'f6hm\plain\fs28 . 
\par      F. von Berchtold & P.M. Opiz,  \i \'d6konomisch-technische Flora B\'f6hmens\plain\fs28 .  Prag. 1836-1843. (\b 1\plain\fs28  in 1836; \b 2\plain\fs28 (\b 1\plain\fs28 ) in 1838; \b 2\plain\fs28 (\b 2\plain\fs28 ) in 1839; \b 3\plain\fs28 (\b 1\plain\fs28 ) in 1841; \b 3\plain\fs28 (\b 2\plain\fs28 ) in 1843.) \b 1\plain\fs28  by F. von Berchtold   &W.B.Seidl. 
\par \pard \b Berchtold & J. Presl\plain\fs28 , \i\b Rostlinar\plain\fs28  
\par      F. von Berchtold & J.S. Presl,  \i O prirozenosti Rostlin aneb Rostlinar\plain\fs28 . Praze. 1823-1835. (\b 1\plain\fs28  in 1823; \b 2\plain\fs28  in 1825; \b 3\plain\fs28  in 1830-1835.) 
\par \b Bergeret\plain\fs28 , \i\b J.P., Phytonomat.\plain\fs28 
\par     J.P. Bergeret,\i  Phytonomatotechnie universelle.\plain\fs28  Paris. 1783-1786. (\b 1\plain\fs28  in 1783;\b  2\plain\fs28  in 1784-1786; \b 3\plain\fs28  in 1786?.)
\par \b Berggren, Jakob\plain\fs28 , \i\b  Res. Eur. \'d6sterl\'e4nd\plain\fs28 . 
\par       Jakob Berggren, \i Resor i Europa och \'d6sterl\'e4nderne\plain\fs28   (containing \i  V\'e4xter i \'d6sterl\'e4nderne samlade af J. Berggren; och nogere   Best\'e4mda af G\'f6ran Wahlenberg\plain\fs28 ).  Stockholm. 1826-1828. (\b 1\plain\fs28  in 1826;\b  2\plain\fs28  in 1827;\b  3\plain\fs28  in 1828.) 
\par \pard \b Bergius\plain\fs28 ,\i\b  Descr. Pl. Cap. Bonae Spei\plain\fs28 
\par     P.J. Bergius, \i Descriptiones Plantarum ex Capite Bonae Spei\plain\fs28 . Stockholmiae. 1767.
\par \b  Bernh\plain\fs28 ., \i\b Syst. Verz. Erfurt\plain\fs28 
\par     J.J. Bernhardi,\i  Systematisches Verzeichniss der Pflanzen, welche in der Gegend um Erfurt gefunden werden\plain\fs28 . Erfurt. 1800.
\par \b Bertol\plain\fs28 .,\i\b  Amoen\plain\fs28 .
\par    A. Bertoloni,\i  Amoenitates italicae, sistentes Opuscula ad Rem herbariam et Zoologiam Italiae spectantia\plain\fs28 . Bononiae. 1819.
\par \pard \b Bertol\plain\fs28 .,\i\b  Elench. Pl. Hort. Bot. Bon\plain\fs28 .
\par     A. Bertoloni, \i Elenchus Plantarum vivarum quas cum aliis vivis Plantis commutandas exhibet Hortus botanicus Archigymnasii bononiensis Anno MDCCCXX\plain\fs28 . Bononiae. 1820.
\par \b  Bertol\plain\fs28 ., \i\b Fl. Ital\plain\fs28 .
\par    A. Bertoloni,\i  Flora italica, sistens Plantas in Italia et Insulis circumstantibus sponte nascentes\plain\fs28 . Bononiae. 1833-1854. (\b 1-10\plain\fs28 : for dates cf. F. A. Stafleu & R.S. Cowan,\i  Taxonomic Literature\plain\fs28  ed. 2, \b 1\plain\fs28 : 204 (1976).)
\par \pard \b Bertol.\plain\fs28 , \i\b Hort. Bot. Bon.\plain\fs28  
\par      A. Bertoloni,\i  Horti botanici bononiensis Plantae novae vel minus cognitae\plain\fs28 .  Bononiae. 1838-1839. (\b 1\plain\fs28  in 1838;\b  2\plain\fs28  in 1839.) 
\par \b  Bertol\plain\fs28 .,\i\b  Misc. Bot\plain\fs28 .
\par     A. Bertoloni, \i Miscellanea botanica\plain\fs28 . Bononiae. 1842-1863. (\b 1-24\plain\fs28  in 1842-1863; for dates cf. F.A. Stafleu & R.S. Cowan, \i Taxonomic Literature\plain\fs28  ed. 2, \b 1\plain\fs28 : 205-206 (1976).)
\par \b Bertol.\plain\fs28 , \i\b Rar. Lig. Pl\plain\fs28 . 
\par      A. Bertoloni, \i Rariorum Liguriae Plantarum Decas\plain\fs28  1 [2, 3]. Genuae, Pisis. 1803-1810. (\b 1\plain\fs28 , Genuae in 1803; \b 2\plain\fs28 , Pisis in 1806; \b 3\plain\fs28 , Pisis in 1810. \b 2 & 3\plain\fs28  titled  \i Rariorum Italiae Plantarum....\plain\fs28 ) 
\par \pard Bertol., Virid. Bon.
\par      A. Bertoloni, Viridarii bononiensis Vegetabilia cum aliis Vegetabilibus commutanda ad Annum 1824. Bononiae. 1824.
\par \b Bertram\plain\fs28 , \i\b Fl. Braunschw\plain\fs28 . 
\par      F.W.W. Bertram,\i  Flora von Braunschweig.\plain\fs28   Ed. 1. Braunschweig. 1876. Ed. 2. Braunschweig. 1881. 
\par \b Besser\plain\fs28 , \i\b Cat. Pl. Horto Cremen.\plain\fs28  
\par   W.S.J.G. von Besser, \i Catalogus Plantarum in Horto botanico Gymnasii volhyniensis Cremeneci cultarum\plain\fs28 .  Cremeneci. 1816. 
\par \b Besser\plain\fs28 ,\i\b  Cat. Pl. Jard. Krzemien\plain\fs28 . 
\par \pard   W.S.J.G. von Besser, \i Catalogue des Plantes du Jardin botanique du Gymnase de Volhynie a Krzemieniec\plain\fs28 .  Ed. 1.   Krzemieniec. 1810. Ed. 2. Krzemieniec. 1811. \b Suppl.\plain\fs28 ,  \i Suppl\'e9ment \plain\fs28 1. Krzemieniec. 1812.\i  Suppl\'e9ment \plain\fs28  2. Krzemieniec. 1813. \i Suppl\'e9ment\plain\fs28  3. Krzemieniec. 1814. \i Suppl\'e9ment\plain\fs28  4. Krzemieniec. 1815. 
\par \b Besser\plain\fs28 ,\i\b  Enum. Horto Cremen\plain\fs28 .
\par     W.S.J.G. von Besser,\i  Enumeratio Plantarum in Horto botanico cremeneci\plain\fs28 . Krzemieniec. 1816, 1819-1821, 1823 & 1830. (Preceded by W.S.J.G. von Besser, \i Catalogus des Plantes du Jardin botanique de Krzemieniec en Volhynie\plain\fs28 , 1810; \i Catalogus...du Gymnase de Volhynie \'e0 Krzemieniec\plain\fs28  in 1811, with \i Suppl\plain\fs28 .\b  1\plain\fs28  in 1812, \i Suppl\plain\fs28 . \b 2\plain\fs28  in 1814, \i Suppl\plain\fs28 . \b 3\plain\fs28  in 1814, \i Suppl\plain\fs28 . \b 4\plain\fs28  in 1815; \i Catalogus Plantarum in Horto botanico Gymnasii volhyniensis Cremeneci cultarum\plain\fs28  in 1814;\i  Catalogus Plantarum in Horto botanico volhyniensis Cremeneci cultarum\plain\fs28  in 1815; and \i Catalogus Plantarum in Horto botanico Gymnasii volhyniensis Cremeneci cultarum\plain\fs28  in 1816.)
\par \pard \b Besser\plain\fs28 , \i\b Ennm. Pl. Volhyn\plain\fs28 . 
\par   W.S.J.G. von Besser,\i  Enumeratio Plantarum hucusque in Volhynia, Podolia, Gub. kiioviensi, Bessarabia cis-tyraica et circa Odessam collectarum, simul cum Observationibus in Primitias Florae Galiciae austriacae\plain\fs28 . Vilnae. 1822. (Definitive ed.; a preliminary issue, comprising pp. 1-79 only, was published in 1821. The text of this is identical to pp. 1-79 of the 1822 edition. Cf. F.A. Stafleu & R.S. Cowan, \i Taxonomic Literature\plain\fs28  ed. 2, \b 1\plain\fs28 : 209 (1976).)
\par \pard \b Besser\plain\fs28 , \i\b Prim. Fl. Galic\plain\fs28 . 
\par    W.S.J.G. von Besser,\i  Primitiae Florae Galiciae austriacae utriusque\plain\fs28 . Viennae. 1809. (\b 1\plain\fs28  & \b 2\plain\fs28  in 1809.) 
\par \b Betcke\plain\fs28 , \i\b Animadv. Bot. Valer\plain\fs28 .
\par    E.F. Betcke, \i Animadversiones botanicae in Valerianellas\plain\fs28 . Rostochii. 1826.
\par \b  Biasol\plain\fs28 .,\i\b  Relaz. Viaggio\plain\fs28 
\par      B. Biasoletto, \i Relazione del Viaggio fatto nella Primavera dell' Anno 1838 dalla Maestia del Re Federico Augusto di Sassonia, nell' Istria, Dalmazia e Montenegro\plain\fs28 . Trieste. 1841.
\par \pard \b Bicknell, C.\plain\fs28 ,\i\b  Fl. Bordighera\plain\fs28 
\par     C. Bicknell,\i  Flora of Bordighera and San Remo\plain\fs28 . Bordighera. 1896.
\par \b  Bieb\plain\fs28 ., \i\b Beschr. L\'e4nd. Terek Casp\plain\fs28 .
\par     F.A. Marschall von Bieberstein, \i Beschreibung der L\'e4nder zwischen den Fl\'fcssen Terek und Kur am caspichen Meere. Mit einem botanischen Anhang\plain\fs28 . Frankfurt. 1800.
\par \b Bieb.\plain\fs28 , \i\b Cent. Pl.\plain\fs28  
\par      F.A. Marschall von Bieberstein, \i Centuria Plantarum rariorum Rossiae meridionalis, praesertim Tauriae et Caucasi, Iconibus   Descriptionibusque illustrata\plain\fs28 . Charkoviae & Petropoli. 1810-1843. (\b 1\plain\fs28 , Charkoviae in 1810; \b 2\plain\fs28 , Petropoli in 1832-1843.)
\par \pard \b Bieb\plain\fs28 .,\i\b  Fl. Taur.-Cauc\plain\fs28 .
\par     F.A. Marschall von Bieberstein,\i  Flora taurico-caucasica, exhibens Stirpes phaerogamas in Chersonenso taurica et Regionibus caucasicis sponte crescentes.\plain\fs28  Charkoviae. 1808-1819. (\b 1\plain\fs28  & \b 2\plain\fs28  in 1808; \b 3\plain\fs28 ,\i  Supplementum\plain\fs28 , in 1819.)
\par \b Bieb.\plain\fs28 , \i\b Tabl. Prov. Casp\plain\fs28 . 
\par      F.A. Marschall von Bieberstein, \i  Tableau des Provinces situ\'e9es sur la C\'f4te occidentale de la Mer Caspienne entre les Fleuves Terek et Kour\plain\fs28 .  St.-Petersbourg. 1798. 
\par \pard \b  Bigelow\plain\fs28 ,\i\b  Fl. Boston\plain\fs28 .
\par      J. Bigelow,\i  Florula bostoniensis. A Collection of Plants of Boston and its Environs\plain\fs28 . Boston. 1814. Ed. 2 (titled \i Florula ... and its Vicinity\plain\fs28 ). Boston. 1824. Ed. 3 (titled\i  Florula...and its Vicinity\plain\fs28 ). Boston. 1840.
\par \b  Billot\plain\fs28 ,\i\b  Annot\plain\fs28 .
\par     P.C. Billot, \i Annotations \'e0 la Flore de France et d'Allemagne\plain\fs28 . Haguenau. 1855-1862. (Pp. 1-38 in 1855; pp. 39-100 in 1856; pp. 101-116 in 1857 ; pp. 117-140 in 1858; pp. 141-210 in 1859; pp. 211-297 in 1862. Cf. F.A. Stafleu & R.S. Cowan,\i  Taxonomic Literature\plain\fs28  ed. 2, \b 1\plain\fs28 : 215-216 (1976).)
\par \pard \b Biria\plain\fs28 ,\i\b  Hist. Renonc\plain\fs28 .
\par     J.A.J. Biria,\i  Histoire naturelle et m\'e9dicale des Renoncules, pr\'e9c\'e9d\'e9e de quelques Observations sur la Famille des Renonculac\'e9es\plain\fs28 . Montpellier. 1811.
\par \b Bischoff\plain\fs28 ,\i\b  Beitr. Fl. Deutschl\plain\fs28 .
\par      G.W. Bischoff, \i Beitr\'e4ge zur Flora Deutschlands und der Schweiz\plain\fs28 . Heidelberg. 1851.
\par \b  Biv\plain\fs28 .,\i\b  Sic. Pl. Cent.\plain\fs28 
\par     A. de Bivona-Bernardi,\i  Sicularum Plantarum Centuria\plain\fs28 . Panormi. 1806-1807/8. (\b 1\plain\fs28  in 1806;\b  2\plain\fs28  in 1807 or early 1808. Cf. F.A. Stafleu & R.S. Cowan, \i Taxonomic Literature\plain\fs28  ed. 2, \b 1\plain\fs28 : 223 (1976).)
\par \pard \b  Biv\plain\fs28 ., \i\b Stirp. Rar. Sic. Descr\plain\fs28 .
\par     A. de Bivona-Bernardi,\i  Stirpium rariorum minusque cognitarum in Sicilia sponte provenientium Descriptiones nonnullis Iconibus auctae\plain\fs28 . Panormi. 1813-1816. (\b 1\plain\fs28  in 1813; \b 2\plain\fs28  in 1814;\b  3\plain\fs28  in 1815; \b 4\plain\fs28  in 1818. Cf. F.A. Stafleu & R.S. Cowan, \i Taxonomic Literature\plain\fs28  ed. 2, \b 1\plain\fs28 : 223 (1976).)
\par \b Biv. fil\plain\fs28 ., \i\b Nuove Piante Ined\plain\fs28 .
\par     A. Bivona-Bernardi fil., \i Nuove Piante inedite\plain\fs28 . Palermo. 1838.
\par \pard \b Bluff & Fingerh\plain\fs28 .,\i\b  Comp. Fl. Germ.\plain\fs28 
\par    M. J. Bluff & K.A. Fingerhuth, \i Compendium Florae Germaniae.\plain\fs28  Norimbergae. 1825-1833. (\b 1\plain\fs28  in 1825 ; \b 2\plain\fs28  in 1825 or more probably 1826; \b 3\plain\fs28  by K.F.W. Wallroth in 1831 ;\b  4\plain\fs28  by K.F.W. Wallroth in 1833.) Ed. 2, by M.J. Bluff,  C.G.D. Nees von Esenbeck & J.K. Schauer. Norimbergae. 1836-1839. (\b 1\plain\fs28 (\b 1\plain\fs28 ) in 1836; \b 1\plain\fs28 (\b 2\plain\fs28 ) in 1837 ; \b 2\plain\fs28  in 1838 ; index in 1839.) (Cf. F. A. Stafleu & R. S. Cowan, \i Taxonomic Literature\plain\fs28  ed. 2, \b 1\plain\fs28 : 233-234 (1976).)
\par \pard \b Blume\plain\fs28 ,\i\b  Rumphia\plain\fs28 
\par      C.L. von Blume,\i  Rumphia, sive Commentationes botanicae imprimis de Plantis Indiae orientalis\plain\fs28 . Lugduni-Batavorum. 1836-1849. (\b 1\plain\fs28 : pp. 1-124, tt. 1-52 in 1836; pp. 125-204, tt. 53-85 in 1837. \b 2\plain\fs28 : pp. 1-92, tt. 86-? in 1838-1839; pp. 93-176, tt. ?-137 in 1843; \b 3\plain\fs28  & \b 4\plain\fs28  in 1849. Cf. F.A. Stafleu & R.S. Cowan, \i Taxonomic Literature\plain\fs28  ed. 2, \b 1\plain\fs28 : 238 (1976).)
\par \b Blytt\plain\fs28 , \i\b Norg. Fl\plain\fs28 .
\par      M.N. Blytt, \i Norges Flora\plain\fs28 . Christiania. 1861-1876. (\b 1\plain\fs28  in 1861; \b 2\plain\fs28  in 1874; \b 3\plain\fs28  in 1876.) \b 2\plain\fs28  & \b 3\plain\fs28  completed by A. Blytt.
\par \pard \b Bobrov & Czerep., or Bobrov & Tzvelev\plain\fs28 , \i\b Fl. URSS\plain\fs28 
\par     Cf. Komarov,\i  Fl. URSS\plain\fs28 .
\par \b B\'f6cher, Holmen & Jakobsen\plain\fs28 , \i\b Gr\'f8nlands Fl.\plain\fs28 
\par    T.W. B\'f6cher, K. Holmen & K. Jakobsen,\i  Gr\'f8nlands Flora.\plain\fs28 K\'f8benhavn. 1957.
\par \b Bodard\plain\fs28 , \i\b Mem. Ver. Cymb\plain\fs28 
\par      P.H.H. Bodard, \i Memoire sur la Veronique cymbalaire\plain\fs28 . Pise. 1798.
\par \b Boenn.\plain\fs28 , \i\b Prodr. Fl. Monast.\plain\fs28  
\par      C.M.F. von Boenninghausen,\i  Prodromus Florae monasteriensis Westphalorum\plain\fs28 .  Monasterii. 1824. 
\par \pard \b Boiss.\plain\fs28 , \b Cent. Euphorb\plain\fs28 . 
\par      P.E. Boissier,\i  Centuria Euphorbiarum\plain\fs28 .  Lipsiae & Parisiis. 1860. 
\par \b Boiss.\plain\fs28 ,\i\b  Diagn. Pl. Or. Nov\plain\fs28 .
\par    P.E. Boissier,\i  Diagnoses Plantarum orientalium novarum\plain\fs28 . Lipsiae & Parisiis. 1843-1859. (Ser. 1, \b 1\plain\fs28 (\b 1-3\plain\fs28 ) in 1843; \b l\plain\fs28  (\b 4-5\plain\fs28 ) in i844;\b  l \plain\fs28 (\b 6-7\plain\fs28 ) in 1846; \b 2\plain\fs28 (\b 8-11\plain\fs28 ) in 1849; \b 2\plain\fs28 (\b 12\plain\fs28 ) in 1853; \b 2\plain\fs28 (\b 13\plain\fs28 ) in 1854; ser. 2, \b 3\plain\fs28 (\b 1\plain\fs28 ) in 1854; \b 3\plain\fs28 (\b 2-3\plain\fs28 ) in 1856;\b  3\plain\fs28 (\b 4\plain\fs28 ) in 1859; \b 3\plain\fs28 (\b 5\plain\fs28 ) in 1856; \b 3\plain\fs28 (\b 6\plain\fs28 ) in 1859. Cf. F.A. Stafleu & R.S. Cowan, \i Taxonomic Literature\plain\fs28  ed. 2, \b 1\plain\fs28 : 258 (1976).)
\par \pard \b Boiss.\plain\fs28 , \i\b Elenchus\plain\fs28 
\par    P.E. Boissier, \i Elenchus Plantarum novarum minusque cognitarum, quas in Itinere hispanico legit.\plain\fs28  Genevae. 1838 (before Webb,\i  Iter. Hisp\plain\fs28 .).
\par \b Boiss\plain\fs28 .,\i\b  Fl. Or.\plain\fs28 
\par    P.E. Boissier, \i Flora orientalis\plain\fs28 . Basileae, Genevae & Lugduni. 1867-1884. (\b 1\plain\fs28 , Basileae & Genevae; \b 2-5\plain\fs28 , Basileae, Genevae & Lugduni. \b 1\plain\fs28  in 1867 ; \b 2\plain\fs28  in 1872; \b 3\plain\fs28  in 1875; \b 4\plain\fs28 : pp. 1-280 in 1875; pp. 281-1276 in 1879; \b 5\plain\fs28 : pp. 1-428 in 1882; pp. 429-868 in 1884.)\i\b  Suppl\plain\fs28 .,\i  Supplementum\plain\fs28 , by R. Buser. Basileae, Genevae & Lugduni. 1888.
\par \pard \b Boiss.\plain\fs28 ,\i\b  Pl. Atticae Heldr\plain\fs28 .
\par      P.E. Boissier,\i  Plantae atticae Heldreichianae\plain\fs28 . [\i Exsiccata\plain\fs28 .] 1844-1846.
\par \b Boiss\plain\fs28 ., \i\b Pl. Or. Nov\plain\fs28 .
\par      P.E. Boissier, \i Plantarum orientalium novarum Decas prima [secunda]\plain\fs28 . Genevae. 1875. (\b 1\plain\fs28  & \b 2\plain\fs28  in 1875.)
\par \b Boiss.\plain\fs28 , \i\b Voy. Bot. Midi Esp\plain\fs28 .
\par    P.E. Boissier, \i Voyage botanique dans le Midi de l'Espagne pendant l' Ann\'e9e 1837\plain\fs28 . Paris. 1839-1845. (\b 1\plain\fs28 : pp. 1 -40, tt. 1-135 in 1839; pp. 41-96, tt. 136-181 in 1840; pp. 97-248, i-x, t. 4a in 1845;\b  2\plain\fs28 : pp. 1-96 in 1839; pp. 97-352 in 1840; pp. 352-544 in 1841 ; pp. 545-640 in 1842; pp. 641-710 in 1844; pp. 711-757 in 1845. Cf. F.A. Stafleu & R.S. Cowan, \i Taxonomic Literature\plain\fs28  ed. 2, \b 1\plain\fs28 : 256-257 (1976).) All new species are described in\b  2\plain\fs28 .
\par \pard \b Boiss. & Reuter\plain\fs28 , \i\b Cat. Graines Jard. Bot. Gen\'e8ve\plain\fs28 
\par      P.E. Boissier & G.F. Reuter, \i Catalogue des Graines recueillies en 1856 et offertes en \'c9change par le Jardin botanique de Gen\'e8ve\plain\fs28 . Gen\'e8ve. 1857.
\par \b Boiss. & Reuter\plain\fs28 , \i\b Diagn. Pl. Nov. Hisp\plain\fs28 .
\par    P.E. Boissier & G.F. Reuter,\i  Diagnoses Plantarum novarum hispanicarum, praesertim in Castella nova lectarum\plain\fs28 . Genevae. 1842.
\par \b Boiss. & Reuter\plain\fs28 ,\i\b  Pugillus\plain\fs28 
\par    P.E. Boissier & G.F. Reuter,\i  Pugillus Plantarum novarum Africae borealis Hispaniaeque australis\plain\fs28 . Genevae. 1852.
\par \pard \b Bol\'f3s, A.\plain\fs28 , \i\b Veg. Com. Barcelon\plain\fs28 .
\par      A. de Bolos, \i Vegetaci\'f3n de las Comarcas barcelonesas\plain\fs28 . Barcelona. 1950.
\par \b Bol\'f3s, O. & Vigo\plain\fs28 ,\i\b  Fl. Pa\'efsos Catal.\plain\fs28 
\par    O. de Bol\'f3s & J. Vigo,\i  Flora dels Pa\'efsos Catalans\plain\fs28 . Barcelona. 1984 \'98\'93. (\b 1\plain\fs28  in 1984; \b 2\plain\fs28  in 1990.)
\par \b Bong. & C.A. Meyer\plain\fs28 , \i\b Verz. Saisang-Nor\plain\fs28 
\par    A.G.H. von Bongard & C.A. von Meyer,\i  Verzeichniss der im Jahre 1838 am Saisang-nor und am Irtysch gesammelten Pflanzen. Ein zweites Supplement zur Flora altaica\plain\fs28 . St. Petersburg. 1841.
\par \pard \b Bonnet & Barratte\plain\fs28 ,\i\b  Cat. Rais. Pl. Vasc. Tunisie\plain\fs28 
\par     E. Bonnet & J.F.G. Barratte, \i Catalogue raisonn\'e9 des Plantes vasculaires de la Tunisie\plain\fs28 . Paris. 1896.
\par \b Bonnier\plain\fs28 , \i\b  Fl. Compl. Fr\plain\fs28 . 
\par      G.E.M. Bonnier, \i Flore complete illustr\'e9e en Couleurs de France, Suisse et Belgique, comprenant la Plupart des Plantes d'Europe.\plain\fs28   Paris, Neuch\'e2tel & Bruxelles. 1911-1935. (\b 1-8\plain\fs28   Paris, Neuch\'e2tel & Bruxelles; \b 9\plain\fs28  Paris & Bruxelles; \b 10-13\plain\fs28  Paris. For dates cf. F.A. Stafleu & R.S. Cowan, \i Taxonomic Literature\plain\fs28  ed. 2 ,\b  l\plain\fs28  : 273(1976).) \b 7-13\plain\fs28  partly by R.C.V. Douin.
\par \pard \b Bonnet\plain\fs28 , \i\b Petite Fl. Paris\plain\fs28 .
\par      E. Bonnet, \i Petite Flore parisienne\plain\fs28 . Paris. 1883.
\par \b Bonnier & Layens\plain\fs28 , \i\b Fl. Fr\plain\fs28 . 
\par      G.E.M. Bonnier & G. de Layens, \i Tableaux synoptiques des Plantes vasculaires de la Flore de la France\plain\fs28 . (La V\'e9g\'e9tation de la France, \b 1\plain\fs28 .)  Paris. 1894. 
\par \b Bonnier & Layens\plain\fs28 , \i\b Tabl. Syn. Pl. Vasc.\plain\fs28 
\par    G.E.M. Bonnier & G. de Layens, \i Tableaux synoptiques des Plantes vasculaires de la Flore de la France\plain\fs28 . (\i La V\'e9g\'e9tation de la France\plain\fs28 ,\b  1\plain\fs28 .)Paris. 1894.
\par \pard \b Bor\plain\fs28 , \i\b Grasses Burma Ceylon India Pakist\plain\fs28 .
\par     N.L. Bor. \i The Grasses of Burma, Ceylon, India and Pakistan\plain\fs28 . Oxford, London, New York & Paris. 1960.
\par \b Borb\'e1s\plain\fs28 , \i\b Abauj-Torna V\'e1rmegye Fl.\plain\fs28  
\par   V. von Borb\'e1s, \i Abauj-Torna V\'e1rmegye Fl\'f3r\'e1ja\plain\fs28   (in  Abauj-Torna V\'e1rmegye Monografi\'e1ja).  1896. 
\par \b Borb\'e1s\plain\fs28 , \i\b Balaton N\'f6v\'e9nyf\'f6ldr\plain\fs28 .
\par    V. von Borb\'e1s,\i  A Balaton Tav\'e1nak \'e9s Partmell\'e9k\'e9nek N\'f6v\'e9nyf\'f6ldrajza \'e9s Ed\'e9nyes N\'f6v\'e9nyzete\plain\fs28 . Budapest. 1900. (Comprising\i  A Balaton tudom\'e1nyos Tanulm\'e1nyoz\'e1s\'e1nak Eredm\'e9nyei\plain\fs28  \b 2\plain\fs28 ;\i  A Balaton Fl\'f3r\'e1ja\plain\b\fs28  2\plain\fs28 .)
\par \pard \b Borb\'e1s\plain\fs28 ,\i\b  Budapest. Korny. N\'f6v\plain\fs28 .
\par    V. von Borb\'e1s, Budapestnek es Kornyekenek Novenyzete. Budapest. 1879.
\par \b Borb\'e1s\plain\fs28 , \i\b Del. Sem., Addit. Revis. Knaut\plain\fs28 .
\par    V. von Borb\'e1s, \i A Kolozs\'e1ri Ferenc J\'f3zsef Tudom\'e1nyegyetem Botanikvskertj\'e9ben, 1904, \'e9vben termesztett \'e9s Cser\'e9re Gyujt\'f6tt Magvak V\'e1laszt\'e9ka\plain\fs28 . /\i  Delectus Seminum in Horto botanico Universitatis Litterarum Francisco-Josephinae, Anno 1904, permutandi Causa collectorum et Hortis botanicis omnibus oblatorum, addita Revisione Knautiarum\plain\fs28 . Kolosvarini. 1905. (For date cf. A. von Degen,\i  Magyar Bot. Lapok\plain\b\fs28  4\plain\fs28 : 234 (1905).)
\par \pard \b Borb\'e1s\plain\fs28 , \i\b Vasv\'e1rm. N\'f6v. Fl\plain\fs28 .
\par     V. von Borb\'e1s, \i Vasv\'e1rmegye N\'f6v\'e9nyf\'f6ldrajza \'e9s Fl\'f3r\'e1ja\plain\fs28 . Szombathely. 1889. (For date cf. A. von Degen, \i Magyar Bot. Lapok\plain\b\fs28  4\plain\fs28 : 210 (1905).)
\par \b Bordzil\plain\fs28 ., or\b  Bordzil. & Lavrenko\plain\fs28 ,\i\b  Fl. RSS Ucr\plain\fs28 .
\par    Cf. Fomin, \i Fl. RSS Ucr.\plain\fs28 
\par \b Boreau\plain\fs28 , \i\b Fl. Centre Fr\plain\fs28 .
\par    A. Boreau, \i Flore du Centre de la France\plain\fs28 . Ed. 1. Paris. 1840. (\b 1\plain\fs28  &\b  2\plain\fs28  in 1840.) Ed. 2. Angers. 1849. (\b 1 & 2\plain\fs28  in 1849.) Ed. 3. Angers. 1857.(\b 1\plain\fs28  &\b  2\plain\fs28  in 1857.) Cf. F.A. Stafleu & R.S. Cowan, \i Taxonomic Literature\plain\fs28  ed. 2, \b 1\plain\fs28 : 279 (1976).
\par \pard \b Boreau\plain\fs28 ,\i\b  Graines Recolt. Jard. Bot. Angers\plain\fs28 
\par      A. Boreau,\i  Graines recolt\'e9es au Jardin botanique de la Ville d 'Angers en 1854\plain\fs28 . Angers. 1855.
\par \b Boreau\plain\fs28 , \i\b Not. Pl. Fr\plain\fs28 .
\par      A. Boreau, \i Notes sur quelques \'c9speces de Plantes fran\'e7aises\plain\fs28 . Angers. 1844-183. (\b 1\plain\fs28  in 1844; \b 2\plain\fs28  in 1846; \b 3\plain\fs28  in 1847; \b 4\plain\fs28  in 1853.) Reprinted, or perhaps preprinted, in \i Bull. Soc. Industr. Angers.\plain\fs28  Cf. F.A. Stafleu & R.S. Cowan, \i Taxonomic Literature\plain\fs28  ed. 2, \b 1\plain\fs28 : 280 (1976).)
\par \pard \b Borkh.\plain\fs28 , \i\b Handb. Forstbot.\plain\fs28  
\par      M.B. Borkhausen,\i  Theoretisch Handbuch der Forstbotanik und Forsttechnologie.\plain\fs28   Giessen & Darmstadt. 1800-1803. (\b 1\plain\fs28 : pp. 1-866 in 1800; \b 2\plain\fs28 (\b 1\plain\fs28 ): pp. 867-2070 in 1803.) 
\par \b Borkh.\plain\fs28 , \i\b Vers. Forstbot. Beschr. Holzart.\plain\fs28  
\par      M.B. Borkhausen, \i Versuch einer forstbotanischen Beschreibung der in den Hessen-Darmstadtschen Landen, besonders in der Obergrafschaft Catzenellenbogen im Freien wachsenden Holzarten\plain\fs28 .  Frankfurt am Main. 1790. 
\par \pard \b B\'f6rner\plain\fs28 ,\i\b  Fl. Deutsche Volk\plain\fs28 
\par      C.J.B. B\'f6rner,\i  Eine Flora f\'fcr das deutsche Volk\plain\fs28 . Leipzig. 1912.
\par \b Bory\plain\fs28 , \i\b Dict. Class. Hist. Nat.\plain\fs28 
\par    J.B.G.M. Bory de Saint-Vincent (edit.), \i Dictionnaire classique d'Histoire Naturelle\plain\fs28 . Paris. 1822-1831. (\b 1\plain\fs28  & \b 2\plain\fs28  in 1822; \b 3\plain\fs28  & \b 4\plain\fs28  in 1823; \b 5\plain\fs28  & \b 6\plain\fs28  in 1824; \b 7-9\plain\fs28  in 1825; \b 10\plain\fs28  in 1826; \b 11\plain\fs28  & \b l2\plain\fs28  in 1827; \b 13\plain\fs28  & \b 14\plain\fs28  in 1828; \b 15\plain\fs28  in 1829; \b 16\plain\fs28  in 1830; \b 17\plain\fs28  in 1831. Cf. F.A. Stafleu & R.S. Cowan, \i Taxonomic Literature\plain\fs28  ed. 2, \b 1\plain\fs28 : 285-286 (1976).)
\par \pard \b Bory\plain\fs28 , \i\b Exp\'e9d. Sci. Mor\'e9e\plain\fs28 
\par    J.B.G.M. Bory de Saint-Vincent, \i Exp\'e9dition scientifique de Mor\'e9e\plain\fs28 . \b 3\plain\fs28 (\b 2\plain\fs28 ), \i Botanique\plain\fs28 . Paris. 1832-1836. (Pp. 1-336 in 1832; pp. 337-367 in 1833;\i  Atlas\plain\fs28  in 1835-1836.)
\par \b Bory\plain\fs28 , \i\b Voy.  Souterrain\plain\fs28  
\par      J.B.G.M. Bory de Saint-Vincent, \i  Voyage souterrain, ou Description du Plateau de Sainte-Pierre de Maestricht et de ses vastes Cryptes...suivi de la Relation de nouveaux Voyages entrepris dans les Montagnes Maudites: par M. Leon Dufour\plain\fs28 . Paris. 1821.
\par \pard \b Bory & Chaub\plain\fs28 ., \i\b Nouv. Fl. P\'e9lop\plain\fs28 .
\par    J.B.G.M. Bory de Saint-Vincent & L.A. Chaubard, \i Nouvelle Flore du P\'e9loponn\'e8se et des Cyclades\plain\fs28 . Paris & Strasbourg. 1838.
\par \b Bory & Durieu\plain\fs28 ,\i\b  Expl. Sci. Alg\'e9r\plain\fs28 . (\i Bot.\plain\fs28 )
\par    J.B.G.M. Bory de Saint-Vincent & M.C. Durieu de Maisonneuve, \i Exploration scientifique de l'Alg\'e9rie pendant les Ann\'e9es 1840, 1841, 1842. Botanique\plain\fs28 . \b 1\plain\fs28 .\i  Cryptogamie, Atlas\plain\fs28 . Paris. 1846-1869. (For dates cf. F.A. Stafleu & R.S. Cowan, \i Taxonomic Literature\plain\fs28  ed. 2, \b 1\plain\fs28 : 711 (1976).)
\par \pard \b Borza\plain\fs28 , \i\b Consp. Fl. Roman.\plain\fs28 
\par    A. Borza, \i Conspectus Florae Romaniae Regionumque affinium\plain\fs28 . Cluj. 1947-1949. (Pp. i-vii, 1-160 in 1947 ; pp. 161-360 in 1949.)
\par \b Boulay\plain\fs28 , \i\b Ronces Vosg\plain\fs28 . 
\par      N.J. Boulay, \i Ronces vosgiennes, Description des Esp\'e8ces\plain\fs28 . Rambervillers. 1864-1866. Saint-Di\'e9. 1867-1869. 
\par \b Br., R\plain\fs28 .,\i\b  Prodr. Fl. Nov. Holl.\plain\fs28 
\par    R. Brown, \i Prodromus Florae Novae Hollandiae et Insulae Van Diemen\plain\fs28 . Ed. 1. Londini. 1810. Ed. 2. Londini. 1819. Ed. 3, titled \i Editio secunda\plain\fs28  ... by C.G.D. Nees von Esenbeck. Norimbergae. 1827.
\par \pard \b Brandza\plain\fs28 , \i\b Prod. Fl. Rom\'e2ne\plain\fs28  
\par      D. Brandza, \i Prodromul Florei rom\'e2ne\plain\fs28 .  Bucuresci. 1879-1883.   (Pp. vii-lxx, 1-128 in 1879 or 1880; pp. i-vi, lxxi-lxxxiv, 129-568 in 1883. Cf. W.T. Stearn,  \i Jour. Bot.\plain\fs28  (\i London\plain\fs28 )\b  79\plain\fs28 : 191 (1941).) 
\par \b Braun, A\plain\fs28 .,\i\b  Ind. Sem. Horti Berol.\plain\fs28 
\par    A. Braun, \i Index Seminum Horti botanici berolinensis\plain\fs28 . Berolini. 1859.
\par \b Br.-Bl.\plain\fs28 ,\i\b  Sched. Fl. Raet. Exsicc\plain\fs28 .
\par    J. Braun-Blanquet,\i  Schedae ad Floram raeticam exsiccatam\plain\fs28 . Chur. \b 1-13\plain\fs28 , 1918-1938. (PubIished in \i Jahres-Bericht der Naturforschenden Gesellschaft Graub\'fcndens\plain\fs28 , various issues.)
\par \pard \b Br\'e9b.\plain\fs28 , \i\b Fl. Normand\plain\fs28 .
\par      L.A. de Br\'e9bisson,\i  Flore de la Normandie. Premi\'e8re Partie. Phan\'e9rogamie\plain\fs28 . Ed. 1. Caen & Paris. 1835. Ed. 2. Caen & Paris. 1849. Ed. 3. Caen & Paris. 1859. Ed. 4. Caen & Paris. 1869. Ed. 5. Caen & Paris. 1879. Eds 3-5 titled \i Flore de la Normandie\plain\fs28  (\i Phan\'e8rogames et Cryptogames semivasculaires\plain\fs28 ).
\par \b Brewer, S. Watson & A. Gray\plain\fs28 , \i\b Bot. Calif\plain\fs28 .
\par     W.H. Brewer, S. Watson & A. Gray, \i Botany of California\plain\fs28 . Cambridge, Mass. 1876-1880. (\b 1\plain\fs28  in 1876;\b  2\plain\fs28  in 1880.)
\par \pard \b Briganti\plain\fs28 , \i\b Nova Pimp. Spec. Diss\plain\fs28 . 
\par     V. Briganti, \i De nova Pimpinellae Specie cui Nomen anisoides Dissertatio\plain\fs28 . Neapoli. 1805\b Briq.\plain\fs28 , \i\b Cytises Alp. Marit\plain\fs28 . 
\par      J.I. Briquet, \i \'c9tudes sur les Cytises des Alpes maritimes\plain\fs28 . Gen\'e8ve & B\'e2le. 1894. 
\par \b Briq\plain\fs28 ., \i\b Lab. Alp. Murit.\plain\fs28 
\par     J.I. Briquet,\i  Les Labi\'e9es des Alpes maritimes\plain\fs28 . Gen\'e8ve & B\'e2le. 1891-1895. (Pp. 1-184 in 1891; pp. [185]-408 in 1893; pp. [409]-587 in 1895.)
\par \pard \b Briq.\plain\fs28 , \i\b Prodr. Fl. Corse\plain\fs28  
\par     J.I. Briquet, \i Prodrome de la Flore corse\plain\fs28 .  Gen\'e8ve, B\'e2le, Lyon & Paris. 1910-1955. (\b 1\plain\fs28 , Gen\'e8ve, B\'e2le & Lyon in 1910 ; \b 2\plain\fs28 (\b 1\plain\fs28 ), Gen\'e8ve, B\'e2le & Lyon in 1913; \b 2\plain\fs28 (\b 2\plain\fs28 ), Paris in 1936; \b 3\plain\fs28 (\b 1\plain\fs28 ), Paris in 1938; \b 3\plain\fs28 (\b 2\plain\fs28 ), Paris in 1955.)  \b 2\plain\fs28 (\b 2\plain\fs28 ) & \b 3\plain\fs28 (\b 1\plain\fs28  & \b 2\plain\fs28 ) by R.V. de Litardi\'e8re. 
\par \b Brittinger\plain\fs28 , \i\b Fl. Ober-\'d6sterr\plain\fs28 .
\par     C.C. Brittinger, \i Flora von Ober-\'d6sterreich.\plain\fs28  Wien. 1862.
\par \pard \b Britton & A. Br.\plain\fs28 ,\i\b  Ill. Fl. U.S. Canad\plain\fs28 .
\par      N.L. Britton & A. Brown, \i An illustrated Flora of the northern United States, Canada and the British Possessions, from Newfoundland to the southern Boundary of Virginia, and from the Atlantic Ocean westward to the 102d Meridian\plain\fs28 . Ed. 1. New York. 1896-1898. (\b 1\plain\fs28  in 1896;\b  2\plain\fs28  in 1897; \b 3\plain\fs28  in 1898.) Ed. 2. New York. 1913. (\b 1-3\plain\fs28  in 1913.) Ed. 3, titled\i  The new Britton and Brown Illustrated Flora of the northeastern United States and adjacent Canada, by H. A. Gleason\plain\fs28 . New York. 1952. (\b 1-3\plain\fs28  in 1952.)
\par \pard \b Britton, E.E. Sterns & Poggenb.\plain\fs28 , \i\b Prelim. Cat\plain\fs28 . 
\par      \i Preliminary Catalogue of Anthophyta and Pteridophyta reported as growing spontaneously within one hundred Miles of New York City. Compiled by [a] Committee of the Torrey Botanical Club. The Nomenclature revised and corrected by N. L. Britton,   E. E. Sterns and Justus F. Poggenburg\plain\fs28 . New York. 1888. 
\par \b Brot.\plain\fs28 , \i\b Fl. Lusit\plain\fs28 . 
\par      F. Avellar Brotero, \i Flora lusitanica\plain\fs28 . Olisipone. 1804. (\b 1\plain\fs28  & \b 2\plain\fs28   in 1804.) 
\par \pard \b Brot.\plain\fs28 , \i\b Phyt. Lusit\plain\fs28 . 
\par      F. Avellar Brotero,  \i Phytographia Lusitaniae selectior\plain\fs28 . Ed. 1. Olisipone. 1800. Ed. 2. Olisipone. 1801. Ed. 3. Olisipone.1816-1827. (\b 1\plain\fs28  in 1816; \b 2\plain\fs28  in 1827.) 
\par \b Brunerye\plain\fs28 ,\i\b  Les S\'e9ne\'e7ons\plain\fs28 
\par     L. J. L. Brunerye,\i  Les S\'e9ne\'e7ons du Groupe\plain\fs28  helenitis. Paris. 1969.
\par \b Bubani\plain\fs28 ,\i\b  Dodecanthea\plain\fs28 
\par      P. Bubani, \i Dodecanthea\plain\fs28 . Florentiae. 1850.
\par \b Buch\plain\fs28 , \i\b Phys. Beschr. Canar\plain\fs28 .
\par \pard     C. L. von Buch,\i  Physicalische Beschreibung der canarischen Inseln\plain\fs28 . Berlin. 1825.
\par \b Bufron\plain\fs28 , \i\b Hist. Nat. Pl.\plain\fs28 
\par    G.L.L. de Buffon,\i  Histoire naturelle ... nouvelle \'c9dition ... Ouvrage ... r\'e9dig\'e9 par C.S. Sonnini. Histoire naturelle, g\'e9n\'e9rale et particuli\'e9re des Plantes; par C.F. Brisseau-Mirbel, ... continu\'e9 par N. Jolyclerc\plain\fs28 . Paris. 1806.
\par \b Bunge\plain\fs28 , \i\b Astrag. Geront.\plain\fs28  
\par      A.A. von Bunge,  \i Generis Astragali Species gerontogeae. \plain\fs28 St.-Petersbourg. 1868. 
\par \pard \b Bunge\plain\fs28 ,\i\b  Beitr. Kenntn. Fl. Russl\plain\fs28 .
\par     A.A. von Bunge,\i  Beitrag zur Kenntniss der Flor Russlands und der Steppen Central-Asiens\plain\fs28 . [St. Petersburg.] 1852. (For date cf. F.A. Stafleu, \i Taxonomic Literature\plain\fs28  68 (1967).)
\par \b Bunge\plain\fs28 , \i\b Del. Sem. Horti Dorpat.\plain\fs28 
\par    A.A. von Bunge, \i Delectus Seminum e Collectione Anni 1836 quae Hortus botanicus dorpatensis ...offert\plain\fs28 . Dorpati Livonorum. 1836; titled \i Delectus Seminum e Collectione Anno ...quae Hortus botanicus dorpatensis pro mutua Commutatione offert,\plain\fs28  1839 & 1840; titled \i Delectus Seminum quae Anno ... in Horto botanico Universitatis Caesareae dorpatensis collecta pro mutua Commutatione offeruntur\plain\fs28 , 1841 & 1842; titled \i Delectus Seminum e Collectione Anni 1845 quae Hortus botanicus dorpatensis pro mutua Commutatione offert,\plain\fs28  1845; titled \i Delectus Seminum Horti botanici dorpatensis\plain\fs28 , 1846 & 1850. (Cf. Lipschitz,\i  Botanicorum russicorum Lexicon biographo-bibliographicum\plain\b\fs28  1\plain\fs28 : 302 (1947) and \i Author Catalogue of the Royal Botanic Gardens Library, Kew\plain\b\fs28  1\plain\fs28 : 420 (1974).) Descriptions of new species from some issues reprinted by Bunge in \i Linnaea\plain\b\fs28  14\plain\fs28 :\i  Litt.-Ber.\plain\fs28  116-122 (1840); \i op. cit\plain\fs28 . \b 15\plain\fs28 :\i  Litt.-Ber\plain\fs28 . 85-90 (1841); \i op. cit\plain\fs28 . \b 16\plain\fs28 : \i Litt.-Ber\plain\fs28 . 98-102 (1842); \i Bot.Zeit.\plain\b\fs28  1\plain\fs28 : 165-168 (1843);\i  Ann.Sci. Nat.\plain\fs28  ser. 3 (\i Bot.\plain\fs28 ) \b 5\plain\fs28 : 367-370 (1846); \i op. cit\plain\fs28 . \b 7\plain\fs28 :190-191 (1847);\i  Linnaea\plain\b\fs28  19\plain\fs28 : 394-397 (1847); \i Ann. Sci. Nat.\plain\fs28  ser. 3 (\i Bot\plain\fs28 .), \b 12\plain\fs28 : 363-364 (1849); \i op. cit\plain\fs28 . \b 14\plain\fs28 : 350 (1850).
\par \pard \b Bunge\plain\fs28 ,\i\b  Enum. Pl. Chin. Bor\plain\fs28 . 
\par      A.A. von Bunge, \i Enumeratio Plantarum quas in China boreali collegit\plain\fs28 . .... Petropoli. 1833. (For date cf. W.T. Stearn,  \i Jour. Bot.\plain\fs28  (\i London\plain\fs28 )\b  79\plain\fs28 : 63 (1941).) 
\par \b Bunge\plain\fs28 , \i\b Tent. Tamaric\plain\fs28 . 
\par      A.A. von Bunge, . . .  \i Tentamen Generis Tamaricum Species accuratius definiendi\plain\fs28 .  Dorpati. 1852. 
\par \b Burgsd.\plain\fs28 , \i\b Anleit. Erzieh. Holzart.\plain\fs28  
\par      F.A.L. von Burgsdorff,  \i Anleitung zur sichern Erziehung und zweckm\'e4ssigen Anpflanzung der einheimischen und fremden   Holzarten, welche in Deutschland und unter \'e4hnlichem Klima im Freyen fortkommen\plain\fs28 . Berlin. Ed. 1. 1787. Ed. 2. Berlin. 1790-1791. (\b 1\plain\fs28  in 1790; \b 2\plain\fs28  in 1791.) Ed. 3. Berlin. 1805. (\b 1\plain\fs28  & \b 2\plain\fs28   in 1805.) 
\par \pard \b Burm. fil.\plain\fs28 , \i\b  Fl. Ind.\plain\fs28  
\par      N.L. Burman, \i Flora indica.\plain\fs28   Lugduni Batavorum & Amstelaedami. 1768. 
\par \b Burm. fil.\plain\fs28 , \i\b Spec. Bot. Geran.\plain\fs28  
\par      N.L. Burman,  \i Specimen botanicum de Geraniis.\plain\fs28  Lugduni Batavorum. 1759. (For date cf. A. Becherer,  \i Feddes Repert.\plain\fs28  \b  25\plain\fs28 : 215 (1928).) 
\par \b Burnat\plain\fs28 ,\i\b  Fl. Alp. Marit.\plain\fs28 
\par    E. Burnat,\i  Flore des Alpes maritimes, ou Catalogue raisonn\'e9e des Plantes qui croissent spontan\'e9ment dans la Cha\'eene des Alpes maritimes, y compris le D\'e9partement fran\'e7ais de ce Nom et une Partie de la Ligurie occidentale\plain\fs28 . Gen\'e8ve, B\'e2le & Lyon. 1892-1931. (\b l-6\plain\fs28 , Gen\'e8ve, B\'e2le & Lyon.\b  7\plain\fs28 , Gen\'e8ve. 1 in 1892;\b  2\plain\fs28  in 1896; \b 3\plain\fs28 : pp. 1-172 in 1899; pp. 173-332 in 1902; \b 4\plain\fs28  in 1906; \b 5\plain\fs28 : pp. 1-96, \i Suppl\'e9ment\plain\fs28 , in 1913; pp. 97-376 in 1915; \b 6\plain\fs28 : pp. 1-170 in 1916; pp. 171-344 in 1917 ; \b 7\plain\fs28  in 1931.)\b  3\plain\fs28 : pp. i-xxxvi by J. Briquet; \b 5\plain\fs28 : pp. 1--96 by F. G. Cavillier;\b  5\plain\fs28 : pp. 97-376, \b 6\plain\fs28  &\b  7\plain\fs28  by J. Briquet & F.G. Cavillier.
\par \pard \b Burnat & Gremli\plain\fs28 ,\i\b  Cat. Hier. Alpes Marit\plain\fs28 .
\par      E. Burnat & A. Gremli,\i  Catalogue raisonn\'e9 des\plain\fs28  Hieracium \i des Alpes maritimes\plain\fs28 . Gen\'e8ve, B\'e2le & Lyon. 1883.
\par \b Buser\plain\fs28 , \i\b Alchim. Valais.\plain\fs28 
\par      R. Buser,  \i Alchimilles valaisannes\plain\fs28 .  Z\'fcrich. 1894. 
\par \b Buser\plain\fs28 , \i\b  Not. Alchim.\plain\fs28  
\par      R. Buser, \i  Notes sur quelques Alchimilles critiques ou nouvelles.\plain\fs28   Grenoble. 1891. 
\par \b Cadevall\plain\fs28 , or \b Cadevall & Font Quer\plain\fs28 , \i\b Fl. Catalunya\plain\fs28 
\par \pard    J. Cadevall y Diars (with collaboration of P. Font i Quer, W. Rothmaler, and A. Salient y Got\'e9s), \i Flora de Catalunya\plain\fs28 . Barcelona. 1913-1937. (\b 1\plain\fs28  in 1913-1915; \b 2\plain\fs28  in 1915-1919; \b 3\plain\fs28 : pp. 1-96 in 1919; pp. 97-192 in  1922; pp. l93-522 in 1923; \b 4\plain\fs28  in 1932; \b 5\plain\fs28  in 1935 (as '1933');\b  6\plain\fs28  in 1937.)
\par \b Cajander\plain\fs28 , \i\b Suomen Kasvio\plain\fs28 
\par    A.K. Cajander, \i A.J. Melan Suomen Kasvio\plain\fs28 . Helsingiss\'e4. 1906. Comprises ed. 5 of A. J. Mela,\i  Suomen Kasvio\plain\fs28 .
\par \pard Camb., Enum. Pl. Balear.
\par J. Cambessedes, Enumeratio Plantarum, quas in Insulis Balearibus collegit, earumque circa Mare mediterraneum Distributio geographica. Parisiis. 1827.
\par \b Campd\plain\fs28 ., \i\b Monogr. Rumex\plain\fs28 
\par    F. Campder\'e1, \i Monographie des\plain\fs28  Rumex,\i  pr\'e9c\'e9d\'e9e de quelques Vues g\'e9n\'e9rales sur la Famille des Polygon\'e9es\plain\fs28 . Paris. 1819.
\par \b Camus\plain\fs28 , \i\b Bambus\plain\fs28 .
\par      E.G. Camus,\i  Les Bambus\'e9es\plain\fs28 . Paris. 1913. There is a separate volume of plates, without title-page.
\par \pard \b Camus\plain\fs28 , \i\b Icon. Orchid. Eur\plain\fs28 .
\par      E.G. Camus, \i Iconographie des Orchid\'e9es d'Europe et du Bassin mediterraneen\plain\fs28 . Paris.1929.
\par \b Camus\plain\fs28 , \i\b Monogr. Orchid. Eur\plain\fs28 .
\par      E.G. Camus,\i  Monographie des Orchid\'e9es de l'Europe, de l'Afrique septentrionale, de l'Asie mineure et des Provinces russes transcaspiennes\plain\fs28 . Paris.1908.
\par \b  Capelli\plain\fs28 , \i\b Cat, Stirp.\plain\fs28 
\par    C.M. Capelli,\i  Catalogus Stirpium quae aluntur in Regio Horto botanico taurinensi\plain\fs28 . Torino. 1821.
\par \pard \b Carri\'e8re\plain\fs28 ,\i\b  Trait\'e9 G\'e9n. Conif\plain\fs28 .
\par     A. Carri\'e8re,\i  Trait\'e9 g\'e9n\'e9ral des Conif\'e8res ou Description de toutes les Esp\'e8ces et Vari\'e9t\'e9 aujourd 'hui connues\plain\fs28 . Paris. 1855. Ed. 2. Paris. 1867.
\par \b Castroviejo et al\plain\fs28 ., \i\b Fl. Iberica\plain\fs28 
\par    S. Castroviejo, M. La\'ednz, G. L\'f3pez Gonz\'e1lez, P. Montserrat, F. Mu\'f1oz Garmendia, J. Paiva & L. Villar (eds.), \i  Flora iberica. Plantas vasculares de la Pen\'ednsula Ib\'e9rica e Islas Baleares\plain\fs28 . Madrid. 1\'98\'93, 1986 \'98\'93. (\b 1\plain\fs28  in 1986; \b 2\plain\fs28  in 1990.)
\par \pard \b Cav\plain\fs28 .,\i\b  Descr. Pl.\plain\fs28 
\par    A.J. Cavanilles,\i  Descripci\'f3n de las Plantas, que D. Antonio Josef Cavanilles demonstr\'f3 en las Lecciones p\'fablicas del A\'f1o 1801, precedida de los Principios elementales de la Botcinica.\plain\fs28  Ed. 1. Madrid. 1802-1803. (Pp. i-cxxxvi in 1802; pp. 1-284, titled \i G\'e9neros y Especies de Plantas demonstradas en las Lecciones p\'fablicas del A\'f1o 1801\plain\fs28 , in 1802 ; pp. 285-625, titled \i ... del A\'f1o 1802\plain\fs28 , in 1802.) Ed. 2. Madrid. 1827.
\par \b Cav.\plain\fs28 , \i\b Elench. Pl. Horti Matrit\plain\fs28 .
\par \pard      A.J. Cavanilles,\i  Elenchus Plantarum Horti regii matritensis. Anno MDCCCIII\plain\fs28 . Matriti. 1803.
\par \b Cav.\plain\fs28 ,  \i\b Icon. Descr.\plain\fs28  
\par      A. J. Cavanilles, \i  Icones et Descriptiones Plantarum, quae aut sponte in Hispania crescunt, aut in Hortis hospitantur\plain\fs28 .  Matriti. 1791-1801.(\b 1\plain\fs28  in 1791; \b 2\plain\fs28  in 1793; \b 3\plain\fs28  in 1795; \b 4\plain\fs28 : pp. 1-36 in 1797;   pp. 37-82 in 1798; \b 5\plain\fs28  in 1799; \b 6\plain\fs28 : pp. l-40 in 1800; pp. 41-97 in 1801.)  Cf. F. A. Stafleu & R. S. Cowan, Taxonomic Literature ed. 2, 1: 473-474 (1976).)
\par \pard \b Cav.\plain\fs28 , \i\b Monad. Class. Diss. Dec.\plain\fs28  
\par      A.J. Cavanilles, \i Monadelphiae Classis Dissertationes decem.\plain\fs28  Matriti. 1785-1790. (Pp. 1-48 in 1785; pp.  49-106 + 4 in app.  in 1786; pp. 107-266 in 1787; pp. 267-354 in 1788; pp. 355- 414 in 1789 ; pp.  415-464 in 1790.) 
\par \b Ceballos & C. Vicioso\plain\fs28 , \i\b  Estud Veg. Fl. Forest. M\'e1laga\plain\fs28  
\par      L. Ceballos & C. Vicioso Martinez,  \i Estudio sobre la Vegetaci\'f3n y Flora forestal de la Provincia de M\'e1laga\plain\fs28 .  Madrid.  1933. 
\par \pard \b Celak\plain\fs28 .,\i\b  Anal. Kvet. Ceska\plain\fs28 
\par      L.J. Celakovsky, \i Analytick\'e1 Kvetena cesk\'e1\plain\fs28 . Ed. 1. Praha. 1879. Ed. 2, titled \i Analytick\'e1 Kvetena Cech, Moravy a rak. Slezska\plain\fs28 . Praha. 1887. Ed. 3, titled \i Analytick\'e1 Kvetena Cech, Moravy a rak. Slezska\plain\fs28 . Praha.1897.
\par \b Celak\plain\fs28 .,\i\b  Prodr. Fl. B\'f6hm.\plain\fs28 
\par    L.J. Celakovsky, \i Prodromus der Flora von B\'f6hmen\plain\fs28 . Prague. 1867-1881. (Published as \i Arch. Naturw. Landesf. B\'f6hm\plain\fs28 . \b 1\plain\fs28 , Bot. Abth.: 1-112 (1867); \b 2\plain\fs28 (\b 2\plain\fs28 ), \i Bot. Abth\plain\fs28 .: 113-388 (1871); \b 3\plain\fs28 , \i Bot. Abth\plain\fs28 .: 389-691 (1875); \b 4\plain\fs28 , \i Bot. Abth\plain\fs28 .: 693-955 (1881).) A Czech version was published 1868-1883. (Cf. F.A. Stafleu & R.S. Cowan, \i Taxonomic Literature\plain\fs28  ed. 2, \b 1\plain\fs28 : 476-477 (1976).)
\par \pard \b Cesati\plain\fs28 , \i\b Icon. Stirp.\plain\fs28  
\par      V. de Cesati, \i Iconographia Stirpium italicarum universa. \plain\fs28  Mediolani.  1840-1843. (\b 1\plain\fs28  in 1840 ;\b  2\plain\fs28   in 1841; \b 3\plain\fs28   in 1843.) 
\par \b Cesati, Passer. & Gibelli\plain\fs28 ,\i\b  Comp. Fl. Ital.\plain\fs28 
\par      V. de Cesati, G. Passerini & G. Gibelli, \i Compendio della Flora italiana\plain\fs28 . Milano. 1868-1889. (Pp. 1-48 in 1868; pp. 49-120 in 1869; pp. 121-168 in 1870; pp. 169-208 & 5 pp. index in 1871 ; pp. 209-256 in 1872; pp. 257-320 in 1874; pp. 321-376 in 1875; pp. 377-393 in 1876 ; pp. 394-416 in 1881 ? ; pp. 417-440 in 1877 ; pp. 441-520 in 1878; pp. 521-560 in 1879; pp. 561-616 in 1880; pp. 617-640 in 1881 ; pp. 641-720 in 1882 ; pp. 721-784 in 1883 ; pp. 785-816 in 1884; pp. 817-888 in 1885; pp. 889-906 in 1886; tt. 100-105 in 1888 ; tt. 106-111 in 1889.\i  Index and Corrigenda\plain\fs28 , by G. Gibelli & O. Mattirolo in 1901. Cf. F.A. Stafleu & R.S. Cowan, \i Taxonomic Literature\plain\fs28  ed. 2, \b 1\plain\fs28 : 479-480 (1976).)
\par \pard \b Cesati\plain\fs28 ,\i\b  Sagg. Geogr. Bot. Fl. Lomb\plain\fs28 .
\par      V. de Cesati,\i  Saggio su la Geografia botanica e su la Flora della Lombardia\plain\fs28 . Milano. 1844.
\par \b Chatel\plain\fs28 .,\i\b  Sp. Inaug. Corall\plain\fs28 
\par      J.J. Chatelain, \i Specimen inaugurale de Corallorhiza\plain\fs28 . Basileae. 1760.
\par \b Chav\plain\fs28 ., \i\b Monogr. Antirrh\plain\fs28 .
\par      E.L. Chavannes, \i Monographie des Antirrhin\'e9es\plain\fs28 . Paris & Lausanne. 1833.
\par \b Chaz\plain\fs28 .,\i\b  Dict. Jard., Suppl\plain\fs28 .
\par     L.M. Chazelles de Prizy.\i  Dictionnaire des Jardiniers. Suppl\'e9ment\plain\fs28 . Paris, Metz. 1790. (\b 1\plain\fs28 , Paris; \b 2\plain\fs28 , Metz.)
\par \pard \b Chevall\plain\fs28 ., \i\b Fl. G\'e9n. Env. Paris\plain\fs28 
\par    F.F. Chevallier,\i  Flore g\'e9n\'e9rale des Environs de Paris\plain\fs28 . Ed. 1. Paris. 1826-1828. (\b 1\plain\fs28  in 1826; \b 2\plain\fs28 (\b 1\plain\fs28 ): pp. 1-512 (or 416?) in 1827 ; \b 2\plain\fs28 (\b 2\plain\fs28 ): pp. 513 (or 417?)-980 in 1828. The division of \b 2\plain\fs28  into parts is uncertain; it may have been published in more than 2 parts. Cf. F. A. Stafleu & R.S. Cowan, \i Taxonomic Literature\plain\fs28  ed. 2, \b 1\plain\fs28 : 494 (1976).) Ed. 2. Paris. (\b 1\plain\fs28  & \b 2\plain\fs28  in 1836.)
\par \pard \b Chiov\plain\fs28 ., \i Stud. Veg. Piemonte\plain\fs28 
\par      E. Chiovenda,\i  Studi sulla Vegetazione nel Piemonte\plain\fs28 . Torino. 1929.
\par \b Choisy\plain\fs28 ,\i\b  Prodr. Monogr. Hyper.\plain\fs28  
\par      J.D. Choisy, \i Prodromus d'une Monographie de la Famille des Hyp\'e9ricin\'e9es.\plain\fs28  Gen\'e8ve & Paris. 1821. 
\par \b Christ\plain\fs28 , \i\b Ros. Schweiz\plain\fs28  
\par      H. Christ, \i Die Rosen der Schweiz\plain\fs28 . Basel, Genf & Lyon.  1873. 
\par \b Christener\plain\fs28 ,\i\b  Hier. Schweiz\plain\fs28 
\par      C. Christener, \i Die Hieracien der Schweiz\plain\fs28 . Bern. 1863.
\par \pard \b Clairv\plain\fs28 ., \i\b Man. Herb. Suisse\plain\fs28 
\par      J.P. de Clairville, \i Manuel d' Herborisation en Suisse et en Valais\plain\fs28 .Winterthur. 1811. Ed. 2. Gen\'e8ve & Paris. 1819.
\par \b Clapham, Tutin & E.F. Warburg\plain\fs28 , \i\b Fl. Brit. Is.\plain\fs28 
\par     A.R. Clapham, T.G. Tutin & E.F. Warburg,\i  Flora of the British Isles\plain\fs28 . Ed. 1. Cambridge. 1952. Reprinted 1957 & 1958 with some corrections. Ed. 2. Cambridge. 1962. Ed. 3, by A.R. Clapham, T.G. Tutin & D.M. Moore. Cambridge. 1987. Reprinted 1989 with major corrections.
\par \pard \b Clarke, E.D\plain\fs28 ., \i\b Travels\plain\fs28 
\par     E.D. Clarke, \i Travels in various Countries of Europe, Asia and Africa\plain\fs28 . Ed. 1. London. 1810-1823. (\b 1\plain\fs28  in 1810 ; \b 2\plain\fs28 (\b 1\plain\fs28 ) in 1812 ; \b 2\plain\fs28 (\b 2\plain\fs28 ) in 1814; \b 2\plain\fs28 (\b 3\plain\fs28 ) in 1816; \b 3\plain\fs28 (\b 1\plain\fs28 ) in 1819; \b 3\plain\fs28 (\b 2\plain\fs28 ) in 1823.) Several later editions.
\par \b Clemente\plain\fs28 , \i\b Elench. Horti Matrit.\plain\fs28 
\par      S. de Rojas Clemente y Rubio, \i Elenchus Plantarum Horti matritensis\plain\fs28 . Matriti. 1806.
\par \pard \b Clemente\plain\fs28 , \i\b Ens. Vid\plain\fs28  
\par      S. de Rojas Clemente y Rubio, \i Ensayo sobre las Variedades de la Vid comun que vegetan en Andalucia\plain\fs28 . Madrid. 1807. 
\par \b Clementi, G.C.\plain\fs28 , \i\b Sert. Or\plain\fs28 . 
\par      G.C. Clementi, \i Sertulum orientale, seu Recensio Plantarum in Olympo bithynico, in Agro byzantino et hellenico nonnullisque aliis Orientis Regionibus Annis 1845-1850.\plain\fs28  Taurini. 1855. 
\par \b Colla\plain\fs28 , \i\b Herb. Pedem.\plain\fs28  
\par      L.A. Colla, \i Herbarium pedemontanum\plain\fs28 . Augustae Taurinorum. 1833-1837. (Text: \b 1\plain\fs28  in 1833; \b 2\plain\fs28  & \b 3\plain\fs28  in 1834;\b  4\plain\fs28  in 1835; \b 5\plain\fs28  & \b 6\plain\fs28  in 1836; \b 7\plain\fs28  & \b 8\plain\fs28  in 1837.  Plates: \b 1\plain\fs28  in 1835; \b 2\plain\fs28   in 1836; \b 3\plain\fs28  in 1837. Cf. R.E.G. Pichi-Sermolli, \i Webbia\plain\b\fs28  8\plain\fs28 : 130-140 (1951) and 407-411 (1952 ). 
\par \pard \b Colmeiro\plain\fs28 ,\i\b  Enum. Pl. Penins. Hisp.-Lusit.\plain\fs28 
\par      M. Colmeiro y Penido, \i Enumeraci\'f3n y Revisi\'f3n de las Plantas de la Peninsula hispano-lusitana e Islas Baleares\plain\fs28 . Madrid. 1885-1889. (\b 1\plain\fs28  in 1885; \b 2\plain\fs28  in 1886; \b 3\plain\fs28  in 1887; \b 4\plain\fs28  in 1888; \b 5\plain\fs28  in 1889.)
\par \b Corb.\plain\fs28 , \i\b Nouv. Fl. Normand. \plain\fs28 
\par      L. Corbi\'e8re,  \i Nouvelle Flore de Normandie.\plain\fs28   Caen.  1894. 
\par \b Cosson\plain\fs28 , \i\b Ill. Fl. Atl.\plain\fs28 
\par    E.S.C. Cosson,\i  Illustrationes Florae atlanticae\plain\fs28 . Parisiis. 1882-1897. (\b 1\plain\fs28 : pp. 1-36, tt. 1-25 in 1882; pp. 37-72, tt. 26-50 in 1884; pp.
\par \pard \b Cosson\plain\fs28 , \i\b Not. Pl. Crit.\plain\fs28  
\par      E.S.C. Cosson, \i Notes sur quelques Plantes critiques, rares et nouvelles, et Additions \'e0 la Flore des Environs de Paris\plain\fs28 . Paris. 1849-1852. (5 fascicles with continuous pagination: pp. 1-24 in 1849; pp. 25-48 in 1849; pp. 49-92 in 1850; pp. 93-140 in 1851; pp. 141--184 in 1852.) Author of Corsican plants, pp. 49-72: J.L. Kralik. Co-author of notes on Algerian plants, pp. 133-139: M.C. Durieu de Maisonneuve.
\par \b Cosson & Germ.\plain\fs28 , \i\b  Fl. Env. Paris\plain\fs28  
\par \pard      E.S.C. Cosson & J.N.E. Germain de Saint-Pierre, \i Flore  descriptive et analytique des Environs de Paris\plain\fs28 . Ed. 1. 1845. Ed. 2. Paris. 1861. 
\par \b Cosson & Germ.\plain\fs28 ,\i\b  Obs. Pl. Crit\plain\fs28 .
\par      E.S.C. Cosson & J.N.E. Germain de Saint-Pierre,\i  Observations sur quelques Plantes critiques des Environs de Paris\plain\fs28 . Paris. 1840.
\par \b Cosson & Kralik\plain\fs28 ,\i\b  Cat. Pl. Syrie Palaest\plain\fs28 .
\par      E.S.C. Cosson & J.L. Kralik, \i Catalogue des Plantes observ\'e9es en Syrie et en Palaestine\plain\fs28 . Paris. 1854.
\par \pard \b Costa\plain\fs28 , \i\b Ind. Sem. Horti Barcin\plain\fs28 . 
\par      A.C. Costa y Cuxart, \i Index Seminum Horti botanici barcinonensis\plain\fs28 .  Barcinone.  1860. 
\par \b Costa\plain\fs28 , \i\b Introd. Fl. Cataluna\plain\fs28  
\par     A.C. Costa y Cuxart, \i Introduccion a la Flora de Catalu\'f1a y Catalogo razonado de las Plantas observadas en esta Region.\plain\fs28  Barcelona. Ed. 1. 1864.  Ed. 2 (containing  \b Supl.\plain\fs28 , \i Suplemento al Catalogo razonado de Plantas vasculares de Catalu\'f1a\plain\fs28 ).  Barcelona. 1877. 
\par \b Coste\plain\fs28 ,  \i\b Fl. Fr.\plain\fs28  
\par \pard      H.J. Coste, \i Flore descriptive et illustr\'e9e de la France, de la Corse et des Contr\'e9es limitrophes\plain\fs28 .  Paris. 1900-1906. (\b 1\plain\fs28 : pp. 1 in 1900; pp.  241-416 in 1901; \b 2\plain\fs28 :  pp. 1-96 in 1901; pp. 97-224 in 1902; pp. 225-627 in 1903;\b  3\plain\fs28 : pp. 1-208 in 1904, pp. 209-384 in 1905; pp. 385-807 in 1906.)  Reprinted in 1937. 
\par \b Coulter\plain\fs28 , \i\b M\'e9m. Dipsac\plain\fs28 .
\par     T. Coulter,\i  M\'e9moire sur les Dipsac\'e9es\plain\fs28 . Gen\'e8ve. 1823.
\par \b Coutinho\plain\fs28 ,\i\b  Fl. Port.\plain\fs28 
\par \pard    A.X. Pereira Coutinho,\i  A Flora de Portugal\plain\fs28  (\i Plantas vasculares\plain\fs28 ). Ed. 1. Paris, Lisboa, Rio de Janeiro, S. Paulo & Bello Horizonte. 1913. Ed. 2, titled \i Flora de Portugal\plain\fs28 , by R.T. Palhinha. Lisboa. 1939.
\par \b Coutinho\plain\fs28 , \i\b  Not. Fl. Port\plain\fs28 . 
\par      A.X. Pereira Coutinho, \i  Notas da Flora de Portugal\plain\fs28 . Paris etc. 1914-1930. (\b 1\plain\fs28  in 1914; \b 2\plain\fs28  in 1915; \b 3\plain\fs28  in  1916; \b 4\plain\fs28   in  1918;\b  5\plain\fs28  in 1921; \b 6\plain\fs28   in 1926;\b  7\plain\fs28  in 1930.) 
\par \pard \b Crantz\plain\fs28 , \i\b Class. Umb\plain\fs28 . 
\par      H.J.N. von Crantz, \i Classis Umbelliferarum emendata cum generali Seminum Tabula et Figuris aeneis in necessarium   Instit. Rei herbar. Supplementum\plain\fs28 . Lipsiae. 1767. 
\par \b Crantz\plain\fs28 ,  \i\b Stirp. Austr\plain\fs28 . 
\par      H.J.N. von Crantz,  \i Stirpes austriacae\plain\fs28 . Ed. 1. Viennae & Lipsiae. 1762-1767. (\b 1\plain\fs28  in 1762;\b  2\plain\fs28  in 1763;\b  3\plain\fs28  in 1767.)  Ed.  2. Viennae. 1769. (\b 1\plain\fs28  & \b 2\plain\fs28 , with continuous pagination, in 1769.) 
\par \pard \b Crantz\plain\fs28 , \i\b Inst. Rei Herb\plain\fs28 .
\par      H.J.N. von Crantz,\i  Institutiones Rei Herbariae juxta Nutum Naturae digestae ex Habitu\plain\fs28 . Viennae. 1766. (\b 1\plain\fs28  & \b 2\plain\fs28  in 1766.)
\par \b Curtis\plain\fs28 ,\i\b  Fl. Lond\plain\fs28 .
\par    W. Curtis, \i Flora londinensis : or, Plates and Descriptions of such Plants as grow wild in the Environs of London\plain\fs28 . London. 1775-1798 (-1779 ?). For detailed accounts and dates of plates cf. A. Stevenson, \i Catalogue of botanical Books in tbe Collection of Rachel McMasters Miller Hunt,\plain\fs28  \b 2\plain\fs28 (\b 2\plain\fs28 ): 389-412 (1961) and F.A. Stafleu & R.S. Cowan, \i Taxonomic Literature\plain\fs28  ed. 2, \b 1\plain\fs28 : 575-577 (1976).)
\par \pard \b Cutanda\plain\fs28 ,\i\b  Fl. Comp. Madrid\plain\fs28 
\par    V. Cutanda,\i  Flora compendiada de Madrid y su Provincia\plain\fs28 . Madrid.1861.
\par \b Cuvier\plain\fs28 ,\i\b  Dict. Sci. Nat.\plain\fs28 
\par    G.-F. Cuvier (ed.), \i Dictionnaire des Sciences naturelles dans lequel on traite m\'e9thodiquement des differentes \'c9tres de la Nature\plain\fs28 . Ed. 1. Paris. 1804-1806. (\b 1\plain\fs28  & \b 2\plain\fs28  in 1804 ;\b  3\plain\fs28  in 1805 ; \b 4-6\plain\fs28  in 1806.) Ed. 2. Paris. 1816-1845. (\b 1\plain\fs28  & \b 2\plain\fs28  in 1816; \b 3-9\plain\fs28  in 1817 ; \b 10\plain\fs28  in 1818; \b 11-15\plain\fs28  in 1819; \b 16-17\plain\fs28  in 1820; \b 18-22\plain\fs28  in 1821;\b  23-25\plain\fs28  in 1822; \b 26-29\plain\fs28  in 1823; \b 30-33\plain\fs28  in 1824; \b 34-38\plain\fs28  in 1825; \b 39-44\plain\fs28  in 1826; \b 45-51\plain\fs28  in 1827 ; \b 52-53\plain\fs28  in 1828; \b 54\plain\fs28  in 1829 [sic]; \b 55-57\plain\fs28  in 1828; \b 58-59\plain\fs28  in 1829;\b  60\plain\fs28  in 1830; \b 61\plain\fs28  in 1845.)
\par \pard \b Cyr\plain\fs28 ., \i\b Pl. Rar. Neap.\plain\fs28 
\par    D.M.L. Cirillo (Cyrillus),\i  Plantarum rariorum Regni neapolitani Fasciculus primus\plain\fs28  [\i secundus\plain\fs28 ]. Neapoli. 1788-1792. (\b 1\plain\fs28  in 1788; \b 2\plain\fs28  in 1792.)
\par \b Czern.\plain\fs28 , \i\b Consp. Pl. Charc\plain\fs28 . 
\par      V.M. Czernajew, \i Conspectus Plantarum circa Charcoviam et in Ucrania sponte crescentium et vulgo cultarum\plain\fs28 .1859. 
\par \b Dalla Torre\plain\fs28 , \i\b Anleit. Beob. Bestimm. Alpenpfl\plain\fs28 .
\par      K.W. von Dalla Torre, \i Anleitung zur Beobachtung und zum Bestimmen der Alpenpflanzen\plain\fs28  (constitutes Vol. 2 of C. von Sonklar\i  et al\plain\fs28 .,\i  Anleitung zu wissenschaftlichen Beobachtungen auf Alpenreisen\plain\fs28 ). Wien. 1882.
\par \pard \b Dalla Torre & Sarnth\plain\fs28 ., \i\b Fl. Tirol\plain\fs28  
\par      K.W. von Dalla Torre & L. von Sarntheim, \i Flora der gef\'fcrsteten Grafschaft Tirol, des Landes Vorarlberg und des F\'fcrstenthumes Liechtenstein\plain\fs28 . Innsbruck. 1900-1913. (\b 1\plain\fs28  in 1909;\b  2\plain\fs28  in 1901; \b 3\plain\fs28  in 1905; \b 4\plain\fs28  in 1902; \b 5\plain\fs28  in 1904; \b 6\plain\fs28 (\b 1\plain\fs28 ) in 1906;   \b 6\plain\fs28 (\b 2\plain\fs28 ) in 1909;\b  6\plain\fs28 (\b 3\plain\fs28 ) in 1912; \b 6\plain\fs28 (\b 4\plain\fs28 ) in 1913.) 
\par \b Davies\plain\fs28 , \i\b Welsh Botanol\plain\fs28 . 
\par \pard     H. Davies, \i Welsh Botanology. / Llysieuiaith Gymreig\plain\fs28 . London. 1813. (\b 1\plain\fs28  & \b 2\plain\fs28  in 1813.) 
\par \b Davis, P.H.\plain\fs28 , \i\b Fl. Turkey\plain\fs28 
\par    P.H. Davis (edit.), \i Flora of Turkey and the East Aegean Islands\plain\fs28 . Edinburgh. \b 1-10\plain\fs28 , 1965-1988. (\b 1\plain\fs28  in 1965; \b 2\plain\fs28  in 1967 ; \b 3\plain\fs28  in 1970; \b 4\plain\fs28  in 1972; \b 5\plain\fs28  in 1975; \b 6\plain\fs28  in 1979; \b 7\plain\fs28  in 1982;\b  8\plain\fs28  in 1984; \b 9\plain\fs28  in 1985; \b 10\plain\fs28 , \i Supplement\plain\fs28 , edit. P.H. Davis, R.R. Mill & Kit Tan in 1988. For date of\b  6\plain\fs28  cf. P.H. Davis & J.R. Edmondson, \i Notes Roy. Bot. Gard. Edinb\plain\fs28 . \b 37\plain\fs28  : 282 (1979).)
\par \pard \b DC.\plain\fs28 , \i\b Astrag.\plain\fs28  
\par     A.P. de Candolle, \i Astragalogia, nempe Astragali, Biserrulae et Oxytropidis, nec non Phacae, Colutae et Lessertiae, Historia   Iconibus illustrata\plain\fs28 . Parisiis. 1802. (2 editions, folio min. and folio max., with different pagination, in same year. Only the former is cited.) 
\par \b DC.\plain\fs28 , \i\b Cat. Pl. Horti Monsp\plain\fs28 . 
\par      A.P. de Candolle, \i Catalogus Plantarum Horti botanici monspeliensis\plain\fs28 . Monspelii. 1813. 
\par \b DC.\plain\fs28 , \i\b Coll. M\'e9m\plain\fs28 . 
\par \pard      A.P. deCandolle, \i Collection de M\'e9moires pour servir \'e0 l'Histoire du R\'e8gne v\'e9g\'e9tal\plain\fs28 . Paris.1828-1838. (\b 1\plain\fs28  (M\'e9moire sur la Famille des M\'e9lastomac\'e9es) & \b 2\plain\fs28  (. . . \i Crassulac\'e9es\plain\fs28 ) in 1828; \b 3\plain\fs28  (. . . \i Onagraires\plain\fs28 ), \b 4\plain\fs28  (. . . \i Paronychi\'e9es\plain\fs28 ) & \b 5\plain\fs28  (. . . \i Ombellif\'e8res\plain\fs28 )  in 1829; \b 6\plain\fs28  ( . . . \i Loranthac\'e9es\plain\fs28 )  in 1830; \b 7\plain\fs28  ( . . .  \i Val\'e9rian\'e9es\plain\fs28 ) in 1832; \b 8\plain\fs28   (\i M\'e9moire sur quelques Esp\'e8ces de Cact\'e9es\plain\fs28 ) in 1834; \b 9\plain\fs28  (\i Observations sur la Structure et la Classification de la Famille des Compos\'e9es\plain\fs28 ) & \b 10\plain\fs28   (\i Statistique de Famille des Compos\'e9es\plain\fs28 ) in 1838.) 
\par \pard \b DC.\plain\fs28 , \i\b Icon. Pl. Gall. Rar\plain\fs28 . 
\par      A.P. de Candolle, \i Icones Plantarum Galliae rariorum.\plain\fs28   Parisiis. 1808. 
\par \b DC.\plain\fs28 , \i\b M\'e9m. L\'e9g\plain\fs28 . 
\par      A.P. de Candolle, \i Memoires sur la Famille des L\'e9gumineuses\plain\fs28 . Paris. 1825-1827. (Pp. 1-128 in 1825; pp. 129-440 in 1826;   pp. 441-515 in 1826 or 1827. Plates in 1825-1827. Cf. F.A. Stafleu & W.T. Stearn, \i Taxon\plain\b\fs28  9\plain\fs28 :  167-171 (1960).) 
\par \b DC.\plain\fs28 , \i\b Prodr.\plain\fs28  
\par      A.P. de Candolle, \i  Prodromus Systematis naturalis Regni vegetabilis\plain\fs28 .  Parisiis. 1824-1874. (\b 1\plain\fs28  in 1824; \b 2\plain\fs28  in 1825; \b 3\plain\fs28  in 1828; \b 4\plain\fs28  in 1830; \b 5\plain\fs28  in 1836;\b  6\plain\fs28  in 1838; \b 7\plain\fs28 (\b 1\plain\fs28 ) in 1838; \b 7\plain\fs28 (\b 2\plain\fs28 ) in 1839; \b 8\plain\fs28  in 1844; \b 9\plain\fs28  in 1845; \b 10\plain\fs28  in 1846; \b 11\plain\fs28  in 1847; \b 12\plain\fs28  in 1848; \b 13\plain\fs28 (\b 1\plain\fs28 ) in 1852; \b 13\plain\fs28 (\b 2\plain\fs28 ) in 1849; \b 14\plain\fs28 : pp. 1-492 in 1856; pp. 493-706 in 1857; \b 15\plain\fs28 (\b 1\plain\fs28 ) in 1864; \b 15\plain\fs28 (\b 2\plain\fs28 ): pp. 1-188 in 1862; pp. 189-1286 in 1866; \b 16\plain\fs28 (\b 1\plain\fs28 ) in 1869; \b 16\plain\fs28 (\b 2\plain\fs28 ): pp. 1-160 in 1864; pp. 161-691 in 1868; \b 17\plain\fs28  in 1873. Index \b 1-4\plain\fs28  in 1843;  \b  5-7\plain\fs28 (\b 1\plain\fs28 ) in 1840; \b 7\plain\fs28 (\b 2\plain\fs28 ) in 1858-1859; \b 14-17\plain\fs28  in 1874.) 
\par \pard \b DC\plain\fs28 .,\i\b Rapp. Voy.Bot.\plain\fs28 
\par    A.P. de Candolle, \i Rapports sur les Voyages botaniques et agronomiques faits dans les D\'e9partements de l' Empire d' apr\'e9s les Ordres de S.E. le Minist\'e8re de l' Int\'e9rieur\plain\fs28 . Paris. 1813. (First published under the above title in 1813; the individual reports were published earlier, with different titles, in \i M\'e9m. Agric. Soc. Agric. D\'e9p. Seine\plain\fs28  \b 10-15\plain\fs28  ( = \i M\'e9m. Soc. Agric. Paris\plain\fs28  \b 39-44\plain\fs28 ) in 1808-1813. For details cf.\i M\'e9m. Agric. Soc. Agric. D\'e9p. Seine\plain\fs28 .)
\par \pard \b DC\plain\fs28 ., \i\b Reg. Veg. Syst. Nat.\plain\fs28 
\par    A.P. de Candolle, \i Regni vegetabilis Systema naturale\plain\fs28 . Parisiis. 1817-1821. (\b 1\plain\fs28  in 1817 ;\b  2\plain\fs28  in 1821.)
\par \b DC., A.\plain\fs28 , \i\b Monogr. Camp\plain\fs28 .
\par     A.L.P.P. de Candolle,\i  Monographie des Campanul\'e9es\plain\fs28 . Paris. 1830.
\par \b DC., A. & C.\plain\fs28 , \i\b Monogr. Phan.\plain\fs28  
\par      A.P. de Candolle & A.L.P.P. de Candolle, \i Monographiae Phanerogamarum Prodromi nunc Continuatio, nunc Revisio\plain\fs28 . Parisiis. 1878-1896. (\b 1\plain\fs28  in 1878;\b  2\plain\fs28  in 1879; \b 3\plain\fs28  in 1881;\b  4\plain\fs28  in 1883; \b 5\plain\fs28 (\b l\plain\fs28 ): pp. 1-303 in 1883; \b 5\plain\fs28 (\b 2\plain\fs28 ): pp. 305-654 in 1887;\b  6\plain\fs28  in 1889; \b 7\plain\fs28  in 1891;\b  8\plain\fs28  in 1893; \b 9\plain\fs28  in 1896.) 
\par \pard \b D\'e9chy\plain\fs28 , \i\b Kaukasus\plain\fs28 
\par     M. D\'e9chy, \i Kaukasus. Reisen und Forschungen im kaukasischen Hochgebirge\plain\fs28 . Berlin. 1905-1907. (\b 1\plain\fs28  in 1905;\b  2\plain\fs28  in 1901; \b 3\plain\fs28  in 1907.)
\par \b Decne\plain\fs28 ,\i\b  Cat. Gr. Mus. Paris\plain\fs28 
\par      \i Catalogue des Graines recolt\'e9es au Museum d'Histoire naturelle de Paris By J. Decaisne in 1877\plain\fs28 .
\par \b Decne\plain\fs28 , \i\b Jard. Fruit.\plain\fs28  
\par     J. Decaisne, \i Le Jardin fruitier du Mus\'e9um, ou Iconographie de toutes les Esp\'e8ces et Vari\'e9t\'e9s d'Arbres fruitiers cultiv\'e9s dans cet \'c9tablissement avec leur Description, leur Histoire, leur Synonymie, etc\plain\fs28 . Paris. 1858-1871. (Originally published in 123 livraisons; later rearranged to form 9 volumes.) 
\par \pard \b Degen\plain\fs28 , \i\b Egy Uj Ajuga Fajrol\plain\fs28 
\par     A. von Degen, \i Egy uj Ajuga Fajrol\plain\fs28 . Budapest. 1896.
\par \b Degen\plain\fs28 ,\i\b  Fl. Veleh\plain\fs28 
\par     A. von Degen, \i Flora velebitica\plain\fs28 . Budapest. 1936-1938. (\b 1\plain\fs28  in 1936; \b 2\plain\fs28  in 1937;\b  3\plain\fs28  & \b 4\plain\fs28  in 1938.)
\par \b Degen\plain\fs28 , \i\b Iter Turc\plain\fs28 . (\i\b Exsicc\plain\fs28 .)
\par     A. von Degen, \i Iter Turcicum\plain\fs28 . (\i Exsiccata\plain\fs28 .) 1890 etc.
\par \b Dehnh.\plain\fs28 , \i\b Cat. Pl. Horti Camald.\plain\fs28  
\par     F. Dehnhardt, \i Catalogus Plantarum Horti camaldulensis\plain\fs28 .  Ed. 1. Neapoli. 1829. Ed. 2. Neapoli. 1832. 
\par \pard \b De Langhe\i  et al\plain\fs28 .,\i\b  Nouv. Fl. Belg\plain\fs28 .
\par      J. E. de Langhe\i  et al.\plain\fs28 , \i Nouvelle Flore de la Belgique, du Grand-Duch\'e9 de Luxembourg, du Nord de la France et des Regions voisines\plain\fs28 . Bruxelles.1973.
\par \b Delarbre\plain\fs28 , \i\b Fl. Auvergne\plain\fs28 
\par    A. Delarbre,\i  Flore d' Auvergne, ou Recueil des Plantes de cette ci-devant Province\plain\fs28 . Ed. 1. Clermont-Ferrand. 1795; re-issued, Paris & Clermont-Ferrand, 1797. Ed. 2. Riom & Clermont-Ferrand. 1800. (\b 1\plain\fs28  & \b 2\plain\fs28  in 1800; \b 2\plain\fs28 , pp. 509-891, titled \i Flore de la ci-devant Auvergne\plain\fs28 .) Ed. 2 [\i sic\plain\fs28 ]. Clermont-Ferrand. 1836 (\b 1\plain\fs28  & \b 2\plain\fs28  in 1836; \b 2\plain\fs28  titled \i Flore de la haute et basse Auvergne\plain\fs28 .) Cf. F.A. Stafleu & R.S. Cowan, \i Taxonomic Literature\plain\fs28  ed. 2, \b 1\plain\fs28 : 612-613 (1976).
\par \pard \b Delaroche\plain\fs28 ,\i\b  Descr. Pl. Nov\plain\fs28 .
\par      D. Delaroche,\i  Descriptiones Plantarum aliquot novarum\plain\fs28 . Lugduni Batavorum.1766.
\par \b Delile\plain\fs28 ,\i\b  Descr. Egypte, Hist. Nat\plain\fs28 .
\par     A.R. Delile, \i Description de l'\'c9gypte. Histoire naturelle\plain\fs28 . \b 2\plain\fs28 . Paris. 1813. Cf. F.A. Stafleu & R.S. Cowan,\i  Taxonomic Literature\plain\fs28  ed. 2, \b 1\plain\fs28 : 617 (1976).
\par \b De Not.\plain\fs28 , \i\b Ind. Sem. Horti. Bot. Genuens\plain\fs28 . 
\par     G. de Notaris, \i Index Seminum Horti botanici genuensis\plain\fs28 . Genova. 1840-1871. 
\par \pard \b De Not.\plain\fs28 , \i\b Prosp. Fl. Ligust\plain\fs28 .
\par     G. de Notaris, \i Prospetto della Flora ligustica e dei Zoofiti del Mar ligustico\plain\fs28 . Genova. 1846.
\par \b De Not.\plain\fs28 ,\i\b  Repert. Fl. Ligust\plain\fs28 .
\par    G. de Notaris, \i Repertorium Florae ligusticae\plain\fs28 . Taurini. 1844. (For date cf. F.A. Stafleu & R.S. Cowan, \i Taxonomic Literature\plain\fs28  ed. 2, \b 1\plain\fs28 : 624 (1976).)
\par \b Desf.\plain\fs28 , \i\b Fl. Atl.\plain\fs28  
\par      R.L. Desfontaines, \i Flora atlantica, sive Historia Plantarum, quae in Atlante, Agro tunetano et algeriensi crescunt\plain\fs28 . Parisiis. 1798-1799. (\b 1\plain\fs28  in 1798; \b 2\plain\fs28 : pp. 1-160 in 1798; pp. 161-458 in 1799. Cf. M.J. van Steenis & W.T. Stearn in C.G.G.J. van Steenis,\i  Fl. Males.\plain\fs28  \b I\plain\fs28 . \b 4\plain\fs28 :  clxxvii (1954).) 
\par \pard \b Desf.\plain\fs28 , \i\b Hist. Arb.\plain\fs28  
\par     R.L. Desfontaines,\i  Histoire des Arbres et des Arbrisseaux qui peuvent \'eatre cultiv\'e9s en plaine Terre sur le Sol de la France.\plain\fs28     Paris. 1809. (\b 1\plain\fs28  & \b 2\plain\fs28  in 1809.) 
\par \b Desportes\plain\fs28 , \i\b Ros. Gan\plain\fs28  
\par      N.H.F. Desportes, \i Rosetum gallicum, ou \'c9num\'e9ration m\'e9thodique des Esp\'e8ces et Variet\'e9s du Genre Rosier indigenes en France ou cultiv\'e9es dans les Jardins, avec la Synonymie fran\'e7aise et latine\plain\fs28 .  Le Mans & Paris. 1828. 
\par \pard \b Desv\plain\fs28 .,\i\b  Jour. Bot. Appl.\plain\fs28 
\par    N.A. Desvaux (edit.), \i Journal de Botanique, appliqu\'e9e \'e0 l' Agriculture, \'e0 la Pharmacie, \'e0 la M\'e9decine et aux Arts\plain\fs28 . Paris. 1813-1816. (\b 1\plain\fs28  & \b 2\plain\fs28  in 1813; \b 3\plain\fs28 (\b 1-3\plain\fs28 ) in 1814; \b 3\plain\fs28 (\b 4\plain\fs28 ) in 1815;\b  3\plain\fs28 (\b 5\plain\fs28 ) in 1816; \b 4\plain\fs28 (\b 1-3\plain\fs28 ) in 1814; \b 4\plain\fs28 (\b 4-6\plain\fs28 ) in 1815. Cf. F.A. Stafleu & R.S. Cowan, \i Taxonomic Literature\plain\fs28  ed. 2, \b 1\plain\fs28  : 634 (1976).)
\par \b Desv\plain\fs28 ., \i\b Jour. Bot. R\'e9dig\'e9\plain\fs28 
\par \pard    N.A. Desvaux \i et al\plain\fs28 . (edit.),\i  Journal de Botanique, r\'e9dig\'e9 par une Soci\'e9t\'e9 de Botanistes\plain\fs28 . Paris. 1808-1809. (\b 1\plain\fs28 : pp. 1-192 in 1808; pp. 193-384 in 1809; \b 2\plain\fs28  in 1809. Cf. F.A. Stafleu & R.S. Cowan, \i Taxonomic Literature\plain\fs28  ed. 2, \b 1\plain\fs28  : 633-634 (1976).)
\par \b Desv\plain\fs28 ., \i\b Obs. Pl. Angers\plain\fs28 
\par    N.A. Desvaux, \i Observations sur les Plantes des Environs d'Angers, pour servir de Suppl\'e9ment \'e0 la Flore de Maine et Loire, et de Suite \'e0 l' Histoire naturelle et critique des Plantes de France\plain\fs28 . Angers & Paris. 1818.
\par \pard \b De Wild.\plain\fs28 , \i\b Pl.  Bequaert.\plain\fs28  
\par      E.A.J. de Wildeman, \i Plantae bequaertianae\plain\fs28 .  Gand. 1921-1932. (\b 1\plain\fs28 : pp. 1-166 in 1921; pp. 167-593 in 1922; \b 2\plain\fs28 : pp. 1-308  in 1923; pp. 309-570 in 1924;  \b 3\plain\fs28 :  pp. 1- 424 in 1925; pp. 425-576 in 1926; \b 4\plain\fs28 :  pp. 1-160 in 1926; pp. 161-308 in 1927; pp. 309-452 in 1928; pp. 453-575 in 1929; \b 5\plain\fs28 : pp. 1-160 in 1929; pp. 161-352 in 1931; pp. 353-496, i-xiii in 1932;\b  6\plain\fs28 : 1-91 in 1932.) 
\par \b Dickson\plain\fs28 ,\i\b  Coll. Dried Pl.\plain\fs28 
\par \pard    J. Dickson, \i A Collection of dried Plants named on the Authority of the Linnean Herbarium and other original Collections\plain\fs28 . London. 1789-1801. (Fasc. 1 in 1789; fasc.2 in 1790; fasc. 3 in 1791 ; fasc. 4 in l80l.)
\par \b Dietr., F. G.\plain\fs28 , \i\b Vollst. Lexic.\plain\fs28  
\par      F.G. Dietrich, \i Vollst\'e4ndiges Lexicon der G\'e4rtnerei und Botanik.\plain\fs28   Weimar & Berlin. 1802-1811. (\b 1-10\plain\fs28  & \i Register\plain\fs28   in   1802-1811.)  \i Nachtrag.\plain\fs28   Berlin. 1815-1821. (1-10 in 1815-1821.)\i  Neuer Nachtrag\plain\fs28 .  Berlin & Ulm. 1825-1840. (1-10 in 1825-1840.) 
\par \pard \b D\'f6ll\plain\fs28 , \i\b  Rhein. Fl\plain\fs28 .
\par     J. C. D\'f6ll, \i Rheinische Flora\plain\fs28 . Frankfurt a. M. 1843.
\par \b Domin\plain\fs28 , \i\b Pl. Cechosl. Enum\plain\fs28 .
\par    K. Domin,\i  Plantarum Cechoslovakiae Enumeratio Species vasculares indigenas et introductas exhibens\plain\fs28 . Praha. 1935. (Also published in \i Preslia\plain\b\fs28  13-15\plain\fs28  (1936).)
\par \b Domin\plain\fs28 ,\i\b  Pterid.\plain\fs28 
\par    K. Domin, \i Pteridophyta: soustavn\'fd prehled zij\'edc\'edch i vyhynulich kaprodorostu\plain\fs28 . Praze. 1929.
\par \b Domin & Podp\plain\fs28 .,\i\b  Klzic Upln\'e9 Kvetene Rep. Cesk\plain\fs28 .
\par \pard    K. Domin & J. Podpera, \i Klzic Upln\'e9 Kvetene Republiky Ceshoslovensk\'e9\plain\fs28 . Olomouci. 1928.
\par \b Don, D\plain\fs28 ., \i\b Prodr. Fl. Nepal.\plain\fs28 
\par    D. Don,\i  Prodromus Florae nepalensis, sive Enumeratio Vegetabilium, quae in Itinere per Nepaliam proprie dictam et Regiones conterminas, Ann. 1802-1803. Detexit atque legit D.D. Franciscus Hamilton (olim Buchanan) ... accedunt Plantae a D. Wallich nuperius missae.\plain\fs28  Londini. 1825. (For date cf. W.T. Stearn,\i  Jour. Arnold Arb\plain\fs28 .\b  26\plain\fs28 : 168 (1945).)
\par \pard \b Don, G\plain\fs28 ., \i\b Herb. Brit.\plain\fs28 
\par    G. Don,\i  Herbarium britannicum, consisting of Fasciculi of dried British Plants, with their appropriate Names and particular Habitats annexed\plain\fs28 . Edinburgh. Fasc. \b 1-9\plain\fs28 , nos. 1-225. 1804--1812/13. (\b 1\plain\fs28  & \b 2\plain\fs28 , nos.1--50, in 1804;\b  3\plain\fs28  &\b  4\plain\fs28 , nos. 51-100, in 1805; \b 5-8\plain\fs28 , nos. 101-200, in 1806;\b  9\plain\fs28  ('1806'), nos. 201-225, in 1812/1813. Cf. G.C. Druce, \i Notes Roy. Bot. Gard. Edinb\plain\fs28 . \b 3\plain\fs28 : 144-182 (1904).)
\par \pard \b Don, G.\plain\fs28 ,\i\b  Monogr. Allium\plain\fs28 
\par      G. Don, \i A Monograph of the Genus\plain\fs28  Alliurn. [Edinburgh.] 1827. Reprinted in\i  Mem. Werner. Soc.\plain\b\fs28  6\plain\fs28 : 1-102 (1832).
\par \b Don fil., G.\plain\fs28 , \i\b Gen. Syst.\plain\fs28  
\par      G. Don, \i A general System of Gardening and Botany\plain\fs28 . Also titled \i A general History of dichlamydeous Plants\plain\fs28 .  London. 1831-1838. (\b 1\plain\fs28  in 1831; \b 2\plain\fs28  in 1832; \b 3\plain\fs28  in 1834; \b 4\plain\fs28  in 1837-1838.   Cf. M.J. van Steenis & W.T. Stearn in C.G.G.J. van Steenis, \i Fl. Males.\plain\b\fs28  I.  4\plain\fs28 : clxxviii (1954).) 
\par \pard \b D\'f6rfler\plain\fs28 , \i\b Herb. Norm.\plain\fs28  
\par      I. D\'f6rfler, \i Herbarium normale. Conditum a F. Schultz, dein continuatum a K. Keck, nunc editum per I. D\'f6rfler\plain\fs28 . Vindobonae. 1894-1915. (\b 31-56\plain\fs28 in 1894-1915.) 
\par \b Dost\'e1l\plain\fs28 , \i\b Kvetena CSR\plain\fs28  
\par      J. Dost\'e1l, \i Kvetena CSR.\plain\fs28   Praha. 1948-1950. (Preface etc., pp. 1-64 in 1950; pp. 1-800 in 1948; pp. 801-1488 in 1949;  pp. 1489-2269 in 1950.) 
\par \b Drejer\plain\fs28 , \i\b Fl. Excurs. Hafn.\plain\fs28 
\par    S.T.N. Drejer, \i Flora excursoria hafniensis\plain\fs28 . Hafniae. 1838.
\par \pard \b Drejer\plain\fs28 , \i\b Revis. Crit. Caric. Bor\plain\fs28 .
\par     S.T.N. Drejer, \i Revisio critica Caricum borealium in Terris sub Imperio danico jacentibus inventarum\plain\fs28 . Hafniae. 1841.
\par \b Dreves\plain\fs28 ,\i\b  Bot. Bilderb\plain\fs28 .
\par    J.F.P. Dreves,\i  Botanisches Bilderbuch f\'fcr die Jugend und Freunde der Pflanzenkunde\plain\fs28 . Leipzig. 1794-1801.
\par \b Druce\plain\fs28 ,\i\b  List Br. Pl.\plain\fs28 
\par    G.C. Druce,\i  List of British Plants\plain\fs28 . Oxford. 1908. Ed. 2, titled \b Brit. Pl. List\plain\fs28 , \i British Plant List\plain\fs28 . Arbroath. 1928.
\par \pard \b Druce\plain\fs28 , \i\b Fl. Berks.\plain\fs28 
\par      G.C. Druce, \i The Flora of Berkshire\plain\fs28 . Oxford. 1898.
\par \b Duby\plain\fs28 ,\i\b  Bot. Gall.\plain\fs28 
\par    J.\'c9. Duby, \i Aug. Pyrami de Candolle Botanicon gallicum, seu Synopsis Plantarum in Flora gallica descriptarum. Editio secunda. Ex Herbariis et Schedis candollianis propriisque digestum a J.\'c9. Duby\plain\fs28 . Paris. 1828-1830. (\b 1\plain\fs28  in 1828;\b  2\plain\fs28  in 1830.)
\par \b Duchartre\plain\fs28 , \i\b Rev. Bot.\plain\fs28 
\par    P.-E.-S. Duchartre (edit.), \i Revue botanique. Recueil mensuel renfermant l' Analyse des Travaux publi\'e9s en France et \'e0 l' \'c9tranger sur la Botanique et sur ses Applications \'e0 l' Horticulture, l' Agriculture, la M\'e9decine etc\plain\fs28 . Paris. 1845-1847. (\b 1\plain\fs28  in 1845-1846 ; \b 2\plain\fs28  in 1846 1847.)
\par \pard \b Duchesne\plain\fs28 , \i\b Hist. Nat. Frais.\plain\fs28 
\par     A.N. Duchesne, \i Histoire naturelle des Fraisiers.\plain\fs28   Paris. 1766. 
\par \b Dulac\plain\fs28 , \i\b Fl. D\'e9p. Hautes-Pyr\plain\fs28 .
\par     J.Dulac, Flore du D\'e9partement des Hautes-Pyrenees. Paris.1867.
\par \b Dum.-Courset\plain\fs28 ,\i\b  Bot. Cult\plain\fs28 .
\par      G.L.M. Dumont de Courset, \i Le Botaniste Cultivateur\plain\fs28 . Ed. 1.
\par \b Dumort\plain\fs28 .,\i\b  Comment. Bot.\plain\fs28 
\par      C.J. Dumortier, \i Commentationes botanicae\plain\fs28 . Tournay. 1822.
\par \b Dumort\plain\fs28 ., \i\b Fl. Belg\plain\fs28 .
\par \pard    B.C.J. Dumortier, \i Florula belgica, Operis majoris Prodromus. Staminacia\plain\fs28 . Tornaci Nerviorum. 1827. (Not reviewed until 1830 and perhaps not published until then. Cf. F.A. Stafleu & R.S. Cowan, \i Taxonomic Literature\plain\fs28  ed. 2, \b 1\plain\fs28  : 699 (1976).)
\par \b Dunal\plain\fs28 , \i\b Hist. Solanum\plain\fs28 
\par      M.F. Dunal, \i Histoire naturelle, medicale et economique des Solanum\plain\fs28 . Paris, Strasbourg & Montpellier. 1813.
\par \b Duperrey\plain\fs28 , \i\b Voy. Autour Monde La Coquille, Bot., Phanerog\plain\fs28 .
\par \pard      L.-I. Duperrey, \i Voyage autour du Monde. .. sur la Corvette de sa Majeste,\plain\fs28  La Coquille, \i pendant les Annees 1822, 1823, 1824 et 1825. Botanique, by J.S.C.D. D'Urville, J.B.G.M. Bory de Saint-Vincent & A.T. Brongniart. Phan\'e9rogamie, by A.T. Brongniart\plain\fs28 . Paris. 1829-1834. ( Pp. 1-40 in 1829; pp. 41-104 in 1831; pp. 105-136 in 1832; pp. 137-176 in 1833; pp. 177-232 in 1834.)
\par \b Durand, T. & Schinz\plain\fs28 ,\i\b  Consp. Fl. Afr\plain\fs28 .
\par      T.A. Durand & H. Schinz,\i  Conspectus Florae Africae\plain\fs28 . Bruxelles. 1895-1898. (\b 1\plain\fs28 (\b 2\plain\fs28 ) in 1898; \b 5\plain\fs28  in 1894; unflnished. Cf. F.A. Stafleu & R.S. Cowan,\i  Taxonomic Literature\plain\fs28  ed. 2, \b 1\plain\fs28 : 709 (1976).)
\par \pard \b Durieu\plain\fs28 , \i\b Expl. Sci. Algerie\plain\fs28 
\par      M.C. Durieu de Maisonneuve,\i  Exploration scientifique de l'Alg\'e9rie pendant les Ann\'e9es 1840, 1841, 1842. Botanique\plain\fs28 . Paris. 1846-1869. (For dates cf. F.A. Stafleu & R.S. Cowan, \i Taxonomic Literature\plain\fs28  ed. 2, \b 1\plain\fs28 : 711-712 (1976).)
\par \b Durieu\plain\fs28 , \i\b Pl. Astur. Exsicc\plain\fs28 .
\par     M.C. Durieu de Maisonneuve,\i  Plant. select. hispano lusit. Sect. Ia asturicae. Anno 1835 collecta\plain\fs28 . (\i Exsicc.\plain\fs28 ) 1836.
\par \b Duroi\plain\fs28 , \i\b Harbk. Baumz.\plain\fs28  
\par \pard      J.P. Duroi, \i Die Harbkesche wilde Baumzucht, theils nordamerikanischer und anderer fremder, theils einheimischer  B\'e4ume, Str\'e4ucher und str\'e4uchartigen Pflanzen nach den Kennzeichen, der Anzucht, den Eigenschaften und der Benutzung beschrieben.\plain\fs28   Braunschweig. Ed. 1. 1771-1772. (\b 1\plain\fs28  in 1771; \b 2\plain\fs28  in  1772.) Ed. 2 by J.F. Pott.1795-1800. (\b 1\plain\fs28  in 1795;\b  2\plain\fs28  & \b 3\plain\fs28  in 1800.) 
\par \b D'Urv\plain\fs28 .,\i\b  Enum\plain\fs28 .
\par      J.S.C.D. D'Urville, \i Enumeratio Plantarum, quas in Insulis Archipelagi aut Littoribus Ponti euxini Annis 1819 et 1820 collegit atque detexit....\plain\fs28  Parisiis. 1822.
\par \pard \b Dykes\plain\fs28 ,\i\b  Gen. Iris\plain\fs28 
\par      W.R. Dykes, \i The Genus Iris\plain\fs28 . Cambridge. 1913.
\par \b Ecklon\plain\fs28 , \i\b Topogr. Verzeichn\plain\fs28 .
\par      C.F. Ecklon, \i Topographisches Verzeichniss der Pflanzensammlung\plain\fs28 . Esslingen.1827.
\par \b Edmondston\plain\fs28 ,\i\b  Fl. Shetl\plain\fs28 .
\par    T.B. Edmondston, \i A Flora of Shetland\plain\fs28 . Aberdeen, London, Edinburgh, Glasgow & Belfast. 1845. Ed. 2, edited by C.F. Argyll Saxby. Edinburgh & London. 1903.
\par \b Ehrh.\plain\fs28 ,\i\b  Beitr. Naturk.\plain\fs28 
\par    J.F. Ehrhart, \i Beitr\'e4ge zur Naturkunde\plain\fs28 . Hannover & Osnabr\'fcck. 1787-1792.(\b 1\plain\fs28  in 1787; \b 2\plain\fs28  &\b  3\plain\fs28  in 1788; \b 4\plain\fs28  in 1789; \b 5\plain\fs28  in 1790; \b 6\plain\fs28  in 1791; \b 7\plain\fs28  in 1792. Cf. F.A. Stafleu & R.S. Cowan,\i  Taxonomic Literature\plain\fs28  ed. 2,\b  1\plain\fs28 : 732-733 (1976).)
\par \pard \b Eichw\plain\fs28 ., \i\b Pl. Nov. It. Casp.-Cauc\plain\fs28 .
\par      K.E. von Eichwald,\i  Plantarum novarum vel minus cognitarum quas in Itinere caspio-caucasico observavit....\plain\fs28  Vilnae & Lipsiae. 1831-1833. (Pp. 1-18 in 1831; pp. 19-42 in 1833.)
\par \b Elfstr.\plain\fs28 , \i\b Hier. Alpina\plain\fs28 
\par      M. Elfstrand, \i Hieracia Alpina aus den Hochgebirgsgegenden des mittleren Skandinaviens\plain\fs28 . Upsala. 1893.
\par \b Elliott\plain\fs28 , \i\b Sketch Bot. South-Carol. Georgia\plain\fs28  
\par      S. Elliott, \i A Sketch of the Botany of South-Carolina and Georgia\plain\fs28 . Charleston. 1816-1824. (\b 1\plain\fs28 : pp. i-ii, 1-200 in 1816; pp. 201-496 in 1817; pp. 497-606 in 1821;\b  2\plain\fs28 : pp. 1-104 in 1821; pp. 105-208 in 1822; pp. 209-312 in ?1822; pp. 313- 520 in ?1823; pp. 521-743 in 1824. Cf. M.J.van Steenis-Kruseman & W.T. Stearn in C.G.G.J. van Steenis, \i Fl. Males\plain\fs28 .\b  I. 4\plain\fs28 :  clxxx (1954).)
\par \pard \b Enander\plain\fs28 , \i\b Salic. Scand. Exsicc\plain\fs28 .
\par     S.J. Enander, \i Salices Scandinaviae exsiccatae\plain\fs28 . Uppsala. 1905-1910. (\b 1\plain\fs28  & \b 2\plain\fs28  in 1905; \b 3\plain\fs28  in 1910.)
\par \b Endl.\plain\fs28 , \i\b Gen. Pl.\plain\fs28  
\par     S.L. Endlicher, \i Genera Plantarum secundum Ordines naturales disposita.\plain\fs28  Vindobonae. 1836-1841. (Pp. 1-160, i-iv in   1836; pp. 161-400 in 1837; pp. 401-640, v-xii in 1838; pp. 637-960, xiii-xx in 1839; pp. 961-1360, xxi-xl in 1840; pp. 1361-1483, xli-lx in 1841. Pp. 1335-1427 comprise \i\b Suppl\plain\fs28 . \b 1\plain\fs28 . \i\b Suppl\plain\fs28 .\b  2\plain\fs28 , titled \i Mantissa botanica\plain\fs28 , in 1842. \i\b Suppl\plain\fs28 . \b 3\plain\fs28 , titled  \i Mantissa botanica altera\plain\fs28 ,  in 1843. \i\b Suppl\plain\fs28 . \b 4\plain\fs28 (\b 2\plain\fs28 ) in 1847 or 1848. \i\b Suppl\plain\fs28 . \b 5\plain\fs28  (= \b 4\plain\fs28 (\b 3\plain\fs28 )) in 1850. Cf. M.J. van Steenis&  W.T. Stearn in C.G.G.J. van Steenis, \i Fl. Males.\plain\b\fs28  I. 4\plain\fs28 : clxxxi (1954).) 
\par \pard \b Endl\plain\fs28 ., \i\b Syn. Conif\plain\fs28 .
\par    S.L. Endlicher, \i Synopsis Coniferarum\plain\fs28 . Sangalli. 1847.
\par \b Endl. et al.\plain\fs28 , \i\b Enum. Pl. H\'fcgel\plain\fs28  
\par     S.L. Endlicher, G. Bentham, E. Fenzl & H.W. Schott, \i  Enumeratio Plantarum quas in Novae Hollandiae Ora austro-occidentali ad Fluvium Cygnorum et in Sinu Regis Georgii collegit Carolus Liber Baro de H\'fcgel\plain\fs28 . Vindobonae. 1837. 
\par \b Engler\plain\fs28 ,\i\b  Monogr. Gatt. Saxifr.\plain\fs28 
\par    H.G.A. Engler, \i Monographie der Gattung\plain\fs28  Saxifraga L. \i mit besonderer Ber\'fccksichtigung der geographischen Verh\'e4ltnisse\plain\fs28 . Breslau. 1872.
\par \pard \b Engler\plain\fs28 ,\i\b  Pflanzenreich\plain\fs28 
\par    H.G.A. Engler (edit.), \i Das Pflanzenreich. Regni vegetabilis Conspectus\plain\fs28 . Berlin. 1900-1953. (For authors and dates.of individual volumes cf. M.T. Davis,\i  Taxon\plain\b\fs28  6\plain\fs28 : 161-182 (1957) and F.A. Stafleu & R.S. Cowan, \i Taxonomic Literature\plain\fs28  ed. 2, \b 1\plain\fs28 : 785-797 (1976).) In citation the number of the Heft is placed first, followed by the systematic numbers (both Roman and Arabic) in brackets.
\par \b Engler & Prantl\plain\fs28 ,\i\b  Nat\'fcrl. Pflanzgenfam.\plain\fs28 
\par \pard    H.G.A. Engler & K.A.E. Prantl, \i Die nat\'fcrlichen Pflanzenfamilien nebst ihren Gattungen und wichtigeren Arten, insbesondere den Nutzpflanzen\plain\fs28 . Ed. 1. Leipzig. 1887-1915. Ed. 2. Leipzig & Berlin. 1925 \'98\'93. (For dates of both editions cf. F.A. Stafleu & R.S. Cowan, \i Taxonomic Literature\plain\fs28  ed. 2, \b 1\plain\fs28 : 764 783 (1976).) Photographic reprint. Berlin. 1960.
\par \b Engler, V.\plain\fs28 , \i\b Monogr. Gatt. Tilia\plain\fs28 
\par      V. Engler, \i Monographie der Gattung \plain\fs28 Tilia. Breslau. 1909.
\par \pard \b Etlinger\plain\fs28 ,\i\b  De Salvia\plain\fs28 
\par      A.E. Etlinger,\i  De Salvia Dissertatio inauguralis\plain\fs28 . Erlangae. 1777.
\par \b Fedorov\plain\fs28 , \i\b Fl. Part. Eur. URSS\plain\fs28 
\par      An. A. Fedorov (edit.), ***** ************ *****\i  CCCP\plain\fs28  [\i Flora evropejskoj Casti SSSR\plain\fs28 ] / \i Flora Partis europaeae URSS\plain\fs28 . Leningrad. 1974 \'98\'93. (\b 1\plain\fs28  in 1974; \b 2\plain\fs28  in 1976.)
\par \b Fedtsch., B.\plain\fs28 ,\i\b  Fl. Az. Ross\plain\fs28 .
\par      B.A. Fedtschenko, ***** ********** ******  [\i Flora aziatskoj Rossii\plain\fs28 ]. St-Peterburg. 1912-1920. (\b 1\plain\fs28  in 1913;\b  2\plain\fs28  & \b 3\plain\fs28  in 1912;\b  4-6\plain\fs28  in 1914; \b 7\plain\fs28  & \b 8\plain\fs28  in 1915; \b 9\plain\fs28  in 1916; \b 10\plain\fs28  in 1915; \b 11\plain\fs28  in 1917; \b 12\plain\fs28  in 1916; \b 13\plain\fs28  in 1918; \b 14\plain\fs28  in 1916; \b 15\plain\fs28  in 1920.)
\par \pard \b Fedtsch., B\plain\fs28 .,\i\b  Rast. Turkest\plain\fs28 .
\par      B.A. Fedtschenko, ************** *********** [\i Rastitel'nost' Turkestana\plain\fs28 ]. Petrograd.1915.
\par \b Fedtsch., O. & B\plain\fs28 ., \i\b Consp. Fl. Turkestan\plain\fs28 .
\par      O.A. & B.A. Fedtschenko, \i Conspectus Florae turkestanicae\plain\fs28 . / ******** ********, **** ********* ** ******** ********** [\i Perecen' Rastenij, diko rastuscikh v Russkom Turkestane\plain\fs28 ]. Sanktpeterburg & Jur'ev. 1906-1916. (\b 1\plain\fs28 , Sanktpeterburg;\b  2-6\plain\fs28 , Jur'ev. \b 1\plain\fs28  in 1906; \b 2\plain\fs28  &\b  3\plain\fs28  in 1909;\b  4\plain\fs28  in 1911; \b 5\plain\fs28  in 1913; \b 6\plain\fs28  in 1916.)
\par \pard \b Fedtsch., B. & Flerow\plain\fs28 ,\i\b  Fl. Evr. Ross\plain\fs28 .
\par      B.A. Fedtschenko & A.F. Flerow, ***** *********** ****** [\i Flora Evropejskoj Rossii\plain\fs28 ]. S.-Peterburg. 1908-1910. (Pp. 1-286 in 1908; pp. 287-710 in 1909; pp. 711-1204 in 1910.)
\par \b F\'e9e\plain\fs28 , \i\b M\'e9m. Fam. Foug\plain\fs28 .
\par     A.L.A. F\'e9e,\i  M\'e9moires sur les Familles des Foug\'e8res\plain\fs28 . Strasbourg. 1844-1866. (\b 1\plain\fs28  in 1844 (t.p.) or 1845 ; \b 2\plain\fs28  in 1845 ; \b 3\plain\fs28  & \b 4\plain\fs28  in 1852 ; \b 5\plain\fs28 , titled \i Genera Filicum. Exposition des Genres de la Famille des Polypodiac\'e9es\plain\fs28  (\i Classe des Foug\'e8res\plain\fs28 ), in 1850-1852 [pp. 3-30, 35-39, originally published in \i M\'e9m. Soc. Hist. Nat. Strasbourg\plain\fs28  \b 4\plain\fs28 (\b 1\plain\fs28 ) in 1850, pp. 40-388 in \i op. cit.\plain\b\fs28  5\plain\fs28  in 1852] ;\b  6\plain\fs28  in 1854 ; \b 7-9\plain\fs28  in 1857 or 1858; \b 10\plain\fs28  in 1865 or 1866; \b 11\plain\fs28  in 1866. Cf. F.A. Stafleu & R.S. Cowan, \i Taxonomic Literature\plain\fs28  ed. 2, \b 1\plain\fs28  : 820 (1976).)
\par \pard \b Fenzl\plain\fs28 , \i\b Pugillus\plain\fs28  
\par      E. Fenzl, \i Pugillus Plantarum novarum Syriae et Tauri occidentalis primus\plain\fs28 .  Vindobonae. 1842. 
\par \b Fenzl\plain\fs28 , \i\b Vers. Darstell. Alsin\plain\fs28 .
\par    E. Fenzl, \i Versuch einer Darstellung der geographischen Verbreitungs- und Vertheilungs- Verh\'e4ltnisse der nat\'fcrlichen Familie der Alsineen in der Polarregion und eines Theile der gem\'e4ssigten Zone der alten Welt\plain\fs28 .Wien. 1883.
\par \b Fernandes, A. & R.\plain\fs28 ,\i\b  Icon. Select. Fl. Azor\plain\fs28 .
\par \pard    A. Fernandes & R. [M.S.] B. Fernandes, \i Iconographia selecta Flora azoricae a Societate broteriana elaborata\plain\fs28 . Conimbriga. 1980 \'98\'93. (\b 1\plain\fs28 (\b 1\plain\fs28 ) in 1980; \b 1\plain\fs28 (\b 2\plain\fs28 ) in 1983; \b 2\plain\fs28 (\b 1\plain\fs28 ) in 1987.)
\par \b Fiori\plain\fs28 , \i\b Nuov. Fl. Anal. Ital.\plain\fs28  
\par      A. Fiori,\i  Nuova Flora analitica d'Italia.\plain\fs28   Firenze. 1923-1929. (\b 1\plain\fs28 : pp. 1-480 in 1923; pp. 481-800 in 1924; pp. 801-944 in 1925; \b 2\plain\fs28 : pp. 1-160 in 1925; pp. 161-480 in 1926; pp. 481-800  in 1927; pp. 801-944 in 1928; pp. 945-1120 in 1929.) 
\par \pard \b Fiori & B\'e9guinot,\plain\fs28  or\b  Fiori, B\'e9guinot & Pampanini\plain\fs28 ,\i\b  Sched. Fl. Ital. Exsicc\plain\fs28 .
\par    A. Fiori, A. B\'e9guinot & R. Pampanini, \i Schedae ad Floram Italiam exsiccatam\plain\fs28 . Ser. 1 & 2, Fasc. \b 1-11\plain\fs28 . Florentiae. 1914. Also published in \i Nuovo Gior. Bot. Ital\plain\fs28 . as Ser. 1 Vols. \b 1\plain\fs28  &\b  2\plain\fs28 , Ser. 2 Vols. \b 1\plain\fs28  & \b 2\plain\fs28 , Centuriae I-XX, as foIlows: Ser. 1, \b 1\plain\fs28 , Cent. I-II as \i op. cit\plain\fs28 . \b 12\plain\fs28 (\b 2\plain\fs28 ): 144-216 (1905); Cent. III as \i op. cit\plain\fs28 . \b 13\plain\fs28 (\b 1\plain\fs28 ): 5-50 (1905); Cent. IV as \i op. cit\plain\fs28 . \b 13\plain\fs28 (\b 2\plain\fs28 ): 163-205 (1906); Cent. V and Index to Cent. I-V as\i  op. cit\plain\fs28 . \b 13\plain\fs28 (\b 4\plain\fs28 ): 289-346 (1906); \b 2\plain\fs28 , Cent. VI as \i op. cit\plain\fs28 . \b 14\plain\fs28 (\b 2\plain\fs28 ): 69-116 (1907); Cent. VII as \i op. cit\plain\fs28 . \b 14\plain\fs28 (\b 3\plain\fs28 ): 247-292 (1907); Cent. VIII as \i op. cit\plain\fs28 . \b 15\plain\fs28 (\b 3\plain\fs28 ): 307-354 (1908); Cent. IX-X and Index to Cent. VI-X as \i op. cit\plain\fs28 . \b 15\plain\fs28 (\b 4\plain\fs28 ): 445-543 (1908). Ser. 2, \b 1\plain\fs28  : Cent. XI as \i op. cit\plain\fs28 . \b 16\plain\fs28 (\b 4\plain\fs28 ): 443-495 (1909) ; Cent. XII as \i op. cit\plain\fs28 . \b 17\plain\fs28 (\b 1\plain\fs28 ): 62-122 (1910); Cent. XIII-XIV as \i op. cit\plain\fs28 . \b 17\plain\fs28 (\b 4\plain\fs28 ): 563-668 (1910); Cent. XV as \i op. cit.\plain\fs28  \b 18\plain\fs28 (\b 3\plain\fs28 ): 279-319 (1911); Cent. XVI as \i op. cit.\plain\fs28  \b 18\plain\fs28 (\b 4\plain\fs28 ): 459-513 (1911); Cent. XVII-XVIII as \i op. cit.\plain\fs28  \b 19\plain\fs28 : 517-607 (1912); Cent. XIX-XX as \i op. cit\plain\fs28 . \b 20\plain\fs28 (\b 1\plain\fs28 ): 15-109 (1914). Ser. 3. Fasc. \b l2\plain\fs28  (Cent. XXI- XXII, pp. 1-94). Padova. 1914. Fasc. \b 13\plain\fs28  (Cent. XXIII-XXIV; pp. 95-175), place and date not traced but between 1915 and 1920. Fasc. \b 14\plain\fs28  (Cent. XXV-X XVI, pp. 176-244). Sancasciano, Val di Pisa. 1921. Fasc. \b 15\plain\fs28  (Cent. XVII-XVIII, pp. 245-326), place not traced, 1923 or 1924. Fasc. \b 16\plain\fs28  (Cent. XXIX-XXX, pp. 327-436). Forli. 1927. (For dates of \b 12\plain\fs28 , \b 14\plain\fs28 , and \b 16\plain\fs28  cf. \i Just's Bot. Jahrb\plain\fs28 . \b 44\plain\fs28 : 1269 (1927), \b 51\plain\fs28 (\b 2\plain\fs28 ): 200 (1933) and \b 55\plain\fs28 (\b 1\plain\fs28 ): 443 (1935). \i \'d6sterr. Bot. Zeitschr\plain\fs28 . \b 78\plain\fs28 : 72 (1924) gives date of issue of the herbarium sheets (\i Flora Italiae Exsiccatae\plain\fs28 ) corresponding to Cent. XVII-XVIII as 1923, while \i Just's Bot. Jahrb\plain\fs28 . \b 54\plain\fs28 (\b 1\plain\fs28 ): 793 (1932) gives 1924.) Ser. 1 by A. Fiori, A. B\'e9guinot & R. Pampanini ; Ser. 2 & 3 by A. Fiori & A. B\'e9guinot.
\par \pard \b Fiori & Paol.\plain\fs28 , \i\b Fl. Anal. Ital.\plain\fs28  
\par      A. Fiori & G. Paoletti, \i Flora analitica d'Italia.\plain\fs28   Padova. 1896-1909. (\b 1\plain\fs28 : pp. i-c in 1908; pp. 1-256 in 1896; pp. 257-610 in 1898; \b 2\plain\fs28 : pp. 1-224 in 1900; pp. 225-304 in 1901; pp. 305- 493 in 1902;\b  3\plain\fs28 : pp. 1-272 in 1903; pp. 273-524 in 1904; \b 4\plain\fs28 : pp.   1-217, index pp. 1-16 in 1907; index pp. 17-330 in 1908; \b 5\plain\fs28   in 1909.) Cf. F.A. Stafleu & R.S. Cowan,\i  Taxonomic Literature\plain\fs28  ed. 2, \b 1\plain\fs28 : 833 (1976).)
\par \pard \b Fischer\plain\fs28 ,\i\b  Cat. Jard. Gorenki\plain\fs28 
\par    F.E.L. von Fischer,\i  Catalogue du Jardin des Plantes du Comte Alexis de Razoumoffsky \'e0 Gorenki pr\'e8s de Moscou\plain\fs28 . Ed. 1. Moscou. 1808. Ed. 2. Moscou. 1812.
\par \b Fischer,\i  Syn. Astrag. Trag.\plain\fs28  
\par      F.E.L. von Fischer, \i Synopsis Astragalorum tragacantharum.\plain\fs28   Mosquae. 1853. 
\par \b Fischer & C.A. Meyer\plain\fs28 , \i\b Enum. Pl. Nov\plain\fs28 .
\par    F.E.L. von Fischer & C.A. von Meyer, \i Enumeratio Plantarum novarum a clarissimo Schrenk lectarum\plain\fs28 . Petropoli & Lipsiae.1841-1842. (\b 1\plain\fs28  in 1841 ; \b 2\plain\fs28  (Enumeratio altera ...) in 1842.)
\par \pard \b Fischer & C.A. Meyer, or Fischer, C.A. Meyer & Av\'e9-Lall.\plain\fs28 , \i\b Ind. Sem. Horti Petrop.\plain\fs28 
\par    F.E.L. von Fischer & C.A. von Meyer, or F.E.L. von Fischer & E.R. von Trautvetter, or F.E.L. von Fischer, C.A. von Meyer & J.L.E. Av\'e9-Lallemant, or J.L.E. Av\'e9-Lallemant, \i Index\plain\fs28  [\i secundus ... undecimus\plain\fs28 ] \i Seminum, quae Hortus botanicus imperialis petropolitanus pro mutua Commutatione offert. Accedunt Animadversiones botanicae nonnullae\plain\fs28 . Petropoli. 1835-1850. (\b 1\plain\fs28  in 1835; \b 2\plain\fs28  in 1836; \b 3\plain\fs28  in 1837 ; \b 4\plain\fs28  in 1838; \b 5\plain\fs28  in 1839; \b 6\plain\fs28  in 1840; \b 7\plain\fs28  in 1841 ; \b 8\plain\fs28  in 1842; \b 9\plain\fs28  in 1843; \b 9\plain\fs28  (\i Suppl\plain\fs28 .) in 1844; \b 10\plain\fs28  in 1845; \b 11\plain\fs28  in 1846; \b 11\plain\fs28  (\i Suppl\plain\fs28 .) in 1846 or later.) Co-authors: \b 1-8\plain\fs28 , C.A. von Meyer; \b 3\plain\fs28  & \b 4\plain\fs28 , E.R. von Trautwetter; \b 6-11\plain\fs28 , J.L.\'c9. Av\'e9-Lallemant. For continuation see Regel et al., \i Ind. Sem. Horti Petrop.\plain\fs28 
\par \pard \b Fischer, C.A. Meyer & Ave-Lall\plain\fs28 .,\i\b  Ind. Sem. Hort. Petrop.\plain\fs28 
\par      Cf. Fischer & C.A. Meyer,\i  Ind. Sem. Hort. Petrop\plain\fs28 .
\par \b Focke\plain\fs28 , \i\b Syn. Rub. Germ.\plain\fs28  
\par      W.O. Focke,  \i Synopsis Ruborum Germaniae\plain\fs28 . / \i Die deutschen Brombeerarten\plain\fs28 .  Bremen. 1877. 
\par \b Fomin\plain\fs28 , \i\b Fl. RSS Ucr\plain\fs28 .
\par    A.V. Fomin,\i  Flora RSS Ucr\plain\fs28 . /\i  Florae Reipublicae sovieticae socialisticae ucrainicae\plain\fs28 . /  ******************** [\i Flora URSR\plain\fs28 ]. Ed. 1. Kioviae. 1936-1965. (\b 1\plain\fs28 , edit. A.V. Fomin in 1936; \b 2\plain\fs28 , edit. E.I. Bordzilowski & E.M. Lavrenko in 1940.) Titled ************ [\i Flora URSR\plain\fs28 ]:\b  3\plain\fs28 , edit. M.L. Kotov & A.I. Barbarich in 1950; \b 4\plain\fs28 , edit. M.I. Kotov in 1952; \b 5\plain\fs28 , edit. M.V. Klokov & E.D. Wissjulina in 1953;\b  6\plain\fs28 , edit. D.K. Zerov in 1954;\b  7\plain\fs28 , edit. M.V. Klokov & E.D. Wissjulina in 1955;\b  8\plain\fs28 , edit. M.I. Kotov & A.I. Barbarich in 1957 ; \b 9\plain\fs28 , edit. M.I. Kotov in 1960; \b 10\plain\fs28 , edit. M.I. Kotov in 1961 ; \b 11\plain\fs28 , edit. E.D. WissjuIina in 1962; \b 12\plain\fs28 , edit. E.D. Wissjulina in 1965.) Ed. 2, titled \i  Flora RSS Ucr\plain\fs28 . (\i Flora Reipublicae sovieticae socialisticae ucrainicae\plain\fs28 ). / ************* [\i Flora URSR\plain\fs28 ]. Kioviae. 1938. (1, edit. E.I. Bordzilowski in 1938.)
\par \pard \b Font Quer\plain\fs28 , \i\b Fl. Card\'f3\plain\fs28  
\par      P. Font Quer \i Fl\'f3rula de Card\'f3\plain\fs28 . Barcelona. 1950
\par \b Font Quer\plain\fs28 ,\i\b  Ill. Fl. Occ.\plain\fs28 
\par      P. Font Quer, \i Illustrationes Florae occidentalis, quae ad Plantas Hispaniae, Lusitaniae et Mauritaniae novas vel imperfecte cognitas, spectant auctore....\plain\fs28  Barcelona. 1926.
\par \b Font Quer\plain\fs28 ,\i\b  Iter Maroc\plain\fs28 . (\i\b Sched.\plain\fs28 )
\par      P. Font Quer, \i Iter maroccanum\plain\fs28  (\i Schedae\plain\fs28 ). 1928-1930.
\par \b Font Quer & Rothm.\plain\fs28 ,\i\b  Sched. Fl. Iber. Select., Cent\plain\fs28 .
\par \pard     P. Font Quer & W. Rothmaler,\i  Schedae ad Floram ibericam selectam\plain\fs28 . Barcelona. 1934-1935. (Centuria \b 1\plain\fs28  in 1934-Centuria \b 2\plain\fs28  & \b 3\plain\fs28  in 1935.)
\par \b Forsk\'e5l\plain\fs28 ,\i\b  Fl. Aegypt\plain\fs28 .
\par    P. Forsk\'e5l, \i Flora aegyptiaco-arabica\plain\fs28 . Hauniae. 1775. (Posthumous ; edit. C. Niebuhr.)
\par \b Forster, G\plain\fs28 ., \i\b Fl. Ins. Austral. Prodr\plain\fs28 .
\par    J.G.A. Forster, \i Florulae Insularum australium Prodromus\plain\fs28 . Gottingae. 1786.
\par \b Forster, J. R. & G.\plain\fs28 , \i\b Char. Gen. Pl.\plain\fs28 
\par \pard      J.R. & J.G.A. Forster,\i  Characteres Generum Plantarum, quas in Itinere ad Insulas Maris australis collegerunt, descripserunt, delinearunt... Joannes Reinoldus Forster... et Georgius Forster\plain\fs28 . Ed. 1. Londini. 1775. Ed. 2. Londini. 1776. Cf. H. St John, \i Le Naturaliste canadien\plain\b\fs28  98\plain\fs28 : 561-581 (1971).
\par \b Fourn., E.\plain\fs28 , \i\b Rech. Fam. Crucif\plain\fs28 .
\par    E.P.N. Fournier, \i Recherches anatomiques taxonomiques sur la Famille des Crucif\'e8res et sur le Genre\plain\fs28  Sisymbrium\i  en particulier\plain\fs28 . Paris. 1865.
\par \pard \b Fourn., P.\plain\fs28 , \i\b Quatre Fl. Fr.\plain\fs28  
\par      P.V. Fournier, \i Les quatre Flores de la France, Corse comprise\plain\fs28 . Poinson-les-Grancey. 1934-1940. (Pp. 1-64 in 1934; pp. 65-256 in 1935; pp. 257-576 in 1936; pp. 577-832 in 1937; pp. 833-896 in 1938; pp. 897-1064 in 1939; pp. 1065-1092 in presumably in 1940 although neither the 1946 edition nor F.A. Stafleu & R.S. Cowan, \i Taxonomic Literature\plain\fs28  ed. 2, \b 1\plain\fs28 : 867 (1976) give the date of their publication ; the date is inferred from the fascicle numbers given in the 1946 ed. J.) Photographic reprint with additions and corrections at end. Paris. 1946. Reprint with more additions and corrections. Paris. 1961.
\par \pard \b Franco\plain\fs28 , \i\b Abetos\plain\fs28 
\par    J.M.A.P. do Amaral Franco,\i  Abetos\plain\fs28 . Lisboa. 1950. (Reprinted from \i Anais Inst. Sup. Agron\plain\fs28 . (\i Lisboa\plain\fs28 ) \b 17\plain\fs28  : 1-260 (1950).)
\par \b Franco\plain\fs28 , \i\b Conif. Duar. Nom\plain\fs28 .
\par    J.M.A.P. do Amaral Franco, \i De Coniferarum duarum Nominibus\plain\fs28 . Lisboa. 1950.
\par \b Franco\plain\fs28 , \i\b Dendrologia Florestal\plain\fs28 
\par    J.M.A.P. do Amaral Franco,\i  Dendrologia florestal\plain\fs28 . Lisboa. 1943.
\par \b Franco\plain\fs28 , \i\b Nova Fl. Portugal\plain\fs28 
\par \pard    J.M.A.P. do Amaral Franco, \i Nova Flora de Portugal\plain\fs28  (\i continente e A\'e7ores\plain\fs28 ). Lisboa. 1971 \'98\'93. (\b 1\plain\fs28  in 1971 ; \b 2\plain\fs28  in 1984.)
\par \b Franklin\plain\fs28 , \i\b Narr. Journey\plain\fs28 
\par    J. Franklin, \i Narrative of a Journey to the Shores of the Polar Sea in the Years 1819, 20, 21 and 22\plain\fs28 . London. 1823. Botanical Appendix by J. Richardson.
\par \b Freyc\plain\fs28 ., \i\b Voy.Bot.\plain\fs28 
\par    H.L.C. De Saulces de Freycinet, \i Voyage autour du Monde, entrepris par Ordre du Roi...ex\'e9cut\'e9 sur les Corvettes de S.M. l'Uranie et la Physicienne, pendant les Ann\'e9es 1817, 1818, 1819 et 1820\plain\fs28 . Paris. 1826-1830. \i Botanique\plain\fs28  by C. Gaudichaud-Beaupr\'e9. (Pp. 1-80, tt. 1-20 in 1826; pp. 81-208, tt. 21-50 in 1827; pp. 209-352, tt. 51-80 in 1828 ; pp. 353-464, tt. 81-1 10 in 1829 (t. 85 possibIy in 1826); pp. 465-522, tt. 111-120 in 1830. Atlas: pp. 1-22 by A. Poiret fils in 1830. Cf. F.A. Stafleu & R.S. Cowan, \i Taxonomic Literature\plain\fs28  ed. 2, 1: 922 (1976).)
\par \pard \b Friedrichsthal\plain\fs28 , \i\b Reise\plain\fs28 
\par      E. von Friedrichsthal, \i Reise in den sudlichen Theilen von Neugriechenland\plain\fs28 . Leipzig. 1838.
\par \b Fries\plain\fs28 , \i\b  Fl. Halland\plain\fs28 . 
\par      E.M. Fries,  \i Flora hallandica.\plain\fs28   Lund. 1817-1819. (Pp. 1-68 in 1817; pp. 69-100 in 1818; pp. 101-159 in 1819.) 
\par \b Fries\plain\fs28 ,\i\b  Hier. Eur. Exsicc\plain\fs28 .
\par      E.M. Fries, \i Hieracia europaea exsiccata\plain\fs28 . 1861-1865.
\par \b Fries\plain\fs28 , \i\b Nov. Fl. Suec\plain\fs28 .
\par    E.M. Fries, \i Novitiae Florae suecicae\plain\fs28 . Ed. 1. Lundae. 1814-1824. (\b 1\plain\fs28 & \b 2\plain\fs28  in 1814; \b 3\plain\fs28  &\b  4\plain\fs28  in 1817; \b 5\plain\fs28  in 1819; \b 6\plain\fs28  in 1823; \b 7\plain\fs28  in 1824.) Ed. 2. Londini  Gothorum. 1828.\i\b  Mant\plain\fs28 ., \i Mantissa\plain\fs28  \b 1\plain\fs28 . Lundae. 1832-1835. (Pp. 1-56 in 1832; pp. 57-64 in 1834; pp. 65-84 in 1835.) \i Mantissa\plain\fs28  \b 2\plain\fs28 . Upsaliae. 1839. \i Mantissa\plain\fs28  \b 3\plain\fs28 . Upsaliae.1842-1845. (Pp. 1-48 in 1842; pp. 49-96 in 1843; pp. 97-204 in 1845.) Cf. F.A. Stafleu & R.S. Cowan,\i  Taxonomic Literature\plain\fs28  ed. 2, \b 1\plain\fs28 : 883 (1976).
\par \pard \b Fries\plain\fs28 , \i\b Summa Veg. Scand.\plain\fs28 
\par    E.M. Fries, \i Summa Vegetabilium Scandinaviae. Sectio prior\plain\fs28 . (Pp. 1-258.) Upsaliae. 1845. (Reissued with different title, \i Summa ... Plantarum quum cotyledonearum, tum nemearum ... lectarum, indicata simul Distributione geographica.\plain\fs28  Upsaliae, Holmiae & Lipsiae in 1846.) \i Sectio posterior\plain\fs28 . (Pp. 259-572; same title as 1846 reissue of \i Sectio prior\plain\fs28 .) Upsaliae, Holmiae & Lipsiae. 1849.
\par \b Fritsch\plain\fs28 , \i\b Exkursionsfl. \'d6sterr.\plain\fs28  
\par \pard      K. Fritsch, \i Excursionsflora f\'fcr \'d6sterreich\plain\fs28  (\i mit Ausschluss von Galizien, Bukowina und Dalmatien\plain\fs28 ).  Ed. 1. Wien. 1897.  Ed. 2, titled \i  Exkursionsflora f\'fcr \'d6sterreich \plain\fs28 (\i mit Ausschluss von Galizien, Bukowina und Dalmatien\plain\fs28 ).  Wien. 1909. Ed. 3, titled  \i Exkursionsflora f\'fcr \'d6sterreich und die ehemals \'f6sterreichischen Nachbargebiete\plain\fs28 .  Wien & Leipzig. 1922. 
\par \b Fritsch\plain\fs28 , \i\b Sched. Fl. Exsicc. Austr.-Hung\plain\fs28 .
\par      Cf. A. Kerner, \i Sched. Fl. Exsicc. Austr.-Hung.\plain\fs28 
\par \pard \b Froelich\plain\fs28 ,\i\b  Gent. Diss\plain\fs28 .
\par      J.A. von Froelich,\i  De Centiana Libellus\plain\fs28 . /\i  De Gentiana Dissertatio\plain\fs28 . Erlangae. 1796.
\par \b Fuss\plain\fs28 , \i\b Fl. Transsilv. Exc.\plain\fs28 
\par      J.M. Fuss, \i Flora transsilvaniae Excursoria.... Hermannstadt\plain\fs28 . 1866.
\par \b Fuss\plain\fs28 ,\i\b  Mantissa\plain\fs28 
\par      M. Fuss, \i Joh. Christ. Gottl. Baumgarten Enumerationis Stirpium Transilvaniae indigenarum Mantissa\plain\fs28  I. Cibinii. 1846.
\par \b Gaertner\plain\fs28 ,\i\b  Fruct. Sem. Pl\plain\fs28 .
\par     J. Gaertner, \i De Fructibus et Seminibus Plantarum\plain\fs28 . Stuttgardiae,Tuebingae & Lipsiae. 1788-1807. (\b 1\plain\fs28 , Stuttgardiae; \b 2\plain\fs28 , Tuebingae; \b 3\plain\fs28 , Lipsiae. \b 1\plain\fs28  in 1788;\b  2\plain\fs28 : pp. 1-184 in 1790; pp. 185-504 in 1791 ; pp. 505-520 in 1792; \b 3\plain\fs28 : pp. 1-56 in 1805; pp. 57-128 in 1806; pp. 129-256 in 1807. Cf. F.A. Stafleu & R.S. Cowan \i Taxonomic Literature\plain\fs28  ed. 2, \b 1\plain\fs28 : 900-901 (1976).) \b 3\plain\fs28  by C.F. von Gaertner.
\par \pard \b Gaertner, P., B. Meyer & Scherb.\plain\fs28 ,\i\b  Fl. Wetter\plain\fs28 .
\par    P.G. Gaertner, B. Meyer & J. Scherbius, \i Oekonomisch-technische Flora der Wetterau\plain\fs28 . Frankfurt. 1799-1803. (\b 1\plain\fs28  in 1799; \b 2\plain\fs28  in 1800; \b 3\plain\fs28 (\b 1\plain\fs28 ) in 1801 ; \b 3\plain\fs28 (\b 2\plain\fs28 ) in 1803.)
\par \b Gand.\plain\fs28 , \i\b Fl. Cret\plain\fs28 
\par     M. Gandoger,\i  Flora cretica\plain\fs28 . Parisiis. 1916.
\par \b Gamisans\plain\fs28 ,\i\b  Cat. Pl. Vasc. Corse\plain\fs28 
\par    J. Gamisans, \i Catalogue des Plantes vasculaires de la Corse\plain\fs28 . Ajaccio.1985.
\par \pard \b Garcke\plain\fs28 , \i\b Fl.  Halle\plain\fs28  
\par      F.A. Garcke, \i Flora von Halle\plain\fs28 . Halle.1848-1856. (\b 1\plain\fs28 (\b 1\plain\fs28  &\b  2\plain\fs28 ) in 1848; \b 2\plain\fs28  in 1856.) 
\par \b Garcke\plain\fs28 , \i\b Fl. Nord-Mittel-Deutschl.\plain\fs28  
\par    C.A.F. Garcke, \i Flora von Nord- und Mittel-Deutschland\plain\fs28 . Ed. 1. Berlin. 1849. Ed. 2. Berlin. 1851. Ed. 3. Berlin. 1854. Ed. 4. Berlin. 1858. Ed. 5. Berlin. 1860. Ed. 6. Berlin. 1863. Ed. 7. Berlin. 1865. Ed. 8. Berlin. 1867. Ed. 9. Berlin. 1869. Ed. 10. Berlin. 1871. Ed. 11. Berlin. 1873. Ed. 12. Berlin. 1875. Ed. 13, titled\i Flora von Deutschland\plain\fs28 . Berlin. 1878. Ed. 14. Berlin. 1882. Ed. 15. Berlin. 1885. Ed. 16. Berlin. 1890. Ed. 17, titled \i Illustrierte Flora von Deutschland\plain\fs28 . Berlin. 1895. Ed. 18. Berlin. 1898. Ed. 19. Berlin. 1903. Ed. 20, titled \i August Gareke's Illustrierte Flora von Deutschland, by F. Niedenzu\plain\fs28 . Berlin. 1908. Ed. 21. Berlin. 1912. Ed. 22. Berlin. 1922. Ed. 23, titled\i  August Gareke Illustrierte Flora von Deutschland und angrenzenden Gebiete, by K. von Weihe\plain\fs28 . Berlin & Hamburg. 1972.
\par \pard \b Gasparr.\plain\fs28 , \i\b Not. Piante Lucan.\plain\fs28  
\par      G. Gasparrini, \i Notizie intorno ad alcune Piante della Lucania.\plain\fs28  Napoli. 1833. Reprinted as \i Progr. Sci. Lett. Arti\plain\fs28  nov. ser., \b 4\plain\fs28 : 161-172 (1833). 
\par \b Gaudin\plain\fs28 , \i\b Agrost. Helv\plain\fs28 .
\par      J.F.A.T.G.P. Gaudin,\i  Agrostologia helvetica\plain\fs28 . Parisiis & Genevae. 1811. (\b 1\plain\fs28  & \b 2\plain\fs28  in 1811.)
\par \b Gaudin\plain\fs28 , \i\b Etrennes Fl\plain\fs28 .
\par      J.F.A.T.G.P. Gaudin,\i  Etrennes de Flore\plain\fs28  (\i Carices\plain\fs28 ). Lausanne. 1804.
\par \pard \b Gaudin\plain\fs28 ,\i\b  Fl. Helv\plain\fs28 .
\par      J.F.A.T.G.P. Gaudin,\i  Flora helvetica\plain\fs28 . Turici. 1828-1833. (\b 1-3\plain\fs28  in 1828; \b 4\plain\fs28  & \b 5\plain\fs28  in 1829; \b 6\plain\fs28  in 1830; \b 7\plain\fs28  in 1833.)
\par \b Gay, C.\plain\fs28 , \i\b Hist. Chil. Bot.\plain\fs28  
\par     C. Gay, \i Historia fisica y politica de Chile. Bot\'e1nica\plain\fs28 .  Paris.1845-1854. (\b 1-8\plain\fs28  in 1845-1854. For dates cf. I.M. Johnston, \i Darwinia\plain\fs28   \b 5\plain\fs28 : 154-165 (1941) and M.J. van Steenis  & W.T. Stearn in C.G.G.J. van Steenis, \i Fl. Males.\plain\fs28  \b I. 4\plain\fs28 : clxxxiv (1954).) 
\par \pard \b Gay\plain\fs28 , \i\b Erysim. Nov\plain\fs28 .
\par    J.\'c9. Gay, \i Erysimorum quorundum novorum Diagnoses simulque Erysimi muralis Descriptionem praemittit, Monographiam Generis editurus\plain\fs28  J. Gay. Parisiis. 1842.
\par \b Genev.\plain\fs28 , \i\b Monogr. Rubus\plain\fs28  
\par      L.G. Genevier, \i Essai monographique sur les \plain\fs28 Rubus\i  du Bassin de la Loire\plain\fs28   (as \i M\'e9m. Soc. Acad. Angers\plain\b\fs28  24\plain\fs28 : 1-364 (1868)). Reprinted, Angers, 1869.\i  Premier Suppl\'e9ment \plain\fs28 (as\i  M\'e9m. Soc. Acad. Angers\plain\b\fs28  28\plain\fs28 :  1-96 (1872)). Ed. 2, titled  \i Monographie des \plain\fs28 Rubus \i  du Bassin de la Loire\plain\fs28 .  Paris & Nantes. 1880. 
\par \pard \b Georgi\plain\fs28 , \i\b Bemerk. Reise\plain\fs28 
\par    J.G. Georgi, \i Bemerkungen einer Reise im russischen Reich in Jahre 1772\plain\fs28 . St Petersburg. 1775. (\b 1\plain\fs28  & \b 2\plain\fs28  in 1775, with continuous pagination.)
\par \b Gmelin, C. C\plain\fs28 .,\i\b  Fl. Bad.\plain\fs28 
\par    C.C. Gmelin,\i  Flora badensis, alsatica et confinium Regionum cis et transrhenana, Plantas a Lacu Bodamico usque ad Confluentem Mosellae et Rheni sponte nascentes, exhibens\plain\fs28 . Carlsruhae. 1805-1826. (\b 1\plain\fs28  in 1805;\b  2\plain\fs28  in 1806; \b 3\plain\fs28  in 1808; \b 4\plain\fs28  in 1826.)
\par \pard \b Gmelin, J.F.\plain\fs28 , \i\b Onomat. Bot. Compl\plain\fs28 .
\par      J.F. Gmelin,\i  Onomatologia botanica completa, oder vollstandiges botanisches Worterbuch\plain\fs28 . Frankfurt & Leipzig. 1772-1778. (\b 1\plain\fs28  & \b 2\plain\fs28  in 1772; \b 3-5\plain\fs28  in 1773;\b  6\plain\fs28  in 1774; \b 7\plain\fs28  in 1775;\b  8\plain\fs28  in 1776; \b 9\plain\fs28  in 1777; \b 10\plain\fs28  in 1778.)
\par \b Gmelin, J.F\plain\fs28 .,\i\b  Syst. Nat.\plain\fs28 
\par      Cf. L., Syst. Nat.
\par \b Gmelin, S.G\plain\fs28 .,\i\b  Reise Russl\plain\fs28 .
\par    S.G. Gmelin, \i Reise durch Russland zur Untersuchung der drey Natur-Reiche\plain\fs28 . St. Petersburg. 1770-1784. (\b 1\plain\fs28  in [possibly 1770-] 1774;\b  2\plain\fs28 & \b 3\plain\fs28  in 1774; \b 4\plain\fs28  in 1784. \b 4\plain\fs28  posthumously published by P.S. Pallas. Cf. F.A. Stafleu & R.S. Cowan, \i Taxonomic Literature\plain\fs28  ed. 2, \b 1\plain\fs28 : 958 (1976).)
\par \pard \b Gochnat\plain\fs28 , \i\b Tent. Pl. Cich\plain\fs28 .
\par      F.C. Gochnat, \i Tentamen medico-botanicum de Plantis cichoraceis\plain\fs28 . Argentorati. 1808.
\par \b Godet\plain\fs28 , \i\b Fl. Jura\plain\fs28  
\par      C.H. Godet, \i Flore du Jura.\plain\fs28  Neuch\'e2tel. 1852-1853. (\b 1\plain\fs28 : pp. 1-432 in 1852; \b 2\plain\fs28 : pp. 433-872 in 1853.) \i  Suppl\'e9ment\plain\fs28 . Neuch\'e2tel. 1869. 
\par \b Godman\plain\fs28 , \i\b  Nat.  Hist. Azores\plain\fs28  
\par      F. Du Cane Godman, \i Natural History of the Azores or Western Islands\plain\fs28 .  London. 1870. 
\par \pard \b Godron\plain\fs28 ,\i\b  Fl. Lorr.\plain\fs28  
\par      D.A. Godron, \i Flore de Lorraine\plain\fs28  (\i Meurthe, Moselle, Meuse, Vosges\plain\fs28 ). Ed. 1. Nancy. 1843-1844. (\b 1\plain\fs28  & \b 2\plain\fs28  in 1843; \b 3\plain\fs28  in 1844). \i Suppl\'e9ment\plain\fs28 .  Nancy. 1845. Ed. 2. Nancy. 1861. (\b 1\plain\fs28  & \b 2\plain\fs28  in 1861.) 
\par \b Goebel\plain\fs28 ,\i\b  Reise Steppen Russl\plain\fs28 .
\par      K.C.T.F. Goebel,\i  Reise in die Steppen des sudlichen Russlands\plain\fs28 . Dorpat. 1837-1838. (\b 1\plain\fs28  in 1837;\b  2\plain\fs28  in 1838. (Cf. F.A. Stafleu & R.S. Cowan, \i Taxonomic Literature\plain\fs28  ed. 2, \b 1\plain\fs28 : 963 (1976).)
\par \pard \b Goiran\plain\fs28 , \i\b Spec. Morph. Veg.\plain\fs28  
\par      A. Goiran,\i  Specimen Morphographiae vegetabilis.\plain\fs28  Veronae. 1875. 
\par \b Gorodkov\plain\fs28 ,\i\b  Fl. Murmansk.\plain\fs28 
\par      B.N. Gorodkov (edit.), *************************** [Flora Murmanskoj Oblasti]. Moskva & Leningrad. 1953-1966. (\b 1\plain\fs28  in 1953; \b 2\plain\fs28  in 1954; \b 3\plain\fs28  in 1956; \b 4\plain\fs28  in 1959; \b 5\plain\fs28  in 1966.) \b 2-5\plain\fs28  edit. A.I. Pojarkova.
\par \b Gorski\plain\fs28 ,\i\b  Icon. Pot. Char. Cyper. Gram. Lithuan\plain\fs28 .
\par      S.B. Gorski, \i Icones Potamogetonum, Characearum, Cyperacearum et Graminearum, novas vel minus cognitas Species Lithuaniae illustrantes\plain\fs28 . Berlin. 1849.
\par \pard \b Gouan\plain\fs28 ,\i\b  Fl. Monsp\plain\fs28 .
\par      A. Gouan,\i  Flora monspeliaca\plain\fs28 . Lugduni. 1764. (For date cf. F.A. Stafleu & R.S. Cowan, \i Taxonomic Literature\plain\fs28  ed.2,\b 1\plain\fs28 : 976 (1976).)
\par \b Gouan\plain\fs28 ,\i\b  Hort. Monsp.\plain\fs28 
\par      A. Gouan, \i Hortus regius Monspeliensis\plain\fs28 . Lugduni. 1762.
\par \b Gouan\plain\fs28 , \i\b Obs. Bot.\plain\fs28  
\par      A. Gouan, \i Illustrationes et Observationes botanicae, ad Specierum Historiam facientes, seu rariorum Plantarum indigenarum, pyrenaicarum, exoticarum Adumbrationes\plain\fs28 . Tiguri. 1773. 
\par \pard \b Govoruchin\plain\fs28 , \i\b Fl. Urala\plain\fs28  
\par      V.S. Govoruchin, *****  ***** [\i Flora Urala\plain\fs28 ]. / \i Flora medio, boreali el polari uralensis\plain\fs28 . Sverdlovsk. 1937. 
\par \b Grauer\plain\fs28 , \i\b Pl. Min. Cogn. Dec\plain\fs28 .
\par      S. Grauer, \i Plantarum minus cognitarum Decuria\plain\fs28 . Kiloniae.1784.
\par \b Gray, A\plain\fs28 .,\i\b  Man. Bot.\plain\fs28 
\par    A. Gray, \i A Manual of the Botany of the northern United States, from New England to Wisconsin and south to Ohio and Pennsylvania inclusive\plain\fs28 . Ed. 1. Boston & Cambridge. 1848. (Salicaceae, pp. 535-567, by J. Carey.) Ed. 2. New York. 1856. (Also 3 'School & College eds.' in 1857, 1858 & 1859 and a reissue of Ed. 2 in 1859.) Ed. 3 (as 'School & College ed.'). New York & Chicago. 1862. Ed. 4. New York & Chicago. 1863. ( 'School & College eds.' in 1864, 1865, 1867, 1869 ; reissue of ' Manual ' Ed. 4 in 1865). Ed. 5. New York & Chicago. 1867. (\i Pinus, Isoetes, Callitriche etc\plain\fs28 . by G. Engelmann ; Ferns by D. C. Eaton.) (Eight reissues, 1868-1880.) Ed. 6. New York & Chicago. 1890. (\i Salix\plain\fs28  by M.S. Bebb;\i  Pteridophytes\plain\fs28  by D.C. Eaton. Co-authors: J.M. Coulter, S. Watson, L.H. Bailey, D.C. Eaton & L.M. Underwood.) Ed. 7. New York, Cincinnati & Chicago. 1908. Co-authors: B.L. Robinson & M. L. Fernald. Ed. 8, titled \i Gray's Manual of Botany, eighth\plain\fs28  (\i Centennial\plain\fs28 ) \i Edition- illustrated. A Handbook of the flowering Plants and Ferns of the central and northeastern United States and adjacent Canada\plain\fs28 , edit. M.L. Fernald. New York, Cincinnati, Chicago, Boston, Atlanta, Dallas, San Francisco. 1950 (reprinted 1970, with corrections; reprinted, 1988).
\par \pard \b Gray, S.F\plain\fs28 ., \i\b Nat. Arr. Brit. Pl.\plain\fs28 
\par     S.F. Gray, \i A natural Arrangement of British Plants\plain\fs28 . London. 1821. (\b 1\plain\fs28  &\b  2\plain\fs28  in 1821. Cf. F.A. Stafleu & R.S. Cowan, \i Taxonomic Literature\plain\fs28  ed. 2, \b 1\plain\fs28 : 994 (1976).)
\par \b Grec.\plain\fs28 , \i\b Consp. Fl. Roman\plain\fs28 . 
\par     D. Grecescu, \i Conspectul Florei Romaniei\plain\fs28 . Bucuresti. 1898. \i\b Supl.\plain\fs28 , \i Suplement\plain\fs28 . Bucuresti. 1909. 
\par \b Greene, E.L.\plain\fs28 , \i\b Cybele Columb.\plain\fs28  
\par      E.L. Greene, \i Cybele columbiana.\plain\fs28  Providence, London & Leipzig. 1914. (\b 1\plain\fs28  in 1914.) 
\par \pard \b Gremli\plain\fs28 , \i\b Beitr. Fl. Schweiz\plain\fs28  
\par      A. Gremli, \i Beitr\'e4ge zur Flora der Schweiz\plain\fs28 . Aarau. 1870. 
\par \b Gremli\plain\fs28 , \i\b Excurs.-Fl. Schweiz\plain\fs28  
\par      A. Gremli, \i Excursionsflora f\'fcr die Schweiz\plain\fs28 .  Ed. 1. Aarau. 1867. Ed. 2. Aarau. 1874. Ed. 3. Aarau. 1878. Ed. 4. Aarau. 1881. Ed. 5. Aarau. 1885. Ed. 6. Aarau. 1889. Ed. 7. Aarau. 1893. Ed. 8. Aarau. 1896. Ed. 9. Aarau. 1901. 
\par \b Gremli\plain\fs28 ,\i\b  Fl. Anal. Suisse\plain\fs28 
\par      A. Gremli, \i Flore analytique de la Suisse\plain\fs28 . Ed. 1. B\'e2le, Gen\'e8ve & Lyon. 1886. Ed. 2. B\'e2le, Gen\'e8ve & Lyon. 1898.
\par \pard \b Gremli\plain\fs28 ,\i\b  Neue Beitr. Fl. Schweiz\plain\fs28  
\par       A. Gremli, \i Neue Beitr\'e4ge zur Flora der Schweiz\plain\fs28 . Aarau. 1880-1890. (\b 1\plain\fs28  in 1880; \b 2\plain\fs28  in 1882;\b  3\plain\fs28  in 1883;\b  4\plain\fs28  in 1887; \b 5\plain\fs28  in 1890.) 
\par \b Gren\plain\fs28 .,\i\b  Fl. Massil. Adv\plain\fs28 .
\par      J.C.M. Grenier,\i  Florula massiliensis advena\plain\fs28 . /\i  Florule exotique des environs de Marseille\plain\fs28 . Besan\'e7on. 1857.
\par \b Gren. & Godron\plain\fs28 , \i\b Fl. Fr.\plain\fs28 
\par    J.C.M. Grenier & D.A. Godron, \i Flore de France, ou Description des Plantes qui croissent naturellement en France et en Corse\plain\fs28 . Paris, London, Besan\'e7on, New York & Madrid. 1847-1856. (\b 1\plain\fs28  & \b 2\plain\fs28 , Paris, London & Besan\'e7on; \b 3\plain\fs28 , Paris, London, New York, Madrid & Besan\'e7on. \b 1\plain\fs28 (\b 1\plain\fs28 ), pp. 1-330 in 1847 ; \b 1\plain\fs28 (\b 2\plain\fs28 ), pp. 331-766 in Dec. 1848 - Jan. 1849;\b  2\plain\fs28 : pp. 1-392 in 1850; pp. 393-760 in 1853 ; \b 3\plain\fs28  : pp. 1-384 in 1855 ; pp. 385-779 in 1856. Cf. F. A. Stafleu & R.S. Cowan, \i Taxonomic Literature\plain\fs28  ed. 2, \b 1\plain\fs28  : 999-1000 (1976).)
\par \pard \b Gren. & Godron\plain\fs28 , \i\b Fl. Fr. Prosp.\plain\fs28  
\par      J.C.M. Grenier & D.A. Godron, \i Flore de France. Prospectus\plain\fs28 . Besan\'e7on. 1846. 
\par \b Greuter, W.\plain\fs28 , \i\b Florist. Rep. Cretan Area\plain\fs28 
\par      W.R. Greuter, \i Floristic Report on the Cretan Area\plain\fs28 . Kifissia. 1972.
\par \b Greuter, Burdet & Long\plain\fs28 ,\i\b  Med-Checklist\plain\fs28 
\par    W. Greuter, H.M. Burdet & G. Long, \i Med-Checklist. A critical Inventory of vascular Plants of the circum-mediterranean Countries\plain\fs28 . /\i  Inventaire critique des Plantes vasculaires des Pays circum Mediterran\'e9ens\plain\fs28 . Gen\'e8ve. \b 1\plain\fs28 \'98\'93, 1984 \'98\'93. (\b 1\plain\fs28  in 1984; \b 3\plain\fs28  in 1986;\b  4\plain\fs28  in 1989. Text of Pteridophyta first published as a preliminary version titled \i Med-Checklist ... I. Pteridopbyta\plain\fs28 , Gen\'e8ve & Berlin, 1981.) Taxonomy and novelties to be attributed to Greuter & Burdet only.
\par \pard \b Griseb\plain\fs28 .,\i\b  Comment. Hier.\plain\fs28 
\par     A.H.R. Grisebach, \i Commentatio de Distributione Hieracii Generis per Europam geographica\plain\fs28 . Goettingae. 1852.
\par \b Griseb\plain\fs28 .,\i\b  Reise Rumel\plain\fs28 .
\par     A.H.R. Grisebach, \i Reise durch Rumelien und nach Brussa im Jahre 1839\plain\fs28 . Gottingen. 1841.
\par \b Griseb\plain\fs28 .,\i\b  Spicil. Fl. Rumel\plain\fs28 .
\par    A.H.R. Grisebach,\i  Spicilegium Florae rumelicae et bithynicae\plain\fs28 .Brunsvigae. 1843-1846. (\b 1\plain\fs28  in 1843; \b 2\plain\fs28 : pp. 1-160 in 1844; pp. 161-548 in 1846. Cf. F.A. Stafleu & R.S. Cowan, \i Taxonomic Literature\plain\fs28  ed. 2, \b 1\plain\fs28 : 1008-1009 (1976).)
\par \pard \b Grossh.\plain\fs28 , \i\b Fl. Kavk.\plain\fs28  
\par       A.A. Grossheim, ***** ******* [\i Flora  Kavkaza\plain\fs28 ]. Ed. 1. Tiflis & Baku. 1928-1934. (\b 1\plain\fs28  in 1928;\b  2\plain\fs28  in 1930; \b 3\plain\fs28  in 1932; \b 4\plain\fs28  in 1934.) \b 1\plain\fs28  &\b  2\plain\fs28  at Tiflis. \b 3\plain\fs28  & \b 4\plain\fs28  at Baku. Ed. 2. Baku, Moskva & Leningrad. 1939. (\b 1\plain\fs28  in 1939; \b 2\plain\fs28  in 1940; \b 3\plain\fs28  in 1945; \b 4\plain\fs28  in 1950; \b 5\plain\fs28  in 1952; \b 6\plain\fs28  in 1962.) \b 1-3\plain\fs28  at Baku; \b 4-6\plain\fs28  at Moskva & Leningrad. 
\par \pard \b Grossh.\plain\fs28 ,\i\b  Opred. Rast. Kavk\plain\fs28 .
\par     A.A. Grossheim, *********** ********* ******* [\i Opredelitel ' Rastenij Kavkaza\plain\fs28 ]. Moskva. 1949.
\par \b Grossh. & Schischkin,\i  Sched. Herb. Pl. Or. Exsicc\plain\fs28 .
\par    A.A. Grossheim & B.K. Schischkin, Schedae ad Herbarium "Plantae orientales exsiccatae". Tiflis. 1924-1928. (\b 1\plain\fs28  : pp. 1-52, fasc. 1-8, nos. 1-200 in 1924 (nos. 1-25 possibly in 1923: cf. \i \'d6sterr. Bot. Zeitschr\plain\fs28 . \b 73\plain\fs28 : 72 (1924));\b  2\plain\fs28 : pp. 1-50, fasc. 9-16, nos. 201-400 in 1928. (Cf. \i Just's Bot. Jahrb\plain\fs28 . \b 53\plain\fs28 (\b 2\plain\fs28 ): 686 (1934) and \i op. cit\plain\fs28 . \b 56\plain\fs28 (\b 1\plain\fs28 ): 697 (1937).)
\par \pard \b Grubov\plain\fs28 ,\i\b  Pl. As. Centr\plain\fs28 .
\par      V.I. Grubov (edit.), ********* *********** **** [\i Rastenija central'noj Azii\plain\fs28 ]. / \i Plantae Asiae eentralis\plain\fs28 . Leningrad. 1963\'98\'93.
\par \b Gu\'e9pin\plain\fs28 ,\i\b  Fl. Maine Loire\plain\fs28 
\par    J.P. Gu\'e9pin, \i Flore de Maine et Loire, ... Tome premier\plain\fs28 . Angers. 1830. (\b 2\plain\fs28 , Cryptogams, never published.) Ed. 2. Angers. 1838. \i\b Suppl\plain\fs28 ., \i Suppl\'e9ment \'e0 la Flore de Maine et Loire\plain\fs28 . Angers. 1842. Ed. 3. Angers & Paris. 1845.\i\b  Suppl\plain\fs28 ., \i Suppl\'e9ment \'e0 la troisi\'e8me \'c9dition de la Flore de Maine et Loire\plain\fs28 . Angers. 1850. \i\b Suppl\plain\fs28 .\b  2\plain\fs28 , titled\i  Notice sur une Flore Angevine manuscrite, suivie d'un second Suppl\'e9ment \'e0 la Flore de Maine et Loire\plain\fs28 . Angers. 1854.
\par \pard \b Guimpel, Otto & Hayne\plain\fs28 , \i\b  Abbild. Fremd. Holzart.\plain\fs28  
\par      F. Guimpel, C.F. Otto & F.G. Hayne, \i Abbildung der fremden, in Deutschland ausdauernden Holzarten\plain\fs28 .  Berlin. 1825. 
\par \b Guinea\plain\fs28 , \i\b Cist\'e1c. Esp.\plain\fs28  
\par      E. Guinea,\i  Cist\'e1ceas espa\'f1olas\plain\fs28  (\i Bol. Inst. Forest. Inv. Exper. Madrid\plain\fs28 ,  No 71). Madrid. 1954. 
\par \b Gugler\plain\fs28 ,\i\b  Centaut. Ung. Nationalmus\plain\fs28 .
\par     W. Gugler,\i  Die Centaureen des ungarischen Nationalmuseums\plain\fs28 . [Budapest.] 1907. Reprinted as \i Ann. Hist.-Nat. Mus. Hung.\plain\b\fs28  6\plain\fs28 
\par \pard \b Gunnerus\plain\fs28 ,\i\b  Fl. Norv\plain\fs28 .
\par      J.E. Gunnerus, \i Flora norvegica\plain\fs28 . Nidrosiae & Hafniae. 1766-1772. (\b 1\plain\fs28  in 1766; \b 2\plain\fs28  in 1772.)
\par \b G\'fcnther & Schummel\plain\fs28 , \i\b Sched Cent. Siles. Exsicc.\plain\fs28  
\par      C.C. G\'fcnther & T.E. Schummel, \i  Schedae Centuriae Plantarum silesiacarum exsiccatarum\plain\fs28 .  Wratislavi\'e6. 1811-1829. (\b 1\plain\fs28  & \b 2\plain\fs28  in 1811;\b  3\plain\fs28  in 1812; \b 4\plain\fs28  & \b 5\plain\fs28  in 1813; \b 6 \plain\fs28 & \b 7\plain\fs28  in 1816; \b 8 \plain\fs28 in 1818; \b 9\plain\fs28  in 1819; \b 10\plain\fs28  in 1820; \b 11\plain\fs28  in 1821; \b 12\plain\fs28 in 1823; \b 13\plain\fs28 in 1825; \b 14\plain\fs28 (\b 1\plain\fs28 ) in 1826; \b 14\plain\fs28 (\b 2\plain\fs28 ) in 1827; \b 15\plain\fs28  in 1829.) 
\par \pard \b Guss\plain\fs28 .,\i\b  Cat. Pl. Boccad\plain\fs28 .
\par     G. Gussone,\i  Catalogus Plantarum, quae asservantur in Regio Horto ser. Fr. Borbonii Principis Juventutis in Bocca di falco prope Panormum\plain\fs28 . Neapoli. 1821.
\par \b Guss\plain\fs28 .,\i\b  Enum. Pl. Inar\plain\fs28 .
\par      G. Gussone, \i Enumeratio Plantarum vascularium in Insula Inarime sponte provenientium vel oeconomico Usu passim cultarum.\plain\fs28  Neapoli.1854.
\par \b Guss\plain\fs28 .,\i\b  Fl. Sic. Prodr\plain\fs28 .
\par     G. Gussone, \i Flora siculae Prodromus\plain\fs28 . Neapoli. 1827-1828. (\b 1\plain\fs28  in 1827;\b  2\plain\fs28  in 1828.) \i\b Suppl. Fl. Sic. Prodr\plain\fs28 ., \i Supplementum ad Florae siculae Prodromus\plain\fs28 . Neapoli. 1832-1834. (Pp. 1-166 in 1832; pp. 167-242 in 1834.)
\par \pard \b Guss\plain\fs28 .,\i\b  Fl. Sic. Syn\plain\fs28 .
\par     G. Gussone,\i  Florae siculae Synopsis\plain\fs28 . Neapoli. 1843-1845. (\b 1\plain\fs28  in 1843; \b 2\plain\fs28 (\b 1\plain\fs28 ): pp. 1-529 in 1844; \b 2\plain\fs28 (\b 2\plain\fs28 ): pp. 527[sic]-668 in 1844; pp. 669-920 in 1845. Cf. F.A. Stafleu & R.S. Cowan,\i  Taxonomic Literature\plain\fs28  ed. 2, \b 1\plain\fs28 : 1026 (1976).)
\par \b Guss\plain\fs28 .,\i\b  Ind. Sem. Horto Boccad.\plain\fs28 
\par \i Index Seminum in Horto Bocca di falci\plain\fs28 . Neapoli. By G. Gussone in 1825 & 1826.
\par \b Guss\plain\fs28 .,\i\b  Pl. Rar.\plain\fs28 
\par \pard    G. Gussone,\i  Plantae rariores quas in Itinere per Oras jonii ac adriatici Maris et per Regiones Samnii ac Aprutii collegit\plain\fs28  ... Neapoli. 1826.
\par \b Guss\plain\fs28 .,\i\b  Suppl. Fl. Sic. Prodr\plain\fs28 .
\par    Cf. Guss.,\i  Fl. Sic. Prodr\plain\fs28 .
\par \b Hackel\plain\fs28 , \i\b Cat. Rais. Gram. Port\plain\fs28 .
\par      E. Hackel, \i Catalogue raisonn\'e9 des Gramin\'e9es du Portugal\plain\fs28 . Coimbre.1880.
\par \b Hackel\plain\fs28 ,\i\b  Monogr\plain\fs28 .
\par      E. Hackel,\i  Monographia Festucarum europaearum\plain\fs28 . Kassel & Berlin.1882.
\par \pard \b Hacq\plain\fs28 .,\i\b  Pl. Carn\plain\fs28 .
\par      B.A. Hacquet,\i  Plantae alpinae carniolicae\plain\fs28 . Viennae. 1782.
\par \b Hal\'e1csy\plain\fs28 , \i\b Consp. Fl. Graec\plain\fs28 .
\par    E. von Hal\'e1csy,\i  Conspectus Florae graecae\plain\fs28 . Lipsiae. 1900-1904. (\b 1\plain\fs28  : pp. 1-576 in 1900; pp. 577-825 in 1901 ;\b  2\plain\fs28  in 1902 ;\b  3\plain\fs28  in 1904. Cf. F.A. Stafleu, \i Taxonomic Literature\plain\fs28  ed. 1, 189 (1967).) \i\b Suppl\plain\fs28 ., \i Supplementum\plain\fs28  [\b 1\plain\fs28 ]. Lipsiae. 1908.\i  Supplementum secundum\plain\fs28  [\b 2\plain\fs28 ]. Budapest. 1912. (Published as \i Magyar Bot. Lapok\plain\fs28  \b 11\plain\fs28 : 114-202 (1912) and also issued separately with independent pagination.)
\par \pard \b Hanb., F.H.\plain\fs28 , \i\b London Cat. Brit. Pl\plain\fs28 .
\par     \i The London Catalogue of British Plants\plain\fs28 . Ed. l. London. 1844. Ed. 2. London. 1848. Ed. 3. London. 1850. Ed. 4. London. 1853. Ed. 5. London. 1857. Ed. 6. London. 1867. Ed. 7. London. 1874. Ed.8. London. 1886. Reprintedwith corrections and additions, l890. Ed. 9. London. 1895. Ed.10. London. 1908. Ed. 11. London. 1925. (Eds. 1-3 by H.C. Watson & G.E. Dennes; eds. 4 & 5 by H.C. Watson & J.T. Boswell-Syme; eds. 6 & 7 by H.C. Watson; eds. 8-11 by F.J. Hanbury.)
\par \pard \b Hand.-Mazz.\plain\fs28 , \i\b Monogr. Taraxacum\plain\fs28 
\par     H. von Handel-Mazzetti, \i Monographie der Gattung\plain\fs28  Taraxacum. Leipzig & Wien. 1907.
\par \b Hanry\plain\fs28 , \i\b Prodr. Hist. Nat. Var\plain\fs28  
\par      H. Hanry  \i et al\plain\fs28 ., \i Prodrome d'Histoire naturelle du Departement du Var\plain\fs28 . Draguignan. 1853. Pp.135-397,\i  Botanique\plain\fs28 , by H. Hanry. 
\par \b Hara\plain\fs28 ,\i\b  Fl. East. Himalaya\plain\fs28 
\par    H. Hara, \i The Flora of eastern Himalaya: Results of the botanical Expedition to eastern Himalaya organized by tbe University of Tokyo 1960 and 1963\plain\fs28 . Tokyo. 1966. \i Second Report\plain\fs28 . Tokyo. 1971. \i Third Report\plain\fs28 , compiled by H. Ohashi. Tokyo. 1975.
\par \pard \b Hartinger\plain\fs28 ,\i\b  Atlas Alpenfl\plain\fs28 . (\i\b Text\plain\fs28 )
\par      A. Hartinger, \i Atlas der Alpenflora. Text\plain\fs28   by K.W. von Dalla Torre. Wien. Ed. 1. 1881-1884. (Lfg. 1 -4 in 1881 ; Lfg. 5-16 in 1882; Lfg. 17-28 in 1883; Lfg. 29-36 in 1884. Text in 1882.) Ed. 2. Graz. 1896-1897. (\b 1\plain\fs28  in 1896;\b  2\plain\fs28  in 1897.) Cf. F.A. Stafleu & R.S. Cowan, \i Taxonomic Literature\plain\fs28  ed. 2, \b 2\plain\fs28 : 64 (1979).
\par \b Hartman\plain\fs28 , \i\b Handb. Skand. Fl\plain\fs28 .
\par     C.J. Hartman,\i  Handbok i Skandinaviens Flora\plain\fs28 . Ed. 1. Stockholm. 1820. Ed. 2. Stockholm. 1832. Ed. 3. Stockholm. 1838. (\b 1\plain\fs28 , \i Botanologien\plain\fs28 , & \b 2\plain\fs28 , \i Floran\plain\fs28 , in 1838.) Ed. 4. Stockholm. 1843. Ed. \b 5\plain\fs28 . Stockholm. 1849 (Dec.) or 1850. Ed. 6 by C. Hartman. Stockholm. 1854. Ed. 7 by C. Hartman. Stockholm. 1858. Ed. 8 by C. Hartman. 1861. Ed. 9 by C. Hartman. Stockholm. 1864. (\b 1\plain\fs28  & \b 2\plain\fs28  in 1864.) Ed. 10 by C. Hartman. Stockholm. 1870-1871. (\b 1\plain\fs28  in 1870; \b 2\plain\fs28  in 1871.) Ed. 11, titled \i C.J. Hartmans Handbok i Skandinaviens Flora\plain\fs28 , by C. Hartman. Stockholm. 1879. Ed. 12, titled \i C.J. och C. Hartmans Handbok i Skandinaviens Flora\plain\fs28 , by T.O.B.N. Krok. Stockholm. 1889. For a continuation, see Holmberg,\i  Skand. Fl\plain\fs28 .
\par \pard \b Hartman\plain\fs28 , \i\b Svensk Norsk Excurs.-Fl\plain\fs28 .
\par      C.J. Hartman,\i  Svensk och norsk Excursions-Flora.\plain\fs28  Ed. 1. Stockholm. 1846. Ed. 2. Stockholm. 1853. Ed. 3. Stockholm. Ed. 4. Stockholm. 1866. (Eds. 2-4 with corrections and additions by C. Hartman.)
\par \b Harvey & Sonder\plain\fs28 ,\i\b  Fl. Cap\plain\fs28 .
\par    W.H. Harvey & O.W. Sonder, \i Flora capensis, being a systematic Description of the Plants of the Cape Colony, Caffraria and Port Natal.\plain\fs28  Ashford, Dublin, London and Cape Town. 1860 - 1933. (\b 1-3\plain\fs28  by W.H. Harvey & O.W. Sonder, \b 4-5\plain\fs28 (\b 2\plain\fs28 ) & \b 5\plain\fs28 (\b 3\plain\fs28 )-\b 7\plain\fs28  by W.T. Thiselton-Dyer, \b 5\plain\fs28 (\b 2\plain\fs28 ) \i Suppl\plain\fs28 . by A.J. Hill. 1, Dublin & Cape Town in 1860; 2, Dublin & Cape Town in 1862; 3, Dublin & Cape Town in 1865; \b 4\plain\fs28 (\b 1\plain\fs28 ), London: pp. 1-336 in 1905; pp. 337-480 in 1906; pp. 481-672 in 1907 ; pp. 673-864 in 1908; pp. 865 1168 in 1909; \b 4\plain\fs28 (\b 2\plain\fs28 ), London in 1904; \b 5\plain\fs28 (\b 1\plain\fs28 ), London: pp. 1 224 in 1901 ; pp. 225 448 in 1900; pp. 449-747 in 1912; \b 5\plain\fs28 (\b 2\plain\fs28 ), London: pp. 1-384 in 1915; pp. 385-528 in 1920; pp. 529-600 in 1925. \b 5\plain\fs28 (\b 2\plain\fs28 ) (\i Supplement\plain\fs28 ), Ashford in 1933. \b 5\plain\fs28 (\b 3\plain\fs28 ), London: pp. 1-192 in 1912; pp. 193-332 in 1913.\b  6\plain\fs28 , London: pp. 1-384 in 1896; pp. 385-563 in 1897.\b  7\plain\fs28 , Ashford: pp. 1-192 in 1897 ; pp. 193-384 in 1898; pp. 385-576 in 1899; pp. 577-791 in 1900.)
\par \pard \b Harz, C.O.\plain\fs28 ,\i\b  Samenk.\plain\fs28 
\par     C.O. Harz,\i  Landwirthschaftliche Samenkunde\plain\fs28 . Berlin. 1885.
\par \b Hassk\plain\fs28 ., \i\b Cat. Horto Bogor\plain\fs28 .
\par      J.C. Hasskarl,\i  Catalogus Plantarum in Horto botanico bogoriensi cultarum alter. / Tweede Catalogus der in's Lands Plantentuin te Buitenzorg gekweekte gewassen\plain\fs28 . Batavia. 1844.
\par \b Haw\plain\fs28 .,\i\b  Revis. Pl. Succ\plain\fs28 .
\par    A.H. Haworth,\i  Saxifragearum Enumeratio. Accedunt Revisiones Plantarum succulentarum\plain\fs28 . Londini. 1821.
\par \pard \b Haw.\plain\fs28 , \i\b Suppl. Pl. Succ.\plain\fs28  
\par     A.H. Haworth,  \i Supplementum Plantarum succulentarum.\plain\fs28   Londini. 1819. 
\par \b Haw.\plain\fs28 , \i\b Syn. Pl. Succ.\plain\fs28  
\par     A.H. Haworth,  \i Synopsis Plantarum succulentarum.\plain\fs28   Londini. 1812. 
\par \b Hayek\plain\fs28 , \i\b Fl. Steierm\plain\fs28 .
\par    A. von Hayek,\i  Flora von Steiermark\plain\fs28 . Berlin & Graz. 1908-1956. (\b 1\plain\fs28 : pp. 1-480 in 1908; pp. 481-960 in 1909; pp. 961-1200 in 1910; pp. 1201-1271 in 1911; \b 2\plain\fs28 (\b 1\plain\fs28 ): pp. 1-160 in 1911; pp. 161-480 in 1912; pp. 481-640 in 1913; pp. 641-870 in 1914; \b 2\plain\fs28 (\b 2\plain\fs28 ) in 1956. Cf. F.A. Stafleu & R.S. Cowan,\i  Taxonomic Literature\plain\fs28  ed.2,\b 2\plain\fs28 : 111 (1979).)
\par \pard \b Hayek\plain\fs28 , \i\b Prodr. Fl. Penins. Balcan.\plain\fs28 
\par    A. von Hayek,\i  Prodromus Florae Peninsulae balcanicae\plain\fs28 . (Published as \i Feddes Repert.\plain\fs28  (\i Beib\plain\fs28 .) \b 30\plain\fs28 .) (\b 1\plain\fs28 : pp. 1-352 in 1924; pp. 353-672 in 1925; pp. 673-960 in 1926; pp. 961-1193 in 1927 ;\b  2\plain\fs28 : pp. 1-96 in 1928; pp. 97-336 in 1929; pp. 337-576 in 1930; pp. 577-1152 in 1931;\b  3\plain\fs28 : pp. 1-368 in 1932; pp. 369-472 in 1933. Cf. F.A. Stafleu & R.S. Cowan, \i Taxonomic Literature\plain\fs28  ed. 2, \b 2\plain\fs28 : 111 (1979).) \b 2\plain\fs28  & \b 3\plain\fs28  edit. F. Markgraf.
\par \pard \b Hayek\plain\fs28 , \i\b Sched. Fl. Stir. Exsicc.\plain\fs28  
\par      A. von Hayek, \i Schedae ad Floram stiriacam exsiccatam\plain\fs28 . Wien. 1904-1912. (\b 1\plain\fs28  & \b 2\plain\fs28  in 1904; \b 3\plain\fs28  & \b 4\plain\fs28  in 1905; \b 5\plain\fs28  & \b 6\plain\fs28  in 1905; \b 7\plain\fs28  & \b 8\plain\fs28  in 1906; \b 9\plain\fs28  & \b 10\plain\fs28  in 1906; \b 11\plain\fs28  & \b 12\plain\fs28  in 1907; \b 13\plain\fs28  & \b 14\plain\fs28  in 1908; \b 15\plain\fs28  & \b 16\plain\fs28  in 1909; \b 17\plain\fs28  & \b 18\plain\fs28  in 1909; \b 19\plain\fs28  & \b 20\plain\fs28  in 1910; \b 21\plain\fs28  & \b 22\plain\fs28  in 1910; \b 23\plain\fs28  & \b 24\plain\fs28  in 1912; \b 25\plain\fs28  & \b 26\plain\fs28  in 1912.) 
\par \pard \b Hayne\plain\fs28 ,\i\b  Darst. Beschr. Arzn. Gew\'e4chse\plain\fs28  
\par      F.G. Hayne, \i Getreue Darstellung und Beschreibung der in der Arzneykunde gebr\'e4uchlichen Gew\'e4chse, wie auch solcher, welche mit ihnen verwechselt werden k\'f6nnen\plain\fs28 . Berlin. \b 1-14\plain\fs28 . 1805-1843. (\b 1\plain\fs28  in 1805; \b 2\plain\fs28  in 1809;\b  3\plain\fs28  in 1813;\b  4\plain\fs28  in 1816 \b 5\plain\fs28  in 1817;\b  6\plain\fs28  in 1819; \b 7\plain\fs28  in 1821; \b 8\plain\fs28  in 1822;\b  9\plain\fs28  in 1825; \b 10\plain\fs28  in   1827; \b 11\plain\fs28  in 1830; \b 12\plain\fs28  in 1833; \b 13\plain\fs28  in 1837; \b 14\plain\fs28 : tt. 1-12 in 1843; tt. 13-24 in 1846.) \b 12\plain\fs28  by F.G. Hayne, J.F. Brandt &   J.T.C. Ratzeburg. \b 13\plain\fs28  continued by J.F. Brandt & J.T.C. Ratzeburg. 
\par \pard \b Hegelm.\plain\fs28 , \i\b Lemnac\plain\fs28 .
\par     C.F. Hegelmaier, \i Die Lemnaceen\plain\fs28 . Leipzig. 1868
\par \b Hegetschw.\plain\fs28 , \i\b Beytr. Krit. Aufz\'e4hl. Schweizerpfl\plain\fs28 .
\par     J.J. Hegetschweiler,\i  Beytr\'e4ge zu einer kritischen Aufz\'e4hlung der Schweizerpflanzen\plain\fs28 . Zurich. 1831.
\par \b Hegetschw\plain\fs28 ., \i\b Fl. Schweiz\plain\fs28 
\par    J.J. Hegetschweiler-Bodmer, \i Die Flora der Schweiz\plain\fs28 . First issue. Z\'fcrich. 1838-1840. (Pp. 1-144 in 1838 ; pp. 145-456,\i  Extrabeilage\plain\fs28  in Dec. 1838 or Jan. 1839 ; pp. 457-684 in 1839 ; pp. 685-1008 in 1840.) Second issue, with \i Supplementum\plain\fs28  by O. Heer with continuous pagination (pp. 1009-1135). Z\'fcrich. 1840. (Pp. 1-1135 in 1840).
\par \pard \b Hegi\plain\fs28 , \i\b Ill. Fl. Mitteleur\plain\fs28 .
\par    G. Hegi,\i  Illustrierte Flora von Mitteleuropa\plain\fs28 . Ed. 1. M\'fcnchen. 1906-1931. (\b 1\plain\fs28 : pp. 1-72 in 1906; pp. 73-312 in 1907 ; pp. 313-412 in 1908; \b 2\plain\fs28 : pp. 1-128 in 1908; pp. 129-405 in 1909; \b 3\plain\fs28 : pp. 5-36 in 1909 ; pp. 37-328 in 1910 ; pp. 329-472 in 1911 ; pp. 473-607 in 1912; \b 4\plain\fs28 (\b 1\plain\fs28 ): pp. 5-96 in 1913; pp. 97-144 in 1914; pp. 145-192 in 1916; pp. 193-320 in 1918; pp. 321-491 in 1919;\b  4\plain\fs28 (\b 2\plain\fs28 ): pp. 497-540 in 1921 ; pp. 541-908 in 1922; pp. 909-1112b in 1923; \b 4\plain\fs28 (\b 3\plain\fs28 ): pp. 1113-1436 in 1923; pp. 1437-1748 in 1924;\b  5\plain\fs28 (\b 1\plain\fs28 ): pp. 1-316 in 1924; pp. 317-674 in 1925; \b 5\plain\fs28 (\b 2\plain\fs28 ): pp. 679-994 in 1925; pp. 995-1562 in 1926; \b 5\plain\fs28 (\b 3\plain\fs28 ): pp. 1567-1722 in 1926; pp. 1723-2250 in 1927 ; \b 5\plain\fs28 (\b 4\plain\fs28 ): pp. 2255-2630 in 1927 ;\b  6\plain\fs28 (\b 1\plain\fs28 ): pp. 5-112 in 1913; pp. 113-304 in 1914; pp. 305-352 in 1915; pp. 353-400 in 1916; pp. 401-496 in 1917; pp. 497-544 in 1918;\b  6\plain\fs28 (\b 2\plain\fs28 ): pp. 549-1152 in 1928; pp. 1153-1386 in 1929; \b 7\plain\fs28  in 1931.) Ed. 2. M\'fcnchen, Berlin & Hamburg. 1936 \'98\'93. (\b 1\plain\fs28 , M\'fcnchen in 1936; \b 2\plain\fs28 , M\'fcnchen in 1939; \b 3\plain\fs28 (\b 1\plain\fs28 ), M\'fcnchen: pp. 1-240 in 1957; pp. 241-452 in 1958; \b 3\plain\fs28 (\b 2\plain\fs28 ): pp. 453-532, M\'fcnchen in 1959; pp. 533-692, M\'fcnchen in 1960; pp. 693-772, M\'fcnchen in 1961 ; pp. 773-852, M\'fcnchen in 1962; pp. 853-932, M\'fcnchen in 1969; pp. 933-1012, M\'fcnchen in 1971 ; pp. 1013-1092, Berlin & Hamburg in 1978; pp. 1093-1265, Berlin & Hamburg in 1979; \b 3\plain\fs28 (\b 3\plain\fs28 ): pp. 1-80, M\'fcnchen in 1965 ; pp. 81-356, Berlin & Hamburg in 1974 ; \b 4\plain\fs28 (\b 1\plain\fs28 ), M\'fcnchen: pp. 1-80 in 1958; pp. 81-160 in 1959; pp. 161-320 in 1960; pp. 321-480 in 1962; pp. 481-548 in 1963; \b 4\plain\fs28 (\b 2A\plain\fs28 ), M\'fcnchen: pp. 1-80 in 1961; pp. 81-224 in 1963; pp. 225-304 in 1964; pp. 305-384 in 1965; pp. 385-448 in 1966; \b 4\plain\fs28 (\b 2B\plain\fs28 ), M\'fcnchen: pp. 1-248 in 1990; \b 4\plain\fs28 (\b 3\plain\fs28 ), M\'fcnchen in 1964 (unchanged reprint of ed. 1), reprinted with adaptations, Berlin & Hamburg in 1974 ; \b 5\plain\fs28 (\b 1\plain\fs28 ), M\'fcnchen in 1965 (unchanged reprint of ed. 1), reprinted with adaptations, Berlin & Hamburg, 1975; \b 5\plain\fs28 (\b 2\plain\fs28 ), M\'fcnchen in 1965 (unchanged reprint of ed. 1), reprinted with adaptations, Berlin & Hamburg in 1975 ; \b 5\plain\fs28 (\b 3\plain\fs28 ), M\'fcnchen in 1966 (unchanged reprint of ed. 1), reprinted with adaptations, Berlin & Hamburg in 1975;\b  5\plain\fs28 (\b 4\plain\fs28 ), M\'fcnchen in 1964 (unchanged reprint of ed. 1 ), reprinted with adaptations, Berlin & Hamburg in 1975; \b 5\plain\fs28  (\i Nachtr\'e4ge\plain\fs28 ), M\'fcnchen in 1968; \b 6\plain\fs28 (\b 1\plain\fs28 ), M\'fcnchen: pp. 1-80 in 1965; pp. 81-161 in 1966; pp. 161-240 in 1968; pp. 241-320 in 1969; Lfg. 5 in 1972; Lfg. 6 in 1974; Lfg. 7/8 in 1974; \b 6\plain\fs28 (\b 2\plain\fs28 ): pp. 1-96, M\'fcnchen in 1966; pp. 97-176, M\'fcnchen in 1970; pp. A1-A36, Berlin & Hamburg : pp. 1-80 in 1979 ; pp. 81-160 in 1983; pp. 161-240 in 1985; pp. 241-320 in 1987 ; pp. 321-400 in 1989 ; \b 2\plain\fs28 (\b 1\plain\fs28 ): pp. 1-80, M\'fcnchen in 1966 ; pp. 81-160, M\'fcnchen in 1968; pp. 161-240, M\'fcnchen in 1969; pp. 241-320, Berlin & Hamburg in 1977; pp. 321-400, Berlin & Hamburg in 1979; pp. 401-440, Berlin & Hamburg in 1980; \b 3\plain\fs28 (\b 1\plain\fs28 ) in 1981; \b 4\plain\fs28 (\b 1\plain\fs28 ), Berlin & Hamburg in 1986.\i  Bibliographie zur Flora von Mitteleuropa\plain\fs28 , by V. Hamann & G. Wagenitz: Berlin & Hamburg in 1977.
\par \pard \b Heimerl\plain\fs28 , \i\b Monogr. Ptarm\plain\fs28 .
\par     A. Heimerl,\i  Monographia Sectionis 'Ptarmica' Achilleae Generis. Die Arten, Unterarten, Varietaten und Hybriden der Section Ptarmica des Genus\plain\fs28  Achillea. Wien. 1884.
\par \b Heldr\plain\fs28 ., \i\b  Fl. C\'e9phal\plain\fs28 .
\par    T.H.H. von Heldreich,\i  Flore de l' \'cele de C\'e9phalonie\plain\fs28 . Lausanne.1882; reissued in 1883. (Cf. F.A. Stafleu & R.S. Cowan, \i Taxonomic Literature\plain\fs28  ed. 2, \b 1\plain\fs28 : 143 (1979).)
\par \b Heldr\plain\fs28 ., \i\b  Sched. Herb. Graec. Norm\plain\fs28 .
\par \pard    T.H.H. von Heldreich,\i  Schedae Plantarum ad Herbaria graeca normalia\plain\fs28 . Ser. 1 (nos. 1-812) in 1854-1861 ; ser. 2 (nos. 813-1599) in 1885-1900; cf.\i  Bull. Soc. Bot. Suisse\plain\b\fs28  50a\plain\fs28 : 259-266 (1940).)
\par \b Henckel\plain\fs28 , \i\b Adumbr. Pl. Horti Hal\plain\fs28 .
\par      L.V.F. Henckel von Donnersmarck, \i Adumbrationes Plantarum nonnullarum Horti halensis academici selectarum\plain\fs28 . Halae. 1806.
\par \b Herbich\plain\fs28 , \i\b  Sel. Pl. Rar. Galic\plain\fs28 .
\par    F. Herbich, \i Selectus Plantarum rariorum Galiciae et Bucovinae\plain\fs28 . Czernovicii. 1836.
\par \pard \b Hermann, F\plain\fs28 ., \i\b  Fl. Deutschl. Fennosk\plain\fs28 .
\par    F. Hermann,\i  Flora von Deutschland und Fennoskandinavien sowie von Island und Spitzbergen\plain\fs28 . Ed. 1. Leipzig. 1912. Ed. 2, titled \i Flora von Nord- und Mitteleuropa\plain\fs28 . Stuttgart. 1956.
\par \b Herrmann, J.\plain\fs28 , \i\b Diss. Rosa\plain\fs28  
\par      J. Herrmann, \i Dissertatio inauguralis botanico-medica de Rosa\plain\fs28 .  Argentorati. 1762. 
\par \b Heuffel\plain\fs28 ,\i\b   Enum. Pl. Banat.\plain\fs28 
\par \b Heukels & Wachter\plain\fs28 , \i\b Bekn. Schoolfl. Nederl\plain\fs28 
\par \pard      H. Heukels & W.H. Wachter,\i  Beknopte Schoolflora voor Nederland\plain\fs28 . Ed. 1. Groningen. ?1932.l Ed. 2. Groningen. ?1936. Ed. 3. Groningen. ?1939. Ed. 4. Groningen. ?1942. Ed. 5. Groningen. 1946. Ed. 6. Groningen. ?. Ed. 7. Groningen 1949.
\par \b Heynh\plain\fs28 ., \i\b  Nomencl. Bot\plain\fs28 .
\par    G. Heynhold,\i  Nomenclator botanicus hortensis, oder alphabetische und synonymische Aufz\'e4hlung der in den G\'e4rten Europa's cultivirten Gew\'e4chse\plain\fs28 . Dresden & Leipzig. 1840-1841. (\b 1\plain\fs28  : pp. 1-408 in 1840; \b 2\plain\fs28 : pp. 409-888 in 1841.)\i  Zweiter Band\plain\fs28 , titled \i\b  Alph. Aufz. Gew\plain\fs28 .,\i  Alphabetische und synonymische Aufz\'e4hlung der in der Jahren 1840 bis 1846 in den europ\'e4ischen G\'e4rten eingef\'fchrten Gew\'e4chse\plain\fs28  ... . Dresden & Leipzig. 1846-1847. (Pp. 1--384[?] in 1846; pp. 385[?] 774 in 1847.)
\par \pard \b Hiitonen\plain\fs28 , \i\b  Suomen Kasvio\plain\fs28 
\par    H.I.A. Hiitonen, \i Suomen Kasvio\plain\fs28 . Helsingiss\'e4. 1933.
\par \b Hill\plain\fs28 ,\i\b  Herb. Brit.\plain\fs28 
\par      J. Hill,\i  Herbarium britannicum, exhibens Plantas Britanniae indigenas, secundum Methodum floralem novam digestas\plain\fs28 . Londini. 1769-1770. (Pp. 1-136 in 1769; pp. 137-296 in 1770.)
\par \b Hill\plain\fs28 ,\i\b  Hort. Kew\plain\fs28 .
\par    J. Hill, \i Hortus kewensis, sistens Herbas exoticas indigenasque rariores in Area botanica Hortorum augustissimae Principissae Cambriae dotissae, apud Kew in Comitatu surreiano cultas\plain\fs28 . Londini. 1768.
\par \pard \b Hill\plain\fs28 , \i\b Veg. Syst\plain\fs28 .
\par      J. Hill, \i The Vegetable System.\plain\fs28  London, 1759-1775. (\b 1\plain\fs28  in 1759, reissued in 1770; \b 2\plain\fs28  in 1761, reissued in 1771; \b 3\plain\fs28  in 1761; \b  4\plain\fs28  in 1762; \b  5\plain\fs28  in 1763; \b  6\plain\fs28  & \b 7\plain\fs28  in 1764;  \b 8-10\plain\fs28  in 1765; \b 11\plain\fs28  & \b 12\plain\fs28  in 1767;\b  13\plain\fs28  in 1768; \b 14\plain\fs28  & \b 15\plain\fs28  in 1769; \b 16\plain\fs28  & \b 17\plain\fs28  in 1770; \b 18\plain\fs28  & \b 19\plain\fs28  in 1771; \b 20 \plain\fs28 &\b  21\plain\fs28  in 1772; \b 22\plain\fs28  & \b 23\plain\fs28  in 1773; \b 24\plain\fs28  & \b 25\plain\fs28  in 1774; \b 26\plain\fs28  in 1775.) 
\par \pard \b Hill, A.W.\plain\fs28 ,  \i\b Hand-List Herb. Pl. Kew\plain\fs28  
\par     \i  Hand-List of herbaceous Plants . . .cultivated in the Royal Botanic Gardens, Kew\plain\fs28 .  Ed. 3, by A.W. Hill, London. 1925. 
\par \b Hoffm\plain\fs28 ., \i\b  Deutschl. Fl.\plain\fs28 
\par    G.F . Hoffmann, \i Deutschlands Flora, oder botanisches Taschenbuch f\'fcr das Jahr 1791\plain\fs28 . Ed. 1. Erlangen. 1791. Ed. 2. \i\b  Crypt.\plain\fs28  ...\i f\'fcr das Jahr 1795. Cryptogamie\plain\fs28 . Erlangen. 1796. Ed. 3. ... \i f\'fcr das Jahr 1800 ... Dritter Jahrgang. I. Abtheilung\plain\fs28  ... Erlangen. 1800. Ed. 4. ... \i f\'fcr das Jahr 1804 ... Vierter Jahrgang oder der III Jahrgangs II Abtheilung.\plain\fs28  Erlangen. 1804. (Cf. F.A. Stafleu & R.S. Cowan, \i Taxonomic Literature\plain\fs28  ed. 2,\b  2\plain\fs28 : 240 (1979).)
\par \pard \b Hoffm.\plain\fs28 , \i\b Gen. Umb.\plain\fs28  
\par      G.F. Hoffmann, \i Genera Plantarum umbelliferarum\plain\fs28 . Ed. 1. Mosquae. 1814. Ed. 2 titled  \i Genera umbelliferarum\plain\fs28 . Mosquae. 1816. 
\par \b Hofmann, E.\plain\fs28 , \i\b N\'f6rdl. Ural\plain\fs28  
\par   Kaiserliche russische geographische Gesellschaft (edit.), \i Der n\'f6rdliche Ural und das K\'fcstengebirge Pae-Choi\plain\fs28 .  St. Petersburg.1853-1856. (\b 2\plain\fs28 , by E. Hofmann, in 1856, containing  \i\b Fl. Bor.- Ural.\plain\fs28 , \i Flora boreali\plain\fs28  by F.J. Ruprecht.) 
\par \pard \b Hoffmanns. & Link\plain\fs28 ,\i\b  Fl. Port\plain\fs28 .
\par      J.C. von Hoffmannsegg & J.H.F. Link, \i Flore portugaise\plain\fs28 . Berlin. 1809-1840. (\b 1\plain\fs28 : tt. 1-20 in 1809; tt. 21-25 in 1810; tt. 26-35 in 1811-1813; tt. 36-50 in 1813; tt. 51-78 in 1813-1820; \b 2\plain\fs28 : tt. 79-102 in 1820-1828; tt. 103-106 in 1834; tt. 107-109 in 1840. Cf. F.A. Stafleu, \i Taxonomic Literature\plain\fs28  206-207 (1967).)
\par \b Holandre\plain\fs28 ,\i\b  Fl. Moselle\plain\fs28 
\par      J.J.J. Holandre, \i Flore de la Moselle\plain\fs28 . Ed. 1. Metz. 1829. Supplement. Metz. 1836. Ed. 2, titled \i Nouvelle Flore de la Moselle\plain\fs28 . Metz & Paris. 1842.
\par \pard \b Holl & Heynh\plain\fs28 .,\i\b   Fl. Sachs\plain\fs28 .
\par      F. Holl & G. Heynhold,\i  Flora von Sachsen\plain\fs28 . \b 1\plain\fs28 ,\i  Phanerogamen\plain\fs28  by G. Heynhold. Dresden. 1842. (Heynhold was sole author of this, the only volume which was published.)
\par \b Holm\plain\fs28 , \i\b Nov.-Zeml. Veg\plain\fs28 .
\par      T. Holm, \i Novaia-Zemlia's Vegetation.\plain\fs28  [Copenhagen.] 1885.
\par \b Holmberg\plain\fs28 , \i\b  Skand. Fl\plain\fs28 .
\par    O.R. Holmberg, \i Hartmans Handbok i Skandinaviens Flora\plain\fs28 . Stockholm. 1922-1931. (\b 1\plain\fs28 : pp. 1-160 in 1922; \b 1\plain\fs28 (\b b, 1\plain\fs28 ): pp. 1-160 in 1931 ; \b 2\plain\fs28 : pp. 161-320 in 1926; \b 2\plain\fs28 (\b a\plain\fs28 ) in 1928.)
\par \pard \b Holmboe\plain\fs28 , \i\b  Stud. Veg. Cyprus\plain\fs28  
\par      J. Holmboe, \i Studies on the Vegetation of Cyprus\plain\fs28 .  Bergen. 1914. (Also published as  \i Bergens Mus. Skr.\plain\fs28   nov. ser., \b 1\plain\fs28 (\b 2\plain\fs28 ) (1914).) 
\par \b Honckeny\plain\fs28 , \i\b  Vollst. Syst. Verz.\plain\fs28 
\par      G.A. Honckney, \i Vollst\'e4ndinges systematisches Verzeichnis aller Gew\'e4chse Teutschlandes.\plain\fs28  Leipzig. 1782.
\par \b Hooker\plain\fs28 , \i\b Bot. Misc\plain\fs28 . 
\par      W.J. Hooker, \i Botanical Miscellany\plain\fs28 .  London. 1829  (\b 1\plain\fs28 : pp. 1-236, tt. 1-50 in 1829; pp. 237-356, tt. 51-75 in 1830;\b  2\plain\fs28 : pp. 1-128, tt. suppl. 1-10 in 1830; pp. 129-416, tt. suppl. 11-19 in 1831; \b 3\plain\fs28 : pp. 1-256, tt. suppl. 21-32, tt. 96-112 in 1832; pp. 257-390, tt. suppl. 33-41 in 1833.) 
\par \pard \b Hooker\plain\fs28 , \i\b  Brit. Fl\plain\fs28 .
\par      W.J. Hooker, \i The British Flora, comprising the phaenogamous Plants and the Ferns\plain\fs28 . Ed. 1. London. 1830. Ed. 2. London. 1832. Ed. 3. London. 1835. Ed. 4. London. 1838. Ed. 5. London. 1842.
\par \b Hooker\plain\fs28 , \i\b  Exot. Fl.\plain\fs28  
\par      W.J. Hooker, \i Exotic Flora\plain\fs28 .  Edinburgh. 1822-1827. (\b 1\plain\fs28 : tt.1-33 in 1822; tt. 34-79 in 1823; \b 2\plain\fs28 : tt. 80-137 in 1824; tt. 138-150 in 1825; \b 3\plain\fs28 : tt. 151-?170 in 1825; tt. ?171-?190 in 1825 or 1826; tt. ?191-?215 in 1826; tt. ?216-?228 in 1826 or 1827; tt. ?229-232 in 1827. Cf. M.J. van Steenis & W.T. Stearn in C.G.G.J. van Steenis, \i Fl. Males.\plain\b\fs28  I. 4\plain\fs28 : clxxxviii (1954).) 
\par \pard \b Hooker\plain\fs28 ,\i\b   Fl. Bor.-Amer\plain\fs28 .
\par    W. J. Hooker,\i  Flora boreali-americana; or, tbe Botany of tbe northern Parts of British America\plain\fs28 . London. 1829-1840. (\b 1\plain\fs28 : pp. 1-48 in 1829; pp. 49-96 in 1830; pp. 97-160 in 1831; pp. 161-272 in 1832; pp. 273-328 in 1833; pp. 329-351 in 1834;\b  2\plain\fs28 : pp. 1-48 in 1834; pp. 49-96 in 1837; pp. 97-192 in 1838; pp. 193-240 in 1839; pp. 241-328 in 1840. Cf. F.A. Stafleu & R.S. Cowan, \i Taxonomic Literature\plain\fs28  ed. 2, \b 2\plain\fs28 : 292 (1979).)
\par \pard \b Hooker\plain\fs28 , \i\b  Gen. Fil\plain\fs28 .
\par    W.J. Hooker, \i Genera Filicum ; or Illustrations of the Ferns, and other allied Genera\plain\fs28 . London. 1842.
\par \b Hooker & Arnott\plain\fs28 , \i\b Bot. Beech. Voy\plain\fs28 .
\par      J.D. Hooker & G.A.W. Arnott, \i The Botany of Captain Beechey's Voyage\plain\fs28 . London 1830-1841. (Pp 1-48 in 1830; pp. 49-144 in 1832; pp. 145-192 in 1833; pp. 193-240 in 1837; pp. 241-336 in 1838; pp. 337-384 in 1839; pp. 385-432 in 1840; pp. 433-485 in 1841. Cf. F.A. Stafleu, \i Taxonomic Literature.\plain\fs28  217 (1967).)
\par \pard \b Hooker & Grev\plain\fs28 .,\i\b   Icon. Fil\plain\fs28 .
\par    W.J. Hooker & R.K. Greville,\i  Icones Filicum. Figures and Descriptions of Ferns\plain\fs28 . Londini. [1827-]1831[-1832]. (\b 1\plain\fs28 (\b 1-3\plain\fs28 ): tt. 1-60 in 1827 ;\b  1\plain\fs28 (\b 4\plain\fs28  & \b 5\plain\fs28 ): tt. 61-100 in 1828;\b  1\plain\fs28 (\b 6\plain\fs28 ): tt. 101-120 in 1829; \b 2\plain\fs28 (\b 7\plain\fs28 ): tt. 121-140 in 1829; \b 2\plain\fs28 (\b 8\plain\fs28 ): tt. 141-160 in 1829 or 1830;\b  2\plain\fs28 (\b 9\plain\fs28 ): tt. 161-180 in 1830; \b 2\plain\fs28 (\b 10\plain\fs28 ): tt. 181-200 in 1830 or 1831 ; \b 2\plain\fs28 (\b 11\plain\fs28 ): tt. 201-220 in 1831 ; \b 2\plain\fs28 (\b 12\plain\fs28 ): tt. 221-240 in 1832.)
\par \pard \b Hooker fil\plain\fs28 .,\i\b  Bot. Antarct. Voy\plain\fs28 .
\par      J.D. Hooker, \i The Botany of the antarctic Voyage of H.M. Discovery Ships\plain\fs28  Erebus\i  and\plain\fs28  Terror \i in the Years 1839-1843\plain\fs28 . London. 1844-1860. (\b 1\plain\fs28 : pp. i-xii, 1-92, tt. 1-48 in 1844; pp. 93-208, tt. 49-80 in 1845; pp. 209-256, tt. 81-104 in 1845; pp. 257-380, tt. 105-168 in 1846, pp. 381-574, tt. 169-198 in 1847;\b  2\plain\fs28 (\b 1\plain\fs28 ): pp. 1-160, tt. 1-40 in 1852; pp. 161-312, tt. 41-70 in 1853; \b 2\plain\fs28 (\b 2\plain\fs28 ): pp. 1-160, tt. 71-110 in 1854; pp. 161-378, tt. 111-130 in 1855; \b 3\plain\fs28 (\b 1\plain\fs28 ): pp. 1-80, tt.1-20 in 1855; pp. 81-240, tt. 21-60 in 1856; pp. 241-359, tt. 61-100 in 1857; \b 3\plain\fs28 (\b 2\plain\fs28 ): pp. 1-160, tt. 101-140 in 1856; pp. 161-422, i-cxxviii, 1-18, tt. 141-200 in 1859. Cf. F.A. Stafleu, \i Taxonomic Literature\plain\fs28  207-208 (1967).)
\par \pard \b Hooker fil\plain\fs28 ., \i\b  Fl. Brit. India\plain\fs28 
\par    J.D. Hooker, \i The Flora of British India\plain\fs28 . London. 1872-1897. (\b 1-7\plain\fs28 ; for dates cf. F.A. Stafleu & R.S. Cowan, \i Taxonomic Literature\plain\fs28  ed. 2,\b  2\plain\fs28 : 274-282 (1979).)
\par \b Hooker fil.\plain\fs28 , \i\b Stud. Fl. Brit. Is.\plain\fs28  
\par      J.D. Hooker, \i The Student's Flora of the British Islands.\plain\fs28   Ed. 1. London. 1870. Ed. 2. London. 1878. Ed. 3. London. 1884.   Reprints in 1897, 1930 & 1937. 
\par \b Hornem.\plain\fs28 ,\i\b  Dansk Oekon. Plantel\plain\fs28 .
\par \pard     J.W. Hornemann, \i Fors\'f8g til en dansk oekonomisk Plantel\'e6re\plain\fs28 . Ed. 1 Kj\'f8benhavn. 1796. Ed. 2. Kj\'f8benhavn. 1806. Ed. 3. Kj\'f8benhavn. 1821-1837. (\b  1\plain\fs28  in 1821; \b 2 \plain\fs28 in 1837.)
\par \b Hornem.\plain\fs28 , \i\b Enum. Hort. Haun.\plain\fs28  
\par      J.W. Hornemann, \i Enumeratio Plantarum Horti botanici hauniensis\plain\fs28 . Hauniae. 1807. 
\par \b Hornemann\plain\fs28 , \i\b Fl. Dan\plain\fs28 .
\par      Cf. Oeder, \i Fl. Dan\plain\fs28 . 
\par \b Hornem\plain\fs28 ., \i\b Hort. Hafn\plain\fs28 .
\par     J.W. Hornemann. \i Hortus regius botanicus hafniensis\plain\fs28 . Hauniae. 1813-1815. (\b 1\plain\fs28  in 1813; \b 2\plain\fs28  in 1815.) \i\b Suppl\plain\fs28 ., \i Supplementum\plain\fs28 . Hafniae. 1819.
\par \pard \b Horv\'e1tovsky\plain\fs28 ,\i\b  Fl. Tyrnav\plain\fs28 .
\par     S. Horv\'e1tovsky,\i  Florae tyrnaviensis indigenae Pars prima\plain\fs28 . Tyrnavii. 1774.
\par \b Host\plain\fs28 , \i\b Fl. Austr\plain\fs28 .
\par     N.T. Host,\i  Flora austriaca\plain\fs28 . Viennae. 1827-1831. (\b 1\plain\fs28  in 1827 ; \b 2\plain\fs28  in 1831.) (Cf. F. A. Stafleu & R. S. Cowan, \i Taxonomic Literature\plain\fs28  ed. 2, \b 2\plain\fs28 : 334 (1979).)
\par \b Host\plain\fs28 ,\i\b  Gram. Austr\plain\fs28 .
\par      N.T. Host, \i Icones et Descriptiones Graminum austriacorum\plain\fs28 .  Vindobonae. 1801-1809. ( \b 1\plain\fs28  in 1801; \b 2\plain\fs28  in 1802; \b 3\plain\fs28  in 1805; \b 4\plain\fs28  in 1809.)
\par \pard \b Host\plain\fs28 , \i\b  Syn. Pl. Austr.\plain\fs28  
\par     N.T. Host,  \i Synopsis Plantarum in Austria Provinciisque adjacentibus sponte crescentium\plain\fs28 . Vindobonae. 1797. 
\par \b Houtt\plain\fs28 ., \i\b Natuurl. Hist\plain\fs28 . (\i\b Handleid\plain\fs28 .)
\par    M. Houttyn, \i Natuurlijke Historie of Uitvoerige Beschrijving der Dieren, Planten en Mineraalen. Tweede Deel\plain\fs28 . Amsterdam. 1773-1783. Botany in \b 2\plain\fs28 . (\b 2\plain\fs28 (\b 1\plain\fs28 ) in 1773; \b 2\plain\fs28 (\b 2\plain\fs28  & \b 3\plain\fs28 ) in 1774; \b 2\plain\fs28 (\b 4\plain\fs28  &\b  5\plain\fs28 ) in 1775; \b 2\plain\fs28 (\b 6\plain\fs28 ) in 1776; \b 2\plain\fs28 (\b 7\plain\fs28  & \b 8\plain\fs28 ) in 1777 ; \b 2\plain\fs28 (\b 9\plain\fs28 ) in 1778; \b 2\plain\fs28 (\b 10\plain\fs28  &\b  11\plain\fs28 ) in 1779; \b 2\plain\fs28 (\b 12\plain\fs28 ) in 1780; \b 2\plain\fs28 (\b 13\plain\fs28 ) in 1782; \b 2\plain\fs28 (\b 14\plain\fs28 ) in 1783; \b 2\plain\fs28 (\b 18\plain\fs28 ) of \i Eerste Deels\plain\fs28  (1st series) in 1773.) (Cf. F. A. Stafleu & R.S. Cowan, \i Taxonomic Literature\plain\fs28  ed. 2, \b 2\plain\fs28 : 344 (1979).) Also published, apparently simultaneously, under the title \i Handleiding tot de Plant en Kruidkunde\plain\fs28 .
\par \pard \b Hudson\plain\fs28 ,\i\b  Fl. Angl\plain\fs28 .
\par    W. Hudson,\i  Flora anglica\plain\fs28 . Ed. 1. London. 1762. Ed. 2. London. 1778. Ed. 3. London. 1798.
\par \b Hull\plain\fs28 ,\i\b  Brit. Fl\plain\fs28 .
\par      J. Hull, \i The British Flora\plain\fs28 . Ed. 1. Manchester. 1799. Ed. 2. Manchester. 1 808.
\par \b Hult\'e9n\plain\fs28 , \i\b Fl. Aleut. Isl\plain\fs28 .
\par      E.O.G. Hult\'e9n,\i  Flora of the Aleutian Islands\plain\fs28 . Ed. 1. Stockholm. 1937. Ed. 2. Weinheim, Codicote & New York. 1960.
\par \b Humb., Bonpl. & Kunth\plain\fs28 ,\i\b  Nov. Gen. Sp\plain\fs28 .
\par \pard    F.W.H.A. von Humboldt, A.J.A. Bonpland & K. (C.) S. Kunth, \i Nova Genera et Species Plantarum quas in Peregrinatione Orbis novi collegerunt, descripserunt, partim adumbraverunt Amatus Bonpland et Alexander de Humboldt. Ex Schedis autographis Amati Bonpland in Ordinem digesset Carolus Sigismund Kunth\plain\fs28 . Lutetiae Parisiorum. 1816-1825. (\b 1-7\plain\fs28 ; for dates cf. F.A. Stafleu & R.S. Cowan, \i Taxonomic Literature\plain\fs28  ed. 2,\b  2\plain\fs28 : 369 (1979).)
\par \b Husnot\plain\fs28 , \i\b Gram\plain\fs28 .
\par \pard      P.T. Husnot, \i Gramin\'e9es. Description, Figures et Usages des Gramin\'e9es spontan\'e9es et cultiv\'e9es de France, Belgique, \'celes britanniques, Suisse\plain\fs28 . Cahan. 1896-1899. (Pp. 1-24, tt. 1-8 in 1896; pp. 25~8, tt. 9-17 in 1897; pp. 49-72, tt. 18-24 in 1898; pp. 73-92, i-viii, tt. 25-33 in 1899. Cf. F. A. Stafleu, \i Taxonomic Literature\plain\fs28  227 (1967).)
\par \b Huter, Porta & Rigo\plain\fs28 ,\i\b  Itin. Ital\plain\fs28 .
\par      R. Huter, P. Porta & G. Rigo, \i Ex Itinere italico\plain\fs28  [III. etc.]. (\i Exsiccata\plain\fs28 ). 1878, etc.
\par \pard \b Hyl\plain\fs28 .\i\b  F\'f6rt. Skand. V\'e4xt\plain\fs28 .
\par    N. Hylander,\i  F\'f6rteckning \'f6ver Skandinaviens V\'e4xter\plain\fs28 . \b 1\plain\fs28 . \i K\'e4rlv\'e4xter\plain\fs28 . Ed. 3. Lund. 1941. (\i Ytterligare Till\'e4gg oeb R\'e4ttelser\plain\fs28  published as \i Bot. Not\plain\fs28 . \b 1945\plain\fs28 : 445-460 (1945).)
\par \b Jacq\plain\fs28 ., \i\b Collect. Bot.\plain\fs28 
\par      N.J. von Jacquin, \i Collectanea ad Botanicam, Chemiam et Historiam naturalem spectantia\plain\fs28 . Vindobonae. 1787-1797. (\b 1\plain\fs28  in 1787; 2 in 1789; \b 3\plain\fs28  in 1791 ; \b 4\plain\fs28  in 1791 ; \b 5\plain\fs28  (\i Supplementum\plain\fs28 ) in 1797. (Cf. F.A. Stafleu & R.S. Cowan,\i  Taxonomic Literature\plain\fs28  ed. \b 2\plain\fs28 , \b 2\plain\fs28 : 412 (1979).)
\par \pard \b Jacq\plain\fs28 ., \i\b Enum. Stirp. Vindob\plain\fs28 .
\par    N.J. von Jacquin, \i Enumeratio Stirpium plerarumque, quae sponte crescunt in Agro vindobonensi, Montibusque confinibus\plain\fs28 . Vindobonae. 1762.
\par \b Jacq\plain\fs28 .,\i\b  Fl. Austr\plain\fs28 .
\par    N.J. von Jacquin,\i  Florae austriacae, sive Plantarum selectarum in Austriae Archiducatu sponte crescentium Icones\plain\fs28 . Viennae. 1773-1778. (\b 1\plain\fs28  in 1773;\b  2\plain\fs28  in 1774; \b 3\plain\fs28  in 1775; \b 4\plain\fs28  in 1776; \b 5\plain\fs28  in 1778.)
\par \b Jacq\plain\fs28 ., \i\b Hort. Vindob\plain\fs28 .
\par \pard    N.J. von Jacquin, \i Hortus botanicus vindobonensis\plain\fs28 . Vindobonae. l770-1777.( \b 1\plain\fs28  :pp. 1-44, tt. 1-30 in 1770, tt. 31-100 in 1771;\b  2\plain\fs28 : pp. 45-95, tt. 101-200 in 1772-1773; \b 3\plain\fs28  in 1776-1777 (probably pp. 1-28. tt. 1-50 in 1776; pp. 29-52, tt. 51-100 in 1777). Cf. F.A. Stafleu & R.S. Cowan, \i Taxonomic Literature\plain\fs28  ed. 2, \b 2\plain\fs28 : 410 (1979).)
\par \b Jacq\plain\fs28 ., \i\b Icon. Pl. Rar\plain\fs28 .
\par    N.J. von Jacquin, \i Icones Plantarum rariorum\plain\fs28 . Vindobonae. 1781-1795. (\b 1\plain\fs28 (\b 1\plain\fs28 ) in 1781; \b 1\plain\fs28 (\b 2\plain\fs28 ) in 1782; \b 1\plain\fs28 (\b 3\plain\fs28 ) in 1783; \b 1\plain\fs28 (\b 4\plain\fs28 ) in 1784; \b 1\plain\fs28 (\b 5-8\plain\fs28 ) in 1787; Text-List of \b 1\plain\fs28  in ?1787; \b 2-3\plain\fs28 (\b 1\plain\fs28 ) in 1788; \b 2-3\plain\fs28 (\b 2\plain\fs28  & \b 3\plain\fs28 ) in 1789; \b 2-3\plain\fs28 (\b 4\plain\fs28  & \b 5\plain\fs28 ) in 1790; \b 2-3\plain\fs28 (\b 6\plain\fs28  & \b 7\plain\fs28 ) in 1791; \b 2-3\plain\fs28 (\b 8\plain\fs28 ) in 1792; \b 2-3\plain\fs28 (\b 9-11\plain\fs28 ) in 1792;\b  2-3\plain\fs28 (\b 12\plain\fs28 ) in 1793; \b 2-3\plain\fs28 (\b 13-15\plain\fs28 ) in 1794; \b 2-3\plain\fs28 (\b 16\plain\fs28 ), Text-List of \b 2-3\plain\fs28  in 1795. (Cf. F.A. Stafleu & R.S. Cowan, \i Taxonomic Literature\plain\fs28  ed.2, \b 2\plain\fs28 : 411 (1979).)
\par \pard \b Jacq\plain\fs28 ., \i\b Misc. Austr. Bot\plain\fs28 .
\par    N.J. von Jacquin, \i Miscellanea austriaca ad Botanicam, Chemiam et Historiam naturalem spectantia\plain\fs28 . Vindobonae. 1779-1781 (-1782 ?). (\b 1\plain\fs28  in 1779; \b 2\plain\fs28  in 1781 or 1782.)
\par \b Jacq\plain\fs28 ., \i\b Obs. Bot\plain\fs28 .
\par    N. J. von Jacquin, \i Observationum botanicorum Iconibus ab Auctore delineatis illustratarum Pars 1\plain\fs28 [-4]. Vindobonae. 1764-1771. (\b 1\plain\fs28  in 1764; \b 2\plain\fs28  in 1767 ; \b 3\plain\fs28  in 1768; \b 4\plain\fs28  in 1771.)
\par \pard \b Jahandiez & Maire\plain\fs28 , \i\b Cat. Pl. Maroc\plain\fs28 .
\par    \'c9. Jahandiez & R.C.J.E. Maire, \i Catalogue des Plantes du Maroc\plain\fs28  (\i Spermatophytes et Pt\'e9ridophytes\plain\fs28 ). Alger. 1931-1941. (\b 1\plain\fs28  in 1931 ;\b  2\plain\fs28  in 1932; \b 3\plain\fs28  in 1934; \b 4\plain\fs28  (\i Suppl\'e9ment\plain\fs28 ) by L. Emberger & R.C.J.E. Maire, in 1941.)
\par \b Jalas & Suominen\plain\fs28 , \i\b Atlas Florae Europaeae\plain\fs28 
\par    A.J.J. Jalas & J.K.K. Suominen,\i  Atlas Florae Europaeae. Distribution of vascular Plants in Europe\plain\fs28 . Helsinki. 1972 \'98\'93. (\b 1\plain\fs28  in 1972; \b 2\plain\fs28  in 1973; \b 3\plain\fs28  in 1976; \b 4\plain\fs28  in 1979; \b 5\plain\fs28  in 1980; \b 6\plain\fs28  in 1983; \b 7\plain\fs28  in 1986; \b 8\plain\fs28  in 1989. (\b 1-7\plain\fs28  republished, Cambridge, in 1988.)
\par \pard \b Jan\plain\fs28 ,  \i\b Cat. Pl. Phaen.\plain\fs28  
\par      G. Jan, \i Catalogus Plantarum phaenogamarum ad usum Botano-philorum exsiceatarum\plain\fs28 . Parmae. 1818. 
\par \b Jan\plain\fs28 , \i\b Elench. Hort. Parm.\plain\fs28  
\par      G. Jan, \i Elenchus Plantarum quae in Horto ducali botanico parmensi Anno MDCCCXXVI coluntur\plain\fs28 .  Parmae. 1827. 
\par \b Janchen\plain\fs28 ,\i\b  Cat. Fl. Austr\plain\fs28 .
\par    K. H\'f6fler & F. Knoll (edit.), \i Catalogus Florae Austriae\plain\fs28 .\b  1\plain\fs28  \i Pteridophyten und Anthophyten\plain\fs28  by E. Janchen. Wien. 1956-1960. (Pp. i-viii, 1-176 in 1956; pp. 177-440 in 1958; pp. 441-710 in 1959; pp. 711-999 in 1960.)
\par \pard \b Janchen & Wendelberger\plain\fs28 ,\i\b  Kleine Fl. Wien\plain\fs28 
\par    E. Janchen & G. Wendelberger,\i  Kleine Flora von Wien, Nieder-\'f6sterreich und Burgenland\plain\fs28 . Wien. 1953.
\par \b Jaub. & Spach\plain\fs28 , \i\b Ill. Pl. Or\plain\fs28 .
\par    H.F. Jaubert & E. Spach, \i Illustrationes Plantarum orientalium, ou Choix de Plantes nouvelles ou peu connues de l' Asie occidentale\plain\fs28 . Paris. 1842-1857. (\b 1-5\plain\fs28 ; for dates cf. F.A. Stafleu & R.S. Cowan, \i Taxonomic Literature\plain\fs28  ed. 2, \b 2\plain\fs28 : 438 (1979).)
\par \pard \b J\'e1v\plain\fs28 ., \i\b Magyar Fl\plain\fs28 .
\par    S. J\'e1vorka, \i Magyar Fl\'f3ra\plain\fs28  (\i Flora hungarica\plain\fs28 ). Budapest. 1924-1925. (Pp. 1-800 in 1924; pp. 801-1307, i-cii in 1925.) No vol. no. is used, as pagination is continuous.
\par \b Jav. & Csapody\plain\fs28 ,\i\b  Icon. Fl. Hung\plain\fs28 .
\par      S. Javorka & V. Csapody, \i A Magyar Flora Kepekben. / Iconographia Florae hungaricae\plain\fs28 . Budapest. 1929-1934. (Pp. 1-96, tt. 1-7 in 1929; pp. 97-224, tt. 8-16 in 1930; pp. 225-288, tt. 17-20 in 1931; pp. 289-448, tt. 21-25 in 1932; pp. 449-576, tt. 26-30 in 1933; tt. 31-40 in 1934.)
\par \pard \b Jirasek, J.\plain\i\fs28  et al.\plain\fs28 , \i\b Beob. Reis. Riesengeb\plain\fs28 .
\par      J. Jirasek\i  et al.\plain\fs28 , \i Beobachtungen auf Reisen nach dem Riesengebirge\plain\fs28 . Dresden. 1791.
\par \b Joh., K. & Sam.\plain\fs28 ,\i\b  Dalarnes Hier. Silvat.\plain\fs28 
\par      K. Johansson & G. Samuelsson, \i Dalarnes Hieracia Silvaticiformia\plain\fs28 . Leipzig. 1923.
\par \b Jordan\plain\fs28 , \i\b Cat. Jard. Dijon\plain\fs28 
\par    C.T.A. Jordan, \i Catalogue des Graines r\'e9colt\'e9es au Jardin botanique de la Ville de Dijon en 1848, offertes en \'c9change\plain\fs28 . Dijon. 1848.
\par \pard \b Jordan\plain\fs28 , \i\b Diagn\plain\fs28 .
\par    C.T.A. Jordan, \i Diagnoses d'Esp\'e9ces nouvelles ou m\'e9connues, pour servir de Mat\'e9riaux \'e0 une Flore r\'e9form\'e9e de la France et des Contr\'e9es voisines\plain\fs28 . Paris & Leipzig. 1864. (Pp. 5-1 50 first published in \i Ann. Soc. Linn\plain\fs28 . Lyon ser. 2, \b 7\plain\fs28  : 373-518 (1861).)
\par \b Jordan\plain\fs28 , \i\b Obs. Pl. Crit\plain\fs28 .
\par    C.T.A. Jordan, \i Observations sur plusieurs Plantes nouvelles, rares ou critiques de la France\plain\fs28 . Paris & Leipzig. 1846-1849. (\i 1-4\plain\fs28 , Paris & Leipzig in 1846;\b  5\plain\fs28 , Paris in 1847 ;\b  6\plain\fs28 , Paris in 1847 ; \b 7\plain\fs28 , Paris in 1849.)
\par \pard \b Jordan\plain\fs28 , \i\b Pug. Pl. Nov\plain\fs28 .
\par    C.T.A. Jordan, \i Pugillus Plantarum novarum praesertim gallicarum\plain\fs28 . Paris. 1852.
\par \b Jordan & Fourr\plain\fs28 ., \i\b Brev. Pl. Nov\plain\fs28 .
\par    C.T.A. Jordan & J.P. Fourreau,\i  Breviarum Plantarum novarum, sive Specierum in Horto plerumque Cultura recognitarum Descriptio contracta ulterius amplianda\plain\fs28 . Parisiis. 1866-1868. (\b 1\plain\fs28  in 1866; \b 2\plain\fs28  in 1868.)
\par \b Jordanov\plain\fs28 ,\i\b  Fl. Rep. Pop. Bulg\plain\fs28 .
\par    D. Jordanov (edit.), ****************************************** [\i Flora na narodna Republika Balgarija\plain\fs28 ]. /\i  Flora Reipublicae popularis Bulgariae\plain\fs28 . Sofia/ Serdicae. \b 1\plain\fs28 \'98\'93, 1963\'98\'93. (\b 1\plain\fs28  in 1963; \b 2\plain\fs28  in 1964; \b 3\plain\fs28  in 1966; \b 4\plain\fs28  in 1970; \b 5\plain\fs28  in 1973; \b 6\plain\fs28  in 1976; \b 7\plain\fs28  in 1979;\b  8\plain\fs28  in 1982;\b  9\plain\fs28  in 1989.) \b 1\plain\fs28  & \b 2\plain\fs28  edit. D. Jordanov, B. Kitanov & S. Valev; \b 3\plain\fs28  edit. D. Jordanov & B.Kuzmanov;\b  4\plain\fs28  edit. D. Jordanov & S. Kozuharov;\b  5\plain\fs28  edit. S. Valev & I. Assenov; \b 6\plain\fs28  edit. D. Jordanov ; \b 7\plain\fs28  edit. B. Kuzmanov ; \b 8\plain\fs28  edit. S. Kozuharov ; \b 9\plain\fs28  edit. B. Kuzmanov.
\par \pard \b Jovet\plain\fs28 , \i\b Fl. Fr\plain\fs28 .
\par      P.A. Jovet (edit.),\i  Flore de France\plain\fs28 . Paris. 1967\'98\'93 . (\b 1\plain\fs28  by H. D. Schotsman.)
\par \b Juss., A.\plain\fs28 ,  \i\b Euphorb. Tent.\plain\fs28  
\par      A. de Jussieu, \i De Euphorbiacearum Generibus medicisque earundem Viribus Tentamen\plain\fs28 .  Parisiis. 1824. 
\par \b Kaltenb.\plain\fs28 , \i\b  Fl. Aachen. Beck.\plain\fs28  
\par      J.H. Kaltenbach, \i Flora des Aachener Beckens.\plain\fs28   Aachen. 1844. 
\par \b Karsten\plain\fs28 , \i\b Deutsche Fl.\plain\fs28 .
\par    G.K.W.H. Karsten, \i Deutsche Flora. Pharmaceutisch-medicinische Botanik\plain\fs28 . Ed. 1. Berlin. 1880- 1883. (Pp. 1-128 in 1880; pp. 129-528 in 1881 ; pp. 529-1008 in 1882; pp. 1009-1284 in 1883). Ed. 2, titled \i Flora von Deutschland, Oesterreich und der Schweiz, Mit ein Einschluss der fremdl\'e4ndischen medicinisch und technisch wichtigen Pflanzen, Droguen und deren chemisch-physiologischen Eisenschaften\plain\fs28 . Gera-Untermhaus. 1894-1895. (Pp. 1-672 in 1894; pp. 673-790 in 1895. Cf. F. A. Stafleu & R. S. Cowan, \i Taxonomic Literature\plain\fs28  ed. 2, \b 2\plain\fs28 : 562 (1979).)
\par \pard \b Kauffm.\plain\fs28 ,  \i\b Mosk. Fl.\plain\fs28  
\par      N.N. Kauffmann (N.N. Kaufman),  ********** *****  [\i Moskovskaja Flora\plain\fs28 ].  Ed. 1. Moskva. 1866. Ed. 2 by P. F. Maevskij. Moskva. 1889. 
\par \b Keller, R., Schlechter & So\'f3\plain\fs28 , \i\b Monogr. Icon. Orchid. Eur\plain\fs28 .
\par      R. Keller, R. Schlechter & R. de So\'f3, \i Monographie und Iconographie der Orchideen Europas und des Mittelmeergebietes\plain\fs28 . Dahlem bei Berlin. 1925-1942. (\b 1\plain\fs28 : pp. 1-40 in 1925; pp. 41-160 in 1926; pp. 161-192 or 240 in 1927; pp. 193 or 241-304 in 1928; \b 2\plain\fs28 : pp. 1-40 in 1930; pp. 41-88 in 1931; pp. 89-120 in 1932; pp. 121-200 in 1933; pp. 201-280 in 1935; pp. 281-360 in 1936; pp. 361-? in 1938; pp. ?472 in 1940; \b 3\plain\fs28 : tt. 1-192 in 1931-1935; \b 4\plain\fs28 : tt. 193-400 in 1935-1938;\b  5\plain\fs28 : tt. 401-580 in 1939-1942.) Published as \i Feddes Repert., Sonderbeih\plain\fs28 .\b  A1-4\plain\fs28 .
\par \pard \b Kerner, A.\plain\fs28 ,\i\b  Monogr. Pulm\plain\fs28 .
\par      A.J. Kerner von Marilaun,\i  Monographia Pulmonariarum\plain\fs28 . Oeniponte. 1878.
\par \b Kerner, A.\plain\fs28 ,\i\b  Nov. Pl. Sp.\plain\fs28 
\par      A.J. Kerner von Marilaun,\i  Novae Plantarum Species\plain\fs28 . Innsbruck. 1870. (\b 1\plain\fs28  & \b 2\plain\fs28  in 1870.)
\par \b Kerner, A\plain\fs28 ., \i\b Sched. Fl. Exsicc. Austro-Hung\plain\fs28 .
\par    A. J. Kerner von Marilaun,\i  Schedae ad Floram exsiccatam austro-hungaricam\plain\fs28 . Vindobonae. 1881-1913. (\b 1\plain\fs28 : pp. 1-62 in 1881; pp. 63-136 in 1882; \b 2\plain\fs28  in 1882; \b 3\plain\fs28  in 1884; \b 4\plain\fs28  in 1886; \b 5\plain\fs28  in 1888 and 1889;\b  6\plain\fs28  in 1893; \b 7\plain\fs28  in 1896; \b 8\plain\fs28  in 1899;\b  9\plain\fs28  in 1902; \b 10\plain\fs28  in 1913.) \b 1-7\plain\fs28  by A. J. Kerner von Marilaun; \b 8\plain\fs28  & \b 9\plain\fs28  by K. (C.) Fritsch; \b 10\plain\fs28  by H. von Handel-Mazzetti & I. D\'f6rfler, edit. R. von Wettstein. Cf. F.A. Stafleu & R.S. Cowan, \i Taxonomic Literature\plain\fs28  ed. 2, \b 2\plain\fs28 :528 (1979).
\par \pard \b Kersten\plain\fs28 , \i\b Reise Ost. Afr. Bot\plain\fs28 .
\par    O. Kersten, \i Baron Carl Claus von der Decken's Reisen in Ost-Afrika in den Jahren 1859 bis 1861\plain\fs28 . Leipzig & Heidelberg. 1869-1879. Botany in \b 3\plain\fs28 (\b 3\plain\fs28 ), 1879, separately paged and titled \i Botanik von Ost-Afrika. Bearbeitet von P. Ascherson, O. B\'f6ckeler, F.W. Klatt, M. Kuhn, P. G. Lorentz, W. Sonder\plain\fs28 . (Cf. F. A. Stafleu & R. S. Cowan, \i Taxonomic Literature\plain\fs28  ed .2, \b 2\plain\fs28 : 531 (1979).)
\par \b Kirby\plain\fs28 , \i\b  Fl. Leicest.\plain\fs28  
\par \pard      M. Kirby, \i The Flora of Leicestershire\plain\fs28 .  Ed. 1. Leicester. 1848.   Ed. 2 titled \i A Flora of Leicestershire\plain\fs28 .  London & Leicester.1850. 
\par \b Kirschleger\plain\fs28 ,\i\b  Fl. Alsace\plain\fs28 
\par    F.R. Kirschleger, \i Flore d'Alsace et des Contr\'e9es limitrophes\plain\fs28 . Strasbourg & Paris. 1850-1862. (\b 1\plain\fs28 : pp. 1-288 in 1850; pp. 289-432 in 1851; pp. 433-624 in 1851 or 1852; pp. 625-662, i-xvii in 1852 ; \b 2\plain\fs28  in parts between 1853 and 1857 ; \b 3\plain\fs28 : pp. 1-188 in 1857-1858; pp. 189-396 in 1859-1860; pp. 397-456 in 1861-1862. Cf. F.A. Stafleu & R.S. Cowan, \i Taxonomic Literature\plain\fs28  ed. 2,\b  2\plain\fs28 : 553-554 (1979).)
\par \pard \b Kindb.\plain\fs28 ,\i\b  Svensk Fl\plain\fs28 .
\par      N. C. Kindberg, \i Svensk Flora\plain\fs28 . Linkoeping. 1877.
\par \b Kirschleger\plain\fs28 , \i\b Fl. Alsace\plain\fs28 
\par     F.R. Kirschleger, \i Flore d'Alsace et des Contr\'e9es limitrophes\plain\fs28 . Strasbourg & Paris. 1852-1862. (\b 1\plain\fs28  in 1852; \b 2\plain\fs28  in 1857; \b 3\plain\fs28  in 1862.)
\par \b Kleopow & Oxner\plain\fs28 , \i\b Sched. Herb. Ucr\plain\fs28 .
\par      J.D. Kleopow & A.N. Oxner, \i Schedae ad Herbarium Florae ucranicae\plain\fs28 .
\par \b Klika et al.\plain\fs28 , \i\b Jehlicnat\'e9\plain\fs28 
\par    J. Klika, K. Siman, F. Nov\'e1k & B.Kavka, \i Jehlicnat\'e9\plain\fs28  Praha. 1953.
\par \pard \b Klokov\plain\fs28 , \i\b Ind. Sem. Hort. Bot. Charkov.\plain\fs28  
\par     M.V. Klokov, \i Index Seminum Horti botanici charkoviensis\plain\fs28 . Kharkov. 1927. 
\par \b Klokov & Wissjul\plain\fs28 .,\i\b  Fl. RSS Ucr\plain\fs28 .
\par    Cf. Fomin,\i  Fl. RSS Ucr\plain\fs28 .
\par \b Knoche\plain\fs28 ,\i\b  Fl.  Balear.\plain\fs28  
\par     H. Knoche, \i Flora balearica.\plain\fs28  Montpellier. 1921-1923. (\b 1\plain\fs28  in 1921;\b  2\plain\fs28  in 1922; \b 3\plain\fs28  &\b  4\plain\fs28  in 1923.) 
\par \b Koch\plain\fs28 ,  \i\b Syn. Deutsch. Fl.\plain\fs28  
\par      W.D.J. Koch, \i Synopsis der deutschen und schweizer Flora\plain\fs28 .  Ed. 1. Frankfurt. 1838. Ed. 2. Leipzig. 1847. Ed. 3. Leipzig. 1890-1907. (\b 1\plain\fs28 : pp. 1-320 in 1890; pp. 321-640 in 1891; pp. 641-997 in 1892;\b  2\plain\fs28 : pp. 999-1110 in 1892; pp. 1111-1270 in 1893; pp. 1271-1430 in 1895; pp. 1431-1590 in 1897; pp. 1591-1750 in 1900; pp. 1751-1910 in 1901; pp. 1911-1990 in 1902;\b  3\plain\fs28 : pp. 1991-2070 in 1902; pp. 2071-2390 in 1903; pp. 2391- 2710 in 1905; pp. 2711-3094 in 1907.) 
\par \pard \b Koch\plain\fs28 ,\i\b  Syn. Fl. Germ\plain\fs28 .
\par    W.D.J. Koch, \i Synopsis Florae germanicae et helveticae\plain\fs28 . Ed. 1. Francofurti a. M. 1835-1837. (Pp. 1-352 in 1835 ; pp. 353-844 in 1837, index pp. [1-]102 in 1838.) Ed. 2. Francofurti a. M. & Lipsiae. 1843-1845. (Pp. 1-452, Francofurti a. M. in 1843; pp. 451\i  bis\plain\fs28  -964, Lipsiae in 1844; pp. 963 \i bis\plain\fs28 -1164, Lipsiae in 1845.) Ed. 3. Lipsiae. 1856-1857. (Pp. 1-400 in 1856; pp. 401-875 in 1857.) Cf. F.A. Stafleu & R.S. Cowan, \i Taxonomic Literature\plain\fs28  ed. 2, \b 2\plain\fs28 : 592-593 (1979).)
\par \pard \b Koch, C.\plain\fs28 , \i\b Dendrologie\plain\fs28  
\par     C.H.E. Koch, \i Dendrologie. B\'e4ume, Str\'e4ucher und Halb-str\'e4ucher, welche in Mittel- und Nordeuropa im Freien kultivirt werden\plain\fs28 . Erlangen. 1869-1873. (\b 1\plain\fs28  in 1869; \b 2\plain\fs28 (\b 1\plain\fs28 ) in 1872; \b 2\plain\fs28 (\b 2\plain\fs28 ) in 1873. Cf. W.T. Stearn, \i Jour. Soc. Bibl. Nat. Hist.\plain\b\fs28  3\plain\fs28 : 175 (1957).) 
\par \b Koch, C.\plain\fs28 , \i\b Hort. Dendrol.\plain\fs28 
\par      C.H.E. Koch, \i Hortus dendrologicus\plain\fs28 . Berlin. 1853. 
\par \b Koch, L.\plain\fs28 ,\i\b  Entw.-Cesch. Orob.\plain\fs28 
\par \pard      L.K.A. Koch,\i  Die Entwicklungsgeschichte der Orobanchen\plain\fs28 . Heidelberg. 1887.
\par \b Koch & Ziz\plain\fs28 , \i\b Fl. Palat.\plain\fs28 
\par    W.D.J. Koch & J.B. Ziz, \i Catalogus Plantarum quas in Ditione Florae Palatinatus legerunt\plain\fs28 . Moguntiae. 1814.
\par \b Koeler\plain\fs28 ,\i\b  Descr. Gram\plain\fs28 .
\par      G.L. Koeler, \i Descriptio Graminum in Gallia et Germania tam sponte nascentium quam humana Industria copiosius provenientium\plain\fs28 . Francofurti ad Moenum. 1802.
\par \b Koelliker\plain\fs28 , \i\b Verz. Phan. Gew. Z\'fcrich\plain\fs28 .
\par \pard      R.A. von Koelliker, \i Verzeichniss der phanerogamischen Gewachse des Cantons Z\'fcrich\plain\fs28 . Z\'fcrich. 1839.
\par \b Komarov\plain\fs28 ,\i\b  Fl. URSS\plain\fs28 
\par    V.L. Komarov et al. (edit.), ***** **** [\i Flora SSSR\plain\fs28 ]. / \i Flora URSS\plain\fs28 . Leningrad & Mosqua. 1934-1964. (\b 1-3\plain\fs28 , Leningrad; \b 4-30\plain\fs28 , Mosqua & Leningrad. For full details of dates and editors of volumes cf. I.A. Linczevski, \i Novit. Syst. Pl. Vasc\plain\fs28 . (\i Leningrad\plain\fs28 ) \b 1966\plain\fs28 : 316-330 (1966) and F.A. Stafleu & R.S. Cowan, \i Taxonomic Literature\plain\fs28  ed. 2, \b 2\plain\fs28 : 612-644 (1979).) ***** ************************************************* [\i Svod dopolnenij i izmenenij k 'Flore SSSR'\plain\fs28  (\i tt. I-XXX\plain\fs28 )]. /\i Addimenta et Corrigenda ad ' Floram URSS '\plain\fs28  (\i Tomi I-XXX\plain\fs28 ), by S.K. Czerepanov. Leningrad. 1973.
\par \pard \b Komarov\plain\fs28 , \i\b Mat. Hist. Fl. Veg. USSR\plain\fs28 
\par      V.L. Komarov (edit.), ********** ** ******* ***** * **************\i CCCP\plain\fs28  [\i Materialy po Istorii Flory i Rastitel'nosti SSSR\plain\fs28 ]./\i Materials on the History of the Flora and Vegetation of the USSR\plain\fs28 . Moscow & Leningrad. 1941-1946. (\b 1\plain\fs28  in 1941;\b  2\plain\fs28  in 1946.)
\par \b Korsh\plain\fs28 ., \i\b Tent. Fl. Russ. Or\plain\fs28 .
\par    S.I. Korshinsky, \i Tentamen Florae Rossiae orientalis, id est Provinciarum Kazan, Wiatka, Perm, Ufa, Orenburg, Samara Partis borealis atque Simbirsk\plain\fs28 . St.-P\'e9tersbourg. 1898.
\par \pard \b Kotov\plain\fs28  or \b Kotov & Barbarich\plain\fs28 ,\i\b  Fl. RSS Ucr\plain\fs28 .
\par    Cf. Fomin,\i  Fl. RSS Ucr\plain\fs28 .
\par \b Kotschy\plain\fs28 ,\i\b  Eichen\plain\fs28 
\par    T. Kotschy, \i Die Eichen Europa's und des Orients\plain\fs28 . Wien & Ollm\'fctz. 1858-1862. (\b 1\plain\fs28  in 1858 ; \b 2-4\plain\fs28  in 1859 ;\b  5\plain\fs28  (with text for tt. 16-25 of 1859-1860) in 1860;\b  6\plain\fs28  in 1861 ; \b 7/8\plain\fs28  in 1862.)
\par \b Kreutzer\plain\fs28 ,\i\b  Anthochron. Pl. Eur. Med\plain\fs28 .
\par      K.J. Kreutzer, \i Anthochronologion Plantarum Europae mediae\plain\fs28 . /\i  Bluthen-Kalenderder Pflanzen des mittleren Europa\plain\fs28 . Wien. 1840.
\par \pard \b Krocker\plain\fs28 ,\i\b  Fl. Siles\plain\fs28 .
\par    A.J. Krocker, \i Flora silesiaca\plain\fs28 . Vratislaviae. 1787-1823. (\b 1\plain\fs28  in 1787 ; \b 2\plain\fs28 (\b 1 \plain\fs28 & \b 2\plain\fs28 ) in 1790; \b 3\plain\fs28  in 1814;\b  4\plain\fs28  (\i Supplementum\plain\fs28 ) in 1823.) Editio altera. Vratislaviae. 1796.(\b 1\plain\fs28  & \b 2\plain\fs28  in 1796.)
\par \b Krylov\plain\fs28 , \i\b  Fl. Zap. Sibir\plain\fs28 . 
\par     P.N. Krylov, ***** ********* ******  [\i Flora zapadnoj Sibiri\plain\fs28 ]. Tomsk. 1927-1949. (\b 1\plain\fs28  in 1927; \b 2\plain\fs28  in 1928; \b 3\plain\fs28  in 1929; \b 4\plain\fs28  in 1930; \b 5\plain\fs28  & \b 6\plain\fs28  in 1931; \b 7\plain\fs28  in 1933; \b 8\plain\fs28  in 1935; \b 9\plain\fs28  in 1937; \b 10\plain\fs28  in 1939; \b 11\plain\fs28  in 1949.) 
\par \pard \b Kunth\plain\fs28 ,\i\b  Enum. Pl.\plain\fs28 
\par      C.S. Kunth, \i Enumeratio Plantarum omnium hucusque cognitarum\plain\fs28 . Stutgardiae & Tubingae. 1833-1850. (\b 1\plain\fs28  in 1833;\b  2\plain\fs28  in 1837; \b 3\plain\fs28  in 1841; \b 4\plain\fs28  in 1843; \b 5\plain\fs28  in 1850. Cf. F. A. Stafleul \i Taxonomic Literature\plain\fs28  249-250 (1967).)
\par \b Kunth\plain\fs28 , \i\b Revis. Gram\plain\fs28 .
\par      C.S. Kunth, \i Revision des Gramin\'e9es publi\'e9es dans les Nova Genera et Species Plantarum de Humboldt et Bonpland\plain\fs28 . Paris. 1829-1834. (Pp. 1-168 in 1829; pp. 169-386 in 1830; pp. 387-522 in 1831; pp. 523-578 in 1832; pp. 579-666 in 1834.)\i\b  Suppl\plain\fs28 ., Supplenda. 1834.
\par \pard \b Kunze, G\plain\fs28 ., \i\b Ind. Hort. Lips\plain\fs28 .
\par    G. Kunze, \i Hortus Universitarum Literarum lipsiensis Seminum Anno 1839 (...) perceptorum offert Delectum\plain\fs28 . Lipsiae. 1839, 1841, 1843-1850. (Descriptions of new taxa also published in \i Linnaea\plain\fs28  as follows: \b 1839\plain\fs28  as \b 16\plain\fs28 : Litt.-Ber. 106-108 (1842); \b 1841\plain\fs28  as \b 16\plain\fs28 : Litt.-Ber. 108-110 (1842); \b l843\plain\fs28  as \b 18\plain\fs28 : 163 (1844); \b l844\plain\fs28  as \b 18\plain\fs28 : 510 (1844); \b 1845\plain\fs28  as \b 19\plain\fs28 : 404 (1847); \b 1846\plain\fs28  as \b 24\plain\fs28 : 161-163 (1851); \b 1847\plain\fs28  as \b 24\plain\fs28 : 176-179 (1851); \b 1848\plain\fs28  as \b 24\plain\fs28 : 191-193 (1851); \b 1849\plain\fs28  as \b 24\plain\fs28 : 201-202 (1851); \b 1850\plain\fs28  as \b 24\plain\fs28 : 208-209 (1851). Commonly referred to as \i Index Horti Lipsiae\plain\fs28  or \i Index Seminum Horti lipsiensis\plain\fs28  but the title as cited in \i Linnaea\plain\fs28  is as given above until at least 1845, after which year the exact titles of the seed lists ceased to be quoted.)
\par \pard \b Kuntze, O.\plain\fs28 ,\i\b  Revis. Gen\plain\fs28 .
\par      K.E.O. Kuntze, \i Revisio Generum Plantarum vascularium omnium\plain\fs28 . Leipzig. 1891-1898. (\b 1\plain\fs28  & \b 2\plain\fs28  in 1891; \b 3\plain\fs28 : pp. i-cccx in 1893; pp. l-576 in 1898. Cf. F.A. Stafleu, \i Taxonomic Literature\plain\fs28  250 (1967).)
\par \b Kusn., N. Busch & Fomin\plain\fs28 , \i\b  Fl. Cauc. Crit.\plain\fs28  
\par      N.I. Kusnezow, N.A. Busch & A.V. Fomin,\i  Flora caucasica critica\plain\fs28 . /  ********* *** ***** ******** [\i Materialy dlja Flory Kavkaza\plain\fs28 ]. Jurjev. 1901-1916. (\b 1\plain\fs28 (\b 1\plain\fs28 ): pp. 1-96 in 1911; pp. 97-224 in 1912; pp. 225-248, i-xlvi in 1913; \b 2\plain\fs28 (\b 1\plain\fs28 ): pp. 1-43 in 1911; \b 2\plain\fs28 (\b 4\plain\fs28 ): pp. 1-64 in 1906; pp. 65-144 in 1912; pp. 145-176 in 1913; \b 2\plain\fs28 (\b 5\plain\fs28 ): pp. 1-32 in 1916; \b 3\plain\fs28 (\b 3\plain\fs28 ): pp. 1-32 in 1901; pp. 33-112 in 1902; pp. 113-256, i-xix in 1903;\b  3\plain\fs28 (\b 4\plain\fs28 ): pp. 1-16 in 1904; pp. 17-64 in 1905; pp. 65-144 in 1907;pp. 145-304 in 1908; pp. 305-544 in 1909; pp. 545-820, i-lxxiv in 1910; \b 3\plain\fs28 (\b 5\plain\fs28 ): pp. 1-32 in 1913; pp. 33-48 in 1915; \b 3\plain\fs28 (\b 7\plain\fs28 ): pp. 1-80 in 1908; pp. 81-96 in 1910; pp. 97-112 in 1912; \b 3\plain\fs28 (\b 8\plain\fs28 ): pp. 1-16 in 1911; pp. 17-48 in 1912;\b  3\plain\fs28 (\b 9\plain\fs28 ): pp. 1-64 in 1906; pp. 65-224 in 1909; pp. 225-288 in 1910; pp. 289-320 in 1912, pp. 321-352 in 1913;\b  4\plain\fs28 (\b 1\plain\fs28 ): pp. 1-128 in 1901; pp. 129-208 in 1902; pp. 209-352 in l903; pp. 353-384 in 1904; pp. 385-464 in 1905, pp. 465-512 in 1906; pp. 513-560 in 1907; pp. 561-590, i-lxii in 1908; \b 4\plain\fs28 (\b 2\plain\fs28 ): pp. 1-32  in 1912; pp. 33-208 in 1913; pp. 209-256 in 1914; pp. 257-320 in 1915; pp. 321-400 in 1916;\b  4\plain\fs28 (\b 3\plain\fs28 ): pp. 1-48 in 1916; \b 4\plain\fs28 (\b 6\plain\fs28 ): pp. 1-16 in 1903; pp. 17-48 in 1904; pp. 49-80 in 1905; pp. 81-144 in 1906; pp. 145-157, i-xviii in 1907.)
\par \pard \b L\plain\fs28 ., \i\b Amoen. Acad\plain\fs28 .
\par    C. von Linn\'e9, \i Amoenitates academicae\plain\fs28 . Holmiae. 1749-1769. (\b 1\plain\fs28  in 1749; \b 2\plain\fs28  in 1751, with an Ed. 2 in 1762; \b 3\plain\fs28  in 1756; \b 4\plain\fs28  in 1759; \b 5\plain\fs28  in 1760; \b 6\plain\fs28  in 1763; \b 7\plain\fs28  in 1769.) Amsterdam edition. Amstelaedami. 1752-1762. (\b 2\plain\fs28  in 1752, with an Ed. 2 in 1764;\b  3\plain\fs28  in 1756; \b 1\plain\fs28  not issued.) Leiden edition. Lugduni Batavorum. 1760-1769. (\b 4\plain\fs28  & \b 5\plain\fs28  in 1760; \b 6\plain\fs28  in 1764; \b 7\plain\fs28  in 1769.) Erlangen edition. Erlangae. 1785-1790. (10 vols., being reprints of \b 1-7\plain\fs28  (\b 1-3\plain\fs28  in 1787 ; \b 4\plain\fs28  &\b  5\plain\fs28  in 1788;\b  6\plain\fs28  & \b 7\plain\fs28  in 1789) and three additional vols.: \b 8\plain\fs28  in 1785; \b 9\plain\fs28  in 1785; \b 10\plain\fs28  in 1790.) Cf. F.A. Stafleu & R.S. Cowan, Taxonomic Literature ed. 2, \b 3\plain\fs28 : 87-88 (1981).
\par \pard \b L\plain\fs28 ., \i\b Cent. Pl\plain\fs28 .
\par       C. von Linn\'e9, \i Centuria Plantarum\plain\fs28 . Upsaliae. 1755-1756. (\b 1\plain\fs28  in 1755; \b 2\plain\fs28  in 1756.)
\par \b L\plain\fs28 .,\i\b  Demonstr. Pl\plain\fs28 .
\par      C. von Linn\'e9,\i  Demonstrationes Plantarum in Horto upsaliensi, 1753\plain\fs28  ... Upsaliae. 1753.
\par \b L.\plain\fs28 ,\i\b  Diss. Erica\plain\fs28 
\par      C. von Linne, \i Dissertationem botanicam de Erica....\plain\fs28  Upsaliae. 1770.
\par \b L.\plain\fs28 ,\i\b  Fl. Angl\plain\fs28 .
\par      C. von Linne, \i Flora anglica\plain\fs28 . Upsaliae. 1754.
\par \pard \b L.,\i  Fl.  Monsp.\plain\fs28  
\par      C. von Linn\'e9, \i Flora monspeliensis\plain\fs28 . Upsaliae. 1756. 
\par \b L\plain\fs28 .,\i\b  Fl. Palaest.\plain\fs28 
\par      C. von Linn\'e9, \i Flora palaestina\plain\fs28 . Upsaliae. 1756. (Reprinted in L., \i Amoen. Acad.\plain\b\fs28  4\plain\fs28 (\b 69\plain\fs28 ): 443-467 (1759).
\par \b L\plain\fs28 .,\i\b  Fl. Suec\plain\fs28 .
\par      C. von Linn\'e9,\i  Flora suecica\plain\fs28 . Ed. 2. Stockholmiae. 1755.
\par \b L.\plain\fs28 , \i\b Gen. Pl\plain\fs28 .
\par      C. von Linne, Genera Plantarum. Ed. 5. Holmiae. 1754. Ed. 6. Holmiae. 1764. Ed. 7, by J. J. Reichard. Francofurti ad Moenum. 1778. Ed. 8a, by J. C. D. von Schreber. Francofurti ad Moenum. 1789-1791. (1 in 1789; 2 in 1791.) Ed. 8b, by T. Haenke. Vindobonae. 1791. (1 & 2 in 1791.) Ed. 9, by K. P. J. Sprengel. Gottingae. 1830 1831. (1 in 1830; 2 in 1831.)
\par \pard \b L.\plain\fs28 , \i\b Mantissa\plain\fs28 
\par     C. von Linn\'e9,\i  Mantissa Plantarum\plain\fs28 . (Pp. 1-142.) Holmiae. 1767.
\par \b L\plain\fs28 ., \i\b Mantissa Alt\plain\fs28 .
\par     C. von Linn\'e9, \i Mantissa Plantarum altera\plain\fs28 . (Pp. 143-587.) Holmiae. 1771.
\par \b L\plain\fs28 .,\i\b  Opobalsam. Decl\plain\fs28 .
\par     C. von Linn\'e9,\i  Opobalsamum declaratum in Dissertatione medica\plain\fs28 . Upsaliae. 1764.
\par \b L\plain\fs28 ., \i\b Sp. Pl\plain\fs28 .
\par      C. von Linn\'e9, \i Species Plantarum\plain\fs28 . Ed. 1. Holmiae. 1753. Ed. 2. Holmiae. 1762-1763. (Pp. 1-784 in 1762; pp. 785-1684 in 1763.)
\par \pard \b L\plain\fs28 ., \i\b Syst. Nat\plain\fs28 .
\par     C. von Linn\'e9, \i Systema Naturae\plain\fs28 . Ed. 10. Botany in \b 2\plain\fs28 . Holmiae. 1759. Ed. 11. Botany in \b 1\plain\fs28  & \b 2\plain\fs28 . Lipsiae. 1762. Ed. 12. Botany in \b 2\plain\fs28  & \b 3\plain\fs28 . Holmiae. 1767-1768. (\b 2\plain\fs28  in 1767 ; \b 3\plain\fs28  in 1768.) Ed. 13, by J.F. Gmelin. Botany in \b 2\plain\fs28 . Lipsiae. 1791-1792. (Pp. 1-884 in 1791; pp. 885-1661 in 1792. Cf. F.A. Stafleu & R.S. Cowan,\i  Taxonomic Literature\plain\fs28  ed. 2,\b  3\plain\fs28 : 100 [ed. 10], 106-107 [ed. 12] (1981).) Titled \i\b Syst. Veg\plain\fs28 ., \i Systema Vegetabilium\plain\fs28 . Ed. 13, edit. J.A. Murray. Gottingae & Gothae. 1774. Ed. 14, by J.A. Murray (new taxa attributable to C. von Linn\'e9). Gottingae. 1784. Ed. 15, by C.H. Persoon. Gottingae. 1797. Ed. nov. (15), by J. J. Roemer & J.A. Schultes. Studtgartiae. 1817-1830. (\b 1\plain\fs28  &\b  2\plain\fs28 in 1817 ; \b 3\plain\fs28  in 1818; \b 4\plain\fs28  in 1819;\b  5\plain\fs28  in 1819; \b 6\plain\fs28  by J.A. Schultes & C.P. J. Sprengel in 1820; \b 7\plain\fs28  by J.A. & J.H. Schultes: pp. i-xliv, 1-754 in 1829; pp. xlv--cviii, 755-1816 in 1830. \i Mantissa\plain\b\fs28  1\plain\fs28  by J.A. Schultes in 1822; \i Mantissa\plain\b\fs28  2\plain\fs28  by J.A. SchuItes in 1824; \i Mantissa\plain\b\fs28  3\plain\fs28  by J.A. Schultes in 1827. Cf. F.A. Stafleu & R.S. Cowan,\i  Taxonomic Literature\plain\fs28  ed. 2,\b  4\plain\fs28 : 847-848 (1983).) Ed. 16, by C.P. J. Sprengel. Gottingae. 1824-1828. (\b l\plain\fs28  in 1824; \b 2\plain\fs28  in 1825;\b  3\plain\fs28  in 1826; \b 4\plain\fs28  (\b 1\plain\fs28  & \b 2\plain\fs28 ) in 1827 ; \b 5\plain\fs28  & \i Suppl\plain\fs28 . in 1828.)
\par \pard \b L.\plain\fs28 ,  \i\b Syst. Pl. Eur.\plain\b\fs28  1\plain\fs28 ,\i\b  Fl. Delph.\plain\fs28  
\par      C. von Linn\'e9, \i Flora delphinalis\plain\fs28   in C. von Linn\'e9, \i Systema Plantarum Europae\plain\b\fs28  1\plain\fs28 .  Coloniae-Allobrogum. 1785. 
\par \b L.\plain\fs28 ,  \i\b Syst. Veg\plain\fs28 . 
\par     Cf. L.,  Syst. Nat. 
\par \b L. fil.\plain\fs28 , \i\b Dec. Prim. Pl. Rar. Hort. Upsal.\plain\fs28  
\par     C. von Linn\'e9 fil., \i Decas prima Plantarum rariorum Horti upsaliensis\plain\fs28 .  Stockholmiae. 1762. 
\par \b L. fil\plain\fs28 ., \i\b Suppl\plain\fs28 .
\par     C. von Linn\'e9 fil., \i Supplementum Plantarum Systematis Vegetabilium Editionis decimus tertiae, Generum Plantarum Editionis sextae, et Specierum Plantarum Editionis secundae\plain\fs28 . Brunsvigae. 1781.
\par \pard \b Labill\plain\fs28 .,\i\b  Icon. Pl. Syr\plain\fs28 .
\par    J.J.H. de Labillardi\'e8re,\i  Icones Plantarum Syriae rariorum\plain\fs28 . Lutetiae Parisiorum (\b 1\plain\fs28 ) / Parisiis (\b 2-5\plain\fs28 ). 1791-1812. (\b 1\plain\fs28  & \b 2\plain\fs28  in 1791 ; \b 3\plain\fs28  in 1809; \b 4\plain\fs28  & \b 5\plain\fs28  in 1812. Cf. F.A. Stafleu & R.S. Cowan,\i  Taxonomic Literature\plain\fs28  ed.2, \b 2\plain\fs28 : 711 (1979).)
\par \b Labill.\plain\fs28 , \i\b Nov. Holl. Pl\plain\fs28 .
\par    J.J.H. de Labillardi\'e8re, \i Novae Hollandiae Plantarum Speimen \plain\fs28 .... Parisiis. 1804-1807. (\b 1\plain\fs28 (\b 1\plain\fs28 ): pp. 1-8, tt. 1-10 in 1804; \b 1\plain\fs28 (\b 2-14\plain\fs28 ): pp. 9-112, tt. 11-140[-142?] in 1805;\b  2\plain\fs28 (\b 15-23\plain\fs28 ): pp. 1-?, tt. 141-230 in 1806; \b 2\plain\fs28  (\b 24-27\plain\fs28 ): pp. ?-130, tt. 231-265 in 1807. Cf. F.A. Stafleu & R.S. Cowan, \i Taxonomic Literature\plain\fs28  ed. 2, \b 2\plain\fs28 : 712-713 (1979).)
\par \pard \b Lag.\plain\fs28 ,\i\b  Gen. Sp. Nov\plain\fs28 .
\par \b Labill.\plain\fs28 ,  \i\b Rel. Voy. Rech. La P\'e9rouse\plain\fs28  
\par     J.J.H. de Labillardi\'e8re, \i  Relation du Voyage a la Recherche de La P\'e8rouse\plain\fs28 .  Paris. 1800. (For date cf. H.W. Rickett & F.A.   Stafleu,  \i Taxon\plain\b\fs28  10\plain\fs28 : 111 (1961).) 
\par \b Lag.\plain\fs28 , \i\b Amen. Nat.\plain\fs28  
\par     M. Lagasca y Segura, \i  Amenidades naturales de las Espa\'f1as.\plain\fs28  Orihuela & Madrid. 1811-1821. (\b 1\plain\fs28 (\b 1\plain\fs28 ): pp. 1-44 in 1811;\b  1\plain\fs28 (\b 2\plain\fs28 ): pp. 47-111 in 1821.) \b 1\plain\fs28 (\b 1\plain\fs28 ) at Orihuela; \b 1\plain\fs28 (\b 2\plain\fs28 ) at Madrid. 
\par \pard \b Lag.\plain\fs28 ,\i\b  Gen. Sp. Nov\plain\fs28 .
\par      M. Lagasca y Segura, \i Genera et Species Plantarum quae aut novae sunt aut nondum recte cognoscuntur\plain\fs28 . Matriti. 1816.
\par \b Laharpe\plain\fs28 ,\i\b  Monogr. Jonc\plain\fs28 .
\par      J. Laharpe, \i Essai d'une Monographie des vraies Jonc\'e9es\plain\fs28 . Paris. 1825.
\par \b Laicharding,\i  Veg. Eur\plain\fs28 . 
\par      J.N. von Laicharding,  \i Vegetabilia europaea\plain\fs28 .  Oeniponte. 1790-1791. (\b 1\plain\fs28  in 1790; \b 2\plain\fs28  in 1791.) 
\par \b La\'ednz\plain\fs28 ,\i\b  Aportac. Fl. Gallega\plain\fs28 
\par \pard      M. La\'ednz, \i Aportaciones al Conocimiento de la Flora gallega 6\plain\fs28 . Madrid. 1968. (Earlier volumes published as follows: \b 1\plain\fs28  as \i Broteria\plain\fs28  (Ser. Ci. Nat.)\b  24\plain\fs28 : 108-151 (1955);\b  2\plain\fs28  as\i  Anal. Inst. Bot. Cavanilles\plain\b\fs28  14\plain\fs28 : 529-554 (1956); \b 3\plain\fs28  as\i  Broteria\plain\fs28  (Ser. Ci. Nat.) \b 26\plain\fs28 : 90-97 (1957); \b 4 \plain\fs28 as \i Anal. Inst. Forest. Invest. Exper.\plain\b\fs28  10\plain\fs28 : 299-334 (1966);\b  5\plain\fs28  as \i op. cit\plain\fs28 . \b 12\plain\fs28 : 1-51 (1967).)
\par \pard \b Lam.\plain\fs28 , \i\b Encycl. M\'e9th. Bot\plain\fs28 .
\par    J.B.A.P. Monnet de la Marck, \i Encyclop\'e9die m\'e9thodique. Botanique\plain\fs28 . Paris. 1783-1817. (For dates cf. F.A. Stafleu & R.S. Cowan, \i Taxonomic Literature\plain\fs28  ed. 2, \b 2\plain\fs28 : 732-733 (1979).) \b 1-2\plain\fs28 , \b 3\plain\fs28 (up to P) by J.B.A.P. Monnet de la Marck ; \b 3\plain\fs28  (P-end) by J.B.A.P. Monnet de la Marck & L.A.J. Desrousseaux; \b 4\plain\fs28  by L.A. J. Desrousseaux, J.L.M. Poiret & M.J.C.L. de Savigny; \b 5\plain\fs28  by J.L.M. Poiret and (occasionally) A.P. de Candolle; \b 6-13\plain\fs28  by J.L.M. Poiret.
\par \pard \b Lam.\plain\fs28 ,\i\b  Fl. Fr\plain\fs28 .
\par    J.B.A.P. Monnet de la Marck, \i Flore fran\'e7aise\plain\fs28 . Ed. 1. Paris. 1779. (\b 1-3\plain\fs28  in 1779. Cf. F.A. Stafleu & R.S. Cowan,\i  Taxonomic Literature\plain\fs28  ed. 2, \b 2\plain\fs28 : 731 (1979).) Ed. 2. Paris. 1795. ( \b 1-3\plain\fs28  in 1795.) Ed. 3 by J.B.A.P. Monnet de la Marck & A.P. de Candolle.Paris. 1805-1815. ( \b 1-4\plain\fs28  in 1805;\b  5\plain\fs28  in 1815. \b 4\plain\fs28  issued in two parts with continuous pagination, the second called \i 'Tome quatri\'e8me. Seconde partie'\plain\fs28  and \i ' Vol. V' \plain\fs28 ;\b  5\plain\fs28  called ' \i Tome cinqui\'e8me, ou sixi\'e8me Volume'\plain\fs28  and ' \i Vol. VI\plain\fs28 ' ;\b  1-4\plain\fs28  also reprinted in 1815.)
\par \pard \b Lam.\plain\fs28 , \i\b Tabl. Encycl. M\'e9th. Bot.\plain\fs28  
\par      J.B.A.P. Monnet de la Marck, \i Tableau encyclop\'e9dique et m\'e9thodique des trois R\'e8gnes de la Nature. Botanique\plain\fs28 .  \b 1-3\plain\fs28 . Paris. 1791-1823. (\b 1\plain\fs28 :pp. 1-200 in 1791; pp. 201-440 in 1792;   pp. 441-496 in 1793; \b 2\plain\fs28 : pp. 1-48 in 1794; pp. 49-72 in 1796;   pp. 73-136 in 1797; pp. 137-551 in 1819; \b 3\plain\fs28 : pp. 1-728 in 1823. Cf. H.W. Rickett & F.A. Stafleu, \i Taxon\plain\b\fs28  10\plain\fs28 : 112 (1961) and   F.A. Stafleu, \i Taxon\plain\b\fs28  12\plain\fs28 : 68 (1963).) 
\par \pard \b Lam. & DC\plain\fs28 ., \i\b Fl. Fr\plain\fs28 .
\par    Cf. Lam., \i Fl. Fr\plain\fs28 .
\par \b Lamb.\plain\fs28 , \i\b Descr. Gen. Pinus\plain\fs28 
\par    A.B. Lambert, \i A Description of tbe Genus\plain\fs28  Pinus. Ed. 1. London. 1803-1824. (\b 1\plain\fs28 : pp. 1-86 in 1803; pp. 87-94 in 1806; pp. 95-98 in 1807 ; \b 2\plain\fs28  in 1824.) Ed. 2. London. 1828-1837. (\b 1\plain\fs28  in 1828 ; \b 2\plain\fs28  by D. Don in 1828;\b  3\plain\fs28 , completing both editions, by D. Don in 1837.) Ed. 3. London. 1832. (\b 1\plain\fs28  & \b 2\plain\fs28  in 1832.) Ed. 4. London. 1837-1842. (Cf. F.A. Stafleu & R.S. Cowan, \i Taxonomic Literature\plain\fs28  ed. 2, \b 2\plain\fs28 : 736-737 (1979).)
\par \pard \b Lamotte\plain\fs28 , \i\b Prodr. Fl. Centr. Fr\plain\fs28 .
\par      M. Lamotte, \i Prodrome de la Flore du Plateau central de la France\plain\fs28 . Paris. 1877-1881. (\b 1\plain\fs28 : pp. 1-355 in 1877; \b 2\plain\fs28 : pp. 351-628 in 1881.)
\par \b Lange\plain\fs28 , \i\b Descr. Icon. Ill\plain\fs28 .
\par    J.M.C. Lange, \i Descriptio Iconibus illustrata Plantarum novarum vel minus cognitarum praecipue e Flora hispanica\plain\fs28 . Hauniae. 1864-l866. (\b 1\plain\fs28 ,pp. 1-8, tt. 1-12 in 1864;\b 2\plain\fs28 , pp.9-12, tt.13-24 in 1865;\b 3\plain\fs28 ,pp.13-20, tt. 25-35 in 1866.)
\par \pard \b Lange\plain\fs28 ,\i\b  Fl. Dan\plain\fs28 .
\par       Cf. Oeder, \i Fl. Dan\plain\fs28 .
\par \b Lange\plain\fs28 ,  \i\b Haandb. Danske Fl.\plain\fs28  
\par      J.M.C. Lange, \i Haandbog i den Danske Flora.\plain\fs28   Ed. 1. Kj\'f8benhavn.1851. Ed. 2. Kj\'f8benhavn. 1856-1859. Ed. 3. Kj\'f8benhavn. 1864. Ed. 4. Kj\'f8benhavn. 1886-1888. \i  Rettelser og Tilfojelser .... Kj\'f8benhavn\plain\fs28 . 1897. 
\par \b Lange\plain\fs28 ,  \i\b Icon. Pl. Fl. Dan\plain\fs28 . 
\par      G.C. Oeder,  \i Icones Plantarum sponte nascentium in Regnis Daniae et Norvegiae, in Ducatibus Slesvici et Holsatiae, et in  Comitatibus Oldenburgi et Delmenhorstiae: ad illustrandum  Opus de iisdem Plantis, Regio jussu exarandum, Florae danicae Nomine inscriptum\plain\fs28 .  Hauniae. 1761-1883. Fasc. \b 45-51\plain\fs28  by J.M.C. Lange in 1861-1883. 
\par \pard \b Lange\plain\fs28 , \i\b Ind. Sem. Horto Haun.\plain\fs28  
\par      J.M.C. Lange, \i  Index Seminum in Horto academico hauniensi collectorum\plain\fs28 .  Hauniae. 1855, 1857 & 1861. 
\par \b Lange\plain\fs28 , \i\b  Rev. Crat.\plain\fs28  
\par     J.M.C. Lange,  \i Revisio Specierum Generis Crataegi imprimis earum, quae in Hortis Daniae coluntur\plain\fs28 . Kj\'f8benhavn. 1897.
\par \b Lapeyr.\plain\fs28 ,\i\b  Fig. Fl. Pyr\plain\fs28 .
\par     P. Picot de Lapeyrouse,\i  Figures de la Flore des Pyren\'e9es, avec des Descriptions, des Notes critiques et des Observations\plain\fs28 . Paris. 1795-1801. (Tt. 1-10 in 1795; tt. 11-43 in 1801.)
\par \pard \b Lapeyr\plain\fs28 .,\i\b  Hist. Abr. Pyr\plain\fs28 .
\par     P. Picot de Lapeyrouse, \i Histoire abr\'e9g\'e9e des Plantes des Pyr\'e9n\'e9es et Itin\'e9raire des Botanistes dans ces Montagnes\plain\fs28 . Toulouse. 1813. \i Suppl\'e9ment\plain\fs28 . 1818.
\par \b Laterrade\plain\fs28 , \i\b Fl. Bordel.\plain\fs28 
\par      J.F. Laterrade, \i Flore bordelaise\plain\fs28 . Ed. 1. Bordeaux. 1811. Ed. 2. Bordeaux. 1821. Ed. 3. Bordeaux. 1829. Ed. 4, titled \i Flore bordelaise et de la Gironde\plain\fs28 . Bordeaux. 1846. Supplement. Bordeaux. 1857.
\par \b Latourr.\plain\fs28 ,  \i\b Chlor. Lugd\plain\fs28 . 
\par \pard      M.A.L.C. de Latourrette,  \i Chloris lugdunensis\plain\fs28 .  Lugduni- gallorum. 1785. 
\par \b Lavrenko\plain\fs28 , \i\b Ind. Sem. Horti Charkov\plain\fs28 .
\par    E.M. Lavrenko,\i  Index Seminum Horti botanici charkoviensis\plain\fs28 . 1926.
\par \b Lavrenko & Soczava\plain\fs28 , \i\b Descr. Veg. URSS\plain\fs28 
\par     E.M. Lavrenko & V.B. Soczava (edit.),\i  Descriptio Vegetationis URSS\plain\fs28 . / *********** *** **** [Rastitel'nyj Pokrov SSSR]. Leningrad. 1956. (\b 1\plain\fs28  & \b 2\plain\fs28  in 1956.)
\par \b Lawson, P.&.C\plain\fs28 ., \i\b Agric. Man\plain\fs28 .
\par \pard    P.&C. Lawson,\i  The Agriculturist's Manual, being a familiar Description of the agricultural Plants cultivated in Europe\plain\fs28 . Edinburgh. 1836.
\par \b Lazar\plain\fs28 , \i\b Ad Annum Horti Bot. Labac. Solemn. CL\plain\fs28 
\par      J. Lazar (edit.), \i Ad Annum Horti botanici labacensis Solemnen CL\plain\fs28 . / \i Zbornik ob 150-letnici botanicnega Vrta v Ljubljani\plain\fs28 . Ljubljana. 1960.
\par \b Lecoq & Lamotte,\i   Cat. Pl. Centr. Fr.\plain\fs28  
\par      H. Lecoq & M. Lamotte, \i  Catalogue raisonne des Plantes vasculaires du Plateau central de la France, comprenant l'Auvergne, le Velay, la Lozere, les Cevennes, une Partie du Bourbonnais et la Vivarais\plain\fs28 .  Paris. 1847. 
\par \pard \b Ledeb\plain\fs28 .,\i\b  Fl. Altaica\plain\fs28 
\par    C.F. von Ledebour,\i  Flora altaica\plain\fs28 . Berolini. 1829-1834. (\b 1\plain\fs28  in 1829; \b 2\plain\fs28  in 1830; \b 3\plain\fs28  in 1831 ; \b 4\plain\fs28  in 1833; Index in 1833 or 1834.)
\par \b Ledeb.\plain\fs28 , \i\b Fl. Ross\plain\fs28 .
\par    C.F. von Ledebour,\i  Flora rossica\plain\fs28 . Stuttgartiae. 1841-1853. (\b 1\plain\fs28 : pp. 1-240 in 1841 ; pp. 241-480 in 1842; pp. 481-790 in 1843;\b  2\plain\fs28 : pp.1-204 in 1843; pp.205-462 in 1844; pp. 463-718 in 1845;pp. 719-937 in 1846;\b  3\plain\fs28 : pp. 1-256 in 1847 ; pp. 257-492 in 1849; pp. 493-684 in 1850; pp. 685-866 in 1851 ; \b 4\plain\fs28 : pp. 1-464 in 1852 ; pp. 465-741 in 1853. Cf. F.A. Stafleu & R.S. Cowan, \i Taxonomic Literature\plain\fs28  ed. 2, \b 2\plain\fs28 : 807-808 (1979.)
\par \pard \b Ledeb\plain\fs28 .,\i\b  Icon. Pl. Fl. Ross\plain\fs28 .
\par    C.F. von Ledebour, \i Icones Plantarum novarum vel imperfecte cognitarum Floram rossicam, imprimis altaicam, illustrantes\plain\fs28 . Rigae. 1829-1834. (\b 1\plain\fs28  in 1829;\b  2\plain\fs28  in 1830; \b 3\plain\fs28 : tt. 201--250 in 1831; tt. 251-300 in 1832; \b 4\plain\fs28  in 1833 or 1834;\b  5\plain\fs28  in 1834. Cf. F.A. Stafleu & R.S. Cowan, \i Taxonomic Literature\plain\fs28  ed.2, \b 2\plain\fs28 : 807 (1979).)
\par \b Ledeb.\plain\fs28 ,\i\b  Ind. Sem. Horti Dorpat\plain\fs28 .
\par    C.F. von Ledebour, \i Index Seminum Horti botanici dorpatensis\plain\fs28 . Dorpat. 1818-1835 ; Appendix in 1821,\i  Suppl\plain\fs28 . \b 1-3\plain\fs28  in 1823-1825. For continuation cf. Bunge,\i  Del. Sem. Horti Dorpat\plain\fs28 .
\par \pard \b Le Gall\plain\fs28 , \i\b Fl. Morbihan\plain\fs28 
\par      N.J.M. le Gall,\i  Flore du Morbihan\plain\fs28 . Vannes. 1852.
\par \b Lehm.\plain\fs28 , \i\b Del. Sem. Horto Hamburg.\plain\fs28 
\par     J.G.C. Lehmann, \i Delectus Seminum quae in Horto Hamburgiensium botanico e Collectione Anni 1831 mutuae Commutationi offeruntur\plain\fs28 . Hamburgi. 1831.
\par \b Lehm.\plain\fs28 ,\i\b  Pl. Asperif\plain\fs28 .
\par     J.G.C. Lehmann,\i  Plantae e Familiae Asperifoliarum nuciferae.\plain\fs28  Berolini. 1818.
\par \b Lehm., J.F.\plain\fs28 , \i\b Prim. Fl. Herbip\plain\fs28 .
\par \pard     J.F. Lehmann,\i  Primae Lineae Florae herbipolensis\plain\fs28 . Herbipoli. 1809.
\par \b Lej\plain\fs28 ., \i\b Fl. Spa\plain\fs28 
\par    A.L.S. Lejeune, \i Flore des Environs de Spa\plain\fs28 . Li\'e8ge. 1811-1813. (\b 1\plain\fs28  in 1811; \b 2\plain\fs28  in 1813.)
\par \b Lej.\plain\fs28 ,  \i\b Rev. Fl. Spa\plain\fs28  
\par      A.L.S. Lejeune, \i Revue de la Flore des Environs de Spa\plain\fs28 . Liege. 1824. 
\par \b Lej. & Court.\plain\fs28 , \i\b Comp. Fl. Belg\plain\fs28 .
\par    A.L.S. Lejeune & R.J. Courtois, \i Compendium Florae belgieae\plain\fs28 . Leodii  & Verviae. 1828-1836. (\b 1\plain\fs28 , Leodii in 1828; \b 2\plain\fs28 , Leodii in 1831; \b 3\plain\fs28 , Verviae in 1836.) \b 3\plain\fs28  edit. A.L.S. Lejeune. (Cf. F.A. Stafleu & R. S. Cowan, \i Taxonomic Literature\plain\fs28  ed.2, \b 2\plain\fs28 : 831 (1979).)
\par \pard \b Leresche & Levier\plain\fs28 , \i\b  Deux Excurs. Bot.\plain\fs28  
\par      L. Leresche & \'c9. Levier,  \i Deux Excursions botaniques dans le Nord de l'Espagne et le Portugal en 1878 et 1879\plain\fs28 .  Lausanne. 1880. 
\par \b Less\plain\fs28 ., \i\b Reise Norweg. Loffod\plain\fs28 
\par      C.F. Lessing,\i  Reise durch Norwegen nach den Loffoden durch Lappland und Schweden\plain\fs28 . Berlin.1831.
\par \b Less.\plain\fs28 , \i\b Syn. Gen. Comp\plain\fs28 .
\par      C.F. Lessing, \i Synopsis Generum Compositarum\plain\fs28 . Berolini. 1832.
\par \b Lester-Garland\plain\fs28 ,\i\b  Fl. Jersey\plain\fs28 
\par \pard    L.V. Lester-Garland,\i  A Flora of the Island of Jersey with a List of Plants of the Channel Islands in general, and Remarks upon their Distribution and geographical Affinities\plain\fs28 . London. 1903.
\par \b Leysser\plain\fs28 ,\i\b  Fl. Hal.\plain\fs28 
\par      F.W. von Leysser, \i Flora halensis\plain\fs28 . Ed. 1. Halae Salicae. 1761. Ed. 2. Halae Salicae. 1783.
\par \b L'Her.\plain\fs28 ,  \i\b Geraniologia\plain\fs28  
\par      C.L. L'Heritier de Brutelle, \i  Geraniologia, seu Erodii, Pelargonii, Geranii, Monsoniae et Grieli Historia Iconibus illustrata\plain\fs28 .    Parisiis. 1792. (For date cf. F.A.Stafleu,  \i Taxon\plain\b\fs28  12\plain\fs28 : 71  (1963).) Reissued in 1813. 
\par \pard \b L'Her\plain\fs28 .,\i\b  Sert. Angl\plain\fs28 .
\par     C.L. L'Heritier de Brutelle, \i Sertum anglicum\plain\fs28 . Parisiis. 1789-1792. (Pp. 1-36, tt. 1-2 in 1789; tt. 3-12 in 1790; tt. 13-34 in 1792. Cf. F.A. Stafleu, \i Taxonomic Literature\plain\fs28  267 (1967).)
\par \b L'Her\plain\fs28 .,\i\b  Stirp. Nov\plain\fs28 .
\par     C.L. L'Heritier de Brutelle, \i Stirpes novae aut minus cognitae\plain\fs28 . Parisiis. 1785-1805. (Pp. i-vi, 1-20 in 1785; pp. vii-viii, 21-40 in 1785 or 1786; pp. ix-x, 41-62 in 1786; pp. xi-xii, 63-102 in 1788; pp. xiii-xiv, 103-134 in 1789; pp. xv-xvi, 135-184 in 1791; tt. 85-124 in 1805. Cf. F.A. Stafleu, \i Taxonomic Literature\plain\fs28  266 (1967).)
\par \pard \b Liebl\plain\fs28 .,\i\b  Fl. Fuld\plain\fs28 .
\par    F.K. Lieblein,\i  Flora fuldensis, oder Verzichniss der in dem F\'fcrstenthume Fuld wildwachsenden B\'e4ume, Str\'e4uche und Pflanzen\plain\fs28 . Frankfurt  a. M. 1784.
\par \b Lightf.\plain\fs28 ,\i\b  Fl. Scot.\plain\fs28 
\par       J. Lightfoot, \i Flora scotica\plain\fs28 . London. 1777. (\b 1\plain\fs28  & \b 2\plain\fs28  in 1777.)
\par \b Lindb. fil., H.\plain\fs28 , \i\b Enum. Pl. Fennoscand. Or.\plain\fs28 
\par      H. Lindberg,\i  Enumeratio Plantarum in Fennoscandia orientali sponte et subsponte nascentium\plain\fs28 . Helsingfors. 1901.
\par \pard \b Lindb. fil., H.\plain\fs28 ,\i\b  Sched Pl. Finl. Exsicc\plain\fs28 .
\par      H. Lindberg, \i Schedae Operis quod inscribitur Plantae Finlandiae exsiccatae e Museo botanico Universitatis helsingforsiensis distributae\plain\fs28 . Helsingforsiae.1907-1944. (\b 1-8\plain\fs28 , pp.1-127, in 1907; \i 9-20\plain\fs28 , pp. 1-166, in 1916; \b 21-42\plain\fs28 : pp. 1-70 part in 1933; pp. 70 part-302 in 1944.)
\par \b Lindeb.\plain\fs28 ,  \i\b Herb. Rub. Scand.\plain\fs28  
\par      C.J. Lindeberg, \i  Herbarium Ruborum Scandinaviae\plain\fs28 . Goteborg. 1882. 
\par \pard \b Lindeb\plain\fs28 .,\i\b  Hier. Scand. Exsicc\plain\fs28 .
\par      C.J. Lindeberg, \i Hieracia scandinavica exsiccata\plain\fs28 . Gothembourg. 1868-1878. (\b 1\plain\fs28 : nos. 1-50 in 1868;\b  2\plain\fs28 : nos. 51-100 in 1872;\b  3\plain\fs28 : nos. 101-150 in 1878.)
\par \b Lindeb.\plain\fs28 , \i\b Nov. Fl. Scand\plain\fs28 . 
\par     C.J. Lindeberg, \i Novitiae Florae scandinavicae\plain\fs28 .  Goteborg. 1858. 
\par \b Lindley\plain\fs28 ,\i\b  Coll. Bot\plain\fs28 .
\par    J. Lindley, \i Collectanea botanica ; or, Figures and botanical Illustrations of rare and curious exotic Plants\plain\fs28 . London. 1821(-?1826). (\b 1-7\plain\fs28 , tt. 1-36, in 1821 ; \b 8\plain\fs28 , tt. 37-41, A-B in ?1826. Cf. F. A. Stafleu & R.S. Cowan, \i Taxonomic Literature\plain\fs28  ed. 2, \b 3\plain\fs28 : 52 (1981).)
\par \pard \b Lindley\plain\fs28 , \i\b Digitalium Monogr\plain\fs28 .
\par      J. Lindley, \i Digitalium Monographia\plain\fs28 . Londini. 1821.
\par \b Lindley\plain\fs28 , \i\b Gen. Sp. Orchid\plain\fs28 .
\par      J. Lindley, \i The Genera and Species of orchidaceous Plants\plain\fs28 . London. 1830-1840. (Pp. 1-94 in 1830; pp. 95-133 in 1831; pp. 134-158 in 1832; pp. 159-256 in 1833; pp. 257-334 in 1835; pp. 335-366 in 1838; pp. 367-380 in 1839; pp. 381-553 in 1840. Cf. F.A. Stafleu, \i Taxonomic Literature\plain\fs28  270-271 (1967).)
\par \b Lindley\plain\fs28 ,\i\b  Ros. Monogr\plain\fs28 . 
\par \pard     J. Lindley,  \i Rosarum Monographia: or, a botanical History of Roses\plain\fs28 .  London, 1820. 
\par \b Lindley\plain\fs28 ,  \i\b Syn. Brit. Fl.\plain\fs28  
\par    J. Lindley,\i  A Synopsis of the British Flora.\plain\fs28   Ed. 1. London. 1829. Ed. 2. London. 1835. Ed. 3. London. 1841. 
\par \b Lindman\plain\fs28 , \i\b Svensk Fanerogamfl\plain\fs28 .
\par    C.A.M. Lindman, \i Svensk Fanerogamflora\plain\fs28 . Ed. 1. Stockholm. 1918. Ed. 2. Stockholm. 1926.
\par \b Link\plain\fs28 , \i\b Enum. Hort. Berol. Alt\plain\fs28 .
\par    J.H.F. Link, \i Enumeratio Plantarum : Horti regii botanici berolinensis altera\plain\fs28 . Berolini. 1821-1822. (\b 1\plain\fs28  in 1821 ; \b 2\plain\fs28  in 1822.)
\par \pard \b Link\plain\fs28 , \i\b Fil. Sp\plain\fs28 .
\par    J.H.F. Link, \i Filicum Species in Horto regio botanico berolinensis cultae\plain\fs28 . Berolini. 1841.
\par \b Link\plain\fs28 , \i\b  Handb\plain\fs28 . 
\par     J.H.F. Link, \i Handbuch zur Erkennung der nutzbarsten und am h\'e4ufigsten vorkommenden Gew\'e4chse\plain\fs28 . Berlin. 1829-1833. (\b 1\plain\fs28  in 1829 ;\b  2\plain\fs28  in 1829; \b 3\plain\fs28  in 1833. Cf. F.A. Stafleu & R.S. Cowan, \i Taxonomic Literature\plain\fs28  ed. 2, \b 3\plain\fs28 : 69 (1981).)
\par \b Link\plain\fs28 , \i\b Hort. Berol\plain\fs28 .
\par      J.H.F. Link, \i Hortus regius botanicus berolinensis, descriptus\plain\fs28 . Berolini. 1827-1833. (\b 1\plain\fs28  in 1827; \b 2\plain\fs28  in 1833.)
\par \pard \b Link & Otto\plain\fs28 ,\i\b  Icon. Pl. Rar. Horti Bot. Berol.\plain\fs28 
\par     J.H.F. Link & C.F. Otto, \i Icones Plantarum rariorum Horti regii botanici berolinensis. \plain\fs28 /\i Abbildungen neuer und seltener Gewachse des koniglichen botanischen Gartens zu Berlin\plain\fs28 . Berlin. 1828-1831. (Pp. 1-36 in 1828; pp. 37-60 in 1829; pp. 61-72 in 1830; pp. 73-96 in 1831. Cf F. A. Stafleu, \i Taxonomic Literature\plain\fs28  274 (1967).)
\par \b Linton, W.R.\plain\fs28 ,\i\b  Brit. Hier\plain\fs28 .
\par      W.R. Linton, \i An Account of the British Hieracia\plain\fs28 . London. 1905.
\par \pard \b Lipsch.\plain\fs28 , \i\b Fragm. Monogr. Scorzonera\plain\fs28 
\par     S.J. Lipschitz, ********* * ********** **** Scorzonera [\i Fragmenti k Monografii Roda\plain\fs28  Scorzonera]. / \i Fragmenta Monographiae Generis Scorzonera\plain\fs28 . Moskva. 1935-1939. (\b 1\plain\fs28  in 1935; \b 2\plain\fs28  in 1939.)
\par \b Lloyd\plain\fs28 , \i\b Fl. Loire-Inf\plain\fs28 .
\par    J. Lloyd, \i Flore de la Loire-inf\'e9rieure\plain\fs28 . Nantes. 1844.
\par \b Loefl\plain\fs28 .,\i\b  Iter Hisp\plain\fs28 .
\par    P. Loefling, \i Iter hispanicum, eller Resa til Spanska L\'e4nderna.\plain\fs28  Stockholm. 1758.
\par \pard \b Loefl.\plain\fs28 , \i\b Reise Span. L\'e4nd\plain\fs28 .
\par    P. Loefling, \i Reise, nach den spanischen L\'e4ndern in Europa und Amerika in den Jahren 1751 bis 1756. Aus dem schwedischen \'fcbersetzet durch A.B. K\'f6lpin\plain\fs28 . Berlin & Stralsund. 1766.
\par \b Loisel\plain\fs28 .,\i\b  Fl. Gall\plain\fs28 .
\par    J.L.A. Loiseleur-Deslongchamps, \i Flora gallica\plain\fs28 . Ed. 1. Lutetiae. 1806-1807. (Pp. 1-336 in 1806; pp. 337-742 in 1807.) Ed. 2. Paris. 1828. For \i Suppl\plain\fs28 ., cf. \i Not. Pl. Fr\plain\fs28 .
\par \b Loisel\plain\fs28 ., \i\b Not. Pl. Fr\plain\fs28 .
\par \pard    J.L.A. Loiseleur-Deslongchamps, \i Notice sur les Plantes \'e0 ajouter \'e0 la Flore de France\plain\fs28  (\i Flora gallica\plain\fs28 ); \i avec quelques Corrections et Observations\plain\fs28 . Paris. 1810.
\par \b Lojac\plain\fs28 .,\i\b  Contr. Fl. Sic\plain\fs28 .
\par     M. Lojacono-Pojero, \i Contributi alla Flora di Sicilia\plain\fs28 . Palermo. 1878.
\par \b Lojac\plain\fs28 ., \i\b Fl. Sic\plain\fs28 .
\par    M. Lojacono-Pojero, \i Flora sicula o Descrizione delle Piante vascolari spontanee o indigenate in Sicilia\plain\fs28 . Palermo. (1886-)1888-1909. (\b 1\plain\fs28 (\b 1\plain\fs28 ) in [1886-]1889; \b 1\plain\fs28 (\b 2\plain\fs28 ) in 1891; \b 2\plain\fs28 (\b 1\plain\fs28 ) in 1903; \b 2\plain\fs28 (\b 2\plain\fs28 ) apparently in parts, 1904-1907 ; \b 3\plain\fs28  apparently in parts, 1908-1909. Parts of \b 1\plain\fs28 (\b 1\plain\fs28 ) published previously, from 1886, in\i  Giornale del Comizio Agrario di Palermo\plain\fs28 . Cf. F.A. Stafleu & R.S. Cowan, \i Taxonomic Literature\plain\fs28 ed. 2, \b 3\plain\fs28 : 151 (1981).)\i  Addenda\plain\fs28  in \i Malpighia\plain\b\fs28  20\plain\fs28 : 37-48, 95-119, 180-218 & 290-300 (1906).
\par \pard \b Losa\plain\fs28 , \i\b Contrib. Estud. Fl. Veg. Prov. Zamora\plain\fs28  
\par      M. Losa Espa\'f1a, \i Contribuci\'f3n al Estudio de la Flora y Vegetaci\'f3n de la Provincia de Zamora\plain\fs28 .  Barcelona. 1949. 
\par \b Losa & P. Monts.\plain\fs28 , \i\b Aport. Conoc. Fl. Andorra\plain\fs28 
\par      M. Losa Espa\'f1a & P. Montserrat Recoder, \i Aportaci\'f3n al Conocimiento de la Flora de Andorra\plain\fs28 . Zaragoza. 1950.
\par \b Loscos\plain\fs28 , \i\b Trat. Pl. Arag\plain\fs28 .
\par     F. Loscos y Bern\'e1l,\i  Tratado de Plantas de Arag\'f3n\plain\fs28 . Madrid. 1876-1886. (\b 1\plain\fs28  in 1876-1877 ;\b  2\plain\fs28  & \i Suppl\plain\fs28 . \b l-4\plain\fs28  in 1880; \b 3\plain\fs28  & \i Suppl\plain\fs28 . \b 5-8\plain\fs28  in 1883-1886. Cf. F.A. Stafleu & R.S. Cowan, \i Taxonomic Literature\plain\fs28  ed. 2,\b  3\plain\fs28 : 165 (1981).) The last pages of\b  8\plain\fs28  were in part written after F. Loscos's death by his son, C. Loscos.
\par \pard \b Loscos & Pardo\plain\fs28 ,\i\b  Ser. Pl. Arag\plain\fs28 .
\par    F. Loscos y Bern\'e1l & J. Pardo y Sastr\'f3n, \i Series inconfecta Plantarum indigenarum Aragoniae praecipue meridionalis, e Lingua castellana in latinam vertit, recensuit, emendavit, Observationibus suis auxit atque edendam curavit Mauritius Willkomm\plain\fs28 . Dresdae. 1863.
\par \b Loudon\plain\fs28 ,\i\b  Arbor. Fruticet. Brit\plain\fs28 .
\par    J.C. Loudon, \i Arboretum et Fruticetum Britannicum : or the Trees and Shrubs of Britain, native and foreign\plain\fs28 . London. 1835-1838. (\b 1-8\plain\fs28 , in 63 parts, in 1835-1838.) Ed. 2. London. 1844.
\par \pard \b Loudon\plain\fs28 ,\i\b  Hort. Brit\plain\fs28 .
\par    J.C. Loudon, \i Hortus britannicus. A Catalogue of all the Plants indigenous, cultivated in, or introduced into Britain\plain\fs28 . Ed. 1. London. 1830. (\b 1\plain\fs28  & \b 2\plain\fs28  in 1830.) Ed. 2 & \i Suppl\plain\fs28 . \b 1\plain\fs28   (pp. 579-602). London. 1832. Ed. 3 & \i Suppl\plain\fs28 . London. 1839. (\i Suppl\plain\fs28 . \b 1\plain\fs28  reprinted, pp. 579--604; \i Suppl\plain\fs28 .\b  2\plain\fs28  by W.H. Baxter revised by G. Don, pp. 603 [\i sic\plain\fs28 ]-742). Ed. 4, with \i Suppl\plain\fs28 . by W.H. Baxter & D. Wooster under the direction of J.W. Loudon. London. 1850.
\par \pard \b Lour.\plain\fs28 ,  \i\b Fl. Cochinch.\plain\fs28  
\par     J. de Loureiro, \i Flora cochinchinensis\plain\fs28 . Ulyssipone. 1790.   (\b 1\plain\fs28  & \b 2\plain\fs28  in 1790. Cf. F.A. Stafleu,  \i Taxon\plain\b\fs28  12\plain\fs28 : 72 (1963).)  Reprinted, Berolini, 1793. 
\par \b Luckwill\plain\fs28 ,\i\b  Gen. Lycopers\plain\fs28 .
\par     L.C. Luckwill, \i The Genus\plain\fs28  Lycopersicon. (Aberdeen University Studies No. 120.) Aberdeen. 1943.
\par \b Lumn.\plain\fs28 , \i\b Fl. Poson\plain\fs28 .
\par     S.I. Lumnitzer, \i Flora posoniensis\plain\fs28 . Lipsiae. 1791.
\par \b Maack\plain\fs28 , \i\b Viljujsk. Okr. Jakutsk. Obl\plain\fs28 
\par \pard      R.K. Maack, ******** ****** ******** ******* [\i Viljujskij Okrug Jakutskoj Oblasti\plain\fs28 ]. S.-Peterburg. 1883-1887. (\b 1\plain\fs28  in 1883;\b  2\plain\fs28  in 1886; \b 3\plain\fs28  in 1887.)
\par \b Mackay\plain\fs28 ,\i\b  Fl. Hibern.\plain\fs28 
\par      J.T. Mackay,\i  Flora hibernica\plain\fs28 . Dublin. 1836.
\par \b Mackenzie & Bush\plain\fs28 ,\i\b   Man. Fl. Jackson Co. Missouri\plain\fs28  
\par     K.K. Mackenzie, B.F. Bush  et al., \i Manual of the Flora of  Jackson County Missouri\plain\fs28 .  Kansas City. 1902. 
\par \b Magnier\plain\fs28 ,  \i\b Fl. Select. Exsicc.\plain\fs28  
\par \pard     C. Magnier, \i Flora selecta exsiccata.\plain\fs28   Saint-Quentin. 1882-1897.   The plants distributed with these labels were again listed in\i  Scrinia Fl. Select\plain\fs28 . (\i Magnier\plain\fs28 ). 
\par \b Magnus\plain\fs28 , \i\b Beitr. Kenntn. Gatt.\plain\b\fs28  Najas\plain\fs28 
\par      P. Magnus,\i  Beitrage zur Kenntniss der Gattung\plain\fs28  Najas L. Berlin. 1870.
\par \b Maire\plain\fs28 , \i\b Fl. Afr. Nord\plain\fs28 
\par      R.C.J.E. Maire, \i Flore de l'Afrique du Nord\plain\fs28 . Paris. 1952 \'98\'93. (\b 1-3\plain\fs28  edit. M. Guinochet & L. Faurel; \b 4\plain\fs28  edit. M. Guinochet;\b  5\plain\fs28  edit. M. Guinochet & P. Quezel;\b  6-14\plain\fs28  edit. P. Quezel.\b  1\plain\fs28  in 1952,\b  2\plain\fs28  in 1953;\b  3\plain\fs28  in 1955; \b 4\plain\fs28  in 1957;\b  5\plain\fs28  in 1958;\b  6\plain\fs28  in 1959;\b  7\plain\fs28  in 1961,\b  8\plain\fs28  in 1962; \b 9 & 10\plain\fs28  in 1963; \b 11\plain\fs28  in 1964; \b 12\plain\fs28  in 1965; \b 13\plain\fs28  in 1967; \b 14\plain\fs28  in 1977.)
\par \pard \b Maire\plain\fs28 , \i\b Sahara Central\plain\fs28 
\par    R.C. J.E. Maire, \i \'c9tudes sur la Flore et la V\'e9g\'e9tation du Sahara central\plain\fs28 . \b 1\plain\fs28  & \b 2\plain\fs28  (M\'e9m. Soc. Hist. Nat. Afrique Nord 1933(3): 1-272). Alger. 1933. \b 3\plain\fs28 . (ibid. \b 1940\plain\fs28 (\b 3\plain\fs28 ): 273-433.) Alger. 1940.
\par \b Maire & Petitmengin\plain\fs28 ,\i\b  \'c9tude Pl. Vasc. R\'e9c. Gr\'e8ce\plain\fs28 
\par    R.C.J.E. Maire & M.G.C. Petitmengin, \'c9tude des Plantes vasculaires r\'e9colt\'e9es en Gr\'e8ce (1904). In R.C.J.E. Maire, Mat\'e9riaux pour servir \'e0 l' \'c9tude de la Flore et de la G\'e9ographie botanique de l' Orient \b 2\plain\fs28 . 46 pp. Nancy. 1907. \'c9tude...(1906). In \i op. cit\plain\fs28 . \b 4\plain\fs28 . 239 pp. Nancy. 1908.
\par \pard \b Majevski\plain\fs28 , \i\b  Fl. Sred. Ross\plain\fs28 . 
\par     P.F. Majevski, ***** ******** ******  [\i Flora srednej Rossii\plain\fs28 ]. Ed. 1. 1892. Ed. 2 by S. I. Korshinsky. 1895. Ed. 3 by B.A. Fedtschenko. 1902. Ed. 4 by D.I. Litvinov. 1912. Ed. 5 by  D. I. Litvinov. 1917. Ed. 6 by B. A. Fedtschenko. 1933. Ed. 7, titled ***** ******* ****** ************* ***** **** [\i Flora srednej Polosy evropejskoj Casti SSSR\plain\fs28 ]  by V.L. Komarov. 1940. Ed. 8 by B.K. Schischkin. Moskva & Leningrad. 1954. Ed. 9 by B.K. Schischkin. Leningrad. 1964. 
\par \pard \b Malagarriga,\i  Nuev. Comb. Subesp. Almeria\plain\fs28 
\par    R.M. de P. Malagarriga Heras,\i  Nuevo Combinaciones de Subespecies de la Provincia de Almeria\plain\fs28 . Barcelona. 1974.
\par \b Maly, J.\plain\fs28 ,  \i\b Enum. Pl. Austr\plain\fs28 . 
\par     J.K. Maly, \i Enumeratio Plantarum phanerogamarum Imperii Austriaci universi\plain\fs28 . Vindobonae. 1848. 
\par \b Malyschev\plain\fs28 , \i\b Vysok. Fl. Vost. Sajana\plain\fs28 
\par     L.I. Malyschev, ********** ***** ********** ******  [\i Vysokogornaja Flora vostocnogo Sajana\plain\fs28 ] . / \i Flora alpina Montium sajanensium orientalium\plain\fs28 . Moskva & Leningrad. 1965.
\par \pard \b Malzev\i  et al., Sorn. Rast. SSSR\plain\fs28 
\par     A.I. Malzev\i  et al\plain\fs28 . (edit.), ****** ********* \i  CCCP\plain\fs28  [\i Sornye Rastenija SSSR\plain\fs28 ]. 1934-1935. (\b 1-3\plain\fs28  in 1934;\b  4\plain\fs28  in 1935.)
\par \b Manden.\plain\fs28 ,  \i\b Kavk. Vidy Heracleum\plain\fs28  
\par     I.P. Mandenova, ********** **** **** Heracleum  [\i Kavkazskie Vidy Roda \plain\fs28 Heracleum]. Tbilisi. 1950. 
\par \b Marchesetti\plain\fs28 ,\i\b  Fl. Trieste\plain\fs28 
\par     C. de Marehesetti,\i  Flora di Trieste e de' suoi Dintorni\plain\fs28 . Trieste. 1896-1897.
\par \pard \b Mares & Vigineix\plain\fs28 , \i\b  Cat. Pl. Balear\plain\fs28 . 
\par     P. Mar\'e8s & G. Vigineix, \i Catalogue raisonn\'e9 des Plantes vasculaires des \'celes Baleares\plain\fs28 . Paris. 1880. 
\par \b Marshall\plain\fs28 ,\i\b  Arbust. Amer\plain\fs28 .
\par    H. Marshall,\i  Arbustum americanum: the American Grove, or an alphabetical Catalogue of Forest Trees and Shrubs, Natives of the American United States\plain\fs28 . Philadelphia. 1785.
\par \b Marsson\plain\fs28 ,  \i\b Fl. Neu-Vorpommern\plain\fs28  
\par      T.F. Marsson, \i Flora von Neu-Vorpommern und den Inseln  R\'fcgen und Usedom\plain\fs28 .  Leipzig. 1869. 
\par \pard \b Massara\plain\fs28 ,  \i\b Prodr. Fl. Valtell.\plain\fs28  
\par     G.F. Massara,  \i Prodromo della Flora valtellinese ossia Catalogo delle Piante\plain\fs28 .  Sondrio. 1834. 
\par \b Mart.,C.F.P.\plain\fs28 , \i\b Fl. Brasil.\plain\fs28 
\par    C.F.P. Martius, \i Flora brasiliensis. Enumeratio Plantarum in Brasilia hactenus detectarum quas suis aliorumque botanicis Studiis descriptas\plain\fs28 . Leipzig. 1840-1906. (\b 1-15\plain\fs28  in 1840-1906. For details of the very complex volumation and pagination cf. F.A. Stafleu & R.S. Cowan, \i Taxonomic Literature\plain\fs28  ed. 2, \b 3\plain\fs28 : 333-337 (1981).)
\par \pard \b Mart., C.F.P.\plain\fs28 , \i\b Hist. Nat. Palm\plain\fs28 .
\par      C.F.P. von Martius,\i  Historia naturalis Palmarum\plain\fs28 . Lipsi 1823-1853. (\b 1-3\plain\fs28 ; for dates cf. F.A. Stafleu, \i Taxonomic Literature\plain\fs28  296-297 (1967).)
\par \b Martrin-Donos\plain\fs28 , \i\b Pl. Crit. Tarn\plain\fs28 
\par     J.V. de Martrin-Donos, \i Plantes critiques du D\'e9partement du Tarn, ou Extrait de la Flore du Tarn (in\'e9dite)\plain\fs28 . Toulouse. 1862.
\par \b Mateo & Figuerola\plain\fs28 , \i\b Fl. Analit. Prov. Valencia\plain\fs28 
\par     G. Mateo Sanz & R. Figuerola Lamata, \i Flora analitica de la Provinciade Valencia\plain\fs28 . Valencia. 1987.
\par \pard \b Maxim\plain\fs28 ., \i\b Razb. Rukop. Socin. F. Schmidta Reis. Amurl.\plain\fs28 
\par      K.J. Maximowicz, ******* *********** ********* ******** *. *. ***** *** ********** [\i Razbor' rukopisnago SocVinenija Magistra F. Smidta pod' Nazvaniem'\plain\fs28 ]: \i Reisen in Amurlande und auf der Insel Sachalin. Botanischer Theil\plain\fs28 . S.-Peterburg. 1866.
\par \b Maxim.\plain\fs28 , \i\b Prim. Fl. Amur\plain\fs28 .
\par     C.J. Maximowicz, \i Primitiae Florae amurensis. Versuch einer Flora des Amur-Landes\plain\fs28 . St. Petersburg. 1859.
\par \pard \b Mayer, E.\plain\fs28 ,\i\b  Sezn. Prap. Cvet. Slov\plain\fs28 .
\par      E. Mayer, \i Seznam praprotnic in Cvetnic Slovenskega Ozemlj\plain\fs28  (First published in \i Razpr. Mat.-Prir. Akad.\plain\fs28  Ljubljani (1952j
\par \b Medicus\plain\fs28 , \i\b  Gesch. Bot\plain\fs28 . 
\par     F.C. Medicus, \i Geschichte der Botanik unserer Zeiten\plain\fs28 .  Mannheim. 1793. 
\par \b Medicus\plain\fs28 ,  \i\b Kunstl. Geschl. Malv.-Fam.\plain\fs28  
\par     F.C. Medicus,  \i Ueber einige k\'fcnstliche Geschlechter aus der  Malven-Familie,  denn der Klasse der Monadelphien\plain\fs28 .  Mannheim. 1787. 
\par \pard \b Medicus\plain\fs28 ,\i\b  Pflanzengatt\plain\fs28 .
\par    F.C. Medicus,\i  Pflanzen-Gattungen nach dem Inbegriffe s\'e4mtlicher Fruktifikations-Theile gebildet, und nach dem Sexual-Pflamgen-Register geordnet\plain\fs28 . Mannheim. 1792. (For date cf. F.A. Stafleu, \i Taxon\plain\fs28  \b 12\plain\fs28 : 74 (1963).)
\par \b Medicus\plain\fs28 , \i\b Philos. Bot\plain\fs28 .
\par    F.C. Medicus, \i Philosophische Botanik\plain\fs28 . Mannheim. 1789-1791. (\b 1\plain\fs28  in 1789 [part of this previously published in \i Vorl. Churpf. Phys.-\'d6kon. Ges.\plain\fs28  \b 4\plain\fs28 (\b 1\plain\fs28 ): 167-282 (1788)]; \b 2\plain\fs28  in 1791. Cf. F.A. Stafleu, \i Taxon\plain\fs28  \b 12\plain\fs28 : 74 (1963).)
\par \pard \b Meerb.\plain\fs28 , \i\b Afbeeld. Zeldz, Gewass\plain\fs28 .
\par    N. Meerburgh, \i Afbeeldingen van zeldzaame Gewassen\plain\fs28 . (By Johannes le Mair.) Leyden. 1775-1780. (\b 1\plain\fs28  in 1775; \b 2\plain\fs28  in 1776; \b 3\plain\fs28  & \b 4\plain\fs28  in 1777; \b 5\plain\fs28  in 1780.) Reissue in 1789, titled \i Plantae rariores vivis Coloribus depictae\plain\fs28 .
\par \b Meikle\plain\fs28 , \i\b Fl. Cyprus\plain\fs28 
\par     R.D. Meikle,\i  Flora of Cyprus\plain\fs28 . Kew. 1977-1985. (\b 1\plain\fs28  in 1977 ; \b 2\plain\fs28  in 1985.)
\par \b Meissner\plain\fs28 ,\i\b  Monogr. Gen. Polyg. Prodr\plain\fs28 .
\par \pard    C.F. Meissner, \i Monographiae Generis\plain\fs28  Polygoni \i Prodromus\plain\fs28 . Genevae. 1826.
\par \b Meissner\plain\fs28 ,  \i\b Pl. Vasc. Gen\plain\fs28 . 
\par     C.F. Meissner,  \i Plantarum vascularium Genera\plain\fs28 .  Lipsiae. 1836-1843. (\b 1\plain\fs28  (=  \i Tab. Diagn.\plain\fs28 ):  pp. i-iv, 1-104 in 1837;  pp. 105-176 in 1838; pp. 177-256 in 1839; pp. 257-312 in 1840; pp. 313-344 in 1841; pp. 345-408 in 1842; pp. 409-442  in 1843; \b 2\plain\fs28  (=  \i Comm\plain\fs28 .):  pp. 1-72 in 1837; pp. 73-120 in 1838;   pp. 121-160 in 1839; pp. 161-224 in 1840 pp. 225-252 in 1841; pp. 253-308 in 1842; pp. 309-402 in 1843. Cf. H.W. Rickett & F.A. Stafleu, \i  Taxon\plain\b\fs28  10\plain\fs28 : 118 (1961).) 
\par \pard \b Mela\plain\fs28 , \i\b Suomen Kasvio\plain\fs28 
\par    Cf. Cajander, \i Suomen Kasvio\plain\fs28 .
\par \b Menyh\plain\fs28 ., \i\b Kal. Vid. N\'f6v\'e9n\plain\fs28 .
\par    L. Menyh\'e1rth, \i Kalocsa vid\'e9k\'e9nek n\'f6v\'e9yteny\'e9szete\plain\fs28 . Budapest. 1877.
\par \b M\'e9rat\plain\fs28 , \i\b Nouv. Fl. Env. Paris\plain\fs28 
\par    F.V. M\'e9rat de Vaumartoise, \i Nouvelle Flore des Environs de Paris\plain\fs28 . Ed. 1. Paris. 1812. Ed. 2. Paris. 1821. (\b 1\plain\fs28  & \b 2\plain\fs28  in 1821.) Ed. 3. Paris. 1831-1834. (\b 1\plain\fs28  in 1834 ;\b  2\plain\fs28  in 1831.) Ed. 4. Paris. 1836. (\b 1\plain\fs28  & \b 2\plain\fs28  in 1836.) Ed. 5. Bruxelles. 1837-1838. (\b 1\plain\fs28  in 1837 ; \b 2\plain\fs28  in 1838.) Ed. 6. BruxelIes. 1841. (\b 1\plain\fs28  & \b 2\plain\fs28  in 1841.) (In each edition, \b 1\plain\fs28  comprised cryptogams, \b 2\plain\fs28  phanerogams.)
\par \pard \b Merino,\i  Fl. Galic\plain\fs28 .
\par      B. Merino y Roman, \i Flora descriptiva e ilustrada de Calici Santiago\plain\fs28 . 1905-1909. (\b 1\plain\fs28  in 1905; \b 2\plain\fs28  in 1906; \b 3\plain\fs28  and Suppl.
\par 1909.)
\par \b Merlet\plain\fs28 , \i\b Herbor. Maine-et-Loire\plain\fs28 
\par      G.E. Merlet de la Boulaye,\i  Herborisations dans le D\'e9part., Maine et Loire\plain\fs28 . Angers.1809.
\par \b Metzger\plain\fs28 , \i\b Eur. Cereal\plain\fs28 .
\par      J. Metzger \i Europ\'e4ische Cerealien in botanischer und landwirthschaftlicher Hinsicht\plain\fs28 . Heidelberg. 1824.
\par \pard \b Meyer\plain\fs28 , \i\b C.A., Verz. Pfl. Cauc\plain\fs28 .
\par    C.A. von Meyer, \i Verzeichniss der Pflanzen, welche w\'e4hrend der, auf allerh\'f6chsten Befehl, in den Jahren 1829 und 1830 unternommenen Reise im Caucasus und in den Provinzen am westlichen Ufer des caspischen Meeres gefunden und eingesammelt worden sind\plain\fs28 . St Petersburg. 1831.
\par \b Meyer, E.H.F\plain\fs28 .,\i\b  Syn. Junc\plain\fs28 .
\par      E.H.F. Meyer,\i  Synopsis Juncorum rite cognitorum\plain\fs28 . Gottingae 1822.
\par \b Michx\plain\fs28 ,\i\b  Fl. Bor.-Amer\plain\fs28 .
\par \pard    A. Michaux,\i  Flora boreali-americana\plain\fs28 . Parisiis & Argentorati. 1803.(\b 1\plain\fs28  & \b 2\plain\fs28  in 1803.)
\par \b Middendorff\plain\fs28 ,\i\b  Reise Nord. \'d6st. Sibir\plain\fs28 .
\par    A.T. von Middendorff \i Reise in den \'e4ussersten Norden und \'d6sten Sibiriens w\'e4hrend der Jahre 1843 und 1844\plain\fs28 . St Petersburg. 1847-1875. \b 1\plain\fs28  (\b 2\plain\fs28 ) 1, titled \i Die Phanogame Pflanzen aus dem Hochnorden\plain\fs28  by E.R. von Trautvetter. 1847. \b 1\plain\fs28  (\b 2\plain\fs28 ) 3, titled \i Florula ochotnensis phaenogama\plain\fs28  by E.R. von Trautvetter & C.A. von Meyer. 1856.
\par \pard \b Milde\plain\fs28 ,\i\b  Fil. Eur\plain\fs28 .
\par    C.A.J. Milde,\i  Filices Europae et Atlantidis, Asiae minoris et Sibiriae\plain\fs28 . Leipzig. 1867.
\par \b Milde\plain\fs28 , \i\b H\'f6heren Sporenpfl. Deutschl. Schweiz\plain\fs28 
\par    C.A.J. Milde,\i  Die h\'f6heren Sporenpflanzen Deutschlands' und der Schweiz\plain\fs28 . Leipzig. 1865.
\par \b Miller\plain\fs28 ,\i\b  Gard. Dict\plain\fs28 .
\par    P. Miller, \i The Gardeners Dictionary\plain\fs28 . Ed. 8. London. 1768. Ed. 9, by T. Martyn. London. 1797-1804. (\b 1\plain\fs28  in 1797 ; \b 2\plain\fs28  in 1804.)
\par \pard \b Min.\plain\fs28 , \i\b Konsp. Fl. Pskovsk. Obl\plain\fs28 .
\par      N.A. Miniaev (edit.), ******** ***** ********** ******* [\i Konspekt Flory Pskovskoj Oblasti\plain\fs28 ]. Leningrad. 1970
\par \b Mirbel\plain\fs28 ,  \i\b Hist. Nat. Pl\plain\fs28 . 
\par     C.F. Mirbel,  \i Histoire naturelle, generale et particuliere des Plantes\plain\fs28 .  Paris.\b  1-18\plain\fs28 . 1802-1806. (\b 3\plain\fs28  & \b 16-18\plain\fs28  by N. Jolyclerc.)   Forms one of the supplements of ed. 2 of G.L.L. de Buffon, \i Histoire naturelle\plain\fs28 . 
\par \b Mitf.\plain\fs28 , \i\b Bamboo Garden\plain\fs28 .
\par \pard \b Moench\plain\fs28 ,\i\b  Meth\plain\fs28 .
\par    C. Moench,\i  Methodus Plantas Horti botanici et Agri marburgensis a Staminum Situ deseribendi\plain\fs28 . Marburgi Cattorum. 1794. \i\b Suppl\plain\fs28 ., \i Supplementum\plain\fs28 . Marburgi Cattorum. 1802.
\par \b Moench\plain\fs28 , \i\b Verz. Ausl. B\'e4ume Weissenst\plain\fs28 .
\par    C. Moench, \i Verzeichniss ausl\'e4ndischer B\'e4ume und Stauden des Lustschlosses Weissenstein bey Cassel\plain\fs28 . Frankfurt a. M. & Leipzig. 1785.
\par \b Moessler\plain\fs28 , \i\b Handb\plain\fs28 .
\par    J.C. Moessler, \i Gemeinn\'fctziges Handbuch der Gew\'e4chskunde\plain\fs28 . Altona. 1815. Ed. 2, by H.G.L. Reichenbach. Ed. 1. Altona. 1827-1830. (\b 1\plain\fs28  in 1827; \b 2\plain\fs28 (\b 1\plain\fs28 ) in 1828; \b 2\plain\fs28 (\b 2\plain\fs28 ) in 1829; \b 3\plain\fs28  in 1830.) Ed. 3, by H.G.L. Reichenbach. Altona. 1833-1835. (\b 1\plain\fs28  in 1833; \b 2\plain\fs28 (\b 1\plain\fs28 ) in 1833; \b 2\plain\fs28 (\b 2\plain\fs28  & \b 3\plain\fs28 ) in 1834; \b 3\plain\fs28  in 1835.) Cf. F.A. Stafleu & R.S.Cowan, \i Taxonomic Literature\plain\fs28  ed. 2, \b 3\plain\fs28 : 539 (1981).
\par \pard \b Moq.\plain\fs28 ,\i\b  Chenop. Monogr. Enum.\plain\fs28 
\par    C.H.B.A. Moquin-Tandon,\i  Chenopodearum monographica Enumeratio\plain\fs28 . Parisiis. 1840.
\par \b Moretti\plain\fs28 , \i\b Bot. Ital.\plain\fs28  
\par      G. Moretti, \i Il  Botanico italiano, ossia Discussioni sulla Flora italica\plain\fs28 .  Pavia. 1826. Reprinted as \i Gior. Fis. Chim. Stor. Nat.\plain\fs28  (\i Pavia\plain\fs28 ) \b 9\plain\fs28 :  65-94, 154-159, 238(1826). 
\par \b Moretti\plain\fs28 , \i\b Pl. Ital\plain\fs28 .
\par      G. Moretti, \i De quibusdam Plantis Italiae\plain\fs28 . Paviae. 1822-18(\b 1-5\plain\fs28  in 1822;\b  6\plain\fs28  in 1823; \b 7\plain\fs28  in 1824.)
\par \pard \b Mori, T\plain\fs28 ., \i\b Enum. Pl. Corea\plain\fs28 
\par    T. Mori, \i An Enumeration of Plants hitherto known from Corea\plain\fs28 . Seoul. 1922.
\par \b Moris\plain\fs28 , \i\b Fl. Sard\plain\fs28 .
\par    G.G. Moris, \i Flora sardoa\plain\fs28 . Taurini. 1837-1859. (\b 1\plain\fs28  in 1837 ; \b 2\plain\fs28  in 1840-1843; \b 3\plain\fs28  in 1858-1859.)
\par \b Moris\plain\fs28 ,\i\b Stirp. Sard\plain\fs28 .
\par    G.G. Moris, \i Stirpium sardoarum Elenchus\plain\fs28 . Carali & Taurini. 1827-1829. (\b 1\plain\fs28 , Carali in 1827; \b 2\plain\fs28 , Carali in 1828; \b 3\plain\fs28 , Taurini in 1829.)\i\b  App\plain\fs28 ., \i Appendix\plain\fs28 . Taurini. 1828. (Cf. F. A. Stafleu & R.S. Cowan, \i Taxonomic Literature\plain\fs28  ed. 2, \b 3\plain\fs28 : 586 (1981).)
\par \pard \b Moris & De Not.\plain\fs28 , \i\b Fl. Caprariae\plain\fs28 
\par     G.G. Moris & G. de Notaris, \i Florula Caprariae.\plain\fs28  Torino. 1839.
\par \b Muenchh\plain\fs28 ., \i\b Hausv\plain\fs28 .
\par     O. von Muenchhausen, \i Der Hausvater. Eine \'f6konomische Schrift\plain\fs28 . Hannover. 1765-1774. (\b 1\plain\fs28 (\b 1-3\plain\fs28 ) in 1765; \b 2\plain\fs28 (\b 1\plain\fs28 ): pp. 1-367 in 1765; \b 2\plain\fs28 (\b 3\plain\fs28 ): pp. 369-935 in 1766; \b 3\plain\fs28 (\b 1\plain\fs28  & \b 2\plain\fs28 ) in 1767 ; \b 3\plain\fs28 (\b 3\plain\fs28 ) in 1768; \b 4\plain\fs28 (\b 1\plain\fs28 ) in 1769; \b 4\plain\fs28 (\b 2\plain\fs28 ) in 1772; \b 5\plain\fs28 (\b 1\plain\fs28  &\b 2\plain\fs28 ) in 1770; \b 6\plain\fs28 (\b 1\plain\fs28 ) in 1773;\b  6\plain\fs28 (\b 2\plain\fs28 ) in 1774.)
\par \pard \b Muhl.\plain\fs28 , \i\b Descr. Gram. Amer. Sept\plain\fs28 .
\par      G.H.E. Muhlenberg, \i Descriptio uberior Graminum et Plantarum calamariarum Americae septentrionalis indigenarum et cicurum\plain\fs28 . Philadelphiae. 1817.
\par \b Murb.\plain\fs28 , \i\b Beitr. Fl. S\'fcdbosn\plain\fs28 .
\par     S.S. Murbeck, \i Beitr\'e4ge zur Kenntniss der Flora von S\'fcdbosnien und der Hercegovina\plain\fs28 . Lund. 1891. (Published as Lunds Univ. \'c5rsskr. \b 27\plain\fs28 .)
\par \b Murb.\plain\fs28 , \i\b Contr. Fl. Nord-Ouest Afr\plain\fs28 .
\par      S.S. Murbeck, \i Contributions a la Connaissance de la Flore du Nord-ouest de l'Afrique et plus specialement de la Tunisie\plain\fs28 . Lund. 1897-1905. (Ser. 1: \b 1\plain\fs28  in 1897;\b  2\plain\fs28  in 1898; \b 3\plain\fs28  in 1899; \b 4\plain\fs28  in 1900. Ser. 2 in 1905.) Published as \i Acta Reg. Soc. Physiogr\plain\fs28 . Lund \b 8-10\plain\fs28  and \b 16\plain\fs28 .
\par \pard \b Murith\plain\fs28 ,\i\b  Guide Bot. Valais\plain\fs28 
\par     L.J. Murith, \i Le Guide du Botaniste qui voyage dans le Valais\plain\fs28 . Lausanne. 1810.
\par \b Murr, J.\plain\fs28 ,\i\b  Neue Uebers. Farn-Bl\'fctenpfl. Vorarlb\plain\fs28 .
\par     J. Murr,\i  Neue Uebersicht \'fcber die Farn- und Bl\'fctenpflanzen von Vorarlberg und Liechtenstein\plain\fs28 . Bregenz. 1923-1926. (Pp. i-xxxii, 1-288 in 1923; pp. xxxvi-xxxx, 291-400 in 1924; pp. xxxxiv-xxxxvii, 403-507 in 1926.)
\par \b Murray, A\plain\fs28 .,\i\b  Bot. Exped. Oreg\plain\fs28 .
\par    A. Murray, \i Botanical Expedition to Oregon\plain\fs28 . Edinburgh. 1849-1859. (\b  l\plain\fs28  in 1849; \b 2\plain\fs28  in l850; \b 3\plain\fs28  in 1851; \b 4\plain\fs28  & \b 5\plain\fs28  in 1852; \b 6-8\plain\fs28  in 1853;\b  9\plain\fs28  in 1854; \b 10\plain\fs28  in 1857 ; \b 11\plain\fs28  in 1859.) \b 1\plain\fs28  & \b 3\plain\fs28  by J.H. Balfour; \b 6\plain\fs28  by J. Jeffrey. Cf. F. A. Stafleu & R.S. Cowan, \i Taxonomic Literature\plain\fs28  ed. 2,\b  3\plain\fs28 : 668(1981).
\par \pard \b Murray, A.\plain\fs28 , \i\b North. Fl\plain\fs28 .
\par     A. Murray, \i The Northern Flora; or, a Description of the wild Plants belonging to the North and East of Scotland\plain\fs28 . Edinburgh. 1836.
\par \b Murray\plain\fs28 ,\i\b  Prodr. Stirp. Gotting\plain\fs28 .
\par    J.A. Murray,\i  Prodromus Designationis Stirpium gottingensium\plain\fs28 . Goettingae. 1770.
\par \b Murray\plain\fs28 , \i\b Syst. Veg\plain\fs28 .
\par      Cf. L., \i Syst. Nat\plain\fs28 .
\par \b Mutel\plain\fs28 , \i\b Fl. Fr\plain\fs28 .
\par    A.P.V. Mutel,\i  Flore fran\'e7aise destin\'e9e aux Herborisations\plain\fs28 . Paris. 1834-1838. ( \b 1\plain\fs28  in 1834; \b 2\plain\fs28  in 1835; \b 3\plain\fs28  in 1836; \b 4\plain\fs28  in 1837; \b 5\plain\fs28  in 1838.) \i Atlas\plain\fs28 . Paris. 1835-1838. (\b 1\plain\fs28  in 1835; \b 2\plain\fs28  & \b 3\plain\fs28  in 1836; \b 4\plain\fs28  in 1837 ; \i Suppl\plain\fs28 . in 1838.)
\par \pard \b Naegeli & Peter\plain\fs28 ,\i\b  Hier. Mittel-Eur\plain\fs28 .
\par      C. von Naegeli & A. Peter, \i Die Hieracien Mittel-Europas\plain\fs28 . M\'fcnchen. 1885-1889. (\b 1\plain\fs28  in 1885;\b  2\plain\fs28 : pp. 1-240 in 1886; pp. 241-340 in 1889.)
\par \b Namegata & Kurata\plain\fs28 , \i\b Coll. Cult. Ferns Fern Allies\plain\fs28 
\par    T. Namegata & S. Kurata, \i Collection and Cultivation of our Ferns and Fern Allies; and An Enumeration of the Japanese Pteridophytes\plain\fs28 . Tokyo. 1961. (Part 2, \i An Enumeration ...\plain\fs28 , also available as a separate.)
\par \pard \b Nees\plain\fs28 ,\i\b  Agrost. Brasil\plain\fs28 .
\par      C.G.D. Nees von Esenbeck,\i  Agrostologia brasiliensis\plain\fs28 . Stuttgartiae & Tubingae. 1829.
\par \b Nees\plain\fs28 , \i\b Fl. Afr. Austr\plain\fs28 .
\par      C.G.D. Nees von Esenbeck, \i Florae Africae australioris Illustrationes monographicae\plain\fs28 . Glogaviae. 1841.
\par \b Nees\plain\fs28 , \i\b Gen. Pl. Fl. Germ\plain\fs28 .
\par      C.G.D. Nees von Esenbeck, \i Genera Plantarum Florae germanicae Iconibus et Descriptionibus illustrata\plain\fs28 . Bonnae. 1833-1860.
\par \b Nees\plain\fs28 , \i\b Horae Phys. Berol\plain\fs28 .
\par \pard    C.G.D. Nees von Esenbeck (edit.), \i Horae physicae berolinenses\plain\fs28 . Bonnae. 1820.
\par \b Nees\plain\fs28 , \i\b Syn. Sp. Gen. Aster. Herb\plain\fs28 .
\par    C.G.D. Nees von Esenbeck, \i Synopsis Specierum Generis Asterum herbacearum\plain\fs28 . Erlangae. 1818.
\par \b Neilr\plain\fs28 ., \i\b Aufz. Ung. Slav. Gef\'e4ss.\plain\fs28 
\par    A. Neilreich, \i Aufz\'e4hlung der in Ungarn und Slavonien bisher beobachteten Gef\'e4sspflanzen nebst einer pflanzengeographischen Uebersicht\plain\fs28 . Wien. 1865 ('1866').\i  Nachtr., Aufz\'e4hlung ... Nachtr\'e4ge und Verbesserungen\plain\fs28 . Wien. 1870.
\par \pard \b Neilr\plain\fs28 ., \i\b Diagn. Ung. Slav. Gefasspfl\plain\fs28 .
\par      A. Neilreieh,\i  Diagnosen der in Ungarn und Slavonien bisher beobachteten Gefasspflanzen welche in Koch's Synopsis nicht enthalten sind\plain\fs28 . Wien. 1867.
\par \b Neilr.\plain\fs28 , \i\b Nachtr. Fl. Wien\plain\fs28 .
\par      A. Neilreich, \i Nachtrage zur Flora von Wien\plain\fs28 . Wien. 1851.
\par \b Neilr.\plain\fs28 , \i\b Vegetationsverh\'e4ltn. Croat\plain\fs28 .
\par     A. Neilreich, \i Die Vegetationsverh\'e4ltnisse von Croatien\plain\fs28 . Wien. 1868.
\par \b Nelson, E.\plain\fs28 ,\i  Gestaltwandel\plain\fs28 
\par \pard     E. Nelson, \i Gestaltwandel und Artbildung er\'f6rtert am Beispiel der Orchidac\'e9en Europas und der Mittelmeerlander insbesondere der Gattung\plain\fs28  Ophrys. Chernex-Montreux. 1962.
\par \b Nestler\plain\fs28 ,  \i\b Monogr. Potent\plain\fs28 . 
\par      C.G. Nestler, \i  Monographia de Potentilla, praemissis nonnullis Observationibus circa Familiam Rosacearum\plain\fs28 .  Parisiis. &   Argentorati. 1816. 
\par \b Neuman\plain\fs28 , \i\b Sver. Fl\plain\fs28 .
\par    L.M. Neuman, \i Sveriges Flora\plain\fs28  (\i Fanerogamerna\plain\fs28 ). Lund. 1901.
\par \pard \b Neygenf.\plain\fs28 , \i\b  Enchirid Bot. Siles\plain\fs28 . 
\par      F.W. Neygenfind, \i Enchiridium botanicum, continens Plantas Silesiae indigenas. / Botanisches Taschenbuch, welches die in   Schlesien einheimischen Pflanzen enth\'e4lt.\plain\fs28   Misenae. 1821. 
\par \b Nicholson\plain\fs28 ,\i\b  Ill. Dict. Gard\plain\fs28 .
\par      G. Nicholson (edit.), \i The illustrated Dictionary of Gardening\plain\fs28 . London. 1884-1888. (1: pp. 1 480 in 1884; pp. 481-544 in 1885; 2: pp. 1-464 in 1885; pp. 465-544 in 1886; 3: pp. 1-400 in 1886; pp. 401-537 in 1881; 4: pp. 1-250 in 1887; pp. 251-608 (Supplement) in 1888.) Century Supplement. London. 1900-1901. (PP. 1-376 in 1900; pp. 377-747 in 1901.)
\par \pard \b Nocca & Balbis\plain\fs28 , \i\b Fl. Ticin\plain\fs28 .
\par      D. Nocca & G.B. Balbis, \i Flora ticinensis\plain\fs28 . Ticini. 1816-1821. (\b 1\plain\fs28  in 1816 \b 2\plain\fs28  in 1821.)
\par \b Nordh.\plain\fs28 , \i\b Norsk Fl\plain\fs28 .
\par       R. Nordhagen,\i  Norsk Flora\plain\fs28 . Oslo. 1940.
\par \b Norlindh, T.\plain\fs28 ,\i\b  Stud. Calend\plain\fs28 .
\par      T. Norlindh, \i Studies in the\plain\fs28  Calenduleae. \b 1\plain\i\fs28  Monograph of the Genera \plain\fs28 Dimorphotheca, Castalis, Osteospermum, Gibbaria \i and\plain\fs28  Chrysanthemoides. Lund. 1943. (\b 2\plain\i\fs28  Phytogeography and Interrelation\plain\fs28 , published as\i  Bot. Not\plain\fs28 . \b 1946\plain\fs28 : 471-506 (1946).)
\par \pard \b Nutt\plain\fs28 .,\i\b  Gen. N. Amer. Pl\plain\fs28 .
\par    T. Nuttall, \i The Genera of North-American Plants, and a Catalogue of the Species, to the Year 1817\plain\fs28 . Philadelphia. 1818. (\b 1\plain\fs28  & \b 2\plain\fs28  in 1818.) Facsimile ed. New York. 1971.
\par \b Nutt\plain\fs28 ., \i\b N. Amer. Sylva\plain\fs28 
\par    T. Nuttall,\i  The North American Sylva : or, a Description of tbe Forest Trees of the United States, Canada, and Nova Scotia\plain\fs28 . Three-volume edition: Philadelphia. 1842-1849. (\b 1\plain\fs28 (\b 1\plain\fs28  & \b 2\plain\fs28 ) in 1842; \b 2\plain\fs28  in 1846; \b 3\plain\fs28  in 1849. Reissues in 1849, 1852, 1853 & 1855.) Two-volume edition: Philadelphia. 1857. (\b 1\plain\fs28  & \b 2\plain\fs28  in 1857. Reissues in 1859 & two in 1865.) Cf. F.A. Stafieu & R.S. Cowan, \i Taxonomic Literature\plain\fs28  ed. 2,\b  3\plain\fs28 : 786-787 (1981).
\par \pard \b Ny\'e1r\'e1dy, E.I\plain\fs28 .,\i\b  Enum. Pl. Vasc. Cheia Turzii\plain\fs28 
\par    E.I. Ny\'e1r\'e1dy,\i  Enumerarea Plantelor vasculare din Cheia Turzii\plain\fs28 . (Published as \i M\'e9m. Comis. Monum. Nat. Rom\'e2nia\plain\fs28 , \b 1\plain\fs28 .) Bucuresti. 1939. 
\par \b Nyl., F.\plain\fs28 , \i\b Spicil. Pl. Fenn\plain\fs28 .
\par      F. Nylander, \i Spicilegium Plantarum fennicarum\plain\fs28 . Helsingforsiae. 1843-1846. (\b 1\plain\fs28  in 1843;\b  2\plain\fs28  in 1844; \b 3\plain\fs28  in 1846.)
\par \b Nyman\plain\fs28 ,\i\b  Consp.\plain\fs28 
\par    C.F. Nyman, \i Conspectus Florae europaeae\plain\fs28 . \'d6rebro. 1878-1882. (Pp. 1-240 in 1878; pp. 241-493 (part) in 1879; pp. 493-677 in 1881 ; pp. 677-858 in 1882 ; p. 256 \i errata\plain\fs28  in 1881 ; p. 493 (part) and p. 677 published twice. Cf. W. T. Stearn, \i Jour. Bot.\plain\fs28  (\i London\plain\fs28 ) \b 76\plain\fs28 : 113 (1938).) \i\b Suppl\plain\fs28 ., \i Supplementum\plain\b\fs28  1\plain\fs28  in 1883-1884 (pp. 1-21, 1-166 titled \i Acotyledoneae vasculares et Characeae Europae\plain\fs28  in 1883; both parts combined as pp. 859-1046 in 1884) ; \b 2\plain\fs28 (\b 1\plain\fs28 ): pp. 1-224 in 1889; \b 2\plain\fs28 (\b 2\plain\fs28 ): pp. 225-404 in 1890. \i\b Addit\plain\fs28 ., \i Additamenta ad Conspectus Florae europaeae\plain\fs28 . / \i Beitr\'e4ge zu C. F. Njman's\plain\fs28  Conspectus Florae europaeae, by E. Roth. Berlin. 1885. (Cf. F. A. Stafleu & R.S. Cowan, \i Taxonomic Literature\plain\fs28  ed. 2, \b 3\plain\fs28 : 798-799 (1981).)
\par \pard \b Nyman\plain\fs28 , \i\b Syll\plain\fs28 
\par    C.F. Nyman, \i Sylloge Florae europaeae\plain\fs28 . Oerobroae. 1854-1855. \i\b Suppl\plain\fs28 ., \i Supplementum\plain\fs28 . Oerebroae. 1865.
\par \b Oeder\plain\fs28 , \i\b Fl. Dan\plain\fs28 .
\par     G.C. Oeder,\i  Icones Plantarum sponte nascentium in Regnis Daniae et Norvegiae, in Ducatibus Slesvici et Holsatiae, et in Comitatibus Oldenburgi et Delmenhorstiae: ad illustrandum Opus de iisdem Plantis, regio Jussu exarandum, Florae danicae Nomine inscriptum\plain\fs28 . Hauniae. 1762-1883. (\b 1\plain\fs28 : tt. 1-60 in 1762; tt. 61-120 in 1763; tt. 121-180 in 1764; \b 2\plain\fs28 : tt. 181-240 in 1765; tt. 241-300 in 1766; tt. 301-360 in 1767; \b 3\plain\fs28 : tt. 361-420 in 1768; tt. 421-480 in 1769; tt. 481-540 in 1770; \b 4\plain\fs28 : tt. 541-600 in 1771; tt. 601-660 in 1775; tt. 661-720 in 1777; \b 5\plain\fs28 : tt. 721-780 in 1778; tt. 781-840 in 1780; tt. 841-900 in 1782; \b 6\plain\fs28 : tt 901-960 in 1787; tt. 961-1020 in 1790; tt. 1021-1080 in 1792; \b 7\plain\fs28 : tt. 1081-1140 in 1794; tt. 1141-1200 in 1797; tt. 1201-1260 in 1799; \b 8\plain\fs28 : tt. 1261-1320 in 1806; tt. 1321-1380 in 1808; tt. 1381-1440 in 1810;\b 9\plain\fs28 : tt. 1441-1500 in 1813; tt. 1501-1560 in 1816; tt. 1561-1620 in 1818; \b 10\plain\fs28 : tt. 1621-1680 in 1819; tt. 1681-1740 in 1821; tt. 1741-1800 in 1823; \b 11\plain\fs28 : tt. 1801-1860 in 1825; tt. 1861-1920 in 1827; tt. 1921-1980 in 1829; \b 12\plain\fs28 : tt. 1981-2040 in 1830: tt. 2041-2100 in 1832; tt. 2101-2160 in 1834; \b 13\plain\fs28 : tt. 2161-2220 in 1836; tt. 2221-2280 in 1839; tt. 2281-2340 in 1840; \b 14\plain\fs28 : tt. 2341-2400 in 1843; tt. 2401-2460 in 1845; tt. 2461-2520 in 1849; \b 15\plain\fs28 : tt. 2521-2580 in 1849; tt. 2581-2640 in 1858; tt. 2641-2700 in 1861; \b 16\plain\fs28 : tt. 2701-2760 in 1867; tt. 2761-2820 in 1869; tt. 2821-2880 in 1871; \b 17\plain\fs28 : tt. 2881-2940 in 1877; tt. 2941-3000 in 1880; tt. 3001-3060 in 1883. \b 1-4\plain\fs28 : t. 600 edit. G. C. Oeder; \b 4\plain\fs28 : t. 601; \b 5\plain\fs28  edit. O. F. Mueller; \b 6\plain\fs28  & \b 7\plain\fs28  edit. M. H. Vahl; \b 8-13\plain\fs28  edit. J. W. Hornemann; \b 14\plain\fs28 : tt. 2341-2400 edit. J. F. Schouw & J. L. M. Vahl; \b 14\plain\fs28 : t. 2401; \b 15\plain\fs28 : t. 2580 edit. F. M. Liebmann; \b 15\plain\fs28 : tt. 2581-2640 edit. J. Steenstrup & J. M. C. Lange; \b 15\plain\fs28 : t. 2641-17 edit. J. M. C. Lange.)
\par \pard \b Oliver\plain\fs28 ,  \i\b Fl. Trop. Afr.\plain\fs28  
\par      D. Oliver  \i et al.\plain\fs28 , \i Flora of tropical Africa\plain\fs28 .  London. 1 \'98\'93.   1868 \'98\'93 . 
\par \b Olivier,\i  Voy. Emp. Othoman\plain\fs28 
\par    G.A. Olivier, \i Voyage dans l' Empire Othoman, l' \'c9gypte et la Perse, fait par Ordre du Gouvernement, pendant les six premi\'e8res Ann\'e9es de la R\'e9publique\plain\fs28 . Quarto edition. Paris. 1800-1807. (\b 1\plain\fs28  in 1800-1801 ;\b  2\plain\fs28  in 1804; \b 3\plain\fs28  in 1807.) Octavo edition (= ed. min.). Paris. 1800-1807. (\b 1\plain\fs28  & \b 2\plain\fs28  in 1800-1801 ; \b 3\plain\fs28  & \b 4\plain\fs28  in 1803-1804 ; \b 5\plain\fs28  & \b 6\plain\fs28  in 1807.) \i Atlas\plain\fs28  (both editions) in 1800-1801.
\par \pard \b Opiz\plain\fs28 , \i\b Naturalientausch\plain\fs28 
\par    P.M. Opiz, Naturalientausch. Prag. 1823-1830. (\b 1-5\plain\fs28  in 1823 [\b 1\plain\fs28  & \b 2\plain\fs28  published twice ]; \b 6-8\plain\fs28  in 1824;\b  9-10\plain\fs28  in 1825; \b 11\plain\fs28  in 1826(-1827); \b 12\plain\fs28 , titled \i Beitr\'e4ge zur Naturgeschichte\plain\fs28 , in 1828(-1830). 1 & 2 originally with separate pagination, reissued with \b 3\plain\fs28 , with continuous pagination to \b 11\plain\fs28  and continuing through \b 12\plain\fs28 . Cf. F.A. Stafleu & R.S. Cowan, \i Taxonomic Literature\plain\fs28  ed. 2, \b 3\plain\fs28 : 841 (1981).)
\par \pard \b Opiz\plain\fs28 , \i\b Seznam\plain\fs28 
\par      P.M. Opiz, \i Seznam Rostlin Kveteny Cesk\'e9\plain\fs28 . V Praze. 1852.
\par \b Opiz\plain\fs28 , \i\b Tent. Fl. Crypt. Boem\plain\fs28 .
\par     P.M. Opiz, \i Tentamen Florae cryptogamicae Boemiae\plain\fs28 . Prag. 1819-1820.
\par \b Orph\plain\fs28 ., \i\b Fl. Graec. Exsicc\plain\fs28 .
\par     T.G. Orphanides,\i  Flora graeca exsiccata.\plain\fs28 
\par \b Ortega\plain\fs28 ,\i\b  Hort. Matrit. Descr\plain\fs28 . 
\par     C. Gomez Ortega, \i Novarum, aut rariorum Plantarum Horti reg. botan. matrit. Descriptionum Decades\plain\fs28 . Matriti.  1797-1800.   (Pp. 1-51 in 1797; pp. 53-108 in 1798; pp. 109-138 in 1800.) 
\par \pard \b Osbeck\plain\fs28 ,  \i\b Dagb. Ostind. Resa\plain\fs28  
\par     P. Osbeck, \i Dagbok \'f6fwer  en ostindsk Resa\plain\fs28 . Stockholm. 1757.   German edition in 1765. 
\par \b Ostenf. & Gr\'f6ntved\plain\fs28 , \i\b Fl. Iceland F\'e6roes\plain\fs28 
\par     C.E.H. Ostenfeld & J. Gr\'f6ntved, \i The Flora of Iceland and the F\'e6roes\plain\fs28 . Copenhagen. 1934.
\par \b Palhinha\plain\fs28 ,  \i\b Cat. Pl. Vasc. A\'e7ores\plain\fs28  
\par     R.T. Palhinha, \i Catalogo das Plantas vasculares dos A\'e7ores.\plain\fs28  Lisboa. 1966. 
\par \b Pallas\plain\fs28 ,\i\b  Fl. Ross.\plain\fs28 
\par    P.S. Pallas, \i Flora rossica\plain\fs28 . Petropoli. 1784-1815(-1831 ?). (\b 1\plain\fs28 (\b 1\plain\fs28 ) in 1784; \b 1\plain\fs28 (\b 2\plain\fs28 ) in 1788 or 1789; \b 2\plain\fs28 (\b 1\plain\fs28 ) in 1815 (title page) but possibly not published until 1831. Cf. F.A. Stafleu & R.S. Cowan, \i Taxonomic Literature\plain\fs28  ed. 2, \b 4\plain\fs28 : 25-26 (1983).)
\par \pard \b Pallas\plain\fs28 ,\i\b  Ill. Pl.\plain\fs28 
\par    P.S. Pallas, \i Illustrationes Plantarum imperfecte vel nondum cognitarum\plain\fs28 . Lipsiae. 1803[-1806].
\par \b Pallas\plain\fs28 , \i\b Reise\plain\fs28 
\par    P.S. Pallas, \i Reise durch verschiedene Provinzen des russischen Reichs.\plain\fs28  Ed. l. St Petersburg. 1771-1776. ( \b 1\plain\fs28  in 1771; \b 2\plain\fs28  in 1773; \b 3\plain\fs28  in 1776.) Ed. 2. St Petersburg. 1801.
\par \b Pallas\plain\fs28 , \i\b Spec. Astrag\plain\fs28 . 
\par      P.S. Pallas,  \i Species Astragalorum descriptae et Iconibus coloratis illustratae\plain\fs28 .  Lipsiae. 1800. 
\par \pard \b Pancic\plain\fs28 , \i\b Elem. Fl. Bulg\plain\fs28 .
\par    J. Pancic, ********************************  [Graca za Floru Knezevine Bugarske]. / \i Elementa ad Floram Principatus 
\par Bulgariae\plain\fs28 . Beograd. 1883.
\par \b Pancic\plain\fs28 , \i\b Elench. Pl. Vasc. Crna Gora\plain\fs28 
\par   J. Pancic, \i Elenchus Plantarum vascularium quas Aestate a. 1873 in Crna Gora legit Dr. J. Pancic\plain\fs28 . Belgradi. 1875.
\par \b Pancic\i , Fl. Princ. Serb.\plain\fs28 
\par    J. Pancic,  ********************************** [ Flora Knezevine Srbije]. / \i Flora Principatus Serbiae\plain\fs28 . Beograd. 1874. \i\b Addit.\plain\fs28 , ************ [\i Dodatak\plain\fs28 ]./ \i Additamenta.\plain\fs28  Beograd. 1884.
\par \pard \b Pancic\plain\fs28 , \i\b Srpska Kralj. Bot. Basta Beograd\plain\fs28 
\par    J. Pancic, ********************************** ... [\i Srpska kraljevska botanicka Basta u Beogradu\plain\fs28  ... ]. / \i Samenkatalog  der belgrader botanicher  Gartens\plain\fs28 . Beograd. 1888.
\par \b Pancic\plain\fs28 , \i\b Nov. Elem. Fl. Bulg\plain\fs28 .
\par     J. Pancic, ***** ********* ****** [\i Nova Graca za Floru Knezevine Bugarske\plain\fs28 ]. / \i Nova Elementa ad Floram Principatus Bulgariae\plain\fs28 . U Beogradu. 1886.
\par \b Parl.\plain\fs28 , \i\b Fl. Ital\plain\fs28 . 
\par \pard      F. Parlatore,  \i Flora italiana\plain\fs28 . Firenze. 1848-1896. (\b 1\plain\fs28 : pp. 1-96 in 1848; pp. 97-568 in 1850; \b 2\plain\fs28 : pp. 1-220 in 1852; pp. 221-638 in 1857;\b  3\plain\fs28 : pp. 1-160 in 1858; pp. 161-690 in 1860;\b  4\plain\fs28 : pp. 1-288 in 1868; pp. 289-623 in 1869; \b 5\plain\fs28 : pp. 1-320 in 1873: pp. 321-671 in 1875; \b 6\plain\fs28 : pp. 1336 in 1884; pp. 337-656 in 1885; pp. 657-971 in 1886; \b 7\plain\fs28  in 1887;\b  8\plain\fs28 : pp. 1-176 in 1888;  pp. 177-773 in 1889;\b  9\plain\fs28 : pp. 1-232 in 1890; pp. 233-624 in 1892; pp. 625-1085 in 1893; \b 10\plain\fs28  in 1894;\b 11\plain\fs28  in 1896.) \b 6-10\plain\fs28 by T.Caruel. 
\par \pard \b Parl.\plain\fs28 ,\i\b  Fl. Panorm\plain\fs28 .
\par      F. Parlatore,\i  Flora panormitana\plain\fs28 . Panormi. 1839.
\par \b Parl.\plain\fs28 ,\i\b  Fl. Palerm\plain\fs28 .
\par      F. Parlatore,\i  Flora palermitana\plain\fs28 . Firenze. 1845.
\par \b Parl.\plain\fs28 , \i\b Nuovi Gen. Sp. Monocot\plain\fs28 .
\par     F. Parlatore,\i  Nuovi Generi e nuove Specie di Piante monocotiledoni\plain\fs28 . Firenze. 1854.
\par \b Parl.\plain\fs28 , \i\b Pl. Nov\plain\fs28 .
\par    F. Parlatore, \i Plantae novae vel minus notae olim descriptae Generibusquibusdam Speciebusquenovisadjectis iterum recognitae.\plain\fs28 . Parisiis. 1842.
\par \pard \b Parry\plain\fs28 , \i\b Jour. Voy. N.W. Pass\plain\fs28 .
\par    W.E. Parry, \i Journal of a Voyage for tbe Discovery of a North West Passage from tbe Atlantic to tbe Pacific; performed in 1819-20 in H.M.S. Hecla and Griper\plain\fs28 . London. 1821.\i\b  Suppl. App.\plain\fs28 , \i Botanical Supplement\plain\fs28  to the \i Appendix\plain\fs28  by R. Brown. London. 1824. (The \i Botanical Supplement\plain\fs28  was preprinted as \i\b Chloris Melv\plain\fs28 ., \i Chloris Melvilliana\plain\fs28 , in 1823; cf. R. Br., \i Chloris Melv\plain\fs28 . Cf. F.A. Stafleu & R.S. Cowan, \i Taxonomic Literature\plain\fs28  ed. 2, \b 4\plain\fs28 : 82 (1983).)
\par \pard \b Pau\plain\fs28 ,\i\b  Not. Bot. Fl. Esp\plain\fs28 .
\par    C. Pau y Espa\'f1ol, \i Notas bot\'e1nicas \'e0 la Flora espa\'f1ola\plain\fs28 . Madrid & Segorbe. 1887-1895. (\b 1\plain\fs28 , \b 2\plain\fs28 , \b 4-6\plain\fs28  Madrid; \b 3\plain\fs28  Segorbe. \b 1\plain\fs28  in 1887 ; \b 2\plain\fs28  in 1888; \b 3\plain\fs28  in 1889; \b 4\plain\fs28  in 1891; \b 5\plain\fs28  in 1892; \b 6\plain\fs28  in 1895. Cf. F.A. Stafieu & R.S. Cowan, \i Taxonomic Literature\plain\fs28  ed. 2, \b 4\plain\fs28 : 108 (1981).)
\par \b Pauquy\plain\fs28 ,\i\b  De la Belladone\plain\fs28 
\par      C.L.C. Pauquy,\i  De la Belladone\plain\fs28 . Paris. 1825.
\par \pard \b Pavlov\plain\fs28 , \i\b Fl. Centr. Kazakhstana\plain\fs28 
\par    N.V. Pavlov, *************************************  [\i Flora central' nogo Kazakhstana\plain\fs28 ]. Alma-Ata. 1928-1938. (\b 1\plain\fs28  in 1928; \b 2\plain\fs28  in 1935; \b 3\plain\fs28  in 1938.)
\par \b Pawl.\plain\fs28 ,\i\b  Fl. Polska\plain\fs28 
\par     Cf. Racib. & Szafer, \i Fl. Polska\plain\fs28 
\par \b Pawl\plain\fs28 .,\i\b Fl. Tatr\plain\fs28 .
\par    B. Pawlowski, \i Flora Tatr. R\'f3sliny naczyniowe\plain\fs28 . / \i Flora Tatrorum, Plantae vasculares\plain\fs28 . Warszawa. 1956\'98\'93. (1 in 1956.)
\par \b Pax\plain\fs28 , \i\b Grundz. Pflanzenverbr. Karp\plain\fs28 .
\par \pard      F.A. Pax, \i Grundzuge der Pflanzenverbreitung in den Karpathen\plain\fs28 . Leipzig. 1898-1908. (\b 1\plain\fs28  in 1898; \b 2\plain\fs28  in 1908.)
\par \b Pennell\plain\fs28 , \i\b Scroph. E. Temp. N. Amer\plain\fs28 .
\par      F.W. Pennell, The Scrophulariaceae of eastern temperate North America. (The Academy of Natural Sciences of Philadelphia. Monographs, 1.) Philadelphia. 1935.
\par \b Pers\plain\fs28 .,\i\b  Syn. Pl\plain\fs28 .
\par    C.H. Persoon, \i Synopsis Plantarum\plain\fs28 . Parisiis Lutetiorum & Tuebingae. 1805-1807. (\b 1\plain\fs28  in 1805; \b 2\plain\fs28 : pp. 1-272 in 1806; pp.273-657 in 1807.) Ed. 2, titled \i Species Plantarum\plain\fs28 . Petropoli. 1817-1822. (\b 1\plain\fs28  in 1817; \b 2\plain\fs28  & \b 3\plain\fs28  in 1819; \b 4\plain\fs28  & \b 5\plain\fs28  in 1821; \b 6\plain\fs28  in 1822.)
\par \pard \b Pers.\plain\fs28 , \i\b Syst. Veg\plain\fs28 .
\par      Cf. L., \i Syst. Nat\plain\fs28 .
\par \b Petagna,\i  Inst. Bot\plain\fs28 .
\par     V. Petagna, \i ...Institutiones botanicae\plain\fs28 . Neapoli. 1785-1787. (\b 1\plain\fs28  in 1785; \b 2\plain\fs28  in 1787.)
\par \b Peterm.\plain\fs28 , \i\b  Deutschl. Fl.\plain\fs28  
\par     W.L. Petermann, \i  Deutschlands Flora\plain\fs28 . Leipzig. 1849. 
\par \b Petrak\plain\fs28 , \i\b Cirsiotheca Universa\plain\fs28  (\i\b Exsicc\plain\fs28 .)
\par      F. Petrak,\i  Cirsiotheca universa \plain\fs28 (\i\b Exsiccata\plain\fs28 ).
\par \b Petrovic\plain\fs28 , \i\b Add. Fl. Agri Nyss\plain\fs28 .
\par \pard      S. Petrovic, ******* ***** ******* **** [\i Dodatak Flori Okoline Nisa\plain\fs28 ]. / \i Additamenta ad Floram Agri nyssani\plain\fs28 . U Beogradu. 1885.
\par \b Petrovic\plain\fs28 ,\i\b  Fl. Agri Nyss\plain\fs28 .
\par      S. Petrovic, ***** ****** **** [\i Flora Okoline Nisa\plain\fs28 ] / \i Flora Agri nyssani\plain\fs28 . Beograd. 1882.
\par \b Petzold & Kirchner\plain\fs28 ,  \i\b Arbor. Muscav\plain\fs28 . 
\par     C.E.A. Petzold & G. Kirchner, \i Arboretum muscaviense\plain\fs28 . Gotha. 1864. 
\par \b Phillips, E.P.\plain\fs28 , \i\b Gen. S. Afr. Fl. Pl.\plain\fs28 
\par \pard    E.P. Phillips, \i Tbe Genera of South African flowering Plants\plain\fs28 . Ed. 1. Cape Town. 1926. Ed. 2. Cape Town. 1951.
\par \b Phipps, C.J\plain\fs28 ., \i\b Voy. N. Pole\plain\fs28 
\par    C.J. Phipps, \i A Voyage towards tbe North Pole undertaken by His Majesty's Command 1773\plain\fs28 . London. 1774.\i  Appendix\plain\fs28  with lists of plants.
\par \b Pio\plain\fs28 , \i\b  De Viola\plain\fs28  
\par      G.B. Pio,  \i De Viola Specimen botanico-medicum\plain\fs28 .  Taurini.1813. 
\par \b Pohl\plain\fs28 , \i\b Tent. Fl. Bohem\plain\fs28 .
\par      J.B.E. Pohl, \i Tentamen Florae Bohemiae\plain\fs28 . Prag. 1809-1814. (\b 1\plain\fs28  in 1809; \b 2\plain\fs28  in 1814.)
\par \pard \b Poiret\plain\fs28 , \i\b Voy. Barb\plain\fs28 .
\par    J.L.M. Poiret, \i Voyage en Barbarie, ou Lettres \'e9crites de l'ancienne Numidie, pendant les Ann\'e9es 1785 & 1786\plain\fs28 . Paris. 1789.
\par \b Pojark.\plain\fs28 ,\i\b  Fl. Murmansk\plain\fs28 .
\par    Cf. Gorodkov,\i  Fl. Murmansk\plain\fs28 .
\par \b Pollich\plain\fs28 , \i\b  Hist. Pl. Palat\plain\fs28 . 
\par     J.A. Pollich, \i  Historia Plantarum in Palatinatu electorali sponte nascentium incepta\plain\fs28 .  Mannhemii. 1776-1777. (\b 1\plain\fs28  in 1776; \b 2\plain\fs28  & \b 3\plain\fs28  in 1777.) 
\par \b Pomel\plain\fs28 , \i\b  Mat. Fl. Atl\plain\fs28 . 
\par \pard     A. Pomel, \i  Mat\'e9riaux pour la Flore atlantique\plain\fs28 . Oran. 1860. 
\par \b Pomel\plain\fs28 ,\i\b  Nouv. Mat. Fl. Atl\plain\fs28 .
\par    A. Pomel,\i  Nouveaux Mat\'e9riaux pour la Flore atlantique\plain\fs28 . Paris & Alger. 1874-1875. (Pp. i-iii, 1-260 in 1874 ; pp. [257-]261-399 in 1875.)
\par \b Popl.\plain\fs28 , \i\b Spisok Rast. Sobr. Krymsk. Gos. Zapov\plain\fs28 .
\par      G.I. Polavskaja, ****** ********, ********* * ******** *************** ************ [\i Spisok Rastenij, sobrannykh v Krymskom gosudarstvennom Zapovednike\plain\fs28 ]. Moskva & Leningrad. 1931.
\par \pard \b Porc.\plain\fs28 ,  \i\b Fl.  Naseud\plain\fs28 . 
\par     F. Porcius, \i Flora phanerogama din Fostulu Districtu alu Ndseudului\plain\fs28 .  Bucarest. 1881. 
\par \b Portenschl.\plain\fs28 , \i\b  Enum. Pl. Dalmat\plain\fs28 . 
\par     F.E. von Portenschlag-Lederrnayer, \i  Enumeratio Plantarum in Dalmatia lectarum\plain\fs28 .  Wien. 1824. 
\par \b Pospichal\plain\fs28 ,  \i\b Fl. \'d6sterr. K\'fcstenl\plain\fs28 . 
\par     E. Pospichal, \i  Flora des \'f6sterreichischen K\'fcstenlandes\plain\fs28 .  Leipzig & Wien. 1879-1899. (\b 1\plain\fs28  in 1879; \b 2\plain\fs28 (\b 1\plain\fs28 ): pp. 1-528 in 1898; \b 2\plain\fs28 (\b 2\plain\fs28 ): pp. 529-946 in 1899.) 
\par \pard \b Post,\i  Fl. Syr. Pal. Sin\plain\fs28 . 
\par    G.E. Post, \i  Flora of Syria, Palestine, and Sinai, from the Taurus to Ras Muhammad and from the Mediterranean Sea to the Syrian Desert\plain\fs28 .  Ed. 1. Beirut. 1896. Ed. 2, by J.E. Dinsmore. Beirut. 1932-1933. (\b 1\plain\fs28  in 1932; \b 2\plain\fs28  in 1933.) 
\par \b Presl, C.\plain\fs28 , \i\b Cyper. Gram. Sic\plain\fs28 .
\par      C.B. Presl \i Cyperaceae et Gramineae siculae\plain\fs28 . Pragae. 1820.
\par \b Presl, C\plain\fs28 ., \i\b Fl. Sic\plain\fs28 .
\par    C.B. Presl,\i  Flora sicula\plain\fs28 . Pragae. 1826.
\par \pard \b Presl, C.\plain\fs28 , \i\b Reliq. Haenk\plain\fs28 .
\par     C.B. Presl, \i Reliquiae haenkeanae\plain\fs28 . Pragae. 1825-1835. \b 1\plain\fs28  pp. iii-xv, 1-84, tt. 1-12 in 1825; pp. 85-148, tt. 13-25 in 1827; pp. 149-206, tt. 26-36 in 1828; pp. 207-355, tt. 37-48 in 1830; \b 2\plain\fs28 : pp. 1-56, tt. 49-60 in 1831; pp. 57-152, tt. 61-72 in 1835. Cf. F.A. Stafleu,\i  Taxonomic Literature\plain\fs28  365 (1967).)
\par \b Presl, C.\plain\fs28 , \i\b  Symb. Bot\plain\fs28 . 
\par    C.B. Presl, \i  Symbolae botanicae\plain\fs28 .  Pragae. 1830-1833. (\b 1\plain\fs28 : tt. 1-10 in 1830; tt. 11-30 in 1831; tt. 31-50 in 1832;\b  2\plain\fs28 : tt. 51-70 in 1833; tt. 71-80 in 1852. Cf. H.W. Rickett & F.A. Stafleu, \i Taxon\plain\b\fs28  10\plain\fs28 : 134 (1961).) 
\par \pard \b Presl, C.\plain\fs28 , \i\b Tent. Pteridogr\plain\fs28 .
\par    C.B. Presl, \i Tentamen Pteridographiae, seu Genera Filicacearum praesertim juxta Venarum Decursum et Distributionem exposita\plain\fs28 . Pragae. 1836. \i\b Suppl\plain\fs28 ., \i Supplementum\plain\fs28 . Pragae. 1845.
\par \b Presl, J. & C\plain\fs28 .,\i\b  Del. Prag\plain\fs28 .
\par    J.S. & C.B. Presl, \i Deliciae pragenses, Historiam naturalem spectantes\plain\fs28 . Pragae. 1822.
\par \b Presl, J. & C.,\i  Fl. Cechica\plain\fs28 
\par    J.S. & C.B. Presl, \i Florae cechica\plain\fs28 . /\i  Kwetena ceska\plain\fs28 . Pragae. 1819. 
\par \pard \b Printz\plain\fs28 , \i\b Veg. Siber.-Mong. Front\plain\fs28 .
\par      H. Printz, \i The Vegetation of the Siberian-Mongolian Frontiers\plain\fs28 . Trondhjern. 1921.
\par \b Pursh\plain\fs28 , \i\b Fl. Amer. Sept\plain\fs28 . 
\par    F.T. Pursh, \i Flora Americae septentrionalis; or a systematic Arrangement and Description of the Plants of North America\plain\fs28 . Ed. 1. London. 1814. (\b 1\plain\fs28  &\b  2\plain\fs28 , with continuous pagination, in 1814.) Ed. 2. London. 1816. (\b 1\plain\fs28  & \b 2\plain\fs28 , with continuous pagination, in 1816.)
\par \pard \b Racib. & Szafer\plain\fs28 , \i\b Fl. Polska\plain\fs28 
\par      M. Raciborski & W. Szafer (edit.),\i  Flora polska\plain\fs28 . Krak\'f3w & Warszawa. 1919 \'98\'93. (\b 1-6\plain\fs28 , \i 9\plain\fs28  & \b 10\plain\fs28  Krak\'f3w;\b  7\plain\fs28  & \b 8\plain\fs28  Warszawa. \b 1\plain\fs28  in 1919, \b 2\plain\fs28  in 1921; \b 3\plain\fs28  in 1927; \b 4\plain\fs28  in 1930; \b 5\plain\fs28  in 1935; \b 6\plain\fs28  in 1947; \b 7\plain\fs28  in 1955 \b 8\plain\fs28  in 1959; \b 9\plain\fs28  in 1960; \b 10\plain\fs28  in 1963; \b 11\plain\fs28  in 1967; \b 12\plain\fs28  in 1971; \b 13\plain\fs28  in 1972.) \b 2-6\plain\fs28  edit. W. Szafer; \b 7-9\plain\fs28  edit. W. Szafer & B. Pawlowski; \b 10\plain\fs28  & \b 11\plain\fs28  edit. B. Pawlowski; \b 12\plain\fs28  & \b 13\plain\fs28  edit. B. Pawlowski & A. Jasiewicz.
\par \pard \b Radius\plain\fs28 , \i\b Diss\plain\fs28 .
\par      J.W.M. Radius, \i Dissertatio de Pyrola et Chimophila\plain\fs28 . Lipsiae. 1821.
\par \b Raffin.\plain\fs28 , \i\b  Atl. Journ\plain\fs28 . 
\par     C.S. Rafinesque-Schmaltz,  \i Atlantic Journal, and Friend of Knowledge\plain\fs28 .  Philadelphia. 1832-1833. (\b 1\plain\fs28 : pp. 1-154 in 1832;   pp. 155-212 in 1833. Cf. H. W. Rickett & F. A. Stafleu, \i Taxon\plain\b\fs28  10\plain\fs28 : 135 (1961).) 
\par \b Rafin\plain\fs28 ., \i\b Autikon Bot\plain\fs28 .
\par    C.S. Rafinesque-Schmaltz, \i Autikon Botanikon, or botanical Illustrations of 2500 new, rare or beautiful Trees, Shrubs, Plants, Vines, Lilies, Grasses, Ferns etc., of all Regions, but chiefly North America, with Descriptions and 2500 self Figures or Specimens\plain\fs28 . (Also with an alternative title page partly in Latin.) Philadelphia. 1840. (Only one vol., describing 1500 species, appeared. No illustrations actually published; the work was to have been accompanied by botanical specimens.)
\par \pard \b Rafin\plain\fs28 .,\i\b  Caratt\plain\fs28 .
\par    C.S. Rafinesque-Schmaltz,\i  Caratteri de alcuni nuovi Generi e nuove Specie di Animali e Piante del la Sicilia\plain\fs28 . Palermo. 1810.
\par \b Rafin\plain\fs28 , \i\b Danm. Holst. Fl\plain\fs28 .
\par     C.G. Rafn, Danmarks och Holsteens Flora systematisk, physisk og oeconomisk bearbeydet. Kiobenhavn. 1796-1800. (1 in 1796; 2 in 1800.)
\par \b Rafin\plain\fs28 ., \i\b Fl. Tellur\plain\fs28 .
\par      C.S. Rafinesque-Schmaltz, \i Flora telluriana\plain\fs28 . Philadelphia. 1837-1838. (\b 1-3\plain\fs28  in 1837; \b 4\plain\fs28  in 1838. Cf. F.A. Stafleu,\i  Taxonomic Literature\plain\fs28  373-374 (1967).)
\par \pard \b Raffin.\plain\fs28 ,  \i\b Precis Decouv. Somiol\plain\fs28 . 
\par     C.S. Rafinesque-Schmalz,  \i Precis des D\'e9couvertes somiologiques ou zoologiques et botaniques\plain\fs28 .  Palerrne. 1814. 
\par \b Rand & Redf\plain\fs28 ., \i\b Fl. Mount Desert Is. Maine\plain\fs28 
\par     E.L. Rand & J.H. Redfield, \i Flora of Mount Desert Island, Maine\plain\fs28 . Cambridge, Massachusetts. 1894.
\par \b Raunk.\plain\fs28 , \i\b Dansk. Ekskurs.-Fl.\plain\fs28  
\par    C. Raunki\'e6r,  \i Dansk Ekskursions-Flora\plain\fs28 .  Ed. 1, Kj\'f8benhavn. 1890. Ed. 2. Kj\'f8benhavn. 1906. Ed. 3, by C.H. Ostenfeld &   C. Raunki\'e6r. K\'f8benhavn & Kristiania. 1914. Ed. 4, by C.H. Ostenfeld & C. Raunki\'e6r. Kj\'f8benhavn & Kristiania. 1922.  Ed. 5, by K. Wiinstedt & K. Jessen. K\'f8benhavn. 1934. Ed. 6, by K. Wiinstedt. K\'f8benhavn. 1942. Ed. 7, by K. Wiinstedt. K\'f8benhavn. 1950. 
\par \pard \b R\'e4uschel\plain\fs28 , \i\b  Nomencl. Bot\plain\fs28 . 
\par     E.A. R\'e4uschel,  \i Nomenclator botanicus\plain\fs28 . Ed. 3. Lipsiae. 1797. Earlier editions published anonymously. 
\par \b Rech. fil\plain\fs28 ., \i\b Fl. Iran\plain\fs28 .
\par    K.H. Rechinger, \i Flora iranica. Flora des iranischen Hochlandes und der umrahmenden Gebirge\plain\fs28 . Graz. 1\'98\'93, 1963\'98\'93. (\b 1--3\plain\fs28  in 1963 ; \b 4-8\plain\fs28  in 1964; \b 9-15\plain\fs28  in 1965; \b 17-39\plain\fs28  in 1966; \b 40-48\plain\fs28  in 1967 ; \b 49-57\plain\fs28  in 1968; \b 58-66\plain\fs28  in 1969; \b 67-74\plain\fs28  in 1970; \b 75-89\plain\fs28  in 1971 ; \b 90--100\plain\fs28  in 1972; \b 101-102\plain\fs28 , \b 104\plain\fs28  in 1973; \b 103\plain\fs28 , \b 105-110\plain\fs28  in 1974; \b 111\plain\fs28 , \b 113-115\plain\fs28  in 1975; \b 112\plain\fs28 , \b 116-121\plain\fs28  in 1976; \b 122-125\plain\fs28  in 1977 ; \b 126-138\plain\fs28  in 1978; \b l39a\plain\fs28 , \b l40-143\plain\fs28  in 1979 ; \b 139b\plain\fs28 , \b 144-l46\plain\fs28  in 1980; \b 147-148\plain\fs28  in 1981 ; \b 149-156\plain\fs28  in 1982; \b 157\plain\fs28  in 1984;\b  158-161\plain\fs28  in 1986; \b 162\plain\fs28  in 1987 ; \b 163\plain\fs28  in 1988; \b 164\plain\fs28  in 1989; \b 165-167\plain\fs28  in 1990; \b 168\plain\fs28  in 1991.) By K.H. Rechinger except as follows : \b 1, 3, 12, 14, 48, 50, 59, 60\plain\fs28  & \b 71\plain\fs28  by H. Riedl;\b  4, 5, 41\plain\fs28  & \b 42\plain\fs28  by H. Schiman-Czeika;\b  6, 13, 56\plain\fs28  & \b 108\plain\fs28  by K.H. Rechinger & H. Schiman-Czeika;\b  7\plain\fs28  by P.H. Raven; \b 8\plain\fs28  by T.G. Yuncker & K.H. Rechinger;\b  9, 10, 11, 53, 67, 76, 110\plain\fs28  & \b 151\plain\fs28  by P.Wendelbo; \b 15\plain\fs28  & \b 43\plain\fs28  by A. Patzak & K.H. Rechinger ; \b 19, 20, 23, 47, 69\plain\fs28  & \b 100\plain\fs28  by E. Sch\'f6nbeck-Temesy ; \b 34\plain\fs28  by J. Cullen; \b 36\plain\fs28  by C. C. Townsend; \b 49\plain\fs28  by N.K.B. Robson; \b 51\plain\fs28  & \b 54\plain\fs28  by A. Polatschek & K.H. Rechinger; \b 52\plain\fs28  & \b 55\plain\fs28  by E. Murray ; \b 57\plain\fs28  by I. C. Hedge ; \b 58\plain\fs28  by S. J. Casper ; \b 61\plain\fs28  by E. Murray & K. H. Rechinger ; \b 65\plain\fs28  by A. Neumann & A. K. Skvortsov ; \b 66\plain\fs28  by K. Browicz, A. Fr\'f6hner, A. Gilli, G. Nordborg, H. Riedl, H. Schiman-Czeika, E. Sch\'f6nbeck-Temesy & L. T. Vassilczenko; \b 68, 113\plain\fs28  & \b 114\plain\fs28  by I.C. Hedge & J.M. Lamond; \b 70\plain\fs28  by N.L. Bor; \b 72\plain\fs28  by C.A. Jansson & K.H. Rechinger; \b 74\plain\fs28  by L.T. Vassilczenko; \b 75\plain\fs28  by S. Snogerup; \b 77\plain\fs28  by K. Browicz & G. L. Menitsky; \b 78-86\plain\fs28  by J.E. Dandy; \b 87, 92, 96-97, 101-102, 121, 148, 153\plain\fs28  &\b  159\plain\fs28  by K. Browicz ; \b 88\plain\fs28  & \b 89\plain\fs28  by D. Podlech ; \b 91\plain\fs28  by P. Aellen; \b 93-94\plain\fs28  by B. Kr\'edsa; \b 95\plain\fs28  by B. Peterson; \b 98\plain\fs28  by M.N. El Hadidi; \b 99\plain\fs28  & \b 105\plain\fs28  by J. Chrtek ; \b 111\plain\fs28  & \b 125\plain\fs28  by K. Browicz & J. Zielinski; \b 112\plain\fs28  by P. Wendelbo & B. Mathew; \b 115\plain\fs28  & \b 124\plain\fs28  by J. Chrtek & B. Kr\'edsa; \b 118\plain\fs28  by H.D. Schotsman; \b 120\plain\fs28  by I. Riedl; \b 122\plain\fs28  by K.H. Rechinger, H.W. Lack & J.L. van Soest; \b 123\plain\fs28  by J.S. Andersen; \b 126\plain\fs28  by J. Renz;\b  135\plain\fs28  by M. Iranshahr; \b 139a\plain\fs28  & \b b\plain\fs28  by M. Dittrich, F. Petrak, K. H. Rechinger & G. Wagenitz ; \b 140\plain\fs28  by A. Chrtkov\'e1-Zerkov\'e1, J. G. van der Maesen & K.H. Rechinger; \b 142\plain\fs28  & \b 152\plain\fs28  by J. Zielinski; \b 143\plain\fs28  by C. Grey-Wilson;\b  144\plain\fs28  by M.N. Chaudhri, J.A. Ratter & K.H. Rechinger; \b 145\plain\fs28  by E. Georgiadou, H.W . Lack, H. Merxmuller, K.H. Rechinger & G. Wagenitz; \b 146\plain\fs28  by H. J.Moore;\b  147\plain\fs28  by M.A. Fischer, J. Grau, A. Huber-Morath, K.H. Rechinger, P. Wendelbo & P.F. Yeo; \b 149\plain\fs28  by M.S. Abdallah, H.C.D. de Wit & K.H. Rechinger; \b 150\plain\fs28  by K.H. Rechinger, I.C. Hedge, J.H. Ietswaart, J. Jalas, J. Mennema & S. Seybold; \b 154\plain\fs28  by A.J.C. Grierson & K.H. Rechinger; \b 155\plain\fs28  by A. Polatschek; \b 157\plain\fs28  by K.H. Rechinger, S.I. Ali, K. Browicz, A. Chrtkov\'e1--Zertkov\'e1, D. Heller, C. C. Heyn, M. Thulin & I.T. Vassilczenko; \b 158\plain\fs28  by D. Podlech, A. Huber-Morath, M. Iranshahr & K.H. Rechinger; \b 162\plain\fs28  by I.C. Hedge, J.M. Lamond, K.H. Rechinger, R. Alava, D.F. Chamberlain, L. Engstrand, I. Herrnstadt, C.C. Heyn, G.H. Leute, I. Mandenova, D. Peev, M.G. Pimenov, S. Snogerup & S.G. Tamamschian; \b 163\plain\fs28  by K.H. Rechinger, V. Melzheimer, W. M\'f6schl & H. Schiman-Czeika; \b 164\plain\fs28  by M. Dittrich, B. Nordenstam & K.H. Rechinger; \b 165\plain\fs28  by K.H. Rechinger, K. Browicz, K. Persson & P. Wendelbo ; \b 168\plain\fs28  by K.H. Rechinger & H. W. Lack.
\par \pard \b Rees\plain\fs28 ,\i\b  Cyclop\plain\fs28 .
\par      A. Rees, \i The Cyclopaedia; or, universal Dictionary of Arts, Sciences and Literature\plain\fs28 . London. 1802-1820. (For dates of parts cf. F. A. Stafleu, \i Taxonomic Literature\plain\fs28  380-382 (1967).)
\par \b Redout\'e9\plain\fs28 , \i\b Liliac\'e9es\plain\fs28 
\par      P.-J. Redout\'e9, \i Les Liliac\'e9es\plain\fs28 . Paris. 1802-1816. (For dates cf. F.A. Stafleu, \i Taxonomic Literature\plain\fs28  377-378 (1967).)
\par \b Regel et al\plain\fs28 ., \i\b Ind. Sem. Horti Petrop\plain\fs28 .
\par    E.A. von Regel et al., \i Index Seminum quae Hortus botanicus imperialis petropolitanus pro mutua Commutatione offert. Accedunt Animadversiones botanicae nonnullae\plain\fs28 . St. Petersburg. 1856-1869. (\b 1855--1868\plain\fs28  in 1856-1869. Continuation of Fischer & C.A. Meyer, \i Ind. Sem. Horti Petrop\plain\fs28 .)
\par \pard \b Rehmann\plain\fs28 , \i\b Not. Veg. Gest. Schwarz. Meer\plain\fs28 
\par      A. Rehmann,\i  Einige Notizen uber die Vegetation des nordlichen Gestade des schwarzen Meeres\plain\fs28 . Brunn.1872.
\par \b Reichard\plain\fs28 ,\i\b  Fl. Moeno-Francofurt\plain\fs28 .
\par      J.J. Reichard, \i Flora moeno-francofurtana\plain\fs28 . Francofurti ad Moenum. 1772-1778. (\b 1\plain\fs28  in 1772;\b  2\plain\fs28  in 1778.)
\par \b Reichenb\plain\fs28 ., \i\b Deutschl. Fl\plain\fs28 .
\par    H.G.L. Reichenbach,\b  Deutschlands Flora\plain\fs28 . Leipzig. 1837-1870. (German ed. of Reichenb. & Reichenb. fil., \i Icon. Fl. Germ.\plain\fs28 ; at least early vols. published concurrently with Latin ed.)
\par \pard \b Reichenb\plain\fs28 .,\i\b  Fl. Germ. Excurs\plain\fs28 .
\par    H.G.L. Reichenbach, \i Flora germanica excursoria\plain\fs28 . Lipsiae. 1830-1833. (Pp. i-viii, 1-136 in 1830; pp. 137-140, 141 -140 in 1831 or 1832; pp. 141-184 in 1831 ; pp. 185-434 in 1831 or 1832; pp. 435-438 in 1832; \b 2\plain\fs28 : pp. [i*-iv*], ix-xlviii, 435 [\i bis\plain\fs28 ]-878 in 1832;\b  3\plain\fs28 , titled \i Reichenbachianae Florae germanicae Clavis synonymica\plain\fs28 , in 1833.)
\par \b Reichenb\plain\fs28 ., or \b Reichenb. fil.\plain\fs28 , \i\b Icon. Fl. Germ\plain\fs28 .
\par \pard    H.G.L. Reichenbach, \i Icones Florae germanicae et helveticae\plain\fs28 . Lipsiae & Gerac. 1834-1914. (\b 1-19\plain\fs28 (\b 1\plain\fs28 ), \b 20\plain\fs28  & \b 2l\plain\fs28 , Lipsiae; \b 19\plain\fs28 (\b 2\plain\fs28 ), \b 22\plain\fs28 , \b 24\plain\fs28  &\b  25\plain\fs28  (\b 1\plain\fs28  & \b 2\plain\fs28 ), Lipsiae & Gerac; \b 23\plain\fs28 , Gerae. \b 1\plain\fs28 , titled \i Agrostographia germanica, sistens Icones Graminearum et Cyperoidearum\plain\fs28 . ( = \i Pl. Crit.\plain\fs28  \b 11\plain\fs28 ) in 1834-1835 (Decas. 1-5 in 1834 ; Decas. 6-10 in 1835); \b 2\plain\fs28  in 1837-1838 (Decas. 1-5 in 1837; Decas. 6-10 in 1838); \b 3\plain\fs28  in 1838-1839; \b 4\plain\fs28  in 1840; \b 5\plain\fs28  in 1841-1842; \b 6\plain\fs28  in 1842-1844; \b 7\plain\fs28  in 1845; \b 8\plain\fs28  in 1846; \b 9\plain\fs28  in 1847; \b 10\plain\fs28  in 1848; \b 11\plain\fs28  in 1849; \b 12\plain\fs28  in 1850. By H.G. Reichenbach: \b 13/14\plain\fs28 : pp. 1-32, tt. \b 1-60\plain\fs28  in 1850; pp. \b 33-194\plain\fs28  in 1851 ; \b 15\plain\fs28 : tt. 1-80 in 1852; tt. 81-160 in 1853; \b 16\plain\fs28 : tt. 1-100 in 1853; tt. 101-150 in 1854; \b 17\plain\fs28  in 1854-1855; \b 18\plain\fs28  in 1856-1858; \b 19\plain\fs28 (\b 1\plain\fs28 ): tt. 1-60 in 1858; tt. 61-150 in 1859; tt. 151-260 in 1860. By G. Beck von Mannagetta, \b 19\plain\fs28 (\b 2\plain\fs28 ): pp. 1-10 in 1904; pp. 11-48 in 1905; pp. 49-104 in 1906; pp. 105-152 in 1907 ; pp. 153-184 in 1908; pp. 185-240 in 1909; pp. 241-288 in 1910; pp. 289-341 in 1911. By H. G. Reichenbach, \b 20\plain\fs28 : pp. 1-48, tt. 1-120 in 1861; pp. 49-125, tt. 121-220 in 1862;\b  21\plain\fs28 : tt. l-70 in 1863; tt. 71-110 in 1864; tt. 111-190 in 1866; tt. 191-220 in 1867 ; \b 22\plain\fs28 : pp. 1-16, tt. 1-40, 46, 47, 57 & 79 in 1867 ; pp. 17-24, tt. 41-45, 48-56, 58-60 in 1869; pp. 25-48 in 1869-1872; pp. 49-56 in 1872; pp. 57-88 in 1872--1885; pp. 89-96 in 1885; pp. 97-104 in 1886. By G. Beck von Mannagetta, \b 22\plain\fs28  : pp. 105--112 in 1900; pp. 113-136 in 1901 ; pp. 137-176 in 1902; pp. 177-230 in 1903. By F.G. Kohl, \b 23\plain\fs28 : pp. 1-32 in 1896; pp. 33-44 in 1897; pp. 45-68 in 1898; pp. 69-83 in 1899. By G. Beck von Mannagetta, \b 24\plain\fs28 : pp. 1-16 in 1903; pp. 17-48 in 1904; pp. 49-64 in 1905; pp. 65-80 in 1906; pp. 81-112 in 1907; pp. 113-152 in 1908; pp. 153-160 in 1909; pp. 161-216 in 1909; \b 25\plain\fs28 (\b 1\plain\fs28 ): pp. 1-12 in 1909; pp. 13-32 in 1910; pp. 33-48 in 1911; pp. 49-72 in 1912; \b 25\plain\fs28 (\b 2\plain\fs28 ): pp. 1-24 in 1913; pp. 25-40 in 1914. Cf. F.A. Stafleu & R.S. Cowan, \i Taxonomic Literature\plain\fs28  ed. 2, \b 4\plain\fs28 : 674-689 (1983).)
\par \pard \b Reichenb\plain\fs28 ., \i\b Monogr. Acon\plain\fs28 .
\par    H.G.L. Reichenbach, \i Monographia Generis Aconiti\plain\fs28 . Lipsiae. 1820-1821. (Pp. i-iv, 1-72, tt. A, 1-6 in 1820; pp. 73--100, tt. 7-18 in 1821. Cf. F.A. Stafleu & R.S. Cowan, \i Taxonomic Literature\plain\fs28  ed. 2, \b 4\plain\fs28 : 669 (1983).)
\par \b Reichenb\plain\fs28 ., \i\b Pl. Crit\plain\fs28 .
\par    H.G.L. Reichenbach, \i Iconographia botanica seu Plantae criticae. Icones Plantarum rariorum et minus rite cognitarum\plain\fs28 . Lipsiae. 1823-1832. (\b 1\plain\fs28  in l823; \b 2\plain\fs28  in l824; \b 3\plain\fs28  in 1825; \b 4\plain\fs28  in 1826; \b 5\plain\fs28  in 1827; \b 6\plain\fs28  in 1828; \b 7\plain\fs28  in 1829; \b 8\plain\fs28  in 1830; \b 9\plain\fs28  in 1831 ; \b 10\plain\fs28  in 1832. For \b 11\plain\fs28  cf. Reichenb.,\i  Icon. Fl. Germ.\plain\b\fs28  1\plain\fs28 .)
\par \pard \b Reichenb\plain\fs28 ., \i\b Uebersicht Acon\plain\fs28 .
\par    H.G.L. Reichenbach, \i Uebersicht der Gattung\plain\fs28  Aconitum.\i  Grundz\'fcge einer Monographie derselben\plain\fs28  ... Regensburg. 1819.
\par \b Reichenb. & Reichenb. fil\plain\fs28 ., \i\b Icon. Fl. Germ\plain\fs28 .
\par    Cf. Reichenb.,\i  Icon. Fl. Germ\plain\fs28 .
\par \b Retz.\plain\fs28 , \i\b Fl. Scand. Prodr.\plain\fs28 
\par    A.J. Retzius, \i Florae Scandinaviae Prodromus\plain\fs28 . Ed. 1. Holmiae. 1779. Ed. 2. Lipsiae. 1795. Suppl. 1. Lund. 1805. \i Suppl\plain\fs28 . 2. Lund. 1809.
\par \b Retz.\plain\fs28 ,  \i\b Obs. Bot\plain\fs28 . 
\par \pard     A.J. Retzius, \i  Observationes botanicae\plain\fs28 . Lipsiae. 1779-1791.   (\b 1\plain\fs28  in 1779; \b 2\plain\fs28  in 1781;\b  3\plain\fs28  in 1783;\b  4\plain\fs28  in 1786 or 1787; \b 5\plain\fs28  in 1788; \b 6\plain\fs28  in 1791. Cf. F. A. Stafleu,  \i Taxon\plain\b\fs28  12\plain\fs28 : 75 (1963) and H.W. Rickett & F.A. Stafleu,  \i Taxon\plain\b\fs28  10\plain\fs28 : 137 (1961).) 
\par \b Reuter\plain\fs28 , \i\b Cat. Graines Jard. Bot. Gen\'e8ve\plain\fs28 
\par    G.F. Reuter, \i Catalogues des Graines recueillies en 1852\plain\fs28  [ 1853, 1854, 1855, 1856, 1857, 1861, 1863, 1865, 1867, 1868]\i  et offertes en \'c9change par le Jardin botanique de Gen\'e8ve\plain\fs28 . Gen\'e8ve. (\b 1852\plain\fs28  in 1853; \b 1853\plain\fs28  in 1854; \b 1854\plain\fs28  in 1854;\b 1855\plain\fs28  in 1855; \b 1856\plain\fs28  in 1856; \b 1857\plain\fs28  in 1858; \b 1861\plain\fs28  in 1861; \b 1863\plain\fs28  in 1864; \b 1865\plain\fs28  in 1866; \b 1867\plain\fs28  in 1868; \b 1868\plain\fs28  in 1869. The descriptions of new and critical species were reprinted as \i Notulae in Species novas vel criticas Plantarum Horti botanici genevensis publici Juris Annis 1852-1868 factae, collectae et iterum editae anno 1916\plain\fs28 , edit. J. Briquet, in \i Annu. Cons. Jard. Bot. Gen\'e8ve\plain\b\fs28 18/19\plain\fs28 : 239-254 (1916); this gives exact publication dates of the original \i Catalogues\plain\fs28 .)
\par \pard \b Reuter\plain\fs28 , \i\b Cat. Pl. Vasc. Geneve\plain\fs28 
\par      G.F. Reuter,\i  Catalogue des Plantes vasculaires qui croissent naturellement aux environs de Gen\'e8ve\plain\fs28 . Ed. 1. Geneve. 1832. Supplement. Gen\'e8ve. 1841. Ed. 2. Gen\'e8ve. 1861.
\par \b Richard, A.\plain\fs28 , \i\b Tent. Fl. Abyss\plain\fs28 .
\par     A. Richard,\i  Tentamen Florae abyssinicae\plain\fs28 . Parisiis. 1847-1851. (\b 1\plain\fs28  in 1847;\b  2\plain\fs28  in 1851.)
\par \b Richard, L.C M.\plain\fs28 , \i\b Orchid. Eur. Annot\plain\fs28 .
\par     L.C.M. Richard, \i De Orchideis europaeis Annotationes\plain\fs28 . Parisiis. 1817.
\par \pard \b Richter\plain\fs28 ,\i\b  Pl. Eur\plain\fs28 .
\par    K. Richter, \i Plantae Europeae. Enumeratio Systematica et Synonymica Plantarum phanerogamicarum in Europa sponte crescentium vel mere inquilinarum\plain\fs28 . Leipzig. 1890 1903. (\b 1\plain\fs28  in 1890; \b 2\plain\fs28 , titled \i Plantae Europaeae\plain\fs28 ..., by R.L.A.M. G\'fcrke: pp. i-vi, 1-160 in 1897; pp. 161-320 in 1899 ; pp. 321-480 in 1903. Cf. W. T. Stearn,\i  Jour. Bot.\plain\fs28  (\i London\plain\fs28 ) \b 77\plain\fs28 : 89-91 (1939).)
\par \b Riddelsd., Hedley & Price\plain\fs28 ,\i\b  Fl. Gloucestershire\plain\fs28 
\par \pard     H.J. Riddelsdell, G.W. Hedley & W.R. Price, \i Flora of Gloucestershire\plain\fs28 . Arbroath. 1948.
\par \b Riviere, A. & C.\plain\fs28 , \i\b Bambous\plain\fs28 
\par      A. & C. Riviere, \i Les Bambous: Vegetation, Culture, Multiplication, en Europe, en Alg\'e9rie, et generalement dans tout le Bassin mediterran\'e9en\plain\fs28 . Paris.1878.
\par \b Rink\plain\fs28 ,\i\b  Gr\'f8nl. Geogr. Stat. Beskr\plain\fs28 .
\par    H.J. Rink, \i Gr\'f8nland geografisk og statistisk beskrevet\plain\fs28 . Kj\'f8benhavn. Botany in \b 1\plain\fs28 (\b 1\plain\fs28 ) by H.J. Rink, 1852; and in \b 2\plain\fs28 (\b 6\plain\fs28 ) by J.M.C. Lange, 1857.
\par \pard \b Risso & Poiteau\plain\fs28 , \i\b Hist. Nat. Orang\plain\fs28 . 
\par     J.A. Risso & P.A. Poiteau,  \i Histoire naturelle des Orangers\plain\fs28 . Ed. 1. Paris. 1818. Ed. 2, by M.A. du Breuil. Paris. 1872. 
\par \b Rivas Goday\plain\fs28 , \i\b Veg. Fl. Cuenca Extr. Guadlana\plain\fs28 
\par     S. Rivas Goday, \i Vegetaci\'f3n y Florula de la Cuenca extreme\'f1a del Guadiana\plain\fs28 . Madrid. 1964.
\par \b Rochel\plain\fs28 , \i\b Pl.  Banat\plain\fs28 . 
\par     A. Rochel, \i Plantae Banatus rariores\plain\fs28 . Pestini. 1828. 
\par \b Rochel\plain\fs28 , \i\b Sched. Pl. Hung. Exsicc\plain\fs28 .
\par \pard    A. Rochel, \i Schedae Plantarum ad Floram hungaricam exsiccatam\plain\fs28 . [Pesth?] 1810.
\par \b Roemer, M.J.\plain\fs28 ,  \i\b Syn. Monogr\plain\fs28 . 
\par    M.J. Roemer,  \i Familiarum naturalium Regni vegetabilis Synopses monographicae\plain\fs28 .  Vimariae. 1846-1847. (\b 1\plain\fs28  & \b 2\plain\fs28  in 1846;\b  3\plain\fs28  & \b 4\plain\fs28  in 1847.) 
\par \b Roemer & Schultes\plain\fs28 , \i\b Syst. Veg\plain\fs28 .
\par    Cf. L., \i Syst. Nat\plain\fs28 .
\par \b R\'f6hling\plain\fs28 , \i\b Deutschl. Fl\plain\fs28 .
\par    J.C. R\'f6hling, \i Deutschlands Flora. Ein Taschenbuch\plain\fs28 . Ed. 1. Bremen. 1796. Ed. 2. Frankfurt a. M. 1812-1813. (\b 1\plain\fs28  & \b 2\plain\fs28  in 1812; \b 3\plain\fs28  in 1813.) Ed. 3. by F.K. Mertens & W.D.J. Koch. Frankfurt a. M. 1823-1839. (\b 1\plain\fs28  in 1823; \b 2\plain\fs28  in 1826; \b 3\plain\fs28  in 1831;\b  4\plain\fs28  in 1833; \b 5\plain\fs28  in 1839.)
\par \pard \b Rosenvinge et al.\plain\fs28 , \i\b Bot. Iceland\plain\fs28 
\par      J.L.A.K. Rosenvinge et al. (edit.), \i The Botany of Iceland\plain\fs28 . Copenhagen & London. 1912-1949. (\b 1\plain\fs28 (\b 1\plain\fs28 ): pp. 1-186 in 1912, pp. 191-343 in 1914;\b  1\plain\fs28 (\b 2\plain\fs28 ): pp. 347-677 in 1918;\b  2\plain\fs28 (\b 1\plain\fs28 ): pp. 1-248 in 1920; \b 2\plain\fs28 (\b 2\plain\fs28 ): pp. 251-447 in 1928; \b 2\plain\fs28 (\b 3\plain\fs28 ): pp. 451-607 in 1932; \b 3\plain\fs28 (\b 1\plain\fs28 ): pp. 1-186 in 1930; \b 3\plain\fs28 (\b 2\plain\fs28 ): pp. 191-227 in 1941; \b 3\plain\fs28 (\b 3\plain\fs28 ): pp. 233-343 in 1942;\b  3\plain\fs28 (\b 4\plain\fs28 ): pp. 347-547 in 1945; \b 4\plain\fs28 (\b 1\plain\fs28 ) in 1942; \b 5\plain\fs28 (\b 1\plain\fs28 ) in 1949.) \b 1-3\plain\fs28 (\b 1\plain\fs28 ) edit. J.L.A.K. Rosenvinge & E. Warming; \b 3\plain\fs28 (\b 2\plain\fs28 ) -\b 4\plain\fs28 (\b 1\plain\fs28 ) edit. J. Grontved, O. Paulsen & T. S\'f8rensen; \b 5\plain\fs28 (\b 1\plain\fs28 ) edit. J. Gr\'f6ntved & T. S\'f8rensen.
\par \pard \b Roshev\plain\fs28 .,\i\b  Zlaki\plain\fs28 
\par      R.J. Roshevitz, *****. ******** * ******** ******** * ******** *****  [\i Zlaki. Vvedenie v Izucenie kormovykh i khlebnykh Zlakov\plain\fs28 ]. Moskva & Leningrad. 1937.
\par \b Ross, J\plain\fs28 ., \i\b Voy. Disc. Baffin\plain\fs28 
\par    J. Ross, \i A Voyage of Discovery made under the Orders of the Admiralty, in H.M.S. Isabella and Alexander, for the Purpose of exploring Baffin's Bay, and inquiring into the Probability of a North-West Passage\plain\fs28 . London. 1819. Appendix 3 contains \i List of Plants collected on the Coasts of Baffin's Bay and at Possession Bay\plain\fs28  by R. Brown.
\par \pard \b Rostk. & W. L. E. Schmidt\plain\fs28 ,\i\b  Fl. Sedin\plain\fs28 .
\par      F.W.G. Rostkovius & W.L.E. Schmidt, \i Flora sedinensis\plain\fs28 . Sedini.1824.
\par \b Roth\plain\fs28 , \i\b Bot. Abh\plain\fs28 .
\par      A.W. Roth, \i Botanische Abhandlungen und Beobachtungen\plain\fs28 . Nurnberg. 1787.
\par \b Roth\plain\fs28 , \i\b Catalecta Bot\plain\fs28 .
\par    A.W. Roth, \i Catalecta botanica, quibus Plantae novae et minus cognitae describuntur atque illustrantur\plain\fs28 . Lipsiae. 1797-1806. (\b 1\plain\fs28  in 1797 ; \b 2\plain\fs28  in 1800; \b 3\plain\fs28  in 1806.)
\par \pard \b Roth\plain\fs28 , \i\b Enum\plain\fs28 .
\par    A.W. Roth,\i  Enumeratio Plantarum phaenogamarum in Germania sponte nascentium\plain\fs28 . Lipsiae. 1827.
\par \b Roth\plain\fs28 ,\i\b  Man. Bot\plain\fs28 .
\par    A.W. Roth,\i  Manuale botanicum, Peregrinationibus botanicis accommodatum. Sive Prodromus Enumerationis Plantarum phanerogamarum in Germania sponte nascentium\plain\fs28 . Lipsiae. 1830. (\b 1-3\plain\fs28  in 1830.)
\par \b Roth\plain\fs28 , \i\b Nov. Pl. Sp\plain\fs28 .
\par    A.W. Roth, \i Novae Plantarum Species praesertim Indiae orientalis\plain\fs28 . Halberstadii. 1821. (Most names published earlier by Roth in Roemer & Schultes, \i Syst. Veg\plain\fs28 . \b 3-5\plain\fs28  (1818-1820).)
\par \pard \b Roth\plain\fs28 , \i\b Tent. Fl. Germ\plain\fs28 .
\par    A.W. Roth, \i Tentamen Florae germanicae\plain\fs28 . Lipsiae. 1788-1800. (\b 1\plain\fs28  in 1788; \b 2\plain\fs28 (\b 1\plain\fs28 ) in 1789; \b 2\plain\fs28 (\b 2\plain\fs28 ) in 1793; \b 3\plain\fs28 (\b 1\plain\fs28 )(\b 1\plain\fs28 ), pp. 1-102 in 1799; \b 3\plain\fs28 (\b 1\plain\fs28 )(\b 2\plain\fs28 ), pp. 103-578 in 1800. Cf. F.A. Stafleu & R.S. Cowan, \i Taxonomic Literature\plain\fs28  ed. 2, \b 4\plain\fs28 : 918 (1983).)
\par \b Rottb.\plain\fs28 , \i\b Pl.  Hort. Univ. Rar. Progr\plain\fs28 . 
\par     C.F. Rottboel, \i  Plantas Horti Universitatis rariores programmate describit ....\plain\fs28   Hafniae. 1773. 
\par \pard \b Rouy\plain\fs28 , or \b Rouy & Camus\plain\fs28 , or \b Rouy & Fouc.\plain\fs28 , \i\b Fl. Fr\plain\fs28 .
\par    G.C.C. Rouy, \i Flore de France\plain\fs28 . Asni\'e8res, Paris & Rochefort. 1893-1913.(\b 1\plain\fs28  in 1893;\b  2 \plain\fs28 in 1895; \b 3 \plain\fs28 in 1896; \b 4 \plain\fs28 in 1897; \b 5 \plain\fs28 in 1899; \b 6 \plain\fs28 in l900; \b 7 \plain\fs28 in 1901; \b 8\plain\fs28  in 1903; \b 9 in\plain\fs28  1905; \b 10 \plain\fs28 in 1908;\b  11\plain\fs28  in 1909; \b 12\plain\fs28  in 1910; \b 13\plain\fs28  in 1912; \b 14\plain\fs28  in 1913.) \b 1-3\plain\fs28  in collaboration with J.Foucaud, \b 6\plain\fs28  &\b  7\plain\fs28  with E.G. Camus.
\par \pard \b Rouy\plain\fs28 ,\i\b  Ill. Pl. Eur. Rar\plain\fs28 .
\par    G.C.C. Rouy, \i Illustrationes Plantarum Europae rariorum\plain\fs28 . Paris. 1895-1905. ( \b 1-4\plain\fs28  in 1895; \b 5-7\plain\fs28  in 1896; \b 8\plain\fs28  in 1897; \b 9\plain\fs28  & \b 10\plain\fs28  in 1898; \b 11\plain\fs28  & \b 12\plain\fs28  in 1899; \b 13\plain\fs28  & \b 14\plain\fs28  in 1900; \b 15\plain\fs28  & \b 16\plain\fs28  in 1901 ; \b 17\plain\fs28  in 1902; \b 18\plain\fs28  in 1903; \b 19\plain\fs28  in 1904; \b 20\plain\fs28  in 1905. Cf. F.A. Stafleu & R.S. Cowan, \i Taxonomic Literature\plain\fs28  ed. 2, \b 4\plain\fs28 : 950-95l (1983).)
\par \pard \b Rouy & Fouc\plain\fs28 ., or\b  Rouy & Camus\plain\fs28  or \b Rouy\plain\fs28 ,\i\b  Fl. Fr\plain\fs28 .
\par     G.C.C. Rouy, \i Flore de France\plain\fs28 . Asnieres, Paris & Rochefort. 1893-1913. (\b 1\plain\fs28  in 1893; \b 2\plain\fs28  in 1895; \b 3\plain\fs28  in 1896; \b 4\plain\fs28  in 1897; \b 5\plain\fs28  in 1899; \b 6\plain\fs28  in 1900; \b 7\plain\fs28  in 1901; \b 8\plain\fs28  in 1903; \b 9\plain\fs28  in 1905; \b 10\plain\fs28  in 1908; \b 11\plain\fs28  in 1909;\b 12\plain\fs28  in 1910;\b  13\plain\fs28  in 1912; \b 14\plain\fs28  in 1913.) \b 1-3\plain\fs28  in collaboration with J. Foucaud,\b  6\plain\fs28  &\b  7\plain\fs28  with E.G. Camus.
\par \pard \b Roxb.\plain\fs28 ,\i\b  Fl. Indica\plain\fs28 
\par      W. Roxburgh, \i Flora indica\plain\fs28 . Ed. 1. Serampore. 1820-1824. (\b 1\plain\fs28  in 1820;\b  2\plain\fs28  in 1824.) Ed. 2. Serampore. 1832. (\b 1-3\plain\fs28  in 1832.
\par \b Royle\plain\fs28 , \i\b Ill. Bot. Himal. Mount\plain\fs28 .
\par    J.F . Royle,\i  Illustrations of the Botany and other Branches of the natural History of the Himalayan Mountains and of the Flora of Cashmere\plain\fs28 . London. 1833-1840. (\b 1-2\plain\fs28 ; for dates cf. F.A. Stafleu & R.S. Cowan, \i Taxonomic Literature\plain\fs28  ed. 2,\b  4\plain\fs28 : 963 (1983).)
\par \pard \b Rudolph, J.H\plain\fs28 ., \i\b Fl. Jen. Pl\plain\fs28 .
\par     J.H. Rudolph, \i Florae jenensis Plantas ad Polyandriam Monogyniam Linnaei pertinentes\plain\fs28 . Jenae. 1781.
\par \b Ruiz & Pav\'f3n,\i   Fl. Peruv\plain\fs28 . 
\par     H. Ruiz Lopez & J. Pav\'f3n,  \i Flora peruviana et chilensis\plain\fs28 . Matriti. 1798-1802. (\b 1\plain\fs28  in 1798; \b 2\plain\fs28  in 1799; \b 3\plain\fs28  in 1802; \b 4\plain\fs28  in ?1802.) 
\par \b Ruiz & Pavon,\i  Fl. Peruv. Chil. Prodr\plain\fs28 .
\par      H. Ruiz Lopez & J. Pavon, \i Florae peruvianae, et chilensis Prodromus\plain\fs28 . Ed. 1. Madrid. 1794. Ed. 2. Romae. 1797.
\par \pard \b Ruiz & Pavon\plain\fs28 ,\i\b  Syst. Veg. Fl. Peruv\plain\fs28 .
\par      H. Ruiz Lopez & J. Pavon, \i Systema Vegetabilium Florae peruvianae et chilensis\plain\fs28 . Madrid. 1798.
\par \b Russell, A\plain\fs28 ., \i\b Nat. Hist. Aleppo\plain\fs28 
\par    A. Russell,\i  The natural History of Aleppo, and Parts adjacent\plain\fs28 . Ed. 1. London. 1756. Ed. 2. London. 1794. (\b 1\plain\fs28  &\b  2\plain\fs28  in 1794.)
\par \b Rydb.\plain\fs28 , \i\b Fl. Rocky Mount\plain\fs28 . 
\par      P.A. Rydberg,  \i Flora of the Rocky Mountains and adjacent Plains\plain\fs28 .  Ed. 1. New York. 1918. Ed. 2. New York. 1922. 
\par \pard \b Rydb.\plain\fs28 , \i\b N. Amer. Fl\plain\fs28 .
\par      \i North American Flora\plain\fs28 . New York. Ser. 1, \b 1-34\plain\fs28 . 1905-1949. (By P.A. Rydberg et al.) Ser. 2, 1954 \'98\'93 .
\par \b Sadler\plain\fs28 , \i\b  Fl. Com. Pest\plain\fs28 . 
\par     J. Sadler, \i  Flora Comitatus pestiensis\plain\fs28 .  Ed. 1. Pestini. 1825-1826. (\b 1\plain\fs28  in 1825;\b  2\plain\fs28  in 1826.) Ed. 2. Pestini. 1840. 
\par \b Salisb\plain\fs28 .,\i\b  Icon. Stirp. Rar\plain\fs28 .
\par      R.A. Salisbury,\i  Icones Stirpium rariorum Descriptionibus illustratae\plain\fs28 . Londini.1791.
\par \pard \b Salisb\plain\fs28 ., \i\b Parad. Lond\plain\fs28 .
\par     R.A. Salisbury, \i The Paradisus londinensis: or coloured Figures of Plants cultivated in the Vicinity of the Metropolis\plain\fs28 . London. 1805-1808. (\b 1\plain\fs28 (\b 1\plain\fs28 ) in 1805 and 1806; \b 1\plain\fs28 (\b 2\plain\fs28 ) in 1806 and 1807 ; \b 2\plain\fs28 (\b 1\plain\fs28 ) in 1807 and 1808; \b 2\plain\fs28 (\b 2\plain\fs28 ) in 1808. Exact dates of publication on individual plates. Descriptions by R.A. Salisbury, plates by W. Hooker.)
\par \b Salisb.\plain\fs28 ,\i\b  Prodr\plain\fs28 .
\par     R.A. Salisbury, \i Prodromus Stirpium in Horto ad Chapel Allerton vigentium\plain\fs28 . Londini. 1796.
\par \pard \b Salm-Dyck\plain\fs28 , \i\b Hort. Dyck\plain\fs28 .
\par     J.F.M.A.H.I. zu Salm-Reifferscheid-Dyck, \i Hortus dyckensis oder Verzeichniss der in dem botanischen Garten zu Dyck wachsenden Pflanzen\plain\fs28 . Dusseldorf. 1834.
\par \b Samp\plain\fs28 .,\i\b  Fl. Port\plain\fs28 .
\par      G.A. da Silva Ferreira Sampaio, \i Manual da Flora portuguesa\plain\fs28 . Ed. 1. Porto. 1909-1914. (Pp. 1-48 in 1909; pp. 49-208 in 1910, pp. 209-320 in 1911, pp. 321-368 in 1912; pp. 369-384 in 1913- pp. 386-416 in 1914. Cf. Taborda de Morais, \i Bol. Soc. Brot\plain\fs28 . ser. 2, \b 12\plain\fs28 : 308 (1937).) Ed. 2. titled \i Flora Portuguesa\plain\fs28 , by A. Pires de Lima. Porto. 1947.
\par \pard  \b Samp.\plain\fs28 , \i\b Lista Esp. Herb. Port\plain\fs28 . 
\par     G.A. da Silva Ferreira Sampaio, \i  Lista das Especies representadas no Herbario portugues\plain\fs28 .  Porto. 1913. Ap.1, Apendice a   Lista....  Porto. 1914.  Ap. 2, Segundo Apendice a Lista.... Porto. 1914.  Ap. 3, Terceiro Apendice a Lista.... Porto. 1914. 
\par \b Sanguinetti\plain\fs28 ,  \i\b Fl. Rom. Prodr. Alt\plain\fs28 . 
\par     P. Sanguinetti, \i  Florae romanae Prodromus alter\plain\fs28 .  Romae.   1864. 
\par \b Santi, G.\plain\fs28 ,\i\b  Viaggio Montam\plain\fs28 .
\par \pard      G. Santi, \i Viaggio al Montamiata\plain\fs28 . Pisa. 1795.
\par \b Saunders\plain\fs28 ,  \i\b Refug. Bot\plain\fs28 . 
\par     W.W. Saunders, \i  Refugium botanicum; or, Figures and Descriptions from living Specimens, of little known or new Plants of botanical Interest\plain\fs28 .  London. 1869-1882. (\b 1\plain\fs28  in 1869; \b 2\plain\fs28 : tt. 73-96 in 1869; tt. 97-120 in 1878; tt. 121-144 in 1882; \b 3\plain\fs28   in 1870; \b 4\plain\fs28  in 1875; \b 5\plain\fs28 : tt. 289-312 in 1871; tt. 313-336 in 1872; tt. 337-360 in 1873.) 
\par \pard \b Sarg\plain\fs28 ., \i\b Silva N. Amer\plain\fs28 .
\par    C.S. Sargent, \i The Silva of North America : a Description of the Trees which grow naturally in North America exclusive of Mexico\plain\fs28 . Boston & New York. 1890-1902.( \b 1\plain\fs28  in 1890; \b 2\plain\fs28  in 1891; \b 3\plain\fs28  & \b 4\plain\fs28  in l892; \b 5\plain\fs28  in 1893; \b 6\plain\fs28  in 1894; \b 7\plain\fs28  & \b 8\plain\fs28  in 1895; \b 9\plain\fs28  & \b 10\plain\fs28  in 1896; \b 11\plain\fs28  in 1898; \b 12\plain\fs28  in 1899; \b 13\plain\fs28  & \b 14\plain\fs28  in 1902.)
\par \b Sauvage & Vindt\plain\fs28 ,\i\b  Fl. Maroc\plain\fs28 
\par \pard     C.P.F. Sauvage & J. Vindt, \i Flore du Maroc\plain\fs28 . Tanger. 1952-1954. (\b 1\plain\fs28  in 1952; \b 2\plain\fs28  in 1954.)
\par \b Savi\plain\fs28 ,  \i\b Bot. Etrusc\plain\fs28 . 
\par     G. Savi,  \i Botanicon etruscum sistens Plantas in Etruria sponte crescentes.\plain\fs28  Pisis. 1808-1825. (\b 1\plain\fs28  in 1808; \b 2\plain\fs28  in 1815;  \b 3\plain\fs28  in 1818;\b  4\plain\fs28  in 1825.) 
\par \b Savi\plain\fs28 , \i\b Due Cent. Piante Etrusc\plain\fs28 .
\par     G. Savi, \i Due Centurie di Piante appartenente alla Flora etrusca\plain\fs28 . Pisa. 1804.
\par \pard \b Savi\plain\fs28 , \i\b  Fl. Pis.\plain\fs28  
\par     G. Savi, \i  Flora pisana\plain\fs28 . Pisa. 1798. (\b 1\plain\fs28  & \b 2\plain\fs28  in 1798.) 
\par \b Savi\plain\fs28 , \i\b Obs. Trif\plain\fs28 . 
\par     G. Savi,  \i Observationes in varias Trifoliorum Species\plain\fs28 . Florentiae. 1810. 
\par \b  Savi\plain\fs28 ,\i\b  Osserv. Div. Piante\plain\fs28 
\par     G. Savi, \i Osservazioni sopra diverse Piante\plain\fs28 . Pisa. 1816.
\par \b Savul\plain\fs28 ., \i\b Fl. Rep. Pop. Rom\'e2ne\plain\fs28 
\par     T. Savulescu, \i Flora Republicii populare Rom\'e2ne\plain\fs28 . / \i Flora Reipublicae popularis romanicae\plain\fs28 . Bucuresti. 1952-1972. (\b 1\plain\fs28  in 1952; \b 2\plain\fs28  in 1953; \b 3\plain\fs28  in 1955; \b 4\plain\fs28  in 1956; \b 5\plain\fs28  in 1957 ;\b  6\plain\fs28  in 1958;\b  7\plain\fs28  in 1960;\b  8\plain\fs28  in 1961 ; \b 9\plain\fs28  in 1964; \b 10\plain\fs28  in 1965; \b 11\plain\fs28  in 1966; \b 12\plain\fs28  in 1972. 3-10 titled \i Flora Republicii Populare Rom\'eene.\plain\fs28  /\i  Flora Reipublicae popularis romanicae\plain\fs28 . \b 11-12\plain\fs28   titled \i Flora Republicii Socialiste Rom\'e2nia.\plain\fs28  /\i  Flora Reipublicae socialisticae Rom\'e2nia\plain\fs28 .) \b 9-11\plain\fs28  edit. E.I. Ny\'e1r\'e1dy; \b 12\plain\fs28  edit. E.I. Ny\'e1r\'e1dy, A. Beldie, I. Molariu & A. Ny\'e1r\'e1dy.
\par \pard \b Schinz & R. Keller\plain\fs28 ,\i\b  Fl. Schweiz\plain\fs28 
\par      H. Schinz & R. Keller, \i Flora der Schweiz\plain\fs28  . Ed. 1. Z\'fcrich. 1899-1900. Ed. 2. Z\'fcrich. 1905. (\b 1\plain\i\fs28  Exkursionsflora\plain\fs28  in 1905;\b  2\plain\fs28  \i Kritische Flora\plain\fs28  in 1905.) Ed. 3. Z\'fcrich. 1909-1914. (\b 1\plain\fs28  \i Exkursionsflora\plain\fs28  in 1909; \b 2\plain\i\fs28  Kritische Flora\plain\fs28 , edit. H. Schinz & A. Thellung, in 1914.) Ed. 4. Z\'fcrich. 1923. (\b 1\plain\i\fs28  Exkursionsflora\plain\fs28 , edit. H. Schinz & A.Thellung, in 1923.)
\par \b Schischkin\plain\fs28 , \i\b Fl. Jugo-Vostoka\plain\fs28 
\par \pard      B.K. Schischkin (edit.), ***** ****-******* *********** ***** \i  CCCP\plain\fs28  [\i Flora Jugo-vostoka Evropejskoj Casti SSSR\plain\fs28 ]./\i  Flora Rossiae austro-orientalis\plain\fs28 .\b  6\plain\fs28 . Moskva & Leningrad. 1936. (\b 1-5\plain\fs28  published in \i Acta Horti Petrop\plain\fs28 . 1927-1931.)
\par \b Schischkin\plain\fs28 , or \b Schischkin & Bobrov\plain\fs28 , or \b Schischkin & Juz\plain\fs28 .,\i\b Fl. URSS\plain\fs28 
\par    Cf. Komarov,\i  Fl. URSS\plain\fs28 .
\par \b Schkuhr\plain\fs28 ,\i\b  Beschr. Abbild. Riedgr\plain\fs28 .
\par      C. Schkuhr, \i Beschreibung und Abbildung der theils bekannten, theils noch nicht beschriebenen Arten von Riedgr\'e4sern\plain\fs28 . Wittenberg. 1801.\i\b  Nachtr.\plain\fs28 ,\i  Nachtrag, oder der zweite H\'e4lfte der Riedgr\'e4ser\plain\fs28 . Wittenberg.1806.
\par \pard \b Schkuhr\plain\fs28 ,\i\b  Handb\plain\fs28 .
\par    C. Schkuhr, \i Botanisches Handbuch der mehresten theils in Deutschland wildwachsenden, theils ausl\'e4ndischen in Deutschland unter freyem Himmel ausdauernden Gew\'e4chse\plain\fs28 . Ed. 1. Wittenbergae. 1791-1803. (\b 1\plain\fs28  in 1791 ; \b 2\plain\fs28  in 1796; \b 3\plain\fs28  in 1803.) Ed. 2. Leipzig. 1806-1814. (\b  l-4\plain\fs28  in 1806-1814 ; title pages all dated 1808. Cf. F. A. Stafleu & R. S. Cowan, \i Taxonomic Literature\plain\fs28  ed. 2, \b 4\plain\fs28 : 184 (1983).)
\par \b Schlecht\plain\fs28 ., \i\b Animadv. Ranunc\plain\fs28 .
\par \pard    D.F.L. von Schlechtendal, \i Animadversiones botanicae in Ranunculaceas Candollii\plain\fs28 . Berolini. 1819-1820. (\b 1\plain\fs28  in 1819; \b 2\plain\fs28  (= Sect. post.) in 1820.)
\par \b Schlosser & Vuk\plain\fs28 .,\i\b Fl. Croat\plain\fs28 .
\par      J.C. Schlosser von Klekovski & L. von F. Vukotinovic,\i  Flora croatica\plain\fs28 . Zagrabiae. 1869.
\par \b Schlosser & Vuk\plain\fs28 .,\i\b  Syll. Fl. Croat\plain\fs28 .
\par      J.C. Schlosser & L.F. Vukotinovic, \i Syllabus Florae croaticae\plain\fs28 . Zagrabiae. 1857.
\par \b Schmalh.\plain\fs28 , \i\b Fl. Sred. Juz. Ross\plain\fs28 .
\par \pard      J.T.(I.F.) Schmal'hausen, ******************************************  [\i Flora srednej i juznoj Rossii, Kryma i severnago Kavkaza\plain\fs28 ]. Kiev. 1895-1897. (\b 1\plain\fs28  in 1895; \b 2\plain\fs28  in 1897.)
\par \b Schmidt, F.W.\plain\fs28 , \i\b  Fl. Bo\'ebm\plain\fs28 . 
\par    F.W. Schmidt,  \i Flora bo\'ebmica inchoata\plain\fs28 . Pragae. 1793-1794. (\b 1\plain\fs28  & \b 2\plain\fs28  in 1793; \b 3\plain\fs28  & \b 4\plain\fs28  in 1794.) 
\par \b Scbmidt, F.W\plain\fs28 ., \i\b Samml. Phys. Aufs. Natark\plain\fs28 .
\par    F.W. Schmidt, \i Sammlung physikalisch-\'f6konomische Aufs\'e4tze, zur Aufnahme der Naturkunde und deren damit verwandten Wissenschaften in B\'f6hmen\plain\fs28 . Prag. 1795.
\par \pard \b Schmidt, Franz\plain\fs28 . \i\b  \'d6str. Allgem. Baumz.\plain\fs28  
\par     Franz Schmidt, \i  \'d6streichs allgemeine Baumzucht\plain\fs28 . Wien. 1792-1822. (\b 1\plain\fs28  in 1792; \b 2\plain\fs28  in 1794; \b 3\plain\fs28  in 1800; \b 4\plain\fs28  in 1822.) 
\par \b Schneider, C.K\plain\fs28 ., \i\b Ill. Handb. Laubholzk\plain\fs28 .
\par     C.K. Schneider, \i Illustriertes Handbuch der Laubholzkunde\plain\fs28 . Jena. 1904-1912. (\b 1\plain\fs28  : pp. 1-304 in 1904 ; pp. 305-592 in 1905 ; pp. 593-810 in 1906;\b  2\plain\fs28 : pp. 1-240 in 1907; pp. 241-496 in 1909; pp. 497-816 in 1911 ; pp. 817-1070 in 1912. Cf. F. A. Stafleu & R.S. Cowan,\i  Taxonomic Literature\plain\fs28  ed. 2, \b 4\plain\fs28 : 271 (1983).)
\par \pard \b Schneider, G.\plain\fs28 , \i\b Hier. Westsad\plain\fs28 .
\par      G. Schneider, \i Die Hieracien der Westsudeten\plain\fs28 . Cunnersdorf. 1889.
\par \b Scholler\plain\fs28 ,\i\b  Fl. Barb\plain\fs28 .
\par     F.A. Scholler,\i  Flora barbiensis\plain\fs28 . Lipsiae. 1775. \i Supplementum\plain\fs28  by J.J. Bossart. Barbii. 1787.
\par \b Schott,\plain\fs28  \i\b Gen. Fil\plain\fs28 .
\par    H.W. Schott,\i  Genera Filicum\plain\fs28 . Vindobonae. 1834.
\par \b Schott\plain\fs28 ,\i\b  Sippen \'d6sterr. Primeln\plain\fs28 
\par     H.W. Schott, \i Die Sippen der osterreichischen Primeln\plain\fs28 . Wier 1851.
\par \pard \b Schott\plain\fs28 ,  \i\b Syn. Aroid\plain\fs28 .
\par     H.W. Schott, \i Synopsis Aroidearum\plain\fs28 . Vindobonae. 1856.
\par \b Schott\plain\fs28 , \i\b Wilde Blendl. \'d6sterr. Primeln\plain\fs28 
\par     H.W. Schott, \i Wilde Blendlinge \'f6sterreichischer Primeln\plain\fs28 . Wien. 1852.
\par \b Schott & Endl\plain\fs28 .,\i\b  Melet. Bot.\plain\fs28 
\par     H.W. Schott & S.L. Endlicher, \i Meletemata botanica\plain\fs28 . Vindobonae. 1832.
\par \b Schott, Nyman & Kotschy\plain\fs28 , \i\b Analecta Bot\plain\fs28 .
\par     H.W. Schott, C.F. Nyman & T. Kotschy, \i Analecta botanica\plain\fs28 . Vindobonae. 1854.
\par \pard \b Schousboe\plain\fs28 , \i\b Vextr. Marokko\plain\fs28 
\par     P.K.A. Schousboe, \i Iagttagelser over Vextriget i Marokko\plain\fs28 . Kj\'f8benhavn. 1800.
\par \b Schrader\plain\fs28 , \i\b Blumenbachia\plain\fs28 
\par     H.A. Schrader, \i Blumenbachia, novum e Loasearum Familia Genus\plain\fs28 . Goettingae. 1827.
\par \b Schrader\plain\fs28 ,\i\b  Fl. Germ\plain\fs28 .
\par     H.A. Schrader, \i Flora germanica\plain\fs28 . Gottingae. 1806.
\par \b Schrader\plain\fs28 ,\i\b  Hort. Gotting\plain\fs28 .
\par    H.A. Schrader, \i Hortus gottingensis, seu Plantae novae et rariores Horti regii botanici gottingensis descriptae et Iconibus illustratae Opera\plain\fs28 . Goettingae. 1809-1811. (\b 1\plain\fs28 : pp. 1-14, tt. 1-8 in 1809;\b  2\plain\fs28 : pp. 15-22, tt. 9-16 in 1811. Cf. F.A. Stafleu & R.S. Cowan, \i Taxonomic Literature\plain\fs28  ed. 2,\b  5\plain\fs28 : 319 (1985).)
\par \pard \b Schrader\plain\fs28 , \i\b Ind. Sem. Horti Gotting\plain\fs28 .
\par    H.A. Schrader, \i Index Seminum Horti academici gottingensis\plain\fs28 . Goettingae. 1821-1835 (\i academici\plain\fs28  not in title of all issues.) New taxa in 1830, 1831, 1832, 1835 issues also published in \i Linnaea, Litt.-Ber\plain\fs28 ., but not simultaneously. From 1837 the \i Index Seminum\plain\fs28  was prepared by F. G. Bartling, with Schrader responsible for some descriptions.
\par \b Schrader,\plain\fs28  \i\b Jour. f\'fcr die Bot. \plain\fs28 
\par    H.A.Schrader, \i\b Journal f\'fcr die Botanik. \plain\fs28 G\'f6ttingen. 1799 -1804. (\b 1799\plain\fs28 (\b 1\plain\fs28 ) in 1799; \b 1799\plain\fs28 (\b 2\plain\fs28 ): pp. 1-200 in 1799; pp. 201-502 in 1800; \b 1800\plain\fs28 (\b 1\plain\fs28 ): pp. 1-220 in 1800; pp. 221 -446 in 1801 ; \b 1800\plain\fs28 (\b 2\plain\fs28 ) in 1801 ; \b 1801\plain\fs28 (\b 1\plain\fs28 ): pp. 1-272 in 1803; pp. 273-504 in 1803-1804. Cf. F.A.Stafleu & R.S. Cowan, \i\b Taxonomic Literature \plain\fs28 ed. 2, \b 5\plain\fs28 : 318 (1985).)
\par \pard \b Schrader\plain\fs28 , \i\b Monogr. Verbasci\plain\fs28 
\par      H.A. Schrader, \i Monographia Generis Verbasci\plain\fs28 . Gottingae. 1813-1823. (\b 1\plain\fs28  in 1813; \b 2\plain\fs28  in 1823.)
\par \b Schrader\plain\fs28 ,\i\b Neues Jour. Bot. \plain\fs28 
\par    H.A. Schrader,\i\b Neues Journal f\'fcr die Botanik.\plain\fs28 Erfurt. 1805-1810. (\b 1\plain\fs28 (\b 1 & 2\plain\fs28 ) in 1805; \b 1\plain\fs28 (\b 3\plain\fs28 ) in 1806;\b 2\plain\fs28 (\b 1\plain\fs28 ) in 1807 ; \b 2\plain\fs28 (\b 2 & 3\plain\fs28 ) in 1808; \b 3\plain\fs28 (\b 1-4\plain\fs28 ) in 1809;\b  4\plain\fs28 (\b 1 & 2\plain\fs28 ) in 1810. Cf. F.A. Stafleu & R.S. Cowan, \i\b Taxonomic Literature \plain\fs28 ed. 2,\b 5\plain\fs28 :319 (1985).)
\par \pard \b Schrader\plain\fs28 , \i\b Sert. Hannov.\plain\fs28 
\par     H.A. Schrader,\i Sertum hannoveranum seu Plantae rariores quae in Hortis regiis Vicinis coluntur. \plain\fs28 Goettingae. 1795-1798. (\b 1\plain\fs28  in 1795 ; \b 2\plain\fs28  in 1796;\b 3\plain\fs28  in 1797; \b 4\plain\fs28  by J.C. Wendland in 1798. J.C. Wendland also co-author of \b 2\plain\fs28  & \b 3\plain\fs28 . Cf. F.A. Stafleu & R.S. Cowan, \i\b Taxonomic Literature \plain\fs28 ed.2, \b 5\plain\fs28 : 317 (1985).)
\par \b Schrank\plain\fs28 , \i\b Baier. Fl. \plain\fs28 
\par    F. von Paula von Schrank, \i\b Baiersche Flora. \plain\fs28 M\'fcnchen. 1789. (\b 1\plain\fs28 & \b 2\plain\fs28  in 1789.)
\par \pard \b  Schrank\plain\fs28 ,\i\b Baier. Reise\plain\fs28  
\par    F. von Paula von Schrank,\i  Baiersche Reise\plain\fs28 . M\'fcnchen. 1786.
\par \b Schrank\plain\fs28 , \i\b Cent. Bot. Anmerk\plain\fs28 .
\par     F. von Paula von Schrank, \i Eine Centurie botaniseher Anmerkungen zu des Ritters von Linne Species Plantarum\plain\fs28 . Erfurt.1781.
\par \b Schrank\plain\fs28 , \i\b Pl. Rar. Horti Monac.\plain\fs28 
\par     F. von Paula von Schrank, \i Plantae rariores Horti academici monacensis.\plain\fs28 Monachii. 1817-1822. (\b 1\plain\fs28 (\b 1-2\plain\fs28 ): tt. 1-20 in 1817; \b 1\plain\fs28 (\b 3-5\plain\fs28 ): tt. 21-50 in 1819; \b 2\plain\fs28 (\b 6\plain\fs28 ): tt. 51-60 in 1820; \b 2\plain\fs28 (\b 7-8\plain\fs28 ): tt. 61-80 in 1821; \b 2\plain\fs28 (\b 9-10\plain\fs28 ): tt. 81-100 in 1822. Cf. F.A. Stafleu, \i Taxonomic Literature\plain\fs28  ed. 1, 433 (1967); the year for \b 2\plain\fs28 (\b 9-10\plain\fs28 ) is misprinted as 1821 in op. cit. ed. 2, \b 5\plain\fs28 : (1985).)
\par \pard \b Schrank & C.F.P. Mart\plain\fs28 ., \i\b Hart. Monac\plain\fs28 .
\par      F. von Paula von Schrank & C.F. P. von Martius, \i Hortus regius monacensis. Verzeichniss der im k\'f6niglichen botanischen Garten zu M\'fcnchen wachsenden Pflanzen.\plain\fs28  M\'fcnchen & Leipzig. 1829.
\par \b Schrank & Moll\plain\fs28 , \i\b Naturh. Briefe\plain\fs28 
\par     F. von Paula von Schrank & K.M.E. von Moll, \i Naturhistorische Briefe uber \'d6sterreich, Salzburg, Passau und Berchtesgaden\plain\fs28 . Salzburg. 1785. (\b 1\plain\fs28  & \b 2\plain\fs28  in 1785.)
\par \pard \b Schreber\plain\fs28 ,\i\b  Beschr. Gr\'e4ser\plain\fs28 
\par      J.C.D. von Schreber,\i  Beschreibung der Gr\'e4ser nebst ihren Abbildungen nach der Natur\plain\fs28 . Leipzig. 1766-1810. (\b 1\plain\fs28 : tt. 1-2 in 1766; tt. 3-10 in 1767; tt. 11-14 in 1768; tt. 15-20 in 1769; \b 2\plain\fs28 : tt. 21-29 in 1772; tt. 30-40 in 1774-1779;\b  3\plain\fs28 : tt. 41-54 in 1810. Cf. F. A. Stafleu, \i Taxonomic Literature\plain\fs28  434 (1967).)
\par \b  Schreber\plain\fs28 ,  \i\b Icon. Descr. Pl\plain\fs28 . 
\par     J.C.D. von Schreber, \i  Icones et Descriptiones Plantarum minus cognitarum\plain\fs28 .  Halae. 1766. 
\par \pard \b Schreber\plain\fs28 , \i\b Pl. Vert. Unilab\plain\fs28 .
\par     J.C.D. von Schreber, \i Plantae verticillatae unilabiatae\plain\fs28 . Erlangae. 1773. Reissue, titled \i Plantarum verticillatarum unilabiatarum Genera et Species\plain\fs28 . Lipsiae. 1774. (For date cf. F.A. Stafleu,\i  Taxonomic Literature\plain\fs28  434 (1967).)
\par \b Schreber\plain\fs28 ,\i\b  Spicil. Fl. Lips.\plain\fs28  
\par     J.C.D. von Schreber, \i Spicilegium Florae lipsicae. \plain\fs28 Lipsiae. 1771.
\par \b Schubler & Martens\plain\fs28 ,\i\b  Fl. W\'fcrtemberg\plain\fs28 
\par     G. Schubler & G.M. von Martens, \i Flora von W\'fcrtemberg\plain\fs28 . Tubingen. 1834.
\par \pard \b Schultes\plain\fs28 ,\i\b  Obs. Bot\plain\fs28 .
\par     J.A. Schultes, \i Observationes botanicae in Linnei Species Plantarum ex Editione C.L. Willdenow\plain\fs28 . Oeniponti. 1809.
\par \b  Schultes\plain\fs28 , \i\b \'d6sterreichs Fl. \plain\fs28 
\par    J.A. Schultes, \i \'d6sterreichs Flora. \plain\fs28 Ed. 1. Wien. 1794. (\b 1 & 2\plain\fs28  in 1794.) Ed. 2, titled \i \'d6sterreichs Flora. \plain\fs28 Wien. 1814. (\b 1 & 2\plain\fs28  in 1814.)
\par \b Schultes & Schultes fil.\plain\fs28 ,\i\b  Syst. Veg\plain\fs28 .
\par     Cf. L.,\i  Syst. Nat\plain\fs28 .
\par \b Schultes & Schultes fil.\plain\fs28 , \i\b Mantissa\plain\fs28 
\par \pard     J.A. & J.H. Schultes, \i Mantissa in Volumen primum [secundum, tertium] Systematis Vegetabilium\plain\fs28 . Stuttgardtiae. 1822-1827. (\b 1\plain\fs28  in 1822; \b 2\plain\fs28  in 1824;\b  3\plain\fs28  in 1827. Cf. F.A. Stafleu, \i Taxonomic Literature\plain\fs28  435 (1967).)
\par \b Schultz Bip.\plain\fs28 ,\i\b  Tanacet\plain\fs28 .
\par    C.H. Schultz, \i Ueber die Tanaceteen, mit besonderer Ber\'fccksichtigung der deutschen Arten\plain\fs28 . Neustadt an der Haardt. 1844.
\par \b Schultz, F.W\plain\fs28 ., \i\b Arch. Fl. Fr. Allem. \plain\fs28 
\par     F.W. Schultz, \i Archives de la Flore de France et d' Allemagne. \plain\fs28 Bitche, Hagenau & Deux-Ponts. 1842-1855. (Pp. 1-48 in 1842; pp. 49-76 in 1844; pp. 77-98 in 1846; pp. 99-154 in 1848; pp. 155-166 in 1850; pp. 167--194 in 1851 ; pp. 195-258 in 1852; pp. 259-282 in 1853; pp. 283-326 in 1854; pp. 327-350 in 1855.)
\par \pard \b Schultz, F.W.\plain\fs28 , \i\b Arch. Fl. Jour. Bot\plain\fs28 .
\par     F.W. Schultz, \i Archives de Flore. Journal botanique r\'e9dig\'e9 par F. Schultz\plain\fs28 . Wissembourg & Deidesheim. 1854-1869. ( Pp. 1-206 in 1854-1855; pp. 207-382 in 1856-1869.)
\par \b Schultz, F.W\plain\fs28 ., \i\b Beitr. Kenntn. Deutsch. Orob\plain\fs28 .
\par     F.W. Schultz, \i Beitrag zur Kenntniss der deutschen Orobanchen\plain\fs28 . Munchen. 1829.
\par \b Schutz, R.\plain\fs28 , \i\b Monogr. Phyteuma\plain\fs28 
\par     R. Schulz, \i Monographische Bearbeitung der Gattung \plain\fs28 Phyteuma. \i Inaugural-Dissertation der Universitat Zurich\plain\fs28 . Geisenheim a. Rhein. 1904.
\par \pard \b Schumacher\plain\fs28 ,\i\b  Enum. Pl. Saell\plain\fs28 .
\par     H.C.F. Schumacher, \i Enumeratio Plantarum in Partibus Saellandiae septentrionalis et orientalis\plain\fs28 . Hafniae. 1801-1803. (\b 1\plain\fs28  in 1801; \b 2\plain\fs28  in 1803.)
\par \b  Schur\plain\fs28 , \i\b Enum. Pl. Transs.\plain\fs28 
\par     P.J.F. Schur, \i Enumeratio Plantarum Transsilvaniae. \plain\fs28 Vindobonae. 1866.
\par \b Schur\plain\fs28 , \i\b Sert. Fl. Transs.\plain\fs28 
\par     P.J.F. Schur, \i Sertum Florae Transsilvaniae\plain\fs28 . Hermannstadt. 1853. (Also published as an extra part of\i  Verh. Mitt. Siebenb. Ver. Naturw\plain\fs28 . \b 4\plain\fs28  (1853) with the same pagination.)
\par \pard \b Schweigger & Koerte\plain\fs28 , \i\b Fl. Erlang.\plain\fs28 
\par     A.F. Schweigger & F. Koerte, \i  Flora erlangensis. \plain\fs28 Erlangae. 1811. (\b 1 & 2\plain\fs28  in 1811. \b 1\plain\fs28 : pp. 1-136, by A.F. Schweigger, were previously published in 1804 as\i\b Specimen Florae erlangensis; \plain\b\fs28 1\plain\fs28  : pp. 137-160, \i Addenda,\plain\fs28 by F. Koerte, and \b 2\plain\fs28 : pp. 1-143, by A.F. Schweigger & F. Koerte, first appeared in 1811. Cf. F. A. Stafleu & R.S. Cowan, \i Taxonomic Literature \plain\fs28 ed. 2,\b  5\plain\fs28 : 429 (1985).)
\par \pard \b  Schweinf.\plain\fs28 , \i\b Beitr. Fl. Aethiop.\plain\fs28 
\par    G.A. Schweinfurth, \i Beitrag zur Flora Aethiopiens. \plain\fs28 Berlin. 1867.
\par \b Scop.\plain\fs28 , \i\b Annus Hist.-Nat\plain\fs28 .
\par    G.A. Scopoli,\i  Annus I\plain\fs28  [-\i V\plain\fs28 ] \i Historico-naturalis.\plain\fs28  Lipsiae. 1769-1772. (\b 1-3\plain\fs28  in 1769; \b 4\plain\fs28  in 1770; \b 5\plain\fs28  in 1772. Cf. F.A. Stafleu, \i Taxonomic Literature\plain\fs28  440 (1967).)
\par \b Scop.\plain\fs28 , \i\b Delic. Fl. Insubr\plain\fs28 .
\par      J.A. Scopoli,\i  Deliciae Florae et Faunae insubricae\plain\fs28 . Pavia. 1786-1788. (\b 1\plain\fs28  &\b  2 \plain\fs28 in 1786; \b 3\plain\fs28  in 1788.)
\par \pard \b Scop.\plain\fs28 , \i\b Fl. Carn. \plain\fs28 
\par    J.A. Scopoli, \i Flora carniolica\plain\fs28 . Ed. 1. Viennae. 1760. (Generic names provided with a description or reference to earlier description validly published; no binary names for species.) Ed. 2. Viennae. 1771-1772. (\b 1\plain\fs28  in 1771, reissued 1772; \b 2\plain\fs28  in 1772. Cf. F.A. Stafleu & R.S. Cowan, \i Taxonomic Literature\plain\fs28  ed. 2, \b 5\plain\fs28 : 455 (1985).)
\par \b Sebastiani\plain\fs28 , \i\b  Rom. Pl\plain\fs28 . 
\par     A. Sebastiani, \i  Romanorum Plantarum Fasciculus primus (=1)\plain\fs28 . Romae. 1813.  \i Romanorum Plantarum Fasciculus alter \plain\fs28 (=2). Romae. 1815. 
\par \pard \b Sebastiani & Mauri\plain\fs28 , \i\b  Fl. Rom\plain\fs28 . 
\par    A. Sebastiani & E. Mauri,  \i Florae romanae Prodromus\plain\fs28 . Romae. 1818. 
\par \b Sebe\'f3k\plain\fs28 ,\i\b  Medico-Bot. Tatar.\plain\fs28 
\par     A. Sebe\'f3k de Szent-Mik\'f3s, \i Syn Theo Dissertatio inauguralis medico botanica de Tataria hungarica.\plain\fs28 Viennae. 1779.
\par  \b Seenus\plain\fs28 , \i\b Beschr. Reise Istr. Dalm\plain\fs28 .
\par     J. von Seenus, \i Beschreibung einer Reise durch Istrien und Dalmatien\plain\fs28 . Nurnberg & Altdorf. 1805.
\par \b Sendtner\plain\fs28 , \i\b Veg. Sudbayerns\plain\fs28 
\par \pard     O. Sendtner, \i Die Vegetations-Verhaltnisse Sudbayerns\plain\fs28 . M\'fcnchen. 1854.
\par \b Sennen\plain\fs28 , \i\b Diagn. Pl. Esp. Maroc\plain\fs28 .
\par      Fr\'e9re Sennen,\i  Diagnoses des Nouveautes parues dans les Exsiccata Plantes d'Espagne et du Maroc de 1928 \'e1 1935\plain\fs28 . 1936.
\par \b Sennen & Mauricio\plain\fs28 ,\i\b  Cat. Fl. Rif Or\plain\fs28 .
\par      Fr\'e9re Sennen & Fr\'e9re Mauricio, \i Catalogo de la Flora del Rif oriental\plain\fs28 . Melilla.1933.
\par \b Sernander\i  et al., Bot. Stad Kjellman\plain\fs28 
\par     J.R. Sernander, N. Svedelius & C.O. Nor\'e9n, \i Botaniska Studier till\'e4gnade F.R. Kjellman\plain\fs28 . Uppsala. 1906.
\par \pard \b  Seub\plain\fs28 ., \i\b Fl. Azor.\plain\fs28 
\par     M.A. Seubert,  \i Flora azorica, quam ex Collectionibus Schedisque Hochstetteri Patris et Filii elaboravit\plain\fs28  ...  Bonnae. 1844.
\par \b  Sibth.\plain\fs28 , \i\b Fl. Oxon.\plain\fs28  
\par     J. Sibthorp, \i Flora oxoniensis.\plain\fs28  Oxonii.  1794.
\par \b  Sibth. & Sm.\plain\fs28 , \i\b Fl. Graeca \plain\fs28 
\par    J. Sibthorp & J.E.  Smith, \i Flora graeca: sive Plantarum rariorum Historia, quas in Provinciis aut Insulis Graeciae legit, investigavit, et depingi curavit Johannes Sibthorp ... Characteres omnium, Descriptiones et Synonyma, elaboravit Jacobus Edvardus Smith \plain\fs28  [\b 1-7\plain\fs28 ] ..\i .elaboravit Johannes Lindley\plain\fs28  [\b 8-10\plain\fs28 ]. Londini. 1806-1840. (For dates see F. A. Stafleu & R.S. Cowan,\i  Taxonomic Literature\plain\fs28  ed. 2, \b 5\plain\fs28 : 579-580 (1985).)
\par \pard \b Sibth. & Sm.\plain\fs28 , \i\b Fl. Graec. Prodr.\plain\fs28 
\par     J. Sibthorp & J. E. Smith, \i Florae graecae Prodromus : sive Plantarum omnium Enumeratio, quas in Provinciis aut Insulis Graeciae invenit Johannes Sibthorp ... Characteres et Synonyma omnium cum Annotationibus elaboravit Jacobus Edvardus Smith\plain\fs28 . Londini. 1806-1816. (\b 1\plain\fs28 (\b 1\plain\fs28 ): pp. 1-218 in 1806 ; \b 1\plain\fs28 (\b 2\plain\fs28 ): pp. 219-442 in 1809 ; \b 2\plain\fs28 (\b 1\plain\fs28 ): pp. 1-210 in 1813; \b 2\plain\fs28 (\b 2\plain\fs28 ): pp. 211-422 in 1816. Cf. F.A. Stafleu & R.S. Cowan, \i Taxonomic Literature\plain\fs28 ed. 2, \b 5\plain\fs28 : 579 (1985).)
\par \pard \b Sieber\plain\fs28 , \i\b  Reise Kreta\plain\fs28  
\par     F.W. Sieber,  \i Reise nach der Insel Kreta im griechischen Archipelagus im Jahre 1817\plain\fs28 .  Leipzig & Sorau. 1823. (\b 1\plain\fs28  & \b 2\plain\fs28  in 1823.) 
\par \b Siebert &Voss\plain\fs28 , \i\b Vilmorin's Blumeng\'e4rtnerei\plain\fs28  
\par      A. Siebert & A. Voss, \i Vilmorin's Blumeng\'e4rtnerei\plain\fs28 . Berlin. 1894-1896. (\b 1\plain\fs28 : pp. 1-832 in 1894; pp. 833-1264 in 1895; pp. i-viii, (1)-(80) in 1896; \b 2\plain\fs28 : pp. 1-128 in 1895; pp. 129-224 in 1896. Cf. F.A. Stafleu, \i Taxonomic Literature\plain\fs28  485 (1967).) Comprises ed. 3 of J. Hartwig & T. Rumpler, \i Vilmorin's illustrierte Blumeng\'e4rtnerei\plain\fs28  (1875).
\par \pard \b  Siebold & Zucc\plain\fs28 ., \i\b Fl. Jap\plain\fs28 .
\par     P.F. von Siebold & J.G. Zuccarini, \i Flora Japonica\plain\fs28 . Lugduni Batavorum. 1835-1870. (\b 1\plain\fs28  : pp. 5-28 in 1835 ; pp. 29-40 in 1836 ; pp. 49--64 in 1837 or ?1838; pp. 65-72 in 1838; pp. 73-120 in 1839; pp. 121-140 in 1840; pp. 141-193 in 1841. \b 2\plain\fs28 : pp. 1-28 in 1842; pp. 29-44 in 1844; pp. 45-89 in 1870. Cf. F.A. Stafleu & R.S. Cowan,\i  Taxonomic Literature\plain\fs28  ed. 2,\b  5\plain\fs28 : 589 (1985).)
\par \b  Simmons\plain\fs28 , \i\b Vasc. Pl. Ellesmereland\plain\fs28 
\par \pard     H.G. Simmons, \i The vascular Plants in the Flora of Ellesmereland\plain\fs28 . Kristiania. 1906.
\par \b  Simonkai\plain\fs28 , \i\b Enum. Fl. Transs.\plain\fs28 
\par    L. von Simonkai, \i Enumeratio Florae transsilvanicae vesculosae critica\plain\fs28 . /\i  Erd\'e9ly ed\'e9nyes Fl\'f3r\'e1j\'e1nak belyesbitett Foglalata\plain\fs28 . Budapest. 1887. (Cf. F.A. Stafleu & R.S. Cowan, \i Taxonomic Literature\plain\fs28  ed. 2,\b  5\plain\fs28 : 610 (1985).)
\par \b  Sirj. & Lavrenko\plain\fs28 , \i\b Consp. Crit. Fl. Prov. Charkov\plain\fs28 .
\par     G.I. Sirjaev & E.M. Lavrenko,\i  Conspectus criticus Florae Provinciae charkoviensis\plain\fs28 . 1926 \'98\'93. (1 in 1926.)
\par \pard \b  Sloboda\plain\fs28 ,\i\b  Rostlinnictvi\plain\fs28 
\par     D. Sloboda, \i Rostlinnictvi cili N\'e1vod k snadn\'e9ma urceni a Pojmenov\'e1ni Rostlin v Cechach, Morave a jinych zemich rakousk\'e9hbo Mocnarstvi dom\'e1cich \plain\fs28 ... Praze (Praha). 1852.
\par \b Sm.\plain\fs28 ,  \i\b Bot. New. Holl\plain\fs28 . 
\par     J.E. Smith, \i  A Specimen of the Botany of New Holland\plain\fs28 . London. 1793-1795. (Pp. 1-24 in 1793; pp. 25-38 in 1794; pp. 39-54 in 1795. Cf. H.W. Rickett & F.A. Stafieu, \i  Taxon\plain\b\fs28  10\plain\fs28 : 142 (1961).) 
\par \b Sm.\plain\fs28 , \i\b Comp. Fl. Brit.\plain\fs28 
\par \pard    J.E. Smith, \i Compendium Florae britannicae\plain\fs28 . Ed. 1. Londini. 1800. German ed. Erlangae. 1801. Ed. 2. Londini. 1816. Ed. 3. Londini. 1818. Ed. 4.  Londini. 1825. Ed. 5. Londini. 1828. Ed. 6. Londini. 1829.
\par \b  Sm\plain\fs28 ., \i\b Engl. Fl\plain\fs28 . 
\par     J.E. Smith,  \i The English Flora\plain\fs28 .  Ed. 1. London. 1824-1828.   (\b 1\plain\fs28  & \i 2\plain\fs28  in 1824; \b 3\plain\fs28  in 1825; \b 4\plain\fs28  in 1828.) Ed. 2. London.1828-1830.(\b 1\plain\fs28  &\b  2\plain\fs28  in 1828;\b  3\plain\fs28  in 1829; \b 4\plain\fs28  in 1830.) Other volumes on Musci,  etc. 
\par \pard \b Sm.\plain\fs28 , \i\b Exot. Bot\plain\fs28 . 
\par     J.E. Smith,  \i Exotic Botany: consisting of coloured Figures and scientific Descriptions of such new, beautiful, or rare Plants as are worthy of Cultivation in the Gardens  of  Britain\plain\fs28 .  London. 1804-1808. (\b 1\plain\fs28 : pp. 1-7 in 1804; pp. 9-118 in 1805;\b  2\plain\fs28 : pp. 1-11, 15, 21-22 in 1805; pp. 13-14, 17-20, 23-112, 117-188 in 1806; pp. 121-122 in 1807; pp. 113-116, 119-120 in 1808.) 
\par \b  Sm.\plain\fs28 , \i\b Fl. Brit\plain\fs28 .
\par     J.E. Smith,\i\b  Flora britannica\plain\fs28 . Londini. 1800 - 1804. (\b 1\plain\fs28  : pp. 1-436 in 1800 ; \b 2\plain\fs28 : pp. 437-914 in 1800;\b  3\plain\fs28  in 1804. Cf. S.W. Greene, \i Jour. Soc. Bibl. Nat. Hist.\plain\fs28  \b 3\plain\fs28 : 281 (1957).)
\par \pard \b  Sm.\plain\fs28 , \i\b Pl. Icon. Ined.\plain\fs28 
\par     J.E. Smith, \i Plantarum Icones bactenus ineditae, plerumque ad Plantas in Herbario linnaeano conservatas delineatae\plain\fs28 . Londini. 1790-1791. (Fasc. \b 1\plain\fs28 : tt. 1-25 in 1789; fasc.\b  2\plain\fs28 : tt.  26-50 in 1790; fasc. 3: tt. 51-75 in 1791. Cf. F.A.  Stafleu, Taxon \b 12\plain\fs28 : 78 (1963).)
\par \b Sm.\plain\fs28 , \i\b Spicil. Bot\plain\fs28 .
\par      J.E. Smith, \i Spicilegium botanicum\plain\fs28 . Londini. 1791-1792. (\b 1\plain\fs28  in 1791; \b 2\plain\fs28  in 1792. Some copies with English title \i Gleanings of Botany\plain\fs28 ; text issued in Latin, English, or in both languages). Cf. F.A. Stafleu, \i Taxon\plain\b\fs28  12\plain\fs28 : 79 (1963).)
\par \pard \b Sm\plain\fs28 ., J., \i\b Ferns Brit. Foreign\plain\fs28 
\par      John Smith,\i  Ferns: British & foreign\plain\fs28 . London. 1866. Ed. 2. London. 1877, reissued 1879 and 1895 or 1896.
\par \b Sm., H.\plain\fs28 , \i\b Veg. Utveckl. Centralsvenska Hogfjalls\plain\fs28 .
\par      H. Smith, \i Vegetationen och dess Utvecklingshistoria i det centralsvenska Hogfjallsomradet\plain\fs28 . Uppsala & Stockholm. 1922. Comprises\i  Norrlandskt Handbibliotek\plain\b\fs28  9\plain\fs28 .
\par \b Smirnov, P.\plain\fs28 , \i\b Del. Sem. Horto Bot. Univ. Mosq\plain\fs28 .
\par      P.A. Smirnov, \i Delectus Seminum in Horto botanico Universitatis mosquensis\plain\fs28 .
\par \pard \b Sobol\plain\fs28 .,\i\b  Fl. Petrop\plain\fs28 .
\par     G. Sobolewski, \i Flora petropolitana\plain\fs28 . Petropoli. 1799.
\par \b Sommerf\plain\fs28 ., \i\b Suppl. Fl. Lapp\plain\fs28 .
\par      S.C. Sommerfelt, \i Supplementum Florae lapponicae quam edidit Dr. Georgius Wahlenberg\plain\fs28 . Christianiae. 1826.
\par \b So\'f3\plain\fs28 , \i\b Nom. Nov. Gen. Dactylorhiza\plain\fs28 
\par      R. de So\'f3, \i Nomina nova Generis Dactylorhiza\plain\fs28 . [Budapest.] 1962.
\par \b So\'f3\plain\fs28 ,\i\b  N\'f6v\'e9nyf\'f6ldrajz.\plain\fs28 
\par      R. de So\'f3,\i  N\'f6v\'e9nyf\'f6ldrajz\plain\fs28 . Ed. 1. Budapest. 1945. Ed. 2. Budapest. 1953. Ed. 3. Budapest. 1956. Ed. 4. Budapest. 1961.
\par \pard \b So\'f3\plain\fs28 , \i\b Omagiu Savulescu\plain\fs28 
\par      R. de So\'f3 et al., \i Omagiu lui T. Savulescu\plain\fs28 . 1959.
\par \b So\'f3\plain\fs28 , \i\b Syn. Syst. Geobot. Fl. Veg. Hung\plain\fs28 .
\par     R. de So\'f3, \i A magyar Fl\'f3ra \'e9s Veget\'e1ci\'f3 rendszertani-n\'f6v\'e9ny-f\'f6ldrajzi K\'e9zik\'f6nyve\plain\fs28 . /\i  Synopsis systematico-geobotanica Florae Vegetationisque Hungariae\plain\fs28 . Budapest.\b  1\plain\fs28  \'98\'93, 1964 \'98\'93 . (\b 1\plain\fs28  in 1964; \b 2\plain\fs28  in 1966;\b  3\plain\fs28  in 1968; \b 4\plain\fs28  in 1970; \b 5\plain\fs28  in 1973.)
\par \b So\'f3\plain\fs28 , \i\b Szek. Fl. Elomunk\plain\fs28 .
\par \pard     R. de So\'f3, \i A Szekelyfold Florajanak Elomunkalatai.\plain\fs28  /\i  Prodromus Florae Terrae Siculorum\plain\fs28 . Koloszvar. 1940.
\par \b So\'f3 & J\'e1v\plain\fs28 ., \i\b Magyar N\'f6v. K\'e9z\plain\fs28 .
\par     R. de So\'f3 & S. J\'e1vorka, \i A Magyar N\'f6v\'e9nyvil\'e1g K\'e9zik\'f6nyve\plain\fs28 . Budapest. 1951. (\b 1\plain\fs28  & \b 2\plain\fs28  in 1951.) 
\par \b Sowerby\plain\fs28 , \i\b Engl. Bot\plain\fs28 .
\par     J. Sowerby,\i  English Botany\plain\fs28 . Ed. 1. \i Text\plain\fs28  by J.E. Smith. London. 1790-1814. (\b 1-36\plain\fs28  in 1790-1814.)\i  Supplement\plain\fs28  by various authors. 1829-1866. (\b 1--5\plain\fs28  in 1829-1866.) Ed. 2. London. 1829-1846. (\b 1-12\plain\fs28  in 1829-1846.) Ed. 3[A]. London. 1847-1854. (\b 1-7\plain\fs28  in 1847-1854, being reissues of ed. 2, \b 1 7\plain\fs28 .) Ed. 3[B], with new descriptions by J.T.I. Boswell-Syme. London. 1863-1886. (\b 1-12\plain\fs28  in 1863-1886.) (For dates of all eds. cf. F.A. Stafleu & R.S. Cowan, \i Taxonomic Literature\plain\fs28  ed. 2, \b 5\plain\fs28 : 682-684 (1985).)
\par \pard \b Soyer-Willemet\plain\fs28 , \i\b Obs. Pl. Fr\plain\fs28 .
\par    H.F. Soyer-Willemet, \i Observations sur quelques Plantes de France, suivies du Catalogue des Plantes vasculaires des Environs de Nancy\plain\fs28 . Nancy. 1828.
\par \b Soyer-Willemet & Godron\plain\fs28 , \i\b Monogr. Silene Alg\'e9r\plain\fs28 .
\par    H.F. Soyer-Willemet & D. A. Godron, \i Monographie des \plain\fs28 Silene\i  del' Alg\'e9rie\plain\fs28 . Nancy. 1851. (Reprinted or preprinted from \i M\'e9m. Soc. Sci. Lettr. Arts Nancy\plain\fs28  \b 1850\plain\fs28 : 139--184 (1850).)
\par \b Spach\plain\fs28 , \i\b Hist. V\'e9g. (Phan.)\plain\fs28 
\par \pard    E. Spach,\i  Histoire naturelle des V\'e9g\'e9taux. Phan\'e9rogames\plain\fs28 . Paris. 1834-1848. (\b 1-3\plain\fs28  in 1834; \b 4\plain\fs28  in 1835; \b 5\plain\fs28  in 1836; \b 6--9\plain\fs28  in 1838; \b 10\plain\fs28  & \b 11\plain\fs28  in 1841; \b 12 & 13\plain\fs28  in 1846; \b 14\plain\fs28  in 1848; Atlas inparts, 1834-1847. For dates cf. F. A. Stafleu & R. S. Cowan, \i Taxonomic Literature\plain\fs28  ed. 2, \b 5\plain\fs28 : 767 (1985).)
\par \b Sprengel\plain\fs28 , \i\b Fl. Hal\plain\fs28 .
\par    C.(K.)P.J. Sprengel, \i Florae halensis Tentamen novum\plain\fs28 . Ed. 1. Halae Saxonum. 1806. Ed. 2. Halae. 1832.\i\b  Mant.\plain\fs28 , \i Mantissa prima Florae balensis, addita novarum Plantarum Centuria\plain\fs28 . Halae. 1807. Ed. 2. Halae. 1832. \i\b Mant. Alt.\plain\fs28 , \i Mantissa altera\plain\fs28 , also titled \i Observationes botanicae ad Floram balensem. Mantissa secunda\plain\fs28 . Halae. 1811. \i Supplementum tertium, or Annus botanicus\plain\fs28 , by F.W. Wallroth. Halae. 1815. (For dates Cf. F.A. Stafleu & R.S. Cowan, \i Taxonomic Literature\plain\fs28  ed. 2,\b  5\plain\fs28 : 810, 811 & 814 (1985).)
\par \pard \b Sprengel\plain\fs28 , \i\b Hist. Rei Herb.\plain\fs28 
\par    C.(K.)P.J. Sprengel, \i Historia Rei Herbariae\plain\fs28 . Amsteldami. 1807-1808. (\b 1\plain\fs28  in 1807 or 1808; \b 2\plain\fs28  in 1808.) Another issue in 1808. (\b 1\plain\fs28  & \b 2\plain\fs28  in 1808).) Cf. F. A. Stafleu & R. S. Cowan, \i Taxonomic Literature\plain\fs28 ed. 2, \b 5\plain\fs28 : 810 (1985).
\par \b Sprengel\plain\fs28 , \i\b Ind. Sem. Horti Halensis\plain\fs28 
\par      \i Index Seminum in Horto botanico halensis collectorum\plain\fs28 . Halae. By K.P.J. Sprengel in 1809-1811, 1813 & 1814, 1818 & 1828.
\par \pard \b Sprengel\plain\fs28 , \i\b  Neue Entdeck\plain\fs28 . 
\par     K.P.J. Sprengel, \i  Neue Entdeckungen im ganzen Umfang der Pflanzenkunde\plain\fs28 .  Leipzig. 1820-1822. (\b 1\plain\fs28  &\b  2\plain\fs28  in 1820; \b 3\plain\fs28  in 1822. Cf. H.W. Rickett & F.A. Stafleu,  \i Taxon\plain\b\fs28  10\plain\fs28 : 143 (1961).) 
\par \b Sprengel\plain\fs28 ,\i\b  Novi Provent\plain\fs28 .
\par    C.(K.)P.J. Sprengel, \i Novi Proventus Hortorum academicorum halensis et berolinensis. Centuria Specierum minus cognitarum, quae vel per Annum 1818 in Horto halensi et berolinensi floruerunt, vel siccae missae fuerunt\plain\fs28 . Halae. 1818. (Cf. F.A. Stafleu & R.S. Cowan, \i Taxonomic Literature\plain\fs28  ed. 2, \b 5\plain\fs28 : 812 (1985).)
\par \pard \b Sprengel\plain\fs28 , \i\b Pugillus\plain\fs28 
\par    C.(K.)P.J. Sprengel, \i Plantarum minus cognitarum Pugillus primus [secundus]\plain\fs28 . Halae. 1813-1815. (\b 1\plain\fs28  in 1813; \b 2\plain\fs28  in 1815.)
\par \b Sprengel\plain\fs28 ,  \i\b Sp. Umb\plain\fs28 . 
\par     K.P.J. Sprengel,  \i Species Umbelliferarum minus cognitae, illustratae\plain\fs28 .  Halae. 1818. 
\par \b Sprengel\plain\fs28 , \i\b Syst. Veg\plain\fs28 .
\par    Cf. L.,\i  Syst. Nat\plain\fs28 .
\par \b St-Amans\plain\fs28 ,\i\b  Fl. Agen\plain\fs28 .
\par    J.F.B. de Saint-Amans, \i Flore agenaise\plain\fs28 . Agen. 1821.
\par \pard \b Stankov & Taliev\plain\fs28 , \i\b Opred Vyss. Rast. Evrop. SSSR\plain\fs28 
\par    S.S. Stankov & V.I. Taliev, ********** ****** ******* ************ ***** \i CCCP\plain\fs28  [\i Opredelitel ' vyssikh Rastenij Evropejskoj Casti SSSR\plain\fs28 ]. Ed. 1. Moskva. 1949. Ed. 2. Moskva. 1957.
\par \b Stearn & P.H. Davis\plain\fs28 , \i\b Peonies of Greece\plain\fs28 
\par    W.T. Stearn & P.H. Davis,\i  Peonies of Greece: a taxonomic and historical Survey of the Genus\plain\fs28  Paeonia\i  in Greece\plain\fs28 . Kifissia. 1984.
\par \b Stechm\plain\fs28 ., \i\b Artem\plain\fs28 .
\par \pard    J. P. Stechrnann, \i Dissertatio inauguralis botanico-medica de Artemisiis\plain\fs28 . Goettingae. 1775.
\par \b Steele\plain\fs28 , \i\b  Handb. Field Bot\plain\fs28 . 
\par     W.E. Steele,\i  A Handbook of Field Botany, comprising the flowering Plants and Ferns indigenous to the British Isles\plain\fs28 .  Dublin. 1847. 
\par \b Stefani, Major & W. Barbey\plain\fs28 ,\i\b  Karpathos\plain\fs28 
\par      C. de Stefani, C.J.F. Major & W. Barbey-Boissier, \i Karpathos. \'c9tude geologique, paleontologique et botanique\plain\fs28 . Lausanne. 1895.
\par \pard \b Stefani, Major & W. Barbey\plain\fs28 , \i\b Samos\plain\fs28 
\par    C. de Stefani, C.I.F. Major & W. Barbey-Boissier,\i  Samos. \'c9tude g\'e9ologique, pal\'e9ontologique et botanique\plain\fs28 . Lausanne. 1891 (title page) or 1892. Cf. F.A. Stafleu & R.S. Cowan, \i Taxonomic Literature\plain\fs28  ed. 2,\b  5\plain\fs28 : 867 (1985).
\par \b Stef\'e1nsson\plain\fs28 , \i\b  Fl. \'cdsl.\plain\fs28  
\par      S. Stef\'e1nsson, \i  Fl\'f3ra \'cdslands\plain\fs28 .  Ed. 1. Kaupmannah\'f6fn. 1901. Ed. 2. Kaupmannah\'f6fn. 1924. Ed. 3 by S. Steind\'f3rsson. Akureyri. 1948. 
\par \b Sternb\plain\fs28 ., \i\b Revis. Saxifr\plain\fs28 .
\par \pard    K.(C.)M. von Sternberg,\i  Revisio Saxifragarum Iconibus illustrata.\plain\fs28 Ratisbonae. 1810. \i Suppl.\plain\b\fs28  1\plain\fs28 . Ratisbonae. 1822. \i Suppl\plain\fs28 . \b 2\plain\fs28 . Pragae. 1831.
\par \b Steudel\plain\fs28 , \i\b Nomencl. Bot\plain\fs28 .
\par    E.G. von Steudel, \i Nomenclator botanicus\plain\fs28 . Ed. 1. Stuttgardtiae & Tuebingae. 1821-1824. (\b 1\plain\fs28  & \b 2\plain\fs28  in 1821 ; \b 3\plain\fs28  in 1824.) Ed. 2, titled \i Nomenclator botanicus, seu Synonymia Plantarum universalis enumerans\plain\fs28  ... Stuttgartiae & Tuebingae. 1840-1841. (\b 1\plain\fs28  in 1840; \b 2\plain\fs28 : pp. 1-48 in 1840; p. 49-810 in 1841. (Cf. F.A. Stafleu & R.S. Cowan, \i Taxonomic Literature\plain\fs28  ed. 2,\b  5\plain\fs28 : 910 (1985).)
\par \pard \b Steudel\plain\fs28 , \i\b Syn. Pl. Glum\plain\fs28 .
\par      E.G. von Steudel, \i Synopsis Plantarum glumacearum\plain\fs28 . Stuttgartiae. 1855-1856. (\b 1\plain\fs28 : pp. 1-80 in 1853; pp. 81 475 in 1854; \b 2\plain\fs28 : pp. 1-80 in 1854; pp. 81-348 in 1855. Cf. F.A. Stafleu, \i Taxonomic Literature\plain\fs28  458-459 (1967).)
\par \b St-Hil.\plain\fs28 , \i\b  Fl. Bras. Mer\plain\fs28 . 
\par     A.C.F.P. de Saint-Hilaire, \i  Flora Brasiliae meridionalis.\plain\fs28  Parisis. 1825-1834. (Quarto edition.\b  1\plain\fs28 : pp. 1-168 in 1825; pp. 169-240 in 1827; pp. 241-400 in 1828; \b 2\plain\fs28 : pp. 1-116 in 1829; pp. 117-276 in 1830; pp. 277-356 in 1832; pp. 357-384 in 1833;\b  3\plain\fs28 : pp. 1-84, 121-160 in 1833; pp. 86-120 in 1834. Cf. H.W. Rickett & F.W. Stafleu, \i  Taxon\plain\fs28  \b 10\plain\fs28 : 139 (1961).) Folio edition published at same time. 
\par \pard \b Stoj. & Stefanov\plain\fs28 , \i\b Fl. Balg\plain\fs28 .
\par    N. Stojanov & B. Stefanov, \i Flore de la Bulgarie\plain\fs28 . Ed. 1. Sofija. 1924-1925.(\b 1\plain\fs28 : pp. 1-608 in 1924; \b 2\plain\fs28 , pp. 609-1367, i-x in 1925.) Ed. 2, titled ******************* [\i Flora na Balgarija\plain\fs28 ]. Sofija. 1933. Ed. 3. Sofija. 1948. Ed. 4, with alternative title \i Flora bulgarica\plain\fs28 , by N. Stojanov, B. Stefanov & B. Kitanov. Sofija. 1966-1967. (\b 1\plain\fs28  in 1966; \b 2\plain\fs28  in 1967.)
\par \b Stokes\plain\fs28 , \i\b Arr. Brit. Pl\plain\fs28 .
\par \pard    Cf. With., \i Arr. Brit. Pl\plain\fs28 .
\par \b Strid\plain\fs28 , \i\b Mount. Fl. Gr\plain\fs28 .
\par    P.A.K. Strid, \i Mountain Flora of Greece\plain\fs28 . Cambridge & Edinburgh. 1986-1991. (\b 1\plain\fs28 , Cambridge in 1986;\b  2\plain\fs28 , Edinburgh in 1991.)
\par \b Sturm\plain\fs28 ,\i\b  Deutschl. Fl\plain\fs28 .
\par    J. Sturm, \i Deutschlands Flora\plain\fs28 . N\'fcrnberg. 1796-1862. (\b 1-21\plain\fs28  in 1796 1855; \i Caricologica germanica\plain\fs28 :\b  47\plain\fs28  in 1827 ; \b 50\plain\fs28  in 1827 ; \b 53\plain\fs28  in 1829 ; \b 55\plain\fs28  in 1830 ; \b 57\plain\fs28  in 1831 ; \b 61\plain\fs28  in 1833 ; \b 69\plain\fs28  in 1835. No Heften dealing with Pteridophytes or Spermatophyta were published after 1855. For dates cf. F. A. Stafleu & R. S. Cowan, \i Taxonomic Literature\plain\fs28  ed. 2, \b 6\plain\fs28 : 66-72 (1986).) Ed. 2. Stuttgart. 1900-1907. (For dates cf. F. A. Stafleu & R. S. Cowan, \i T'axonomic Literature\plain\fs28 ed. 2,\b  6\plain\fs28 : 71 (1986).) \b 1, 4-15\plain\fs28  by E.H. L. Krause; \b 2\plain\fs28  by E. R. Missbach & E.H. L. Krause; \b 3\plain\fs28  by K. G. Lutz.
\par \pard \b Sudre\plain\fs28 ,\i\b   Bat. Eur\plain\fs28 . 
\par     H. Sudre, \i  Batotheca europaea\plain\fs28 . Albi. 1903-1917. (1-16 in 1903; pp. 17-35 in 1904; pp. 37-48 in 1905; pp. 51-62 in 1906; pp. 63-74 in 1907; pp. 75-84 in 1908; pp. 85-92 in 1909; pp. 93-100 in 1910; pp. 101-107 in 1911; pp. 109-116 in 1912; pp. 117-122 in 1913; pp. 123-130 in 1914; pp. 131-138 in 1915; pp. 139-145 in 1916; pp. 147-153 in 1917.) 
\par \b Sudre\plain\fs28 ,  \i\b Fl. Toulous\plain\fs28 .
\par     H. Sudre, \i  Florule toulousaine\plain\fs28 .  Paris, Toulouse & Albi. 1907. 
\par \pard \b Sudre\plain\fs28 ,\i\b  Hier. Centre Fr\plain\fs28 .
\par     H. Sudre, \i Les\plain\fs28  Hieracium\i  du Centre de la France\plain\fs28 . Albi. 1902.
\par \b Sudre\plain\fs28 , \i\b  Rubi Eur.\plain\fs28  
\par     H. Sudre,  \i Rubi Europae vel Monographia Iconibus illustrata Ruborum Europae\plain\fs28 .  Paris. 1908-1913. (Pp. 1-40 in 1908; pp. 41-80 in 1909; pp. 81-120 in 1910; pp. 121-160 in 1911; pp. 161- 200 in 1912; pp. 201-294 in 1913.) 
\par \b Suter\plain\fs28 , \i\b Fl. Helv\plain\fs28 .
\par    J.R. Suter,\i  Flora helvetica\plain\fs28 . Ed. 1. Turici. 1802. (\b 1\plain\fs28  &\b  2\plain\fs28  in 1802.) Ed. 2. Turici. 1822. (\b 1\plain\fs28  & \b 2\plain\fs28  in 1822.)
\par \pard \b Swartz\plain\fs28 , \i\b Nov. Gen. Sp. Pl.\plain\fs28 
\par     O.P. Swartz, \i Nova Genera & Species Plantarum, seu Prodromus Descriptionum Vegetabilium maximam Partem incognitorum guae sub Itinere in Indiam occidentalem Annis 1783-87 digessit . .\plain\fs28  . Holmiae, Upsaliae & Aboae. 1788.
\par \b Swartz\plain\fs28 , \i\b Summa Veg. Scand\plain\fs28 .
\par     O.P. Swartz, \i Summa Vegetabilium Scandinaviae systematice coordinatorum\plain\fs28 . Holmiae. 1814.
\par \b Sweet\plain\fs28 , \i\b Brit. Fl. Gard\plain\fs28 .
\par     R. Sweet, \i The British Flower Garden\plain\fs28 . London. 1823-1838. (Ser. 1, comprising \b 1-3\plain\fs28 ; ser. 2, comprising \b 4-7\plain\fs28 . Ser. 1: tt. 1-40 in 1823; tt. 41-88 in 1824; tt. 89-136 in 1825; tt. 137-184 in 1826; tt. 185-232 in 1827; tt. 233-280 in 1828; tt. 281-300 in 1829; ser. 2: tt. 1-28 in 1829; tt. 29-76 in 1830; tt. 77-124 in 1831; tt. 125-172 in 1832; tt. 173-220 in 1833; tt. 221-268 in 1834; tt. 269-316 in 1835; tt. 317-364 in 1836; tt. 365-412 in 1837. Cf. F.A. Stafleu, \i Taxonomic Literature\plain\fs28  464 (1967).)
\par \pard \b Sweet\plain\fs28 , \i\b  Cistin\plain\fs28 . 
\par     R. Sweet, \i  Cistineae. The natural Order of\plain\fs28  Cistus\i  or Rock-Rose\plain\fs28 . London. 1825-1830. (Tt. 1-12 in 1825; tt. 13-36 in 1826; tt. 37-60 in 1827; tt. 61-84 in 1828; tt. 85-108 in 1829; tt. 109-112  in 1830.) 
\par \b Sweet\plain\fs28 , \i\b Hort. Brit\plain\fs28 .
\par    R. Sweet,\i  Hortus britannicus\plain\fs28 . Ed. 1. London. 1826. Reissued 1827. Ed. 2. London. 1830. Ed. 3, edit. G. Don. London. 1839. Cf. F.A. Stafleu & R.S. Cowan, \i Taxonomic Literature\plain\fs28  ed. 2, \b 6\plain\fs28 : 124 (1986).
\par \pard \b Syme\plain\fs28 , \i\b Engl. Bot\plain\fs28 .
\par    Cf. Sowerby, \i Engl. Bot.\plain\fs28 
\par \b Symons\plain\fs28 , \i\b Syn. Pl. Brit\plain\fs28 .
\par     J. Symons, \i Synopsis Plantarum Insulis britannicis indigenarum\plain\fs28 . Londini. 1798.
\par \b Syreistschikov\plain\fs28 ,\i\b  Ill. Fl. Mosk. Gub\plain\fs28 .
\par     D.P. Syreistschikov, **************** ***** ********* ******** [\i Illjustrirovannaja Flora Moskovskoj Gubernii\plain\fs28 ]. Moskva. 1906-1914. (\b 1\plain\fs28  in 1906; \b 2\plain\fs28  in 1907; \b 3\plain\fs28  in 1910;\b  4\plain\fs28  in 1914 )
\par \b Szafer, Kulcz. & Pawl\plain\fs28 .,\i\b  Rosl. Polskie\plain\fs28 
\par \pard      W. Szafer, S. Kulczynski & B. Pawlowski, \i Rosliny Polskie\plain\fs28 . Warszawa. 1953.
\par \b Takht.\plain\fs28 , \i\b Krasnaja Kniga\plain\fs28 
\par    A.L. Takhtadzhan (ed.), ******************************************************************************* [\i Krasnaja Kniga: dikorastuscie Vidy Flory SSSR nuuzdajusciesja v okhrane\plain\fs28 ]. / \i Red Book: native Plant Species to be protected in tbe USSR\plain\fs28 . Leningrad. 1975.
\par \b Tausch\plain\fs28 ,\i\b   Hort. Canal\plain\fs28 . 
\par     I.F. Tausch, \i  Hortus canalius, seu Plantarum rariorum, quae in Horto illustrissimi, ac excellentissimi Josephi Malabaila Comitis de Canal coluntur, Icones et Descriptiones\plain\fs28 . Pragae. 1823-1825. (\b 1\plain\fs28 (\b 1\plain\fs28 ) in 1823; \b 1\plain\fs28 (\b 2\plain\fs28 ) in ?1825. Cf. F. Widder, \i Phyton\plain\fs28  (\i Austria\plain\fs28 ) \b 1\plain\fs28 :  258-268 (1949).) 
\par \pard \b Ten.\plain\fs28 ,\i\b  App. Ind. Sem. Horti Neap\plain\fs28 .
\par      M. Tenore, \i Appendix ad Indicem Seminum Horti regii neapolitani pro Anno 1827\plain\fs28 . Napoli. 1827.
\par \b Ten.\plain\fs28 ,\i\b  Cat. Piante Orto Bot. Napoli\plain\fs28 
\par     M. Tenore, \i Catalogo delle Piante che si coltivano nel r. Orto botanico di Napoli\plain\fs28 . Napoli. 1845.
\par \b Ten.\plain\fs28 ,\i\b  Cat. Pl. Hort. Neap\plain\fs28 .
\par     M. Tenore,\i  Catalogus Plantarum Horti regii neapolitani ad Annum 1813\plain\fs28 . Neapoli. 1813. \i\b App\plain\fs28 ., \i Appendix\plain\fs28 . Ed. 1. Neapoli. 1815. Ed. 2. Neapoli. 1819.
\par \pard \b Ten.\plain\fs28 , \i\b Corso Bot. Lez.\plain\fs28 
\par    M. Tenore, \i Corso delle botaniche Lezione\plain\fs28 . Ed. 1. Napoli. 1806-1822. (\b 1\plain\fs28  in 1806;\b  2\plain\fs28  in 1810; \b 3\plain\fs28  in 1821 ; \b 4\plain\fs28  in 1822. Cf. F.A. Stafleu & R.S. Cowan, \i Taxonomic Literature\plain\fs28  ed.2, \b 6\plain\fs28 : 213-214 (1986). Also later editions.
\par \b Ten.\plain\fs28 , \i\b Fl. Nap\plain\fs28 .
\par    M. Tenore,\i  Flora napolitana\plain\fs28 . Napoli. 1811-1838. (\b 1\plain\fs28  in 1811-1815, including \i\b Prodr\plain\fs28 ., \i Prodromo della Flora napolitana\plain\fs28  followed by \i\b Suppl. 1\plain\fs28 , \i Supplimento primo\plain\fs28  and \i\b Suppl. 2\plain\fs28 ,\i  Supplimento secondo\plain\fs28  with continuous pagination; \b 2\plain\fs28  in 1820, including \i\b Prodr. Suppl. 3\plain\fs28 , \i Prodromo della Flora napolitana, Supplimento terzo\plain\fs28 ; \b 3\plain\fs28  in 1824 1829, including reprint of\i\b  Prodr. Suppl. 4\plain\fs28 , \i Prodromo della Flora napolitana, Supplimento quarto\plain\fs28 ; \b 4\plain\fs28  in 1830, including \i\b Syll\plain\fs28 .,\i  Florae neapolitanae Sylloge\plain\fs28  (reprinted separately in 1831 as \i Sylloge Plantarum vascularium Florae neapolitanae\plain\fs28 ) followed by\i\b  Syll. App. 1.\plain\i\fs28  Appendix 1\plain\fs28  (\i Addenda et Emendanda\plain\fs28 ) and \i\b Syll. App. 2\plain\fs28 , \i Appendix 2\plain\fs28  (\i Addenda et Emendanda altera\plain\fs28 ) with continuous pagination, and \i\b Syll. App. 3\plain\fs28 ,\i  Ad Florae neapolitanae Plantarum vascularium Syllogem Appendix tertia\plain\fs28 ; \b 5\plain\fs28  in 1835-1838, including \i\b Syll. App. 4\plain\fs28 , \i Ad Florae neapolitanae Syllogem Appendix quarta\plain\fs28 .) The included works were in most cases reprinted separately later, with different pagination. The \i\b Fl. Neap. Syll\plain\fs28 . of 1831 is cited in \b 4\plain\fs28 , 1830. Cf. F.A. Stafleu & R.S. Cowan, \i Taxonomic Literature\plain\fs28  ed. 2, \b 6\plain\fs28 : 213-214 (1986).
\par \pard \b Ten.\plain\fs28 , \i\b Fl. Neap. Prodr. App. Quinta\plain\fs28 
\par      M. Tenore, \i Ad Florae neapolitanae Prodromum Appendix quinta\plain\fs28 . Neapoli. 1826. This work was never included in the volumes of \i Flora napolitana\plain\fs28 .
\par \b Ten\plain\fs28 ., \i\b Fl. Neap. Syll. App. Quinta\plain\fs28 
\par      M. Tenore, \i Ad Florae neapolitanae Syllogem Appendix quinta. Napoli\plain\fs28 . 1842.
\par \b Ten\plain\fs28 ., \i\b Fl. Neap. Syll\plain\fs28 .
\par     Cf. \i Ten., F1. Nap\plain\fs28 .
\par \b Ten.\plain\fs28 , \i\b Ind. Sem. Horti Neap\plain\fs28 .
\par     M. Tenore, or M. Tenore & G. Gussone, \i Index Seminum Horti botanici neapolitani\plain\fs28 . Neapoli. 1825-1840.
\par \pard \b Ten\plain\fs28 ., \i\b Mem. Crochi Fl. Nap\plain\fs28 .
\par     M. Tenore,\i  Memoria sulle Specie e Varieta di Crochi della Flora napolitana\plain\fs28 . Napoli.1826.
\par \b Ten\plain\fs28 .,\i\b  Prodr. Fl. Nap\plain\fs28 .
\par     Cf. Ten., \i Fl. Nap\plain\fs28 .; \i\b Prodr. Suppl. 4\plain\fs28  was published in 1823, and later reprinted in \i Fl. Nap\plain\fs28 . For \i Suppl\plain\fs28 .\b  5\plain\fs28  cf. Ten., \i Fl. Neap. Prodr. App. Quinta\plain\fs28 .
\par \b Ten.\plain\fs28 , \i\b Sem. 1830 Coll. Hort. Bot. Neap\plain\fs28 .
\par      \i Semina Anno 1830 collecta, quae Hortus botanicus neapolitanus pro mutua Commutatione offert\plain\fs28 . By M. Tenore in 1830 etc.
\par \pard \b Ten.\plain\fs28 , \i\b Succ. Relaz. Viagg. Abruzzo\plain\fs28 
\par      M. Tenore, \i Succinta Relazione del Viaggio fatto in Abruzzo ed in alcune Parti dello Stato pontifico\plain\fs28 . Napoli. 1832.
\par \b Ten.\plain\fs28 , \i\b Viagg. Calabr\plain\fs28 .
\par     M. Tenore, \i Viaggio in alcuni Luoghi della Basilicata e della Calabria citeriore effettuato nel 1826\plain\fs28 . Napoli. 1827.
\par \b Ten. & Guss.\plain\fs28 , \i\b  Ind. Sem. Horti Neap.\plain\fs28 
\par     Cf. Ten., \i Ind. Sem. Horti Neap\plain\fs28 .
\par \b Texidor\plain\fs28 , \i\b  Apunt. Fl. Esp\plain\fs28 .
\par \pard     J. Texidor y Cos, \i  Apuntes para la Flora de Espa\'f1a\plain\fs28 . Madrid. 1869.
\par \b Thell.\plain\fs28 ,\i\b  Fl. Adv. Montpellier\plain\fs28 
\par     A. Thellung, \i La Flore adventice de Montpellier\plain\fs28 . Cherbourg. 1912.
\par \b Thompson, Z.\plain\fs28 , \i\b Hist. Vermont\plain\fs28 
\par      Z. Thompson, \i History of Vermont, natural, civil, and statistical\plain\fs28 . Burlington, Vermont. 1842. (\b 1-3\plain\fs28  in 1842.)
\par \b Thore\plain\fs28 , \i\b Essai Chlor. Land\plain\fs28 .
\par    J. Thore,\i  Essai d' une Chloris du D\'e9partement des Landes\plain\fs28 . Dax. 1803.
\par \pard \b Thouars\plain\fs28 ,\i\b  M\'e9lang. Bot\plain\fs28 .
\par    L.M.A. Aubert du Petit-Thouars,\i  M\'e9langes de Botanique et des Voyages\plain\fs28 . Paris. 1811.
\par \b Thuill\plain\fs28 ., \i\b Fl. Paris\plain\fs28 
\par    J.L. Thuillier, \i La Flore des Environs de Paris\plain\fs28 . Ed. 1. Paris. 1790. Ed. 2. Paris. 1799. Reissued 1824.
\par \b Thunb.\plain\fs28 , \i\b  Diss. Hydrocot\plain\fs28 .
\par      C.P. Thunberg,\i   Dissertatio botanica de Hydrocotyle\plain\fs28 . Upsaliae. 1798.
\par \b Thunb\plain\fs28 .,\i\b  Fl. Jap\plain\fs28 .
\par      C.P. Thunberg, \i  Flora japonica\plain\fs28 . Lipsiae. 1784.
\par \pard \b Thunb\plain\fs28 ., \i\b Nova Gen. Pl\plain\fs28 .
\par    C.P. Thunberg, \i Nova Genera Plantarum\plain\fs28 . Upsaliae. 1781-1801. (\b 1\plain\fs28  in 1781; \b 2\plain\fs28  in 1782; \b 3\plain\fs28  in 1783; \b 4\plain\fs28  & \b 5\plain\fs28  in 1784; \b 6\plain\fs28  & \b 7\plain\fs28  in 1792; \b 8\plain\fs28  & \b 9\plain\fs28  in 1798; \b 10-12\plain\fs28  in 1800; \b 13-16\plain\fs28  in 1801.)
\par \b Thunb.\plain\fs28 ,\i\b  Prodr. Pl. Cap\plain\fs28 .
\par    C.P. Thunberg, \i Prodromus Plantarum capensium\plain\fs28 . Upsaliae. 1794-1800. (Pars prior, pp. i-xii, 1--84 in 1794; pars posterior, pp. i-viii, 85--192 in 1800.)
\par \pard \b Thwaites\plain\fs28 , \i\b Enum. Pl. Zeyl\plain\fs28 .
\par      G.H.K. Thwaites, \i Enumeratio Plantarum Zeylaniae\plain\fs28  . /\i  An Enumeration of Ceylon Plants\plain\fs28 . London. 1858-1864. (Pp. 1-80 in 1858; pp. 81-160 in 1859; pp. 161-240 in 1860; pp. 241-320 in 1861; pp. 321-483 in 1864. Cf. F.A. Stafleu, \i Taxonomic Literature\plain\fs28  469 470 (1967).)
\par \b Tineo\plain\fs28 , \i\b Cat. Pl. Horti Panorm\plain\fs28 .
\par     V. Tineo, \i Catalogus Plantarum Horti regii panormitani ad Annum 1827\plain\fs28 . Panormi.1827.
\par \b Tineo\plain\fs28 , \i\b Pl. Rar. Sic. Pug\plain\fs28 .
\par \pard    V. Tineo, \i Plantarum rariorum Siciliae minus cognitarum Pugillus primus\plain\fs28 . Panormi. 1817.
\par \b Tod.\plain\fs28 , \i\b Fl. Sicula Exsicc\plain\fs28 .
\par    A. Todaro, \i Flora sicula Exsiccata\plain\fs28 . Palermo. 1864. (The work contains a list of names for numbers 1-200, but 1600 exsiccatae numbers were issued from 1864 onwards.)
\par \b Tod.\plain\fs28 , \i\b Ind. Sem. Horti Panorm\plain\fs28 .
\par    \i  Index Seminum Horti regii botanici panormitani\plain\fs28 . Panormi. By A. Todaro in 1860.
\par \b Tolm.\plain\fs28 , \i\b Fl. Arct. URSS\plain\fs28 
\par \pard    A.I. Tolmatchev,\i  Flora arctica URSS.\plain\fs28  / ********************* [\i Arkticeskaja Flora SSSR\plain\fs28 ]. Moskva & Leningrad. 1960-1987.( \b 1\plain\fs28  in 1960; \b 2\plain\fs28  in 1964; \b 3\plain\fs28  in 1966; \b 4\plain\fs28  in 1963; \b 5\plain\fs28  in 1966; \b 6\plain\fs28  in 1971 ; \b 8\plain\fs28 (\b 1\plain\fs28 ) in 1980; \b 8\plain\fs28 (\b 2\plain\fs28 ) in 1983; \b 9\plain\fs28 (\b 1\plain\fs28 ) in 1984; \b 9\plain\fs28 (\b 2\plain\fs28 ) in 1986; \b 10\plain\fs28  in 1987.)
\par \b Tommasini\plain\fs28 , \i\b Veg. Isole Veglia\plain\fs28 
\par      M.G.S. de Tommasini,\i  Sulle Vegetazione den'Isola di Veglia\plain\fs28 . Trieste. 1875.
\par \pard \b Torrey\plain\fs28 , \i\b Cat. Pl. New York\plain\fs28 
\par     J. Torrey, \i A Catalogue of Plants growing spontaneously within thirty Miles of the City of New-York\plain\fs28 . Albany. 1819.
\par \b Torrey\plain\fs28 , \i\b Fl. N. York\plain\fs28 
\par    J. Torrey, \i A Flora of the State of New York\plain\fs28 . Albany. 1843. (\b 1\plain\fs28  & \b 2\plain\fs28  in 1843 but \b 1 \plain\fs28 dated Dec. 1842. Cf. F. A. Stafleu & R. S. Cowan, \i Taxonomic Literature\plain\fs28  ed. 2,\b  6\plain\fs28 : 406 (1986).)
\par \b Torrey & A. Gray\plain\fs28 , \i\b Fl. N. Amer\plain\fs28 .
\par \pard   J. Torrey & A. Gray,\i  A Flora of North America\plain\fs28 . New York & London. 1838-1843. (\b 1\plain\fs28 : pp. 1-360 in 1838; pp. 361-711 in 1840; \b 2\plain\fs28 : pp. 1-184 in 1841 ; pp. 185-392 in 1842; pp. 293-504 in 1843. Cf. F.A. Stafieu & R. S. Cowan, \i Taxonomic Literature\plain\fs28  ed. 2, \b 6\plain\fs28 : 405 (1986).)
\par \b Tourlet\plain\fs28 , \i\b Cat. Pl. Indre Loire\plain\fs28 
\par      E.-H. Tourlet, \i Catalogue raisonn\'e9 des Plantes vasculaires du Departement d'Indre-et-Loire\plain\fs28 . Paris & Tours. 1908.
\par \pard \b Tratt\plain\fs28 ., \i\b Ausgem. Taf. Arch. Gewachsk\plain\fs28 .
\par     L. Trattinick, \i Ausgemalte Tafeln aus dem Archiv der Gewachskunde\plain\fs28 . Wien. 1812-1814. (\b 1\plain\fs28  in 1812;\b  2\plain\fs28  in 1813;\b  3-4\plain\fs28  in 1814.)
\par \b Tratt.\plain\fs28 , \i\b Arch. Gew\'e4chsk\plain\fs28 .
\par    L. Trattinick,\i  Archiv der Gew\'e4chskunde\plain\fs28 . Wien. 1811-1818. (Uncoloured plates ed.: \b 1\plain\fs28  in 1811 ; \b 2\plain\fs28  in 1812 (preface in 1814); \b 3\plain\fs28  in 1813 or 1814; \b 4\plain\fs28  in 1814;\b  5\plain\fs28  in 1818. Coloured plates ed.: \b 1\plain\fs28  in 1812; \b 2\plain\fs28  in 1813; \b 3\plain\fs28  & \b 4\plain\fs28  in 1814. Cf. F.A. Stafleu & R.S. Cowan, \i Taxonomic Literature\plain\fs28  ed. 2, \b 6\plain\fs28 : 438 (1986).)
\par \pard \b Tratt.\plain\fs28 , \i\b  Ros. Monogr\plain\fs28 .
\par     L. Trattinnick,  \i Rosacearum Monographia\plain\fs28 . Vindobonae. 1823-1824.  (\b 1-3\plain\fs28  in  1823;\b  4\plain\fs28   in 1824.)
\par \b Trautv\plain\fs28 ., \i\b Del. Sem. Horti Kiov\plain\fs28 .
\par    E.R. T rautvetter, \i Delectus Seminum in Horto kiovensi ... Anno 1840\plain\fs28  [\i 1841\plain\fs28 ] \i collectorum\plain\fs28 . Kioviae. 1840 in 1840; 1841 in 1842.
\par \b Trautv\plain\fs28 .,\i\b  Echin. Gen\plain\fs28 .
\par     E.R. von Trautvetter,\i  De Echinope Genere Capita II\plain\fs28 . Mitaviae. 1833.
\par \pard \b Trevisan\plain\fs28 ,\i\b  Prosp. Fl. Euganea\plain\fs28 
\par      V.B.A. Trevisan de Saint-Leon, \i Prospetto della Flora Euganea\plain\fs28 . Padova. 1842.
\par \b Trin\plain\fs28 ., \i\b Fund. Agrost.\plain\fs28 
\par       C.B. von Trinius,\i  Fundamenta Agrostographiae\plain\fs28 . Viennae. 1820.
\par \b Trin\plain\fs28 ., \i\b Gram. Unifl.\plain\fs28 
\par       K.B. von Trinius, \i De Graminibus unifloris et sesquifloris Dissertatio botanica\plain\fs28 . Petropoli. 1824.
\par \b Trin\plain\fs28 .,\i\b  Sp. Gram. Icon. Descr\plain\fs28 .
\par      K.B. von Trinius, \i Species Graminum Iconibus et Descriptionibus illustravit ....\plain\fs28  Petropoli. 1823-1836. (For dates cf. F.A. Stafleu, \i Taxonomic Literature\plain\fs28  476 (1967).)
\par \pard \b Trin. & Rupr\plain\fs28 .\i\b  Sp. Gram Stip\plain\fs28 .
\par     K.B. von Trinius & F.J. Ruprecht, \i Species Graminum stipaceorum\plain\fs28 . Petropoli. 1842. Reprinted as \i Mem. Acad. Sci. Petersb\plain\fs28 . ser. 6,\b  7\plain\fs28 (\b 1-2\plain\fs28 ): 1-189 (1843).
\par \b Trotzky\plain\fs28 , \i\b Ind. Sem. Horti Casan\plain\fs28 .
\par    P.K. Trotzky,\i  Index Seminum Horti casaniensis\plain\fs28 . [Kazan'.] 1834 and 1839.
\par \b Turra,\i   Farset. Nov. Gen\plain\fs28 .
\par     A. Turra, \i  Farsetia, novum Genus\plain\fs28 . Venetiis. 1765.
\par \b Tzanoudakis\plain\fs28 , \i\b Kytt. Meleti Gen. Paeonia Ell\plain\fs28 .
\par \pard    D.B. Tzanoudakis, **************************** \i Paeonia L\plain\fs28 . ************[\i Kyttarotaksinomiki Meleti tou Genous\plain\fs28  Paeonia L.\i  en Elladi\plain\fs28 ]. /\i  Cytotaxonomic Study of the Genus\plain\fs28  Paeonia L. \i in Greece\plain\fs28 . Patras. 1977.
\par \b Unger\plain\fs28 , \i Wiss. Ergeb. Reise Griech\plain\fs28 .
\par    F.J.A.N. Unger, \i Wissenschaftliche Ergebnisse einer Reise in Griechenland und in den jonischen Inseln\plain\fs28 . Wien. 1862.
\par \b Unger & Kotschy\plain\fs28 , \i\b Ins. Cypern\plain\fs28 
\par    F.J.A.N. Unger & T. Kotschy, \i Die Insel Cypern, ibrer physischen und organischen Natur  nach, mit R\'fccksicht auf ihre fr\'fchere Geschichte\plain\fs28 . Wien. 1865.
\par \pard \b Ung.-Sternb\plain\fs28 ., \i\b Syst. Salicorn\plain\fs28 .
\par    F. Ungern-Sternberg, \i Versuch einer Systematik der Salicornieen\plain\fs28 . Dorpat. 1866.
\par \b Urban\plain\fs28 , \i\b Symb. Antill\plain\fs28 .
\par      I. Urban, \i Symbolae antillanae, seu Fundamenta Florae Indiae occidentalis\plain\fs28 . Berolini, Lipsiae, Parisiis & Londini. 1898-1928. (\b 1\plain\fs28  at Berolini, Parisiis & Londini; \b 2-7\plain\fs28  at Lipsiae, Parisiis & Londini; \b 8\plain\fs28  &\b  9\plain\fs28  at Lipsiae. \b 1\plain\fs28 : pp. 1-192 in 1898; pp. 193-471 in 1899; pp. 472-536 in 1900;\b  2\plain\fs28 : pp. 1-336 in 1900; pp. 337-508 in 1901; \b 3\plain\fs28 : pp.1-352 in 1902; pp. 353-546 in 1903; \b 4\plain\fs28 : pp.1-192 in 1903; pp. 193-352 in 1905; pp. 353-528 in 1910; pp. 529-771 in 1911;\b  5\plain\fs28 : pp. 1-176 in 1904; pp. 177-352 in 1907; pp. 353-555 in 1908; \b 6\plain\fs28 : pp. 1-432 in 1909; pp. 433-721 in 1910; \b 7\plain\fs28 : pp. 1-160 in 1911; pp. 161-432 in 1912; pp. 433-580 in 1913; \b 8\plain\fs28 : pp. 1-480 in 1920; pp. 481-860 in 1921; \b 9\plain\fs28 : pp. 1-176 in 1923; pp. 177-272 in 1924; pp. 273-432 in 1925; pp. 433-568 in 1928.) \i A cumulative Index\plain\fs28 , by E. Carroll & S. Sutton. Jamaica Plain, Mass.1965.
\par \pard \b Urban & Graebner\plain\fs28 , \i\b Festschr. Ascherson\plain\fs28 
\par     I. Urban & K.O.P.P. Graebner,\i  Festschrift zur Feier des siebzigsten Geburtstagesdes. . . Dr. P. Ascherson\plain\fs28 . Leipzig. 1904.
\par \b Vacc.\plain\fs28 , \i\b Cat. Rais. Pl. Vasc. Aoste\plain\fs28 
\par      L. Vaccari, \i Catalogue raisonne des Plantes vasculaires de la Vallee d'Aoste\plain\fs28 . Aoste. 1904-1911.
\par \b Vahl\plain\fs28 , \i\b Enum. Pl\plain\fs28 .
\par     M.H. Vahl, \i Enumeratio Plantarum\plain\fs28 . Hauniae. 1804-1805. (\b 1\plain\fs28  in 1804; \b 2\plain\fs28  in 1805. Cf. F.A. Stafleu, \i Taxonomic Literature\plain\fs28  480 (1967).)
\par \pard \b Vahl\plain\fs28 , \i\b Symb. Bot\plain\fs28 .
\par    M.H. Vahl, \i Symbolae botanicae, sive Plantarum, tam earum, quas in Itinere, imprimis orientali, collegit Petrus Forsk\'e5l\plain\fs28 . Hauniae. 1790-1794. (\b 1\plain\fs28  in 1790; \b 2\plain\fs28  in 1791 ; \b 3\plain\fs28  in 1794. Cf. F.A. Stafleu & R.S. Cowan, \i Taxonomic Literature\plain\fs28  ed. 2, \b 6\plain\fs28 : 630 (1986).)
\par \b Vahl, J.\plain\fs28 , \i\b Fl. Dan\plain\fs28 .
\par      Cf. Oeder, Fl. Dan.
\par \b Valdes\plain\fs28 , \i\b Rev. Esp. Eur. Linaria\plain\fs28 
\par     B. Valdes Castrillon,\i  Revision de las Especies Europeas de Linaria con Semillas aladas\plain\fs28 . (Publ. Univ. Sevilla, Ser. Ci. No.7.) Sevilla. 1970.
\par \pard \b Vandas\plain\fs28 ,\i\b  Reliq. Form\'e1nek\plain\fs28 .
\par      C. Vandas,\i  Reliquiae formanekianae. Enumeratio critica Plantarum vascularium, quas Itineribus in Haemo Peninsula et Asia Minore\plain\fs28  (\i Bithynia\plain\fs28 )\i  factis collegit Dr. Ed. Form\'e1nek, Professor Gymnasii brunensis bohemici\plain\fs28 . Brunae. 1909.
\par \b Vandelli\plain\fs28 ,\i\b  Fasc. Pl.\plain\fs28 
\par     D. Vandelli, \i Fasciculus Plantarum, cum novis Generibus et Speciebus\plain\fs28 . Olisipone.1771.
\par \b Velen\plain\fs28 ., \i\b Fl. Bulg\plain\fs28 .
\par     J. Velenovsk\'fd, \i Flora bulgarica\plain\fs28 . Pragae. 1891. \i\b Suppl\plain\fs28 ., \i Supplementum\plain\fs28 . 1898.
\par \pard \b Velen\plain\fs28 .,\i\b  Rel. Mrkvick\plain\fs28 .
\par     J. Velenovsky, \i Reliquiae mrkvickanae\plain\fs28 . Pragae. 1922.
\par \b Velloso\plain\fs28 ,\i\b  Fl. Flum\plain\fs28 .
\par     J. M. de Concei\'e7\'e3o Velloso,\i  Florae fluminensis, seu Descriptionum Plantarum Praefectura fluminensi sponte nascentium Liber primus\plain\fs28 . Flumine Januario. 1825.
\par \b Vent\plain\fs28 .,\i\b  Descr. Pl. Jard. Cels\plain\fs28 
\par    E.P. Ventenat, \i Description des Plantes nouvelles ou peu connues cultiv\'e9es dans le Jardin de J. M. Cels\plain\fs28 . Paris. 1800-1803 (Tt. 1-10 in 1800; tt. 11-20 in 1800 or 1801 ; tt. 21-60 in 1801 ; tt. 61-90 in 1802; tt. 91-100 in 1803. Cf. F.A. Stafleu & R.S. Cowan, \i Taxonomic Literature\plain\fs28  ed. 2,\b  6\plain\fs28 : 701 (1986).)
\par \pard \b Vent.\plain\fs28 , \i\b Tabl. R\'e8gne V\'e9g\'e9t.\plain\fs28 
\par    E.P. Ventenat, \i Tableau du R\'e8gne v\'e9g\'e9al\plain\fs28 . Paris. 1799.( \b 1-4\plain\fs28  in 1799.)
\par \b Verlot\plain\fs28 , \i\b Cat. Pl. Dauph\plain\fs28 .
\par     J.-B. Verlot,\i  Catalogue raisonn\'e9 des Plantes vasculaires du Dauphin\'e9\plain\fs28 . Grenoble. 1872.
\par \b Vig\plain\fs28 .,\i\b  Hist. Pavots Arg\'e9m\plain\fs28 .
\par    L.G.A. Viguier,\i  Histoire naturelle, m\'e9dicale et \'e9conomique, des Pavots et des Arg\'e9mones\plain\fs28 . Montpellier. 1814.
\par \b Vill.\plain\fs28 , \i\b  Cat. M\'e9th. Jard. Strasb\plain\fs28 .
\par \pard     D. Villars,  \i Catalogue m\'e9thodique des Plantes du Jardin de l'\'c9cole de M\'e9decine de Strasbourg\plain\fs28 . Strasbourg. 1807.
\par \b Vill\plain\fs28 ., \i\b Hist. Pl. Dauph\plain\fs28 .
\par    D. Villars,\i  Histoire des Plantes de Dauphin\'e9\plain\fs28 . Grenoble. 1786--1789. (\b 1\plain\fs28  in 1786;\b  2\plain\fs28  in 1787 ;\b  3\plain\fs28 (\b 1\plain\fs28 ): pp. 1-580 in 1788; \b 3\plain\fs28 (\b 2\plain\fs28 ): pp. 581-1091 in 1789. Cf. F. A. Stafleu & R. S. Cowan, \i Taxonomic Literature\plain\fs28  ed. 2, \b 6\plain\fs28 : 740 (1986).)
\par \b Vill\plain\fs28 ., \i\b Prosp. Pl. Dauph\plain\fs28 .
\par \pard      D. Villars, \i Prospectus de l' Histoire des Plantes de Dauphin\'e9\plain\fs28 . Grenoble. 1779.
\par \b Vill., G. Lauth & A. Nestler\plain\fs28 , \i\b Precis Voy. Bot\plain\fs28 .
\par     D. Villars, G. Lauth & A. Nestler, \i Precis d'un Voyage botanique\plain\fs28 . Paris. 1812.
\par \b Vines & Druce\plain\fs28 , \i\b Acc. Morison. Herb\plain\fs28 .
\par     S.H. Vines & G.C. Druce,\i  An Account of the Morisonian Herbarium in the Possession of the University of Oxford\plain\fs28 . Oxford. 1914.
\par \b Vis\plain\fs28 ., \i\b Fl. Dalm\plain\fs28 .
\par    R. de Visiani, \i Flora dalmatica\plain\fs28 . Lipsiae. 1842-1851. (\b 1\plain\fs28  in 1842; \b 2\plain\fs28  in 1847; \b 3\plain\fs28 (\b 1\plain\fs28 ): pp. 1-185 in 1850; \b 3\plain\fs28 (\b 2\plain\fs28 ): pp. 185-390 in 1851. \i\b Suppl\plain\fs28 .\b  1\plain\fs28 , \i Supplementum\plain\fs28 . Lipsiae. 1872. \i\b Suppl\plain\fs28 . \b 2\plain\fs28 , \i Supplementum alterum\plain\fs28 . Lipsiae. 1877-1881. (\b 2\plain\fs28 (\b 1\plain\fs28 ) in 1877;\b  2\plain\fs28 (\b 2\plain\fs28 ) in 1881.) Cf. F.A. Stafleu & R.S. Cowan, \i Taxonomic Literature\plain\fs28  ed. 2, \b 6\plain\fs28 : 757 (1986).
\par \pard \b Vis.\plain\fs28 , \i\b Fl. Dalm\plain\fs28 .
\par      R. de Visiani,  \i Flora dalmatica\plain\fs28 . Lipsiae.1842-1852. (\b 1\plain\fs28  in 1842;\b  2\plain\fs28  in 1847; \b 3\plain\fs28  in 1850-1852.)  \i Suppl\plain\fs28 . 1.  Lipsiae.  1872.  \i Suppl\plain\fs28 . 2. Lipsiae.  1877.
\par \b Vis.\plain\fs28 , \i\b Sem. Horto Bot. Patav\plain\fs28 . 
\par   \i Semina in Horto botanico Patavius lecta\plain\fs28 . By R. de Visiani in 1855
\par \b Vis.\plain\fs28 , \i\b Ill. Pi. Grecia\plain\fs28 
\par     R. de Visiani, \i Illustrazione di alcune Piante della Grecia e dell' Asia Minore\plain\fs28 . Venezia. 1842.
\par \pard \b Vis.\plain\fs28 , \i\b Stirp. Dalm\plain\fs28 .
\par     R. de Visiani,  \i Stirpium dalmaticarum Specimen\plain\fs28 .  Patavii. 1826.
\par \b Vitman\plain\fs28 ,\i\b  Sunzma Pl\plain\fs28 .
\par      F. Vitman, \i Summa Plantarum\plain\fs28 . Mediolani. 1789-1792. (\b 1-3\plain\fs28  in 1789 or 1790; \b 4\plain\fs28  in 1790; \b 5\plain\fs28  in 1791;\b  6\plain\fs28  in 1792. Cf. F. A. Stafleu,\i  Taxonomic Literature\plain\fs28  485 (1967).)
\par \b Viv.\plain\fs28 ,\i\b  Elench. Pl. Horti Bot\plain\fs28 .
\par    D. Viviani, \i Elenchus Plantarum Horti botanici J. Car. Dinegro Observationibus quod novas, vel rariores  Species passim intetjectis\plain\fs28 . Genuae. 1802.
\par \pard \b Viv\plain\fs28 .,\i\b  Fl. Cors\plain\fs28 .
\par    D. Viviani, \i Florae Corsicae Specierum novarum, vel minus cognitarum Diagnosis\plain\fs28 . Genuae. 1824. \i\b App.\plain\b\fs28  1\plain\fs28 , \i Appendix ad Florae Corsicae Prodromum\plain\fs28 . Genuae. 1825. \i\b App\plain\fs28 . \b 2\plain\fs28 , \i Appendix  altera ad Florae Corsicae Prodromum\plain\fs28 . Genuae. 1830. Cf. F.A. Stafleu & R.S. Cowan, \i Taxonomic Literature\plain\fs28  ed. 2, \b 6\plain\fs28 : 762 (1986).
\par \b Viv.\plain\fs28 , \i\b Fl. Ital. Fragm\plain\fs28 .
\par    D. Viviani, \i Florae italicae Fragmenta\plain\fs28 . Genuae. 1808.
\par \pard \b Viv\plain\fs28 .,\i\b  Fl. Lib\plain\fs28 .
\par    D. Viviani, \i Florae libycae Specimen\plain\fs28 . Genuae. 1824.
\par \b Vollmann\plain\fs28 ,\i\b  Fl. Bayern\plain\fs28 
\par      F. Vollmann,\i  Flora von Bayern\plain\fs28 . Stuttgart. 1914.
\par \b Voss & Siebert\plain\fs28 , \i\b  Vilmorin's Blumeng\plain\fs28 .
\par      A.Voss & A. Siebert,  \i Vilmorin's Blumeng\'e4rtnerei. Beschreibung, Kultur  und Verwendung des gesamten Pflanzenmaterials f\'fcr deutsche G\'e4rten\plain\fs28 . Ed. 3. Berlin. 1894-1896. (\b 1\plain\fs28 :  pp.  1-592 in 1894; pp. 593-1264 in 1895; pp. i-viii,  [1]-[80] in 1896; \b 2\plain\fs28 : pp. 1-96 in 1895; pp. 97-238 in 1896.)  An entirely new work with nothing in common with the earlier editions  of Vilmorin's  Blumeng\'e4rtnerei.
\par \pard \b Vuk\plain\fs28 ., \i\b Hier. Croat\plain\fs28 .
\par       L.F. Vukatinovic,\i  Hieracia croatica\plain\fs28 . Zagrabiae. 1858.
\par \b Wahlenb\plain\fs28 ., \i Fl. Lapp\plain\fs28 .
\par    G. Wahlenberg,\i  Flora lapponica\plain\fs28 . Berolini. 1812.
\par \b Wahlenb.\plain\fs28 , \i\b Fl. Suec\plain\fs28 .
\par     P.F. Wahlenberg, \i Flora suecica, enumerans Plantas Sueciae indigenas.. post Linnaeum edita\plain\fs28 . Ed. 1. Upsaliae. 1824-1826. (Pp. 1-428 in 1824; pp. 429-1117, i-lxxxviii in 1826.) Ed. 2. Upsaliae. 1831-1833. (Pp. 1-445 in 1831; pp. 447-1134, i-xcvii in 1833.)
\par \pard \b Waldst. & Kit.\plain\fs28 ,\i\b   Pl. Rar. Hung\plain\fs28 .
\par      F.A. von Waldstein & P. Kitaibel,  \i Descriptiones et Icones Plantarum rariorum Hungariae\plain\fs28 . Viennae. 1799-1812.   (\b 1\plain\fs28 : tt. 1-10 in 1799; tt. 11-30 in 1800; tt. 31-50 in 1800-1801; tt. 51-70 in 1801; tt. 71-90 in 1801-1802; tt. 91-100 in 1802;\b  2\plain\fs28 : tt. 101-130 in 1802 or 1803; tt. 131-170 in 1803 or 1804; tt. 171-190 in 1804; tt. 191-200 in 1805;\b  3\plain\fs28 : tt. 201-220 in 1806 or 1807; tt. 221-240 in 1807; tt. 241-250 in 1808 or 1809; tt. 251-260 in 1809; tt. 261-270 in 1810 or 1811; tt. 271-280 in 1812. Cf. M. J. van Steenis & W.T. Stearn in C.G.G.J. van Steenis,  \i Fl. Males.\plain\b\fs28  I. 4\plain\fs28 : ccxvi (1954).)
\par \pard \b Wall\plain\fs28 ., \i\b Pl. Asiat. Rar\plain\fs28 .
\par    N. Wallich, \i Plantae asiaticae rariores; or, Descriptions and Figures of a select Number of unpublished East Indian Plants\plain\fs28 . London. 1829-1832. (\b 1\plain\fs28 : pp. 1-22 [= part 1] in 1829; pp. 23-84 [= parts 2-4] in 1830; \b 2\plain\fs28 : pp. 1-20 [ = part 5] in 1830; pp. 21-86 [ = parts 6-8] in 1831 ; \b 3\plain\fs28 : pp. 1-? [ = part 9] in 1831 ; pp. ?-117 [ = parts 10--12] in 1832. Cf. F.A. Stafleu & R.S. Cowan,\i  Taxonomic Literature\plain\fs28  ed. 2,\b  7\plain\fs28  : 40 (1988).)
\par \pard \b Wallr.\plain\fs28 , \i\b Annus Bot.\plain\fs28 
\par    K.F.W. Wallroth,\i  Annus botanicus, sive Supplementum tertium ad Curtii Sprengelii Floram Halensem\plain\fs28 . Halae. 1815.
\par \b Wallr.\plain\fs28 , \i\b Beitr. Bot\plain\fs28 .
\par     K.F.W. Wallroth, \i Beitrage zur Botanik\plain\fs28 . Leipzig. 1842-1844. (1: pp 1-123 in 1842; pp. 125-252 in 1844.)
\par \b Wallr.\plain\fs28 , \i\b  Erst. Beitr. Fl. Hercyn\plain\fs28 .
\par     K.F.W. Wallroth, \i  Erster Beitrag zur Flora hercynica\plain\fs28 .  Halle. 1840. 
\par \b Wallr.\plain\fs28 ,\i\b  Orob. Gen\plain\fs28 .
\par \pard    K.F.W. Wallroth,\i  Orobanches Generis ********\plain\fs28 . Francofurti ad Moenum. 1825.
\par \b Wallr.\plain\fs28 , \i\b Sched. Cri\plain\fs28 .
\par     K.F.W. Wallroth, \i Schedulae criticae de Plantis Florae Halensis selectis\plain\fs28 . Halae. 1822.
\par \b Walpers\plain\fs28 , \i\b Repert. Bot. Syst\plain\fs28 .
\par     W.G. Walpers,\i  Repertorium Botanices systematicae\plain\fs28 . Lipsiae. 1842-1848. (\b 1\plain\fs28 : pp. 1-768 in 1842; pp. 769-947 in 1843; \b 2\plain\fs28  in 1843;\b  3\plain\fs28 : pp. 1-768 in 1844; pp. 769-1002 in 1845; \b 4\plain\fs28 : pp. 1-192 in 1845; pp. 193-576 in 1847 ; pp. 577-821 in 1848; \b 5\plain\fs28 : pp. 1-192 in 1845; pp. 193-982 in 1846; \b 6\plain\fs28 : pp. 1-384 in 1846; pp. 385-834 in 1847. Cf. F. A. Stafleu & R. S. Cowan, \i Taxonomic Literature\plain\fs28  ed. 2, \b 7\plain\fs28 : 46-47 (1988).)
\par \pard \b Walters, S.M. et al\plain\fs28 .,\i\b  Eur. Garden Fl\plain\fs28 .
\par       S.M. Walters, A. Brady, C.D. Brickell, J. Cullen, P.S. Green, J. Lewis, V.A. Matthews, D.A. Webb, P.F. Yeo &  J.C.M. Alexander (eds.), \i The European Garden Flora\plain\fs28 . Cambridge etc., 1984\'98\'93. (\b 1\plain\fs28  in 1986; \b 2\plain\fs28  in 1984; \b 3\plain\fs28  in 1989.) 3 ed. S.M. Walters, J.C.M. Alexander, A. Brady, C.D. Brickell, J. Cullen, P.S. Green, V.H. Heywood, V.A. Matthews, N.K.B. Robson, P.F. Yeo & S.G. Knees.
\par \b Warming et. al\plain\fs28 ., \i\b Bot. F\'e6r\'f6es\plain\fs28 
\par \pard     J.E.B. Warming et al.,\i  Botany of the F\'e6r\'f6es\plain\fs28 . Copenhagen, Christiania & London. 1901-1908. (Pp. 1-338 in 1901; pp. 339-532 in 1902; pp. 533-681 in 1903; pp. 683-834 & Appendix in 1905; pp. 835-864 in 1907; pp. 867-1070 in 1908.)
\par \b Warncke\plain\fs28 , \i\b Eur. Sippen\plain\fs28  Aconitum lycoctonum-\i\b Gruppe\plain\fs28 
\par    K. Warncke, \i Die europ\'e4ischen Sippen der\plain\fs28  Aconitum lycoctonum-\i Gruppe\plain\fs28 . M\'fcnchen. 1964. (Inaugural-Dissertation; in typescript, with printed title page.)
\par \pard \b Watson, H.C\plain\fs28 ., \i\b Part First Suppl. Cyb. Brit\plain\fs28 .
\par    H.C. Watson,\i  Part first of a Supplement to the Cybele britannica\plain\fs28 . London. 1860.
\par \b Webb\plain\fs28 , \i\b  Iter Hisp.\plain\fs28 
\par      P.B. Webb, \i  Iter hispaniense\plain\fs28 .  Paris & London. 1838. 
\par \b Webb\plain\fs28 , \i\b Otia Hisp\plain\fs28 .
\par     P.B. Webb, \i Otia hispanica\plain\fs28 . Ed. 1. Paris & London. 1839. Ed. 2. Paris & London. 1853.
\par \b Webb & Berth\plain\fs28 ., \i\b Phyt. Canar\plain\fs28 .
\par    P.B. Webb & S. Berthelot, \i Phytographia canariensis\plain\fs28 . (Vol. \b 3\plain\fs28 (\b 2\plain\fs28 ) of \i Histoire naturelle des \'celes Canaries\plain\fs28 .) Paris. 1836-1850. (For dates cf. F.A. Stafleu & R.S. Cowan,\i  Taxonomic Literature\plain\fs28  ed. 2, \b 7\plain\fs28 : 119-120 (1988).)
\par \pard \b Weber\plain\fs28 , \i\b  Pl. Min. Cogn. Dec\plain\fs28 .
\par     G.H. Weber,  \i Plantarum minus cognitarum Decuria\plain\fs28 .  Kiloniae. 1784. 
\par \b Weber\plain\fs28 ,\i\b  Suppl. Fl. Holsat\plain\fs28 .
\par     G.H. Weber, \i Supplementum Florae holsaticae\plain\fs28 . Kilonii. 1787
\par \b Weber fil. & Mohr\plain\fs28 , \i\b Beitr. Naturk\plain\fs28 .
\par      F. Weber & D.M.H. Mohr, \i Beitrage zur Naturkunde\plain\fs28 . Kiel. 1805-1810. (\b 1\plain\fs28  in 1805-1806;\b  2\plain\fs28  in 1810. Cf. F.A. Stafleu,\i  Taxonomic Literature\plain\fs28  496 (1967) .)
\par \b Weigel\plain\fs28 , \i\b Obs. Bot.\plain\fs28 
\par \pard     C.E. von Weigel, \i Observationes botanicae\plain\fs28 . Gryphiswaldiae. 1772.
\par \b Weihe & Nees\plain\fs28 , \i\b  Rubi Germ\plain\fs28 . 
\par     K.E.A. Weihe & C.G.D. Nees von Esenbeck, \i  Rubi germanici\plain\fs28 . Elberfeldae. 1822-1827. (Pp. 1-28 in 1822; pp. 29-40 in 1824;   pp. 41-70 in 1825; pp. 71-78 in 1825 or 1826; pp. 79-86 in 1826; pp. 89-116 in 1827. Cf. W.T. Stearn, \i Jour. Soc. Bibl. Nat. Hist.\plain\b\fs28  4\plain\fs28 : 68-69 (1962).) Also German edition, titled  \i Die deutschen Brombeerstr\'e4uche\plain\fs28 .  Elberfeld. 1822-1827. (Pp. 1-28 in 1822; pp. 29-42 in 1824; pp. 43-76 in 1825; pp. 77-86 in 1825 or 1826; pp. 87-96 in 1826; pp. 97-130 in 1827. Cf. W.T. Stearn, \i  Jour. Soc. Bibl. Nat. Hist.\plain\b\fs28  4\plain\fs28 : 68-69(1962).) Only the Latin edition is cited. 
\par \pard \b Weinm.\plain\fs28 , \i\b Bot. Gart. Dorpat \plain\fs28 
\par     J.A. Weinmann, \i  Der botanische Garten der kaiser. Universit\'e4t zu Dorpat im Jahre 1810\plain\fs28 . Dorpat. 1810. 
\par \b Weston\plain\fs28 , \i\b Univ. Bot.\plain\fs28 
\par      R. Weston, \i Botanicus universalis et Hortulanus\plain\fs28 . / \i The universal Botanist and Nurseryman\plain\fs28 . London. 1770-1777. (\b 1\plain\fs28  in 1770; \b 2\plain\fs28  in 1771; \b 3\plain\fs28  in 1772;\b  4\plain\fs28  in 1777.)
\par \b Wettst.\plain\fs28 , \i\b Monogr. Gatt. Euphrasia\plain\fs28 
\par     R. von Wettstein,\i  Monographie der Gattung\plain\fs28  Euphrasia. Leipzig. 1896.
\par \pard \b White\plain\fs28 ,  \i\b Jour. Voy. New S. Wales\plain\fs28  
\par     J. White,  \i Journal of a Voyage to New South Wales\plain\fs28 .  London. 1790. 
\par \b Wibel\plain\fs28 , \i\b Prim. Fl. Werthem\plain\fs28 .
\par    A.W.E.C. Wibel, \i Primitiae Florae werthemensis\plain\fs28 . Jenae. 1799.
\par \b Widmer\plain\fs28 ,\i\b  Eur. Arten Primula\plain\fs28 
\par     E. Widmer,\i  Die europaischen Arten der Gattung\plain\fs28  Primula. M\'fcnchen. 1891.
\par \b Wiggers\plain\fs28 ,\i\b  Prim. Fl. Holsat\plain\fs28 .
\par     F.H. Wiggers,\i  Primitiae Florae holsaticae\plain\fs28 . Kiliae. 1780. (For date cf. F.A. Stafleu, \i Taxonomic Literature\plain\fs28  500 (1967).)
\par \pard \b Willd.\plain\fs28 , \i\b Berlin. Baumz\plain\fs28 .
\par    C.L. Willdenow, \i Berlinische Baumzucht, oder Beschreibung der in den G\'e4rten um Berlin, im Freien ausdauernden B\'e4ume und Str\'e4ucber\plain\fs28 . Ed. 1. Berlin. 1796. Ed. 2. Berlin. 1811.
\par \b Willd\plain\fs28 .,\i\b  Enum. Pl. Horti Berol\plain\fs28 .
\par    C.L. Willdenow, \i Enumeratio Plantarum Horti regii botanici berolinensis\plain\fs28 . Berolini. 1809. \i\b Suppl\plain\fs28 ., \i Supplementum\plain\fs28  by D.F.L. von Schlechtendal. Berolini. 1814. For dates cf. F.A. Stafleu & R.S. Cowan, \i Taxonomic Literature\plain\fs28  ed. 2, \b 7\plain\fs28 : 305 (1988).
\par \pard \b Willd.\plain\fs28 ,\i\b  Hort. Berol\plain\fs28 . 
\par     C.L. Willdenow,  \i Hortus berolinensis, sive Icones et Descriptiones, Plantarum rariorum vel minus cognitarum, quae in Horto regio botanico berolinensi excoluntur\plain\fs28 . Berolini. 1803-1816. (\b 1\plain\fs28 (\b 1\plain\fs28 ): tt. 1-12 in 1803; \b 1\plain\fs28 (\b 2-3\plain\fs28 ): tt. 13-36 in 1804; \b 1\plain\fs28 (\b 4-5\plain\fs28 ): tt. 37-60 in 1805; \b 1\plain\fs28 (\b 6\plain\fs28 ) & \b 2\plain\fs28 (\b 7\plain\fs28 ): tt. 61-84 in 1806;\b 2\plain\fs28 (\b 8\plain\fs28 ): tt. 85-96 in 1809; \b 2\plain\fs28 (\b 9\plain\fs28 ): tt. 97-108 in 1812. Cf. W.T. Stearn,  \i Jour. Bot. \plain\fs28 (\i London\plain\fs28 ) \b 75\plain\fs28 : 233 (1937) and M. J. van Steenis & W.T. Stearn in C.G.G.J. van Steenis, \i Fl. Males.\plain\b\fs28  I. 4\plain\fs28 : ccxviii (1954).) 
\par \pard \b Willd.\plain\fs28 , \i\b  Phytogr\plain\fs28 . 
\par     C.L. Willdenow, \i Phytographia, seu Descriptio rariorum minus cognitarum Plantarum\plain\fs28 . Erlangae. 1794. 
\par \b Willd\plain\fs28 .,\b  Sp. Pl\plain\fs28 .
\par     C.L. Willdenow, ed. 4 of C. von Linn\'e9, \i Species Plantarum\plain\fs28 . Berolini. 1797-1810(-1830). (\b 1\plain\fs28 (\b 1\plain\fs28 ): pp. 1-495 in 1797 ; \b 1\plain\fs28 (\b 2\plain\fs28 ): pp. 496-1068 in 1798; \b 2\plain\fs28 (\b 1\plain\fs28  &\b  2\plain\fs28 ) in 1799; \b 3\plain\fs28 (\b 1\plain\fs28 ): pp. 1-847 in 1800; \b 3\plain\fs28 (\b 2\plain\fs28 ): pp. 849-1474 in 1802; \b 3\plain\fs28 (\b 3\plain\fs28 ): pp. 1475-2409 in 1803; \b 4\plain\fs28 (\b 1\plain\fs28 ): pp. 1-629 in 1805; \b 4\plain\fs28 (\b 2\plain\fs28 ): pp. 631-1157 in 1806; \b 5\plain\fs28 (\b 1\plain\fs28 ): pp. 1-544 in 1810. By C. F. Schwagrichen: \b 5\plain\fs28 (\b 2\plain\fs28 ): pp. 1-122 in 1830, also titled \i Species Muscorum frondosorum\plain\fs28 . By H.F. Link: \b 6\plain\fs28 (\b 1\plain\fs28 ): pp. 1-162 in 1824; \b 6\plain\fs28 (\b 2\plain\fs28 ): pp. 1-128 in 1825. Cf. F.A. Stafleu & R.S. Cowan, \i Taxonomic Literature\plain\fs28  ed. 2, \b 7\plain\fs28  : 303 (1988).)
\par \pard \b Willd.\plain\fs28 , \i\b Tract. Achilleis\plain\fs28 
\par      C.L. Willdenow, \i Tractatus botanico-mediccus de Achilleis, cui accedit Supplementum Generis Tanaceti\plain\fs28 . Halae Magdeburgicae. 1789.
\par \b Willk.\plain\fs28 ,\i\b  Icon. Descr. Pl. Nov\plain\fs28 .
\par    H.M. Willkomm,\i  Icones et Descriptiones Plantarum novarum criticarum et rariorum Europae austro-occidentalis praecipue Hispaniae\plain\fs28 . Lipsiae. 1852-1862. (For dates cf. F.A. Stafleu & R.S. Cowan, \i Taxonomic Literature\plain\fs28  ed. 2, \b 7\plain\fs28  : 339 (1988).)
\par \pard \b Willk\plain\fs28 .,\i\b  Ill. Fl. Hisp\plain\fs28 .
\par    H.M. Willkomm, \i Illustrationes Florae Hispaniae Insularumque Balearium\plain\fs28 . Stuttgart. 1881-1892. (For dates cf. F.A. Stafleu & R.S. Cowan, \i Taxonomic Literature\plain\fs28  ed. 2,\b  7\plain\fs28 : 342-343 (1988).)
\par \b Willk\plain\fs28 .,\i\b  Rech. Glob\plain\fs28 .
\par     H.M. Willkomm,\i  Recherches sur l 'Organographie et la Classification des Globulairi\'e9es\plain\fs28 . Leipsick. 1850.
\par \b Willk.\plain\fs28 ,\i\b  Strand-Steppengeb. Iber. Halbins\plain\fs28 .
\par    H.M. Willkomm, \i Die Strand- und Steppengebiete der iberischen Halbinsel und deren Vegetation\plain\fs28 . Leipzig. 1852.
\par \pard \b Willk\plain\fs28 ., \i\b Suppl. Prodr. Fl. Hisp\plain\fs28 .
\par    H.M. Willkomm, \i Supplementum Prodromi Florae hispanieae\plain\fs28 . Stuttgartiae. 1893.
\par \b Willk. & Lange\plain\fs28 ,\i\b  Prodr. Fl. Hisp\plain\fs28 .
\par    H.M. Willkomm & J.M. C. Lange, \i Prodromus Florae hispanieae\plain\fs28 . Stuttgartiae. 1861-1880. (\b 1\plain\fs28  : pp. i-vii, 1-192 in 1861 ; pp. ix-xxx, 193-316 in 1862;\b  2\plain\fs28 : pp. 1-272 in 1865; pp. 273-480 in 1868; pp. 481-680 in 1870; \b 3\plain\fs28 : pp. 1-240 in 1874 ; pp. 241-512 in 1877 ; pp. 513-736 in 1878; pp. 737-1144 in 1880. Cf. F.A. Stafleu & R.S. Cowan, \i Taxonomic Literature\plain\fs28  ed. 2, \b 7\plain\fs28  : 340 (1988).)
\par \pard \b Wimmer\plain\fs28 , \i\b  Fl. Schles\plain\fs28 . 
\par    C.F.H. Wimmer, \i  Flora von Schlesien\plain\fs28 . Ed. 1. Berlin. 1832. Ed. 2. Breslau. 1841. \i Erg\'e4nzungsband\plain\fs28 .  Breslau. 1845. Ed. 3.   Breslau. 1857. 
\par \b Wimmer\plain\fs28 , \i\b Salices Eur\plain\fs28 .
\par    C.F.H. Wimmer, \i Salices europaeae\plain\fs28 . Vratislavae. 1866.
\par \b Wimmer & Grab.\plain\fs28 ,\i\b  Fl. Siles\plain\fs28 . 
\par    C.F.H. Wimmer & H. E. Grabowski,\i  Flora Silesiae\plain\fs28 . Vratislaviae. 1827-1829. (\b 1\plain\fs28  in 1827; \b 2\plain\fs28 (\b 1\plain\fs28 ) & \b 2\plain\fs28 (\b 2\plain\fs28 ) in 1829.) 
\par \pard \b Wirsing\plain\fs28 , \i\b Eclog. Bot\plain\fs28 .
\par     A. L. Wirsing, \i Eclogae botanicae e Dictionario Regni vegetabilis Buc'hodziano collectae\plain\fs28 . Norimbergae. 1778.
\par \b Wirtgen\plain\fs28 ,  \i\b Prodr. Fl. Preuss. Rheinl\plain\fs28 . 
\par     P.W. Wirtgen,  \i Prodromus der Flora der preussischen Rheinlande\plain\fs28 .  Bonn. 1842. 
\par \b Wissjul\plain\fs28 .,\i\b  Fl. RSS Ucr.\plain\fs28 
\par     Cf. Fomin, Fl. RSS Ucr.
\par \b With.\plain\fs28 , \i\b Arr. Brit. Pl\plain\fs28 .
\par     W. Withering,\i  A botanical Arrangement of all the Vegetables naturally growing in Great Britain, with Descriptions of the Genera and Species\plain\fs28 . Ed. 1. Birmingham & London. 1776. Ed. 2, titled \i A botanical Arrangement of British Plants\plain\fs28 . Birmingham & London. 1787-1792. (\b 1\plain\fs28  &\b  2\plain\fs28  in 1787; \b 3\plain\fs28 (\b 1\plain\fs28 ) in 1789; \b 3\plain\fs28 (\b 2\plain\fs28 ) in 1792.) Ed. 3, titled \i An Arrangement of British Plants\plain\fs28  by J. Stokes. London. 1796. Ed. 4, titled \i A systematic Arrangement of British Plants by W. Withering fil\plain\fs28 . London. 1801. Ed. 5. Birmingham. 1812. Ed. 6, titled\i  An Arrangement of British Plants\plain\fs28 . London. 1818. Ed. 7. London. 1830.
\par \pard \b Woloszczak\plain\fs28 , \i\b Fl. Polon. Exsicc\plain\fs28 .
\par      E. Woloszczak, \i Flora polonica exsiccata\plain\fs28 . Lwow.
\par \b Woods, J\plain\fs28 ., \i\b Tourist's Fl\plain\fs28 .
\par      J. Woods, \i The Tourist's Flora: a descriptive Catalogue of the flowering Plants and Ferns of the British Islands, France, Germany Switzerland, Italy, and the Italian Islands\plain\fs28 . London. 1850.
\par \b Wulf,\plain\fs28  \i\b Fl. Kryma\plain\fs28 
\par      E.V. Wulf, **** **** [\i Flora Kryma\plain\fs28 ]. /\i  Flora taurica\plain\fs28 . Jalta. 1927-1969. (\b 1\plain\fs28 (\b 1\plain\fs28 ) in 1927; \b 1\plain\fs28 (\b 2\plain\fs28 ) in 1929; \b 1\plain\fs28 (\b 3\plain\fs28 ) in 1930; \b 1\plain\fs28 (\b 4\plain\fs28 ) in 1951;\b  2\plain\fs28 (\b 1\plain\fs28 ) in 1947;\b  2\plain\fs28 (\b 2\plain\fs28 ) in 1960; \b 2\plain\fs28 (\b 3\plain\fs28 ) in 1953; \b 3\plain\fs28 (\b 1\plain\fs28 ) in 1957; \b 3\plain\fs28 (\b 2\plain\fs28 ) in 1966; \b 3\plain\fs28 (\b 3\plain\fs28 ) in 1969.) \b 1\plain\fs28 (\b 2-3\plain\fs28 ), Leningrad; \b 1\plain\fs28 (\b 4\plain\fs28 ), \b 2\plain\fs28 (\b 2-3\plain\fs28 ) & \b 3\plain\fs28 (\b 1-2\plain\fs28 ), Moskva; \b 2\plain\fs28 (\b 1\plain\fs28 ), Moskva & Leningrad. ,********** * I *** "***** *****" [\i Dopolnenija k I Tomu 'Flory Kryma'\plain\fs28 ]. / \i Addenda et Corrigenda ad Vol. I 'Florae tauricae'\plain\fs28  Jalta. 1959.
\par \pard \b Zapal\plain\fs28 .,\i\b  Consp. Fl. Galic\plain\fs28 .
\par     H. Zapalowicz, \i Conspectus Florae Galiciae criticus\plain\fs28 . / \i Krytyczny Przeglad Roslinnosci Galieyi\plain\fs28 . Krak\'f3w. 1906-1911. (\b 1\plain\fs28  in 1906;\b  2\plain\fs28  in l908 ; \b 3\plain\fs28  in 1911.)
\par \b Zahn\plain\fs28 , \i\b Hier. Alpes Marit.\plain\fs28 
\par      K.H. Zahn, \i Les Hieracium des Alpes maritimes\plain\fs28 . Geneve Bale & Lyon. 1916.
\par \b Zerov et al.\plain\fs28 , \i\b Vyzn. Rosl. Ukr.\plain\fs28 
\par      D.K. Zerov et al. (edit.), ********* ****** ******* [\i Vyznacnyk Roslyn Ukrajiny\plain\fs28 ]. Kyjiv. 1965.
\par \pard \b Zimmeter\plain\fs28 , \i\b Gatt. Potent\plain\fs28 . 
\par     A. Zimmeter, \i  Die europaischen Arten der Gattung \plain\fs28 Potentilla. Steyr. 1884. 
\par \page
{\up #}{\footnote\pard\plain{\up #} GUG8_I}
\pard\qc \b APPENDIX III\plain\fs28 
\par \pard 
\par \pard\qc \b KEY TO THE ABBREVIATIONS OF TITLES OF PERIODICALS AND\plain\fs28 
\par \b ANONYMOUS WORKS CITED IN VOLUMES 1 (2nd. Ed.), 2, 3, 4 & 5.\plain\fs28 
\par \pard 
\par \i\b Abh. Akad. Wiss . (M\'fcnchen)\plain\fs28 
\par    \i Abhandlungen der mathematisch-physikalischen Classe der k\'f6niglich bayerischen Akademie der Wissenschaften\plain\fs28 . M\'fcnchen. \b 1-29\plain\fs28 , 1829-1922. (Minor variations of title occur.) Titled \i Abhandlungen der k\'f6niglich-bayerischen Akademie der Wissenschaften Math.-Phys. Kl., \plain\b\fs28 30-32\plain\fs28 , 1924-1928. Nov. ser., 1->, 1929->, titled \i\b Abh. Bayer. Akad. Wiss\plain\fs28 ., \i Abhandlungen der bayerischen Akademie der Wissenschaften, Mathematisch-naturwissenschaftliche Abteilung\plain\fs28 .
\par \pard \i\b Abh. Bayer. Akad. Wiss.\plain\fs28 
\par    Cf. \i Abh. Akad. Wiss\plain\fs28 . (\i M\'fcnchen\plain\fs28 ).
\par \i\b Abh. B\'f6hm. Ges. Wiss.\plain\fs28 
\par    \i Abhandlungen der b\'f6hmischen Gesellschaft der Wissenschaften in Prag\plain\fs28 . Prague. Ser. 1, \b 1785-1786\plain\fs28 , 1785-1786; \b 3-4\plain\fs28 , 1788--1789. Ser. 2, titled \i Neues\plain\fs28  [\i Neuere\plain\fs28 ] \i Abhandlungen der k.\plain\fs28  (\b 3\plain\fs28 , 1798, k\'f6niglichen) \b 1-3\plain\fs28 , 1790-1798. Ser. 3, titled \i Abhandlungen der k\'f6niglichen b\'f6hmischen Gesellschaft der Wissenschaften\plain\fs28 , \b 1-8\plain\fs28 , 1804-1824. Nov. ser. [= Ser. 4], \b 1-5\plain\fs28 , 1827-1837. Ser. 5, \b 1-14\plain\fs28 , 1838-1875. Ser. 6, titled \i Abhandlungen der k\'f6niglichen-B\'f6hmischen Gesellschaft der Wissenschaften\plain\fs28  (\i Math.-Nat. Kl\plain\fs28 .) /\i  Pojednani kralovsk\'e9 cesk\'e9 Spolecnosti Nauk,\plain\fs28  \b 1-12\plain\fs28  (=\b 1867-1884\plain\fs28 ), 1868-1885. Ser. 7, titled \i Abhandlungen der k\'f6niglichen-B\'f6hmischen Gesellschaft der Wissenschaften \plain\fs28 (\i Math.-Nat. Kl.\plain\fs28  / \i Rozpravy kralovsk\'e9 cesk\'e9 Spolecnosti Nauk,\plain\fs28  \b 1-4\plain\fs28  (= \b 1885-1891\plain\fs28 ), 1886-1892. Continued as \i Rozpravy kralovsk\'e9 cesk\'e9 Spolecnosti Nauk. Tridy mathematicko-prirodovodeck\'e9.\plain\fs28  / \i Travaux scientifiques de la Soci\'e9t\'e9 royale des Sciences de Boh\'eame.\plain\fs28  \b 1-3\plain\fs28 , 1928-1929.
\par \pard \i\b Abh. Nat. Ver. Bremen\plain\fs28 
\par      \i Abhandlungen herausgegeben vom naturwissenschaftlichen Verein zu Bremen\plain\fs28 . Bremen. 1868-> .
\par \i\b Abh. Preuss. Akad. Wiss\plain\fs28 .
\par      \i Abhandlungen der physikalischen Klasse der k\'f6niglich-preussischen Akademie der Wissenschaften\plain\fs28 . Berlin. 1804-> . With minor changes of title.
\par \i\b Abh. Senckenb. Naturf. Ges.\plain\fs28 
\par    \i Abhandlungen herausgegeben von der Senckenbergischen Naturforschenden Gesellschaft\plain\fs28 . Frankfurt a. M. 1854->.
\par \pard \i\b Abh. Ver. Naturk. Kassel\plain\fs28 
\par     \i Jahresbericht \'fcber die Th\'e4tigkeit des Vereins f\'fcr Naturkunde in Cassel\plain\fs28 . Cassel. \b 1-11\plain\fs28 , 1837-1847; titled\i  Bericht. . . \plain\fs28 ,\b 12\plain\fs28 , 1860; titled \i Bericht des Vereins\plain\fs28  (\i Vereines\plain\fs28 ) \i f\'fcr Naturkunde zu Cassel\plain\fs28  (\i Kassel\plain\fs28 ), \b 13-39\plain\fs28 , 1863-1894; \i Abhandlungen und Berichte des Vereins f\'fcr Naturkunde zu Kassel\plain\fs28 , \b 40-58\plain\fs28 , 1895-1936; later titled \i Abhandlungen des Vereins f\'fcr Naturkunde zu Kassel\plain\fs28 .
\par \pard \i\b Abh. Zool.-Bot. Ges. Wien\plain\fs28 
\par    \i Abhandlungen der kaiserlich-k\'f6niglichen zoologisch-botanischen Gesellschaft in Wien.\plain\fs28  Wien. 1->, 1901->.
\par \i\b Acta Acad. Theod.-Pal\plain\fs28 .
\par     \i  Acta Academiae theodoro-palatinae.\plain\fs28  Mannheimii. \b 1-7\plain\fs28 , 1766-1794.
\par \i\b Acta Agric. Suec.\plain\fs28 
\par      \i Acta Agriculturae suecana\plain\fs28 . Stockholm. \b 1\plain\fs28 ->, 1945->.
\par \i\b Acta Arct\plain\fs28 .
\par      \i Acta arctica\plain\fs28 . K\'f8benhavn. \b 1\plain\fs28 ->,1943->.
\par \i\b Acta Biol. Cracov.\plain\fs28  (\i\b Bot\plain\fs28 .)
\par \pard     \i  Acta biologica cracoviensia. Series botanica\plain\fs28 . Cracovie. 1958-> .
\par \i\b Acta Biol. Acad. Sci. Hung\plain\fs28 .
\par      \i Acta biologica Academiae Scientiarum hungaricae\plain\fs28 . Budapest. \b 1\plain\fs28 ->, 1950->.
\par \i\b Acta Bot. Acad. Sci. Hung\plain\fs28 .
\par    \i Acta botanica Academiae Scientiarum hungaricae\plain\fs28 . Budapest. \b 1-28\plain\fs28 , 1954-1982; titled \i Acta Botanica hungarica,\plain\b\fs28  29\plain\fs28 ->, 1983->.
\par \i\b Acta Bot. Bohem\plain\fs28 .
\par      \i Acta botanica bohemica\plain\fs28 . Praha. 1922-1947.
\par \pard \i\b Acta Bot. Croat\plain\fs28 .
\par      Cf. \i Acta Bot. Inst. Bot. Univ. Zagreb\plain\fs28 .
\par \i\b Acta Bot. Fenn.\plain\fs28 
\par    \i Acta botanica fennica\plain\fs28 . Helsingforsiae. \b 1\plain\fs28 ->, 1925->.
\par \i\b Acta Bot. Inst. Bot. Univ. Zagreb\plain\fs28 .
\par     \i  Acta botanica Instituti botanici Universitatis zagrebensis\plain\fs28 . / \i Izvjesca botanickog Zavoda Sveucilista u Zagrebu\plain\fs28 . Zagreb. \b 1-15\plain\fs28 , 1925-1956 (in \b 5-15\plain\fs28 , 1930-1956, Serbo-Croat title reads \i Izvjesca botanickog Instituta Univerziteta u Zagrebu\plain\fs28 ); titled \i\b Acta Bot. Croat.\plain\fs28 , \i Acta botanica croatica,\plain\b\fs28  16\plain\fs28 ->, 1957-> .
\par \pard \i\b Acta Bot. Malac.\plain\fs28 
\par    \i Acta botanica malacitana\plain\fs28 . M\'e1laga. \b 1\plain\fs28 ->, 1975->. (\b 1\plain\fs28 , 1975, possibly not published until 1976.)
\par \i\b Acta Bot. Neerl.\plain\fs28 
\par    \i Acta botanica neerlandica\plain\fs28 . Amsterdam. \b 1\plain\fs28 ->, 1952->.
\par \i\b Acta Fac. Rer. Nat. Carol.\plain\fs28 
\par    \i Acta Facultatis Rerum naturalium Universitatis Carolinae\plain\fs28 . /\i  Spisy Vyd\'e1van\'e9 Prirodovedeckou Fakultou Karlovy University. / Publications de la Facult\'e9 des Sciences de l' Universit\'e9 Charles\plain\fs28 . Praha. \b 1-195\plain\fs28 , 1923-1949.
\par \pard \i\b Acta Fauna Fl. Universali\plain\fs28 
\par      \i Acta pro Fauna et Flora universali. Series 2. Botanica.\plain\fs28  Bucuresti. \b 1-3\plain\fs28 , 1932-1940.
\par \i\b Acta Geobot. Barcinon.\plain\fs28 
\par      \i Acta geobotanica barcinonensia.\plain\fs28  Barcelona. 1964-> .
\par \i\b Acta Geobot. Hung.\plain\fs28 
\par    \i Acta geobotanica hungarica.\plain\fs28  / \i Debreceni Tisza Istv\'e1n tudom\'e1nyos T\'e1rsas\'e1g III. Matematikai--termeszettudom\'e1nyi Oszt\'e1ly\'e1nak Munk\'e1i. Debrecen\plain\fs28 . \b 1-6\plain\fs28 , 1936-1949.
\par \i\b Acta Horti Berg.\plain\fs28 
\par    \i Acta Horti bergiani.\plain\fs28  /\i  Meddelanden fr\'e5n Kungl. [Kongl.] Svenska Vetenskaps-Akademiens Tr\'e4dg\'e5rd, Bergielund\plain\fs28 . Stockholm. \b 1\plain\fs28 ->, 1890->.
\par \pard \i\b Acta Horti Bot. Prag.\plain\fs28 
\par      \i Acta Horti botanici pragensis\plain\fs28 . Praga. 1962->
\par \i\b Acta Horti Bot. Univ. Jurjev.\plain\fs28 
\par ******************************************************************** [\i Trudy botaniceskago Sada imperatorskago Jur'evskago Universiteta\plain\fs28 ]. / \i Acta Horti botanici Universitatis imperialis jurjevensis\plain\fs28 . Jurjev. \b 1-14\plain\fs28 , 1900 - 1914.
\par \i\b Acta Horti Bot. Univ. Latv.\plain\fs28 
\par \i Acta Horti botanici Universitatis latviensis\plain\fs28 . / \i Latvijas Universit\'e4tes botaniska darza raksti\plain\fs28 . Riga. \b 1-13\plain\fs28 , 1926-1939; titled \i Acta Horti botanici Universitatis.\plain\fs28  / \i Schriften des Botanischen Gartens der Universit\'e4t\plain\fs28 . / \i Universitates botaniska darza raksti\plain\fs28 , \b 14\plain\fs28 , 1944.
\par \pard \i\b Acta Horti Gothob.\plain\fs28 
\par    \i Acta Horti gothoburgensis\plain\fs28  [\i gotoburgensis\plain\fs28 ]. / \i Meddelanden fr\'e5n G\'f6teborgs botaniska Tr\'e4dg\'e5rd\plain\fs28 . G\'f6teborg. \b 1\plain\fs28 ->, 1924->.
\par \i\b Acta Horti Petrop.\plain\fs28 
\par    \i Acta Horti petropolitani\plain\fs28 . Peterburgi. \b 1-43\plain\fs28 , 1871--1931. (With alternative titles ************************************************************** [\i Trudy imperatorskago S.-Peterburgskago botaniceskago Sada\plain\fs28 ], \b 1-30\plain\fs28 (\b 1\plain\fs28 ), 1871-1909, and \b 31\plain\fs28 (\b 1-2\plain\fs28 ), 1912-1913, \b 32\plain\fs28 , 1912; **************************************************************** [\i Trudy Imperatorskago botaniceskago Sada Petra Velikago\plain\fs28 ], \b 30\plain\fs28 (\b 2\plain\fs28 ), 1913 & \b 31\plain\fs28 (\b 3\plain\fs28 ), 1915, and ************************************** [\i Trudy glavnago botaniceskago Sada\plain\fs28 ], Petrograd, \b 33-42\plain\fs28 (\b 1\plain\fs28 ), 1915-1929, \b 43\plain\fs28 (\b 1\plain\fs28 ), 1930. Titled ********************************************************* [\i Trudy botaniceskago Sada Akademii Nauk SSSR\plain\fs28 ]. / \i Acta Horti botanici Academiae Scientiarum \plain\fs28 <ante petropolitani>, \b 42\plain\fs28 (\b 2\plain\fs28 ), 1931, \b 43\plain\fs28 (\b 2\plain\fs28 )-\b 44\plain\fs28 , 1931.)
\par \pard \i\b Acta Inst. Bot. Acad. Sci. URSS\plain\fs28  (\i Ser. 1\plain\fs28 )
\par    ********************************************************************************************************************** [\i Trudy botaniceskago Instituta Akademii Nauk SSSR. Serija 1. Flora i Sistematika vyssikh Rastenij\plain\fs28 ]. / \i Acta Instituti botanici Academiae Scientiarum URSS. Ser. 1. Flora et Systematica Plantae vasculares\plain\fs28 . Leningrad & Mosqua. \b 1-13\plain\fs28 , 1933-1964. (Minor variations of title in later volumes.)
\par \pard \i\b Acta Mus. Nation. Prag.\plain\fs28 
\par      \i Sbornik narodniho Musea v Praze. B\plain\fs28  (\i Prirodovedny\plain\fs28 ). / \i Acta Musei nationalis Pragae. B\plain\fs28  (\i Scientiae naturales\plain\fs28 ) Pragae. \b 1\plain\fs28 ->, 1938-> .
\par \i\b Acta Phytogeogr. Suec.\plain\fs28 
\par    \i Acta phytogeographica suecica\plain\fs28 . Uppsala. \b 1\plain\fs28 ->, 1929->.
\par \i\b Acta Phytotax. Geobot\plain\fs28 . (\i Kyoto\plain\fs28 )
\par    \i Acta phytotaxonomica et geobotanica.\plain\fs28  ******* [\i Shokubutsu bunrul chiri\plain\fs28 ]. Kyoto. \b 1\plain\fs28 ->, 1932->.
\par \pard \i\b Acta Soc. Bot. Polon.\plain\fs28 
\par     \i  Acta Societatis Botanicorum Poloniae\plain\fs28 . Warszawa. \b 1\plain\fs28 ->, 1923->.
\par \i\b Acta Soc. Fauna Fl. Fenn\plain\fs28 .
\par     \i Acta societatis pro Fauna et Flora rennica\plain\fs28 . Helsingforsiae. 1875->.
\par \i\b Act. Soc. Linn. Bordeaux\plain\fs28 
\par      \i Bulletin d 'Histoire naturelle de la Soci\'e9t\'e9 linn\'e9enne de Bordeaux\plain\fs28 . Bordeaux. 1-3, 1826-1829; titled \i Actes de la Societe linn\'e9enne de Bordeaux\plain\fs28 , \b 4\plain\fs28 ->, 1830-> .
\par \i\b Acta Acad. Sci. Nat. Mor.-Sil\plain\fs28 .
\par \pard      \i Acta Societatis Scientiarum naturalium Moraviae\plain\fs28 . / \i Pr\'e1ce moravsk\'e9 prirodovedecke Spolecnosti\plain\fs28 . Brno. \b 1-18\plain\fs28 , 1924-1947; titled \i Acta Academiae Scientiarum naturalium moravo-silesiacae\plain\fs28 . / \i Pr\'e1ce moravskoslezsk\'e9 Akademie ved prirodnich,\plain\fs28  \b 19-25\plain\fs28 , 1948-1953; titled \i Acta Academiae Scientiarum cechoslovenicae, Basis brunensis\plain\fs28 . / \i Pr\'e1ce brnensk\'e9 Z\'e1kladny ceskoslo-vensk\'e9 Akademie Ved\plain\fs28 , \b 26\plain\fs28 ->, 1954-> .
\par \i\b Acta Acad. Theod.-Pal\plain\fs28 .
\par \pard      \i Acta Academiae Theodoro-Palatinae\plain\fs28 . Mannheimii. \b 1-7\plain\fs28 , 1766-1794.
\par \i\b Acta Biol. Cracov. (Bot.)\plain\fs28 
\par      \i Acta biologica cracoviensia. Series botanica\plain\fs28 . Cracovie. 1958-> .
\par \i\b Acta Biol. Acad. Sci. Hung\plain\fs28 .
\par      \i Acta biologica Academiae Scientiarum hungaricae\plain\fs28 . Budapest. 1951-> .
\par \i\b Acta Bot. Acad. Sci. Hung\plain\fs28 .
\par      \i Acta botanica Academiae Scientiarum hungaricae\plain\fs28 . Budapest. 1954-> .
\par \i\b Acta Bot. Neerl\plain\fs28 .
\par      \i Acta botanica neerlandica\plain\fs28 . Amsterdam. 1952-> .
\par \pard \i\b Acta Dendrol. Cech\plain\fs28 .
\par      \i Acta dendrologica cechoslovaca\plain\fs28 .
\par \i\b Acta Horti Berg\plain\fs28 .
\par      \i Acta Horti bergiani\plain\fs28 . /\i  Meddelanden fran Kongl. Svenska Vetenskaps-Akademiens Tr\'e4dg\'e5rd, Bergielund\plain\fs28 . Stockholm. 1890-> .
\par \i\b Acta Horti Bot. Prag\plain\fs28 .
\par      \i Acta Horti botanici pragensis\plain\fs28 . Praga. 1962-> .
\par \i\b Acta Horti Petrop\plain\fs28 .
\par     \i Acta Horti petropolitani\plain\fs28 . Peterburgi. \b 1-43\plain\fs28 , 1871-1931. (With alternative title ***** ***. *-************** ************* **** [\i Trudy Imp. S.-Peterburgskago botaniceskago Sada\plain\fs28 ] 1871-1918, and  ***** ******** ************* **** [Trudy glavnago botaniceskago Sada] 1918-1931.)
\par \pard \i\b Acta Inst. Bot. Acad Sci. URSS\plain\fs28 
\par     ***** ************* ********** ******** **** **** [\i Trudy botaniceskago Instituta Akademii Nauk SSSR\plain\fs28 ]. /\i  Acta Instituti botanici Academiae Scientiarum URSS\plain\fs28 . Leningrad & Mosqua. 1933-> .
\par \i\b Acta Mus. Nat. Pragae\plain\fs28 
\par      \i Sbornik n\'e1rodn\'edho Musea v Praze\plain\fs28 . / \i Acta Musei nationalis Pragae\plain\fs28 . Praha. 1938-> .
\par \i\b Acta Phytogeogr. Suec\plain\fs28 .
\par      \i Acta phytogeographica suecica\plain\fs28 . Uppsala. 1929-> .
\par \i\b Acta Phytotax. Barcinon.\plain\fs28 
\par \pard      \i Acta phytotaxonomica barcinonensia\plain\fs28 . Barcelona. 1969-> .
\par \i\b Acta Soc. Bot. Polon\plain\fs28 .
\par      \i Acta Societatis Botanicorum Poloniae.\plain\fs28  / \i Organ Polskiego Towarzystwa botanicznego\plain\fs28 . / \i Publication de la Soci\'e9te botanique de Pologne\plain\fs28 . Warszawa. 1923-> .
\par \i\b Acta Soc. Fauna Fl. Fenn\plain\fs28 .
\par      \i Acta Societatis pro Fauna et Flora fennica\plain\fs28 . Helsingforsiae. 1875-> .
\par \i\b Acta Soc. Sci. Fenn.\plain\fs28 
\par    \i Acta Societatis Scientiarum fennicae\plain\fs28 . Helsingforsiae. Ser. 1, \b 1-50\plain\fs28 , 1842-1926. Nov. ser., B, \b 1\plain\fs28 ->, 1931->.
\par \pard \i\b Acta Univ. As. Med\plain\fs28 .
\par      ***** ******-********** **************** ************ [\i Trudy sredne-aziatskogo gosudarstvennogo Universiteta\plain\fs28 ]. / \i Acta Universitatis Asiae mediae\plain\fs28 . Taschkent. \b 1-35\plain\fs28 , 1928-1937-
\par \i\b Acta Univ. Carol. (Biol.)\plain\fs28 
\par    \i Universitas carolina biologica\plain\fs28 . Pragae. \b 1-3\plain\fs28 , 1954-1957 ; titled \i Acta Universitatis carolinae. 3. Biologica\plain\fs28 . Pragae / Praha. \b 4\plain\fs28 ->, 1958->. \i\b Suppl.\plain\fs28 ,  Supplementum . 1961-1967. (Published at irregular intervals as follows: \b 1960\plain\fs28  in 1961; \b 1962\plain\fs28  in 1962; \b 1964/1\plain\fs28  & \b 1964/2\plain\fs28  in 1964; \b 1965\plain\fs28  in 1965; \b 1966\plain\fs28  \b 1/2\plain\fs28  (single issue) in 1967.)
\par \pard \i\b Actas Mem. Prim. Congr. Nat. Esp. Zaragoza\plain\fs28 
\par    \i Actas y Memorias del primer Congreso de Naturalistas espa\'f1oles\plain\fs28 
\par \i celebrado en Zaragoza los Dias 7-10 de Octobre de 1908\plain\fs28 . Zaragoza. 1909.
\par \i\b Actas Soc. Esp. Hist. Nat\plain\fs28 .
\par    \i Actas de la Sociedad espa\'f1ola de Historia natural\plain\fs28 . Madrid. 1897--1900. (Earlier issues, from 1872, were incorporated in \i Anales de la Sociedad espa\'f1ola de Historia natural\plain\fs28 .)
\par \i\b Actes Soc. Hist. Nat. Paris\plain\fs28 
\par     \i  Actes de la Soci\'e9t\'e9 d 'Histoire naturelle de Paris\plain\fs28 . Paris. \b 1\plain\fs28 , 1792.
\par \pard \i\b Actes Soc. Linn. Bordeaux\plain\fs28 .
\par    \i Actes de la Soei\'e9t\'e9 linn\'e9enne de Bordeaux\plain\fs28 . Bordeaux. \b 4-106\plain\fs28 , 1830-1969. (\b 1-3\plain\fs28 , 1826-1829, titled \i Bulletin de l'Histoire naturelle de la Soci\'e9t\'e9 linn\'e9enne de Bordeaux\plain\fs28 ; of this, an ed. 2, \b 1-2\plain\fs28  was issued 1830 1845.)
\par \i\b Adansonia\plain\fs28 
\par    \i Adansonia; Recueil p\'e9riodique d'Observations botaniques\plain\fs28 . Paris. \b 1-12\plain\fs28 , 1860-1879. Nov. ser., titled \i Adansonia\plain\fs28 , \b 1-20\plain\fs28 , 1961-1981 ; titled \i Bulletin du Mus\'e9um national d'Histoire naturelle\plain\fs28 . 4 \i S\'e9rie. Section B. Adansonia. Botanique Phytochimie\plain\fs28 , \b 3\plain\fs28 ->, 1981->.
\par \pard \i\b Agric. Colon\plain\fs28 .
\par      \i  L'Agricoltura coloniale\plain\fs28 . Firenze. \b 1-38\plain\fs28 , 1907-1944. Titled \i Revista di Agricoltura tropicale e subtropicale\plain\fs28 , \b 39\plain\fs28 ->, 1945->.
\par \i\b Agric. Rec\plain\fs28 . (\i\b Tel-Aviv\plain\fs28 )
\par      \i Agricultural Records. Agricultural Experiment Station, Institute of Agriculture and natural History\plain\fs28 . Tel-Aviv. \b 1\plain\fs28 ->, 1927->.
\par \i\b Agron. Jour\plain\fs28 .
\par      \i Agronomy Journal\plain\fs28 . Madison, Wisconsin . 1949-> .
\par \i\b Agron. Lusit.\plain\fs28 
\par    \i Agronomia lusitana\plain\fs28 . Sacav\'e9m. 1->, 1939->. (\b 24\plain\fs28 (\b 3\plain\fs28 )->, 1962->, at Oeiras.)
\par \pard \i\b Allgem. Bot. Zeitschr\plain\fs28 .
\par    \i Allgemeine botanische Zeitschrift f\'fcr Systematik, Floristik, Pflanzengeographie, etc\plain\fs28 . Karlsruhe. \b 1-26\plain\fs28 /\b 33\plain\fs28 , 1895-1927.
\par \i\b Allgem. Gartenz.\plain\fs28 
\par      \i Allgemeine Gartenzeitung\plain\fs28 . Berlin. 1833-1856.
\par \i\b Allgem. Th\'fcr. Gartenz\plain\fs28 .
\par      \i Allgemeine th\'fcringische Gartenzeitung\plain\fs28 . 1842-> .
\par \i\b Alpina\plain\fs28  (\i\b Winterthur\plain\fs28 )
\par      \i Alpina.\plain\fs28  Winterthur.\b  1\plain\fs28 ->, 1806-1809.
\par \i\b Amer. Fern Jour\plain\fs28 .
\par    \i American Fern Journal. A Quarterly devoted to Ferns\plain\fs28 . (From \b 62\plain\fs28 , 1972, subtitled \i Quarterly Journal of the American Fern Society\plain\fs28 .) Port Richmond, New York. \b 1\plain\fs28 ->, 1910->. (\b 3-13\plain\fs28 , 1913-1926, at Auburndale, Massachusetts; \b 14-24\plain\fs28 , 1914--1934, at Lancaster, Pennsylvania; \b 25-28\plain\fs28 (\b 2\plain\fs28 ), 1935 1938, at Lancaster, Pennsylvania and Brattleboro, Vermont ; \b 28\plain\fs28 (\b 3\plain\fs28 ) - \b 37\plain\fs28 (\b 1\plain\fs28 ), 1938-1947, at Lancaster, Pennsylvania and Brooklyn, New York ; \b 37\plain\fs28 (\b 2\plain\fs28 )-\b 49\plain\fs28 , 1947-1959, at Lancaster, Pennsylvania;\b 50-62\plain\fs28 , 1960-1972, at Baltimore, Maryland; \b 63- 74\plain\fs28 , 1973-1984, at Washington, D.C.; \b 75\plain\fs28 ->, 1985->,at Burlington, Vermont.)
\par \pard \i\b Amer. Jour. Bot.\plain\fs28 
\par    \i American Journal of Botany\plain\fs28 . Lancaster, Pennsylvania. 1914->. (\b 26-36\plain\fs28 , 1939-1949, at Burlington, Vermont; \b 37-58\plain\fs28 , 1950-1971, at Baltimore, Maryland; \b 59\plain\fs28 , 1972, at Lawrence, Kansas; \b 60\plain\fs28 ->, 1973->, at Columbus, Ohio.)
\par \i\b Amer. Jour. Sci. Arts\plain\fs28 
\par    \i American Journal of Science and Arts\plain\fs28 . New Haven, Connecticut. \b 2--118\plain\fs28 . 1820-1879. (\b 1\plain\fs28 , 1818, and \b 119\plain\fs28 ->, 1880->, titled \i American Journal of Science\plain\fs28 .)
\par \pard \i\b Amer. Midl. Nat.\plain\fs28 
\par      \i American Midland Naturalist\plain\fs28 . Notre Dame, Indiana. 1909-> .
\par \i\b Anais Ci. Nat. (Porto)\plain\fs28 
\par    \i Anais de Sci\'eancias naturaes. / Anais de Ci\'eancias naturais\plain\fs28 . Porto. \b 1--10\plain\fs28 , 1894-1906.
\par \i\b Anais Inst. Sup. Agron. (Lisboa)\plain\fs28 
\par    \i Anais do Instituto superior de Agronomia da Universidade technica de Lisboa\plain\fs28 . Lisboa. 1->, 1920->.
\par \i\b Anais Inst. Vinho Porto\plain\fs28 
\par      \i Anais do Instituto do Vinho do Porto\plain\fs28 . Porto. 1940-> .
\par \pard \i\b Anal. Acad. Rep. Pop. Rom.\plain\fs28 
\par    Cf. \i Anal. Acad. Rom\'e2ne\plain\fs28 
\par \i\b Anal. Acad. Rom\'e2ne\plain\fs28 
\par    \i Analile Societ\'e2tei Academice rom\'e2ne\plain\fs28 . Bucuresti. Ser. 1, \b 1-11\plain\fs28 , 1867-1878. Ser. 2, titled \i Analele Academiei rom\'e2ne\plain\fs28 , \b 1-41\plain\fs28 , 1879-1922. Ser. 3, titled \i\b Mem. Sect. Sti.\plain\fs28  (\i\b Acad. Rom\'e2na\plain\fs28 ), \i Academia rom\'e2na. Memoriile Sectiuneii stiintifice,\plain\fs28  \b 1-23\plain\fs28 , 1922-1948. Titled \i\b Anal. Acad. Rep. Pop. Rom\plain\fs28 ., \i Analele Academiei Republicii populare rom\'e2ne\plain\fs28  [\i rom\'eene\plain\fs28 ], \i Sect. Biol., Geogr., Geol\plain\fs28 ., \b 1-3\plain\fs28 , 1948-1950. Nov. ser., \b 1\plain\fs28 ->, 1950->.
\par \pard \i\b Anal. Ci. Nat.\plain\fs28 
\par    Cf.\i  Anal. Hist. Nat\plain\fs28 .
\par \i\b Anal. Hist. Nat.\plain\fs28 
\par    \i Anales de Historia natural\plain\fs28 . Madrid. \b 1-2\plain\fs28 , 1799-1800; titled \i\b Anal. Ci. Nat.\plain\fs28 , \i Anales de Ciencias naturales\plain\fs28 , \b 3-7\plain\fs28 , 1801-1804.
\par \i\b Anal. Inst. Bot. Cavanilles\plain\fs28 
\par    \i Anales del Instituto bot\'e1nico A. J. Cavanilles\plain\fs28 . Madrid. \b 10-35\plain\fs28 , 1951-1978. (For \b 1-9\plain\fs28  & \b 36\plain\fs28 ->, cf. \i Anal. Jard. Bot. Madrid\plain\fs28 ).
\par \i\b Anal. Inst. Forest. Invest. Exper\plain\fs28 . (\i\b Madrid\plain\fs28 )
\par \pard      \i Anales. Instituto Forestal de Investigaciones y Experiencias\plain\fs28 . Madrid. \b 1\plain\fs28 ->, 1956-> .
\par \i\b Anal. Jard. Bot. Madrid\plain\fs28 
\par    \i Anales del Jardin bot\'e1nico de Madrid\plain\fs28 . Madrid. \b 1-9\plain\fs28 , 1941-1950, and 36->, 1979->. (For \b 10-35\plain\fs28 , 1951-1978, cf. \i Anal. Inst. Bot. A.J. Cavanilles\plain\fs28 ).
\par \i\b Anal. R. Acad. Farm\plain\fs28 . (Madrid)
\par      \i Anales R. Academia de Farmacia\plain\fs28 . Madrid. 1942-> .
\par \i\b Anal. Soc. Esp. Hist. Nat.\plain\fs28 
\par    \i Anales de la Sociedad espa\'f1ola de Historia natural\plain\fs28 . Madrid. \b 1-30\plain\fs28 , 1872/1873-1901 /1902. (Volumes \b 21-30\plain\fs28  also numbered \b 1-10\plain\fs28 . From 1872-1896, this journal also incorporated \i Actas Soc. Esp. Hist. Nat\plain\fs28 .)
\par \pard \i\b Anal. Sti. Univ. Al. 1. Cuza Iasi\plain\fs28  (\i\b Biol\plain\fs28 .)
\par      \i Analele stiinlifice ale Universitatii->Al. I. Cuz-> din Iasi\plain\fs28 . Iasi. \b 1\plain\fs28 ->, 1955->.
\par \i\b Animadv. Syst. Herb. Univ. Tomsk\plain\fs28 .
\par      \i Animadversiones systematicae ex Herbario Universitatis tomskiensis.\plain\fs28  / *************** ******* ** ********** ********* ******** ************  [\i Sistematiceskie Zametki po Materialam Gerbarija Tomskogo Universiteta\plain\fs28 ]. Tomsk. 1927-> .
\par \i\b Ann. Acad. Horti-Viticult\plain\fs28 . (Budapest)
\par \pard      Cf. \i Mitt. Kgl. Ungar. Gartenb.-Lehranst\plain\fs28 .
\par \i\b Ann. Accad Aspir. Nat.\plain\fs28  (\i\b Napoli\plain\fs28 )
\par      \i Annali dell'Accademia degli aspiranti Naturalisti.\plain\fs28  Napoli. Era 1, Ser. 1, \b 1-3\plain\fs28 , 1843-1846. Ser. 2, \b 1\plain\fs28 , 1847. Ser. 3, \b 1-6\plain\fs28 , 1861-1867. Ser. 4, \b 1\plain\fs28 , 1867. Era 2, \b 1-2\plain\fs28 , 1868-1869. Era 3, \b 1\plain\fs28 , 1887.
\par \i\b Ann. Acad. Sci. Fenn\plain\fs28 .
\par      \i Suomalaisen Tiedeakatemiart Toimituksia. Sarja A.\plain\fs28  / \i Annales Academiae Scientiarum fennicae\plain\fs28 . Ser. A. Helsinki. \b 1\plain\fs28 ->, 1909-> . From \b 61\plain\fs28 ->, 1961->, Latin title only is used.
\par \pard \i\b Ann. Agric. Col. Sweden\plain\fs28 
\par      \i  Landbrukshogskolans Annaler \plain\fs28 ./ \i Annals of the agricultural College of Sweden\plain\fs28 ./ \i Annalen der landwirtschaftlichen Hoch-schule Schwedens\plain\fs28  / \i Annales de l'\'c9cole superieure d'Agriculture de la Suede.\plain\fs28  Uppsala. \b 1\plain\fs28 ->, 1933-> . With minor changes of title.
\par \i\b Ann. Agric. Sic.\plain\fs28 
\par      \i Annali di Agricoltura siciliana, redatti per Istifuzione del Principe Castelnuovo\plain\fs28 . Palermo.
\par \i\b Ann. Bot.\plain\fs28 
\par    \i Annals of Botany\plain\fs28 . London. \b 1-50\plain\fs28 , 1887-1936. Nov. ser., 1->, 1937->. (Nov. ser. \b 1-38\plain\fs28 , 1937-1974, at Oxford; \b 39\plain\fs28 ->, 1975->, at London etc.)
\par \pard \i\b Ann. Bot.\plain\fs28  (\i\b Konig & Sims\plain\fs28 )
\par      \i Annals of Botany. Editors, Charles Konig, F.L.S. and John Sims, M.D., F.L.S. London\plain\fs28 . \b 1-2\plain\fs28 , 1804-1806.
\par \i\b Ann. Bot. Fenn.\plain\fs28 
\par    \i Annales botanici fennici\plain\fs28 . Helsinki. \b 1\plain\fs28 ->, 1964->.
\par \i\b Ann. Bot.\plain\fs28  (\i Roma\plain\fs28 )
\par      \i Annali di Botanica\plain\fs28 . Roma. 1903-> .
\par \i\b Ann. Bot. Soc. Zool.-Bot. Fenn. Vanamo\plain\fs28 
\par    \i Suomalaisen el\'e4in- ja kasvitieteellisen Seuran Vanamon Julkaisuja\plain\fs28 . / \i Annales Societatis zoologicae-botanicae fennicae ' Vanamo'\plain\fs28 . Helsinki. \b 1-15\plain\fs28 , 1923-1931. (Botany combined with zoology.) Titled \i Suomalaisen el\'e4in- ja kasvitieteellisen Seuran Vanamon kasvitieteellisi\'e4 Julkaisuja.\plain\fs28  / \i Annales botanici Societatis zoologicae-botanicae fennicae 'Vanamo'\plain\fs28 , \b 1-35\plain\fs28 , 1931-1964. (For continuation cf. \i Ann. Bot. Fenn\plain\fs28 .)
\par \pard \i\b Ann. Bot. (Usteri)\plain\fs28 
\par    \i Annalen der Botanick. Herausgegeben von P. Usteri\plain\fs28 . \b 1-24\plain\fs28 . Z\'fcrich. 1791-1800. (\b 8-24\plain\fs28 , 1794-1800, titled \i Annalen der Botanik\plain\fs28 ; \b 14-24\plain\fs28 , 1795--1800, at Leipzig.)
\par \i\b Ann. G\'e9n. Sci. Phys . (Bruxelles)\plain\fs28 
\par    \i Annales g\'e9n\'e9rales des Sciences physiques\plain\fs28 . Bruxelles. \b 1-8\plain\fs28 , 1819-1821.
\par \i\b Ann. Hist.-Nat. Mus. Hung\plain\fs28 .
\par     \i  Annales historico-naturales Musei nationalis hungarici\plain\fs28 . / \i A Magyar nemzeti Muzeum Terme'szetrajzi Oszt\'e1lyainak Foly\'f3irata. Budapest\plain\fs28 . Ser. 1, \b 1-41\plain\fs28 , 1903-1948 (33->, 1940->, Hungarian title read s Az Orsz\'e1gos Magyar Term\'e9szettu-dom\'e1nyi Muzeum Foly\'f3irata.) Nov. ser., \b 1-9\plain\fs28 , 1951-1958. Vol. nos. then revert to ser. 1, \b 51\plain\fs28 ->, 1959-> . (With several variations of Hungarian title.) 
\par \pard \i\b Ann. Lyc. New York\plain\fs28 
\par      \i Annals of the Lyceum of Natural History of New York\plain\fs28 . New York. \b 1-11\plain\fs28 , 1824-1886.
\par \i\b Ann. Missouri Bot. Gard.\plain\fs28 
\par    \i Annals of the Missouri Botanica1 Garden\plain\fs28 . St Louis, Missouri. \b 1\plain\fs28 ->, 1914->.
\par \i\b Ann. Mus. Firenze\plain\fs28 
\par    \i Annali del Mus\'e8o imperiale di Fisica e Storia naturale di Firenze\plain\fs28 . Firenze. Ser. 1, \b 1-2\plain\fs28 , 1808-1810. Nov. ser., titled \i Annali del r. Museo di Fisica e Storia naturale di Firenze\plain\fs28 , \b 1\plain\fs28 , 1866.
\par \pard \i\b Ann. Mus. Goulandris\plain\fs28 
\par **************************************************************************************************************************************. ********************************************************; [\i Epeteris Mouseion Goulandre. Sumbole eis ten phusiken istorian tes Ellados kai tes periokhes tes Mesogeion. Ekdosis tou Mouseion Goulandre phusikes Istorias\plain\fs28 ]. / \i Annales Musei Goulandris. Contributiones ad Historiam naturalem Graeciae et Regiones mediterranae a Museo Goulandris Historiae naturalis editae\plain\fs28 . Kifissia.\b  1\plain\fs28 ->, 1973->.
\par \pard \i\b Ann. Mus. Hist. Nat. (Paris)\plain\fs28 
\par    \i Annales du Mus\'e9um d' Histoire naturelle\plain\fs28 . Paris. \b 1-20\plain\fs28 , 1802-1813. \b 21\plain\fs28  (Index to \b 1-20\plain\fs28 ), 1827.
\par \i\b Ann. Nat. Hist.\plain\fs28 
\par    \i Annals of natural History; or, Magazine of Zoology, Botany and Geology\plain\fs28 . London. Ser. 1, \b 1-5\plain\fs28 , 1838-1840; titled \i The Annals and Magazine of natural History, including Zoology, Botany and Geology\plain\fs28 , \b 6-20\plain\fs28 , 1841-1847. Ser. 2, \b 1-20\plain\fs28  1848-1857. Ser. 3, \b 1-20\plain\fs28 , 1858-1867. Ser. 4, \b 1-20\plain\fs28 , 1868-1877. Ser. 5, \b 1-20\plain\fs28 , 1878-1887. Ser. 6, \b 1-20\plain\fs28 , 1888--1897. Ser. 7, \b 1-20\plain\fs28 , 1898-1907. Ser. 8, \b 1-20\plain\fs28 , 1908-1917. Ser. 9, \b 1-20\plain\fs28 , 1918-1927. Ser. 10, \b 1-20\plain\fs28 , 1928-1937. Ser. 11, \b 1\plain\fs28 ->, 1938->.
\par \pard \i\b Ann. Naturh. Mus. (Wien)\plain\fs28 
\par    \i Annalen des k.k. naturhistorischen Hofmuseums\plain\fs28 . Wien. \b 1-31\plain\fs28 , 1886-1917; titled \i Annalen des naturhistorischen Hofmuseums\plain\fs28 , \b 32\plain\fs28 , 1918; titled \i Annalen des naturhistorischen Museums in Wien\plain\fs28 , \b 33\plain\fs28 ->, 1919->. (From 84=, 1983=, Botany in \i Serie B f\'fcr Botanik und Zoologie\plain\fs28 .)
\par \i\b Ann. Rep. Missouri Bot. Gard\plain\fs28 .
\par      \i Annual Report. Missouri botanical Garden\plain\fs28 . St Louis. \b 1-23\plain\fs28 , 1890-1912.
\par \pard \i\b Ann. Sci. Acad. Polyt. Porto\plain\fs28 
\par    \i Annaes scientificos [Anais cientificos] da Academia polytechnica do Porto\plain\fs28 . Coimbra. \b 1-14\plain\fs28 , 1905-1922; titled \i\b Anais Fac. Ci. Porto\plain\fs28 , \i Anais da Faculdade de Sci\'eancias do Porto\plain\fs28 , \b 15-46\plain\fs28 , 1927-1963; titled \i Anais da Faculdade de Ci\'eancias. Universidade do Porto\plain\fs28 , \b 47\plain\fs28 ->, 1964->. (\b 15\plain\fs28 ->, 1927->, at Porto.)
\par \i\b Ann. Sci. Nat.\plain\fs28 
\par    \i Annales des Sciences naturelles\plain\fs28 . Paris. Ser. 1, \b 1-30\plain\fs28 , 1824-1833. Ser. 2, \b 1-20\plain\fs28 , 1834-1843. Ser. 3, \b 1-20\plain\fs28 , 1844-1853. Ser. 4, \b 1-20\plain\fs28 , 1854-1863. Ser. 5, \b 1-20\plain\fs28 , 1864-1874. Ser. 6, \b 1-20\plain\fs28 , 1875-1884. Ser. 7, \b 1-20\plain\fs28 , 1885-1895. Ser. 8, \b 1-20\plain\fs28 , 1895-1904. Ser. 9, \b 1-20\plain\fs28 , 1905-1917. Ser. 10, \b 1-20\plain\fs28 , 1919-1938. Ser. 11, \b 1-20\plain\fs28 , 1939-1959. Ser. 12, \b 1-19\plain\fs28 , 1960-1978. Ser. 13, \b 1\plain\fs28 ->, 1979->. (Ser. 2-10, Botanique. Ser. 11->, \i Botanique et Biologie v\'e9g\'e9tale\plain\fs28 .)
\par \pard \i\b Ann. Sci. Nat.\plain\fs28  (\i\b Porto\plain\fs28 ).
\par      \i Annaes de Sciencias naturaes\plain\fs28 . Porto. \b 1-10\plain\fs28 , 1894-1906.
\par \i\b Ann. Sci. Obs\plain\fs28 .
\par      \i Annales des Sciences d 'Observation\plain\fs28 . Paris. \b 1\plain\fs28 ->, 1829-1830.
\par \i\b Ann. Sci. Phys. Nat. Agric. Industr\plain\fs28 .
\par      \i Annales des Sciences physiques et naturelles, d'Agriculture et d'Industrie\plain\fs28 . Lyon, Paris & Londres. Ser. 1, \b 1-11\plain\fs28 , 1838-1849. Ser. 2, \b 1-8\plain\fs28 , 1849-1856. Ser. 3, \b 1-11\plain\fs28 , 1857-1867. Later Series with other titles.
\par \pard \i\b Ann. Scott. Nat. Hist\plain\fs28 .
\par      \i The Annals of Scottish Natural History\plain\fs28 . Edinburgh. 1892-1911 .
\par \i\b Ann. Sect. Horti- Viticult. Univ. Sci. Agr. (Budapest)\plain\fs28 
\par    Cf.\i  Mitt. Kgl. Ungar. Gartenb.-Lehranst\plain\fs28 .
\par \i\b Ann. Soc. Bot. Lyon\plain\fs28 
\par      \i Annales de la Societe botanique de Lyon\plain\fs28 . Lyon. \b 1-42\plain\fs28 , 1873-1922.
\par \i\b Ann. Soc. Linn. Lyon\plain\fs28 
\par    \i Annales de la Soci\'e9t\'e9 linn\'e9enne de Lyon\plain\fs28 . Lyon. Ser. 1, \b 1-4\plain\fs28 [\b 1836-1850\plain\fs28 / \b 1852\plain\fs28 ], 1836-1852. Nov. ser., \b 1-80\plain\fs28 , 1853-1937.
\par \pard \i\b Ann. Sperim. Agraria\plain\fs28  (\i\b Roma\plain\fs28 )
\par      \i Annali della Sperimentazione agraria.\plain\fs28  Roma. Ser. 1, \b 1-40\plain\fs28 , 1930-1941. Nov. ser., \b 1\plain\fs28 ->, 1947-> .
\par \i\b Ann. Stor. Nat.\plain\fs28  (\i\b Bologna\plain\fs28 )
\par      \i Annalidi Storia naturale\plain\fs28 . Bologna. \b 1-4\plain\fs28 , 1829-1830.
\par \i\b Ann. Univ. Sci. Budapest. Rolando E\'f6tv\'f6s\plain\fs28 
\par      \i  Annales Universitatis Scientiarum budapestinensis de Rolando E\'f6tv\'f6s nominatae. Sectio biologica\plain\fs28 . Budapest. \b 1\plain\fs28 ->, 1957-> .
\par \i\b Annot. Zool. Bot.\plain\fs28  (\i\b Bratislava\plain\fs28 )
\par \pard     \i  Annotationes zoologicae et botanicae\plain\fs28 . Bratislava. \b 1\plain\fs28 ->, 1964-> .
\par \i\b Annu. Cons. Jard. Bot. Gen\'e8ve\plain\fs28 
\par    \i Annuaire du Conservatoire et du Jardin botaniques de Gen\'e8ve\plain\fs28 . Gen\'e8ve. \b 1-21\plain\fs28 , [1896 ]1897-1922. Continued as \i Candollea\plain\fs28 .
\par \i\b Annu. Soc. Dendrol. Pologne\plain\fs28 
\par    \i Annuaire de la Soci\'e9t\'e9 dendrologique de la Soci\'e9t\'e9 botanique de Pologne\plain\fs28 . / \i Rocznik Polskiego Towarzystwa dendrologicznego\plain\fs28 . Lw\'f3w.1926-1935; titled \i Rocznik Sekcji dendrologicznej Polskiego Towarzystwa Botanicznego\plain\fs28 , Warszawa, \b 1\plain\fs28 ->, 1946->.
\par \pard \i\b Annu. Univ. Sofia Phys.-Math. 3. (Sci. Nat.)\plain\fs28 
\par **************************************** [\i Godisnik na Sofijskzija Universitet\plain\fs28 ]. / \i Jahrbuch der Universit\'e4t Sofia, phys.-mathematische Fakult\'e4t\plain\fs28 . / \i Annuaire de l' Universit\'e9 de Sofia, Facult\'e9 physico-math\'e9matique. Livre 3\plain\fs28 . (\i Sciences Nat.\plain\fs28 ) Sofia. \b 1\plain\fs28 ->, 1904->. (From \b 5\plain\fs28 , divided into sections.)
\par \i\b Anzeig. Akad. Wiss. (Wien)\plain\fs28 
\par    \i Anzeiger der kaiserliche Akademie der Wissenschaften. Mathematisch-naturwissenschaftliche Classe\plain\fs28 . Wien. \b 1-51\plain\fs28 , 1864-1914; titled \i Anzeiger. Kaiserliche Akademie der Wissenschaften in Wien. Mathematisch-naturwissenschafliche Klasse\plain\fs28 , \b 52-54\plain\fs28 , 1915-1917; titled \i Anzeiger. Akademie der Wissenschaften in Wien. Mathematisch-naturwissenschaftliche Klasse\plain\fs28 , \b 55-83\plain\fs28 , 1918--1946; titled \i Anzeiger. \'d6sterreichische Akademie der Wissenschaften. Mathematisch-naturwissenschaftliche Klasse\plain\fs28 , \b 84\plain\fs28 ->, 1947->.
\par \pard \i\b \'c5rbok Univ. Bergen\plain\fs28 
\par      \i Bergens Museums Aarsberetning\plain\fs28 . Bergen. 1884-1892; titled\i  Bergens Museums Aarbog/Aarbok/\'c5rbok\plain\fs28 , 1893-1948; titled \i Universitetet i Bergen \'c5rbok\plain\fs28 , 1949-1959; titled \i \'c5rbok for Universitetet i Bergen\plain\fs28 , 1960-> .
\par \i\b Arboret. K\'f3rnickie\plain\fs28 
\par    \i Arboretum K\'f3rnickie\plain\fs28 . Pozn\'e1n. \b 1\plain\fs28 ->, 1955->.
\par \i\b Arb. Naturf.-Ver. Riga\plain\fs28 
\par      \i Arbeiten des naturforschenden Vereins zu Riga\plain\fs28 . Rudolstadt. Ser. 1,\b 1\plain\fs28 , 1847-1848. Nov. ser., titled \i Arbeiten des Naturforscher-Vereins zu Riga,\plain\fs28  Riga, \b 1-21\plain\fs28 , 1865-1937.
\par \pard \i\b Arch. Apothekerver. N\'f6rdl. Teutschl\plain\fs28 .
\par      \i Archiv des Apothekervereins im nordlichen Teutschland\plain\fs28 . Hannover. \b 1-39\plain\fs28 , 1821-1831.
\par \i\b Arch. Biol. V\'e9g.\plain\fs28  (\i\b Ath\'e8nes\plain\fs28 )
\par      \i Archives de Biologie v\'e9g\'e9tale pure et appliqu\'e9e\plain\fs28 . Ath\'e8nes. \b 1\plain\fs28 -?, 1901-?.
\par \i\b Arch. Bot. Bull.\plain\fs28  (\i\b Caen\plain\fs28 )
\par     \i  Archives de Botanique. Bulletin mensuel\plain\fs28 . Caen. \b 1\plain\fs28 ->, 1927-1930.
\par \i\b Arch. Bot\plain\fs28 . (\i\b Forli\plain\fs28 )
\par      \i Archivio botanico\plain\fs28 .  Forli. 1925-> .
\par \pard \i\b Arch. Bot. (Roemer)\plain\fs28 
\par    \i Archiv f\'fcr die Botanik\plain\fs28 . (\i Herausgegeben von D. Johann Jacob R\'f6mer\plain\fs28 .) Leipzig. \b 1-3\plain\fs28 , 1796-1805. (\b 1\plain\fs28 (\b 1\plain\fs28 ): pp. 1-134 in 1796; \b 1\plain\fs28 (\b 2\plain\fs28 ): pp. 1-122 in 1797 ; \b 1\plain\fs28 (\b 3\plain\fs28 ): pp. 1-212 in 1798;\b  2\plain\fs28 (\b 1\plain\fs28 ): pp. 1-131 in 1800; \b 2\plain\fs28 (\b 2\plain\fs28  & \b 3\plain\fs28 ): pp. 133-514 in 1801 ; \b 3\plain\fs28 (\b 1 /2\plain\fs28 ): pp. 1-310 in 1803; \b 3\plain\fs28 (\b 3\plain\fs28 ): pp. 311-438 in 1805.)
\par \i\b Arch. Freunde Naturgesch. Mecklenb\plain\fs28 .
\par \pard      \i Archiv der Freunde der Naturgeschichte in Mecklenburg\plain\fs28 . Rostock. 1954-> .
\par \i\b Arch. Gew\'e4chsk\plain\fs28 .
\par      \i Archiv der Gewachskunde, von Leopold Trattinick\plain\fs28 . Wien. 1812-1818.
\par \i\b Arch. Hydrobiol\plain\fs28 .
\par      \i Archiv f\'fcr Hydrobiologie\plain\fs28 . Stuttgart. \b 1\plain\fs28 ->, 1906-> .
\par \i\b Arch. Inst. G.-D. Luxemb\plain\fs28 . (\i\b Sci. Nat\plain\fs28 .)
\par     \i  Archives. Institut grand-ducal Luxembourg. Section des Sciences naturelles, physiques et mathematiques\plain\fs28 . Luxembourg.
\par \i\b Arch. Naturgesch. (Berlin)\plain\fs28 
\par \pard    \i Archiv f\'fcr Naturgeschichte\plain\fs28 . Berlin. \b 1-92\plain\fs28 , 1835-1928. Nov. ser., as \i Abteilung B\plain\fs28  of \i Zeitschrift f\'fcr wissenschaftliche Zoologie\plain\fs28 , Leipzig, 1932-1944.
\par \i\b Arch. Sci. Phys. Nat\plain\fs28 . (\i\b Gen\'e8ve\plain\fs28 )
\par      \i Archives des Sciences physiques et naturelles\plain\fs28 . (\i Biblioth\'e8que universelle de Gen\'e8ve\plain\fs28 .) Gen\'e8ve. Ser. 1, \b 1-36\plain\fs28 , 1846-1857. Ser. 2, \b 1-64\plain\fs28 , 1858-1878. Ser. 3, \b 1-34\plain\fs28 , 1879-1895. Ser. 4, \b 1-46\plain\fs28 , 189~1918. Ser. 5, \b 1-29\plain\fs28 , 1919-1947. Ser. 6, titled\i  Archives des Sciences, \'e9dit\'e9es par la Societe de Physique et d'Histoire naturelle de Gen\'e8ve,\plain\fs28  \b 1\plain\fs28 ->, 1948-> .
\par \pard \i\b Arch. Soc. Zool.-Bot. Fenn. Vanamo\plain\fs28 
\par    \i Suomalaisen el\'e4in- ja kasvitieteellisen Seuran Vanamon Tiedonannot ja P\'f6yt\'e4kirjat\plain\fs28  (from \b 6\plain\fs28 , 1951, titled\i  Suomalaisen el\'e4in- ja kasvitieteellisen Seuran Vanamon Tiedonannot\plain\fs28 ). /\i  Archivum Societatis zoologicae-botanicae fennicae ' Vanamo'\plain\fs28 . Helsinki. \b 1\plain\fs28 ->, 1946->.
\par \i\b Ark. Bot.\plain\fs28 
\par    \i Arkiv f\'f6r Botanik\plain\fs28 . Stockholm. Ser. 1, \b 1-33\plain\fs28 , 1903-1949. Ser. 2, \b 1-7\plain\fs28 , 1949-1974. (Ser. 1, \b 4-13\plain\fs28 , 1905-1914, at Uppsala & Stockholm; \b 14-33\plain\fs28 , 1915-1948, at Stockholm. Ser. 2, \b 1-3\plain\fs28 , 1949-1956, & \b 6-7\plain\fs28 , 1964-1974, at Stockholm; Ser. 2, \b 4-5\plain\fs28 , 1957-1963, at Stockholm, G\'f6teborg & Uppsala.)
\par \pard \i\b Arx. Secc. Ci. Inst. Est. Catalans\plain\fs28 
\par    \i Arxivs de la Secci\'f3 de Ci\'e9ncies Institut d' Estudis Catalans\plain\fs28 . Barcelona. \b 1-12\plain\fs28 , 1911-1924; \b 13\plain\fs28 ->, 1947-> (suspended 1924-1947). (Cf.\i  Cat. P\'e9riod. Biblioth. Cons. Jard. Bot. Gen\'e8ve Suppl\plain\fs28 . 1980-1987 : \b 14\plain\fs28  (1988).)
\par \i\b Atti Accad. Agiati\plain\fs28 
\par    \i Atti dell' imperiali regia Accademia di Scienze, Lettere ed Arti degli Agiati di Rovereto\plain\fs28 . Rovereto. \b 1-12\plain\fs28 , 1826-?. Ser. 2, \b 1-12\plain\fs28 , 1883-1894. Ser. 3, \b 1-18\plain\fs28 , 1895-1912. Ser. 4, titled \i Atti dell' i.r. Accademia roveretena di Scienze, Lettere ed Arti degli Agiati\plain\fs28 , \b 1\plain\fs28 ->, 1913->.
\par \pard \i\b Atti Accad. Ital\plain\fs28 . (\i\b Firenze\plain\fs28 )
\par      \i Atti dell'Accademia italiana\plain\fs28 . Firenze. \b 1-2\plain\fs28 , 1808-1810.
\par \i\b Atti Accad. Sci. Palermo\plain\fs28 
\par      \i Atti della Accademia di Scienze e Lettere di Palermo. Nuova Serie\plain\fs28 . Palermo. \b 1-10\plain\fs28 , 1845-1889. Ser. 3, \b 1-20\plain\fs28 , 1891-1938. Ser. 4, \b 1\plain\fs28 ->, 1941-> . With minor changes of title.
\par \i\b Atti Accad. Sci. Torino\plain\fs28 
\par     \i Atti della R. Accademia delle Scienzedi Torino\plain\fs28 . Torino. 1866-> .
\par \i\b Atti Congr. Int. Bot. Firenze\plain\fs28 
\par \pard    \i Atti del Congresso internazionale botanico tenuto in Firenze nel Mese di Maggio 1874. Pubblicati per Cura della R. Societ\'e0 toscana di Orticultura\plain\fs28 . Firenze. 1876.
\par \i\b Atti Real Ist. Incoragg. Sci. Nat. Nap\plain\fs28 .
\par      \i Atti del real Istituto d'Incoraggiamento alle Scienze naturali di Napoli\plain\fs28 . Napoli. Ser. 1, \b 1-12\plain\fs28 , 1811-1864. Ser. 2, \b 1-17\plain\fs28 , 1864-1881. Ser. 3, \b 1-6\plain\fs28 , 1882-1887. Ser. 4, \b 1-11\plain\fs28 , 1888-1898. Ser. 5, \b 1-5\plain\fs28 , 1899-1904. Ser. 5, \i 56-60\plain\fs28 , 1905-1909.
\par \pard \i\b Atti Riun. Sci. Ital\plain\fs28 .
\par    \i Atti della Riunione degli Scienziati italiani\plain\fs28 . Pisa, etc. Ed. 1. \b 1-11\plain\fs28 , 1840-1875. With minor variations of title and different places of publication for each volume. Ed. 2, \b 1\plain\fs28 . 1840.
\par \i\b Atti Soc. Tosc. Sci. Nat\plain\fs28 .
\par      \i Atti della Societa toscana di Scienze naturali di Pisa\plain\fs28 . Pisa. \b 1\plain\fs28 ->, 1875-> .
\par \i\b Baileya\plain\fs28 
\par      \i Baileya. A quarterly Journal of horticultural Taxonomy\plain\fs28 . Ithaca, New York. 1953-> .
\par \pard \i\b Bambou\plain\fs28  (\i\b Mons\plain\fs28 )
\par      \i Le Bambou, son \'c9tude, sa Culture, son Emploi.\plain\fs28  Mons. 1906-1908. (\b 1\plain\fs28 : pp. 1-170 in 1906; \b 2\plain\fs28 : pp. 171-222 in 1907; pp. 223-295 in 1908.)
\par \i\b Bauhinia\plain\fs28 
\par      \i Bauhinia. Zeitschrift der basler botanischen Gesellschaft.\plain\fs28  Basel. 1955-> .
\par \i\b Beih. Bot. Centr.\plain\fs28 
\par    \i Beihefte zum botanischen Centralblatt\plain\fs28 . Cassel. \b 1-62\plain\fs28 , 1891-1944. (\b 1-11\plain\fs28 , 1891-1902, at Cassel; \b 12-17\plain\fs28 , 1903-1904, at Jena; \b 18-19\plain\fs28 , 1905-1906, at Leipzig;\b  20-62\plain\fs28 , 1906-1944, at Dresden.)
\par \pard \i\b Beitr. Geobot. Landesaufn.\plain\fs28 
\par      \i Beitr\'e4ge zur geobotanischen Landesaufnahme\plain\fs28 . Z\'fcrich & Leipzig. \b 1-15\plain\fs28 , 1916-1927. Titled \i Beitr\'e4ge zur geobotanischen Landes-aufnahme der Schweiz\plain\fs28 ,\b  16\plain\fs28 ->, 1930-> .
\par \i\b Beitr. Naturk\plain\fs28 . (\i\b Dorpat\plain\fs28 )
\par      \i Beitr\'e4ge zur Naturkunde aus den Ostseeprovinzen Russlands\plain\fs28 . Dorpat. \b 1\plain\fs28 , 1820.
\par \i\b Beitr. Pfl. Russ. Reich.\plain\fs28 
\par **************************************************************************** [\i Materialy k blizajsemu Poznaniju Prozjabaemosti rossijskoj Imperii\plain\fs28 ]. / \i Beitr\'e4ge zur Pflanzgenkunde des russischen Reiches\plain\fs28 . St. Petersburg. \b 1-11\plain\fs28 , 1844-1859.
\par \pard \i\b Belmontia\plain\fs28 
\par    \i Belmontia. Miscellaneous Publications in Botany. I. Taxonomy\plain\fs28 . Wageningen. \b 1-14\plain\fs28  (1-95), 1957-1973. (Other sections: \i II. Ecology\plain\fs28 , \b 1-17\plain\fs28  (1-125), 1957-1972;\i  III. Horticulture\plain\fs28 , \b 1-9\plain\fs28  (1-54), 1957-1970; \i IV. Incidental\plain\fs28 , \b 1-13\plain\fs28  (1-25), 1957--1970.) New~Series, incorporating all four sections, \b 1\plain\fs28 -> (1->), 1973->.
\par \i\b Ber. Bayer. Bot. Ges.\plain\fs28 
\par    \i Berichte der bayerischen botanischen Gesellschaft zur Erforschung der heimischen Flora\plain\fs28 . M\'fcnchen. \b 1\plain\fs28 ->, 1891->.
\par \pard \i\b Ber. Deutsch. Bot. Ges\plain\fs28 .
\par    \i Berichte der deutschen botanischen Gesellschaft\plain\fs28 . Berlin. \b 1-100\plain\fs28 , 1883-1987. (\b 59-61\plain\fs28 , 1941-1944, at Jena; \b 62-100\plain\fs28 , 1949-1987, at Stuttgart.) Titled\i  Botanica Acta. Berichte der deutschen botanischen Gesellschaft\plain\fs28 . / \i Journal of the German botanical Society\plain\fs28 , Stuttgart & New York, \b 101\plain\fs28 (\b 1\plain\fs28 )->, 1988->. (The holding at Gen\'e8ve is said to commence from \b 101\plain\fs28 (\b 0\plain\fs28 ) [sic], 1987; this has not been seen. Cf. \i Cat. P\'e9riod. Bibl. Cons. Jard. Bot. Gen\'e8ve Suppl\plain\fs28 . 1980-1987: 24 (1988).)
\par \pard \i\b Ber. Geobot. Inst. R\'fcbel\plain\fs28  (\i\b Z\'fcrich\plain\fs28 )
\par     \i Bericht uber das geobotanische Forschungsinstitut R\'fcbel in Z\'fcrich. Z\'fcrich. 1931-1958, 1929-1959; titled Berichte des geobotanischen Institutes der eidg. techn. Hochschule Stiftung R\'fcbel\plain\fs28 , \b 31\plain\fs28 ->, 1960-> .
\par \i\b Ber. Natutw. Bot. Ver. Innsbruck\plain\fs28 
\par      \i Berichte der naturwissenschaftlich-medizinischen Vereins in Innsbruck.\plain\fs28  Innsbruck. 1870->.
\par \i\b Ber. Saratow. Naturforscherges\plain\fs28 .
\par [****************************************************]. / \i Bericht der saratower Naturforschergesellschaft\plain\fs28 . Saratow. \b 1-3\plain\fs28 , 1924 - 1929.
\par \pard \i\b Ber. Schweiz. Bot. Ges\plain\fs28 .
\par    \i Berichte der schweizerischen botanischen Gesellschaft\plain\fs28 . / \i Bulletin de la Soci\'e9t\'e9 botanique suisse\plain\fs28 . Basel & Genf. 1891-1980. (\b 1\plain\fs28  & \b 2\plain\fs28 , 1891-1892, at Basel & Genf; \b 3-18\plain\fs28 , 1893--1909, at Bern; \b 19-26\plain\fs28 /\b 29\plain\fs28 , 1910 - 1920, at Z\'fcrich; \b 30\plain\fs28 /\b 31\plain\fs28 , 1922, at Bern; \b 32-47\plain\fs28 , 1923-1947, at Bern & Z\'fcrich; \b 48-50\plain\fs28 , 1938-1940, at Bern; \b 50A\plain\fs28 , 1940, at Gen\'e8ve;\b  51-53\plain\fs28 , \b 53A\plain\fs28 , \b 54-69\plain\fs28 , 1941-1959, at Bern; \b 70-81\plain\fs28 , 1960-1972, at Wabern; \b 82-90\plain\fs28 , 1973-1980, at Wetzikon.) Titled \i\b Bot. Helvet\plain\fs28 ., \i Botanica helvetica\plain\fs28 , \b 91\plain\fs28 ->, 1981->. ( \b 91-93\plain\fs28 , 1981-1983, at Teufen; \b 94\plain\fs28 ->, 1984->, at Basel.)
\par \pard \i\b Ber. T\'e4t. St. Gall. Naturw. Ges\plain\fs28 .
\par      \i Bericht \'fcber die T\'e4tigkeit der St. Gallischen Naturwissenschaftlichen Gesellschaft\plain\fs28 . St. Gallen. 1858-1901 and 1939-> .
\par \i\b Bergens Mus. Aarb.\plain\fs28 
\par    \i Bergens Museums Aarbog\plain\fs28  [\i \'c5rbog, Aarbok, \'c5rbok\plain\fs28 ]. \i Afhandlinger og Aarsberetning\plain\fs28 . Bergen. 1883-1948. From \b 1917-1918\plain\fs28 ->,1918->,\i\b  Naturv. Rekke\plain\fs28 , \i Naturvidenskabelig\plain\fs28  [\i Naturvitenskapelik\plain\fs28 ] \i Rakke\plain\fs28  [\i Rekke\plain\fs28 ] is added to the title.) Titled \i Universitet i Bergen. \'c5rbok. Naturvitenskapelig Rekke\plain\fs28 , 1948-1959; titled \i \'c5rbok for Universitet i Bergen, Matematisk-naturvitenskapelig Serie\plain\fs28 , 1960->.
\par \pard \i\b Bergens Mus. Skr.\plain\fs28 
\par    \i Bergens Museums Skrifter\plain\fs28 . Bergen. \b 1-22\plain\fs28 , 1878-1943.
\par \i\b Biblioth. Bot.\plain\fs28  (\i\b Stuttgart\plain\fs28 )
\par     \i  Bibliotheca botanica. Abhandlungen aus dem Gesammtgebiete der Botanik.\plain\fs28  Cassel. 1886->. (\b 29\plain\fs28 ->, 1894->, at Stuttgart.)
\par \i\b Bibliot. Ital\plain\fs28 .
\par      \i Biblioteca italiana, ossia Giornale di Letteratura, Scienze ed Arti Milano\plain\fs28 . \b 1-100\plain\fs28 , 1816-1840.
\par \i\b Biblioth. Phys.-\'c9con\plain\fs28 .
\par     \i  Bibliotheque physico-economique, instructive et amusante\plain\fs28 . Paris. Ser. 1, \b 1-16\plain\fs28 , 1782-1797. Ser. 2, \b 1-13\plain\fs28 , 1802-1816. Ser. 3, \b 1-20\plain\fs28 , 1817-1826. Ser. 4, \b 1-10\plain\fs28 , 1827-1831.
\par \pard \i\b Biblioth. Univ. Gen\'e8ve\plain\fs28 
\par    \i Biblioth\'e8que universelle des Sciences, Belles-lettres, et Arts, faisant suite \'e0 la Biblioth\'e8que britannique. Partie des Sciences\plain\fs28 . Gen\'e8ve. Ser. 1, \b 1-60\plain\fs28 , 1816-1835. Ser. 2, titled \i Biblioth\'e8que universelle de Gen\'e8ve\plain\fs28 , \b l-60\plain\fs28 , 1836-1845.
\par \i\b Bihang Kongl. Svenska Vet.-Akad. Handl.\plain\fs28 
\par      \i Bihang till kongl. svenska Vetenskaps-Akademiens Handlingar\plain\fs28 . Stockholm. \b 1-28\plain\fs28 , 1872-1903.
\par \i\b Billotia\plain\fs28 
\par    \i Billotia; ou, Notes de Botanique\plain\fs28 . Besan\'e7on. \b 1\plain\fs28 , 1864-1869.
\par \pard \i\b Biol. \'c9col. M\'e9dit\plain\fs28 .
\par    (\i  Revue de\plain\fs28 ) \i Biologie et \'c9cologie m\'e9diterrann\'e9enne. Annales; de l' Universit\'e9 de Provence\plain\fs28 . (\i ' Revue de'\plain\fs28  only in running heads and title pages, not on wrappers.) Marseille. \b 1-10\plain\fs28 , 1974-1983.
\par \i\b Biol. Gallo-Hellen\plain\fs28 .
\par      \i Biologiagallo-hellenica.\plain\fs28  Keramou. \b 1\plain\fs28 ->, 1967-> .
\par \i\b Biol. Glasn. (Zagreb)\plain\fs28 
\par    \i Glasnik bioloske Sekcije. Hrvatsko prirodoslovno Drustvo\plain\fs28 . / \i Periodicum biologorum. Societas Scientiarum naturalium croatica\plain\fs28 . Zagreb. \b 1-7\plain\fs28 , 1947-1955 ; titled \i Bioloski Glasnik. Hrvatsko prirodoslovno Drustvo\plain\fs28 . / \i Periodicorum biologorum. Soeietas Scientiarum naturalium croatica\plain\fs28 , \b 8-21\plain\fs28 , 1955-1969; titled \i Periodicum biologorum\plain\fs28 , \b 72\plain\fs28 ->, 1970->.
\par \pard \i\b Biol. Meddel. Kong. Danske Vid. Selsk\plain\fs28 .
\par      \i Biologiske Meddelelser udgivet af det kongelige danske Videnskabernes Selskab\plain\fs28 . K\'f8benhavn. 1917-> .
\par \i\b Biol. Nauki\plain\fs28 
\par *********************************************************** [Biologiceskie Nauki. Naucnye Doklady Vyssei Skoly]. Moskva. 1958->.
\par \i\b Biol. Pr\'e1ce Slovensk. Akad. Vied\plain\fs28  (\i\b Bratislava\plain\fs28 )
\par      \i Sekcie Slovenskej Akad\'e9mie Vied. S\'e9ria biologick\'e1. Pr\'e1ce II\plain\fs28 . Bratislava.\b  1\plain\fs28 , 1955; titled \i Biologick\'e9 Pr\'e1ce, Edicia Sekcie bio-logickych a Lekarskych Vied. Slovenskej Akad\'e9mie Vied\plain\fs28 , \b 2\plain\fs28 ->, 1956->, with minor changes of title.
\par \pard \i\b Biol. Zentr\plain\fs28 .
\par      \i Biologisches Zentralblatt\plain\fs28  (\i Centralblatt\plain\fs28 ). Erlangen. \b 1\plain\fs28 ->,1881->. Later volumes mostly published at Leipzig.
\par \i\b Biosistematika\plain\fs28 
\par    \i Biosistematika\plain\fs28 . ( \i Acta biologica iugoslaviea Seriya G\plain\fs28 .) Belgrade.\b  1\plain\fs28 ->, 1975->.
\par \i\b Bjull. Glavn. Bot. Sada\plain\fs28 
\par      ********** ******** ************* **** [\i Bjulleten' glavnogo botaniceskogo Sada\plain\fs28 ]. Moskva & Leningrad. 1948-> .
\par \i\b Bjull. Gosud. Nikitsk. Bot. Sada\plain\fs28 
\par \pard    ************************************************************************* [\i Bjulleten'gosudarstvennogo Nikitskogo opytnogo Botaniceskogo Sada\plain\fs28 ]. ******************************************************************************* [ \i Bjulleten' gosudarstvennogo Nikitskij opytnyj botaniceskij Sad\plain\fs28 ]. /\i  Bulletin. Government botanica1 Garden Nikita.\plain\fs28  Yalta. \b 1-19\plain\fs28 , 1929-1938; titled ******************************************************************** [\i Bjulleten' gosudarstvennogo Nikitskogo botaniceskogo Sada\plain\fs28 ], \b 1\plain\fs28 (\b 7\plain\fs28 )->, 1968->.
\par \pard \i\b Bjull. Mosk. Obsc. Isp. Prir., Otd. Biol.\plain\fs28 
\par    Cf. \i Bull. Soc. Nat. Moscou.\plain\fs28 
\par \i\b Bjull. Obsc. Estestv. Voronez Univ.\plain\fs28 
\par    ***************************************************************************************************** [\i Bjulleten' Obscestva Estestvoispytatelej pri Voronezskom gosudarstvennom' Universjtet'\plain\fs28 ]. / \i Bulletin de la Soci\'e9t\'e9' des Naturalistes de Voron\'e8je\plain\fs28 . Voronez. \b 1-2\plain\fs28 (\b 2\plain\fs28 ), 1925-1928 & \b 3-9\plain\fs28 , 1939-1955. (\b 2\plain\fs28 (\b 3\plain\fs28 /\b 4\plain\fs28 ), 1929, titled \i\b Bull. Soc. Nat. Voron\'e8je\plain\fs28 , ************************************************************************************************** [\i Bjulleten' Voronezskogo Obscestva Estestvoispytatelej pri gosudarstvennom' Universjtet'\plain\fs28 ]. / \i Bulletin de la Soci\'e9t\'e9 des Naturalistes de Voron\'e8je\plain\fs28 .)
\par \pard \i\b Bl\'e4tt. Staudenk.\plain\fs28 
\par    \i Bl\'e4tter f\'fcr Staudenkunde\plain\fs28 . Berlin. \b 1-2\plain\fs28 , 1937-1940.
\par \i\b Blumea\plain\fs28 
\par    \i Blumea. Tijdschrift voor de Systematiek en de Geografie der Planten\plain\fs28 . (\i A Journal of Plant Taxonomy and Plant Geography\plain\fs28 .) Leiden. 1->, 1934->.
\par \i\b Blyttia\plain\fs28 
\par    \i Blyttia\plain\fs28 . Oslo. \b 1\plain\fs28 ->, 1943->.
\par \i\b Boissiera\plain\fs28 
\par    \i Boissiera. M\'e9moires du Conservatoire de Botanique et de l' Institut de Botanique syst\'e9matique de l' Universit\'e9 de Gen\'e8ve\plain\fs28 . Gen\'e8ve. \b 1-7\plain\fs28 , 1936-1948; titled \i Boissiera\plain\fs28  (without subtitle),\b  8-13\plain\fs28 , 1949-1967 ; titled \i Boissiera. M\'e9moires des Conservatoire et Jardin botaniques de la Ville de Gen\'e8ve\plain\fs28 , \b 14-30\plain\fs28 , 1969-1979; titled \i Boissiera. M\'e9moires de Botanique syst\'e9matique\plain\fs28 , \b 31\plain\fs28 ->, 1980->. (Supplement of \i Candollea\plain\fs28 .)
\par \pard \i\b Bol. Acad. Nac. Ci.\plain\fs28 
\par   \i  Bolet\'edn de la Academia nacional de Ciencias\plain\fs28 . C\'f3rdoba (Argentina). \b 1\plain\fs28 ->, 1875->.
\par \i\b Bol. Inst. Estud. Astur. (Supl. Ci.)\plain\fs28 
\par    \i Bolet\'edn del Instituto de Estudios asturianos. Suplemento de Ciencias\plain\fs28 . Oviedo. \b 1-24\plain\fs28 , 1960-1978 (\b 19-24\plain\fs28 , 1974-1978, titled \i Suplemento de Ci\'e9ncias del Bolet\'edn del Instituto de Estudios asturianos\plain\fs28 ); titled \i Bolet\'edn de Ci\'e9ncias de la Naturaleza. Instituto de Estudios asturianos\plain\fs28 , 1979->.(Cf. Castroviejo et al., \i Fl. Iberica\plain\b\fs28  2\plain\fs28 : 752 (1990).)
\par \pard \i\b Boll. Soc. Adr. Sci. Nat. Trieste\plain\fs28  Trieste. \b 1\plain\fs28 , 1874-> . (\b 32-45\plain\fs28 , 1934-1950, at Udine;\b  46-49\plain\fs28 , 1951-1958, at Rocca San Casciano.)
\par 
\par     \i  Bolletino della Societa adriatica di Scienze naturali in Trieste\plain\fs28 .
\par \i\b Bol. Soc. Aragon. Ci. Nat.\plain\fs28 
\par    \i Bolet\'edn de la Sociedad aragonesa de Cieneias naturales\plain\fs28 . Zaragoza. \b 1-17\plain\fs28 , 1902-1918; titled \i\b Bol. Soc. Ib\'e9r. Ci. Nat\plain\fs28 ., \i Bolet\'edn de la Sociedad ib\'e9rica de Ciencias naturales\plain\fs28 , \b 18-33\plain\fs28 , 1919-1934.
\par \pard \i\b Bol. Soc. Argent. Bot.\plain\fs28 
\par      \i Boletin de la Sociedad argentina de Botanica\plain\fs28 . La Plata. \b 1\plain\fs28 ->, 1945-> . (\b 13\plain\fs28 (\b 2-3\plain\fs28 ) ->, 1970->, at Buenos Aires.)
\par \i\b Bol. Soc. Brot.\plain\fs28 
\par    \i Boletim da Sociedade broteriana\plain\fs28 . Coimbra. Ser. 1, \b 1-28\plain\fs28 , 1880-1920. Ser. 2, \b 1\plain\fs28 ->, 1922->.
\par \i\b Bol. Soc. Esp. Hist. Nat.\plain\fs28 
\par    \i Bolet\'edn de la Sociedad espa\'f1ola de Historia natural\plain\fs28 . Madrid. \b 1-47\plain\fs28 , 1901-1949 ; \b 48\plain\fs28 ->, 1950-> (divided into \i Actas\plain\fs28 , \i\b Secc. Biol\plain\fs28 ., \i Seccion biologica\plain\fs28  and \i Seccion geologica\plain\fs28 ). From \b 4-31\plain\fs28 , 1904-1931, and 38->,1940->, titled \i Bolet\'edn de la Real Sociedad espa\'f1ola de Historia natural\plain\fs28 .
\par \pard \i\b Bol. Soc. Geogr. Lisboa\plain\fs28 
\par      \i Bolrtim da Sociedade de Geographia de Lisboa\plain\fs28 . Lisboa. 1876->.
\par \i\b Bol. Soc. Ib\'e9r. Ci. Nat\plain\fs28 .
\par      Cf.\i  Bol. Soc. Aragon. Ci. Nat\plain\fs28 .
\par \i\b Bol. Soc. Port. Ci. Nat\plain\fs28 .
\par      Cf.\i  Bull. Soc. Port. Sci. Nat.\plain\fs28 
\par \i\b Boll. Orto Bot. Napoli\plain\fs28 
\par    \i Bollettino dell'Orto botanico della Regia Universit\'e0 di Napoli\plain\fs28 . Napoli. \b 1-17\plain\fs28 , 1899-1947; titled \i Delpinoa\plain\fs28 , \b 1-11\plain\fs28 , 1948-1958; nov. ser. \b 1\plain\fs28 ->,1959->.
\par \pard \i\b Boll. Orto Bot. Palermo\plain\fs28 
\par    \i Bollettino delle Reale Orto botanico e Giardino coloniale di Palermo.\plain\fs28  Palermo. \b 1-11\plain\fs28 , 1897-1912; nov. ser. \b 1-2\plain\fs28 , 1914-1921.
\par \i\b Boll. Soc. Adr. Sci. Nat. Trieste\plain\fs28 
\par    \i Bollettino della Societ\'e0 adriatica di Scienze naturali di Trieste\plain\fs28 . T rieste. \b 1\plain\fs28 ->, 1875->. (\b 32-45\plain\fs28 , 1934-1950, at Udine ;\b  46-49\plain\fs28 , 1951-1958, at Rocca San Casciano.)
\par \i\b Boll. Soc. Sarda Sci. Nat\plain\fs28 .
\par    \i Bollettino della Societ\'e0 sarda di Scienze naturali\plain\fs28 . Sassari. \b 1\plain\fs28 ->, 1967->.
\par \pard \i\b Boll. Soc. Sci. Nat. Econ. Palermo\plain\fs28 
\par     \i  Bolletino della Societa di Scienze naturali ed economiche di Palermo.\plain\fs28  Palermo.1877- ?.
\par \i\b Bonplandia\plain\fs28 
\par    \i Bonplandia. Zeitschrift f\'fcr die gesammte Botanik\plain\fs28 . Hannover, London, New York & Paris. \b 1-10\plain\fs28 , 1853-1862.
\par \i\b Borb\'e1sia\plain\fs28 
\par      \i Borb\'e1sia. Dissertationes botanicae\plain\fs28 . Budapest. \b 1-9\plain\fs28 , 1938-1949. (\b 3-9\plain\fs28 , 1941-1949, subtitled\i  A magyar n\'f6v\'e9nytani Tarsasag Foly\'f3irata\plain\fs28 . /\i  Acta Societatis Botanicorum hungaricae\plain\fs28 .)
\par \pard \i\b Borb\'e1sia Nova\plain\fs28 
\par      \i Borb\'e1sia nova\plain\fs28 . Budapest. \b 1-25\plain\fs28 , 1940-1944.
\par \i\b Boston Jour. Nat. Hist.\plain\fs28 
\par      \i Boston Journal of natural History.\plain\fs28  Boston.\b  1-7\plain\fs28 , 1837-1863.
\par \i\b Bot. Arch. (Berlin)\plain\fs28 
\par    \i Botanisches Archiv. Zeitschrift f\'fcr die gesammte Botanik\plain\fs28 . Berlin & K\'f6nigsberg. \b l-45\plain\fs28 , 1922-1944. (\b 21-45\plain\fs28 , 1928-1944, at Leipzig as \i\b Bot. Arch. (Leipzig)\plain\fs28 , \i Botanisches Archiv. Zeitschrift f\'fcr die gesammte Botanik\plain\fs28 .)
\par \pard \i\b Bot. Arch. (K\'f6nigsberg)\plain\fs28 
\par    Cf. \i Bot. Arch\plain\fs28 . (\i Berlin\plain\fs28 ).
\par \i\b Bot. Arch. (Leipzig)\plain\fs28 
\par    Cf. \i Bot. Arch\plain\fs28 . (\i Berlin\plain\fs28 ).
\par \i\b Bot. Beobacht\plain\fs28 .
\par      \i Botanische Beobachtungen.\plain\fs28  Mannheim. \b 1782-1783\plain\fs28 , 1783-1784.
\par \i\b Bot. Centr.\plain\fs28 
\par    \i Botanisches Centralblatt\plain\fs28 . Cassel. \b 1-173\plain\fs28 , 1880-1938; titled \i Botanisches Zentralblatt\plain\fs28 , \b 174-179\plain\fs28 , 1938-1945. (\b 101-179\plain\fs28 , 1906-1945, at Jena.)
\par \i\b Bot. Chron.\plain\fs28 
\par *************** [\i Botanika Chronika\plain\fs28 ]. Patras. \b 1\plain\fs28 ->, 1981->.
\par \pard \i\b Bot. Gaz\plain\fs28 .
\par      \i Botanical Bulletin\plain\fs28 . Hanover, Indiana, etc. \b 1\plain\fs28 , 1875-1876; titled \i Botanical Gazette\plain\fs28 , \b 2\plain\fs28 ->, 1876-> . (\b 22\plain\fs28  _->, 1896->, at Chicago, Illinois.)
\par \i\b Bot. Gaz. (London)\plain\fs28 
\par    \i The botanical Gazette, a Journal of the Progress of British Botany and the contemporary Literature of the Science, by A. Henfrey\plain\fs28 . London. \b 1-3\plain\fs28 , 1849-1851. (\b 1\plain\fs28  in 1849; \b 2\plain\fs28  in 1850; \b 3\plain\fs28  in 1851.)
\par \i\b Bot. Helvet.\plain\fs28 
\par \pard    Cf. \i Ber. Schweiz. Bot. Ges\plain\fs28 .
\par \i\b Bot. Jahrb\plain\fs28 .
\par    \i Botanische Jahrb\'fccher f\'fcr Systematik, Pflanzengeschichte und Pflanzengeographie\plain\fs28 . Leipzig. \b 1\plain\fs28 ->, 1880->. (\b 69\plain\fs28 ->, 1938->, at Stuttgart.)
\par \i\b Bot. Jour. Linn. Soc.\plain\fs28 
\par    Cf.\i  Jour. Linn. Soc. London\plain\fs28  (\i Bot\plain\fs28 .)
\par \i\b Bot. K\'f6zl\plain\fs28 .
\par    Cf. \i N\'f6v. K\'f6zl\plain\fs28 .
\par \i\b Bot. Macar\plain\fs28 .
\par    \i Botanica Macaronesica\plain\fs28 . Las Palmas, Gran Canaria. \b 1\plain\fs28 ->, 1976->. (\b 1\plain\fs28  (Jan. 1976) in 1976; \b 2\plain\fs28  (Oct. 1976) in 1976; \b 3\plain\fs28  (Jul. 1977) in 1978; \b 4\plain\fs28  (Oct. 1977) in 1979; \b 5\plain\fs28  (Nov. 1978) in 1980;\b  6\plain\fs28  (Dec. 1978) in 1980; \b 7\plain\fs28  (Nov. 1980) in 1982; \b 8/9\plain\fs28  (1981) in Sept. 1982; \b 10\plain\fs28  (1982) in 1984; \b 11\plain\fs28  (1983) in 1984; \b 12/13\plain\fs28  (1984) in 1986; \b 14\plain\fs28  (1985) in 1986; \b 15\plain\fs28  (1986) in 1986; nov. ser. \b 16\plain\fs28  (no year in title) in 1988. Publication was often apparently not effective until considerably later than the year stated on the cover. Dates given in parentheses are those printed as part of the title on the outside front cover; others are (\b 1-7\plain\fs28 ) dates of receipt at E ; (\b 8\plain\fs28  /\b 9\plain\fs28 -> ) date of publication as stated on inside front cover. \b 8/9\plain\fs28  and \b 12/13\plain\fs28  were single issues given double volume numbers.)
\par \pard \i\b Bot. Mag\plain\fs28 .
\par    \i The botanical Magazine\plain\fs28  (from \b 15\plain\fs28 , 1801, \i Curtis's botanical Magazine\plain\fs28 ) ; or,\i  Flower-Garden Displayed: in which the most ornamental foreign Plants, cultivated in the open Ground, the Greenhouse, and the Stove, are accurately represented in their natural Colours\plain\fs28  ... London. \b 1-184\plain\fs28 , 1787-1983. (For publication dates up to \b 180\plain\fs28 , 1974, cf. F.A. Stafleu & R.S. Cowan, \i Taxonomic Literature\plain\fs28  ed. 2, \b 1\plain\fs28 : 578-584 (1976); \b 181\plain\fs28 (\b 1-2\plain\fs28 ) in 1976; \b 181\plain\fs28 (\b 3-4\plain\fs28 ) in 1977 ;\b  182\plain\fs28 (\b 1-2\plain\fs28 ) in 1978; \b 182\plain\fs28 (\b 3-4\plain\fs28 ) in 1979; \b 183\plain\fs28 (\b 1\plain\fs28 ) in 1980; \b 183\plain\fs28 (\b 2-4\plain\fs28 ) in 1981; \b 184\plain\fs28 (\b 1-2\plain\fs28 ) in 1982 ; \b 183\plain\fs28 (\b 3-4\plain\fs28 ) in 1983. Continuous volume numbers are used in citations and series are ignored.) Continued as \i The Kew Magazine, incorporating Curtis's Botanical Magazine\plain\fs28 . Kew. \b 1\plain\fs28 ->, 1984->. (\b 1\plain\fs28  in 1984; \b 2\plain\fs28  in 1985; \b 3\plain\fs28  in 1986; \b 4\plain\fs28  in 1987 ;\b  5\plain\fs28  in 1988; \b 6\plain\fs28  in 1989; \b 7\plain\fs28  in 1990;\b  8\plain\fs28  in 1991.)
\par \pard \i\b Bot. Mag. (Tokyo)\plain\fs28 
\par    \i The botanical Magazine\plain\fs28 . / ***** [\i Shokubutsu-gaku zasshi\plain\fs28 ]. Tokyo. \b 1-19\plain\fs28 , 1887-1905 ; titled \i The botanical Magazine published by the Tokyo botanical Society\plain\fs28 , \b 20-45\plain\fs28 , 1906-1931 ; titled \i The botanical Magazine published by the botanical Society of Japan\plain\fs28 , \b 46\plain\fs28 ->, 1932->. (\b 68\plain\fs28 ->, 1955->, also titled\i  The botanical Magazine, Tokyo\plain\fs28 .) The Japanese title has remained unchanged throughout.
\par \i\b Bot. Mag.\plain\fs28  (\i\b Z\'fcrich\plain\fs28 )
\par \pard     \i  Botanisches Magazin. Magazin f\'fcr die Botanik. Herausgegeben von Joh. Jacob Romer und Paulus Usteri\plain\fs28 . Z\'fcrich.\b  1-4\plain\fs28 , 1787-1790.
\par \i\b Bot. Not.\plain\fs28 
\par    \i Botaniska Notiser\plain\fs28 . Lund. \b 1-133\plain\fs28 , 1839-1980. (Year used as volume number until \b 108\plain\fs28 ->, 1955->.) Continued as\i\b  Nordic Jour. Bot.\plain\fs28 ,\i Nordic Journal of Botany\plain\fs28 . Copenhagen. \b 1\plain\fs28 ->, 1981->.
\par \i\b Bot. Reg.\plain\fs28 
\par    \i The botanical Register; consisting of coloured Figures of exotic Plants cultivated in British Gardens ; with their History and Mode of Treatment\plain\fs28 . London. \b 1-14\plain\fs28 , 1815-1829; titled \i Edwards' Botanical Register; or, Flower Garden and Shrubbery\plain\fs28 , \b 15-33\plain\fs28 , 1829-1847. (For dates of publication cf. F.A. Stafleu & R.S. Cowan, \i Taxonomic Literature\plain\fs28  ed. 2, \b 1\plain\fs28 : 724-725 (1976).)
\par \pard \i\b Bot. Rev\plain\fs28 .
\par      \i The botanical Review, interpreting botanical Progress.\plain\fs28  Lancaster, Pennsylvania. 1935-> .
\par \i\b Bot. Taschenb\plain\fs28 .
\par      \i Botanisches Taschenbuch f\'fcr die Anf\'e4nger dieser Wissenschaft und der Apothekerkunst\plain\fs28 . Regensburg. 1790-1811.
\par \i\b Bot. Tidsskr\plain\fs28 .
\par    \i Botanisk Tidsskrift\plain\fs28 . Kj\'f8benhavn. \b 1-75\plain\fs28 , 1868-1981. Continued as \i\b Nordic Jour. Bot.\plain\fs28 , \i Nordic Journal of Botany\plain\fs28 . Copenhagen. \b 1\plain\fs28 ->, 1981->.
\par \i\b Bot. Zeit.\plain\fs28 
\par \pard   \i Botanische Zeitung\plain\fs28 . Berlin. \b 1-68\plain\fs28 , 1843-1910. (\b 14-68\plain\fs28 , 1856-1910, at Leipzig. From \b 51\plain\fs28 , 1893, 2 \i Abteilung\plain\fs28  is added to the title.)
\par \i\b Bot. Zeit. (Regensburg)\plain\fs28 
\par    \i Botanische Zeitung welche Recensionen, Abhandlungen, Aufs\'e4tze, Neuigkeiten und Nachrichten, die Botanik betreffend, enth\'e4lt\plain\fs28 . Regensburg. \b l-6\plain\fs28 , 1802-1807. (\b 1-5\plain\fs28 , 1802-1805, also issued under the (part) title \i Allgemeine botanische Bibliothek des neunzehnten Jahrhunderts\plain\fs28 , Erlangen.)
\par \pard \i\b Bot. Zur.\plain\fs28 
\par *********************************************************************************** [\i Zurnal russkago botaniceskago Obscestva pri imperatorskoj Akademii Nauk\plain\fs28 ]. /\i  Journal de la Soci\'e9t\'e9 botanique de Russie\plain\fs28 . Petrograd. \b 1\plain\fs28 , 1916-1917; titled *************** [*********] ************** [***************] ***************************** [\i Zurnal russkago\plain\fs28  [\i russkogo\plain\fs28 ] \i botaniceskago\plain\fs28  [\i botaniceskogo\plain\fs28 ]\i  Obscestva pri Akademii Nauk\plain\fs28 ]. / \i Journal de la Soci\'e9t\'e9 botanique de Russie\plain\fs28 , \b 2-9\plain\fs28 , 1917-1924 ('russkogo' and 'botaniceskogo' in\b  3-9\plain\fs28 ); titled ****** **************************************************************** [\i Zurnal russkogo botaniceskogo Obscestva pri Akademii Nauk SSSR\plain\fs28 ], Moskva & Leningrad, \b 10-13\plain\fs28 , 1925-1928; titled ********************************************* [\i Zurnal russkogo botaniceskogo Obscestva\plain\fs28 ], \b 14-16\plain\fs28 , 1930-1931; titled ************************ [\i Botaniceskij Zurnal SSSR\plain\fs28 ]. / \i Journal botanique de l' URSS\plain\fs28 , \b 17-32\plain\fs28 , 1932-1947; titled ************************ [\i Botaniceskij Zurnal\plain\fs28 ], \b 33\plain\fs28 ->, 1948->. (\b 33-51\plain\fs28 , 1948-1966, at Moscow & Leningrad; \b 52\plain\fs28 ->, 1967->,at Leningrad.)
\par \pard \i\b Botaniker\plain\fs28  (\i\b Halle\plain\fs28 )
\par      \i Der Botaniker; oder compendiose Bibliothek alles Wissens-wurdigen aus dem Gebiete der Botanik\plain\fs28 . Halle, Gotha & Eisenach. 1793-1797.
\par \i\b Bothalia\plain\fs28 
\par    \i Bothalia. A Record of Contributions from the National Herbarium, Union of South Africa\plain\fs28 . Pretoria. \b 1\plain\fs28 ->, 1921->. (\b 7\plain\fs28  &\b  8\plain\fs28 , 1958-1965, subtitled \i A Record... Republic of South Africa\plain\fs28 ; subtitle omitted from \b 9\plain\fs28 , 1966-1968, onwards.)
\par \i\b Bradleya\plain\fs28 
\par \pard    \i Bradleya. Yearbook of the British Cactus and Succulent Society\plain\fs28 . Botley. \b 1\plain\fs28 ->,1983->.(\b 6-7\plain\fs28 , 1988-1989, at Summerseat Bury; \b 8\plain\fs28 ->, 1990->, at Kew.)
\par \i\b Brit. Fern Gazg\plain\fs28 .
\par    \i British Fern Gazette\plain\fs28 . Kendal. \b 1-10\plain\fs28 , 1959-1973; titled\i\b  Fern Garz.\plain\fs28 , \i The Fern Gazette. The Journal of the British pteridological Society\plain\fs28 , \b 11\plain\fs28 ->, 1974->. (\b 1-4\plain\fs28 , 1909-1921, at Kendal;\b  5-8\plain\fs28 , 1923-1958, at Reading;\b  9\plain\fs28 ->, 1959->, at London.)
\par \pard \i\b Brit. Flower Gard\plain\fs28 .
\par      \i The British Flower Garden . . .\plain\fs28  by Robert Sweet. London. Ser. 1, \b 1-3\plain\fs28 , 1823-1829. Ser. 2, \b 1-4\plain\fs28 , 1829-1838.
\par \i\b Brittonia\plain\fs28 
\par    \i Brittonia\plain\fs28 . New York. \b 1\plain\fs28 ->, 1931->.
\par \i\b Brot\'e9ria\plain\fs28  (\i\b Bot\plain\fs28 .)
\par      \i Brot\'e9ria\plain\fs28 . Lisboa. 1902-> . Serie botanica, \b 6-25\plain\fs28 , 1907-1931. S\'e9rie Ci\'eancias naturias, \b 1\plain\fs28 ->, 1932-> .
\par \i\b Bul. Acad. Stud. Agron. Cluj\plain\fs28 
\par     \i Buletinul Academiei de \'eenalte Studii agronomice din Cluj\plain\fs28 . Cluj. \b l-6\plain\fs28 , 1930-1937 ; titled \i\b Bul. Fac. Agron. Cluj\plain\fs28 , \i Buletinul Facultatii de Agronomie din Cluj\plain\fs28 , 1938-1943; titled \i Analele Facultatii de Agronomie din Cluj\plain\fs28 , 1944-1947; titled \i Anuar lucrarilor stiintifice. Institutul agronomie 'Dr Petru Groza'\plain\fs28 , 1957->.
\par \pard \i\b Bull. Acad. Sci. URSS\plain\fs28 ******** ******** **** **** [\i Izvestija Akademii Nauk SSSR\plain\fs28 ]. / \i Bulletin de l'URSS\plain\fs28 . Leningrad. 1928->. (In several series with different titles.)
\par \i\b Bull. Alp. Gard. Soc.\plain\fs28 
\par      \i Bulletin of the Alpine Garden Society\plain\fs28 . London etc.\b  1-2\plain\fs28 (\b 1\plain\fs28 ), 1930-1933; titled \i\b Quart. Bull. Alp. Gard. Soc\plain\fs28 ., \i Quarterly Bulletin of the Alpine Garden Society\plain\fs28 , \b 2\plain\fs28 (\b 2\plain\fs28 )->, 1933->.(\b 2\plain\fs28 (\b 2\plain\fs28 )-\b 15\plain\fs28 , 1933-1947, at London; \b 16-27\plain\fs28 , 1948-1959, at Farnborough;\b  28\plain\fs28 , 1960, at Orpington; \b 29-39\plain\fs28 , 1961-1971, at London; \b 40\plain\fs28 ->, 1972->, at Woking.)
\par \pard \i\b Bull. Appl. Bot. Pl.-Breed.\plain\fs28  (\i\b Leningrad\plain\fs28 )
\par       ***** ** ********** ******** (********) * ********  [\i Trudy po prikladnoj Botanike\plain\fs28  (\i Genetike\plain\fs28 ) \i i Selekcii\plain\fs28 ]. / \i Bulletin of applied Botany and Plant Breeding\plain\fs28 . Leningrad. 1922-1929. Several concurrent series.
\par \i\b Bull. Appl. Bot.\plain\fs28  (\i\b S.-Peterburg\plain\fs28 )
\par      ***** ***** ** ********** ******** [\i Trudy Bjuro po prikladnoj Botanike\plain\fs28 ]. / \i Bulletin of applied Botany\plain\fs28 . / \i Bulletin des Bureaufurangewandte Botanik\plain\fs28 . S.-Peterburg. \b 1-10\plain\fs28 , 1908-1917. English and German titles are not used in all volumes.
\par \pard \i\b Bull. Brit. Mus.\plain\fs28  (\i\b Bot\plain\fs28 .)
\par      \i Bulletin of the British Museum \plain\fs28 (\i Natural History\plain\fs28 ). \i Botany\plain\fs28 . London. 1951 ) .
\par \i\b Bul. Fac. Sti. Cernauti\plain\fs28 
\par      \i Buletinul Facultatii de Stiinte din Cernauti\plain\fs28 . Cernauti \b 1-8\plain\fs28 , 1927-1937.
\par \i\b Bul. Grad. Bot. Univ. Cluj\plain\fs28 
\par    \i Buletinul de Informatii al Gradinii botanice si al Muzeului botanic dela Universitatea din Cluj\plain\fs28 . / \i Bulletin d' Informations du Jardin et du Mus\'e9e botanique de l'Universit\'e9 de Cluj, Roumanie\plain\fs28 . Cluj. \b 1-5\plain\fs28 , 1921-1925; titled \i Buletinul Gradinii botanice si al Muzeului botanic de la Universitatea din Cluj\plain\fs28 , \b 6-28\plain\fs28 , 1926-1948, with minor variations of title. 
\par \pard \i\b Bul. Sti. Acad. Rep. Pop. Romane\plain\fs28 
\par      \i Buletin stiintific. Academia Republicii populare rom\'e2ne\plain\fs28  [\i rom\'eene\plain\fs28 ]./\i  Bulletin scientifique. Acad\'e9mie de la R\'e9publique populaire roumaine\plain\fs28 . ******* ******. ******** ********* ******** ********** [\i Naucnyj Vestnik. Akademija Rumynskoj narodnoj Republiki\plain\fs28 ]. Bucuresti. \b 1-9\plain\fs28 , 1949-1957.
\par \i\b Bull. Acad. Imp. Sci. P\'e9tersb\plain\fs28 .
\par      \i Bulletin de l'Acad\'e9mie imp\'e9riale des Sciences de St.-P\'e9tersbourg\plain\fs28 . St.-P\'e9tersbourg. Ser. 1,\b  1-32\plain\fs28 , 1860-1888. Ser. 2, \b 1-2\plain\fs28  1889-1892. Different series and titles later.
\par \pard \i\b Bull. Acad. Int. G\'e9ogr. Bot.\plain\fs28  (\i\b Le Mans\plain\fs28 ) 
\par     Cf. \i Monde Pl\plain\fs28 .
\par \i\b Bull. Acad. Sci. URSS\plain\fs28 
\par      \i Bulletin de l'Academie des Sciences de l'Union des Republiques Sovietiques Socialistes\plain\fs28 . / ******** ******** **** ***** ********* *************** ******** [\i Izvestija Akademii Nauk Soiuza Sovetskikh Socialisticeskikh Respublik\plain\fs28 ]. Leningrad. Ser. 7, 1931-1936. Other series with other titles.
\par \i\b Bull. Alp. Gard. Soc\plain\fs28 .
\par      \i Bulletin of the Alpine Garden Society\plain\fs28  (\i of Great Britain\plain\fs28 ). Various places of publication. 1930-> .
\par \pard \i\b Bull. Appl. Bot. Pl.-Breed\plain\fs28 . (\i\b Leningrad\plain\fs28 )
\par      ***** ** *********** ********* (*********) * ******** [\i Trudy po prikladnoj Botanike (Genetike) i Selekcii\plain\fs28 ]. / \i Bulletin of applied Botany and Plant Breeding\plain\fs28 . Leningrad. 1922-1939. Several concurrent series.
\par \i\b Bull. Assoc. Fr. Bot\plain\fs28 .
\par      \i Bulletin de l'Association fran\'e7aise de Botanique\plain\fs28 . Le Mans. \b 1-5\plain\fs28 , 1898-1902.
\par \i\b Bull. Assoc. Pyr\plain\fs28 .
\par      \i Bulletin de l'Association pyren\'e9enne pour l'\'c9change des Plantes\plain\fs28 . Poitiers. \b 1-14\plain\fs28 , 1891-1904.
\par \pard \i\b Bull. Assoc. Russe Sci. Prague\plain\fs28 
\par      ******* ******-****************** ************, ******* ********** ************ * ****** [\i Zapiski naucno-issledovatel'skago O->edinenija, Russkij svobodnyj Universitet v Prage\plain\fs28 ]. /\i  Rozpravy Yedecke spolecnosti Badatelske' pri Ruske' svobodne' Universite v Praze\plain\fs28 . /\i  Bulletin de l'Association russe pour les Recherches scientifiques a Prague\plain\fs28 . Praga. 1935-> .
\par \i\b Bull Brit. Mus\plain\fs28 . (\i\b Bot\plain\fs28 .)
\par      \i Bulletin of the British Museum\plain\fs28  (\i Natural History\plain\fs28 ).\i  Botany\plain\fs28 . London. 1951-> .
\par \pard \b Bull. Fan Mem. Inst. Biol. Bot. (Peking)\plain\fs28 
\par      \i Bulletin of the Fan Memorial Institute of Biology. Botany.\plain\fs28  Peking. \b 1-11\plain\fs28 , 1929-1941. Nov. ser. \b 1\plain\fs28 , 1943-1948.
\par \i\b Bull. Congr. Bot. P\'e9tersb.\plain\fs28 
\par    \i  Bulletin du Congr\'e8s botanique\plain\fs28 . Saint-P\'e9tersbourg.
\par \i\b Bull. Herb. Boiss\plain\fs28 .
\par      \i Bulletin de l'Herbier Boissier\plain\fs28 . Gen\'e8ve & B\'e2le. Ser. 1, \b 1-7\plain\fs28  1893-1899. Ser. 2, \b 1-8\plain\fs28 , 1900-1909.
\par \i\b Bull. Inst. Bot\plain\fs28 . (\i\b Sofia\plain\fs28 )
\par \pard      ******** ** ************** *********  [\i Izvestija na botaniceskija Institut\plain\fs28 ]. / \i Bulletin de l'Institut botanique\plain\fs28 . Sofia. 1950-> .
\par \i\b Bull. Inst. Jard. Bot. Univ. Beograd\plain\fs28 
\par      ******* ********** ****** * ***** ************** * ******** [\i Glasnik botanickog Zavoda i Baste Univerziteta u Beogradu\plain\fs28 ]. / Bulletin de l'lnstitut et du Jardin botaniques de I'Universite de Beograd. Beograd. \b 1-4\plain\fs28 , 1928-1937.
\par \i\b Bull. Inst. Roy. Hist. Nat.\plain\fs28  (Sofia)
\par \pard      \i Bulletin des Institutions royales d'Histoire Naturelle.\plain\fs28  Sofia. 1928-1943.
\par \i\b Bull. Int. Acad. Sci. Cracovie\plain\fs28 
\par      \i Bulletin international de l'Academie des Sciences de Cracovie. Classe des Sciences math\'e9matiques et naturelles. S\'e9rie B: Sciences naturelles\plain\fs28 . /\i  Anzeiger der Akademie der Wissenschaften in Krakau. Mathematisch-naturwissenschaftliche Klasse. Reihe B: Biologische Wissenschaften\plain\fs28 . Cracovie. 1889-1919. Dates are used as vol. nos. Continued as \i Bulletin international de l'Academie polonaise des Sciences et des Lettres\plain\fs28 , 1920-1953.
\par \pard \i\b Bull. Int. Acad Tch\'e8que Sci\plain\fs28 .
\par      \i Bulletin international. Acad\'e9mie des Sciences de l'Empereur Fran\'e7ois Joseph. Classe des Sciences math\'e9matiques et naturelles\plain\fs28 . Prague. \b 1-20\plain\fs28 , 1895-1916; titled\i  Bulletin international. Acad\'e9mie des Sciences\plain\fs28 , \b 21-22\plain\fs28 , 1919-1920; titled\i  Bulletin international. Acad\'e9mie tch\'e8que des Sciences\plain\fs28 , \b 23-53\plain\fs28 , 1923-1953.
\par \i\b Bull. Jard. Bot. Bruxelles\plain\fs28 
\par      \i Bulletin du Jardin botanique de l'\'c9tat \'e0 Bruxelles\plain\fs28 . Bruxelles. \b 1-36\plain\fs28 , 1902-1966. (\b 15-36\plain\fs28 , 1938-1966, with alternative title \i Bulletin van den [de] Rijksplantentuin Brussel\plain\fs28 ); titled\b  Bull. Jard. Bot. Nat. Belg\plain\fs28 ., \i Bulletin du Jardin botanique national de Belgique. Bulletin van de nationale Plantentuin van Belge\plain\fs28 , \b 37\plain\fs28 -> , 1967->
\par \pard \i\b Bull. Jard. Bot. Kieff\plain\fs28 
\par      \i Bulletin du Jardin botanique de Kieff.\plain\fs28  / ****** ********** *********** **** [\i Visnyk Kyjivs'kogo botanicnogo Sadu\plain\fs28 ]. Kieff. 1924-1934.
\par \i\b Bull. Jard. Bot. P\'e9tersb\plain\fs28 .
\par      \i Bulletin du Jardin imp\'e9rial botanique de St.-Petersbourg\plain\fs28 . / ******** *************** *.-************* ************* **** [\i Izvestija imperatorskago S.-Peterburgskago botaniceskago Sada\plain\fs28 ]. S.-Peterburg. \b 1-12\plain\fs28 , 1901-1912; titled \i Bulletin du Jardin imperial botanique de Pierre le Grand\plain\fs28 . / ******* ************** ************* **** ***** *********  [\i Izvestija imperatorskago botaniceskago Sada Petra Velikago\plain\fs28 ], \b 13-17\plain\fs28 , 1912-1917; titled\i\b  Bull. Jard. Bot. URSS\plain\fs28 ,\i  Bulletin du principal Jardin botanique de la R\'e9publique Russe\plain\fs28 . / ******* ******** ************** **** *.*.*.*. [\i Izvestija glavnogo botaniceskogo Sada R.S.F.S.R.\plain\fs28 ], \b 18-22\plain\fs28 , 1918-1923; titled \i Bulletin du Jardin botanique de la R\'e9publique Russe\plain\fs28 . /[Russian title as before], \b 23-24\plain\fs28 , 1924-1925; titled \i Bulletin du Jardin Botanique principal de l'U.R.S.S\plain\fs28 . / ********* ******** ************** **** *.*.*.*. [\i Izvestija glavnogo botaniceskogo Sada S.S.S.R.\plain\fs28 ], \b 25-29\plain\fs28 , 1926-1930; titled \i Bulletin du Jardin botanique de l'Acad\'e9mie des Sciences de l'URSS.\plain\fs28  ******** ************* **** ******** **** [\i Izvestija botaniceskogo Sada Academii Nauk SSSR\plain\fs28 ], \b 30\plain\fs28 , 1932; titled *********[*]* ******** [\i Sovietski[j]a Botanika\plain\fs28 ], Moscow & Leningrad, 1933-1947 
\par \pard \i\b Bull. Jard. Bot. URSS\plain\fs28 
\par       Cf. \i Bull. Jard. Bot. P\'e9tersb\plain\fs28 .
\par \i\b Bull. Mens. Soc. Linn. Lyon\plain\fs28 
\par      \i Bulletin bimensuel de la Soci\'e9t\'e9 linn\'e9enne de Lyon\plain\fs28 . Lyon. \b 1-10\plain\fs28 , 1922-1931. Continued as \i Bulletin mensuel de la Soci\'e9t\'e9 linn\'e9enne de Lyon\plain\fs28 , \b 1\plain\fs28 ->, 1932->.
\par \i\b Bull. Mus. Nat. Nist. Nat.\plain\fs28  (\i\b Paris\plain\fs28 )
\par      \i Bulletin du Museum d 'Histoire naturelle.\plain\fs28  Paris.\b 1-12\plain\fs28 ,1895-1906; titled\i  Bulletin du Museum national d 'Histoire naturelle\plain\fs28 , \b 13\plain\fs28 ->, 1907-> .
\par \pard \i\b Bull. Mus. Hist. Nat. Pays Serbe\plain\fs28 
\par      ****** ************* ****** ****** ****** [\i Glasnik Prirodnjackog Muzeja Srpske Zemlje\plain\fs28 .] /\i  Bulletin du Museum d'Histoire naturelle du Pays Serbe\plain\fs28 . Beograd. Ser. B,\b  1-10\plain\fs28 , 1949-1957.
\par \i\b Bull. Nat. Mus. Can\plain\fs28 .
\par      \i Bulletin. Victoria Memorial Museum. Geological Survey.\plain\fs28  Ottawa. \b 1\plain\fs28 , 1913; titled \i Museum Bulletin. Geological Survey\plain\fs28 , \b 2-49\plain\fs28 , 1914-1928; titled \i Bulletin. National Museum of Canada.\plain\b\fs28  50\plain\fs28 ->, 1928-> .
\par \pard \i\b Bull. New York Bot. Gard.\plain\fs28 
\par      \i Bulletin of the New York Botanical Garden.\plain\fs28  New York. 1896-1932
\par \i\b Bull. Orto Bot. Napoli\plain\fs28 
\par      \i Bullettino dell'Orto botanico della R. Universita di Napoli\plain\fs28 . Napoli. \b 1-17\plain\fs28 , 1899-1947.
\par \i\b Bull. Phys.-Math. Acad. P\'e9tersb.\plain\fs28 
\par      \i Bulletin de la Classe physico-math\'e9matique de l'Acad\'e9mie imperiale des Sciences\plain\fs28 . St.Petersbourg & Leipzig. Ser. 2, \b 1-17\plain\fs28 , 1843-1859; titled \i Bulletin de l'Acad\'e9mie imp\'e9riale des Sciences de Saint P\'e9tersbourg\plain\fs28 , Ser. 3, \b 1-32\plain\fs28 , 1860-1888; Ser. 4, \b 1-4\plain\fs28  (also numbered \b 33-36\plain\fs28 ), 1890-1894; titled ******** *************  ******** **** [\i Izvestija imperatorskoj Akademii Nauk\plain\fs28 ]. / Bulletin de l'Acad\'e9mie imp\'e9riale des Sciences (de Saint P\'e9tersbourg), Ser. 5, \b 1-15\plain\fs28 , 1894-1906/1907 ; Ser. 6, \b 1-11\plain\fs28 (\b 4\plain\fs28 ), 1907-1917; titled ******** ******** **** [\i Izvestija Akademii Nauk\plain\fs28 ]. / \i Bulletin de l'Acad\'e9mie des Sciences, Petrograd\plain\fs28 , \b 11\plain\fs28 (\b 5\plain\fs28 )-\b 11\plain\fs28 (\b 11\plain\fs28 ), 1917; titled ******** *********. ******** ***** [\i Izvestija Rossijsk. Akademii Nauk\plain\fs28 ]. / \i Bulletin de l'Acad\'e9mie des Sciences de Russie\plain\fs28 , \b 11\plain\fs28 (\b 12\plain\fs28 )-\b 19\plain\fs28 (\b 9\plain\fs28 /\b 11\plain\fs28 ), 1917-1925; titled ******** ******** **** **** [\i Izvestija Akademii Nauk SSSR\plain\fs28 ]. / \i Bulletin de l'Acad\'e9mie des Sciences de l'URSS\plain\fs28 , \b 19\plain\fs28 (\b 12\plain\fs28 )-\b 21\plain\fs28 , 1925-1927; titled ******** ***** ********* **** ****. Cep. 7. *********** ********-************** **** [\i Izvestija Akademii Nauk SSSR. Ser. 7. Otdelenie fiziko-matematiceskikh Nauk\plain\fs28 ]. / \i Bulletin de l' Acad\'e9mie des Sciences de l' URSS. Classe des Sciences physico-math\'e9matiques\plain\fs28 , Moscow & Leningrad, 1928-1930; titled ********** ********* **** ****. ***. *. *********** ************** * ************* **** [\i Izvestzja Akademii Nauk SSSR. Ser\plain\fs28 . 7. \i Otdelenie matematiceskikh i estestvennykh Nauk\plain\fs28 ]. / \i Bulletin de l'Acad\'e9mie des Sciences de l' URSS. Classe des Sciences math\'e9matiques et naturelles\plain\fs28 , 1931-1935; titled ********************************* [****************************************************************** [\i Izvestija Akademii Nauk SSSR. Otdelenie math\'e9maticeskikh i estestvennykh Nauk. Serija biologiceskaja\plain\fs28 ]. /\i  Bulletin de l' Acad\'e9mie des Sciences de l' URSS. Classe des Sciences math\'e9matiques et naturelles. S\'e9rie biologique\plain\fs28 , 1936-1938. (French title not in all vols.); titled ************************************************** [\i Izvestjja Akademii Nauk SSSR. Serija biologiceskaja\plain\fs28 ]. / \i Bulletin de l' Acad\'e9mie des Sciences de l' URSS. S\'e9rie biologique\plain\fs28 , 1939->.
\par \pard \i\b Bull. Res. Counc. Israel\plain\fs28 
\par    \i Bulletin of the Research Council of Israel\plain\fs28 . Jerusalem. \b 1-11\plain\fs28  (from \b 5\plain\fs28 , 1955, onwards \i Botany\plain\fs28  in \i Section D\plain\fs28 ), 1951-1963. (Sect. D, Botany, being continuation of \i Palestine Journal of Botany and horticultural Science\plain\fs28 .) Titled \i\b Israel Jour. Bot.\plain\fs28 , \i Israel Journal of Botany\plain\fs28 , \b 12\plain\fs28 ->, 1963->.
\par \i\b Bull. Sci. Acad. Imp. Sci. P\'e9tersb\plain\fs28 .
\par    \i Bulletin scientifique publi\'e9 par l' Acad\'e9mie imp\'e9riale des Sciences de Saint-P\'e9tersbourg\plain\fs28 . Saint-P\'e9tersbourg & Leipzig. \b 1-10\plain\fs28 , 1836-1842.
\par \pard \i\b Bull. Sci. Nat. Geol\plain\fs28 .
\par      \i Bulletin des Sciences naturelles et de G\'e9ologie\plain\fs28 . Paris. \b 1-26\plain\fs28 , 1823-1832.
\par \i\b Bull. Sci. Soc. Philom. Paris\plain\fs28 
\par    \i Bulletin des Sciences, par la Soci\'e9t\'e9 Philomatique\plain\fs28 . Paris. \b 1-3\plain\fs28 , 1791-1805 ; titled \i Nouveau Bulletin des Sciences, publi\'e9 par la Soci\'e9t\'e9 Philomatique\plain\fs28 , \b 1-3\plain\fs28  ( = ann\'e9es \b 1-6\plain\fs28 ), 1807-1813. Continued under original title, 1814-1824; as \i Nouv. Bull....\plain\fs28 , 1825-1826; suspended 1827-1831 ; titled \i Nouv. Bull....\plain\fs28 , 1832-1833.
\par \pard \i\b Bull. Soc. Acclim\plain\fs28 . (\i\b Paris\plain\fs28 )
\par      \i Bulletin de la Soci\'e9t\'e9 zoologique d 'Acclimatation\plain\fs28 . Paris. Ser. 1\b 1-10\plain\fs28 , 1854-1863. Ser. 2, \b 1-7\plain\fs28 , 1864-1870; titled \i Bulletin de la Soci\'e9t\'e9 d 'Acclimatation\plain\fs28 ,\b  8-10\plain\fs28  1871-1873. Ser . 3, \b 1-8\plain\fs28 , 1874-1881. With several minor changes of title; other series and titles follow.
\par \i\b Bull. Soc. Bot. Belg\plain\fs28 .
\par    \i Bulletin de la Soci\'e9t\'e9 royale de Botanique de Belgique\plain\fs28 . Bruxelles. \b 1\plain\fs28 ->, 1862->. (\b 18-42\plain\fs28 , 1879-1905, in two parts : 1. \i M\'e9moires\plain\fs28  and 2. \i Comptes rendus des S\'e9ances\plain\fs28 . \i 51-79\plain\fs28 , 1912-1947, also numbered Ser. 2, \b 1-29\plain\fs28 .)
\par \pard \i\b Bull. Soc. Bot. Bulg\plain\fs28 .
\par         ******* ** *********** *********** [\i Izvestijana balgarskoto botanicesko Druzestvo\plain\fs28 ]. /\i  Bulletin de la Soci\'e9t\'e9 botanique de Bulgarie\plain\fs28 . Sofija. \b 1-9\plain\fs28 , 1926-1943.
\par \i\b Bull. Soc. Bot. Fr.\plain\fs28 
\par    \i Bulletin de la Soci\'e9t\'e9 botanique de France\plain\fs28 . Paris. \b 1\plain\fs28 ->, 1854->. From 1978/1979 divided into 2 parts: \i\b Actu. Bot\plain\fs28 ., \i Actualit\'e9s botaniques\plain\fs28  (from \b 125\plain\fs28 ->, 1978->) and \i\b Lettres Bot\plain\fs28 ., \i Lettres botaniques\plain\fs28  (from \b 126\plain\fs28 ->, 1979->.)
\par \pard \i\b Bull. Soc. Bot. Ital\plain\fs28 .
\par    \i Bullettino della Societ\'e0 botanica italiana\plain\fs28 . Firenze. \b 1892-1926\plain\fs28 , 1892-1926. (From 1927, published in \i Nuovo Gior. Bot. Ital\plain\fs28 .) 
\par \i\b Bull. Soc. Bot. Gen\'e9ve\plain\fs28 
\par     \i Bulletin des Travaux de la Soci\'e9t\'e9 botanique de Gen\'e8ve\plain\fs28 . Gen\'e8ve. Ser. 1,\b  1-11\plain\fs28 , 1879-1905. Ser. 2, titled \i Bulletin de la Soci\'e9te botanique de Gen\'e8ve\plain\fs28 , \b 1-43\plain\fs28 , 1909-1952.
\par \i\b Bull. Soc. Bot. Ital\plain\fs28 .
\par      \i Bullettino della Societa botanica italiana\plain\fs28 . Firenze. 1892-1926, 1892-1926.
\par \pard \i\b Bull. Soc. Bot. Rochel\plain\fs28 .
\par      \i Comptes-rendus. Soci\'e9t\'e9 botanique rochelaise\plain\fs28 . La Rochelle. \b 1-10\plain\fs28 , 1879-1889; titled \i Bulletin. Soci\'e9t\'e9 botanique rochelaise\plain\fs28 , \b 11-24\plain\fs28 , 1890-1903.
\par \i\b Bull. Soc. Dauph. \'c9ch. Pl.\plain\fs28 
\par    \i Bulletin de la Soci\'e9t\'e9 dauphinoise pour 1' \'c9change des Plantes\plain\fs28 . Grenoble. \b 1-16\plain\fs28 , 1874-1889. Ser. 2, \b 1-3\plain\fs28 , 1890-1892.
\par \i\b Bull. Soc. \'c9tud Sci. Angers\plain\fs28 
\par      \i Bulletin de la Societ\'e9 d'\'c9tudes scientifiques d'Angers\plain\fs28 . Angers. \b 1-89\plain\fs28 , 1872-1959; titled \i Bulletin de la Societ\'e9 d'\'c9tudes scientifiques de l'Anjou\plain\fs28 , \b 90\plain\fs28 ->, 1960-> .
\par \pard \i\b Bull. Soc. Fr. \'c9ch. Pl. Vasc\plain\fs28 .
\par      \i Bulletin de la Soci\'e9t\'e9 fran\'e7aise pour l'\'c9change des Plantes vasculaires.\plain\fs28  Versailles. \b 1\plain\fs28 ->, 1947-> . (\b 13\plain\fs28 ->, 1970->, at Le Chesnay.)
\par \i\b Bull. Soc. Hist. Nat. Afr. Nord\plain\fs28 
\par    \i Bulletin de la Soci\'e9t\'e9 d' Histoire naturelle de 1' Afrique du Nord\plain\fs28 . Alger. \b 1\plain\fs28 ->,1909->.
\par \i\b Bull. Soc. Hist. Nat. Savoie\plain\fs28 
\par      \i Bulletin de la Soci\'e9t\'e9 d 'Histoire Naturelle de Savoie\plain\fs28 . Chambery. 1850-1886. Ser. 1, \b 1-7\plain\fs28 , 1887-1895. Ser. 2, \b 1-23\plain\fs28 , 1895-1935.
\par \pard \i\b Bull. Soc. Hist. Nat. Toulouse\plain\fs28 
\par    \i Bulletin de la Soci\'e9t\'e9 d'Histoire naturelle de Toulouse\plain\fs28 . Toulouse. \b 1\plain\fs28 ->,1867->.
\par \i\b Bull. Soc. Hort. Rh\'f4ne\plain\fs28 
\par      \i Bulletin de la Soci\'e9t\'e9 d 'Horticulture pratique du D\'e9partement du Rh\'f4ne\plain\fs28 . Lyon. 1841-> .
\par \i\b Bull. Soc. Industr. Angers\plain\fs28 
\par      \i Bulletin de la Soci\'e9t\'e9 industrielle d 'Angers et du D\'e9partement de Maine et Loire\plain\fs28 . Angers. \b 1\plain\fs28 ->, 1830-> . With parallel numbering in series, and several minor changes of title.
\par \pard \i\b Bull. Soc. Linn. Lyon\plain\fs28 
\par    \i Bulletin mensuel de la Soci\'e9t\'e9 linn\'e9enne de Lyon\plain\fs28 . Lyon. Nos. 1-18, 1883-1884 ? ; titled \i Bulletin bi-mensuel de la Soci\'e9t\'e9 linn\'e9enne de Lyon\plain\fs28 , \b 1-10\plain\fs28 , 1922-1931 ; titled \i Bulletin mensuel de la Soci\'e9t\'e9 linn\'e9enne et des Soci\'e9t\'e9s botaniques de Lyon, d'Anthropologie et de Biologie de Lyon r\'e9unies\plain\fs28 , \b 1\plain\fs28 ->, 1932->.
\par \i\b Bull. Soc. Litt. Sci. Castres\plain\fs28 
\par      \i Bulletin de la Soci\'e9t\'e9 litt\'e9raire et scientifique de Castres\plain\fs28 . Castres.
\par \pard \i\b Bull. Soc. Nat. Ain\plain\fs28 
\par      \i Bulletin de la Soci\'e9te des Naturalistes et des Archeologues de l'Ain\plain\fs28 . Bourg. 1886-> .
\par \i\b Bul. Soc. Sci. Nat. Maroc\plain\fs28 
\par      \i Bulletin de la Soci\'e9t\'e9 des Sciences naturelles du Maroc\plain\fs28 . Rabat. \b 1-32\plain\fs28 , 1921-1953; titled \i Bulletin de la Soci\'e9t\'e9 des Sciences naturelles et physiques du Maroc\plain\fs28 , \b 33\plain\fs28 ->, 1953-> . (\b 28-33\plain\fs28 , 1948-1953, at Rabat, Paris, Casablanca & Londres; \b 34-38\plain\fs28 , 1954-1958, at Paris, Casablanca & Rabat.)
\par \pard \i\b Bull. Soc. Nat. Moscou\plain\fs28 
\par    \i Bulletin de la Soci\'e9t\'e9 imp\'e9riale des Naturalistes de Moscou\plain\fs28 . Moscow. \b 1-62\plain\fs28 , 1829-1886. Nov. ser., \b 1-30\plain\fs28 , 1887-1917 ; titled \i\b Bjull. Mosk. Obsc. Isp. Prir., Otd. Biol\plain\fs28 ., ************* [*****************]*********** [***************] **************************************, ************************  [\i Bjulleten' (Imperatorskago) Moskovskogo (Moskovskago) Obscestva ispytatelej Prirody. Otdel biologiceskij\plain\fs28 ]. / \i Bulletin de la Soci\'e9t\'e9 Imp\'e9riale des Naturalistes de Moscou. Section biologique\plain\fs28 . Nov. ser. \b 31\plain\fs28 ->, 1922->. (Nov. ser. \b 52\plain\fs28 (\b 5\plain\fs28 )->, 1947->, with Russian title only ; from \b 46\plain\fs28 (\b 3\plain\fs28 )->, 1991-> with English subtitle \i Bulletin of Moscow Society of Naturalists, Biological Series\plain\fs28 .) 
\par \pard \i\b Bull. Soc. Nat. Voron\'e8je\plain\fs28 
\par    Cf.\i  Bjull Obsc. Estestv. Voronez Univ.\plain\fs28 
\par \i\b Bull. Soc. Neuch\'e2tel Sci. Nat.\plain\fs28 
\par    Cf. \i Bull. Soc. Sci. Nat. Neuch\'e2tel.\plain\fs28 
\par \i\b Bull. Soc. Oural. Sci. Nat\plain\fs28 .
\par     ******* ********** ******** ********* **************** [\i Zapiski Ural'skago Obscestva Ljubitelej Estestvoznanija\plain\fs28 ]. /\i  Bulletin de la Soci\'e9t\'e9 ouralienne d'Amateurs\plain\fs28  / \i Amis des Sciences naturelles\plain\fs28 . Ekaterinburg. \b 1-40\plain\fs28 , 1873-1927.
\par \i\b Bull. Soc. Philom. Paris\plain\fs28 
\par \pard      \i Bulletin de la Soci\'e9t\'e9 philomathique de Paris\plain\fs28 . Paris. 1791-> .
\par \i\b Bull. Soc. Polymath. Morbihan\plain\fs28 
\par      \i Bulletin de la Soci\'e9t\'e9 polymathique du Morbihan\plain\fs28 . Vannes. 1861-1894.
\par \i\b Bull. Soc. Port. Sci. Nat\plain\fs28 .
\par      \i Bulletin de la Soci\'e9t\'e9 portugaise des Sciences naturelles\plain\fs28 . Lisbonne. Ser. 1, \b 1-14\plain\fs28 , 1907-1943. Ser. 2, with alternative title \i\b Bol. Soc. Port. Ci. Nat\plain\fs28 ., \i Boletim da Sociedade portuguesa de Ci\'eancias naturais\plain\fs28 , \b 1\plain\fs28 ->, 1944-> .
\par \pard \i\b Bull. Soc. Sci. Dauph.\plain\fs28 
\par    \i Bulletin de la Soci\'e9t\'e9 de Statistique, des Sciences naturelles, et des Arts industriels du D\'e9partement de l' Is\'e8re\plain\fs28 . Grenoble. Ser. 1, \b 1-4\plain\fs28 , 1838 or 1840 - 1846 or 1848. \b 5-11\plain\fs28  (ser. 2, \b 1-7\plain\fs28 ), 1851-1864. \b 12-26\plain\fs28  (ser. 3, \b 1-15\plain\fs28 ), 1867-1890. \b 27-41\plain\fs28  (ser. 4, \b 1-15\plain\fs28 ), 1892-1920. Titled\i\b  Bull. Soc. Sci. Is\'e8re\plain\fs28 , \i Bulletin de la Soci\'e9t\'e9 scientifique de l' Is\'e8re, ancienne Soci\'e9t\'e9 de Statistique des Sciences naturelles et des Arts industriels\plain\fs28 . \b 42\plain\fs28  (ser. 5, \b 1\plain\fs28 ) -\b 45\plain\fs28  (ser. 5,\b  4\plain\fs28 ), 1921-1924. Titled\i\b  Bull. Soc. Sci. Dauph.\plain\fs28 ,\i  Bulletin de la Soci\'e9t\'e9 scientifique du Dauphin\'e9, ancienne Soci\'e9t\'e9 de Statistique des Sciences naturelles et des Arts industriels du D\'e9partement de l' Is\'e8re\plain\fs28 , \b 46 \plain\fs28 (ser. 5,\b  5\plain\fs28 )-\b 60\plain\fs28  (ser. 5, \b 18\plain\fs28 ), 1925-1944; \b 61\plain\fs28 -> (ser.6, \b l\plain\fs28 ->), 1945->.
\par \pard \i\b Bull. Soc. Sci. Is\'e8re\plain\fs28 
\par    Cf. \i Bull. Soc. Sci. Dauph.\plain\fs28 
\par \i\b Bull. Soc. Sci. Nancy\plain\fs28 
\par     \i  Bulletin de la Soci\'e9t\'e9 des Sciences de Nancy\plain\fs28 . Nancy. Ser. 2,\b  1-16\plain\fs28 , 187~1900. Ser. 3,\b 1-15\plain\fs28 , 1900-1915. Ser. 4,\b 1-3\plain\fs28 , 192 1929. Ser. 5, \b 1-19\plain\fs28 , 1936-1960.
\par \i\b Bull. Soc. Sci. Nat. Neuch\'e2tel\plain\fs28 
\par    \i Bulletin de la Soci\'e9t\'e9 des Sciences naturelles de Neuch\'e2tel\plain\fs28 . Neuch\'e2tel. \b 1-25\plain\fs28 , 1847-1897 ; titled \i\b Bull. Soc. Neuch\'e2tel Sci. Nat\plain\fs28 ., \i Bulletin. Soci\'e9t\'e9 neuch\'e2teloise des Sciences naturelles\plain\fs28 , \b 26\plain\fs28 ->, 1898->.
\par \pard \i\b Bull. Soc. Sci. Phys. Alg\'e9rie\plain\fs28 
\par    \i Bulletin de la Soci\'e9t\'e9 des Sciences physiques, naturelles et climatologiques de l'Alg\'e9rie\plain\fs28 . Alger. 1864-1889; titled \i Bulletin de la Soci\'e9t\'e9 climatologique alg\'e9rienne\plain\fs28 , 1890->.
\par \i\b Bull. Soc. Sci. Phys. Nat. Toulouse\plain\fs28 
\par      \i Bulletin de la Soci\'e9t\'e9 des Sciences physiques & naturelles de Toulouse\plain\fs28 . Toulouse. \b 1-8\plain\fs28 , 1872-1889.
\par \i\b Bull. Soc. Sci. Skoplje\plain\fs28 
\par      ******* ******** ******* ******  [\i Glasnik skopskog naucnog Drustva\plain\fs28 ]. / \i Bulletin de la Soci\'e9t\'e9 scientifique de Skoplje\plain\fs28 . Skoplje. \b 1\plain\fs28 ->, 1925-> .
\par \pard \i\b Bull. Soc. Vaud. Sci. Nat.\plain\fs28 
\par    \i Bulletin de la Soci\'e9t\'e9vaudoise des Sciences naturelles\plain\fs28 . Lausanne. \b 1\plain\fs28 ->, 1842->.
\par \i\b Bull. Torrey Bot. Club\plain\fs28 
\par    \i Bulletin of the Torrey botanical Club\plain\fs28 . New York. \b 1\plain\fs28 ->, 1870->. (\b 73-78\plain\fs28 , 1946-1951, titled \i Bulletin of the Torrey botanica1 Club and Torreya\plain\fs28 . \b 20-54\plain\fs28 , 1893-1927, at Lancaster, Pennsylvania; \b 55-66\plain\fs28 , -1928-1939, at Menasha, Wisconsin; \b 67\plain\fs28 , 1940, at Burlington, Vermont.)
\par \pard \i\b Bull. Trav. Soc. Agric. Sci. Agen\plain\fs28 
\par      \i Bulletin des Travaux de la Soci\'e9t\'e9 d'Agriculture, Sciences et Belles-Lettres d'Agen\plain\fs28 . Agen. 1, 1804. Continued under other titles with several series.
\par \i\b Bull. Trav. Soc. Pharm. Bordeaux\plain\fs28 
\par      \i Bulletin des Travaux de la Soci\'e9t\'e9 de Pharmacie de Bordeaux\plain\fs28 . Bordeaux. \b 1\plain\fs28 -> ?, 1860-?1968.
\par \i\b Bull. Trav. Soc. Murith\plain\fs28 .
\par      \i Bulletins des Travaux de la Soci\'e9t\'e9 murithienne\plain\fs28 . Aigle. \b 1-5\plain\fs28 , 1868-1876. (\b 2\plain\fs28 , 1873, at Geneve; \b 3\plain\fs28 , 1875, at Sion.)
\par \pard \i\b Bull. Turkestan Sect. Russ. Geogr. Soc.\plain\fs28 
\par    ***************************************************************************** [\i Izvestija Turkestanskago Otdela imperatorskago geograficeskago Obscestva\plain\fs28 ]. Taskent'. \b 1-12\plain\fs28 , 1898-1916; titled ************************************************************************ [\i Izvestija Turkestanskogo Otdela Russkogo geograficeskogo Obscestva\plain\fs28 ]. / \i Journal of the Turkestan Branch of the Russian Geographical Society. / Bulletin de la Section du Turkestan de la Soci\'e9t\'e9 russe de G\'e9ographie\plain\fs28 ,\b  13-17\plain\fs28 , 1917-1924; titled ************************************************************************************************ [\i Izvestija Sredne-Aziatskogo Otdela Gosudarstvennogo russkogo geograficeskogo Obscestva\plain\fs28 ], \b 18\plain\fs28 , 1929; titled ******************************************************** [\i Izvestija Sredne-Aziatskogo Geograficeskogo Obscestva\plain\fs28 ], \b 19-20\plain\fs28 , 1930?-1932; titled *************************************************** [\i Trudy Uzbekistanskogo geograficeskogo Obscestva\plain\fs28 ], \b 21-22\plain\fs28  (= \b 1-2\plain\fs28 ), 1937-1948.
\par \pard \i\b Bull. Univ. Asie Centr\plain\fs28 .
\par      \i Bulletin de l'Universit\'e9 de l'Asie cenrale (Tachkent)\plain\fs28 . / ********* ******-********** ***************** ************* [\i Bjulleten' Sredne-Aziatskogo Gosudarstvennogo Universiteta\plain\fs28 ]. Taskent. 1923-1945.
\par \i\b Butll. Inst. Catalana Hist. Nat.\plain\fs28 
\par    \i Butlleti de la Instituci\'f3 catalana d' Historia natural\plain\fs28 . Barcelona. \b 1\plain\fs28 ->,1901->.
\par \i\b Cactus Jour\plain\fs28 .
\par      \i The Cactus Journal.\plain\fs28  London etc. \b 1\plain\fs28 ->, 1932-> . (\i 8\plain\fs28 (\i 3\plain\fs28 )->, 1946->, titled \i The Cactus and Succulent Journal\plain\fs28 .)
\par \pard \i\b Cahiers Nat. Paris\plain\fs28 .
\par    \i La Feuille des jeunes Naturalistes\plain\fs28 . Rennes & Paris. \b l-44\plain\fs28 , 1870-1915; titled \i La Feuille des Naturalistes. Revue mensuelle d' Histoire naturelle. Bulletin de la Soci\'e9t\'e9 des Naturalistes parisiens,\plain\fs28  \b 45-47\plain\fs28 , 1924-1926. Nov. ser., \b 1-7\plain\fs28 , 1946-1952. Titled \i Cahiers des Naturalistes. Bulletin des Naturalistes parisiens\plain\fs28 . Nov. ser. \b 8\plain\fs28 ->,1953->.
\par \i\b Canad. Jour. Bot.\plain\fs28 
\par    \i Canadian Journal of Research\plain\fs28 . Ottawa. \b 1-12\plain\fs28 , 1929-1934; titled \i Canadian Journal of Research. Section C.\plain\fs28  (\i Botanical Sciences\plain\fs28 ), \b 13-28\plain\fs28 , 1935-1950; titled\i  Canadian Journal of Botany\plain\fs28 , \b 29-50\plain\fs28 , 1951-1972; titled \i Canadian Journal of Botany\plain\fs28 . / \i Journal canadien de Botanique\plain\fs28 , \b 51\plain\fs28 ->, 1973->.
\par \pard \i\b Canad.  Jour.  Genet. Cytol\plain\fs28 .
\par      \i Canadian Journal of Genetics and Cytology\plain\fs28 . / \i  Journal canadien de G\'e9n\'e9tique et de Cytologie\plain\fs28 . Ottawa. 1959-> .
\par \i\b Canad. Nat. Quart. Jour. Sci.\plain\fs28 
\par    \i Canadian Naturalist and quarterly Journal of Science, with Proeeedings of the Natural History Society of Montrea1\plain\fs28 . (Subtitle varies.) Montreal. \b 1-8\plain\fs28 , 1856-1863. Nov. ser. \b 1-10\plain\fs28 , 1864-1883.
\par \i\b Candollea\plain\fs28 
\par    \i Candollea. Organe du Conservatoire et du Jardin botaniques de la Ville de Gen\'e8ve\plain\fs28 . Gen\'e8ve. \b 1\plain\fs28 ->, 1922->.
\par \pard \i\b Carinthia II\plain\fs28 
\par    \i Carinthia II.\plain\fs28  /\i  Mitteilungen des naturhistorischen Landesmuseums f\'fcr K\'e4rnten\plain\fs28 . / \i Naturwissenschaftliche Beitr\'e4ge zur Heimatkunde K\'e4rntens\plain\fs28 . / \i Mitteilungen des Vereines naturkundlicher Landesmuseum f\'fcr K\'e4rnten\plain\fs28 . Klagenfurt. \b 81\plain\fs28 ->. 1891->. (Continuation of \i Carinthia. Ein Wochenblatt zum Nutzen und Vergn\'fcgen\plain\fs28 . Klagenfurt. \b 1-80\plain\fs28 , 1811-1890.)
\par \i\b Carnegie Inst. Washington Publ\plain\fs28 .
\par      \i Carnegie Institute of Washington Publications\plain\fs28 . Washington, D.C. 1902-> .
\par \pard \i\b Caryologia\plain\fs28 
\par     \i  Caryologia\plain\fs28 . Pisis. \b 1\plain\fs28 ->, 1948-> . (\b 6\plain\fs28 ->, 1954->, Florentiae.)
\par \i\b Cavanillesia\plain\fs28 
\par    \i Cavanillesia. Rerum botanicarum Acta\plain\fs28 . Barcinone. \b 1-8\plain\fs28 , 1928-1938.
\par \i\b Christ. Vidensk.-Sels. Forh\plain\fs28 .
\par    \i Kristiana Videnskabs Selskabs Forhandlingar\plain\fs28 . Oslo. 1886->. ('Christiania' in some vols.)
\par \i\b Cold Spring Harbor Symp. Quant. Biol\plain\fs28 .
\par      \i Cold Spring Harbor Symposia on quantitative Biology\plain\fs28 . Cold Spring Harbor, New York. 1933-> .
\par \pard \i\b Collect. Bot. (Barcelona)\plain\fs28 
\par    \i Collectanea botanica a barcinonensi botanico Instituta edita\plain\fs28 . Barcinone. \b 1\plain\fs28 ->,1946->.
\par \i\b Comment. Ateneo Brescia\plain\fs28 
\par      \i Commentarj della Accademia di Scienze, Lettere, Agricultura, ed Arti del Dipartimento del Mella\plain\fs28 . Brescia. \b 1808-1811\plain\fs28 , 1808-1812; titled \i Commentarj dell'Ateneo di Brescia\plain\fs28 , \b 1812-1886\plain\fs28 , 1814-1886.
\par \i\b Comment. Biol.\plain\fs28 
\par      \i Commentationes biologicae\plain\fs28 . Helsinki. \b 1\plain\fs28 ->, 1924-> .
\par \pard \i\b Comment. Gotting.\plain\fs28 
\par    \i Commentarii Societatis regiae Scientiarum gottingensis\plain\fs28 . Gottingae. \b 1-4\plain\fs28 , 1751-1754. Continued as \i\b Novi Comment. Gotting.\plain\fs28 ,\i  Novi Commentarii Societatis regiae Scientiarum gottingensis\plain\fs28 . Gottingae & Gotha, \b 1-8\plain\fs28 , 1771-1778. Continued as \i\b Comment. Gotting.\plain\fs28 , Ser. 2. \i Commentationes Societatis regiae Scientiarum gottingensis\plain\fs28 . Gottingae. \b 1-16\plain\fs28 , 1779-1808. Continued as\i\b  Comment. Gotting. Recent\plain\fs28 ., \i Commentationes Societatis regiae Scientiarum gottingensis recentiores\plain\fs28 . Gottingae. \b 1-8\plain\fs28 , 1811-1841.
\par \pard \i\b Comment. Soc. Phys.-Med. Mosq.\plain\fs28 
\par    \i Commentationes Societatis physico-medicae mosquensis\plain\fs28 . Mosquae. \b 1\plain\fs28  in 1805. Titled \i\b Comment. Soc. Phys.-Med. Univ. Mosq\plain\fs28 ., \i Commentationes Societatis physico-medicae apud Universitatem Literarum caesaream mosquensem Institutae\plain\fs28 . Mosquae. \b 1-3\plain\fs28 , 1808-1823.
\par \i\b Comment. Soc. Phys.-Med. Univ. Mosq.\plain\fs28 
\par    Cf. \i Comment. Soc. Phys.-Med. Mosq.\plain\fs28 
\par \i\b Commun. Stat. Int. G\'e9obot. M\'e9dit. Alp\plain\fs28 
\par    \i Communications de la Station internationale de G\'e9obotanique m\'e9diterran\'e9enne et alpine\plain\fs28 . Montpellier. \b 1\plain\fs28 ->, 1931->.
\par \pard \i\b Compt. Rend. Acad. Bulg. Sci.\plain\fs28 
\par    \i Comptes rendus de l' Acad\'e9mie bulgare des Sciences\plain\fs28 . Sofia. \b 1\plain\fs28 ->, 1948->. (\b 3\plain\fs28 ->, 1951->, also titled ************************************* [\i Dokladi bolgarskoj Akademii Nauk\plain\fs28 ].)
\par \i\b Compt. Rend. Acad. (Paris)\plain\fs28 
\par    \i Compte[s] rendu[s] hebdomadaire[s] des S\'e9ances de l'Acad\'e9mie des Sciences\plain\fs28 . Paris. \b 1\plain\fs28 ->, 1835->.
\par \i\b Compt.-Rend. Assoc. Fr. Avancem. Sci.\plain\fs28 
\par      \i Comptes-rendus. Association fran\'e7caise pour l'Avancement des Sciences\plain\fs28 . 1872-> . Various places of publication.
\par \pard \i\b Compt. Rend. Congr. Soc. Sav\plain\fs28 . (\i\b Sci\plain\fs28 .)
\par      \i Comptes rendus du Congres des Soci\'e9t\'e9s savantes de Paris et des D\'e9partements. Section des Sciences\plain\fs28 . Paris. 1896-> .
\par \i\b Compt. Rend. Soc. Bot. Rochel\plain\fs28 .
\par      \i Comptes-rendus des Excursions botaniques. Soci\'e9t\'e9 botanique rochelaise\plain\fs28 . La Rochelle.\b  1-4\plain\fs28 , 1879-1882; titled \i Comptes-rendus, Descriptions, Notes et Communications,\plain\b\fs28  5-10\plain\fs28 , 1883-1889; titled \i\b Bull. Soc. Bot. Rochel.\plain\fs28 ,\i  Bulletin. Soci\'e9t\'e9 botanique rochelaise\plain\fs28 , \b 11-24\plain\fs28 , 1890 1903.
\par \pard \i\b Compt. Rend. Soc. Hall\'e9r.\plain\fs28 
\par    \i Compte-rendu des Travaux de la Soci\'e9t\'e9 hall\'e9rienne\plain\fs28 . Gen\'e8ve. \b 1-4\plain\fs28 , 1852-1856. (\b 1\plain\fs28 : pp. 1-12 in 1852-1853;\b  2\plain\fs28 : pp. 13-76 in 1853-1854;\b  3\plain\fs28 : pp. 77-90 in 1854-1855;\b  4\plain\fs28 : pp. 93-184 in 1854-1856.)
\par \i\b Compt. Rend. Trav. Lab. Carlsb. (S\'e9r. Physiol.)\plain\fs28 
\par    \i Comptes-rendus des Travaux du Carlsberg Laboratoriet\plain\fs28 . Copenhagen. \b 1-20\plain\fs28 , 1878-1935; titled \i Comptes-rendus des Travaux du Carlsberg Laboratoriet; S\'e9rie physiologique\plain\fs28 ,\b  21\plain\fs28 ->. 1935->. (The earlier volumes, not in series, are sometimes titled \i Meddelelser frei Carlsberg Laboratoriet\plain\fs28 .)
\par \pard \i\b Comun. Inst. Nac. Invest. Agrar. Ser. Recurs. Nat.\plain\fs28  (\i\b Madrid\plain\fs28 )
\par      \i Comunicaciones. Instituto nacional de Investigaciones agrarias. Serie: Recursos naturales\plain\fs28 . Madrid.
\par \i\b Congr. Sci. Fr.\plain\fs28 
\par    \i Sessions des Congr\'e8s scientifiques de France\plain\fs28 . Rouen, Paris etc. (Place of publication changed each year.) \b 1 -42\plain\fs28 , \b 44\plain\fs28 . 1833-1879. (\b 43\plain\fs28  not published.)
\par \i\b Contr. Bolus Herb.\plain\fs28 
\par    \i Contributions from the Bolus Herbarium\plain\fs28 . Rondebosch C.P. \b 1\plain\fs28 ->, 1969->.
\par \pard \i\b Contr. Bot.\plain\fs28  (\i Cluj\plain\fs28 )
\par      \i Contributiuni botanice din Cluj ./ Contributions botaniques de Cluj, Roumanie\plain\fs28 . Cluj. \b 1-2\plain\fs28 , 1921-1937. Titled \i Contribuii botanice\plain\fs28 , 1960->, 1960-> .
\par \i\b Contr. Gray Herb.\plain\fs28 
\par    \i Contributions from the Gray Herbarium of Harvard University\plain\fs28 . Cambridge, Massachusetts. Nov. ser., \b 1-200\plain\fs28 , 1891-1970 ('nov. ser.' omitted from \b 76-200\plain\fs28 , 1926-1970); titled \i Contributions from the Gray Herbarium\plain\fs28 , \b 201-214\plain\fs28 , 1971-1984. Superseded by \i Harvard Papers in Botany\plain\fs28 ,\b  1\plain\fs28 ->, 1989->.
\par \pard \i\b Contr. Inst. Bot. Univ. Montr\'e9al\plain\fs28 
\par      \i Contributions du Laboratoire de Botanique de l'Universite de Montr\'e9al\plain\fs28 . Montreal. \b 1-30\plain\fs28 , 1922-1938; titled \i Contributions de l'Institut botanique de l'Universit\'e9 de Montr\'e9al\plain\fs28  \b 31\plain\fs28 ->, 1938-> . (\b 6-28\plain\fs28 , 1926-1937, at New York, Montr\'e9al & Leipzig; \b 29-35\plain\fs28  1937-1940, at New York, Montr\'e9al & Paris.)
\par \i\b Contr. U.S. Nat. Herb.\plain\fs28 
\par    \i Contributions from the United States National Herbarium\plain\fs28 . Washington. \b 1\plain\fs28 ->, 1890->.
\par \pard \i\b Cuad. Ci. Biol.\plain\fs28 
\par    \i Cuadernos de Ciencias biol\'f3gicas. Universidad de Granada\plain\fs28 . Granada. \b 1-7\plain\fs28 , [1971] 1972-1980.
\par \i\b Cytologia\plain\fs28 
\par      \i Cytologia. International Journal of Cytology\plain\fs28 . /\i  Internationale Zeitschrift f\'fcr Zytologie\plain\fs28 . /\i  Archives internationales de Cytologie\plain\fs28 . Tokyo. 1929-> .
\par \i\b Daff. Tulip Year Book\plain\fs28 
\par      \i Daffodil Year-Book.\plain\fs28  London. \b 1-11\plain\fs28 , 1913-1941. Continued as \i Daffodil and Tulip Year Book\plain\fs28 , \b 12\plain\fs28 ->, 1946-> .
\par \pard \i\b Dansk Bot. Ark\plain\fs28 .
\par     \i Dansk botanisk Arkiv\plain\fs28 . K\'f8benhavn. 1913-> .
\par \i\b Danske Vid. Selsk.\plain\fs28 
\par    Cf. \i Skr. Ki\'f8benhavnske Selsk. Laerd. Vid\plain\fs28 .
\par \i\b Darwiniana\plain\fs28 
\par    \i Darwiniana. Carpeta del->Darwinio->\plain\fs28 . (From \b 3\plain\fs28 , 1937/1939, subtitle changes to \i Revista del Instituto do Bot\'e1nica Darwinion\plain\fs28 .) Buenos Aires. \b 1\plain\fs28 ->, 1922->.
\par \i\b Decheniana\plain\fs28 
\par      \i Verhandlungen des naturhistorischen Vereines der preussischen Rheinlande\plain\fs28 . Bonn. \b 1-90\plain\fs28 , 1844-1933. With minor changes of title. Titled \i Decheniana. Verhandlungen des naturhistorischen Vereins der Rheinlande und Westfalens\plain\fs28 , \b 91\plain\fs28 ->, 1935->.
\par \pard \i\b Denkschr. Akad. Wiss. Math.-Nat. Kl. (Wien)\plain\fs28 
\par    \i Denkschriften der kaiserlichen Akademie der Wissenschaften, mathematisch-naturwissenschaftliche Klasse\plain\fs28 . Wien. \b 1-95\plain\fs28 , 1850-1918. (\b 93-95\plain\fs28 , 1917-1918, titled \i\b Kaiserl. Akad. Wiss. Wien Math.-Nat. Kl. Denkschr\plain\fs28 ., \i Kaiserliche Akademie der Wissenschaften in Wien. Mathematisch-naturwissenschaftliche Klasse. Denkschriften\plain\fs28 .) Titled \i Akademie der Wissenschaften in Wien. Mathematisch-naturwissenschaftliche Klasse. Denkschriften\plain\fs28 , \b 96-107\plain\fs28 , 1919-1951 (\b 105\plain\fs28  in 1945-1951; \b 106\plain\fs28  in 1942-1946); titled \i \'d6sterreichische Akademie der Wissenschaften. Mathematisch-naturwissenschaftliche Klasse. Denkschriften\plain\fs28 , \b 108\plain\fs28 ->, 1948->.
\par \pard \i\b Denkschr. Akad. Wiss. M\'fcnchen\plain\fs28 
\par      \i Denkschriften der Akademie der Wissenschaften zu M\'fcnchen\plain\fs28 . M\'fcnchen. \b 1-9\plain\fs28 , 1809-1825.
\par \i\b Denkschr. Bayer. Bot. Ges. Regensb.\plain\fs28 
\par    \i Denkschriften der k\'f6niglich-baierischen [k\'f6niglich bayerischen] botanischen Gesellschaft in [zu] Regensburg\plain\fs28 . Regensburg. \b 1-22\plain\fs28 , 1815-1947, with minor variations of title as indicated in parentheses. (\b 7-22\plain\fs28 , 1898-1947, also called nov. ser., \b 1-15\plain\fs28 .)
\par \i\b Denkschr. Schweiz. Naturf. Ges.\plain\fs28 
\par \pard    Cf.\i  Neue Denkschr. Schweiz. Ges. Naturw.\plain\fs28 
\par \i\b Deutsche Bot. Monatsschr\plain\fs28 .
\par      \i Deutsche botanische Monatsschrift\plain\fs28 . Sondershausen. \b 1-22\plain\fs28 , 1883-1912. (\b 6-22\plain\fs28  at Arnstadt.)
\par \i\b Deutsche Heilpfl\plain\fs28 .
\par     \i  Deutsche Heilpflanze\plain\fs28 . Stollberg i. E. 1934->
\par \i\b Diana\plain\fs28 
\par      \i La Diana.\plain\fs28  Montbrison. 1797-1816. (?.Also a later series, \b 1-2\plain\fs28 , 1863-1865.)
\par \i\b Diar. Med. Flajiani\plain\fs28 
\par      \i Diaria medico di Flajiani\plain\fs28 .
\par \i\b Dict. Sci. Nat.\plain\fs28 
\par \pard      \i Dictionnaire des Sciences naturelles.\plain\fs28  Paris. \b 1-60\plain\fs28 , 1804-1830.
\par \i\b Dnevn. Vseross.->ezda Rassk. Bot\plain\fs28 .
\par      ******* ************** ****** ******* ********  [\i Dnevnik vserossijskogo->ezda russkikh Botanikov\plain\fs28 ]. Petrograd. \b 1\plain\fs28 , 1921.
\par \i\b Doc. Cartes V\'e9g.\plain\fs28 
\par      \i Documents pour les Cartes des Productions v\'e9g\'e9tales\plain\fs28 . Paris. (Several series.)
\par \i\b Doc. Phytosoc.\plain\fs28  (\i\b Lille\plain\fs28 )
\par      \i Documents phytosociologiques.\plain\fs28  Lille & Bailleul. \b 1\plain\fs28 ->, 1972-> .
\par \pard \i\b Dokl. Akad. Nauk SSSR\plain\fs28 
\par      ****** *********** **** ****  [\i Doklady Akadermii Nauk SSSR\plain\fs28 ]. Moskva & Leningrad.
\par \i\b Economic Botany\plain\fs28 .
\par      \i Economic Botany.\plain\fs28  New York. 1947-> .
\par \i\b Edinb. New Philos. Jour.\plain\fs28 
\par    \i The Edinburgh new philosophical Journal, exhibiting a View of the progressive Improvements and Discoveries in the Sciences and the Arts\plain\fs28 . Edinburgh. Ser. 1, \b 1-57\plain\fs28 , 1826-1854. Nov. ser., \b 1-19\plain\fs28 , 1855-1864.
\par \i\b Edinb. Philos. Jour.\plain\fs28 
\par \pard    \i The Edinburgh philosophical Journal, exbibiting a View of the Progress of Discovery in natural Philosophy, Chemistry, natural History, practical Mechanics, Geography, Statistics, and the fine and useful Arts\plain\fs28 . Edinburgh. \b 1\plain\fs28 , 1819 ; titled ... \i Geography, Navigation, Statistics\plain\fs28 , ... , \b 2-10\plain\fs28 , 1820-1824 (\b 2\plain\fs28  & \b 3 \plain\fs28 in 1820; \b 4\plain\fs28  &\b  5\plain\fs28  in 1821;\b  6\plain\fs28  &\b  7\plain\fs28  in 1822; \b 8\plain\fs28  & \b 9\plain\fs28  in 1823;\b  10\plain\fs28  in 1824); titled... \i natural History, comparative Anatomy, practical Mechanics, Geography, Navigation, Statistics\plain\fs28  ... , \b 11-13\plain\fs28 , 1824-1825. (\b 11\plain\fs28  in 1824; \b 12\plain\fs28  &\b  13\plain\fs28  in 1825.)
\par \pard \i\b Erd. Kis\'e9rl.\plain\fs28 
\par      \i  Erdeszeti Kis\'e9rletek\plain\fs28 . Sopron. \b 1-49\plain\fs28 , 1899-1949.
\par \i\b Erd\'e9sz. Lapok\plain\fs28 
\par      \i Erd\'e9szeti Lapok\plain\fs28 . Budapest. 1862-1950.
\par \i\b \'c9rtek. Term. K\'f6r\'e9b. Magyar Tud. Akad.\plain\fs28 
\par    \i \'c9rtekez\'e9sek a Term\'e9szettudom\'e1nyi[ok] K\'f6r\'e9b\'f6l Magyar Tudom\'e1nyos Akad\'e9mia\plain\fs28 . Budapest. \b 1-23\plain\fs28 , 1867-1893.
\par \i\b Euphytica\plain\fs28 
\par      \i Euphytica. Netherlands Journal of Plant Breeding\plain\fs28 . Wageningen. \b 1\plain\fs28 ->, 1952-> .
\par \i\b Evolution\plain\fs28 
\par    \i Evolution, Internationa1 Journal of organic Evolution\plain\fs28 . Lancaster, Pennsylvania. \b 1\plain\fs28 ->, 1947->. (\b 15\plain\fs28 ->, 1961->,at Lawrence, Kansas.)
\par \pard \i\b Exsicc. Genav\plain\fs28 .
\par      \i Exsiccatorum genavensium a Conservatorio botanico distributorum Fasciculus....\plain\fs28  Genavae. 1970-> .
\par \i\b Fac. Fil. Letras Buenos Aires Publ. Inst. Invest. Geogr\plain\fs28 .
\par      \i Facultad de Filosofia y Letras de la Universidad Nacional de Buenos Aires. Publicaciones de la Secci\'f3n Geografia\plain\fs28 . Ser. A. \b 1-5\plain\fs28 , 1917-1921. Ser. B.\b  2-4\plain\fs28 , 193~1952. Titled \i Publicaciones del Instituto de Investigaciones geograficas,\plain\fs28  \b 6-13\plain\fs28 , 1924-1930. Titled \i Publicaciones del Instituto de Geografia\plain\fs28 , in several series, \b 14\plain\fs28 ->,1950->.
\par \pard \i\b Farmacognosia\plain\fs28  (\i\b Madrid\plain\fs28 )
\par      \i Farmacognosia. Anales del Instituto Jose Celestino Mutis\plain\fs28 . Madrid. 1942-> .
\par \i\b Feddes Repert\plain\fs28 
\par    \i Repertorium novarum Specierum Regni vegetabilis\plain\fs28 . Berlin. \b 1-8\plain\fs28 : p. 144, 1905-1910; titled Repertorium Specierum novarum Regni vegetabilis, \b 8\plain\fs28 : p. 145-51, 1910-1942; titled \i Feddes Repertorium Specierum novarum Regni vegetabilis\plain\fs28 , \b 52-69\plain\fs28 , 1 943-1964 ; titled \i Feddes Repertorium. Zeitschrift f\'fcr botanische Taxonomie und Geobotanik\plain\fs28 , \b 70\plain\fs28 ->, 1965->. (This work includes \i Repertorium Europaeum et Mediterraneum\plain\fs28 , indicated by dual pagination.)
\par \pard \i\b Feddes Repert. (Beih.)\plain\fs28 
\par    \i Repertorium Specierum novarum Regni vegetabilis. Beiheft\plain\fs28 . Berlin. \b 1-127\plain\fs28 , 1914-1942; titled \i Feddes Repertorium Specierum novarum Regni vegetabilis. Beiheft\plain\fs28 , \b 128-141\plain\fs28 , 1952-1964; titled \i Feddes Repertorium. Zeitschrift f\'fcr botanische Taxonomie und Geobotanik. Beiheft\plain\fs28 , \b 142\plain\fs28 ->, 1965->. \i\b Sonderbeih\plain\fs28 ., \i Sonderbeiheft\plain\fs28 . \b A-E\plain\fs28 , 1914-1939. (\b A\plain\fs28  in parts, 1928 1939;\b  B\plain\fs28 , 1914-1929; - \b C\plain\fs28  in parts, 1930 - 1936; \b D\plain\fs28  in parts, 1936-1937 ; \b E\plain\fs28  in 1938.)
\par \pard \i\b Fern Gaz\plain\fs28 .
\par    Cf. \i Brit. Fern Gaz\plain\fs28 .
\par \i\b Festschr. Ges. Naturf. Freunde Berlin\plain\fs28 
\par      \i Festschrift zur Feier des hundertjahrigen Bestehens der Gesellschaft naturforschender Freunde zu Berlin\plain\fs28 . Berlin. 1873.
\par \i\b Fl. Fenn.\plain\fs28 
\par    \i  Flora fennica.\plain\fs28  Helsinki. \b 1\plain\fs28 ->, 1923-> .
\par \i\b Fl. Medit.\plain\fs28 
\par    \i Flora mediterranea. Acta Herbarii mediterranei panormitani sub Auspiciis Societatis Botanicorum mediterraneorum-> OPTIMA-> nuncupanda edita\plain\fs28 . Palermo. \b 1\plain\fs28 ->, 1991->.
\par \pard \i\b Fl. Pl. S. Afr\plain\fs28 .
\par    \i The flowering Plants of South Africa. A Magazine containing hand-coloured Figures with Descriptions of the flowering Plants indigenous to South Africa\plain\fs28 . London, Johannesburg & Cape Town. \b 1-24\plain\fs28 , 1920-1944; titled \i The flowering Plants of Africa. A Magazjne containing coloured Figures with Descriptions of the flowering Plants indigenous in Africa\plain\fs28 . Pretoria & Ashford. \b 25->\plain\fs28 , 1945->. This work has no page numbers, only plates.
\par \pard \i\b Fl. Serres Jard. Eur\plain\fs28 
\par   \i  Flore des Serres et des Jardins de l' Europe\plain\fs28 . Gand. \b 1-23\plain\fs28 , 1845-1880. (\b 1\plain\fs28  in 1845; \b 2\plain\fs28 ,in 1846; \b 3\plain\fs28  in 1847 ; \b 4\plain\fs28  in 1848; \b 5\plain\fs28  in 1849 ;\b  6\plain\fs28  in 1851 ; \b 7\plain\fs28  in 1851-1852; \b 8\plain\fs28  in 1853; \b 9\plain\fs28  in 1854; \b 10\plain\fs28  in 1855; \b 11\plain\fs28  in 1856; \b 12\plain\fs28  in 1857 ; \b 13\plain\fs28  in 1858; \b 14\plain\fs28  in 1859; \b 15\plain\fs28  in 1865; \b 16\plain\fs28  in 1865--1867 ; \b 17\plain\fs28 in 1868-1869; \b 18\plain\fs28  in 1869-1870; \b 19\plain\fs28  in 1873; \b 20\plain\fs28  in 1874; \b 21\plain\fs28  in 1875 ; \b 22\plain\fs28  in 1877 ; \b 23\plain\fs28  in 1880.) The full title of this work is very variable, but the first part (given above) is more or less constant. Earlier volumes have no page numbers, but nearly every leaf is numbered, and these are treated as page numbers, sometimes with a & b added.
\par \pard \i\b Fl. Syst. Pl. Vasc\plain\fs28 .
\par      \i Flora et Systematica Plantae vasculares. Acta Instituti botanici Academiae Scientiarum Unionis Rerum publicarum sovieticarum socialisticarum\plain\fs28 . / (***** * *********** ******* ********. ***** ************** ********** ********* **** **** [\i Flora i Sistematika vyssikh Rastenij. Trudy botaniceskogo Instituta Akademii Nauk CCCP\plain\fs28 ]. Leningrad. 1933-> . (\b 2\plain\fs28 ->, 1936->, at Mosqua & Leningrad.)
\par \i\b Flora\plain\fs28 
\par    Cf. \i Flora\plain\fs28  (\i Regensb\plain\fs28 .)
\par \pard \i\b Flora (Regensb.)\plain\fs28 
\par    \i Flora, oder allgemeine botanische Zeitung\plain\fs28 . Regensburg. \b 1\plain\fs28 ->, 1888->. (\b 72-95\plain\fs28 , 1889-1905, at Marburg; \b 96\plain\fs28 ->, 1906->, at Jena. \i\b Erg.-Bl\plain\fs28 ., \i Erg\'e4nzungsbl\'e4tter\plain\fs28 . \b 1\plain\fs28  in 1829.) Divided into 2 Abteilungen, \i Abt. A, Physiologie und Biochemie\plain\fs28 , \b 156-160\plain\fs28 , 1966-1969, and \i Abt. B, Morphologie und Geobotanik\plain\fs28 , \b 156-158\plain\fs28 , 1966-1969. Abt. A continued as \i Biochemie und Physiologie der Pflanzen\plain\fs28 , Jena, \b 159\plain\fs28 ->, 1970->. \i Abt. B\plain\fs28  continued as \i\b Flora\plain\fs28 , \i Flora. Morphologie, Geobotanik, Oekophysiologie\plain\fs28 , Jena, \b 159-179\plain\fs28 , 1970-1987; titled \i Flora. Morphologie, Geobotanik, \'d6kologie\plain\fs28 , \b 180->\plain\fs28 , 1988->.
\par \pard \i\b F\'f6ldmuv. \'c9rdek\plain\fs28 .
\par     \i  F\'f6ldmuvelesi \'c9rdekeink\plain\fs28 . Budapest. \b 1-22\plain\fs28 , 1873-1894.
\par \i\b Folia Fac. Sci. Nat. Univ. Purkyn. Brun.\plain\fs28 
\par      \i Folia Facultatis Scientiarum naturalium Universitatis purkynianae brunensis\plain\fs28 . /\i  Folia prirodovedecke Fakulty University J. E. Purkyne v Brne\plain\fs28 . Brno. 1960-> .
\par \i\b Folia Geobot. Phytotax. (Praha)\plain\fs28 
\par    \i Folia geobotanica & phytotaxonomica bohemoslovaca\plain\fs28 . Pruhonice, Praha. \b 1\plain\fs28 ->, 1966->. (bohemoslovaca only in title of \b 1\plain\fs28 .)
\par \pard \i\b Fragm. Fl. Geobot.\plain\fs28 
\par    \i Fragmenta floristica et geobotanica. / Materialy floristiczne i geoboticzne\plain\fs28 . Krak\'f3w. \b 1\plain\fs28 ->, 1954->. (\b 18\plain\fs28 (\b 2\plain\fs28 )->, 1972->, at Warszawa & Krak\'f3w).
\par \i\b Gard. Chron.\plain\fs28 
\par    \i Gardeners' Chronicle and agricultural Gazette\plain\fs28 . London. Ser. 1, \b 1841-1873\plain\fs28 , 1841-1873. Ser. 2, titled \i The Gardeners' Chronicle. A weekly illustrated Journal of Horticulture and allied Subjects\plain\fs28 , \b 1-26\plain\fs28 , 1874-1886. Ser. 3, \b 1\plain\fs28 ->, 1887->. (\b 140-154\plain\fs28 , 1956-1963, titled \i Gardeners' Chronicle and Gardening illustrated\plain\fs28 ; \b 155-159\plain\fs28  (\b 15\plain\fs28 ), 1964--1966, titled \i Gardeners' Chronicle, Gardening illustrated and the Greenbouse\plain\fs28 ; \b 159\plain\fs28 (\b 16\plain\fs28 )-\b 199\plain\fs28 (\b 1\plain\fs28 ), 1966-1986, titled \i Gardeners' Chronicle, with various subtitles\plain\fs28 .) Titled \i Horticulture Week\plain\fs28 , with various subtitles, \b 199\plain\fs28 (\b 2\plain\fs28 ), 1986->.
\par \pard \i\b Gard. Farm. Jour\plain\fs28 .
\par    \i Gardeners' and Farmers' Journal\plain\fs28 . London. 1847-1880.
\par \i\b Gard. Mag. (Loudon)\plain\fs28 
\par    \i The Gardeners' Magazine and Register of rura1 and domestic Improvement\plain\fs28  (conducted by J. C. Loudon). London. \b 1-19\plain\fs28 , 1826-1844.
\par \i\b Gartenfl.\plain\fs28 
\par    \i Gartenflora. Monatsschrift f\'fcr deutsche und schweizerische Garten- und Blumenkunde\plain\fs28 . Erlangen. \b 1-87\plain\fs28 , 1852-1938; Nov. ser., 1938-1940. With minor changes of title. (\b 23-34\plain\fs28 , 1874 1885, at Stuttgart; \b 35-87\plain\fs28  and Nov. ser., 1886-1940, at Berlin.)
\par \pard \i\b Garten-Zeit.\plain\fs28  (\i\b Wittmack\plain\fs28 )
\par      \i Garten-Zeitung. Monatsschrift f\'fcr G\'e4rtner und Gartenfreunde. Herausgegeben von Dr. L. Wittmack\plain\fs28 . Berlin. \b 1-2\plain\fs28 , 1882-1883; titled \i Garten-Zeitung. Wochenschrift f\'fcr G\'e4rtner und Gartenfreunde\plain\fs28 , \b 3-4\plain\fs28 , 1884-1885; titled\i  Deutsche Garten-Zeitung. Wochenschrift f\'fcr G\'e4rtner und G\'e4rtenfreunde\plain\fs28 . \b 1886\plain\fs28 , 1886.
\par \i\b G\'e4rtn. Zentral-Bl.\plain\fs28 
\par    \i G\'e4rtnerisches Zentral-Blatt\plain\fs28  [\i Centralblatt\plain\fs28 ]. \i Referierendes und forschendes Organ f\'fcr den gesammten Gartenbau, f\'fcr Nomenklatur und Pflanzenkunde, Pflanzenern\'e4hrung und Pflanzenschutz, Gewerbliches und Hygienisches, Unterrichtswesen und Litteratur\plain\fs28 . Berlin. \b 1\plain\fs28 , 1899. (Cf. R. Schmid & M. D. Turner, \i Madro\'f1o\plain\b\fs28  24\plain\fs28 : 68-74 (1977) and \i Just's Botanischer Jahresbericht\plain\b\fs28  27\plain\fs28  (Abt. 2): 194 (1899).)
\par \pard \i\b Genetica\plain\fs28 
\par    \i Genetica. Nederlandsch Tijdschrift voor Erfelijkheids- en Afstammingsleer\plain\fs28 . The Hague. \b 1\plain\fs28 ->, 1919->.
\par \i\b Gentes Herb\plain\fs28 .
\par    \i Gentes Herbarum. Occasional Papers on the Kinds of Plants\plain\fs28 . Ithaca, N.Y. \b 1\plain\fs28 ->, 1920->.
\par \i\b Ges. Naturf. Freunde Berlin Mag.\plain\fs28 
\par    \i Der Gesellschaft naturforschender Freunde zu Berlin, Magazin f\'fcr die neuesten Entdeckungen in der gesammten Naturkunde\plain\fs28 . Berlin. \b 1-8\plain\fs28 , 1807-1818. Other titles at other periods.
\par \pard \i\b Ges. Naturf. Freunde Berlin Neue Schr\plain\fs28 .
\par      \i Der Gesellschaft naturforschender Freunde zu Berlin, neue Schriften\plain\fs28 . Berlin. 1795-1803.
\par \i\b Gior. Arcad. Sci. (Roma)\plain\fs28 
\par    \i Giornale arcadico di Scienze, Lettere ed Arti\plain\fs28 . Roma. \b 1-212\plain\fs28 , 1819-1868.
\par \i\b Gior. Bot. Ital\plain\fs28 .
\par    \i Giornale botanico italiano\plain\fs28 . Firenze. \b 1-2\plain\fs28 . 1844-1847 ; titled \i\b Nuovo Gior. Bot. Ital\plain\fs28 .,\i  Nuovo Giornale botanico italiano\plain\fs28 . Ser. 1, \b 1-25\plain\fs28 , 1869-1893. Nov. ser. \b 1-68\plain\fs28 , 1894-1961 ; titled\i\b  Gior. Bot. Ital.\plain\fs28 , \i Giornale botanico italiano\plain\fs28 , \b 69-73\plain\fs28 , 1962-1966. Volumes then revert to original numbering as \b 101\plain\fs28 ->, 1967->.
\par \pard \i\b  Gior. Fis. (Brugnat.)\plain\fs28 
\par    \i Giornale di Fisica, Chimica e Storia naturale, ossia Raccolta di Memorie sulle Scienze, Artie Manifatture ad esse relative di L. Brugnatelli.\plain\fs28  Pavia. Ser. 1, \b 1-5\plain\fs28 , 1808-1812; titled \i Giornale di Fisica, Chimica, Storia naturale, Medicina ed Arti del Regno italico\plain\fs28 , \b 6-10\plain\fs28 , 1813-1817. Ser. 2, titled \i Giornale di Fisica, Chimica e Storia naturale, Medicina ed Arti\plain\fs28 , \b 1-10\plain\fs28 , 1818-1827.
\par \i\b Gior. Ital. Sci. Nat. Agric. Arti Commerc\plain\fs28 
\par \pard    \i Giornale d'Italia, spettante alla Scienze naturale, e principalmente all' Agricoltura, alle Arti ed al Commercio\plain\fs28 . Edit. F. Grisclini. Venezia. \b 1-11\plain\fs28 , 1764-1775; titled\i  Nuovo Giornale ..., 1777-1780\plain\fs28 .
\par \i\b Gior. Sci. Nat. Econ. Palermo\plain\fs28 
\par    \i Giornale di Scienze naturali ed economiche di Palermo\plain\fs28 . Palermo. \b 1\plain\fs28 ->, 1866->.
\par \i\b Gior. Sci. Sic\plain\fs28 .
\par      \i Giornale di Scienze, Lettere ed Arti per la Sicilia\plain\fs28 . Palermo. \b 1-79\plain\fs28 , 1823-1842.
\par \pard \i\b Glas. Rep. Zavoda Zast. Prir.\plain\fs28  (\i\b Titograd\plain\fs28 )
\par      \i Glasnik Republickog Zavoda za Zastitu Prirode i Prirodnjacke Zbirke u Titogradu\plain\fs28 . Titograd. \b 1\plain\fs28 ->,1968-> .
\par \i\b Glas Srpske Kralj. Akad\plain\fs28 .
\par      **** ****** ********* **********  [\i Glas Srpske Kraljevske Akademije\plain\fs28 ]. Beograd. 1888-1941.
\par \i\b Glasn. Hrvatsk. Prir. Drustva\plain\fs28 
\par      \i Glasnik hrvatskoga naravoslovnoga Drustva\plain\fs28 . Zagreb. \b 1-19\plain\fs28 , 1886-1907; titled \i Glasnik hrvatskoga prirodoslovnoga Drustva. Periodicum Biologorum. Societas historico-naturalis croatica\plain\fs28 , \b 2~50\plain\fs28 , 1908-1938. (Latin title varies or is omitted.)
\par \pard \i\b Glasn. Muzg. Bosni Herceg\plain\fs28 .
\par    **************************************************** [\i Glasnik Zemaljskog Muz(s)eja u Bosni i Hercegovini\plain\fs28 ]. Sarajevo. \b l-49\plain\fs28 , 1889-1937; titled ************************************************* [\i Glasnik Zemaljskog Muzea kraljevine Jugoslavije\plain\fs28 ], \b 50-51\plain\fs28 , 1937-1942; titled *********************************************** [\i Glasnik Hrvatskih zemaljskog Muzea u Sarajevu\plain\fs28 ], \b 53-54\plain\fs28 , 1942-1944; titled **************************************************** [\i Glasnik Dr. Zavnog Muzeja Sarajevo. Prirodne Nauke\plain\fs28 ], Nov. ser. \b 1\plain\fs28 , 1945; titled ************************************* [\i Glasnik Zemaljskog Muzeja a Sarajevu\plain\fs28 ]. / Bulletin de Mus\'e9e de la R\'e9publique populaire de Bosnie et Herce\'e9govine \'e0 Sarajevo, \b 2\plain\fs28 ->, 1947->.
\par \pard \i\b Glasn. Skopsk. Naucn. Drustva\plain\fs28 
\par    ********************************** [\i Glasnik skopskog nauncog Drustva\plain\fs28 ]. / \i Bulletin de la Soci\'e9t\'e9' scientifique de Skopje\plain\fs28 . Skoplje. \b 1-22\plain\fs28 , 1925 1941.
\par \i\b God. Biol. Inst.\plain\fs28  (\i\b Sarajevo\plain\fs28 )
\par      \i Godisnjak bioloskog Instituta u Sarajevu\plain\fs28 . Sarajevo.\b  1-10\plain\fs28 , 1948-1957. \b 5\plain\fs28 , 1953 & \b 10\plain\fs28 , 1957, also titled\i  Jahrbuch des biologischen Institutes in Sarajevo\plain\fs28 . / \i Annuaire de l'Institut biologique a Sarajevo\plain\fs28 .
\par \pard \i\b God. Sof. Univ.\plain\fs28  (\i\b Agro.-Les. Fak\plain\fs28 .)
\par    ***********************************************************************************. [\i Godisnik na Sofijskija Universitet. Agronomiceski-Lesovodstvo Fakul'tet]. / Annuaire de l' Universit\'e9 de Sofia\plain\fs28 . Sofija. \b 1\plain\fs28 ->, 1904->. From \b 5\plain\fs28 , 1909 in sections; titled ******************************************************* [\i Godisnik ... Universitet. Agronomiceski Fakul'tet\plain\fs28 ]. /\i  Annuaire ... Sofia. Facult\'e9 agronomique\plain\fs28 , 1923->.
\par \pard \i\b Gorteria\plain\fs28 
\par    \i Gorteria. Mededelingenblad ten dienste van de Floristiek en bet Vegetatie-Onderzoek van Nederland\plain\fs28 . Leiden.\b  1\plain\fs28 , 1961 ; titled \i Gorteria. Tijdschrift ten dienste van de Floristiek, de Oecologie en het Vegetatie-Onderzoek van Nederland\plain\fs28 , \b 2-3\plain\fs28 , 1964-1967; titled \i Gorteria. Tijdschrjft voor de Floristiek, de Plantenoecologie en het Vegetatie-Onderzoek van Nederland\plain\fs28 , \b 4-12\plain\fs28 , 1968-1985; titled \i Gorteria. Tijdschrzift voor de Floristiek\plain\fs28 , \b 13\plain\fs28 ->, 1986->.
\par \pard \i\b G\'f6teb. Kungl. Vetensk. Vitterh. Samh. Handl\plain\fs28 .
\par      \i Det g\'f6theborgska Wetenskaps och Witterhets Samh\'e4llets Handlingar\plain\fs28 . G\'f6theborg. Ser. 1, \b 1-4\plain\fs28 , 1778-1788. Ser. 2, titled \i Nya Handlingar af kongl. Wettenskaps och Witterhets Samh\'e4llet i G\'f6theborg\plain\fs28 , \b 1-5\plain\fs28 , 1808-1822, with minor changes of title. Ser. 3, titled \i G\'f6theborgs kongl. Vetenskaps och Vitterhets Samh\'e4lles, Handlingar\plain\fs28 , \b 1-32\plain\fs28 ,1850-1897. Ser.4, titled\i  G\'f6teborgs kung\plain\fs28 ...., \b 1-33\plain\fs28 , 1898-1928. Ser. 5, \b 1-6\plain\fs28 , 1934-1940. Ser. 6, \b 1\plain\fs28 -> 1941-> .
\par \pard \i\b Hannover. Mag.\plain\fs28 
\par    \i Hannoverisches Magazin\plain\fs28 . Hannover. \b 1-28\plain\fs28 , 1764-1791, and 1815-1850. Several series; often with many volumes published in the same year. Titled \i\b Neues Hannover. Mag.\plain\fs28 ,\i  Neues Hannoverisches Magazin, worin kleine Abhandlungen ... gesamlet und aufbewahrt sind\plain\fs28 , \b 1-23\plain\fs28 , 1791-1813.
\par \i\b Hedwigia\plain\fs28 
\par    \i Hedwigia. Ein Notizblatt f\'fcr kryptogamisch Studien\plain\fs28 . Dresden. \b 1-82\plain\fs28 , 1852-1944. (\b 24-26\plain\fs28 , 1885-1887, subtitled \i Organ f\'fcr specielle Kryptogamenkunde nebst Repertorium f\'fcr ktyptogamische Literatur\plain\fs28 ; \b 27-36\plain\fs28 , 1888-1897, subtitled\i  Organ f\'fcr Kryptogamenkunde nebst Repertorium f\'fcr kryptogamische Literatur\plain\fs28 ; \b 37-82\plain\fs28 , 1893-1944, subtitled \i Organ f\'fcr Kryptogamenkunde und Phytopathologie nebst Repertorium f\'fcr Literatur\plain\fs28 .)
\par \pard \i\b Herbertia\plain\fs28 
\par      \i Herbertia.\plain\fs28  Orlando, Florida. \b 1-15\plain\fs28 , 1934-1948. (\b 10\plain\fs28 , 1944, at Salinas, California; \b 11-14\plain\fs28 , 1944-1948, at Stanford, California; \b 15\plain\fs28 - ?, 1959-?, at La Jolla, California. Later merged with \i Plant Life\plain\fs28 .)
\par \i\b  Hercynia\plain\fs28 
\par      \i  Hercynia. Abhandlungen der Botanischen Vereinigung Mittel-deutschlands\plain\fs28 . Halle. 1937->.
\par \i\b Hereditas\plain\fs28 
\par      \i Hereditas. Genetiskt Arkiv\plain\fs28 . Lund. 1920-> .
\par \i\b Hilgardia\plain\fs28 
\par \pard    \i Hilgardia. A Journal of agricultural Science published by the California agricultural Experimental Station\plain\fs28 . Berkeley, California. \b 1\plain\fs28 ->, 1925->.
\par \i\b Hist. Comment. Acad. Elect. Theod.-Palat.\plain\fs28 
\par      \i Historia et Commentationes. Academia electoralis Scientiarum et elegantiorum Literarum Theodoro-Palatina.\plain\fs28  Mannheim. 1766-1794.
\par \i\b Hook. Ic.\plain\fs28 
\par    \i Icones Plantarum; or Figures, with brief descriptive Characters and Remarks of new and rare Plants\plain\fs28 . London. \b 1-10\plain\fs28 , 1836-1864 ; titled \i Hooker's Icones Plantarum \plain\fs28 ;..., \b 11\plain\fs28 ->, 1867->.
\par \pard \i\b Hung. Acta Biol\plain\fs28 .
\par      \i Hungarica Acta biologica\plain\fs28 . Budapest. \b 1\plain\fs28 , 1948-1950.
\par \i\b Illinois Biol. Monogr.\plain\fs28 
\par      \i Illinois biological Monographs.\plain\fs28  Urbana, Illinois. \b 1\plain\fs28 ->, 1914->.
\par \i\b Ind. Forest\plain\fs28 .
\par      \i The Indian Forester\plain\fs28 . Calcutta, etc. \b 1\plain\fs28 ->, 1875-> .
\par \i\b Ind. Horti Bot. Univ. Budapest\plain\fs28 .
\par      \i Index Horti botanici Universitatis budapestinensis\plain\fs28 . Budapest. \b 1-6\plain\fs28 , 1932-1943.
\par \i\b Ind. Kew\plain\fs28 .
\par      \i Index kewensis Plantarum phanerogamarum\plain\fs28 . Oxford. \b 1-2\plain\fs28 , 1893-1895. Supplementum \b 1\plain\fs28 ->, 1901-> .
\par \pard \i\b Irish Nat. Jour\plain\fs28 .
\par     \i Irish Naturalists' Journal\plain\fs28 . Belfast. \b 1\plain\fs28 ->, 1925-> .
\par \i\b Isis (Oken)\plain\fs28 
\par    \i Isis, oder encyclop\'e4dische Zeitung von Oken\plain\fs28 . Edit. L. Oken. Jena. \b 1\plain\fs28 -[\b 5\plain\fs28 ], 181 7-1819 ; titled \i Isis von Oken\plain\fs28 , [\b 6-19\plain\fs28 ], 1820-1827 ; titled \i Isis\plain\fs28 , \b 20\plain\fs28 -[\b 41\plain\fs28 ], 1828-1848. (\b 21-41\plain\fs28 , 1828-1848, at Leipzig. \b 2-19\plain\fs28 , 1818-1826, and \b 23-41\plain\fs28 , 1830-1848, originally without volumation, the volume nos. being assigned later.)
\par \pard \i\b Israel Jour. Bot\plain\fs28 .
\par    Cf. \i Bull. Res. Counc. Israel.\plain\fs28 
\par \i\b Izv. Bot. Inst. (Sofia)\plain\fs28 
\par    ************************************ [\i Izvestiya na botaniceskiya Institut\plain\fs28 .] / \i Bulletin de l' Institut botanique\plain\fs28 . Sofia. \b 1-25\plain\fs28 , 1950-1974. Continued as *********** [\i Fitologiya\plain\fs28 ] / \i Phytology\plain\fs28 , \b 1\plain\fs28 ->,1975->.
\par \i\b Izv. Kavkaz. Muz.\plain\fs28 
\par      ******** ************ ***** [\i Izvestija Kavkazskogo Muzeja\plain\fs28 ]. / \i Bulletin. Mus\'e9e du Caucase.\plain\fs28  / \i Mitteilungen des kaukasischen Museum.\plain\fs28  St. P\'e9tersburg. \b 1-12\plain\fs28 , 1897-1919. Continued as \i Bull. Mus. G\'e9orgie\plain\fs28  and \i Trav. Mus. G\'e9orgie.\plain\fs28 
\par \pard \i\b Izv. Kavk. Obsc. Ljub. Est.\plain\fs28 
\par       ******* ********** ******** ********* ************** [\i Izvestija kavkazkago Obscestva Ljubitelej Estestvo-znanija\plain\fs28 ]. Tbilisi. 1879-> ?.
\par \i\b Izv. Kazakhsk. Fil. Akad. Nauk SSSR (Ser Bot.)\plain\fs28 
\par      ******** ** ************ ******** [\i Izvestija Kazakhskago Filiala, Akademija Nauk SSSR. Serija botaniceskaja\plain\fs28 ] Alma Ata. 1944->.
\par \i\b Izv. Saratovsk. Opyt. Stan\plain\fs28 .
\par     ******* ********** ***'***************** ***** ******  [\i Izvestija saratovskoj sel 'sko-khozjajstvennoj opytnoj Stancii\plain\fs28 ]. Saratov.
\par \pard \i\b Izv. Tadzik. Bazy Bot\plain\fs28 .
\par      ********* *************** **** *******  [\i Izvestija tadzikistanskoj Bazy Botaniki\plain\fs28 ]. Leningrad. \b 1\plain\fs28 ->, 1933-> .
\par \i\b Jahrb. Fr.-Wedersch. Cymn\plain\fs28 . (\i\b Berlin\plain\fs28 )
\par      \i Jahrbuch des Friedrich-Wedersch...Gymnasium\plain\fs28 . Berlin.
\par \i\b Jahrb. Gewachsk\plain\fs28 .
\par      \i Jahrbucher der Gew\'e4chskunde\plain\fs28 . Berlin & Leipzig. \b 1\plain\fs28 , 1818-1820. (\b 1\plain\fs28 (\b 1\plain\fs28 ) in 1818; \b 1\plain\fs28 (\b 2\plain\fs28 ) in 1819; \b 1\plain\fs28 (\b 3\plain\fs28 ) in 1820. Cf. G. Sayre, \i Dates Publ. Musci\plain\fs28  59 (1959).)
\par \pard \i\b Jahrb. Hamb. Wiss. Anst\plain\fs28 .
\par      \i Jahrbuch der hamburgischen wissenschaftlichen Anstalten\plain\fs28 . Hamburg.1884-1921.
\par \i\b Jahrb. Nassau. Ver. Naturk\plain\fs28 .
\par      \i Jahrb\'fccher des Vereins f\'fcr Naturkunde im Herzogthum Nassau\plain\fs28 . Wiesbaden. \b 1-18\plain\fs28 , 1844-1863; titled \i Jahrbucher des nassauischen Vereins f\'fcr Naturkunde\plain\fs28 , \b 19\plain\fs28 ->, 1864-> .
\par \i\b Jahrb. Naturh. Landes-mus. K\'e4rnten\plain\fs28 
\par    \i Jahrbuch des naturhistorischen Landesmuseums\plain\fs28  [\i Landes-Museums\plain\fs28 ]\i  von K\'e4rnten\plain\fs28 . Klagenfurt. \b 1-29\plain\fs28 , 1852-1918.
\par \pard \i\b Jahrb. Ver. Schultze Alpenpfl.\plain\fs28 
\par      \i Jahrbuch des Vereins zum Schultze der Alpenpflanzen.\plain\fs28  Freising & M\'fcnchen. \b 1-6\plain\fs28 , 1929-1934; titled \i Jahrbuch des Vereins zum Schultze der Alpenpflantzen und -tiere,\plain\fs28  \b 7\plain\fs28 ->, 1935->.
\par \i\b Jahresb. Landes-Lehrersem. Baden bei Wien\plain\fs28 
\par    \i Jahresbericht des nieder-\'f6sterreichischen Landes-Lehrerseminars Baden bei Wien\plain\fs28 . Wien. (\b 48\plain\fs28  in 1911; full volumation and publication dates unavailable.)
\par \i\b Jahresb. Landes-Lehrersem. Wiener- Neustadt\plain\fs28 
\par \pard    \i Jahresbericht des nieder-\'f6sterreichischen Landes-Lehrerseminars in Wiener-Neustadt\plain\fs28 . Wien. (\b 34-36\plain\fs28  in 1907-1909; full volumation and publication dates unavailable.)
\par \i\b Jahresb. Naturf. Ges. Graub\'fcndens\plain\fs28 
\par      \i Jahresbericht der naturforschenden Gesellschaft Graub\'fcndens. Neue Folge\plain\fs28 . Chur. 1856-> . The first series appeared in the\i  B\'fcndnerische Volksblatt\plain\fs28 .
\par \i\b Jahresb. Naturw. Ver. Wuppertal\plain\fs28 
\par     \i Jahres-Berichte des naturwissenschaftlichen Vereins von Elberfeld und Barmen\plain\fs28 . Elberfeld. \b 1-16\plain\fs28 , 1851-1935. With minor changes of title. Titled \i Jahresberichte des naturwissenschaftlichen Vereins in Wuppertal\plain\fs28 , \b 17\plain\fs28 ->, 1938-> .
\par \pard \i\b Jahresb. Schles. Ges. Vaterl. Kult\plain\fs28 .
\par    \i Uebersicht der Arbeiten und Ver\'e4nderungen der schlesischen Gesellschaft f\'fcr vaterl\'e4ndische Cultur\plain\fs28  [\i Kultur\plain\fs28 ]. Breslau. \b 1-28\plain\fs28 , 1825-1851 ; titled\i  Jahresbericht\plain\fs28  [\i Jahres-Bericht] der schlesischen Gesellschaft f\'fcr vaterl\'e4ndische Kultur\plain\fs28  [\i Cultur\plain\fs28 ], \b 28-114\plain\fs28 , 1851-1941; Sammelheften in 1940 and 1943.
\par \i\b Jahresb. Staats-Gymnas\plain\fs28 . Laibach
\par     \i  Jahresbericht des k.k.i. Staatsgymnasiums zu Laibach\plain\fs28 . Laibach.
\par \pard \i\b Jahresb. Staats-ober-Realschule Steyr\plain\fs28 
\par    \i Jahresbericht der k.k. Staats-ober-Realschule zu Steyr\plain\fs28 . Steyr. (\b 5\plain\fs28  in 1875; full volumation and publication dates unavailable.)
\par \i\b Jahres-kat. Wien. Bot. Tauschver\plain\fs28 .
\par    \i Jahres-Katalog pro ... des wiener botanischen Tauschvereins\plain\fs28 . Wien. 1894-1895; titled\i  Jahres-Katalog pro ... des wiener botanischen Tauschanstalt\plain\fs28 , 1896-1914.
\par \i\b Jap. Jour. Bot.\plain\fs28 
\par     \i  Japanese Journal of Botany\plain\fs28 . Tokyo. 1923-> .
\par \pard \i\b Jour. Acad. Nat. Sci. Philad\plain\fs28 .
\par      \i Journal of the Academy of natural Sciences of Philadelphia.\plain\fs28  Philadelphia, Pennsylvania. Ser. 1, \b 1-8\plain\fs28 , 1817-1842. Ser. 2, \b 1-16\plain\fs28 , 1847-1918.
\par \i\b Jour. Agr. Bot. (Kharkov)\plain\fs28 
\par      \i Journal of agricultural Botany\plain\fs28 . / ***** ********-*********** ******* [\i Trudy sil'sko-gospodarskoji Botaniki\plain\fs28 ]. Kharkiv. 1926 1929.
\par \i\b Jour. Arnold Arb\plain\fs28 .
\par    \i Journal of the Arnold Arboretum\plain\fs28 . Cambridge, Massachusetts. \b 1-71\plain\fs28 , 1919-1990. (\b 2\plain\fs28 (\b 3\plain\fs28 )-\b 13\plain\fs28 , 1921-1932, at Lancaster, Pennsylvania; \b 14-36\plain\fs28 (\b 2-3\plain\fs28 ), 1933-1955, at Jamaica Plain, Massachusetts. Publication was suspended in 1990 but a \i Supplementary Series\plain\fs28  is being issued, \b 1\plain\fs28 ->, 1991->.)
\par \pard \i\b Jour. Bot. Acad. Sci. Ukr\plain\fs28 .
\par    ***************** [\i Botanicniy Zurnal\plain\fs28 ]. / \i Journal botanique de l' Acad\'e9mie des Sciences de la RSS d' Ukraine\plain\fs28 . Kieff \b 1-12\plain\fs28 , 1940-1955.
\par \i\b Jour. Bot.\plain\fs28  (\i\b Hooker\plain\fs28 )
\par      \i The Journal of Botany, being a second Series of the Botanical Miscellany...by W. J. Hooker\plain\fs28 . London. \b 1-4\plain\fs28 , 1834-1842.
\par \i\b Jour. Bot. Kew Gard. Misc.\plain\fs28 
\par      \i Hooker's Journal of Botany and Kew Garden Miscellany\plain\fs28 . London. \b 1-9\plain\fs28 , 1849-1857.
\par \pard \i\b Jour. Bot. (London)\plain\fs28 
\par    \i The Journal of Botany, British and foreign\plain\fs28 . London. \b 1-80\plain\fs28 , 1863-1942.
\par \i\b Jour. Bot. (Paris)\plain\fs28 
\par    \i Journal de Botanique\plain\fs28 . [Edit. by L. Morot.] Paris. Ser. 1, \b 1-20\plain\fs28 , 1887-1906. Ser. 2, \b 1-3\plain\fs28 , 1907-1925 ('1913'). (Ser. 2, \b 3\plain\fs28 , for 1913, was unfinished, only pp. 1-104 being printed, in 1914 ; it was not in fact issued until 1925. Cf. M. L. Green in Kew Bull. \b 1928\plain\fs28 : 155-156 (1928).)
\par \i\b Jour. Ecol\plain\fs28 .
\par \pard      \i The Journal of Ecology\plain\fs28 . Cambridge. 1913-> . (\b 44\plain\fs28 ->, 1956->, at Oxford.) .
\par \i\b Jour. Elisha Mitchell Soc\plain\fs28 .
\par    \i Journal of the Elisha Mitchell Scientific Society\plain\fs28 . Chapel Hill, North Carolina. \b 1\plain\fs28 ->, 1883->.
\par \i\b Jour. Fac. Sci. Tokyo Univ. (Bot.)\plain\fs28 
\par    \i Journa1 of the Faculty of Science, Tokyo Imperial University. Sect. 3. Botany\plain\fs28 . Tokyo. \b 1\plain\fs28 ->, 1925->.
\par \i\b Jour. Governm. Bot. Gard. Nikita\plain\fs28 
\par    ********************************************************************* [\i Zapiski gosudarstvennogo Nikitskogo opytnogo botaniceskogo Sada\plain\fs28 ]. / \i Journal of the Government Botanic Garden, Yalta, Crimea\plain\fs28 . Yalta.\b  8\plain\fs28  ('opytnogo' omitted), \b 9-14\plain\fs28 (\b 1\plain\fs28 ), \b 16\plain\fs28 , 1925-1930 and 1931. (\b 14\plain\fs28 (\b 2\plain\fs28 ) & \b 15\plain\fs28 , 1930, and \b 18-25\plain\fs28 , 1934-1953, titled *************************************************************** [\i  Trudy gosudarstvennogo Nikitskogo botaniceskogo Sada\plain\fs28 ]. /\i  Arbeiten aus dem botanischen Garten Nikita, Jalta, Krim\plain\fs28 .)  Continuation of  **************************************** \i Zapiski imperatorskago Nikitskago Sada\plain\fs28 ]. Yalta, \b 1-7\plain\fs28 , 1908-1916; titled ************************************************************ [\i Trudy gosudarstvenn'ij Nikitskij botaniceskij Sad\plain\fs28 ], \b 26\plain\fs28 ->, 1956->.
\par \pard \i\b Jour. Hist. Nat.\plain\fs28  (\i\b Paris\plain\fs28 )
\par      \i Journal d'Histoire naturelle. Paris.\plain\b\fs28  1-2\plain\fs28 , 1792.
\par \i\b Jour. Hort. Soc. London\plain\fs28 
\par    \i The Journal of the Horticultural Society of London\plain\fs28 . London. \b 1-9\plain\fs28 , 1846-1855.
\par \i\b Jour. Inst. Bot. Acad. Sci. Ukr\plain\fs28 .
\par    ************************************************** [\i Zurnal Instytutu Botaniky Akad. Nauk URSR\plain\fs28 ]. /\i  Journal de l' Institut botanique de l'Acad\'e9mie des Sciences de la RSS d' Ukraine\plain\fs28 . Kieff. \b 9-31\plain\fs28 , 1933-1939.
\par \pard \i\b Jour. Jap. Bot.\plain\fs28 
\par     \i  The Journal of Japanese Botany\plain\fs28 . Tokyo. 1916-> .
\par \i\b Jour. Linn. Soc. London (Bot.)\plain\fs28 
\par    \i The Journal of the Proceedings of the Linnean Society. Botany\plain\fs28 . London. \b 1--7\plain\fs28 , 1856-1864; titled \i The Journal of the Linnean Society. Botany\plain\fs28 ,\b  8-46\plain\fs28 , 1865-1924 ; titled \i The Journal of the Linnean Society of London. Botany\plain\fs28 , \b 47-61\plain\fs28 , 1925-1968; titled\i\b  Bot. Jour. Linn. SJc\plain\fs28 ., \i Botanical Journal of the Linnean Society\plain\fs28 ,\b  62\plain\fs28 ->, 1969->.
\par \pard \i\b Jour. Roy. Hort. Soc.\plain\fs28 
\par    \i The Journal of the Royal Horticultural Society of London\plain\fs28 . London. \b 1-4\plain\fs28 , 1865-1877 ; titled \i The Journal of the Royal Horticultural Society\plain\fs28 , \b 5-100\plain\fs28 (\b 5\plain\fs28 ), 1869-1975; titled \i The Garden. Journal of the Royal Horticultural Society\plain\fs28 , \b 100\plain\fs28 (\b 6\plain\fs28 )->, 1975->.
\par \i\b Jour. Washington Acad Sci.\plain\fs28 
\par      \i Journal of the Washington Academy of Sciences\plain\fs28 . Washington. 1911->.
\par \i\b Jour. S. Afr. Bot.\plain\fs28 
\par \pard    \i Journal of South African Botany\plain\fs28 . Kirstenbosch. \b 1-50\plain\fs28 , 1935-1984. Superseded by \i South African Journal of Botany\plain\fs28 . / \i Suid-Afrikaanse Tydskrif vir Plantkunde\plain\fs28 . Pretoria. \b 1-3\plain\fs28 , 1982-1984 (as an independent journal from \i Jour. S. Afr. Bot\plain\fs28 .); \b 51\plain\fs28 ->, 1985-> (\i Jour. S. Afr. Bot.\plain\fs28  amalgamated with \i S. Afr. Jour. Bot\plain\fs28 . and title of the latter but volumation of the former used.)
\par \i\b Jour. Sci. Arts\plain\fs28  (\i\b London\plain\fs28 )
\par \pard      \i The Journal of Science and the Arts\plain\fs28 . London. \b 1-6\plain\fs28 , 1816-1819. Titled \i The Quarterly Journal of Science, Literature and the Arts\plain\fs28 , \b 7-29\plain\fs28 , 1819-1830.
\par \i\b Kaiserl. Akad. Wiss. Wien Math.-Nat. Kl. Denkschr\plain\fs28 .
\par    Cf. \i Denkschr. Akad. Wiss. Math.-Nat. Kl. (Wien)\plain\fs28 .
\par \i\b Kew Bull\plain\fs28 .
\par    \i Bulletin of miscellaneous Information. Royal Gardens, Kew\plain\fs28 . London. 1887-1941, 1887-1942; titled \i Kew Bulletin\plain\fs28 , \b 1\plain\fs28 ->, 1946->.
\par \i\b Kew Handlist Herb. Pl\plain\fs28 .
\par \pard    \i Kew Handlist of herbaceous Plants\plain\fs28 . Kew. Various dates. 
\par \i\b Kirkia\plain\fs28 
\par      \i Kirkia. Journal of the Federal Herbarium, Salisbury, Rhodesia and Nyasaland\plain\fs28 . Salisbury. \b 1\plain\fs28 ->, 1960->. With minor changes of title.
\par \i\b Kong. Danske Vid. Selsk.\plain\fs28 
\par    Cf.\i  Skr. Ki\'f8benhavnsk. Selsk. L\'e6rd. Vid.\plain\fs28 
\par \i\b Kong. Norske Vid. Selsk. Skr. (Trondhjem)\plain\fs28 
\par    \i Det Kongeljge norske Videnskabers Selskabs Skrifter\plain\fs28 . Trondhjem. 1878->. Year and part number are as volume number.
\par \pard \i\b K\'f6nigsb. Arch. Naturw\plain\fs28 .
\par    \i K\'f6nigsberger Archiv f\'fcr Naturwissenschaft und Mathematik\plain\fs28 . K\'f6nigsberg. \b 1\plain\fs28 , 1811-1812. 
\par \i\b Kongl. Svenska Vet.-Akad. Handl.\plain\fs28 
\par    \i Swenska Wetenskaps Academiens Handlingar\plain\fs28 . Stockholm. 1, 1739; titled \i Kongl. swenska Wetenskaps Academiens Handlingar\plain\fs28 , \b 2-7\plain\fs28 , 1743-1746; titled\i  Kongl. svenska Vetenskaps Academiens Handlingar\plain\fs28 ,\b  8-17\plain\fs28 , 1747-1756; titled \i Kongl. Vetenskaps Academiens Handlingar\plain\fs28 , \b 18-40\plain\fs28 , 1757-1779. Nov. ser., titled\i  Kongl. Vetenskaps Academiens nya Handlingar\plain\fs28 , \b 1-33\plain\fs28 , 1780-1812; titled \i Kongl. Vetenskaps Academiens\plain\fs28  [\i Vetenskaps-academiens\plain\fs28 ] Handlingar, \b 1813-1844\plain\fs28 , 1813-1846; titled \i Kongl. Vetenskaps-Akademiens Handlingar\plain\fs28 , \b 1845-1855\plain\fs28 , 1846-1855. Nov. ser., titled \i Kongliga svenska Vetenskaps-Akademiens Handlingar. Ny F\'f6ljd\plain\fs28 , \b 1-35\plain\fs28 , 1855-1902; titled \i Kungliga svenska Vetenskaps-Akademiens Handlingar\plain\fs28 ,\b  36-63\plain\fs28 , 1902-1923. Ser. 3, \b 1-25\plain\fs28 , 1924-1948. Ser. 4, \b 1\plain\fs28 ->, 1951->.
\par \pard \i\b Korrespondenzbl. Naturf.-Ver. Riga\plain\fs28 
\par     \i  Korrespondenzblatt\plain\fs28  [\i Correspondenzblatt\plain\fs28 ] \i des Naturforscher\plain\fs28  [\i naturforschenden\plain\fs28 ]-\i Vereins zu Riga\plain\fs28 . Riga. \b 1-64\plain\fs28 , 1845-1942.
\par \i\b Kosmos\plain\fs28  (\i\b Lwow\plain\fs28 )
\par      \i Kosmos. Lwow\plain\fs28 . \b 1-64\plain\fs28 , 1876-1939.
\par \i\b Kulturpfl\plain\fs28 .
\par      \i Die Kulturpflanze. Berichte und Mitteilungen aus dem Institut f\'fcr Kulturpflanzenforschung der deutschen Akademie der Wissenschaften zu Berlin\plain\fs28 . Berlin. 1953-> . \i\b Beih\plain\fs28 ., \i Beihefte\plain\fs28 . 1956-> .
\par \pard \i\b Kungl. Svenska Vet.-Akad Handl.\plain\fs28 
\par      \i Kongl. svenska Vetenskaps Academiens Handlingar\plain\fs28 . Stockholm. Ser. 1, \b 1-40\plain\fs28 , 1739-1779 (\i svenska\plain\fs28  omitted after 1755). Nov. ser. titled \i Kongl. Vetenskaps Academiens nya Handlingar\plain\fs28 , \b 1-33\plain\fs28 , 1780-1812; titled \i Kongl. Vetenskaps Academiens Handlingar\plain\fs28 , \b 1813-1846\plain\fs28 , 1813-1846; titled\i  Kongl. Vetenskaps-Akademiens Handlingar\plain\fs28 ,\b  1846-1858\plain\fs28 , 1846-1858. Nov. ser., titled \i Kongliga svenska Vetenskaps-Akademiens Handlingar. Ny F\'f6ljd\plain\fs28 , \b 1-35\plain\fs28  1855-1902; titled \i Kungliga svenska Vetenskaps-Akademiens Handlingar\plain\fs28 , \b 36-63\plain\fs28 , 1902-1923. Ser. 3, \b 1-25\plain\fs28 , 1924 1948. Ser. 4, \b 1\plain\fs28 ->, 1951-> .
\par \pard \i\b Lagascalia\plain\fs28 
\par    \i Lagascalia\plain\fs28 . Sevilla. \b 1\plain\fs28 ->, 1971->.
\par \i\b Lazaroa\plain\fs28 
\par    \i Lazaroa\plain\fs28 . Madrid. \b 1\plain\fs28 ->, 1979->.
\par \i\b Lejeunia\plain\fs28 
\par    \i Lejeunia. Revue de Botanique\plain\fs28 . (Subtitle varies.) Li\'e8ge. \b 1-23\plain\fs28 , 1937-Mar. 1961. Nov. ser., \b 1\plain\fs28 ->, Oct. 1961->.
\par \i\b Leopoldina\plain\fs28 
\par      \i Leopoldina. Amtliches Organ der kaiserlichen leopoldinisch-carolinischen deutschen Akademie der Naturforscher\plain\fs28 . Jena. Ser. 1, \b 1-58\plain\fs28 , 1859-1922. Ser. 2, subtitled \i Berichtederkaiserlich deutschen Akademie der Naturforscher zu Halle\plain\fs28 , \b 1-6\plain\fs28 , 1926-1930. Ser. 3, subtitled\i  Mitteilungen der deutschen Akademie der Naturforscher\plain\fs28 , \b 1\plain\fs28 -> ,1955-> . (Ser. 2 at Leipzig; ser. 3 at Halle.)
\par \pard \i\b Lily Year Book\plain\fs28 
\par      \i Lily Year-Book\plain\fs28 . London. \b 1\plain\fs28 ->, 1932-> . Later titled \i The Lily Year Book\plain\fs28 .
\par \i\b Linnaea\plain\fs28 
\par    \i Linnaea. Ein Journal f\'fcr die Botanik in ihrem ganzen Umfange\plain\fs28 . Berlin. \b l-43\plain\fs28 , 1826-1882. (\b 9-34\plain\fs28 , 1834-1866, at Halle. From \b 17-34\plain\fs28 , 1843-1866, \i Oder Beitr\'e4ge zur Pflanzenkunde\plain\fs28  was added to the subtitle; \i Neue Folge Erster Band\plain\fs28  [\i ...Band IX\plain\fs28 ] was additionally added from \b 35-43\plain\fs28 , 1867-1882. From \b 3-16\plain\fs28 , 1828-1842, with a separately paginated section, \i\b Litt.-Ber.\plain\fs28 , \i Litteratur-Bericht zur Linnaea f\'fcr das Jahr 1828\plain\fs28  ( ... 1842). (For dates see F.A. Stafleu & R.S. Cowan, \i Taxonomic Literature\plain\fs28  ed. 2, \b 5\plain\fs28 : 193-200 (1985).)
\par \pard \i\b Linn. Inst. Skr.\plain\fs28 
\par      \i  Linneska Institutets Skrifter\plain\fs28 . Uppsala. \b 1\plain\fs28 , 1807.
\par \i\b Linzer Biol. Beitr\plain\fs28 .
\par       Cf. \i Mitt. Bot. Arbeitsgem. Oberosterr. Landesmus.\plain\fs28  Linz.
\par \i\b London Jour. Bot\plain\fs28 . (\i\b Hooker\plain\fs28 )
\par      \i The London Journal of Botany\plain\fs28 . London. \b 1-7\plain\fs28 , 1842-1848. (\b 1\plain\fs28  in 1842; \b 2\plain\fs28  in 1843; \b 3\plain\fs28  in 1844; \b 4\plain\fs28  in 1845; \b 5\plain\fs28  in 1846;\b  6\plain\fs28  in 1847; \b 7\plain\fs28  in 1848.)
\par \i\b Lotos\plain\fs28 
\par      \i Lotos. Zeitschrift f\'fcr Naturwissenschaften\plain\fs28 . Prag.\b  1-88\plain\fs28 , 1851-1943. With many minor changes of title.
\par \pard \i\b Lunds Univ. \'c5rsskr\plain\fs28 .
\par    \i Lunds Universitets \'c5rsskrjft\plain\fs28 . /\i  Acta Universitatis lundensis\plain\fs28 . Lund. Ser. 1, \b 1-40\plain\fs28 , 1864-1902. Nov. ser., \b 1-59\plain\fs28 , 1905-1963.\i  Sectio 2, Medica, Mathematica, Scientiae Rerum naturalium\plain\fs28 , \b 1\plain\fs28 ->, 1964->.
\par \i\b Madro\'f1o\plain\fs28 
\par    \i Madro\'f1o. Journal of the California botanical Society\plain\fs28 . Berkeley, California. \b 1-2\plain\fs28 , 1916-1934; titled\i  Madro\'f1o. A West American Journal of Botany\plain\fs28 , \b 3\plain\fs28 ->, 1935->.
\par \pard \i\b Mag. Hort. (Li\'e8ge)\plain\fs28 
\par      \i  Magasin d'Horticulture\plain\fs28 . Liege. \b 1\plain\fs28 , 1833.
\par \i\b Magyar Biol. Int. Munk\'e1i\plain\fs28 
\par     \i Archivum balatonicum\plain\fs28 . Tihany. \b 1\plain\fs28 , 1927; titled \i A magyar biologiai Kutat\'f3 Int\'e9zet Munk\'e1i.\plain\fs28  /\i  Arbeiten des ungarischen biologischen Forschungs-Institutes\plain\fs28 , \b 2-16\plain\fs28 , 1928-1946. Continued under other titles.
\par \i\b Magyar Bot. Lapok\plain\fs28 
\par    \i Magyar Botanikai Lapok.\plain\fs28  /\i  Ungarische botanischer Bl\'e4tter\plain\fs28 . Budapest. \b 1-33\plain\fs28 , 1902-1934.
\par \pard \i\b Magyar N\'f6v. Lapok\plain\fs28 
\par     \i  Magyar n\'f6v\'e9nytani Lapok\plain\fs28 . Kolozsv\'e1r. \b 1-15\plain\fs28 , 1877-1892.
\par \i\b Magyar Tud\'f3s T\'e1rsas\'e1g \'c9vk\'f6nyrei\plain\fs28  (\i\b Budapest\plain\fs28 )
\par      \i A 'Magyar tud\'e1s T\'e1rsas\'e1g \'c9vk\'f6nyvei\plain\fs28 . Budapest. \b 1-7\plain\fs28 , 1831-1846; titled \i A Magyar Tudom. Akad\'e9mia \'c9vk\'f6nyvei\plain\fs28 , \b 8-17\plain\fs28 , 1847-1889.
\par \i\b Malesia\plain\fs28 
\par      \i  Malesia\plain\fs28 . Genova. \b 1-3\plain\fs28 , 1877-1890.
\par \i\b Malpighia\plain\fs28 
\par    \i Malpighia. Rassegna mensuale [mensile] di Botanica\plain\fs28 . Messina. \b 1-34\plain\fs28 , 1886-1937. (\b 3-23\plain\fs28 , 1889-1909, at Genova; \b 24-29\plain\fs28 , 1911 1923, at Catania; \b 30-31\plain\fs28 , 1927-1928, at Palermo; \b 32-34\plain\fs28 , 1932-1937, at Bologna.)
\par \pard \i\b Mat. \'c9tude Fl. G\'e9ogr. Bot. Or.\plain\fs28 
\par    \i Mat\'e9riaux pour servir & l' \'c9tude de la Flore et de la G\'e9ographie botanique de l'Orient (Missions du Minist\'e8re de l' Instruction publique en 1904 et en 1906\plain\fs28 .) Nancy. \b 1-7\plain\fs28 , 1906-1922.
\par \i\b Math. Term. Ertesit\'f6\plain\fs28 
\par    \i Mathematikai \'e9s term\'e9szettudom\'e1nyi \'c9rtesit\'f6\plain\fs28 . Budapest. \b 1-63\plain\fs28 , 1882-1944 (from \b 40\plain\fs28 , 1923, titled \i Matematikai...\plain\fs28 ; \b 43-63\plain\fs28 , 1926-1944, with German subtitle\i  Mathematischer und naturwissenschaftlicher Anzeiger der ungarischen Akademie der Wissenschaften\plain\fs28 ).
\par \pard \i\b Math. Term. K\'f6zl.\plain\fs28 
\par    \i Mathematikai \'e9s term\'e9szettudom\'e1nyi K\'f6zlem\'e9nyek, vonatkosz\'f3lag a hazai Viszonyokra\plain\fs28 . Budapest. \b 1-40\plain\fs28 , 1861-1944 (from \b 35\plain\fs28 (\b 5\plain\fs28 ), 1926, titled \i Matematikai ... \plain\fs28 ).
\par \i\b Med. Reposit.\plain\fs28  (\i\b New York\plain\fs28 )
\par      \i The medical Repository\plain\fs28 . New York. Ser. 1,\b  1-15\plain\fs28 , 1797-1812. Nov. ser.,\b  1-15\plain\fs28 , 1812-1826.
\par \i\b Meddel. Gr\'f8nl.\plain\fs28 
\par    \i Meddelelser om Gr\'f8nland, af Kommissionen for Ledelsen af de geologiske og geographiske Unders\'f8gelser i Gr\'f8nland\plain\fs28 . K\'f8benhavn. \b 1-206\plain\fs28 (\b 5\plain\fs28 ), 1879-1976. From 1979 divided into sections, Bioscience, Geoscience and Man and Society ; Botany in Meddelelser om Gr\'f8nland, Bioscience. Copenhagen. \b 1\plain\fs28 ->, 1979->.
\par \pard \i\b Meddel. Soc. Fauna Fl. Fenn.\plain\fs28 
\par    \i Meddelanden af Societas pro Fauna et Flora fennica\plain\fs28 . Helsingfors. \b 1-50\plain\fs28 , 1876-1925.
\par \i\b Meded. Bot. Mus. Herb. Rijksuniv. Utrecht\plain\fs28 
\par    \i Mededeelingen van het botanisch Museum en Herbarium van de rijks Universiteit te Utrecht.\plain\b\fs28  1-90\plain\fs28 , 1932-1942 (occasional parts, from \b 14\plain\fs28 , 1934, titled \i ...rijksuniversiteit\plain\fs28 ); titled \i Mededelingen ...rijksuniversiteit ...\plain\fs28 , \b 91\plain\fs28 ->, 1943->.
\par \i\b M\'e9lang. Philos. Math. Soc. Roy. Turin\plain\fs28  (\i\b Misc. Taur.\plain\fs28 )
\par \pard    \i Miscellanea philosophica-mathematica Societatis privatae taurinensis\plain\fs28 . Augustae Taurinorum. \b 1\plain\fs28 , 1759 ; titled\i  M\'e9langes de Philosophie et de Math\'e9matique de la Soci\'e9t\'e9 royale de Turin. Miscellanea taurinensia\plain\fs28 , Turin,\b  2-5\plain\fs28 , 1760- 1774. Continued as \i Mem. Acad. Sci.\plain\fs28  (\i Turin\plain\fs28 ).
\par \i\b Mem. Acad. Barcelona\plain\fs28 
\par    \i Memorias de la Real Academia de Ciencias y Artes de Barcelona.\plain\fs28  Barcelona. \b 1-2\plain\fs28 , 1876-1885. Nov. ser., \b 1\plain\fs28 ->, 1892->, titled\i\b  Mem. Real Acad. Ci. Arts Barcelon\'e9, Memorias de la real Academia de Ciencias y Artes de Barcelona\plain\fs28 . (Some vols. titled\i  Mem\'f2ries de la reial Acad\'e8mia de Ciencies i Arts de Barcelon\'e9\plain\fs28 .\i  Real/reial\plain\fs28  omitted from \b 22\plain\fs28 (\b 18\plain\fs28 )--\b 25\plain\fs28 (\b 16\plain\fs28 ), 1931-1936. There are also alternative volume numbers in several series. Cf. Castroviejo et al., \i Fl. Iberica\plain\b\fs28  2\plain\fs28 : 759 (1990).)
\par \pard \i\b  M\'e9m. Acad. Montp.\plain\fs28  (\i\b Sect. M\'e9d\plain\fs28 .)
\par      \i M\'e9moires de l 'Academie des Sciences et Lettres de Montpellier. Sect. Medecine\plain\fs28 . Montpellier. 1849-1910.
\par \i\b M\'e9m.- Acad. Roy. Sci. Lyon Sect. Sci.\plain\fs28 
\par    \i M\'e9moires de l' Acad\'e9mie royale des Sciences, Belles-Lettres et Arts de Lyon. Section de Sciences\plain\fs28 . Lyon. \b 1-2\plain\fs28 , 1845---1847. Ser. 2, \b 1-31\plain\fs28 , 1851-1892. (\b 1\plain\fs28 , 1851, titled M\'e9moires de 1' Acad\'e9mie nationale des ... ; \b 3\plain\fs28 , 1853, titled M\'e9moires de l' Acad\'e9mie imp\'e9riale ... ; \b 18\plain\fs28 , 1870-1871, titled \i M\'e9moires de l'Acad\'e9mie des Sciences\plain\fs28  ...) Ser. 3, with section title \i Sciences et Lettres\plain\fs28 , \b 1\plain\fs28 ->, 1893->.
\par \pard \i\b M\'e9m. Acad. Sci. P\'e9tersb\plain\fs28 .
\par    ***************************************************************************** [\i Zapiski imp. Akademii Nauk\plain\fs28  (\i po fizikomatematiceskomu Otdeleniju\plain\fs28 )]. / \i M\'e9moires de l' Acad\'e9mie imp\'e9riale des Sciences de St.-P\'e9tersbourg\plain\fs28  (\i Classe\plain\fs28  [\i des Sciences\plain\fs28 ] \i physico-math\'e9matiques\plain\fs28 ). St. P\'e9tersbourg. Ser. 5,\b  1--11\plain\fs28 , 1809-1830. Ser. 6, \b 1-10\plain\fs28 , 1831-1859 (\b 3-10\plain\fs28 , 1835-1859, also numbered \b 1-8\plain\fs28  and with second title \i M\'e9moires de l' Acad\'e9mie imp\'e9riale des Sciences de Saint P\'e9tersbourg. Sixi\'e8me s\'e9rie. Sciences naturelles\plain\fs28 .) Ser. 7, \b l--42\plain\fs28 , 1859-1897. Ser. 8, \b 1---21\plain\fs28 (\b 6\plain\fs28 ), 1894-1914;\b  22-34\plain\fs28 , 1907-1916.
\par \pard \i\b M\'e9m. Acad Sci.\plain\fs28  (\i\b Paris\plain\fs28 )
\par      \i M\'e9moires de l'Acad\'e9mie des Sciences\plain\fs28 . Paris. 1733-1790. With minor changes of title.
\par \i\b M\'e9m. Acad Sci. P\'e9tersb.\plain\fs28 
\par      ******* ***. ******* ***** ( ** *****-************** ********* ) [\i Zapiski imp. Akademii Nauk (po fiziko-matematiceskomu Otdeleniju)\plain\fs28 ]. /\i  M\'e9moires de l'Acad\'e9mie imp\'e9riale des Sciences de St.P\'e9tersbourg\plain\fs28  (\i Classe des Sciences physiques et mathematiques\plain\fs28 ). St. P\'e9tersbourg. Ser. 5, \b 1-11\plain\fs28 , 1809-1830 Ser. 6, \b 1-10\plain\fs28 , 1831-1859. Ser. 7, \b 1-42\plain\fs28 , 1859-1897.
\par \pard \i\b M\'e9m. Acad. Sci. Toulouse\plain\fs28 
\par    \i Histoire et M\'e9moires de l' Acad\'e9mie royale des Sciences, Inscriptions et Belles Lettres de Toulouse\plain\fs28 . Toulouse. Ser. 1, \b 1--4\plain\fs28 , 1782-1792. Ser. 2, \b 1-6\plain\fs28 , 1827--1843. Ser. 3, titled \i M\'e9moires. Acad\'e9mie des Sciences, Inscriptions et Belles Lettres de Toulouse\plain\fs28 , \b 1-6\plain\fs28 , 1842-1850. Ser. 4, \b 1-6\plain\fs28 , 1851-1856. Ser. 5, \b 1-6\plain\fs28 , 1857-1862. Ser. 6, \b 1-6\plain\fs28 , 1863-1868. Ser. 7, \b 1-10\plain\fs28 , 1869-1878. Ser. 8,\b  1--10\plain\fs28 , 1879-1888. Ser. 9, \b 1-9\plain\fs28 , 1888-1897. Ser. 10, \b 1-12\plain\fs28 , 1901--1912. Ser. 11, \b 1-10\plain\fs28 , 1913-1922. Ser. 12, \b 1\plain\fs28 -?, 1923-1937. (With numerous minor changes of title.) The \i M\'e9moires\plain\fs28  were suspended 1898-1900, \i Bulletin de l' Acad\'e9mie des Sciences, Inscriptions et Belles-lettres de Toulouse\plain\b\fs28  1-3\plain\fs28 , 1897-1900, being issued instead.
\par \pard \i\b M\'e9m. Acad. Sci. (Turin)\plain\fs28 
\par    \i M\'e9moires de l' Acad\'e9mie royale des Sciences de Turin\plain\fs28 . Turin. Ser. 1, \b 1-5\plain\fs28 , 1786-1793 ; titled \i M\'e9moires de l' Acad\'e9mie des Sciences de Turin\plain\fs28 , \b 6\plain\fs28 , 1801; titled\i  M\'e9moires de l'Acad\'e9mie des Sciences, Litt\'e9rature et Beaux-Arts de Turin. Sciences, Physiques et Math\'e9matiques\plain\fs28 , \b 1802--1803\plain\fs28  (also numbered\b  7\plain\fs28 ), 1804 ; titled \i M\'e9moires de l' Acad\'e9mie Imp\'e9riale de Sciences, Litt\'e9rature et Beaux-Arts de Turin. Sciences, Physiques et Math\'e9matiques\plain\fs28 , 1805-1813; titled \i M\'e9moires de l' Acad\'e9mie royale des Sciences de Turin\plain\fs28 , \b 1813-1814\plain\fs28  (also numbered \b 22\plain\fs28 ), 1816; titled \i\b Mem. Accad. Sci. Torino\plain\fs28 ,\i  Memorie della reale Accademia delle Scienze di Torino\plain\fs28 , \b 23-40\plain\fs28 , 1818-1838 (each volume contains different classes, etc.). Ser. 2,\b  l-6\plain\fs28 , \b 23\plain\fs28 -> (volume nos.\b 7-22\plain\fs28  not used), 1839->.
\par \pard \i\b Mem. Accad. Ist. Bologna\plain\fs28 
\par      \i Memorie della Accademia delle Scienze dell'Istituto di Bologna\plain\fs28 . Bologna. Ser. 1, \b 1-12\plain\fs28 , 1850-1862. Ser. 2, \b 1-10\plain\fs28 , 1862-1871. Ser. 3,\b  1-10\plain\fs28 , 1871-1880. Ser. 4, \b 1-10\plain\fs28 , 1880-1889. Ser. 5, \b 1-10\plain\fs28 , 1890-1904.-Ser. 6, \b 1-10\plain\fs28 , 1905-1914. Ser. 7,\b  1-10\plain\fs28 , 1914 1923. Ser. 8,\b  1-10\plain\fs28 , 1924-1933. Ser. 9, \b 1-10\plain\fs28 , 1934-1943. Ser. 10, \b 1-10\plain\fs28 , 1944-1953. Ser. 11, \b 1-10\plain\fs28 , 1954-1963. Ser. 12,\b  1\plain\fs28 ->, 1964-> .
\par \pard \i\b Mem. Accad. Sci. Torino\plain\fs28 
\par     Cf. \i Mem. Acad. Sci.\plain\fs28  (\i Turin\plain\fs28 )
\par \i\b M\'e9m. Agric. Soc. Agric. D\'e9p. Seine\plain\fs28 
\par    \i M\'e9moires d' Agriculture, d' Economie rurale et domestique, pub. par la Soci\'e9t\'e9 d'Agriculture du D\'e9partement de la Seine\plain\fs28 . Paris. \b 1-15\plain\fs28  (also numbered as \i M\'e9m. Soc. Agric\plain\fs28 . Paris \b 29-44\plain\fs28 ). 1801-1813. Many other titles at other periods, from 1761-1800 and 1814-1916. (These vols. contain the original versions of \i\b DC., Rapp. Voy. Bot\plain\fs28 ., as follows: \i Rapports sur deux Voyages botaniques et agronomiques dans les D\'e9partemens de l'Ouest et du Sud-Ouest, op. cit\plain\fs28 . \b 10\plain\fs28 : 228-? & \b 11\plain\fs28 : 1-? (1808).\i  Rapports...du Sud-Est et de l'Est, op. cit.\plain\fs28  \b 12\plain\fs28 : 210-260 &\b  13\plain\fs28 : 203-253 (1810). \i Rapports ...de Nord-Est et du Centre, op. cit\plain\fs28 . \b 14\plain\fs28 : 213-? &\b  15\plain\fs28 : 200-? (1813). The six reports were reprinted under a different title in 1813 (cf. DC., \i Rapp. Voy. Bot.\plain\fs28  in Appendix II).)
\par \pard \i\b M\'e9m. Cour. Acad. Roy. Sci. Belg.\plain\fs28 
\par      \i M\'e9moires sur les Questions propos\'e9es par l'Acad\'e9mie royal des Sciences, et Belles-Lettres de Bruxelles. \plain\fs28  Bruxelles. \b 1-5\plain\fs28 , 1818-1826; titled \i M\'e9moires couronn\'e9s par l'Acad\'e9mie royal des Sciences et Belles-Lettres de Bruxelles, 6-15\plain\fs28 , 1827-1841; titled \i M\'e9moires couronn\'e9s et M\'e9moires des Savants \'e9tranger publi\'e9s par l'Academie royal des Sciences et des Belles-Lettres de Bruxelles,\plain\b\fs28 16-18\plain\fs28 , 1844-1845; titled \i M\'e9moires couronn\'e9 et M\'e9moires des Savants \'e9trangers publi\'e9s par l'Acad\'e9mie royal des Sciences, des Lettres et des Beaux-Arts de Belgique,\plain\fs28  \b 19-62\plain\fs28 , 1845-1904.
\par \pard \i\b Mem. Fac. Agric. Kagawa Univ\plain\fs28 .
\par      \i Memoirs of the Faculty of Agriculture, Kagawa University\plain\fs28 . Kagawa-ken. \b 1\plain\fs28 ->, 1955-> .
\par \i\b M\'e9m. Herb. Boiss.\plain\fs28 
\par    \i M\'e9moires de l' Herbier Boissier\plain\fs28 . Gen\'e8ve, \b 1-22\plain\fs28 , 1900.
\par \i\b M\'e9m. Inst. \'c9gypt\plain\fs28 .
\par    \i M\'e9moires d' Institut \'c9gyptien\plain\fs28 . Paris & Le Ca\'efre.\b  1-9\plain\fs28 , 1862-1916; titled \i M\'e9moires de l' Institut d' \'c9gypte\plain\fs28 . Cairo. Nov. ser., \b 1\plain\fs28 ->.1918->.
\par \i\b Mem. Ist. Veneto\plain\fs28 
\par    \i Memorie dell' i. r. Istituto Veneto di Scienze, Lettere ed Arti\plain\fs28 . Venezia. \b 1-13\plain\fs28 , 1843--1866 ; titled \i Memorie del reale Istituto Veneto di Scienze, Lettere ed Arti\plain\fs28 , \b 14\plain\fs28 ->, 1868->.
\par \pard \i\b Mem. Mat. Fis. Soc. Ital. Sci\plain\fs28 .
\par      \i Memorie di Matematica e Fisica della Societa italiana\plain\fs28 . Verona. Ser. 1, \b 1-25\plain\fs28 , 1782-1852. (\b 9\plain\fs28 ->, . . . delle Scienze added to title;\b  8-13\plain\fs28  & \b 18-25\plain\fs28  at Modena.) Ser. 2, Modena \b 1-2\plain\fs28 , 1862-1866. Ser. 3, ?\b 3- 23\plain\fs28 , 1879-1930. (\b 3-9\plain\fs28  at Napoli; \b 10-22\plain\fs28  at Roma;\b  23\plain\fs28  at Modena.) Revived, \b 24\plain\fs28 -> in 1938->, With Changes of title after \b 26\plain\fs28 .
\par \i\b Mem. Mus. Ci. Nat. Barcelona (Bot.)\plain\fs28 
\par \pard    \i Mem\'f2ries del Museu de Ci\'e8ncies naturals de Barcelona. S\'e8rie botanica\plain\fs28 . Barcelona. \b 1\plain\fs28 (\b 1\plain\fs28 ), 1922; titled \i Memorias del Museo de Ciencias naturales de Barcelona. Serie botanica\plain\fs28 , \b 1\plain\fs28 (\b 2-3\plain\fs28 ), 1924-1925. (\b 1\plain\fs28 (\b 2\plain\fs28 ) in 1924; \b 1\plain\fs28 (\b 3\plain\fs28 ) in 1925. Cf. \i Cat. P\'e9riod. Bibl. Cons. Jard. Bot. Gen\'e8ve Suppl\plain\fs28 . 1980-1987 : 63 (1988).)
\par \i\b M\'e9m. Mus. Hist. Nat. (Paris)\plain\fs28 
\par    \i M\'e9moires du Mus\'e9um d' Histoire naturelle\plain\fs28 . Paris. \b 1-20\plain\fs28 , 1815-1832.
\par \pard \i\b Mem. Real Acad. Ci. Artes Barcelon\'e9\plain\fs28 
\par    Cf. \i Mem. Acad. Barcelona\plain\fs28 .
\par \i\b Mem. Real Acad. C. Madrid\plain\fs28 
\par      \i Memorias. Real Academia de Ciencias exactas, fisicas y naturales de Madrid\plain\fs28 . Madrid. Ser. 1, \b 1-32\plain\fs28 , 1850-1929. Ser. 2, \b 1-9\plain\fs28 , 1921-1929.
\par \i\b M\'e9m. Sav. \'c9tr. P\'e9tersb\plain\fs28 .
\par    \i M\'e9moires des Savants \'e9trangers. M\'e9moires pr\'e9sent\'e9s \'e1 l' Acad\'e9mie imp\'e9riale des Sciences de St. P\'e9tersbourg par divers Savants et lus dans ses Assembl\'e9s\plain\fs28 . St. P\'e9tersbourg. \b 1-9\plain\fs28 , 1831--1859.
\par \pard \i\b Mem. Sect. Sti\plain\fs28 . (\i\b Acad. Romana\plain\fs28 )
\par       Cf. \i Anal. Acad. Rom\'e2ne\plain\fs28 .
\par \i\b M\'e9m. Soc. Acad. (Angers)\plain\fs28 
\par    \i M\'e9moires de la Soci\'e9t\'e9 acad\'e9mique de Maine et Loire\plain\fs28 . Angers. 1-38, 1857-1883.
\par \i\b M\'e9m. Soc. Agric. Paris\plain\fs28 
\par      \i M\'e9moires de la Soci\'e9t\'e9 royale d'Agriculture de Paris\plain\fs28 . Paris. 1761-1801. Continued as \i M\'e9moires de la Soci\'e9t\'e9 royale et centrale de l'Agriculture du D\'e9partement de la Seine\plain\fs28 . Paris. 1802-1852.
\par \i\b M\'e9m. Soc. Bot. Fr.\plain\fs28 
\par \pard    \i M\'e9moires de la Soci\'e9t\'e9 botanique de France\plain\fs28 . Paris. 1905-1921, as part of \i Bull. Soc. Bot. Fr\plain\fs28 .; 1949->. Year is used as volume number.
\par \i\b Mem. Soc. Brot.\plain\fs28 
\par    \i Mem\'f3rias da Sociedade broteriana\plain\fs28 . Coimbra. \b 1\plain\fs28 ->, 1930->.
\par \i\b M\'e9m. Soc. \'c9mul. Doubs\plain\fs28 
\par   \i M\'e9moires et Comptes rendus de la Soci\'e9t\'e9 d' \'c9mulation du Doubs\plain\fs28  (with minor variations of title). Besan\'e7on. Ser. 1, \b 1-3\plain\fs28 , 1841-1849. S\'e9r. 2, titled \i M\'e9moires de la Soci\'e9t\'e9 libre d' \'c9mulation du Doubs\plain\fs28 , \b 1-5\plain\fs28 , 1850-1854 ; titled \i M\'e9moires de la Soci\'e9t\'e9d' \'c9mulation du D\'e9partement du Doubs\plain\fs28 ,\b  6-8\plain\fs28 , 1855-1857. Ser. 3, titled\i  M\'e9moires de la Soci\'e9t\'e9 d' \'c9mulation du D\'e9partement du Doubs\plain\fs28 , \b 1-7\plain\fs28 , 1856-1864; titled\i  M\'e9moires de la Soci\'e9t\'e9 d' Emulation du Doubs\plain\fs28 , \b 8-10\plain\fs28 , 1864-1869. Ser. 4, with same title, \b 1-10\plain\fs28 , 1866-1876. Ser. 5, \b 1-10\plain\fs28 , 1877-1886. Ser. 6, \b 1-10\plain\fs28 , 1887-1896. Ser. 7, \b 1-10\plain\fs28 , 1897-1906. Ser. 8, \b 1-10\plain\fs28 , 1907-1920. Ser. 9, \b 1-10\plain\fs28 , 1922--1931. Ser. 10,\b  1-8\plain\fs28 , 1931-1939.
\par \pard \i\b Mem. Soc. Esp. Hist. Nat.\plain\fs28 
\par    \i Memorias de la real Sociedad espa\'f1ola de Historia natural\plain\fs28 . Madrid. \b 1-17\plain\fs28 , 1903-1935. \i\b Tomo extr\plain\fs28 ., \i Tomo extraordinario\plain\fs28 .
\par \i\b Mem. Soc. Fauna Fl. Fenn.\plain\fs28 
\par      \i Memoranda Societatis pro Fauna et Flora fennica.\plain\fs28  Helsingforsiae. 1927-> .
\par \i\b M\'e9m. Soc. Fribourg. Sci. Nat\plain\fs28 .
\par      \i Memoires de la Soci\'e9t\'e9 fribourgeoise des Sciences naturelles.\plain\fs28  /\i  Mitteilungen der naturforschenden Gesellschaft in Freiburg\plain\fs28  (\i Schweiz\plain\fs28 ).\i  Botanique\plain\fs28 . Fribourg (Suisse). \b 1-5\plain\fs28 , 1901-1947.
\par \pard \i\b M\'e9m. Soc. Linn. Paris\plain\fs28 
\par      \i M\'e9moires de la Soci\'e9t\'e9 linn\'e9enne de Paris\plain\fs28 . \b 1\plain\fs28 ->, 1822-1828.
\par \i\b M\'e9m. Soc. Nat. Kieff\plain\fs28 
\par      ******* ******** ************ *******, *********** *** ************* ********** ************ [\i Zapiski Kievskago Obscestva estestvoispytatelej\plain\fs28 ]. / \i M\'e9moires de la Soci\'e9t\'e9 des Naturalistes de Kieff\plain\fs28  [\i Kiew\plain\fs28 ]. \b 1\plain\fs28 -\b 26\plain\fs28 (\b 1\plain\fs28 ), 1870-1917; titled ******* *********** ********** ************** [\i Zapysky Kyjivs'kogo tovarystva pryrodoznavciv\plain\fs28 ], \b 26\plain\fs28 (\b 2\plain\fs28 )-\b 27\plain\fs28 , 1919-1929.
\par \pard \i\b M\'e9m. Soc. Nat. Moscou\plain\fs28 
\par      ******* ******** ************ ********, *********** *** ************* ********* ************ [\i Zapiski obscestva ispytatelej prirody, osnovannago pri imperatorskom Moskovskom Universtete\plain\fs28 ]. /\i M\'e9moires de la Soci\'e9t\'e9 imperiale des Naturalistes de l'Universit\'e9 de Moscou\plain\fs28 . Moscou. \b 1\plain\fs28 , 1806; titled \i M\'e9moires de la Soci\'e9t\'e9 imp\'e9rial des Naturalistes de Moscou\plain\fs28 , \b 2\plain\fs28 -\b 6\plain\fs28 , 1809-1823. Ed. 2. \b 1\plain\fs28  in 1811; \b 2\plain\fs28 -\b 4\plain\fs28  in 1830. Ed. 3. \b 1\plain\fs28  in 1830.
\par \pard \i\b M\'e9m. Soc. Nat. Sci. Cherbourg\plain\fs28 
\par      \i M\'e9moires de la Soci\'e9t\'e9 des Sciences naturelles de Cherbourg\plain\fs28 . Cherbourg. \b 1\plain\fs28 -\b 2\plain\fs28 , 1852-1854; titled \i M\'e9moires de la Soci\'e9t\'e9 imp\'e9riale des Sciences naturelles de Cherbourg\plain\fs28 , \b 3\plain\fs28 -\b 15\plain\fs28 , 1855-1870; titled \i M\'e9moires de la Soci\'e9t\'e9 nationale des Sciences naturelles de Cherbourg\plain\fs28  16-, 1871-1878; tiled \i M\'e9moires de la Soci\'e9t\'e9 nationale des Sciences naturelles et math\'e9matiques de Cherbourg\plain\fs28 , \b 22\plain\fs28 ->, 1879->.
\par \pard \i\b M\'e9m. Soc. Phys. Hist. Nat. Gen\'e8ve\plain\fs28 
\par      \i M\'e9moires de la Soci\'e9t\'e9 de Physique et d'Histoire naturelle de Gen\'e8ve\plain\fs28 . Gen\'e8ve. 1821-> .
\par \i\b M\'e9m. Soc. Roy. M\'e9d\plain\fs28 . (\i\b Paris\plain\fs28 )
\par      \i M\'e9moires de M\'e9decine et de Physique m\'e9dicale de la Soci\'e9t\'e9 royale de M\'e9decine\plain\fs28 . Paris. \b 1-10\plain\fs28 , 1779-1798.
\par \i\b M\'e9m. Soc. Sci. Boh\'eame\plain\fs28 
\par      Cf. \i Sitz.-Ber. B\'f6hm. Ges. Wiss\plain\fs28 .
\par \i\b M\'e9m. Soc. Sci. Nat. Maroc\plain\fs28 
\par      \i M\'e9moires de la Soci\'e9t\'e9 des Sciences naturelles du Maroc\plain\fs28 . Rabat, Paris & Londres. Ser. 1, \b 1-50\plain\fs28 , 1921-1952. Nov. ser., titled\i  M\'e9moires de la Soci\'e9t\'e9 des Sciences naturelles et physiques du Maroc. Botanique\plain\fs28 . Rabat, \b 1\plain\fs28 ->, 1960-> .
\par \pard \i\b M\'e9m. Soc. Vaud Sci. Nat.\plain\fs28 
\par      \i M\'e9moires de la Soci\'e9t\'e9 vaudoise des Sciences naturelles\plain\fs28 . Lausanne. 1922-> .
\par \i\b Mem. Torrey Bot. Club\plain\fs28 
\par      \i M\'e9moirs of the Torrey botanical Club\plain\fs28 . New York. 1889-> . (\b 18-19\plain\fs28 , 1931-1941, at Menasha, Wisconsin; \b 20\plain\fs28 , 1943-1954 at Lancaster, Pennsylvania; \b 21\plain\fs28 ->, 1958-> at Durham, North Carolina.)
\par \i\b Mem. Valdarn\plain\fs28 .
\par      \i Memorie valdarnesi\plain\fs28 . Pisa. \b 1\plain\fs28 ->, 1835-1855.
\par \i\b Mitt. Bad. Bot. Ver\plain\fs28 .
\par \pard      \i Mitteilungen des botanischen Vereins f\'fcr den Kreis Freiburg und das Land Baden\plain\fs28 . Freiburg im Breisgau. \b 1-50\plain\fs28 , 1882-1888; titled\i  Mitteilungen des badischen botanischen Vereins,\plain\b\fs28  51-225\plain\fs28 , 1888-1908. Continued under other titles.
\par \i\b Mitt. Bad. Landesver. Naturk. Natursch. Freiburg\plain\fs28 
\par      \i Mitteilungen des botanischen Vereins f\'fcr den Kreis Freiburg und das Land Baden\plain\fs28 . Freiburg im Breisgau. Ser. 1, \b 1\plain\fs28 , 1882-1888; titled \i Mitteilungen des badischen botanischen Vereins\plain\fs28 , \b 2-5\plain\fs28 , 1888-1910; titled \i Mitteilungen des badischen Landesvereins f\'fcr Naturkunde und Naturschutz in Freiburg im Breisgau\plain\fs28 ,\b  6\plain\fs28 , 1911-1915. Nov. ser., \b 1\plain\fs28 ->, 1919->.
\par \pard \i\b Mitt. Bayer. Bot. Ges\plain\fs28 .
\par     \i  Mitteilungen der bayerischen botanischen Gesellschaft zur Erforschung der heimischen Flora\plain\fs28 . M\'fcnchen. \b 1-4\plain\fs28 , 1892-1936.
\par \i\b Mitt. Bot. Arbeitsgem. Oberosterr. Landesmus. Linz\plain\fs28 
\par      \i Mitteilungen der botanischen Arbeitsgemeinschaft am Ober-\'f6sterreichischen Landesmuseum Linz\plain\fs28 . Linz. \b 1-6\plain\fs28 , 1969-1975. Titled \i Linzer Biol. Beitr., Linzer biologische Beitr\'e4ge\plain\fs28 , \b 7\plain\fs28 ->, 1975-> .
\par \i\b Mitt. Bot. Mus. Z\'fcrich\plain\fs28 
\par \pard      \i Mitteilungen aus dem Botanischen Museum der Universitat Z\'fcrich\plain\fs28 . Z\'fcrich.->, 1893->. (\b 223\plain\fs28 , 1963, and \b 225\plain\fs28 , 1964, titled \i Mitteilungen aus dem botanischen Garten und Museum der Universit\'e4t Z\'fcrich\plain\fs28 .)
\par \i\b Mitt. Bot. Staatssamm\plain\fs28 . (\i\b M\'fcnchen\plain\fs28 )
\par      \i Mitteilungen aus der botanischen Staatssammlung\plain\fs28 . M\'fcnchen. 1950-> .
\par \i\b Mitt. Deutsch. Dendrol. Ges\plain\fs28 .
\par      \i Mitteilungen der deutschen dendrologischen Gesellschaft\plain\fs28 . Berlin. 1893-> . (1894-1912 at Poppelsdorf-Bonn; 1913-1932 at Thyrow; 1933 at Berlin; 1934 at Berlin & Dortmund; 1935-1942 at Dortmund; 1950-> at Darmstadt.)
\par \pard \i\b Mitt. Fl.-Soziol. Abeitsgem\plain\fs28 .
\par      \i Mitteilungen der Floristich-soziologischen Arbeitsgemeinschaft\plain\fs28 . Stolzenau. \b 1\plain\fs28 -\b 5\plain\fs28 , 1928-1939. Nov. ser., \b 1\plain\fs28 ->, 1949->.\i\b Mitt. Geogr. Ges. Th\'fcr. Jena\plain\fs28 
\par      \i Mitteilungen der geographischen Gesellschaft\plain\fs28  (\i f\'fcr Th\'fcringen\plain\fs28 ) \i zu Jena\plain\fs28 . Jena. 1882-> .
\par \i\b Mitt. Kgl. Ungar. Gartenb.-Lehranst\plain\fs28 .
\par      \i  A m. kir. Kert\'e9szeti Tanint\'e9zet K\'f6zlem\'e9nyei.\plain\fs28  /\i  Mitteilungen der kgl. ungarischen Gartenbau-Lehranstalt\plain\fs28 . / \i Bulletin de l'\'c9cole royale hongroise d 'Horticulture\plain\fs28 . /\i  Bulletin of the Royal Hungarian Horticultural College\plain\fs28 . Budapest. Ser. 1, \b 1-5\plain\fs28 , 1935-1939. Ser. 2, titled \i A m. Kert\'e9szeti Akad\'e9mia K\'f6zlem\'e9nyei, with the above alternative titles unaltered\plain\fs28 , \b 1-5\plain\fs28 , 1940-1947 (also called ser. 1, \b 7-11\plain\fs28 ). Continued as \i\b Ann. Sect. Horti-Viticult. Univ. Sci. Agr.\plain\fs28  (\i\b Budapest\plain\fs28 ), \i Agr\'e1rtudom\'e1nyi Egyetem Kert- es Sz->logazdas\'e1gtudom\'e1nyi Kar\'e1nak \'c9vk\'f6nyve\plain\fs28 . /\i  Annales Sectionis Horti- et Viticulturae Universitatis Scientiae agriculturae\plain\fs28 ,\b  12-16\plain\fs28 , 1948-1952; titled \i\b Ann. Acad. Horti-Viticult\plain\fs28 . (\i\b Budapest\plain\fs28 ),\i  A Kert\'e9szeti \'e9s Sz->leszeti F\'f6iskola \'c9vk\'f6nyve\plain\fs28 . / \i Annales Academiae Horti- et Viticulturae\plain\fs28 ,\b  17\plain\fs28 -> , 1953
\par \pard \i\b Mitt. Naturf. Ges. Bern\plain\fs28 
\par     \i  Mittheilungen der naturforschenden Gesellschaft in Bern\plain\fs28 . Bern. Ser. 1, 1843-1919. Titled \i Mitteilungen der naturforschenden Gesellschaft Bern\plain\fs28 , 1920-1942. Nov. ser., \b 1\plain\fs28 ->, 1944-> .
\par \i\b Mitt. Naturw. Ver. Steierm\plain\fs28 .
\par      \i Mitteilungen des naturwissenschaftlichen Vereines f\'fcr Steier-mark\plain\fs28 . Graz. 1863-> .
\par \i\b Mitt. Naturw. Ver. Wien\plain\fs28 
\par      \i Mitteilungen des naturwissenschaftlichen Vereins an der Universit\'e4t Wien\plain\fs28 . Wien.\b  1-12\plain\fs28 , 1894-1914.
\par \pard \i\b Mitt. Th\'fcr. Bot. Ges\plain\fs28 .
\par      \i Mitteilungen der th\'fcringischen botanischen Gesellschaft.\plain\fs28  Weimar \b 1-2\plain\fs28 , 1949-1960.
\par \i\b Mitt. Th\'fcr. Bot. Ver.\plain\fs28 
\par      \i Mitteilungen des th\'fcringischen botanischen Vereins\plain\fs28 . Weimar. Ser. 1, \b 1-9\plain\fs28 , 1882-1890. Nov. ser., \b 1-51\plain\fs28 ,1891-1944.
\par \i\b Mitteilungsbl. Naturw. Ver. Steierm. Florist. Arbeitsgem\plain\fs28 .
\par      \i Mitteilungsblatt. Naturwissenschaftlicher Verein f\'fcr Steier-mark Floristische Arbeitsgemeinschaft.\plain\fs28  Graz.
\par \pard \i\b Monde Pl\plain\fs28 .
\par      \i  Le Monde des Plantes. Revue mensuelle de Botanique. Organe de l'Academie internationale de Geographie botanique\plain\fs28 . Le Mans. \b 1-8\plain\fs28 : p. 56, 1891-1898. Continued as\i  Le Monde des Plantes\plain\fs28 ,\b  1\plain\fs28 ->, 1899-> (later published elsewhere). Also continued as \i\b Bull. Acad. Int. G\'e9ogr. Bot\plain\fs28 . (\i\b Le Mans\plain\fs28 ), \i Bulletin de l'Academie internationale de G\'e9ographie botanique,\plain\fs28  \b 8\plain\fs28 : p. 47 [57]-\b 19\plain\fs28 , 1899-1910; titled\i  Bulletin de G\'e9ographie botanique. Organe mensuel de l'Acad\'e9mie internationale de Botanique\plain\fs28 , \b 21-27\plain\fs28 , 1911-1919. (\b 16-20\plain\fs28  at Paris.)
\par \pard \i\b Monit. Jard. Bot. Tiflis\plain\fs28 
\par    ********************************************** [ \i V\'e9stnik Tfflisskago botaniceskago Sada\plain\fs28 ]./ \i Moniteur du Jardin botanique de Tiflis\plain\fs28 . / *********************************************** [\i Tp'hilisis botanik'our baghis moamb\plain\fs28 ]. Tiflis. Ser. 1, \b 1-51\plain\fs28 , 1905-1921. Nov. ser., \b 1-5\plain\fs28 , 1925-1931.
\par \i\b Monogr. Bot. (Warszawa)\plain\fs28 
\par     \i  Monographiae botanicae. Warszawa.\plain\fs28  1953-> .
\par \i\b Mus. Senck\plain\fs28 .
\par      \i Museum serckenbergianum. Abandlungen aus dem Gebiete der beschreibenden Naturgeschichte\plain\fs28 . Frankfurt am Main. \b 1-3\plain\fs28 , 1833-1845.
\par \pard \i\b Nachr. K\'f6nigl. Ges. Wiss. G\'f6tting\plain\fs28 . (\i\b Math.-Phys. Kl\plain\fs28 .)
\par      \i Nachrichten von der k\'f6niglichen Gesellschaft der Wissen-schaften zu G\'f6ttingen. Mathematisch-physikalische Klasse\plain\fs28 . Gottingen. 1894-1922.
\par \i\b Nat. Monsp.\plain\fs28  (\i\b Bot\plain\fs28 .)
\par      \i Naturalia monspeliensia. Serie botanique\plain\fs28 . Montpellier. 1955-> .
\par \i\b Natura\plain\fs28  (\i\b Milano\plain\fs28 )
\par      \i Natura.\plain\fs28  Milano. \b 1\plain\fs28 ->, 1909 -> .
\par \i\b Naturalist\plain\fs28  (\i\b Leeds\plain\fs28 )
\par      \i The Naturalist\plain\fs28 . London. 1864 \'98 . (Later vols. published at Leeds or Huddersfield.)
\par \pard \i\b Naturaliste Canad.\plain\fs28 
\par     \i  Le Naturaliste Canadien\plain\fs28 . Quebec. \b 1\plain\fs28 ->, 1869-> .
\par \i\b Naturaliste (Paris)\plain\fs28 
\par    \i Le Naturaliste. Journal des \'c9changes et des Nouvelles\plain\fs28 . Paris. \b 1-53\plain\fs28 (= ann\'e9e \b 1-9\plain\fs28 ), 1879-1889. Ser. 2, \b 1-548\plain\fs28  (= ann\'e9e \b 9-32\plain\fs28 ), 1887-1910.
\par \i\b Naturk. Jahrb. Stadt Linz\plain\fs28 
\par     \i  Naturkundliches Jahrbuch der Stadt Linz\plain\fs28 . Linz. 1955-> .
\par \i\b Nat. sicil.\plain\fs28 
\par    \i Il Naturalista siciliano. Giornale di Scienze naturali\plain\fs28 . Palermo. \b 1-14\plain\fs28 , 1881-1895. Nov. ser., \b 1-20\plain\fs28 , 1896-1908. Nov. ser., \b 1-27\plain\fs28 , 1909-1930. Ser. 3 [\i sic\plain\fs28 ], \b 1-3\plain\fs28 , 1946-1948. Ser. 4, \b 1\plain\fs28 ->, 1978->. (Cf. \i Cat. P\'e9riod. Bibl. Cons. Bot. Gen\'e8ve, Suppl\plain\fs28 . 1980-1987: 68 (1988).)
\par \pard \i\b Naucni Trud. Agron. Fak. Plovdiv\plain\fs28 
\par      ****** *******. ************* *********.  [\i Naucni Trudove. Agronomiceski Fakultet. Viss selskostopanski Institut\plain\fs28 ]. Plovdiv.\b  1\plain\fs28 ->, 1952-> .
\par \i\b Nauk. Zapysky Kyjiv. Derz. Univ\plain\fs28 .
\par      ******* *******. ******** ******** *********** [\i Naukovi Zapysky. Kyjivskyj derzavnyj Universytet\plain\fs28 ]. /\i  Bulletin scientifique. Universite d '\'c9tat de Kiev\plain\fs28 . Kyjiv. \b 1\plain\fs28 ->, 1934-> .
\par \i\b Nederl. Kruidk. Arch.\plain\fs28 
\par    \i Nederlandsch kruidkundig Archief. Verslagen en mededelingen der nederlandsche botanische Vereeniging\plain\fs28 . Amsterdam, later Leyden. Ser. 1, \b 1-5\plain\fs28 , 1846-1870. Ser. 2,\b  1-6\plain\fs28 , 1871-1895. Ser. 3, \b 1-2\plain\fs28 , 1896-1900/1904. Years are then used as vol. nos., 1904-1932, 1904-1932. Vol. nos. then revert to ser. 1, \b 43-58\plain\fs28 , 1933-1951. (Ser. 2, ser. 3 & \b 1904-1913\plain\fs28 (\b 1\plain\fs28 ) at Nijmegen; \b 1913\plain\fs28 (\b 2\plain\fs28 )-1919 at Groningen; \b 1920-1921\plain\fs28  at Utrecht; \b 1922-1932\plain\fs28  and \b 43-58\plain\fs28  at Amsterdam.)
\par \pard \i\b Neue Denkschr. Schweiz. Ges. Naturw\plain\fs28 .
\par    \i Neue Denkschriften der allgemeinen schweizerischen Gesellschaft f\'fcr die gesammten Naturwissenschaften\plain\fs28 . / \i Nouveaux M\'e9moires de la Soci\'e9t\'e9 helv\'e9tique des Sciences naturelles\plain\fs28 . Neuch\'e2tel. \b 1-40\plain\fs28 , 1837-1906 ; titled \i\b Neue Denkschr. Schweiz. Naturf. Ges\plain\fs28 .,\i  Neue Denkschriften der schweizerischen naturforschenden Gesellschaft\plain\fs28 , same French title, \b 41-54\plain\fs28 , 1906-1918; titled \i\b Denkschr. Schwei:g. Naturf. Ges\plain\fs28 ., \i Denkschriften der schweizerischen naturforschenden Gesellschaft.\plain\fs28  /\i  M\'e9moires de la Soci\'e9t\'e9 helvetique des Sciences naturelles\plain\fs28 ,\b  55\plain\fs28 ->, 1920->. (\b 8-9\plain\fs28 , 1847, at Neuenberg; \b 10\plain\fs28 , 1849, at Neuch\'e2tel; \b 11\plain\fs28 ->, 1850->, at Z\'fcrich.)
\par \pard \i\b Neue Denkschr. Schweiz. Naturf. Ges\plain\fs28 .
\par    Cf. \i Neue Denkschr. Schweiz. Ges. Naturw.\plain\fs28  
\par \i\b Neues Hannover Mag\plain\fs28 .
\par     Cf. \i Hannover Mag\plain\fs28 .
\par \i\b Neues Mag. Bot.\plain\fs28  (\i\b Roemer\plain\fs28 )
\par      \i Neues Magazin Jur die Botanik in ihrem ganzen Umfange. Herausgegeben von J. J. Roemer\plain\fs28 . Z\'fcrich. \b 1\plain\fs28 , 1794.
\par \i\b New Phytol\plain\fs28 .
\par    \i The new Phytologist; a British botanical Journal\plain\fs28 . (Subtitle omitted from \b 31\plain\fs28 ->, 1932->.) London.\b  1\plain\fs28 ->, 1902->. (\b 6-10\plain\fs28 , 1907-1912, at Cambridge; \b 11-28\plain\fs28 , 1912-1929, at London; \b 29-54\plain\fs28 , 1930-1955, at Cambridge; \b 55--81\plain\fs28 , 1956-1978, at Oxford; \b 82\plain\fs28 ->, 1979->, at London.)
\par \pard \i\b New Zealand Jour. Bot\plain\fs28 .
\par      \i  New Zealand Journal of Botany\plain\fs28 . Wellington. 1963-> .
\par \i\b Nordic Jour. Bot\plain\fs28 .
\par    \i Nordic Journal of Botany. Copenhagen\plain\fs28 . \b 1\plain\fs28 ->, 1981->. (Continuation of \i Bot. Not., Bot. Tidsskr., Dansk Bot. Arkiv., Friesia and Nytt Mag. Bot.\plain\fs28 )
\par \i\b Norges Svalb.-Ishavs-Unders\'f8k. Skr.\plain\fs28 
\par    \i Skrifter om Svalbard og Ishavet\plain\fs28 . Oslo. \b 1-81\plain\fs28 , 1929-1940; titled \i Norges Svalbard- og Ishavs-Unders\'f8kelser Skrifter\plain\fs28 , \b 82-89\plain\fs28 , 1941-1947 ; titled\i  Skrifter Norsk Polarinstitutt\plain\fs28 , \b 90\plain\fs28 ->, 1948->.
\par \pard \i\b Not. Syst. Herb. Inst. Bot. Acad. Kasachst.\plain\fs28 
\par      \i Notulae systematicae ex Herbario Instituti botanici Academiae Scientiarum kasachstanicae\plain\fs28 . / *********** ********* ******** ********* ******** ******** **** ********* *** [\i Botaniceskie Materialy Gerbarija Instituta botaniki Akademii Nauk Kazakhskoj SSR\plain\fs28 ]. Alma-Ata. 1963-> .
\par \i\b Not. Syst. Inst. Bot. Thbiliss\plain\fs28 .
\par      \i Notulae systematicae ac geographicae Instituti botanici thbilissiensis\plain\fs28 . / ****** ** *********** * ********* ****** [\i Zametki po Sistematike i Geografii Rasteny\plain\fs28 ]. Thbilisi. 1938-> .
\par \pard \i\b Not. Syst. Herb. Inst. Bot. Zool. Acad. Uzbek\plain\fs28 .
\par      \i Notulae systematicae ex Herbario Instituti botanici et zoologici Academiae Scientiarum uzbekistanicae\plain\fs28 ./ ************ ********* ******** ********* ******** * ******** ******** **** ****** [\i Botaniceskie Materialy Gerbarija Instituta botaniki i zoologii Akademii Nauk UzSSR\plain\fs28 ]. Taschkent. With minor changes of title.
\par \i\b Not. Syst. (Leningrad)\plain\fs28 
\par    ************************************************************************ [\i Botaniceskie Materialy Gerbarija glavnogo botaniceskogo Sada RSFSR\plain\fs28 ]. / \i Notulae systematicae ex Herbario Horti botanici petropolitani\plain\fs28 . Petrograd.\b  l-4\plain\fs28 , 1919-1923; titled the same in Russian and \i Notulae systematicae ex Herbario Horti botanici Reipublicae rossicae\plain\fs28 , \b 5\plain\fs28 , 1924; titled ******************************************************************* [\i Botaniceskie Materialy Gerbarija glavnogo botaniceskogo Sada SSSR\plain\fs28 ]. / \i Notulae systematicae ex Herbario Horti botanici URSS\plain\fs28 , Leningrad, \b 6\plain\fs28 , 1926; titled ***************************************************************************** [\i Botaniceskie Materialy Gerbarija botaniceskogo Instituta Akademii Nauk SSSR\plain\fs28 ]. /\i  Notulae systematicae ex Herbario Instituti botanici Academiae Scientiarum URSS\plain\fs28 ,\b  7-8\plain\fs28 (\b 3\plain\fs28 ), 1937-1938; titled **************************************************************************************************** [\i Botaniceskie Materialy Gerbarija botaniceskogo Instituta Imeni V. L. Komarova Akademii Nauk SSSR\plain\fs28 ]. / \i Notulae systematicae ex Herbario Instituti botanice nomine V. L. Komarovii Academiae Scientiarum URSS\plain\fs28 , \b 8\plain\fs28 (\b 4\plain\fs28 )-\b 22\plain\fs28 , 1940-1963.
\par \pard \i\b Notas Mus. La Plata\plain\fs28  (\i\b Bot\plain\fs28 .)
\par      \i Notas del Museo de La Plata. Botanica\plain\fs28 . Buenos Aires. \b 1\plain\fs28 ->, 1935-> . (\b 7\plain\fs28 ->, 1942->, at La Plata.)
\par \i\b Notes Roy. Bot. Gard. Edinb\plain\fs28 .
\par    \i Notes from the Royal Botanic Garden, Edinburgh. Edinburgh\plain\fs28 . \b 1 -46\plain\fs28 , 1900-1990; titled \i Edinburgh Journal of Botany\plain\fs28 , \b 47\plain\fs28 ->, 1990->.
\par \i\b Notizbl. Bot. Gart. Berlin\plain\fs28 
\par    \i Notizblatt des k\'f6niglichen botanischen Gartens und Museums zu Berlin\plain\fs28 . Leipzig. \b 1-15\plain\fs28 , 1895-1944 ; with minor changes of title, becoming \i Notizblatt des botanisches Gartens und Museums zu Berlin-Dahlem\plain\fs28 , \b 7\plain\fs28 (\b 68\plain\fs28 )-\b 15\plain\fs28 (\b 7\plain\fs28 ), 1920-1944. (\b 6-7\plain\fs28 , 1913-1920, at Leipzig & Berlin; \b 8-15\plain\fs28 , 1921-1944, at Berlin-Dahlem.)
\par \pard \i\b Nouv. Arch. Mus. Hist. Nat. Paris\plain\fs28 
\par      \i Nouvelles Archives du Museum d'Histoire naturelle de Paris\plain\fs28 . Paris. Ser. 1, \b 1-10\plain\fs28 , 1865-1874. Ser. 2, \b 1-10\plain\fs28 , 1878-1888. Ser. 3, \b 1-10\plain\fs28 , 1889-1898. Ser. 4, \b 1-10\plain\fs28 , 1899-1908. Ser. 5, \b 1\plain\fs28 ->, 1909-1914.
\par \i\b Nouv. Dict. Hist. Nat\plain\fs28 .
\par    \i Nouveau Dictionnaire d' Histoire naturelle, appliqu\'e9e aux Arts, principalement \'e0 l' Agriculture et \'e0 l' \'c9conomie rurale et domestique : par une Soci\'e9t\'e9 de Naturalistes et d'Agriculteurs: avee Figures tir\'e9es des trois R\'e8gnes de la Nature\plain\fs28 . Paris. 1802-1804. (\b 1-3\plain\fs28  in 1802; \b 4-21\plain\fs28  in 1803 ; \b 22-24\plain\fs28  in 1804.) Ed. 2. Paris. 1816-1819. (\b 1-6\plain\fs28  in 1816 ; \b 7-18\plain\fs28  in 1817 ; \b 19-27\plain\fs28  in 1818; \b 28-36\plain\fs28  in 1819.)
\par \pard \i\b Nouv. M\'e9m. Soc. Nat. Moscou\plain\fs28 
\par      \i Nouveaux M\'e9moires de la Soci\'e9t\'e9 imperiale des Naturalistes de Moscou\plain\fs28 . Moscou. 1829-> .
\par \i\b N\'f6v. K\'f6zl.\plain\fs28 
\par      \i N\'f6v\'e9nytani k\'f6zlem\'e9nyek.\plain\fs28  Budapest.\b  1-7\plain\fs28 , 1902-1908; titled\i\b  Bot. K\'f6zl.\plain\fs28 , \i Botanikai k\'f6zlem\'e9nyek,\plain\b\fs28  8\plain\fs28 ->, 1909-> .
\par \i\b Nov. Syst. Pl. Vasc.\plain\fs28  (\i\b Leningrad\plain\fs28 )
\par      ******* ************ ****** ********* [\i Novosti sistematiki vyssikh Rastenij\plain\fs28 ]. /\i  Novitates systematicae Plantarum vascularium\plain\fs28 . Moskva & Leningrad. 1964-> . (In first 5 vols., year serves as volume number; from \b 6\plain\fs28 ->, 1968->, volumes are numbered on title page.)
\par \pard \i\b Nova Acta Acad. Leop.-Carol.\plain\fs28 
\par    \i Nova Acta physico-medica Academiae Caesareae Leopoldino-Carolinae Naturae curiosorum exhibentia Ephemerides sive Observationes Historias et Experimenta\plain\fs28 . (From \b 9\plain\fs28 , 1818, titled \i Nova Acta . . . curiosorum\plain\fs28 .) Norimbergae. Ser. 1, \b 1-19\plain\fs28 (\b 1\plain\fs28 ), 1757-1839; titled \i Novorum Actorum Academiae caesareae Leopoldinae-Carolinae Naturae curiosorum. Verhandlungen der kaiserlichen Leopoldinisch-Carolinischen Akademie der Naturforscher\plain\fs28 , \b 19\plain\fs28 (\b 2\plain\fs28 )-\b 26\plain\fs28 , 1842-1858; titled \i Novorum Actorum Academia caesareae Leopoldinae-Carolinae germanicae Naturae curiosorum. Verhandlungen der kaiserlichen Leopoldinisch-Carolinischen deutschen Akademie der Naturforscher\plain\fs28 , \b 27-35\plain\fs28 , 1860-1870; titled \i Nova Acta Academiae Caesareae Leopoldino-Carolinae germanicae Naturae curiosorum. Verhandlungen der kaiserlich Leopoldinisch-Carolinischen deutschen Akademie der Naturforscher\plain\fs28 , \b 36-106\plain\fs28 , 1873-1922; titled \i Nova Acta Abhandlungen der Leopoldinisch-Carolinischen deutschen Akademie der Naturforscher\plain\fs28 , \b 107-108\plain\fs28 , 1923-1926; titled \i Nova Acta Abhandlungen der kaiserlich Leopoldinischen deutschen Akademie der Naturforscher\plain\fs28 , \b 109-110\plain\fs28 , 1928. Nov. ser., titled \i Nova Acta Leopoldina. Abhandlungen der kaiserlich Leopoldinisch-Carolinisch deutschen Akademie der Naturforscher\plain\fs28  (German title varies), \b 1\plain\fs28 ->, 1932->. (\b 19\plain\fs28 (\b 2\plain\fs28 )-\b 26\plain\fs28 , 1842-1858, at Breslau; \b 27-35\plain\fs28 , 1860--1870, at Jena; \b 36-106\plain\fs28 , 1873-1922, at Dresden; \b 107-110\plain\fs28 , 1923-1926, and Nov. ser. \b 1->\plain\fs28 , 1932->, at Halle.)
\par \pard \i\b Nova Acta Acad. Sci. Petrop\plain\fs28 .
\par    \i Nova Acta Academiae Scientiarum imperialis petropolitanae. Praecedit Historia ejusdem Academiae\plain\fs28 . St. Petersburg. \b 1-15\plain\fs28 , 1787-1806.
\par \i\b Nova Acta Helv. Phys.-Math.\plain\fs28 
\par      \i Nova Acta helvetica, physico-mathematico-botanico-medica\plain\fs28 . Basileae. \b 1\plain\fs28 , 1787.
\par \i\b Nova Acta Reg. Soc. Sci. Upsal\plain\fs28 .
\par      \i Nova Acta regiae Societatis Scientiarum upsaliensis\plain\fs28 . Upsaliae. \b 1-14\plain\fs28 , 1773-1850. Ser. 3, \b 1-20\plain\fs28 , 1851-1899. Ser. 4, \b 1\plain\fs28 ->, 1905-> .
\par \pard \i\b Nov. Bot. Horti Bot. Univ. Carol. Prag\plain\fs28 .
\par      \i Novitates botanicae et Delectus Seminum, Fructuum, Sporarumque anno... collectorum, quae Praefectus Horti botanici Universitatis carolinae pragensis libentissime pro mutua Commutatione offert\plain\fs28 . Praga. 1960-> . Various minor changes of title.
\par \i\b Novi Comment. Acad. Sci. Petrop\plain\fs28 .
\par    \i Novi Commentarii Academiae Scientiarum imperialis petropolitanae\plain\fs28 . Petropoli. \b 1-20\plain\fs28 , 1750-1776.
\par \i\b Novi Comment. Gotting\plain\fs28 .
\par \pard    Cf.\i  Comment. Gotting.\plain\fs28 
\par \i\b Novit. Bot. Inst. Bot. Univ. Carol. Prag\plain\fs28 
\par    \i Novitates botanicae et Delectus Seminum, Fructuum, Sporarumque Anno 1960 collectorum, quae Praefectus Horti botanici Universitatis carolinae pragensis libentissime pro mutua Commutatione offert\plain\fs28 . Praga. 1960. Titled \i Novitates botanicae (cum Delectu Seminum, Fructuum, Sporarum Plantarumque), quas scient. Praefectus Horti botanici Universitatis carolinae pragensis in Anno 1961 [1962, 1963] libentissime pro mutua Commutatione offert\plain\fs28 , Praga, 1961-1963; titled\i  Novitates botanicae cum Delectu Seminum, Fructuum, Sporarum Plantarumque quas Institutum botanicum et Hortus botanicus Universitatis carolinae pragensis in Anno 1964 [ ... 1970] libentissime pro mutua Commutatione offert\plain\fs28 , 1964-1970. (Title of 1967 issue, \i Novitates botanicae quas Institutum botanicum Universitatis carolinae pragensis in Anno 1967 ...offert\plain\fs28 .) Titled as \i Novitates botanicae ex Instituto et Horto botanico Universitatis carolinae pragensis 1971\plain\fs28  [1972, 1973-1975]. \i Litterae taxonomicae, nomenclatoricae aut phytogeographicae nec non inventis Plantarum Florae Reipublicae socialisticae Cechoslovacae novarum imprimi breviores\plain\fs28 , Praga, 1971, 1973 and 1976; titled \i Novitates botanicae ex Universitate Carolinae,\plain\fs28  Praha, \b 1\plain\fs28 , 1982.
\par \pard \i\b Nucleus (Calcutta)\plain\fs28 
\par    \i Nucleus. International Journal of Cytology and allied Topics\plain\fs28 . Calcutta. \b 1\plain\fs28 ->,1958->.
\par \i\b Nuovo Gior. Bot. Ital.\plain\fs28 
\par    Cf. \i Gior. Bot. Ital.\plain\fs28 
\par \i\b Nuovo Racc. Opusc. Aut. Sic\plain\fs28 .
\par      \i Nuovo Raccolta di Opuscoli di Autori siciliani\plain\fs28 . Palermo. 1788- ?.
\par \i\b Nyt. Mag. Naturvid. (Christiania)\plain\fs28 
\par    \i Nyt Magazin for Naturvidenskaberne\plain\fs28 . Christiania. \b 1-74\plain\fs28 , 1836-1934. (\b 21-26\plain\fs28 , 1875-1881, also as ser. 2, \b 1-6\plain\fs28 ; \b 27-32\plain\fs28 , 1882-1892, also as ser. 3,\b  l-6\plain\fs28 ; \b 33-37\plain\fs28 , 1893-1900, also as ser. 4, \b 1-5\plain\fs28 .) Titled \i Nytt Magazin for Naturvidenskaperne\plain\fs28 , Oslo, \b 75-88\plain\fs28 , 1935-1951.
\par \pard \i\b Nytt Mag.Bot\plain\fs28 .
\par    \i Nytt Magasin f\'f6r Botanikk\plain\fs28 . Oslo. \b 1-17\plain\fs28 , 1952-1970; titled \i Norwegian Journal of Botany\plain\fs28 , \b 18-27\plain\fs28 , 1971-1980(-1981? \b 27\plain\fs28 (\b 4\plain\fs28 ), 1980, not received at E until 14 January 1981.) Continued as \i\b Nordic Jour. Bot\plain\fs28 ., \i Nordic Journal of Botany\plain\fs28 . Copenhagen. \b 1\plain\fs28 ->, 1981->.
\par \i\b Oc. Fitosoc. Fitogeog.\plain\fs28 
\par    ***********************************************  [\i Ocerki po Fitosociologij i Fitogeografij\plain\fs28 ]. Moscow. 1929. (A collection of papers dedicated to V. N. Sukaev. Abstracted in \i Bot. Centr\plain\fs28 . \b 17\plain\fs28  : 174, etc. (1930) under the alternative German title \i Skizzen zur Phytosoziologie und Phytogeographie\plain\fs28 .)
\par \pard \i\b Ochr. Przyr\plain\fs28 .
\par      \i Ochrona Przyrody\plain\fs28 . Krakow. 1920-> .
\par \i\b \'d6fvers. Finska Vet.-Soc. F\'f6rhandl.\plain\fs28 
\par      \i \'d6fversigt af finska Vetenskaps-Societetens F\'f6rhandlingar\plain\fs28 . Helsingfors. \b 1-64\plain\fs28 , 1838-1922.
\par \i\b \'d6fvers. Kongl. Vet.-Akad F\'f6rhandl\plain\fs28 .
\par      \i \'d6fversigt af kongl. Vetenskaps-Akademiens F\'f6rhandlingar\plain\fs28 . Stockholm. \b 1-63\plain\fs28 . 1844-1921.
\par \i\b Ohio Jour. Sci\plain\fs28 .
\par      \i The Ohio Naturalist\plain\fs28 . Columbus, Ohio. \b 1-15\plain\fs28 , 1900-1915; titled \i The Ohio Journal of Science\plain\fs28 , \b 16\plain\fs28 ->, 1915-> .
\par \pard \i\b Op. Bot.\plain\fs28 
\par    Cf.\i  Op. Bot. (Lund)\plain\fs28 .
\par \i\b Op. Bot. Cech\plain\fs28 .
\par      \i Opera botanica cechica\plain\fs28 . Praha. \b 1\plain\fs28 ->, 1939-1948.
\par \i\b Op. Bot. (Lund)\plain\fs28 
\par    \i Opera botanica. A Societate botanica lundensi in Supplementum Seriei\plain\fs28  Botaniska Notiser \i edita\plain\fs28 . Stockholm.\b  l-60\plain\fs28 , 1953-1980. (\b 13-60\plain\fs28 , 1967-1980, at Lund.) Continued as \i\b Op. Bot\plain\fs28 ., \i Opera botanica\plain\fs28 . Copenhagen. \b 61\plain\fs28 ->, 1981->.
\par \i\b Orchid Rev\plain\fs28 .
\par     \i  The Orchid Review\plain\fs28 . London, etc. \b 1\plain\fs28 ->, 1893.
\par \pard \i\b Orchidee\plain\fs28 
\par      \i Die Orchidee\plain\fs28 . Hamburg. \b 1\plain\fs28 ->, 1949->. (\b 16-24\plain\fs28 , 1965-1973, at Hannover; \i 25\plain\fs28 ->, 1974->, at Hildesheim.)
\par \i\b Ostenia\plain\fs28 
\par    \i Ostenia. Colecci\'f3n de Trabajos bot\'e1nicos dedicados a Don Cornelio Osten\plain\fs28 . Montevideo. 1933.
\par \i\b \'d6sterr. Bot. Wochenbl\plain\fs28 .
\par    \i \'d6sterreichisches botanisches Wochenblatt\plain\fs28 . Wien. \b 1-7\plain\fs28 , 1851-1857; titled \i\b \'d6sterr. Bot. Zeitschr\plain\fs28 ., \i \'d6sterreichische\plain\fs28  [\i Oesterreichische\plain\fs28 ] \i botanische Zeitschrift\plain\fs28 , \b 8-91\plain\fs28  & \b 94-122\plain\fs28 , 1858-1942, 1947-1973 (\b 92-93\plain\fs28 , 1943-1944, titled \i Wiener botanische Zeitschrzjft\plain\fs28 ); titled \i\b Pl. Syst. Evol\plain\fs28 ., \i Plant Systematics and Evolution\plain\fs28 . / \i Entwicklungsgeschichte und Systematik der Pflanzen\plain\fs28 , \b 123\plain\fs28 ->, 1975->. (German subtitle discontinued from \b 155\plain\fs28 ->, 1987->.)
\par \pard \i\b \'d6sterr. Bot. Zeitschr\plain\fs28 .
\par    Cf.\i  \'d6sterr. Bot. Wochenbl\plain\fs28 .
\par \i\b \'d6sterr. Monatschr. Forstwes\plain\fs28 .
\par    \i \'d6sterreichische Monatschrjft f\'fcr Forstwesen\plain\fs28 . Wien. \b 15-37\plain\fs28 , 1863-1882.
\par \i\b Otc. Pocv.-Bot. Kazakhst. Eksped\plain\fs28 .
\par      ***** * ******* ********-************* ****** ************ ********** ******** **** **** [\i Otcet o Rabotakh pocvenno-botaniceskogo Otrjada Kazakhstanskoj Ekspedicii Akademii Nauk SSSR\plain\fs28 ]. Leningrad. \b 1-7\plain\fs28 , 1928-30.
\par \i\b Overs. Kong. Danske Vid. Selsk. Forh\plain\fs28 .
\par \pard      \i Oversigt over det kongelige danske Videnskabernes Selskabs Forhandlinger\plain\fs28 . Kiobenhavn. 1806-> .
\par \i\b Palest. Jour. Bot.\plain\fs28  (\i\b Jerusalem\plain\fs28 )
\par      \i Palestine Journal of Botany. Jerusalem Series\plain\fs28 . Jerusalem. \b 1-6\plain\fs28 , 1935-1955.
\par \i\b Pallas Nagy Lexikona\plain\fs28 
\par    \i A Pallas Nagy Lexikona\plain\fs28 . Budapest. (\b 10\plain\fs28  in 1875. It has not been possible to ascertain whether all vols. of this encyclopaedia were published simultaneously.)
\par \i\b Paxton's Mag. Bot\plain\fs28 .
\par \pard      \i Paxton's Magazine of Botany\plain\fs28 . London. \b 1-16\plain\fs28 , 1841-1849.
\par \i\b Penny Cycl\plain\fs28 
\par    \i The Penny Cyclopaedia of the Society for the Diffusion of useful Knowledge\plain\fs28 . London. 1833--1858.
\par \i\b Period. Biol.\plain\fs28  (\i\b Zagreb\plain\fs28 )
\par      \i Glasnik bioloske Sekcije\plain\fs28 . / \i Periodicum Biologorum.\plain\fs28  \b 1-7\plain\fs28 , 1947-1954. Titled \i Bioloski Glasnik\plain\fs28 . / \i Periodicum Biologorwn,\plain\fs28  \b 8-21\plain\fs28 , 1955-1969. Titled \i Periodicum Biologorum,\plain\b\fs28  72\plain\fs28  [=\b  22\plain\fs28 ]->, 1970-> .
\par \pard \i\b Period. Soc. M\'e9d. C\'e1diz\plain\fs28 
\par    \i Periodico de la Sociedad m\'e9dico-quir\'fargica de C\'e1diz\plain\fs28 . C\'e1diz.\b  1-4\plain\fs28 , 1820-1824.
\par \i\b Period. Spis. Balg. Kniz. Druz\plain\fs28 .
\par      ************* ******** ** ************ ********* ********* [\i Periodicesko Spisanie na balgarskoto knizovno Druzestvo\plain\fs28 ]. Sofija. 1870-1910.
\par \i\b Pflanzenareale\plain\fs28 
\par      \i Die Pflanzenareale. Sammlung kartographischer Darstellungen von Verbreitungsbezirken der lebenden und fossilen Pflanzen-Familien, -Gattungen und -Arten\plain\fs28 . Jena. 1926-> .
\par \pard \i\b Pharm. Jour.\plain\fs28 
\par      \i Pharmaceutical Journal and Transactions\plain\fs28 . London. \b 1-54\plain\fs28 , 1841-1895. Titled \i Pharmaceutical Journal,\plain\fs28  \b 55\plain\fs28 ->, 1895->. Up to 1965, a parallel numbering of volumes, in 4 series, was also used.
\par \i\b Philipp. Jour. Sci. (Bot.)\plain\fs28 
\par    \i The Philippine Journal of Science. Section C. Botany\plain\fs28 . Manila. \b 1-13\plain\fs28 , 1906-1918. (Sectional title only in \b 2-13\plain\fs28 .) Titled The Philippine Journa1 of Science, \b 14\plain\fs28 ->, 1919->.
\par \pard \i\b Philos. Mag.\plain\fs28 
\par      \i The Philosophical Magazine\plain\fs28 . London. \b 1\plain\fs28 ->, 1798-> . With many series and several minor changes of title.
\par \i\b Philos. Trans. Roy. Soc. Lond.\plain\fs28 
\par    \i Philosophical Transactions: giving some Account of the present Undertakings, Studies, and Labours of the Ingenious in many Parts of the World\plain\fs28 . London. \b 1 -65\plain\fs28 , 1665-1775 ; titled \i Philosophical Transactions, of the Royal Society of London\plain\fs28 ,\b  66-177\plain\fs28 , 1776-1886; titled \i Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society of London\plain\fs28 . Series B, containing Papers of a biological Character,\b  178-223\plain\fs28 , 1887-1933; titled\i  Philosophical Transactions ... Series B. Biological  Sciences\plain\fs28 , \b 224\plain\fs28 ->, 1934/1935->.)
\par \pard \i\b Phytologist (Newman)\plain\fs28 
\par    \i The Phytologist: a popular botanical Miscellany. Conducted by George Luxford\plain\fs28 . London. Ser. 1, edit. G. Luxford & E. Newman, \b 1\plain\fs28  & \b 2\plain\fs28 : pp. 1-372, 1841--1845; ... Conducted by Edward Newman, edit. E. Newman (only), \b 2\plain\fs28 : pp. 373-end,\b  3-5\plain\fs28 , 1846-1854. Ser. 2, by A. Irvine and subtitled\i  A botanical Journal\plain\fs28 , \b 1-6\plain\fs28 , 1855-1863. (Cf. F.A. Stafleu & R.S. Cowan, \i Taxonomic Literature\plain\fs28  ed. 2, \b 3\plain\fs28 : \b 199\plain\fs28  & \b 737\plain\fs28  (1981).)
\par \pard \i\b Phyton (Austria)\plain\fs28 
\par    \i Phyton. Annales Rei botanicae\plain\fs28 . Horn. \b 1\plain\fs28 ->, 1948->.
\par \i\b Pittonia\plain\fs28 
\par      \i Pittonia. A Series of Papers relating to Botany and Botanists\plain\fs28 . Berkeley, California. \b 1-5\plain\fs28 , 1887-1905. (\b 3-5\plain\fs28 , 189~1905, at Washington, D.C.)
\par \i\b Pl. Polon. Exsicc.\plain\fs28 
\par    \i Rosliny Polskie\plain\fs28 . / \i Plantae Poloniae exsiccatae\plain\fs28 . Cracoviae.
\par \i\b Pl. Syst. Evol.\plain\fs28 
\par    \i Cf. \'d6sterr. Bot. Wochenbl\plain\fs28 .
\par \i\b Plant Life\plain\fs28 
\par      \i  Plant Life.\plain\fs28  Stanford, California. \b 1\plain\fs28 ->, 1945
\par \pard \i\b Planta\plain\fs28 
\par    \i Planta. Archiv f\'fcr wissenschaftliche Botanik. Zeitschrift f\'fcr wissenschaftliche Biologie. Abt. E\plain\fs28 . Berlin-Dahlem. \b 1\plain\fs28 ->, 1925->.
\par \i\b Pollen et Spores\plain\fs28 
\par    \i Pollen et Spores\plain\fs28 . Paris. \b 1\plain\fs28 ->, 1959->.
\par \i\b Pollichia\plain\fs28 
\par      \i Jahresbericht der Pollichia, eines naturwissenschaftlichen Vereins der bayerischen Pfalz\plain\fs28 . Landau. \b 1-32\plain\fs28 , 1843-1874. (\b 15-32\plain\fs28 , 1857-1874, titled \i . . .der Rheinpfalz\plain\fs28 .)
\par \i\b Polsk. Towarz. Bot. (Monogr. Bot.)\plain\fs28 
\par \pard    \i Polskie Towarzystwo botaniczne. Monographae botanicae\plain\fs28 . Warszawa. \b 1\plain\fs28 ->,1953->.
\par \i\b Portug. Acta Biol.\plain\fs28 
\par      \i Portugaliae Acta biologica\plain\fs28 . Lisboa. 1944-> .
\par \i\b Predv. Otcet Rabot. Nizegorod. Geobot. Eksped\plain\fs28 .
\par      *************** ***** * ****** ************* *************** **********  [\i Predvaritel'nyj Otcet o Rabotakh NizVegorodskoj geobotaniceskoj Ekspedicii\plain\fs28 ]. Nizni-Novgorod.\b  1925-1928\plain\fs28 , 1926-1929.
\par \i\b Preslia\plain\fs28 
\par    \i Preslia. Vestnik cesk\'e9 botanick\'e9 Spolecnosti\plain\fs28 . Praha. \b 1\plain\fs28 , 1914; titled \i Preslia. Vestnik ceskoslovensk\'e9 botanick\'e9 Spolecnosti\plain\fs28 . / \i Bulletin de la Soci\'e9t\'e9 botanique tch\'e9coslovaque \'e0 Prague\plain\fs28 . / \i Reports of the Czechoslovak botanical Society of Prague\plain\fs28 , \b 2-15\plain\fs28 , 1923-1936 ; titled \i Preslia. Vestnik cs. botanick\'e9 Spolecnosti. / Bulletin de la Soci\'e9t\'e9 botanique tch\'e9que \'e0 Prague. / Reports of the Ccech botanical Society of Prague\plain\fs28 ,\b  16-17\plain\fs28 , 1939; titled\i  Preslia. Vestnik cesk\'e9 botanick\'e9 Spolecnosti\plain\fs28 , \b 18-21\plain\fs28 , 1940-1942; titled \i Preslia. Vestnik ceskoslovensk\'e9 botanick\'e9 Spolecnosti v Praze\plain\fs28  \b  22-23\plain\fs28 , 1948; titled \i Preslia. Casopis ceskoslovenske botanick\'e9 Spolecnosti\plain\fs28 , \b 24\plain\fs28 ->, 1952->.
\par \pard \i\b Proc. Acad Nat. Sci. Philad\plain\fs28 .
\par      \i Proceedings of the Academy of natural Sciences of Philadelphia.\plain\fs28  Philadelphia, Pennsylvania. \b 1\plain\fs28 ->, 1841->.
\par \i\b Proc. Biol. Soc. Washington\plain\fs28 
\par      \i Proceedings of the Biological Society of Washington\plain\fs28 . Washington. \b 1\plain\fs28 ->, 1882->.
\par \i\b Proc. Amer. Acad. Arts Sci.\plain\fs28 
\par    \i Proceedings of the American Academy of Arts and Sciences\plain\fs28 . Boston. \b 1-85\plain\fs28 , 1846-1958. Continued as (?amalgamated with)\i  Daedalus\plain\fs28 . \i Proceedings ... Boston\plain\fs28 . (\b 1-85\plain\fs28 , 1846-1954) \b 86\plain\fs28 ->, 1955->.
\par \pard \i\b Proc. Bot. Soc. Brit. Is.\plain\fs28 
\par      \i Proceedings of the botanical Society of the British Isles\plain\fs28 . London. 1954-> .
\par \i\b Proc. California Acad. Sci\plain\fs28 .
\par      \i Proceedings of the California Academy of natural Sciences\plain\fs28 . San Francisco. Ser. 1, \b 1-3\plain\fs28 , 1854 1868; titled \i Proceedings of the California Academy of Sciences\plain\fs28 , \b 4-7\plain\fs28 , 1869-1877. Ser. 2, \b 1\plain\fs28 ->, 1888-1896. Ser. 3, Botany, \b 1-2\plain\fs28 , 1897-1904. Ser. 4, \b 1\plain\fs28 ->, 1907-> .
\par \i\b Proc. Koninkl. Nederl. Akad. Wetensch\plain\fs28 .
\par \pard      \i Proceedings. Koninklijke nederlandse Akademie van Wetenschappen\plain\fs28 . Amsterdam. Series C. Biological and medical Sciences,\b  54\plain\fs28 ->, 1951-> .
\par \i\b Proc. Linn. Soc. London\plain\fs28 
\par     \i Proceedings of the Linnean Society of London\plain\fs28 . London. 1838-> .
\par \i\b Proc. Linn. Soc. New S. Wales\plain\fs28 
\par      \i The Proceedings of the Linnean Society of New South Wales\plain\fs28 . Sydney. Ser. 1, \b 1-10\plain\fs28 , 1875-1885. Ser. 2, \b 1-10\plain\fs28 , 1886-1895. Ser. 1, \b 21\plain\fs28 ->, 1896-> .
\par \pard \i\b Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. U.S\plain\fs28 .
\par      \i Proceedings. National Academy of Sciences\plain\fs28 . Washington.\b  1\plain\fs28 , 1877; titled \i Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences\plain\fs28 , Baltimore, \b 1\plain\fs28 , 1915; titled \i Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America\plain\fs28 ,\b  2\plain\fs28 ->, 1916-> . Later Vols. published at Easton, Chicago and Washington.
\par \i\b Proc. Roy. Irish Acad.\plain\fs28 
\par     \i Proceedings of the Royal Irish Academy\plain\fs28 . Dublin.\b  1\plain\fs28 ->, 1930->.
\par \pard \i\b Proc. Study Fauna Fl. USSR, N.S. Sect. Bot\plain\fs28 .
\par    ************************************************************************************************************************************************************ [\i Materialy k Poznaniu Fauny i Flory SSSR, Izdavaemye Moskovskii Obscestvom Ispytatelej Prirodjy, Novaya Serijya, Otdel botaniceskij\plain\fs28 ]. / \i Proceedings of the Study of the Fauna and Flora of the USSR. New Series. Section of Botany\plain\fs28 . Moskva. [\b 15\plain\fs28 (\b 23\plain\fs28 ) in 1968. Full details of volumation unavailable.]
\par \pard \i\b Proc\'e8s-Verb. Mens. Soc. Dauph. \'c9thnol. Arch\'e9ol\plain\fs28 .
\par      \i Proces-verbaux mensuels de la Soci\'e9t\'e9 dauphinoise \'e9thnologique et arch\'e9ologique\plain\fs28 .
\par \i\b Proc\'e8s-Verb. Soc. Dauph. \'c9tud. Biol.\plain\fs28  (\i\b Grenoble\plain\fs28 )
\par      \i Proc\'e8s-verbaux de la Soci\'e9t\'e9 dauphinoise d'Etudes biologiques et de Protection de la Nature\plain\fs28 . Grenoble.
\par \i\b Progr. Sald. Realsch. Brandenb\plain\fs28 .
\par      \i Programm der Saldern'schen Realschule zu Brandenburg a.d.H\plain\fs28 . Brandenburg.
\par \i\b Provence Agric.\plain\fs28 
\par \pard      \i La Provence agricole et horticole\plain\fs28 . Toulon. \b 1\plain\fs28 ->, 1881-> .
\par \i\b Publ. Fac. Sci. Univ. Charles\plain\fs28 
\par      \i Publications de la Faculte des Sciences de l 'Universite Charles\plain\fs28 . / \i Spisy vydavane prirodovedeckou Fakultou karlovy University\plain\fs28 . Prague. \b 1\plain\fs28 ->, 1923-> . In \b 167\plain\fs28 ->, 1939->, French title is replaced by \i Acta Facultatis Rerum naturalium Universitatis carolinae\plain\fs28 .
\par \i\b Publ. Field Mus. Bot.\plain\fs28  (\i\b Chicago\plain\fs28 )
\par      \i Publications of the Field Columbian Museum. Botanical Series\plain\fs28 . Chicago. \b 1\plain\fs28 , 1895-1902; titled \i Publications of the Field Museum of natural History. Botanical Series\plain\fs28 . \b 2-8\plain\fs28 , 1903-1932; titled \i Publications. Field Museum of natural History. Botanical Series\plain\fs28 ,\b  9-23\plain\fs28 , 1941-1947; titled \i\b Fieldiana\plain\fs28 , \i Fieldiana: Botany\plain\fs28 ,\b  24\plain\fs28 ->, 1958-> .
\par \pard \i\b Prosv. Glasn\plain\fs28 .
\par      ********* ****** [\i Prosvetni Glasnik\plain\fs28 ]. Beograd. 1880-1928.
\par \i\b Publ. Cairo Univ. Herb.\plain\fs28 
\par    \i Publications from the Cairo University Herbarium.\plain\fs28  Cairo. \b 1-7/8\plain\fs28 , 1969-1977. (\b 1-6\plain\fs28  at Cairo; \b 7/8\plain\fs28  [single issue] at Koenigstein. \b 1\plain\fs28  in 1970; \b 2\plain\fs28  in 1969; \b 3\plain\fs28  in 1970; \b 4\plain\fs28  in 1971; \b 5\plain\fs28  in 1972; \b 6\plain\fs28  in 1975; \b 7/8\plain\fs28  in 1977.) Continued as \i Taeckholmia\plain\fs28 . Koenigstein. \b 9->\plain\fs28 , 1980->. (\b 9\plain\fs28 , for 1978, in 1980; cf. \i Taxon\plain\b\fs28  29\plain\fs28 : 555 (1980). \b 10\plain\fs28 ->, 1987->, at Cairo.)\i  Additional Series\plain\fs28  (\i Flora of Egypt\plain\fs28 ), Cairo, \b 1\plain\fs28 ->, 1980->.
\par \pard \i\b Publ. Fac. Sci. Univ. Masaryk\plain\fs28 
\par     \i  Publications de la Facult\'e9 des Sciences de 1' Universit\'e9 Masaryk\plain\fs28 . / \i Spisy vyd\'e1van\'e9 prirodovedeckou Fakultou Masarykovy University\plain\fs28 . Brno. 1921-1958. (1950-> With additional title **** ***********-************* ********** ************ **. *.*. ******* [\i Trudy Estestvenno-istoriceskogo Fakul'teta Universiteta im. T.G. Masarika\plain\fs28 ].)
\par \i\b Publ. Field Mus. Bot\plain\fs28 . (\i\b Chicago\plain\fs28 )
\par      \i  Publications of the Field Columbian Museum. Botanical Series.\plain\fs28  Chicago. \b 1\plain\fs28 , 1895-1902; titled \i Publications of the Field Museum of natural History\plain\fs28 . Botanical Series. \b 2-8\plain\fs28 , 1903-1932; titled \i Publications Field Museum of natural History. Botanical\plain\fs28  Series,\b  9-23\plain\fs28 , 1941-1947; titled \i\b Fieldiana\plain\fs28 , \i Fieldiana: Botany,\plain\b\fs28  24\plain\fs28 ->, 1958->
\par \pard \i\b Publ. Inst. Biol. Apl. (Barcelona)\plain\fs28 
\par      \i Publicaciones del Instituto de Biol\'f3gia aplicada\plain\fs28 . Barcelona. \b 1\plain\fs28 ->, 1946->.
\par \i\b Quart. Bull. Alp. Gard. Soc.\plain\fs28 
\par    Cf. \i Bull. Alp. Gard. Soc.\plain\fs28 
\par \i\b Rad Jug. Akad Znan. Umj\plain\fs28 .
\par      \i  Rad jugoslavenske Akademije Znanosti i Umjetnosti.\plain\fs28  Zagreb. 1867-> . (\b 270-272\plain\fs28 , 1941, titled \i Rad hrvatske Akademije Znanosti i Umjetnosti\plain\fs28 ).
\par \i\b Rad. Polj. Sum. Fakult. Sarajevu\plain\fs28 
\par    \i Radovi poljoprivredno-sumarskog Fakulteta, Univerziteta u Sarajevu\plain\fs28 . Sarajevo. \b 1\plain\fs28 ->, 1956->.
\par \pard \i\b Rapports Comm. Congr. Internat. Bot\plain\fs28 .
\par      \i Rapports et Communications. Congres International de Botanique\plain\fs28 .
\par \i\b Razpr. Mat.-Prir. Akad. Ljubljani\plain\fs28 
\par    \i Razprave. Matematicno-Prirodoslovnega Razreda Akademije Znanosti in Umetnosti v Ljubljani\plain\fs28 . Ljubljana. \b 1-3\plain\fs28 , 1940-1942; titled \i Razprave. Slovenska Akademija Znanostiin Umetnosti. Ljubljana. Razred Mat., Prirod. Med. Tech. Prirod. Odsek.\plain\fs28 , \b 4\plain\fs28 , 1949; titled \i Razprave. Slovenska Akademija Znanosti in Umetnosti, Razred za Prirodoslovne in Medicinske vede\plain\fs28 . / \i Dissertationes. Academia Scientiarum et Artium slovenica, Classis 4, Historia naturalis et Medecina\plain\fs28 , \b 1-17\plain\fs28 , 1951-1974 (\b 5\plain\fs28 , for 1959, published in 1960; from \b 6-17\plain\fs28 , 1961-1974,\i  Oddelek za Prirodoslovne vede.\plain\fs28  /\i  Pars historico-naturalis\plain\fs28  is added to the title.) Cf.\i  Cat. P\'e9riod. Bibl. Cons. Jard. Bot. Gen\'e8ve, Supp1. 7980- 1987\plain\fs28  : 88 (1988).
\par \pard \i\b Rec. Trav. Montpellier\plain\fs28  (\i\b Ser. Bot\plain\fs28 .)
\par      \i Recueil des Travaux de l'Institut botanique\plain\fs28 . Montpellier. \b 1-4\plain\fs28 , 1944 1949; titled \i Recueil des Travaux des Laboratoires de Botaniques, Geologie et Zoologie de la Faculte des Sciences de Montpellier. Serie botanique\plain\fs28 ,\b  5\plain\fs28 ->, 1952-> .
\par \i\b Redog. Allm. Larov. Norr.- Soderkoping\plain\fs28 
\par      \i Redogorelse for Allmanna Laroverken i Norrkoping och Soderkoping\plain\fs28 . Norrkoping.
\par \i\b Ref. Nauc.-Issled Rabot. Akad. Nauk SSSR\plain\fs28  (\i\b Biol.\plain\fs28 )
\par \pard        ******* ******-************'***** *****. ********* **** ****.************* **** [\i Referaty naucno-issledovatel'skikh Rabot. Akademija Nauk SSSR. Biologiceskij Otdel\plain\fs28 ]. Leningrad. 1945->
\par \i\b Regn. Veg\plain\fs28 .
\par      \i Regnum vegetabile; a Series of Handbooks for the Use of Plant Taxonomists and Plant Geographers\plain\fs28 . Utrecht. 1953-> .
\par \i\b Reinwardtia\plain\fs28 
\par      \i Reinwardtia.\plain\fs28  Bogor. 1950-> .
\par \i\b Rendic. Accad. Sci. Fis. Mat. (Napoli)\plain\fs28 
\par    \i Rendiconti dell' Accademia delle Scienze fisiche e matematiche\plain\fs28 . Napoli. \b 1-20\plain\fs28 , 1842-1861 ; titled \i\b Rendic. Reale Accad. Sci. (Napoli)\plain\fs28 ,\i  Rendiconti della Reale Accademia...\plain\fs28 , Ser. 1, \b 1-25\plain\fs28 , 1862-1886; ser. 2, \b 1-8\plain\fs28 , 1887-1894 ; ser. 3, \b 1-36\plain\fs28 , 1895-1930; ser. 4,\b  1\plain\fs28 ->, 1931->.
\par \pard \i\b Rendic. Reale Accad. Sci. (Napoli)\plain\fs28 
\par      Cf. \i Rendic. Accad. Sci. (Napoli)\plain\fs28 
\par \i\b Rep. Bot. Exch. Club Brit. Is.\plain\fs28 
\par    \i The London botanical Exchange Club. Report of the Curators for 1866\plain\fs28  (\i ...-1868\plain\fs28 ). London. \b 1866-1868\plain\fs28 , 1867-1869 (\b 1867-1868\plain\fs28 , 1868-1869, titled\i  Report ...and List of Desiderata for 1869\plain\fs28  [1870]); titled \i Report of the botanical Exchange Club for 1869\plain\fs28  (\i  ... -1877/ 78\plain\fs28 ), \b 1869-1877/1878\plain\fs28 , 1870-1879; titled \i Report of the botanical Exchange Club of the British Isles,\plain\fs28  \b 1\plain\fs28 (\b 1879-1900\plain\fs28 ), 1880-1901; titled \i Report of the botanical Exchange Club and Society of the British Isles\plain\fs28 , \b 2\plain\fs28 (\b 1901\plain\fs28 )-\b 3\plain\fs28 (\b 6\plain\fs28 ), 1902-1914; titled \i Report of the botanical Society and Exchange Club of the British Isles\plain\fs28 , \b 4-13\plain\fs28 , 1914/1916-1947. (\b 1\plain\fs28 (\b 1879-1900\plain\fs28 ) &\b  2\plain\fs28 (\b 1901-1902\plain\fs28 ), 1880-1903, at Manchester; \b 2\plain\fs28 (\b 1903\plain\fs28 )-\b 3\plain\fs28 (\b 4\plain\fs28 ), 1904-1913, at Oxford; \b 3\plain\fs28 (\b 5\plain\fs28 )-\b 13\plain\fs28 , 1913-1947, at Arbroath.)
\par \pard \i\b Rep. Dept. Agric. Univ. Inst. Appl. Sci.\plain\fs28  (\i\b Reykjavik\plain\fs28 )
\par      \i Reports. Department of Agriculture, University Institute of applied Sciences\plain\fs28 . /\i  Rit Landbuna\'f0ardeildar, Atvinnudeild H\'e1sk\'f3lans\plain\fs28 . Reykjavik. \b 1\plain\fs28 ->, 1943-> .
\par \i\b Res. Stud. State Coll. Washington\plain\fs28 
\par      \i Research Studies of the State College of Washington\plain\fs28 . Pullman Washington,\b  1\plain\fs28 ->, 1929-> . (\b 27\plain\fs28 (\b 3-34\plain\fs28 (\b 2\plain\fs28 ), 1959-1966, titled \i Research Studies, a quarterly Publication of Washington State University\plain\fs28 ; \b 34\plain\fs28 (\b 3\plain\fs28 )->, 1966->, titled\i  Research Studies, Washington State University\plain\fs28 .)
\par \pard \i\b Result. Wiss. Erforsch. Balaton\plain\fs28 .
\par      \i Resultate der wissenschaftlichen Erforschung des Balatonsees\plain\fs28 . Wien. 1897-1920. (Comprises German edition of \i A Balaton tudomanyos Tanulmanyozasanak Eredmenyei\plain\fs28 , Budapest, 1897-1920.)
\par \i\b Rev. Biol.\plain\fs28  (\i\b Bucarest\plain\fs28 )
\par      \i Revue de Biologie\plain\fs28 . Bucarest. \b 1-8\plain\fs28 , 1954-1963; titled \i\b Rev. Roum. Biol.\plain\fs28 ,\i  Revue Roumaine de Biologie. Serie de Botanique\plain\fs28 , \b 9\plain\fs28 ->, 1964-> .
\par \i\b Rev. Bot. Appl.\plain\fs28 
\par \pard     \i  Revue de Botanique appliqu\'e9e et d'Agriculture coloniale\plain\fs28 . Paris.\b  1-8\plain\fs28 , 1921-1928; titled \i Revue de Botanique appliqu\'e9e et d'Agriculture tropicale\plain\fs28 , \b 9-25\plain\fs28 , 1929-1945; titled \i Revue internationale de Botanique appliqu\'e9e et d 'Agriculture tropicale\plain\fs28 , \b 26-33\plain\fs28 ,1946-1953.
\par \i\b Rev. Bot. Syst. G\'e9ogr. Bot.\plain\fs28 
\par      \i Revue de Botanique syst\'e9matique et de G\'e9ographie botanique\plain\fs28 . Paris. \b 1-2\plain\fs28 , 1903-1905.
\par \i\b Rev. Cytol. Biol. Veget\plain\fs28 .
\par \pard      \i Revue de Cytologie et de Cytophysiologie v\'e9g\'e9tales\plain\fs28 . Paris. \b 1-10\plain\fs28 , 1934-1943. Titled \i Revue de Cytologie et de Biologie v\'e9g\'e9tales\plain\fs28 , \b 11\plain\fs28 ->, 1945-> .
\par \i\b Rev. Gen. Bot.\plain\fs28 
\par      \i  Revue gen\'e9rale de Botanique\plain\fs28 . Paris. 1889-> .
\par \i\b Rev. Hort\plain\fs28 . (\i\b Paris\plain\fs28 )
\par     \i  Revue horticole\plain\fs28 . Paris \b 1\plain\fs28 , 1829-1832. Ser. 1, \b 1-3\plain\fs28 , 1832-1841. Ser. 2, \b 1-5\plain\fs28 , 1841-1846. Ser. 3, \b 1-5\plain\fs28 , 1847-1851. Ser. 4, \b 1-5\plain\fs28 , 1852-1856. Then \b 1857-1865\plain\fs28 , 1857-1865. Then\b  37\plain\fs28 ->, 1866-> .
\par \pard \i\b Rev. Roum. Biol\plain\fs28 .
\par      \i Revue de Biologie\plain\fs28 . Bucarest. \b 1-8\plain\fs28 , 1954 1963; titled \i Revue Roumaine de Biologie\plain\fs28 ,\b  9\plain\fs28 ->, 1964-> .
\par \i\b Revista Biol\plain\fs28 .
\par    \i Revista de Biologia\plain\fs28 . Lisboa, Lunda, Louren\'e7o Marques & Rio de Janeiro. \b 1\plain\fs28 ->. 1956->. (\b 12\plain\fs28 -> published at Lisboa and Rio de Janeiro only.)
\par \i\b Revista Progr. Ci. Exact. Fis. Nat\plain\fs28 .
\par      \i Revista de los Progresos de la Ci\'eancias exactas, fisicas y naturales\plain\fs28 . Madrid. \b 1-12\plain\fs28 , 1850-1862.
\par \pard \i\b Revue Hort. (Paris)\plain\fs28 
\par    \i Revue horticole\plain\fs28 . Paris. \b 1\plain\fs28 , 1829-1832. Ser. 1, \b 1-3\plain\fs28 , 1832-1841. Ser. 2, \b 1-5\plain\fs28 , 1841-1846. Ser. 3, \b 1-5\plain\fs28 , 1847-1851. Ser. 4, \b 1-5\plain\fs28 , 1852-1856. Then\b  1857-1865\plain\fs28 , 1857-1865. Then \b 37\plain\fs28 ->, 1866->.
\par \i\b Revista Fac. Ci.\plain\fs28  (\i\b Lisboa\plain\fs28 )
\par      \i Revista da Faculdade de Ci\'eancias naturais.\plain\fs28  Lisboa. 1950->
\par \i\b Revista Olot\plain\fs28 
\par      \i Revista d'Olot.\plain\fs28  1926->.
\par \i\b Rhodora\plain\fs28 
\par    \i Rhodora. Journal of the New England botanical Club\plain\fs28 . Boston, Massachusetts & Providence, Rhode I. \b 1\plain\fs28 ->, 1891->. (\i 31-44\plain\fs28 , 1929-1942, at Lancaster, Pennsylvania & Boston; \b 45-60\plain\fs28 , 1943-1958, at Lancaster, Pennsylvania & Cambridge, Massachusetts; \b 61\plain\fs28 ->, 1959->, at Cambridge, Massachusetts.)
\par \pard \i\b Roczn. Nauk Roln\plain\fs28 .
\par      \i Roczniki Nauk Rolniczych\plain\fs28 . Krakow, Poznan & Warszawa. 1913-> .
\par \i\b Rozpr. Akad. Um. (Mat.-Przyr.)\plain\fs28 
\par    \i Rozprawy i Sprawodania z Posiedzen Wydzialu matematyczno-przyrodniczego Akademii Umiejetnosci\plain\fs28 . Krak\'f3w. \b 1-20\plain\fs28 , 1874- 1890. Ser. 2, titled \i Rozprawy Akademii Umiejetnosci. Wydzial matematyczno-przyrodniczy\plain\fs28 , \b 1-19\plain\fs28 , 1891-1902. Ser. 3, titled\i  Rozprawy Wydzialu matematyczno-przyrodniczego Akademii Umiejetnosci. Dzial B. Nauki biologiczne\plain\fs28 , \b 1-18\plain\fs28 , 1902-1918.
\par \pard \i\b Rozpr. Cesk. Akad Ved\plain\fs28 .
\par      \i Rozpravy ceske Akademie cisare Frantiska Josefa pro Vedy, Slovesnost a Umeni.\plain\fs28  V Praze.\b  1-25\plain\fs28 , 1892-1916; titled \i Rozpravy ceske Akademie Ved\plain\fs28 , \b 63\plain\fs28 ->, 1953-> .
\par \i\b Rozpr. Uniw. Mik. Kopernika\plain\fs28  (\i\b Torun\plain\fs28 )
\par     \i Rozprawy. Uniwersytet Mikolaja Kopernika w Toruniu\plain\fs28 . Torun.
\par \i\b Rozpr Wydz. Mat.-Przyr. Polsk. Akad. Um. (Biol.)\plain\fs28 
\par    \i Rozprawy Wydzialu matematyczno-przyrodniczego Polskiej Akademii Umiejetnosci. Dzial A/B. Nauki matematyczno-fizyczne oraz biologiczne\plain\fs28  Krak\'f3w. Ser. 3, \b 19-25/26\plain\fs28 , 1920-1928; titled \i Polska Akademja Umiejetnosci. Rozprawy Wydzialu matematyczno-przyrodniczego. Dzial B. Nauki biologiczne\plain\fs28 , 1928-1954.
\par \pard \i\b Sborn. Balg. Akad. Nauk\plain\fs28 .
\par    *********************************************** [\i Sbornik na Balgarskata Akademija na Naukite\plain\fs28 ]. Sofija. 1911->.
\par \i\b Sched. Fl. Hung. Exsicc\plain\fs28 .
\par    \i Jegyz\'e9k Magyarorszag N\'f6v\'e9nyeinek Gy\'fcjtem\'e9nyehez, kiadja a Magyar Nemzeti M\'fazeum N\'f6v\'e9nytani Oszt\'e1lya. / Schedae ad Floram hungaricam exsiccatam a Sectione botanica Musei nationalis hungarici editam\plain\fs28 . Budapest. \b 1-10\plain\fs28 , 1912-1932. (\b 1\plain\fs28  in 1912; \b 2\plain\fs28  in 1914; \b 3\plain\fs28  in 1914;\b  4\plain\fs28  in 1916; \b 5\plain\fs28  in 1919; \b 6\plain\fs28  in 1923; \b 7\plain\fs28  in 1925; \b 8\plain\fs28  in 1927 ; \b 9\plain\fs28  in 1932; \b 10\plain\fs28  in 1932.)
\par \pard \i\b Sched. Herb. Fl. Ross\plain\fs28 .
\par    \i Schedae ad Herbarium Florae rossicae, a Sectione botanica Societatis imp. petropolitanae Naturae Curiosorum editum\plain\fs28 . / ****************************************** [\i Spisok Rastenij Gerbarzija Russkoj Flory\plain\fs28 ]. Peterburg. \b 1-8\plain\fs28 , 1898-1922. (\b 1\plain\fs28  in 1898; \b 2\plain\fs28  in 1900; \b 3\plain\fs28  in 1901 ; \b 4\plain\fs28  in 1902; \b 5\plain\fs28  in 1905;\b  6\plain\fs28  in 1908; \b 7\plain\fs28  in 1911 ; \b 8\plain\fs28  in 1922.) Contributors include B. M. Koso-Poliansky, D. I. Litvinov and J. N. Woronow. Titled \i\b Sched. Herb. Fl. URSS\plain\fs28 ., \i Schedae ad Herbarium Florae URSS\plain\fs28  / ************************************* [\i Spisok Rastenzij Gerbarija Flory SSSR\plain\fs28 ]. \b 9\plain\fs28 ->, 1932->. (\b 9\plain\fs28  in 1932; \b 10\plain\fs28  in 1936; \b 11\plain\fs28  in 1949; \b 12\plain\fs28  in 1953; \b 13\plain\fs28  in 1955; \b 14\plain\fs28  in 1957 ; \b 15\plain\fs28  in 1963; \b 16\plain\fs28  in 1966; \b 17\plain\fs28  in 1967 ; \b 18\plain\fs28  in 1970; \b 19\plain\fs28  in 1972.) \b 12 & 13\plain\fs28  lack Latin title and are abbreviated as \i\b Spisok Rast. Gerb. Fl. SSSR.\plain\fs28 
\par \pard \i\b Sched. Herb. Fl. URSS\plain\fs28 
\par       Cf. \i Sched. Herb. Fl. Ross\plain\fs28 .
\par \i\b Sci. Pap. Appl. Sect. Tiflis Bot. Gard.\plain\fs28 
\par      ****** ******-*********** ******** *********** ************* **** [\i Zapiski naucno-prikladnykh Otdelov Tiflisskago botanicesko Sada\plain\fs28 ]./ i Scientific Papers of the applied Sections of the Tiflis botanical Gardens. Tiflis. \b 1-7\plain\fs28 , 1919-1930.
\par \i\b Scient. Pharmac\plain\fs28 .
\par    \i Scientia pharmaceutica.\plain\fs28  Wien. 1930->.
\par \i\b Schr. Ges. Naturf. Freunde Berlin\plain\fs28 
\par \pard      \i Schriften der berlinischen Gesellschaft naturforschender Freunde\plain\fs28 . Berlin.\b  1-6\plain\fs28 , 1781-1785; titled \i Schriften der Gesellschaft naturforschender Freunde zu Berlin\plain\fs28 , \b 7-11\plain\fs28 , 1787-1794.
\par \i\b Schriftenreihe \'d6sterr. Ges. Holzforsch\plain\fs28 .
\par    \i Schriftenreihe der \'d6sterreischischen Gesellschaft f\'fcr Holzforschung\plain\fs28 . Vienna. \b 1--6\plain\fs28 , 1950- 1956.
\par \i\b Sci. Mag. Biol. (Kharkov)\plain\fs28 
\par    ************************* [\i Naukovi Zapysky Biologiji\plain\fs28 ]. / \i Scientific Magazine of Biology\plain\fs28 . Kharkov. \b 1\plain\fs28 ->, 1927->.
\par \pard \i\b Scott. Bot. Rev.\plain\fs28 
\par     \i  The Scottish botanical Review\plain\fs28 . Edinburgh. \b 1\plain\fs28 , 1911-1912.
\par \i\b Scott. Naturalist\plain\fs28 
\par      \i The Scottish Naturalist\plain\fs28 . Perth.\b  1-11\plain\fs28 , 1871-1891. (\b 5\plain\fs28  & \b 6\plain\fs28  at Edinburgh.) 1912->, at Edinburgh.
\par \i\b Scrin. Fl. Select.\plain\fs28  (\i\b Magnier\plain\fs28 )
\par    \i  Scrinia Florae selectae\plain\fs28  (\i Directeur: Charles Magnier\plain\fs28 .) Saint Quentin. \b 1-15\plain\fs28 , 1882-1896. (\b 1\plain\fs28 : pp. 1-48 in 1882; \b 2\plain\fs28 : pp. 49-56 in 1883; \b 3\plain\fs28 : pp. 57-72 in 1884; \b 4\plain\fs28 : pp. 73-88 in 1885; \b 5\plain\fs28 : pp. 89-104 in 1886;\b  6\plain\fs28 : pp. 105-120 in 1887;\b  7\plain\fs28 : pp. 121-136 in 1888; \b 8\plain\fs28 : pp. 137-156 in 1889; \b 9\plain\fs28 : pp. 157-176 in 1890; \b 10\plain\fs28 : pp. 177-196 in 1891; pp. 197-228 in ?1891; \b 11\plain\fs28 : pp. 229-262 in 1892; \b 12\plain\fs28 : pp. 263-298 in 1893; \b 13\plain\fs28 : pp. 299-336 in 1894; \b 14\plain\fs28 : pp. 337-364 in 1895; \b 15\plain\fs28 : pp. 365-383 in 1896.)
\par \pard \i\b Scripta Acad. Hierosol.\plain\fs28 
\par      \i Scripta academica hierosolymitana\plain\fs28 . Jerusalem. 1938-> .
\par \i\b Scripta Bot. Mus. Transs\plain\fs28 .
\par      \i Scripta botanica Musei transsilvanici\plain\fs28 . Kolozsvar. \b 1-3\plain\fs28 , 1942-1944.
\par \i\b Scripta Horti Bot. Univ. Vyt. Magni\plain\fs28 
\par      \i Scripta Horti botanici Universitatis Vytauti magni\plain\fs28 . Kaunas. 1931-> .
\par \i\b S\'e9ances Publiq. Acad. Sci. Besan\'e7on\plain\fs28 
\par    \i S\'e9ances publiques de l' Acad\'e9mie des Sciences, Belles-lettres et Arts de Besan\'e7on\plain\fs28 . Besan\'e7on. 1754-1813?; titled \i Acad\'e9mie des Sciences, Belles-lettres et Arts, de Besan\'e7on. S\'e9ance[s] publique[s]\plain\fs28 , 1814?-1858, 1866-1875. ( 1859-1865, titled \i M\'e9moires et Documents de l' Acad\'e9mie des Sciences, Belles-lettres et Arts, de Besan\'e7on\plain\fs28 .)
\par \pard \i\b Sinensia\plain\fs28 
\par      \i Sinensia. Contributions from the Metropolitan Museum of Natural History Academia sinica\plain\fs28 . Nanking. \b 1\plain\fs28 ->, 1929. Later at Shanghai.
\par \i\b Sitz.-Ber. Akad. Wiss. Wien\plain\fs28 
\par      \i Sitzungsberichte der kaiserlichen Akademie der Wissenschaften. Mathematisch-naturwissenschaftliche Classe\plain\fs28 . /\i  Sitzungsberichte der mathematisch-naturwissenschaftlichen Classe der kaiserlichen Akademie der Wissenschaften\plain\fs28 . Wien. \b 1-123\plain\fs28 , 1848-1914; titled\i  Sitzungsberichte. Kaiserliche Akademie der Wissenschaften in Wien. Mathematisch-naturwissenschaftliche Klasse\plain\fs28 ,\b  124-155\plain\fs28 , 1915-1947 (Kaiserliche dropped from \b 127\plain\fs28 , 1918, onwards); titled \i Sitzungsberichte. \'d6sterreichische Akademie der Wissenschaften. Mathematisch-naturwissenschaftliche Klasse,\plain\fs28  \b 156\plain\fs28 -> , 1947-> .
\par \pard \i\b Sitz.-Ber. B\'f6hm. Ges. Wiss\plain\fs28 .
\par    \i Sitzungsberichte der k\'f6nigl. b\'f6hmischen Gesellschaft der Wissenschaften in Prag\plain\fs28 . Prag. 1859-1873; titled \i Zpr\'e1vy o Zased\'e1ni kr\'e1lovsk\'e9 cesk\'e9 Spolecnosti Nauk v Praze. / Sitzungsberichte der k\'f6nigl. b\'f6hmischen Gesellschaft der Wissenschaften in Prag\plain\fs28 , 1874-1885; titled \i Zpr\'e1vy o Zased\'e1ni kr\'e1lovsk\'e9 cesk\'e9 Spolecnosti Nauk. Trida mathematicko-prirodovedeck\'e1. / Sitzungsberichte der k\'f6nigl. b\'f6hmischen Gesellschaft der Wissenschaften. Mathematisch-naturwzissenschaftliche Classe\plain\fs28 , 1886; titled \i\b Vestn. Kr\'e1l. Cesk\'e9 Spolecn. Nauk, Tr. Math.-Prir\plain\fs28 ., \i Vestnik kralovsk\'e9 cesk\'e9 Spolecnosti Nauk. Trida mathematicko-prirodovedeck\'e1. / Sitzungsberichte der k\'f6nigl. b\'f6hmischen Gesellschaft der Wissenschaften. Mathematisch-naturwissenschaftliche Classe\plain\fs28 , 1887-1915; titled \i Vestnik kr\'e1lovsk\'e9 cesk\'e9 Spolecnosti Nauk. Trida mathematicko-prirodovedeck\'e1\plain\fs28 . /\i  M\'e9moires de la Societ\'e9 royale des Sciences de Boh\'eame. Classe des Sciences\plain\fs28 , 1919-1935; titled \i Vestnik kr\'e1lovsk\'e9 cesk\'e9 Spolecnosti Nauk. Trida mathematicko-prirodovedeck\'e1\plain\fs28  / \i M\'e9moires de la Societ\'e9 royale des Lettres et des Sciences de Boh\'eame. Classe des Sciences\plain\fs28 , 1936-1953. (1940- 1944 lacks French title.)
\par \pard \i\b Sitz.-Ber. Deutsch. Naturw.-Med. Ver. Lotos\plain\fs28 
\par      \i Sitzungsberichte des deutschen naturwissenschaftlich-medicinischen Vereines f\'fcr B\'f6hmen->Loto-> in Prag\plain\fs28 . Prag. Nov. ser., \b 16-26\plain\fs28 , 1896-1906. Other titles at other periods.
\par \i\b Sitz.-Ber. Ges. Naturf. Freunde Berlin\plain\fs28 
\par      \i Sitzungsberichte der Gesellschft naturforschender Freunde zu Berlin\plain\fs28 . Berlin. Ser. 1, 1839-1943. Nov. ser., 1961-> .
\par \i\b Sitz.-Ber. Naturw. Ges. Isis Dresden\plain\fs28 
\par      \i Sitzungs-Berichte der naturwissenschaftlichen Gesellschaft Isis zu Dresden\plain\fs28 . Dresden. \b 1861-1939\plain\fs28 , 1862-1940. With minor changes of title.
\par \pard \i\b Skr. Ki\'f8benhavnske Selsk. L\'e6rd. Vid\plain\fs28 .
\par    \i Skrifter som udi det Ki\'f8benhavnske Selskab af L\'e6rdoms og Videnskabers Elskere ere fremlagte og oplaste\plain\fs28 . K\'f8benhavn. \b 1-10\plain\fs28 , 1745-1770; titled \i Skrifter som udi det kongelige Videnskabers Selskab ere fremlagte, og nu til Trykken befordrede\plain\fs28 , \b 11-12\plain\fs28 , 1777-1779. Continued as \i\b Kong. Danske Vid. Selsk\plain\fs28 .,\i  Nye Samling af det kongelige danske Videnskabers Selskabs Skrifter\plain\fs28 , \b 1-5\plain\fs28 , 1781-1799. Continued as \i\b Danske Vid. Selsk\plain\fs28 .,\i  Det kongelige danske Videnskabers-Selskabs Skrivter\plain\fs28 . Ser. 3, \b 1-7\plain\fs28 , 1800-1818. Several later series, with minor title variations, until 1938. Continued as \i Biologiske Skrifter. Kongelige danske Videnskabernes Selskab\plain\fs28 , \b 1\plain\fs28 ->,1939->.
\par \pard \i\b Skr. Vid-Akad. Oslo\plain\fs28 
\par      \i Skrifter utgitt av det norske Videnskaps-Akademi i Oslo. I. Matematisk-naturvidenskapelig Klasse\plain\fs28 . Oslo. 1925-> .
\par \i\b Skr. Vid.-Selsk. Christ.\plain\fs28 
\par    \i Skrifter udgivne af Videnskabsselskabet i Cbristiania. Matematisk-naturvidenskabelig Klasse\plain\fs28 . Christiania. 1894-1925. (With minor changes of title, becoming \i Skrifter utgit av Videnskapsselskapet i Kristiania\plain\fs28 , Kristiania, 1911-1925.)
\par \i\b Soc. \'c9ch. Pl. Eur. Occ. M\'e9dit\plain\fs28 .
\par \pard      \i Soci\'e9t\'e9 pour l'\'c9change des Plantes vasculaires de l'Europe occidentale et du Bassin m\'e9diterraneen. Bulletin\plain\fs28 . Liege. Formerly \i Soci\'e9t\'e9 Fran\'e7aise pour l'\'c9change des Plantes vasculaires\plain\fs28 .
\par \i\b Soc. Helv. \'c9ch. Pl.\plain\fs28 
\par      \i Soci\'e9t\'e9 helvetique pour l'\'c9change des Plantes\plain\fs28 . / \i Helvetischer Verein f\'fcr den Austausch von Pflanzen\plain\fs28 . Neuch\'e2tel. \b 1\plain\fs28 -?, 1871-?.
\par \i\b Sommerfeltia\plain\fs28 
\par    \i Sommerfeltia\plain\fs28 . Oslo. \b 1\plain\fs28 ->, 1985->.
\par \i\b  Sovetsk. Bot\plain\fs28 .
\par \pard     ********** *********  [\i Sovetskaja  Botanika\plain\fs28 ]. Moskva & Leningrad. 1933-1946.
\par \i\b Specch. Sci.\plain\fs28 
\par    \i Specchio delle Scienze o Giornale enciclopedico di Sicilia\plain\fs28 . Palermo. \b 1-2\plain\fs28 , 1814.
\par \i\b Spis. Balg. Akad Nauk\plain\fs28 .
\par      ******** ** ************ ********* ** *******  [\i Spisanie na Bailgarskata Akademija na Naukite\plain\fs28 ]. Sofija. 1911-> .
\par \i\b Spisok Rast. Gerb. Fl. SSSR\plain\fs28 
\par      Cf. \i Sched Herb. Fl. Ross.\plain\fs28 
\par \i\b  Spisy Vyd\'e1v. Prir. Fak. Karlovy Univ.\plain\fs28 
\par \pard      \i Spisy vyd\'e1van\'e9 prirodovedeckou Fakultou Karlovy University\plain\fs28 . /\i  Publications de la Facult\'e9 des Sciences de l'Universit\'e9 Charles\plain\fs28 . Praha. \b 1-195\plain\fs28 , 1923-1949. (\b 167-195\plain\fs28 , 1939-1949, French title replaced by \i Acta Facultatis Rerum naturalium Universitatis carolinae\plain\fs28 .)
\par \i\b Spraw. Kom. Fizyogr. Krakow.\plain\fs28 
\par    \i Spraworzdanie Komisyi fizyjograficznej c. k. Towarzystwa naukowego krakowskiego\plain\fs28 . Krak\'f3w. \b l-6\plain\fs28 , 1867-1872; titled \i Akademia Umiejetnosci. Krakowie. Sprawozdanie Komisyi fizyjograficznej\plain\fs28 , \b 7-52\plain\fs28 , 1873-1918 (from \b 27\plain\fs28 , 1892,\i  ...fizyograficznej\plain\fs28  ...); titled \i Polska Akademia Umiejetnosci. Spraworzdania Komisji fizjograficznej\plain\fs28 , \b 53-73\plain\fs28 , 1920-1939.
\par \pard \i\b Studia Bot. Cech\plain\fs28 .
\par      \i Studia botanica cechoslovaca\plain\fs28 . Pragae. \b 1-12\plain\fs28 , 1938-1951. (\b 2-6\plain\fs28 , 1939-1943 titled \i Studia botanica cechica\plain\fs28 .)
\par \i\b Studii Cerc. Biol.\plain\fs28 
\par      \i  Studii si Cercetari de Biologie\plain\fs28 . Bucuresti. \b 7\plain\fs28 ->, 1956-> .
\par \i\b Studii Cerc. Sti. Cluj\plain\fs28 
\par      \i Studii si Cercetari stiintifice. Filiala Cluj, Academia RPR\plain\fs28 . Bucuresti. 1950-1954.
\par \i\b Steyerm. Zeitschr\plain\fs28 .
\par      \i Steyermarkische Zeitschrift.\plain\fs28  Graz. Ser. 1, \b 1-12\plain\fs28 , 1821-1834. Ser. 2, \b 1-9\plain\fs28 , 1835-1848.
\par \pard \i\b Svensk Bot. Tidskr\plain\fs28 .
\par    \i Svensk botanisk Tidskrift\plain\fs28 . Stockholm. \b 1\plain\fs28 ->, 1907->. (\b 16\plain\fs28 ->, 1922->,at Uppsala.)
\par \i\b Syll. Pl. Nov. Ratisbon. (K\'f6nigl. Baier. Bot. Ges.)\plain\fs28 
\par    \i Sylloge Plantarum novarum itemque minus cognitarum a praestantissimis Botanicis adhuc viventibus collecta et a Societate regia botanica ratisbonensi edita\plain\fs28 . (\i K\'f6niglich-baierische botanische Gesellschaft in Regensburg\plain\fs28 .) Ratisbonae. \b 1-2\plain\fs28 , 1824-1828. (\b 1\plain\fs28  in 1824; \b 2\plain\fs28  in 1828.)
\par \pard \i\b Symb. Bot. Upsal.\plain\fs28 
\par    \i Symbolae botanicae upsalienses. Arbeten fr\'e5n botaniska Institutionen i Uppsala\plain\fs28 . Uppsala. \b 1\plain\fs28 ->, 1932->.
\par \i\b Syst. Bot\plain\fs28 .
\par    \i Systematic Botany. Quarterly Journal of the American Society of Plant Taxonomists\plain\fs28 . Tallahassee, Florida. \b 1\plain\fs28 ->, 1976->. (\b 3\plain\fs28 (\b 4\plain\fs28 )-\b 7\plain\fs28 (\b 1\plain\fs28 ), 1978-1982, at Ann Arbor, Michigan; \b 7\plain\fs28 (\b 2\plain\fs28 )-\b 10\plain\fs28 (\b 4\plain\fs28 ), 1982-1985, at Kent, Ohio; \b 11\plain\fs28 ->, 1986->, at New York.)
\par \pard \i\b Taxon\plain\fs28 
\par    \i Taxon. Official News Bulletin of the international Association for Plant Taxonomy\plain\fs28 . Utrecht. \b 1-16\plain\fs28 , 1951-1967 ; titled \i Taxon. Journal of the International Association for Plant Taxonomy\plain\fs28 , \b 17\plain\fs28 ->, 1968->. (\b 37\plain\fs28 ->, 1988->, at Berlin.)
\par \i\b Term. F\'fcz.\plain\fs28 
\par    \i Term\'e9szetrajzi F\'fczetek\plain\fs28 . Budapest. \b 1-25\plain\fs28 , 1877-1902.
\par \i\b Term.-Tud. K\'f6zgl.\plain\fs28 
\par    \i Term\'e9szettudom\'e1nyi K\'f6zl\'f6ny\plain\fs28 . Budapest. \b 1-76\plain\fs28 , 1869-1944;\b  88\plain\fs28  (= Nov. ser. \b 1\plain\fs28 )->, 1957->. (Titled \i Term\'e9szettudom\'e1yi\plain\fs28 , \b 1-3\plain\fs28 , 1946-1948; titled \i Term\'e9szget \'e9s Technika\plain\fs28 , \b 108-112\plain\fs28 , 1949-1953; titled \i Term\'e9szet \'e9s T\'e1rsadalam\plain\fs28 , \b 113-115\plain\fs28 , 1954-1956.)\i\b  P\'f3tf\'fcz\plain\fs28 .,\i  P\'f3tf\'fczetek a Term\'e9szettudom\'e1nyi K\'f6zl\'f6nyboz\plain\fs28 . \b 1-88\plain\fs28 , 1888-1907.
\par \pard \i\b Teze Fac. Sti.\plain\fs28  (\i\b Bucuresti\plain\fs28 )
\par     \i  Teze Facultatei Stiinze\plain\fs28 . Bucuresti.
\par \i\b Tisia \plain\fs28 
\par     \i Tisia\plain\fs28 . Debrecen. \b 1-6\plain\fs28 , 1936-1943.
\par \i\b Trab. Dep. Bot. Fisiol. Veg\plain\fs28 .
\par    \i Trabajos del Departamento de Botanica y Fisiologia vegetal, Universidad de Madrid\plain\fs28 . Madrid. \b 1\plain\fs28 ->, 1968->.
\par \i\b Trab. Jard Bot. Univ. Santiago Comp\plain\fs28 .
\par      \i Trabajos del Jardin botanico. Facultad de Farmacia, Universidad de Santiago de Compostela\plain\fs28 . Santiago de Compostela. 1950-> .
\par \pard \i\b Trab. Mus. Ci. Nat. Barcelona\plain\fs28 
\par      \i Trabajos del Museo de Ciencias naturales de Barcelona\plain\fs28  / \i Treballs del Museu de Ci\'e8ncies naturals de Barcelona \plain\fs28 / \i Musei barcinonensis Scientiarum naturalium Opera.\plain\fs28  Barcelona. 1917-> .
\par \i\b Trans. Acad. Sci. St. Louis\plain\fs28 
\par    \i Transactions of the Academy of Science of St. Louis\plain\fs28 . St. Louis, Missouri. \b 1\plain\fs28 ->, 1856->.
\par \i\b Trans. Amer. Philos. Soc.\plain\fs28 
\par \'a0  \i Transactions of the American philosophical Society, held at Philadelphia for promoting useful Knowledge\plain\fs28 . Philadelphia, Pennsylvania. \b 1-6\plain\fs28 , 1771-1809. Nov. ser. \b 1\plain\fs28 ->, 1818->.
\par \pard \i\b Trans. Cambr. Philos. Soc.\plain\fs28 
\par    \i Transactions of the Cambridge philosophica1 Society\plain\fs28 . Cambridge. \b 1-23\plain\fs28 , 1821 or 1822-1928. (Cf. British Library KIST microfiche catalogue, which gives different starting dates for four different holdings.)
\par \i\b Trans. Linn. Soc. London\plain\fs28 
\par    \i Transactions of the Linnean Society\plain\fs28 . London. Ser. 1, \b 1-6\plain\fs28 , 1791-1802 ; titled \i Transactions of the Linnean Society of London\plain\fs28 , \b 7-30\plain\fs28 , 1804-1875; Ser. 2, titled \i\b Trans. Linn. Soc. London\plain\fs28  (\i\b Bot.\plain\fs28 ),\i  Transactions of the Linnean Society of London. Botany\plain\fs28 ,\b  1-9\plain\fs28 , 1875-1922. Ser. 3, titled \i Transactions of the Linnean Society of London\plain\fs28 , \b 1\plain\fs28 , 1939-1955. (\b 1\plain\fs28 (\b 1\plain\fs28 ) in 1939; \b 1\plain\fs28 (\b 2\plain\fs28 ) in 1940; \b 1\plain\fs28 (\b 3\plain\fs28 ) in 1955; \i Botany\plain\fs28  and \i Zoology\plain\fs28  are combined.)
\par \pard \i\b Trans. Linn. Soc. London (Bot.)\plain\fs28 
\par    Cf. \i Trans. Linn. Soc. London.\plain\fs28 
\par \i\b Trans. New York Acad. Sci.\plain\fs28 
\par      \i Transactions of the New York Academy of Sciences.\plain\fs28  New York. Ser. 1, \b 1-16\plain\fs28 , 1881-1897. Ser. 2, \b 1\plain\fs28 ->, 1938->.
\par \i\b Trans. Proc. Bot. Soc. Edinb\plain\fs28 .
\par    \i Transactions of the botanical Society\plain\fs28 . Edinburgh. \b 1-11\plain\fs28 , 1844-1873; titled \i Transactions and Proceedings of the botanical Society\plain\fs28 , \b 12-19\plain\fs28 , 1873-1893 ('and Proceedings' not in title of \b 16-18\plain\fs28 , 1886-1891); titled \i Transactions and Proceedings of the botanical Society of Edinburgh\plain\fs28 , \b 20-40\plain\fs28 , 1894-1969; titled \i Trans. Bot. Soc. Edinb., Botanical Society of Edinburgh. Transactions\plain\fs28 , \b 41-45\plain\fs28 , 1970-1991; titled \i Botanical Journal of Scotland\plain\fs28 , \b 46\plain\fs28 (\b 1\plain\fs28 ) (for 1991), 1992->.
\par \pard \i\b Trans. Proc. N.Z. Inst.\plain\fs28 
\par    \i Transactions and Proceedings of the New Zealand Institute\plain\fs28 . Wellington. \b l-63\plain\fs28 , 1868-1934 (\b 63\plain\fs28 , 1933/1934, at Dunedin.) Titled \i Transactions and Proceedings of the Royal Society of New Zealand\plain\fs28 , Dunedin, \b 64-79\plain\fs28 , 1934- 1952 ; titled \i Transactions of the Royal Society of New Zealand\plain\fs28 , Dunedin,\b  80-88\plain\fs28 , 1952-1966. Nov. ser., titled \i Transactions of the Royal Society of New Zealand. Botany\plain\fs28 , \b 1-3\plain\fs28 , 1961-1969; titled \i Transactions of the Royal Society of New Zealand\plain\fs28 . Biological Sciences, \b 11-12\plain\fs28 , 1968-1970 (with volume numbering continuing that of \i Zoology\plain\fs28 ); titled\i  Journal of the Royal Society of New Zealand\plain\fs28 , \b 1\plain\fs28 ->, 1971->.
\par \pard \i\b Trans. Roy. Soc. Edinb\plain\fs28 .
\par      \i Transactions of the Royal Society of Edinburgh.\plain\fs28  Edinburgh. 1783-> .
\par \i\b Trans. Roy. Soc. S. Afr\plain\fs28 .
\par      \i Transactions of the Royal Society of South Africa\plain\fs28 . Cape Town. \b 1\plain\fs28 ->, 1908->.
\par \i\b Trav. Assoc. Fr. Avanc. Sci\plain\fs28 .
\par      \i Travaux de l'Association fran\'e7aise pour l'Avancement des Sciences\plain\fs28 . Paris.
\par \i\b Trav. Inst. Bot. (Charkov)\plain\fs28 
\par    \i Travaux de l' Institut botanique\plain\fs28 . / ********************************* [\i Trudy N.-D. Ynstytutu botanyki\plain\fs28 ]. / \i Traveaux de l' Institut botanique\plain\fs28 . Charkov. \b 1-3\plain\fs28 , 1936-1938. (3, 1938, also titled ***************************************************** ***************** ** [\i Uceny Zapiski Kharivs'kogo derzavnogo Ynyversitety Im. O.M. Gor'kogo\plain\fs28  \b 14\plain\fs28 .] / \i Kharkov A Gorky State University, Book\plain\fs28  \b 14\plain\fs28 ,\i  Proceedings of the Botanical Institute\plain\fs28 .)
\par \pard \i\b Trav. Inst. Sci. Ch\'e9rif.\plain\fs28 
\par      \i Travaux de l'Institut scientifique ch\'e9rifien. S\'e9rie Botanique\plain\fs28 . Tanger. 1952-> . (1956-> at Rabat.)
\par \i\b Trav. Mus. Bot. Acad. P\'e9tersb.\plain\fs28 
\par    *********************************************************** [\i Trudy botaniceskago Muzeja imperatorskoj Akademii Nauk\plain\fs28 ]. / \i Travaux du Mus\'e9e botanique de l' Acad\'e9mie imp\'e9riale des Sciences de Saint P\'e9tersbourg\plain\fs28  [\i de Petrograd\plain\fs28 ]. St. Petersburg (Petrograd). \b 1-16\plain\fs28 , 1902-1916; titled *************************************************************** [\i Trudy botaniceskago[ogo] Muzeja Rossijskoj Akademii Nauk\plain\fs28 ]. / \i Travaux du Mus\'e9e botanique de l'Acad\'e9mie des Sciences de Russie\plain\fs28 . Petrograd. \b 17-18\plain\fs28 , 1918-1920; titled **************************** [\i Trudy botaniceskogo Muzeja\plain\fs28 ]. / \i Travaux du Mus\'e9e botanique\plain\fs28 . Leningrad. \b 19-25\plain\fs28 , 1928-1932.
\par \pard \i\b Trav. Mus. G\'e9orgie\plain\fs28 
\par    *************************************. [\i Sakarthk'elos Mouzoumis sromebi\plain\fs28 ]. / \i Travaux du Mus\'e9e de G\'e9orgie\plain\fs28 . Tph'lissi. 1920-1933.
\par \i\b Trav. Soc. Pharm. Montpellier\plain\fs28 
\par      \i Travaux de la Soci\'e9t\'e9 de Pharmacie de Montpellier\plain\fs28 . Montpellier. 1942-> .
\par \i\b Treb. Inst. Catalana Hist. Nat\plain\fs28 .
\par    \i Treballs de la Instituci\'f3 catalana d' Historia natural\plain\fs28 . Barcelona. \b 1-7\plain\fs28 , 1915-1924.
\par \i\b Troms\'f8 Mus. Aarshefter\plain\fs28 
\par    \i Troms\'f8 Museums Aarshefter\plain\fs28 . Tromso. \b 1-70\plain\fs28 , 1878-1947.
\par \pard \i\b Trudy Bot. Sada Jur'ev\plain\fs28 .
\par      ***** *************** *** *************** ********** ************* [Trudy botaniceskago Sada imperatorskago Jur'evskago Universiteta]. / \i Acta Horti botanici Universitatis imperialis jurjevensis\plain\fs28 . Jur'ev.\b  1-15\plain\fs28 , 1900-1914.
\par \i\b Trudy Kommiss. Kiev. Ucebn. Okr\plain\fs28 .
\par    ************************************************************************************************************************************************************. [\i Trudy Kommissii, vysocajse ucreszdennoj pri imperatorskom Universitete Sv. Vladimira, dlja Opisanija Gubernii Kievskago Ucebnago Okruga\plain\fs28 ]. Kiev.
\par \pard \i\b Trudy Obsc. Estestv. Imp. Kazansk. Univ\plain\fs28 .
\par     **** ******** ****************** *** ************** ********* *********** ; [\i Trudy Obscestva Estestvo-ispytatelej pri imperatorskom Kazanskom Universitete.\plain\fs28 ] Kazan. \b 1-49\plain\fs28 , 1871-1916.
\par \i\b Tudy Nauc.-Issled. Inst. Biol. (Har'kov)\plain\fs28 
\par    ************************************************************************************************************** [\i Trudy naucno-issledovatel' skogo Instituta Biologii. Praci naukovo-doslidnogo Instytutu Biologiji\plain\fs28 ]. Later titled ************************************************************************************************************ [\i Trudy ... Biologii i biologiceskogo Fakul'teta. Praci... Biologiji i biologicnogo Fakul'tetu\plain\fs28 ]. Har'kov. \b 12-35\plain\fs28 , 1947-1963; \b 37\plain\fs28 ->. 1963-> (\b 1\plain\fs28 , 1936, and \b 3-11\plain\fs28 , 193?-1941, titled ************************************************************ [\i Praci naukovogdoslidnogo zoologo-biologicnogo Institutu\plain\fs28 ] / **************************************************************************. [\i Traudi naucnoissledovtel'skogo  zoologo-biologicskogo Instituta\plain\fs28 ]. / \i Proceedings of the zoological-biological Institute for scientific Research\plain\fs28 ; \b 2\plain\fs28 , 1934, titled ******************************************************************************* [\i Praci zoobiologicnogo Instytutu. Trudy zoobiologiceskogo Instituta\plain\fs28 ]; \b 36\plain\fs28 , 1963, titled ************************************************************* [\i  Trudy biologiceskogo Fakul'teta po Genetike i Zoologii\plain\fs28 ].
\par \pard \i\b Trudy Odessk. Obsc. Sad.\plain\fs28 
\par   ************************************** [\i Trudjy Odesskago Obscestva sadstva\plain\fs28 ]. / \i Travaux de la Soci\'e9t\'e9 d' Horticulture d' Odessa.\plain\fs28 
\par \i\b Trudy Peterb. Obsc. Estestv\plain\fs28 .
\par      ***** *****-************* ******** **************-***** [\i Trudy Sankt-Peterburgskago Obscvestva Estestvoispy-tatelej\plain\fs28 ]. S.-Peterburg. \b 1-18\plain\fs28 , 1870-1887; with additional title \i Travaux de la Soci\'e9t\'e9 des Naturalistes de St.-P\'e9tersbourg\plain\fs28 , \b 19-25\plain\fs28 , 1888-1895; titled ***** ************** *. -************* ******** ******************* [\i Trudy imperatorskago S.-Peterburgskago Obscestva Estestvoispytatelej\plain\fs28 ]. / \i Travaux de la Soci\'e9t\'e9 imperiale des Naturalistes de St.-P\'e9tersbourg,\plain\fs28  \b 26-43\plain\fs28 (\b 2\plain\fs28 ), 1896-1912; titled ***** ************** ******** ************-*******  [\i Trudy Petrogradskago Obscestva Estestvoispy-tatelej\plain\fs28 ]. / \i Travaux de la Soci\'e9t\'e9  des Naturalistes de Petrograd\plain\fs28 , \b 47\plain\fs28 (\b 7-8\plain\fs28 )-\b 53\plain\fs28 , 1916-1922; titled ***** *************** ******** ******************* [\i Trudy Leningradskogo Obscestva Estestvoispytatelej\plain\fs28 ]. / \i Travaux de la Soci\'e9t\'e9 des Naturalistes de Leningrad\plain\fs28 , \b 54\plain\fs28 , 1925 (French title ceases at \b 70\plain\fs28 , 1959- from \b 71\plain\fs28 (\b 3\plain\fs28 )->, 1969->, with alternative title\i  Transactions of the Leningrad Society of Naturalists\plain\fs28 .)
\par \pard \i\b Trudy Petergof. Est.-Nauc. Inst.\plain\fs28 
\par   ******************************************************* [\i Trudj Petergofskogo estestvenno-naucnogo Instituta\plain\fs28 ]. / \i Travaux de l' Institut des Sciences naturelles de Peterhoff. Peterhoff \plain\b\fs28 1-8\plain\fs28 , 1925-1952; titled ************************************************** [\i Trudy Petergofskogo biologiceskogo Instituta\plain\fs28 ]. / \i Travaux de l' Institut biologique de P\'e9terhof\plain\fs28 . Moscow. \b 9-13/14\plain\fs28 , 1932-1935; \b 16-17\plain\fs28 , 1938-1939. (\b 15\plain\fs28 , 1935, at Leningrad and titled ******************************************************************************************************** [\i Trudy Petergofskogo biologiceskogo Instituta Leningradskogo gosudarstvennogo Universiteta\plain\fs28 ].)
\par \pard \i\b Trudy Tifliss. Bot. Sada\plain\fs28 
\par    ****************************************** [\i Trudj Tiflisskago botaniceskago Sada\plain\fs28 ]. / \i Travaux du Jardin botanique de Tiflis\plain\fs28  (from \b 22\plain\fs28 ) ****************************************** [\i Trudy Tiflisskogo botaniceskogo Sada\plain\fs28 ]. / ************************************** [\i  Thbilisis botanikuri bag\'edr sromebi\plain\fs28 ]. / \i Travaux du Jardin botanique de Tiflis\plain\fs28 . Tiflis. \b 1-20\plain\fs28 , 1895-1917; \b 21-26\plain\fs28  (= ser. 2, \b 1-6\plain\fs28 ), 1920-1933/1934. Continued as ****************************** [\i Thbilisis botanikuri sromebi\plain\fs28 ]. / ************************************** [\i Trudy -Tbilisskogo botaniceskogo Sada\plain\fs28 ]. / \i Travaux du Jardin botanique du Tibilissi\plain\fs28 , Tiflis (Tbilisi), \b 27-38\plain\fs28  ( = ser. 2, \b 7-10\plain\fs28  & \b 6-13\plain\fs28 , nos.\b  6-10\plain\fs28  being used twice), 1938-1949.
\par \pard \i\b Ucen. Zap. Khar'kovsk. Derz. Univ\plain\fs28 .
\par      ****** ******* ************ ************** ********** ***** *.*. ******* [UcenyeZapiski Khar'kovskogo gosudarstevennogo Universiteta Imeni A. M. Gor'kogo]. Proceedings of the Kharkov State University. Kharkov. 1 ~, 1935 ) . With several changes of title after 12, 1938.
\par  \i\b Ukr. Bot. Zur.\plain\fs28 
\par      ************ ********** ***** [\i Ukrajinskyji botanicnyji Zurnal\plain\fs28 ]. /\i  The Ukrainian botanical Review\plain\fs28 . Kiev. \b 1-5\plain\fs28 , 1922-1929. Continued as \i Zur. Inst. Bot. URSR,\plain\fs28  ***** ********* ******** ** **** [\i Zurnal instytutu botaniky AN URSR\plain\fs28 ]. /\i  Journal de l'Institut botanique de l'Academie des Sciences de la RSS d'Ukraine\plain\fs28 . \b 1-23\plain\fs28 , 1934-1940. Continued as\i\b  Ukr. Bot. Zur.\plain\fs28 ,  [\i Botanicnyj Zurnal\plain\fs28 ]. /\i  Journal botanique de l'Acad\'e9mie des Sciences de la RSS d'Ukraine\plain\fs28 . \b 1-12\plain\fs28 , 1940-1955. Titled *********** *********** ****** [\i Ukrajinskyji botanicnyji Zurnal\plain\fs28 ], \b 13\plain\fs28 ->, 1956-> .
\par \pard \i\b  Univ. Calif. Publ. Bot\plain\fs28 .
\par      \i University of California Publications in Botany\plain\fs28 . Berkeley, California. 1902->.
\par \i\b Univ. Colorado Stud. Biol\plain\fs28 .
\par      \i University of Colorado Studies. Series in Biology\plain\fs28 . Boulder, Colorado. \b 1\plain\fs28 ->, 1950->.
\par \i\b Univ. Izv.\plain\fs28  (\i\b Kiev\plain\fs28 )
\par     ************** ********  [\i Unyversytetskija YzveVstija\plain\fs28 ]. Kiev. \b 1-59\plain\fs28 , 1861-1919.
\par \i\b Univ. Kansas Sci. Bull.\plain\fs28 
\par      \i The Kansas University Science Bulletin.\plain\fs28  Lawrence, Kansas. \b 1-26\plain\fs28 , 1902-1939; \b 27\plain\fs28 ->, 1941->, titled \i University of Kansas Science Bulletin.\plain\fs28 
\par \pard \i\b Uppsala Univ. \'c5rsskr.\plain\fs28 
\par      \i  Uppsala Universitets \'c5rsskrift\plain\fs28 . Uppsala. 1861-> .
\par \i\b U.S. Dept. Agric. Bur. Pl. Ind. Bull\plain\fs28 .
\par      \i United States Department of Agriculture. Bureau of Plant Industry. Bulletin.\plain\fs28  Washington. 1901-1913.
\par \i\b U.S. Dept. Agric. Techn. Bull\plain\fs28 .
\par      \i United States Department of Agriculture. Technical Bulletin\plain\fs28 . Washington. 1927-> .
\par \i\b  Ukr. Bot. Zur.\plain\fs28 
\par    ************************************** [\i Ukrajinskyji botanicnyji Zurnal\plain\fs28 ]. / \i The Ukrainian botanical Review\plain\fs28 . Kiev. \b 1-5\plain\fs28 , 1922-1929. Continued as \i\b Zur. Inst. Bot. URSR\plain\fs28 , *********************************** [\i Zurnal Instytutu botaniky AN URSR\plain\fs28 ]. / \i Journal de l' Institut botanique de l'Acad\'e9mie des Sciences de la RSS d'Ukraine\plain\fs28 . \b 1-23\plain\fs28 , 1934-1940. Continued as \i\b Ukr. Bot. Zur\plain\fs28 ., ********************* [\i Botanicnyi Zunal.\plain\fs28 ] / \i Journal botanique de\'a0l' Acad\'e9mie des Sciences de la RSS d' Ukraine\plain\fs28 . Nov. ser., \b 1-12\plain\fs28 , 1940-1955. Titled ************************************** [\i Ukrajinskyji botanicnyji Zurnal\plain\fs28 ], \b 13\plain\fs28 ->, 1956->. 
\par \pard \i\b Uppsala Univ. \'c5rsskr\plain\fs28 .
\par      \i Uppsala Universitets \'c5rsskrift\plain\fs28 . Uppsala. 1861-> .
\par \i\b Univ. Izv. (Kiev)\plain\fs28 
\par   *************************** [\i Unyversytetskija  Yzvestija\plain\fs28 ]. Kiev. \b 1-59\plain\fs28 , 1861-1919.
\par \i\b Varied. Ci. Lit. Artes\plain\fs28  (\i\b Madrid\plain\fs28 )
\par      \i Variedades de Ciencias, Literatura y Artes. Madrid.\plain\b\fs28  1-2\plain\fs28 , 1803-1805.
\par \i\b Vegetatio\plain\fs28 
\par      \i Vegetatio.\plain\fs28  Den Haag. 1948-> .
\par \i\b Verh. Bot. Ver. Brandenb\plain\fs28 
\par    \i Verhandlungen des botanischen Vereins f\'fcr die Provinz Brandenburg und die angrenzenden L\'e4nder\plain\fs28 . Berlin. \b 1-115\plain\fs28 , 1859-1980. (From \b 12\plain\fs28 , 1870,\i  ...und die angrenzenden L\'e4nder\plain\fs28  is dropped; from \b 14\plain\fs28 , 1872, titled \i Verhandlungen des botanisches Vereins der Provinz Brandenburg\plain\fs28 . ) Continued as \i Verhandlungen des Berliner botanischen Vereins\plain\fs28 , \b 1\plain\fs28 ->,1982->.
\par \pard \i\b Verh. Ges. Deutsch. Naturf. \'c4rzte\plain\fs28 
\par      \i Verhandlungen der Gesellschaft deutscher Naturforscher und \'c4rzte\plain\fs28 . Leipzig, etc. \b 63\plain\fs28 ->, 1890-> .
\par \i\b Verh. Ges. Vaterl. Mus. B\'f6hm\plain\fs28 .
\par    \i Verhandlungen der Gesellschaft des vaterl\'e4ndischen Museums in B\'f6hmen\plain\fs28 . / \i Casopis Ceskeho Museum\plain\fs28 . Praha. \b l-4\plain\fs28 , 1823-1826; \b 10-34\plain\fs28 , 1832-1856. (Vols.\b  5-9\plain\fs28  not used; titled \i Monatsschrift der Gesellschaft des vaterl\'e4ndischen Museums in B\'f6hmen\plain\fs28 , 1827-1829; titled \i Jahrb\'fccher des b\'f6hmischer Museums f\'fcr Natur- und Landerkunde, Geschichte, Kunst, und Literatur\plain\fs28 , \b 1-2\plain\fs28 , 1830-1831.)
\par \pard  \i\b Verh. Holland Maatsch. Wetensch. Haarlem\plain\fs28 
\par      \i Verhandelingen uitgegeeven door de Hollandse Maatschappye der Wetenschappen te Haarlem\plain\fs28 . Haarlem. \b 1-30\plain\fs28 , 1754-1793.
\par \i\b Verh. Mitt. Siebenb. Ver. Naturw\plain\fs28 .
\par    \i Verhandlungen und Mittheilungen\plain\fs28  [\i Mitteilungen\plain\fs28 ] \i des siebenb\'fcrgischen Vereins f\'fcr Naturwissenschaften zu Hermannstadt\plain\fs28 . Hermannstadt. \b 1-90\plain\fs28 , 1850-1940; titled \i Mitteilungen der Arbeitsgemeinschaft f\'fcr Naturwissenschaften Sibiu-Hermannstadt\plain\fs28 , \b 91-92\plain\fs28 , 1941-1942.
\par \pard \i\b Verh. Naturf. Ges. Basel\plain\fs28 
\par    \i Verhandlungen der naturforschenden Gesellschaft in Basel\plain\fs28 . Basel. \b 1\plain\fs28 ->, 1854->.
\par \i\b Verh. Naturf. Ver. Br\'fcnn\plain\fs28 
\par    \i Verhandlungen des naturforschenden Vereins in Br\'fcnn\plain\fs28 . Br\'fcnn. \b 1-74\plain\fs28 , 1862-1944.
\par \i\b Verh. Schweiz. Naturf. Ges.\plain\fs28 
\par    \i Er\'f6ffnungsrede der Jahresversammlung der allgemeinen schweizerischen Gesellschaft f\'fcr die gesammten Wissenschaften\plain\fs28 . Z\'fcrich. 1817 & 1819; titled \i Discours ..., en ouvrant la premi\'e8re S\'e9ance de la R\'e9union p\'e9riodique de la Soci\'e9t\'e9 helv\'e9tique des Sciences naturelles\plain\fs28 . Lausanne. 1818 ; titled \i Discours d' Ouverture de la Session de la Soci\'e9t\'e9 helv\'e9tique des Sciences naturelles, Lausanne, 1820; titled Er\'f6ffnungs-Rede der Jahresversammlung der allgem. schweizerischen Gesellschaft f\'fcr gesammte Naturwissenschaften\plain\fs28 , Z\'fcrich. \b 7\plain\fs28 , 1821; titled\i  Er\'f6ffnungs-Rede der schweizerischen Gesellschaft f\'fcr die gesammten Naturwissenschaften\plain\fs28 , Z\'fcrich,\b  8\plain\fs28 , 1823; titled \i Kurze \'dcbersicht der Verhandlungen der allgemeinen schweizerischen Gesellschaft f\'fcr die gesammten Naturwissenschaften\plain\fs28 , Aarau,\b  9-10\plain\fs28 , 1823-1824; titled \i Verhandlungen der allgemeinen schweizerischen Gesellschaft f\'fcr die gesammten Naturwissenschaften\plain\fs28 , Solothurn, \b 11-13\plain\fs28 , 1825-1827, \b 16\plain\fs28 , 1831, \b 19\plain\fs28 , 1835, \b 21\plain\fs28 , 1837; titled \i Actes de la Soci\'e9t\'e9 helv\'e9tique des Sciences naturelles\plain\fs28 , Lausanne, \b 14-15\plain\fs28 , 1829-1830, \b 17\plain\fs28 , 1832, \b 22\plain\fs28 , 1837, \b 25\plain\fs28 , 1841, \b 28\plain\fs28 , 1845 ; titled \i Atti della Soci\'e9t\'e9 elvetica delle Scienze naturali\plain\fs28 , Lugano, \b 18\plain\fs28 , 1833 &\b  44\plain\fs28 , 1861; titled \i Verhandlungen der schweizerischen naturforschenden Gesellschaft\plain\fs28 , Basel, \b 23-24\plain\fs28 , 1838-1839, \b 26-27\plain\fs28 , 1842-1843, \b 29\plain\fs28 , 1845, \b 31-43\plain\fs28 , 1847-1860 & \b 46-140\plain\fs28 , 1863--1960 (with changes of main title and sometimes alternative titles in French and/or Italian; \b 45\plain\fs28 , Lausanne, 1862, titled \i Actes de la Soci\'e9t\'e9 suisse des Sciences naturelles\plain\fs28 ); titled \i Verhandlungen der schweizerischen naturforschenden Gesellschaft, Wissenschaftlicher Teil\plain\fs28 , Basel, \b 141-157\plain\fs28 , 1961-1977 ; titled \i Jahrbuch der schweizerischen naturforschenden Gesellschaft. Wissenschaftlicher Tei1\plain\fs28 , Bern,\b  158->\plain\fs28 , 1978->.
\par \pard \i\b Verh. Ver. Bef\'f6rd. Gartenb. Preuss\plain\fs28 .
\par      \i Verhandlungen des Vereins zur Bef\'f6rderung des Gartenbaues in den k\'f6niglich preussischen Staaten\plain\fs28 . Berlin. Ser. 1, \b 1-20\plain\fs28 , 1824 1853. Nov. ser., \b 1-7\plain\fs28 , 1853-1860.
\par \i\b Verh. Ver. Nat. Heilk. Presburg\plain\fs28 
\par     \i  Verhandlungen des Vereins fur Naturkunde zu Presburg\plain\fs28 . Presburg. Ser. 1, \b 1-5\plain\fs28 , \b 8-9\plain\fs28 , 1856-1866. Nov. ser., titled \i Verhandlungen des Vereins fur Natur- und Heilkunde zu Presburg\plain\fs28  [\i Pozsony\plain\fs28 ]. / \i A Pozsonyi term\'e9szettudom\'e1nyi es orvosi Egyesulet K\'f6zlem\'e9nyei\plain\fs28 , \b 1-23\plain\fs28 , 1871-1913. With minor changes of Hungarian title; continued under other titles.
\par \pard \i\b Verh. Zool.-Bot. Ges. Wien\plain\fs28 
\par    \i Verhandlungen des zoologisch-botanischen Vereins in Wien\plain\fs28 . Wien. \b 1-7\plain\fs28 , 1852-1857; titled \i Verhandlungen der kaiserlich-k\'f6niglichen zoologisch-botanischen Gesellschaft in Wien\plain\fs28 ,\b  8-67\plain\fs28 , 1858-1918; titled \i Verhandlungen der zoologisch-botanischen Gesellschaft in Wien\plain\fs28 , 68->,1918->.
\par \i\b Ver\'f6ff. Geobot. Inst. R\'fcbel\plain\fs28  (\i\b Z\'fcrich\plain\fs28 )
\par      \i Ver\'f6ffentlichungen des geobotanischen Institutes R\'fcbel\plain\fs28 . Z\'fcrich. 1924-> .
\par \pard \i\b Ver\'f6ff. \'dcberseemus. Bremen A\plain\fs28 
\par    \i Ver\'f6ffentlichungen aus dem \'dcbersee-Museum Bremen. Reibe A\plain\fs28 . Bremen. \b 1\plain\fs28 ->, 1952->.
\par \i\b Verz. Tausch S\'e4m. Fr\'fcchte Z\'fcrich\plain\fs28 
\par    \i Verzeichnis im Tausch abgebbarer S\'e4mereien und Fr\'fcchte des botanischen Gartens der Universit\'e4t Z\'fcrich\plain\fs28 . Z\'fcrich. 1826->. Year is used for vol. no.
\par \i\b Vestn. Kr\'e1l. Ceske: Spolecn. Nauk. Tr. Mat.-Prir.\plain\fs28 
\par     Cf. \i Sitz.-Ber. B\'f6hm. Ges. Wiss\plain\fs28 .
\par \i\b Vid. Meddel. Dansk Naturh. Foren. Kj\'f8benhavn\plain\fs28 
\par \pard    \i Videnskabelige Meddelelser fra den naturhistoriske Forening i Kj\'f6benhavn\plain\fs28 . Kj\'f6benhavn. \b 1-63\plain\fs28 , 1849-1912; titled\i  Videnskabelige Meddelelser fra dansk naturhistorisk Forening i Kj\'f8benhavn\plain\fs28 ,\b  64\plain\fs28 ->, 1913-> . Years used as vol. nos. until\b  63\plain\fs28 , 1912.
\par \i\b Vidensk. Selsk. Skr.\plain\fs28 
\par    \i Skrifter udgivne af Videnskabs-Selskabet: Christiana. Mathematisk-naturvidenskabelig Klasse\plain\fs28 . Christiania. 1894-1924.
\par \i\b Viert. Natutf. Ges. Z\'fcrich\plain\fs28 
\par \pard    \i Vierteljahrsschrift der naturforschenden Gesellschaft in Z\'fcrich\plain\fs28 . Z\'fcrich. 1->,1856->.
\par \i\b Vigne Am\'e9r. Viticult. Eur\plain\fs28 .
\par      \i La Vigne am\'e9ricaine et la Viticulture en Europe. Revue publi\'e9e par V. Pulliat et J. E. Robin sous la Direction de J. E. Planchon\plain\fs28 . Paris.\b  1-6\plain\fs28 , 1877-1882.
\par \i\b V\'edsind. \'cdslend\plain\fs28 .
\par      \i Rit V\'edsindafj\'e9lags \'cdslendinga\plain\fs28 . Akureyri. \b 1-4\plain\fs28 , 1923-1929, titled \i V\'edsindafj\'e9lags \'cdslendinga\plain\fs28 , \b 5\plain\fs28 ->, 1930-> . (From \b 2\plain\fs28 ->, 1927->, at Reykjavik.)
\par \pard \i\b Vorl. Churpf. Phys.-\'d6kon. Ges\plain\fs28 .
\par      \i Vorlesungen der kurpf\'e4lzischen /churpfalzischen physikalisch-\'f6konomischen Gesellschaft\plain\fs28 . Mannheim. \b 1-5\plain\fs28 , 1785-1791.
\par \i\b Watsonia\plain\fs28 
\par    \i Watsonia. Journal of the botanical Soeiety of the British Isles\plain\fs28 . Arbroath. \b 1\plain\fs28 ->, 1949->. (\b 3\plain\fs28 ->, 1953->, at London; \b 8-16\plain\fs28 , 1970-1987, subtitled\i  Journal and Proceedings of the botanical Society of the British Isles.\plain\fs28 )
\par \i\b Webbia\plain\fs28 
\par    \i Webbia. Raccolta di Scritti botanici pubblicati in Occasione del 50\'b0 Anniversario della Morte di Filippi Barker Webb\plain\fs28 . Firenze. \b 1-5\plain\fs28 , 1905-1923 (\i 'pubblicati... Webb'\plain\fs28  only in\b  1\plain\fs28 , 1905);\b  6\plain\fs28 ->, 1948->. (Publication suspended 1924-1947 ; from \b 39\plain\fs28 ->, 1985->, subtitled \i Rivista internazionale di Sistematica e Fitogeografia\plain\fs28 . / \i International Journal of Plant Taxonomy and Geography\plain\fs28 .)
\par \pard \i\b Wentia\plain\fs28 
\par    \i Wentia\plain\fs28 . Amsterdam. \b 1-17\plain\fs28 , 1959-1966.
\par \i\b Wiener Illustr. Garten-Zeit\plain\fs28 .
\par      \i Wiener Obst- und Gartenzeitung\plain\fs28 . Wien. \b 1-3\plain\fs28 , 1876-1878; titled \i Wiener illustrirte\plain\fs28  [\i illustrierte\plain\fs28 ] \i Garten-Zeitung. Organ der k.k. Gartenbau-Gesellschaft in Wien\plain\fs28 , \b 4-30\plain\fs28 , 1879-1905.
\par \i\b Willdenowia\plain\fs28 
\par    \i Willdenowia. Mitteilungen aus dem botanischen Garten und Museum Berlin-Dahlem\plain\fs28 . Berlin-Dahlem. \b 1\plain\fs28 (\b 2\plain\fs28 )->, 1953->. (\b 1\plain\fs28 (\b 1\plain\fs28 ) with above title, omitting \i Willdenowia\plain\fs28 .)
\par \pard \i\b Wiss. Zeitschr. Friedrich-Schiller Univ., Math.-Nat. Reihe\plain\fs28 
\par    \i Wissenschaftliche Zeitschrift der Friedrich-Schiller-Universit\'e4t Jena\plain\fs28  / \i Th\'fcringen\plain\fs28 . Jena. \b 1\plain\fs28 , 1951-1952; titled \i Wissenschaftliche Zeitschrift der Friedrich-Schiller Universit\'e4t Jena\plain\fs28  / \i Th\'fcringen. Mathematisch-naturwissenschaftliche Reihe\plain\fs28 ,\b  2\plain\fs28 ->, 1952->. (\i Th\'fcringen\plain\fs28  not in all vols.; series title becomes \i Naturwissenschaftliche Reihe\plain\fs28  from \b 33\plain\fs28 ->, 1984.)
\par \pard \i\b Wiss. Zeitschr. P\'e4dag. Hochsch. Potsdam\plain\fs28 
\par      \i Wissenschaftliche Zeitschrift der p\'e4dogogischen Hochschule Potsdam\plain\fs28 . Potsdam. 1952-> .
\par \i\b Wiss. Zeitschr. Univ. Greifswald\plain\fs28 
\par     \i  Wissenschaftliche Zeitschrift der Universit\'e4t Greifswald. Mathematisch-naturwissenschaftliche Reihe\plain\fs28 . Greifswald. \b 1-3\plain\fs28 , 1951-1954; titled \i Wissenschaftliche Zeitschrift der Ernst Moritz Arndt-Universit\'e4t Greifswald\plain\fs28 , \b 4\plain\fs28 ->, 1954-> .
\par \i\b Wiss. Zeitschr. Univ. Halle\plain\fs28 
\par \pard     \i Wissenschaftliche Zeitschrift der Martin-Luther-Universit\'e4t Halle-Wittenberg\plain\fs28 . Halle. \b 1\plain\fs28 ->, 1951->.~ (\i\b Math.-Nat. Reihe\plain\fs28 , \i Mathematisch-naturwissenschaftliche Reihe\plain\fs28 , is added to title from \b 3\plain\fs28 ->,1953->.)
\par \i\b Wochenschr. Gartn. Pflanzenk.\plain\fs28 
\par    \i Verhandlungen des Vereins zur Bef\'f6rderung des Gartenbaues in den k\'f6niglich preussischen Staaten\plain\fs28 . Berlin. \b 1-20\plain\fs28 , 1824-1853. Nov. ser. 1854-1860. (Also numbered \b 1-28\plain\fs28 .) Continued as \i Wochenschrift f\'fcr G\'e4rtnerei und Pflanzenkunde\plain\fs28 , \b 1-2\plain\fs28 , 1858-1859; titled \i Wochenschrift des Vereines zur Bef\'f6rderung des Gartenbaues in den k\'f6niglich preussischen Staaten f\'fcr G\'e4rtnerei und Pflanzenkunde\plain\fs28 , \b 3-15\plain\fs28 , 1860-1872; titled \i Monatsschrift des Vereins zur Bef\'f6rderung des Gartenbaues in den k\'f6niglich preussischen Staaten f\'fcr G\'e4rtnerei und Pflanzenkunde\plain\fs28 , \b 16-21\plain\fs28 , 1873-1878; titled \i Monatsschrift des Vereins zur Bef\'f6rderung des Gartenbaues in den k\'f6niglich preussischen Staaten und der Gesellschaft der Gartenfreunde Berlins\plain\fs28 , \b 22-24\plain\fs28 , 1879-1881; titled \i Garten-Zeitung. Monatsschrift f\'fcr G\'e4rtner und Gartenfreunde\plain\fs28 , \b 1-4\plain\fs28 , 1882-1885; titled \i Garten-Zeitung. Deutsche Wochenschrift f\'fcr G\'e4rtner und Gartenfreunde\plain\fs28 , \b 1\plain\fs28 , 1886 ; titled \i Verhandlungen des Vereins zur Bef\'f6rderung des Gartenbaues und der Gesellschaft der Gartenfreunde Berlins\plain\fs28 , 1887-1893.
\par \pard \i\b Wrightia\plain\fs28 
\par     \i  Wrightia. A botanical Journal.\plain\fs28  Dallas, Texas. 1945-> . (\b 2\plain\fs28 ->, 1959->, at Renner, Texas.)
\par \i\b Zap. Krymsk. Obsc. Estestv\plain\fs28 .
\par      ******* ********* ******** ******************** * ********* ********  [\i Zapiski krymskago Obscestva Estestvoispytatelej i Ljubitelej Prirody\plain\fs28 ]. / \i Bulletin de la Soci\'e9t\'e9 des Naturalistes et des Amis de la Nature en Crim\'e9e\plain\fs28 . Simferopol. \b 1-12\plain\fs28 , 1912-1930.
\par \i\b Zap. Novoross. Obsc. Estestv\plain\fs28 .
\par \pard      ******* *************** ******** ********************  [\i Zapiski Novorossijskago Obcestva Estestvoispytatelej\plain\fs28 ]. Odessa. \b 1-42\plain\fs28 , 1872-1918. (\b 11-42\plain\fs28 , 1886-1819, subtitled\i  M\'e9moires de la Soci\'e9t\'e9 des Naturalistes de la Nouvelle-Russie.\plain\fs28 )
\par \i\b Zeitschr. Acker-Pflanzenbau\plain\fs28 
\par      \i Zeitschrift f\'fcr Acker- und Pflanzenbau\plain\fs28 . Berlin. 1949-> .
\par \i\b Zeitschr. Bot.\plain\fs28  (\i\b Stuttgart\plain\fs28 )
\par      \i Zeitschrift f\'fcr Botatik\plain\fs28 . Jena. \b 1-52\plain\fs28 , 1909-1965. (\b 40-52\plain\fs28 , 1952-1965, at Stuttgart.) Titled \i Zeitschrift f\'fcr Pflanzenphysiologie\plain\fs28 , Stuttgart, \b 53\plain\fs28 ->, 1965-> .
\par \pard \i\b Zeitschr. Deutsch. Alpen-Ver\plain\fs28 .
\par      \i Zeitschrift. Deutscher Alpen-Verein\plain\fs28 . M\'fcnchen. \b 1-2\plain\fs28 , 187~1871. Continued as\i  Zeitschrift. Deutscher und \'f6sterreichischer Alpen-Verein\plain\fs28 , \b 3-7\plain\fs28 , 1872-1876.
\par \i\b Zeitschr. Ferdinand. Tirol (Innsbruck)\plain\fs28 
\par    \i Zeitschr. f\'fcr Tirol und Vorarlberg\plain\fs28 . Innsbruck. Ser. 1, \b 1-8\plain\fs28 , 1825-1834. Ser. 2, titled \i Neue Zeitschrift des Ferdinandeums f\'fcr Tirol und Vorarlberg\plain\fs28 , \b 1-12\plain\fs28 , 1835-1846. Ser. 3, titled\i  Zeitschrift des Ferdinandeums f\'fcr Tirol und Vorarlberg\plain\fs28 , \b 1-60\plain\fs28 , 1852-1920.
\par \pard \i\b Zeitschr. Indukt. Abstamm. Vererbungslehre\plain\fs28 
\par    \i Zeitschrift f\'fcr induktive Abstammungs- und Vererbungslehre\plain\fs28 . Berlin. \b 1-88\plain\fs28 , 1908-1957; titled \i Zeitschrift f\'fcr Vererbungslehre\plain\fs28 . \b 89\plain\fs28 ->, 1958->.
\par \i\b Zeitschr. Naturw. Abt. Deutsch. Ges. Wiss. Posen\plain\fs28 
\par      \i Zeitschrift der naturwissenschaftlichen Abteilung der deutschen Gesellschaft f\'fcr Kunst und Wissenschaft\plain\fs28 . Posen.
\par \i\b Zeitschr. Naturwiss. (Halle)\plain\fs28 
\par     \i  Zeitschrift f\'fcr die gesammten Naturwissenschaften\plain\fs28 . Halle. \b 1-54\plain\fs28 , 1853-1881; titled\i  Zeitschrift f\'fcr Naturwissenschaften\plain\fs28 , \b 55-95\plain\fs28 , 1882-1941. (Some volumes published at Berlin, Leipzig or Stuttgart.)
\par \pard \i\b Zeitschr. Sukkulentenk\plain\fs28 .
\par    \i Zeitschrift f\'fcr Sukkulentenkunde\plain\fs28 . Berlin. \b 1-3\plain\fs28 , 1923-1928.
\par \i\b Ziva\plain\fs28 
\par      \i Ziva Praha.\plain\fs28  Ser. 1, \b 1-12\plain\fs28 , 1853-1864. Ser. 2, \b 1-24\plain\fs28 , 1891-1914. Ser. 3, \b 1\plain\fs28 ->, 1953->.
\par \i\b Z\'fcchter\plain\fs28 
\par     \i  Der Z\'fcchter. Internationale Zeitschrift f\'fcr theoretische und angewandte Genetik\plain\fs28 . Berlin, Heidelberg & New York. 1929-> .
\par \i\b Zur. Inst. Bot. URSR\plain\fs28 
\par      Cf. \i Ukr. Bot. Zur\plain\fs28 .
\par \i\b Zur. Russk. Bot. Obsc\plain\fs28 .
\par \pard     ***** ******** *************** *********  [\i Zurnal russkago botaniceskago Obscestva.\plain\fs28  /\i  Journal de la Soci\'e9t\'e9 botanique de Russie\plain\fs28 . Petrograd. \b 1-16\plain\fs28 , 1916-1931.
\par \page
{\up #}{\footnote\pard\plain{\up #} H7JHOY}
\pard \b 
\par \pard\qc THE FLORA EUROPAEA ORGANIZATION\plain\fs28 
\par 
\par \pard The membership shown below is as it was constituted during the preparation of the first edition of Volume 1, which was completed in January 1963.
\par 
\par \pard\qc SPONSOR
\par \pard 
\par The Linnean Society of London
\par 
\par \pard\qc EDITORIAL COMMITTEE
\par \pard T. G. TUTIN, University of Leicester; \i Chairman \plain\fs28 
\par V. H. HEYWOOD, University of Liverpool; \i Secretary\plain\fs28 
\par N. A. BURGES, University of Liverpool
\par D. H. VALENTINE, University of Durham
\par S. M. WALTERS, University of Cambridge
\par D. A. WEBB, University of Dublin (Trinity College)
\par 
\par \pard\qc ORGANIZING COMMITTEE
\par \pard 
\par \i The above members and:\plain\fs28 
\par 
\par A. R. CLAPHAM, University of Sheffield
\par Representatives of the London Linnean Society
\par R. D. MEIKLE, Royal Botanic Gardens, Kew
\par A. MELDERIS, British Museum (Natural History),
\par 
\par \pard\qc ADVISORY EDITORS
\par \pard 
\par T. W. B\'d6CHER, Institut for Planteanatomi og Cytologie, K\'f8benhavn
\par J. E. DANDY, British Museum (Natural History), London
\par J. DOST\'c1L, Palack\'fd's University, Olomouc
\par \'86 P. FONT QUER, Instituto BOT\'c1NICO, Barcelona
\par H. GAUSSEN, Laboratoire de Botanique, Facult\'e9 des Sciences,Toulouse
\par W. L\'dcDI, Geobotanisches Forschungs-Institut R\'fcbel, Z\'fcrich
\par K. H. RECHINGER, Naturhistorisches Museum, Wien
\par \'86 B. K. SCHISCHKIN, Botaniceskie Institut Akademii Nauk S.S.S.R., Leningrad
\par SIR GEORGE TAYLOR, Royal Botanic Gardens, Kew.
\par \pard 
\par \pard\qc REGIONAL ADVISERS
\par \pard 
\par Albania                F. MARKGRAF, Z\'fcrich
\par Austria                E. JANCHEN, Wien
\par                             K.H. RECHINGER, Wien
\par Belgium               A. LAWALR\'c9E, Bruxelles
\par Bulgaria               N. STOJANOV, Sofija
\par Czechoslovakia    D.DOST\'c1L, Olomouc
\par Denmark              T. W. B\'d6CHER, K\'f8benhavn
\par Finland                 J. JALAS, Helsinki
\par France                 H. GAUSSEN, Toulouse
\par                             P. JOVET, Paris
\par Germany             H. MERXM\'dcLLER, M\'fcnchen
\par \pard                         \'86W. ROTHMALER, Greifswald
\par Greece                K.H. RECHINGER,Wien
\par Hungary              R.DE SO\'d3, Budapest
\par                          \'86S. J\'c1VORKA, Budapest
\par Iceland                I. \'d3SKARSSON, Reykjav\'edk
\par Italy                    R.E.G.PICHI-SERMOLLI, Genova
\par Jugoslavia           E. MAYER, Ljubljana
\par Netherlands         S.J. VAN OOSTSTROOM, Leiden
\par Norway               R. NORDHAGEN, Oslo
\par Poland                 B. PAWLOWSKI, Krak\'f3w
\par Portugal              A.R. PINTO DA SILVA, Sacav\'e9m
\par \pard Romania             A. BORZA, Cluj
\par                            E.I. NY\'c1R\'c1DY, Cluj
\par Spain                   E. GUINEA, Madrid
\par                            ORIOL DE BOL\'d2S, Barcelona
\par Sweden               N. HYLANDER, Uppsala
\par Switzerland         E. LANDOLT, Z\'fcrich
\par Turkey                 P. H. DAVIS, Edinburgh
\par U.S.S.R.            \'86B. K. SCHISCHKIN, Leningrad
\par                            ANDREY A. FEDOROV, Leningrad
\par 
\par \pard\qc TECHNICAL CONSULTANTS
\par 
\par A. L\'d6VE, Montreal
\par \'86W. ROTHMALER, Greifswald
\par \pard 
\par \pard\qc GEOGRAPHICAL ADVISER
\par \pard 
\par \pard\qc H. MEUSEL, Halle
\par \pard 
\par \pard\qc \b EDITORIAL COMMITTEE AS CONSTITUTED IN 1990\plain\fs28 
\par \pard 
\par N. A. BURGES, Coleraine;\i  Chairman\plain\fs28 
\par J. R. EDMONDSON, National Museums & Galleries on Merseyside; \i Secretary\plain\fs28 
\par J. R. AKEROYD, Hindolveston, Norfolk
\par F. A. BISBY, University of Southampton
\par A. O. CHATER, Natural History Museum, London
\par V. H. HEYWOOD, Richmond
\par S. L. JURY, University of Reading
\par D. M. MOORE, University of Reading
\par S. M. WALTERS, Cambridge
\par 
\par M. E. NEWTON, National Museums & Galleries on Merseyside;\i  Flora Europaea Research Officer\plain\fs28 
\par \page
{\up #}{\footnote\pard\plain{\up #} H7JHOZ}
\pard \b 
\par \pard\qc THE  FLORA  EUROPAEA  ORGANIZATION\plain\fs28 
\par 
\par \pard SPONSORS  The Linnean Society of London
\par 
\par \pard\qc EDITORIAL  COMMITTEE.
\par \pard T.G. TUTIN,  University of Leicester; Chairman
\par V. H. HEYWOOD, University of Reading; Secretary
\par N.A. BURGES, New University of Ulster
\par D.M. MOORE, University of Leicester
\par D. H. VALENTINE, University of Manchester
\par S. M. WALTERS, University of Cambridge 
\par D. A. WEBB, University of Dublin (Trinity College)
\par 
\par \pard\qc RESEARCH ASSISTANTS
\par \pard P.W. BALL, University of Liverpool
\par A.O. CHATER, University of Leicester
\par I.K. FERGUSON, British Museum (Natural History), London
\par 
\par \pard\qc ORGANIZING COMMITTEE
\par \pard The above members and:
\par A.R. CLAPHAM, University of Sheffield 
\par Representatives of the Linnean Society
\par R.D. MEIKLE, Royal Botanic Gardens, Kew
\par A.MELDERIS, British Museum (Natural History), London
\par 
\par \pard\qc ADVISORY  EDITORS
\par \pard T. W. B\'d6CHER, Institut for Planteanatomi og Cytologie, K\'f8benhavn
\par J.E. DANDY, British Museum (Natural History), London
\par J. DOST\'c1L,  Universita Palack\'e9ho , Olomouc 
\par ANDREY A. FEDOROV, Botaniceskie Institut Akademii Nauk S.S.S.R., Leningrad
\par H. GAUSSEN, Laboratoire de Botanique, Facult\'e9 des Sciences, Toulouse
\par W. L\'dcDI, Geobotanisches Forschungs-Institut R\'fcbel, Z\'fcrich
\par K.H. RECHINGER, Naturhistorisches Museum, Wien
\par SIR GEORGE  TAYLOR, Royal Botanic Gardens, Kew
\par 
\par \pard\qc  
\par \pard Albania               F. MARKGRAF, Z\'fcrich 
\par                            I. MITRUSHI, Tirana
\par Austria                F. EHRENDORFER, Graz
\par Belgium              A. LAWALR\'c9E, Bruxelles 
\par Bulgaria              N. STOJANOV, Sofija
\par                            B. KUZMANOV, Sofija
\par Czechoslovakia   J. DOST\'c1L, Olomouc
\par                            J. HOLUB, Pruhonice u Prahy
\par Denmark            A. HANSEN, K\'f8benhavn
\par Finland               J. JALAS, Helsinki 
\par France                P. DUPONT, Nantes
\par \pard                            P. JOVET, Paris 
\par                            R. de VILMORIN, Orsay
\par Germany             H. MERXM\'dcLLER, M\'fcnchen  
\par                            K. WERNER, Halle
\par Greece                K.H. RECHINGER, Wien
\par Hungary              R. de SO\'d3, Budapest
\par                            Z.E. K\'c1RP\'c1TI, Budapest 
\par Iceland               E. EINARSSON, Reykjavik
\par Italy                    G. MOGGI,Firenze
\par                            R.E.G. PICHI-SERMOLLI, Genova
\par Jugoslavia           V. BLECIC, Beograd
\par \pard                            E. MAYER, Ljubljana
\par Netherlands         S.J. VAN OOSTSTROOM, Leiden
\par Norway               R. NORDHAGEN, Oslo
\par Poland                 B. PAWLOWSKI, Krak\'f3w
\par Portugal               J. do AMARAL FRANCO, Lisboa
\par                                   (assisted by MARIA da LUZ da ROCHA AFONSO)
\par                             A.R. PINTO da SILVA,  (Oeiras)  
\par Romania              A. BORZA, Cluj
\par                          \'86 E.I.  NY\'c1R\'c1DY, Cluj 
\par Spain                   O. de BOL\'d3S, Barcelona 
\par \pard                             E. FERN\'c1NDEZ-GALIANO Sevilla
\par                             E. GUINEA, Madrid
\par Sweden               N. HYLANDER, Uppsala
\par Switzerland         E. LANDOLT, Z\'fcrich
\par Turkey                P. H. DAVIS, Edinburgh
\par U.S.S.R.              T.V. EGOROVA, Leningrad 
\par (Russia)              A.I. POJARKOVA, Leningrad
\par                            V.N. TIKHOMIROV, Moskva
\par 
\par \pard\qc TECHNICAL  CONSULTANTS
\par \pard \'c1. L\'d6VE, Boulder
\par 
\par \pard\qc GEOGRAPHICAL   ADVISER
\par \pard  H. MEUSEL, Halle-Wittenberg
\par 
\par The above lists refer to the Organization as it was constituted during the preparation of volume 2,which was completed in February 1967.
\par \b 
\par \page
{\up #}{\footnote\pard\plain{\up #} 1WJ7GSP}
\pard 
\par \pard\qc \plain\fs28  \b THE  FLORA  EUROPAEA  ORGANIZATION\plain\fs28 
\par 
\par \pard SPONSORS  The Linnean Society of London
\par 
\par \pard\qc EDITORIAL  COMMITTEE.
\par \pard T.G. TUTIN,  University of Leicester; Chairman
\par V. H. HEYWOOD, University of Reading; Secretary
\par N.A. BURGES, New University of Ulster
\par D.M. MOORE, University of Reading
\par D. H. VALENTINE, University of Manchester
\par S. M. WALTERS, University of Cambridge 
\par D. A. WEBB, University of Dublin (Trinity College)
\par 
\par \pard\qc RESEARCH ASSISTANTS
\par \pard P.W. BALL, \i Flora Europaea\plain\fs28 , at University of Liverpool (until September 1969)
\par A.O. CHATER, \i Flora Europaea\plain\fs28 , at University of Leicester 
\par R.A. DeFILIPPS, \i Flora Europaea\plain\fs28 , University of Reading
\par I.K. FERGUSON, \i Flora Europaea\plain\fs28 , at British Museum (Natural History), London (until September 1968)
\par I.B.K. RICHARDSON, \i Flora Europaea\plain\fs28 , at University of Reading
\par 
\par REPRESENTATIVES OF THE LINNEAN SOCIETY R. D. MEIKLE, Royal Botanic Gardens, Kew 
\par A. MELDERIS, British Museum (Natural History), London
\par \pard 
\par \pard\qc ADVISORY  EDITORS
\par \pard T. W. B\'d6CHER, Institut for Planteanatomi og Cytologie, K\'f8benhavn
\par A.R. CLAPHAM, University of Sheffield
\par \'86J. E. DANDY, British Museum (Natural History), London
\par J. DOST\'c1L,  Universita Palack\'e9ho, Olomouc
\par ANDREY A. FEDOROV, Akademija Nauk S.S.S.R., Leningrad
\par H.GAUSSEN, Facult\'e9 des Sciences, Toulouse 
\par M. GUINOCHET, Universit\'e9 de Paris-Sud
\par \'9cN. HYLANDER, Uppsala Universitet
\par K.H. RECHINGER, Naturhistorisches Museum, Wien 
\par SIR GEORGE  TAYLOR, Royal Botanic Gardens, Kew
\par 
\par \pard\qc REGIONAL  ADVISERS 
\par \pard Albania              F. MARKGRAF, Z\'fcrich 
\par                           I. MITRUSHI, Tirana
\par Austria               F. EHRENDORFER, Graz
\par Belgium             A. LAWALR\'c9E, Bruxelles 
\par Bulgaria             B. KUZMANOV, Sofija
\par                          \'86N. STOJANOV, Sofija
\par Czechoslovakia   J. DOST\'c1L, Olomouc (Praha)
\par                            J. HOLUB, Pruhonice u Prahy
\par Denmark            A. HANSEN, K\'f8benhavn
\par Finland               J. JALAS, Helsinki 
\par France                P. DUPONT, Nantes
\par \pard                           H. GAUSSEN, Toulouse 
\par                           P. JOVET, Paris 
\par                           R. de VILMORIN, Orsay
\par Germany           H. MERXM\'dcLLER, M\'fcnchen  
\par                          K. WERNER, Halle-Wittenberg
\par Greece              W. GREUTER, Gen\'e8ve
\par                          D. PHITOS, Patrai
\par                          K.H. RECHINGER, Wien (resigned May 1970)
\par                          H. RUNEMARK, Lund
\par Hungary           \'86Z.E. K\'c1RP\'c1TI, Budapest 
\par \pard                           R. de SO\'d3, Budapest
\par Iceland               E. EINARSSON, Reykjavik
\par Italy                   G. MOGGI,Firenze
\par                           R.E.G. PICHI-SERMOLLI, Genova
\par Jugoslavia          V. BLECIC, Beograd
\par                            E. MAYER, Ljubljana
\par Netherlands        S.J. VAN OOSTSTROOM, Leiden
\par Norway               R. NORDHAGEN, Oslo
\par Poland               \'86B. PAWLOWSKI, Krak\'f3w
\par Portugal               J. do AMARAL FRANCO, Lisboa
\par                                   (assisted by MARIA da LUZ da ROCHA AFONSO)
\par \pard                           A.R. PINTO da SILVA, Sacav\'e9m (Oeiras)  
\par Romania           \'86A. BORZA, Cluj
\par                            C. ZAHARIADI, Bucuresti (resigned September 1969)
\par Russia                 T.V. EGOROVA, Leningrad         
\par                            A.I. POJARKOVA, Leningrad
\par                            V.N. TIKHOMIROV, Moskva
\par Spain                   O. de BOL\'d3S, Barcelona 
\par                             E. FERN\'c1NDEZ-GALIANO Sevilla
\par                             E. GUINEA L\'d3PEZ, Madrid
\par \pard Sweden                B. JONSELL, Uppsala
\par Switzerland          E. LANDOLT, Z\'fcrich
\par Turkey                 P. H. DAVIS, Edinburgh
\par 
\par \pard\qc TECHNICAL  CONSULTANTS
\par \pard \'c1. L\'d6VE, University of Colorado, Boulder
\par 
\par \pard\qc GEOGRAPHICAL   ADVISER
\par \pard  H. MEUSEL, Halle-Wittenberg
\par 
\par The above lists refer to the Organization as it was constituted during the preparation of volume 3, which was completed in April 1971.
\par \b 
\par \page
{\up #}{\footnote\pard\plain{\up #} H7JHP1}
\pard 
\par \pard\qc \plain\fs28  \b THE  FLORA  EUROPAEA  ORGANIZATION\plain\fs28 
\par 
\par \pard SPONSORS  The Linnean Society of London
\par 
\par \pard\qc EDITORIAL  COMMITTEE.
\par \pard T.G. TUTIN,  University of Leicester; Chairman
\par V. H. HEYWOOD, University of Reading; Secretary
\par N.A. BURGES, New University of Ulster
\par D.M. MOORE, University of Reading
\par D. H. VALENTINE, University of Manchester
\par S. M. WALTERS, University of Cambridge 
\par D. A. WEBB, University of Dublin (Trinity College)
\par 
\par \pard\qc RESEARCH ASSISTANTS
\par \pard A.O. CHATER, \i  Flora Europaea\plain\fs28 , at University of Leicester 
\par R.A. DeFILIPPS, \i Flora Europaea\plain\fs28 , University of Reading
\par I.B.K. RICHARDSON, \i Flora Europaea\plain\fs28 , at University of Reading
\par 
\par REPRESENTATIVES OF THE LINNEAN SOCIETYR.D. MEIKLE, Royal Botanic Gardens, Kew 
\par A. MELDERIS, London
\par 
\par \pard\qc ADVISORY  EDITORS
\par \pard T. W. B\'d6CHER, Institut for Planteanatomi og Cytologie, K\'f8benhavn
\par A.R. CLAPHAM, University of Sheffield
\par \'86J. E. DANDY, British Museum (Natural History), London
\par J. DOST\'c1L,  Universita Palack\'e9ho, Olomouc
\par ANDREY A. FEDOROV, Akademija Nauk S.S.S.R., Leningrad
\par H.GAUSSEN, Facult\'e9 des Sciences, Toulouse 
\par M. GUINOCHET, Universit\'e9 de Paris-Sud
\par H. MERXM\'dcLLER, M\'fcnchen
\par J. MI\'c8GE, Gen\'e8ve
\par 
\par \pard\qc REGIONAL  ADVISERS 
\par \pard Albania              F. MARKGRAF, Z\'fcrich 
\par                           I. MITRUSHI, Tirana
\par Austria               F. EHRENDORFER, Graz
\par Belgium             A. LAWALR\'c9E, Bruxelles 
\par Bulgaria             B. KUZMANOV, Sofija
\par Czechoslovakia  J. DOST\'c1L, Olomouc (Praha)
\par                           J. HOLUB, Pruhonice u Prahy
\par Denmark           A. HANSEN, K\'f8benhavn
\par Finland              J. JALAS, Helsinki 
\par France               P. DUPONT, Nantes
\par                          P. JOVET, Paris 
\par \pard                          R. de VILMORIN, Orsay
\par Germany          H. MERXM\'dcLLER, M\'fcnchen  
\par                          K. WERNER, Halle-Wittenberg
\par Greece              W. GREUTER, Gen\'e8ve
\par                          D. PHITOS, Patrai
\par                          H. RUNEMARK, Lund
\par Hungary            R. de SO\'d3, Budapest
\par Iceland              E. EINARSSON, Reykjavik
\par Italy                  G. MOGGI,Firenze
\par                          R.E.G. PICHI-SERMOLLI, Genova
\par Jugoslavia         V. BLECIC, Beograd
\par \pard                           E. MAYER, Ljubljana
\par Netherlands        S.J. VAN OOSTSTROOM, Leiden
\par Norway              R. NORDHAGEN, Oslo
\par Poland                A. JASIEWICZ, Krak\'f3w
\par Portugal              J. do AMARAL FRANCO, Lisboa
\par                                   (assisted by MARIA da LUZ da ROCHA AFONSO)
\par                            A.R. PINTO da SILVA, Sacav\'e9m (Oeiras)  
\par Romania             G. DIHORU, Bucuresti
\par                            I. MORARIU, Bucuresti
\par Russia                 T.V. EGOROVA, Leningrad         
\par \pard                            A.I. POJARKOVA, Leningrad
\par                            V.N. TIKHOMIROV, Moskva
\par Spain                   O. de BOL\'d3S, Barcelona 
\par                             E. FERN\'c1NDEZ-GALIANO Sevilla
\par                             E. GUINEA L\'d3PEZ, Madrid
\par Sweden                B. JONSELL, Uppsala
\par Switzerland          E. LANDOLT, Z\'fcrich
\par Turkey                  P. H. DAVIS, Edinburgh
\par 
\par \pard\qc TECHNICAL  CONSULTANTS
\par \pard \'c1. L\'d6VE, University of Colorado, Boulder
\par 
\par \pard\qc GEOGRAPHICAL  ADVISER
\par \pard  H. MEUSEL, Halle-Wittenberg
\par 
\par The above lists refer to the Organization as it was constituted during the preparation of volume 4, which was completed in November 1974.
\par 
\par \page
{\up #}{\footnote\pard\plain{\up #} H7JHP2}
\pard \b 
\par \pard\qc THE  FLORA  EUROPAEA  ORGANIZATION\plain\fs28 
\par 
\par \pard SPONSORS  The Linnean Society of London
\par 
\par \pard\qc EDITORIAL  COMMITTEE.
\par \pard T.G. TUTIN,  University of Leicester; Chairman
\par V. H. HEYWOOD, University of Reading; Secretary
\par N.A. BURGES, New University of Ulster
\par D.M. MOORE, University of Reading
\par D. H. VALENTINE, University of Manchester
\par S. M. WALTERS, University of Cambridge 
\par D. A. WEBB, University of Dublin (Trinity College)
\par 
\par \pard\qc RESEARCH ASSISTANTS
\par \pard A.O. CHATER, \i  Flora Europaea\plain\fs28 , at University of Leicester 
\par I.B.K. RICHARDSON, \i Flora Europaea\plain\fs28 , at University of Reading
\par 
\par REPRESENTATIVES OF THE LINNEAN SOCIETYR.D. MEIKLE, Royal Botanic Gardens, Kew 
\par A. MELDERIS, London
\par 
\par \pard\qc ADVISORY  EDITORS
\par \pard T. W. B\'d6CHER, Institut for Planteanatomi og Cytologie, K\'f8benhavn
\par A.R. CLAPHAM, Lancaster
\par \'86J. E. DANDY, British Museum (Natural History), Tring
\par J. DOST\'c1L,  Praha
\par ANDREY A. FEDOROV, Akademija Nauk S.S.S.R., Leningrad
\par H.GAUSSEN, Facult\'e9 des Sciences, Toulouse 
\par M. GUINOCHET, Universit\'e9 de Paris-Sud
\par H. MERXM\'dcLLER, M\'fcnchen
\par J. MI\'c8GE, Gen\'e8ve
\par 
\par \pard\qc REGIONAL  ADVISERS 
\par \pard Albania              F. MARKGRAF, Z\'fcrich 
\par                           I. MITRUSHI, Tirana
\par Austria               F. EHRENDORFER, Graz
\par Belgium             A. LAWALR\'c9E, Bruxelles 
\par Bulgaria             B. KUZMANOV, Sofija
\par Czechoslovakia  J. DOST\'c1L, Praha
\par                           J. HOLUB, Pruhonice u Prahy
\par Denmark           A. HANSEN, K\'f8benhavn
\par Finland               J. JALAS, Helsinki 
\par France                P. DUPONT, Nantes
\par                           P. JOVET, Paris 
\par \pard                           R. de VILMORIN, Orsay
\par Germany            H. MERXM\'dcLLER, M\'fcnchen  
\par                           K. WERNER, Halle-Wittenberg
\par Greece               W. GREUTER, Gen\'e8ve
\par                           D. PHITOS, Patrai
\par                           H. RUNEMARK, Lund
\par Hungary             R. de SO\'d3, Budapest
\par                           A. TERP\'d3, Budapest
\par Iceland               E. EINARSSON, Reykjavik
\par Italy                   G. MOGGI,Firenze
\par                           R.E.G. PICHI-SERMOLLI, Genova
\par \pard Jugoslavia          V. BLECIC, Beograd
\par                            E. MAYER, Ljubljana
\par Netherlands        S.J. VAN OOSTSTROOM, Leiden
\par Norway               R. NORDHAGEN, Oslo
\par Poland                 A. JASIEWICZ, Krak\'f3w
\par Portugal               J. do AMARAL FRANCO, Lisboa
\par                                   (assisted by MARIA da LUZ da ROCHA AFONSO)
\par                            A.R. PINTO da SILVA, Sacav\'e9m (Oeiras)  
\par Romania             G. DIHORU, Bucuresti
\par                            I. MORARIU, Bucuresti
\par \pard Russia                 T.V. EGOROVA, Leningrad         
\par                            A.I. POJARKOVA, Leningrad
\par                            V.N. TIKHOMIROV, Moskva
\par Spain                   O. de BOL\'d3S, Barcelona 
\par                             E. FERN\'c1NDEZ-GALIANO Sevilla
\par                             E. GUINEA L\'d3PEZ, Madrid
\par Sweden                B. JONSELL, Uppsala
\par Switzerland          E. LANDOLT, Z\'fcrich
\par Turkey                 P. H. DAVIS, Edinburgh
\par 
\par \pard\qc TECHNICAL  CONSULTANTS
\par \pard \'c1. L\'d6VE, San Jos\'e9, California
\par 
\par \pard\qc GEOGRAPHICAL  ADVISER
\par \pard  H. MEUSEL, Halle-Wittenberg
\par 
\par The above lists refer to the Organization as it was constituted during the preparation of volume 5, (January 1973 to September 1977).
\par \b 
\par \page
{\up #}{\footnote\pard\plain{\up #} 31_V__R}
\pard\qc PREFACE TO VOLUME 1 (\plain\fs28 2nd ed\b .)
\par \pard \plain\fs28 
\par On 4 September 1977, a meeting was held in Cambridge of many of those associated with the \i Flora Europaea\plain\fs28  project to mark the completion of the work and to hand formally to the Cambridge University Press the manuscript of the final volume. During this meeting there were discussions on the need for revisions, for corrigenda and addenda, for a possible second edition and on the future of the Flora Europaea Organization as a whole. There was a strong feeling, particularly amongst our continental colleagues, that some way of continuing the links which had been built up through the Flora Europaea Organization, should be maintained. It was generally agreed that neither the Editorial Committee nor the Flora Europaea Organization should be disbanded but, for the time being, would go into abeyance.
\par \pard      After the proofs of Volume 5 had been checked and the other responsibilities completed, the Editorial Committee arranged for the papers associated with the Flora Europaea Organization and with the preparation of the manuscripts to be deposited in the Library of the University of Reading under the care of the University Archivist. Arrangements had already been made for the royalties from the sale of the volumes of \i Flora Europaea\plain\fs28  and associated publications to be paid into a special Trust Fund administered by the Linnean Society of London. The Editorial Committee would like to record its thanks to the Linnean Society for so ably administering the Trust Fund and for the continuing support which the Society has given in so many ways.
\par \pard       Since Volume 5 was published, many informal discussions have taken place between members of the Editorial Committee regarding the production of indices and taxonomic publications closely associated with \i Flora Europaea\plain\fs28  and, particularly, about the continually accumulating addenda and corrigenda, which were being assembled by Professors Heywood and Moore at the University of Reading. In October 1981, the Editorial Committee reassembled on a formal basis and has continued to meet at regular intervals. There was a general feeling among the members of the Committee that, if any revision were to be attempted, it would be particularly necessary for Volume 1. This was, in part, because it was the most out of date, but also because the Committee believed it to contain more errors than did later volumes. Many of these arose from the fact that the technique of making the critical synthesis, at which the Flora aimed, took some time to learn, and also from the necessity of meeting an acceptable time-schedule, which meant that some parts of the volume were written or edited in more haste than the Editorial Committee would have wished.
\par \pard       At a meeting in June 1983, the Editorial Committee discussed detailed papers prepared by members of the Committee on proposals for the revision of Volume 1. It was agreed that the Committee should undertake the responsibility itself and an outline of the procedures to be followed was agreed. The accumulated royalties in the Flora Europaea Trust Fund made it possible for the Committee to appoint an experienced full-time research worker to carry out the revision under the direction of the Committee. Dr J. R. Akeroyd was appointed, taking up his duties on 1 October 1983. His previous experience with the taxonomy and evolution of British and Mediterranean plants was, in the view of the Editorial Committee, particularly appropriate. Later, a further appointment was made, and Dr M. E. Newton began work on the Flora in February 1990. Since the publication of Volume 5, Mr A. O. Chater of the Natural History Museum, London, and Dr J. R. Edmondson of the National Museums & Galleries on Merseyside, Liverpool, have joined the Editorial Committee. It was with great regret that the members of the Organization learnt of the deaths of Professor D. H. Valentine on 10 April 1987 and Professor T. G. Tutin, F.R.S. on 7 October 1987. These colleagues both played major r\'f4les in the inception, development and subsequent successful conclusion of the Flora Europaea project.
\par \pard        Following the death of Professor Tutin, Dr N.A. Burges was appointed Chairman of the Committee, whilst Professor V.H. Heywood, who had so very ably carried out the duties of Secretary since the formation of the Committee in January 1956, was succeeded by Professor D. M. Moore in November 1986 and he, in October 1989, by Dr J. R. Edmondson. Professors Heywood and Moore both remain as members of the Committee.
\par       With the limited resources available it was impossible to continue the formal continent-wide consultation and the circulation of manuscripts in various stages of completion, valued almost as much by our European colleagues as by ourselves in the preparation of the first edition. However, many colleagues throughout Europe have significantly assisted in the revision of this volume. Throughout the revision, the Committee for Mapping the Flora of Europe, in Helsinki, has also made available a great deal of manuscript information which has proved invaluable.
\par \pard       Virtually every genus has been critically examined, and the accounts of most genera have been substantially revised. The relative amount of work undertaken by the authors involved in the revisions varies greatly and it has not been easy to indicate this succinctly in the text. The compromise decided on by the Editorial Committee has been to limit the attribution of authorship to three categories: (i) where the original author is deceased, inaccessible or did not wish to be associated with the revised account, the account is shown as 'original author (edition 1 ) revised by new contributor (edition 2) '; (ii) where a major revision has been undertaken by a new contributor with the approval of the original author, it is shown as 'original author revised by new contributor'; and (iii) where the revision has been made in collaboration with the original author, the names of both contributors are given with no reference to edition.
\par \pard       The Editorial Committee realizes that the restriction to only three categories may lead to an over-simplification of the variation in the amount of work undertaken by different contributors, but it believes this is preferable to attempting to provide a more detailed quantitative assessment which would be difficult to do with any precision. There have been instances where the Editorial Committee has found it necessary to take firm editorial action to achieve the consistency of treatment which has been such a fundamental feature of \i Flora Europaea\plain\fs28  since its inception and which experience has shown has been valued by the users of the Flora. As throughout the Flora, the Editorial Committee accepts responsibility for the accounts as published.
\par \pard        Since publication of the first edition of Volume 1 in 1964, some 250 species and 150 subspecies belonging to families in Volume 1 have been described from Europe as new to science. In addition to these, 25 species, known elsewhere, have been recorded as occurring as natives in Europe, while around 40 additional alien species have been reported as being naturalized in Europe. A critical assessment of these in accordance with the principles used throughout \i Flora Europaea\plain\fs28  has led us to include some 350 extra taxa in the new edition. At the same time, further information has enabled us to clarify many of the doubts raised in the first edition and has resulted in the deletion of about 20 taxa. Changes in taxonomy and nomenclature have been made only when there seemed to be general agreement as to their correctness by those who had studied the problem. When reasonable doubt remained, we thought it better to make no change. Although the main burden of the work in revising Volume 1 has fallen on Dr Akeroyd, the Editorial Committee has maintained a close supervision throughout.
\par \pard        In the preparation of the second edition of Volume 1 we have attempted to meet one of the most widely voiced criticisms of the first edition; that text synonymy was too often inadequate, many synonyms being restricted to the index alone. All synonyms are now cited in the text.
\par        In the first edition, separate lists were given of what were regarded as Basic Floras and Standard Floras. The inclusion of synonyms in the text and the appearance of newer works has made the distinction no longer of value. Accordingly, there is now a single list of Standard Floras which gives an indication of the source of synonyms and of the most up-to-date Floras of the various areas covered by Europaea.
\par \pard       The publication of a revised Volume 1 naturally raises the issue as to what revisions, if any, should be made of the other volumes. At the moment no decision has been taken but the matter is under active review by the Editorial Committee, the Secretariat of which is now based in the Department of Botany at Liverpool Museum, part of the National Museums & Galleries on Merseyside.
\par June 1991
\par \pard\qc 
\par \page
{\up #}{\footnote\pard\plain{\up #} 31_V__S}
\pard\qc \b PREFACE TO VOLUME 2\plain\fs28 
\par \pard 
\par The development of the Flora Europaea project was outlined in the Preface to Volume 1, and it is not necessary to recapitulate it here. It is sufficient to remind the reader of the successful publication of Volume 1, and the fulfilment of the promise to proceed as quickly as possible with Volume 2. That it has been possible to produce it in less than four years is gratifying to the Editorial Committee, and is a tribute to the unstinted collaboration of our advisers and friends in every part of Europe. We must express our gratitude here to our advisory editors and regional advisers, both old and new. The tradition of biennial Symposia has been maintained with meetings in Denmark in 1965, and in Spain in 1967.
\par \pard Since the publication of Volume 1; the Editorial Committee has been strengthened by the addition of Dr D. M. Moore; and Dr I. K. Ferguson has been appointed as a third research assistant.
\par We again record our deep gratitude to the United Kingdom Science Research Council, whose continuing financial support has made it possible to maintain our organization and secretariat, and also to appoint from 1966 the additional Research Assistant. We have also been able to invite, for periods of three months, a number of visiting bursars, who have worked at British Universities and research institutes. Each has prepared an account of a particular genus or group of species for Volume 3. Visitors to date have been Dr A. Jasiewicz (Krak\'f3w), Dr S. Kozuharov (Sofija) and Dr J. Holub (Pruhonice). The total amount of the Science Research Council grant for the period 1965-8 is \'a334,000.
\par \pard In addition to this main grant, the project has received direct and indirect financial help from several countries, among which should be mentioned The Royal Society, London, the Danish Botanical Society and the Spanish Higher Council for Scientific Research. We gratefully acknowledge the continuing sponsorship of our project by the Linnean Society of London. A committee has been set up jointly by the Society and the Flora Europaea Organizing Committee to administer, in the interests of taxonomic research on the flora of Europe, a trust fund arising from the royalties from the Flora.
\par \pard The British Museum (Natural History) has provided accommodation for Dr Ferguson; our special thanks are due to the Keeper of Botany and his staff for this and for many other favours. We are also grateful to the Director and Staff of the Herbarium and Library, Royal Botanic Gardens, Kew, for much help, willingly given ; and to institutions abroad, notably the Naturhistorisches Museum, Wien and the Komarov Botanical Institute of the Academy of Sciences, Leningrad. We should like to mention specially Mr J.E. Dandy, one of our Advisory Editors, who has played an increasingly important part as adviser on nomenclature. In addition, many botanists, not formally associated with our organization, have helped us in various ways, notably H. Runemark (Lund), S. Kozuharov (Sofija) and the late N.Y. Sandwith (Kew). P.D. Sell (Cambridge) undertook the laborious task of preparing the index for the press.
\par \pard As in Volume 1, the names of the authors primarily responsible for writing the accounts of families and genera are given in footnotes to the text. It should, however, be made clear that the Editorial Committee takes full responsibility for the form in which the text is published. Acknowledgements are due to the Universities of Cambridge, Dublin, Durham, Leicester, Liverpool and Manchester for their support in making facilities available to members of the Editorial Committee and their assistants. In particular, the University of Liverpool has continued to provide accommodation in the Hartley Botanical Laboratories for the Secretariat. We should in conclusion express om gratitude to the staff of the Secretariat, Mrs J. Beck, Mrs M.E. Donnelly and Mrs M.L. Pollard for their continuing efficiency and loyalty.
\par \page
{\up #}{\footnote\pard\plain{\up #} 31_V__T}
\pard\qc \b PREFACE TO VOLUME 3\plain\fs28 
\par \pard 
\par The publication of Volume 3 of \i Flora Europaea\b  \plain\fs28 marks another stage in the progress of this international cooperative venture. A work of this nature is the outcome of a vast fund of goodwill and collaboration which we have continued to enjoy from our friends and advisers throughout Europe.
\par It is a matter of great satisfaction to the Editorial Committee to see the many ways in which the previous two volumes of \i Flora Europaea\b  \plain\fs28 have stimulated taxonomic and floristic research in many parts of Europe. Furthermore, the project has been a source of inspiration to botanists in other continents when contemplating the production of Floras of their own regions.
\par \pard 
\par The United Kingdom Science Research Council has continued its generous financial support during the period of preparation of this volume and has enabled us to maintain our secretariat and staff as well as permitting us to invite a further number of visiting bursars, who have assisted us in preparing accounts. These visiting bursars have been Professor I.Dost\'e1l (Olomouc), Dr K. Werner (Halle), Dr Viera Fer\'e1kov\'e1 (Bratislava), Dr S.Snogerup (Lund), Professor L.Boulos (Cairo), Dr M.Kovanda (Praha), and Dr Delphine Cartier (Orsay). The total amount of the Science Research Council grant for the period 1968-72 is \'a336,560, and we wish to record our deep gratitude for this support.
\par \pard 
\par The sixth Flora Europaea symposium was held in Switzerland and France in 1970, and we are grateful to Professors J. Mi\'e8ge (Gen\'e8ve), M. Guinochet (Orsay),J.-P. Barry (Nice) and their staff for the local organization of this highly successful meeting. Financial support was received from The Royal Society, the International Union of Biological Sciences, Hoffmann-La Roche & Cie S.A., B\'e2le, Zyma S.A., Nyon, Ciba S.A., B\'e2le, and Geigy S.A., B\'e2le. Publication in 1971 of the \i Actes du VI Symposium de Flora Europaea \plain\fs28 (as \i Boissiera \plain\fs28 Volume 19), under the editorship of J. Mi\'e8ge and W. Greuter, was made possible by a grant from the Fonds National Suisse pour la R\'e9cherche Scientifique.
\par \pard 
\par Although it was our original intention to publish the whole of the \i Sympetalae\plain\fs28  as a single volume, it became evident at an early stage of preparation that such a volume would run to some 1,000 pages and would be too large to handle conveniently either editorially or physically. Accordingly it was decided to spread the \i Sympetalae\plain\fs28  over two volumes, of which this is the first. Preparation of the other part (Volume 4) covering the Plantaginales and Campanulales is already well advanced.
\par \pard The Editorial Committee has remained the same for Volume 3 as for Volume 2 but there have been changes in our team of Research Associates. Dr P. W. Ball left us in 1969 after having worked for \i Flora Europaea \plain\fs28 for\i\b  \plain\fs28 more than ten years, during which he made many contributions to the Flora and assisted with editorial and secretarial matters. Dr I.K. Ferguson also resigned, in 1968, and was replaced by Mr I. B. K. Richardson the same year. Dr Ball's successor was Dr R. A. DeFilipps who joined us in 1969.
\par \pard 
\par The Linnean Society of London have continued to act as our sponsor and have generously agreed to the publication of our series \i Notulae Systematicae ad Floram Europaeam spectantes in \plain\fs28 their Botanical Journal, following a decision to discontinue publication in \i Feddes Repertorium. \plain\fs28 Our thanks are due to the Keeper of Botany and Staff of the Department of Botany, British Museum (Natural History) for continuing to provide us and our collaborators with many facilities. We are also grateful to the Director and Staff of the Herbarium and Library, Royal Botanic Gardens, Kew, for similar assistance and advice. Other European institutions have assisted with the loan of material and given us hospitality during our visits, especially the Naturhistorisches Museum, Wien, the Conservatoire et Jardin botaniques, Gen\'e8ve, and the Istituto Botanico dell'Universit\'e0 di Firenze. To these and many other institutions we would like to express our thanks.
\par \pard Once again Mr J.E. Dandy, one of our Advisory Editors, has performed a most valuable service in checking the nomenclature of the great majority of the manuscripts and given freely of his expert advice. As in the previous volumes Mr P. D. Sell (Cambridge) has prepared the index for the press and we are indebted to him for undertaking this complex and painstaking work.
\par The names of the authors primarily responsible for the accounts of families and genera are given in footnotes. The Editorial Committee accepts full responsibility for the text as published, which may in some cases have been substantially altered in form and presentation.
\par \pard We wish to make acknowledgement to the Universities of Cambridge, Dublin, Leicester, Manchester, Reading and Ulster for kindly providing facilities for members of the Editorial Committee and their assistants. In 1968, following the acceptance of an appointment at the University of Reading by our Secretary, Professor V. H. Heywood, the Secretariat moved to Reading and is housed in the University Department of Botany.
\par Finally we wish to record our gratitude to the secretarial staff who play a key role in the production of the Flora. In Liverpool the team comprised Mrs Joan Beck, Mrs Margaret Donnelly, and Mrs Margaret Pollard. The staff at Reading are Mrs Rosa Husain and Mrs Linda Bennett. We greatly appreciate their devoted service.
\par \page
{\up #}{\footnote\pard\plain{\up #} 31_V__U}
\pard\qc \b PREFACE TO VOLUME 4
\par \plain\fs28 
\par \pard The publication of Volume 4 of \i Flora Europaea\b  \plain\fs28 completes our account of the Dicotyledonous families, leaving a final fifth volume to cover the Monocotyledones. The present volume contains many genera of exceptional taxonomic difficulty and it is in no small measure due to the unfailing cooperation and advice we have received from our many friends and advisers who make up the \i Flora Europaea\b  \plain\fs28 organization that we have been able to prepare it for publication within four years of the previous volume.
\par \pard After a modest start nearly twenty years ago, the \i Flora Europaea\b  \plain\fs28 organization is now a well-established feature of the botanical scene in Europe, and its significance has been widely appreciated in other continents. We are indebted to all our Regional Advisers and Advisory Editors for keeping faith with us year after year. To our authors we owe a special debt of gratitude for the way in which they have not only provided us with manuscripts but have accepted the very extensive modifications to which these have often been subjected during the various stages of editing. Problems of generic delimitation have been of special concern in some families in this volume and the willingness of our authors to accept, although not without extensive discussion and debate, proposals for the modification of their original generic disposition, in the interests of some degree of uniformity of treatment, has been testimony to their cooperation. As in the previous volumes, the Editorial Committee accepts full responsibility for the form in which the text appears.
\par \pard Our team of Research Associates has remained unchanged during the preparation of this volume; Dr R. DeFilipps after five years' loyal service with us has now returned to the Smithsonian Institution, Washington.
\par There has been a major change in the pattern of financial support for the project during the past years. The United Kingdom Science Research Council has provided support continuously for the project since 1959 but its final grant expired in 1973. We wish to express our profound appreciation of this outstanding support, amounting to over \'a3130,000, which made the realization of the \i Flora Europaea\b  \plain\fs28 project possible. Since 1973 we have been fortunate in obtaining grants from European sources outside the United Kingdom. The contributing bodies have been Funda\'e7\'e3o Calouste Gulbenkian; Consiglio Nazionale delle Ricerche, Italy; Fonds national de la recherche scientifique, Switzerland; Natural Science Research Council, Sweden; Consejo Superior de Investigaciones Cientificas, Spain; Trinity College, University of Dublin, Ireland; Royal Irish Academy; National Science Council, Ireland; National Research Council, Denmark; National Research Council, Iceland; M. Roger de Vilmorin, France; Goulandris Botanical Museum, Greece; Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique, France. At the time of writing \'a322,475 has been received or promised from these bodies and we are grateful to them and to our Advisers who have been instrumental in negotiating the grants. In particular we wish to acknowledge the role of the Natural Science Research Council of Sweden which has coordinated the work of seeking contributions within the West European Research Councils. A substantial grant has also been made by the \i Flora Europaea \plain\fs28 Trust Fund of the Linnean Society of London, which receives its income from the royalties from the Flora.
\par \pard The seventh \i Flora\b  \plain\i\fs28 Europaea \plain\fs28 symposium was held in Coimbra in May 1972 and was arranged through the courtesy of Professor A. Fernandes. Financial support for this very successful meeting was provided by the Instituto de Alta Cultura, the Ministry of National Education, the Mayor of Coimbra and the Sociedade Broteriana.
\par We have continued to enjoy unfailing courtesy and assistance from the Keeper and Staff of the Department of Botany, British Museum (Natural History), London, and from the Director and Staff of the Herbarium and Library, Royal Botanic Gardens, Kew. We are also grateful to many other European institutions for their help in lending us material.
\par \pard Once again we wish to acknowledge the exceedingly valuable contribution to the Flora made by Mr J.E.Dandy, one of our Advisory Editors, who has checked the nomenclature of most of the accounts in this volume and has been unsparing in his advice and suggestions. Dr W. T. Stearn has also generously given much assistance with nomenclatural problems. Other botanists who have assisted us in special ways include Mr P. D. Sell who has been responsible for the painstaking labour needed to prepare the index for the press, and Professor G. Wagenitz and Dr W. Gutermann who made valuable comments on many genera.
\par \pard The University of Reading has continued to provide accommodation for the Secretariat in the Plant Science Laboratories and has handled the financial accounts of the project without charge. The Universities of Cambridge, Dublin, Leicester, Manchester and Ulster have also supported the members of the Editorial Committee in making facilities available to them. We owe a special debt of gratitude to Mrs Rosa Husain who has run the office at the Secretariat with great efficiency and loyalty.
\par \page
{\up #}{\footnote\pard\plain{\up #} 31_V__V}
\pard\qc \b PREFACE TO VOLUME 5\plain\fs28 
\par \pard 
\par The publication of this final volume of \i Flora Europaea\b  \plain\fs28 represents a landmark in European floristics. The Editorial Committee has achieved its primary aim of producing a concise and complete Flora of the flowering plants and ferns of Europe in the shortest possible time. In practice, completion of the project has taken longer than the twelve years originally anticipated but very many problems had to be overcome, some of which are mentioned in the outline of the history of the \i Flora Europaea\b  \plain\fs28 project given below.
\par \pard This volume, devoted to the Monocotyledons, follows the same pattern as the preceding ones. Taxonomically the treatment of the Monocotyledons differs little from that of the Dicotyledons, although the pattern of variation conventionally accepted has led to the acceptance of a smaller proportion of subspecies than in previous volumes. Genera presenting special problems are few, but they include \i Allium\b  \plain\fs28 and \i Ornithogalum\b , \plain\fs28 some of the orchids, such as \i Dactylorhiza\b  \plain\fs28 and \i Ophrys\b , \plain\fs28 and some of the grasses, with \i Festuca \plain\fs28 outstanding. We are indebted to the numerous authors involved in the volume for their cooperation and understanding. Their manuscripts have been subject to the detailed editorial procedures established by the Editorial Committee over the years and it has to be reiterated that the Committee accepts full responsibility for the texts as they appear here.
\par \pard The preparation of this volume has been financed by a final grant from the UK Science Research Council, which very generously agreed, following a year of support from other European Research Councils, to guarantee sufficient funds to enable the project to be completed. The Editorial Committee wishes to express, on behalf of the botanical community, its full appreciation of the Science Research Council's financial support which it has provided since 1959 when, as the Department of Scientific and Industrial Research, it made an initial three-year grant for the project. Support on this scale for a taxonomic biological project in Europe is unprecedented and without it the \i Flora Europaea\b  \plain\fs28 organization would simply have foundered.
\par \pard The eighth and final \i Flora Europaea \plain\fs28 symposium was held in Cambridge in September 1977. Financial support was provided by the British Council, the Cambridge Philosophical Society, Cambridge University Press, the Linnean Society, the Science Research Council and the University Botanic Garden, Cambridge. It was a pleasure to welcome so many friends and colleagues to this highly successful meeting, during which the manuscript of this volume was handed over to the Press.
\par \pard The preparation of the final volume of \i Flora Europaea\b  \plain\fs28 has been undertaken with a very much reduced research and secretarial staff. Mr I.B.K. Richardson left to take up an appointment at the Herbarium, Royal Botanic Gardens, Kew in April 1976 and Mr A. O. Chater ceased his formal duties with the organization in Febmary 1977 and joined the staff of the British Museum (Natural History). Both of them have given long and loyal service to the organization, for which the Editorial Committee would like to express its deep appreciation. For the whole period of preparation of volume 5, all the secretarial and clerical duties have been undertaken single-handed by Mrs Rosa Husain. Her skill and accuracy in typing the many hundreds of pages of text in their various stages have been appreciated by all members of the organization and were a source of constant admiration on the part of the Committee. We wish to express our profound gratitude for all her untiring effort over a period of nine years.
\par \pard 
\par A special tribute must be paid to the invaluable assistance given over the years by the late Mr J. E. Dandy, former Keeper of Botany, British Museum (Natural History). He applied his unrivalled skills in nomenclature and bibliography to the checking of the manuscripts and thus added a stamp of authority in these areas which the Flora would not otherwise have possessed. The extent of his labours was known to only a few of us who would regularly see him devoting whole days, even in his retirement, to painstaking routine checking, to detecting trivial errors (themselves often inexcusable in the first place) in the places of publication and page citations, as well as in unravelling the most complex nomenclatural problems with the delicate and sure skill of a surgeon. His untimely death in 1976 robbed us of his guidance for much of Volume 5 and we have been hard pressed to fill this gap. Professor Webb and Mr Chater, with the generous assistance of members of the Kew Herbarium staff, especially Mr R. D. Meikle, and also Dr R. K. Brummitt, have borne much of the burden of this nomenclatural and bibliographical work for the greater part of Volume 5. Professor W. T. Stearn, formerly of the British Museum (Natural History), has always been ready to assist us on matters bibliographical and nomenclatural and indeed was frequently involved with Mr Dandy in sorting out some of the more abstruse problems that arose. We are also indebted to Dr C. E. Hubbard, formerly Keeper of the Herbarium at Kew, for his assistance with the Gramineae. His unrivalled knowledge of the world's grasses has been valuable in many ways, particularly in delimiting and describing the tribes.
\par \pard In a more general way we have received willing co-operation and assistance from the staff of the Herbarium and Library at both the Royal Botanic Gardens, Kew and the Department of Botany, British Museum (Natural History) during the preparation of this and previous volumes, and we wish to record our appreciation to them and to their respective Directors and Keepers.
\par The University of Reading has continued to provide accommodation for the Secretariat in the Plant Science Laboratories and has handled the financial accounts of the project without charge. The Universities of Cambridge, Dublin, Leicester, Manchester and Ulster have also supported members of the Editorial Committee in making facilities available to them.
\par \pard We are grateful for the care and skill with which the staff of the Cambridge University Press have guided our manuscripts through the various stages to publication. Without their informed interest, help and patience the Flora might never have seen the light of day and certainly would not have been so convenient to use or such a tribute to the printer's art.
\par \i Flora Europaea\b  \plain\fs28 has been from the start a cooperative venture and has depended by its very nature on its panels of Advisory Editors and Regional Advisers for advice, comments, corrections and additions to the draft manuscripts. We have been fortunate in being able to count on their support during the past twenty or so years and we are most grateful for their patience and cooperation volume after volume. Their individual contributions to the success of the project have varied widely according to circumstance and it would seem invidious to single out particular advisers; yet special mention should be made of the very great trouble taken by Professor I. do Amaral Franco and Dr J. Holub in checking almost every manuscript. The thoroughness and completeness of their work must have consumed a great deal of their time over the years and it is a pleasure to acknowledge this. It would be appropriate here to add a few words about the specialized duties of the members of the Editorial Committee, as distinct from family editorships. Professor Webb has from an early stage been responsible for the thankless task of editing the geographical information and later the ecological data. This has involved a great deal of very expert checking and revision of every single manuscript. Chromosome data have been the responsibility of Dr Walters and then Professor Moore. Mr Chater has undertaken the checking of citations for Volumes 2-5 and has performed the exceedingly intricate task of compiling Appendices I-III, which have attracted almost universal praise. Professor Heywood has had the responsibility since the inception of the project for running the Secretariat and for the general administration of the organization, a task in which Professor Moore has also shared in recent years.
\par \pard The compilation of the index of each volume has been entrusted to Mr P. D. Sell, who has undertaken it with characteristic thoroughness. Finally we should like to acknowledge all those people and organizations who have assisted us with finance or by their general support and encouragement. \i Flora Europaea\b  \plain\fs28 stands as a monument to international botanical cooperation and has set its mark on the taxonomic scene. This is a source of great satisfaction to the Editorial Committee and is in no small way a reward for its
\par \pard efforts.
\par T.G.T. N.A.B. D.H.V.
\par V.H.H. D.M.M. S.M.W.
\par December 1977
\par D.A.W.
\par As Secretary to the Editorial Committee and one who has been closely involved with \i Flora Europaea\b  \plain\fs28 from its earliest beginnings, I should like to add a few words of tribute to our Chairman, Professor Tutin, whose unflagging enthusiasm and determination during the twenty-two years that the planning, writing and editing of the Flora has taken has been an inspiration to us all. Through all the many vicissitudes of this period he has steadily worked away, always retaining his enthusiasm and underlying optimism. That we have now completed our \i magnum opus\b  \plain\fs28 (an apposite term, for once) has been in no small measure due to him.
\par \pard 
\par V.H.H.
\par \page
\pard \b \page
{\up #}{\footnote\pard\plain{\up #} _D9FH0}
\pard\qc Map2\page
\pard\qc {\up #}{\footnote\pard\plain{\up #} ZMEF4K}
Map3\page
\pard\qc 
\par {\up #}{\footnote\pard\plain{\up #} 4LHS73}
INTRODUCTION TO VOLUME 1 (\plain\fs28 2nd ed.)
\par 
\par \b 
\par \pard \plain\fs28 The aim of the Flora is in general diagnostic, and the descriptions, while brief, are as far as possible comparable for related species. The Standard Floras listed on p. xxviii, and the monographs or revisions given when appropriate after the descriptions of families and genera, may assist the reader in obtaining more detailed information. Other references to published work are occasionally given in cases of special taxonomic difficulty.
\par All available evidence, morphological, geographical, ecological and cytogenetical, has been taken into consideration in delimiting species and subspecies, but they are in all cases definable in morphological terms. (Taxa below the rank of subspecies are not normally included.)
\par \pard The delimitation of genera is often controversial and the solution adopted in the Flora may on occasion be a somewhat arbitrary choice between conflicting opinions. We have endeavoured to weigh as fairly as possible the various opinions available, but there has been no consistent policy of 'lumping' or 'splitting' genera (or, for that matter, species). The order and circumscription of the Dicotyledones in the second edition follows that of the first edition, which was largely based on that of Engler-Diels, \i Syllabus der Pflanzenamilien \plain\fs28 ed. 11 (1936). It therefore differs in certain points from that of Melchior in Engler, S\i yllabus der Pflanzenfamilien \plain\fs28 ed. 12 (1964). The order of the Pteridophyta follows Derrick, Jermy and Paul, \i Sommerfeltia\b  \plain\b\fs28 6\plain\fs28 : 1-94 (1987).
\par \pard All descriptions of taxa refer only to their representatives in Europe. In practice, we have relaxed this rule slightly for families and genera to avoid giving taxonomically misleading information, particularly in those cases where a large family or genus has only one or few, perhaps atypical, members in Europe. In such cases we have occasionally added ' in European members' or a similar phrase to emphasize the atypical representation. In no case, however, should it be assumed that the description is valid for all the non-European representatives of these taxa.
\par \pard Often a short note follows the description of a species or, occasionally, a genus, containing additional information of various kinds.
\par 
\par 
\par \pard\qc \i (a) Choice of language
\par 
\par \pard \plain\fs28 Much thought was given to the question of the best language for the Flora. There were many reasons in favour of English, but the alternative of Latin also had much to commend it. After consulting the Regional Advisers, we decided in favour of English. Opinion in Europe was fairly evenly divided, but it seemed likely that whereas in some European countries the professional taxonomist might prefer Latin, the general botanist and other biologists would prefer English. It was also clear that outside Europe English would be preferred. As we were anxious to make the Flora available to as wide a circle of readers as possible, we felt that these considerations were decisive.
\par \pard We have tried, however, to bear in mind throughout the writing and editing of the work that it will be used by many readers whose knowledge of English is very imperfect. For this reason we have restricted ourselves to a much smaller technical vocabulary than is usual, believing that the gain in ease of understanding would offset the small loss of precision sometimes involved. For the same reason, in most cases where there are two English words with the same meaning, we have preferred the one derived from a Latin root. A glossary has been added, whose purpose is not the usual one of explaining technical terms in simple language (which is impracticable on an international basis), but of giving a Latin equivalent of those English words which are important for an understanding of the text, and which differ substantially from their Latin equivalents. We have also provided a short fist of English definitions of those terms which experience has shown to be open to misconstruction.
\par \pard Place-names used in the summary of geographical distribution have been given in their English form when they refer to independent States or to such geographical features of Europe as transcend national boundaries. All other place-names are given in the language of the country concerned. Thus we write \i Sweden, Ukraine, Danube, Alps, Mediterranean, \plain\fs28 but \i Corse, Kriti, Rodopi Planina, Ahvenanmaa. Macedonia \plain\fs28 is written in its English form if reference is intended to the whole of the region that has traditionally been known by that name; but the Jugoslav and Greek administrative units are referred to as \i Makedonija \plain\fs28 and \i Makedhonia \plain\fs28 respectively.
\par \pard In transliteration from Cyrillic characters we have, as far as place-names and titles of publications are concerned, followed the ISO system recommended in the UNESCO \i Bulletin for Libraries \plain\fs28 10: 136-137 (1956). This is almost identical with the system recommended by Paclt in \i Taxon \plain\fs28 2: 159 (1953). Both are based essentially on the conventions of Serbo-Croat and, although the number of diacritical signs which they require is an undoubted disadvantage, they are the only systems which have any real claim to be considered international, all others in current use being based frankly on the acceptance of German or English conventions of pronunciation. With personal names, however, we have been influenced by the fact that Russian botanists, in transliterating their own names, usually follow German conventions; we have therefore followed the list of transliterations given in the index-volume (1962) to \i Not. Syst. (Leningrad)/Botaniceskie Materialj, \plain\fs28 and have transliterated personal names which do not occur in this list according to the same conventions.
\par \pard In transliterating place-names from Greek characters we have, except for omitting the accents, followed \i The Times Atlas of the World, Mid-Century Edition, \plain\fs28 vol. 4 (London, 1956).
\par 
\par 
\par \pard\qc \i (b) Delimitation of Europe
\par 
\par \pard \plain\fs28 We have tried as far as possible to interpret ' Europe' for the purposes of this Flora in its traditional sense. There is no doubt that phytogeographically a more natural unit would be a Greater Europe', bounded by the Sahara desert and the great deserts of Asia, and including, therefore, North Africa and much of south-west Asia. But to have attempted to cover this area would have more than doubled our task and would have meant the inclusion of a disproportionately large number of plants whose status and identity are very uncertain. Europe in its traditional sense, however, is completely covered by Floras which, although they vary widely in competence and modernity, reduce the unsolved problems of taxonomy and distribution to a more reasonable compass.
\par \pard In framing a precise definition of Europe in this traditional sense three questions arose : where the boundary with Asia was to be drawn in eastern Russia and Kazakhstan; where it was to be drawn in the Aegean region; and which islands in the Mediterranean Sea and the Atlantic and Arctic Oceans were to be included.
\par Some confusion may be caused by apparent differences in geographical distribution in the former territories of the U.S.S.R. between our data and those of the invaluable \i Flora Partis europaeae URSS. \plain\fs28 In a few cases they arise from differences of taxonomic opinion, or of judgements as to the status of a plant (casual, naturalized or native), but in most cases they can be attributed to the fact that the divisions used in that Flora are, though very similar to ours, not quite identical. This is because Fedorov, in the map published in the first volume of his Flora, very sensibly made his boundaries follow the lines of administrative divisions, whereas we had perforce to follow the not very precisely indicated boundaries of Komarov's divisions, which were ecologically and floristically based and paid no attention to administrative boundaries. The most important divergences are in northern Ukraine, southern Ural, and the region north-east of St Petersburg. These are included by Fedorov in his western (Zapad), eastern (Vostok) and northern (Sever) divisions respectively, whereas for us they all fall into Rs(C). There is also a divergence in the line delimiting Europe in the cis-Caucasian region: Fedorov includes a large part of the Stavropol plateau, which we exclude from Europe.
\par \pard It will be seen that, in the Arctic, Franz Joseph Land (Zemlja Franca Josifa) and Novaja Zemlja are excluded, but the islands of Kolguev and Vajgac are included ; that the boundary is then defined by the crest of the Ural Mountains (with a small deviation eastwards near Sverdlovsk ) and the Ural River to the Caspian Sea (thus including in Europe a small portion of W. Kazakhstan) ; and that the whole of the Caucasus is excluded.
\par In the Aegean region we have drawn our boundary along the deep-water channel which separates the Sporadhes and the islands lying close to the mainland of Anatolia from those of the C. and W. Aegean. The only large islands under Greek sovereignty which are excluded from Europe are the Sporadhes, Khios, Lesvos and Rodhos. The only island under Turkish sovereignty which is included in Europe is Imroz; Bozcaada (Tenedos) and all the islands in the Sea of Marmara are excluded. Cyprus is also excluded.
\par \pard All other islands in the Mediterranean (except those administered from Africa) are included in Europe, as are also the A\'e7ores, F\'e6r\'f6er, Iceland, Jan Mayen, Bj\'f6rn\'f6ya (Bear Island) and Svalbard (Spitsbergen).
\par 
\par \pard\qc \i (c)Keys
\par \plain\fs28 
\par \pard Artificial dichotomous keys are provided within families and genera, and, where necessary, within species. A general key to families is also given (p. xxxiii), which includes all the families in the European flora, not only those described in this volume. The keys have been designed to be practical, and do not in general use characters which are difficult to observe, even if important taxonomically ; they have also been kept as brief as possible. We have tried to give characters useful both in the herbarium and in the field, though this has often been difficult because of the lack of information about field characters in certain areas, notably S.E. Europe.
\par \pard The choice of the indented key was made only after thorough discussion of the advantages and disadvantages of the many possible types of key. Briefly, the advantage of the indented key is that it may also act to some extent as a conspectus; in \i Papaver, \plain\fs28 for example, it separates the scapose species of the section \i Meconella \plain\fs28 from the rest of the genus. In this way similar species are often grouped together in the key , and identification of an unknown plant is facilitated. On the other hand, we have not hesitated to key out more than once certain taxa in which the relevant characters are variable.
\par \pard 
\par 
\par \pard\qc \i (d) Citation and synonymy
\par \plain\fs28 
\par \pard The use of abbreviations for author and place of publication has been standardized as far as possible, and lists of these abbreviations are given in Appendices I, II and III.
\par It is important to note that no attempt has been made to give a complete synonymy. Even at the binomial level, the number of names for European plants is four or five times the number of accepted species, and to include all these would be impracticable. Synonyms, whether full or partial, are given only when they are used or included in one of the Standard Floras or when they are necessary to prevent confusion. Synonyms (or the basionym) are also usually given when the combination has not previously been used in a Flora or monograph, or when the nomenclature is unfamiliar or in need of explanation. Where the name of a familiar species has been changed, an explanation has usually been published as a Notula (see Section (\i j\plain\fs28 )).
\par \pard 
\par 
\par \pard\qc \i (e) Species descriptions
\par 
\par \pard \plain\fs28 In order to save space and facilitate identification, descriptions may take the form of a comparison with another description. The conventional way of setting this out is, to give an example (p. 212):
\par 
\par \pard\qc \b 131. Silene dioica\plain\fs28  (L.) Clairv ...Like \b 129\plain\fs28  but...
\par 
\par \pard This implies that the description with which it is being compared (in this example 129) applies to this taxon but for the differences noted. It does not necessarily mean that the two taxa are similar in appearance or that they are closely related. Additional descriptive information is sometimes also given, but in separate sentences.
\par Where dimensions are given, a measurement without qualification refers to length. Two measurements connected by x indicate length followed by width. Further measurements in parentheses indicate exceptional cases outside the normal ranges.
\par \pard The \i diploid chromosome number \plain\fs28 (2n = ) is given where it has been possible to verify that the count was made on material of-known wild European origin. Details of those included in the first edition were provided by Moore, \i Flora Europaea Check-list and Chromosome Index, \plain\fs28 1982, but subsequently published data have also been included in this revision.
\par \i Ecological information \plain\fs28 has been given very sparingly, and only where the ecological characteristics of a species are clearly and concisely definable for its total European range. There is an inevitable irregularity of treatment in this respect, but here, as with chromosome number, the Editorial Committee has thought it best to include only well-verified statements.
\par \pard The description of each species is followed by an indication of its \i distribution within Europe. \plain\fs28 This falls into two parts: (1) a summary in a short phrase; (2) a list of abbreviations of 'territories' in which the species occurs. The summary phrase makes use of everyday geographical phrases and concepts such as 'W. Europe', 'the Mediterranean region', 'the Balkan peninsula', etc. Maps IV and V and the lists accompanying them indicate the interpretation which is to be put on these phrases. We would emphasize that they are to be interpreted in a simple geographical sense, and do not attempt in any way to divide Europe phytogeographically.
\par \pard Species or subspecies believed to be endemic to Europe are distinguished by a symbol (\'95) before the summary of geographical distribution.
\par A more precise indication of distribution is given by the enumeration of the 'territories' (indicated by two-letter abbreviations from Latin) in which the plant is believed to occur. The limits of these territories follow, with very few exceptions, existing political boundaries. An alternative plan, which has been suggested by several colleagues, of dividing Europe into floristic regions and ignoring political boundaries would seem at first sight to have much to commend it. It is, however, impracticable for two reasons. First, although there is some agreement as to the broad primary units into which Europe might be divided floristically, there is no agreement on where exactly their boundaries are to be drawn, or on how they should be subdivided into smaller units of convenient size. Secondly, the information is more readily available in political than in phytogeographical terms. For rare or localised species it would have been possible to translate the information from one system to the other; but for wide-ranging species, which are described as occurring, for example, \i dans une grande partie de la France mais tr\'e8s rare dans la r\'e9gion m\'e9diterran\'e9enne, \plain\fs28 the assignment to phytogeographical areas would have meant a search of local Floras and herbaria quite beyond the powers of authors or editors in the time available.
\par \pard The political divisions have, therefore, been accepted. Each territory represents a sovereign State, with the following exceptions: Certain islands or island-groups have, on account of their size, isolation, or floristic peculiarities, been treated as separate territories. These comprise Kriti, Corse, Sardegna, Sicilia, Islas Baleares, F\'e6r\'f6er, Svalbard, A\'e7ores. Malta is grouped with Sicilia, and the Channel Islands are grouped with France. Ireland and Jugoslavia are each treated as a single territory. The former U.S.S.R. has been subdivided, not according to its constituent republics (though these are often referred to by name in the geographical summary), but into six divisions formed by grouping together the floristic regions used in \i Flora URSS. \plain\fs28 A small adjustment has been made in the N. and E. Ukraine, so as to bring the boundaries as far as possible into line with those which delimit the regions used in \i Flora RSS Ucr. \plain\fs28 The territories, of course, vary greatly in size, and Ga, Hs or Ju gives much less precise information than does Fa, Rs(K) or Tu. In all cases, however, the lists provide a statement as to which national Floras should be searched for further detailed information, whether on distribution or on taxonomy.
\par \pard Occasionally the list of territories is followed by a brief indication, in parentheses, of extra European distribution. We should, perhaps, explain why we have not done this for all species - a policy that was urged on us by many of our advisers. It is simply because we found that in far too many cases the information was not available. It is one thing to note that a plant has been recorded from China, from tropical Africa, or from North America under the same name as a European species; it is a very different matter to find out whether, in the opinion of a competent taxonomist, the two should really be judged as conspecific. We therefore thought it better to say nothing than to give further currency to data which have not been critically sifted and which contain many erroneous records. The only exceptions to this rule are for plants not native in Europe and for plants of which the-European range is only a small fraction of their total area. If the only European record for a plant is from a limited area of S. Spain the reader may well wish to know whether it is strictly endemic there, or is found also across the straits in Morocco, or is a wide-ranging plant of North Africa that has established a small bridgehead in    Europe. The three cases would be distinguished thus:
\par \pard            \'95 \i S. Spain. \plain\fs28 Hs.      indicates endemic to S. Spain, \line
\i              S. Spain. \plain\fs28 Hs.       indicates found also outside Europe, \line
\i              S. Spain. \plain\fs28 Hs. (\i N\plain\fs28 . \i Africa.)      \plain\fs28 indicates widespread also in North \line
                                                         Africa; not primarily a European plant.
\par 
\par 
\par \pard\qc \i (f) Infraspecific taxa
\par 
\par \pard \plain\fs28 In general the only infraspecific taxa described and keyed in the Flora are subspecies. Any formal treatment of variation below the level of subspecies would have been impossible in a Flora of this kind ; most of the known variation of taxa is, however, covered in the descriptions. Taxa below the level of subspecies may be mentioned when, in the opinion of the author, they seem to have some claim to recognition at higher rank, but require further investigation. Conversely, many taxa published as species or subspecies, but whose claim to the rank seems-doubtful, are described or briefly mentioned in supplementary notes under the species to which they seem most closely related.
\par \pard No 'experimental' categories, such as ecotypes, are used in the Flora in a formal systematic sense, though they are sometimes mentioned in notes.
\par 
\par 
\par \pard\qc \i (g) Treatment of critical groups\plain\fs28 
\par 
\par \pard In certain cases where it is difficult to distinguish between a number of closely similar species, an \i ad hoc \plain\fs28 'group' has-been made, and these groups, not the individual species, are keyed out in the main species-key. They will serve for at least a partial identification. Following the description of a group in the text, a key to the component species is given, and they are then numbered and described so that a more detailed study, or the use of more adequate material, may enable the user to take the identification further. For example, in \i Stellaria \plain\fs28 there is the \i S. media \plain\fs28 group, which comprises the species \i S. media \plain\fs28 (L.) Vill., \i S. neglecta \plain\fs28 Weihe and \i S. pallida \plain\fs28 (Dumort.) Pire. Such groups have no taxonomic or nomenclatural status.
\par \pard For the inbreeding and apomictic groups, other \i ad hoc \plain\fs28 treatments have been devised. The general approach to such groups is set out and discussed in detail in the Report of the first Flora Europaea Symposium in \i Feddes Repert. \plain\fs28 63: 107-228 (1961).
\par 
\par 
\par \pard\qc \i (h) Treatment of hybrids
\par \plain\fs28 
\par \pard Only those few hybrids which reproduce vegetatively and are frequent over a reasonably large area (e.g. \i Sagina \plain\fs28 x \i normaniana) \plain\fs28 are described and keyed as for species. Other common hybrids may be mentioned individually in notes (e.g. \i Silene dioica \plain\fs28 x \i latifolia), \plain\fs28 or collectively for the whole genus (e.g. \i Quercus).
\par \plain\fs28 
\par 
\par \pard\qc \i (i) Alien species
\par 
\par \pard \plain\fs28 The question of which alien species should be included is a difficult one for any Flora, and the difficulty is even greater on a continental scale. We have attempted to include the following categories: 
\par              (i) Aliens which are effectively naturalized. These include garden plants which have escaped to situations not immediately adjacent to those in which they are cultivated, as well as weeds and other plants which have been accidentally introduced ; provided, in both cases, that the plant has been established in at least one station for at least 25 years, or is reported as naturalized in a number of widely separated localities. 
\par \pard             (ii) Trees or crop-plants which are planted or cultivated in continuous stands on a fairly extensive scale.
\par 
\par Casual aliens, i.e. those which do not persist without constant fresh introductions, are not included unless they have often been mistaken for a native or established species, or are for any other reason of special interest.
\par In assessing the status of a species in any part of Europe we have, however, been dependent almost entirely on the information contained in the national Floras, and it is clear that the criteria used by different authors vary widely. There are some genera, for example \i Chenopodium\plain\fs28 , in\i  \plain\fs28 which every transitional state from a casual to a well-established weed can be observed. All data on native, established or casual status relating to weeds or other 'palaeosynanthropic' plants must, therefore, be regarded only as approximate.
\par \pard 
\par 
\par \pard\qc \i (j) Publication of \plain\fs28 Novitates
\par \i 
\par \pard \plain\fs28 In the process of writing the accounts, new material requiring publication has naturally been brought together. For the publication of much of this material, the Committee made an arrangement with the Editorial Board of \i Feddes Repertorium, \plain\fs28 by which taxonomic and nomenclatural notes were published as part of a series entitled \i Notulae Systematicae ad Floram Europaeam spectantes. \plain\fs28 The first of these appeared in 1961. From 1971 such \i Notulae \plain\fs28 were published in the \i Botanical Journal of the Linnean Society. \plain\fs28 This continued until 1979, with the completion of the Flora in 1980. Beginning in 1987, a new series of \i Notulae \plain\fs28 relating to the revision of \i Flora Europaea \plain\fs28 vol. 1 has also been published in the \i Botanical Journal of the Linnean Society. \plain\fs28 By these arrangements, publication of new names or combinations in the Flora itself has been avoided.
\par \pard 
\par \page
\pard\qc \b 
\par {\up #}{\footnote\pard\plain{\up #} 4LHS74}
INTRODUCTION TO VOLUME 2
\par \plain\fs28 
\par \pard\fi375\tqc\tx565\tqc\tx6515 The aim of the Flora is in general diagnostic, and the descriptions, while brief, are as far as possible comparable for related species. The Floras listed on pp. xvii-xix, and the monographs or revisions given when appropriate after the descriptions of families and genera, may assist the reader in obtaining more detailed information. Other references to published work are occasionally given in cases of special taxonomic difficulty.
\par \pard\fi375\tx3535 All available evidence, morphological, geographical, ecological and cytogenetical, has been taken into consideration in delimiting species and subspecies, but they are in all cases definable in morphological terms. (Taxa below the rank of subspecies are not normally included.) The delimitation of genera is often controversial and the solution adopted in the Flora may be a somewhat arbitrary choice between conflicting opinions. We have endeavoured to weigh as fairly as possible the various opinions available, but there has been no consistent policy of 'lumping' or 'splitting' genera (or, for that matter, species). The order and circumscription of the families is that of Melchior in\i\b  \plain\i\fs28 Engler-Diels, Syllabus der Pflanzenfamilien ed\b . \plain\fs28 12 (1964). Since, however, this edition of the \i Syllabus\b  \plain\fs28 did\i\b  \plain\fs28 not appear until Volume 1 of the Flora had gone to press, there are some small discrepancies between the two with regard to the sequence of families. In particular, the Cactaceae and Guttiferae, which should have been in Volume 1, have been inserted in Volume 2.
\par \pard\fi375\tx3535 All descriptions of taxa refer only to their representatives in Europe. In practice, we have relaxed this rule slightly for families and genera to avoid giving taxonomically misleading information, particularly in those cases where a large family or genus has only one or few, somewhat atypical, members in Europe. In such cases we have occasionally added 'in European members' or a similar phrase to emphasize the atypical representation. It should, however, never be assumed that the description is valid for all non-European taxa.
\par \pard\fi375\tx3535 For the purpose of this Flora, we have tried as far as possible to interpret Europe in its traditional sense. The area covered is shown on the maps at the end of the volume.
\par \pard\fi375\tx3535 \i Place-names\b  \plain\fs28 used in the summaries of geographical distribution have been given in their English form when they refer to independent states (including the constituent republics of the U.S.S.R.) or to such geographical features of Europe as transcend national boundaries. All other place-names are given in the language of the country concerned. Thus we write \i Sweden, Ukraine, Danube, Alps, Mediterranean \plain\fs28 but \i Corse, Kriti, Slovenija, Rodopi Planina\b , \plain\i\fs28 Ahvenanmaa\b .\plain\fs28 
\par \pard\fi375\tx3535 In \i transliteration\plain\fs28  from\i\b  \plain\fs28 Cyrillic characters we have followed the ISO system recommended in the UNESCO \i Bulletin for Libraries\b  \plain\b\fs28 10\plain\fs28 : 137 (1956) for place-names and titles of journals. With personal names, however, we have followed the list of transliterations given in the index-volume (1962) to \i Not.\b  \plain\i\fs28 Syst. (Leningrad),\b  \plain\fs28 and have transliterated personal names which do not occur in this list according to the conventions used there.
\par \pard\fi375\tx3535 In transliterating place-names from Greek characters, we have, except for omitting the accents, followed \i The Times Atlas of the World, \plain\fs28 Mid-Century Edition, vol. 4 (London, 1956).
\par \pard\fi375\tx3535  On pp. xvii-xix, we give a list of \i Basic and Standard Floras. \plain\fs28 The reason behind the choice of these Floras was not made clear in Volume 1. Basic Floras have been chosen as widely known Floras\b  \plain\fs28 covering large or important parts of Europe. Standard Floras are considered to represent those Floras in current use and likely to be familiar to a large number of people in the particular country concerned; the list has been revised since the publication of Volume\b  1.
\par \pard\fi375\tx3535 \plain\i\fs28 Synonyms\b , \plain\fs28 whether full or partial, are given in parentheses in the text only when they are used in one of the Basic Floras or when they are necessary to prevent confusion. (For primarily Iberian and Mediterranean species, synonyms used in the \i Prodromus\b  \plain\fs28 of\i\b  \plain\fs28 Willkonnn & Lange, and the \i Supplementum\b  \plain\fs28 by Willkomm (p. xix) are also included.) Synonyms (or the basionym) are also usually given in the text when the combination has not previously been used in a Flora or monograph, or when the nomenclature is otherwise unfamiliar or in need of explanation. Otherwise, synonyms are given in the Index only; but it is important to note that no attempt has been made to give a complete synonymy. Even at the binomial level, the number of names for European plants is four or five times the number of accepted species, and to include all these would be impracticable. Thus, in addition to the binomials in the text, the Index contains all synonyms at specific rank which are used in the Basic and Standard Floras, or in cited monographs, with an indication of the species in the text under which they have been relegated to synonymy. Some subspecific names also appear in the Index. In this way, we hope that users of any Basic or Standard Flora will be able to relate the names used in their own Floras to those in \i Flora Europaea\b . \plain\fs28 In\i\b  \plain\fs28 cases where the name of a familiar species has been changed, an explanation of this is usually published as a Notula (see p. xvi).
\par \pard\fi375\tx3535 \i Citations\b  \plain\fs28 have been abbreviated,and the abbreviations used for authors and places of publication have been standardized; lists of these abbreviations are given in Appendices I, II and III. These lists apply only to the abbreviations used in Volume 2.
\par \pard\fi375\tx3535 \i Species descriptions\b  \plain\fs28 attempt to give, within the limits of length set by the Flora, both the diagnostic characters of the plant and a general idea of its appearance. Where dimensions are given, a measmement without qualification refers to length. Two measurements connected by \'d7 indicate length followed by width. Further measurements in parentheses indicate exceptional sizes outside the normal ranges. In order to save space and facilitate identification, descriptions may sometimes take the form of a comparison with another description. The conventional way of setting this out is, to give an example (p. 41):
\par \pard\qc\fi375\tx3535 \b 16. Potentilla chamissonis Hult\'e9n...\plain\fs28 Like\b  15 \plain\fs28 but\b ...
\par \pard\fi375\tx3535 \plain\fs28 This implies that the description with which it is being compared (in this example \b 15. P. nivea \plain\fs28 L.) applies to this taxon but for the differences noted. It does not necessarily mean that the two taxa are similar in general appearance. Additional descriptive information is sometimes also given, but in separate sentences.
\par \pard\fi375\tx3535 The \i diploid chromosome number\b  \plain\fs28 (2\i n\plain\fs28 = ) is given where it has been possible to verify that the count was made on material of known wild European origin. For naturalized and cultivated species, the count is from material which is naturalized or is cultivated in the way which justifies its inclusion in the Flora. It is hoped to publish separately a list of references to the data on which the published numbers are based.
\par \pard\fi375\tx3535 \i Ecological information\b  \plain\fs28 is given sparingly, and only where the ecological characteristics of a species are clearly and concisely definable for its total European range. Sometimes a general statement, applicable to a whole genus or to a group of species, is made. There is an inevitable irregularity of treatment, as in a great many cases reliable ecological information is not available.
\par \pard\fi375\tx3535  The description of each species is followed by an indication of its \i distribution within Europe. \plain\fs28 This falls into two parts: (1) a summary in a short phrase; (2) a list of abbreviations of 'territories' in which the species occurs. The summary phrase makes use of everyday geographical phrases and concepts such as 'W. Europe', 'the Mediterranean region', 'the Balkan peninsula', etc. Maps IV\b  \plain\fs28 and V and the legends accompanying them indicate the interpretation which is to be put on these phrases. We would emphasize that they are to be interpreted in a simple geographical sense, and do not attempt in any way to divide Europe phytogeographically.
\par \pard\fi375\tx3535 Species believed to be endemic to Europe are distinguished by a symbol (\'95) before the summary of geographical distribution.
\par \pard\fi375\tx3535 A more precise indication of distribution is given by the enumeration of the 'territories' (indicated by a two-letter abbreviation) in which the plant is believed to occur. The limits of these territories follow, with very few exceptions, existing political boundaries (see Map I). The territories, of course, vary greatly in size, and Ga, Hs or Ju gives very much less information than does Fa, Rs(K) or Tu. In all cases, however, the lists provide a guide to which national Floras should be searched for further detailed information, whether on taxonomy or on distribution. Occasionally, the list of territories is followed by a brief indication, in parentheses, of extra-European distribution. This is done only for plants of which the European range is but a small fraction of the total and for species not native in Europe.
\par \pard\fi375\tx3535 In general the only infraspecific taxa described and keyed in the Flora are subspecies. Any formal treatment of variation below the level of subspecies would have been impossible in a Flora of this kind; the known variation of taxa is, however, covered in the descriptions. No 'experimental' categories, such as ecotypes, are used in the Flora in a formal systematic sense, though they are sometimes mentioned in notes.
\par \pard\fi375\tx3535 Where it is difficult to distinguish between a number of closely similar species in a genus, an \i ad hoc\b  \plain\fs28 'group' has been made, and these groups, not the individual species, are keyed out in the main species key. They will serve for at least a partial identification. Following the description of a group in the text, a key to the component species is given, and they are then numbered and described, so that a more detailed study, or the availability of more adequate material, may enable the user to take the identification further. For example, in\i\b  \plain\i\fs28 Potentilla\b  \plain\fs28 there is the \i P. argentea \plain\fs28 group, which comprises the species \i P. argentea \plain\fs28 L., \i P. calabra \plain\fs28 Ten. and \i P. neglecta \plain\fs28 Baumg. Such groups have no nomenclatural status.
\par \pard\fi375\tx3535 For inbreeding and apomictic groups, other \i ad hoc\b  \plain\fs28 treatments have been devised. In Volume 2, the main problems have arisen in the Rosaceae; the methods used to overcome them are described in the notes following the descriptions of that family and the genera concerned.
\par \pard\fi375\tx3535 Only those few \i hybrids\b  \plain\fs28 which reproduce vegetatively and are frequent over a reasonably large area (e.g. \i Circaea \b \'d7 \plain\i\fs28 intermedia) \plain\fs28 are described and keyed as for species. Other common hybrids may be mentioned individually in notes (e.g. in \i Viola), \plain\fs28 or collectively for the whole genus (e.g. in \i Epilobium). \b 
\par \pard\fi375\tx3535 \plain\fs28 We have attempted to include the following categories of \i alien species\plain\fs28 :\i\b  
\par \pard\fi375\tx3535 \plain\fs28 (i) Aliens which are effectively naturalized. These include garden plants which have escaped to situations not immediately adjacent to those in which they are cultivated, as well as weeds and other plants which have been accidentally introduced; provided, in both cases, that the plant has been established in a single station for at least 25 years, or is reported as naturalized in a number of widely separated localities.
\par \pard\fi375\tx3535 (ii) Trees or crop-plants which are planted or cultivated in continuous stands on a fairly extensive scale.
\par \pard\fi375\tx3535 Casual aliens, i.e. those which do not persist without repeated re-introduction, are not included unless they have often been mistaken for a native or established species, or are for any other reason of special interest. In assessing the status of a species in any part of Europe we have, however, been dependent very largely on the information contained in the national Floras, and it is clear that the criteria used by different authors vary widely. All data on native, naturalized or casual status relating to synanthropic plants must, therefore, be regarded only as approximate.
\par \pard\fi375\tx3535 It is the policy of the Committee not to publish new names in the Flora itself. To deal with the publication of much of this material, an arrangement has been made with the Editorial Board of \i Feddes Repertorium\b , \plain\fs28 by which taxonomic and nomenclatural notes are being published as part of a series entitled \i Notulae Systematicae ad Floram Europaeam spectantes\b ; \plain\fs28 the first six parts of these have already appeared.
\par \pard\sl275\tx3535 
\par \page
\pard\qc \b 
\par {\up #}{\footnote\pard\plain{\up #} 4LHS75}
INTRODUCTION TO VOLUME 3
\par \pard\sl275\fi375 \plain\fs28 
\par \pard\fi355 The aim of the Flora is in general diagnostic, and the descriptions, while brief, are as far as possible comparable for related species. The Floras listed on pp. xix-xxi, and the monographs or revisions given when appropriate after the descriptions of families and genera, may assist the reader in obtaining more detailed information. Other references to published work are occasionally given in cases of special taxonomic difficulty.
\par \pard\fi375 All available evidence, morphological, geographical, ecological and cytogenetical, has been taken into consideration in delimiting species and subspecies, but they are in all cases definable in morphological terms. (Taxa below the rank of subspecies are not normally included.) The delimitation of genera is often controversial and the solution adopted in the Flora may be a somewhat arbitrary choice between conflicting opinions. We have endeavoured to weigh as fairly as possible the various opinions available, but there has been no consistent policy of 'lumping' or 'splitting' genera (or, for that matter, species). The order and circumscription of the families is that of Melchior in Engler, \i Syllabus der Pflanzenfamilien ed.\b  \plain\fs28 12 (1964). Since, however, this edition of the \i Syllabus \plain\fs28 did not appear until Volume 1 of the Flora had gone to press, there are some small discrepancies between the two with regard to the sequence of families. In particular, the Cactaceae and Guttiferae, which should have been in Volume 1, were inserted in Volume 2. The main text of the Rubiaceae will appear in Volume 4, as noted on p. 73.
\par \pard\fi375 All descriptions of taxa refer only to their representatives in Europe. In practice, we have relaxed this rule slightly for families and genera to avoid giving taxonomically misleading information, particularly in those cases where a large family or genus has only one or few, somewhat atypical, members in Europe. In such cases we have occasionally added 'in European members' or a similar phrase to emphasize the atypical representation. It should, however, never be assumed that the description is valid for all non-European taxa.
\par \pard\fi375 For the purpose of this Flora, we have tried as far as possible to interpret Europe in its traditional sense. The area covered is shown on the maps at the end of the volume.
\par \i Place-names\b  \plain\fs28 used in the summaries of geographical distribution have been given in their English form when they refer to independent states (including the constituent republics of the U.S.S.R.) or to such geographical features of Europe as transcend national boundaries. All other place-names are given in the language of the country concemed. Thus we write \i Sweden, Ukraine,\b  \plain\i\fs28 Danube, Alps, Mediterranean\b  \plain\fs28 but \i Corse, Kriti, Slovenija, Rodopi Planina\b , \plain\i\fs28 Ahvenanmaa.\plain\fs28 
\par \pard\fi375 In \i transliteration\plain\fs28  from\i\b  \plain\fs28 Cyrillic characters we have followed the ISO system recommended in the UNESCO \i Bulletin for Libraries\b  \plain\b\fs28 10\plain\fs28 : 136-137 (1956) for place-names and titles of journals. With personal names, however, we have followed the list of transliterations given in the index-volume (1962) to \i Not. Syst. \plain\fs28 (\i Leningrad\plain\fs28 ),\i\b  \plain\fs28 and have transliterated personal names which do not occur in this list according to the conventions used there.
\par \pard\fi375 In transliterating place-names from Greek characters, we have, except for omitting the accents, followed \i The Times Atlas of the World\b , \plain\fs28 Mid-Century Edition, vol. 4 (London, 1956).
\par On pp. xix-xxi, we give a list of \i Basic and Standard Floras\b . \plain\fs28 The reason behind the choice of these Floras was not made clear in Volume 1. Basic Floras have been chosen as widely known Floras covering large or important parts of Europe. Standard Floras are considered to represent those Floras in current use and likely to be familiar to a large number of people in the particular country concerned; the list has been revised since the publication of Volume 2.
\par \pard \i     Synonyms\b , \plain\fs28 whether full or partial, are given in parentheses in the text only when they are used in one of the Basic Floras or when they are necessary to prevent confusion. (For primarily Iberian and Mediterranean species, synonyms used in the \i Prodromus\plain\fs28  of\i\b  \plain\fs28 Willkomm & Lange, and the \i Supplementum\b  \plain\fs28 by Willkomm (p. xxi) are also included.) Synonyms (or the basionym) are also usually given in the text when the combination has not previously been used in a Flora or monograph, or when the nomenclature is otherwise unfamiliar or in need of explanation. Otherwise, synonyms are given in the Index only; but it is important to note that no attempt has been made to give a complete synonymy. Even at the binomial level, the number of names for European plants is four or five times the number of accepted species, and to include all these would be impracticable. Thus, in addition to the binomials in the text, the Index contains all synonyms at specific rank which are used in the Basic and Standard Floras, or in cited monographs, with an indication of the species in the text under which they have been relegated to synonymy. Some subspecific names also appear in the Index. In this way, we hope that users of any Basic or Standard Flora will be able to relate the names used in their own Floras to those in \i Flora Europaea\plain\fs28 . In\i\b  \plain\fs28 cases where the name of a familiar species has been changed, an explanation of this is usually published as a Notula (see p. xviii).
\par \pard\fi375 \i Citations \plain\fs28 have been abbreviated, and the abbreviations used for authors and places of publication have been standardized; lists of these abbreviations are given in Appendices I, II and III. These lists apply only to the abbreviations used in Volume 3.
\par \i Species descriptions\b  \plain\fs28 attempt to give, within the limits of length set by the Flora, both the diagnostic characters of the plant and a general idea of its appearance. Where dimensions are given, a measurement without qualification refers to length. Two measurements connected by \'d7 indicate length followed by width. Further measurements in parentheses indicate exceptional sizes outside the normal ranges. In order to save space and facilitate identification, descriptions may sometimes take the form of a comparison with another description. The conventional way of setting this out is, to give an example (p. 233):
\par \pard\fi985 \b 44. Linaria lilacina Lange...\plain\fs28 Like\b  \plain\fs28 43 but... 
\par \pard\fi375 This implies that the description with which it is being compared (in this example \b 43\plain\fs28 . \b L. anticaria \plain\fs28 Boiss. & Reuter) applies to this taxon but for the differences noted. It does not necessarily mean that the two taxa are similar in general appearance. Additional descriptive information is sometimes also given, but in separate sentences.
\par \pard\fi95 The \i diploid chromosome number \plain\fs28 (2\i n\plain\fs28 = ) is given where it has been possible to verify that the count was made on material of known wild European origin. For naturalized and cultivated species, the count is from material which is naturalized or is cultivated in the way which justifies its inclusion in the Flora. It is hoped to publish separately a list of references to the data on which the published numbers are based.
\par \pard \i Ecological information \plain\fs28 is given sparingly, and only where the ecological characteristics of a species are clearly and concisely definable for its total European range. Sometimes a general statement, applicable to a whole genus or to a group of species, is made. There is an inevitable irregularity of treatment, as in a great many cases reliable ecological information is not available.
\par  The description of each species is followed by an indication of its \i distribution within Europe. \plain\fs28 This falls into two parts: (1) a summary in a short phrase; (2) a list of abbreviations of 'territories' in which the species occurs. The summary phrase makes use of everyday geographical phrases and concepts such as 'W. Europe', 'the Meditemanean region', 'the Balkan peninsula', etc. Maps IV and V and the legends accompanying them indicate the intertation which is to be put on these phrases. We would emphasize that they are to be interpreted in a simple geographical sense, and do not attempt in any way to divide Europe phytogeographically.
\par \pard\fi375 Species believed to be endemic to Europe are distinguished by a symbol (\'95) before the summary of geographical distribution.
\par A more precise indication of distribution is given by the enumeration of the 'territories' (indicated by a two-letter abbreviation) in which the plant is believed to occur. The limits of these territories follow, with very few exceptions, existing political boundaries (see Map I). The territories, of course, vary greatly in size, and Ga, Hs or Ju gives very much less information than does Fa, Rs(K) or Tu. In all cases, however, the lists provide a guide to which national Floras should be searched for further detailed information, whether on taxonomy or on distribution. Occasionally, the list of territories is followed by a brief indication, in parentheses, of extra-European distribution. This is done only for plants of which the European range is but a small fraction of the total and for species not native in Europe.
\par \pard\fi375 In general the only infraspecific taxa described and keyed in the Flora are subspecies. Any formal treatment of variation below the level of subspecies would have been impossible in a Flora of this kind; the known variation of taxa is, however, covered in the descriptions. No 'experimental' categories, such as ecotypes, are used in the Flora in a formal systematic sense, though they are sometimes mentioned in notes.
\par \pard\fi235 Where it is difficult to distinguish between a number of closely similar species in a genus, an \i ad hoc \plain\fs28 'group' has been made, and these groups, not the individual species, are keyed out in the main species key. They will serve for at least a partial identification. Following the description of a group in the text, a key to the component species is given, and they are then numbered and described, so that a more detailed study, or the availability of more adequate material, may enable the user to take the identification further. For example, in \i Linaria \plain\fs28 there is the \i L. arvensis \plain\fs28 group, which comprises the species \i L. arvensis \plain\fs28 (L.) Desf., \i L. simplex \plain\fs28 (Willd.) DC. and \i L. micrantha \plain\fs28 (Cav.) Hoffmanns. & Link. Such groups have no nomenclatural status.
\par \pard\fi235 For some of the difficult hemiparasitic genera in the Scrophulariaceae, other \i ad hoc\b  \plain\fs28 treatments have been devised; these are described in the notes following the descriptions of the genera concerned.
\par Only those few \i hybrids \plain\fs28 which reproduce vegetatively and are frequent over a reasonably large area (e.g. \i Mentha \'d7 verticillata) \plain\fs28 are described and keyed as for species. Other common hybrids may be mentioned individually in notes (e.g. in\i  Euphrasia), or \plain\fs28 collectively for the whole genus (e.g. in \i Armeria\plain\fs28 ).\i 
\par \pard\fi235  \plain\fs28 We have attempted to include the following categories of \i alien species\plain\fs28 :\i  
\par \plain\fs28 (i) Aliens which are effectively naturalized. These include garden plants which have escaped to situations not immediately adjacent to those in which they are cultivated, as well as weeds and other plants which have been accidentally introduced; provided, in both cases, that the plant has been established in a single station for at least 25 years, or is reported as naturalized in a number of widely separated localities. 
\par \pard\fi235 (ii) Trees or crop-plants which are planted or cultivated in continuous stands on a fairly extensive scale.
\par Casual aliens, i.e. those which do not persist without repeated re-introduction, are not included unless they have often been mistaken for a native or established species, or are for any other reason of special interest. In assessing the status of a species in any part of Europe we have, however, been dependent very largely on the information contained in the national Floras, and it is clear that the criteria used by different authors vary widely. All data on native, naturalized or casual status relating to synanthropic plants must, therefore, be regarded only as approximate.
\par \pard\fi235 It is the policy of the Committee not to publish new names in the Flora itself. To deal with the publication of much of this material, an arrangement has been made with our sponsor The Linnean Society of London, by which taxonomic and nomenclatural notes are being published as part of a series entitled \i Notulae Systematicae ad Floram Europaeam spectantes\plain\fs28  in\i  \plain\fs28 the \i Botanical Journal of the Linnean Society. \plain\fs28 The \i Notulae \plain\fs28 corresponding to Volumes 1 and 2 were published in \i Feddes Repertorium.\plain\fs28 
\par \pard\sl275\fi375 
\par \page
\pard\qc 
\par {\up #}{\footnote\pard\plain{\up #} 4LHS76}
\b INTRODUCTION TO VOLUME 4\plain\fs28 
\par \pard\fi-895 
\par \pard\fi175 The aim of the Flora is in general diagnostic, and the descriptions, while brief, are as far as possible comparable for related species. The Floras listed on pp. xix-xxi, and the monographs or revisions given when appropriate after the descriptions of families and genera, may assist the reader in obtaining more detailed information. Other references to published work are occasionally given in cases of special taxonomic difficulty.
\par All available evidence, morphological, geographical, ecological and cytogenetical, has been taken into consideration in delimiting species and subspecies, but they are in all cases definable in morphological terms. (Taxa below the rank of subspecies are not normally included.) The delimitation of genera is often controversial and the solution adopted in the Flora may be a somewhat arbitrary choice between conflicting opinions. We have endeavoured to weigh as fairly as possible the various opinions available, but there has been no consistent policy of 'lumping' or 'splitting' genera (or, for that matter, species). The order and circumscription of the families is that of Melchior in\b  \plain\fs28 Engler,\b  \plain\i\fs28 Syllabus\b  \plain\i\fs28 der Pflanzenfamilien\b  \plain\fs28 ed. 12\b  (\plain\fs28 1964\b ). \plain\fs28 This volume contains the second part of the Sympetalae (Plantaginales-Campanulales), the first part having appeared in Volume 3 with the exception of the Rubiaceae, which is placed at the head of this volume.
\par \pard\fi175 All descriptions of taxa refer only to their representatives in Europe. In practice, we have relaxed this rule slightly for families and genera to avoid giving taxonomically misleading information, particularly in those cases where a large family or genus has only one or few, somewhat atypical, members in Europe. In such cases we have occasionally added 'in European members' or a similar phrase to emphasize the atypical representation. It should, however, never be assumed that the description is valid for all non-European taxa.
\par \pard\fi175 For the purpose of this Flora, we have tried as far as possible to interpret Europe in its traditional sense. The area covered is shown on the maps at the end of the volume.
\par \i Place-names \plain\fs28 used in the summaries of geographical distribution have been given in their English form when they refer to independent states (including the constituent republics of the U.S.S.R.) or to such geographical features of Europe as transcend national boundaries. All other place-names are given in the language of the country concerned. Thus we write\b  \plain\i\fs28 Sweden, Ukraine, Danube, Alps, Mediterranean \plain\fs28 but\b  \plain\i\fs28 Corse, Kriti, Slovenija, Rodopi Planina, Ahvenanmaa.\plain\b\fs28 
\par \pard\fi175 \plain\fs28 In \i transliteration \plain\fs28 from Cyrillic characters we have followed the ISO\b  \plain\fs28 system recommended in the\b  \plain\fs28 UNESCO \i Bulletin for Libraries\b  \plain\b\fs28 10:\plain\fs28  136-137\b  (\plain\fs28 1956\b ) \plain\fs28 for place-names and titles of journals. With personal names, however, we have followed the list of transliterations given in the index-volume (1962) to \i Not. Syst.\plain\fs28  (\i Leningrad\plain\fs28 ),\i  \plain\fs28 and have transliterated personal names which do not occur in this list according to the conventions used there.
\par \pard\fi175 In transliterating place-names from Greek characters, we have, except for omitting the accents, followed \i The Times Atlas of the World,\b  \plain\fs28 Mid-Century Edition, vol. 4 (London, 1956).
\par On pp. xix-xxi, we give a list of \i Basic and Standard Floras. \plain\fs28 Basic Floras have been chosen as widely known Floras covering large or important parts of Europe. Standard Floras are considered to represent those Floras in current use and likely to be familiar to a large number of people in the particular country concerned; the list has been revised since the publication of Volume 3.
\par \pard\fi175 \i Synonyms, \plain\fs28 whether full or partial, are given in parentheses in the text only when they are used in one of the Basic Floras or when they are necessary to prevent confusion. (For primarily Iberian and Mediterranean species, synonyms used in the \i Prodromus \plain\fs28 of Willkomm & Lange, and the \i Supplementum \plain\fs28 by Willkomm (p.xxi) are also included.) Synonyms (or the basionym) are also usually given in the text when the combination has not previously been used in a Flora or monograph, or when the nomenclature is otherwise unfamiliar or in need of explanation. Otherwise, synonyms are given in the Index only ; but it is important to note that no attempt has been made to give a complete synonymy. Even at the binomial level, the number of names for European plants is four or five times the number of accepted species, and to include all these would be impracticable. Thus, in addition to the binomials in the text, the Index contains all synonyms at specific rank which are used in the Basic and Standard Floras, or in cited monographs, with an indication of the\b  \plain\fs28 species in the text under which they have been relegated to synonymy. Some subspecific names also appear in the Index. In this way, we hope that users of any Basic or Standard Flora will be able to relate the names used in their own Floras to those in \i Flora Europaea. \plain\fs28 In cases where the name of a familiar species has been changed, an explanation of this is usually published as a Notula (see p. xviii).
\par \pard\fi175 \i Citations \plain\fs28 have been abbreviated, and the abbreviations used for authors and places of publication have been standardized ; lists of these abbreviations are given in Appendices I, II and III. These lists apply only to the abbreviations used in Volume 4.
\par \i Species descriptions \plain\fs28 attempt to give, within the limits of length set by the Flora, both the diagnostic characters of the plant and a general idea of its appearance. Where dimensions are given, a measurement without qualification refers to length. Two measurements connected by  \'d7 indicate length followed by width. Further measurements in parentheses indicate exceptional sizes outside the normal ranges. In order to save space and facilitate identification, descriptions may sometimes take the form of a comparison with another description. The conventional way of setting this out is, to give an example (p. 11):
\par \pard\qc\fi175 \b 42. Asperula taygetea\plain\fs28  Boiss. & Heldr....Like\b  41\plain\fs28  but...
\par \pard\fi175 This implies that the description with which it is being compared (in this example\b  41.\plain\fs28  \b Asperula incana\plain\fs28  Sibth. & Sm.) applies to this taxon but for the differences noted. It does not necessarily mean that the two taxa are similar in general appearance. Additional descriptive information is sometimes also given, but in separate sentences.\b 
\par \plain\fs28 The \i diploid chromosome number \plain\fs28 (2\i n\plain\fs28  = ) is given where it has been possible to verify that the count was made on material of known wild European origin. For naturalized and cultivated species, the count is from material which is naturalized or is cultivated in the way which justifies its inclusion in the Flora. It is hoped to publish separately a list of references to the data on which the published numbers are based.
\par \pard\fi175 \i Ecological information\b  \plain\fs28 is given sparingly, and only where the ecological characteristics of a species are clearly and concisely definable for its total European range. Sometimes a general statement, applicable to a whole genus or to a group of species, is made. There is an inevitable irregularity of treatment, as in a great many cases reliable ecological information is not available.
\par The description of each species is followed by an indication of its \i distribution within Europe\b . \plain\fs28 This falls into two parts: (1) a summary in a short phrase; (2) a list of abbreviations of 'territories' in which the species occurs. The summary phrase makes use of every-day geographical phrases and concepts such as 'W. Europe', 'the Mediterranean region', 'the Balkan peninsula', etc. Maps IV and V and the legends accompanying them indicate the interpretation which is to be put on these phrases. We would emphasize that they are to be interpreted in a simple geographical sense, and do not attempt in any way to divide Europe phytogeographically.
\par \pard\fi175 Species believed to be endemic to Europe are distinguished by a symbol (\'95) before the summary of geographical distribution.
\par A more precise indication of distribution is given by the enumeration of the 'territories' (indicated by two-letter abbreviations) in which the plant occurs. The limits of these territories follow, with very few exceptions, existing political boundaries (see Map I). The territories, of course, vary greatly in size, and Ga, Hs or Ju gives very much less information than does Fa, Rs(K) or Tu. In all cases, however, the lists provide a guide to which national Floras should be searched for further detailed information, whether on taxonomy or on distribution. Occasionally, the list of territories is followed by a brief indication, in parentheses, of extra-European distribution. This is done only for plants of which the European range is but a small fraction of the total and for species not native in Europe.
\par \pard\fi175 In general the only infraspecific taxa described and keyed in the Flora are subspecies. Any formal treatment of variation below the level of subspecies would have been impossible in a Flora of this kind; the known variation of taxa is, however, covered in the descriptions. No 'experimental' categories, such as ecotypes, are used in the Flora in a formal systematic sense, though they are sometimes mentioned in notes.
\par Where it is difficult to distinguish between a number of closely similar species in a genus, an \i ad hoc\b  \plain\fs28 'group' has been made, and these groups, not the individual species, are keyed out in the main species key. They will serve for at least a partial identification. Following the description of a group in the text, a key to the component species is given, and they are then numbered and described, so that a more detailed study, or the availability of more adequate material, may enable the user to take the identification further. For example, in\i\b  \plain\i\fs28 Asperula \plain\fs28 there is the \i A. pyrenaica\b  \plain\fs28 group, which comprises the species \i A. neilreichii\b  \plain\fs28 G. Beck, \i A.\b  \plain\i\fs28 beckiana\b  \plain\fs28 Degen, \i A. neglecta\b  \plain\fs28 Guss., \i A. rupicola\plain\b\fs28  J\plain\fs28 ordan and \i A. pyrenaica\plain\fs28  L.\i\b  \plain\fs28 Such groups have no nomenclatural status.
\par \pard\fi175 The genera \i Taraxacum\b  \plain\fs28 and \i Hieracium\b  \plain\fs28 have presented special problems in this volume, because they contain many apomictic species. As has been our practice in previous volumes, we have dealt with them in a pragmatic way. Complete accounts listing and describing all the named species, even if practicable, would have taken up too much space. What we have done is to provide a concise summary, indicating where further information can be sought. Thus in\i\b  \plain\i\fs28 Taraxacum\plain\fs28  4\i\b  \plain\fs28 species and 26 groups have been described and keyed. Under each group, a selection of its more widespread species is listed, with geographical distribution, and in each group (except the \i T. officinale\b  \plain\fs28 group) all the species described from Europe are indexed. \i Hieracium\b  \plain\fs28 is rather more complex, because of its two subgenera \i Pilosella\b  \plain\fs28 and \i Hieracium\b  \plain\fs28 which behave in rather different ways, e.g. with respect to hybridization, but here again a uniform treatment, along the lines indicated for\i  Taraxacum\b , \plain\fs28 has been worked out.
\par \pard\fi175 Only those few \i hybrids\b  \plain\fs28 which are frequent over a reasonably large area (e.g. \i Galium\b  \plain\fs28 \'d7 \i pomeranicum)\b  \plain\fs28 are described and keyed as for species. Other common hybrids may be mentioned individually in notes (e.g. in \i Cirsium\plain\fs28 )\i\b  \plain\fs28 or collectively for the whole genus (e.g.\b ).\plain\fs28  in\i  Achillea\plain\fs28 ).
\par We have attempted to include the following categories of\i  alien species\plain\fs28 :\i  
\par \plain\fs28 (i) Aliens\b  \plain\fs28 which are effectively naturalized. These include garden plants which have escaped\b  \plain\fs28 to situations not immediately adjacent to those in which they are cultivated, as well as weeds and other plants which have been accidentally introduced; provided, in both cases, that the plant has been established in a single station for at least 25 years, or is reported as naturalized in a number of widely separated localities.
\par \pard\fi175 (ii) Trees or crop-plants which are planted or cultivated in continuous stands on a\b  \plain\fs28 fairly extensive scale.\b 
\par \plain\fs28 Casual aliens, i.e. those which do not persist without repeated re-introduction, are not included unless they have often been mistaken for a native or established species, or are for any other reason of special interest. In assessing the status of a species in any part of Europe we have, however, been dependent very largely on the information contained in the national Floras, and it is clear that the criteria used by different authors vary widely. All data on native, naturalized or casual status relating to synanthropic plants must, therefore, be regarded as only approximate.
\par \pard\fi175 It is the policy of\i  \plain\fs28 the Committee not to publish new names in\i  \plain\fs28 the Flora itself. To\i  \plain\fs28 deal with the publication of much of\i  \plain\fs28 this material, an arrangement has been made with our sponsor the Linnean Society of London\i , \plain\fs28 by which taxonomic and nomenclatural notes are being published as part of\i  \plain\fs28 a series entitled \i Notulae Systematicae ad Floram Europaeam spectantes in \plain\fs28 the \i Botanical Journal of the Linnean Society. \plain\fs28 The\i  Notulae \plain\fs28 corresponding to Volumes 1 and \i 2 \plain\fs28 were published in \i Feddes Repertorium.
\par \pard\qc\li-1795\fi175 \plain\b\fs28 
\par 
\par \pard\qc 
\par \page
\pard\qc 
\par {\up #}{\footnote\pard\plain{\up #} 4LHS77}
INTRODUCTION TO VOLUME 5
\par \pard\fi275 \plain\fs28 
\par The aim of the Flora is in general diagnostic, and the descriptions, while brief, are as far as possible comparable for related species. The Floras listed on pp. xxv-xxvii, and the monographs or revisions given when appropriate after the descriptions of families and genera, may assist the reader in obtaining more detailed information. Other references to published work are occasionally given in cases of special taxonomic difficulty.
\par All available evidence, morphological, geographical, ecological and cytogenetical, has been taken into consideration in delimiting species and subspecies, but they are in all cases definable in morphological terms. (Taxa below the rank of subspecies are not nomally included.) The delimitation of genera is often controversial and the solution adopted in the Flora may be a somewhat arbitrary choice between conflicting opinions. We have endeavoured to weigh as fairly as possible the various opinions available, but there has been no consistent policy of 'lumping' or 'splitting' genera (or, for that matter, species). The order and circumscription of the families is, with few small exceptions, that of\b  \plain\fs28 Melchior in\b  \plain\fs28 Engler,\b  \plain\i\fs28 Syllabus der Pflanzenfamilien ed. \plain\fs28 12\b  (\plain\fs28 1964\b ).
\par \pard\fi275 \plain\fs28 All descriptions of taxa refer only to their representatives in Europe. In practice, we have relaxed this rule slightly for families and genera to avoid giving taxonomically misleading information, particularly in those cases where a large family or genus has only one or few, somewhat atypical, members in Europe. In such cases we have occasionally added 'in European members' or a similar phrase to emphasize the atypical representation. It should, however, never be assumed that the description is valid for all non-European taxa.
\par \pard\fi275 For the purpose of this Flora, we have tried as far as possible to interpret Europe in its traditional sense. The area covered is shown on the maps at the end of the volume.
\par \i Place-names \plain\fs28 used in the summaries of geographical distribution have been given in their English form when they refer to independent states (including the constituent republics of the U.S.S.R.) or to such geographical features of Europe as transcend national boundaries. All other place-names are given in the language of the country concerned. Thus we write \i Sweden, Ukraine, Danube, Alps, Mediterranean \plain\fs28 but \i Corse, Kriti, Slovenija, Rodopi Planina, Ahvenanmaa.\plain\fs28 
\par \pard\fi275 In\i  transliteration\plain\fs28  from\i  \plain\fs28 Cyrillic characters we have followed the ISO system recommended in the UNESCO \i Bulletin for Libraries\b  \plain\b\fs28 10\plain\fs28 : 136-137 (1956) for place-names and titles of journals. With personal names, however, we have followed the list of transliterations given in the index-volume (1962) to \i Not. Syst. (Leningrad), \plain\fs28 and have transliterated personal names which do not occur in this list according to the conventions used there.
\par In\i\b  \plain\fs28 transliterating place-names from Greek characters, we have, except for omitting the accents, followed \i The Times Atlas of the World\plain\fs28 , Mid-Century Edition, vol. 4 (London, 1956).
\par \pard\fi275 On pp. xxv-xxvii, we give a list of \i Basic and Standard Floras. \plain\fs28 Basic Floras have been chosen as widely known Floras covering large or important parts of Europe. Standard Floras are considered to represent those Floras in current use and likely to be familiar to a large number of people in the particular country concerned; the list has been revised since the publication of Volume 4. There are, of course, a number of other useful Floras which do not, for one reason or another, appear in our list; the list, however, attempts to include those which are widely consulted and which have, therefore, been used as the main source of synonyms cited in \i Flora Europaea.\plain\fs28 
\par \pard\fi275 \i Synonyms,\plain\fs28  whether full or partial, are given in parentheses in the text only when they are used in one of the Basic Floras or when they are necessary to prevent confusion. (For primarily Iberian and Mediterranean species, synonyms used in the \i Prodromus\plain\fs28  of Willkomm & Lange, and the \i Supplementum\plain\fs28  by Willkomm (p. xxvii) are also included.) Synonyms (or the basionym) are also usually given in the text when the combination has not previously been used in a Flora or monograph, or when the nomenclature is otherwise unfamiliar or in need of explanation. Otherwise, synonyms are given in the Index only; but it is important to note that no attempt has been made to give a complete synonymy. Even at\b  \plain\fs28 the binomial level, the number of names for European plants is four or five times the number of accepted species, and to include all these would be impracticable. Thus, in addition to the binomials in the text, the Index contains all synonyms at specific rank which are used in the Basic and Standard Floras, or in cited monographs, with an indication of the species in the text under which they have been relegated to synonymy. Some subspecific names also appear in the Index. In this way, we hope that users of any Basic or Standard Flora will be able to relate the names used in their own Floras to those in \i Flora Europaea\plain\fs28 . In cases where the name of a familiar species has been changed, an explanation of this is usually published as a Notula (see p. xxiv).\i 
\par \pard\fi275 Citations \plain\fs28 have been abbreviated, and the abbreviations used for authors and places of publication have been standardized; lists of these abbreviations are given in Appendices I, II\i  \plain\fs28 and III. These lists apply only to the abbreviations used in Volume 5.
\par \i Species descriptions\plain\fs28  attempt to give, within the limits of length set by the Flora, both the diagnostic characters of the plant and a general idea of its appearance. Where dimensions are given, a measurement without qualification refers to length. Two measurements connected by \'d7 indicate length followed by width. Further measurements in parentheses indicate exceptional sizes outside the normal ranges. In order to save space and facilitate identification, descriptions may sometimes take the form of a comparison with another description. The conventional way of setting this out is, to give an example (p. 77):
\par \pard\fi2125 \b 6. Leucojum valentinum\plain\fs28  Pau....Like \b 5\plain\fs28  but....
\par \pard\fi275 This implies that the description with which it is being compared (in this example \b 5.\plain\fs28  \b Leucojum nicaeense\plain\fs28  Ardoino) applies to this taxon but for the\b  \plain\fs28 differences noted. It does not necessarily mean that the two taxa are similar in general appearance. Additional descriptive information is sometimes also given, but in separate sentences.
\par The\i  diploid chromosome number\plain\fs28  (2\i n\plain\fs28  = ) is given where it has been possible to verify that the count was made on material of known wild European origin. For naturalized and cultivated species, the count is from material which is naturalized or is cultivated in the way which justifies its inclusion in the Flora. It is hoped to publish separately a list of references to the data on which the published numbers are based.
\par \pard\fi275 \i Ecological information\plain\fs28  is given sparingly, and only where the ecological characteristics of a species are clearly and concisely definable for its total European range. Sometimes a general statement, applicable to a whole genus or to a group of species, is made. There is an inevitable irregularity of treatment, as in a great many cases reliable ecological information is not available. 
\par The description of each species is followed by an indication of its\i  distribution within\plain\fs28  \i Europe\plain\fs28 . This falls into two parts: (1) a summary in a short phrase; (2) a list of abbreviations of 'territories' in which the species occurs. The summary phrase makes use of everyday geographical phrases and concepts such as 'W. Europe','the Mediterranean region', 'the Balkan peninsula', etc. Maps IV and V and the legends accompanying them indicate the interpretation which is to be put on these phrases. We would emphasize that they are to be interpreted in a simple geographical sense, and do not attempt in any way to divide Europe phytogeographically.
\par \pard\fi275 Species believed to be endemic to Europe are distinguished by a symbol (\'95) before the summary of geographical distribution.
\par \pard\fi285 A more precise indication of distribution is given by the enumeration of the 'territories' (indicated by two-letter abbreviations) in which the plant occurs. The limits of these territories follow, with very few exceptions, existing political boundaries (see Map I). The territories, of course, vary greatly in size, and Ga, Hs or Ju gives very much less information than does Fa, Rs(K) or Tu. In all cases, however, the lists provide a guide to which national Floras should be searched for further detailed information, whether on taxonomy or on distribution. Occasionally, the fist of territories is followed by a brief indication, in parentheses, of extra-European distribution. This is done only for plants of which the European range is but a small fraction of the total and for species not native in Europe.
\par \pard\fi285 We have been greatly assisted in our preparation of the accounts of the Gramineae, Cyperaceae, and a few smaller families by the publication, before this volume went to press, of the first two parts of the \i Flora Partis Europaeae URSS, \plain\fs28 under the editorship of An. A. Fedorov, and we hope that at least for these families the accuracy of our information on the taxonomy and distribution of Russian plants has been improved. It is necessary, however to draw attention to the fact that the geographical subdivisions of the USSR used by Fedorov, although modelled on those used in \i Flora Europaea, \plain\fs28 do\i  \plain\fs28 not exactly correspond. This is because Fedorov has (very sensibly) defined his areas mainly in terms of administrative boundaries, whereas we have been compelled, in order to maintain consistency with our earlier volumes, to adhere to the rather imprecisely drawn ecological boundaries put forward by Komarov in 1934. The three most important areas of divergence are in N.W. Ukraine, S. Ural, and the region north-east of Leningrad. These are included by Fedorov in his western (Zapad), eastern (Vostok) and northem (Sever) divisions respectively, whereas for us they are all included in Rs(C). Our divergences, therefore, from Fedorov's distributional data, though they sometimes arise from a difference of opinion on the status of a species (native, introduced or casual), are more often due simply to the use of slightly different geographical units.
\par \pard\fi285 In general the only infraspecific taxa described and keyed in the Flora are subspecies. Any formal treatment of variation below the level of subspecies would have been impossible in a Flora of this kind; the known variation of taxa is, however, covered in the descriptions. No 'experimental' categories, such as ecotypes, are used in the Flora in a formal systematic sense, though they are sometimes mentioned in notes.
\par Where it is difficult to distinguish between a number of closely similar species in a genus, an \i ad hoc \plain\fs28 'group' has been made, and these groups, not the individual species, are keyed out in the main species key. They will serve for at least a partial identification. Following the description of a group in the text, a key to the component species is given, and they are then numbered and described, so that a more detailed study, or the availability of more adequate material, may enable the user to take the\b  \plain\fs28 identification further. For example, in \i Carex\plain\fs28  there is the\i  C. flava\plain\fs28  group, which comprises the species \i C. flava\plain\fs28  L., \i C. lepidocarpa\plain\fs28  Tausch, \i C.\plain\fs28  \i jemtlandica\plain\fs28  (Palmgren) Palmgren, \i C. nevadensis\plain\fs28   Boiss. & Reuter,\i  C. bergrothii\plain\fs28  Palmgren, \i C. demissa\plain\fs28  Hornem. and \i C. serotina\plain\fs28  M\'e9rat. Such groups have no nomenclatural status.
\par \pard\fi285 Only those few \i hybrids\plain\fs28  which are frequent over a reasonably large area (e.g. \i Narcissus\plain\fs28  \'d7 \i medioluteus \plain\fs28 Miller) are described and keyed as for species. Other fairly common hybrids may be mentioned individually in notes (e.g. in\i  Alisma\plain\fs28 ) or collectively for the whole genus (e.g. in Dactylorhiza). We have attempted to include the following categories of \i alien species\plain\fs28 :
\par  (i) Aliens which are effectively naturalized. These include garden plants which have escaped to situations not immediately adjacent to those in which they are cultivated, as well as weeds and other plants which have been accidentally introduced; provided, in both cases, that the plant has been established in a single station for at least 25 years, or is reported as naturalized in a number of widely separated localities.
\par \pard\fi285 (ii) Trees or crop-plants which are planted or cultivated in continuous stands on a fairly extensive scale.
\par Casual aliens, i.e. those which do not persist without repeated re-introduction, are not included unless they have often been mistaken for a native or established species, or are for any other reason of special interest. In assessing the status of a species in any part of Europe we have, however, been dependent very largely on the information contained in the national Floras, and it is clear that the criteria used by different authors vary widely. All data on native, naturalized or casual status relating to synanthropic plants must, therefore, be regarded as only approximate; in particular, we have found it very difficult to distinguish casual from naturalized status in the numerous tropical and subtropical grasses which have been introduced to the Mediterranean region.
\par \pard\fi285 It is the policy of the Committee not to publish new names in the Flora itself. To deal with the publication of much of this material, an arrangement has been made with our sponsor the Linnean Society of London, by which taxonomic and nomenclatural notes are being published as part of a series entitled \i Notulae Systematicae ad Floram Europaeam spectantes\plain\fs28  in the \i Botanical Journal of the Linnean Society\plain\fs28 . The \i Notulae\plain\fs28  corresponding to Volumes 1 and 2 were published in \i Feddes Repertorium\plain\fs28 .
\par \page
{\up #}{\footnote\pard\plain{\up #} 0D5R2B}
\pard\qc \b LIST OF CONTRIBUTORS TO VOLUME 1\plain\fs28 (1st and 2nd eds.).
\par \pard 
\par The following is a list of the authors who have contributed accounts of genera in whole or in part.
\par 
\par \'86P.AELLEN, Basel
\par  J.R.AKEROYD, Hindolveston
\par  P.W. BALL, Toronto
\par  Y.I. BARKOUDAH, Damascus
\par \'86J.P.M. BRENAN, Kew
\par  R.K.BRUMMITT, Kew
\par  N.A. BURGES, Coleraine
\par  A.O. CHATER, London
\par \'86A.R. CLAPHAM, Bentham
\par  C.D.K. COOK, Z\'fcrich
\par  J.A. CRABBE, London
\par  J. CULLEN, Cambridge
\par  \'c5.E. DAHL, G\'f6teborg
\par  R. DOMAC, Zagreb
\par  T.R. DUDLEY, Jamaica Plain, Mass.
\par  C. FAVARGER, Neuch\'e2tel
\par \pard  J. DO AMARAL FRANCO, Lisboa
\par  C.R. FRASER-JENKINS, Oxford
\par  H. FREITAG,Kassel
\par  H.P. Fuchs, Wassenaar
\par \'86H. GAUSSEN, Toulouse
\par  D.V. GELTMAN, St.Petersburg
\par \'86E. GUINEA, Madrid
\par  G. HALLIDAY, Lancaster
\par  H.'T HART, Utrecht
\par  R. HENDRYCH, Praha
\par  V.H. HEYWOOD, Richmond
\par  R.N. HIGTON, Oxford
\par  D.J.N. HIND, Kew
\par  J. JALAS, Helsinki
\par  N. JARDINE, Cambridge
\par  A.C. JERMY, London
\par  B.M.G. JONES, London
\par  B. JONSELL, Stockholm
\par  J.W.K ADEREIT, Heidelberg
\par  A. LAWALR\'c9E, Bruxelles
\par  E.A. LEADLAY,London
\par \pard  M. LID\'c9N, G\'f6teborg
\par  J.D. LOVIS, Christchurch
\par  M. MAIER-STOLTE, Kassel
\par  K. MARHOLD, Bratislava
\par \'86F. MARKGRAF, Z\'fcrich
\par  J.B. MARTINEZ-LABORDE, Madrid
\par  R.D. MEIKLE, Minehead
\par \'86H. MERXM\'dcLLER, M\'fcnchen
\par  R.R. MILL, Edinburgh
\par  P. MONNIER, Montpellier
\par  A.B. MOWAT, Inverness
\par  E. NARDI, Firenze
\par \'86E.I. NY\'c1R\'c1DY, Cluj
\par  C.N. PAGE, Edinburgh
\par  J. PARNELL, Dublin
\par  A.M. PAUL, London
\par  S.PAWLOWSKA, Krak\'f3w
\par \'86B.PAWLOWSKI,Krak\'f3w
\par  A.R. PINTO DA SILVA, Sacav\'e9m
\par  C.D. PRESTON, Abbots Ripton
\par \pard  J.A. RATTER, Edinburgh
\par  K.H. RECHINGER, Wien
\par  T.C.G. RICH, Peterborough
\par \'86W. ROTHMALER, Greifswald
\par \'86O. SCHWARZ, Jena
\par  P.D. SELL, Cambridge
\par  W.T. STEARN, Kew
\par \'86T.G. TUTIN, Leicester
\par \'86D.H. VALENTINE, Manchester
\par \'86J.DE CARVALHO E VASCONCELLOS, Lisboa
\par  R. VIANE, Gent
\par  T.G. WALKER, Leeds
\par  S.M. WALTERS, Cambridge
\par  D.A. WEBB, Dublin
\par \'86F.H. WHITEHEAD, London
\par  F. WRIGLEY, Westerham
\par  M.B. WYSE JACKSON, Dublin
\par  P.S. WYSE JACKSON, Kew
\par  P.F. YEO, Cambridge
\par  F. Z\'c9SIGER, Neuch\'e2tel
\par \pard\qc \b 
\par \page
{\up #}{\footnote\pard\plain{\up #} 0D5R2C}
\pard\qc LIST OF CONTRIBUTORS TO VOLUME 2\plain\fs28 
\par \pard 
\par The following is a list of authors who have contributed accounts of genera or parts of them
\par 
\par P. W. BALL, Liverpool
\par B. BAUM, Ottawa
\par K. BROWICZ, K\'f3rnik, Poland
\par R. K. BRUMMITT, Kew
\par N. A. BURGES, Coleraine
\par M..S. CAMPBELL, Gen\'e8ve
\par J. F. M. CANNON, London
\par A. O CHATER, Leicester
\par C. D. K. COOK, Liverpool
\par D. E. COOMBE, Cambridge
\par I. CULLEN, Liverpool
\par D. M. DALBY, London
\par J. DOST\'c1L, Olomouc
\par T. T. ELKINGTON, Sheffield
\par I. K. FERGUSON, London
\par R. FERNANDES, Coimbra
\par J. DO AMARAL FRANCO, Lisboa
\par \pard D. FRODIN, Cambridge
\par W. GAJEWSKI, Warszawa
\par P. E. GIBBS, St Andrews
\par E. GUINEA, Madrid
\par A. HANSEN, K\'f8benhavn
\par Y. HESLOP-HARRISON, Madison
\par V. H. HEYWOOD, Liverpool
\par R. B. IVIMEY-COOK, Exeter
\par Z. E. K\'c1RP\'c1TI, Budapest
\par I. KL\'c1STERSK\'dd, Pruhonice u Prahy
\par P. LEINS, M\'fcnchen
\par H. MERXM\'dcLLER, M\'fcnchen
\par D. M. MOORE, Leicester
\par J. MCNEILL, Liverpool
\par G. NORDBORG, Lund
\par D.J. OCKENDON, Cambridge
\par B. PAWLOWSKI, Krak\'f3w
\par A. R. PINTO DA SILVA, Oeiras
\par M. C. F. PROCTOR, Exeter
\par P. H. RAVEN, Stanford
\par \pard N. K. B. ROBSON, London
\par A. SCHMIDT, Hamburg
\par V. SKALICK\'dd, Praha
\par A. R. SMITH, Kew
\par A. TERP\'d3, Budapest
\par C. C. TOWNSEND, Kew
\par T. G. TUTIN, Leicester
\par D. H. VALENTINE, Manchester
\par S. M. WALTERS, Cambridge
\par \'86E. F. WARBURG, Oxford
\par D. A. WEBB, Dublin
\par P. F. YEO, Cambridge
\par D. P. YOUNG, Sanderstead, United Kingdom
\par A. CHRTKOV\'c1-ZERTOVA, Pruhonice u Prahy
\par \page
{\up #}{\footnote\pard\plain{\up #} 0D5R2D}
\pard\qc \b LIST OF CONTRIBUTORS TO VOLUME 3\plain\fs28 
\par \pard 
\par The following is a list of authors who have contributed accounts of genera or parts of them
\par 
\par P. W. BALL, University of Toronto
\par J. BORJA CARBONELL, Jardin Bot\'e1nico, Madrid
\par D. BRAMWELL, University of Reading
\par R. K. BRUMMITT, Royal Botanic Gardens, Kew
\par J. M. CAMARASA, Instituto Bot\'e1nico, Barcelona
\par S.J. CASPER, Friedrich-Schiller Universit\'e4t, Jena
\par A. O. CHATER, University of Leicester
\par J. CULLEN, University of Liverpool
\par R. A. DE FILIPPS, University of Reading
\par R. DOMAC, Sveuciliste u Zagrebu
\par \pard J. M. EDMONDS, University of Cambridge
\par N. FEINBRUN, Hebrew University of Jerusalem
\par I.K.FERGUSON, Royal Botanic Gardens, Kew
\par L. F. FERGUSON, British Museum (Natural History), London
\par R. B. FERNANDES, Universidade de Coimbra
\par J. DO AMARAL FRANCO, Instituto Superior de Agronomia, Lisboa
\par J. W. FRANKS, Manchester Museum, University of Manchester
\par F. M. GETLIFFE, University of Natal, Durban
\par P. E. GIBBS, University of St Andrews
\par J. GRAU, Universit\'e4t M\'fcnchen
\par P.S. GREEN, Royal Botanic Gardens, Kew
\par \pard E. GUINEA L\'d3PEZ, Jard\'edn Bot\'e1nico, Madrid
\par A. HANSEN, Universitetets Botaniske Museum, K\'f8benhavn
\par R. M. HARLEY, Royal Botanic Gardens, Kew
\par J. G. HAWKES, University of Birnlingham
\par I. C. HEDGE, Royal Botanic Garden, Edinburgh
\par V. H. HEYWOOD, University of Reading
\par J. JALAS, Yliopiston Kasvitieteen Laitos, Helsinki
\par M. KOVANDA, Ceskoslovenska Akademie Ved, Pruhonice u Prahy
\par S. KOZUHAROV, Balgarska Akademija na Naukite, Sofija
\par A. KRESS, Botanischer Garten, M\'fcnchen-Nymphenburg
\par \pard B. KR\'cdSA, Universita Karlova, Praha
\par A. LAWALR\'c9E, Jardin Botanique Nationale de Belgique, Bruxelles
\par F. MARKGRAF, Universit\'e4t Z\'fcrich
\par E. MAYER, Universa Ljubljana
\par R. D. MEIKLE, Royal Botanic Gardens, Kew
\par A. MELDERIS, British Museum (Natural History), London
\par H. MERXM\'dcLLER, Botanische Staatssammlung, M\'fcnchen
\par D. M. MOORE, University of Reading
\par A. PATZAK, Naturhistorisches Museum, Wien
\par S. PAWLOWSKA, Polska Akademia Nauk, Krak\'f3w
\par \'86B. PAWLOWSKI, Polska Akademia Nauk, Krak\'f3w
\par \pard D. PHILCOX, Royal Botanic Gardens, Kew
\par S. PIGNATTI, Universit\'e0 degli Studi di Trieste
\par A.R.PINTO DA SILVA, Esta\'e7\'e3o Agron\'f3mica Nacional, Oeiras
\par T. N. POPOVA, Akademija Nauk S.S.S.R., Leningrad
\par N. M. PRITCHARD, University of Aberdeen
\par I. B. K. RICHARDSON, University of Reading
\par H. RIEDL, Naturhistorisches Museum, Wien
\par E. M. RIX, University of Cambridge
\par M. DA LUZ DA ROCHA AFONSO, Instituto Superior de Agronomia, Lisboa
\par W. SAUER, Universit\'e4t M\'fcnchen
\par H. D. SCHOTSMAN, Mus\'e9um National d'Histoire Naturelle, Paris
\par \pard N. H. SINNOTT, Royal Botanic Gardens, Kew
\par A. R. SMITH, Royal Botanic Gardens, Kew
\par R. DE SO\'d3, Egyetemi Botanikus Kert, Budapest
\par C.A. STACE, University of Manchester
\par W. T. STEARN, British Museum (Natural History), London
\par P. TAYLOR, Royal Botanic Gardens, Kew
\par C. C. T OWNSEND, Royal Botanic Gardens, Kew
\par C. TURNER, University of Cambridge
\par T. G. TUTIN, University of Leicester
\par B. VALD\'c9S CASTRILL\'d3N, Universidad de Sevilla
\par D. H. VALENTINE, University of Manchester
\par S. M. WALTERS, University of Cambridge
\par \pard D.A. WEBB, Trinity College, Dublin
\par D. WOOD, Royal Botanic Garden, Edinburgh
\par P. F. YEO, University of Cambridge
\par \page
{\up #}{\footnote\pard\plain{\up #} 0D5R2E}
\pard\qc \b LIST OF CONTRIBUTORS TO VOLUME 4\plain\fs28 
\par \pard 
\par The following is a list of authors who have contributed accounts of genera or parts of them
\par 
\par S.A. ALAVI, Wigan
\par P. W. BALL, University of Toronto
\par L. BOULOS, University of Jordan
\par D. BRAMWELL, University of Reading
\par L. BROWICZ, Polska Akademia Nauk, K\'f3rnik
\par R. K. BRUMMITT, Royal Botanic Gardens, Kew
\par J. F. M. CANNON, British Museum (Natural History), London
\par D. CARTIER, Universit\'e9 de Paris-Sud
\par A. O. CHATER, University of Leicester
\par A. R. CLAPHAM, University of Sheflield
\par \pard A. CRONQUIST, New York Botanical Garden
\par J. DAMBOLDT, Freie Universit\'e4t Berlin
\par R. A. DE FILIPPS, Smithsonian Institution, Washington DC
\par I. DINGWALL, University of Manchester
\par l. DOST\'c1L, Praha
\par F. EHRENDORFER, Universit\'e4t Wien
\par D. ERNET, Universit\'e4t Graz
\par An. A. FEDOROV, Akademija Nauk S.S.S.R., Leningrad
\par V. FER\'c1KOV\'c1, Univerzita Komensk\'e9ho v Bratislave
\par I. K. FERGUSON, Royal Botanic Gardens, Kew
\par R. B. FERNANDES, Universidade de Coimbra
\par R. A. FINCH, Plant Breeding Institute, Trumpington
\par \pard J. DO AMARAL FRANCO, Instituto Superior de Agronomia, Lisboa
\par E. GUINEA L\'d3PEZ, Jard\'edn Bot\'e1nico, Madrid
\par W. GUTERMANN, Universit\'e4t Wien
\par G. HALLIDAY, University of Lancaster
\par P. HANELT, Deutsche Akademie der Wissenschaften zu Berlin
\par A. HANSEN, Universitetets Botaniske Museum, K\'f8benhavn
\par V. H. HEYWOOD, University of Reading
\par J. HOLUB, Ceskoslovenska Akadenlie Ved, Prfihonice u Prahy
\par A.JASIEWICZ, Polska Akademia Nauk, Krak\'f3w
\par Q.O.N. KAY, University of Wales, Swansea
\par M. KOVANDA, Ceskoslovenska Academie Ved, Pruhonice u Prahy
\par \pard S. KOZUHAROV, Balgarska Akademija na Naukite, Sofija
\par F. KRENDL, Naturhistorisches Museum, Wien
\par B. KUZMANOV, Balgarska Akademija na Naukite, Sofija
\par S. LIPSCHITZ, Akademija Nauk S.S.S.R., Leningrad
\par D. L\'d6VE, University of Colorado
\par I. B. MARSHALL, British Museum (Natural History), London
\par J. MCNEILL, Canada Agriculture, Ottaw:
\par R. D. MEIKLE, Royal Botanic Gardens, Kew
\par H. MERXM\'dcLLER, Botanische Staatssammlung, M\'fcnchen
\par D. M. MOORE, University of Reading
\par D.J. OCKENDON, National Vegetable Research Station, Wellesbourne
\par \pard F. H. PERRING, Natural Environment Research Council, Monks Wood, Abbots Ripton
\par K. PERSSON, G\'f6teborgs Universitet
\par C. PUFF, Universit\'e4t Wien
\par D. RATCLIFFE, University of Leicester
\par A.J. RICHARDS, University of Newcastle-upon-T yne
\par I. B. K. RICHARDSON, University of Reading
\par M. L. ROCHA AFONSO, Instituto Superior de Agronomia, Lisboa
\par A. SCHREIBER, Botanische Staatssammlung, M\'fcnchen
\par P.D. SELL, University of Cambridge
\par V.N. TIKHOMIROV, Moskovskij Gosudarstvennij Universitet im. M.V. Lomonosova, Moskva
\par \pard T. G. TUTIN, University of Leicester
\par S. M. WALTERS, University of Cambridge
\par D.A. WEBB, Trinity College, Dublin
\par K. WERNER, Martin-Luther-Universit\'e4t, Halle-Wittenberg
\par C. WEST, Ditton, Maidstone
\par P. F. YEO, University of Cambridge
\par \page
{\up #}{\footnote\pard\plain{\up #} 0D5R2F}
\pard\qc \b LIST OF CONTRIBUTORS TO VOLUME 5\plain\fs28 
\par \pard 
\par The following is a list of authors who have contributed accounts of genera or parts of them
\par 
\par C.D. BRICKELL, Wisley
\par N.A. BURGES, Coleraine
\par A.O. CHATER, Leicester
\par J. CHRTEK, Praha
\par G.C.S. CLARKE, London
\par W.D. CLAYTON, Kew
\par C.D.K. COOK, Z\'fcrich
\par R. COTTON, Preston
\par \'86J.E. DANDY, Tring
\par P.H. DAVIS, Edinburgh
\par R.A. DE FILIPPS, Washington
\par M. DEYL, Praha
\par J.R. EDMONDSON, Edinburgh
\par J. DO AMARAL FRANCO, Lisboa
\par C. GREY-WILSON, Kew
\par G. HALLIDAY, Lancaster
\par A.P. HAMILTON, London
\par \pard A. HANSEN, K\'f8benhavn
\par S.A. HEATHCOTE, London
\par V.H. HEYWOOD, Reading
\par J. HOLUB, Pruhonice u Prahy
\par W.E. HUGHES, Leicester
\par C.J. HUMPHRIES, London
\par D.R. HUNT, Kew
\par R. INGRAM, Dundee
\par A.C. JERMY, London
\par B. JONSELL, Uppsala
\par B. KR\'cdSA, Praha
\par A. LAWALR\'c9E, Meise
\par D. MCCLINTOCK, London
\par J. MCNEILL, Ottawa
\par W. MARAIS, Kew
\par I. MARKGRAF-DANNENBERG, Z\'fcrich
\par J.O. MARTINOVSK\'dd, Praha
\par B.F. MATHEW, Kew
\par VA. MATTHEWS, Edinburgh
\par A. MELDERIS, London
\par D.M. MOORE, Reading
\par J. PONERT, Praha
\par \pard \'86C.T. PRIME, Warlingham
\par A. REGUIERO, Madrid
\par I.B.K. RICHARDSON, Reading
\par E.M.RIX, Wisley
\par M.L. ROCHA AFONSA, Lisboa
\par P.M. SMITH, Edinburgh
\par B.E. SMYTHIES, Kew
\par S. SNOGERUP, Lund
\par R. DE SO\'d3, Budapest
\par C.A. STACE, Leicester
\par W.T. STEARN, London
\par D.C. STUART, Edinburgh
\par T.G. TUTIN, Leicester
\par B. VALD\'c9S, Sevilla
\par D.H. VALENTINE, Manchester
\par S.M. WALTERS, Cambridge
\par D.A. WEBB, Dublin
\par G. WEIMARCK, Lund
\par P.F. YEO, Cambridge
\par C. ZAHARIADI, Kifisia
\par \page
{\up #}{\footnote\pard\plain{\up #} 2I_V_J3}
\pard\qc \b PREFACE TO VOLUME 1 (\plain\fs28 1st ed.\b )
\par \pard \plain\fs24 
\par \fs28 Europe, where scientific taxonomy was developed, and whose taxonomists have participated, for more than a century, in the preparation of Floras for other continents, does not possess a Flora of its own. Many hundreds of national and regional Floras exist, together covering almost every part of Europe, but there is no modern work which deals with the area as a whole.
\par       There are obvious historical and political reasons which explain the lack of such a Flora. It is, however, becoming increasingly important, as in all other fields of science, that a work synthesizing the accumulated data from the various regions should be produced. For one thing, the channels of distribution of information are being choked by the accumulation of unassimilated or neglected data and if these channels can be cleared, and the data sifted, collected and arranged, botanical science will be stimulated. Equally important, good taxonomy is the basis for many kinds of scientific research, but this taxonomy must be broadly based and well considered and must transcend national boundaries. To the biosystematist and the phytogeographer, for example, local taxonomy can be misleading, whereas a wider treatment, on a continental scale, can correct misconceptions and reveal problems that had not been previously suspected. A new, synthetic Flora of Europe will be useful, not only to specialists, but also tobiologists of many kinds. It should make it easier for them to give a plant an accurate name, which we regard as one of the primary aims of a Flora, and it should also direct their attention to literature in which further information can be found. 
\par \pard       The problems which face those attempting to write a Flora of Europe are formidable. The materials available are of various kinds: there are some outdated catalogues of European plants (such as Nyman's \i Conspectus Florae Europaeae\plain\fs28 ), some important regional Floras, such as those by Hegi and Komarov, and many excellent national Floras. In addition, there is a vast accumulation of literature, published in many places and in a variety of languages, much of which is relatively inaccessible and virtually unknown outside its country of origin. The writers of a European Flora must be prepared to seek out this literature and review it critically, in addition to studying for themselves in the herbarium and the field the plants about which they propose to write.
\par \pard        This, then, is the background against which any decision to write a Flora of Europe has to be taken. Mention must be made of the \i Flora Europaea \plain\fs28 projected by Werner Rothmaler in the 1940s which was to cover not only Europe but also the Caucasus, Transjordan and parts of North Africa. Owing to the conditions of wartime this scheme was abandoned. The question was reopened in a discussion on 'Progress of Work in the European Flora' at a session of the 8th International Botanical Congress held at Paris in 1954.Although no formal decision to write a Flora was taken, further discussions between a number of European botanists followed, and eventually an informal committee came into being, which held its first meeting at Leicester in January 1956. This committee (the constitution of which is given in "The Flora Europaea Organization"), has remained in being, and, with few modifications, has become the executive committee in charge of the project. It was realized from the start that, while it was obviously advantageous to have a central organization in one part of Europe (the British Isles), the project could only succeed with continuous and substantial advice and help from every part of Europe. Accordingly, invitations to a number of distinguished European botanists to act as Advisory Editors were issued; the prompt acceptance of these invitations and the approval and support received encouraged the committee to proceed.
\par \pard      The next step was to plan the Flora in detail. As a result of much discussion a booklet entitled \i The Presentation of Taxonomic Information: A Short Guide for Contributors to Flora Europaea\plain\fs28  was prepared and published in 1958, and it then became possible to begin the writing of the Flora. Editors for each family were appointed from the Editorial Committee, and accounts of individual families or genera were obtained from botanists in all parts of Europe. The list of contributors to volume I is given. Details of the style and form of the Flora are given below.
\par \pard       It should be emphasized that it has been, and remains, the intention of the Editorial Committee to produce a concise and complete Flora in the shortest possible time. Consequently, the principle has been adopted that publication of the Flora cannot be delayed for an indefinite period to allow the lengthy and detailed research required for a complete solution of all the problems that arise during its preparation. The committee believes that it is more valuable to have a complete Flora, representing a synthesis of available information, than a series of detailed monographs where completion could not be foreseen. It is planned to complete the Flora in four volumes over the next eight years.
\par \pard         It is important to emphasize that full collaboration with taxonomists in every part of Europe has been sought and obtained at every stage during the writing of the Flora. A panel of Regional Advisers was organized (the full list is given above). All manuscripts were circulated tothese Advisers, and their comments on them, based on their specialized knowledge of both taxonomy and local distributions, have been invaluable and constitute an integral part of the organization of the Flora.
\par \pard         Arising out of the contacts established in this way, Symposia have been held, at Vienna in 1959, and at Genoa in 1961, to which all the Advisers of the Flora were invited, and at which topics of common interest were discussed. These Symposia have been important in establishing international collaboration on a firm basis, and in making it possible to plan the future progress of the Flora with confidence. A further Symposium was held in 1963 in Romania.
\par          The names of the authors primarily responsible for writing the accounts of the various families and genera are given in the text. In preparing the first volume of the Flora for the press, much trouble has been taken by the editors to produce a self-consistent manuscript, in a fairly standardized form, incorporating such revision and alteration of taxonomy ,nomenclature and distribution as has been necessary. It should therefore bemade clear that the Editorial Committee takes full responsibility for the form in which the text is published.
\par \pard           Acknowledgement is made below to the many people and organizations who have given help, financial and otherwise, in the preparation of the Flora. We should, however, record here our special gratitude to the Department of Scientific and Industrial Research in London which, by granting the Committee large sums of money over a period of several years, has made it possible to set up and maintain a permanent secretariat at the University of Liverpool, and to undertake the many ancillary activities which have arisen. It is in the prospect of their continuing support that we are now proceeding with the second volume.
\par \pard 
\par October 1963
\par \page
{\up #}{\footnote\pard\plain{\up #} H49UCK}
\pard\qc \b APPENDIX V
\par VOCABULARIUM ANGLO-LATINUM\plain\fs28 
\par 
\par IN USUM LECTORUM LINGUAE ANGLICAE MINUS PERITORUM CONFECTUM
\par \pard 
\par N.B. Plurimi termini ad descriptionem botanicam in lingua anglica usurpati aequipollentibus latinis persimiles sunt, e.g. ovate (ovatus), inflorescence (inflorescentia). Talia verba omnia sunt omissa.
\par 
\par \b above\plain\fs28  insuper, supra, super
\par \b all\plain\fs28  omnes
\par \b almost\plain\fs28  fere, paene
\par \b always\plain\fs28  semper
\par \b arable fields\plain\fs28  arva
\par \b around\plain\fs28  circum
\par \b arranged\plain\fs28  dispositus
\par \b attached\plain\fs28  affixus
\par \b awn\plain\fs28  arista
\par \b back\plain\fs28  dorsum
\par \b backward(s)\plain\fs28  retro
\par \pard \b bank\plain\fs28  ripa
\par \b barbed\plain\fs28  pilis hamatis obsitus
\par \b bare\plain\fs28  nudus
\par \b bark\plain\fs28  cortex
\par \b basin-shaped\plain\fs28  pelvifomis
\par \b beak\plain\fs28  rostrum
\par \b bearded\plain\fs28  barbatus
\par \b become\plain\fs28  fieri
\par \b below\plain\fs28  infra, sub
\par \b beneath\plain\fs28  infra, subtus
\par \b bent\plain\fs28  inflexus
\par \b berry\plain\fs28  bacca
\par \b between\plain\fs28  inter
\par \b bind\plain\fs28  colligare, firmare
\par \b bitter\plain\fs28  amarus
\par \b black\plain\fs28  niger, ater
\par \b bloom\plain\fs28  pruina
\par \b blotch\plain\fs28  macula
\par \b blue\plain\fs28  caeruleus
\par \b boat\plain\fs28  navicula
\par \pard \b border\plain\fs28  margo
\par \b borne\plain\fs28  prolatus
\par \b branch\plain\fs28  ramus
\par \b breadth\plain\fs28  latitudo
\par \b bright\plain\fs28  laete
\par \b bristle\plain\fs28  seta
\par \b broad\plain\fs28  latus
\par \b bronze\plain\fs28  aeneus
\par \b brown\plain\fs28  fuscus, brunneus
\par \b bud\plain\fs28  gemma
\par \b bundle\plain\fs28  fasciculus
\par \b bushy\plain\fs28  spisse et iteratim ramosus
\par \b casual\plain\fs28  fortuitus
\par \b catkin\plain\fs28  amentum
\par \b chaffy\plain\fs28  paleaceus
\par \b chamber\plain\fs28  loculus
\par \b chequered\plain\fs28  cancellatus
\par \b chestnut\plain\fs28  castaneus
\par \b chief\plain\fs28  principalis
\par \pard \b claw\plain\fs28  unguis
\par \b cliff\plain\fs28  rupes
\par \b climbing\plain\fs28  scandens
\par \b close\plain\fs28  propinquus, affinis
\par \b closed\plain\fs28  clausus
\par \b clothed\plain\fs28  vestitus
\par \b cluster\plain\fs28  glomerulus
\par \b coarse\plain\fs28  crassus, grossus
\par \b coast\plain\fs28  litus, ora
\par \b coat\plain\fs28  tunica
\par \b common\plain\fs28  vulgaris
\par \b completely\plain\fs28  omnino, ex toto
\par \b compound\plain\fs28  compositus
\par \b cone\plain\fs28  strobilus
\par \b corner\plain\fs28  angulus
\par \b cornfield\plain\fs28  seges
\par \b covered\plain\fs28  obtectus
\par \b cream\plain\fs28  ochroleucus, albido-flavescens
\par \pard \b crest\plain\fs28  crista
\par \b crevice\plain\fs28  fissura
\par \b crimson\plain\fs28  kermesinus, sanguineus; ut flos \i Paeoniae officinalis\plain\fs28  coloratus
\par \b crowded\plain\fs28  confertus
\par \b cultivated\plain\fs28  cultus, sativus
\par \b curled\plain\fs28  crispus
\par \b cushion\plain\fs28  pulvinus
\par \b damp\plain\fs28  humidus
\par \b dark\plain\fs28  obscure
\par \b dead\plain\fs28  emortuus
\par \b decay\plain\fs28  dissolutio
\par \b deep\plain\fs28  profundus; intense
\par \b developed\plain\fs28  evolutus
\par \b die\plain\fs28  mori
\par \b docks\plain\fs28  navalia
\par \b downwards\plain\fs28  deorsum
\par \b downy\plain\fs28  lanuginosus
\par \pard \b dry\plain\fs28  siccus
\par \b dull\plain\fs28  opace, impolitus
\par \b dwarf\plain\fs28  nanus
\par \b early\plain\fs28  prius, mox, praecoce
\par \b eastern\plain\fs28  orientalis
\par \b eastwards\plain\fs28  orientem versus
\par \b edge\plain\fs28  margo
\par \b edible\plain\fs28  edulis
\par \b either...or\plain\fs28  aut...aut
\par \b end\plain\fs28  pars terminalis
\par \b enlarge\plain\fs28  crescere, augere
\par \b entire\plain\fs28  integer
\par \b entirely\plain\fs28  omnino
\par \b equal\plain\fs28  aequalis, aequans
\par \b escape\plain\fs28  evadere; planta ex horto elapsa
\par \b established\plain\fs28  subspon taneus
\par \b evening\plain\fs28  vesper
\par \pard \b evergreen\plain\fs28  sempervirens
\par \b exceeding\plain\fs28  superans
\par \b face\plain\fs28  facies
\par \b fan-shaped\plain\fs28  flabellatus
\par \b feebly\plain\fs28  debiliter, perleviter
\par \b female\plain\fs28  femineus, pistillatus
\par \b few\plain\fs28  pauci
\par \b finely\plain\fs28  subtiliter
\par \b first\plain\fs28  primus
\par \b flap\plain\fs28  valva, ligula
\par \b flat\plain\fs28  planus
\par \b flattened\plain\fs28  compressus, applanatus
\par \b flax \plain\i\fs28 Linum usitatissintum\plain\fs28 
\par \b flesh-coloured\plain\fs28  carneus, pallide et opace roseus
\par \b fleshy\plain\fs28  carnosus
\par \b floating\plain\fs28  natans
\par \pard \b flooded\plain\fs28  inundatus
\par \b flower\plain\fs28  flos
\par \b fodder\plain\fs28  bestiarum pabulum
\par \b fold\plain\fs28  plica
\par \b following\plain\fs28  sequens
\par \b food\plain\fs28  cibus
\par \b forest\plain\fs28  silva magna
\par \b forwards\plain\fs28  porro
\par \b free\plain\fs28  liber
\par \b fringe\plain\fs28  fimbriae
\par \b fruit\plain\fs28  fructus
\par \b furnished\plain\fs28  munitus
\par \b furrow\plain\fs28  sulcus
\par \b garden\plain\fs28  hortus
\par \b glossy\plain\fs28  nitidus
\par \b golden\plain\fs28  aureus
\par \b grassy\plain\fs28  graminosus
\par \b gravelly\plain\fs28  glareosus
\par \b graze\plain\fs28  pascere
\par \b green\plain\fs28  viridis
\par \pard \b grey\plain\fs28  cinereus
\par \b grooved\plain\fs28  canaliculatus, sulcatus
\par \b ground\plain\fs28  solum
\par \b group\plain\fs28  grex
\par \b grow\plain\fs28  crescere, habitare
\par \b hair\plain\fs28  pilum
\par \b hairy\plain\fs28  pilis munitus
\par \b half\plain\fs28  dimidium
\par \b hard\plain\fs28  durus
\par \b head\plain\fs28  caput, capitulum
\par \b heath\plain\fs28  ericetum, callunetum
\par \b hedge\plain\fs28  saepes
\par \b helmet\plain\fs28  galea
\par \b hill\plain\fs28  collis
\par \b hoary\plain\fs28  incanus
\par \b hollow\plain\fs28  fistulosus, cavus; cavum, excavatio
\par \b hood\plain\fs28  cucullus
\par \b hooked\plain\fs28  uncinatus
\par \pard \b inner\plain\fs28  interior, internus
\par \b inside\plain\fs28  intus, intra; pagina vel pars interior
\par \b introduced\plain\fs28  inquilinus, allatus
\par \b jagged\plain\fs28  argutus
\par \b jointed\plain\fs28  articulatus
\par \b juice\plain\fs28  succus
\par \b keel\plain\fs28  carina
\par \b key\plain\fs28  clavis
\par \b lake\plain\fs28  lacus
\par \b late\plain\fs28  sero
\par \b later\plain\fs28  postea
\par \b leaf\plain\fs28  folium
\par \b leafless\plain\fs28  foliis carens
\par \b leaflet\plain\fs28  foliolum
\par \b length\plain\fs28  longitudo
\par \b less\plain\fs28  minus
\par \b level\plain\fs28  altitudo, gradus
\par \b lid\plain\fs28  operculum
\par \pard \b light\plain\fs28  clare
\par \b limestone\plain\fs28  calx
\par \b lip\plain\fs28  labium
\par \b locally\plain\fs28  hic inde
\par \b low\plain\fs28  humilis, pusillus
\par \b lower\plain\fs28  inferior
\par \b lowland\plain\fs28  campestris, planitiem incolens
\par \b main\plain\fs28  principalis
\par \b male\plain\fs28  masculus, stamineus
\par \b many\plain\fs28  multi
\par \b marbled\plain\fs28  marmoratus
\par \b marsh\plain\fs28  palus
\par \b mat\plain\fs28  stratum e ramulis procumbentibus intertextis compositum
\par \b mauve\plain\fs28  malvinus
\par \b meadow\plain\fs28  pratum
\par \b mealy\plain\fs28  farinosus
\par \b medicinal\plain\fs28  officinalis
\par \pard \b middle\plain\fs28  pars centralis; medius
\par \b midrib\plain\fs28  costa, folii nervus principalis
\par \b milky\plain\fs28  lacteus
\par \b mistake\plain\fs28  error
\par \b more\plain\fs28  plus, magis
\par \b most\plain\fs28  plerique, pars major
\par \b mountain\plain\fs28  mons
\par \b mouth\plain\fs28  os
\par \b much\plain\fs28  multo, multum
\par \b naked \plain\fs28 nudus
\par \b narrow\plain\fs28  angustus
\par \b native\plain\fs28  indigenus
\par \b naturalized\plain\fs28  inquilinus
\par \b near\plain\fs28  prope
\par \b nearly\plain\fs28  paene, fere
\par \b neither...nor\plain\fs28  nec...nec
\par \b net\plain\fs28  reticulum
\par \b never\plain\fs28  numquam
\par \pard \b nodding\plain\fs28  nutans, cernuus
\par \b none\plain\fs28  nulli
\par \b northern\plain\fs28  borealis
\par \b northwards\plain\fs28  septentrionem versus
\par \b notch\plain\fs28  incisio
\par \b nut\plain\fs28  nux
\par \b often\plain\fs28  saepe
\par \b oil\plain\fs28  oleum
\par \b old\plain\fs28  vetus, antiquus
\par \b open\plain\fs28  apertus
\par \b orange\plain\fs28  aurantiacus
\par \b ornament\plain\fs28  decus
\par \b other\plain\fs28  alius, alter
\par \b otherwise\plain\fs28  aliter
\par \b outer\plain\fs28  exterior, externus
\par \b outside\plain\fs28  extra; pagina vel pars exterior
\par \b overlapping\plain\fs28  imbricatus
\par \b pale\plain\fs28  pallidus
\par \pard \b papery\plain\fs28  chartaceus
\par \b pasture\plain\fs28  pascuum
\par \b patch\plain\fs28  macula
\par \b peat-bog\plain\fs28  turbarium
\par \b pink\plain\fs28  roseus
\par \b pitted\plain\fs28  foveolatus
\par \b planted\plain\fs28  cultus
\par \b point\plain\fs28  acumen
\par \b pond\plain\fs28  stagnum
\par \b pool\plain\fs28  stagnum
\par \b poor\plain\fs28  egens
\par \b prickle\plain\fs28  aculeus
\par \b pricklet\plain\fs28  aculeolus
\par \b purple\plain\fs28  purpureus
\par \b quarter\plain\fs28  pars quarta
\par \b rank\plain\fs28  ordo
\par \b rarely\plain\fs28  raro
\par \b ray\plain\fs28  radius
\par \b red\plain\fs28  ruber
\par \b related\plain\fs28  affinis
\par \b remins\plain\fs28  reliquiae
\par \pard \b rest\plain\fs28  ceteri
\par \b rib\plain\fs28  costa
\par \b rice-field\plain\fs28  oryzetum
\par \b rich\plain\fs28  abundans
\par \b ridge\plain\fs28  carina
\par \b rind\plain\fs28  fructus cortex
\par \b ring\plain\fs28  anulus
\par \b ripe\plain\fs28  maturus
\par \b river\plain\fs28  flumen
\par \b road\plain\fs28  via
\par \b rock\plain\fs28  saxum, rupes
\par \b root\plain\fs28  radix
\par \b rosette\plain\fs28  rosula
\par \b rough\plain\fs28  asper
\par \b rounded\plain\fs28  rotundatus
\par \b rust-coloured\plain\fs28  ferrugineus
\par \b salt-marsh\plain\fs28  palus salsa
\par \b sand\plain\fs28  arena
\par \b scale\plain\fs28  squama
\par \b scanty\plain\fs28  exiguus
\par \b scar\plain\fs28  cicatrix
\par \pard \b scarcely\plain\fs28  vix
\par \b scarlet\plain\fs28  laete et clare ruber, paullulo aurantiaco affectus; ut flos \i Salviae splendentis\plain\fs28  coloratus
\par \b scattered\plain\fs28  sparsus
\par \b scented\plain\fs28  fragrans
\par \b scree\plain\fs28  clivus alpestris, saxis deorsum conjectis coopertus
\par \b scrub\plain\fs28  dumetum, fruticetum
\par \b sea\plain\fs28  mare
\par \b seed\plain\fs28  semen
\par \b seldom\plain\fs28  raro
\par \b several\plain\fs28  nonnulli, complures
\par \b shady\plain\fs28  umbrosus
\par \b shallow\plain\fs28  haud profundus
\par \b shape\plain\fs28  forma
\par \b sharply\plain\fs28  acute
\par \pard \b sheath\plain\fs28  vagina
\par \b shelter\plain\fs28  tegmen contra ventum
\par \b shingle\plain\fs28  glarea maritima vel fluviatilis
\par \b shiny\plain\fs28  nitidus
\par \b shoot\plain\fs28  caudiculus, surculus
\par \b shore\plain\fs28  litus, ora
\par \b short\plain\fs28  brevis
\par \b shoulder\plain\fs28  angulus obtusus
\par \b shrub\plain\fs28  frutex
\par \b side\plain\fs28  latus, pagina
\par \b silky\plain\fs28  sericeus
\par \b silvery\plain\fs28  argenteus
\par \b slender\plain\fs28  tenuis, gracilis
\par \b slightly\plain\fs28  leviter, paullo
\par \b slipper\plain\fs28  calceolus
\par \b slit\plain\fs28  rima, foramen longum sed angustum
\par \pard \b slope\plain\fs28  clivus, declivitas
\par \b small\plain\fs28  parvus
\par \b smell\plain\fs28  odor
\par \b smooth\plain\fs28  laevis
\par \b snow-patch\plain\fs28  locus in montibus ubi nix sero perdurat
\par \b soft\plain\fs28  mollis
\par \b soil\plain\fs28  solum
\par \b sometimes\plain\fs28  interdum
\par \b southern\plain\fs28  australis
\par \b southwards\plain\fs28  meridiem versus
\par \b spikelet\plain\fs28  spicula
\par \b spot\plain\fs28  punctum, macula
\par \b spreading\plain\fs28  patens, divaricatus
\par \b spring\plain\fs28  ver
\par \b spur\plain\fs28  calcar
\par \b square\plain\fs28  quadratus
\par \b stalk\plain\fs28  stipes
\par \b standard\plain\fs28  vexillum
\par \pard \b stem\plain\fs28  caulis
\par \b stiff\plain\fs28  rigidus
\par \b stock\plain\fs28  caudex
\par \b stony\plain\fs28  lapidosus
\par \b stout\plain\fs28  crassus, robustus
\par \b straight\plain\fs28  rectus
\par \b streak\plain\fs28  linea
\par \b stream\plain\fs28  rivulus
\par \b stripe\plain\fs28  vitta
\par \b strong\plain\fs28  robustus, validus
\par \b suddenly\plain\fs28  abrupte
\par \b summer\plain\fs28  aestas
\par \b sunk(en)\plain\fs28  immersus
\par \b surface\plain\fs28  superficies, pagina
\par \b sweet\plain\fs28  dulcis
\par \b swollen\plain\fs28  tumidus, inflatus
\par \b tall\plain\fs28  altus
\par \b taste\plain\fs28  sapor
\par \b tawny\plain\fs28  fulvus
\par \pard \b teeth\plain\fs28  dentes
\par \b thick\plain\fs28  crassus, densus, spissus
\par \b thicket\plain\fs28  dumetum
\par \b thin\plain\fs28  tenuis
\par \b third\plain\fs28  pars tertia
\par \b timber\plain\fs28  materia; lignum ad usum hominum aptum
\par \b tinge\plain\fs28  suffusus
\par \b tip\plain\fs28  apex
\par \b tipped\plain\fs28  ad apicem munitus vel tinctus
\par \b tooth\plain\fs28  dens
\par \b top\plain\fs28  vertex
\par \b tough\plain\fs28  lentus
\par \b tree\plain\fs28  arbor
\par \b true\plain\fs28  verus
\par \b tufted\plain\fs28  in fasciculos dispositus, caespitosus
\par \b twice\plain\fs28  bis
\par \b twig\plain\fs28  ramulus, virga
\par \pard \b twining\plain\fs28  volubilis
\par \b twisted\plain\fs28  contortus
\par \b unarmed\plain\fs28  inermis
\par \b uncertain\plain\fs28  incertus, dubius
\par \b undivided\plain\fs28  indivisus
\par \b unequal\plain\fs28  inaequalis
\par \b united\plain\fs28  conjunctus, connatus
\par \b upper\plain\fs28  superior
\par \b uppermost\plain\fs28  supremus
\par \b upwards\plain\fs28  sursum
\par \b usually\plain\fs28  plerumque
\par \b vegetable\plain\fs28  olus
\par \b veil\plain\fs28  velum
\par \b vein\plain\fs28  nervus
\par \b velvety\plain\fs28  velutinus
\par \b vessel\plain\fs28  vas
\par \b violet\plain\fs28  violaceus
\par \b wart\plain\fs28  verruca
\par \b waste\plain\fs28  incultus
\par \pard \b weak\plain\fs28  debilis, flaccidus
\par \b well\plain\fs28  bene
\par \b western\plain\fs28  occidentalis
\par \b westwards\plain\fs28  occidentem versus
\par \b wet\plain\fs28  madidus
\par \b white\plain\fs28  albus, candidus
\par \b whorled\plain\fs28  verticillatus
\par \b wide\plain\fs28  latus
\par \b widespread\plain\fs28  late diffusus
\par \b width\plain\fs28  latitudo
\par \b wing\plain\fs28  ala
\par \b winter\plain\fs28  hiems
\par \b wiry\plain\fs28  filo ferreo similis
\par \b withered\plain\fs28  marcidus
\par \b without\plain\fs28  sine
\par \b wood\plain\fs28  silva; lignum
\par \b woody\plain\fs28  lignosus
\par \b woolly\plain\fs28  lanatus
\par \b wrinkled\plain\fs28  rugosus
\par \pard \b yellow\plain\fs28  flavus, luteus
\par \b young\plain\fs28  juvenis
\par \page
{\up #}{\footnote\pard\plain{\up #} 4YBXZFK}
\pard\qc \b APPENDIX IV\plain\fs28 
\par 
\par  \b GLOSSARY OF TECHNICAL TERMS\plain\fs28 
\par \pard 
\par The number of technical terms used in Flora Europaea has been kept as low as is consistent with a reasonable standard of accuracy and brevity. Most of them are used in well-established traditional senses, and their meanings may be ascertained by reference to glossaries such as H.I. Featherly,\i Taxonomic Terminology of the Higher Plants\plain\fs28  (Ames, Iowa, U.S.A., 1954). No term is used in a sense inconsistent with that given by Featherly.
\par Experience has shown, however, that some useful terms are liable to misinterpretation, and others, which can be used in a wider sense, are used in a restricted sense in \i Flora Europaea\plain\fs28 . This glossary is intended simply to indicate without ambiguity the sense in which these potentially ambiguous terms are employed.
\par \pard Certain technical terms, which are restricted to descriptions in particular families or genera, are explained under the family or genus concerned.
\par 
\par ABOVE Used to indicate both the upper surface of a normally horizontal organ and the upper part of an organ or of the whole plant.
\par ACHENEA small, dry, 1-seeded, indehiscent fruit, whether derived from a superior or from an inferior ovary.
\par ALTERNATE Arising singly at a node; includes regularly spiral, as well as distichous arrangements.
\par \pard ANNUAL Completing its life-cycle from seed to seed in less than 12 months; includes 'overwintering' annuals, which germinate in autumn and flower the following year.
\par BELOW Used to indicate the basal part of a plant, stem or inflorescence; cf. \i beneath\plain\fs28 .
\par BENEATH Used to indicate the lower surface of a normally horizontal organ; cf. \i below\plain\fs28 .
\par BIDENTATE With two teeth.
\par BISERRATE Serrate, With the teeth themselves serrate.
\par CADUCOUS Falling unusually early.
\par CILIATE With hairs on the margin.
\par \pard DECIDUOUS Of leaves: falling in autumn; of other organs: falling before the majority of adjacent or associated organs.
\par ERECTO-PATENT Diverging at an angle of 15~45\'b0 from the axis on which the structure is borne.
\par FLOCCOSE Clothed with woolly hairs, which are disposed in tufts or tend to rub off and adhere in small masses.
\par GLABRESCENT Becoming glabrous with increasing age or maturity. For structures very slightly but persistently hairy the term subglabrous is used.
\par HIRSUTE Covered with long, moderately stiff and not inter-woven hairs.
\par \pard HISPID Covered with stiff hairs or bristles.
\par LANATE Covered with soft, flexuous, intertwined hairs.
\par PELTATE Denotes an organ of which the stalk is attached to a more or less flat surface, and not to the margin; the attachment is not, however, necessarily central.
\par PUBERULENT With very short hairs.
\par PUBESCENT With soft, short hairs.
\par PYRENE A small stone, consisting of one or few seeds with a hard covering, enclosed in fleshy tissue, e.g.\i Arctostaphylos, Corema\plain\fs28 .
\par SEMI-PATENT Between patent and appressed.
\par \pard SERICEOUS With silky, appressed hairs.
\par SETOSE Covered with stout, rigid bristles.
\par SIMPLE HAIR Indicates an unbranched hair; it may or may not bear a gland.
\par STOCK The persistent, usually somewhat woody base of an otherwise herbaceous perennial.
\par STOLON A short-lived, horizontal stem, either above or below the surface of the ground, rooting at one or more nodes.
\par STRIGOSE With stiff, appressed, straight hairs.
\par TERETE More or less cylindrical, without grooves or ridges.
\par \pard TOMENTOSE With hairs compacted into a felty mass.
\par TUBERCULATE Covered with smooth, knob-like elevations.
\par VELUTINOUS With a dense indumentum of fine, soft, straight hairs.
\par VERRUCOSE Covered with rough, wart-like elevations.
\par VILLOUS Covered with long, soft, straight hairs.
\par \page
\pard\qc 
\par {\up #}{\footnote\pard\plain{\up #} 29HSZXW}
\b LIST OF STANDARD FLORAS
\par 
\par \pard \plain\fs28 More detailed information on authorship and dates of publication as well as details of the other floristic works can be found in Frodin, D. G. , \i Guide to Standard Floras of the world,\plain\fs28  Cambridge, 1984..
\par 
\par AESCHIMANN, D. & BURDET, H. \i Flore de la Suisse et des territoires limitrophes\plain\fs28 . Neuch\'e2tel, 1989.
\par ARCANGELI, G. \i Compendio della Flora italiana\plain\fs28 , ed. 1. Torino, 1882.
\par BARCEL\'d3 Y COMBIS, F. \i Flora de las Islas Baleares\plain\fs28 . Palma [de Mallorca], 1879-1881.
\par \pard BECK VON MANNAGETTA, G. \i et al\plain\fs28 .(ed.). \i Flore Bosne, Hercegovine i Novipazarskog Sandzaka\plain\fs28 . Vols. 1-4. Beograd & Sarajevo, 1903-1974.
\par BINZ, A. \i Schul- und Exkursionsflora f\'fcr die Schweiz,\plain\fs28  ed. 14 by A. Becherer. Basel, 1970.
\par BINZ, A. & THOMMEN, E. \i Flore de la Suisse,\plain\fs28  ed. 2. Lausanne, 1953.
\par BOISSIER, E. \i Flora orientalis\plain\fs28 . Vols. 1-5. Gen\'e8ve, B\'e2le & Lyon,1867-1884. \i Supplementum\plain\fs28 . 1888.
\par BOL\'d2S, O. DE & VIGO, J. \i Flora dels pa\'efsos Catalans\plain\fs28 . Vols. 1- . Barcelona, 1984- .
\par \pard BORNM\'dcLLER, J. \i Beitr\'e4ge zur Flora Mazedoniens\plain\fs28  (In \i Bot. Jabrb.\plain\b\fs28  59\plain\fs28  (Beibl. 136), \b 60\plain\fs28  (Beibl. 140),\b  61\plain\fs28 ). Leipzig, 1925-1928.
\par BORZA, A. \i Conspectus Florae Romaniae.\plain\fs28  Cluj, 1947-1949.
\par BRIQUET, J. \i Prodrome de la Flore corse\plain\fs28 . Vols. 1-3. Gen\'e8ve, B\'e2le, Lyon & Paris, 1910-1955.
\par CADEVALL I DIARS, J. \i Flora de Catalunya\plain\fs28 . Vols. 1 - 6. Barcelona, 1913-1937.
\par CASTROVIEJO, S. \i et al\plain\fs28 . (ed.). \i Flora ib\'e9rica\plain\fs28 .Vols. 1- . Madrid, 1986- .
\par \pard CLAPHAM, A.R., TUTlN, T.G. & WARBURG, E.F. \i Flora of the British Isles\plain\fs28 , ed. 3 by A.R.Clapham, T.G.Tutin & D.M. Moore. Cambridge, 1987.
\par COSTE, H. \i Flore descriptive et illustr\'e9e de la France, de la Corse et des Contr\'e9es limitrophes\plain\fs28 . Vols. 1-3. Paris, 1900-1906. Suppl\'e9ment 1-6, by P. Jovet & R. de Vilmorin. Paris, 1972-1985.
\par COUTINHO, A.X. PEREIRA. \i Flora de Portugal\plain\fs28 , ed. 2 by R.T. Palhinha. Lisboa, 1939.
\par DAVIS, P.H. (ed.). \i Flora of Turkey and the East Aegean islands\plain\fs28 . Vols. 1-10. Edinburgh, 1965-1988.
\par \pard DEGEN, A. VON. \i Flora velebitica\plain\fs28 . Vols. 1-4. Budapest, 1936-1938.
\par DE LANGHE, J.-E. \i et al. Nouvelle Flore de la Belgique, du Grand-Duch\'e9 de Luxembourg, du Nord de la France et des R\'e9gions voisines\plain\fs28 , ed. 3. Bruxelles, 1983.
\par DEMIRI, M. \i Flora ekskursioniste e Shqip\'ebris\'eb\plain\fs28 . Tiran\'eb, 1983.
\par DIAPOULIS, K.A. \i Ellenike Khloris\plain\fs28 . Vols. 1-3. Athenai, 1939-1949.
\par DOMAC, R. \i Flora za odredivanje i upoznavanje bilja\plain\fs28 . Zagreb, 1950.
\par DOST\'c1L, J. \i Kvetena CSR\plain\fs28 . Praha, 1948-1950.
\par \pard DOST\'c1L, J. \i Nov\'e1 Kvetena CSSR\plain\fs28 . Vols. 1- . Praha, 1989- .
\par EHRENDORFER, F. (ed.).\i  Liste der Gef\'e4sspflanzen Mitteleuropas\plain\fs28 , ed. 2 by W. Gutermann. Stuttgart, 1973.
\par FEDOROV, An. A. (ed.).\i  Flora Partis europaeae URSS\plain\fs28 . Vols. 1-6. Leningrad, 1974-1987; Vols. 8-, ed. by N.N. Tzvelev, 1989- .
\par FIORI, A. \i Nuova Flora analitica d'Italia\plain\fs28 . Vols. 1-2. Firenze, 1923 -1929.
\par FOMIN, A.V.\i  et al.\plain\fs28  (ed.). \i Flora Reipublicae Sovieticae Socialisticae Ucrainicae\plain\fs28 , ed. 1. Vols. 1-12. Kijiv, 1936-1965. Ed. 2. Vol. 1. Kijiv, 1938.
\par \pard FOURNIER, P. \i Les quatre Flores de la France, Corse  comprise\plain\fs28 .   Poinson-les-Grancey, 1934-1940. (Reprints with additions and corrections, Paris, 1946 and 1961; ed. 2, Paris, 1977, unrevised.)
\par FRANCO, J. DO AMARAL. \i Nova flora de Portugal\plain\fs28 . Vols. 1- . Lisboa, 1971- .
\par FRITSCH, K. \i Exkursionsflora f\'fcr \'d6sterreich und die ehemals \'f6sterreichischen Nachbargebiete\plain\fs28 , ed. 3. Wien & Leipzig, 1922.
\par GAMISANS, J.  \i Catalogue des Plantes vasculaires de la Corse\plain\fs28 . Ajaccio, 1985.
\par \pard GEIDEMAN, T.S. \i Opredelitel' vyssikh Rastenij Moldavskoy SSR\plain\fs28 , ed. 2. Kisinev, 1975.
\par GOFFART, J.\i Nouveau Manuel de la Flore de Belgique et des R\'e9gions limitrophes\plain\fs28 , ed. 3. Li\'e8ge, 1945.
\par GORODKOV, B.N. & POJARKOVA, A.I. (ed.).\i  Flora Murmanskoj Oblasti\plain\fs28 . Vols. 1-5. Moskva & Leningrad, 1953-1966.
\par GREUTER, W., BURDET, H.M. & LONG,  G. (ed.). \i Med-Checklist\plain\fs28 . Vols. 1- . Gen\'e8ve, 1984-.
\par HAL\'c1CSY, E. VON. \i Conspectus Florae graecae\plain\fs28 . Vols. 1-3. Leipzig, 1900-1904. \i Supplementum\plain\fs28  1. Leipzig, 1908. \i Supplementum\plain\fs28  2 (In \i Magyar Bot. Lapok\plain\b\fs28  11\plain\fs28 ). Budapest, 1912.
\par \pard H\'c4MET-AHTI, L.\i  et al\plain\fs28 . (ed.).\i  Retkeilykasvio\plain\fs28 , ed. 3. Helsinki, 1986.
\par HANSEN, K. (ed.). \i Dansk Feltflora\plain\fs28 . Copenhagen, 1981.
\par HASLAM, S.M., SELL, P.D. & WOLSELEY, P.A. \i  A flora of the Maltese Islands\plain\fs28 . Msida, 1977.
\par HAYEK, A. VON. \i Prodromus Florae Peninsulae balcanicae\plain\fs28  (In \i Feddes Repert\plain\fs28 . (\i Beih\plain\fs28 .) \b 30\plain\fs28 ). Vols. 1-3. Berlin-Dahlem, 1924-1933.
\par HEGI, G. \i Illustrierte Flora von Mittel-Europa\plain\fs28 , ed. 1. Vols. 1-7. M\'fcnchen, 1906-1931. Ed. 2. Vols. 1- . M\'fcnchen, 1936. Ed. 3. Vols. 1- . M\'fcnchen, 1966- .
\par \pard HESS, H.E., LANDOLT, E. & HIRZEL, R. \i Flora der Schweiz\plain\fs28 . Vols. 1-3. Basel & Stuttgart, 1967-1972.
\par HEUKELS, H.  \i Flora van Nederland\plain\fs28 , ed. 21 by R. van der Meijden \i et al\plain\fs28 . Groningen, 1990.
\par HIITONEN, H.I.A.\i Suomen Kasvio\plain\fs28 . Helsinki, 1933.
\par HORV\'c1TIC, S. (ed.). \i Analitiske Flora Jugoslavije\plain\fs28 . Vols. 1- . Zagreb, 1967- .
\par HULT\'c9N, E. \i Atlas of the distribution of vascular plants in Northwestern Europe\plain\fs28 , ed. 2. Stockholm, 1971.
\par HYLANDER, N. \i Nordisk K\'e4rlv\'e4xtflora.\plain\fs28  Vols. 1-2. Stockholm, 1953-1966.
\par \pard JALAS, J. & SUOMINEN, J.(ed.). \i Atlas Florae europaeae\plain\fs28 . Vols. 1- . Helsinki, 1972- .
\par JANCHEN, E. \i Catalogus Florae Austriae\plain\fs28 . Vol. 1. Wien, 1956-1960.\i  Erg\'e4nzungsheft\plain\fs28 . Wien, 1963. \i Zweites Erg\'e4nzungsheft\plain\fs28 . Wien, 1964. \i Drittes Erg\'e4nzungsheft\plain\fs28 . Wien, 1966. \i Viertes Erg\'e4nzungsheft\plain\fs28 . Wien & New York, 1968.
\par JORDANOV, D. (ed.). \i Flora na Narodna Republika Balgarija\plain\fs28 . Vol. 1- . Sofija, 1963-.
\par JOSIFOVIC, M. (ed.). \i Flora de la Republique socialiste de Serbie\plain\fs28 . Vols. 1-8. Beograd, 1970-1976. \i Dodatak\plain\fs28 . Beograd, 1977- .
\par \pard KNOCHE, H. \i Flora balearica\plain\fs28 . Vols. 1-4. Montpellier, 1921-1923.
\par KOMAROV, V.L. \i et al\plain\fs28 . (ed.). \i Flora URSS\plain\fs28 . Vols. 1-30. Leningrad & Moskva, 1934-1964.\i  Additamenta et Corrigenda\plain\fs28 . Leningrad, 1973.
\par KROK,T.O.B.N. & ALMQUIST, S. \i Svensk Flora: Fanerogamer och ormbunksvaxter\plain\fs28 , ed. 27 by L. Jonsell & B. Jonsell. Uppsala, 1984.
\par LID, J. \i Norsk og svensk Flora\plain\fs28 . Oslo, 1963..
\par LID, J. \i The Flora of Jan Mayen\plain\fs28 . Oslo, 1964.
\par LID, J. \i Norsk, svensk, finsk Flora\plain\fs28 , ed. 5 by O. Gj\'e6revoll. Oslo, 1985
\par \pard LINDMAN, C.A.M. \i Svensk Fanerogamflora\plain\fs28 , ed. 2. Stockholm, 1926.
\par L\'d6VE, \'c1. \i \'cdslenzkar Jurtir.\plain\fs28  K\'f8benhavn, 1945
\par L\'d6VE, \'c1. \i \'cdslensk Fer\'f0afl\'f3ra\plain\fs28  Reykjav\'edk 1970
\par L\'d6VE, \'c1. \i The Flora of Iceland\plain\fs28 . Reykjav\'edk, 1983.
\par MAEVSKIJ, P.F. \i Flora srednej Polosy evropejskoj Casti SSSR\plain\fs28 , ed. 9 by B.K. Schischkin. Leningrad, 1964.
\par MARTINCIC, A. & SUSNIK, F. \i Mala Flora Slovenije\plain\fs28 . Ljubljana, 1969.
\par MAYER, E. \i Seznam praprotnic in Cvetnic Sloveskega Ozemlja\plain\fs28  (in \i Razpr. Mat.-Prir. Akad. Lubljani. Dela \plain\fs28 5\i  Inst. Biol\plain\fs28 . 3) Ljubljana, 1952. 
\par \pard MERINO Y ROM\'c1N, P. B. \i Flora deseriptiva \'e9 ilustrada de Galicia\plain\fs28 . Vols. 1-3. Santiago [de Compostela], 1905-1909.
\par MULLENDERS, W. (ed.). \i Flors de la Belgique, du Nord da la France et des R\'e9gions voisines\plain\fs28 . Li\'e8ge 1967.
\par NORDHAGEN, R.\i  Norsk Flora\plain\fs28 . Oslo, 1940.
\par NYMAN, C.F. \i Conspectus Florae europaeae\plain\fs28 . \'d6rebro, 1878-1882. \i Supplementum\plain\fs28  1, 1882-1884. \i Additamenta\plain\fs28 , 1886. \i Supplementum\plain\fs28  2, 1889-1890.
\par OSTENFELD, C.E.H. & GR\'d6NTVED, J. \i The Flora of Iceland and the Faeroes\plain\fs28 . K\'f8benhavn, 1934.
\par \pard PALHINHA, R.T. \i Cat\'e1logo das Plantas vasculares dos A\'e7ores\plain\fs28 . Lisboa, 1966.
\par PIGNATTI, S. \i Flora d'Italia\plain\fs28 . Vols. 1-3. Bologna, 1982.
\par RACIBORSKI, M., SZAFER, W. & PAWLOWSKI, B. (ed.). \i Flora polska\plain\fs28 . Vols. 1-14. Krak\'f3w & Warszawa, 1919-1980.
\par RASMUSSEN, R. \i F\'f6roya Flora\plain\fs28 , ed. 2. T\'f3rshavn, 1952.
\par RAUNKI\'c6R, C. \i Dansk Ekskursions-Flora\plain\fs28 , ed. 7 by K. Wiinstedt. K\'f8benhavn, 1950.
\par RECHINGER, K.H.\i  Flora aegaea\plain\fs28  (In \i Denkschr. Akad. Wiss. Math.-Nat. Kl.\plain\fs28  (\i Wien\plain\fs28 ) \b 105\plain\fs28 (\b 1\plain\fs28 )). Wien, 1943. \i Supplementum\plain\fs28  (In \i Phyton\plain\fs28  (\i Austria\plain\fs28 ) \b 1\plain\fs28 ). Horn, 1949.
\par \pard ROBYNS, W. (ed.). \i Flore g\'e9n\'e9rale de Belgique\plain\fs28 . Spermatophytes. Vols. 1-. Bruxelles, 1952-.
\par ROHLENA, J. \i Conspectus Florae montenegrinae\plain\fs28  (in\i  Preslia\plain\b\fs28  20\plain\fs28  and\b  21\plain\fs28 ). Praha, 1942.
\par R\'d8NNING, O. I. \i Svalbards Flora\plain\fs28 . Oslo, 1964.
\par ROSTRUP, F.G.E. \i Den danske Flora\plain\fs28 , ed. 19 by C.A. J\'f8rgensen. K\'f8benhavn, 1961
\par ROTHMALER, W.\i  Exkursionsflora f\'fcr die Gebiete der DDR und der BRD\plain\fs28 . 2: \i Gef\'e4sspflanzen\plain\fs28 , ed. 12 by H. Meusel & R. Schubert. Berlin, 1984. 4: \i Kritischer Band\plain\fs28 , ed. 6 by R.Schubert & W. Vent. Berlin,1986. 3: \i Atlas der Gef\'e4sspflanzen\plain\fs28 , ed. 7 by R. Schubert, E. J\'e4ger & K.Werner. Berlin, 1988.
\par \pard ROUY, G.C.C. \i Conspectus de la Flore de France\plain\fs28 . Paris, 1927.
\par ROUY, G.C.C. \i et al. Flore de France\plain\fs28 . Vols. 1-14. Asni\'e8res, Paris & Rochefort, 1893-1913.
\par RUBTSOV, N.I. (ed.). \i Opredelitel' vyssikh Rastenij Kryma\plain\fs28 . Leningrad, 1972.
\par SAMPAIO, G.A. de SILVA FERREIRA. \i Flora portuguesa\plain\fs28 , ed. 2 by A. Pires de Lima. Porto, 1947.
\par SAVULESCU, T. (ed.). \i Flora Republicii populare Rom\'e2ne\plain\fs28 . Vols. 1-12. Bucuresti, 1952-1972.
\par SCHMEIL, O. & FITSCHEN, J. \i Flora von Deutschland\plain\fs28 , ed. 87 by W. Rauh & K. Senghas. Heidelberg, 1982.
\par \pard SO\'d3, R. DE & J\'c1VORKA, S. \i A Magyar N\'f6v\'e9nyvil\'e1g K\'e9zik\'f6nyve\plain\fs28 . Vols. 1-2. Budapest, 1951
\par SO\'d3, R. \i A Magyar Fl\'f3ra es Veget\'e1ci\'f3 Rendszertani-N\'f6\'e9nyf\'f6ldrajzi K\'e9zik\'f6nyve\plain\fs28 . Vols. 1-5. Budapest, 1964 - 1973.
\par SO\'d3, R. & K\'c1RP\'c1TI, Z.\i N\'f6v\'e9nyhat\'e1roz\'f3 2. Magyar Fl\'f3ra\plain\fs28 . Budapest, 1968.
\par STANKOV, S.S. & TALIEV, V.I. \i Opredelitel' vyssikh Rastenij evropejskoy Casti SSSR\plain\fs28 , ed. 2. Moskva, 1957.
\par STEF\'c1NSSON, S. \i Fl\'f3ra \'cdslands\plain\fs28 , ed. 3. Akureyri, 1948.
\par STOJANOV, N., STEFANOV, E. & KITANOV, B.\i  Flora na Balgarija\plain\fs28 , ed. 4. Vols. 1-2. Sofija, 1966-1967.
\par \pard STRID, A. (ed.). \i Mountain Flora of Greece\plain\fs28 . Vols. 1-2. Cambridge & Edinburgh, 1984-1991.
\par SZAFER, W., KULCZINSKI, S. & PAWLOWSKI, B. \i  R\'f3sliny polskie\plain\fs28 . Warszawa, 1953.
\par TOLMATCHEV, A.I. \i Arkticeskaja Flora SSSR\plain\fs28 . Vols. 1-10. Moskva & Leningrad, 1960- 1987.
\par TRELEASE, W.\i  Botanical Observations on the Azores\plain\fs28  (in\i  Ann. Rep. Missouri Bot. Gard.\plain\fs28  \b 8\plain\fs28 ). St Louis, 1897.
\par TUTIN, T.G.\i  et al\plain\fs28 . (ed.).\i  Flora europaea\plain\fs28 . Vols. 1-5. Cambridge, 1964-1980.
\par \pard VALD\'c9S,  B., TALAVERA, S. &  FERNANDEZ-GALIANO, E. (ed.). \i Flora vascular de Andaluc\'eda occidental\plain\fs28 . Vols. 1-3. Barcelona, 1987.
\par WEBB, D. A. \i An Irish Flora\plain\fs28 , ed. 6. Dundalk, 1977.
\par WEBB, D. A. \i The Flora of European Turkey\plain\fs28  (In \i Proc. Roy. Irish Acad\plain\fs28 .\b 65B \plain\fs28 ). Dublin, 1966.
\par WEEVERS, T. \i et al\plain\fs28 . (ed.).\i  Flora neerlandica\plain\fs28 . Vols. 1- . Amsterdam, 1948- .
\par WILLKOMM, H.M. \i Supplementum Prodromi Florae hispanicae\plain\fs28 . Stuttgart, 1893.
\par \pard WILLKOMM, H. M. & LANGE, J. \i Prodromus Florae hispanicae\plain\fs28 . Vols. 1-3. Stuttgart, 1861-1880.
\par WULF, E.V.\i  Flora Kryma\plain\fs28 . Vols. 1-3. Yalta, Leningrad & Moskva, 1927 - 1969.
\par ZEROV, D.K. \i et al\plain\fs28 . (ed.).\i  Vyznacnyk Roslyn Ukrajiny,\plain\fs28  ed. 2 Kijiv, 1965
\par 
\par \page
{\up #}{\footnote\pard\plain{\up #} GV9QFY}
\pard\qc \b  Caption for Map 1\plain\fs28 
\par 
\par \pard To illustrate the boundaries of Europe for the purposes of Flora Europaea, and its division into 'territories' which are indicated by two-letter abbreviations after the summary of geographical distribution for each species. These abbreviations are derived from the Latin name of the territory concerned.
\par 
\par Al        Albania
\par Au       Austria, with Liechtenstein
\par Az        A\'e7ores
\par Be        Belgium, with Luxembourg
\par Bl         Islas Baleares
\par Br         Britain, including Orkneys, Zetland and Isle of Man; excluding Channel Islands and Northern Ireland
\par \pard Bu         Bulgaria
\par Co         Corse
\par Cr          Kriti (Creta), with Karpathos, Kasos and Gavdhos
\par Cz         Czechoslovakia
\par Dk         Denmark (\i Dania\plain\fs28 ), including Bornholm
\par Fa          F\'e6r\'f6er
\par Fe          Finland (\i Fennia\plain\fs28 ), including Ahvenanmaa (Aaland Islands)
\par Ga          France (\i Gallia\plain\fs28 ), with the Channel Islands (\'celes Normandes) and Monaco; excluding Corse
\par Ge          Germany (both eastern and western republics)
\par Gr          Greece, excluding those islands included under Kriti (\i supra\plain\fs28 ) and those which are outside Europe as defined for\i  Flora Europaea\plain\fs28 
\par \pard Hb          Ireland (\i Hibernia\plain\fs28 ); both the republic and Northern Ireland
\par He          Switzerland (\i Helvetia\plain\fs28 )
\par Ho          Netherlands (\i Hollandia\plain\fs28 )
\par Hs           Spain (\i Hispania\plain\fs28 ), with Gibraltar and Andorra; excluding Islas Baleares
\par Hu          Hungary
\par Is            Iceland (\i Islandia\plain\fs28 )
\par It            Italy, including the Arcipelago Toscano; excluding Sardegna and Sicilia as defined\i  infra\plain\fs28 
\par Ju           Jugoslavia
\par Lu          Portugal (\i Lusitania\plain\fs28 )
\par \pard No          Norway
\par Po           Poland
\par Ro           Romania
\par Rs           U.S.S.R. (Rossia). This has been subdivided as follows, using the floristic divisions of Komarov's\i  Flora U.R.S.S.\plain\fs28 ; in a few places, however, our
\par                boundaries deviate slightly from those of Komarov.*
\par                Rs (N) \i Northern division\plain\fs28 : Arctic Europe, Karelo-Lapland, Dvina-Pecora
\par                Rs (B) \i Baltic division\plain\fs28 : Estonia, Latvia, Lithuania, Kaliningradskaja Oblast'
\par \pard                Rs (C) \i Central division\plain\fs28 : Ladoga-Ilmen, Upper Volga, Volga-Kama,
\par                Upper Dnepr, Volga-Don, Ural
\par                Rs (W)\i  South-western division\plain\fs28 : Moldavia, Middle Dnepr, Black Sea, Upper Dnestr
\par                Rs (K) \i Krym\plain\fs28  
\par                Rs (E) \i South-eastern division\plain\fs28 : Lower Don, Lower Volga, Transvolga
\par                White Russia falls entirely within Rs (C). Ukraine is largely in Rs (W),
\par                but partly in Rs (K ), Rs (C) and Rs (E). The European part of Kazakhstan is in Rs (E)
\par \pard Sa           Sardegna
\par Sb           Svalbard, comprising Spitsbergen, Bj\'f6rn\'f6ya (Bear Island) and Jan Mayen
\par Si            Sicilia, with Pantelleria, Isole Pelagie, Isole Lipari and Ustica; also the Malta archipelago
\par Su           Sweden (\i Suecia\plain\fs28 ), including \'d6land and Gotland
\par Tu          Turkey (European part), including Imroz
\par *             For the relation of these subdivisions to those used in Fedorov's 
\par  Partis Europaeae URSS, see Introduction.
\par \page
{\up #}{\footnote\pard\plain{\up #} GV9QFZ}
\pard\qc \b Caption for Map 2\plain\fs28 
\par 
\par \pard To illustrate the boundary between Europe and Asia in the Aegean region.
\par The boundary is based largely on the proposals of K.H. Rechinger, 'Grundz\'fcge der Pflanzenverbreitung in der Aeg\'e4is', \i Vegetatio\plain\b\fs28  2\plain\fs28 : 55 (1949). His northern, western and Kikladhes divisions are regarded as entirely in Europe and his eastern division as entirely in Asia; it was, however, necessary to divide his southern and north-eastern divisions.
\par \page
{\up #}{\footnote\pard\plain{\up #} 1W_QPJP}
\pard\qc \b Caption for Map 3\plain\fs28 
\par 
\par \pard To illustrate the boundary between Europe and Asia in the southern part of the U.S.S.R.
\par The southern boundary of Europe between the Caspian and Black Seas is defined for \i Flora Europaea\plain\fs28 
\par \page
{\up #}{\footnote\pard\plain{\up #} GV9QG1}
\pard\qc \b Caption for Map 4\plain\fs28 
\par 
\par \pard To illustrate the meaning to be attached to certain phrases used in summaries of geographical distribution. 
\par \i W. Europe\plain\fs28 : A\'e7ores, Portugal, Spain, Islas Baleares, France, Ireland, Britain, F\'e6r\'f6er, Iceland, S.W. Norway, Netherlands, Belgium, N.W. Germany, W. Denmark (Jylland), Corse, Sardegna, and small parts of N.W. Italy and W. Switzerland.
\par \i E. Europe\plain\fs28 : N.E. Greece and the Aegean islands, Bulgaria, S. & E. Romania, Finland, U.S.S.R.
\par \i N. Europe\plain\fs28 : Svalbard, Iceland, F\'e6r\'f6er, Ireland, Britain (excluding S. England), Denmark, Fennoscandia, U.S.S.R. north of a line running through Minsk-Tula-Penza-Orsk.
\par \pard \i S. Europe\plain\fs28 : Europe south of a line running through Bordeaux\'97Chamb\'e9ry\'97Aosta\'97Locarno\'97Riva\'97Udine\'97Zagreb\'97Beograd\'97Ploesti\'97Odessa\'97Rostov\'97Astrakhan'.
\par \pard\qc - - - - - - - - - - - - - -  eastern boundary of \i W. Europe\plain\fs28 
\par \'b0 \'b0 \'b0 \'b0 \'b0 \'b0 \'b0 \'b0 \'b0 \'b0 \'b0 \'b0   western boundary of\i  E. Europe\plain\fs28 
\par .-.-.-.-.-.-.-.-.-.-.-.-.-.-   southern boundary of\i  N. Europe\plain\fs28 
\par \'d7 \'d7 \'d7 \'d7 \'d7 \'d7 \'d7 \'d7 \'d7 \'d7  northern boundary of \i S. Europe\plain\fs28 
\par \pard For the definition and illustration of the meaning of S.W., N.W., S.E., N.E. and C. Europe, and of certain other geographical phrases, see MAP V.
\par \page
{\up #}{\footnote\pard\plain{\up #} GV9QG2}
\pard \fs24 
\par \pard\qc \b\fs28 Caption for Map 5\plain\fs28 
\par 
\par \pard To illustrate the meaning to be attached to certain phrases used in summaries of geographical distribution.
\par \i S.W. Europe\plain\fs28 : A\'e7ores, Portugal, Spain, Islas Baleares, Corse, Sardegna, S. France, N.W. Italy
\par \i N.W. Europe\plain\fs28 : Iceland, F\'e6r\'f6er, Britain, N. France, Belgium, Netherlands, N.W. Germany, W. Denmark (Jylland), Norway
\par \i S.E. Europe\plain\fs28 : The Balkan peninsula, Aegean islands, S.E. Italy, S. & E. Romania, U.S.S.R. south of about 48\'b0 N.
\par \i N.E. Europe\plain\fs28 : U.S.S.R. north of a line from Vilnius to Sverdlovsk, Finland, E. Sweden, a small part of N.E. Norway.
\par \pard \i C. Europe\plain\fs28 : Alsace and Lorraine, Germany, Switzerland, Austria, the Italian Alps from Monte Bianco eastwards, Hungary, Czechoslovakia, Poland, the Ukrainian Carpathians, N., W. & C. Romania, Jugoslavia north of the Danube-Sava-Kupa line.
\par 
\par Maps IV and V are intended merely to give precision to certain geographical phrases which are commonly used, but used in various senses in different parts of Europe. They do not purport to divide Europe into phyto-geographical regions, as is apparent from the fact that along parts of their boundaries these regions overlap, and along other parts they are not contiguous.
\par \pard 
\par Certain other phrases used in the summaries of geographical distribution, but not illustrated in the maps, may be briefly defined as follows:
\par \i Alps\plain\fs28 : Separated from the Appennini at 8\'b015' E. (above Savona); bounded on the east by the line Semmering\'97Graz\'97Maribor\'97Ljubljana\'97Trieste. Divided into three major divisions: eastern, central, and south-western, by the lines Arlberg\'97St Moritz\'97Chiavenna\'97Como and Gen\'e8ve\'97Chamonix\'97Aosta\'97Ivrea.
\par \i Arctic\plain\fs28 : This term is used to designate all territories north of the Arctic Circle, and is not restricted to those which have only 'arctic' vegetation.
\par \pard \i Extreme north\plain\fs28 : Arctic Europe, together with Iceland, and Fennoscandia and Russia northwards from approximately 64\'b0 N.
\par \i Carpathians\plain\fs28 : Divided into \i western\plain\fs28 ,\i  eastern\plain\fs28  and \i southern\plain\fs28  divisions at the pass of Lupk\'f3w (22\'b0 E.) and the Oituz Pass (46\'b0 05' N.). The western division is in Czechoslovakia and Poland, the southern entirely in Romania, the eastern extends from Czechoslovakia and Poland through Ukraine to Romania.
\par \i Pyrenees\plain\fs28 : Includes the subsidiary chains within 50 km of the main watershed, and extends westwards to Bilbao and Vitoria. Divided into eastern, central and western divisions at the Pont du Roi (0\'b0 45' E.) and the Col du Somport (0\'b0 30' W.).\i Balkan peninsula\plain\fs28 : Jugoslavia south of the Danube\'97Sava\'97Kupa line, Bulgaria, Albania, Greece (including islands close to the mainland) and Turkey-in-Europe.
\par \pard \i Fennoscandia\plain\fs28 : Norway, Sweden, Finland and part of N.W. Russia (Murmanskaja Oblast' and Karelskaja A.S.S.R.).
\par \i Mediterranean region\plain\fs28 : All European territories within 100 km of the Mediterranean Sea (including the Adriatic, but not the Black Sea), and including also all Italy except the Alpine region and all Spain except the west and north-west. It is divided into\i  eastern\plain\fs28  and \i western\plain\fs28  divisions by a line following the main watershed of Italy and running east of Sicilia. \i Central Mediterranean\plain\fs28  indicates the region between 8\'b0 E. and 20\'b0 E.
\par \pard \i Aegean region\plain\fs28 : All islands in the Aegean Sea which come within the scope of the\i  Flora\plain\fs28 , and those parts of Greece and Turkey-in-Europe which drain into the Aegean Sea or the Dardanelles.
\par \i Macedonia\plain\fs28 : Comprises the Jugoslav republic of Makedonija, the Greek province of Makedhonia, and the Bulgarian province of Blagoevgrad.
\par \page
\pard\qc 
\par {\up #}{\footnote\pard\plain{\up #} .TISG}
\b Acknowledgements\plain\fs28  (Volume 1, 1st ed.)
\par 
\par \pard The Flora Europaea project received in its early stages several valuable \i ad hoc \plain\fs28 grants without which no substantial progress could have been made; these were from the Royal Society, the Botanical Research Fund, the Royal Horticultural Society, and Miss M. S. Campbell. A loan from Mr and Mrs J. E. Raven tided the Committee over a difficult period. In 1959 a successful application was made by the Organizing Committee to the Department of Scientific and Industrial Research for a three-year grant which has now been extended for a further three years. The total amount of the grant for the period 1959-1965 is \'a332,000. This has permitted adequate finance of the Secretariat and its services, and the appointment of a number of full-time Research Assistants: Miss A. B. Mowat (1959-1960), Dr P. W. Ball (1959-) and Mr A. O. Chater (1960-). Dr Ball previously held a Leverhulme Research Fellowship at the University of Liverpool to work on the project. The Committee gratefully acknowledges all this generous support.
\par \pard\sa75\sl275\fi175 In addition to this main grant from British sources, the project received direct and indirect financial help from several countries, among which should be mentioned a grant for secretarial printing from the Instituto de Alta Cultura, Lisbon, and grants from the Ministries of Education in Austria and Italy, and from the International Union of Biological Sciences, towards the Symposia held in Vienna and Genoa. The third Symposium which was held in Romania was generously subsidized by the Academy of the Romanian People's Republic. We gratefully acknowledge the sponsorship of our project by the Linnean Society of London.
\par \pard\sa75\sl275\fi175 Acknowledgement is also due to the Universities of Cambridge, Dublin, Durham, Leicester and Liverpool for their support in making facilities available to the members of the Editorial Committee and their assistants. In particular the University of Liverpool has provided accommodation in the Hartley Botanical Laboratories for the Secretariat since 1957.
\par We are also grateful to the Directors of the various Museums and Herbaria who have provided the Editorial Committee and Regional Advisers with facilities to study their collections and utilize their libraries. Amongst these must be mentioned the Herbarium and Library, Royal Botanic Gardens, Kew; the Department of Botany, British Museum (Natural History), London; the Naturhistorisches Museum, Vienna; and the Herbarium of the Istituto Botanico, Florence. The Trinity College Dublin Trust has made a substantial grant towards the provision of microfilm and a reader.
\par \pard\sa75\sl275\fi175 A very large number of individual botanists have assisted us in various ways. The following deserve special mention: P. Aellen (Basel), Miss P. Edwards (London), A. Hansen (K\'f8benhavn), E.K. Horwood (Leicester), A.C. Jermy (London), N.Y. Sandwith (Kew). P.D.  Sell (Cambridge), as well as assisting in several other ways, undertook the laborious task of preparing the index for the press.
\par \pard\sa275\sl275\fi175 The staff of the Secretariat, Mrs R. Seddon, Mrs J. Beck and Mrs T. Donnelly, deserve our special gratitude for their great efficiency and loyalty even during times of almost overwhelming pressure.
\par October 1963
\par \page
\pard\qc 
\par {\up #}{\footnote\pard\plain{\up #} .TISH}
\b Acknowledgements\plain\fs28  (Volume 1, 2nd ed.)
\par 
\par \pard\sa95\sl275 The Editorial Committee gratefully acknowledges the support of the Linnean Society of London, whose Flora Europaea Trust Fund provided \'a3120,000 towards the cost of revising this volume. It has financed the employment of two full-time Research Officers, J.R. Akeroyd (1983-1988) and M.E. Newton (1990-), and has met other expenses of the Secretariat. This was helped over a difficult period by a loan from the Royal Society's scientific publications fund. Financial assistance in the form of a legacy from the estate of the late Miss M.S. Campbell is also greatly appreciated, having provided an opportunity to commission illustrations for a new series of Notulae.
\par \pard\sa75\sl275\fi175 In undertaking the revision of Volume 1 of \i Flora Europaea \plain\fs28 the Committee has enjoyed continued assistance and encouragement from many colleagues throughout Europe. We wish to thank them for their willing and generous co-operation. Their help has been given in many ways, some of them botanical and others technical, but all of them vital to the success of our project.
\par We are deeply appreciative of the assistance of R.R. Mill, who compiled and checked the Appendices, and Mrs L. Walters, who transferred synonymy to the text and drew up the index. Our special thanks are due to Mrs M. Hart for typing the manuscript so diligently.
\par \pard In addition to the authors of individual accounts, we have received advice on particular groups from many people: J. Cullen \i (Alyssum, Aurinia), \plain\fs28 C.R.Fraser-Jenkins \i (Polypodium), \plain\fs28 H.Freitag (Chenopodiaceae), I.C. Hedge (Chenopodiaceae), M.V. Kasakova \i (Schivereckia), \plain\fs28 R.D. Meikle (Salicaceae), C.N. Page \i (Equisetum), \plain\fs28 J.R. Press (Rumex, Subgen. \i Platypodium), \plain\fs28 C.D. Preston (Aizoaceae), K.H. Rechinger (Rumex), T.C.G. Rich (Cruciferae), L.-P. Ronse Decraene \i (Polygonum), \plain\fs28 F. Rose \i (Salicornia), \plain\fs28 G.D. Rowley (Aizoaceae, Crassulaceae), D. Tzanoudakis \i (Paeonia), \plain\fs28 P. Uotila \i (Chenopodium) \plain\fs28 and S.D. Webster \i (Ranunculus, \plain\fs28 Subgen. \i Batrachium). \plain\fs28 P\i .\plain\fs28 W. Ball, as well as editing Cruciferae, critically read many of the manuscripts, and A.C. Jermy and Miss A.M. Paul carefully checked Pteridophyta.
\par \pard\sa75\sl275\fi175 More general comment and advice for which we are grateful was received from: H.J.M. Bowen, R.K. Brummitt, G. Buzas, E.J. Clement, D.V. Geltman, A. Hansen, J. Jalas, C.E. Jarvis, S.L. Jury, D.H. Kent, Miss C. Leon, Mrs B. Molesworth Allen, D. Nicolson, Miss E. Powell, R.W. Rutherford, P.D. Sell, C.A. Stace, J. Suominen and M.F. Watson. The Editorial Committee is also most grateful to members of the Committee for Mapping the Flora of Europe for their generosity in allowing us to consult unpublished typescripts from the \i Atlas Florae Europaeae \plain\fs28 project.
\par \pard\sa275\sl275\fi175 The Committee acknowledges a debt of gratitude to the Directors of many Museums and Herbaria. We thank them all but wish particularly to mention the University of Cambridge ; Trinity College, Dublin; the Royal Botanic Garden, Edinburgh; the National Museums & Galleries on Merseyside, Liverpool; the Natural History Museum, London; and the University of Reading, the institutions whose facilities we have enjoyed for the greater part of our work.
\par \page
\pard\qc 
\par {\up #}{\footnote\pard\plain{\up #} 3DHT9Z3}
\b\ul Identification Keys\plain\ul\fs28 
\par \plain\fs28 
\par Use this screen to trace through a key.
\par 
\par \pard\li355\fi-355\tx355 \f1 \'b7\tab \plain\fs28 Click on one of the boxes (\i e.g\plain\fs28 . Angiospermae) to display the first couplet of a key.
\par \f1 \'b7\tab \plain\fs28 Select characters with a click in one of the two panels.
\par \f1 \'b7\tab \plain\fs28 Selected characters appear in the \i Accumulated Characters\plain\fs28  list.
\par \f1 \'b7\tab \plain\fs28 To back up to an earlier character, click on a character in this list.
\par \f1 \'b7\tab \plain\fs28 Click the \i Possible Outcomes\plain\fs28  box to list the taxa which have the selected characters in common.
\par \f1 \'b7\tab \plain\fs28 At an end-point, the outcome appears in the box above the couplet.
\par \pard\li355\fi-355\tx355 \f1 \'b7\tab \plain\fs28 For a description of the taxon, click the book icon.
\par \f1 \'b7\tab \plain\fs28 Click the outcome box to continue the identification.
\par \pard\tx355 
\par \pard\tx355 To link to the Glossary, hold down the <Ctrl> key and left mouse button and stroke over the term in a character panel. This works only when the character panels are active (these become inactive and appear dimmed when an outcome has been reached). To reactivate the character panels, click a character in the \i Accumulated Characters\plain\fs28  panel.
\par \page
\pard\qc\fi355 
\par {\up #}{\footnote\pard\plain{\up #} 1PBLC5Z}
\b\ul Introduction\plain\ul\fs28 
\par 
\par \pard\fi355 \plain\fs28 Use the Main Menu to navigate to the folowing screens:
\par 
\par \pard\li715\fi-355\tx355 \f1 \'b7\tab \plain\fs28 Identification Keys
\par \f1 \'b7\tab \plain\fs28 Indexes
\par \f1 \'b7\tab \plain\fs28 Search
\par \f1 \'b7\tab \plain\fs28 Glossary
\par \pard\li355\tx355 
\par \pard\li715\fi-355\tx355 \f1 \'b7\tab \plain\fs28 For context-sensitive help, drag '?' from the top right corner of the screen over the panel and click.
\par \f1 \'b7\tab \plain\fs28 To show the definition of a term in a text page, stroke over the term with the the left mouse button held down. 
\par \f1 \'b7\tab \plain\fs28 In a text page , click on the the arrows at the bottom right corner of the screen to navigate through the pages.
\par \pard\li355\tx355 
\par \pard\li355\tx355 To go directly to the text of Flora Europaea, click on \i Text of Flora Europaea\plain\fs28 : 
\par \pard\li715\fi-355\tx355 \f1 \'b7\tab \plain\fs28 Select \i Preliminaries\plain\fs28  to navigate to the Maps, Appendices, etc.
\par \f1 \'b7\tab \plain\fs28 Select \i Text\plain\fs28  to call up a particular page.
\par \pard\li355\tx355 
\par \pard\li355\tx355 The program's main features are shown in real-time (230 MHz PC) in the EuroFloraDemo movie
\par \page
\pard\qc 
\par {\up #}{\footnote\pard\plain{\up #} 3G2I93}
\b\ul Search \plain\fs28 
\par \pard 
\par \pard\li355 Use this screen to find virtually any item or combination of items in Flora Europaea. For detailed help on constructing a search phrase and several examples, drag '?' from the top right corner over the phrase text box and click.
\par \pard 
\par \b\ul To conduct a search\plain\fs28 :
\par \pard\li715\fi-355\tx355 \f1 \'b7\tab \plain\fs28 Click on the panel to toggle between a case-sensitive and case-insensitive search.
\par \f1 \'b7\tab \plain\fs28 Construct the search phrase.
\par \f1 \'b7\tab \plain\fs28 Select \i Search in Paragraph\plain\fs28  or \i Search in Page\plain\fs28  (only available if the search is for one item). \i Search in Paragraph\plain\fs28  is the only choice if the search phrase has more than one item, the items searched for are all in one paragraph (usually describing a species). 
\par \f1 \'b7\tab \plain\fs28 Click \i Go\plain\fs28 , then click the \i List results\plain\fs28  box.
\par \pard\li715\fi-355\tx355 \f1 \'b7\tab \plain\fs28 Click in the \i Results \plain\fs28 list to show the text.
\par \pard\li355\tx355 
\par \page
\pard\qc 
\par {\up #}{\footnote\pard\plain{\up #} 2HJ00U}
\b\ul Indexes\plain\fs28 
\par 
\par \pard\li355\fi-355\tx355 Use this screen to send the key for a taxon to the \i Identification Keys\plain\fs28  screen or to go directly to its description in the text. 
\par 
\par \f1 \'b7\tab \plain\fs28 To select the taxon, type the leading letters in the text box and click on the item in the scrolled-up list.
\par \pard\tx355 
\par \pard\tx355 \b\ul Identification:\plain\fs28 
\par \pard\li355\fi-355\tx355 \f1 \'b7\tab \plain\fs28 Click on the \i Keys\plain\fs28  box at the bottom of the screen to go to \i Identification Keys\plain\fs28  .
\par \f1 \'b7\tab \plain\fs28 In \i Identification Keys\plain\fs28 , click on the taxon name to show the first couplet of the key and continue the identification (\i cf\plain\fs28 . Identification Keys).
\par \pard\tx355 
\par \pard\tx355 \b\ul Description :\plain\ul\fs28 
\par \pard\li355\fi-355\tx355 \plain\f1\fs28 \'b7\tab \plain\fs28 Click the \i All Species\plain\fs28  box.
\par \f1 \'b7\tab \plain\fs28 Scroll down the list to the desired species and click on it to select it.
\par \f1 \'b7\tab \plain\fs28 Click the book icon to show the text (in the text page click the right mouse button repeatedly to show all instances of the name on the page).\ul 
\par \page
{\up #}{\footnote\pard\plain{\up #} A6EI.S}
\pard\qc \b\ul The Electronic Flora Europaea
\par 
\par \pard \plain\fs28 
\par When the preparation of \i Flora Europaea\plain\fs28  began in the 1950s, no-one could have envisaged the dramatic developments in information technology and their application to floristic projects of this nature. It is, therefore, with great pleasure that we welcome the publication of this electronic version of \i Flora Europaea\plain\fs28 . Even today, the number of Floras that are available as CD Roms is still very small and we are sure that this will be widely welcomed as a tool that is in tune with the age. Dr S. Jorna (assisted by Dr C. Muir) is to be congratulated on his careful scanning and setting up of the five volumes of text that made the issue of this CD Rom of \i Flora Europaea\plain\fs28  possible.\i  
\par \pard 
\par \plain\fs28 The completion of \i Flora Europaea\plain\fs28 , 20 years ago, was a landmark. Not only did it give Europe a consensus Flora for the whole continent and provide a nomenclatural standard, but it served as an inspiration and model for Flora writers in other continents. 
\par 
\par It had been predicted that the publication of \i Flora Europaea\plain\fs28  would de detrimental to plant taxonomy, but the opposite has been the case. It lead to a remarkable resurgence of activity in the systematics of European plants, with large numbers of new taxa described and numerous taxonomic treatments published, including regional, national and local Floras and revisions of individual genera and species groups. This has been particularly true for southern Europe where major Flora projects are now particularly active in areas of high plant diversity: the Iberian Peninsula and Greece. 
\par \pard 
\par The skilful management of the royalties, paid into a Trust Fund administered by the Linnean Society of London, enabled the \i Flora Europaea \plain\fs28 Editorial Committee to appoint Dr J. R. Akeroyd to undertake a revision of volume one under the direction of the Editorial Committee. The revised volume contains some 10% more numbered species than the original and the 350-odd species mentioned in \'91observations\'92 in the first edition have been either enumerated or reduced to synonymy, although further species in \'91observations\'92 have been added. 
\par \pard 
\par The Editorial Committee decided that it would not be feasible or desirable to continue to revise volumes 2-5 in this way and this has meant that no more revisions have been undertaken or are planned for \i Flora Europaea.\plain\fs28  Following this decision, the Editorial Committee decided to disband and created \'91The \i Flora Europaea \plain\fs28 Residuary Body\'92 to deal with any matters arising out of the publication of Flora Europaea, such as this CD Rom.
\par 
\par Recently,. an organization called Euro+Med PlantBase has been established to create a modern electronic Euro-Mediterranean plant information system and database (Project Sisyphus), that aims to produce a new plant checklist for Europe and provide revised taxonomic treatments for all of Europe, the countries bordering the Mediterranean Sea and Macaronesia. It aims to restore the taxonomic consensus once established by \i Flora Europaea. \plain\fs28 The Linnean Society of London is again a sponsor of this project as is the Organisation for the Phyto-Taxonomic Investigation of the Mediterranean Area (OPTIMA). A grant from the European Union under Framework 5 has recently been obtained for the initial phase of this project whose Secretariat is based at the University of Reading.
\par \pard 
\par An earlier electronic version of \i Flora Europaea, \plain\fs28 excluding the descriptions, was prepared under the direction of one of us (VHH) at Reading. This database became known as the European Science Foundation European Documentation System (ESFEDS) and this has been further developed at the Royal Botanic Garden, Edinburgh by Dr R. J. Pankhurst. The ESFEDS database provides the main starting point for the Euro+Med PlantBase project. It will thus build on the strengths and underlying philosophy of \i Flora Europaea\plain\fs28 . 
\par \pard 
\par V. H. Heywood (Secretary of the \i Flora Europaea\plain\fs28  Organization 1955\'961986, and member of the \i Flora Europaea\plain\fs28  Residuary Body)
\par 
\par S. L. Jury (Secretary of the \i Flora Europaea\plain\fs28  Residuary Body)
\par 
\par Centre for Plant Diversity and Systematics
\par School of Plant Sciences
\par The University of Reading
\par 
\par September 2000
\par 
\par 
\par \b\ul 
\par \plain\fs28 Flora Europaea\b , \plain\fs28 published in five\b  \plain\fs28 volumes over three decades, remains the definitive reference for the identification of ferns, conifers or flowering plants growing wild or widely cultivated in Europe. The entire text including all appendices, maps, etc. has been faithfully reproduced and uniquely enhanced to include:
\par \pard 
\par \pard\li355\fi-355\tx355 \f1 \'b7\tab \plain\fs28 The entire text of the five currently published volumes on one single CD
\par \pard\tx355 
\par \pard\li355\fi-355\tx355 \f1 \'b7\tab \plain\fs28 Fully interactive identification keys that allow the user to retrace the route taken, or to project forward to possible outcomes, at any point in the identification process
\par \pard\tx355 
\par \pard\li355\fi-355\tx355 \f1 \'b7\tab \plain\fs28 A powerful Boolean search engine allowing wildcards and up to 25 search items linkable by AND, OR or FOLLOWED BY 
\par \pard\tx355 
\par \pard\li355\fi-355\tx355 \f1 \'b7\tab \plain\fs28 Immediate access from the text or key to a comprehensive glossary yielding definitions of taxonomic terms 
\par \pard\tx355 
\par \pard\li355\fi-355\tx355 \f1 \'b7\tab \plain\fs28 Indexes to the families, genera, and species listed in Flora Europaea which lead directly to their description in the text or to their key \b 
\par \pard\tx355 
\par \page
\pard \plain\fs28 
\par \pard\qc {\up #}{\footnote\pard\plain{\up #} .YWNEW}
\ul Accessing the text\plain\fs28 
\par 
\par \pard To access the text directly, click on \i 'Text of Flora Europaea'\plain\fs28 .
\par \pard\li355\fi-355\tx355 \f1 \'b7\tab \plain\fs28 The sub-menu \i 'Preliminaries\plain\fs28 ' yields a menu which gains access to the Prefaces, Appendices, Maps, etc. of the five volumes of Flora Europaea.
\par \f1 \'b7\tab \plain\fs28 The sub-menu \i 'Text'\plain\fs28  is used to go directly to a page in Flora Europaea.
\par \page
{\up #}{\footnote\pard\plain{\up #} 25GR_RB}
\pard\qc \ul Accessing the Glossary\plain\fs28 
\par \pard 
\par A click on \i 'Glossary' \plain\fs28 leads to the alphabetized Glossary.
\par \page
\pard\qc 
\par }