{\rtf1\ansi\deff0\deftab720{\fonttbl{\f0\fswiss MS Sans Serif;}{\f1\froman\fcharset2 Symbol;}{\f2\fswiss MS Sans Serif;}{\f3\froman\fprq2 Times New Roman;}}
{\colortbl\red0\green0\blue0;\red0\green0\blue128;\red0\green0\blue255;}
\deflang1033\pard\plain\f3\fs28\cf1\b  A 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Abaxial -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Said of an embryo which is out of the axis of the seed as the result of one-sided development of the albumen, or of the side of a lateral organ away from the axis.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Aberrant -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Differing from the type of a species, genus, or higher taxon in one or more characters, but not readily assignable to another taxon.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Abortion -n.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  The arrested development of an organ.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Abortive -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Imperfectly developed, not fully developed at maturity, as abortive stamens with filaments only.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Abrupt -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Changing suddenly rather than gradually, as in a pinnately compound leaf without a terminal leaflet.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Acaulescent -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Stemless or apparently stemless.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Accrescent -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Enlarging with age, as the bud scales of some hickories or sepals of some flowers.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Accumbent -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Lying against another body.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Achene (akene)-n.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  A small, dry, indehiscent, one-seeded fruit in which the ovary wall is free from the seed.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Acicular -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Slenderly needle-shaped.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Actinomorphic -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  With radial symmetry.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Aculeate -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Prickly; beset with prickles or sharp points.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Aculeolate -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Beset with small prickles.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Acuminate -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Tapering to a prolonged point; attenuate.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Acute -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Distinctly and sharply pointed, but not drawn out.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Adaxial -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  With side or face next to the axis; ventral.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Adherent -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Attached or joined, though naturally or normally separate; adnate.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Adhesion -n.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  The union or fusion of unlike parts.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Adnate -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  With unlike parts congenitally grown together.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Adventitious -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Said of plants recently introduced, or of organs arising from abnormal positions, as buds from a root or roots from the stem or leaf.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Adventive -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Imperfectly naturalized.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Aestival -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Belonging or peculiar to summer.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Aestivation -n.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  The arrangement of the parts of a flower in the bud.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Affinity -n.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  The closeness of relationship between plants as shown by similarity of important organs.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Agamospermy -n.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Seed production without fertilization.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Aggregate -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Assembled; collected together.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Aggregate fruit -n.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  A cluster of ripened ovaries traceable to separate pistils of the same flower and inserted on a common receptacle.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Aggregate species -n.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  A superspecies which may be compounded of more than one true species.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Albino -n.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Any animal with congenital deficiency of pigment in skin, hair, eyes, etc.; a plant with colorless chromatophores, due to the absence of chloroplasts or undeveloped chromoplasts.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Allogamous -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Reproducing by cross-fertilization.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Allogamy -n.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  The pollination of a flower with pollen from another flower. See also Geitonogamy; Xenogamy.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Alpine -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Pertaining to the Alps or to the Arctic zone of a mountain; above timberline.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Alternate -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Any arrangement of leaves or other parts not opposite or whorled; placed singly at different heights on the axis or stem.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Alveolate -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  With pits or depressions suggesting honey-comb.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Ammophilous -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Sand-loving.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Amphibious -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Capable of living on land or in water.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Amphitropous -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Turned both ways; applied to an ovule with hilum intermediate between the micropyle and chalaza.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Amplexicaul -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Clasping or embracing the stem, as a leaf.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Anastomosing -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Netted; interveined; said of leaves marked by cross-veins forming a network; interlacing.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Anastomosis -n.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  The union of one vein with another, the connection forming a reticulation.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Anatropous -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  The ovule reversed with micropyle close to the side of the hylum and the chalaza at the opposite end.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Anemophilous -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Said of flowers pollinated by wind.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Annual -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Of one year's duration; completing its life cycle in one year.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Annular -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Said of any organs disposed in a circle.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Annulus -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  In ferns, the elastic organ which partially invests the theca, and at maturity bursts it;  in Equisetaceae, the imperfectly developed foliar sheath below the fruit spike; the fleshy rim of the corolla in  Asclepiads, as the genus  Stapelia.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Anomalous -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Not equal; unlike its allies in certain points; contrary to rule; unusual; out of the ordinary.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Anterior -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Front; on the front side; away from the axis; toward the subtending bract.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Anther -n.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  That portion of the stamen which bears the pollen.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Anthesis -n.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  The act of flowering; strictly, the time of expansion of a flower, but often used to designate the flowering period.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Antrorse -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Directed upward or forward; opposite of retrorse.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Apetalous -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Without petals, or with a single perianth.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Apical -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Pertaining to the apex or tip.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Apicula -n.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  A short, sharp, but not stiff point.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Apiculate -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Having a minute pointed tip.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Apocarpous -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  With carpels separate, not united. See also Syncarpous.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Apocarpy -n.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  The condition of having the carpels separate.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Apophysis -n.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  An enlargement or swelling of the surface of an organ; the part of a cone scale that is exposed when the cone is closed.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Appendiculate -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Furnished with an appendage.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Appressed -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Lying flat against an organ.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Approximate -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Drawn close together, but not united.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Aquatic -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Living in water.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Arachnoid -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Cobwebby; composed of soft, slender entangled hairs; spider-like.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Arborescent -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Attaining the size or character of a tree; tree-like.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Arbuscula -n.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  A small shrub with the aspect of a tree.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Arcuate -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Moderately curved; bent like a bow; descriptive of leaf venation of  Cornus, Ceanothus, etc.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Areolate -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Marked with areoles, divided into distinct spaces; reticulate.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Aril -n.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  An appendage or an outer covering of a seed growing out from the hilum or funiculus; sometimes it appears as pulpy covering.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Aristate -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Awned; provided with a bristle at the end, rarely on the back or edge.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Armed -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Provided with any kind of strong and sharp defense, as of thorns, spines, prickles, barbs, etc.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Aromatic -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Fragrant, spicy, pungent.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Articulate -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Jointed; provided with nodes or joints, or places where separation may naturally take place.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Ascending -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Rising up; produced somewhat obliquely or indirectly upward.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Asperous -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Rough or harsh to the touch.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Attenuate -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Long tapering, acuminate.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Auricle -n.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  An ear; applied to earlike lobes at base of leaf blades and to small lobes at the summit of the sheath in many species of  Gramineae.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Auriculate -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  With ear-like appendages.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Austral -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Southern; occasionally applied to plants which are native to warmer countries, even if not from the Southern Hemisphere.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Autogamous -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Self-fertilized.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Autogamy -n.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  The fertilization of a flower by its own pollen, as in an autophilous flower.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Autumnal -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Of, or pertaining to autumn; flowering in autumn; serotinal.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Awn -n.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  A bristle-like appendage, especially on the glumes of grasses.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Axil -n.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  The upper angle formed between the axis and any organ that arises from it.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Axile -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  In the axis, said ordinarily of the placentae in the ovary.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Axillary -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Situated in the axil.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Axis -n.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  The main or central line of development of any plant or organ; the main stem.\tab 
\par \pard\tx4320\plain\f3\fs28\cf1\b  B 
\par \pard\plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Baccate -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Berry-like; pulpy or fleshy.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Barbed -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  With rigid points or short bristles, usually reflexed like the barb of a fishhook.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Barbellate -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Finely barbed.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Basifixed -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Attached or fixed by the base, as an ovule that is affixed to its support by its bottom rather than by its side.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Beak -n.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  A long, prominent, and substantial projection; applied particularly to a prolongation of a fruit or carpel.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Beaked -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Ending in a firm, prolonged, slender tip.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Beard -n.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  A long awn, or bristle-like hair.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Bearded -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Bearing or furnished with long or stiff hairs.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Berry -n.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Any simple fruit having a pulpy or fleshy pericarp, as the grape, gooseberry, tomato, or banana.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Bicuspidate -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Having two sharp points.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Bidentate -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Having two teeth.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Biennial -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Of two seasons' duration from seed to maturity and death.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Bifid -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Forked.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Bifurcate -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Forked or two-pronged.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Bilabiate -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Two-lipped.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Bilateral -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Arranged on opposite sides.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Bilocular -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Two-celled, with two compartments.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Binomial -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  The generic and specific name of an organism.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Bipinnate -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  A condition in which both primary and secondary divisions of a leaf are pinnate.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Bisexual -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Having both sexes on the same individual; a hermaphrodite.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Blade -n.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Lamina; the expanded portion of a leaf or petal.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Bloom -n.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  The white, waxy, or pruinose covering on many fruits, leaves, and stems.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Boreal -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Northern.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Boss -n.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  A knoblike or rounded protuberance; umbo.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Bossed -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  With a rounded surface having a projection in its center.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Brachiate -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Spreading with branches suggesting arms.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Bract -n.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  A modified leaf subtending a flower or belonging to an inflorescence.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Bracteate -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  With bracts.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Bracteolate -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  With small bracts or bractlets.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Bracteole -n.d i\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  A bractlet, or small bract.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Bracteose -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Having conspicuous or numerous bracts.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Bractlet -n.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Bract borne on a secondary axis, as on the peduncle or even on a petiole.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Bradycarpic -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Fruiting after the winter, in the second season after flowering.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Bradyspore -n.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  A plant which disperses its seed slowly.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Branch -n.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  A lateral division of the stem, or axis of growth.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Branchlet -n.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  The ultimate divisions of a branch.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Bristle -n.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  A stiff hair.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Bristly -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Bearing stiff, strong hairs.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Bud -n.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  An embryonic axis with its appendages.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Bulb -n.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  A modified bud, usually underground; imbricated - with scaly modifications of the leaves, as in the lily; tunicated - with complete enveloping coats, as in the onion.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Bulbil -n.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  A bulb arising from the mother bulb.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Bulbous -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Having the character of a bulb.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Bullate -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Blistered or puckered on the surface, as the leaf of a Savoy cabbage.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Bulliform -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Applied to large thin-walled epidermal cells of most  Gramineae and  Cyperaceae.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Bursicle -n.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  A pouchlike receptacle.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Bush -n.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  A low shrub, branching from the ground.\tab 
\par \pard\li288\tx4320\plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\cf0\b 
\par \pard\tx4320\plain\f3\fs28\cf0\b\up6  \plain\f3\fs28\cf2\b\up6 C\plain\f3\fs28\cf0\b\up6  \plain\f3\fs28\cf1\b 
\par \pard\plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Caducous -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Falling off early, or prematurely, as the sepals in some plants.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Caespitose -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Growing in tufts.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Calcareous -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Of or pertaining to calcium carbonate (limestone), as a calcareous soil.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Calceiform -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Shoe-shaped.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Calcicolous -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Growing best in a soil with a high lime content.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Callosity -n.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  A hardened thickening.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Callus -n.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  A hard prominence or protuberance; in a cutting or on a severed or injured part, the roll of new covering tissue; an extension of the flowering-glume below its point of insertion and grown to the axis or rachilla of the spikelet.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Calyx -n.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  The outermost circle of the floral envelopes.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Campanula -n.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Small bell.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Campanulate -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Bell-shaped.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Campylotropous -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Said of an ovule or seed which is curved in its formation so as to bring the micropyle or true apex down near the hilum.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Canaliculate -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Longitudinally channeled.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Canescent -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Becoming hoary, usually with a gray pubescence.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Capillary -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Hair-like; very slender.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Capitate -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Headed; in heads; formed like a head; aggregated into a very dense or compact cluster.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Capsule -n.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  A simple dry fruit, the product of a compound pistil splitting along two or more lines of suture.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Carpel -n.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  A simple pistil; one unit of a compound pistil; in conifers, the cone scale of the female cone.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Carpellate -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Possessing carpels.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Carpophore -n.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  A portion of receptacle prolonged between the carpels, as in  Umbelliferae.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Caruncle -n.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  An excrescence or appendage at or about the hilum of the seed.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Carunculate -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  With a caruncle.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Caryopsis -n.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  The grain or fruit of most grasses, with the seed coat grown fast to the pericarp.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Catkin -n.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  A flexible, usually  pendulous scaly spike bearing apetalous, unisexual flowers; ament.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Caudate -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  With a tail or taillike appendage.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Caudicle -n.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  A cartilaginous strap which connects certain pollen-masses to the stigma, as in orchids.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Caulescent -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  More or less stemmed or stem-bearing; having an evident stem above ground.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Cauline -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Pertaining or belonging to the stem.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Cell -n.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Any structure containing a cavity, as the cell of an anther or ovary; locule; a unit of plant structure.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Cellular -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Pertaining to cells.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Cereal -n.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Any grass whose seeds serve as food (from Ceres, the goddess of agriculture).\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Chalaza -n.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  That part of the ovule or seed in which the nucellus joins the integuments; the base of the nucellus, always opposite the upper end of the cotyledons.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Chartaceous -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Having the texture of writing paper.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Chasmogamous -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  With pollination taking place while the flower is open (the opposite of cleistogamous).\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Chlorophyll -n.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  The green coloring matter in the cells of autophytic plants.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Chlorophyllous -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Containing chlorophyll.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Chromosome -n.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  One of the small bodies, ordinarily definite in number in the cells of a given species and often more or less definite in shape, into which the chromatin of the cell nucleus resolves itself previous to the mitotic division of the cell.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Ciliate -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Said of a margin fringed with hairs.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Ciliolate -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Said of a margin fringed with small hairs.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Circinate -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Coiled from the top downward; coiled into a ring, or partially so.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Circumscissile -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Opening or dehiscing along a horizontal line around the fruit or anther, the valve usually coming off like a lid.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Cladode -n.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  A branch of a single internode simulating a leaf; a cladophyll.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Clathrate -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Latticed.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Clavate -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Club-shaped; said of a long body thickened toward the free end.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Clavellate -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Diminutive of clavate.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Claw -n.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  The long narrow petiole-like base of the petals or sepals in some flowers; the modified auricle of some grass leaves, such as wheat and barley.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Cleft -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Divided into lobes separated by narrow or acute sinuses which extend more than halfway to the midrib.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Cleistogamous -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Having fertilization occur within the unopened flower.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Cleistogamy -n.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  The state of being cleistogamous.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Climbing -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Ascending by using other objects as supports.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Cline -n.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  A series of form changes; a gradient of biotypes along an environmental transition.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Cochleate -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Spiral, like a snail shell.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Coherent -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Two or more similar parts or organs joined.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Collar -n.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  The transition zone between primary stem and root; the back side of the union of the blade and sheath in grasses.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Column -n.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  A combination of stamens and styles into a solid central body, as in orchids; the lower, twisted portion of an awn of grasses. not always present.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Coma -n.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  The hairs at the end of some seeds; the tuft at the summit of the inflorescence, as in the pineapple; the entire head of a tree.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Comose -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Bearing a tuft or tufts of hair.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Complanate -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Flattened, compressed.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Complicate -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Folded upon itself.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Compound -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Similar parts aggregated into a common whole.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Compressed -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Flattened; especially, flattened laterally.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Concave -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Hollow, as the inside of a saucer.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Concolor -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Of the same color.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Conduplicate -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Folded together lengthwise with the upper surface within, as in the blades of many grasses.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Cone -n.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  The fruit of a pine, cycad, or fir-tree with scales forming a strobile; an inflorescence or fruit with overlapping scales.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Confluent -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Blended into  one, passing by degrees one  into another.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Congested -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Crowded.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Conglomerate -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Clustered.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Conical -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Having the form of a cone, as the carrot.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Conifer -n.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  A cone-bearer.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Coniferous -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Producing or bearing cones.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Connate -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  United congenitally or subsequently.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Connate-perfoliate -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  United at the base in pairs around the supporting axis.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Connivent -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Coming together or converging but not organically connected.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Contorted -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Twisted or bent; in aestivation, the same as convolute.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Contracted -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Said of the inflorescences that are narrow and dense, the branches short or appressed.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Convergent -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Applied to veins which run from the base to the apex of a leaf in a curved manner.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Convex -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Having a more or less rounded surface.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Convolute -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Said of floral envelopes in the bud in which the parts are circumferentially imbricated.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Copious -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Abundant.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Cordate -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Heart-shaped; said of leaves having the petiole at the broader and notched end.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Coriaceous -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Like leather.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Cork -n.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Protective tissue replacing the epidermis in older superficial parts of plants; the outer cells contain air, and are elastic and spongy in texture, but impervious to liquids.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Corm -n.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  A solid bulblike stem, usually subterranean, as the "bulb" of Crocus, or Gladiolus.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Corneous -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Horny, with a horny texture.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Corniculate -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Bearing or terminating in a small horn-like  protuberance or process.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Corolla -n.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28 The inner floral envelope, composed of separate or connate petals.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Corona -n.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Crown, coronet; any appendage or intrusion that stands between the corolla and stamens, or on the corolla, as the cup of a daffodil, or that is the outgrowth of the staminal part or circle, as in the milkweed.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Coronate -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Crowned; with a corona.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Coroniform -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Shaped like a crown.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Cortex -n.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Rind or bark.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Corymb -n.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Short and broad, more or less flat-topped indeterminate flower cluster, the outer flowers opening first.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Corymbiform -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Shaped like a corymb.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Corymbose -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Arranged in corymbs.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Costa -n.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  A rib, as a midrib.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Costate -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Ribbed; with one or more longitudinal ribs or nerves.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Cotyledon -n.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Seed leaf; the primary leaf or leaves in the embryo.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Crateriform -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Saucer- or cup-shaped; shallow.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Creeping -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Running along on the ground and rooting.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Crenate -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28 Said of a margin with rounded or blunt teeth.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Crenulate -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Finely crenate.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Crested -a..\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  With elevated and irregularly toothed ridge.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Cristate -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Crested.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Cristulate -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  With small crests.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Crown -n.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Corona; the base of a tufted, herbaceous, perennial grass; the hard ring or zone at the summit of the lemma of some species of Stipa; the part of a stem at the surface of the ground; a part of a rhizome with a large bud, used in propagation.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Cruciform -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Cross-shaped.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Crustaceous -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Of hard and brittle texture.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Cucullate -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Hooded or hood-shaped.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Culm -n.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  The jointed stem of grasses and sedges.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Cultigen -n.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Plant or group known only in cultivation; presumably originating under domestication; contrast with indigen.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Cultivar -n.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  A variety or race that has originated and persisted under cultivation, but not necessarily referable to a botanical species.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Cuneate -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Wedge-shaped; triangular, with the narrow end at the  point of attachment, as of leaves or petals.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Cuneiform -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Wedge-shaped.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Cup -n.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  An involucre, as of an acorn.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Cupule -n.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  The cup of such fruits as the acorn; an involucre composed of bracts adherent by their base at least.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Cupuliform -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Cup-or cupule-shaped.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Cuspidate -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Tipped with a sharp, rigid point.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Cycle -n.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  A term used for one turn of a helix or spire, in leaf arrangement; for a whorl of floral envelopes.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Cyclic -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Said of foliar structures arranged in whorls; coiled into a cycle or relating to a cycle.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Cylindrical -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Elongated with a circular cross section.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Cyme -n.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  A broad, more or less flat-topped determinate flower-cluster, with central flowers blooming first.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Cymose -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Cyme-like.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Cypsela -n.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  An achene invested by an adnate calyx, as the fruit of Compositae.\tab 
\par \pard\li288\tx4320\plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\cf0\b 
\par \pard\tx4320\plain\f3\fs28\cf0\b\up6  \plain\f3\fs28\cf2\b\up6 D\plain\f3\fs28\cf0\b\up6  \plain\f3\fs28\cf1\b 
\par \pard\plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Decumbent -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Reclining or lying on the ground, but with the ends ascending.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Decurrent -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Said of a leaf or leaf scar, part of which extends in a ridge down the twig below the point of insertion.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Decussate -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  In pairs alternately crossing at right angles.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Definite -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Precise; of a certain number, as of stamens not exceeding twenty; applied to inflorescence, it means cymose.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Deflexed -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Bent or turned abruptly downward.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Dehiscence -n.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  The method or process of opening of a seed-pod or an anther.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Dehiscent -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  That which dehisces, as the opening of an anther or fruit along regular lines of suture.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Dehisce -v.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  To open spontaneously when ripe, as seed capsules.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Deltoid -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Triangular, delta-like.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Dentate -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Said of a margin with sharp teeth pointing outward.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Denticulate -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Minutely or finely dentate.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Depauperate -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Reduced or undeveloped, impoverished, dwarfed.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Depressed -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  More or less flattened end-wise or from above; pressed down.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Descending -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Tending gradually downward; as the branches of some trees or as the roots.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Determinate -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Said of an inflorescence in which the terminal flower blooms slightly in advance of its nearest associates; limited in number or extent.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Diadelphous -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Said of stamens formed in two groups through the union of their filaments.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Diaphragm -n.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  A dividing membrane, or partition, as in the pith of  Juglans.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Dichasium -n.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  A cyme with two lateral axes.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Dichotomous -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Branching by constantly forking in pairs.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Dicotyledonous -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Having two cotyledons.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Didymous -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Found in pairs, as the fruits of  Umbelliferae; divided into two lobes.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Didynamous -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Said of four-stamened flowers with stamens in pairs, two long, two short, as in some  Labiatae.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Diffuse -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  loosely branching or spreading; of open growth.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Digitate -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Finger-like; compound with the members arising from one point, as the leaflets of horse chestnut.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Dimorphic -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Occurring in two forms.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Dioecious -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Unisexual, the male and female elements in different plants.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Disc, disk -n.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Development of the torus within the calyx or within the corolla and stamens; the central part of a capitulum in Compositae as opposed to the ray; the base of a pollinium; the expanded base of the style in Umbelliferae; in a bulb, the solid base of the stem around which the scales are arranged.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Disciform -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Depressed and circular like a disk.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Discoid -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  With a round thickened lamina and rounded margins.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Disk -n.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  See Disc.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Dispersal -n.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  The act of dispersing or scattering.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Dissected -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Deeply divided, or cut into many segments.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Distant -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Said of similar parts not closely aggregated; opposed to approximate; remote.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Distichous -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Conspicuously two-ranked, in two rows.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Distinct -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Separate; not united with parts in the same series.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Divaricate -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Widely divergent.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Divergent -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Inclining away from each other.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Divided -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Characterized by a lobing or segmentation which extends to the base.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Dolabriform -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Axe-shaped or hatchet-shaped.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Dormant -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Said of parts which are not in active life.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Dorsal -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Relating to the back, or attached thereto; the surface turned away from the axis, which in a leaf is the lower surface; opposed to ventral.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Dorsifixed -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Attached by the back.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Dorsiventral -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  With a distinct upper and lower surface.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Down -n.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Soft pubescence; the pappus of such plants as thistles.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Drupaceous -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Resembling a drupe, possessing its character, or producing similar fruit.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Drupe -n.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  A fleshy one-seeded, indehiscent fruit, with seed enclosed in a stony endocarp called a pit.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Drupelet -n.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  One drupe in a fruit made up of aggregate drupes, as in a raspberry.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Dubious -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Doubtful, said of plants whose structure or affinities are doubtful.\tab 
\par \pard\li288\tx4320\plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\cf0\b 
\par \pard\tx4320\plain\f3\fs28\cf0\b\up6  \plain\f3\fs28\cf2\b\up6 E\plain\f3\fs28\cf0\b\up6  \plain\f3\fs28\cf1\b 
\par \pard\plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Ebracteate -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Without bracts.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Echinate -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Armed with prickles.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Ecological -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Pertaining to the relation of organisms to their environment.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Ecology -n.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  The study of organisms in relation to their environment.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Ecotype -n.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  A habitat type of plant.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Efflorescence -n.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  The season of flowering, anthesis.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Effuse -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Patulous, expanded, loosely spreading.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Eglandular -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Without glands.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Ellipsoid -n.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  An elliptic solid.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Elliptic -n.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  A flat part or body that is oval and narrowed to rounded ends.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Elliptical -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Shaped like an ellipse, oblong with rounded ends.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Elongate -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Stretched; lengthened.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Emarginate -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28   With shallow notch at the apex.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Embracing -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Clasping by the base, amplectant.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Embryo -n.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  The rudimentary plant formed in the seed.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Emersed -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Raised above and out of the water.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Endemic -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Indigenous or native.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Endocarp -n.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  The inner layer of a pericarp.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Endosperm -n.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  The albumen of a seed in angiosperms; in gymnosperms the prothallium within the embryo sac.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Ensiform -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Sword-shaped, as in the leaf of Iris.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Entire -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Without toothing or division, with even margin.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Entomophilous -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Said of a plant whose flowers are pollinated by insects.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Envelope -n.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  The surrounding part.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Ephemeral -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Persisting for one day only, as flowers of spiderwort.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Epicalyx -n.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  A series of bracts close to and resembling the calyx.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Epicarp -n.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  The external layer of a pericarp, exocarp.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Epicormic -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Said of adventitious buds which develop on the trunks of trees, and of branches which develop on the body of a forest tree from which surrounding trees have been removed.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Epigynous -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Borne on the ovary; said of floral parts in which the ovary is inferior and not perigynous.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Epipetalous -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Borne upon the petals; placed before the petals.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Epiphyte -n.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  A plant which grows on other plants, but not parasitically.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Epithet -n.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  A single descriptive word or single descriptive phrase; in taxonomy, it is applied to the subdivisions of genera, to the second component of the name of species, and to the subdivisions of species.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Equal -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Alike as to length, size, or number.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Equitant -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Folded over as if astride; used for conduplicate in which the leaves are folded together lengthwise in two ranks, as in Iris.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Ericoid -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Erica-like, like the heath.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Erose -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Irregularly toothed or eroded as though bitten or gnawed.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Essential -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  The necessary constituent of an existing object.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Evergreen -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Remaining green during its dormant season; said of plants that are green throughout the year.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Excentric -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  One-sided, off-center, abaxial.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Excurrent -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Running through to the apex and beyond, as a mucro; a stem that remains central, the other parts being regularly disposed around it.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Exfoliate -v.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  To come off in scales or flakes, as the bark of the sycamore.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Exfoliating -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Coming off in thin layers.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Exine -n.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  The outer coat of a pollen grain.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Exocarp -n.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  The outer layer of a pericarp.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Exserted -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Sticking out; projecting beyond, as stamens from a perianth; not included.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Exstipulate -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Without stipules.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Extravaginal -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Beyond or outside the sheath; said of branches springing from buds, which break through the sheath of the subtending leaf, chiefly in grasses.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Extrorse -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Facing or opening outward.\tab 
\par \pard\li288\tx4320\plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\cf0\b 
\par \pard\tx4320\plain\f3\fs28\cf0\b\up6  \plain\f3\fs28\cf2\b\up6 F\plain\f3\fs28\cf0\b\up6  \plain\f3\fs28\cf1\b 
\par \pard\plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Facultative -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Having the power to live under different conditions, as a facultative parasite, a plant which is normally saprophytic, but which may exist wholly or in part as a parasite; opposed to obligate.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Falcate -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Sickle- or scythe-shaped.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Family -n.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  The taxon next higher than the genus.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Farinose -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Covered with a meal.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Fasciated -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Much flattened; an abnormal widening and flattening of the stem as though several sterns had coalesced in one plane.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Fascicle -n.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  A close cluster or bundle of flowers, leaves, stems, or roots.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Fascicled -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  In clusters or bundles.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Fasciculate -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  In close bundles or clusters.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Fastigiate -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Parallel, clustered, and erect, as the branches of Populus fastigiata.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Felted -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Matted with intertwined hairs.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Female -n.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  The fruiting element in plants, the pistil and its analogues.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Ferruginous -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Rust-colored.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Fertile flowers -pl. n.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Female flowers, those which possess pistils.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Fetid -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Having a disagreeable odor.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Fibrillose -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Furnished or abounding with fine fibers.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Fibrous -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Having numerous woody fibers, as the rind of a coconut.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Filament -n.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  The part of a stamen that supports the anther; thread-like structures.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Filamentous -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Formed of filaments or fibers.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Filiform -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Threadlike, long and very slender.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Fimbria -n.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  A fringe.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Fimbriate -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Fringed, the hairs longer or coarser as compared with ciliate.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Fistular -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Hollow-cylindrical.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Flabellate -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Fan-shaped, dilated in a wedge-shape, sometimes plaited.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Flabelliform -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Fan-shaped. \tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Flaccid -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Withered and limp, flabby.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Flagelliform -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Whip-shaped. \tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Flask -n.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  The utricle of  Carez.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Fleshy -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Succulent.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Flexible -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Capable of being bent, but elastic enough to be able to resume its original shape.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Flexuous -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Bent alternately in different directions.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Floccose -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Bearing tufts of woolly hairs.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Flocculose -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Bearing small tufts of woolly hairs.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Flora -n.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  The aggregate of plants of a country or district, or a work which contains the enumeration of them.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Floral -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Of or pertaining to flowers.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Floral diagram -n.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  A drawing to show the relative position and number of the constituent parts.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Floral envelope -n.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  The perianth leaves, calyx, and corolla.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Floral formula -n.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  A formula composed of letters, figures, and symbols arranged to show number, union, sex, shape, elevation, etc. of the floral parts.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Floral glume -n.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  The lower glume of the floret in grasses; the lemma.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Florescence -n.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Anthesis, the period of flowering.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Floret -n.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  The lemma and palea with included flower (stamens and pistil); a small flower; one of a cluster, as in Compositae.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Floriferous -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Flower-bearing.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Flos (pl. flores) -n.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  a perfect flower with some protecting envelope.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Flower -n.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  (See Flos.) A modified plant structure concerned with the production of seeds in the angiosperms.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Flower bud -n.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  An unexpanded flower, as distinct from a leaf bud or mixed bud.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Flower-glume -n.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  The lower of the two scales which subtend the flower of grasses, the lemma.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Fluted -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Regularly marked by alternating longitudinal ridges and groove-like depressions.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Foliaceous -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Leaf-like; said particularly of sepals, calyx-lobes, and of bracts that in texture, size, or color look like leaves.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Foliage -n.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  The leafy covering, especially of trees.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Foliar -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Pertaining to a leaf.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Foliose -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Closely clothed with leaves, leafy.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Follicle -n.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  A single carpellate dry fruit dehiscing along one line of suture.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Follicular -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Of or pertaining to a follicle.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Foraminose -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Perforated by holes.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Forest -n.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Land covered with trees exclusively, or with undergrowth or shrubs or herbs.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Fovea -n.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  A depression or pit, as in the upper surface of the leaf-base in Isoetes, which contains the sporangium; the seat of the pollinium in orchids.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Foveolate -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Marked with small pittings.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Free -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Not joined to another organ.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Frond -n.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  The foliage of ferns and some other cryptogams; the leaves of palms.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Fruit -n.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  A mature ovary or ovaries with or without closely related parts.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Fruit dots -n.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  The sori of ferns.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Frutex -n.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  A woody plant destitute of a trunk.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Frutical -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Shrubby with a soft, woody stem, such as shrubby species of Geranium.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Fruticose -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Shrubby or shrub-like in the sense of being woody.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Fugacious -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Soon falling or fading; not permanent.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Fulvous -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Yellow, tawny.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Funicle -n.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  A stem or thread which connects the ovule or seed to the placenta; funiculus.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Funnel -n.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  A space below the thick outer coats of the macrospore in Marsiliaceae, into which the apical papilla projects.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Furcate -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Forked with terminal lobes which are like prongs.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Furrowed -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  With longitudinal channels or grooves; sulcate; striate on a large scale.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Fusiform -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Spindle-shaped; narrowed both ways from a swollen middle, as Dahlia roots.\tab 
\par \pard\li288\tx4320\plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\cf0\b 
\par \pard\tx4320\plain\f3\fs28\cf0\b\up6  \plain\f3\fs28\cf2\b\up6 G\plain\f3\fs28\cf0\b\up6  \plain\f3\fs28\cf1\b 
\par \pard\plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Galea-n.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  A petal shaped like a helmet placed next to the axis, as in Aconitum.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Galeate -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Hollow and vaulted, as in many labiate corollas.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Gamopetalous -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  With corolla of one piece; petals united.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Gelatinous -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Jelly-like.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Gene -n.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  A unit of inheritance, which occupies a fixed place on a chromosome.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Geniculate -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Abruptly bent so as to resemble the knee-joint, as of awns and the lower nodes of some culms.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Genotype -n.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  The type of a genus, the species upon which the genus was established.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Genus -n.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  The smallest natural group containing distinct species; large genera are frequently divided for the sake of convenience into subgenera, but the generic name is applied to all species.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Gibbous -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Swollen on one side as the glume in Sacciolepis; a pouch-like enlargement of the base of an organ, as of a calyx.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Glabrous -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Smooth, devoid of pubescence or hair of whatsoever form.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Gland -n.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  An acorn, or acorn-like fruit; a definite secreting structure on the surface, embedded, or ending a hair; any protuberance of like nature which may not secrete, as the warty swellings at the base of the leaf in the cherry and peach.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Glandular -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Furnished with glands, or of the nature of glands.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Glaucescent -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Becoming sea-green; somewhat glaucous.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Glaucous -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Covered with a "bloom" or a whitish substance that rubs off, as of a plum or cabbage leaf.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Globose -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Spherical, globular.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Globular -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Spherical.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Glochidiate -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Pubescent with barbed bristles.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Glomerate -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  In a dense, compact cluster or clusters.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Glomerule -n.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  A cluster of capitula in a common involucre.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Glumaceous -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  With glumes; resembling the glumes of grasses.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Glume -n.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  The chaffy two-ranked members of the inflorescence of grasses and similar plants; one of the two empty bracts at the base of a grass spikelet.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Glume, empty -n.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Glume which subtends a spikelet, and does not include a flower.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Glume, flowering -n.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  The glume in grasses which includes a flower; the lemma.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Glutinous -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Covered with a sticky exudation.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Gorge -n.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  The throat of a flower.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Granular -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Covered with very small grains; minutely or finely mealy.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Granulose -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Granular.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Gregarious -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Growing in groups or masses, but not matted.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Gymnospermous -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Bearing naked seeds.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Gynodioecious -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Dioecious, with some flowers hermaphrodite, others pistillate only on separate plants.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Gynoecium -n.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  The pistil or pistils of a flower; the female part of a flower.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Gynophore -n.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Stipe of an ovary prolonged within the calyx.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Gynostegium -n.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  A sheath or covering of the gynoecium of whatever nature.\tab 
\par \pard\li288\tx4320\plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\cf0\b 
\par \pard\tx4320\plain\f3\fs28\cf0\b\up6  \plain\f3\fs28\cf2\b\up6 H\plain\f3\fs28\cf0\b\up6  \plain\f3\fs28\cf1\b 
\par \pard\plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Habit -n.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  The general appearance of a plant, whether erect, prostrate, climbing, etc.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Habitat -n.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  The kind of locality in which a plant grows.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Hair -n.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  An outgrowth of the epidermis consisting of one to several cells.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Hamate -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Hooked at the tip.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Hastate -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Halberd-shaped, sagittate, with the basal lobes turned outward.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Head -n.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  A dense spherical or flat-topped inflorescence of sessile flowers clustered on a common receptacle.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Helicoid -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Curved or spiraled like a snail-shell.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Herb -n.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  A plant naturally dying to the ground at the end of the growing season, without persistent stem above ground, and lacking definite woody, firm structure.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Herbaceous -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Not woody; dying to the ground each year; said also of soft branches before they become woody.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Hermaphrodite -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  With stamens and pistil in the same flower.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Heterogeneous -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Not uniform in kind.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Heterophyllous -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  With leaves of more than one shape.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Heterostyly -n.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  The state of having unlike or different length styles.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Hilum -n.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  The scar or mark on a seed indicating the point of attachment.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Hirsute -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  With stiff or bristly hairs.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Hirsutulous -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Slightly hirsute.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Hirtellous -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Softly or minutely hirsute or hairy.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Hispid -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Beset with rough hairs or bristles.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Hispidulous -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Somewhat or minutely hispid.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Hoary -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Covered with a close white or whitish pubescence.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Holosericeus -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Covered with a fine and silky pubescence.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Holotype -n.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  The single specimen chosen as the basis for the original diagnosis.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Homalotropous -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Said of organs which grow in a horizontal direction.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Homocephalic -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Term used by Delpino for homogamy in which the pollen of one flower fertilizes the stigma of another flower in the same inflorescence.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Homoclinous -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Term used by Delpino for homogamy in which the pollen of one flower fertilizes the stigma of the same complete flower.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Homodromous -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Having the spirals all of the same direction.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Homoeandrous-a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Having uniform stamens.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Homogamous -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Characterized by homogamy.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Homogamy -n.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Simultaneous ripening of pollen and stigmas in a perfect flower.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Homogeneous -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  All of one kind, uniform.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Host -n.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  A plant which nourishes a parasite.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Husk -n.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  The outer covering of certain fruits or seeds.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Hyaline -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Thin and translucent or transparent.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Hybrid -n.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  A cross usually between two species of the same genus.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Hydrophilous -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Dwelling in wet places or water; pollinated by water.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Hygroscopic -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Altering form or position through changes in humidity.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Hypanthium -n.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  An enlargement or development of the torus under the calyx.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Hypocotyl -n.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  The axis of an embryo below the cotyledons, but not passing beyond them.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Hypogynous -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Free from, but inserted beneath, the pistil or gynoecium.\tab 
\par \pard\li288\tx4320\plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\cf0\b 
\par \pard\tx4320\plain\f3\fs28\cf0\b\up6  \plain\f3\fs28\cf2\b\up6 I\plain\f3\fs28\cf0\b\up6  \plain\f3\fs28\cf1\b 
\par \pard\plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Imbricated -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Overlapping as shingles on a roof; in aestivation, said of a calyx or corolla in which one piece must be wholly internal and one wholly external, or overlapping at the edge only.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Immersed -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Entirely under water; embedded in the substance of a leaf.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Imparipinnate -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Unequally pinnate, odd pinnate, with a single terminal leaflet.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Imperfect -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28 Said of a flower with one of the sexes wanting.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Impressed -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Bent inward, hollowed, or furrowed as if by pressure.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Incised -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Cut sharply and irregularly, more or less deeply.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Included -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Not protruding beyond the surrounding organ; not exserted.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Incompatibility -n.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  The inability of pollen to effect fertilization.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Incompletae -pl. n.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Usually synonymous with Monochlamydeae, but variously circumscribed by different authors.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Incomplete -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Said of flowers with one or more of the four floral organs wanting.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Incrassate -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Made thick or stout, as the leaves of house-leek.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Incumbent -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Resting or leaning upon.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Indefinite -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Uncertain or not positive in character; too many for easy enumeration, as abundance of stamens; in an inflorescence, indeterminate.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Indefinite growth -n.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Continuous growth until cold weather kills back the immature terminal bud as well as the outer end of the twig as in certain species of Rubus.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Indefinite inflorescence \tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  An inflorescence that is indeterminate or centrifugal, acropetal according to some authors; one that blooms progressively from outside inward or from the bottom upward.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Indehiscent -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Not opening by valves or along regular lines.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Indigenous -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Native to the country, not introduced.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Induplicate -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  With the margins bent inwards, and the external face of these edges applied to each other without twisting.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Indurated -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Hardened.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Indusial -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Pertaining to indusia.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Indusial flaps -n.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  A false indusium as in Woodwardia.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Indusiate -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Possessing an indusium.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Indusium -n.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  The epidermal outgrowth covering the sori or "fruit-dots" on ferns; a ring of collecting hairs below the stigma.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Inferior -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Said of one organ when below another, as an inferior ovary with an adnate or superior calyx.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Inferior ovary -n.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Ovary with the perianth located on top.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Inflated -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Bladder-like, swollen, puffed up.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Inflexed -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Turned in at the margins.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Inflorescence -n.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Mode of flower bearing; technically less correct but much more common in the sense of a flower-cluster.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Inflorescence, definite.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  A condition in which each axis in turn is terminated with a flower, as in a cyme.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Inflorescence,indefinite \tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  A condition in which the floral axis is capable of continuous extension, as in a raceme.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Infra-axillary -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Below the axil, sub-axillary.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Infundibular -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Funnel-shaped.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Infundibuliform -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Funnel-shaped.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Inrolled -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Rolled inwards.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Insectivorous -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Said of those plants which capture insects and presumably absorb nutriment from them.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Inserted -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Attached to, or growing out of.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Integument -n.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  The covering of an organ or body; the envelope of an ovule.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Intercostal -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Between the ribs or nerves of a leaf.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Internode -n.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  The part of the stem between two successive nodes.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Interrupted -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Having any symmetrical arrangement destroyed; not continuous.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Interruptedly pinnate \tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Pinnate with small leaflets interposed with those of larger size.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Intramarginal -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Within and near the margin.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Introduced -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Brought from another region.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Introrse -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Turned or faced inward or toward the axis, as an anther facing toward the center of the flower.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Invaginated -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Enclosed in a sheath.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Inverted -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Turned over; end-for-end;  top side down.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Involucel -n.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  A secondary involucre; a small involucre about the parts of a cluster.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Involucral -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Pertaining to an involucre.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Involucrate -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  With an involucre.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Involucre -n.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  A cluster of bracts subtending a flower or inflorescence.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Involute -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Rolled in from the edges, the upper surface within.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Irregular -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Wanting in regularity of form; asymmetric, as a flower which cannot be halved in any plane, or one that is capable of bisection in one plane only, zygomorphic.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Irregular flower -n.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  A flower with some parts different from other parts in the same series.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Isolation -n.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  The separation of one group from another within a species so that crossing between the groups is prevented.\tab 
\par \pard\li288\tx4320\plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\cf0\b 
\par \pard\tx4320\plain\f3\fs28\cf1\b  J 
\par \pard\plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Joint - n.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  An articulation, as a node in grasses or other plants.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Jointed -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  With nodes or points of real or apparent articulation.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Juvenile -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Young, early forms.\tab 
\par \pard\li288\tx4320\plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\cf0\b 
\par \pard\tx4320\plain\f3\fs28\cf1\b  K 
\par \pard\plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Keel -n.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  A central dorsal ridge; the united petals of a papilionaceous flower.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Key -n.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  A short statement of the contrasted characters of a genus or other group.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Key fruit -n.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  The samara of ash.\tab 
\par \pard\li288\tx4320\plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\cf0\b 
\par \pard\tx4320\plain\f3\fs28\cf0\b\up6 
\par  \plain\f3\fs28\cf1\b L 
\par \pard\plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Labellum -n.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  The third petal of orchids, usually enlarged, and by torsion of the ovary having become anterior from its normal posterior position; a similar petal in other flowers; lip.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Labiate -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Lipped; a member of the Labiatae.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Labium -n.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  The lower lip of a labiate flower; the lip subtending the ligule in Isoetes.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Lacerate -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Torn at the edge or irregularly cleft, as in some ligules.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Laciniate -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Cut into lobes separated by deep, narrow, irregular incisions.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Lamina -n.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  The limb, blade, or expanded part of a leaf or petal.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Lanate -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Clothed with woolly and interwoven hairs.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Lanceolate -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Lance-shaped, rather narrow, tapering to both ends with the broadest part below the middle.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Lanuginous -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Cottony or woolly.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Lateral -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  On or at the side.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Laterally compressed \tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Flattened from the sides as certain spikelets, glumes, and lemmas.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Latex -n.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  The milky juice of such plants as spurge or milkweed; the moisture of the stigma.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Lax -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Loose, distant.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Leaf -n.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  A lateral projection on a stem at a node and subtending a bud; it is usually expanded and concerned with the manufacture of food (photosynthesis).\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Leaf bud -n.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  A bud which develops into a leafy branch; opposed to "flower bud."\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Leaf, compound -n.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  A leaf with two or more blades, called leaflets.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Leaf cycle -n.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  In phyllotaxis, a spiral which passes through the insertion of intermediate leaves until it attains the next leaf exactly above its starting point.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Leafing -n.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  The unfolding of leaves.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Leaflet -n.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  A single division of a compound leaf.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Leaf scar -n.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  The mark or cicatrice left by the articulation and fall of a leaf.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Leaf sheath -n.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  The lower part of the petiole, which more or less invests the stem.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Leaf, simple -n.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28 A leaf with a single blade; not  compounded.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Leaf stock -n.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  The stem of a leaf; petiole, foot-stalk.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Leaf tendril -n.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  A tendril which is a transformed leaf.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Leaf trace -n.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  All the common bundles in a stem belonging to one leaf.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Lectotype -n.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  A specimen or other element selected from the original material to serve as the nomenclatural type, when the holotype was not designated at the time of publication, or when the  holotype is missing.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Legume -n.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  A member of the legume family,  Leguminosae; a superior, one-celled monocarpellary fruit usually dehiscent into two valves and having the seeds attached along the ventral suture; indehiscent legumes are usually constricted between the seeds and break crosswise into one-seeded segments at maturity.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Leguminous -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Pertaining to a legume, or  to the Leguminosae.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Lemma -n.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  In grasses, the flowering glume, the lower of the two bracts immediately enclosing the flower.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Lenticular -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Shaped like a double convex lens.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Lid -n.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28   Operculum.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Ligulate -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  With a ligule; strap shaped or strap-like.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Ligule -n.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  A strap-shaped body, such as the limb of the ray florets in Compositae; the lobe of the outer corona in Stapelia; the thin scarious projection from the top of the leaf-sheath in grasses; a narrow membranous, acuminate structure, internal to the leaf-base in Isoetes and Selaginella; an appendage to certain petals as those of Silene and Cuscuta; the ovuliferous scale in Araucaria, united with the bract, and resembling the ligule in Isoetes; the envelope which protects the young leaf in palms, as in Chamacrops and Rhaphis.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Liguliform -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Strap-shaped.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Limb -n.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  The border or expanded part of a gamopetalous corolla, as distinct from the tube or throat; the lamina of a leaf or of a petal.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Linear -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Long and narrow with margins parallel, or nearly so.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Lingulate -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Tongue-shaped.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Linnean System -n.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  The artificial classification devised by Linnaeus, based upon the number and position of the stamens and pistils.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Lip -n.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  One of the two divisions of a bilabiate corolla or calyx, that is, a gamopetalous or gamosepalous organ cleft into an upper (superior or posterior) and a lower (inferior or anterior) portion; the labellum of orchids.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Littoral -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Belonging to, or growing on the sea-shore.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Livid -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Pale lead-colored.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Lobate -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Divided into, or bearing lobes.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Lobe -n.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Any part or segment of an organ; specifically, a part of petal, calyx, or leaf that represents a division to about the middle.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Lobulate -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Divided into small lobes.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Lobule -n.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  A small lobe.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Locule -n.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Compartment or cell of a pistil or anther.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Loculicidal -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  With dehiscence on the back, between the partitions into the cavity.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Lomentaceous -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Bearing or resembling loments.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Lorate -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Strap-shaped; ligulate.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Lunate -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Crescent-shaped, half-moon shaped.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Lustrous -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Glossy, shiny.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Lyrate -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Lyre-shaped, pinnatifid with the terminal lobe large and rounded, the lower lobes small\tab 
\par \pard\li288\tx4320\plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\cf0\b 
\par \pard\tx4320\plain\f3\fs28\cf1\b  M 
\par \pard\plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Major -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Larger.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Mammiform -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Breast-shaped, conical with rounded apex.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Marbled -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Stained with irregular streaks of color.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Marcescent -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Withering without falling off.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Marginal -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Of, pertaining to, or attached to the edge.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Marginate -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Broad-brimmed, furnished with a margin of distinct character.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Marine -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Growing within the influence of the sea, or immersed in its waters.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Maritime -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Pertaining to the sea.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Median -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Pertaining to the middle.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Megasporangium -n.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  The sporangium which produces the megaspores.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Megaspore -n.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  The more correct form of macrospore; the larger spore of heterosporous plants.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Melanoxylon -n.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Black wood.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Membranaceous -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  See Membranous.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Membranous -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Thin, more or less flexible, and translucent; like a thin membrane.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Mericarp -n.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  One of the two seed-like carpels of an umbelliferous fruit.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Meristem -n.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Embryonic or undifferentiated tissue the cells of which are capable of active division.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Mesocarp -n.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  The middle layer of a pericarp.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Micropyle -n.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  The aperture in the skin of a seed formerly the foramen of the ovule; it marks the position of the radicle.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Midrib -n.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  The main rib or central vein of a leaf or leaf-like structure.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Minor -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Smaller.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Minute -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Very small, inconspicuous.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Mitriform -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Shaped like a mitre or cap.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Monadelphous -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  With stamens united by their filaments into a tube or column.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Moniliform -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Necklace-shaped; like a string of beads.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Monoecious -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Having unisexual flowers with both sexes borne on the same plant.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Montane -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Pertaining to mountains, as a plant which grows on them.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Mucilaginous -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Slimy, composed of mucilage.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Mucro -n.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  A sharp terminal point.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Mucronate -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Furnished with a mucro (bristle-tipped).\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Multifid -a.Lu\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Cleft into many lobes or segments.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Multiradiate -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  With numerous rays.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Muricate -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Rough with short, hard points.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Muriculate -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Very finely muricate.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Mutant -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  That which undergoes mutation.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Mutation -n.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  A sudden hereditary variation of an offspring from its parents.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Muticous -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Pointless, blunt, awnless, curtailed.\tab 
\par \pard\li288\tx4320\plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\cf0\b 
\par \pard\tx4320\plain\f3\fs28\cf1\b  N 
\par \pard\plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Naked -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Wanting its usual covering, as without pubescence, or flowers destitute of perianth, or buds without scales.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Naked bud -n.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  A bud without scales.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Napiform -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Turnip-shaped.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Naturalized -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Having become thoroughly established in a region to which it is not indigenous.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Natural selection -n.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  The natural processes contributing to the "survival of the fittest".\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Natural System -n.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  An arrangement according to the affinity of plants, and the sum of their characters, opposed to any artificial system, based on one set of characters.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Navicular -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Boat-shaped; like the bow of a canoe.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Neck -n.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  The collar or junction of stem and root; the point where the blade separates from the sheath in certain leaves; the contracted part of the corolla or calyx tube.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Nectar -n.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  The sweet secretion from glands or nectaries, which act as an inducement to insect visitors.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Nectar glands -n.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  The secreting organs which produce nectar.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Nectar guides -n.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Lines, spots, or other devices directing to the nectary.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Nectariferous -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Nectar-bearing.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Nectary -n.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  The organ in which nectar is secreted, formerly applied to any anomalous part of a flower, as its spurred petal.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Needle -n.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  A stiff linear leaf as in Pinaceae.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Nocturnal -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Occurring at night, as night-blooming; active in the night.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Nodal -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Relating to the node.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Nodal diaphragm -n.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Any septum which extends across the hollow of a stem at the node.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Nodding -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Curved somewhat from the vertical.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Node -n.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  That point on a stem which normally bears a leaf or leaves.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Nodose -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Knotty or knobby.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Nodule -n.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  A small knot or rounded body.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Nodulose -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  With little knobs or knots.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Nomenclature -n.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  The names of things in any science; in botany, frequently restricted to the correct usage of scientific names in taxonomy.any \tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Normal -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  According to rule, usual as to structure.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Nude -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Bare, naked, uncovered.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Nut -n.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  A dry indehiscent, usually one-celled, one-seeded fruit (though usually traceable to a compound ovary) with a bony, woody, leathery, or papery wall and in general, partially or wholly encased in an involucre or husk.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Nutant -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Nodding, drooping.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Nutlet -n.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  The diminutive of nut.\tab 
\par \pard\li288\tx4320\plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\cf0\b 
\par \pard\tx4320\plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\cf0\b  \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\cf2\b O\plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\cf0\b  
\par \pard\plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Obclavate -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Club-shaped and attached at the thicker end.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b  Obcompressed -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Compressed dorso-ventrally instead of laterally.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Obconic -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Conical, but attached at the narrower end.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Obconical -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Inversely conical, having the attachment at the apex.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Obcordate -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Inversely heart-shaped, the notch being apical.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Oblanceolate -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Inverted lanceolate.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Oblate -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Flattened at the poles, as a tangerine-orange.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Obligate -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Necessary, essential, the reverse of facultative.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Oblique -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Slanting, unequal sided.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Oblong -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Longer than broad, with the margins nearly parallel.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Obovate -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Reversed ovate, the distal end the broader.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Obovoid -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Appearing as an inverted egg.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Obscure -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Dark or dingy in tint; uncertain in affinity or distinctiveness.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Obsolescent -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Becoming rudimentary or extinct.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Obsolete -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Not evident or apparent; rudimentary; no longer used.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Obtuse -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Blunt or rounded at the end.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Oculus -n.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  The first appearance of a bud, especially on a tuber, as the eyes on a potato.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Odd pinnate -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  With a terminal leaflet, imparipinnate.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Official -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Of the shops; used in medicine or arts.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Oleaginous -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Oily and succulent.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Oligotrophic -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Growing in poor soil and competing for the nutritive salts in it.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Opaque -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Dull; neither shining nor translucent.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Operculum (pl. opercula) -n.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  A lid or cover which separates by a transverse line of division, as in the pyxis, also in some pollen grains.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Opposite -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  On both sides at the same level, as two leaves at a node; one part before another, as a stamen in front of a petal.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Orange -a.orr\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  The fruit of Citrus aurantium; a secondary color, red and yellow combined, taking its name from the tint of the fruit mentioned.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Orbicular -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Flat with a circular outline.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Orbiculate -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Disk-shaped, round.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Order -n.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  In botany, a group between genus (tribe and suborder) and class.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Orifice -n.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  An opening by which spores, etc. escape; any opening.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Ornithogamous -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Pollinated by birds.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Orthotropous -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Said of an ovule or seed with a straight axis, chalaza at the insertion, the orifice at the other end.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Oval -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Broadly elliptical with the width greater than half the length.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Ovary -n.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  That part of the pistil which contains the ovules.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Ovate -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Shaped like a longitudinal section of a hen's egg, the broader end basal; applied to ovoid.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Ovoid -n.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  A solid that is oval (less correctly, ovate) in flat outline.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Ovulate -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Pertaining to the ovule, or possessing ovules.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Ovule -n.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  That which becomes a seed after fertilization.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Ovuliferous -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Bearing ovules.\tab 
\par \pard\tx4320\plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\cf0\b 
\par \plain\f3\fs28\cf1\b  P 
\par \pard\plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Palate -n.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  In personate corollas, a rounded projection or prominence of the lower lip, closing the throat or very nearly so.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Pale -n.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  A chaffy scale such as often subtends the fruit of Compositae.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Palea -n.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  The inner bract of a grass floret; the chaffy scales on the receptacle of many Compositae; the ramenta or chaffy scales on the stipe of many ferns.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Paleaceous -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Chaffy, chaff-like in structure.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Palmate -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Resembling a hand with the fingers spread; having lobes radiating from a common point.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Palmately -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  In a palmate manner.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Palmatifid -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Cut in a palmate fashion nearly to the petiole.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Pandura -n.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Violin.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Pandurate -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Fiddle-like.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Panduriform -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Fiddle-shaped.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Panicle -n.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  A compound or branched raceme.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Paniculate -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Having a panicle type of inflorescence.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Pannose -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Having the appearance or texture of felt or woolen cloth of very close texture.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Papery -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Having the texture of paper, chartaceous.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Papilionaceous -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Descriptive of the flower of many legumes having a standard, wings, and keel; with a pea-like flower; like a butterfly.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Papilla -n.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  A minute nipple-shaped projection.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Papillose -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Bearing papillae.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Pappus -n.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Thistle-down; the various tufts of hairs on achenes or fruits; the limb of the calyx of Compositae florets.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Parallel -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Extended in the same direction, but equally distant at every point.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Parallel-veined -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  With lateral veins straight, as in Alnus; the entire system straight, as in the grasses.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Parasite -n.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  An organism subsisting on another, the host.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Parasitic -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Deriving nourishment from another organism.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Parasol -n.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  A peculiar set of spines on some cacti.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Parenchyma -n.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Soft tissue of cells with unthickened walls, as pith cells.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Parietal -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Borne on or belonging to a wall, as parietal placentation.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Paripinnate -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Pinnate, with an equal number of leaflets, that is without a terminal one, abruptly pinnate.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Partition -n.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  A wall or dissepiment; a separated part or segment; the deepest division into which a leaf can be cut without becoming compound.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Patelliform -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Disk-shaped.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Patent -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Spreading.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Pathological -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Diseased.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Pectinate -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Comb-like; beset with narrow, closely inserted segments like the teeth in a comb.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Pedate -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Palmately divided or parted with the lateral divisions cleft.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Pedicel -n.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  An ultimate flower stalk, the support of a single flower; in grasses, the stalk of a spikelet.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Pedicellate -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Borne on a pedicel.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Peduncle -n.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  A primary flower stalk supporting either a cluster or a solitary flower.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Pedunculate -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  With a footstalk or peduncle.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Peg -n.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  An embryonic organ at the lower end of the hypocotyl of seedlings of  Cucumis, Gnetum, etc., lasting until the cotyledons are withdrawn from the testa.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Pellucid -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Wholly or partially transparent.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Peltate -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Shield-shaped, as a leaf attached by its lower surface to a stalk instead of by its margin.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Pendent -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Hanging down from its support.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Pendulous -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Hanging downward.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Penicillate -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Like a small brush.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Pepo -n.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  The fruit of the gourd family, Cucurbitaceae; an inferior berry-like fruit with more or less rind and with lateral placentation.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Perennation -n.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  A lasting, or perennial state.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Perennial -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Continuing to live from year to year.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Perfect -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Said of flowers having both sex organs present and functioning.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Perfoliate -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Having the stem apparently passing through the leaf; said of opposite leaves joined at their bases.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Perforated -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  With holes.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Perianth -n.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  The floral envelope, of whatever form; the calyx and corolla.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Pericarp -n.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  The wall of a mature ovary.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Perigynium -n.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  The hypogynous setae of sedges; the flask, or utricle of Carex; any hypogynous disc.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Perigynous -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Borne around the ovary, as with calyx, corolla, and stamens borne on the edge of a cup-shaped hypanthium; such cases are said to exhibit perigyny. See also Hypogyny and Epigyny.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Peripheral -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  On or near the margin.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Persistent -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Remaining attached; not falling off.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Petal -n.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  One of the leafy expansions in the floral whorl styled the corolla; of the hop, the scales of the strobile.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Petaliferous -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Bearing petals.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Petaloid -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Like a petal, or having a floral envelope resembling petals.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Petiolate -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Having a petiole.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Petiole -n.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  The stem of a leaf.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Petiolule -n.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  A small petiole; the petiole of a leaflet.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Phyllode -n.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Leaf-like petiole having no blade, as in some acacias and other plants.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Pilose -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  With soft hairs.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Pinna -n.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  The primary unit of a pinnately compound leaf.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Pinnate -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Feather-formed, as with the leaflets of a compound leaf placed on either side of a rachis.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Pinnately -adv.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  In a pinnate fashion.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Pinnately veined -n.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  With the vein pattern simulating a feather.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Pinnatifid -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Cleft in a pinnate manner.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Pinnatisect -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Cut down to the midrib in a pinnate way.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Pinnule -n.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  A secondary pinna; the foliaceous unit of a bipinnately compound leaf.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Pip -n.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  A popular name for the seed of an apple or pear.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Pistil -n.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  The female organ of a flower, consisting when complete of an ovary, style, and stigma.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Pistillate -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Having pistils and no stamens; female.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Pit -n.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  A small hollow or depression; the endocarp of a drupe containing a kernel or seed.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Pith -n.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  The spongy center of an exogenous stem.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Pitted -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Marked with small depressions, punctate.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Placenta -n.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  The place in the ovary where ovules are attached.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Placentation -n.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  The disposition of the placenta.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Plane -n.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Level, even, or flat surface.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Plane of symmetry -n.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  That which divides an object into symmetrical halves.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Plant -n.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  A vegetable organism nourished by gases or liquids and not ingesting solid particles of food.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Plicate -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Folded on the several ribs in the manner of a closed fan, occurring in palmately veined leaves, as in maple and currant.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Plumose -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Pubescent in a manner simulating a feather or a plume.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Plurilocular -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Many-celled; with many locules.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Pollen -n.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  The fertilizing dust-like powder produced in the anthers of phanerogams, more or less globular in shape, sometimes spoken of as "microspores"; the male gametophyte in seed plants.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Pollen carrier -n.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  The retinaculum of asclepiads; the gland to which the pollen-masses are attached, either immediately or by caudicles.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Pollen flower -n.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  A flower which produces pollen but no nectar.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Pollen-mass -n.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Pollen grains cohering by a waxy texture of fine threads into a single body.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Pollinate -v.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  To transfer pollen from the anther to the stigma or female organ.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Pollination -n.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  The placing of pollen on the stigma or stigmatic surface.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Polygamous -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Bearing perfect and unisexual flowers on the same individual.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Polymorphic -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  With several or various forms, variable as to habit.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Polypetalous -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  With many distinct petals.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Pome -n.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  A fleshy fruit, the product of a compound pistil with the seeds encased within a papery or cartilaginous cell, as the apple.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Porrect -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Directed outward and forward.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Posterior -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  At or toward the back; opposite the front; toward the axis; away from the subtending bract.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Potamophilous -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  River-loving.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Praemorse -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  As though bitten off, terminated abruptly.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Preformed -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Said of flowers and inflorescences which appear in fall, but do not function until the following spring.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Prickle -n.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  A small and weak spine-like body borne irregularly on the bark or epidermis.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Primary -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  First in order of time or development.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Process -n.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Any projecting appendage.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Procumbent -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Prostrate, trailing; lying flat upon the ground.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Proliferating -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Producing offshoots.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Prostrate -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Laying flat on the ground.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Prothallus -n.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  The gametophyte stage or generation of Pteridophytes, a multicellular and usually flattened thallus-like structure on the ground, bearing the sexual organs, as the antheridia and archegonia.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Protogynous -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Characterized by protogyny.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Pruinose -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  With a waxy powdery secretion on the surface, glaucous.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Pseudobulb -n.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  The thickened or bulb-formed stems of certain orchids, the part being solid and borne above ground.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Puberulent -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Somewhat or minutely pubescent.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Pubescence -n.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Hairiness.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Pubescent -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Covered with short soft hairs, or down.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Pulvinate -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Cushion-shaped.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Pulvinus -n.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  An enlargement close under the insertion of a leaf; the swollen base of a petiole, as in Mimosa pudica, sometimes at the top of the petiole.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Punctate -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Marked with dots, depressions or translucent glands.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Puncticulate -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Minutely punctate.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Pungent -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Ending in a rigid and sharp point.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Pustular -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Having slight blisterlike elevations.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Pyramidal -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Pyramid-shaped.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Pyrene -n.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Nutlet, particularly the nutlet in a drupe.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Pyriform -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Pear-shaped.\tab 
\par \pard\li288\tx4320\plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\cf0\b 
\par \pard\tx4320\plain\f3\fs28\cf1\b  Q 
\par \pard\plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Quadrate -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Nearly square in form.\tab 
\par \pard\li288\tx4320\plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\cf0\b 
\par \pard\tx4320\plain\f3\fs28\cf1\b  R 
\par \pard\plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Race -n.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  A variety of such fixity as to be reproduced from seeds; used also in a loose sense for related individuals without regard for rank.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Raceme -n.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  An indeterminate inflorescence consisting of a central rachis bearing a number of flowers with pedicels of nearly equal length.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Racemiform -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  In the form of a raceme.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Racemose -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Resembling a raceme; in racemes.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Rachilla -n.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  A diminutive or secondary rachis or axis; in grasses and sedges, the axis that bears the florets.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Rachis -n.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  An axis bearing flowers or leaflets; petiole of a fern frond.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Radiate -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Spreading from or arranged around a common center.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Radicle -n.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  The lower portion of the axis of an embryo seedling.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Rank -n.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  A row, especially a vertical row.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Raphe -n.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  In a more or less anatropous ovule, a cord or ridge of fibro-vascular tissue connecting the base of the nucellus with the placenta.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Raphis -n.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  A needle-shaped crystal, used in the plural to describe the crystals found in the cells of some plants.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Ray -n.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  One of the radiating branches of an umbel; the marginal, as opposed to the disk, flowers in Compositae or other flower clusters, when there is a difference in structure.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Ray flower -n.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  An outer ligulate flower of Compositae.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Ray, medullary -n.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  The primary rays in exogenous stems between the different bundles, passing radially outwards.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Receptacle -n.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  That expanded portion of the axis which bears the floral organs; torus.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Recurved -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Bent or curved downward or backward.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Reflexed -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Abruptly curved or bent downward or backward.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Region -n.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  The area occupied by given forms.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Region, austral -n.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Southern region.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Region, boreal -n.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Northern region.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Region, tropical -n.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Region within the tropics.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Regular -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Uniform or symmetrical in shape or structure; of a flower, actinomorphic, radially symmetrical.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Remote -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Scattered, not close together.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Reniform -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Kidney-shaped, said of the form of some leaves.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Repand -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Undulate or wavy, as the margin of some leaves.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Repletum -n.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  A fruit with the valves connected by threads, persistent after dehiscence, such as in orchids, Aristolochia and some Papaveraceae.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Resin cyst -n.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Cell or cavity occluded with resin.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Resiniferous -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Producing resin.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Rest -n.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Dormancy induced in cold climates by lowness of temperature, in hot climates by want of moisture.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Resupinate -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Upside down, or apparently so.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Reticulate -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Forming a network.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Reticulation -n.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Network, the regular crossing of threads.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Reticulum -n.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  A membrane of cross-fibers found in palms at the base of the petiole.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Retinaculum -n.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  The gland to which one or more pollinia are attached in orchids; in asclepiads, a horny elastic body to which the pollen-masses are fixed; in most  Acanthaceae, the funiculus, which is curved like a hook and retains the seed until mature.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Retrorse -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Directed backward or downward.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Retuse -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  With a shallow notch at a rounded apex.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Revolute -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Rolled backward, margin rolled toward lower side.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Rhachilla -n.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  See Rachilla.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Rhachis -n.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  See Rachis.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Rhizome -n.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  The root-stock or dorsiventral stem having a root-like appearance, prostrate on or underground, sending off rootlets, the apex progressively sending up stems or leaves.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Rhomboidal -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Approaching a rhombic outline, quadrangular, with the lateral angles obtuse.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Rib -n.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  A primary vein, especially the central longitudinal or midrib\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Rigid -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Stiff, inflexible.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Rind -n.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  The outer bark of a tree, all the tissue outside the cambium; the tough outer layer of some fleshy fruits.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Ripe -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Mature, characterized by the completion of an organ or organism for its allotted function.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Rivulose -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Having small sinuate channels; marked with lines like a rivulet.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Rootstock -n.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Subterranean stem; rhizome.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Rosette -n.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  A cluster of spreading or radiating basal leaves.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Rostellate -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  The diminutive of rostrate, somewhat beaked.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Rostellum -n.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  A little beak; a slender extension from the upper edge of the stigma in orchids.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Rostrate -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  With a beak, narrowed into a slender tip or point.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Rostrum -n.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Any beak-like extension; the inner segment of the coronal lobes in asclepiads.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Rosulate -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  In the form of a rosette.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Rotate -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Wheel-shaped, circular, and flat, applied to a gamopetalous corolla with a short tube.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Ruderal -n.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  A plant growing in rubbish or waste places.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Rudiment -n.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  An imperfectly developed organ or part.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Rudimentary -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Arrested in an early stage of development.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Rugose -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Wrinkled, as a leaf surface with sunken veins.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Rugulose -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Finely wrinkled.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Ruminate -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Having a chewed appearance.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Runcinate -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Saw-toothed or sharply incised, the teeth retrorse.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Runner -n.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  A stolon, an elongated lateral shoot, rooting at intervals, the intermediate part apt to perish, and thus new individuals arise.\tab 
\par \pard\li288\tx4320\plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\cf0\b 
\par \pard\tx4320\plain\f3\fs28\cf1\b  S 
\par \pard\plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Saccate -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Bag-shaped.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Sagittate -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Enlarged at the base into two acute straight lobes, like the barbed head of an arrow.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Saline -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Of or pertaining to salt.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Salverform -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  With a slender tube and an abruptly expanding limb, as that of the Phlox; hypocrateriform, salver-shaped.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Samara -n.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  A winged achene-like fruit.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Sap -n.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  The juice of a plant; the fluid contents of cells and young vessels, consisting of water and salts absorbed by the roots and distributed through the plant.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Saxicolous -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Dwelling or growing among rocks.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Scabridulous -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Slightly rough.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Scabrous -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  With short bristly hairs; rough to the touch.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Scalariform -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Having markings suggestive of a ladder.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Scale -n.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Any thin scarious body, usually a degenerative leaf, sometimes of epidermal origin.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Scandent -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Climbing in any manner.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Scape -n.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Leafless peduncle arising from the ground, it may bear scales or bracts but not foliage leaves and may be one- or many-flowered.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Scapose -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Bearing or resembling a scape.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Scar -n.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  A mark left on the stem by the separation of a leaf, or on a seed by its detachment; a cicatrix.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Scarious -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Thin, dry, and membranous, not green.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Scarlet -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Vivid red, having some yellow in its composition.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Schizocarp -n.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  A pericarp which splits into one-seeded portions, mericarps.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Scissile -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Separating, easily split.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Scrobiculate -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Marked by minute or shallow depressions, pitted.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Scutate -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Buckler-shaped, like a small shield.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Secund -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Said of parts or organs directed to one side only, usually by torsion.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Seed -n.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  A mature ovule.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Seed-leaf -n.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Cotyledon.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Seedling -n.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  A plant produced from seed, in distinction to a plant propagated vegetatively; a juvenile plant.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Seed-stalk -n.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  The funiculus or podosperm.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Segment -n.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  One of the parts of a leaf, petal, calyx, or perianth that is divided but not truly compound; any of the parts into which an organism naturally separates or is divided; a section.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Segregate -n.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  That which is kept apart; a segregate is a species separated from a super-species.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Selfed -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Fertilized by its own pollen.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Semiglobose -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Half-globose; hemispherical.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Semilunate -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Shaped like a half-moon, crescent -shaped.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Sensitive -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Responsive to stimuli, as the leaves of Mimosa pudica.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Sepal -n.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  One of the separate parts of a calyx.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Sepaloid -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  With the texture of, or resembling a sepal.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Septate -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Partitioned; divided by partitions.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Septentate -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Having parts in sevens, as in a compound leaf, with seven leaflets arising from the same point.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Septicidal -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Said of a capsule that dehisces through the dissepiments or lines of junction.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Septifragal -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  With the valves breaking away from the dissepiments in dehiscence.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Septum -n.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Any kind of partition, whether a true or false dissepiment.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Seriate -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Disposed in series of rows, either transverse or longitudinal.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Sericeous -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Silky, clothed with closely appressed, soft, straight pubescence.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Serrate -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  With sharp teeth on the margin pointing forward.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Serrulate -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Serrate with minute teeth.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Sessile -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Without a stalk of any kind, as a leaf without a petiole.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Seta (pl. setae) -n.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  A bristle or bristle-shaped body; the arista or awn of grasses, when terminal; a peculiar stalked gland in Rubus; used by cyperologists for the bristle within the utricle of certain species of Carex; it represents a continuation of the floral axis.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Setaceous -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Bristle-like, with bristle.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Setiferous -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Bearing bristles.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Setiform -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  In the shape of a bristle.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Setose -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Bristly, beset with bristles.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Setulose -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  With minute bristles.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Sex -n.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  In botany, male or female functions in plants.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Sexual -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Pertaining to sex.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Sheath -n.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Any long or more or less tubular structure  surrounding an organ or part.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Sheathing -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Enclosing, as by a sheath.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Shield -n.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  The staminode of Cypripedium; in Coniferae, the thick rhomboid extremity of the cone-scales.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Shoot -n.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  A young growing branch or twig; the ascending axis.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Shrub -n.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  A low, usually several-stemmed, woody plant: a bush.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Sigmoid -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Said of a leaflet or segment that is curved sidewise in opposing directions; S-shaped.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Siliceous, silicious -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Composed of or abounding in silica.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Silique -n.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  The peculiar pod of the Cruciferae, with two valves falling away from a frame (the replum) on which the seeds grow, and across which a false partition is formed.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Silky -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Having a covering of soft appressed fine hairs; sericeous.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Silvery -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  With a whitish metallic more or less shiny luster.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Simple -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Of one piece; not compound.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Simple fruits -n.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Those fruits which result from the ripening of a single pistil.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Simple inflorescence \tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  A flower cluster with one axis, as a spadix, spike, or catkin.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Simple leaf -n.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  A leaf with one blade, with incomplete segmentation.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Simple pistil -n.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  A pistil consisting of one carpel.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Sinuate -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  With a deep, wavy margin.tl\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Sinuous -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  See Sinuate.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Sinus -n.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  The space between two lobes of a leaf or other expanded organ.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Skin -n.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  A thin external covering, the cuticle or epidermis.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Sleep -n.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  The response of plants to the absence of light resulting in changes in position of organs such as leaves.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Sleep movement -n.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Positions taken by leaves during the night; nyctitropic movement.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Smooth -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Without roughness or pubescence.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Soboliferous -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Sucker-bearing.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Solitary -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Single, only one from the same place; species of which the individuals are in extreme isolation.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Sorus -n.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  A cluster of sporangia in ferns.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Spadix -n.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  The thick or fleshy spike of certain plants, as the Araceae, surrounded or subtended by a spathe.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Sparse -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Scattered.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Spathe -n.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  The bract or pair of bracts surrounding or subtending a flower cluster or spadix; it is sometimes colored and flower-like, as in the Calla.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Speciation -n.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  The processes whereby new species are formed.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Species -n.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Groups of actually or potentially interbreeding natural populations, which are reproductively isolated from other such groups.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Species nova -n.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  New species.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Specimen -n.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  A plant, or portion of one, prepared for botanic study.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Spicate -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Like a spike, or disposed in a spike.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Spiciform -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Spike-like, in the form of a spike.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Spicule -n.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  A diminutive or secondary spike; a fine, fleshy erect point.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Spiculose -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  With a surface covered with fine points.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Spike -n.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  An inflorescence consisting of a central rachis bearing a number of sessile flowers.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Spikelet -n.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  The unit of the inflorescence in grasses, consisting of two glumes and one or more florets; a diminutive spike.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Spine -n.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  A sharp woody outgrowth from the stem, usually a modified branch, sometimes a petiole, stipule, or other part.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Spinescent -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Ending in a spine or sharp point; more or less spiny.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Spinose -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Spine-like or with spines.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Spinule - n.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  A little spine or spine-like process.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Spinulose -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  With small spines.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Spiny -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Beset with spines.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Sporadic -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Occurring here and there, without continuous range.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Sporangiophore -n.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  A stalk-like structure bearing sporangia.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Sporangium -n.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  A sac endogenously producing spores.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Spore -n.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  A cell which becomes free and capable of direct development into a new individual.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Sporophyll -n.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  A spore-bearing leaf.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Spray -n.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Small branches or branchlets of trees with their leaves.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Squamate -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Furnished with scales, scalelike leaves, or bracts.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Squamulose -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  With small scales.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Squarrose -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Spreading or recurved at the tip, said of the tips of some lemmas.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Squarrulose -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Diminutively squarrose.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Stalk -n.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  The stem of any organ, as the petiole, peduncle, pedicel, filament, culm, or stipe.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Stamen -n.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  The pollen-bearing organ of the flower, the male organ in the angiosperms.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Stamen, sterile -n.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  A body belonging to the series of stamens but without pollen.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Staminate -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Having stamens and no pistil, male.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Stamineal -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Relating to or consisting of stamens.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Staminode -n.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  A sterile stamen, or a structure resembling such and borne in the staminal part of the flower; in some flowers, as in Canna, staminodia are petal-like and showy.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Standard -n.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  The upper and broad more or less erect petal of a papilionaceous flower.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Stellate -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Star-shaped or radiating like the points of a star.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Stellate scales -pl. n.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Discs borne by their edge or center.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Stem -n.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  The main axis of a plant; leaf-bearing and flower-bearing as distinguished from the root-bearing axis.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Stem, subterranean -n.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  A rhizome, tuber, bulb, or corm.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Sterile -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Barren, as a flower destitute of pistil; used for staminate or neuter flowers.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Stigma -n.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  The part of a pistil or style which receives the pollen; a point on the spores of Equisetum.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Stigmatic -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Pertaining to the stigma.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Stinging hair -n.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  A hollow hair seated on a gland which secretes an acid substance, as in nettles.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Stipe -n.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  The "leaf-stalk" of a fern; the support of a gynoecium or carpel.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Stipitate -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  With a stipe.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Stipular -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Having stipules or relating to them.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Stipulate -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Furnished with stipules.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Stipule -n. \tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28 One of the pair of appendages borne at the base of the leaf in many plants.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Stipulose -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Having stipules.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Stolon -n.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  A sucker, runner, or any basal branch which is disposed to root.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Stoloniferous -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  With stolons or runners that take root.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Stoma (pl. stomata) -n.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  A specialized orifice in the epidermis communicating with intercellular spaces.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Stomate -n.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  See Stoma.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Stone -n.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  The hard endocarp of a drupe, a pit.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Stone fruit -n.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  A drupe such as a plum or peach.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Stool -n.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  The base of a plant from which off-sets or layers are taken; several stems arising from the same root, as in wheat.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Stopple -n.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  A projection or lid on a pollen grain which falls away to admit passage of the pollen tube.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Stramineous -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Straw-like or straw-colored.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Strap -n.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  The ligule of a ray floret in Compositae.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Strap-shaped -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Ligulate or lorate.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Straw -n.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  The jointed hollow culm (stem) of grasses.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Striate -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  With fine grooves, ridges or lines of color.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Strict -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Stiffly upright, rigid, erect.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Strigose -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Beset with sharp-pointed appressed straight and stiff hairs or bristles; hispid.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Strophiole -n.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  An appendage at the hilum of certain seeds; a caruncle.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Stylar -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Relating to the style.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Stylar column -n.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  The column of orchids.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Style -n.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  The more or less elongated part of the pistil between the ovary and the stigma.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Subcordate -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Almost cordate.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Suber -n.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Cork.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Submerged -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Growing under water.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Suborder -n.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  A group of genera lower than an order and higher than a family.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Subpetiolar -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Under the petioles, as the buds in Platanus.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Subspecies -n.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  A group of forms ambiguous in rank, and between a variety and a species.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Subtend -v.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  To stand below and close to, as a bract below a flower or a leaf below a bud.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Subula -n.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  A fine, abrupt, sharp point.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Subulate -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Awl-shaped.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Succulent -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Juicy or pulpy.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Sucker -n.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  A shoot of subterranean origin; a haustorium, sometimes restricted to the penetrating organ or papilla.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Suffrutescent -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Obscurely or somewhat shrubby.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Suffruticose -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Pertaining to a low and somewhat woody plant; diminutively shrubby or fruticose; woody at base.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Sulcate -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Grooved or furrowed lengthwise.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Sulcus -n.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  A small groove.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Superior -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Growing or placed above; also in a lateral flower on the side next to the axis; the posterior, or upper lip of a corolla is the superior.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Superior ovary -n.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  An ovary with the floral envelopes inserted below it on the torus; a hypogynous ovary.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Superposed -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Placed vertically over some other part.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Supine -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Prostrate with face turned upward.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Supra-axillary -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  See Super-axillary.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Suture -n.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  A junction or seam of union; a line of opening or dehiscence.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Symmetrical - a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Actinomorphic; regular, capable of division by a longitudinal plane into similar halves.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Symmetry -n.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  A due proportion of the several parts of a body to each other.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Symmetry, bilateral -n.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Symmetrical arrangement capable of equal division in one plane only, as in a pea flower.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Symmetry, radial -n.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Symmetrical arrangement capable of equal division in more than one direction through the center; as in the mallow flower.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Sympatric -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Inhabiting one and the same area.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Sympetalous -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  With partially or wholly fused petals.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Syncarp -n.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  A multiple or fleshy aggregate fruit, as the mulberry or magnolia.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Syncarpous -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Composed of two or more united carpels.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Synonym -n.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  A name with the same meaning as another name in the same language but spelled differently; in taxonomy, synonyms are two or more scientific names for the same taxon, one of which is correct and the others incorrect under the International Rules of Nomenclature.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Synonymous -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Having the same meaning.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Synonymy -n.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Discarded names for identical objects.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b System -n.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  A scheme of classification, as the Natural System.\tab 
\par \pard\li288\tx4320\plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\cf0\b 
\par \pard\tx4320\plain\f3\fs28\cf1\b  T 
\par \pard\plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Tassel -n.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  The staminate inflorescence in maize.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Taxon (pl. taxa) -n.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  A general term applied to any taxonomic element, population, or group, irrespective of its classification level.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Taxonomy -n.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  The systematic classification of organisms.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Tendril -n.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  A rotating or twisting threadlike process or extension by which the plant grasps an object and clings to it for support; morphologically it may be a modified stem, leaf, leaflet, or stipule.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Terete -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Circular in transverse section.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Terminal -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Proceeding from, or belonging to the end or apex.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Ternate -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  In threes.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Terrestrial -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Growing in the soil in distinction from growing in water or other habitats.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Tesselate -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  With the surface marked with square or oblong depressions.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Testa -n.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  The outer coat of the seed, usually hard and brittle.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Tetradymous -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Having four cells or cases.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Tetradynamous -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Having four long stamens and two short, as in Cruciferae.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Tetragonal -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Four-angled.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Tetrastichous -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  In four vertical ranks.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Throat -n.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  The opening or orifice into a gamopetalous corolla or perianth; the place where the limb joins the tube.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Thyrsoid -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Resembling a thyrse.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Tillering -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Throwing out shoots from the base of the stem.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Tomentose -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  With tomentum; densely woolly or pubescent; with matted soft wool-like hairiness.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Tomentulose -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Somewhat or delicately tomentose.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Tomentum -n.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  A densely matted pubescence.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Tooth -n.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  A small, pointed marginal lobe.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Torose -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Cylindrical with contractions at intervals, somewhat moniliform.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Torulose -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  The diminutive of torose.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Trailing -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Prostrate, but not rooting.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Tree -n.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  A woody plant that  produces one main trunk and a more or less distinct and elevated head.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Triad -n.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  A group of three objects.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Tribe -n.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  A group superior to a genus, but less than an order.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Trichotomous -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Three-forked, branching into three divisions.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Tricolor -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Three-colored.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Tricussate -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Said of whorls of three leaves each, ternate.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Tridentate -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Three-toothed.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Trifoliate -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Having three leaflets.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Trifurcate -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Having three forks or branches.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Trigonous -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Three-angled.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Trimorphic -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Occurring under three forms, as with long, short, and intermediate styles.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Tripartite -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Divided into three parts.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Triquetrous -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  With three salient angles.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Truncate -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Ending abruptly, the base or apex nearly or quite straight across.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Tuber -n.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  A short, thickened branch of a subterranean stem, beset with buds or "eyes."\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Tubercle -n.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  A little tuber; any excrescence, as on the roots, ascribed to the action of symbiotic organisms.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Tuberculate -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Furnished with knoblike excrescences or tubercles.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Tuberiferous -a.2\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Bearing tubers.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Tuberous -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  With tubers, tuberlike.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Tufted -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Cespitose, clustered, or clumped.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Tunic -n.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  The skin of a seed, the spermoderm; the coat of a bulb; any loose membranous skin not formed from the epidermis.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Turbinate -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Top-shaped.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Turgid -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Swollen from fullness, but not from air.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Tussock -n.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  A tuft of grass or grass-like plants.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Twig -n.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  A small shoot or branch of a tree.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Type -n.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  A nomenclatural type is that constituent element of a taxon to which the name of the taxon is permanently attached, whether as an accepted name or as a synonym.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Type specimen -n.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  The original specimen from which a description was written.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Type specimens -pl. n.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Icotypes.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Typical -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  In classification, conforming to the originally described specimen.\tab 
\par \pard\li288\tx4320\plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\cf0\b 
\par \pard\tx4320\plain\f3\fs28\cf1\b  U 
\par \pard\plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Umbel -n.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  An indeterminate inflorescence consisting of several pedicellate flowers having a common point of attachment.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Umbel, compound -n.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  An umbel with each ray itself bearing an umbel.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Umbel, cymose -n.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  An apparent umbel, but with the flowers opening centrifugally; a cyme which simulates an umbel.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Umbellate -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Umbelled; with umbels; pertaining to umbels.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Umbelliform -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  In the shape of an umbel.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Umbilicate -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Depressed in the center.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Umbilicus -n.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  The hilum of a seed.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Umbo (pl. umbones) -n.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  A boss or protuberance.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Umbonate -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Bearing an umbo or boss in the center.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Unarmed -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Destitute of prickles or other armature; sometimes it means pointless, muticous.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Uncinate -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Hooked at the point, with hooks.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Undulate -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Wavy, repand.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Unguicular -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Furnished with a claw.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Unguiculate -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Contracted at the base into a claw.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Uniseriate -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  In one horizontal row or series.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Unisexual -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Of one sex; with either stamens or pistil or their representative.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Unitypic -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Monotypic, of one type.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Urceolate -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Pitcher-like, hollow and contracted at the mouth like an urn or pitcher.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Utricle -n.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  A small bladdery  pericarp, as in Atriplex; a membranous sac surrounding the fruit proper in Carex; any bladder-shaped appendage.2\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Utricular -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Bladder-shaped.\tab 
\par \pard\li288\tx4320\plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\cf0\b 
\par \pard\tx4320\plain\f3\fs28\cf1\b  V 
\par \pard\plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Vagina -n.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  The sheathing petiole which forms a continuous tube, as in sedges or grasses.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Vaginate -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Sheathed.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Vaginiferous -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Bearing sheaths.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Vallecula -n.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  The grooves in the intervals between the ridges in the fruit of Umbelliferae.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Vallecular -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Of or pertaining to the grooves in the fruit of Umbelliferae.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Valvate -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Opening by valves, as in most dehiscent fruits and some anthers; parts of a flower bud that meet without overlapping.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Valve -n.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  One of the pieces into which a capsule naturally separates at maturity; the segment of a calyx meeting in vernation without overlapping; a partially detached flap of an anther.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Variant -n.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  A form arising from variation.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Variety -n.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  A group of organisms within a species that differs from other members or groups within the species in one or more minor characteristics but not enough to justify a new specific epithet.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Vascular -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  With vessels or ducts.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Vegetable -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Belonging to or consisting of plants.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Vegetation -n.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  The sum total of all plants growing on an area.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Vein -n.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  A strand of vascular tissue in a flat organ such as a leaf.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Velum -n.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  The membranous indusium in Isoetes.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Velutinous -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Velvety, due to a coating of fine soft hairs.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Venation -n.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Veining; arrangements or disposition of veins.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Ventral -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Of or pertaining to the belly; pertaining to or designating that surface of a carpel, petal, etc., which faces toward the center of the flower.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Ventural suture -n.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  The ventral seam or line of dehiscence in a carpel.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Ventricose -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Swelling or inflated on one side, as the corolla of some labiates and Scrophulariaceae.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Vernal -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Pertaining to spring.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Vernation -n.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  The disposition or arrangement of leaves in the bud.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Verrucose -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Covered with wartlike elevations.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Versatile -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Hung or attached near the middle and usually moving freely, as an anther attached crosswise on the apex of a filament and capable of turning.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Versicolor -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Variously colored, as of one color blending into another, or changing in color.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Verticillaster -n.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  A false whorl, composed of a pair of opposed cymes, as in Labiatae.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Verticillastrate -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Bearing or arranged in clusters resembling whorls.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Verticillate -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Whorled with two or more leaves at a node, cyclical.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Vesicle -n.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  A small bladder or cavity.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Vesicular -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Composed or covered with little bladders or blisters.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Vestige -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  The remaining trace of an organ which was fully developed in some ancestral form.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Vestigial -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Rudimentary.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Villose -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  With long, silky, straight hairs.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Vine -n.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  The plant which bears grapes, Vitis vinifera; in the U.S. applied to any trailing or climbing stem, or runner.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Violaceous -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Violet-colored, ianthine.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Virgate -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Wand-shaped, twiggy.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Viscid -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Sticky from a tenacious coating or secretion.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Vitta -n.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  An aromatic oil tube of the pericarp of most Umbelliferae.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Viviparous -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Germinating or sprouting from seed or bud while attached to the parent plant.\tab 
\par \pard\li288\tx4320\plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\cf0\b 
\par \pard\tx4320\plain\f3\fs28\cf1\b  W 
\par \pard\plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Wart -n.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  A hard or firm excrescence.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Weed -n.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  A plant detrimental to man's interest, displeasing to the eye, or of no apparent value.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Weedy -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  With the attributes of a weed.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Whorl -n.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Cyclic arrangement of appendages at a node.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Wing -n.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Any membranous expansion attached to an organ; the lateral petal of a papilonaceous flower.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Wood -n.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  The lignified portion of plants, included within the cambium, but exclusive of the pith.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Woolly -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Lanate, tomentose, clothed with long and tortuous or matted hairs.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Wrinkled -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Rugose, creased.\tab 
\par \pard\li288\tx4320\plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\cf0\b 
\par \pard\tx4320\plain\f3\fs28\cf1\b  X 
\par \pard\li288\tx4320\plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\cf0\b 
\par \pard\tx4320\plain\f3\fs28\cf1\b  Y 
\par \pard\li288\tx4320\plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\cf0\b 
\par \pard\tx4320\plain\f3\fs28\cf1\b  Z 
\par \pard\plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Zigzag -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Having short bends or angles from side to side.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Zoned -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Colored in rings or circles.\tab 
\par \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\b Zygomorphic -a.\tab \plain\lang2057\f3\fs28  Capable of division by only one plane of symmetry.\tab 
\par \pard\li288\plain\lang2057\f3\fs28\cf0\b 
\par \pard\plain\lang2057\f3\fs20 
\par }