{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Plant without spinose branches, sometimes with spine-tipped leaves and bracts
\par
4 Leaves flat
\par
5 Plant with yellow or brownish glands or glandular hairs ..... {\b 3. Chenopodium}
\par
5 Plant eglandular
\par
6 Leaves and bracts spinose-acuminate
\par
7 Leaves 1-4 cm; flowers unisexual; bracteoles connate, enclosing fruit
\par
  ................................................................................................ {\b 10. Ceratocarpus}
\par
7 Leaves to 8 cm; flowers hermaphrodite; bracteoles free, not
\par 
   enclosing fruit ..................................................................... {\b 15. Agriophyllum}
\par
6 Leaves and bracts not spinose
\par
8 Flowers all unisexual; female flowers mostly without perianth,
\par
  but with 2 bracteoles which become enlarged and enclose the fruit
\par
9 Plant pubescent ............................................................ {\b  9. Krascheninnikovia}
\par
9 Plant glabrous or farinose
\par
10 Bracteoles free, at least in the upper ½
\par
11 Male flowers mostly 5-merous, bracteole 0;
\par
  female bracteoles without subtending bract .................................... {\b 6. Atriplex}
\par
11 Male flowers mostly 4-merous, bracteole 1;
\par
   female bracteoles much larger than subtending bract ......... {\b 8. Cremnophyton}
\par
10 Bracteoles connate almost to the apex
\par
12 Plant green; stigmas 4 or 5 .......................................................... {\b 5. Spinacia}
\par
12 Plant silvery-farinose; stigmas 2 or 3 ....................................... {\b 7. Halimione}
\par
8  Flowers mostly hermaphrodite, rarely all unisexual and then
\par
   the female with 3 or more perianth segments
\par
13 Perianth-segments in fruit with a tubercle, spine horizontal wing
\par
   or keel dorsally
\par
14 Perianth-segments with a spine in fruit ........................................ {\b 13. Bassia}
\par
14 Perianth-segments with a wing, keel or tubercle in fruit
\par
15 Plant glabrous or farinose ............................................................ {\b 23. Suaeda}
\par
15 Plant pubescent at least above 
\par
16 Wings of the perianth connate and completely encircling the fruit;
   leaves dentate to sinuate-pinnatifid ............................................ {\b 4. Cycloloma}
\par
16 Wings of the perianth free; leaves entire ...................................... {\b 13. Bassia}
\par
13 Perianth-segments without appendages, or vertically keeled or winged
\par
17 Ovary semi-inferior, connate with the swollen receptacle
\par
   in fruit ................................................................................................... {\b 2. Beta}
\par
17 Ovary superior
\par
18 Achenes encircled by a distinct wing or margin, sometimes
\par
   emarginate at apex ............................................................... {\b 14. Corispermum}
\par
18 Achenes not winged or margined, rarely with a 2-lobed wing at apex 
\par
19 Plant pubescent 
\par
20 Perianth-segments mostly solitary, not enclosing the achene
\par
   .............................................................................................. {\b 14. Corispermum}
\par
20 Perianth-segments 3 or more, enclosing the achene
\par
21 Leaves up to 9 cm, broadly lanceolate; flowers unisexual .......... {\b 11. Axyris}
\par
21 Leaves not more than 1-5 cm, linear or linear-lanceolate;
\par
   flowers hermaphrodite, sometimes some female .............. {\b 12. Camphorosma}
\par
19 Plant glabrous or farinose
\par
22 Flowers unisexual, the male in terminal spicate inflorescences,
\par
   the female axillary ......................................................................... {\b 5. Spinacia}
\par
22 Flowers hermaphrodite, sometimes some female 
\par
23 Perianth-segments equal; lower leaves elliptical to ovate or triangular
\par
   ............................................................................................... {\b 3. Chenopodium} 
\par
23 Two lateral perianth-segments larger than the rest; lower leaves
   linear to linear-oblong ........................................................ {\b 12. Camphorosma}
\par
4  Leaves filiform, semi-cylindrical, scale-like or apparently absent
\par
24 Stems segmented, with opposite branches; leaves rudimentary, opposite
\par
25 Stamens (3-)5; perianth-segments in fruit usually with a transverse
   wing dorsally; embryo spiral
\par
26 Staminodes present; stigmas 2(3); seeds vertical ..................... {\b 29. Anabasis}
\par
26 Staminodes absent; stigmas 4; seeds horizontal .................... {\b 30. Haloxylon}
\par
25 Stamens 1 or 2; perianth-segments not winged;
\par
   embryo annular or conduplicate
\par
27 Annual; all branches terminated by an inflorescence
\par
28 Flowers and perianth obvious, fleshy; seeds with soft, often minutely
\par
   hairy, green or brown testa ....................................................... {\b 21. Salicornia}
\par
28 Flowers minute, ± hidden by the bracts; perianth thin, membranous;
\par
   seeds with black, crustaceous, granular testa .................... {\b 22. Microcnemum}
\par
27 Perennial, usually shrubs or small trees, with many
\par
   non-flowering branches
\par
29 Opposite pairs of bracts connate to form a segment ....... {\b 20. Arthrocnemum}
\par
29 Opposite pairs of bracts free, reniform or orbicular
\par
30 Shrub or small tree up to 350 cm, without subglobular axillary branches;
\par
   bracts ± orbicular ................................................................... {\b 18. Halostachys}
\par
30 Small shrub not more than 50 cm, with numerous subglobular axillary
   branches; bracts reniform-orbicular ..................................... {\b 19. Halocnemum}
\par
24 Stems not segmented, the branches opposite or alternate; leaves obvious,
\par
   sometimes small but then alternate
\par
31 Perianth-segments in fruit with a wing, keel or dorsal spine
\par
32 Perianth-segments with 1 unbranched spine dorsally ................... {\b 13. Bassia}
\par
32 Perianth-segments winged or keeled, rarely with spine dorsally
\par
33 Leaves mostly opposite
\par
34 Leaves semi-cylindrical or oblong;
\par
   apex obtuse or mucronulate ........................................................... {\b 25. Salsola}
\par
34 Leaves broadly triangular or ovate; apex spinose ............. {\b 28. Girgensohnia}
\par
33 Leaves all alternate
\par
35 Perianth with 3 outer large segments and 2 inner very small
\par
   segments (rarely 0); stamen 1 ..................................................... {\b 27. Ofaiston}
\par
35 Perianth-segments ± equal; stamens usually 3-5
\par
36 Flowers (at least the outer ones in each cyme) with 2 conspicuous
   bracteoles 
\par
37 All flowers with bracteoles ......................................................... {\b 25. Salsola}
\par

\par
109}
\par