{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 {\i O. vulgatum} subsp.{\i  polyphyllum} auct., non A. Braun, {\i O. vulgatum} var. {\i islandicum} Á. & D. Löve, {\i O. vulgatum} var. {\i minus} Ostenf. & Gröntved, {\i O. sabulicolum} Sauzé & Maillard). Leaves (1)2 or 3 together; lamina 1·5-3(-5) × 0·5-2(-3) cm, deflexed, shortly stalked, cuneate at the base, lanceolate to ovate, acute, net-veined, with fine, oblong secondary meshes and free vein-endings. Fertile spike with 6-15(-20) sporangia on each side; spores tuberculate. 2n = 720. ?.•{\i  W. Europe; very local in C. Europe}. Az Br Co Cz Ga Hb Hs Is It Po Sa.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   {\b 3. O. polyphyllum} A. Braun in Seub.,{\i  Fl. Azor.}17 (1844). Like {\b 2} but leaves usually 1 or 2; stipular sheaths persistent at base of petiole; lamina 2-6 × 0·5-1·8 cm, lanceolate to narrowly elliptical, apiculate; fertile spike with 15-30 sporangia on each side.{\i  N. Portugal} ({\i Douro valley}) ?It Lu. ({\i Africa, S.W. Asia.})
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 4. O. vulgatum} L.,{\i  Sp. Pl.} 1062 (1753) ({\i O. alpinum} Rouy). Leaves usually single, rarely in pairs; lamina 3-15 × 2-6 cm, erect, sessile, with truncate or cordate, rarely cuneate base, broadly ovate to ovate-acuminate, net-veined, with fine, ovate or roundish secondary meshes and free vein-endings. Fertile spike with 12-45 sporangia on each side; spores tuberculate. 2n = 480, c. 496, 500-520. {\i Usually in damp grassland. Europe, except the extreme north, but local in the Mediterranean region and much of the east}. All except Az Bl Cr Fa Is Sb Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 2.              Botrychium}              Swartz
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc   By †Rothmaler.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Lamina usually compound, 1- to 4-pinnate, rarely simple, oblong to triangular, somewhat fleshy, with dichotomous free veins. Fertile spikes always compound, with subsessile free sporangia in 2 rows.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Most species occur in fairly dry, often acid, grassland, less often in open woodland.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Lamina broadly triangular, wider than long, hairy at least when young
\par
2 Lamina fleshy, petiolate, 2- or 3-pinnate; segments obtuse ...... {\b 6. multifidum}
\par
2 Lamina membranous, sessile, 3- or 4-pinnate; segments acute 
\par
  ................................................................................................... {\b 7. virginianum}
\par
1 Lamina oblong, ovate or triangular-ovate, longer than wide,
\par
  almost glabrous
\par
3 Lamina simple, 3-lobed or pinnate; pinnae with dichotomous veins 
\par
  and without midrib
\par
4 Lamina petiolate, simple, 3-lobed or pinnate, with 2(-4) pairs 
\par
  of pinnae .......................................................................................... {\b 1. simplex}
\par
4 Lamina sessile, always pinnate, with (2)3-9 pairs of pinnae ........... {\b 2. lunaria}
\par
3 Lamina 2-pinnate; segments with ± conspicuous midrib
\par
5 Segments about as long as wide, triangular to rhomboid or ovate
\par
  ........................................................................................................... {\b 3. boreale}
\par
5 Segments longer than wide, lanceolate to oblong  
\par
  (if wider, then pinnatifid)
\par
6 Segments obtuse, ovate to oblong, with somewhat
\par
  inconspicuous midrib ......................................................... {\b 4. matricariifolium}
\par
6 Segments acute, lanceolate to linear-lanceolate, with
\par
  pronounced midrib .................................................................... {\b 5. lanceolatum}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. B. simplex} E. Hitchc.,{\i  Amer. Jour. Sci. Arts }{\b 6:} 103 (1823). Leaves 2-10(-15) cm; lamina with a long petiole, simple, 3-lobed, trifoliolate or pinnate, with 2 or rarely 3 or 4 pairs of obovate or roundish, entire pinnae with rounded (rarely lobed) apex.{\i  N. & N.C. Europe northwards to} 66°{\i  N., extending very locally southwards to Corse; one station in N.W. Greece}. Au Co Cz Da Fe Ga Ge Gr He Is It Ju No Po Rs(N, B, C) Su.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   {\b 2. B. lunaria} (L.) Swartz in Schrader,{\i  Jour. für die Bot. }{\b 1800} ({\b 2}): 110 (1802). Leaves 5-30 cm; lamina sessile, oblong, always pinnate, with (2)3-9 pairs of trapezoid or flabellate pinnae; pinnae with semilunar-cuneate base and often semicircular, rounded, entire or rarely incised apex, without midrib. 2n = 90, 96.{\i  Most of Europe, but local in much of the south and east.} All except Bl Lu Sb Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 3. B. boreale} Milde, {\i Nova Acta Acad. Leop.-Carol.}{\b  26}({\b 2}): 627, 757 (1858). Leaves 10-30 cm; lamina nearly sessile, triangular-ovate, somewhat longer than broad, 2-pinnate, with triangular, ovate to rhombic, acute, crenate pinnae tapering to the apex, and with midrib. 2n = 90.{\i  Arctic and subarctic Europe, extending southwards to 59° N. in Sweden}. Fe Is No Rs(N) Su.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 4. B. matricariifolium} (Retz.) A. Braun ex Koch, {\i Syn. Fl. Germ.} ed. 2, 972 (1845) ({\i B. ramosum} (Roth) Ascherson). Leaves 4-20 cm; lamina nearly sessile, oblong, ovate or deltate-ovate, 2-pinnate; pinnae and pinnules oblong to ovate, obtuse (but tapering to the apex), entire or crenate, with often not very pronounced midrib. 2n = c. 180.{\i  N., E. & C. Europe, extending locally southwards to Corse and N. Albania}. Al Au Co Cz Da Fe Ga Ge He †Ho Hu It Ju No Po †Rm Rs(N, B, C, W) Su.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 5. B. lanceolatum} (S.G. Gmelin) Ångstrom,{\i  Bot. Not.}{\b  1854}: 68 (1854). Leaves 5-25 cm; lamina nearly sessile, triangular-ovate to oblong, 2-pinnate; pinnae lanceolate to linear-lanceolate or oblong, acutely serrate or pinnatifid, with pronounced midrib. 2n = 90.{\i  N. Europe, southwards to 55° N. in White Russia; Alps; W. Carpathians}. Au Fe †Ga He Is It No Po Rs(N, B, C) Su.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 6. B. multifidum} (S.G. Gmelin) Rupr.,{\i  Beitr. Pfl. Russ. Reich. }{\b 11:} 40 (1859) ({\i B. matricariae} (Schrank) Sprengel, {\i B. palmatum} C. Presl,{\i  B. rutaceum} Swartz,{\i  B. rutaefolium} A. Braun, {\i ?B. ternatum} (Thunb.) Swartz). Leaves 5-20 cm; lamina deflexed, triangular, wider than long, petiolate, 2- or 3-pinnate, always sparsely hairy, coriaceous; pinnae roundish or ovate, obtuse, imbricate, entire to crenate, with pronounced midrib.{\i  N., C. & E. Europe; one station in N. Appennini.} Au Cz Da Fe Ga Ge He Hu It Ju No Po Rm Rs(N, B, C, W) Su.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 7. B. virginianum} (L.) Swartz in Schrader, {\i Jour. für die Bot. }{\b 1800} ({\b 2}): 111 (1802). Leaves 20-80 cm; lamina deflexed, triangular, wider than long, sessile, membranous, sparsely hairy, 3- or 4-pinnate; pinnae and pinnules oblong to ovate, acuminate, acutely toothed and decurrent, with pronounced midrib.{\i  N.E. Europe extending locally to Switzerland, Romania and C. Ukraine.} Au Cz Fe He Hu Ju Po Rm Rs(N, B, C, W) Su.
\par

\par
10}
\par