{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 36. R. pulcher} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 336 (1753). Perennial 20-60 cm. Plant often papillose. Basal leaves small, fleshy, about twice as long as wide, usually panduriform, cordate at the base. Panicle open; branches usually divaricate, flexuous, often entangled or arcuate; whorls all remote and subtended by a leaf. Pedicels thick, shorter than to as long as the valves; fruits scarcely deciduous. Valves thick, coarsely foveolate-rugose, variable in outline; at least 1 valve with a large rugose or verrucose tubercle.{\i  Mainly ruderal. S. & W. Europe, extending to Hungary and N. Romania.} Al Az Bl Br Bu Co Cr Ga Ge Gr Hb He Hs Hu It Ju Lu Rm Rs(K) Sa Si Tu [Au He].
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Valves entire, or with a few teeth not more than 0·5 mm near the base 
\par
  ......................................................................................... ({\b d} ) subsp.{\b  anodontus}
\par
1 Valves with several teeth on each margin; teeth more than 0·5 mm
\par
2 Valves suborbicular or ovate-triangular, broadly acuminate at apex;
\par
  teeth short, up to 8 on each margin .................................... ({\b c}) subsp. {\b woodsii}
\par
2 Valves narrowly ovate or oblong with lingulate apex;
\par
  teeth 4-6 on each margin
\par
3 Valves 4-5 mm; teeth 1-2 mm, 4 on each margin ............. ({\b a}) subsp.{\b  pulcher}
\par
3 Valves c. 6 mm; teeth 3-4 mm, 5 or 6 on each margin ...... ({\b b}) subsp.{\b  raulinii}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp.{\b  pulcher} : Basal leaves usually panduriform. Branches angular-flexuous, often forming an intricate mass. Valves 4-5 mm, narrowly ovate or oblong, with lingulate apex; 1 or 2 meshes of venation on each side of the tubercle; teeth 1-2 mm, 4 on each margin. 2n = 20.{\i  Throughout the range of the species}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp.{\b  raulinii} (Boiss.) Rech. fil.,{\i  Beih. Bot. Centr.}{\b  49}({\b 2}): 39 (1932): Like subsp. ({\b a}) but valves c. 6 mm; teeth 3-4 mm, 5 or 6 on each margin. 2n = 20.{\i  Greece and Aegean region}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b c}) Subsp.{\b  woodsii} (De Not.) Arcangeli, {\i Comp. Fl. Ital.} 585 (1882) (subsp.{\i  divaricatus} (L.) Murb.): Basal leaves seldom panduriform. Branches arcuate-divaricate. Valves 4-5 mm, suborbicular or ovate-triangular, broadly acuminate at the apex; usually 3 meshes of venation on each side of the tubercle; teeth 0·5-1 mm, up to 8 on each margin. 2n = 20.{\i  S. Europe}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b d}) Subsp.{\b  anodontus} (Hausskn.) Rech. fil.,{\i  Beih. Bot. Centr.}{\b  49}({\b 2}): 34 (1932): Basal leaves and branches similar to those of subsp. ({\b c}). Valves 4-5 mm, narrowly ovate-triangular, entire or with 1 or 2 teeth up to 0·5 mm near the base.{\i  Kriti.} ({\i S.W. Asia, N. Africa}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 37. R. obtusifolius} L.,{\i  Sp. Pl}. 335 (1753). Perennial 60-120 cm. Basal leaves large, twice as long as wide, thin, obtuse or subacute, cordate at the base; petiole slightly longer than the lamina. Panicle open; branches arcuate; whorls mostly remote, the lower ones subtended by a leaf. Pedicels slender, up to 2½ times as long as the valves; fruits readily deciduous. Valves 3-6 × 2-3 mm.{\i  Europe, except the extreme north and south.} All except Cr Is Sb Si, but only as an alien in Az Fe and perhaps Rs(N).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Valves entire or with a few short or indistinct teeth near the base, 
\par
  all with tubercles .............................................................. ({\b d}) subsp.{\b  silvestris}
\par
1 Valves with several distinct, often long teeth
\par
2 All valves with tubercles; tubercles often unequal .......... ({\b c}) subsp.{\b  transiens}
\par
2 One valve with a tubercle, the other 2 without
\par
3 Valves ovate or ovate-triangular, obtuse; leaves papillose beneath
\par
  ...................................................................................... ({\b a}) subsp.{\b  obtusifolius}
\par
3 Valves narrowly triangular or lingulate, subacute; leaves
\par
  usually not papillose beneath ........................................ ({\b b}) subsp.{\b  subalpinus}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp.{\b  obtusifolius} (subsp.{\i  agrestis} (Fries) Celak.): Leaves papillose beneath. Valves ovate or ovate-triangular, with several distinct, often long teeth, obtuse; 1 valve with a tubercle. 2n = 40.{\i  Cultivated ground, pastures and waste places. Native in W. Europe, and widely naturalized elsewhere}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp.{\b  subalpinus} (Schur) Celak., {\i Prodr. Fl. Böhm.} 159 (1873): Leaves smooth or minutely papillose beneath. Valves narrowly triangular, with several distinct teeth, subacute; 1 valve with a tubercle.{\i  Streams and woodland margins. Carpathians and mountains of Balkan peninsula}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b c}) Subsp.{\b  transiens} (Simonkai) Rech. fil.,{\i  Beih. Bot. Centr.}{\b  49}({\b 2}): 52 (1932): Leaves somewhat papillose beneath. Valves ovate to narrowly triangular, with a few teeth near the base, obtuse to subacute; all valves with tubercles. 2n = 40.{\i  Mainly ruderal. C. Europe, Balkan peninsula, S. Scandinavia; locally naturalized elsewhere}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b d}) Subsp.{\b  silvestris} Celak.,{\i  Prodr. Fl. Böhm.} 159 (1871) (subsp.{\i  sylvestris }(Wallr.) Rech.,{\i  R. sylvestris} Wallr.): Leaves smooth beneath. Valves narrowly triangular or lingulate, entire or with a few short or indistinct teeth near the base, subacute; all valves with tubercles. 2n = 40.{\i  Riversides, woodland margins, and as a ruderal. Europe from Italy and Sweden eastwards; occasionally naturalized elsewhere}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 The species hybridizes easily with other members of the section, especially{\b  25},{\b  26}, {\b 28}, {\b 29} and {\b 30}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 38. R. dentatus} L., {\i Mantissa Alt.} 226 (1771) ({\i R. limosus }Thuill.). Annual 20-70 cm. Basal leaves small, 2-3 times as long as wide, truncate or subcordate at the base; petiole equalling or shorter than the lamina. Pedicels somewhat longer than the valves. Valves 4-6 × 2-3 mm, all or only 1 with tubercle; teeth 3-6 mm. 2n = 40.{\i  S.E. Europe}. Bu Gr Rm Rs(W, E) [Hs].
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b halacsyi} (Rech.) Rech. fil.,{\i  Beih. Bot. Centr.}{\b  49}({\b 2}): 16 (1932): Valves 4 × 2 mm, all with tubercles; teeth as long as width of valves.{\i  Romania to Greece; naturalized in S.W. Spain and perhaps elsewhere}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp{\b . reticulatus} (Besser) Rech. fil., {\i op. cit.} 18 (1932) ({\i R. reticulatus} Besser): Valves 5-6 × 3 mm, only 1 with a tubercle; teeth longer than width of valves.{\i  Ukraine and S.E. Russia}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Subsp.{\i  dentatus,} described from Egypt, has not been recorded from Europe except as a casual.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b R. obovatus} Danser,{\i  Nederl. Kruidk. Arch. }{\b 1920:} 241 (1921), from temperate South America, like{\b  38} but with obovate basal and lower cauline leaves and warty tubercles, has been widely recorded in N. Europe as a casual and may be becoming locally naturalized.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 39. R. palustris} Sm.,{\i  Fl. Brit.}{\b  1:} 394 (1800). Annual or biennial 30-60 cm; whole plant brown when fruit is ripe. Basal leaves about 6 times as long as wide, lanceolate, acute, cuneate at the base; margin undulate. Branches of panicle arcuate; whorls remote, all subtended by leaves. Pedicels 1-1½ times as long as the valves, slender. Valves 3-3·5(-4) × 1·2-1·5 mm (excluding teeth), narrowly lingulate; teeth 2 or 3 on each margin, about as long as the width of the valve. 2n = 40.{\i  Marshes and riversides. C. & S. Europe, extending northwards to Denmark}. Al Au Be Br Bu Cz Da Ga Ge Gr Ho Hu It Ju Po Rm Rs(B) Su Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 40. R. maritimus} L.,{\i  Sp. Pl.} 335 (1753). Annual 10-50(-70) cm; whole plant golden-yellow when fruit is ripe. Basal leaves narrowly elliptical, tapering nearly equally at both ends. Branches of panicle arcuate; all whorls except the lower ones confluent when fruit is ripe. Pedicels filiform, somewhat longer
\par

\par
106}
\par