{\rtf1\ansi \deff4\deflang1033{\fonttbl{\f4\froman\fcharset0\fprq2 Times New Roman;}}{\colortbl;\red0\green0\blue0;\red0\green0\blue255;\red0\green255\blue255;\red0\green255\blue0;\red255\green0\blue255;\red255\green0\blue0;\red255\green255\blue0;\red255\green255\blue255;\red0\green0\blue128;\red0\green128\blue128;\red0\green128\blue0;\red128\green0\blue128;\red128\green0\blue0;\red128\green128\blue0;\red128\green128\blue128;\red192\green192\blue192;}{\stylesheet{\widctlpar \f4\fs20\lang2057 \snext0 Normal;}{\*\cs10 \additive Default Paragraph Font;}}{\info{\author dddd}{\operator dddd}{\creatim\yr1998\mo11\dy11\hr16\min12}{\revtim\yr1998\mo11\dy11\hr16\min12}{\version2}{\edmins0}{\nofpages3}{\nofwords778}{\nofchars4440}{\*\company  }{\vern57431}}\widowctrl\ftnbj\aenddoc\hyphcaps0 \fet0\sectd \linex0 {\*\pnseclvl1\pnucrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl2\pnucltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl3\pndec\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl4\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl5\pndec\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl6\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl7\pnlcrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl8\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl9\pnlcrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}
\pard\plain  \f4\fs20\lang2057 {\fs24 
\par }{\fs28 or terminal racemes. Fruiting perianth berry-like, white. Nut 2-2\'b75 mm, black, glossy.}{\i\fs28  Naturalized on coasts of W. Europe.}{\fs28  [Az Br Ga Lu.] (}{\i\fs28 New Zealand.}{\fs28 )
\par 
\par }{\b\fs28 M. sagittifolia}{\fs28  (Ortega) Meissner, }{\i\fs28 loc. cit.}{\fs28  (1839), from temperate South America, like}{\b\fs28  1}{\fs28  but with lanceolate leaves c. 5 mm, has been recorded as an escape from gardens in A\'e7ores and Portugal, and may be locally naturalized.
\par 
\par }
\pard \qc {\fs28  }{\b\fs28 11.               Calligonum}{\fs28           L.
\par      }{\fs24  By D.A. Webb.
\par 
\par }
\pard  {\fs28 Erect shrubs. Leaves small, caducous. Ochreae short, without veins. Flowers hermaphrodite, in axillary clusters. Perianth segments 5 or 6, more or less petaloid, free, persistent but deflexed in fruit. Stamens c. 15. Stigmas 4; fruit furnished with wings or bristles.
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 1. C. aphyllum}{\fs28  (Pallas) G\'fcrke in K Richter,}{\i\fs28  Pl. Eur.}{\b\fs28  2:}{\fs28  111 (1897). Stems up to 2 m; twigs numerous, slender, dark green, arising in bunches of 2-6 from each node. Leaves 2-3 mm, more or less subulate, caducous. Flowers usually in pairs, stalked. Outer perianth-segments 3 mm, broadly ovate, green with white margins; the inner smaller, white with pink mid-vein. Nut with 4 flat, membranous wings decurrent on the pedicel. }{\i\fs28 Sandy places. S.E. Russia.}{\fs28  Rs(C, E). (}{\i\fs28 W. & C. Asia.}{\fs28 )
\par 
\par }
\pard \qc {\fs28  }{\b\fs28 12.               Atraphaxis}{\fs28            L.
\par   }{\fs24  By D.A. Webb.
\par 
\par }
\pard  {\fs28 Erect, small-leaved shrubs. Ochreae brown proximally, hyaline distally, bifid, 2-veined. Flowers hermaphrodite, in short racemes. Perianth-segments 4 or 5, the inner 2 or 3, accrescent and surrounding the fruit. Stamens 6 or 8, united into a ring at the base. Stigmas 2 or 3; nut not winged.
\par 
\par }
\pard \li200 {\fs28 1 Perianth-segments 4; stamens 6
\par 2 Branches mostly leafless and spiny towards the apex;
\par   fruiting perianth 5-6 mm wide .......................................................... }{\b\fs28 1. spinosa}{\fs28 
\par 2 Branches mostly leafy to the apex, not spiny; fruiting
\par   perianth 8-9 mm wide ..................................................................... }{\b\fs28 2. replicata}{\fs28 
\par 1 Perianth-segments 5; stamens 8
\par 3 Inner perianth-segments scarcely exceeding the nut ................... }{\b\fs28 3. frutescens}{\fs28 
\par 3 Inner perianth-segments about twice as long as the nut .............. }{\b\fs28 4. billardieri}{\fs28 
\par 
\par }
\pard  {\fs28    }{\b\fs28 1. A. spinosa}{\fs28  L., }{\i\fs28 Sp. Pl. }{\fs28 333 (1753). Plant 30-80 cm, with numerous, slender, divaricate branches, many of them leafless towards the apex and more or less spiny. Leaves 7-11 mm, ovate or elliptical, mucronate, very shortly petiolate. Flowers in short-stalked, axillary racemes. Perianth-segments bright pink with white margins; segments 4, the 2 inner 4-5 \'d7 5-6 mm in fruit. Nut broadly ovate, flattened, pale greenish-brown. }{\i\fs28 Steppes and semideserts. S.E. Russia, W. Kazakhstan.}{\fs28  Rs(E). (}{\i\fs28 W. & C. Asia}{\fs28 .)
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 2. A. replicata}{\fs28  Lam.,}{\i\fs28  Encycl.M\'e9th. Bot. }{\b\fs28 1: }{\fs28 329 (1783) (}{\i\fs28 A. spinosa}{\fs28  var.}{\i\fs28  rotundifolia}{\fs28  Boiss.). Like }{\b\fs28 1}{\fs28  but with branches seldom spine-tipped and usually leafy to the apex; leaves 3-8 mm, sometimes almost orbicular; and fruiting perianth-segments 7-8 \'d7 8-9 mm.}{\i\fs28  S.E. Russia, Westwards to Krym}{\fs28 . Rs (K, E). (}{\i\fs28 W. & C. Asia.}{\fs28 )
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 3. A. frutescens}{\fs28  (L.) C. Koch,}{\i\fs28  Dendrologie }{\b\fs28 2}{\fs28 (}{\b\fs28 1}{\fs28 ): 360 (1872) (}{\i\fs28 A. lanceolata }{\fs28 Meissner). Plant 20-70 cm; branches usually leafy, rarely spine-tipped. Leaves 12-17 \'d7 2-8 mm, fleshy, glaucous, linear-lanceolate to oblong-obovate, entire or bluntly toothed, with a short, white, apical mucro. Flowers in short, lax, terminal racemes. Perianth-segments 5, pinkish- or greenish-white, the 2 inner 4-5 \'d7 5-6 mm, semi-circular, equalling or slightly exceeding the dark brown, glossy, acutely trigonous nut.}{\i\fs28  Steppes and semideserts. S.E. Russia}{\fs28 . Rs (C, E). (}{\i\fs28 W & C. Asia}{\fs28 .)
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 4. A. billardieri}{\fs28  Jaub. & Spach,}{\i\fs28  Ill. Pl. Or.}{\b\fs28  2:}{\fs28  14 (1844). Like}{\b\fs28  3}{\fs28  but branches spiny; leaves ovate or oblong, obtuse to acute, sometimes slightly acuminate but not mucronate; and perianth-segments pink, the 2 inner 5-9 \'d7 4-8 mm in fruit and nearly twice as long as the nut.}{\i\fs28  Dry mountain rocks. C. Greece and Kriti; very local.}{\fs28  Cr Gr. (}{\i\fs28 S.W. Asia.}{\fs28 )
\par 
\par 
\par }
\pard \qc {\fs36 CENTROSPERMAE
\par 
\par }{\fs28  }{\b\fs28   48. CHENOPODIACEAE}{\fs28 
\par }{\fs24  Edit J.R. Edmondson.
\par 
\par }
\pard  {\fs28 Herbs, shrubs or rarely small trees, often succulent; glabrous, pubescent or farinose with vesicular hairs. Leaves alternate or opposite, exstipulate. Flowers hermaphrodite or unisexual, often bracteolate, solitary or in dense cymose clusters in a spicate or paniculate inflorescence. Perianth absent or 1- to 5-merous, often accrescent in fruit; segments usually more or less connate. Stamens 1-5, opposite the perianth-segments. Ovary superior, rarely semi-inferior, unilocular; ovules solitary, basal; stigmas (1)2 or 3(-5). Fruit usually an achene. Seeds horizontal (compressed in the vertical plane) or vertical (compressed in the horizontal plane).
\par 
\par The majority of the species are halophytes or ruderals. The family is particularly predominant in maritime habitats, and in the steppe and semi-desert regions of S.E. Europe.
\par 
\par The interpretation of the structure of the segmented genera in this family (}{\b\fs28 18-22}{\fs28 , }{\b\fs28 29}{\fs28 , }{\b\fs28 30}{\fs28 ) is a matter of considerable controversy. For accounts of the two interpretations see: A. Fahn & T. Arzee, Amer.}{\i\fs28  Jour. Bot.}{\b\fs28  46:}{\fs28  330 338 (1959); F.F. Leysle, }{\i\fs28 Bot. Zur.}{\b\fs28  34:}{\fs28  253-266 (1949). The latter interpretation is that accepted here.
\par 
\par }
\pard \li200 {\fs28 1 Plant with spinose branches
\par 2 Annual herb; inflorescence of numerous dichasial cymes ... }{\b\fs28 3. Chenopodium}{\fs28 
\par 2 Small shrubs; flowers solitary
\par 3 Leaves not more than 8 mm, filiform or scale-like, mucronate .... }{\b\fs28 25. Salsola}{\fs28 
\par 3 Leaves up to 50 mm, semi-cylindrical, obtuse ............................... }{\b\fs28 26. Noaea}{\fs28 
\par 
\par 108}
\par }