{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 the base; lateral veins joining midrib of leaf at an angle of 45°-60°. Valves 4-10 mm long and wide, entire or subentire. Nut 3-4 mm, pale brown.{\i  Mainly ruderal. From N.W. Jugoslavia to S.E. Russia; formerly cultivated elsewhere as a vegetable, and locally naturalized.} Al Au Bu Cz Gr Hu *It Ju Rm Rs(W, K, E) Tu [Br Ge He Po Rs(C) *Si].
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Valves 6-10 × 8-10 mm ................................................. ({\b c}) subsp.{\b  orientalis}
\par
1 Valves less than 8 mm wide
\par
2 Valves about as long as wide, obtuse, distinctly cordate at the base
\par
  ........................................................................................... ({\b a}) subsp.{\b  patientia}
\par
2 Valves longer than wide, acute, truncate or subcordate at the base
\par
  ........................................................................................ ({\b b}) subsp.{\b  recurvatus}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp.{\b  patientia} : Valves 4-8 × 4-8 mm, obtuse, cordate at the base, with 1 subglobose to avoid tubercle 1·5-2 mm. 2n = 60.{\i  From Czechoslovakia to N. Greece}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp.{\b  recurvatus} (Rech.) Rech. fil.,{\i  Feddes Repert. }{\b 31:} 252 (1933): Valves 4-8 × 4-7 mm, acute, truncate to subcordate at the base, with 1 subglobose to ovoid tubercle 1·5-2 mm. 2n = 60.{\i  Czechoslovakia; Romania; Bulgaria}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b c}) Subsp.{\b  orientalis} (Bernh.) Danser,{\i  Nederl. Kruidk. Arch.}{\b  1923:} 281 (1924) ({\i R. lonaczewskii} Klokov,{\i  R. orientalis} Bernh.): Valves 6-10 × 8-10 mm, obtuse to subacute, cordate at the base, with usually 1 ovoid tubercle 2-3 mm. 2n = 60.{\i  Through most of the range of the species}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 30. R. crispus} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 335 (1753) ({\i R. odontocarpus} Sándor). Usually perennial; stems 30-150(-200) cm. Basal leaves 4-5 times as long as wide, narrowly lanceolate, acute, usually cuneate at the base; margins undulate; petiole usually shorter than the lamina. Branches of inflorescence erect or ascending; lower whorls usually remote. Pedicels 2-2½ times as long as the valves. Valves 3-6(-8) × 3-5(-7) mm, cordate, variable in outline and in development of tubercles, more or less entire.{\i  In a wide range of open habitats; frequently as a ruderal. Almost throughout Europe.} All except Cr Sb, but only naturalized in Az Is.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Hybridizes commonly with other members of the section, especially {\b 25}, {\b 26}, {\b 29}, {\b 36} and {\b 37}. The hybrid with{\b  37} is the commonest in the genus, and was originally described as a species ({\i R. pratensis} Mert. & Koch). It is found wherever the parents grow together, and can be recognized by the different size and outline of the valves on the same plant, some of the flowers falling off before the valves have reached their normal size.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 A very variable species. The following three subspecies can be distinguished, although intermediate populations occur, especially where habitats have been disturbed.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Nut 1·3-2·5 mm; tubercles of valves usually less than 2·5 mm, distinctly
  unequal in size, sometimes only 1 developed .................. ({\b a}) subsp.{\b  crispus} 
\par
1 Nut 2·5-3·5 mm; tubercles of valves up to 3·5 mm, often subequal
\par
2 Stems usually less than 100 cm; panicle dense in fruit
\par
  ........................................................................................ ({\b b}) subsp.{\b  littoreus}
\par
2 Stems 100-200 cm; panicle lax in fruit ...................... ({\b c}) subsp.{\b  uliginosus}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b crispus} : Stems 30-120(-150) cm. Leaves with strongly undulate margins, not fleshy, green. Panicle usually lax in fruit. Tubercles of valves usually less than 2·5 mm, distinctly unequal, sometimes only 1 developed. Nut 1·3-2·5 mm. 2n = 60. {\i Ruderal, and as a weed of cultivation. Throughout the range of the species}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp.{\b  littoreus} (Hardy) Akeroyd, {\i Watsonia}{\b  17:} 444 (1989) ({\i R. crispus} var.{\i  littoreus} Hardy): Stems 30-80(-120) cm. Leaves with strongly undulate margins, fleshy, somewhat glaucous. Panicle dense in fruit, branches sometimes fastigiate. Tubercles of valves up to 3·5 mm, often subequal. Nut 2·5-3·5 mm.{\i  Maritime sand and shingle. Coasts of W. & N. Europe}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b c}) Subsp.{\b  uliginosus} (Le Gall) Akeroyd,{\i  loc. cit.} (1989) ({\i R. crispus} var.{\i  uliginosus} Le Gall): Stems 100-200 cm. Leaves flat or with slightly undulate margins, not fleshy, green. Panicle lax in fruit, with long branches. Tubercles of valves up to 3·5 mm, subequal to unequal. Nut 2·5-3·5 mm.{\i  Muddy banks of tidal rivers. • N.W. France, S. Ireland, S. Britain}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 31. R. stenophyllus} Ledeb., {\i Fl. Altaica}{\b  2:} 58 (1830). Like {\b 30}({\b a}) but leaves usually less undulate; pedicels 1½-2 times as long as the valves; valves 3·5-4(-5) mm long and wide, cordate-triangular, with numerous, small but distinct teeth 0·5-1 mm, the apex broadly triangular, entire. 2n = 60. {\i Damp, often saline habitats. C. & E. Europe.} Au Bu Cz Ge Hu Ju Rm Rs(C, W, K, E).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 32. R. conglomeratus} Murray,{\i  Prodr. Stirp. Gotting. }52 (1770) ({\i R. nemorosus} Schrader). Perennial 30-80(-120) cm. Leaves oblong to lanceolate, subacute. Panicle lax; whorls all remote and usually subtended by a leaf. Pedicels about as long as the valves, articulated near the middle. Valves 2·5-3·2 × 1-1·7 mm, oblong-ovate, entire, all tuberculate; tubercles ovoid, often covering nearly the whole valve. 2n = 20.{\i  Damp, more or less open habitats. Europe, from Scotland, S. Sweden and C. Russia southwards.} All except Fa Is Rs(N, B, E) Sb, but only as an alien in Az Fe No.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 33. R. sanguineus} L.,{\i  Sp. Pl. }334 (1753). Like {\b 32} but more slender and erect; leaves oblong, acute or subacute; panicle leafy only at the base; pedicels longer than the valves, articulated below the middle; only 1 valve with a tubercle; tubercle globose or subglobose, much shorter than the valve. 2n = 20.{\i  Damp and shady places. Most of Europe from c.} 60°{\i  N. southwards, except E. Russia; rare in the Mediterranean region.} Au Be Br Bu Co Cz Da Ga Ge Gr Hb He Ho Hs Hu It Ju No Po Rm Rs(B, C, W, E) Sa Si Su Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 The common wild plant is var. {\i viridis} (Sibth.) Koch; var.{\i  sanguineus}, with purple-veined leaves and stems suffused with reddish-purple, is cultivated for ornament, and is locally naturalized.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Fertile intermediates between{\b  32} and {\b 33}, of presumed hybrid origin, occur commonly in Britain and perhaps elsewhere.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 34. R. rupestris} Le Gall, {\i Congr. Sci. Fr.}{\b  16}({\b 1}): 143 (1850). Like {\b 32} but leaves oblong, narrowed at the base, obtuse, glaucous, lamina usually much longer than the petiole; usually only the lowest whorl on each branch subtended by a leaf; valves c. 4 mm, oblong, obtuse, with ellipsoidal tubercles 2·5-3 mm. 2n = 20.{\i  Maritime rocks, sand and shingle. • Coasts of W. Europe, from N.W. Spain to Wales.} Br Ga Hs.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 35. R. nepalensis} Sprengel,{\i  Syst. Veg.}{\b  2:} 159 (1825). Rhizome stout; stems 60-170 cm. Basal leaves 1½-2½ times as long as wide, oblong-ovate, pubescent beneath, cordate at the base, rounded or broadly acuminate at the apex. Panicle open; branches solitary, arcuate-divaricate, nearly leafless; flower-whorls remote. Valves 5-7 × 3·5-5 mm, ovate-triangular, all tuberculate, with numerous hooked teeth developing early. Nut 3-5 × 2-2·5 mm. 2n = 120.{\i  Clearings in mountain woods. Balkan peninsula, C. & S. Italy; local}. Al Gr It Ju. ({\i Anatolia to S.W. China}.)
\par

\par
105}
\par