{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b c}) Subsp. {\b vinealis} (Timb.-Lagr.) O. Bolòs & Vigo,{\i  Butll. Inst. Catalana Hist. Nat.}{\b  38} (Sec. Bot. 1): 85 (1974) ({\i R. vinealis} Timb.-Lagr.): Plant glabrous, purplish, without acid taste. Stems numerous from a thick stock, branched from below the middle. Basal leaves ovate, slightly sagittate. Inflorescence long, narrow. {\i Vineyards. S.W. France }({\i near Toulouse}).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Plants with fleshy leaves, stout stems and a dense inflorescence, from coastal rocks and cliffs in W. Europe from N. Spain to W. Ireland, have been called subsp.{\b  biformis} (Lange) Castroviejo & Valdés-Bermejo,{\i  Anal. Inst. Bot. Cavanilles }{\b 34:} 326 (1977), but cannot be separated satisfactorily from robust plants of subsp. ({\b a}).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 12. R. rugosus} Campd., {\i Monogr. Rumex }113 (1819) ({\i R. ambiguus }Gren.). Stems 50-160 cm, erect, stout. Basal leaves up to 15 × 10 cm, pale green, somewhat fleshy when alive, very thin when dry, (1½-)2-4 times as long as wide, ovate-oblong, rounded at the apex, with deflexed basal lobes; cauline leaves decreasing slightly upwards, the uppermost sessile, triangular, with a broadly cordate base, tapering towards the apex. Panicle rather lax, the branches repeatedly branched. Valves 3-4 mm. Nut c. 2 mm, dark brown, shiny. 2n = 14(female), 15(male).{\i  Origin unknown; cultivated as a vegetable} ({\i Sorrel}){\i  and established here and there as an escape}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Known only from cultivation. It has been treated by some authors as a variant or subspecies of {\b 11}, to which vegetatively it bears a close resemblance, although the repeatedly branched inflorescence and the slightly smaller valves are more similar to those of {\b 13}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 13. R. thyrsiflorus} Fingerh.,{\i  Linnaea}{\b  4:} 380 (1829) ({\i R. auriculatus} Wallr., {\i R. haematinus} Kihlman; incl.{\i  R. nemorivagus} Timb.Lagr.). Stems 30-120 cm. Basal leaves 3-6 times as long as wide, narrowly oblong; cauline leaves becoming progressively narrower upwards, up to 14 times as long as wide; basal lobes divergent, sometimes divided. Panicle dense, the branches repeatedly branched. Valves cordate-reniform to orbicular, sometimes wider than long, with a small, deflexed tubercle near the base. {\i E. & C. Europe, extending westwards to Norway and E. France; Spain and Portugal.} Al Au Be Bu Cz Da Fe Ga Ge Gr Ho Hs Hu It Ju Lu No Po Rm Rs(N, B, C, W, E) Su [He It].
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp.{\b  thyrsiflorus} : Stems and leaves usually glabrous. Valves (2·5-)3-4 mm. Nut 1·8-2·2 mm. 2n = 14(female), 15(male). Throughout the range of the species except Spain and Portugal.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp.{\b  papillaris} (Boiss. & Reuter) Sagredo & Malagarriga in Malagarriga,{\i  Nuev. Comb. Subesp. Almeria} 9 (1974) ({\i R. papillaris} Boiss. & Reuter): Plant more slender. Stems and lower surface of leaves papillose-pubescent. Valves 2·2-3·5 mm. Nut 1·5-1·8 mm. 2n = 14(female), 15(male).{\i  Spain and Portugal}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   {\b 14. R. intermedius} DC. in Lam. & DC.,{\i  Fl. Fr.} ed. 3,{\b  5:} 369 (1815). Stems 60 cm, often several. Basal leaves 10 × 1-1·5 cm, rarely wider, linear-triangular, with narrow, divergent basal lobes; cauline leaves narrowly linear with sagittate base; all leaves often crispate at the margin. Valves 3-4 mm, somewhat wider than long, not or scarcely cordate at the base. Nut 2 × 1 mm, dark brown. 2n = 14(female), 15(male).{\i  S.W. Europe; S.E. Italy}. Bl Ga Hs It Lu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 15. R. thyrsoides} Desf.,{\i  Fl. Atl. }{\b 1:} 321 (1798). Roots tuberous. Stems 30-50 cm. Basal leaves thick, e. 2-3 times as long as wide, often constricted above the base, with short, acute, deflexed basal lobes; cauline leaves progressively smaller and narrower, the uppermost sometimes linear; all leaves often crispate at the margin. Inflorescence dense. Valves 4-6 × 7-9 mm, subcordate at the base. Nut 3 × 1·5 mm, dark purplish-brown. 2n = 14(female), 15(male). {\i S. Europe, from Portugal to S.E. Italy.} Co Hs It Lu Sa Si.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 16. R. vesicarius} L.,{\i  Sp. Pl.} 336 (1753). Glaucous annual 5-30 cm. Leaves triangular, with long petioles. Each pedicel bearing paired flowers (primary and smaller secondary flower); valves of primary flowers 10-20 mm long, suborbicular, membranous, finely and densely reticulately veined, 2 valves of each flower with small tubercles, all with margins bent outwards so as to hide the tubercles and the secondary flower. Nut of primary flower 3·5-5 mm, greyish-brown; nut of secondary flower 2·8-4·5 mm, somewhat darker brown.{\i  Rocks and stony ground. S. Greece }({\i N.E. Peloponnisos}). Gr. ({\i N. Africa, S.W. Asia.})
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Subgen.{\b  Rumex} (Subgen. {\i Lapathum} (Campd.) Rech. fil.). All or most flowers hermaphrodite. Valves several times as wide as the nut, with or without tubercles. Basal and lower cauline leaves never hastate or sagittate.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Many species of the subgenus hybridize freely. Most hybrids are highly sterile, the pollen grains being of irregular size or remaining clumped together in the anthers. Hybrids may be recognized by their lax and untidy habit, the stems often taller than those of their parents, the reddish and mostly sterile flowers shed prematurely from the primary inflorescence, the occurrence of secondary flowering branches below the primary inflorescence, the valves of different shapes and sizes on the same plant, and the nuts empty or failing to develop.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 17. R. salicifolius} (Danser) Hickman, {\i Madroño}{\b  31:} 249 (1984) ({\i R. triangulivalvis} auct., non (Danser) Rech. fil.,{\i  R. mexicanus} auct., non Meissner). Perennial. Stem 30-50(-100) cm, rarely flexuous and decumbent at the base. Leaves c. 5 times as long as wide, linear-lanceolate, acute, pale green; petiole short. Valves 3-4 × 2·5-3 mm triangular, entire, each with a tubercle. Nut 2 × 1·3 mm.{\i  Naturalized in N. & C. Europe}. [Br Cz Fe Ge No.] ({\i North America}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 This species is very variable in its native range. The plant naturalized in Europe is var.{\i  triangulivalvis} (Danser) Hickman.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 18. R. frutescens} Thouars,{\i  Mélang. Bot. }{\b 1}({\b 5}): 38 (1811) ({\i R. cuneifolius} Campd.). Rhizome long, creeping, jointed, branched, with erect, leafy flowering stems up to 25 cm. Leaves c. 1½ times as long as wide, obovate, thick; petiole short. Inflorescence small, crowded, leafless. Valves 4 × 3 mm, longer than the pedicels, ovate-triangular, entire, coriaceous, each with a fusiform tubercle. Nut 2·5 × 2 mm, broadest in the middle.{\i  Naturalized on sand-dunes in S.W. Britain; casual elsewhere}. [Br ?Lu.] ({\i South America}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 19. R. alpinus} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 334 (1753). Perennial with stout, creeping rhizome; stems 50-100 cm, erect. Basal leaves about as long as wide, deeply cordate, rounded at the apex; petiole longer than the lamina. Panicle crowded, leafless; branches fasciculate, repeatedly branched. Valves 4·5-5(-6) × 3·5-5 mm, entire, without tubercles. 2n = 20. {\i Strongly nitrophilous. Mountains of C. & S. Europe.} Al Au Bu Cz Ga Ge Gr He Hs It Ju Po Rm Rs(W) [Br].
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 20. R. aquaticus} L.,{\i  Sp. Pl.} 336 (1753). Perennial. Stem up to 200 cm, erect. Basal leaves triangular to elliptical, acute, 1½-2½ times as long as wide, widest at or below the middle; petiole at least as long as the lamina. Panicle large, dense. Valves (4-)6-8·5 mm, ovate-triangular, more or less acute, longer than wide, entire, without tubercles. {\i Wet places. N., C. & E. Europe, extending locally to W. Jugoslavia and C. France.} Au †Be Br Bu Cz Da Fe Ga Ge He †Ho Hu It Ju No Po Rm Rs(N, B, C, W, E) Su.
\par

\par
103}
\par