{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 49 Lateral veins joining midrib of leaf at an angle of 45°-60°; 
\par
    valves entire or obscurely crenate .............................................. {\b 29. patientia} 
\par
46 Valves less than 6 mm
\par
50 Stems less than 50 cm, arising from a creeping rhizome; leaves 
\par
   obovate, the margins undulate .................................................. {\b 18. frutescens}
\par
50 Stems usually more than 50 cm; plant without creeping rhizome; 
\par
   leaves broadest at or below the middle, the margins not undulate
\par
51 Basal leaves about as long as wide, deeply cordate ................. {\b 26. confertus}
\par
51 Basal leaves at least twice as long as wide
\par
52 Valves usually toothed
\par
53 Basal leaves acute; petiole up to ½ as long as lamina ............... {\b 28. cristatus}
\par
53 Basal leaves obtuse or subacute; petiole slightly longer than lamina
\par
   ................................................................................................. {\b 37. obtusifolius} 
\par
52 Valves entire or obscurely crenulate
\par
54 All the whorls in the lower ½ of the inflorescence subtended 
\par
   by small, leaf-like bracts ................................................... {\b 32. conglomeratus}
\par
54 Only the lowest 1 or 2 whorls in each branch of the inflorescence
\par
   subtended by bracts 
\par
55 Valves ± cordate ....................................................................... {\b 29. patientia}
\par
55 Valves not cordate 
\par
56 Basal leaves ± cordate ......................................................... {\b 37. obtusifolius}
\par
56 Basal leaves not cordate 
\par
57 Leaves glaucous; valves c. 4 mm, all with ellipsoidal tubercles
\par
   ..................................................................................................... {\b 34. rupestris} 
\par
57 Leaves not glaucous; valves c. 3 mm, usually only 1 with a globose 
\par
   or subglobose tubercle ............................................................ {\b 33. sanguineus}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Subgen. {\b Acetosella} (Meissner) Rech. fil. Dioecious (very rarely polygamous). Slender perennials with acid taste. Valves seldom much longer than the nut, without tubercles. Leaves hastate or sagittate, sometimes with several pairs of basal lobes.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. R. acetosella} L., {\i Sp. Pl. }338 (1753) ({\i R. fascilobus} Klokov). Stems 5-75 cm, erect or ascending, branching at or above the middle. Leaves hastate; central lobe lanceolate or linear; basal lobes 2 (rarely 0) or 2-15 pairs. Inflorescence less leafy than the lower stem. Nut 0·8-1·5 mm, obtusely trigonous, adhering to (angiocarpous) or free from (gymnocarpous) the valves. {\i Calcifuge. Almost throughout Europe}. All except Bl, Rs(K); naturalized in Sb.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Very variable. Four subspecies can be recognized on the basis of the degree of adhesion of the perianth to the fruit, and the number of lobes at the base of the leaf. These subspecies occur in more or less distinct geographical areas, although they overlap in distribution and individual plants or populations may exhibit characters that are at variance with a particular regional facies. The following treatment is a summary of that given by J.C.M. den Nijs,{\i  Feddes Repert.}{\b  95:} 43-66 (1984).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Valves loosely enclosing and (when rubbed) easily separable from the nut
\par
2 Leaves usually with a single pair of basal lobes ........... ({\b a}) subsp.{\b  acetosella}
\par
2 Leaves with 2-15 pairs of basal lobes .................... ({\b b}) subsp.{\b  acetoselloides}
\par
1 Valves adnate to and (when rubbed) not easily separable from the nut
\par
3 Leaves usually with a single pair of basal lobes ......... ({\b c}) subsp.{\b  pyrenaicus}
\par
3 Leaves with 2-12 pairs of basal lobes .......................... ({\b d}) subsp.{\b  multifidus}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp.{\b  acetosella} (incl.{\i  R. tenuifolius} (Wallr.) Á. Löve): Leaves usually with a single pair of basal lobes. Valves loosely enclosing and easily separable from the nut. 2n = 28, 42.{\i  N. W., N. & C. Europe}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b acetoselloides} (Balansa) den Nijs,{\i  Feddes Repert.}{\b  95:} 60 (1984): Like subsp. ({\b a}) but leaves with 2-15 pairs of basal lobes. 2n = 14, 28, 42.{\i  S.E. Europe; rarely elsewhere in C. & E. Europe}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b c}) Subsp.{\b  pyrenaicus} (Pourret ex Lapeyr.) Akeroyd,{\i  Bot. Jour. Linn. Soc.}{\b  106:} 99 (1991) ({\i R. angiocarpus} auct.,{\i  R. salicifolius} auct.; incl.{\i  R. australis} (Willk.) A. Fernandes): Leaves usually with a single pair of basal lobes. Valves adnate to and adhering tightly to the nut. Often ruderal. 2n = 14, 28, 42, 56.{\i  W. Europe}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b d}) Subsp. {\b multifidus} (L.) Arcangeli, {\i Comp. Fl. Ital.} 587 (1882) ({\i R. acetosella} subsp.{\i  angiocarpus} (Murb.) Murb.): Like subsp. ({\b c}) but leaves with 2-12 pairs of basal lobes. 2n = 14, 28, 42.{\i  C. & S. Italy; Balkan peninsula, Romania}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Plants with narrowly linear leaves up to 10 times as long as wide, and procumbent to ascending stems, usually branched from below the middle, have been called{\b  R. tenuifolius} (Wallr.) Á. Löve,{\i  Bot. Not.}{\b  1941:} 99 (1941). The variation between these and typical plants of subsp. ({\b a}) is continuous, and they merit only varietal rank as var.{\i  tenuifolius} Wallr.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Angiocarpous plants from Portugal and S. Spain, with slightly larger male flowers and pollen grains than subsp. ({\b c}), and a chromosome number of 2n = 56, have been recognized as {\b R. australis} (Willk.) A. Fernandes,{\i  Revista Biol. }{\b 12:} 356 (1983), but probably merit only varietal rank.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. R. graminifolius} J.H. Rudolph ex Lamb.,{\i  Trans. Linn. Soc. London }{\b 10:} 264 (1811) ({\i R. angustissimus} Ledeb.). Stem usually procumbent. Leaves small, narrowly linear, obtuse; basal lobes indistinct or absent. Valves from slightly longer than to nearly twice as long as the nut. Nut c. 1·8 mm, longer than wide. 2n = 56.{\i  Arctic Europe, extending southwards to} 61°{\i  N. in N.W. Russia.} No Rs(N, C).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Subgen.{\b  Acetosa} (Miller) Rech. fil. Dioecious or polygamous, rarely monoecious. Valves considerably longer than the nut, with or without tubercles. Leaves usually hastate or sagittate, often with acid taste.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 3. R. lunaria} L.,{\i  Sp. Pl.} 336 (1753). Shrub up to 2 m with flexuous branches. Leaves 2·5-5 × 2·5-6 cm, often wider than long, broadly ovate-spathulate, truncate to rounded at the base, rounded at the apex. Inflorescence a wide, compound panicle up to 15 cm. Outer perianth-segments 2 mm, lanceolate, deflexed. Valves 5 × 7 mm, reniform-orbicular, narrowly cordate at the base, rounded or truncate at the apex, with a small, flat, quadrangular tubercle near the base; margin entire. Nut 3 × 1·3 mm, widest a little below the middle.{\i  Planted for hedges, and naturalized in S. Italy, Sicilia and Sardegna}. [Sa Si It.] ({\i Islas Canarias}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 4. R. tingitanus} L.,{\i  Syst. Nat}. ed. 10, {\b 2:} 991 (1759). Rhizome emitting long stolons. Leaves ovate- to lanceolate-triangular, usually truncate at the base, gradually attenuate at the apex, sinuate-dentate or pinnatipartite (var.{\i  lacerus} Boiss., non{\i  R. lacerus }Balbis).
\par

\par
101}
\par