{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 14 Roots not tuberous; valves 3-5 × 2-4 mm ................................... {\b 11. acetosa}
\par
10 Inflorescence usually dense, the branches repeatedly branched
\par
15 Valves 6-9 mm wide
\par
16 Valves rounded at apex, suborbicular ....................................... {\b 7. tuberosus}
\par
16 Valves broadly emarginate, wider than long .......................... {\b 15. thyrsoides}
\par
15 Valves less than 6 mm wide
\par
17 Upper cauline leaves 2-3 times as long as wide ......................... {\b 12. rugosus}
\par
17 Upper cauline leaves at least 4 times as long as wide
\par
18 Lower leaves lanceolate to narrowly oblong, sagittate ......... {\b 13. thyrsiflorus}
\par
18 Lower leaves narrowly linear, hastate .................................. {\b 14. intermedius}
\par
2  Leaves neither hastate nor sagittate; base of lamina cuneate 
\par
   or truncate, or cordate with the basal lobes short and rounded
\par
19 Valves without corky tubercles
\par
20 Leaves more than 4 times as long as wide
\par
21 Stem erect; leaves undulate; flowers mostly hermaphrodite
\par
   ....................................................................................... {\b 23. pseudonatronatus}
\par
21 Stem ± procumbent; leaves not undulate; 
\par
   flowers mostly unisexual ....................................................... {\b 2. graminifolius}
\par
20 Leaves not more than 4 times as long as wide
\par
22 Basal leaves cuneate to truncate at base
\par
23 Petiole of basal leaves shorter than lamina ............................ {\b 22. balcanicus}
\par
23 Petiole of basal leaves at least as long as lamina ..................... {\b 20. aquaticus}
\par
22 Basal leaves cordate at base
\par
24 Basal leaves about as long as wide
\par
25 Leaves and petioles densely papillose beneath; 
\par
   valves 6-8 × 8-10 .................................................................... {\b 24. aquitanicus}
\par
25 Leaves and petioles not papillose; valves 4·5-6 × 3·5-5 mm ...... {\b 19. alpinus}
\par
24 Basal leaves distinctly longer than wide
\par
26 Basal leaves 3-4 times as long as wide; valves almost as long 
\par
   as wide ..................................................................................... {\b 25. longifolius}
\par
26 Basal leaves 1½-2 times as long as wide; valves distinctly 
\par
   longer than wide
\par
27 Basal leaves ± acute; valves entire .......................................... {\b 20. aquaticus}
\par
27 Basal leaves obtuse; valves minutely denticulate ..................... {\b 21. azoricus}
\par
19 At least 1 valve bearing a corky tubercle
\par
28 Valves with conspicuous marginal teeth at least 1 mm long
\par
29 Teeth of valves hooked or spirally curved at apex ................ {\b 35. nepalensis}
\par
29 Teeth of valves straight or slightly curved
\par
30 Lower leaves not more than 3½ times as long as wide
\par
31 Flowers in clusters of 2-4 ............................................ {\b 44. bucephalophorus}
\par
31 Flowers in whorls of more than 4
\par
32 Pedicels equalling or shorter than the valves, stout, articulated 
\par
   near the middle; leaves usually panduriform ................................ {\b 36. pulcher}
\par
32 Pedicels longer than the valves, slender, articulated near the base;
\par
   leaves not constricted near the middle
\par
33 Annual; teeth of valves 3-6 mm ................................................ {\b 38. dentatus}
\par
33 Perennial; teeth of valves seldom more than 2 mm ............. {\b 37. obtusifolius}
\par
30 Lower leaves at least 4 times as long as wide
\par
34 Only 1 valve with a tubercle ........................................... {\b 42. marschallianus}
\par
34 All valves with tubercles
\par
35 Teeth of valves longer than width of valve
\par
36 Stem branched from the base; infructescence reddish-brown  {\b 43. ucranicus}
\par
36 Stem branched from a little distance above the base; 
\par
   infructescence golden-yellow .................................................. {\b 40. maritimus}
\par
35 Teeth of valve ± equalling width of valve
\par
37 Leaves obovate; valves up to 2·5 × 1 mm ............................... {\b 43. ucranicus}
\par
37 Leaves elliptical or lanceolate; valves more than 2·5 × 1 mm
\par
38 Valves at least 3 mm, about 2½ times as long as wide ............. {\b 39. palustris}
\par
38 Valves not more than 3 mm, less than twice as long as wide .... {\b 41. rossicus}
\par
28 Valves entire, obscurely crenate, or with marginal teeth not 
\par
   more than 1 mm long
\par
39 Lower leaves more than 3½ times as long as wide
\par
40 Leaves 50-100 cm; plant ± aquatic ................................. {\b 27. hydrolapathum}
\par
40 Leaves not more than 35 mm; plant of relatively dry places
\par
41 Terminal inflorescence overtopped at fruiting stage by those from 
\par
   axillary branches; tubercles of valves rugose .......................... {\b 17. salicifolius}
\par
41 Terminal inflorescence not overtopped by those of lateral branches;
\par
   tubercles of valves smooth
\par
42 Valves oblong, distinctly longer than wide; tubercle occupying 
\par
   almost the entire width of valve .................................................. {\b 34. rupestris}
\par
42 Valves almost as wide as long; tubercle occupying not more than 
\par
   ½ the width of valve
\par
43 Valves deltate, with short but distinct teeth ........................ {\b 31. stenophyllus}
\par
43 Valves suborbicular, entire or obscurely toothed
\par
44 Leaf-margin ± plane; petiole flat above; tubercles of valves 
\par
   developing and hardening late .................................................... {\b 29. patientia}
\par
44 Leaf-margin undulate; petiole canaliculate; tubercles of valves
\par
   developing and hardening early .................................................... {\b 30. crispus}
\par
39 Lower leaves not more than 3½ times as long as wide
\par
45 Branching strongly divaricate; leaves mostly less than 10 cm ....{\b 36. pulcher}
\par
45 Branching not strongly divaricate; larger leaves more than 10 cm
\par
46 Valves at least 6 mm
\par
47 Basal leaves only slightly longer than wide, usually deeply cordate;
\par
   valves with 1 small tubercle ....................................................... {\b 26. confertus}
\par
47 Basal leaves at least twice as long as wide; valves with 1 large
\par
   tubercle and sometimes 2 smaller
\par
48 Valves not cordate ................................................................ {\b 37. obtusifolius}
\par
48 Valves cordate
\par
49 Lateral veins joining midrib of leaf at an angle of 60°-80°; 
\par
   valves irregularly crenate or toothed ........................................... {\b 28. cristatus}
\par

\par
100}
\par