{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 than the valves. Valves 2·5-3 × 1·5-2 mm (excluding teeth), ovate-triangular, with a narrow, triangular apex; teeth 2-5 on each margin, setiform, longer than the width of the valve. Nut 1·3-1·5(-1·8) mm. 2n = 40. {\i Wet places. Most of Europe except the south and the extreme north}. Au Be Br Cz Da Fe Ga Ge Hb He Ho Hu It Ju No Po Rm Rs(N, B, C, W, K, E) Su.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 41. R. rossicus} Murb.,{\i  Bot. Not. }{\b 1913:} 221 (1913). Like {\b 40} but pedicels mostly shorter than the valves; teeth 1 or 2 on each margin, about equalling the width of the valve; nut 1·1-1·3 mm. 2n = 40.{\i  Riversides. N. & C. Russia.} Rs(N, C).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 42. R. marschallianus} Reichenb., {\i Pl. Crit.}{\b  4:} 58 (1826). Slender annual 5-25 cm, often with decumbent branches from the base. All leaves with comparatively long petioles, linear-lanceolate; lower ones with cordate or truncate base. Lower whorls remote; upper confluent. Valves 2·5-3 mm, excluding the long subulate apex, which is as long as the rest of the valve, unequal, the larger one with a narrow tubercle; teeth up to 5 mm, several times as long as the width of the valve. 2n = 40.{\i  Riversides. S.E. Russia, E. Ukraine.} Rs(C, W, E).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 43. R. ucranicus} Besser ex Sprengel, {\i Novi Provent.} 36 (1819). Slender, purplish annual 8-25 cm, branched from the base. Basal leaves small, obovate. Cauline leaves linear-lanceolate, 3-4 times as long as wide; margin often undulate; petiole longer than the width of the lamina. Petiole of leaves of inflorescence exceeding the whorl it subtends. Valves 2(-2·5) × 1 mm (excluding teeth), narrowly triangular, very acute, each with a large, orange tubercle; teeth 3 on each margin, at least as long as the width of the valve. 2n = 40. {\i Riversides. C. & E. Russia southwards, extending to Poland and S.W. Ukraine.} Po Rs(C, W, E) [Rs(N)].
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Subgen. {\b Platypodium} (Willk.) Rech. fil. Usually annual. Basal leaves small, lanceolate, ovate or spathulate. Flowers in clusters of 4 or fewer. Flowers, fruits and pedicels often heteromorphic; valves very small, usually with teeth and small tubercles.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 44. R. bucephalophorus} L.,{\i  Sp. Pl.} 336 (1753). Annual with 1 to several slender stems 5-50 cm. Flowers usually in clusters of 2 or 3. Pedicels usually heteromorphic, some cylindrical and short, others long, curved, convex and clavately thickened. Valves up to 5 × 3·5 mm, often heteromorphic; teeth straight to slightly curved, or uncinate.{\i  Sandy and stony places. Mediterranean region and S.W. Europe}. Al Az Bl Co Cr Ga Gr Hs It Ju Lu Sa Si Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Very variable. The following treatment follows J.R. Press,{\i  Bot. Jour. Linn. Soc.}{\b  97:} 344 355 (1988).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Pedicels mostly about as long as valves; valves with 4-8 teeth
\par
  on each margin
\par
2 All valves ovate-oblong, with up to 6 hooked teeth on each margin
\par
  ......................................................................................... ({\b c}) subsp.{\b  hispanicus}
\par
2 Some valves narrowly triangular with up to 8 straight or slightly curved
  teeth on each margin, others lingulate, entire ............... ({\b d}) subsp.{\b  canariensis}
\par
1 Pedicels longer or shorter than valves; valves with 2-4
\par
  teeth on each margin or some entire
\par
3 All valves broadly triangular, with 2(3) stout teeth on each margin
\par
  .............................................................................. ({\b a}) subsp.{\b  bucephalophorus}
\par
3 Some valves narrowly triangular, with (2)3 or 4 slender teeth on
\par
  each margin, others lingulate, entire .................................. ({\b b}) subsp.{\b  gallicus}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp.{\b  bucephalophorus }(incl. subsp.{\b  graecus} (Steinh.) Rech. fil.): Stems robust, usually few, often erect, simple or sparsely branched. Thickened fruits absent at the base of the stems. Pedicels heteromorphic. Valves 2·5-5 × 1-3·5 mm, broadly triangular; teeth 2 or 3(4) on each margin, stout. 2n = 16.{\i  Mediterranean region; mainly in the centre and the east.}
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp.{\b  gallicus} (Steinh.) Rech. fil., {\i Bot. Not. }{\b 1939:} 497 (1939) (subsp.{\i  bucephalophorus} auct. eur.): Stems slender to robust, often many and branched near the base. Thickened fruits often present at the base of the stems. Pedicels heteromorphic. Valves 2-3 × 0·5-1·2 mm, lingulate, entire, or 1·5-2·5 × 0·5-1 mm, narrowly triangular, with (2)3 or 4 slender teeth on each margin. 2n = 16. {\i Mediterranean region}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b c}) Subsp.{\b  hispanicus }(Steinh.) Rech. fil.,{\i  op. cit.} 500 (1939): Stems procumbent to decumbent, somewhat robust. Thickened fruits absent at the base of the stems. Pedicels mostly short. Valves 2·5-3 × 1-1·5 mm, ovate-oblong, with 4-6 slender, uncinate teeth on each margin. 2n = 16.•{\i  Coastal regions of Portugal, N. Spain and W. France}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b d}) Subsp. {\b canariensis} (Steinh.) Rech. fil., {\i op. cit.} 502 (1939): Stems decumbent to ascending, usually branched at the base, slender. Thickened fruits absent at the base of the stems. Pedicels mostly short. Valves 2-3(-3·5) mm, lingulate, entire, or 2-2·5 mm, narrowly triangular, with 4-8 slender teeth on each margin.{\i  Açores.} ({\i Madeira, Islas Canarias}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Plants with thickened fruits at the base of the stems and both basal and cauline fruits toothed (var.{\i  aegaeus} (Rech. fil.) Maire), occur in Greece and the Aegean region. Similar plants from the W. Mediterranean region and Sicilia, but with fruits both entire and toothed, have been called var.{\i  subaegaeus} Maire.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 9.              Emex}                   Campd.
\par 

\pard\f0\fs24\qc  By †T.G. Tutin.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Monoecious annuals. Ochreae not ciliate, soon lacerate. Female flowers at the base of the inflorescence; perianth-segments 6, free in male flowers, connate in female flowers, the outer 3 spinescent and indurate in fruit. Stamens 4-6. Stigmas 3. Nut triquetrous, included in the perianth.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. E. spinosa} (L.) Campd., {\i Monogr. Rumex} 58 (1819). Plant glabrous; stems 30 cm or more, erect or ascending. Leaves ovate, truncate or subcordate at the base, petiolate. Male flowers in terminal and axillary, pedunculate clusters; female axillary, sessile. Fruit enclosed in the perianth; outer segments ending in patent spines; inner erect, tubercled. Sandy shores and disturbed ground. Mediterranean region, extending to N.W. Spain. Bl †Co Cr Gr Hs It Lu Sa Si [Az].
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 10.           Muehlenbeckia}        Meissner
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc  By J.R. Akeroyd & D.A. Webb.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Woody plants, usually climbers; dioecious or polygamous. Ochreae not ciliate, soon lacerate and evanescent. Perianth-segments 5 sepaloid, united at the base, accrescent and fleshy in fruit. Stamens 8, represented by staminodes in female flowers. Stigmas 3, subsessile. Nut triquetrous, partly fused with the accrescent perianth. ({\i Calacinum} Rafin.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. M. complexa} (A. Cunn.) Meissner, {\i Pl. Vase. Gen. }{\b 1:} 227 (1839). Glabrous, straggling or climbing shrub 1-5 m, with slender, twining branches. Leaves 5-25 mm, broadly oblong to suborbicular, slightly apiculate. Flowers greenish, in short, axillary
\par

\par
107}
\par