{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Ochreae of inflorescence large, persistent. Flowers usually polygamous. Outer perianth-segments c. 4 mm, free, obovate, deflexed. Valves (7-)9-11 × 10-13 mm, thin, pale, often purplish towards the margin, entire, with tubercles. Nut 3·5-4·2 × 1·5-2 mm, reddish, widest below the middle.{\i  Sandy soils. S.W. Europe.} Ga Hs Lu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 5. R. suffruticosus} Gay ex Meissner in DC., {\i Prodr. }{\b 14:} 72 (1856). Stems densely branched, dark and woody at the base; flowering branches herbaceous, erect. Leaves narrowly linear, hastate, with long, narrow basal lobes diverging at right-angles. Outer perianth-segments free, appressed to the margins of the valves. Inflorescence small, narrow, usually lax; branches simple. Valves c. 3 × 3 mm, dark brown. •{\i  Mountains of N. & C. Spain; one station in E.C. Portugal}. Hs Lu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 6. R. scutatus} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 337 (1753) (incl.{\i  R. aetnensis} C. Presl). Suffrutescent, with subterranean shoots, branching from the base; stems 20-60(-80) cm. Leaves scutate, panduriform or hastate, about as long as wide, green or glaucous. Inflorescence lax. Pedicels shorter than the valves. Flowers polygamous. Valves 4·5-6(-9) × 5-6(-10) mm, pale, cordate, without tubercles. Nut 3-3·5 mm, yellowish-grey.{\i  Screes and other open, stony habitats. C. & S. Europe, extending northwards to the Netherlands; cultivated elsewhere as a vegetable, and locally naturalized.} Al Au Be Bu Co Cz Ga Ge Gr He Ho Hs It Ju Lu Po Rm Rs(W, K) Sa Si [Br Su].
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b scutatus} (incl. subsp.{\i  gallaecicus} Lago): Inflorescence more or less leafy, with few branches; flowering branches not becoming indurate in fruit, forming a loose mass. 2n = 20.{\i  Usually calcicole. Throughout most of the range of the species, except Portugal}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b induratus} (Boiss. & Reuter) Nyman,{\i  Consp.} 636 (1881) ({\i R. induratus} Boiss. & Reuter): Inflorescence almost leafless, much-branched; flowering branches becoming indurate in fruit, forming an intricate, globose mass. 2n = 20, 40.{\i  Calcifuge. Iberian peninsula, mainly in the south and west}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 7. R. tuberosus} L., {\i Sp. Pl. }ed. 2, 481 (1762) ({\i R. euxinus} Klokov). At least some of the roots tuberous, fusiform. Stems 20-80 cm. Leaves hastate-sagittate. Valves 5-8 × 5-8 mm, more or less orbicular, cordate.{\i  S. Europe, from Sicilia and Italy to S.E. Russia}. Bu Cr †Ga Gr It Ju Rm Rs(K, E) Si Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b tuberosus}: Stems solitary or few, up to 80 cm, erect. Leaves acute. Inflorescence long, usually lax. Valves c. 5 × 5 mm.{\i  Throughout most of the range of the species}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp.{\b  creticus}  (Boiss.) Rech. fil.,{\i  Candollea }{\b 12:} 30 (1949) ({\i R. creticus} Boiss.): Stems several, usually less than 30 cm, arcuate-ascending. Basal leaves more or less obtuse. Inflorescence short, dense. Valves up to 8 × 8 mm. 2n = 14(female), 15(male). {\i Aegean region}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 8. R. nivalis} Hegetschw.,{\i  Fl. Schweiz }345 (1839). Stems 7-20 cm, several from a thick stock, leafless or with 1 or 2 cauline leaves. Leaves small; outermost (or sometimes all) basal leaves rounded at the apex, slightly cordate at the base, without basal lobes; cauline leaves (if present) and sometimes inner basal leaves more or less hastate. Inflorescence lax, usually simple, rarely with 1 or 2 short branches. Valves c. 3 mm. Nut pale brown. 2n = 14(female), 15(male).{\i  Stony places in the mountains above} 1500 {\i m; calcicole. Alps; S.W. Jugoslavia.} Al Au Ge He It Ju.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 9. R. alpestris} Jacq., {\i Enum. Stirp. Vindob.} 62 (1762) ({\i R. arifolius} All.,{\i  R. carpaticus} Rech. fil.,{\i  R. montanus} Desf.; incl. {\i R. amplexicaulis} Lapeyr.). Stems (10-)50-120 cm, with numerous cauline leaves. Basal leaves ovate, about twice as long as wide, cordate at the base with short, truncate or rounded basal lobes; upper leaves sagittate. Ochreae more or less entire. Panicle lax, with flexuous branches, the lower sometimes branched. Valves 3·3-4·5 mm long and wide. Nut 2·5-3 mm, usually yellowish-grey (rarely brown), dull. 2n = 14(female), 15(male).{\i  Meadows; mainly on mountains in the south. N. Europe, southwards to S. Norway; C. & S. Europe, from C. Germany to N. Greece and N. Spain.} Au Bu Co Cz Fe Ga Ge Gr He Hs It Ju ?Lu No Po Rm Rs(N, W) ?Sa Su.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 The Fennoscandian plants are generally smaller and more slender, with fewer cauline leaves. They have been called subsp.{\b  lapponicus} (Hiitonen) Jalas,{\i  Ann. Bot. Fenn. }{\b 14:} 191 (1977) ({\i R. acetosa} subsp.{\i  lapponicus} Hiitonen).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 10. R. nebroides} Campd., {\i Monogr. Rumex} 150 (1819) ({\i R. triangularis} sensu Guss., non DC.,{\i  R. gussonei} Arcangeli, {\i R. acetosa} var.{\i  alpinus} Boiss.). Stems 10-50 cm, sometimes more or less caespitose. Basal leaves 2-3 times as long as wide, sagittate, acute. with acute, deflexed basal lobes; cauline leaves few, very narrow. Inflorescence lax, narrow, with few, short branches. Valves 3-5 mm, pale, membranous, with a small, deflexed tubercle near the base. Nut 2-2·5 × 1·5 mm, brown, widest below the middle. 2n = 14 (female), 15 (male).{\i  Rocks and stony pastures on limestone. Mountains of S. Europe, from E. Pyrenees to S. Greece.} Al Ga Gr It Ju Si.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Recorded elsewhere only from one station in N.W. Turkey.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 11. R. acetosa} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 337 (1753). Stems 10-130 cm, erect or ascending. Basal leaves sagittate or slightly hastate, oblong-lanceolate to ovate-oblong or -lanceolate, 2-5 times as long as wide. Ochreae fimbriate. Branches of inflorescence simple, except the lowermost which sometimes have secondary branches. Valves 3-5 mm, suborbicular. Nut 1·8-2·5 mm, brown or blackish, glossy. 2n = 14 (female), 15 (male).{\i  Most of Europe, but rare in much of the south.} All except Az Bl Cr Gr Sb.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 A very variable species that has been divided into a number of species and subspecies by different authors. The variation is generally of a continuous pattern, but the following subspecies can be recognized. Further study is required of the species across its whole range.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Plant purplish; leaves without acid taste; stems branched from 
\par
  below the middle ............................................................. ({\b c}) subsp.{\b  vinealis}
\par
1 Plant green (rarely somewhat purplish); leaves with acid taste;
\par 
  stems branched only in upper part
\par
2 Plant usually glabrous; inflorescence lax; stems usually
\par
  more than 30 cm .............................................................. ({\b a}) subsp.{\b  acetosa}
\par
2 Plant papillose-puberulent; inflorescence dense; 
\par
  stems 10-30 cm ........................................................... ({\b b}) subsp.{\b  hibernicus}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp.{\b  acetosa} (incl. subsp.{\i  serpentinicola} (Rune) Nordh., {\i R. fontanopaludosus} Kalela): Plant glabrous, rarely papillose-puberulent (var.{\i  hirtulus} Freyn): Stems solitary or few, 30-130 cm. Basal and lower cauline leaves sagittate, variable in the shape of the main lobe; upper cauline leaves triangular, up to 6 times as long as wide. Inflorescence lax, the lower branches up to 25 cm, often branched.{\i  Grassland. Throughout the range of the species}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp.{\b  hibernicus} (Rech. fil.) Akeroyd,{\i  Watsonia}{\b  17:} 444 (1989) ({\i R. hibernicus} Rech. fil.): Plant papillose-puberulent. Stems usually several, 10-30 cm. Leaves small, somewhat fleshy; upper cauline leaves up to 10 times as long as wide. Inflorescence dense, simple or little-branched, with branches up to 5 cm.{\i  Sand-dunes. Coasts of W. & S. Ireland, W. Britain}.
\par

\par
102}
\par