{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Panicle much-branched, dense ....................................... ({\b a}) subsp.{\b  aquaticus}
\par
1 Panicle simple, lax
\par
2 Stem more than 50 cm; leaves widest near the base ..... ({\b b}) subsp.{\b  protractus}
\par
2 Stem up to 50 cm; leaves widest near the middle ............. ({\b c}) subsp.{\b  arcticus}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp.{\b  aquaticus} : Stem usually more than 100 cm. Leaves widest near the base. Panicle much-branched, dense. Valves (5-)6-8·5 mm, ovate-triangular. 2n = 120, c. 200. {\i Throughout the range of the species except arctic Russia.}
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp.{\b  protractus} (Rech. fil.) Rech. fil., {\i Candollea }{\b 12:} 56 (1949): Stem 60-100 cm. Leaves widest near the base. Panicle lax, simple. Valves c. 5 mm, ovate-orbicular or -triangular. 2n = 120.{\i  Arctic Russia}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b c}) Subsp.{\b  arcticus} (Trautv.) Hiitonen,{\i  Suomen Kasvio} 297 (1933) ({\i R. arcticus }Trautv.): Stem 15-50 cm. Leaves widest near the middle. Panicle lax, usually simple. Valves 5-6 mm, ovate. 2n = 120.{\i  Arctic and subarctic Russia.}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Plants from the island of Kolgujev, intermediate between subspp. ({\b b}) and ({\b c}), have been described as subsp.{\b  insularis} Tolm.,{\i  Fl. Arct. URSS }158 (1966).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Many records from S. Europe are erroneous. The hybrid with {\b 27} (described under that species) is frequent and fully fertile. The hybrid with {\b 25} is frequent, especially in N. Sweden.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 21. R. azoricus} Rech. fil.,{\i  Candollea}{\b  11:} 229 (1948). Like {\b 20}({\b a}) but stouter, with massive stock; basal leaves obtuse, the petiole shorter than the lamina; valves c. 5 mm, subacute, the margins minutely but distinctly denticulate. • Açores. Az.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 22. R. balcanicus} Rech. fil.,{\i  Magyar Bot. Lapok}{\b  33: }5 (1934). Perennial with fleshy, creeping rhizome. Stems up to 100 cm, erect, with few cauline leaves. Basal leaves elliptical to rhomboidal, 1½-2 times as long as wide, equally tapered at both ends, somewhat fleshy when alive, very thin when dry; petiole shorter than the lamina. Inflorescence lax, usually leafless. Valves 5-6 × 4·5-6 mm, ovate-triangular, cordate at the base, obtuse, more or less entire, without tubercles. Nut c. 3 mm, brown.{\i  Beside mountain streams. • W. part of Balkan peninsula; local.} Al Gr Ju.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 23. R. pseudonatronatus} Borbás, {\i Értek. Term. Köréb. Magyar Tud. Akad. }{\b 11}({\b 18}): 21 (1880) ({\i R. fennicus} (Murb.) Murb.). Perennial; root fusiform. Stem 80-150 cm, stiffly erect, slender. Leaves 8-15 times as long as wide, narrowly lanceolate, undulate. Inflorescence long, narrow, dense, nearly leafless. Valves 3·5-5 × 3-5 mm, slightly cordate at the base, rounded at the apex, entire, without tubercles. Nut 2-3 × 1-1·5 mm. 2n = 40.{\i  Riversides and seashores. E. Europe, extending to E. Sweden and E. Austria.} Au Fe Hu Rm Rs(N, B, C, W, E) Su.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 24. R. aquitanicus} Rech. fil.,{\i  Feddes Repert.}{\b  26:} 177 (1929) ({\i R. cantabricus} Rech. fil.). Perennial up to 100 cm. Petioles and leaves densely papillose-scabrid. Petiole of basal and lower cauline leaves about as long as the lamina; lamina distinctly cordate, widest below the middle, about as long as wide; lateral veins forming an angle of 50°-60° with the midrib. Valves 6-8 × 8-10 mm, slightly cordate at the base, without tubercles; margin with many small teeth. Nut c. 3·5 × 2 mm, pale brown. •{\i  Cordillera Cantabrica and W. Pyrenees.} Ga Hs.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 25. R. longifolius} DC. in Lam. & DC.,{\i  Fl. Fr.} ed. 3,{\b  5:} 368 (1815) ({\i R. domesticus} Hartman). Stout perennial 60-120 cm. Leaves broadly lanceolate, 3-4 times as long as wide. Valves 4·5-5·5 × 5·5-6·5 mm, slightly cordate at the base, rounded at the apex, entire, without tubercles. 2n = 60.{\i  Ruderal. N. Europe, extending southwards to} 50°{\i  N. in Russia; S. France and N. Spain}. Br Da Fa Fe Ga Ge Hs Is No Rs(N, B, C, W, E) Su [Cz Po].
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 26. R. confertus} Willd.,{\i  Enum. Pl. Horti Berol. }397 (1809). Perennial up to 80 cm, papillose-pubescent. Basal leaves deeply cordate-triangular, scarcely longer than wide, the basal lobes and apex rounded; petiole often longer than the lamina. Axis of panicle flexuous; branches arcuate at the base. Valves c. 6 × 8 mm, broadly reniform-scutate, with small, irregular, indistinct teeth near the base, 1 with a small tubercle. 2n = 40.{\i  Mainly ruderal. E. & E.C. Europe; C. Appennini.} Cz Hu It ?Po Rm Rs(N, B, C, W, K, E)[Br Fe].
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 27. R. hydrolapathum} Hudson,{\i  Fl. Angl}. ed. 2, 154 (1778). Perennial up to 200 cm. Leaves flat, suberect, broadly lanceolate, tapering equally at both ends, lateral veins at a right-angle to the midrib; basal leaves 4-5 times as long as wide. Pedicels stiff, c. 1½ times as long as the valves. Valves triangular, each with a distinct, fusiform tubercle. Nut 4·5-5 mm. 2n = 200.{\i  Marshes and beside lakes and rivers. Most of Europe, from} 62°{\i  N. in Finland to} 40°{\i  N. in Italy, but very local in the south}. Al Au Be Br Bu Cz Da Fe Ga Ge Gr Hb He Ho Hs Hu It Ju No Po Rm Rs(N, B, C, W, E) Sa Su.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Outside Europe, known only from one station in the Caucasus.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 The hybrid with{\b  20} ({\i R. heterophyllus} C.F. Schultz,{\i  R. maximus} Schreber, non C.C. Gmelin) is frequent in N.C. Europe and S. Fennoscandia. It is similar in habit to {\b 27} but has wider and shorter leaves, rounded or slightly cordate at the base, and valves of somewhat irregular development, in part larger and wider than in {\b 27}. The hybrid with {\b 37} is rarer, but not infrequent in England and the Netherlands; it is similar in habit to {\b 27} but easily distinguished by the distinct teeth near the base of the valves and by their rather long apex.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 28. R. cristatus} DC.,{\i  Cat. Pl. Horti Monsp. }139 (1813) ({\i R. graecus} Boiss. & Heldr.). Perennial 40-200 cm. Basal leaves 20-30 × 10-15 cm, ovate-lanceolate, with a cordate base, acute at the apex; lateral veins joining the midrib of the leaf at an angle of 60-80°; petiole up to 1/2 as long as the lamina. Valves 5-8 × 5-8 mm, reddish-brown when ripe, cordate, with very small, irregular, acute teeth up to 1 mm; all with unequal tubercles. Nut 3-3·5 mm, dark brown. {\i Ruderal. Balkan peninsula and E.C. Europe; naturalized further west.} Al Bu Gr Hu Ju Rm Tu [Br Hs It Lu *Si].
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp.{\b  cristatus} : Plant up to 200 cm; branches often secondarily branched. Leaves minutely papillose beneath. Valves often with 3 tubercles, reddish-brown, with distinct, irregular teeth up to 1 mm. 2n = 80.{\i  Ruderal; mainly lowland. S. part of Balkan peninsula; locally naturalized elsewhere}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b kerneri} (Borbás) Akeroyd & D.A. Webb,{\i  Bol. Jour. Linn. Soc.}{\b  106:} 104 (1991) ({\i R. confertoides} Bihari): Plant often less than 100 cm; branches short, usually without secondary branches. Leaves papillose-scabrid beneath. Valves usually with only 1 tubercle, usually dark brown, subentire or with teeth up to 0·5 mm. 2n = 80.{\i  Mainly in the mountains. From Hungary to C. Romania and C. Greece.}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 29. R. patientia} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 333 (1753). Perennial 80-200 cm. Leaves pale green, 3-4 times as long as wide, ovate- or oblong-lanceolate, acute, truncate or broadly cuneate (rarely subcordate) at
\par

\par
104}
\par