{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 6 Leaves up to 30 mm, obtuse, fleshy; perianth-segments orbicular,
\par
  glabrous or sparsely pubescent ....................................................... {\b 5. saxicola}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. B. hyssopifolia} (Pallas) O. Kuntze, {\i Revis. Gen.}{\b  1:} 547 (1891) ({\i Kochia hyssopifolia} (Pallas) Schrader). Erect, white, hirsute or villous annual 10-100 cm; branches erect. Leaves up to 35 × 4 mm, linear-lanceolate, flat, attenuate at the base. Perianth villous-lanate; spines 1-1·5 mm, subulate, curved, glabrous. 2n = 18.{\i  Saline soils and cultivated ground. From Moldavia to W. Kazakhstan; E. Spain.} Hs ?It Rs(W, ?K, E) [Ga].
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. B. hirsuta} (L.) Ascherson in Schweinf.,{\i  Beitr. Fl. Aethiop.} 187 (1867) ({\i Echinopsilon hirsutum} (L.) Moq.,{\i  Kochia hirsuta} (L.) Nolte). Procumbent or ascending, villous or glabrescent annual 10-60 cm; branches flexuous. Leaves up to 15 mm, linear, fleshy, semi-cylindrical, rarely the lower spathulate and more or less flat. Perianth hirsute; spines c. 1 mm, conical or hooked, pubescent. 2n = 18.{\i  Maritime sands and saline soils. S.E. Europe, from Turkey to S.E. Russia; W. Kazakhstan; C. Mediterranean region; N. Germany and Denmark.} ?Be Bu Co Da Ga Ge Gr †Ho It Rm Rs(W, K, E) Sa †Su Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 3. B. sedoides} (Pallas) Ascherson in Schweinf., {\i loc. cit}. (1867) ({\i Kochia sedoides} (Pallas) Schrader). Erect, lanate annual 10-100 cm; branches erect. Leaves up to 12 mm, filiform, fleshy. Perianth villous; spines c. 1 mm, conical, usually straight, glabrous distally.{\i  Saline habitats. E. Europe, from N.C. Russia to S.E. Romania; Hungary}. Hu Ju Rm Rs(C, W, K, E).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 4. B. prostrata} (L.) A.J. Scott, {\i Feddes Repert.}{\b  89:} 108 (1978) ({\i Kochia prostrata} (L.) Schrader). Small shrub with procumbent stems up to 80 cm. Leaves up to 12 mm, linear-subulate, stiff, acute or mucronate. Fruiting perianth 3-4·5 mm, pubescent; segments ovate, obtuse; wing semi-circular, erose.{\i  Dry places. S. Europe, extending northwards to Czechoslovakia and E.C. Russia}. Au Bu Cz Ga He Hs Hu It Ju Rm Rs(C, W, K, E).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 5. B. saxicola} (Guss.) A.J. Scott,{\i  loc. cit.} (1978) ({\i Kochia saxicola} Guss.). Small shrub up to 30 cm. Leaves up to 30 mm, cylindrical, fleshy, obtuse. Fruiting perianth c. 4 mm, glabrous or sparsely pubescent; segments suborbicular, very obtuse; wing cuneate-obovate, apex obtuse or retuse.{\i  Maritime rocks and cliffs. Islands of Ischia, Capri and Strombolichio} ({\i Isole Lipari}). It Si.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 6. B. laniflora} (S.G. Gmelin) A.J. Scott,{\i  loc. cit.} (1978) ({\i Kochia laniflora }(S.G. Gmelin) Borbás, {\i K. arenaria} (P. Gaertner, B. Meyer & Scherb.) Roth). Erect annual up to 80 cm. Leaves up to 25 mm, filiform, soft. Fruiting perianth 4-6 mm, perianth-segments ovate; wing not more than 1 mm wide, oblong-obtuse or obovate. 2n = 18. {\i Dry, sandy places. From S. France and W. Germany to E.C. Russia.} Al Au Bu Cz Ga Ge Gr Hs Hu It Ju Po Rm Rs(C, W, K, E).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   {\b 7. B. scoparia} (L.) A.J. Scott,{\i  loc. cit.} (1978) (incl.{\i  B. sicorica} (O. Bolòs & Masclans) Greuter & Burdet, {\i Kochia sicorica} O. Bolòs & Masclans,{\i  K. scoparia} (L.) Schrader). Erect annual 20-150 cm. Leaves up to 50 mm, flat, lanceolate or linear-lanceolate, 1- or 3-veined. Fruiting perianth 3-4 mm, pubescent, with ovate, obtuse segments; wing very short or reduced to a tubercle. 2n = 18. {\i Widely cultivated for its ornamental foliage, and naturalized in C., E. & S. Europe, but perhaps native in S. and E. Russia}. Rs(*C, *E) [Al Au Bu Cz Ga Ge Gr He Hs Hu It Ju Po Rm Rs(W, K) Si Tu]. ({\i Temperate Asia.})
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {b 14.               Corispermum }               L.
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc  By †P . Aellen (Ed.1) revised by J.R. Akeroyd (Ed.2).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Annual herbs, often pubescent with stellate hairs. Leaves alternate, linear or lanceolate, flat or semi-cylindrical. Flowers hermaphrodite, solitary in the axils of bracts, in spikes arranged in a branched inflorescence. Perianth-segments 0-3(-5). Stamens 1-5. Stigmas 2. Achene strongly compressed, usually with a marginal wing. Seeds vertical.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 All species occur in open, gravelly or sandy habitats.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Literature: M. Iljin,{\i  Bull. Jard. Bot. URSS}{\b  28:} 637-654 (1929). M. Klokov,{\i  Not. Syst.} ({\i Leningrad}) {\b 20:} 90-136 (1960).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Base of style curved outwards ....................................................... {\b 1. uralense}
\par
1 Base of style straight
\par
2 Achene not winged ..................................................................... {\b 11. orientale}
\par
2 Achene winged, sometimes narrowly
\par
3 Wing membranous
\par
4 Flowers in long, lax spikes ......................................................... {\b 4. canescens}
\par
4 Flowers in short, dense spikes
\par
5 Apex of wing distinctly emarginate ......................................... {\b 2. marschallii}
\par
5 Apex of wing not emarginate ........................................................ {\b 3. algidum}
\par
3 Wing thick, or membranous only at margin, often very narrow
\par
6 Perianth-segments absent from most flowers ...................... {\b 10. intermedium}
\par
6 Perianth-segments obvious in all flowers
\par
7 Achene with triangular-acuminate apex ................................... {\b 8. declinatum}
\par
7 Achene with emarginate or obtuse apex
\par
8 Achene with emarginate apex ............................................. {\b 5. aralocaspicum}
\par
8 Achene with obtuse apex
\par
9 Leaves filiform or semi-cylindrical
\par
10 Achene 4-5 mm ......................................................................... {\b 7. filifolium}
\par
10 Achene 2·5-3·5 mm ...................................................................... {\b 6. nitidum}
\par
9  Leaves flat
\par
11 Wing not more than 1/10 as wide as achene ..................... {\b 9. hyssopifolium}
\par
11 Wing c. 1/5 as wide as achene ........................................... {\b 10. intermedium}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. C. uralense} (Iljin) Aellen,{\i  Feddes Repert.}{\b  69:} 144 (1964). ({\i C. squarrosum} auct.) Plant 5-40 cm, often reddish, pubescent becoming glabrous; branches long. Leaves oblong-linear to linear. Spikes cylindrical, dense. Bracts ovate or oblong-ovate, pubescent. Perianth-segments 0 or 1. Achene 2·3-3·3 × 2-2·6 mm, ovate; base of the style curved outwards; wing very small, membranous, undulate.{\i  S.E. Russia.} Rs(E). ({\i Asiatic Ural}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. C. marschallii} Steven,{\i  Mém. Soc. Nat. Moscou}{\b  5:} 336 (1814). Plant 30-40 cm, densely pubescent, becoming glabrous; branches long. Leaves narrowly lanceolate to linear. Spikes usually short, dense. Bracts broadly ovate, acute, longer but narrower than the achene, margin membranous. Perianth-segments 0(-2). Achene 4-5 × 3-4 mm, ovate to orbicular; wing broad (1/3-1/2 as wide as the achene), cordate at the base, membranous, erose, emarginate; style included in the notch.{\i  E. & E.C. Europe}. *Bu *Cz *Ge Ju Po Rm Rs(C, W, E) [Ho It Rs(B)].
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 3. C. algidum} Iljin,{\i  Bull. Jard. Bot. URSS}{\b  28:} 642 (1929). Like {\b 2} but the plant 3-15 cm, pubescent; leaves oblong or linear-oblong; spikes usually ovoid, bracts oblong or ovate; achene 3-4 × 2·2-3 mm, ovate, or ovate-orbicular, obtuse; wing 1/8-1/4 as
\par

\par
119}
\par