{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 5.               Spinacia}                  L.
\par     

\pard\f0\fs24\qc  By P.W. Ball.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Annual or biennial glabrous herb. Leaves flat. Flowers unisexual. Male flowers 4- or 5-merous, in a dense, spicate inflorescence. Female flowers axillary, without perianth but with 2(-4) persistent bracteoles which become enlarged, connate and hardened in fruit; stigmas 4 or 5. Seeds vertical.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. S. oleracea} L.,{\i  Sp. Pl. }1027 (1753) ({\i S. glabra} Miller,{\i  S. inermis} Moench,{\i  S. spinosa} Moench). Stems up to 1 m or more, erect. Leaves ovate to triangular-hastate, entire or dentate. Bracteoles in fruit orbicular-obovate, usually wider than long, often with a divergent spine at the apex. {\i Widely cultivated vegetable} ({\i Spinach}); {\i occurring throughout most of Europe as an escape from cultivation, but rarely persisting.} ({\i ?W. Asia}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 6.             Atriplex}                L.
\par  

\pard\f0\fs24\qc  By †P. Aellen (Ed.1) revised by J.R. Akeroyd.(Ed.2)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Annuals or small shrubs; glabrous or farinose. Leaves flat. Flowers usually unisexual. Male flowers with 5 perianth-segments and 5 stamens. Female flowers without perianth but with 2 large persistent bracteoles, free or connate to half-way; rarely some female flowers with 4- or 5-lobed perianth; stigmas 2. Seeds vertical, often dimorphic, rarely some horizontal.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Shrubby perennial
\par
2 Bracteoles reniform to orbicular, orbicular-ovate or rhombic-orbicular,
\par
  not lobed
\par
3 Plant erect, usually more than 50 cm; leaves entire, rarely dentate
\par
  ......................................................................................................... {\b 1. halimus}
\par
3 Plant prostrate, less than 50 cm; leaves dentate or lobed ............. {\b 13. recurva}
\par
2 Bracteoles ovate-rhombic to orbicular-deltate, often 3-lobed
\par
4 Bracteoles 4-5 mm, not or only slightly 3-lobed, with numerous
   filiform dorsal appendages ............................................................... {\b 2. glauca}
\par
4 Bracteoles 2-4 mm, 3-lobed, with 0-2 dorsal tubercles ...................... {\b 3. cana}
\par
1 Annual
\par
5 Female flowers dimorphic, some with horizontal seeds and 4- or 5-lobed
\par
  perianth, the rest with vertical seeds and 2 bracteoles
\par
6 Leaves green or purplish-brown, glabrous, sometimes the
   uppermost slightly farinose .......................................................... {\b 4. hortensis}
\par
6 Leaves grey- to white-farinose, at least beneath
\par
7 Stem cylindrical or obtusely angled; leaves thin, grey beneath,
   mostly broadly triangular-cordate ..................................................... {\b 5. nitens}
\par
7 Stem 4- or 5-angled; leaves thick, white beneath, narrowly
\par
  triangular-cordate ............................................................................ {\b 6. aucheri}
\par
5 Female flowers monomorphic, all with vertical seeds and 2 bracteoles
\par
8 Bracteoles elliptical or orbicular-cordate, smooth and usually entire
\par
9 Leaves mostly lanceolate to narrowly hastate ........................ {\b 7. oblongifolia}
\par
9 Leaves broadly triangular-hastate .............................................. {\b 8. micrantha}
\par
8 Bracteoles rhombic or rhombic-orbicular to -ovate, usually with teeth,
\par
  or appendages dorsally
\par
10 Bracteoles becoming hard in fruit; stems terete or angled
\par
11 Cymes in terminal, usually leafless, often long panicles ............ {\b 12. tatarica}
\par
11 Cymes axillary or in leafy panicles
\par
12 Bracteoles broadly rhombic, usually wider than long, 3-lobed 
   with quadrangular lateral lobes and entire middle lobe, 
  smooth or muricate dorsally ........................................................ {\b 11. laciniata}
\par
12 Bracteoles rhombic or angular-ovate, acute and irregularly toothed 
\par
   in the upper part, usually with large dorsal appendages
\par
13 Stem and branches almost glabrous; flowers not more than
   3 in each cyme; seeds with flat sides ................................. {\b 9. sphaeromorpha}
\par
13 Stem and branches densely farinose; flowers 5-10 in a cyme; 
\par
   seeds with convex sides ................................................................... {\b 10. rosea}
\par
10 Bracteoles not becoming hard in fruit; stems strongly ridged
\par
14 Bracteoles serrate or laciniate .................................................. {\b 17. calotheca}
\par
14 Bracteoles entire or dentate
\par
15 At least some bracteoles stalked .......................... ({\b 18-21}).{\b  prostrata} group
\par
15 Bracteoles sessile, sometimes cuneate
\par
16 Lower leaves truncate at base .............................. ({\b 18-21}). {\b prostrata} group
\par
16 Lower leaves cuneate or attenuate at base
\par
17 Bracteoles ovate-rhombic with long-acuminate apex; lower leaves linear
\par
   or linear-lanceolate ...................................................................... {\b 14. littoralis}
\par
17 Bracteoles rhombic or orbicular-rhombic; lower leaves rhombic-hastate to
\par
   to elliptic-lanceolate 
\par
18 Lower leaves at least 4 times as long as wide .............................. {\b 15. patens}
\par
18 Lower leaves 3-4 times as long as wide ....................................... {\b 16. patula}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. A. halimus} L.,{\i  Sp. Pl.} 1052 (1753). Erect, stout, shrubby perennial up to 250 cm, silvery-white. Leaves up to 4 cm, ovate-rhombic or deltate, almost coriaceous, entire or rarely dentate. Cymes remote, in a paniculate inflorescence. Bracteoles orbicular-ovate to orbicular or reniform, entire or dentate, usually without dorsal appendages. 2n = 18. {\i Saline habitats, less often in dry waste places inland. S. Europe. }Bl Co Cr Ga Gr Hs It Lu Sa Si.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. A. glauca} L.,{\i  Sp. Pl.} ed. 2, 1493 (1763). Dwarf shrub up to 50 cm, grey-green to silvery. Leaves up to 1(-3) × 0·5(-1) cm, oblong-lanceolate to orbicular, entire or dentate, slightly fleshy, silvery, sometimes grey-green on the upper surface. Cymes in long, spicate inflorescences. Bracteoles 4-5 mm, ovate-rhombic to ovate-deltate, entire or dentate, sometimes almost 3-lobed, with numerous, large dorsal appendages.{\i  C., E. & S. Spain, S. Portugal}. Hs Lu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 3. A. cana} Ledeb.,{\i  Icon. Pl. Fl. Ross.}{\b  1:} 11 (1829). Dwarf shrub up to 50 cm, much-branched from the base. Leaves 0·5-3 × 0·2- 0·7 cm, oblong-spathulate to linear-lanceolate, usually entire, thick, coriaceous, grey. Inflorescence paniculate, lax, shortly branched. Bracteoles up to 4 × 3 mm, fleshy, 3-lobed, campanulate to orbicular-deltate, entire, with or without dorsal appendages.{\i  Steppes. S.E. Russia and Krym}. Rs(K, E).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 4. A. hortensis} L.,{\i  Sp. Pl.} 1053 (1753). Erect annual up to 250 cm. Leaves usually more than 10 cm, cordate- or hastate-triangular, slightly dentate or almost entire, the uppermost
\par

\par
115}
\par