{\rtf1\ansi \deff4\deflang1033{\fonttbl{\f4\froman\fcharset0\fprq2 Times New Roman;}}{\colortbl;\red0\green0\blue0;\red0\green0\blue255;\red0\green255\blue255;\red0\green255\blue0;\red255\green0\blue255;\red255\green0\blue0;\red255\green255\blue0;\red255\green255\blue255;\red0\green0\blue128;\red0\green128\blue128;\red0\green128\blue0;\red128\green0\blue128;\red128\green0\blue0;\red128\green128\blue0;\red128\green128\blue128;\red192\green192\blue192;}{\stylesheet{\widctlpar \f4\fs20\lang2057 \snext0 Normal;}{\*\cs10 \additive Default Paragraph Font;}}{\info{\author dddd}{\operator dddd}{\creatim\yr1998\mo11\dy11\hr15\min58}{\revtim\yr1998\mo11\dy11\hr15\min58}{\version2}{\edmins0}{\nofpages3}{\nofwords573}{\nofchars3271}{\*\company  }{\vern57431}}\widowctrl\ftnbj\aenddoc\hyphcaps0 \fet0\sectd \linex0 {\*\pnseclvl1\pnucrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl2\pnucltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl3\pndec\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl4\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl5\pndec\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl6\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl7\pnlcrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl8\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl9\pnlcrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}
\pard\plain \qc \f4\fs20\lang2057 {\fs28  }{\b\fs28  7.     OSMUNDACEAE}{\fs28  
\par     }{\fs24 Edit. \'86D.H. Valentine & D.M. Moore.
\par 
\par }
\pard  {\fs28 Stems erect, without scales. Leaves large, pinnately divided. Homosporous; sporangia not in definite sori, with walls 1 cell thick, without an annulus and opening by a longitudinal slit. Prothallus green.
\par 
\par }
\pard \qc {\fs28  }{\b\fs28 1.                  Osmunda}{\fs28                  L.
\par }{\fs24  By D.A. Webb.
\par 
\par }
\pard  {\fs28 Stems short, stout, covered by persistent leaf-bases. Leaves in a dense crown, not persistent, 2-pinnate. Sporangia globular or pyriform, massed in dense clusters on certain pinnae of the fertile fronds, where they entirely replace the photosynthetic tissue.
\par 
\par 
\par   }{\b\fs28 1. O. regalis}{\fs28  L.,}{\i\fs28  Sp. Pl.}{\fs28  1065(1753). Leaves 30-150 cm, densely tufted, only the upper (inner) ones of each year's growth being fertile; sterile pinnules 3-5 \'d7 1-1\'b75 cm, oblong, obtuse, sessile, sometimes pinnatifid at the base, otherwise entire, or rarely serrulate, with conspicuous, dichotomous, free lateral veins. Sporangia confined to a few terminal pinnae of the fertile leaves, not occupying more than 4 of the leaf; fertile pinnules c. 12 \'d7 3 mm, pale green, rapidly turning brown. 2n = 44.}{\i\fs28  Damp places; often on peat and somewhat calcifuge. Widespread in W. Europe, extending very locally eastwards to E. Sweden, Poland and Turkey; much reduced by drainage in many areas.}{\fs28  Al Az Be Br Bu Co Cr *Cz Da Ga Ge Gr Hb He Ho Hs Hu It Ju Lu No Po Sa Si Su Tu.
\par 
\par }{\b\fs29    8-22}{\fs29 
\par }{\fs28 These families are sometimes placed in a single family, Polypodiaceae. They have the following characters in common. Stems usually with hairs or scales. Leaves usually relatively large. Homosporous; sporangia with walls 1 cell thick; annulus present. Prothallus green.
\par 
\par 
\par }
\pard \qc {\fs28  }{\b\fs28  8.     PARKERIACEAE}{\fs28 
\par }{\fs24  Edit D.M. Moore.
\par 
\par }
\pard  {\fs28 Aquatic plants. Stem dictyostelic. Leaves dimorphic, pinnatifid. Sori along the veins, occupying most of the lower surface of the fertile leaves. Indusium absent.
\par 
\par }
\pard \qc {\fs28  }{\b\fs28 1.                Ceratopteris}{\fs28              Brongn.}{\fs24 
\par By J.R. Akeroyd.
\par 
\par }
\pard  {\fs28 Plant floating or sometimes rooted in mud. Stem short, erect, with sparse, translucent, brown scales. Leaves in a rosette; margins of fertile leaves reflexed and covering sori; veins anastomosing. Annulus irregular, of many somewhat indurated cells; spores large.
\par 
\par Literature: R.M. Lloyd, }{\i\fs28 Brittonia}{\b\fs28  26:}{\fs28  139-160 (1974).
\par 
\par   }{\b\fs28 1. C. thalictroides}{\fs28  (L.) Brongn.,}{\i\fs28  Bull. Sci. Soe. Philom. Paris}{\fs28  ser. 3,}{\b\fs28  8:}{\fs28  186 (1821) (}{\i\fs28 Acrostichum thalictroides}{\fs28  L.). Leaves 10-40 cm, 2- or 3-pinnatifid, triangular, often proliferous, bearing plantlets in the axils of the pinnae; petioles inflated, with a network of air-filled spaces. Fertile leaves more deeply dissected with linear segments.}{\i\fs28  Cultivated in aquaria; naturalized in warm springs in S. Austria}{\fs28  (}{\i\fs28 Villach}{\fs28 ). (}{\i\fs28 Tropics and subtropics.}{\fs28 ) [Au ?Ju.]
\par 
\par }
\pard \qc {\fs28  }{\b\fs28  9.     ADIANTACEAE}{\fs28 
\par   (Incl. }{\i\fs28 Cryptogrammaceae, Gymnogrammaceae, Sinopteridaceae}{\fs28 )
\par }{\fs24  Edit. D.M. Moore.  
\par 
\par }
\pard  {\fs28 Rhizome solenostelic or rarely dictyostelic, with opaque scales. Petiole usually dark and shining, with 1 or 2 vascular strands at the base which divide distally. Sori usually submarginal and often borne on or covered by the deflexed leaf-margin which forms a pseudoindusium; spores tetrahedral or globose.
\par 
\par Species of}{\i\fs28  Pityrogramma}{\fs28 , a genus with leaves 1- to 3-pinnatisect, triangular-lanceolate and farinose beneath, are cultivated for ornament. At least one of these,}{\b\fs28  P. calomelanos}{\fs28  (L.) Link,}{\i\fs28  Handb.}{\b\fs28  3:}{\fs28  20 (1833), from tropical America and Africa, has been recorded as naturalized in A\'e7ores.
\par 
\par }
\pard \li200 {\fs28 1 Fertile and sterile leaves distinct
\par 2 Fertile leaf-margins deflexed; sori \'b1 marginal .................... }{\b\fs28 7. Cryptogramma}{\fs28 
\par 2 Fertile leaf-margins not deflexed; sori superficial ................... }{\b\fs28 5. Anogramma}{\fs28 
\par 1 Fertile and sterile leaves similar
\par 3 Leaf-segments flabellate, \'b1 toothed ............................................ }{\b\fs28 6. Adiantum}{\fs28 
\par 3 Leaf-segments not flabellate (sometimes \'b1 triangular), entire 
\par 4 Leaves glabrous ............................................................................... }{\b\fs28 3. Pellaea}{\fs28 
\par 4 Leaves hairy, scaly or glandular, at least below
\par 
\par 11}
\par }