{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 2 Perianth green or purplish, sometimes with a scarious margin
\par
3 Inflorescence ebracteate or the bracts much smaller than the leaves
\par
4 Inflorescence ebracteate or bracteate only in the lower ½;
\par
  perianth segments not more than 3 mm in fruit .............................. {\b 1. vulgaris}
\par
4 Inflorescence bracteate to the apex; perianth segments
\par
  up to 5 mm in fruit ..................................................................... {\b 2. macrocarpa}
\par
3 Inflorescence bracteate with at least the lower bracts similar in size
\par
  and shape to the cauline leaves
\par
5 Stigmas 3; cymes 2- to many-flowered ....................................... {\b 3. adanensis}
\par
5 Stigmas 2; cymes 1- to 3-flowered, usually only 1 flower
\par
  forming a fruit ............................................................................... {\b 4. patellaris}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. B. vulgaris} L.,{\i  Sp. Pl. }222 (1753). Annual to perennial up to 200 cm. Basal leaves ovate-cordate to rhombic-cuneate; cauline leaves rhombic to lanceolate. Inflorescence dense, becoming interrupted towards the base in fruit, ebracteate at least in the upper ½ . Receptacle pelviform; segments not more than 3 mm in fruit, incurved. Stigmas usually 2.{\i  S. & W. Europe northwards to c.} 59°{\i  N. in W. Sweden; cultivated throughout most of Europe, and occasionally naturalized.} Al Az Be Bl Br Bu Co Cr Da Ga Ge Gr Hb Ho Hs It Ju Lu Sa Si Su Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp.{\b  vulgaris} (subsp. {\i cicla} (L.) Arcangeli): Usually biennial. Stem up to 200 cm, erect; root swollen; leaves up to 20 cm; cymes 2- to 8-flowered. 2n = 18.{\i  Widely cultivated, some cultivars for sugar} ({\i Sugar-beet}),{\i  others for the edible leaf} ({\i Spinach-beet, Chard}), {\i hypocotyl and root} ({\i Beetroot}),{\i  others for fodder; often persisting as a casual and occasionally naturalized}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp.{\b  maritima} (L.) Arcangeli,{\i  Comp. Fl. Ital.} 593 (1882) ({\i B. maritima }L., {\i B. perennis} (L.) Freyn, {\i ?B. atriplicifolia} Rouy): Annual (especially in S. Europe) to perennial. Stem up to 80 cm, procumbent to erect, root usually not swollen; leaves up to 10 cm; cymes 1- to 3-flowered. 2n = 18.{\i  Coasts of S. & W. Europe, and as a weed inland in S. Europe}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 The many cultivars of subsp. ({\b a}) have sometimes been given subspecific or varietal rank.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. B. macrocarpa} Guss., {\i Fl. Sic. Prodr. }{\b 1:} 302 (1827) ({\i B. bourgaei} Cosson). Annual 15-40 cm, procumbent or ascending. Basal leaves oblong-spathulate to triangular-ovate, sometimes subcordate; cauline leaves obovate to lanceolate or rhombic. Inflorescence lax, bracteate to the apex. Cymes 2- or 3(-5)-flowered. Receptacle pelviform and hard in fruit; perianth-segments up to 5 mm, erect, often incurved at the apex; stigmas 2 or 3.{\i  S. part of Mediterranean region} ({\i very local}) {\i and S. Portugal.} Bl Cr Gr Hs It Lu Sa Si [Ga].
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 3. B. adanensis} Pamukc. ex Aellen, {\i Notes Roy. Bot. Gard. Edinb.}{\b  28:} 29 (1967). Annual or biennial; stems up to 100 cm, branched from base. Basal leaves deltoid; cauline leaves rhombic-spathulate, the lower ones petiolate. Inflorescence lax, composed of 2- to many-flowered axillary cymes; bracts oblong-ovate. Perianth-segments triangular-oblong, strongly keeled, spongy, incurved in fruit. Stigmas 3. {\i Dry places near the sea. Karpathos and E. Kriti; one station in N.E. Greece.} Cr Gr.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 4. B. patellaris} Moq. in DC., {\i Prodr. }{\b 13}({\b 2}): 57 (1849) (incl.{\i  B. diffusa }Cosson). Annual up to 60 cm, procumbent. Leaves broadly triangular-ovate, usually cordate. Inflorescence very lax, with leaf-like bracts almost to the apex. Cymes 1- to 3-flowered, usually developing 1 fruit. Receptacle hemispherical in fruit; segments 1-1·5 mm, incurved or erect; stigmas 2.{\i  Maritime rocks E. Spain; Mallorca; Lampedusa.} Bl Hs Si.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 5. B. trigyna} Waldst. & Kit.,{\i  Pl. Rar. Hung. }{\b 1:} 34 (1800). Perennial up to 100 cm, erect. Basal leaves up to 20 cm, broadly ovate; cauline leaves ovate to lanceolate, often cordate. Inflorescence usually dense in the upper part, the bracts small or absent. Cymes 1- to 3-flowered. Receptacle pelviform; perianth whitish-yellow; segments erect in fruit; stigmas 3. 2n = 54.{\i  Ruderal. S.E. Europe, from W. Jugoslavia to Krym; occasionally naturalized elsewhere.} Bu *Gr Ju Rm Rs(W, K) Tu [Br Ga].
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 6. B. nana} Boiss. & Heldr. in Boiss.,{\i  Diagn. Pl. Or. Nov.}{\b  1}({\b 7}): 82 (1846-7). Decumbent perennial with stout, cylindrical root. Leaves all basal, 15-20 × 8-10 mm, ovate-oblong or rhombic. Flowering stems 5-10 cm, leafless but with a lax, bracteate inflorescence. Flowers solitary. Receptacle hemispherical, strongly ridged; segments incurved in fruit; stigmas 2. 2n = 18.{\i  Snow-patches. Mountains of S. & C. Greece.} Gr.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc {\b 3.              Chenopodium}                L.
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc  By †J.P.M. Brenan (Ed.1) revised by J.R. Akeroyd (Ed.2)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Annual, rarely perennial herbs, glabrous, pubescent, glandular or farinose. Leaves alternate, flat. Flowers hermaphrodite and female, usually in cymes, variously arranged. Bracteoles absent. Perianth-segments 2-5, more or less unaltered in fruit, rarely becoming fleshy; stamens 1-5; stigmas 2(-5). Seeds usually horizontal.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Most species grow in man-made habitats and it is often impossible to decide whether they fall into the category of casual, established alien or native in any particular country.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 To see the markings on the testa, which are taxonomically important, the skin-like pericarp which closely invests the ripe seed must be removed; a magnification of × 40 is required.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Literature: P. Aellen in Hegi,{\i  Ill. Fl. Mitteleur.} ed. 2, {\b 3}({\b 2}): 569-659 (1960). T. Kowal,{\i  Polsk. Towarz. Bot.} ({\i Monogr. Bot.}) {\b 1: }87-163 (1954). A. Beauge, Chenopodium album{\i  et espèces affines.} Paris, 1974.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Ultimate branches of the axillary cymes ending in bare, subulate,
\par
  spinescent points; leaves linear-oblanceolate, entire to slightly
\par
  dentate ........................................................................................... {\b 3. aristatum}
\par
1 Ultimate branches of the inflorescence neither bare and subulate
\par
  nor spinescent; leaves various
\par
2 Plant pubescent, with yellow or amber-coloured glands or glandular hairs,
\par
  aromatic, not farinose
\par
3 Inflorescence usually composed of distinct though sometimes small,
\par
  axillary, dichasial cymes
\par
4 Glands on lower surface of leaves and outside of sepals very shortly
\par
  stalked; sepals not keeled ................................................................... {\b 1. botrys}
\par
4 Glands on lower surface of leaves and outside of sepals sessile;
\par
  sepals keeled ......................................................................... {\b 2. schraderianum}
\par
3 Inflorescence composed of small, axillary, sessile clusters of flowers
\par
5 Sepals in fruit connate to near apex, the calyx saccate and
\par
  net-veined dorsally; seeds 0·9-1·5 mm ...................................... {\b 6. multifidum}
\par
5 Sepals in fruit free in at least upper ½; the calyx neither saccate
\par
  nor net-veined dorsally; seeds 0·5-0·8 mm
\par
6 Inflorescence distinctly paniculate; leaves entire
\par
  or dentate ................................................................................ {\b 4. ambrosioides}
\par

\par
111}
\par