{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 triangular or oblong-lanceolate, slightly farinose when young, more or less glabrous when mature, often purplish-brown. Inflorescence terminal, spicate. Female flowers dimorphic. Bracteoles 5-15 mm, orbicular-cordate. Seeds horizontal and vertical. {\i Cultivated throughout most of Europe as a vegetable} ({\i Orache}),{\i  and naturalized mainly in the centre and south.} [Al Au Bl Bu Cr Ge Gr He Ho Hs Hu It Ju Lu Po Rm Rs(C, W, K, E) Tu.] ({\i C. Asia}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 5. A. nitens} Schkuhr,{\i  Handb.}{\b  3:} 541 (1803) ({\i A. acuminata} Waldst. & Kit.). Like {\b 4} but the leaves white beneath, often irregularly and coarsely dentate; bracteoles oblong-cordate, conspicuously reticulate-veined.{\i  Roadsides and waste places. C. & E. Europe.} Au Bu Cz Ge Hu *It Ju Po Rm Rs(B, C, W, K, E) [Ga].
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 6. A. aucheri} Moq., {\i Chenop. Monogr. Enum.} 51 (1840) ({\i A. amblyostegia }Turcz., {\i A. desertorum} D. Sosn.). Like{\b  4} but not more than 150 cm; leaves smaller, thick, distinctly bicolorous, the lower surface white, the upper green.{\i  E. Ukraine; S.E. Russia.} Rs(W, E)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 7. A. oblongifolia} Waldst. & Kit.,{\i  Pl. Rar. Hung. }{\b 3:} 278 (1812). Erect annual up to 120 cm. Lower leaves ovate-lanceolate, often hastate, usually sinuate-dentate, the upper lanceolate. Cymes few-flowered, axillary, or in long, terminal, interrupted spicate inflorescences. Bracteoles up to 13 mm, triangular- to rhombic-ovate, usually entire, smooth dorsally. 2n = 36.{\i  Ruderal. C., E. & S.E. Europe}. Au Bu Cz Ge Gr Hu It Ju Po Rm Rs(C, W, K, E) [Ga].
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 8. A. micrantha} Ledeb.,{\i  Icon. Pl. Fl. Ross.}{\b  1:} 11 (1829) ({\i A. micrantha }C.A. Meyer, {\i A. heterosperma} Bunge). Like {\b 7} but the lower leaves up to 15 cm, sagittate, entire or irregularly dentate, the upper narrow, hastate; inflorescence lax, spicate; bracteoles up to 6 mm, orbicular or cordate, somewhat farinose.{\i  Ruderal. Southern part of S.E. Russia and Ukraine; naturalized or casual elsewhere}. Rs(W, E) [?Au ?Ga Ge Hs Po ?Rm].
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 9. A. sphaeromorpha} Iljin,{\i  Bull. Jard. Bot. URSS}{\b  26:} 414 (1927). Much-branched annual up to 80 cm. Leaves up to 3 × 2 cm, triangular-ovate or deltate, broadly cuneate, obtuse, crenate-serrate, grey-green. Female flowers few, axillary; male terminal, in short, leafless, spicate inflorescences. Bracteoles c. 6 mm, rhombic, irregularly dentate, ventricose, becoming hardened towards the base.{\i  S.E. Russia and S. Ukraine.} Rs(W, E).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 10 A. rosea} L.,{\i  Sp. Pl.} ed. 2, 1493 (1763). Erect or ascending annual up to 100 cm, much-branched; stems smooth or angled. Leaves up to 6 × 3 cm, ovate-rhombic or rhombic-triangular, sinuate-dentate, white. Cymes axillary, except the uppermost. Bracteoles up to 12 mm, rhombic, dentate, becoming hard in the lower ½ usually with large dorsal appendages.{\i  Ruderal. Europe northwards to} 57°{\i  N. in C. Russia, but rare in the north-west}. Au Bl Bu Co Cr Cz Ga Ge Gr Hs Hu It Ju Lu Po Rm Rs(B, C, W, K, E) Sa Si Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 11. A. laciniata} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 1053 (1753) ({\i A. sabulosa} Rouy,{\i  A. arenaria} J. Woods,{\i  A. maritima} L.). Procumbent, much-branched, silvery annual up to 30 cm; stem smooth or angled. Leaves 1·5-2(-4) cm, rhombic to ovate, sinuate-dentate. Cymes axillary. Bracteoles 6-7 mm, broadly rhombic, rounded or toothed on the lateral angles, becoming hard in the lower ½. 2n = 18. {\i Maritime sands and shingle. W. & N.W. Europe, extending to S. Sweden.} Be Br Da Ga Ge Hb Ho Hs No Su.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 12. A. tatarica} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 1053 (1753) ({\i A. laciniata} auct., non L.; incl. {\i A. tornabenii }Tineo). Procumbent to erect, much-branched, whitish annual up to 150 cm; stem smooth or angled. Leaves up to 10 × 7 cm, silvery, triangular-rhombic to triangular-hastate, irregularly sinuate-lobed, the lowest lobe largest. Inflorescence terminal, paniculate or spicate, more or less leafless. Bracteoles up to 7 mm, orbicular to oblong-rhombic, reticulate-veined, becoming hard in the lower ½ with or without dorsal appendages. 2n = 18.{\i  S. & S.C. Europe; southern half of S. & S.C. Europe, extending to E. Russia}. Au Bl Bu Co Cz Ga Gr Hs Hu It Ju Rm Rs(C,W,K,E) Sa Si Tu [Ge Po Rs(N, B)].
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 13. A. recurva} D'Urv., {\i Mém. Soc. Linn. Paris}{\b  1:} 284 (1822) ({\i A. tatarica} subsp. {\i recurva} (D'Urv.) Rech. fil.). Prostrate, shrubby perennial 10-40 cm. Leaves up to 7 × 5 cm, similar in shape to those of {\b 12}. Inflorescence terminal, leafless. Bracteoles up to 20 mm, rhombic to orbicular, without or with small dorsal appendages. 2n = 18. • {\i Coasts of S. & C. Aegean region.} Cr Gr.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 14. A. littoralis} L.,{\i  Sp. Pl.} 1054 (1753) ({\i A. laciniata} auct., non L.). Erect, usually much-branched annual up to 150 cm; stems strongly ridged. Leaves linear to oblong-linear, entire or dentate, the lower shortly petiolate, the upper sessile. Inflorescence long, spicate, leafy only at the base. Bracteoles 3-6 mm, triangular-ovate, dentate or entire, dorsally muricate; apex acuminate or lingulate. 2n = 18.{\i  Seashores and saline places inland. Coasts of most of Europe; inland in C. & S.E. Europe.} Au Be Br Co Cz Da Fe Ga Ge Gr Hb Ho Hs Hu It Ju No Po Rm Rs(B, C, W, E) Su.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 15. A. patens} (Litv.) Iljin,{\i  Bull. Jard. Bot. URSS}{\b  26:} 415 (1927). Erect annual 15-70 cm. Lower and middle leaves up to 8 × 2 cm, narrowly oblong-hastate to elliptic-lanceolate, crenate-serrate, the upper linear-lanceolate, entire. Cymes small, in leafless, terminal, spicate inflorescences. Bracteoles orbicular-deltate, acuminate, entire or dentate, farinose, smooth or muricate dorsally.{\i  S. Russia Ukraine.} Rs(C, W, E).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 16. A. patula} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 1053 (1753). Much-branched annual 10-150 cm, slightly farinose; stem strongly ridged. Lower leaves 3-14 × 1-6 cm, rhombic-hastate with cuneate base, the upper lanceolate to linear, entire. Cymes axillary or in long, spicate inflorescences. Bracteoles 3-7(-20) mm, broadly rhombic, entire or denticulate, smooth or tuberculate dorsally. 2n = 36. {\i Cultivated ground and as a ruderal. Throughout Europe.} All except Sb.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 17. A. calotheca} (Rafn) Fries,{\i  Nov. Fl. Suec}. ed. 2, Mant. {\b 3:} 164 (1842). More or less glabrous annual 30-100 cm. Leaves triangular-hastate, coarsely and irregularly sinuate-dentate. Inflorescence spicate, acute. Bracteoles up to 30 mm, hastate or cordate-triangular, laciniate, without dorsal appendages. 2n = 18. •{\i  Coasts of the Baltic, extending to S. Norway and N.W. Germany}. Da Fe Ge No Po Rs(B, C) Su.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   {\b  18-21. A. prostrata} group. Erect or procumbent annuals up to 100 cm, farinose when young; stems strongly ridged. Lower leaves up to 10 × 7 cm. Inflorescence paniculate or spicate. Bracteoles smooth or tuberculate dorsally. Seeds dimorphic; the ' small ' seeds 1-2 mm, black, smooth, the 'large' seeds 2-3 mm, brown, reticulate-rugose.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 A difficult group not yet fully understood. The evidence available indicates that all the species within the group are interfertile, and many populations are made up of plants variously intermediate between two or more of the species. It is, therefore, often impossible to identify individual plants with certainty.
\par

\par
116}
\par