{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 37 Outer flowers of each cyme with bracteoles, the inner flowers
\par
   ebracteolate ............................................................................... {\b 34. Halogeton}
\par
36 Flowers ebracteolate or with minute bracteoles
\par
38 Plant pubescent, sometimes sparsely so ....................................... {\b 13. Bassia}
\par
38 Plant glabrous or papillose
\par
39 Perianth-segments of the lower flowers keeled, the upper narrowly winged
\par
   in fruit, the wings free ................................................................... {\b 23. Suaeda}
\par
39 Perianth-segments broadly winged in fruit, the wings connate
\par
   ..................................................................................................... {\b 24. Bienertia} 
\par
31 Perianth without appendages
\par
40 Bracteoles 2, connate in fruit, each with a long, terminal, patent,
\par
   subulate appendage; flowers all unisexual ........................... {\b 10. Ceratocarpus}
\par
40 Bracteoles absent, or if present without a terminal subulate appendage;
\par
   flowers hermaphrodite and female
\par
41 Perianth-segments up to 10 mm in fruit, shining;
\par
   pulvinate shrub ...................................................................... {\b 31. Nanophyton}
\par
41 Perianth-segments smaller, not conspicuously shining; plant not pulvinate
\par
42 Leaves with spinose apex
\par
43 Flowers with 2 conspicuous bracteoles ................................ {\b 1. Polycnemum}
\par
43 Flowers with minute bracteoles ................................................... {\b 23. Suaeda}
\par
42 Leaves not spinose
\par
44 Cymes mostly 3-flowered, immersed in the axis of a spike-like
\par
   inflorescence; lamina of leaves not more than 6 mm
\par
45 Small shrubs; seeds 1-1·5 mm  ................................................ {\b 16. Kalidium}
\par
45 Annual; seeds c. 0·5 mm ....................................................... {\b 17. Halopeplis}
\par
44 Cymes with a variable number of flowers, not immersed in the axis of
   the inflorescence; leaves usually more than 6 mm
\par
46 Achenes conspicuously margined or winged .................... {\b 14. Corispermum}
\par
46 Achenes not winged or margined
\par
47 Perianth-segments solitary ................................................ {\b 14. Corispermum}
\par
47 Perianth-segments 2-5 
\par
48 Flowers with 2 conspicuous bracteoles; perianth-segments becoming
\par
   hard in fruit (see also{\b  27})
\par
49 Seeds vertical; hairs medifixed, irregular .......................... {\b 32. Petrosimonia}
\par
49 Seeds horizontal; hairs simple ......................................... {\b 33. Halimocnemis} 
\par
48 Flowers ebracteate or with minute bracteoles;
\par
   perianth-segments fleshy or membranous
\par
50 Perianth membranous, 2 segments larger than the others; embryo annular;
\par
   plant pubescent, rarely glabrous ........................................ {\b 12. Camphorosma}
\par
50 Perianth fleshy, the segments all ± equal; embryo spiral;
\par
   plant glabrous or farinose .............................................................. {\b 23. Suaeda}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 1.             Polycnemum}              L.
\par 

\pard\f0\fs24\qc  By P.W. Ball.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Glabrous or pubescent annuals. Leaves subulate, rigid, spine-tipped. Flowers hermaphrodite, solitary in the axils of leaf-like bracts; bracteoles 2; perianth-segments 5; stamens usually 3; stigmas 2. Seeds vertical.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Leaves not more than 0·3 mm in diameter, filiform,
   often glandular-pubescent  ............................................................ {\b 4. heuffelii}
\par
1 Leaves at least 0·5 mm in diameter, triquetrous, usually glabrous
\par
2 Lower leaves 10-20 mm; bracteoles up to twice as long as the perianth;
\par
  seeds 1·5-2 mm ................................................................................... {\b 1. majus}
\par
2 Lower leaves 3-10(-12) mm; bracteoles as long as the perianth;
\par
  seeds 1-1·5 mm
\par
3 Uppermost bracts at least 3 times as long as the perianth .............. {\b 2. arvense}
\par
3 Uppermost bracts not more than 2-3 times as long as the perianth
\par
  ................................................................................................... {\b 3. verrucosum}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. P. majus} A. Braun,{\i  Flora} ({\i Regensb}.) {\b 24:} 151 (1841). Procumbent or erect, 5-30 cm, glabrous, not verrucose. Leaves (6-)10-20 mm. Bracts at least twice as long as the perianth; bracteoles 1-2 times as long as the perianth. Seeds 1·5-2 mm.{\i  Dry places, often as a ruderal. C. & S. Europe, extending to N. France and to c.} 42°{\i  E. in Russia}. Al Au Bu Cz Ga Ge Gr He Hs Hu It Ju Rm Rs(C, W, K, E) Tu [Be Po].
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. P. arvense} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 35 (1753). Procumbent or erect, with spirally twisted branches, up to 50 cm, usually verrucose. Leaves 3-10(-12) mm, softly spine-tipped. Bracts at least 3 times as long as the perianth; bracteoles about equalling the perianth. Seeds 1-1·5 mm.{\i  Sandy soils, often as a weed. C. & S. Europe, extending to C. France and C. Russia.} Al Au Be Bu Co Cz Ga Ge Gr He Hs Hu It Ju Lu Po Rm Rs(B, C, W, E) Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 3. P. verrucosum} A.F. Láng,{\i  Syll. Pl. Nov. Ratisbon.} ({\i Königl. Baier. Bot. Ges}.) {\b 1:} 179 (1824). Like {\b 2} but branches stiffly erect at the apex; leaves glaucous; uppermost bracts not more than 2-3 times as long as the perianth.{\i  Dry, sandy places. Danube basin, Ukraine, S.E. Russia.} Au Cz Ge Hu Ju Rm Rs(W, E) *Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 4. P. heuffelii} A.F. Láng, {\i op. cit.}{\b  2:} 219 (1828). Procumbent, 5-30 cm. Leaves 5-12 × 0·1-0·3 mm, filiform, recurved, densely glandular-pilose to subglabrous. Bracts at least twice as long as the perianth; bracteoles 1-2 times as long as the perianth. Seeds 1-1·3 mm. •{\i  S.E. & E.C. Europe from W. Poland and N.E. Ukraine to C. Greece}. Au Bu Cz Gr Hu Ju Po Rm Rs(C, W).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b  2.               Beta}                 L.
\par  

\pard\f0\fs24\qc  By P.W. Ball & J.R. Akeroyd.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Glabrous herbs. Leaves flat, more or less entire. Flowers hermaphrodite, solitary or in few-flowered cymes arranged in a spicate inflorescence. Perianth-segments and stamens 5; ovary semi-inferior, connate with the receptacle in fruit; stigmas usually 2 or 3. Fruits often adhering together by the swollen perianth and receptacle. Seeds horizontal.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Literature: B.V. Ford-Lloyd & J.T. Williams, {\i Bot. Jour. Linn. Soc.}{\b  71: }89-102 (1975). K.P. Buttler,{\i  Pl. Syst. Evol.}{\b  128:} 123-136 (1977).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Stems not more than 10 cm, decumbent, leafless except for bracts
  subtending solitary flowers .................................................................. {\b 6. nana}
\par
1 Stems normally much more than 10 cm, leafy; cymes 1- to many-flowered
\par
2 Perianth mostly white or yellow, petaloid ....................................... {\b 5. trigyna}
\par

\par
110}
\par