{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\i in S. Europe.} [Al Bl Bu Co Ga Gr Hs It Ju Lu Sa Si Tu.] ({\i South America.})
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 7. C. bonus-henricus} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 218 (1753). Perennial 5-80 cm, erect or ascending, sparsely farinose. Leaves more or less triangular, hastate to sagittate, usually subentire except for basal lobes. Inflorescence mostly terminal, narrow, tapering, leafless above. Sepals not or scarcely keeled. Stigmas 0·8-1·5 mm. Seeds 1·5-2·2 mm in diameter, vertical except in the terminal flowers. 2n = 36.•{\i  Much of Europe but rare in the east and doubtfully native in the north; mainly on mountains in the south}. Al Au *Be Bu Co Cz *Da Ga Ge Gr He *Ho Hs Hu It Ju Lu *No *Po Rm Rs(*B, C, W, E) Sa Si [Br Fe Hb].
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 8. C. foliosum} (Moench) Ascherson,{\i  Fl. Brandenb.}{\b  1:} 572 (1864) ({\i Morocarpus foliosus} Moench, {\i C. virgatum} (L.) Ambrosi, non Thunb.). Annual (7-)25-100 cm, erect, glabrous or almost so. Lower leaves triangular-sagittate, coarsely and sharply dentate-serrate; bracts linear-lanceolate, with a projecting lobe on either side near the base. Inflorescence of many sessile, conspicuously bracteate cymes along the main stems. Calyx red and fleshy in fruit. Seeds 1-1·3 mm in diameter, mostly vertical, reddish-brown, not acutely keeled. 2n = 18.{\i  Mountains of S. & S.C. Europe; widely naturalized elsewhere.} Al Au Bu Ga *Ge Gr He Hs It Ju [Cz Ho Hu Po Rm Rs(B, C, W, K, E)].
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b C. capitatum} (L.) Ambrosi, {\i Fl. Tirolo Mer.}{\b  2:} 180 (1857), is like {\b 8} but has less toothed leaves, and fewer and larger cymes in the inflorescence, which is ebracteate in the upper part. It has long been cultivated, and occurs as a casual in scattered localities in Europe.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 9. C. exsuccum} (C. Loscos) Uotila,{\i  Ann. Bot. Fenn.}{\b  16:} 237 (1979). Like{\b  8} but smaller; stems up to 40 cm, ascending; lower leaves broadly triangular-hastate, bluntly dentate-serrate; upper leaves broader than those of {\b 8}, hastate; calyx green and dry or sometimes red and fleshy in fruit; seeds 0·8-1·2 mm in diameter. {\i Spain and N.E. Portugal.} Hs Lu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 10. C. glaucum} L.,{\i  Sp. Pl}. 220 (1753). Annual 2-40(-120) cm, procumbent or erect, much-branched, glabrous or almost so, except for the leaves beneath. Leaves elliptical, lanceolate, or rarely linear-elliptic, usually coarsely sinuate-serrate to sinuate, rarely subentire or entire, green above, densely glaucous-farinose beneath. Inflorescences axillary and terminal; cymes usually arranged in spikes or more or less paniculate. Sepals of lateral flowers 2-4, free to the middle or below, not or scarcely keeled. Seeds of lateral flowers 0·6-1·1 mm in diameter, vertical, reddish-brown. 2n = 18. {\i Most of Europe except the extreme north and the islands.} Al Au Be *Br Bu Cz Da Fe He Ho Hs Hu It Ju Lu Po Rm Rs(N,B,C,W,K,E) Su Tu [No].
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b C. wolffii} Simonkai, {\i Term. Fuz.}{\b  3:} 164 (1879), recorded from Romania (Transsylvania), is very like {\b 10} but the leaves are mostly linear and entire or only slightly dentate; it is probably a variant of 10.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 11. C. rubrum} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 218 (1753). Annual 5-100 cm, procumbent to erect, usually much-branched, glabrous or almost so. Leaves ovate-rhombic to lanceolate, coarsely serrate-lobed to subentire. Cymes in variable, often pyramidal and leafy inflorescences. Flowers and seeds as in{\b  10}. 2n = 36.{\i  Most of Europe except the extreme north, but rare in the Mediterranean region}. Au Be Br Bu Co Cz Da Fe Ga Ge Gr Hb He Ho Hs Hu It Ju Po Rm Rs(N, B, C, W, K, E) Su [No].
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 12. C. chenopodioides} (L.) Aellen, {\i Ostenia} 98 (1933) ({\i C. botryodes }Sm., {\i C. concatenatum }Thuill., {\i C. crassifolium} Hornem.,{\i  C. rubrum} var.{\i  crassifolium} (Hornem.) Moq.). Like {\b 11} but stems more often spreading or decumbent; leaves deltate to rhombic, subentire or slightly dentate, except for basal angles; sepals of lateral flowers more or less distinctly ridged or keeled, connate almost to the apex and forming a sac closely investing the fruit. {\i Usually in saline habitats. C. & S. Europe, extending to England, Denmark and E. Ukraine.} Au Be Br Co Cz Da Ga Ge †Ho Hs Hu It Ju Lu Po Rm Rs(?B, W) Sa.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 13. C. hybridum} L., {\i Sp. Pl. }219 (1753) ({\i C. angulosum} Lam.). Annual 10-100 cm, sparsely farinose to subglabrous. Leaves ovate, usually acuminate at the apex, more or less cordate to subtruncate at the base, with 1-5 coarse, angular teeth on each margin. Inflorescence cymose, often lax; ultimate branches divaricate. Sepals not keeled. Seeds 1·75-2 mm in diameter, horizontal; testa black, coarsely pitted. 2n = 18.{\i  Europe southwards from} 60°{\i  N., but rare in the Mediterranean region.} Al Au Be Bu Cz Da Ga Ge Gr He Ho Hs Hu It Ju Po Rm Rs(?N, B, C, W, K, E) Si Tu [Br Fe No].
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 14. C. polyspermum} L., {\i Sp. Pl. }220 (1753). Annual (5-)15-100 cm, erect or procumbent, glabrous. Leaves up to 8 × 5 cm, ovate-elliptical, entire or rarely with a single, slight tooth just above the base on each side, cuneate. Inflorescence long, lax, tapering, of many axillary, mostly divaricately branched cymes. Sepals 5, not keeled. Seeds 0·8-1·25 mm in diameter, horizontal. 2n = 18.{\i  Most of Europe except the extreme north, but rare in the Mediterranean region.} All except Az Bl Cr Fa Hb Is Sb.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 15. C. vulvaria} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 220 (1753) ({\i C. foetidum} Lam.,{\i  C. olidum} Curtis). Annual (4-)10-65 cm, procumbent, much-branched, grey-farinose, smelling of decaying fish. Leaves up to 2·5(-3) × 2·3(-2·7) cm, rhombic to ovate, entire or with an acute angle on each margin at the broadest part, more or less densely grey-farinose beneath. Inflorescences terminal and axillary, small, leafy. Sepals 5, not keeled. Seeds 1-1·5 mm in diameter, brownish-black, obtusely keeled. 2n = 18.{\i  Most of Europe northwards to c.} 50°{\i  N.} Al Au Be Bl Br Bu Co Cr Cz Ga Ge Gr He †H o Hs Hu It Ju Lu Po Rm Rs(B, C, W, K, E) Sa Si Su Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 16. C. urbicum} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 218 (1753). Annual (4-)15-100 cm, erect, glabrous or very sparingly farinose. Lower leaves up to 14 × 11 cm, deltate to ovate, attenuate into the petiole; margins shallowly dentate to coarsely dentate-lobate above the basal lobes. Panicles with crowded suberect branches. Sepals 5, not keeled. Seeds 0·9-1·3 mm in diameter, horizontal, black, obtusely keeled. 2n = 36. {\i Most of Europe except the extreme north, but now decreasing.} Al Au Be Bu Co Cz †Da †Fe He Hs Hu It Ju Lu Po Rm Rs(B, C, W, K, E) Sa Si Tu [Br].
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 17. C. murale} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 219 (1753). Annual up to 90 cm, erect or spreading, usually much-branched, more or less farinose. Leaves usually rhombic-ovate and coarsely dentate, not 3-lobed. Inflorescences terminal and axillary, divaricately branched, leafy. Sepals 5, bluntly keeled above. Seeds 1·2-1·5 mm in diameter, black, horizontal, acutely margined; pericarp adherent; testa closely and minutely pitted. 2n = 18.{\i  S., W. & C. Europe, extending to C. Sweden and E. Ukraine, but doubtfully native in much of the north.} Al Au Az Be Bl Br Bu Co Cr Cz Da Ga Ge Gr He Ho Hs Hu It Ju Lu Po Rm Rs(B, C, W, K) Sa Si Su Tu.
\par

\par
113}
\par