{\rtf1\ansi \deff4\deflang1033{\fonttbl{\f4\froman\fcharset0\fprq2 Times New Roman;}}{\colortbl;\red0\green0\blue0;\red0\green0\blue255;\red0\green255\blue255;\red0\green255\blue0;\red255\green0\blue255;\red255\green0\blue0;\red255\green255\blue0;\red255\green255\blue255;\red0\green0\blue128;\red0\green128\blue128;\red0\green128\blue0;\red128\green0\blue128;\red128\green0\blue0;\red128\green128\blue0;\red128\green128\blue128;\red192\green192\blue192;}{\stylesheet{\widctlpar \f4\fs20\lang2057 \snext0 Normal;}{\*\cs10 \additive Default Paragraph Font;}}{\info{\author dddd}{\operator dddd}{\creatim\yr1998\mo11\dy11\hr16\min13}{\revtim\yr1998\mo11\dy11\hr16\min15}{\version2}{\edmins2}{\nofpages4}{\nofwords886}{\nofchars5051}{\*\company  }{\vern57431}}\widowctrl\ftnbj\aenddoc\hyphcaps0 \fet0\sectd \linex0 {\*\pnseclvl1\pnucrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl2\pnucltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl3\pndec\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl4\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl5\pndec\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl6\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl7\pnlcrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl8\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl9\pnlcrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}
\pard\plain  \f4\fs20\lang2057 {\fs24 
\par }{\fs28 Literature: M. Gustafsson, }{\i\fs28 Op. Bot.}{\fs28  (}{\i\fs28 Lund}{\fs28 ) }{\b\fs28 39: }{\fs28 1-63 (1976). P.M. Taschereau, }{\i\fs28 Watsonia}{\b\fs28  15:}{\fs28  183-209 (1985); 17: 247-264 (1989).
\par 
\par }
\pard \li200 {\fs28 1 Bracteoles sessile, sometimes cuneate at base
\par 2 Bracteoles thin, not inflated; plant usually erect ........................ }{\b\fs28 18. prostrata}{\fs28 
\par 2 Bracteoles thick, inflated; plant usually procumbent ........... }{\b\fs28 19. glabriuscula}{\fs28 
\par 1 At least some bracteoles distinctly stalked
\par 3 Bracteoles at least 5 mm, with stalks up to 30 mm ..................... }{\b\fs28 20. longipes}{\fs28 
\par 3 Bracteoles 3-5 mm, with stalks up to 1\'b75 mm ............................. }{\b\fs28 21. praecox}{\fs28 
\par 
\par }
\pard  {\fs28    }{\b\fs28 18. A. prostrata}{\fs28  Boucher ex DC. in Lam. & DC.,}{\i\fs28  Fl. Fr}{\fs28 ., ed. 3, 387 (1805) (}{\i\fs28 A. hastata}{\fs28  auct., non L.,}{\i\fs28  A. triangularis}{\fs28  Willd., }{\i\fs28 A. deltoidea}{\fs28  Bab., }{\i\fs28 A. latifolia}{\fs28  Wahlenb.). Erect or procumbent; stems up to 100 cm. Lower leaves hastate, the base subcordate. Bracteoles 2-6 mm, triangular to triangular-ovate, dentate. Seeds nearly all small. 2n = 18.}{\i\fs28  Ruderal, often near the coast; salt-marshes. Throughout Europe northwards to c.}{\fs28  71\'b0}{\i\fs28  N. in Norway}{\fs28 . All except ?Cr Fa Is Sb.
\par 
\par Very variable; one of the more distinct variants is subsp.}{\b\fs28  polonica}{\fs28  (Zapal.) Uotila, }{\i\fs28 Ann. Bot. Fenn.}{\b\fs28  14:}{\fs28  197 (1977), from S.E. Poland, Estonia and W. Ukraine. It has the lower leaves almost sagittate-hastate, deeply sinuate-dentate and bracteoles rhombic with acute dorsal appendages.
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 19. A. glabriuscula}{\fs28  Edmondston,}{\i\fs28  Fl. Shetl. }{\fs28 39 (1845). (}{\i\fs28 A. babingtonii}{\fs28  J. Woods). Usually procumbent; stems 20-90 cm. Leaves hastate; base truncate. Bracteoles 4-10 mm, rhombic, inflated, thick, entire or dentate. Large seeds numerous. 2n = 18.}{\i\fs28  Maritime habitats. Coasts of W. & N.W. Europe}{\fs28 . Br Da Fa Ga Ge Hb Ho ?Hs Is No Po Rs(N, B) Su.
\par 
\par Hybrids between }{\b\fs28 19}{\fs28  and }{\b\fs28 20}{\fs28  are frequent in N. Britain.
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 20. A. longipes}{\fs28  Drejer,}{\i\fs28  Fl. Excurs. Hafn.}{\fs28  107 (1838). Erect; stems 20-90 cm. Lower leaves triangular-hastate and somewhat cuneate at base. Bracteoles 5-25 mm, at least some distinctly stalked up to 30 mm, triangular to rhombic, usually entire, smooth or muricate dorsally. Large seeds usually numerous. 2n = 18.}{\i\fs28  Brackish salt-marshes. Coasts of the Baltic, arctic Russia and Britain; probably also occurring elsewhere in W. & N.W. Europe}{\fs28 . Br Da Fe Po Rs(N) Su [No].
\par 
\par }{\b\fs28 A.}{\fs28  \'d7 }{\b\fs28 gustafssoniana}{\fs28  Taschereau, }{\i\fs28 Watsonia }{\b\fs28 17:}{\fs28  256 (1989) (incl. }{\i\fs28 A. longipes}{\fs28  subsp.}{\i\fs28  kattegatensis}{\fs28  Turesson), the hybrid between }{\b\fs28 18}{\fs28  and }{\b\fs28 20}{\fs28 , is frequent on the coasts of Britain and W. Sweden.
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 21. A. praecox}{\fs28  H\'fclphers in Lindman, }{\i\fs28 Svensk. Fanerogamfl.}{\fs28  228 (1918) (incl. }{\i\fs28 A. nudicaulis}{\fs28  Boguslaw,}{\i\fs28  A. lapponica}{\fs28  Pojark.?,}{\i\fs28  A. kuzenerae}{\fs28  N. Semen.?). Erect or procumbent, 3-15 cm, often reddish. Leaves up to 3 cm, ovate to lanceolate, cuneate at the base. Bracteoles 3-6 mm, some with stalks up to 1\'b75 mm, rhombic- or triangular-ovate, entire, thin, smooth dorsally. 2n = 18.}{\i\fs28  Shingle or sand on sheltered coasts. Fennoscandia; N. Britain; Iceland.}{\fs28  Br Fe Is No Rs(N, B) Su.
\par 
\par Plants intermediate between }{\b\fs28 20}{\fs28  and}{\b\fs28  21}{\fs28 , together with putative hybrids, occur in the Baltic and these two species are often treated at subspecific rank.
\par 
\par }
\pard \qc {\fs28  }{\b\fs28 7.               Halimione}{\fs28                Aellen
\par    }{\fs24  By P.W. Ball.
\par 
\par }
\pard  {\fs28 Like }{\b\i\fs28 Atriplex}{\fs28  but the bracteoles connate almost to the apex in fruit.
\par }
\pard \li200 {\fs28 1 Annual; fruit with pedicel up to 12 mm .................................. }{\b\fs28 3. pedunculata}{\fs28 
\par 1 Small shrub; fruit \'b1 sessile
\par 2 Bracteoles 2\'b75-5 mm in fruit, obdeltate, usually  3-lobed distally  ...................................................................... }{\b\fs28 1. portulacoides}{\fs28 
\par 2 Bracteoles c. 2 mm in fruit, suborbicular, obtuse with  dentate margin   .......................................................................... }{\b\fs28 2. verrucifera}{\fs28 
\par 
\par }
\pard  {\fs28    }{\b\fs28 1. H. portulacoides}{\fs28  (L.) Aellen, }{\i\fs28 Verh. Naturf. Ges. Basel}{\b\fs28  49:}{\fs28  126 (1938) (}{\i\fs28 Atriplex portulacoides}{\fs28  L., }{\i\fs28 Obione portulacoides}{\fs28  (L.) Moq.). Decumbent small shrub 20-80(-150) cm, silvery-farinose; stems often rooting. Lower leaves opposite, oblong, elliptical or obovate, entire, thick and fleshy. Fruit sessile. Bracteoles 2\'b75-5 mm, obdeltate, usually 3-lobed at the apex. 2n = 36. }{\i\fs28 Salt-marshes, particularly at the edges of channels and pools; occasionally on rocks and cliffs. Coasts of S. & W. Europe, from Bulgaria to Denmark.}{\fs28  Al Be Bl Br Bu Co Cr Da Ga Ge Gr Hb Ho Hs It Ju Lu Sa Si \'86Su Tu.
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 2. H. verrucifera}{\fs28  (Bieb.) Aellen, }{\i\fs28 op. cit. }{\fs28 129 (1938) (}{\i\fs28 Atriplex verrucifera }{\fs28 Bieb.,}{\i\fs28  Obione verrucifera}{\fs28  (L.) Moq.). Like }{\b\fs28 1}{\fs28  but bracteoles c. 2 mm, suborbicular, obtuse, dentate, verrucose.}{\i\fs28  Saline habitats. S.E. Europe from Turkey to c.}{\fs28  52\'b0}{\i\fs28  N. in E. Russia}{\fs28 . Rm Rs(C, W, K, E) Tu.
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 3. H. pedunculata}{\fs28  (L.) Aellen,}{\i\fs28  op. cit. }{\fs28 123 (1938) (}{\i\fs28 Atriplex pedunculata}{\fs28  L., }{\i\fs28 Obione pedunculata}{\fs28  (L.) Moq.). Erect annual up to 50 cm, silvery-farinose. Leaves alternate, oblong to elliptical or obovate, entire. Fruiting pedicels up to 12 mm. Bracteoles 2-3 mm, obdeltate, 3-lobed, the middle lobe very small, the lateral lobes large and spreading. 2n = 18. }{\i\fs28 Saline soils. Coasts of N.W. & N. Europe, from N. France to Estonia, and of the Black Sea, and in saline places inland.}{\fs28  Be Br Bu Da Ga Ge Ho Po Rm Rs(B, C, W, K, E) Su.
\par 
\par Rare and becoming extinct in many of its localities in N.W. Europe.
\par 
\par }
\pard \qc {\fs28  }{\b\fs28 8.            Cremnophyton}{\fs28          Brullo & Pavone
\par }{\fs24  By J.R. Akeroyd.
\par 
\par }
\pard  {\fs28 Small shrubs; silvery-lepidote. Leaves flat, entire. Flowers unisexual, sessile, in a lax panicle. Male flowers with 4 perianth-segments and 4 stamens; bracteole 1. Female flowers without perianth; bracteoles 2, free; bract 1. Seeds vertical.
\par 
\par Literature: S. Brullo & P. Pavone,}{\i\fs28  Candollea}{\b\fs28  42:}{\fs28  621-625 (1987).
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 1. C. lanfrancoi}{\fs28  Brullo & Pavone,}{\i\fs28  Candollea}{\b\fs28  42:}{\fs28  622 (1987). Erect, branched shrub up to 100 cm. Leaves opposite or alternate, 10-30 \'d7 1-4 mm, linear-lanceolate or linear, obtuse or subacute. Flowers in sessile clusters of usually 1 female and 4 male. Female bracteoles 5-9 mm in fruit, orbicular, rounded or retuse at the apex, with or without 2 small appendages dorsally. Seeds c. 2 mm, ovoid, brown. 2n = 20.}{\i\fs28  Limestone sea-cliffs. \bullet   Malta & Gozo.}{\fs28  Si.
\par 
\par }
\pard \qc {\fs28  }{\b\fs28 9.             Krascheninnikovia}{\fs28            Gueldenst.
\par }{\fs24  By P.W. Ball.
\par 
\par }
\pard  {\fs28 Perennial herbs or small shrubs with stellate hairs. Leaves alternate,flat, entire. Flowers unisexual. Male flowers in a dense, spicate
\par 
\par 117}
\par }