{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 18. C. ficifolium} Sm., {\i Fl. Brit.}{\b  1:} 276 (1800) ({\i C. serotinum} auct., non L.). Annual 30-90 cm, usually erect, more or less farinose, green. Leaves up to c. 7 × 4 cm, lanceolate to linear-oblong, usually with a single, prominent, divergent lobe on either side near the base; middle lobe oblong, more or less parallel-sided, slightly lobed to subentire. Inflorescence much-branched; branches usually slender. Sepals 5, keeled. Seeds 1-1·15 mm in diameter, obtusely keeled; testa with close, radially elongate pits. 2n = 18.{\i  S. & C. Europe, extending to England}. Au Be Br Bu Cz Ga Ge Gr He Ho Hs Hu It Ju Po Rm Rs(N, C, W, K, E) Tu [Da Rs(B) Su].
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 19. C. acerifolium} Andrz., {\i Univ. Izv.} ({\i Kiev}) {\b 7-8: }132 (1862) ({\i C. album} subsp.{\i  hastatum} (Klinggr.) J. Murr,{\i  C. klinggraeffi} (Abromeit) Aellen). Like {\b 18} but with more prominent lateral lobes to leaves, the middle lobe more or less triangular and acute, with few irregular teeth; pits on testa of seeds less deep and regular. Whole plant soon becoming red, and finally yellow.{\i  From Poland to E. Russia, southwards to Ukraine}. Po Rs(B, C, W, E).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 ({\b 20-25}). {\b C. album }group. More or less farinose annuals. Stems 5-150(-300) cm, usually erect and much-branched, but variable in habit. Leaves variable in outline, often rhombic or deltate, entire or toothed, acute to obtuse. Inflorescence a spicate or cymosely branched panicle. Sepals 5, with or without keel. Seeds 1-1·85 mm in diameter, black; testa smooth or with radial furrows, rarely reticulate.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Leaves up to 14 cm; young shoots conspicuously tinged with
   reddish-purple  ......................................................................... {\b 25. giganteum}
\par
1 Leaves rarely more than 6 cm; young shoots not conspicuously
   tinged with reddish-purple
\par
2 Stems 5-30 cm, ± procumbent; leaves 3-lobed (arctic Russia)
\par
  ................................................................................................. {\b 20. jenissejense}
\par
2 Stems usually erect or ascending; leaves variable
\par
3 Leaves (at least middle and lower cauline) ± as wide as long;
\par
  inflorescence very grey-farinose ............................................. {\b 21. opulifolium}
\par
3 Leaves (except the most juvenile) at least 1½ times as long 
  as wide; inflorescence usually not very grey-farinose
\par
4 Plant usually rather bright glaucescent green; stems not red; larger
\par
  cauline leaves ovate-rhombic, with acute, forwardly-directed teeth;
\par
  testa with rather numerous close and deep furrows ................... {\b 24. suecicum}
\par
4 Plant deep green to greyish; stems often red or red striped;
\par
  leaves usually ovate-lanceolate, dentate or entire; testa with shallow,
\par
  widely-spaced, radial furrows
\par
5 Leaves rhombic-ovate to lanceolate, usually acute;stems green or red
\par
  .......................................................................................................... {\b 22. album}
\par
5 Leaves oblong to elliptical, obtuse; stems red-striped ................ {\b 23. strictum}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 20. C. jenissejense} Aellen & Iljin in Komarov,{\i  Fl. URSS}{\b  6:} 873 (1936). Annual 5-30 cm, procumbent, rarely suberect. Leaves up to 4 × 2·5 cm, oblong- or elliptic-deltate, more or less 3-lobed, with tooth-like lateral lobes at the middle of the leaf, and with 1 or 2 teeth above, green. Inflorescence dense, spicate. Sepals slightly keeled and farinose. Seeds 1-1·25 mm in diameter, without clear pattern on testa. {\i N.E. Russia.} Rs(N). (Siberia.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 21. C. opulifolium} Schrader ex Koch & Ziz,{\i  Fl. Palat. }6 (1814). Annual 60-150 cm, erect, much-branched, green to almost white, rarely red-tinged, more or less grey-farinose. Leaves (at least middle and lower rhombic-ovate, almost as wide as long, usually with a short, prominent lobe on each side, otherwise entire or with several teeth. Inflorescence a very grey-farinose panicle. Sepals keeled. Seeds 1·1-1·5 mm in diameter, obtusely keeled; testa not pitted. 2n = 54. {\i  S.,C. & S.E. Europe.} Al Au Bl Bu Co Cr Cz Ga Ge Gr *He Hs Hu It Ju Lu Po Rm Rs(C, W, K, E) Sa Si Tu [Be Su].
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 22. C. album} L., {\i Sp. Pl}. 219 (1753). Annual 10-150 cm, usually erect, more or less grey-farinose; stems green or red. Leaves 1-8 × 0·3-5·5 cm, very variable, rhombic-ovate to lanceolate, mostly at least 1½ times as long as wide, entire or shallowly dentate, sometimes more or less 3-lobed. Sepals weakly keeled. Seeds 1·2-1·6(-1·85) mm in diameter, obtusely margined; testa usually marked with faint, radial furrows or (var.{\i  reticulatum} (Aellen) Uotila) a reticulate pattern, otherwise almost smooth. 2n = ?36, 54. {\i  Most of Europe}. All except  Sb; introduced in Fa and Is.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 A very variable and complex species. The pattern of variation has not been fully resolved. There are a number of closely related taxa adventive in Europe, some of which form hybrids with{\b  22}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 23. C. strictum} Roth, {\i Nov. Pl. Sp.} 180 (1821) ({\i C. striatum} Krasan,{\i  C. album} subsp.{\i  striatum }(Krasan) J. Murr,{\i  C. betaceum} Andrz.; incl. {\i C. striatiforme} J. Murr). Like {\b 22} but stems red- or purple-striped; leaves oblong to elliptical, obtuse; leaf-margins entire or somewhat dentate; sepals not keeled; seeds 1·0-1·3 mm in diameter. 2n = 36.{\i  C. & S.E. Europe; a frequent casual elsewhere.} Au Cz Ge Hu Rm Rs(C, W, E).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b C. zerovii} Iljin in Kotov,{\i  Fl. RSS Ucr.}{\i  4:} 650 (1952), from the C. & S. Ukraine, is like{\b  22} but has elongate, horizontally spreading and arcuate-decumbent lower branches, and rather thick leaves, very whitish-farinose beneath, ovate, subobtuse, and held upright. The status of this plant requires further investigation.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 24. C. suecicum} J. Murr, {\i Magyar Bot. Lapok }{\b 1: }341 (1902) ({\i C. pseudopulifolium} (J.B. Scholz) A. Nyárády, {\i C. viride }auct., non L.). Like {\b 22} but usually a rather bright, glaucescent green, somewhat farinose when young; stems not tinged with red; cauline leaves larger, ovate-rhombic, with sharp ascending teeth; cymes rather lax; testa with more numerous, closer and deeper furrows. 2n = 18.{\i  N. Europe southwards to N. Italy and S.E. Russia}. Au Br Cz Da Fe Ga Ge He Ho ?Hu It No Po ?Rm Rs(N, B, C, W, E) Su.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 25. C. giganteum} D. Don,{\i  Prodr. Fl. Nepal.} 75 (1825) ({\i C. album} subsp.{\i  amaranticolor }Coste & Reyn.,{\i  C. amaranticolor} (Coste & Reyn.) Coste & Reyn.). Like {\b 22} but 200-300 cm, with young parts of plant conspicuously tinged vivid reddish-purple, and with large rhombic-deltate leaves up to c. 14 cm long and wide.{\i  Cultivated as a vegetable, and naturalized in S. Europe}. [Cr Ga Gr Si.] ({\i N. India}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 4.               Cycloloma}               Moq.
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc  By P.W. Ball.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Like {\i Chenopodium} but pubescent and eglandular; perianth-segments in fruit with a transverse wing on the back, the wings connate and completely encircling the fruit.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. C. atriplicifolia} (Sprengel) J.M. Coulter,{\i  Mem. Torrey Bot. Club}{\b  5:} 143 (1894) ({\i C. platyphylla} (Michx) Moq.). Erect or ascending pubescent annual up to 80 cm. Leaves 3-6 cm, oblong-ovate or lanceolate, sinuate-pinnatifid or dentate. Perianth c. 2 mm in diameter in fruit; wing c. 0·5 mm wide.{\i  Locally naturalized in S. & S.C. Europe}. [Al Cz Ga It.] ({\i C. & W. North America}.)
\par

\par
114}
\par