{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 6 Inflorescence not paniculate; leaves sinuate, with 3 or 4
\par 
  lobes on each margin ....................................................................... {\b 5. pumilio}
\par
2 Plant glabrous or farinose (at least on the young parts), eglandular,
\par
  not aromatic (sometimes foetid)
\par
7 Perennial with triangular-hastate or -sagittate leaves; stigmas 0·8-
\par
  1·5 mm; seeds vertical except in terminal flowers ............... {\b 7. bonus-henricus}
\par
7 Annual; leaves variable but not hastate or sagittate (except{\b  8} and{\b  9});
\par
  stigmas up to c. 0·5 mm; seeds vertical or horizontal
\par
8 Seeds vertical except sometimes in the terminal flowers of the partial
\par
  inflorescence; inflorescence glabrous
\par
9 Leaves densely glaucous-farinose beneath ................................. {\b 10. glaucum}
\par
9 Leaves green (or reddish) and glabrous beneath
\par
10 Cymes sessile, axillary along main stems, densely globose;
\par
   perianth often fleshy and red in fruit
\par
11 Leaves sharply dentate; perianth always red and fleshy in fruit
\par
   ....................................................................................................... {\b 8. foliosum}
\par
11 Leaves bluntly dentate; perianth usually green and dry in fruit
\par
   ..................................................................................................... {\b 9. exsuccum}
\par
10 Cymes usually in branched axillary and terminal panicles; perianth not
\par
   markedly fleshy and red in fruit
\par
12 Sepals of lateral flowers of partial inflorescence scarcely ridged
\par
   dorsally, usually free in at least upper ½ ....................................... {\b 11. rubrum}
\par
12 Sepals of lateral flowers distinctly ridged or keeled dorsally 
\par
   (at least when young), connate almost to apex, forming a sac closely
\par
   investing the fruit ............................................................. {\b 12. chenopodioides}
\par
8  Seeds usually all horizontal; inflorescence sometimes glabrous,
\par
   but more often farinose
\par
13 Larger cauline leaves ± cordate to subtruncate at base; 
\par
   seeds 1·75-2 mm in diameter, with coarsely pitted testa ........... {\b 13. hybridum}
\par
13 Larger cauline leaves not cordate, ± cuneate; seeds usually less
\par
   than 1·75 mm in diameter, the testa not coarsely pitted
\par
14 Inflorescence-axes and outside of sepals glabrous (rarely sparsely
\par
   farinose in {\b 16})
\par
15 Leaves entire, or rarely with a single, inconspicuous tooth
    on each side, ovate-elliptical, cuneate; stems 4-angled ..... {\b 14. polyspermum}
\par
15 Leaves ± dentate, the larger ones deltate; stems not 4-angled ... {\b 16. urbicum}
\par
14 Inflorescence-axes and outside of sepals ± conspicuously farinose,
\par
    at least when young
\par
16 Plant smelling strongly of decaying fish; leaves entire or with
\par
   a single angle on 1 or both sides towards base ............................ {\b 15. vulvaria}
\par
16 Plant not smelling strongly of decaying fish; leaves often ± dentate or
\par
   lobed 
17 Seeds with acute margins; testa with minute, very close,
   rounded pits; leaves not at all 3-lobed ........................................... {\b 17. murale}
\par
17 Seeds with obtuse margins; testa smooth, furrowed, or with much larger
\par
   pits than{\b  17}; leaves sometimes 3-lobed
\par 
18 Testa strongly pitted; leaves conspicuously 3-lobed
\par
19 Middle lobe of leaves ± oblong and parallel-sided, slightly lobed to
\par
   subentire; pits on testa close and radially elongate;
   plant not turning red .................................................................. {\b 18. ficifolium}
\par
19 Middle lobe of leaves ± triangular and acute, with a few, irregular
\par
   teeth; pits less regular; plant soon turning red ........................ {\b 19. acerifolium}
\par
18 Testa not strongly pitted, usually ± smooth or furrowed;
\par
   leaves 3-lobed or not .................................................. ({\b 20-25}).{\b  album} group
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. C. botrys} L.,{\i  Sp. Pl.} 219 (1753). Annual (4-)15-70 cm, aromatic, clothed all over with short, glandular hairs. Leaves pinnatifid, with up to 4(-6) lobes on each side. Inflorescence narrow, elongate, of many axillary cymes, the upper equalling or exceeding the bracts. Sepals not keeled. Seeds 0·5-0·8 mm in diameter. 2n = 18.{\i  S. Europe, extending northwards to N. France and C. Russia.} Al Bu Co Cz Ga Gr *He Hs Hu It Ju Lu Rm Rs(W, K, E) Sa Si Tu [Au Be Ge Po Rs(B, C)].
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. C. schraderianum} Schultes in Roemer & Schultes,{\i  Syst. Veg.}{\b  6:} 260 (1820) ({\i C. foetidum} Schrader, non Lam.). Like {\b 1} but up to 130 cm; smell unpleasant; glands on the lower side of the leaf and outside of sepals sessile; sepals each with a prominent, dentate keel outside from near apex to base; seeds 0·7-0·8 mm in diameter. 2n = 18.{\i  E.C. & E. Europe.} [Cz Hu Po Rm Rs(C, W, E).] ({\i E. Africa}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 3. C. aristatum} L.,{\i  Sp. Pl.} 221 (1753). Annual 3-30 cm, bushy, much-branched, glabrous or sparsely glandular. Leaves up to 7 × 0·7 cm, linear-oblanceolate, entire or feebly dentate. Inflorescence of numerous axillary, dichasial cymes, whose ultimate branches are bare, subulate and spinescent. Sepals free to near the base, slightly keeled. Seeds 0·5-0·7 mm in diameter.{\i  E. Russia and E. Ukraine; naturalized elsewhere.} Rs(*C, E) [Hu It]. ({\i N. & C. Asia, North America}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 4. C. ambrosioides} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 219 (1753) ({\i C. anthelminticum} auct., non L., {\i C. integrifolium} Vorosch.). Annual, rarely short-lived perennial, up to 1·2 m, strongly aromatic, pubescent (rarely with longer hairs), with many sessile glands. Leaves usually lanceolate, entire, dentate or rarely laciniate. Inflorescence paniculate; cymes sessile along the ultimate branches, usually bracteate. Calyx not saccate or net-veined; sepals free in at least upper ½ rounded dorsally. Seeds 0·5-0·8 mm in diameter. 2n = 32.{\i  Cultivated as a vermifuge, and naturalized throughout much of W., C. & S. Europe}. [Al Au Az Be Bl Co Cr Ga Ge Gr Hs Hu It Ju Lu Po Rm Rs(W) Sa Si.] ({\i Tropical America.})
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 5. C. pumilio} R. Br.,{\i  Prodr. Fl. Nov. Holl.}{\b  1:} 407 (1810). Annual, 10-40 cm, procumbent to erect, aromatic, densely clothed with eglandular, white, multicellular hairs and sessile glands. Leaves 1-4 × 0·5-2 cm, sinuate with 3 or 4 lobes on each margin. Inflorescence of sessile, axillary clusters of flowers on the ultimate branches. Calyx not saccate or net-veined; sepals free almost to the base, rounded dorsally. Seeds 0·5-0·8 mm in diameter, red-brown, glossy. 2n = 18.{\i  Spreading and becoming naturalized in scattered localities in W. & C. Europe.} [Be Cz ?Ga Ge Hs Lu.] ({\i Australia}).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 6. C. multifidum} L.,{\i  Sp. Pl.} 220 (1753). Perennial up to 1 m, procumbent to erect, much-branched, pubescent and with sessile glands. Leaves mostly pinnatifid, with narrow lobes. Flowers sessile or almost so, in sessile, axillary clusters. Fruiting calyx enlarged and saccate; sepals connate nearly to the apex, net-veined dorsally. Seeds 0·9-1·5 mm in diameter. 2n = 32. {\i Widely naturalized}
\par

\par
112}
\par