{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 inflorescence; perianth-segments 4; stamens 4. Female flowers axillary, without perianth but with 2 persistent bracteoles; stigmas 2. Seeds vertical. (Ceratoides Gagnebin, Eurotia auct.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. K. ceratoides} (L.) Gueldenst.,{\i  Novi Comment. Acad. Sci. Petrop.}{\b  16:} 555 (1792) ({\i Eurotia ceratoides }(L.) C.A. Meyer,{\i  E. ferruginea} (Nees) Boiss.,{\i  Ceratoides latens }(J.F. Gmelin) Reveal & Holmgren). Plant 30-100 cm, erect, tomentose or lanate, with grey or reddish-brown hairs. Leaves 12-40 mm, linear-oblong or lanceolate, attenuate at the base into a short petiole. Flowers densely tomentose or lanate. Bracteoles c. 3 mm in fruit, obovate, pubescent.{\i  Dry places. S., S.C. & S.E. Europe, from S. Spain to the middle Volga; very local.} Au †Cz Hs Hu Ju Rm Rs(C, W, K, E).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 10.               Ceratocarpus}               L.
\par 

\pard\f0\fs24\qc  By P.W. Ball.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Annual herbs with stellate hairs. Leaves entire, spine-tipped. Flowers unisexual. Male flowers solitary or in short, axillary cymes; perianth-segments 2; stamens 1(-3). Female flowers solitary, without perianth but with 2 persistent bracteoles; stigmas 2. Seeds vertical.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. C. arenarius} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 969 (1753). Much-branched herb up to 30 cm with grey or reddish-brown tomentum. Leaves 1-4 cm, linear or linear-filiform, the lower opposite, the upper alternate. Bracteoles 5-7 mm in fruit, connate, forming a triangular-cuneate involucre; apex of bracteoles with a patent subulate appendage.{\i  Sandy ground, and as a seed of cultivation. E. Europe from N.E. Bulgaria to E. Russia.} Bu Rm Rs(C, W, K, E).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 11.                Axyris}                    L.
\par  

\pard\f0\fs24\qc  By P.W. Ball.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Stellate-pubescent annual herbs. Leaves alternate, flat. Flowers unisexual; the male in dense cymes forming a spicate inflorescence; the female 2-bracteolate, solitary or forming a cyme with the male flowers. Perianth-segments 3(-5); stamens 2-5; stigmas 2. Fruit usually with a short wing at the apex. Seeds vertical.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. A. amaranthoides} L.,{\i  Sp. Pl. }979 (1753). Stems 15-80 cm. Leaves up to 9 × 3 cm, lanceolate, densely pubescent. Achenes 2-3 mm, often with 2-lobed wing at the apex.{\i  Cultivated ground and waste places. C., S. & E. Russia; W. Kazakhstan.} Rs(C, E).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 12.                Camphorosma}               L.
\par 

\pard\f0\fs24\qc  By P.W. Ball & J.R. Akeroyd.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Annual or perennial herbs or small shrubs, usually pubescent. Leaves alternate, linear or subulate. Flowers hermaphrodite, male or female, solitary or in dense ovoid cymes. Perianth-segments 4(5) with the 2 lateral segments larger. Stamens 4 or 5. Stigmas 2(3). Seeds vertical.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Dwarf shrub ............................................................................ {\b 1. monspeliaca}
\par
1 Annual herb
\par
2 Perianth ± glabrous, with divergent lateral segments ....................... {\b 2. annua}
\par
2 Perianth densely pubescent, with incurved lateral segments ...... {\b 3. songorica}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. C. monspeliaca} L.,{\i  Sp. Pl. }122 (1753) ({\i C. ruthenica} Bieb.; incl. {\i C. nestensis} Turrill). Caespitose perennial with short, woody, leafy branches at the base, and flowering stems 10-80 cm. Leaves 2-10 mm, linear, stiff, often fasciculate.{\i  Saline soils and dry waste places. S. Europe, extending northwards to c.} 53°{\i  N. in E. Russia.} Al Bu Co Ga Gr Hs It Ju Rm Rs(C, W, K, E) Sa Si.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp.{\b  monspeliaca} : Plant smelling of camphor. Perianth 2-3·5 mm, glabrous or pubescent at the apex of the segments; 1 pair of segments larger, divergent at the apex. Seeds 1·5-2 mm. 2n = 12.{\i  Throughout the range of the species}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp.{\b  lessingii} (Litv.) Aellen,{\i  Notes Roy. Bot. Gard. Edinb.}{\b  28:} 31 (1967) ({\i C. lessingii} Litv., {\i C. ruthenica} auct., non Bieb.): Plant not smelling of camphor. Perianth 2-2·5 mm, villous-tomentose; segments subequal, not divergent at the apex. Seeds c. 1 mm.{\i  W. Kazakhstan and adjacent parts of S.E. Russia.} ({\i C. & S.W. Asia.})
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. C. annua} Pallas,{\i  Reise}{\b  3:} 603 (1776) ({\i C. ovata }Waldst. & Kit.). Glabrous or sparsely pubescent annual or biennial 5-40 cm. Leaves 5-15 mm, linear. Perianth 2·5-4 mm, glabrous; lateral perianth-segments divergent at the apex. {\i Saline habitats. • E.C. Europe, extending to Bulgaria and C. Ukraine}. Au Bu Cz Hu Ju Rm Rs(C, W).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 3. C. songorica} Bunge, {\i Acta Horti Petrop.}{\b  6:} 415 (1880) ({\i C. annua} auct., non Pallas). Like{\b  2} but lanate; perianth pubescent; apex of lateral segments incurved, usually villous.{\i  Salt-marshes. S.E. Russia.} Rs(C, E). ({\i C. & W. Asia.})
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 13.              Bassia}                    All.
\par 

\pard\f0\fs24\qc  By P.W. Ball & J.R. Akeroyd.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Pubescent herbs or small shrubs. Leaves linear, flat or cylindrical, entire. Flowers hermaphrodite or female, solitary or in cymes arranged in a panicle. Perianth-segments 5, becoming enlarged in fruit and developing a spine or transverse wing (rarely a tubercle) dorsally. Stamens 5. Stigmas 2 or 3. Seeds horizontal. (Echinopsilon Moq.; incl. {\i Kochia} Roth.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Literature: A.J. Scott,{\i  Feddes Repert.}{\b  89:} 101-109 (1978).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Fruiting perianth-segments with spine dorsally
\par
2 Leaves linear-lanceolate, flat, attenuate towards the base; 
\par
  spines of perianth 1-1·5 mm .................................................... {\b 1. hyssopifolia}
\par
2 Leaves semi-cylindrical or filiform, rarely the lowest ± flat; 
\par
  spines of perianth usually not more than 1 mm
\par
3 Spines of perianth pubescent; stem usually procumbent or
  ascending  ......................................................................................... {\b 2. hirsuta}
\par
3 Spines of perianth glabrous distally; stem erect ........................... {\b 3. sedoides}
\par
1 Fruiting perianth-segments with transverse wing or tubercle dorsally
\par
4 Leaves flat, lanceolate or linear-lanceolate, 1- or 3-veined; fruiting
\par
  perianth-segments with very short wing sometimes reduced to
  a tubercle  ....................................................................................... {\b 7. scoparia}
\par
4 Leaves semi-cylindrical, linear-subulate, obscurely veined or
  1-veined; fruiting perianth-segments with distinct, scarious wing
\par
5 Annual; fruiting perianth-segments with oblong or obovate
  wing not  more than 1 mm wide .................................................... {\b 6. laniflora}
\par
5 Small shrub; fruiting perianth-segments with suborbicular or
\par
  triangular-orbicular wing usually at least 2 mm wide
\par
6 Leaves up to 12 mm, acute or mucronate, not fleshy;
   perianth-segments ovate, obtuse, densely pubescent ................... {\b 4. prostrata}
\par

\par
118}
\par