{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 9 Leaves 2-10(-15) mm; stems and often the leaves pubescent
\par
10 Leaves 2-5 mm, glabrous ...................................................... {\b 25. dendroides}
\par
10 Leaves 5-10(-15) mm, usually pubescent, sometimes very sparsely so
\par
11 Primary branches of the inflorescence up to 20-40 cm, with 
\par
   the secondary branches regularly arranged (S.W. Europe) ....{\b 23. vermiculata} 
\par
11 Primary branches of the inflorescence not more than 10 cm, 
\par
   irregularly branched
\par
12 Plant not more than 30 cm; branches divaricate .......................... {\b 24. aegaea}
\par
12 Plant up to 70 cm; branches erect ............................................... {\b 26. laricina}
\par
1  Annual herbs
\par
13 Upper leaves clavate; perianth in fruit spongy, inflated ................ {\b 1. foliosa}
\par
13 Leaves not clavate; perianth in fruit not spongy and inflated
\par
14 Leaves spine-tipped, mucronate or acuminate
\par
15 Perianth-segments rigid, mucronulate; mid-vein distinct
\par
16 Plant densely covered with brittle bristles .......................................... {\b 8. kali}
\par
16 Plant glabrous or papillose
\par
17 Leaves coriaceous, erect, yellowish, contrasting sharply with the
\par
   purple or reddish stem .................................................................. {\b 3. paulsenii}
\par
17 Leaves soft, dark green, the lower usually deflexed;  
\par
   stem green .................................................................................... {\b 4. pellucida}
\par
15 Perianth-segments flaccid; mid-vein weak or absent
\par
18 Leaves opposite, pubescent ....................................................... {\b 2. brachiata}
\par
18 Leaves alternate, or sometimes opposite but then glabrous
\par
19 Perianth tubular in fruit; lower leaves mostly opposite
\par
20 Lower leaves 20-70 mm; uppermost bracts equalling the flowers ... {\b 5. soda}
\par
20 Lower leaves 10-20(-30) mm; uppermost bracts shorter than
\par
   the flowers ................................................................................... {\b 6. acutifolia}
\par
19 Perianth pelviform in fruit; lower leaves alternate or at most
\par
   1-3 pairs opposite
\par
21 Bracteoles mucronulate .......................................................... {\b 7. tamariscina}
\par
21 Bracteoles cuspidate
\par
22 Bracts ± appressed ......................................................................... {\b 9. collina}
\par
22 Bracts ± patent .................................................................................... {\b 8. kali}
\par
14 Leaves obtuse, not spine-tipped, mucronate or acuminate
\par
23 Leaves not decurrent; perianth 5-10 mm in diameter in fruit
\par
24 Lower leaves 5-8 mm; bracts shorter than or equalling the
\par
   bracteoles ...................................................................................... {\b 13. nitraria}
\par
24 Lower leaves 8-16 mm; bracts exceeding the bracteoles ............. {\b 14. affinis}
\par
23 Leaves shortly decurrent; perianth 10-20 mm in diameter in fruit
\par
25 Plant lanate in the upper part; stigmas shorter than the style ....... {\b 10. lanata}
\par
25 Plant pubescent or glabrous; stigmas equalling or longer than the style
\par
26 Stigmas at least 3 times as long as the style; plant glaucous;
\par
   hairs short, straight ............................................................... {\b 11. turcomanica}
\par
26 Stigmas usually less than 3 times as long as the style; 
\par
   plant grey or white; hairs long, crispate ......................................... {\b 12. crassa}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. S. foliosa} (L.) Schrader in Roemer & Schultes, {\i Syst. Veg. }{\b 6:} 804 (1820) ({\i S. clavifolia} Pallas). Simple or virgate annual 15-80 cm, glabrous, blue-black when dry. Leaves 10-20 mm, semi-cylindrical, at least the upper clavate, obtuse, mucronulate. Perianth spongy, inflated in fruit, the segments ovate, the part above the wing short, triangular or rounded, brownish; wings reniform or orbicular, yellow, finely veined, the lowermost larger than the rest.{\i  S.E. Russia, W. Kazakhstan.} Rs(E). ({\i C. Asia.})
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. S. brachiata} Pallas,{\i  Ill. Pl.} 30 (1803). Virgate annual 10-30 cm, usually pubescent; branches mostly opposite. Leaves 15-20 mm, semi-cylindrical, semi-amplexicaul, acute, mucronate, opposite. Lower bracts acuminate. Perianth-segments small, with sparse appressed hairs; wings unequal, reniform or obovate, densely dark-striate. Stigma sessile. Seeds vertical. {\i S.E. Russia, W. Kazakhstan, Krym.} Rs(K, E).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 3. S. paulsenii} Litv.,{\i  Bull. Turkestan Sect. Russ. Geogr. Soc.}{\b  4}({\b 5}): 28 (1905). Annual 10-40 cm, glabrous or sparsely papillose; stem red. Leaves 15-30 mm, semi-cylindrical, mucronate, coriaceous, yellow, contrasting sharply with the stems. Bracts ovate at the base, with a linear, spinose apex; bracteoles partly connate with the solitary flowers. Perianth with a short tube and small, acute, incurved segments; wings membranous, with broad veins. Style short.{\i  S.E. Russia.} Rs(E). ({\i C. Asia}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 4. S. pellucida} Litv.,{\i  Sched. Herb. Fl. Ross.}{\b  8: }16 (1922). Like{\b  3} but up to 60 cm, sparsely but distinctly papillose; stem green; leaves dark green, the lower opposite; bracts and bracteoles linear, sometimes with a triangular base; perianth with short, broad tube, the segments long, narrow, acute, softly spine-tipped; wing flabellate. {\i S.E. Russia, W. Kazakhstan.} Rs(E). ({\i C. Asia.})
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 5. S. soda} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 223 (1753). Erect glabrous annual up to 70 cm. Leaves 20-70 mm, semi-cylindrical, ovate at the base, with long, linear, mucronulate apex; the lower opposite. Upper bracts equalling the flowers; bracteoles ovate, with short acumen. Perianth-segments ovate, becoming hardened in fruit, the margin pectinate-ciliate, transversely keeled or with a small wing (c. 1 mm) dorsally. Stigma longer than the styles. Seeds 3-4 mm, vertical, oblique or horizontal. 2n = 18.{\i  Europe, northwards to N.W. France, Hungary and E.C. Russia.} Al Bl Bu Co Ga Gr Hs Hu It Ju Lu Rm Rs(W, K, E) Sa Si Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 6. S. acutifolia} (Bunge) Botsch.,{\i  Not. Syst}. ({\i Leningrad}) {\b 22:} 29 (1963) ({\i S. mutica} C.A. Meyer). Like {\b 5} but not more than 50 cm; leaves 10-20(-30) mm, semi-cylindrical becoming slightly wider at the base, acuminate; uppermost bracts shorter than the perianth; bracteoles orbicular; perianth-segments ovate-elliptical, with a transverse appendage dorsally; seeds always vertical. {\i S.E. Russia, S.E. Ukraine, W. Kazakhstan}. Rs(W, E).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 7. S. tamariscina} Pallas,{\i  Reise}{\b  3:} 604 (1776). Erect, virgate, papillose-scabrid annual 10-50 cm. Leaves 5-15 mm, semi-cylindrical, wider at the base and membranous-margined, mucronate. Bracts acuminate, not or only slightly longer than the flowers; bracteoles ovate-lanceolate, acuminate, mucronate, equalling the flowers. Perianth-segments ovate, with long, narrow, triangular apex; wing suborbicular. Stigmas longer than the style. {\i S.E. Russia, E. Ukraine}. Rs(W, K, E).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 8. S. kali} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 222 (1753) ({\i S. aptera} Iljin,{\i  S. pontica} Iljin, {\i S. praecox} Litv.). Erect or diffuse, glabrous or hispid annual up to 100 cm. Leaves 10-40 mm, linear-subulate, acuminate. Bracts
\par

\par
126}
\par