{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 wide as the achene, almost entire, or dentate towards the apex, scarcely emarginate.{\i  N. Russia.} Rs(N).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 4. C. canescens} Kit. in Schultes,{\i  Österreichs Fl.} ed. 2,{\b  1:} 7 (1814). Plant 30-70 cm, simple or with long branches, usually pubescent. Leaves linear. Spikes long, lax. Bracts ovate, acute, broadly membranous-margined, covering the fruit. Perianth-segments 0-5. Achene 3·5-4 × 2·5-3·3 mm, ovate or orbicular; wing broad (1/8-1/4 as wide as the achene), translucent, erose.{\i  C. & E. Europe}. Cz Hu Ju Rm Rs(C, W, E).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b C. ucrainicum} Iljin,{\i  Not. Syst.} ({\i Leningrad}) {\b 9:} 262 (1946),{\b  C. stenopterum} Klokov,{\i  Not. Syst.} ({\i Leningrad}){\b  20:} 93 (1960), {\b C. volgicum} Klokov, {\i op. cit. }100 (1960) and {\b C. borysthenicum} Andrz.,{\i  Univ Izv.} ({\i Kiev}){\b  7-8:} 134 (1862) should probably be included here.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 5. C. aralocaspicum} Iljin, {\i Bull. Jard. Bot. URSS}{\b  28:} 637 (1929). Plant 10-60 cm, with long branches from the base, more or less glabrous. Leaves linear, flat. Spikes short, dense at the base. Bracts oblong-ovate, shorter than the fruit. Perianth-segments 1 (-3). Achene 3·5-3·75 × 3·3-3·5 mm, almost orbicular, apex rounded, almost truncate; wing broad (¼-½ as wide as the achene) towards the apex, undulate.{\i  S.E. Russia; W. Kazakhstan}. Rs(E).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 6. C. nitidum} Kit. in Schultes,{\i  Österreichs Fl.} ed. 2, {\b 1:} 7 (1814). Plant 10-50 cm, branches procumbent, sparsely pubescent or glabrous, often reddish. Leaves linear, slightly fleshy. Spikes long, slender, lax. Upper bracts broadly ovate to orbicular, shortly acuminate, broadly membranous-margined. Perianth-segments 3. Achene 2·5-3·5 × 2-2·75 mm, ovate or almost orbicular, apex truncate and shortly bidentate; wing very narrow, thick, entire. {\i E.C. & E. Europe.} Bu Cz Gr Hu Ju Rm Rs(W, K, E).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b C. nitidulum} Klokov,{\i  Not. Syst. }({\i Leningrad}){\b  20:} 105 (1960) and {\b C. calvum} Klokov, {\i op. cit.} 112 (1960) are probably only variants of{\b  6}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 7. C. filifolium} C.A. Meyer, {\i Bull. Soc. Nat. Moscou}{\b  2:} 455 (1854). Like {\b 6} but leaves filiform; achene 4-5 × 3-4 mm, ovate, obtuse, the wing with a gap at the style-base.{\i  S.E. Russia.} Rs(E).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 8. C. declinatum} Stephan ex Steven, {\i Mém. Soc. Nat. Moscou}{\b  5:} 384 (1817). Plant 15-50 cm, with long branches from the base, glabrous or subglabrous. Leaves linear or linear-lanceolate. Spikes long, lax. Bracts oblong, long-acuminate, broadly membranous at the base. Perianth-segments rudimentary. Achene 3-4 × 1·3-2·5 mm, oblong-obovate, almost parallel-margined; wing very narrow, thick, slightly erose, with a triangular apex.{\i  S.E. Russia.} Rs(*C, E)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 9. C. hyssopifolium} L.,{\i  Sp. Pl.} 4 (1753). Plant 15-60 cm, branched from the base. Leaves linear. Spikes long, narrow, more or less lax. Lower bracts longer than the achene, upper shorter and narrower. Perianth-segments 1(-3). Achene 4-5 × 3-4 mm, ovate; wing very narrow, thin, sometimes absent, apex rounded, entire.{\i  S. & C. Russia, Ukraine.} *Po Rs(*B, C, W, E) [Cz].
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   {\b C. hybridum} Besser ex Andrz., {\i Univ. Izv.} ({\i Kiev}) {\b 7-8:} 135 (1862), {\b C. glabratum} Klokov,{\i  Not. Syst.} ({\i Leningrad}) {\b 20:} 122 (1960),{\b  C. czernajaevii }Klokov,{\i  op. cit.} 120 (1960), and{\b  C. insulare} Klokov,{\i  op. cit.} 124 (1960) should probably be included in {\b 9}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 10. C. intermedium} Schweigger,{\i  Königsb. Arch. Naturw.}{\b  1:} 211 (1812) (incl.{\i  C. leptopterum} (Ascherson) Iljin, {\i C. gallicum} Iljin, {\i C. hyssopifolium} auct. eur. centr., non L.). Plant 10-60 cm, with long branches, pubescent when young, or glabrous. Leaves lanceolate to linear. Spikes short or elongate, usually thick and dense. Bracts lanceolate to broadly ovate-lanceolate, narrower but slightly longer than the fruit. Perianth-segments 0 or 1(-3). Achene 3-4·5 × 3·5 mm, elliptical to suborbicular; wing thick or membranous, 1/8-1/3 as wide as the achene, undulate or entire, apex usually rounded, projecting slightly at the base of the style. •{\i  S. & C. Europe.} Ga Ge It Po Rs(C, E) Si [Be Cz Ho Hs Rs(B)].
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Plants from S. Europe, extending northwards to S. Germany, have been placed in a separate species, {\b C. leptopterum }(Ascherson) Iljin,{\i  Bull. Jard. Bot. URSS}{\b  28:} 653 (1929). They are generally taller and glabrous, with a more elongate, narrowly winged achene. The two taxa were perhaps formerly morphologically and geographically distinct, but introgression has probably obscured differences between them.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 11. C. orientale} Lam.,{\i  Encycl.Méth. Bot.}{\b  2:} 111 (1786). Plant 5-60 cm, with patent branches, more or less pubescent. Leaves oblong to linear. Spikes short, dense. Bracts ovate, acuminate, membranous-margined, slightly longer than the fruit. Perianth-segment 1. Achene 2-3 × 1·5-2 mm, elliptic-ovate, bidentate at the apex; wing practically absent.{\i  C. & S.E. Russia; W. Kazakhstan.} Rs(C, E)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 15.             Agriophyllum}             Bieb. ex C.A. Meyer
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc  By P.W. Ball.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Stellate-pubescent annual herbs. Leaves alternate, flat, spine-tipped. Flowers hermaphrodite, in axillary cymes. Perianth-segments (0)1-3. Stamens 2 or 3. Stigmas 2. Achene compressed, narrowly winged, with the persistent stigmas forming a 2-lobed beak. Seeds vertical.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. A. squarrosum} (L.) Moq. in DC.,{\i  Prodr.}{\b  13}({\b 2}): 139 (1849) ({\i A. arenarium }Bieb. ex C.A. Meyer,{\i  Corispermum squarrosum} L.). Leaves up to 8 cm, lanceolate or linear-lanceolate, acuminate, with spinose apex and with 5-15 more or less parallel veins. Bracts ovate, with spinose apex. Cymes c. 1 cm, ovoid. Achene 3-6 mm.{\i  Mobile sands. S.E. Russia; W. Kazakhstan.} Rs(E). ({\i W. & C. Asia}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 16.               Kalidium}                Moq.
\par  

\pard\f0\fs24\qc  By P.W. Ball.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Small fleshy shrubs, not articulate. Leaves alternate, fleshy, small, decurrent. Flowers hermaphrodite or female, in usually 3-flowered cymes immersed in the fleshy axis of a spicate inflorescence. Perianth-segments 5. Stamens 2. Stigmas 2.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200  Lamina of leaves 2-6 mm, patent or recurved ................................. {\b 1. foliatum}
\par
Lamina of leaves reduced to a small tubercle at the apex of the
\par
 decurrent-amplexicaul base ........................................................... {\b 2. caspicum}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. K. foliatum} (Pallas) Moq. in DC.,{\i  Prodr.}{\b  13}({\b 2}): 147 (1849) ({\i Salicornia foliata} Pallas). Stems 10-75 cm, branches not fragile when dry; lamina of leaves 2-6 mm, linear to ovate, semi-terete, patent or recurved; base semi-amplexicaul. Terminal spikes 20-30 mm. Achene c. 1·25-1·5 mm. {\i  Saline habitats. S.E. Russia, W. Kazakhstan; S. Spain.} Hs Rs(E). ({\i W. & C. Asia}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. K. caspicum} (L.) Ung.-Sternb.,{\i  Atti Congr. Int. Bot. Firenze} 317 (1876) ({\i Salicornia caspica} L.). Stems 15-25 cm, branches fragile
\par

\par
120}
\par