{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 when dry; lamina of leaves a small tubercle, convex below, flattened above; base amplexicaul-obovate. Terminal spikes 6-12 mm. Achene c. 1 mm.{\i  Saline habitats. W. Kazakhstan.} Rs(E). ({\i S.W. & C. Asia}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 17.             Halopeplis}                Bunge ex Ung.-Sternb.
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc  By P.W. Ball.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Annual herbs. Leaves alternate, subglobose and amplexicaul with rudimentary lamina. Inflorescence spicate, with a 3-flowered cyme in the axil of each bract. Flowers hermaphrodite or female, more or less connate with each other and with the surrounding bracts. Perianth-segments 3. Stamens 1 or 2. Stigmas 2.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. H. amplexicaulis} (Vahl) Ung.-Sternb. ex Cesati, Passer. & Gibelli, {\i Comp. Fl. Ital.} 271 (1874) ({\i Halostachys perfoliata} sensu Willk.). Stem erect, 5-30 cm, glaucous, with stout base. Leaves distant; lamina c. 2 mm. Spikes 5-15 mm; bracts ovate-orbicular. Seeds c. 0·5 mm, with cylindrical papillae.{\i  Salt-marshes. S. Europe from S.E. Portugal to S. Italy.} Hs It Lu Sa Si.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   {\b H. pygmaea} (Pallas) Bunge ex Ung.-Sternb., {\i Syst. Salicorn.} 105 (1866), a smaller, more slender plant with crowded leaves, has been doubtfully recorded from the European shore of the Caspian Sea.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 18.             Halostachys}                  C.A. Meyer
\par  

\pard\f0\fs24\qc  By P.W. Ball.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Shrubs or small trees. Leaves opposite, connate, with a rudimentary lamina. Inflorescence spicate, with 3-flowered cymes in the axils of opposite, free bracts. Flowers free, hermaphrodite. Perianth-segments 3. Stamen 1. Stigmas 2 or 3.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. H. belangeriana} (Moq.) Botsch.,{\i  Not. Syst.} ({\i Leningrad}) {\b 16:} 84 (1954) ({\i H. caspica} auct., {\i H. caspia} C.A. Meyer, {\i Halocnemum caspicum} Bieb. pro parte, {\i Arthrocnemum belangerianum} Moq.,{\i  Salicornia caspica} sensu Pallas, non L.). Shrub or small tree up to 3·5 m with erect branched trunk; ultimate branches articulated. Spikes 1-3 cm. Bracts more or less orbicular, slightly cordate. Seeds 0·5-1 mm. {\i Salt-marshes. W. Kazakhstan}. Rs(E). ({\i S.W. & C. Asia.})
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 19.                Halocnemum }                 Bieb.
\par      

\pard\f0\fs24\qc  By P.W. Ball.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Small, fleshy shrubs with opposite and decussate leaves. Flowers hermaphrodite, in 2- or 3-flowered axillary cymes arranged in a spicate, articulate inflorescence. Perianth-segments 3. Stamen 1. Stigmas 2 or 3.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. H. strobilaceum} (Pallas) Bieb.,{\i  Fl. Taur.-Cauc.}{\b  3:} 3 (1819) ({\i Halostachys perfoliata} (Forskål) Moq.). Stem up to 50 cm, becoming woody. Leaves connate at the base and enclosing the stem so that it is apparently articulate; free part of leaves c. 1 mm, broadly obovate, obtuse; leaves subtending short, globose branches. Bracts free, reniform-orbicular; cymes globose to cylindrical-globose. Seeds 0·5-0·8 mm.{\i  Salt-marshes. Coasts of S. Europe, from S.W. Spain to W. Kazakhstan.} Al Gr Hs Rm Rs(W, K, E) Sa Si Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 20.               Arthrocnemum}                 Moq.
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc  By P.W. Ball.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Articulate, glabrous, dwarf shrubs. Leaves opposite, scale-like, the bases of each pair amplexicaul, fused to form a segment. Inflorescence spicate, segmented; each fertile segment composed of two 3-flowered cymes immersed in the pair of bracts arising from the node above; the flowers of each cyme more or less equal in site, the central distinctly separating the lateral. Perianth-segments usually 4. Stamens 2. (Incl.{\i  Sarcocornia} A.J. Scott.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 The delimitation of this genus from Salicornia is that proposed by C.E. Moss,{\i  Jour. S. Afr. Bot.}{\b  20:} 1-22 (1954), but there is much disagreement as to the limits of these genera.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 The species occur mainly in salt-marshes.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Flowers of each cyme falling to leave an undivided hollow in
   the segment; seeds black; testa hard, tuberculate .............. {\b 3. macrostachyum}
\par
1 Flowers of each cyme falling to leave a tripartite hollow in the
   segment; seeds greenish-brown to greyish; testa thin, membranous,
   covered with short conical or curved hairs
\par
2 Plant usually with creeping, subterranean stems; green, often becoming
\par
  red or orange-brown; seeds covered with curved or hooked hairs . {\b 1. perenne}
\par
2 Plant always without creeping, subterranean stems; usually glaucous;
\par
  seeds covered with ± conical hairs ............................................. {\b 2. fruticosum}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. A. perenne} (Miller) Moss, {\i Jour. S. Afr. Bot.}{\b  14:} 40 (1948) ({\i Salicornia perennis} Miller, {\i S. radicans} Sm., {\i Sarcocornia perennis} (Miller) A.J. Scott). Small shrub with creeping, subterranean stems forming mats up to 1 m in diameter and short, erect, non-flowering and flowering stems, which are green, becoming red or orange-brown. Cymes completely immersed in and connate with the fertile segments, falling to leave a tripartite hollow in the segment; flowers almost reaching the upper edge of the segment. Seeds greenish-brown or greyish; testa thin, membranous, covered with curved or hooked hairs; endosperm almost absent. 2n = 18.{\i  Coasts of S. & W. Europe, northwards to c.} 55°{\i  N. in Britain.} Al Bl Br Co Cr Ga Gr Hb Hs It Lu Sa Si.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Much confused with procumbent plants of{\b  2}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. A. fruticosum} (L.) Moq.,{\i  Chenop. Monogr. Enum.} 111 (1840) ({\i Salicornia fruticosa} (L.) L., {\i Salicornia arabica} auct.). Like {\b 1} but the stems up to 1 m, erect or procumbent, usually stout and not rooting, glaucous; cymes clearly not reaching the upper edge of the fertile segment; testa covered with short conical hairs. 2n = 54.{\i  Coasts of S. & W. Europe, extending northwards to} 48°{\i  N. in W. France}. Al Bl Co ?Cr Ga Gr Hs It Ju Lu Sa Si Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 3. A. macrostachyum} (Moric.) C. Koch,{\i  Hort. Dendrol.} 96 (1853) ({\i A. glaucum }(Delile) Ung.-Sternb.,{\i  Salicornia macrostachya} Moric., {\i Salicornia glauca} Delile). More or less erect shrub up to 1 m, glaucous, becoming yellowish-green or reddish. Cymes protruding, free, falling to leave 1 hollow in the segment; flowers extending to not more than 1/3 of the length of the segment. Seeds black; testa hard, tuberculate; endosperm abundant. 2n = 36. {\i Coasts of S. Europe.} Al Bl Co Cr Ga Gr Hs It Ju Lu Sa Si.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 21.                Salicornia}                    L.
\par    

\pard\f0\fs24\qc  By P.W. Ball &  J.R. Akeroyd.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Annual, articulate herbs. Leaves and inflorescence like those of{\i  Arthrocnemum.} Cymes (1-)3-flowered, connate with and completely immersed in the bract of the segment, the flowers arranged in a triangle, the lateral flowers usually meeting below the central.
\par

\par
121}
\par