{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 20. S. webbii} Moq.,{\i  Chenop. Monogr. Enum.} 139 (1840). Erect shrub up to 200 cm, glabrous except for tufts of hairs in the axils of the leaves. Leaves 10-25 × c. 0·5 mm, filiform, mucronate, pale bluish-green, semi-amplexicaul, decurrent. Bracts ovate, subacute, shorter than the flowers; bracteoles orbicular-ovate, keeled, obtuse or shortly acuminate, about equalling the perianth. Perianth c. 13 mm in diameter in fruit, the segments lanceolate; wing brownish.{\i  S. Spain.} Hs. ({\i N.W. Africa.})
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 21. S. oppositifolia} Desf.,{\i  Fl. Atl.}{\b  1:} 219 (1798) ({\i S. longifolia} sensu Willk.,{\i  S. verticillata} auct., non Schousboe, {\i S. sieberi} auct.). Glabrous shrub 50-100 cm. Leaves up to 30 mm, nearly all opposite, linear or linear-oblong, attenuate towards the base and scarcely amplexicaul. Bracts linear-oblong, keeled, usually longer than the flowers; bracteoles oblong-elliptical. Perianth 12-20 mm in diameter in fruit, the segments obtuse, almost entirely membranous, fimbriate; wing orbicular-obovate, reniform. {\i S. & E. Spain, Islas Baleares; S. Italy, Sicilia, Lampedusa.} Bl Hs It Si.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 22. S. papillosa} (Cosson) Willk.,{\i  Strand-Steppengeb. Iber. Halbins.} 146 (1852). Divaricately branched, often procumbent shrub up to 60 cm, glabrous or pubescent. Leaves 4-12 × 1-3 mm, semi-cylindrical, obtuse, enlarged at the base, glabrous, pale bluish-green, whitish when dry. Bracts like the leaves; bracteoles oblong-lanceolate, obtuse, hyaline at the base. Perianth-segments oblong-lanceolate.{\i  Rocky, calcareous hills. S.E. Spain}. Hs.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 23. S. vermiculata} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 323 (1753) ({\i S. tamariscifolia} (L.) Lag. ; incl.{\i  S. hispanica} Botsch., {\i S. agrigentina} Guss., {\i S. flavescens} Cav.). Pubescent virgate shrub up to 100 cm. Leaves 5-10 × 0·5-1 mm, semi-cylindrical to filiform, expanding into an ovate base, semi-amplexicaul, obtuse, usually pubescent. Primary branches of the inflorescence up to 20-40 cm, with regularly arranged secondary branches. Bracts ovate with filiform apex; bracteoles ovate, keeled, fimbriate, shorter than the perianth. Perianth 6-12 mm in diameter in fruit, the segments oblong-ovate, acute, sparsely pubescent; wing obovate, finely veined. Stigmas shorter than the style, subulate, long-papillose. {\i W. Mediterranean region and S. Portugal.} Bl Hs Lu Sa Si.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 24. S. aegaea} Rech. fil.,{\i  Denkschr. Akad. Wiss. Math.-Nat. Kl.} ({\i Wien}) {\b 105}({\b 2}): 67 (1943) ({\i S. vermiculata }auct. balcan., non L.). Like {\b 23} but not more than 30 cm, with much shorter, divaricate branches; lower leaves 5(-10) mm, oblong, glabrescent; upper leaves and bracts shortly triangular, usually pubescent; bracteoles orbicular to rhombic.{\i  Calcareous maritime rocks. S. Aegean region.} Cr Gr. ({\i Rodhos.})
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 25. S. dendroides} Pallas,{\i  Ill. Pl.} 22 (1803) ({\i S. brevifolia }D'Urv.,{\i  S. verrucosa }Bieb.). Virgate shrub 75-150 cm. Lower leaves 2-5 mm, semi-cylindrical, obtuse, broader at the base, glabrous, deciduous. Primary branches of the inflorescence 5-10 cm. Bracts like the leaves but shorter; bracteoles orbicular, glabrous. Perianth 7-9 mm in diameter in fruit, the segments narrowly triangular-ovate, acute, almost entirely membranous, glabrous, incurved. Stigmas lingulate.{\i  S.E. Russia} ({\i N.W. shore of Caspian Sea}). Rs(E). ({\i C. & S.W. Asia.})
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 26. S. laricina} Pallas,{\i  Ill. Pl.} 21 (1803). Erect shrub 20-70 cm. Leaves 5-12 mm, semi-cylindrical or filiform, slightly broader at the base, glaucous, sparsely pubescent, persistent. Primary branches of the inflorescence 5-10 cm, the secondary branches irregular. Bracts like the leaves; bracteoles ovate-orbicular, keeled, apex cucullate, glabrous. Perianth 5-7 mm in diameter in fruit, the segments orbicular to oblong, acute, almost entirely membranous. Stigmas lorate.{\i  S.E. Russia, S. Ukraine, W. Kazakhstan}. Rs(W, K, E)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 26.               Noaea}                   Moq.
\par    

\pard\f0\fs24\qc  By P.W. Ball.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Spiny, glabrous shrub. Leaves alternate, filiform. Flowers hermaphrodite, solitary, axillary. Perianth-segments 5 (3 outer and 2 inner), all developing a transverse wing dorsally in fruit. Stamens 5. Stigmas 2. Seeds vertical.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. N. mucronata} (Forskål) Ascherson & Schweinf.,{\i  Mém. Inst. Egypt.}{\b  2:} 131 (1889) ({\i N. spinosissima} L. fil.). Stem 20-75 cm, much-branched, with the branches spine-tipped. Leaves up to 5 cm, filiform, obtuse. Perianth c. 4 mm, the wings 3-6 mm, obovate or obovate-orbicular with erose margin.{\i  Maritime rocks. Aegean region, Turkey-in-Europe} ({\i Istanbul}); {\i local}. Cr Gr Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 27.               Ofaiston  }                  Rafin.
\par 

\pard\f0\fs24\qc  By P.W. Ball.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Annual glabrous herbs; leaves alternate, nearly all basal. Flowers hermaphrodite, solitary, enclosed by 2 bracteoles. Perianth-segments 3 or 5, the 3 outer larger, developing a short transverse wing dorsally in fruit, the 2 inner very small or absent. Stamen 1. Stigmas 2. Seeds vertical.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. O. monandrum} (Pallas) Moq. in DC., {\i Prodr.}{\b  13}({\b 2}): 203 (1849). More or less erect, flexuous, up to 40 cm. Leaves 10-20 mm, fleshy, filiform. Bracts 2-3 mm, ovoid-triquetrous, acute, with broad, membranous margin; bracteoles ovate, becoming cartilaginous and keeled, enclosing the fruit. Perianth-segments membranous, with oblong or orbicular-ovate wing.{\i  Salt-marshes. S.E. Russia, W. Kazakhstan.} Rs(?K, E). ({\i W. Asia.})
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 28.           Girgensohnia }              Bunge ex Fenzl 
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc  By P.W. Ball.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Annual glabrous herb. Leaves opposite. Flowers hermaphrodite. Perianth-segments 5 (3 outer and 2 inner), 2 or 3 segments developing a transverse wing dorsally in fruit. Stamens 5, alternating with 5 short staminodes. Stigmas 2. Seeds vertical.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. G. oppositifolia} (Pallas) Fenzl in Ledeb.,{\i  Fl. Ross. }{\b 3:} 835 (1851). Stems 10-50 cm, more or less segmented, glaucous or reddish. Leaves up to 15 mm, broadly triangular or ovate, spine-tipped. Flowers solitary or in short, spicate inflorescences in the axils of broadly ovate bracts. Wing of perianth suborbicular, reddish. Seeds 1-2 mm.{\i  Saline semi-deserts. On the borders of Europe in W. Kazakhstan.} Rs(E). ({\i C. & S.W. Asia}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 29.            Anabasis }                  L.
\par          

\pard\f0\fs24\qc  By P.W. Ball.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Articulate, fleshy small shrubs. Leaves opposite, connate and amplexicaul, forming a segment. Flowers hermaphrodite and female, 1 or several in the axils of the upper leaves. Perianth-segments 5, usually developing a transverse wing dorsally in fruit. Stamens 5, alternating with 5 staminodes. Stigmas 2(3). Seeds vertical.
\par

\par
128}
\par