{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Perianth 3- or 4-lobed. Stamens 1 or 2. Seeds with thin membranous testa; endosperm very sparse.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 All species occur in saline habitats, and it is possible that immersion in salt water is essential for their growth.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 It is usually impossible to identify dried specimens with any reasonable degree of accuracy. As a result most Floras recognize only one species ({\i S. europaea} L. or{\i  S. herbacea} (L.) L.), although there can be little doubt that several others occur in Europe. In recent years accounts of the genus based on living material, but covering relatively small areas, have been published, but these cannot be satisfactorily correlated either taxonomically or nomenclaturally, even in N.W. Europe.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Literature: J. Nannfeldt,{\i  Svensk Bot. Tidskr.}{\b  49:} 97-109 (1955). P.W. Ball & T.G. Tutin,{\i  Watsonia}{\b  4:} 193-205 (1959). D. König, {\i Mitt. Fl.-Soziol. Arbeitsgem.} n.s.{\b  8:} 5-58 (1960). K.R. Soó von Bere,{\i  Acta Bot. Acad. Sci. Hung.}{\b  6:} 397 403 (1960). P.W. Ball, {\i Feddes Repert.}{\b  69:} 1-8 (1964). A.J. Scott,{\i  Bot. Jour. Linn. Soc.}{\b  75:} 367-374 (1977).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Cymes 1-flowered; infructescence disarticulating .......................... {\b 5. pusilla}
\par
1 Cymes 3-flowered; infructescence not disarticulating
\par
2 Anthers 0·2-0·5 mm, often not exserted; fertile segments
   with convex sides; lateral flowers usually distinctly
   smaller than the central .............................................. ({\b 1-4}).{\b  europaea} group
\par
2 Anthers (0·5-)0·6-1 mm, always exserted; fertile segments ± 
  cylindrical, sometimes with slightly concave sides;
  flowers subequal .................................................... ({\b 6-8}).{\b  procumbens }group
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Sect. SALICORNIA. Cymes usually 3-flowered. Lateral flowers usually distinctly smaller than the central. Stamens usually 1, rarely 0 or 2; anthers 0·2-0·5 mm. Seeds 1-1·7 mm. Diploid.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    ({\b 1-4}). {\b S. europaea} group. Plants usually red or purple in fruit; the uppermost primary branches straight, making an acute angle (usually less than 45°) with the main stem; terminal spike with 3-12(-22) fertile segments; fertile segments with convex sides, the lateral flowers of each cyme usually distinctly smaller than the central flower; flowers often cleistogamous, the anthers usually dehiscing before exsertion, or not exserted and persisting in the perianth.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 The specific limits within this group are obscure. Inbreeding is predominant, the taxa consisting of one or a few homozygous lines.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Plants belonging to this group are found on almost all the coasts of Europe, and locally inland in C. Europe and the Ukraine and S. Russia. On the basis of the data available it is not possible to assign many records to a particular species within the group. Records are available for the following territories: Al Be Bl Br Bu Co Cr Cz Da Fe Ga Ge Gr Hb Ho Hs It Ju No Po Rm Rs(N,B,W, K, E) Sa Si Su Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Lower fertile segments of the terminal spike 3-5 mm wide at the 
\par
  narrowest point; upper edge with an inconspicuous, scarious margin
\par
  (not more than 0·1 mm wide)
\par
2 Upper scarious margin of fertile segments up to 0·1 mm wide, 
\par
  cuspidate at apex; lateral flowers distinctly smaller than the central
  ........................................................................................................ {\b 1. europaea}
\par
2 Upper scarious margin of fertile segments up to 0·05 mm wide,
\par
  rounded at apex; lateral flowers smaller than the central, 
\par
  but not distinctly so ......................................................................... {\b 2. obscura} 
\par
1 Lower fertile segments of the terminal spike 2-3·5(-4) mm wide
  (or less) at the narrowest point; upper edge with a conspicuous,
  scarious margin (0·1-0·2 mm wide)
\par
3 Lower fertile segments of the terminal spike 2·5-4 mm wide at
\par
  the narrowest point and 3-5·3 mm wide at the widest ............. {\b 3. ramosissima}
\par
3 Lower fertile segments of the terminal spike 2-2·5 mm wide at 
\par
  the narrowest point, and 2·5-3 mm wide at the widest .................. {\b 4. prostrata}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. S. europaea} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 3 (1753) ({\i S. herbacea} (L.) L.). Plant 10-35 cm, erect or procumbent, simple to much-branched, primary branches often as long as the main stem; grass-green, sometimes becoming yellow-green, usually with red or pinkish-red colour appearing diffusely in the fertile segments. Terminal spike 10-50 mm; lower fertile segments 2·5-4·5 mm, 3-5 mm wide at the narrowest point and 3·5-6 mm wide at the widest; upper edge with an inconspicuous, narrow, scarious margin up to 0·1 mm wide, cuspidate at the apex. Flowers distinctly unequal in size. 2n = 18.{\i  Mostly in upper part of salt-marshes. N.W. Europe, probably elsewhere}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Very variable. {\b S. stricta} Dumort., {\i Bull. Soc. Bot. Belg.}{\b  7:} 334 (1868),{\b  S. patula} Duval-Jouve,{\i  Bull. Soc. Bot. Fr.}{\b  15:} 175 (1868),{\b  S. brachystachya} (G.F.W. Meyer) D. König, {\i Mitt. Fl.-Soziol. Arbeitsgem. n.s. }{\b 8: }11 (1960), pro parte, and {\b S. simonkaiana} (Soó) Soó,{\i  Acta Bot. Acad. Sci. Hung.}{\b  6:} 401 (1960) are probably variants of this species.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. S. obscura} P.W. Ball & Tutin, {\i Watsonia}{\b  4:} 204 (1959). Like {\b 1} but 10-45 cm, always erect, little-branched (without tertiary branches), primary branches not more than l as long as the main stem; rather glaucous-green becoming yellow, rarely becoming pink or red around the flowers; upper edge of fertile segments with very narrow, scarious margin up to 0·05 mm, rounded and not cuspidate at the apex; flowers unequal in size, but not distinctly so. 2n = 18.{\i  Bare sand and mud in salt-pans and channels of salt-marshes. • W. Europe}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 3. S. ramosissima} J. Woods,{\i  Bot. Gaz. (London)}{\b  3:} 29 (1851) ({\i S. appressa} Dumort.,{\i  S. prostrata }auct., non Pallas, {\i S. smithiana} Moss). Plant up to 40 cm, erect or procumbent, typically much-branched and bushy but sometimes forming pure stands of small, simple plants; dark green sometimes becoming yellowish-green, with dark purplish-red or purple first appearing round the flowers and along the upper edge of the fertile segments and sometimes eventually colouring the whole segment. Terminal spike 5-30(-40) mm; lower fertile segments 1·9-3·5 mm, 2·5-4 mm wide at the narrowest point and 3-5·3 mm wide at the widest; upper edge with a conspicuous, scarious margin 0·1-0·2 mm wide. 2n = 18.{\i  Less open mud in middle and upper parts of salt-marshes. • W. Europe and W. Mediterranean region.}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Very variable in habit and colour.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 4. S. prostrata} Pallas,{\i  Ill. Pl.} 3 (1803) ({\i S. ramosissima }auct. eur. orient., non J. Woods). Like{\b  3} but more slender; lower fertile segments of the terminal spike 2-2·5 mm wide at the narrowest point and 2·5-3 mm wide at the widest. 2n = 18.{\i  E. & E.C. Europe.} Au Bu Hu Rm Rs(W, E).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 5. S. pusilla} J. Woods,{\i  Bot. Gaz. (London)}{\b  3:} 30 (1851) ({\i S. disarticulata }Moss). Plants up to 25 cm, erect or procumbent, usually much-branched, yellowish-green becoming brownish- or pinkish-yellow. Terminal spike up to 6(-15) mm, disarticulating in fruit; fertile segments 2-4(-12), with convex sides. Cymes 1-flowered.
\par

\par
122}
\par