{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 5 Leaves elliptical, tapered towards base; upper surface of lamina with
\par
  filiform scales (woolly hairs); spores tetrahedral ........................ {\b 4. Cosentinia}
\par
5 Leaves lanceolate to deltate, truncate at base; upper surface of 
\par
  lamina glabrous; spores globose
\par
6 Lower surface of leaf glabrous or with filiform scales or glandular 
\par
  hairs ........................................................................................... {\b 1. Cheilanthes}
\par
6 Lower surface of leaf with flat, triangular scales ...................... {\b 2. Notholaena}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 1.                Cheilanthes}              Swartz
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc  By A.C. Jermyand, H.P. Fuchs (Ed. 1) revised by A.C. Jermy & A.M. Paul (Ed. 2)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Rhizome more or less erect, often branched. Leaves tufted, more or less erect; petiole rigid, scaly, at least at the base; lamina finely divided, 2-pinnate, the ultimate segments with no obvious midrib; veins free; lamina glabrous or with sparse indumentum beneath. Margin of fertile segments deflexed and modified to form a continuous or interrupted, usually membranous pseudoindusium (sometimes only seen in young growth); sori c. 0·5 mm, marginal on ends of veins; spores globose.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Most species grow in crevices of dry, siliceous rocks and walls.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Lamina with reddish, stalked glands or glandular hairs beneath
\par
2 Glandular hairs 8- to 14-celled, densely covering lamina beneath;
\par
  lamina deltate ................................................................................ {\b 5. hispanica}
\par
2 Glandular hairs 2- to 5-celled, sparse; lamina ovate-lanceolate ..........{\b 6. tinaei}
\par
1 Lamina without reddish glands or hairs beneath
\par
3 Ultimate segments ovate to orbicular
\par
4 Pseudoindusium entire; rhachis and costae ± glabrous ............. {\b 1. maderensis}
\par
4 Pseudoindusium with ciliate margin; rhachis and costae scaly
\par
5 Pseudoindusium broad, irregular with short cilia .......................... {\b 4. acrostica}
\par
5 Pseudoindusium narrow, densely long-ciliate .................................. {\b 7. persica}
\par
3 Ultimate segments linear to lanceolate
\par
6 Sori well-spaced, on rounded segment-lobes ............................ {\b 1. maderensis}
\par
6 Sori ± continuous along margin of segment
\par
7 Ultimate segments linear-oblong, crenate;
\par
   pseudoindusium interrupted ........................................................ {\b 2. guanchica}
\par
7 Ultimate segments linear, entire; pseudoindusium continuous  ....{\b 3. pulchella}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. C. maderensis} Lowe,{\i  Trans. Cambr. Philos. Soc.}{\b  6:} 528 (1838) ({\i C. fragrans} (L.) Swartz, {\i C. pteridioides} (Reichard) C. Chr.). Rhizome-scales brown. Leaves up to 18 cm, smelling of coumarin; petiole usually as long as or slightly shorter than the lamina, reddish-brown, shiny, with scattered scales; lamina 1-3 cm wide, subtriangular to linear-lanceolate, 2-pinnate for most of its length, with sessile glands beneath; lower pinnules pinnatifid with ultimate segments oblong or suborbicular, lobed. Sori well spaced; pseudoindusium narrow, entire with rounded lobes; spores (33-)36-42(-45) µm. finely papillose. 2n = 60. {\i S. Europe.} Az Co Cr Ga Gr Hs It Lu Sa Si.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. C. guanchica} C. Bolle, {\i Bonplandia}{\b  7:} 107 (1859) ({\i C. fragrans} auct. pro parte, non (L.) Swartz). Like {\b 1} but rhizome-scales reddish-brown; leaves up to 30 cm, not smelling of coumarin; petiole with scales mostly near the base; lamina up to 6 cm wide, deltate-lanceolate, eglandular, glabrous; ultimate segments of pinnules linear-oblong, lobed below, crenate above; sori more or less continuous; pseudoindusium broad, subrectangular, somewhat toothed; spores (31-)42-45(-52) µm. reticulately ridged. 2n = 120.{\i  Mediterranean region; Portugal.} Co ?Ga Gr Hs It Lu Sa.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   {\b 3. C. pulchella} Bory ex Willd.,{\i  Sp. Pl. }{\b 5}({\b 1}): 456 (1810). Like {\b 1} but rhizome bearing narrow, dark brown scales. Leaves up to 40 cm, not smelling of coumarin; petiole as long as or slightly longer than the lamina, with scattered scales towards the base; lamina up to 10 cm wide, ovate-lanceolate, glabrous, eglandular; ultimate segments linear, entire or sometimes lobed at the base, the apical segment usually longer than all acroscopic pinnules; pseudoindusium broad, continuous along sides of ultimate segments, the margin dentate to short-ciliate; spores (36-)39-42(-45) µm. minutely papillose.{\i  Spain}. ?Hs. ({\i Islas Canarias}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b 4. C. acrostica} (Balbis) Tod., {\i Gior. Sei. Nat. Econ. Palermo}{\b  1:} 215 (1866) ({\i C. fragrans} auct. pro parte, non (L.) Swartz, {\i C. odora} Swartz). Rhizome-scales reddish-brown. Leaves up to 25 cm, not smelling of coumarin; petiole usually as long as or slightly shorter than the lamina, with abundant scales throughout its length, about as long as the lamina; lamina up to 4 cm wide, ovate to lanceolate, 2-pinnate for most of its length, eglandular, with scales on the rhachis and costae; ultimate segments of pinnules suborbicular. Pseudoindusium broad, irregularly lobed, ciliate; spores (45-)48-51(-54) µm. granulose. 2n = 120.{\i  Mediterranean region; Portugal, Açores}. Al Az Bl Co Cr Ga Gr Hs It Ju Lu Sa Si.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 5. C. hispanica} Mett.,{\i  Abh. Senekenb. Naturf. Ges.}{\b  3:} 74 (1859). Like{\b  4} but leaves up to 26 cm, the petiole 2-4 times as long as the lamina, with tuft of dark scales at base; lamina up to 6 cm wide, deltate, with dense 8- to 14-celled glandular hairs beneath; scales absent; ultimate segments ovate to suborbicular, lobed; pseudoindusium narrow, with rounded lobes entire, more or less lacking a membranous margin; spores (33-)36-39(-42) µm. striate. 2n = 60. {\i S.W. Europe.} Ga Hs Lu Sa.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 6. C. tinaei} Tod.,{\i  Gior. Sci. Nat. Econ. Palermo}{\b  1:} 217 (1866) ({\i C. corsica} Reichstein & Vida). Like {\b 4} but leaves up to 30 cm, smelling of coumarin, the petiole 1-2 times as long as the lamina, with scattered scales; lamina up to 5 cm wide, ovate-deltate or lanceolate-deltate, with sparse 2- to 5-celled glandular hairs beneath; pinnules ovate-lanceolate, lobed; pseudoindusium with rounded lobes and narrow, entire membranous margin; spores (45-)48-51(-57) µm. 2n = 120. {\i W. Mediterranean region; Portugal}. Co Ga ?Gr Hs It Lu Sa Si.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 7. C. persica} (Bory) Mett. ex Kuhn,{\i  Bot. Zeit. }{\b 26:} 234 (1868) ({\i C. szovitsii} Fischer & C.A. Meyer). Rhizome covered with narrow, dark brown scales. Leaves up to 25 cm, not smelling of coumarin; petiole about as long as the lamina, with many narrow, brown scales; lamina up to 4 cm wide, oblong or linear-lanceolate, 2-pinnate for most of its length, eglandular, with scales on the rhachis and costae; ultimate segments oblong to suborbicular, lobed. Pseudoindusium narrow, with many long marginal hairs which cover the lower surface of the segment; spores (33-)36-42(-45) µm. minutely papillose. 2n = 60.{\i  S.E. Europe.} Al Bu Cr Gr It Ju Rs(K).
\par

\par
12}
\par