{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Perianth-segments not winged in fruit; anthers apiculate ................... {\b 1. salsa}
\par
1 Perianth-segments developing a conspicuous wing in fruit; 
\par
  anthers not apiculate 
\par
2 Plant caespitose, with simple, deciduous flowering stems not
\par
  more than 10 cm ............................................................................. {\b 3. cretacea}
\par
2 Plant with branched, persistent stems usually more than 10 cm
\par
3 Fruiting perianth segments unequally winged, 3 with larger wing 
\par
  than other 2 ...................................................................................... {\b 2. aphylla}
\par
3 Fruiting perianth segments equally winged ................................. {\b 4. articulata}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. A. salsa} (C.A. Meyer) Bentham ex Volkens in Engler & Prantl,{\i  Natürl. Pflanzenfam.}{\b  3}({\b 1a}): 87 (1893). Stems 5-25 cm, procumbent, woody at the base, with numerous erect, more or less simple, deciduous branches; upper segments up to 40 × 2-3 mm. Leaves 1-5 mm, subcylindrical, with deciduous apical seta. Perianth-segments not winged, becoming hard in the upper part in fruit; staminodes fimbriate.{\i  Saline soils. S.E. Russia, W. Kazakhstan.} Rs(C, E)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. A. aphylla} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 223 (1753). Stems 25-75 cm, persistent, branched, woody below; upper segments up to 20 × 1 mm. Leaves c. 1 mm, each pair forming a short, truncate cupule. Three perianth-segments winged; wing up to 4 mm, orbicular-ovate; staminodes ciliolate. {\i Saline soils. S.E. Russia, W. Kazakhstan.} Rs(E).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 3. A. cretacea} Pallas,{\i  Reise }{\b 1:} 442 (1771). Caespitose, with simple deciduous flowering stems up to 10 cm; upper segments of flowering stems c. 10 × 1 mm. Leaves c. 3 mm, triangular-ovate, often patent. Three perianth-segments with an orbicular-ovate wing and 2 without a wing or with a smaller narrower wing; staminodes fimbriate.{\i  Calcareous soils. S.E. Russia, W. Kazakhstan}. Rs(E). ({\i W.C. Asia}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 4. A. articulata} (Forskål) Moq. in DC.,{\i  Prodr.}{\b  13}({\b 2}): 212 (1849) ({\i A. hispanica} Pau,{\i  A. mucronata }(Lag.) C. Vicioso). Stems 10-30 cm, persistent, branched, woody below; upper segments up to 8 × 2 mm. Leaves 1-2 mm. Five perianth-segments winged; wing up to 4 × 7 mm, reniform-orbicular; staminodes villose. {\i Saline soils. S.E. Spain.} Hs. ({\i N. Africa, W. Asia.})
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 30.                 Haloxylon              }  Bunge
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc  By P.W. Ball.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Small shrubs with articulate stems. Leaves opposite, connate and amplexicaul, forming segments; lamina rudimentary. Inflorescence spicate, usually interrupted; flowers usually solitary. Perianth-segments 5, developing a transverse wing dorsally in fruit. Stamens usually 5, connate. Stigmas 4. Seeds horizontal.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. H. tamariscifolium} (L.) Pau,{\i  Bol. Soc. Aragon. Ci. Nat.}{\b  2:} 71 (1903) ({\i Haloxylon articulatum} (Moq.) Bunge,{\i  Hammada tamariscisolia} (L.) Iljin). Plant 10-60 cm, erect, caespitose, glaucous; segments of main branches c. 10 mm. Leaves with lamina up to 3 mm, triangular-subulate. Perianth-segments c. 1 mm, elliptical, obtuse; wing up to 3 × 4 mm, reniform-orbicular to orbicular-ovate, pinkish. {\i Dry saline soils. S.E. Spain.} Hs. ({\i N. Africa, S.W. Asia}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 31.              Nanophyton  }              Less.
\par       

\pard\f0\fs24\qc  By P.W. Ball.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Glabrous small shrub. Leaves alternate, triangular-subulate. Flowers hermaphrodite, in groups of 1-7 at the apices of the branches; bracteoles 2. Perianth-segments 5, very enlarged and inflated in fruit. Stamens 5. Stigmas 2. Seeds vertical.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. N. erinaceum} (Pallas) Bunge, {\i Mém. Acad. Sci. Pétersb.} ser. 7, {\b 4}({\b 11}): 51 (1862). Plant 5-15 cm, pulvinate, with procumbent, tortuous woody stems. Leaves 3-7 mm, semi-amplexicaul, spine-tipped. Perianth-segments up to 10 mm in fruit, pale yellowish-green, shining. Achenes c. 3 mm.{\i  Dry and saline places. S.E. Russia, W. Kazakhstan.} Rs(E). ({\i W. & C. Asia}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 32.             Petrosimonia }                Bunge
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc  By P.W. Ball.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Annual, usually pubescent herbs. Leaves alternate or opposite, cylindrical or semi-cylindrical. Inflorescence a panicle, the flowers hermaphrodite, solitary, axillary; bracteoles 2, becoming hard and enclosing the fruit. Perianth-segments 2-5. Stamens 1-5. Stigmas 2. Seeds vertical.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 All species occur in saline habitats.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Leaves all opposite; perianth-segments 5 .................................... {\b 1. brachiata}
\par
1 Middle and upper leaves alternate; perianth-segments almost always 2 or 3
\par
2 Leaves c. 1 mm in diameter or less; stamens 1-3
\par
3 Perianth-segments 3 or 4, all pubescent dorsally; 
\par
  stamens 1 or 2 .............................................................................. {\b 4. monandra}
\par
3 Perianth-segments 2 or 3, glabrous (rarely one of them pubescent
\par
  dorsally); stamens 2 or 3
\par
4 Perianth-segments and stamens 3; lower leaves up to 50 mm ....... {\b 2. triandra}
\par
4 Perianth-segments and stamens mostly 2; lower leaves
\par
  usually not more than 10 mm ...................................................... {\b 3. litwinowii}
\par
2 Leaves (at least the lower) 2-3 mm in diameter; stamens 5
\par
5 Apex of bracteoles deflexed, attenuate .................................... {\b 7. glaucescens}
\par
5 Apex of bracteoles erect, not attenuate
\par
6 Perianth-segments glabrous or shortly pubescent, becoming 
\par
  cartilaginous in fruit .............................................................. {\b 5. opppositifolia}
\par
6 Perianth-segments long-ciliate, at least at the apex, not
\par
  becoming cartilaginous in fruit .............................................. {\b 6. brachyphylla}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. P. brachiata} (Pallas) Bunge, {\i Mém. Acad. Sci. Pétersb}. ser. 7, {\b 4}({\b 11}): 59 (1862). Stems 5-40 cm, erect, branched from the base, pubescent. Leaves up to 30 × 2 mm, all opposite. Perianth-segments and stamens 5.{\i  S.E. Europe, from S.E. Greece to W. Kazakhstan.} Bu Gr Rs(W, K, E).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. P. triandra} (Pallas) Simonkai, {\i Enum. Fl. Transs.} 466 (1887) ({\i P. volvox} (Pallas) Bunge). Stems 5-35 cm, procumbent or diffuse, pubescent or glabrous. Leaves up to 50 × 1 mm, the middle and upper alternate. Panicle lax in fruit. Perianth-segments 3, glabrous; stamens 3. {\i S.E. Europe}. Rm Rs(W, K, E).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 3. P. litwinowii} Korsh.,{\i  Mém. Acad. Sci. Pétersb}. ser. 8, {\b 7}({\b 1}): 358 (1898). Stems 5-30 cm, green, erect or procumbent, glabrous or pubescent. Leaves usually not more than 10 × 1 mm, alternate. Panicle lax in fruit. Perianth-segments 2, glabrous; stamens 2.{\i  S.E. Russia, W. Kazakhstan.} Rs(E).
\par

\par
129}
\par