{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 patent; bracteoles ovate-triangular, with long, spine-like apex, longer than the flowers. Perianth-segments ovate, acuminate, usually with ovate to reniform wing. Stigmas longer than the style.{\i  Often on non-saline sands, or as a ruderal. Throughout most of Europe northwards to} 60° 30'{\i  N., but almost exclusively coastal in the north.} All except Fa Is Sb Rs(N) [He].
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 A polymorphic species, comprising many subspecies and varieties. At least three subspecies can be recognized in Europe.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Perianth-segments stiff, ± spinose, with distinct mid-vein ({\b a})..... subsp.{\b  kali}
\par
1 Perianth-segments soft, with obscure mid-vein
\par
2 Bracteoles swollen and ± connate at the base; perianth
\par
  segments not winged ........................................................... ({\b b}) subsp.{\b  tragus}
\par
2 Bracteoles not swollen, free; perianth-segments usually winged
\par
  ......................................................................................... ({\b c}) subsp.{\b  ruthenica}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp.{\b  kali} : Plant up to 60 cm, usually hispid, green. Bracteoles not swollen, free. Perianth-segments stiff, usually winged, more or less spinose, with a distinct mid-vein.{\i  Coasts of Europe, northwards to} 60° 30'{\i  N}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp.{\b  tragus }(L.) Nyman, {\i Consp}. 631 (1881) ({\i S. tragus} L.): Plant up to 100 cm, glabrous or hispid, yellowish. Bracteoles swollen and more or less connate at the base. Perianth-segments soft, not winged, not spinose, with obscure mid-vein.{\i  Coasts of S. Europe}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b c}) Subsp. {\b ruthenica} (Iljin) Soó in Soó & Jáv., {\i Magyar Nov. Kez.}{\b  2:} 786 (1951) ({\i S. ruthenica} Iljin; incl. {\i S. pestifer} A. Nelson): Plant up to 100 cm, glabrous or shortly hispid, grey-green. Bracteoles not swollen, free. Perianth-segments soft, usually winged, not spinose, with obscure mid-vein. 2n = 36. {\i Throughout the range of the species, but only casual in much of the north}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 9. S. collina} Pallas,{\i  Ill. Pl.} 34 (1803). Like{\b  8}({\b c}) but leaves semi-amplexicaul; bracts appressed, imbricate, exceeding the bracteoles; perianth-segments often connate with the bracteoles; wing small, with erose margin, or absent. {\i C. & E. Russia.} Rs(C, E).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 10. S. lanata} Pallas,{\i  Reise}{\b  2:} 736 (1773). Erect annual 10-60 cm, lanate with long and short hairs. Leaves 10-25 × 1-2 mm, semicylindrical, obtuse, semi-amplexicaul, decurrent. Bracts oblong-triangular, somewhat deflexed; bracteoles triangular-ovate, broadly membranous-margined in the lower part. Perianth 10-20 mm in diameter in fruit, glabrous in the lower part, segments triangular, with lingulate apex; wing broadly reniform, brown, with numerous fine veins. Style c. 2 mm; stigmas much shorter than the style.{\i  S.E. Russia, W. Kazakhstan.} Rs(E). ({\i C. & S.W. Asia}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 11. S. turcomanica} Litv.,{\i  Sched. Herb. Fl. Ross.}{\b  2:} 10 (1900). Like {\b 10} but glaucous, pubescent, with very short, patent hairs; bracts broadly ovate at the base, membranous-margined, narrowed to a semi-cylindrical, sulcate apex; perianth pubescent, the segments long, acute, with incurved or patent apex; stigmas at least 3 times as long as the style.{\i  S.E. Russia, W. Kazakhstan}. Rs(E). ({\i C. & S.W. Asia.})
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 12. S. crassa} Bieb.,{\i  Mém. Soc. Nat. Moscou}{\b  1:} 100 (1806). Like {\b 10} but upper parts grey- or white-pubescent with long, crispate hairs, or glabrous; perianth-segments acute; style short; stigmas 3-4 mm, but usually less than 3 times as long as the style.{\i  S.E. Russia, W. Kazakhstan.} Rs(E). ({\i S.W. Asia}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 13. S. nitraria} Pallas,{\i  Ill. Pl. }23 (1803). Erect, much-branched annual 5-40 cm; upper parts villous. Leaves 5-8 × 1-2 mm, linear, semi-cylindrical, somewhat enlarged at the base. Bracts broadly cordate, spurred, glabrous, shorter than or equalling the bracteoles; bracteoles orbicular-elliptical. Perianth 7-10 mm in diameter in fruit, glabrous, the segments triangular, acute, incurved; wing blackish-brown. Stigmas about as long as the style.{\i  S.E. Russia, W. Kazakhstan.} Rs(E). ({\i C. & S.W. Asia.})
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 14. S. affinis} C.A. Meyer,{\i  Bull. Phys.-Math. Acad.} ({\i Pétersb.}){\b  1:} 360 (1843). Erect annual up to 25(-40) cm, pubescent or subglabrous. Leaves 8-16 × 1·5-2 mm, semi-cylindrical, obtuse. Bracts elliptical or elliptic-orbicular, longer than the bracteoles; bracteoles oblong or lanceolate. Perianth 7-10 mm in diameter in fruit, the segments lanceolate, acute, glabrescent; wing reniform. Stigmas shorter than the style.{\i  S.E. Russia} ({\i Astrakhan'}), {\i W. Kazakhstan.} Rs(E).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 15. S. nodulosa} (Moq.) Iljin, {\i Acta Horti Petrop.}{\b  43}({\b 4}): 222 (1930). Shrub 10-40 cm, grey-pubescent. Leaves 2-3 × 0·5 mm, narrowly triangular, obtuse, semi-amplexicaul. Bracts resembling the leaves but shorter and broader; bracteoles reniform, shortly acuminate, shorter than the flower. Perianth c. 10 mm in diameter in fruit, the segments oblong, with triangular apex, sparsely pubescent; wing brownish. Filaments with a lanceolate or elliptic-oblong, acute appendage.{\i  Doubtfully recorded from S.E. Russia} ({\i near Astrakhan}). Rs(E). ({\i W. Caucasus}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 16. S. carpatha} P.H. Davis, Notes Roy. Bot. Gard. Edinb.21: 139 (1953). Erect grey-pubescent shrub 30-40 cm. Leaves 5-13 mm, oblong-linear, acute. Bracts narrowly oblong-elliptical; bracteoles similar, about equalling or shorter than the flower. Perianth-segments ovate-lanceolate, grey-pubescent. Filaments with lanceolate appendage c. 1·5 mm. Fruit not known. Calcareous maritime rocks. Islands of S.E. Aegean region. Cr Gr.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 17. S. melitensis} Botsch.,{\i  Nov. Syst. Pl. Vasc.} ({\i Leningrad}) {\b 13:} 95 (1976). Glabrous shrub up to 100 cm, green or somewhat glaucous. Leaves up to 14 mm, linear, terete, acute, constricted at the base with hairy pulvinus. Bracts 2-9 mm, leaf-like, longer than the bracteoles and perianth; bracteoles ovate, acute. Flowers solitary. Perianth subglobose, 5-7 mm in diameter in fruit; segments ovate, obtuse, with 5 wings up to 2·5 mm. Stigmas shorter than the style. •{\i  Maltese Islands.} Si.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 The only European representative of a group of closely related species from the southern part of the Mediterranean region from Morocco to Palestine, sometimes treated under{\i  Darniella }Maire.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 18. S. arbuscula} Pallas,{\i  Reise}{\b  1:} 488 (1771). Glabrous shrub 20-100 cm. Leaves 5-35 mm, linear to oblong-linear, much enlarged at the base, with a distinct constriction above it. Bracts orbicular-ovate, becoming very hard in fruit; bracteoles linear, attenuate at the base, longer than the flower. Perianth 8-12 mm in diameter, becoming hard in fruit; segments broadly lanceolate-oblong, incurved, pale yellow or greenish-yellow; wing brown. Style shorter than the stigmas. {\i E. Russia.} Rs(C, E). ({\i C. Asia.})
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 19. S. genistoides} Juss. ex Poiret in Lam.,{\i  Encycl. Méth. Bot. }{\b 7:} 294 (1806) ({\i S. tamariscifolia }Lag. pro parte). Glabrous, glaucous virgate shrub 30-50 cm; first- and second-year stems with numerous longitudinal ridges. Leaves up to 8 mm, fugacious, linear-filiform, mucronate, the uppermost scale-like. Bracts ovate-orbicular, acute, keeled, floccose on the upper surface. Perianth 10-15 mm in diameter in fruit, the segments elliptical, obtuse, the apex deflexed, 1-veined; wing reddish.{\i  S.E. Spain.} Hs.
\par

\par
127}
\par