{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Flowers almost orbicular. 2n = 18.{\i  Uppermost parts of salt-marshes and shores of estuaries. S. Britain, S. Ireland, N. France; probably elsewhere in W. Europe}. Br Ga Hb.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Intermediates with 1- to 3-flowered cymes, presumably of hybrid origin between{\b  5} and{\b  3}, occur sometimes when the two species grow together. Similar plants also occur in the W. Mediterranean region. The breeding system is similar to that of the other diploid species ({\b 1-4}).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Sect. DOLICHOSTACHYAE A.J. Scott. Cymes 3-flowered. Infructescence not disarticulating. Flowers subequal. Stamens usually 2, exserted. Anthers at least (0·4-)0·5 mm. Seeds 1·4-2·2 mm. Tetraploid.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b 6-8}).{\b  S. procumbens} group. Plants usually not pink or purple in fruit; uppermost primary branches curving upwards; terminal spike with (4-)6-30 fertile segments; fertile segments usually more or less cylindrical, the lateral flowers of each cyme almost as large as the central flower; flowers chasmogamous; stamens 1 or 2; anthers dehiscing after exsertion.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b S. procumbens} Sm. in Sowerby, {\i Engl. Bot.} t. 2475 (1813) must be identical with either{\b  7} or {\b 8} but information at present available does not permit of a decision.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Lower fertile segments of terminal spike with a minimum
   diameter 2-3·5 mm; plant usually becoming light brownish-
   or orange-purple ................................................................................ {\b 6. nitens}
\par
1 Lower fertile segments of terminal spike with a minimum diameter 
\par
  usually exceeding 3·5 mm; plant rarely pale red or purple
\par
2 Terminal spike with 6-16(-22) fertile segments, ± cylindrical; spikes
\par
  of the primary lateral branches cylindrical; plant dull green to
\par
  yellowish-green, often becoming bright yellow in fruit .................. {\b 7. fragilis}
\par
2 Terminal spike with 12-30 fertile segments, distinctly tapering 
\par
  towards the apex; spikes of the primary lateral branches tapering;
\par
  plant dark, dull green, becoming paler or dull yellow in fruit
\par
  .............................................................................................. {\b 8. dolichostachya}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 6. S. nitens} P.W. Ball & Tutin, {\i Watsonia}{\b  4:} 204 (1959). Erect, 5-25 cm, usually with the primary branches less than ½ as long as the main stem; green to yellowish-green, usually soon becoming light brownish- or orange-purple. Terminal spike 1-4 cm, cylindrical, with 4-9 fertile segments. Lower fertile segments 2-3·5 × 2-3·5 mm at the narrowest point and 2·3-4·0 mm wide at the widest. 2n = 36.{\i  Mud in upper part of salt-marshes. W. Europe.} Br Hb Lu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 7. S. fragilis} P.W. Ball & Tutin, {\i loc. cit.} (1959) ({\i S. stricta} auct., pro parte, non Dumort.). Erect, (10-)15-30(-40) cm, usually much-branched, primary branches usually not more than ½ as long as the main stem; green to yellowish-green, usually becoming bright yellow to brownish. Terminal spike (1·5-)2·5-8 cm, cylindrical, with 6-16(-22) fertile segments. Lower fertile segments 3-5 × 3·5-6 mm, cylindrical. 2n = 36.{\i  Often colonizing open sandy soils, but occurring in a wide range of salt-marshes. • Known certainly only from England and Ireland but probably widespread in W. & S. Europe}. Br Hb.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   {\b S. emerici} Duval-Jouve,{\i  Bull. Soc. Bot. Fr.}{\b  15:} 176 (1868), erect or prostrate and becoming pink or red, and{\b  S. stricta} subsp.{\b  decumbens} Aellen in Hegi,{\i  Ill. Fl. Mitteleur.} ed. 2, {\b 3}({\b 2}): 730 (1961), pro parte ({\i S. stricta} subsp.{\i  procumbens} sensu D. König, pro parte) are probably variants of this species.{\b  S. veneta} Pignatti & Lausi,{\i  Gior. Bot. Ital.}{\b  103:} 185 (1969), from N.E. Italy (Laguna Veneta and adjacent coasts), is somewhat taller, up to 50 cm, with primary branches up to 2/3 as long as the main stem, terminal spike cylindrical, and plant green becoming yellowish. It is similar to {\b S. lutescens} P.W. Ball & Tutin, {\i Watsonia}{\b  4:} 203 (1959), described from S. Britain. This group of taxa requires further investigation on a European basis.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 8. S. dolichostachya} Moss,{\i  New Phytol.}{\b  11:} 409 (1912) ({\i S. stricta} sensu D. König, pro max. parte, non Dumort., {\i ?S. leiosperma} K. Gram). Erect, 10-40(-45) cm, much-branched, primary branches almost as long as the main stem, straggling to fastigiate, dark green becoming yellowish and usually brown. Terminal spike (2·5-)5-12(-20) cm, tapering, with (8-)12-30 fertile segments. Lower fertile segments 3-6 × 3-6 mm, cylindrical.{\i  Mud and sand at relatively low tidal levels. • N. Europe.} Be Br Da Ga Ge Hb Ho No Rs(N) Su.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 This species is said to differ from all others in the absence of spirally thickened or striated cells in the fertile segments. Some variants of{\b  7} are, however, often almost without these cells, so the taxonomic value of this character is doubtful.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp.{\b  dolichostachya} ({\i S. pojarkovae} N. Semen.): Plant straggling to fastigiate; uppermost branches arising at an angle of c. 60-90° with the axis and curving upwards. 2n = 36. {\i Throughout the range of the species, except the Baltic region}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp.{\b  strictissima} (K. Gram) P.W. Ball,{\i  Feddes Repert.}{\b  69:} 7 (1964) ({\i S. strictissima} K. Gram). Plant erect, fastigiate; uppermost branches arising at an angle of 45° or less with the axis, straight.{\i  Baltic region and possibly parts of the North Sea coasts}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b S. oliveri} Moss,{\i  Jour. Bot.} ({\i London}) {\b 49:} 183 (1911), described from N.W. France, is possibly a dwarf variant of subsp. ({\b a}).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc   {\b 22.             Microcnemum}             Ung.-Sternb.
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc  By P.W. Ball.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Like {\i Salicornia} but flowers free, minute, with thin membranous perianth; central flower in each cyme hermaphrodite, laterals usually female. Stamen 1. Seeds with black, crustaceous, granular testa.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. M. coralloides} (Loscos & Pardo) Buen,{\i  Anal. Soc. Esp. Hist. Nat.}{\b  12:} 431 (1883) ({\i M. fastigiatum} Ung.-Sternb.). Erect, usually much-branched annual 5-10 cm, often becoming purplish. Terminal spike 1-4 cm, with up to 16 fertile segments. Fertile segments 2-3 mm, with broad membranous upper margin; flowers more or less concealed. Seeds obscurely tuberculate.{\i  Saline soils. E. & C. Spain.} Hs. ({\i S.W. Asia}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 In Europe represented only by the endemic subsp.{\b  coralloides}, with tuberculate, not papillose, seeds.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 23.                Suaeda}              Forskål ex Scop.
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc  By P.W. Ball & J.R. Akeroyd.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Annual or perennial herbs or small shrubs, glabrous or farinose. Leaves usually alternate, semi-cylindrical or flat. Flowers hermaphrodite and female, solitary or in few-flowered cymes; bracteoles 2, minute. Perianth-segments 5, fleshy, sometimes with a small tubercle, horn, or narrow transverse wing dorsally in fruit. Stamens 5. Stigmas 2 or 3(-5). Seeds vertical or horizontal.
\par

\par
123}
\par