{\rtf1\ansi \deff4\deflang1033{\fonttbl{\f4\froman\fcharset0\fprq2 Times New Roman;}}{\colortbl;\red0\green0\blue0;\red0\green0\blue255;\red0\green255\blue255;\red0\green255\blue0;\red255\green0\blue255;\red255\green0\blue0;\red255\green255\blue0;\red255\green255\blue255;\red0\green0\blue128;\red0\green128\blue128;\red0\green128\blue0;\red128\green0\blue128;\red128\green0\blue0;\red128\green128\blue0;\red128\green128\blue128;\red192\green192\blue192;}{\stylesheet{\widctlpar \f4\fs20\lang2057 \snext0 Normal;}{\*\cs10 \additive Default Paragraph Font;}}{\info{\author dddd}{\operator dddd}{\creatim\yr1998\mo11\dy11\hr16\min15}{\revtim\yr1998\mo11\dy11\hr16\min17}{\version2}{\edmins2}{\nofpages4}{\nofwords958}{\nofchars5462}{\*\company  }{\vern57431}}\widowctrl\ftnbj\aenddoc\hyphcaps0 \fet0\sectd \linex0 {\*\pnseclvl1\pnucrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl2\pnucltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl3\pndec\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl4\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl5\pndec\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl6\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl7\pnlcrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl8\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl9\pnlcrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}
\pard\plain  \f4\fs20\lang2057 {\fs24 
\par }
\pard \li200 {\fs28 1 Perianth-segments without either a membranous margin, or keel or tubercle
\par   dorsally 2 
\par 2 Upper surface of the leaves flat; seeds distinctly reticulate
\par   ........................................................................................... (}{\b\fs28 a}{\fs28 ) subsp. }{\b\fs28  maritima}{\fs28  
\par 2 Upper surface of the leaves sulcate; seeds almost smooth
\par   ................................................................................................. (}{\b\fs28 b}{\fs28 ) subsp.  }{\b\fs28 salsa}{\fs28 
\par 
\par }
\pard  {\fs28  (}{\b\fs28 a}{\fs28 ) Subsp.}{\b\fs28  maritima}{\fs28  (incl.}{\i\fs28  S. prostrata}{\fs28  Pallas): Plant up to 50 cm. Upper surface of leaves flat. Perianth-segments without a membranous margin and without a keel or dorsal tubercle. Seeds 1-1\'b75(-3) mm, with a distinctly reticulate surface. 2n = 36. }{\i\fs28 Throughout the range of the species, but many records from E.C. & E. Europe may be referable to subsp.}{\fs28  (}{\b\fs28 b}{\fs28 ).
\par  (}{\b\fs28 b}{\fs28 ) Subsp.}{\b\fs28  salsa}{\fs28  (L.) So\'f3 in So\'f3 & J\'e1v.,}{\i\fs28  Magyar Nov. Kez}{\fs28 . 785 (1951) (}{\i\fs28 S. salsa}{\fs28  (L.) Pallas): Plant 25-100 cm. Upper surface of leaves sulcate. Perianth-segments without a membranous margin and without a keel or dorsal tubercle. Seeds 1\'b73-1\'b75 mm, almost smooth. 2n = 36.}{\i\fs28  E.C. & E. Europe}{\fs28 .
\par  (}{\b\fs28 c}{\fs28 ) Subsp.}{\b\fs28  pannonica}{\fs28  (G. Beck) So\'f3 ex P.W. Ball,}{\i\fs28  Feddes Repert.}{\b\fs28  69:}{\fs28  44 (1964) (}{\i\fs28 S. pannonica }{\fs28 G. Beck): Plant up to 20 cm. Upper surface of leaves flat. Perianth-segments with a membranous margin and with a keel and small dorsal tubercle. Seeds c. 0\'b78 mm, almost smooth. \bullet }{\i\fs28  E.C. Europe}{\fs28 .
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 9. S. corniculata}{\fs28  (C.A. Meyer) Bunge, }{\i\fs28 Acta Horti Petrop.}{\b\fs28  6:}{\fs28  429 (1880). Annual up to 50 cm. Leaves 12-20 \'d7 1-1\'b75 mm, semi-cylindrical, more or less acute. Cymes dense, occurring in the axils of most leaves. Fruiting perianth with 1 or 2 segments horned dorsally, the upper perianths almost stellate. Seeds reticulate-punctate, usually horizontal.}{\i\fs28  S.E. Russia, E. Ukraine, W. Kazakhstan}{\fs28 . Rs (C, W, E).
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 10. S. splendens}{\fs28  (Pourret) Gren. & Godron,}{\i\fs28  Fl. Fr.}{\b\fs28  3:}{\fs28  30 (1855) (}{\i\fs28 S. setigera}{\fs28  (DC.) Moq.). Diffuse annual up to 50 cm. Leaves 8-20 \'d7 1-2 mm, semi-cylindrical, semi-translucent, acuminate or mucronate, usually with a fine caducous apex up to 1 mm. Cymes dense. Fruiting perianth very inflated, rugose. Seeds smooth, usually horizontal. 2n = 18, 36.}{\i\fs28  Mediterranean region, extending to C. Portugal.}{\fs28  Al Bl Ga Gr Hs It Lu Sa Tu.
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 11. S. altissima}{\fs28  (L.) Pallas,}{\i\fs28  Ill. Pl. }{\fs28 49 (1803). Erect annual up to 150 cm. Leaves 12-30 \'d7 0\'b75 mm, filiform, acute or subobtuse. Cymes lax or dense, usually shortly pedunculate, the peduncle connate with the base of the bracts. Fruiting perianth not inflated, rounded dorsally. Seeds almost smooth, vertical or horizontal.}{\i\fs28  S.E. Europe from E. Greece to W. Kazakhstan; Spain}{\fs28 . Bu Gr Hs Rs(W, K, E)
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 12. S. linifolia}{\fs28  Pallas, Ill. Pl. 43 (1803). Erect annual up to 75 cm. Leaves 12-30 \'d7 1-3 mm, linear, acute, flat. Cymes usually lax, very shortly pedunculate, the peduncle connate with the base of the bracts. Fruiting perianth-segments not inflated, with a slight tubercle dorsally. Seeds granular, vertical or horizontal. S.E. Russia, W. Kazakhstan. Rs(E). (W. Asia.)
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 13. S. eltonica}{\fs28  Iljin, }{\i\fs28 Bull. Jard. Bot. URSS}{\b\fs28  26:}{\fs28  415 (1927). Like }{\b\fs28 12}{\fs28  but plant up to 150 cm; leaves 20-40 mm; cymes dense; fruiting perianth-segments transversely keeled; seeds smooth. }{\i\fs28 S.E. Russia.}{\fs28  Rs(E).
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 14. S. heterophylla}{\fs28  (Kar. & Kir.) Bunge ex Boiss.,}{\i\fs28  Fl. Or.}{\b\fs28  4:}{\fs28  943 (1879). Erect annual up to 80 cm. Leaves 10-16 \'d7 1-1\'b75 mm, semi-cylindrical, acute. Cymes free, dense. Fruiting perianth-segments of the upper flowers with a narrow transverse wing, of the lower flowers with a transverse keel. Seeds finely punctate-reticulate, mostly horizontal.}{\i\fs28  S.E. Russia, W. Kazakhstan; E. Bulgaria.}{\fs28  Bu Rs(E).
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 15. S. kossinskyi}{\fs28  Iljin,}{\i\fs28  Bull. Jard. Bot. URSS}{\b\fs28  26:}{\fs28  115 (1927). Like }{\b\fs28 14}{\fs28  but 5-15 cm, branched at the base; leaves up to 5 mm wide, oblong to obovate, obtuse; cymes in the axils of almost all the leaves.}{\i\fs28  S.E. Russia, W. Kazakhstan}{\fs28 . Rs(E).
\par 
\par }
\pard \qc {\fs28  }{\b\fs28 24.             Bienertia}{\fs28               Bunge ex Boiss.
\par }{\fs24  By P.W. Ball.
\par 
\par }
\pard  {\fs28 Like}{\i\fs28  Suaeda}{\fs28  but the fruiting perianth with transverse wings dorsally, the wings connate and encircling the perianth.
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 1. B. cycloptera}{\fs28  Bunge ex Boiss.,}{\i\fs28  Fl. Or.}{\b\fs28  4:}{\fs28  945 (1879). Annual 10-40 cm. Leaves 10-20 mm, linear to oblong, semi-terete, fleshy. Inflorescence a narrow panicle with short branches bearing 6- to 10-flowered cymes. Fruiting perianth 5-7 mm in diameter (including wing), lenticular; apices of the segments verrucose.}{\i\fs28  Gypsaceous and saline habitats. S.E. Russia}{\fs28  (}{\i\fs28 near Volgograd}{\fs28 ), }{\i\fs28 W. Kazakhstan}{\fs28 . Rs(E). (}{\i\fs28 S.W. Asia.}{\fs28 )
\par 
\par }
\pard \qc {\fs28  }{\b\fs28 25.              Salsola }{\fs28                  L.
\par }{\fs24 By \'86P. Aellen revised by J.R. Akeroyd.
\par 
\par }
\pard  {\fs28 Annuals or dwarf shrubs; glabrous or pubescent. Leaves filiform or semi-cylindrical, alternate or opposite. Flowers hermaphrodite, with 2 conspicuous bracteoles. Perianth-segments 5 (3 outer and 2 inner), usually developing a transverse wing dorsally in fruit. Stamens 5. Stigmas 2(3). Seeds usually horizontal. (}{\i\fs28 Darniella}{\fs28  Maire.)
\par 
\par Most species are restricted to more or less saline, sandy habitats, either maritime or in arid regions inland. A large proportion is essentially Asiatic, and occurs only on the extreme S.E. margin of Europe.
\par 
\par Measurements of the perianth in fruit include the wings.
\par 
\par }
\pard \li200 {\fs28 1 Shrubs
\par 2 Anther-appendage lanceolate or elliptic-oblong, acute
\par 3 Leaves 2-3 mm; bracteoles reniform, shorter than the flower ... }{\b\fs28 15. nodulosa}{\fs28 
\par 3 Leaves 5-13 mm; bracteoles elliptical, about equalling
\par   the flower ..................................................................................... }{\b\fs28 16. carpatha}{\fs28 
\par 2 Anther-appendage short, obtuse
\par 4 Leaves constricted just above the base
\par 5 Bracteoles ovate ....................................................................... }{\b\fs28 17. melitensis}{\fs28 
\par 5 Bracteoles linear ........................................................................ }{\b\fs28 18. arbuscula}{\fs28 
\par 4 Leaves not constricted just above the base
\par 6 First- and second-year stems with numerous longitudinal ridges;
\par    leaves fugacious ..................................................................... }{\b\fs28 19. genistoides}{\fs28 
\par 6 First- and second-year stems terete or with c. 4 angles or ridges;
\par   leaves usually \'b1 persistent
\par 7 Perianth-segments obtuse, fimbriate; leaves nearly all opposite
\par   ................................................................................................ }{\b\fs28 21. oppositifolia}{\fs28 
\par 7 Perianth-segments acute, not fimbriate; leaves alternate or some opposite
\par 8 Leaves 1-3 mm in diameter (S.E. Spain) ................................... }{\b\fs28 22. papillosa}{\fs28 
\par 8 Leaves less than 1 mm in diameter (sometimes deciduous)
\par 9 Leaves 10-25 mm; plant glabrous except for tufts of hairs in
\par    the axils of the leaves (S. Spain) ................................................... }{\b\fs28 20. webbii}{\fs28 
\par 
\par 125}
\par }