{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Several species produce dimorphic seeds. The first-formed are black, shining, smooth or with a fine pattern on the testa; the later-formed are larger, light brown or olive, dull, with a distinct, coarse reticulum on the testa. The seeds referred to in this account are always the first-formed seeds.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 All the species occur in saline habitats.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Fruiting perianth-segments of the upper flowers transversely winged,
\par
  those of the lower flowers usually keeled
\par
2 Leaves linear-semicylindrical, not more than 1·5 mm in diameter; 
\par
  bracts ovate, acute, much shorter than the leaves .................. {\b 14. heterophylla}
\par
2 Leaves and bracts similar, flat, ovate to oblong,
\par
  up to 5 mm wide, obtuse ........................................................... {\b 15. kossinskyi}
\par
1 Fruiting perianth-segments not transversely winged
\par
3 Fruiting perianth with 1 or 2 segments horned dorsally,the 
\par
  upper perianths often almost stellate ......................................... {\b 9. corniculata}
\par
3 Fruiting perianth not horned (occasionally with tubercles)
\par
4 Peduncle of the cyme connate with the bract
\par
5 Small shrub; leaves 5-16 mm .................................................... {\b 5. dendroides} 
\par
5 Annual herb; leaves 12-40 mm
\par
6 Leaves c. 0·5 mm in diameter, cylindrical ................................. {\b 11. altissima}
\par
6 Leaves 1-3 mm wide, flat
\par
7 Fruiting perianth-segments with a slight tubercle dorsally;
\par
  seeds granular ............................................................................... {\b 12. linifolia}
\par
7 Fruiting perianth-segments with a transverse keel;  
\par
  seeds smooth ................................................................................. {\b 13. eltonica} 
\par
4 Peduncle of the cyme not connate with the bract 
\par
8 Seeds with a distinct fine pattern on the testa
\par
9 Small shrub; perianth inflated in fruit ...................................... {\b 4. physophora}
\par
9 Annual herb, sometimes ± woody at the base;
\par
  perianth not inflated ...................................................................... {\b 8. maritima} 
\par
8 Seeds smooth or very indistinctly patterned
\par
10 Leaves with a slender caducous apex (up to 1 mm); 
\par
   fruiting perianth rugose ............................................................ {\b 10. splendens}
\par
10 Leaves obtuse, acute or shortly acuminate, but without a caducous apex;
\par
   fruiting perianth smooth
\par
11 Perianth-segments very inflated, red in fruit ............................. {\b 7. baccifera}
\par
11 Perianth-segments not inflated in fruit, usually green
\par
12 Annual, sometimes woody at base; longest leaves usually more
   than 20 mm; stigmas 2(3)
\par
13 Leaves acute to mucronate; seeds completely smooth ................. {\b 6. confusa}
\par
13 Leaves obtuse or subacute; seeds at least faintly reticulate ........{\b 8. maritima}
\par
12 Small shrub; longest leaves usually less than 18 mm; stigmas 3
\par
14 Stigmas 0·2-0·4 mm, united at base, flat, or lobed, forming complex,
\par
   peltate or capitate structure .................................................................. {\b 1. vera}
\par
14 Stigmas 0·5-1·0 mm, free from base, or almost so, undivided,
\par
   subulate or filiform
\par
15 Young axes with dense, appressed hairs; leaves obtuse ........ {\b 2. vermiculata}
\par
15 All axes glabrous; leaves distinctly apiculate ............................. {\b 3. pelagica}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. S. vera} J.F. Gmelin in L.,{\i  Syst. Nat.} ed. 13,{\b  2}({\b 1}): 503 (1791) ({\i S. fruticosa} auct.). Small shrub up to 120 cm, glabrous. Leaves 5-18 × (0·8-)1-2·5 mm, semi-cylindrical, usually shortly apiculate, sessile, glaucous. Cymes dense, shorter than the bracts. Stigmas 0·2-0·4 mm, united at the base, flat, lobed, forming a complex peltate or capitate structure. Fruiting perianth not inflated, usually green. Seeds smooth, usually vertical. 2n = 18, 36.{\i  S. & W. Europe northwards to c.} 53°{\i  N. in England.} Al Bl Br Co Cr Ga Gr Hs It Ju Lu Sa Si.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. S. vermiculata} Forskål ex J.F. Gmelin in L., {\i Syst. Nat.} 503 (1791) ({\i S. pruinosa} Lange,{\i  S. fruticosa} var.{\i  brevifolia} Moq., pro parte, {\i S. vera} auct. lusit.). Like {\b 1} but the young stems with dense, appressed hairs; leaves 2-5(-6) × 0·5-1·0 mm, obtuse, more or less cylindrical; middle and upper bracts not exceeding the cymes; stigmas 0·8-1·0 mm, filiform or subulate.{\i  Spain; one station in Sicilia}. Hs Si.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 3. S. pelagica} Bartolo, Brullo & Pavone, {\i Willdenowia}{\b  16:} 391 (1987). Compact shrub up to 100 cm, with divaricate branches forming an intricate mass. Leaves 3-6 × 1·5-2·5 mm, semi-cylindrical, arcuate, sessile, apiculate. Flowers c. 2 mm, sessile, shorter than the ovate bract, forming spikes. Fruiting perianth not inflated, green. Seeds smooth, black, mostly horizontal.{\i  Marl cliffs. • Sicilia} ({\i Lampedusa}). Si.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 The species is very close to and probably not specifically distinct from {\i S. palaestina }Eig & Zohary, described from Palestine.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 4. S. physophora} Pallas,{\i }{\i  Ill. Pl.} 51 (1803). Small shrub up to 120 cm. Leaves 20-40 × 1-2 mm, filiform, obtuse or subacute. Cymes very lax. Fruiting perianth spongy-inflated, reddish. Seeds punctate, mostly horizontal.{\i  S.E. Russia, W. Kazakhstan}. Rs(E). ({\i C. Asia.})
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 5. S. dendroides} (C.A. Meyer) Moq., {\i Chenop. Monogr. Enum. }126 (1840). Small shrub up to 60 cm. Leaves 5-16 × 1-2 mm, semicylindrical, obtuse, attenuate at the base. Cymes dense; peduncle connate with the base of the bract. Fruiting perianth inflated, green. Seeds more or less smooth, mostly horizontal. {\i S.E. Russia, W. Kazakhstan.} Rs(E). ({\i Caspian region}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 6. S. confusa} Iljin, {\i Acta Horti Petrop.}{\b  26:} 284 (1930). Annual up to 50 cm, often woody at the base. Leaves 10-25 × c. 1 mm, semi-cylindrical, acute, acuminate or mucronate. Cymes dense. Fruiting perianth not inflated, green. Seeds smooth, mostly horizontal.{\i  S.E. Russia, S. Ukraine.} Rs(W, K, E).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 7. S. baccifera} Pallas,{\i  Ill. Pl.} 48 (1803). Annual up to 50 cm, often woody at the base. Leaves 12-25 × 0·6-1 mm, semi-cylindrical, mostly obtuse. Cymes dense. Fruiting perianth much enlarged, baccate, red. Seeds smooth, mostly horizontal.{\i  S. Russia; one locality in E. Ukraine}. Rs(W, E).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 8. S. maritima} (L.) Dumort., {\i Fl. Belg.} 22 (1827) ({\i S. cavanillesiana} (Láz.-Ibiza) Coutinho). Annual up to 50(-100) cm, of very variable habit and colour. Leaves 10-50 × c. 1 mm, semi-cylindrical, acute or subobtuse. Cymes dense. Fruiting perianth not inflated, green or red. Seeds finely reticulate, usually horizontal. {\i Throughout most of Europe except the north-east and extreme north}. All except Az ?Cr Fa He Is Rs(N) Sb.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Very variable in habit, leaf-shape and colour. Very little of the variation is correlated with distribution. The following subspecies appear to be the most distinct.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Perianth-segments with a membranous margin, with a keel
\par
  and small tubercle dorsally ............................................ ({\b c}) subsp.{\b  pannonica}
\par

\par
124}
\par