{\rtf1\ansi \deff4\deflang1033{\fonttbl{\f4\froman\fcharset0\fprq2 Times New Roman;}}{\colortbl;\red0\green0\blue0;\red0\green0\blue255;\red0\green255\blue255;\red0\green255\blue0;\red255\green0\blue255;\red255\green0\blue0;\red255\green255\blue0;\red255\green255\blue255;\red0\green0\blue128;\red0\green128\blue128;\red0\green128\blue0;\red128\green0\blue128;\red128\green0\blue0;\red128\green128\blue0;\red128\green128\blue128;\red192\green192\blue192;}{\stylesheet{\widctlpar \f4\fs20\lang2057 \snext0 Normal;}{\*\cs10 \additive Default Paragraph Font;}}{\info{\author dddd}{\operator dddd}{\creatim\yr1998\mo11\dy5\hr12\min16}{\revtim\yr1998\mo11\dy5\hr12\min17}{\version2}{\edmins1}{\nofpages4}{\nofwords923}{\nofchars5262}{\*\company  }{\vern57431}}\widowctrl\ftnbj\aenddoc\hyphcaps0 \fet0\sectd \linex0 {\*\pnseclvl1\pnucrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl2\pnucltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl3\pndec\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl4\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl5\pndec\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl6\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl7\pnlcrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl8\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl9\pnlcrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}
\pard\plain  \f4\fs20\lang2057 {\fs28 confused, since many species and genera have been described from cultivated plants in European gardens without knowledge of the precise origin of the material. Furthermore, these succulent plants make poor herbarium specimens and type specimens have not always been preserved or have not survived. In addition to the genera described below, }{\b\fs28 Galenia secunda}{\fs28  Sonder in Harvey & Sonder,}{\i\fs28  Fl. Cap.}{\b\fs28  2:}{\fs28  474 (1862), from South Africa, a procumbent perennial with appressed-hairy stems, ovate-spathulate leaves and 5-merous, yellowish flowers, is becoming naturalized in S.W. Spain. }{\b\fs28 Ruschia caroli}{\fs28  (L. Bolus) Schwantes,}{\i\fs28  Zeitschr. Sukkulentenk.}{\b\fs28  3:}{\fs28  20 (1927), a perennial with linear, more or less triquetrous leaves, and flowers 1-5 together, 1-3 cm in diameter and with purple petals, is more or less established on walls in S.W. England (Isles of Scilly) and S.W. Portugal (Algarve).
\par 
\par Literature: G. Schwantes,}{\i\fs28  Flowering Stones and Mid-day Flowers.}{\fs28  London, 1957. H. Herre, }{\i\fs28 The Genera of the Mesembryanthemaceae.}{\fs28  Cape Town, 1971. C.D. Preston & P.D. Sell, }{\i\fs28 Watsonia}{\b\fs28  17:}{\fs28  217-245 (1989). J.R. Akeroyd & C.D. Preston,}{\i\fs28  Bot. Jour. Linn. Soc.}{\b\fs28  103:}{\fs28  197-200 (1990).
\par 
\par }
\pard \li200\ {\fs28 1 Petals absent; ovary superior .......................................................... }{\b\fs28 1. Aizoon}{\fs28 
\par 1 Petals present; ovary inferior or semi-inferior
\par 2 Stigmas 8-20; fruit fleshy; seeds embedded in mucilage ........ }{\b\fs28 2. Carpobrotus}{\fs28 
\par 2 Stigmas 4 or 5; fruit a woody capsule; seeds not embedded in mucilage
\par 3 At least the lower leaves petiolate 
\par 4 Leaves cordate at base, finely papillose ......................................... }{\b\fs28 5. Aptenia}{\fs28 
\par 4 Leaves not cordate at base, covered with hyaline vesicles
\par   .................................................................................... }{\b\fs28 3. Mesembryanthemum}{\fs28 
\par 3 All leaves sessile
\par 5 Annual; flowers subsessile ........................................ }{\b\fs28 3. Mesembryanthemum}{\fs28 
\par 5 Perennial; flowers distinctly pedunculate
\par 6 Leaves in groups of 3 or more ................................................... }{\b\fs28 6. Disphyma}{\fs28 
\par 6 Leaves in pairs
\par 7 Stems hirsute or hispid; leaves papillose-tuberculate ........ }{\b\fs28 4. Drosanthemum}{\fs28 
\par 7 Stems and leaves glabrous
\par 8 Leaves obscurely 3-angled; petals longer than sepals ........... }{\b\fs28 7. Lampranthus}{\fs28 
\par 8 Leaves acutely 3-angled; petals shorter than sepals ....................... }{\b\fs28 8. Erepsia}{\fs28 
\par 
\par }
\pard \qc\ {\fs28  }{\b\fs28 1.           Aizoon   }{\fs28           L.
\par }{\fs24  By  †T.G. Tutin.
\par 
\par }
\pard  {\fs28 Annual. Leaves usually alternate. Flowers subsessile. Petals absent. Stamens c. 20, connate in 5 bundles. Ovary superior; stigmas 5. Capsule opening by 5 valves at the apex; seeds numerous.
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 1. A. hispanicum}{\fs28  L., }{\i\fs28 Sp. Pl.}{\fs28  488 (1753). Densely papillose annual, 5-15 cm. Leaves oblong-lanceolate, obtuse. Flowers solitary, usually in the dichotomies of the stem. Perianth-tube shortly obconical to hemispherical; lobes lanceolate, acute, yellowish above.}{\i\fs28  S. & E. Spain; Islas Baleares; S.W. Italy; Kriti.}{\fs28  Bl Cr Hs It.
\par 
\par Sesuvium portulacastrum L.,}{\i\fs28  Syst. Nat.}{\fs28  ed. 10,}{\b\fs28  2:}{\fs28  1058 (1759), from Tropical Africa and America, similar to }{\b\fs28 1}{\fs28  but with opposite, glabrous leaves and a circumscissile capsule, was formerly naturalized on maritime sands near Lisboa, but has not been seen recently.
\par 
\par }
\pard \qc\ {\fs28  }{\b\fs28 2.                Carpobrotus }{\fs28              N.E. Br.}{\fs24  
\par By  †T.G. Tutin (Ed.1) revised by J.R. Akeroyd &  C.D. Preston (Ed.2)
\par 
\par }
\pard  {\fs28 Procumbent, woody perennials forming large mats. Leaves opposite, 3-angled, fleshy. Flowers solitary, pedunculate. Petals and stamens numerous. Stigmas 8-20. Ovary inferior; fruit fleshy, indehiscent. Seeds embedded in mucilage.
\par 
\par }
\pard \li200\ {\fs28 Flowers usually more than 5 cm in diameter; petals purple or
\par      yellow at the base ........................................................................... }{\b\fs28 1. edulis}{\fs28 
\par Flowers usually 3-5 cm in diameter; petals white at the base ....}{\b\fs28 2. glaucescens}{\fs28 
\par 
\par }
\pard  {\fs28    }{\b\fs28 1. C. edulis}{\fs28  (L.) N.E. Br. in E.P. Phillips,}{\i\fs28  Gen. S. Afr. Fl. Pl.}{\fs28  249 (1926) (}{\i\fs28 Mesembryanthemum}{\fs28  edule L.). Stems up to several metres. Leaves not glaucous, not broadening above the middle, tapering gradually to the acute apex; dorsal angle serrulate. Flowers 4-9 cm in diameter; petals yellow, pinkish-purple (var.}{\i\fs28  rubescens }{\fs28 Druce,}{\i\fs28  C. acinaciformis}{\fs28  auct. eur., non (L.) L. Bolus,}{\i\fs28  Mesembryanthemum acinaciforme}{\fs28  auct. eur., non L.) or purple with a yellow base (var. }{\i\fs28 chrysophthalmus}{\fs28  C.D. Preston & P.D. Sell); anthers yellow, the filaments yellow or brownish. 2n = 18.}{\i\fs28  Cultivated for ornament, and naturalized on coastal cliffs and sands in S. & W. Europe, northwards to N. Wales}{\fs28 . [Al Az Bl Br Co Ga Gr Hb Hs It Lu Si.] (}{\i\fs28 South Africa}{\fs28 .)
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 2. C. glaucescens}{\fs28  (Haw.) Schwantes, }{\i\fs28 Gartenfl.}{\b\fs28  77:}{\fs28  69 (1928). Like }{\b\fs28 1}{\fs28  but smaller, somewhat glaucous; flowers 3-5(-6) cm in diameter; petals purple with white base; anthers yellow; filaments white. 2n = 18.}{\i\fs28  Cultivated for ornament, and naturalized on coastal cliffs and rocks in the Channel Islands and locally in Britain}{\fs28 . [Br Ga.] (}{\i\fs28 Australia}{\fs28 .)
\par 
\par C. aequilaterus (Haw.) N.E. Br., }{\i\fs28 Jour. Bot.}{\fs28  (}{\i\fs28 London}{\fs28 )}{\b\fs28  66:}{\fs28  324 (1928) (}{\i\fs28 C. chilensis}{\fs28  (Molina) N.E. Br.,}{\i\fs28  Mesembryanthemum aequilaterus}{\fs28  Haw., }{\i\fs28 M. chilense}{\fs28  Molina), from South America, is like }{\b\fs28 2}{\fs28  but more slender with more acute leaves and petals without a white base. It is reported to be naturalized in Spain and Islas Baleares.
\par 
\par }
\pard \qc\ {\fs28  }{\b\fs28 3.           Mesembryanthemum }{\fs28              L.
\par }{\fs24  By  †T.G. Tutin.
\par 
\par }
\pard  {\fs28 Herbs. Leaves fleshy, flat or subterete, alternate or opposite. Flowers solitary or in cymes. Petals and stamens numerous. Stigmas 5. Ovary inferior; capsule with 5 valves, winged on the angles. (}{\i\fs28 Cryophytum}{\fs28  N.E. Br.,}{\i\fs28  Gasoul}{\fs28  Adanson.)
\par 
\par }
\pard \li200\ {\fs28  Leaves narrowly oblong, subterete ............................................. }{\b\fs28 1. nodiflorum}{\fs28 
\par Leaves spathulate to broadly ovate, flat ................................... }{\b\fs28 2. crystallinum}{\fs28 
\par 
\par }
\pard  {\fs28    }{\b\fs28 1. M. nodiflorum}{\fs28  L., }{\i\fs28 Sp. Pl.}{\fs28  480 (1753) (}{\i\fs28 Gasoul nodiflorum}{\fs28  (L.) Rothm.). More or less procumbent annual, 3-20 cm. Leaves narrowly oblong, subterete, obtuse, glaucous and slightly crystalline-papillose. Flowers terminal and axillary, solitary, subsessile. Petals shorter than the sepals, yellowish or white.}{\b\fs28  Coastal sands and salt-marshes. Mediterranean region.}{\fs28  Bl Co Cr Ga Gr Hs It Ju Sa Si [Az Lu].
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 2. M. crystallinum}{\fs28  L.,}{\i\fs28  Sp. Pl.}{\fs28  480 (1753) (}{\i\fs28 Cryophytum crystallinum}{\fs28  (L.) N.E. Br.). Like }{\b\fs28 1}{\fs28  but the whole plant densely crystalline-papillose; leaves spathulate to broadly ovate, flat; petals longer than the sepals. 2n = 18.}{\i\fs28  Coastal sands and salt-marshes. W. & C. Mediterranean region.}{\fs28  Bl Co *Cr Ga *Gr Hs It Ju Sa Si [Az Lu].
\par 
\par 135}
\par }