{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 3.                Mirabilis }                  L.
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc  By D.A. Webb.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Perennial herbs with opposite leaves. Flowers in axillary cymes, each flower surrounded by a tubular or narrowly campanulate, calyx-like involucre of 5 bracts. Perianth infundibuliform, with a long tube, contracted above the ovary, and a spreading, plicate, slightly 5-lobed limb. Stamens 5. Anthocarp coriaceous.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. M. jalapa} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 177 (1753). Plant glabrous or slightly pubescent. Stems 50-100 cm, erect. Leaves ovate, acuminate. Flowers in crowded terminal cymes, opening in the afternoon. Perianth red, yellow, white, or parti-coloured; limb e. 25 mm in diameter; tube 25-35 mm. {\i Cultivated for ornament, and locally naturalized in S. Europe.} [Az Bl Bu Ga Gr Hs It.] ({\i Tropical America}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Plants with scented flowers and the anthocarp more strongly ridged and verrucose than usual are sometimes distinguished as{\b  M. odorata} L., {\i Cent. Pl.}{\b  1:} 7 (1755) ({\i M. dichotoma} L.), but are probably best regarded as a variety of {\b 1. M. longiflora} L., {\i Kungl. Svenska Vet.-Akad. Handl.}{\b  1755:} 176 (1755), from Mexico, like {\b 1} but glandular-pubescent and viscid, with a very slender perianth tube 60-100 mm and perianth-limb white to pink or lilac, is also cultivated for ornament and may occasionally be naturalized.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 4.              Oxybaphus }         L'Hér .ex Willd.
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc  By D.A. Webb.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Like{\i  Mirabilis} but with involucre subtending several flowers and strongly accrescent, becoming membranous in fruit; stamens exserted, sometimes less than 5.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. O. nyctagineus} (Michx) Sweet,{\i  Hort. Brit.} 334 (1826) ({\i Mirabilis nyctaginea }(Michx) MacMillan, {\i M. oxybaphus} Bordzil.). Stems erect, angular, dichotomously branched. Leaves 5-10 cm, broadly ovate, petiolate. Flowers in axillary and terminal cymes. Peduncles and pedicels hairy. Involucre up to 2 cm in diameter in fruit, very broadly conical, 5-lobed, membranous, with conspicuous veins, subtending 3-5 flowers. Perianth c. 12 × 8 mm, campanulate, red. Stamens 3-5, exserted. Anthocarp ribbed, hairy. 2n = 58.{\i  Established as a weed and ruderal in parts of C. & E. Europe}. [Cz Hu Rm Rs(C, W).] ({\i North America.})
\par

\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 51.     PHYTOLACCACEAE}
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc  Edit. D.A. Webb.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Herbs, shrubs or trees with alternate, entire leaves. Flowers in racemes. Perianth-segments 5, free, persistent. Stamens hypogynous. Carpels united at least at the base (rarely free), each containing a single ovule.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 1.             Phytolacca }                L.
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc  By D.A. Webb &  J.R. Akeroyd.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Racemes usually opposite the leaves. Perianth-segments small, between sepaloid and petaloid in colour and texture. Stamens 10 or more; carpels 10 or fewer. Fruit a berry or cluster of drupelets.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Literature: H. Walter in Engler,{\i  Pflanzenreich}{\b  39} ({\b IV. 83}): 36-63 (1909).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Small tree; dioecious; stamens c. 25 ................................................. {\b 3. dioica}
\par
1 Herb, sometimes woody at the base; flowers hermaphrodite;
\par
  stamens 8 or 10
\par
2 Stamens 10; carpels 10, united ................................................... {\b 1. americana}
\par
2 Stamens 8; carpels 8, free ............................................................ {\b 2. esculenta}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. P. americana} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 441 (1753) ({\i P. decandra} L.).Glabrous, perennial herb, somewhat woody at the base. Stems 1-3 m, subdichotomously branched, often red, with decurrent ridges from the leaf-bases. Leaves 12-25 × 5-10 cm, ovate-lanceolate, petiolate. Racemes c. 10 cm, more or less erect, drooping in fruit. Flowers hermaphrodite. Perianth-segments 2·5 mm, broadly ovate, greenish-white, turning reddish in fruit. Stamens 10. Carpels 10, united except for the styles. Fruit 10 mm in diameter, depressed-globose, purplish-black. 2n = 36. {\i Waste places. Cultivated for ornament and for dye from the berries; widely naturalized in S. Europe, and locally in C. & W. Europe.} [Al Au Az Bl Bu Co Cr Cz Ga Ge Gr He Ho Hs Hu It Ju Lu Rm Rs(W, K) Sa Si Tu.] ({\i United States.})
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. P. esculenta} Van Houtte,{\i  Fl. Serres Jard. Eur.}{\b  4:} 398 (1848). Like {\b 1} but not more than 2 m; leaves ovate-elliptical to suborbicular; racemes erect in fruit; stamens 8; carpels 8, free. {\i Cultivated for ornament and as a vegetable; naturalized in the Netherlands, and locally elsewhere.} [?Br Cz ?Da Ho Rm.] ({\i E. Asia}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 3. P. dioica} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} ed. 2, 632 (1762). Dioecious small tree with stout branches. Leaves 6-12 × 2·5-6 cm, evergreen, ovate to lanceolate, petiolate, glabrous. Racemes drooping. Perianth-segments 3·5 mm, oblong, green spotted with white. Stamens c. 25, exceeding the perianth. Carpels 7-10, united only in the lower part. Fruit subglobose, purplish-black.{\i  Planted for ornament and shade in the Mediterranean region, and locally naturalized.} [Ga Gr Hs Si.] ({\i Temperate and subtropical South America}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 52.       AIZOACEAE}
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc  Edit. D.A. Webb.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Herbs or small shrubs. Leaves usually opposite and fleshy. Calyx tubular or turbinate, often with fleshy lobes. Petals and stamens usually numerous. Ovary usually inferior or semi-inferior. Fruit woody and opening on moistening, or fleshy and indehiscent.  Most of the genera that occur in Europe originate from South Africa. They are cultivated for ornament, and many have become naturalized in milder, more or less frost-free, coastal regions of S. and W. Europe. The taxonomy and nomenclature of this family is
\par

\par
134}
\par