{\rtf1\ansi \deff4\deflang1033{\fonttbl{\f1\froman\fcharset2\fprq2 Symbol;}{\f4\froman\fcharset0\fprq2 Times New Roman;}}{\colortbl;\red0\green0\blue0;\red0\green0\blue255;\red0\green255\blue255;\red0\green255\blue0;\red255\green0\blue255;\red255\green0\blue0;\red255\green255\blue0;\red255\green255\blue255;\red0\green0\blue128;\red0\green128\blue128;\red0\green128\blue0;\red128\green0\blue128;\red128\green0\blue0;\red128\green128\blue0;\red128\green128\blue128;\red192\green192\blue192;}{\stylesheet{\widctlpar \f4\fs20\lang2057 \snext0 Normal;}{\*\cs10 \additive Default Paragraph Font;}}{\info{\author dddd}{\operator dddd}{\creatim\yr1998\mo10\dy28\hr15\min8}{\revtim\yr1998\mo10\dy28\hr15\min9}{\version2}{\edmins1}{\nofpages4}{\nofwords953}{\nofchars5437}{\*\company  }{\vern57431}}\widowctrl\ftnbj\aenddoc\hyphcaps0 \fet0\sectd \linex0 {\*\pnseclvl1\pnucrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl2\pnucltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl3\pndec\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl4\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl5\pndec\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl6\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl7\pnlcrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl8\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl9\pnlcrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}
\pard\plain \qc \f4\fs20\lang2057 {\fs28  }{\b\fs28 2.            Notholaena}{\fs28               R.Br.
\par }{\fs24  By A.C. Jermy & A.M. Paul.
\par 
\par }
\pard  {\fs28 Rhizome short-creeping and densely scaly. Leaves crowded, pinnate-pinnatisect to 2-pinnate, the ultimate segments with well defined midribs; veins free; lamina densely covered beneath with scales or hairs; petiole rigid and scaly. Margin of fertile segments slightly deflexed with a narrow, membranous edge, forming a rudimentary pseudoindusium; sori not discrete, the sporangia submarginal, spreading inwards along veins; spores globose.
\par 
\par   }{\b\fs28 1. N. marantae}{\fs28  (L.) Desv.,}{\i\fs28  Jour. Bot. Appl.}{\b\fs28  1:}{\fs28  92 (1813) (}{\i\fs28 Cheilanthes marantae}{\fs28  (L.) Domin,}{\i\fs28  Paraceterach marantae}{\fs28  (L.) R.M. Tryon jun.). Rhizome densely covered with light brown scales. Leaves 10-35 cm, arising in groups, erect; petiole dark reddish-brown, dull, with scattered linear-filiform scales; lamina 2-5 cm wide, linear-lanceolate, pinnate-pinnatisect or, more rarely, 2-pinnate, glabrous above, densely clothed with light brown or colourless, attenuate-triangular scales beneath. Spores c. 48 }{\fs28 {\field{\*\fldinst SYMBOL 109 \\f "Symbol" \\s 14}{\fldrslt\f1\fs28}}}{\fs28 m, spherical, lophoreticulate. 2n = 58.}{\i\fs28  S. Europe, extending northwards to S. Czechoslovakia}{\fs28 . Al Au Bu Co Cz Ga Gr He Hs Hu It Ju Rm Rs(K).
\par 
\par }
\pard \qc {\fs28  }{\b\fs28 3.                Pellaea}{\fs28                   Link
\par }{\fs24  By  †D.H. Valentine (Ed. 1) revised by J.R. Akeroyd and A.M. Paul (Ed. 2)
\par 
\par }
\pard  {\fs28 Rhizome short. Leaves ovate-lanceolate, 2- or 3-pinnate, glabrous, coriaceous; petiole blackish-brown, longer than the lamina. Sori in contact laterally but not confluent, forming an almost continuous marginal line, protected by a continuous pseudoindusium; spores tetrahedral or globose.
\par  Leaves 2-pinnate; pinnules stalked, less than twice as long as wide
\par   .................................................................................................. }{\b\fs28 1. calomelanos}{\fs28 
\par Leaves 2- or 3-pinnate; pinnules sessile or subsessile, 
\par  at least twice as long as wide .............................................................. }{\b\fs28 2. viridis}{\fs28 
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 1. P. calomelanos}{\fs28  (Swartz) Link, }{\i\fs28 Fil. Sp.}{\fs28  61 (1841). Leaves 10-25 cm; pinnules stalked, shallowly cordate, triangular, 3- or 5-angled, shaped like the leaf of}{\i\fs28  Hedera helix. Siliceous rocks. A\'e7ores; N.E. Spain}{\fs28  (}{\i\fs28 Prov. Gerona}{\fs28 ). *Az Hs. (}{\i\fs28 S. & E. Africa, Asia}{\fs28 .)
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 2. P. viridis}{\fs28  (Forsk\'e5l) Prantl,}{\i\fs28  Bot. Jahrb.}{\b\fs28  3:}{\fs28  420 (1882). Leaves 15-60 cm, 2- or 3-pinnate; pinnules sessile or subsessile, lanceolate to ovate, cuneate to somewhat truncate at the base.}{\i\fs28  Naturalized in A\'e7ores.}{\fs28  [Az.] (}{\i\fs28 Old World Tropics}{\fs28 .)
\par 
\par }
\pard \qc {\fs28  }{\b\fs28 4.               Cosentinia}{\fs28                Tod. 
\par }{\fs24  By A.C. Jermy & A.M. Paul.
\par 
\par }
\pard  {\fs28 Rhizome short-creeping to erect, densely scaly. Leaves tufted, lanuginose above, lamina 2-pinnate, the ultimate segments with no obvious midrib; veins free; lamina densely covered beneath, more sparsely above, with a woolly indumentum of white to brown multicellular hairs; petiole rigid, scaly at base. Margin of fertile segments usually deflexed, but not membranous or modified; sori not discrete, the sporangia mostly submarginal, spreading inwards along veins; spores tetrahedral.
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 1. C. vellea}{\fs28  (Aiton) Tod., }{\i\fs28 Gior. Sci. Nat. Econ. Palermo }{\b\fs28 1:}{\fs28  220 (1866) (}{\i\fs28 Notholaena vellea}{\fs28  (Aiton) Desv.,}{\i\fs28  N. lanuginosa}{\fs28  (Desf.) Desv. ex Poiret, }{\i\fs28 Cheilanthes vellea}{\fs28  (Aiton) F. Mueller,}{\i\fs28  C. catanensis}{\fs28  (Cosent.) H.P. Fuchs). Rhizome short; apex covered with long, narrow, pale brown scales. Leaves 8-35 cm, suberect or spreading, forming a crown; petiole usually very short (up to 3 cm), yellowish-brown; lamina 2-4 cm wide, linear-lanceolate, lower pinnae widely spaced and greatly reduced; pinnules crenately lobed, oblong or suborbicular; indumentum may be lost from the upper surface as the frond ages. Spores c. 62 \'b5m. finely reticulate.}{\i\fs28  Mediterranean region; Portugal.}{\fs28  Bl Co Cr Ga Gr Hs It Lu Sa Si.
\par 
\par }
\pard \qc {\fs28  }{\b\fs28 5.               Anogramma}{\fs28                 Link 
\par   }{\fs24  By  †T.G. Tutin.
\par 
\par }
\pard  {\fs28 Sporophyte annual; gametophyte said to be perennial. Stock very short; scales few. Leaves somewhat dimorphic, 2- or 3-pinnate, the margins flat; veins free. Sori spread along the veins; indusium absent; spores tetrahedral.
\par 
\par   }{\b\fs28 1. A. leptophylla}{\fs28  (L.) Link,}{\i\fs28  Fil. Sp.}{\fs28  137 (1841) (}{\i\fs28 Gymnogramma leptophylla}{\fs28  (L.) Desv., }{\i\fs28 Grammitis leptophylla}{\fs28  (L.) Swartz). Stock with a few scales when young. Leaves slightly hairy when young, soon becoming glabrous; outer leaves sterile, much shorter than the fertile leaves and with thin, obovate-cuneate pinnules, lobed or dentate at the apex; fertile leaves 3-20 cm, with narrowly obovate-cuneate pinnules. Sori appearing confluent when mature. 2n = 52. }{\i\fs28 Damp shady places. S. & W. Europe, northwards to the Channel Islands.}{\fs28  Az Bl Co Cr Ga Gr He Hs It Ju Lu Rs(K) Sa Si.
\par 
\par }
\pard \qc {\fs28  }{\b\fs28 6.                 Adiantum}{\fs28                     L.
\par }{\fs24  By A. Lawalrée (Ed. 1) revised by J.R. Akeroyd & A.M. Paul (Ed. 2)
\par 
\par }
\pard  {\fs28 Rhizome short-creeping, with narrow, brown scales. Petiole usually with scales at the base only; lamina wide, pinnately compound; veins free. Sori in groups of 2-10 on the deflexed margins of the lower side of the pinnules (pseudoindusia), along and between the parallel veins; spores tetrahedral.
\par 
\par }
\pard \li200 {\fs28 1 Leaves pedately branched, subcoriaceous, hairy ...................... }{\b\fs28 3. hispidulum}{\fs28 
\par 1 Leaves flabellately branched, thin, glabrous
\par 2 Veins of sterile segments ending in teeth; 
\par   pseudoindusium \'b1 oblong, between sinuses ...................... }{\b\fs28 1. capillus-veneris}{\fs28 
\par 2 Veins of sterile segments ending in sinuses; 
\par   pseudoindusium reniform, around a sinus .................................. }{\b\fs28 2. raddianum}{\fs28 
\par 
\par }
\pard  {\fs28    }{\b\fs28 1. A. capillus-veneris}{\fs28  L., }{\i\fs28 Sp. Pl.}{\fs28  1096 (1753). Leaves 10-60 cm, 2- or 3-pinnate, flabellately branched, ovate to ovate-lanceolate; petiole up to 25 cm, black and shining; lamina bright green, of thin, delicate texture, glabrous. Pinnules (0\'b75-)1-3 cm wide, cuneate, flabellate, on fine capillary stalks, obtusely lobed, variable in depth of lobing; veins of sterile segments ending in teeth. Pseudoindusia more or less oblong, between sinuses. 2n = 60.}{\i\fs28  Damp rocks, often on calcareous tufa. W. & S. Europe}{\fs28 . Al Az Bl Br Bu Co Cr Ga Gr Hb He Hs It Ju Lu Rs(K) Sa Si Tu [Be Hu].
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 2. A. raddianum}{\fs28  C. Presl, }{\i\fs28 Tent. Pteridogr.}{\fs28  158 (1836) (}{\i\fs28 A. cuneatum}{\fs28  Langsd. & Fischer). Like }{\b\fs28 1}{\fs28  but the leaves 3- or 4-pinnate; pinnules 0\'b75-1 cm wide, usually less deeply lobed; veins of sterile segments ending in sinuses; pseudoindusia reniform, around sinus.}{\i\fs28  Cultivated for ornament, and sometimes naturalized in milder regions}{\fs28 . [Az Lu.] (}{\i\fs28 E. South America}{\fs28 .)
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 3. A. hispidulum}{\fs28  Swartz in Schrader,}{\i\fs28  Jour. f\'fcr die Bot. }{\b\fs28 1800:}{\fs28  82 (1801). Leaves 15-60 cm, pedately branched, each branch with numerous alternate, obliquely oblong segments 0\'b78-2 \'d7 0\'b73-0\'b76 cm, sharply dentate, subcoriaceous, hairy, especially below; petiole
\par 
\par 13}
\par }
