{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 4. P. monandra} (Pallas) Bunge,{\i  Mém. Acad. Sci. Pétersb}. ser. 7, {\b 4}({\b 11}): 53 (1862). Stems 5-30 cm, erect or procumbent, often densely pubescent. Leaves up to 10 × 1 mm, crowded, alternate. Panicle dense in fruit. Perianth-segments 3(-5), pubescent dorsally; stamens 1 or 2.{\i  S.E. Russia, W. Kazakhstan}. Rs(E). ({\i W. & C. Asia}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 5. P. oppositifolia} (Pallas) Litv.,{\i  Sched. Herb. Fl. Ross.}{\b  7:} 13 (1911) ({\i P. crassifolia }auct.). Stems 5-40 cm, erect or procumbent, glabrous or pubescent. Leaves up to 40 × 3 mm, very fleshy, obtuse, the upper alternate. Bracteoles obtuse, not deflexed. Perianth-segments 2, glabrous or shortly pubescent, becoming cartilaginous in fruit; stamens 5. {\i S.E. Europe.} Al Rm Rs(W, K, E).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 6. P. brachyphylla} (Bunge) Iljin, {\i Acta Horti Petrop.}{\b  43:} 234 (1930). Like{\b  5} but the perianth-segments long-ciliate at least towards the apex, not becoming cartilaginous in fruit.{\i  S.E. Russia, W. Kazakhstan.} Rs(E). ({\i W. & C. Asia.})
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 7. P. glaucescens} (Bunge) Iljin, {\i loc. cit.} 233 (1930) ({\i P. glauca }sensu Boiss.). Like {\b 5} but plant densely pubescent; bracteoles acute, apex deflexed; perianth-segments hirsute dorsally, not becoming cartilaginous in fruit.{\i  S.E. Russia, W. Kazakhstan}. Rs(E). ({\i W. & C. Asia}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 33.             Halimocnemis  }           C.A. Meyer
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc  By P.W. Ball.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Like{\i  Petrosimonia} but the seeds horizontal.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. H. sclerosperma} (Pallas) C.A. Meyer in Ledeb., {\i Fl. Altaica}{\b  1:} 384 (1829). Stems 5-30 cm, thick and flexuous. Leaves 15-25 mm, linear or oblong, mucronate. Bracts ovate, acuminate. Perianth-segments 3(-5), the 2 outer segments becoming 7-8 mm and hard in fruit.{\i  Saline soils. S.E. Russia, W. Kazakhstan}. Rs(E).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 34.              Halogeton  }            C.A. Meyer
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc  By P.W. Ball.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Annual glabrous or papillose herbs. Leaves alternate, fleshy, more or less cylindrical. Flowers hermaphrodite or female, in dense cymes in the axils of leaf-like bracts; the outer in each cyme 2-bracteolate, the inner ebracteolate. Perianth-segments 5, developing a transverse wing in fruit. Stamens 3-5. Stigmas 2. Seeds vertical or horizontal.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. H. sativus} (L.) Moq.,{\i  Chenop. Monogr. Enum. }158 (1840). Stems 15-80 cm. Leaves 5-16 × 1-1·5 mm, usually mucronate. Stamens 5. Perianth-wing up to 3 × 4 mm, reniform-orbicular to ovate, unequal, often pinkish. Seeds c. 1·5 mm.{\i  Saline habitats, mainly maritime. S.E. Spain}. Hs. ({\i N.W Africa.})
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Formerly cultivated in the Mediterranean region, where it was grown as a vegetable and burned for the production of base-rich ash.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 H. glomeratus (Bieb.) C.A. Meyer in Ledeb.,{\i  Fl. Altaica}{\b  1: }378 (1829), from S.E. Russia and W. Kazakhstan, is very doubtfully distinct from{\b  1}. It is less robust (stems 3-40 cm), with the leaves up to 12 × 2 mm and 1-3(-5) stamens.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 49.       AMARANTHACEAE}
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc  Edit †T.G. Tutin & J.R. Edmondson.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Herbs or rarely small shrubs. Leaves opposite or alternate, entire, exstipulate. Flowers usually hermaphrodite, often in spicate or capitate, usually bracteate inflorescences; bracteoles 2-5. Perianth almost always dry and scarious, usually 4- or 5-merous; segments free or connate at base. Stamens 1-5, opposite the perianth-segments and usually not exserted. Ovary superior, unilocular; ovules amphitropous. Fruit with a membranous, rarely fleshy wall, dehiscing irregularly, or circumscissile (sometimes indehiscent).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Literature: U.H. Eliasson,{\i  Bot. Jour. Linn. Soc.}{\b  96:} 235-283 (1988).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Leaves opposite
\par
2 Inflorescence long, lax; fruits deflexed .................................. {\b 3. Achyranthes}
\par
2 Inflorescence dense, capitate; fruits not deflexed .................{\b  4. Alternanthera}
\par
1 Leaves alternate
\par
3 Filaments connate below into a tube; fruit with numerous seeds ....{\b 1. Celosia}
\par
3 Filaments free; fruit with 1 seed ............................................. {\b 2. Amaranthus}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 1.               Celosia  }                    L.
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc  By †T.G. Tutin (Ed.1) revised by J.R. Akeroyd (Ed.2).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Leaves alternate. Bracteoles 3. Perianth-segments 5, oblong, acute or obtuse. Stamens 5, alternating with 5 teeth; filaments connate below into a membranous tube. Style long, filiform. Fruit circumscissile; seeds numerous.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. C. argentea} L., {\i Sp. Pl}. 205 (1753). Glabrous, branched annual 15-50 cm. Leaves broadly lanceolate to ovate; petioles short. Inflorescences subsessile, spicate, usually cylindrical, often fasciated. Flowers sessile; perianth much longer than the bracteoles, usually purple, sometimes red, orange, yellow or white.{\i  Widely cultivated for ornament, and frequently occurring as a casual in S. Europe}.[It.] ({\i Tropics}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 The plant cultivated in Europe is var. {\i cristata} (L.) O. Kuntze ({\i C. cristata }L.).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 2.               Amaranthus  }             L.
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc  By †P. Aellen (Ed.1) revised by J.R. Akeroyd (Ed.2).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Annual, rarely perennial herbs; monoecious or dioecious. Leaves usually alternate. Bracteoles 3-5, small and herbaceous or membranous and spinescent. Perianth-segments 0-5, linear or lanceolate to spathulate. Styles and stigmas 2 or 3. Fruit dry, membranous, indehiscent or dehiscing transversely. Seeds vertically compressed.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 In the following descriptions characters of the perianth refer to female flowers.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 All the species are ruderals or weeds. Most of them have been
\par

\par
130}
\par