{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\i locally in S. Europe; casual elsewhere.} [Bl Gr Hs Lu Sa Si.] ({\i Temperate South America.})
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 6. A. blitoides} S. Watson,{\i  Proc. Amer. Acad. Arts Sci.}{\b  12:} 273 (1877). Stems 15-50 cm, procumbent, whitish, glabrous or pubescent in the upper part. Leaves 1·5-3 cm, oblong-lanceolate to obovate-spathulate, obtuse, with distinct membranous margin. Inflorescence of short, axillary cymose clusters, leafy to the apex. Bracteoles shorter than the perianth, lanceolate. Perianth-segments 4 or 5, unequal, resembling the bracteoles; the largest 2-2·5 mm, with short acumen. Fruit dehiscing transversely. 2n = 32. {\i Naturalized in C. & S. Europe; casual throughout most of Europe}. [Al Au Az Bl Bu Co Cr Cz Ga Ge Gr Ho Hs Hu It Lu Po Rm Rs(B,C,W,K,E).] ({\i C. & W. North America}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 7. A. crispus} (Lesp. & Thév.) N. Terracc.,{\i  Rendic. Accad. Sci. Fis. Mat}. ({\b Napoli}) {\b 4:} 188 (1890). Stems up to 40 cm, procumbent or ascending, much-branched, densely puberulent. Leaves mostly 0·5-1·5 cm, ovate- or lanceolate-rhombic, obtuse, mucronate; margin undulate-crenate. Inflorescence of ovoid or spherical, axillary cymose clusters, leafy to the apex. Bracteoles ½ as long as the perianth, ovate, acute. Perianth-segments 5, 0·6 mm wide at the apex, obovate to spathulate, obtuse. Fruit muricate, indehiscent. 2n = 34.{\i  Naturalized in S. and parts of C. Europe; casual elsewhere.} [Au Bu Cz Hu It Ju Rm.] ({\i Argentina}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b A. standleyanus} Parodi ex Covas,{\i  Darwiniana}{\b  5:} 339 (1941) ({\i A. vulgatissimus} auct.), from Argentina, also with indehiscent fruits, but with stems up to 70 cm, leaves 3-5 cm, entire, and distinctly clawed perianth-segments, has been reported from Spain and elsewhere, but is only casual.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 8. A. albus} L., {\i Syst. Nat.} ed. 10, {\b 2:} 1268 (1759). Stems 10-50 cm, erect or procumbent, much-branched, glabrous or sparsely puberulent. Leaves 2-5 cm, oblong or spathulate, cuneate, obtuse and slightly emarginate, mucronate; margin undulate. Inflorescence of short, axillary cymose clusters. Bracteoles twice as long as the perianth, ensiform with long, spinose apex. Perianth-segments 3, narrowly elliptical. Fruit c. 1·5 mm, scarcely muricate, dehiscing transversely. 2n = 32.{\i  Naturalized or a casual in most of Europe}. [Al Au Be Bl Bu Co Cr Cz Ga Ge Gr He Ho Hs Hu It Ju Lu Po Rm Rs(B, C, W, K, E) Sa Si Tu.]
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 9. A. graecizans} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 990 (1753) ({\i A. angustifolius} Lam.,{\i  A. sylvestris} Vill., {\i A. blitum} auct., non L.). Stems up to 70 cm, usually erect, usually glabrous. Leaves 2-4 cm, ovate or elliptic-rhombic, usually acute. Inflorescence of axillary cymose clusters. Bracteoles 3/5-3/4 as long as the perianth, ovate, mucronulate. Perianth-segments 3, 1·3-2 mm, ovate-lanceolate, acute. Fruit longer than the perianth, somewhat muricate, dehiscing transversely, with green, longitudinal veins when young. 2n = 32. {\i S. Europe, perhaps native further north; introduced throughout most of Europe and sometimes naturalized}. Al Au Az Bl Bu *Co Cr *Cz *Ga Gr Hs Hu It Ju Lu *Rs (K) Si Tu [Au Be Ge He Hu Rm].
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 10. A. deflexus} L.,{\i  Mantissa Alt.} 295 (1771). Procumbent perennial up to 40 cm, densely puberulent in the upper part. Leaves 3-5 cm, rhombic-ovate, obtuse; margin finely undulate. Inflorescence usually dense, terminal, spicate, becoming interrupted and leafy towards the base. Bracteoles 1/3-1/2 as long as the perianth, ovate, wide at the base, mucronate. Perianth-segments 2 or 3, 1·2-1·5 mm, linear to oblong-spathulate. Fruit 2·5-3 mm, oblong-ovate, inflated-membranous, smooth, with 3 dull green, longitudinal veins, not dehiscing transversely. Seeds much smaller than the fruit. 2n = 32, 34.{\i  Naturalized in S. Europe; casual elsewhere.} [Al Az Bl Bu Co Cz Ga Gr He Hs Hu It Ju Lu Rm Rs(C, W, K) Sa Si Tu.]
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 11. A. lividus} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 990 (1753) ({\i A. blitum} L., {\i A. polygonoides} L., {\i A. ascendens }Loisel.). Stems 30-80 cm, procumbent to erect, glabrous. Leaves 2-6 cm, rhombic- to orbicular-ovate, with light or dark spots on the upper surface, subtruncate or emarginate, the margin often undulate. Inflorescence of axillary cymose clusters, forming a dense, more or less leafless spike towards the apex. Bracteoles 1/3-1/2 as long as the perianth, ovate with wide base, acute. Perianth-segments 3(-5), oblong-linear to spathulate. Fruit feebly rugose, without green veins, indehiscent or dehiscing irregularly. Seeds almost as large as the fruit. 2n = 34. {\i  S. Europe; introduced and sometimes naturalized elsewhere.} Al Au Az Bl Bu Cr *Cz Ga *Ge Gr *He Hs Hu It Ju Lu *Po Rm Sa Si Tu [Be Ho Rs(B, C, W, K, E) Su] .
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Many records, especially from S. Europe, may result from confusion with{\b  9} and{\b  12}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 12. A. viridis} L.,{\i  Sp. Pl.} ed. 2, 1405 (1763) ({\i A. gracilis} Poiret). Stems up to 70 cm, procumbent to erect, glabrous or slightly hairy above. Leaves 3-8 cm, ovate-rhombic, somewhat emarginate, long-petiolate. Inflorescence of axillary cymose clusters, forming a long, slender, terminal spike. Bracteoles 1/3-2/3 as long as the perianth, ovate, acuminate. Perianth-segments 3, ovate-oblong. Fruit about as long as the perianth, subglobose, strongly muricate, dehiscing irregularly, or indehiscent.{\i  Naturalized or casual in S. Europe.} [Az Bl Cr Gr Hs It Si.] ({\i South America}).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 3.              Achyranthes  }                  L.
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc  By †T.G. Tutin.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Leaves opposite. Inflorescence long, lax, spicate. Flowers erect, becoming deflexed. Perianth-segments 4 or 5, narrowly lanceolate, becoming indurate and ribbed. Stamens (2-)5 alternating with teeth; filaments connate below into a tube. Fruits deflexed.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200  Stem densely pubescent; leaves green beneath .................................. {\b 1. aspera}
\par
Stem almost glabrous; leaves silvery beneath ..................................... {\b 2. sicula}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. A. aspera} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 204 (1753). Pubescent perennial, woody below. Leaves broadly ovate or broadly rhombic, shortly acuminate, green on both surfaces. Flowers pedicellate, somewhat shining, green. Bracteoles glabrous, awned. Perianth about twice as long as the bracteoles. Teeth alternating with the stamens, fimbriate at the apex.{\i  Ruderal. Locally naturalized in S. Europe.} [?Az Hs Si.] ({\i Tropics}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. A. sicula} (L.) All., {\i Mélang. Philos. Math. Soc. Roy. Turin} ({\i Misc. Taur}.){\b  5:} 93 (1774) ({\i A. argentea} Lam.). Like{\b  1} but the stem only slightly pubescent to nearly glabrous; leaves ovate to ovate-oblong, densely silvery-sericeous beneath; teeth alternating with stamens, entire at the apex.{\i  Ruderal. S. part of W. Mediterranean region}. Hs It Sa Si.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 4.              Alternanthera}                Forskål
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc  By †T.G. Tutin.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Leaves opposite. Inflorescence capitate, terminal or axillary. Perianth-segments 5, free. Stamens 2-5; filaments connate below into a tube. Fruits not deflexed.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 A number of species besides the following occur as casuals.
\par

\par
132}
\par