{\rtf1\ansi \deff4\deflang1033{\fonttbl{\f4\froman\fcharset0\fprq2 Times New Roman;}}{\colortbl;\red0\green0\blue0;\red0\green0\blue255;\red0\green255\blue255;\red0\green255\blue0;\red255\green0\blue255;\red255\green0\blue0;\red255\green255\blue0;\red255\green255\blue255;\red0\green0\blue128;\red0\green128\blue128;\red0\green128\blue0;\red128\green0\blue128;\red128\green0\blue0;\red128\green128\blue0;\red128\green128\blue128;\red192\green192\blue192;}{\stylesheet{\widctlpar \f4\fs20\lang2057 \snext0 Normal;}{\*\cs10 \additive Default Paragraph Font;}}{\info{\author dddd}{\operator dddd}{\creatim\yr1998\mo10\dy28\hr14\min57}{\revtim\yr1998\mo10\dy28\hr15\min1}{\version2}{\edmins4}{\nofpages3}{\nofwords677}{\nofchars3861}{\*\company  }{\vern57431}}\widowctrl\ftnbj\aenddoc\hyphcaps0 \fet0\sectd \linex0 {\*\pnseclvl1\pnucrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl2\pnucltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl3\pndec\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl4\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl5\pndec\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl6\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl7\pnlcrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl8\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl9\pnlcrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}
\pard\plain  \f4\fs20\lang2057 {\fs24 
\par }
\pard \qc\ {\fs28  }{\b\fs28 53.    MOLLUGINACEAE}{\fs24  
\par Edit. \'86T.G. Tutin & S.M. Walters
\par 
\par }
\pard  {\fs28 Annual herbs. Leaves not fleshy. Perianth of 5 free sepals. Petals absent. Petaloid staminodes 0-20. Stamens 3-20. Ovary superior. Fruit a membranous, loculicidal capsule, opening to the base by 3-5 valves on drying.
\par 
\par }
\pard \li200\ {\fs28 Petaloid staminodes absent; plant \'b1 glabrous .................................... 1. Mollugo
\par Petaloid staminodes present; plant stellate-tomentose .......................... 2. Glinus
\par 
\par }
\pard \qc\ {\fs28  }{\b\fs28 1.           Mollugo}{\fs28               L.
\par }{\fs24  By \'86T.G. Tutin
\par 
\par }
\pard  {\fs28 Flowers in axillary cymes or fascicles. Petaloid staminodes absent. Stamens 5. Stigmas 3. Capsule opening by 3 valves; seeds without a strophiole.
\par 
\par }
\pard \li200\ {\fs28  Flowers in axillary fascicles; leaves obovate-lanceolate to spathulate
\par    .................................................................................................... }{\b\fs28 1. verticillata}{\fs28 
\par Flowers in axillary, pedunculate, umbellate cymes; leaves linear
\par    ....................................................................................................... }{\b\fs28 2. cerviana}{\fs28 
\par 
\par }
\pard  {\fs28    }{\b\fs28 1. M. verticillata}{\fs28  L.,}{\i\fs28  Sp. Pl.}{\fs28  89 (1753). Procumbent or ascending, branched, glabrous annual 5-10(-40) cm. Leaves in whorls of 3-5, obovate-lanceolate to spathulate. Flowers small, pedicellate, in axillary fascicles. Perianth-segments acute, with scarious margins.}{\i\fs28  Naturalized locally in S. Europe.}{\fs28  [Az Hs It Lu.] (}{\i\fs28 Tropical America.}{\fs28 )
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 2. M. cerviana}{\fs28  (L.) Ser. in DC.,}{\i\fs28  Prodr. }{\b\fs28 1:}{\fs28  392 (1824). Like}{\b\fs28  1}{\fs28  but rather taller; leaves in whorls of 3-10, linear; flowers in pedunculate, umbellate cymes; perianth-segments obtuse.}{\i\fs28  Sandy and gravelly places. S. Europe, extending northwards to c.}{\fs28  52\'b0}{\i\fs28  N. in C. Russia}{\fs28 . Al Bu Gr Hs It Lu Rm Rs(C, W, K, E) Tu.
\par 
\par }
\pard \qc\ {\fs28  }{\b\fs28 2.                  Glinus}{\fs28              L.
\par }{\fs24  By \'86T.G. Tutin
\par 
\par }
\pard  {\fs28 Flowers in subsessile, axillary fascicles. Petaloid staminodes numerous. Stamens 12. Stigmas 5. Capsule opening by 5 valves; seeds with a large strophiole.
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 1. G. lotoides}{\fs28  L.,}{\i\fs28  Sp. Pl. }{\fs28 463 (1753) (}{\i\fs28 Mollugo lotoides}{\fs28  (L.) Arcangeli). Softly stellate-tomentose, procumbent annual, 10-40 cm. Leaves obovate or oblong-spathulate, often fascicled. Sepals yellow above; staminodes white.}{\i\fs28  S. Europe}{\fs28 . Al Bu Cr Gr Hs It Ju Lu Rm Sa Si.
\par 
\par 
\par }
\pard \qc\ {\fs28  }{\b\fs28 54.       TETRAGONIACEAE}{\fs24  
\par Edit \'86T.G. Tutin & S.M. Walters.
\par 
\par }
\pard  {\fs28 Perianth of 4 or 5 sepaloid segments. Stamens 3-15, inserted in the perianth-tube. Ovary inferior; stigmas 3-8. Fruit an indehiscent drupe.
\par 
\par }
\pard \qc\ {\fs28  }{\b\fs28 1.             Tetragonia}{\fs28                 L.
\par }{\fs24  By \'86T.G. Tutin
\par 
\par }
\pard  {\fs28 Leaves ovate-rhombic. Flowers subsessile, solitary. Stamens usually c. 15.
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 1. T. tetragonoides}{\fs28  (Pallas) O. Kuntze,}{\i\fs28  Revis. Gen.}{\b\fs28  1:}{\fs28  264 (1891) (}{\i\fs28 T. expansa}{\fs28  Murray). Densely papillose, somewhat fleshy, procumbent or ascending annual. Leaves often more or less hastate. Sepals yellow above. Fruit with large tubercles near the top. 2n = 32. }{\i\fs28 Cultivated as a vegetable}{\fs28  (}{\i\fs28 New Zealand spinach}{\fs28 )}{\i\fs28  in S.W. Europe; occurring as a casual, and sometimes becoming naturalized.}{\fs28  [Az Bl Hs It Lu.] (}{\i\fs28 Australia, New Zealand}{\fs28 .)
\par 
\par }
\pard \qc\ {\fs28  }{\b\fs28 55.        PORTULACACEAE}{\fs24  
\par Edit. S.M. Walters.
\par 
\par }
\pard  {\fs28 Annual or perennial herbs, usually glabrous and fleshy. Leaves simple, entire. Flowers solitary or in cymes, hermaphrodite. Sepals 2; petals 4-6, free or joined below; stamens 3 to many. Ovary unilocular, with 1 to many campylotropous ovules on a basal placenta. Fruit a capsule.
\par 
\par Several species from America are grown in gardens. Species of }{\i\fs28 Calandrinia}{\fs28  Humb., Bonpl. & Kunth in particular are occasionally recorded as naturalized, but none seem to be at all widely established. }{\b\fs28 Talinum paniculatum}{\fs28  (Jacq.) Gaertner,}{\i\fs28  Fruct. Sem. Pl.}{\b\fs28  2:}{\fs28  219 (1791), may be becoming naturalized in A\'e7ores.
\par 
\par Literature: J. McNeill,}{\i\fs28  Canad. Jour. Bot.}{\b\fs28  53:}{\fs28  789-809 (1975).
\par 
\par }
\pard \li200\ {\fs28 1 Stamens numerous; ovary semi-inferior ...................................... }{\b\fs28 1. Portulaca}{\fs28 
\par 1 Stamens 3 or 5; ovary superior
\par 2 Plant usually procumbent; leaves all cauline ..................................}{\b\fs28  2. Montia}{\fs28 
\par 2 Plant erect; leaves mostly in basal rosette ................................... }{\b\fs28 3. Claytonia}{\fs28 
\par 
\par 
\par }
\pard \qc\ {\fs28  }{\b\fs28 1.              Portulaca}{\fs28            L.
\par }{\fs24  By S.M. Walters
\par 
\par }
\pard  {\fs28 Glabrous, fleshy herbs with alternate or opposite leaves and small, setaceous stipules. Flowers often terminal. Petals fugacious; stamens numerous; ovary semi-inferior. Capsule unilocular, with thin wall, dehiscing with a transverse lid. Seeds numerous, reniform.
\par 
\par Literature: K. von Poellnitz, }{\i\fs28 Feddes Repert. }{\b\fs28 37:}{\fs28  240-320 (1934); A. Danin, I. Baker & H.G. Baker, }{\b\fs28 Israel Jour. Bot. 27:}{\fs28  177-211 (1978).
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 1. P. oleracea}{\fs28  L.,}{\i\fs28  Sp. Pl.}{\fs28  445 (1753). Annual with branched stems 10-50 cm. Leaves mostly scattered and alternate, but subopposite and crowded below flowers, oblong-obovate, sessile with a cuneate base, shining. Flowers solitary or 2 or 3 together,
\par 
\par 137}
\par }