{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 1.         Boussingaultia}       Humb., Bonpl. & Kunth
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc  By S.M. Walters
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Filaments curved outwards in bud; sepals not winged in fruit.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Literature: E. Ulbrich in Engler & Prantl, {\i Natürl. Pflanzenfam.} ed. 2, {\b 16c}: 263-271 (1934).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. B. cordifolia} Ten.,{\i  Ann. Sci. Nat. ser. 3,}{\b  19:} 355 (1853) ({\i B. baselloides} auct., non Humb., Bonpl. & Kunth). Tall, slender, twining plant with numerous potato-like tubers on the rhizomes. Leaves 2-7 cm. Inflorescence 5-15 cm, more or less compound, axillary; flowers c. 2 mm, whitish.{\i  Cultivated for ornament and as a vegetable, and naturalized on roadsides and in waste places in S. Europe.} [Az Ga Hs Ju Lu Si.] ({\i Subtropical South America}.)
\par

\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 57.     CARYOPHYLLACEAE}
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc  Edit. S.M. Walters
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Herbs, more rarely small shrubs. Leaves usually opposite and decussate, more rarely alternate or verticillate, simple, entire, with or without scarious stipules. Flowers actinomorphic, usually hermaphrodite, often in bracteate dichasia. Sepals 4 or 5, free, or fused and often united by scarious strips of tissue (commissures) alternating with the calyx-teeth. Petals (0-)4 or 5, free. Stamens usually 8-10, obdiplostemonous. Ovary superior, unilocular at least above, with 1 to numerous campylotropous ovules on a basal or free-central placenta; stigmas (1)2-5. Fruit usually a capsule, dehiscing with teeth equalling the styles in number or twice as many; more rarely fruit a berry or achene.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 The subdivision of the family, and also in most cases the generic circumscriptions, follow F. Pax & K. Hoffmann in Engler & Prantl,{\i  Natürl. Pflanzenfam.} ed. 2, {\b 16c:} 275-364 (1934).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Stipules present, though sometimes caducous (Subfam. Paronychioideae)
\par
2 All leaves alternate
\par
3 Sepals less than 3 mm; fruit an achene .................................... {\b 14. Corrigiola}
\par
3 Sepals 3-7 mm; fruit a capsule ................................................ {\b 24. Telephium}
\par
2 Leaves opposite or verticillate (or some leaves apparently alternate)
\par
4 Fruit with persistent inflated peduncle, and crowned by
   spiny processes ........................................................................ {\b 18. Pteranthus}
\par
4 Fruit not as above 
\par
5 Stigmas 1 or 2
\par
6 Bracts conspicuous, longer than flowers ............................... {\b 15. Paronychia}
\par
6 Bracts inconspicuous, shorter than flowers
\par
7 Leaves aristate; plant erect ..................................................... {\b 15. Paronychia}
\par
7 Leaves not aristate; plant procumbent or erect
\par
8 Sepals not white and spongy ..................................................... {\b 16. Herniaria}
\par
8 Sepals conspicuously white and spongy ................................. {\b 17. Illecebrum} 
\par
5 Stigmas 3 or 5
\par
9 Sepals with a single, large tooth on each side ......................... {\b 21. Loeflingia}
\par
9 Sepals entire
\par
10 Leaves obovate or orbicular ................................................. {\b 19. Polycarpon}
\par
10 Leaves subulate, linear or linear-lanceolate
\par
11 Petals 0; style 1 ........................................................................... {\b 20. Ortegia}
\par
11 Petals 5; styles 3 or 5
\par
12 Styles 5; stipules not connate ................................................... {\b 22. Spergula}
\par
12 Styles 3; stipules connate ..................................................... {\b 23. Spergularia}
\par
1  Stipules absent
\par
13 Sepals free, or joined only at base (Subfam. Alsinoideae)
\par
14 Styles 2
\par
15 Petals absent; fruit indehiscent ............................................ {\b 13. Scleranthus} 
\par
15 Petals present; fruit a dehiscent capsule
\par
16 Capsule dehiscing with 4 equal teeth; seeds with strophiole
\par
   .................................................................................................. {\b 2. Moehringia}
\par
16 Capsule dehiscing with 2 entire or bifid teeth;
   seeds without strophiole
\par
17 Basal leaves linear-spathulate; capsule with bifid teeth ............. {\b 1. Arenaria}
\par
17 Basal leaves setaceous; capsule with entire teeth ....................... {\b 5. Bufonia}
\par
14 Styles 3-5
\par
18 Capsule-teeth as many as styles
\par
19 Fleshy maritime plant; seeds 3-4·5 mm ................................... {\b 4. Honkenya}
\par
19 Plant not fleshy; seeds less than 3 mm
\par
20 Styles fewer than sepals ............................................................ {\b 3. Minuartia}
\par
20 Styles as many as sepals
\par
21 Capsule-teeth shallowly bifid; leaves ovate ........................... {\b 11. Myosoton}
\par
21 Capsule-teeth entire; leaves subulate ........................................... {\b 12. Sagina}
\par
18 Capsule-teeth twice as many as styles
\par
22 Petals absent
\par
23 Styles 3 ........................................................................................ {\b 6. Stellaria}
\par
23 Styles 5 ..................................................................................... {\b 9. Cerastium}
\par
22 Petals present
\par
24 Petals bifid to at least half-way ................................................... {\b 6. Stellaria}
\par
24 Petals bifid to less than half-way or entire
\par
25 Plant with napiform tubers on rhizome ............................ {\b 7. Pseudostellaria}
\par
25 Plant without napiform tubers
\par
26 Petals irregularly toothed ........................................................ {\b 8. Holosteum}
\par
26 Petals entire, emarginate or bifid
\par
27 Styles 4 or 5
\par
28 Annuals or perennials, usually hairy; petals (4)5,
\par
   distinctly bifid ............................................................................ {\b 9. Cerastium}
\par
28 Glabrous, glaucous annuals; petals 4(5), entire
\par
   or emarginate ........................................................................... {\b 10. Moenchia}
\par
27 Styles 3 on at least some flowers
\par
29 Petals bifid to c. 1/3 ................................................................. {\b 9. Cerastium}
\par
29 Petals emarginate (to less than ¼) or entire 
\par
30 Seeds without strophiole ............................................................ {\b 1. Arenaria}
\par
30 Seeds with persistent strophiole ............................................ {\b 2. Moehringia}
\par
13 Sepals joined to form a distinct calyx-tube (Subfam. Silenoideae)
\par
31 Calyx-tube with commissural veins alternating with the
\par
   mid-veins of the sepals; styles 3-5
\par
32 Fruit a berry ........................................................................... {\b 29. Cucubalus}
\par
32 Fruit a capsule
\par
33 Capsule dehiscing with a lid ....................................................... {\b 30. Drypis}
\par
33 Capsule dehiscing with teeth
\par

\par
139}
\par