{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 often terminal. Sepals c. 4 mm, keeled, united into a short tube at the base; petals 5, 6-8 mm, yellow, obovate, slightly united; stamens 7-12. Capsule 3-9 mm, obovoid; seeds black.{\i  Cultivated as a vegetable} ({\i Purslane}),{\i  and a weed of cultivation. Europe, northwards to c.} 55°{\i  N. Not native, except perhaps in parts of the south; casual only in N. Europe.} *Al *Au *Az *Bl *Bu *Co *Cr *Cz *Ga *Ge *Gr *He *Hs *Hu *It *Ju *Lu *Rm *Rs (C, W, K, E) *Sa *Si *Tu [Be Br Ho Po].
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp.{\b  oleracea} ({\i P. oleracea} subsp.{\i  silvestris} (Montandon) Thell.): Procumbent or decumbent. Seeds c. 0·5 mm. 2n = 54. {\i Widespread weed of cultivation in S. and C. Europe, rare and casual in N. Europe; native range unknown but probably Eurasia}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp.{\b  sativa} (Haw.) Celak.,{\i  Prodr. Fl. Böhm.} 484 (1875) ({\i P. sativa} Haw.). Robust, erect, and larger in all its parts than subsp. ({\b a}). Seeds c. 1 mm. 2n = 54.{\i  Cultivated in S. and S.E. Europe, and occurring as an escape}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 A number of other subspecies have been recognized, mainly on the basis of the ornamentation of the testa, by A. Danin{\i  et al., loc. cit.,} but few data are available on their distribution.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b P. grandiflora} Hooker,{\i  Bot. Mag.}{\b  56:} t. 2885 (1829), with 4-5 cm reddish or orange flowers, usually {\i flore pleno,} is a native of South America commonly grown in gardens. It is occasionally established on roadsides and in waste places in S. and S.C. Europe.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 2.             Montia}                 L.
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc  By S.M. Walters
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Small, glabrous, somewhat fleshy herbs with opposite, exstipulate cauline leaves. Flowers in terminal cymes. Stamens 3. Ovary superior; ovules 3. Fruit a globose capsule dehiscing with 3 valves. Seeds broadly reniform, black.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. M. fontana} L.,{\i  Sp. Pl.} 87 (1753) ({\i M. minor} C.C. Gmelin,{\i  M. rivularis} C.C. Gmelin,{\i  M. verna} Necker). Annual or perennial, with weak, branching stems up to 50 cm or more in water, but short and erect, more or less caespitose on land. Leaves 3-30 mm, usually narrowly spathulate. Flowers c. 2 mm, very inconspicuous, in small, terminal cymes often overtopped by non-flowering branches. Capsule 1·5-2 mm; seeds usually 3.{\i  In water, or on mud or seasonally wet open ground, usually calcifuge. Much of Europe, but rare in the east and parts of the south}. All except Al Az Bl Rs(W, K, E) Sb.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 A very variable species, in which the seed characters show correlation with geographical distribution and, less satisfactorily, with habit and habitat differences. Four subspecies can be recognized:
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Ripe seeds shining, smooth ............................................ ({\b a}) subsp.{\b  fontana}
\par
1 Ripe seeds dull or somewhat shining, with at least some low
\par
  tubercles on keel
\par
2 Ripe seeds dull, entirely covered with broad, obtuse tubercles
\par
  ............................................................................. ({\b d}) subsp. {\b chondrosperma}
\par
2 Ripe seeds somewhat shining, tubercles confined to keel
\par
3 Ripe seeds with 3 or 4 rows of long, acute tubercles on keel
\par
  .................................................................................... ({\b c}) subsp.{\b  amporitana}
\par
3 Ripe seeds with variably developed, broad, low tubercles on keel
\par
  ....................................................................................... ({\b b}) subsp.{\b  variabilis}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b fontana} ({\i M. lamprosperma} Cham., {\i M. rivularis} auct., ?C.C. Gmelin): Annual or perennial, variable in habit. Ripe seeds 1·1-1·35 mm, shining, smooth. 2n = 18, 20.{\i  N. & C. Europe; occasional in the mountains of S. Europe}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp.{\b  variabilis} Walters, {\i Watsonia}{\b  3:} 5 (1953) ({\i M. rivularis} auct., ?C.C. Gmelin): Annual or perennial, variable in habit. Ripe seeds 0·9-1·1 mm, with variously developed, broad, low tubercles on keel.{\i  N., W. & C. Europe}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b c}) Subsp.{\b  amporitana} Sennen, {\i Bull. Géogr. Bot.} ({\i Le Mans}){\b  21:} 110 (1911) ({\i M. lusitanica} Samp.,{\i  M. rivularis} auct., ?C.C. Gmelin,{\i  M. limosa} Decker): Annual or perennial, variable in habit. Ripe seeds 0·85-1·1 mm, with 3 or 4 rows of long, acute tubercles on keel.{\i  Europe eastwards to Romania and Greece, but mainly in the west.}
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b d}) Subsp.{\b  chondrosperma }(Fenzl) Walters, {\i Watsonia}{\b  3:} 4 (1953) ({\i M. verna} Necker, {\i M. minor} C.C. Gmelin): Usually annual, with erect, caespitose stems. Ripe seeds 1·0-1·2 mm, dull, entirely covered with broad, obtuse tubercles. 2n = 18, 20. {\i In drier places than subsp.} ({\b a}), ({\b b}){\i  and} ({\b c}),{\i  often on sandy ground or short, mossy turf. Europe northwards to Scotland and S. Sweden; rare in the south}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 3.                Claytonia}                 L.
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc  By S.M. Walters & J.R. Akeroyd
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Like{\i  Montia} but leaves mostly basal; cauline leaves 2, subtending the inflorescence; stamens 5; ovules 3-6.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Cauline leaves connate; petals 2-3 mm .......................................... {\b 1. perfoliata}
\par
Cauline leaves not connate; petals 8-10 mm ...................................... {\b 2. sibirica}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. C. perfoliata} Donn ex Willd., {\i Sp. Pl.}{\b  1}({\b 2}): 1186 (1798) ({\i Montia perfoliata} (Donn ex Willd.) Howell). Annual, 5-30 cm. Basal leaves in a rosette, elliptical to rhombic-ovate, fleshy; cauline leaves broadly connate. Inflorescence usually few-flowered. Petals 2-3 mm, white, entire to emarginate, slightly longer than the sepals. Capsule shorter than the persistent sepals. 2n = 36. {\i On rather dry, sandy soils, sometimes locally abundant. Naturalized mainly in N.W. Europe.} [Be Br Cz Da Ga Ge Ho Lu Su.] ({\i W. North America}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. C. sibirica} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 204 (1753) ({\i C. alsinoides} Sims,{\i  Montia sibirica} (L.) Howell). Like {\b 1} but basal leaves ovate, acuminate; cauline leaves not connate; petals 8-10 mm, pink or more rarely white, bifid.{\i  Damp, shady places on acid, sandy soils. Extensively naturalized in N.W. Europe, and occasionally elsewhere.} [Br Bu Cz Fa Fe Ga Ho No.] ({\i W. North America}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 56.       BASELLACEAE}
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc  Edit. S.M. Walters
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Glabrous, perennial, twining herbs, usually fleshy. Leaves alternate, usually ovate with a more or less cordate base, entire. Flowers in spikes, racemes or racemose panicles, hermaphrodite. Sepals 2; petals 5; stamens 5, opposite petals. Ovary unilocular, with 3 styles and a single basal ovule. Fruit indehiscent, fleshy, surrounded by persistent sepals and petals.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 A small family, mainly in America, and not native to Europe.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b Basella alba} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 390 (1753), a very fleshy perennial with flowers in spikes, probably a native of tropical Asia, is widely cultivated as a vegetable in S. Europe and occasionally escapes, but does not seem to be naturalized.
\par

\par
138}
\par