{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 4.             Drosanthemum  }          Schwantes
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc  By J.R. Akeroyd & C.D. Preston
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Like {\i Mesembryanthemum} but sprawling shrubs; leaves cylindrical or narrowly obovoid; flowers solitary or 2 or 3 together.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200  Flowers usually less than 2·5 cm in diameter; petals whitish or
\par
    pink ........................................................................................ {\b 1. floribundum}
\par
Flowers 2·5-3 cm in diameter; petals purple ................................... {\b 2. hispidum}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. D. floribundum} (Haw.) Schwantes,{\i  Zeitschr. Sukkulentenk. }{\b 3:} 29 (1927) ({\i D. candens }(Haw.) Schwantes). Stems procumbent or trailing, much-branched, hirsute, not rooting freely at the nodes. Leaves 0·5-2·5(-3) cm, almost cylindrical, densely tuberculate-papillose. Flowers solitary, 1-2·5 cm in diameter; petals whitish or pink. 2n = 36.{\i  Cultivated for ornament, and naturalized on coastal rocks and walls in W. Europe.} [Az Br Ga ?Hs Lu.] ({\i South Africa}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. D. hispidum} (L.) Schwantes, {\i loc. cit.} (1927) ({\i Mesembryanthemum hispidum} L.). Stems erect or trailing, hispid, the lower branches sometimes rooting at the nodes. Leaves 1·2-3 cm, tuberculate-papillose, often reddish. Flowers solitary or 2 or 3 together, 2·5-3 cm in diameter; petals purple.{\i  Cultivated for ornament, and locally naturalized on coasts of W. Mediterranean region}. [Bl Hs It.] ({\i South Africa}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 5.            Aptenia  }              N.E. Br.
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc  By †T.G. Tutin
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Like {\i Mesembryanthemum} but with 4 stigmas and a 4-locular capsule; valves without wings.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. A. cordifolia} (L fil.) Schwantes,{\i  Gartenfl.}{\b  77:} 69 (1928). Procumbent perennial; stems 20-60 cm, much-branched. Leaves opposite, ovate-cordate, finely papillose, flat, not glaucous. Flowers solitary, axillary and terminal, pedunculate; petals purple. 2n = 18. {\i Naturalized in open ground on coasts of S. & W. Europe}. [Az Bl Br Cr Ga Hs It Lu Si.] ({\i South Africa.})
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 6.             Disphyma  }           N.E. Br.
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc  By D.A. Webb (Ed.1) revised by J.R. Akeroyd (Ed.2)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Like {\i Mesembryanthemum} but sprawling shrubs; glabrous, not papillose; wings on capsule widely separated at the base; apical tubercles of capsule bifid.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. D. crassifolium} (L.) L. Bolus,{\i  Fl. Pl. S. Afr.}{\b  7:} t. 276 (1927) ({\i Mesembryanthemum crassifolium} L.). Perennial; stems 20-100 cm, procumbent or trailing, rooting freely at the nodes. Leaves in groups of 3-10, 15-40 × 3-10 mm, oblanceolate, flat above, rounded or somewhat keeled beneath, with rounded apex, yellowish-green to reddish. Flowers solitary, axillary, 3-5 cm in diameter; petals purple. 2n = 36.{\i  Cultivated for ornament, and naturalized on coastal cliffs and sands in W. Europe, northwards to N. Wales.} [Az Br Ga Lu.] ({\i South Africa}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 7.           Lampranthus}         N.E. Br.
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc  By D.A. Webb (Ed.1) revised by J.R. Akeroyd (Ed.2)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Like{\i  Mesembryanthemum} but shrubs; glabrous, not papillose; leaves opposite, slightly connate, more or less 3-angled; flowers solitary or 2 or 3 together, terminal, the petals longer than the sepals; stigmas large, conspicuous, surrounded by a raised nectary-ring; ovary semi-inferior. ({\i Oscularia} Schwantes.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Leaves less than twice as long as wide; peduncles 2-3 mm ......... {\b 1. deltoides}
\par
1 Leaves 4-8 times as long as wide; peduncles 5-20 mm
\par
2 Stems mostly erect; leaves dark bluish-green ........................ {\b 2. multiradiatus}
\par
2 Stems mostly procumbent; leaves distinctly pruinose .............. {\b 3. falciformis}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. L. deltoides} (L.) Glen,{\i  Bothalia}{\b  16:} 55 (1986) ({\i Mesembryanthemum deltoides} L., {\i Oscularia deltoides} (L.) Schwantes). Stems up to 50 cm, decumbent or trailing. Leaves 5-18 × 3-10 mm, triangular-obovoid, broadest above the middle, denticulate on the angles, pruinose. Flowers 1-3 together, 1-2 cm in diameter; petals purple. 2n = 18.{\i  Cultivated for ornament, and naturalized on coastal rocks and walls in S.W. England} ({\i Isles of Scilly}). [Br.] ({\i South Africa}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. L. multiradiatus} (Jacq.) N.E. Br.,{\i  Gard. Chron}. ser. 3,{\b  87:} 71 (1930) ({\i L. roseus} (Willd.) Schwantes, {\i L. glaucus}  auct., non (L.) N.E. Br.). Stems up to 20 cm, decumbent, ascending or erect. Leaves 10-25 × 2-4 mm, linear-oblong, almost triangular in section, dark bluish-green. Flowers 1-3 together, 2-5 cm in diameter; petals pink to purplish-pink. 2n = 36.{\i  Cultivated for ornament, ana naturalized on coastal cliffs in the Channel Islands and S.W. Britain}. [Br Ga.] ({\i South Africa.})
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 3. L. falciformis} (Haw.) N.E. Br.,{\i  Gard. Chron.} ser. 3, {\b 87:} 212 (1930). Stems up to 80 cm, mostly procumbent but some erect. Leaves 6-8 × 1·5-4 mm, linear-oblong to falcate, generally more slender than those of{\b  2}, flattened above, obscurely keeled beneath pale bluish-green, pruinose. Flowers 1 or 2 together, 3·5-4·5 cm in diameter; petals pink or purple.{\i  Cultivated for ornament, and naturalized on coastal cliffs and sands in W. Europe}. [Az Bl Br Ga Hb Lu.] ({\i South Africa}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b 2} and {\b 3} are very similar and are perhaps not distinct.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 8.          Erepsia}             N.E. Br.
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc  By C.D. Preston
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Like {\i Mesembryanthemum} but shrubs; glabrous, not papillose; leaves opposite, slightly connate, acutely 3-angled; flowers solitary, or 2 or 3 together; stigmas more or less globular, very small; nectary glands minute, inconspicuous.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. E. heteropetala} (Haw.) Schwantes,{\i  Gartenfl.}{\b  77:} 68 (1928). Stems up to 35 cm, erect or decumbent. Leaves 16-30 × 6-13 mm narrowly obovoid, irregularly denticulate on the angles, pruinose. Flowers terminal, 1-1·5 cm in diameter; petals purple, shorter than the sepals; inner petals erect or inflexed; staminodes numerous. 2n = 18.{\i  Naturalized on coastal cliffs in S.W. England} ({\i Isles of Scilly}). [Br.] ({\i South Africa}.)
\par

\par
136}
\par