{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Literature: P. Aellen in Hegi,{\i  Ill. Fl. Mitteleur. }ed. 2, {\b 3}({\b 2}): 523-528 (1959). S.J. van Ooststroom & Th. J. Reichgelt,{\i  Gorteria}{\b  1:} 2-6 (1961).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Annual; leaves linear; bracteoles and outer perianth-segments
\par
  not pungent ................................................................................... {\b 3. nodiflora}
\par
1 Perennial; leaves ovate or obovate; bracteoles and outer
\par
  perianth-segments pungent
\par
2 Two of the outer perianth-segments with points c. 1/3 as long
\par
  as the whole; filament about as long as the anther ......................... {\b 1. pungens}
\par
2 Two of the outer perianth-segments with points not more than 1/10
\par
  as long as the whole; filament about twice as long as the anther
\par
  ...................................................................................................... {\b 2. peploides}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. A. pungens} Kunth in Humb., Bonpl. & Kunth, {\i Nov. Gen. Sp.}{\b  2:} 206 (1818) ({\i A. achyrantha} (L.) Swartz,{\i  A. repens} auct.). Perennial up to 30 cm. Stems somewhat woody at base, pubescent. Leaves ovate or obovate, shortly petiolate. Inflorescences sessile, 2 or 3 together, ovoid. Flowers subtended by 2 boat-shaped, pungent bracteoles. Three outer perianth-segments longer than the 2 inner, 2 with points c. 1/3 as long as the whole, the other and the inner ones with short, slender points; all with small tufts of short, retrorsely barbed hairs. Filaments and the teeth between them about as long as the anthers.{\i  Ruderal. Naturalized in E. Spain.} [Hs.] ({\i Temperate South America}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28     {\b 2. A. caracasana} Kunth in Humb., Bonpl. & Kunth, {\i Nov. Gen. Sp.}{\b  2:} 165 (1818) ({\i A. peploides} (Humb. & Bonpl.) Urban,{\i  A. achyrantha} (L.) Swartz,{\i  A. repens} auct.). Like {\b 1} but points of outer perianth-segments not more than 1/10 as long as the whole; perianth-segments with more numerous, longer, retrorsely barbed hairs; filaments and the teeth between them about twice as long as the anthers. 2n = 96. {\i Cultivated ground and as a ruderal. Naturalized in Açores and S. & E. Spain}. [Az Hs.] ({\i W. Indies, tropical America.})
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 3. A. nodiflora} R. Br., {\i Prodr. Fl. Nov. Holl.}{\b  1:} 417 (1810). Annual. Stems glabrous or slightly hairy at the nodes, but with 2 lines of hairs when young. Leaves linear, sessile. Inflorescence sessile, axillary, globose. Bracteoles not spinose. Perianth-segments c. 3 mm, white.{\i  Naturalized in S. Spain.} [Hs.] ({\i Australia, India, Africa.})
\par

\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 50.       NYCTAGINACEAE}
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc  Edit. V.H. Heywood.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Herbs, shrubs or woody climbers, often with swollen nodes. Leaves simple, entire, exstipulate. Flowers solitary or in small, terminal umbels (rarely in whorls), subtended by bracts which often simulate a perianth. Perianth petaloid, tubular, with a short, 5-lobed limb; lower part of tube persistent and concrescent with the fruit to form an achene-like anthocarp. Stamens usually 3-5. Ovary superior, 1-celled, containing a single ovule.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Various cultivars and hybrids of {\i Bougainvillea,} woody climbers with alternate leaves and an involucre of 3 conspicuous, brightly coloured bracts, are extensively planted for ornament in parts of the Mediterranean region.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Bracts few and inconspicuous; flowers in umbels of 4-10
\par

\par
2 Leaves and stems viscid; anthocarp with distinct longitudinal ribs
\par
  ...................................................................................................... {\b 1. Boerhavia}
\par
2 Leaves and stems not viscid; anthocarp terete ..................... {\b 2. Commicarpus}
\par
1 Bracts conspicuous, united around the base of each flower or umbel
\par
   to form a calyx-like involucre; flowers solitary or in umbels of 3-5
\par
3 Perianth c. 25 mm in diameter; involucre tubular, not accrescent,
  or membranous, subtending only 1 flower ...................................{\b  3. Mirabilis}
\par
3 Perianth c. 8 mm in diameter; involucre broadly conical, accrescent,
  membranous in fruit, subtending several flowers ..................... {\b 4. Oxybaphus}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 1.               Boerhavia}              L.
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc  By J.R. Akeroyd.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Shrubs or somewhat woody herbs with opposite leaves. Flowers small, in whorls or umbels. Bracts few and inconspicuous. Perianth-tube contracted above the ovary and surmounted by a spreading, 5-lobed limb. Stamens 1-6. Anthocarp with distinct longitudinal ribs, glandular, viscid.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. B. repens} L.,{\i  Sp. Pl.} 3 (1753). Plant glandular-pubescent, viscid; rather woody. Stems up to 100 cm, decumbent to ascending, much-branched. Leaves 5-25(-50) mm, ovate to elliptical, with sinuate margins; petiole about as long as the lamina. Flowers in rather dense, 4- to 10-flowered umbels on peduncles 1-2 cm. Perianth 2·5-3 mm, pink or purple. Stamens 2. Anthocarp 3-4 mm, clavate. {\i Naturalized as a ruderal in Sicilia} ({\i Palermo}). [Si.] ({\i Tropical Africa and Asia.})
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 The plant naturalized in Europe is subsp.{\b  viscosa} (Choisy) Maire, {\i Sahara Central }88 (1933).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 2.            Commicarpus}             Standley
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc  By D.A. Webb.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Like{\i  Boerhavia}, but stamens usually 3 and anthocarp terete with hooked hairs.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. C. plumbagineus} (Cav.) Standley, {\i Contr. U.S. Nat. Herb.}{\b  18:} 101 (1916) ({\i Boerhavia plumbaginea} Cav.). Stems up to 70 cm, woody, geniculate, straggling or procumbent with long internodes. Leaves c. 3 × 2 cm, deltate to ovate, stalked, puberulent beneath. Flowers in small, long-pedunculate, axillary, c. 10-flowered umbels, sometimes with a whorl of flowers on the peduncle. Bracts 1 or 2, very small. Perianth c. 13 × 6 mm, pubescent, sharply differentiated into a lower, blackish portion surrounding the ovary, and an upper portion, white or pale pink, narrowly tubular below and gradually expanded into a flat limb with 5 emarginate lobes; at the junction of the 2 portions are 5 black tubercles. Stamens and style exserted. Anthocarp 8 mm, obconical, striate, glandular-tuberculate, especially at the apex.{\i  Rocky and stony places. S.E. Spain} ({\i hills near Orihuela}). Hs. ({\i S.W. Asia and tropical Africa}.)
\par

\par
133}
\par