{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 introduced into Europe and are usually casual in the north and centre. This account includes only those species that are known to be naturalized.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b A. caudatus} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 990 (1753), native in South America, with long, pendent, red or rarely green inflorescences, is commonly cultivated for ornament, and sometimes occurs as a casual.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Literature: A. Thellung in Ascherson & Graebner, {\i Syn. Mitteleur. Fl.}{\b  5}({\b 1}): 225-356 (1914). S. Priszter,{\i  Ann. Sect. Horti Viticult. Univ. Sci. Agr. }({\i Budapest}){\b  20:} 121-262 (1953). P. Aellen in Hegi,{\i  Ill. Fl. Mitteleur.} ed. 2, {\b 3}({\b 2}): 465-516 (1959). J.P.M. Brenan, {\i Watsonia }{\b 4:} 261-280 (1961). J.D. Sauer,{\i  Ann. Missouri Bot. Gard.}{\b  54:} 103-137 (1967). J.L. Carretero,{\i  Collect. Bot}. ({\i Barcelona}){\b  11:} 105-142 (1979).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Perianth-segments (4)5
\par
2 Inflorescence composed entirely of axillary cymose clusters, 
\par
  usually leafy to the apex
\par
3 Fruit dehiscing transversely; larger perianth-segments with a 
\par
  short acumen .................................................................................. {\b 6. blitoides}
\par
3 Fruit indehiscent; perianth-segments obtuse ................................... {\b 7. crispus}
\par
2 Inflorescence a terminal panicle, the apical part leafless and often
\par
  spicate
\par
4 Fruit dehiscing transversely
\par
5 Perianth-segments enlarged in the upper part, ± spathulate, 
\par
  obtuse or truncate ....................................................................... {\b 4. retroflexus}
\par
5 Perianth-segments lanceolate or narrowly ovate or elliptical, acute
\par
6 Longest bracteoles of the female flowers 1-1½ times as long 
\par
  as the perianth ................................................................................ {\b 2. cruentus}
\par
6 Longest bracteoles of the female flowers usually twice as long 
\par
  as the perianth
\par
7 Longest bracteoles not more than 4 mm; stamens 5 ................... {\b 1. hybridus}
\par
7 Longest bracteoles 4-6 mm; stamens usually 3 ............................ {\b 3. powellii}
\par
4 Fruit indehiscent
\par
8 Bracteoles longer than the perianth, spinose; leaves ovate or
\par
  ovate-oblong ................................................................................... {\b 3. powellii}
\par
8 Bracteoles shorter than the perianth, not spinose; leaves
\par
  linear-lanceolate .......................................................................... {\b 5. muricatus}
\par
1 Perianth-segments (2)3
\par
9 Fruit dehiscing transversely
\par
10 Bracteoles twice as long as the perianth, spinose ............................ {\b 8. albus}
\par
10 Bracteoles not longer than the perianth, not spinose ............... {\b 9. graecizans}
\par
9  Fruit indehiscent or dehiscing irregularly
\par
11 Leaves obtuse; stems puberulent above; fruit inflated ............. {\b 10. deflexus}
\par
11 Leaves ± emarginate; stems usually glabrous; fruit not inflated
\par
12 Fruit feebly rugose, broadly ellipsoidal; stems glabrous ............. {\b 11. lividus}
\par
12 Fruit strongly muricate, subglobose; stems sometimes puberulent
\par
   above .............................................................................................. {\b 12. viridis}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. A. hybridus} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 990 (1753) ({\i A. patulus} auct., non Bertol.,{\i  A. chlorostachys} Willd.). Stems 20-100 cm, erect, sparsely to densely pubescent above. Leaves 3-8 cm, rhombic-ovate. Inflorescence elongate-spicate, often compound, with long branches. Bracteoles (2-)3-4 mm, ovate, with a very long mucro, about twice as long as the perianth. Perianth-segments 5, 1·5-2(-2·4) mm, narrowly ovate, usually acute, about as long as the fruit. Stamens 5. Fruit dehiscing transversely. 2n = 32.{\i  Commonly naturalized in many parts of Europe}. [Al Au Az Bl Br Bu Co Cr Cz Ga Ge Gr He Hs Hu It Ju Lu Po Rm Rs(K) Sa Si.] ({\i Tropical and subtropical America}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 There has been considerable taxonomic and nomenclatural confusion between species {\b 1-3} which has arisen because of the great level of phenotypic plasticity in these species, hybridization with each other and other species (especially{\b  4}), and the naming of taxa in the Old and New Worlds without reference to the total pattern of variation. The geographical distributions of these species reported here must therefore be regarded as provisional.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Their taxonomy is summarized in J.D. Sauer,{\i  loc. cit.} (1967).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. A. cruentus} L., {\i Syst. Nat.} ed. 10,{\i  2:} 1269 (1759) (incl.{\i  A. paniculatus} L., {\i A. patulus} Bertol.). Like {\b 1} but the terminal inflorescence usually dense and with short branches at the base; bracteoles 2-4 mm, with short mucro, 1-1½ times as long as the perianth. 2n = 34.{\i  Commonly naturalized, mainly in S. & C. Europe}. [Al Bl Bu Co Cr Cz Ga Ge He Hs Hu It Ju Lu Rm Rs(C, W, K) Sa Si.] ({\i Tropical and subtropical America.})
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Grown as a grain crop in Central America, but long cultivated for ornament in Europe, where red- or yellow-flowered plants have been known as {\i A. paniculatus} L.,{\i  Sp. Pl}. ed. 2, 1406 (1763).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 3. A. powellii} S. Watson, {\i Proc. Amer. Acad. Arts Sci.}{\b  10:} 347 (1875) ({\i A. bouchonii} Thell.,{\i  A. chlorostachys} auct., non Willd.). Like {\b 1} but the stem glabrous to sparsely pubescent; longest bracteoles 4-6 mm, linear-lanceolate, long-spinous; perianth-segments 3-5, (1·5-)2·5-3 mm, elliptic-lanceolate to linear; stamens 3(-5); fruit dehiscent or indehiscent.{\i  Naturalized in S.W. & C. Europe; casual elsewhere}. [Ga Ge Hs It.] ({\i North and South America}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 In North America this species usually has dehiscent fruits, and plants with indehiscent fruits occur sporadically within populations. Plants from S.W. Europe and elsewhere differ in the more branched inflorescence and the somewhat smaller, indehiscent fruits.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 4. A. retroflexus} L.,{\i  Sp. Pl}. 991 (1753) (incl.{\i  A. hungaricus} Kovacev). Stems 15-100 cm, erect, lanate in the upper part. Leaves 3-8 cm, rhombic-ovate. Inflorescence spicate, usually short and dense. Bracteoles 3-6 mm, stout and spinescent, 1 1/3-2 times as long as the perianth. Perianth-segments 2-3 mm, linear-cuneate, truncate or obtuse, with short mucro. Fruit dehiscing transversely, feebly muricate. 2n = 34.{\i  Introduced and naturalized throughout most of Europe, but only casual in the north}. [Al Au Az Be Bl Br Bu Co Cz Da Ga Ge Gr He Ho Hs Hu It Ju Lu Po Rm Rs(B, C, W, K, E) Si Su Tu.] ({\i North America.})
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b A. quitensis} Kunth in Humb., Bonpl. & Kunth,{\i  Nov. Gen. Sp.}{\b  2:} 194 (1818), from South America, like {\b 4} but glabrous or puberulent, the inflorescence with numerous distinct lateral branches, and the perianth-segments with green excurrent midrib, is a widespread casual that is perhaps becoming naturalized in Açores and Islas Baleares.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 5. A. muricatus} (Gillies ex Moq.) Hieron.,{\i  Bol. Acad. Nac. Ci.}{\b  4:} 421 (1881) ({\i Euloxus muricatus} Gillies ex Moq.). Decumbent perennial up to 60 cm, usually glabrous. Leaves 2-5 cm, linear to lanceolate or narrowly ovate-lanceolate, long-petiolate. Inflorescence a long panicle, branched at the base. Bracteoles ½ as long as the perianth, ovate, acute. Perianth-segments 5, c. 2 mm, spathulate. Fruit indehiscent, strongly muricate. 2n = 34.{\i  Naturalized}
\par

\par
131}
\par