{\rtf1\ansi \deff4\deflang1033{\fonttbl{\f4\froman\fcharset0\fprq2 Times New Roman;}{\f31\fnil\fcharset2\fprq2 Math3Mono;}}{\colortbl;\red0\green0\blue0;\red0\green0\blue255;\red0\green255\blue255;\red0\green255\blue0;\red255\green0\blue255;\red255\green0\blue0;\red255\green255\blue0;\red255\green255\blue255;\red0\green0\blue128;\red0\green128\blue128;\red0\green128\blue0;\red128\green0\blue128;\red128\green0\blue0;\red128\green128\blue0;\red128\green128\blue128;\red192\green192\blue192;}{\stylesheet{\widctlpar \f4\fs20\lang2057 \snext0 Normal;}{\*\cs10 \additive Default Paragraph Font;}}{\info{\author dddd}{\operator dddd}{\creatim\yr1998\mo11\dy11\hr16\min19}{\revtim\yr1998\mo11\dy11\hr16\min22}{\version2}{\edmins3}{\nofpages4}{\nofwords1035}{\nofchars5902}{\*\company  }{\vern57431}}\widowctrl\ftnbj\aenddoc\hyphcaps0 \fet0\sectd \linex0 {\*\pnseclvl1\pnucrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl2\pnucltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl3\pndec\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl4\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl5\pndec\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl6\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl7\pnlcrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl8\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl9\pnlcrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}
\pard\plain  \f4\fs20\lang2057 {\fs28    }{\b\fs28 28. A. orbicularis}{\fs28  Vis.,}{\i\fs28  Fl. Dalm.}{\b\fs28  3:}{\fs28  180 (1850) (}{\i\fs28 A. deflexa}{\fs28  auct., non Decne, }{\i\fs28 A. pubescens}{\fs28  D'Urv., }{\i\fs28 A. graveolens}{\fs28  auct. balcan., non Schreber). Like}{\b\fs28  27}{\fs28 (}{\b\fs28 a}{\fs28 ) but whole plant more densely glandular-pubescent; leaves thicker and wider, broadly elliptical or obovate; all leaves, including the upper, narrowed at base and more or less petiolate; sepals lanceolate, acuminate; petals only slightly exceeding sepals; seeds 0\'b74-0\'b76 mm. 2n = 44,}{\fs28 {\field{\*\fldinst SYMBOL 232 \\f "Math3Mono" \\s 14}{\fldrslt\f31\fs28}}}{\i\fs28  N.W. Jugoslavia}{\fs28  (}{\i\fs28 Velebit}{\fs28 ). Ju.
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 29. A. fragillima}{\fs28  Rech. fil.,}{\i\fs28  Feddes Repert.}{\b\fs28  47:}{\fs28  49 (1939) (}{\i\fs28 A. pamphylica}{\fs28  sensu Hayek). Like}{\b\fs28  27}{\fs28 (}{\b\fs28 a}{\fs28 ) but plant less densely caespitose, greyish-green, and covered with very short, eglandular hairs, with or without glandular hairs; leaves thicker and shorter, all more or less petiolate; inflorescence dense, few-flowered; peduncles and pedicels shorter and stouter; sepals 4-5 mm, lanceolate, acuminate; petals only slightly exceeding sepals; seeds 0\'b75-0\'b76 mm. 2n = 22. }{\i\fs28 Dry stony places}{\fs28 . \bullet }{\i\fs28  S. Aegean region.}{\fs28  Cr Gr.
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 30. A. ligericina}{\fs28  Lecoq & Lamotte, }{\i\fs28 Cat. Pl. Centr. Fr.}{\fs28  104 (1847) (}{\i\fs28 A. lesurina}{\fs28  Loret). Like }{\b\fs28 27}{\fs28 (}{\b\fs28 a}{\fs28 ) but stems 7-40 cm, usually stouter; leaves with midrib obscure beneath; sepals 3\'b75-5\'b75 mm, more or less distinctly 1-veined, lacking or having obscure lateral veins; petals c. 1 1/3 times as long as sepals; seeds with low, obtuse tubercles or ridges. }{\i\fs28 Calcareous rocks and sands. \bullet  S. France}{\fs28  (}{\i\fs28 Loz\'e8re and Aveyron}{\fs28 );}{\i\fs28  E. Pyrenees.}{\fs28  Ga Hs.
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 31. A. cretica}{\fs28  Sprengel, }{\i\fs28 Syst. Veg. }{\b\fs28 2:}{\fs28  396 (1825) (incl.}{\i\fs28  A. pirinica}{\fs28  Stoj.). Densely caespitose perennial; stems 2-10 cm, slender, fragile, usually glandular-pubescent only in inflorescence. Leaves 3-10 mm, crowded, oblong-elliptical or oblanceolate, rather obtuse, glabrous or glandular-pubescent (var.}{\i\fs28  stygia }{\fs28 (Boiss. & Heldr.) Boiss.), 1-veined. Inflorescence 1- to 5-flowered, usually corymbose; pedicels 1-3 times as long as sepals. Sepals 2\'b75-5 mm, oblong or oblong-lanceolate, obtuse or subacute, veinless, keeled at the base, glandular-pubescent; petals 2 or more times as long as sepals, white. Capsule slightly exceeding sepals, ovoid. 2n = 24, 40.}{\i\fs28  Limestone rocks. \bullet  Mountains of S. part of Balkan peninsula; Kriti.}{\fs28  Al Bu Cr Gr.
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 32. A. halacsyi}{\fs28  Bald.,}{\i\fs28  Malpighia}{\b\fs28  5:}{\fs28  65 (1891). Dwarf caespitose perennial; stems 2-5 cm, slender, eglandular, with short, white, deflexed hairs especially above. Leaves 2-4 mm, ovate, lanceolate or obovate, shortly petiolate, 1-veined, subglabrous, strongly ciliate at base, crowded on vegetative stems. Flowers solitary or paired; pedicels 1-2 times as long as sepals. Sepals 3-4 mm, oblong-lanceolate, obtuse or subacute, glandular-hairy; petals scarcely exceeding sepals, broadly spathulate, white. Capsule slightly exceeding sepals, ovoid.}{\i\fs28  Rock-crevices.\bullet  Crna Gora}{\fs28  (}{\i\fs28 Komovi, S.W. of Andrijevica}{\fs28 ). Ju.
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 33. A. cinerea}{\fs28  DC. in Lam. & DC.,}{\i\fs28  Fl. Fr.}{\fs28  ed. 3, }{\b\fs28 5:}{\fs28  611 (1815). Perennial, suffruticose at base, with many ascending flowering stems 10-20 cm, and with very few and inconspicuous vegetative leafy stems at time of flowering, so appearing annual; stems with short, deflexed hairs. Leaves 3-5 mm, 1-veined, the lower oblong-lanceolate, acute, the upper linear-lanceolate. Inflorescence lax, 3- to 10-flowered, eglandular; pedicels 4-6 times as long as sepals, rigid, erect, with short, deflexed hairs. Sepals 4-5 mm, ovate-lanceolate, acute, distinctly 1-veined, developing a strongly ciliate keel after flowering; petals about twice as long as sepals. Capsule slightly exceeding sepals, ovoid-globose. Seeds with low, flattened tubercles.}{\i\fs28  Dry and rocky places. \bullet  S.E. France.}{\fs28  Ga.
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 34. A. hispida}{\fs28  L.,}{\i\fs28  Sp. Pl.}{\fs28  608 (1753). Pubescent, caespitose perennial; stems 7-25 cm, many, ascending. Leaves 5-10 \'d7 0\'b75(-1) mm, subulate, rarely linear-lanceolate and acuminate, not narrowed at base, 1-veined. Inflorescence lax, 3- to 10-flowered, glandular-pubescent. Sepals 3-4\'b75 mm, lanceolate, acuminate, 3- to 5-veined, with the mid-vein prominent; petals 5 mm, c. 1 1/3 times as long as sepals. Capsule slightly shorter than or equalling sepals, broadly ovoid. Seeds 0\'b76 mm, reniform, with acute tubercles. 2n = 40.}{\i\fs28  Calcareous, often dolomitic rocks.\bullet  S.E. France. }{\fs28 Ga.
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 35. A. fontqueri}{\fs28  Cardona & J.M. Monts.,}{\i\fs28  Biol. \'c9col. M\'e9dit.}{\b\fs28  8:}{\fs28  15 (1981). Like }{\b\fs28 34}{\fs28  but biennial; leaves linear-oblanceolate, acute; sepals ovate-lanceolate, acute, 3(-5)-veined; petals 4 mm; capsule ovoid-conical, more or less exceeding sepals; seeds 0\'b78-1 mm, rugose-granulate. 2n = 44, 66. \bullet }{\i\fs28  N.E. Spain.}{\fs28  Hs.
\par 
\par Three subspecies have been recognized, based on minor differences, but the characters overlap to a large extent.
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 36. A. serpyllifolia}{\fs28  L.,}{\i\fs28  Sp. Pl.}{\fs28  423 (1753) (}{\i\fs28 Minuartia olonensis}{\fs28  (Bonnier) P. Fourn.). A relatively robust, scabrid-puberulent annual, sometimes biennial or perennial; stems 2-30 cm, usually profusely branched at base, ascending or erect. Leaves 2\'b75-8 mm, broadly ovate to ovate-lanceolate, acute or acuminate, 3- to 5-veined, the lower petiolate, the upper sessile. Flowers in diffuse or dense dichasia; pedicels usually longer than sepals. Sepals ovate-lanceolate or ovate, acute, 3- to 5-veined; the inner with a scarious margin, the central green part usually being 1/3-1/2 the width of the sepals; petals white, not more than 2/3 as long as sepals. Capsule less than twice as long as wide, ovoid-conical or subovoid-cylindrical. Seeds 0\'b73-0\'b77 mm.}{\i\fs28  Dry, often sandy places. Almost throughout Europe}{\fs28 . All except Az Fa Is Sb.
\par 
\par }
\pard \li200\ {\fs28 1 Capsule ovoid-conical, \'b1 swollen at base
\par 2 Inflorescence lax; pedicels longer than sepals; capsule distinctly 
\par   swollen at base, 1\'b75-2 mm wide ................................. (}{\b\fs28 a}{\fs28 ) subsp.}{\b\fs28  serpyllifolia}{\fs28 
\par 2 Inflorescence dense; pedicels shorter than sepals; capsule slightly
\par   swollen at base, at least 2 mm wide ............................. (}{\b\fs28 b}{\fs28 ) subsp.}{\b\fs28  macrocarpa}{\fs28 
\par 1 Capsule subovoid-cylindrical, not swollen at base
\par 3 Sepals 2-3 mm; plant lax ............................................. (}{\b\fs28 c}{\fs28 ) subsp.}{\b\fs28  leptoclados}{\fs28 
\par 3 Sepals 3\'b75-4\'b75 mm; plant compact
\par 4 Plant usually eglandular; leaves acute ....................... (}{\b\fs28 d}{\fs28 ) subsp.}{\b\fs28  marschlinsii}{\fs28 
\par 4 Plant glandular, often densely; leaves subacute to obtuse .. (}{\b\fs28 e}{\fs28 ) subsp.}{\b\fs28  aegaea}{\fs28 
\par 
\par }
\pard  {\fs28  (}{\b\fs28 a}{\fs28 ) Subsp. }{\b\fs28 serpyllifolia}{\fs28  : Plant 3-30 cm, lax, usually eglandular-puberulent. Leaves ovate or elliptical, acute or acuminate. Pedicels longer than sepals. Sepals 3-4\'b75 mm, the inner with broad, scarious margins. Capsule ovoid-conical, distinctly swollen at base, slightly longer than sepals. Seeds 0\'b74-0\'b76(-0\'b77) mm. 2n = 40. }{\i\fs28 Almost throughout the range of the species, but only on mountains in the south}{\fs28 .
\par  (}{\b\fs28 b}{\fs28 ) Subsp.}{\b\fs28  macrocarpa}{\fs28  (Lloyd) Perring & P.D. Sell,}{\i\fs28  Watsonia}{\b\fs28  6:}{\fs28  294 (1967): Like subsp. (}{\b\fs28 a}{\fs28 ) but inflorescence dense, with pedicels shorter than sepals; capsule at least 2 mm wide; seeds 0\'b76(-0\'b77) mm.}{\i\fs28  Dunes on the Atlantic coasts of Europe.}{\fs28 
\par  (}{\b\fs28 c}{\fs28 ) Subsp.}{\b\fs28  leptoclados}{\fs28  (Reichenb.) Nyman, }{\i\fs28 Consp}{\fs28 . 115 (1878) (}{\i\fs28 A. leptoclados}{\fs28  (Reichenb.) Guss., }{\i\fs28 A. minutiflora}{\fs28  Loscos,}{\i\fs28  A. leptoclados}{\fs28  subsp.}{\i\fs28  minutiflora}{\fs28  (Loscos) H. Lindb.,}{\i\fs28  A. brevifolia}{\fs28  Gilib.,}{\i\fs28  A. uralensis }{\fs28 Pallas,}{\i\fs28  A. zozii}{\fs28  Kleopow): Stems and leaves like subsp. (}{\b\fs28 a}{\fs28 ) but more slender. Sepals 2-3 mm. Capsule subovoid-cylindrical, not swollen at base, shorter than or equalling sepals. Seeds
\par 
\par 146}
\par }