{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 diameter which show growth-rings inside; stems usually completely covered by the 4-ranked, densely imbricate leaves. Leaves 1-2 mm, ovate-deltate, obtuse, recurved. Flowers 4-merous, solitary, terminal, sessile, not more than half-exserted from the cushion. Sepals c. 2·5 mm, ovate-lanceolate, obtuse; petals c. 1½ times as long as sepals. Seeds 0·7-0·9 mm. 2n = 40.{\i  Rocky mountain slopes. S.E. Spain.} Hs.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 8. A. tetraquetra} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 423 (1753). Perennial, usually forming dense cushions 5-25 cm in diameter, not showing growth-rings, subglabrous; stems more or less densely covered with 4-ranked imbricate leaves. Leaves 1-4 mm, ovate, obtuse, recurved, glabrous, ciliate at base. Flowers solitary and terminal, completely exserted from foliage, on slightly (up to c. 1 cm) protruding stems; bracts ovate-lanceolate. Sepals 4-9 mm, ovate-lanceolate, gradually narrowed to obtuse apex, with prominent, raised veins; petals slightly exceeding or up to 1½ times as long as sepals. Seeds 0·8-1·2(-1·4) mm.{\i  Dry places on mountains. • C. & E. Pyrenees, N.C. & S.E. Spain}. Ga Hs.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp.{\b  tetraquetra} : Leaves broadly ovate. Flowers 4-merous; petals 4·5-8 mm; stamens 8. 2n = 120, c. 140.{\i  C. & E. Pyrenees; N.C. Spain} ({\i Segovia and Guadalajara provs}).
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp.{\b  amabilis} (Bory) H. Lindb.,{\i  Acta Soc. Sci. Fenn.} nov. ser., B, {\b 1:} 45 (1932) (var.{\i  granatensis} Boiss.): Leaves ovate. Flowers 5-merous; petals 3·5-6·5 mm; stamens 10. 2n = 40, 60, 80, 100.{\i  S.E. Spain.}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 9. A. tomentosa} Willk.,{\i  Linnaea}{\b  25:} 15 (1852). Perennial, forming compact, silvery cushions 5-10 cm in diameter, more or less densely covered with very short, crisped, white hairs; stems densely covered with imbricate leaves. Leaves 1-1·5 mm, ovate, obtuse, recurved. Flowers 5-merous, completely exserted from the cushion, solitary and terminal or 2 or 3 in a terminal cluster with 1 or 2 axillary flowers just below. Sepals 4-5 mm, lanceolate, gradually narrowed to obtuse apex, keeled for c. 1 mm at base, otherwise very obscurely veined; petals slightly exceeding sepals. •{\i  S.E. Spain} ({\i W. of Vélez Rubio}). Hs.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Possibly not specifically distinct from {\b 10}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 10. A. armerina} Bory,{\i  Ann. Gen. Sci. Phys.} ({\i Bruxelles}) {\b 3:} 5 (1820) ({\i A. armeriastrum }Boiss.; incl.{\i  A. vitoriana} Uribe-Echebarria & Alejandre). Usually laxly caespitose perennial, with flowering stems protruding from the lax vegetative cushion; stems 5-20 cm, usually puberulent. Leaves 2-6 mm, linear-lanceolate to ovate, obtuse, recurved, usually folded, rarely imbricate, puberulent or subglabrous. Flowers 5-merous, 2-12 in dense terminal heads surrounded by linear-lanceolate bracts, sometimes with 1-3 axillary flowers below. Sepals 3-8(-9) mm, ovate-lanceolate, acute, with very prominent raised veins, subglabrous to sublanate; petals slightly exceeding or up to 1½ times as long as sepals. Seeds 0·7-1·3(-1·5) mm. 2n = 30, 32, 36, 60.{\i  S.E. & E.C. Spain.} Hs.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 A variable species, in which several local populations have been described at specific or subspecific rank. However, these are linked to typical populations of {\b 10} by intermediates and probably merit, at most, varietal rank. Densely puberulent plants with sublanate sepals are best treated as var. {\i caesia} (Boiss.) Pau.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 11. A. aggregata} (L.) Loisel. in Cuvier, {\i Dict. Sci. Nat.}{\b  46:} 513 (1827). Caespitose perennial. Leaves 1-4 mm, usually acute and mucronate, recurved and folded, glabrous or sparsely puberulent. Flowers 5-merous. Sepals usually lanceolate or linear-lanceolate, with strong raised veins; petals equalling or slightly exceeding sepals.{\i  S.W. Europe.} Ga Hs It ?Lu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Leaves not imbricate; sepals ovate-lanceolate ............ ({\b c}) subsp.{\b  racemosa}
\par
1 Leaves imbricate; sepals lanceolate or linear-lanceolate
\par
2 Flowers 3-20 in head .................................................. ({\b a}) subsp. {\b aggregata}
\par
2 Flowers solitary, rarely 2 or 3 together ........................ ({\b b}) subsp.{\b  erinacea}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b aggregata} ({\i A. capitata} Lam.; incl.{\i  A. pseudarmeriastrum} Boiss.): Plant forming a lax cushion with stems 2-5 cm, covered with more or less imbricate, mostly triangular leaves. Flowering stems protruding usually 3 cm or more above the cushion, unbranched, with dense, terminal 3- to 20-flowered heads. Sepals 5-6·5 mm, acuminate. 2n = 26, 30.{\i  Iberian peninsula; S. France; N.W. Italy} ({\i Alpi Marittime}).
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b erinacea} (Boiss.) Font Quer, {\i Anal. Jard. Bot. Madrid}{\b  6}({\b 2}): 487 (1946) ({\i A. erinacea} Boiss.): Plant forming a dense cushion 5-10 cm in diameter, with stems covered with densely imbricate, ovate leaves. Flowers solitary and terminal, rarely 2 or 3 together, on the surface of the cushion, not on protruding stems. Sepals 4-6 mm, acuminate. 2n = 20, c. 28, 30. •{\i  E. Spain.}
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b c}) Subsp.{\b  racemosa} (Willk.) Font Quer, {\i Arx. Secc. Ci. Inst. Est. Catalans}{\b  15:} 30 (1948) ({\i A. racemosa} Willk.): Plant laxly caespitose, with acute, mucronate, more or less distant and not imbricate leaves. Flowers (1)2-5 in lax racemes. Sepals 4-6 mm, ovate-lanceolate, acute, strongly veined. 2n = 30. •{\i  S. Spain.}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Intermediates between subspp. ({\b a}) and ({\b b}) have been reported from S.E. France (Mont Ventoux).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Other subspecies have been recognized in the Iberian peninsula; these are listed in W. Greuter, H.M. Burdet & G. Long,{\i  Medchecklist}{\b  1:} 168-169 (1984).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 12. A. querioides} Pourret ex Willk.,{\i  Bot. Zeit.}{\b  5:} 239 (1847). Caespitose perennial. Leaves of flowering stems 2·5-7 mm, ovate, strongly keeled, acute to acuminate, reflexed, usually glabrous; leaves of sterile stems not reflexed. Flowers 5-merous, 10-20 in a terminal head; flowering stems often procumbent; bracts ovate. Sepals 4-8 mm, ovate-lanceolate; petals slightly exceeding sepals. Seeds 0·9-1·3 mm. 2n = 26. •{\i  Mountains of N. & C. Spain and N. Portugal}. Hs Lu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 13. A. pungens} Clemente ex Lag.,{\i  Gen. Sp. Nov.} 15 (1816). Perennial, forming dense, spiny cushions; stems 10-20 cm, branched, viscid-puberulent at least above. Leaves c. 15-30 mm, linear-subulate, subtriquetrous, very stiff and spiny, patent, at least the upper puberulent. Stems 1(-3)-flowered; pedicels c. 2-3 times as long as sepals, viscid-puberulent. Sepals 6-13 mm, linear-lanceolate, acuminate, stiff, spiny, viscid-puberulent; petals shorter than sepals, white, oblong-obovate. Capsule shorter than sepals, ovoid. 2n = 56. {\i Dry screes, c. }1900-3000{\i  m. S. Spain} ({\i Sierra Nevada}). Hs. ({\i Morocco.})
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 14. A. valentina} Boiss.,{\i  Diagn. Pl. Or. Nov.}{\b  3}({\b 1}): 90 (1854). Perennial, sometimes laxly caespitose; stems 5-20 cm, slender, straggling, branched at right-angles, bearing minute, deflexed hairs. Leaves 3-10 × 0·5-1·5 mm, linear or linear-lanceolate, rather rigid but not spiny, usually fasciculate, flat but often appearing subulate because the margins are revolute. Branches 1(-3)flowered; pedicels 3-5 times as long as sepals. Sepals 2·5-5 mm, ovate, subacute to acuminate, with a distinct mid-vein, glabrous, often ciliate at base; petals about twice as long as sepals, oblong
\par

\par
143}
\par