{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 species, but the differences are not easily described and moreover are unreliably preserved in dried material. There are good illustrations in the account of the genus in S. Pignatti,{\i  Flora d'Italia }{\b 1:} 195-199 (1982).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Literature: H. Merxmüller & J. Grau,{\i  Mitt. Bot. Staatssam.} ({\i München}) {\b 6:} 257-273 (1967). S.M. Walters,{\i  Bot. Jour. Linn. Soc.}{\b  109:} 323-324 (1992).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Stems glabrous
\par
2 Leaves ciliate at base
\par
3 Decumbent perennial; stems often rooting .................................... {\b 20. ciliata}
\par
3 Annual or biennial; stems not rooting
\par
4 Lower leaves spathulate; upper leaves linear-lanceolate ......... {\b 4. diversifolia}
\par
4 All leaves ± ovate ..................................................................... {\b 5. minutiflora}
\par
2 Leaves glabrous
\par
5 Flowers solitary; pedicels without bracteoles ......................... {\b 17. markgrafii}
\par
5 Flowers usually in a simple cyme; pedicels bracteolate
\par
6 Flowers mostly 4-merous
\par
7 Plant green; leaves sometimes shiny when fresh, rarely glaucescent
\par
8 Stems freely rooting, often procumbent; lower leaves never fleshy
\par
  ...................................................................................................... {\b 15. muscosa}
\par
8 Stems arising from apex of rootstock, often pendent, not rooting; 
\par
  lower leaves often fleshy ......................................................... {\b 16. intermedia}
\par
7 Plant grey (rarely green); leaves glaucous, never shiny when fresh
\par
9 Leaves usually 5-10 mm, cylindrical; stems weak and slender . {\b 25. sedoides}
\par
9 Leaves mostly more than 10 mm, usually flat; stems sturdy, 
\par
  not very slender
\par
10 Petals not more than 4 mm; strophiole simply branched ......... {\b 18. papulosa}
\par
10 Petals usually more than 5 mm; strophiole intricately branched
\par
   ................................................................................................. {\b 19. tommasinii}
\par
6  Flowers mostly 5-merous
\par
11 At least the upper leaves linear
\par
12 Petals at least 4 mm
\par
13 Upper leaves glaucous; stems slightly thickened at nodes; 
\par
   petals usually 1½-2 times as long as sepals ............................... {\b 22. bavarica}
\par
13 Whole plant glaucous; stems strongly thickened at nodes; 
\par
   petals less than 1½ times as long as sepals ............................... {\b 23. insubrica}
\par
12 Petals 2-4 mm
\par
14 Sepals 1·8-2·2 mm; seeds tuberculate ........................................ {\b 10. pichleri}
\par
14 Sepals 2·5-3 mm; seeds smooth ......................................... {\b 21. glaucovirens}
\par
11 Leaves lanceolate, ovate or broadly spathulate
\par
15 Pedicels erect in fruit
\par
16 Leaves distinctly petiolate ........................................................... {\b 6. intricata}
\par
16 Leaves sessile or subsessile
\par
17 Leaves less than 3 times as long as broad ................................ {\b 7. tejedensis}
\par
17 Leaves more than 3 times as long as broad ................................. {\b 8. lebrunii}
\par
15 Pedicels deflexed in fruit
\par
18 Sepals obtuse ............................................................................. {\b 10. pichleri}
\par
18 Sepals acute or acuminate
\par
19 Leaves 2-3 mm wide; seeds 1·5-2·0 mm ................................. {\b 24. dielsiana}
\par
19 Leaves less than 2 mm wide; seeds not more than 1 mm
\par
20 Leaves lanceolate; petals c. 7 mm ............................................... {\b 11. villosa}
\par
20 Leaves oblanceolate-spathulate; petals c. 3 mm ..................... {\b 14. hypanica}
\par
 1 Stems at least slightly pubescent
\par
21 Stems with 2 distinct lines of hairs, at least at base
\par
22 Perennial; strophiole large ........................................................ {\b 13. pendula}
\par
22 Annual; strophiole small
\par
23 Lamina distinctly hairy (margin conspicuously ciliate);
\par
   capsule ovoid; seeds smooth ........................................................ {\b 2. trinervia}
\par
23 Lamina with few scattered hairs; capsule ± globose;
\par
   seeds tuberculate ........................................................................ {\b 3. pentandra}
\par
21 Stems with scattered hairs, not in distinct lines even at base
\par
24 Upper leaf-surface pubescent ................................................. {\b 9. grisebachii}
\par
24 Upper leaf-surface glabrous or subglabrous
\par
25 Leaves ovate to elliptic-lanceolate; 
\par
   strophiole small, ± entire ............................................................ {\b 1. lateriflora}
\par
25 Leaves linear to linear-lanceolate or lanceolate;
\par
   strophiole large or medium-sized, papillate or branched
\par
26 Stems procumbent, readily rooting .............................................. {\b 20. ciliata}
\par
26 Stems ± erect, not rooting
\par
27 Petals c. 7 mm; seeds smooth ...................................................... {\b 11. villosa}
\par
27 Petals 3-4 mm; seeds tuberculate ................................................ {\b 12. jankae}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. M. lateriflora} (L.) Fenzl, {\i Vers. Darstell. Alsin.} tab. ad p. 18 & p. 38 (1833) ({\i Arenaria lateriflora} L.). Rhizomatous perennial with erect, pubescent stems, 5-20 cm. Leaves 10-30 × 3·5-10 mm, much shorter than internodes, ovate to elliptic-lanceolate, obtuse, 1- to 3-veined, glabrous above, ciliate on midrib and on margins. Cymes 1- to 5-flowered; pedicels slender, puberulent. Flowers 5-merous; sepals 2-3 mm, ovate or obovate, obtuse or acute, glabrous with scarious margins; petals 4-6 mm; styles 3. Capsule 5 × 3 mm, ovoid, often exserted from calyx. Seeds 1-1·4 mm, dark brown, glossy, smooth; strophiole small, more or less entire. 2n = c. 52. {\i Woods, meadows and screes. N.E. Europe, extending southwards to 50° N. in C. Ukraine.} Fe No Rs(N, B, C, E) Su.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. M. trinervia} (L.) Clairv.,{\i  Man. Herb. Suisse }150 (1811) ({\i Arenaria trinervia} L.). Annual, with stems 10-30(-45) cm, prostrate or ascending, diffusely branched, pubescent with hairs forming 2 distinct lines. Leaves 6-25(-45) × 8-17 mm, ovate, acute, 3(5)-veined; upper leaves more or less sessile, ovate to lanceolate; margins entire, ciliate. Inflorescence simple, of 1 - to 7(-15)flowered cymes; pedicels slender, pubescent, becoming recurved after anthesis. Flowers mostly 5-merous; sepals 3-5 mm, lanceolate, 3-veined, acuminate, with ciliate scarious margins; petals 3-5 mm; styles usually 3. Capsule 3·5 mm, ovoid, usually included in sepals. Seeds 0·8-1·2 × 0·6-1·0 mm, reniform, dark brown or blackish, shining, smooth, but with distinct cellular pattern; strophiole small, whitish. 2n = 24.{\i  Woods and shady places. Almost throughout Europe.} All except Az Bl Cr Fa Is Sb.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 3. M. pentandra} Gay,{\i  Ann. Sci. Nat.} ser. 1, {\b 26:} 230 (1832) ({\i M. trinervia }subsp. {\i pentandra} (Gay) Nyman,{\i  Arenaria pentandra} (Gay) Ard.; incl.{\i  M. thasia} Stoj. & Kitanov). Like {\b 1} but more delicate; leaves glabrous (but petiole ciliate), rarely with scattered cilia; flowers solitary in axils of leaves and in forks of branching stems, never in simple cymes; sepals 2-3(-4) mm, with wider scarious margins and indistinct lateral veins; petals rudimentary, 0·5-1·2 mm; stamens usually 5; capsule 2-2·5 mm, subglobose,
\par

\par
149}
\par