{\rtf1\ansi \deff4\deflang1033{\fonttbl{\f4\froman\fcharset0\fprq2 Times New Roman;}}{\colortbl;\red0\green0\blue0;\red0\green0\blue255;\red0\green255\blue255;\red0\green255\blue0;\red255\green0\blue255;\red255\green0\blue0;\red255\green255\blue0;\red255\green255\blue255;\red0\green0\blue128;\red0\green128\blue128;\red0\green128\blue0;\red128\green0\blue128;\red128\green0\blue0;\red128\green128\blue0;\red128\green128\blue128;\red192\green192\blue192;}{\stylesheet{\widctlpar \f4\fs20\lang2057 \snext0 Normal;}{\*\cs10 \additive Default Paragraph Font;}}{\info{\author dddd}{\operator dddd}{\creatim\yr1998\mo11\dy11\hr16\min22}{\revtim\yr1998\mo11\dy11\hr16\min23}{\version2}{\edmins1}{\nofpages3}{\nofwords987}{\nofchars5628}{\*\company  }{\vern57431}}\widowctrl\ftnbj\aenddoc\hyphcaps0 \fet0\sectd \linex0 {\*\pnseclvl1\pnucrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl2\pnucltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl3\pndec\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl4\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl5\pndec\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl6\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl7\pnlcrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl8\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl9\pnlcrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}
\pard\plain  \f4\fs20\lang2057 {\fs28 0\'b73-0\'b76 mm. 2n = 20. }{\i\fs28  S., W. & C. Europe, extending to S.E. Sweden and Ukraine}{\fs28 .
\par  (}{\b\fs28 d}{\fs28 ) Subsp.}{\b\fs28  marschlinsii}{\fs28  (Koch) Nyman, }{\i\fs28 loc. cit.}{\fs28  (1878) (}{\i\fs28 A. marschlinsii}{\fs28  Koch): Plant 2-10 cm, often perennial, compact, usually eglandular-puberulent. Leaves ovate or sometimes elliptical, acute. Inflorescences dense, few-flowered. Sepals 3\'b75-4\'b75 mm, the inner with narrow, scarious margin. Capsule like that of subsp. (}{\b\fs28 c}{\fs28 ). Seeds 0\'b74-0\'b77 mm. 2n = 20.}{\i\fs28  Open habitats above}{\fs28  1800}{\i\fs28  m.  \bullet  ?- Alps; Pyrenees}{\fs28 .
\par  (}{\b\fs28 e}{\fs28 ) Subsp. }{\b\fs28 aegaea}{\fs28  (Rech. fil.) Akeroyd, }{\i\fs28 Bot. Jour. Linn. Soc.}{\b\fs28  97:}{\fs28  337 (1988) (}{\i\fs28 A. aegaea}{\fs28  Rech. fil.): Plant 2-6 cm, compact, densely branched, glandular-puberulent, especially above. Leaves broadly elliptical or ovate to suborbicular, subacute to obtuse, somewhat fleshy. Sepals 3\'b75-4 mm, the inner with broad, scarious margin. Capsule like that of subsp. (}{\b\fs28 c}{\fs28 ). Seeds 0\'b74-0\'b75 mm.}{\i\fs28  Maritime or submaritime rocky and stony habitats, usually on small islands. C. & S. Aegean region}{\fs28 .
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 37. A. conferta}{\fs28  Boiss.,}{\i\fs28  Diagn. Pl. Or. Nov.}{\b\fs28  1}{\fs28 (}{\b\fs28 1}{\fs28 ): 51 (1843). Like }{\b\fs28 36}{\fs28 (}{\b\fs28 a}{\fs28 ) but often biennial; plant with a short, greyish pubescence; inflorescence dense, the branches more or less strict, usually with pedicels shorter than sepals (rarely some pedicels up to 3 times as long as sepals); sepals more sharply acute; petals more or less equalling or longer than sepals; capsule slightly shorter than sepals; seeds 0\'b775-1 mm.}{\i\fs28  Stony places on mountains. \bullet  Balkan peninsula, mainly in the west. }{\fs28 Al Gr Ju.
\par 
\par Very variable in habit, but probably always distinguishable from }{\b\fs28 36}{\fs28  by the longer petals and shorter capsules.
\par 
\par  (}{\b\fs28 a}{\fs28 ) Subsp. }{\b\fs28 conferta}{\fs28  : Stems procumbent to ascending. Leaves densely puberulent, greyish. Inflorescence usually dense, with both eglandular and glandular hairs. 2n = 20.}{\i\fs28  Almost throughout the range of the species}{\fs28 .
\par  (}{\b\fs28 b}{\fs28 ) Subsp.}{\b\fs28  serpentini}{\fs28  (A.K. Jackson) Strid,}{\i\fs28  Ann. Bot. Fenn. }{\b\fs28 20:}{\fs28  113 (1983) (}{\i\fs28 A. serpentini}{\fs28  A.K. Jackson): Stems usually ascending to suberect. Leaves sparsely puberulent, green. Inflorescence lax to dense, eglandular-hairy or glabrous.}{\i\fs28  Mostly on serpentine. \bullet  S. Albania to G. Greece}{\fs28 .
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 38. A. nevadensis}{\fs28  Boiss. & Reuter in Boiss.,}{\i\fs28  Diagn. Pl. Or. Nov.}{\b\fs28 3}{\fs28 (}{\b\fs28 1}{\fs28 ): 90 (1853). Glandular-puberulent annual, usually purplish at base; stems 5-8 cm, branched. Leaves 4-7 mm, mostly 3-veined, the lower ovate and patent, the upper linear-lanceolate and erect. Flowers clustered in more or less dense corymbs; pedicels equalling or up to twice as long as sepals, always erect and strict. Sepals 4\'b75-6 mm, lanceolate, long-pointed, obtuse or subacute; petals c. \'be as long as sepals, oblong, white. Capsule shorter than sepals, oblong-ovoid. }{\i\fs28 S. .Spain }{\fs28 (}{\i\fs28 Sierra Nevada}{\fs28 ). Hs.
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 39. A. muralis}{\fs28  (Link) Sieber ex Sprengel,}{\i\fs28  Syst. Veg.}{\b\fs28  2:}{\fs28  397 (1825) (}{\i\fs28 A. oxypetala}{\fs28  auct., vix Sibth. & Sm.). Glandular-pubescent annual; stems 5-15 cm, ascending or erect, slender, diffusely branched from base. Leaves 5-15 mm, obovate, acute, 1-veined, narrowed into a distinct petiole. Inflorescence lax, 5- to 20-flowered; pedicels (2-)3-4 times as long as sepals, slender, rigid, patent or deflexed in fruit. Sepals 2\'b75-3\'b75 mm, lanceolate, acute, with obscure veins; petals scarcely exceeding sepals, linear-lanceolate. Capsule slightly exceeding sepals, narrowly ovoid. Seeds 0\'b74-0\'b76 mm with very acute tubercles. }{\i\fs28 Aegean region.}{\fs28  Cr Gr.
\par 
\par Recorded elsewhere only from the East Aegean Islands.
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 40. A. graveolens}{\fs28  Schreber,}{\i\fs28  Nova Acta Acad. Leop.-Carol. }{\b\fs28 3:}{\fs28  478 (1767) (}{\i\fs28 A. oxypetala}{\fs28  Sibth. & Sm.). Like }{\b\fs28 39}{\fs28  but stems up to 30 cm; petals shorter than or equalling sepals; sepals narrowly lanceolate, acuminate; seeds (0\'b76-)0\'b78-1 mm.}{\i\fs28  E.C. Greece}{\fs28  (}{\i\fs28 Evvoia}{\fs28 ). Gr. (}{\i\fs28 Anatolia.}{\fs28 )
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 41. A. saponarioides}{\fs28  Boiss. & Balansa in Boiss.,}{\i\fs28  Diagn. Pl. Or. Nov.}{\b\fs28  3}{\fs28 (}{\b\fs28 6}{\fs28 ): 35 (1859) (}{\i\fs28 A. nana}{\fs28  Boiss. & Heldr., non Willd.). Glandular-pubescent dwarf annual; stems not more than 4 cm , solitary or or 2 or 3 together. Leaves oblong-obvate, narrowed into the petiole, obtuse, 3- to 7-veined, the upper forming an involucre around the inflorescence. Flowers 1-5; pedicels shorter than sepals. Sepals 5-6 mm, lanceolate, acute, with 3 prominent veins, elongating in fruit; petals c. \'bd as long as sepals, ovate. Capsule shorter than sepals, ovoid. Seeds e. 1 mm, dark brown.}{\i\fs28  Stony places on mountains. Kriti.}{\fs28  Cr.
\par 
\par The plant from Kriti is referable to subsp. }{\b\fs28 boissieri}{\fs28  (Pax) McNeill, }{\i\fs28 Notes Roy. Bot. Gard. Edinb.}{\b\fs28  24: }{\fs28 289 (1963), which also occurs in Cyprus. Subsp.}{\i\fs28  saponarioides}{\fs28  is known only from Anatolia.
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 42. A. guicciardii}{\fs28  Heldr. ex Boiss., }{\i\fs28 Diagn. Pl. Or. Nov.}{\b\fs28  3}{\fs28 (}{\b\fs28 5}{\fs28 ): 60 (1856). Scabrid-puberulent, slightly glandular annual; stems 3-20 cm, usually many, ascending or erect, rather densely leafy. Leaves 3-5 mm, ovate or ovate-oblong, acute or acuminate, subsessile or petiolate, 3- to 5-veined. Flowers 5-20 in dense clusters; pedicels usually not more than \'bd as long as sepals, rather stout. Sepals 4-6 mm, lanceolate, long-acuminate with usually patent or recurved apex, 3- to 5-veined with thickened, prominent veins; petals 1/3 as long as sepals. Capsule more or less equalling sepals, narrowly cylindrical.}{\i\fs28  Dry, stony places. S. Greece and Kriti}{\fs28 . Cr Gr.
\par 
\par Recorded elsewhere only from the East Aegean Islands (Rodhos and Samos).
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 43. A. hispanica}{\fs28  Sprengel,}{\i\fs28  Syst. Veg.}{\b\fs28  2:}{\fs28  396 (1825) (}{\i\fs28 A. cerastioides}{\fs28  auct., non Poiret). Robust, pubescent and glandular annual; stems 10-40 cm, usually branched from base. Leaves 10-25 mm, broadly spathulate to obovate-oblanceolate, subacute to acuminate, 1-veined, the lower long-petiolate. Inflorescence 4- to many-flowered, lax; pedicels 3-5 times as long as sepals. Sepals 4-5\'b75 mm, ovate, obtuse or subacute, usually purplish-black at apex; petals twice as long as sepals, slightly emarginate, white; anthers blue or violet. Capsule 3/4-1 1/3 as long as sepals. Seeds 0\'b77-0\'b79(-1) mm, globose, black, almost smooth. }{\i\fs28 Disturbed ground. S.W. Spain.}{\fs28  Hs.
\par 
\par }{\b\fs28 A. cerastioides}{\fs28  Poiret, }{\i\fs28 Voy. Barb.}{\b\fs28  2:}{\fs28  166 (1789) (}{\i\fs28 A. spathulata}{\fs28  Desf.), from N.W. Africa, smaller than}{\b\fs28  43}{\fs28  in all its parts and with reniform, tuberculate seeds 0\'b74-0\'b77 mm, has been recorded in error from S.W. Spain.
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 44. A. pomelii}{\fs28  Munby,}{\i\fs28  Bull. Soc. Bot. Fr.}{\b\fs28  11:}{\fs28  45 (1864). Puberulent annual; stems up to 16 cm, ascending, branched from the base. Leaves 7-14 mm, oblong to spathulate, obtuse. Inflorescence few-flowered. Pedicels 10-20 mm. Sepals dimorphic; 3 outer 5-7 mm, ovate; 2 inner 4\'b75-5\'b75 mm, oblong. Petals shorter than outer sepals, equalling or slightly exceeding the inner, oblong, acute, entire. Capsule shorter than outer sepals. Seeds 0\'b79-1 mm, reniform, tuberculate, grey or black.}{\i\fs28  Calcifuge. Mountains of S. Spain}{\fs28 . Hs. (}{\i\fs28 N.W. Africa.}{\fs28 )
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 45. A. emarginata}{\fs28  Brot.,}{\i\fs28  Fl. Lusit.}{\b\fs28  2:}{\fs28  202 (1804). Glandular-pubescent annual; stems 5-10 cm, erect, branched. Leaves 5-15 mm, linear or linear-subulate, obtuse, 1-veined, patent; the lower and middle equalling or exceeding internodes; the upper
\par 
\par 147}
\par }