{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 spathulate, white. Capsule slightly exceeding sepals, ovoid-globose.{\i  Calcareous rocks.• S.E. Spain.} Hs.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   {\b 15. A. grandiflora} L., {\i Syst. Nat}. ed. 10,{\b  2:} 1034 (1759). Laxly caespitose perennial; stems 5-15 cm, the vegetative stems with short, deflexed hairs; flowering stems with patent, glandular hairs. Leaves 5-10 × 0·75-1(-1·5) mm, linear-lanceolate, acuminate, green, with a long arista; midrib and margins prominent beneath and coriaceous. Stems 1- to 3(-6)-flowered; pedicels 2-6 times as long as sepals, glandular-pubescent. Sepals 3-5·5 mm, ovate, acute or acuminate, sparsely glandular-pubescent, often keeled, the mid-vein always prominent; petals 1½-2½ times as long as sepals, oblong-obovate, white. Capsule 1¼(-2) times as long as sepals, ovoid. 2n = 44.{\i  Dry, rocky and stony places, mostly on mountains. S. & S.C. Europe, eastwards to c.} 17° {\i E}. Au Bl Cz Ga He Hs It Si.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Var.{\i  incrassata} (Lange) Cosson (subsp.{\i  incrassata} (Lange) C. Vicioso) differs from the typical plant in forming dense, more leafy tussocks, in the tetragonous, not terete, stems, and the broader, elliptical and densely fasciculate leaves. It replaces typical plants of {\b 15} in N. Spain and may merit subspecific status.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 16. A. bertolonii} Fiori in Fiori & Paol.,{\i  Fl. Anal. Ital.}{\b  1:} 346 (1898) ({\i A. saxifraga} (Bertol.) Fenzl). Laxly caespitose perennial; stems 5-12 cm, branched, pubescent or glabrous. Leaves 5-13 mm, ovate, acute or subobtuse, pubescent; the lower shortly petiolate, the upper sessile. Flowers solitary or in 2- or 3-flowered cymes; pedicels 2-4 times as long as sepals, slender. Sepals (4-)5-6·5 mm, ovate-lanceolate, obtuse or subacute, veinless, sparsely glandular-pubescent; petals 2-3 times as long as sepals, usually emarginate, white. Capsule equalling or slightly exceeding sepals, ovoid. 2n = 30.{\i  Mountain rocks and screes. C. Mediterranean region.} Co It Sa ?Si.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 17. A. huteri} A. Kerner, {\i Österr. Bot. Zeitschr.}{\b  22:} 368 (1872). Like {\b 16} but usually more caespitose; leaves oblanceolate, subobtuse; pedicels 3-5 times as long as sepals; sepals oblong-lanceolate; petals 1¾-2 times as long as sepals, entire; capsule shorter than sepals. {\i Crevices of dolomitic rocks.• N.E. Italy} ({\i Alpi Carniche}). It.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 18. A. montana} L., Cent. Pl. {\b 1:} 12 (1755). Robust, greyish-green, crisply and shortly pubescent perennial; stems 10-30 cm, spreading or erect. Leaves 10-20(-40) × 2-4 mm, oblong-lanceolate to linear, acute, 1-veined. Flowers solitary or in 2- to 11-flowered cymes; pedicels 2-6 times as long as sepals. Sepals (5-)6-9 mm, ovate-lanceolate to ovate, acute or subacute,1-veined; petals twice as long as sepals, white. Capsule shorter than or equalling sepals.{\i  S.W. Europe, extending northwards to C. & N.W. France.} Ga Hs Lu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp.{\b  montana}: Stems 10-30 cm, spreading or erect. Leaves 10-20(-40) × 2-4 mm, oblong- or linear-lanceolate. Pedicels usually eglandular. Sepals lanceolate to ovate, acute or subacute, usually with scarious margin. 2n = 28. {\i Throughout the range of the species except S.E. Spain}.
\par
 ({\b b}) Subsp.{\b  intricata} (Dufour) Pau, {\i Actas Soc. Esp. Hist. Nat.}{\b  27}: 199 (1898): Stems 10-40 cm, straggling. Leaves 10-40 × 1-2 mm, linear. Pedicels usually glandular. Sepals ovate, acute or subobtuse, usually without scarious margin.•{\i  S.E. Spain}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 19. A. balearica} L.,{\i  Syst. Nat.} ed. 12,{\b  3:} 230 (1768) ({\i A. gayana} F.N. Williams). Perennial with slender, almost filiform, procumbent, branched stems forming dense mats. Leaves 2-4 mm, broadly ovate or orbicular, obtuse, shortly pubescent; petioles equalling lamina. Flowering stems up to 6 cm, ascending, glabrous or scabrid; flowers solitary; pedicels 5-10 times as long as sepals, filiform. Sepals 2·5-3 mm, ovate, subobtuse, distinctly 1-veined, shortly and sparsely pubescent; petals twice as long as sepals. Capsule slightly exserted. 2n = 18.{\i  Shaded rocky places, up to }1450{\i  m. Islands of W. Mediterranean, from Mallorca to Montecristo; naturalized from gardens in the British Isles and N. France}. Bl Co It Sa [Br Ga Hb] .
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 20. A. biflora} L.,{\i  Mantissa} 71 (1767). Perennial; stems up to 20 cm, procumbent, slender, rooting at nodes, glabrous or rarely puberulent. Leaves 3-4 × 1·5-2·5 mm, obovate to orbicular, obtuse, distinctly 1-veined, abruptly contracted into a ciliate petiole. Flowering branches 2-3 cm; flowers solitary or 2(-5) together; pedicels 1-2 times as long as sepals. Sepals 3-4·5 mm, ovate, obtuse or subacute, rarely acute, usually glabrous, often ciliate near base, 1(-3)-veined; petals slightly exceeding sepals. Capsule more or less equalling sepals. 2n = 22.{\i  Damp places above }1600{\i  m, often in snow-patches. Mountains of S. & C. Europe, from E. Carpathians to E. Pyrenees and C. Greece.} Al Au Bu Ga Gr He Hs It Ju Rm.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Plants from Romania and the northern part of the Balkan peninsula with lanceolate, acute sepals, often more-flowered branches, and petals slightly shorter than the sepals, have been called A.{\i  rotundifolia} Bieb.,{\i  Fl. Taur. -Cauc. }{\b 1:} 343 (1808), but there appears to be no satisfactory basis for specific separation. A chromosome number of 2n = 44 has been recorded for this plant.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 21. A. humifusa} Wahlenb., {\i Fl. Lapp.} 129 (1812). Small, mat-forming perennial up to 3 cm, with procumbent, glabrous stems and slender, elongate stolons at or just above ground-level. Leaves 3-4 × 1-1·75 mm, elliptical to narrowly obovate, glabrous or very slightly ciliate at base. Flowers solitary or rarely 2 together; pedicels much shorter than or equalling sepals, slightly scabrid. Sepals 3-4 mm, ovate, usually glabrous, obscurely 3-veined, with narrow, scarious margin; petals slightly exceeding sepals; anthers pale purple. Capsule exserted, cylindrical. Seeds 0·7-0·75 mm, reddish-brown. 2n = 40, 44.{\i  Moist, open habitats on basic soil. Arctic Europe; subarctic Norway} ({\i very rare}). No Rs(N) Sb Su.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 22. A. norvegica} Gunnerus, {\i Fl. Norv.}{\b  2:} 144 (1772). Annual to perennial forming lax tufts 3-7 cm high. Leaves oblanceolate, glabrous, often slightly ciliate below, obscurely veined. Cymes 1 or 2(-4)-flowered; pedicels 1-3 times as long as sepals, slightly scabrid. Sepals 3-4 mm, ovate, glabrous, 3-veined, the lateral veins often obscure; petals 4-5·5 mm, exceeding sepals; anthers white. Capsule equalling or slightly exceeding sepals, conical. Seeds 0·8-1 mm, black, dull, with low, broad tubercles. •{\i  N.W. Europe, extending to N. Finland.} Br Fe ?Hb Is No Su.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp.{\b  norvegica} : Perennial. Leaves 3-4·5(-6) mm, somewhat fleshy, dark green. Sepals usually not ciliate; petals 4-4·5 mm. 2n = 80.{\i  Open habitats on basic soils in the mountains. • Throughout the range of the species, except England}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp.{\b  anglica }Halliday, {\i Watsonia}{\b  4:} 209 (1960) ({\i A. gothica} auct. angl., non Fries): Annual or biennial, with a laxer habit than subsp. ({\b a}). Leaves 4·5-5(-6) mm, lighter green. Sepals usually with a few basal cilia; petals 5-5·5 mm. 2n = 80. {\i Damp, bare depressions on limestone pavement. • N. England} ({\i W. Yorkshire}).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 23. A. ciliata} L.,{\i  Sp. Pl.} 425 (1753). Low-growing perennial with scabrid stems 2-15 cm. Leaves broadly elliptical, oblanceolate
\par

\par
144}
\par