{\rtf1\ansi \deff4\deflang1033{\fonttbl{\f4\froman\fcharset0\fprq2 Times New Roman;}}{\colortbl;\red0\green0\blue0;\red0\green0\blue255;\red0\green255\blue255;\red0\green255\blue0;\red255\green0\blue255;\red255\green0\blue0;\red255\green255\blue0;\red255\green255\blue255;\red0\green0\blue128;\red0\green128\blue128;\red0\green128\blue0;\red128\green0\blue128;\red128\green0\blue0;\red128\green128\blue0;\red128\green128\blue128;\red192\green192\blue192;}{\stylesheet{\widctlpar \f4\fs20\lang2057 \snext0 Normal;}{\*\cs10 \additive Default Paragraph Font;}}{\info{\author dddd}{\operator dddd}{\creatim\yr1998\mo11\dy11\hr16\min23}{\revtim\yr1998\mo11\dy11\hr18\min51}{\version2}{\edmins1}{\nofpages4}{\nofwords1041}{\nofchars5937}{\*\company  }{\vern57431}}\widowctrl\ftnbj\aenddoc\hyphcaps0 \fet0\sectd \linex0 {\*\pnseclvl1\pnucrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl2\pnucltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl3\pndec\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl4\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl5\pndec\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl6\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl7\pnlcrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl8\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl9\pnlcrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}
\pard\plain  \f4\fs20\lang2057 {\fs28 shorter. Flowers in a usually dense inflorescence; pedicels scarcely equalling or up to twice as long as sepals, patent in fruit. Sepals 3-6 mm, lanceolate, subobtuse, 1-veined; petals more or less equalling sepals, oblong, truncate-emarginate, pinkish. Capsule shorter than sepals, ovoid-oblong.}{\i\fs28  Dry, sandy places. S. Portugal; S.W. Spain}{\fs28 . Hs Lu. (}{\i\fs28 N.W. Africa.}{\fs28 )
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 46. A. algarbiensis}{\fs28  Welw. ex Willk.,}{\i\fs28  Icon. Descr. Pl. Nov.}{\b\fs28  1}{\fs28 (}{\b\fs28 9}{\fs28 ): 93 (1855). Glandular, puberulent or shortly pubescent annual; stems 5-10 cm, ascending or erect, slender. Leaves 2-5 mm, linear-lanceolate, all shorter than internodes. Inflorescence lax, several- to many-flowered; pedicels 3-5 times as long as sepals. Sepals 3-4 mm, ovate or ovate-lanceolate, obtuse or subacute, with 3-5 prominent veins; petals 2-3 times as long as sepals, deeply emarginate, white. Capsule slightly shorter than sepals, ovoid-oblong. }{\i\fs28 \bullet  S. Portugal; S.W. Spain.}{\fs28   Hs Lu.
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 47. A. conimbricensis}{\fs28  Brot., }{\i\fs28 Fl. Lusit. }{\b\fs28 2:}{\fs28  200 (1804) (}{\i\fs28 A. tenuior}{\fs28  (Mert. & Koch) G\'fcrke; incl.}{\i\fs28  A. loscosii }{\fs28 Texidor). Glandular, puberulent or pubescent annual; stems 5-15 cm, branched. Leaves 5-15 mm, linear to linear-oblanceolate, flat, obtuse and subapiculate, ciliate at base, the lower oblanceolate to spathulate. Inflorescence lax, several- to many-flowered; pedicels 3-5 times as long as sepals, very slender but scarcely capillary, patent in fruit, covered with patent, glandular hairs. Sepals 1\'b75-3\'b75 mm, ovate, obtuse, obscurely 1 -veined, or veinless; petals 1\'bd-2 times as long as sepals, obovate, entire, white; anthers vinous. Capsule about equalling sepals, ovoid-oblong. Seeds c. 0\'b76 mm, reniform, with obtuse or acute tubercles. 2n = 22.}{\i\fs28  Sandy places or wasteground.\bullet  C., E. & S. Spain; C. & S. Portugal.}{\fs28  Hs Lu.
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 48. A. obtusiflora}{\fs28  G. Kunze,}{\i\fs28  Flora}{\fs28  (}{\i\fs28 Regensb}{\fs28 .)}{\b\fs28  29:}{\fs28  632 (1846). Eglandular annual; stems 5-15 cm. Leaves 3-10 mm, linear-oblanceolate, acute, 1-veined, flat. Inflorescence glabrous or puberulent. Sepals 2-3\'b75 mm, ovate, obtuse, often apiculate; petals 1\'bd-2 times as long as sepals; anthers vinous. Seeds 0\'b75-0\'b78 mm.}{\i\fs28  Screes. \bullet  N. & E. Spain}{\fs28 . Hs.
\par 
\par  (}{\b\fs28 a}{\fs28 ) Subsp. }{\b\fs28 obtusiflora}{\fs28  : Stems usually simple and with short deflexed hairs below, branched and glabrous or subglabrous above. Inflorescence glabrous or subglabrous; pedicels 3-6 times as long as sepals, filiform, patent in fruit. Sepals 2-3 mm. Capsule more or less equalling sepals, ovoid. Seeds with acute tubercles.}{\i\fs28  S.E. Spain}{\fs28 .
\par  (}{\b\fs28 b}{\fs28 ) Subsp.}{\b\fs28  ciliaris}{\fs28  (Loscos) Font Quer, }{\i\fs28 Collect. Bot}{\fs28 . (}{\i\fs28 Barcelona}{\fs28 )}{\b\fs28  3:}{\fs28  348 (1953) (}{\i\fs28 A. ciliaris }{\fs28 Loscos): Usually smaller and more bushy than subsp. (}{\b\fs28 a}{\fs28 ); stems usually much-branched from the base, with short deflexed hairs throughout. Inflorescence-branches puberulent; pedicels 2-3 times as long as sepals, always erect, subglabrous or with minute deflexed hairs. Sepals 2\'b75-3\'b75 mm, subglabrous or puberulent. Capsule 1\'bd-2 times as long as sepals, globose-conical. Seeds with obtuse tubercles. }{\i\fs28 N. & E.C. Spain}{\fs28 .
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 49. A. controversa}{\fs28  Boiss., }{\i\fs28 Voy. Bot. Midi Esp.}{\b\fs28  2: }{\fs28 100 (1839). Like }{\b\fs28 48}{\fs28  but stems, branches and pedicels covered with minute deflexed hairs; leaves linear, trigonous; pedicels 2-3 times as long as sepals; sepals 2-4\'b75 mm, ovate-lanceolate, acute or subacute; capsule slightly exceeding sepals. \bullet }{\i\fs28  C. & W. France.}{\fs28  Ga.
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 50. A. conica}{\fs28  Boiss., }{\i\fs28 op. cit.}{\fs28  98 (1839). Annual; whole plant glandular-puberulent; stems 2\'b75-5 cm, branched. Leaves 5-15 mm, linear-subulate, obtuse. Inflorescence usually 3-flowered; pedicels 1\'bd-2 times as long as sepals, erect or slightly patent. Sepals 3\'b75-4 mm, ovate-lanceolate, subacute, 3-veined; petals c. 2/3 as long as the sepals, oblong, white. Capsule slightly exceeding sepals, ovoid. Seeds 0\'b75-0\'b76 mm, with obtuse tubercles. }{\i\fs28 Cultivated ground. S. Spain.}{\fs28  Hs.
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 51. A. modesta}{\fs28  Dufour,}{\i\fs28  Ann. G\'e9n. Sci. Phys.}{\fs28  (}{\i\fs28 Bruxelles}{\fs28 ) }{\b\fs28 7:}{\fs28  291 (1821). Annual; stems 5-15 cm, often branched from base glandular-pubescent. Leaves 3-10 mm, linear or linear-oblanceolate, acute, 1-veined. Inflorescence usually many-flowered, lax pedicels 2-5 times as long as sepals, erect or patent in fruit, with patent glandular and minute deflexed eglandular hairs, rarely more or less eglandular. Sepals 3-4(-5) mm, ovate-lanceolate, acute with a very fine, sharp point, obscurely 3-veined, glandular-pubescent; petals more or less equalling sepals, oblong, obtuse, white. Capsule slightly exceeding sepals, ovoid-conical. Seeds c. 0\'b75 mm, reniform, with usually obtuse tubercles. 2n = 26. }{\i\fs28 Dry places. E. & S. Spain, S. France.}{\fs28  Ga Hs.
\par 
\par Var.}{\i\fs28  purpurascens}{\fs28  Cuatrec., from S.E. Spain, has sepals less finely acute and seeds (0\'b76-)0\'b77-0\'b78 mm, with acute tubercles. In these respects it approaches }{\b\fs28 52}{\fs28 , but is quite distinct from it in the shape of its leaves. It may merit subspecific status under }{\b\fs28 51}{\fs28 .
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 52. A. retusa}{\fs28  Boiss.,}{\i\fs28  Voy. Bot. Midi Esp.}{\b\fs28  2:}{\fs28  99 (1839). Like }{\b\fs28 51}{\fs28  but leaves oblanceolate to obovate-oblanceolate, acuminate; sepals less finely acute, with more prominent veins; petals truncate, twice as long as sepals; seeds c. 0\'b77 mm, with acute tubercles.}{\i\fs28  Stony and rocky places. \bullet  S. Spain.}{\fs28  Hs.
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 53. A. capillipes}{\fs28  (Boiss.) Boiss., }{\i\fs28 op. cit.}{\fs28  98 (1839). Very slender annual; stems c. 5 cm, branched, capillary, glabrous above, scabrid with minute hairs below; internodes much longer than leaves. Leaves 2-4 mm, linear-lanceolate, acute, veinless. Inflorescence several- to many-flowered, very lax; pedicels 3-6 times as long as sepals, capillary, glabrous. Sepals 2\'b75 mm, lanceolate, acute, 3-veined; petals more or less equalling sepals. Capsule ovoid-globose.}{\i\fs28  Sandy places. \bullet  S. Spain.}{\fs28  Hs.
\par 
\par Subgen.}{\b\fs28  Arenariastrum}{\fs28  F.N. Williams. Annuals. Styles 2.
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 54. A. provincialis}{\fs28  Chater & Halliday, }{\i\fs28 Feddes Repert.}{\b\fs28  69:}{\fs28  50 (1964) (}{\i\fs28 A. gouffeia}{\fs28  Chaub. nom. illeg., }{\i\fs28 Gouffeia arenarioides}{\fs28  Robill. & Cast. ex DC.). Glabrous; stems 10-20 cm, many, slender, branched, ascending. Basal leaves linear-spathulate, obtuse; cauline leaves linear-lanceolate, acute, subconnate at base; all leaves ciliate at base obscurely 3-veined. Flowers in a lax cyme, rarely solitary and terminal; bracts herbaceous; pedicels mostly longer than sepals capillary. Sepals 3-4 mm, lanceolate, acute, 3- to 5-veined; petals equalling sepals, oblong, denticulate, white. Capsule 2-3 mm, oblong-ovoid, with 2 bifid teeth. 2n = 40. }{\i\fs28 Rocky and sandy places. \bullet  S.E. France}{\fs28  (}{\i\fs28 near Marseille and Toulon}{\fs28 ). Ga.
\par 
\par }
\pard \qc\ {\fs28  }{\b\fs28 2.              Moehringia}{\fs28                 L.
\par }{\fs24  By G. Halliday (Ed.1) revised by D.J.N. Hind (Ed.2)
\par 
\par }
\pard  {\fs28 Annual (rarely biennial) or perennial herbs. Stems sometimes weak or fragile, often straggling. Leaves opposite, spathulate or ovate to linear, entire. Inflorescence a lax, usually few-flowered, simple dichasium, sometimes of solitary axillary flowers. Flowers 4- or 5-merous; petals white, usually entire, rarely rudimentary; stamens 8 or 10, rarely reduced to 5; styles 2 or 3. Capsule subglobose, rarely elongated or pyriform, dehiscing with 4 or 6 teeth. Seeds reniform to subreniform, dark reddish-brown to black, often shiny, smooth or tuberculate, with a persistent strophiole.
\par   The genus differs from}{\i\fs28  Arenaria}{\fs28  in possessing strophiolate seeds, and in its basic chromosome number, x = 12. The shape and size of strophioles have been increasingly used in the discrimination of
\par 
\par 148}
\par }