{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 or spathulate, the midrib prominent below, usually ciliate at least in lower ½. Cymes 1- to 7(-9)-flowered; pedicels scabrid. Sepals ovate-lanceolate, usually ciliate at base; petals exceeding sepals; anthers white. Capsule swollen below. Seeds 0·85-1·05 mm, black, dull, with low, broad tubercles. {\i Open habitats on basic soil. Mountains of C. Europe, southwards to C. Spain and N. Italy; locally in N. Europe}. Au Cz Fe Ga Ge Hb He Hs It Ju No Po Rm Rs(N) Sb.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 The following is a conservative treatment of the various geographical and chromosomal variants of this very polymorphic species.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Leaves 3-4 times as long as wide, usually ciliate throughout
\par
  ........................................................................................... ({\b a}) subsp.{\b  ciliata}
\par
1 Leaves 2-3 times as long as wide, not ciliate throughout
\par
2 Flowers in 2- to 6(-9)-flowered cymes ............. ({\b b}) subsp.{\b  moehringioides}
\par
2 Flowers usually solitary ....................................... ({\b c}) subsp.{\b  pseudofrigida}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b ciliata} (incl. subsp.{\i  tenella} (Kit.) Br.-Bl., subsp.{\i  hibernica} Ostenf. & O.C. Dahl): Leaves 3-4 times as long as wide, scarcely to entirely ciliate. Flowers 1 or 2(3). Sepals 3·5-5 mm; petals 5-8 mm. 2n = 40, 80, 120, 160.{\i  C. & E. Alps, Carpathians; N.W. Ireland.}
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp.{\b  moehringioides} (J. Murr) Br.-Bl., {\i Sched. Fl. Raet. Exsicc.} 279 (1927) (incl. subsp.{\i  polycarpoides} Br.-Bl.,{\i  A. multicaulis} L., nom. illeg.): Leaves 2-3 times as long as wide, ciliate for the basal 1/3-2/3. Cymes 2- to 6(-9)-flowered. Sepals 3·5-4 mm; petals 4-6 mm. 2n = 40.{\i  N.W. Spain, Pyrenees, Jura, Alps eastwards to Vorarlberg, N. Appennini.}
\par
 ({\b c}) Subsp.{\b  pseudofrigida} Ostenf. & O.C. Dahl,{\i  Nyt. Mag. Naturvid. }({\i Christiania}) {\b 55:} 217 (1917) ({\i A. pseudofrigida} (Ostenf. & O.C. Dahl) Juz. ex Schischkin & Knorring): Like subsp. ({\b a}) but smaller and more compact; leaves weakly ciliate; flowers 1 (2). 2n = 40.{\i  Finland, arctic Norway and Russia, Svalbard}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Subsp. {\b bernensis} Favarger,{\i  Ber. Schweiz. Bot. Ges.}{\b  73:} 176 (1963), from the W. Alps, is similar to subsp. ({\b a}) but has larger parts and strongly ciliate leaves, and a chromosome number of 2n = c. 200, 240. It is not, however, readily distinguished from the very variable subsp. ({\b a}).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Subsp. ({\b b}) is perhaps more closely related to{\b  24}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 24. A. gothica} Fries, {\i Nov. Fl. Suec.} ed. 2, {\i Mant.} 2: 33 (1839). Annual or biennial with ascending, rather robust, scabrid stems up to 12(-15) cm. Leaves 4-6 mm, broadly elliptical to obovate, less than 3 times as long as wide, the margin strongly ciliate at least in the lower ½. Cymes (1)2- to 6(-8)-flowered; pedicels strongly scabrid. Sepals 3-4 mm, ovate-lanceolate, ciliate below and often also on keel, 3-veined; petals 4-5·5 mm, slightly exceeding sepals. Seeds 0·8-0·9 mm, black, dull, with low, broad tubercles. 2n = 100.{\i  Dry limestone pavement and lake-shores. • S. Sweden} ({\i Gotland; one station in Vastergotland}); {\i Jura} ({\i Lac de Joux}). He Su.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 This description applies to var.{\i  gothica} from Sweden. The plants from Switzerland (var.{\i  fugax} (Gay ex Gren.) M.B. Wyse Jackson & J. Parnell) are taller, less ciliate, with more flowers in a cyme, and slightly larger seeds. Although their chromosome number is the same, it is quite possible that they are of different origin.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 25. A. gionae} L.-Å. Gustavsson, {\i Bot. Not.}{\b  129:} 276 (1976). Glabrous, caespitose perennial; stems 1-2(-3) cm, slender, with a single pair of cauline leaves. Leaves 3-7 mm, crowded, linear-lanceolate to linear, acute, 1-veined. Flowers solitary; pedicels 1-2 times as long as sepals. Sepals 3·5-4·2 mm, obtuse or acute, keeled at base, the outer lanceolate with a narrow, scarious margin, the inner ovate with a scarious margin up to 0·7 mm wide; petals about twice as long as sepals, white. Capsule slightly exceeding sepals, ovoid. {\i Crevices of limestone rocks, }1800-2200{\i  m. S.C. Greece }({\i Giona Oros}). Gr.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 26. A. gracilis} Waldst. & Kit., {\i Pl. Rar. Hung. }{\b 3:} 305 (1812). Laxly (rarely densely) caespitose perennial; stem 2-8 cm, ascending or erect, slender, papillose-scabrid below, glabrous above. Leaves 3-8 mm, lanceolate to elliptic-lanceolate, rarely narrower, acute, 1-veined, usually glabrous, denticulate. Flowers 1 or 2(3); pedicels 2-5 times as long as sepals, glabrous. Sepals 3·5-5·5 mm, ovate, obtuse or acute, often strongly keeled below, obscurely 1- to 3-veined, glabrous; petals about twice as long as sepals, white. Capsule slightly exceeding sepals, ovoid. 2n = 24.{\i  Mountain rocks. • W. Jugoslavia}. Ju.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 27. A. filicaulis} Fenzl in Griseb., {\i Spicil. Fl. Rumel}{\b . 1:} 203 (1843). Glandular-pubescent caespitose perennial; stems 5-15 cm, slender, fragile. Leaves acute, 1-veined, light green, the lower shortly petiolate, the upper sessile; midrib prominent beneath. Flowers 3-10 in a lax, leafy inflorescence with slender, patent branches; pedicels 2-5(-10) times as long as sepals. Sepals 3·5-4·5 mm; petals oblong-cuneate, white. Seeds 0·7-1 mm, with acute tubercles.{\i  Limestone rocks. Mountains of Balkan peninsula southwards from S.C. Bulgaria; W. Kriti}. Bu Cr Gr Ju.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 A variable species that can be divided into three rather poorly defined subspecies.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Lower bracts truncate or cordate at base ............................. ({\b c}) subsp.{\b  teddii}
\par
1 Lower bracts cuneate at base
\par
2 Sepals ovate-lanceolate, acuminate, slightly shorter than
\par
  capsule .............................................................................. ({\b a}) subsp.{\b  filicaulis}
\par
2 Sepals ovate, acute, about as long as capsule ..................... ({\b b}) subsp.{\b  graeca}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp.{\b  filicaulis }(incl. subsp. {\i euboica} McNeill): Plant moderately hairy with rather short, slender hairs. Leaves 3-8 mm, elliptic-lanceolate or oblanceolate. Sepals ovate-lanceolate, acuminate. Lower bracts cuneate at the base. Capsule slightly exceeding sepals.{\i  S.C. Bulgaria to E.C. Greece}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp.{\b  graeca} (Boiss.) McNeill,{\i  Notes Roy. Bot. Gard. Edinb.}{\b  24: }270 (1963) ({\i A. graeca} (Boiss.) Halácsy,{\i  A. graveolens} var.{\i  graeca} Boiss.): Plant usually more densely hairy with longer, stouter hairs. Leaves 5-10 mm, ovate-elliptical. Lower bracts cuneate at base. Sepals ovate, acute. Capsule about as long as sepals. 2n = 40.{\i  Greece, W. Kriti; ?S. Bulgaria}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b c}) Subsp.{\b  teddii} (Turrill) Strid,{\i  Mount. Fl. Gr.}{\b  1:} 86 (1986) ({\i A. teddii} Turrill): Plant more or less densely hairy with rather short, slender hairs. Leaves 3-7 mm, ovate. Lower bracts truncate or cordate at the base. Sepals ovate-lanceolate, acuminate. Capsule slightly shorter than sepals. •{\i  N. Greece }({\i Pangeon}).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b A. phitosiana} Greuter & Burdet,{\i  Willdenowia}{\b  12:} 37 (1982) ({\i A. litoralis} Phitos, non Salisb.) is finely but densely pubescent, with moderately thick, obovate-spathulate lower leaves and obovate median leaves. From limestone coastal cliffs in the Aegean (Voriai Sporadhes), it may be a variant of subsp. ({\b a}).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b A. rhodopaea} Delip., {\i Compt. Rend. Acad. Bulg. Sci.}{\b  17:} 645 (1964), from Rodopi Planina, is like subsp. ({\b b}) but with suborbicular, fleshier and more hairy leaves, and somewhat larger flowers. It should perhaps be included within subsp. ({\b b}).
\par

\par
145}
\par