{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 34 Capsule-teeth twice as many as styles, or teeth bifid ................... {\b 28. Silene}
\par
34 Capsule-teeth as many as styles, entire
\par
35 Annual; calyx-teeth foliaceous .......................................... {\b 26. Agrostemma}
\par
35 Perennial; calyx-teeth not foliaceous
\par
36 Seeds glabrous; petals contorted in bud .................................... {\b 25. Lychnis}
\par
36 Seeds with a hair-tuft at hilum; petals imbricate in bud ........{\b 27. Petrocoptis}
\par
31 Calyx-tube without commissural veins; styles 2 or 3 
\par
37 Calyx-tube with 5 wings .......................................................... {\b 34. Vaccaria}
\par
37 Calyx-tube without wings
\par
38 Calyx-tube with scarious commissures
\par
39 Seeds scutate, with facial hilum ........................................... {\b 35. Petrorhagia}
\par
39 Seeds reniform or comma-shaped, with lateral hilum
\par
40 Calyx campanulate; petal-limb gradually narrowed into claw
\par
   ................................................................................................ {\b 31. Gypsophila}
\par
40 Calyx tubular; petal-limb abruptly contracted into claw ....... {\b 32. Bolanthus}
\par
38 Calyx-tube without scarious commissures
\par
41 Epicalyx present ...................................................................... {\b 36. Dianthus}
\par
41 Epicalyx absent
\par
42 Seeds reniform, with lateral hilum ........................................ {\b 33. Saponaria}
\par
42 Seeds scutate, with facial hilum ................................................ {\b 37. Velezia}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  Subfam.{\b  Alsinoideae}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Leaves opposite; stipules absent. Petals usually well-developed; sepals free or joined only at the base.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 1.             Arenaria}             L.
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc  By A.O. Chater & G. Halliday.
\par 

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Annual, biennial or perennial herbs. Leaves opposite, entire, very variable in shape from orbicular to subulate. Flowers usually in few-flowered cymes, sometimes solitary, (4)5-merous. Sepals free; petals usually entire, white (rarely pink or purple); stamens (8-)10; styles (2)3(-5). Capsule conical to cylindrical, dehiscing with twice as many teeth as styles; teeth narrow, acute. Seeds several, reniform (rarely globose), usually dark brown, smooth or tuberculate. (Incl.{\i  Gouffeia }Robill. & Cast. ex DC.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Literature: J. McNeill,{\i  Notes Roy. Bot. Gard. Edinb.}{\b  24:} 102-129 (1962), 245-302 (1963).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Perennial, with leafy vegetative stems
\par
2 Leaves usually more than 30 mm, linear, erect
\par
3 Sepals acute or acuminate
\par
4 Pedicels usually longer than sepals;
  petals 2-3 times as long as sepals ........................................ {\b 3. gypsophiloides}
\par
4 Pedicels usually equalling or shorter than sepals;
\par
  petals equalling or slightly exceeding sepals
\par
5 Basal leaves 20-120 × 0·5-0·75 mm; inflorescence ± elongate;
  bracts 5-7 mm .................................................................................... {\b 1. rigida}
\par
5 Basal leaves 100-400 × 1-1·3 mm; inflorescence a compact,
  hemispherical head; bracts c. 15 mm ......................................... {\b 2. cephalotes}
\par
3 Sepals obtuse
\par
6 Sepals 2·5-5 mm, not keeled .......................................................... {\b 4. procera}
\par
6 Sepals 2-3 mm, with a prominent keel ....................................... {\b 5. longifolia}
\par
2 Leaves usually less than 30 mm, usually patent or recurved
\par
7 Leaves 15-30 mm, linear-subulate, very stiff and spiny ............ {\b 13. pungens}
\par
7 Leaves not stiff or spiny
\par
8 Flowers sessile or subsessile
\par
9 Leaves thick or subcoriaceous, with thickened margins
\par
10 Leaves acute and mucronate
\par
11 Inflorescence with not more than 10 flowers ......................... {\b 11. aggregata}
\par
11 Inflorescence usually with at least 15 flowers
\par
12 Leaves of sterile and flowering stems ± reflexed .................. {\b 11. aggregata}
\par
12 Leaves of sterile stems not reflexed ..................................... {\b 12. querioides}
\par
10 Leaves obtuse
\par
13 Flowers not more than half-exserted from the very hard, compact cushion
\par
14 Sepals c. 2·5 mm ................................................................... {\b 7. alfacarensis}
\par
14 Sepals 4-6 mm ........................................................................ {\b 11. aggregata}
\par
13 Flowers completely exserted from the foliage, or clustered
   on long peduncles
\par
15 Plant ± densely covered with very short, white hairs, 
\par
    forming compact, silvery cushions 5-10 cm in diameter; 
\par
    sepals keeled for c. 1 mm at base, otherwise very obscurely 
\par
    veined ........................................................................................ {\b 9. tomentosa}
\par
15 Plant not silvery; sepals with strong, raised veins
\par
16 Flowers solitary and terminal .................................................. {\b 8. tetraquetra}
\par
16 Flowers (2-)4-12 in dense terminal clusters
\par
17 Leaves distinctly obtuse; capsule usually longer than sepals
\par
   .................................................................................................... {\b 10. armerina}
\par
17 Leaves subobtuse; capsule usually shorter than sepals .......... {\b 11. aggregata}
\par
9  Leaves thin, without raised margins
\par
18 Petals slightly exceeding sepals; leaves glabrous ................... {\b 21. humifusa}
\par
18 Petals distinctly shorter than sepals; leaves scabrid
\par
   puberulent ............................................................................ {\b 36. serpyllifolia}
\par
8  Flowers pedicellate; pedicels usually equalling or longer
\par
   than sepals
\par
19 Stems procumbent, rooting at nodes ........................................... {\b 20. biflora}
\par
19 Stems not rooting at nodes
\par
20 Sepals glabrous on surface, though often ciliate
\par
21 Plant with slender, yellowish stolons; stems very slender ...... {\b 21. humifusa}
\par
21 Plant without stolons
\par
22 Capsule very long-exserted from calyx, cylindrical, shining
\par
   ............................................................................................... {\b 6. purpurascens}
\par
22 Capsule slightly exserted from calyx, ovoid to globose
\par
23 Leaves with revolute margins; stems 5-20 cm, straggling ...... {\b 14. valentina}
\par
23 Leaves flat; stems not more than 8 cm, ± compact
\par
24 Leaves finely denticulate ........................................................... {\b 26. gracilis}
\par
24 Leaves entire
\par
25 Leaves not ciliate (Greece) ......................................................... {\b 25. gionae}
\par
25 Leaves ± ciliate at base
\par
26 Leaves somewhat fleshy, obscurely 1-veined; not more 
\par
   than the lower 3 of margin ciliate ............................................ {\b 22. norvegica}
\par
26 Leaves not fleshy, distinctly 1-veined; the lower 2/4-2/3 of
\par
   margin ciliate ................................................................................. {\b 23. ciliata}
\par
20 Sepals hairy on surface
\par
27 Leaves linear-lanceolate, with prominent keel-like midrib 
\par
   beneath and a long arista ........................................................ {\b 15. grandiflora}
\par

\par
140}
\par