{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 63 Petals emarginate, 2-3 times as long as sepals ................... {\b 46. algarbiensis} 
\par
63 Petals entire, not more than twice as long as sepals
\par
64 Petals shorter than sepals
\par
65 Inflorescence few- (often 3-)flowered; pedicels 1½-2 
\par
   times as long as sepals; sepals subacute ........................................ {\b 50. conica}
\par
65 Inflorescence many-flowered; pedicels 2-5 times as long as sepals;
\par
   sepals usually very finely acute .................................................. {\b 51. modesta}
\par
64 Petals equalling or exceeding sepals
\par
66 Sepals obtuse
\par
67 Capsule included in, or scarcely exserted from sepals; 
\par
   pedicels with  patent glandular hairs ............................... {\b 47. conimbricensis}
\par
67 Capsule 1½-2 times as long as sepals; pedicels minutely
\par
   scabrid-puberulent .................................................................. {\b 48. obtusiflora}
\par
66 Sepals acute
\par
68 Plant eglandular; pedicels with minute deflexed hairs; 
\par
   leaves subtrigonous ............................................................... {\b 49. controversa}
\par
68 Plant glandular-pubescent; pedicels usually with patent 
\par
   glandular hairs; leaves thin, flat
\par
69 Sepals usually very finely acute, very obscurely veined; 
\par
   petals ± equalling sepals ............................................................. {\b 52. modesta}
\par
69 Sepals acute, with 3(-5) raised veins; petals exceeding sepals
\par
70 Petals obtuse; seeds rugose-granulate ..................................... {\b 35. fontqueri}
\par
70 Petals truncate; seeds with acute tubercles ................................... {\b 52. retusa}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Subgen. {\b Eremogone} (Fenzl) Fenzl. Perennials, woody at the base, with linear leaves more than 30 mm. Styles 3(-5).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. A. rigida} Bieb.,{\i  Fl. Taur.-Cauc.}{\b  1:} 346 (1808). Glabrous perennial with woody, branched stock; stems 7-40 cm, erect, slender, rigid, simple. Basal leaves 30-120 × 0·5-0·75 mm, linear, acuminate; cauline shorter and wider, merging into lanceolate, acuminate bracts 5-7 mm. Inflorescence a several- to many-flowered, more or less strict, compact, oblong panicle; pedicels mostly equalling or shorter than sepals. Sepals 4-6 mm, lanceolate, acuminate, with very obtuse keel; petals equalling or slightly exceeding sepals.{\i  Dry, stony or sandy ground. • S. Ukraine and Black Sea coast.} Bu Rm Rs(W, E).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. A. cephalotes} Bieb.,{\i  loc. cit.} (1808). Like {\b 1} but stems 20-50 cm, stout; basal leaves 100-400 × 1-1·3 mm; inflorescence a dense, terminal, hemispherical head; bracts c. 15 mm, coriaceous, conspicuous; pedicels shorter than sepals and flowers often subsessile; sepals 5·5-7 mm, lanceolate, acute.{\i  Dry, open slopes. • S.W. Ukraine and Moldavia.} Rs(W).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 3. A. gypsophiloides} L.,{\i  Mantissa} 71 (1767). Like {\b 1} but stems stout; basal leaves c. 1 mm wide; inflorescence a lax, elongate panicle; pedicels 1-2 times as long as sepals; sepals 4-5 mm, ovate, acute or acuminate; petals 2-3 times as long as sepals.{\i  S. & E. Bulgaria.} Bu. ({\i S.W. Asia}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 The typical plant, with glandular-pubescent inflorescence, is recorded only from Aitos. Var.{\i  rhodopaea }Velen., recorded from limestone rocks in two valleys in the Rodopi Planina and not collected since the turn of the century, has larger flowers and glabrous inflorescences.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 4. A. procera} Sprengel,{\i  Hist. Rei Herb.}{\b  2:} 153 (1808) ({\i A. biebersteinii} Schlecht.). Perennial with branched, woody stock; stems (10-)20-40 cm, erect, rigid, rather stout, simple, glabrous below, sometimes pubescent above. Basal leaves 30-120 × c. 1 mm, linear, acuminate; cauline leaves shorter and wider. Inflorescence usually a very lax, subcorymbose panicle, sometimes elongate or fasciculate; pedicels usually 2-4 times as long as sepals. Sepals 2·5-5 mm, ovate, very obtuse, not keeled; petals about twice as long as sepals.{\i  C. & E. Europe.} Au Cz Hu Po Rm Rs(N, B, C, W, E)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b procera} ({\i A. procera} subsp.{\i  glabra} (F.N. Williams) J. Holub,{\i  A. graminifolia} Schrader, non Ard., {\i A. micradenia} Smirnov, {\i A. saxatilis} sensu Ikonn., non L.; incl. {\i A. koriniana} Fischer, {\i A. ucrainica} Sprengel ex Steudel,{\i  A. stenophylla} Ledeb., {\i A. syreistschikowii} Smirnov, {\i A. polaris} Schischkin): Leaf-sheaths at base of stem c. 2·5-4 mm. Inflorescence-branches and pedicels glabrous, eglandular. 2n = 22, 44, 110.{\i  Throughout the range of the species}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp.{\b  pubescens} (Fenzl) Jalas, {\i Ann. Bot. Fenn.}{\b  20:} 109 (1983) (incl.{\i  A. pineticola} Klokov): Leaf-sheaths at base of stem c. 2 mm. Branches of inflorescence and pedicels glandular-pubescent.{\i  Ukraine and S. Russia}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Subsp. ({\b a}) is very variable, but it is not clear on the basis of the data available at present whether or not it should be divided into several subspecies. For further information, and full references, see Jalas & Suominen,{\i  Atlas Florae Europaeae}{\b  6:} 12 (1983).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 5. A. longifolia} Bieb.,{\i  Fl. Taur.-Cauc. }{\b 1:} 345 (1808). Glabrous perennial with branched, slightly woody stock; stems 20-40 cm, erect, fairly stout, simple. Basal leaves 100-200 × c. 0·75 mm, linear, acuminate; cauline leaves shorter but scarcely wider. Inflorescence many-flowered, subcorymbose; pedicels usually 1-3 times as long as sepals. Sepals 2-3 mm, ovate, obtuse, with a prominent, blunt keel; petals about twice as long as sepals. {\i C., S. & E. Russia; E. Ukraine.} Rs(C, W, E).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Subgen. {\b Porphyrantha} (Fenzl) McNeill. Perennials with lanceolate leaves. Styles 3. Capsule cylindrical, long-exserted, shiny.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 6. A. purpurascens} Ramond ex DC. in Lam. & DC.,{\i  Fl. Fr.} ed. 3,{\b  4:} 785 (1805). Stems 4-10 cm, diffuse, ascending, glabrous, with distinct scale-leaves towards the base; puberulent with deflexed hairs, branched and leafy in upper part. Leaves 5-10 mm, elliptic-lanceolate or lanceolate, acute, strongly 1-veined, glabrous, ciliate at base. Flowers 2-4 in rather dense clusters, rarely solitary; pedicels usually equalling sepals, pubescent, erect in fruit. Sepals 4·5-6·5 mm, lanceolate, acute, 3- to 5-veined, glabrous; petals 1½-2 times as long as sepals, oblong, pale purplish or white. Capsule 1 3/4-2 times as long as sepals, cylindrical. 2n = 46 {\i  Damp, rocky places on mountains. • Pyrenees; Cordillera Cantabrica; one station in S.E. France} ({\i Vercors}). Ga Hs.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Subgen. {\b Arenaria}. Annuals to perennials, of various habit. Leaves less than 30 mm. Styles 3(-5). Capsule more or less ovoid.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Species {\b 7-12} form a variable complex that has had numerous different taxonomic treatments. The treatment below largely follows that of D.J. Goyder, {\i Bot. Jour. Linn. Soc. }{\b 97:} 9-32 (1988).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 7. A. alfacarensis} Pamp., {\i Nuovo Gior. Bot. Ital.} nov. ser.,{\b  22:} 64 (1915) ({\i A. lithops} Heywood ex McNeill,{\i  A. pulvinata} Huter, non Edgew.). Dioecious perennial, sparsely covered with very short, crisped hairs, forming very compact, hard cushions 5-100 cm in
\par

\par
142}
\par