{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 27 Leaves without keel-like midrib or arista
\par
28 Plant with ± filiform, procumbent stems forming dense mats;  
\par
   leaves broadly ovate or orbicular; sepals not more than 3 mm
\par
   ...................................................................................................  {\b 19. balearica}
\par
28 Plant with stout stems, not forming dense mats; leaves narrow; 
\par
   sepals usually more than 3 mm
\par
29 Leaves linear-subulate (or rarely linear-lanceolate), not more 
\par
   than 1 mm wide (S. France) ......................................................... {\b 34. hispida}
\par
29 Leaves usually more than 1 mm wide
\par
30 Sepals usually more than 5 mm
\par
31 Petals less than 1½ times as long as sepals ............................. {\b 30. ligericina}
\par
31 Petals more than 1½ times as long as sepals
\par
32 Leaves ovate ........................................................................... {\b 16. bertolonii}
\par
32 Leaves oblanceolate or oblong to linear
\par
33 Caespitose, leaves usually not more than 10 mm long,
\par
   widest above middle ....................................................................... {\b 17. huteri}
\par
33 Not caespitose; leaves usually more than 10 mm long, widest at or 
\par
   below middle (rarely a few in middle of stem widest above middle)
\par
    ................................................................................................... {\b 18. montana}
\par
30 Sepals not more than 5 mm
\par
34 Sepals eglandular
\par
35 Pedicels not more than 3 times as long as sepals ......................... {\b 23. ciliata}
\par
35 Pedicels more than 3 times as long as sepals ............................. {\b 33. cinerea}
\par
34 Sepals glandular-pubescent
\par
36 Petals about twice as long as sepals
\par
37 Sepals acute to acuminate; capsule slightly shorter than sepals 
\par
   ..................................................................................................... {\b 27. filicaulis}
\par
37 Sepals obtuse or subacute; capsule slightly exceeding sepals ......{\b 31. cretica}
\par
36 Petals not more than 1½ times as long as sepals
\par
38 Dwarf caespitose plant, less than 5 cm; pedicels 1-2 times as
   long as sepals; flowers solitary or paired .................................... {\b 32. halacsyi}
\par
38 Large plant, more than 5 cm; pedicels 2-5(-10) times as 
\par
   long as sepals; inflorescence with more than 2 flowers 
\par
39 Leaves broadly elliptical to obovate; petals very slightly 
\par
   exceeding sepals
\par
40 Plant pubescent; stems, branches and pedicels slender
\par
   and long ................................................................................... {\b 28. orbicularis}
\par
40 Plant puberulent; stems, branches and pedicels stout
\par
   and short ................................................................................... {\b 29. fragillima}
\par
39 Leaves elliptical, lanceolate or oblanceolate; petals 
\par
   1 1/3-1 1/2 times as long as sepals
\par
41 Seeds with acute tubercles; leaves with prominent midrib ...... {\b 27. filicaulis}
\par
41 Seeds with low, obtuse tubercles or ridges; leaves without
\par
   prominent midrib ...................................................................... {\b 30. ligericina}
\par
1  Annual or biennial, lacking leafy vegetative stems at time 
\par
   of flowering (see also{\b  33})
\par
42 Lower leaves lanceolate or wider, often with 3 or more veins
\par
43 Petals equalling or exceeding sepals
\par
44 Pedicels ± glabrous ................................................................... {\b 37. conferta}
\par
44 Pedicels pubescent or puberulent
\par
45 Seeds globose and smooth; sepals often purplish-black at apex
\par
   ................................................................................................... {\b 43. hispanica}
\par
45 Seeds reniform and tuberculate; sepals usually not purplish-black 
\par
   at apex
\par
46 Seeds with acute tubercles
\par
47 Sepals ovate-oblong, obtuse .......................................... {\b 47. conimbricensis}
\par
47 Sepals lanceolate or ovate-lanceolate, acute or acuminate 
\par
48 Petals 1½-2 times as long as sepals .............................................. {\b 52. retusa}
\par
48 Petals scarcely exceeding or shorter than sepals 
\par
49 Sepals acute; seeds 0·4-0·6 mm ................................................. {\b 39. muralis}
\par
49 Sepals acuminate; seeds 0·6-1 mm ....................................... {\b 40. graveolens}
\par
46 Seeds with low, obtuse tubercles
\par
50 Sepals dimorphic; petals equalling or exceeding inner sepals, 
\par
   shorter than the outer ................................................................... {\b 44. pomelii}
\par
50 Sepals not dimorphic; petals equalling or exceeding all sepals 
\par
51 Leaves ± densely pubescent ..................................................... {\b 37. conferta}
\par
51 Leaves not pubescent, though usually ciliate 
\par
52 Leaves more than 3 times as long as wide ............................. {\b 22. norvegica}
\par
52 Leaves less than 3 times as long as wide ................................... {\b 24. gothica}
\par
43 Petals shorter than sepals
\par
53 Bracts forming an involucre around the inflorescence; 
\par
   stems less than 4 cm ........................................................... {\b 41. saponarioides}
\par
53 Bracts not forming an involucre; stems 3-20 cm
\par
54 Sepals with patent or recurved apices ................................... {\b 42. guicciardii}
\par
54 Sepals straight
\par
55 Sepals 4·5-7 mm
\par
56 Lower leaves ovate, the upper linear-lanceolate; sepals lanceolate 
\par
   ................................................................................................. {\b 38. nevadensis}
\par
56 Leaves oblong to spathulate; sepals dimorphic, broadly ovate
\par
   or oblong ...................................................................................... {\b 44. pomelii}
\par
55 Sepals 2-4·5 mm
\par
57 Leaves obovate, with single vein; sepals obscurely veined ..{\b 40. graveolens}
\par
57 Leaves ovate to ovate-lanceolate, 3- to 5-veined; 
\par
   sepals with 3-5 veins 
\par
58 Petals not more than 2/3 as long as sepals; seeds 0·3-0·7 mm
\par
   ............................................................................................... {\b 36. serpyllifolia}
\par
58 Petals almost equalling sepals; seeds 0·7-1 mm ....................... {\b 37. conferta}
\par
42 All leaves linear-lanceolate or linear, usually 1-veined
\par
59 Pedicels glabrous or subglabrous
\par
60 Petals 1½-2 times as long as sepals; sepals ovate, obtuse
\par
   ................................................................................................. {\b 48. obtusiflora}
\par
60 Petals ± equalling sepals; sepals lanceolate, acute
\par
61 Sepals 2·5 mm; capsule with 6 teeth ...................................... {\b 53. capillipes}
\par
61 Sepals 3-4 mm; capsule with 2 bifid teeth .......................... {\b 54. provincialis}
\par
59 Pedicels pubescent or puberulent
\par
62 Petals pink, truncate-emarginate, ± equalling sepals ........... {\b 45. emarginata}
\par
62 Petals white
\par

\par
141}
\par