{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 dark brown, somewhat shining; veins of sterile segments ending in teeth. Pseudoindusia reniform and bearing stiff, brown hairs. Rhachis tomentose to hispid.{\i  Naturalized in Açores.} [Az.] ({\i Tropics and austral subtropics.})
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 7.                Cryptogramma}              R.Br. ex Richardson
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc  By A. Lawalrée.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Rhizome creeping or ascending. Leaves 2- or 3-pinnate, with free veins, dimorphic, the sterile with wide and the fertile with narrower divisions; sori submarginal, becoming confluent, borne on ends of veins and covered by the continuous deflexed membranous leaf-margins (pseudoindusia). Spores tetrahedral, translucent.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b Onychium japonicum }(Thunb.) G. Kunze,{\i  Bot. Zeit. }{\b 1848:} 507 (1848), with dimorphic, 4-pinnate leaves 30-80 cm, is superficially similar to {\i Cryptogramma.} It is perhaps becoming naturalized in Açores.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 Leaves tufted, 3-pinnate ....................................................................... {\b 1. crispa}
\par
Leaves arising singly, 2-pinnate ......................................................... {\b 2. stelleri}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. C. crispa} (L.) R. Br. ex Hooker,{\i  Gen. Fil.} t. 115B (1842) ({\i Allosorus crispus} (L.) Röhling). Leaves 15-30 cm, up to 7 cm wide, tufted, ovate to triangular-ovate, 3-pinnate, bright green, dying down in winter; petiole twice as long as the lamina; ultimate segments of sterile leaves with cuneate base, narrowly ovate and coarsely and irregularly toothed; ultimate segments of fertile leaves 1-2 mm wide, linear. 2n = 120. {\i Mountain rocks and screes; calcifuge. Much of Europe but rare in the east; only in mountain districts except in the north.} Al Au Be Br Bu Co Cz Fe Ga Ge Hb He Hs Is It Ju Lu No Po ?Rm Rs(N) Su.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. C. stelleri} (S.G. Gmelin) Prantl,{\i  Bot. Jahrb.}{\b  3:} 413 (1882). Leaves arising singly from a slender, creeping rhizome, 8-20 × 2-5 cm wide, 2-pinnate, ovate to ovate-elongate; petiole equalling or rather longer than the lamina; ultimate segments of sterile leaves similar to those of {\b 1}, those of the fertile leaves 2-3 mm wide, linear-lanceolate. {\i Rock-crevices in shady places. N.E. Russia}. Rs(N, C). ({\i Arctic and subarctic Asia; N. America}.)
\par

\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b  10.      PTERIDACEAE }
\par    

\pard\f0\fs24\qc  Edit. †D.H. Valentine.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Rhizome solenostelic or dictyostelic, with opaque scales. Petiole with a single U-shaped strand. Sori submarginal, forming coenosori which are borne on the veinlet connecting the vein ends, and which are covered by the scarious, deflexed leaf-margins; spores tetrahedral, opaque.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 1.                   Pteris}                  L. 
\par   

\pard\f0\fs24\qc  By T.G. Walker.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Rhizome short. Leaves tufted, pinnate or 2-pinnate. Sori with paraphyses.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Pinnae pinnatisect ..................................................................... {\b 1. incompleta}
\par
1 Pinnae simple
\par
2 Not more than 7 pairs of pinnae; lamina ovate ................................ {\b 2. cretica}
\par
2 10 or more pairs of pinnae; lamina lanceolate .................................. {\b 3. vittata}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. P. incompleta} Cav.,{\i  Anal. Ci. Nat.}{\b  2:} 107 (1801) ({\i P. serrulata} Forskål, non L. fil.,{\i  P. arguta} Aiton). Rhizome creeping; scales long, narrow, dark brown. Petiole up to c. 50 cm, brown; lamina up to c. 100 × 40 cm, ovate; pinnae 7-9(-11) pairs, pinnatisect, the lowest pair often forked, all pinnatisect; segments oblong-lanceolate, falcate, serrate in distal ½, acute. Sori occupying lower 1/2-2/3 of the segments, not extending to the base of the sinus; indusium prominent, thick. {\i Açores; two stations in S.W. Spain.} Az Hs [Lu].
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b P. multifida }Poiret in Lam.,{\i  Encycl. Méth. Bot.}{\b  5:} 714 (1804) ({\i P. serrulata} L. fil., non Forskål), from China and Japan, with oblong-linear leaf-segments, which are serrate with sori occupying the entire margin except for the apex, and {\b P. tremula} R. Br., {\i Prodr. Fl. Nov. Holl.} 154 (1810), from Australia, New Zealand and Fiji, with 2- to 4-pinnate leaves up to 90 × 60 cm, are reported from Açores as escapes from cultivation, and may be becoming naturalized.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. P. cretica} L.,{\i  Mantissa} 130 (1767). Rhizome short-creeping; scales small, dark brown. Petiole up to c. 30 cm, light brown; lamina up to c. 40 cm, ovate; pinnae 1-7 pairs, linear, simple (except for lowest 1 or 2 pairs which may be forked), serrate at the apex; sterile pinnae serrulate, slightly wider than fertile. Sori occupying entire margin except for the apex; indusium reflexed and inconspicuous when mature. 2n = 58. {\i C. Mediterranean region and N. Italy; one station in S. Greece; often cultivated for ornament, and locally naturalized.} Co ?Cr Ga Gr He It *Sa Si [Az Br Ho *Hs Hu].
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 3. P. vittata} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 1074 (1753) ({\i P. longifolia} auct., non L., {\i P. ensifolia} Poiret). Like {\b 2} but petiole not more than 10 cm; lamina up to 60 cm, lanceolate, with 10 or more pairs of pinnae; pinnae always simple, cordate at the base.{\i  Mediterranean region.} ?Bl Cr Gr Hs It Si [Az Ga *He Hu].
\par

\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b  11.       HYMENOPHYLLACEAE}
\par   

\pard\f0\fs24\qc  Edit. †D.H. Valentine & D.M. Moore.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Plants small. Rhizome slender, extensively creeping. Lamina dark, translucent green, only 1 cell thick except on the veins. Sori gradate, marginal; indusium tubular or 2-valved, symmetrical; spores tetrahedral.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 A predominantly austral and tropical family. Delimitation of species is difficult, and the plants from Europe are held by some authors to be conspecific with those in the tropics or the southern hemisphere; as here delimited, they are believed to extend outside Europe only to Madeira and Islas Canarias.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Literature: E.B. Copeland,{\i  Philipp. Jour. Sci.} ({\i Bot.}){\b  67:} 1-110 (1938).
\par

\par
14}
\par