{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 13. M. pendula} (Waldst. & Kit.) Fenzl, {\i Vers. Darstell. Alsin.} tab. ad p. 46 (1833) ({\i Arenaria pendula} Waldst. & Kit.). Caespitose, suffrutescent perennial with numerous creeping, often pendent stems 14-25(-50) cm, often purplish above, with abundant hairs in 2 distinct lines, becoming glabrous. Leaves 10-25(-40) × 1-3·5(-5) mm, linear, lanceolate, or narrowly elliptical, flat, patent, glabrous beneath, with scattered hairs on upper surface, and ciliate on margins only at base, acute to acuminate. Inflorescence an erect, 1- to 7-flowered simple cyme at ends of short side branches; pedicels 10-17 mm, often swollen towards apex, becoming deflexed in fruit, bracteolate. Flowers 5-merous; sepals 3-4 mm, glabrous, sometimes with scattered cilia at base, keeled, lanceolate to subulate, with broad scarious margins; petals 4·5-8 mm, oblong, obtuse, somewhat narrowed into a claw, patent; styles 3. Capsule 4 × 5 mm. Seeds 1·2-1·4 × 1 mm, reniform, dark brown to black, shiny, tuberculate; strophiole large, branched, white.{\i  Rocks and screes. • From C. Romania to N. Greece}. Bu Gr Ju Rm.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 14. M. hypanica} Grinj & Klokov, {\i Jour. Bot. Acad. Sci. Ukr.}{\b  7}({\b 4}): 56 (1951). Caespitose, glabrous perennial; stems 8-10 cm, prostrate to ascending, diffusely branched, glabrous. Leaves 8-12 × 0·7-1·7 mm, oblanceolate-spathulate, apex acute or acuminate. Inflorescence a terminal 1- to 7-flowered cyme; pedicels 5-12 mm, deflexed in fruit; bracteoles linear-lanceolate with scarious margins. Flowers 5-merous; sepals 2-2·5 mm, elliptic-lanceolate, acuminate; petals 2·5-3 mm, ovate-lanceolate; styles 3. Capsule c. 2·5 mm, subglobose. Seeds 0·8 mm, dark reddish, smooth; strophiole white.{\i  Granite outcrops. • S. Ukraine, N. of Odessa}. Rs(W).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 15. M. muscosa} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 359 (1753). Laxly caespitose, glabrous perennial; stems 10-20(-35) cm, procumbent to ascending, rarely pendent or erect, branched, the internodes often swollen above node. Leaves 10-30(-70) × 0·5-2 mm, linear to filiform, bright green, sometimes shiny. Inflorescence a terminal, 3- to 15(or many)-flowered divaricate cyme; pedicels 12-25 mm, swollen at base, becoming patent in fruit, but not recurved. Flowers usually 4-merous; sepals 3 mm, with narrow scarious margins; petals 5-7 mm, patent, without a distinct claw, acute; styles usually 2. Capsule 2·5 × 2 mm, subglobose to ovoid, usually slightly exceeding calyx, teeth usually somewhat recurved. Seeds 1·2-1·5 mm, black, shiny, smooth; strophiole entire, white. 2n = 24.{\i  Damp rocks and woodland. • Mountains of S. & C. Europe northwards to }50°{\i  N.} Al Au Bu Cz Ga Ge He Hs Hu It Ju Po Rm Rs(W) Si.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Very variable in habit and leaf size. Hybrids occur frequently with{\b  22} ({\i M.} ×{\i  coronensis} Behrendsen) and with {\b 20} ({\i M.} × {\i hybrida} A. Kerner ex Hand.-Mazz.). Hybrid plants are very variable, usually with a more or less equal ratio of 4- and 5-merous flowers on the same plant.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 16. M. intermedia} (Loisel.) Panizzi,{\i  Nuovo Gior. Bot. Ital.}{\b  21}({\b 3}): 477 (1889) ({\i M. provincialis} Merxm. & Grau). Caespitose, glabrous perennial; stems up to 25 cm, usually arising from a central rootstock, often pendent. Leaves often dark green, rarely somewhat glaucescent, linear to narrowly oblanceolate, apex acute, somewhat fleshy, upper surface flat, lower keeled; upper leaves 15-25(-30) × 1·5-2·5 mm. Inflorescence a 1- to 7-flowered cyme; pedicels becoming recurved in fruit, bracteolate. Flowers 4(5)-merous; sepals 4 × 1·5 mm, lanceolate, acute, keeled, with rather wide scarious margins; petals 7 × 3 mm, broadly elliptical, truncate at base, obtuse; styles 2 or 3. Capsule 3-4 × 3 mm, subglobose.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Seeds c. 1·3 mm, black, shiny, smooth; strophiole large, branched, white. 2n = 24.{\i  Limestone fissures. • S.E. France} ({\i Alpes de Haute Provence}). Ga.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 17. M. markgrafii} Merxm. & Guterm.,{\i  Phyton} ({\i Austria}){\b  7:} 1 (1 957) . Caespitose, glabrous perennial, becoming suffruticose; stems 10-15 cm, filiform, usually few, decumbent, arising from a single rootstock, becoming branched 2-4 cm above crown. Leaves on mature stems (3-)4-6 × 1 mm, semi-terete, but shrivelling at maturity; leaves on younger stems 15-30 × 1-1·5 mm, rather fleshy, distinctly keeled, linear or linear-lanceolate. Flowers solitary, axillary or subterminal, rarely terminal, ebracteolate; pedicel usually thinner than branches, but markedly swollen at apex below flower, becoming recurved in fruit. Flowers 4-merous; sepals 2·7-3 mm, with a distinctly keeled dorsal surface and broad scarious margins; petals c. 4 mm, somewhat longer than sepals; styles 2. Capsule 2-2·5 mm, globose, included within calyx. Seeds 1·4-1·7 mm, black, shiny, smooth; strophiole branched, white, becoming brownish. 2n = 24.{\i  Fissures of shady limestone cliffs. • N. Italy }({\i Alpi Bresciane}). It.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 18. M. papulosa} Bertol., {\i Fl. Ital.}{\b  4:} 363 (1840). Suffrutescent, glabrous perennial; stems 5-15 cm, pendent, somewhat glaucous and fleshy. Leaves c. 20 × 2 mm, oblanceolate, usually fleshy. Inflorescence a 3- to 5-flowered cyme; pedicels swollen below calyx, bracteolate. Flowers 4-merous; sepals 3 mm, broadly lanceolate, acute; petals 4 × 2 mm, not or only indistinctly clawed; styles 2. Capsule 2·5-3 mm, subglobose. Seeds 1·2 × 1·0 mm, black, shiny, smooth; strophiole large, simply branched, white. 2n = 24.{\i  Limestone cliffs and overhanging rocks. • C. Appennini.} It.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 19. M. tommasinii} Marchesetti,{\i  Boll. Soc. Adr. Sci. Nat. Trieste}{\b  5:} 327 (1880). Caespitose, suffrutescent perennial; stems 5-20 cm, pendent to procumbent, occasionally suberect, glabrous, glaucous, somewhat fleshy, occasionally swollen at nodes, becoming fragile when dry. Leaves 5-20(-25) × 1-1·5 mm, semi-terete, rather fleshy, the upper flat, linear or elongate-spathulate, keeled, acute. Inflorescence a terminal 3- to 7-flowered cyme; pedicels 8-20 mm, becoming markedly recurved in fruit, slightly swollen at apex, bracteolate. Flowers 4-merous; sepals 2-2·5 mm, lanceolate, with rather wide scarious margins; petals ovate-lanceolate, (4-)5-7 × 3 mm; styles 2(-4). Capsule 3 mm, subglobose to ovoid, more or less included within calyx. Seeds 1-1·2 mm, black, shiny; testa smooth; strophiole intricately branched, white. 2n = 24.{\i  Calcareous rocks and cliffs.• E. part of Istrian peninsula}. It Ju.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Flowers with shorter petals are sometimes found and plants may also show some form of teratological aberration.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 20. M. ciliata} (Scop.) Dalla Torre in Hartinger, {\i Atlas Alpenfl.} (Text) 78 (1882) ({\i Stellaria ciliata} Scop.,{\i  M. polygonoides} (Wulfen) Mert. & Koch). Decumbent, caespitose, subglabrous or somewhat hairy perennial; stems 5-13 cm, often profusely branched, usually producing adventitious roots. Leaves 3-10 × 0·6-1·5 mm, usually linear to lanceolate, rather fleshy, glabrous except for margins usually ciliate towards base. Inflorescence a 1- to 5-flowered cyme; peduncle puberulent; pedicels 5-8 mm, deflexed in fruit, bracteolate. Flowers (4)5-merous; sepals 2·5-4 × 1 mm, ovate, glabrous, with broad scarious margins; petals 3·5-5 mm, elliptical, patent or recurved, acute; styles usually 3. Capsule 2-4 mm, subglobose, equalling or exceeding sepals. Seeds 1 × 1·2 mm, black, shiny, smooth; strophiole large, branched, white. 2n = 24.{\i  Limestone rocks and screes. • Alps; W. part of Balkan peninsula}. Al Au Ga Ge He It Ju.
\par

\par
151}
\par