{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 or 2(3)-flowered; petals usually 2/3 as long as sepals, obtuse; capsule-teeth 3 or 4; seeds 0·55-0·7 mm. Homogamous. 2n = 24, 26.{\i  Open, stony habitats on base-rich soil. Arctic and subarctic Europe, extending southwards to }56° 30'{\i  N. in Scotland}. Br Fa Fe Is No Rs(N) Sb Su.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Sect. ALSINANTHE (Fenzl) Graebner. Perennial. Plant glabrous. Leaves 1-veined, linear to subulate. Sepals erect at anthesis; petals shorter than sepals.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 41. M. stricta} (Swartz) Hiern,{\i  Jour. Bot.} ({\i London}) {\b 37:} 320 (1899) ({\i Alsine stricta} (Swartz) Wahlenb.). Laxly caespitose perennial; flowering stems up to 10 cm, erect. Leaves 6-12 mm, obscurely 1-veined. Cymes 1- to 3(4)-flowered; pedicels 15-50 mm. Sepals 2·5-4 mm, ovate, acute, 3-veined when dry; petals slightly shorter than sepals. Capsule equalling or slightly exceeding sepals, dehiscing almost to base with patent teeth. Seeds 0·65-0·85 mm, reddish-brown, smooth. 2n = 22, 26, 30.{\i  Arctic and subarctic Europe southwards to} 60°{\i  N. in Norway; isolated stations in N. England and N.W. Switzerland.} Br Fe †Ga †Ge He Is No Rs(N) Sb Su.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   {\b 42. M. rossii} (R. Br. ex Richardson) Graebner in Ascherson & Graebner, {\i Syn. Mitteleur. Fl.}{\b  5}({\b 1}): 772 (1918). Low, densely caespitose perennial with spreading flowering stems. Leaves 2-5 mm, subulate; vegetative propagation by short, detachable shoots in axils of upper leaves. Flowers solitary, rarely produced; pedicels 5-15 mm. Sepals 1·5-2·5 mm, ovate-deltate; petals and capsule slightly shorter than sepals. Seeds 0·6-0·7 mm.{\i  Spitsbergen. }Sb. ({\i Arctic and montane North America, Greenland.})
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Sect. SPECTABILES (Fenzl) Hayek. Sepals linear-oblong, obtuse, erect at anthesis. Petals usually exceeding sepals. Capsule cylindrical.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 43. M. wettsteinii} Mattf.,{\i  Bot. Jahrb.}{\b  57} Beibl. 127: 62 (1922). Caespitose, glabrous perennial. Leaves linear, obtuse, glaucous. Cymes few-flowered. Sepals 3·5-5 mm, 5-veined, somewhat fleshy; petals just exceeding sepals; glands at base of outer stamens swollen, hairy.{\i  Rocks at c.} 1400{\i  m. E. Kriti }({\i Afendi Kavousi, N.E. of Ierapetra}). Cr.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 44. M. capillacea} (All.) Graebner in Ascherson & Graebner,{\i  Syn. Mitteleur. Fl.}{\b  5}({\b 1}): 757 (1918) ({\i Alsine liniflora} (L.) Hegetschw.). Laxly caespitose perennial with woody stock; stems 8-30 cm, densely glandular-pubescent above. Leaves 10-20 × 0·5 mm, linear-setaceous, rigid, 1- to 3-veined, obtuse, ciliolate. Cymes 1- to 6-flowered; pedicels and sepals densely glandular-pubescent. Sepals 5-7 mm, ovate-oblong; veins 3, the outer pair disappearing in upper ½; petals and capsule 1½-2 times as long as sepals. Seeds 1·5-2 mm, prominently tuberculate to almost fimbriate dorsally, the face rugose. 2n = 26. {\i Calcareous rocks and screes. • Mountains of S. & S.C. Europe from France to S. Jugoslavia.} Al Ga He It Ju.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 45. M. baldaccii} (Halácsy) Mattf. in Ascherson & Graebner,{\i  Syn. Mitteleur. Fl.}{\b  5}({\b 1}): 940 (1919). Perennial with woody rhizomes up to 20 cm; stems (2-)5-20 cm, with crowded internodes; flowering stems glandular-pubescent, especially above. Leaves linear-subulate, acute, often secund, ciliolate, 1-veined. Cymes 1- to 7-flowered. Sepals 4-7 × 1·5 mm, oblong, 3-veined to apex; petals broadly obovate, 2-2½ times as long as sepals. Capsule equalling sepals.{\i  Rocky and stony ground. • Balkan peninsula, mainly in the west.} Al Gr Ju.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Leaves densely glandular-pubescent .......................... ({\b c}) subsp.{\b  skutariensis}
\par
1 Leaves  glabrous
\par
2 Leaves green; sepals 4-5 mm; petals 11-12 mm ............. ({\b b}) subsp. {\b doerfleri}
\par
2 Leaves glaucous; sepals 5-7 mm; petals 15-18 mm ....... ({\b a}) subsp.{\b  baldaccii}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp.{\b  baldaccii} : Leaves 8-18 mm, glabrous, glaucous. Flowering stems 6-15(-22) cm; cymes 1- to 5-flowered. Sepals 5--7 mm; petals 15-18 mm. {\i Usually on serpentine. Albania; S. Jugoslavia; N.W. Greece}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp.{\b  doerfleri} (Hayek) Hayek, {\i Prodr. Fl. Penins. Balcan. }{\b 1:} 193 (1924) ({\i M. doerfleri} Hayek): Leaves 3-8 mm, glabrous, green. Flowering stems 2-6 cm; cymes 1(-3)-flowered. Sepals 4-5 mm; petals 11-12 mm.{\i  N.E. Albania; S.W. Jugoslavia; N.E. Greece} ({\i Falakron}).
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b c}) Subsp.{\b  skutariensis} Hayek,{\i  loc. cit. }(1924): Leaves 5-10 mm, densely glandular-pubescent. Flowering stems up to 12 cm; cymes 1- to 7-flowered. Sepals c. 5 mm; petals c. 10 mm. {\i N.W. Albania}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 46. M. garckeana} (Ascherson & Sint. ex Boiss.) Mattf., {\i Feddes Repert.} ({\i Beih}).{\b  15:} 192 (1922). Like {\b 45} but stems densely caespitose, shortly rhizomatous; leaves somewhat fleshy; sepals 3-5 × 0·5-1 mm; petals 6 mm, slightly exceeding sepals. {\i Balkan peninsula, from E. Albania and N. Greece to E. Bulgaria}. Al Bu Gr Ju.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 47. M. handelii} Mattf.,{\i  Feddes Repert.}{\b  19:} 193 (1923). Like{\b  45} but flowering stems only 0·5-1 cm; flowers solitary; petals 5 mm, scarcely exceeding sepals.{\i  Mountain rocks, }2100{\i  m. Hercegovina }({\i Cvrsnica}). Ju.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 48. M. laricifolia} (L.) Schinz & Thell.,{\i  Bull. Herb. Boiss}. ser. 2, {\b 7:} 403 (1907) ({\i M. striata }(L.) Mattf., {\i Alsine laricifolia} (L.) Crantz,{\i  A. striata} (L.) Gren.). Perennial with stems 8-30 cm, laxly or densely caespitose, woody below, but less robust than {\b 44}. Leaves linear-setaceous, rigid, acute, somewhat falcate, obscurely 1-veined, glabrous, ciliolate at base. Cymes 1- to 6-flowered; pedicels and sepals with crispate hairs, rarely glandular-pubescent. Sepals 4-7 mm, linear-oblong, 3-veined to apex, the margin usually red; petals up to 1½-2 times as long as sepals.{\i  Mountain rocks and screes. • Mountains of S. & C. Europe from N.E. Spain to the Carpathians}. Au Cz Ga He Hs It Po Rm.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Petals 6-7 mm, less than 1½ times as long as sepals .... ({\b c}) subsp.{\b  ophiolitica}
\par
1 Petals 8-10 mm, 1½-2 times as long as sepals
\par
2 Capsule 1-1½ times as long as sepals; seeds 0·8-1 mm,
\par
  rugose .............................................................................. ({\b a}) subsp.{\b  laricifolia}
\par
2 Capsule 1½-2 times as long as sepals; seeds 1·2-1·5 mm,
\par
  tuberculate ........................................................................ ({\b b}) subsp.{\b  kitaibelii}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp.{\b  laricifolia} (incl. subsp.{\i  diomedis }(Br.-Bl.) Mattf., subsp. {\i striata }(L.) Mattf.): Laxly caespitose. Sepals 4-5·5 mm, sometimes glandular. Capsule 1-1½ times as long as sepals. Seeds 0·8-1 mm, rugose dorsally. 2n = 26.{\i  Calcifuge. From the C. Pyrenees to }12°{\i  E. in S.E. Alps}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b kitaibelii} (Nyman) Mattf.,{\i  Feddes Repert.} ({\i Beih}.) {\b 15:} 190 (1922). More robust than subsp. ({\b a}). Sepals 5-7 mm, eglandular. Capsule 1½-2 times as long as sepals. Seeds 1·2-1·5 mm, tuberculate dorsally. 2n = 26.{\i  Calcicole. E. Austrian Alps; Carpathians}.
\par
 ({\b c}) Subsp.{\b  ophiolitica }Pignatti, Gior. Bot. Ital. 107: 208 (1973): Like subsp. ({\b a}) but densely caespitose; leaves greyish; petals 6-7 mm, less than 1½ times as long as sepals; seeds smaller.{\i  Serpentine rocks. N. Appennini}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 49. M. macrocarpa} (Pursh) Ostenf.,{\i  Meddel. Grønl.}{\b  37:} 226
\par

\par

\par
159}
\par