{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28\li200  Rhizome filiform; indusium of 2 distinct valves; receptacle included
\par
   .......................................................................................... {\b 1. Hymenophyllum}
\par
Rhizome 2-4 mm in diameter; indusium tubular; receptacle exserted
\par
   ................................................................................................. {\b 2. Trichomanes}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 1.               Hymenophyllum}            Sm.
\par 

\pard\f0\fs24\qc  By D.A. Webb.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Plants with the habit of bryophytes, and often growing with them. Rhizomes filiform, less than 1 mm in diameter, smooth. Leaves more or less procumbent, persistent after withering, forming a dense mat of foliage, deeply pinnatisect, the segments asymmetrical, subentire on their proximal side, deeply lobed on their distal side with 2-15 oblong, obtuse, dentate lobes. Sori solitary, more or less globose, situated near the base of the distal segments of the lamina; indusium of 2 ovate or suborbicular valves, united only at the base.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Literature: E.B. Copeland,{\i  Philipp. Jour. Sci.} ({\i Bot}.){\b  64:} 1-188 (1937).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200  Valves of indusium dentate; leaves bluish-green ....................... {\b 1. tunbrigense}
\par
Valves of indusium entire; leaves somewhat olive-green ................ {\b 2. wilsonii}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. H. tunbrigense} (L.) Sm. in Sowerby,{\i  Engl. Bot. }{\b 3}: t. 162 (1794). Lamina usually 22-45 × c. 15 mm, flat, somewhat glossy, slightly bluish-green. Indusium-valves suborbicular, fimbriate-dentate in the distal 1/2 nearly flat. 2n = 26. {\i Woods and other damp, shady, sheltered places. Locally in W.. Europe from N. Spain to Scotland; Açores; a few isolated stations eastwards to N. Italy.} Az Be Br †Cz Ga Ge Hb Hs It †Ju.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. H. wilsonii} Hooker, {\i Brit. Fl.} 450 (1830) ({\i H. unilaterale} auct., vix Bory). Like {\b 1} but with usually narrower leaves, which are deflexed laterally and therefore appear even narrower, darker, somewhat olive-green; indusium-valves ovate, entire, convex. 2n = 36. {\i Similar situations to} {\b 1}{\i  but more tolerant of exposure. N.W. Europe; Açores.} Az Br Fa Ga Hb No.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 2.               Trichomanes}                L.
\par   

\pard\f0\fs24\qc  By D.A. Webb.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Like Hymenophyllum, but with stouter, more hairy rhizomes, larger, erect, more compoundly pinnatisect leaves, and elongate, cylindrical sori, of which the basal part is protected by tubular, slightly 2-lipped indusium, the apical part eventually protruding and persisting in the form of a bristle-like receptacle after the sporangia have fallen off.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Copeland,{\i  Philipp. Jour. Sci.} ({\i Bot}.) {\b 64:} 1-188 (1937), has divided this large genus into numerous smaller genera; in this treatment the European species is assigned to the genus{\i  Vandenboschia} Copel.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. T. speciosum} Willd., {\i Sp. Pl.}{\b  5}({\b 1}): 514 (1810) ({\i T. radicans} auct., non Swartz). Rhizome 2- 4 mm in diameter, covered with black hairs. Leaves 20-35(-50) cm, the winged petiole about equalling the ovate, deeply 3- or 4-pinnatisect lamina; ultimate segments oblong, obtuse, entire, disposed symmetrically, not unilaterally as in {\i Hymenophyllum.} 2n = 144. {\i By waterfalls, at mouths of caves, and in similar damp, dark situations. Extreme west of Europe, eastwards to the Pyrenees}. Az Br Ga Hb Hs It [Lu].
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b  12.       POLYPODIACEAE}
\par     

\pard\f0\fs24\qc  Edit. †D.H. Valentine & D.M. Moore.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Rhizome polystelic or solenostelic, with opaque scales. Leaves 2-ranked on the upper side of the rhizome and articulated to it; petiole with 1-3 major vascular strands. Sori superficial, without indusium; spores bilateral.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 1.                Polypodium}                L.
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc  By †D.H. Valentine (Ed. 1) revised by J.R. Akeroyd & A.C. Jermy (Ed. 2).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Rhizome creeping. Leaves uniform; lamina pinnatifid or pinnate, glabrous, without scales; pinnae entire or dentate, the veins free. Sori orbicular or elliptical, without indusium.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Literature: M.G. Shivas,{\i  Jour. Linn. Soc. London} ({\i Bot}.){\b  58:} 13-38 (1961). R.H. Roberts,{\i  Fern Gaz.}{\b  12}: 69-74 (1980).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 In Europe the genus consists of a polyploid complex in which four species can be recognized. These all have deeply pinnatifid leaves up to 50 cm or more in length; the lamina is longer than the petiole, and the pinnae are usually alternate, with 5-28 on each side. The sori are arranged in 1 row on each side of the midrib of the pinna. All the species grow on rocks and walls, or, in the wetter parts of Europe, as epiphytes on trees.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Some rhizome-scales at least 10 mm; sori with paraphyses
\par
2 Sori with some large, branched paraphyses; pinnae doubly
\par
  serrate ........................................................................................ {\b 1. cambricum}
\par
2 Sori with few small, unbranched or short-branched paraphyses
\par
  (often difficult to observe); pinnae simply serrate ............. {\b 2. macaronesicum}
\par
1 Longest rhizome-scales not more than 10 mm;
   sori without paraphyses
\par
3 Annulus with (7-)11-14(-18) indurated cells;
   ripe annulus reddish-brown  ........................................................... {\b 3. vulgare}
\par
3 Annulus with (4 )7-10(-13) indurated cells; ripe annulus     
\par
  usually colourless or pale brown ...............................................{\b  4. interjectum}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. P. cambricum} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 1086 (1753) ({\i P. australe} Fée,{\i  P. serratum} (Willd.) Sauter, non Aublet). Rhizome-scales 5-15 mm, linear-lanceolate to lanceolate. New leaves produced in autumn; leaves ovate to triangular-ovate; pinnae narrow, acute, doubly serrate, the basal pair projecting forward; secondary veins with 3 or 4(-6) bifurcations. Paraphyses (400-)600-1200(-1800) µm. branched; annulus with 4-10 indurated cells. 2n = 74.{\i  Calcicole. S. & W. Europe.} Al Bl Br Bu Co Cr Ga Gr Hb He Hs It Ju Lu Rs(K) Sa Si Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   {\b 2. P. macaronesicum} Bobrov,{\i  Bot. Zur.}{\b  49:} 540 (1964) ({\i P. cambricum} subsp.{\i  macaronesicum} (Bobrov) Fraser-Jenkins). Like {\b 1} but rhizome-scales often distinctly toothed; pinnae simply serrate; paraphyses 200-400(-800) µm. simple or subsimple, often difficult to observe; annulus with (7-)9-20 indurated cells.{\i  Often an epiphyte on trees, and on walls. S.W. Spain; Açores}. Az Hs. ({\i Madeira, Islas Canarias}.)
\par

\par
15}
\par