{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 (Velen.) Stoj. & Stefanov). Like {\b 23} but cymes compact, many-flowered; pedicels not longer than sepals; sepals 3-4 mm, 5- to 9-veined, slightly shorter than petals. {\i Mountain rocks and screes. • W. & C. Bulgaria}. Bu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Sect. LANCEOLATAE (Fenzl) Graebner. Perennial. Leaves lanceolate to linear-lanceolate, rarely oblanceolate. Sepals 5- to 7(-9)-veined (often obscurely so), erect or suberect at anthesis.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 25. M. saxifraga} (Friv.) Graebner in Ascherson & Graebner, {\i Syn. Mitteleur. Fl.}{\b  5}({\b 1}): 756 (1918). Densely caespitose perennial with erect, densely glandular-pubescent flowering stems. Leaves lanceolate to ovate-lanceolate, not rigid. Flowers in compact, 3- to 12-flowered cymes. Sepals lanceolate, densely glandular-pubescent; veins 5-9, the outer curved towards the margin; petals obovate, slightly exceeding sepals. 2n = 32.{\i  Mountain rocks, }1200-1800{\i  m. Bulgaria and N. Greece}. Bu Gr.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 The European plants belong to subsp. {\i saxifraga.} Subsp. tmolea Mattf.,{\i  Feddes Repert. Beih.}{\b  15:} 132 (1922), occurs in W. Anatolia (Boz Dag).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 26. M. graminifolia} (Ard.) Jáv.,{\i  Sched. Fl. Hung. Exsicc.}{\b  2:} 22 (1914). Densely pulvinate perennial with unbranched flowering stems 4-18 cm. Leaves 10-40 mm, linear-lanceolate, rigid. Cymes 2- to 7-flowered. Sepals 5-10 mm, lanceolate, 5- to 7-veined; petals exceeding sepals. Capsule included. 2n = 32. {\i Mountain rocks. • S. Europe, from N. Italy and S.W. Romania to Sicilia.} Al Gr It Ju Rm Si.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b graminifolia} (incl. subsp.{\i  hungarica} Jáv.): Whole plant glandular-pubescent, often densely so. Leaves of non-flowering stems 20-40 mm, those of the flowering stems at least ½ as long as internodes. {\i Throughout the range of the species, except Jugoslavia and Albania}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp.{\b  clandestina }(Portenschl.) Mattf.,{\i  Bot. Jahrb.} {\b 57} Beibl. 126: 31 (1921): Stems and leaves glabrous. Leaves of non-flowering stems 10-30 mm; those of the flowering stems rarely more than 1/3 as long as internodes. Pedicels and sepals glabrous or sparsely glandular-pubescent.{\i  N. Albania; W. & S. Jugoslavia.}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 27. M. stellata} (E.D. Clarke) Maire & Petitmengin,{\i  Mat. Étude Fl. Géogr. Bot. Or.}{\b  4:} 48 (1908). Densely pulvinate perennial with columnar stems clothed with dead, imbricate leaves. Leaves up to 10 mm, in rosettes, deltate-lanceolate to lanceolate, rigid, glabrous. Flowering stems and sepals glandular-pubescent; flowers solitary, rarely in pairs. Sepals 4-6 mm, lanceolate, 5-veined; petals c. 1½ times as long as sepals. Capsule slightly shorter than sepals. 2n =32.{\i  Limestone rocks above }1700{\i  m. •  Mountains of Greece and S. Albania.} Al Gr.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 28. M. pseudosaxifraga} (Mattf.) Greuter & Burdet, {\i Willdenowia}{\b  12:} 188 (1982) ({\i M. stellata} subsp.{\i  pseudosaxifraga} Mattf.). Laxly caespitose, densely glandular-pubescent perennial, forming greyish-green cushions. Stems rather long, stout, woody, not clothed with persistent dead leaves. Leaves 8-18 mm, oblanceolate to narrowly oblong, rather soft. Flowering stems 2-5 cm; cymes (1-)3- to 5-flowered. Sepals 5·5-7·5 mm; petals 1-2 times as long as sepals. Capsule slightly shorter than sepals. 2n = 32.{\i  Limestone rocks, }1800-2000{\i  m.  N.W. Greece} ({\i Pindhos}). Gr.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Although described as a subspecies of {\b 27}, this species is very distinct and perhaps more closely related to {\b 25}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 29. M. cerastiifolia} (Ramond ex DC.) Graebner in Ascherson & Graebner, {\i Syn. Mitteleur. Fl.}{\b  5}({\b 1}): 754 (1918) ({\i Alsine cerastiifolia} (Ramond ex DC.) Fenzl). Glandular-pubescent, caespitose perennial with stems up to 8 cm. Leaves 3-10 mm, lanceolate to lanceolate-elliptical; midrib very prominent beneath. Flowers 1(2); pedicels usually twice as long as sepals. Sepals 3-4 mm, ovate-lanceolate; petals 1½ times as long as sepals. Capsule exserted. Seeds 1-1·4 mm, reddish-brown.{\i  Screes and rocks above} 1800{\i  m. W.C. Pyrenees.} Ga Hs.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 30. M. rupestris} (Scop.) Schinz & Thell.,{\i  Bull. Herb. Boiss.} ser. 2, {\b 7:} 403 (1907) ({\i M. lanceolata} (All.) Mattf. subsp.{\i  rupestris }(Scop.) Mattf., {\i Alsine rupestris} (Scop.) Fenzl). Laxly caespitose or creeping perennial; stems rooting intermittently at nodes, glandular-pubescent above. Leaves lanceolate, shortly ciliate. Sepals 3·5-5 mm, lanceolate; usually glandular-pubescent; petals and sepals about equal. Capsule included. Seeds 1-1·2 mm. {\i Screes and rocks above} 1600{\i  m. Alps.} Au Ga Ge He It Ju.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b rupestris} : Leaves 2 4 mm. Flowering stems 1-3 mm; flowers usually solitary; pedicels 1-4 mm. 2n = c. 72. {\i Throughout much of the range of the species}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp.{\b  clementei} (Huter) Greuter & Burdet, {\i Willdenowia }{\b 14:} 43 (1984) ({\i M. lanceolata} (All.) Mattf.,{\i  M. lanceolata} subsp. {\i elementei }(Huter) Mattf.): Plant more robust. Stem leaves up to 8 mm. Flowering stems 5-7 cm; flowers 1 or 2; pedicels 8-15 mm. 2n = 36.{\i  S.W. Alps }({\i Alpes Cottiennes}).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 31. M. grignensis} (Reichenb.) Mattf.,{\i  Feddes Repert. }({\i Beih}.) {\b 15:} 141 (1922) ({\i Alsine villarii} var.{\i  grignensis} (Reichenb.) Tanfani). Glabrous perennial with very crowded lower internodes and elongate flowering stems up to 10 cm. Leaves 5-15 mm, linear, erect or erecto-patent, 3-veined. Cymes 5- to 12-flowered; pedicels 8-15 mm, slender. Sepals 2-3 mm, ovate, acute, 3-veined; petals and capsule slightly exceeding sepals. Seeds 1-1·2 mm, fimbriate. 2n = 36.{\i  Limestone and dolomite cliffs,} 1300-1900{\i  m. • N. Italy} ({\i Alpi Bergamasche}). It.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 A very distinct species that falls between Sect.{\i  Lanceolatae} and Sect.{\i  Acutiflorae}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Sect. ARETIOIDEAE Mattf. Perennials. Leaves oblong-elliptical. Flowers 4-merous. Sepals erect at anthesis. Seeds fimbriate.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 32. M. cherlerioides} (Hoppe) Becherer,{\i  Denkschr. Schweiz. Naturf. Ges.}{\b  81:} 167 (1956) ({\i M.aretioides} (Sommer.) Schinz & Thell,{\i  Alsine octandra} (Sieber) A. Kerner). Densely caespitose perennial 2-5 cm; stems usually richly branched. Leaves 1·5-3 × 1 mm, oblong-elliptical, obtuse, somewhat fleshy; apex cucullate; veins 3, distinct and persistent. Flowers solitary; pedicels shorter than sepals. Sepals 2-4 mm, lanceolate, acute, 3-veined; petals slightly shorter than sepals, sometimes absent; styles usually 3. Capsule exserted. Seeds 0·9-1·2 mm.{\i  Rocks and screes above} 2000{\i  m. • C. & E. Alps.} Au Ge He It Ju.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp.{\b  cherlerioides}: Leaves glabrous.{\i  Calcicole. E. Alps, westwards to c.} 9°30'{\i  E}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b rionii} (Gremli) Friedrich,{\i  Feddes Repert.}{\b  70:} 2 (1964) ({\i M. aretioides} subsp.{\i  rionii} (Gremli) Schinz & Thell.): Leaves ciliolate.{\i  Calcifuge. C. Alps, eastwards to c.} 10°30'{\i  E}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Sect. ACUTIFLORAE (Fenzl) Hayek. Perennials. Leaves linear, 3-veined. Bracts herbaceous. Sepals erect at anthesis; petals exceeding sepals. Seeds rugose, or shortly tuberculate.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 33. M. austriaca} (Jacq.) Hayek,{\i  Fl. Steierm. }{\b 1:} 274 (1908) ({\i Alsine austriaca }(Jacq.) Wahlenb.). Laxly caespitose perennial with
\par

\par
157}
\par