{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 tubercles. 2n = 30.{\i  C. & S.E. Europe, extending to W. France and to }39°{\i  E. in S.C. Russia}. Al Au Bu Cz Ga Ge Gr Hu Ju Po Rm Rs(C, W, K, E).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Many variants of this very polymorphic species have been given taxonomic recognition but, pending a detailed study of the European material, only two subspecies are recognized here.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp.{\b  setacea} ({\i M. aucta} Klokov,{\i  M. leiosperma} Klokov, {\i M. thyraica }Klokov): Cymes 3- to many-flowered. Sepals 2-3·5 mm, ovate-lanceolate. 2n = 30. {\i Throughout the range of the species}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b bannatica} (Reichenb.) E.I. Nyárády, {\i Enum. Pl. Vasc. Cheia Turzii} 124 (1939) (incl. subsp.{\i  stojanovii }(Kitanov) Strid): Cymes 3- to 5-flowered. Sepals 3·5-5 mm, linear-lanceolate. •{\i  From C. Austria and C. Czechoslovakia to Bulgaria.}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 The distribution of subsp. ({\b b}) is imperfectly known.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 17. M. bosniaca} (G. Beck) K. Malý,{\i  Glasn. Muz. Bosni Herceg.}{\b  20:} 563 (1908). Like {\b 16} but sepals 3-4 mm; petals and sepals subequal; glands at base of the outer stamens elongate and bipartite; seeds 0·8 mm, acutely tuberculate. 2n = 28. •{\i  Balkan peninsula southwards to N. Greece}. Al Bu Gr Ju.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 18. M. krascheninnikovii} Schischkin,{\i  Acta Inst. Bot. Acad. Sci. URSS} ({\i Ser. 1}){\b  3:} 170 (1937). Like {\b 16} but leaves 0·2-0·5 mm wide; cymes 1- to 4-flowered; pedicels usually less than twice as long as sepals; sepals 3-4 mm; petals 1-1½ times as long as sepals; seeds 0·75-1 mm, acutely tuberculate. {\i E. Russia.} Rs(C).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 19. M. adenotricha} Schischkin,{\i  loc. cit.} 169 (1937). Like {\b 16} but leaves 0·3 mm, wide; cymes 1- to 6-flowered; pedicels 2-6 mm; pedicels and sepals sparsely pubescent; sepals 4-5 mm; petals scarcely exceeding sepals; seeds c. 0·75 mm, with low, rounded tubercles. {\i Mountain rocks. • Krym. }?Bu Rs(K.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 20. M. anatolica} (Boiss.) Woronow in Woronow & Schelkownikow, {\i Sched. Herb. Fl. Cauc.}{\b  4:} 92 (1914). Densely pubescent, laxly caespitose perennial; flowering stems with compact, ovoid, axillary vegetative fascicles, often covered with arachnoid indumentum; fascicular leaves appressed. Cymes crowded, many-flowered; pedicels seldom longer than sepals. Sepals 3-4 mm, equalling or slightly exceeding petals.{\i  E. part of Balkan peninsula; Samothraki}. Bu Gr Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 The closely related{\b  M. erythrosepala} (Boiss.) Hand.-Mazz.,{\i  Ann. Naturh. Mus.} ({\i Wien}){\b  23}: 152 (1909), has been reported from Samothraki. Records from Turkey-in-Europe are probably referable to {\b 20}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 21. M. confusa} (Boiss.) Maire & Petitmengin,{\i  Étude Pl. Vasc. Réc. Grèce}{\b  4:} 49 (1908) ({\i M. trichocalycina} auct., non (Ten. & Guss.) Grande). Perennial with sparse, crispate hairs and procumbent stems. Leaves linear-subulate. Cymes dense; pedicels shorter than sepals. Sepals 3·5-6 mm, linear-lanceolate; petals less than ½ as long as sepals. Capsule included. 2n = 30. • {\i  Calcicole,} 1500-2400{\i  m. Greece.} Gr.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Sect. PLURINERVIAE McNeill ({\i Tryphane} sensu Mattf.). Perennials. Leaves linear-subulate to -setaceous, 3- to 5-veined towards base. Sepals usually 5- to 7-veined, patent at anthesis; petals 1-1½ times as long as sepals, usually oblong-obovate, narrowed towards base.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 22. M. hirsuta} (Bieb.) Hand.-Mazz., {\i Ann. Naturh. Mus.} ({\i Wien}) {\b 23:} 152 (1909) ({\i M. recurva} subsp.{\i  hirsuta }(Bieb.) Stoj. & Stefanov). Laxly caespitose, usually glandular-pubescent perennial; flowering stems erect, up to 20 cm. Cymes lax, 3- to many-flowered; pedicels longer than sepals. Sepals usually ovate-lanceolate, 5- to 7-veined; margin scarious.{\i  Mountain rocks and stony places. E.C. & S.E. Europe.} Bu Cz Gr Hu Ju Rm Rs(K) Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 A variable species. Some authors regard it as a subspecies of{\b  23}, whilst others give the following subspecies specific rank.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Plant glabrous ........................................................... ({\b d}) subsp. {\b eurytanica}
\par
1 Plant glandular-pubescent, at least above
\par
2 Leaves 20-30 mm, slender, erect, glabrous; 
\par
  plant glandular-pubescent above ................................ ({\b c}) subsp.{\b  frutescens}
\par
2 Leaves 5-15 mm, somewhat rigid, often falcate
\par
3 Plant densely glandular-pubescent throughout; leaves 0·5-1 mm wide;
\par
  seeds acutely tuberculate dorsally ................................... ({\b a}) subsp.{\b  hirsuta}
\par
3 Plant glandular-pubescent above; leaves not more than 0·3 mm wide;
\par
  seeds obscurely tuberculate ............................................. ({\b b}) subsp.{\b  falcata}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp.{\b  hirsuta} (subsp.{\i  falcata} sensu Mattf. pro parte): Plant densely glandular-pubescent. Leaves 5-15 mm, somewhat rigid, often falcate. Sepals with narrow, scarious margins. Seeds acutely tuberculate dorsally. •{\i  Krym.}
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp.{\b  falcata} (Griseb.) Mattf.,{\i  Bot. Jahrb.}{\b  57} Beibl. 126: 13 (1921): Like subsp. ({\b a}) but leaves more slender; bracts lanceolate; seeds obscurely tuberculate. 2n = 30.{\i  Balkan peninsula}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b c}) Subsp. {\b frutescens} (Kit.) Hand.-Mazz., {\i Ann. Naturh. Mus}. ({\i Wien}){\b  23:} 152 (1909) ({\i M. frutescens} (Kit.) Tuzson; incl.{\i  M. cataractarum} Janka): Plant glandular-pubescent above. Sepals with narrow, scarious margin. 2n = 30, 32. •{\i  From W. Carpathians to S. Jugoslavia and S. Bulgaria}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b d}) Subsp.{\b  eurytanica} (Boiss. & Heldr.) Strid,{\i  Ann. Bot. Fenn.}{\b  20:} 113 (1983) ({\i M. eurytanica} (Boiss. & Heldr.) Hand.-Mazz.): Plant glabrous. Leaves 7-15 mm, somewhat rigid, falcate. Sepals lanceolate with wide, scarious margin. •{\i  N. & C. Greece}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 23. M. recurva} (All.) Schinz & Thell.,{\i  Bull. Herb. Boiss.} ser. 2,{\b  7:} 404 (1907) ({\i Alsine recurva} (All.) Wahlenb.). Densely caespitose perennial; stems woody and often black below; flowering stems usually up to 12 cm; plant sparsely glandular-pubescent, at least above. Leaves 3-10 mm, 3-veined, falcate. Cymes 1- to 8-flowered; pedicels up to 3 times as long as sepals. Sepals 3-5·5(-6) mm, ovate-lanceolate, 5- to 7-veined; petals and capsule slightly exceeding sepals. Seeds 1·2 mm, weakly tuberculate. 2n = 30. {\i Usually calcifuge. Mountains of S. & S.C. Europe; one station in S.W. Ireland.} Al Au Bu Ga Gr Hb He Hs It Ju Lu Rm Si Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b recurva} : Cymes 1- to 3(-5)-flowered; bracts 3- to 5-veined. Outer sepals 3-4·25 mm, 5-veined. 2n = 30.{\i  Almost throughout the range of the species, but absent from Sicilia}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp.{\b  condensata} (C. Presl) Greuter & Burdet, {\i Willdenowia}{\b  12:} 188 (1982) (subsp.{\i  juressi} (Willd. ex Schlecht.) Mattf.,{\i  M. condensata} (J. & C. Presl) Hand.-Mazz.; incl.{\i  M. engleri} Mattf.): More robust than subsp. ({\b a}); flowering stems up to 15 cm. Cymes 3- to 8-flowered; bracts 5- to 7-veined. Outer sepals 4-5·5(-6) mm, 7-veined.{\i  Sicilia; S. & C. Italy; S. part of Balkan peninsula.} Al Gr It Ju Si.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Although subsp. ({\b b}) appears fairly distinct, and has often been accorded specific rank, plants intermediate between the two subspecies occur in the Iberian peninsula, S. France and the S.E. Alps.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 24. M. bulgarica} (Velen.) Graebner in Ascherson & Graebner, {\i Syn. Mitteleur. Fl.}{\b  5}({\b 1}): 727 (1918) ({\i M. recurva} subsp.{\i  bulgarica}
\par

\par
156}
\par