{\rtf1\ansi \deff4\deflang1033{\fonttbl{\f4\froman\fcharset0\fprq2 Times New Roman;}}{\colortbl;\red0\green0\blue0;\red0\green0\blue255;\red0\green255\blue255;\red0\green255\blue0;\red255\green0\blue255;\red255\green0\blue0;\red255\green255\blue0;\red255\green255\blue255;\red0\green0\blue128;\red0\green128\blue128;\red0\green128\blue0;\red128\green0\blue128;\red128\green0\blue0;\red128\green128\blue0;\red128\green128\blue128;\red192\green192\blue192;}{\stylesheet{\widctlpar \f4\fs20\lang2057 \snext0 Normal;}{\*\cs10 \additive Default Paragraph Font;}}{\info{\author dddd}{\operator dddd}{\creatim\yr1998\mo11\dy11\hr16\min31}{\revtim\yr1998\mo11\dy11\hr16\min31}{\version2}{\edmins0}{\nofpages4}{\nofwords1017}{\nofchars5798}{\*\company  }{\vern57431}}\widowctrl\ftnbj\aenddoc\hyphcaps0 \fet0\sectd \linex0 {\*\pnseclvl1\pnucrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl2\pnucltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl3\pndec\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl4\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl5\pndec\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl6\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl7\pnlcrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl8\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl9\pnlcrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}
\pard\plain  \f4\fs20\lang2057 {\fs28 glabrous or sparsely glandular-pubescent stems 8-20 cm. Leaves 10-20 \'d7 0\'b75-1 mm, glabrous. Flowers 1 or 2(3); pedicels more than 4 times as long as sepals. Sepals 4-6 mm, ovate-lanceolate; petals slightly emarginate; petals and capsule 1\'bd-2 times as long as sepals. Seeds 1-1\'b75 mm, prominently tuberculate dorsally. 2n = 26.}{\i\fs28  Calcareous rocks and screes. \bullet  E. Alps, westwards to Alpi Bergamasche.}{\fs28  Au Ge It Ju.
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 34. M. helmii}{\fs28  (Ser.) Schischkin,}{\i\fs28  Jour. Governm. Bot. Gard. Nikita }{\b\fs28 10}{\fs28 (}{\b\fs28 2}{\fs28 ): 38 (1928). Like }{\b\fs28 33}{\fs28  but stems densely caespitose; plant densely glandular-pubescent; sepals obscurely veined; capsule only slightly exceeding sepals. 2n = 26. }{\i\fs28 N. Ural}{\fs28 . Rs(N).
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 35. M. villarii}{\fs28  (Balbis) Wilczek & Chenevard,}{\i\fs28  Annu. Cons. Jard. Bot. Gen\'e8ve}{\b\fs28  15:}{\fs28  256 (1912) (}{\i\fs28 M. flaccida}{\fs28  sensu Schinz & Thell., }{\i\fs28 Alsine villarii }{\fs28 (Balbis) Mert. & Koch). Like }{\b\fs28 33}{\fs28  in habit. Leaves 0\'b77-2 mm wide. Cymes 2- to 4(-7)-flowered; pedicels 1-5(-7) times as long as sepals. Sepals 3\'b75-5 mm; petals 1-1\'bd times as long as sepals. Capsule slightly exceeding sepals. 2n = 26.}{\i\fs28  Rocks and screes. \bullet  Mountains of S.W. Europe from N. Spain to S.E. Alps.}{\fs28  Ga Hs It.
\par 
\par Variable in degree of pubescence; completely glabrous plants are not uncommon, whilst plants with densely glandular-pubescent leaves occur in the S.W. Alps.
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 36. M. taurica}{\fs28  (Steven) Graebner in Ascherson & Graebner }{\i\fs28 Syn. Mitteleur. Fl.}{\b\fs28  5}{\fs28 (}{\b\fs28 1}{\fs28 ): 758 (1918). Glandular-pubescent perennial. Leaves 5-10 \'d7 1 mm. Cymes 1- to 5-flowered; pedicels 2-4 times as long as sepals. Sepals 4\'b75-5 mm, ovate; petals twice as long as sepals. Capsule usually included. Seeds c. 0\'b775 mm, slightly tuberculate dorsally. }{\i\fs28 Mountain rocks. \bullet  Krym}{\fs28 . Rs(K).
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 37. M. juniperina}{\fs28  (L.) Maire & Petitmengin, }{\i\fs28 Mat. \'c9tude Fl. G\'e9ogr. Bot. Or.}{\b\fs28  4:}{\fs28  48 (1908). Sparsely glandular-pubescent, caespitose perennial; stems rigid, nodes thickened. Leaves 10-20 mm, rigid, almost spiny, usually patent, terete, with fascicles of small leaves in their axils. Cymes 3- to 7(-15)-flowered. Sepals 4-5 mm, lanceolate; petals and capsule e. 1\'bd times as long as sepals. 2n = 26.}{\i\fs28  Mountain rocks above }{\fs28 2000 }{\i\fs28 m. S. & W. Greece.}{\fs28  Gr. (}{\i\fs28 S.W. Asia.}{\fs28 )
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 38. M. pichleri}{\fs28  (Boiss.) Maire & Petitmengin, }{\i\fs28 loc. cit.}{\fs28  (1908). Densely caespitose, glandular-pubescent perennial. Leaves c. 6 mm, 3-veined, somewhat falcate. Cymes 1- to 6-flowered; pedicels 3-5 times as long as sepals. Sepals 3-5 mm, ovate-lanceolate; petals 1\'bd times as long as sepals. Capsule slightly exserted. Seeds acutely tuberculate dorsally. 2n = 26.}{\i\fs28  Mountain rocks above}{\fs28  1200 }{\i\fs28 m. S. Greece; local}{\fs28 . Gr.
\par 
\par Although very similar in appearance to }{\b\fs28 39}{\fs28  it is readily distinguished by the dense pubescence, herbaceous bracts and longer petals.
\par 
\par }{\b\fs28 M. favargeri }{\fs28 Iatro\'fa & Georgiadis, }{\i\fs28 Candollea}{\b\fs28  40:}{\fs28  129 (1985), from 500 to 600 m on Parnon Oros, differs from }{\b\fs28 38}{\fs28  in its somewhat sparser glandular pubescence, leaves 8-12 mm, smaller sepals and petals, and capsule distinctly exceeding sepals; the chromosome number is 2n = 26. It is probably not specifically distinct.
\par 
\par Sect. TRYPHANE (Fenzl) Hayek. Perennials. Leaves linear-subulate to setaceous; veins 3, persistent. Sepals prominently 3-veined, patent at anthesis. Seeds rugose.
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 39. M. verna}{\fs28  (L.) Hiern,}{\i\fs28  Jour. Bot. }{\fs28 (}{\i\fs28 London}{\fs28 ) }{\b\fs28 37:}{\fs28  320 (1899) (}{\i\fs28 M. caespitosa}{\fs28  (Ehrh.) Degen,}{\i\fs28  Alsine verna}{\fs28  (L.) Wahlenb.,}{\i\fs28  Arenaria verna}{\fs28  L.). Laxly caespitose perennial; stems usually glandular pubescent above. Leaves 5-20 mm, linear-lanceolate, setaceous or subulate, glabrous or glandular-pubescent, very rarely scabrid. Cymes lax, few- to many-flowered; pedicels longer than sepals. Sepals ovate-lanceolate, usually glandular-pubescent; petals \'bd-1\'bd times as long as sepals. Capsule equalling or slightly exceeding sepals. Seeds 0\'b75-1 mm, brown, varying from almost smooth to acutely tuberculate. Protandrous. }{\i\fs28 S., W. & C. Europe; N. Russia.}{\fs28  Al Au Be Br Bu Co Cr Cz Ga Ge Gr Hb He Hs Hu It Ju Po Rm Rs(N, W) Sa Si Tu.
\par 
\par A very variable species; the following treatment is provisional.
\par 
\par }
\pard \li200\ {\fs28 1 Petals obtuse, widest at or above middle
\par 2 Stems woody below; leaves linear-lanceolate, the margins scabrid
\par   .................................................................................................. (}{\b\fs28 c}{\fs28 ) subsp.}{\b\fs28  paui}{\fs28 
\par 2 Stems not woody below; leaves linear-subulate to setaceous,
\par   the margins entire
\par 3 Axillary fascicles of leaves present on flowering stems;
\par   cymes 6- to many-flowered ................................................. (}{\b\fs28 b}{\fs28 ) subsp.}{\b\fs28  collina}{\fs28 
\par 3 Axillary fascicles of leaves absent; cymes 1- to 7-flowered
\par   ........................................................ (}{\b\fs28 a}{\fs28 ) subsp.}{\b\fs28  verna}{\fs28 
\par 1 Petals acute, widest below middle
\par 4 Plant not woody below, green; sepals 2\'b72-3 mm ........... (}{\b\fs28 d}{\fs28 ) subsp.}{\b\fs28  oxypetala}{\fs28 
\par 4 Plant woody below, glaucous; sepals (2-)3-6 mm
\par 5 Sepals (2-)3-5 mm; leaves \'b1 strict ........................................ (}{\b\fs28 e}{\fs28 ) subsp.}{\b\fs28  attica}{\fs28 
\par 5 Sepals 4-6 mm; leaves \'b1 patent ................................... (}{\b\fs28 f}{\fs28 ) subsp.}{\b\fs28  grandiflora}{\fs28 
\par 
\par }
\pard  {\fs28  (}{\b\fs28 a}{\fs28 ) Subsp. }{\b\fs28 verna}{\fs28  (incl. subsp.}{\i\fs28  gerardii}{\fs28  (Willd.) Fenzl,}{\i\fs28  M. zarecznyi }{\fs28 (Zapal.) Klokov,}{\i\fs28  M. smejkalii}{\fs28  Dvor\'e1kov\'e1): Plant not woody below. Leaves up to 20 mm. Cymes 1- to 7-flowered. Petals obtuse, widest at or above middle, usually exceeding sepals. Sepals 3\'b75-4\'b75 mm. Anthers purplish. 2n = 24.}{\i\fs28  Throughout the range of the species but only on mountains in the south}{\fs28 .
\par  (}{\b\fs28 b}{\fs28 ) Subsp.}{\b\fs28  collina}{\fs28  (Neilr.) Domin,}{\i\fs28  Vestn. Kral. Ceske Spolecn. Nauk. Tr. Mat.-Prir. }{\b\fs28 1947}{\fs28 (}{\b\fs28 2}{\fs28 ): 24 (1947) (subsp.}{\i\fs28  montana}{\fs28  (Fenzl) Hayek): Like subsp. (}{\b\fs28 a}{\fs28 ) but flowering stems with axillary fascicles of leaves; cymes 6- to many-flowered; petals equalling or slightly exceeding sepals; sepals 2\'b72-3\'b72 mm; anthers yellow. 2n = 48.}{\i\fs28  S. & E.C. Europe, from N.E. Italy and Czechoslovakia eastwards}{\fs28 .
\par  (}{\b\fs28 c}{\fs28 ) Subsp. }{\b\fs28 paui}{\fs28  (Willk. ex Hervier) Rivas Goday & Borja,}{\i\fs28  Anal. Inst. Bot. Cavanilles}{\b\fs28  19:}{\fs28  331 (1961) (}{\i\fs28 Alsine paui}{\fs28  Willk. ex Hervier,}{\i\fs28  M. ?Jerna}{\fs28  subsp.}{\i\fs28  Valentina}{\fs28  (Pau) Font Quer): Stems woody below. Leaves linear-lanceolate, stiffly patent, the margins scabrid. Cymes usually more than 7-flowered. Petals obtuse, widest at or above the middle. \bullet }{\i\fs28  E. Spain}{\fs28  (}{\i\fs28 Sierra Espadada, north of Valencia}{\fs28 ).
\par  (}{\b\fs28 d}{\fs28 ) Subsp.}{\b\fs28  oxypetala}{\fs28  (Woloszczak) Halliday,}{\i\fs28  Feddes Repert.}{\b\fs28  69: }{\fs28 13 (1964): Leaves up to 10 mm. Cymes 1- to 5-flowered. Petals acute, widest below middle, shorter than sepals. Sepals 2\'b72-3 mm.}{\i\fs28  E. Carpathians}{\fs28 .
\par  (}{\b\fs28 e}{\fs28 ) Subsp. }{\b\fs28 attica}{\fs28  (Boiss. & Spruner) Hayek,}{\i\fs28  \'d6sterr. Bot. Zeitschr.}{\b\fs28  71:}{\fs28  112 (1922) (}{\i\fs28 M. attica}{\fs28  (Boiss. & Spruner) Vierh.; incl. }{\i\fs28 M. idaea}{\fs28  (Hal\'e1csy) Pawl.): Plant woody below, glaucous. Leaves up to 10 mm. Cymes (1-)3- to 20-flowered. Sepals (2-)3-5 mm. Petals acute, widest below middle, more or less equalling or shorter than sepals. Anthers reddish. }{\i\fs28 S. Europe, from N.W. Jugoslavia and C. Italy to Bulgaria and Kriti}{\fs28 .
\par  (}{\b\fs28 f}{\fs28 ) Subsp. }{\b\fs28 grandiflora}{\fs28  (C. Presl) Hayek, }{\i\fs28 loc. cit.}{\fs28  (1922): Like subsp. (}{\b\fs28 e}{\fs28 ) but leaves patent; cymes 3- to 5-flowered; sepals 4-6 mm, shorter than petals. }{\i\fs28 Sicilia, Sardegna}{\fs28 .
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 40. M. rubella}{\fs28  (Wahlenb.) Hiern,}{\i\fs28  Jour. Bot.}{\fs28  (}{\i\fs28 London}{\fs28 ) }{\b\fs28 37:}{\fs28  320 (1899). Like small high montane variants of }{\b\fs28 39}{\fs28 (}{\b\fs28 a}{\fs28 ) but usually smaller; leaves 4-8 mm, glabrous or glandular-pubescent; cymes 1
\par 
\par 158}
\par }