{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 Very variable in habit and hairiness. Dwarf, very compact plants with subsessile flowers with petals almost twice as long as sepals have been called subsp.{\i  nana }(St.-Lager) Schinz & R. Keller, but this variation does not seem to be worth taxonomic distinction.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 21. M. glaucovirens} Bertol.,{\i  Fl. Ital.}{\b  6:} 626 (1847). Caespitose, glabrous and glaucous perennial, forming dense, fragile tufts up to 30 cm in diameter; stems up to 10 cm, slender, branched from base, somewhat fleshy, often swollen above and below nodes. Leaves 5-10(-15) mm, linear, semi-terete, somewhat fleshy, persistent. Inflorescence a terminal 1- to 7-flowered cyme; peduncles 10-15 mm, somewhat fleshy; pedicels filiform, reflexed in fruit, bracteolate. Flowers (4)5-merous; sepals 2·5-3 mm, ovate-lanceolate, with narrow scarious margins; petals usually 3-4 mm, sometimes shorter; styles usually 3. Capsule 2 × 2·5 mm, subglobose. Seeds c. 1 mm, reniform, black, shiny, smooth; strophiole branched, whitish. 2n = 24. {\i Shady limestone cliffs. • S. Alps from }10°30' {\i to }12°30'{\i  E.} It.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 22. M. bavarica} (L.) Gren.,{\i  Mém. Soc. Émul. Doubs}., sér. 1, {\b 1}({\b 2}): 37 (1841) ({\i Arenaria bavarica} L.). Caespitose, suffrutescent, glabrous and glaucous perennial; stems 10-20(-30) cm, clothed in remains of old leaves, fleshy, becoming fragile, especially when dry; internodes slightly swollen above and below node. Lower leaves 3-7 mm, linear to linear-lanceolate, cylindrical to keeled, the upper 7-35(-40) mm, somewhat flattened. Inflorescence a terminal, (1-)3- to 7-flowered cyme; pedicels 10-25 mm, robust, fleshy, swollen below calyx, becoming reflexed in fruit, bracteolate. Flowers 5-merous; sepals with broad, scarious margins; petals ovate to obovate, obtuse, usually 1½-2 times as long as sepals; styles 3. Capsule c. 3 mm, globose to ellipsoidal. Seeds 1·2 mm, black, shiny, smooth; strophiole large, branched, white. 2n = 24.{\i  Limestone cliffs. • E. Alps; mountains of W. part of Balkan peninsula.} Au Al It Ju.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 23. M. insubrica} Degen,{\i  Magyar Bot. Lapok}{\b  24:} 76 (1926) ({\i M. bavarica }subsp.{\i  insubrica} (Degen) W. Sauer). Caespitose, suffrutescent, glabrous perennial, the young parts distinctly pruinose or glaucous; stems 10-20(-30) cm, pendulous, erect at apex; internodes distinctly swollen above and below nodes. Leaves 5-15(-25) × 1·5-2·5 mm, green or glaucous, often fleshy. Inflorescence a terminal, (1-)3- to 7-flowered cyme; pedicels 10-25 mm, usually swollen at base, less markedly swollen below calyx, erect, becoming reflexed in fruit, bracteolate. Flowers 5-merous; sepals ovate-lanceolate, with broad scarious margins; petals ovate-oblong, less than 1½ times as long as sepals; styles 3. Capsule c. 2·5 mm, subglobose to pyriform. Seeds 1-1·5 mm, black, shiny, smooth; strophiole large, branched, white. 2n = 24. •{\i  N. Italy} ({\i Alpi Bresciane on the east shore of Lago d'Iseo}). It.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 24. M. dielsiana} Mattf.,{\i  Ber. Deutsch. Bot. Ges.}{\b  43:} 509 (1925). Caespitose, glabrous, somewhat fleshy perennial; stems 5-20 cm, glaucous, fragile, prostrate, ascending or pendent. Upper leaves 5-11 × 2-3 mm, oblanceolate (rarely linear-lanceolate), fleshy, acute or shortly mucronate, usually longer than internodes. Inflorescence a terminal 1- to 5-flowered cyme; pedicels 10-15 mm, more or less swollen at apex, becoming recurved in fruit, bracteolate. Flowers (4)5-merous; sepals c. 4 mm, oblanceolate, acute, glabrous, with broad scarious margins; petals c. 6 mm, obtuse; styles 3. Capsule 2·5 × 3 mm, globose to pyriform, usually included within calyx. Seeds 1·5-1·8 mm, black, shiny, smooth; strophiole branched, white, becoming pale brown. 2n = 24.{\i  Limestone cliffs. • N. Italy} ({\i Alpi Bergamasche}). It.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 25. M. sedoides} (Pers.) Cumino ex Loisel.,{\i  Fl. Gall.} 725 (1807) ({\i M. sedifolia} Willd., {\i M. dasyphylla} Bruno ex Gren. & Godron). Densely to laxly caespitose, glabrous and glaucous perennial; stems arising from a rather woody stock, usually fleshy, becoming fragile when dry, either rather erect, up to 15 cm, producing hemispherical clumps, or pendent, producing larger plants. Leaves 5-15 mm, cylindrical, usually fleshy. Inflorescence a terminal, 1- to 7-flowered cyme; peduncle 8-15 mm; pedicels 6-15 mm, filiform, bracteolate. Flowers 4(5)-merous; sepals 3-4 mm, with scarious margins; petals 5-7 mm, patent; styles usually 2. Capsule 3-5 mm, subglobose to ellipsoidal. Seeds 1·2 × 1 mm, black, shiny, smooth; strophiole large, branched, whitish. 2n = 24.{\i  Shady limestone and conglomerate cliffs. • Maritime Alps.} Ga It.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 3.               Minuartia}                L.
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc  By G. Halliday.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Like {\i Arenaria} but leaves usually narrowly lanceolate, setaceous or subulate; capsule dehiscing with as many teeth as styles; capsule-teeth wide and obtuse; seeds 1 to many, smooth, tuberculate or fimbriate. (Incl.{\i  Alsine }auct., Cherleria L., {\i Queria} L.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Literature: J. Mattfeld, {\i Feddes Repert.} ({\i Beih}.){\b  15: }1-228 (1922). J. McNeill,{\i  Notes Roy. Bot. Gard. Edinb.}{\b  24:} 133-155 (1962); 311-401 (1963).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Annual or biennial, lacking vegetative stems at time of flowering
\par
2 Sepals 1-veined
\par
3 Stems and sepals glandular-pubescent; pedicels up to ½ as long as sepals
\par
4 Glandular hairs short and crisped; fascicles of flowers sessile
\par
  ................................................................................................... {\b 10. campestris}
\par
4 Glandular hairs patent; fascicles of flowers pedunculate ......... {\b 12. glomerata}
\par
3 Stems and sepals usually glabrous or sparsely pubescent;
\par
  pedicels about equalling sepals
\par
5 Stems erect; cymes in small, dense fascicles ................................... {\b 13. rubra}
\par
5 Stems ascending; cymes elongate, corymbose ............................... {\b 14. funkii}
\par
2 Sepals 3-veined
\par
6 Stems slender; cymes usually lax; scarious margin of sepals usually narrow
\par
7 Leaves ciliolate at base; sepals with a broad scarious margin
\par
  ....................................................................................................... {\b 6. regeliana}
\par
7 Leaves not ciliolate; sepals with a narrow scarious margin
\par
8 Pedicels not longer than sepals; cymes crowded .................. {\b 5. mediterranea}
\par
8 Pedicels usually longer than sepals; cymes lax
\par
9 Sepals 2-3 times as long as broad; petals at least ¾ as long as sepals
\par
10 Seeds obscurely tuberculate; stems decumbent or erect ........ {\b 1. mesogitana}
\par
10 Seeds acutely tuberculate; stems erect ...................................... {\b 3. bilykiana}
\par
9  Sepals 3-5 times as long as broad; petals not more than
\par
   ¾ as long as sepals
\par
11 Capsule usually shorter than sepals; seeds 0·3-0·4 mm;
   sepals 2-3(-3·5) mm ....................................................................... {\b 2. viscosa}
\par
11 Capsule 1-1½ times as long as sepals; seeds (0·3-)0·4-0·6 mm;
\par
   sepals (2·5-)3-5 mm ...................................................................... {\b 4. hybrida}
\par
6  Stems robust; cymes condensed into dense fascicles;
\par

\par
152}
\par