{\rtf1\ansi \deff4\deflang1033{\fonttbl{\f4\froman\fcharset0\fprq2 Times New Roman;}}{\colortbl;\red0\green0\blue0;\red0\green0\blue255;\red0\green255\blue255;\red0\green255\blue0;\red255\green0\blue255;\red255\green0\blue0;\red255\green255\blue0;\red255\green255\blue255;\red0\green0\blue128;\red0\green128\blue128;\red0\green128\blue0;\red128\green0\blue128;\red128\green0\blue0;\red128\green128\blue0;\red128\green128\blue128;\red192\green192\blue192;}{\stylesheet{\widctlpar \f4\fs20\lang2057 \snext0 Normal;}{\*\cs10 \additive Default Paragraph Font;}}{\info{\author dddd}{\operator dddd}{\creatim\yr1998\mo11\dy11\hr16\min27}{\revtim\yr1998\mo11\dy11\hr16\min31}{\version2}{\edmins4}{\nofpages4}{\nofwords948}{\nofchars5406}{\*\company  }{\vern57431}}\widowctrl\ftnbj\aenddoc\hyphcaps0 \fet0\sectd \linex0 {\*\pnseclvl1\pnucrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl2\pnucltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl3\pndec\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl4\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl5\pndec\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl6\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl7\pnlcrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl8\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl9\pnlcrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}
\pard\plain \li200\ \f4\fs20\lang2057 {\fs28 52 Leaves oblong-elliptical, cucullate above; flowers 4-merous
\par    .............................................................................................. }{\b\fs28 32. cherlerioides}{\fs28 
\par 52 Leaves linear to lanceolate, oblanceolate or narrowly oblong,   flat; flowers 5-merous
\par 53 Leaves usually narrowly linear, 3-veined; plant glabrous ..... }{\b\fs28 31. grignensis}{\fs28 
\par 53 Leaves linear-lanceolate to lanceolate, oblanceolate or narrowly   oblong, 5-veined; stems usually glandular-pubescent above
\par 54 Sepals 1- to 3-veined in upper \'bd
\par 55 Petals and capsule 1\'bd times as long as sepals;
\par    pedicels longer than sepals .................................................... }{\b\fs28 29. cerastiifolia}{\fs28 
\par 55 Petals and capsule equalling sepals .......................................... }{\b\fs28 30. rupestris}{\fs28 
\par 54 Sepals 5- to 7(-9)-veined in upper \'bd
\par 56 Flowering stems 1-2 cm; flowers usually solitary ...................... }{\b\fs28 27. stellata}{\fs28 
\par 56 Flowering stems 2-18 cm; cymes (1)2- to 12-flowered
\par 57 Leaves oblanceolate to narrowly oblong; petals 1-2 times as   long as sepals; flowering stems 2-5 cm ......................... }{\b\fs28 28. pseudosaxifraga}{\fs28 
\par 57 Leaves ovate- to linear-lanceolate; petals \'b1 equalling to slightly
\par    exceeding sepals; flowering stems often more than 5 cm
\par 58 Leaves not rigid; outer veins of sepals curving outwards ....... }{\b\fs28 25. saxifraga}{\fs28 
\par 58 Leaves rigid; outer veins of sepals parallel ........................ }{\b\fs28 26. graminifolia}{\fs28 
\par 
\par }
\pard  {\fs28 Subgen.}{\b\fs28  Minuartia}{\fs28 . Annuals or perennials. Flowers usually white. Radicle incumbent.
\par 
\par Sect. SABULINA (Reichenb.) Graebner. Annuals. Leaves linear, rarely linear-spathulate, 3-veined at least at the base. Sepals 3-veined, patent at anthesis, not becoming indurated; scarious margin narrow. Petals seldom exceeding sepals; stamens 3-10.
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 1. M. mesogitana}{\fs28  (Boiss.) Hand.-Mazz., }{\i\fs28 Ann. Naturh. Mus.}{\fs28  (}{\i\fs28 Wien}{\fs28 ) }{\b\fs28 26:}{\fs28  148 (1912) (}{\i\fs28 M. tenuifolia}{\fs28  subsp.}{\i\fs28  mesogitana}{\fs28  (Boiss.) Prodan). Annual; stems up to 12 cm. Leaves linear, somewhat fleshy. Cymes lax, sparsely glandular-pubescent; pedicels patent. Sepals 2\'b725-3\'b75 mm, ovate-lanceolate; petals and capsule up to 1-1\'bd times as long as sepals. Seeds obscurely tuberculate.}{\i\fs28  Dry places. S.E. Romania; Balkan peninsula; Aegean region.}{\fs28  Al Bu Cr Gr Ju Rm.
\par 
\par }
\pard \li200\ {\fs28 1 Stems usually simple; seeds 0\'b73-0\'b75 mm ................ (}{\b\fs28 b}{\fs28 ) subsp. }{\b\fs28 kotschyana}{\fs28 
\par 1 Stems branched; seeds 0\'b75-0\'b77 mm
\par 2 Plant decumbent; leaves 8-20 mm .......................... (}{\b\fs28 a}{\fs28 ) subsp. }{\b\fs28 mesogitana}{\fs28 
\par 2 Plant erect; leaves 4-8 mm ..................................... (}{\b\fs28 c}{\fs28 ) subsp.}{\b\fs28  velenovskyi}{\fs28 
\par 
\par }
\pard  {\fs28  (}{\b\fs28 a}{\fs28 ) Subsp.}{\b\fs28  mesogitana}{\fs28  : Plant decumbent, branched at base. Leaves 8-20 mm. Sepals 3-3\'b75 mm, more or less equalling or shorter than petals. Seeds 0\'b75-0\'b765 mm.}{\i\fs28  S.E. Romania, N.E. Bulgaria}{\fs28 .
\par  (}{\b\fs28 b}{\fs28 ) Subsp.}{\b\fs28  kotschyana}{\fs28  (Boiss.) McNeill, }{\i\fs28 Notes Roy. Bot. Gard. Edinb.}{\b\fs28  28:}{\fs28  19 (1967): Plant erect, the stems simple or only slightly branched. Leaves 8-20 mm. Sepals 2-3 mm, more or less equalling or shorter than petals. Seeds 0\'b73-0\'b75 mm.}{\i\fs28  S. Greece, Aegean region; ?S.W. Bulgaria}{\fs28 .
\par  (}{\b\fs28 c}{\fs28 ) Subsp. }{\b\fs28 velenovskyi}{\fs28  (Rohlena) McNeill,}{\i\fs28  Notes Roy. Bot. Gard. Edinb.}{\b\fs28  24:}{\fs28  389 (1963)}{\i\fs28  (M. velenovskyi}{\fs28  Rohlena): Plant erect, much-branched. Leaves 4-8 mm. Sepals 2-3 mm, longer than petals. Seeds 0\'b755-0\'b77 mm.}{\i\fs28  \bullet  Albania, S. Jugoslavia.}{\fs28 
\par 
\par }{\b\fs28 M. thymifolia }{\fs28 (Sm.) Bornm.,}{\i\fs28  Beih. Bot. Centr.}{\b\fs28  31}{\fs28 (}{\b\fs28 2}{\fs28 ): 193 (1914), like }{\b\fs28 1}{\fs28  but a smaller plant with linear-spathulate, fleshier leaves and ovate sepals, has been recorded from maritime sands in Kriti but probably in error.
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 2. M. viscosa}{\fs28  (Schreber) Schinz & Thell., }{\i\fs28 Bull. Herb. Boiss}{\fs28 . ser. 2, }{\b\fs28 7:}{\fs28  404 (1907) (}{\i\fs28 M. piskunovii}{\fs28  Klokov,}{\i\fs28  M. tenuifolia}{\fs28  subsp. }{\i\fs28 viscosa }{\fs28 (Schreber) Briq., }{\i\fs28 Alsine viscosa}{\fs28  Schreber). Annual with rather slender, erect stems branched usually from above the middle; branches usually erect, more rarely erecto-patent; plant glandular-pubescent, often densely so, rarely glabrous. Leaves 4-9(-12) mm, linear-subulate. Cymes lax; pedicels 3-8 mm, slender. Sepals 2-3(-3\'b75) mm, lanceolate; petals distinctly shorter than sepals. Capsule shorter than to more or less equalling sepals. Seeds 0\'b73-0\'b74 mm, almost smooth. 2n = 46.}{\i\fs28  Dry, sandy places. Widely distributed, but local,from N. France to E. Ukraine, and from Denmark to N. Greece.}{\fs28  Al Au Bu Cz Da Ga Ge Gr He Hu It Ju Po Rm Rs(C,W, E) Su ?Tu.
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 3. M. bilykiana}{\fs28  Klokov in Kotov, }{\i\fs28 Fl. RSS Ucr}{\fs28 .}{\b\fs28  4:}{\fs28  654 (1952). Like }{\b\fs28 2}{\fs28  but stems somewhat fleshy; branches often patent; sepals 2\'b725-3 mm; petals and capsule slightly exceeding sepals; seeds 0\'b75-0\'b76 mm, acutely tuberculate.}{\i\fs28  \bullet  S.W. Ukraine}{\fs28  (}{\i\fs28 near Izmail}{\fs28 ). Rs(W).
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 4. M. hybrida}{\fs28  (Vill.) Schischkin in Komarov, }{\i\fs28 Fl. URSS}{\b\fs28  6:}{\fs28  488 (1936) (}{\i\fs28 M. tenuifolia}{\fs28  (L.) Hiern, non Nees ex C.F.P. Mart., }{\i\fs28 M. birjuczensis}{\fs28  Klokov, }{\i\fs28 Alsine tenuifolia}{\fs28  (L.) Crantz,}{\i\fs28  Arenaria tenuifolia}{\fs28  L.). Annual, but more robust than }{\b\fs28 2}{\fs28 , with erect stems 3-12(-20) cm, branched at base and from above the middle; plant usually glandular-pubescent, at least above, or sometimes glabrous. Leaves up to 12 mm. Cymes lax, many-flowered; pedicels 5-20 mm. Sepals (2\'b75-)3-5 mm, linear to ovate-lanceolate, acuminate; petals slightly shorter than sepals. Capsule 1-1\'bd times as long as sepals. Seeds (0\'b73-)0\'b74-0\'b76 mm, minutely tuberculate, reddish-brown. 2n = 46, 70.}{\i\fs28  Dry, open habitats. S. & W. Europe, northwards to N. England, and extending locally to S.E. Russia; occasionally naturalized elsewhere.}{\fs28  Be Bl Br Bu Co Cr Cz Ga Ge Gr He Ho Hs It Ju Lu Rm Rs(C, W, K, E) Sa Si Tu [Au Da Hb].
\par 
\par A very variable species, particularly in height, pubescence and size and shape of the sepals.
\par 
\par Plants with glabrous, ovate-lanceolate sepals occurring from Italy to the Netherlands (}{\b\fs28 M. tenuifolia}{\fs28  subsp.}{\b\fs28  vaillantiana}{\fs28  (DC.) Mattf.) do not justify subspecific recognition, since the sepal-shape is inconstant and glabrous plants occur throughout the range of the species.
\par 
\par Plants from Krym and C. Greece (Parnes) with lanceolate, narrowly acute sepals, the petals almost as long as the sepals, have been referred to subsp.}{\b\fs28  turcica}{\fs28  McNeill,}{\i\fs28  Notes Roy. Bot. Gard. Edinb.}{\b\fs28  24:}{\fs28  395 (1963), a principally S.W. Asian taxon.
\par 
\par Plants from E. Greece, with smaller sepals, have been called subsp.}{\b\fs28  lydia}{\fs28  (Boiss.) Rech. fil., but the difference is inadequate for subspecific distinction.
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 5. M. mediterranea}{\fs28  (Ledeb.) K. Mal\'fd, }{\i\fs28 Glasn. Muz. Bosni Herceg.}{\b\fs28  20:}{\fs28  563 (1908) (}{\i\fs28 M. tenuifolia}{\fs28  subsp.}{\i\fs28  mediterranea}{\fs28  (Ledeb.) Briq.) Like}{\b\fs28  4}{\fs28  in habit; stems 4-12 cm, glabrous or subglabrous. Cymes dense; pedicels usually shorter than sepals. Sepals 3-5 \'d7 0\'b75-0\'b77 mm, narrowly linear-lanceolate; petals 1/3 - 1/2 as long as sepals, sometimes absent. Capsule usually included. Seeds 0\'b74 mm, smooth. 2n = 24. }{\i\fs28 Mediterranean region, Portugal; N.W. France}{\fs28 
\par 
\par 154}
\par }