{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 usually just exceeding calyx; seeds tuberculate. 2n = 48.{\i  In drier habitats than}{\b  2},{\i  in woods and open ground. S.W. Europe, extending locally eastwards to N. Greece}. Bl Co Ga Gr Hs It Lu Sa Si.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 4. M. diversifolia} Dolliner ex Koch, {\i Flora} ({\i Regensb}.) {\b 22:} 2 (1839). More or less glabrous annual or biennial with prostrate to ascending stems 7-23 cm, branching profusely. Leaves bright green, dimorphic; lower leaves spathulate, with few, long cilia around the connate leaf-bases, the lamina cuneate, petiolate, usually glabrous, occasionally with scattered hairs, 5-10 × 2-6 mm, acute to obtuse; upper leaves 20-40(-50) × 1-3·5 mm, sessile, linear-lanceolate, acute. Inflorescence a terminal, glabrous, 3- to 7-flowered cyme; pedicels glabrous, bracteolate on upper flowers. Flowers 5-merous; sepals 1·8-2 mm, ovate, subobtuse to obtuse, with broad scarious margins; petals 1·5-2 mm; styles 3. Capsule 2 × 3 mm, subglobose. Seeds 0·8-1·1 × 0·6-0·8 mm, brown to black, shiny, smooth; strophiole large, white to yellowish. 2n = 24. {\i Rock-crevices and screes; usually calcicole. • S.E. Austria}. Au.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 5. M. minutiflora} Bornm.,{\i  Feddes Repert.}{\b  16:} 183 (1919). Glabrous or subglabrous, very slender annual; stems 3-17 cm, procumbent to ascending, branching profusely below. Leaves 7-10(-15) × 4-8(-10) mm, ovate, 3- to 5-veined, with scattered cilia towards base, acute to subacute, more or less acuminate, often very pale green. Flowers solitary in axils of branches of the dichasium, or sometimes forming a simple 3- to 15-flowered cyme; pedicels ebracteolate, filiform. Flowers usually 5-merous; sepals 1-2 mm, glabrous, keeled, with broad hyaline margins; petals to 1·5 × 0·5 mm, rudimentary, white, entire or crenate; stamens usually 5; styles usually 3. Capsule 1-5 mm, subglobose, included within calyx. Seeds 0·5-0·8 mm, reniform, brown to blackish, shiny, smooth; strophiole minute, whitish to pale yellowish-brown. 2n = 24.{\i  Crevices under granite boulders and in fissures of granite rocks. • Makedonija} ({\i Prilep}). Ju.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 6. M. intricata} R. de Roemer ex Willk., {\i Linnaea}{\b  25:} 14 (1852). Caespitose, glabrous perennial, woody at base, with profusely branched stems, 6-15(-22) cm. Leaves spathulate to lanceolate, somewhat glaucous, petiolate; the lower 2-8 × 1·5-2·5 mm, distinctly fleshy, the upper 7-15 × 2-6 mm, less fleshy, narrowly elliptical to spathulate, acuminate. Inflorescence a simple, 3- to 15-flowered cyme; pedicels (7-)12-20(-35) mm, slender, bracteolate. Flowers 5-merous; sepals 2·5-3·5 mm, oblong-lanceolate, with narrow scarious margins, glabrous; petals 5-6 × 2-2·5 mm, ovate-lanceolate; styles 3. Capsule c. 3·5 mm, globose. Seeds c. 1·3 mm, brown, rather dull, tuberculate, especially on dorsal ridge; strophiole papillate, white becoming brown. 2n = ?26.{\i  Limestone crevices and caves. • Mountains of C. & S.E. Spain}. Hs.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 7. M. tejedensis} Huter, Porta & Rigo ex Willk., {\i Suppl. Prodr. Fl. Hisp.} 275 (1893) (? incl.{\i  M. fontqueri} Pau). Caespitose, usually glabrous perennial; stems 5-13(-15) cm, arising from a central rootstock, ascending, simple or basally branched, clothed in remains of dead leaves. Leaves 4-10 × 1·5-3·5 mm, glabrous, persistent, crowded below, bright green when young; lower leaves sessile to subsessile; upper leaves ovate, somewhat fleshy, apiculate. Inflorescence a terminal 1- to 7-flowered simple dichasium; pedicels 15-25 mm, bracteolate. Flowers 5-merous; sepals lanceolate, with broad scarious margins; petals obovate; styles 3. Capsule 3·5-4 × 2·5 mm, ovoid to subglobose. Seeds 1·2 × 0·9-1·0 mm, reniform, tuberculate especially on dorsal ridge; strophiole papillate, brownish.{\i  Crevices of limestone rocks. • S.E. Spain} ({\i Sierra Tejeda and Sierra Granada}). Hs.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 8. M. lebrunii} Merxm.,{\i  Monde Pl. }{\b 50:} 5 (1965) ({\i M. dasyphylla} auct., pro parte,{\i  M. papulosa} auct., non Bertol.). Caespitose, rather glaucous perennial; stems 5-30 cm, numerous, pendent or erect, profusely branched, glabrous, somewhat glaucous; old leaves persistent. Leaves 7-25(-35) × 1·5-4 mm, oblanceolate, cuneate, acute or mucronate; lower leaves rather fleshy, rigid, the upper leaves thinner. Inflorescence a 1- to 3-flowered cyme; pedicels 20-40(-80) mm, robust, bracteolate. Flowers (4)5-merous; sepals 3-4 mm, lanceolate, with scarious margins; petals 6-7 × 3-3·5 mm; styles (2)3. Capsule e. 3 mm wide, subglobose, included in the calyx. Seeds c. 1·5 mm, dark brown, shiny, smooth; strophiole branched, whitish. 2n = 24.{\i  Rock fissures and ledges; calcicole. • Maritime Alps.} Ga It.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 9. M. grisebachii} Janka,{\i  Österr. Bot. Zeitschr.}{\b  23:} 194 (1873). Caespitose perennial; stems 5-13 cm, glaucous, profusely branched, densely pubescent. Leaves (6-)9-33 × 0·5-0·8(-2·3) mm, linear-lanceolate or -oblong, sessile, slightly fleshy, pubescent, acuminate or acute. Inflorescence a simple (3-)7- to 10-flowered cyme. Flowers 5-merous; sepals 1·8-2·5 mm, glabrous, obtuse, with broad scarious margins; petals 2-2·5 mm, obtuse; styles 3. Capsule 1·5 × 2·5 mm, subglobose, generally included within sepals. Seeds 0·9 mm, black, dull, tuberculate; strophiole papillate, small.{\i  Damp, rocky areas;  calcifuge. • N.E. part of Balkan peninsula; E. Romania.} Bu Rm Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 10. M. pichleri} Huter,{\i  Österr. Bot. Zeitschr.}{\b  54}({\b 12}): 449 (1904). Caespitose perennial with glabrous, profusely-branched stems 4-7 cm. Leaves 11-25 × 0·4-0·7 mm, linear to lanceolate, glabrous. Inflorescence a simple 3- to 7-flowered cyme; pedicels 4-10 mm, filiform, bracteolate, deflexed in fruit. Flowers 5-merous; sepals 1·8-2·2 mm, glabrous, with broad scarious margins, obtuse; petals c. 2 × 1 mm; styles 3. Capsule subglobose, 2 × 3 mm. Seeds 0·9 mm, tuberculate; strophiole large, papillate.{\i  Shady rocks. • S. Bulgaria} ({\i Rodopi Planina}). Bu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 11. M. villosa} (Wulfen) Fenzl, {\i Vers. Darstell. Alsin.} tab. ad p. 46 (1833) ({\i Arenaria villosa} Wulfen). Caespitose perennial with glabrous or pubescent stems 4-12 cm, the nodes usually glabrous. Leaves 7-20 × 0·5-1·6 mm, lanceolate, subglabrous with scattered hairs on midrib and margin, the lowest somewhat fleshy. Inflorescence a simple (1-)3- to 5-flowered cyme; pedicels glabrous or pubescent, bracteolate, deflexed in fruit. Flowers 5-merous; sepals 2·7-4 × 1·2 mm, lanceolate, acute, ciliate on margin and midrib, with narrow scarious margins; petals c. 7 × 2 mm; styles 3. Capsule 2·7 × 4 mm. Seeds 1·0 × 0·8 mm, black, shiny, smooth, occasionally with cellular outlines; strophiole large, branched, whitish. {\i Limestone cliffs. • Mountains of N.W. Jugoslavia} ({\i Slovenija}). Ju.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 12. M. jankae} Griseb. ex Janka,{\i  Österr. Bot. Zeitschr.}{\b  23:} 195 (1873). Caespitose perennial, with stems 5-11 cm, erect, generally sparsely branched, glabrous above, pubescent towards base; internodes swollen above ciliate nodes. Lower leaves 12-20(-30) × 1·2-3(-4) mm, acuminate, distinctly petiolate, glabrous, except for petiole-base and scattered hairs on upper surface; upper leaves 8-15 × 1-1·5 mm, linear-lanceolate, subglabrous, ciliate on margins. Inflorescence a (1-)3- to 7-flowered cyme; pedicels bracteolate, filiform, usually deflexed in fruit; bracteoles 0·5-1 mm, ciliate on margins in lower ½ only. Flowers 5-merous; sepals 2·2-3 mm, acuminate, the margins ciliate at base; petals 3-3·5 mm; styles 3. Capsule 2 × 2-3 mm. Seeds 1 × 0·8 mm, black, dull, tuberculate; strophiole medium-sized, papillate.{\i  Shady calcareous rocks. • E. Bulgaria, E. Romania.} Bu Rm.
\par

\par
150}
\par