{\rtf1\ansi \deff4\deflang1033{\fonttbl{\f4\froman\fcharset0\fprq2 Times New Roman;}}{\colortbl;\red0\green0\blue0;\red0\green0\blue255;\red0\green255\blue255;\red0\green255\blue0;\red255\green0\blue255;\red255\green0\blue0;\red255\green255\blue0;\red255\green255\blue255;\red0\green0\blue128;\red0\green128\blue128;\red0\green128\blue0;\red128\green0\blue128;\red128\green0\blue0;\red128\green128\blue0;\red128\green128\blue128;\red192\green192\blue192;}{\stylesheet{\widctlpar \f4\fs20\lang2057 \snext0 Normal;}{\*\cs10 \additive Default Paragraph Font;}}{\info{\author dddd}{\operator dddd}{\creatim\yr1998\mo11\dy11\hr16\min25}{\revtim\yr1998\mo11\dy11\hr16\min27}{\version3}{\edmins2}{\nofpages4}{\nofwords1034}{\nofchars5895}{\*\company  }{\vern57431}}\widowctrl\ftnbj\aenddoc\hyphcaps0 \fet0\sectd \linex0 {\*\pnseclvl1\pnucrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl2\pnucltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl3\pndec\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl4\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl5\pndec\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl6\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl7\pnlcrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl8\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl9\pnlcrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}
\pard\plain \li200\ \f4\fs20\lang2057 {\fs28     scarious margin of sepals extending half-way to mid-vein
\par 12 Bracts elongate, strongly curved; capsule with 1 seed ................. }{\b\fs28 7. hamata}{\fs28 
\par 12 Bracts neither elongate nor strongly curved; capsule
\par    with 5 or more seeds
\par 13 Plant densely glandular-pubescent; pedicels \'bd as long as sepals   ................................................................................................... }{\b\fs28 11. globulosa}{\fs28 
\par 13 Plant with crisped, eglandular hairs; flowers subsessile
\par 14 Fascicles of flowers forming a dense, wide, terminal capitulum;   stamens 3 ................................................................................... }{\b\fs28 8. dichotoma}{\fs28 
\par 14 Fascicles of flowers axillary and terminal; stamens 10 .............. }{\b\fs28 9. montana}{\fs28 
\par 1  Perennial; vegetative shoots usually present at time of flowering
\par 15 Sepals appearing veinless, densely glandular-pubescent;
\par    petals usually pale pink ........................................................... }{\b\fs28 53. geniculata}{\fs28 
\par 15 Sepals usually distinctly veined; petals white (rarely pale lilac)
\par 16 Sepals obtuse, oblong
\par 17 Petals absent or rudimentary; flowers solitary ......................... }{\b\fs28 52. sedoides}{\fs28 
\par 17 Petals equalling or exceeding sepals; cymes usually 3 to many-flowered
\par 18 Leaves prominently ciliate; seeds 2-2\'b75 mm, fringed with long   tubercles ................................................................................ }{\b\fs28 49. macrocarpa}{\fs28 
\par 18 Leaves not prominently ciliate; seeds not more than 2 mm,
\par    usually smooth or with low tubercles
\par 19 Flowering stems 0\'b75-1 cm, mostly lateral, scarcely exserted from   the cushion; flowers solitary ....................................................... }{\b\fs28 47. handelii}{\fs28 
\par 19 Flowering stems at least 3 cm 
\par 20 Plant glabrous ........................................................................ }{\b\fs28 43. wettsteinii}{\fs28 
\par 20 Plant pubescent, at least above 
\par 21 Petals at least twice as long as the sepals
\par 22 Plant densely caespitose .............................................................. }{\b\fs28 50. arctica}{\fs28 
\par 22 Plant with conspicuous woody rhizomes .................................. }{\b\fs28 45. baldaccii}{\fs28  
\par 21 Petals usually less than twice as long as the sepals
\par 23 Plant usually laxly caespitose; petals 1\'bd-2 times as
\par    long as the sepals
\par 24 Leaves 10-20 mm; inflorescence densely glandular-pubescent;   sepals 5-7 mm .......................................................................... }{\b\fs28 44. capillacea}{\fs28 
\par 24 Leaves 5-12 mm; inflorescence with dense crispate hairs,   rarely glandular-pubescent; sepals 4-5\'b75 mm ........................... }{\b\fs28 48. laricifolia}{\fs28 
\par 23 Plant densely caespitose; petals not more than 1\'bd times   as long as the sepals
\par 25 Inflorescence with dense crispate hairs, rarely glandular-
\par    pubescent .................................................................................. }{\b\fs28 48. laricifolia}{\fs28 
\par 25 Inflorescence glandular-pubescent
\par 26 Leaves acute; sepals obtuse ................................................... }{\b\fs28 46. garckeana}{\fs28 
\par 26 Leaves obtuse; sepals acuminate ................................................. }{\b\fs28 51. biflora}{\fs28 
\par 16 Sepals acute, ovate to linear-lanceolate
\par 27 Sepals 1-veined; scarious margin extending nearly to vein
\par 28 Pedicels and sepals glandular-pubescent
\par 29 Sepals 2-4 mm; vegetative fascicles of leaves short, ovoid,
\par    compact ..................................................................................... }{\b\fs28 20. anatolica}{\fs28 
\par 29 Sepals 4-6 mm; vegetative fascicles of leaves long
\par 30 Petals less than \'bd as long as sepals ................................ }{\b\fs28 21. trichocalycina}{\fs28 
\par 30 Petals more than \'bd as long as sepals
\par 31 Petals 2/3 as long as sepals .................................................... }{\b\fs28 12. glomerata}{\fs28 
\par 31 Petals equalling or slightly exceeding sepals ...................... }{\b\fs28 19. adenotricha}{\fs28 
\par 28 Pedicels and sepals glabrous
\par 32 Petals less than \'bd as long as sepals; stems procumbent ............ }{\b\fs28 21. confusa}{\fs28 
\par 32 Petals more than \'bd as long as sepals; stems erect
\par 33 Cymes 1- to 4-flowered ............................................. }{\b\fs28 18. krascheninnikovii}{\fs28 
\par 33 Cymes usually many-flowered
\par 34 Petals slightly exceeding sepals .................................................. }{\b\fs28 16. setacea}{\fs28 
\par 34 Petals not exceeding sepals
\par 35 Sepals 3\'b75-5\'b75 mm, linear-lanceolate ...................................... }{\b\fs28 15. mutabilis}{\fs28 
\par 35 Sepals 3-4 mm, ovate-lanceolate ............................................. }{\b\fs28 17. bosniaca}{\fs28 
\par 27 Sepals 3- to 7(-9)-veined; scarious margin extending at most   to lateral veins
\par 36 Leaves linear-setaceous to -subulate
\par 37 Sepals 3-veined
\par 38 Leaves 1-veined; plant glabrous
\par 39 Stems laxly caespitose; cymes 1- to 4-flowered;
\par    pedicels 15-50 mm ......................................................................... }{\b\fs28 41. stricta}{\fs28 
\par 39 Stems densely caespitose; flowers solitary, rarely present;
\par    pedicels 5-15 mm ............................................................................ }{\b\fs28 42. rossii}{\fs28 
\par 38 Leaves 3-veined; stems usually glandular-pubescent, at least above
\par 40 Sepals erect at anthesis
\par 41 Veins of leaf all equally prominent; pedicels patent to   erecto-patent ................................................................................ }{\b\fs28 38. pichleri}{\fs28 
\par 41 Midrib of leaf more prominent than lateral veins;   pedicels erect to erecto-patent
\par 42 Leaves rigid, somewhat fleshy
\par 43 Leaves 5-10 mm (Krym) ............................................................ }{\b\fs28 36. taurica}{\fs28 
\par 43 Leaves 10-20 mm (Greece) .................................................... }{\b\fs28 37. juniperina}{\fs28 
\par 42 Leaves not rigid, not fleshy
\par 44 Leaves glabrous
\par 45 Flowers usually in pairs; capsule 1\'bd times as long as   sepals ......................................................................................... }{\b\fs28 33. austriaca}{\fs28 
\par 45 Cymes 3- or more-flowered; capsule and sepals \'b1 equal
\par 46 Sepals 2-3 mm ....................................................................... }{\b\fs28 31. grignensis}{\fs28 
\par 46 Sepals 3\'b75-5 mm .......................................................................... }{\b\fs28 35. villarii}{\fs28 
\par 44 Leaves glandular-pubescent
\par 47 Flowers solitary or in pairs .......................................................... }{\b\fs28 34. helmii}{\fs28 
\par 47 Cymes usually 3- or 4-flowered .................................................. }{\b\fs28 35. villarii}{\fs28 
\par 40 Sepals patent at anthesis
\par 48 Leaves usually secund; stems black below ................................ }{\b\fs28 23. recurva}{\fs28 
\par 48 Leaves somewhat recurved but never secund; stems not black below
\par 49 Petals ovate, acute ......................................................................... }{\b\fs28 39. verna}{\fs28 
\par 49 Petals obovate, obtuse ................................................................ }{\b\fs28 40. rubella}{\fs28 
\par 37 Sepals 5- to 7-veined at least near base
\par 50 Stems laxly caespitose ................................................................ }{\b\fs28 22. hirsuta}{\fs28 
\par 50 Stems densely caespitose; plant often pulvinate
\par 51 Cymes 1- to 5(-8)-flowered, lax; pedicels 1-3 times as long
\par    as sepals ....................................................................................... }{\b\fs28 23. recurva}{\fs28 
\par 51 Cymes many-flowered, dense; pedicels not longer than sepals
\par    ................................................................................................... }{\b\fs28 24. bulgarica}{\fs28 
\par 36 Leaves linear, oblanceolate, lanceolate or oblong-elliptical
\par 
\par 153}
\par }