{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 ({\i W. coast of Normandie}). Al Bl Bu Co Cr Ga Gr Hs It Ju Lu ?Sa Si Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 6. M. regeliana} (Trautv.) Mattf.,{\i  Bot. Jahrb.}{\b  57} Beibl. 126: 29 (1921). Glabrous annual; stems 5-15 cm, branched from base. Leaves 2-10 mm, narrowly linear, often ciliolate at base. Pedicels 3-17 mm, filiform. Sepals 2·5-3·5 mm, ovate-lanceolate, 3-veined in lower ½, with broad scarious margins. Capsule usually exserted. Seeds 0·5 mm, finely tuberculate.{\i  Salt steppe and desert soils. Borders of W. Kazakhstan and S.E. Russia}. Rs(E). ({\i Caucasus, C. Asia.})
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Sect. MINUARTIA. Annuals or perennials. Leaves linear to linear-lanceolate. Cymes lax (perennials) or in dense fascicles (annuals). Sepals 3-veined, with scarious margin extending to lateral veins, or 1-veined with margin extending almost to vein; sepals becoming indurated; stamens 3-10.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 7. M. hamata} (Hausskn.) Mattf.,{\i  Bot. Jahrb.}{\b  57} Beibl. 126: 29 (1921) ({\i Queria hispanica} L., non{\i  M. hispanica} sensu Mattf.). Annual, sparsely covered with crisped hairs; stems 3-7 cm, usually branched from base. Leaves 10-20 mm, linear-setaceous. Bracts 3- to 5-veined, shorter than leaves, abruptly narrowed from a very broad sheathing base, hamate, incurved above, with broad, scarious margin; fascicles of cymes in capitula which are deciduous at maturity; flowers sessile, the terminal rudimentary. Sepals c. 4 mm, lanceolate, becoming indurated, 3-veined; scarious margin broad; petals minute, subulate; stamens usually 10. Capsule with 1 seed. 2n = 30.{\i  Dry places. Spain; Balkan peninsula}; Krym. Al Bu Gr Hs Ju Rs(K) ?Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 8. M. dichotoma} L.,{\i  Sp. Pl.} 879 (1753) ({\i M. hispanica} sensu Mattf.,{\i  Alsine dichotoma }(L.) Fenzl). Annual, covered with crispate hairs; stems 2-8 cm, erect, occasionally branched from the base; stems branched above to give a congested capitulum of fascicles of flowers. Leaves 8-15 mm, erecto-patent, much longer than internodes. Bracts scarious, exceeding the flowers, curved above. Sepals 3-veined, sparsely hairy; petals absent or rudimentary; stamens usually 3. Seeds 0·5-0·8 mm, 6-12, almost smooth. 2n = 60.{\i  Dry, sandy places. N. & C. Spain.} Hs.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 9. M. montana} L.,{\i  Sp. Pl.} 90 (1753) ({\i Alsine montana} (L.) Fenzl). Like{\b  8} but more robust; stems often branched from base; leaves 15-20 mm, squarrose, sometimes recurved; fascicles of flowers terminal and axillary, shorter than bracts; sepals glabrous; stamens 10; seeds 0·6-0·8 mm, minutely tuberculate.{\i  Dry, sandy and rocky places. C., E. & S. Spain; S.W. Bulgaria; Krym.} Bu Hs Rs(K).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp.{\b  montana} : Inflorescence sparsely glandular-hairy. Petals 0·7-0·9 mm. 2n = 28. {\i C., E. & S. Spain}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp.{\b  wiesneri} (Stapf) McNeill, {\i Notes Roy. Bot. Gard. Edinb.}{\b  24:} 359 (1963) ({\i M. wiesneri} (Stapf) Schischkin): Inflorescence densely crispate-hairy. Petals absent.{\i  S.W. Bulgaria; Krym}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 10. M. campestris} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 89 (1753) ({\i Alsine campestris} (L.) Fenzl). Glandular-pubescent annual; stems 2-10 cm. Leaves up to 15 mm, erect. Bracts and fascicles of flowers almost equal to and scarcely exceeding internodes; at maturity fascicles present at most nodes. Sepals 1-veined; petals rudimentary; stamens usually 5. Seeds 0·4-0·6 mm, minutely tuberculate.{\i  Dry places. Spain.} Hs.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 11. M. globulosa} (Labill.) Schinz & Thell.,{\i  Bull. Herb. Boiss.} ser. 2, {\b 7:} 403 (1907). Densely glandular-pubescent annual with erect stems up to 13 cm. Leaves linear-lanceolate. Bracts scarcely exceeding pedicels; cymes axillary and terminal; pedicels ½ as long as sepals, erecto-patent. Sepals lanceolate; petals 1/3 as long as sepals.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Capsule included. Seeds 0·6-0·8 mm, tuberculate dorsally.{\i  Dry, cultivated ground. W. Jugoslavia, E. Greece and Kriti.} Cr Gr Ju.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 12. M. glomerata} (Bieb.) Degen,{\i  Mitt. Naturw. Ver. Steierm.}{\b  46}: 319 (1910). Glandular-pubescent biennial or perennial (sometimes annual) with erect stems up to 20 cm. Leaves linear-setaceous, 3-veined at base. Fascicles of flowers terminal and axillary; pedicels up to 2(-3) mm. Sepals 4-6 mm, narrowly lanceolate, long-acuminate; petals 1/3-2/3 as long as sepals.{\i  S.E. Europe, extending northwards to S. Czechoslovakia and N. Ukraine.} Al Bu Cz Gr Hu Ju Rm Rs(W, K) Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp.{\b  glomerata} : Annual or biennial. Leaves erect, appressed. Cymes dense, many-flowered. Petals ½ as long as sepals. 2n = 28.{\i  Throughout the range of the species, except the extreme south}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp.{\b  macedonica} (Degen & Dörfler) McNeill,{\i  Notes Roy. Bot. Gard. Edinb.}{\b  24:} 384 (1963) (subsp.{\i  velutina} (Boiss. & Orph.) Mattf.; incl.{\i  M. jordanovii }Panov,{\i  M. rhodopaea} (Degen) Kozuharov & Kuzmanov): Perennial. Leaves often falcate. Cymes lax, few-flowered. Petals slightly shorter than sepals. 2n = 28.{\i  From Albania to Thrace}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 The relationship between subsp. ({\b b}) and M. velutina Boiss. & Orph. requires clarification.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 13. M. rubra} (Scop.) McNeill,{\i  Feddes Repert.}{\b  68:} 173 (1963) ({\i M. fastigiata} (Sm.) Reichenb.,{\i  M. fasciculata} auct., non (L.) Hiern, {\i M. cymifera }(Rouy & Fouc.) Graebner,{\i  Alsine fasciculata} auct., non (L.) Wahlenb., {\i A. jacquinii} Koch). Biennial with erect stems up to 30 cm; branches erect, glabrous or sparsely hairy above, very rarely glandular-pubescent. Leaves 3-veined at base, linear-setaceous. Flowers in dense axillary and terminal fascicles; pedicels and sepals almost equal. Sepals 4-6 mm, linear, glabrous or sparsely hairy; petals 1/3 as long as sepals; stamens 5. Capsule included. Seeds 0·7-0·8 mm, distinctly but shortly tuberculate dorsally. 2n = 30. {\i Dry, sandy places. S.C. Europe, northwards to} 50°{\i  N. in W. Germany.} Au Cz Ga Ge He Hs Hu It Ju Rm.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 14. M. funkii} (Jordan) Graebner in Ascherson & Graebner, {\i Syn. Mitteleur. Fl.}{\b  5}({\b 1}): 714 (1918) ({\i Alsine funkii }Jordan). Like {\b 13} but with ascending stems and corymbose cymes.{\i  E. Spain; S. France.} Ga Hs.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 15. M. mutabilis} (Lapeyr.) Schinz & Thell. ex Becherer, {\i Ber. Schweiz. Bot. Ges.}{\b  48:} 296 (1938) ({\i M. rostrata} (Pers.) Reichenb.,{\b  M. lanuginosa} (Coste) P. Fourn., {\b Alsine mucronata} auct., non L., {\b A. rostrata} (Pers.) Fenzl, ?{\b M. trichocalycina} (Ten. & Guss.) Grande). Laxly caespitose, usually glabrous perennial with numerous, erect flowering stems 10-20 cm, branched above. Leaves erect to erecto-patent. Terminal cymes usually many-flowered; pedicels usually equalling sepals. Sepals 3·5-5·5 mm, narrowly lanceolate; petals slightly shorter than sepals. Capsule about equalling sepals. Seeds 0·7-0·8 mm, distinctly tuberculate dorsally. 2n = 28, 30. {\i Dry places. Mountains of S.W. Europe, extending to C. France and to} 11°{\i  E. in N. Italy.} Co Ga He Hs It.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 16. M. setacea} (Thuill.) Hayek, {\i Fl. Steierm. }{\b 1:} 271 (1908) ({\i Alsine setacea} (Thuill.) Mert. & Koch). Caespitose perennial with numerous erect flowering stems up to 20 cm, with crispate hairs below, glabrous above. Leaves 8-15 × 0·2 mm, setaceous-filiform, 3-veined at base, usually erect, rarely patent or falcate, scabrid. Cymes 3- to many-flowered, lax (dense in var.{\i  parviflora} (Velen.) Prodan); pedicels usually 2-4 times as long as sepals. Sepals 2-5 mm, ovate-lanceolate to lanceolate; petals and capsule usually slightly exceeding sepals. Seeds 0·5-0·7 mm, with low, rounded
\par

\par
155}
\par