{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 The plants from Açores have thicker, very broad, often almost suborbicular leaves, and have been treated as a separate species,{\b  P. azoricum} (Vasc.) R. Fernandes,{\i  Bol. Soc. Brot.} ser. 2, {\b 42:} 242 (1968) ({\i P. cambricum} subsp. {\i azoricum} (Vasc.) Nardi).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 3. P. vulgare} L., {\i Sp. Pl. }1085 (1753). Rhizome-scales 3-6 mm, ovate, acuminate. New leaves produced in early summer; leaves lanceolate; pinnae obtuse or somewhat acute, the basal pair not projecting forward; secondary veins with 1-3(4) bifurcations. Sori orbicular; paraphyses absent; annulus with 10-15(-20) indurated cells, reddish-brown. 2n = 148.{\i  Most of Europe, but local in the east}. All except Bl Cr Sb Si.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 4. P. interjectum} Shivas,{\i  Jour. Linn. Soc. London} ({\i Bot.}) {\b 58:} 28 (1961) ({\i P. vulgare} subsp.{\i  prionodes} (Ascherson) Rothm.). Rhizomescales 3-6(-10) mm, ovate-lanceolate. New leaves produced in summer; leaves ovate to ovate-lanceolate; pinnae acute, the basal pair projecting forward; secondary veins with 3(4) bifurcations. Sori elliptical; paraphyses absent; annulus with 7-10 indurated cells, usually colourless or pale brown. 2n = 222.{\i  W. & C. Europe, northwards to Scotland and eastwards to the Baltic region}. Au Be Bl Br Co Cz Da Ga Ge Hb He Ho Hs Hu It Ju Lu Rs (B,?C,W, ?K) Sa ?Tu.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Some of the records from E.C. & E. Europe may refer to variants of {\b 1} with unusually short paraphyses.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 13.         GRAMMITIDACEAE}
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc   Edit. D.M. Moore
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Description as for genus. A predominantly austral and tropical family.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 1.              Grammitis}          Swartz
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc  J.R. Akeroyd
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Epiphyte. Rhizome dictyostelic. Leaves simple, entire; veins free, branched. Sori discrete, in a line along the costa, without indusium.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b 1. G. jungermannioides} (Klotzsch) R.-C. Ching,{\i  Bull. Fan. Mem. Inst. Biol. Bot.} ({\i Peking}) {\b 10:} 240 (1941). Rhizome erect, without scales. Leaves 3-5 cm, narrowly oblong to narrowly obovate, obtuse, somewhat coriaceous, with soft, spreading hairs on both surfaces. Sori orbicular.{\i  Mossy forest. One station in Açores }({\i Pico}). *Az. ({\i S. Central America and Caribbean region}.)
\par

\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 14.     DICKSONIACEAE}
\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc (Incl.{\i  Cyatheaceae})
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc Edit. †D.H. Valentine & D.M. Moore.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Stems solenostelic, stout, densely covered with scales or hairs. Petiole with a single, U-shaped vascular strand which soon divides into several strands. Sori marginal, covered by a 2-valved indusium; spores tetrahedral.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b Dicksonia antarctica} Labill., {\i Nov. Holl. Pl.}{\b  2:} 100 (1806), from S.E. Australia, with an erect stem up to 2 m and large, 2- or 3-pinnate leaves, is cultivated for ornament in S.W. England and S.W. Ireland. It reproduces freely by spores and persists in abandoned gardens, but does not appear to be truly naturalized.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Another tree-fern,{\b  Cyathea cooperi} (Hooker & F. Mueller) Domin, {\i Pterid.} 262 (1929), from Australia, is perhaps becoming naturalized in Açores.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 1.                Culcita}                C. Presl
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc   †D.H. Valentine
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Leaves pinnately divided, uniform. Sori 2-4 mm, more or less spherical; sporangia maturing basipetally; annulus slightly oblique.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Literature: M.C. de Rezende-Pinto,{\i  Bol. Soc. Brot.} ser. 2, {\b 17:} 93-140 (1943).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. C. macrocarpa} C. Presl,{\i  Tent. Pteridogr.} 135 (1836) ({\i Dicksonia culcita} L'Hér.). Rhizome with setiform, ferruginous scales. Leaves 30-100(-200) cm, as long as or rather longer than wide, in a lax tuft; lamina triangular, 4- or 5-pinnate, coriaceous, shining, about as long as the petiole; ultimate segments inciso-serrate. Indusium reniform. 2n = 132-136.{\i  Açores; W. Spain and N.W. Portugal, very local.} Az Hs *Lu.
\par

\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 15. HYPOLEPIDACEAE}
\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  (Incl.{\i  Dennstaedtiaceae})
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc   Edit. D.M. Moore
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Rhizome with a perforated solenostele. Petiole with several vascular strands which fuse to form a single, U-shaped strand. Sori marginal, borne on the connecting veinlet, covered by both the deflexed margin of the leaf and by an inner indusium; spores tetrahedral.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 1.              Pteridium}              Gled. ex Scop.
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc By †D.H. Valentine (Ed.1) revised by C.N. Page (Ed.2)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Rhizome subterranean, far-creeping. Leaves distinct; petiole long; lamina up to 3-pinnate; pinnae and pinnules with nectaries at the base; ultimate segments numerous, ovate to linear. Sori contiguous, on the marginal vein, covered both by the revolute leaf-margins and by the indusia.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Literature: C.N. Page, {\i Bot. Jour. Linn. Soc.}{\b  73:} 1-34 (1976); {\i Watsonia}{\b  17:} 429-434 (1989).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b 1. P. aquilinum} (L.) Kuhn in Kersten,{\i  Reise Ost. Afr. Bot. }{\b 3}({\b 3}):
\par

\par
16}
\par