{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 9  Capsule conspicuously curved; bracts with or without scarious margins
\par
10 Seeds 1·5-2 mm, slightly rugose ............................................ {\b 32. uniflorum}
\par
10 Seeds less than 1·5 mm, tuberculate
\par
11 Lower cauline leaves petiolate ............................................. {\b 42. sylvaticum}
\par
11 Leaves sessile ......................................................................... {\b 43. fontanum}
\par
9  Capsule straight; bracts without scarious margins
\par
12 Leaves usually 50-80 mm ....................................................... {\b 4. dahuricum}
\par
12 Leaves usually not more than 30 mm
\par
13 Petals ciliate at base; seeds 1·7-2·5 mm .............................. {\b 35. pyrenaicum}
\par
13 Petals not ciliate; seeds 0·5-1·8 mm
\par
14 Plant densely glandular-hairy; seeds 1·4-1·8 mm ................ {\b 33. theophrasti}
\par
14 Plant with eglandular hairs or ± glabrous; seeds up to c. 1 mm
\par
15 Stem with line of hairs down each internode; 
\par
   petals up to twice as long as sepals .......................................... {\b 1. cerastoides}
\par
15 Stem ± uniformly pubescent or almost glabrous; 
\par
   petals only slightly longer than sepals 
\par
16 Sepals 7-8 mm, with wide scarious margins ........................ {\b 36. runemarkii}
\par
16 Sepals 5-7 mm, with narrow scarious margins ............... {\b 37. pedunculatum}
\par
5  Petals at least twice as long as sepals
\par
17 Plant with long, soft hairs (sometimes on stems and young leaves only)
\par
18 Plant densely white- to yellow-tomentose to lanate
\par
19 Ovary hairy; leaves 0·5-1·5 mm wide ................................ {\b 9. grandiflorum}
\par
19 Ovary glabrous; leaves usually more than 1·5 mm wide
\par
20 Plant with branched hairs .............................................. {\b 10. candidissimum}
\par
20 Plant without branched hairs
\par
21 Capsule-teeth with flat margins ......................................... {\b 11. biebersteinii}
\par
21 Capsule-teeth with revolute margins ................................. {\b 12. tomentosum}
\par
18 Plant not densely tomentose, greyish or greenish
\par
22 Leaves less than 3 times as long as wide
\par
23 Plant tall, laxly caespitose; flowers many; 
\par
   bracts and sepals obtuse ......................................................... {\b 13. moesiacum}
\par
23 Plant mat-forming; flowers 1-5; bracts and sepals acute ......... {\b 29. alpinum}
\par
22 Leaves at least 3 times as long as wide
\par
24 Seeds more than 1·6 mm
\par
25 Leaves 10-20 × 1-5 mm, lanceolate ................................ {\b 15. boissierianum}
\par
25 Leaves 20-50 × 4-7 mm, elliptical to oblanceolate ...... {\b 40. transsilvanicum}
\par
24 Seeds up to 1·6 mm
\par
26 Leaves of flowering stems sparsely ciliate at margins,
\par
   the surfaces glabrous or subglabrous; midrib thin ........................ {\b 17. lineare}
\par
26 Leaves tomentose and/or glandular, with soft hairs at
\par
   least at margins; midrib strong and prominent beneath
\par
27 Capsule twice as long as sepals ....................................... {\b 16. gibraltaricum}
\par
27 Capsule as long as or slightly longer than sepals
\par
28 Seeds 1-1·3 mm, strongly tuberculate .................................... {\b 14. decalvans}
\par
28 Seeds 1·5-2 mm, rugose .................................................. {\b 15. boissierianum}
\par
17 Plant pubescent, glandular or glabrous, but never with long, soft hairs
\par
29 Flowering stems with non-flowering axillary shoots or conspicuous buds
\par
30 Fruiting pedicel curved just beneath calyx; capsule curved
\par
31 Sepals (4-)5-8 mm; leaves usually more than 3 times as long as wide
\par
32 Stems usually more than 6 cm; leaves not imbricate ................ {\b 24. arvense}
\par
32 Stems 2-6 cm; leaves imbricate (C. Italy) ............................... {\b 25. thomasii}
\par
31 Sepals 3-5 mm; leaves not more than 3 times as long as wide
\par
33 Petals up to 2½ times as long as sepals .............................. {\b 26. alsinifolium}
\par
33 Petals not more than twice as long as sepals ................ {\b 27. gorodkovianum}
\par
30 Fruiting pedicel and capsule straight
\par
34 Bracts ciliate from base to apex
\par
35 Leaves less than 4 mm wide ................................................... {\b 20. soleirolii}
\par
35 Leaves usually at least 4 mm wide ............................................ {\b 21. scaranii}
\par
34 Bracts not ciliate or only ciliate at base
\par
36 Young stems glabrous except for a line of small hairs 
\par
   down each internode; leaves pale green, somewhat fleshy ..... {\b 1. cerastoides}
\par
36 Young stems hairy all round, at least above; 
\par
   leaves dark to greyish-green, not fleshy
\par
37 Leaves 6-10 mm wide, lanceolate to ovate-lanceolate (Açores)
\par
38 Leaves 4-6 times as long as wide, lanceolate ............................. {\b 22. vagans}
\par
38 Leaves less than 4 times as long as wide, spathulate 
\par
   to ovate-lanceolate .................................................................... {\b 23. azoricum}
\par
37 Leaves linear to linear-lanceolate, up to 5 mm wide
\par
39 Bracts pubescent, all with wide, scarious margins ............... {\b 18. banaticum}
\par
39 Bracts glabrous or nearly so, the lowest herbaceous, 
\par
   the upper with narrow, scarious margins .................................... {\b 19. julicum}
\par
29 Non-flowering axillary shoots or buds not present on flowering stems
\par
40 Bracts leaf-like, without scarious margins
\par
41 Plant glaucous-pruinose; stems up to 100 cm; 
\par
   leaves usually 50-80 mm (N.E. Russia) .................................... {\b 4. dahuricum}
\par
41 Plant not pruinose; stems up to 20 cm; leaves up to 30 mm
\par
42 Leaves of at least the non-flowering shoots ovate 
\par
   to obovate to spathulate, or suborbicular
\par
43 Seeds 1-1·5 mm, the testa close ............................................ {\b 31. nigrescens}
\par
43 Seeds 1·5-2 mm, the testa loose ............................................. {\b 32. uniflorum}
\par
42 Leaves ovate to elliptical, acute
\par
44 Seeds 1·7-2·5 mm .................................................................. {\b 34. latifolium}
\par
44 Seeds 1·3-1·7 mm ............................................................. {\b 39. carinthiacum}
\par
40 At least upper bracts sepal-like or minute, with scarious margins
\par
45 Sepals 7-10 mm
\par
46 Plant glabrous; leaves up to 20 mm ...................................... {\b 30. glabratum}
\par
46 Plant pubescent; leaves 20-80 mm
\par

\par
165}
\par