{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 almost erect, with revolute margins. Seeds 1-1·6 mm, yellowish-brown, rugose. 2n = c. 144.{\i  Damp, montane grassland. • C. & S. Jugoslavia, N. Albania, W. Bulgaria}. Al Bu Ju.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 14. C. decalvans} Schlosser & Vuk.,{\i  Fl. Croat.} 360 (1869) ({\i C. lanigerum }G.C. Clementi, non Desv., {\i C. grandiflorum }sensu Boiss., non Waldst. & Kit.). Perennial 7-40 cm. Leaves lanceolate to lanceolate-elliptical, attenuate, acute, sparsely tomentose to pubescent, with prominent, yellowish midrib. Bracts and sepals lanceolate, acute, with wide scarious margins. Sepals 6-8 mm, pubescent and often glandular; petals patent. Capsule 7-9 mm, broadly cylindrical; teeth erect, with revolute margins. Seeds 1-1·3 mm, strongly tuberculate. 2n = 36, 72, 126.{\i  • Mountains of Balkan peninsula}. Al Bu Gr Ju.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp.{\b  decalvans} : Stems up to 30 cm. Leaves 8-20 mm, sparsely tomentose, becoming more or less glabrous. Sepals often glandular. Capsule slightly curved. 2n = 36, 72.{\i  Almost throughout the range of the species}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp.{\b  orbelicum} (Velen.) Stoj. & Stefanov,{\i  Fl. Balg. }416 (1948) ({\i C. orbelicum }Velen.). Stems up to 40 cm. Leaves 40-50 mm, persistently tomentose. Sepals eglandular. Capsule straight. 2n = 126. {\i S.W. Bulgaria, N.E. Greece}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 15. C. boissierianum} Greuter & Burdet, {\i Willdenowia}{\b  14:} 41 (1984) ({\i C. boissieri} Gren.). Perennial 5-30 cm, laxly caespitose, matforming, with non-flowering stems arising from subterranean basal branches; basal internodes of flowering stems almost as long as the leaves, the uppermost much longer. Leaves usually 10-20 × 1-5 mm, lanceolate, stiff, patent, straight to recurved, narrowly acute or almost aristate, white- to greyish-tomentose; midrib strong. Flowers 1-7 in a lax cyme; upper internodes, peduncles, pedicels, bracts and sepals densely glandular. Sepals 6-8 mm, lanceolate, with wide scarious margins; petals up to 15 mm. Capsule straight, broadly cylindrical, the teeth erect, with slightly curved margins. Seeds 1·5-2 mm, yellowish-brown; testa loose. 2n = 72.{\i  Rocks and screes. S. & E. Spain; Corse, Sardegna.} Co Hs Sa.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 16. C. gibraltaricum} Boiss.,{\i  Elenchus} 24 (1838) ({\i C. boissieri} var.{\i  gibraltaricum} (Boiss.) Gren.). Perennial 10-25 cm; non-flowering stems procumbent; flowering stems ascending, with leafy axillary shoots, glandular-pubescent. Leaves up to 45 × 8 mm, linear-lanceolate, subaristate, often somewhat curved, glandular, the margins ciliate with short and long hairs; midrib prominent beneath. Flowers 1-5, on long peduncles; bracts glandular, with scarious margins, especially distally. Sepals 6-8 mm, ovate-elliptical, glandular, with wide scarious margin at the apex. Capsule twice as long as the sepals; teeth short, straight, with somewhat revolute margins. Seeds 1-1·6 mm, rugose, dark brown.{\i  S. Spain} ({\i Gibraltar}). Hs. ({\i N.Africa}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 17. C. lineare} All.,{\i  Fl. Pedem.}{\b  2}: 365 (1785). Perennial 5-20 cm, stoloniferous, fragile; lower internodes 1-2 cm, the uppermost longer, all sparsely villous to slightly hairy, often on only 1 side. Leaves of procumbent non-flowering stems rosulate, lanceolate to elliptical, soon decaying and sparsely villous-tomentose; leaves of flowering stems 20-50 × 2-4 mm, linear, acute, with surfaces glabrous or nearly so, sparsely ciliate, with slender midrib. Flowers 1-3; peduncles and pedicels long, slender, villous especially distally; bracts lanceolate, connate at the base. Sepals 5-7 mm, lanceolate, acute, villous to slightly hairy, the outer with narrow, the inner with wide scarious margins. Capsule straight, cylindrical. Seeds 1·2-1·5 mm, pale yellowish-brown, strongly tuberculate.{\i  Rocky grassland. • S.W. Alps.} Ga It.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 18. C. banaticum} (Rochel) Heuffel, {\i Enum. Pl. Banat.} 41 (1858). Perennial up to 40 cm; stems, especially above, with deflexed hairs shorter than the diameter of the stem, sometimes glandular, with somewhat swollen nodes; internodes about as long as the leaves, the uppermost long. Leaves linear to linear-lanceolate, often pilose, especially along the prominent, rounded midrib, or glabrous, ciliate at the base. Flowers 3-7; bracts convex, subobtuse, pubescent beneath, with wide scarious margins. Sepals 5-9 mm, ovate to ovate-lanceolate, subobtuse, puberulent, the margins scarious. Capsule 8-12 mm; teeth erect, with revolute margins. Seeds 1·2-1·8 mm, longer than wide, acutely tuberculate.{\i  Rocks. S. & E. part of Balkan peninsula; S.W. Romania}. Al Bu Gr Ju Rm.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp.{\b  banaticum} : Hairs of uppermost internode short, appressed. Leaves up to 55 × 2-5 mm, sparsely hairy to glabrous. {\i Throughout most of the range of the species}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b speciosum} (Boiss.) Jalas,{\i  Ann. Bot. Fenn.}{\b  20:} 109 (1983) ({\i C. speciosum} (Boiss.) Hausskn., {\i C. banaticum} subsp.{\i  alpinum} (Boiss.) Buschm.). Hairs of uppermost internode longer and more patent than in subsp. ({\b a}). Leaves up to 25 × 5 mm, hairy to nearly glabrous. 2n = c. 120, c. 144.{\i  From C. Greece to N. Albania and N. Bulgaria}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 19. C. julicum} Schellm.,{\i  Carinthia II}{\b  48:} 69 (1938) ({\i C. rupestre} Krasan, non Fischer). Densely caespitose perennial; upper part of stems glandular with patent hairs about as long as the diameter of the stem, the basal part slightly hairy to glabrous; upper internode not or only slightly elongate. Leaves 10-30 × 1-2·5 mm, sparsely ciliate towards the base, otherwise glabrous, with keeled midrib and revolute margins. Flowers 1-3; bracts lanceolate, acute, glabrous or almost so, the lower herbaceous, the upper with narrow scarious margins. Sepals 5-8 mm, acute, pubescent. Capsule up to twice as long as the sepals, with thickened outer and inner cell-walls; teeth erect, with revolute margins. Seeds 1·3-1·8 mm, verrucose. 2n = 36. {\i Calcareous rocks, }1700-2400{\i  m. S.E. Alps.} Au Ju.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 20. C. soleirolii} Ser. ex Duby,{\i  Bot. Gall.}{\b  1:} 87 (1928) (incl. {\i C. stenopetalum} Fenzl,{\i  C. thomasii} sensu Briq., non Ten.). Perennial 2·5-20 cm, more or less caespitose; stems pubescent and glandular, at least above. Leaves 10-20 × 1·5-4 mm, linear to linear-lanceolate, pubescent to glabrous. Flowers 1-7; bracts glandular-pubescent, ciliate, scarious at the apex. Sepals 7-9 mm, lanceolate, acute, glandular-pubescent, with scarious margins; petals obovate. Capsule with thin cell-walls; teeth erect, with flat margins. Seeds 1·5-1·8 mm; testa loose. 2n = 72.{\i  Rocks and screes above }1900{\i  m. Corse.} Co.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 21. C. scaranii} Ten., {\i Prodr. Fl. Nap}. xxvii (1811) ({\i C. hirsutum} auct. ital., non Crantz, {\i C. kochii} (Wettst.) Ascherson & Graebner). Perennial 10-25 cm; stems strongly pubescent and sometimes glandular. Leaves 15-55 × 4-10 mm, ovate-lanceolate to elliptical, usually densely pubescent on both sides. Bracts ciliate, with wide scarious margins. Sepals 6-8 mm; petals obcordate. Capsule c. 10 mm; teeth erect, with revolute margins. Seeds 0·9-1·3 mm, rugose; testa usually close. 2n = 36.{\i  Dry places; calcicole. • Italy, from Alpi Apuane southwards; Sicilia}. It Si.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 22. C. vagans} Lowe,{\i  Trans. Cambr. Philos. Soc.}{\b  6:} 548 (1838). Perennial 20-40 cm, with robust, ascending flowering stems; uppermost internodes not conspicuously longer than the others. Leaves 6-10 mm wide, 4-6 times as long as wide, lanceolate, hirsute. Flowers 7-11 in divaricate, glandular-pubescent inflorescence; bracts ovate, acute, with scarious margins at the apex. Sepals
\par

\par
168}
\par