{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 47 Inflorescence umbel-like; pedicels mostly shorter than sepals
\par
    ................................................................................................... {\b 3. maximum}
\par
47 Inflorescence a wide-spreading cyme;
   pedicels much longer than sepals ................................... {\b 40. transsilvanicum}
\par
45 Sepals 2-6 mm
\par
48 Leaves usually 30-70 mm
\par
49 Capsule-teeth revolute ........................................................ {\b 44. pauciflorum}
\par
49 Capsule-teeth erect
\par
50 Leaves sessile ..................................................................... {\b 41. subtriflorum}
\par
50 Lower cauline leaves petiolate ............................................. {\b 42. sylvaticum}
\par
48 Leaves usually not more than 25 mm
\par
51 Plant pulvinate, propagating by means of bulbil-like 
\par
   terminal buds (Arctic) .................................................................... {\b 28. regelii}
\par
51 Plant usually not pulvinate, without bulbil-like terminal buds
\par
52 Leafy stolons absent
\par
53 Seeds squamose ..................................................................... {\b 38. dinaricum}
\par
53 Seeds with low tubercles .................................................. {\b 39. carinthiacum}
\par
52 Leafy stolons present
\par
54 All bracts with scarious margins ............................................... {\b 24. arvense}
\par
54 Lowest bracts herbaceous
\par
55 Leaves usually not more than 5 mm wide; seeds 
\par
   finely tuberculate .................................................................. {\b 26. alsinifolium}
\par
55 Leaves usually more than 5 mm wide; seeds strongly 
\par
   tuberculate ........................................................................... {\b 41. subtriflorum}
\par
4  Annual, never with short non-flowering branches in axils of leaves
\par
56 Plant glabrous
\par
57 Cauline leaves connate ......................................................... {\b 6. perfoliatum}
\par
57 Cauline leaves not connate ........................................... {\b 54. semidecandrum}
\par
56 Plant hairy
\par
58 Pedicels with deflexed-appressed eglandular hairs,  without
\par
   glandular hairs
\par
59 Sepals with eglandular hairs protruding well beyond apex
\par
60 Petals equalling or longer than sepals; styles usually
\par
   at least 2 mm .............................................................................. {\b 45. illyricum}
\par
60 Petals shorter than sepals; styles 1-1·5 mm
\par
61 Stem 1·5-12 cm; outer sepals without or with only 
\par
   narrow scarious margins ........................................................... {\b 46. comatum}
\par
61 Stem 15-25 cm; sepals with scarious margins ............... {\b 49. brachypetalum}
\par
59 Sepals without eglandular hairs protruding beyond apex
\par
62 Pedicels 8-15 mm; petals ± equalling sepals .......................... {\b 45. illyricum}
\par
62 Pedicels 10-70 mm; petals longer than sepals
\par
63 Sepals 8-9·5 mm ................................................................. {\b 47. pedunculare}
\par
63 Sepals 4-5·5 mm .................................................................... {\b 48. scaposum}
\par
58 Pedicels without deflexed-appressed eglandular hairs, 
\par
   with or without glandular hairs
\par
64 Sepals with eglandular hairs protruding well beyond apex
\par
65 Pedicels shorter than sepals; flowers in dense clusters . {\b 50. glomeratum}
\par
65 Pedicels usually longer than sepals; flowers in open dichasia
\par
66 Sepals 10-11 mm .................................................................... {\b 45. illyricum}
\par
66 Sepals 3-6·5 mm ............................................................ {\b 49. brachypetalum}
\par
64 Sepals without eglandular hairs protruding beyond apex
\par
67 Petals ciliate at base
\par
68 Sepals with eglandular and glandular hairs ................................ {\b 51. rectum}
\par
68 Sepals with eglandular hairs only ............................................. {\b 5. nemorale}
\par
67 Petals glabrous
\par
69 Pedicels shorter than sepals; flowers clustered
\par
70 Sepals with eglandular hairs ..................................................... {\b 57. siculum}
\par
70 Sepals without eglandular hairs
\par
71 Sepals 2·5-7 mm; capsule not more than 15 mm ........................ {\b 58. gracile}
\par
71 Sepals 9-12 mm; capsule more than 15 mm ....................... {\b 7. dichotomum}
\par
69 Pedicels longer than sepals; flowers in open dichasia
\par
72 Bracts with scarious margin
\par
73 Upper bracts scarious at least in upper 1/3 ...................... {\b 54. semidecandrum}
\par
73 Upper bracts scarious at most in upper 1/5
\par
74 Leaves 12-27 mm; plant up to 22 cm; petals at 
\par
   least 1½ times as long as sepals .............................................. {\b 52. ligusticum}
\par
74 Leaves 4-15 mm; plant not more than 14 cm; petals 
\par
   not more than 1½ times as long as sepals ................................. {\b 55. pumilum}
\par
72 Bracts completely herbaceous
\par
75 Sepals glandular-hairy, without eglandular hairs
\par
76 Petals 1½-2 times as long as sepals ...................................... {\b 52. ligusticum}
\par
76 Petals shorter than to slightly longer than sepals ....................... {\b 58. gracile}
\par
75 Sepals with eglandular as well as glandular hairs
\par
77 Petals shorter than sepals ........................................................ {\b 56. diffusum}
\par
77 Petals longer than sepals 
\par
78 Petals entire ............................................................................ {\b 8. vourinense}
\par
78 Petals bifid
\par
79 Sepals obtuse; seeds 0·5-0·9 mm .......................................... {\b 52. ligusticum}
\par
79 Sepals acute; seeds 1-1·4 mm ............................................ {\b 53. smolikanum}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. C. cerastoides} (L.) Britton.{\i  Mem. Torrey Bot. Club}{\b  5:} 150 (1894) ({\i C. trigynum} Vill.,{\i  C. lapponicum} Crantz,{\i  C. lagascanum }C. Vicioso). Loosely matted perennial, usually glabrous except for a line of small hairs down each internode. Vegetative stems creeping; flowering stems 5-15 cm, decumbent or ascending; all stems rooting. Leaves 6-20 × 1-2·5 mm, pale green, somewhat fleshy, linear to oblong, obtuse, usually curving to one side. Flowers 1-3; pedicels up to 8 cm, slender, glandular; bracts herbaceous. Sepals 4-6 mm; petals deeply bifid, up to twice as long as the sepals; styles usually 3. Capsule oblong, straight, up to twice as long as the sepals; teeth patent. Seeds 0·5 mm, tuberculate. 2n = 38.{\i  Snow lies and other damp places. Arctic and subarctic Europe, southwards to N. England, principal mountain ranges of Europe.} Al Au Br Bu Cz Fa Fe Ga Ge Gr He Hs Is It Ju No Po Rm Rs(N,W)Sb Su.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. C. dubium} (Bast.) Guépin,{\i  Fl. Maine Loire} ed. 2,{\b  1}: 267 (1838) ({\i C. anomalum} Waldst. & Kit.). Annual with numerous erect, minutely viscid-glandular stems up to 40 cm. Leaves 10-30 × 1-2 mm, linear to linear-oblong, obtuse to subacute, glabrous or minutely viscid-glandular. Inflorescence of lax-flowered dichasia; pedicels up to 15 cm, slender, with numerous minute viscid glands; bracts herbaceous. Sepals 5-6 mm, ovate-lanceolate, the margin and apex scarious, minutely viscid-glandular; petals 1 1/3 times as long as the sepals, bifid; styles 3. Capsule twice as long as the sepals,
\par

\par
166}
\par