{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 {\i Mediterranean region.} Au Be Br Bu Cz Da Fe Ga Ge Gr Hb He Ho Hs Hu It Ju Lu No Po Rm Rs(N, B, C, W, E) Su Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 7. S. uliginosa} Murray, {\i Prodr. Stirp. Gotting.}{\b  55} (1770) ({\i S. alsine} Grimm, nom. inval.). Creeping perennial; stems up to 40 cm procumbent to ascending, quadrangular, glabrous, smooth. Leaves up to 15(-20) mm, elliptical to ovate-lanceolate, acute, sessile, or long-petiolate on overwintering vegetative shoots. Bracts scarious, with green midrib, not ciliate. Calyx infundibular at base; sepals 2·5-3·5 mm, exceeding petals; stamens 10. 2n = 24.{\i  Most of Europe northwards to} 67°{\i  N. in Norway, but rare in the east and only on mountains in the south.} Au Be Br Bu Co Cz Da Fa Fe Ga Ge Gr Hb He Ho Hs Hu It Ju Lu No Po Rm Rs(N, B, C, ?W, E) Su.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Very variable in habit and in the size and shape of the leaves.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 8. S. palustris} Retz.,{\i  Fl. Scand. Prodr.} ed. 2, 106 (1795) ({\i S. barthiana} Schur,{\i  S. dilleniana} Moench, {\i S. glauca} With.). Creeping perennial, entirely glabrous; stems up to 60 cm, erect, quadrangular, usually smooth. Leaves 15-20 mm, linear-lanceolate, smooth, glaucous or green. Inflorescence lax, usually 2- to 9-flowered; bracts scarious, with green midrib. Sepals 5-7 mm, lanceolate, acute; petals equalling or up to twice as long as sepals, bifid almost to base.{\i  N. & C. Europe, extending southwards to Corse, Bulgaria and Ukraine.} Au Be Br Bu Co Cz Da Fe Ga Ge Hb †He Ho Hu It Ju No Po Rm Rs(N, B, C, W, E) Su.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 9. S. fennica} (Murb.) Perf.,{\i  Bot. Zur.}{\b  2-3:} 152 (1941) ({\i S. palustris }var.{\i  fennica} Murb.). Like {\b 8} but the angles of the stems and the margins of the leaves rough with small papillae (as in {\b 15}); sepals 3-5 mm.{\i  N.E. Europe.} Fe Rs(N) Su.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 In N. Fennoscandia intermediates are found between{\b  8} and{\b  9}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 10. S. hebecalyx} Fenzl in Rupr.,{\i  Beitr. Pfl. Russ. Reich. }{\b 2:} 26 (1845) ({\i S. ponojensis} A. Arrh.). Like {\b 8} but leaves 8-25 mm, triangular-lanceolate, narrowed evenly to subacute or obtuse apex; bracts sometimes ciliate towards apex; sepals 4-5·5 mm, ciliate, ovate-lanceolate, pubescent beneath towards apex.{\i  River-banks and ground subject to flooding. N. & E. Russia.} Rs(N, C) [Fe]. (Siberia.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Very variable. See A. Kalela,{\i  Arch. Soc. Zool.-Bot. Fenn. Vanamo }{\b 9} (suppl.): 92-112 (1955).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 11. S. graminea} L.,{\i  Sp. Pl.} 422 (1753). Perennial; stems up to 90 cm, ascending, weak, diffuse, usually much-branched, quadrangular, smooth. Leaves up to 5 cm, linear- to elliptic-lanceolate, acute, smooth. Inflorescence lax, usually 10- to 60-flowered; bracts scarious, usually ciliate; flowers 5-12 mm in diameter, very variable. Sepals 3-7 mm, usually ciliate, sometimes pubescent beneath but only near base, glabrous (rarely puberulent) in upper ½; petals shorter than or exceeding sepals. 2n = 26, 39, 52.{\i  Europe, except the extreme south and many of the islands.} All except Az Bl Cr Fa Sa Sb Si. Introduced in Is.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 The flowers are large in hermaphrodite plants, and small in partly or completely male-sterile plants.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 ({\b 12-14}).{\b  S. longipes }group. Short-creeping or caespitose perennials. Leaves ovate to linear-lanceolate, sessile.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 This group has been reviewed by E. Hultén,{\i  Bot. Not.}{\b  1943:} 251 (1943), T.W. Böcher, {\i Bot. Tidsskr.}{\b  48:} 401 (1951) and C.C. Chinnappa & J.K. Morton, {\i Rhodora}{\b  78:} 488-502 (1976). The three species given below are morphologically quite distinct in Europe, but not in North America, and a satisfactory interpretation of the group cannot be made without further investigation throughout the range.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Sepals ciliate ......................................................................... {\b 14. ciliatisepala}
\par
1 Sepals not ciliate
\par
2 Leaves ovate to ovate-lanceolate, thick, rigid; short, condensed
\par
  non-flowering shoots usually present in axils of some upper leaves
\par
  ..................................................................................................... {\b 13. crassipes}
\par
2 Leaves linear-lanceolate, thin; short, condensed nonflowering 
\par
  shoots not present in axils of upper leaves .................................. {\b 12. longipes}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 12. S. longipes} Goldie,{\i  Edinb. Philos. Jour.}{\b  6:} 327 (1822) ({\i ?S. peduncularis} Bunge). Creeping or caespitose perennial; stems up to 25 cm, usually ascending, laxly branched, quadrangular; sometimes with non-flowering branches in axils of upper leaves, but never with the condensed shoots typical of {\b 13}. Leaves linear-lanceolate, thin, very acute. Inflorescence usually several-flowered. Sepals 3-7 mm, ovate-lanceolate, obtuse, not ciliate, glabrous; petals exceeding sepals. Ripe capsule 1½-2 times as long as sepals, dark brown or blackish; teeth straight. {\i Spitsbergen and Kolguev}. Rs(N) Sb. ({\i Arctic Asia and America}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 13. S. crassipes} Hultén, {\i Bot. Not. }{\b 1943:} 261 (1943) ({\i S. longipes} auct., {\i S. arctica }Schischkin). Shortly creeping or caespitose perennial; stems 2-10 cm, terete; short, condensed non-flowering shoots usually present in axils of some upper leaves. Leaves 3-15 × 2-4 mm, ovate to ovate-lanceolate, thick, rigid. Flowers usually solitary; pedicels short, stout. Sepals 3-4 mm, shorter than petals. Ripe capsule shorter than calyx, light brown; teeth recurved. 2n = 104.{\i  Arctic Europe; one station in C. Norway}. No Rs(N) Sb Su.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 14. S. ciliatisepala} Trautv. in Middendorff,{\i  Reise Nord. Öst. Sibir. }{\b 1}({\b 2}){\b 1:} 52 (1856) ({\i S. longipes} auct., {\i S. edwardsii} auct.). Very variable. Shortly creeping perennial; stems up to 20 cm, quadrangular, lacking condensed non-flowering shoots in axils of upper leaves. Leaves up to 10 mm, ovate to ovate-lanceolate. Inflorescence few-, rarely 1-flowered; bracts scarious, ciliate. Sepals ciliate, sometimes pubescent beneath but only near base. Ripe capsule exceeding calyx, dark brown or blackish.{\i  E. part of arctic Russia.} Rs(N). ({\i Circumpolar}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 In North America {\b 13} and {\b 14} cannot be separated satisfactorily and the two species should perhaps be treated at subspecific rank.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 15. S. longifolia} Muhl. ex Willd., {\i Enum. Pl. Horti Berol. }479 (1809) ({\i S. friesiana }Ser.). Creeping perennial; stems 5-25 cm, ascending, branched, quadrangular; angles of upper part of stem, margins of leaves and underside of midrib rough with small papillae. Leaves 5-40 mm, linear-lanceolate to linear. Inflorescence many-flowered; bracts scarious, often with green midrib. Sepals 2-4 mm, glabrous; petals equalling sepals. Ripe capsule slightly exceeding sepals. 2n = 26.{\i  C. Europe; Fennoscandia; C. & N. Russia.} Au Cz Fe Ge He It No Po Rm Rs(N, B, C, W, E) Su.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 In the opinion of some authors plants from Europe and Asia are distinct from plants from North America. They have been called {\b S. diffusa }Schlecht.,{\i  Ges. Naturf. Freunde Berlin Mag.}{\b  7:}195 (1815) but the characters used for separating them are unreliable.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 16. S. borealis} Bigelow,{\i  Fl. Boston.} ed. 2, 182 (1824) ({\i S. calycantha }auct. eur., non (Ledeb.) Bong.). Shortly creeping or caespitose perennial; stems 10- 45 cm, quadrangular, smooth or slightly rough. Leaves 10-30 × 2-8 mm, ovate- to linear-lanceolate, usually pale yellowish-green, the margins papillose and ciliate.
\par

\par
163}
\par