{\rtf1\ansi \deff4\deflang1033{\fonttbl{\f4\froman\fcharset0\fprq2 Times New Roman;}}{\colortbl;\red0\green0\blue0;\red0\green0\blue255;\red0\green255\blue255;\red0\green255\blue0;\red255\green0\blue255;\red255\green0\blue0;\red255\green255\blue0;\red255\green255\blue255;\red0\green0\blue128;\red0\green128\blue128;\red0\green128\blue0;\red128\green0\blue128;\red128\green0\blue0;\red128\green128\blue0;\red128\green128\blue128;\red192\green192\blue192;}{\stylesheet{\widctlpar \f4\fs20\lang2057 \snext0 Normal;}{\*\cs10 \additive Default Paragraph Font;}}{\info{\author dddd}{\operator dddd}{\creatim\yr1998\mo11\dy11\hr16\min32}{\revtim\yr1998\mo11\dy11\hr16\min32}{\version2}{\edmins0}{\nofpages4}{\nofwords968}{\nofchars5521}{\*\company  }{\vern57431}}\widowctrl\ftnbj\aenddoc\hyphcaps0 \fet0\sectd \linex0 {\*\pnseclvl1\pnucrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl2\pnucltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl3\pndec\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl4\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl5\pndec\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl6\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl7\pnlcrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl8\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl9\pnlcrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}
\pard\plain \ \f4\fs20\lang2057 {\fs28 (1920). Caespitose perennial; flowering stems 2-6 cm, glandular-pubescent. Leaves 5-12 mm, linear-oblong, obtuse, distinctly ciliate. Flowers solitary; pedicels 5-13 mm. Sepals 5-7 mm, linear-oblong, glandular-pubescent; petals usually 1\'bd-2 times as long as sepals. Capsule 2-2\'bd times as long as sepals. Seeds 2-2\'b75 mm, fringed dorsally with very long, fine tubercles. }{\i\fs28 Arctic and subarctic Russia.}{\fs28  Rs(N). (}{\i\fs28 N. Asia, N.W. America.}{\fs28 )
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 50. M. arctica}{\fs28  (Ser.) Graebner in Ascherson & Graebner, }{\i\fs28 Syn. Mitteleur. Fl.}{\b\fs28  5}{\fs28 (}{\b\fs28 1}{\fs28 ): 772 (1918). Densely caespitose perennial; flowering stems 5-9 cm, glandular-pubescent. Leaves 6-16 mm, narrowly linear, with cilia usually absent; leaves of flowering stems shorter and wider. Flowers solitary, rarely in pairs. Sepals 5-7 mm, linear-oblong, glandular-pubescent; petals twice as long as sepals. Capsule 1\'bd-2 times as long as sepals. Seeds 1-1\'b75 mm, bluntly tuberculate dorsally. }{\i\fs28 Arctic and N.E. Russia.}{\fs28  Rs(N). (}{\i\fs28 N. Asia, N.W. America.}{\fs28 )
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 51. M. biflora}{\fs28  (L.) Schinz & Thell., }{\i\fs28 Bull. Herb. Boiss.}{\fs28  ser. 2, }{\b\fs28 7:}{\fs28  404 (1907) (}{\i\fs28 Alsine biflora}{\fs28  (L.) Wahlenb.). Slender, caespitose perennial with flowering stems up to 10 cm. Leaves up to 10 mm, linear, obtuse, 1-veined. Flowers 1-3; pedicels and sepals sparsely pubescent. Sepals (3-)3\'b75-4\'b75(-5) mm, ovate-oblong, cucullate, 3-veined; petals 0\'b75 mm wide, 1-1\'bd times as long as sepals, occasionally pale lilac. Capsule 1\'bd times as long as sepals. Seeds 0\'b77 mm, smooth dorsally.}{\i\fs28  Damp, open habitats in the mountains, often in snow-patches. N. Europe, southwards to}{\fs28  59\'b0}{\i\fs28  N. in Norway; C. & E. Alps.}{\fs28  Au Fe He Is It No Rs(N) Sb Su.
\par 
\par M.}{\i\fs28  olonensis }{\fs28 (Bonnier) P. Fourn., described from W. France, has been shown by M. La\'ednz, }{\i\fs28 Candollea}{\b\fs28  24:}{\fs28  259 (1969), to be a variant of}{\i\fs28  Arenaria serpyllifolia}{\fs28 .
\par 
\par Sect. CHERLERIA (L.) Mattf. Perennial. Leaves somewhat fleshy. Sepals obtuse; petals absent or rudimentary; glands of outer stamens prominent, deeply divided.
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 52. M. sedoides}{\fs28  (L.) Hiern,}{\i\fs28  Jour. Bot. }{\fs28 (}{\i\fs28 London}{\fs28 ) }{\b\fs28 37:}{\fs28  321 (1899) (}{\i\fs28 Alsine sedoides}{\fs28  (L.) Kittel,}{\i\fs28  A. cherleri}{\fs28  Fenzl). Glabrous, densely pulvinate perennial. Leaves 3\'b75-6 mm, densely imbricate, linear-lanceolate, 3-veined, furrowed above; margins smooth or ciliate-scabrid. Flowers solitary, scarcely exserted from cushion; pedicels up to 3(-5) mm. Sepals 2-5 mm, linear; either the stamens or the ovary may abort. Capsule 1\'bd-2 times as long as sepals. Seeds 0\'b78-1 mm, smooth. 2n = 26, 51-52.}{\i\fs28  Mountain ledges, exposed ridges, moraines. \bullet  Pyrenees; Alps; Carpathians; mountains of W. Jugoslavia; Scotland.}{\fs28  Au Br Cz Ga Ge He Hs It Ju Po Rm.
\par 
\par Subgen. }{\b\fs28 Rhodalsine}{\fs28  (Gay) Graebner. Perennial. Flowers usually pale pink. Radicle of embryo accumbent.
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 53. M. geniculata}{\fs28  (Poiret) Thell.,}{\i\fs28  Fl. Adv. Montpellier}{\fs28  232 (1912) (}{\i\fs28 Rhodalsine geniculata}{\fs28  (Poiret) F.N. Williams; incl. }{\i\fs28 M. procumbens}{\fs28  (Vahl) Graebner). Glandular-pubescent perennial; stems up to 30 cm, woody at base, procumbent and ascending, geniculate, much-branched. Leaves (4-)6-10(-12) \'d7 (0\'b75-)1-2(-2\'b75) mm, elliptical to linear, with 1 prominent vein beneath. Flowers axillary and in terminal cymes; pedicels 1\'bd-6 times as long as sepals. Sepals 3-4 mm, oblong-ovate, usually obtuse, appearing veinless, with a wide, scarious margin; petals and capsule about equalling sepals. Seeds 0\'b75-0\'b78 mm, the margin slightly rugose.}{\i\fs28  Dry, sandy places, often by the sea. W. Mediterranean region, S. Portugal.}{\fs28  Bl ?Gr Hs It Lu Sa Si.
\par 
\par Very variable, particularly in leaf-shape and pubescence.
\par 
\par }
\pard \qc\ {\fs28  }{\b\fs28 4.               Honkenya}{\fs28                 Ehrh.
\par }{\fs24  By G. Halliday.
\par 
\par }
\pard \ {\fs28 Like}{\i\fs28  Minuartia}{\fs28  but succulent; capsule globose; seeds more than 3 mm, pyriform. (}{\i\fs28 Ammadenia}{\fs28  Rupr.)
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 1. H. peploides}{\fs28  (L.) Ehrh., }{\i\fs28 Beitr. Naturk.}{\b\fs28  2:}{\fs28  181 (1788) (}{\i\fs28 Ammadenia peploides}{\fs28  (L.) Rupr.,}{\i\fs28  Arenaria peploides}{\fs28  L., }{\i\fs28 Minuartia peploides}{\fs28  (L.) Hiern). Glabrous, hermaphrodite or dioecious perennial with trailing, succulent stems rooting at the nodes. Leaves 5-20 \'d7 5-10 mm, ovate to oblong, 1-veined, acute. Flowers axillary and solitary, and in 1- to 6-flowered terminal cymes; pedicels usually 2-6 mm. Sepals 3-5 mm, ovate, 1-veined; petals greenish-white, equalling sepals in male flowers, shorter than sepals in female flowers. Capsule (4-)6-10 mm wide, globose, twice as long as sepals. Seeds 3-4(-4\'b75) mm, usually 3-8, dark reddish-brown, shiny, almost smooth. 2n = 66, 68-70.}{\i\fs28  Maritime sands and shingle, very rarely inland. Coasts of N. & W. Europe, southwards to C. Portugal; Ural}{\fs28 . Be Br Da Fa Fe Ga Ge Hb Ho Hs Is Lu No Po Rs (N, B, C) Sb Su.
\par 
\par Plants from Iceland and arctic Europe usually have a more diffuse growth, pedicels 4-15 mm, and capsules with usually 4-12 seeds. They are best treated as var.}{\i\fs28  diffusa}{\fs28  (Hornem.) Ostenf.
\par 
\par }
\pard \qc\ {\fs28  }{\b\fs28 5.                  Bufonia}{\fs28                   L.}{\fs24  
\par By G. Halliday.
\par 
\par }
\pard \ {\fs28 Annual or perennial herbs, rarely biennial; stems usually branched from base; flowering stems erect. Leaves linear-setaceous, appressed, those of the flowering stems shorter than internodes. Inflorescence a cymose panicle; pedicels short; flowers self-pollinated. Sepals 4, the 2 outer being shorter, lanceolate, with a hyaline margin; petals 4, equalling or shorter than sepals, white; stamens 2-8; styles 2. Capsule included, dehiscing with 2 teeth. Seeds 1 or 2, oblong, compressed, tuberculate.
\par 
\par All species occur in dry, sandy or rocky habitats.
\par 
\par }
\pard \li200\ {\fs28 1 Annual, or rarely biennial, without vegetative stems at time of flowering
\par 2 Sepals with 5 veins, 3 of which continue into the upper \'bd;
\par   seeds usually more than 1\'b75 mm, with prominent,
\par   obtuse tubercles .......................................................................... }{\b\fs28 1. paniculata}{\fs28 
\par 2 Sepals 3-veined; veins confluent in upper \'bd; seeds
\par   1-1\'b75 mm, with small, acute tubercles ......................................... }{\b\fs28 2. tenuifolia}{\fs28 
\par 1 Perennial, with vegetative stems at time of flowering
\par 3 Flowering stems usually unbranched, arcuate ................................. }{\b\fs28 7. stricta}{\fs28 
\par 3 Flowering stems branched above, straight
\par 4 Petals exceeding outer sepals ................................................. }{\b\fs28 4. macropetala}{\fs28 
\par 4 Petals not exceeding outer sepals
\par 5 Inflorescence dense; branches strict; flowers overlapping ...... }{\b\fs28 3. tuberculata}{\fs28 
\par 5 Inflorescence lax; branches usually divergent; flowers not overlapping
\par 6 Outer sepals 2-2\'b75 mm; seeds 1-1\'b73 mm ............................ }{\b\fs28 5. willkommiana}{\fs28 
\par 6 Outer sepals 3-3\'b75 mm; seeds 1\'b75-2 mm ...................................... }{\b\fs28 6. perennis}{\fs28 
\par 
\par }
\pard \ {\fs28    }{\b\fs28 1. B. paniculata}{\fs28  F. Dubois in Delarbre,}{\i\fs28  Fl. Auvergne }{\fs28 ed. 2, 300 (1800) (}{\i\fs28 B. macrosperma}{\fs28  Gay ex Mutel). Annual up to 20 cm, usually richly and divaricately branched. Sepals lanceolate, acute; veins 5, distinct, 3 continuing almost to the apex; petals almost equalling outer sepals. Capsule 2-3 mm. Seeds 1\'b75-2\'b725 mm, oblong-
\par 
\par 160}
\par }