{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 elliptical; margin with prominent, obtuse tubercles; faces rugose.{\i  S.W. Europe, extending to C. France and Switzerland; isolated stations in C. Italy and Greece}. Ga Gr He Hs It.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. B. tenuifolia} L.,{\i  Sp. Pl.} 123 (1753) ({\i B. parviflora} Griseb.). Like {\b 1} but usually less robust and smaller in all its parts. Sepals strongly acuminate; veins 3, confluent in upper ½; petals ½ as long as outer sepals; stamens 2 or 3. Capsule 1·5 mm. Seeds 1-1·5 mm; margin with small, acute tubercles; faces almost smooth.{\i  S. Europe, extending north-eastwards to E. Ukraine}. Bu Ga Gr Hs It Rm Rs(W, K).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 The plants from Ukraine include specimens intermediate between {\b 1} and {\b 2}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 3. B. tuberculata} Loscos, {\i Trat. Pl. Arag.}{\b  3}, Suppl. 8: 104 (1886). Erect perennial. Leaves setaceous, serrulate, glaucous. Inflorescence dense; branches strict; flowers usually overlapping. Sepals lanceolate, the outer 3·5-4·5 mm; veins usually 5; petals and capsule slightly shorter than the outer sepals. Seeds 1·75-2 mm, 1 or 2 per capsule; margin with prominent, oblong-cylindrical tubercles. •{\i  E. Spain}. Hs.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 The available descriptions of this species are inadequate, and it may prove to be only a perennial variant of {\b 1}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 4. B. macropetala} Willk.,{\i  Flora} ({\i Regensb}.){\b  34:} 604 (1851). Perennial with glabrous, erect stems branched above. Leaves linear-subulate; margins ciliolate. Sepals lanceolate, the outer 3·5-4·5 mm; veins 5, the outer often obscure; petals oblong, about equalling inner sepals. Capsule often 1-seeded. Seeds tuberculate on margin. • {\i W. & C. Spain.} Hs.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 5. B. willkommiana} Boiss.,{\i  Diagn. Pl. Or. Nov.}{\b  3}({\b 1}): 83 (1853). Perennial with robust, erect stems, woody below, shortly branched above. Leaves linear-setaceous, margins ciliolate. Inflorescence lax; cymes 1- to 3(4)-flowered; branches patent. Sepals ovate-lanceolate, the outer 2-2·5 mm; veins 3-5; petals and capsule equalling outer sepals. Seeds 1-1·3 mm, 1 or 2 per capsule; margin with low tubercles. •{\i  S. Spain, E. Portugal.} Hs Lu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 6. B. perennis} Pourret, {\i Mém. Acad. Sci. Toulouse}{\b  3:} 309 (1788). Perennial with robust stems up to 30 cm. Leaves rigid, erect, linear-setaceous, the basal 1-2 cm; margins serrulate. Inflorescence lax; cymes 1- or 2-flowered; branches patent. Sepals lanceolate-acuminate, the outer 3-3·5 mm, 5-veined below; petals about equalling outer sepals; stamens 8. Seeds 1·5-2 mm, 1 or 2 per capsule, with prominent tubercles on margin; faces rugose. •{\i  S. France, N.E. Spain.} Ga Hs.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 7. B. stricta} (Sibth. & Sm.) Gürke in K. Richter,{\i  Pl. Eur.}{\b  2:} 247 (1899). Perennial with erect, arcuate, slender, usually unbranched flowering stems up to 20 cm, woody below. Leaves of flowering stems short, subulate, often closely appressed. Flowers few, often 1. Outer sepals 3·5-4 mm; veins 3-5; petals equalling outer sepals. Seeds small; margins tuberculate; faces smooth.{\i  Limestone rocks and stony ground. • Mountains of S. Greece, Kriti}. Cr Gr.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 The flowering stems bear a striking, superficial resemblance to those of {\i Parapholis strigosa} (Gramineae).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 6.               Stellaria}               L.
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc  By A.O. Chater & V.H. Heywood.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Annual or perennial herbs. Inflorescence usually a dichasium; flowers rarely solitary or 2 together; bracts scarious or herbaceous. Sepals 5; petals 5 or fewer, or absent, white, rarely greenish, usually deeply bifid; stamens 10(11) or fewer or absent; nectaries usually present; styles 3. Fruit a globose to cylindrical capsule, dehiscing with 6 teeth usually to about the middle.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 At least the lower leaves distinctly petiolate; leaves never
\par
  linear-lanceolate or linear
\par
2 Stems hairy all round
\par
3 Petals equalling or slightly exceeding sepals ................. ({\b 3-5}).{\b  media} group
\par
3 Petals about twice as long as sepals
\par
4 Sepals broadly ovate, pubescent beneath all over, the margins 
\par
  narrowly scarious; ripe capsule equalling or only slightly  
\par
  exceeding sepals .......................................................................... {\b 2. bungeana}
\par
4 Sepals lanceolate, pubescent only at base, the margins broadly 
\par
  scarious; ripe capsule 1½-2 times as long as sepals .................... {\b 1. nemorum}
\par
2 Stems with a single line of hairs down each internode,
\par
  rarely with 2 lines or glabrous
\par
5 Stems quadrangular; bracts scarious ........................................... {\b 7. uliginosa}
\par
5 Stems terete; bracts herbaceous ..................................... ({\b 3-5}).{\b  media} group
\par
1 All leaves sessile
\par
6 Bracts herbaceous
\par
7 Petals bifid to about half-way or less
\par
8 Leaves 30-80 mm ......................................................................... {\b 6. holostea}
\par
8 Leaves not more than 10 mm ................................. ({\b 12-14}). {\b longipes} group
\par
7 Petals bifid almost to base
\par
9 Bracts and leaves ciliate; largest leaves usually 15 mm 
\par
  or more ......................................................................................... {\b 16. borealis}
\par
9 Bracts and leaves not ciliate; leaves usually less than 15 mm
\par
10 Leaves 2-8 mm; sepals 3·5-6 mm, equalling ripe capsule; 
\par
   seeds ± smooth .......................................................................... {\b 18. humifusa}
\par
10 Leaves 6-15(-25) mm; sepals 2-3 mm, shorter than ripe capsule;
\par
   seeds rugose ............................................................................ {\b 17. crassifolia}
\par
6  Bracts scarious, with green midrib, or entirely scarious
\par
11 Angles of upper part of stems or margins of leaves rough with papillae
\par
12 Leaf-margins smooth; sepals 5-7 mm ........................................ {\b 8. palustris}
\par
12 Leaf-margins rough with small papillae; sepals not more than 5 mm
\par
13 Petals up to twice as long as sepals .............................................. {\b 9. fennica}
\par
13 Petals equalling sepals ............................................................ {\b 15. longifolia}
\par
11 Stems and margins of leaves smooth
\par
14 Leaves elliptical, ovate or ovate-lanceolate, usually less than 15 mm
\par
15 Stems terete; leaves thick, rigid ............................ ({\b 12-14}). {\b longipes} group
\par
15 Stems quadrangular; leaves thin
\par
16 Sepals not ciliate; ripe capsule pale brown ............................... {\b 7. uliginosa}
\par
16 Sepals ciliate; ripe capsule dark brown, or blackish
\par
   ................................................................................ ({\b 12--14}). {\b longipes} group
\par
14 Leaves attenuate-triangular to linear-lanceolate, usually 
\par
   more than 15 mm
\par
17 Sepals pubescent beneath towards apex ................................ {\b 10. hebecalyx}
\par
17 Sepals glabrous (rarely puberulent) towards apex
\par
18 Inflorescence usually 10- to 60-flowered;
\par 
   bracts usually ciliate ................................................................. {\b 11. graminea}
\par
18 Inflorescence usually 2- to 9-flowered; bracts not ciliate
\par

\par
161}
\par