{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 5-7 mm, hairy; outer ciliate in basal ½ with scarious margins at the apex; inner with scarious margins (0·2-0·3 mm wide) from base to apex; petals 9-10 mm. Capsule 6-8 mm; teeth erect to somewhat patent, with revolute margins. Seeds 0·9-1·4 mm, acutely tuberculate especially along the edges.{\i  Açores} ({\i Sao Jorge}). Az. ({\i Madeira}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 The Açores plants belong to var.{\i  ciliatum }Tutin & E.F. Warburg. Var. {\i vagans} is confined to Madeira.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 23. C. azoricum} Hochst. ex Seub.,{\i  Fl. Azor.} 45 (1844). Like {\b 22} but more hirsute; leaves less than 4 times as long as wide, spathulate- to ovate-lanceolate, with yellowish hairs; inflorescence narrower and more compact; seeds 0·7-1 mm. •{\i  Açores} ({\i Corvo, Flores}). Az.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Perhaps not specifically distinct from{\b  22}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 24. C. arvense} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 438 (1753). ({\i ?C. strictum} L.). Perennial 5-30 cm, loosely matted to caespitose, with procumbent leafy stems freely rooting at the lower internodes. Leaves linear-acicular to lanceolate-elliptical. Bracts ciliate, with scarious margins; petals 2(-3) times as long as the sepals. Seeds seldom more than 1 mm, tuberculate.{\i  Most of Europe, but only as a naturalized alien in Fennoscandia.} Al Au Be Br Bu Cz *Da Ga Ge Hb He Ho Hs Hu It Ju Po Rm Rs(N, B, C, W, E) Su [Fe No].
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Lower leaves attenuate, shortly petiolate; seeds 1·1-1·7 mm
\par
2 Sepals lanceolate, subacute ................................ ({\b e}) subsp.{\b  lerchenfeldianum}
\par
2 Sepals ovate-lanceolate, subobtuse ............................ ({\b f}) subsp.{\b  glandulosum}
\par
1 Leaves sessile; seeds not more than 1 mm
\par
3 Plants mostly loosely matted; non-flowering shoots nearly 
\par
  as long as flowering stems .................................................. ({\b a}) subsp.{\b  arvense}
\par
3 Plants ± caespitose; non-flowering shoots much shorter than
\par
  flowering stems
\par
4 Stems seldom more than 10 cm; capsule as long as or  
\par
  slightly longer than sepals ................................................ ({\b b}) subsp{\b . strictum}
\par
4 Stems usually 10-30 cm; capsule up to twice as long as sepals
\par
5 Non-flowering axillary shoots long; leaves up to
\par
  40 mm, linear-filiform ............................................. ({\b c}) subsp.{\b  suffruticosum}
\par
5 Non-flowering axillary shoots short; leaves seldom
\par
  more than 20 mm, linear to lanceolate ................................. ({\b d}) subsp.{\b  molle}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp.{\b  arvense} : Stems usually 10-20 cm. Leaves 10-30 × 1·5-3 mm, linear-lanceolate. Flowers 3-7. Sepals 5-7 mm. 2n = 72. {\i Throughout the range of the species}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp.{\b  strictum} Gaudin,{\i  Fl. Helv.}{\b  3:} 245 (1828) ({\i C. strictu} Haenke, non L.): Plants 3-10 cm, caespitose. Leaves 6-15 × 1-4 mm, lanceolate. Flowers usually 1-3. Sepals 4-6 mm; petals up to 12 mm. 2n = 36.{\i  Pyrenees; ,Alps, Appennini, mountains of W. Jugoslavia}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b c}) Subsp.{\b  suffruticosum} (L.) Hegi,{\i  Ill. Fl. Mitteleur.}{\b  3:} 375 (1911): Plant usually 10-30 cm, mat-forming, with weak stems. Leaves 10-40 mm, linear-filiform. Bracts with wide scarious margins. Sepals 5-7 mm. 2n = 36, 72, 108. •{\i   Alps, Appennini}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b d}) Subsp.{\b  molle} (Vill.) Arcangeli,{\i  Comp. Fl. Ital.} 99 (1882) (incl. subsp. matrense (Kit.) Jáv., subsp.{\i  calcicola} (Schur) Borza, subsp.{\i  pallasii} (Vest) Walters, subsp.{\i  rigidum} (Scop.) Hegi, subsp.{\i  tiliatum} (Waldst. & Kit.) Hayek,{\i  C. ciliatum} Waldst. & Kit., {\i C. pallasii }Vest): Plant densely matted and stiff. Bracts with wide, scarious margins. Sepals 5-8 mm. 2n = c. 72. {\i E.C. Europe; Balkan peninsula}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b e}) Subsp.{\b  lerchenfeldianum} (Schur) Ascherson & Graebner,{\i  Syn. Mitteleur. Fl.}{\b  5}({\b 1}): 611 (1917) ({\i C. lerchenfeldianum} Schur): Stems 10-30 mm. Lower leaves 10-20 × 2-3 mm, attenuate; upper leaves 10-20 × 6 mm, with rounded base, almost glabrous. Bracts scarious at the apex. Sepals 5-7 mm; petals twice as long as the sepals. Capsule 8 mm; teeth almost flat.{\i  • Carpathians, N.E. Jugoslavia}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b f}) Subsp.{\b  glandulosum} (Kit.) Soó, {\i Acta Geobot. Hung.}{\b  2:} 237 (1939) ({\i C. tatrae} Borbás): Like subsp. ({\b e}) but more densely caespitose and with stems 8-15 cm; bracts with narrow scarious margins; sepals wider and more obtuse; petals wider and up to 3 times as long as the calyx; capsule up to twice as long as the sepals. {\i W. Carpathians} ({\i Tatra}).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b C. uralense} Grubov, {\i Nov. Syst. Pl. Vase.} ({\i Leningrad}) {\b 1968: }104 (1968), described from sandy banks of River Ufa in E.C. Russia, and said to differ by its longer capsules and larger leaves up to 8 mm wide, is probably a variant of subsp. ({\b a}).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Plants from Morocco have been referred to subsp. ({\b b}), but these require further investigation.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 25. C. thomasii} Ten.,{\i  Prodr. Fl. Nap., Suppl.}{\b  4:} 21 (1823) ({\i C. arvense} subsp.{\i  thomasii} (Ten.) Rouy & Fouc.; incl.{\i  C. viscatum} (Montelucci) Jalas). Plant compact, stems 2-6 cm. Leaves more or less imbricate, 4-10 × 1-3 mm, linear to lanceolate, obtuse, hairy. Flowers 1-3. Sepals 5-6 mm; petals 8-10 mm. Capsule somewhat longer than the sepals. 2n = 36. {\i Calcareous rocks,} 1700-2900{\i  m. C. Appennini}. It.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 26. C. alsinifolium} Tausch, {\i Syll. Pl. Nov. Ratisbon.} ({\i Königl. Baier. Bot. Ges.}){\b  2:} 243 (1828). Caespitose perennial 5-25 cm; non-flowering axillary shoots often lacking. Leaves of creeping basal stems 5-15 × 2-6 mm, ovate-elliptical, somewhat hairy to almost glabrous. Flowers few to many, in lax cymes; lowest bracts herbaceous. Sepals 3-4 mm; petals up to 2½ times as long as the sepals. Capsule up to 2½ times as long as the sepals, slightly curved or almost straight.{\i  On serpentine. • W. Czechoslovakia} ({\i near Mariánske Lazne}). Cz.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 27. C. gorodkovianum} Schischkin,{\i  Fl. URSS}{\b  6:} 883 (1936) ({\i C. jenisejense} Hultén, {\i C. beeringianum} sensu Schischkin, non Cham. & Schlecht.). Perennial 12-30 cm; flowering stems slender, with long internodes, sparsely hairy with short patent hairs, or subglabrous; basal branches stolon-like, leafy, with axillary bulbils usually present. Leaves 10 × 4 mm, elliptical, acute, pubescent at least on the margins and veins. Flowers 3-7, in lax cymes; pedicels glandular-pubescent; upper bracts small, acute, with narrow, scarious margins. Sepals 3-5 mm, acute, with scarious margins; petals about twice as long as the sepals. Capsule 8-12 mm, curved; teeth erect or somewhat patent, with revolute margins. Seeds c. 1 mm, strongly tuberculate.{\i  Arctic and subarctic Russia.} Rs (N).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b C. beeringianum} Cham. & Schlecht.,{\i  Linnaea}{\b  1:} 62 (1826) ({\i C. bialynickii} Tolm.) is like {\b 27} but more compact and low-growing, with rigid, erect flowering stems, lacking long runners and axillary bulbils, and petals only slightly longer than the obtuse sepals. It has been recorded from Poluostrov Kanin but the identity of specimens available is not clear.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 28. C. regelii} Ostenf.,{\i  Skr. Vid.-Selsk. Christ.}{\b  1908}({\b 8}): 10 (1910). Densely caespitose, subglabrous perennial 1-5 cm, often not flowering, and propagating by means of thin, more or less subterranean runners with deciduous, bulbil-like terminal buds. Leaves 3-7 × 1·5-3 mm, roundish to broadly spathulate or el-
\par

\par
169}
\par