{\rtf1\ansi \deff4\deflang1033{\fonttbl{\f4\froman\fcharset0\fprq2 Times New Roman;}}{\colortbl;\red0\green0\blue0;\red0\green0\blue255;\red0\green255\blue255;\red0\green255\blue0;\red255\green0\blue255;\red255\green0\blue0;\red255\green255\blue0;\red255\green255\blue255;\red0\green0\blue128;\red0\green128\blue128;\red0\green128\blue0;\red128\green0\blue128;\red128\green0\blue0;\red128\green128\blue0;\red128\green128\blue128;\red192\green192\blue192;}{\stylesheet{\widctlpar \f4\fs20\lang2057 \snext0 Normal;}{\*\cs10 \additive Default Paragraph Font;}}{\info{\author dddd}{\operator dddd}{\creatim\yr1998\mo11\dy11\hr16\min34}{\revtim\yr1998\mo11\dy11\hr16\min35}{\version2}{\edmins1}{\nofpages4}{\nofwords979}{\nofchars5582}{\*\company  }{\vern57431}}\widowctrl\ftnbj\aenddoc\hyphcaps0 \fet0\sectd \linex0 {\*\pnseclvl1\pnucrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl2\pnucltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl3\pndec\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl4\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl5\pndec\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl6\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl7\pnlcrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl8\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl9\pnlcrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}
\pard\plain \ \f4\fs20\lang2057 {\fs28 Flowers few or solitary; bracts herbaceous, ciliate. Sepals 2-3\'b75 mm; petals shorter than sepals, or absent. Ripe capsule nearly twice as long as sepals. 2n = 52.}{\i\fs28  N. Europe, southwards to S. Norway.}{\fs28  Fe Is No Rs(N) Su.
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 17. S. crassifolia}{\fs28  Ehrh.,}{\i\fs28  Hannover. Mag.}{\b\fs28  8:}{\fs28  116 (1784). Creeping perennial; stems 3-45 cm, usually ascending, laxly branched, quadrangular, glabrous, smooth. Leaves 6-25 \'d7 2-6 mm, ovate to linear-lanceolate, acute, sessile, usually somewhat fleshy, margins smooth, not ciliate. Flowers solitary or in few-flowered leafy cymes; bracts herbaceous, not ciliate; flowers 5-8 mm in diameter. Sepals 2-3 mm, linear-lanceolate, acute; petals exceeding sepals. Ripe capsule exceeding and up to twice as long as sepals. Seeds rugose. 2n = 26.}{\i\fs28  N. Europe, extending locally southwards to S. Germany and C. Ukraine.}{\fs28  Da Fe Ge Is No Po Rs(N, B, C, W, E) Su.
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 18. S. humifusa}{\fs28  Rottb.,}{\i\fs28  Kong. Danske Vid. Selsk.}{\b\fs28  10:}{\fs28  447 (1770). Like }{\b\fs28 17}{\fs28  but stems usually procumbent, matted; leaves 2-8 \'d7 1-4 mm, usually crowded; plant often reproducing by vegetative buds in axils of leaves; flowers 8-16 mm in diameter; sepals 3\'b75-6 mm, ovate-lanceolate, subacute; ripe capsule usually equalling sepals; seeds almost smooth. 2n = 26.}{\i\fs28  Coasts of arctic and subarctic Europe, southwards to}{\fs28  64\'b0}{\i\fs28  N. in N.W. Russia.}{\fs28  ?Fe Is No Rs(N) Sb.
\par 
\par }
\pard \qc\ {\fs28  }{\b\fs28 7.             Pseudostellaria}{\fs28                 Pax
\par }{\fs24  By A.O. Chater.
\par 
\par }
\pard \ {\fs28 Like}{\i\fs28  Stellaria,}{\fs28  but bearing small napiform tubers laterally on the rhizomes. (}{\i\fs28 Krascheninnikowia }{\fs28 Turcz., non Gueldenst.)
\par 
\par The other species in this genus are from Asia, and are further characterized by small, fertile cleistogamous flowers, without petals and with 4 sepals (the larger outer pair enclosing the smaller inner pair), which are borne on the lower parts of the plant. The European species rarely produces these cleistogamous flowers and, since its petaliferous flowers are probably always sterile, propagation is largely by the tubers.
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 1. P. europaea}{\fs28  Schaeftlein,}{\i\fs28  Phyton }{\fs28 (}{\i\fs28 Austria}{\fs28 ) }{\b\fs28 7:}{\fs28  190 (1957) (}{\i\fs28 Stellaria bulbosa}{\fs28  Wulfen, non}{\i\fs28  Pseudostellaria bulbosa}{\fs28  (Nakai) Ohwi). Perennial herb; stems 5-20 cm, usually simple, terete, with 1 line of hairs. Leaves sessile, elliptical to lanceolate, acute. Flowers 1-3, 9-13 mm in diameter. Sepals 4-7 mm; petals equalling or exceeding sepals, bifid to less than half-way. 2n = 32. }{\i\fs28 Damp and shady places. \bullet  S.E. Austria and N. Jugoslavia; N.W. Italy}{\fs28  (}{\i\fs28 Vercelli prov}{\fs28 .). Au It Ju.
\par 
\par }
\pard \qc\ {\fs28  }{\b\fs28 8.             Holosteum }{\fs28                       L.
\par }{\fs24  By S.M. Walters & J.R. Akeroyd.
\par 
\par }
\pard \ {\fs28 Annual. Inflorescence terminal, umbellate. Petals irregularly toothed; styles 3. Fruit a cylindrical capsule. Seeds asymmetrically reniform and laterally expanded.
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 1. H. umbellatum}{\fs28  L., }{\i\fs28 Sp. Pl.}{\fs28  88 (1753). Erect, simple or branched, 5-20(-35) cm, usually glaucous towards base, and variably glandular-viscid or with simple eglandular hairs. Basal leaves oblanceolate, narrowed into petiole; cauline elliptical, sessile; all leaves acute, entire. Flowers in simple umbels on slender pedicels of varying length; pedicels deflexed in young fruiting stage. Petals white or pale pink, about twice as long as sepals. Capsule cylindrical, somewhat narrowed above, twice as long as sepals. Seeds 0\'b75-1 mm, reddish-brown. }{\i\fs28 Light, often sandy, soils, usually in disturbed habitats. C., E. & S. Europe, extending northwards to S. Sweden.}{\fs28  Al Au Be \'86Br Bu *Co Cr Cz Da Ga Ge Gr He Ho Hs Hu It Ju Lu Po Rm Rs(B, C, W, K, E) Sa Si Su Tu.
\par 
\par Very variable in habit and indumentum.
\par 
\par }
\pard \li200\ {\fs28 1 Glandular hairs absent; seeds more than 1 mm ................ (}{\b\fs28 c}{\fs28 ) subsp. }{\b\fs28 hirsutum}{\fs28 
\par 1 Glandular hairs present; seeds up to 1 mm
\par 2 Lower part of stem glabrous; stamens usually 3-5 ..... (}{\b\fs28 a}{\fs28 ) subsp.}{\b\fs28  umbellatum}{\fs28 
\par 2 Lower part of stem glandular-viscid; stamens usually 8-10
\par   ....................................................................................... (}{\b\fs28 b}{\fs28 ) subsp. }{\b\fs28 glutinosum}{\fs28 
\par 
\par }
\pard \ {\fs28  (}{\b\fs28 a}{\fs28 ) Subsp.}{\b\fs28  umbellatum}{\fs28 : Glandular hairs more or less confined to middle part of stem and margin of leaves. Stamens usually 3-5. Seeds 0\'b75-1 mm. 2n = 20.}{\i\fs28  Throughout the range of the species}{\fs28 .
\par  (}{\b\fs28 b}{\fs28 ) Subsp.}{\b\fs28  glutinosum}{\fs28  (Bieb.) Nyman,}{\i\fs28  Consp.}{\fs28  112 (1878) (}{\i\fs28 H. glutinosum}{\fs28  (Bieb.) Fischer & C.A. Meyer,}{\i\fs28  H. umbellatum}{\fs28  subsp.}{\i\fs28  heuffelii}{\fs28  (Wierzb.) Dost\'e1l): Whole plant, except leaf-surfaces, more or less viscid with a dense glandular pubescence. Stamens usually 8-10. Seeds 0\'b75-1 mm.}{\i\fs28  Mainly in S.E. Europe}{\fs28 .
\par  (}{\b\fs28 c}{\fs28 ) Subsp.}{\b\fs28  hirsutum}{\fs28  (Mutel) Breistr., }{\i\fs28 Candollea}{\b\fs28  25:}{\fs28  95 (1970): Glandular hairs absent; margin and often upper surface of leaves with simple hairs. Stamens usually 10. Seeds 1\'b72-1\'b73 mm. \bullet }{\i\fs28  S.E. France}{\fs28 .
\par 
\par }
\pard \qc\ {\fs28  }{\b\fs28 9.            Cerastium}{\fs28                   L.
\par }{\fs24  By J. Jalas (perennial species); }{\i\fs24 C. fontanum,}{\fs24  M.B. Wyse Jackson;
\par  P.D. Sell and \'86F.H. Whitehead (annual  species).
\par 
\par }
\pard \ {\fs28 Herbs, sometimes slightly woody at the base, usually hairy. Flowers usually in cymose inflorescences, sometimes solitary. Sepals free. Petals white, usually bifid or emarginate, sometimes absent; stamens 5-10, rarely fewer; nectaries present; styles usually 5, opposite the sepals, sometimes 3, 4 or 6. Fruit a cylindrical or oblong capsule, often more or less curved, dehiscing with twice as many teeth as styles. Seeds numerous, spherical or reniform.
\par 
\par Literature: A. Buschmann, }{\i\fs28 Feddes Repert.}{\b\fs28  43:}{\fs28 118-143 (1938). H. Gartner,}{\i\fs28  Feddes Repert.}{\fs28  (}{\i\fs28 Beih}{\fs28 .) }{\b\fs28 113:}{\fs28  1-96 (1939). E. Hult\'e9n,}{\i\fs28  Svensk Bot. Tidskr.}{\b\fs28  50:}{\fs28  411-495 (1956). J. Jalas, }{\i\fs28 Arch. Soc. Zool.-Bot. Fenn. Vanamo }{\b\fs28 18:}{\fs28  57-65 (1963);}{\i\fs28  Ann. Bot. Fenn.}{\b\fs28  3:}{\fs28  129-139 (1966);}{\b\fs28  20:}{\fs28  109-111 (1983). J. Jalas & P.D. Sell, }{\i\fs28 Watsonia}{\b\fs28  6:}{\fs28  292-294 (1967). A. Lonsing, }{\i\fs28 Feddes Repert.}{\b\fs28  46:}{\fs28  139-165 (1939). W. M\'f6schl,}{\i\fs28  Feddes Repert.}{\b\fs28  41:}{\fs28  153-163 (1936);}{\i\fs28  Agron. Lusit.}{\b\fs28  13:}{\fs28  23-66 (1951).
\par 
\par }
\pard \li200\ {\fs28 1 Styles 3, 4, or 6; capsule-teeth 6, 8 or 12
\par 2 Petals shorter than sepals .......................................................... }{\b\fs28 56. diffusum}{\fs28 
\par 2 Petals 1 1/3-2 times as long as sepals except for a
\par 3 Stem decumbent or ascending, glabrous line of eglandular
\par   hairs down each internode ........................................................ }{\b\fs28 1. cerastoides}{\fs28 
\par 3 Stem erect, covered with minute viscid glands ............................. }{\b\fs28 2. dubium}{\fs28 
\par 1 Styles 5; capsule-teeth 10
\par 4 Perennial, often with short non-flowering branches in the axils of leaves
\par 5 Petals less than twice as long as sepals
\par 6 Stems 2-6 cm; leaves imbricate (C. Italy) ................................. }{\b\fs28 25. thomasii}{\fs28 
\par 6 Stems more than 6 cm; if less, then leaves not imbricate
\par 7 Capsule 6-8 mm, straight; stem 20-40 cm
\par 8 Leaves 4-6 times as long as wide, lanceolate .............................. }{\b\fs28 22. vagans}{\fs28 
\par 8 Leaves less than 4 times as long as wide, spathulate to
\par   ovate-lanceolate ......................................................................... }{\b\fs28 23. azoricum}{\fs28 
\par 7 Capsule more than 8 mm, straight or curved;  if less,
\par   then capsule curved or stem not more than 15 cm
\par 
\par 164}
\par }