{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 19 Sepals lanceolate, acute; plant usually more than 25 cm ........... {\b 8. palustris}
\par
19 Sepals ovate-lanceolate, obtuse; plant usually less than 25 cm
\par
   ................................................................................. ({\b 12-14}).{\b  longipes} group
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28     {\b 1. S. nemorum} L.,{\i  Sp. Pl}. 421 (1753). Stoloniferous perennial herb; stems up to 65 cm, terete, hairy all round, usually branched only in the lax, many-flowered inflorescence. Lower leaves ovate, acute, with long petioles; upper usually sessile, acuminate. Sepals 6-7 mm, lanceolate, glabrous, or pubescent only at the base, margins narrowly scarious; petals twice as long as sepals, bifid almost to base. Seeds 1-1·3 mm. {\i Most of Europe, but rare in much of the west and south.} Al Au Be Br Bu Co Cz Da Fe Ga Ge Gr He Ho Hs Hu It Ju No Po Rm Rs(N, B, C, W, E) Su.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp.{\b  nemorum} ({\i S. nemorum} subsp.{\i  montana} sensu Murb., {\i S. nemorum} subsp.{\i  reichenbachiana }Wierzb.): Bracts decreasing gradually in size at each dichotomy, the second pair usually more than 1/3 as long as the first. Ripe seeds with rows of hemispherical tubercles on margins. 2n = 26. {\i Almost throughout the range of the species}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b glochidisperma}  Murb.,{\i  Lunds Univ. Årsskr.}{\b  27}({\b 5}): 156 (1892) ({\i S. glochidisperma} (Murb.) Freyn, {\i S. montana }Pierrat,{\i  S. nemorum} subsp.{\i  circaeoides} A. Schwarz): Bracts decreasing abruptly in size after first dichotomy, second pair usually less than 1/3 as long as the first, third pair 1-2 mm, scale-like. Ripe seeds with cylindrical papillae on margins. {\i From Britain} ({\i Wales}) {\i and N.W. Spain eastwards to E. Sweden and C. Greece}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. S. bungeana} Fenzl in Ledeb.,{\i  Fl. Ross.}{\b  1: }376 (1842). Like {\b 1}({\b a}) but upper leaves acute to subacuminate; sepals 5-6 mm, ovate, obtuse, pubescent beneath all over, margins narrowly scarious; seeds 1·3-1·5 mm. {\i Woods and shady ravines. N. & E. Russia}. Rs(N, C, E)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 ({\b 3-5}). {\b S. media} group. Annual; stems terete. At least the lower leaves petiolate. Petals bifid almost to base.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 The species of this group are extremely variable and almost all their characters show some overlap, though they can usually be readily distinguished when all the relevant characters are considered together. They are mostly autogamous, and so far as is known separated by sterility barriers.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Stems hairy all round ....................................................................... {\b 3. media}
\par
1 Stems with 1(2) lines of hairs, or rarely glabrous
\par
2 Stamens (2-)10(11); seeds usually 1·1-1·7 mm; petals
\par
  equalling or exceeding sepals ........................................................ {\b 4. neglecta}
\par
2 Stamens (0-)3-5(-10); seeds usually less than 1·3 mm;
\par
  petals usually shorter than sepals, or absent
\par
3 Sepals usually less than 3 mm; seeds usually less than 0·8 mm,
\par
  light yellowish-brown; petals absent (rarely minute) ...................... {\b 5. pallida}
\par
3 Sepals usually more than 3 mm; seeds usually more than 0·8 mm,
\par
  dark reddish-brown; petals present (rarely minute or absent) ........... {\b 3. media}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 3. S. media} (L.) Vill.,{\i  Hist. Pl. Dauph.}{\b  3:} 615 (1789) ({\i S. media} subsp.{\i  vulgaris} Raunk.). Stems up to 90 cm. Lower leaves ovate, acute or acuminate, with long petioles; upper more or less sessile. Inflorescence few- or many-flowered; pedicels patent or erect in fruit. Sepals 3-7 mm; petals shorter than or slightly longer than sepals; stamens (0-)3-10. Seeds usually 0·8-1·4 mm, usually dark reddish-brown.{\i  Mainly ruderal and as a weed of cultivation. Throughout Europe}. All territories, but probably only as an alien in the extreme north.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp.{\b  media} ({\i S. media} subsp.{\i  glabra} Raunk.): Stems up to 40 cm, with 1(2) lines of hairs, or rarely glabrous. Leaves usually glabrous. Inflorescence glandular, usually lax. Sepals usually 3-5 mm; petals equalling or slightly shorter than sepals; stamens (0-)3-5(-10). Seeds usually 0·8-1·3 mm, with rounded, rarely conical tubercles. 2n = 40, 42, 44.{\i  Throughout the range of the species.}

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp.{\b  cupaniana} (Jordan & Fourr.) Nyman,{\i  Consp.} 111 (1878) ({\i S. neglecta} var. {\i cupaniana} auct., {\i S. cupaniana} (Jordan & Fourr.) Béguinot; incl.{\i  S. media} subsp.{\i  postii} Holmboe, {\i S. media} var.{\i  pubescens }Post): Stems up to 90 cm, pubescent all round and usually throughout, usually glandular. Leaves puberulent or pubescent, often glandular. Inflorescence densely glandular-pubescent, lax or dense. Sepals usually 4·5-7 mm; petals variable in length; stamens usually 5-10. Seeds usually 1·3-1·5 mm, with conical tubercles.{\i  C. & E. Mediterranean region}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Var.{\i  apetala} Gaudin of subsp. ({\b a}), with sepals 3-4 mm, petals minute or absent, and condensed inflorescences, has often been confused with{\b  5}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Subsp. ({\b b}) appears to be distinguishable from {\b 4} by the pubescence of the stems and inflorescences, and intermediates between the species do not seem to occur, but their relationship requires further study.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 4. S. neglecta} Weihe in Bluff & Fingerh., {\i Comp. Fl. Germ.}{\b  1:} 560 (1825) ({\i S. media} subsp.{\i  major} (Koch) Arcangeli,{\i  S. media} subsp.{\i  neglecta} (Weihe) Gremli,{\i  S. neglecta }subsp.{\i  gracilipes} Raunk., {\i S. neglecta }subsp.{\i  vernalis} Raunk.). Stems up to 80 cm, with 1 line of hairs down each internode, eglandular. Lower leaves ovate, subcordate at base, acute or acuminate, more or less glabrous, petiolate; upper leaves usually sessile. Inflorescence few- or many-flowered; pedicels long, slender, usually deflexed in fruit. Sepals usually 5-6·5 mm; petals equalling or slightly exceeding sepals; stamens (2-)10(-11). Seeds usually more than 1·1 mm, often 1·3-1·6 mm, usually dark reddish-brown, with conical tubercles. 2n = 22.{\i  W., S. & C. Europe, extending to S. Sweden and S. Ukraine.} Al Au Be Bl Br Bu Co Cr Cz Da Ga Ge Gr Hb He Ho Hs Hu It Ju Lu Po Rm Rs(B, W, K) Sa Si Su.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 5. S. pallida} (Dumort.) Piré,{\i  Bull. Soc. Bot. Belg.}{\b  2:} 49 (1863) ({\i S. apetala} auct., non Ucria, {\i S. media }subsp.{\i  pallida} (Dumort.) Ascherson & Graebner). Stems up to 30 cm, very slender, with 1 line of hairs down each internode, rarely glabrous. Leaves ovate, subacute, glabrous, usually all petiolate. Inflorescence few- or many-flowered; pedicels short, filiform, patent or erect in fruit. Sepals usually less than 3 mm, often grey-tomentose; petals absent (or minute); stamens 1-3, very rarely 5. Seeds usually less than 0·8 mm, pale yellowish-brown, rarely dark brown, with rounded or conical tubercles. 2n = 22.{\i  Usually on sandy soils. W., S. & C. Europe, extending to S. Sweden, Latvia and Ukraine.} Al Au Be Bl Br Bu Co Cr Cz Da Ga Ge Gr Hb He Ho Hs Hu It Ju Po Rm Rs(B, W, K) Sa Si Su Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 6. S. holostea} L., {\i Sp. Pl. }422 (1753). Perennial; stems up to 60 cm, ascending, weak, diffuse, sharply quadrangular, usually rough. Leaves 30-80 mm, lanceolate-acuminate, rough on margins and on midrib beneath. Inflorescence lax; flowers 15-30 mm in diameter. Sepals 6-9 mm; petals up to twice as long as sepals, bifid to about half-way, rarely absent. 2n = 26.{\i  Much of Europe, but absent from N. & C. Fennoscandia and many of the islands, and rare in the}
\par

\par
162}
\par