{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 oblong-ovoid; teeth patent. Seeds 0·6 mm, pale brown, tuberculate. 2n = 38. {\i Mainly in C. & S.E. Europe, but extending to C. Spain, Sicilia, S. Poland and C. Russia.} Au Bu Cz Ga Ge Gr Hs Hu It Ju Po Rm Rs(C, W, K, E) Si Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 3. C. maximum} L.,{\i  Sp. Pl.} 439 (1753). Robust, stoloniferous perennial 20-40 cm, puberulent and glandular above. Leaves 40-80 × 5-15 mm, lanceolate to linear-lanceolate. Flowers 3-13, in dense umbel-like cymes, with minute bracteoles. Petals up to 3 times as long as the sepals, obcordate, with crenate or dentate lobes. Capsule 17-22 × 6-8 mm, straight; teeth revolute. Seeds c. 1·8 mm, obtusely tuberculate.{\i  E. part of arctic Russia}. Rs(N). ({\i N. Asia and North America.})
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 4. C. dahuricum} Fischer ex Sprengel,{\i  Pugillus}{\b  2}: 65 (1815). Glaucous perennial 50-100 cm. Leaves usually 50-80 × 15-30 mm, ovate, subobtuse. Flowers 11-17, in a large, spreading cyme; bracts herbaceous. Sepals 8-12 mm; petals up to twice as long as the sepals, ciliate. Capsule 10-15 mm, straight. Seeds c. 1·5 mm, acutely tuberculate.{\i  Meadows and woodland-margins. E. Russia southwards to} 52°{\i  N}. Rs(N, C).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 5. C. nemorale} Bieb., {\i Fl. Taur.-Cauc.}{\b  3:} 317 (1819). Annual with weak, ascending stems (8-)15-60 cm, hairy. Leaves 20-70 × 3-20 mm, the basal obovate-spathulate, the cauline lanceolate, acute, weakly cordate at the base; all more or less hairy. Inflorescence furcate, many-flowered; pedicels hairy, 1-4 times as long as the sepals. Sepals 6-10 mm, lanceolate, acute, narrowly scarious at the apex, with dense eglandular hairs, without glandular hairs; petals bifid for 1/3 their length, equalling or a little shorter than the sepals, with a ciliate claw; stamens hairy at the base; styles 5. Capsule twice as long as the sepals, more or less bent; teeth deflexed. Seeds 0·7 mm, reddish-brown, tuberculate.{\i  S. & E. Ukraine; Moldavia.} Rs(W, K, E).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 6. C. perfoliatum} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 437 (1753). Glaucous, glabrous annual up to 50 cm. Leaves up to 40 mm, very narrowly elliptical to ovate-lanceolate, subacute, connate at the base. Inflorescence furcate, with a dichasium of 2-7 flowers at the end of each branch; pedicels 1-2 times as long as the sepals; bracts herbaceous. Sepals 9-11 mm, lanceolate, acute, with a scarious margin at the apex; petals shorter than the sepals, bifid at the apex. Capsule twice as long as the sepals, bent near the apex; teeth deflexed. Seeds 1·2-1·5 mm, acutely tuberculate. 2n = c. 37.{\i  Black Sea region; E. & C. Spain.} Bu Hs Rs(W, K, E), Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 7. C. dichotomum} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 438 (1753). Annual up to 18 cm; stems densely viscid-glandular. Leaves up to 22 mm, more or less linear, the upper sometimes ovate-lanceolate, densely viscid-glandular. Pedicels shorter than the sepals; bracts herbaceous. Sepals 9-12 mm, more or less lanceolate, acute, densely viscid-glandular, without eglandular hairs; petals c. ½ as long as the sepals, shortly bifid; stamens 5. Capsule 15-22 mm. Seeds 1 mm, chestnut-brown, tuberculate.{\i  Spain; S. Greece}. Gr Hs.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 8. C. vourinense} Möschl & Rech. fil.,{\i  Bol. Soc. Brot.,} ser. 2, {\b 35:} 129 (1961). Annual up to 18 cm, glandular- and eglandular-pubescent, pale green. Basal leaves spathulate, the cauline elliptical, sessile. Inflorescence very lax. Pedicels slender, 1-3 times as long as the calyx, deflexed after anthesis; bracts herbaceous, the lower ones leaf-like. Sepals 5-5·5 mm, the inner with scarious margins; petals c. 6 × 2 mm, narrowly oblong to narrowly ovate, entire. Capsule about as long as the sepals, subcylindrical, slightly curved; teeth circinnately revolute. Seeds 0·9-1 mm, tuberculate on the dorsal face.{\i  Shady serpentine rocks and screes, above} 1500{\i  m. • N.W. Greece}. Gr.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 9. C. grandiflorum} Waldst. & Kit.,{\i  Pl. Rar. Hung.}{\b  2:} 183 (1804) ({\i C. nodosum} Buschm.). Perennial 15-30 cm, caespitose, white- to greyish-tomentose; uppermost internode up to 15 cm. Leaves 25-70 × 0·5-1·5 mm, narrowly linear, subacute, the margins strongly revolute. Inflorescence a fastigiate cyme of 7-15 flowers; peduncles 1-4 cm; bracts ovate to broadly lanceolate, with wide, scarious margins and apices. Sepals 6-8 mm, subobtuse, tomentose, with scarious margins; petals up to 18 mm, gradually tapering towards the base; ovary and capsule tomentose, at least at the base. Capsule straight, up to twice as long as the calyx; teeth flat, patent.{\i  Mountain rocks. • W. Jugoslavia, Albania}. Al Ju.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 10. C. candidissimum} Corr.,{\i  Österr. Bot. Zeitschr.}{\b  59:} 171 (1909) ({\i C. tomentosum} sensu Boiss., non L.,{\i  C. tomentosum} sensu Halácsy, non L.). Perennial 15-30 cm, caespitose, white- to yellowish-lanate; uppermost internode not considerably longer than the others. Leaves c. 20 × 3 mm, lanceolate to linear-lanceolate, subobtuse, straight to curved, the margins revolute. Inflorescence a dense cyme with peduncles and pedicels not more than twice as long as the sepals; bracts ovate, acute to subobtuse, with wide scarious margins. Sepals 5-6 mm, obtuse, white-tomentose; petals up to 10 mm, truncate to auriculate; ovary glabrous. Capsule-teeth flat, recurved . 2n = 36 .{\i  Mountain rocks and screes.•  C. & S. Greece}. Gr.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 11. C. biebersteinii} DC.,{\i  Mém. Soc. Phys. Hist. Nat. Genève }{\b 1:} 436 (1822). Perennial 10-30 cm, mat-forming, white-lanate; uppermost internode up to 10 cm, considerably longer than the others. Leaves 20-50 × 3-8 mm, linear-lanceolate to lanceolate, margins not or slightly revolute. Inflorescence an elongate cyme of 3-15 flowers, with pedicels more than twice as long as the sepals; bracts lanceolate, tomentose, with scarious margins. Sepals 6-10 mm, lanceolate, tomentose, subacute to obtuse, with broad scarious margins; petals about twice as long as the sepals, gradually tapering towards the base. Capsule-teeth erect, with flat margins. •{\i  Krym; cultivated for ornament elsewhere, and becoming naturalized.} Rs(K) [Br].
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 12. C. tomentosum} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 440 (1753). Like {\b 11} but up to 45 cm; leaves 10-30 × 2-5 mm, with slightly revolute margins; sepals 5-7 mm; capsule-teeth patent, with revolute margins. 2n = c. 108. •{\i  C. & S. Appennini, Sicilia; widely cultivated for ornament elsewhere and often becoming naturalized}. It Si [Au Br Cz Da ?Ga Ge Hb He Ho Su].
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Very variable in habit, hairiness and leaf-shape. Some of the naturalized plants recorded under this name may be {\b 10} or {\b 11} × {\b 22}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Var.{\i  aetnaeum} Jan from Sicilia (Etna) is shorter, with narrower and shorter leaves which are sparingly tomentose to subglabrous beneath, and subglabrous sepals and a shorter capsule. It has a chromosome number of 2n = 72.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 13. C. moesiacum} Friv.,{\i  Flora }({\i Regensb.}){\b  19:} 435 (1836) ({\i C. tomentosum }sensu Boiss., non L.). Perennial up to 40 cm, laxly caespitose, with creeping, non-flowering basal shoots, tomentose; uppermost internode up to 10 cm, slightly longer than the others. Leaves up to 25 × 10 mm, elliptical to broadly lanceolate, those of the non-flowering shoots obovate, obtuse. Flowers many, in an elongate cyme; bracts obtuse, with wide, scarious margins, sparingly tomentose or sericeous. Sepals obtuse; petals more than twice as long as the sepals. Capsule 10-12 mm, straight; teeth
\par

\par
167}
\par