{\rtf1\ansi \deff4\deflang1033{\fonttbl{\f4\froman\fcharset0\fprq2 Times New Roman;}}{\colortbl;\red0\green0\blue0;\red0\green0\blue255;\red0\green255\blue255;\red0\green255\blue0;\red255\green0\blue255;\red255\green0\blue0;\red255\green255\blue0;\red255\green255\blue255;\red0\green0\blue128;\red0\green128\blue128;\red0\green128\blue0;\red128\green0\blue128;\red128\green0\blue0;\red128\green128\blue0;\red128\green128\blue128;\red192\green192\blue192;}{\stylesheet{\widctlpar \f4\fs20\lang2057 \snext0 Normal;}{\*\cs10 \additive Default Paragraph Font;}}{\info{\author dddd}{\operator dddd}{\creatim\yr1998\mo11\dy11\hr16\min37}{\revtim\yr1998\mo11\dy11\hr16\min38}{\version2}{\edmins1}{\nofpages4}{\nofwords997}{\nofchars5687}{\*\company  }{\vern57431}}\widowctrl\ftnbj\aenddoc\hyphcaps0 \fet0\sectd \linex0 {\*\pnseclvl1\pnucrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl2\pnucltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl3\pndec\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl4\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl5\pndec\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl6\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl7\pnlcrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl8\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl9\pnlcrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}
\pard\plain \ \f4\fs20\lang2057 {\i\fs28 Arctic & N.W. Europe, southwards to Scotland and S. Norway.}{\fs28  Br Fa Fe Is No Rs(N) Sb Su.
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 3. S. caespitosa}{\fs28  (J. Vahl) Lange in Rink,}{\i\fs28  Gr\'f8nl. Geogr. Stat. Beskr.}{\b\fs28  2}{\fs28 (}{\b\fs28 6}{\fs28 ): 133 (1857). Perennial, forming small cushions like those of}{\b\fs28  2}{\fs28  but with persistent dead leaves. Flowers usually 5-merous, 1 or 2 together on short peduncles scarcely exserted from the cushions. Sepals 1\'b78-3 mm, with violet margins and often with conspicuous veins; petals up to 4 mm, longer than the sepals; stamens 10. Ripe capsule 2-3\'b75 mm, less than 1\'bd times as long as the appressed sepals; fruiting pedicels straight. 2n = 88. }{\i\fs28 W. Fennoscandia; Iceland; Spitsbergen.}{\fs28  Is No Sb Su.
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 4. S. glabra}{\fs28  (Willd.) Fenzl, }{\i\fs28 Vers. Darstell. Alsin.}{\fs28  tab. ad 57 (1833) (}{\i\fs28 S. repens}{\fs28  (Zumagl.) Burnat). Laxly caespitose perennial with procumbent or ascending rooting stems up to 2 cm. Upper leaves scarcely shorter than the lower, about equalling the internodes and with elongating axillary shoots; all leaves narrowly linear, muticous or shortly mucronate. Flowers solitary, 5-merous, 5-10 mm in diameter; pedicels 1-2 cm or more. Sepals ovate-oblong, obtuse; petals 1\'bd-2 times as long as the sepals; stamens 10. Ripe capsule 1 1/3 times as long as the appressed sepals.\bullet }{\i\fs28  Alps; Appennini; Pyrenees.}{\fs28  Ga He It.
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 5. S. pilifera}{\fs28  (DC.) Fenzl,}{\i\fs28  loc. cit.}{\fs28  (1833) (}{\i\fs28 S. saginoides}{\fs28  (L.) Karsten var.}{\i\fs28  pilifera }{\fs28 (DC.) Fiori). Like }{\b\fs28 4}{\fs28  but more densely caespitose; leaves long-aristate; petals more than twice as long as the sepals. \bullet }{\i\fs28  Mountains of Corse and Sardegna.}{\fs28  Co Sa.
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 6. S. subulata}{\fs28  (Swartz) C. Presl,}{\i\fs28  Fl. Sic.}{\fs28  158 (1826). Perennial, mat-forming, with short, non-flowering main stem and numerous decumbent then erect or ascending flowering stems 2-7\'b75(-12\'b75) cm. All stems with basal rosettes of linear leaves 0\'b75-1\'b75 cm; cauline leaves narrowed to an aristate apex, the arista \'be-1\'bd times as long as the maximum leaf-width. Flowers usually solitary, 5-merous; pedicels 2-4 cm, filiform, glandular-hairy at least above, rarely glabrous. Sepals broadly ovate, obtuse, usually glandular; petals about equalling the sepals; stamens 10. Ripe capsule 3 mm, slightly exceeding the appressed sepals. 2n = 22.}{\i\fs28  Dry, sandy, gravelly or rocky places. Europe eastwards to}{\fs28  23\'b0}{\i\fs28  E. in Czechoslovakia and Greece.}{\fs28  Al Au Br Co Cz Da Fa Ga Ge Gr Hb He \'86Ho Hs Hu Is It Ju Lu No Po ?Rm Sa Si Su.
\par 
\par Variable. Dwarf, short-lived variants from coastal localities in S.W. Europe (var.}{\i\fs28  pygmaea }{\fs28 Samp. and var.}{\i\fs28  gracilis}{\fs28  Fouc. & E. Simon primus) need further investigation, as do robust, long-lived Mediterranean variants with basal leaves up to 2\'b75 cm and petals much exceeding the sepals (}{\b\fs28 S. revelieri}{\fs28  Jordan & Fourr.,}{\i\fs28  Brel. Pl. Nov.}{\b\fs28  1}{\fs28  11 (1866)).
\par 
\par  The hybrid between }{\b\fs28 6}{\fs28  and }{\b\fs28 10}{\fs28  is occasional.
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 7. S. sabuletorum}{\fs28  (Gay) Lange,}{\i\fs28  Descr. Icon. Ill.}{\fs28  3 (1864) (}{\i\fs28 S. loscosii}{\fs28  Boiss.). Annual or perennial, robust, with a single, non-flowering rosette from which many procumbent flowering stems; radiate. Rosette-leaves 1\'b75-3 cm; cauline leaves 0\'b75-1\'b75 cm, all shortly mucronate. Flowers 5-merous, 2-4 per stem, borne singly in the axils of the uppermost leaves; pedicels and sepals densely glandular; pedicels not more than 1\'b75 cm. Fertile stamens 5. Capsule much longer than the sepals.}{\i\fs28  Sandy and gravelly places at low altitudes. Spain and N.E. Portugal.}{\fs28  Hs Lu [?Hu].
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 8. S. saginoides}{\fs28  (L.) Karsten,}{\i\fs28  Deutsche Fl.}{\fs28  539 (1882) (}{\i\fs28 S. linnaei}{\fs28  C. Presl,}{\i\fs28  S. macrocarpa}{\fs28  (Reichenb.) J. Mal\'fd,}{\i\fs28  S. rosoni}{\fs28  Merino,}{\i\fs28  S. saxatilis}{\fs28  (Wimmer & Grab.) Wimmer). Perennial. Rosette leaves up to 2 cm; cauline leaves 0\'b75-1 cm; leaves usually glabrous, sometimes slightly ciliate, muticous to shortly mucronate. Flowers usually solitary, sometimes 2, on slender pedicels. Sepals more than 2\'b78 mm, ovate-oblong, obtuse; petals about equalling the sepals; stamens (5-)10. Ripe capsule (3\'b75-)4-5 mm, pale straw-coloured, shining, about twice as long as the appressed sepals when dehisced.}{\i\fs28  Arctic and subarctic Europe, southwards to C. Scotland; principal mountain ranges southwards to S. Spain and C. Greece}{\fs28 . Al Au Br Bu Co Cz Fe Ga Ge Gr He Hs Is It Ju No Po Rm Rs(N) Sa Su.
\par 
\par Variable; the following treatment is tentative.
\par 
\par  (}{\b\fs28 a}{\fs28 ) Subsp.}{\b\fs28  saginoides}{\fs28  : Flowers sometimes 2. Pedicels glabrous, rarely flexuous. Sepals glabrous. Stamens (5-)10. 2n = 22. }{\i\fs28 Throughout the range of the species, except Spain & Portugal}{\fs28 .
\par  (}{\b\fs28 b}{\fs28 ) Subsp.}{\b\fs28  nevadensis}{\fs28  (Boiss. & Reuter) Greuter & Burdet, }{\i\fs28 Willdenouwia}{\b\fs28  12:}{\fs28  189 (1982) (}{\i\fs28 S. nevadensis}{\fs28  Boiss. & Reuter): More densely caespitose than subsp. (}{\b\fs28 a}{\fs28 ). Flowers solitary. Pedicels glandular-puberulent, often flexuous. Sepals glandular-puberulent. Stamens 10. \bullet }{\i\fs28  N.C. & S. Spain; N.C. Portugal}{\fs28 .
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 9. S}{\fs28 . \'d7}{\b\fs28  normaniana}{\fs28  Lagerh.,}{\i\fs28  Kong. Norske Vid. Selsk. Skr.}{\fs28  (}{\i\fs28 Trondhjem}{\fs28 ) }{\b\fs28 1898}{\fs28 (}{\b\fs28 1}{\fs28 ): 1 (1898) (}{\i\fs28 S. procumbens}{\fs28  \'d7 }{\i\fs28 saginoides, S. saginoides}{\fs28  subsp.}{\i\fs28  scotica}{\fs28  (Druce) Clapham). Like }{\b\fs28 8}{\fs28  but with longer, more slender and rooting procumbent stems; rosette-leaves 0\'b75-3 cm; sepals 2-2\'b75 mm; fruiting pedicels 1\'b75-4 cm; capsules 3-3\'b75 mm, usually remaining undeveloped and setting no seed.}{\i\fs28  Mountains of Scandinavia, Scotland and Austria.}{\fs28  Au Br No Su.
\par 
\par Plants in cultivation often have some well-developed capsules with good seed.
\par 
\par Variants of uncertain status intermediate between}{\b\fs28  8}{\fs28  and }{\b\fs28 10}{\fs28  include }{\b\fs28 S. saginoides}{\fs28  subsp.}{\b\fs28  parviflora}{\fs28  Litard. & Maire,}{\i\fs28  M\'e9m. Soc. Sci. Nat. Maroc. }{\b\fs28 4:}{\fs28  9 (1924), from S. Spain (Sierra Nevada), }{\b\fs28 S. muscosa}{\fs28  Jordan, }{\i\fs28 M\'e9m. Acad. Roy. Sci. Lyon Sect. Sci.}{\fs28  ser. 2, }{\b\fs28 1:}{\fs28  243 (1851), from S.E. France, and }{\b\fs28 S. pyrenaica}{\fs28  Rouy,}{\i\fs28  Ill. Pl. Eur. Rar.}{\b\fs28  4:}{\fs28  26 (1895), from the Pyrenees.
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 10. S. procumbens}{\fs28  L.,}{\i\fs28  Sp. Pl.}{\fs28  128 (1753) (}{\i\fs28 S. fasciculata}{\fs28  Poiret). Mat-forming perennial with short, non-flowering main stem bearing a dense, central leaf-rosette, and numerous lateral stems up to 20 cm, ascending from procumbent rooting bases; usually glabrous, sometimes minutely ciliate. Leaves 5-12 mm, linear-subulate, shortly aristate, glabrous or rarely ciliate. Flowers solitary, 4(5)-merous; pedicels 5-20 mm, glabrous. Sepals 1-2\'b75 mm, broadly ovate, obtuse; petals usually minute or absent, sometimes conspicuous; stamens 4(5). Ripe capsule 2-3 mm, longer than the usually patent sepals. 2n = 22.}{\i\fs28  Throughout Europe}{\fs28 . All except Bl ?Cr Sb.
\par 
\par Variable. Many poorly defined local taxa have been described.
\par 
\par }{\b\fs28 S. boydii}{\fs28  Buchanan-White,}{\i\fs28  Trans. Proc. Bot. Soc. Edinb.}{\b\fs28  17:}{\fs28  33 (1887), a densely caespitose perennial with short, erect, glabrous stems, crowded, imbricate, rigid, strongly recurved leaves, and 4- or 5-merous flowers, is presumed to have been collected near Braemar, Scotland, in 1878 but has not been seen since, though retained in cultivation. Ripe seeds are very rarely formed; the capsule remains enclosed in the tightly appressed sepals. 2n = 22.
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 11. S. apetala}{\fs28  Ard.}{\i\fs28  Animadv. Bot. Spec. Alt.}{\b\fs28  2:}{\fs28  22 (1763) (}{\i\fs28 S. patula}{\fs28  Jordan,}{\i\fs28  S. reuteri}{\fs28  Boiss.). Annual; stem (1-)310(-20) cm, erect or ascending, with non-persistent basal leaves in a lax cluster, simple or with decumbent (rarely procumbent) to
\par 
\par 177}
\par }