{\rtf1\ansi \deff4\deflang1033{\fonttbl{\f4\froman\fcharset0\fprq2 Times New Roman;}}{\colortbl;\red0\green0\blue0;\red0\green0\blue255;\red0\green255\blue255;\red0\green255\blue0;\red255\green0\blue255;\red255\green0\blue0;\red255\green255\blue0;\red255\green255\blue255;\red0\green0\blue128;\red0\green128\blue128;\red0\green128\blue0;\red128\green0\blue128;\red128\green0\blue0;\red128\green128\blue0;\red128\green128\blue128;\red192\green192\blue192;}{\stylesheet{\widctlpar \f4\fs20\lang2057 \snext0 Normal;}{\*\cs10 \additive Default Paragraph Font;}}{\info{\author dddd}{\operator dddd}{\creatim\yr1998\mo11\dy11\hr16\min35}{\revtim\yr1998\mo11\dy11\hr16\min36}{\version2}{\edmins1}{\nofpages3}{\nofwords1011}{\nofchars5765}{\*\company  }{\vern57431}}\widowctrl\ftnbj\aenddoc\hyphcaps0 \fet0\sectd \linex0 {\*\pnseclvl1\pnucrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl2\pnucltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl3\pndec\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl4\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl5\pndec\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl6\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl7\pnlcrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl8\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl9\pnlcrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}
\pard\plain \ \f4\fs20\lang2057 {\fs28 seeds c. 1\'b75 mm. \bullet }{\i\fs28  Mountains of N.W. part of Balkan peninsula.}{\fs28  Al Ju.
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 39. C. carinthiacum}{\fs28  Vest,}{\i\fs28  Bot. Zeit. }{\fs28 (}{\i\fs28 Regensb}{\fs28 .)}{\b\fs28  6:}{\fs28  120 (1807) (}{\i\fs28 C. latifolium}{\fs28  auct. carpat., non L.). Perennial up to 20 cm, loosely matted. Leaves 10 25 \'d7 3-8 mm, ovate-elliptical to lanceolate, acute, often glabrous, shining. Flowers up to 7, in a spreading cyme. Sepals 5-6 mm, subobtuse. Capsule at least twice as long as the sepals, straight or slightly curved. Seeds 1\'b73-1\'b77 mm, with low tubercles; testa loose. \bullet }{\i\fs28  E. Alps.}{\fs28  Au He It Ju.
\par 
\par  (}{\b\fs28 a}{\fs28 ) Subsp.}{\b\fs28  carinthiacum}{\fs28  : Often nearly glabrous. All except the lowest bracts with wide scarious margins. 2n = 36. Mainly in the eastern part of the range of the species.
\par  (}{\b\fs28 b}{\fs28 ) Subsp. }{\b\fs28 austroalpinum}{\fs28  (H. Kunz) H. Kunz in Janchen, }{\i\fs28 Cat. Fl. Austr.}{\b\fs28  1:}{\fs28  155 (1956) (}{\i\fs28 C. austroalpinum}{\fs28  H. Kunz): More densely glandular-hairy, especially above. Uppermost bracts herbaceous or with narrow scarious margins. 2n = 36.}{\i\fs28  From S. Switzerland to E. Austria; local}{\fs28 .
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 40. C. transsilvanicum}{\fs28  Schur in Griseb. & Schenk,}{\i\fs28  Arch. Naturgesch.}{\fs28  (}{\i\fs28 Berlin}{\fs28 ) }{\b\fs28 1852:}{\fs28  305 (1852). Glandular-pubescent, caespitose perennial with numerous flowering stems up to 40 cm, and short non-flowering shoots. Leaves of flowering stems 20-50 \'d7 4-7 mm, elliptical to oblanceolate, acute, attenuate, sparsely pubescent to subglabrous, often with longer, somewhat villous hairs on the margins; leaves of non-flowering stems smaller, more densely hairy. Inflorescence a wide, many-flowered cyme; bracts scarious, obtuse. Sepals acute, the inner with wide scarious margins. Capsule up to twice as long as the sepals, straight; teeth erect, obtuse. Seeds c. 2 mm, acutely tuberculate. \bullet }{\i\fs28  E. & S. Carpathians.}{\fs28  Rm.
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 41. C. subtriflorum}{\fs28  (Reichenb.) Pacher,}{\i\fs28  Jahrb. Nat\'fcrh. Landesmus. K\'e4rnten}{\b\fs28  18:}{\fs28  104 (1886) (incl. }{\i\fs28 C. sonticum}{\fs28  G. Beck). Biennial or perennial up to 45 cm, hirsute, glandular, with leafy stolons. Leaves elliptical to ovate-lanceolate, sessile. Inflorescence a 3- to many-flowered cyme; lowest bracts usually herbaceous, the upper small, with scarious margins. Sepals up to 5 mm, with scarious margins; petals up to 3 times as long as the sepals. Capsule twice as long as the sepals, straight; teeth erect. Seeds 0\'b77-1 mm, tuberculate; testa close. 2n = 36. \bullet }{\i\fs28  N.W. Jugoslavia}{\fs28  (}{\i\fs28 Slovenija}{\fs28 ),}{\i\fs28  just extending into Italy}{\fs28  (}{\i\fs28 Alpi Giulie}{\fs28 ). It Ju.
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 42. C. sylvaticum}{\fs28  Waldst. & Kit.,}{\i\fs28  Pl. Rar. Hung.}{\b\fs28  1:}{\fs28  100 (1802) (}{\i\fs28 C. umbrosum}{\fs28  Kit.). Hirsute, glandular, biennial or perennial 15-70 cm, with runner-like rooting, leafy basal branches. Lower cauline leaves up to 75 \'d7 18 mm, the lower oblanceolate, petiolate; upper sessile, elliptical to lanceolate-elliptical; leaves of non-flowering shoots oblanceolate to rhombic-elliptical. At least the upper bracts usually with scarious margins. Sepals usually 3-6(-8) mm; petals and stamens ciliate or glabrous. Capsule up to 10 mm, often conspicuously curved. Seeds 0\'b78-1\'b73 mm, densely tuberculate. 2n = 36. \bullet }{\i\fs28  Mainly in E.C. Europe, extending from S.Italy, Albania and S.W. Ukraine northwards to the Baltic region}{\fs28 . Al Au Cz Hu It Ju Po Rm Rs(B, W).
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 43. C. fontanum}{\fs28  Baumg., }{\i\fs28 Enum. Stirp. Transs. }{\b\fs28 1:}{\fs28  425 (1816). Short-lived perennial up to 90 cm, with short, basal non-flowering shoots. Leaves sessile. At least the upper bracts with scarious margins. Petals shorter than to somewhat longer than the sepals. Capsule usually curved. Seeds 0\'b74-1\'b73 mm, tuberculate.}{\i\fs28  Almost throughout Europe}{\fs28 . All territories except Cr, but only introduced in Sb.
\par 
\par An extremely variable species.
\par 
\par }
\pard \li200\ {\fs28 1 Plant glandular
\par 2 Lowest bracts without scarious margin; leaves usually 25-60 mm;
\par   petals usually ciliate ........................................................... (}{\b\fs28 b}{\fs28 ) subsp. }{\b\fs28 lucorum}{\fs28 
\par 2 Lowest bracts with or without scarious margin; leaves
\par   usually less than 25 mm; petals usually without cilia ......... (}{\b\fs28 e}{\fs28 ) subsp.}{\b\fs28  vulgare}{\fs28 
\par 1 Plant eglandular
\par 3 Lowest bracts with or without scarious margin; cymes usually with
\par   8-40 flowers; petals shorter to slightly longer than sepals;
\par   seeds 0\'b74-0\'b78(-1\'b72) mm ....................................................... (}{\b\fs28 e}{\fs28 ) subsp.}{\b\fs28  vulgare}{\fs28 
\par 3 Lowest bracts nearly always with scarious margin; cymes 
\par   with 1-6(-11) flowers; petals usually conspicuously 
\par   longer than sepals; seeds 0\'b78-1\'b72(-1\'b73) mm
\par 4 Flowering stems usually densely pubescent, with 
\par   hairs at least 0\'b78 mm; sepals 6-9 mm, weakly keeled ...... (}{\b\fs28 a}{\fs28 ) subsp.}{\b\fs28  fontanum}{\fs28 
\par 4 Flowering stems usually sparsely pubescent, with hairs 
\par   not more than 0\'b76 mm; sepals usually not more than 6 mm,  usually strongly keeled at base .......................................... (}{\b\fs28 d}{\fs28 ) subsp.}{\b\fs28  scoticum}{\fs28 
\par 
\par }
\pard \ {\fs28  (}{\b\fs28 a}{\fs28 ) Subsp.}{\b\fs28  fontanum}{\fs28  (subsp.}{\i\fs28  scandicum}{\fs28  H. Gartner, subsp. }{\i\fs28 alpicum}{\fs28  H. Gartner,}{\i\fs28  C. macrocarpum}{\fs28  Schur nom. illeg., }{\i\fs28 C. vulgatum}{\fs28  subsp.}{\i\fs28  alpinum}{\fs28  (Mert. & Koch) Hartman,}{\i\fs28  C. longirostre }{\fs28 Wichura, }{\i\fs28 C. vulgatum }{\fs28 subsp.}{\i\fs28  fontanum }{\fs28 (Baumg.) Simonkai,}{\i\fs28  C. caespitosum }{\fs28 subsp.}{\i\fs28  fontanum}{\fs28  (Baumg.) Schinz & R. Keller, }{\i\fs28 C. caespitosum}{\fs28  subsp.}{\i\fs28  alpestre}{\fs28  (Lindblom ex Fries) Lindman,}{\i\fs28  C. vulgatum}{\fs28  subsp.}{\i\fs28  macrocarpum}{\fs28  Nyman, }{\i\fs28 C. fontanum}{\fs28  subsp.}{\i\fs28  alpestre}{\fs28  (Hegetschw.) Janchen, }{\i\fs28 C. fontanum}{\fs28  subsp.}{\i\fs28  alpinum }{\fs28 (Mert. & Koch) Janchen): Plant very densely to sparsely pubescent, without glandular hairs. Flowering stems 10-40(-50) cm. Cauline leaves (8-)10-24(-27) mm. Cymes with 1-6(-11) flowers; lowest bracts almost always with scarious margin; petals up to 1\'b74 times as long as sepals. Capsule 11-17(-18) mm. Seeds (0\'b78-)0\'b79-1\'b72(-1\'b73) mm, with tubercles up to 0\'b707 mm. 2n = 144. }{\i\fs28 N. Europe; mountains of C. Europe}{\fs28 .
\par  (}{\b\fs28 b}{\fs28 ) Subsp.}{\i\fs28  lucorum}{\fs28  (Schur) So\'f3,}{\i\fs28  Acta Bot. Acad. Sci. Hung.}{\b\fs28  15:}{\fs28  340 (1969) (}{\i\fs28 C. fontanum}{\fs28  subsp.}{\i\fs28  macrocarpum}{\fs28  sensu Jalas, non}{\i\fs28  C. macrocarpum}{\fs28  Schur,}{\i\fs28  C. fontanum}{\fs28  subsp.}{\i\fs28  schurii}{\fs28  Borza,}{\i\fs28  C. vulgatum}{\fs28  subsp. }{\i\fs28 lucorum}{\fs28  (Schur) So\'f3, }{\i\fs28 C. lucorum}{\fs28  (Schur) M\'f6schl): Plant often sparsely pubescent, the stems with glandular hairs. Flowering stems up to 70 cm, sometimes with long, non-flowering basal shoots. Cauline leaves (15-)25-60 \'d7 (6-)10-20(-25) mm, thin, somewhat translucent. Cymes with (9-)12-33 flowers; lowest bracts without scarious margin; sepals 6-8\'b75 mm. Capsule (12-)13-16(-18) mm. Seeds 0\'b78-1\'b71(-1\'b72) mm, with tubercles up to 0\'b708 mm. 2n = 144. \bullet }{\i\fs28  Damp, shady habitats. Mainly in C. Europe, but extending westwards to N. Spain}{\fs28 .
\par  (}{\b\fs28 c}{\fs28 ) Subsp.}{\i\fs28  vulgare}{\fs28  (Hartman) Greuter & Burdet, }{\i\fs28 Willdenowia}{\b\fs28  12:}{\fs28  37 (1982) (subsp. }{\i\fs28 balcanum}{\fs28  H. Gartner, subsp.}{\i\fs28  hispanicum}{\fs28  H. Gartner, subsp.}{\i\fs28  pyrenaeum}{\fs28  H. Gartner,}{\i\fs28  C. caespitosum}{\fs28  subsp.}{\i\fs28  triviale}{\fs28  (Spenner) Hiitonen,}{\i\fs28  C. vulgatum}{\fs28  subsp.}{\i\fs28  caespitosum}{\fs28  (Ascherson) Dost\'e1l,}{\i\fs28  C. fontanum}{\fs28  subsp.}{\i\fs28  triviale}{\fs28  (Spenner) Jalas, }{\i\fs28 C. caespitosum}{\fs28  Gilib. ex Ascherson nom. illeg.,}{\i\fs28  C. triviale}{\fs28  Link nom. illeg.,}{\i\fs28  C. vulgare}{\fs28  Hartman, }{\i\fs28 ?C. viscosum}{\fs28  L. pro parte, }{\i\fs28 ?C. vulgatum}{\fs28  L. pro parte,}{\i\fs28  C. holosteoides}{\fs28  Fries, }{\i\fs28 C. vulgatum}{\fs28  subsp.}{\i\fs28  glabrescens}{\fs28  (G.F.W. Meyer) Janchen, }{\i\fs28 C. holosteoides}{\fs28  subsp.}{\i\fs28  pseudoholosteoides}{\fs28  M\'f6schl,}{\i\fs28  C. fontanum}{\fs28  subsp.}{\i\fs28  glabrescens}{\fs28  (G.F.W. Meyer) Salman, van Omm. & de Voogd): Plant densely pubescent to subglabrous, the stems sometimes with some glandular hairs. Flowering stems 5-70(-90) cm, with leafy basal shoots. Cauline leaves
\par 
\par 171}
\par }