{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 sepals; bracts herbaceous or with a narrow scarious margin. Sepals 3-10 mm, lanceolate, acute, with numerous glandular and eglandular hairs not exceeding the apex, the margin scarious; petals 2/3-1 1/3 as long as the sepals, strongly ciliate at the base; stamens 5-10; styles 5. Capsule up to twice as long as the sepals. Seeds 0·6-1 mm.{\i • Balkan peninsula.} Al Bu Gr Ju.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp.{\b  rectum} : Plant 25-80 cm. Leaves 25-60 × 10-25 mm, lanceolate. Inflorescence lax, many-flowered. Sepals 7-10 mm; stamens 10. Capsule 10-5 mm. Seeds c. 1 mm. Almost throughout the range of the species.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp.{\b  petricola} (Pancic) H. Gartner, {\i Feddes Repert.} ({\i Beih.}) {\b 113:} 38 (1939) ({\i C. petricola} Pancic): Plant 8-25 cm. Leaves 5-25 × 5-10 mm, ovate or oblong-ovate, rarely lanceolate. Inflorescence less lax, with fewer flowers than in subsp. ({\i a}). Sepals 3-7 mm; stamens 5-10. Capsule 7-10 mm. Seeds c. 0·6 mm. 2n = 36. •{\i  From N. Greece to W.C. Bulgaria}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 52. C. ligusticum} Viv.,{\i  Elench. Pl. Horti Bot. }15 (1802). Annual up to 30 cm; stem with fine glandular and occasional eglandular hairs. Lower leaves spathulate, the cauline elliptical or oblong, hairy. Pedicels much longer than the sepals; bracts herbaceous or scarious at most for 1/5 their length. Sepals 3-8 mm, ovate-lanceolate, obtuse, the margin scarious, with numerous glandular hairs, with or without eglandular hairs usually not exceeding the apex; petals 1½-2 times as long as the sepals, bifid for up to 1/3 their length, glabrous; stamens 5-10; styles 5. Capsule 6-7 mm. Seeds 0·5-0·9 mm, brown, sharply and minutely tuberculate. {\i E. & C. Mediterranean region.} Al Co ?Ga It Ju Sa Si.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Bracts scarious for 5 their length ............................... ({\b d}) subsp. {\b trichogynum}
\par
1 Bracts herbaceous or very slightly scarious
\par
2 Sepals 7-8 mm; seeds 0·7-0·9 mm ................................ ({\b c}) subsp.{\b  granulatum}
\par
2 Sepals 3-6 mm; seeds 0·5-0·65 mm
\par
3 Plant not more than 7 cm; leaves not more than 6 mm;
\par
  sepals 3-4 mm .................................................................... ({\b b}) subsp. {\b palustre}
\par
3 Plant up to 15 cm; leaves up to 20 mm; sepals 4-6 mm
\par
  ......................................................................................... ({\b a}) subsp.{\b  ligusticum}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b ligusticum }({\i C. campanulatum} Viv.): Rarely more than 15 cm. Leaves up to 20 mm. Bracts herbaceous. Sepals 4-6 mm; stamens 10. Seeds 0·5-0·65 mm. 2n = 34.{\i  Italy, Sicilia, Corse.}
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp.{\b  palustre }(Moris) P.D. Sell & Whitehead,{\i  Feddes Repert.}{\b  69:} 20 (1964) ({\i C. palustre} Moris, {\i C.campanulatum} subsp.{\i  palustre }(Moris) Möschl, {\i C. pumilum} subsp.{\i  campanulatum} (viv.) Briq.): Up to 7 cm. Leaves up to 6 mm. Bracts herbaceous. Sepals 3-4 mm; stamens 10. Seeds 0·5-0·6 mm. 2n = 34. •{\i   Sardegna}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b c}) Subsp.{\b  granulatum} (Huter, Porta & Rigo ex Möschl) P.D. Sell & Whitehead,{\i  Feddes Repert.}{\b  69:} 21 (1964) ({\i C. campanulatum} subsp. {\i granulatum} Huter, Porta & Rigo ex Möschl): Up to 30 cm. Leaves up to 30 mm. Bracts herbaceous. Sepals 7-8 mm; stamens 10. Seeds 0·7-0·9 mm. •{\i  S. Italy}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b d}) Subsp.{\b  trichogynum} (Möschl) P.D. Sell & Whitehead,{\i  loc. cit.} (1964) ({\i C. trichogynum} Möschl): Up to 22 cm. Leaves 12-27 mm. Bracts scarious at most for 1/5 their length. Sepals 4-5 mm; stamens 5-10. Seeds c. 0·7 mm. •{\i  Albania, W. Jugoslavia}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 53. C. smolikanum} Hartvig,{\i  Bot. Not.}{\b  132:} 359 (1979). Like {\b 52} but stems 5-15 cm; cauline leaves spathulate; bracts herbaceous, obovate to spathulate; sepals narrowly ovate, acute, only slightly exceeded by the petals; stamens 10; capsule up to 8 mm; seeds 1-1·4 mm, yellowish-brown, with longer tubercles. {\i Serpentine rocks and screes above} 2300{\i  m. • N.W. Greece} ({\i Smolikas}). Gr.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 54. C. semidecandrum} L.,{\i  Sp. Pl.} 438 (1753) ({\i C. balearicum} F. Hermann,{\i  C. dentatum} Möschl,{\i  C. fallax} Guss.,{\i  C. heterotrichum} Klokov,{\i  C. obscurum} Chaub., {\i C. pentandrum}] L.,{\i  C. rotundatum} Schur). Procumbent to erect annual up to 20 cm; stem with eglandular and dense glandular hairs, rarely glabrous. Leaves up to 18 mm, the basal oblanceolate, the cauline ovate to broadly elliptical. Pedicels equalling or slightly longer than the sepals; pedicels and sepals usually with dense glandular and few eglandular hairs; bracts sometimes almost entirely scarious, always scarious in upper 1/3. Sepals 3-5 mm, lanceolate, acute, with wide scarious margins; petals shorter than the sepals, slightly notched. Capsule 4·5-7 mm. Seeds 0·4-0·5 mm, yellowish-brown, finely tuberculate. 2n = 36.{\i  Throughout Europe except Açores and parts of the north and north-east. All except} Az Fa Is Rs(N) Sb.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Subsp.{\b  macilentum} (Aspegren) Möschl,{\i  Feddes Repert.}{\b  93:} 157 (1936), recorded from S. Sweden and differing from {\b 54} only in being completely glabrous, is best treated as a variety of {\b 54} and is probably extinct.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 55. C. pumilum} Curtis,{\i  Fl. Lond.}{\b  2}({\b 6}): t. 30 (1777) ({\i C. ucrainicum} (Kleopow) Klokov, {\i C. varians} Cosson & Germ.). Annual up to 14 cm; stem with numerous glandular and some eglandular hairs. Leaves 4-15 mm, the lower oblanceolate, the upper ovate or ovate-oblong, obtuse, hairy. Pedicels longer than the sepals; bracts scarious for up to 1/8 their length. Sepals 4-5 mm, lanceolate to oblong-lanceolate, acute, scarious for up to ¼ their length, with glandular hairs, and eglandular hairs reaching near to but not exceeding the apex; petals sometimes purple-tinged, equalling or slightly longer than the sepals, bifid for up to ¼ their length, with branched veins; stamens 5-10; styles 5. Capsule 6-8 mm. Seeds 0·5-0·6 mm, chestnut-brown, finely tuberculate. 2n = 90-100.{\i  Most of Europe, but absent from large areas of the north and east.} Al Au Be Bl Br Bu Co Cz Da Fe He Ho Hs Hu It Ju Lu No Po Rm Rs(B, C, W) Sa Su Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Only upper bracts with a scarious margin; petals 3 
\par
  times as long as wide; stamens 5 ...................................... ({\b a}) subsp.{\b  pumilum}
\par
1 All bracts with a scarious margin; petals not more 
\par
  than 2½ times as long as wide; stamens (5)6-10
\par

\par
2 Petals c. 2½ times as long as wide; stamens (5)6-10; anthers
\par
  0·2-0·5 mm .................................................................... ({\b b}) subsp.{\b  glutinosum}
\par
2 Petals about twice as long as wide; stamens 10; 
\par
  anthers 0·4-1 mm ............................................................ ({\b c}) subsp.{\b  litigiosum}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp.{\b  pumilum} ({\i C.glutinosum} auct., non Fries): Plant often suffused with red. Only upper bracts with a scarious margin. Petals narrow, c. 3 times as long as wide; stamens 5. 2n = 72, 90 100.{\i  W. Europe; S. Sweden; possibly also in parts of C. & S. Europe}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp.{\b  glutinosum} (Fries) Jalas,{\i  Fenn. Bot. Fenn.}{\b  20:} 110 (1983) (subsp. {\i pallens} (F.W. Schultz) Schinz & Thell., {\i C. atriusculum }Klokov, {\i C. kioviense }Klokov, {\i C. pallens} F.W. Schultz,{\i  C. syvaschicum} Kleopow,{\i  C. glutinosum} Fries): Plant often pale green. All bracts with a scarious margin. Petals c. 2½ times as long as wide; stamens (5)6-10; anthers 0·2-0·5 mm.{\i  Probably throughout the range of the species.}
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b c}) Subsp.{\b  litigiosum} (De Lens) P.D. Sell & Whitehead,{\i  Feddes Repert}{\b . 69:} 22 (1964) ({\i C. litigiosum} De Lens): All bracts with a scarious margin. Petals about twice as long as wide and exceeding the sepals by at least 1 mm; stamens 10; anthers 0·4-1 mm.•{\i  C. Europe and N. Italy}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Subsp. ({\b c}) has been included in {\b 52}({\b a}) by some authors.
\par

\par
174}
\par