{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b mantica} : Petals white, up to twice as long as the sepals. Capsule about equalling the sepals.{\i  Throughout the range of the species}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp.{\b  caerulea} (Boiss.) Clapham,{\i  Feddes Repert.}{\b  69:} 49 (1964) ({\i M. caerulea} Boiss.,{\i  M. mantica }var. {\i violascens} Aznav.): Petals blue, 2-3 times as long as the sepals. Capsule exceeding the sepals.{\i  Balkan peninsula; perhaps introduced elsewhere}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 11.               Myosoton}                 Moench
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc  By †A.R. Clapham.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Perennial. Leaves ovate. Inflorescence a leafy dichasium; flowers 5-merous. Petals deeply bifid, white; stamens 10; styles 5, alternating with the sepals. Fruit an ovoid capsule, dehiscing to almost halfway with 5 shortly bifid, blunt teeth. Seeds numerous, reniform, tuberculate. ({\i Malachium} Fries.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. M. aquaticum} (L.) Moench, {\i Méth.} 225 (1794) ({\i Cerastium aquaticum} L., {\i Stellaria aquatica} (L.) Scop.,{\i  Malachium aquaticum} (L.) Fries). Flowering stems 20-120 cm, decumbent or ascending, weak, glandular-hairy above. Leaves 2-5(-8) cm, thin, ovate, acute to acuminate at the apex, truncate or cordate at the base, hairy or glabrous, shortly petiolate, or the upper sessile. Petals bifid to the base, white, exceeding the obtuse sepals. Ripe capsule exceeding the sepals, pendent from the patent pedicel. 2n = 28.{\i  Most of Europe, but absent from much of the north and parts of the Mediterranean region.} All except Az Bl Cr Fa Hb Is Sa Sb.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Variable, especially in habit, hairiness and leaf-shape.{\b  Malachium calycinum} Willk.,{\i  Bot. Zeit.}{\b  5:} 239 (1847), from S. Spain (Carratraca, N.W. of Malaga), has stems with a single row of hairs and petals only ½ as long as the sepals. It may merit subspecific rank within {\b 1}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 12.             Sagina}                 L.
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc  By †A.R. Clapham & Jardine.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Small annual or perennial herbs, often caespitose, with slender, procumbent or ascending flowering stems and subulate to linear-lanceolate leaves in slightly connate pairs. Flowers 4- or 5-merous, almost globose in bud, solitary or in few-flowered cymes. Sepals free; petals usually white, entire, often minute, sometimes 0; stamens as many or twice as many as the sepals; styles 4 or 5, alternating with the sepals. Fruit a capsule splitting to the base into 4 or 5 valves. Seeds numerous.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Annual, without vegetative stems at time of flowering; flowers 4-merous
\par
2 Leaves with a well-marked arista; seeds usually less than 0·4 mm
\par
  ........................................................................................................ {\b 11. apetala}
\par
2 Leaves muticous or very shortly mucronate; seeds usually
\par
  more than 0·4 mm ...................................................................... {\b 12. maritima}
\par
1 Usually perennial, with vegetative stems at time of flowering, 
\par
  rarely annual; flowers usually 5-merous, sometimes 4-merous
\par
  (if annual, flowers 5-merous)
\par
3 Cauline leaves at the 2 uppermost nodes less than 2·5 mm,
   with short, dense axillary leaf-fascicles ......................................... {\b 1. nodosa}
\par
3 Cauline leaves at the 2 uppermost nodes not distinctly shorter
\par
  than those at the lower nodes
\par
4 Leaves with a terminal arista ¾-1½ times as long as the maximum
\par
  leaf-width
\par
5 Petals 1½-2 times as long as sepals (Corse and Sardegna) ............ {\b 5. pilifera}
\par
5 Petals less than 1½ times as long as sepals .................................. {\b 6. subulata}
\par
4 Leaves muticous or with an arista less than ¾ as long as the maximum 
\par
  leaf-width
\par
6 Sepals and pedicels glandular (sometimes very sparsely so)
\par
7 Petals more than 1½ times as long as sepals ................................... {\b 4. glabra}
\par
7 Petals less than 1½ times as long as sepals
\par
8 Plant more or less densely caespitose; flowers solitary ........... {\b 8. saginoides}
\par
8 Plant not densely caespitose; inflorescence 2- to 5 flowered
\par
  ................................................................................................. {\b 7. sabuletorum}
\par
6 Sepals and pedicels glabrous
\par
9 Plants forming small, dense tufts; sepals usually with purple margins;
\par
  fruiting pedicels not recurved during ripening
\par
10 Flowers 4- or 5-merous, usually with fewer than 10 stamens;
\par
   sepals longer than petals; fruiting pedicels curving outwards .........{\b 2. nivalis}
\par
10 Flowers 5-merous; stamens 10; petals longer than sepals; 
\par
   fruiting pedicels straight ........................................................... {\b 3. caespitosa}
\par
9 Plants forming lax tufts or mats; sepals with white margins; 
\par
  fruiting pedicels recurved at some stage during ripening
\par
11 Flowers usually 4-merous, occasionally 5-merous; petals often 
\par
   minute or absent, sometimes conspicuous; capsule less than 3 mm
\par
   ............................................................................................... {\b 10. procumbens}
\par
11 Flowers usually 5-merous, occasionally 4-merous; petals
    about equalling sepals; capsule 3 mm or more
\par
12 Capsule more than 3·5 mm; sepals more than 2·8 mm;
\par
   plant fully fertile ....................................................................... {\b 8. saginoides}
\par
12 Capsule less than 3·5 mm; sepals less than 2·8 mm; 
\par
   plant with reduced fertility ................................................. {\b 9} . ×{\b  normaniana}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. S. nodosa} (L.) Fenzl,{\i  Vers. Darstell. Alsin.} tab. ad 18 (1833) (incl. {\i S. merinoi} Pau). Perennial with short, non-flowering main stem and many procumbent or ascending flowering stems 5-15(-35) cm, each with a basal rosette and with cauline leaves markedly diminishing upwards. Upper leaves shorter than the internodes and mostly with short, dense axillary leaf-fascicles; all leaves narrowly linear, shortly mucronate. Flowers 1-3, 5-merous, 5-10 mm in diameter. Sepals 2-4 mm, ovate-oblong, obtuse; petals 2-3 times as long as the sepals; stamens 10. Ripe capsule 1 1/3 times as long as the appressed sepals. 2n = 22-24, 44, 56.{\i  Damp places. Europe southwards to N. Portugal and Romania.} Au Be Br Cz Da Fa Fe Ga Ge Hb He Ho Hs Hu Is †It Lu No Po Rm Rs(N, B, C, W) Su.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Var.{\i  moniliformis} (G.F.W. Meyer) Lange, procumbent and rarely flowering, but with numerous, deciduous, bulbil-like axillary fascicles, occurs in N. Europe.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. S. nivalis} (Lindblad) Fries,{\i  Nov. Fl. Suec., Mant. }{\b 3:} 31 (1842) ({\i S. intermedia} Fenzl). Perennial, forming small cushions 1·5-5 cm in diameter and 1-3 cm high. Basal leaf-rosettes only present during the first season; cauline leaves 3-6 mm, linear, usually shortly mucronate, usually glabrous, sometimes slightly ciliate. Flowers 3-6 mm in diameter, 4- or 5-merous, solitary on pedicels 2-5 mm. Sepals 1·5-2 mm, ovate, obtuse, with narrow, scarious, often violet margins; petals narrow, somewhat shorter than the sepals; stamens 8-10, sometimes fewer. Ripe capsule 2·5-3 mm, greenish- or whitish-yellow, 1½ times as long as the appressed sepals; fruiting pedicels usually curving outwards. 2n = 88.
\par

\par
176}
\par