{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 ascending, non-rooting branches. Leaves linear, long-mucronate to aristate, usually more or less ciliate towards the base. Flowers usually 4-merous, solitary; pedicels filiform, often glandular-hairy at least above. Sepals ovate to ovate-oblong, rounded to acute at the apex, often hooded; petals minute, often falling early, rarely absent. Ripe capsule equalling or exceeding the patent or appressed sepals. Seeds usually less than 0·4 mm. 2n = 12. {\i Dry, open habitats. W., C. & S. Europe, extending to S. Sweden; probably casual further east.} All except Fa Fe Is No Rs(N, ?B, K, E) Sb.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 This largely autogamous species is extremely variable, and all combinations of characters involving the ciliation of the leaves and the glandular-hairiness of the sepals and pedicels are to be found in local variants. The following subspecies can be recognized.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp.{\b  apetala} ({\i S. ciliata} Fries, {\i S. depressa} C.F. Schultz): Fruiting sepals appressed or slightly patent, subacute. Terminal capsule of well-grown plants c. 1¼ times as long as the sepals.{\i  Throughout the range of the species}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp.{\b  erecta} (Hornem.) F. Hermann,{\i  Fl. Deutschl. Fennosk.} 182 (1912) ({\i S. apetala} auct.). Fruiting sepals patent, subobtuse. Terminal capsule of well-grown plants more than 1¼ times as long as the sepals.{\i  Almost throughout the range of the species, but rare in the Mediterranean region.}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Glabrous maritime variants of subsp. ({\b a}) with persistent basal leaves ({\i S. ambigua} auct., non Lloyd), occur in W. France and S. England.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Intermediates ({\i S. melitensis} Gulia ex Duthie,{\i  S. filicaulis} auct., non Jordan, {\i S. ciliata} var. {\i minor} Rouy & Fouc.) are not uncommon, especially in the Mediterranean region where the subspecific distinction is difficult to maintain.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 12. S. maritima} G. Don, {\i Herb. Brit.} fasc. {\b 7}, 155 (1806) ({\i S. rodriguezii} Willk.,{\i  S. stricta} Fries). Annual, usually glabrous, with or without a central rosette of leaves; main stem flowering, it and the numerous lateral branches varying from procumbent to erect; sometimes densely caespitose. Leaves linear-lanceolate, somewhat fleshy, obtuse or mucronulate but not aristate, rarely ciliate. Flowers usually 4-merous, solitary; peduncles erect, glabrous, filiform. Sepals ovate, obtuse, not mucronate, often with purplish margin; petals minute, or absent. Ripe capsule equalling or slightly shorter than the obliquely erect but not appressed sepals. Seeds usually more than 0·4 mm. 2n = 22-24, 28.{\i  Coasts of Europe from Bulgaria and Estonia westwards, and northwards to} 68°{\i  N. in Norway; rarely on mountains in Scotland.} Az Be Bl Br Bu Co Cr Da Fe Ga Ge Gr Hb Ho Hs It Ju Lu No Po Rs(B) Sa Si Su Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Very variable, many local species and subspecies having been described. All combinations of characters may be found, and it is difficult to make any useful subdivision.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 13.              Scleranthus}                L.
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc  By P.D. Sell.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Annual, biennial or perennial herbs; stems diffusely branched, hairy on 2 sides. Leaves connate at the base. Inflorescence of more or less dense terminal and axillary cymose clusters. Sepals usually 5, inserted on the rim of the urceolate perigynous zone (the whole being called the 'fruit' in the following account); petals absent; stamens up to 10; styles 2. Fruit an indehiscent 1(2)-seeded nutlet enclosed by the hardened wall of the perigynous zone and the persistent sepals, which are shed with it. Seeds lenticular, smooth.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Measurements of the ' fruit ' are from the apex of the sepal to the base of the perigynous zone and vary little between flowering and fruiting.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Literature: W. Rössler,{\i  Agron. Lusit.}{\b  15:} 97-138 (1953);{\i  Österr. Bot. Zeitschr.}{\b  102:} 30-72 (1955).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Apex of sepals curved inwards and forming a hook .................. {\b 3. uncinatus}
\par
1 Apex of sepals patent, erect or slightly incurved, but not hooked
\par
2 Sepals obtuse, with a scarious margin 0·3-0·5 mm wide ............. {\b 1. perennis}
\par
2 Sepals ± acute, with a scarious margin not more than 0·1 mm wide
   ......................................................................................................... {\b 2. annuus}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. S. perennis} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 406 (1753). Perennial herb often with woody stock and procumbent to erect stems up to 22 cm. Leaves linear to lanceolate, channelled, obtuse to acute, glabrous or with short cilia. Inflorescence of terminal clusters which are not usually exceeded by the bracts. Fruit 2-6·5 mm; sepals lanceolate, obtuse, with a scarious margin 0·3-0·5 mm wide.{\i  Dry, open habitats. Most of Europe, but absent from much of the north and rare in the extreme west.} Al Au Be Br Bu Co Cz Da Ga Ge Gr He Ho Hs Hu It Ju No Po Rm Rs(B, C, W, K) ?Sa Si Su Tu [Fe].
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Fruit 4·5-6·5 mm
\par
2 Stems procumbent, not dichotomously branched;
   fruit 4·5-5·5 mm  .......................................................... ({\b f}) subsp. {\b marginatus}
\par
2 Stems ascending, dichotomously branched;
   fruit 6-6·5 mm  ............................................................ ({\b g}) subsp.{\b  dichotomus}
\par
1 Fruit 2-4·5 mm
\par
3 Plant with procumbent or slightly ascending stems or forming a
\par
  dense cushion; at least some of the inflorescences with more
\par
  than 7 flowers in a cluster
\par
4 Plant with long procumbent or slightly ascending stems;
\par
  fruit 2-3(-3·5) mm ........................................................... ({\b b}) subsp.{\b  prostratus}
\par
4 Plant forming a dense cushion with stems up to 5 cm
\par
5 Fruits 2-3 mm .................................................................... ({\b c}) subsp.{\b  burnatii}
\par
5 Fruits 3·5-4·5 mm .................................................. ({\b d}) subsp. {\b polycnemoides}
\par
3 Plant with ascending to erect stems 3-22 cm; all inflorescences
\par
  with not more than 7 flowers in a cluster
\par
6 Stems up to 6 cm; leaves lanceolate, obtuse; internodes 2-4 mm 
\par
  ........................................................................................ ({\b e}) subsp.{\b  vulcanicus}
\par
6 Stems up to 22 cm; leaves linear, acute; internodes 6-10 mm
\par
  ............................................................................................ ({\b a}) subsp. {\b perennis}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b perennis} ({\i ?S. dichotomus} sensu P. Fourn., non Schur): Stems up to 22 cm, ascending to erect; internodes 6-10 mm. Leaves 5-9 mm, linear, acute, shortly ciliate. Inflorescence with not more than 7 flowers in a cluster. Fruit (3-)3·5-4·5 mm; sepals erect or slightly incurved. 2n = 22.{\i  Throughout the range of the species}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp.{\b  prostratus} P.D. Sell,{\i  Feddes Repert.}{\b  68:} 168 (1963): Stems long, procumbent to slightly ascending; internodes 2-3(-10) mm. Leaves 3-5(-7) mm, linear, acute, glabrous or slightly ciliate. Inflorescence often with more than 7 flowers in a cluster. Fruit 2-3(-3·5) mm; sepals erect or slightly incurved.{\i  Sandy heaths. • E. England}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b c}) Subsp. {\b burnatii} (Briq.) P.D. Sell,{\i  loc. cit.} (1963) ({\i S. burnatii} Briq.): Forming a more or less dense cushion, with stems up to 5 cm, ascending; internodes 1-5 mm. Leaves 4-6 mm, linear, more or less acute, ciliate. Inflorescence usually with more than 7 flowers in a cluster. Fruit 2-3 mm; sepals slightly incurved. {\i • Mountains of Corse and S. Spain; ?Sardegna.}
\par

\par
178}
\par