{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 56. C. diffusum} Pers.,{\i  Syn. Pl.}{\b  1:} 520 (1805) ({\i C.tetrandrum} Curtis). Annual up to 30 cm; stem with glandular and usually some eglandular hairs. Leaves 5-20 mm, the lower oblanceolate to spathulate, the upper ovate to elliptical, hairy. Pedicels much longer than the sepals; bracts usually herbaceous. Sepals 4-9 mm, ovate-lanceolate to lanceolate, acute or acuminate, with a scarious margin at the apex for up to 1/10 their length, with glandular hairs, and some eglandular hairs not exceeding the apex. Petals shorter than the sepals, bifid for c. 1/5 their length, with branched veins; stamens and styles 4 or 5. Capsule 5-10 mm. Seeds 0·4-0·7 mm, yellowish to chestnut-brown, bluntly tuberculate.{\i  S., W. & C. Europe, extending northwards to S. Sweden and eastwards to Ukraine.} Au Be Br Co Cz Da Fa Ga Ge Gr Hb Ho Hs Hu It Ju Lu No Po Rs(W, K, ?E) Sa Si Su Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Sepals 7-9 mm; capsule 7-10 mm ........................... ({\b c}) subsp.{\b  subtetrandrum}
\par
1 Sepals 4-7 mm; capsule 5-7 mm
\par
2 Flowers 5-merous; petals 4 times as long as wide .......... ({\b b}) subsp.{\b  gussonei}
\par
2 Flowers 4(5)-merous; petals 3 times as long as wide ...... ({\b a}) subsp.{\b  diffusum}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp.{\b  diffusum} ({\i C. atrovirens} Bab.,{\i  C. tetrandrum }Curtis, nom. illeg.): Flowers 4(5)-merous. Sepals 4-7 mm; petals 3 times as long as wide. Capsule 5-7 mm. Seeds 0·5-0·7 mm. 2n = 36, 72.{\i  Mainly W. & C. Europe}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b gussonei }(Tod. ex Lojac.) P.D. Sell & Whitehead,{\i  Feddes Repert.}{\b  69:} 23 (1964) ({\i C. gussonei} Tod. ex Lojac.): Flowers always 5-merous. Sepals c. 4 mm; petals 4 times as long as wide. Capsule c. 5 mm. Seeds c. 0·5 mm.{\i  Sicilia}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b c}) Subsp.{\b  subtetrandrum} (Lange) P.D. Sell & Whitehead,{\i  loc. cit.} (1964) ({\i C. subtetrandrum} (Lange) Murb.): Flowers (4)5-merous. Sepals 7-9 mm; petals 2 ½ times as long as wide. Capsule 7-10 mm. Seeds c. 0·5 mm. 2n = 72. •{\i  E.C. Europe, extending to S. Sweden}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Subsp. ({\b c}) has been included in{\b  55}({\b a}) by some authors.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 57. C. siculum} Guss.,{\i  Suppl. Fl. Sic. Prodr.} 137 (1832). Annual up to 12 cm; stems with minute glandular and a few eglandular hairs. Leaves 5-15 mm, the basal oblanceolate, the cauline ovate-lanceolate to broadly elliptical, obtuse or subacute, hairy. Inflorescence with a dense dichasium at the end of each branch; pedicels shorter than the sepals; bracts herbaceous. Sepals 5-6 mm, oblong or oblong-lanceolate, acute, scarious at the apex, with dense glandular hairs, and a few eglandular hairs not exceeding the apex; petals 2/3 as long as the sepals, bifid for up to 1/5 their length. Capsule 7-8 mm. Seeds 0·4-0·5 mm, pale brown, finely tuberculate. {\i W. Mediterranean region.} Bl Co Ga ?Hs It Sa Si.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 58. C. gracile} Dufour,{\i  Ann. Gén. Sci. Phys.} ({\i Bruxelles}){\b  7:} 304 (1820) ({\i C. bulgaricum} Uechtr., {\i C. gayanum} Boiss.,{\i  C. schmalhausenii} Pacz., {\i C. velenovskyi} Hayek, {\i C. carpetanum} Lomax, {\i C. cavanillesianum} Font Quer & Rivas Goday,{\i  C. durieui} Desmoulins, {\i C. lamottei} Legrand,{\i  C. pseudobulgaricum} Klokov, {\i C. ramosissimum} Boiss.,{\i  C. riaei} Desmoulins). Annual up to 22 cm; stem, leaves, young capsule and petals sometimes suffused with purple; stems with numerous glandular and few eglandular hairs. Leaves 3-15 mm, the lower spathulate or obovate, the cauline linear-lanceolate to ovate-oblong, glandular and hairy. Inflorescence often much-branched; pedicels usually shorter, rarely longer, than the sepals; bracts herbaceous. Sepals 2·5-7 mm, ovate-lanceolate to ovate-oblong, obtuse to acute, the outer without or with a very narrow, scarious margin, the inner with a scarious margin, all glandular-hairy, the glands not exceeding the apex; petals shorter to slightly longer than the sepals, emarginate or shallowly bifid. Capsule 4-14 mm. Seeds 0·4-1 mm, pale to chestnut-brown, finely tuberculate. 2n = 36, 44-46, 54, 88-92.{\i  Spain and S. France; S.E. Europe.} Bu Ga Gr Hs Lu Rm Rs(W, K, E) Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Very variable, especially in the size of the sepals, petals, capsules and seeds; perhaps divisible into several subspecies.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 10.               Moenchia}                Ehrh.
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc  By †A.R. Clapham.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Glabrous, usually glaucous annuals. Leaves linear to oblong-lanceolate. Flowers 4- or 5-merous, solitary or in few-flowered, spreading cymes; bracts white-margined. Sepals lanceolate, acute, with broad, white, membranous margins; petals entire or slightly emarginate; stamens 4(5) or 8(10); styles (3)4(5), opposite the sepals. Fruit a straight capsule, dehiscing with twice as many short, obtuse teeth as styles. Seeds numerous, reniform, papillose.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Petals exceeding the sepals; flowers 5-merous; capsule
\par
  broadly ovoid ................................................................................. {\b 3. mantica}
\par
1 Petals shorter than or equalling the sepals; flowers 4- or
\par
  5-merous; capsule cylindrical to narrowly ovoid
\par
2 Leaves linear to linear-lanceolate; pedicels not thickened
\par
  distally; flowers 4-merous ................................................................ {\b 1. erecta}
\par
2 Leaves oblong-lanceolate; pedicels thickened distally;
\par
  flowers 5-merous ............................................................................. {\b 2. graeca}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. M. erecta} (L.) P. Gaertner, B. Meyer & Scherb.,{\i  Fl. Wetter.}{\b  1:} 219 (1799) ({\i M. quaternella} Ehrh.,{\i  Cerastium erectum} (L.) Cosson & Germ.). Erect annual, usually with ascending basal branches. Basal leaves shortly petiolate, the upper sessile, ascending; all linear or linear-lanceolate, rigid, acute, glaucous. Flowers 1-3(-5), c. 8 mm in diameter. Petals 4 (rarely 5 or absent), narrow, entire; stamens 4 or 8; styles 4, short and recurved. Capsule equalling or somewhat exceeding the sepals, opening by 8 revolute teeth.{\i  W., W.C. & S. Europe, northwards to England & eastwards to Turkey-in-Europe.} Be Br Bu Co †Cz Ga Ge Gr †Ho Hs It Ju Lu Sa Si Tu [Po].
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b erecta} : Stem 25-10 cm. Flowers 1-3. Petals 2/3 as long as the sepals; stamens 4. Capsule cylindrical, usually slightly exceeding the sepals. 2n = 36.{\i  Almost throughout the range of the species}.
\par
 ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b octandra} (Ziz ex Mert. & Koch) Coutinho,{\i  Fl. Port.} 211 (1913) ({\i M. octandra} (Ziz ex Mert. & Koch) Gay): Stem 10-20 cm. Flowers 2-5. Petals almost equalling the sepals; stamens 8. Capsule narrowly ovoid, scarcely equalling the sepals. {\i W. Mediterranean region, Portugal; Turkey-in-Europe}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. M. graeca} Boiss. & Heldr. in Boiss., {\i Diagn. Pl. Or. Nov.}{\b  3}({\b 1}): 91 (1853). Like {\b 1} but usually smaller and more branched; leaves oblong-lanceolate, scarcely acute; flowers 5-merous; pedicels flexuous, thickened distally; sepals exceeding the petals; styles about as long as the ovary in flower; capsule c. 2/3 as long as the sepals.{\i  E. & S. parts of Balkan peninsula; Aegean islands.} Al Bu Cr Gr
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 3. M. mantica} (L.) Bartl., {\i Cat. Sem. Horti Gotting.}{\b  5} (1839). Like {\b 1} but usually 15-30 cm, and larger throughout; bracts very broadly white-margined; flowers 3-9 or more, 5-merous; petals equalling to much exceeding the sepals; stamens 10; styles 5 (rarely 3 or 4), at least as long as the ovary; capsule broadly ovoid, opening by 10 teeth. 2n = 36. {\i S.E. Europe, extending to Austria and N.W. Italy}. Al Au Bu Gr He Hu It Ju Rm Tu.
\par

\par
175}
\par