{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 liptical, often distinctly connate at the base, yellowish-green and somewhat fleshy, ciliate, otherwise glabrous and shining. Flowers mostly solitary on short, upright stems which are glandular in the upper part; bracts scarious at the apex. Sepals 4-6 mm, rounded at the apex, glandular, 1/3 as long as the deeply bifid petals. Ripe capsules and seeds unknown. 2n = 72.{\i  N.E. Russia, Svalbard.} Rs(N) Sb. ({\i Circumpolar.})
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 29. C. alpinum} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 438 (1753) (incl.{\i  C. bekuravense} Jáv., {\i C. lanatum }Lam., {\i C. squalidum} Ramond). Perennial 5-20 cm. Leaves c. 10 × 5 mm, obovate to oblanceolate-elliptical, acute to obtuse at the apex, with long, soft hairs. Flowers 1-5; peduncles 1-4 cm; bracts acute, with scarious margins. Sepals 7-10 mm, acute, truncate at the base; petals about twice as long as the sepals. Capsule 8-14 mm, the upper ½ narrower and slightly curved. Seeds 1-1·4 mm, acutely tuberculate. 2n = c. 54, 72 (144).{\i  Arctic and subarctic Europe, extending southwards to Britain and Estonia; most of the principal mountain ranges of Europe.} Al Au Br Bu Cz Fe Ga Ge He Hs Is It Ju No Po Rm Rs(N, B, W) Sb Su.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Very variable in habit, leaf-shape and hairiness. Plants with dense, lanate, eglandular indumentum occur throughout the range of the species and are best distinguished as var.{\i  lanatum }(Lam.) Hegetschw. ({\i C. lanatum} Lam.). Pyrenean plants with densely glandular-hairy peduncles have been called subsp.{\i  squalidum} (Ramond) Hultén, but similar variants have been recorded for the Alps, Carpathians and Balkans, and are best recognized, if at all, at varietal level.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 30. C. glabratum} Hartman, {\i Handb. Skand. Fl.} 180 (1820) ({\i C. alpinum }subsp.{\i  glabratum} (Hartman) Á. & D. Löve). Like {\b 29} but with slender subterranean runners and totally glabrous stems and leaves; habit suberect; upper internodes often somewhat elongated; leaves up to 20 mm, narrow; sepals somewhat saccate.{\i  N.W. Russia, Fennoscandia, Iceland}. Fe Is No Rs(N) Su.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b C. glaberrimum }Lapeyr.,{\i  Hist. Abr. Pyr.} 265 (1813), from C. & E. Pyrenees, is like {\b 29} but the petals do not exceed the sepals. It probably deserves subspecific recognition.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 31. C. nigrescens} (H.C. Watson) Edmondston ex H.C. Watson,{\i  Part First Suppl. Cyb. Brit.}{\b  1:} 81 (1860). Perennial 2-15 cm, with subterranean runners. Leaves usually 10-15 × 4-5 mm, mostly narrower than in {\b 29}({\b a}). Flowers 1-3; bracts herbaceous. Sepals 6-9 mm, ovate to ovate-lanceolate with wide, scarious margins; petals at least twice as long as the sepals, shallowly bifid. Capsule broadly cylindrical, with a wide mouth, almost straight, up to twice as long as the sepals. Seeds 1-1·5 mm, rugose; testa close.{\i  N.W. Europe, extending to Svalbard and N.W. Finland.} Br Fa Fe Is No Sb Su.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Very variable in leaf-shape, hairiness, etc., especially in the Arctic. To some extent this variation may be due to hybridization with {\b 28} and {\b 29}. At present it seems best to distinguish only the following two subspecies.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp.{\b  nigrescens }({\i C. edmondstonii} (Edmondston) Murb. & Ostenf., {\i C. arcticum} subsp. {\i edmondstonii} (Edmondston) Á. & D. Löve): Compact. Leaves short, ovate to suborbicular, somewhat fleshy, dark green, densely glandular. Pedicels short, densely glandular. Sepals obtuse. 2n = 108.{\i  Stony slopes on serpentine. • Zetland} ({\i Unst}).
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp.{\b  arcticum} (Lange) Lusby,{\i  Watsonia}{\b  16:} 296 (1987). ({\i C. arcticum} Lange,{\i  C. edmondstonii} auct., non (Edmondston) Murb. & Ostenf.): Leaves up to 15 mm, pale or yellowish-green; margins with short, few-celled cilia, otherwise leaves glabrous to slightly pubescent. Sepals acute. 2n = 108. {\i Throughout the range of the species}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 32. C. uniflorum} Clairv., {\i Man. Herb. Suisse} 147 (1811). Like {\b 31}({\b b}) but 3-10 cm with leaves 10-18 × 3-5 mm, those of non-flowering shoots obovate to spathulate, subobtuse, attenuate, soft, bright green; sepals 5-7 mm; petals up to twice as long as the sepals, bifid half-way to the base; capsule narrower, twice as long as the sepals; pedicel twice as long as the narrowly cylindrical, curved capsule; seeds 1·5-2 mm, smoother; testa loose. 2n = 36.{\i  Screes and stony slopes; calcifuge. • Alps, W. Carpathians, mountains of C. Jugoslavia}. Au Cz Ga Ge He It Ju Po.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 33. C. theophrasti} Merxm. & Strid,{\i  Bot. Not.}{\b  130:} 469 (1977). Caespitose, densely glandular-hairy perennial; stems 2-9 cm. Leaves 7-11(-14) × 2·5-4 mm, narrowly elliptical to oblanceolate, obtuse. Flowers 1 or 2(3); pedicels deflexed at anthesis. Sepals 5-7 mm, subacute, with narrow scarious margins; petals 7-9·5 mm. Capsule 8-10 mm, tapering slightly above. Seeds 1·4-1·8 mm, with long acute tubercles. 2n = 36.{\i  Limestone screes above} 2600 {\i m. N. Greece} ({\i Olimbos}). Gr.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 34. C. latifolium} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 439 (1753). Perennial 3-10 cm, laxly caespitose, glandular-pubescent. Leaves 12-30 × 5-10 mm, ovate to ovate-elliptical, acute, sessile, rigid, bluish-green. Flowers 1-3; bracts herbaceous. Sepals 5-7 mm, with wide scarious margins; petals more than twice as long as the sepals, shallowly bifid. Capsule often more than twice as long as the sepals, broadly cylindrical, almost straight; pedicel not longer than the capsule. Seeds 1·7-2·5 mm, shallowly rugose; testa loose. 2n = 36.{\i  Stony slopes; calcicole. • Alps; isolated stations in Appennini and Carpathians.} Au Cz Ga Ge He It Po Rm.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 35. C. pyrenaicum} Gay,{\i  Ann. Sci. Nat.} ser. 1, {\b 26:} 231 (1832). Like {\b 34} but petals ciliate at the base, and only slightly exceeding the sepals. 2n = 38.{\i  E. Pyrenees.} Ga Hs.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 36. C. runemarkii} Möschl & Rech. fil.,{\i  Anzeig. Akad. Wiss.} ({\i Wien}) {\b 1962:} 231 (1962) ({\i C. coronense }Runemark, non Schur). Mat-forming or caespitose perennial 5-10 cm; stems, peduncles, leaves and sepals covered with long, straight, eglandular hairs. Leaves 5-10 × 2-4 mm, elliptical to oblanceolate. Flowers solitary, terminal or in leaf-axils, without sepal-like bracts; peduncles 1·5-3 cm. Sepals 7-8 mm, lanceolate, with wide scarious margins; petals 9-10 mm. Capsule not much longer than the sepals, scarcely curved. Seeds 0·7-0·8 mm, minutely muricate. 2n = 36.{\i  Limestone and schistose cliffs. • Kikhlades (Naxos); Evvoia }({\i Okhi}). Gr.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 37. C. pedunculatum} Gaudin,{\i  Fl. Helv.}{\b  3:} 251 (1828). Perennial 3-10 cm, laxly caespitose, sparsely pubescent or almost glabrous. Leaves 10-20 × 3 mm, lanceolate, stiff. Flowers campanulate, mostly solitary; pedicels up to 3 times as long as the capsule. Sepals 5-7 mm, acute, with narrow scarious margins; petals glabrous, only slightly exceeding the sepals, deeply bifid. Capsule up to twice as long as the sepals; teeth revolute. Seeds c. 1 mm; testa loose. 2n = 36.{\i  Stony slopes above} 2000{\i  m; calcifuge. Alps.} Au Ga He It.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 38. C. dinaricum} G. Beck & Szysz.,{\i  Rozpr. Akad. Um. }({\i Mat.Przyr}.) {\b 19:} 62 (1889). Like {\b 37} but up to 15 cm; upper bracts sepal-like, with scarious margins; sepals 3-5 mm, acute, with broad scarious margins; capsule more than twice as long as the sepals;
\par

\par
170}
\par