{\rtf1\ansi \deff4\deflang1033{\fonttbl{\f4\froman\fcharset0\fprq2 Times New Roman;}}{\colortbl;\red0\green0\blue0;\red0\green0\blue255;\red0\green255\blue255;\red0\green255\blue0;\red255\green0\blue255;\red255\green0\blue0;\red255\green255\blue0;\red255\green255\blue255;\red0\green0\blue128;\red0\green128\blue128;\red0\green128\blue0;\red128\green0\blue128;\red128\green0\blue0;\red128\green128\blue0;\red128\green128\blue128;\red192\green192\blue192;}{\stylesheet{\widctlpar \f4\fs20\lang2057 \snext0 Normal;}{\*\cs10 \additive Default Paragraph Font;}}{\info{\author dddd}{\operator dddd}{\creatim\yr1998\mo11\dy11\hr16\min36}{\revtim\yr1998\mo11\dy11\hr16\min37}{\version2}{\edmins1}{\nofpages3}{\nofwords1054}{\nofchars6012}{\*\company  }{\vern57431}}\widowctrl\ftnbj\aenddoc\hyphcaps0 \fet0\sectd \linex0 {\*\pnseclvl1\pnucrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl2\pnucltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl3\pndec\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl4\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl5\pndec\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl6\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl7\pnlcrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl8\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl9\pnlcrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}
\pard\plain \ \f4\fs20\lang2057 {\fs28    }{\b\fs28 49. C. brachypetalum}{\fs28  Pers.,}{\i\fs28  Syn. Pl.}{\b\fs28  1:}{\fs28  520 (1805). Annual up to 40 cm; stem with long, deflexed, patent or ascending eglandular hairs, with or without glandular hairs. Leaves up to 20 mm, the lower spathulate or obovate, the upper ovate, elliptical or oblong, obtuse to acute, hairy. Inflorescence more or less lax; pedicels 3-27 mm, bent just below the flower, with patent or ascending-appressed eglandular hairs, with or without glandular hairs; bracts herbaceous. Sepals 3-6\'b75 mm, lanceolate to oblong-lanceolate, obtuse to acute, the margin scarious, with eglandular hairs exceeding the apex, with or without glandular hairs; petals shorter than or longer than the sepals, bifid for up to 1/3 their length, with a small auricle at the base; stamens up to 10; styles 5. Capsule 6-9 mm. Seeds 0\'b74-1 mm, minutely tuberculate.}{\i\fs28  S., W. & C. Europe, extending northwards to S. Sweden and eastwards to Krym}{\fs28 . Al Au Be Bl *Br Bu Co Cz Da Ga Ge Gr He \'86Ho Hs Hu It Ju Lu No Po Rm Rs(C, ?W, K, E) Si Su Tu.
\par 
\par }
\pard \li200\ {\fs28 1 Pedicels and sepals with long eglandular hairs, without glandular hairs
\par 2 Pedicels with ascending-appressed eglandular hairs  (}{\b\fs28 e}{\fs28 ) subsp.}{\b\fs28  tenoreanum}{\fs28 
\par 2 Pedicels with patent, deflexed or slightly ascending hairs
\par 3 Hairs of pedicels patent or deflexed; hairs on sepals up to
\par   2\'b75 mm; capsule-teeth erect ............................................ (}{\b\fs28 f}{\fs28 ) subsp.}{\b\fs28  atheniense}{\fs28 
\par 3 Hairs of pedicels usually slightly ascending; hairs 
\par   on sepals up to 1\'b75 mm; capsule-teeth patent .......... (}{\b\fs28 a}{\fs28 ) subsp.}{\b\fs28  brachypetalum}{\fs28 
\par 1 Pedicels and sepals with long glandular hairs mixed with eglandular hairs
\par 4 Petals longer than sepals
\par 5 Plant up to 7 cm, with numerous glandular and eglandular hairs;
\par   styles c. 1 mm; seeds c. 1 mm .......................................... (}{\b\fs28 d}{\fs28 ) subsp.}{\b\fs28  doerfleri}{\fs28 
\par 5 Plant 7-25 cm, with numerous glandular and few eglandular hairs;
\par   styles 1\'b75-3 mm; seeds 0\'b75-0\'b77 mm
\par 6 Stamens glabrous; styles 2-3 mm ................................ (}{\b\fs28 b}{\fs28 ) subsp.}{\b\fs28  pindigenum}{\fs28 
\par 6 Stamens ciliate; styles 1\'b75-2 mm ................................... (}{\b\fs28 c}{\fs28 ) subsp. }{\b\fs28 corcyrense}{\fs28 
\par 4 Petals shorter than or almost equalling sepals
\par 7 Seeds 0\'b75-0\'b76 mm; glandular and eglandular hairs of pedicels and sepals
\par   usually more or less equally abundant and not dense ....... (}{\b\fs28 g}{\fs28 ) subsp.}{\b\fs28  tauricum}{\fs28 
\par 7 Seeds 0\'b76-0\'b78 mm; glandular hairs usually denser and
\par   eglandular hairs fewer .......................................................... (}{\b\fs28 h}{\fs28 ) subsp.}{\b\fs28  roeseri}{\fs28 
\par 
\par }
\pard \ {\fs28  (}{\b\fs28 a}{\fs28 ) Subsp.}{\b\fs28  brachypetalum}{\fs28  : Plant 5-40 cm; stems with slightly ascending eglandular hairs up to 1\'b75 mm, without glandular hairs. Pedicels 5-18 mm, clothed like the stem. Sepals 4-5\'b75 mm, clothed like the stem; petals c. 3/4 as long as the sepals, glabrous or ciliate; stamens glabrous or ciliate; styles 0\'b775-1 mm. Capsule 6-7\'b75 mm; teeth patent. Seeds c. 0\'b75 mm. 2n = 90.}{\i\fs28  W. & C. Europe, extending to Italy and Denmark}{\fs28 .
\par  (}{\b\fs28 b}{\fs28 ) Subsp.}{\b\fs28  pindigenum}{\fs28  (Lonsing) P.D. Sell & Whitehead,}{\i\fs28  Feddes Repert.}{\b\fs28  69:}{\fs28  18 (1964) (}{\i\fs28 C. pindigenum}{\fs28  Lonsing): Plant 7-25 cm; stems with dense glandular and few eglandular hairs. Pedicels 4-20 mm, clothed like the stem. Sepals 3-5 mm, with numerous glandular hairs and a few eglandular hairs mostly near the apex; petals longer than the sepals, cuneate at the base, glabrous or with a few hairs; stamens glabrous; styles 2-3 mm. Capsule 6-8 mm; teeth patent. Seeds 0\'b75-0\'b77 mm.}{\i\fs28  N. & C. Greece.}{\fs28 
\par  (}{\b\fs28 c}{\fs28 ) Subsp. }{\b\fs28 corcyrense}{\fs28  (M\'f6schl) P.D. Sell & Whitehead,}{\i\fs28  loc. cit.}{\fs28  (1964) (}{\i\fs28 C. corcyrense}{\fs28  M\'f6schl,}{\i\fs28  C. brachiatum}{\fs28  Lonsing): Plant 7-12 cm; stems with dense glandular and few eglandular hairs. Pedicels 3-13 mm, clothed like the stem. Sepals 4-5 mm, with numerous glandular hairs, and few eglandular hairs especially near the apex; petals longer than the sepals, obcordate, ciliate at the base; stamens ciliate at the base; styles 1\'b75-2 mm. Capsule 7-9 mm; teeth patent. Seeds 0\'b75-0\'b77 mm. \bullet }{\i\fs28  N.W. Greece}{\fs28  (}{\i\fs28 Kerkira}{\fs28 ).
\par  (}{\b\fs28 d}{\fs28 ) Subsp.}{\b\fs28  doerfleri}{\fs28  (Hal\'e1csy ex Hayek) P.D. Sell & Whitehead, }{\i\fs28 loc. cit.}{\fs28  (1964) (}{\i\fs28 C. doerfleri}{\fs28  Hal\'e1csy ex Hayek,}{\i\fs28  C. brachiatum}{\fs28  Lonsing): Plant up to 7 cm; stems with eglandular and glandular hairs. Pedicels 3-11 mm, clothed like the stem. Sepals 3\'b75-6 mm, clothed like the stem; petals longer than the sepals, glabrous; stamens glabrous; styles c. 1 mm. Capsule c. 8 mm; teeth erect. Seeds c. 1 mm. }{\i\fs28 \bullet  Mountains of Kriti}{\fs28 .
\par  (}{\b\fs28 e}{\fs28 ) Subsp.}{\b\fs28  tenoreanum}{\fs28  (Ser.) So\'f3 in So\'f3 & J\'e1v.,}{\i\fs28  Magyar Nov. Kez.}{\b\fs28  2:}{\fs28  761 (1951) (}{\i\fs28 ?C. epiroticum}{\fs28  M\'f6schl & Rech. fil., }{\i\fs28 C. tenoreanum}{\fs28  Ser.): Plant 5-18 cm; stems with ascending-appressed eglandular hairs, without glandular hairs. Pedicels 5-17 mm, clothed like the stem. Sepals 4-5 mm, with eglandular hairs up to 1\'b75 mm, without glandular hairs; petals c. 3/4 as long as the sepals, ciliate at the base; stamens glabrous; styles 0\'b775-1 mm. Capsule 6\'b75-7\'b75 mm; teeth patent. Seeds 0\'b74-0\'b76 mm. 2n = 52. }{\i\fs28 \bullet  C. & S. Europe from Italy eastwards}{\fs28 .
\par  (}{\b\fs28 f}{\fs28 ) Subsp.}{\b\fs28  atheniense}{\fs28  (Lonsing) P.D. Sell & Whitehead,}{\i\fs28  Feddes Repert.}{\b\fs28  69:}{\fs28  19 (1964) (}{\i\fs28 C. atheniense}{\fs28  Lonsing): Plant 15-25 cm; stems with long, patent or deflexed eglandular hairs, without glandular hairs. Pedicels 5-25 mm, clothed like the stem. Sepals 4-6 mm, with eglandular hairs up to 2\'b75 mm, without glandular hairs; petals c. \'bd as long as the sepals, ciliate at the base; stamens glabrous or slightly ciliate; styles 1\'b72-1\'b75 mm. Capsule 6-9 mm; teeth erect. Seeds 0\'b76-0\'b78 mm. 2n = c. 90.\bullet }{\i\fs28   E.C. Greece}{\fs28  (}{\b\fs28 Attiki}{\fs28 ).
\par  (}{\b\fs28 g}{\fs28 ) Subsp.}{\b\fs28  tauricum}{\fs28  (Sprengel) Murb.,}{\i\fs28  Lunds Univ. Arsskr.}{\b\fs28  27}{\fs28 (}{\b\fs28 5}{\fs28 ): 159 (1892) (}{\i\fs28 C. luridum}{\fs28  Guss.,}{\i\fs28  C. tauricum}{\fs28  Sprengel): Plant 5-37 cm; stems with long, patent or slightly ascending eglandular hairs mixed with long glandular hairs. Pedicels 5-27 mm, clothed like the stem. Sepals 4\'b75-5 mm, clothed like the stem; petals c. 3/4 as long as the sepals, glabrous or ciliate; styles c. 0\'b775 mm. Capsule 6-8 mm; teeth patent. Seeds 0\'b75-0\'b76 mm. 2n = c. 90.}{\i\fs28  W. & C. Europe, extending to S. Sweden, Balkan peninsula and Krym}{\fs28 .
\par  (}{\b\fs28 h}{\fs28 ) Subsp.}{\b\fs28  roeseri}{\fs28  (Boiss. & Heldr.) Nyman, }{\i\fs28 Consp. }{\fs28 109 (1878) (}{\i\fs28 C. luridum}{\fs28  subsp.}{\i\fs28  mediterraneum}{\fs28  Lonsing): Plant 6-35 cm; stems with dense, long glandular and few eglandular hairs. Pedicels 3-12(-15) mm, clothed like the stem. Sepals 4-6\'b75 mm, clothed like the stem; petals nearly as long as the sepals, glabrous; stamens glabrous; styles 0\'b775-1\'b75 mm. Capsule 6-9 mm; teeth patent. Seeds 0\'b76-0\'b78 mm. 2n = 72.}{\i\fs28  S. Europe}{\fs28 .
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 50. C. glomeratum}{\fs28  Thuill.,}{\i\fs28  Fl. Paris }{\fs28 ed. 2, 226 (1799) (}{\i\fs28 C. viscosum}{\fs28  auct. mult.). Annual up to 30(-45) cm; stem with eglandular and glandular hairs. Leaves 5-25 mm, the lower oblanceolate to obovate, the cauline ovate or ovate-elliptical, obtuse, hairy. Flowers in compact, cymose clusters; pedicels shorter than the sepals; bracts herbaceous. Sepals 4-5 mm, lanceolate, acute, with a narrow, scarious margin, with glandular hairs and eglandular hairs exceeding the apex; petals more or less equalling or shorter than the sepals (rarely absent), bifid for up to 1/4 their length; stamens 10; styles 5. Capsule 6-10 mm. Seeds 0\'b74-0\'b75 mm, pale brown, finely tuberculate. 2n = 72.}{\i\fs28  Dry, open habitats. Throughout Europe except the north-east. All except}{\fs28  Fe Rs(N) Sb.
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 51. C. rectum}{\fs28  Friv.,}{\i\fs28  Flora}{\fs28  (}{\i\fs28 Regensb}{\fs28 .) }{\b\fs28 19:}{\fs28  435 (1836). Annual 8-80 cm; stem with glandular and short eglandular hairs. Leaves up to 60 mm, ovate, oblong-ovate or lanceolate, with more or less numerous eglandular and glandular hairs. Pedicels longer than the
\par 
\par 173}
\par }