{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 (4-)8-25(-36) mm × (1·5-)3-10(-13) mm. Cymes with few to many flowers; lowest bracts with or without scarious margin; sepals 3-7(-9) mm; petals shorter to slightly longer than the sepals. Capsule (7-)9-13(-15) mm. Seeds 0·4-0·85(-1·2) mm, with tubercles usually not more than 0·04 mm. 2n = 144, 162 (?72-180).{\i  Throughout the range of the species}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b d}) Subsp.{\b  scoticum} Jalas & P.D. Sell,{\i  Watsonia}{\b  6:} 293 (1967) ({\i C. triviale} var.{\i  alpinum} auct. brit., non Mert. & Koch): Plant pubescent to subglabrous, without glandular hairs. Flowering stems 3-16 cm. Cauline leaves (5-)7-8(-10) × 1·5-3 mm. Cymes with (1-)3(-6) flowers; lowest bracts with or without scarious margin; petals 1·4-1·7 times as long as the sepals. Capsule 9-12·5 mm. Seeds 0·8-1·2 mm, with tubercles up to 0·05 mm.{\i  Serpentine rocks. Scotland} ({\i Glen Clova}).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Subsp. ({\b b}) sometimes resembles {\b 42} but has longer sepals and capsules and shorter petals.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Plants from N. Europe that have been called subsp. scandicum H. Gartner,{\i  Feddes Repert.} ({\i Beih}.) {\b 113:} 68 (1939), are often less hairy than those from C. Europe. Plants from Iceland and Færöer that have been assigned to subsp. scandicum are more or less intermediate between subspp. ({\b a}) and ({\b c}). Plants similar to subsp. ({\b a}) but with glandular hairs are hybrids with{\b  29} or {\b 31}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Var.{\i  holosteoides} (Fries) Jalas of subsp. ({\b c}) ({\i C. holosteoides} Fries,{\i  C. fontanum} subsp. {\i glabrescens} (G.F.W. Meyer) Salman, van Omm. & de Voogd), from riversides in N.W. Europe, grades into var.{\i  vulgare} but in its extreme form has subglabrous, eglandular flowering stems up to 90 cm, leaves up to 36 mm, sepals up to 9 mm, capsules up to 16 mm and seeds up to 1·2 mm.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 44. C. pauciflorum} Steven ex Ser. in DC., {\i Prodr. }{\b 1:} 414 (1824). Perennial 20-60 cm, glandular-hairy, usually with a single flowering stem, without runner-like leafy shoots. Leaves lanceolate-elliptical, sessile or subsessile. Sepals 4-6 mm, obtuse; petals and capsule 2½-3 times as long as the sepals. Capsule with revolute teeth. Seeds 0·7-0·8 mm, strongly tuberculate.{\i  E. Russia.} Rs(C). ({\i N. & C. Asia}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 45. C. illyricum} Ard.,{\i  Animadv. Bot. Spec. Alt.} 26 (1763) ({\i C. illyricum} var.{\i  macropetalum} Boiss., {\i C. pilosum} Sibth. & Sm.). Annual 1·5-20(-30) cm, very hairy throughout, the hairs of the stems and pedicels often deflexed-appressed. Leaves up to 14 mm, the lower spathulate or obovate, the upper oblong to ovate or elliptical, more or less obtuse. Bracts herbaceous. Sepals oblong-lanceolate to lanceolate, more or less acute; petals with a minute, acute auricle at the base, glabrous; stamens 5-10; styles 5. Seeds chestnut-brown, minutely tuberculate. • {\i S. & W. Greece.} Gr.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Sepals 10-11 mm; stamens ciliate at base; capsule 11-12 mm
\par
  ............................................................................................ ({\b d}) subsp.{\b  crinitum}
\par
1 Sepals 4-9 mm; stamens glabrous; capsule 6-7 mm
\par
2 Sepals 8-9 mm, with wide scarious margins; 
\par
  hairs not or scarcely extending beyond apex .................... ({\b a}) subsp.{\b  illyricum}
\par
2 Sepals 4-8 mm, with narrow or no scarious margins; 
\par
  hairs extending well beyond apex
\par
3 Plant 2·5-10 cm; sepals 5-5·5 mm; fruiting pedicels
\par
  5-13 mm ........................................................................ ({\b b}) subsp.{\b  decrescens}
\par
3 Plant 5-22 cm; sepals 5·5-8 mm; fruiting pedicels 
  10-50 mm ...................................................................... ({\b c}) subsp. {\b brachiatum}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp.{\b  illyricum} ({\i C. pelligerum} Bornm. & Hayek): Plant 6-20 cm. Fruiting pedicels 8-15(-18) mm, erect, with appressed hairs. Sepals 8-9 mm, with wide scarious margins; hairs not scarcely exceeding the apex; petals about equalling the sepals; stamens glabrous. Capsule c. 6 mm. 2n = 34. •{\i  W. Greece} ({\i Ionioi Nisoi}).
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp.{\b  decrescens} (Lonsing) P.D. Sell & Whitehead,{\i  Feddes Repert.}{\i  69:} 15 (1964) ({\i C.pedunculare} sensu Hayek pro parte, non Bory & Chaub.,{\i  C. illyricum} subsp.{\i  pilosum} sensu Rouy & Fouc.): Plant 2·5-10 cm. Fruiting pedicels 5-13 mm, more or less divaricate, the hairs mainly deflexed-appressed. Sepals 5-5·5 mm, the outer without or with only narrow, scarious margins; hairs much exceeding the apex; petals equalling or a little longer than the sepals; stamens glabrous; styles 2-3 mm. Capsule 6-7 mm. Seeds c. 0·6 mm. •{\i  S. Greece }({\i Argolis, Arkadhia and Kefallinia}).
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b c}) Subsp.{\b  brachiatum} (Lonsing) Jalas,{\i  Ann. Bot. Fenn.}{\b  20:} 110 (1983) (subsp.{\i  prolixum} (Lonsing) P.D. Sell & Whitehead, {\i C. pedunculare} sensu Hayek, pro parte, non Bory & Chaub.,{\i  C. brachiatum} Lonsing): Plant 5-22 cm. Fruiting pedicels 10-50 mm, erect or divaricate, the hairs mostly deflexed-appressed. Sepals 5·5-8 mm, the outer without or with only narrow scarious margins; hairs much exceeding the apex; petals equalling or a little longer than the sepals; stamens glabrous; styles 3-4 mm. Capsule 6-7·5 mm. Seeds c. 0·6 mm. 2n = 34. •{\i  S. & W. Greece}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b d}) Subsp.{\b  crinitum} (Lonsing) P.D. Sell & Whitehead,{\i  Feddes Repert.}{\b  69:} 15 (1964) ({\i C. crinitum} Lonsing): Plant up to 18 cm. Fruiting pedicels 8-15 mm, erect, with long, patent hairs. Sepals 10-11 mm, the outer without or with very narrow scarious margins; hairs much exceeding the apex; petals more or less equalling the sepals; stamens ciliate at the base; styles c. 3-5 mm. Capsule 11-12 mm. Seeds 0·6-1 mm. •{\i  W. Greece} ({\i Akarnania}).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 46. C. comatum} Desv., {\i Jour. Bot. Appl.}{\b  3:} 228 (1816) ({\i C. illyricum} Ard. subsp.{\i  comatum} (Desv.) P.D. Sell & Whitehead, {\i C. illyricum} sensu Hayek, non Ard.). Annual 1·5-12 cm; very hairy throughout. Leaves like those of {\b 45}. Bracts herbaceous. Fruiting pedicels 2-20 mm, more or less erect, the hairs mostly deflexed. Sepals 4-7·5 mm, the outer without or with only narrow scarious margins; hairs much exceeding the apex; petals usually only ½ but sometimes up to ¾ as long as the sepals; stamens glabrous; styles c. 1 mm. Capsule c. 7 mm. Seeds 0·5-0·8 mm. 2n = 34.{\i  Dry places. Aegean region; Corse.} Co Cr Gr Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 47. C. pedunculare} Bory & Chaub. in Bory, {\i Expéd. Sci. Morée}{\b  3}({\b 2}): 130 (1832) ({\i C. laxum} Boiss. & Heldr.). Annual up to 20 cm; stem with deflexed-appressed hairs and minute glands. Lower leaves spathulate, the cauline up to 15 mm, ovate or elliptical, hairy. Inflorescence lax; pedicels 10-60 mm, with deflexed-appressed hairs; bracts herbaceous. Sepals 8-9·5 mm, more or less lanceolate, subacute, the margin and apex scarious, with long hairs not exceeding the apex; petals 1½ times as long again as the sepals, bifid for 1/5 their length; stamens 10; styles 5. Capsule c. 8 mm. Seeds 0·8-1 mm, chestnut-brown, minutely tuberculate. •{\i  S.W. Greece }({\i Messinia}). Gr.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 48. C. scaposum} Boiss. & Heldr. in Boiss.,{\i  Diagn. Pl. Or. Nov.}{\b  2}({\b 8}): 104 (1849). Annual up to 11 cm; stem very short, stiffly hairy. Leaves 3-12 mm, ovate, obovate or elliptical, more or less obtuse, hairy. Flowers usually solitary on slender, appressed-hairy pedicels 30-70 mm. Sepals 4-5·5 mm, ovate-lanceolate to lanceolate, more or less obtuse, with wide, scarious margins and apex, and long, appressed hairs not exceeding the apex; petals longer than the sepals, bifid for c. 1/5 their length; stamens 10; styles 5. Capsule 6-8 mm. Seeds 0·6-1 mm, chestnut-brown, minutely tuberculate. 2n = 36.{\i  Limestone rocks and screes.• Mountains of Kriti.} Cr.
\par

\par
172}
\par