{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}
\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b d}) Subsp.{\b  polycnemoides} (Willk. & Costa) Font Quer,{\i  Butll. Inst. Catalana Hist. Nat. }{\b 37:} 51 (1949) ({\i S. polycnemoides} Willk. & Costa): Forming a dense cushion, with stems up to 3 cm; internodes up to 5 mm. Leaves 4-6 mm, linear, acute, glabrous or slightly hairy. Inflorescence usually with more than 7 flowers in a cluster. Fruit 3·5-4·5 mm; sepals erect or incurved.{\i • E. Pyrenees}.
\par
\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b e}) Subsp.{\b  vulcanicus} (Strobl) Béguinot in Fiori & Béguinot,{\i  Nuovo Gior. Bot. Ital.} nov. ser., {\b 16:} 464 (1909): Compact, with stems up to 6 cm; internodes 2-4 mm. Leaves 3-6(-8) mm, lanceolate, obtuse, shortly ciliate. Inflorescence with not more than 5 flowers in a cluster. Fruit 3-4·5 mm; sepals more or less patent. •{\i  Sicilia} ({\i Etna}).
\par
\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b f}) Subsp.{\b  marginatus} (Guss.) Nyman,{\i  Consp.} 257 (1879) ({\i S. neglectus} Rochel ex Baumg., {\i S. perennis} subsp.{\i  neglectus} (Rochel ex Baumg.) Stoj. & Stefanov): With numerous long, procumbent stems; internodes 5-10(-25) mm. Leaves 5-9 mm, linear, obtuse, shortly ciliate. Inflorescence with not more than 5 flowers in a cluster. Fruit 4·5-5·5 mm; sepals more or less patent.{\i  Balkan peninsula, Romania; S. Italy, Sicilia}.
\par
\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b g}) Subsp.{\b  dichotomus} (Schur) Nyman, {\i Consp., Suppl.}{\b  2:} 126 (1889) ({\i S. dichotomus} Schur): Like subsp. ({\b f}) but stems fewer, ascending, dichotomously branched; fruit 5-6·5 mm. {\i Mountain rocks. From N. Romania to N. Greece}.
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. S. annuus} L.,{\i  Sp. Pl}. 406 (1753). Annual or biennial herb with ascending stems up to 25 cm. Leaves linear, channelled obtuse, ciliate at the base. Inflorescence of axillary and terminal clusters, which are often exceeded by the bracts. Fruit 1·2-5·5 mm; sepals lanceolate, more or less acute, with a scarious margin not more than 0·1 mm wide. 2n = 44.{\i  Almost throughout Europe except the extreme north.} All except Az Fa Is Sb.
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Fruit 3·2-4·5(-5·5) mm; sepals patent ................................. ({\b a}) subsp.{\b  annuus}
\par 1 Fruit 1·2-3(-3·8) mm; sepals erect or connivent
\par 2 Sepals unequal, connivent .......................................... ({\b c}) subsp.{\b  verticillatus}
\par 2 Sepals equal, erect or connivent
\par 3 Fruit 2·2-3(-3·8) mm; sepals erect or connivent ........... ({\b b}) subsp.{\b  polycarpos}
\par 3 Fruit 1·2-1·6(-2·3) mm; sepals distinctly connivent ........... ({\b d}) subsp.{\b  delortii} 
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp.{\b  annuus }({\i S. glaucovirens} Halácsy,{\i  S. velebiticus} Degen & Rossi): Stems 2-24 cm. Leaves 4-10(-20) mm. Fruit 3·2-4·5(-5·5) mm; sepals more or less equal, patent.{\i  Usually calcifuge. Throughout the range of the species}.
\par
\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp.{\b  polycarpos} (L.) Thell. in Schinz & R. Keller,{\i  Fl. Schweiz} ed. 3,{\b  2:} 109 (1914) ({\i S. polycarpos} L.): Stems 2-17 cm. Leaves 4-8 mm. Fruit 2·2-3(-3·8) mm; sepals equal, erect or connivent. 2n = 44.{\i  Usually calcifuge. Most of Europe, but absent from much of the south and east.}
\par
\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b c}) Subsp.{\b  verticillatus} (Tausch) Arcangeli, {\i Comp. Fl. Ital.} 110 (1882) ({\i S. polycarpos} subsp. {\i collinus} (Hornung ex Opiz) Pignatti,{\i  S. collinus} Hornung ex Opiz, {\i S. verticillatus }Tausch,{\i  S. syvashicus} Kleopow): Stems 3-14 cm. Leaves 4-6(-10) mm. Fruit 1·5-2·2(-3·0) mm; sepals unequal, connivent. {\i Somewhat calcicole. S. & S.C. Europe}.
\par
\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b d}) Subsp.{\b  delortii} (Gren.) Meikle,{\i  Fl. Cyprus}{\b  1:} 286 (1977) ({\i S. delortii }Gren., {\i S. ruscinonensis} (Gillot & Coste) Rössler, {\i S. polycarpos} subsp. {\i ruscinonensis} (Gillot & Coste) Pignatti, {\i S. annuus} subsp. {\i ruscinonensis} (Gillot & Coste) P.D. Sell): Usually less than 10 cm. Leaves 4-6 mm. Fruit 1·2-1·6(-2·3) mm; sepals equal, connivent at the apex.{\i  S.W. Europe.}
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28 Subsp.{\b  aetnensis} (Strobl) Pignatti,{\i  Gior. Bot. Ital.}{\b  107:} 207 (1973), from Sicilia (Etna), has fruits c. 3 mm and sepals with a somewhat narrower scarious margin, but otherwise resembles subsp ({\b a})
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28 Hybrids between {\b 1} and {\b 2}, which are more or less sterile, sometimes occur where the two species grow together.
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 3. S. uncinatus} Schur, Verh. Mitt. Siebenb. Ver. Naturw. 1: 107 (1850). Annual with ascending stems up to 12 cm. Leaves 7-10 mm, linear, channelled, subacute, glabrous or slightly ciliate at the base. Inflorescence of axillary and terminal 2- to 6-flowered clusters; bracts often exceeding clusters. Fruit 5-6 mm; sepals linear-lanceolate, patent with an incurved hook at the apex, with a scarious margin not more than 0·1 mm wide. S. Europe; Carpathians. Al Bu Ga Hs It Ju Rm Rs(W, ?K) ?Tu.
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b  Subfam.   Paronychioideae}
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28 Leaves opposite, alternate or verticillate; stipules present. Petals often very small or absent; sepals free.
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 14.            Corrigiola}                L.
\par
\pard\f0\fs24\qc  By S.M. Walters & J.R. Akeroyd.
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28 Glabrous herbs with more or less decumbent stems and alternate leaves. Inflorescence compound, cymose; flowers numerous, small, more or less aggregated, slightly perigynous. Sepals, petals and stamens 5; stigmas 3. Fruit a trigonous achene enclosed in the persistent calyx.
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28 Literature: M.N. Chaudhri,{\i  Meded. Bot. Mus. Herb. Rijksuniv. Utrecht}{\b  285:} 34 52 (1968).
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. C. litoralis} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 271 (1753). Glaucous, with decumbent or ascending stems up to 25 cm. Cauline leaves linear-oblanceolate obtuse, entire; stipules small, scarious. Flowers in dense, terminal and axillary cymose clusters. Sepals c. 1 mm, slightly longer than the whitish petals. Fruit 1-2 mm. {\i On seasonally wet, sandy ground. W., C. & S. Europe; occasional as a casual elsewhere.} Al Be Bl Br Bu Co Cr Cz Ga Ge Gr Ho Hs It Ju Lu Po Sa Si Tu.
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b litoralis} (incl. subsp.{\i  foliosa} (Pérez-Lara ex Willk.) Chaudhri): Annual, with slender taproot; stems decumbent. Basal leaves similar to the cauline, not fleshy. Inflorescence-branches with leafy bracts at the base. Fruit 1-1·5 mm. 2n = 18.{\i  Throughout the range of the species}.
\par
\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp.{\b  telephiifolia} (Pourret) Briq.,{\i  Prodr. Fl. Corse}{\b  1:} 481 (1910) ({\i C. telephiifolia} Pourret): Usually perennial, with thick, woody taproot; stems often ascending, stouter. Basal leaves narrowly obovate, more or less fleshy. Inflorescence-branches usually ebracteate. Fruit 1·5-2 mm. 2n = 18. {\i S.W. Europe}.
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28 {\b C. imbricata }Lapeyr.,{\i  Hist. Abr. Pyr.} 169 (1813) ({\i C. telephiifolia} subsp.{\i  imbrieata} (Lapeyr.) Greuter & Burdet), from S.W. Europe, is perennial with short stems and more or less densely imbricate leaves. It is, perhaps, best included within subsp. ({\b b}) as var.{\i  imbricata} (Lapeyr.) DC.
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 15.           Paronychia}             Miller
\par
\pard\f0\fs24\qc  By A.O. Chater & J.R. Akeroyd.
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28 Herbs, sometimes woody at the base, with erect to procumbent, usually much-branched stems. Leaves opposite (or sometimes
\par
\par 179}
\par