{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 11 (1879) ({\i P. tauricum} (C. Presl) V. Krecz., {\i Pteris aquilina} L.).Leaves 40-400 cm, 2-pinnate or more usually 3-pinnate-pinnatifid, more or less woolly to glabrous on the lower surface, glabrous or subglabrous on the upper, the young unfurling fronds (croziers) with filiform, white (colourless) scales and usually with red hairs; petiole tomentose at the base, remaining so or becoming glabrous throughout; pinnae orientated horizontally; pinnules shortly acuminate to obtuse. Indusium ciliate. 2n = 104.{\i  Usually calcifuge. Almost throughout Europe but local in the east.} All except Fa Is Sb.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 A cosmopolitan species with three or possibly more subspecies in Europe.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Croziers without red hairs; rhachis ± erect ................... ({\b c}) subsp.{\b  atlanticum}
\par
1 Croziers with red hairs; rhachis inclined
\par
2 Petiole fleshy, green; croziers with few red hairs .......... ({\b a}) subsp.{\b  aquilinum}
\par
2 Petiole wiry, reddish; croziers with dense red hairs .... ({\b b}) subsp.{\b  latiusculum}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp.{\b  aquilinum} : Croziers with white filiform scales and few red hairs. Petiole fleshy, mucilaginous, green; rhachis inclined slightly further at each successive pair of pinnae; lamina oblong-lanceolate to ovate-triangular; pinnae arising at angle of c. 75°.{\i  Calcifuge. Throughout the range of the species}.
\par
 ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b latiusculum} (Desv.) C.N. Page, {\i Watsonia}{\b  17:} 429 (1989) ({\i P. aquilinum} var.{\i  latiusculum} (Desv.) Underw. ex A.A. Heller): Croziers with dense red hairs and few, white, filiform scales. Petiole wiry, rigid, reddish; rhachis strongly inclined at  position of first pair of pinnae; lamina broadly triangular; pinnae arising at angle of c. 60°. {\i Calcifuge; native conifer woodland. N.C. & N. Europe}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b c}) Subsp.{\b  atlanticum} C.N. Page, {\i Watsonia}{\b  17:} 431 (1989): Croziers with dense white, filiform scales, without red hairs. Petiole succulent, mucilaginous, pale green; rhachis more or less vertical; lamina ovate-triangular; pinnae spreading nearly at right-angles.{\i  Calcicole; limestone grassland near coasts. W. Scotland}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Subsp.{\b  brevipes} (Tausch) Wulf,{\i  Fl. Kryma }{\b 1:} 20 (1927), with tough, stiff, pale-green petioles, coriaceous lamina, thickly lanate beneath, few pinnae, and with croziers lacking red hairs, has been described from Kriti and Krym. Its identity is uncertain.
\par

\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 16.       THELYPTERIDACEAE} 
\par 

\pard\f0\fs24\qc  Edit. †D.H. Valentine & D.M. Moore.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Rhizome dictyostelic, with hairs, or with papillate or hairy scales. Hairs on leaves and rhizomes always unicellular, acicular. Petiole with U-shaped vascular strand; rhachis grooved but not interrupted to admit grooves of costae. Sori superficial, median or submarginal; indusium usually absent or caducous; spores bilateral.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Literature: R.E. Holttum, {\i Acta Bot. Malac.}{\b  8:} 47-58 (1983).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 At least the lowermost veins from adjacent leaf-segments 
\par
  uniting some way below the sinus ............................................... {\b 5. Christella}
\par
1 All veins free, or the lowermost veins from adjacent 
\par
  leaf-segments just meeting at the sinus
\par
2 Lamina covered in yellow glands beneath, smelling of lemon; 
\par
  lower pinnae markedly decrescent .............................................. {\b 2. Oreopteris}
\par
2 Lamina not very glandular; lower pinnae not decrescent
\par
3 Lamina not, or very sparsely, hairy above ............................... {\b 1. Thelypteris}
\par
3 Lamina hairy above
\par
4 Lamina deltate-ovate, the lowermost pinnae deflexed; 
\par
  costules not furrowed on upper side .......................................... {\b 3. Phegopteris}
\par
4 Lamina lanceolate, the lowermost pinnae not deflexed; 
\par
  costules grooved above ........................................................ {\b 4. Stegnogramma}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc {\b 1.            Thelypteris}              Schmidel
\par       

\pard\f0\fs24\qc By A.C. Jermy & A.M. Paul.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Rhizome creeping or ascending. Leaves 1-pinnate with pinnatifid pinnae, or 2-pinnatisect, with few, sparse hairs beneath; veins free. Sori orbicular, more or less discrete, near the margin of the segment; indusium often caducous; spores echinate.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. T. palustris} Schott, {\i Gen. Fil.} t. 10 (1834) ({\i Dryopteris thelypteris} (L.) A. Gray,{\i  Lastrea thelypteris} (L.) C. Presl,{\i  Nephrodium thelypteris} (L.) Strempel,{\i  Polystichum thelypteris} (L.) Roth). Rhizome slender, far-creeping, hairy, with few, ovate, papillose scales when young. Leaves (15-)25-100(-120) cm, usually solitary, erect, pinnate; petiole as long as, to slightly longer than, the lamina, greenish-yellow, blackish at the base, glabrous except for occasional colourless hairs; lamina lanceolate, thin, pale green; pinnae pinnatisect, the longest 5-12 cm, linear-lanceolate; segments linear, entire, obtuse; sterile segments c. 5 mm wide, flat, the fertile narrower, with inrolled margins. Sori more or less confluent; indusium glandular. 2n = 70.{\i  Fens and marshes. Most of Europe except the extreme north.} Al Au Az Be Br Bu Co Cz Da Fe Ga Ge Gr Hb He Ho Hs Hu It Ju Lu No Po Rm Rs(N, B, C, W, K, E) Su.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc {\b 2.             Oreopteris}               J. Holub 
\par 

\pard\f0\fs24\qc By A.C. Jermy & A.M. Paul.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Rhizome ascending. Leaves 1-pinnate, with deeply pinnatisect pinnae and abundant yellow glands beneath; veins free, reaching margin. Sori orbicular, near the margin of the segment; indusium caducous; spores winged, with raised reticulum.
\par

\par
   {\b 1. O. limbosperma} (Bellardi ex All.) J. Holub, {\i Folia Geobot. Phytotax.} ({\i Praha}){\b  4:} 46 (1969) ({\i Thelypteris limbosperma} (Bellardi ex All.) H.P. Fuchs,{\i  T. oreopteris} (Ehrh.) Slosson,{\i  Dryopteris oreopteris} (Ehrh.) Maxon, {\i D. montana} (Vogler) O. Kuntze,{\i  Lastrea oreopteris} (Ehrh.) Bory,{\i  L. limbosperma} (Bellardi ex All.) J. Holub & Pouzar,{\i  Nephrodium oreopteris} (Ehrh.) Desv., {\i Polystichum oreopteris} (Ehrh.) Bernh., {\i P. montanum} (Vogler) Roth). Rhizome stout, the apex covered with white, becoming brown, ovate-lanceolate, papillate scales. Leaves 30-100 cm, forming a crown at the apex of the rhizome, suberect; petiole 1/8-1/5 as long as the lamina, with scattered brown, ovate to ovate-lanceolate scales; lamina lanceolate or oblanceolate, firm, yellowish-green, lemon-scented when crushed; pinnae linear-lanceolate, the longest 5-12 cm, becoming shorter towards the base; veins hairy beneath. Indusium inconspicuous, irregularly toothed, glandular. 2n = 68.{\i  Woods, especially by streams, and in relatively open situations, as on screes. C. & N.W. Europe, extending to S. Sweden, W. Ukraine, C. Italy and the Pyrenees}. Au Az Be Br Co Cz Da Ga Ge Hb He Ho Hs Hu It Ju No Po Rm Rs(W) Su.
\par

\par
17}
\par