{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 spicuous; bracts 6-10 mm, greatly exceeding and concealing the flowers. Calyx 2·5-3·5 mm; lobes very unequal, the shortest 2/3-3/4 as long as the longest. {\i Mediterranean region.} Bl Co Ga Gr Hs It Si.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 17. P. macrosepala} Boiss., {\i Diagn. Pl. Or. Nov.}{\b  1}({\b 3}): 11 (1843) ({\i P. euboea} Beauverd & Top.). Like{\b  16} but stems 2-10 cm; leaves elliptical to obovate-oblanceolate, subacute to obtuse; bracts 4·5-6 mm, scarcely concealing the flowers. 2n = 18.{\i  Aegean region.} Cr Gr Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 16.            Herniaria }              L.
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc  By R.K. Brummitt &V.H. Heywood (ed.1) revised by J.R. Akeroyd (ed.2).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Like{\i  Paronychia}, but flowers sometimes 4-merous; bracts inconspicuous; stigma notched or bifid, subsessile or rarely on a distinct style.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Literature: F.N. Williams, {\i Bull. Herb. Boiss.} ser. 2,{\b  4:} 556-570 (1896). F. Hermann, {\i Feddes Repert.}{\b  42:} 203-224 (1937). M.N. Chaudhri, {\i Meded. Bot. Mus. Herb. Rijksuniv. Utrecht}{\b  285:} 297-398 (1968).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Flowers 4-merous, with the 2 outer sepals ± enclosing 2 smaller inner;
\par
  upper stipules and bracts with conspicuous  purplish-black coloration
\par
2 Leaves ± flat, elliptical, not in dense clusters; flower-clusters
\par
  distributed along most upper branches ...................................... {\b 16. fontanesii}
\par
2 Leaves ovoid to subglobose, in dense clusters; 
\par
  flower-clusters terminal or subterminal ...................................... {\b 17. fruticosa}
\par
1 Flowers 4- or 5-merous, with sepals ± equal; stipules and bracts
\par
  usually without purplish-black coloration
\par
3 Annual, without a woody stock
\par
4 Flowers 4-merous
\par
5 Perigynous zone with patent, hooked hairs .............................. {\b 14. polygama}
\par
5 Perigynous zone without patent, hooked hairs ................... {\b 15. nigrimontium}
\par
4 Flowers 5-merous
\par
6 Leaves and sepals glabrous or ciliate ............................................... {\b 5. glabra}
\par
6 Leaves and sepals conspicuously hairy
\par
7 Leaves suborbicular or obovate-spathulate, with curved 
\par
  or curled hairs ............................................................................. {\b 13. algarvica}
\par
7 Leaves elliptical or oblong to oblanceolate, with straight hairs 
\par
8 Leaves and sepals with ± stiff hairs; 
\par
  flowers 1-1·5 mm ........................................................................... {\b 11. hirsuta} 
\par
8 Leaves and sepals with soft, fine hairs; flowers  
\par
  usually more than 1·5 mm ......................................................... {\b 12. lusitanica}
\par
3 Perennial, with a ± woody stock
\par
9 Sepals and leaves glabrous or ciliate
\par
10 Sepals c. 0·5 mm; leaves usually entirely glabrous; flower-
\par
   clusters usually contiguous on short lateral branches ...................... {\b 5. glabra}
\par
10 Sepals 0·7-1 mm; at least the younger leaves ciliate; 
\par
   flower-clusters usually not contiguous on short lateral branches
\par
11 Plant usually compact; hairs on leaf-margins strongly curved 
\par
   forwards, appressed to leaf-margin ........................................... {\b 4. parnassica}
\par
11 Plant not compact; hairs on leaf-margins not appressed ............. {\b 6. ciliolata}
\par
9  Sepals densely hairy; leaves densely hairy or conspicuously ciliate
\par
12 Plant compact, the internodes seldom more than 5 mm; flower-clusters
\par
   terminal or subterminal
\par
13 Leaves more than 2·5 × 1·2 mm, at least the older leaves 
\par
   glabrous on the surface ..................................................................... {\b 1. alpina}
\par
13 Leaves up to 2·5 × 1·2 mm, densely covered with appressed hairs  
\par
   ....................................................................................................... {\b 2. boissieri}
\par
12 Plant not compact, with most internodes more than 5 mm,or if not, 
\par
   then flower-clusters distributed along most of the younger branches
\par
14 Leaves strongly ciliate, the surface ± glabrous except for a line of
\par
   hairs on the prominent midrib ....................................................... {\b 3. latifolia}
\par
14 Leaves with hairs evenly distributed over the surface
\par
15 Mature leaves mostly more than 6 mm, at least 3 times as long as wide; 
\par
   sepals with hairs about equalling the width of the sepals .............. {\b 10. incana}
\par
15 Leaves rarely more than 6 mm, less than 3 times as long as wide; 
\par
   sepals with hairs much shorter than the width of the sepals
\par
16 Flower-clusters lax, up to 6-flowered, mostly terminal or subterminal 
\par
   on the shorter branches; pubescence greyish-white ........................ {\b 9. baetica}
\par
16 Flower-clusters dense, more than 6-flowered, leaf opposed or  
\par
   distributed along the shorter branches; pubescence usually yellowish
\par
17 Older stems woody, the younger hairy on 1 side only .............. {\b 7. maritima}
\par
17 Stems usually not woody, the younger hairy all round .............. {\b 8. scabrida}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Subgen. Herniaria. Annuals or perennials. Upper stipules and bracts usually without purplish-black coloration. Flowers 5-merous, or 4-merous in some annual species. Sepals more or less equal.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. H. alpina} Chaix in Vill.,{\i  Hist. Pl. Dauph.}{\b  1:} 379 (1786). Caespitose perennial; younger stems densely leafy, with internodes not more than 5 mm. Leaves not more than 4·5 × 2 mm, elliptic-obovate, strongly ciliate, the surface glabrous, or rarely with few hairs. Flowers up to 2·5 mm, in few-flowered, lax, mostly terminal clusters, or solitary. Sepals with patent hairs. 2n = 18. .• {\i  Alps; E. Pyrenees.} Au Ga He ?Hs It.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b H. olympica} Gay in Duchartre,{\i  Rev. Bot.}{\b  2:} 370 (1847), from Anatolia, recorded from S.W. Bulgaria (Ali Botus), is like {\b 1} but has shorter, usually curved hairs on the sepals and a short, broad, bifid style.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. H. boissieri} Gay in Duchartre,{\i  Rev. Bot.}{\b  2:} 370 (1847) ({\i H. frigida }G. Kunze, nom. nud.). Like {\b 1} but smaller in all parts; stem, leaves and flowers densely covered with minute, closely appressed, forwardly-directed, silky, white hairs; leaves up to 2·5 × 1·2 mm; flowers up to 1 mm, in fairly dense terminal or subterminal clusters of up to 12. {\i Mountains of S. Spain }({\i Sierra Nevada}). Hs. ({\i N. Africa}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 3. H. latifolia} Lapeyr.,{\i  Hist. Abr. Pyr.} 127 (1813) ({\i H. pyrenaica} Gay). Perennial; internodes up to 15 mm, hairy on 1 side only. Leaves up to 9 × 4 mm, broadly elliptical, darkish green, conspicuously ciliate, the surface glabrous or with hairs mainly on the prominent midrib. Flowers 1·5-2 mm, in clusters which are leaf-
\par

\par
182}
\par