{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 8 Stipules on young shoots connate for considerably less than ½
\par
  their length; seeds ± dark brown, unwinged (or with vestigial wing)
\par
10 Sepals mucronate, scarious except for a narrow, green
\par
   vein; seeds less than 0·4 mm ........................................................ {\b 9. segetalis}
\par
10 Sepals not or scarcely mucronate, green, with scarious
\par
   margins; seeds more than 0·4 mm
\par
11 Inflorescence ebracteate above; petals narrowly 
\par
   elliptical; capsule  globose ........................................................... {\b 10. diandra}
\par
11 Inflorescence bracteate (upper bracts often very short); 
\par
   petals ovate; capsule ovoid to subglobose 
\par
12 Petals much longer than sepals ................................................ {\b 11. purpurea}
\par
12 Petals about equalling or shorter than sepals 
\par
13 Seeds black, smooth or densely spinulose
\par
14 Stipules ± cordate; sepals acute to mucronulate; 
\par
   seeds ± smooth ........................................................................ {\b 16. heldreichii}
\par
14 Stipules triangular; sepals obtuse; seeds densely 
\par
   spinulose ............................................................................ {\b 17. echinosperma}
\par
13 Seeds brown, tuberculate
\par
15 Petals white, or pink above and white beneath; 
\par
   seeds pale greyish-brown ........................................................... {\b 15. bocconii}
\par
15 Petals uniformly pink; seeds dark brown
\par
16 Upper bracts almost as long as leaves ........................................... {\b 12. rubra}
\par
16 Upper bracts much shorter than leaves
\par
17 Plant rather robust, not rooting at nodes; 
\par
   stipules broadly triangular ........................................................ {\b 13. nicaeensis}
\par
17 Plant slender, often rooting at nodes; stipules 
\par
   lanceolate-acuminate ................................................................ {\b 14. capillacea}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. S. azorica} (Kindb.) Lebel, {\i Mém. Soc. Nat. Sci. Cherbourg}{\b  14:} 47 (1868) ({\i S. macrorhiza }sensu Trelease, non (Req.) Heynh.). Perennial; stems 8-15 cm, woody below, densely glandular-hairy. Leaves flat, widening towards the apex, mucronate; stipules wider than long, dull. Sepals and petals 3-5 mm; stamens 10. Capsule subglobose, equalling or exceeding the sepals. Seeds brown, pyriform, unwinged or with vestigial wing, the hilum subapical. •{\i  Açores}. Az.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. S. fimbriata} Boiss.,{\i  Diagn. Pl. Or. Nov.}{\b  3}({\b 1}): 94 (1854). Perennial; stems 5-35 cm, robust, often woody below, glandular-hairy above. Leaves awned; stipules very long (6-10 mm), with setaceous apices, silvery. Petals 4-6 mm, lilac, equalling or longer than the sepals; stamens 10. Capsule 3·5-5·5 mm. Seeds black, some unwinged, others usually with laciniate-fimbriate wings.{\i  Coasts of S.W. Spain and S. Portugal; Ibiza.} Bl Hs Lu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   {\b 3. S. rupicola} Lebel ex Le Jolis,{\i  Mém. Soc. Nat. Sci. Cherbourg}{\b  7:} 274 (1860) ({\i S. lebeliana} Rouy, {\i S. rupestris} Lebel). Perennial; stems 5-35 cm, robust, somewhat woody below, often glandular-hairy throughout. Leaves narrowly linear, mucronate; stipules ovate-triangular, acuminate, somewhat silvery. Sepals 4-4·5 mm; petals uniformly pink, about equalling the sepals; stamens 10. Capsule 4·5-7 mm, ovoid, equalling or somewhat exceeding the sepals. Seeds 0·5-0·7 mm, dark brown to black, unwinged, regularly tuberculate. 2n = 36.{\i  Rocky places by the sea. W. Europe, from S. Portugal to N.W. Scotland}. Br Ga Hb Hs Lu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 4. S. macrorhiza} (Req.) Heynh.,{\i  Nomencl. Bot.}{\b  2:} 689 (1846). Like {\b 3} but leaves broadly linear and very crowded; petals white or pinkish, shorter than the sepals; capsule subglobose, much shorter than the sepals. 2n = 36.{\i  Rocky places by the sea. Corse; Sardegna; S.E. Italy.} Co It Sa.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 5. S. australis} (Samp.) Ratter,{\i  Bot. Jour. Linn. Soc.}{\b  109:} 322 (1992) ({\i S. rupicola }var. australis Samp.). Like {\b 3} but leaves somewhat narrowed towards base; stipules very silvery; capsule more globose; seeds with vestigial or well-developed wings, smooth or slightly tuberculate, black. 2n = 40.{\i  Rocky places by the sea. • Portugal, Spain}. Hs Lu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 6. S. media} (L.) C. Presl, {\i Fl. Sic.} 161 (1826) ({\i S. maritima }(All.) Chiov., {\i S. marginata }Kittel,{\i  S. marina} sensu Halácsy, non (L.) Griseb., {\i Spergula marginata} (Kittel) Murb.). Perennial; stems 5-40 cm, glabrous throughout or glandular-hairy in the inflorescence. Leaves mucronate; stipules broadly triangular, not acuminate. Sepals 4-6 mm; petals white or pink, equalling or somewhat exceeding the sepals; stamens (7-)10. Capsule 7-9 mm, usually much exceeding the sepals. Seeds 0·7-1 mm (excluding wing), dark brown, smooth or tuberculate, usually winged; margin of wing entire or only slightly denticulate. 2n = 18, 36. {\i Seashores, salt-marshes, and saline habitats inland. Coasts of Europe} ({\i except the north-east}) {\i and inland saline areas}. Au Be Bl Br Bu Co Cz Da Ga Ge Gr Hb Ho Hs Hu It Ju Lu No ?Po Rm Rs(B, W, K, E) Sa Si Su Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Populations of{\b  6} with unwinged seeds occur in W. Europe and the Baltic region. They have been called subsp.{\b  angustata} (Clavaud) Greuter & Burdet,{\i  Willdenowia}{\b  12:} 190 (1982) ({\i S. marginata} var.{\i  angustata} Clavaud).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Subsp.{\b  tunetana} (Maire) Greuter & Burdet,{\i  op. cit.} 191 (1982) ({\i S. tunetana} (Maire) Jalas), from N. Africa, with winged and unwinged echinulate seeds, the wing entire or subentire, has been reported from W. Sicilia.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 7. S. marina} (L.) Griseb., {\i Spicil. Fl. Rumel.}{\b  1:} 213 (1843) ({\i S. salina} J. & C. Presl,{\i  S. dillenii} Lebel,{\i  Spergula salina }(J. & C. Presl) D. Dietr.). Annual, biennial or rarely perennial, with slender or slightly fleshy stock. Leaves fleshy, mucronate; stipules short, obtuse, forming a sheath. Sepals 2·5-4 mm; petals pink above and white near the base, rarely entirely white, not exceeding the sepals; stamens 1-5(-8). Capsule (3-)4 6 mm, usually exceeding the sepals. Seeds 0·6-0·7(-0·8) mm, light brown, smooth or densely tuberculate, unwinged or mixed winged and unwinged; wing of seed when present erose to laciniate. 2n = 36.{\i  Coasts of Europe and inland saline areas.} All except Fa He Sb.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 8. S. tangerina} P. Monnier,{\i  Feddes Repert.}{\b  69:} 50 (1964). Like{\b  7} but stems 5-10 cm, very slender; inflorescence very condensed; petals and sepals 1·5-3 mm; capsule 2-3 mm; seeds 0·5-0·65 mm, sparsely covered with long papillae. 2n = 18. {\i Saline soils. W. Mediterranean region.} Co Ga Hs Lu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 9. S. segetalis} (L.) G. Don fil., {\i Gen. Syst.}{\b  1:} 425 (1831) ({\i Alsine segetalis} L., {\i Delia segetalis} (L.) Dumort.). Glabrous annual with slender taproot; stems 3-15 cm, ascending. Leaves awned; stipules long, silvery, much-divided at the apex. Inflorescence very slender, without upper bracts. Sepals 1·5-2 mm, acute, mucronate, with wide, scarious margin and narrow, green vein; petals white, shorter than the sepals. Capsule 1·5-3 mm, ovoid. Seeds 0·4 mm, black, ovoid, unwinged, tuberculate. 2n = 18.{\i  Cornfields. W. & W.C. Europe, extending to C. Italy}. †Be Ga Ge He †Ho Hs It Lu Po.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 10. S. diandra} (Guss.) Boiss., {\i Fl. Or.}{\b  1:} 733 (1867) ({\i S. salsuginea }Fenzl). Annual or biennial with slender taproot; stems 3-30 cm, slender, ascending. Stipules short, triangular (rarely lanceolate). Inflorescence much-branched, very slender, without upper bracts. Sepals 2-3 mm; petals lilac (rarely white), narrowly elliptical,
\par

\par
187}
\par