{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 with hooked hairs. Stamens 2. Style 0·2-0·5 mm. {\i Mediterranean region; S. Portugal.}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b H. micrantha} A.K. Jackson & Turrill,{\i  Kew Bull.}{\b  1939:} 478 (1939), from Anatolia and Cyprus, like subsp. ({\b a}) but the leaves glabrous or ciliate and with a more compact habit, has been reported in error from Turkey-in-Europe.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 12. H. lusitanica} Chaudhri, {\i Meded. Bot. Mus. Herb. Rijksuniv. Utrecht }{\b 285:} 341 (1968) (incl.{\i  H. berlingiana} (Chaudhri) Franco). Annual to perennial; stems prostrate, branched, with patent or deflexed hairs, or subglabrous. Leaves up to 9 × 3 mm, oblong, oblanceolate or obovate, finely pubescent. Flowers (1-)1·75-2 mm, in often dense, leaf-opposed clusters. Sepals with fine, patent hairs. Fruit ovoid-globose. {\i Dry, often ruderal habitats. • Portugal; W., C. & S. Spain.} Hs Lu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 13. H. algarvica} Chaudhri, {\i op. cit. }346 (1968). Annual; stems up to 10 cm, prostrate, much-branched, forming a dense mat. Leaves and flowers densely covered with curved or curled hairs. Leaves up to 4 × 2·5 mm, suborbicular or obovate-spathulate, obtuse. Stipules ciliate. Flowers 1·5-1·75 mm, in dense, leaf-opposed clusters, subsessile; perigynous zone usually subglabrous.{\i  Sandy places. • S.W. Portugal}. Lu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 14. H. polygama} Gay in Duchartre,{\i  Rev. Bot.}{\b  2:} 371 (1847) ({\i H. euxina} Klokov,{\i  H. odorata }Andrz.). Perennial; stems slender, with regularly alternating branches; hairs strongly recurved. Leaves glabrous or with few, minute, marginal hairs. Sepals 4, glabrous towards the apex but with patent, hooked hairs at the base and on the perigynous zone. Style slender, exceeding the sepals. {\i White Russia, Ukraine, and Russia northwards to} 57°{\i  N.} ?Po Rs(C, W, E).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 15. H. nigrimontium} F. Hermann,{\i  Feddes Repert.}{\b  42:} 223 (1937). Like {\b 14} but annual or biennial; leaves shortly ciliate; sepals with hairs over the outer surface and no patent, hooked hairs at the base. •{\i  C. part of Balkan peninsula.} Bu Gr Ju.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b H. degenii} (F. Hermann) Chaudhri, {\i Meded. Bot. Mus. Herb. Rijksuniv. Utrecht}{\b  285:} 382 (1968), from the N. Aegean region (Samothraki), is like {\b 15} but with young leaves strigose, stipules densely ciliate and flowers covered with long, stout, bristly hairs. It is probably only sub-specifically distinct from {\b 15}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Subgen.{\b  Heterochiton} (Graebner & Mattf.) F. Hermann. Perennials, woody at the base. Upper stipules and bracts with purplish-black coloration over most of the surface. Flowers 4-merous; 2 opposite sepals more or less enclosing the other 2.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 16. H. fontanesii} Gay in Duchartre,{\i  Rev. Bot.}{\b  2:} 371 (1847). Leaves mostly 2-4 mm, more or less flat, elliptical, mostly opposite and not clustered. Flowers 2-2·5 mm, in clusters distributed along all the younger branches. Outer sepals divergent above.{\i  S.E. Spain; S. Sicilia.} Hs Si. ({\i N. Africa.})
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b fontanesii} ({\i H. empedocleana} Lojac.): Stems with strongly deflexed hairs. Leaves and sepals glabrous or rarely with short, crisped hairs. Outer sepals without purplish-black patches. {\i Maritime hills and sand-dunes. Sicilia }({\i near Porto Empedocle}).
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp.{\b  almeriana }Brummitt & Heywood,{\i  Feddes Repert. }{\b 69:} 31 (1964): Stems with more or less patent hairs. Leaves and sepals with more or less silky hairs. Outer sepals with purplish-black patches on the lateral margins near the base.{\i  Hills of S.E. Spain}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 17. H. fruticosa} L., {\i Cent. Pl. }{\b 1:} 8 (1755). Leaves up to 2 mm, ovoid to subglobose, in dense clusters at each node, glabrous or minutely puberulent. Flowers c. 1·5 mm, in terminal or subterminal clusters. Outer sepals more or less erect, not divergent above, glabrous or subglabrous. •{\i  C. & E. Spain.} Hs.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp.{\b  fruticosa} : Procumbent. Flowers in dense, terminal clusters; purplish-black coloration, if present, restricted to small patches at the base of the sepals. {\i Probably throughout the range of the species}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp.{\b  erecta} (Willk.) Batt. in Batt. & Trabut, {\i Fl. Algér.} ({\i Dicot.}) 168 (1888) excl. descr.: Suberect. Flowers in lax, terminal and subterminal clusters. Outer sepals with purplish-black patches on margin near the base; inner sepals purplish-black on most of the margins.{\i  S.E. Spain}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 17.           Illecebrum}            L.
\par  

\pard\f0\fs24\qc  By A.O. Chater.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Like {\i Paronychia, }but annuals; sepals white, spongy, persistent round the capsule; capsule 1-seeded, dehiscing with 5(-10) valves which remain more or less joined above.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. I. verticillatum} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 206 (1753). Glabrous; stems usually 5-30 cm (sometimes 1 cm in dry, or up to 70 cm in flooded habitats), branched or simple, decumbent, slender, quadrangular, often rooting near the base. Leaves 2-5 mm, opposite, linear-spathulate to obovate, obtuse; stipules small. Flower-clusters 2 at each node, 4- to 6-flowered, forming small, very white, usually crowded pseudo-whorls; bracteoles c. 1 mm, silvery. Sepals 1·5-2·5 mm. 2n = 10.{\i  Seasonally damp, sandy or gravelly places. W. & N.C. Europe; C. & E. Mediterranean region, very local.} Au Az Be Br Co Cz Da Ga Ge Gr †He Ho Hs It Lu Po Sa [Su].
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 18.          Pteranthus}         Forskål
\par     

\pard\f0\fs24\qc  By P.D. Sell &  S.M. Walters.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Small annuals. Flowers sessile, in groups of 3. ' Fruit ' complex, 1-seeded, described below.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. P. dichotomus} Forskål,{\i  Fl. Aegypt.} lxii & 36 (1775). Fleshy annual herb; stems 10-20 cm, procumbent to ascending, articulate at the nodes. Leaves linear, subverticillate; stipules minute, lanceolate. Flowers sessile, in groups of 3, situated at the apex of an oblanceolate, swollen, hollow, compressed peduncle, the 2 lateral flowers sterile; each flower situated between 2 minutely glandular bracts with spirally arranged curved spines. Petals absent; stamens 4; styles 2. Capsule indehiscent, 1-seeded, enclosed in the spiny bracts and borne on the persistent, compressed, inflated, wing-like peduncle, the whole 'fruit' 12-20 mm. {\i S.E. Spain; Malta}. Hs *Si. ({\i N. Africa, S.W. Asia}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 19.          Polycarpon}             Loefl. ex L.
\par  

\pard\f0\fs24\qc  By A.O. Chater & J.R. Akeroyd.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Small annuals to perennials; stems ascending or erect, usually branched, usually rough at the angles. Leaves more or less petiolate, opposite, often apparently verticillate. Flowers small, in cymose clusters with scarious bracts. Sepals 5; petals 5, hyaline, shorter than the sepals; stamens 1-5, the filaments more or less united at the base; style short, 3-lobed. Capsule dehiscing with 3 valves almost to the base; valves twisting spirally into tubes. Seeds several.
\par

\par
184}
\par