{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 opposed or contiguous on leafless lateral branches. Sepals with conspicuous patent hairs. •{\i  Pyrenees and mountains of N. & C. Spain; Corse, Sardegna}. Co Ga Hs Sa.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp.{\b  latifolia} : Leaves subtruncate, with a few hairs on the surface.{\i  Spain and Pyrenees}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp.{\b  litardieri} Gamisans, {\i Candollea}{\b  36:} 6 (1981) ({\i H. litardieri} (Gamisans) Greuter & Burdet): Leaves cuneate, ciliate only; hairs more robust than in subsp. ({\b a}), and flowers smaller.{\i  Corse, Sardegna}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 4. H. parnassica} Heldr. & Sart. ex Boiss.,{\i  Diagn. Pl. Or. Nov.}{\b  3}({\b 1}): 95 (1853). Perennial, usually rather compact; stems 3-10(-15) cm. Leaves obovate to suborbicular, with minute, strongly curved hairs appressed to the margin, the surfaces glabrous. Flowers 1·5 mm, the clusters more or less distinct, not contiguous. Sepals 0·7-1 mm, ciliate, rarely with few hairs on the dorsal surface. Capsule slightly exceeding the sepals. •{\i  Mountains of S. Albania, Greece and Kriti.} Al Cr Gr.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp.{\b  parnassica} : Adventitious roots conspicuous. Stems puberulent. Leaves densely ciliate. Sepals usually ciliate. Capsule 1-1·25 mm, narrowly ellipsoidal.{\i  S. Albania; Greece}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp.{\b  cretica} Chaudhri, {\i Meded. Bot. Mus. Herb. Rijksuniv. Utrecht}{\b  285:} 33 (1968). Adventitious roots absent or inconspicuous. Stems glabrous to slightly puberulent. Leaves smaller, sparsely ciliate to glabrous. Sepals usually glabrous. Capsule c. 0·75 mm, ovoid-globose.{\i  Kriti.}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b H. bornmuelleri} Chaudhri,{\i  op. cit.} 325 (1968), described from C. Italy (Abruzzi), is like {\b 4}({\b a}) but pulvinate, stems becoming glabrous and without adventitious roots, leaves obscurely ciliate and sepals glabrous. It may represent a third subspecies of {\b 4}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 5. H. glabra} L.,{\i  Sp. Pl.} 218 (1753) ({\i H. ceretana} Sennen,{\i  H. ceretanica }(Sennen) Sennen, {\i H. corrigioloides} Lojac.,{\i  H. kotovii} Klokov, {\i H. rotundifolia }Vis.,{\i  H. suavis} Klokov,{\i  H. vulgaris} Hill). Annual to perennial, sometimes woody at the base; stems subglabrous or with short hairs all round. Leaves up to 7 × 3·5 mm, elliptic-obovate, glabrous, or rarely more or less ciliate; upper stipules and bracts very rarely with purplish-black coloration. Flowers usually c. 1 mm, the clusters usually contiguous on short, leafless branches. Sepals c. 0·5 mm. Capsule usually distinctly exceeding the sepals. 2n = 18, 36, 72.{\i  Dry, sandy places; calcifuge. Most of Europe except the extreme north.} Al Au Be Br Bu Co Cz Da Ge Gr He Ho Hs Hu It Ju Lu Po Rm Rs(B, C, W, K, E) ?Sa Si Su Tu [Fe No RS(N)].
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Variable in duration, habit, presence of hairs on leaf-margins and sepals, size of flowers and length of fruit (vide H.W. Pugsley, {\i Jour. Bot. }({\i London}){\b  68:} 214-218 (1930) and M.N. Chaudhri, {\i op. cit.} 315-320 (1968)). Perennial, suffruticose plants with ciliate leaves and larger flowers have been distinguished as subsp.{\b  nebrodensis} Jan ex Nyman,{\i  Consp.}{\b  3}, in obs. post pag. 677 (1881) ({\i H. microcarpa} C. Presl). They occur on mountains of Sicilia, C. & S. Italy and perhaps elsewhere.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 6. H. ciliolata} Melderis, {\i Watsonia}{\b  4:} 42 (1957) ({\i H. ciliata} Bab., non Clairv.). Often woody at the base; stems hairy on 1 side only. Leaves up to 7 × 4 mm, suborbicular to elliptical, at least the younger ones ciliate with patent hairs, the surfaces glabrous. Flowers c. 1·5 mm, the clusters mostly not contiguous. Sepals 0·7-1 mm, sometimes ciliate, usually with a single, minute, apical hair. Capsule equalling to slightly exceeding the sepals. 2n = 72, 108, 126. •{\i  W. coast of Europe,from C. Portugal to S.W. England.} Br Ga Hs Lu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 7. H. maritima} Link in Schrader, {\i Jour. für die Bot.}{\b  1799} ({\b 1}): 57 (1799). Stems up to 30 cm; older stems woody at the base, with prominent nodes; younger stems hairy on 1 side only. Leaves 2-4(-6) mm, broadly elliptical to rhombic, yellowish-green, with dense, appressed hairs on both surfaces, or the older sometimes only ciliate; upper stipules and bracts sometimes with purplish-black coloration. Flowers up to 2 mm; clusters not contiguous. Sepals covered with more or less appressed hairs. Capsule about equalling the sepals. •{\i  S.W. Portugal.} Lu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b H. regnieri} Br.-Bl. & Maire,{\i  Bull. Soc. Hist. Nat. Afr. Nord.}{\b  16:} 28 (1925), like{\b  7} but more compact with smaller, fleshy leaves and sepals with loosely spreading hairs, has been reported once from S. Spain (Málága prov.).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 8. H. scabrida} Boiss., {\i Elenchus} 42 (1838). Compact or elongate perennial; stems up to 45 cm. Leaves up to 6 × 3 mm, elliptical, yellowish-green, densely covered with appressed hairs; upper stipules and bracts often with some purplish-black coloration. Flowers c. 1·5 mm; clusters often contiguous on short, leafless branches. Sepals densely covered with usually very short hairs.  •{\i S.W. Europe.} Ga Hs Lu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Very variable in habit, hairiness, and development of dark coloration on the stipules and bracts. More elongate and less hairy plants, intermediate between this species and {\b 5}, have been referred to var.{\i  glabrescens} Boiss.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 9. H. baetica} Boiss. & Reuter in Boiss., {\i Diagn. Pl. Or. Nov.}{\b  3}({\b 1}): 95 (1853). Woody at the base. Leaves broadly obovate to suborbicular, densely covered with whitish, appressed hairs. Flowers 2-2·5 mm (including short pedicel); clusters few-flowered, mostly more or less contiguous towards the ends of the branches. Sepals densely covered with white, patent hairs. •{\i  Mountains of S. Spain.} Hs.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 10. H. incana} Lam.,{\i  Encycl. Méth. Bot.}{\i  3:} 124 (1789) ({\i H. besseri }(Fischer) DC., {\i H. macrocarpa} Sibth. & Sm.). Stock stout and woody. Leaves up to 12 × 3 mm, oblanceolate, at least 3 times as long as wide, densely covered with stiff, white hairs; stipules usually hairy on their outer surface. Flowers c. 2 mm (including short pedicel); clusters mostly leaf-opposed. Sepals 5, covered with white, patent hairs. 2n = 18.{\i  S. Europe, extending northwards to Czechoslovakia and to }52°{\i  N. in E. Russia}. Al †Au ?Bl Bu Cz Ga †Ge Gr Hs Hu It Ju ?Po Rm Rs(C, W, K, E) Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 11. H. hirsuta} L.,{\i  Sp. Pl.} 218 (1753) ({\i H. diandra} Bunge; ?incl.{\i  H. permixta} Guss.) Annual; stems slender, usually with regularly alternating branches, with patent hairs. Leaves elliptical to oblanceolate, hispid, or the older sometimes only ciliate; stipules ciliate. Flowers 1-1·5 mm, sessile, in dense clusters which are leaf-opposed or contiguous on short branches. Sepals 5, densely hairy. 2n = 18, 36.{\i  C. & S. Europe extending to N.W. France and C. Ukraine.} Al Au Be Bl Bu Co Cr Cz Ga Ge Gr He Hs Hu It Ju Lu Rm Rs(W) Sa Si Tu [Po].
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp.{\b  hirsuta} : Sepals with short, straight hairs; perigynous zone subglabrous. Stamens usually 3-5. Style 0·1-0·2 mm. {\i Throughout the range of the species except Portugal and most of Spain}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp.{\b  cinerea} (DC.) Coutinho, {\i Fl. Port.} 202 (1913) ({\i H. cinerea} DC.): Sepals with long, stout hairs; perigynous zone
\par

\par
183}
\par