{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 equalling the sepals; stamens 2 or 3. Capsule 1·5-3 mm, globose, about equalling the sepals; valves purple-black at maturity. Seeds 0·6-0·7 mm, unwinged, dark brown to black, rugulose or bristling with rigid papillae. 2n = 18. {\i Saline waste places. S. Europe; S.E. Russia.} Al *Az Bl Cr Ga Gr Hs It Sa Si Rs(E) Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 11. S. purpurea} (Pers.) G. Don fil., {\i Gen. Syst. }{\b 1:} 425 (1831) ({\i S. longipes} Rouy). Annual or biennial with slender taproot; stems 2-25 cm, slender. Stipules lanceolate, acuminate, silvery. Inflorescence often slender, bracteate. Sepals 2·5-4 mm; petals 3-4·5 mm, uniformly rose-purple, exceeding the sepals; stamens 10. Capsule 2·5-3·5 mm, shortly stipitate, equalling or somewhat exceeding the sepals. Seeds 0·45-0·6 mm, unwinged, dark brown or black, finely tuberculate. 2n = 18, 36.{\i  Sandy waste places. Spain and Portugal.} Hs Lu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 12. S. rubra} (L.) J. & C. Presl,{\i  Fl. Cechica} 94 (1819) ({\i S. campestris} (L.) Ascherson,{\i  Spergula rubra} (L.) D. Dietr.). Annual to perennial with slender to somewhat woody taproot; stems 5-25 cm, diffuse, decumbent or procumbent. Leaves very fasciculate; stipules lanceolate, acuminate, silvery. Bracts of the inflorescence almost as large as the leaves. Sepals and petals 3-4 mm; petals uniformly pink; stamens (5-)10. Capsule 4-5 mm, about equalling the sepals. Seeds 0·45-0·55 mm, unwinged, dark brown, subtrigonous. 2n = 36, 54.{\i  Sandy soils. Throughout Europe.} All except Az ?Cr Fa Is Rs(K) Sb.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Plants from the mountains of W. Kriti (Lefka Ori) have been referred to the Anatolian species {\b S. lycia} P. Monnier & Quézel, {\i Candollea}{\b  25:} 359 (1970), but the status of plants of{\b  12} from high altitudes in the Mediterranean region, often treated as var. {\i alpina} (Boiss.) Willk. & Lange, is in need of clarification.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 13. S. nicaeensis} Sarato ex Burnat, {\i Fl. Alp. Marit.}{\b  1:} 269 (1892). Like{\b  12} but biennial to perennial with stout, woody stock; stems 10-35 cm, robust; stipules short, triangular; upper bracts very short; capsule slightly exceeding the sepals; seeds 0·5-0·65 mm, dark brown, ovoid, often with a vestigial wing near the micropyle. 2n = 36.{\i  Saline soils and waste places; nitrophilous. W. & C. Mediterranean region.} Co Ga Hs It Sa ?Si.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 14. S. capillacea} (Kindb. & Lange) Willk. in Willk. & Lange,{\i  Prodr. Fl. Hisp.}{\b  3:} 163 (1874). Like {\b 12} but stems 8-35 cm, procumbent, rooting at the nodes; inflorescence few-flowered, with very small bracts; seeds semicircular in outline. 2n = 18. {\i Granitic sands. N. & C. Spain; N. & C. Portugal.} Hs Lu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 15. S. bocconii} (Scheele) Ascherson & Graebner,{\i  Syn. Mitteleur. Fl.}{\b  5}({\b 1}): 849 (1919) ({\i S. atheniensis} (Heldr. & Sart.) Ascherson & Schweinf., {\i S. campestris} sensu Willk. & Lange, non (L.) Ascherson). Annual or biennial with slender taproot; stems 5-25 cm, slender, densely glandular-hairy in the inflorescence. Leaves not fasciculate; stipules triangular, not acuminate. Upper bracts much reduced. Sepals 2-3·5 mm; petals pink, with white base or entirely white, somewhat shorter than or equalling the sepals; stamens (0-)2-5(-8). Capsule 2-3·5 mm, equalling or shorter than the sepals. Seeds 0·35-0·45 mm, unwinged, light greybrown, finely tuberculate. 2n = 36.{\i  Ruderal. S. & W. Europe, mainly near the coast.} Az Bl Br Co Cr Ga Gr Hs It Ju Lu Sa Si Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 16. S. heldreichii} Fouc. ex E. simon secundus & P. Monnier,{\i  Bull. Soc. Bot. Fr. }{\b 105:} 263 (1958). Annual with slender taproot; stems 8-35 cm, glandular-hairy only in the inflorescence. Stipules more or less cordate, with short, often bifid, point. Sepals 2·5-3·5 mm, acute with nearly mucronate apex; petals pink to lilac, somewhat paler at the base, shorter than or equalling the sepals; stamens (2-)6-8(-10). Capsule 2·5-3·5 mm, about equalling the sepals. Seeds 0·5-0·6 mm, unwinged, metallic black, smooth or slightly rugulose. 2n = 36.{\i  Maritime sands. S.W. Europe}. Bl Co Ga Hs It Lu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 17. S. echinosperma} (Celak.) Ascherson & Graebner, {\i Ber. Deutsch. Bot. Ges.}{\b  11:} 517 (1893) ({\i S. rubra} subsp.{\i  echinosperma} Celak.). Annual (rarely perennial) with slender taproot; stems 4-10 cm, slender. Leaves slightly fasciculate; stipules triangular, often wider than long. Inflorescence few-flowered, with well-developed bracts. Sepals 2·5-3·5 mm, curved in fruit; petals pale pink, equalling or somewhat shorter than the sepals; stamens (0-)2-5. Capsule subglobose, exceeding the sepals. Seeds 0·45-0·55 mm, black, unwinged, densely spinulose.{\i  Margins of lakes and streams. W.C. Europe and France; one station in S.W. Spain.} Au Cz Ga Ge Hs.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 24.               Telephium}               L.
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc  By A.O. Chater.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Procumbent perennials, woody at the base. Flowers in terminal cymes, 5-merous. Styles 3(4), free to the base; ovary septate below, with many ovules. Capsule usually trigonous, dehiscing with 3(4) valves.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. T. imperati} L.,{\i  Sp. Pl.} 271 (1753). Glabrous dwarf shrub; rhizome very stout, woody; stems 15-40 cm, rarely branched, procumbent to ascending, often rooting near the base, terete. Leaves up to 15 mm, rather fleshy and glaucous, alternate, usually secund. Flowers shortly pedicellate, in 5- to 20(-50)-flowered, terminal, capitate cymes; bracts small. Sepals oblong-lanceolate, obtuse, green with white, scarious margins; petals white, slightly exceeding the sepals. Capsule 15- to 20-seeded, exceeding the sepals.{\i  S. Europe, extending northwards to the French Jura}. Cr Ga Gr He Hs It.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp.{\b  imperati} : Leaves obovate to obovate-subspathulate, obtuse. Sepals 4-7 mm. Capsule rather abruptly contracted into a beak. 2n = 18. {\i Spain and S. France; very locally in N. Italy and S.W. Switzerland}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp.{\b  orientale} (Boiss.) Nyman,{\i  Consp.} 254 (1879) ({\i T. orientale} Boiss.): Like subsp. ({\b a}) but smaller and more slender in all its parts; leaves narrower, the upper linear-lanceolate and rather acute; cymes few-flowered, denser; sepals 3-45 mm; capsule more gradually narrowed into a beak, and more exserted. 2n = 18.{\i  Greece, Kriti}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 The plants from Kriti have been separated from subsp. ({\b b}) as subsp. {\b pauciflorum} (Greuter) Greuter & Burdet,{\i  Willdenowia }{\b 12:} 191 (1982) ({\b T. imperati} subsp. {\b orientale} var.{\b  pauciflorum} Greuter), on the basis of their dwarf habit and fewer seeds, but are best included in subsp. ({\b b}).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  Subfam.  {\b Silenoideae}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Leaves opposite; stipules absent. Flowers, 5-merous. Epicalyx-scales (bracteoles) sometimes present. Sepals joined in a tubular or campanulate calyx, sometimes with scarious commissures. Petals usually well-developed; stamens, petals and ovary often situated on a more or less elongated column which forms the carpophore in fruit.
\par

\par
188}
\par