{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 3.             Phegopteris}               (C. Presl) Fée
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc  By A.C. Jermy & A.M. Paul.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Rhizome creeping. Leaves 1-pinnate; pinnae pinnatisect, the lowest pair deflexed; veins free, mostly not reaching margin. Sori orbicular, often coalescing; indusium absent; spores rugulose-granulate.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. P. connectilis} (Michx) Watt, {\i Canad. Nat. Quart. Jour. Sci}. ser. 2,{\b  3:} 159 (1867) ({\i Thelypteris phegopteris} (L.) Slosson,{\i  Dryopteris phegopteris} (L.) C. Chr.,{\i  Lastrea phegopteris} (L.) Bory,{\i  Nephrodium phegopteris} (L.) Prantl,{\i  Phegopteris vulgaris} Mett., {\i P. polypodioides} Fée,{\i  Polypodium phegopteris} L.). Rhizome slender, with light brown, hairy, lanceolate scales when young. Leaves 10-50 cm, solitary; petiole up to twice as long as the lamina, greenish-yellow, sparsely covered with colourless hairs and occasional brown scales; lamina 5-15 cm wide, triangular-ovate, thin, yellowish-green, bent back almost at right-angles to the petiole; pinnae lanceolate, attenuate; segments linear-oblong, entire or crenate, rounded at the apex, hairy on both surfaces, with narrow, lanceolate scales on the veins. 2n = 90.{\i  Shady places. Most of Europe, but rare in the south.} Au Be Br Bu Co Cz Da Fa Fe Ga Ge Gr Hb He Ho Hs Hu Is It Ju No Po Rm Rs(N, B, C, W, E) Su.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 4.              Stegnogramma}                Blume 
\par      

\pard\f0\fs24\qc  By A.C. Jermy & A.M. Paul.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Rhizome creeping. Leaves 1-pinnate; veins free. Sori linear; indusium absent; spores echinate.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. S. pozoi} (Lag.) Iwatsuki, {\i Acta Phytotax. Geobot.} ({\i Kyoto}){\b  19:} 124 (1963) ({\i Thelypteris pozoi}(Lag.) C.V. Morton, {\i Dryopteris africana} (Desv.) C. Chr.,{\i  Gymnogramma totta }(Willd.) Schlecht.,{\i  Hemionitis pozoi }Lag., {\i Ceterach hispanicum} sensu Willk., pro parte). Rhizome with ovate-lanceolate, hairy, brown scales, at least on younger parts. Leaves 25-60(-75) × 6-15 cm, solitary, erect; petiole as long as or rather shorter than the lamina, brownish-yellow, hairy; lamina lanceolate, firm, light green; rhachis densely hairy; pinnae regularly pinnatifid; segments entire, obtuse, divided about halfway to the midrib, hairy on both surfaces. Sporangia setose, spread out along lateral vein of segment.{\i  Damp, shady places. Pyrenees; Açores.} Az Ga Hs.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 5.               Christella}                   Léveillé
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc  By A.C. Jermy & A.M. Paul.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Rhizome creeping. Leaves 1-pinnate, with pinnatifid pinnae, hairy; veins free except for the lowermost pair of each segment, which unite with those from the adjacent segments to form a single vein, excurrent in the sinus. Sori orbicular, medial; indusium reniform, densely hairy; spores papillose, the papillae often confluent to form ridges. ({\i Cyclosorus} Link.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b 1. C. dentata} (Forskål) Brownsey & Jermy,{\i  Brit. Fern Gaz.}{\b  10:} 338 (1973) ({\i Cyclosorus dentatus} (Forskål) R.-C. Ching,{\i  Dryopteris dentata} (Forskål) C. Chr.,{\i  D. mollis} (Jacq.) Hieron.,{\i  Aspidium molle} (Jacq.) Swartz). Rhizome stout, the apex covered with shiny brown, lanceolate, hairy scales. Leaves 30-100 cm, forming a crown at the apex of the rhizome, pinnate; petiole less than 1/3 as long as the lamina, light brown, hairy; lamina lanceolate to elliptical, tapering abruptly at the apex; lower pinnae often very reduced in size; longest pinnae 10-15 × 1-2 cm, pinnatifid; segments parallel-sided, truncate at the apex, sparsely hairy above, densely hairy beneath. Sporangial stalks glandular.{\i  Damp places beside streams. Açores; Mediterranean region, very local}. Az Cr Hs ?It Si. ({\i Old World tropics}.)
\par

\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 17.      ASPLENIACEAE}
\par            

\pard\f0\fs24\qc  Edit. †D.H. Valentine & D.M. Moore.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Rhizome dictyostelic, with clathrate scales. Petiole with 2 vascular strands, often fusing to form a single ×-shaped strand. Sori superficial, borne along one or both sides of the fertile veins; spores bilateral.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc {\b 1.               Asplenium}                  L.
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc By J.A. Crabbe, A.C. Jermy and J.D. Lovis (Ed.1) revised by
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc R. Viane, A.C. Jermy and J.D. Lovis (Ed.2).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Rhizome short, erect or occasionally creeping, with dark, linear-triangular to linear-lanceolate, sometimes filiform scales. Leaves in apical tufts; petiole dark, at least at the base, often glabrous; lamina entire or variously dissected; veins free or rarely marginally anastomosing. Sori elliptical to linear; indusium resembling the sorus in shape and size, attached along the vein, sometimes rudimentary or absent.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Spore measurements given are those of the inner wall (exospore) and do not include the ornamented perispore. Many interspecific hybrids have been recorded but, except {\b 5}({\b a}) ×{\b  20}, are not frequent enough to be mentioned individually. (Incl. {\i Ceterach }DC., {\i Phyllitis} Hill,{\i  Pleurosorus} Fée.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Indusium absent; plant covered with pale hairs c. 1 mm ....... {\b 28. hispanicum}
\par
1 Indusium present (occasionally reduced or absent); 
\par
  plant ± glabrous or with dense scales or unicellular glands
\par
2 Underside of leaf brown, completely covered with scales .......... {\b 27. ceterach}
\par
2 Underside of leaf green, sparsely covered with scales or subglabrous
\par
3 Leaves simple or palmately lobed
\par
4 Leaves palmately lobed; sori not paired (not opening to
   each other)  ..................... ........................................................... {\b 1. hemionitis}
\par
4 Leaves simple, linear or hastate; sori paired, opening to each other 
\par
5 Leaves cordate at the base ................................................. {\b 29. scolopendrium}
\par
5 Leaves auricled to hastate at the base ....................................... {\b 30. sagittatum}
\par
3 Leaves pinnatifid, pinnate, ternate or irregularly divided into narrow
\par
  segments
\par
6 Leaves pinnatifid at the base, the upper segments confluent into 
\par
  an entire  apex ............................................................................ {\b 31. hybridum}
\par
6 Leaves pinnate, forked or ternate 
\par
7 Leaves forked or ternate 
\par
8 Leaves 3-partite (rarely simple), with narrowly elliptical to rhombic 
\par
  segments ........................................................................................ {\b 21. seelosii}
\par
8 Leaves with 2-4 (or more) linear segments ........................ {\b 20. septentrionale}
\par

\par
18}
\par