{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Root thick and woody; plant densely glandular-hairy
\par
  (N.W. Spain) ................................................................................... {\b 5. viscosa}
\par
1 Root ± slender, not woody; plant glandular-hairy or not
\par
2 Styles and capsule-valves 3; seeds compressed, 
\par
  with a broad, scarious wing ............................................................... {\b 4. fallax}
\par
2 Styles and capsule-valves 5; seeds subglobose or compressed,
\par
  winged or not
\par
3 Seeds subglobose or globose, keeled or with a narrow wing;
\par
  leaves usually channelled beneath ................................................. {\b 1. arvensis}
\par
3 Seeds compressed, broadly winged; leaves not 
\par
  channelled beneath
\par
4 Seed wider than its brownish wing; petals ovate,
\par
  obtuse, contiguous ....................................................................... {\b 2. morisonii}
\par
4 Seed as wide as its transparent, shining wing; petals
\par
  lanceolate, acute, not contiguous ................................................ {\b 3. pentandra}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. S. arvensis} L., {\i Sp. Pl}. 440 (1753) ({\i S. vulgaris} Boenn.,{\i  S. sativa }Boenn.,{\i  S. maxima }Weihe, {\i S. linicola} Boreau). Annual 5-70 cm, with ascending stems more or less branched at the base, moderately to densely glandular-hairy above. Leaves 1-3(-8) cm, linear, fleshy, channelled beneath. Sepals 3-5 mm, ovate; petals white, obovate, obtuse; stamens 5-10. Capsule 5 mm. Seeds 1-2 mm, subglobose, keeled or with a very narrow wing, grey-black, papillose or not.{\i  Cultivated ground, especially on sandy soils; calcifuge. Throughout Europe.} All except Bl Rs(K) Sb.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Very variable in habit, pubescence, size of seed and presence of seed-papillae. Two subspecies can be recognized.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp.{\b  arvensis} : Terminal inflorescence pedunculate. Petals more or less truncate at the base, about as long as or slightly longer than the sepals. Capsule distinctly exceeding the sepals. 2n = 18.{\i  Almost throughout the range of the species}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b chieussiana} (Pomel) Briq.,{\i  Prodr. Fl. Corse}{\b  1:} 494 (1910) ({\i S. chieussiana} Pomel): Terminal inflorescence sessile. Sepals and petals narrower; petals rounded at the base, usually longer than the sepals. Capsule about as long as or longer than the sepals. {\i W. Mediterranean region, C. & S. Portugal}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Plants from maritime sands on Corse, that are like subsp. ({\b b}) but prostrate to weakly ascending, with dark, glandular hairs, have been called subsp.{\b  gracilis} (E. Petit) Briq.,{\i  op. cit. }495 (1910). They resemble coastal ecotypic variants of {\b 1} from other parts of Europe.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. S. morisonii} Boreau in Duchartre,{\i  Rev. Bot.}{\b  2:} 424 (1847) ({\i S. vernalis} auct.). Annual with ascending stems 5-30 cm, glabrous or sparsely pubescent. Leaves 1-2 cm, linear, not channelled beneath; leaf-fascicles conspicuously shorter than the internodes. Sepals 4 mm, ovate, acuminate; petals about equalling the sepals, ovate, obtuse, overlapping at the margins; stamens 5-10. Capsule 5 mm, slightly exceeding the sepals. Seeds 1-1·5 mm (including wing), laterally compressed, brown, with a brownish, striate wing narrower than the seed. 2n = 18. {\i W. & C. Europe, extending northwards to} 64°{\i  N. in Sweden.} Be Cz Da Fe Ga Ge Ho Hs Lu No Po Rm Rs(B, C) Su.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 3. S. pentandra} L., {\i Sp. Pl}. 440 (1753). Like{\b  2} but petals lanceolate, acute, not contiguous, somewhat exceeding the sepals; stamens usually 5; seeds with a white, shining wing about as wide as the seed.{\i  W., S. & C. Europe}. Au †Be Bu Co Cz Ga Ge Gr Hs Hu It Ju Lu Po Rm Sa Si Tu [Rs(B)].
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 4. S. fallax} (Lowe) E.H.L. Krause in Sturm,{\i  Deutschl. Fl.} ed. 2,{\b  5:} 19 (1901). Glabrous annual, with ascending stems 5-30 cm. Leaves 1-2·5 cm, linear, not channelled beneath. Sepals 3-4 mm, oblong; petals whitish, shorter than or about equalling the sepals; styles 3. Capsule 4-6 mm, distinctly exceeding the sepals, dehiscing by 3 valves. Seeds 1-1·5 mm (including wing), compressed, black or blackish-grey, glossy, with a broad, scarious wing.{\i  Dry hills and fields. Sicilia} ({\i Linosa}). Si. ({\i N. Africa & S.W. Asia.})
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 5. S. viscosa} Lag., {\i Gen. Sp. Nov. }15 (1816). Apparently perennial with woody taproot; stems many, ascending, densely glandular-hairy and viscid. Leaves densely fasciculate, channelled beneath. Petals much shorter than the sepals. Seeds 2·5-3 mm (including wing), laterally compressed, dark brown, with a brownish wing narrower than the seed.{\i  Sandy places on mountains. • N.W. Spain.} Hs.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 23.            Spergularia}           (Pers.) J.& C. Presl
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc  By P. Monnier & J.A. Ratter.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Annual to perennial herbs, sometimes woody at the base; stems erect, decumbent or procumbent, dilated at the nodes, somewhat flattened. Leaves linear, decussate, with pale, scarious stipules united to surround the node, forming more or less triangular structures on either side of the stem; leaf-fascicles (short, leafy, lateral branches) when present borne on only 1 side at each node. Perianth 5-merous; sepals free, green, with scarious margins; petals entire; stamens 1-10; styles 3. Capsule dehiscing with 3 valves. Seeds often winged.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Plant robust, with thick, woody stock; sepals usually at least 4 mm
\par
2 Stipules 6-10 mm, with setaceous apex; leaves awned; wing 
\par
  of seed (if present) deeply laciniate-fimbriate ............................. {\b 2. fimbriata}
\par
2 Stipules 2-6 mm, not setaceous; leaves mucronate or obtuse; 
\par
  wing of seed (if present) entire or somewhat toothed
\par
3 Stipules wider than long; leaves flattened, widening above (Açores)
\par
  .......................................................................................................... {\b 1. azorica}
\par
3 Stipules longer than wide; leaves semi-cylindrical, linear
\par
4 Seeds unwinged; plant often densely glandular-hairy throughout
\par
5 Petals much shorter than sepals, white or pinkish; capsule subglobose
\par
  ................................................................................................... {\b 4. macrorhiza}
\par
5 Petals about as long as sepals, pink; capsule ovoid ...................... {\b 3. rupicola}
\par
4 Seeds with ± developed wing (exceptionally absent); plant  
\par
  glandular-hairy only in the inflorescence
\par
6 Seeds black; leaves narrowed towards base; stipules silvery ....... {\b 5. australis}
\par
6 Seeds brown; leaves not narrowed towards base; stipules not silvery
\par
7 Stipules on young stems connate for more than ½ their length; 
\par
  capsule more than 6 mm ................................................................... {\b 6. media}
\par
7 Stipules on young stems connate for considerably less than 
\par
  ½ their length; capsule less than 6 mm .................................... {\b 13. nicaeensis}
\par
1 Plant slender, with ± slender taproot; sepals usually less
\par
  than 4 mm
\par
8 Stipules on young shoots connate for about ½ their 
\par
  length (forming a sheath); seeds light brown, often winged
\par
9 Inflorescence little-branched; seeds smooth or tuberculate; 
\par
  petals at least 3 mm ......................................................................... {\b 7. marina}
\par
9 Inflorescence much-branched; seeds sparsely papillose; 
\par
  petals less than 3 mm ................................................................... {\b 8. tangerina}
\par

\par
186}
\par