{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 narrower than the spinulose mid-vein. {\i Calcifuge. Mountains of S. Europe.} Co Ga Gr Hs It Lu Sa Si.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b P. arabica }(L.) DC. in Lam.,{\i  Encycl. Méth. Bot.}{\b  5}: 24 (1804) subsp. {\b cossoniana} (Gay) Batt.,{\i  Bull. Soc. Bot. Fr.}{\b  46:} 267 (1900), from N. Africa, like{\b  6 }but leaves oblanceolate to linear-oblong and calyx-lobes with membranous margins somewhat wider than the mid-vein, has been recorded from S. Spain (Málaga) but perhaps only as a casual.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 7. P. kapela} (Hacq.) A. Kerner,{\i  Österr. Bot. Zeitschr.}{\b  19:} 367 (1869) ({\i P. capitata }auct., non (L.) Lam.). Perennial; stems 5-15 cm, much-branched. Leaves crowded, ciliate; stipules linear-lanceolate, usually equalling or shorter than the leaves. Flower-clusters 7-15 mm in diameter, very conspicuous; bracts 3-5 mm, elliptical to suborbicular, silvery. Calyx less than 1½ times as long as the ripe fruit; lobes entirely herbaceous, equal or subequal, ovate to linear-oblong, usually obtuse, incurved at the apex in fruit. Fruit c. 1·5 mm, ovoid-subglobose. {\i S. Europe.} Al Bu Ga Hs It Ju Rm.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Leaves flattened in 1 plane ......................................... ({\b b}) subsp.{\b  serpyllifolia}
\par
1 Leaves in 4 ranks
\par
2 Leaves glabrous on both surfaces ........................................ ({\b a}) subsp.{\b  kapela}
\par
2 Leaves pubescent on both surfaces
\par
3 Sepals 1·6-2·3 mm ............................................... ({\b c}) subsp. {\b galloprovincialis}
\par
3 Sepals 1·4-1·6 mm .............................................................. ({\b d}) subsp.{\b  baetica}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp.{\b  kapela} : Stems procumbent to ascending, not mat-forming. Leaves 3-5 mm, in 4 ranks, narrowly elliptical to ovate-lanceolate, crowded, glabrous on both surfaces, ciliate. Calyx 1·5-2·5 mm; lobes ovate to linear-oblong. 2n = 18.{\i  Throughout the range of the species except C. & S. Spain}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b serpyllifolia} (Chaix) Graebner in Ascherson & Graebner, {\i Syn. Mitteleur. Fl.}{\b  5}({\b 1}): 892 (1919) ({\i P. serpyllifolia }(Chaix) DC.): Stems procumbent, mat-forming. Leaves 1·5-3·5 mm, flattened in 1 plane, elliptical to ovate or suborbicular, densely crowded, pubescent, strongly ciliate. Calyx c. 1·5 mm; lobes ovate. 2n = 18, 36.{\i  Spain and Pyrenees; S.W. Alps}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b c}) Subsp.{\b  galloprovincialis} Küpfer,{\i  Boissiera}{\b  23:} 148 (1974): Like subsp. ({\b a}) but leaves 2·5-3·5 mm, densely crowded, narrowly obovate, pubescent; stipules 1-1½ times as long as the leaves; calyx 1·6-2·3 mm. 2n = 54. •{\i  S.E. France} ({\i Mt. Ventoux}).
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b d}) Subsp.{\b  baetica} Küpfer, {\i op. cit. }150 (1974): Like subsp. ({\b a}) but leaves pubescent; stipules equalling to somewhat longer than the leaves; calyx 1·4-1·6 mm. 2n = 18.  •{\i S.E. Spain}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 8. P. chionaea} Boiss.,{\i  Diagn. Pl. Or. Nov.}{\b  1}({\b 3}): 9 (1843) ({\i P. kapela} subsp.{\i  chionaea} (Boiss.) Borhidi). Like{\b  7}({\b a}) but stems 5-10(-15) cm, mat-forming; leaves 4-8 mm, densely pubescent; stipules lanceolate; bracts 6-9 mm, oblong to ovate or suborbicular; calyx 2·5-3 mm; fruit c. 2 mm, oblong-ellipsoidal.{\i  W. part of Balkan peninsula.} Al ?Gr Ju.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b P. sintenisii} Chaudhri,{\i  Acta Bot. Neerl.}{\b  15:} 196 (1966), from N.W. Turkey, like {\b 8} but with shorter stems, smaller leaves and bracts, and flower-clusters 7-9 mm, has been reported from N. Greece, apparently in error.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 9. P. taurica} Borhidi & Sikura,{\i  Acta Bot. Acad. Sci. Hung.}{\b  7:} 3 (1961). Like {\b 7}({\b a}) but stems ascending; flowering stems much longer than vegetative stems; flower-clusters 17-21 mm in diameter, laxer; bracts 7-11 mm, ovate-lanceolate, acute; calyx 2·5-3·5 mm. {\i Calcareous rocks. Mountains of Krym.} Rs(K).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 10. P. cephalotes} (Bieb.) Besser,{\i  Enum. Horto Cremen.} 4 (1830). Like {\b 7}({\b a}) but leaves oblong to linear-lanceolate; bracts 5-7 mm; calyx 2·5-4 mm, twice as long as the ripe fruit; lobes linear-lanceolate, acute, not incurved at the apex in fruit. 2n = 36.{\i  E.C. & S.E. Europe}. Bu Gr Hu Ju Rm Rs(W, K) Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b P. bornmuelleri} Chaudhri, {\i Meded. Bot. Mus. Herb. Rijksuniv. Utrecht}{\b  285:} 259 (1968), from the N. Aegean region (Thasos), like {\b 10} but with a more lax habit, leaves obovate, and sepal-lobes unequal, is known only from the type collection.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 11. P. rechingeri} Chaudhri, {\i op. cit. }225 (1968). Perennial; stems 10-25 cm, slightly woody below, mat-forming. Leaves 3-6 mm, crowded, elliptical to obovate, subobtuse, glabrous on both surfaces, ciliate. Stipules lanceolate, up to as long as the leaves. Flower-clusters 10-14 mm in diameter, conspicuous; bracts up to 6·5 mm, silvery. Calyx 1·6-2 mm; lobes more or less equal, oblong obtuse or subobtuse. Fruit ovoid, included within the sepals.{\i  Limestone rocks. • Mountains of N. & C. Greece and S.W. Bulgaria.} Bu Gr.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 12. P. pontica} (Borhidi) Chaudhri, {\i op. cit.} 241 (1968) ({\i P. cephalotes} subsp.{\i  pontica} Borhidi). Perennial; stems 5-15 cm, ascending, much-branched; flowering stems much longer than vegetative. Leaves crowded, linear to linear-oblong, glabrous to pubescent, ciliate; stipules linear-lanceolate. Flower-clusters 10-15(-18) mm in diameter; bracts 6-8 mm, oblong to ovate or suborbicular. Calyx 2·5-3·5 mm; lobes equal, obtuse.{\i  Black Sea region.} Bu Rs(W, K).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 13. P. macedonica} Chaudhri, {\i op. cit.} 248 (1968). Densely caespitose perennial; stems 5-12(-18) mm, ascending, woody at the base. Leaves 2-5 mm, imbricate, often recurved, oblong to oblanceolate, subobtuse, pubescent to subglabrous, ciliate. Stipules oblong to ovate, equalling or slightly shorter than the leaves. Flower-clusters 9-13 mm in diameter; bracts 5-6 mm, broadly ovate, obtuse, concealing the flowers. Calyx 1·6-2 mm; lobes very unequal, oblanceolate.•{\i  Greece, S. Jugoslavia.} Gr Ju.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 14. P. albanica} Chaudhri, {\i op. cit.} 250 (1968). Caespitose perennial; stems 3-10 cm, procumbent. Leaves 2·5-6 mm, not recurved, obovate-elliptical, subacute, subglabrous, ciliate. Stipules ovate-lanceolate, more or less equalling the leaves. Flower-clusters 10-18 mm in diameter; bracts 5-6 mm, broadly ovate, subacute, concealing the flowers. Sepals 1·6-2 mm; lobes somewhat unequal, oblanceolate. 2n = 36. •{\i  S. & C. Greece, Albania, S. Jugoslavia}. Al Gr Ju.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 The plants from C. & S. Greece are more densely caespitose and have smaller flowers, and have been distinguished as subsp. {\b graeca} Chaudhri,{\i  op. cit. }252 (1968).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 15. P. aretioides} DC., {\i Prodr.}{\b  3:} 371 (1828). Caespitose perennial, woody at the base; stems up to 8 cm, much-branched, covered by densely imbricate leaves which are themselves more or less completely covered by the cucullate, scarious stipules. Leaves c. 1·5 mm, oblong or linear-oblong, more or less obtuse. Flower-clusters very conspicuous; bracts 2·5-3 mm, orbicular or often wider than long, very obtuse. Calyx 1-1·75 mm.{\i  Calcicole. • Mountains of E. & S. Spain.} Hs.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 16. P. capitata} (L.) Lam.,{\i  Fl. Fr.}{\b  3:} 229 (1778) ({\i P. nivea} DC.). Laxly caespitose perennial; stems up to 15 cm, much-branched. Leaves 3-6 mm, oblong- to linear-lanceolate, acute, pubescent, ciliate, greyish-green. Flower-clusters c. 10 mm in diameter, con-
\par

\par
181}
\par