{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}
\pard\f0\fs28\li200 Annual to perennial, without a woody stock; stipules and
\par  bracts ± conspicuous and silvery; petals usually emarginate
\par  ................................................................................................. {\b 1. tetraphyllum}
\parPerennial, with a woody stock; stipules and bracts inconspicuous,
\par  greyish; petals entire ............................................................. {\b 2. polycarpoides}
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. P. tetraphyllum} (L.) L., {\i Syst. Nat.} ed. 10, {\b 2:} 881 (1759).Annual, biennial or perennial, without a woody stock; stems simple or much-branched. Leaves obovate. Inflorescence lax, spreading, much-branched. Sepals c. 2 mm; petals usually emarginate.{\i  S. & W. Europe.} Al Az Bl Br Bu Co Cr Ga Ge Gr He Hs It Ju Lu Sa Si Tu [Be Cz].
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Leaves not purplish-tinged; inflorescence lax, spreading,  
\par  with many conspicuous branches ............................... ({\b a}) subsp.{\b  tetraphyllum}
\par 1 Leaves often purplish-tinged; inflorescence ± condensed, 
\par  few-flowered, usually without conspicuous branches
\par 2 Stems usually simple; leaves usually paired, always purplish-tinged 
\par  at least near base of plant; stamens 1-3 .......................... ({\b b}) subsp. {\b diphyllum}
\par 2 Stems often branched; usually at least some leaves near middle 
\par  of stem in whorls of 4; leaves not purplish-tinged; stamens 5
\par  ....................................................................................... ({\b c}) subsp.{\b  alsinifolium}
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp.{\b  tetraphyllum} : Stems much-branched. Leaves green, mostly in whorls of 4. Inflorescence lax, much-branched. Stamens (1-)3-5. Seeds usually less than 0·5 mm, punctulate.{\i  Sandy or rocky places, usually inland. Throughout the range of the species}.
\par
\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp.{\b  diphyllum} (Cav.) O. Bolòs & Font Quer,{\i  Collect. Bot.} ({\i Barcelona}) {\b 6:} 356 (1962) ({\i P. diphyllum }Cav.,{\i  P. alsinifolium} auct., non (Biv.) DC.): Annual; stems usually simple. Leaves purplish-tinged, at least near the base of the stems, usually paired. Inflorescence few-flowered, condensed. Stamens 1-3. Seeds like those of subsp. ({\b a}). {\i Sandy places, usually coastal. S.W. Europe; Aegean region}.
\par
\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b c}) Subsp.{\b  alsinifolium }(Biv.) Ball, {\i Jour. Linn. Soc. London} ({\i Bot.}) {\b 16:} 370 (1877) ({\i P. alsinifolium} (Biv.) DC.; incl. {\i P. rotundifolium} Rouy): Stems often branched. Leaves green or purplish-tinged, at least some near the middle of the stem in whorls of 4. Inflorescence few-flowered, condensed. Stamens 5. Seeds at least 0·5 mm, smooth.{\i  Sandy places, usually coastal. W. & S. Europe, northwards to N.W. France}.
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. P. polycarpoides} (Biv.) Zodda, {\i Nuovo Gior. Bot. Ital.} nov. ser., {\b 15: }347 (1908) ({\i P. alsinifolium} auct., non (Biv.) DC.,{\i  P. peploides} DC.; incl.{\i  P. colomense} Porta). Perennial, with woody stock; stems branched. Leaves obovate to suborbicular, fleshy, usually paired, rarely verticillate; stipules small, greyish. Flowers few, in a lax inflorescence. Sepals 1·5-2 mm, obtuse or acute; petals entire, about as long as the sepals; stamens 5. Seeds 0·5 mm or more, tuberculate.{\i  Rocks, usually coastal. W. Mediterranean region.} Bl Ga Hs It Si.
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28 Subsp.{\b  herniarioides} (Ball) Maire & Weiller in Maire,{\i  Fl. Afr. Nord}{\b  9:} 73 (1963), from N.W. Africa, has been reported from Sierra de Gádor, west of Almeria. It differs from subsp.{\b  polycarpoides} by the more compact habit with short, little-branched stems, petals 1/2 as long as the sepals and seeds 0·4-0·5 mm with smaller tubercles.
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 20.             Ortegia}                L.
\par  
\pard\f0\fs24\qc  By A.O. Chater.
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28 Small plant with opposite leaves. Flowers small, shortly pedicellate in opposite, cymose clusters which are arranged in a panicle. Sepals 5, keeled, the margins scarious; petals absent; stamens 3; style 1, stigma 3-toothed or -lobed. Capsule dehiscing with 3 valves. Seeds numerous, minute, ovoid, acute.
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. O. hispanica} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 560 (1753) ({\i O. dichotoma} L.). Annual to perennial; stems up to 40 cm, with many strict branches, angular, often very rough above. Leaves 5-18 mm, opposite, linear or linear-lanceolate, obtuse or acute, much shorter than the internodes, erect; stipules setiform, caducous, with blackish glands. Sepals 2-3 mm, ovate-lanceolate, acute, keeled, green, with scarious margins. {\i Spain and Portugal}. Hs †It Lu.
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 21.           Loeflingia}              L.
\par    
\pard\f0\fs24\qc  By V.H. Heywood.
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28 Annuals. Flowers small, sessile, in compound dichasial or monochasial cymes, often spicate. Sepals free, unequal, the outer 3 longer and wider than the inner 2, all or only the outer with a setiform appendage on each side; petals 3 or 5, very small; stamens 3 or 5; style 1; stigmas 3, or 1, more or less 3-lobed. Fruit a capsule dehiscing with 3 valves. Seeds numerous.
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Inflorescence-branches narrow, often secund; style deeply
\par  3-partite ..................................................................................... {\b 3. tavaresiana}
\par 1 Inflorescence-branches ± condensed, not secund; style
\par  usually almost undivided or with 3 short lobes
\par 2 Sepals (2-)2·5-3 mm, all with setiform appendages; style
\par  shorter than capsule ..................................................................... {\b 1. hispanica}
\par 2 Sepals 1·5-2 mm, only 3 with setiform appendages; style
\par  as long as capsule ............................................................................ {\b 2. baetica}
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. L. hispanica} L., {\i Sp. Pl. }35 (1753) ({\i L. hispanica} var. {\i pentandra} sensu Coutinho; incl. {\i L. pentandra} Cav.). Much-branched, glandular-pubescent annual 2-10 cm. Leaves linear, acute, connate at the base with the subulate stipules. Inflorescence-branches more or less condensed, not secund. Sepals (2-)2*5-3 mm, all with setiform appendages; stamens usually 3; style about 1/2 as long as the capsule; stigma usually only shallowly lobed. {\i Sandy soils. W. Mediterranean region.} Bl Ga Hs Lu Si.
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. L. baetica} Lag.,{\i  Period. Soc. Med. Cádiz}{\b  4}({\b 1}): 5 (1824) ({\i L. hispanica} var.{\i  micrantha} (Boiss. & Reuter) Maire; incl.{\i  L. gaditana }Boiss. & Reuter, {\i L. micrantha }Boiss. & Reuter). Like {\b 1} but sepals 1·5-2 mm, only 3 with setiform appendages; stamens 5; style as long as the capsule.{\i  Maritime sands. S. Spain; C. & S. Portugal}. Hs Lu.
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 3. L. tavaresiana} Samp. in Nobre,{\i  Anais Ci. Nat.} ({\i Porto}) {\b 10:} 25 (1906). Like {\b 1} but much-branched from the base; inflorescence branches narrow, often secund and sometimes obviously recurved; stamens 5; style deeply 3-partite.{\i  Maritime sands. • S. Portugal}. Lu.
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 22.          Spergula}                 L.
\par
\pard\f0\fs24\qc  By J.A. Ratter & J.R. Akeroyd.
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28 Annuals (rarely perennials); stems ascending, often decumbent and much-branched at the base. Leaves linear, obtuse, decussate; stipules scarious, not united to surround the node; leaf-fascicles (short, leafy, lateral branches) borne on both sides at each node. Perianth 5-merous; sepals free, green, with scarious margins; petals white, entire; stamens 5-10; styles 3 or 5. Capsule ovoid to subglobose, dehiscing with 3 or 5 valves. Seeds often winged.
\par
\par 185}
\par