{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 25.           Lychnis}            L.
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc  By A.O. Chater.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Erect perennials. Petals contorted in bud. Epicalyx absent. Calyx 10-veined, with 5 short teeth. Limb of petal more or less distinct from claw; coronal scales present. Stamens 10, rarely up to 20; styles usually 5, opposite calyx-teeth. Fruit a capsule, dehiscing with (usually) 5 teeth. Carpophore short or long. Seeds without a tuft of hairs at hilum. (Incl.{\i  Coronaria} Schaeffer, {\i Polyschemone }Schott, {\i Viscaria} Bernh.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Leaves and stems densely villous with white hairs
\par
2 Inflorescence ± capitate; petals 2-lobed ..................................... {\b 3. flos-jovis}
\par
2 Flowers long-stalked in a lax inflorescence; 
\par
  petals entire or emarginate .......................................................... {\b 2. coronaria}
\par
1 Stems and leaves not villous
\par
3 Petals deeply 4-lobed with linear, patent lobes; 
\par
  rarely broadly 2-lobed with toothed lobes ................................. {\b 4. flos-cuculi}
\par
3 Petals entire, emarginate or 2-lobed with entire lobes
\par
4 Leaves and lower part of stems sparsely hispid or pubescent
\par
5 Calyx more than 10 mm; leaves sparsely hispid ................... {\b 1. chalcedonica}
\par
5 Calyx less than 10 mm; leaves pubescent with crispate hairs ....... {\b 5. sibirica}
\par
4 Leaves glabrous or ciliate; lower part of stems glabrous
\par
6 Calyx less than 6 mm; inflorescence ± capitate ............................... {\b 7. alpina}
\par
6 Calyx more than 6 mm; inflorescence not capitate
\par
7 Inflorescence many-flowered ........................................................ {\b 6. viscaria}
\par
7 Inflorescence 1- to 3-flowered ........................................................ {\b 8. nivalis}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. L. chalcedonica} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 436 (1753). Stems 30-45(-60) cm, simple, stout, hispid. Leaves sparsely hispid, ovate, acute; the cauline cordate-amplexicaul. Inflorescence 10- to 50-flowered, capitate. Calyx 14-17 mm. Petal-limb bright scarlet, bifid for 1/3 of its length. Carpophore 4-6 mm. {\i Woods and thickets. C. & E. Russia from c.} 49°{\i  to }56°{\i  N. }Rs(C, E).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Cultivated widely for ornament.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. L. coronaria} (L.) Desr. in Lam.,{\i  Encycl. Méth. Bot.}{\b  3:} 643 (1792) ({\i Coronaria coriacea} Schischkin ex Gorschk.). Whole plant densely villous with white hairs; stems 30-100 cm, often branched. Leaves ovate to ovate-lanceolate, acute. Flowers long-pedicellate in a few-flowered inflorescence. Calyx 15-20 mm. Petal-limb purplish, rarely very pale or white, entire or emarginate. Carpophore c. 2 mm. 2n = 24.{\i  Dry banks and scrub. E.C. & S.E. Europe, Italy; doubtfully native elsewhere in S. Europe; cultivated widely for ornament, and locally naturalized.} Al ?Au Bu Cz *Ga Gr *He *Hs Hu It Ju *Lu Rm Rs(W, K)Tu
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 3. L. flos-jovis} (L.) Desr. in Lam.,{\i  Encycl. Méth. Bot. }{\b 3:} 644 (1792). Less densely villous than {\b 2}; stems 20-90 cm, usually erect and little-branched. Basal leaves lanceolate-spathulate, acute; cauline lanceolate. Inflorescence 4- to 10-flowered, more or less capitate. Calyx 11-13 mm. Petal-limb purplish or scarlet, rarely white, bifid with wide, often lobed, lobes. Capsule c. 14 mm; carpophore c. 2 mm.{\i  Dry, sunny slopes,} 1000-2000{\i  m. Alps, eastwards to c. }11° 15'{\i  E.; one station in C. Italy.} ?Au Ge He It [Cz].
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 4. L. flos-cuculi }L.,{\i  Sp. Pl. }436 (1753) ({\i L. cyrilli} K. Richter,{\i  Agrostemma flos-cuculi} (L.) G. Don fil., {\i Coronaria flos-cuculi }(L.) A. Braun). Stems 20-90 cm, often branched, sparsely scabrid-puberulent. Basal leaves oblong-spathulate, petiolate, slightly scabrid, often ciliate at base; cauline linear-lanceolate, connate at base. Flowers in long-stalked dichasia. Calyx 6-10 mm. Capsule 6-10 mm; carpophore very short or absent.{\i  Damp places. Most of Europe, but rare in parts of the south}. All except Az Bl Cr Rs(K) Sb ?Si.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b flos-cuculi} : Petal-limb deeply 4-lobed with linear, acute, patent lobes, usually purplish-pink. 2n = 24.{\i  Throughout the range of the species}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp.{\b  subintegra} Hayek,{\i  Österr. Bot. Zeitschr.}{\b  70:} 14 (1921): Petal-limb 2-lobed with oblong, obtuse lobes which are toothed near apex, usually white.{\i  Balkan peninsula}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 5. L. sibirica} L.,{\i  Sp. Pl.} 437 (1753). Whole plant pubescent with short, crispate hairs. Stems 8-30 cm, usually simple. Basal leaves crowded on woody stock, linear-lanceolate; cauline 3-8 pairs, remote. Inflorescence (1-)3- to 4(-8)-flowered, lax; pedicels mostly longer than calyx. Calyx 5-6(-8) mm. Petal-limb pale yellow or white, bifid to about half-way; coronal scales lanceolate, acute. Capsule 6-8 mm; carpophore very short.{\i  Arctic and subarctic Russia.} Rs (N). ({\i N. Asia })
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 The European plant is subsp.{\b  samojedorum} Sambuk,{\i  Bull. Acad. Sci. URSS} ser. 7, {\b 22: }47 (1928) ({\i L. samojedorum} (Sambuk) Gorschk.). Subsp. {\i sibirica} occurs in Siberia and approaches close to the boundary of Europe north-east of Sverdlovsk.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 6. L. viscaria} L.,{\i  Sp. Pl}. 436 (1753) ({\i Viscaria viscosa} Ascherson, {\i V. vulgaris }Bernh.). Stems 15-90 cm, simple or branched above, glabrous or slightly hairy above, viscid below the upper nodes. Leaves mostly basal, linear- to ovate-lanceolate, petiolate, glabrous, usually ciliate at base. Flowers usually in 3- to 6-flowered, shortly stalked, opposite dichasia which are arranged in a lax, spike-like panicle. Calyx 6-15 mm. Petals usually dark- or pinkish-purple (rarely white), entire or emarginate. Capsule 7-10 mm.{\i  Dry, sunny slopes; somewhat calcifuge. Much of Europe, except the south-west, but absent from the islands, except Britain.} Al Au Be Br Bu Cz Da Fe Ge Gr He Hu It Ju No Po Rm Rs(N, B, C, W, E) Su Tu [Ga].
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Very variable, the centre of variation being in Makedonija. To the north and west of this region, the plants have a long carpophore, and in Greece only plants with a short carpophore occur. The shape of the calyx is more or less correlated with the length of the carpophore, but the other variable characters are not. Two subspecies can be recognized.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b viscaria} : Calyx clavate. Carpophore more than 3 mm, at least ½ as long as ripe capsule. 2n = 24.{\i  Throughout the range of the species, except the south and east parts of the Balkan peninsula}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp{\b . atropurpurea} (Griseb.) Chater,{\i  Feddes Repert.}{\b  69:} 45 (1964) ({\i L. atropurpurea} (Griseb.) Nyman,{\i  L. sartorii} (Boiss.) Hayek,{\i  Viscaria atropurpurea} Griseb.; incl.{\i  V. sartorii} Boiss.). Calyx tubular to campanulate, not clavate. Carpophore up to 2 mm, less than 1/3 as long as ripe capsule. 2n = 24. •{\i  Balkan peninsula and Romania}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 7. L. alpina} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 436 (1753) ({\i Viscaria alpina} (L.) G. Don fil.). Caespitose, glabrous, with ciliate leaf-bases; stems 5-15 cm, simple, not viscid. Basal leaves crowded, linear-subspathulate to linear; cauline usually 2 or 3 pairs, often wider. Inflorescence (6-)10- to 20-flowered, more or less capitate, rarely elongate. Calyx (3-)4-5 mm. Petal-limb pink, rarely white, bifid to about half-way. Capsule c. 4 mm; carpophore 2 mm or less. Some flowers are large and hermaphrodite, some small and usually with abortive stamens. 2n = 24.{\i  Screes and stony grassland; somewhat calcifuge. N. Europe, southwards to} 55°{\i  N.; mountains of S. & S.C. Europe,from W.C. Spain to W. Austria}. Au Br Fe Ga He Hs Is It No Rs(N, C) Su.
\par

\par
189}
\par