{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 apparently alternate), elliptical to linear; stipules usually conspicuous, scarious. Flowers small, slightly perigynous, in axillary, rarely terminal, spherical clusters; bracts scarious, usually silvery and often very conspicuous and concealing the flowers. Calyx very deeply 5-lobed, the lobes often cucullate and awned, and often with membranous margins; petals minute or absent; stamens 5; styles 2, or sometimes fused but bifid near the apex or with a bifid stigma (rarely conical and subentire). Fruit an achene with membranous pericarp.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Literature: M.N. Chaudhri, {\i Meded. Bot. Mus. Herb. Rijksuniv. Utrecht}{\b  285:} 65-297 (1968).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Calyx-lobes with membranous margins, cucullate, awned 
\par
  on the back near the apex
\par
2 Calyx-lobes very unequal, 3 outer enclosing 2 smaller, 
\par
  narrower, inner ones; leaves less than 1 mm wide ......................... {\b 1. cymosa}
\par
2 Calyx-lobes equal or subequal; leaves more than 1 mm wide
\par
3 Bracts conspicuous, exceeding calyx; plant perennial
\par
4 Flower-clusters usually more than 8 mm in diameter, 
\par
  well-defined; bracts 4-6 mm, ovate, concealing flowers .............. {\b 5. argentea}
\par
4 Flower-clusters usually less than 6 mm in diameter, indefinite;
\par
  bracts 2-4 mm, lanceolate, not concealing flowers ............... {\b 6. polygonifolia}
\par
3 Bracts inconspicuous, shorter than calyx; plant perennial or annual
\par
5 Perennial; calyx without hooked hairs at base, and with 
\par
  awn less than 0·5 mm ............................................................... {\b 4. suffruticosa}
\par
5 Annual; calyx with hooked hairs at base, and with awn c. 1 mm or more
\par
6 Leaves ovate to oblong-ovate, reddish; awn on calyx-lobes
\par
  usually straight ........................................................................... {\b 2. echinulata}
\par
6 Leaves linear-oblong, green; awn on calyx-lobes curled or hooked 
\par
  at apex ............................................................................................ {\b 3. rouyana}
\par
1 Calyx-lobes entirely herbaceous, not cucullate or awned
\par
7 Calyx-lobes very unequal in length
\par
8 Bracts scarcely concealing flowers ..................................... {\b 17. macrosepala}
\par
8 Bracts greatly exceeding and concealing flowers
\par
9 Bracts 5-6 mm; calyx 1·6-2 mm
\par
10 Stems ascending; leaves often recurved, ± obtuse ............. {\b 13. macedonica}
\par
10 Stems procumbent; leaves not recurved, ± acute .................... {\b 14. albanica}
\par
9  Bracts 6-10 mm; calyx 2·5-3·5 mm ........................................... {\b 16. capitata}
\par
7  Calyx-lobes equal or subequal in length
\par
11 Leaves c. 1·5 mm, imbricate, ± completely concealed by 
\par
   scarious stipules (E. & S. Spain) .............................................. {\b 15. aretioides}
\par
11 Leaves usually more than 2 mm, not completely concealed by stipules
\par
12 Calyx 2·5-4 mm, about twice as long as ripe fruit; lobes 
\par
   linear-lanceolate, acute, not incurved at apex in fruit ............. {\b 10. cephalotes}
\par
12 Calyx 1·5-3 mm, not more than 1½ times as long as ripe fruit; 
\par
   lobes oblong to linear-oblong or linear-ellipsoidal, subacute, 
\par
   ± incurved at apex in fruit
\par
13 Flower-clusters 17-21 mm in diameter, lax; bracts ovate-lanceolate, 
\par
   acute ................................................................................................ {\b 9. taurica}
\par
13 Flower-clusters 7-15 mm in diameter, dense; bracts orbicular 
\par
   to ovate, obtuse or subacute
\par
14 Leaves linear to linear-oblong ................................................... {\b 12. pontica}
\par
14 Leaves elliptical to ovate or suborbicular
\par
15 Bracts 6-9 mm; leaves 4-8 mm ................................................. {\b 8. chionaea}
\par
15 Bracts not more than 6·5 mm; leaves not more than 6 mm
\par
16 Mat-forming; bracts up to 6·5 mm ........................................ {\b 11. rechingeri}
\par
16 Usually not mat-forming; bracts not more than 5 mm .................. {\b 7. kapela}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. P. cymosa} (L.) DC. in Lam.,{\i  Encycl. Méth. Bot. }{\b 5:} 26 (1804) ({\i Chaetonychia cyanosa} (L.) Sweet). Annual; stems 3-7(-15) cm, usually erect. Leaves linear, usually in apparent whorls of 4. Flower-clusters 3-10 mm in diameter, globose, elongating up to 17 mm in fruit to form scorpioid cymes. Calyx 2-2·5 mm, exceeding the bracts; lobes unequal, the outer 3 broadly spathulate with alveolate hood, enclosing the 2 smaller inner lobes; awn stout, often hooked. {\i Dry, open habitats. S.W. Europe.} Co Ga Hs Lu Sa.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. P. echinulata} Chater, {\i Feddes Repert.}{\b  69:} 52 (1964) ({\i P. echinata} auct., non Lam.). Annual; stems 2-20 cm, spreading or erect, usually much-branched. Leaves ovate to oblong-lanceolate, reddish, with pale, membranous margin, shortly aristate. Flower-clusters 3-8 mm in diameter, not elongating in fruit. Calyx 2-2·5 mm, equalling or exceeding the bracts; lobes equal or subequal, spathulate, with crispate or hooked hairs at the base; base and mid-vein reddish; margin and hood slightly alveolate; awn 1 mm or more, stout, patent, usually straight.{\i  Dry, sandy or stony places; calcifuge. Mediterranean region, Portugal.} Bl Co Cr Ga Gr Hs It Lu Sa Si.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 3. P. rouyana} Coincy in Morot,{\i  Jour. Bot.} ({\i Paris}){\b  8:} 65 (1894). Like{\b  2} but plant light green, reddish only below; leaves linear-oblong, more strongly aristate; calyx-lobes pale greenish, sometimes reddish towards apex, with apex of awn strongly curved or hooked. • {\i C. Spain.} Hs.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 4. P. suffruticosa} (L.) Lam.,{\i  Encycl. Méth. Bot.}{\b  5}: 25 (1804) ({\i Herniaria polygonoides} Cav.,{\i  H. suffruticosa }(L.) Desf.). Perennial; stems 7-30 cm, erect, branched, subglabrous or scabrid with short, stiff, deflexed hairs. Leaves 5-10 mm, elliptical to ovate-elliptical, acute, aristate, coriaceous, reddish, with a thickened, pale margin. Flowers subsessile in small, dense clusters in a branched inflorescence; bracts 1/3-1/2 as long as the calyx, inconspicuous, ciliate, white. Calyx 1·2-1·6 mm; lobes equal, glabrous, reddish, with scarious margins and hood; awn c. 0·5 mm, patent, straight. •{\i  S.E. Spain.} Hs.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 5. P. argentea} Lam.,{\i  Fl. Fr.}{\b  3:} 230 (1778). Perennial; stems 5-30 cm, usually procumbent, much-branched, mat-forming; internodes usually equalling or longer than the leaves. Leaves 4-8(-20) mm, ovate to lanceolate. Flower-clusters usually more than 8 mm in diameter, well-defined; bracts 4-6 mm, ovate, acute, silvery, concealing the flowers. Calyx 1·5-2·5 mm; lobes equal, oblong, cucullate; awn smooth or scarcely spinulose; membranous margins equalling or wider than the brownish, usually smooth midvein.{\i  Mediterranean region, Portugal and N.W. Spain.} Bl Co Cr Ga Gr Hs It Lu Sa Si.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 6. P. polygonifolia} (Vill.) DC. in Lam. & DC., {\i Fl. Fr.} ed. 3, {\b 3:} 403 (1805). Like {\b 5} but leaves 2-3(-10) mm, often subspathulate, crowded, usually longer than the internodes; flower-clusters usually less than 6 mm in diameter, indefinite and inconspicuous; bracts (1·5-)2-4 mm, lanceolate, not concealing the flowers; calyx 1-1·75 mm; lobes with spinulose awn; membranous margins
\par

\par
180}
\par