{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 21 Calyx not more than 15 mm; calyx-tube 2-3 times as 
\par
   long as teeth; petals white ........................................................ {\b 168. germana}
\par
21 Calyx usually more than 15 mm; calyx-tube 3-5 times 
\par
   as long as teeth; petals pale pink ............................................... {\b 169. almolae}
\par
16 Flowers in monochasia or dichasia
\par
22 Flowers in raceme-like, simple or branched monochasia, 
\par
   with or without alar flowers
\par
23 Calyx not contracted at mouth
\par
24 Seeds subglobose, umbilicate (Karpathos) ............................ {\b 143. insularis}
\par
24 Seeds reniform
\par
25 Pedicels patent in fruit, slender, usually longer than calyx
\par
26 Calyx 6-9 mm; seeds 0·3-0·5 mm .......................................... {\b 146. sedoides}
\par
26 Calyx 10-25 mm; seeds at least 0·6 mm
\par
27 Seeds 0·8-1·2 mm, deeply grooved and striate ............... {\b 166. oropediorum}
\par
27 Seeds 0·6-1 mm, ± smooth
\par
28 Calyx 10-19 mm ....................................................................... {\b 165. littorea}
\par
28 Calyx (17-)19-25 mm ............................................................ {\b 167. stockenii}
\par
25 Pedicels erect in fruit, ± stout, usually shorter than calyx
\par
29 Stems 1(-3)-flowered ................................................................ {\b 178. sericea}
\par
29 Stems more than 3-flowered
\par
30 Seeds excavate on face; plant never villous
\par
31 Carpophore less than 2 mm ................................................... {\b 179. nocturna}
\par
31 Carpophore usually more than 2 mm
\par
32 Calyx 10-14 mm; cauline leaves obtuse ............................. {\b 176. obtusifolia}
\par
32 Calyx 9-10·5 mm; cauline leaves acute ................................. {\b 177. gaditana}
\par
30 Seeds ± plane on face; plant usually villous, at least 
\par
   on buds and shoot-apices
\par
33 Plant not villous (Karpathos) .................................................. {\b 175. discolor}
\par
33 Plant villous, at least on buds and shoot-apices
\par
34 Carpophore more than 5 mm; petal-limb more than 5 mm, 
\par
   reddish .................................................................................. {\b 173. scabriflora}
\par
34 Carpophore less than 5 mm; petal-limb not more than 3 mm, 
\par
   white or pink ....................................................................... {\b 174. micropetala}
\par
23 Calyx contracted at mouth
\par
35 Fruiting pedicels patent or deflexed
\par
36 Calyx not inflated ..................................................................... {\b 165. littorea}
\par
36 Calyx inflated, widest at the middle
\par
37 Cauline leaves ovate to ovate-lanceolate ................................ {\b 163. pendula}
\par
37 Cauline leaves linear-lanceolate to linear ............................ {\b 164. psammitis}
\par
35 Fruiting pedicels ± erect
\par
38 Carpophore at least 5 mm; calyx with ascending,
\par
    ± bulbous-based hairs on veins ................................................. {\b 160. gallinyi}
\par
38 Carpophore not more than 5 mm; calyx without ascending, 
\par
   bulbous-based hairs
\par
39 Seeds more than 1 mm; carpophore glabrous
\par
40 Plant entirely glabrous ............................................................... {\b 152. graeca}
\par
40 Plant hairy, at least in part (Sect.{\i  Dichotomae})
\par
41 Veins of calyx sparsely hispid ............................................ {\b 170. dichotoma}
\par
41 Veins of calyx glabrous but serrate with
\par
   ascending teeth ..................................................................... {\b 171. heldreichii}
\par
39 Seeds less than 1 mm; carpophore pubescent (Sect.{\i  Silene})
\par
42 Veins of calyx distinctly anastomosing above
\par
43 Calyx usually less than 11 mm; calyx-tube about twice as 
\par
   long as the lanceolate, acute teeth; carpophore 2-4 mm ...... {\b 183. cerastoides}
\par
43 Calyx at least 11 mm; calyx-tube about equalling the 
\par
   linear, acuminate teeth; carpophore 1-2 mm .......................... {\b 184. tridentata}
\par
42 Veins of calyx obscurely anastomosing or free
\par
44 Calyx more than 13 mm .................................................... {\b 182. bellidifolia}
\par
44 Calyx less than 13 mm
\par
45 Inflorescence subcapitate ........................................................ {\b 185. disticha}
\par
45 Inflorescence ± elongate 
\par
46 Calyx 9-12 mm; carpophore 1·5-2 mm; seeds with ± flat 
\par
   face and narrow, acutely grooved back ............................. {\b 180. ramosissima}
\par
46 Calyx 7-10 mm; carpophore less than 1 mm; seeds with 
\par
   excavate face and wide, flat or concave back ............................. {\b 181. gallica}
\par
22 Flowers in regular or irregular dichasia, not in raceme-like monochasia
\par
47 Calyx not contracted at mouth
\par
48 Flowers usually 2-8, in sessile or shortly stalked, subcapitate
\par
   dichasia arranged laterally on a simple or branched axis ...... {\b 172. nicaeensis}
\par
48 Inflorescence more or less regularly dichasially branched
\par
49 Calyx at least 11 mm
\par
50 Carpophore not more than 4 mm
\par
51 Capsule 10-11 mm; calyx-teeth acute .................................. {\b 144. divaricata}
\par
51 Capsule 7-8 mm; calyx-teeth obtuse ............ ({\b 140-142}).{\b  diversifolia} group
\par
50 Carpophore more than 4 mm
\par
52 Calyx glabrous
\par
53 Seeds with 1 or 2 rows of rounded tubercles on back;
\par
   petals pink or whitish, without darker veins ........................... {\b 134. portensis}
\par
53 Seeds with 4 rows of acute tubercles on back; petals white, 
\par
   with purplish veins .......................................................... {\b 135. echinosperma}
\par
52 Calyx hairy
\par
54 Carpophore 9-10 mm, pubescent .................................... {\b 139. pseudatocion}
\par
54 Carpophore 4·5-8 mm, glabrous
\par
55 Carpophore 4·5-7 mm; inflorescence ± dense .......................... {\b 138. fuscata}
\par
55 Carpophore 7-8 mm; inflorescence ± lax ........................ {\b 145. integripetala}
\par
49 Calyx less than 11 mm
\par
56 Carpophore more than 4 mm ................................................. {\b 149. laconica}
\par
56 Carpophore less than 4 mm
\par
57 Seeds with excavate face ............................. ({\b 140-142}). {\b diversifolia} group
\par
57 Seeds with plane or concave, but not excavate, face
\par
58 Calyx glabrous
\par
59 Petal-limb exserted; calyx 4-7·5 mm ................................... {\b 136. pinetorum}
\par

\par
192}
\par