{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 3. S. damboldtiana} Greuter & Melzh., {\i Willdenowia}{\b  8:} 614 (1979). Like {\b 1} but smaller, up to 40 cm; stolons absent; inflorescence narrow with short, usually 1-flowered branches; calyx eglandular-pubescent. 2n = 24. •{\i  Mountains of N. Greece & S.E. Albania.} Al Gr.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    ({\b 4-11}).{\b  S. mollissima} group. Robust, tomentose perennials with woody stock and flowering stems up to 120 cm. Basal leaves usually elliptical. Inflorescence usually relatively short and broad, often subcorymbose. Calyx 17-25 mm, more or less densely hairy with relatively long, multicellular glandular or eglandular hairs; teeth obtuse. Petals white, reddish, purplish or violet. Capsule 8-14 mm, ovoid, enclosed in calyx and as long as or somewhat longer than carpophore. Seeds usually 1·5-2 mm, reniform, dark brown.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 The above description covers a group of closely related plants in S.W. Europe, mostly chasmophytes of sea-cliffs, which have been treated at specific rank by W. Rothmaler,{\i  Feddes Repert.}{\b  52:} 275 (1943), and D. Jeanmonod, {\i Candollea}{\b  39: }195-259 (1984).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b S. rothmaleri }P. Silva,{\i  Agron. Lusit. }{\b 9: }18 (1956), from S.W. Portugal (Cabo de S. vicente), with whitish flowers in rather dense panicles, and calyx 20-23 mm, may belong to this group, but its affinities are obscure. It is known only from the type collection.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Calyx glandular, at least in part
\par
2 Calyx with both glandular and eglandular hairs ........................... {\b 5. velutina}
\par
2 Calyx with glandular hairs only
\par
3 Calyx 20-25 mm .................................................................... {\b 7. andryalifolia}
\par
3 Calyx 16-20 mm
\par
4 Capsule 11-14 mm; inflorescence condensed ........................... {\b 10. tyrrhenia}
\par
4 Capsule 9-11 mm; inflorescence lax ........................................... {\b 11. rosulata}
\par
1 Calyx eglandular
\par
5 Basal leaves obtuse; petals whitish .......................................... {\b 4. mollissima}
\par
5 Basal leaves acute or acuminate; petals pink to purple
\par
6 Petals pale violet, with large coronal scales .............................. {\b 9. tomentosa}
\par
6 Petals pink, red or purple, with small coronal scales
\par
7 Capsule not more than 11 mm ...................................................... {\b 6. hicesiae}
\par
7 Capsule 11-13 mm ..................................................................... {\b 8. hifacensis}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 4. S. mollissima} (L.) Pers., {\i Syn. Pl.}{\b 1:} 498 (1805). Basal leaves obtuse. Calyx 20-22 mm, densely eglandular-tomentose. Petals whitish, with ciliate claw and small coronal scales. Capsule 10-12 mm, as long as carpophore. 2n = 24. •{\i  Islas Baleares}. Bl.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 5. S. velutina} Pourret ex Loisel. in Desv., {\i Jour. Bot. Rédigé }{\b 2:} 324 (1809) ({\i S. salzmannii }Otth). Basal leaves acute. Calyx (15-)18-25 mm, tomentose, with a rather variable proportion of glandular and eglandular hairs. Petals whitish or purplish-pink; coronal scales absent. Capsule 9-12 mm, usually somewhat longer than carpophore. 2n = 24. •{\i  Small islands between Sardegna and Corse; formerly on Corse}. Co Sa.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 6. S. hicesiae} Brullo & Signorello,{\b  Willdenowia}{\b  14:} 141 (1984). Basal leaves acuminate. Stems up to 120 cm; inflorescence elongate. Calyx (15-)18-25 mm, eglandular-pubescent. Petals pinkish-purple, with small coronal scales. Capsule 8-11 mm. 2n = 24.{\i  Cliffs. • Isole Eolie} ({\i Panarea});{\i  one station in Sicilia} ({\i near Palermo}). Si.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 7. S. andryalifolia} Pomel,{\i  Nouv. Mat. Fl. Atl.} 331 (1875) ({\i S. pseudovelutina }Rochm.). Basal leaves acuminate. Calyx 20-25 mm, densely tomentose with long glandular hairs only. Petals whitish, with glabrous claw; coronal scales absent. Capsule 8-12 mm, as long as carpophore. 2n = 24.{\i  S. Spain}. Hs. ({\i N. Africa}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 8. S. hifacensis} Rouy ex Willk., {\i Ill. Fl. Hisp.}{\b  1}({\b 10}): 150 (1885). Basal leaves acute to acuminate. Calyx 17-22 mm, densely eglandular-pubescent. Petals reddish or purplish, with small coronal scales. Capsule 11-13 mm, slightly longer than carpophore. 2n = 24. •{\i  Islas Baleares; E. Spain} ({\i Alicante prov.}). Bl Hs.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 9. S. tomentosa} Otth in DC.,{\i  Prodr.}{\b  1:} 383 (1824) ({\i S. gibraltarica} Boiss.). Basal leaves spathulate, acuminate. Calyx 18-20 mm, densely eglandular-pubescent. Petals pale violet, with large coronal scales. Capsule c. 11 mm, slightly longer than carpophore.{\i  Crevices of calcareous cliffs near the sea. • S. Spain} ({\i Gibraltar}). Hs.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 10. S. tyrrhenia} Jeanmonod & Bocquet,{\i  Candollea}{\b  38:} 198 (1983) ({\i S. salzmannii} Badaro ex Moretti, non Otth). Whole plant  densely puberulent. Basal leaves in dense rosettes, elliptical-subspathulate, acute or subacute. Stems up to 60 cm bearing condensed inflorescence. Calyx 16-20 mm, densely glandular-puberulent. Petals white or yellowish-white. Capsule 11-14 mm, oblong-ovoid. 2n = 24.{\i  Coastal cliffs, rocks and screes. • S.E. France and N.W. Italy}. Ga It.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 11. S. rosulata} Soyer-Willemet & Godron, {\i Monogr. Silene Algér }50 (1851). Basal leaves elliptical-spathulate, more or less acute. Stems 40-70(-90) cm, purple. Inflorescence lax, with ascending branches bearing usually 3-flowered dichasia. Calyx 16-19 mm, densely glandular-puberulent. Petals white. Capsule 9-11 mm, oblong-ovoid; carpophore 7-9 mm. Seeds c. 1·3 mm.{\i  Maritime sands. N. Sardinia }({\i near Segna Teresa Gallura}). Sa. ({\i N. Africa}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 European plants have been referred to subsp.{\b  sanctae-therasiae} (Jeanmonod) Jeanmonod,{\i  Willdenowia }{\b 14:} 47 (1984). Subsp.{\i  rosulata} and other subspecies occur widely in N. Africa.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 12. S. mellifera} Boiss. & Reuter,{\i  Diagn. Pl. Nov. Hisp.} 8 (1842) (incl.{\i  S. nevadensis} Boiss.). Stems (20-)40-80 cm, eglandular-tomentose in lower ½, viscid above. Basal leaves lanceolate-spathulate, upper cauline linear. Inflorescence lax, with branches bearing 1- to 3-flowered dichasia. Calyx 8-13 mm, glabrous or sparsely hairy, with anastomosing veins. Petal-limb 5-8 mm, bifid, greenish-white; coronal scales very small or absent. Capsule 6·5-9 mm; carpophore 3·5-6·5 mm, pubescent. 2n = 24.{\i  • C., E. & S. Spain; S. Portugal.} Hs Lu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b S. sennenii} Pau,{\i  Bol. Soe. Aragon. Ci. Nat.}{\b  4:} 309 (1905), from N.E. Spain (Gerona), with linear-lanceolate to linear leaves, non-anastomosing calyx veins, and somewhat narrower capsule, seems doubtfully distinct from {\b 12}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 13. S. fernandezii} Jeanmonod, {\i Candollea}{\b  39:} 619 (1984). Like {\b 12} but densely caespitose; leaves narrowly oblong-elliptical; calyx 17-22 mm, sparsely eglandular-pubescent. {\i Stony and rocky places on serpentine. • S. Spain} ({\i Sierra Bermeja}). Hs.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 14. S. longicilia} (Brot.) Otth in DC.,{\i  Prodr.}{\b  1:} 377 (1824) ({\i S. patula} auct., non Desf.; incl. {\i S. cintrana} Rothm.). Like {\b 12} but calyx 10-14 mm, subglabrous, with sparse glandular hairs; teeth usually dimorphic (2 triangular acute, 3 obtuse with broad hyaline margins); petals reddish-purple (more rarely whitish); capsule 1½-2 times as long as carpophore. 2n = 24. {\i • W. Portugal}. Lu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 15. S. paradoxa} L.,{\i  Sp. Pl.} ed. 2, 1673 (1763). Stems up to 80 cm, pubescent below. Basal leaves lanceolate to lanceolate-obovate. Inflorescence lax, with ascending branches. Calyx
\par

\par
198}
\par