{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 204 Capsule less than twice as long as carpophore ........................ {\b 17. cythnia}
\par
204 Capsule about twice as long as carpophore ............................. {\b 93. taliewii}
\par
203 Stems glabrous
\par
205 Stems up to 40 cm; petals white or pink .................................... {\b 75. caesia}
\par
205 Stems up to 10 cm; arising from long, procumbent shoots; petals
\par
    greyish-violet ........................................................................... {\b 76. variegata}
\par
199 At least some cauline leaves linear 
\par
206 Calyx more than 18 mm
\par
207 Leaves thick and rigid; coronal scales absent ......................... {\b 91. cretacea}
\par
207 Leaves not obviously thick and rigid; coronal scales present
\par
208 Lower cauline leaves oblanceolate; coronal scales minute;
\par
     carpophore 10-12 mm
\par
209 Carpophore glabrous ............................................................. {\b 16. nodulosa}
\par
209 Carpophore pubescent ...................................................... {\b 104. multicaulis}
\par
208 Lower cauline leaves linear; coronal scales conspicuous; 
\par
    carpophore (11-)13-22 mm
\par
210 Uppermost cauline leaves very close to base of calyx of  
\par
    single terminal flower .......................................................... {\b 108. orphanidis}
\par
210 Uppermost cauline leaves distinctly separated from flower(s)
\par
211 Inflorescence 1- to 5-flowered, on stems
\par
    up to 25 cm; petals white .................................................... {\b 105. waldsteinii}
\par
211 Flowers solitary, on slender stems usually c. 10 cm;
\par
    petals brownish ...................................................................... {\b 106. pindicola}
\par
206 Calyx up to 18(-19) mm
\par
212 Basal leaves spathulate, ± fleshy
\par
213 Internodes rough with minute deflexed hairs, 
\par
    the upper glabrous ..................................................................... {\b 36. radicosa}
\par
213 All internodes glabrous ......................................................... {\b 76. variegata}
\par
212 Basal leaves linear or narrowly spathulate, not fleshy
\par
214 Capsule 6-8 mm; stems retrorsely aculeolate below ............ {\b 107. dionysii}
\par
214 Capsule often more than 8 mm; stems not retrorsely aculeolate
\par
215 Densely pulvinate or mat-forming
\par
216 Calyx clavate ................................................... ({\b 97-102}).{\b  saxifraga }group
\par
216 Calyx oblong-campanulate ................................................... {\b 114. dinarica}
\par
215 Plant not pulvinate or mat-forming
\par
217 Not caespitose; stems few, robust (S.E. Russia) ............. {\b 92. suffrutescens}
\par
217 Caespitose, with many slender flowering stems
\par
218 Calyx 14-18 mm; carpophore pubescent
\par
219 Petal-claw not or slightly exceeding calyx; 
\par
    calyx oblong-turbinate ....................................... ({\b 97-102}).{\b  saxifraga} group
\par
219 Petal-claw long-exserted from calyx; 
\par
    calyx narrowly clavate ........................................................ {\b 104. multicaulis}
\par
218 Calyx not more than 13 mm; carpophore usually glabrous
\par
220 Lobes of petals long, linear;filaments ± hairy (Greece)..... {\b 29. marschallii}
\par
220 Lobes of petals broader, not linear; filaments glabrous
\par
    ............................................................................. ({\b 97-102}).{\b  saxifraga }group
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Sect. SIPHONOMORPHA Otth (incl. Sect.{\i  Paniculatae} (Boiss.) Chowdhuri, Sect. {\i Viridiflorae} Boiss.). Perennials with woody stock, more rarely biennials. Lower leaves lanceolate to spathulate. Inflorescence paniculate, with opposite, viscid branches bearing (1-)3- to 7-flowered dichasia; flowers usually large, erect or inclined at anthesis. Filaments glabrous. Seeds with plane face and usually shallowly grooved back.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. S. italica} (L.) Pers.,{\i  Syn. Pl.}{\b  1:} 498 (1805). Stems 20-80(-100) cm, pubescent below. Basal leaves oblanceolate-spathulate, obtuse. Inflorescence lax, branches usually bearing 3-flowered dichasia. Calyx 14-24 mm, glandular-pubescent, rarely more or less glabrous; teeth obtuse. Petals usually creamy-white above, reddish or greenish beneath, deeply bifid; coronal scales very small or absent. Capsule 8-13 mm, ovoid, usually more or less equalling pubescent carpophore. Seeds c. 1 mm, reniform.{\i  S. & C. Europe; casual in N. Europe, rarely naturalized.} Al Au Bu ?Co Cz Ga Ge Gr Hs Hu It Ju Lu Po Rm Rs(W, K) Si Tu [Br Da]
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Carpophore usually more than 7 mm
\par
2 Plant perennial with several flowering stems; 
\par
  petal-claw ciliate ............................................................... ({\b a}) subsp.{\b  italica}
\par
2 Plant biennial with single flowering stem; 
\par
  petal-claw usually glabrous ........................................ ({\b b}) subsp.{\b  nemoralis}
\par
1 Carpophore usually less than 7 mm
\par
3 Plant robust with stems up to 100 cm; flowers white  ({\b c}) subsp.{\b  coutinhoi}
\par
3 Plant slender with stems rarely more than 60 cm; 
\par
  flowers pinkish ................................................................. ({\b d}) subsp.{\b  sicula}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp.{\b  italica} : Perennial, with short stolons and several bearing lax panicles. Petal-claw usually ciliate. Carpophore 7-8(-10) mm. 2n = 24.{\i  S. Europe; casual in W., C. & N. Europe}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp.{\b  nemoralis} (Waldst. & Kit.) Nyman, {\i Consp.} 90 (1878) ({\i S. nemoralis} Waldst. & Kit., {\i S. jundzillii} Zapal.): Biennial, without stolons and with single stems bearing a rather dense panicle. Petal-claw usually glabrous. Carpophore 7-8(-10). 2n = 24.{\i  C. Europe, and mountains in S. Europe}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b c}) Subsp.{\b  coutinhoi} (Rothm. & P. Silva) Franco,{\i  Nova Fl. Portugal}{\b  1:} 143 (1971) ({\i S. coutinhoi} Rothm. & P. Silva): Usually robust perennial, with several stems bearing lax panicles. Calyx glabrous or nearly so. Petal-claw usually glabrous. Carpophore 5-7 mm. 2n = 24. •{\i  Portugal, N.C. Spain}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b d}) Subsp.{\b  sicula} (Ucria) Jeanmonod,{\i  Willdenowia}{\b  14:} 46 (1984) ({\b S. sicula} Ucria): Perennial, with several stems up to 60 cm bearing lax panicles. Petals usually pinkish; petal-claw ciliate or glabrous. Carpophore 5-7(-8) mm. 2n = 24. •{\i  Sicilia, Calabria.}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Robust plants from Spain that have been called {\b S. crassicaulis} Willk. & Costa,{\i  Linnaea}{\b  30:} 91 (1859), are best treated as a variety of subsp. ({\b b}).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28     {\b 2. S. sieberi} Fenzl, {\i Pugillus} 8 (1842). Like {\b 1} but smaller, stems 10-30(-40) cm; stolons absent; panicle very lax, with a few long, divaricate branches, usually 1-flowered; small stems often 1- or 2-flowered. 2n = 24.{\i  Rocks and stony ground.• Kriti.} Cr.
\par

\par
197}
\par