{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\i P. guarensis} Fernández Casas,{\i  P. montsicciana} O. Bolòs & Rivas Martínez). Glaucous plant without basal leaf-rosettes; stems up to 40 cm, often branched. Leaves ovate to lanceolate, thick in texture. Bracts 2·5-5 mm, greenish or scarious. Calyx 9-13(-15) mm. Petals 15-22 mm, entire, pink or lilac. Seeds 1·2-1·7 mm, rugose, not or scarcely shining; strophiole covering at least 1/3 of seed. 2n = 24. •{\i  Mountains of N.E. Spain}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 28.           Silene}                L.
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc  By A.O. Chater, S.M. Walters & J.R. Akeroyd; Sect.{\i  Otites}, F. Wrigley.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Herbs or small shrubs. Epicalyx absent. Calyx with (5-)10-30(-60) veins and 5 short teeth. Limb of petal distinct from claw. Stamens 10; styles usually 3 (sometimes 4 on same plant), more rarely 5. Fruit with or without basal septa opening by 6 (more rarely 5, 8 or 10) teeth, twice the number of styles; carpophore present. Seeds glabrous. (Incl. {\i Eudianthe} (Reichenb.) Reichenb.,{\i  Heliosperma} (Reichenb.) Reichenb., {\i Melandrium }Röhling,{\i  Otites} Adanson.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 A wide generic concept is adopted, following P.K. Chowdhuri (see below). Calyx-length normally changes little between flowering and fruiting, and provides a convenient measurement of flower-size. Measurements of the capsule and carpophore refer to the ripe fruiting stage. Seed-characters have been extensively used in the description of annual species, and ripe seed is necessary to confirm the identification in some groups. There is great variety in seed-form. Most seeds are reniform, and the two sides ('faces' in the descriptions) may be plane, concave, excavate (i.e. with an abrupt, relatively deep excavation), or concavo-convex (i.e. convex, but with a concavity near the hilum). The edge of the seed (' back ' in the descriptions) may be plane, grooved, ridged, winged or variously sculpted.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 The terminology of the inflorescence is difficult. In the perennial sections there are some paniculate inflorescences with more or less equal opposite branches bearing groups of 3-flowered dichasia, and it is possible to derive many of the other inflorescence types theoretically from this paniculate type. Chowdhuri's arrangement of the genus, largely adopted here, follows this logical pattern. Reduction of the typical panicle produces the narrow, spike-like inflorescence in which the opposite branches may be very short-stalked (the inflorescence is then pseudoverticillate) or may be reduced to single flowers.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Further reductions may suppress some or all of the branches, and this series of more or less irregular, alternately branched panicles finishes with those species with a solitary flower. In the annual species it is possible to describe most inflorescences as regular or irregular compound dichasia, simple or compound raceme-like monochasia, few-flowered, or solitary. Alar flowers are single in the apparent axil of a branch. As, however, environmental conditions affect the development of the inflorescence, no key which depends on inflorescence-form can work with more than moderate success, and small specimens, whether of annual or perennial species, may be wrongly identified. In the present state of knowledge, there appears to be no remedy to this.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Most annual species of {\i Silene} are weeds of ruderal or cultivated habitats and it is therefore difficult in many cases to decide on the limits of their range as natives. Most perennial species grow in open, stony or sandy ground; many are caespitose, mat-forming or, more rarely, pulvinate mountain-plants with relatively large flowers.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Literature: P. Rohrbach, {\i Monographie der Gattung Silene}. Leipzig, 1868. F.N. Williams,{\i  Jour. Linn. Soc. London} ({\i Bot}.) {\b 32:} 1-196 (1896). P.K. Chowdhuri,{\i  Notes Roy. Bot. Gard. Edinb.}{\b  22:} 221-278 (1957). V. Melzheimer,{\i  Bot. Jahrb.}{\b  98:} 1-92 (1977); 101: 153-190 (1980). D. Jeanmonod,{\i  Candollea}{\b  39:} 195-259; 549-639 (1984). S. Talavera in S. Castroviejo et al. (eds.),{\i  Flora Iberica}{\b  2:} 313-406 (1990). F. Wrigley,{\i  Ann. Bot. Fenn.}{\b  23:} 69-81 (1986) (Sect. {\i Otites}).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Annual, without non-flowering shoots at time of flowering,
\par
  and usually without a woody stock; inflorescence various, 
\par
  but never paniculate with regular and equal opposite branches
\par
2 Styles 5, or flowers male only; capsule with 10 teeth or 
\par
  with 5 bifid teeth
\par
3 Leaves ovate-lanceolate to obovate; petals usually white
\par
4 Calyx (at least in female flowers) with 20 conspicuous veins; 
\par
  capsule usually with erect teeth .................................................. {\b 129. latifolia}
\par
4 Calyx with 10 inconspicuous veins;
\par
  capsule with recurved teeth ....................................................... {\b 132. heuffelii}
\par
3 Leaves linear-lanceolate; petals pink (Sect.{\i  Eudianthe})
\par
5 Calyx less than 12 mm ................................................................... {\b 161. laeta}
\par
5 Calyx more than 12 mm ......................................................... {\b 162. coeli-rosa}
\par
2 Styles 3; capsule with 6 teeth
\par
6 Calyx 15- to 60-veined
\par
7 Calyx 15- to 20-veined
\par
8 Calyx with 10 longer and 10 alternating shorter veins;
\par
  petals white ..................................................................................... {\b 71. csereii}
\par
8 Calyx with 15-20 subequal veins; petals pink ..................... {\b 190. ammophila}
\par
7 Calyx 30- or 60-veined
\par
9 Calyx 60-veined .................................................................. {\b 191. macrodonta}
\par
9 Calyx 30-veined
\par
10 Capsule 12-18 mm; seeds more than 1 mm, dark brown ...... {\b 194. conoidea}
\par
10 Capsule 7-12 mm; seeds 1 mm or less, pruinose 
\par
11 Calyx shortly pubescent ............................................................ {\b 192. conica}
\par
11 Calyx with short glandular hairs and ± dense, long 
\par
   eglandular hairs ............................................................................. {\b 193. lydia}
\par
6  Calyx 10-veined
\par
12 Seeds with back narrowly grooved between 2 undulate
\par
   wings (Sect.{\i  Dipterospermae})
\par
13 Carpophore more than 4 mm
\par
14 Seeds 1-1·5 mm; calyx-teeth ovate, obtuse ............................. {\b 186. colorata}
\par
14 Seeds at least 2 mm; calyx-teeth lanceolate, acute .......... {\b 187. secundiflora}
\par
13 Carpophore less than 4 mm
\par
15 Carpophore 1-2 mm; petals often absent .................................. {\b 188. apetala}
\par
15 Carpophore 2·5-3·5 mm; petals always present ................. {\b 189. longicaulis}
\par
12 Seeds without 2 undulate wings on back
\par
16 Flowers solitary, terminal
\par
17 Calyx not contracted at mouth
\par
18 Seeds 0·6-0·8 mm ..................................................................... {\b 165. littorea}
\par
18 Seeds 1-1·4 mm ........................................................................ {\b 178. sericea}
\par
17 Calyx contracted at mouth (Iberian peninsula)
\par
19 Calyx loose and inflated in fruit .......................................... {\b 164. psammitis}
\par
19 Calyx not loose and inflated in fruit
\par
20 Seeds ± smooth; carpophore (2·5-)4-9 mm .............................. {\b 165. littorea}
\par
20 Seeds tuberculate; carpophore 2-4 mm
\par

\par
191}
\par