{\rtf1\ansi \deff4\deflang1033{\fonttbl{\f4\froman\fcharset0\fprq2 Times New Roman;}}{\colortbl;\red0\green0\blue0;\red0\green0\blue255;\red0\green255\blue255;\red0\green255\blue0;\red255\green0\blue255;\red255\green0\blue0;\red255\green255\blue0;\red255\green255\blue255;\red0\green0\blue128;\red0\green128\blue128;\red0\green128\blue0;\red128\green0\blue128;\red128\green0\blue0;\red128\green128\blue0;\red128\green128\blue128;\red192\green192\blue192;}{\stylesheet{\widctlpar \f4\fs20\lang2057 \snext0 Normal;}{\*\cs10 \additive Default Paragraph Font;}}{\info{\author dddd}{\operator dddd}{\creatim\yr1998\mo11\dy11\hr16\min39}{\revtim\yr1998\mo11\dy11\hr16\min39}{\version2}{\edmins0}{\nofpages4}{\nofwords977}{\nofchars5573}{\*\company  }{\vern57431}}\widowctrl\ftnbj\aenddoc\hyphcaps0 \fet0\sectd \linex0 {\*\pnseclvl1\pnucrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl2\pnucltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl3\pndec\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl4\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl5\pndec\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl6\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl7\pnlcrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl8\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl9\pnlcrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}
\pard\plain \ \f4\fs20\lang2057 {\fs28    }{\b\fs28 8. L. nivalis}{\fs28  Kit. in Schultes,}{\i\fs28  \'d6sterreichs Fl. }{\fs28 ed. 2, }{\b\fs28 1:}{\fs28  698 (1814). Caespitose, glabrous, with ciliate or serrulate leaves. Stems 5-20 cm, simple, not viscid. Basal leaves crowded, oblong-lanceolate to subspathulate; cauline 1 or 2 pairs, often linear. Flowers 1-3; pedicels equalling or shorter than calyx. Calyx 10-12 mm. Petal-limb purple or white, 2-lobed. Carpophore short. }{\i\fs28 Damp, stony places,}{\fs28  1800-2300}{\i\fs28  m. E. Carpathians}{\fs28  (}{\i\fs28 Muntii Rodnei}{\fs28 ). Rm.
\par 
\par }
\pard \qc\ {\fs28  }{\b\fs28 26.            Agrostemma}{\fs28              L.
\par }{\fs24  By A.O. Chater.
\par 
\par }
\pard \ {\fs28 Like }{\i\fs28 Lychnis,}{\fs28  but annuals; calyx with 5 long, linear, foliaceous teeth; styles 5, alternating with calyx-teeth; carpophore absent.
\par 
\par }
\pard \li200\ {\fs28  Calyx-teeth longer than tube; petals shorter than calyx .................... }{\b\fs28 1. githago}{\fs28 
\par Calyx-teeth equalling or shorter than tube; petals longer than
\par    calyx ................................................................................................ }{\b\fs28 2. gracile}{\fs28 
\par 
\par }
\pard \ {\fs28    }{\b\fs28 1. A. githago}{\fs28  L., }{\i\fs28 Sp. Pl.}{\fs28  435 (1753) (}{\i\fs28 Lychnis githago}{\fs28  (L.) Scop.; incl. }{\i\fs28 A. linicola }{\fs28 Terechov). Plant covered with long, appressed, greyish hairs; stems 30-100 cm. Leaves usually linear, slightly connate, acute, or the lower obtuse. Calyx 3-7 cm, the ovoid or oblong tube usually much shorter than the often caducous teeth. Petals shorter than calyx; limb not spotted, dull purple, rarely white. Seeds mostly 3 mm or more, with prominent, acute tubercles. 2n = 48.}{\i\fs28  Probably native in Europe only in the E. Mediterranean region; introduced as a weed of cultivation almost throughout Europe, but much less abundant than formerly, and extinct in some parts.}{\fs28  All except Sb, but in Az Fa Is only as a rare casual.
\par 
\par Plants from flax-fields in Russia (var. }{\i\fs28 linicola}{\fs28  (Terechov) Hammer) have a narrower, less hairy calyx-tube and smaller and less tuberculate seeds.
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 2. A. gracile}{\fs28  Boiss., }{\i\fs28 Diagn. Pl. Or. Nov.}{\b\fs28  3}{\fs28 (}{\b\fs28 1}{\fs28 ): 80 (1854). Like }{\b\fs28 1}{\fs28  but smaller, more slender and less hairy; calyx-tube narrower, equalling or longer than teeth; petals longer than calyx; limb pale purple, with lines of black spots at base.}{\i\fs28  E.C. Greece}{\fs28  (}{\i\fs28 near Farsala}{\fs28 ). Gr. (}{\i\fs28 Anatolia.}{\fs28 )
\par 
\par }
\pard \qc\ {\fs28  }{\b\fs28 27.            Petrocoptis}{\fs28             A. Braun
\par }{\fs24  By \'86W. Rothmahler (ed.1) revised by S.M. Walters (ed.2).
\par 
\par }
\pard \ {\fs28 Perennials, woody at the base, glabrous or nearly so, often glaucous and viscid above. Inflorescence cymose, 1- to 10-flowered. Epicalyx absent. Calyx conical-campanulate, 10-veined. Petals imbricate in bud, long-clawed; coronal scales present; stamens 10; styles 5 opposite the calyx-teeth; carpophore present. Seeds reniform, black, with a conspicuous strophiole consisting of a tuft of hairs at the hilum.
\par 
\par All species grow in crevices of calcareous rocks, mainly above 500 m, but occasionally in the lowlands.
\par 
\par Literature: W. Rothmaler,}{\i\fs28  Bot. Jahrb.}{\b\fs28  72}{\fs28 (}{\b\fs28 1}{\fs28 ): 117-130 (1941). H. Merxm\'fcller & J. Grau, }{\i\fs28 Collect. Bot.}{\fs28  (}{\i\fs28 Barcelona}{\fs28 ),}{\b\fs28  7:}{\fs28  787-797 (1968). P. Montserrat & J. Fern\'e1ndez Casas in S. Castroviejo et al. (eds.),}{\i\fs28  Flora Iberica}{\b\fs28  2:}{\fs28  304 312 (1990).
\par 
\par }
\pard \li200\ {\fs28 1 Seeds smooth and shining
\par 2 Seeds c. 1\'b75 mm .......................................................................... }{\b\fs28 3. hispanica}{\fs28 
\par 2 Seeds c. 1 mm
\par 3 Calyx 5-9 mm ............................................................................. }{\b\fs28 1. pyrenaica}{\fs28 
\par 3 Calyx 10-14 mm ...................................................................... }{\b\fs28 2. grandiflora}{\fs28 
\par 1 Seeds \'b1 rugose, not or scarcely shining
\par 4 Strophiole covering not more than 1/3 of seed; petals often
\par   white, slightly emarginate .......................................................... }{\b\fs28 4. crassifolia}{\fs28 
\par 4 Strophiole covering more than 1/3 of seed; petals pink or
\par   red, entire ......................................................................................... }{\b\fs28 5. pardoi}{\fs28 
\par 
\par }
\pard \ {\fs28    }{\b\fs28 1. P. pyrenaica}{\fs28  (J.P. Bergeret) A. Braun ex Walpers,}{\i\fs28  Repert. Bot. Syst.}{\b\fs28  1:}{\fs28  281 (1842) (}{\i\fs28 Lychnis pyrenaica}{\fs28  J.P. Bergeret). Plant more or less glaucous, with or without basal leaf rosettes. Stems up to 30 cm, more or less viscid above. Basal leaves up to 3 cm, ovate to ovate-lanceolate, petiolate, with more or less ciliate margins cauline ovate to lanceolate, sessile. Bracts 1-4 mm, often greenish or purplish with scarious margins, sometimes entirely scarious. Calyx 5-9 mm. Petals 10-18 mm, usually emarginate, white, pink or purple. Seeds c. 1 mm, smooth and shining. \bullet }{\i\fs28  Pyrenees and mountains of N. Spain.}{\fs28  Ga Hs.
\par 
\par }
\pard \li200\ {\fs28 1 Plant without basal leaf-rosettes .................................. (}{\b\fs28 b}{\fs28 ) subsp.}{\b\fs28  glaucifolia}{\fs28 
\par 1 Plant with basal leaf-rosettes
\par 2 Stems very viscid; bracts c. 1 mm ..................................... (}{\b\fs28 c}{\fs28 ) subsp. }{\b\fs28 viscosa}{\fs28 
\par 2 Stems not very viscid; bracts up to 4 mm ...................... (}{\b\fs28 a}{\fs28 ) subsp.}{\b\fs28  pyrenaica}{\fs28 
\par 
\par }
\pard \ {\fs28  (}{\b\fs28 a}{\fs28 ) Subsp.}{\b\fs28  pyrenaica}{\fs28  : Basal leaf-rosettes present; bracts 1-4 mm; calyx 5-8 mm. 2n = 24.}{\i\fs28  W. & C. Pyrenees, extending westwards to c. }{\fs28 2\'b0 30'}{\i\fs28  W. in N. Spain}{\fs28 .
\par  (}{\b\fs28 b}{\fs28 ) Subsp.}{\b\fs28  glaucifolia}{\fs28  (Lag.) P. Monts. & Fern\'e1ndez Casas,}{\i\fs28  Anal. Jard. Bot. Madrid}{\b\fs28  45:}{\fs28  362 (1988) (}{\i\fs28 P. glaucifolia}{\fs28  (Lag.) Boiss.,}{\i\fs28  P. lagascae}{\fs28  (Willk.) Willk., }{\i\fs28 P. wiedmannii}{\fs28  Merxm. & Grau,}{\i\fs28  Silene glaucifolia}{\fs28  Lag.): Basal leaf-rosettes absent; bracts 1-2 mm; calyx 7-9 mm. 2n = 24.}{\i\fs28  Cordillera Cantabrica}{\fs28 .
\par  (}{\b\fs28 c}{\fs28 ) Subsp. }{\b\fs28 viscosa}{\fs28  (Rothm.) P. Monts. & Fern\'e1ndez Casas, }{\i\fs28 loc. cit.}{\fs28  (1988) (}{\i\fs28 P. viscosa}{\fs28  Rothm.): Basal leaf-rosettes present; leaves and stems very viscid; bracts c. 1 mm; calyx 7-9 mm. 2n = 24.}{\i\fs28  N.W. Spain}{\fs28  (}{\i\fs28 near Ponferrada}{\fs28 ).
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 2. P. grandiflora}{\fs28  Rothm.,}{\i\fs28  Cavanillesia}{\b\fs28  7:}{\fs28  111 (1935). Like}{\b\fs28  }{\fs28 1(b) but bracts c. 4 mm, green; calyx 10-14 mm, petals c. 2 cm, entire, deep purple. \bullet }{\i\fs28  N.W. Spain}{\fs28  (}{\i\fs28 Leon & Orense provs}{\fs28 .).
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 3. P. hispanica}{\fs28  (Willk.) Pau,}{\i\fs28  Bol. Soc. Aragon. Ci. Nat.}{\b\fs28  15:}{\fs28  65 (1916) (}{\i\fs28 P.pyrenaica }{\fs28 var. }{\i\fs28 hispanica}{\fs28  Willk.). Plant with basal leaf-rosettes; stems up to 40(-60) cm. Basal leaves up to 8 cm, obovate glaucous, thick in texture, petiolate, not ciliate; lower cauline elliptical to ovate; upper suborbicular. Bracts 1-2\'b75 mm, scarious with green midrib. Calyx 6-8(-10) mm. Petals emarginate, white or pale pink. Seeds c. 1\'b75 mm, rather shining. 2n = 24. \bullet }{\i\fs28  W. & C. Pre-Pyrenees}{\fs28 . Hs.
\par 
\par }{\b\fs28 P. pseudoviscosa}{\fs28  Fern\'e1ndez Casas,}{\i\fs28  Cuad. Ci. Biol.}{\b\fs28  2:}{\fs28  44 (1973), described from the same region (gorge of R. Esera), is said to differ from }{\b\fs28 3}{\fs28  in the absence of leaf-rosettes and in the larger strophiole. It seems doubtfully distinct.
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 4. P. crassifolia}{\fs28  Rouy,}{\i\fs28  Ill. Pl. Eur. Rar. }{\b\fs28 4:}{\fs28  26 (1895) (incl. }{\i\fs28 P. montserratii}{\fs28  Fern\'e1ndez Casas). Plant with basal leaf-rosettes; stems up to 40(-80) cm. Basal leaves ovate-spathulate, glaucous, thick in texture, petiolate, not ciliate; cauline ovate-lanceolate. Bracts 2-5 mm, acuminate, more or less scarious. Calyx 8-12 mm. Petals at least 2 cm, entire or slightly emarginate, white or pink. Seeds c. 2 mm, rugose, not shining, with small strophiole not covering 1/3 of seed. 2n = 24. \bullet }{\i\fs28  C. Pyrenees.}{\fs28  Hs.
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 5. P. pardoi}{\fs28  Pau, }{\i\fs28 Actas Soc. Esp. Hist. Nat.}{\b\fs28  22:}{\fs28  196 (1898) (incl.
\par 
\par 190}
\par }