{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200     calyx 9-12 mm; petal-limb deeply emarginate ............ {\b 116. lerchenfeldiana}
\par
131 Flowering stem usually robust, terminal; calyx 12-20 mm; 
\par
    petal-limb entire or emarginate (Sect.{\i  Compactae})
\par
132 Upper cauline leaves not closely investing base of 
\par
    laxly or densely corymbose inflorescence ................................ {\b 125. armeria}
\par
132 Upper cauline leaves (bracts) closely investing base 
\par
    of subcapitate inflorescence
\par
133 Biennial; bracts herbaceous; calyx not purplish ................. {\b 126. compacta}
\par
133 Perennial; bracts membranous; calyx purplish ...................... {\b 127. asterias}
\par
125 Inflorescence not a regular dichasium, and neither
\par
    corymbose nor subcapitate
\par
134 Calyx hairy (sometimes slightly so)
\par
135 Calyx 7-9 mm
\par
136 Capsule c. 8 mm
\par
137 Calyx eglandular ................................................................. {\b 78. flavescens}
\par
137 Calyx glandular-pubescent .............................................. {\b 79. thessalonica}
\par
136 Capsule 4-5 mm
\par
138 Petals yellowish; calyx densely glandular-hairy ................... {\b 80. congesta}
\par
138 Petals purple; calyx sparsely hairy .................................. {\b 103. schmuckeri}
\par
135 Calyx more than 9 mm
\par
139 Leaves acicular, pungent .......................................................... {\b 90. altaica}
\par
139 Leaves not acicular
\par
140 Plant with long, creeping stolons
\par
141 Leaves linear ............................................................................. {\b 85. repens}
\par
141 Leaves obovate to spathulate ................................................. {\b 86. sangaria}
\par
140 Plant not stoloniferous
\par
142 Coronal scales well-developed and conspicuous
\par
143 Inflorescence a lax panicle .............................................. {\b 88. spergulifolia}
\par
143 Inflorescence a raceme-like monochasial cyme
\par
144 Leaves spathulate to obovate-spathulate;
\par 
    face of seeds excavate .......................................................... {\b 176. obtusifolia}
\par
144 Leaves linear to lanceolate-spathulate; face of seeds 
\par
    not excavate
\par
145 Flowering stems arising terminally from centre of 
\par
    leaf-rosettes; carpophore pubescent ............................................ {\b 110. ciliata}
\par
145 Flowering stems arising below leaf-rosettes;
\par
    carpophore glabrous ........................................................... {\b 111. legionensis}
\par
142 Coronal scales small or absent
\par
146 Petals yellow
\par
147 Calyx eglandular ................................................................. {\b 78. flavescens}
\par
147 Calyx glandular-pubescent ............................................... {\b 79. thessalonica}
\par
146 Petals not yellow
\par
148 Inflorescence-branches alternate, with rather compact, 
\par
    long-peduncled, 3-flowered dichasia;
\par
    basal leaves linear-lanceolate ............................................... {\b 81. cephallenia}
\par
148 Inflorescence-branches not as above; basal leaves 
\par
    lanceolate, ovate or spathulate
\par
149 Robust biennial (rarely perennial), covered with dense, 
\par
    viscid, glandular hairs ................................................................. {\b 35. viscosa}
\par
149 Perennial, not viscid except in inflorescence ....................... {\b 34. multiflora}
\par
134 Calyx glabrous (except for cilia on teeth)
\par
150 Calyx 20-30 mm .............................................................. {\b 30. bupleuroides}
\par
150 Calyx less than 20 mm
\par
151 Petals greenish (sometimes pinkish); carpophore 2-3 mm
\par
152 Stem glabrous
\par
153 Calyx teeth ovate, obtuse .................................................... {\b 32. chlorantha}
\par
153 Calyx teeth ovate-lanceolate, acute .......................................... {\b 40. tatarica}
\par
152 Stem scabrid with short, deflexed hairs
\par
154 Calyx 7-8·5 mm .................................................................... {\b 37. oligantha}
\par
154 Calyx 10-12 mm ..................................................................... {\b 39. skorpilii}
\par
151 Petals white, pink or reddish; carpophore at least 3 mm
\par
155 Inflorescence very long and narrow, with short, 
\par
    opposite, 1-flowered branches ........................................ {\b 33. frivaldszkyana}
\par
155 Inflorescence shorter, ± compound
\par
156 Lower part of stem with patent hairs
\par
157 Inflorescence narrow; lower part of stem usually with
\par
    numerous short, leafy, non-flowering branches ......................... {\b 40. tatarica}
\par
157 Inflorescence a spreading, alternately branched panicle; 
\par
    lower part of stem with few or no short leafy branches (cf. also 1) 
\par
158 Calyx 14-20 mm ...................................................................... {\b 17. cythnia}
\par
158 Calyx 11-13 mm ................................................................... {\b 18. goulimyi}
\par
156 Lower part of stem glabrous, or rough with minute, 
\par
    deflexed hairs
\par
159 Coronal scales absent; capsule equalling or only slightly 
\par
    longer than carpophore .......................................................... {\b 34. multiflora}
\par
159 Coronal scales present, but small; capsule c. 3 times as  
\par
    long as carpophore ............................................................ {\b 38. reichenbachii}
\par
124 Inflorescence 1- to 5(-7)-flowered
\par
160 Calyx hairy, sometimes only sparsely so
\par
161 Calyx with glandular hairs
\par
162 Petals usually 4-toothed or 4-fid; seeds winged
\par
    (Sect.{\i  Heliosperma}) .......................................... ({\b 117-124}).{\b  pusilla }group
\par
162 Petals ± bifid; seeds not winged
\par
163 Calyx inflated, not closely investing ripe capsule
\par
164 Basal leaves not thick and fleshy; capsule with 
\par
    basal septa ................................................................................. {\b 68. herminii}
\par
164 Basal leaves thick and fleshy, in rosettes; capsule 
\par
    without basal septa (Sect. {\i Odontopetalae})
\par
165 Calyx 12-15 mm; basal leaves with long cilia 1-2 mm ....... {\b 62. auriculata}
\par
165 Calyx more than 15 mm; basal leaves with shorter cilia 
\par
    c. 1 mm, or not ciliate
\par
166 Petals dark reddish-purple ................................................. {\b 64. elisabethae}
\par
166 Petals white or whitish
\par

\par
195}
\par