{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 59 Petals absent, or with limb included; calyx 7-10 mm ...... {\b 137. inaperta}
\par
58 Calyx hairy
\par
60 Capsule exceeding calyx; carpophore c. 2 mm; seeds 0·5-0·75 mm
\par
   .................................................................................................. {\b 147. pentelica}
\par
60 Capsule equalling calyx; carpophore c. 3 mm; seeds 0·75-1 mm
\par
   ........................................................................................... {\b 148. haussknechtii}
\par
47 Calyx contracted at mouth
\par
61 Veins of calyx with prominent, ascending, bulbous-based hairs
\par
62 Hairs on veins of calyx c. 1·5 mm, with distal part 
\par
   longer than bulbous base .......................................................... {\b 158. echinata}
\par
62 Hairs on veins of calyx c. 1 mm, with distal part 
\par
   shorter than bulbous base .................................................... {\b 159. squamigera}
\par
61 Veins of calyx without bulbous-based hairs
\par
63 Plant glabrous (except sometimes for carpophore)
\par
64 Calyx with 5 green wings .......................................................... {\b 154. stricta}
\par
64 Calyx without wings or with scarious wings
\par
65 Carpophore not more than 2 mm
\par
66 Inflorescence lax; flowers not overlapping ................................ {\b 155. behen}
\par
66 Inflorescence dense; flowers overlapping ......................... {\b 156. holzmannii}
\par
65 Carpophore more than 2 mm
\par
67 Cauline leaves not amplexicaul; calyx-teeth acute ............. {\b 153. muscipula}
\par
67 Cauline leaves amplexicaul; calyx-teeth obtuse
\par
68 Upper cauline leaves not closely investing base of 
\par
   laxly or densely corymbose inflorescence ................................. {\b 125. armeria}
\par
68 Upper cauline leaves closely investing base of subcapitate 
\par
   inflorescence ........................................................................... {\b 126. compacta}
\par
63 Plant hairy, at least at base
\par
69 Flowers in a 3- to 8-flowered subcapitate inflorescence; 
\par
   calyx 8-9 mm ............................................................................. {\b 185. disticha}
\par
69 Inflorescence lax; calyx at least 9 mm
\par
70 Stem pubescent with patent hairs; calyx 20-30 mm ............. {\b 128. noctiflora}
\par
70 Stem pubescent with crispate, deflexed hairs, or puberulent; 
\par
   calyx less than 20 mm
\par
71 Carpophore pubescent
\par
72 Seeds with ± plane face; capsule oblong ............................. {\b 153. muscipula}
\par
72 Seeds with excavate face; capsule ovoid ................................. {\b 157. linicola}
\par
71 Carpophore glabrous
\par
73 Calyx smooth, glabrous, usually shorter than pedicel
\par
74 Carpophore 1-5 mm .................................................................. {\b 150. cretica}
\par
74 Carpophore 6-8 mm .................................................................. {\b 151. ungeri}
\par
73 Calyx scabrid to pubescent, usually at least as long as pedicel
\par
75 Calyx 11-15 mm; calyx-tube 2-3 times as long as teeth; 
\par
   petals white .............................................................................. {\b 168. germana}
\par
75 Calyx (12-)15-18 mm; calyx-tube 3-5 times as long as teeth; 
\par
   petals very pale pink ................................................................. {\b 169. almolae}
\par
1  Perennial (more rarely biennial), usually with non-flowering shoots
\par
   at time of flowering and a woody, branched stock; inflorescence,
\par
   if compound, often paniculate with equal, opposite branches
\par
76 Styles 5; dioecious; flowers large (calyx more than 10 mm)
\par
77 Calyx inconspicuously 10-veined .......................................... {\b 132. heuffelii}
\par
77 Calyx, at least in female flowers, 20-veined
\par
78 Biennial or short-lived perennial; flowers white ..................... {\b 129. latifolia}
\par
78 Perennial; flowers usually pink or red
\par
79 Stems densely glandular-hairy ................................................. {\b 130. marizii}
\par
79 Stems ± eglandular
\par
80 Leaves ovate; petals deeply bifid ............................................... {\b 131. dioica}
\par
80 Leaves lanceolate; petals emarginate or shallowly bifid ......... {\b 133. diclinis}
\par
76 Styles 3 (rarely 4 or 5); flowers usually hermaphrodite
\par
   (or, if dioecious, calyx less than 8 mm) 
\par
81 Calyx 20-veined
\par
82 Calyx pubescent; petals emarginate ................................... {\b 77. procumbens}
\par
82 Calyx glabrous and glaucous; petals bifid
\par
83 Plant usually tall, ± erect; inflorescence many
\par
   flowered; bracts usually scarious ................................................ {\b 69. vulgaris}
\par
83 Plant smaller, ± procumbent; inflorescence 1- to
\par
   few-flowered; bracts usually herbaceous .................................... {\b 70. uniflora}
\par
81 Calyx (5-)10-veined
\par
84 Flowers small, unisexual; calyx less than 8 mm; 
\par
   petals often entire, never deeply bifid (Sect. {\i Otites}) (see also {\b 113})
\par
85 Petals spathulate, white
\par
86 Petals ± entire ......................................................................... {\b 47. sendtneri}
\par
86 Petals shallowly bifid
\par
87 Calyx subglabrous, not inflated ................................................ {\b 46. roemeri}
\par
87 Calyx pubescent, inflated ..................................................... {\b 48. ventricosa}
\par
85 Petals linear, greenish, yellow or white
\par
88 Monoecious; carpophore c. 2 mm .............................................. {\b 45. sibirica}
\par
88 Usually dioecious; carpophore less than 2 mm
\par
89 Whole plant, including pedicels and calyx, ± densely pubescent
\par
90 Calyx 2-3 mm; capsule c. 3 mm, subglobose .................... {\b 49. borysthenica}
\par
90 Calyx 3·5-5 mm; capsule 7-9 mm, ovoid ............................. {\b 51. hellmannii}
\par
89 At least pedicels and calyx glabrous
\par
91 Calyx 1·5-3 mm; capsule subglobose
\par
92 Petal-claw ciliate; filaments hairy ................................................ {\b 50. media}
\par
92 Petal-claw and filaments glabrous ......................................... {\b 53. velebitica}
\par
91 Calyx more than 3 mm; capsule more than 3 mm, usually ovoid
\par
93 Petals yellow or greenish; filaments glabrous ........... ({\b 56-61}).{\b  otites} group
\par
93 Petals white or greenish; filaments hairy 
\par
94 Hairs on lower part of stem both long and short; 
\par
   petal-claw glabrous .................................................................. {\b 54. wolgensis}
\par
94 Hairs on lower part of stem of same length; petal-claw ciliate
\par
95 Petals white; seeds tuberculate ........................................ {\b 55. baschkirorum}
\par
95 Petals greenish; seeds smooth .......................................................... {\b 52. cyri}
\par
84 Flowers larger, hermaphrodite; calyx often more than 8 mm; 
\par
   petals usually distinctly bifid
\par

\par
193}
\par