{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 167 Calyx 15-17 mm, only slightly glandular ............................ {\b 63. zawadzkii}
\par
167 Calyx (20-)25-30 mm, densely glandular ............................. {\b 65. requienii}
\par
163 Calyx not or only slightly inflated, ± closely investing
\par
    ripe capsule
\par
168 Flowering stems ± procumbent
\par
169 Leaves linear to linear-lanceolate ................................... {\b 88. spergulifolia}
\par
169 Leaves ovate to obovate or oblanceolate
\par
170 Whole plant viscid with dense glandular pubescence ........ {\b 87. succulenta}
\par
170 Plant pubescent and ± glandular, but not viscid .................. {\b 89. thymifolia}
\par
168 Flowering stems erect or suberect
\par
171 Calyx 8-11·5 mm
\par
172 Basal leaves spathulate; carpophore up to 3 mm ............. {\b 79. thessalonica}
\par
172 Basal leaves linear or linear-lanceolate; carpophore 
\par
    more than 3 mm .................................................................... {\b 81. cephallenia}
\par
171 Calyx at least 12 mm
\par
173 Cauline leaves cordate-ovate ................................................ {\b 66. cordifolia}
\par
173 Cauline leaves ovate-lanceolate to linear 
\par
174 Petal-limb emarginate ............................................................... {\b 67. foetida}
\par
174 Petal-limb bifid
\par
175 Capsule scabrid or glandular-hairy (Sect. {\i Auriculatae})
\par
176 Capsule 8-10 mm, at least twice as long as carpophore ......... {\b 84. jailensis}
\par
176 Capsule more than 10 mm, shorter than or equalling carpophore
\par
177 Coronal scales small; capsule equalling carpophore ............... {\b 82. vallesia}
\par
177 Coronal scales conspicuous; capsule much shorter than
\par
    carpophore ...................................................................................... {\b 83. boryi}
\par
175 Capsule glabrous
\par
178 Calyx less than 25 mm; coronal scales small and obtuse, 
\par
    or absent ......................................................................................... {\b 2. sieberi}
\par
178 Calyx 25-30 mm; coronal scales lanceolate, acute ............... {\b 15. paradoxa}
\par
161 Calyx eglandular
\par
179 Styles 5; calyx ± inflated (Sect.{\i  Gastrolychnis})
\par
180 Calyx 14-18 mm; petals reddish-purple ................................ {\b 43. uralensis}
\par
180 Calyx 10-12 mm; petals white ................................................. {\b 44. furcata}
\par
179 Styles 3; calyx usually not inflated
\par
181 Calyx not more than 11 mm
\par
182 Petals yellow; carpophore c. 1 mm ..................................... {\b 78. flavescens}
\par
182 Petals pink or purple; carpophore at least 3 mm
\par
183 Petals purple; basal leaves not papillose ......................... {\b 103. schmuckeri}
\par
183 Petals pink; basal leaves papillose and punctate .................. {\b 112. borderei}
\par
181 Calyx more than 11 mm
\par
184 Basal leaves obovate-spathulate or elliptical
\par
185 Petals white ......................................................................... {\b 63. zawadzkii}
\par
185 Petals greenish ......................................................... {\b 95. schwarzenbergeri}
\par
184 Basal leaves linear or lanceolate, more rarely lanceolate-spathulate
\par
186 Calyx-teeth alternately acute and obtuse ......................... {\b 104. multicaulis}
\par
186 Calyx-teeth not alternately acute and obtuse 
\par
187 Calyx-teeth acute ..................................................................... {\b 94. linifolia}
\par
187 Calyx-teeth obtuse
\par
188 Inflorescence viscid (N. Greece and S. Albania) ............. {\b 3. damboldtiana}
\par
188 Inflorescence not viscid
\par
189 Flowering stems terminal to leaf-rosettes;   
\par
    veins of calyx usually obviously anastomosing .......................... {\b 110. ciliata}
\par
189 Flowering stems lateral to leaf-rosettes; veins of calyx
\par
    calyx scarcely anastomosing .............................................. {\b 111. legionensis}
\par
160 Calyx glabrous
\par
190 Calyx less than 10 mm
\par
191 Plant densely pulvinate; petals pink or pale purple
\par
192 Calyx 7-9 mm, campanulate; leaves stiffly ciliate ................. {\b 113. acaulis}
\par
192 Calyx 5-7·5 mm, turbinate; leaves scabrid ....................... {\b 109. barbeyana}
\par
191 Plant not densely pulvinate; petals white, pink or   
\par
    greenish, rarely brownish-purple
\par
193 Basal leaves spathulate, ± fleshy or not
\par
194 Capsule 6-9(-12) mm; carpophore pubescent ........................ {\b 36. radicosa}
\par
194 Capsule 4·5-6 mm; carpophore glabrous .............................. {\b 37. oligantha}
\par
193 Basal leaves linear or linear-lanceolate to spathulate, not fleshy
\par
195 Petals usually 4-toothed or 4-fid;
\par
    seeds winged (Sect.{\i  Heliosperma}) .................... ({\b 117-124}).{\b  pusilla} group
\par
195 Petals ± bifid; seeds not winged
\par
196 Plant caespitose, with many slender flowering stems
\par
    ............................................................................. ({\b 97-102}).{\b  saxifraga} group
\par
196 Plant not caespitose; stems solitary or few 
\par
197 Calyx not inflated (Maritime Alps) .................................... {\b 96. campanula}
\par
197 Calyx ± inflated (N.E. Russia)
\par
198 Calyx 4-6 mm wide; petal-claw not ciliate .......................... {\b 41. paucifolia}
\par
198 Calyx 3-4 mm wide; petal-claw ciliate ............................ {\b 42. graminifolia}
\par
190 Calyx at least 10 mm
\par
199 Cauline leaves lanceolate or wider
\par
200 Calyx at least 18 mm
\par
201 Plant glabrous and glaucous; cauline leaves cordate, 
\par
    amplexicaul ............................................................................ {\b 31. chlorifolia}
\par
201 Plant not glaucous; stem somewhat pubescent; cauline 
\par
    leaves not cordate
\par
202 Petals white; calyx-teeth obtuse; capsule c. 10 mm .............. {\b 16. nodulosa}
\par
202 Petals pink; calyx-teeth acute; capsule 11-12 mm ................... {\b 17. cythnia}
\par
200 Calyx not more than 15 mm
\par
203 Stems shortly pubescent to tomentose
\par

\par
196}
\par