{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 25-30 mm, cylindrical, with attenuate base, glandular; teeth lanceolate, acute. Petals pinkish above, yellowish beneath; coronal scales acute. Capsule 10-13(-18) mm, rather narrowly ovoid; carpophore 7-11 mm. Seeds c. 1·5 mm. 2n = 24. •{\i  S. Europe, from S.E. France and Corse to Greece}. Al Co Ga Gr It Ju.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 16. S. nodulosa} Viv.,{\i  Fl. Cors.} 6 (1824) ({\i S. pauciflora} Salzm. ex DC., non Ucria). Perennial with rather slender, branched, woody stock and numerous slender flowering stems up to 30 cm; lower part of stem and leaves scabrid-puberulent. Lower leaves up to 30 × 5 mm, oblanceolate to narrowly spathulate; upper cauline leaves linear, distant. Inflorescence glabrous, (1)2- to 5-flowered; pedicels up to 7 cm, very slender. Calyx 18-20 mm, narrow, glabrous; teeth obtuse, more or less ciliate. Petals white, reddish beneath. Capsule c. 10 mm, ovoid; carpophore c. 12 mm, glabrous. Seeds c. 1 mm, black. 2n = 24. •{\i  Corse; Sardegna.} Co Sa.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 17. S. cythnia} (Halácsy) Walters,{\i  Feddes Repert.}{\b  69:} 46 (1964) ({\i S. italica }var. {\i cythnia} Halácsy). Stems 20-80 cm. Basal leaves lanceolate-spathulate. Inflorescence a lax panicle, with alternate branches bearing 3-flowered dichasia. Calyx 14-20 mm, glabrous, with acute, ciliate teeth. Petals pink. Capsule 11-12 mm, ellipsoidal, up to twice as long as carpophore. 2n = 24.{\i  Aegean region} ({\i Kikladhes}). Gr.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 18. S. goulimyi} Turrill,{\i  Kew Bull.}{\b  1955:} 353 (1955). Like {\b 17} but woodier at base, dwarf and few-flowered; calyx 11-13 mm; carpophore up to 4 mm. 2n = 24. •{\i  S. Greece} ({\i Taïyetos}). Gr.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 19. S. spinescens} Sibth. & Sm.,{\i  Fl. Graec. Prodr.}{\b  1:} 299 (1809). Stock very woody, much-branched; flowering stems 10-30 cm, erect, bearing numerous, non-flowering, rigid branches below, forming a spiny, persistent cushion. Basal leaves spathulate; cauline leaves linear, stiff, often spinose; leaves and stems greyish-tomentose. Inflorescence-branches mostly 1-flowered. Calyx c. 20 mm, pubescent; teeth obtuse. Petals white, deeply bifid; coronal scales ovate. Capsule c. 1½ times as long as carpophore. 2n = 24. {\i • S.E. Greece}. Gr.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 20. S. fruticosa} L.,{\i  Sp. Pl.} 417 (1753). Robust perennial up to 50 cm, almost completely glabrous. Lower leaves obovate or narrowly spathulate, the upper lanceolate; all glabrous and shining above, ciliate. Inflorescence dense; flowers large, erect, on short peduncles. Calyx c. 25 mm, with patent glandular hairs; teeth acute. Petals pink or red, shallowly bifid; coronal scales obvious, acute, sometimes laciniate. Capsule c. 15 mm, ovoid, beaked, equalling or longer than carpophore. Seeds 1·5-2 mm. 2n = 24. {\i  • Mediterranean region} ({\i Sicilia to Karpathos}); {\i very local.} Cr Gr Si.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 21. S. gigantea} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 418 (1753). Robust biennial up to 100 cm, usually unbranched, with a well-developed basal rosette of thick, spathulate leaves; stem and leaves pubescent. Inflorescence-branches short and pseudo-verticillate (or long and rather diffuse in var.{\i  incana} (Griseb.) Chowdhuri). Flowers rather small. Calyx 8-12 mm. Petals white, pink or greenish. Capsule c. 3 times as long as carpophore. 2n = 24. {\i Balkan peninsula northwards to }43° 30'{\i  N.; Aegean region}. Al Bu Cr Gr Ju.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 The typical plant is apparently less widespread than var.{\i  incana }({\i S. rhodopaea} Janka), which is less hairy, with narrow leaves and a laxly paniculate inflorescence.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 22. S. nutans} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 417 (1753). Stems 20-60(-100) cm, usually unbranched, and obviously pubescent below, rarely glabrous. Lower leaves up to 10 cm, oblong-spathulate, the upper linear-lanceolate. Flowers usually inclined, in a lax, secund panicle. Calyx 9-12 mm, glandular-pubescent, truncate at base; teeth lanceolate, acute. Petals variable in colour, usually whitish above, greenish or reddish beneath, deeply bifid with narrow, inrolled lobes; coronal scales lanceolate, acute. Capsule 7-13(-18) mm, 3-5 times as long as pubescent carpophore.{\i  Usually calcicole. Most of Europe except the extreme north and most of the islands.} Al Au Be Br Bu Cz Da Fe Ga Ge Gr He Ho Hs Hu It Ju Lu No Po Rm Rs(N, B, C, W, E) Su.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Extremely variable in habit, hairiness, leaf-shape, colour and size of flowers, and size of capsule.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b nutans} (incl. subsp.{\i  smithiana} (Moss) Jeanmonod & Bocquet): Stems and leaves pubescent with spreading multicellular hairs (rarely glabrous, var.{\i  infracta} (Kit.) Wahlenb.). Inflorescence branches usually at least 3-flowered. Calyx-teeth usually subequal. Petals white, often veined yellow, green or red. Petal-claw 5-8 mm, usually without an auricle. Capsule 8-12(-18) mm, c. 3 times as long as carpophore. 2n = 24.{\i  Throughout the range of the species.}
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp.{\b  dubia} (Herbich) Zapal.,{\i  Rozpr. Wydz. Mat.-Przyr. Polsk. Akad. Um}. ({\i Biol.}) ser. 3, {\b 11B:} 151 (1911) ({\i S. dubia} Herbich): Stems with short, retrorse hairs. Leaves with short marginal cilia and usually with some 1- or 2-cellular hairs on surface. Inflorescence-branches usually 1- to 3-flowered. Calyx-teeth usually distinctly unequal. Petals white to yellowish-green. Petal-claw 2·5-4·5 mm, with well-developed, acute auricle. Capsule 8-11 mm, 4-5 times as long as carpophore. 2n = 24.{\i  S. & E. Carpathians and mountains of Transyllvania.}
\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Plants from S. France and N. Spain like subsp. ({\b a}) but with capsule 13-18 mm have been called {\b S. brachypoda} Rouy,{\i  Ill. Pl. Eur. Rar.}{\b  4:} 26 (1895), but capsule length is variable in this species and these plants are best treated as a variety of subsp. ({\i a}), var.{\i  brachypoda} (Rouy) Molero.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Subsp. ({\b b}) has been treated as a separate species by several authors.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Plants from S. Europe, from S.E. France to C. Romania, that are robust, with stems up to 100 cm bearing a broad inflorescence and slightly larger flowers and capsules, the petals greyish-purple to greenish beneath, have been called subsp.{\b  livida }(Willd.) Jeanmonod & Bocquet,{\i  Candollea}{\b  38:} 291 (1983) ({\i S. livida} Willd.). This pattern of variation may represent former introgressive hybridization with {\b 24}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 23. S. velutinoides} Pomel,{\i  Nouv. Mat. Fl. Atl.}{\b  1:} 208 (1874). Like {\b 22}({\b a}) but woody at the base, caespitose; calyx 8-10 mm; petals white with greenish veins; capsule 7-8 mm, not more than twice as long as carpophore. 2n = 24.{\i  Crevices of calcareous rocks. Sardegna.} Sa. ({\i Algeria}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 24. S. viridiflora} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} ed. 2, 597 (1762). Plant robust, 40-90 cm. Lower leaves oblong-spathulate, the upper ovate-lanceolate, acuminate. Inflorescence lax, with long peduncles; flowers inclined. Calyx 15-20 mm, gradually attenuate at base, pubescent; teeth lanceolate, acute. Petals greenish-white, with long-exserted claw and linear lobes; coronal scales oblong, acute. Capsule 12-14 mm, ovoid; carpophore 2-3·5 mm. 2n = 24. {\i S. Europe, extending northwards to c.} 49°{\i  N. in Czechoslovakia.} Al Bu Co Cz Ga Gr Hs Hu It Ju Rm Rs(K) Sa Si Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 25. S. catholica} (L.) Aiton fil. in Aiton, {\i Hort. Kew}. ed. 2, {\b 3:} 85 (1811). Slender perennial, 40-80 cm, very viscid above. Leaves ovate-lanceolate, scabrid and sparsely ciliate. Inflorescence
\par

\par
199}
\par