{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 96 Inflorescence a ± spreading, racemose panicle with opposite 
\par
   branches, at least 1 branch with a 3- or more-flowered dichasium
\par
97 Capsule less than 1½ times as long as carpophore
\par
98 Plant glabrous; flowers large; calyx more than 20 mm
\par
99 Petals red; inflorescence short ................................................ {\b 20. fruticosa}
\par
99 Petals white or pink; inflorescence long .......................... {\b 30. bupleuroides}
\par
98 Plant hairy, at least below; calyx often less than 20 mm
\par
100 Inflorescence short, often subcorymbose ......... ({\b 4-11}).{\b  mollissima} group
\par
100 Inflorescence ± elongate
\par
101 Calyx 8-13 mm ...................................................................... {\b 12. mellifera}
\par
101 Calyx at least 14 mm
\par
102 Calyx 25-30 mm; coronal scales lanceolate, acute ............... {\b 15. paradoxa}
\par
102 Calyx less than 25 mm; coronal scales small and obtuse, or absent
\par
103 Calyx usually glandular-pubescent, rarely ± glabrous ................. {\b 1. italica}
\par
103 Calyx sparsely pubescent, eglandular ................................ {\b 13. fernandezii}
\par
97  Capsule at least 1½ times as long as carpophore
\par
104 Calyx glabrous or scabrid, sometimes with very 
\par
    sparse glandular or eglandular hairs
\par
105 Terminal flower distinctly overtopped by long, slender
\par
    lateral branches of inflorescence arising in axils of 
\par
    2 uppermost bracts (Greece) ................................................. {\b 27. longipetala}
\par
105 Terminal flower not distinctly overtopped by 
\par
    inflorescence-branches in axils of 2 uppermost bracts
\par
106 Inflorescence a compound panicle of many small flowers; 
\par
    capsule 6-7 mm ........................................................................ {\b 25. catholica}
\par
106 Inflorescence simpler, with fewer, larger flowers; 
\par
    capsule usually more than 7 mm
\par
107 Capsule 1½-2 times as long as carpophore 
\par
108 Calyx-teeth dimorphic, 2 acute, 3 obtuse ............................. {\b 14. longicilia}
\par
108 Calyx-teeth not dimorphic
\par
109 Capsule 9-19 mm; calyx 17-22 mm .................................. {\b 13. fernandezii}
\par
109 Capsule 6·5-9 mm; calyx 8-13 mm
\par
110 Stems viscid above; coronal scales small or absent ............. {\b 12. mellifera}
\par
110 Stems not viscid; coronal scales lanceolate, acute ........... {\b 23. velutinoides}
\par
107 Capsule at least 2½ times as long as carpophore
\par
111 Petals deep pinkish-purple; calyx 4-6 mm ....................... {\b 26. viscariopsis}
\par
111 Petals white or greenish; calyx more than 6 mm
\par
112 Plant densely caespitose; leaves linear or linear-lanceolate
\par
    ............................................................................................... {\b 29. marschallii}
\par
112 Plant usually not densely caespitose; basal leaves 
\par
    lanceolate or wider
\par
113 Whole plant glabrous; coronal scales very small, obtuse ... {\b 32. chlorantha}
\par
113 Plant usually ± pubescent; coronal scales obvious, acute ......... {\b 22. nutans}
\par
104 Calyx distinctly pubescent, with or without glandular hairs
\par
114 Plant with a persistent, woody cushion of rigid,
\par
    non-flowering branches (Greece) .......................................... {\b 19. spinescens}
\par
114 Plant woody or not at base, without a cushion
\par
    of rigid, non-flowering branches
\par
115 Inflorescence short, often subcorymbose;
\par
    plant ± densely tomentose ................................... ({\b 4-11}).{\b  mollissima} group
\par
115 Inflorescence elongate; plant not tomentose
\par
116 Capsule 1½-2 times as long as carpophore
\par
117 Petals white, with long, linear lobes; filaments ± hairy ........... {\b 28. niederi}
\par
117 Petals rarely white, with shorter, broader lobes;
\par
    filaments glabrous
\par
118 Calyx eglandular, or at least with some
\par
    eglandular hairs ................................................... ({\b 4-11}).{\b  mollissima} group
\par
118 Calyx with glandular hairs only
\par
119 At least some calyx-teeth acute
\par
120 Calyx-teeth dimorphic, 2 acute, 3 obtuse ............................. {\b 14. longicilia}
\par
120 Calyx-teeth all acute ......................................................... {\b 23. velutinoides}
\par
119 Calyx-teeth all obtuse
\par
121 Calyx 8-13 mm ...................................................................... {\b 12. mellifera}
\par
121 Calyx 17-22 mm ................................................................ {\b 13. fernandezii}
\par
116 Capsule at least 2½ times as long as carpophore
\par
122 Calyx cylindrical, ± attenuate at base; petal
\par
    claw distinctly exserted .......................................................... {\b 24. viridiflora}
\par
122 Calyx clavate, truncate or umbilicate at base;
\par
    petal-claw only slightly exserted
\par
123 Flowers erect; inflorescence not secund;
\par
    capsule c. 3 times as long as carpophore ................................... {\b 21. gigantea}
\par
123 Flowers often inclined; inflorescence ± secund; 
\par
    capsule 3-5 times as long as carpophore ...................................... {\b 22. nutans}
\par
96  Inflorescence not a diffuse panicle with opposite
\par
    branches bearing dichasia
\par
124 Inflorescence more than 5-flowered (rarely 4- or 5-flowered)
\par
125 Inflorescence a ± regular dichasium, sometimes
\par
    corymbose or subcapitate
\par
126 Petals usually 4-toothed or 4-fid; seeds winged (Sect.{\i  Heliosperma})
\par
    .............................................................................. ({\b 117-124}). {\b pusilla} group
\par
126 Petals entire, emarginate or bifid; seeds not winged
\par
127 Calyx 4-6 mm ...................................................................... {\b 115. rupestris}
\par
127 Calyx more than 6 mm
\par
128 Carpophore c. 2 mm; calyx ± inflated
\par
129 Calyx strongly inflated; stem leafless in  upper ½ ............ {\b 74. fabarioides}
\par
129 Calyx slightly inflated; stem leafy throughout
\par
130 Capsule at least 10 mm; robust plant to 100 cm ...................... {\b 72. fabaria}
\par
130 Capsule 6-8·5 mm; low-growing plant ...................................... {\b 73. ionica}
\par
128 Carpophore more than 3 mm; calyx not inflated
\par
131 Flowering stems slender, obviously lateral;
\par

\par
194}
\par