{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 7 Leaves pinnately divided, not forked or 3-partite
\par
9 Abaxial side of rhachis entirely green or stramineous
\par
10 Leaves 1-pinnate, the pinnae entire to pinnatifid
\par
11 Pinnae stalked ........................................................ {\b 9. trichomanes-ramosum}
\par
11 Pinnae adnate to the rhachis .................................................. {\b 11. jahandiezii}
\par
10 Leaves 2-pinnate or more
\par
12 Basal pinnae much reduced ..................................................... {\b 13. fontanum}
\par
12 Basal pinnae the largest
\par
13 Rhizome-scales uniformly clathrate 
\par
   (occasionally with some opaque cells)
\par
14 Sori linear; sporangia more medial on vein, 
\par
   covering segment of lamina at maturity ............................... {\b 22. ruta-muraria}
\par
14 Sori oblong; sporangia more basal, not covering 
\par
   whole segment ............................................................................. {\b 23. lepidum}
\par
13 Rhizome-scales with central part black and opaque, 
\par
   the margin clathrate
\par
15 Ultimate leaf-segments narrowly linear; 
\par
   base of petiole becoming shiny reddish-brown to black ................ {\b 24. fissum}
\par
15 Ultimate leaf-segments rhombic to wedge-shaped; 
\par
   base of petiole occasionally becoming brown
\par
16 Rhizome-scales c. 1 mm; lamina triangular-ovate, 
\par
   with numerous unicellular glands ............................................... {\b 25. aegaeum}
\par
16 Rhizome-scales c. 3 mm; lamina triangular-lanceolate, 
\par
   with few cylindrical glands ......................................................... {\b 26. creticum}
\par
9  Abaxial side of rhachis brown or blackish-brown, or
\par
   with brown streaks, green or brown above
\par
17 Leaves 1-pinnate; pinnae entire to pinnatifid
\par
18 Scales clathrate, occasionally dark brown 
\par
   but without opaque central zone
\par
19 Middle pinnae adnate to the rhachis ......................................... {\b 10. bourgaei}
\par
19 Middle pinnae stalked
\par
20 Lamina less than 4 cm wide; pinnae pinnatifid 
\par
   or deeply cut ............................................................................ {\b 12. majoricum}
\par
20 Lamina usually more than 4 cm wide; pinnae entire, 
\par
   the margins crenate ....................................................................... {\b 2. marinum}
\par
18 Scales on the petiole base and on the rhizome 
\par
   with at least a central band of dark, opaque cells
\par
21 Petiole and lamina with dense, unicellular glands ................... {\b 3. petrarchae}
\par
21 Petiole and lamina without unicellular glands
\par
22 Rhachis with 3 wings ..................................................................... {\b 6. anceps}
\par
22 Rhachis with 2 wings
\par
23 Middle pinnae more than twice as long as wide
\par
24 Pinnae usually with 1 single sorus, along the 
\par
   basiscopic entire margin ............................................................ {\b 4. monanthes}
\par
24 Pinnae usually with several sori, the 
\par
   basiscopic margin crenate ............................................................ {\b 7. azoricum}
\par
23 Middle pinnae usually less than twice as long as wide
\par
25 Rhachis green in the distal 1/3 .............................................. {\b 8. adulterinum}
\par
25 Rhachis brown throughout (sometimes green near 
\par
   the apex when young) ............................................................. {\b 5. trichomanes}
\par
17 Leaves 2- to 4-pinnate
\par
26 Leaves 3- or 4-pinnate; plants usually more than 10 cm
\par
   .................................................................. ({\b 17-19}).{\b  adiantum-nigrum} group
\par
26 Leaves 2-pinnate, rarely 3-pinnate at the base
\par
27 Lamina narrowly triangular to deltate; petiole swollen at the base
\par
28 Lamina triangular to deltate, usually with more 
\par
   than 7 pairs of pinnae; teeth usually narrow and acute, 
\par
   or obtuse ................................................... ({\b 17-19}). {\b adiantum-nigrum} group
\par
28 Lamina narrowly triangular to triangular, usually with fewer
\par
   than 7 pairs of pinnae; teeth broad and mucronate ................. {\b 16. balearicum}
\par
27 Lamina ovate to ovate-lanceolate or elliptical; 
\par
   petiole not distinctly swollen at the base
\par
29 Pinnules and ultimate segments crenate, with obtuse 
\par
   (obscurely mucronate) teeth ..................................................... {\b 15. obovatum}
\par
29 Pinnules dentate to pinnatifid, with acute and distinctly 
\par
   mucronate teeth or lobes
\par
30 Lamina lanceolate to narrowly elliptical, with several pairs of
\par
   distinctly reduced basal pinnae .................................................. {\b 13. fontanum}
\par
30 Lamina lanceolate to narrowly ovate or triangular; basal 
\par
   pinnae little or not reduced
\par
31 Pinnae with only the basal segments free, the distal 
\par
   segments adnate to the costa and confluent into a rounded apex
\par
32 Basal pinnae often deflected towards petiole and somewhat 
\par
   reduced; sori proximal on their vein ........................................ {\b 14. foreziense}
\par
32 Basal pinnae rarely deflected or reduced; sori medial 
\par
   on the vein ............................................................................... {\b 16. balearicum}
\par
31 Pinnae deeply divided for most of their length, the apex acute
\par
33 Sori distal; rhizome-scales more than 5 mm ........................... {\b 15. obovatum}
\par
33 Sori medial; rhizome-scales less than 5 mm ......................... {\b 16. balearicum}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Subgen.{\b  Asplenium.} Leaves simple or compound; lamina usually subglabrous; veins free. Sorus single on a vein; indusium present.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. A. hemionitis} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 1078 (1753) ({\i A. palmatum }Lam.). Rhizome-scales with purplish sheen. Leaves 20-35 cm; petiole about twice as long as the lamina, reddish-brown with a few filiform scales at the base; lamina 10-20 cm wide, light green, glabrous, usually palmately 5-lobed; lobes acute, the middle lobe longer than the others. Sori linear, often running the full length of the vein. 2n = 72.{\i  Non-calcareous rocks and forest floors. Portugal, Açores,} Az Lu.({\i Madeira, Islas Canarias}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. A. marinum} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 1081 (1753). Plant robust. Rhizome with filiform scales at the apex. Leaves 10-30(-40) cm; petiole about 1/2 as long as the lamina, reddish-brown; lamina linear-lanceolate, pinnate, coriaceous, glabrous; rhachis with green wings; pinnae 1-4 cm, oblong, more developed on the upper side, crenate-serrate, the base truncate or broadly cuneate, the apex rounded. 2n = 72.{\i  Rocks and walls exposed to sea-spray. W. Europe, extending eastwards very locally to S. Italy.} Az Bl Br Co Ga Hb Hs It Lu No Sa Si.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 3. A. petrarchae} (Guérin) DC. in Lam. & DC.{\i  Fl. Fr. }ed. 3,{\b  5:} 238 (1815) ({\i A. glandulosum} Loisel.). Rhizome caespitose; scales filiform, consisting of black, opaque cells, except occasionally for a narrow border of clathrate cells. Leaves 4-12 cm; petiole and
\par

\par
19}
\par