{\rtf1\ansi \deff4\deflang1033{\fonttbl{\f1\froman\fcharset2\fprq2 Symbol;}{\f4\froman\fcharset0\fprq2 Times New Roman;}}{\colortbl;\red0\green0\blue0;\red0\green0\blue255;\red0\green255\blue255;\red0\green255\blue0;\red255\green0\blue255;\red255\green0\blue0;\red255\green255\blue0;\red255\green255\blue255;\red0\green0\blue128;\red0\green128\blue128;\red0\green128\blue0;\red128\green0\blue128;\red128\green0\blue0;\red128\green128\blue0;\red128\green128\blue128;\red192\green192\blue192;}{\stylesheet{\widctlpar \f4\fs20\lang2057 \snext0 Normal;}{\*\cs10 \additive Default Paragraph Font;}}{\info{\author dddd}{\operator dddd}{\creatim\yr1998\mo10\dy28\hr15\min7}{\revtim\yr1998\mo11\dy11\hr16}{\version2}{\edmins2}{\nofpages4}{\nofwords1035}{\nofchars5904}{\*\company  }{\vern57431}}\widowctrl\ftnbj\aenddoc\hyphcaps0 \fet0\sectd \linex0 {\*\pnseclvl1\pnucrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl2\pnucltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl3\pndec\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl4\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl5\pndec\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl6\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl7\pnlcrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl8\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl9\pnlcrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}
\pard\plain \ \f4\fs20\lang2057 {\fs28 rhachis reddish-black with green apex, dull, densely covered with glandular hairs, persistent when dead and forming wiry tufts; lamina 2/3-3/4 as long as the leaf, narrowly elliptical, pinnate, thin, bright green, covered above and beneath with unicellular, capitate, glandular hairs; pinnae 0\'b75-1 cm, ovate, truncate or broadly cuneate at the base, inciso-crenate to lobed. Exospores (33-)36-51(-57) \'b5m. 2n = 144.}{\i\fs28  Calcareous rocks. \bullet  Mediterranean region; Portugal.}{\fs28  Al Bl Ga Gr Hs It Ju Lu Si.
\par 
\par Diploid plants (2n = 72) from Spain have been named subsp.}{\b\fs28  bivalens}{\fs28  D.E. Meyer, Lovis & Reichstein, }{\i\fs28 Ber. Schweiz. Bot. Ges.}{\b\fs28  79:}{\fs28  336 (1969) (}{\i\fs28 A. glandulosoides}{\fs28  \'c1. & D. L\'f6ve). They differ principally in having smaller exospores (33-)36-39(-45) \'b5m.
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 4. A. monanthes}{\fs28  L., }{\i\fs28 Mantissa}{\fs28  130 (1767). Rhizome-scales narrow, attenuate, with dark central stripe. Leaves 20-30(-45) cm, occasionally with proliferating buds at the base of the rhachis; petiole \'bc as long as the lamina, dark reddish-brown, glabrous; lamina linear-elliptical, light green, pinnate; pinnae 0\'b75-1 cm, oblong to rhombic, entire to crenulate-dentate, the base truncate, the apex rounded. Sori oblong, usually borne singly on the pinna. 2n = 108.}{\i\fs28  A\'e7ores}{\fs28 . Az. (}{\i\fs28 Africa; Central and South America; Madeira}{\fs28 .)
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 5. A. trichomanes}{\fs28  L., }{\i\fs28 Sp. Pl.}{\fs28  1080 (1753). Rhizome caespitose; scales up to 5 mm, with dark central stripe. Leaves 4-20(-35) cm; petiole c. \'bc as long as the lamina, dark reddish-brown; lamina pinnate, thicker and darker green than in }{\b\fs28 3}{\fs28 , with occasional multicellular glandular hairs beneath or glabrous; rhachis dark reddish-brown to the apex, with 2 narrow, pale brown wings on the upper side; pinnae not more than twice as long as wide, entire or crenate-serrate, the base truncate or asymmetrically cuneate, the apex rounded. Sori small, linear, but the sporangia usually covering the pinna at maturity.}{\i\fs28  Throughout Europe}{\fs28 . All except Sb.
\par 
\par }
\pard \li200\ {\fs28 1 Rhizome-scales not more than 3-5 mm; exospore typically 27-32 \'b5m.
\par 2 Pinnae suborbicular, auriculate and obliquely inserted above;  
\par   terminal pinna 2-4 mm wide ...................................... (}{\b\fs28 a}{\fs28 ) subsp.}{\b\fs28  trichomanes}{\fs28 
\par 2 Pinnae square or oblong, squarely inserted; terminal pinna 
\par   4-7 mm wide ................................................................ (}{\b\fs28 c}{\fs28 ) subsp.}{\b\fs28  inexpectans}{\fs28  
\par 1 Rhizome-scales up to 5 mm; exospore typically 32-39 \'b5m
\par 3 Leaves erect; pinnae oblong, rarely imbricate .......... (}{\b\fs28 b}{\fs28 ) subsp.}{\b\fs28  quadrivalens}{\fs28 
\par 3 Leaves procumbent; pinnae auriculate or biauriculate
\par 4 Pinnae often imbricate, the margins usually crenulate
\par   ...................................................................................... (}{\b\fs28 d}{\fs28 ) subsp.}{\b\fs28  pachyrachis}{\fs28 
\par 4 Pinnae not imbricate, the margins irregularly undulate or lobed, 
\par   mostly strongly revolute .......................................... (}{\b\fs28 e}{\fs28 ) subsp.}{\b\fs28  coriaceifolium}{\fs28 
\par 
\par }
\pard \ {\fs28  (}{\b\fs28 a}{\fs28 ) Subsp.}{\b\fs28  trichomanes}{\fs28  : Rhizome-scales not more than 3\'b75 mm, lanceolate. Pinnae 3-8 mm, suborbicular or more rarely oblong, more or less distant, especially near the apex of the lamina, thin; insertion of upper pinnae oblique; terminal pinna 2-4 mm wide; mean stomata guard-cell length 32-40 \'b5m. exospores (23-)28-32(-34) \'b5m. 2n = 72.}{\i\fs28  Non-calcareous rocks, usually in the mountains. Throughout the range of the species}{\fs28 .
\par  (}{\b\fs28 b}{\fs28 ) Subsp.}{\b\fs28  quadrivalens}{\fs28  D.E. Meyer emend. Lovis, }{\i\fs28 Brit. Fern Gaz.}{\b\fs28  9:}{\fs28  152 (1964): Rhizome-scales up to 5 mm, lanceolate or linear-lanceolate. Pinnae 4-12 mm, oblong, more or less crowded and usually more robust than in subsp. (}{\b\fs28 a}{\fs28 ); insertion of upper pinnae at right-angles or slightly oblique; terminal pinna 2-5 mm wide; mean stomata guard-cell length 40-48 \'b5m. exospores (26-)32-38(-47) \'b5m. 2n = 144. }{\i\fs28 Calcareous rocks and mortared walls. Throughout the range of the species}{\fs28 .
\par  (}{\b\fs28 c}{\fs28 ) Subsp. }{\b\fs28 inexpectans}{\fs28  Lovis, }{\i\fs28 Brit. Fern Gaz.}{\b\fs28  9:}{\fs28  155 (1964). Rhizome-scales not more than 3\'b75 mm, lanceolate. Leaves procumbent, not tapered towards the apex; pinnae 4-10 mm, square or oblong, slightly distant, thin; insertion of upper pinnae square or slightly oblique; terminal pinna 4-7 mm wide; mean stomata guard-cell length 32-42 \'b5m. exospores (22-)27-31(-36) \'b5m. 2n = 72. }{\i\fs28 Limestone rocks. \bullet  E., C. & S.E. Europe; Sweden.}{\fs28 
\par  (}{\b\fs28 d}{\fs28 ) Subsp.}{\b\fs28  pachyrachis}{\fs28  (Christ) Lovis & Reichstein, }{\i\fs28 Willdenowia}{\b\fs28  10:}{\fs28  18 (1980) }{\i\fs28 (A. csikii}{\fs28  K\'fcmmerle & Andrasovszky). Like subsp. (}{\b\fs28 c}{\fs28 ) but rhizome-scales often linear-lanceolate; lamina more coriaceous; pinnae broadly lanceolate to oblong-lanceolate, auriculate, markedly so on the acroscopic side, the margins usually crenulate; lower pinnae often biauriculate; insertion of upper pinnae more or less oblique; terminal pinna small, irregularly cut; mean stomata guard-cell length 40-49 }{\fs28 {\field{\*\fldinst SYMBOL 109 \\f "Symbol" \\s 14}{\fldrslt\f1\fs28}}}{\fs28 m; exospores (26-)32-38(-50) \'b5m. 2n = 144.}{\i\fs28  Calcareous rocks, often under overhangs. S. & W. Europe}{\fs28 .
\par  (}{\b\fs28 e}{\fs28 ) Subsp.}{\b\fs28  coriaceifolium }{\fs28 H. & K. Rasbach, Reichstein & Bennert, }{\i\fs28 Willdenowia }{\b\fs28 19:}{\fs28  471 (1990). Like subsp. (}{\b\fs28 d}{\fs28 ) but stipe and rhachis stiff and brittle; lamina strongly coriaceous (less so when grown in shade); pinnae slightly asymmetrical, auriculate on the acroscopic side; margins irregularly undulate or lobed, with few incisions or small teeth, mostly strongly revolute; terminal pinna deltate to elliptical, dark green, with bluish tinge, glossy when fresh; mean stomata guard-cell length 45-58 \'b5m. exospores (33-)36-39(-43) \'b5m. 2n = 144.}{\i\fs28  Limestone rocks and walls. \bullet  Spain, Baleares}{\fs28 .
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 6. A. anceps}{\fs28  Lowe ex Hooker & Grev., }{\i\fs28 Icon. Fil.}{\b\fs28  2:}{\fs28  t. 195 (1831). Like }{\b\fs28 5}{\fs28 (}{\b\fs28 b}{\fs28 ) but the rhachis carinate, with a third wing below; lamina dark green and shining on the upper surface; pinnae symmetrically cuneate at the base; exospores (21-)27-30(-32) \'b5m. 2n = 72.}{\i\fs28  Non-calcareous rocks and forest floors. A\'e7ores}{\fs28  (}{\i\fs28 Pico}{\fs28 ). Az. (}{\i\fs28 Madeira, Islas Canarias}{\fs28 .)
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 7. A. azoricum}{\fs28  Lovis, H. Rasbach & Reichstein, }{\i\fs28 Amer. Fern Jour.}{\b\fs28  67:}{\fs28  88 (1977) (}{\i\fs28 A. trichomanes}{\fs28  var.}{\i\fs28  anceps}{\fs28  (Lowe ex Hooker & Grev.) Milde f.}{\i\fs28  azoricum}{\fs28  Milde). Like}{\b\fs28  5}{\fs28 (}{\b\fs28 b}{\fs28 ) but rhachis black; lamina dark green and shining on the upper surface; pinnae up to 1\'b75 cm, 2-3 times as long as wide, ovate-oblong, with conspicuous costa, distinctly crenate-serrate, glabrous on both surfaces; lower pinnae biauriculate; exospores (27-)33-36(-39) \'b5m. 2n = 144.}{\i\fs28  Shady rocks and walls. \bullet  A\'e7ores.}{\fs28  Az.
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 8. A. adulterinum}{\fs28  Milde,}{\i\fs28  Hoheren Sporenpfl. Deutschl. Schweiz}{\fs28  40 (1865). Intermediate between}{\b\fs28  5}{\fs28  and}{\b\fs28  9}{\fs28 . At least some rhizome-scales with dark central stripe. Pinnae intermediate in shape and texture between those of }{\b\fs28 5}{\fs28  and }{\b\fs28 9}{\fs28 , with scattered glandular hairs beneath; rhachis reddish-brown, becoming green towards the apex. 2n = 144.}{\i\fs28  Ledges and crevices of serpentine or rarely basic rocks. \bullet  C. Europe, extending to Norway and N.W. Greece.}{\fs28  Au Cz Fe Ge Gr He It Ju No Po Rm Su.
\par 
\par  (}{\b\fs28 a}{\fs28 ) Subsp.}{\b\fs28  adulterinum}{\fs28  : Fronds erect; pinnae usually not touching, the margins distinctly (more than 0\'b72 mm deep) crenate; terminal pinna 0\'b75-2 mm wide. }{\i\fs28 On ultrabasic rocks}{\fs28  (}{\i\fs28 serpentine, magnesite}{\fs28 ).}{\i\fs28  Throughout the range of the species}{\fs28 .
\par  (}{\b\fs28 b}{\fs28 ) Subsp.}{\b\fs28  presolanense}{\fs28  Mokry, H. Rasbach & Reichstein,}{\i\fs28  Bot. Helvet.}{\b\fs28  96:}{\fs28  8 (1986). Fronds drooping or procumbent; pinnae usually touching or imbricate, the margins entire or slightly crenate; terminal pinna 1-5 mm wide.}{\i\fs28  On limestone or mica-schist. N. Italy, S. Switzerland}{\fs28 .
\par 
\par 20}
\par }