{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 78. S. flavescens} Waldst. & Kit.,{\i  Pl. Rar. Hung. }{\b 2:} 191 (1804) ({\i S. subcorymbosa} Adamovic). Plant with woody rootstock. Stems up to 30 cm, stiff, erect, shortly pubescent below, viscid above. Basal leaves rather densely hairy, spathulate; cauline few, linear or linear-lanceolate. Flowers usually solitary or paired; pedicels long. Calyx 8-11 mm, cylindrical, distinctly hairy. Petals yellow; coronal scales small. Capsule c. 8 mm; carpophore c. 1 mm. 2n = 24. •{\i  Mountains of Balkan peninsula, extending northwards to Transsylvania and Hungary.} Bu Gr Hu Ju Rm.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 79. S. thessalonica} Boiss. & Heldr. in Boiss., {\i Diagn. Pl. Or. Nov. }{\b 3}({\b 1}): 74 (1854). Like {\b 78} but with a denser, more glandular indumentum; cauline leaves obovate or ovate to linear; inflorescence (1)2- to 7-flowered; calyx glandular-pubescent; carpophore 1-3 mm. •{\i  Albania and N. Greece; E. Kriti.} Al Cr Gr.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp.{\b  thessalonica} : Stems several, up to 35 cm. Basal leaves with long petiole; cauline leaves in 5-8 pairs, obovate to linear. 2n = 24.{\i  Rock-crevices and rocky slopes. Albania, N. Greece}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp.{\b  dictaea }(Rech. fil.) Melzh.,{\i  Bot. Jahrb. }{\b 98:} 45 (1977) ({\i S. dictaea} Rech. fil.): Stems usually 1-3, up to 17 cm. Basal leaves with short petiole; cauline leaves in 3-5 pairs, ovate to linear.{\i  Crevices of limestone rocks. E. Kriti }({\i Dhikti Ori}).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 80. S. congesta} Sm. in Sibth. & Sm.,{\i  Fl. Graec. Prodr.}{\b  1:} 300 (1809). Stock woody, branched. Stems up to 65 cm, stiff, erect, woody, with dense pubescence on leaves and lower part of stem. Inflorescence-branches alternate, with terminal, subsessile groups of 3-5 rather small flowers. Calyx 7·5-9 mm, densely glandular-hairy. Petals yellowish; coronal scales absent. Capsule c. 5 mm, broadly ovoid; carpophore 1·5-2 mm. 2n = 24. •{\i  Mountains of Greece.} Gr.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b congesta} : Stems up to 65 cm, with 8-11 pairs of cauline leaves. Pedicels and calyx densely glandular-hairy. Calyx-teeth acute, with narrow membranous margin.{\i  N. & C. Greece}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b moreana} Melzh.,{\i  Bot. Jahrb.}{\b  98:} 48 (1977): Stems shorter, up to 40 cm, with 5-8 pairs of cauline leaves. Pedicels and calyx very densely glandular-hairy. Calyx-teeth obtuse, with broad membranous margin.{\i  S. Greece}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b S. adelphiae} Runemark, {\i Willdenowia}{\b  14:} 45 (1984), from limestone cliffs in S. Kikladhes, like{\b  80} but pulvinate, with flowering stems shorter, more woody and densely pubescent, and seeds tuberculate, may represent a third subspecies.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 81. S. cephallenia} Heldr.,{\i  Fl. Céphal.} 26 (1882). Woody at base; stems up to 50 cm, with linear or linear-lanceolate basal leaves. In robust specimens the flowers usually in rather crowded, 3-flowered cymes, the inflorescence often with long alternate branches spreading at a wide angle; in small specimens the inflorescence reduced to a single, few-flowered group. Petals white. Calyx 9·5-11·5 mm, glandular-hairy. Capsule 6-8 mm; carpophore 3·5-6 mm, hairy. 2n = 24.{\i  Rocks. • S. Albania and W. Greece}. Al Gr.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp.{\b  cephallenia} : Basal leaves 3-5 mm wide, lanceolate to spathulate, green. Inflorescence usually many-flowered. Carpophore densely hairy. 2n = 24.{\i  Kefallinia}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp.{\b  epirotica} Melzh., {\i Bot. Jahrb.}{\b  98:} 51 (1877): Basal leaves 1-2 mm wide, linear to lanceolate, yellow-green; inflorescence usually few-flowered. Carpophore slightly hairy. {\i Throughout the range of the species except Kefallinia}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b S. paeoniensis} Bornm., {\i Mitt. Thür. Bot. Ver. }nov. ser. {\b 36:} 44 (1925), from S.W. Jugoslavia, has oblanceolate-spathulate basal leaves and an eglandular calyx, but otherwise resembles {\b 81}. It may deserve subspecific distinction.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Sect. AURICULATAE (Boiss.) Schischkin. Caespitose, montane perennials with large flowers terminating short stems. Calyx cylindrical-clavate, glandular. Petal-claw auriculate.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 82. S. vallesia} L., {\i Syst. Nat.} ed. 10, {\b 2:} 1032 (1759). Mat-forming perennial with ascending, glandular-pubescent stems up to 15 cm. Leaves oblong-lanceolate to linear, pubescent. Inflorescence 1- to 3-flowered. Petals usually pale pink above and red beneath, or white; claw exserted; coronal scales small, truncate. Capsule scabrid, equalling the glabrous carpophore. {\i Mountain rocks. • S. & S.C. Europe from S.E. France to S.W. Jugoslavia.} Al Ga He It Ju.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b vallesia} : Leaves oblong-lanceolate or lanceolate. Calyx c. 25 mm. Petals usually pink. 2n = 24, 48.{\i  Alps}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp.{\b  graminea} (vis. ex Reichenb.) Nyman, {\i Consp.} 92 (1878) ({\i S. graminea} vis. ex Reichenb.): Leaves linear. Calyx 12-15 mm. Petals usually white. 2n = 24, 48.{\i  Jugoslavia and Albania; Appennini and Alpi Apuane, locally in S.W. Alps}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 83. S. boryi} Boiss.,{\i  Elenchus} 19 (1838) (incl. {\i S. tejedensis} Boiss., {\i S. duriensis} Samp.). Like {\b 82} but coronal scales conspicuous; carpophore up to 18 mm, much longer than the ripe capsule. 2n = 24, 48, 72. {\i Spain, N. Portugal.} Hs Lu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 A variable species that has been divided into as many as five subspecies. since some at least of these are very weakly differentiated, we have not given any subspecific treatment. J. Jalas & J. Suominen, {\i Atlas Florae Europaeae}{\b  7:} 68 (1986), give full references.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 84. S. jailensis} Rubtsov, {\i Bjull. Gosud. Nikitsk. Bot. Sada}{\b  2}({\b 24}): 5 (1974). Densely-branched, glandular-pubescent small shrub; stems 10-20 cm. Leaves 3-4 cm, linear. Flowers solitary or sometimes paired. Calyx 20-25 mm. Petals white or yellowish. Capsule 8-10 mm, ovoid, more than twice as long as carpophore.{\i  Mountain rocks, c.} 1400{\i  m. Krym} ({\i near Gurzuf}). Rs(K).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Sect. SPERGULIFOLIAE Boiss. (incl. Sect.{\i  Suffruticosae} (Rohrb.) Schischkin and Sect.{\i  Macranthae} Rohrb.). Perennials with more or less woody stock and ovate, lanceolate or linear leaves. Inflorescence few-flowered or flowers solitary; flowers usually large. Carpophore well-developed.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 85. S. repens} Patrin in Pers.,{\i  Syn. Pl.}{\b  1:} 500 (1805). Pubescent perennial with long, creeping stolons and suberect stems up to 60 cm. Leaves up to 5 cm, linear, acute, the basal withering early. Inflorescence narrow, with short, few-flowered, opposite branches. Calyx 10-16 mm, densely pubescent, cylindrical-clavate, somewhat inflated in fruit. Petal-limb c. 10 mm, whitish, deeply lobed with broad, ovate lobes and glabrous, auriculate claw; coronal scales c. 1·5 mm. Capsule c. 6 mm, more or less equalling carpophore. 2n = 24.{\i  N., C. & E. Russia}. Rs(N, C, E).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 86. S. sangaria} Coode & Cullen, {\i Notes Roy. Bot. Gard. Edinb.}{\b  28: }2 (1967). Like {\b 85} but leaves fleshy, the basal obovate to spathulate and the cauline narrowly obovate. {\i Maritime sands. Turkey-in-Europe.} Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 87. S. succulenta} Forskål,{\i  Fl. Aegypt.} lxvi, 89 (1775) (incl. {\i S. corsica} DC.). Fleshy perennial with woody stock and numerous
\par

\par
206}
\par