{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 perennials, possessing the general habit of {\b 49-55} but with glabrous pedicels, petal-claws, filaments and calyx. Stems hairy below, glabrous and viscid above. Petals yellow. Capsule 4-7 mm; carpophore very short, up to 1 mm. Very variable in habit, inflorescence-form and pubescence. This group is characteristic of steppe communities and ruderal habitats in S.E. Europe.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Hairs on lower part of stem more than 1 mm; tall, leafy plants 
\par
  (up to 200 cm) 
\par
2 Petals pale yellow; seeds more than 1 mm, ± smooth; 
\par
  inflorescence acuminate ............................................................... {\b 60. exaltata}
\par
2 Petals dark yellow; seeds less than 1 mm, tuberculate;
\par
  inflorescence rhombic .......................................................... {\b 61. chersonensis}
\par
1 Hairs on lower part of stem less than 1 mm; plants of variable height
\par
3 Rosette leaves conspicuously undulate, broadly spathulate,
\par
  grey-green with soft pubescence
\par
4 Hairs on lower stem up to 0·9 mm; dichasia dense, ± sessile
\par
  ................................................................................................... {\b 59. densiflora}
\par
4 Hairs on lower stem up to 0·4 mm; dichasia not dense, stalked 
\par
  ................................................................................................ {\b 58. colpophylla}
\par
3 Rosette leaves not undulate, oblanceolate-spathulate
\par
  or narrowly spathulate, puberulent
\par
5 Lower ½ of stem with few leaves; 1-4 middle internodes
\par
  slightly viscid; dichasia not dense, stalked ...................................... {\b 56. otites}
\par
5 Lower ½ of stem leafy in axils; 3-8 middle 
\par
  internodes very viscid; dichasia dense, ± sessile ...................... {\b 57. donetzica}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 56. S. otites} (L.) Wibel,{\i  Prim. Fl. Werthem.} 241 (1799). Stems 10-50(-140) cm. Basal leaves narrowly spathulate; cauline leaves few and small with little or no development of axillary leafy shoots. Calyx 3-4 mm, ovoid, glabrous; teeth obtuse. Petal-limb inconspicuous, greenish, linear. Capsule (3·5-)4-5(-5·5) mm, ovoid to subglobose, exceeding the calyx; carpophore usually c. 1 mm.{\i  S.C. & W. Europe, from C. Spain eastwards to Lithuania and Bulgaria.} Al Au Br Bu Cz Da Ga Ge Gr He Ho Hs Hu It Ju Po ?Rm Rs(B) Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 A very variable species. At least two subspecies can be recognized.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b otites} : Stems usually less than 50 cm. Seeds smooth. 2n = 24. {\i  Almost throughout the range of the species}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b hungarica }Wrigley, {\i Ann. Bot. Fenn.}{\b  23:} 74 (1986): Stems usually at least 50 cm. Seeds tuberculate. •{\i  E.C. Europe}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 These subspecies are linked by intermediate populations; subsp. ({\b b}) may have arisen through introgressive hybridization with {\b 57},{\b  61} and perhaps {\b 60}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b S}. ×{\b  pseudotites} Besser ex Reichenb.,{\i  Fl. Germ. Excurs.} 819 (1832), a tall plant with broadly spathulate basal leaves with undulate margins, spreading panicles and larger, subglobose capsules, occurs in N. Italy and S.E. France. This plant has sometimes been included in {\b 56}, but has been shown to be a hybrid between {\b 56} and{\b  58} (vide F. Wrigley, {\i Ann. Bot. Fenn.}{\b  23:} 69-81 (1986)).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 57. S. donetzica} Kleopow, {\i Jour. Inst. Bot. Acad. Sci. Ukr.}{\b  9:} 116 (1936) ({\i S. sillingeri} Hendrych). Like {\b 56} but stems robust, 90-150(-170) cm, with dense, short pubescence (up to 0·1 mm); internodes 4-8, very viscid; basal leaves oblanceolate-spathulate; cauline leaves numerous, with leafy shoots developed in the axils; inflorescence very dense with condensed verticillasters; ultimate dichasia with very short peduncles; flowers often subsessile; seeds larger, tuberculate. •{\i  C. & E. Europe from E. Czechoslovakia to E. Ukraine}. Cz Hu Rm Rs(C, W, E).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 58. S. colpophylla} Wrigley, {\i Ann. Bot. Fenn.}{\b  23:} 77 (1986). Stems usually 100-150 cm, pubescent below, glabrous above. Basal leaves broadly spathulate, with undulate margins, densely pubescent; cauline leaves few, with little development of axillary leafy shoots. Inflorescence somewhat lax, with distinctly stalked dichasia. Calyx 3·5-4·5 mm, cylindrical-campanulate, glabrous. Petals yellowish. Capsule 6-6·5 mm, ovoid; carpophore c. 0·7 mm. Seeds large, smooth, with tuberculate margin. •{\i  S.E. France} ({\i Provence}). Ga.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 59. S. densiflora} D'Urv.,{\i  Mém. Soc. Linn. Paris}{\b  1:} 303 (1822) ({\i Otites dolichocarpa} Klokov). Like {\b 58} but smaller (up to 110 cm), the stem pilose below, with 2-7 very viscid internodes; inflorescence with more or less condensed verticillasters; ultimate dichasia with very short peduncles, and flowers often subsessile.{\i  S. Ukraine}. Rs(W, K, E)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 60. S. exaltata} Friv.,{\i  Flora }({\i Regensb}.){\b  18:} 333 (1835) ({\i Otites exaltata} (Friv.) J. Holub). Stems up to 200 cm, with hairs more than 1·5 mm in the lower part. Cauline leaves many, oblanceolate, becoming revolute, with leafy shoots developed in the axils. Inflorescence lax, acuminate, with subsessile dichasia. Flowers somewhat fragrant; petals pale yellow. Calyx 3-3·5 mm. Capsule c. 5·5 mm; carpophore c. 1 mm. Seeds c. 1·3 mm, more or less smooth. •{\i  S.E. Europe.} Bu Gr Ju Rm.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 61. S. chersonensis} (Zapal.) Kleopow, {\i Bull. Jard. Bot. Kiev}{\b  9:} 9 (1929) (incl.{\i  Otites moldavica} Klokov). Like {\b 60} but shorter (up to 150 cm); cauline leaves patent or somewhat deflexed; inflorescence not acuminate, the dichasia stalked; flowers fragrant; petals dark yellow; capsule c. 4·8 mm; seeds c. 0·8 mm, tuberculate. •{\i  S.E. Europe.} Rm Rs(C, W, K, E).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 The hybrid between {\b 57} and {\b 61} occurs in parts of Romania and along the River Dnester.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Sect. ODONTOPETALAE Schischkin ex Chowdhuri. Perennials with woody stock; flowering stems lateral in axils of basal leaves. Flowers large, solitary or in few-flowered dichasia. Calyx more or less inflated, hairy, 10-veined. Petals with bifid limb toothed near base, and auriculate claw; coronal scales present. Capsule unilocular, without basal septa.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 62. S. auriculata} Sm. in Sibth. & Sm.,{\i  Fl. Graec. Prodr.}{\b  1: }301 (1809) (incl. {\i S. lanuginosa} Bertol.). Caespitose, with short, branched, woody stock and robust, 1- to few-flowered, pubescent stems up to 30 cm. Basal leaves up to 12 cm, lanceolate, acute, thick, with roughly punctate surface, densely ciliate with undulate hairs 1-2 mm; cauline leaves 1-3 pairs, small, remote. Calyx 12-15 mm, densely glandular-hairy; teeth triangular, acute. Petals white or cream; limb 5-8 mm; claw exserted. Capsule c. 3 times as long as carpophore, ovoid, enclosed within calyx. 2n = 24. {\i Crevices of limestone rocks. • Mountains of Italy} ({\i Alpi Apuane}) {\i and Greece}. Gr It.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 63. S. zawadzkii} Herbich in Zawadzki,{\i  Enum. Pl. Galic. Bucow.}{\b  191} (1835). Like {\b 62} but basal leaves usually wider, elliptical; cilia shorter; flowers larger; calyx 15-17 mm, hairy, but not or slightly glandular; petal-limb 10 mm or more. 2n = 24. •{\i  E. Carpathians.} Rm Rs(W).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b 64. S. elisabethae} Jan,{\i  Flora} ({\i Regensb}.){\b  15:} 177 (1832) ({\i Meland-}
\par

\par
203}
\par