{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 5 Petal-claw distinctly exserted (2-3 mm) from calyx;
\par
  capsule considerably exceeding calyx ................................... {\b 102. parnassica} 
\par
5 Petal-claw equalling calyx or slightly exserted (less than 2 mm);
\par
  capsule ± equalling calyx
\par
6 Stems up to 10 cm; carpophore glabrous ........................ {\b 99. conglomeratica}
\par
6 Stems usually more than 10 cm; carpophore slightly
\par
  pubescent ................................................................................. {\b 101. balcanica}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 97. S. saxifraga} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 421 (1753) ({\i S. petraea }Waldst. & Kit.; incl.{\i  S. hayekiana} Hand.-Mazz. & Janchen, {\i S. stojanovii} Panov, {\i S. taygetea }Halácsy, {\i S. velcevii }Jordanov & Panov). More or less densely caespitose. Stems usually numerous, up to 25 cm, pubescent below, viscid above, 1- or 2( 4)-flowered. Basal leaves linear-oblanceolate, scabrid-ciliate on lower margins. Calyx 6-11 mm, oblong-turbinate. Petals white above, brownish-red beneath; claw not exceeding calyx. Capsule 6-10 mm, ovoid, not exceeding or slightly exceeding calyx; carpophore 2·5-4 mm, slightly pubescent below. 2n = 24.{\i  Rocks and screes. • ?S. Europe, mainly in the mountains, extending northwards to W. Austria.} Al Au Bu Ga Gr He Hs It Ju Rm Si.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 98. S. fruticulosa} Sieber in DC.,{\i  Prodr.}{\b  1:} 376 (1824). Like {\b 97} but pulvinate; stems up to 10 cm, 1(2)-flowered; basal leaves linear-spathulate; calyx (9-)10·5-13 mm, clavate; petal-limb greenish beneath; carpophore 5-9 mm, glabrous. 2n = 24.{\i  Rocks. E. Kriti.} Cr.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 99. S. conglomeratica} Melzh.,{\i  Willdenouwia}{\b  13:} 123 (1983). Like {\b 97} but with woodier, extensively branched stock; branches procumbent or trailing; flowering stems few, up to 10 cm, 1(2)-flowered; calyx clavate; petals white or pink; capsule shorter than calyx; carpophore up to 5·5 mm, glabrous.{\i  Conglomerate rocks. • N. Peloponnisos} ({\i gorge of R. Vouraikos}). Gr.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 100. S. dirphya} Greuter & Burdet, {\i Willdenowia}{\b  13: }281 (1983) ({\i S. smithii} Boiss. & Heldr., non J.F. Gmelin). Like{\b  97} but stems up to 10 cm, very slender, 1(2)-flowered; leaves subspathulate; calyx 7-8·5 mm, turbinate-clavate; capsule 5·5-6·5 mm, slightly exceeding calyx; carpophore stout, slightly pubescent.{\i  Crevices of limestone rocks. • E. Greece} ({\i N. Evvoia}). Gr.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 101. S. balcanica} (Urum.) Hayek,{\i  Prodr. Fl. Penins. Balcan.}{\b  1:} 270 (1924). Densely caespitose. Stems 5-30 cm, 1(2)-flowered. Leaves linear-spathulate. Calyx 8·5-16 mm, oblong-turbinate. Petal-claw slightly exceeding calyx. Capsule more or less equalling or somewhat longer than calyx; carpophore 5-7 mm, slightly pubescent. 2n = 24.{\i  Rocky slopes and rocky grassland. •  E. part of Balkan peninsula.} Bu Gr Ju.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 102. S. parnassica} Boiss. & Spruner in Boiss.,{\i  Diagn. Pl. Or. Nov.}{\b  2}({\b 8}): 91 (1849). Densely caespitose. Stems up to 20(-30) cm, 1-flowered. Leaves linear to linear-lanceolate or linear-spathulate, with serrulate or strongly scabrid margins; cauline leaves often with sterile shoots in the axils. Petal-claw exserted 2-3 mm from calyx. Calyx (8-)10-14(-16) mm, oblong to obconical. Capsule 7·5-10·5(-12) mm, distinctly and often completely exserted from calyx; carpophore 5-10(-12) mm. 2n = 24.{\i  Rocks.  • Mountains of W. part of Balkan peninsula and Italy}. Al Gr It Ju.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Plants from serpentine in N. Greece (Vourinos Oros), distinguished mainly by the pubescent calyx, have been described as subsp. {\b vourinensis} Greuter, {\i Willdenowia}{\b  14:} 47 (1984).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 103. S. schmuckeri} Wettst.,{\i  Biblioth. Bot.} ({\i Stuttgart}){\b  26:} 30 (1892). Caespitose; stems up to 15 cm. Leaves up to 10 mm, linear-lanceolate, acute (or the lower obtuse), scabrid or puberulent, canescent. Inflorescence 1- to 6(-8)-flowered. Calyx 7-9 mm, pale greenish or vinous, slightly pubescent above. Petals purple; claw not exserted. Capsule 4-5 mm, equalling or slightly exceeding calyx; carpophore 3-4 mm, slender, slightly pubescent. •{\i  Mountains of N.W. Makedonija.} Ju.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 104. S. multicaulis} Guss.,{\i  Pl. Rar. }172 (1826) ({\i S. saxifraga} var.{\i  multicaulis} (Guss.) Fiori). Usually less densely caespitose than {\b 97}; stems up to 45 cm, (1-)3- to 4(-8)-flowered. Leaves oblanceolate or linear-lanceolate to linear. Calyx 14-22 mm, narrowly clavate, pale greenish or vinous, rarely with anastomosing veins, sometimes slightly scabrid above; teeth alternately obtuse and acute. Petals whitish above, greenish to reddish beneath; claw long-exserted. Capsule 7-9·5 mm, equalling or slightly longer than calyx; carpophore 6-12 mm, pubescent, especially below. 2n = 24.{\i • Mountains of Balkan peninsula and Italy}; E. Kriti. Al ?Cr Gr It Ju.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Lower cauline leaves oblanceolate; calyx 17-22 mm ... ({\b c}) subsp.{\b  sporadum}
\par
1 Lower cauline leaves linear to lanceolate; calyx 12-18 mm
\par
2 Calyx slightly pubescent; carpophore 6-8 mm ............ ({\b a}) subsp.{\b  multicaulis}
\par
2 Calyx glabrous; carpophore 8-10 mm ..................... ({\b b}) subsp.{\b  stenocalycina}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b multicaulis} : Lower cauline leaves 1-3 mm wide, linear to lanceolate. Calyx 13-18 mm, slightly pubescent. Capsule ovoid; carpophore 6-8 × 1-2 mm. {\i Throughout the range of the species except most of the Aegean region}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp.{\b  stenocalycina} (Rech. fil.) Melzh., {\i Bot. Jahrb.}{\b  98:} 60 (1977) ({\i S. stenocaycina }Rech. fil.): Like subsp. ({\b a}) but calyx 13-16 mm, glabrous; carpophore 8-10 × 1 mm.{\i  E. Greece} ({\i Evvoia}).
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b c}) Subsp.{\b  sporadum} (Halácsy) Greuter & Burdet,{\i  Willdenowia}{\b  12:} 190 (1982) ({\i S. genistifolia} Halácsy): Lower cauline leaves 2·5-4 mm wide, oblanceolate. Calyx 17-22 mm, slightly pubescent. Capsule narrowly ovoid; carpophore 10-12 × 1-2 mm.{\i  N. & C. Greece, N. Aegean region}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 A fourth subspecies, subsp.{\b  cretica} Melzh., {\i Phyton} ({\i Austria}) {\b 21:} 132 (1981), with stems 10-20 cm and 1- or 2-flowered, calyx 12-15 mm and carpophore 6-8 mm, has been described from E. Kriti (Dhikti Ori). It may represent a non-caespitose variant of {\b 98}, which it otherwise closely resembles.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 105. S. waldsteinii} Griseb.,{\i  Spicil. Fl. Rumel.}{\b  1:} 179 (1843) ({\i S. clavata} (Hampe) Rohrb., non Moench; incl. {\i S. macropoda} Velen.). Densely caespitose, with crowded, linear leaves, and 1- to 5-flowered, erect stems up to 25 cm. Calyx 20-25(-28) mm, narrowly clavate, with acute, distinctly patent teeth; veins anastomosing. Petals white; claw exserted. Capsule exceeding calyx; carpophore pubescent at least near base. 2n = 48. •{\b  Mountains of Balkan peninsula.} Al Bu Gr Ju.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 106. S. pindicola} Hausskn., {\i Mitt. Thür. Bot. Ver.}{\b  5:} 85 (1887). Dwarf, densely caespitose; flowering stems up to 20 cm, very slender, 1-flowered, pubescent below, glabrous and very viscid above. Leaves up to 15 mm, linear; cauline leaves often with sterile shoots in the axils. Calyx 18-24 mm, narrowly clavate, glabrous, vinous. Petals brownish; claw ½- to 2/3-exserted; coronal scales c. 1 mm. Capsule 7-12·5 mm, narrowly ovoid, ½-exserted from calyx; carpophore 11-16 mm, pubescent. 2n = 24.{\i  Rocky and stony}
\par

\par
208}
\par