{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 3(-7)-flowered; flowers large. Calyx 14-24 mm; teeth ovate,obtuse. Petals white; coronal scales absent. Capsule 12-14 mm, 3-4 times as long as carpophore. 2n = 24.{\i  C. & E. Europe; extending northwards to} 60° 30' {\i N. in Finland.} Au ?Bu Cz Da Fe Hu Ju Po Rm Rs(B, C, W, K, E) Su [Ge].
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 36. S. radicosa} Boiss. & Heldr. in Boiss.,{\i  Diagn. Pl. Or. Nov.}{\b 1}({\b 6}): 24 (1846). Caespitose, with thick, woody stock and numerous erect flowering stems 15-40(-60) cm; internodes very long, the lower rough with minute deflexed hairs, the upper glabrous. Basal leaves somewhat fleshy, spathulate, mucronate, margin strongly ciliate; upper cauline very small, linear. Inflorescence small, (1)2- to 5-flowered. Calyx 7-11 mm, coriaceous, somewhat sulcate, with wide, simple veins; teeth acute, patent, ciliate. Petals reddish, greenish or brownish-purple; coronal scales small. Capsule 6-9(-12) mm, slightly (or sometimes distinctly) exceeding calyx; carpophore c. 3 mm, pubescent. •{\i  Mountains of S. part of Balkan peninsula}. Al Gr Ju.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Calyx 7-8 mm; capsule infundibular ..................... ({\b c}) subsp.{\b  pseudoradicosa}
\par
1 Calyx 9-11 mm; capsule ovoid to subglobose
\par
2 Petiole of basal leaves ciliate; capsule narrowly ovoid to ovoid
\par
  ............................................................................................ ({\b a}) subsp.{\b  radicosa}
\par
2 Petiole of basal leaves villous; capsule broadly ovoid to
\par
  subglobose ..................................................................... ({\b b}) subsp. {\b rechingeri}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b radicosa} : Petiole of basal leaves ciliate. Calyx 9-11 mm, not abruptly contracted at base of capsule. Petal-limb light greenish-yellow above, greenish-brown beneath. Capsule 6-8(-12) mm, narrowly ovoid to ovoid. 2n = 24.{\i  Throughout the range of the species, except Evvoia}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b rechingeri} Melzh.,{\i  Bot. Jahrb.}{\b  98:} 31 (1977): Petiole of basal leaves villous. Calyx 9-11 mm, abruptly contracted at base of capsule. Petal-limb brownish-purple. Capsule 6·5-8 mm, broadly ovoid to subglobose. 2n = 24.{\i  Usually on serpentine. N.W. Greece}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b c}) Subsp.{\b  pseudoradicosa }Rech. fil., {\i Bot. Jahrb.}{\b  80:} 320 (1961): Petiole of basal leaves shortly ciliate. Calyx 7-8 mm. Petal-limb greenish-white above, brownish-purple beneath. Capsule 7-9 mm, truncately infundibular, distinctly exceeding calyx. 2n = 24.{\i  E. Greece} ({\i Evvoia}).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 37. S. oligantha} Boiss. & Heldr. in Boiss., {\i Diagn. Pl. Or. Nov. }{\b 3}({\b 1}): 75 (1854). Like {\b 36} but basal leaves broadly spathulate, densely and shortly pubescent; inflorescence 4- to 9-flowered, somewhat secund; flowers nodding, fragrant; calyx 7-8·5 mm; capsule 4·5-6 mm; carpophore 2-3 mm, glabrous.  2n = 24. {\i  Rocky places in openings of forest. • N. Greece} ({\i Olimbos}). Gr.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 38. S. reichenbachii} Vis.,{\i  Fl. Dalm.}{\b  3:} 169 (1850). Like {\b 36} but basal leaves oblanceolate-spathulate, acute; upper cauline larger, linear-lanceolate; inflorescence 5- to 20-flowered, with 1- to 3-flowered branches; petals white. 2n = 24. • {\i W. Jugoslavia}. Ju.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 39. S. skorpilii} Velen.,{\i  Sitz.-Ber. Böhm. Ges. Wiss.}{\b  1:} 39 (1890). Robust, 30-50 cm, with somewhat woody stock. Stem and leaves densely clothed with very short, stiff hairs. Basal leaves spathulate, withered at time of flowering; cauline up to 4 × 1·5 cm, ovate, more or less sessile, with cuneate base. Inflorescence usually narrow, (5-)7- to 13-flowered; upper flowers more or less aggregated; lower in more distant opposite pairs. Calyx 10-12 mm, clavate, glabrous, viscid; veins distinct, simple. Petals narrow, greenish. Capsule 7-9 mm, 2-3 times as long as carpophore. 2n = 24. •{\i  Balkan peninsula from C. Bulgaria to C. Greece.} Bu Gr Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 40. S. tatarica} (L.) Pers.,{\i  Syn. Pl.}{\b  1:} 497 (1805). Stems 30-60 cm, with sparse patent hairs below, almost glabrous and not viscid above; often with short, leafy, non-flowering branches below. Leaves lanceolate or lanceolate-spathulate, acute, the basal smaller and withering early. Inflorescence narrow, with 1- to 3-flowered branches; flowers inclined; pedicels erect, slightly hairy. Calyx 10-13 mm, glabrous; teeth ovate-lanceolate, acute; veins distinct. Petals white, cream or greenish-white; lobes linear; coronal scales absent. Capsule 8-10 mm, 3-4 times as long as the slightly pubescent carpophore.{\i  E. & E.C. Europe, northwards from} 47° 30'{\i  N. in Ukraine, and extending to arctic Norway.} Fe Ge No Po Rs(N, B, C, W, E).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Sect. GRAMINIFOLIAE; Chowdhuri. Small, narrow-leaved perennials with few, linear cauline leaves. Flowers few, hermaphrodite. Calyx glabrous, usually somewhat inflated. Styles 3. Capsule with basal septa.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 41. S. paucifolia} Ledeb.,{\i  Fl. Ross. }{\b 1:} 306 (1842). Plant dwarf subglabrous; stems 5-15 cm, few-flowered, scarcely viscid. Basal leaves few, sparsely hairy, oblong-linear; cauline linear. Calyx 6-9 × 4-6 mm, inflated, glabrous. Petal-limb ovate, white; claw glabrous; coronal scales very small or absent. 2n = 24.{\i  N.E. Russia}. Rs(N).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 42. S. graminifolia} Otth in DC., {\i Prodr.}{\b  1: }368 (1824). Like {\b 41} but stems taller, more leafy, viscid above; flowers smaller; calyx 3-4 mm wide; petal-claw hairy. {\i N.E. Russia} ({\i near Pechora}). Rs(N). ({\i Siberia}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Sect. GASTROLYCHNIS (Fenzl) Chowdhuri. Small, narrow-leaved perennials. Flowers few, hermaphrodite. Styles 5. Calyx pubescent. Capsule without basal septa, dehiscing with 5 more or less bifid teeth.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 43. S. uralensis} (Rupr.) Bocquet,{\i  Candollea }{\b 22:} 26 (1967) ({\i S. wahlbergella} Chowdhuri, {\i Gastrolychnis uralensis} Rupr.). Stem simple, erect, pubescent above. Flowers usually solitary, nodding at anthesis. Calyx 14-18 mm, whitish, inflated. Petals not or only slightly exserted, usually dull reddish-purple. Seeds with prominent, swollen wings.{\i  N. Europe southwards to S. Norway and C. Ural}. Fe No Rs(N, C) Sb Su.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp.{\b  uralensis} : Petals distinctly exserted from calyx. 2n = 24. {\i Spitsbergen and N.E. Russia.} ({\i Arctic Asia and North America}.)
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp.{\b  apetala} (L.) Bocquet,{\i  Candollea }{\b 22:} 26 (1967) ({\i Lychnis apetala} L.,{\i  Melandrium apetalum} (L.) Fenzl): Petals not exserted from calyx. 2n = 24. •{\i  N. & W. Fennoscandia.}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 44. S. furcata} Rafin.,{\i  Autikon Bot. }{\b 1: }28 (1840) ({\i Lychnis affinis }J. Vahl ex Fries). Like {\b 43} but stem often branched above, glandular, viscid; flowers smaller, erect; calyx 10-12 mm, scarcely inflated; petals whitish, exserted; seeds with narrow wings. {\i Arctic Europe}. Fe No Rs(N) Sb Su.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp.{\b  furcata} : Stem with 1(2) pair of cauline leaves, much shorter than the basal. Calyx broadly campanulate, somewhat inflated in fruit. 2n = 48.{\i  Spitsbergen and N.E. Russia.} ({\i Arctic Asia}.)
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp{\b . angustiflora} (Rupr.) Walters, {\i Feddes Repert.}{\b  69:} 46 (1964) ({\i Wahlbergella angustiflora} Rupr.): Stem with 2 or 3 pairs of cauline leaves, the lower about equalling the basal. Calyx narrowly campanulate, not inflated in fruit. 2n = 48. {\i Throughout the range of the species except Spitsbergen}.
\par

\par
201}
\par