{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 branches very long; flowers numerous and very small. Calyx 6-8 mm, glabrous. Petals small, white. Capsule 6-7 mm, ovoid, 1½-2 times as long as carpophore. •{\i  S. & C. Italy; one station in W. Jugoslavia.} It Ju.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 26. S. viscariopsis} Bornm., {\i Feddes Repert.}{\b  17:} 38 (1921). Biennial or short-lived perennial with slender, erect stems 20-30(-40) cm, shortly pubescent below, glabrous and viscid above. Basal leaves linear-lanceolate; cauline linear. Panicle 3- to 20(-25)-flowered, with opposite, spreading, 1- to 3-flowered branches; pedicels 1-3 cm, slender. Calyx 4-6 mm, broadly campanulate, somewhat inflated and contracted at mouth in fruit, 10-veined, with no lateral veins, more or less pruinose and scabrid. Petals deep pinkish-purple, with long claw and deeply bifid lamina. Capsule 7-8 mm, broadly ovoid; carpophore very short. 2n = 24.{\i  Dry, open grassland. • S. Makedonija} ({\i near Prilep}). Ju.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 J. Bornmüller described a new section to accommodate this species. It is very different from the other members of Sect.{\i  Siphonomorpha,} though resembling them in inflorescence form. It could perhaps be classified with the annual species in Sect. {\i Behenantha} Otth (spp. {\b 150-156}).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Sect. LASIOSTEMONES (Boiss.) Schischkin. Perennials with woody stock. Inflorescence paniculate; flowers nodding at anthesis. Filaments hairy.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 27. S. longipetala} Vent., {\i Descr. Pl. Jard. Cels} t. 83 (1802). Stock branched, procumbent; stems 30-85 cm. Basal leaves oblong-lanceolate, acute, scabrid, the cauline lanceolate or linear. Panicle large, subsecund, with long, spreading branches; terminal flower usually distinctly overtopped by lateral branches in axils of 2 subtending bracts. Calyx 10-12 mm, glabrous; teeth obtuse. Petals white, with long, linear lobes; coronal scales triangular. Capsule 7-10 mm, ovoid; carpophore 2-2·5 mm.{\i  E. Greece.} Gr.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 28. S. niederi} Heldr. ex Boiss., Diagn. Pl. Or. Nov. 3(6): 32 (1859). Like 27 in habit, leaf-shape and flower-size, but calyx pubescent; coronal scales absent; capsule 1½ times as long as carpophore. 2n = 24. C. & N.W. Greece. Gr.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 29. S. marschallii} C.A. Meyer,{\i  Verz. Pfl. Cauc.} 214 (1831) (incl. {\i S. guicciardii} Boiss. & Heldr.). Plant densely caespitose; flowering-stems 15-30 cm, numerous, erect. Leaves linear-lanceolate to linear, glabrous. Inflorescence-branches with 1-3 flowers; pedicels very short. Calyx c. 12 mm, glabrous. Petals white, with linear lobes. Capsule c. 10 mm; carpophore 2-3·5 mm. {\i Mountain rocks. C. Greece} ({\b Parnassos}). Gr. ({\i S.W. Asia}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Sect. SCLEROCALYCINAE (Boiss.) Schischkin (incl. Sect.{\i  Chloranthae }(Rohrb.) Schischkin, Sect. {\i Tataricae} Chowdhuri). Perennials with woody stock, more rarely biennials. Inflorescence usually narrow, spike-like, with opposite branches bearing 1- to 3(-5)flowered dichasia. Calyx often glabrous or subglabrous, usually rather sulcate, with conspicuous veins.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 30. S. bupleuroides} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 421 (1753) ({\i S. longiflora }Ehrh.). Stems 25-80 cm, glabrous and glaucous. Basal leaves oblong-lanceolate to linear-lanceolate, long-attenuate into petiole. Inflorescence paniculate to pseudo-racemose; flowers large. Calyx 20-30 mm, glabrous and membranous-coriaceous. Petal-limb cuneate, deeply bifid, white, pinkish or greenish; coronal scales acute. Capsule 10-14 mm, included in calyx. Seeds 1·5-2 mm. {\i  S.E. & E.C. Europe.} Al Bu Cz Gr Hu Ju Rm Rs(W, K).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp.{\b  bupleuroides} (incl.{\i  S. mariae} Klokov, {\i S. montifuga }Klokov, {\i S. odessana }Klokov,{\i  S. ucrainica }Klokov): Plant laxly caespitose; flowering stems up to 80 cm. Basal leaves oblong-lanceolate. Inflorescence lax, the lower branches several-flowered. Capsule equalling carpophore. 2n = 24. {\i Throughout the range of the species except for S. part of the Balkan peninsula}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b staticifolia} (Sm.) Chowdhuri,{\i  Notes Roy. Bot. Gard. Edinb.}{\b  22:} 255 (1957) ({\i S. staticifolia} Sm.; incl.{\i  S. regis-ferdinandi} Degen & Urum.). Plant densely caespitose; flowering stems up to 40 cm. Basal leaves linear. Inflorescence very narrow, pseudoracemose. Capsule shorter than carpophore. 2n = 24.{\i  Balkan peninsula northwards to C. Jugoslavia}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 31. S. chlorifolia} Sm., {\i Pl. Icon. Ined.}{\b  1:} t. 13 (1789). Glabrous and glaucous; stems 25-50 cm, robust, erect. Basal leaves broadly elliptical to spathulate, attenuate at base, acute or acuminate, thick, cauline broadly cordate, amplexicaul, acute. Inflorescence 1- to 5-flowered; flowers very large, on slender pedicels which are sometimes opposite in upper leaf-axils. Calyx (15-)18-25(-30) mm, rather coriaceous; teeth alternately acute and obtuse. Petals whitish; claw exserted; coronal scales oblong, acute. Capsule oblong, longer than carpophore. {\i Turkey-in-Europe }({\i near Tekirdag}), {\i one station in Jugoslavia.} ?Gr Ju Tu. ({\i S.W. Asia}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 32. S. chlorantha} (Willd.) Ehrh., {\i Beitr. Naturk.}{\b  7:} 144 (1792). Glabrous and usually glaucous; stems 30-80 cm. Basal leaves lanceolate-spathulate; cauline small, linear, much shorter than the slender internodes. Inflorescence typically narrow, subsecund; branches usually 1- to 3-flowered; flowers inclined or horizontal. Calyx 9-12 mm, glaucous, not sulcate; teeth ovate, obtuse, with wide, ciliate, hyaline margin. Petals pale yellowish-green; lobes linear; claw exserted; coronal scales very small. Capsule c. 8 mm, 3-4 times as long as carpophore. Seeds less than 1 mm. 2n = 24.{\i  E. & C. Europe, westwards to c. }13°{\i  E. in Germany and southwards to S. Bulgaria}. Bu Ge Ju Po Rm Rs(B, C, W, K, E).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 33. S. frivaldszkyana} Hampe,{\i  Flora} ({\i Regensb.}){\b  20:} 226 (1837). Like {\b 32} but inflorescence-branches short, erect, always 1-flowered; calyx 12-16 mm, teeth ovate-lanceolate, acute; petals whitish; coronal scales very small or absent; capsule c. 10 mm, about twice as long as carpophore. 2n = 24. •{\i  Balkan peninsula from} 40° 30'{\i  to} 43°{\i  N.} Al Bu ?Gr Ju Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Large specimens of {\b 32} and {\b 33} may have more profusely-branched inflorescences, in which the branches themselves have the structure here described for the whole inflorescence.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 34. S. multiflora} (Waldst. & Kit.) Pers., {\i Syn. Pl.}{\b  1:} 496 (1805) (incl. {\i S. steppicola} Kleopow, {\i S. syvashica }Kleopow). Stems 30-60 cm, simple, rough with minute, crisped hairs or glabrous, not viscid. Basal leaves thick, spathulate, very obtuse; upper cauline linear. Inflorescence narrowly paniculate to pseudo-verticillate; branches short, erect, opposite, 1- to 3(-7)-flowered. Calyx 12-15 mm, glabrous or sparsely hairy; teeth ovate-lanceolate, acute, margins hyaline, ciliate. Petals white; coronal scales absent. Capsule (7-)8-10 mm, equalling or somewhat longer than pubescent carpophore. 2n = 24.{\i  E. & C. Europe.} Au Cz Hu Ju Rm Rs(C, W, E)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 35. S. viscosa} (L.) Pers.,{\i  Syn. Pl.}{\b  1:} 497 (1805) ({\i Melandrium viscosum} (L.) Celak.). Robust biennial, sometimes perennial, up to 60 cm. Whole plant glandular-tomentose, viscid. Basal and lower cauline leaves ovate-lanceolate, acute, undulate. Inflorescence tall, narrow, pseudo-verticillate; branches short, erect, opposite, 1- to
\par

\par
200}
\par