{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 {\i places, usually on serpentine. • Mountains of N.W. Greece and S.E. Albania.} Al Gr.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 107. S. dionysii} Stoj. & Jordanov,{\i  Annu. Univ. Sofia Phys.Math. 3 (Sci. Nat.)}{\b  34:} 175 (1938). Caespitose; stems woody below with numerous, persistent, short shoots. Flowering stems 20-35 cm, slender, retrorsely aculeolate below, 1- to 3-flowered. Leaves linear, margins scabrid. Calyx 16-19 mm. Petals white or pale greenish. Capsule 6-8 mm, more or less exserted from calyx; carpophore 13-18 mm. 2n = 24. {\i  Rocky places in ravines and clearings of Pinus woodland.•  E.C. Greece} ({\i Olimbos}). Gr.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 108. S. orphanidis} Boiss.,{\i  Fl. Or.}{\b  1:} 651 (1867). Caespitose; stems up to 20 cm, very slender, viscid above, 1-flowered. Uppermost pair of leaves small, very close to the base of the calyx. Calyx 20-30 mm. Petals white or pale pink above, purplish beneath. Capsule 8-10 mm, almost completely exserted from calyx; carpophore 18-22 mm.{\i  Crevices of limestone rocks. • N. Greece} ({\i Athos}). Gr.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 109. S. barbeyana} Heldr. ex Boiss., {\i Fl. Or., Suppl.}, 107 (1888). Densely pulvinate, with short, branched stock densely clothed with whitish, persistent leaves. Leaves linear, glabrous, with scabrid margins. Flowering stems up to 9 cm, very slender, glabrous, 1-flowered, viscid above, with 1 or 2 pairs of linear leaves. Calyx 5-7·5 mm, turbinate, glabrous. Petal-limb obcordate, pale purple. Carpophore very short. 2n = 24. {\i Crevices of limestone cliffs above }2000{\i  m. • Mountains of S.C. Greece.} Gr.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b S. falcata} Sm. in Sibth. & Sm.,{\i  Fl. Graec. Prodr.}{\b  1: }301 (1809), was erroneously reported from Greece in{\i  Flora Europaea} ed. 1,{\b  1:} 172 (1964). It is endemic to the mountains of W. Anatolia.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b S. caryophylloides} (Poiret) Otth in DC., {\i Prodr.}{\b  1:} 369 (1824), a widespread and variable species in Anatolia, is recorded without detail from Krym in P.H. Davis, {\i Fl. Turkey}{\b  2:} 221 (1967). It has not proved possible to substantiate this record.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Sect. FRUTICULOSAE (Rohrb.) Chowdhuri. Perennials with elongated, woody stock. Inflorescence a raceme-like monochasial cyme with the axis simple or forked below, without an alar flower. Calyx 10-veined, clavate and widest at mouth in fruit; teeth ovate, obtuse. Seeds reniform; faces somewhat concave, striate; back concave.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 110. S. ciliata} Pourret, {\i Mém. Acad. Soi. Toulouse}{\b  3:} 329 (1788) (incl.{\i  S. perinica} Hayek). Caespitose, with dense rosettes of linear- to lanceolate-spathulate leaves; flowering stems 5-30 cm, arising terminally from centre of rosettes, erect or ascending, pubescent. Inflorescence simple, (1)2- to 3(-7)-flowered, rarely branched. Calyx 11-20 mm, pubescent; veins usually anastomosing. Petals white or pink, usually greenish or reddish beneath; coronal scales well-developed. Capsule 5-10 mm, broadly ovoid; carpophore 5-8 mm, pubescent. Seeds c. 1 mm, black, almost smooth, with shallowly grooved back. 2n = 24, 36, 48, 72, 84, c. 96, c. 120, 144, 168, 192, 216, 240. •{\i  Mountains of S. Europe; local.} Bu Ga Gr Hs It ?Ju Lu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 A very variable species, unique in the genus for its extraordinary range of polyploid chromosome numbers. The Italian plant is large-leaved with a 4- to 7-flowered inflorescence, and has been treated by some authors as a separate species,{\b  S. graefferi }Guss., {\i Pl. Rar.} 170 (1826), as has also the small plant from N. Spain & N. Portugal,{\b  S. elegans} Link ex Brot.,{\i  Fl. Lusit.}{\b  2:} 185 (1805), with a very reduced 1- or 2-flowered inflorescence. Full details and references can be found in J. Jalas & J. Suominen, {\i Atlas Florae Europaeae}{\b  7:} 80 81 (1986).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 111. S. legionensis} Lag., {\i Gen. Sp. Nov.} 14 (1816). Like {\b 110} but flowering stems 15-40 cm, arising laterally from below leaf-rosettes; inflorescence usually simple, with 3-9 flowers; calyx 13-23 mm, veins scarcely anastomosing; petals yellowish or greenish; carpophore 7-12 mm, almost glabrous at maturity. 2n = 24, 48. •{\i  Spain, N.E. Portugal.} Hs Lu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 112. S. borderei} Jordan,{\i  Ann. Soc. Linn. Lyon} nov. ser.,{\b  12:} 445 (1866). Dwarf, mat-forming perennial with thick, branching stock and erect, glabrous, 1- or 2(-5)-flowered stems up to 12 cm. Basal leaves with minute papillae on upper surface, ciliate, narrowly spathulate; cauline few, linear. Calyx 8-10 mm, pubescent, with obtuse teeth. Petal-limb pink, bifid; claw ciliate, not auriculate; coronal scales ovate. Capsule c. 6 mm, broadly ovoid, equalling or somewhat longer than the pubescent carpophore. Seeds reniform, with obtuse tubercles and shallowly grooved back. {\i Mountain rocks. • E. & C. Pyrenees.} Ga Hs.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Variously associated with Sect.{\i  Macranthae} and Sect.{\i  Fruticulosae}; it resembles small plants of {\b 110} ({\i S. elegans} Link ex Brot.), but differs in the papillose leaves and in the tuberculate seeds.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Sect. NANOSILENE Otth. Dwarf, mat-forming or pulvinate perennials with woody taproot, linear leaves, and usually 1-flowered stems bearing 1 or 2(-4) pairs of cauline leaves.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 113. S. acaulis} (L.) Jacq., {\i Enum. Stirp. Vindob.}{\b  78}, 242 (1762). Glabrous, moss-like, mat-forming or pulvinate perennial with short, erect flowering stems 0·5-3(-10) cm. Leaves 6-12 mm, linear-subulate; margin cartilaginous, stiffly ciliate. Calyx 7-9 mm, glabrous, campanulate, faintly 10-veined, without lateral veins. Petal-limb emarginate to shallowly bifid, usually deep pink; claw not auriculate; coronal scales small. Capsule subcylindrical, up to twice as long as calyx and longer than the pubescent carpophore. {\i Arctic Europe and Ural; higher mountains of Europe}. Au Br Bu Cz Fa Fe Ga Ge Hb He Hs Is It Ju No Po Rm Rs(N, C) Sb Su.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Both unisexual and hermaphrodite plants occur. A variable species that can be divided into two subspecies in the Alps.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b acaulis} (subsp.{\i  longiscapa }(A. Kerner ex Vierh.) Vierh., subsp. {\i pannonica} Vierh.): Flowering stems up to 5 cm. Calyx truncate at base. Capsule 6-13 mm, 1½-2 times as long as calyx. 2n = 24.{\i  N. Europe, southwards to Wales; mountains of C. & S. Europe, southwards to C. Appennini and S.W. Bulgaria}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b bryoides} (Jordan) Nyman, {\i Consp.} 93 (1878) (subsp.{\i  exscapa} (All.) J. Braun, subsp.{\i  norica }Vierh.): Flowering stems very short, rarely more than 0·5 cm. Calyx more or less cuneate at base. Capsule 3-5 mm, scarcely exceeding calyx. 2n = 24. •{\i  Mountains of C. & S. Europe}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 114. S. dinarica} Sprengel,{\i  Syst. Veg.} ed. 16,{\b  2:} 405 (1825). Like {\b 113} but stems more or less pubescent, usually with 2-4 pairs of leaves; calyx 12-15 mm, oblong-campanulate, with reticulate lateral venation. •{\i  S. Carpathians.} Rm.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Sect. RUPIFRAGA Otth. Small, slender, glabrous perennials with numerous small flowers in regular dichasia. Seeds reniform with flat or shallowly grooved back.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 115. S. rupestris} L.,{\i  Sp. Pl.} 421 (1753). Stems up to 25 cm, erect, branched below. Basal leaves oblanceolate; cauline num-
\par

\par
209}
\par