{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}
\pard\f0\fs28 {\i rium elisabethae} (Jan) Rohrb.). Like{\b  62} but basal leaves glabrous or only sparsely ciliate; cauline leaves 3-5 pairs; flowers very large, often solitary; calyx up to 20 mm, densely glandular-hairy; petal-limb c. 15 mm, dark red or reddish-purple; coronal scales laciniate; carpophore very short . 2n = 24. {\i  Calcareous rocks and screes,} 1500-2500 {\i m. • S. Alps, between} 9°{\i  and} 11°{\i  E}. It.
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 65. S. requienii} Otth in DC.,{\i  Prodr. }{\b 1:} 381 (1824). Like {\b 62} but basal leaves wider, subspathulate, not roughly punctate; inflorescence several-flowered; calyx up to 30 mm, cylindrical-clavate; capsule oblong-acuminate, only slightly longer than carpophore. {\i Mountain rocks. • Corse}. Co.
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28 Sect. CORDIFOLIAE Chowdhuri. Caespitose, glandular-hairy perennials with woody stock and numerous ovate or cordate-ovate acuminate leaves. Inflorescence a few-flowered dichasium. Calyx glandular, somewhat inflated.
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 66. S. cordifolia} All.,{\i  Fl. Pedem.}{\b  2:} 82 (1785). Stems up to 20 cm. Basal leaves ovate, attenuate at base, withering early; cauline leaves larger, cordate-ovate, acuminate. Inflorescence of 1-4 erect flowers. Calyx 12-15 mm, glandular-pubescent, slightly inflated, with linear-lanceolate, acuminate teeth. Petal-limb bifid, white or pink; claw not auriculate; coronal scales small, obtuse. Capsule 8-10 mm, oblong, twice as long as glabrous carpophore. 2n = 24. •{\i  Maritime Alps}. Ga It.
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 67. S. foetida} Link ex Sprengel, {\i Syst. Veg.} ed. 16,{\b  2:} 406 (1825) ({\i S. acutifolia} Link ex Rohrb., {\i S. melandrioides} Lange). Like{\b  66} but cauline leaves ovate-lanceolate; stems usually 3-flowered; petals pink with rather wide, emarginate limb, short auriculate claw and prominent coronal scales. 2n = 24. • {\i Mountains of N. Portugal and N.W. Spain.} Hs Lu.
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 68. S. herminii} (Welw. ex Rouy) Welw. ex Rouy,{\i  Ill. Pl. Eur. Rar.}{\b  4:} 17 (1895) ({\i S. foetida} auct., non Link,{\i  S. macrorhiza} Gay & Durieu ex Lacaita). Like{\b  66} but stock very woody; stems up to 30 cm, more or less procumbent; leaves more densely pubescent; calyx 22-30 mm, obviously inflated; petal-limb white or pale pink, deeply bifid; claw long, not auriculate; capsule c. 15 mm. •{\i  Mountains of Portugal and N.W. Spain.} Hs Lu.
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28 Sect. INFLATAE (Boiss.) Chowdhuri. Usually perennial. Flowers solitary or in dichasia, sometimes many-flowered. Calyx 10- or 20-veined, with conspicuous reticulate venation, often markedly inflated. Petals with imbricate aestivation.
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 69. S. vulgaris} (Moench) Garcke,{\i  Fl. Nord- Mittel-Deutschl.} ed. 9, 64 (1869) ({\i S. cucubalus} Wibel,{\i  S. inflata} Sm.,{\i  S. latifolia} (Miller) Britten & Rendle, non Poiret, {\i S. venosa} Ascherson). Perennial, sometimes caespitose and woody at base; stems up to 60 cm, erect, usually branched, glabrous or pubescent, often glaucous. Leaves up to 12 cm, variable in shape from broadly ovate to linear. Inflorescence with numerous flowers; bracts usually scarious. Flowers inclined, somewhat zygomorphic (especially the functionally female ones). Calyx 20-veined, inflated, persistent, loosely investing ripe capsule. Petals large, deeply bifid, usually whitish, with poorly-developed coronal scales. Ripe capsule up to 13 mm, with neck 2-3 mm wide and erect or patent teeth. Seeds 1-2 mm, usually tuberculate.{\i  Throughout Europe except for some northern islands.} All except Fa Is Sb.
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28 Extremely variable. The taxa here included in {\b 69} and{\b  70} have been variously treated by different authors. The treatment here takes into account the large body of experimental and other data summarized in E.M. Marsden-Jones & W.B. Turrill, {\i Bladder Campions }(1957) and in D. Aeschimann, {\i Candollea}{\b  40: }57-98 (1985).
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Capsule usually more than 10 mm; petals usually pink or greenish
\par 2 Plant with long stolons ............................................... ({\b d}) subsp.{\b  macrocarpa}
\par 2 Plant suffruticose, without stolons ........................... ({\b e}) subsp.{\b  suffrutescens}
\par 1 Capsule up to c. 10 mm; petals usually white
\par 3 Lower cauline leaves broadly oblong-ovate to ovate
\par  elliptical, often obtuse and apiculate ............................ ({\b c}) subsp.{\b  commutata}
\par 3 Lower cauline leaves ovate-lanceolate to linear
\par 4 Lower cauline leaves ovate-lanceolate ............................. ({\b a}) subsp.{\b  vulgaris}
\par 4 Lower cauline leaves linear-lanceolate to linear ........ ({\b b}) subsp.{\b  angustifolia}
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp.{\b  vulgaris} : Stems up to 60 cm, ascending or erect. Leaves 3-12 × 1-2·5 cm, glabrous or rarely pubescent, ovate-lanceolate. Capsule c. 10 mm; carpophore 2-3 mm. 2n = 24.{\i  Throughout Europe except for some of the islands.}
\par
\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp.{\b  angustifolia} Hayek, {\i Prodr. Fl. Penins. Balcan.}{\b  1:} 256 (1924) ({\i S. tenoreana }Colla): Like subsp. ({\b a}) but leaves 3-8 × 0·3-1 cm, linear-lanceolate or linear.{\i  Usually on coastal sands and rocks. Mediterranean region, Portugal}.
\par
\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b c}) Subsp.{\b  commutata} (Guss.) Hayek, {\i op. cit. }258 (1924) ({\i S. commutata }Guss.; incl. subsp.{\i  antelopum} (Vest) Hayek, subsp.{\i  bosniaca} (G. Beck) Janchen): Like subsp. ({\b a}) but leaves 4-9 × 1·5-4 cm, glabrous or pubescent, broadly oblong-ovate to ovate-elliptical, often obtuse and apiculate. 2n = 48.{\i  S. & S.C. Europe}.
\par
\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b d}) Subsp.{\b  macrocarpa} Turrill,{\i  Hook. Ic.}{\b  36:} t. 3551 (1956) ({\i S. angustifolia} var.{\i  carneiflora} sensu Clapham): Plant with long stolons; stems up to 50 cm. Leaves 4-7 × 0·7-1·6 cm, narrowly lanceolate. Flowers pink or greenish. Capsule 10-13 mm; carpophore 2-4 mm; seeds large, 1·6-2·1 mm. 2n = 48. {\i Usually a weed of cultivation. Mediterranean region. Introduced and long established in S.W. England} ({\i Plymouth}).
\par
\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b e}) Subsp.{\b  suffrutescens} Greuter, Matthäs & Risse, {\i Willdenowia }{\b 14:} 34 (1984): Like subsp. ({\b d}) but woody at base, without stolons; capsule up to 11 mm. 2n = 24.{\i  Cliffs. • Kriti; one station in S.E. Greece}.
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28 Subsp.{\b  aetnensis} (Strobl) Pignatti,{\i  Gior. Bot. Ital.}{\b  107:} 208 (1973), from Sicilia (W. slopes of Etna), is like subsp. ({\b c}) but has spathulate, acute, rather fleshy leaves and an indistinctly veined calyx c. 10 mm. It has not been recorded recently.
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 70. S. uniflora} Roth,{\i  Ann. Bot.} ({\i Usteri}){\b  10:} 46 (1794) ({\i S. maritima }With.). Like {\b 69} but usually procumbent to decumbent-ascending; leaves often fleshy; inflorescence 1- to few-flowered; bracts usually herbaceous; coronal scales usually well developed; ripe capsule with neck 3-4 mm wide and patent or deflexed teeth, and seeds usually without tubercles. • {\i Coasts of W. & N.W. Europe; mountains of C. & S. Europe.} ?Al Au Az Br Co Cz Da Fe Ga Ge Hb He Hs Is It Ju Lu No Po Rm Rs(N) Sa Si Su.
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Flowers large, often solitary, ± erect and actinomorphic
\par 2 Leaves linear-lanceolate to subspathulate, glaucous, often
\par  not crowded ....................................................................... ({\b a}) subsp. {\b uniflora}
\par 2 Leaves broadly elliptical to spathulate, not or only slightly
\par  glaucous, rather crowded ..................................................... ({\b b}) subsp.{\b  thorei}
\par 1 Flowers smaller, usually inclined and slightly zygomorphic, in  
\par  (1)2-7-flowered inflorescences
\par
\par 204}
\par