{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 Sect. OTITES Otth (incl. Subsect.{\i  Sibiricae} Schischkin ex Chowdhuri). Biennials or perennials; often dioecious. Flowers small, usually unisexual, in dichasia aggregated in compound racemose panicles, often narrow with crowded verticillasters. Calyx less than 7 mm. Petals entire or shallowly bifid; coronal scales absent. Carpophore not more than 3 mm, sometimes almost absent. Seeds 0·7-1·4 mm, reniform.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Petal-colour and flower-scent provide useful characters in fresh material, and are particularly helpful in distinguishing {\b 54} and{\b  61}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 45. S. sibirica} (L.) Pers.,{\i  Syn. Pl.}{\b  1:} 497 (1805). Subglabrous perennial 40-60 cm; monoecious. Basal leaves oblong-lanceolate or oblong-linear; cauline leaves linear-lanceolate, in fascicles. Inflorescence narrow, interrupted, with long internodes separating many-flowered verticillasters; flowers mostly unisexual. Calyx 4-5 mm. Petals greenish, narrow, entire or emarginate. Capsule c. 6 mm, ovoid, 2-3 times as long as carpophore. Seeds reniform, with plane face and grooved back.{\i  S.E. Russia, Ukraine}. Rs(C, W, E).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 46. S. roemeri} Friv.,{\i  Flora }({\i Regensb}.){\b  19:} 439 (1836) ({\i Otites roemeri} (Friv.) J. Holub). Densely puberulent perennial 20-50 cm. Basal leaves oblong-spathulate, acute, attenuate into a long, ciliate petiole; cauline lanceolate to linear. Inflorescence subcapitate in small specimens but often, in larger plants, more or less interrupted with rather dense verticillasters. Calyx 3-6 mm, subglabrous; teeth ovate. Petal-limb white, broadly spathulate, shallowly bifid, with oblong lobes. Capsule 4·5-7 mm, broadly ovoid, 2-5 times as long as carpophore. Seeds c. 1 mm, reniform, with plane face and grooved back. 2n = 24. •{\i  Mountains of Balkan peninsula and C. & S. Italy}. Al Bu Gr It Ju.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Apparently gynodioecious, with female and hermaphrodite plants, the latter with both male and hermaphrodite flowers.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 47. S. sendtneri} Boiss.,{\i  Fl. Or.}{\b  1:} 608 (1867) ({\i Otites sendtneri }(Boiss.) J. Holub; incl.{\i  S. velenovskyana} Jordanov & Panov). Like {\b 46} but with shorter calyx, entire or only slightly emarginate petals, and more often capitate inflorescence. 2n = 24.{\i  Subalpine meadows. • W. part of Balkan peninsula.} Al Bu Ju.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Apparently almost completely dioecious.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 48. S. ventricosa} Adamovic, {\i Österr. Bot. Zeitschr.}{\b  55:} 180 (1905) ({\i Otites ventricosa} (Adamovic) J. Holub). Like {\b 46} but dioecious, with more or less procumbent non-flowering shoots and short, erect flowering stems up to 30 cm; inflorescence subcapitate; calyx 4-5 × 3·5-4 mm, inflated, more or less puberulent, often purplish. •{\i  Mountains of S. Albania and S. Jugoslavia}. Al ?Gr Ju.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Species {\b 46-48} are very similar and might be treated as subspecies of a single species, but there is insufficient information available.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 49. S. borysthenica} (Gruner) Walters, {\i Feddes Repert.}{\b  69:} 47 (1964) ({\i S. otites }var. {\i borysthenica} Gruner,{\i  Otites borysthenica} (Gruner) Klokov, {\i S. parviflora} (Ehrh.) Pers., non Moench, {\i S. ehrhartiana} Soó). Dioecious biennial (? rarely perennial); stems up to 80 cm, without viscid internodes; whole plant pubescent. Basal leaves narrowly spathulate, often withered at time of flowering; cauline linear-oblanceolate. Inflorescence usually a narrow panicle; flowers very numerous, small; hairs on pedicels short, dense, forwardly directed and curled. Calyx 2-3 mm. Petals linear, greenish, entire; claw ciliate; filaments hairy. Capsule 2-3 mm, subglobose; carpophore very short. Seeds c. 0·75 mm, smooth. 2n = 24. {\i Dry places, particularly in open coniferous woodland. C. & E. Europe.} Bu Cz Hu Ju Po Rm Rs(B, C, W, K, E) [Rs(N)].
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 50. S. media} (Litv.) Kleopow,{\i  Bull. Jard. Bot. Kieff}{\b  9:} 64 (1929). Like {\b 49} but stem puberulent below, glabrous above, without viscid internodes; leaves sparsely puberulent; cauline leaves linear, acute; pedicels glabrous; calyx glabrous, often only 5-veined; calyx of female flowers 1·5-2·5 mm.{\i  S.E. Russia, S. Ukraine}. Rs(W, E). ({\i C. Asia.})
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 51. S. hellmannii} Claus,{\i  Beitr. Pfl. Russ. Reich.}{\b  8:} 289 (1851) (incl. {\i S. krymensis} Kleopow, {\i Otites graniticola} Klokov). Dioecious; stems up to 60 cm, with viscid internodes; whole plant, including pedicels and calyx, clothed with short, dense, more or less straight, deflexed hairs. Basal leaves broadly spathulate; cauline oblanceolate-spathulate. Inflorescence usually a narrow panicle of relatively few flowers. Calyx 3·5-5 mm. Petals linear, greenish, entire; claw ciliate; filaments hairy. Capsule 7-9 mm, ovoid; carpophore very short; seeds more than 1 mm, with undulate surface. • {\i S.E. Russia, S. & E. Ukraine.} Rs(W, K, E).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 52. S. cyri} Schischkin in Grossh.{\i  et al., Trav. Mus. Georgie}{\b  3:} 202 (1925). Like {\b 51} but densely puberulent below, glabrous above, including pedicels and calyx; seeds smooth.{\i  S.E. Russia} ({\i N.W. shores of Caspian Sea}). Rs(E). ({\i W. Asia.})
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b 51} and {\b 52} are very similar in appearance, but seem to be distinct species with different distributions and have been shown experimentally to exhibit intersterility.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 53. S. velebitica} (Degen) Wrigley,{\i  Ann. Bot. Fenn.}{\b  23:} 70 (1986) ({\i S. otites} subsp.{\i  velebitica} Degen,{\i  Otites velebitica} (Degen) J. Holub). Dioecious; stems 45-70(-85) cm, slender, shortly and densely puberulent below, without viscid internodes. Basal leaves narrowly oblanceolate; cauline leaves linear-lanceolate. Inflorescence subsimple, glabrous. Calyx 3 mm. Petals pale yellow; claw and filaments glabrous. Capsule 5-6 mm, subglobose; carpophore very short; seeds c. 1·2 mm, smooth with tuberculate margin.{\i  Rocky grassland on limestone. • N.W. Jugoslavia.} Ju.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Readily distinguished from the other members of Sect. {\i Otites} by its slender habit.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 54. S. wolgensis} (Hornem.) Otth in DC.,{\i  Prodr.}{\b  1:} 370 (1824) (incl. {\i Otites} orae-syvashicae Klokov). Dioecious; stems often 100 cm or more, with very diffuse panicle of small, white flowers; lower part of stem with hairs of different lengths, 0·25-1·15 mm; glabrous and viscid above. Leaves pilose, oblanceolate-spathulate. Calyx 3-3·5 mm. Petal-claw glabrous; filaments hairy. Capsule 5-6 mm; carpophore very short. Seeds less than 1 mm, surface undulate. 2n = 24. {\i  S. Russia, S.E. Ukraine.} Rs(C, W, K, E).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 The white petals, unpleasant flower-scent and wide-angled lower panicle-branches provide good characters in living material. The complete intersterility with {\b 56} emphasizes the relationship of this species with species {\b 49-53} rather than with {\b 56-61}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 55. S. baschkirorum} Janisch., {\i Ber. Saratow. Naturforscherges.}{\b  3}({\b 1}): 33 (1929) (incl.{\i  S. polaris} Kleopow). Like {\b 54} but stems usually 40-60 cm, puberulent below without long hairs, glabrous and viscid above; leaves puberulent; flowers with pleasant scent; petal-claw ciliate; seeds c. 1·25 mm, tuberculate. 2n = 24.{\i  E. Russia.} Rs(N, C, E).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 ({\b 56-61}). {\b S. otites} group. Dioecious biennials or short-lived
\par

\par
202}
\par