{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 3 Leaves lanceolate, glabrous; inflorescence often
\par
   5- to 7-flowered ................................................................ ({\b c}) subsp.{\b  glareosa}
\par
3 Leaves ovate to ovate-lanceolate, with short, dense  
\par
  pubescence; inflorescence 1- to 3(-5)-flowered .............. ({\b d}) subsp. {\b prostrata}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b uniflora }(incl. subsp.{\i  cratericola} (Franco) Franco): Glabrous, glaucous plant, often with rather diffuse habit. Leaves 0·5-2(-4) × 0·2-0·7 cm, linear-lanceolate to subspathulate, often not crowded. Flowers large, actinomorphic, often solitary. 2n = 24.{\i  Usually on coastal rocks or shingle. N. & W. Europe, eastwards to the Kola peninsula}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp.{\b  thorei} (Dufour) Jalas,{\i  Willdenowia }{\b 14:} 48 (1984) ({\i S. thorei }Dufour): Like subsp. ({\b a}) but stems much-branched and usually embedded in sand below; leaves 0·5-2 × 0·3-1·2 cm, broadly elliptical to subspathulate, not or only slightly glaucous, rather crowded. 2n = 24.{\i  Coastal sands. N. Spain and W. France northwards to} 46° 30'{\i  N.}
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b c}) Subsp.{\b  glareosa} (Jordan) Chater & Walters,{\i  Bot. Jour. Linn. Soc.}{\b  103:} 216 (1990) ({\i S. glareosa} Jordan): Glabrous plant with slender, procumbent to ascending stems from a slightly woody stock. Leaves 1-3 × 0·2-0·6 cm, lanceolate. Flowers smaller than subsp. ({\b a}), rarely solitary, usually in 3- to 7-flowered inflorescences, inclined and slightly zygomorphic. 2n = 24.{\i  Usually on calcareous screes. From the Pyrenees and E.C. France to the E. Carpathians}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b d}) Subsp.{\b  prostrata} (Gaudin) Chater & Walters,{\i  op. cit.}{\b  103:} 215 (1990) ({\i S. alpina} auct., {\i S. angustifolia} subsp.{\i  prostrata} (Gaudin) Briq., {\i S. inflata} subsp.{\i  prostrata} Gaudin, {\i S. vulgaris} subsp.{\i  marginata} (Kit.) Hayek and subsp.{\i  megalosperma }(Sart.) Hayek,{\i  S. willdenovii} Sweet): Like subsp. ({\b c}) but stems shorter; leaves 0·5-2 × 0·5-1·5 cm, ovate to ovate-lanceolate, covered in short, dense pubescence; flowers often solitary, sometimes in 2- or 3-flowered inflorescences. 2n = 24.{\i  Mountain rocks. S. Europe, from N. Spain to E. Greece}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Icelandic plants, often subcaespitose with small, imbricate, ovate-lanceolate to subspathulate leaves, have been distinguished as{\b  S. maritima }With. subsp.{\b  islandica}  Á. & D. Löve,{\i  Acta Horti Gothob.}{\b  20:} 183 (1956). They seem best treated as local variants of subsp. ({\b a}).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 On Öland and Gotland small-flowered, procumbent plants with few-flowered inflorescences have been distinguished as{\i  S. maritima}. With. var. {\i petraea} Fries. Such plants approach subsp. ({\b c}) and could be included in this subspecies, but the populations are apparently very variable and further study is required. See R. Sterner, {\i Acta Phytogeogr. Suec.}{\b  9:} 97 (1938).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 71. S. csereii} Baumg., {\i Enum. Stirp. Transs. }{\b 3:} 345 (1816). Glabrous annual to 65 cm, with few, spathulate basal leaves, and numerous pairs of ovate-lanceolate, sessile cauline leaves. Inflorescence variably composed, usually with several flowers. Calyx 9-13 mm, somewhat inflated in flower but closely investing ripe fruit, thin and scarious, with 20 green veins of which the alternate ones are shorter. Petal-limb not more than 5 mm, white, with 2 spathulate lobes; corona represented only by 2 small protuberances. Capsule 7·5-10 mm, ovate; carpophore c. 1·5 mm. Seeds with concave face. 2n = 24.{\i  S.E. Europe; occasionally casual elsewhere.} Bu Rm Rs(W, K, E).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 72. S. fabaria} (L.) Sm. in Sibth. & Sm.,{\i  Fl. Graec. Prodr. }{\b 1:} 293 (1809) (incl.{\i  S. thebana} Orph. ex Boiss.). Robust, glabrous and glaucous perennial up to 100 cm. Leaves fleshy; basal more or less spathulate-ovate; cauline distant, smaller, elliptical or obovate-lanceolate, obtuse, often mucronate. Inflorescence usually branched. Calyx 8-10 mm, 10-veined, not markedly inflated; teeth triangular, acute. Petal-limb 2·5-5 mm, white; coronal scales present. Capsule 10-12 mm, ovoid, exceeding the closely appressed calyx; carpophore c. 2 mm. Seeds with concave face. 2n = 24.{\i  Usually on maritime rocks. C. Greece and Aegean region.} Cr Gr.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 V. Melzheimer, {\i Pl. Syst. Evol.}{\b  155:} 251-256 (1987), has treated S. thebana as a subspecies of{\b  72}, but the cited differences, mainly in coronal development, seem to be an inadequate basis for distinction.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 73. S. ionica} Halácsy, {\i Consp. Fl. Graec. }{\b 1:} 158 (1900). Like {\b 72} but a low-growing plant with ascending flowering stems, and often with overwintering stolons terminating in rosettes of green leaves; basal leaves spathulate-orbicular; petal-limb c. 2 mm, with no coronal scales; capsule 6-8·5 mm. 2n = 24.{\i  Stony mountain slopes.• W.C. Greece}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 74. S. fabarioides} Hausskn.,{\i  Mitt. Thür. Bot. Ver}. nov. ser.{\b  5:} 47 (1893). Like {\b 72} but biennial, up to 60 cm; stems leafless in upper ½ ; calyx (9-)10-14 mm, markedly inflated; ripe capsule 6-9 mm, not exceeding the calyx. •{\i  Balkan peninsula}. Al Bu Gr.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Earlier described as perennial, but {\i fide} V. Melzheimer,{\i  Bot. Jahrb.}{\b  101:} 174 178 (1980), strictly biennial, and clearly separable from {\b 72}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 75. S. caesia} Sm. in Sibth. & Sm.,{\i  Fl. Graec. Prodr.}{\b  1:} 294 (1909). Glabrous, rhizomatous perennial with ascending flowering stems up to 40 cm, and variably-developed sterile shoots often submerged in scree. Leaves fleshy, glaucous, the basal spathulate, the cauline elliptical to ovate. Inflorescence few-flowered; calyx 10-13 mm, not strongly inflated, with 10 veins very conspicuous in fruiting stage; petal-limb 2-6 mm, white or pink, often red beneath, with 2 linear lobes and small coronal scales. Capsule 6-9 mm, ovoid; carpophore c. 2 mm.{\i  Mountain screes. W. Greece and S. Albania; N. Aegean region} ({\i Samothraki}). Al Gr.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp.{\b  caesia} : Petal-limb 4-6 mm; capsule exceeding the calyx. 2n = 24. •{\i  Greece and S. Albania}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp.{\b  samothracica} (Rech. fil.) Melzh.,{\i  Bot. Jahrb.}{\b  101:} 181 (1980): Petal-limb c. 2 mm; capsule equalling the calyx.{\i  N. Aegean region} ({\i Samothraki}). ({\i E. Aegean} ({\i Chios}).)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 76. S. variegata} (Desf.) Boiss. & Heldr. in Boiss., {\i Diagn. Pl. Or. Nov.}{\b  2}({\b 8}): 82 (1849). Like {\b 75} but smaller, with stems up to 10 cm; calyx 11-15 mm; petals greyish-violet; ripe capsule 8-11 mm, ovate-lanceolate; carpophore c. 3 mm. 2n = 24.{\i  Mountain screes. • Kriti.} Cr.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 77. S. procumbens} Murray, {\i Comment. Gotting.} ser. 2,{\b  7:} 83 (1786). Stems up to 30 cm, procumbent, branched, scabrid-puberulent. Leaves oblong-lanceolate, acute, subglabrous. Flowers solitary or 2 or 3 together; pedicels equalling calyx. Calyx 15-20 mm, hairy, inflated, oblong-campanulate, 20-veined, with anastomosing lateral veins. Petals white, cuneate, emarginate; coronal scales acute. Capsule 5-6 mm, ovoid-globose, c. 3 times as long as the glabrous carpophore. {\i S., C. & E. Russia, E. Ukraine.} Rs(C, W, E).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Sect. BRACHYPODAE (Boiss.) Chowdhuri. Perennials, sometimes suffruticose, with lanceolate to spathulate basal leaves and few-flowered stems. Capsule included in the hairy calyx, usually much longer than the short carpophore.
\par

\par
205}
\par