{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 procumbent or ascending stems, clothed throughout with dense, viscid, glandular pubescence. Leaves obovate or oblanceolate. Flowers large, solitary or paired (rarely 3 or more), in axils of leafy bracts. Calyx 15-20 mm, narrowly clavate, with conspicuous greenish or reddish veins. Petal-limb bifid, white; claw long-exserted; coronal scales conspicuously toothed. Capsule c. 10 mm, broadly oblong, equalling the deflexed-hairy carpophore. 2n = 24.{\i  Maritime sands. Corse, Sardegna; Kriti.} Co Cr Sa.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Plants from Corse and Sardegna have smaller leaves and rather shorter, more obtuse calyx-teeth than the typical plant, which occurs in Kriti; they have been distinguished as subsp.{\b  corsica} (DC.) Nyman, {\i Consp.} 92 (1878).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 88. S. spergulifolia} (Willd.) Bieb., {\i Fl. Taur.-Cauc.}{\b  3:} 305 (1820) ({\i Cucubalus spergulifolius} Willd.,{\i  S. armeniaca }Rohrb., {\i S. supina} Bieb.). Perennial with branched, woody stock. Stems numerous, 15-40 cm, procumbent or ascending to erect, scabrid-puberulent, somewhat glandular above. Leaves 15-40 × (0·5-)1-4 mm, linear to linear-lanceolate, usually with sterile shoots in the axils. Inflorescence a lax, (1)2- to 12-flowered panicle. Calyx (8-)11-20 mm, narrowly cylindrical, glandular-puberulent. Petals white or pale yellow; claw exserted, ciliate; coronal scales up to 1·5 mm. Capsule (3-)5-9 mm, ovoid, enclosed within the calyx, about as long as the pubescent carpophore. 2n = 24, 48. {\i S.E. Europe, southwards to} 40°{\i  N.} Bu Gr Ju Rm Rs(C, W, K, E) Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 The plants from Krym have been distinguished as {\b S. syreistschikowii} Smirnov,{\i  Bjull. Mosk. Obsc. Isp. Prir., Otd. Biol.}, ser. 2,{\b  49}({\b 2}): 87 (1940), with somewhat broader leaves and almost eglandular calyx, but the differences do not merit specific distinction.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 89. S. thymifolia} Sm. in Sibth. & Sm.,{\i  Fl. Graec. Prodr.}{\b  1:} 292 (1809) ({\i S. pontica} Brandza). Like {\b 88} but leaves fleshy, ovate, conspicuously pubescent; inflorescence few-flowered, with alternate or opposite 2- or 3-flowered branches; calyx 12-15 mm, narrowly clavate, glandular-villous; capsule slightly longer than carpophore. 2n = {\i 48. Maritime sands. N. & W. coasts of Black Sea.} Bu Rm Rs(W) Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 90. S. altaica} Pers., {\i Syn. Pl. }{\b 1:} 497 (1805). Stems up to 50 cm, much-branched, scabrid-puberulent below, glabrous and viscid above. Leaves up to 3 cm, acicular, pungent, scabrid. Inflorescence more or less compound, with alternate 1- to 3-flowered branches; pedicels equalling or longer than calyx. Calyx 10-14 mm, sparsely pubescent. Petals white; claw ciliate; coronal scales present. Capsule 8-10 mm, 1½-2 times as long as carpophore. {\i S.E. Russia}. Rs(C). ({\i Temperate Asia.})
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 91. S. cretacea} Fischer ex Sprengel,{\i  Syst. Veg.} ed. 16, {\b 2:} 405 (1825). Stems up to 30 cm, much-branched, with hoary pubescence below. Leaves up to 10 mm, linear, thick and rigid, acuminate. Inflorescence 1- to 3-flowered; pedicels usually shorter than calyx. Calyx 18-20 mm, glabrous or slightly scabrid on veins. Petals white; claw exserted; coronal scales absent. Capsule 10- 12 mm; carpophore 5-7 mm, stout. Seeds with flat faces and grooved back.{\i  Chalk hills. • S. Russia, E. Ukraine.} Rs(C, W, E).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 92. S. suffrutescens} Bieb.,{\i  Beschr. Länd. Terek Casp.} 175 (1800). Stems up to 40 cm, suberect, shortly pubescent. Basal leaves up to 4 mm wide, linear-spathulate, mucronate; upper cauline linear. Inflorescence 1- or few-flowered; pedicels equalling or longer than calyx. Calyx 10-15 mm, glabrous or slightly scabrid. Petals white; coronal scales linear, acute. Capsule c. 10 mm; carpophore 6-7 mm.{\i  S.E. Russia, W. Kazakhstan}. Rs(E).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 93. S. taliewii} Kleopow, {\i Jour. Bot. Acad. Sci. Ukr.}{\b  9}({\b 17}): 119 (1936). Like {\b 92} but with stems less than 20 cm; leaves up to 5 mm wide, oblanceolate or lanceolate-spathulate, thick; calyx entirely glabrous; coronal scales absent; capsule about twice as long as carpophore, ovoid-globose.{\i  S.E. Russia} ({\i west of Ural'sk}). Rs(E).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 94. S. linifolia} Sm. in Sibth. & Sm.,{\i  Fl. Graec. Prodr.}{\b  1:} 301 (1809). Stems up to 65 cm, numerous, suberect, with short, hoary pubescence below, glabrous and viscid above. Basal leaves linear-lanceolate, puberulent. Inflorescence with few- or 1-flowered alternate branches; pedicels shorter than calyx. Calyx 15-20 mm, abruptly contracted below capsule, usually pubescent; teeth acute. Petals pinkish above, purplish beneath; claw ciliate; coronal scales truncate. Capsule 7-10 mm, equalling or somewhat longer than carpophore. 2n = 24. • {\i C. Greece.} Gr.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 95. S. schwarzenbergeri} Halácsy, {\i Denkschr. Akad. Wiss. Math. Nat. Kl.} ({\i Wien}){\b  61:} 472 (1894) (incl. {\i S. horvatii} Micevski). Stems 10-45 cm, simple, erect from woody stock, slender, pubescent, viscid above. Basal leaves small, obovate-spathulate; upper cauline minute, linear. Inflorescence more or less racemose, 1- to 4-flowered; pedicels much shorter than calyx. Calyx 12-21 mm, puberulent; teeth ovate-lanceolate, more or less obtuse. Petals greenish; claw glabrous. Capsule equalling or somewhat shorter than carpophore. 2n = 24.{\i  Mountain rocks. • N.W. Greece and adjacent parts of Albania and Jugoslavia.} Al Gr Ju.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 96. S. campanula} Pers.,{\i  Syn. Pl.}{\b  1:} 500 (1805). Slender, glabrous perennial up to 20 cm, with the habit of{\i  Campanula rotundifolia}. Leaves linear to linear-lanceolate, acute, ciliate at base. Flowers solitary or paired, terminal on slender pedicels. Calyx 7-8 mm, campanulate, vinous, glabrous. Petals white, reddish-purple beneath. Capsule c. 6 mm, slightly longer than or up to twice as long as the thick, pubescent carpophore.{\i  Calcareous mountain rocks. • Maritime Alps.} Ga It.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    ({\b 97-102}).{\b  S. saxifraga} group. Caespitose perennials. Stems usually numerous, up to 20(-30) cm, suberect, slender, usually pubescent below, glabrous and viscid above. Leaves linear to linear-spathulate or linear-oblanceolate, often with scabrid or ciliate margins. Inflorescence 1- or 2(-4)-flowered. Calyx 6-16 mm, glabrous, pale, rarely vinous. Petals white above, reddish or greenish beneath; claw more or less exserted; coronal scales small. Capsule 5·5-12·5 mm; carpophore 2·5-12 mm, glabrous or slightly pubescent.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 A difficult group of closely related, variable species that requires further revision, especially in the Balkan peninsula. The following treatment is provisional and it may be more appropriate for these taxa to be treated at subspecific rank.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Carpophore less than 5 mm
\par
2 Carpophore glabrous ....................................................... {\b 99. conglomeratica}
\par
2 Carpophore slightly pubescent below
\par
3 Stems 10-25 cm; calyx oblong-turbinate .................................. {\b 97. saxifraga}
\par
3 Stems usually less than 10 cm; calyx turbinate-clavate ............ {\b 100. dirphya}
\par
1 Carpophore 5-12 mm
\par
4 Plant pulvinate; stems up to 10 cm ......................................... {\b 98. fruticulosa}
\par
4 Plant forming a ± lax mat; stems up to 30 cm
\par

\par
207}
\par