{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 calyx (12-)15-18 mm, toothed for 1/6-1/4 of its length with triangular, acute teeth; veins more distinctly anastomosing; petals very pale pink; claw included; seeds up to c. 1·4 mm, with 2 rows of tubercles on back. 2n = 24. •{\i  C. & S.E. Spain.} Hs.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28 Sect. DICHOTOMAE (Rohrb.) Chowdhuri. Annuals; stems erect, pubescent. Inflorescence branched, composed of raceme-like monochasial cymes. Calyx contracted at mouth in fruit, with prominent simple veins. Seeds reniform, with plane or slightly concave, tuberculate faces, and bluntly tuberculate back.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 170. S. dichotoma }Ehrh., {\i Beitr. Naturk.}{\b  7}: 143 (1792). ({\i S. mathei} Pénzes). Stems 20-100 cm, branched above, puberulent to hispid-pubescent. Lower leaves spathulate to lanceolate; cauline lanceolate. Inflorescence usually with alar flowers- branches 5- to 10-flowered; pedicels all very short; upper bracts small, ovate, with scarious margins. Calyx 7-15 mm, ovoid-oblong in fruit, not inflated, sparsely and shortly pubescent between veins, sparsely hispid on veins; teeth ovate-lanceolate, acute. Petal-limb 7-8 mm, white, rarely pink; filaments and styles very long-exserted. Carpophore 1·5-4 mm, very stout, glabrous. Seeds 1·1-1·4 mm, blackish-brown. 2n = 24.{\i  Native in S. & E. Europe; widely naturalized elsewhere}. Bu Cr Gr Hu It Ju Rm Rs(B, C, W, K, E) Tu [Be Co Cz Ga Ge He Hs Po Rs(N) Su].
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b dichotoma}: Basal leaves not in dense rosettes, green, pubescent. Flowers crowded, or sometimes separated by their own length; inflorescence 1 or 2(3) times dichotomously branched; upper bracts not ciliate. Petal-limb bifid for c. 2/3 of its length. 2n = 24.{\i  Throughout the range of the species, except Greece and the Aegean region}.
\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b racemosa} (Otth) Graebner in Ascherson & Graebner, {\i Syn. Mitteleur. Fl. }{\b 5}({\b 2}): 93 (1920) ({\i S. racemosa} Otth, {\i S. sibthorpiana} Reichenb.): Basal leaves in dense rosettes, more or less densely grey-pubescent. Flowers less densely crowded; inflorescence often more branched; upper bracts ciliate. Petal-limb bifid almost to base.{\i  S.E. Europe}.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    Subsp. {\b euxina} (Rupr.) Coode & Cullen, {\i Notes Roy. Bot. Gard. Edinb.}{\b  28}: 8 (1967) ({\i S. euxina} Rupr.), from maritime sands of the N. Aegean and Black Sea, is similar to subsp. ({\b b}) but has narrower leaves, up to 8 mm wide. It probably does not merit subspecific recognition. The European plants have white petals ({\i S. euxina} var. {\i bulgarica} Jordanov & Panov), whereas they are usually pink in Asiatic material.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 171. S. heldreichii }Boiss.,{\i  Diagn. Pl. Or. Nov.}{\b  2}({\b 8}): 81 (1849) ({\i S. remotiflora} Vis.). Like {\b 170}({\b a}) but lower leaves ovate-lanceolate; cauline linear-lanceolate; inflorescence 1-3 times dichotomously branched, without alar flowers; flowers very remote, 1-3 on each branch; pedicels up to ½ as long as calyx; upper bracts larger, mostly equalling flowers; calyx scabrid between veins, serrate with ascending sharp teeth on veins.{\i  W. part of Balkan peninsula; very local.} Al ?Gr Ju.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28 Sect. SCORPIOIDEAE (Rohrb.) Chowdhuri. Annuals, rarely perennials. Calyx not contracted at mouth in fruit; veins usually anastomosing. Seeds of various types, but never winged.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 172. S. nicaeensis }All.,{\i  Mélang. Philos. Math. Soc. Roy. Turin} ({\i Misc. Taur.}) {\b 5}: 88 (1774). Often perennial; whole plant hirsute; stems 10-40 cm, erect, stout, usually branched, viscid. Lower leaves linear-spathulate to oblong-lanceolate; cauline linear-lanceolate to linear, often curved. Flowers on pedicels equalling or shorter than calyx, 2-8 together in sessile or shortly stalked subcapitate dichasia which are arranged, the lower remote, the upper overlapping, on long axes in a simple or branched inflorescence. Calyx 10-13 mm, subclavate in fruit; teeth ovate, obtuse. Petal-limb very deeply bifid, with oblong-linear lobes, white or reddish-pink. Capsule 6-9 mm, ovoid-oblong; carpophore 3·5-5 mm, pubescent. Seeds 0·9-1·1 mm, reniform, dark brown; faces flat, finely striate; back narrow, more or less deeply grooved. 2n = 24.{\i  Maritime sands. Mediterranean region, mainly in the west; Portugal}. Bl Co Ga Gr Hs It Lu Sa Si.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 173. S. scabriflora }Brot.,{\i  Fl. Lusit.}{\b  2}: 184 (1805) ({\i S. hirsuta} Lag., non Poiret; incl. {\i S. laxiflora} Brot.). Whole plant often densely villous, sometimes pubescent or subglabrous in part, the hairs always more or less ascending; buds and shoot-apices always villous; stems 5-35 cm, ascending or erect, branched. Flowers 4-9 in raceme-like monochasial cymes, all but the lower 1 or 2 usually overlapping and subsessile; inflorescence usually branched, never with alar flowers. Calyx (11-)13-25 mm, clavate in fruit, usually villous; veins not anastomosing; teeth obtuse. Petal-limb 8-10 mm pale to deep red. Capsule 5-9 mm, ovoid-oblong; carpophore 7-16 mm. Seeds 0·6-0·8 mm, reniform, brown, slightly pruinose; faces plane, ridged; back wide, plane or concave, tuberculate. 2n = 24. •{\i  Spain, Portugal.} Hs Lu.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b S. mariana} Pau, {\i Mem. Soc. Esp. Hist. Nat}. (tomo extr.) 292 (1921), from S. Spain, has a more robust habit and slightly larger capsules and seeds, but otherwise closely resembles {\b 173}.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 174. S. micropetala }Lag., {\i Gen. Sp. Nov.} 15 (1816). Like {\b 173} but calyx 10-15 mm, cuneate-subclavate in fruit; veins usually anastomosing above; petal-limb up to 3 mm, white or pink; capsule 9-10 mm, oblong; carpophore 3-4 mm; seeds with striate faces and less strongly tuberculate back. 2n = 24. {\i C. & S. Spain, Portugal.} Hs Lu.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 175. S. discolor }Sm. in Sibth. & Sm.,{\i  Fl. Graec. Prodr.}{\b  1}: 292 (1809) ({\i S. pompeiopolitana} Gay ex Boiss.). Like {\b 173} but stems and calyx with both long, soft hairs and short, glandular hairs; plant never villous; calyx 10-12 mm; petal-limb 4-6 mm, pink above, greenish beneath; capsule 7-8 mm; carpophore 4 mm; seeds 0·4-0·6 mm, chestnut-brown; faces very finely striate; back narrow, concave or grooved with a median row of low tubercles.{\i  Maritime sands. Karpathos}. Cr. ({\i E. Mediterranean region}.)
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 176. S. obtusifolia }Willd.,{\i  Enum. Pl. Horti Berol}. 473 (1809). Plant sometimes perennial, never villous; stems 15-35 cm, erect, branched, densely pubescent with patent or ascending hairs. All leaves except uppermost spathulate to obovate-spathulate, obtuse rather thick; uppermost oblanceolate, obtuse; all ciliate. Inflorescence as in {\b 173}. Calyx 10-13(-14) mm, subclavate in fruit pubescent with short, ascending hairs; veins somewhat raised usually reddish, anastomosing; teeth oblong, obtuse. Petals pink or white; coronal scales well-developed. Capsule 8-9 mm, oblong; carpophore 3-5·5 mm, puberulent. Seeds 0·6-1 mm, elongate-reniform, dark brown; faces excavate; back very wide, with an obtuse median groove. 2n = 24.{\i  Maritime sands and rocks. S.W. Spain, S.W. Portugal}. Hs Lu. ({\i N.W. Africa; Islas Canarias}.)
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 177. S. gaditana }Talavera & Bocquet,{\i  Lagascalia}{\b  5}: 50 (1975). Like {\b 176} but always annual; leaves lanceolate-spathulate; cauline leaves acute to subacute; calyx 9-10·5 mm, usually glandular; capsule 7-8 mm. 2n = 24. • {\i Stony slopes. S.W. Spain}.
\par 

\par 
216}
\par