{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 erous, lanceolate, acute. Inflorescence a diffuse, compound dichasium with small flowers on long, slender pedicels. Calyx 4-6 mm, glabrous, obconical, 10-veined, without lateral veins. Petal-limb obovate, deeply emarginate, white or pink; coronal scales acute. Capsule c. 5 mm, oblong-ovoid; carpophore c. 1 mm, glabrous. 2n = 24. ?•{\i  Fennoscandia; mountains of C. & S. Europe, from the Vosges to S.E. Spain and S. Jugoslavia.} Au Co *Cz Fe Ga Ge He Hs It Ju No Rm Rs(N, C) ?Sa Su.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Doubtfully recorded outside Europe at one station in W. Siberia.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 116. S. lerchenfeldiana} Baumg.,{\i  Enum. Stirp. Transs.}{\b  1:} 398 (1816). Like{\b  115} but stems arcuate-ascending, obviously lateral, in axils of longer, narrower basal leaves; flowers fewer, larger, shortly pedicellate; calyx 9-12 mm, narrowly clavate, with some lateral venation; petal-limb oblong-linear, reddish or purplish, sometimes white (var.{\i  macedonica }(Form.) Bornm.); carpophore 5-7·5 mm, almost equalling capsule. 2n = 24.{\i  Rock-crevices. • S. Carpathians and mountains of Balkan peninsula southwards to} 41° {\i N.} Bu Gr Ju Rm.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Sect. HELIOSPERMA Reichenb. Like Sect.{\i  Rupifraga,} but often hairy; seeds winged with a characteristic dorsal crest consisting of 2 or more rows of long papillae on the back. Endemic to mountains of S. Europe.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    ({\b 117-124}).{\b  S. pusilla} group. Perennials with rather slender, sometimes woody stock, and slender, weak, branched stems up to 30 cm. Inflorescence a spreading dichasium of small flowers on long, slender pedicels. Calyx 3-10 mm, obconical, weakly 10-veined. Petal-limb obovate, usually (2-)4-toothed or -fid, white or pink. Capsule 5-8 mm, ovoid, equalling or exceeding calyx; carpophore 1-5 mm.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Plants of this group occur in damp, open habitats, often on calcareous rock, in mountain regions from the Pyrenees to the Carpathians and Balkan peninsula. The great variation in habit, leaf-shape and hairiness shows some geographical and ecological correlation, but has been treated differently by different authors. The following treatment attempts to reconcile the accounts of H. Neumayer in Hayek,{\i  Prodr. Fl. Penins. Balcan.}{\b  1:} 264-267 (1924), and of P.F.A. Ascherson & K.O.R.P.P. Graebner,{\i  Syn. Mitteleur. Fl.}{\b  5}({\b 2}): 17-31 (1920), and takes into account more recent work incorporated in the treatment by J. Jalas & J. Suominen,{\i  Atlas Florae Europaeae}{\b  7:} 85-87 (1986).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Petal-claw ciliate ...................................................................... {\b 124. alpestris}
\par
1 Petal-claw glabrous
\par
2 Capsule at least 3 times as long as carpophore
\par
3 Petals entire or shallowly emarginate; calyx c. 8 mm ........... {\b 119. macrantha}
\par
3 Petals ± deeply 2- to 4-toothed or -fid; calyx 3-6(-7) mm
\par
4 Subglabrous or somewhat glandular-hairy; dorsal crest of
\par
  seed constituting more than 1/3 of diameter of seed .................... {\b 117. pusilla}
\par
4 Densely hairy, with long, multicellular glandular and
  eglandular hairs; dorsal crest of seed constituting not more
  than ¼ of diameter of seed ....................................................... {\b 118. veselskyi}
\par
2 Capsule not more than twice as long as carpophore
\par
5 Plant caespitose; leaves less than 2 mm wide ............................ {\b 122. intonsa}
\par
5 Plant not caespitose; leaves usually at least 2 mm wide
\par
6 Calyx less than 7 mm ........................................................ {\b 123. chromodonta}
\par
6 Calyx usually more than 7 mm
\par
7 Sparsely hairy, with short glandular hairs; dorsal crest of  
\par
  seed constituting c. 1/10 of diameter of seed ........................ {\b 120. tommasinii}
\par
7 Densely hairy, with long glandular and eglandular hairs; dorsal
\par
  crest of seed constituting c. 1/5 of diameter of seed .......... {\b 121. retzdorffiana}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 117. S. pusilla} Waldst. & Kit., {\i Pl. Rar. Hung.}{\b  3:} 235 (1812) ({\i S. quadrifida} auct., non L.,{\i  S. quadridentata} subsp.{\i  quadridentata} sensu Hayek, subsp.{\i  pusilla} (Waldst. & Kit.) H. Neumayer, subsp.{\i  albanica} (K. Malý) H. Neumayer; incl.{\i  S. monachorum }Vis. & Pancic, {\i Heliosperma quadrifidum} sensu Hegi). Stems up to 15 cm, weak, ascending, subglabrous or rather sparsely hairy, viscid in upper part with sessile glands and occasionally some multicellular glandular hairs. Leaves 1-2(-4) mm wide, linear or linear-lanceolate. Calyx 3·5-7 mm, glabrous or somewhat glandular-hairy. Petals white, rarely pink or lilac; claw glabrous. Capsule broadly ovoid to subglobose, usually equalling or only slightly exceeding calyx, and 3-4 times as long as carpophore. Seeds c. 1 mm, papillate; dorsal crest constituting at least 1/3 of diameter of seed. 2n = 24.{\i  Mountain rocks and streamsides, rarely below} 500{\i  m. • S. & C. Europe, northwards to W. Carpathians.} Al Au Bu Cz Ga Ge Gr He Hs It Ju Po Rm Rs(W) Si.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Two plants described as subspecies of{\i  S. quadridentata} auct., non (L.) Pers., subsp.{\b  malyi} H. Neumayer,{\i  Österr. Bot. Zeitschr.}{\b  72:} 282 (1923), from Jugoslavia (Dinara Planina), and subsp. {\b candavica} H. Neumayer,{\i  loc. cit.} (1923), from E. Albania (Jablanica), are characterized by unusually well-developed coronal scales, which reach or exceed the base of the petal-lobes. There is insufficient information to decide their status, and they are best treated as variants of {\b 117}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 118. S. veselskyi} (Janka) H. Neumayer,{\i  Denkschr. Akad. Wiss. Math.-Nat. Kl.} ({\b Wien}) {\b 94:} 143 (1917) ({\i S. quadridentata} subsp.{\i  marchesettii} H. Neumayer, {\i Heliosperma eriophorum} Juratzka). Like {\b 117} but densely hairy with long, multicellular glandular and eglandular hairs; sessile glands absent; capsule subglobose; dorsal crest of seed constituting 1/5-1/4 of diameter of seed. 2n = 24.{\i  Cliffs and rocks, in drier habitats than} {\b 117},{\i  mainly below} 500{\i  m. • S.E. Alps.} Au It Ju.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 119. S. macrantha} (Pancic) H. Neumayer,{\i  Denkschr. Akad. Wiss. Math.-Nat. Kl.} ({\i Wien}){\b  94:} 143 (1917). More robust than {\b 117} and {\b 118}, with glandular-hairy stems up to 15 cm, and obovate-lanceolate leaves. Flowers relatively large. Calyx 8 mm, slightly hairy. Petals usually pink, with obovate, truncate or slightly emarginate, long-exserted limb. Capsule subglobose, c. 4 times as long as carpophore.{\i  Mountain rocks. • N. Albania, S.W. Jugoslavia} ({\i Crna Gora}). Al Ju.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 120. S. tommasinii} Vis., {\i Flora} ({\i Regensb}.){\b  12}, {\i Erg.-Bl.}{\b  1:} 12 (1829) ({\i S. quadridentata} subsp.{\i  tommasinii} (Vis.) H. Neumayer). Stems up to 10 cm, slender, clothed with short glandular hairs. Leaves 2-3(-8) mm wide, linear-lanceolate to obovate-lanceolate. Calyx 7-9 mm. Petals white; claw glabrous. Capsule ovoid, only slightly longer than carpophore. Dorsal crest of seed very narrow, constituting c. 1/10 of diameter of seed.{\i  Mountain rocks. •  N. Albania, W. Jugoslavia.} Al Ju.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 121. S. retzdorffiana} (K. Malý) H. Neumayer,{\i  Denkschr. Akad. Wiss. Math.-Nat. Kl. }({\i Wien}){\b  94:} 143 (1917). Like {\b 120} but more robust; stems up to 20 cm; glandular hairs abundant, long; calyx (6-)8-10 mm; dorsal crest of seed constituting c. 1/5 of diameter of seed.{\i  Wet rocks,} 200-300{\i  m. • N. Albania, W. Jugoslavia.} Al ?Gr Ju.
\par

\par
210}
\par