{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 178. S. sericea }All., {\i Fl. Pedem.}{\b  2}: 81 (1785). Stems up to 50 cm, pubescent, ascending, branched. Leaves linear-lanceolate. Flowers solitary and terminal at ends of stems, rarely 2 or 3 in a reduced monochasial cyme. Calyx 12-20(-23) mm; teeth lanceolate, acute or subobtuse. Petals pink. Carpophore 4-10(-12) mm. Seeds 1-1·4 mm, reniform or elongate-reniform, dark brown; faces concave-excavate, striate; back grooved between rounded or angled (not winged and undulate) sides. 2n = 24.{\i  Maritime sands. •? W. Mediterranean region.} Bl Co ?Ga It Sa.
\par 
\par 
\pard\f0\fs28 Often confused with {\b 186} and best distinguished by the seeds.
\par 
\par 
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 179. S. nocturna }L.,{\i  Sp. Pl.} 416 (1753) ({\i S. micropetala} subsp. {\i boullui} (Jordan) Rouy & Fouc., {\i S. boullui} Jordan). Stems 10-60 cm, erect, usually branched. Lower leaves obovate- to lanceolate-spathulate, obtuse, pubescent. Flowers 5-15 in raceme-like monochasial cymes, very densely crowded above, remote below (or flowers 1-5 in the cymes, mostly remote, var. brachypetala (Robill. & Cast.) vis.); inflorescence usually compound, sometimes with alar flowers. Calyx (6-)9-13 mm, oblong-obovoid in fruit, pubescent with ascending hairs; veins wide, green, anastomosing. Petal-limb usually pink, bifid, exserted (or emarginate and included, var. brachypetala). Capsule 8-11 mm, oblong or ovoid-oblong; carpophore 1-1·5 mm, puberulent. Seeds reniform; faces excavate-auriculate; back wide, with shallow, tuberculate groove.{\i  Mediterranean region, extending to Portugal and N. Spain.} Al Bl Co Cr Ga Gr Hs It Ju Lu Sa Si Tu.
\par 
\par 
\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b nocturna}: Plant usually fairly sparsely pubescent below. Calyx-teeth usually triangular-acuminate or lanceolate and acute. Filaments glabrous. Seeds 0·5-0·7 mm, blackish. 2n = 24. {\i Throughout the range of the species}.
\par 
\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b neglecta} (Ten.) Arcangeli,{\i  Comp. Fl. Ital.} 88 (1882) ({\i S. neglecta} Ten.,{\i  S. reflexa} auct.): Plant usually densely hirsute below. Lower leaves often patent or deflexed. Calyx-teeth linear. Alternate filaments hairy at base. Seeds 0·8-0·9 mm, reddish-brown.{\i  S. France, Italy, Sicilia}.
\par 
\par 
\pard\f0\fs28 S. reflexa (L.) Aiton fil. in Aiton,{\i  Hort. Kew.} ed. 2, {\b 3}: 86 (1811), non Moench, is probably a cleistogamous variant of subsp. ({\b a}).
\par 
\par 
\pard\f0\fs28 Sect. SILENE . Annuals. Inflorescence of monochasial cymes. Calyx contracted at mouth in fruit. Carpophore pubescent. Seeds less than 1 mm, reniform, not winged.
\par 
\par 
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 180. S. ramosissima }Desf.,{\i  Fl. Atl.}{\b  1}: 354 (1798). Whole plant viscid; stems 10-40 cm, stout, erect, branched, villous. Leaves oblong-spathulate, obtuse, pubescent. Flowers in monochasial cymes; lower pedicels 1-5 times as long as calyx. Calyx 9-12 mm, cylindrical, becoming ovoid in fruit, hairy, toothed for 1/4 of its length with lanceolate-triangular, acute teeth. Petals pink or white. Capsule 8-10 mm; carpophore 1·5-2 mm, stout. Seeds pale brown; faces more or less plane and smooth; back very narrow, deeply and acutely grooved. 2n = 24.{\i  Maritime sands. S. Portugal, S. & E. Spain.} Hs Lu.
\par 
\par 
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 181. S. gallica }L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 417 (1753) ({\i S. anglica} L.; incl. {\i S. giraldii} Guss., {\i S. linophila} Rothm., {\i S. transtagana} Coutinho). Stems 15-45 cm, erect, simple to much-branched, pubescent, viscid above, or (var.{\i  giraldii} (Guss.) Walters) glabrous. Leaves pubescent. Flowers subsecund, in 1 to many raceme-like monochasial cymes; lower pedicels up to 11/2 times as long as calyx, the upper short. Calyx 7-10 mm, cylindrical-ovoid, becoming ovoid in fruit, hispid, toothed for 1/4 of its length with triangular, acute teeth; veins scarcely anastomosing. Petals white or pink, often with crimson spot (var. {\i quinquevulnera} (L.) Koch); limb up to 6 mm, entire or emarginate. Capsule 6-9 mm; carpophore usually 1 mm or less. Seeds dark brown; faces deeply concave, striate; back wide, plane. 2n = 24.{\i  W., S. & S.C. Europe; naturalized further north}. Al Au Az Bl Br Bu Co Cr Ga Gr He Hs Hu It Ju Lu Rm Rs(W) Sa Si *Tu [*Be Cz Ge *Hb Ho Po Rs(C)].
\par 
\par 
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 182. S. bellidifolia }Juss. ex Jacq., {\i Hort. Vindob.}{\b  3}: 44 (1776) ({\i S. hispida} Desf., {\i S. vespertina} Retz.). Stems 30-60 cm, erect, branched, pubescent or puberulent above; hispid and simple, rarely branched, below. Leaves sparsely hispid. Flowers subsessile, usually secund, in dense, raceme-like, long-stalked monochasial cymes. Calyx 14-17 mm, cylindrical-clavate, becoming clavate in fruit, villous. Petal-limb 3-5 mm, bifid, pink. Capsule 9-11 mm; carpophore 4-5 mm. Seeds very small, dark brown; faces deeply concave, striate; back wide, shallowly and broadly grooved. 2n = 24. {\i Mediterranean region; Portugal}. Al Bl Co Cr Gr Hs It Lu Sa Si Tu.
\par 
\par 
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 183. S. cerastoides }L.,{\i  Sp. Pl}. 417 (1753). Whole plant somewhat hispid, glandular-viscid above; stems up to 25 cm, often branched at base. Flowers in lax, raceme-like monochasial cymes; pedicels not longer than calyx. Calyx 8-11 mm, cylindrical-clavate, glandular-pubescent, becoming very strongly contracted both above and below capsule in fruit, toothed for 1/3 of its length with lanceolate, acute teeth; veins conspicuously anastomosing. Petal-limb small, bifid, pink. Capsule 6-8 mm, shortly attenuate above; carpophore 2-4 mm. Seeds dark brown; faces deeply concave, striate; back wide with narrow, shallow central groove. 2n = 24.{\i  S. & E. Spain, S. Portugal, Islas Baleares; a few localities in the E. Mediterranean.} Bl Cr Gr Hs Ju Lu.
\par 
\par 
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 184. S. tridentata }Desf., {\i Fl. Atl. }{\b 1}: 349 (1798). Whole plant hispidulous; stems 10-40 cm, simple or branched. Flowers subsessile, in lax, raceme-like monochasial cymes. Calyx 11-14 mm, ellipsoid-cylindrical, becoming ovoid in fruit, not so strongly contracted as in {\b 183}, toothed to c. half-way, with acuminate or linear teeth; veins anastomosing. Petal-limb bifid, almost included in calyx, pink. Capsule 7-10 mm, attenuate above; carpophore 1-2 mm. Seeds dark brown; faces concave, striate; back wide, with wide, shallow central groove. 2n = 24.{\i  C., S. & E. Spain.} Hs.
\par 
\par 
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 185. S. disticha }Willd.,{\i  Enum. Pl. Horti Berol.} 476 (1809). Whole plant hispid; stems 20-40 cm, erect, simple. Flowers subsessile or shortly pedicellate in a 3- to 8-flowered, subcapitate or fastigiate inflorescence. Calyx 8-9 mm, ellipsoidal, becoming ovoid and shortly clavate in fruit, toothed for 1/4 of its length, with triangular, acute teeth; veins not anastomosing. Petals white. Capsule c. 7 mm; carpophore 1-2 mm, stout. Seeds dark brown; faces concave, striate; back very wide, with wide, shallow groove. 2n = 24.{\i  Islas Baleares; S. Spain, Portugal.} Bl Hs Lu.
\par 
\par 
\pard\f0\fs28 Sect. DIPTEROSPERMAE (Rohrb.) Chowdhuri. Annuals. Inflorescence of various types. Calyx not or scarcely contracted at mouth in fruit. Seeds reniform, with flat faces, the back deeply and acutely grooved between 2 undulate wings.
\par 
\par 
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 186. S. colorata }Poiret,{\i  Voy. Barb.}{\b  2}: 163 (1789). Whole plant pubescent or puberulent. Stems 10-50 cm, decumbent to erect, branched. Leaves linear to ovate-spathulate. Pedicels shorter than calyx; bracts of a pair usually unequal. Calyx 11-13(-17) mm, cylindrical, becoming broadly clavate in fruit; teeth ovate, obtuse, densely ciliate. Petal-limb 5-9 mm, pink or white. Capsule 7-9 mm, ovoid; carpophore 5-7 mm. Seeds 1-1·5 mm, dark chestnut-brown. 2n = 24.{\i  S. Europe.} Al *Co Cr Gr Hs It Lu Sa Si Tu.
\par 
\par 217}
\par