{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 iculate. Calyx 12-16 mm, clavate in fruit, glandular-pubescent, usually reddish; teeth ovate, obtuse. Petals deep pink. Capsule 6-8 mm; carpophore 4·5-7 mm, glabrous. Seeds c. 1 mm, reniform; faces concavo-convex or subexcavate, striate; back wide, with shallow median groove. 2n = 24.{\i  Mediterranean region; Portugal}. Cr ?Gr Hs It Lu Sa Si.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 139. S. pseudatocion }Desf., Fl. Atl. 1: 353 (1798). Stems 30-60 cm, branched, pubescent with fine, patent hairs. Inflorescence a lax dichasium; pedicels ¼-1¼ times as long as calyx. Calyx (13-)18-20 mm, clavate in fruit, glandular-pubescent, greenish; teeth lanceolate, acute. Petal-limb c. 10 mm, entire, pink. Capsule 7-9 mm; carpophore 9-10 mm, pubescent. Seeds 1·5-1·75 mm, reniform; faces very deeply excavate, striate; back very wide, plane or slightly concave, with 3 or 4 rows of low tubercles. 2n = 24.{\i  Naturalized in Mallorca and perhaps in S.W. Spain}. [Bl ?Hs]. ({\i N. Africa}.)
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    ({\b 140-142}). {\b S. diversifolia} group. Stems 10-50 cm, with short, deflexed eglandular hairs above, subglabrous below. Lower leaves oblanceolate to spathulate, pubescent. Calyx 7-11 mm, the veins reddish or greenish; teeth very obtuse. Petal-limb up to 4 mm, emarginate or bifid, pink. Capsule 7-8 mm, 1-2 times as long as wide. Seeds 0·75-1 mm, reniform, with wide notch; faces excavate, sharply ridged or striate.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28 Plants of this group have been variously treated by different authors. The following account is based on that by B. Oxelman,{\i  Bot. Jour. Linn. Soc.}{\b  106}: 115-117 (1991).
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Petal-limb emarginate; veins of calyx not anastomosing .... {\b 140. diversifolia}
\par 
1 Petal-limb bifid; veins of calyx often anastomosing
\par 
2 Middle cauline leaves acute ..................................................... {\b 141. turbinata}
\par 
2 Middle cauline leaves obtuse ................................................... {\b 142. bergiana}
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 140. S. diversifolia }Otth in DC.,{\i  Prodr.}{\b  1}: 378 (1824) ({\i S. rubella} auct., non L.; incl.{\i  S. segetalis} Dufour). Lower leaves spathulate, the middle obovate, obtuse; leaves of third node from top 2-4 times as long as wide. Veins of calyx often reddish, never anastomosing; teeth without conspicuous colouring of veins. Petal-limb 3-4 mm, emarginate. Carpophore 2-3·5 mm. Capsule up to twice as long as wide, shiny.{\i  Face of seeds twice as wide as back. W. part of Mediterranean region, extending to S.E. Italy}. Bl †Co Hs It Sa Si [Ju].
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 141. S. turbinata }Guss.,{\i  Fl. Sic. Prodr.}{\b  1}: 506 (1827) ({\i S. rubella} L. subsp. {\i turbinata} (Guss.) Chater & Walters). Lower leaves oblanceolate, the middle linear-lanceolate, acute; leaves of third node from top 5-7 times as long as wide. Veins of calyx reddish or greenish, sometimes anastomosing, often wide; teeth often appearing acute due to arrangement of conspicuously coloured veins. Petal-limb 1-3 mm, bifid. Carpophore 1·5-2·5 mm. Capsule 1½ times as long as wide, dull. Face of seeds 1-1½ times as wide as back.{\i  Sicilia.} Si.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 142. S. bergiana }Lindman,{\i  Acta Horti Berg.}{\b  1}({\b 6}): 4 (1891) ({\i S. rubella} L. subsp. {\i bergiana} (Lindman) Graebner & Graebner fil.). Like {\b 141} but lower leaves spathulate, the middle oblanceolate to lanceolate, obtuse; leaves of third node from top 4-6 times as long as wide; veins of calyx greenish, wide, anastomosing; teeth not appearing acute; petal-limb 1-2 mm; carpophore 2-3 mm; capsule slightly shiny; face of seeds 1½-2 times as wide as back.{\i  Portugal, S. Spain}. Hs Lu.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 143. S. insularis }W. Barbey, {\i Bull. Soc. Vaud. Sci. Nat.} ser. 3, {\b 21}: 220 (1886). Stems 5-15 cm, procumbent-ascending, branched, pubescent with patent hairs. Flowers 2-5 in lax, raceme-like monochasial cymes; pedicels 1-3 times as long as calyx. Calyx 6-10 mm, oblong-ovoid in fruit; teeth ovate, obtuse. Petal-limb 2 mm, entire, pink. Capsule c. 8 mm; carpophore 1-2 mm, stout. Seeds c. 1·5 mm, subglobose, umbilicate at hilum. 2n = 24. •{\i  S. Aegean region} ({\i Karpathos}). Cr.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 144. S. divaricata }Clemente, {\i Elench. Horti Matrit. }103 (1806) (incl.{\i  S. willkommiana} Gay, {\i S. ramosissima} sensu Willk., non Desf.). Stems 10-20 cm, branched, terete, densely hirsute with long, patent hairs. Inflorescence lax, irregularly dichotomously and divaricately branched; pedicels mostly 1-3 times as long as calyx. Calyx (11-)13-15 mm, clavate in fruit, hirsute, usually tinged with red; teeth ovate, acute. Petal-limb very short, emarginate, pink. Capsule 10-11 mm; carpophore 3-4 mm, very stout, glabrous. Seeds 0·75-1 mm, reniform; faces excavate, obtusely ridged; back wide, shallowly grooved. 2n = 24.{\i  S.E. Spain.} Hs. ({\i N.W. Africa}.)
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 145. S. integripetala }Bory & Chaub. in Bory,{\i  Expéd. Sci. Morée}{\b  3}({\b 2}): 123 (1832). Stems 10-40 cm, usually branched, glandular-pubescent with rather thick, patent or ascending hairs. Lower leaves often crowded. Inflorescence few- to many-flowered, dichotomously branched; pedicels ½-3 times as long as calyx. Calyx 13-17 mm, narrowly clavate in fruit, reddish, shortly glandular-pubescent; teeth ovate, obtuse. Petal-limb pink. Capsule 7-8 mm; carpophore 7-8 mm, slender, glabrous. Seeds 0·6-0·75 mm, reniform; faces slightly concave, striate; back not wide, shallowly grooved. 2n = 24. •{\i  S. Greece; Kriti.} Cr Gr.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b integripetala}: Plant lax; stems 10-30(-40) cm. Inflorescence many-flowered, spreading. Petal-limb 10-12 mm, entire. 2n = 24.{\i  S. Greece}.
\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b greuteri} (Phitos) Akeroyd,{\i  Bot. Jour. Linn. Soc.}{\b  97}: 341 (1988): Plant compact; stems 4-10 cm. Inflorescence few-flowered; flowers often solitary. Petal-limb 4-6 mm, emarginate.{\i  W. Kriti}.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 146. S. sedoides }Poiret, {\i Voy. Barb. }{\b 2}: 164 (1789). Stems 5-20(-30) cm, usually much-branched, erect, slender, densely pubescent with patent hairs. Inflorescence profusely and divaricately branched, the branches forming raceme-like monochasial cymes; pedicels mostly 1-2 times as long as calyx, patent in fruit. Calyx 6-8(-9) × 2-3(-3·5) mm, oblong-clavate in fruit, shortly and stiffly pubescent, greenish, rarely reddish; teeth ovate, obtuse or subacute. Petal-limb short, reddish or whitish. Capsule 5-6 mm; carpophore 1·5-2 mm. Seeds 0·3-0·5 mm, reniform; faces slightly concave, striate; back wide, obtusely grooved. 2n = 24.{\i  Mediterranean region, mainly in the east.} Al Bl Cr Ga Gr Hs It Ju Sa Si.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 147. S. pentelica }Boiss.,{\i  Diagn. Pl. Or. Nov.}{\b  2}({\b 8}): 74 (1849). Like {\b 146} but inflorescence a more or less regular dichasium; pedicels erect in fruit; calyx usually reddish-tinged; capsule (5-)6-7·5 mm, often exceeding calyx by c. 2 mm; carpophore 2-2·5 mm; seeds 0·5-0·75 mm, more acutely striate on face and with slightly narrower back.{\i  E. Greece }({\i Attiki, Evvoia}). Gr.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 148. S. haussknechtii }Heldr. ex Hausskn., {\i Mitt. Thür. Bot. Ver}. nov. ser., {\b 5}: 51 (1893). Like {\b 146} but inflorescence a very lax, more or less regular dichasium; pedicels erect in fruit; calyx 7-10 mm, clavate in fruit; carpophore 2-3 mm; seeds 0·75-1 mm; back narrow, obtusely grooved.{\i  Rocky and stony places on serpentine. • Mountains of N.W. Greece.} Gr.
\par 

\par
213}
\par