{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 149. S. laconica }Boiss. & Orph. in Boiss.,{\i  Diagn. Pl. Or. Nov.}{\b  3}({\b 6}): 34 (1859). Like {\b 146} but inflorescence a more or less regular dichasium; pedicels erect in fruit; flowers larger; calyx usually reddish-tinged; petal-limb bilobed, pink; carpophore more than 4 mm, equalling capsule.{\i  S. Greece} ({\i Parnon}). Gr.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28 Sect. BEHENANTHA Otth. Annuals; stems usually glabrous and viscid above. Calyx contracted at mouth in fruit.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 150. S. cretica }L., Sp. Pl. 420 (1753) ({\i S. clandestina} Jacq.; incl. {\i S. annulata} Thore,{\i  S. tenuiflora} Guss.). Stems (15-)30-60 cm, usually branched, erect, puberulent at base with deflexed hairs, glabrous above, rarely entirely glabrous. Flowers in lax, usually narrow dichasia; pedicels 2-5 times as long as calyx. Calyx 9-16 mm, ovoid in fruit; teeth triangular, acute or acuminate. Petal-limb large, red, emarginate or bifid. Capsule 7-10 mm; carpophore 1-5 mm, glabrous. Seeds 0·75-2 mm, reniform; faces slightly concave, tuberculate-ridged; back wide, plane or slightly concave, with 3 or 4 rows of low, rounded tubercles.{\i  Mediterranean region, westwards to N.W. Italy; locally naturalized in Spain and Portugal, and occasionally casual elsewhere.} Al Bu Cr Gr It Ju Si Tu [Hs Lu].
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28 Plants from Greece and Italy with the calyx 14-16 mm, the carpophore 4-5 mm, the capsule e. 10 mm and the seeds e. 0·75 mm have been separated as{\b  S. tenuiflora} Guss.,{\i  Pl. Rar.} 177 (1826). A predominantly western variant with the petals very deeply bifid, the carpophore less than 2 mm, the capsule 7-8 mm, and the seeds c. 2 mm, has been separated as{\b  S. annulata} Thore, {\i Essai Chlor. Land.} 173 (1803) ({\i S. cretica} subsp. {\i annulata} (Thore) Hayek). These variations are of a clinal nature, and do not merit even subspecific status.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 151. S. ungeri }Fenzl in Unger,{\i  Wiss. Ergeb. Reise Griech.} 136 (1862) ({\i S. aetolica} Heldr.). Stems 15-40 cm, often branched, erect, puberulent at base with deflexed hairs, glabrous and very viscid above, often purplish. Flowers in 3- to 12-flowered dichasial cymes; pedicels shorter than, or up to c. 4 times as long as calyx. Calyx 14-17 mm, clavate, glabrous; teeth ovate, acute or acuminate, often patent; veins distinctly anastomosing above, reddish. Petal-limb 7-8 mm, emarginate, crimson. Capsule 8-11 mm; carpophore 6-8 mm. Seeds c. 1 mm, reniform; faces concave, tuberculate-ridged; back not wide, more or less plane, with 3 rows of rounded tubercles. • {\i W. Greece.} ?Al Gr.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 152. S. graeca }Boiss. & Spruner in Boiss.,{\i  Diagn. Pl. Or. Nov.}{\b  1}({\b 1}): 36 (1843). Whole plant glabrous; stems (10-)20-40(-60) cm, usually branched, erect. Leaves glaucous; cauline dense but not usually overlapping. Inflorescence dichotomously branched at base with 1 alar flower and 2 equal, raceme-like, monochasial cymes; pedicels very short; flowers not overlapping. Calyx 9-15 mm, oblong-subclavate in fruit; teeth ovate, obtuse, usually greenish. Petals white or flesh-coloured; limb 5-10 mm, bifid. Capsule 6-9 mm, ovoid-oblong; carpophore 2-4 mm, stout. Seeds 1-1·3 mm, reniform; faces slightly concave, tuberculate-striate; back very wide, more or less plane, with 4 or 5 rows of low, rounded tubercles. 2n = 24.{\i  S. part of Balkan peninsula}. Al Bu Gr Ju.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 153. S. muscipula }L., {\i Sp. Pl. }420 (1753). ({\i S. arvensis} Loscos, non Salisb.; incl. {\i S. corymbifera} Bertol.). Stems 15-40 cm, usually simple below, erect, generally glabrous, rather rigid. Cauline leaves dense, always imbricate throughout most of stem. Inflorescence a more or less regularly branched dichasium; internodes rather long; branches strict; pedicels all very short. Calyx 13-17 mm, oblong-clavate; veins prominent, greenish or reddish, anastomosing; teeth ovate-lanceolate, acute. Petal-limb deeply emarginate, pink. Capsule 8-10 mm, oblong; carpophore 3-6(-7) mm, pubescent. Seeds 0·9-1·1 mm, reniform; faces plane, striate, tuberculate on edge; back narrow, obtusely grooved. 2n = 24.{\i  Cultivated ground. Mediterranean region, Portugal; doubtfully native in some regions.} Ga *Gr Hs It Lu *Si.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 154. S. stricta }L.,{\i  Cent. Pl.}{\b  2}: 17 (1756). Like {\b 153} but calyx with 5 herbaceous wings; calyx-teeth lanceolate-acuminate; capsule ovoid-conical, attenuate above; seeds c. 0·75 mm, with subacute tubercles on sides of faces and on back. 2n = 24.{\i  S. Spain, Portugal}. Hs Lu.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 155. S. behen }L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 418 (1753) (incl.{\i  S. reinholdii} Heldr.). Whole plant glabrous; stems 15-20 cm, simple or branched, rather stout, erect or ascending. Cauline leaves glaucous, usually imbricate. Inflorescence a lax dichasium; lowest pair of internodes of fruiting inflorescence 5-10 cm; next pair also long; flowers not overlapping; pedicels stout, usually shorter than calyx. Calyx 11-17 mm, ovoid in fruit, whitish, with reddish, anastomosing veins above; teeth ovate, obtuse. Petal-limb 3-6 mm, pink. Capsule 9-10 mm, ovoid; carpophore 1-2 mm, very stout. Seeds c. 1·5 mm, reniform; faces concavo-convex, strongly tuberculate-ridged; back wide, plane or slightly convex, with 4 rows of acute, conical tubercles. 2n = 24.{\i  Mediterranean region.} Cr Gr Hs It *Sa Si Tu.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 156. S. holzmannii }Heldr. ex Boiss., {\i Fl. Or., Suppl}., 91 (1888). Like {\b 155} but lowest pair of internodes of fruiting inflorescence 2-4 cm; next pair very short; flowers (except the lowest one) overlapping; petals smaller; limb scarcely exserted; capsule indehiscent; seeds echinate with parallel-sided spines. 2n = 24.{\i  Islets in S. Aegean region.} Cr Gr.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28 Sect. LASIOCALYCINAE Chowdhuri. Annuals. Calyx contracted at mouth in fruit; veins papillose-scabrid or with ascending, bulbous-based hairs.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 157. S. linicola }C.C. Gmelin,{\i  Fl. Bad.}{\b  4}: 304 (1826). Whole plant scabrid-puberulent; stems erect, slender, with deflexed scales or hairs, simple below, strictly branched above. Inflorescence a lax, subcorymbose, more or less regularly-branched dichasium; pedicels ½-3 times as long as calyx. Calyx 11-14 mm, broadly clavate in fruit, with ascending scales or hairs; veins broad, green, anastomosing; teeth triangular-ovate, obtuse. Petal-limb 2-4 mm, pink. Capsule 9-11 mm, ovoid; carpophore 3-5 mm. Seeds 1·75-2 mm, reniform; faces deeply excavate, ridged-striate; back very wide, slightly concave.{\i  Flax-fields, becoming very rare. Italy; probably extinct elsewhere.} ?Ga It ?Ju.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28 A closely related species, {\b S. crassipes} Fenzl, {\i Pugillus} 8 (1842), from Syria and Palestine, has been reported from cultivated fields in Thrace, but there are no recent records.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 158. S. echinata }Otth in DC.,{\i  Prodr.}{\b  1}: 380 (1824). Stems 20-60 cm, simple or branched, puberulent to pubescent-hispid with deflexed (or the longer patent) hairs. Inflorescence irregularly dichotomously branched; flowers subsessile, 4-6 in rather dense, long-stalked dichasia. Calyx 15-20 mm, clavate in fruit, greenish, sometimes purplish above; teeth ovate-lanceolate, acute; hairs on veins c. 1·5 mm, narrow, with bulbous base shorter than the narrow distal part. Petal-limb 6-8 mm, pink or whitish. Capsule (7-)8-11 mm, ovoid-oblong; carpophore (5-)7·5-9 mm, glabrous. Seeds 0·6-0·8 mm, reniform; faces plane or slightly concave, tuberculate; back concave or grooved, not wide. •{\i  S. Italy, casual further north}. It.
\par 

\par
214}
\par