{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 122. S. intonsa }Melzh. & Greuter, {\i Willdenowia}{\b  12}: 29 (1982). Like {\b 120} but caespitose with woody basal shoots, densely pilose, glandular-pubescent above; stems rarely more than 8 cm; leaves 0·7-1·5 mm wide, lanceolate to spathulate; calyx 5-8 mm, glandular-pubescent; capsule 3-4 mm; carpophore 1·5-3·5 mm.{\i  Damp crevices of limestone rocks,} 450-550{\i  m. N.W. Greece} ({\i near Konitsa}). Gr.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 123. S. chromodonta }Boiss. & Reuter, {\i Diagn. Pl. Or. Nov.}{\b  3}: 71 (1854) (incl. {\i S. moehringifolia} Uechtr. ex Pancic, {\i S. trojanensis} (Velen.) Jordanov & Panov, {\i S. quadridentata} subsp.{\i  phyllitica} H. Neumayer). Like {\b 120} but calyx only 4-6 mm; calyx-teeth usually reddish; capsule up to twice as long as carpophore.{\i  Shaded crevices of mountain rocks and screes. Balkan peninsula southwards to} 40°{\i  N}. Al Bu Gr Ju.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 124. S. alpestris }Jacq.,{\i  Fl. Austr.}{\b  1}: 60 (1773) ({\i S. quadrifida} L., nom. ambig., {\i Heliosperma alpestre} (Jacq.) Reichenb.; incl.{\i  H. arcanum} Zapal.). More robust than {\b 117-123}. Stock rather woody; stems up to 30 cm, subglabrous to somewhat hairy. Leaves up to 9 mm wide, obovate-lanceolate to linear-lanceolate. Inflorescence more or less viscid; flowers relatively large. Calyx 5-7 mm, scabrid or more or less glandular-puberulent. Petals usually white, 4- to 6-toothed; claw ciliate. Capsule ovoid, 3-4 times as long as carpophore, and much exceeding calyx. Seeds as in {\b 117} but somewhat larger (1-1·3 mm).{\i  Mountain rocks, rarely below 1250 m. • E. Alps, N.W. Jugoslavia.} Au ?Cz It Ju ?Rs(W).
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28 The record from Ukraine ({\i Heliosperma arcanum }Zapal.) was based on a single gathering from a gorge of the Dnestr river. It has not been confirmed.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28 Sect. COMPACTAE (Boiss.) Schischkin. Usually robust annuals, biennials or perennials with cymose, often densely corymbose, inflorescence. Pedicels often very short. Petals entire or emarginate, not bifid.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 125. S. armeria }L.,{\i  Sp. Pl.} 420 (1753) ({\i S. lituanica} Zapal.). Erect, glabrous and glaucous annual or biennial with usually simple stems up to 40 cm, viscid above. Basal leaves spathulate, withering early; cauline ovate-cordate to lanceolate, amplexicaul, decreasing gradually upwards. Inflorescence usually corymbose, often densely so. Calyx 12-15 mm, cylindrical-clavate; teeth obtuse. Petal-limb obovate, emarginate, usually pink; coronal scales lanceolate, acute. Capsule 7-10 mm, oblong, equalling or somewhat longer than the glabrous carpophore. 2n = 24.{\i  Certainly native in C., S. and parts of E. Europe; widely cultivated elsewhere and sometimes naturalized}. Al Bu Co Ga Gr He It Ju Po Rm Rs(B, C, W) Sa Tu [Az Be Cz Hs Hu].
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28 Variable in habit, leaf-shape and inflorescence. Especially in the E. Mediterranean region, variants with a less compact inflorescence occur, which have been called var. {\i serpentini} G. Beck and var.{\i  sparsiflora} Schur. Such plants may deserve subspecific recognition.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 126. S. compacta }Fischer,{\i  Cat. Jard. Gorenki} ed. 2, 60 (1812). Like {\b 125} but stems stouter, up to 80 cm, and leaves wider; upper cauline leaves closely investing base of subcapitate inflorescence; calyx 13-20 mm; petals entire, bright pink. 2n = 24. {\i S.E. Europe, from S. Aegean region to S.W. Ukraine.} Bu Gr Rm Rs(W) Tu.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28 Plants from the Ukraine have been distinguished as{\i  S. hypanica} Klokov,{\i  Jour. Bot. Acad. Sci. Ukr.}{\b  5}: 20 (1948); they are said to differ mainly in the upper cauline leaves being herbaceous, not membranous, and in the brown, not black, seeds. They seem best regarded as a variant of {\b 126}.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 127. S. asterias }Griseb., {\i Spicil. Fl. Rumel.}{\b  1}: 168 (1843). Like {\b 125} but a rhizomatous perennial; stems up to 100 cm; inflorescence capitate, subtended by membranous bracts; cauline leaves few, lanceolate; calyx-teeth acute; petal-limb oblong, entire, deep purple; coronal scales short; capsule 5-7 mm, slightly shorter than the carpophore.{\i  Marshy places. • From N.W. Greece to N.W. Bulgaria.} Al Bu Gr Ju.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28 Sect. ELISANTHE (Fenzl) Fenzl (Sect.{\i  Melandriformes }(Boiss.) Chowdhuri). Annuals, biennials or perennials with large flowers, solitary or in dichasia; dioecious (except {\b 128}). Petal-limb bifid; coronal scales prominent; claw auriculate; styles 5 (3 in 128). Capsule without basal septa, dehiscing with 6 or 10 teeth; carpophore very short.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 128. S. noctiflora }L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 419 (1753) ({\i Melandrium noctiflorum} (L.) Fries). Annual; stems up to 40 cm, erect, simple or with few basal branches, densely hairy below, viscid with abundant glandular hairs above. Leaves ovate or ovate-lanceolate; cauline sessile. Inflorescence few-flowered; flowers large, hermaphrodite, scented in evening. Calyx 20-30 mm, 10-veined; teeth long, slender. Petal-limb pink above, yellowish beneath, inrolled during day, opening in evening; styles 3. Capsule ovoid-conical, more or less enclosed by calyx, dehiscing with 6 teeth. 2n = 24. {\i Cultivated ground. Widespread in Europe, but absent from or only casual in much of the southwest, north and many islands.} Au Be Br Bu Cz Ga Ge Gr He Ho Hu It Ju Po Rm Rs(B, C, W, K, E) Tu [Da Hb No Rs(N) Su].
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 129. S. latifolia }Poiret, {\i Voy. Barb.}{\b  2}: 165 (1789). Dioecious, short-lived perennial (sometimes annual) up to 80 cm, often much-branched, usually rather densely and softly hairy, and more or less glandular above. Leaves ovate or ovate-lanceolate; cauline sessile. Inflorescence a lax, compound dichasium of large flowers, opening in the evening and slightly scented. Calyx of male flowers 15-22 mm, 10-veined; of female 20-30 mm, 20-veined, more or less inflated and accrescent in fruit; calyx-teeth narrowly triangular. Petals usually white; styles 5. Capsule 10-25 mm, more or less ovoid, dehiscing with 10 teeth.{\i  Disturbed or cultivated ground. Almost throughout Europe.} All except Bl Cr Fa Is Sb; probably not native in Hb; naturalized in Az.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Calyx eglandular; seeds with acute tubercles ........ ({\b c}) subsp. {\b eriocalycina}
\par 
1 Calyx glandular; seeds with obtuse tubercles
\par 
2 Capsule 20-25 mm, subglobose ................................. ({\b d}) subsp. {\b mariziana}
\par 
2 Capsule 10-20 mm, ovoid
\par 
3 Calyx-teeth obtuse; capsule-teeth erect .............................. ({\b b}) subsp. {\b alba}
\par 
3 Calyx-teeth acuminate; capsule-teeth ± patent 
\par 
  or recurved ..................................................................... ({\b a}) subsp. {\b latifolia}
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b latifolia} ({\i Lychnis divaricata} Reichenb., L.{\i  macrocarpa} Boiss. & Reuter, {\i Melandrium boissieri} Schischkin,{\i  M. latifolium} (Poiret) Maire): Fruiting calyx glandular, strongly accrescent and inflated; teeth very long, acuminate. Capsule-teeth more or less patent or recurved on dehiscence. Seeds with concave faces and obtuse tubercles. 2n = 24.{\i  S. Europe}.
\par 
 ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b alba} (Miller) Greuter & Burdet, {\i Willdenowia}{\b  12}: 189 (1982) ({\i S. alba} (Miller) E.H.L. Krause,{\i  S. pratensis }(Rafn) Godron, {\i Melandrium album} (Miller) Garcke): Fruiting calyx glandular, slightly accrescent; teeth obtuse. Capsule-teeth erect on dehiscence. Seeds with plane faces and obtuse tubercles. 2n = 24.{\i  Almost throughout the range of the species}.
\par 
 ({\b c}) Subsp. {\b eriocalycina} (Boiss.) Greuter & Burdet,{\i  Willdenowia}{\b  12}: 189 (1982) ({\i Melandrium eriocalycinum} Boiss.): Like subsp. ({\b a}) but
\par 

\par 
211}
\par