{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 159. S. squamigera }Boiss.,{\i  Diagn. Pl. Or. Nov.}{\b  1}({\b 1}): 38 (1843). Like {\b 158} but branches more patent; flowers in lax, indistinct dichasia; calyx 14-15 mm, teeth ovate, obtuse; hairs on veins c. 1 mm, with bulbous base longer than the narrow distal part; carpophore pubescent; seeds 1-1·25 mm, with radially elongated tubercles on faces. {\i C. & S. Greece; E. Jugoslavia.} Gr Ju.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 160. S. gallinyi }Reichenb., {\i Fl. Germ. Excurs. }815 (1832) ({\i S. trinervia} Sebastiani & Mauri). Stems 20-60 cm, usually divaricately branched, pubescent with appressed hairs. Inflorescence of 1 to several 3- to 8-flowered, long-stalked raceme-like monochasial cymes; flowers subsessile, usually slightly overlapping. Calyx 13-20 mm, clavate in fruit, greenish; hairs on veins less than 1 mm, the relative length of the bulbous base variable. Petal-limb c. 6-7 mm, pink. Capsule 8-10 mm; carpophore 5-8 mm, pubescent, slender. Seeds 0·75-0·9 mm, reniform; faces slightly concavo-convex, tuberculate-ridged; back wide, more or less plane, with 4 rows of low, rounded tubercles. 2n = 24.{\i  Balkan peninsula, extending to S.W. Romania and C. Italy.} Al Bu Gr It Ju Rm Tu.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28 Sect. EUDIANTHE (Reichenb.) A. Braun. Annuals. Inflorescence a very lax, irregular, several-flowered dichasium; lower pedicels 4-10, upper 2-6 times as long as calyx. Styles 5. Capsule dehiscing with 5 bifid teeth. Seeds 0·6-1 mm, subreniform, more or less umbilicate at hilum; faces convex, with obtuse, conical tubercles; back very broad and convex, with acute tubercles.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 161. S. laeta }(Aiton) Godron in Gren. & Godron, {\i Fl. Fr.}{\b  1}: 220 (1847) ({\i Eudianthe laeta} (Aiton) Willk.; incl.{\i  S. loiseleurii} Godron). Whole plant glabrous, or upper part of stems, pedicels and calyx-veins sparsely spinulose-papillose (var.{\i  loiseleurii} (Godron) Rouy & Fouc.). Leaves linear-lanceolate. Calyx 6-10 mm, broadly campanulate and widest at mouth in fruit; bands of thickened tissue present between veins; tube 2-3 times as long as the triangular-acuminate, often patent teeth. Petal-limb 4-10 mm, pink. Capsule 5-10 mm, globose to ovoid; carpophore 1-2 mm, glabrous. 2n = 24. {\i Damp places. S.W. Europe, extending eastwards to C. Italy.} Co Ga Hs It Lu Sa.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 162. S. coeli-rosa} (L.) Godron in Gren. & Godron,{\i  op. cit.} 221 (1847) ({\i Eudianthe coeli-rosa} (L.) Reichenb.). Whole plant glabrous. Stems 20-50 cm. Leaves linear-lanceolate. Calyx 15-28 mm, subclavate and contracted at mouth in fruit, deeply sulcate between veins, with transverse undulations on each side of grooves; tube 2-3 times as long as the linear, acuminate or acute, usually patent teeth; petal-limb 1-2 cm, pink. Capsule (7-)10-17 mm; carpophore (5-)7-12 mm, glabrous.{\i  W. & C. Mediterranean region.} Co Hs It Lu Sa Si [Hu].
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28 Sect. ERECTOREFRACTAE Chowdhuri. Annuals; stems glandular-pubescent. Inflorescence of raceme-like monochasial cymes, or dichasial; angle of pedicels to axis changing after flowering. Calyx usually contracted at mouth.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 163. S. pendula }L.,{\i  Sp. Pl.} 418 (1753). Stems 15-40 cm, procumbent-ascending, branched, pubescent. Cauline leaves 2-5 cm, ovate to ovate-lanceolate, acute, pubescent. Inflorescence very lax, of raceme-like monochasial cymes. Pedicels usually erect in flower, patent or deflexed in fruit. Calyx 13-18 mm, obovoid in fruit, contracted at mouth, very inflated and loose, with wide hyaline bands between the prominent, narrow veins; teeth short, ovate or triangular, obtuse. Petal-limb 7-10 mm, pink, rarely white. Capsule 9-12 mm, ovoid-conical; carpophore 3-6 mm. Seeds 1·3-1·4 mm, subglobose, blackish, faces convex or plano-convex, with concentric rings of small tubercles; back convex or plano-convex, with 7 or 8 rows of tubercles. 2n = 24. {\i Italy; cultivated for ornament, and a frequent casual elsewhere.} It [Hs.].
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28 The plant commonly cultivated is a {\i flore pleno} variant.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 164. S. psammitis }Link ex Sprengel, {\i Novi Provent. }39 (1818) ({\i S. agrostemma} Boiss. & Reuter; incl. {\i S. lasiostyla} Boiss.). Stems 10-20 cm, ascending, much-branched, glandular-pubescent. Basal and lower cauline leaves usually 1-3 cm, linear-lanceolate or linear, somewhat fleshy, often crowded. Inflorescence a few-flowered, usually condensed monochasial cyme; lower pedicels usually longer than calyx, erect in flower, patent or deflexed in fruit. Calyx 13-18 mm, contracted at mouth, straight, less distinctly inflated in fruit than in {\b 163}, with wide hyaline bands between the prominent, narrow veins. Petals pink, rarely white. Capsule 9-12 mm, ovoid; carpophore 3-6 mm, glabrous. Seeds 0·8-1·2 mm, otherwise like those of {\b 163}. 2n = 24. {\i Spain and Portugal.} Hs Lu.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 165. S. littorea }Brot.,{\i  Fl. Lusit.}{\b  2}:186 (1805) (incl. {\i S. adscendens} Lag.). Stems 5-15 cm, ascending, much-branched, glandular-pubescent. Basal and lower cauline leaves oblong-obovate to linear-oblong. Inflorescence a few-flowered, usually condensed, leafy monochasial cyme; lower pedicels usually equalling or shorter than the calyx. Calyx 10-19 mm, subclavate but not loose and inflated in fruit, with narrow hyaline bands, not or scarcely contracted at mouth. Petal-limb purplish-pink or white. Capsule 6-9 mm, ovoid; carpophore (2·5-)4-9 mm. Seeds 0·6-0·8 mm, reniform; faces convex, reticulate-pitted, rather smooth; back slightly grooved or plane, smooth. 2n = 24.{\i  Maritime sands. Spain and Portugal.} Hs Lu.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28 Plants from maritime sands in Islas Baleares and one locality in E. Spain have been called {\b S. cambessedesii} Boiss. & Reuter,{\i  Pugillus} 18 (1852). They differ from {\b 165} principally in the longer calyx, capsule and carpophore, and are possibly subspecifically distinct.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 166. S. oropediorum }Cosson, {\i Ill. Fl. Atl. }{\b 1}: 132 (1891). Like {\b 165} but taller and more erect; seeds 0·8-1·2 mm, deeply grooved and striate.{\i  Weed of cultivation. E. Spain} ({\i Albacete prov}.). Hs. ({\i N. Africa}.)
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 167. S. stockenii }Chater, {\i Lagascalia }{\b 3}: 219 (1973). Like {\b 165} but basal leaves linear-spathulate; cauline leaves linear-oblanceolate or linear; inflorescence lax; calyx (17-)19-25 mm; petal-limb bright pink; claw yellowish-white; carpophore 5-9 mm; seeds 0·7-1 mm. 2n = 24. • {\i S. Spain} ({\i Prov. Cádiz}). Hs.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 168. S. germana }Gay in Cosson, {\i Not. Pl. Crit.} 31 (1849). ({\i S. boissieri} Gay). Stems 10-20 cm, erect, usually branched. Basal leaves ovate-spathulate; cauline linear-lanceolate to linear. Flowers 3-8 in more or less regular dichasia, sometimes solitary; pedicels of lower flowers often equalling, of the upper shorter than, calyx, usually nodding in flower, erect in fruit. Calyx 11-15 mm, oblong in flower, ovoid in fruit, toothed for 1/4-1/3 of its length with lanceolate, acute or triangular, acuminate teeth; veins rather wide, not or obscurely anastomosing. Petal-limb 3-4 mm, white; claw exserted. Capsule 8-11 mm, ovoid; carpophore 2-4 mm, glabrous. Seeds c. 1 mm, reniform, chestnut or blackish-brown, faces slightly concavo-convex, tuberculate-ridged; back wide, more or less plane, with 3 or 4 rows of tubercles. 2n = 24. •{\i  S. Spain.} Hs.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 169. S. almolae }Gay in Cosson,{\i  loc. cit. }(1849). Like {\b 168} but stems always simple, less viscid, sometimes subglabrous in part;
\par 

\par
215}
\par