{\rtf1\ansi \deff4\deflang1033{\fonttbl{\f4\froman\fcharset0\fprq2 Times New Roman;}}{\colortbl;\red0\green0\blue0;\red0\green0\blue255;\red0\green255\blue255;\red0\green255\blue0;\red255\green0\blue255;\red255\green0\blue0;\red255\green255\blue0;\red255\green255\blue255;\red0\green0\blue128;\red0\green128\blue128;\red0\green128\blue0;\red128\green0\blue128;\red128\green0\blue0;\red128\green128\blue0;\red128\green128\blue128;\red192\green192\blue192;}{\stylesheet{\widctlpar \f4\fs20\lang2057 \snext0 Normal;}{\*\cs10 \additive Default Paragraph Font;}}{\info{\author dddd}{\operator dddd}{\creatim\yr1998\mo11\dy11\hr16\min40}{\revtim\yr1998\mo11\dy11\hr16\min41}{\version2}{\edmins1}{\nofpages4}{\nofwords968}{\nofchars5522}{\*\company  }{\vern57431}}\widowctrl\ftnbj\aenddoc\hyphcaps0 \fet0\sectd \linex0 {\*\pnseclvl1\pnucrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl2\pnucltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl3\pndec\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl4\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl5\pndec\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl6\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl7\pnlcrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl8\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl9\pnlcrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}
\pard\plain \ \f4\fs20\lang2057 {\fs28 Often confused with }{\b\fs28 178}{\fs28  and best distinguished by the seeds.
\par 
\par Plants from S. Italy, Sicilia and Greece with the calyx c. 10 mm, and carpophore and capsule 4-5 mm, have been called }{\b\fs28 S. canescens}{\fs28  Ten., }{\i\fs28 Prodr}{\b\fs28 . }{\i\fs28 Fl. Nap}{\b\fs28 .}{\fs28  xxv (1811), and may be worth subspecific rank.
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 187. S. secundiflora }{\fs28 Otth in DC.,}{\i\fs28  Prodr.}{\b\fs28  1}{\fs28 : 375 (1824) (}{\i\fs28 S. glauca}{\fs28  Pourret ex Lag., non Salisb.). Like }{\b\fs28 186}{\fs28  but leaves usually ovate-lanceolate and often subglabrous; lowest pedicels sometimes up to twice as long as calyx; bracts of a pair usually more or less equal; calyx 13-16 mm; teeth lanceolate, acute; veins more conspicuously anastomosing; carpophore 4\'b75-6 mm; seeds 2 mm or more. 2n = 24.}{\i\fs28  S. & E. Spain; Islas Baleares.}{\fs28  Bl Hs ?Lu.
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 188. S. apetala }{\fs28 Willd.,}{\i\fs28  Sp. Pl.}{\b\fs28  2}{\fs28 (}{\b\fs28 1}{\fs28 ): 703 (1799) (incl. }{\i\fs28 S. decipiens }{\fs28 Barc., non Ball). Whole plant pubescent; stems 10-35 cm, erect, branched, especially at base. Leaves lanceolate to linear-lanceolate; upper ovate-lanceolate. Lower pedicels as long as or up to 3 times as long as calyx. Calyx 7-10 mm, ellipsoid-cylindrical, becoming broadly campanulate in fruit; teeth triangular, acute. Petals absent, or included in calyx, or exserted, with bifid limb up to c. 3 mm. Capsule 6-7\'b75 mm; carpophore 1-2 mm. Seeds 1 mm or less, dull blackish-brown. 2n = 24.}{\i\fs28  S.W. Europe; locally elsewhere in the Mediterranean region.}{\fs28  Al Bl Cr ?Gr Hs It Lu Sa Si.
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 189. S. longicaulis }{\fs28 Pourret ex Lag.,}{\i\fs28  Gen. Sp. Nov.}{\fs28  15 (1816). Stems 10-40 cm, simple or little-branched, pubescent or hispid, glabrescent above; upper internodes very long. Leaves ovate-lanceolate to subspathulate, pubescent. Lower pedicels (1-)2-5 times as long as calyx. Calyx 9-13 mm, oblong-cylindrical, becoming campanulate-subclavate in fruit, pubescent on veins or glabrous; teeth triangular, acute. Petal-limb c. 5 mm, bifid, pink. Capsule 7\'b75-11 mm; carpophore 2\'b75-3\'b75 mm. Seeds 1-1\'b75 mm, chestnut-brown. 2n = 24.}{\i\fs28  Sandy places, mainly maritime. C. & S. Portugal; S.W. Spain.}{\fs28  Hs Lu.
\par 
\par Sect. CONOMORPHA Otth. Annuals. Inflorescence of lax dichasia. Calyx 15- to 60-veined; veins usually prominent, parallel. Seeds reniform; faces plane or slightly concave, usually striate; back wide, with shallow groove.
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 190. S. ammophila }{\fs28 Boiss. & Heldr. in Boiss., }{\i\fs28 Diagn. Pl. Or. Nov.}{\b\fs28  2}{\fs28 (}{\b\fs28 8}{\fs28 ): 82 (1849). Whole plant grey-pubescent; stems up to 15 cm, branched at base, procumbent or ascending, viscid above. Lower leaves up to 1\'b75 cm, more or less obtuse. Flowers pink. Calyx cylindrical, becoming broadly campanulate in fruit, 15- to 20-veined; tube twice as long as the lanceolate, acute teeth. Capsule ovoid, subsessile. \bullet }{\i\fs28  S. Aegean region.}{\fs28  Cr.
\par 
\par  (}{\b\fs28 a}{\fs28 ) Subsp. }{\b\fs28 ammophila}{\fs28 : Calyx 5-7 mm. Petal-limb 1-2 mm, emarginate. Capsule 3-4 mm. }{\i\fs28 Maritime sands. E. Kriti and Gaidhouronisi}{\fs28 .
\par  (}{\b\fs28 b}{\fs28 ) Subsp. }{\b\fs28 carpathae}{\fs28  Chowdhuri, }{\i\fs28 Notes Roy. Bot. Gard. Edinb.}{\b\fs28  22}{\fs28 : 278 (1957): Calyx 7-9\'b75 mm. Petal-limb 3-4 mm, entire. Capsule 5-7 mm. }{\i\fs28 Karpathos}{\fs28 .
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 191. S. macrodonta }{\fs28 Boiss., }{\i\fs28 Diagn. Pl. Or. Nov.}{\b\fs28  1}{\fs28 (}{\b\fs28 1}{\fs28 ): 37 (1843). Stems 10-30 cm, erect, densely and shortly pubescent. Leaves linear to lanceolate. Dichasia up to 15-flowered. Calyx 14-17 mm, 60-veined; veins slender, not prominent. Petal-limb white or pink, emarginate to bifid. Capsule 8-10 mm, shorter than calyx; carpophore 1-2\'b75 mm. }{\i\fs28 S. Aegean region}{\fs28  (}{\i\fs28 Karpathos}{\fs28 ). Cr. (}{\i\fs28 S.W. Asia.}{\fs28 )
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 192. S. conica }{\fs28 L., }{\i\fs28 Sp. Pl.}{\fs28  418 (1753). Whole plant pubescent; dichasia 5- to 30-flowered. Calyx 30-veined, toothed for c. 1/3 of its length with acuminate teeth, shortly pubescent, glandular or eglandular. Petal-limb 3-5 mm. Capsule 7-12 mm, obovoid-conical. Seeds 0\'b775-1 mm, pruinose. }{\i\fs28 W., S. & S.C. Europe.}{\fs28  Al Au Be Br Bu Cr Cz Ga Ge Gr Ho Hs Hu It Ju Lu Rm Rs(W, K) Si Tu [Da He Po Su].
\par 
\par }
\pard \li200\ {\fs28 1 Carpophore 1-4 mm; calyx 13-18 mm .......................... (}{\b\fs28 b}{\fs28 ) subsp. }{\b\fs28 subconica}{\fs28 
\par 1 Carpophore less than 1 mm; calyx 8-15 mm
\par 2 Lower leaves obtuse; stems usually ascending ................. (}{\b\fs28 c}{\fs28 ) subsp. }{\b\fs28 sartorii}{\fs28 
\par 2 Lower leaves acute; stems erect ......................................... (}{\b\fs28 a}{\fs28 ) subsp. }{\b\fs28 conica}{\fs28 
\par 
\par }
\pard \ {\fs28  (}{\b\fs28 a}{\fs28 ) Subsp. }{\b\fs28 conica}{\fs28 : Stems 15-50 cm, erect. Lower leaves oblong to linear-lanceolate, acute. Calyx 10-15 mm, obovoid-cylindrical in flower, broadly obovoid in fruit. Petal-limb comparatively narrow, pink, rarely white, bifid. Capsule 7-12 mm; carpophore less than 1 mm. 2n = 20.}{\i\fs28  Almost throughout the range of the species, but absent from most of S.E. Europe and Ukraine}{\fs28 .
\par  (}{\b\fs28 b}{\fs28 ) Subsp. }{\b\fs28 subconica}{\fs28  (Friv.) Gavioli in Fiori & B\'e9guinot,}{\i\fs28  Sched. Fl. Ital. Exsicc.,}{\fs28  ser. 3, }{\b\fs28 16}{\fs28 : 363 (1927) (}{\i\fs28 S. subconica}{\fs28  Friv.; incl.}{\i\fs28  S. juvenalis}{\fs28  Delile, }{\i\fs28 S. tempskyana}{\fs28  Freyn & Sint.): Plant glandular-pubescent. Stems 15-50 cm, erect. Lower leaves oblong- to linear-lanceolate, acute. Calyx 13-18 mm, cylindrical in flower, broadly obovoid in fruit. Petal-limb comparatively wide, pink, emarginate (claw sometimes much exceeding calyx,}{\i\fs28  S. subconica }{\fs28 var.}{\i\fs28  grisebachii}{\fs28  Davidov). Capsule 7-8 mm; carpophore 1-4 mm. 2n = 20.}{\i\fs28  S.E. Europe; Italy}{\fs28 .
\par  (}{\b\fs28 c}{\fs28 ) Subsp. }{\b\fs28 sartorii}{\fs28  (Boiss. & Heldr.) Chater & Walters,}{\i\fs28  Feddes Repert.}{\b\fs28  69}{\fs28 : 49 (1964) (}{\i\fs28 S. sartorii}{\fs28  Boiss. & Heldr.): Stems 5-20 cm, usually ascending. Lower leaves obovate-spathulate, obtuse. Calyx 8-13 mm, cylindrical in flower, obovoid in fruit. Petal-limb comparatively wide, pink, bifid. Capsule 8-10 mm, ovoid-conical; carpophore less than 1 mm. 2n = 20. }{\i\fs28 S. part of Aegean region.}{\fs28 
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 193. S. lydia }{\fs28 Boiss.,}{\i\fs28  Diagn. Pl. Or. Nov.}{\b\fs28  1}{\fs28 (}{\b\fs28 1}{\fs28 ): 37 (1843). Like }{\b\fs28 192}{\fs28 (}{\b\fs28 a}{\fs28 ) but stems more strongly pubescent and viscid above; upper cauline leaves long-acuminate; calyx with short glandular hairs and long eglandular hairs; teeth longer, often up to \'bd as long as calyx. }{\i\fs28 E. part of Balkan peninsula.}{\fs28  Bu Gr ?Ju Tu.
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 194. S. conoidea }{\fs28 L., Sp. Pl. 418 (1753). Like }{\b\fs28 192}{\fs28 (}{\b\fs28 a}{\fs28 ) but leaves wider and less densely pubescent, often subglabrous; calyx 15-28 mm, attenuate above in flower; petal-limb entire or slightly emarginate; capsule 12-18 mm, long-attenuate above; seeds 1\'b725-1\'b75 mm, dark chestnut-brown. 2n = 20. S.W. Europe; Turkey-in-Europe. Ga Hs *It Tu.
\par 
\par }
\pard \qc\ {\fs28  }{\b\fs28 29.           Cucubalus}{\fs28                 L.
\par }{\fs24  S.M. Walters.
\par 
\par }
\pard \ {\fs28 Like }{\i\fs28 Silene}{\fs28  but fruit indehiscent, somewhat fleshy and berry-like when ripe.
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 1. C. baccifer }{\fs28 L.,}{\i\fs28  Sp. Pl.}{\fs28  414 (1753). Weak-stemmed, pubescent perennial herb up to 120 cm, with divaricate branches. Leaves ovate, acuminate, entire; petioles short. Inflorescence a lax, few-flowered dichasium with leaf-like bracts. Calyx 8-15 mm, broadly campanulate, indistinctly veined, with 5 long, obtuse teeth revolute in fruiting stage. Petals greenish-white, deeply bifid. Fruit 6-8 mm, black, globose; carpophore 2-3 mm. Seeds 1\'b75 mm, black. 2n = 24.}{\i\fs28  Europe northwards to c.}{\fs28  60\'b0}{\i\fs28  N. in W. Russia, but rare in much of the Mediterranean region.}{\fs28  Al Au Be *Br Bu Cz Ga Ge ?Gr He Ho Hs Hu It Ju Lu Po Rm Rs(B, C, W, K, E) Si Tu.
\par 
\par 218}
\par }