{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 9. A. trichomanes-ramosum} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 1082 (1753) ({\i A. viride }Hudson). Rhizome caespitose; scales without dark central stripe. Leaves 5-15(-20) cm; petiole c. 1/3 as long as the lamina, reddish-brown at the base, abruptly becoming green; lamina linear to linear-lanceolate, light green, pinnate, thin, glabrous; rhachis green, not winged, with occasional glandular hairs; pinnae c. 5 mm, often convex, especially when young, semi-circular to suborbicular, crenate to incised, broadly cuneate at the base. Sori small, elliptical, but the sporangia often covering the entire surface of the lamina at maturity. 2n = 72.{\i  Mainly calcareous rock-crevices and ledges. Most of Europe, mainly in the mountains}. Al Au Be Br Bu Co Cr Cz Fe Ga Ge Gr Hb He Ho Hs Hu Is It Ju No Po Rm Rs(N, C, W, K) Su.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 10. A. bourgaei} Boiss. ex Milde,{\i  Bot. Zeit. }{\b 24:} 384 (1866). Rhizome caespitose. Leaves 4-28 cm; petiole up to 1/3 as long as the lamina, green above, blackish below; lamina linear-lanceolate, 1-pinnate; pinnae 8-20 opposite pairs, the acroscopic base adnate, forming a wing on the rhachis, pinnatifid, the segments crenulate towards the apex. 2n = 72.{\i  Shady crevices of limestone rocks. Karpathos.} Cr. ({\i E. Mediterranean region.})
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 11. A. jahandiezii} (Litard.) Rouy, {\i Fl. Fr. }{\b 14:} 437 (1913). Leaves 3-12 cm; petiole 1/6-1/4 as long as the lamina, green, with occasional narrow scales; lamina linear-elliptical, pinnate, with occasional scales on the rhachis and costules; pinnae 0·5-1 cm, adnate to the rhachis, the lower margin decurrent in a narrow wing, oblong, serrate, occasionally incised at the base. Sori lying near the midrib. 2n = 72. {\i Limestone cliffs. • S.E. France} ({\i Gorges du Verdon, Var}). Ga.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 12. A. majoricum} Litard.,{\i  Bull. Géogr. Bot.} ({\i Le Mans}){\b  19:} 28 (1911) ({\i A. lanceolatum} var.{\i  majoricum} (Litard.) Sennen & Pau). Rhizome erect; scales without dark central stripe. Leaves 8-12 cm, the petiole c. 1/3 as long as the lamina, dark at the base, shiny black beneath, greenish above; lamina elliptical to oblanceolate, pinnate-pinnatifid; rhachis green above, black below for ½ its length; median pinnae 8-10 mm, the lower progressively smaller and distant, pinnatifid or deeply lobed, the segments with wide, obtuse teeth without a mucro. Sori small, lying near the midrib of the pinna; indusium persistent, deeply and conspicuously lobed; exospores (39-)42-48(-51) µm. irregularly echinulate, sometimes with cristate wings. 2n = 144.{\i  Dry stone walls.  • Islas Baleares}. Bl.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 13. A. fontanum} (L.) Bernh. in Schrader,{\i  Jour. für die Bot. }{\b 1799}({\b 1}): 314 (1799) ({\i A. halleri} DC.). Rhizome erect; scales lanceolate, dark brown. Leaves 5-25 cm; petiole 1/3-1/2 as long as the lamina, reddish-brown at the base, soon becoming straw-coloured or greenish; lamina lanceolate to narrowly elliptical, thin, light green, 2-pinnate, the lower pinnae decreasing in length towards the base of the leaf; rhachis with occasional glandular hairs; pinnae 0·5-1·5 cm, with 3-8 pairs of pinnules, the terminal segment ¼ as long as the pinna or less; pinnules pinnatifid, with mucronate lobes. Sori lying near the midrib. 2n = 72.{\i  Calcareous rocks. S. & C. Europe.} ?Au †Be Bl Co Cr ?Cz Ga Ge Gr He Ho Hs †Hu It.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 14. A. foreziense} Legrand,{\i  Bull. Soc. Dauph. Ech. Pl.}{\b  12:} 501 (1885) ({\i A. forisiense} Legrand,{\i  A. foresiacum} (Legrand) Christ; incl.{\i  A. macedonicum} Kümmerle,{\i  A. bornmuelleri} Kümmerle). Like {\b 13} but rhizome with filiform scales at the apex; leaves 10-20 cm; petiole reddish-brown, becoming green at the base of the rhachis; lamina lanceolate, acuminate, thicker, the lower pinnae not decreasing in length to any marked extent towards the base of the leaf; pinnae with 1-3 pairs of toothed, rounded pinnules, the terminal segment about 1/2 as long as the pinna, not deeply cut. 2n = 144.{\i  Siliceous rocks. • S.W. Europe, extending locally northwards to the Netherlands and eastwards to S. Jugoslavia.} †Be Co Ga Ge He Ho Hs It Ju Sa.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 15. A. obovatum} Viv., {\i Fl. Lib.} 68 (1824). Rhizome-scales narrow, becoming filiform at the apex of the rhizome. Leaves 15-30 cm; petiole up to as long as the lamina, but not less than ½ its length, not swollen below, light reddish-brown, with few filiform scales; lamina ovate-lanceolate, acuminate, bright green, glabrous, 2-pinnate, the rhachis and midrib with occasional filiform scales; pinnae 2-4 cm, ovate-triangular, pinnately divided only in proximal ½, pinnatifid distally; pinnules suborbicular, with obtuse, mucronate teeth. Sori ovate, nearer margin than midrib. {\i Ledges, rocks and walls, often near the sea. • W. Europe and Mediterranean region}. Az Be Br Co Cr Ga Gr Hb He Hs He It ?Ju Lu Sa Si Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b obovatum} : Pinnae 2-4 cm, ovate-triangular, pinnately divided only in the proximal ½, pinnatifid distally; pinnules suborbicular, almost crenate with obtuse or rounded teeth only faintly mucronate. 2n = 72. {\i Mediterranean region; Portugal and one station in N.W. France}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp.{\b  lanceolatum} (Fiori) P. Silva, {\i Agron. Lusit.}{\b  20:} 217 (1959) ({\i A. lanceolatum} Hudson, non Forskål, {\i A. billotii} F.W. Schultz, {\i A. obovatum} var.{\i  billotii} (F.W. Schultz) Becherer): Pinnae 3-7 cm, linear-oblong, pinnate for most of their length, the longer pinnae often recurved; pinnules oblong, with acute, mucronate teeth. 2n = 144.{\i  W. Europe, extending eastwards to Switzerland and S. Italy}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Diploid plants with the morphology of subsp. ({\b b}) have been found in S. Spain and need further investigation.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   {\b 16. A. balearicum} Shivas, {\i Brit. Fern Gaz.}{\b  10:} 75 (1969). Rhizome short, erect; scales c. 4 mm, subulate, brown. Leaves c. 18 × 5 cm; petiole shorter than the lamina, not swollen below, brown, with a few subulate scales; lamina triangular, 2-pinnate or 2-pinnate-pinnatifid; pinnae up to 7 pairs, triangular, obliquely inserted; pinnules ovate to elliptical, the lowermost with mucronate lobes. Sori ovate, between the midrib and margin of the pinnule. 2n = 144.{\i  Non-calcareous rocks and forest floors. • W. Mediterranean region}. Bl Co It Sa Si.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    ({\b 17-19}).{\b  A. adiantum-nigrum} group. Rhizome ascending or short-creeping; scales attenuate, with some filiform scales at apex of rhizome. Leaves 10-50 cm; petiole about as long as the lamina, swollen at junction with rhizome, reddish-brown, with narrow scales at the base; lamina deltate, dark green, coriaceous, glabrous, 2- or 3-pinnate; pinnae triangular-ovate to lanceolate, the longest 2·5-7 cm; pinnules pinnatisect. Sori adjacent to the midrib.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 A group of three closely related species.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Leaves and pinnae distinctly caudate; mean exospore length 25-30 µm.
  ..................................................................................................... {\b 18. onopteris}
\par
1 Leaves and pinnae rarely caudate; mean exospore-length greater 
\par
  than 30 µm.
2 Ultimate leaf-segments lanceolate to linear, with acute teeth
\par
  ........................................................................................ {\b 17. adiantum-nigrum}
\par
2 Ultimate leaf-segments flabellate, with obtuse teeth ............ {\b 19. cuneifolium}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 17. A. adiantum-nigrum} L.,{\i  Sp. Pl.} 1081 (1753). Lamina not caudate, dark green, usually longer than the petiole. Ultimate segments lanceolate, obtuse at the base, with acute teeth; mean stomata guard-cell length 50-62 µm. Exospores (30-)31-37(-45) µm. 2n = 144.{\i  Rocks, walls and hedge-banks. S}.,
\par

\par
21}
\par