{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 calyx eglandular and seeds with acute tubercles. {\i S.E. Europe,from E. Jugoslavia to Turkey-in-Europe}.
\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b d}) Subsp. {\b mariziana} (Gand.) Greuter & Burdet, {\i Willdenowia }{\b 12}:189 (1982) ({\i Melandrium marizianum} Gand.): Like subsp. ({\b a}) but plant densely glandular-tomentose; leaves thicker; capsule 20-25 mm, subglobose.{\i  Coastal rocks. • W. Portugal; N.W. Spain}.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b S. astrachanica} (Pacz.) Takht.,{\i  Krasnaya Kniga }48 (1975) ({\i Melandrium astrachanicum} Pacz.), from S.E. Russia (Volga delta), is closely related to {\b 129}. It is said to differ in being biennial, with rather narrow, ovate-lanceolate basal leaves and eglandular calyx 10-15 mm. Its relationship to {\b 129} ({\b b}) and ({\b c}) requires further investigation.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 130. S. marizii }Samp., {\i Ann. Sci. Acad. Polyt. Porto}{\b  4}: 126 (1909) ({\i Melandrium viscosum} Mariz, non (Pers.) Celak.,{\i  M. glutinosum} Rouy). Like {\b 129} but always perennial, foetid; stems densely glandular-hairy, with soft, flexuous, viscid hairs; all leaves sessile, glandular; basal leaves spathulate to oblanceolate; cauline leaves lanceolate to ovate-elliptical; flowers open in daytime; calyx densely glandular-hairy; calyx of male flowers 9-15 mm, that of female flowers 10-20 mm; corolla white or pale pink; capsule 10-20 mm, ovoid to conical. 2n = 24.{\i  Rocky ground. • C. Spain, N. Portugal.} Hs Lu.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 131. S. dioica }(L.) Clairv., {\i Mazz. Herb. Suisse }145 (1811) ({\i Melandrium dioicum} (L.) Cosson & Germ., {\i M. rubrum} (Weigel) Garcke, {\i M. silvestre} (Schkuhr) Röhling,{\i  Lychnis rubra} (Weigel) Patze, E.H.F. Meyer & Elkan). Like {\b 129} but always perennial; stems eglandular or almost so; leaves broadly ovate; flowers usually red, open in daytime; calyx 10-15 mm, teeth broadly triangular; capsule 10-15 mm, globose to broadly ovoid, dehiscing with recurved teeth. 2n = 24.{\i  Usually in woodland. Much of Europe, but rare in the south and east.} Au Be Br Bu Cz Da Fa Fe Ga Ge Hb He Ho Hs Hu Is It Ju No Po Rm Rs(N, B, C, W) Su [Is (Rs(K)].
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28 Widespread and variable in habit; dwarf variants occur on mountains, exposed rocks and sand-dunes.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28 Hybrids with {\b 129}, usually having pale pink flowers, occur frequently where the two species meet; they are fully fertile.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 132. S. heuffelii }Soó,{\i  Feddes Repert.}{\b  69}: 48 (1964) ({\i Melandrium nemorale} Heuffel ex Reichenb.). Like {\b 129} but usually biennial; calyx 10-12(-15) mm, sparsely hairy, inconspicuously 10-veined, broadly campanulate in fruit, with triangular teeth; capsule c. 10 mm, subglobose, dehiscing with recurved teeth. 2n = 24.{\i  Woods in hilly regions. • Romania and N. half of Balkan peninsula.} Au Bu Gr Ju Rm.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28 Resembles {\b 129} in habit and flower colour, but {\b 131} in capsule; the calyx, particularly in fruiting specimens, distinguishes it from both.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 133. S. diclinis }(Lag.) Laínz, {\i Bol. Inst. Estud. Astur.} ({\i Supl. Ci.}) {\b 6}: 45 (1963) ({\i Lychnis diclinis} Lag.,{\i  Melandrium dicline} (Lag.) Willk.). Dioecious, rhizomatous perennial with decumbent, branched stems up to 20 cm, bearing lanceolate, 1-veined leaves and clothed with long, soft, white eglandular hairs. Flowers usually solitary in leaf-axils; pedicels long. Calyx of female flowers 11-14 mm, 20-veined; of male flowers 9-10 mm, 10-veined. Petal-limb deep pink, shallowly bifid (for up to ¼ of its length) in female flowers, emarginate and smaller in male; coronal scales prominent, lanceolate, acute; petal-claw long; auricles acute. Filaments glabrous; styles 5, hairy. Capsule c. 8 mm, ovoid; carpophore less than 1 mm. Seeds 1·5-2 mm, pale, reniform, with convex face and rounded back, tuberculate. 2n = 24.{\i  Calcareous rocky slopes. • E. Spain} ({\i near Játiva}). Hs.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28 Sect. RIGIDULAE (Boiss.) Schischkin. Annuals; stems branched rigid, often filiform, viscid above. Cauline leaves usually fasciculate. Inflorescence very lax, composed of divaricately-branched, equal dichasia; pedicels usually 1-4 times as long as calyx. Calyx not inflated, not contracted at mouth in fruit. Seeds broadly reniform, with flat or slightly convex faces.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 134. S. portensis }L.,{\i  Sp. Pl}. ed. 2, 600 (1762). Stems 15-40 cm, usually divaricately branched, puberulent or glabrous. Rosette-leaves oblong-spathulate, obtuse, rarely persistent; cauline linear, acute. Calyx 11-16 mm, clavate in fruit, glabrous; teeth short, ovate, obtuse or apiculate. Petal-limb c. 6 mm, bifid to c. half-way pink, rarely whitish; claw slightly exserted. Capsule 5-10 mm, carpophore 6-9 mm, pubescent. Seeds 0·75-1 mm, blackish to pale brown; faces slightly concave, striate, with subconical tubercles at edge; back wide, plane or slightly convex, with 1 or 2 rows of subconical tubercles.{\i  W. Europe, northwards to N.W. France; C. & S.E. Greece.} ?Co Ga Gr Hs Lu.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b portensis}: Capsule 5-6 mm, shorter than the carpophore. 2n = 24. •{\i  W. Europe}.
\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b rigidula} Greuter & Burdet,{\i  Willdenowia}{\b  12}: 190 (1982) ({\i S. rigidula} Sm., non L.,{\i  S. vittata} Stapf): Capsule 6-10 mm, more or less equalling the carpophore. 2n = 24.{\i  C. & S.E. Greece}.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28 Plants from S. Greece (Korinthos), described as{\b  S. corinthiaca} Boiss. & Heldr. in Boiss.,{\i  Fl. Or., Suppl.,} 96 (1888), differ especially in having the back of the seed distinctly grooved, and require further investigation.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 135. S. echinosperma }Boiss. & Heldr. in Boiss., {\i Diagn. Pl. Or. Nov.}{\b  2}({\b 8}): 78 (1849). Like {\b 134}({\b a}) but usually taller; petal-limb white, with purplish veins; seeds 1-1·4 mm, the faces somewhat concavo-convex, the back wider, with 4 rows of acute, conical tubercles. {\i Shady rocks. • S. Greece} ({\i Taïyetos}). Gr.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 136. S. pinetorum }Boiss. & Heldr. in Boiss.,{\i  Diagn. Pl. Or. Nov.}{\b  2}({\b 8}): 75 (1849). Stems 5-20 cm, branched, puberulent below, glabrous above. Basal leaves often in a rosette, spathulate, obtuse uppermost linear-lanceolate, acute. Calyx 4-7·5 mm, clavate in fruit, glabrous; teeth short, ovate, rounded. Petals pink; claw scarcely exserted; limb 2-3 mm, bifid. Capsule 3·5-4·5 mm; carpophore 2-3 mm, slender, glabrous. Seeds 0·6-0·8 mm, pale brown faces slightly concave, very finely striate; back very wide, plane or slightly concave, smooth or finely striate. • {\i Kriti}. Cr.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 137. S. inaperta }L., {\i Sp. Pl. }419 (1753). Stems 15-40 cm, erect, often simple below, divaricately branched above, puberulent. Leaves all narrowly linear, acute. Calyx 7-10 mm, oblong-clavate in fruit, glabrous; teeth short, ovate, acute or apiculate. Petals absent or included in calyx. Capsule 5-8 mm; carpophore 2-3·5 mm, stout, slightly pubescent. Seeds 0·6-0·8 mm, dark chestnut or blackish-brown; faces more or less plane, striate; back narrow, more or less acutely grooved, striate. 2n = 24. {\i S.W. Europe.} Co Ga Hs It Lu.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28 Sect. ATOCION Otth. Annuals; stems erect, usually slender, not rigid, viscid above. Inflorescence a dichasial or monochasial cyme. Calyx not contracted at mouth in fruit. Seeds not winged.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 138. S. fuscata }Link ex Brot., {\i Fl. Lusit.}{\b  2}: 187 (1805). Stems 10-45 cm, simple or branched, not rigid, rather stout, ribbed or angled, pubescent with patent, stout, contorted hairs. Lower leaves oblong-lanceolate, undulate, sparsely hispid or subglabrous. Inflorescence several- to many-flowered, rather densely cymose-pan-
\par 

\par 
212}
\par