{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 30.            Drypis}                  L.
\par 

\pard\f0\fs24\qc  R. Domac.
\par 

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Perennial herbs. Leaves and bracts spinose. Inflorescence subcapitate. Petals with long claw and bifid limb; stamens 5; stigmas 3. Capsule 1(2)-seeded, transversely dehiscent.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. D. spinosa }L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 413 (1753). Stems 8-30 cm, numerous, stiff, much-branched, glabrous, quadrangular. Leaves spinose-subulate, canaliculate above. Inflorescence a subcapitate compound dichasium surrounded by spinose bracts. Calyx 5-toothed. Petals very small and narrow, white or pinkish, with small coronal scales; anthers bluish. Capsule ovoid-ellipsoidal. 2n = 60. {\i Open stony, gravelly or sandy habitats. • S. Europe, from N.W. Jugoslavia to S. Italy and S. Greece.} Al Gr It Ju.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b spinosa} (subsp. {\i linneana} Murb. & Wettst.): Outer bracts lanceolate, with long terminal spine considerably exceeding flowers. Calyx membranous below. Limb of petal bifid to base; claw exceeding calyx.{\i  Mountain screes. Throughout the range of the species}.
\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b jacquiniana} Murb. & Wettst. ex Murb., {\i Lunds Univ. Arsskr.}{\b  27}: 161 (1891): Outer bracts ovate, with short terminal spine scarcely exceeding flowers. Calyx coriaceous. Limb of petal bifid half-way to base; claw equalling calyx.{\i  Rocks and sand-dunes. N.W. & W. Jugoslavia}.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 31.            Gypsophila}            L.
\par 

\pard\f0\fs24\qc  Y.I. Barkoudah & A.O. Chater (ed.1) revised by J.R. Akeroyd (ed.2)
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28 Annual or perennial herbs. Inflorescence dichasial, paniculate to capitate; bracts scarious. Epicalyx absent. Calyx 5-veined, with scarious commissures. Petals exceeding calyx, usually gradually narrowed into claw; coronal scales absent; claw unwinged; stamens 10; styles 2; stigmatic surface terminal. Capsule dehiscing with 4 teeth; carpophore absent. Seeds subreniform, flattened on both sides, with lateral hilum; embryo peripheral, with prominent radicle.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28 Literature: F.N. Williams, {\i Jour. Bot.} ({\i London}){\b  27}: 321-329 (1889). G. Stroh,{\i  Beih. Bot. Centr.}{\b  59B}: 455-477 (1930). Y.I. Barkoudah,{\i  Wentia}{\b  9}: 1-157 (1962).
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28 1 Annual, without woody stock and vegetative stems
\par 
2 Leaves not more than 3 mm wide, linear
\par 
3 Calyx 2 mm, glandular-puberulent; petals emarginate ........... {\b 23. linearifolia}
\par 
3 Calyx 2·5-4 mm, glabrous; petals entire ...................................... {\b 25. muralis}
\par 
2 Leaves more than 3 mm wide, lanceolate
\par 
4 Plant glabrous .............................................................................. {\b 24. elegans}
\par 
4 Stem villous or hispid ..................................................................... {\b 27. pilosa}
\par 
1 Perennial, with woody stock and vegetative stems
\par 
5 Flowers subsessile, in dense, globose clusters
\par 
6 Stem not more than 20 cm, simple, with solitary flower-cluster
\par  
  ........................................................................................................ {\b 14. petraea}
\par 
6 Stem usually more than 20 cm, always branched
\par 
7 Branches of inflorescence glabrous, rarely glandular-pubescent;
\par 
  leaves 10-50 mm, semi-terete .................................................... {\b 10. struthium}
\par 
7 Branches of inflorescence puberulent; leaves 20-100 mm, 
\par 
  linear-lanceolate
\par 
8 Bracts triangular, acute, entire; seeds with long, acute,
\par 
  conical tubercles ............................................................................ {\b 15. pallasii}
\par 
8 Bracts ovate-orbicular, erose; seeds with obtuse tubercles ...... {\b 16. glomerata}
\par 
5 Flowers distinctly pedicellate
\par 
9 Whole inflorescence, including calyx and pedicels, glabrous
\par 
10 Leaves 10 mm or more wide, 3- to 7-veined
\par 
11 Petals emarginate; leaves ovate to oblong-lanceolate ............ {\b 20. perfoliata}
\par 
11 Petals entire; leaves lanceolate to ovate-lanceolate ............... {\b 22. tomentosa}
\par 
10 Leaves less than 10 mm wide, often 1-veined
\par 
12 Most leaves 3- to 7-veined
\par 
13 Calyx 3-3·5 mm, the teeth acuminate; seeds with long, 
\par 
   acute, conical tubercles ............................................................. {\b 19. acutifolia}
\par 
13 Calyx 2-2·5 mm, the teeth obtuse; seeds smooth .................. {\b 22. tomentosa}
\par 
12 Leaves usually 1-veined
\par 
14 Leaves c. 6 × 0·5 mm .......................................................... {\b 26. macedonica}
\par 
14 Leaves at least 10 × 0·5 mm
\par 
15 Inflorescence lax, paniculate or corymbose; 
\par 
   pedicels at least twice as long as calyx
\par 
16 Plant with procumbent rhizome; leaves usually subobtuse;
\par 
   calyx-teeth acute .............................................................................. {\b 3. repens}
\par 
16 Plant without procumbent rhizome; leaves acute; 
\par 
   calyx-teeth obtuse
\par 
17 Calyx 1·5-2 mm ..................................................................... {\b 17. paniculata}
\par 
17 Calyx 2·5-4·5 mm
\par 
18 Petals less than twice as long as calyx; 
\par 
   seeds with acute tubercles (Spain) ............................................. {\b 11. bermejoi}
\par 
18 Petals 2-3 times as long as calyx; seeds 
\par 
   with flattened tubercles (E. Russia) .............................................. {\b 12. patrinii}
\par 
15 Inflorescence dense, corymbose; pedicels 
\par 
   less than twice as long as calyx
\par 
19 Calyx usually not more than 2 mm; leaves 
\par 
   obtuse or subacute (Spain) ........................................................ {\b 10. struthium}
\par 
19 Calyx 2 mm or more; leaves acuminate
\par 
20 Bracts and calyx-teeth not ciliate; seeds 
\par 
   with obtuse tubercles ................................................................... {\b 8. papillosa}
\par 
20 Bracts and calyx-teeth ciliate; seeds with long, acute,
\par 
   conical tubercles .............................................................................. {\b 9. collina}
\par 
9  Inflorescence glandular-hairy, at least in part
\par 
21 Inflorescence dense; pedicels not more than twice as long as calyx
\par 
22 Leaves 1-veined, linear
\par 
23 Calyx 2-3 mm, glabrous ............................................................ {\b 7. fastigiata}
\par 
23 Calyx 3-4·5 mm, glandular-pubescent ..................................... {\b 13. uralensis}
\par 
22 Most leaves 3(-5)-veined, not linear
\par 
24 Leaves oblanceolate to linear-oblanceolate ............................... {\b 5. altissima}
\par 
24 Leaves lanceolate to linear-lanceolate .................................... {\b 19. acutifolia}
\par 
21 Inflorescence lax; pedicels usually more than twice as
\par 
   long as calyx
\par 
25 Leaves not more than 20 mm; inflorescence rarely
\par 
   with more than 10 flowers
\par 
26 Leaves at least 2 mm wide ............................................................... {\b 1. nana}
\par 
26 Leaves less than 2 mm wide
\par 
27 Seeds with flattened tubercles ............................................. {\b 2. spergulifolia}
\par 
27 Seeds with acute tubercles .................................................... {\b 4. montserratii}
\par 
25 Leaves at least 20 mm; inflorescence with more than 10 flowers
\par 
28 Leaves 10 mm or more wide
\par 
29 Seeds with blunt tubercles; plant glaucous .................... {\b 21. scorzonerifolia}
\par 

\par 
219}
\par