{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 5. P. cretica }(L.) P.W. Ball & Heywood,{\i  op. cit.} 142 (1964) ({\i Tunica pachygona} Fischer & C.A. Meyer, {\i T. cretica} (L.) Fischer & C.A. Meyer). Annual up to 40 cm, densely glandular-pubescent. Inflorescence lax; pedicels 4·5-20(-30) mm, usually glabrous. Calyx 6-10·5 mm, with strongly 3-veined teeth. Petals linear-spathulate, white, sometimes reddish beneath, usually included in the calyx. Seeds 2-2·8 mm.{\i  C. Greece }({\i near Kalambaka}). Gr. ({\i S.W. Asia.})
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28 Sect. PSEUDOGYPSOPHILA (A. Braun) P.W. Ball & Heywood. Annuals. Leaves 3- to 5-veined. Bracts absent. Petals not clawed. Seeds blackish-brown, reticulate-tuberculate, with thickened margin.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 6. P. alpina }(Habl.) P.W. Ball & Heywood, {\i op. cit.} 145 (1964) ({\i Tunica stricta} (Ledeb.) Fischer & C.A. Meyer,{\i  T. alpina} (Habl.) Bobrov, {\i T. olympica} Boiss., {\i Gypsophila alpina} Habl.). Up to 40 cm, glabrous. Inflorescence lax; pedicels up to 30 mm, patent. Calyx 2·5-4·5(-5·5) mm, with 1-veined teeth. Petals 3-6 mm, linear-oblong, white. Seeds 0·7-1·2 mm.{\i  S.W. Bulgaria} ({\i Pirin Planina}). Bu.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    In Europe represented by subsp. {\b olympica} (Boiss.) P.W. Ball & Heywood, {\i op. cit.}{\b  3}: 146 (1964), which occurs mainly in W. & S. Anatolia. Subsp. {\b alpina} is widespread in the mountains of W. & C. Asia.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28 Sect. PETRORHAGIA . Perennials. Leaves 1 (-5)-veined. Flowers with or without bracts. Petals not abruptly clawed. Seeds blackish-brown, tuberculate, with thickened margins.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 7. P. phthiotica }(Boiss. & Heldr.) P.W. Ball & Heywood, {\i op. cit. }149 (1964) ({\i Tunica ochroleuca} var.{\i  phthiotica} (Boiss. & Heldr.) Hayek, {\i T. phthiotica} Boiss. & Heldr.). Plant 3-20 cm, sparsely glandular-pubescent above. Lower leaves 1- to 3-veined. Inflorescence lax. Bracts absent. Calyx 3-5 mm, glabrous; teeth 1-veined, broadly triangular, acute to obtuse, mucronate. Petals 4-6·5 × 0·5-1 mm, entire, pink. Seeds 1·2-1·6 mm. 2n = 28.{\i  Mountain rocks, }1800-2150{\i  m. S. & S.C. Greece.} Gr.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 8. P. fasciculata }(Margot & Reuter) P.W. Ball & Heywood,{\i  op. cit.} 150 (1964) ({\i Tunica fasciculata} (Margot & Reuter) Boiss., {\i Gypsophila fasciculata} Margot & Reuter). Plant 5-30 cm, glandular-pubescent, sometimes glabrous above. Leaves rarely up to 5-veined. Flowers usually fasciculate and bracteate, rarely in a lax panicle and ebracteate. Calyx 2·5-5·5 mm, pubescent or sparsely hirsute, sometimes glandular; teeth 1-veined, acute or subobtuse. Petals 3·5-6 mm, linear-spathulate, emarginate, white. Seeds 0·8-1 mm. 2n = 30. •{\i  W. Greece.} Gr.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 9. P. saxifraga }(L.) Link,{\i  Handb.}{\b  2}: 235 (1829) ({\i Tunica saxifraga} (L.) Scop.,{\i  Kohlrauschia saxifraga} (L.) Dandy; incl. {\i T. rigida} (L.) Boiss.). Up to 45 cm, glabrous or scabrid-pubescent. Inflorescence lax, occasionally fasciculate; flowers usually with 4 bracts. Calyx 3-6(-7) mm; teeth oblong, obtuse, 1-veined, with 2 weak lateral veins. Petals 4·5-10 × 1·2-3(-4) mm, white or pink; limb obcordate, narrowing gradually into the claw. Seeds 0·9-1·6 mm. 2n = 30, 60.{\i  C. & S. Europe, eastwards to W. Ukraine}. Al Au Bu Co Cz Ga Ge Gr He Hs Hu It Ju Lu Rm Rs(W) Sa Si ?Tu [Br ?Po Rs(B) Su].
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 10. P. graminea }(Sm.) P.W. Ball & Heywood,{\i  Bull. Brit. Mus.} ({\i Bot.}) {\b 3}: 155 (1964) ({\i Tunica graminea} (Sm.) Boiss.). Up to 40 cm, shortly and densely pubescent, sometimes glabrous above. Inflorescence usually lax, sometimes with a few fasciculate flowers. Bracts absent. Calyx 3·5-5·5 mm, densely pubescent; teeth oblong, obtuse, 1-veined, with 2 weak lateral veins. Petals 5-10 × 1·8-2·5 mm, pink or reddish; limb obcordate, narrowing gradually into the claw. Seeds 1·1-1·5 mm. 2n = 60.{\i  S. Greece} ({\i Peloponnisos}). Gr.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28 Intermediates between this species and {\b 9} occur in N. Peloponnisos, and require further investigation.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 11. P. thessala }(Boiss.) P.W. Ball & Heywood, {\i op. cit.} 156 (1964) ({\i Tunica thessala} Boiss.). Plant 10-35 cm, papillose-pubescent at least at the base. Inflorescence a capitulum, up to 10-flowered, with 6 to many bracts. Largest bracts 6-10 × 2·5-4 mm, brown with white, membranous margin, rarely 5-7 × 1·5-2 mm, almost completely white, membranous. Calyx 5·5-7 mm, glabrous or papillose, with oblong, obtuse teeth. Petals 6·5-8 mm, linear-spathulate, entire, emarginate or crenate, white, with pink or purple veins. Seeds 1·8-2·3 mm. 2n = 30.{\i  S. part of Balkan peninsula.} Bu Gr Ju.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 12. P. grandiflora }Iatroú, {\i Nordic Jour. Bot.}{\b  5}: 441 (1985). Like {\b 11} but stems up to 45 cm, glabrous; largest bracts 10-12 × 3-4 mm, white or pale brown, membranous, with a dark brown midrib; calyx c. 10 mm, glandular-pubescent; petals 18-22 mm, entire. 2n = 30. •{\i  S. Greece }({\i Parnon}). Gr.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 13. P. dianthoides }(Sm.) P.W. Ball & Heywood,{\i  Bull. Brit. Mus.} ({\i Bot}.){\b  3}: 158 (1964) ({\i Tunica dianthoides} (Sm.) Boiss.). Like {\b 11} but stems up to 40 cm, glabrous; heads with 1-6(-8) flowers; bracts 4 to many, the largest 4·5-10 × 1-2·5 mm, white-membranous except for the brown midrib; calyx pubescent, with triangular-lanceolate, more or less acute teeth; petals 6-10 mm, entire; seeds 1-1·3 mm. 2n = 30. •{\i  W. Kriti}. Cr.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28 Sect. KOHLRAUSCHIA (Kunth) P.W. Ball & Heywood. Annuals. Leaves 3-veined. Inflorescence a capitulum, with very wide, brown, scarious bracts. Petals abruptly clawed. Seeds blackish-brown, reticulate to papillose, with thick margins.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 14. P. prolifera }(L.) P.W. Ball & Heywood,{\i  op. cit.} 161 (1964) ({\i Dianthus prolifer} L., {\i Tunica prolifera} (L.) Scop., {\i Kohlrauschia prolifera} (L.) Kunth). Up to 50 cm, glabrous or scabrid-pubescent. Leaf-sheaths usually about as long as wide. Largest bracts 6-12 × 3-7(-8) mm, usually obtuse, mucronate. Petals 10-14 × 2-3·5 mm, pink with darker veins; limb obcordate. Seeds 1·3-1·9 × 0·8-1·1 mm, reticulate, with strongly incurved sides. 2n = 30.{\i  C. & S. Europe, extending northwards to S. Sweden, westwards to C. Spain and eastwards to Krym.} Al Au Be Bu Co Cz Da Ga Ge Gr He Ho Hs Hu It Ju Po Rm Rs(C, W, K) Sa Si Su Tu [*Br].
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 15. P. nanteuilii }(Burnat) P.W. Ball & Heywood, {\i op. cit.} 164 (1964) ({\i Dianthus prolifer, Tunica prolifera, Kohlrauschia prolifera} auct. eur. occident., pro parte,{\i  K. nanteuilii} (Burnat) P.W. Ball & Heywood). Like {\b 14} but the middle part of the stem often tomentose; leaf-sheaths up to twice as long as wide; seeds tuberculate. 2n = 60.{\i  W. Europe, extending eastwards to C. Italy.} Bl Br Co Ga Hs It Lu Sa.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 16. P. velutina }(Guss.) P.W. Ball & Heywood,{\i  op. cit. }166 (1964) ({\i Dianthus velutinus} Guss., {\i Tunica velutina }(Guss.) Fischer & C.A. Meyer, {\i Kohlrauschia velutina} (Guss.) Reichenb.). Very like {\b 14} but the middle part of the stem usually densely glandular-tomentose; leaf-sheaths at least twice as long as wide; all outer bracts acute or mucronate; petal-limb 1·2-2·5 mm wide; seeds 1-1·3 × 0·7-0·8 mm, with cylindrical papillae. 2n = 30.{\i  S. Europe.} Al Bu Co Cr Ga Gr Hs It Ju Lu Sa Si Tu.
\par 

\par 
226}
\par