{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 above. Leaves 10-20 × 1-2 mm, linear to linear-spathulate, pubescent. Inflorescence few-flowered; pedicels many times as long as calyx, filiform. Calyx 2·5 mm or less, glandular-puberulent. Petals 3-4 mm, white, bilobed. Seeds with long, acute, conical tubercles. {\i Gypsaceous semi-deserts. E. Russia, W. Kazakhstan.} Rs(E). ({\i W.C. Asia.})
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 24. G. elegans }Bieb.,{\i  Fl. Taur.-Cauc.} 319 (1808). Plant glabrous; stems 20-50 cm, branched above. Leaves 20-40 × 3-5(-15) mm, oblong- to linear-lanceolate, obscurely 1- to 3-veined. Inflorescence lax; bracts scarious, with dark midrib; pedicels many times as long as calyx. Calyx 3-5 mm. Petals 2-5 times as long as calyx, white with purple veins. Seeds with obtuse tubercles. {\i S. Ukraine; cultivated elsewhere for ornament, and naturalized in a few places}. Rs(W, K) [?Au Cz Ge Rs(B)]. ({\i Caucasus, Anatolia}.)
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28 Sect. MACRORRHIZAEA Boiss. Calyx more or less tubular. Capsule oblong. Ovules 24-36.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 25. G. muralis }L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 408 (1753). Annual; stems 4-25(-40) cm, branched, glabrous above, puberulent (often very sparsely so) below. Leaves 5-25 × 0·5-3 mm, linear, acute, glaucous. Inflorescence diffusely corymbose-paniculate; pedicels filiform, several to many times as long as calyx. Calyx 3-4 mm. Petals about twice as long as calyx, entire, pink, with darker veins. Capsule longer than calyx. Seeds with very small tubercles. 2n = 34.{\i  C. & E. Europe, extending locally to W. France, S. Sweden and C. Greece.} Au Be Bu Cz Fe Ga Ge Gr He Ho Hs Hu It Ju Po Rm Rs(N, B, C, W, K, E) Su Tu.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28 {\i G. muralis} var. {\i stepposa} (Klokov) Schischkin ({\i G. stepposa }Klokov), from S. Russia, has a narrower calyx and shorter, white petals with pink spots.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 26. G. macedonica }Vandas,{\i  Magyar Bot. Lapok}{\b  4}: 111 (1905). Like {\b 25} but entirely glabrous, caespitose perennial with stems up to 15 cm, little-branched; leaves c. 6 × 0·5 mm; calyx not more than 2 mm.{\i  S. Jugoslavia} ({\i Bitola}); N. Greece ({\i Veroia}). Gr Ju.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28 Sect. HAGENIA  A. Braun. Annuals. Inflorescence paniculate, dichasial. Calyx more or less tubular. Capsule long-ovoid. Ovules 4-20.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 27. G. pilosa }Hudson,{\i  Philos. Trans. Roy. Soc. Lond.}{\b  56}: 252 (1767) ({\i G. porrigens} (L.) Boiss.). Stems 20-65 cm, stout, usually glabrous at base and in the inflorescence, villous or hispid in the middle, branched above. Leaves 40-80 × 10-15 mm, lanceolate, obscurely 3-veined. Pedicels 3-4 times as long as calyx, filiform, becoming deflexed. Calyx 4-7 mm. Petals about twice as long as calyx, pink or pale purple. Seeds with obtuse tubercles.{\i  Naturalized in Mallorca and S.E. Spain; an occasional casual elsewhere.} [Bl Hs *Tu.] ({\i W. Asia}.)
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 32.            Bolanthus}             (Ser.) Reichenb.
\par 

\pard\f0\fs24\qc  Y.I. Barkoudah (ed.1) revised by J.R. Akeroyd (ed.2).
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28 Perennials; rather woody at base. Inflorescence dichasial, paniculate to subcapitate; bracts leafy. Epicalyx absent. Calyx with 5 projecting ribs and scarious commissures. Petals with long, linear claw and small, patent limb; coronal scales absent; claw delicately winged; stamens 10; styles 2, stigmatose all along their inner side. Capsule oblong-ovoid, dehiscing with 4 teeth; carpophore short. Seeds comma-shaped, with lateral hilum; embryo hook-shaped, with projecting radicle. ({\i Gypsophila} Sect. {\i Bolanthus} (Ser.) Boiss.)
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28 All species occur in calcareous, rocky or stony habitats.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28 Literature: As for {\i Gypsophila}; also D. Phitos,{\i  Bot. Chron.}{\b  1}: 35-45 (1981).
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Inflorescence usually lax, of solitary or paired flowers
\par 
2 Petal-limb with transverse purple stripe; stem rigid,
\par 
  somewhat branched above; seeds with flattened tubercles ...... {\b 2. fruticulosus}
\par 
2 Petal-limb entirely white; stem flexible, much-branched;
\par 
  seeds with acute tubercles ............................................................. {\b 3. thessalus}
\par 
1 Inflorescence ± dense, of 2- to 20-flowered clusters
\par 
3 Calyx 5-6·5 mm .............................................................................. {\b 4. graecus}
\par 
3 Calyx 2·5-4 mm
\par 
4 Stems not more than 6 cm; calyx 2·5-3·5 mm; 
\par 
   petals purplish ......................................................................... {\b 6. creutzbergii}
\par 
4 Stems usually more than 6 cm; calyx 3-4 mm; petals white
\par 
5 Stems glabrous to puberulent; flowers up to 20 in cluster .......... {\b 1. laconicus}
\par 
5 Stems densely pubescent; flowers up to 5 in cluster ............... {\b 5. thymifolius}
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. B. laconicus }(Boiss.) Barkoudah,{\i  Wentia}{\b  9}: 163 (1962) ({\i Gypsophila laconica} (Boiss.) Boiss. & Heldr.). Stems 10-25(-30) cm, slender, mostly unbranched, glabrous to puberulent with glandular and eglandular hairs. Leaves 10-20 × 0·5-1 mm, linear to linear-subulate, subobtuse. Flowers 2-20 in dense, terminal, long-pedunculate clusters; pedicels shorter than calyx. Calyx 3-4 mm, with small triangular teeth, glandular-hairy. Petals white. Seeds with small tubercles.{\i  Mountain rocks; calcicole. • S. Greece} ({\i Peloponnisos}). Gr.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. B. fruticulosus }(Bory & Chaub.) Barkoudah,{\i  op. cit. }164 (1962) ({\i Gypsophila fruticulosa} (Bory & Chaub.) Boiss.). Stems 5-35 cm, branched in upper part, rigid, erect, hairy with a mixture of short hairs and long, patent hairs. Leaves 5-15 × 1·5-3 mm, oblanceolate, hirsute. Inflorescence usually lax; flowers solitary or in pairs; pedicels usually ½ as long as calyx, sometimes as long as calyx. Calyx 4·5-6 mm, glandular-hairy. Petals white, with a transverse purple stripe. Seeds with flattened tubercles.  •{\i C. & S. Greece.} Gr.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 3. B. thessalus }(Jaub. & Spach) Barkoudah,{\i  op cit. }164 (1962) ({\i Gypsophila thessala} (Jaub. & Spach) Halácsy,{\i  G. hirsuta} (Labill.) Boiss.). Stems 10-30 cm, much-branched, flexible, with a mixture of short hairs and long, patent hairs. Leaves 5-12 × 0·5-1 mm, linear-oblanceolate, hirsute. Inflorescence lax, dichasial; flowers solitary or in pairs; pedicels as long as calyx. Calyx 4-5·5 mm, with a mixture of long and short hairs on the ribs. Seeds with acute tubercles. •{\i  C.E. Greece} ({\i Thessalia, Evvoia}). Gr.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b B. chelmicus} Phitos, {\i Bot. Chron.}{\b  1}: 40 (1981), described from S. Greece (Chelmos Oros), is like {\b 3} but has flowers mostly in 2- to 8-flowered clusters, and calyx 3·5-4·5 mm. It is known only from the type collection, and is perhaps not specifically distinct.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 4. B. graecus }(Schreber) Barkoudah, {\b Wentia}{\b  9}: 166 (1962) ({\i Gypsophila polygonoides} (Willd.) Halácsy, {\i G. hirsuta} (Labill.) Boiss., {\i G. ocellata} Sm.). Stems 5-25 cm, usually unbranched, pubescent, sometimes glandular-hairy; hairs of more or less equal length. Leaves 5-10 × 1-2 mm, oblanceolate or oblong-spathulate, puberulent. Flowers usually in dense 3- to 10-flowered heads; pedicels usually shorter than calyx. Calyx 5-6·5 mm, puberulent, with long,
\par 

\par 
222}
\par