{\rtf1\ansi \deff4\deflang1033{\fonttbl{\f4\froman\fcharset0\fprq2 Times New Roman;}}{\colortbl;\red0\green0\blue0;\red0\green0\blue255;\red0\green255\blue255;\red0\green255\blue0;\red255\green0\blue255;\red255\green0\blue0;
\red255\green255\blue0;\red255\green255\blue255;\red0\green0\blue128;\red0\green128\blue128;\red0\green128\blue0;\red128\green0\blue128;\red128\green0\blue0;\red128\green128\blue0;\red128\green128\blue128;\red192\green192\blue192;}{\stylesheet{\widctlpar 
\f4\fs20\lang2057 \snext0 Normal;}{\*\cs10 \additive Default Paragraph Font;}}{\info{\author dddd}{\operator dddd}{\creatim\yr1999\mo12\dy14\hr15\min36}{\revtim\yr1999\mo12\dy14\hr15\min40}{\version2}{\edmins2}{\nofpages4}{\nofwords953}{\nofchars5435}
{\*\company  }{\vern57431}}\widowctrl\ftnbj\aenddoc\hyphcaps0 \fet0\sectd \linex0 {\*\pnseclvl1\pnucrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl2\pnucltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl3\pndec\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang
{\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl4\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl5\pndec\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl6\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl7
\pnlcrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl8\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl9\pnlcrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}\pard\plain \li200\ri-990\nowidctlpar 
\f4\fs20\lang2057 {\fs28 5 Calyx-teeth pubescent or glandular
\par }\pard \li200\nowidctlpar {\fs28 6 Petals 18-22 mm; calyx-teeth obtuse ..................................... }{\b\fs28 12. grandiflora}{\fs28 
\par 6 Petals 6\'b75-8 mm; calyx-teeth \'b1 acute .................................... }{\b\fs28 13. dianthoides}{\fs28 
\par 4 Largest bracts at least 4 mm wide; petals with a long claw and
\par   distinct limb, pink or purplish, sometimes with darker veins
\par 7 Leaf-sheaths at least twice as long as wide; seeds
\par   1-1\'b73 mm, covered with cylindrical papillae ............................... }{\b\fs28 16. velutina}{\fs28 
\par 7 Leaf-sheaths less than twice as long as wide; seeds at
\par   least (1\'b71-)1\'b73 mm, reticulate, tuberculate or almost smooth
\par 8 Largest bracts 15-22 mm; petal-limb laciniate to crenate;  seeds with \'b1 flat lateral margins ................................................ }{\b\fs28 18. glumacea}{\fs28 
\par 8 Largest bracts not more than 15(-16) mm; petal-limb obcordate,  rarely crenate or laciniate; seeds with strongly incurved lateral margins
\par 9 Petal-limb 3-6 mm wide, sometimes laciniate or crenate;
\par   largest bracts 10\'b75-16 \'d7 6-13 mm, obtuse ................................. }{\b\fs28 17. obcordata}{\fs28 
\par 9 Petal-limb 2-3\'b75 mm wide, entire; largest bracts 6-12 \'d7 3-7(-8) mm,  mucronate 10 Seeds reticulate ........................................................................ }{\b\fs28 14. prolifera}{\fs28 
\par  10 Seeds tuberculate .................................................................... }{\b\fs28 15. nanteuilii}{\fs28 
\par 1  Bracts not enclosing the calyx; flowers solitary, rarely fasciculate
\par 11 Petals emarginate
\par 12 Calyx-teeth oblong, obtuse; petals usually pink or reddish .... }{\b\fs28 10. graminea}{\fs28 
\par 12 Calyx-teeth triangular-oblong, \'b1 acute or mucronate;   petals white, sometimes with pink veins
\par 13 Calyx-teeth 3-veined, the lateral veins sometimes obscure near the apex;   seeds c. 1\'b75 mm, black, smooth ..................................................... }{\b\fs28 4. candica}{\fs28 
\par 13 Calyx-teeth 1-veined; seeds c. 1 mm, blackish-brown,   \'b1 tuberculate ............................................................................. }{\b\fs28 8. fasciculata}{\fs28 
\par 11 Petals entire
\par 14 Annual, without non-flowering rosettes
\par 15 Glandular-pubescent; calyx-teeth 3-veined .................................. }{\b\fs28 5. cretica}{\fs28 
\par 15 Glabrous; calyx-teeth 1-veined ...................................................... }{\b\fs28 6. alpina}{\fs28 
\par 14 Perennial, \'b1 caespitose and woody at the base, with
\par    non-flowering rosettes
\par 16 Petals pink; seeds blackish-brown, reticulate-tuberculate ....... }{\b\fs28 7. phthiotica}{\fs28 
\par 16 Petals white or yellow, sometimes with pink veins or
\par    purplish spots at the base; seeds black, smooth
\par 17 Stem glandular-pubescent at the base and apex, glabrous in
\par    the middle; calyx-teeth strongly 3-veined ............................... }{\b\fs28 3. armerioides}{\fs28 
\par 17 Indumentum of stem variable, but never as above;
\par    calyx-teeth 1-veined or with obscure lateral veins
\par 18 Stem densely glandular-pubescent throughout or glabrous below,
\par    rarely completely glabrous; petals white or pale yellow;
\par    anthers usually purple ..................................................................... }{\b\fs28 1. illyrica}{\fs28 
\par 18 Stem densely glandular-tomentose at the base,
\par    otherwise glabrous; petals yellow; anthers white ..................... }{\b\fs28 2. ochroleuca}{\fs28 
\par 
\par }\pard \nowidctlpar {\fs28 Sect. PSEUDOTUNICA (Fenzl) P.W. Ball & Heywood. Annuals or perennials. Leaves 3-veined. Bracts absent. Petals not clawed. black, smooth, with thin margins. Seeds, black, smooth with thin margins.
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 1. P. illyrica }{\fs28 (Ard.) P.W. Ball & Heywood, }{\i\fs28 Bull. Brit.Mus.}{\fs28  (}{\i\fs28 Bot.}{\fs28 ) }{\b\fs28 3}{\fs28 : 133 (1964) (}{\i\fs28 Tunica illyrica}{\fs28 
 (Ard.) Fischer & C. Perennial up to 40 cm. Inflorescence lax or subfastigiate. Petals 5\'b75-10 mm, oblong-spathulate, entire, white or rarely pale yellow, spotted with purple at the base and sometimes pink-veined; anthers usually purple. Seeds 1\'b77-2
\'b73 \'d7 0\'b79-1\'b73 mm.}{\i\fs28  S.E. Europe, extending westwards to Sicilia.}{\fs28  Al Bu Cr Gr It Ju Rm Si.
\par 
\par }\pard \li200\nowidctlpar {\fs28 1 Stem usually glabrous, at least at the base; 
\par   calyx 5-8 mm ............................................................... (}{\b\fs28 b}{\fs28 ) subsp. }{\b\fs28 haynaldiana}{\fs28 
\par 1 Stem glandular-pubescent throughout; calyx 3\'b75-6 mm
\par 2 Calyx-teeth 1-veined; inflorescence usually subfastigiate . (}{\b\fs28 a}{\fs28 ) subsp. }{\b\fs28 illyrica}{\fs28 
\par 2 Calyx-teeth with weak lateral veins; inflorescence lax .... (}{\b\fs28 c}{\fs28 ) subsp. }{\b\fs28 taygetea}{\fs28 
\par 
\par }\pard \nowidctlpar {\fs28  (}{\b\fs28 a}{\fs28 ) Subsp. }{\b\fs28 illyrica}{\fs28 : Stems glandular-pubescent throughout. Inflorescence usually subfastigiate. Calyx 3\'b75-6 mm; calyx-teeth 1-veined. \bullet }{\i\fs28  From N.E. Jugoslavia to Greece}{
\fs28 .
\par  (}{\b\fs28 b}{\fs28 ) Subsp. }{\b\fs28 haynaldiana}{\fs28  (Janka) P.W. Ball & Heywood,}{\i\fs28  op. cit. }{\fs28 134 (1964) (}{\i\fs28 Tunica illyrica }{\fs28 subsp. }{\i\fs28 haynaldiana}{\fs28 
 (Janka) Prodan): Stems usually glabrous, at least at the base. Inflorescence lax or subfastigiate. Calyx 5-8 mm; calyx-teeth 1-veined. 2n = 26.}{\i\fs28  Romania; Balkan peninsula southwards to S.C. Greece; Calabria; Sicilia}{\fs28 .
\par  (}{\b\fs28 c}{\fs28 ) Subsp. }{\b\fs28 taygetea}{\fs28  (Boiss.) P.W. Ball & Heywood, }{\i\fs28 op. cit.}{\fs28  137 (1964) (}{\i\fs28 Tunica cretica}{\fs28  sensu Hayek, pro parte, }{\i\fs28 T. taygetea}{\fs28 
 (Boiss.) P.H. Davis): Stems glandular-pubescent throughout. Inflorescence lax. Calyx 3\'b75-5 mm; calyx-teeth 3-veined, lateral veins often weak. 2n = 26. \bullet }{\i\fs28  S. Greece}{\fs28  (}{\i\fs28 Peloponnisos}{\fs28 ); Kriti.
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 2. P. ochroleuca }{\fs28 (Sibth. & Sm.) P.W. Ball & Heywood, }{\i\fs28 op. cit.}{\fs28  138 (1964) (}{\i\fs28 Tunica ochroleuca}{\fs28  (Sibth. & Sm.) Fischer & C.A. Meyer). Very like }{\b\fs28 1}{\fs28 
 but the stems densely glandular-tomentose at the base, glabrous or rarely sparsely glandular in the upper part; pedicels 4-14 mm; petals 5-7 mm, linear-oblong, pale yellow, purplish at the base; anthers white. 2n = 30.}{\i\fs28  E. Greece }{\fs28 (}{
\i\fs28 Attiki and Evvoia}{\fs28 ). Gr.
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 3. P. armerioides }{\fs28 (Ser.) P.W. Ball & Heywood, op. cit. 139 (1964) (}{\i\fs28 Tunica armerioides}{\fs28  (Ser.) Hal\'e1csy, }{\i\fs28 T. sibthorpii}{\fs28 
 Boiss.). Perennial up to 30 cm, densely glandular-pubescent at the base and apex, glabrous in the middle. Inflorescence fastigiate; pedicels 1-5 mm. Calyx 4-6\'b7
5 mm, teeth strongly 3-veined. Petals 6-8(-9) mm, oblong-spathulate, white, often purple spotted at the base; anthers usually purple. Seeds 1\'b78-2\'b71 \'d7 1\'b70-1\'b73 mm.  2n = 26.}{\i\fs28  Aegean islands and S.E. Greece.}{\fs28  Gr.
\par 
\par Some plants from the mainland of intermediate between 1 and 3 or 2 and stems glandular-pubescent throughout, and sometimes lax inflorescences w
ith pedicels up to 9 mm. These latter plants have been confused with 4, from which they can be distinguished by the entire petals.
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 4. P. candica }{\fs28 P.W. Ball & Heywood,}{\i\fs28  op. cit.}{\fs28  141 (1964) (}{\i\fs28 Tunica cretica}{\fs28  Fischer & C.A. Meyer, pro parte,}{\i\fs28  T. taygetea}{\fs28  sensu P.H. Davis pro parte, non (Boiss.) P.H. Davis, }{\i\fs28 
T. cretica}{\fs28  auct. balcan., non (L.) Fischer & C.A. Meyer). Perennial up to 20 cm, glabrous or sparsely glandular-pubescent. Inflorescence lax; pedicels up to 20 mm. Calyx 3-4\'b75 mm; teeth 3-veined, the lateral veins sometimes weak. Petals 4\'b7
5-7 mm, oblong-spathulate, emarginate, white, with pink veins. Seeds c. 1\'b75 mm. \bullet }{\i\fs28  Kriti.}{\fs28  Cr.
\par 
\par 225}
\par }