{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 {\i W. & C. Europe, extending to S. Sweden}. All except Bl ?Cr Fe Is Rs(N, B, C, E) Sb ?Si.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Plants from serpentine in the British Isles, Corse, Italy and S.W. Europe are similar to {\b 19} but have a chromosome number 2n = 144. They probably represent an ecotypic variant of {\b 17}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 18. A. onopteris} L.,{\i  loc. cit.} (1753) ({\i A. adiantum-nigrum} subsp.{\i  onopteris} (L.) Luerssen). Lamina caudate, usually shorter than the petiole; pinnae and pinnules caudate, usually curved towards the apex of the leaf and pinna respectively; ultimate segments narrowly lanceolate to linear, acute at the base with acute teeth; mean stomata guard-cell length 45-55 µm. Exospores (21-)25-30(-38) µm. 2n = 72. {\i Usually on base-poor rocks. S. and W. Europe; one station in S.W. Poland.} Al Az ?Be Bl Bu Co Cr Ga Gr Hb He Hs It Ju Lu Po Rm Sa Si Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 19. A. cuneifolium} Viv., {\i Fl. Ital. Fragm. }{\b 1:} 16 (1808) ({\i A. forsteri} Sadler,{\i  A. serpentini} Tausch,{\i  A. adiantum-nigrum} subsp. {\i serpentini} (Tausch) Koch). Lamina not caudate; ultimate leaf-segments flabellate, with obtuse teeth; mean stomata guard-cell length 43-53 µm. Exospores (23-)30-34(-44) µm. 2n = 72. {\i Usually on serpentine. S. & C. Europe.} Al Au ?Bu Co Cz Ga Ge Gr He ?Hs Hu It Ju ?Lu Po Rm Rs(W).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 20. A. septentrionale} (L.) Hoffm.,{\i  Deutschl. Fl. Crypt.} 12 (1795). Rhizome caespitose, sometimes short-creeping. Leaves 5-15 cm; petiole 2-3 times as long as the lamina, dark reddish-brown only at the base, abruptly becoming green; lamina much reduced, thick, dark green, glabrous, dichotomously forked 1-3 times; segments c. 1 mm wide, linear, decurrent along the rhachis, minutely forked again at the apex. Sori elongate, running the whole length of the segment. 2n = 144. {\i Siliceous rocks and walls. Most of Europe but rarer in the east}. All except Az Bl Cr Fa Ho Is Rs(B, E) Sb.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Hybrids between{\b  5}({\b a}) and {\b 20} ({\i A.} ×{\i  alternifolium} Wulfen, {\i A.} ×{\i  germanicum} auct.,{\i  A.} ×{\i  breynii} auct.) are scattered throughout Europe with the parents. They are intermediate in morphology between the parents, and differ from{\b  20} in having the petiole 1-2 times as long as the lamina, almost entirely dark reddish-brown, and the lamina pinnate with pinnae c. 2 mm wide, the lowest forked. They have a chromosome number of 2n = 108.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 21. A. seelosii} Leybold,{\i  Flora} ({\i Regensb}.) {\b 38:} 348 (1855). Rhizome caespitose, sometimes short-creeping. Leaves 3-10 cm; petiole dark reddish-brown at the base, abruptly green above; lamina much reduced, thick, dark green, ternate; segments c. 1 mm wide, rhombic, decurrent along the rhachis, toothed at apex, often incised, the terminal segment often again 3-lobed. 2n = 72.{\i  Calcareous rocks. C. & E. Alps; Pyrenees and N. Spain.} Au Ga Ge Hs It Ju.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp.{\b  seelosii} : Leaves glandular-hairy, the ultimate segments incised; petiole 2-3 times as long as the lamina. 2n = 72.  • {\i C. & E.Alps}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b b}) Subsp.{\b  glabrum} (Litard. & Maire) Rothm. in Cadevall & Font Quer,{\i  Fl. Catalunya}{\b  6:} 339 (1937) ({\i A. celtibericum} Rivas Martínez): Leaves glabrous, the ultimate segments incised-dentate; petiole 3-5 times as long as the lamina. 2n = 72.{\i  Pyrenees and N. Spain}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Outside Europe, subsp. ({\b b}) is known only from Morocco.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 22. A. ruta-muraria} L.,{\i  Sp. Pl.} 1081 (1753). Rhizome branched, often creeping; scales very narrow, filiform at the apex of the rhizome. Leaves 4-15 cm; petiole about as long as the lamina, dark only at very base, otherwise green, with occasional glandular hairs; lamina 1-3 cm wide, ovate-lanceolate, glabrous, 2-pinnate; pinnae of 3-5 segments, the segments often again similarly divided; ultimate segments 2-3 mm, broadly flabellate to rhombic, the apex serrate to incised. Sori linear and medial, the sporangia covering the whole segment when mature; spores cristate. {\i Walls and base-rich rocks. Almost throughout Europe}. All except Az Fa Is Sb.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b ruta-muraria} : Fronds thick and robust; pinnules usually without a pellucid margin. Mean exospore-length 40-50 µm. 2n = 144. {\i Throughout the range of the species}.
\par
 ({\b b}) Subsp.{\b  dolomiticum} Lovis & Reichstein,{\i  Brit. Fern Gaz.}{\b  9:} 143 (1964) (incl.{\i  A. eberlei} D.E. Meyer): Leaves somewhat thinner and more delicate; pinnules usually smaller, with a distinct pellucid margin. Mean exospore-length 35-42 µm. 2n = 72.{\i  S. & S.C. Europe}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 23. A. lepidum} C. Presl,{\i  Verh. Ges. Vaterl. Mus. Böhm.}{\b  1836 :} 63 (1836). Like{\b  22} but rhizome caespitose; scales very dark; filiform scales at the apex of the rhizome very few or absent; petiole more slender, wiry, persistent; lamina light green, of thinner texture; ultimate segments narrower, the apex crenately incised; sori oblong, usually basal on segment, the sporangia not covering the segment at maturity.{\i  S.E. & S.C. Europe, extending locally westwards to N.E. Spain.} Al Au Bu Cr Ga Gr Hs Hu It Ju Rm Si.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Plants with extremely dissected leaves (var.{\i  fissoides }Ritter & Schumacher) from Greece and Jugoslavia may be confused with{\b  24}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp.{\b  lepidum} : Rhizome-scales 2 4 mm. Leaves glandular. 2n = 144.{\i  Throughout the range of the species}.
\par
 ({\b b}) Subsp.{\b  haussknechtii} (Godet & Reuter) Brownsey, {\i Bot. Jour. Linn. Soc.}{\b  72:} 261 (1976) ({\i A. haussknechtii} Godet & Reuter): Rhizome-scales 1-3 mm. Leaves glabrous except when young. 2n = 144. {\i Mountains of C. & E. Kriti; N.E. Spain.} ({\i S.W. Asia}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 24. A. fissum} Kit. ex Willd., {\i Sp. Pl.}{\b  5}({\b 1}): 348 (1810). Rhizome branched and short-creeping; scales with central stripe of black cells. Leaves 15-22(-32) cm; petiole 1-2 times as long as the lamina, blackish-red, darkening with age, green distally; lamina very much reduced, lanceolate, glabrous (rarely with short glands), 3-pinnate; pinnules palmately dissected; ultimate segments c. 1 mm wide. Sori oblong. 2n = 72.{\i  Fissures in calcareous rocks. • Mountains of S.C. & S.E. Europe, from Austria to the Maritime Alps and N. Greece.} Al Au Bu ?Cr Ga Ge Gr †He It Ju.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 25. A. aegaeum} Lovis, Reichstein & Greuter,{\i  Ann. Mus. Goulandris}{\b  1:} 141 (1973). Rhizome short, erect; scales c. 1 mm, with dark central stripe. Leaves 3-8 cm, densely covered with cylindrical glands less than 50 µm. petiole usually shorter than the lamina, brown at the base, green above; lamina ovate to ovate-triangular, 2-pinnate below; pinnae 3-5 pairs, the lowest pair larger than the others; ultimate segments 0·5-1 mm wide. Sori oblong, often confluent at maturity. 2n = 72.{\i  Limestone mountain rocks. S. Greece, Kriti.} Cr Gr. ({\i Anatolia.})
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 26. A. creticum} Lovis, Reichstein & Zaffran, {\i Ann. Mus. Goulandris }{\b 1: }145 (1973). Like {\b 25} but rhizome-scales c. 3 mm; leaves up to 15 cm, glabrous, with a few cylindrical glands more than 50 µm. lamina triangular-lanceolate, 1- or 2-pinnate; pinnae 4-10 pairs, the lower shortly stalked, the upper sessile; ultimate segments wider, with short teeth. 2n = 144. {\i Limestone mountain rocks. •  Kriti}. Cr.
\par

\par
22}
\par