{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 2 Flowering stems 50-60 cm, mostly more than 8-flowered;
\par 
  inflorescence-branches glandular-hispid ....................... ({\b c}) subsp. {\b stranjensis}
\par 
2 Flowering stems 5-25 cm, 2- to 8-flowered; inflorescence-
\par 
  branches glandular-pubescent ............................................... ({\b a}) subsp. {\b sicula}
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b sicula} ({\i S. depressa} Biv.): Densely caespitose; flowering stems 5-15(-25) cm, with c. 2 pairs of linear-oblanceolate leaves, c. 2- to 8-flowered. Inflorescence-branches and pedicels densely glandular-pubescent. Calyx densely glandular-pubescent with rather stout hairs.{\i  Sicilia; Sardegna}.
\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b intermedia} (Simmler) Chater,{\i  Feddes Repert.}{\b  69}: 52 (1964) ({\i S. intermedia} Simmler; incl. {\i S. haussknechtii} Simmler): Like subsp. ({\b a}) but usually less densely caespitose; flowering stems (5-)10-50 cm, more leafy, 1- to 30-flowered; inflorescence-branches and pedicels less densely pubescent, usually glandular; calyx less densely pubescent with more slender hairs, eglandular. •{\i  S. Jugoslavia, N. Greece, Albania}.
\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b c}) Subsp. {\b stranjensis} (Jordanov) Chater, {\i Feddes Repert.}{\b  69}: 52 (1964) ({\i S. stranjensis} Jordanov): Like subsp. ({\b a}) but less densely caespitose and very woody at base; flowering stems 50-60 cm, mostly more than 8-flowered; inflorescence-branches and pedicels glandular-hispid; petal-limb more deeply bifid. •{\i  S.E. Bulgaria}.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 7. S. calabrica }Guss.,{\i  Pl. Rar.} 164 (1826) ({\i S. aenesia} Heldr.,{\i  S. graeca} Boiss.). Annual; stem with many divaricate branches, glabrous below, glandular-hairy above. Lower leaves more or less spathulate, upper oblong-ovate. Inflorescence lax, spreading; pedicels glandular-hispid, often deflexed in fruit. Calyx 6-10 mm, glandular-hispid; teeth obtuse. Petal-limb 3-5 mm, pale purplish.{\i  E. Mediterranean region. }Al Cr Gr It ?Si Tu.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b S. orientalis} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 409 (1753), a native of S.W. Asia, which is like {\b 7} in habit but without coronal scales and calyx-teeth acute, has been doubtfully recorded from Greece.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 8. S. ocymoides }L., {\i Sp. Pl}. 409 (1753). Much-branched perennial with procumbent or ascending hairy stems. Lower leaves subspathulate to ovate-lanceolate, obtuse; upper narrower, acute. Inflorescence lax, spreading; pedicels and calyx glandular-pubescent. Calyx 7-12 mm, teeth obtuse. Petal-limb 3-5 mm, pale purplish. 2n = 28. •{\i  S.W. & S.C. Europe; N. & C. Italy.} Au Co Ga Ge He Hs It Ju Sa [Cz].
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28 Plants from Corse and Sardegna that are less hairy and smaller in all their parts have been called subsp. {\b alsinoides} (Viv.) Arcangeli, {\i Comp. Fl. Ital.} ed. 2, 304 (1892).
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 9. S. officinalis }L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 408 (1753). Perennial; stems 30-90 cm, erect, usually glabrous, simple or branched above. Leaves ovate to ovate-lanceolate, 3-veined, acute. Inflorescence condensed, with opposite branches bearing few-flowered dichasia; flowers large, shortly pedicellate, usually pale pink. Calyx c. 20 mm, glabrous or rarely hairy, green or reddish; teeth triangular, acute. Petal-limb c. 10 mm, more or less entire. 2n = 28.{\i  Europe, from N. Germany and C. Russia southwards; frequently cultivated, often as a variant} flore pleno,{\i  and naturalized in many places in the north}. Al Au Be Bl Bu Co Cz Ga Ge Gr He Ho Hs Hu It Ju Lu Po Rm Rs (C,W,K, E) Sa Si Tu [Br Da Fe Hb No *Rs (B) Su].
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 10. S. chlorifolia }(Poiret) G. Kunze,{\i  Ind. Hort. Lips. }{\b 1846}: 4 (1846) ({\i Cyathophylla chlorifolia} (Poiret) Bocquet & Strid). Glabrous, glaucous annual; stems 8-15 cm, procumbent or ascending. Basal leaves in a rosette, ovate or broadly spathulate, obtuse; cauline perfoliate, ovate to orbicular. Inflorescence capitate, of 2-6 shortly pedicellate flowers; involucre bowl-shaped, entire. Calyx 9-13 mm, with short, triangular teeth. Petals about equalling the calyx, pink. Seeds c. 12 mm, reddish-brown to blackish. 2n = 30.{\i  Limestone rocks and screes, }1700-1850{\i  m. S. Greece} ({\i Chelmos Oros}). Gr. ({\i W. & C. Anatolia.})
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 34.              Vaccaria}             Medicus
\par 

\pard\f0\fs24\qc  A.O. Chater.
\par 

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Annuals. Epicalyx absent. Calyx-tube inflated below, whitish, with 5 green wings at the angles, without scarious commissures. Petals 5, long-clawed; coronal scales absent; ovary unilocular (almost 2-locular at the base); styles 2. Capsule ovoid, with thick, papery exocarp dehiscing with 4 teeth, and with thinner endocarp dehiscing irregularly.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. V. hispanica }(Miller) Rauschert, {\i Wiss. Zeitschr. Univ. Halle}{\b  14}: 496 (1965) ({\i  V. pyramidata} Medicus, {\i V. parviflora} Moench,{\i  V. perfoliata} Gilib., {\i V. grandiflora} Jaub. & Spach, {\i V. vulgaris} Host, {\i V. segetalis} Garcke, {\i Gypsophila vaccaria} (L.) Sm.,{\i  Saponaria vaccaria} L., {\i S. hispanica} Miller). Stems 30-60 cm, erect, branched above, glabrous. Leaves c. 5 cm, ovate to lanceolate, glaucous. Flowers in much-branched dichasia; pedicels long; bracts scarious, with green midrib. Calyx 12-17 mm; teeth ovate, acute. Petal-limb 3-8 mm, sometimes exserted, pale or dark purplish, entire or bifid. Seeds 2-2·5 mm, numerous, subglobose. 2n = 30.{\i  Usually a weed of cultivated fields. Most of Europe, except Fennoscandia and the north-west, but only naturalized or casual in much of the northern part of its range}. Al †Au Be Bl Bu †Co Cr Ga Ge Gr He Hs Hu It Ju Lu Po Rm Rs(N, B, C, W, K, E) *Sa Si Tu [Cz Ho].
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 35.             Petrorhagia}              (Ser.ex DC.)Link
\par 

\pard\f0\fs24\qc  P.W. Ball & J.R. Akeroyd.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28 Annual or perennial herbs. Inflorescence paniculate to capitate. Bracts present or absent. Calyx 5-toothed, 5- to 15-veined with scarious commissures. Petals 5, exceeding the calyx, with or without claw; coronal scales absent. Stamens 10; styles 2. Capsule dehiscing with 4 teeth. Seeds dorsiventrally compressed; embryo straight. (Incl.{\i  Tunica} auct.,{\i  Kohlrauschia }Kunth.)
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28 It is not practicable to make a clear distinction, as is done in{\i  Dianthus}, between epicalyx-scales and bracts. The term 'bract' is therefore used to cover both.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28 All species occur in dry, calcareous or sandy habitats.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28 Literature: P.W. Ball & V.H. Heywood,{\i  Bull. Brit. Mus.} ({\i Bot}.){\b  3}: 121-172 (1964).
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Bracts enclosing the calyx; inflorescence often capitate or fasciculate
\par 
2 Flowers solitary or fasciculate; bracts usually distinctly
\par 
  shorter than the calyx; stem usually much-branched
\par 
3 Stems glandular-pubescent, at least at the base; calyx
\par 
  teeth ± triangular, acute or subobtuse ........................................ {\b 8. fasciculata}
\par 
3 Stems eglandular-pubescent; calyx-teeth oblong, obtuse ............ {\b 9. saxifraga}
\par 
2 Flowers in a capitulum; bracts ± completely enclosing the
\par 
  calyx; stems simple or with a few branches
\par 
4 Largest bracts not more than 4 mm wide; petals linear
\par 
  spathulate, white with pink or purple veins
\par 
5 Calyx-teeth glabrous .................................................................... {\b 11. thessala}
\par 

\par 
224}
\par