{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 lanceolate, flat, acute. Inflorescence a many-flowered corymbose cyme. Calyx 2·5-3 mm; teeth ovate-lanceolate, sometimes ciliate. Petals 2·5-4·5 mm, ovate-oblong, entire or emarginate, pink. Seeds 1-1·5 mm, reniform, with acute tubercles, black. 2n = 68.{\i  Gypsaceous soils. • C. & N.C. Spain.} Hs.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28 Probably an allopolyploid derivative of the hybrid between {\b 9} and {\b 22} ({\i G.} ×{\i  castellana} Pau).
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 12. G. patrinii }Ser. in DC.,{\i  Prodr. }{\b 1}: 353 (1824). Plant entirely glabrous; stems up to 50 cm, ascending or erect, often branched. Leaves 10-50 × 1-4 mm, linear or linear-lanceolate, long-acuminate, flat or triquetrous. Inflorescence lax; pedicels 2-5 times as long as calyx. Calyx 2·5-3·5 mm; teeth obtuse, mucronate, ciliate. Petals 2-3 times as long as calyx, pale purplish. Seeds with flattened tubercles.{\i  Rocky and stony ground. E. Russia}. Rs(C). ({\i Temperate Asia.})
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 13. G. uralensis }Less., {\i Linnaea}{\b  9}: 172 (1834). Plant caespitose. Stems 5-20 cm, erect, simple, glabrous below, glandular-pubescent above. Leaves 10-50 × 0·5-2 mm, linear, sometimes triquetrous, falcate. Inflorescence dense, with 5-15 flowers; pedicels glandular-pubescent, not longer than calyx. Calyx 3-4·5 mm, glandular-pubescent; teeth oblong, obtuse. Petals 2-3 times as long as calyx, white. Seeds with very small tubercles. {\i Rocky and stony ground. N. Russia and Ural.} Rs(N, C).
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28 Sect. CAPITULIFORMES F.N. Williams. Perennials. Leaves very narrow. Flowers in dense, capitate clusters. Calyx conic-campanulate. Capsule globose. Ovules 4-12.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 14. G. petraea }(Baumg.) Reichenb.,{\i  Fl. Germ. Excurs. }801 (1832) ({\i G. transylvanica }Sprengel). Plant densely caespitose. Stems 4-20 cm, simple, glabrous or scabrid below, puberulent above. Leaves 25-50 × c. 1 mm, linear, glabrous. Inflorescence 1-2 cm in diameter, globose or subcapitate, surrounded at base by large, triangular-ovate, scarious bracts. Calyx 2-3·5 mm; teeth triangular-ovate, acute. Petals 1½ times as long as calyx, white or pale purplish. Seeds with spiny tubercles on back. 2n = 34.{\i  Mountain rocks; calcicole. • E. & S. Carpathians.} Rm.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 15. G. pallasii }Ikonn.,{\i  Nov. Syst. Pl. Vasc. }({\i Leningrad}) {\b 13}: 118 (1976) ({\i G.glomerata} auct., non Pallas ex Adams). Plant more or less caespitose; stems 20-80 cm, erect, branched above, glabrous, or sometimes puberulent above; upper branches and inflorescence puberulent, more or less viscid. Leaves 20-100 × 1-4 mm, linear to linear-lanceolate, glabrous, glaucous. Flower-heads long-pedunculate. Bracts at base of flower-heads large, triangular-acute, entire, ciliate, scarious. Calyx 2-3·5 mm; teeth oblong, obtuse, entire. Petals 1½ times as long as calyx, white. Seeds with long, acute, conical tubercles. {\i S.E. Europe,from E. Jugoslavia to Krym}. Bu Gr Rm Rs(W, K) Tu.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 16. G. glomerata }Pallas ex Adams in Weber fil. & Mohr,{\i  Beitr. Naturk.}{\b  1}: 54 (1805) ({\i G. globulosa} Steven ex Boiss.). Like {\b 15} but bracts at base of flower-heads ovate-orbicular, obtuse, strongly erose; calyx-teeth erose; seeds with obtuse tubercles.{\i  S.W. Ukraine }({\i Reni});{\i  S.E. Russia }({\i W. of Rostov}). Rs(W, E). ({\i Caucasus}.)
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28 Sect. ROKEJEKA (Forskål) A. Braun. Perennials. Inflorescence a lax, diffuse panicle. Calyx campanulate. Capsule globose.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 17. G. paniculata }L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 407 (1753). Plant glaucous, glabrous (or pubescent below, var. {\i hungarica} Borbás), very rarely pubescent throughout except for pedicels and calyx; rhizome stout; stems 50-90 cm, diffusely branched. Leaves 20-70 × 2·5-10 mm, lanceolate, acute or acuminate. Pedicels 2-3 times as long as calyx. Calyx 1·5-2 mm; teeth ovate, obtuse. Petals 3-4 mm, linear-spathulate, white or pale reddish. Seeds with obtuse tubercles.{\i  Dry, sandy and stony places. E. & C. Europe, westwards to C. Austria, southwards to Bulgaria, and northwards to c.} 57°{\i  N. in Russia; cultivated for ornament and naturalized elsewhere.} Au Bu Cz Hu Ju Po Rm Rs(C, W, K, E) [Ge Rs(B)].
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28 Plants from one station in White Russia, differing chiefly by their acute calyx-teeth, have been named{\b  G. belorossica} Barkoudah, {\i Wentia}{\b  9}: 99 (1962).
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 18. G. arrostii }Guss.,{\i  Pl. Rar.} 160 (1826). Like {\b 17} but some pedicels always pubescent and the rest of plant usually subglabrous; leaves linear to linear-lanceolate; pedicels 5-10 times as long as calyx; calyx 2-2·5 mm; teeth oblong, obtuse; petals elliptic-oblong, pale purplish; seeds with flattened tubercles.{\i  S. Italy, Sicilia.} It Si.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28 European plants belong to subsp. {\b arrostii}, which is endemic. Subsp. {\b nebulosa} (Boiss. & Heldr.) Greuter & Burdet,{\i  Willdenowia}{\b  12}: 188 (1982), occurs in Anatolia.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 19. G. acutifolia }Steven ex Sprengel,{\i  Novi Provent. }21 (1818). Stems 20-170 cm, erect, branched, glabrous below, glandular-pubescent above. Leaves 20-80 × 2-10 mm, linear-lanceolate to lanceolate, long-acuminate. Inflorescence a rather dense panicle; pedicels 1-4 mm, glabrous or glandular-pubescent. Calyx 3-3·5 mm; teeth oblong, acuminate. Petals twice as long as calyx, white. Seeds with long, acute, conical tubercles.{\i  W. Ukraine.} Rs(W) [Rm]. ({\i Caucasus}.)
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b G. scariosa }Tausch, {\i Flora} ({\i Regensb}.){\b  14}: 213 (1831), should be excluded from the European flora; recorded in error from Switzerland.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 20. G. perfoliata }L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 408 (1753) ({\i G. trichotoma} Wenderoth,{\i  G. scorzonerifolia} auct., non Ser.; incl. {\i G. paulii} Klokov and{\i  G. tekirae }Stefanov). Plant yellow-green; stems 30-100 cm, ascending at base, glandular-pubescent below, glabrous above, rarely entirely glabrous. Leaves ovate or oblong-lanceolate, acute to obtuse, amplexicaul and shortly connate at base; the lower 20-80 × 10-35 mm, 3- to 7-veined, pubescent. Pedicels 4-15 mm, glabrous. Calyx 2-2·5 mm; teeth ovate, obtuse. Petals white to pale purple, emarginate. Seeds with very small tubercles.{\i  S.E. Europe, from Bulgaria to E. Russia.} Bu Rm Rs(W, K, E) [Ge Rs(B)].
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 21. G. scorzonerifolia }Ser. in DC.,{\i  Prodr. }{\b 1}: 352 (1824). Like {\b 20} but glaucous, glabrous below, glandular-pubescent above; leaves glabrous; pedicels mostly glandular-pubescent at base; petals darker purple; seeds with obtuse tubercles.{\i  Saline and sandy soils. S.E. Russia, E. Ukraine}. Rs(E) [Cz Ge].
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 22. G. tomentosa }L., {\i Cent. Pl.}{\b  1}: 11 (1755) ({\i G.perfoliata} auct. hisp.). Like {\b 20} but somewhat smaller; stems, inflorescence-branches and leaves usually glandular-pubescent; pedicels usually glabrous; leaves narrower, ovate-lanceolate to lanceolate; petals entire; seeds black, smooth, shining.{\i  Saline places. • C. & S.E. Spain.} Hs.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28 Sect. DICHOGLOTTIS (Fischer & C.A. Meyer) Fenzl. Annuals. Inflorescence a dichasial panicle; pedicels capillary; bracts more or less herbaceous. Calyx campanulate. Capsule globose. Ovules 12-24.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 23. G. linearifolia }(Fischer & C.A. Meyer) Boiss.,{\i  Fl. Or.}{\b  1}: 550 (1867). Stems 3-25 cm, glandular-pubescent below, glabrous
\par 

\par 
221}
\par