{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 This species sometimes has a glabrous stem, and such plants have been confused with {\b 14}, particularly in Italy.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 17. P. obcordata }(Margot & Reuter) Greuter & Burdet, {\i Willdenowia }{\b 12}: 188 (1982) ({\i Dianthus obcordatus} Margot & Reuter,{\i  Kohlrauschia glumacea} (Chaub. & Bory) Hayek var. {\i obcordata }(Margot & Reuter) Hayek). Up to 50 cm, glabrous; stems more or less simple. Leaf-sheaths about as long as wide. Largest bracts 10·5-16 × 6-13 mm, obtuse, mucronate. Petals 12-18 × 3-6 mm, pink with darker veins, rarely bright pink and without conspicuous veins; limb obcordate, entire to laciniate. Seeds 1·1-2·2 × 0·7-1·7 mm, reticulate or tuberculate, with strongly incurved sides. 2n = 30. •{\i  Balkan peninsula.} Al Gr Ju Tu.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28 Plants intermediate between {\b 17} and {\b 18} occur in Peloponnisos. Plants with reticulate seeds are said to be restricted to S. Greece, outside the range of {\b 14}. Plants with entire petals occur mainly in the northern half of the range, whilst plants with crenate to laciniate petals occur mainly in Greece.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 18. P. glumacea }(Chaub. & Bory) P.W. Ball & Heywood, {\i Bull. Brit. Mus.} ({\i Bot}.) 3: 169 (1964) ({\i Tunica glumacea} (Chaub. & Bory) Boiss.). Up to 50 cm, glabrous, simple or with few branches. Leaf-sheaths about as long as wide. Largest bracts 15-22 × 9-17 mm, obtuse. Petals 15-18 × 3-4·5 mm, bright pink, without conspicuous veins; limb crenate to laciniate. Seeds 1·5-3·1 × 1·3-2·1 mm, sparsely tuberculate to almost smooth, the sides not strongly incurved. 2n = 30. •{\i  S. Greece }({\i Peloponnisos}). Gr.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 36.             Dianthus}              L.
\par 

\pard\f0\fs24\qc  †T.G. Tutin & S.M. Walters
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28 Perennial herbs or small shrubs, more rarely annuals or biennials, with entire, usually linear, parallel-veined, often glaucous leaves. Flowering stems often swollen and brittle at nodes. Flowers usually conspicuous, solitary, in lax, few-flowered cymes, or in heads surrounded by bracts. Epicalyx-scales 2 to many, usually appressed to the calyx. Calyx tubular, 5-toothed, without scarious commissures. Petals 5, long-clawed, entire, dentate or laciniate, but not deeply bifid; coronal scales absent, but petals often with a tuft of hairs (bearded) at mouth of flower. Capsule dehiscing apically with 4 teeth; carpophore often present. Seeds numerous, concave on 1 side.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28 Male-sterile plants of a number of species occur sporadically and add to the difficulties of identification, as such plants are often dwarf, with flowers smaller in all their parts than normal, and sometimes with a reduced number of epicalyx-scales. Late flowers, particularly if borne on lateral branches produced by damaged main stems, may also be abnormal. Species which normally have capitate inflorescences frequently produce solitary flowers in these circumstances. It is therefore often difficult to identify plants flowering outside their normal season.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28 The shape and measurements of the calyx refer to the calyx at anthesis. The diameter of the stem is measured just below a node. Bracts occur in species with capitate inflorescences, and should be distinguished from epicalyx-scales which subtend a single flower.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28 Most of the species are more or less interfertile but, since they are usually geographically isolated, hybrids are rather local. They seem, however, to occur in most localities when two or more species grow together, and are particularly common in the Pyrenees.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28 In the absence of any recent monograph, the arrangement here adopted largely follows that of Pax & Hoffmann (see Literature) in dividing the species into two subgenera:{\i  Dianthus} ({\i Caryophyllum}) and {\i Armeriastrum}. Whilst the position of several species in such an arrangement is quite arbitrary, the classification has the advantage that any {\i Dianthus} with several flowers in a head surrounded by involucral bracts is likely to be found in subgenus {\i Armeriastrum}, and most Mediterranean shrubby species also belong to this subgenus.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28 Literature: F. Pax & K. Hoffmann in Engler & Prantl,{\i  Natürl. Pflanzenfam}., ed. 2, {\b 16c}: 356-361 (1934), which has a very extensive bibliography.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Shrubs with obvious woody branches
\par 
2 Leaves more than 3 mm wide, linear-oblong to oblance ovate or elliptical
\par 
3 Calyx less than 18 mm .............................................................. {\b 39. uralensis}
\par 
3 Calyx at least 18 mm
\par 
4 Calyx 4-5 mm wide, almost cylindrical;
\par 
  flowers in distinct bracteate heads ............................................... {\b 18. rupicola}
\par 
4 Calyx not more than 3 mm wide, narrowed from about the middle; 
\par 
  flowers not in bracteate heads ................................................... {\b 19. fruticosus}
\par 
2 Leaves not more than 3 mm wide, linear, often needle-like
\par 
5 Calyx at least 15 mm ............................................................... {\b 17. aciphyllus}
\par 
5 Calyx less than 15 mm
\par 
6 Hummock-forming (E. Kriti) ............................................. {\b 16. pulviniformis}
\par 
6 Not hummock-forming
\par 
7 Petals white (S.E. Russia, Krym) ................................................. {\b 38. rigidus}
\par 
7 Petals pinkish, at least above
\par 
8 Epicalyx-scales obcordate, with subulate apex ..................... {\b 15. juniperinus}
\par 
8 Epicalyx-scales ovate, acuminate .............................................. {\b 39. uralensis} 
\par 
1 Herbs, sometimes woody at base, but without obvious woody branches
\par 
9 Sheaths of cauline leaves at least 3 times as long as
\par 
  diameter of stem; flowers in heads, usually with
\par 
  involucral bracts, more rarely solitary or few
\par 
10 Flowers yellow ............................................................................ {\b 5. knappii}
\par 
10 Flowers pink to purple
\par 
11 Uppermost leaves greatly widened in lower part .................... {\b 20. capitatus}
\par 
11 Uppermost leaves not greatly widened in lower part
\par 
12 Leaves with thin margins and without prominent submarginal
\par 
   veins beneath
\par 
13 Bracts entirely brown ............................................................... {\b 31. cruentus}
\par 
13 Bracts green, at least in upper part
\par 
14 Epicalyx-scales acute or shortly aristate, brown or scarious,
\par 
   all much shorter than calyx ................................................ {\b 6. membranaceus}
\par 
14 Epicalyx-scales aristate, largely green, at least some  
\par 
   about as long as calyx
\par 
15 Sheaths c. 3 times as long as diameter of stem;
\par 
   bracts 4 ................................................................................ {\b 3. trifasciculatus}
\par 
15 Sheaths 5-9 times as long as diameter of stem;
\par 
   bracts numerous ......................................................................... {\b 4. urumoffii}
\par 
12 Leaves with thick margins or prominent submarginal veins beneath
\par 
16 Calyx-teeth obtuse or subobtuse but sometimes mucronate
\par 
17 Calyx c. 8 mm ................................................................ {\b 24. giganteiformis}
\par 
17 Calyx 10-22 mm
\par 

\par 
227}
\par