{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 18 Leaves obtuse or subobtuse; calyx-teeth little longer than wide,   
\par 
   not mucronate ............................................................................. {\b 25. diutinus}
\par 
18 Leaves acute or acuminate; calyx-teeth at least twice as 
\par 
   long as wide, mucronate
\par 
19 Calyx not more than 14 mm; petal-limb 5-8 mm, pink ......... {\b 26. platyodon}
\par 
19 Calyx 18-22 mm; petal-limb 10-15 mm, dark purplish ..... {\b 27. bessarabicus}
\par  
16 Calyx-teeth acuminate
\par 
20 Plant glandular-viscid; calyx 6-7 × 1·5 mm ....................... {\b 115. formanekii}
\par 
20 Plant sometimes puberulent but not glandular-viscid; 
\par 
   calyx more than 7 mm or, if less, 2-3 mm wide
\par 
21 Flowers solitary or few together, usually distinctly pedicellate;
\par 
   bracts 0, or narrow and not closely subtending the flowers
\par 
22 Epicalyx-scales coriaceous, not broadly scarious;
\par 
   calyx ± coriaceous
\par 
23 Petals with short glandular hairs on upper surface .................. {\b 108. biflorus}
\par 
23 Petals with long eglandular hairs on upper surface .................. {\b 106. gracilis}
\par 
22 Epicalyx-scales membranous or broadly scarious; calyx membranous
\par 
24 Epicalyx-scales broadly scarious ....................................... {\b 34. brachyzonus}
\par 
24 Epicalyx-scales usually dark brown, not or narrowly scarious
\par 
25 Leaves 1-2 mm wide, usually flat; calyx usually dark 
\par 
   purple .............................................................................. {\b 28. carthusianorum}
\par 
25 Leaves usually setaceous, up to c. 1 mm wide; calyx usually
\par 
   green with a green apex (E. & S. Carpathians)
\par 
26 Cauline leaves as long as or longer than internodes; 
\par 
   some bracts at least as long as inflorescence .................. {\b 28. carthusianorum}
\par 
26 Cauline leaves shorter than internodes; 
\par 
   bracts shorter than inflorescence .................................................. {\b 30. henteri}
\par 
21 Flowers usually numerous, subsessile, crowded in dense heads;
\par 
   bracts conspicuous, closely subtending the flowers
\par 
27 Calyx up to 10 mm
\par 
28 Epicalyx-scales gradually narrowed at apex, acute or
\par 
   shortly awned ............................................................................ {\b 23. giganteus}
\par 
28 Epicalyx-scales abruptly narrowed into an awn
\par 
29 At least the basal leaves setaceous
\par 
30 Petal-limb 5-8(-10) mm .......................................................... {\b 22. pinifolius}
\par 
30 Petal-limb 3-4 mm
\par 
31 Leaves c. 0·5 mm wide; awn of epicalyx-scales usually patent 
\par 
   ............................................................................................... {\b 36. stenopetalus}
\par 
31 Leaves c. 1 mm wide; awn of epicalyxscales erect ............... {\b 37. moesiacus}
\par 
29 Leaves flat
\par 
32 Bracts broadly ovate; awn of epicalyx-scales shorter than 
\par 
   wide part of scale, usually patent or deflexed ....................... {\b 35. pelviformis}
\par 
32 Bracts ovate-oblong; awn of epicalyx-scales as long as wide part of
\par 
   scale, erect or somewhat patent
\par 
33 Epicalyx-scales dark brown .......................................................... {\b 32. tristis}
\par 
33 Epicalyx-scales pale purplish ................................................... {\b 33. stribrnyi}
\par 
27 Calyx more than 10 mm
\par 
34 Epicalyx-scales gradually narrowed at apex
\par 
35 Epicalyx-scales broadly scarious; calyx pink tinged ................ {\b 29. borbasii}
\par 
35 Epicalyx-scales not or scarcely scarious; calyx dark purple
\par 
36 Calyx (15-)17-20 mm; petal-limb 5-8 mm ............................. {\b 23. giganteus}
\par 
36 Calyx 10-14 mm; petal-limb 3-5 mm ............................. {\b 24. giganteiformis}
\par 
34 Epicalyx-scales obcordate or almost truncate, abruptly aristate
\par 
37 Calyx 15-20 mm
\par 
38 Leaves less than 1 mm wide
\par 
39 Petal-limb 5-8(-10) mm .......................................................... {\b 22. pinifolius}
\par 
39 Petal-limb 10-15 mm ..................................................... {\b 28. carthusianorum}
\par 
38 Leaves at least 1 mm wide
\par 
40 Epicalyx-scales whitish with wide hyaline margin ............ {\b 34. brachyzonus}
\par 
40 Epicalyx-scales brown or blackish without or with a  narrow hyaline margin
\par 
41 Wide part of epicalyx-scales distinctly longer than awn
\par 
   .......................................................................................... {\b 28. carthusianorum}
\par 
41 Wide part of epicalyx-scales usually shorter than awn
\par 
42 Bracts with a green apex; epicalyx-scales coriaceous ......... {\b 21. ferrugineus}
\par 
42 Bracts without a green apex; epicalyxscales not coriaceous .... {\b 31. cruentus}
\par 
37 Calyx 10-15 mm
\par 
43 Leaves setaceous
\par 
44 Calyx usually more than 2 mm wide; epicalyx-scales at least 
\par 
   4 as long as calyx ...................................................................... {\b 22. pinifolius}
\par 
44 Calyx usually less than 2 mm wide;
\par 
   epicalyx-scales c. ½ as long as calyx ...................................... {\b 37. moesiacus}
\par 
43 At least the cauline leaves flat
\par 
45 Petal-limb subglabrous ................................................................. {\b 32. tristis}
\par 
45 Petal-limb bearded
\par 
46 Awn of epicalyx-scales longer than wide part; 
\par 
   calyx ± cylindrical ................................................................. {\b 21. ferrugineus}
\par 
46 Awn of epicalyx-scales equalling or shorter than wide part; 
\par 
   calyx ± tapering above middle
\par 
47 Epicalyx-scales whitish, ± purplish tinged; awn ± equalling 
\par 
   wide part of scale ....................................................................... {\b 31. cruentus}
\par 
47 Epicalyx-scales usually brown; awn shorter than wide
\par 
   part of scale ..................................................................... {\b 28. carthusianorum}
\par 
9  Sheaths of cauline leaves not more than twice (rarely 3 times)
\par 
   as long as diameter of stem; flowers mostly solitary or in small
\par 
   groups without involucral bracts (but see{\b  8} and {\b 22}) 
\par 
48 Calyx pubescent or glandular-pubescent
\par 
49 Annual or biennial, with slender stock and root; 
\par 
   non-flowering stems absent
\par 
50 Epicalyx-scales c. ½ as long as calyx ............ ({\b 111-114}).{\b  corymbosus }group
\par 
50 Epicalyx-scales about as long as calyx
\par 

\par 
228}
\par