{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 29 Seeds smooth; plant green ..................................................... {\b 22. tomentosa}
\par 
28 Leaves less than 10 mm wide
\par 
30 Seeds smooth ......................................................................... {\b 22. tomentosa}
\par 
30 Seeds tuberculate
\par 
31 All pedicels glabrous; calyx not more than 2 mm ................. {\b 17. paniculata}
\par 
31 At least some pedicels pubescent; calyx at least 2 mm
\par 
32 Pedicels 2-3 times as long as calyx ......................................... {\b 6. litwinowii}
\par 
32 Pedicels 5-10 times as long as calyx .......................................... {\b 18. arrostii}
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28 Sect. GYPSOPHILA. Perennials. Stems up to 25 cm, usually procumbent or ascending. Leaves linear. Inflorescence usually lax or few-flowered; pedicels mostly at least twice as long as calyx. Calyx campanulate. Capsule globose. Ovules 8-16.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. G. nana }Bory & Chaub. in Bory,{\i  Expéd. Sci. Morée}{\b  3}({\b 2}): 116 (1832) (incl. {\i G. achaia} Bornm.). Whole plant viscid-pubescent (leaves rarely glabrous), more or less caespitose; stems 2-4(-15) cm, ascending. Leaves 5-20 × 2-3 mm, narrowly oblong, obtuse, rarely subacute. Flowers 3-7; pedicels mostly 2-3 times as long as calyx. Calyx 3-5 mm. Petals 2-3 times as long as calyx, lilac-pink, rarely white. Seeds with acute, conical tubercles. 2n = 34. {\i Crevices of limestone rocks. • Mountains of S. & C. Greece; Kriti}. Cr Gr.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. G. spergulifolia }Griseb.,{\i  Spicil. Fl. Rumel. }{\b 1}: 183 (1843). Densely caespitose; stems 5-25 cm, much-branched, glabrous below, densely glandular-pubescent in the inflorescence. Leaves 5-15 × c. 0·5 mm. Pedicels glandular-pubescent. Calyx 2·5-4 mm, sparsely glandular-pubescent. Petals twice as long as calyx, white or pale purplish. Seeds with flattened tubercles. • {\i C. Jugoslavia, Albania.} Al Ju.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 3. G. repens }L.,{\i  Sp. Pl.} 407 (1753). Plant glabrous; rhizome much-branched, with numerous vegetative and flowering stems up to 25 cm. Leaves 10-30 × 1·5-3 mm, often falcate. Inflorescence usually 5- to 30-flowered, subcorymbose; bracts scarious; pedicels mostly 2 or more times as long as calyx. Calyx 2·5-3·5 mm. Petals more than twice as long as calyx, white, lilac or pale purplish. Seeds with long, acute, conical tubercles. 2n = 34.{\i  Calcicole. • Principal mountains of C. & S. Europe from the Jura, Alps and W. Carpathians to N.W. Spain and C. Italy}. Au Cz Ga Ge He Hs It Ju Po.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 4. G. montserratii }Fernández Casas, {\i Publ. Inst. Biol. Apl.} ({\i Barcelona}){\b  52}: 121 (1972). Stock woody, branched; stems 5-15(-20) cm, glandular-puberulent. Leaves 4-8 mm, somewhat fleshy, obtuse, with ciliate margins. Inflorescence 3- to 8-flowered. Pedicels and calyx glandular-puberulent. Petals about twice as long as calyx. Seeds with acute, conical tubercles. 2n = 26.{\i  Crevices of limestone rocks. • S.E. Spain} ({\i Albacete prov}.). Hs.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28 Sect. CORYMBOSAE Barkoudah. Perennials. Stems usually more than 25 cm. Inflorescence usually more or less corymbose; pedicels usually short and rigid. Calyx campanulate. Capsule globose. Ovules 8-24.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 5. G. altissima }L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 407 (1753) (incl.{\i  G. ucrainica} Kleopow). Stock stout; stems 25-80 cm, erect, branched above, glabrous below, glandular-pubescent above. Leaves 50-80 × 5-20 mm, oblanceolate to linear-oblanceolate, acute or subobtuse, 3(-5)-veined. Inflorescence dense; pedicels shorter than or equalling calyx, glandular-pubescent. Calyx 2-2·5 mm; teeth ovate, obtuse. Petals 1½-2 times as long as calyx.{\i  S. & E. Russia, Ukraine}. Rs(C, W, E).
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 6. G. litwinowii }Kos.-Pol., {\i Sched. Herb. Fl. Ross.}{\b  8}: 61 (1922). Like {\b 5} but leaves 20-50 × 2-4 5 mm, linear to linear-lanceolate, obscurely veined; inflorescence a lax, diffuse panicle; pedicels 2-3 times as long as calyx. •{\i  S.C. Russia} ({\i Zemljansk, N.W. of Voronez}). Rs(C).
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28 Possibly a hybrid between {\b 5} and {\b 17}.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 7. G. fastigiata }L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 407 (1753) (?{\i G. dichotoma }Besser). Rhizome woody; stems 5-100 cm, erect, often branched, glabrous below, glandular-pubescent above and in the inflorescence; internodes longer than leaves. Leaves 20-80 × 1-4 mm, linear, obtuse or abruptly acute, 1-veined. Flowers many, in a rather dense inflorescence; pedicels usually shorter than calyx, usually glabrous. Calyx 2-3 mm, glabrous; teeth ovate, obtuse, not apiculate. Petals c. 1½ times as long as calyx, obovate, rounded at apex, white or pale purplish. Seeds with long, acute, conical tubercles. 2n = 34. • {\i Mainly in E.C. Europe, but extending locally to W. Germany, Sweden, arctic Russia and C. Ukraine}. Au Cz Fe Ge Hu ?Ju Po ?Rm Rs(N, B, C, W) Su.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28 Towards the south-east plants become larger, and have laxer, densely pubescent inflorescences with pubescent pedicels and rather larger flowers. These have been called {\b G. arenaria} Waldst. & Kit.,{\i  Pl. Rar. Hung. }{\b 1}: 40 (1800-1), but the differences are mostly phenotypic, and the difference in size is the only character that remains constant in cultivation.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 8. G. papillosa }Porta, {\b Atti Accad. Agiati} ser. 3, {\b 11} ({\b 2}): 1 (1905) ({\i G. glandulosa} Porta, non Walpers, {\i G. fastigiata} auct. ital., non L.). Like {\b 7} but entirely glabrous; internodes shorter than leaves; leaves linear-lanceolate, long-acuminate; calyx-teeth apiculate; petals emarginate; capsule purplish; seeds with obtuse tubercles.{\i  Dry, stony ground. • N. Italy} ({\i near Garda}). It.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 9. G. collina }Steven ex Ser. in DC.,{\i  Prodr. }{\b 1}: 352 (1824) ({\i G. dichotoma} auct., non Besser, {\i G. arenaria }var. {\i leioclados} Borbás). Like {\b 7} but entirely.glabrous; internodes shorter than leaves; leaves linear, long-acuminate; inflorescence denser, often subcapitate; calyx-teeth obtuse and mucronate, ciliate.{\i  C. Romania; S.W. Ukraine.} Rm Rs(W).
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 10. G. struthium }Loefl.,{\i  Iter Hisp.}{\b  79}: 303 (1758) ({\i G. iberica} Barkoudah). Plant more or less glabrous; rhizome woody, branched. Stems 20-100 cm, ascending to erect, branched. Leaves 10-50 × 1-2 mm. Inflorescence a loose panicle of dense clusters of flowers. Pedicels short, glabrous or glandular-pubescent. Calyx 1·5-3·5 mm. Petals c. 3 mm, cuneate, white. Seeds with long, acute, conical tubercles. {\i Gypsaceous soils. • C., E. & N. Spain.} Hs.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b struthium}: Leaves semi-terete, acute. Flowers subsessile in capitate clusters c. 1 cm in diameter. Calyx 2-3·5 mm; teeth lanceolate. 2n = 24.{\i  C. & S.E. Spain}.
\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b hispanica} (Willk.) G. López, {\i Anal. Jard. Bot. Madrid}{\b  41}: 36 (1984) ({\i G. hispanica} Willk., {\i G. struthium} sensu Barkoudah, non Loefl.): Leaves subtriquetrous or flat, obtuse or subacute. Flowers in distinctly pedicellate corymbs. Calyx 1·5-2 mm; teeth oblong-lanceolate.{\i  C., E. & N. Spain}.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 11. G. bermejoi }G. López, {\i An. Jard. Bot. Madrid}{\b  41}: 35 (1984). Plant glabrous; rhizome woody. Stems 40-80(-100) cm, ascending, branched. Leaves 10-50 × 2-8 mm, narrowly oblong to oblong
\par 

\par 
220}
\par