{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 patent hairs on the ribs. Petals white, with a transverse purple stripe. 2n = 30.{\i  C. Greece; Kikhlades }({\i Naxos}). Gr.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b B. intermedius} Phitos,{\i  Bot. Chron.}{\b  1}: 39 (1981), described from serpentine rocks in N. Evvoia, differs from {\b 4} mainly by the flowers being in terminal 2- to 7-flowered clusters or solitary or paired in the axils of cauline leaves, and having both long and short hairs on the stems. It is known only from the type collection, and is probably not specifically distinct.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 5. B. thymifolius }(Sm.) Phitos, {\i Bot. Chron.}{\b  1}: 39 (1981) ({\i B. graecus} var.{\i  thymifolia} (Sm.) Barkoudah). Plant densely pubescent, glandular-hairy above. Stems up to 25 cm, branched. Leaves up to 15 mm, linear-oblanceolate or sometimes obovate-spathulate. Flowers subsessile in 2- to 5-flowered dense heads, or with longer pedicels, solitary or paired in the axils of cauline leaves. Calyx 3-4 mm. Petals white. •{\i  N.C. & C. Greece.} ?Bu Gr.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 6. B. creutzbergii }Greuter, {\i Candollea}{\b  20}: 210 (1965). Plant caespitose, densely hairy with glandular and longer eglandular hairs. Stems 1·5-6 cm, mostly unbranched. Leaves 2-5 × 0·5-1·5 mm, lanceolate-spathulate. Flowers in 2- to 10-flowered terminal clusters, subsessile or shortly pedicellate. Calyx 2·5-3·5 mm. Petals purplish. Seeds minutely papillose. 2n = 20.{\i  Calcareous rocks and screes, }1700-2000{\i  m. • Mountains of Kriti.} Cr.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28 Plants from coastal sands in W. Kriti (near Palaiochora) seem to belong within {\b 6}, but require further investigation.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 33.                Saponaria}               L.
\par 

\pard\f0\fs24\qc  A.O. Chater.
\par 

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Annual or perennial herbs. Inflorescence dichasial, paniculate to capitate; rarely flowers solitary. Epicalyx absent. Calyx cylindrical or oblong, 5-toothed, 15- to 25-veined, without scarious commissures. Petals 5, exceeding calyx, narrowed abruptly (or rarely gradually) into a long claw; coronal scales usually present; stamens 10; styles 2, rarely 3. Capsule cylindrical to ovoid, dehiscing with 4, rarely 6, teeth. Seeds reniform, with lateral hilum, more or less compressed.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28 Literature: G. Simmler, {\i Denkschr. Akad. Wiss. Math.-Nat. Kl.} ({\i Wien}) {\b 85}: 433-509 (1910).
\par 

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Petals yellow; inflorescence capitate
\par 
2 Filaments yellow; leaves spathulate ......................................... {\b 1. bellidifolia}
\par 
2 Filaments deep violet; leaves linear-lanceolate ................................. {\b 2. lutea}
\par 
1 Petals pink to purple, rarely white, never yellow;
\par 
  inflorescence various
\par 
3 Stems 1-flowered
\par 
4 Styles 3 (rarely 2); calyx not more than 20 mm; teeth obtuse ....... {\b 4. pumilio}
\par 
4 Styles 2; calyx 20-30 mm; teeth acute .............................................. {\b 6. sicula}
\par 
3 Stems with 2 or more flowers
\par 
5 Calyx not more than 15 mm
\par 
6 Plant densely caespitose; basal leaves linear-lanceolate;
\par 
  calyx 12-15 mm .......................................................................... {\b 3. caespitosa}
\par 
6 Plant not caespitose; basal leaves spathulate, ovate-lanceolate 
\par 
  or ovate; calyx 7-13 mm
\par 
7 Perennial, woody below, with conspicuous, nonflowering leafy stems
\par 
  .................................................................................................... {\b 8. ocymoides}
\par 
7 Annual, without conspicuous, non-flowering leafy stems
\par 
8 Stems much-branched; pedicels and calyx glandular-hispid ....... {\b 7. calabrica}
\par 
8 Stems little-branched; pedicels and calyx glabrous ................ {\b 10. chlorifolia}
\par 
5 Calyx more than 15 mm
\par 
9 Plant usually caespitose; leaves 1-veined; inflorescence 
\par 
  branches mostly alternate .................................................................. {\b 6. sicula}
\par 
9 Plant not caespitose; leaves 3-veined; inflorescence branches  
\par 
  mostly opposite
\par 
10 Plant ± glabrous, or hairy only in the inflorescence;
\par 
   petal-limb c. 10 mm ................................................................... {\b 9. officinalis}
\par 
10 Plant glandular-hispid; petal-limb c. 5 mm .............................. {\b 5. glutinosa}
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. S. bellidifolia }Sm.,{\i  Spicil. Bot.}{\b  1}: 5 (1791). Caespitose; flowering stems 20-40 cm, erect, unbranched, usually glabrous, usually with 1 pair of linear-lanceolate leaves. Basal leaves spathulate. Inflorescence capitate, with a pair of linear-lanceolate bracts; flowers sessile. Upper part of calyx hairy; teeth triangular, acute. Petal-limb c. 4 mm, yellow; filaments yellow, long-exserted. 2n = 28.{\i  Mountain rocks and pastures. • Balkan peninsula; locally elsewhere in S. Europe from the Pyrenees to C. Romania}. Al Bu Ga Gr Hs It Ju Rm.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. S. lutea }L.,{\i  Sp. Pl.} ed. 2, 585 (1762). Caespitose; flowering stems 2-12 cm, erect, unbranched, shortly hairy, with 2 or more pairs of linear leaves. Basal leaves linear-lanceolate. Inflorescence more or less capitate; pedicels and calyx densely hairy. Calyx-teeth triangular, acute. Petal-limb c. 4 mm, yellow; filaments deep violet, long-exserted. •{\i  S.W. & S.C. Alps.} Ga He It.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 3. S. caespitosa }DC., {\i Rapp. Voy. Bot.}{\b  2}: 78 (1808). Densely caespitose; flowering stems 5-15 cm, usually unbranched, glabrous, or slightly hairy above, with 2 or more pairs of small linear-lanceolate leaves. Basal leaves linear-lanceolate. Inflorescence condensed or capitate. Calyx densely hairy, purplish; teeth triangular-lanceolate, acute. Petal-limb 4-7 mm, purplish.{\i  Mountain rocks and screes. • C. Pyrenees.} Ga Hs.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 4. S. pumilio }(L.) Fenzl ex A. Braun,{\i  Flora} ({\i Regensb.}){\b  26}: 801 (1843) ({\i Silene pumilio} (L.) Wulfen). Caespitose; stems very short, often shorter than the solitary, terminal flower. Leaves linear. Calyx 13-20 mm, rather inflated, hairy; teeth ovate, obtuse. Petals pale purplish, rarely white; limb 7-9 mm; styles 3, rarely 2.{\i  Mountain pastures; Calcifuge. • E. Alps; S. Carpathians}. Au It Rm.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 5. S. glutinosa }Bieb.,{\i  Fl. Taur.-Cauc.}{\b  1}: 322 (1808). Annual or biennial, usually glandular-hispid throughout; stem 25-50 cm, branched above in a pyramidal panicle. Basal leaves spathulate, rarely almost linear; cauline ovate-lanceolate, acute. Calyx 20-25 mm; teeth lanceolate, acuminate. Petal-limb c. 5 mm, purple, bifid. 2n = 56.{\i  S.E. Europe; Spain}. Al Bu Cr Gr Hs Ju Rm Rs(K) ?Tu.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 6. S. sicula }Rafin.,{\i  Specch. Sci.}{\b  2}: 7 (1814). Caespitose perennial; stems procumbent to erect, glabrous below. Leaves 1-4 cm, narrowly spathulate to linear-oblanceolate, 1-veined. Inflorescence usually with alternate branches; branches, pedicels and calyx hairy. Calyx 20-30 mm, reddish-tinged, becoming somewhat inflated; teeth triangular, acute or acuminate. Petal-limb 5-8 mm, bifid, red.{\i  Sicilia; Sardegna; C. part of Balkan peninsula.} Al Bu Gr Ju Sa Si.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Calyx eglandular-pubescent ......................................... ({\b b}) subsp. {\b intermedia}
\par 
1 Calyx glandular-pubescent
\par 

\par 
223}
\par