{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 51 Epicalyx-scales lanceolate; calyx 15-20 mm .............................. {\b 1. armeria}
\par 
51 Epicalyx-scales ovate; calyx c. 10 mm .............................. {\b 2. pseudarmeria}
\par 
49 Perennial with stout, woody stock or root; non-flowering
\par 
   stems present at anthesis
\par 
52 Lower leaves obtuse or subobtuse
\par 
53 Petal-limb bearded ................................................................... {\b 93. deltoides}
\par 
53 Petal-limb glabrous ..................................... ({\b 111-114}). {\b corymbosus} group
\par 
52 Lower leaves acuminate
\par 
54 Cauline leaves shorter than internodes (S.W. Europe) ................ {\b 76. scaber}
\par 
54 Cauline leaves at least as long as internodes
\par 
   (Bulgaria, Greece, Turkey) ................................................. {\b 105. roseoluteus}
\par 
48 Calyx glabrous
\par 
55 Annual, with slender stock and root; non-flowering stems absent
\par 
56 Calyx verruculose ............................................................. {\b 110. tripunctatus}
\par 
56 Calyx smooth
\par 
57 Cauline leaves narrowly oblong, mostly obtuse .................. {\b 47. viridescens}
\par 
57 Cauline leaves linear, acute or acuminate
\par 
58 Flowers usually in clusters of 2 or 3; calyx (10-)12-17 mm 
\par 
   .......................................................................... ({\b 111-114}). {\b corymbosus} group
\par 
58 Flowers in many-flowered heads; calyx c. 10 mm ............. {\b 2. pseudarmeria}
\par 
55 Perennial, with stout stock or root; non-flowering
\par 
   stems usually present at anthesis
\par 
59 At least some of the leaves obtuse or subobtuse
\par 
60 Flowers numerous, in a dense head ............................................ {\b 8. barbatus}
\par 
60 Flowers solitary, or few together and distinctly pedicellate
\par 
61 Leaves of non-flowering stems c. 5 mm, elliptical
\par 
62 Leaves on flowering stems similar to those on non-flowering  
\par 
   stems, longer than internodes .............................................. {\b 94. myrtinervius}
\par 
62 Leaves on flowering stems narrower than on non-flowering stems, 
\par 
   shorter than internodes
\par 
63 Stock stout; calyx tapering upwards from below the 
\par 
   middle .................................................................................. {\b 95. sphacioticus}
\par 
63 Stock slender; calyx cylindrical or widening upwards ........... {\b 93. deltoides}
\par 
61 Leaves of non-flowering stems more than 5 mm, or else not elliptical
\par 
64 Stems shortly pubescent
\par 
65 Petals glabrous
\par 
66 Calyx c. 18 mm; petal-limb c. 3 mm, cream above, 
\par 
   cinnamon beneath ............................................................ {\b 101. cinnamomeus}
\par 
66 Calyx 9-13 mm; petal-limb 7-10 mm, pink or pinkish-purple 
\par 
   .......................................................................... ({\b 111-114}).{\b  corymbosus} group
\par 
65 Petals bearded
\par 
67 Petals spotted; basal leaves usually narrowly oblong or
\par 
   lanceolate ................................................................................... {\b 93. deltoides}
\par 
67 Petals unspotted; basal leaves linear or spathulate
\par 
   ......................................................................... ({\b 111-114}).{\b  corymbosus} group
\par 
64 Stems glabrous, smooth or rarely scabrid on the angles
\par 
68 Petal-limb laciniate
\par 
69 Leaves of non-flowering shoots 1·5-3 mm wide 
\par 
   (Atlantic coast from N. Spain to N.W. France) ........................... {\b 91. gallicus}
\par 
69 Leaves of non-flowering shoots usually less than 1 mm wide
\par 
70 Central, undivided part of petal-limb lanceolate, with a greenish  
\par 
   or purplish spot at base .............................................................. {\b 88. arenarius}
\par 
70 Central, undivided part of petal-limb narrowly
   obovate-cuneate, unspotted
\par 
71 Epicalyx-scales 4-6 (E.C. Russia) ....................................... {\b 89. krylovianus}
\par 
71 Epicalyx-scales 2-4
\par 
72 Calyx-teeth obtuse or apiculate, with broadly scarious margin
\par 
   .................................................................................................. {\b 83. plumarius}
\par 
72 Calyx-teeth acute to acuminate, usually not broadly 
\par 
   scarious (S. Czechoslovakia) .................................................. {\b 84. moravicus}
\par 
68 Petal-limb dentate to subentire
\par 
73 Epicalyx-scales not more than 1/3 as long as calyx
\par 
74 Calyx 6-10(-13) mm; petals glabrous ................................... {\b 66. subacaulis}
\par 
74 Calyx 14-25 mm; petals usually bearded
\par 
75 Epicalyx-scales gradually narrowed at apex ........................... {\b 78. cintranus}
\par 
75 Epicalyx-scales abruptly contracted at apex
\par 
76 Flowers usually 2-4 together; leaves with thin margins ........... {\b 40. seguieri}
\par 
76 Flowers solitary; leaves with thick margins
\par 
77 Epicalyx-scales green and purplish, herbaceous 
\par 
   (W. & C. Europe) ......................................................... {\b 62. gratianopolitanus}
\par 
77 Epicalyx-scales brown, coriaceous (Kriti and Karpathos) .. {\b 63. xylorrhizus}
\par 
73 Epicalyx-scales at least ½ as long as calyx
\par 
78 Epicalyx-scales c. ½ as long as calyx
\par 
79 Cauline leaves at least 5 pairs; flowers usually 2 or 3 together
\par 
   ....................................................................................................... {\b 55. nitidus}
\par 
79 Cauline leaves 1-3(4) pairs; flowers nearly always solitary
\par 
80 Epicalyx-scales membranous, acute; cauline leaves scale-like
\par 
   ................................................................................................. {\b 60. microlepis}
\par 
80 Epicalyx-scales herbaceous, apex subulate; cauline leaves not scale-like
\par 
81 Epicalyx-scales often 4, the inner ovate, abruptly narrowed at apex;
\par 
   calyx c. 5 mm wide ....................................................................... {\b 53. repens}
\par 
81 Epicalyx-scales 2, lanceolate, gradually narrowed at apex;
\par 
   calyx c. 3 mm wide ................................................................... {\b 56. scardicus}
\par 
78 Epicalyx-scales more than ½ as long to as long as calyx
\par 
82 Leaf-margins thick and cartilaginous ............................ {\b 107. haematocalyx}
\par 
82 Leaf-margins not thick and cartilaginous
\par 
83 Cauline leaves at least 5 pairs
\par 
84 Middle cauline leaves much smaller than basal .......................... {\b 55. nitidus}
\par 
84 Middle cauline leaves much larger than basal ....................... {\b 57. callizonus}
\par 
83 Cauline leaves 4 pairs or fewer
\par 
85 Basal leaves at least 3 mm wide, oblong-lanceolate ................... {\b 54. alpinus}
\par 
85 Basal leaves up to 2-5 mm wide, linear
\par 

\par 
229}
\par