{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b armeriastrum} (Wolfner) Velen.,{\i  Fl. Bulg., Suppl.} 42 (1898) ({\i D. armeriastrum} Wolfner): Inner epicalyx-scales ovate. Calyx purplish. 2n = 30.{\i  From Hungary and N. Romania southwards to N. Greece}.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. D. pseudoarmeria }Bieb.,{\i  Fl. Taur.-Cauc. }{\b 1}: 323 (1808). Like {\b 1} but epicalyx-scales ovate, abruptly contracted to a subulate point; calyx c. 10 × 1·5 mm; petal-limb pink.{\i  Lowlands of S.E. Europe, from S.E. Jugoslavia to S. Russia.} Bu Ju Rm Rs(W, K, E) Tu.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 3. D. trifasciculatus }Kit. in Schultes,{\i  Österreichs Fl}. ed. 2, {\b 1}: 654 (1814). Glabrous or puberulent perennial up to 80 cm. Leaves 4-10 mm wide, linear-lanceolate, thin; basal leaves few or none at anthesis; cauline usually 10-20 pairs; veins 7-9, at least some of the laterals almost as prominent as the midrib; sheaths 2-3 times as long as diameter of stem. Flowers usually numerous and usually in 3 pedunculate heads; bracts 4, green at least above, about as long as flowers. Epicalyx-scales lanceolate to ovate, with a green, subulate apex about as long as calyx. Calyx 10-16 mm. Petal-limb 4-10 mm, bearded. •{\i  S.E. Europe, from W.C. Bulgaria to C. Ukraine}. Bu Ju Rm Rs(W).
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Petal-limb c. 4 mm, lilac .............................................. ({\b b}) subsp. {\b parviflorus}
\par 
1 Petal-limb c. 10 mm, pink or purple
\par 
2 Heads shortly pedunculate; petals pink .................... ({\b a}) subsp. {\b trifasciculatus}
\par 
2 Heads long-pedunculate; petals purple .................. ({\b c}) subsp. {\b pseudobarbatus}
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b trifasciculatus} (incl. subsp. {\i pseudoliburnicus} Stoj. & Acht.): Heads shortly pedunculate. Calyx c. 16 mm. Petal-limb c. 10 mm, pink.{\i  Romania, Bulgaria, E. Jugoslavia}.
\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b parviflorus} Stoj. & Acht., {\i Sborn. Balg. Akad. Nauk.}{\b  29}: 40 (1935) ({\i D. desertii} Prodan, non Post): Heads subsessile. Calyx c. 11 mm. Petal-limb c. 4 mm, lilac.{\i  Lower Danube valley}.
\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b c}) Subsp. {\b pseudobarbatus} (Schmalh.) Jalas, {\i Ann. Bot. Fenn.}{\b  22}: 219 (1985) ({\i D. euponticus} Zapal.): Heads long-pedunculate, often more than 3. Calyx 10-13 mm. Petal-limb c. 10 mm, purple. {\i Almost throughout the range of the species}.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 4. D. urumoffii }Stoj. & Acht.,{\i  Sborn. Balg. Akad. Nauk.}{\b  29}: 42 (1935). Like {\b 3}({\b a}) but sheaths 5-9 times as long as diameter of stem; bracts numerous; calyx 16-20 × 3-3·5 mm, narrowly cylindrical and narrowed towards apex; petal-limb red, with yellow spot at base. {\i W. Bulgaria.} Bu.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28 Not seen recently and possibly extinct.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 5. D. knappii }(Pant.) Ascherson & Kanitz ex Borbás,{\i  Math. Term. Közl. }{\b 13}: 196 (1877). Shortly pubescent perennial to 40 cm. Leaves linear-lanceolate, 5- to 7-veined; midrib more prominent than lateral veins; sheaths c. 3 times as long as diameter of stem. Heads usually 2, shortly pedunculate, many-flowered; outer bracts leaf-like, the inner more or less scarious. Epicalyx-scales ovate, with a green, subulate awn nearly as long as calyx. Calyx 15 mm; teeth ovate-acuminate. Petals sulphur-yellow. •{\i  W. Jugoslavia.} Ju.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 6. D. membranaceus }Borbás,{\i  Österr. Bot. Zeitschr.}{\b  26}: 125 (1876) ({\i D. euponticus} sensu Schischkin, non Zapal., {\i D. rehmannii} Blocki). Perennial 30-70 cm. Leaves linear-lanceolate, acute or acuminate; sheaths 2-4 times as long as diameter of stem. Heads usually 3- to 6-flowered, solitary or 2 or 3, shortly pedunculate; bracts lanceolate or ovate-lanceolate, acuminate, usually shorter than flowers. Epicalyx-scales ovate, broadly scarious, narrowed into a short awn, shorter than broad part of scale. Calyx 12-18 mm, narrowed upwards; teeth lanceolate, aristate, the margins pubescent, whitish. Petal-limb c. 5 mm, bearded, purple. •{\i  From N.E. Bulgaria to S.C. Russia.} Bu Rm Rs(C, W, E).
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 7. D. dobrogensis }Prodan,{\i  Bul. Acad. Stud. Agron. Cluj }{\b  5}({\b 1}): 97 (1934) ({\i D. membranaceus} sensu Stoj. & Stefanov, non Borbás). Like {\b 6} but epicalyx-scales rounded at apex, mucronate; calyx c. 10 mm; teeth obtuse, sometimes shortly mucronate; petals glabrous, pink. •{\i  S.E. Romania and N.E. Bulgaria.} Bu Rm.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 8. D. barbatus }L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 409 (1753) ({\i D. girardini} Lamotte). Subglabrous perennial up to 60 cm. Leaves lanceolate, often narrowed into a short petiole, the lower obtuse, the upper acute or acuminate; midrib prominent; lateral veins obscure. Heads large, many-flowered; pedicels short; bracts herbaceous, about equalling flowers. Epicalyx-scales ovate, aristate. Petal-limb purple, shortly bearded.{\i  From the Pyrenees to the E. Carpathians and Balkan peninsula; widely cultivated for ornament elsewhere, and locally naturalized}. Au Bu Cz Ga Hs Hu It Ju Po Rm Rs(W) Tu [Fe Ge Rs(B, C, E)].
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b barbatus}: Leaves sessile. Bracts equalling flowers. Epicalyx-scales and calyx usually green. 2n = 30.{\i  Throughout the range of the species except E.C. Europe; mainly lowland and often cultivated and naturalized}.
\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b compactus} (Kit.) Heuffel, {\i Verh. Zool.-Bot. Ges. Wien}{\b  8}: 68 (1858) ({\i D. compactus} Kit.): Lower leaves attenuate into a petiole. Bracts shorter than flowers. Epicalyx-scales and calyx usually purplish-brown. 2n = 30.{\i  Mountains of C. & S. Europe from the Carpathians to S. Italy}.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 9. D. humilis }Willd. ex Ledeb., {\i Fl. Ross.}{\b  1}: 280 (1842). Densely caespitose perennial 5-35 cm; stems simple or little-branched. Leaves 0·5-1 mm wide, short, stiff, setaceous. Epicalyx-scales usually 6, c. 2/3 as long as calyx; inner ovate, acuminate; outer much smaller and narrower. Calyx 10-15 × 2 mm, tapering above the middle. Petal-limb 2-3 mm, dentate, bearded. •{\i  S. Ukraine}. Rs(*W, K)
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 10. D. ciliatus }Guss.,{\i  Ind. Sem. Horto Boccad.}{\b  1825}: 5 (1825). Laxly caespitose perennial up to c. 60 cm. Leaves 1-2 mm wide, more or less flat, linear, acuminate, the basal often few at anthesis. Epicalyx-scales usually 8, c. ½ as long as calyx, ovate, acuminate. Calyx 15-23 × 3 mm, tapering from below the middle. Petal-limb 5-10 mm, dentate to subentire, glabrous. •{\i  Italy, W. Jugoslavia, Albania.} Al It Ju.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b ciliatus}: Stock stout; stems little-branched. Cauline leaves usually 4-6 pairs. Petals shallowly dentate or subentire.{\i  Italy, N.W. Jugoslavia}.
\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b dalmaticus} (Celak.) Hayek,{\i  Prodr. Fl. Penins. Balcan.}{\b  1}: 246 (1924) ({\i D. dalmaticus} Celak.): Stock slender; stems much-branched. Cauline leaves usually 7-13 pairs. Petals dentate. {\i S.W. Jugoslavia, W. Albania.}
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 11. D. arpadianus }Ade & Bornm.,{\i  Feddes Repert.}{\b  36}: 385 (1934). Pulvinate perennial 2-8 cm. Leaves usually 5-8 mm, linear, acuminate; cauline leaves 1-3 pairs. Flowers 1 or 2. Epicalyx-scales 4-6, ½ - ¾ as long as calyx, ovate, with a subulate apex. Calyx 8-10 × 2-3 mm, almost cylindrical. Petal-limb 2-3 mm, dentate, bearded.{\i  N. Aegean region} ({\i Samothraki}). Gr. ({\i Anatolia}.)
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 12. D. nardiformis }Janka,{\i  Österr. Bot. Zeitschr. }{\b 23}: 195 (1873). Caespitose perennial up to c. 10 cm, with slender, branched, woody
\par 

\par 
233}
\par