{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 150 Flowers solitary; petal-limb 9-12 mm .................................. {\b 78. cintranus}
\par 
122 Petal-limb completely glabrous
\par 
151 Basal leaves withered at anthesis
\par 
152 Sheaths 2-3 times as long as diameter of stem ................ {\b 103. lanceolatus}
\par 
152 Sheaths about as long as diameter of stem
\par 
153 Petal-limb narrowly rhombic ......................................... {\b 104. leptopetalus}
\par 
153 Petal-limb obovate
\par 
154 Stems simple or with 1 or 2 branches; petal-limb cinnamon 
\par 
    beneath ............................................................................ {\b 101. cinnamomeus}
\par 
154 Stems freely branched; petal-limb greenish or pink beneath 
\par 
155 Calyx c. 15 × 3 mm .......................................................... {\b 100. marschallii}
\par 
155 Calyx 17-22 × 4 mm ..................................................... {\b 102. monadelphus}
\par 
151 Basal leaves or leafy non-flowering stems present at anthesis
\par 
156 Epicalyx-scales usually 8-12
\par 
157 Stem glabrous below; petal-limb 5-10 mm .............................. {\b 10. ciliatus}
\par 
157 Stem puberulent below; petal-limb 2-4 mm ......................... {\b 14. ingoldbyi}
\par 
156 Epicalyx-scales usually 4(-8)
\par 
158 At least the outer epicalyx-scales attenuate at apex
\par 
159 Leaves c. 0·5 mm wide
\par 
160 Calyx 4·5-6 mm wide ............................................................ {\b 78. cintranus}
\par 
160 Calyx 2-4 mm wide
\par 
161 Stems 5-15(-20) cm, simple  (E. Pyrenees) ............................ {\b 67. pungens}
\par 
161 Stems 15-45 cm, simple or branched
\par 
162 Stems usually simple; calyx 9-15 mm .............................. {\b 72. serratifolius}
\par 
162 Stems usually branched; calyx 15-30 mm .......................... {\b 73. pyrenaicus}
\par 
159 Some leaves 1 mm or more wide 
\par 
163 Calyx 17-32 mm
\par 
164 Calyx 4·5-6 mm wide; petals reddish-lilac ........................... {\b 78. cintranus}
\par 
164 Calyx (2-)3-4 mm wide; petals white ..................................... {\b 79. petraeus}
\par 
163 Calyx 10-16 mm (see also {\b 79}({\b a}))
\par 
165 Epicalyx-scales c. 1/3 as long as calyx; calyx ± cylindrical,
\par 
    or narrowly ovoid ........................................................................ {\b 80. integer}
\par 
165 Epicalyx-scales c. ½ as long as calyx; calyx tapering 
\par 
    from middle or below
\par 
166 Cauline leaves 10-30 mm, usually patent; stock slender ........ {\b 46. furcatus}
\par 
166 Cauline leaves 5-10 mm, closely appressed to stem;
\par 
    stock stout and woody .................................................................. {\b 69. costae}
\par 
158 At least the inner epicalyx-scales abruptly cuspidate to truncate
\par 
167 Calyx 15 mm or more 
\par 
168 Calyx less than 3 mm wide ..................................................... {\b 79. petraeus}
\par 
168 Calyx at least 4 mm wide
\par 
169 Calyx up to 20 mm, tapering markedly above the middle at anthesis
\par 
170 Petal-limb 3-5 mm .............................................................. {\b 68. hispanicus}
\par 
170 Petal-limb 5-10 mm ............................................................ {\b 71. laricifolius}
\par 
169 Calyx up to 30 mm, almost cylindrical, if tapering, more than 20 mm
\par 
171 Basal leaves usually less than 1 mm wide, convolute, wiry . {\b 64. sylvestris}
\par 
171 Basal leaves more than 1 mm wide, flat and rather soft
\par 
172 Petal-limb 4-6 mm, dirty white ......................................... {\b 63. xylorrhizus}
\par 
172 Petal-limb 10-15 mm, pink or purplish ........................... {\b 65. caryophyllus} 
\par 
167 Calyx less than 15 mm
\par 
173 Calyx-teeth up to 2(-2·5) times as long as wide, obtuse or
\par 
    subobtuse to acute, not acuminate
\par 
174 Calyx usually not more than 10 mm
\par 
175 Basal leaves c. 1 mm wide; calyx 3-4 mm wide, ventricose {\b 66. subacaulis}
\par 
175 Basal leaves c. 0·5 mm wide; calyx c. 2 mm wide, almost 
\par 
    cylindrical ................................................................................ {\b 70. langeanus}
\par 
174 Calyx at least 10 mm
\par 
176 Flowers pink .......................................................................... {\b 64. sylvestris}
\par 
176 Flowers white
\par 
177 Epicalyx-scales 2-4; petal-limb ± entire ................................... {\b 80. integer}
\par 
177 Epicalyx-scales (4-)6; petal-limb subentire to dentate ........ {\b 13. anatolicus}
\par 
173 Calyx-teeth 3-4 times as long as wide, acuminate or apiculate
\par 
178 Inner epicalyx-scales less than twice as long as wide
\par 
179 Inner and outer epicalyx-scales similar;
\par 
    flowers solitary ....................................................................... {\b 68. hispanicus}
\par 
179 Outer epicalyx-scales narrow and gradually acuminate, inner
\par 
    obovate, cuspidate; flowers usually 2 or 3 together .............. {\b 71. laricifolius}
\par 
178 Inner epicalyx-scales at least twice as long as wide
\par 
180 Calyx 6-10(-13) mm; stem usually simple .......................... {\b 66. subacaulis}
\par 
180 Calyx 14-20 mm; stem usually freely branched ................. {\b 71. laricifolius}
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28 Subgenus{\b  Armeriastrum} Ser. Flowers in groups or heads often surrounded by involucral bracts, rarely solitary. Plants often obviously woody at base.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. D. armeria }L.,{\i  Sp. Pl.} 410 (1753) ({\i D. epirotus} Halácsy). Usually pubescent and branched annual or biennial up to 40 cm. Basal leaves oblong, obtuse; cauline linear, acute; all flat and thin. Flowers clustered; bracts leaf-like, about as long as flowers. Epicalyx-scales 2, about as long as calyx, lanceolate, with green, subulate apex. Calyx 15-20 × 2-3 mm, narrowed above the middle. Petal-limb c. 5 mm, dentate, bearded, reddish with pale dots. {\i W., C. & S. Europe, extending to S. Sweden and E. Ukraine}. Al Au Be Br Bu Co Cz Da Ga Ge Gr He Ho Hs Hu It Ju Lu Po Rm Rs(B, C, W, ?E) Sa Si Su Tu.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b armeria}: Inner epicalyx-scales lanceolate. Calyx green. 2n = 30. {\i Throughout the range of the species}.
\par 

\par 
232}
\par