{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 less than ½ as long as calyx; calyx c. 18 mm; petal-limb 12-25 mm, pink. 2n = 90. •{\i  E. Alps}. Au It Ju.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 53. D. repens }Willd.,{\i  Sp. Pl. }{\b 2}({\b 1}): 681 (1799). Glabrous perennial 5-22 cm. Leaves linear-oblong, at least the lower obtuse. Epicalyx-scales usually 4, ½ as long as calyx, rarely longer; outer lanceolate with a subulate point, the inner ovate, abruptly narrowed at apex. Calyx 9-12 × 4-5 mm, widening upwards. Petal-limb 10-12 mm, bearded, pink or purplish. 2n = 60.{\i  N. & E. Russia.} Rs(N, C).
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 54. D. alpinus }L.,{\i  Sp. Pl.} 412 (1753). Subcaespitose, glabrous perennial 2-20 cm. Leaves oblong to oblanceolate, obtuse, the basal 3-5 mm wide. Flowers borne above the leaves. Epicalyx-scales 2-4, herbaceous, ovate, with a subulate apex, more than ½ as long as calyx. Calyx 15-18 × 6-7·5 mm, widening upwards; teeth ovate, acute, broadly scarious. Petal-limb 15-18 mm, bearded purplish-red with white spots (rarely entirely white). 2n = 30. •{\i  N.E. Alps}. Au.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 55. D. nitidus }Waldst. & Kit., {\i Pl. Rar. Hung.}{\b  3}: 209 (1806). Like {\b 54} but taller; stems often branched and flowers in pairs; calyx 10-12 mm; petal-limb 8-10 mm. 2n = 30.{\i  Calcicole. • W. Carpathians.} Cz †Po.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 56. D. scardicus }Wettst.,{\i  Biblioth. Bot.} ({\i Stuttgart}) 26: 31 (1892) ({\i D. nitidus} sensu Boiss. pro parte, non Waldst. & Kit.). Subcaespitose, with long non-flowering stems; stems 1·5-10 cm. Leaves c. 15 × 2-3 mm, 3-veined. Flowers usually solitary. Epicalyx-scales 2, about ½ as long as calyx; apex 3-veined, patent or appressed. Calyx 10-12 mm, widening upwards. Petal-limb 7-8 mm, pink.{\i  Mountain pastures. • S.W. Jugoslavia; E. Albania}. Al Ju.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 57. D. callizonus }Schott & Kotschy, {\i Bot. Zeit.}{\b  9}: 192 (1851). Stems 5-20 cm, 1-flowered, glabrous. Leaves linear-lanceolate, the upper acute or acuminate, the lower obtuse. Epicalyx-scales 2-4, ovate, with a green subulate apex, the outer about as long as calyx. Calyx c. 16 mm, widening upwards, dark red; teeth ovate-lanceolate, acuminate. Petal-limb 10-15 mm, bright pink, with dark spots near base. 2n = 30. •{\i  S. Carpathians} ({\i Muntii Piatra Craiului, S.W. of Brasov}). Rm.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 58. D. glacialis }Haenke in Jacq.,{\i  Collect. Bot.}{\b  2}: 84 (1789). Nearly glabrous, caespitose perennial usually c. 5 cm. Leaves 1-2 mm wide, linear, or widest above the middle, mostly obtuse; cauline 1-3 pairs. Flowers solitary, usually surrounded by the leaves. Epicalyx-scales 2-4, ovate, with a green, subulate point, about as long as calyx. Calyx 12-16 × 3-7 mm, widening upwards. •{\i  E. Alps and Carpathians}. Au Cz He It ?Ju Po Rm.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28 ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b glacialis}: Leaf-margin almost glabrous. Calyx 3-4 mm wide. Petal-limb usually 5-7 mm. 2n = 30. {\i Almost throughout the range of the species}.
\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b gelidus} (Schott, Nyman & Kotschy) Tutin,{\i  Feddes Repert.}{\b  68}: 190 (1963) ({\i D. gelidus} Schott, Nyman & Kotschy): Leaf-margin ciliate towards base. Calyx 5-7 mm wide. Petal-limb 10-12 mm.{\i  S. & E. Carpathians}.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28 Plants intermediate between subspp. ({\b a}) and ({\b b}) have been called {\i D. glacialis} var.{\i  pawlowskianus} Soó.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 59. D. freynii }Vandas, {\i Sitz.-Ber. Böhm. Ges. Wiss. }{\b 1890}({\b 1}): 255 (1890). Like {\b 58} but leaves usually less than 1 mm wide; flowers borne above leaves; calyx 8-10 × 3-4 mm; petal-limb 5-9 mm. •{\i  C. Jugoslavia }({\i Bosna}). Ju.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 60. D. microlepis }Boiss., {\i Diagn. Pl. Or. Nov. }{\b 1}({\b 1}): 22 (1843). Caespitose perennial 1-10 cm; stems leafless or with 1 or 2 pairs of scale-like leaves. Basal leaves 10-20 × 1·2-1·5 mm, obtuse. Epicalyx-scales 2, more or less remote, membranous, ovate, the apex herbaceous or not. Calyx 9-10·5 mm, widening upwards. Petal-limb 6-7 mm, purple. 2n = 30. •{\i  Mountains of Bulgaria and S. Jugoslavia.} Bu ?Gr Ju.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 61. D. pavonius }Tausch, {\i Flora} ({\i Regensb}.) {\b 22}: 145 (1839) ({\i D. neglectus} Loisel. pro parte). Caespitose perennial 4-10 cm. Leaves linear, acuminate, 3-veined. Flowers 1(-3). Epicalyx-scales usually herbaceous, ovate, gradually narrowed to the subulate apex, about as long as calyx. Calyx 12-15 × 4-5 mm, narrowing somewhat upwards; teeth broadly scarious, acute or acuminate. Petal-limb 10-12 mm, bearded, purplish-red. 2n = 30. •{\i  S.W. Alps; ?E. Alps.} Ga It.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 62. D. gratianopolitanus }Vill.,{\i  Hist. Pl. Dauph.}{\b  3}: 598 (1789) ({\i D. caesius} Sm.). Subcaespitose, glabrous, more or less glaucous perennial 6-25 cm. Leaves 1-2 mm wide, linear-lanceolate, more or less flat, the cauline usually 2 or 3 pairs. Flowers usually solitary, fragrant. Epicalyx-scales herbaceous, ovate to obovate, cuspidate or mucronate, 1/4 - 1/3 as long as calyx. Calyx 13-17(-20) mm, almost cylindrical; teeth ovate, little longer than wide, often obtuse. Petal-limb 7-15 mm, bearded, pink, unspotted. 2n = 60, 90. •{\i  W. & C. Europe; one station in W. Ukraine.} Be Br Cz Ga Ge He Po Rs(W).
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 63. D. xylorrhizus }Boiss. & Heldr. in Boiss., {\i Diagn. Pl. Or. Nov.}{\b  2}({\b 8}): 67 (1849). Perennial 5-15 cm, with a thick, woody stock. Basal leaves up to 4 mm wide, linear-oblong, obtuse or acute, rather thick and soft; midrib prominent beneath; lateral veins obscure; cauline leaves 3-6 pairs, shorter and narrower than the basal. Epicalyx-scales usually 4, ovate, acute or cuspidate, coriaceous, c. ¼ as long as calyx. Calyx 20-25 × 4-5 mm, widest below the middle. Petal-limb 4-6 mm, glabrous, dirty white. •{\i  W. Kriti}. Cr.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 64. D. sylvestris }Wulfen in Jacq.,{\i  Collect. Bot.}{\b  1}: 237 (1786) ({\i D. boissieri} Willk.,{\i  D. virgineus} Gren. & Godron, {\i D. inodorus} (L.) Gaertner). Densely caespitose perennial with a short, stout, woody stock. Basal leaves usually numerous, 0·5-1·2 mm wide, green, wiry and often recurved. Flowers not or slightly fragrant. Epicalyx-scales 2-5(-8), broadly obovate, truncate or cuspidate, coriaceous 1/4-1/3 as long as calyx. Calyx 12-30 × 4-7 mm, nearly cylindrical. Petal-limb glabrous, usually pink, dentate to entire. 2n = 30, c. 60.{\i  S. & S.C. Europe, extending northwards to} 47° 50'{\i  N. in E.C. France.} Al Au Co Ga Ge Gr He Hs It Ju Sa Si.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28 A polymorphic species closely related to {\b 65}. The following subspecies may be recognized:
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Plant somewhat glaucous; epicalyx-scales 2(-4);  
\par 
  petals entire, usually not contiguous .............................. ({\b f}) subsp. {\b tergestinus}
\par 
1 Plant usually green; epicalyx-scales (2-)4-6(-8); petals 
\par 
  dentate or denticulate, usually contiguous
\par 
2 Stems usually puberulent below; epicalyx-scales not 
\par 
  green at apex; calyx-teeth 2-3 mm, obtuse ....................... ({\b d}) subsp. {\b nodosus}
\par 
2 Stems usually glabrous; epicalyx-scales with a green apex; 
\par 
  calyx-teeth 3-5 mm, obtuse to acuminate
\par 
3 Calyx usually less than 15 mm; petals denticulate ........ ({\b e}) subsp. {\b bertisceus}
\par 

\par 
239}
\par