{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 setaceous, the cauline up to 1 mm wide, linear, obtuse or subobtuse; sheaths several times as long as diameter of stem. Flowers 2 to several, in a dense head; bracts and epicalyx-scales ovate, coriaceous, apiculate or shortly aristate. Calyx (10-)12-15 × 2-3 mm, somewhat narrowed above the middle; teeth rounded, little longer than wide. Petal-limb 5-8 mm, dentate, glabrous, pinkish-lilac. •{\i  Hungary, E. Jugoslavia.} Hu Ju.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 26. D. platyodon }Klokov,{\i  Jour. Bot. Acad. Sci. Ukr.}{\b  5}({\b 1}): 27 (1948). Perennial 10-30 cm. Leaves c. 1 mm wide, linear, acute; sheaths several times as long as diameter of stem. Flowers 1 to several in a head; bracts lanceolate, acuminate. Epicalyx-scales obovate, abruptly acuminate or mucronate, coriaceous, with scarious margins. Calyx 10-14 × 3-4 mm; teeth oblong, mucronate. Petal-limb 5-8 mm, bearded, deep pink.{\i  Ukraine, S.E. Russia. }Rs(C, W, K, E).
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 27. D. bessarabicus }(Kleopow) Klokov in Kotov, {\i Fl. RSS Ucr.}{\b  4}: 659 (1952). Robust perennial 30-50 cm. Leaves linear, acute; lower cauline up to c. 2 mm wide; sheaths several times as long as diameter of stem. Flowers usually several in a head; bracts oblong, often with a green point. Epicalyx-scales obovate-oblong, mucronate, coriaceous, with hyaline margins. Calyx 18-22 × 5-6 mm; teeth ovate, obtuse. Petal-limb 10-15 mm, bearded, deep purplish. •{\i  E. Romania, Moldavia}. Rm Rs(W).
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b 25-27} may be conspecific with{\i  D. polymorphus} Bieb.,{\i  Fl. Taur.-Cauc. }{\b 1}: 324 (1808).
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 28. D. carthusianorum }L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 409 (1753) ({\i D. atrorubens} All., {\i D. bukovinensis} Klokov, {\i D. capillifrons} (Borbás) H. Neumayer,{\i  D. carpaticus }Woloszczak,{\i  D. polonicus} Zapal., {\i D. vaginatus} Chaix, {\i D. velebiticus} Borbás; incl.{\i  D. puberulus} (Simonkai) A. Kerner,{\i  D. tenuifolius} Schur, {\i D. rogowiczii} Kleopow, {\i D. commutatus} (Zapal.) Klokov,{\i  D. sanguineus} Vis., {\i D. giganteus} subsp. {\i italicus} Tutin,{\i  D. leucophoeniceus} (Dörfler & Hayek) Tutin). Glabrous perennial up to c. 60 cm. Leaves 0·5-5 mm wide, linear, acuminate, flat; sheaths several times as long as diameter of stem. Flowers few to many in a usually dense head; bracts lanceolate to oblong, more or less herbaceous to coriaceous. Epicalyx-scales obovate to obcordate, abruptly aristate, coriaceous to membranous. Calyx 10-20 × 2-5 mm, narrowed above the middle. Petal-limb usually 10-15 mm, dentate, deep pink to purple, very rarely white, bearded. 2n = 30. ?•{\i  S., W. & C. Europe, extending eastwards to C. Ukraine.} Al Au Be Bu Cz Ga Ge He †Ho Hs Hu It Ju Po Rm Rs(C, W) *Si [RS(*B) Su].
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28 A very variable species which has been much subdivided by different authors. The variation in leaf-width, length of awn, colour, shape and texture of epicalyx-scales, length and colour of the calyx, and petal-size seems to be largely continuous and with little correlation between the different characters. The variation does not always fall into a geographical pattern, though distinct populations appear to exist, especially near the limits of the distribution of the species. A valuable summary of the taxonomy and distribution of the infraspecific taxa is given in J. Jalas & J. Suominen, {\i Atlas Florae Europaeae}{\b  7}: 210-214 (1986).
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 29. D. borbasii }Vandas,{\i  Österr. Bot. Zeitschr. }{\b 36}: 193 (1886). Perennial with an unbranched woody stock from which flowering stems and short leafy shoots arise. Leaves c. 1 mm wide, linear, acuminate, the basal mostly withered at anthesis. Stems 30-50 cm, simple, or little-branched near the top. Heads (1)2- to 8-flowered. Epicalyx-scales ovate, narrowed into a short awn, pale brown and broadly scarious. Calyx 14-17 × 3-4 mm, pink or purplish. Petal-limb c. 10 mm, dentate, pink, bearded. •{\i  E. Europe, from c. }57° {\i N. in E.C. Russia southwards to Krym, and westwards to Lithuania}. Rs(B, C, W, K, E).
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b borbasii}: Bracts and epicalyx-scales usually not more than ½ as long as calyx. Calyx-teeth 3·5-4·5 mm. {\i Throughout the range of the species}.
\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b capitellatus} (Klokov) Tutin,{\i  Feddes Repert.}{\b  68}: 192 (1963) ({\i D. capitellatus} Klokov): Bracts and epicalyx-scales usually not more than ½ as long as calyx. Calyx-teeth 3·5-4·5 mm.{\i  S.E. Ukraine; perhaps elsewhere}.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 30. D. henteri }Heuffel ex Griseb. & Schenk,{\i  Arch. Naturgesch.} ({\i Berlin}){\b  18}({\b 1}): 303 (1852). Caespitose perennial 15-30 cm. Leaves c. 0·5 mm wide, linear, acuminate, rather rigid; cauline leaves shorter than internodes; sheaths 3-4 times as long as diameter of stem. Flowers usually 2 or 3 together; bracts narrow, often herbaceous, shorter than inflorescence. Epicalyx-scales broadly ovate to obovate, often somewhat retuse, aristate. Calyx 12-14 × 4-5 mm, nearly cylindrical, green or purplish with brown teeth. Petal-limb 8-12 mm, dentate. {\i Damp, grassy places. • S. Carpathians.} Rm.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 31. D. cruentus }Griseb.,{\i  Spicil. Fl. Rumel.}{\b  1}: 186 (1843) (incl. {\i D. lateritius} Halácsy,{\i  D. calocephalus} Bald., non Boiss., {\i D. holzmannianus} Heldr. & Hausskn.). Usually more or less glaucous perennial up to 100 cm. Leaves 1-3 mm wide, linear, acuminate, flat; sheaths several times as long as diameter of stem. Flowers numerous, in a dense head; bracts puberulent, oblong to ovate-oblong, with an awn up to about as long as calyx. Epicalyx-scales similar but smaller, pale to reddish-brown. Calyx 13-20 × 3-4 mm, somewhat tapering from about the middle, puberulent, usually reddish-purple. Petal-limb 3-8 mm, dentate, more or less bearded.{\i  Balkan peninsula}. Al Bu Gr Ju Tu.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b cruentus}: Awn considerably longer than the reddish-brown epicalyx-scales. Petals more or less glabrous, deep purple. 2n = 30. •{\i  Bosna to Albania and W. Bulgaria}.
\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b turcicus} (Velen.) Stoj. & Acht. in Stoj. & Stefanov,{\i  Fl. Balg.} ed. 3, 405 (1948) ({\i D. turcicus} Velen.): Awn about as long as the pale epicalyx-scales. Petals bearded, pinkish-purple. 2n = 30.{\i  Albania and S.W. Greece to E. Bulgaria and Turkey}.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b D. quadrangulus} Velen.,{\i  Sitz.-Ber. Böhm. Ges. Wiss. }{\b 1892}: 372 (1893), from the E. part of the Balkan peninsula, and{\b  D. strymonis} Rech fil., {\i Bot. Jahrb. }{\b 69}: 450 (1939), from N.E. Greece (near Serrai), have been described as separate species but are difficult to separate from{\b  31}. They are more or less intermediate between subspp. ({\b a}) and ({\b b}), which are themselves frequently difficult to distinguish.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 32. D. tristis }Velen., {\i Sitz.-Ber. Böhm. Ges. Wiss.}{\b  1889}({\b 2}): 41 (1890) ({\i D. pancicii} Velen., non F.N. Williams). Like {\b 31} but up to 40 cm, less robust; cauline leaves 1-2 mm wide; bracts and epicalyx-scales glabrous, dark brown; awn of epicalyx-scales up to about as long as the scale, often patent; calyx 8-11 × 2-3 mm, dark purple; petal-limb pink, subglabrous. 2n = 30. • {\i C. part of Balkan peninsula, mainly in the mountains.} Al Bu Gr Ju.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 33. D. stribrnyi }Velen., {\i Sitz.-Ber. Böhm. Ges. Wiss.}{\b  1893}({\b 37}): 15 (1894) ({\i D. moesiacus} subsp. {\i stribrnyi} (Velen.) Stoj. & Acht.). Like {\b 31} but smaller and less robust; cauline leaves 2-3 mm wide; bracts and epicalyx-scales purplish; awn of epicalyx-scales about as long as
\par 

\par 
236}
\par