{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 Subgen. {\b Ceterach} (Willd.) Vida ex Bir, Fraser-Jenkins & Lovis. Leaves pinnatisect, lamina densely scaly, veins marginally anastomosing. Sorus single on a vein, indusium reduced or absent.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 27. A. ceterach} L.,{\i  Sp. Pl.} 1080 (1753) ({\i Ceterach officinarum} DC.). Leaves 3-25 cm, persistent, oblong; petiole short, 1/6-1/4 as long as the lamina, covered with scales; lamina pinnatisect, greyish to dark green above, covered with light brown, overlapping scales beneath; leaf-segments alternate, ovate or oblong, 9-12 on each side, entire or crenate, rounded at the apex. Sori c. 2 mm. Mean exospore-length 35-41 µm. 2n = 72, 144.{\i  Dry rocks and walls. W., S. & C. Europe, northwards to Scotland and S.E. Sweden, eastwards to Krym}. Al Be Bl Br Bu Co Cr Cz Ga Ge Gr Hb He Ho Hs Hu It Ju Lu Rm Rs(K) Sa Si Su Tu [Au Po].
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Diploid plants (2n = 72) from E.C. & S. Europe have been described as subsp. {\b bivalens} (D.E. Meyer) Greuter & Burdet, {\i Willdenowia }{\b 10:} 17 (1980) ({\i A. javorkeanum} Vida). They differ principally by the smaller mean exospore-length, 28-35 µm.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Subgen.{\b  Pleurosorus} (Fée) Salvo, Díaz & Prada. Leaves pinnate to bipinnate; lamina hairy; veins free. Sorus single on a vein; indusium absent.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 28. A. hispanicum} (Cosson) Greuter & Burdet, {\b Willdenowia}{\b  10:} 17 (1980) ({\i Ceterach hispanicum} (Cosson) Mett.,{\i  Pleurosorus hispanicus} (Cosson) C.V. Morton{\i  P. pozoi} auct.). Leaves 3-8 cm, tufted; petiole and lamina about equal in length, covered with stiff, eglandular hairs; pinnae 1 cm or less, rather distant, shortly stalked or subsessile, cuneate at the base, pinnatifid or lobed; each fertile pinna with 3-5 small, ovate or elliptical sori. 2n = 72.{\i  Shady places on calcareous mountains. S. Spain}. Hs. ({\i N. Africa}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Subgen.{\b  Phyllitis} (Hill) Jermy & viane. Leaves entire; lamina subglabrous; veins free. Sori paired on 2 neighbouring veins; indusium present.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 29. A. scolopendrium} L.,{\i  Sp. Pl.} 1079 (1753) ({\i Phyllitis scolopendrium} (L.) Newman,{\i  Scolopendrium officinale }Sm.). Leaves 5-60 cm, persistent; petiole up to ½ as long as the lamina; lamina 3-6(-7) cm wide, linear-lanceolate, cordate at the base, the margin slightly undulate, entire. Sori 8-18 mm wide, linear, parallel, usually occupying more than ½ the width of the lamina. {\i Shady places. S., W. & C. Europe, extending to S.E. Sweden and N. Ukraine.} All except Fa Fe Is Rs(N, B, C, E) Sb.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Many variants of this species, some with curled or cleft fronds, are known both in nature and in cultivation.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b scolopendrium} : Leaves up to 60 cm, the margins undulate, entire. Sori not extending to the margin of the leaf. 2n = 72.{\i  Throughout the range of the species}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b antri-jovis} (Kümmerle) Brownsey & Jermy,{\i  Brit. Fern Gaz.}{\b  10}: 346 (1973) ({\i Biropteris antri-jovis} Kümmerle): Leaves not more than 20 cm, the margins indented. Sori extending to the indentations of the margin of the leaf. 2n = 72.{\i  Mountains of Kriti}. ({\i Palestine}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 30. A. sagittatum} (DC.) Bange, {\i Bull. Soc. Linn. Lyon }{\b 21:} 84 (1952) ({\i Phyllitis sagittata} (DC.) Guinea & Heywood,{\i  P. hemionitis} (Swartz) O. Kuntze, {\i Scolopendrium hemionitis} (Swartz) Lag.). Leaves 12-30 cm, tufted, persistent; petiole ½ as long as or equalling the lamina; lamina oblong-lanceolate, deeply cordate and auricled at the base; auricles of young leaves rounded, those of mature leaves triangular, more or less lobed, sometimes projecting horizontally for 3-4 cm and leaves then hastate. Sori elliptical, shorter and wider than in {\b 29}. 2n = 72.{\i  Moist, shady calcareous rocks. Mediterranean region}. Bl Co Ga Gr Hs It Ju Sa Si.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Subgen. {\b Phyllitopsis} (Reichstein) Jermy & Viane. Leaves simple to pinnatifid; lamina sparsely scaly; veins free or rarely anastomosing at the margins. Sorus single or paired on a vein; indusium present.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 31. A. hybridum} (Milde) Bange,{\i  loc. cit.} (1952) ({\i Phyllitis hybrida} (Milde) C. Chr.,{\i  Phyllitopsis hybrida} (Milde) Reichstein). Leaves up to 12 × 2 cm, the petiole about 1/2 as long as the lamina; lamina oblong-lanceolate, obtuse, irregularly pinnatifid and often with rounded auricles at the base, not deeply cordate. Sori narrowly elliptical to broadly ovate. 2n = 144.{\i  Calcareous rocks and walls. • Islands of N.W. Jugoslavia}. Ju.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc {\b  18.      WOODSIACEAE }
\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc ({\i  Athyriaceae})
\par            

\pard\f0\fs24\qc Edit. †D.H. Valentine and D.M. Moore.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Rhizome dictyostelic, with opaque scales. Petiole grooved, with 2 vascular strands which unite distally. Sori , situated on the veins; spores bilateral.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Fertile and sterile leaves dissimilar
\par
2 Sterile leaves up to 170 cm; veins free ..................................... {\b 7. Matteuccia}
\par
2 Sterile leaves up to 50 cm; veins anastomosing ............................ {\b 8. Onoclea}
\par
1 Fertile and sterile leaves similar
\par
3 Indusium absent
\par
4 Rhizome thick, erect; leaves forming a rosette ........................... {\b 1. Athyrium}
\par
4 Rhizome slender, creeping; leaves solitary ....................... {\b 6. Gymnocarpium}
\par
3 Indusium present
\par
5 Indusium hood-like or cup-shaped,
\par
 
\par
  attached at the basiscopic side of sorus
\par
6 Indusium entire or shallowly toothed ....................................... {\b 4. Cystopteris}
\par
6 Indusium with a wide fringe of narrow, hair-like teeth ................ {\b 5. Woodsia}
\par
5 Indusium flap-like, linear or oblong, attached laterally
\par
7 Leaves forming a crown at apex of erect rhizome; indusium 
\par
  usually curved, crossing the vein ................................................. {\b 1. Athyrium}
\par
7 Leaves solitary on a creeping rhizome; indusium straight,
\par
  not or rarely crossing the vein
\par
8 Groove of frond-axis open at junction of costa or costule ........ {\b 2. Diplazium}
\par
8 Groove of frond-axis not open at junction of costa or costule  .......{\b 3. Deparia}
\par

\par
23}
\par