{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 stems. Basal leaves c. 10 mm, setaceous, semi-terete; cauline leaves 6-10 pairs, longer than internodes. Flowers solitary. Epicalyx-scales (4-)6, c. ½ as long as calyx, ovate, aristate. Calyx 15-18 mm, narrowed from about the middle. Petal-limb c. 5 mm, dentate, bearded, pink. 2n = 30. •{\i  E. Romania, N. Bulgaria.} Bu Rm.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 13. D. anatolicus }Boiss.,{\i  Diagn. Pl. Or. Nov.}{\b  1}({\b 1}): 22 (1843). Caespitose perennial 8-35 cm. Leaves 1-1·8 mm wide, linear, acuminate. Flowers solitary or 2 or 3 together; pedicels 5 mm or more. Epicalyx-scales (4-)6, narrowly ovate, apiculate. Calyx 8·5-11 mm; petal-limb 2·5-3·5 mm, linear to linear-oblong, subentire to dentate, white. {\i Turkey-in-Europe} ({\i Gelibolu peninsula}). Tu. ({\i Anatolia.})
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 14. D. ingoldbyi }Turrill, {\i Kew Bull.}{\b  1924}: 314 (1924). Caespitose perennial c. 30 cm, with a woody stock; stems puberulent below. Leaves c. 2 mm wide, linear, acuminate, coriaceous. Flowers 2-5 together, subsessile. Epicalyx-scales 10-12, ovate, gradually acuminate. Calyx 15-17 × 2 mm, tapering above the middle. Petal-limb 2-4 mm, denticulate, whitish- or greenish-yellow. •{\i  Turkey-in-Europe.} Tu.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 15. D. juniperinus }Sm.,{\i  Trans. Linn. Soe. London} ser. 1, {\b 2}: 303 (1794). Small shrub with erect, woody, branched stems bearing herbaceous, usually unbranched flowering stems up to 20 cm. Leaves 0·5-1·5 mm wide, linear, abundant on non-flowering stems, 2 or 3 pairs on flowering stems. Epicalyx-scales 4-8, 1/3 - 1/2 as long as calyx, obcordate, with a subulate apex. Calyx 10-13 × 2-3·5 mm, nearly cylindrical; teeth acute. Petal-limb 4-8 mm, dentate, bearded. 2n = 30.{\i  Limestone rocks. • W. Kriti} ({\i Sfakia prov}.). Cr.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b juniperinus}: Leaves usually 2-3 cm. Flowering stems 10-20 cm, robust, 2- to 6-flowered. Calyx 10-11 mm. Petal-limb 3-4 mm wide, pale pink, unspotted, shortly dentate.{\i  Mountains above }1400{\i  m}.
\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b heldreichii} Greuter, {\i Candollea }{\b 20}: 187 (1965): Leaves usually 1·5-2 cm. Flowering stems 6-10 cm, slender, 1- or 2-flowered. Calyx 12-13 mm. Petal-limb 5-6 mm wide, bright pink, with a few purple spots, shortly dentate or crenate.{\i  Hills,} 600-650{\i  m}.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 16. D. pulviniformis }Greuter, {\i op. cit.} 189 (1965). Dwarf shrub forming rounded hummocks. Leaves of young branches 1-1·5 cm, needle-like, densely crowded. Flowering stems 3-5 cm, slender, 2- or 3-flowered. Epicalyx-scales c. ½ as long as calyx, with slender mucro 1-1·5 mm. Calyx 7-8 mm. Petal-limb 3-4 mm wide, obovate, cuneate, shortly and sharply dentate, white.{\i  Limestone rocks, c.} 600{\i  m. • S. Kriti} ({\i Kedros}). Cr.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28 Known only from the type collection.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 17. D. aciphyllus }Sieber ex Ser. in DC.,{\i  Prodr. }{\b 1}: 358 (1824). ({\i D. arboreus} L., nom. ambig.). Small shrub up to 50 cm. Leaves 20-40 × 1·5-3 mm, needle-like, linear to linear-lanceolate, densely crowded. Flowering stems 15-30 cm, robust, many-flowered. Epicalyx-scales with strong mucro 2-4 mm. Calyx (15-)18-23 mm. Petal-limb c. 10 mm wide, suborbicular, pink, with purple spots, deeply and sharply dentate. {\i Limestone rocks. • E. Kriti.} Cr.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 18. D. rupicola }Biv.,{\i  Sic. Pl. Cent.}{\b  1}: 31 (1806). Small shrub 30-60 cm. Leaves 3-5 mm, wide, rather thick, linear-oblong, the lower obtuse, the upper acute. Flowers in bracteate heads; pedicels short. Epicalyx-scales 12-16, obovate, acuminate. Calyx 25-30 × 4-5 mm, almost cylindrical. Petal-limb 10-15 mm, dentate, bearded, pink.{\i  S. Italy, Sicilia, Mallorca.} Bl It Si.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28 Plants from Islas Baleares (Mallorca) have been referred to the N. African subsp. {\b hermaeensis} (Cosson) O. Bolòs & Vigo, {\i Butll. Inst. Catalana Hist. Nat.}{\b  38} (Sec. Bot. 1): 87 (1974).
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 19. D. fruticosus }L.,{\i  Sp. Pl.} 413 (1753) ({\i D. arboreus} auct., non L.). Small shrub up to 50 cm, with tortuous branches. Leaves 3-8 mm wide, linear to oblanceolate or elliptical, obtuse, fleshy, glaucous. Flowers numerous; pedicels short. Epicalyx-scales (8-)10-20, obovate, shortly cuspidate. Calyx 18-25 × 2-3 mm, narrowed from about the middle. Petal-limb c. 10 mm, dentate, bearded, pink. 2n = 30.{\i  S. & W. Greece, S. Aegean region.} Cr Gr.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28 In the European part of the distribution six subspecies have been recognized by H. Runemark, {\i Bot. Not.}{\b  133}: 475-490 (1980). These represent well-marked local variants, but the characters show too great a degree of overlap for the subspecies to be maintained here.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 20. D. capitatus }Balbis ex DC.,{\i  Cat. Pl. Horti Monsp.} 103 (1813). Glaucous perennial up to 70 cm. Leaves 2-3 mm wide, linear, the upper 1 or 2 pairs greatly enlarged near base; sheaths more than 3 times as long as diameter of stem. Heads many-flowered, dense, solitary; bracts about as long as calyx, ovate, coriaceous, with a green or brown apex. Epicalyx-scales ½ as long as to nearly as long as calyx, ovate, shortly awned; margins scarious. Calyx 9-19 mm, narrowed upwards; teeth lanceolate to ovate, acute. Petal-limb c. 5 mm, bearded to almost glabrous, purple.{\i  S.E. Europe, extending northwards to c.} 56°{\i  N. in C. Russia}. Ju Rm Rs(C, W, K, E) Tu.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b capitatus}: Epicalyx-scales about as long as calyx. Calyx 16-19 mm. Petals distinctly bearded.{\i  Scattered localities around the Black Sea}.
\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b andrzejowskianus} Zapal.,{\i  Rozpr. Wydz. Mat. Przyr. Polsk. Akad. Um}. ({\b Biol.}) ser. 3, {\b 11B}: 25 (1911) ({\i D. andrzejowskianus} (Zapal.) Kulcz.): Epicalyx-scales about ½ as long as calyx. Calyx 10-15 mm. Petals almost glabrous.{\i  Almost throughout the range of the species}.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 21. D. ferrugineus }Miller, {\i Gard. Dict.} ed. 8, no. 9 (1768) ({\i D. balbisii }Ser.). Perennial with woody stock; stems 30-60 cm, numerous, simple. Leaves convolute to linear-lanceolate, acuminate; sheaths more than 3 times as long as diameter of stem. Heads few- to many-flowered, usually dense; bracts oblong to ovate, long-acuminate, herbaceous above, about equalling flowers. Epicalyx-scales 4, oblong to ovate, abruptly contracted into the awn, about as long as calyx. Calyx 14-20 × 3-5 mm, almost cylindrical; teeth lanceolate, acuminate or aristate. Petal-limb pink, purplish or sometimes yellowish, more or less bearded.{\i  C. Mediterranean region, from S.E. France to Albania.} Al ?Co Ga It Ju.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Leaves 1·5-2·5 mm wide, usually convolute .................. ({\b c}) subsp. {\b vulturius}
\par 
1 Leaves 2-5(-10) mm wide, flat
\par 
2 Leaves 2-3 mm wide; petal-limb 8-10 mm ................. ({\b a}) subsp. {\b ferrugineus}
\par 
2 Leaves 3-5 mm wide; petal-limb 5-6 mm ..................... ({\b b}) subsp. {\b liburnicus}
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b ferrugineus} ({\i D. liburnicus} sensu Hayek, non Bartl.): 2n = 30.{\i  Throughout the range of the species}.
\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b liburnicus} (Bartl.) Tutin,{\i  Feddes Repert.}{\b  68}: 191 (1963) ({\i D. liburnicus} Bartl., {\i D. balbisii} subsp. {\i liburnicus} (Bartl.) Pignatti). •{\i  N.W. Italy, Jugoslavia}.
\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b c}) Subsp. {\b vulturius} (Guss. & Ten.) Tutin, {\i loc. cit.} (1963) ({\i D. vulgaris}  Guss. & Ten.):{\i  C. & S. Italy}.
\par 

\par 
234}
\par