{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 Subsp. ({\b e}) approaches {\b 22} in the leaves and the often rather small heads with more or less oblong bracts, but is larger in all its parts; intermediates between it and {\b 21}({\b a}) occur.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b D. stamatiadae} Rech. fil.,{\i  Bot. Not.}{\b  124}: 7 (1971), from E.C. Greece (near Servia), is like {\b 21}({\b a}) but with a laxer habit and longer leaf-sheaths, and is probably not specifically distinct from 21.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 22. D. pinifolius }Sm. in Sibth. & Sm., {\i Fl. Graec. Prodr.}{\b  1}: 284 (1809) ({\i D. lilacinus }Boiss. & Heldr.; incl.{\i  D. lydus} sensu Hayek, {\i D. rhodopeus} Davidov, non Velen., {\i D. serulis} Kulcz., {\b ?D. serresianus }Halácsy & Charrel). Densely caespitose perennial 15-45 cm. Leaves less than 1 mm wide, linear, often falcate, acuminate, usually rather rigid, with prominent midrib and strongly thickened margins; sheaths (2-)3-8 times as long as diameter of stem. Flowers in dense heads; bracts coriaceous, ovate- to obovate-oblong, aristate. Epicalyx-scales usually 6, obovate, aristate. Calyx 8-20 × 2-4 mm, tapering somewhat above the middle. Petal-limb 5-8(-10) mm, dentate, purple or lilac.{\i  Balkan peninsula, S. Romania.} Al Bu Gr Ju Rm Tu.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28 A variable species. The following subspecies can be distinguished, but many intermediate plants occur.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Bracts distinctly shorter than calyx ............................... ({\b a}) subsp. {\b pinifolius}
\par 
1 Bracts (including awn) about as long as to slightly longer
\par 
  than calyx
\par 
2 Calyx 13-18 mm ............................................................. ({\b b}) subsp. {\b serbicus}
\par 
2 Calyx 9-14 mm ............................................................... ({\b e}) subsp. {\b lilacinus}
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b pinifolius} (subsp. {\i smithii} Wettst.): Flowering stems 15-25 cm, rather slender. Leaf-sheaths 3-6 mm. Bracts small, distinctly shorter than calyx, contracted abruptly into an awn. Calyx 8-12(-15) mm. 2n = 30.{\i  Balkan peninsula and Aegean region southwards to }40°{\i  N}.
\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b serbicus} Wettst.,{\i  Biblioth. Bot.} ({\i Stuttgart}){\b  26}: 34 (1892): Flowering stems 20-45 cm. Leaf-sheaths 5-10 mm. Bracts about as long as calyx, gradually narrowed into an awn. Calyx 13-18 mm. •{\i  From N.W. Greece to S.C. Romania.}
\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b e}) Subsp. {\b lilacinus} (Boiss. & Heldr.) Wettst., {\i op. cit. }33 (1892): Flowering stems 15-40 cm, rather robust. Leaf-sheaths 5-10 mm. Bracts large and conspicuous, about as long as to somewhat longer than calyx, abruptly contracted into an awn. Calyx 9-14 mm. •{\i  S. Albania, Greece}.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b D. androsaceus} (Boiss. & Heldr.) Hayek,{\i  Denkschr. Akad. Wiss. Math.-Nat. Kl.} ({\i Wien}) {\b 94}: 141 (1917), from S. Greece (Killini), a densely pulvinate perennial, with smaller flowers 1-3 in a more or less acaulescent cluster, and epicalyx-scales elliptical, is probably not specifically distinct from {\b 22}. It is known only from the type collection.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 23. D. giganteus }D' Urv., {\i Mém. Soc. Linn. Paris}{\b  1}: 301 (1822). Robust, often pruinose perennial 20-100 cm. Leaves 0·5-8 mm wide, widest near the middle, linear, acuminate; sheaths several times as long as diameter of stem. Flowers usually numerous, in dense heads, occasionally with a pair of leaves close below the head. Epicalyx-scales usually ½ as long as calyx, brown or scarious, ovate, acute or acuminate. Calyx (8-)17-22 × (2-)3-4 mm, tapering from about the middle. Petal-limb 5-8 mm, dentate, purple. 2n = 30.{\i  Balkan peninsula, extending to N. Jugoslavia and N. Romania.} ?Al Bu Gr Ju Rm Tu.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Leaves c. 0·5 mm wide, often convolute .......................... ({\b f}) subsp. {\b vandasii}
\par 
1 Leaves 2-8 mm wide, flat
\par 
2 Epicalyx-scales acute to acuminate, glabrous ............... ({\b a}) subsp. {\b giganteus}
\par 
2 Epicalyx-scales cuspidate, usually ± puberulent
\par 
3 Cauline leaves 5-7 mm wide ................................... ({\b d}) subsp. {\b haynaldianus}
\par 
3 Cauline leaves not more than 5 mm wide
\par 
4 Calyx 15-20 mm; cauline leaves 2-5 mm wide ...... ({\b e}) subsp. {\b subgiganteus}
\par 
4 Calyx up to 17 mm; cauline leaves rarely more than
\par 
  3 mm wide
\par 
5 Calyx 14-17 × 2·5-3 mm ................................................ ({\b b}) subsp. {\b croaticus}
\par 
5 Calyx 12-15 × 3-4·5 mm ................................................ ({\b c}) subsp. {\b banaticus}
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b giganteus}: Plant very robust, sometimes pruinose. Cauline leaves 3-8 mm wide. Heads many-flowered. Epicalyx-scales acute or acuminate, glabrous, brownish. Calyx 17-20 mm. 2n = 30. •{\i  From C. Romania to N. Greece}.
\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b croaticus} (Borbás) Tutin, {\i Feddes Repert.}{\b  70}: 4 (1964) ({\i D. croaticus} Borbás): Plant usually slender, green. Cauline leaves rarely more than 3 mm wide. Heads rather few-flowered. Epicalyx-scales cuspidate, dark brown, awned; awn of epicalyx-scales usually 3-5 mm. Calyx 14-17 × 2·5-3 mm. •{\i  N. & C. Jugoslavia}.
\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b c}) Subsp. {\b banaticus} (Heuffel) Tutin,{\i  Feddes Repert.}{\b  68}: 191 (1963) ({\i D. carthusianorum} var.{\i  banaticus} Heuffel, {\i D. banaticus} (Heuffel) Borbás): Like subsp. ({\b b}) but awn of epicalyx-scales usually 1-2 mm; calyx 12-15 × 3-4·5 mm. •{\i  Romania, E. Jugoslavia}.
\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b d}) Subsp. {\b haynaldianus} (Borbás) Tutin, {\i loc. cit.} (1963) ({\i D. haynaldianus} Borbás, {\i D. intermedius} Boiss.): Like subsp. ({\b b}) but cauline leaves 5-7 mm wide; calyx 20 mm.{\i  S. Jugoslavia}.
\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b e}) Subsp. {\b subgiganteus} (Borbás) Hayek,{\i  Denkschr. Akad. Wiss. Math.-Nat. Kl.} ({\i Wien}) {\b 94}: 138 (1917): Plant robust, green. Cauline leaves 2-5 mm wide. Heads usually many-flowered. Epicalyx-scales brown near apex, awned. Calyx 15-20 mm. •{\i  N. Greece; Bulgaria}.
\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b f}) Subsp. {\b vandasii} (Velen.) Stoj. & Acht.,{\i  Sborn. Balg. Akad. Nauk.}{\b  29}: 43 (1935) ({\i D. vandasii} (Velen.): Plant slender, sometimes pruinose. Leaves c. 0·5 mm wide, often convolute. Epicalyx-scales cuspidate. Calyx 8-14 × 2-3 mm.{\i  Bulgaria, S. Romania}.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 24. D. giganteiformis }Borbás,{\i  Math. Term. Közl. }{\b 12}: 83 (1876). Like {\b 23} but smaller and more slender; inner epicalyx-scales obovate, acute or shortly aristate; calyx 8-14 × 2-3 mm; petal-limb 3-5 mm. •{\i  E.C. Europe, extending to N. Italy and E. Bulgaria.} Au Bu Cz Hu ?It Ju Rm ?Rs(K).
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Calyx c. 8 mm; teeth subobtuse and mucronate .......... ({\b c}) subsp. {\b kladovanus}
\par 
1 Calyx 10 mm or more; teeth acute
\par 
2 Calyx c. 10 mm; outer epicalyx-scales brown, abruptly
\par 
  contracted into a short awn ........................................... ({\b b}) subsp. {\b pontederae}
\par 
2 Calyx c. 14 mm; outer epicalyx-scales straw-coloured,
\par 
  acuminate ................................................................ ({\b a}) subsp. {\b giganteiformis}
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b giganteiformis}: 2n = 30. {\i Hungary, Romania, E. Jugoslavia.}
\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b pontederae} (A. Kerner) Soó,{\i  Acta Bot. Acad. Sci. Hung.}{\b  15}: 339 (1970) ({\i D. diutinus} Reichenb., non Kit. {\i D. urziceniensis} Prodan): 2n = 30.{\i  From C. Czechoslovakia to E. Romania}.
\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b c}) Subsp. {\b kladovanus} (Degen) Soó,{\i  Feddes Repert.}{\b  83}: 161 (1972) ({\i D. kladovanus} Degen,{\i  D. pontederae} subsp. {\i kladovanus} (Degen) Stoj. & Acht.): 2n = 30.{\i  Jugoslavia, Bulgaria, Romania}.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 25. D. diutinus }Kit. in Schultes,{\i  Österreichs Fl.} ed. 2, {\b 1}: 655 (1814). Somewhat glaucous perennial up to c. 50 cm. Basal leaves
\par 

\par 
235}
\par