{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}
\pard\f0\fs28\li200 116 Petal-limb unspotted
\par 117 Leaves usually not more than 0·5 mm wide (Ural) .............. {\b 86. acicularis}
\par 117 Leaves usually at least 1 mm wide
\par 118 Calyx 3-6 mm wide
\par 119 Undivided central part of petal-limb cuneate; 
\par     calyx 3-4 mm wide .............................................................. {\b 82. spiculifolius}
\par 119 Undivided central part of petal-limb suborbicular;    calyx 4-6 mm wide
\par 120 Calyx-teeth obtuse or apiculate, with broadly scarious 
\par     margin ..................................................................................... {\b 83. plumarius}
\par 120 Calyx-teeth acute to acuminate, usually not broadly scarious
\par     (S. Czechoslovakia) ................................................................ {\b 84. moravicus}
\par 118 Calyx less than 3 mm wide
\par 121 Calyx not more than 20 mm; epicalyx scales 1/6 - 1/4 as long
\par     as calyx; petal-limb 1/2-3/4 as long as calyx ....................... {\b 89. krylovianus}
\par 121 Calyx c. 25 mm; epicalyx-scales 1/4-1/3 as long as calyx;
\par     petal-limb less than 1/2 as long as calyx .................................... {\b 90. volgicus}
\par 109 Petal-limb subentire to deeply dentate
\par 122 Petal-limb bearded, sometimes only sparsely so
\par 123 Densely pulvinate (Samothraki) ......................................... {\b 11. arpadianus}
\par 123 Not pulvinate
\par 124 Leaves without apparent veins, except at base ...................... {\b 74. lusitanus}
\par 124 Leaves with midrib apparent throughout their length
\par 125 Flowers subsessile, in dense heads
\par 126 Cauline leaves less than 1 mm wide, the sheaths (2-)3-8 
\par     times as long as diameter of stem; epicalyx-scales obovate, 
\par     usually 6 .................................................................................. {\b 22. pinifolius}
\par 126 Cauline leaves 2-2·5 mm wide, the sheaths as long as diameter 
\par     of the stem; epicalyxscales lanceolate, usually 4 ..................... {\b 77. crassipes}
\par 125 Flowers solitary or few, never in dense heads
\par 127 Most flowers with 2 or 4 epicalyx-scales
\par 128 Basal leaves and non-flowering stems absent at anthesis
\par 129 Leaves almost setaceous, usually appressed to stem .......... {\b 99. carbonatus}
\par 129 Leaves at least 1 mm wide, ± patent
\par 130 Calyx less than 15 mm ..................................................... {\b 96. pallidiflorus}
\par 130 Calyx usually at least 15 mm
\par 131 Epicalyx-scales c. 1/2 as long as calyx .................................... {\b 106. gracilis}
\par 131 Epicalyx-scales up to 1/3 as long as calyx
\par 132 Stems 25-60 cm, without non-flowering branches ............. {\b 97. campestris}
\par 132 Stems usually 10-20 cm, with short, non-flowering     branches ................................................................................. {\b 98. hypanicus}
\par 128 Basal leaves or non-flowering stems present at anthesis
\par 133 Epicalyx-scales at least 3/4 as long as calyx
\par 134 Stems 4-10 cm; epicalyx-scales ± equalling calyx ............... {\b 61. pavonius}
\par 134 Stems 15-40 cm; epicalyx-scales c. 3/4 as long as calyx
\par 135 Leaf-sheaths ± equalling diameter of stem ............................. {\b 46. furcatus}
\par 135 Leaf-sheaths c. 3 times as long as diameter of stem .............. {\b 106. gracilis}
\par 133 Epicalyx-scales less than 3/4 as long as calyx
\par 136 Inner epicalyx-scales broadly ovate, or obovate,
\par     or almost truncate, apiculate or abruptly aristate
\par 137 Stem usually puberulent ............................. ({\b 111-114}). {\b corymbosus} group
\par 137 Stem glabrous
\par 138 Epicalyx-scales 1/3-1/ 2 as long as calyx .............................. {\b 78. cintranus}
\par 138 Epicalyx-scales not more than 1/3 as long as calyx
\par 139 Calyx almost cylindrical; teeth acute to obtuse ........ {\b 62. gratianopolitanus}
\par 139 Calyx tapering from below the middle; teeth acuminate ........ {\b 79. petraeus}
\par 136 Inner epicalyx-scales ovate, attenuate, acuminate
\par 140 Calyx 17-27 mm .................................................................... {\b 78. cintranus}
\par 140 Calyx 10-15 mm
\par 141 Stem puberulent, at least below; basal leaves c. 1 mm
\par     wide ......................................................................................... {\b 81. graniticus}
\par 141 Stem glabrous; basal leaves mostly 0·5 mm wide ..................... {\b 9. humilis}
\par 127 Most flowers with 6 or more epicalyx-scales
\par 142 At least some epicalyx-scales about as long as calyx-tube
\par 143 Flowers in small heads .............................................................. {\b 76. scaber}
\par 143 Flowers solitary or few, not in heads
\par 144 Cauline leaves 6 or more pairs .............................................. {\b 108. biflorus}
\par 144 Cauline leaves 2 or 3 pairs .......................................... {\b 107. haematocalyx}
\par 142 Epicalyx-scales distinctly shorter than calyx-tube
\par 145 Epicalyx-scales obovate, almost truncate and apiculate ........ {\b 106. gracilis}
\par 145 Epicalyx-scales ovate, attenuate to the
\par     acuminate or aristate apex
\par 146 Leaves up to 1 mm wide
\par 147 Calyx 17-28 mm .................................................................... {\b 78. cintranus}
\par 147 Calyx 10-18 mm
\par 148 Petal-limb 2-3 mm ..................................................................... {\b 9. humilis}
\par 148 Petal-limb at least 5 mm
\par 149 Plant 15-40 cm, not densely caespitose; flowers solitary or in 
\par     few-flowered inflorescences ..................................................... {\b 106. gracilis}
\par 149 Plant up to 10 cm, densely caespitose; flowers always solitary
\par     ............................................................................................... {\b 12. nardiformis}
\par 146 Leaves more than 1 mm wide
\par 150 Flowers in small heads; petal-limb 5-8 mm .............................. {\b 76. scaber}
\par 
\par 231}
\par