{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 86 Leaves soft, widest above the middle; calyx 12-16 mm ........ {\b 58. glacialis}
\par  
86 Leaves rigid, linear; calyx 9-10 mm ........................................... {\b 59. freynii}
\par 
59 All leaves acute or acuminate
\par 
87 Leaves thin and flat, without a thick margin or
\par 
   prominent submarginal veins
\par 
88 Sheaths of cauline leaves 2-4 times as long as diameter of stem
\par 
89 Flowers long-pedunculate .................................................. {\b 103. lanceolatus}
\par 
89 Flowers subsessile in heads
\par 
90 Calyx-teeth acuminate; epicalyx-scales gradually 
\par 
  narrowed at apex ................................................................. {\b 6. membranaceus}
\par 
90 Calyx-teeth obtuse; epicalyx-scales rounded and 
\par 
  mucronate at apex .................................................................... {\b 7. dobrogensis}
\par 
88 Sheaths of cauline leaves 1-2 times as long as diameter of stem
\par 
91 Petal-limb laciniate
\par 
92 Petal-limb divided more than 4-way to middle, the undivided 
\par 
   central portion narrowly oblong ................................................ {\b 92. superbus}
\par 
92 Petal-limb divided not more than 4-way to middle, the undivided 
\par 
   central portion suborbicular
\par 
93 Plant usually more than 20 cm; flowers in clusters ..... {\b 51. monspessulanus}
\par 
93 Plant usually less than 20 cm; flowers solitary ..................... {\b 52. sternbergii}
\par 
91 Petal-limb dentate to subentire
\par 
94 Calyx verruculose, not longitudinally ribbed ........................... {\b 109. strictus}
\par 
94 Calyx not verruculose, distinctly longitudinally ribbed
\par 
95 Petals glabrous
\par 
96 Epicalyx-scales 6 ..................................................................... {\b 78. cintranus}
\par 
96 Epicalyx-scales 4
\par 
97 Epicalyx-scales gradually narrowed into a green, 
\par 
   subulate point .............................................................................. {\b 46. furcatus}
\par 
97 Epicalyx-scales abruptly acuminate or cuspidate, the point 
\par 
   usually brownish ............................................................... {\b 102. monadelphus}
\par 
95 Petals bearded
\par 
98 Outer epicalyx-scales at least as long as calyx, leaf-like
\par 
99 Leaves 7- to 9-veined, some lateral veins almost as 
\par 
   prominent as midrib ............................................................ {\b 3. trifasciculatus}
\par 
99 Leaves 3- to 5-veined, lateral veins all much weaker than midrib
\par 
   ..................................................................................................... {\b 50. guttatus}
\par 
98 Epicalyx-scales shorter than calyx
\par 
100 Leaves 0·5-1 mm wide; epicalyx-scales up to ½ as long as
\par 
    calyx .......................................................................................... {\b 78. cintranus}
\par 
100 Leaves 1-8 mm wide; epicalyx-scales usually at least ½ as  
\par 
    long as calyx 
\par 
101 Stems solitary or few, stout, simple or branched in upper part; 
\par 
    flowers often in small heads
\par 
102 Petal-limb narrowly obovate, purple with black spots at base 
\par 
    ................................................................................................... {\b 48. eugeniae}
\par 
102 Petal-limb broadly ovate, pinkish or purplish, unspotted or 
\par 
    with whitish spots at base
\par 
103 Basal leaves present and ± rosette-forming at anthesis ........... {\b 40. seguieri}
\par  
103 Basal leaves withered at anthesis
\par 
104 Cauline leaves 3-8 mm wide, usually 10 or more pairs, tapering
\par 
    from about the middle ................................................................ {\b 41. collinus}
\par 
104 Cauline leaves usually less than 3 mm wide, usually fewer 
\par 
    than 10 pairs, tapering from near base ........................................ {\b 42. fischeri}
\par 
101 Stems numerous, slender, usually branched from near base; 
\par 
    flowers usually solitary
\par 
105 Basal rosette well developed at anthesis (Pyrenees, N.W. Spain) 
\par 
    .................................................................................................... {\b 46. furcatus}
\par 
105 Basal leaves mostly or quite withered at anthesis 
\par 
106 Stem and leaves glabrous; epicalyx scales usually more than 
\par 
    ½ as long as calyx .................................................................... {\b 43. pratensis}
\par 
106 Stem and leaves usually puberulent; epicalyx-scales 
\par 
    usually less than ½ as long as calyx
\par 
107 Epicalyx-scales shortly aristate, the margin not
\par 
    scarious ................................................................................... {\b 49. tesquicola}
\par 
107 Epicalyx-scales acuminate, the margin broadly scarious
\par 
108 Calyx tapering markedly from the middle ........................... {\b 44. versicolor}
\par 
108 Calyx scarcely tapering upwards .............................. {\b 45. pseudoversicolor}
\par 
87  At least the upper cauline leaves with a thick margin
\par 
    or strong submarginal veins, often ± convolute 
\par 
109 Petal-limb laciniate, divided at least to half-way
\par 
110 Leaves not crowded at base of stems, rigid, mostly
    recurved ................................................................................. {\b 87. squarrosus}
\par 
110 Leaves crowded at base of stems; cauline few and distant,
\par 
    not recurved
\par 
111 Calyx 10-12 mm; outer epicalyx-scales at least ½ as long 
\par 
    as calyx, with a green, subulate point ........................................ {\b 46. furcatus}
\par 
111 Calyx at least 15 mm; epicalyx-scales up to ½ as long as 
\par 
    calyx, without a green, subulate point
\par 
112 Epicalyx-scales ovate, gradually long-acuminate
\par 
113 Epicalyx-scales 1/3 - 1/2 as long as calyx, usually
\par 
    6 or more; petal-limb c. 15 mm ............................................... {\b 75. serrulatus}
\par 
113 Epicalyx-scales 5-3 as long as calyx, usually 4(-6);
\par 
    petal-limb 4-10 mm ................................................................... {\b 79. petraeus}
\par 
112 Epicalyx-scales obovate, not long-acuminate
\par 
114 Calyx tapering from near base
\par 
115 Plant usually glaucous; cauline leaves (6-)8-14(-19) pairs;
\par 
    calyx-teeth lanceolate, apiculate .............................................. {\b 85. serotinus}
\par 
115 Plant usually green; cauline leaves rarely more than 6 pairs; 
\par 
    calyx-teeth narrowly acuminate ................................................ {\b 79. petraeus}
\par 
114 Calyx ± cylindrical or tapering from about the middle
\par 
116 Petal-limb with a greenish or purplish spot near base .......... {\b 88. arenarius}
\par 

\par 
230}
\par