{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 (1963) ({\i D. racovitzae} Prodan): Stems 40-60 cm, robust. Outer epicalyx-scales c. 10 mm. •{\i  E. Romania}.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 44. D. versicolor }Fischer ex Link,{\i  Enum. Hort. Berol. Alt.}{\b  10}: 420 (1821). Like {\b 43} but stock very stout; stems and leaves more or less puberulent and rough; outer epicalyx-scales c. ½ as long as calyx, abruptly contracted into a subulate apex; petal-limb pinkish-purple above, greenish beneath.{\i  C. & E. Russia, N.E. Ukraine.} Rs(C, E)
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 45. D. pseudoversicolor }Klokov in Kotov,{\i  Fl. RSS Ucr.}{\b  4}: 660 (1952). Like {\b 43}({\b a}) but pubescent; leaves 10-55 × 1-3 mm; epicalyx-scales mucronate; calyx 15-18 × 3-4·5 mm, almost cylindrical; petal-limb 18-25 mm, dentate, pinkish-purple. •{\i  S. Russia, N.E. Ukraine}. Rs(W, E).
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 46. D. furcatus }Balbis, {\i Mém. Acad. Sci.} ({\i Turin}) {\b 10-11}: 13 (1804) ({\i D. requienii} Gren. & Godron, {\i D. fallens} Timb.-Lagr., {\i D. alpester }Balbis,{\i  D. benearensis} Loret). Laxly caespitose, not glaucous perennial (10-)15-30(-60) cm, with a slender stock. Stem simple or more commonly branched. Leaves 1-3 mm wide, more or less flat, linear-lanceolate, the cauline usually at least 3 pairs; sheaths up to as long as diameter of stem, somewhat inflated. Flowers 1 to several. Epicalyx-scales 2-6, ovate to ovate-lanceolate, narrowed to a subulate apex, usually c. ½ as long as calyx. Calyx 10-17(-20) mm, somewhat attenuate above; teeth lanceolate, acuminate. Petal-limb 5-10 mm, shallowly laciniate to subentire, glabrous, rarely sparsely hairy, pink or whitish, unspotted, but dark at base. •{\i  Mountains of S.W. Europe}. Co Ga Hs It.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Stems up to c. 10 cm and less than 0·5 mm in diameter, simple;
\par 
  2 pairs of cauline leaves; calyx 10-13 mm ....................... ({\b b}) subsp. {\b lereschii}
\par 
1 Stems usually 15-30 cm and more than 0·5 mm in diameter, commonly
\par 
  branched; 3 or more pairs of cauline leaves; calyx usually 14-19 mm
\par 
2 Leaves usually 2-3 mm wide, entire; epicalyx-scales as long
\par 
  as calyx-tube; petals whitish ........................................ ({\b d}) subsp. {\b gyspergerae}
\par 
2 Leaves usually 1-2 mm wide, serrulate; epicalyx-scales shorter than
\par 
  calyx-tube; petals pink
\par 
3 Calyx 15-16 × 2·5 mm, tapering markedly from the middle, 
\par 
  usually purplish; teeth narrowly triangular ........................ ({\b a}) subsp. {\b furcatus}
\par 
3 Calyx c. 17 × 4 mm, nearly cylindrical, usually green;
\par 
  teeth broadly triangular ............................................... ({\b c}) subsp. {\b geminiflorus}
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b furcatus}: Leaves usually 1-2 mm wide, serrulate. Epicalyx-scales shorter than calyx-tube. Calyx c. 15 × 2·5 mm, tapering markedly from the middle, usually purplish. Petals pink. 2n = 60.{\i  S.W. Alps}.
\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b lereschii} (Burnat) Pignatti, {\i Gior. Bot. Ital. }{\b 107}: 209 (1973) (subsp. {\i tener} Tutin, non{\i  D. tener} Balbis): Stems not more than 10 cm and less than 0·5 mm in diameter, simple. Cauline leaves 2 pairs. Leaves 1-2 mm wide, serrulate. Epicalyx-scales shorter than calyx-tube. Calyx 10-13 mm. Petals pink.{\i  N.W. Italy} ({\i Piemonte}).
\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b c}) Subsp. {\b geminiflorus} (Loisel.) Tutin,{\i  Feddes Repert.}{\b  68}: 189 (1963) ({\i D. geminiflorus} Loisel.): Leaves usually 1-2 mm wide, serrulate. Epicalyx-scales shorter than calyx-tube. Calyx c. 17 × 4 mm, nearly cylindrical, usually green, the teeth broadly triangular. Petals pink. 2n = 30. {\i Pyrenees}.
\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b d}) Subsp. {\b gyspergerae} (Rouy) Burnat ex Briq.,{\i  Prodr. Fl. Corse}{\b  1}: 572 (1910) ({\i D. gyspergerae} Rouy): Leaves usually 2-3 mm wide, entire. Epicalyx-scales as long as calyx-tube. Calyx 11-14 mm. Petals whitish.{\i  W. Corse} ({\i near Porto}).
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28 Subsp. {\b dissimilis} (Burnat) Pignatti, {\i Gior. Bot. Ital.}{\b  107}: 209 (1973), from Alpi Marittime, similar to subsp. ({\b a}) but with calyx 16-18 × 4-5 mm, and larger petals, may be a hybrid between{\b  46 }and {\b 62}.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 47. D. viridescens }G.C. Clementi,{\i  Atti 3 Riun. Sci. Ital.} 520 (1841). Annual up to 60 cm; stems c. 1·5 mm in diameter, freely branched above. Leaves mostly 2-3 mm wide, obtuse, thin, flat; basal leaves few or absent at flowering; cauline usually 5-7 pairs; sheaths short. Epicalyx-scales 2, obovate, with a green, subulate apex, about as long as calyx-tube. Calyx c. 17 mm, almost cylindrical; teeth long, acuminate. Petal-limb 7-10 mm, pink, dentate, bearded. •{\i  S. & W. Jugoslavia; N. Albania}. Al Ju.
\par 

\par 
 
\pard\f0\fs28   {\b 48. D. eugeniae }Kleopow,{\i  Bull. Jard. Bot. Kieff}{\b  14}: 103 (1932). Glabrous perennial 40-60 cm. Leaves 2-5 mm wide, linear-lanceolate or linear, the basal withered at anthesis, sheaths about as long as diameter of stem. Flowers usually solitary at ends of branches. Epicalyx-scales ovate, abruptly narrowed to the subulate apex, at least some reaching base of calyx-teeth; margins scarious. Calyx 15-17 mm. Petal-limb 8-10 mm, purple, with black spots at base. •{\i  N. & E. Ukraine, and adjacent regions of Russia.} Rs(W, C, E)
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 49. D. tesquicola }Klokov, {\i Jour. Inst. Bot. Acad. Sci. Ukr.}{\b  5}({\b 1}): 26 (1948). Like {\b 48} but usually smaller; stems and leaves more or less puberulent; leaves 1-2 mm wide; epicalyx-scales shortly aristate, up to ½ as long as calyx; calyx 12-15 mm; petal-limb 3-5 mm. C. & E. Ukraine. Rs(W).
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 50. D. guttatus }Bieb.,{\i  Fl. Taur.-Cauc.}{\b  1}: 328 (1808) ({\i D. pseudogrisebachii} Grec.). Like {\b 48} but 20-45 cm; leaves 1-3 mm wide; sheaths c. ½ as long as leaf-width; outer epicalyx-scales leaf-like, at least as long as calyx; petal-limb 5-8 mm, pinkish with white spots above, yellow-green beneath. •{\i  S. Romania to E. Ukraine.} Rm Rs(W).
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 51. D. monspessulanus }L.,{\i  Amoen. Acad.}{\b  4}: 313 (1759) (incl.{\i  D. hyssopifolius} L. pro parte). Laxly caespitose perennial 20-60 cm; stems slender, simple or little-branched. Leaves 1-3 mm wide, linear to linear-lanceolate, thin, acuminate; sheaths about as long as diameter of stem. Flowers (1)2-5(-7), fragrant; pedicels short. Epicalyx-scales 4, ovate, with a subulate, herbaceous apex, usually more than ½ as long as calyx. Calyx 18-25 × 3-5 mm, nearly cylindrical; teeth usually ovate-lanceolate, mucronate. Petal-limb 10-25 mm, divided to c. ¼ into narrow lobes, the entire part suborbicular, white or pink, sometimes bearded. 2n = 30. •{\i  S. Europe, extending northwards to the Jura and N.E. Alps; mainly in the mountains}. Al Ga He Hs It Ju Lu.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b monspessulanus}: Plant 20-60 cm. Epicalyx-scales usually more than ½ as long as calyx. Petal-limb 10-15 mm. {\i Throughout the range of the species except C. & S. Italy}.
\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b marsicus} (Ten.) Novák,{\i  Acta Fac. Rer. Nat. Carol.}{\b  21}: 25 (1924) ({\i D. marsicus} Ten.): Plant usually c. 20 cm. Epicalyx-scales usually at least ½ as long as calyx. Petal-limb 15-25 mm.{\i  C. & S. Appennini}.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 52. D. sternbergii }Sieber ex Capelli, {\i Cat. Stirp.} 24 (1821) ({\i D. waldsteinii} Sternb.,{\i  D. monspessulanus }subsp. {\i sternbergii} Hegi): Like {\b 51} but plant 10-22 cm; flowers 1(2); epicalyx-scales sometimes
\par 

\par 
238}
\par