{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 scale; calyx 8-10 × 2-3 mm, purplish; petal-limb pale pink, nearly or quite glabrous. •{\i  From N. Albania to C. Bulgaria.} Al Bu Ju.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 34. D. brachyzonus }Borbás & Form., {\i Verh. Naturf. Ver. Brunn }{\b 35}: 194 (1897) ({\i D. hyalolepis} Acht. & Lindt.). Perennial up to 50 cm. Leaves 1-3 mm wide, linear, acuminate, flat; sheaths several times as long as diameter of stem. Flowers 1-7 together; bracts ovate-lanceolate, with a long, usually green, subulate point. Epicalyx-scales broadly obovate, almost truncate, emarginate, whitish-coriaceous and broadly scarious; awn 3-6 mm. Calyx 15-20 × 2-3 mm, almost cylindrical. Petal-limb 4-5 mm, dentate, dark purple, bearded. 2n = 30. •{\i  S.W. Jugoslavia, S. Albania, N.W. Greece}. Al Gr Ju.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 35. D. pelviformis }Heuffel, {\i Flora} ({\i Regensb}.){\b  36}: 625 (1853) (incl. {\i D. zernyi} Hayek). Perennial up to 40 cm. Leaves c. 2 mm wide, linear, acute, flat; sheaths several times as long as diameter of stem. Flowers numerous, in a dense head; bracts broadly ovate, imbricate, usually emarginate with a patent or deflexed, sometimes green, subulate point. Epicalyx-scales ovate, broadly scarious, shortly awned. Calyx 7-8 × 2-3 mm, somewhat ventricose. Petal-limb 2-3 mm, dentate, glabrous, dark purple. 2n = 30. •{\i  C. part of Balkan peninsula}. Al Bu Gr Ju.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 36. D. stenopetalus }Griseb.,{\i  Spicil. Fl. Rumel.}{\b  1}: 189 (1843) ({\i D. geticus} Kulcz.). Caespitose perennial, almost stemless or up to c. 40 cm. Leaves c. 0·5 mm wide, convolute; sheaths several times as long as diameter of stem. Flowers few to many in a dense head; bracts broadly ovate, emarginate, awned, coriaceous. Epicalyx-scales ovate, awned, broadly scarious, pale. Calyx 5-7 × 2-3 mm, somewhat ventricose, purple. Petal-limb entire or obscurely dentate, reddish-purple. 2n = 30. •{\i  Balkan peninsula, from c. }42°{\i  N. southwards}. Al Bu Gr Ju.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 37. D. moesiacus }Vis. & Pancic,{\i  Mem. Ist. Veneto }{\b 15}: 17 (1870) (incl.{\i  D. burgasensis} Tutin). Caespitose perennial up to 60 cm. Leaves setaceous, up to 1 mm wide; sheaths several times as long as diameter of stem. Flowers numerous in rather narrow, dense heads; bracts oblong, emarginate, with a subulate point, coriaceous. Epicalyx-scales like the bracts but smaller, shortly awned, c. ½ as long as calyx to nearly equalling it. Calyx 10-12 × 1·5-2 mm, tapering from the middle. Petal-limb 3-4 mm, obovate, glabrous. •{\i  E. Jugoslavia, Bulgaria.} Bu Ju.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 38. D. rigidus }Bieb.,{\i  Fl. Taur.-Cauc}{\b  1}: 325 (1808). Dwarf shrub 10-50 cm, with rigid, much-branched, erect woody stems and herbaceous flowering stems. Leaves not crowded at base of stem, linear, less than 1 mm wide, apparently 1-veined. Epicalyx-scales 4, ovate, acuminate, c. ¼ as long as calyx, the outer much smaller than the inner. Calyx 10-12 × 2 mm, cylindrical. Petal-limb c. 5 mm, dentate, bearded, white.{\i  S.E. Russia; Krym.} Rs(K, E).
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 39. D. uralensis }Korsh., {\i Mém. Acad. Sci. Pétersb.} ser. 8,{\b  7}: 59 (1898). Like {\b 38} but most leaves at least 1 mm wide, distinctly 3-veined; epicalyx-scales c. 1/3 as long as calyx; calyx c. 3 mm wide; petal-limb pink above, yellowish-green beneath. {\i S. Ural.} Rs(C).
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28 Subgen.{\b  Dianthus.} Flowers solitary or in groups, usually without involucral bracts. Plants usually not woody at base.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 40. D. seguieri }Vill.,{\i  Hist. Pl. Dauph.}{\b  1}: 330 (1786). Laxly caespitose perennial (10-)30-60 cm, with a slender stock. Stem simple or branched. Leaves 1-4(-5) mm wide, more or less flat, linear-lanceolate; cauline leaves usually more than 4 pairs; sheaths up to as long as diameter of stem, somewhat inflated. Flowers 1 to several. Epicalyx-scales 2-6, ovate to ovate-lanceolate, gradually or abruptly narrowed to a subulate apex, ½-¾ as long as calyx. Calyx 14-20 mm, almost cylindrical. Petal-limb 7-12(-17) mm, dentate, reddish-pink, bearded and often whitish-spotted at base. •{\i  S.W. & W.C. Europe, from N.E. Spain to N. Italy and E. Germany.} Cz Ga Ge He Hs It.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Leaves 2-5 mm wide ........................................................... ({\b c}) subsp. {\b glaber}
\par 
1 Leaves usually 1-2 mm wide
\par 
2 Leaves with midrib much more prominent than lateral veins beneath;
\par 
  epicalyx-scales often nearly as long as calyx .................... ({\b a}) subsp. {\b seguieri}
\par 
2 Leaves with all veins ± equally prominent beneath; 
\par 
  epicalyx-scales c. ½ as long as calyx ................................. ({\b b}) subsp. {\b gautieri}
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b seguieri} (incl. subsp. {\i italicus} Tutin): Leaves usually 1-2 mm wide, the midrib much more prominent than the lateral veins beneath. Flowers often in pairs. Epicalyx-scales almost as long as calyx. 2n = 90.{\i  S.E. France and N. Italy}.
\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b gautieri} (Sennen) Tutin,{\b  Feddes Repert.}{\b  68}: 1 89 (1963) ({\i D. gautieri} Sennen,{\i  D. neglectus} auct. hisp., non Loisel.): Leaves usually 1-2 mm wide, all veins more or less equally prominent beneath. Flowers often solitary. Epicalyx-scales c. ½ as long as calyx.{\i  N.E. Spain, E. Pyrenees}.
\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b c}) Subsp. {\b glaber} Celak.,{\i  Prodr. Fl. Böhm.}{\b  3}: 507 (1875) (incl.{\i  D. sylvaticus} Hoppe,{\i  D. seguieri} subsp. {\i sylvaticus} (Hoppe) Hegi): Leaves 2-5 mm wide. Flowers 1 to several. Epicalyx-scales c. ½ as long as calyx. 2n = 60.{\i  S.C. France, Czechoslovakia}, S. Germany.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 41. D. collinus }Waldst. & Kit., {\i Pl. Rar. Hung.}{\b  1}: 51 (1801). Shortly pubescent to glabrous perennial 20-80 cm. Leaves 3-8 mm wide, linear-lanceolate, thin; basal leaves few or none at anthesis; cauline usually 7-15 pairs; veins 3-5, the midrib usually distinctly more prominent than the laterals; sheaths 1-2 times as long as diameter of stem. Flowers usually 2-8, commonly in 2 rather lax heads; bracts green, shorter than flowers. Epicalyx-scales ovate, acuminate, ½ as long as calyx. Calyx 14-18 mm. Petal-limb 7-14 mm, pink or purplish, bearded. •{\i  E.C. Europe, extending to E. Jugoslavia and N.E. Romania.} Au Cz Hu Ju Po Rm Rs(W).
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b collinus}: Plant shortly pubescent. 2n = 90.{\i  From Austria and E. Czechoslovakia to Jugoslavia}.
\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b glabriusculus} (Kit.) Thaisz,{\i  Bot. Közl.}{\b  8}: 252 (1910) ({\i D. piatr-neamtzui} Prodan): Plant glabrous. 2n = 90.{\i  From Poland to Hungary and Romania.}
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 42. D. fischeri }Sprengel,{\i  Pugillus}{\b  2}: 62 (1815) ({\i D. mariae} (Kleopow) Klokov). Like {\b 41} but cauline leaves c. 7 pairs, 2-3 mm wide, tapering from just above base. •{\i  W. & C. Russia, Ukraine}. Rs(C, W, K, E).
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 43. D. pratensis }Bieb.,{\i  Fl. Taur.-Cauo.}{\b  3}: 300 (1819). Glabrous perennial with a slender, creeping stock. Leaves 20-70 × 2-4 mm, linear-lanceolate; cauline leaves usually 3 or 4 pairs. Flowers 1 or 2; pedicels long. Epicalyx-scales 4(-6), ovate, gradually narrowed into a subulate, herbaceous apex reaching about to base of calyx-teeth. Calyx 10-17 × 4-5 mm, widest at about the middle. Petal-limb 5-7 mm, dentate, pale pink to pinkish-purple, bearded. •{\i  E. Europe, from C. Ural to E. Romania}. Rm Rs(C, W, E) [Rs(B)].
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b pratensis}: Stems 15-40 cm, slender. Outer epicalyx-scales c. 5 mm.{\i  Throughout the range of the species except Romania}.
\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b racovitzae} (Prodan) Tutin, {\i Feddes Repert.}{\b  68}: 189
\par 

\par 
237}
\par