{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 1.              Athyrium}               Roth
\par       

\pard\f0\fs24\qc  By A.C. Jermy.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Rhizome branched, covered with broadly lanceolate, acuminate scales. Leaves uniform, forming a crown at apex of rhizome, 2-pinnate, with pinnatifid or pinnatisect pinnules; lamina broadly lanceolate with pinnae decreasing towards base; veins free. Sori oblong or orbicular; indusium rudimentary and caducous, or persistent, oblong or linear, fimbriate at margin, attached laterally, opening towards the midrib.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 Sori oblong; indusium persistent; spores not winged ................. {\b 1. filix-femina} 
\par
Sori orbicular; indusium rudimentary or absent;
   spores winged  ...................................................................... {\b 2. distentifolium}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. A. filix-femina} (L.) Roth, {\i Tent. Fl. Germ.}{\b  3}({\b 1}): 65 (1799) ({\i Polypodium rhaeticum} L.,{\i  P. axillare} Aiton,{\i  Asplenium filix-femina} (L.) Bernh.). Rhizome short, suberect. Leaves 20-150 cm, suberect or spreading; petiole pale yellowish-green or purplish-red, ¼-½ as long as the lamina; lamina thin, flaccid, light green, lanceolate; longest pinnae 3-25 cm, decreasing towards base of leaf, linear-lanceolate, tapered at apex; pinnules 3-20 mm, sessile, oblong or oblong-lanceolate, pinnatifid or pinnatisect. Sori c. 1 mm, more or less oblong; indusium persistent, flap-like, the lower hooked, the upper nearly straight; spores minutely papillose. 2n = 80. {\i Shady places. Throughout Europe but local in the south and east.} All except Rs(K) Sb.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 This species has many variants, differing mainly in the form and dissection of the leaf, which bear no relation to habitat.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   {\b 2. A. distentifolium} Tausch ex Opiz, {\i Tent. Fl. Crypt. Boem. }{\b 1:} 14 (1820) ({\i A. alpestre} (Hoppe) Rylands ex T. Moore, non Clairv., {\i Polypodium rhaeticum }auct., non L.). Like {\b 1} but segments of pinnules usually blunt and often tricuspidate at apex; sori less than 1 mm, orbicular, near edge of lamina; indusium rudimentary or caducous at a very early stage; spores reticulate, with narrow wings. 2n = 80.{\i  Screes and rocky outcrops in exposed places. N. Europe; mountains of C. & S.Europe}. Au Br Bu Co Cz Fa Fe Ga Ge He Hs Is It Ju No Po Rm Rs(N, C, W) Su.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Var.{\i  flexile} (Newman) Jermy ({\i A. flexile} (Newman) Druce), known only from Scotland, has leaves 15-25 cm and very small sori, often of 3-5 sporangia only.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 2.              Diplazium}             Swartz 
\par      

\pard\f0\fs24\qc  By A.C. Jermy.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Rhizome creeping or erect, sparsely covered with ovate, dark brown scales. Leaves erect, distant, usually 2-pinnate, with pinnules pinnatisect, glabrous above; lamina deltate or ovate-lanceolate; articulate hairs usually absent; groove of frond-axis open at junction of costa and costule; veins free. Sori oblong or linear, often paired; indusium oblong or linear, fimbriate at margin, attached laterally along the vein.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 Pinnules acuminate, glabrous beneath ........................................... {\b 1. caudatum}
\par
Pinnules rounded at apex; main veins hairy beneath ..................... {\b 2. sibiricum}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. D. caudatum} (Cav.) Jermy,{\i  Brit. Fern Gaz.}{\b  9:} 161 (1964) ({\i Tectaria caudata} Cav.,{\i  Asplenium umbrosum} auct. non Sm.). Rhizome up to 40 cm, creeping. Leaves 70-150(-200) cm; petiole glabrous, shorter than the lamina; lamina 25-50 cm wide, ovate or ovate-lanceolate; pinnae lanceolate, acuminate or caudate; pinnules lanceolate, acute, deeply pinnatisect, the basal pairs not markedly shorter than the upper; segments serrate-dentate, glabrous beneath. Sori oblong.{\i  Woods and shady places. Açores; one station in S.W. Spain.} Az Hs. ({\i Islas Canarias}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. D. sibiricum} (Turcz. ex G. Kunze) Kurata in Namegata & Kurata, {\i Coll. Cult. Ferns Fern Allies} 340 (1961) ({\i Athyrium crenatum} (Sommerf.) Rupr.). Rhizome slender, often much-branched and far-creeping. Leaves 25-60 cm; petiole glabrous or sparsely scaly, as long as the lamina; lamina 20-30 cm wide, deltate; pinnae lanceolate, the lowest inflexed; pinnules obtuse or rounded, decreasing in size towards base, deeply pinnatisect, the segments crenate-dentate, oblong, the main veins covered beneath with multicellular, crispate hairs. Sori small; indusium obscure, often caducous. 2n = 82. Picea-{\i woodland. N.E. Europe, southwards to} 53°{\i  N.; one small region of C. Norway}. Fe No Rs(N, C) Su.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b D. esculentum} (Retz.) Swartz in Schrader, {\i Jour. für die Bot.}{\b  1800:} 312 (1803), from tropical Asia, with a stout, erect rhizome, pinnules shallowly pinnatifid to dentate and linear sori, is cultivated for ornament. It is perhaps becoming naturalized in Açores.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 3.                 Deparia}                  Hooker & Grev.
\par   

\pard\f0\fs24\qc  By A.C. Jermy.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Like{\i  Diplazium} but groove of frond-axis not open at junction of costa or costule; articulated hairs usually present.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. D. petersenii} (G. Kunze) Kato, {\i Bot. Mag.} ({\i Tokyo}){\b  90:} 37 (1977) ({\i Asplenium petersenii} G. Kunze,{\i  Diplazium allorgei} Tardieu-Blot,{\i  Lunathyrium japonicum} auct., non (Thunb.) Kurata). Leaves 70-100 cm; petiole hispid, dark brown, shorter than the lamina; lamina 25-50 cm wide, ovate or ovate-lanceolate; pinnae lanceolate, acuminate or caudate; pinnules crenate-serrate, obtuse or truncate at apex, glabrous beneath. Sori oblong to linear.{\i  Naturalized in Açores}. [Az.] ({\i Tropical and subtropical Asia.})
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 4.              Cystopteris}              Bernh.
\par  

\pard\f0\fs24\qc  By J.A. Crabbe (Ed. 1) revised by A.C. Jermy (Ed. 2)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Rhizome blackish. Leaves uniform, delicate, slender-stalked, dying down in winter; veins free. Sori orbicular; indusium hood-like, pale, attached across the vein at basiscopic side of sorus, becoming deflexed and shrivelled as the sporangia mature.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Rhizome creeping, slender; leaves solitary; lamina deltate, usually 
\par
  shorter than petiole
\par
2 Proximal basiscopic pinnule conspicuously the longest ............... {\b 5. montana}
\par
2 Proximal basiscopic pinnule not the longest ................................. {\b 6. sudetica}
\par
1 Rhizome short, stout; leaves tufted; lamina lanceolate, 
\par
  usually longer than petiole
\par
3 Spores rugose .............................................................................. {\b 4. dickieana}
\par
3 Spores echinate
\par
4 Spores densely echinate, the spines almost touching at base ....... {\b 3. diaphana}
\par
4 Spores ± sparsely echinate, the spines at least their own width apart
\par
5 Ultimate segments of pinnae ovate to oblong ................................. {\b 1. fragilis}
\par
5 Ultimate segments of pinnae linear-oblong ...................................... {\b 2. alpina}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. C. fragilis} (L.) Bernh. in Schrader,{\i  Neues Jour. Bot. }{\b 1}({\b 2}): 27 (1805) ({\i C. filix-fragilis} (L.) Borbás). Rhizome c. 5 mm in diameter, short, much-branched, covered with old leaf-bases, and with lanceolate, acuminate scales at the apex. Leaves 5-45 cm, tufted, 2-
\par

\par
24}
\par