{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 leaf-like, at least 2/3 as long as calyx. Calyx 5-9 mm, campanulate, herbaceous. Petal-limb 3-5 mm, bearded, pink.•{\i  Mountains of W. Macedonia.} Gr Ju.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 95. D. sphacioticus }Boiss. & Heldr. in Boiss.,{\i  Diagn. Pl. Or. Nov.}{\b  2}({\b 8}): 70 (1849). Perennial 2-10(-15) cm with a stout, woody stock. Leaves 3-6 mm, oblong to oblong-lanceolate, those of the flowering stems shorter than internodes. Flowers solitary. Epicalyx-scales usually 6, c. 1/3 as long as calyx; outer ovate and leaf-like; inner obovate, cuspidate. Calyx 14-18 mm, tapering from below the middle. Petal-limb 3-4 mm, obovate, subentire, bearded. •{\i  W. Kriti} ({\i Levka Ori}). Cr.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 96. D. pallidiflorus }Ser. in DC.,{\i  Prodr.}{\b  1}: 358 (1824) ({\i D. maeoticus }Klokov; incl.{\i  D. aridus} Griseb. ex Janka). Freely-branched perennial up to 50 cm, with a stout stock. Basal leaves withered at anthesis; cauline 3·5-6 cm, usually 6 or 7 pairs, flat, rather soft. Flowers usually long-pedicellate. Epicalyx-scales usually 4, 1/3-3/4 as long as calyx, ovate with scarious margins, shortly aristate. Calyx 10-14 × 2 mm, tapering above the middle. Petal-limb 4-6 mm, dentate, bearded, white or pale pink.{\i  S.E. Europe, from S. Bulgaria to S.E. Russia.} Bu ?Gr Rs(?C, W, K, E).
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 97. D. campestris }Bieb., {\i Fl. Taur.-Cauc.}{\b  1}: 326 (1808) ({\i D. serbanii} Prodan). Usually puberulent perennial with a stout stock and numerous stems 20-60 cm. Leaves 1-5 mm wide, the lower withered at anthesis; sheaths 2-4 mm. Flowers solitary or in pairs, terminating all the branches. Epicalyx-scales 4-6, c. 1/3 as long as calyx, ovate, acuminate, with scarious margins. Calyx 15-18 × 3-4 mm, nearly cylindrical. Petal-limb 6-7 mm, dentate, bearded, pink or purplish above, greenish-yellow beneath.{\i  S.E. Europe from W. Ukraine to S. Ural.} Rm Rs(C, W, K, E).
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Leaves not more than 2·5 mm wide; flowers c. 20 mm in
\par 
  diameter .......................................................................... ({\b a}) subsp. {\b campestris}
\par 
1 Leaves 3 5 mm wide; flowers less than 20 mm in diameter
\par 
2 Epicalyx-scales with a point up to 0·5 mm ................... ({\b b}) subsp. {\b laevigatus}
\par 
2 Epicalyx-scales with a point at least 1 mm .................. ({\b c}) subsp. {\b steppaceus}
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b campestris}: Plant up to 30 cm, puberulent. Branches of inflorescence long; flowers c. 20 mm in diameter. 2n = 30.{\i  Throughout the range of the species}.
\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b laevigatus} (Gruner) Klokov in Kotov,{\i  Fl. RSS Ucr.}{\b  4}: 625 (1952): Plant 40-60 cm, glabrous. Branches of inflorescence long; flowers less than 20 mm in diameter. •{\i  Dnepr and Dnestr valleys}.
\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b c}) Subsp. {\b steppaceus} Sirj. in Sirj. & Lavrenko, {\i Consp. Crit. Fl. Prov. Charkov.}{\b  1} (1926): Plant up to 50 cm, glabrous or puberulent. Branches of inflorescence short; flowers less than 20 mm in diameter.{\i  E. Ukraine}.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 98. D. hypanicus }Andrz.,{\i  Trudy Kommiss. Kiev. Ucebn. Okr.}{\b  4}({\b 1}): 18 (1860). Like {\b 97} but stems 10-20(-25) cm, slender, with numerous short, non-flowering branches; leaves 1-2 mm wide; sheaths up to 1·5 mm; flowers solitary; epicalyx-scales usually ¼ as long as calyx. • {\i S.C. Ukraine.} Rs(W).
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 99. D. carbonatus }Klokov, {\i Sci. Mag. Biol.} ({\i Kharkov}) {\b 1927}: 15 (1927). Like {\b 97} but leaves rarely as much as 1 mm wide, almost setaceous; sheaths 1-3 mm; flowers often 2 or 3 together; epicalyx-scales usually ½ as long as calyx which is usually 2·5 mm wide. •{\i  Moldavia, S. Ukraine.} Rs(W, K).
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 100. D. marschallii }Schischkin, {\i Jour. Governm. Bot. Gard. Nikita}{\b  10}({\b 2}): 39 (1928) ({\i D. bicolor} Bieb.). Perennial 20-30 cm, with a woody stock and no basal leaves at anthesis; stems usually with long branches. Cauline leaves usually 3-5 pairs, linear, acuminate. Epicalyx-scales ovate, cuspidate, c. 1/3 as long as calyx. Calyx c. 15 × 3 mm, narrowed in upper ½; teeth triangular. Petal-limb 7-10 mm, glabrous, subentire, yellowish-white above, pink beneath. •{\i  Moldavia to Krym.} Rs(W, K).
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 101. D. cinnamomeus }Sm. in Sibth. & Sm.,{\i  Fl. Graec. Prodr.}{\b  1}: 287 (1809) . Perennial 15-30 cm, with a stout stock; stem terete, more or less puberulent. Lower leaves usually obtuse, the basal often withered at anthesis. Epicalyx-scales obovate, apiculate to cuspidate, 1/4-1/3 as long as calyx. Calyx c. 18 × 4 mm; teeth oblong-lanceolate. Petal-limb c. 3 mm, glabrous, cream above, cinnamon beneath.{\i  Islands of S. Aegean region.} Cr Gr.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 102. D. monadelphus }Vent.,{\i  Descr. Pl. Jard. Cels} t. 39 (1801) (incl. {\i D. rhodopaeus} Velen.). Like {\b 101} but up to 50 cm, usually pruinose; epicalyx-scales ovate, acute or acuminate; teeth lanceolate, acuminate; petal-limb greenish beneath.{\i  S. & E. parts of Balkan peninsula  S.E. Romania.} Bu Gr Rm Ju Tu.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b monadelphus}: Epicalyx-scales ½ as long as calyx, their apices patent, subulate.{\i  Turkey-in-Europe} ({\i near Istanbul}). ({\i S.W. Asia}.)
\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b pallens} (Sm.) Greuter & Burdet, {\i Willdenowia}{\b  12}:187 (1982) ({\i D. pallens} Sm.): Epicalyx-scales 1/4-1/3 as long as calyx, apiculate. 2n = 30. {\i Almost throughout the range of the species}.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 103. D. lanceolatus }Steven ex Reichenb.,{\i  Pl. Crit.}{\b  6}: 34 (1828) ({\i D. leptopetalus} auct., non Willd.). Robust perennial up to c. 50 cm, with a woody stock and no basal leaves at anthesis; stems usually branched above. Cauline leaves usually 5-7 pairs, linear, acuminate, thin; sheaths 2-3 times as long as diameter of stem. Epicalyx-scales 4, 1/4-1/3 as long as calyx; outer ovate, abruptly acuminate; inner broadly obovate, cuspidate. Calyx 25-30 × 4-5 mm, narrowed in the upper 1/2. Petal-limb c. 10 mm, dentate, whitish, glabrous.{\i  S.E. Russia, S. Ukraine.} Rs(C, W, K, E).
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 104. D. leptopetalus }Willd., {\i Enum. Pl. Horti Berol.} 468 (1809) ({\i D. rhodopaeus} Velen.). Like {\b 103} but calyx 20-28 × 3-4 mm, tapering markedly from below the middle; petal-limb narrowly rhombic, widest just above the middle, purplish beneath. 2n = 30.{\i  S.E. Europe, from Turkey-in-Europe to S. Ural.} ?Gr Rm Rs(C, W, E) Tu.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 105. D. roseoluteus }Velen., {\i Österr. Bot. Zeitschr.}{\b  36}: 226 (1886 ({\i D. purpureoluteus} Velen.). Pubescent, branched perennial 30-50 cm. Basal leaves withered at anthesis; cauline 20-30 × 2-3 mm, usually 5-10 pairs, at least as long as internodes, flat, acuminate; sheaths about as long as diameter of stem. Epicalyx-scales usually 6; outer leaf-like and about as long as calyx; inner ovate, with a subulate point. Calyx 18-22 × c. 4 mm, tapering from about the middle; teeth usually 5-8 mm. Petal-limb c. 7 mm, dentate, bearded, pink above, yellowish beneath.{\i  N.E. part of Balkan peninsula.} Bu Gr Tu.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 106. D. gracilis }Sm. in Sibth. & Sm.,{\i  Fl. Graec. Prodr.}{\b  1}: 288 (1809). Glabrous perennial 15-40 cm; stems simple or branched. Basal leaves c. 1 mm wide, often absent at anthesis; cauline 4-6 pairs, shorter than internodes, flat, acuminate; sheaths c. 3 times as long as diameter of stem. Epicalyx-scales 4-6, ¼-¾ as long as calyx, obovate, cuspidate or, rarely, gradually tapering from about the
\par 

\par 
244}
\par