{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b multiceps} (Costa ex Willk.) Tutin,{\i  Feddes Repert.}{\b  68}: 190 (1963) ({\i D. multiceps} Costa ex Willk.): Like subsp. ({\b a}) but petal-limb usually less than 5 mm, the claw often exserted. •{\i  N.E. Spain}.
\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b c}) Subsp. {\b barbatus} R. Fernandes & Franco in Franco,{\i  Nova Fl. Portugal}{\b  1}: 159 (1971): Like subsp. ({\b a}) but leaves usually narrower; epicalyx-scales abruptly contracted to apex, 0·5-1 mm wide at base; petal-limb 5-10 × 3-4 mm, bearded. {\i Calcicole. •  N. & C. Portugal}.
\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b d}) Subsp. {\b charidemii} (Pau) Tutin,{\i  Feddes Repert}{\b . 68}: 190 (1963) ({\i D. charidemii} Pau): Stems 15-20 cm, usually simple. Epicalyx-scales 4-6. Petal-limb usually more than 5 mm; claw usually exserted. •{\i  S.E. Spain} ({\i Cabo de Gata}).
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b D. anticarius}  Boiss. & Reuter,{\i  Pugillus }19 (1852), from S. Spain, usually has a simple inflorescence, but otherwise resembles{\b  78}({\b a}), and is probably best included in this subspecies.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 79. D. petraeus }Waldst. & Kit.,{\i  Pl. Rar. Hung.}{\b  3}: 246 (1808) (incl. {\i D. nicolai} G. Beck & Szysz.,{\i  D. prenjus} G. Beck,{\i  D. strictus} auct., non Sibth. & Sm., nec Banks & Solander,{\i  D. suendermannii} Bornm.). Green or somewhat glaucous, usually laxly caespitose perennial up to c. 30 cm. Leaves acuminate, tapering from near the middle; cauline leaves usually 2-5 pairs. Epicalyx-scales elliptical to ovate, acuminate or cuspidate, 1/5 - 1/3 as long as calyx. Calyx (12-)20-32 × (2-)3-4 mm, tapering from below the middle; teeth narrowly triangular. Petal-limb 4-10 mm, glabrous or somewhat bearded, laciniate, dentate or subentire, white. Capsule more or less equalling or slightly longer than calyx. •{\i  Balkan peninsula, S.W. & C. Romania.} Al Bu Gr Ju Rm.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28 A species which shows great variability in size, division and pubescence of the petals, though the long, narrow, tapering calyx in particular is characteristic. At least three subspecies may be recognized:
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Epicalyx-scales narrowed into an acute or acuminate
\par 
   herbaceous apex ............................................................... ({\b a}) subsp. {\b petraeus}
\par 
1 Epicalyx-scales shortly cuspidate
\par 
2 Petal-limb c. 6 mm, obovate, dentate to subentire .......... ({\b b}) subsp. {\b orbelicus}
\par 
2 Petal-limb c. 8 mm, elliptical, laciniate .......................... ({\b c}) subsp. {\b noaeanus}
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b petraeus} ({\i D. bebius }Vis., {\i D. kitaibelii} Janka,{\i  D. noaeanus} auct. jugosl., non Boiss.): Epicalyx-scales 4-6(-8), narrowed into an acute or acuminate herbaceous apex. Petal-limb obovate, dentate to laciniate. 2n = 30.{\i  Almost throughout the range of the species}.
\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b orbelicus} (Velen.) Greuter & Burdet,{\i  Willdenowia}{\b  12}: 187 (1982) ({\i D. strictus} subsp. {\i orbelicus} Velen.; incl. {\i D. stefanoffi} Eig, {\i D. strictus} Sibth. & Sm., non Banks & Solander, {\i D. petraeus} subsp. {\i simonkaianus} (Péterfi) Tutin, {\i D. simonkaianus} Péterfi): Epicalyx-scales 4-6(-8), shortly cuspidate. Petal-limb c. 6 mm, obovate, dentate or subentire. 2n = 30.{\i  From N.C. Romania to N.E. Greece; S.W. & C. Bulgaria}.
\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b c}) Subsp. {\b noaeanus} (Boiss.) Tutin,{\i  Feddes Repert.}{\b  68}: 190 (1963) ({\i D. noaeanus} Boiss.): Densely caespitose; leaves more pungent than those of subspp. ({\b a}) and ({\b b}). Epicalyx-scales 6-8, shortly cuspidate. Petal-limb c. 8 mm, elliptical, laciniate. 2n = 30.{\i  Bulgaria and E. Jugoslavia; one station in N. Greece}.
\par 

\par 
 
\pard\f0\fs28   {\b 80. D. integer }Vis., {\i Flora }({\i Regensb}.){\b  12}, Erg.-Bl. {\b 1}: 11 (1829). Like {\b 79} but epicalyx-scales 2-4, at least 1/3 as long as calyx; calyx 8-20 × 3-4·5 mm, cylindrical to narrowly ovoid, usually ringed with purple; calyx-teeth ovate-triangular; petal-limb entire or subentire; capsule exceeding calyx. •{\i  Mountains of S. & W. parts of Balkan peninsula}.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b integer}: Epicalyx-scales acute to acuminate. Calyx 8-14 mm; teeth acute. Petal-limb pale pink. 2n = 60. {\i W. Jugoslavia, Albania}.
\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b minutiflorus} (Halácsy) Bornm., {\i Bot. Jahrb.}{\b  49}: 388 (1935) ({\i D. minutiflorus} Halácsy, {\i D. petraeus} subsp. {\i minutiflorus} (Halácsy) Greuter & Burdet, {\i D. strictus} var.{\i  brachyanthus }(Boiss.) Boiss.): Epicalyx-scales cuspidate. Calyx 12-20 mm; teeth obtuse. Petal-limb white. 2n = 60, 90.{\i  From N. Albania to S. Greece}.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 81. D. graniticus }Jordan,{\i  Obs. Pl. Crit.}{\b  7}: 13 (1849). Like {\b 80} but stems somewhat hairy below, with 6 or 7 cauline leaves; calyx 10-15 mm, cylindrical; petal-limb toothed, bearded, reddish-purple. 2n = 30. •{\i  Calcifuge. S.C. France}.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 82. D. spiculifolius }Schur, {\i Enum. Pl. Transs.} 98 (1866). Like {\b 80} but petals pink, deeply laciniate, always bearded, with limb 10-15 mm. 2n = 90.  •{\i Calcicole. E. Carpathians.} Rm Rs(W).
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 83. D. plumarius }L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 411 (1753) ({\i D. blandus }(Reichenb.) Hayek,{\i  D. hoppei} Portenschl.,{\i  D. neilreichii} Hayek). A more or less glaucous perennial up to 40 cm; flowering stems with 1-4(-10) pairs of leaves. Leaves c. 1 mm wide, narrowed only in the upper part, acute or subacute. Flowers solitary (rarely more in wild plants), fragrant. Epicalyx-scales (2-)4(-6), obovate, often almost truncate, shortly apiculate, c. ¼ as long as calyx. Calyx 17-30 × 4-6 mm, almost cylindrical, green or slightly purple; teeth lanceolate to ovate, obtuse or apiculate; margin broadly scarious. Petal-limb 12-18 mm divided to about the middle into narrow lobes, white or bright pink, usually bearded. •{\i  Calcareous mountains of E.C. Europe; widely cultivated for ornament, and locally naturalized}. Au Cz Hu Ju Po [Br Ge *It].
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28 Many hybrids between this and {\b 65} are grown in gardens. A number of isolated and slightly different populations have been given specific or subspecific rank by some authors. The most distinct of these are{\b  D. hungaricus} Pers., {\i Syn. Pl. }{\b 1}: 494 (1805), from the Tatra mountains, with broadly scarious epicalyx-scales, and violet filaments, and{\b  D. lumnitzeri} Wiesb., {\i Bot. Centr.}{\b  26}: 85 (1886), from E. Austria (Hainburger Berge) to N.E. Hungary (Bukk Hegyseg), with a narrow, rather attenuate calyx.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 84. D. moravicus }Kovanda,{\i  Preslia}{\b  54}: 223 (1982). Like {\b 83} but leaves linear to narrowly triangular; calyx 15-20(-24) mm, the teeth acute to acuminate, usually not broadly scarious; petal-limb 12-15(-17) mm, pink to red. 2n = 60, 90. •{\i  S. Czechoslovakia} ({\i Moravia}).
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 85. D. serotinus }Waldst. & Kit.,{\i  Pl. Rar. Hung.}{\b  2}: 188 (1804). Like {\b 83} but flowering stems usually more slender, with (6-)8-14(-19) pairs of leaves; leaves narrowed gradually from near base; flowers often 1-5; calyx 20-28 × 2·5-4 mm, tapering upwards from below the middle; teeth lanceolate, apiculate; petal-limb usually cream. 2n = 90.{\i  Sandy ground. • E.C. Europe.} Cz Hu Ju Rm.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 86. D. acicularis }Fischer ex Ledeb.,{\i  Fl. Ross. }{\b 1}: 284 (1842). Caespitose perennial up to 30 cm; flowering stems quadrangular, with 2-4 pairs of leaves. Leaves c. 0·5 mm wide, narrowly linear, acuminate. Epicalyx-scales 4, obovate, obtusely mucronate, c. ¼ as long as calyx. Calyx 20-25 × 3-4 mm, tapering from the middle. Petal-limb 10-15 mm, laciniate; central part oblong, bearded.{\i  C. & S. Ural, extending westwards to near Saratov.} Rs(C, E).
\par 

\par 
242}
\par