{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 87. D. squarrosus }Bieb.,{\i  Fl. Taur.-Cauc.}{\b  1}: 331 (1808). Laxly caespitose perennial 15-30 cm. Leaves 10-20 mm, not crowded at base of flowering stems, linear, acuminate, recurved. Inflorescence branched. Epicalyx-scales 4, obovate, cuspidate, c. 1/5 as long as calyx, the outer much smaller than the inner. Calyx c. 25 × 3 mm, tapering from below the middle. Petal-limb c. 8 mm, deeply laciniate, bearded, white.{\i  E. Europe from C. Ukraine to W. Kazakhstan}. Rs(C, W, E).
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 88. D. arenarius }L.,{\i  Sp. Pl.} 412 (1753). Caespitose perennial up to c. 45 cm; stems slender, subcylindrical, simple or branched. Leaves frequently less than 1 mm wide, linear, obtuse or acute. Flowers usually solitary, fragrant. Epicalyx-scales 2-4, broadly ovate to obovate, up to ¼ as long as calyx, often with a short, obtuse apiculus. Calyx 16-30 × 2-4·5 mm, nearly cylindrical. Petal-limb 10-15 mm, laciniate to beyond the middle, white, with a green spot, often with a purplish margin at base, bearded. •{\i  E. & E.C. Europe, southwards to} 46°{\i  N. in N. Jugoslavia, and extending westwards to Czechoslovakia, E. Germany and Sweden.} Au Cz Fe Ge Hu Ju Po Rm Rs(N, B, C, W, E) Su.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Stems usually 10-20 cm, simple or little-branched ........ ({\b a}) subsp. {\b arenarius}
\par 
1 Stems usually more than 20 cm, freely branched
\par 
2 Plant not glaucous; leaves usually 0·5 mm wide; 
\par 
  petal-limb usually c. 10 mm .......................................... ({\b b}) subsp. {\b borussicus}
\par 
2 Plant glaucous; leaves usually c. 1 mm wide; petal-limb
\par 
  usually c. 15 mm
\par 
3 Stem with 1-3 flowers; epicalyx-scales 4; calyx usually
\par 
  4-4·5 mm wide ...................................................... ({\b e}) subsp. {\b pseudoserotinus}
\par 
3 Stem with (1-)3-24 flowers; epicalyx-scales 4-6; calyx
\par 
   usually 3-4 mm wide ......................................... ({\b d}) subsp. {\b pseudosquarrosus}
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b arenarius}: Caespitose, usually not glaucous, the stems 10-20 cm, simple or little branched. Lower leaves usually obtuse. Calyx c. 20 mm. 2n = 60.{\i  S. Sweden}.
\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b borussicus} Vierh. in Fritsch,{\i  Sched. Fl. Exsicc. Austr.-Hung.}{\b  9}: 15 (1902) ({\i D. borussicus} (Vierh.) Juz.): Laxly caespitose, not glaucous, the stems usually more than 20 cm, flexuous. Lower leaves short, acute or subacute. Calyx 20-25 × 3 mm.{\i  Almost throughout the range of the species}.
\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b e}) Subsp. {\b pseudoserotinus} (Blocki) Tutin, {\i Feddes Repert.}{\b  68}: 190 (1963) ({\i D. pseudoserotinus} Blocki): Laxly caespitose, glaucous; stems straight. Lower leaves long, acute or acuminate. Calyx 20 × 4-4·5 mm.{\i  W. Ukraine}.
\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b d}) Subsp. {\b pseudosquarrosus} (Novák) Kleopow, {\i Bull. Jard. Bot. Kieff}{\b  12-13}: 35 (1931) ({\i D. pseudosquarrosus} Novák): Laxly caespitose, glaucous. Lower leaves long, acuminate, recurved. Calyx usually 22-30 × 3-4 mm.{\i  White Russia and C. Ukraine}.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 89. D. krylovianus }Juz.,{\i  Not. Syst.} ({\i Leningrad}) {\b 13}: 71 (1950). Caespitose perennial; stems 12-28 cm, branched, subcylindrical. Leaves up to 1·5 mm wide, often subobtuse. Epicalyx-scales 4-6, broadly ovate or obovate, 1/6-1/4 as long as calyx, shortly mucronate.  Calyx 17-20 × 2-3 mm, nearly cylindrical. Petal-limb 8-15 mm, laciniate usually to less than 4, white, bearded. •{\i  E.C. Russia} ({\i N- & W. of Kazan}'). Rs(C).
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 90. D. volgicus }Juz., {\i op. cit.} 73 (1950). Like {\b 89} but laxly caespitose; epicalyx-scales 4, acute or acuminate, 1/4-1/3 as long as calyx; calyx c. 25 mm; petal-limb less than 1/2 as long as calyx. {\i Middle Volga }({\i N. & W. of Kujbyslev}). Rs(C, E).
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 91. D. gallicus }Pers.,{\i  Syn. Pl.}{\b  1}: 495 (1805). Laxly caespitose perennial up to 50 cm. Leaves c. 10-15 × 1·5-3 mm, obtuse or subacute, the cauline usually 6-10 pairs. Flowers 1-3 together, fragrant. Epicalyx-scales 4, broadly obovate, cuspidate, or the outer narrower, mostly green, c. 1/3 as long as calyx. Calyx 20-25 × 3-4 mm, slightly tapering. Petal-limb 10-15 mm, laciniate, bearded, pink. 2n = 60.{\i  Maritime sands. • Coasts of W. France and N. Spain.} Ga Hs.
\par

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 92. D. superbus }L., {\i Fl. Suec.} ed. 2, 146 (1755). Perennial up to 90 cm; stems often decumbent below, branched above. Leaves linear-lanceolate. Flowers usually solitary or paired, fragrant. Epicalyx-scales 2-4, ovate, acuminate or shortly awned, 1/4-1/3 as long as calyx. Calyx 15-30 × 3-6 mm, narrowed upwards. Petal-limb (6-)15-30 mm, laciniate to more than 1/4, pink or purplish, rarely white, bearded.{\i  Europe, except much of the west and south.} Au Bu Cz Da Fe Ga Ge Gr He †Ho Hu It Ju No Po Rm Rs(N, B, C, W, E) Su.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Calyx c. 24 × 3 mm, green or somewhat purplish ....... ({\b e}) subsp. {\b stenocalyx}
\par 
1 Calyx 15-30 × 4-6 mm, purple or violet
\par 
2 Not or slightly glaucous; petal-limb c. 20 mm ................ ({\b a}) subsp. {\b superbus}
\par 
2 Glaucous; petal-limb c. 30 mm ........................................ ({\b b}) subsp. {\b alpestris}
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b superbus}: Plant not or slightly glaucous. Calyx 15-30 × 4-6 mm, purple or violet. Petal-limb c. 20 mm. {\i Throughout the range of the species; lowland}.
\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b alpestris} Kablík ex Celak.,{\i  Prodr. Fl. Böhm.} 508 (1881) (subsp. {\b speciosus} (Reichenb.) Pawl.,{\i  D. speciosus} Reichenb.): Like subsp. ({\b a}) but glaucous; petal-limb c. 30 mm. 2n = 30. •{\i  Higher mountains of Europe, from the S.W. Alps to the E. Carpathians}.
\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b c}) Subsp. {\b stenocalyx} (Trautv. ex Juz.) Kleopow,{\i  Bull. Jard. Bot. Kieff }{\b 14}: 137 (1932) ({\i D. stenocalyx} Trautv. ex Juz.): Plant not glaucous. Calyx 20-25 × 3 mm, green or somewhat purplish. Petal-limb c. 30 mm.{\i  S.C. Russia, N. Ukraine}.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 93. D. deltoides }L.,{\i  Sp. Pl. }411 (1753). Subcaespitose green or glaucous perennial; stems puberulent. Flowers usually solitary. Epicalyx-scales 2(-4), ovate, c. ½ as long as calyx, narrowed to a subulate apex, herbaceous, with a scarious margin. Epicalyx-scales and calyx puberulent. Calyx nearly cylindrical. Petal-limb 6-9 mm, bearded. {\i Most of Europe, but rare in parts of the south.} Al Au Be Br Bu Cz Da Fe Ga Ge Gr He Ho Hs Hu It Ju No Po Rm Rs(N,B,C,W, E) Si Su.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b deltoides}: Leaves of non-flowering stems 8-14 mm, broadly linear to narrowly elliptical, shortly pubescent on margins. Flowering stems 15-45 cm, with 5-10 pairs of linear cauline leaves. Epicalyx-scales puberulent. Calyx 14-18 mm. Petal-limb deep pink or rarely white, with a darker basal band and pale spots. 2n = 30.{\i  Throughout the range of the species}.
\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b degenii} (Bald.) Strid, {\i Willdenowia}{\b  13}: 280 (1983) ({\i D. degenii} Bald.): Leaves of non-flowering stems 5-10 mm, elliptical, usually glabrous. Flowering stems 8-15 cm, usually with 4 pairs of narrowly oblong cauline leaves. Epicalyx-scales glabrous. Calyx 8-12 mm. Petal-limb with a purple spot near base. •{\i  Mountains of W. part of Balkan peninsula}.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 94. D. myrtinervius }Griseb., {\i Spicil. Fl. Rumel.}{\b  1}: 194 (1843) (incl.{\i  D. oxylepis} (Boiss.) Kümmerle & Jáv., {\i D. kajmaktzalanicus} Micevski). Procumbent or caespitose, densely leafy perennial. Leaves 2-5 mm, elliptical, longer than internodes. Flowers solitary, on very short pedicels. Epicalyx-scales 2-4, the outer usually
\par 

\par 
243}
\par