{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. N. nucifera }Gaertner,{\i  Fruct. Sem. Pl.}{\b 1}: 73 (1788) ({\i Nelumbium nuciferum} auct.; incl.{\i  N. caspicum} Fischer). Rhizome stout, branching, bearing numerous scale-leaves. Foliage leaves with petioles 1-2 m; lamina 30-100 cm in diameter, orbicular, entire, glaucous and unwettable. Flowers 16-23 cm in diameter, pink or almost white, scented, borne above the leaves. Seeds 1·7 × 1·3 cm, ovoid. Still or slowly moving water.{\i  Lower Volga; cultivated in parts of S. Europe, and locally naturalized.} Rs(E) [It Rm Rs(W)]. ({\i S. & E. Asia, tropical Australia}.)
\par 

\par 

\par 
 
\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 60.       CERATOPHYLLACEAE}
\par 

\pard\f0\fs24\qc Edit D.A. Webb.
\par 

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Monoecious herbs with whorled leaves. Perianth of 8-12 linear segments, united at the base. Stamens numerous; filaments short or absent; connective prolonged apically. Ovary superior, 1-celled; fruit a 1-seeded nut.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 1.         Ceratophyllum}               L.
\par 

\pard\f0\fs24\qc  D.A. Webb.
\par 

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Submerged aquatics, perennating by dormant terminal buds. Leaves in whorls of 3-8, dichotomously divided. Flowers axillary, sessile, the male and female at different nodes. Perianth green in female flowers, whitish in male. Stamens up to 30. Nut usually armed with 1 or more spines.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28 All species inhabit still or slow-moving waters.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28 Literature: D.H. Les, {\i Syst. Bot. }{\b 10}: 338-346 (1985); {\b 11}: 549-558 (1986). M. Wilmot-Dear, {\i Kew Bull.}{\b  40}: 243-271 (1985).
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28 Most upper leaves forked once or twice, the segments conspicuously
\par 
  spinose-denticulate; terminal spine of nut (1·5-)3·5-12 mm ...... {\b 1. demersum}
\par 
Upper leaves forked 3 or 4 times, the segments entire or minutely
\par 
  denticulate; terminal spine of nut usually 0·3-1(-2) mm .......... {\b 2. submersum}
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. C. demersum }L.,{\i  Sp. Pl.} 992 (1753). Stems 30-150 cm. Leaves 8-40 mm, rather stiff; upper leaves forked once or twice into linear, flattened, spinose-denticulate segments 0·2-0·7 mm thick; lower leaves similar or 3 or 4 times dichotomous. Male flowers 1-3 at a node; stamens often more than 20. Female flowers solitary. Nut (3-)4-5·5(-7) × 2-3·5 mm, with or without 2 basal spines; terminal spine (1·5-)3·5-12 mm. 2n = 24.{\i  Most of Europe.} All except Fa Is Sb.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b demersum}: Nut ovoid or ellipsoidal, rarely obovoid, not winged, usually not conspicuously flattened, the surface more or less smooth with scattered glands. Basal spines (1-)2-6(-10) mm, terete or flattened, sometimes absent; terminal spine terete or laterally flattened.{\i  Throughout the range of the species}.
\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b platyacanthum} (Cham.) Nyman,{\i  Consp.} 251 (1879) ({\i C. platyacanthum} Cham., {\i C. komarovii} Kuzen., {\i C. pentacanthum} Haynald): Nut more or less triangular, conspicuously flattened, surrounded by a broad wing between the bases of the usually flattened spines, the surface with numerous raised glands and usually a single spine or tubercle in the centre of each face; basal spines 7-10 mm; terminal spine 10-12 mm. {\i Widely scattered in Europe, from France to Russia, but very local}.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. C. submersum }L.,{\i  Sp. Pl.} ed. 2, 1409 (1763). Stems 20-80 cm. Leaves 20-40 mm, soft; all leaves forked 3 or 4(5) times, the segments 0·1-0·3 mm thick, entire or minutely denticulate. Stamens often fewer than 10. Nut 3-5 × (1·5-)2·5-3 mm, conspicuously flattened, surrounded by thickened or membranous wing, the surface papillose-tuberculate, rarely smooth; basal spines present or absent; terminal spine 0·3-2(-9) mm. 2n = 24, 40.{\i  Europe, northwards to }58°{\i  N. in Sweden, but rather rare in the Mediterranean region.} Al Au Be Br Bu Co Cz Da Ga Ge Gr He Ho Hs Hu It Ju Po Rm Rs(B, C, W, K, E) Si Su.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b submersum}: Nut ovoid-ellipsoidal to ellipsoidal; basal spines absent; terminal spine 0·3-1(-2) mm.{\i  Throughout the range of the species}.
\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b muricatum} (Cham.) Wilmot-Dear,{\i  Kew Bull.}{\b  40}: 266 (1985) ({\i C. muricatum} Cham., {\i C. tanaiticum} Sapjegin): Nut obovoid, ellipsoidal or ovoid to almost triangular; basal spines (0·5-)2-6 mm; terminal spine (1-)4-9 mm.{\i  Ukraine & S.E. Russia; naturalized in rice-fields in Bulgaria} ({\i near Plovdiv}).
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 61.      RANUNCULACEAE}
\par 

\pard\f0\fs24\qc Edit †T.G. Tutin & A.O. Chater
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28 Herbs or rarely woody climbers. Leaves alternate, exstipulate, rarely opposite or stipulate. Flowers usually hermaphrodite and actinomorphic, hypogynous. Perianth petaloid or sepaloid, verticillate. Honey-leaves (petaloid structures bearing nectaries) often present, sometimes infundibuliform. Stamens numerous, usually spirally arranged, extrorse. Carpels 1 to many, usually free and spirally arranged. Fruit usually of 1 or more follicles or a head of achenes.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28 The term ' fruit ' is used in the English sense of the product of a single flower, whether the ovary be apocarpous, syncarpous or intermediate between the two.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Flowers zygomorphic
\par 
2 Upper perianth-segment hooded .............................................. {\b 11. Aconitum}
\par 
2 Upper perianth-segment not hooded
\par 
3 Follicles 2 or more ................................................................ {\b 12. Delphinium}
\par 
3 Follicle 1 .................................................................................. {\b 13. Consolida}
\par 
1 Flowers actinomorphic
\par 

\par 
248}
\par