{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 12 petals; outermost stamens with fairly narrow filament, 
\par 
  quite distinct from the petals ........................................................ {\b 3. tetragona}
\par 
2 Leaves at least 10 × 7 cm; flowers with at least 12 petals; 
\par 
  outermost stamens with very broad filament, showing a
\par 
  gradual transition to the petals
\par 
3 Filaments of innermost stamens narrower than the anthers;
\par 
  stigma ± flat .......................................................................................... {\b 1. alba}
\par 
3 Filaments of innermost stamens wider than the anthers; 
\par 
  stigma distinctly concave ................................................................ {\b 2. candida}
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. N. alba }L.,{\i  Sp. Pl.} 510 (1753) ({\i N. minoriflora} (Simonkai) Wiss jul.,{\i  N. occidentalis} (Ostenf.) Moss, {\i Castalia alba} (L.) W. Wood). Rhizome horizontal, with a few stout branches. Leaves up to 30 × 25 cm, entire. Flowers 10-20 cm in diameter, open nearly all day, faintly scented. Receptacle cylindrical. Petals 20-25, passing gradually into the stamens; outermost stamens with a broad, petaloid filament; the innermost filiform filament narrower than the anther. Stigma more or less flat, with 14-20 rays. Seeds 2-3 mm. 2n = 84, c. 105, 112.{\i  Almost throughout Europe.} All except Az Cr Fa Is Rs(K) Sb; perhaps extinct in Sa Si.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28 Plants similar to {\b 1} but with smaller flowers and leaves, recorded mainly from N.W. Europe, have been distinguished as{\i  N. occidentalis} (Ostenf.) Moss, but the frequency of intermediate plants makes it difficult to give them taxonomic recognition at any rank.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. N. candida }C. Presl in J. & C. Presl,{\i  Del. Prag.} 224 (1822) ({\i N. fennica} Mela, {\i Castalia candida} (C. Presl) Schinz & Thell.). Like {\b 1} but usually slightly smaller in all its parts; flowers 6-11 cm in diameter; receptacle weakly 4-angled; filament of innermost stamens lanceolate, wider than the anther; stigma concave, with 6-14 rays; seeds 3·5 mm. 2n = 112, c. 160.{\i  N., N.E. & N.C. Europe, extending locally to E. France, S.W. Romania and S.E. Russia.} Au Be Cz Fe Ga Ge †He Ho No Po Rm Rs(N, B, C, W, E) Su.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28 Hybrids with {\b 1} and {\b 3} are fairly frequent in N. Europe.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 3. N. tetragona }Georgi, {\i Bemerk. Reise}{\b  1}: 220 (1775) ({\i N. fennica }Mela). Rhizome vertical, unbranched. Leaves 5-10 × 3-8 cm, entire. Flowers 4-5 cm in diameter, open in the afternoon only, not scented. Receptacle strongly 4-angled. Petals 10-12(-15). Outer stamens with relatively broad filaments, but not transitional to the petals. Stigma more or less flat, with 7-10 rays. Seeds 2-3 mm.{\i  Finland and N. Russia}. Fe Rs(N, C). ({\i N. & E. Asia, North America}.)
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 4. N. lotus }L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 511 (1753). Rhizome stout, horizontal, with slender, stolon-like branches, from the ends of which new plants arise. Leaves 20-50 cm, acutely spinose-dentate and somewhat undulate, prominently veined beneath. Flowers 15-25 cm in diameter, open at night and early morning. Sepals conspicuously veined with white. Petals 12-25, white above, purplish beneath. Stamens with relatively wide, white filament, but quite distinct from the petals. Stigma concave, with 21-35 rays.{\i  Hot springs in N.W. Romania} ({\i near Oradea}). Rm. ({\i Egypt, tropical Africa, tropical Asia}.)
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28 The European plant, which is glabrous, belongs to var.{\i  thermalis} (DC.) Tuzson ({\i N. thermalis} DC.), in which the leaves are glabrous. In var.{\i  lotus} they are pubescent beneath.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b N. rubra} Roxb. ex Salisb., {\i Parad. Lond.}{\b  1}: t. 14 (1806), from India, which is like {\b 4} but with deep crimson flowers and young leaves, has been planted in hot springs in Hungary, and may perhaps be regarded as naturalized.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 2.            Nuphar}              Sm.
\par 

\pard\f0\fs24\qc  †T.G. Tutin.
\par 

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Leaves partly submerged, partly floating, exstipulate; lateral veins forked, but not anastomosing. Sepals yellowish. Petals yellow, the outer shorter than the sepals. Ovary superior.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28 Literature: E.O. Beal,{\i  Jour. Elisha Mitchell Soc. }{\b 72}: 317-346 (1956).
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28 Flowers 4-6 cm in diameter; stigma-rays 15-20 ................................... {\b 1. lutea}
\par 
Flowers 1·5-3·5 cm in diameter; stigma-rays 8-10 ............................ {\b 2. pumila}
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. N. lutea }(L.) Sm. in Sibth. & Sm., Fl. Graec. Prodr. 1: 361 (1809) (Nymphaea lutea L., Nymphosanthus luteus (L.) Fernald). Floating leaves 12-40 × 9-30 cm, ovate, with a deep, acute basal sinus; submerged leaves thin, cordate, with wider sinus. Flowers borne above the water, 4-6 cm in diameter, smelling of alcohol. Sepals 2-3 cm, obovate, persistent, 3 times as long as the broadly spathulate petals. Disc of stigma entire; rays 15-20, not quite reaching its margin. Seeds 5 mm. 2n = 34. Almost throughout Europe. All except Az Bl Co Cr Fa Is Rs(K) Sb; extinct in Si.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. N. pumila }(Timm) DC., Reg. Veg. Syst. Nat. 2: 61 (1821) (N. tenella Reichenb., Nymphosanthus pumilus (Timm) Fernald). Like {\b 1} but smaller in all its parts; floating leaves not more than 15 × 13 cm; flowers 1·5-3·5 cm in diameter; sepals suborbicular; disc of stigma lobed; rays 8-10, reaching its margin; seeds 4 mm. 2n = 34. N., C. & E. Europe, southwards to c. 43° N. Au †Be Br Cz Da Fe Ga Ge He Hs Ju No Po Rs(N, B, C, E) Su.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28 The hybrid between 1 × 2 (N. × spenneriana Gaudin) occurs frequently in N. Europe, where local populations may consist exclusively of it.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 59.            NELUMBONACEAE}
\par 

\pard\f0\fs24\qc Edit D.A. Webb.
\par 

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Perennial, rhizomatous, aquatic herbs. Flowers solitary, hermaphrodite, actinomorphic. Sepals 4 or 5; petals and stamens numerous. Carpels numerous, immersed in the obconical receptacle; ovules 1 or 2.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 1.             Nelumbo}              Adanson
\par 

\pard\f0\fs24\qc  †T.G. Tutin.
\par 

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Leaves and flowers borne above the surface of the water. Foliage leaves peltate.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28 The only genus.
\par 

\par 
247}
\par