{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 middle. Calyx (10-)13-18 mm, cylindrical or tapering slightly from below the middle. Petal-limb 5-10 mm, dentate, bearded with long hairs, deep pink above, yellow or purplish beneath. 2n = 60. •{\i  Balkan peninsula from S.C. Jugoslavia to S. Greece}. Al Bu Gr Ju.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Point of epicalyx-scales less than ½ as long as wide part of scale
\par 
2 Epicalyx-scales usually 4; flowers mostly solitary; 
\par 
  pedicels long ........................................................................ ({\b a}) subsp. {\b gracilis}
\par 
2 Epicalyx-scales usually 6; flowers mostly in groups of 
\par 
  2 or more; pedicels very short....................................... ({\b b}) subsp. {\b armerioides}
\par 
1 Point of epicalyx-scales more than ½ as long as wide part of scale
\par 
3 Basal leaves usually absent at flowering; cauline leaves
\par 
  soft; epicalyx-scales c. ½ as long as calyx .......................... ({\b a}) subsp. {\b gracilis}
\par 
3 Basal leaves usually present at flowering; cauline leaves
\par 
  rigid; epicalyx-scales c. ¾ as long as calyx ............ ({\b e}) subsp. {\b drenowskianus}
\par 

\par 
 ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b gracilis} ({\i D. athous} Rech. fil.; incl. subsp. {\i xanthianus} (Davidov) Tutin, {\i D. xanthianus} Davidov): {\i Almost throughout the range of the species}.
\par 
 ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b armerioides} (Griseb.) Tutin,{\i  Feddes Repert.}{\b  68}: 191 (1963) ({\i D. gracilis }var.{\i  armerioides} Griseb., {\i D. suskalovicii} Adamovic, {\i D. albanicus} Wettst.; incl. subsp. {\i achtarovii} (Stoj. & Kitanov) Tutin, subsp. {\i  friwaldskyanus} (Boiss.) Tutin): {\i N. Macedonia, Albania.}
\par 
 ({\b c}) Subsp. {\b drenowskianus} (Rech. fil.) Strid, {\i Willdenowia}{\b  13}: 281 (1983) ({\i D. drenowskianus} Rech. fil.): N.E. Greece, S.W. Bulgaria.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b D. simulans} Stoj. & Stefanov, {\i Magyar Bot. Lapok}{\b  32}: 1 (1933), from E. Macedonia (Orvilos), densely caespitose with stems 2-6 cm, flowers solitary, and calyx 9-13 mm, may represent a variant of {\b 106}({\b c}).
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 107. D. haematocalyx }Boiss. & Heldr. in Boiss.,{\i  Diagn. Pl. Or. Nov.}{\b  3}({\b 1}): 65 (1853). Caespitose, glabrous perennial 1-30 cm. Leaves linear to linear-lanceolate, acute or obtuse. Epicalyx-scales 4-6, ovate-lanceolate, with a long, more or less patent apex. Calyx 16-26 × 4-7 mm, narrowed upwards; teeth acuminate. Petal-limb 6-12 mm, bearded, usually deep pinkish-purple above, yellow beneath. •{\i  S. part of Balkan peninsula, mostly in the mountains}. Al Gr Ju.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Epicalyx-scales tapering gradually towards apex; stems up to 30 cm, 
\par 
  usually branched
\par 
2 Plant not glaucous; leaves not markedly rigid;
\par 
  epicalyx scales about as long as calyx ....................... ({\b a}) subsp. {\b haematocalyx}
\par 
2 Plant glaucous; leaves rigid; epicalyx-scales shorter 
\par 
  than calyx ......................................................................... ({\b b}) subsp. {\b pruinosus}
\par 
1 Epicalyx-scales abruptly contracted into a subulate apex; 
\par 
  stems up to 10 cm, simple
\par 
3 Plant glaucescent; leaves linear ...................................... ({\b e}) subsp. {\b sibthorpii}
\par 
3 Plant not glaucescent; leaves narrowly elliptical ............ ({\b d}) subsp. {\b pindicola}
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b haematocalyx}: Usually laxly caespitose; stems 5-25 cm. Leaves 15-40 mm, linear to linear-lanceolate, not glaucous. Flowers 1-5. Epicalyx-scales tapering gradually towards apex, about as long as calyx. Calyx 18-24 mm. 2n = 30.{\i  S. Jugoslavia, N. Greece}.
\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b pruinosus} (Boiss. & Orph.) Hayek,{\i  Prodr. Fl. Penins. Balcan.}{\b  1}: 240 (1924) ({\i D. pruinosus} Boiss. & Orph.).: Like subsp. ({\b a}) but plant glaucous; leaves rigid; epicalyx-scales shorter than calyx.{\i  E. Greece} ({\i near Volos}).
\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b c}) Subsp. {\b sibthorpii} (Vierh.) Hayek, {\i loc. cit.} (1924) ({\i D. ventricosus} Halácsy, nom. illeg.,{\i  D. sibthorpii} Vierh.): Densely caespitose; stems 1-4(-8) cm. Leaves up to 15 mm, linear, somewhat glaucous. Flowers solitary. Epicalyx-scales abruptly contracted into a subulate apex, shorter than calyx. Calyx 12-17 mm. Petals lilac-pink. 2n = 30.{\i  C. Greece}.
\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b d}) Subsp. {\b pindicola} (Vierh.) Hayek,{\i  loc. cit.} (1924) ({\i D. pindicola} Vierh.): More or less densely caespitose; stems 1-6(-10) cm. Leaves up to 15 mm, narrowly elliptical. Flowers solitary. Epicalyx-scales abruptly contracted into a subulate apex, shorter than calyx. Calyx 12-19 mm.{\i  Often on serpentine. N.W. Greece; S. Albania.}
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b D. kapinaensis} Markgraf & Lindt.,{\i  Glasn. Skopsk. Naucn. Drustva }{\b 18}: 125 (1938), from Jugoslavia, has been compared with {\b 106}({\b b}) and {\b 107}({\b b}), but requires further study.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 108. D. biflorus }Sm. in Sibth. & Sm.,{\i  Fl. Graec. Prodr.}{\b  1}: 285 (1809) ({\i D. cinnabarinus} Spruner ex Boiss.; incl. {\i D. samaritanii} Heldr. ex Halácsy, {\i D. mercurii} Heldr.). Laxly caespitose perennial 15-60 cm. Cauline leaves 3-6 pairs, acuminate; sheaths usually several times as long as diameter of stem. Flowers solitary or few in a head. Epicalyx-scales usually 6, c. 1/3-1/2 as long as, rarely as long as, calyx, obovate, aristate, coriaceous. Calyx 16-25 × 4-5 mm, tapering from about the middle. Petal-limb 6-15 mm, dentate, usually with numerous very short hairs and glands all over the upper surface. 2n = 30.{\i  Mountain rocks. • Greece, northwards to }39° 50' {\i N.} Gr.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 109. D. strictus }Banks & Solander in A. Russell, {\i Nat. Hist. Aleppo} ed. 2, {\b 2}: 252 (1794) ({\i D. multipunctatus }Ser.). Glabrous perennial 30-50 cm, with woody stock and simple or branched stems. Basal leaves withered at anthesis; cauline 1-3 mm wide, acuminate, 6-12 pairs, about as long as internodes. Epicalyx-scales 1/3 as long as calyx, ovate, cuspidate, broadly scarious. Calyx 15-18 mm, conical, verruculose, unribbed but with purple lines on the teeth continued downwards from sinuses. Petal-limb c. 10 mm, dentate, bearded. 2n = 30.{\i  W. Kriti.} Cr. ({\i S.W. Asia}.)
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28 European plants belong to subsp. {\b multipunctatus} (Ser. Greuter & Burdet,{\i  Willdenowia }{\b 12}: 187 (1982).
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 110. D. tripunctatus }Sm. in Sibth. & Sm.,{\i  Fl. Graec. Prodr. }{\b 1}: 286 (1809). Divaricately-branched, glabrous annual 15-40 cm. Basal leaves usually withered at anthesis, 3-8 mm wide, oblong-spathulate, obtuse; cauline leaves linear, acuminate. Epicalyx-scales c. ¾ as long as calyx, ovate with a long, usually green, subulate apex. Calyx c. 15 mm, conical, broadly ribbed and verruculose on sides of ribs, glabrous. Petal-limb c. 10 mm, dentate, bearded, with 3 red spots at base.{\i  S. Greece and Aegean region; Italy} ({\i Calabria, Elba}). Cr Gr It [Lu].
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    ({\b 111-114}). {\b D. corymbosus} group. Pubescent, often glandular annuals to perennials, usually ascending to erect. Basal leaves mostly withered at anthesis. Flowers solitary or in few-flowered clusters. Calyx 10-22 mm. Petal-limb usually bearded, pink or pinkish-purple.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28 A difficult group in the mountains of the Balkans and the Aegean Islands; for further details, see A. Strid,{\i  Mount. Fl. Gr.,}{\b  1}: 191-193 (1986).
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Stems 4 10 cm, procumbent; epicalyx-scales almost as long
\par 
  as calyx .............................................................................. {\b 113. tymphresteus}
\par 
1 Stems usually more than 10 cm, ascending to erect;  
\par 
  epicalyx-scales ½-¾ as long as calyx
\par 

\par
245}
\par