{\rtf1\ansi \deff4\deflang1033{\fonttbl{\f4\froman\fcharset0\fprq2 Times New Roman;}}{\colortbl;\red0\green0\blue0;\red0\green0\blue255;\red0\green255\blue255;\red0\green255\blue0;\red255\green0\blue255;\red255\green0\blue0;\red255\green255\blue0;\red255\green255\blue255;\red0\green0\blue128;\red0\green128\blue128;\red0\green128\blue0;\red128\green0\blue128;\red128\green0\blue0;\red128\green128\blue0;\red128\green128\blue128;\red192\green192\blue192;}{\stylesheet{\widctlpar \f4\fs20\lang2057 \snext0 Normal;}{\*\cs10 \additive Default Paragraph Font;}}{\info{\author dddd}{\operator dddd}{\creatim\yr1998\mo11\dy11\hr16\min41}{\revtim\yr1998\mo11\dy11\hr16\min43}{\version2}{\edmins1}{\nofpages3}{\nofwords828}{\nofchars4723}{\*\company  }{\vern57431}}\widowctrl\ftnbj\aenddoc\hyphcaps0 \fet0\sectd \linex0 {\*\pnseclvl1\pnucrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl2\pnucltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl3\pndec\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl4\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl5\pndec\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl6\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl7\pnlcrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl8\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl9\pnlcrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}
\pard\plain \li200\ \f4\fs20\lang2057 {\fs28 2 Annual or biennial; calyx 2\'b75-3 mm wide .......................... }{\b\fs28 111. corymbosus}{\fs28 
\par 2 Perennial; calyx 3-4 mm wide
\par 3 Flowers usually in clusters of 2-7 ............................................. }{\b\fs28 112. viscidus}{\fs28 
\par 3 Flowers usually solitary ........................................................ }{\b\fs28 114. pubescens}{\fs28 
\par 
\par }
\pard \ {\fs28    }{\b\fs28 111. D. corymbosus }{\fs28 Sm. in Sibth. & Sm., }{\i\fs28 Fl. Graec. Prodr.}{\b\fs28  1}{\fs28 : 285 (1809) (}{\i\fs28 D. chalcidicus}{\fs28  Hal\'e1csy, }{\i\fs28 D. viscidus}{\fs28  sensu Hayek pro parte, non Bory & Chaub.). Annual or biennial 10-45 cm; upper cauline leaves linear, acuminate. Flowers usually in clusters of 2 or 3. Epicalyx-scales \'bd-\'be as long as calyx, ovate-lanceolate with a green apex usually about as long as broad part of scale. Calyx 10-17(-20) \'d7 2\'b75-3 mm, usually glandular-pubescent, almost cylindrical. Petal-limb 7-10 mm, dentate, bearded, unspotted. 2n = 30. \bullet }{\i\fs28  N. & N.C. Greece.}{\fs28  Gr.
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 112. D. viscidus }{\fs28 Bory & Chaub.,}{\i\fs28  Nouv. Fl. P\'e9lop. }{\fs28 26 (1838) (}{\i\fs28 D. corymbosus}{\fs28  auct., non Sibth. & Sm., }{\i\fs28 D. tenuiflorus}{\fs28  Griseb., }{\i\fs28 D. parnassicus}{\fs28  Boiss. & Heldr.). Like }{\b\fs28 111}{\fs28  but perennial; basal leaves acute; flowers usually in clusters of 2-7; epicalyx-scales more or less inflated, shiny, with a setaceous point; calyx 10-22 \'d7 3-4 mm, glabrous or puberulent, tapering from about the middle; petal-limb 6-9 mm, usually with small, whitish spots. 2n = 30.}{\i\fs28  Balkan peninsula.}{\fs28  Al Bu Gr Ju Tu.
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 113. D. tymphresteus }{\fs28 (Boiss. & Spruner) Heldr. & Sart. ex Boiss.,}{\i\fs28  Diagn. Pl. Nov. Or.}{\b\fs28  2}{\fs28 (}{\b\fs28 6}{\fs28 ): 27 (1859). Like }{\b\fs28 111}{\fs28  but perennial; stems 4-10 cm, procumbent; basal leaves subobtuse; epicalyx-scales almost as long as calyx, broadly obovate, with a setaceous point; calyx 9-13 mm, glabrous or puberulent, tapering from about the middle; petal-limb glabrous, with purple spot at base. 2n = 30.}{\i\fs28  Limestone. \bullet  Mountains of C. Greece. }{\fs28 Gr.
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 114. D. pubescens }{\fs28 Sm. in Sibth. & Sm.,}{\i\fs28  Fl. Graec. Prodr.}{\b\fs28  1}{\fs28 : 285 (1809) (incl.}{\i\fs28  D. diffusus }{\fs28 Sibth. & Sm., }{\i\fs28 D. glutinosus}{\fs28  Boiss. & Heldr.). Like }{\b\fs28 111}{\fs28  but perennial; flowers solitary, or 2 together but distinctly pedicellate; epicalyx-scales broadly ovate, with a wide scarious margin and setaceous point usually shorter than the wide part of the scale; calyx 18-22 \'d7 3-4 mm, glabrous. 2n = 30.}{\i\fs28  S. part of Balkan peninsula; Aegean region}{\fs28 . Gr Ju Tu.
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 115. D. formanekii }{\fs28 Borb\'e1s ex Form., }{\i\fs28 Verh. Naturf. Ver. Br\'fcnn }{\b\fs28 32}{\fs28 : 187 (1894). Glandular-viscid perennial up to c. 50 cm. Leaves 0\'b75-1 mm wide, linear, acute, flat; sheaths several times as long as diameter of stem. Flowers numerous, in small, dense heads; bracts ovate-oblong, shortly aristate. Epicalyx-scales like the bracts, \'bd-\'be as long as calyx. Calyx 6-7 \'d7 1\'b75 mm, narrowed from below the middle. Petal-limb c. 2 mm, denticulate, purple. \bullet }{\i\fs28  Macedonia and Thessalia.}{\fs28  Gr Ju.
\par 
\par }
\pard \qc\ {\b\fs28 37.           Velezia}{\fs28              L.
\par }{\fs24  A.O. Chater.
\par 
\par }
\pard \ {\fs28 Annuals with rigid, dichotomously branched stems. Flowers shortly pedicellate, solitary or in clusters of 2 or 3 at the nodes. Epicalyx absent. Calyx narrowly tubular, 5-toothed, (5-)15-veined, without scarious commissures. Petals 5, with long claw and small limb; coronal scales small or absent; stamens 5 or 10; styles 2. Capsule cylindrical, very narrow, dehiscing with 4 teeth; carpophore absent. Seeds few, scutate with facial hilum, usually with projecting radicle.
\par 
\par }
\pard \li200\ {\fs28 Limb of petal bifid; calyx linear, 5-6 times as long as pedicel;
\par  plant glandular-pubescent ................................................................... }{\b\fs28 1. rigida}{\fs28 
\par Limb of petal 4-toothed; calyx narrowly elliptical, 2-3 times as
\par  long as pedicel; plant sparsely glandular-pubescent or glabrous
\par  ................................................................................................. }{\b\fs28 2. quadridentata}{\fs28 
\par 
\par }
\pard \ {\fs28    }{\b\fs28 1. V. rigida }{\fs28 L.,}{\i\fs28  Sp. Pl.}{\fs28  332 (1753). Glandular-pubescent; stems 5-15(-30) cm, procumbent or ascending, rigid, with many divaricate branches. Leaves 10-20 mm, linear-acuminate, the lower sometimes linear-subspathulate; all ciliate. Flowers solitary or paired, borne at most nodes. Calyx 10-14 mm, linear, 5-6 times as long as pedicel. Limb of petal bifid. 2n = 28.}{\i\fs28  Dry, open habitats. S. Europe.}{\fs28  Al Bu \'86Co Cr Ga Gr Hs It Ju Lu Rs(K) Si Tu.
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 2. V. quadridentata }{\fs28 Sm. in Sibth. & Sm., }{\i\fs28 Fl. Graec. Prodr.}{\b\fs28  1}{\fs28 : 283 (1809). Like }{\b\fs28 1}{\fs28  but plant sparsely glandular-pubescent or glabrous; flowers solitary or 2 or 3 together; calyx 9-13 mm, slightly inflated near middle, narrowly elliptical, 2-3 times as long as pedicel; limb of petal 4-toothed.}{\i\fs28  Aegean region.}{\fs28  Gr Tu.
\par 
\par }
\pard \qc\ {\fs36 RANALES
\par 
\par }{\fs28  }{\b\fs28 58.       NYMPHAEACEAE}{\fs28 
\par }{\fs24 Edit \'86T.G. Tutin & D.A. Webb
\par 
\par }
\pard \ {\fs28 Perennial, rhizomatous, aquatic herbs. Leaves broadly ellipticovate to orbicular, with a deep basal sinus, glabrous in European plants. Flowers solitary, hermaphrodite, actinomorphic. Perianth-segments free, numerous, the outer 4-6 more or less clearly differentiated as sepals, the remainder petaloid. Stamens numerous, the outer often petaloid. Carpels 8 or more; ovary superior to semi-inferior; ovules 1 to numerous, scattered all over the inner wall of the ovary. Fruit a rather dry berry.
\par 
\par All species grow in still or slowly flowing fresh water.
\par 
\par }
\pard \li200\ {\fs28 1 Flowers white, rarely pink or red; ovary semi-inferior ............... 1. Nymphaea
\par 1 Flowers deep yellow; ovary superior ................................................ 2. Nuphar
\par 
\par }
\pard \qc\ {\fs28  }{\b\fs28 1.           Nymphaea}{\fs28                  L.
\par }{\fs24 By \'86T.G. Tutin & D.A. Webb.
\par 
\par }
\pard \ {\fs28 Leaves all floating, often reddish beneath, stipulate; lateral veins anastomosing. Sepals green beneath. Petals white, rarely pink or red, the outermost longer than the sepals. Ovary semi-inferior.
\par 
\par Literature: H.S. Conard, }{\i\fs28 The Waterlilies. }{\fs28 Washington, D.C., 1905.
\par 
\par }
\pard \li200\ {\fs28 1 Sepals conspicuously white-veined; leaves spinous-dentate ............. }{\b\fs28 4. lotus}{\fs28 
\par 1 Sepals obscurely veined; leaves entire
\par 2 Leaves 5-10 \'d7 3-8 cm; flowers usually with not more than
\par 
\par 246}
\par }