{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 3 Calyx usually more than 15 mm; petals dentate
\par 
4 Calyx usually 4-5 mm wide; epicalyx-scales usually 4 . ({\b a}) subsp. {\b sylvestris}
\par 
4 Calyx 5-7 mm wide; epicalyx-scales 4-8
\par 
5 Petal-limb 10-15 mm; calyx-teeth acuminate .................... ({\b b}) subsp. {\b siculus}
\par 
5 Petal-limb 7-9 mm; calyx-teeth obtuse or subacute ..... ({\b c}) subsp. {\b longicaulis}
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b sylvestris}: Variable; stems usually branched, but in alpine plants often simple and c. 10 cm high. Epicalyx-scales usually 4. Calyx (12-)15-22 × 4-5 mm; teeth ovate-lanceolate, obtuse. Petal-limb 8-12 mm, usually contiguous.{\i  Throughout the range of the species except parts of the W. Mediterranean region}.
\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b siculus} (C. Presl) Tutin,{\i  Feddes Repert.}{\b  68}: 190 (1963) ({\i D. siculus} C. Presl,{\i  D. longicaulis} Ten.,{\i  D. gasparrinii} Guss.): Robust, usually branched. Epicalyx-scales 4-8. Calyx 24-30 × 5-7 mm; teeth lanceolate, acuminate. Petal-limb 10-15 mm, usually contiguous, dentate or denticulate.{\i  Sardegna and Sicilia}.
\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b c}) Subsp. {\b longicaulis} (Ten.) Greuter & Burdet,{\i  Willdenowia}{\b  12}: 187 (1982) ({\i D. contractus} Jan ex Nyman,{\i  D. godronianus} Jordan, {\i D. sylvestris} subsp. {\i garganicus} (Grande) Pignatti): Like subsp. ({\b b}) but often glaucous; calyx 18-28 mm, the teeth long, triangular, subacute or obtuse; petal-limb 7-9 mm. 2n = 30.{\i  Mediterranean region, from S. Spain to W. Jugoslavia}.
\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b d}) Subsp. {\b nodosus} (Tausch) Hayek, {\i Prodr. Fl. Penins. Balcan.}{\b  1}: (1924) ({\i D. nodosus }Tausch): Stems usually puberulent below. Epicalyx-scales (2-)4-6(-8). Calyx 15-20 × c. 4 mm. Petal-limb 8-10 mm, usually contiguous, dentate or denticulate. •{\i  W. part of Balkan peninsula}.
\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b e}) Subsp. {\b bertisceus} Rech. fil.,{\i  Feddes Repert.}{\b  38}: 150 (1935). Stems usually simple. Epicalyx-scales (2-)4-6(-8). Calyx (10-)12-16(-20) × 5 mm. Petal-limb 5-6 mm, dentate or denticulate. •{\i  W. & S. Jugoslavia, Albania}.
\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b f}) Subsp. {\b tergestinus} (Reichenb.) Hayek,{\i  loc. cit.} (1924) ({\i D. tergestinus} (Reichenb.) A. Kerner): Plant somewhat glaucous. Epicalyx-scales 2(-4). Calyx 15-20 × 4-5 mm. Petal-limb c. 6 mm, usually not contiguous, entire. 2n = 30. •{\i  W. Jugoslavia, Albania; E. Italy} ({\i Gargano}).
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 65. D. caryophyllus }L., {\i Sp. Pl. }410 (1753). Laxly caespitose, usually glaucous perennial up to 80 cm; woody basal part of stem rather long and not very thick. Leaves 2-4 mm wide, linear, nearly flat. Flowers strongly fragrant. Epicalyx-scales 4, c. ¼ as long as calyx, broadly obovate, cuspidate. Calyx usually 25-30 × 5-7 mm, nearly cylindrical; teeth c. 5 mm, acuminate to subobtuse. Petal-limb 10-15 mm, usually contiguous, glabrous, purple, rarely pink or white, dentate. 2n = 30.{\i  Widely cultivated for ornament and occasionally naturalized, but apparently not known wild, except perhaps in some Mediterranean countries}. *Gr *It *Sa *Si [Ga Hs].
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b D. arrostii} C. Presl in J. & C. Presl,{\i  Del. Prag.}{\b  1}: 60 (1822), from Sardegna and Sicilia, appears to differ only in the patent epicalyx-scales, somewhat shorter calyx, and uniformly pale pink petals.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b D. multinervis} Vis.,{\i  Fl. Dalm. }{\b 3}: 164 (1852), described from the Adriatic island of Pomo, but now extinct, appears to have been close to, or possibly an abnormal variant of{\b  65}, characterized by the 5- to 9-veined leaves which are described as broadly lanceolate, and by the shorter calyx.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 66. D. subacaulis }Vill.,{\i  Hist. Pl. Dauph.}{\b  3}: 597 (1789) (incl. {\i D. brachyanthus} Boiss.). Usually densely caespitose perennial 3-20 cm, with a stout, woody stock; stems nearly always simple. Leaves linear-lanceolate, often obtuse, the basal usually c. 10 × 1 mm; cauline shorter, appressed. Epicalyx-scales 4, broadly ovate, apiculate or acuminate, c. 1/3 as long as calyx. Calyx 6-10(-13) × 3-4 mm, more or less ventricose. Petal-limb 3-5(-10) mm, glabrous, subentire, pale pink.{\i  Mountains of S.W. Europe}. Ga Hs.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b subacaulis}: Plant often laxly caespitose. Epicalyx-scales usually acuminate, sometimes nearly ½ as long as calyx. Calyx-teeth acute or apiculate, c. 3 times as long as wide.{\i  S.E. France, ?Spain}.
\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b brachyanthus} (Boiss.) P. Fourn.,{\i  Quatre Fl. Fr. }331 (1936): Plant usually densely caespitose with thick, woody stock. Epicalyx-scales apiculate, c. 1/3 as long as calyx. Calyx-teeth obtuse, twice as long as wide. 2n = 30.{\i  From C. France to S.E. Spain}.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28 Plants of subsp. ({\b a}) from S. France (near Narbonne) with long, slender, trailing stems, longer leaves, calyx 10-13 × 4 mm, and petal-limb c. 10 mm have been called var. {\i ruscinonensis} Boiss. They have a chromosome number of 2n = 60.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 67. D. pungens }L.,{\i  Mantissa Alt.} 240 (1771) ({\i D. acuminatus} Rouy, ?{\i D. serratus} Lapeyr.). Laxly caespitose perennial 5-20 cm, with slender, woody stock; stems simple. Leaves c. 20 × 0·5 mm, acuminate, rather rigid. Epicalyx-scales 4, ovate, gradually long-acuminate, c. ½ as long as calyx. Calyx c. 15 × 3-4 mm, nearly cylindrical. Petal-limb c. 5 mm, glabrous, pink. •{\i  E. Pyrenees.} Ga Hs.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 68. D. hispanicus }Asso, {\i Syn. Stirp. Arag.} 53 (1779) ({\i D. pungens} sensu Willk., non L.). Perennial 15-40 cm, with a stout, woody stock. Stems simple or little-branched. Leaves usually 2-3 cm, acute, flat or convolute, rigid, often recurved; cauline 2-4(-6) pairs. Epicalyx-scales 4, obovate, cuspidate, mainly coriaceous, c. 1/3 as long as calyx. Calyx 13-20 × 4-5 mm, tapering above the middle but becoming cylindrical or even widening upwards in fruit. Petal-limb 3-5 mm, glabrous. 2n = 30.{\i  Spain.} Hs.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28 Plants intermediate between this species and {\b 66} are not infrequent.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 69. D. costae }Willk. in Willk. & Lange, {\i Prodr. Fl. Hisp.}{\b  3}: 683 (1878) ({\i D. pungens} sensu Willk., non L.; incl.{\i  D. algetanus} Graells ex F.N. Williams,{\i  D. turolensis} Pau). Perennial 10-40 cm, with stout, woody stock. Leaves linear, acuminate, flat; cauline usually 2 pairs, appressed to the stem. Flowers solitary or few together; pedicels short. Epicalyx-scales 4-6, sometimes with 1 or 2 pairs of scale-like leaves just below them, c. ½ as long as calyx, ovate, acuminate; margin broadly scarious; apex green. Calyx 10-16 × 3-4 mm, narrowed from the middle or below. Petal-limb 6-8 mm, dentate, glabrous. •{\i  C. & E. Spain}. Hs.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 70. D. langeanus }Willk. in Willk. & Lange,{\i  Prodr. Fl. Hisp.}{\b  3}: 690 (1878) ({\i D. gredensis} Pau ex Caball.). Laxly caespitose perennial, often with rather slender, trailing stems; stems 10-20 cm, slender, simple or little-branched. Leaves 1-2 cm, rather thick and rigid, acute, canaliculate when dry; cauline leaves 2-4 pairs, shorter than internodes, erect. Epicalyx-scales 4, c. ¼ as long as calyx, ovate, subacute, shortly apiculate or obtuse, the inner wider than the outer. Calyx 8-10 × 2 mm, almost cylindrical. Petal-limb 5-7 mm, dentate to entire, pink, glabrous. •{\i  N.W. & W.C. Spain.} Hs ?Lu.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 71. D. laricifolius }Boiss. & Reuter,{\i  Biblioth. Univ. Genève} ser. 2,{\b  38}: 199 (1842) (incl.{\i  D. caespitosifolius} Planellas, {\b D. planellae }Willk.,
\par 

\par 
240}
\par