{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 {\i D. cintranus} auct., non Boiss. & Reuter,{\i  D. marizii} (Samp.) Samp.). Laxly caespitose perennial, woody at base; stems 20-60 cm. Basal leaves 10-30 mm, linear-subulate, fasciculate, with a distinct mid-vein and prominent marginal veins, erect and somewhat rigid; cauline leaves 4-6 pairs, erect. Flowers often 2 or 3 together. Epicalyx segments 4(-6), ovate, whitish, not veined, all more or less abruptly cuspidate with a green point, c. 1/3 as long as calyx. Calyx 14-20 × 4-5 mm, narrowed above; teeth acute, mucronulate. Petal-limb 5-10 mm, bright reddish-purple to pale pink. •{\i  C. & W. Spain, N. & C. Portugal}. Hs Lu.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28 A very variable species variously divided into a number of subspecies and species by different authors.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 72. D. serratifolius }Sm. in Sibth. & Sm., {\i Fl. Graec. Prodr.}{\b 1}: 287 (1809). Laxly to rather densely caespitose perennial 15-30 cm, with long, trailing, woody stems. Basal leaves usually 15-30 mm, linear, acuminate, with 3 prominent veins beneath; cauline smaller. Flowers usually solitary. Epicalyx-scales elliptical or ovate, acute or acuminate, usually entirely brown. Calyx 9-15 × c. 3 mm, tapering from near base, becoming cylindrical in fruit. Petal-limb 3-4 mm, dentate, pink.{\i  S. & E.C. Greece.} Gr.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28 The plants from the mountains of S. Greece (Peloponnisos) have somewhat shorter basal leaves, fewer cauline leaves, (2-)4 somewhat longer epicalyx-scales, and a more deeply dentate petal-limb. They have been called subsp. {\b abbreviatus} (Heldr. & Halácsy) Strid,{\i  Mount. Fl. Gr.}{\b  1}: 179 (1986).
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 73. D. pyrenaicus }Pourret, {\i Mém. Acad. Sci. Toulouse}{\b  3}: 318 (1788) ({\i D. attenuatus} Sm.,{\i  D. requienii} sensu Willk. pro parte, non Gren. & Godron,{\i  D. maritimus} Rouy). Laxly caespitose perennial 15-45 cm, usually with long, trailing, rather slender, woody stems. Leaves usually rigid, pungent, not densely crowded on flowering stems. Inflorescence usually branched. Epicalyx-scales (4-)6-8, ovate, gradually acuminate, c. 1/3 as long as calyx. Calyx 15-30 × 2-3 mm, tapering markedly from about the middle. Petal-limb 3-8 mm, glabrous, dentate, pink. 2n = 30, 60. •{\i  S. France, N.E. Spain.} Ga Hs.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b pyrenaicus}: Not glaucous. Calyx 15-20 mm. Petal-limb c. 3 mm, pale pink.{\i  Pyrenees}.
\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b catalaunicus} (Willk. & Costa) Tutin,{\i  Feddes Repert.}{\b  68}: 190 (1963). Usually glaucous. Calyx 20-30 mm. Petal-limb 6-8 mm, deep pink.{\i  Throughout the range of the species.}
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 74. D. lusitanus }Brot., {\i Fl. Lusit.}{\b  2}: 177 (1804) ({\i D. lusitanicus} auct.). Glaucous perennial 15-45 cm; stems erect or ascending, woody below. Leaves usually c. 10 mm, not crowded on flowering stems, somewhat fleshy and without obvious veins. Inflorescence usually branched. Epicalyx-scales 4, ovate, acuminate, c. 1/3 as long as calyx. Calyx 20-23 × 2·5-3·5 mm, tapering markedly from about the middle. Petal-limb 7-10 mm, bearded, deeply dentate, pink. 2n = 30, 60.{\i  Spain and Portugal.} Hs Lu.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 75. D. serrulatus }Desf.,{\i  Fl. Atl. }{\b 1}: 346 (1798) ({\i D. malacitanus} Haenseler ex Boiss., nom. inval.,{\i  D. broteri} Boiss. & Reuter,{\i  D. valentinus} Willk., {\i D. fimbriatus} Brot., non Bieb.). Perennial up to 50 cm. Leaves 1-2 mm wide, linear, acuminate, glaucous. Epicalyx-scales usually 6-8, elliptical to ovate-lanceolate, acuminate, 1/3-1/2 as long as calyx. Calyx c. 30 mm, tapering from near base. Petal-limb c. 15 mm, laciniate, bearded. 2n = 60.{\i  S. & E. Spain, S. & C. Portugal}. Hs Lu.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28 European plants are referable to subsp. {\b barbatus} (Boiss.) Greuter & Burdet,{\i  Willdenowia}{\b  13}: 281 (1984). Subsp. {\b serrulatus} occurs in N.W. Africa.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 76. D. scaber }Chaix in Vill.,{\i  Hist. Pl. Dauph.}{\b  1}: 331 (1786) ({\i D. hirtus} Vill.). Laxly caespitose perennial 15-40 cm. Leaves 1-3 mm wide, flat, linear, acuminate; cauline leaves usually 3 or 4 pairs. Flowers in small heads; bracts usually absent. Epicalyx-scales usually 6, ovate, acuminate, from ½ as long as to as long as calyx. Calyx 17-22(-25) mm, tapering above the middle. Petal-limb 4-8 mm, dentate, bearded. •{\i  S.W. Europe.} Ga Hs Lu.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Point of epicalyx-scales subulate, at least ½ as long as  
\par 
  wide part of scale, 5- to 7-veined at base ......................... ({\b c}) subsp. {\b toletanus}
\par 
1 Point of epicalyx-scales setaceous, 1/4 - 1/3 as long as
\par 
  wide part of scale, 3-veined at base
\par 
2 Stems usually 10-20 cm; petal-limb 4-6 mm ...................... ({\b a}) subsp. {\b scaber}
\par 
2 Stems usually 20-30 cm; petal-limb 7-8 mm .................. ({\b b}) subsp. {\b cutandae}
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b scaber}: Stems usually 10-20 cm. Point of epicalyx-scales setaceous, 1/4-1/3 as long as wide part of scale, 3-veined at base. Petal-limb 4-5 mm.{\i  S.E. France; N.E. Spain}.
\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b cutandae} (Pau) Tutin, {\i Feddes Repert.}{\b  68}: 190 (1963) ({\i D. cutandae} (Pau) Pau): Stems usually 20-30 mm. Epicalyx-scales as in subsp. ({\b a}). Petal-limb 7-8 mm. 2n = 30.{\i  C. & N.W. Spain}.
\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b c}) Subsp. {\b toletanus} (Boiss. & Reuter) Tutin,{\i  loc. cit.} (1963) ({\i D. toletanus} Boiss. & Reuter): Stems 15-40(-60) cm. Point of epicalyx-scales subulate, at least ½ as long as wide part of scale, 5- to 7-veined at base. Petal-limb 5-8 mm. 2n = 30. {\i C. & S.E. Spain S. Portugal}.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 77. D. crassipes }R. de Roemer,{\i  Linnaea }{\b 25}: 11 (1852) (incl.{\i  D. serenaeus} Coincy). Robust perennial with a stout, woody stock; stems 30-60 cm, puberulent, terete. Cauline leaves 2-2·5 mm wide, rigid, acute, puberulent; sheaths as long as diameter of stem. Flowers usually 20-30, subsessile in dense corymbose heads; bracts broadly scarious, with a green point, about as long as flowers. Epicalyx-scales 4, little shorter than calyx, lanceolate, similar to bracts but more abruptly and finely acuminate. Calyx 18-25 mm, narrowed above. Petal-limb 7-9 mm, dentate, bearded, purple. •{\i  S.C. Spain}. Hs.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 78. D. cintranus }Boiss. & Reuter,{\i  Pugillus }20 (1852). Glabrous perennial 10-50 cm, with trailing, woody stems. Leaves 0·5-2(-5) mm wide, flat, acute or acuminate, the lower sometimes obtuse. Inflorescence simple or branched. Epicalyx-scales 4-6, 1/3 - 1/2 as long as calyx, ovate, cuspidate to acuminate. Calyx 17-28 × 4·5-6 mm, not purple-tinged. Petal-limb 4-12 mm, obovate, dentate, scarcely bearded to glabrous.{\i  Spain and Portugal}. Hs Lu.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Stems 15-20 cm, usually simple; epicalyx-scales often 6
\par 
  ........................................................................................ ({\b d}) subsp. {\b charidemii}
\par 
1 Stems usually more than 20 cm, branched; epicalyx-scales usually 4
\par 
2 Petal-limb usually less than 5 mm ................................. ({\b b}) subsp. {\b multiceps}
\par 
2 Petal-limb usually more than 5 mm
\par 
3 Petal-limb 5-8 mm wide, glabrous .................................. ({\b a}) subsp. {\b cintranus}
\par 
3 Petal-limb 3-4 mm wide, bearded .................................... ({\b c}) subsp. {\b barbatus}
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b cintranus} (incl.{\i  D. gaditanus} Boiss.): Stems usually more than 20 cm, branched. Epicalyx-scales usually 4, gradually contracted to an apex 2-3 mm wide at base. Petal-limb 7-12 × 5-8 mm; claw usually included. 2n = 60.{\i  C. Portugal, S. & N.W. Spain.}
\par 

\par 
241}
\par