{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 4 Leaves opposite; perianth-segments valvate in bud .................. {\b 17. Clematis}
\par 
4 Leaves alternate or verticillate; perianth-segments imbricate in bud
\par 
5 Flowers spurred
\par 
6 Leaves linear to spathulate, entire, all basal;
\par 
  achenes in a long head .............................................................. {\b 21. Myosurus}
\par 
6 Leaves ternately divided, some cauline;
\par 
  follicles in a single whorl .......................................................... {\b 22. Aquilegia}
\par 
5 Flowers not spurred
\par 
7 Perianth of 2 dissimilar whorls (or apparently so), the inner
\par 
  of which may consist of petaloid honey-leaves
\par 
8 Petaloid whorl of the perianth without nectaries
\par 
9 Leaves with 3-5 shallow, ovate lobes ........................................ {\b 15. Hepatica}
\par 
9 Leaves finely divided ................................................................... {\b 18. Adonis}
\par 
8 Petaloid whorl of the perianth with nectaries at base
\par 
10 Fruit a group of follicles ........................................................ {\b 9. Cimicifuga}
\par 
10 Fruit a group of achenes
\par 
11 Achenes with an empty cell on either side; beak 2-3 times 
\par 
   as long as achene ............................................................... {\b 20. Ceratocephala}
\par 
11 Achenes without empty cells; beak less than twice as long as achene 
\par 
12 Leaves pinnately divided ................................................. {\b 3. Callianthemum} 
\par 
12 Leaves simple or palmately divided ................................... {\b 19. Ranunculus}
\par 
7  Perianth of 1 whorl of green or variously coloured segments; 
\par 
   nectaries present or absent, but not petaloid
\par 
13 Perianth-segments and honey-leaves shorter than stamens
\par 
14 Fruit a berry .................................................................................. {\b 8. Actaea}
\par 
14 Fruit a group of achenes or follicles
\par 
15 Fruit a group of achenes ....................................................... {\b 23. Thalictrum}
\par 
15 Fruit a group of follicles ........................................................ {\b 9. Cimicifuga}
\par 
13 Perianth-segments or honey-leaves longer than stamens
\par 
16 Infundibuliform or spathulate honey-leaves present
\par 
17 Follicles united for at least 1/3 of their length; annuals 
\par 
18 Honey-leaves much shorter than the ± persistent 
\par 
   perianth-segments .......................................................................... {\b 4. Nigella}
\par 
18 Honey-leaves longer than the caducous perianth-segments ..... {\b 5. Garidella}
\par 
17 Follicles free or united only at base; perennials
\par 
19 Perianth green, purplish or white
\par 
20 Leaves palmate or pedate ....................................................... {\b 1. Helleborus}
\par 
20 Leaves 2-ternate ....................................................................... {\b 7. Isopyrum}
\par 
19 Perianth yellow
\par 
21 Cauline leaves in a whorl of 3 .................................................... {\b 2. Eranthis}
\par 
21 Cauline leaves not verticillate ..................................................... {\b 6. Trollius}
\par 
16 Honey-leaves absent (nectar-secreting staminodes present in {\b 16})
\par 
22 Flowers subtended by a whorl of leaves or bracts
\par 
23 Flowers closely subtended by 3 sepaloid bracts ...................... {\b 15. Hepatica}
\par 
23 Bracts ± leaf-like and some distance below flower 
\par 
24 Styles not elongating in fruit; flowers without nectar- 
\par 
   secreting staminodes ................................................................. {\b 14. Anemone}
\par 
24 Styles elongating greatly and becoming feathery in fruit; 
\par 
   nectar-secreting staminodes present ......................................... {\b 16. Pulsatilla}
\par 
22 Flowers not subtended by a whorl of leaves or bracts 
\par 
25 Leaves simple .............................................................................. {\b 10. Caltha}
\par 
25 Leaves pinnate or ternate
\par 
26 Flowers in a raceme; fruit a head of follicles ........................ {\b 9. Cimicifuga}
\par 
26 Flowers in a panicle; fruit a head of achenes ....................... {\b 23. Thalictrum}
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 1.          Helleborus}              L.
\par 

\pard\f0\fs24\qc  †T.G. Tutin.
\par 

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Perennial herbs with rhizomes or erect, rather woody stems and digitate or pedate leaves. Inflorescence cymose. Flowers large; perianth-segments 5; honey-leaves 8-12, obliquely infundibuliform, smaller than the perianth-segments; involucre absent. Fruit of 3-8, several-seeded follicles.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28 Literature: H. Merxmüller & D. Podlech,{\i  Feddes Repert.}{\b  64}: 1-8 (1961). B. Mathew,{\i  Hellebores.} Woking. 1989.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Rhizome absent; stems overwintering, ± woody; leaves all cauline
\par 
2 Leaf-segments 7-11; flowers campanulate ................................... {\b 1. foetidus}
\par 
2 Leaf-segments 3; flowers with widely spreading perianth-
\par 
  segments ........................................................................................... {\b 2. lividus}
\par 
1 Rhizome present; stems of short duration, herbaceous;
\par 
  basal leaves present
\par 
3 Bracts entire ..................................................................................... {\b 11. niger}
\par 
3 Bracts divided and leaf-like
\par 
4 Follicles free to base, shortly stipitate
\par 
5 Flowers pale green, scented; leaves not overwintering ......... {\b 3. cyclophyllus}
\par 
5 Flowers cream at first, becoming greenish- to yellowish-brown,
\par 
   not scented; leaves overwintering ............................................... {\b 4. orientalis}
\par 
4 Follicles connate at base for about ½ of their length
\par 
6 Flowers reddish or purplish, at least outside
\par 
7 Leaves entirely glabrous, even on the slender, inconspicuous 
\par 
  veins beneath ............................................................................ {\b 9. dumetorum}
\par 
7 Leaves pubescent, at least on the stout, prominent veins beneath
\par 
8 Leaves digitate; flowers 4-7 cm in diameter ...................... {\b 10. purpurascens}
\par 
8 Leaves pedate; flowers 3-4·5 cm in diameter ........................... {\b 7. multifidus}
\par 
6 Flowers greenish with no reddish or purplish tinge
\par 
9 Flowers usually not more than 4 cm in diameter, 
\par 
  nodding; perianth-segments not or scarcely imbricate
\par 
10 Leaves pubescent, at least on the prominent veins beneath; 
\par 
   cauline leaves small ................................................................... {\b 7. multifidus}
\par 
10 Leaves glabrous or nearly so, even on the slender veins beneath; 
\par 
   cauline leaves large
\par 
11 Leaves very finely dentate; flowers not scented, over-topped
\par 
   by the leaves ............................................................................ {\b 9. dumetorum}
\par 
11 Leaves coarsely incised-dentate; flowers scented, over-topping
\par 
   the leaves ......................................................................................... {\b 5. viridis}
\par 
9  Flowers at least 4 cm in diameter, not or slightly nodding at anthesis;
\par 
   perianth-segments usually imbricate
\par 
12 Flowers 4-5 cm in diameter, yellowish-green; veins slender, 
\par 
   but prominent beneath ..................................................................... {\b 5. viridis}
\par 

\par 
249}
\par