{\rtf1\ansi \deff4\deflang1033{\fonttbl{\f4\froman\fcharset0\fprq2 Times New Roman;}}{\colortbl;\red0\green0\blue0;\red0\green0\blue255;\red0\green255\blue255;\red0\green255\blue0;\red255\green0\blue255;\red255\green0\blue0;\red255\green255\blue0;\red255\green255\blue255;\red0\green0\blue128;\red0\green128\blue128;\red0\green128\blue0;\red128\green0\blue128;\red128\green0\blue0;\red128\green128\blue0;\red128\green128\blue128;\red192\green192\blue192;}{\stylesheet{\widctlpar \f4\fs20\lang2057 \snext0 Normal;}{\*\cs10 \additive Default Paragraph Font;}}{\info{\author dddd}{\operator dddd}{\creatim\yr1998\mo11\dy5\hr12\min17}{\revtim\yr1998\mo11\dy11\hr16\min44}{\version2}{\edmins1}{\nofpages4}{\nofwords955}{\nofchars5448}{\*\company  }{\vern57431}}\widowctrl\ftnbj\aenddoc\hyphcaps0 \fet0\sectd \linex0 {\*\pnseclvl1\pnucrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl2\pnucltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl3\pndec\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl4\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl5\pndec\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl6\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl7\pnlcrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl8\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl9\pnlcrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}
\pard\plain \ \f4\fs20\lang2057 {\fs28    }{\b\fs28 9. H. dumetorum }{\fs28 Waldst. & Kit. in Willd.,}{\i\fs28  Enum. Pl. Horti Berol. }{\fs28 592 (1809) (}{\i\fs28 H. viridis}{\fs28  subsp. }{\i\fs28 dumetorum}{\fs28  (Waldst. & Kit.) Hayek). Stems 15-45 cm. Basal leaves 2 or 3, thin, not overwintering; leaf-segments 7-11(-13), distinctly pedate, undivided; veins not prominent beneath. Flowers 2 or 3, 3-6 cm in diameter. Perianth-segments patent, violet or green. Follicles connate at the base. 2n = 32. \bullet }{\i\fs28  E.C. Europe.}{\fs28  Au Hu Ju Rm [Rs(W)].
\par 
\par  (}{\b\fs28 a}{\fs28 ) Subsp. }{\b\fs28 dumetorum}{\fs28 : Flowers 3-4 cm in diameter, green. }{\i\fs28 Throughout the range of the species}{\fs28 .
\par  (}{\b\fs28 b}{\fs28 ) Subsp. }{\b\fs28 atrorubens}{\fs28  (Waldst. & Kit.) Merxm. & Podl.,}{\i\fs28  Feddes Repert.}{\b\fs28  64}{\fs28 : 5 (1961) (}{\i\fs28 H. atrorubens}{\fs28  Waldst. & Kit.): Flowers 4-6 cm in diameter, violet.}{\i\fs28  N. Jugoslavia.}{\fs28 
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 10. H. purpurascens }{\fs28 Waldst. & Kit.,}{\i\fs28  Pl. Rar. Hung.}{\b\fs28  2}{\fs28 : 105 (1802 or 1803). Stems 15-35 cm. Basal leaves usually 2, not overwintering; segments usually 5, not distinctly pedate, divided to the middle into 2-5 lobes, pubescent, at least on the prominent veins beneath. Flowers up to 3, 4-7 cm in diameter. Perianth-segments patent, purplish-violet. Follicles connate at the base. 2n = 32. \bullet }{\i\fs28  E.C. Europe.}{\fs28  Cz Hu Ju Rm Rs(W) [It].
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 11. H. niger }{\fs28 L.,}{\i\fs28  Sp. Pl.}{\fs28  558 (1753). Stems 10-30 cm. Basal leaves overwintering, pedate with 7-9 segments; cauline ovate, entire, pale green. Flowers 1-3, 5-11 cm in diameter. Perianth-segments white or pink-tinged, ovate. Follicles c. 7, connate at the base. \bullet }{\i\fs28  Woods and thickets, mainly in the mountains; calcicole. Alps, Appennini and adjacent regions; widely cultivated for ornament, and sometimes naturalized.}{\fs28  Au Ge He It Ju [Cz Ga].
\par 
\par  (}{\b\fs28 a}{\fs28 ) Subsp. }{\b\fs28 niger}{\fs28 : Leaf-segments oblong-cuneate, dark green, serrate near the apex. Flowers 5-8 cm in diameter. Perianth-segments often pinkish, broadly ovate. 2n = 32.}{\i\fs28  Throughout the range of the species}{\fs28 .
\par  (}{\b\fs28 b}{\fs28 ) Subsp. }{\b\fs28 macranthus}{\fs28  (Freyn) Schiffner, Bot. Jahrb. 11: 105 (1889): Leaf-segments broadly lanceolate, somewhat glaucous, spinulose-serrate. Flowers 8-11 cm in diameter. Perianth-segments usually white, ovate. 2n = 32. }{\i\fs28 Italy, N. Jugoslavia}{\fs28 .
\par 
\par }
\pard \qc\ {\fs28  }{\b\fs28 2.            Eranthis}{\fs28                 Salisb.
\par }{\fs24   †T.G. Tutin.
\par 
\par }
\pard \ {\fs28 Perennials with tuberous rhizomes. Basal leaves petiolate, deeply palmately divided; cauline leaves 3, similar to basal but sessile and arranged in a whorl close to the solitary terminal flower. Perianth-segments usually 6, yellow; honey-leaves tubular, 2-lipped. Follicles usually 6.
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 1. E. hyemalis }{\fs28 (L.) Salisb.,}{\i\fs28  Trans. Linn. Soc. London}{\b\fs28  8}{\fs28 : 304 (1807) (incl. }{\i\fs28 E. bulgaricus}{\fs28  (Stefanov) Stefanov,}{\i\fs28  E. cilicicus }{\fs28 Schott & Kotschy). Plant 5-15 cm, glabrous. Flowers 25-40 mm in diameter. Perianth-segments narrowly ovate; honey-leaves shorter than the stamens. Follicles c. 15 mm, shortly stalked.}{\i\fs28  S. Europe, from S.E. France to Bulgaria; cultilvated for ornament, and naturalized in C. & W. Europe.}{\fs28  Bu *Ga It Ju [Be Br Cz Ge He Ho Hu Rm].
\par 
\par }
\pard \qc\ {\fs28  }{\b\fs28 3.            Callianthemum}{\fs28           C.A. Meyer
\par }{\fs24   †T.G. Tutin.
\par 
\par }
\pard \ {\fs28 Small perennials of high mountains. Leaves imparipinnate, the divisions 2- or 3-pinnatifid. Perianth-segments sepaloid, shorter than the honey-leaves; honey-leaves 5-20, petaloid. Carpels numerous, very shortly stipitate; ovule 1, pendulous. Fruit of 1-seeded follicles.
\par 
\par Literature: J. Witasek, }{\i\fs28 Verh. Zool.-Bot. Ges. Wien}{\b\fs28  49}{\fs28 : 316-356 (1899).
\par 
\par }
\pard \li200\ {\fs28 1 Honey-leaves broadly ovate; basal leaves developed at
\par   anthesis .............................................................................. }{\b\fs28 3. coriandrifolium}{\fs28 
\par 1 Honey-leaves linear-oblong; basal leaves developing after
\par   anthesis
\par 2 Plant 5-20 cm; fruit 4\'b75-5 \'d7 2 mm, strongly reticulately
\par   veined ..................................................................................... }{\b\fs28 1. anemonoides}{\fs28 
\par 2 Plant 3-6 cm; fruit 3-4 \'d7 2\'b75 mm, smooth ............................. }{\b\fs28 2. kernerianum}{\fs28 
\par 
\par }
\pard \ {\fs28    }{\b\fs28 1. C. anemonoides }{\fs28 (Zahlbr.) Endl. ex Heynh.,}{\i\fs28  Nomencl. Bot.}{\b\fs28  2}{\fs28 : 106 (1846) (}{\i\fs28 C. rutifolium}{\fs28  auct., pro parte). Plant 5-20 cm. Basal leaves developing after anthesis, long-petiolate, more or less triangular in outline; segments linear-oblong; cauline leaves similar but sessile and less divided, the uppermost bract-like. Flowers 30-35 mm in diameter. Honey-leaves pink to white, with orange nectaries. Follicles 4\'b75-5 \'d7 2 mm, strongly reticulately veined. 2n = 32. }{\i\fs28 Open coniferous woods; somewhat calcicole. \bullet  N.E. Alps}{\fs28 . Au.
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 2. C. kernerianum }{\fs28 Freyn ex A. Kerner,}{\i\fs28  Sched. Fl. Exsicc. Austro-Hung.}{\b\fs28  5}{\fs28 : 36 (1888). Like }{\b\fs28 1}{\fs28  but smaller; lower branches of the basal leaves shortly stalked; flowers c. 25 mm diameter; follicles 3-4 \'d7 2\'b75 mm, smooth. 2n = 32.}{\i\fs28  Stony mountain pastures; calcicole. S. Alps from c.}{\fs28  10\'b0 30'}{\i\fs28  to}{\fs28  c. 11\'b0 30'}{\i\fs28  E}{\fs28 . It.
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 3. C. coriandrifolium }{\fs28 Reichenb., }{\i\fs28 Fl. Germ. Excurs.}{\fs28  727 (1832) (}{\i\fs28 C. rutifolium}{\fs28  auct., pro parte). Like }{\b\fs28 1}{\fs28  but basal leaves developed at anthesis; honey-leaves broadly ovate; follicles 3 \'d7 2-2\'b75 mm. 2n = 16.}{\i\fs28  Somewhat calcifuge. \bullet  Mountains of S. & S.C. Europe, from N.W. Spain to the S. Carpathians.}{\fs28  Au Cz Ga He Hs It Ju Po Rm.
\par 
\par }
\pard \qc\ {\fs28  }{\b\fs28 4.                Nigella}{\fs28                     L.
\par }{\fs24 By  †T.G. Tutin (Ed.1) revised by J.R. Akeroyd (Ed.2)}{\fs28 
\par 
\par }
\pard \ {\fs28 Annuals. Leaves usually 2- or 3-pinnatisect with linear segments. Perianth-segments 5, petaloid, persistent for a time after anthesis. Honey-leaves 5, opposite to and much smaller than the perianth-segments. Fruit of 5 (rarely 10) partly or completely united follicles; styles long, patent or rarely erect.
\par 
\par Literature: A. Strid,}{\i\fs28  Op. Bot.}{\fs28  (}{\i\fs28 Lund}{\fs28 )}{\b\fs28  28}{\fs28 : 1-169 (1970). M. Zohary,}{\i\fs28  Pl. Syst. Evol.}{\b\fs28  142}{\fs28 : 71-107 (1983).
\par 
\par }
\pard \li200\ {\fs28 1 Flowers yellowish-white or greenish-yellow; seeds compressed
\par 2 Lower lip of honey-leaves very short, 2-fid; follicles usually 
\par   slightly longer than styles .......................................................... }{\b\fs28 13. orientalis}{\fs28 
\par 2 Lower lip of honey-leaves with 2 filiform appendages; follicles 
\par   up to twice as long as styles ...................................................... }{\b\fs28 14. oxypetala}{\fs28 
\par 1 Flowers blue, greenish or reddish; seeds ovoid or triquetrous
\par 3 Anthers not mucronate
\par 4 Flowers without an involucre of leaves
\par 5 Stems procumbent; leaf-segments small, ovate; follicles 
\par   united for 1/3 of their length .................................................... }{\b\fs28 7. fumariifolia}{\fs28 
\par 5 Stems erect; leaf-segments linear; follicles united for 
\par   nearly all of their length .................................................................. }{\b\fs28 10. sativa}{\fs28 
\par 4 Flowers with an involucre of leaves
\par 6 Perianth-segments not clawed; lobes of lower lip of honey-leaves
\par    c. 3 times as long as wide; fruit 5-celled .......................................... }{\b\fs28 11. elata}{\fs28 
\par 6 Perianth-segments shortly clawed; lobes of lower lip of 
\par   honey-leaves about as long as wide; fruit 10-celled ............... }{\b\fs28 12. damascena}{\fs28 
\par 
\par 251}
\par }