{\rtf1\ansi \deff4\deflang1033{\fonttbl{\f4\froman\fcharset0\fprq2 Times New Roman;}}{\colortbl;\red0\green0\blue0;\red0\green0\blue255;\red0\green255\blue255;\red0\green255\blue0;\red255\green0\blue255;\red255\green0\blue0;\red255\green255\blue0;\red255\green255\blue255;\red0\green0\blue128;\red0\green128\blue128;\red0\green128\blue0;\red128\green0\blue128;\red128\green0\blue0;\red128\green128\blue0;\red128\green128\blue128;\red192\green192\blue192;}{\stylesheet{\widctlpar \f4\fs20\lang2057 \snext0 Normal;}{\*\cs10 \additive Default Paragraph Font;}}{\info{\author dddd}{\operator dddd}{\creatim\yr1998\mo11\dy5\hr12\min18}{\revtim\yr1998\mo11\dy5\hr12\min19}{\version2}{\edmins1}{\nofpages4}{\nofwords920}{\nofchars5244}{\*\company  }{\vern57431}}\widowctrl\ftnbj\aenddoc\hyphcaps0 \fet0\sectd \linex0 {\*\pnseclvl1\pnucrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl2\pnucltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl3\pndec\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl4\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl5\pndec\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl6\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl7\pnlcrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl8\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl9\pnlcrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}
\pard\plain \ \f4\fs20\lang2057 {\fs28    }{\b\fs28 9. N. stricta }{\fs28 Strid, }{\i\fs28 Op. Bot.}{\fs28  (}{\i\fs28 Lund}{\fs28 ) }{\b\fs28 28}{\fs28 : 63 (1970). Stems 5-12 cm, procumbent, with divaricate branches. Leaf-segments linear-lanceolate. Flowers 10-15 mm in diameter. Perianth-segments reddish. Anthers very shortly mucronate, red. Follicles 8-14 mm, united for c. 1/3 of their length, tuberculate. 2n = 12.}{\i\fs28  S.W. Kriti, Kithira.}{\fs28  Cr Gr.
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 10. N. sativa }{\fs28 L., }{\i\fs28 Sp. Pl.}{\fs28  534 (1753) (}{\i\fs28 N. cretica}{\fs28  Miller). Stems 20-60 cm, erect, branched. Leaf-segments linear-lanceolate. Perianth-segments ovate, shortly clawed, whitish. Anthers not mucronate. Follicles united for all of their length, tuberculate on the back. 2n = 12. }{\i\fs28 Widely cultivated for its aromatic seeds, and frequently naturalized}{\fs28 . [Bu Ga Gr It Ju Rm Rs(C, W, K) Tu.] (}{\i\fs28 Origin unknown; possibly native in parts of S.E. Europe.}{\fs28 )
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 11. N. elata }{\fs28 Boiss., }{\i\fs28 Diagn. Pl. Or. Nov. }{\b\fs28 1}{\fs28 (}{\b\fs28 1}{\fs28 ): 66 (1843). Stems 20-100 cm, simple or little-branched. Leaf-segments linear. Involucre with short, rigid segments. Perianth-segments ovate-oblong, not clawed, blue. Lobes of lower lip of honey-leaves c. 3 times as long as wide. Anthers not mucronate. Follicles united for all of their length, forming an inflated 5-celled capsule.}{\i\fs28  S.E. Europe; local.}{\fs28  Bu ?Gr Rs(K) Tu. (}{\i\fs28 S.W. Asia}{\fs28 .)
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 12. N. damascena }{\fs28 L.,}{\i\fs28  Sp. Pl.}{\fs28  534 (1753). Stems 10-60 cm. Segments of the lower leaves linear-lanceolate, those of the upper leaves linear; involucral leaves similar to cauline. Perianth-segments ovate-oblong, clawed, bluish. Lobes of lower lip of honey-leaves about as long as wide. Anthers not mucronate. Follicles united for all of their length, forming an inflated 10-celled capsule, the 5 outer loculi sterile. 2n = 12.}{\i\fs28  S. Europe; cultivated for ornament, and a frequent casual elsewhere}{\fs28 . Al Bl Bu Co Cr Ga Gr Hs It Ju Lu Rs(K) Sa Si Tu.
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 13. N. orientalis }{\fs28 L., }{\i\fs28 Sp. Pl.}{\fs28  534 (1753). Stems up to 50 cm. Leaf-segments linear. Perianth-segments ovate, shortly clawed, yellowish-white with red dots, eventually deflexed. Flowers without involucre. Anthers not mucronate. Follicles united for \'bd of their length, slightly longer than the erect beaks. Seeds compressed.}{\i\fs28  S.E. part of Balkan peninsula.}{\fs28  Bu ?Gr Tu. (}{\i\fs28 S.W. Asia.}{\fs28 )
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 14. N. oxypetala }{\fs28 Boiss., }{\i\fs28 Ann. Sci. Nat.}{\b\fs28  16}{\fs28 : 357 (1841). Like }{\b\fs28 13}{\fs28  but with a lax involucre; perianth-segments oblong, scarcely clawed, greenish-yellow; lobes of lower lip of honey-leaves produced into long, filiform appendages; follicles up to twice as long as the beaks.}{\i\fs28  Krym.}{\fs28  Rs(K). (}{\i\fs28 S.W. Asia}{\fs28 .)
\par 
\par }
\pard \qc\ {\fs28  }{\b\fs28 5.             Garidella}{\fs28                    L.
\par }{\fs24 By \'86T.G. Tutin (Ed.1) revised by J.R. Akeroyd (Ed.2)}{\fs28 
\par 
\par }
\pard \ {\fs28 Like }{\i\fs28 Nigella}{\fs28  but perianth-segments caducous, shorter than the honey-leaves; follicles 2 or 3, united below, inflated; styles c. 1 mm.
\par 
\par Literature: A. Strid, }{\i\fs28 Bot. Not.}{\b\fs28  122}{\fs28 : 330 332 (1969).
\par 
\par }
\pard \li200\ {\fs28 1 Honey-leaves 7-9 mm, oblong; anthers dark brown .............. }{\b\fs28 1. nigellastrum}{\fs28 
\par 1 Honey-leaves 10-14 mm, broadly ovate; anthers yellowish . }{\b\fs28 2. unguicularis}{\fs28 
\par 
\par }
\pard \ {\fs28    }{\b\fs28 1. G. nigellastrum }{\fs28 L., }{\i\fs28 Sp. Pl. }{\fs28 425 (1753) (}{\i\fs28 Nigella nigellastrum}{\fs28  (L.) Willk.,}{\i\fs28  N. garidella}{\fs28  Spenner). Stem 30-50 cm, slender, simple or with ascending branches. Flowers solitary on long pedicels. Perianth-segments 3-4 mm, greenish, tinged purplish or reddish. Honey-leaves 7-9 mm, the claw not exserted; lower lip of limb oblong, narrowed at base, divided into two linear-oblong lobes. Anthers dark brown. Seeds rugose with anastomosing ridges.}{\i\fs28  Mediterranean region and Krym; very local.}{\fs28  Cr Ga Gr Hs Rs(K).
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 2. G. unguicularis }{\fs28 Poiret in Lam., }{\i\fs28 Encycl. M\'e9th. Bot.}{\b\fs28  10}{\fs28 : 709 (1812) (}{\i\fs28 Nigella unguicularis}{\fs28  (Poiret) Spenner). Like }{\b\fs28 1}{\fs28  but honey-leaves 10-14 mm, the claw long-exserted; lower lip of limb broadly ovate, cordate at base, 2-fid; anthers yellowish. 2n = 12. }{\i\fs28 Kriti.}{\fs28  Cr. (}{\i\fs28 S.W. Asia}{\fs28 .)
\par 
\par }
\pard \qc\ {\fs28  }{\b\fs28 6.             Trollius}{\fs28                   L.
\par }{\fs24  \'86T.G. Tutin.
\par 
\par }
\pard \ {\fs28 Perennial herbs. Flowers with all parts spirally arranged. Perianth-segments 5-15, petaloid; honey-leaves 5-15, small, narrow, yellow. Fruit of many follicles.
\par 
\par Perianth-segments strongly incurved, the flower globose; 
\par    honey-leaves as long as stamens ............................................... }{\b\fs28 1. europaeus}{\fs28 
\par Perianth-segments not strongly incurved, the flower somewhat open;
\par    honey-leaves usually longer than stamens ..................................... }{\b\fs28 2. apertus}{\fs28 
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 1. T. europaeus }{\fs28 L.,}{\i\fs28  Sp. Pl.}{\fs28  556 (1753). Plant 10-80 cm, glabrous. Basal leaves long-petiolate, 3- to 5-lobed; lobes cuneate and more or less deeply lobed and serrate; cauline leaves smaller and more or less sessile. Flowers up to 5 cm in diameter, globose. Perianth-segments usually 10, incurved, pale yellow, rarely the outer green beneath. Honey-leaves about as long as the stamens. Follicles c. 12 mm; beak 0\'b75-5 mm.}{\i\fs28  Meadows and woodland-margins. Widespread in Europe, but only on mountains in the south.}{\fs28  Al Au Br Bu Cz Da Fe Ga Ge Gr Hb He Hs Hu It Ju No Po Rm Rs(N, B, C, W, E) Su [Be].
\par 
\par The length of the beak of the mature follicle and the shape of the basal leaves are rather variable, especially in E. Europe. The prevalence of self-pollination probably helps to emphasize this variation. Two subspecies can be recognized:
\par 
\par  (}{\b\fs28 a}{\fs28 ) Subsp. }{\b\fs28 europaeus}{\fs28 : Plant usually 30-80 cm. Stigma not more than 3 mm, straight. 2n = 16, 18.}{\i\fs28  Almost throughout the range of the species}{\fs28 .
\par  (}{\b\fs28 b}{\fs28 ) Subsp. }{\b\fs28 transsilvanicus}{\fs28  (Schur) Domin in Domin & Podp.,}{\i\fs28  Klic Uplne Kvetene Rep. Cesk.}{\fs28  25 (1928): Plant usually 10-20 cm; stigma 3-5 mm, more or less recurved. 2n = 16. \bullet }{\i\fs28  From S. Alp to Carpathians}{\fs28 .
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 2. T. apertus }{\fs28 Perf. ex Igoshina,}{\i\fs28  Bot. Zur.}{\b\fs28  53}{\fs28 : 793 (1968) (}{\i\fs28 T. asiaticus}{\fs28  auct., non L., }{\i\fs28 T. uralensis}{\fs28  Gorodkov). Like }{\b\fs28 1}{\fs28  but plant 40-60 cm; flowers somewhat open; perianth-segments not incurved, often pale orange; honey-leaves usually longer than the stamens.}{\i\fs28  N.E. Russia.}{\fs28  Rs(N).
\par 
\par }
\pard \qc\ {\fs28   }{\b\fs28 7.              Isopyrum}{\fs28                L.
\par }{\fs24  \'86T.G. Tutin.
\par 
\par }
\pard \ {\fs28 Perennials. Flowers solitary. Perianth-segments 5, petaloid; honey-leaves small or absent. Stamens shorter than the perianth-segments. Fruit of 2-20 sessile, free follicles.
\par 
\par     }{\b\fs28 1. I. thalictroides }{\fs28 L., }{\i\fs28 Sp. Pl.}{\fs28  557 (1753). Plant 10-30 cm, slender, glabrous, more or less glaucous. Rhizome creeping. Stem simple and leafless below, branched and leafy above. Basal leaves petiolate, ternate; leaflets 3-fid; segments ovate, more or less 3-lobed. Cauline leaves similar to the basal but sessile, with conspicuous stipules. Flowers 10-20 mm in diameter. Perianth-segments white. Honey-leaves 1-1\'b75 mm. Follicles usually 2,
\par 
\par 253}
\par }