{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 DC., {\i Reg. Veg. Syst. Nat.}{\b  1}: 374 (1817), and {\b A}. ×{\b  stoerckianum} Reichenb., {\i Uebersicht Acon}. 49 (1919), are hybrids between subsp. ({\b a}) and 5({\b a}).
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 4. A. toxicum }Reichenb.,{\i  Uebersicht Acon.} 43 (1819) ({\i A. bosniacum }G. Beck). Like {\b 3}({\b a}) but inflorescence glandular; bracteoles ovate; helmet about twice as high as wide. •{\i  Romania; C. & W. Jugoslavia.} Ju Rm.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 5. A. napellus }L.,{\i  Sp. Pl.} 532 (1753) ({\i A. formosum} Reichenb., {\i A. lobelianum} Reichenb., {\i A. pyramidale} Miller, {\i A. strictum} Bernh. ex DC.). Stems 10-200(-300) cm. Leaves divided to the base, the usually narrow segments divided to half-way or more to the midrib into linear or linear-lanceolate lobes 1-8 mm wide. Inflorescence simple or branched, with simple, curved eglandular hairs (rarely a few glandular hairs present, or glabrous), the terminal part larger than the branches. Flowers violet or blue; helmet (12-)18-25(-30) × 11-18 mm, hemispherical; nectary-spurs straight. Follicles usually 3. Seeds 4·5 mm, winged at the angles, the sides smooth or rugulose. •{\i  W. & C. Europe, extending to the S. Carpathians; one station in C. Russia.} Au Be Br Co Cz †Da Ga Ge He Hs It Ju Lu Po Rm Rs(C, W) *Su [Rs(B)].
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28 A very variable species in which numerous local variants have been recognized as species or subspecies. A number of distinct regional facies appear to merit subspecific rank; the treatment here is based on that of W. Seitz,{\i  Feddes Repert.}{\b  80}: 1-76 (1969). Measurements of bracteoles refer to those of the lower flowers in the terminal inflorescence.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28 Hybrids between {\b 5} and{\b  7} are cultivated for ornament and are locally naturalized from gardens.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 At least some bracteoles 2- or 3- or multi-fid, or dentate
\par 
  .............................................................................................. ({\b i}) subsp. {\b firmum}
\par 
1 Bracteoles undivided, entire
\par 
2 Leaf-lobes tapered to a long, acute apex ......................... ({\b a}) subsp. {\b napellus}
\par 
2 Leaf-lobes usually acute, but not tapered to the apex
\par 
3 Stalk of nectary straight; helmet ± triangular ................ ({\b d}) subsp. {\b corsicum}
\par 
3 Stalk of nectary curved; helmet not triangular
\par 
4 Bracteoles 1-2(-3) mm; carpels usually 2 ............................ ({\b e}) subsp. {\b hians}
\par 
4 Bracteoles more than 3 mm; carpels usually 3
\par 
5 Inflorescence glabrous or very sparsely hairy; helmet ± glabrous
\par 
6 Plant usually at least 80 cm; helmet 18-25(-30) mm ........ ({\b g}) subsp. {\b fissurae}
\par 
6 Plant 10-60(-80) cm; helmet 12-20 mm .......................... ({\b h}) subsp. {\b tauricum}
\par 
5 Inflorescence hairy; helmet somewhat hairy
\par 
7 Lower surface of cauline leaves with distinct reticulate 
\par 
  venation; middle leaf-segment divided for not more than 
\par 
  ½ of its length .................................................................. ({\b f}) subsp. {\b superbum}
\par 
7 Lower surface of cauline leaves without reticulate venation; 
\par 
  middle leaf-segment divided for more than ½ of its length
\par 
8 Leaf-lobes at least (2-)3-6 mm wide ............................ ({\b b}) subsp. {\b lusitanicum}
\par 
8 Leaf-lobes 1-2(-3) mm wide .............................................. ({\b c}) subsp. {\b vulgare}
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b napellus} ({\i A. anglicum} Stapf): Stems 50-150 cm. Middle leaf-segment divided for 3/5 of its length; leaf-lobes tapered to a long, acute apex. Inflorescence branched; bracteoles 2-2·5(-4) mm, entire. Flowering in spring and summer (earlier than the other subspecies). 2n = 32.{\i  S.W. Britain; ?S.W. France}.
\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b lusitanicum} Rouy, {\i Naturaliste} ({\i Paris}){\b  6}: 405 (1884) ({\i A. linnaeanum} Gáyer, {\i A. napellus} subsp. {\i neomontanum} (Wulfen) Gáyer, {\i A. neomontanum} Wulfen; incl. {\i A. napellus} subsp. {\i castellanum} Molero & C. Blanché): Stems up to 200(-300) cm. Middle leaf-segment divided for 2/3-3/4 of its length; leaf-lobes (2-)3-6 mm wide, acute to subobtuse. Inflorescence branched, hairy or sometimes glabrous; bracteoles 3-5 mm, entire. 2n = 32.{\i  W. & C. Europe}.
\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b c}) Subsp. {\b vulgare} (DC.) Rouy & Fouc.,{\i  Fl. Fr.}{\b  1}: 142 (1893) ({\i A. compactum} (Reichenb.) Gáyer): Stems up to 170 cm. Middle leaf-segment divided for 2/3 of its length; leaf-lobes 1-2(-3) mm wide. Inflorescence usually simple, compact; bracteoles 3-8 mm, entire. Helmet (14-)18-32 mm.{\i  Alps; Pyrenees, Cordillera Cantabrica}.
\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b d}) Subsp. {\b corsicum} (Gáyer) W. Seitz, {\i Feddes Repert.}{\b  80}: 44 (1969) ({\i A. corsicum} Gáyer): Like subsp. ({\b c}) but claw of honey-leaf and stalk of nectary straight; helmet more or less triangular.{\i  Corse}.
\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b e}) Subsp. {\b hians} (Reichenb.) Gáyer in Hegi, {\i Ill. Fl. Mitteleur.}{\b  3}: 498 (1912) ({\i A. firmum} Reichenb. pro parte, {\i A. callibotryon} Reichenb.): Stems up to 200 cm. Middle leaf-segment divided for 1/2-2/3 of its length. Inflorescence little-branched; bracteoles 1-2(-3) mm, entire. Carpels usually 2. {\i C. Europe}.
\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b f}) Subsp. {\b superbum} (Fritsch) W. Seitz,{\i  Feddes Repert.}{\b  80}: 41 (1969) ({\i A. superbum} Fritsch): Stems 50-200(-300) cm. Lower surface of cauline leaves with distinct reticulate venation leaf-lobes wide; middle leaf-segment divided for c. ½ of its length. Inflorescence lax, much-branched; bracteoles 3-5 mm, entire. 2n = 32. {\i  N.W. & C. Jugoslavia}.
\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b g}) Subsp. {\b fissurae} (E.I. Nyárády) W. Seitz, {\i op. cit.} 42 (1969 (incl. {\i A. flerovii} Steinb.,{\i  A. romanicum} Woloszczak): Stems 60-150 cm. Inflorescence glabrous or very sparsely hairy; bracteoles 3-5 mm, entire. Helmet 18-25(-30) mm, glabrous. 2n = 32. {\i  N.W. Jugoslavia; Romania; C. Russia}.
\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b h}) Subsp. {\b tauricum} (Wulfen) Gáyer in Hegi,{\i  Ill. Fl. Mitteleur.}{\b  3}: 496 (1912) ({\i A. eustachyum} Reichenb.,{\i  A. latemarense} Degen & Gáyer, {\i A. tauricum} Wulfen): Stems 10-60(-80) cm. Leaf-lobes 2-3 mm wide. Inflorescence glabrous or sometimes very sparsely hairy; bracteoles (2-)3-8 mm, entire. Helmet 12-20 mm, glabrous 2n = 32.{\i  E. Alps and N.W. Jugoslavia; S. & E. Carpathians}.
\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b i}) Subsp. {\b firmum} (Reichenb.) Gáyer, {\i op. cit.} 498 (1912) ({\i A. firmum} Reichenb., {\i A. napellus} subsp. {\i skerisorae} (Gáyer) W. Seitz, {\i A. skerisorae} Gáyer): Stems up to 150 cm. Middle leaf-segment divided for c. 3/5 of its length. Inflorescence little-branched, glabrous. Bracteoles 2·5-15 mm, mostly 2- or 3- or multi-fid or dentate. 2n = 32.{\i  E.C. Europe}.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 6. A. burnatii }Gáyer,{\i  Magyar Bot. Lapok}{\b  8}: 141 (1909). Like {\b 5}({\b c}) but somewhat smaller, the stems up to 140 cm; inflorescence densely glandular-pubescent.{\i  Mountains of S. Europe.} Bu Ga Gr Hs It Ju.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b burnatii} ({\i A. delphinense} Gáyer, {\i A. nevadense} Uechtr. ex Gáyer): Inflorescence lax, usually branched below.{\i  W. Mediterranean region}.
\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b pentheri} (Hayek) Jalas, {\i Ann. Bot. Fenn.}{\b  22}: 220 (1985) ({\i A. divergens} Pancic, non Rafin., {\i A. pentheri} Hayek): Inflorescence dense, simple.{\i  Balkan peninsula.}
\par 

\par 
   {\b 7. A. angustifolium }Bernh. ex Reichenb.,{\i  Monogr. Acon.} 95 (1820). Like {\b 5}({\b c}) but stems up to 130 cm; inflorescence glabrous; seeds with 7 or 8 transverse lamellae on each side. 2n = 48. •{\i  N.E. Italy; N.W. Jugoslavia.} It Ju.
\par 

\par 
256}
\par