{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}
\pard\f0\fs28\li200 3 Anthers mucronate, sometimes very shortly so
\par 7 Cauline leaves with short, ovate or oblong segments, or sometimes
\par   undivided
\par 8 Follicles united to at least the middle
\par 9 Stems 15-30 cm, procumbent; anthers red ................................... {\b 3. carpatha}
\par 9 Stems 5-15 cm, erect; anthers yellowish ...................................... {\b 8. doerfleri}
\par 8 Follicles united for c. 1/3 of their length
\par 10 Stems usually more than 10 cm, erect; perianth-segments violet  
\par    to greenish ...................................................................................... {\b 6. degenii}
\par 10 Stems usually less than 10 cm, procumbent;
\par    perianth-segments reddish ............................................................... {\b 9. stricta}
\par 7  Cauline leaves deeply divided into linear segments
\par 11 Follicles 3-veined throughout, united for c. 1/2 of
\par    their length .................................................................................... {\b 1. arvensis}
\par 11 Follicles 1-veined, united for usually more than 1/2 of their length
\par 12 Claw of perianth-segments not more than 1/4 as long as limb;
\par    follicles usually densely glandular .............................................. {\b 2. papillosa}
\par 12 Claw of perianth-segments 1/3 as long to as long as limb; 
\par    follicles eglandular or sparsely glandular
\par 13 Claw of perianth-segments usually more than 1/2 as long as limb; lobes
\par    of lower lip of honey-leaves with a lingulate, obtuse apex  {\b 4. hispanica}
\par 13 Claw of perianth-segments 1/3-1/2 as long as limb; lobes of 
\par    lower lip of honey-leaves with an acute apex .............................. {\b 5. segetalis}
\par 
\par 
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. N. arvensis }L.,{\i  Sp. Pl. }534 (1753). Stems 10-40 cm. Leaves with linear segments. Involucre absent (or present in some E. Mediterranean plants). Flowers 20-30 mm in diameter. Perianth-segments ovate-cordate, apiculate, bluish; claw usually at least as long as limb. Follicles 3-veined, united for c. 1/2 of their length. Seeds granulate, black.{\i  Cornfields and open ground. Most of Europe, except the north and much of the south-west, but rapidly becoming rarer, and probably extinct in several territories}. Al Au Be Bu †Cr Cz Ga Ge Gr †He Ho Hu It Ju Po Rm Rs(C, W, K, E) Sa Si Tu.
\par 
\par 
\pard\f0\fs28 A very polymorphic species that has been divided into numerous taxa that are connected by intermediate variants. Taxa are treated as varieties or subspecies by different authors.
\par 
\par 
\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Cauline leaves forming an involucre below the flower ..... ({\b b}) subsp. {\b aristata}
\par 1 Cauline leaves not forming an involucre below the flower
\par 2 Follicles smooth ................................................................ ({\b a}) subsp. {\b arvensis}
\par 2 Follicles densely tuberculate ............................................... ({\b c}) subsp. {\b glauca}
\par 
\par 
\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b arvensis} (N. divaricata Gaud.-Beaup.): Leaves green, the cauline not crowded to form an involucre below the flower. Follicles smooth. 2n = 12. •{\i  Almost throughout the range of the species}.
\par 
\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b aristata} (Sibth. & Sm.) Nyman,{\i  Consp.} 17 (1878) ({\i N. aristata} Sibth. & Sm.,{\i  N. arvensis} subsp. {\i rechingeri} (Tutin) Tutin): Leaves rather glaucous, the upper cauline crowded and forming an involucre below the flower. Follicles densely tuberculate. 2n = 12.{\i  C. & S. Greece, Kikladhes; Turkey-in-Europe}.
\par 
\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b c}) Subsp. {\b glauca} (Boiss.) N. Terracc., {\i Boll. Orto Bot. Palermo}{\b  2}: 34 (1898): Leaves green to glaucous, the cauline usually not crowded to form an involucre below the flower. Follicles densely tuberculate.{\i  Turkey-in-Europe.} ({\i Anatolia.})
\par 
\par 
\pard\f0\fs28 Subsp. {\b brevifolia} Strid, {\i Op. Bot.} ({\i Lund}) {\b 28}: 44 (1970) ({\i N. cretica} auct., non Miller), from Rodhos and adjacent small islands in the East Aegean, and characterized by short leaves with few, rather wide segments, was described from W. Kriti but has not been seen there since 1884.
\par 
\par 
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. N. papillosa }G. López, {\i Anal. Jard. Bot. Madrid}{\b  41}: 468 (1985) ({\i N. hispanica} auct., non L.). Like {\b 1}({\b a}) but flowers 35-70 mm in diameter, blue; claw of perianth-segments up to 1/4 as long as limb; follicles 1-veined, usually densely glandular. 2n = 12.{\i  Spain, Portugal; ?Sicilia.} Hs Lu ?Si [Az].
\par 
\par 
\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b papillosa}: Flowers 5-7 mm in diameter. Claw of perianth-segments absent or very short. Follicles densely glandular. •{\i  Spain, Portugal}.
\par 
\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b atlantica} (Murb.) Amich ex G. López,{\i  op. cit.} 468 (1985) ({\i N. hispanica} subsp. {\i atlantica} Murb.): Flowers 3·5-7 mm in diameter. Claw of perianth-segments up to 1/3 as long as limb. Follicles sparsely glandular.{\i  S. Spain, S. Portugal; ?Sicilia. Naturalized in Açores.}
\par 
\par 
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 3. N. carpatha }Strid,{\i  Op. Bot.} ({\i Lund}){\b  28}: 49 (1970). Stems 15-30 cm, procumbent, diffuse, slender. Flowers 12-17 mm in diameter. Perianth-segments reddish. Anthers very shortly mucronate, red. Follicles 6-10 mm, united for c. 1/2 of their length, tuberculate. 2n = 12. {\i Open, stony ground.• Karpathos and Kasos.} Cr.
\par 
\par 
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 4. N. hispanica }L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 534 (1753) ({\i N. gallica} Jordan). Stems 10-40 cm. Leaves with broadly linear segments. Involucre absent. Flowers 20-35 mm in diameter. Perianth-segments pale blue; claw usually more than 1/2 as long as limb. Lobes of lower lip of honey-leaves ovate-lanceolate in lower 1/2; upper 1/2 lingulate, obtuse. Anthers distinctly mucronate. Follicles glabrous or very slightly glandular.{\i  Cornfields. • S.W. Europe; almost extinct in S.W. France.} Ga Hs Lu.
\par 
\par 
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 5. N. segetalis }Bieb.,{\i  Fl. Taur.-Cauc.}{\b  2}: 16 (1808). Like {\b 4} but claw of perianth-segments 1/3-1/2 as long as limb; lobes of lower lip of honey-leaves ovate, acute; anthers very shortly mucronate.{\i  Cornfields. S. Ukraine.} Rs(W, K, E).
\par 
\par 
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 6. N. degenii }Vierh., {\i Magyar Bot. Lapok}{\b  25}: 148 (1926). Stems 10-40 cm, usually erect. Cauline leaves with oblong segments. Flowers 12-25 mm in diameter. Perianth-segments violet to greenish. Anthers mucronate. Follicles free for most of their length; beak slender, usually not longer than follicle. 2n = 12. {\i Disturbed open habitats. • Kikladhes.} Gr.
\par 
\par 
\pard\f0\fs28 A very variable species that forms distinct local populations on different islands, some of which have been given taxonomic rank (see A. Strid,{\i  Op. Bot.} ({\i Lund}){\b  28}: 1-169 (1970)).
\par 
\par 
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 7. N. fumariifolia }Kotschy in Unger & Kotschy,{\i  Ins. Cypern }319 (1865). Stems numerous, procumbent. Leaf-segments ovate, very small. Perianth-segments ovate-oblong, cordate, clawed, greenish-white. Anthers not mucronate. Follicles united for 1/3 of their length, tuberculate-rugose in lower 1/2, indehiscent. 2n = 12.{\i  S. Aegean region}. Cr Gr.
\par 
\par 
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 8. N. doerfleri }Vierh.,{\i  Magyar Bot. Lapok}{\b  25}: 147 (1926). Stems 5-15 cm, erect, somewhat glaucous, with few, usually divaricate branches. Leaf-segments few, ovate. Flowers small, greenish-blue. Anthers shortly mucronate, yellowish. Follicles united for nearly all of their length, tuberculate-scabrid; beak c. 1/2 as long as follicle, stout, patent. 2n = 12, 14. •{\i  S. Aegean region}. Cr Gr.
\par 
\par 252}
\par