{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}
 
\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 12.            Delphinium}               L.
\par 

\pard\f0\fs24\qc †B. Pawlowski.
\par 

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Leaves usually about as wide as long, and deeply palmate, the lobes pinnatisect. Flowers zygomorphic. Perianth-segments 5, the upper with a spur. Honey-leaves 4, free; the 2 upper (nectariferous) with spurs inserted into the spur of the uppermost perianth-segment, and with the limb exserted; the 2 lateral with a wide limb and a narrow claw. Stamens in 8 spirally arranged series. Follicles 3(-5), free.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Perennial; limb of lateral honey-leaves ciliate and bearded
\par 
  on upper surface
\par 
2 Tubers absent; seeds not covered with scales, winged at angles
\par 
3 Stems (especially above) and perianth-segments with mostly smooth, 
\par 
  arcuate  hairs; perianth-segments rather narrow
\par 
4 Perianth-segments usually 22-32 mm, acuminate; hairs not
\par 
  crowded near apex of perianth-segments ................................ {\b 3. oxysepalum}
\par 
4 Perianth-segments rarely more than 23 mm, subobtuse or acute;  
\par 
  hairs ± crowded near apex of perianth-segments
\par 
5 Perianth-segments pale blue; petiole, even of upper leaves, not or
\par 
  scarcely shorter than lamina; carpels usually densely pubescent
\par 
  .................................................................................................... {\b 1. montanum}
\par 
5 Perianth-segments deep blue; petiole of upper and middle leaves 
\par 
  usually many times shorter than lamina; carpels glabrous 
\par 
  or sparsely (very rarely densely) puberulent .................................. {\b 2. dubium}
\par 
3 Stems with straight hairs or minutely scabrid arcuate hairs, or 
\par 
  stems glabrous; perianth-segments 1-2(-3) times as long as wide,
  suborbicular or obovate, rarely oblong
\par 
6 Honey-leaves blue, or the upper yellowish; leaves 3-lobed 
\par 
  almost to base
\par 
7 Bracts and bracteoles linear; perianth-segments 10-16(-18) mm
\par 
  ............................................................................................... {\b 7. dyctiocarpum}
\par 
7 Lower bracts usually 3-fid, bracteoles linear; perianth-segments 
\par 
  15-25 mm .............................................................................. {\b 8. middendorffii}
\par 
6 Honey-leaves blackish or dark brown (if blue then leaves not 
\par 
  3-lobed to base)
\par 
8 Leaves ± cordate at base; lobes rather wide, not free to base . {\b 4. elatum}
\par 
8 Leaves ± cuneate at base; lobes rather narrow,  
\par 
  usually free to base
\par 
9 Inflorescence-axis and perianth-segments glabrous, more 
\par 
  rarely patent-pubescent; leaf-lobes linear-lanceolate .......... {\b 5. simonkaianum}
\par 
9 Inflorescence-axis and perianth-segments covered with 
\par 
  subappressed, minutely scabrid hairs; leaf-lobes  oblong ............. {\b 6. cuneatum}
\par 
2 Tubers present; seeds covered with membranous scales, not winged
\par 
10 Base of petiole little dilated, surrounding less than ½ 
\par 
   circumference of stem; pedicels of lower flowers usually at 
\par 
   least as long as flowers
\par 
11 Follicles usually 5 ................................................................ {\b 9. pentagynum}
\par 
11 Follicles 3 ......................................................................... {\b 10. emarginatum}
\par 
10 Base of petiole strongly dilated, almost completely surrounding 
\par 
   stem; pedicels of lower flowers usually shorter than flowers
\par 
12 Stem angled; petiole of middle and upper cauline leaves
\par 
   very short ........................................................................ {\b 15. schmalhausenii}
\par 
12 Stem ± terete; all cauline leaves ± long-petiolate
\par 
13 Flowers dirty blackish-violet or -purple, rather widely open;
\par 
   spur ± equalling perianth-segments ......................................... {\b 14. puniceum}
\par 
13 Flowers blue, violet-blue, lilac or whitish, rarely yellowish-violet, 
\par 
    not widely open; spur usually distinctly longer than perianth-segments
\par 
14 Bracts and bracteoles ovate-lanceolate; flowers (incl. spur) 
\par 
   19-23 mm, pale blue or whitish .............................................. {\b 13. albiflorum}
\par 
14 Bracts and bracteoles linear; flowers (incl. spur) usually 
\par 
   more than 23 mm, blue, lilac or yellowish-violet
\par 
15 Stems 3-6 mm thick; flowers (incl. spur) 22-27 mm .................. {\b 11. fissum}
\par 
15 Stems 7-10 mm thick; flowers (incl. spur) 30-36 mm ............... {\b 12. bolosii}
\par 
1  Annual or biennial; lateral honey-leaves glabrous and not
\par 
   ciliate (Mediterranean region)
\par 
16 Limb of upper honey-leaves unwinged; seeds few, rugose-areolate
\par 
17 Spur 1/5-1/3 as long as perianth-segments; 
\par 
   seeds 5·5-7·5 mm ................................................................. {\b 23. staphisagria}
\par 
17 Spur at least 2/5 as long as perianth-segments; seeds 3-4·5 mm
\par 
18 Inflorescence-axis, pedicels and outside of perianth-segments 
\par 
   shortly pubescent; bracteoles inserted at base of pedicels ........... {\b 25. pictum}
\par 
18 Inflorescence-axis and outside of perianth-segments villous-hirsute;
\par 
   bracteoles inserted at some distance above base of pedicels .... {\b 24. requienii}
\par 
16 Limb of upper honey-leaves with lateral wings; seeds numerous, 
\par 
   covered with transverse membranous scales
\par 
19 Limb of lateral honey-leaves cuneate at base, gradually 
\par 
   narrowed into claw
\par 
20 Limb of lateral honey-leaves ovate or elliptical; spur of 
\par 
   perianth-segments up to twice as long as segments .............. {\b 16. peregrinum}
\par 
20 Limb of lateral honey-leaves subquadrate, with wide, truncate apex; 
\par 
   spur of perianth-segments ± equalling segments ........... {\b 17. hirschfeldianum}
\par 
19 Limb of lateral honey-leaves abruptly contracted into claw
\par 
21 Limb of lateral honey-leaves not or little shorter than claw, 
\par 
   usually distinctly exserted, not cordate at base ...................... {\b 18. ambiguum}
\par 
21 Limb of lateral honey-leaves ½-¾ as long as claw,
\par 
   cordate or subcordate at base
\par 
22 Limb of lateral honey-leaves oblong, 1¼-2 times as long 
\par 
   as wide, exserted
\par 
23 Limb of lateral honey-leaves usually 1 1/3-2 times as long 
\par 
   as wide; perianth-segments usually 7-9 mm ................................. {\b 21. gracile}
\par 
23 Limb of lateral honey-leaves up to 1 1/3 times as long as wide;
\par 
   perianth-segments usually 5-7 mm ........................................ {\b 22. hellenicum}
\par 
22 Limb of lateral honey-leaves suborbicular, included
\par 

\par 
257}
\par