{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 more rarely glabrous above. Base of petiole of cauline leaves surrounding not more than ½ the circumference of the stem. Upper leaves palmatisect, with more or less linear segments; lower leaves palmatipartite, with wider segments. Flowers pale or dirty violet-blue; lateral perianth-segments 13-16 mm, about equalling the subacute spur. Follicles 5, more or less divergent. Seeds 1·2-1·5 mm, obscurely angled, covered with long scales. 2n = 16.{\i  W. & S. Spain, C. & S. Portugal.} Hs Lu.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 10. D. emarginatum }C. Presl in J. & C. Presl,{\i  Del. Prag.}{\b  1}: 6 (1822). Tubers present. Stock surrounded by fibres. Stems robust, distinctly angled. Base of petiole of cauline leaves surrounding not more than ½ the circumference of the stem. Perianth-segments 10-14 mm, glabrous on the outside. Follicles 3, erect, glabrous. Seeds obscurely angled, covered with scales.{\i  S.E. Spain; W. Sicilia.} Hs Si. ({\i N. Africa}.)
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b emarginatum}: Stems up to 80 cm, glabrous or slightly pubescent above. Pedicels glabrous or subglabrous. Perianth-segments bluish-lilac, as long as or scarcely shorter than the spur. {\i W. Sicilia}.
\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b nevadense} (G. Kunze) C. Blanché & Molero, {\i Anal. Jard. Bot. Madrid}{\b  41}: 469 (1985) ({\i D. nevadense} G. Kunze): Stems up to 160 cm, glabrous above. Pedicels glabrous. Perianth-segments bright blue, distinctly shorter than the spur. 2n = 16.{\i  Mountains of S.E. Spain}.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 11. D. fissum }Waldst. & Kit.,{\i  Pl. Rar. Hung.}{\b  1}: 83 (1802) ({\i D. leiocarpum} Huth,{\i  D. pallasii} Nevski, {\i D. velutinum} Bertol.). Tubers present. Stock without fibres. Stems 50-160 cm, terete, 3-6 mm thick, simple or little-branched, often pubescent. Leaves mostly 3-fid, acute. Base of petiole of lower cauline leaves almost surrounding the stem. Raceme dense. Bracts and bracteoles linear; margin not membranous. Flowers (including spur) 22-27 mm; perianth-segments directed forwards; spur more or less horizontal. Seeds 2-3·5 mm, densely covered with undulate scales.{\i  S. Europe, extending northwards to N. Romania and C. Ukraine}. Al Bu Ga Gr Hs It Ju Rm Rs(W, K) Tu.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28 A polymorphic species which varies especially in the degree and nature of the pubescence on all parts; the bracts may be entire or the lower divided, and the leaf-segments may be linear to lanceolate.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b fissum}: Leaf-segments usually linear-lanceolate to linear. Flowers blue, blue-violet or lilac, the perianth-segments not connivent, variably but not densely pubescent. {\i Throughout the range of the species except Spain}.
\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b sordidum} (Cuatrec.) Amich, Rico & Sánchez,{\i  Anal. Jard. Bot. Madrid}{\b  38}: 153 (1981) ({\i D. sordidum} Cuatrec.): Leaf-segments broadly lanceolate. Flowers dirty yellowish-violet, the perianth-segments connivent, densely pubescent. 2n = 16. {\i W. & S. Spain}.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 12. D. bolosii }C. Blanché & Molero, {\i Candollea }{\b 38}: 710 (1983). Like {\b 11} but stems 7-10 mm thick, more or less glabrous; leaves 5-to 7-fid; racemes lax; flowers (including spur) 30-36 mm, violet-blue, glabrous to scarcely pubescent. 2n = 18. •{\i  Mountains of N.E. Spain} ({\i Tarragona prov.}).
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 13. D. albiflorum }DC.,{\i  Reg. Veg. Syst. Nat.}{\b  1}: 353 (1817) ({\i D. fissum} subsp. {\i albiflorum} (DC.) Greuter & Burdet). Like {\b 11} but bracts and bracteoles ovate-lanceolate, usually membranous margined; flowers (including spur) 19-23 mm; perianth-segments pale blue, whitish or yellowish-white; honey-leaves blue. {\i N. Greece} ({\i Athos}). ?Gr. ({\i Anatolia.})
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28 The presence of this species in Greece requires confirmation. Bulgarian records have been referred to{\i  D. fissum }var.{\i  alibotuchiensis} Rech. fil.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 14. D. puniceum }Pallas,{\i  Reise }{\b 3}: 736 (1776). Tubers present. Stock without fibres. Stems 30-80 cm, shortly appressed pubescent. Leaf-segments linear. Base of petiole of lower cauline leaves almost surrounding the stem. Bracts shorter than the pedicels, linear. Perianth-segments dark purple-violet, puberulent on the outside. Follicles appressed-pubescent, more rarely glabrous. Seeds obscurely angled, covered with scales.{\i  S.E. Russia, E. Ukraine}. Rs(E). ({\i W. & C. Asia}.)
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 15. D. schmalhausenii }Albov, {\i Trudy Odessk. Obsc. Sad.}{\b  1890} 441 (1891) ({\i D. sergei }Wissjul.). Tubers present. Stock without fibres. Stems 40-130 cm, distinctly angled, more or less pubescent. Leaves with numerous linear segments; petioles of middle and upper leaves very short, widely membranous-margined, almost surrounding the stem. Inflorescence long and dense. Flowers deep bluish-violet; spur little longer than the perianth-segments, steeply ascending. Seeds obscurely angled, covered with scales.{\i  S.E. Russia}. Rs(E). ({\i Caucasus, Anatolia.})
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28 Sect. DELPHINIUM. Annuals or biennials. Honey-leaves glabrous, the same colour as the perianth-segments, the upper winged, not clawed. Seeds numerous.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 16. D. peregrinum }L.,{\i  Sp. Pl.} 531 (1753). Stems (15-)30-80 cm, erect, pruinose, pubescent throughout or only at the base, with ascending branches. Leaves 1 (2)-palmatisect, with linear-lanceolate or linear segments; upper leaves entire. Flowers dirty violet or bluish-violet. Perianth-segments puberulent on the outside, the lateral 7-10 mm, distinctly shorter than the spur. Honey-leaves longer than the perianth-segments; upper with the distal part (above the wings) 3-6 times as long as wide; lateral with elliptical, ovate or obovate limb, gradually narrowed into claw. Follicles usually pubescent.{\i  C. & E. Mediterranean region.} Al Bu Cr Gr It Ju Tu.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 17. D. hirschfeldianum }Heldr. & Holzm. in Boiss.,{\i  Fl. Or. Suppl.} 19 (1888). Like {\b 16} but perianth-segments deep blue, about as long as the spur; limb of lateral honey-leaves subquadrate, crenate-dentate, shortly cuneate at the base. •{\i  Aegean islands} ({\i Aiyina, Kithnos}). Gr.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 18. D. ambiguum }L., {\i Sp. Pl.} ed. 2, 749 (1762) ({\i D. nanum} DC.{\i  D. obcordatum }DC.). Stems 10-30(-50) cm, slender, usually appressed-pubescent, with numerous, long arcuate-divaricate branches. Inflorescence 2- to 10(-15)-flowered, lax. Pedicels and outside of the perianth-segments appressed-pubescent. Flowers deep bluish-violet; spur about twice as long as the perianth-segments. Limb of lateral honey-leaves about as long as the claw not cordate at the base. Follicles 6-11 mm, 3½-5 times as long as wide, slender, densely appressed-puberulent, often more or less divaricate. 2n = 16.{\i  S. Spain, S. Portugal.} Hs Lu.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 19. D. halteratum }Sm. in Sibth. & Sm.,{\i  Fl. Graec. Prodr.}{\b  1}: 37 (1809) ({\i D. longipes }Moris). Stems 10-80 cm, minutely appressed-pubescent (rarely glabrous), few- or many-branched; branches sometimes long and erecto-patent, but not virgate. Inflorescence up to 50-flowered, the flowers violet-blue. Perianth-segments 7-12 mm, minutely and more or less densely appressed-pubescent. Follicles 6-10(-11) mm, 2½-4½ times as long as wide.{\i  S.W. Europe, extending eastwards to S. Italy.} Ga Hs It Ju Lu Sa Si.
\par 

\par 
259}
\par