{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 12 Flowers 5-7 cm in diameter, yellowish; veins stout,  
\par 
   very prominent beneath
\par 
13 Leaf-segments 7-11, undivided or with the marginal ones
\par 
   somewhat divided ........................................................................... {\b 6. odorus}
\par 
13 Leaf-segments usually 5-7, more deeply divided
\par 
14 Leaves entirely glabrous, the basal c. 10 cm wide, the cauline 
\par 
   scarcely smaller ........................................................................... {\b 8. bocconei}
\par 
14 Leaves pubescent, at least on the veins beneath; basal 20-30 cm 
\par 
   wide; cauline much smaller
\par 
15 Leaf-segments ovate-lanceolate, some undivided, the others 
\par 
   2- to 5-fid, finely dentate ................................................................. {\b 6. odorus}
\par 
15 Leaf-segments linear-lanceolate, most or all 2- to 10-fid,
\par 
   coarsely dentate ........................................................................... {\b 8. bocconei}
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. H. foetidus }L.,{\i  Sp. Pl.} 558 (1753). Plant foetid, glandular-puberulent above. Stems 20-80 cm, stout, leafy, overwintering. Basal leaves absent; lower cauline pedate, petiolate, with sheathing base; leaf-segments 7-11, narrowly lanceolate, serrate. Bracts broadly ovate, entire, sometimes leaf-like. Flowers 1-3 cm in diameter, numerous, nodding, campanulate. Perianth-segments green, usually with purplish margins. Follicles usually 3, connate below. 2n = 32. •{\i  W. Europe, extending northwards to N. England and eastwards to S. Italy and C. Germany}. Be Bl Br Co Ga Ge He Hs It Lu ?Si.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. H. lividus }Aiton,{\i  Hort. Kew.}{\b  2}: 272 (1789) ({\i H. trifolius} Miller). Like {\b 1} but leaf-segments 3, unequally ovate-lanceolate; flowers 2-5 cm in diameter; perianth-segments patent, pale green or purplish.{\i  Dry scrub and rocky ground. • Islands of W. Mediterranean}. Bl Co Sa.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b lividus}: Leaf-segments with small, distant teeth or entire. Inflorescence lax, up to 10-flowered; perianth pale green or purplish. 2n = 32.{\i  Islas Baleares} ({\i Mallorca}).
\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b corsicus} (Willd.) Tutin,{\i  Feddes Repert.}{\b  69}: 53 (1964) ({\i H. corsicus} Willd., {\i H. argutifolius }Viv.): Plant taller, up to 150 cm. Leaf-segments closely spinose-dentate. Inflorescence dense, 15- to 30-flowered; perianth pale green. 2n = 32.{\i  Corse, Sardegna}.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 3. H. cyclophyllus }Boiss.,{\i  Fl. Or.}{\b  1}: 61 (1867). Stems 20-50 cm. Leaves not overwintering; basal usually very large, solitary, weakly pedate to almost digitate with 5-9, usually undivided, ovate-lanceolate, serrate segments; cauline smaller, 3- to 5-fid. Flowers 3 or 4, 4-7 cm in diameter, scented. Perianth-segments patent, pale green. Follicles free, narrowed to the shortly stipitate base. 2n = 32.{\i  Woods and thickets. • Balkan peninsula.} Al Bu Gr Ju.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28 Plants intermediate between {\b 3} and {\b 6} occur occasionally. In N.W. Greece (Kerkira) plants occur which have some follicles united at the base, but which are otherwise indistinguishable from {\b 3}.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 4. H. orientalis }Lam.,{\i  Encycl. Méth. Bot.}{\b  3}: 96 (1789). Like {\b 3} but leaves overwintering; leaf-segments 5-11, biserrate; flowers not scented; perianth-segments very pale greenish-cream, becoming brownish- to yellowish-green (rarely purplish). 2n = 32.{\i  Woods and scrub. Thrace}. ?Gr Tu.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 5. H. viridis }L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 558 (1753). Stems 20-40 cm. Leaves not overwintering; basal usually 2, digitate to weakly pedate, with 7-13 serrate segments and slender, prominent veins beneath; cauline smaller, more or less digitate. Flowers 2-4, 4-5 cm in diameter. Perianth-segments patent, yellowish-green. Follicles connate at the base.{\i  Calcicole. • W. & C. Europe, eastwards to N. Italy and E. Austria.} Au Be Br Ga Ge He Hs It [Cz *Ho Rs(W)].
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b viridis}: Leaves pubescent beneath; segments finely serrate. Perianth-segments broadly ovate. 2n = 32.{\i  C. Europe and Maritime Alps}.
\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b occidentalis} (Reuter) Schiffner, {\i Bot. Jahrb.}{\b  11}: 118 (1889): Leaves glabrous beneath; segments coarsely serrate. Perianth-segments narrower, ovate to elliptical. 2n = 32.{\i  W. Europe}.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 6. H. odorus }Waldst. & Kit. in Willd.,{\i  Enum. Pl. Horti Berol.} 592 (1809). Stems 20-60 cm. Basal leaves overwintering, usually solitary; segments (5-)7-11, ovate-lanceolate, undivided or rarely with a marginal segment divided, coriaceous, pubescent beneath. Flowers 2 or 3, 5-7 cm in diameter, scented. Perianth-segments patent, broadly ovate, clear green. Follicles connate at the base. •{\i  E., C. & S. Europe from Italy to S. Romania.} Al Hu It Ju Rm.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b odorus}: Leaf-segments 7-11, mostly undivided. {\i Throughout the range of the species except Italy}.
\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b laxus} (Host) Merxm. & Podl.,{\i  Feddes Repert.}{\b  64}: 5 (1961): Leaf-segments usually 5-7, mostly 2- to 5-fid. 2n = 30 + 1-11B.{\i  N. & C. Italy, N.W. Jugoslavia.}
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 7. H. multifidus }Vis., {\i Flora (Regensb.)}{\b  12}({\b 1}) Erg.-Bl: 13 (1829) ({\i H. odorus} subsp. {\i multifidus} (Vis.) Hayek). Like {\b 6} but leaf-segments 9-15, divided almost to the base into 3-12 linear lobes; flowers 3·5-5·5 cm in diameter; perianth-segments narrow, scarcely overlapping.{\i  Scrub and grassland; calcicole. • Jugoslavia, Albania}. Al Ju ?Rm.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Leaf-segments entire or divided to a little beyond the middle,
\par 
  usually finely dentate ......................................................... ({\b c}) subsp. {\b istriacus}
\par 
1 Leaf-segments all divided nearly to the base, rather coarsely 
\par 
  and remotely dentate
\par 
2 Flowers green ................................................................. ({\b a}) subsp. {\b multifidus}
\par 
2 Flowers purplish-violet ..................................................... ({\b b}) subsp. {\b serbicus}
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b multifidus}: Leaf-segments divided nearly to the base, rather coarsely and remotely dentate. Flowers 3·5-4·5 cm in diameter, green. 2n = 30 + 1-9B.{\i  Albania, W. Jugoslavia, ?Romania}.
\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b serbicus} (Adamovic) Merxm. & Podl.,{\i  Feddes Repert.}{\b  64}: 5 (1961) ({\i H. torquatus} Archer-Hind): Like subsp. ({\b a}) but flowers 4-5·5 cm in diameter, dark purplish-violet. 2n = 28.{\i  Srbja, Albania}.
\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b c}) Subsp. {\b istriacus} (Schiffner) Merxm. & Podl., {\i loc. cit.} (1961): Leaf-segments entire or divided to a little beyond the middle, usually finely dentate. Flowers 4-5·5 cm in diameter, green.{\i  Jugoslavia.}
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 8. H. bocconei }Ten.,{\i  Corso Bot. Lez.}{\b  4}({\b 1}): 459 (1822). Stems 20-60 cm. Basal leaves overwintering, usually solitary; segments 5-7, lanceolate or linear-lanceolate, usually divided to the middle, coarsely and irregularly toothed, coriaceous, glabrous or pubescent beneath. Flowers 2 or 3, 5-7 cm in diameter, scented. Perianth-segments patent, broadly ovate, green. Follicles connate at the base.{\i  Woods and shady places. • C. & S. Italy, Sicilia.} It Si.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b bocconei}: Leaves pubescent, at least on the veins beneath; basal leaves 20-30 cm wide.{\i  C. Italy}.
\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b intermedius} (Guss.) Greuter & Burdet, {\i Willdenowia }{\b 19}: 44 (1989) ({\i H. viridis} subsp. {\i siculus} (Schiffner) Merxm. & Podl.): Leaves usually entirely glabrous; basal leaves 8-20 cm wide.{\i  S. Italy, Sicilia}.
\par 

\par 
250}
\par