{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 or 3-pinnate; petiole 1/3-2/3 as long as the lamina; lamina dull green, glabrous or rarely glandular, lanceolate, acute; pinnae up to c. 5 cm, subopposite, subsessile, ovate-lanceolate, becoming increasingly distant below, the second pair from the base usually the longest; pinnules up to c. 15 mm, ovate to oblong, entire and dentate to pinnate; teeth acute to obtuse, sometimes bidentate at the apex, often dentate on the margins; veins ending in the apices of the teeth. Indusium ovate-lanceolate, acuminate; spores echinate, the spines at least their own width apart. 2n = 168, 252.{\i  Mostly on shady, basic rocks. Throughout Europe; mainly on mountains in the Mediterranean region.} All territories.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. C. alpina} (Lam.) Desv.,{\i  Mém. Soc. Linn. Paris}{\b  6:} 264 (1827) ({\i C. regia} auct. plur. pro parte). Like {\b 1} but pinnae more deeply dissected, the ultimate segments linear-oblong . 2n = 252.{\i  On calcareous rocks. • Throughout Europe but detailed distribution needs clarification.} Al Bu Co ?Cz ?Da ?Fe Ga ?Ge Gr ?He Hs It Ju ?No ?Po ?Rm Rs(W) Si ?Su.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 3. C. diaphana} (Bory) Blasdell, {\i Mem. Torrey Bot. Club}{\b  21:} 47 (1963) ({\i C. viridula} (Desv.) Desv.). Like {\b 1} but lamina less tapered at the base, 2-pinnate, the ultimate segments often wide and contiguous; veins ending in the sinus of a retuse segment apex or between pinnule teeth. Spores densely echinate, their spines short, almost touching at the base. 2n = 252.{\i  On shady, mildly basic rocks. S. & S.W. Europe, Açores.} Az Co Ga Hs It Lu Si. ({\i Africa}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 4. C. dickieana} R. Sim, {\i Gard. Farm. Jour. }{\b 2}({\b 20}): 308 (1848) ({\i C. baenitzii} Dörfler). Like {\b 1} but leaves 2-pinnate; indusium lanceolate; spores rugose. 2n = 168. {\i Widely distributed in Europe, but the distribution is imperfectly known.} Br Co Fe Ga Ge Gr He Hs Is It Lu No Rs(N) Sa Si Su.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Originally described from Britain, where the plants represent a variant in which the pinnae are deflexed and horizontally overlapping and inclined, and the pinnules wide, obtuse, more or less overlapping, and crenate to crenately lobed.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Species {\b 1-4} form a widespread, polymorphic, polyploid complex in which it is difficult to distinguish the variants taxonomically. Tetraploid and hexaploid populations of {\b 1} cannot as yet be distinguished with certainty either from one another or from diploid populations which have been recorded from North America. Sterile hybrids occur interspecifically and between cytotypes of {\b 1}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 5. C. montana} (Lam.) Desv.,{\i  Mém. Soc. Linn. Paris}{\b  6:} 264 (1827). Rhizome c. 2 mm in diameter, creeping, little-branched, with a few scattered scales on the younger parts. Leaves 10-40 cm, solitary, 3-pinnate; petiole 1-2 times as long as the lamina; lamina deep green, more or less thinly glandular, deltate-pentagonal; pinnae up to c. 10 cm, subopposite, subsessile, obliquely triangular-ovate, acute, the lowest pair the longest; pinnules up to c. 5 cm, the proximal basiscopic pair the longest; ultimate segments up to c.10 mm, ovate to oblong, more or less acute, pinnately divided. Indusium suborbicular, often glandular, caducous; spores muricate. 2n = 168. {\i Woods, usually on basic rocks. N. & N.E. Europe; mountains of C. & S. Europe from the Pyrenees to the E. Carpathians.} Au Br Cz Fe Ga Ge He Hs It Ju No Po Rm Rs(N, C, W, E) Su.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 6. C. sudetica} A. Braun & Milde,{\i  Jahresb. Schles. Ges. Vaterl. Kult.}{\b  33:} 92 (1855). Like {\b 5} but lamina ovate-deltate, yellowish-green; pinnae oblong-lanceolate, the proximal basiscopic pinnules not the longest; ultimate segments more or less obtuse. 2n = 168.{\i  Mountain woods. N. Europe, from Norway to Ural; mountains of E.C. Europe}. †Au Cz Ge No Po Rm Rs(N, B, C, W).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 5.                 Woodsia}                     R. Br.
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc  By A.O. Chater.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Rhizome short, covered by persistent leaf-bases. Leaves tufted, pinnate, with lobed to pinnatisect pinnae; petiole articulated above the base; veins free. Sori orbicular; indusium divided into a fringe of hair-like scales surrounding the base of the sorus.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Literature: J. Poelt, {\i Mitt. Bot. Staatssamm.} ({\i München}) {\b 1}({\b 5}): 167-174 (1952). R.E.G. Pichi Sermolli, {\i Webbia}{\b  12:} 179-216 (1955).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Petiole pale, greenish to straw-coloured above the black base;
\par
  petiole and rhachis glabrous or with very few scales or hairs .........{\b 3. glabella}
\par
1 Petiole dark, brownish above the black base; petiole and
\par
  rhachis sparsely to densely covered with scales and hairs
\par
2 Rhachis and lower surface of pinnae ± densely covered with scales and
\par
  hairs; longest pinnae with 4-8 lobes on each side ........................... {\b 1. ilvensis}
\par
2 Rhachis sparsely clothed with scales and hairs; lower
\par
  surface of pinnae with few scales and hairs, or glabrous;
\par
  longest pinnae with 1-4 lobes on each side ........................................ {\b 2. alpina}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. W. ilvensis} (L.) R. Br.,{\i  Trans. Linn. Soc. London }{\b 11:} 173 (1815) ({\i W. rufidula} (Michx) G. Beck, {\i W. ilvensis} subsp.{\i  rufidula }(Michx) Ascherson). Leaves 4-20 cm, dull or brownish-green; petiole densely covered with lanceolate scales near the base, with subulate scales above, and with flexuous hairs throughout; lamina oblong-lanceolate, with 7-18 pinnatifid or rarely pinnatisect pinnae on each side; longest pinnae 7-20 mm, 1½-2 times as long as wide, with 4-8 obtuse lobes on each side; rhachis and lower surface of pinnae densely covered with subulate scales (2-3 mm) and flexuous hairs. 2n = 82.{\i  Crevices of siliceous rocks. N. & C. Europe; C. & S. Ural; C. Ukraine} ({\i near Zitomir}). Au Br Cz Fe Ga Ge He Hu Is It Ju No Po Rm Rs(N, B, C, W) Su.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. W. alpina} (Bolton) S.F. Gray,{\i  Nat. Arr. Brit. Pl.}{\b  2:} 17 (1821) ({\i W. hyperborea} (Liljeblad) R. Br., {\i W. ilvensis} subsp.{\i  alpina} (Bolton) Ascherson). Usually smaller than {\b 1}. Leaves pale or yellowish-green; petiole with few scales or hairs, glabrescent; lamina linear-oblong, with 7-14 pinnately lobed or pinnatifid pinnae on each side; longest pinnae 5-15 mm, 1-1½ times as long as wide, with 1-4 very obtuse lobes on each side; rhachis sparsely clothed with subulate, rarely lanceolate scales (1-2 mm) and with hairs; lower surface of pinnae with very few scales or hairs, or glabrous. 2n = 164.{\i  Rock-crevices, rarely on walls. N. Europe, and on mountains southwards to C. Italy and the Pyrenees.} Au Br Cz Fe Ga Ge He Hs Hu Is It Ju No Po Rm Rs(N, C, W) Su.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 3. W. glabella} R. Br. ex Richardson in Franklin,{\i  Narr. Journey} 26 (1823). Leaves 1·5-12 cm, usually yellowish-green and more or less translucent; petiole with very few scales or hairs at the base, glabrous above; lamina broadly or narrowly lanceolate or linear; pinnae 5-16, pinnately lobed or pinnatifid; longest pinnae 3-7(-10) mm with 1-7 obtuse to subacute lobes on each side; rhachis and lower surface of pinnae usually completely lacking scales or hairs. 2n = 78.{\i  Rock-crevices; calcicole. Arctic and subarctic Europe; Alps; isolated stations in Pyrenees and Carpathians.} Au Fe ?Ga Ge He Hs It Ju No Rm Rs(N, C) Sb Su.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 ({\b a}) Subsp.{\b  glabella}: Leaves not more than 8 cm. Pinnae usually
\par

\par
25}
\par