{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 6 Leaf-segments 1-2(-3) mm wide ....................................... {\b 7. angustifolium}
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. A. lycoctonum }L.,{\i  Sp. Pl.} 523 (1753). Leaf-segments divided into 3 or more incise-serrate to very deeply laciniate-dentate lobes. Inflorescence simple or branched. Perianth-segments deciduous; helmet 12-25 × 3-10 mm, c. 3 times as high as wide, conical-cylindrical; nectary-spurs spirally curved. Follicles (2)3(-5). Seeds brownish-black, 4-sided with convex sides and obtuse angles.{\i  Most of Europe, but absent from most of the north-west and much of the Mediterranean region}. Al Au Be Bu Cz Fe Ga Ge Gr He Ho Hs Hu It Ju No Po Rm Rs(N, B, C, W, K, E) Su.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Helmet with a wide base, tapering abruptly into a narrow, 
\par 
  elongate hood (N. & E. Europe)
\par 
2 Flowers dark violet ..................................................... ({\b a}) subsp. {\b lycoctonum}
\par 
2 Flowers yellowish ...................................................... ({\b b}) subsp. {\b lasiostomum}
\par 
1 Helmet usually saccate, not conspicuously wider at base 
\par 
  (S. & C. Europe)
\par 
3 Flowers blue ............................................................... ({\b c}) subsp. {\b moldavicum}
\par 
3 Flowers yellowish
\par 
4 Leaf-segments 3-fid to the middle; terminal inflorescence  
\par 
  small and few-flowered .................................................... ({\b d}) subsp. {\b vulparia}
\par 
4 Leaf-segments divided beyond the middle into several lobes;
\par 
  terminal inflorescence large and many-flowered ...... ({\b e}) subsp. {\b neapolitanum}
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b lycoctonum} ({\i A. septentrionale} Koelle; incl.{\i  A. excelsum} Reichenb.): Stems 60-150(-200) cm. Leaves dark green; segments 4-6, 3-fid. Inflorescence villous with eglandular and glandular hairs. Flowers dark violet; helmet 18-25 × 3-5 mm, tapering abruptly from the wide base, sparsely hairy. 2n = 16.{\i  N. & E. Europe from Norway to S.E. Russia.}
\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b lasiostomum} (Reichenb. ex Besser) Warncke, {\i Eur. Sippen} Aconitum lycoctonum{\i -Gruppe }51 (1964) ({\i A. lasiostomum} Reichenb. ex Besser, {\i A. besserianum} Andrz. ex Trautv.,{\i  A. rogowiczii} Wissjul.): Like subsp. ({\b a}) but flowers yellowish. •{\i  C. Russia, extending to Estonia, Romania and Krym}.
\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b c}) Subsp. {\b moldavicum} (Hacq.) Jalas,{\i  Ann. Bot. Fenn. }{\b 22}: 219 (1985) ({\i A. moldavicum} Hacq., {\i A. hosteanum} Schur): Stems 60-150(-200) cm. Leaves dark green; segments 4-6, 3-fid. Inflorescence covered with short, crispate eglandular hairs. Flowers blue; helmet 16-23 × 4-7 mm, not tapering abruptly from a wide base.{\i  E.C. Europe, extending to Romania and W. Ukraine}.
\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b d}) Subsp. {\b vulparia} (Reichenb.) Nyman,{\i  Consp., Suppl.}{\b  2}: 13 (1889) ({\i A. croaticum} Degen & Gáyer, {\i A. gracilescens} Gáyer,{\i  A. lasianthum} (Reichenb.) Simonkai, {\i A. laxiflorum} (DC.) Reichenb.,{\i  A. lycoctonum} auct., non L., {\i A. pauciflorum} Host., {\i A. penninum} (Ser.) Gáyer, {\i A. puberulum} (Ser.) G. Grint., {\i A. thalianum }(Wallr.) Gáyer,{\i  A. velebiticum} Degen,{\i  A. velutinum} (Reichenb.) G. Grint., {\i A. vulparia} Reichenb.): Like subsp. ({\b c}) but stems 40-120 cm; leaf-segments 3-fid to the middle; inflorescence small, few-flowered; flowers yellow. 2n = 16. •{\i  From France and the Netherlands eastwards to Romania.}
\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b e}) Subsp. {\b neapolitanum} (Ten.) Nyman,{\i  Consp.} 19 (1878) ({\i A. fallax} (Gren. & Godron) Gáyer, {\i A. lamarckii} Reichenb.,{\i  A. neapolitanum} Ten.,{\i  A. pantocsekianum} Degen & Bald., {\i A. pyrenaicum} auct., non L., {\i A. ranunculifolium} Reichenb.,{\i  A. stenotomum} Borbás, {\i A. vulparia} subsp. {\i neopolitanum} (Ten.) Muñoz Garmendia, {\i A. wagneri }Degen): Leaves light green; segments 5-8, several times divided to beyond the middle. Inflorescence large, many-flowered. Flowers yellow. 2n = 16.{\i  Mountains of S. & S.C. Europe}.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28 Populations more or less intermediate between subspp. ({\b d}) and ({\b e}) occur, particularly in the southern Alps, Jugoslavia and Romania; some of these have been called{\b  A. dasytrichum} (Degen ex Gáyer) G. Grint. in Savul.,{\i  Fl. Rep. Pop. Române}{\b  2}: 506 (1953) and{\b  A. planatifolium} Degen ex Gáyer,{\i  Magyar Bot. Lapok}{\b  6}: 118 (1907). Plants morphologically indistinguishable from subsp. ({\b c}) occur in the mountains of China.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. A. anthora }L.,{\i  Sp. Pl.} 532 (1753). Leaves divided 3 or 4 times completely to the base or midrib; segments not more than 3 mm wide, linear. Inflorescence simple or branched, with eglandular hairs. Flowers yellowish, rarely blue; perianth persistent; helmet 8-12 × 14-16 mm, more or less hemispherical; nectary-spurs not spirally curved. Follicles (3-)5. Seeds 3-5 mm, black, irregularly 4-sided, with acute angles. 2n = 32.{\i  S., C. & E. Europe, mainly in the mountains.} Au ?Co Cz Ga He Hs Hu It Ju Rm Rs(C, W, K, E).
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 3. A. variegatum }L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 532 (1753). Leaves divided to the base, the wide segments often divided to beyond the middle, and deeply incise-dentate. Inflorescence nearly always branched, the terminal part not much larger than the branches. Flowers white, blue or variegated; helmet 8-15 × 9-14 mm, up to twice as high as wide, hemispherical to conical; nectary-spurs not spirally curved. Follicles 3-5. Seeds winged on 1 angle, with prominent transverse lamellae on the sides. {\i C. Europe, extending to C. Italy, Bulgaria and N.E. Greece; W. Pyrenees.} Au Bu Cz Ga Ge Gr He Hs Hu It Ju Po Rm Rs(W)
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Inflorescence with glandular hairs
\par 
2 Follicles 3-5, glabrous ................................................ ({\b d}) subsp. {\b paniculatum}
\par 
2 Follicles 5, hairy ........................................................... ({\b e}) subsp. {\b valesiacum}
\par 
1 Inflorescence glabrous or with eglandular hairs
\par 
3 Helmet scarcely higher than wide ............................... ({\b b}) subsp. {\b pyrenaicum}
\par 
3 Helmet about twice as high as wide
\par 
4 Follicles 3-5, hairy at the suture .................................. ({\b a}) subsp. {\b variegatum}
\par 
4 Follicles 3, glabrous ......................................................... ({\b e}) subsp. {\b nasutum}
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b variegatum} ({\i A. cammarum} Jacq.,{\i  A.gracile} Reichenb.,{\i  A. judenbergense} (Reichenb.) Gáyer,{\i  A. odontandrum} Wissjul., {\i A. rostratum} Bernh. ex DC.): Inflorescence glabrous or with short, crispate hairs only, eglandular; bracteoles linear-spathulate. Helmet about twice as high as wide. Follicles 3-5, hairy at the suture. 2n = 16. •{\i  C. Europe, extending to N. Italy and C. Ukraine}.
\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b pyrenaicum} Vivant ex Delay,{\i  Bull. Soc. Bot. Fr. }{\b 127},{\i  Lettres Bot.}: 501 (1981): Like subsp. ({\b a}) but helmet scarcely higher than wide; follicles 3, glabrous. •{\i  W. Pyrenees}.
\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b e}) Subsp. {\b nasutum} (Fischer ex Reichenb.) Götz,{\i  Feddes Repert.}{\b  76}: 36 (1967) ({\i A. balcanicum} Velen., {\i A. camptotrichum} Gáyer, {\i A. nasutum} Fischer ex Reichenb.): Like subsp. ({\b a}) but follicles 3, glabrous.{\i  From the E. Alps to N. Greece}.
\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b d}) Subsp. {\b paniculatum} (Arcangeli) Greuter & Burdet, {\i Willdenowia}{\b  19}: 42 (1989) ({\i A. degenii} Gáyer, {\i A. paniculatum} Lam., nom. illeg.): Inflorescence more or less glandular-hairy; bracteoles linear. Helmet scarcely higher than wide. Follicles 3-5, glabrous. •{\i  Mountains of C. Europe}.
\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b e}) Subsp. {\b valesiacum} (Gáyer) Greuter & Burdet,{\i  Willdenowia}{\b  19}: 42 (1989) ({\i A. hebegynum} DC., {\i A. paniculatum} subsp. {\i valesiacum} (Gáyer) Gáyer, {\i A. valesiacum} Gáyer): Like subsp. ({\b d}) but follicles 5, hairy. {\i Alps}.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28 Plants called{\b  A}. × {\b oenipontanum} Gáyer, {\i Magyar Bot. Lapok }{\b 10}: 201 (1911), are hybrids between subspp. ({\b a}) and ({\b d}). Those called {\b A.} ×{\b  zahlbruckneri} Gáyer, {\i op. cit.}{\b  8}: 148 (1909), are hybrids between subsp. ({\b a}) and {\b 5}({\b e}), and those called {\b A}. × {\b intermedium}
\par 

\par 
255}
\par