{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 broadly ovate, compressed. 2n = 14. •{\i  W. & C. Europe, extending to C. Italy, Bulgaria and C. Ukraine.} Au Bu Co Cz Ga †He Hs Hu It Ju Po Rm Rs (B, C, W).
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 8.              Actaea}                  L.
\par 

\pard\f0\fs24\qc  †T.G. Tutin.
\par 

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Glabrous perennials. Flowers small, in short racemes. Perianth-segments 3-5, petaloid; honey-leaves 4-10, small. Carpel 1. Fruit a berry.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28\li200  Fruit 12-13 mm, black when ripe ..................................................... {\b 1. spicata}
\par 
 Fruit 9-10 mm, red when ripe .................................................. {\b 2. erythrocarpa}
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. A. spicata }L., Sp. Pl. 504 (1753). Plant 30-65 cm. Basal leaves large, 2-ternate or 2-pinnate; leaflets ovate, more or less dentate, more or less pubescent beneath; cauline leaves much smaller. Flowers white. Honey-leaves shorter than the white stamens. Fruit 12-13 mm, ovoid, black when ripe. 2n = 16.{\i  Shady places. Most of Europe, but only on mountains in the south.} Al Au Be Br Bu Cz Da Fe Ga Ge Gr He Ho Hs Hu It Ju No Po Rm Rs(N, B, C, W, K, E) Su.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. A. erythrocarpa }Fischer in Fischer & C.A. Meyer, {\i Ind. Sem. Horti Petrop.}{\b  1}: 20 (1835). Like {\b 1} but leaves usually 3-ternate; fruit 9-10 mm, red when ripe. 2n = 16. {\i N.E. Europe.} Fe Rs(N, C) Su.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 9.               Cimicifuga}                 L.
\par 

\pard\f0\fs24\qc  †T.G. Tutin.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Like{\b  Actaea} but fruit of 2-8 dry, dehiscent follicles.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. C. europaea }Schipcz. in Komarov,{\i  Fl. URSS}{\b  7}: 85 (1937) ({\i C. foetida }auct., non L.). Foetid herb 40-100(-200) cm. Stem glabrous. Leaves very large, 2- or 3-pinnate; leaflets ovate, acuminate, irregularly 2-serrate; petioles sparsely pubescent. Raceme long and narrow. Flowers greenish. Bracts lanceolate, acuminate, shorter than pedicels. Follicles 10-17 mm, pubescent. 2n = 16.{\i  E. & C. Europe from Czechoslovakia to C. Ukraine.} †Au Cz Hu Po Rm Rs(C, W).
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 10.               Caltha}                    L.
\par 

\pard\f0\fs24\qc  †T.G. Tutin (Ed.1) revised by J.R. Akeroyd (Ed.2).
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28 Perennial herbs with more or less cordate leaves. Inflorescence a few-flowered corymbose cyme. Perianth-segments 5 or more, yellow. Honey-leaves absent; carpels nectar-secreting. Follicles 5-15.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28 Literature: P.G. Smit,{\i  Blumea }{\b 21}: 119-150 (1973). S.R.J. Woodell & M. Kootin-Sanwu, {\i New Phytol.}{\b  70}: 173-186 (1971).
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. C. palustris }L.,{\i  Sp. Pl.} 558 (1753) (incl. {\i C. minor} Miller, {\i C. polypetala} Hochst. ex Lorent,{\i  C. cornuta} Schott, Nyman & Kotschy, {\i C. laeta} Schott, Nyman & Kotschy,{\i  C. longirostris} G. Beck). Stems 10-60 cm, hollow, glabrous, creeping and rooting to erect. Leaves crenate to dentate, the basal long-petiolate, the cauline smaller, shortly petiolate to subsessile. Flowers 1·5-5 cm in diameter; perianth-segments bright shining yellow above, often greenish beneath. Ripe follicles 9-18 mm, beaked, erect or recurved. 2n = 24, 30, 32-34, 36, 40, 42-44, 46, 48, 52-64, 72, 80, with 0-6 B chromosomes.{\i  Wet places. Most of Europe, but very rare in the Mediterranean region}. All except Az Bl Co Cr Sa Sb Si Tu.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28 This species varies greatly in many characters such as habit, size, shape of leaf and follicle and in chromosome number; many of these characters are phenotypically very plastic. Several taxa have been described from Europe and given specific or subspecific rank; these have been mostly based on follicle characters, which vary independently of other morphological characters and of chromosome number.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28 Plants from the Arctic and mountainous regions that are small, few-flowered and have stems that root at the nodes, have been called var. radicans (T.F. Forster) Hooker. The variation between this and var. palustris is continuous.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 11.           Aconitum}              L.
\par 

\pard\f0\fs24\qc  †T.G. Tutin (Ed.1) revised by J.R. Akeroyd & A.O. Chater (Ed.2).
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28 Perennials, with stout leafy stems; stock tuberous, with brown, fragile roots. Leaves alternate, palmately or pedately divided, the segments dentate or lobed. Flowers zygomorphic, in a terminal raceme or racemose panicle. Perianth-segments 5, petaloid, the posterior forming a large, erect hood (helmet). Honey-leaves 2-10; posterior pair included in the helmet, the claw long and the limb prolonged into nectar-secreting spurs; others very small or absent. Stamens numerous. Follicles 2-5, free or shortly connate at base.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28 The measurements of the helmet given in the text are from the highest point of the straight or arched part of the base of the helmet to the apex (height), and across the most nearly parallel-sided part (width).
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28 A great deal of variation occurs in all the species, perhaps as a result of hybridization. It does not in general fall into a recognizable morphological or geographical pattern, though many local populations can be recognized and have been given specific or subspecific rank. Much work remains to be carried out in this genus, and the following account must be regarded as a provisional outline of the grouping of the very many taxa which have been described.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28 Literature: G. Gáyer,{\i  Magyar Bot. Lapok}{\b  5}: 122-137 (1906);{\b  6}: 286-303 (1907);{\b  8}: 114-206, 310-327 (1909). H.G.L. Reichenbach,{\i  Monographia Generis Aconiti.} Leipzig. 1820-1821.{\i  A. vulparia }group: L.A. Lauener & M. Tamura, {\i Notes Roy. Bot. Gard. Edinb. }{\b 37}: 113-124 (1978); M. Tamura & L.A. Lauener, {\i Notes Roy. Bot. Gard. Edinb.}{\b  37}: 431-466 (1979). {\i A. variegatum} group: E. Götz, {\i Feddes Repert.}{\b  76}: 1-62 (1967). {\i A. napellus} group: W. Seitz, {\i Feddes Repert.}{\b  80}: 1-76 (1969).
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Helmet c. 3 times as high as wide, conical-cylindrical; 
\par 
  nectary-spurs ± spirally curved ................................................ {\b 1. lycoctonum}
\par 
1 Helmet not more than twice as high as wide, rounded or hemispherical;
\par 
  nectary-spurs ± straight
\par 
2 Flowers usually yellow; perianth persistent .................................. {\b 2. anthora}
\par 
2 Flowers blue or purple, sometimes white, rarely variegated; 
\par 
  perianth deciduous
\par 
3 Seeds winged on 3 angles, smooth or rugulose, and without lamellae 
\par 
  on the sides
\par 
4 Inflorescence eglandular-hairy (rarely a few glandular hairs present)
\par 
  ........................................................................................................ {\b 5. napellus}
\par 
4 Inflorescence densely glandular-hairy .......................................... {\b 6. burnatii}
\par 
3 Seeds winged on 1 angle, and with prominent transverse lamellae 
\par 
  on the sides
\par 
5 Bracteoles ovate ............................................................................ {\b 4. toxicum}
\par 
5 Bracteoles linear to linear-spathulate
\par 
6 Leaf-segments more than 3 mm wide ..................................... {\b 3. variegatum}
\par 

\par 
254}
\par