{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}
\pard\f0\fs28\li200 24 Follicles and outside of perianth-segments minutely 
\par    appressed-pubescent (rarely follicles glabrous) ...................... {\b 19. halteratum}
\par 24 Follicles and outside of perianth-segments densely covered 
\par    with patent hairs ..................................................................... {\b 20. balcanicum}
\par 
\par 
\pard\f0\fs28 Sect. DELPHINASTRUM DC. Perennials. Limb of lateral honey-leaves deflexed, ciliate, bearded on the upper surface. Upper honey-leaves not winged or clawed. Seeds numerous.
\par 
\par 
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. D. montanum }DC. in Lam. & DC.,{\i  Fl. Fr.} ed. 3, {\b 5}: 641 (1815). Tubers absent. Stems 15-50(-65) cm, densely covered, like the leaves, pedicels and perianth-segments, with erecto-patent hairs. Petioles not sheathing at the base, those of the upper leaves about as long as the lamina. At least the 3 lowest bracts divided; all bracts shorter, or the lower 1-4 bracts longer, than the flowers. Perianth-segments 12-20(-24) × 3*5-8 mm, pale blue. Honey-leaves about 1/2 as long as the perianth-segments. Carpels densely pubescent (rarely more or less glabrous). Seeds winged at angles. •{\i  E. & C. Pyrenees}. Ga Hs.
\par 
\par 
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. D. dubium }(Rouy & Fouc.) Pawl., {\i Bull. Int. Acad. Sci. Cracovie} ser. B,{\b  1933}({\b 1}): 39 (1934). Like {\b 1} but stems 30-100 cm; hairs usually appressed; petioles of upper leaves shorter than the lamina; lower bracts longer than the flowers; perianth-segments 16-23(-28) × 4-10(-14) mm, dark blue; carpels glabrous (rarely pubescent). •{\i  S.E. France, N. Italy.} Ga It.
\par 
\par 
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 3. D. oxysepalum }Borbás & Pax in Borbás, {\i Term.-Tud. Közl.}{\b  22}: 647 (1890). Tubers absent. Stems 10-50(-80) cm, subglabrous below, more or less densely pubescent above, with appressed hairs. Petioles scarcely sheathing at the base, those of the upper leaves about as long as the lamina. Usually not more than the 2 lowest bracts divided and all of them shorter than the flowers. Perianth-segments 20-32(-40) mm, deep blue or bluish-violet. Honey-leaves about 1/2 as long as the perianth-segments. Carpels glabrous (rarely sparsely pubescent). Seeds winged at angles. 2n = 32. • {\i W. Carpathians.} Cz Po.
\par 
\par 
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 4. D. elatum }L.,{\i  Sp. Pl.} 531 (1753). Tubers absent. Stems 40-200 cm, with patent or slightly deflexed hairs below, glabrous or with patent hairs above, usually pruinose. Petioles not sheathing at the base, those of the upper leaves shorter than the lamina; lamina palmately lobed. All bracts usually shorter than the flowers, the lower 0-5 divided. Perianth-segments (9-)13-19(-22) mm, deep or dirty blue, or bluish-violet, glabrous or with patent hairs on the outside. Carpels glabrous or more or less patent-pilose. Seeds winged at angles.{\i  Mountains of C. Europe extending to C. Jugoslavia; N. & C. Russia.} Au Cz Ga He It Ju Po Rm Rs(N, C, W, E) [Fe Rs(B) Su].
\par 
\par 
\pard\f0\fs28 A polymorphic species that includes three subspecies and many varieties in Europe.
\par 
\par 
\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Honey-leaves the same colour as the perianth, or the upper
\par   paler or yellowish .......................................................... ({\b c}) subsp. {\b austriacum}
\par 1 Honey-leaves blackish or dark brown
\par 2 Lower perianth-segments 11/2-21/2 times as long as wide, the
\par   lateral distinctly wider ......................................................... ({\b a}) subsp. {\b elatum}
\par 2 Lower perianth-segments 21/2-31/2 times as long as wide, the
\par   lateral little wider .......................................................... ({\b b}) subsp. {\b helveticum}
\par 
\par 
\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b elatum} ({\i D. intermedium} Aiton; incl. {\i D. alpinum} Waldst. & Kit.,{\i  D. tiroliense} A. Kerner, {\i D. cryophilum} Nevski, {\i D. elatum} subsp. {\i cryophilum} Nevski) Jurtzev): Perianth-segments (excluding spur) (11-)14-19(-22) mm. Spur usually distinctly longer than the perianth-segments. 2n = 32. {\i Throughout most of the range of the species}.
\par 
\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b helveticum} Pawl.,{\i  Bull. Int. Acad. Sci. Cracovie} ser. B, {\b 1933}({\b 1}): 99 (1934): Perianth-segments (excluding spur) (12-)15-19(-24) mm. Spur about equalling the perianth-segments. •{\i  S.W. & C.Alps}.
\par 
\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b c}) Subsp. {\b austriacum} Pawl.,{\i  Fragm. Fl. Geobot.}{\b  9}: 434 (1963): Flowers usually larger. Perianth-segments (excluding spur) (16-)17-21(-25) mm. Spur about equalling the perianth-segments.{\i  Austria}.
\par 
\par 
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 5. D. simonkaianum }Pawl.,{\i  Bull. Acad. Polon. Sci. Lett., Cl. Math. Nat. B.} (1) {\b 1933}: 107 (1934) ({\i D. pyramidatum} auct., non Albov). Tubers absent. Stems very sparsely hairy below, otherwise glabrous (rarely puberulent in inflorescence), with few, short branches. Leaves shortly cuneate at the base, palmatisect, the segments elongate. Bracts all linear and entire. Perianth-segments with a tuft of hairs at the apex, otherwise glabrous (rarely pilose outside). Carpels usually glabrous. Seeds winged at angles. •{\i  C. Romania.} Rm.
\par 
\par 
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 6. D. cuneatum }Steven ex DC., {\i Reg. Veg. Syst. Nat. }{\b 1}: 359 (1817) (incl. {\i D. rossicum} Litv.). Tubers absent. Stems with deflexed hairs below; inflorescence-axis, pedicels and outside of perianth-segments puberulent with minutely scabrid hairs. Leaves distinctly cuneate at the base, deeply palmatisect, the segments elongate or not. Lowest 1-3 bracts divided; bracteoles linear to ovate-lanceolate. Carpels glabrous or puberulent. Seeds winged at angles. •{\i  C. & S.E. Russia, Ukraine.} Rs(C, W, E).
\par 
\par 
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 7. D. dyctiocarpum }DC., {\i Reg. Veg. Syst. Nat.}{\b  1}: 360 (1817) ({\i D. pubiflorum} Turcz.). Tubers absent. Stems 60-120 cm. Leaves rigid, with closed or narrow basal sinus, divided almost to the base into 3 lobes, the lateral lobes deeply divided into narrow segments. Bracts and bracteoles linear. Perianth-segments 10-16(-18) mm, pale blue; spur 10-12 mm. Honey-leaves blue, or the upper yellowish, the laterals usually with suborbicular limb, very densely long-ciliate and bearded. Seeds winged at angles{\i . E. Russia.} Rs(C, E)
\par 
\par 
\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b dyctiocarpum}: Stems glabrous, or patent-pilose at the base. Petioles glabrous or long-ciliate below. Perianth-segments glabrous outside. Follicles glabrous, or ciliate on suture.{\i  S.E. Russia.} ({\i C. Asia, W. Siberia}.)
\par 
\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b uralense} (Nevski) Pawl., {\i Fragm. Fl. Geobot.}{\b  9}: 435 (1963) ({\i D. uralense} Nevski): Stems, leaves, pedicels, perianth-segments and follicles covered with appressed hairs.{\i  S. Ural}.
\par 
\par 
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 8. D. middendorffii }Trautv. in Middendorff,{\i  Reise Nord. Öst. Sibir. }{\b 1}({\b 2}): 63 (1847) ({\i D. cheilanthum} auct., non Fischer ex DC.). Tubers absent. Stems usually less than 50 cm, simple, more or less glabrous. Leaves cordate or reniform, divided almost to the base into 3 lobes, each 3-fid into linear-lanceolate segments, greyish, shortly puberulent beneath, usually glabrous above; petioles long, glabrous. Lower bracts usually 3-fid; bracteoles linear. Perianth-segments 15-25 mm, blue; spur 10-18 mm. Honey-leaves blue. Follicles usually appressed-pubescent, sometimes glabrous. 2n = 16.{\i  Arctic Russia} ({\i near Saratov}). Rs(N). ({\i Siberia.})
\par 
\par 
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 9. D. pentagynum }Lam.,{\i  Encycl. Méth. Bot.}{\b  2}: 264 (1786) (incl.{\i  D. gautieri} (Rouy) Pawl.). Tubers present. Stock surrounded by fibres. Stems 30-70(-100) cm, slender, slightly angled, with patent or somewhat deflexed hairs below, with subappressed hairs above,
\par 
\par 258}
\par