{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 achenes nodding. 2n = 28-32, 37, 42, 45, 46.{\i  Woods. Most of Europe, but rare in the Mediterranean region}. Al Au Be Br Bu Co Cz Da Fe Ga Ge Gr Hb He Ho Hs Hu It Ju Rs(N, B, C, W, ?E) Su Tu.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28 An isolated population in arctic Russia (Poluostrov Kol'skij), with 9-12 perianth-segments, is somewhat intermediate between {\b 1} and{\b  2}. Sterile hybrids between {\b 1} and {\b 4} occur where the parents grow together.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. A. altaica }Fischer ex C.A. Meyer in Ledeb.,{\i  Fl. Altaica }{\b 2}: 362 (1830). Like {\b 1} but with a rather thick, yellow rhizome; marginal hairs on cauline leaves shorter; flowering stems up to 20 cm; flowers with 8-12 perianth-segments which are sometimes violet beneath.{\i  Woodland margins. N., C. & E. Russia.} Rs(N, C, E).({\i N- Asia.})
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28 Closely related to {\b 1} and perhaps a subspecies of it.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 3. A. trifolia }L., {\i Sp. Pl}. 540 (1753). Like {\b 1} but basal leaves usually absent; all leaves 3-partite and serrate, but not lobed; cauline leaves with buds in their axils; anthers white or blue; achenes shortly setose; head of achenes erect or nodding. 2n = 32. •{\i  S. & S.C. Europe, from Portugal to Hungary; one station in Finland.} Au Fe Ga Hs Hu It Ju Lu.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b trifolia}: Perianth-segments ovate; anthers blue; head of achenes erect. 2n = 16.{\i  Usually calcicole. Throughout the range of the species, except the Iberian peninsula}.
\par 
 ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b albida} (Mariz) Ulbr.,{\i  Bot. Jahrb.}{\b  37}: 220 (1905). Perianth-segments elliptical; anthers white; head of achenes usually nodding.{\i  Usually calcifuge. N.W. Spain and Portugal}.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 4. A. ranunculoides }L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 541 (1753). Rhizome brown. Basal leaves 0 or 1, deeply divided. Stem 7-30 cm; cauline leaves deeply divided; petioles short. Flowers 1·5-2 cm in diameter, solitary or 2(-5), yellow. Perianth-segments broadly ovate, slightly pubescent beneath; epidermal cells of upper surface not mamillate. Anthers yellow. 2n = 32,48.{\i  Woods. Most of Europe except the islands, but rare in the west and most of the Mediterranean region.} Au Be Bu Cz Da Fe Ga Ge He Ho Hs Hu It Ju No Po Rm Rs(N, B, C, W, K, E) Su Tu.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28 Small plants with short rhizomes, forming dense patches, have been called subsp. {\b wockeana} (Ascherson & Graebner) Ulbr., {\i Bot. Jahrb.}{\b  37}: 215 (1905).{\i  They occur in Czechoslovakia, Germany and Poland}.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 5. A. uralensis }Fischer ex DC.,{\i  Prodr.}{\b  1}: 19 (1824). Like {\b 4} but flowers reddish, purplish, yellow or white; epidermal cells of upper surface of perianth-segments mamillate.{\i  Open coniferous woodland. C. & S. Ural} (55° {\i N. to }58° {\i N.}). Rs(C).
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28 Intermediate between {\b 4} and {\i A. caerulea }DC. from Siberia, and perhaps of hybrid origin.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 6. A. apennina }L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 541 (1753). Rhizome tuberous, brown. Basal leaves 1 or 2, 3-partite, the divisions acute, stalked, and again deeply lobed, pubescent beneath; cauline leaves all petiolate, 2-ternate, subglabrous. Flowering stems 5-30 cm. Perianth-segments 8-14(-18), narrowly oblong-elliptical, blue (or white, var. {\i albiflora} Strobl), pubescent beneath near base. Anthers greenish-cream. Achenes downy. Head of achenes erect. • {\i C. part of Mediterranean region, extending to S.E. Jugoslavia; cultivated elsewhere for ornament, and widely naturalized.} Al Co It Ju Si [Au Be Br Da Ga Ge Ho Su].
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 7. A. blanda }Schott & Kotschy,{\i  Österr. Bot. Wochenbl.}{\b  4}: 129 (1854). Like {\b 6} but leaves glabrous beneath, the primary divisions subsessile, more or less obtuse; perianth-segments usually more numerous, glabrous; head of achenes nodding. 2n = 14, 16.{\i  Balkan peninsula}. Al Bu Gr Ju Tu.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28 Perhaps only subspecifically distinct from {\b 6}.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 8. A. reflexa }Stephan in Willd.,{\i  Sp. Pl.}{\b  2}({\b 2}): 1282 (1799). Rhizome slender, yellowish-brown. Basal leaves with rhombic or ovate, long-petiolulate segments; cauline leaves petiolate, ternate subglabrous. Perianth-segments 5(6), 6-7 × 1-1·5 mm linear-oblong, greenish-white, pubescent beneath, deflexed parallel to the peduncle. Achenes densely pubescent.{\i  E. Russia} ({\i C. Ural}). Rs(C) ({\i N. Asia.})
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28 Sect. OMALOCARPUS DC. Achenes strongly compressed, often winged, not lanate. Style shorter than achene, hooked.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 9. A. narcissifolia }L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 542 (1753) ({\i A. narcissiflora} L. (1759), nom. illeg.). Plant 20-40 cm, pubescent. Stock stout. Basal leaves deeply palmately divided; petioles long. Cauline leaves sessile, deeply cut, the segments narrowly linear. Inflorescence umbellate, with 3-8 flowers. Flowers 2-3(-4) cm in diameter white, sometimes pinkish outside; pedicels 3-4 cm. Perianth-segments 5 or 6, obovate. Anthers yellow.{\i  Mountains of S. & C. Europe; Ural.} Al Au Bu Cz Ga Ge He Hs It Ju Po Rm Rs(N, C, W).
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28 Variable in E. Europe and still more so in Asia, and probably divisible into a number of subspecies, but a thorough review of the whole complex is needed. Two subspecies can be recognized in Europe:
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b narcissifolia} (incl. {\i A. laxa} (Ulbr.) Juz.): Primary divisions of leaves 5, sessile. 2n = 14. {\i Throughout the range of the species except Ural}.
\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b biarmiensis} (Juz.) Jalas,{\i  Ann. Bot. Fenn.}{\b  25}: 29 (1988) ({\i A. biarmiensis} Juz.): Primary divisions of leaves 3, distinctly petiolulate. 2n = 14. {\i Ural}.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28 Sect. ANEMONIDIUM Spach. Achenes strongly compressed and winged, not lanate. Style about as long as achene, straight.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 10. A. dichotoma }L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 540 (1753) ({\i A. pennsylvanica} sensu Ledeb., non L.). Rhizome slender. Stems 20-70 cm, repeatedly branched. Leaves deeply 5- to 7-lobed; petioles long. Lowest cauline leaves 3 in a whorl, deeply 2- or 3-lobed, the others 2 in a whorl; all sessile. Flowers c. 3 cm in diameter, white. Perianth-segments 5, unequal. Achenes glabrous.{\i  E. Russia.} Rs(C). ({\i N. Asia.})
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28 Sect. ANEMONE. Achenes densely lanate with hairs longer than diameter of achene. Style straight, shorter than achene.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 11. A. sylvestris }L.,{\i  Sp. Pl.} 540 (1753). Plant 15-50 cm, pubescent, spreading by root-buds. Basal leaves deeply palmately divided, the petioles long; cauline leaves similar but smaller, the petioles short. Flowers solitary or (2), 4-7 cm in diameter, white. Perianth-segments usually 5, broadly ovate. Anthers yellow. 2n = 16.{\i  C. & E. Europe, extending to S.E. Sweden and N.C. France}. Au †Be Bu Cz Ga Ge He Hu It Ju Po Rm Rs(N,B,C,W,?K,E)Su.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 12. A. baldensis }L., {\i Mantissa }78 (1767). Plant 5-12 cm, up to 20 cm in fruit, pubescent. Stock slender, with few or no remains of old petioles. Basal leaves 3 times 3-fid with 2- or 3-lobed segments;
\par 

\par 
263}
\par