{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 6 Leaves at least twice as long as wide; petals obovate .................... {\b 3. sibirica}
\par 
6 Leaves little longer than wide; petals elliptical or narrowly lanceolate
\par 
7 Leaf-lobes narrowly linear, entire ................................................. {\b 1. vernalis}
\par 
7 Leaf-lobes linear-lanceolate, dentate .......................................... {\b 2. volgensis} 
\par 
5 Basal foliage-leaves present
\par 
8 Sepals pubescent; beak of achene c. 1 mm; 
\par 
  stems less than 20 cm ..................................................................... {\b 5. distorta}
\par 
8 Sepals usually glabrous; beak of achene at least 2 mm;
\par 
   stems usually 25-60 cm
\par 
9 Beak c. 2 mm, distinctly shorter than achene, stout and
\par 
  flattened ....................................................................................... {\b 4. pyrenaica}
\par 
9 Beak 3-4 mm, almost as long as achene, slender, terete .............. {\b 6. cyllenea}
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28 Sect. CONSILIGO DC. Perennials. Petals 8 or more, yellow or white. Anthers yellow.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28 All species occur on calcareous, rocky ground.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. A. vernalis }L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 547 (1753). Stems 10-45 cm, scaly at the base. Cauline leaves sessile, not or scarcely longer than wide, 2-pinnatisect with narrowly linear, entire lobes. Flowers 4-8 cm in diameter. Sepals 2 as long as the petals, broadly obovate, pubescent. Petals 10-20, elliptical, yellow. Achenes 3-4·5 mm, almost globose, reticulately rugose and rather densely pubescent; beak short, curved and appressed to the achene. 2n = 16.{\i  E., C. & S. Europe, northwards to C. Ural and S.E. Sweden.} Au Bu Cz Ga Ge He Hs Hu It Ju Po Rm Rs(C, W, K, E) Su.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. A. volgensis }Steven ex DC.,{\i  Reg. Veg. Syst. Nat. }{\b 1}: 545 (1817). Like {\b 1} but the stems more branched; leaf-lobes linear-lanceolate, dentate; sepals 1/3 as long as the petals; petals more numerous, narrowly lanceolate; achenes pubescent only at the base.{\i  S.E. Europe, extending northwards to C. Ural, and locally westwards to S.E. Hungary}. Bu Hu Rm Rs(C, W, K, E).
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28 The hybrid between {\b 1} and{\b  2} ({\i A.} ×{\i  hybrida} H. Wolff) occurs with the parents.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 3. A. sibirica }Patrin ex Ledeb.,{\i  Ind. Setn. Horti Dorpat.} suppl., 2 (1824). Plant glabrous; stems 20-60 cm. Leaves at least twice as long as wide, the segments 2- or 3-pinnatifid with linear lobes. Flowers 4-6 cm in diameter. Petals obovate, yellow. Achenes c. 4·5 mm, more or less pubescent.{\i  Forest-margins. N.W. & E. Russia.} Rs (N, C). ({\i N. Asia.})
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 4. A. pyrenaica }DC. in Lam. & DC.,{\i  Fl. Fr.} ed. 3, {\b 5}: 635 (1815). Stems 20-45 cm, without scales at the base. Leaves 2- to 4-pinnatisect, the basal long-petiolate. Sepals glabrous or sparsely pubescent, c. ½ as long as the petals. Petals 10-15, yellow. Achenes c. 6 mm, sparsely pubescent or almost glabrous; beak 2-3 mm, flattened, curved, not appressed to the achene. 2n = 16.  •{\i Pyrenees and Cordillera Cantabrica; one station in Alpes Maritimes.} Ga Hs.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 5. A. distorta }Ten.,{\i  Fl. Nap.}{\b  4}: 337 (1830). Like {\b 4} but plant seldom more than 15 cm, with curved leaf-segments; petals 8-18, sometimes white; sepals pubescent; achenes glabrous, the beak c. 1 mm, strongly curved. {\i Calcareous rocks and screes}, 2000-2500{\i  m. • C. Appennini.} It.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 6. A. cyllenea }Boiss., Heldr. & Orph. in Boiss.,{\i  Diagn. Pl. Or. Nov.}{\b  3}({\b 5}): 5 (1856). Like {\b 4} but the stems often up to 60 cm and freely branched; sepals almost as long as the petals; beak 3-4 mm, almost as long as the achene, slender, terete, hooked at the apex. 2n = 16. ?•{\i  S. Greece }({\i Killini Oligirtos}). Gr.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28 Elsewhere known only from one collection from Pontus in N.E. Turkey which has been referred to var.{\i  paryadrica} Boiss. Its status requires investigation.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28 Sect. ADONIS. Annuals. Petals 8 or fewer, usually red, though often yellow when dried. Anthers blackish-purple.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28 All species occur as weeds of cultivation or in similar open habitats; although not strictly calcicole, they are found mainly on base-rich soils.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 7. A. annua }L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 547 (1753) ({\i A. autumnalis} L.). Stems 10-70 cm. Leaves 3-pinnate, the segments linear, mucronate. Flowers 15-25 mm in diameter. Sepals ovate, patent. Petals 5-8, suberect, concave, oblong, somewhat longer than the sepals, bright scarlet, with a dark basal spot. Inner margin of achene nearly straight, the outer curved; beak short, straight, green throughout.{\i  Cultivated land. S. Europe, extending northwards to N. France; sometimes naturalized and often a casual elsewhere.} Al †Be Bl Bu Co Cr Ga Gr He Hs It Ju Lu Sa Si Tu [Br].
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b annua} (incl.{\i  A. baetica} Cosson): Sepals glabrous. Achenes 4·5-5·5(-6) mm.{\i  Almost throughout the range of the species}.
\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b cupaniana} (Guss.) C. Steinb.,{\i  Webbia }{\b 25}: 324 (1971): Sepals hairy. Achenes 3-4·5 mm.{\i  S. Europe}.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28 Plants from Spain and S. France, similar to subsp. ({\b b}) but hairy throughout, have been distinguished as subsp. {\b castellana} (Pau) C. Steinb.,{\i  op. cit.} 332 (1971).
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 8. A. flammea }Jacq.,{\i  Fl. Austr.}{\b  4}: 29 (1776). Like {\b 7} but the flowers 20-30 mm in diameter; sepals more or less hirsute, appressed to the deep scarlet (rarely yellow), linear-oblong petals; achenes 2·5-4 mm, the inner margin with a rounded projection just below the beak; beak ascending, black at the apex.{\i  S. & C. Europe, extending to N. France; sometimes casual elsewhere}. Al Au †Be Bu Cz Ga Ge Gr He Hs Hu It Ju Po Rm Rs(W, K) Tu.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 9. A. aestivalis }L.,{\i  Sp. Pl}. ed. 2, 771 (1762). Stems 20-50(-70) cm. Leaves 3- or 4-pinnate, the segments linear, mucronate. Flowers 10-35 mm in diameter. Sepals glabrous, ovate, patent. Petals 5-8, suberect, concave, oblong, somewhat longer than the sepals, red or yellow. Achenes 3·5-6 mm, with a transverse ridge about the middle; inner margin with 2 projections, the lower acute, the upper obtuse and 1/3 of the distance from apex to base.{\i  Most of Europe, southwards from} 55°{\i  N.} Au Be Bl Bu Co Cz Ga Ge Gr He †Ho Hs Hu It Ju Po Rm Rs(C, W, K, E) Sa Si Tu.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b aestivalis}: Plant glabrous above. Sepals usually glabrous. Achenes with an indistinct transverse ridge.{\i  Almost throughout the range of the species.}
\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b squarrosa} (Steven) Nyman, {\i Consp.} 4 (1878) (incl. subsp. {\b provincialis} (DC.) C. Steinb.): Plant somewhat smaller, sparsely hairy above. Sepals hairy, sometimes with a few glandular hairs. Achenes with a distinct transverse ridge.{\i  S. Europe}.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28 Plants with smaller flowers and smaller achenes with inconspicuous projections have been recorded from Kazakhstan and elsewhere in W.C. Asia, and perhaps from S.E. Russia. They have been distinguished as subsp. {\b parviflora} (Fischer ex DC.) N. Busch in Kusn., N. Busch & Fomin,{\i  Fl. Cauc. Crit. }{\b 3}: 201 (1903), but the distinctions from subsp. ({\b a}) appear to be inconstant.
\par 

\par 
268}
\par