{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}
\pard\f0\fs28 (A) Spur of perianth-segment circinate-involute at apex; nectary attached to pedicel by the extreme end, between the 2 lateral (lower) lobes; spur remote from lateral lobes and pedicel; intermediate lobes present above each lateral lobe; upper lobe small, bifid.
\par 
\par 
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. C. aconiti }(L.) Lindley,{\i  Jour. Hort. Soc. London}{\b  6}: 55 (1851) ({\i Delphinium aconiti} L.). Stem up to 50 cm, much-branched, densely covered with short, deflexed hairs. Leaf-segments linear. Inflorescence paniculate. Perianth-segments 5-6 mm, blue; spur c. 12 mm, circinate-involute at apex. Nectary with triangular, acute intermediate lobes. Follicle 15-25 mm, linear, glabrous.{\i  Turkey-in-Europe} ({\i Eceabat}). Tu. ({\i W. Anatolia.})
\par 
\par 
\pard\f0\fs28 {\b C. thirkeana} (Boiss.) Schrödinger,{\i  Abh. Zool.-Bot. Ges. Wien }{\b 4}({\b 5}): 62 (1909) ({\i Delphinium thirkeanum} Boiss.), from Anatolia, like {\b 1} but the nectary with obtuse intermediate lobes and follicle 7-8 mm, has been reported erroneously from Turkey-in-Europe.
\par 
\par 
\pard\f0\fs28 (B) Spur of perianth-segment straight or slightly curved; nectary attached to pedicel by the middle, near base of spur which is adjacent to the 2 lateral (lower) lobes; intermediate lobes absent; upper lobe bifid or entire (in {\b 2}, nectary, except for spur, often entire).
\par 
\par 
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. C. hellespontica }(Boiss.) Chater, {\i Feddes Repert.}{\b  69}: 55 (1964) ({\i C. olopetala }(Boiss.) Hayek var.{\i  paphlagonica} sensu Hayek, non {\i Delphinium paphlagonica} Huth, {\i D. tomentosum} Boiss. 1867 pro parte, non Boiss. 1841, {\i D. hellesponticum} Boiss.). Stem 10-40 cm. Leaf-segments linear. Inflorescence racemose. Perianth-segments 12-15 mm, bluish-violet; spur 12-22 mm. Nectary ovate, entire, or minutely bifid at apex. Follicle 10-15 mm, appressed-sericeous.{\i  S.E. Jugoslavia, S. Bulgaria, N.E. Greece.} Bu Gr Ju.
\par 
\par 
\pard\f0\fs28 European plants have been distinguished as subsp. {\b macedonica} (Halácsy & Charrel) Chater,{\i  Feddes Repert.}{\b  69}: 55 (1964). The typical subspecies, from Asia Minor, is smaller in all its parts. However, the difference is inconstant.
\par 
\par 
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 3. C. orientalis }(Gay) Schrödinger,{\i  Abh. Zool.-Bot. Ges. Wien}{\b  4}({\b 5}): 25 (1909) ({\i Delphinium orientale} Gay). Stem up to 100 cm, simple or branched. Basal leaves with linear-oblong segments; cauline with linear segments. Inflorescence racemose; lower bracts dissected; bracteoles usually close to, and reaching beyond, base of flower. Lower pedicels usually more than 12 mm in fruit, up to twice as long as spur. Perianth-segments 10-14(-20) mm, purplish-violet; spur (8-)10-12 mm. Nectary 3-lobed, with bifid upper lobe. Follicle 15-20 × 5 mm, gibbous above, very abruptly contracted at apex, with beak c. 1 mm; seeds reddish-brown. 2n = 16. {\i N, C. & E. Spain; S.E. Europe; locally naturalized elsewhere.} Al Bu Gr Hs *Hu Ju Rm Rs(W, K, E) Tu [Au Cz Ga Ge He *It Si].
\par 
\par 
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 4. C. phrygia }(Boiss.) Soó,{\i  Österr. Bot. Zeitschr.}{\b  71}: 245 (1922). Like {\b 3} but inflorescence laxer, with fewer, paler flowers; lower pedicels 5-10 mm in fruit, shorter than spur; perianth-segments and spur 10-17 mm; follicle not gibbous above; beak c.2 mm. N.{\i  Aegean region and Bulgaria, just extending to S.E. Jugoslavia}. Bu Gr Ju Tu.
\par 
\par 
\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b phrygia} ({\i C. orientalis} subsp. {\i phrygia} (Boiss.) Chater,{\i  Delphinium phrygium} Boiss.): Lower bracts about equalling pedicels, with few divisions. Perianth-segments 7-11 mm, pale pink or mauve. Upper lobe of nectary shorter than lateral lobes. {\i Bulgaria and S.E. Jugoslavia}.
\par 
\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b thessalonica} (Soó) P.H. Davis,{\i  Notes Roy. Bot. Gard. Edinb.}{\b  26}: 174 (1965): Lower bracts exceeding pedicels, with many divisions. Perianth-segments 10-17 mm, pale violet. Upper lobe of nectary at least as long as lateral lobes.{\i  N. Aegean region.}
\par 
\par 
\pard\f0\fs28 Further work is required on the distinction between these subspecies in Europe, as well as confirmation of the identity of the plants from Bulgaria.
\par 
\par 
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 5. C. ajacis }(L.) Schur, {\i Verh. Mitt. Siebenb. Ver. Naturw.}{\b  4}: 41 (1853) ({\i C. ambigua }sensu P.W. Ball & Heywood, {\i Delphinium ajacis} L.,{\i  D. ambiguum} auct., non L.). Stem up to 100 cm, simple or branched. Basal leaves with oblong segments; cauline with linear segments. Inflorescence usually racemose, occasionally paniculate; lower bracts dissected; bracteoles small, remote, usually not reaching base of flower. Lower pedicels mostly more than 12 mm in fruit, but less than twice as long as ripe follicle. Perianth-segments 10-14(-20) mm, usually deep blue; spur 13-18 mm. Nectary 3-lobed, with bifid upper lobe. Follicle 15-20 × 5 mm pubescent, gradually narrowed at apex; seeds black.{\i  S. Europe, extending to N.W. France and N. Romania; locally naturalized elsewhere.} Al Bu Co Cr Ga Gr It Ju Rs(K) *Si Tu [Az Be Br Ge He Hs Rm Rs(W)]
\par 
\par 
\pard\f0\fs28 Both {\b 3} and {\b 5} are frequently cultivated for ornament, and naturalized plants often belong to cultivars of these species.
\par 
\par 
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 6. C. brevicornis }(Vis.) Soó,{\i  Österr. Bot. Zeitschr.}{\b  71}: 245 (1922). Like {\b 5} but plant less robust; basal leaves often with linear segments perianth-segments violet; spur 5-6 mm; follicle abruptly contracted at apex. •{\i  W. coast of Jugoslavia; N.W. Greece} ({\i Ionioi Nisoi}). Gr Ju.
\par 
\par 
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 7. C. uechtritziana }(Huth) Soó,{\i  Österr. Bot. Zeitschr.}{\b  71}: 236 (1922) ({\i Delphinium uechtritzianum} Huth). Like {\b 5} but lower bracts entire; spur almost twice as long as perianth-segments; seeds reddish-brown. • {\i Jugoslavia, Greece; local. }Gr Ju.
\par 
\par 
\pard\f0\fs28 According to Huth, this species becomes very similar to{\b  5} in cultivation, but the available information is insufficient for any decision to be made as to its status.
\par 
\par 
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 8. C. tuntasiana }(Halácsy) Soó, {\i Österr. Bot. Zeitschr.}{\b  71}: 239 (1922). Stem less than 15 cm, simple or little-branched. Basal leaves with cuneate-obovate segments; cauline with linear segments. Flowers up to 6, in lax racemes; bracts dissected. Pedicels not more than 5 mm, very stout. Perianth-segments c. 10 mm, pale violet; spur c. 4 mm. Nectary with very broad, shallowly bifid upper lobe. Follicle 15-17 mm, pubescent. •{\i  S. Greece.} Gr.
\par 
\par 
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 9. C. raveyi }(Boiss.) Schrödinger, {\i Abh. Zool.-Bot. Ges. Wien }{\b 4}({\b 5}) 62 (1909). Stems 10-40 cm, densely pubescent, simple or branched near base. Leaves with linear to linear-oblanceolate segments, appressed-pubescent. Flowers (7-)10-30 in lax racemes; bracts dissected. Pedicels less than 5 mm, stout. Perianth-segments 12-17 mm, violet; spur 2-4 mm. Nectary with narrow, deeply bifid upper lobe. Follicle 10-15 mm, appressed-pubescent.{\i  Turkey-in-Europe} ({\i near Istanbul}). Tu. ({\i Anatolia}.)
\par 
\par 
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 10. C. regalis }S.F. Gray,{\i  Nat. Arr. Brit. Pl.}{\b  2}: 711 (1821) ({\i C. segetum} (Lam.) S.F. Gray). Stem up to 50 cm, branched, covered with short deflexed hairs. Leaf-segments all linear. Inflorescence paniculate; all bracts linear, entire; lower pedicels longer than flower and ripe follicle. Spur 12-25 mm. Upper lobe of nectary more than 2 mm wide, entire, erose, or shallowly bifid with rounded lobes. Follicle 8-15 mm; seeds black.{\i  Most of Europe},
\par 
\par 261}
\par