{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 10. A. microcarpa }DC.,{\i  Reg. Veg. Syst. Nat. }{\b 1}: 223 (1817) ({\i A. dentata} auct. eur., non Delile, {\i A. annua} subsp. {\i carinata} Vierh.). Like {\b 9} but the stems 10-25(-50) cm; petals usually yellow; achenes 2·5-4 mm, with or without a transverse ridge; upper projection from inner edge of achene close to the beak.{\i  S. Europe.} Al Bl †Bu Co Cr Ga Gr Hs It Ju Lu Rs(W) Sa Si Tu.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 19.                Ranunculus}                L.
\par 

\pard\f0\fs24\qc By †T.G. Tutin (Ed.1) revised by †T.G. Tutin & J.R. Akeroyd (Ed.2);
\par 

\pard\f0\fs24\qc subgen. Batrachium, C.D.K. Cook.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28 Annual or perennial herbs, sometimes aquatic. Flowers solitary or in cymose panicles. Perianth-segments (3-)5(-7). Honey-leaves (0-)5(-12), usually deciduous, petaloid, yellow or white, rarely red or purple. Achenes numerous, usually with a persistent glabrous style.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Flowers white, pink, purple or red
\par 
2 Terrestrial; leaves mostly basal; achene not transversely rugose 
\par 
3 Basal leaves hastate (S. Spain) ........................................ {\b 98. acetosellifolius}
\par 
3 Basal leaves not hastate
\par 
4 Most basal leaves entire to dentate, but not more deeply
\par 
  divided
\par 
5 Cauline leaves lanceolate to ovate, amplexicaul 6 Sepals ± glabrous
\par 
7 Achene smooth ............................................................... {\b 119. parnassiifolius}
\par 
7 Achene strongly veined
\par 
8 Cauline leaves few or 0; pedicels hairy .................................... {\b 115. kuepferi}
\par 
8 Cauline leaves present; pedicels glabrous ....................... {\b 121. amplexicaulis}
\par 
6 Sepals pubescent
\par 
9 Petiole not widening into lamina; main veins usually 7; 
\par 
  achene strongly veined .................................................... {\b 119. parnassiifolius}
\par 
9 Petiole widening into lamina; main veins usually 5; 
\par 
  achene smooth ........................................................................ {\b 120. wettsteinii}
\par 
5 Cauline leaves linear to linear-oblong or narrowly lanceolate, 
\par 
  not amplexicaul 
\par 
10 Basal leaves never crenate or dentate .................................. {\b 114. pyrenaeus}
\par 
10 Basal leaves crenate or sometimes dentate at apex
\par 
11 Honey-leaves rounded at apex ................................................. {\b 93. crenatus}
\par 
11 Honey-leaves emarginate to deeply notched at apex ................. {\b 94. bilobus}
\par 
4  All basal leaves ± deeply lobed
\par 
12 Sepals 3 ...................................................................................... {\b 84. pallasii}
\par 
12 Sepals 5 or more
\par 
13 Sepals densely ferruginous-villous ........................................... {\b 99. glacialis}
\par 
13 Sepals glabrous or nearly so
\par 
14 Flowers at least 30 mm in diameter; honey-leaves 7 or more;  
\par 
   roots tuberous ............................................................................. {\b 69. asiaticus}
\par 
14 Flowers 10-20(-25) mm in diameter; honey-leaves 5; roots not tuberous
\par 
15 Cauline leaves differing markedly from basal, simple or rarely 3-fid;
   receptacle glabrous ..................................................................... {\b 92. alpestris}
\par 
15 Cauline leaves like basal, lobed and dentate; receptacle pubescent
\par 
16 Plant rarely as much as 20 cm; segments of basal leaves narrowly oblong;
   flowers 1 to few .......................................................................... {\b 97. seguieri}
\par 
16 Plant usually more than 20 cm; segments of basal leaves ovate-cuneate;
\par 
   flowers numerous
\par 
17 Middle segment of basal leaves free to base ..................... {\b 95. aconitifolius}
\par 
17 Middle segment of basal leaves not free to base ............... {\b 96. platanifolius}
\par 
2  Aquatic or marsh plants; leaves all cauline; achene
\par 
   transversely rugose
\par 
18 Laminate leaves present; capillary leaves present or absent
\par 
19 Capillary leaves absent
\par 
20 Achene pubescent (sometimes sparsely and minutely so) ...... {\b 126. peltatus}
\par 
20 Achene entirely glabrous
\par 
21 Receptacle glabrous
\par 
22 Leaf-segments widest at the sinus; honey-leaves not or  
\par 
   scarcely longer than sepals ................................................... {\b 122. hederaceus}
\par 
22 Leaf-segments narrowest at the sinus; honeyleaves 2-3 times
\par 
   as long as sepals ................................................................. {\b 123. omiophyllus}
\par 
21 Receptacle pubescent
\par 
23 Honey-leaves less than 6 mm, not contiguous;
   receptacle globose .................................................................. {\b 124. tripartitus}
\par 
23 Honey-leaves more than 6 mm contiguous; receptacle ovoid . {\b 126. peltatus}
\par 
19 Capillary leaves present
\par 
24 Honey-leaves less than 6 mm, not contiguous ..................... {\b 124. tripartitus}
\par 
24 Honey-leaves more than 6 mm, contiguous
\par 
25 Immature achene completely glabrous; 
\par 
   laminate leaves 3-lobed to 2/3 or more
\par 
26 Capillary leaves collapsing when removed from water; 
\par 
   mature achene unwinged; receptacle globose (fresh water) .. {\b 125. ololeucos}
\par 
26 Capillary leaves not collapsing when removed from water; 
\par 
   mature achene winged; receptacle ovoid (brackish water) ....... {\b 126. peltatus}
\par 
25 Immature achene pubescent (sometimes minutely so); laminate 
\par 
   leaves 3- to 5-lobed, usually to less than 2/3
\par 
27 Pedicel in fruit usually less than 50 mm, rarely exceeding petiole 
\par 
   of opposing laminate leaf; honey-leaves rarely more than 10 mm
\par 
28 Segments of laminate leaves crenate; nectaries ± pyriform .... {\b 126. peltatus}
\par 
28 Segments of laminate leaves dentate; nectaries circular ........ {\b 129. aquatilis}
\par 
27 Pedicel in fruit usually more than 50 mm, often exceeding petiole of
\par 
   opposing laminate leaf; honey-leaves usually more than 10 mm
\par 
29 Capillary leaves shorter than internodes ................................. {\b 126. peltatus}
\par 
29 Capillary leaves longer than internodes ............................ {\b 127. penicillatus}
\par 
18 Laminate leaves absent
\par 
30 Leaves usually exceeding 8 cm (up to 30 cm), longer than internodes,
\par 
   their segments usually parallel to the main axis
\par 
31 Receptacle distinctly hairy ................................................ {\b 127. penicillatus}
\par 
31 Receptacle nearly or quite glabrous ........................................ {\b 133. fluitans}
\par 
30 Leaves usually much less than 8 cm, shorter than
\par 

\par 
269}
\par