{\rtf1\ansi \deff4\deflang1033{\fonttbl{\f4\froman\fcharset0\fprq2 Times New Roman;}}{\colortbl;\red0\green0\blue0;\red0\green0\blue255;\red0\green255\blue255;\red0\green255\blue0;\red255\green0\blue255;\red255\green0\blue0;
\red255\green255\blue0;\red255\green255\blue255;\red0\green0\blue128;\red0\green128\blue128;\red0\green128\blue0;\red128\green0\blue128;\red128\green0\blue0;\red128\green128\blue0;\red128\green128\blue128;\red192\green192\blue192;}{\stylesheet{\widctlpar 
\f4\fs20\lang2057 \snext0 Normal;}{\*\cs10 \additive Default Paragraph Font;}}{\info{\author dddd}{\operator dddd}{\creatim\yr1999\mo12\dy23\hr15\min41}{\revtim\yr1999\mo12\dy23\hr15\min41}{\version2}{\edmins0}{\nofpages4}{\nofwords948}{\nofchars5406}
{\*\company  }{\vern57431}}\widowctrl\ftnbj\aenddoc\hyphcaps0 \fet0\sectd \linex0 {\*\pnseclvl1\pnucrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl2\pnucltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl3\pndec\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang
{\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl4\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl5\pndec\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl6\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl7
\pnlcrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl8\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl9\pnlcrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}\pard\plain \nowidctlpar \f4\fs20\lang2057 {\fs28 
cauline similar but smaller, with short, broad petioles. Flowers solitary or (2), 2\'b75-4 cm in diameter, white. Perianth-segments (6-)8-10, ovate to elliptical, acute. Anthers yellow. Head of achenes ovoid-oblong. 2n = 16. }{\i\fs28 
Alps, local; mountains of Jugoslavia, southwards to Crna Gora}{\fs28 . Au Ga He It Ju.
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 13. A. pavoniana }{\fs28 Boiss., }{\i\fs28 Diagn. Pl. Or. Nov.}{\b\fs28  3}{\fs28 (}{\b\fs28 1}{\fs28 ): 6 (1854). Like }{\b\fs28 12}{\fs28  but
 plant 25-50 cm, sparsely pubescent; stock stout, clothed in remains of old petioles; perianth-segments 6-8, elliptic-oblong, obtuse; head of achenes subglobose. 2n = 16.  \bullet }{\i\fs28 Mountains of N. Spain.}{\fs28  Hs.
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 14. A. palmata }{\fs28 L., }{\i\fs28 Sp. Pl.}{\fs28 
 538 (1753). Plant 10-60 cm. Rhizome tuberous. Stem pubescent. Basal leaves suborbicular, with 3-5 shallow, obtuse, dentate lobes. Cauline leaves united at base, with 3-5 linear-lanceolate divisions. Flowers 1 or 2, 2\'b75-3\'b7
5 cm in diameter, yellow. Perianth-segments 8-15, oblong. 2n = 16.}{\i\fs28  S.W. Europe.}{\fs28  Ga ?Gr Hs Lu Sa Si.
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 15. A. coronaria }{\fs28 L., }{\i\fs28 Sp. Pl. }{\fs28 539 (1753). Plant 15-45 cm. Basal leaves biternate, the segments deeply lobed. Cauline leaves deeply cut into narrow divisions. Flowers 3\'b75-6\'b7
5 cm in diameter, solitary. Perianth-segments 5-8, elliptical, red, purple, pink, blue or white. Anthers blue.}{\i\fs28  Mediterranean region.}{\fs28  Bl Co Cr Ga Gr *Hs It Ju *Sa Si Tu.
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 16. A. hortensis }{\fs28 L., }{\i\fs28 Sp. Pl.}{\fs28  540 (1753) (}{\i\fs28 A. stellata}{\fs28  Lam.). Like }{\b\fs28 15}{\fs28  but basal leaves less divided (or only lobed), with broa
der segments; cauline leaves linear-lanceolate, usually undivided; perianth-segments 12-19, narrowly elliptical, patent, purplish-pink. \bullet }{\i\fs28  C. Mediterranean region, extending to the S. Aegean region.}{\fs28  Al Co Cr Ga Gr It Ju Sa Si.

\par 
\par  (}{\b\fs28 a}{\fs28 ) Subsp. }{\b\fs28 hortensis}{\fs28 : Flowers 3-4 cm in diameter. Perianth-segments often more than 14, usually purplish-pink. 2n = 16. \bullet  }{\i\fs28 C. Mediterranean region}{\fs28 .
\par  (}{\b\fs28 b}{\fs28 ) Subsp. }{\b\fs28 heldreichii}{\fs28  (Boiss.) Rech. fil.,}{\i\fs28  Denkschr. Akad. Wiss. Math.-Nat. Kl.}{\fs28  (}{\i\fs28 Wien}{\fs28 ) }{\b\fs28 105}{\fs28 : 74 (1943) (}{\i\fs28 A. hortensis}{\fs28  var.}{\i\fs28  heldreichii}{
\fs28  Boiss.): Flowers 2-3\'b75 cm in diameter. Perianth-segments up to 14, narrower, white, bluish or pinkish beneath. \bullet }{\i\fs28  Kriti, Karpathos}{\fs28 .
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 17. A. pavonina }{\fs28 Lam., }{\i\fs28 Encycl. M\'e9th. Bot.}{\b\fs28  1}{\fs28 : 166 (1783). Like }{\b\fs28 15}{\fs28 
 but lowest leaves less divided (or only lobed), with broader segments; cauline leaves linear-lanceolate, usually undivided; perianth-segments (7)8 or 9(-12), scarlet, pink or purple, often yellowish at base. 2n = 16. }{\i\fs28 
S. Europe, from S.W. France to Turkey, local.}{\fs28  Bu \'86Co Ga Gr *It Ju Tu.
\par 
\par A. fulgens Gay in DC.,}{\i\fs28  Prodr.}{\b\fs28  1}{\fs28 : 18 (1824), is probably a hybrid between }{\b\fs28 16}{\fs28  and}{\b\fs28  17}{\fs28 . It is more or less intermediate and does not breed true.
\par 
\par }\pard \qc\nowidctlpar {\fs28  }{\b\fs28 15.             Hepatica}{\fs28                Miller
\par }{\fs24  \'86T.G. Tutin.
\par }\pard \nowidctlpar {\fs28 Like }{\i\fs28 Anemone}{\fs28  but with 3- to 5-lobed evergreen leaves with entire or crenate-dentate lobes, and a calyx-like involucre of 3 small, entire bracts usually close below the flower.
\par 
\par }\pard \li200\nowidctlpar {\fs28 Rhizome short, thick; leaf-lobes entire (rarely with 1 or 2 teeth); 
\par  flowers 2\'b75-3\'b75 cm diameter ............................................................. }{\b\fs28 1. nobilis}{\fs28 
\par Rhizome long, slender; leaf-lobes with 3-5 large crenations; 
\par  flowers c. 5 cm diameter ....................................................... }{\b\fs28 2. transsilvanica}{\fs28 
\par 
\par }\pard \nowidctlpar {\fs28    }{\b\fs28 1. H. nobilis }{\fs28 Schreber, }{\i\fs28 Spicil. Fl. Lips.}{\fs28  39 (1771) (}{\i\fs28 H. triloba}{\fs28  Chaix, }{\i\fs28 Anemone hepatica}{\fs28  L., }{\i\fs28 A. angulosa }{\fs28 
auct., non Lam.). Rhizome short, thick, dark brown. Petioles and peduncles 5-15 cm. Leaves cordate at base, 3-lobed, often purplish beneath; lobes ovate, entire, or rarely with 1 or 2 teeth, sericeous when young and sometimes pers
istently villous beneath. Flowers 15-25 mm in diameter, bluish-violet, purple, white or pinkish. Bracts ovate, entire. Perianth of 6 or 7(-10) oblong-ovate segments. 2n = 14.}{\i\fs28  Much of Europe, but absent from most of the islands.}{\fs28 
 Al Au Bu Co Cz Da Fe Ga Ge He Hs Hu It Ju No Po Rm Rs(N, B, C, W) Su [Be]
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 2. H. transsilvanica }{\fs28 Fuss, }{\i\fs28 Verh. Mitt. Siebenb. Ver. Naturw. }{\b\fs28 1}{\fs28 : 83 (1850) (}{\i\fs28 H. angulosa}{\fs28  auct., non (Lam.) DC.). Like }{\b\fs28 1}{\fs28 
 but with a long, slender rhizome; leaf-lobes crenate-dentate with 3-5 large crenations; flowers 25-40 mm in diameter, usually with 8 or 9 elliptical perianth-segments; and bracts with 2 or 3 small teeth near the top. 2n = 28.}{\i\fs28  Mountain woods. 
\bullet  C. Romania.}{\fs28  Rm.
\par 
\par The hybrid between }{\b\fs28 1}{\fs28  and}{\b\fs28  2}{\fs28  (}{\i\fs28 H.}{\fs28  \'d7 }{\i\fs28 media}{\fs28  Simonkai) occurs locally with the parents and has sterile pollen.
\par 
\par }\pard \qc\nowidctlpar {\fs28  }{\b\fs28 16.        Pulsatilla }{\fs28            Miller
\par }{\fs24  \'86T.G. Tutin (Ed.1) revised by J.R. Akeroyd (Ed.2).
\par 
\par }\pard \nowidctlpar {\fs28 Caespitose perennial herbs with a stout stock. Lea
ves usually 2- to 4-pinnately or -palmately divided, often sericeous when young. Cauline leaves usually sessile and united at the base. Flowers solitary. Perianth-segments usually 6, sericeous beneath; nectar-secreting staminodes present. Styles elongatin
g and feathery in fruit.
\par 
\par The distribution of most of the species is very fragmented, probably mainly owing to post-glacial climatic changes and the intolerance of the species to ploughing, shade and bad drainage; they display considerable variation in pube
scence, dissection of leaves and the size and colour of the perianth-segments. These characters have been used as a basis for specific distinction, but correlations between characters that are reliable within a small area break down when larger areas are 
considered. The variation, in fact, appears to be of a ' dissected continuous ' type, rather than the discontinuous kind met with in related genera, and does not often appear to fall into the geographical pattern characteristic of subspecies.
\par 
\par Literature: A. Zamels,}{\i\fs28  Acta Horti Bot. Univ. Latv.}{\b\fs28  1}{\fs28 : 81-108 (1926). A. Zamels & B. Paegle, }{\i\fs28 op. cit.}{\b\fs28  2}{\fs28 : 133-161 (1927). D. Aichele & H.W. Schwegler,}{\i\fs28  Feddes Repert.}{\b\fs28  60}{\fs28 
: 1-230 (1957). K. Krause,}{\i\fs28  Bot. Jahrb.}{\b\fs28  78}{\fs28 : 1-68 (1958).
\par 
\par }\pard \li200\nowidctlpar {\fs28 1 Cauline leaves shortly petiolate, resembling the basal but smaller
\par 2 Terminal segments of mature leaves not divided to midrib;  
\par   lamina distinctly pubescent ............................................................... }{\b\fs28 1. alpina}{\fs28 
\par 2 Terminal segment of mature leaves divided to midrib; 
\par   lamina glabrous or subglabrous ........................................................... }{\b\fs28 2. alba}{\fs28 
\par 1 Cauline leaves sessile, divided into linear segments and not closely
\par   resembling the basal
\par 3 Basal leaves palmately divided ....................................................... }{\b\fs28 9. patens}{\fs28 
\par 3 Basal leaves pinnately divided
\par .4 Basal leaves evergreen, 1-pinnatifid, the segments lobed; 
\par   flowers usually white ..................................................................... }{\b\fs28 3. vernalis}{\fs28 
\par 4 Basal leaves withering in autumn, 1- to 4-pinnate; flowers 
\par   usually purple
\par 5 Flowers erect
\par 6 Basal leaves 3- or 4-pinnatisect, with 7-9 primary
\par 
\par 264}
\par }