{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 {\i except the extreme north and south}. Al Au Be Bu Cz Da Ga Ge Gr He Hu It Ju Po Rm Rs(N, B, C, W, K, E) Su Tu [Fe Ho Hs].
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b regalis} ({\i Delphinium consolida} L., {\i D. consolida} subsp. {\i arvense} (Opiz) Graebner, {\i C. regalis} subsp. {\i arvensis} (Opiz) Soó): Stem little-branched. Inflorescence rather dense. Perianth-segments 12-15 mm, usually light violet-blue. Follicle usually 3 times as long as wide, glabrous. 2n = 16.{\i  Mainly N. & C. Europe}.
\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b paniculata} (Host) Soó,{\i  Österr. Bof. Zeitschr.}{\b  71}: 243 (1922) ({\i C. segetum} subsp. {\i hostianum} sensu Dostál, {\i Delphinium paniculatum} Host; incl. {\i D. divaricatum} Ledeb., {\i C. divaricata} (Ledeb.) Schrödinger, {\i C. regalis} subsp. {\i divaricata} (Ledeb.) Munz): Stem much-branched. Inflorescence very lax. Perianth-segments 9-11 mm, dark blue. Follicle usually twice as long as wide, glabrous or appressed-pubescent. 2n = 16. {\i S.E. & S.C. Europe, extending to N. Italy and S.E. France.}
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 11. C. tenuissima }(Sibth. & Sm.) Soó,{\i  Österr. Bot. Zeitschr.}{\b  71}: 241 (1922) ({\i Delphinium tenuissimum} . Sibth. & Sm.). Stem up to 50 cm, branched, covered with patent hairs. Segments of basal leaves oblong; segments of cauline leaves linear. Inflorescence lax, paniculate; lower bracts linear, entire; lower pedicels longer than flower and ripe follicle. Perianth-segments 5-7 mm, violet-blue; spur 7-10 mm. Upper lobe of nectary broad, bifid, with obtuse lobes. Follicle 5-8 mm, less than twice as long as wide, glabrous. •{\i  S.E. Greece.} Gr.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 12. C. pubescens }(DC.) Soó, {\i loc. cit. }(1922) ({\i Delphinium pubescens} DC.; incl. {\i D. loscosii }Costa). Whole plant densely appressed-pubescent; stem up to 50 cm, branched. Leaf-segments linear. Inflorescence lax, paniculate; lower bracts entire or dissected; bracteoles not reaching base of flower; pedicels longer than flower and ripe follicle. Perianth-segments 6-12 mm, violet, pale blue or whitish; spur 12-16 mm. Upper lobe of nectary 2-3(-4) mm, longer than lateral perianth-segments, not more than 2 mm wide, bifid, with acute lobes. Follicle 10-15 × 5 mm, sparsely pubescent, the suture not enlarged and tuberculate; seeds grey or reddish, with well-separated annular flanges 0·3-0·5 mm.{\i  S.W. Europe, extending to S. Italy}. Ga Hs It †Si.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 13. C. mauritanica }(Cosson) Munz,{\i  Jour. Arnold Arb.}{\b  48}: 48 (1967) ({\i Delphinium mauritanicum} Cosson). Like {\b 12} but upper lobe of nectary 0·5-1 mm, shorter than lateral perianth-segments; spur 16-22 mm; fruiting pedicel as long as or shorter than flower and ripe follicle; suture of follicle enlarged and tuberculate; seeds with more or less imbricate, annular flanges 0·2-0·3 mm.{\i  C. & E. Spain.} Hs.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b C. incana} (E.D. Clarke) Munz,{\i  Jour. Arnold Arb.}{\b  48}: 181 (1967) ({\i C. rigida} (DC.) Hayek, {\i Delphinium rigidum} DC.), from W. Asia, has been reported as naturalized in Jugoslavia, but appears to have been never more than casual.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 14.               Anemone}                  L.
\par 

\pard\f0\fs24\qc  †T.G. Tutin (Ed.1)  revised by A.O. Chater (Ed.2).
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28 Perennial herbs. Flowering stems with a whorl of 3(4) often partially united leaves. Flowers conspicuous, usually solitary. Perianth-segments 5-19, petaloid, imbricate. Honey-leaves absent. Achenes numerous; style not elongated or feathery.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Cauline leaves sessile
\par 
2 Stems branched ......................................................................  {\b 10. dichotoma}
\par 
2 Stems simple
\par 
3 Cauline leaves undivided or almost so
\par 
4 Perianth-segments 12-19, narrowly elliptical ........................... {\b 16. hortensis}
\par 
4 Perianth-segments 7-12, broader .............................................. {\b 17. pavonina}
\par 
3 Cauline leaves much divided
\par 
5 Flowers 3-8 in an umbel; achenes glabrous, winged ............. {\b 9. narcissifolia}
\par 
5 Flowers solitary; achenes lanate, not winged
\par 
6 Basal leaves deeply cut; flowers not yellow ............................ {\b 15. coronaria}
\par 
6 Basal leaves shallowly lobed, suborbicular; flowers yellow ...... {\b 14. palmata}
\par 
1 Cauline leaves petiolate
\par 
7 Plant without a creeping or tuberous rhizome; achenes lanate
\par 
8 Primary divisions of leaves 5; perianth-segments usually 5 ..... {\b 11. sylvestris}
\par 
8 Primary divisions of leaves 3; perianth-segments 7-10
\par 
9 Plant 5-12 cm (up to 20 cm in fruit); stock slender, 
\par 
  with few or no remains of old petioles; head of achenes 
\par 
  elongating in fruit ...................................................................... {\b 12. baldensis}
\par 
9 Plant 25-30 cm; stock stout, clothed in remains 
\par 
  of old petioles; head of achenes subglobose ............................ {\b 13. pavoniana}
\par 
7 Plant with a creeping or tuberous rhizome; achenes not
\par 
  lanate, but sometimes densely pubescent
\par 
10 Perianth-segments 1-1·5 mm wide, greenish-white, 
\par 
   strongly deflexed ............................................................................ {\b 8. reflexa}
\par 
10 Perianth-segments at least 2·5 mm wide, variously 
\par 
   coloured or white but not greenish-white, patent
\par 
11 Leaves 3-partite and serrate but not further divided ..................... {\b 3. trifolia}
\par 
11 Leaves with primary divisions lobed
\par 
12 Anthers pale yellow, greenish or white; flowers usually blue
\par 
13 Perianth-segments pubescent beneath; head of achenes erect .. {\b 6. apennina}
\par 
13 Perianth-segments glabrous beneath; head of achenes nodding ... {\b 7. blanda}
\par 
12 Anthers deep yellow; flowers rarely blue
\par 
14 Perianth-segments with white hairs beneath
\par 
15 Cells of the upper epidermis of the perianth-segments 
\par 
   not mamillate; flowers always yellow ................................ {\b 4. ranunculoides}
\par 
15 Cells of the upper epidermis of the perianth-segments mamillate;
\par 
   flowers reddish, purplish, white or yellow (C. Ural) .................. {\b 5. uralensis}
\par 
14 Perianth-segments glabrous beneath
\par 
16 Rhizome brown; perianth-segments (5)6 or 7(-12) .................. {\b 1. nemorosa}
\par 
16 Rhizome yellowish; perianth-segments 8-12 ................................ {\b 2. altaica}
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28 Sect. SYLVIA Gaudin. Achenes not or slightly compressed, not lanate. Style shorter than achene, hooked.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. A. nemorosa }L.,{\i  Sp. Pl.} 541 (1753). Rhizome brown, creeping. Basal leaves 1 or 2, 3-partite, the divisions shortly stalked and again deeply lobed, pubescent beneath; petioles long. Flowering stems 6-30 cm; cauline leaves without buds in their axils, similar to basal leaves but smaller and petioles flattened; marginal hairs 0·5-0·75 mm. Perianth-segments (5)6 or 7(-12), white, flushed with pink or purple beneath (rarely entirely purple or blue), oblong-ovate, glabrous. Anthers yellow. Achenes downy. Head of
\par 

\par 
262}
\par