{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28\li200   segments; plant at first sericeous, becoming glabrous ................... {\b 7. vulgaris}
\par 
6 Basal leaves pinnate, with 3-5 primary segments;
\par 
  plant persistently lanate .................................................................... {\b 8. halleri}
\par 
5 Flowers nodding
\par 
7 Perianth-segments less than 1½ times as long as
\par 
  stamens, recurved at apex ............................................................. {\b 4. pratensis}
\par 
7 Perianth-segments at least twice as long as stamens,
\par 
  not recurved at apex
\par 
8 Cauline leaves with c. 25 lobes; flowers bluish to dark violet ......{\b 5. montana}
\par 
8 Cauline leaves with c. 20 lobes; flowers reddish or
\par 
  sometimes dark violet ......................................................................... {\b 6. rubra}
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. P. alpina }(L.) Delarbre,{\i  Fl. Auvergne} ed. 2, 552 (1800) ({\i Anemone alpina} L.). Stem 20-45 cm. Basal leaves long-petiolate, distinctly pubescent, 2-pinnate; terminal segment not divided quite to the midrib, the lobes often recurved; cauline leaves similar, but with short, broad petioles. Flowers 4-6 cm in diameter, more or less erect; perianth-segments ovate, the outer purplish, the inner white, or all pale yellow, sericeous.{\i  Mountains of C. & S. Europe, from S. Germany to C. Spain.} Au Co Ga Ge He Hs It Ju.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b alpina} (incl. subsp. {\i cantabrica} Laínz, subsp. {\i font-queri} Laínz & P. Monts.): Outer perianth-segments white or purplish, the inner white. Achenes c. 5 mm. 2n = 16.{\i  Usually calcicole}.
\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b apiifolia} (Scop.) Nyman, {\i Consp.} 2 (1878) (subsp. {\i sulphurea} (DC.) Ascherson & Graebner): Perianth-segments pale yellow. Achenes c. 4 mm. 2n = 16. {\i Usually calcifuge}.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28 The plants from Corse have been distinguished as subsp. {\b cyrnea} Gamisans,{\i  Candollea}{\b  32}: 58 (1977), but differ from subsp. ({\b a}) only in having broader, less hairy leaf-lobes and in being calcifuge.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. P. alba }Reichenb.,{\i  Fl. Germ. Excurs.} 732 (1832) ({\i P. alpina }subsp. {\i alpicola} H. Neumayer, nom. inval.; incl.{\i  P. alpina} subsp. {\i austriaca} Schwegler). Like {\b 1} but usually smaller; terminal segments of mature leaves divided quite to the midrib, the lobes not recurved; lamina glabrous or subglabrous; flowers 2·5-4·5 cm in diameter, always white. 2n = 16.{\i  Usually calcifuge. Mountains of C. Europe, extending to N. Spain and C. Jugoslavia.} Au Cz Ga Ge Hs Ju Po Rm Rs(W).
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 3. P. vernalis }(L.) Miller, {\i Gard. Dict.} ed. 8, no. 3 (1768) ({\i Anemone vernalis} L.). Stem 5-15 cm (up to 35 cm in fruit). Basal leaves 1-pinnatifid with 3-5 dentate segments, evergreen, shortly petiolate, subglabrous; cauline leaves sericeous, the segments linear. Flowers 4-6 cm in diameter, nodding at first, then erect; perianth-segments narrowly ovate, the outer flushed pink, violet or blue, the inner white, sericeous. 2n = 16. •{\i  From c.} 63°{\i  N. in Scandinavia to N. Spain, N. Italy and Bulgaria.} Au Bu Cz Da Fe Ga Ge He Hs It Ju No Po Su.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28 Hybrids with{\b  9}({\b a}) occur in Finland.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 4. P. pratensis }(L.) Miller,{\i  op. cit.,} no. 2 (1768) ({\i P. nigricans} Störck{\i  Anemone pratensis }L.). Stem c. 10 cm (up to 45 cm in fruit). Basal leaves pubescent, petiolate, usually 3-pinnate, the segments deeply cut into c. 150 narrow lobes; cauline leaves united below, pubescent, with c. 30 lobes. Flowers 3-4 cm in diameter, more or less cylindrical, nodding, dark purple, reddish, pale violet, greenish-yellow or rarely white; perianth-segments recurved at the apex, less than 12 times as long as the stamens. 2n = 16, 32. •{\i  C. & E. Europe, extending westwards to S.E. Norway, W. Denmark and N.W. Jugoslavia}. Au Bu Cz Da Ge Hu Ju No Po Rm Rs(B, C, W, E)Su.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28 The variation in flower-colour is correlated with distribution but is probably not of subspecific significance. Plants with dark purple flowers occur in the north, and have been called subsp. {\i nigricans} (Störck) Zamels, those with the flowers dirty yellow or pale greyish-violet inside occur in the south-east (subsp. {\i hungarica} Soó), and those with pale violet flowers (subsp. {\i pratensis}) occur in the intervening area.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 5. P. montana }(Hoppe) Reichenb.,{\i  Fl. Germ. Excurs.} 733 (1832) ({\i Anemone montana} Hoppe,{\i  A. balkana} Gürke). Like {\b 4} but the cauline leaves with c. 25 lobes; flowers bluish to dark violet; perianth-segments not recurved at the apex but soon spreading from the base, about twice as long as the stamens. 2n = 16. •{\i  From S.W. Alps to E. Romania and N. Greece}. Bu Ga ?Gr He It Ju Rm.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28 This species has been divided into a number of subspecies and varieties by different authors; these are described in J. Rummelspacher,{\i  Feddes Repert.}{\b  71}: 1-49 (1965).
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 6. P. rubra }(Lam.) Delarbre,{\i  Fl. Auvergne} ed. 2, 553 (1800). Like {\b 4} but the cauline leaves with c. 20 lobes; flowers dark reddish-brown to purplish- or blackish-red, or reddish-violet; perianth-segments not recurved at the apex but soon spreading from the base, 2-2½ times as long as the stamens. •{\i  C. & S. France; N.E. Spain.} Ga Hs.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28 The plants from Spain have been described as subsp. {\b hispanica} Zimm. ex Aichele & Schwegler,{\i  Feddes Repert.}{\b  60}: 158 (1957). They differ from subsp. {\i rubra} principally in having reddish-violet flowers, and merit at most varietal rank.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 7. P. vulgaris }Miller,{\i  Gard. Dict.} ed. 8, no. 1 (1768) ({\i P. ucrainica} (Ugr.) Wissjul.,{\i  Anemone pulsatilla} L.). Stem 3-12 cm (up to 45 cm in fruit). Basal leaves more or less sericeous when young, becoming glabrous or subglabrous, pinnately divided into 7-9, 2- or 3-pinnatisect segments; lobes linear to linear-lanceolate; cauline leaves united below, sericeous. Flowers 5·5-8·5 cm in diameter, campanulate, erect or suberect, dark to pale purple; perianth-segments usually straight, acute, 2-3 times as long as the stamens. •{\i  W. & C. Europe, extending northwards to }60°{\i  N. in Sweden, and eastwards to E. Ukraine.} Au Be Br Cz Da Ga Ge He †Ho Hu Ju Po Rm Rs(C, W, E) Su.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28 A very variable complex which has been divided into numerous species and subspecies which are, however, ill-defined and appear to represent the more distinct of the numerous isolated populations.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28 The smaller and more isolated of these, particularly towards the edge of the range of the species, are fairly homogeneous, but in other areas there is considerable variation within populations. While it is likely that most populations are statistically separable from one another, there is a large amount of overlap between them and intermediates occur frequently. Two subspecies can be recognized:
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b vulgaris}: Leaves appearing with the flowers; basal leaves usually with more than 100 lobes; perianth-segments narrowly elliptical. 2n = 32.{\i  W. & C. Europe; S. Scandinavia}.
\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b grandis} (Wenderoth) Zamels,{\i  Acta Horti Bot. Univ. Latv.}{\b  1}({\b 2}): 104 (1926) ({\i P. grandis }Wenderoth): Leaves appearing after the flowers; basal leaves with c. 40 lobes; perianth-segments broadly elliptical.{\i  C. Europe; Ukraine.}
\par 

\par 
265}
\par