{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 crowded and overlapping, the longest 3-5(-6) mm, the lowest 2-4 on each side orbicular, the others ovate to lanceolate. 2n = c. 80, 164. {\i Arctic and subarctic Europe; S. Carpathians}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp.{\b  pulchella} (Bertol.) Á. & D. Löve, {\i Bot. Not.}{\b  114:} 49 (1961) ({\i W. pulchella} Bertol., {\i W. glabella} auct. eur. centr., non R. Br.): Leaves up to 12 cm. Pinnae not or scarcely overlapping, the longest 4-7(-10) mm, the lowest 1 or 2 on each side orbicular, the others ovate-lanceolate to lanceolate. 2n = 78. •{\i  E. & C. Alps; Pyrenees}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 6.            Gymnocarpium}                 Newman
\par       

\pard\f0\fs24\qc  By A.C. Jermy.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Rhizome slender, creeping; scales on younger part only, light brown, broadly ovate, fringed with papillae. Leaves solitary, in 2 ranks, erect; petiole 1½-3 times as long as the lamina, blackish-brown below, brownish-yellow above; lamina deltate; veins free. Sori submarginal, round or elongated, often confluent; indusium absent.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Leaves glabrous, eglandular or with a few glands, bright green; 
\par
  rhachis glabrous or with sparse glands only ................................ {\b 1. dryopteris}
\par
1 Leaves with short glandular hairs, dull green; rhachis
\par
  densely glandular
\par
2 Basal acroscopic pinnule of lowest pinna conspicuously 
\par
  narrower than the opposite basiscopic pinnule ......................... {\b 2. robertianum}
\par
2 Basal acroscopic pinnule of lowest pinna ± the same width 
\par
  as the opposite basiscopic pinnule ................................................ {\b 3. jessoense}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. G. dryopteris} (L.) Newman,{\i  Phytologist} ({\i Newman}) {\b 4:} 371 (1851) ({\i Dryopteris linnaeana} C. Chr.,{\i  D. disjuncta} (Rupr.) C.V. Morton, {\i Phegopteris dryopteris} (L.) Fée, {\i Polypodium dryopteris} L.,{\i  Lastrea dryopteris} (L.) Bory,{\i  Nephrodium dryopteris} (L.) Michx, {\i Thelypteris dryopteris} (L.) Slosson). Rhizome far-creeping. Leaves 10-40 cm, rolled up when young to form 3 small balls; petiole glabrous, with few scales near the base; lamina up to 30 cm wide, markedly deflexed, light green, glabrous; pinnae linear-lanceolate, opposite, pinnately lobed; each of lowest pair of pinnae often as large as the rest of the lamina, triangular, pinnate, the basiscopic pinnule larger than the acroscopic; ultimate segments more or less oblong, entire, toothed or lobed. 2n = 160. {\i Woods, and shady places amongst rocks. Most of Europe, but rare in the south}. Al Au Be Br Bu Co Cz Da Fa Fe Ga Ge Gr Hb He Ho Hs Hu Is It Ju No Po Rm Rs(N, B, C, W, E, K) Su.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   {\b 2. G. robertianum} (Hoffm.) Newman,{\i  loc. cit.} (1851) ({\i Dryopteris robertiana} (Hoffm.) C. Chr.,{\i  D. obtusifolia} (Schrank) O. Schwarz,{\i  Phegopteris robertiana} (Hoffm.) A. Braun,{\i  Polypodium robertianum} Hoffm., {\i Lastrea robertiana} (Hoffm.) Newman,{\i  Nephrodium robertianum} (Hoffm.) Prantl,{\i  Thelypteris robertiana} (Hoffm.) Slosson). Like{\b  1} but the leaves usually 15-60 cm, rolled up when young to form a single ball; petiole sparsely glandular below but increasingly glandular towards the apex; lamina not obviously deflexed, dull green, with shortly-stalked glands on rhachis, veins and under surface; each of lowest pair of pinnae smaller than the rest of the lamina. 2n = 160-168. {\i Limestone rocks and screes, in less shaded situations than}{\b  1}. {\i Frequent in C. Europe; local elsewhere.} Al Au Be Br Bu Cz Fe Ga Ge Gr Hb He Ho Hs Hu It Ju No Po Rm Rs (N, B, C, W, K) Su.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 3. G. jessoense} (Koidz.) Koidz.,{\i  Acta Phytotax. Geobot.} ({\i Kyoto}){\b  5:} 40 (1936). Like {\b 2} but the basal acroscopic pinnule only slightly narrower than the opposite basiscopic pinnule; lobes or pinnules of the basal pinna inserted obliquely. 2n = 80. {\i Calcareous screes in} Picea-{\i woodland. N.E. Europe}. Fe No Rs(N) Su. ({\i N. Asia, North America}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 The European plants belong to subsp. {\b parvula} Sarvela,{\i  Acta Bot. Fenn.}{\b  15:} 103 (1978) ({\i G. continentale} (Petrov) Pojark.). They are distinguished by having a bipinnate lamina less than 12 cm.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 7.                  Matteuccia}                  Tod.
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc  By A. Lawalrée.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Rhizome stout. Leaves tufted, pinnate with lobed or pinnatifid pinnae, dimorphic, with free veins; fertile leaves smaller, less dissected and with longer petioles than the sterile; petiole spathulate at the base. Sori round, 1 or 2 at base of each lobe, covered by the inrolled apex of the leaf; indusium caducous.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. M. struthiopteris} (L.) Tod.,{\i  Gior. Sci. Nat. Econ. Palermo }{\b 1:} 235 (1866) ({\i Struthiopteris filicastrum} All.,{\i  S. germanica} Willd., {\i Onoclea struthiopteris} (L.) Roth). Rhizome short, erect, producing underground stolons. Sterile leaves up to 170 × 35 cm, not persistent; petiole very short; lamina oblong-lanceolate, soft, bright green; pinnae 30-70, alternate, narrowly lanceolate, pinnatifid. Fertile leaves up to 60 × 6 cm, persistent, eventually dark brown; pinnae linear, obtuse. 2n = c. 80.{\i  N., E. & C. Europe, extending to Belgium, S.W. Alps and C. Jugoslavia}. Au Be Cz Da Fe Ge He Hu It Ju No Po Rm Rs (N, B, C, W, E) ?Si Su [Br Ga Hb].
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 8.                Onoclea}                  L.
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc  By †D.H. Valentine.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Rhizome creeping. Leaves dimorphic, the sterile glabrous, pinnately divided, herbaceous, with anastomosing veins, the fertile 2-pinnate without laminar expansion, the pinnules lobed. Sori 1 on each lobe, the lobes recurved and collectively forming a globose structure enclosing a group of sori; indusium caducous.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. O. sensibilis} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 1062 (1753). Sterile leaves up to 50 cm, dying down in winter, triangular, deeply pinnatifid, with winged rhachis and 2-16 pairs of sinuate or coarsely pinnatifid pinnae. Fertile leaves equalling the sterile, lanceolate, stiffly erect, becoming dark brown or black.{\i  Damp places. Naturalized in a few localities in Britain and Germany.} [Br Ge.] ({\i North America and E. Asia.})
\par

\par
26}
\par