{\rtf1\ansi \deff4\deflang1033{\fonttbl{\f4\froman\fcharset0\fprq2 Times New Roman;}}{\colortbl;\red0\green0\blue0;\red0\green0\blue255;\red0\green255\blue255;\red0\green255\blue0;\red255\green0\blue255;\red255\green0\blue0;
\red255\green255\blue0;\red255\green255\blue255;\red0\green0\blue128;\red0\green128\blue128;\red0\green128\blue0;\red128\green0\blue128;\red128\green0\blue0;\red128\green128\blue0;\red128\green128\blue128;\red192\green192\blue192;}{\stylesheet{\widctlpar 
\f4\fs20\lang2057 \snext0 Normal;}{\*\cs10 \additive Default Paragraph Font;}}{\info{\author dddd}{\operator dddd}{\creatim\yr2000\mo12\dy6\hr12\min42}{\revtim\yr2000\mo12\dy6\hr12\min43}{\version2}{\edmins1}{\nofpages4}{\nofwords919}{\nofchars5240}
{\*\company  }{\vern57431}}\widowctrl\ftnbj\aenddoc\hyphcaps0 \fet0\sectd \linex0 {\*\pnseclvl1\pnucrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl2\pnucltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl3\pndec\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang
{\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl4\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl5\pndec\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl6\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl7
\pnlcrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl8\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl9\pnlcrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}\pard\plain \nowidctlpar \f4\fs20\lang2057 {\fs28 (}{
\b\fs28 a}{\fs28 ) Subsp. }{\b\fs28 halteratum}{\fs28 : Upper leaves often entire. Inflorescence up to 5-flowered, more or less lax. Limb of lateral honey-leaves weakly cordate at the base. Follicles usually appressed-pubescent.}{\i\fs28 
 From S.E. France to S. Italy and W. Jugoslavia}{\fs28 .
\par  (}{\b\fs28 b}{\fs28 ) Subsp. }{\b\fs28 verdunense}{\fs28  (Balbis) Graebner & Graebner fil. in Ascherson & Graebner, }{\i\fs28 Syn. Mitteleur. Fl.}{\b\fs28  5}{\fs28 (}{\b\fs28 2}{\fs28 ); 703 (1929) (}{\i\fs28 D. verdunense}{\fs28  Balbis, }{\i\fs28 
D. cardiopetalum}{\fs28  DC.): Upper leaves usually 3-fid. Inflorescence usually not more than 15-flowered, dense. Limb of lateral honey-leaves strongly cordate at the base. Follicles subglabrous. 2n = 16.}{\i\fs28  Iberian peninsula; W. France}{\fs28 .

\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 20. D. balcanicum }{\fs28 Pawl., }{\i\fs28 Fragm. Fl. Geobot.}{\b\fs28  9}{\fs28 : 439 (1963) (}{\i\fs28 D. peregrinum}{\fs28  sensu Willk. pro max. parte, non L.). Like }{\b\fs28 19}{\fs28 (}{\b\fs28 a}{\fs28 
) but inflorescence usually dense; perianth-segments 6-9 mm, patent-pilose; follicles 5-7(-9) mm, 2-3 times as long as wide, densely covered with rather long patent hairs. 2n = 16.}{\i\fs28  S. part of Balkan peninsula}{\fs28 . Bu Gr Ju Tu.
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 21. D. gracile }{\fs28 DC., }{\i\fs28 Reg. Veg. Syst. Nat.}{\b\fs28  1}{\fs28 
: 347 (1817). Stems 20-90 cm, very slender, with numerous, long virgate branches, appressed-puberulent or more or less glabrous. Upper leaves mostly entire, shorter than the internodes. Inflorescence usually lax, (1-)3- to 15(-30)-flowered. Flowers often 
pale lilac-violet or whitish; perianth-segments (6-)7-9 mm, minutely appressed-puberulent outside; spur (1\'bd-)2-2\'bd times as long as the perianth-segments. Lateral ho
ney-leaves longer than the perianth-segments; limb 1 1/3-2 times as long as wide, oblong, exserted. Follicles 6-11 mm, 2\'bd-4 times as long as wide, glabrous or sparsely appressed-pubescent.}{\i\fs28  Spain, Portugal and Islas Baleares.}{\fs28  Bl Hs Lu.

\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 22. D. hellenicum }{\fs28 Pawl.,}{\i\fs28  Fragm. Fl. Geobot.}{\b\fs28  9}{\fs28 : 442 (1963) (}{\i\fs28 D. peregrinum}{\fs28  sensu Hal\'e1csy, non L.). Like }{\b\fs28 21}{\fs28 
 but stems up to 100 cm, sparsely branched; perianth-segments 5-7(-8) mm; spur 2\'bd-3 times as long as the perianth-segments; limb of lateral honey-leaves c. 1\'bc times as long as wide, ovate or subquadrate; follicles glabrous. \bullet }{\i\fs28 
 S. Greece}{\fs28 . Gr.
\par 
\par Sect. STAPHISAGRIA DC. Annuals or biennials. Honey-leaves glabrous, the same colour as the perianth-segments, the upper paler or yellowish, shortly clawed, unwinged. Seeds few.
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 23. D. staphisagria }{\fs28 L., }{\i\fs28 Sp. Pl.}{\fs28 
 531 (1753). Stems 30-100 cm, stout, simple, patent-pilose. Leaves palmately 5- to 7-lobed, pubescent on both surfaces with mixed very short and longer hairs; segments entire or 3-lobed, with ovate-lanceolate, or oblong, acute 
lobes. Flowers deep blue. Perianth-segments 13-20 mm. Limb of lateral honey-leaves gradually narrowed into claw. Follicles 8-11 mm wide, inflated.}{\i\fs28  Mediterranean region; Portugal.}{\fs28  Al Bl Co Cr Ga Gr Hs It Ju Lu Sa Si.
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 24. D. requienii }{\fs28 DC. in Lam. & DC.,}{\i\fs28  Fl. Fr.}{\fs28  ed. 3, }{\b\fs28 5}{\fs28 : 642 (1815) (}{\i\fs28 D. pictum}{\fs28  subsp. }{\i\fs28 requienii}{\fs28  (DC.) C. Blanch\'e9 & Molero). Like }{\b\fs28 23}{\fs28 
 but rhachis, pedicels and outside of perianth-segments villous-hirsute; inflorescence usually lax; lower and middle pedicels distinctly longer than the flowers; br
acteoles inserted distinctly above the base of the pedicels; limb of lateral honey-leaves obovate, more or less gradually narrowed into claw. \bullet }{\i\fs28  S. France}{\fs28  (}{\i\fs28 \'celes d'Hyeres}{\fs28 ), }{\i\fs28 Corse, Sardegna.}{\fs28 
 ?Co Ga Sa.
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 25. D. pictum }{\fs28 Willd.,}{\i\fs28  Enum. Pl. Horti Berol.}{\fs28 
 574 (1809). Stems up to 80 cm, pubescent, sometimes with mixed long and short hairs. Rhachis, pedicels and outside of perianth-segments shortly pubescent. Inflorescence usually dense; pedicels shorter than the flowers (except sometimes the lower); bracte
oles inserted at the base of the pedicels. Perianth-segments 9-14 mm, bluish-white, darkening to pale blue on drying; spur 6-8 mm. Limb of lateral honey-leaves suborbicular, abruptly contracted into claw. Follicles up to 6 mm wide, inflated. \bullet }{
\i\fs28  Islands of W. Mediterranean region.}{\fs28  Bl Co Sa.
\par 
\par }\pard \qc\nowidctlpar {\fs28  }{\b\fs28 13.            Consolida }{\fs28            (DC.) S.F. Gray
\par }{\fs24  A.O. Chater.
\par 
\par }\pard \nowidctlpar {\fs28 Like}{\i\fs28  Delphinium}{\fs28  but always annual; the 2 upper honey-leaves coalescent into a single structure (nectary), with a single spur; lateral honey-leaves absent; stamens i
n 5 spirally arranged series; fruit a single follicle.
\par 
\par Literature: E. Huth,}{\i\fs28  Bot. Jahrb.}{\b\fs28  20}{\fs28 : 365-391 (1895). R. de So\'f3,}{\i\fs28  \'d6sterr. Bot. Zeitschr. }{\b\fs28 71}{\fs28 : 233-246 (1922).
\par 
\par }\pard \li200\nowidctlpar {\fs28 1 Nectary ovate, entire; follicle appressed-sericeous .............. }{\b\fs28 2. hellespontica}{\fs28 
\par 1 Nectary lobed; follicle glabrous or pubescent but not sericeous
\par 2 Spur circinate-involute at apex ....................................................... }{\b\fs28 1. aconiti}{\fs28 
\par 2 Spur straight or scarcely curved
\par 3 Follicle glabrous
\par 4 Perianth-segments 9 mm or more ................................................. }{\b\fs28 10. regalis}{\fs28 
\par 4 Perianth-segments less than 9 mm ......................................... }{\b\fs28 11. tenuissima}{\fs28 
\par 3 Follicle pubescent
\par 5 Spur less than 7 mm
\par 6 Lower pedicels more than 7 mm ............................................. }{\b\fs28 6. brevicornis}{\fs28 
\par 6 Lower pedicels not more than 5 mm
\par 7 Racemes with not more than 6 flowers ..................................... }{\b\fs28 8. tuntasiana}{\fs28 
\par 7 Racemes with more than 6 flowers ................................................. }{\b\fs28 9. raveyi}{\fs28 
\par 5 Spur 7 mm or more
\par 8 Lower bracts entire
\par 9 Inflorescence racemose, not or little-branched ..................... }{\b\fs28 7. uechtritziana}{\fs28 
\par 9 Inflorescence paniculate, much-branched
\par 10 Upper lobe of nectary more than 2 mm wide; plant 
\par    sparsely pubescent; flowers dark blue; seeds black ........................ }{\b\fs28 9. regalis}{\fs28 
\par 10 Upper lobe of nectary not more than 2 mm wide; plant densely
\par    whitish-pubescent; flowers violet, pale blue or whitish; 
\par    seeds grey or reddish
\par 11 Upper lobe of nectary 2 mm or more; spur 12-16 mm ......... }{\b\fs28 12. pubescens}{\fs28 
\par 11 Upper lobe of nectary less than 2 mm; spur 16-22 mm ..... }{\b\fs28 13. mauritanica}{\fs28 
\par 8  Lower bracts dissected
\par 12 Bracteoles reaching to or beyond base of flower; 
\par    spur not more than 12 mm
\par 13 Lower pedicels 1-2 times as long as spur; 
\par    follicle gibbous above ................................................................. }{\b\fs28 3. orientalis}{\fs28 
\par 13 Lower pedicels shorter than spur; follicle not gibbous above ..... }{\b\fs28 4. phrygia}{\fs28 
\par 12 Bracteoles, at least of lower flowers, not reaching 
\par    base of flower; spur 12 mm or more
\par 14 Inflorescence usually racemose; ripe follicle 15-20 mm ................ }{\b\fs28 5. ajacis}{\fs28 
\par 14 Inflorescence paniculate; ripe follicle 10-15 mm
\par 15 Upper lobe of nectary 2 mm or more; spur 12-16 mm .......... }{\b\fs28 12. pubescens}{\fs28 
\par 15 Upper lobe of nectary less than 2 mm; spur 16-22 mm ...... }{\b\fs28 13. mauritanica}{\fs28 
\par 
\par 260}
\par }