{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 to suborbicular, entire or 3-lobed. Flowers c. 2 cm in diameter, fragrant. Perianth-segments obtuse, pubescent beneath and on the margins, white. Anthers 3-4 mm. Receptacle sparsely puberulent to glabrous. Achenes strongly compressed. 2n = 16.{\i  S. Europe}. Al Bl Bu Co Ga Gr Hs It Ju Lu Sa Si Tu [Az Cz Hu Rs(K)].
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. C. vitalba }L.,{\i  loc. cit.} (1753). Deciduous, woody climber up to 30 m. Leaves 1-pinnate; leaflets ovate, rarely linear-lanceolate, dentate or subentire. Flowers c. 2 cm in diameter, fragrant. Perianth-segments obtuse, greenish-white, pubescent on both surfaces. Anthers 1-2 mm. Receptacle pubescent. Achenes scarcely compressed. 2n = 16.{\i   S.,W. & C. Europe.} Al Au Be Br Bu Co Cz Ga Ge Gr He Ho Hs Hu It Ju Lu Rm Rs(W, K) Sa Si Tu [Da Hb Po Su].
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 3. C. orientalis }L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 543 (1753). Like {\b 2} but leaflets oblong or linear, 3-lobed, often dentate, glaucous; perianth-segments acuminate, yellowish. Stamens ciliate.{\i  S.E. Russia and Ukraine; naturalized locally elsewhere.} Rs(*W, E) [Cz Hs It]. ({\i Temperate Asia.})
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 4. C. recta }L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 544 (1753) ({\i C. lathyrifolia} Besser). Erect herb with fistular stems 1-1·5 m. Leaves up to 25 cm, 1-pinnate; leaflets 5-9 cm, ovate, acute, usually entire, stalked. Flowers c. 2 cm in diameter, white, erect, fragrant. Perianth-segments 0·5-1·8 cm, with tomentose margins but otherwise glabrous.{\i  C., S. & E. Europe, northwards to} 57° 30'{\i  N. in C. Russia and westwards to N. Spain}. Au Bu Co Cz Ga Ge He Hs Hu It Ju Po Rm Rs(*B, C, W, K, E) [Be]
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b C. elisabethae-caroli} Greuter,{\i  Candollea}{\b  20}: 213 (1965), from Kriti (Sfakia prov.), is like {\b 4} but is a shrub up to 2 m with wiry stems, simple lower leaves, leaflets 3-6 cm, and flowers c. 3 cm in diameter. It is known only from the type locality and its status is uncertain.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 5. C. pseudoflammula }Schmalh. ex Lipsky,{\i  Mém. Soc. Nat. Kieff}{\b  12}: 230 (1894). Like {\b 4} but the stems not more than 70 cm; leaves almost always 2-pinnate with leaflets 3-5 cm.{\i  S. Russia, S. & E. Ukraine.} Rs(W, E).
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28 Sect. CHEIROPSIS DC. Bracteoles united into a 2-lipped involucre. Flowers white, yellowish or sometimes red-spotted, solitary in the leaf-axils; staminodes absent. Style plumose in fruit.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 6. C. cirrhosa }L.,{\i  Sp. Pl.} 544 (1753) ({\i C. calycina} Aiton). Evergreen climber up to 4 m. Leaves 2·5-5 cm, simple, dentate or 3-lobed, or 1- or 2-ternate with dentate or lobed leaflets. Flowers 4-7 cm in diameter, nodding; pedicels 2-5 cm. Perianth-segments yellowish-white, sometimes with red spots, ovate, pubescent beneath. Flowering in winter.{\i  Mediterranean region, S. Portugal.} Bl Co Cr Gr Hs It Lu Sa Si Tu.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28 Sect. VITICELLA Link. Bracteoles free. Flowers blue, purple, violet or violet-tinged, 1-3 in the leaf-axils; staminodes absent. Style not plumose in fruit.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 7. C. viticella }L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 543 (1753). A deciduous, more or less woody climber 3-4 m. Leaves 10-13 cm, 1-pinnate, the primary divisions with 3 lanceolate to ovate, often lobed leaflets 2-7 cm. Flowers 4 cm in diameter, rotate, blue or purple, fragrant. Style glabrous.{\i  S. Europe, eastwards from Italy; often cultivated for ornament, and locally naturalized elsewhere.} Al Bu Gr It Ju Tu [Be Cz Ga Ge Ho] .
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28 In S. Italy and elsewhere plants transitional to {\b 8} have been recorded. They require further investigation.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 8. C. campaniflora }Brot.,{\i  Fl. Lusit.}{\b  2}: 359 (1804) ({\i C. viticella} subsp. {\i campaniflora} (Brot.) Font Quer ex O. Bolòs & Vigo). Like {\b 7} but the stems up to 7 m, very slender; flowers broadly campanulate, pale violet; styles pubescent in the lower 2/3.{\i  Portugal, W. & S. Spain}. Hs Lu.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28 Sect. VIORNA (Reichenb.) Prantl. Bracteoles absent. Flowers dark violet or blue, rarely white, solitary, terminal. Staminodes absent. Style plumose in fruit.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 9. C. integrifolia }L.,{\i  Sp. Pl.} 544 (1753). Erect herb 30-70 cm. Stems usually simple. Leaves up to 9 × 5 cm, simple, ovate, acute, entire. Flowers solitary, rarely 2 or 3, terminal, nodding, stellate-campanulate. Perianth-segments 3-5 cm, glabrous except near the margins.{\i  S.C. & S.E. Europe, northwards to c. }53°{\i  N. in C. Russia}. Al Au Bu Cz Hu It Ju Rm Rs(C, W, K, E).
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28 Sect. ATRAGENE: (L.) DC. Bracteoles free, basal. Flowers violet or yellowish-white, solitary, terminal on short axillary shoots; staminodes present, petaloid. Style plumose in fruit.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 10. C. alpina }(L.) Miller, {\i Gard. Dict.} ed. 8, no. 9 (1968). Deciduous. Stems 1-4 m, scrambling, woody. Leaves 2-ternate; leaflets 2·5-5 cm, ovate-lanceolate, coarsely serrate. Flowers solitary, nodding, stellate-campanulate. Perianth-segments 2·5-4 cm, silky beneath. Staminodes up to ½ as long as the perianth-segments.{\i  N. Europe and mountains of C. & S. Europe.} Au Bu Cz Fe Ga Ge He Hu It Ju No Po Rm Rs(N, C, W).
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b alpina} ({\i Atragene alpina} L.): Flowers violet (rarely white). 2n = 16. •{\i  C. & S. Europe}.
\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b sibirica} (Miller) O. Kuntze, {\i Verh. Bot. Ver. Brandenb. }{\b 26}: 162 (1885) ({\i C. sibirica }Miller, {\i Atragene sibirica} L., nom. ambig.): Flowers yellowish-white (rarely pale violet). 2n = 16.{\i  N.E. Europe, extending to S. Norway}.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 18.            Adonis}                L.
\par 

\pard\f0\fs24\qc  †T.G. Tutin (Ed.1) revised by J.R. Akeroyd (Ed.2).
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28 Herbs with 1- to 3-pinnate leaves with more or less linear segments. Sepals 5(-8), often somewhat petaloid. Petals 3-20, glossy; nectaries absent. Achenes numerous, rugose, forming an elongated head at maturity.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28 There is much diversity of opinion amongst recent authors about the taxonomic treatment of the annual species (Sect. Adonis), and the following treatment should be regarded as provisional.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28 Literature: H. Riedl,{\i  Ann. Naturh. Mus.} ({\i Wien}) {\b 66}: 51-90 (1963). C. Steinberg, {\i Webbia }{\b 25}: 299-351 (1971).
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Annual; petals not more than 8; anthers blackish-purple
\par 
2 Inner margin of achene almost straight, without a projection .......... {\b 7. annua}
\par 
2 Inner margin of achene with a rounded or angular projection
\par 
3 Sepals hirsute; beak of achene black at apex ............................... {\b 8. flammea}
\par 
3 Sepals glabrous or slightly hairy; beak of achene green throughout
\par 
4 Upper projection on inner margin of achene at 1/3 of the 
\par 
  distance from apex to base ........................................................... {\b 9. aestivalis}
\par 
4 Upper projection on inner margin of achene close to beak ... {\b 10. microcarpa}
\par 
1 Perennial; petals more than 8; anthers yellow
\par 
5 Basal leaves reduced to scales
\par 

\par 
267}
\par