{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 An isolated population on Gotland, which seems to belong to subsp. ({\b b}), has been called subsp. {\b gotlandica} (K. Joh.) Zämels & Paegle, {\i Acta Horti Bot. Univ. Latv.}{\b  2}: 159 (1927).
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 8. P. halleri }(All.) Willd., {\i Enum. Pl. Horti Berol.} 580 (1809) ({\i Anemone halleri} All.). Stems 3-12 cm (up to 45 cm in fruit). Basal leaves persistently and often densely lanate, 1-pinnate with 3-5 segments, the terminal long-stalked; segments pinnatifid; lobes oblong-lanceolate; cauline leaves united below, sericeous. Flowers 5·5-8·5 cm in diameter, campanulate, erect or suberect, dark violet; perianth-segments usually straight, acute, 2-3 times as long as the stamens. •{\i  Alps; W. Carpathians; Balkan peninsula; Krym.} ?Al Au Bu Cz Ga He It Ju Po Rs(K).
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Plant rarely more than 5 cm at anthesis; basal leaves with 50-100 lobes
\par 
2 Primary divisions of basal leaves often petiolate ......... ({\b b}) subsp. {\b rhodopaea}
\par 
2 Primary divisions of basal leaves usually sessile ............... ({\b c}) subsp. {\b taurica}
\par 
1 Plant usually more than 5 cm at anthesis; basal leaves 
\par 
  usually with fewer than 50 lobes
\par 
3 Primary divisions of basal leaves usually 3 ....................... ({\b d}) subsp. {\b slavica}
\par 
3 Primary divisions of basal leaves usually 5
\par 
4 Lamina 3-7 cm .................................................................... ({\b a}) subsp. {\b halleri}
\par 
4 Lamina 5-11 cm ................................................................ ({\b e}) subsp. {\b styriaca}
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b halleri}: Plant usually more than 5 cm at anthesis. Primary divisions of the basal leaves usually 5, sessile; lamina 3-7 cm, usually with fewer than 50 lobes, more or less lanate. 2n = 32. •{\i  S.W. & S.C. Alps}.
\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b rhodopaea} (Stoj. & Stefanov) K. Krause,{\i  Bot. Jahrb.}{\b  78}: 44 (1958) ({\i P. latifolia} Rupr.,{\i  P. velezensis} (G. Beck) Aichele & Schwegler, {\i Anemone rhodopaea} (Stoj. & Stefanov) Stoj. & Stefanov): Plant rarely more than 5 cm at anthesis. Primary divisions of the basal leaves usually 5, often petiolate; lamina with 50-100 lobes, densely lanate. 2n = 32.{\i  S. Jugoslavia, Bulgaria}.
\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b c}) Subsp. {\b taurica} (Juz.) K. Krause,{\i  op. cit.} 45 (1958) ({\i P. taurica }Juz.): Like subsp. ({\b a}) but primary divisions of the basal leaves usually sessile. 2n = 32. {\i Krym}.
\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b d}) Subsp. {\b slavica} (G. Reuss) Zämels, {\i Acta Horti Bot. Univ. Latv.}{\b  1}({\b 2}): 104 (1926) ({\i P. slavica} G. Reuss): Plant usually more than 5 cm at anthesis. Primary divisions of the basal leaves usually 3, sessile; lamina with usually fewer than 50 lobes, more or less lanate. 2n = 32. {\i W. Carpathians.}
\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b e}) Subsp. {\b styriaca} (G.A. Pritzel) Zämels, {\i loc. cit.} (1926) ({\i P. styriaca }(G.A. Pritzel) Simonkai): Like subsp. ({\b a}) but the lamina of the basal leaves 5-11 cm. 2n = 32.{\i  E. Austria} ({\i Steiermark}).
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 9. P. patens }(L.) Miller,{\i  Gard. Dict.} ed. 8, no. 4 (1768) ({\i Anemone patens} L.). Stem 3-12 cm (up to 45 cm in fruit). Basal leaves more or less sericeous when young, becoming glabrous or subglabrous, with 3-7 palmate primary divisions, the middle segment sometimes shortly stalked. Flowers 5·5-8·5 cm in diameter, campanulate, erect or suberect, usually bluish-violet; perianth-segments spreading widely from the base, 2-3 times as long as the stamens.{\i  E. & E.C. Europe, extending westwards to Sweden and S. Germany}. Cz Fe Ge Hu Po Rm Rs(N, B, C, W, E) Su.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Lobes of basal leaves usually 17-30, 5-12 mm wide .......... ({\b a}) subsp. {\b patens}
\par 
1 Lobes of basal leaves usually 30-80, 1-4 mm wide
\par 
2 Flowers bluish-violet .................................................. ({\b b}) subsp. {\b multifida}
\par 
2 Flowers yellow to yellowish-white .......................... ({\b c}) subsp. {\b flavescens}
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b patens} ({\i P. latifolia} sensu Wissjul., non Rupr.,{\i  P. patens }subsp. {\i teklae} (Zämels) Zämels, {\i P. teklae} Zämels, {\i P. wolfgangiana} Besser): Middle segment of the basal leaves sessile; lobes usually 17-30, 5-12 mm wide. Flowers bluish-violet. 2n = 16. {\i Throughout the range of the species}.
\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b multifida} (G.A. Pritzel) Zämels,{\i  Acta Horti Bot. Univ. Latv.}{\b  1}({\b 2}): 98 (1926) ({\i P. multifida} (G.A. Pritzel) Juz.): Middle segment of the lower basal leaves with a long stalk (rarely sessile); lobes usually 30-80, 1-4 mm wide. Flowers bluish-violet.{\i  E. Russia.} ({\i Siberia.})
\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b c}) Subsp. {\b flavescens} (Zucc.) Zämels, {\i op. cit.} 95 (1926) ({\i P. flavescens} (Zucc.) Juz.): Like subsp. ({\b b}) but the flowers yellow to yellowish-white. {\i E. Russia.} ({\i N. Asia}.)
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 17.               Clematis}                 L.
\par 

\pard\f0\fs24\qc  †T.G. Tutin (Ed.1) revised by J.R. Akeroyd (Ed.2)
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28 Woody climbers or perennial herbs. Leaves opposite, simple, ternate or 1- or 2-pinnate. Perianth-segments 4 (rarely 5, 6 or 8), petaloid, valvate. Honey-leaves absent. Petaloid staminodes sometimes present. Achenes numerous; style persistent, often long and plumose.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Plant erect, not climbing; stems herbaceous, or woody at base only
\par 
2 Leaves simple; flowers deep violet or blue, very rarely
\par 
  white .......................................................................................... {\b 9. integrifolia}
\par 
2 Leaves pinnate; flowers white
\par 
3 Leaves 1-pinnate; leaflets up to 9 cm ................................................ {\b 4. recta}
\par 
3 Leaves usually 2-pinnate; leaflets 3-5 cm ...................... {\b 5. pseudoflammula}
\par 
1 Plant climbing or scrambling by means of tendrils; stems
\par 
  usually woody
\par 
4 Spathulate petaloid staminodes present ......................................... {\b 10. alpina}
\par 
4 Petaloid staminodes absent
\par 
5 Flowers blue, purple or violet-tinged; style not plumose in fruit
\par 
6 Style glabrous; flowers rotate ....................................................... {\b 7. viticella}
\par 
6 Style pubescent in the lower 2/3; flowers ± campanulate .... {\b 8. campaniflora}
\par 
5 Flowers white or yellowish, rarely reddish; style 
\par 
  plumose in fruit
\par 
7 Plant evergreen; bracteoles connate, forming a 2-lipped 
\par 
  involucre beneath the flower .......................................................... {\b 6. cirrhosa}
\par 
7 Plant deciduous; bracteoles free, not forming an 
\par 
  involucre beneath the flower
\par 
8 Perianth-segments yellowish, acuminate; leaves glaucous ......... {\b 3. orientalis}
\par 
8 Perianth-segments white or greenish-white, obtuse; 
\par 
  leaves not glaucous
\par 
9 Leaves 2-pinnate; perianth-segments glabrous on upper surface {\b 1. flammula}
\par 
9 Leaves 1-pinnate; perianth-segments tomentose on both surfaces {\b 2. vitalba}
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28 Sect. CLEMATIS. Bracteoles free. Flowers white or yellowish, usually numerous, in large panicles. Staminodes absent. Style plumose in fruit.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. C. flammula }L.,{\i  Sp. Pl. }544 (1753). Deciduous, more or less woody climber 3-5 m. Leaves 2-pinnate; leaflets narrowly oblong
\par 

\par 
266}
\par