{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 Like {\b 47} but very slender; tubers ovoid; basal leaves 3-partite; segments often stipitate, cuneate, again 3-partite; lobes linear-lanceolate; flowers c. 15 mm in diameter; head of achenes globose; beak of achene very short, hooked. •{\i  Thessalia.} Gr.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 49. R. isthmicus }Boiss.,{\i  Diagn. Pl. Or. Nov.}{\b  1}({\b 6}): 4 (1846) (incl.{\i  R. orientalis} auct., non L.). Small, spreading, appressed-pubescent perennial with fusiform tubers. Basal leaves 2- or 3-fid, or the outer 3-sect or 3-fid; lobes linear-lanceolate. Achenes tubercled, with an appressed appendage at base; beak as long as achene, wide, falcate. {\i Sicilia; Greece.} Gr Si.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28 Represented in Europe by subsp. {\i isthmicus} only.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 50. R. illyricus }L.,{\i  Sp. Pl.} 552 (1753) ({\i R. scythicus} Klokov) Appressed-sericeous perennial up to c. 50 cm, with ovoid tubers. Basal leaves 3-fid; segments linear-lanceolate, entire or 2- or 3-fid into linear-lanceolate, entire lobes. Receptacle glabrous. Achenes c. 3 mm, more or less triangular, strongly compressed and almost winged, finely punctate; beak about as long as achene, nearly straight. 2n = 32.{\i  Dry grassland; calcicole. C. & S.E. Europe extending to Italy; Öland.} Au Bu Cz Ge Gr Hu It Ju Po Rm Rs(C, W, K, E) Su Tu.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b R. stojanovii }Delip.,{\i  Feddes Repert.}{\b  81}: 715 (1971), known only from the type collection from Bulgaria (Rodopi Planina) is like {\b 50} but has lanceolate leaf-segments and verrucose, sparsely hairy (not glabrous) achenes; its status is uncertain.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28 (B) Sepals not deflexed at anthesis.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 51. R. pedatus }Waldst. & Kit.,{\i  Pl. Rar. Hung.}{\b  2}: 112 (1802 or 1803). Almost glabrous perennial up to c. 30 cm, with oblong tubers. Basal leaves glabrous, pedately 3- to 5-partite; segments linear-lanceolate, entire or deeply 2-lobed. Achenes membranous, strongly compressed and almost winged; beak straight, except for the hooked tip. 2n = 16.{\i  E. & E.C. Europe.} Bu Cz Gr Hu Ju Rm Rs(W).
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28 Plants from S. Ukraine, like {\b 51} but with basal leaves palmatisect and with narrowly linear segments have been called{\b  R. odessanus} Klokov fil., {\i Nov. Syst. Pl. Varc.} ({\i Leningrad}){\b  1968}: 120 (1968), and plants from E. Ukraine and S. Russia, like {\b 51} but with stems more pubescent, basal leaves with fewer, wider segments, larger flowers and subglabrous (not densely hairy) sepals have been called{\b  R. silvisteppaceus} Dubovik,{\i  op. cit.} 116 (1968); their status is uncertain.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 52. R. platyspermus }Fischer ex DC.,{\i  Prodr.}{\b  1}: 37 (1824). Like {\b 51} but villous; basal leaves 1- or 2-ternate, with pinnatifid segments. Achenes circular, strongly compressed and winged; beak very short, hooked.{\i  S.E. Russia}. Rs(E). ({\i C. Asia.})
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 53. R. paludosus }Poiret, {\i Voy. Barb.}{\b  2}: 184 (1789) ({\i R. flabellatus} Desf., {\i R. chaerophyllos} sensu Coste, non L.,{\i  R. chaerophyllos} sensu Arcangeli, non L.; incl.{\i  R. heldreichianus} Jordan,{\i  R. winkleri} Freyn). Perennial 10-50 cm, with fusiform tubers. Stock usually short, with persistent fibres. Outer basal leaves shallowly 3-lobed; inner 3-fid; middle segment long-stipitate; all divided into narrow, dentate segments. Flowers 1-8. Receptacle glabrous. Achenes c. 2 mm, minutely punctate, sparsely pubescent, strongly keeled on back, tapering into a nearly straight beak about as long as the achene and hooked at tip. 2n = 16, 32. {\i Mediterranean region and W. Europe, northwards to the Channel Islands}. Co Cr Ga Gr Hs It Ju Lu Sa Si Tu.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 54. R. barceloi }Grau, {\i Mitt. Bot. Staatssamm.} ({\i München}){\b  20}: 54 (1984) ({\i R. chaerophyllos} var.{\i  balearicus} Barc.). Like {\b 53} but with more slender tuberous roots; stem 15-45 cm; outer basal leaves suborbicular, coarsely crenate; flowers 1-4(5); achenes with curved, hooked beak.{\i  Streamsides. • Islas Baleares }({\i Mallorca}). Bl.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 55. R. pseudomillefoliatus }Grau, {\i loc. cit.} (1984). Like {\b 53} but stems not more than 30 cm; basal leaves withered at anthesis; leaves multifid, the segments c. 1 mm wide, linear; cauline leaves 1 or 2, the upper subsimple; achenes pubescent, with straight beak. •{\i  C. & S. Spain.} Hs.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 56. R. gregarius }Brot.,{\i  Fl. Lusit.}{\b  2}: 369 (1804) ({\i R. hollianus} Reichenb.). Slender, pubescent perennial 10-25 cm, with cylindrical tubers. Basal leaves reniform or pentagonal, entire to 3-fid; segments more or less lobed and dentate, sometimes divided into narrow sessile or stipitate lobes, appressed-hirsute to more or less glabrous; cauline leaves 0 or few with lanceolate segments. Flowers 1(-3), c. 20 mm in diameter. Head of achenes c. 10 mm. Receptacle pubescent to nearly glabrous. Achenes broadly orbicular, sparsely setose or rarely glabrous; beak shorter than achene, hooked.{\i  S. Spain, Portugal.} Hs Lu.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b R. henriquesii} Freyn,{\i  Bot. Centr.}{\b  6}({\b 3}): 21 (1881), from C. & N. Portugal, up to 50 cm, with narrow, acute, villous, distant leaf-lobes and densely pubescent receptacle, and{\b  R. malessanus} Degen & Hervier,{\i  Bull. Acad. Int. Géogr. Bot.} ({\i Le Mans}) {\b 16}: 222 (1906), from S. Spain (Sierra de Cazorla, Sierra de Segura), with basal leaves 3- to 5-fid, the leaf-lobes oblong, obtuse, more or less glabrous and overlapping, stems scapose, and receptacle nearly glabrous, are probably best included in{\b  56}.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 57. R. ollissiponensis }Pers., {\i Syn. Pl.}{\b  2}: 106 (1806) ({\i R.gregarius} sensu Tutin, non Brot.). Slender perennial 5-40 cm, with cylindrical or fusiform tubers. Basal leaves ovate, 3- to 5-fid, the segments 3-fid; cauline leaves few, simple to subsimple. Achenes pubescent, with straight beak. •{\i   Spain and Portugal}. Hs Lu.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b ollissiponensis} ({\i R. nevadensis} Willk.,{\i  R. escurialensis} Boiss. & Reuter, {\i R. carpetanus} Boiss. & Reuter, {\i R. suborbiculatus} Freyn): Tubers fusiform. Middle segment of basal leaves sessile or subsessile. Stem usually with several flowers. Achenes c. 2·5 mm, sparsely pubescent.{\i  Throughout the range of the species.}
\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b alpinus} (Boiss. & Reuter) Grau,{\i  Mitt. Bot. Staatssamm.} ({\i München}) {\b 20}: 53 (1984) ({\i R. blepharicarpos} auct., non Boiss., {\i R. carpetanus} var. {\i alpinus} Boiss. & Reuter): Tubers cylindrical. Middle segment of basal leaves stipitate. Stem usually with a single flower. Achenes c. 3 mm, glabrous or subglabrous.{\i  Mountains of C. & N. Spain}.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 58. R. cupreus }Boiss. & Heldr. in Boiss.,{\i  Diagn. Pl. Or. Nov.}{\b  2}({\b 8}): 3 (1849). A somewhat pubescent perennial 5-20 cm, with ovoid tubers. Basal leaves 2-pinnatisect; segments obovate. Flowers c. 15 mm in diameter. Honey-leaves copper-coloured beneath. Achenes 2·5 mm, with a broad, hooked beak c. 1 mm.{\i  Shady, limestone rocks. • Kriti.} Cr.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 59. R. millefoliatus }Vahl, {\i Symb. Bot.}{\b  2}: 63 (1791) (incl. {\i R. garganicus }Ten.). More or less pubescent perennial 10-30 cm, with ovoid or oblong tubers. Basal leaves 2- or 3-pinnatisect, with linear-lanceolate acute or obtuse lobes. Sepals usually glabrous. Honey-leaves 5, yellow on both surfaces. Receptacle glabrous, less frequently pubescent. Achenes c. 3·5 mm, rounded, broadly keeled on back; beak ½ as long as the achene, wide, hooked to nearly straight. 2n = 16, 32.{\i  S. & E.C. Europe.} Al Bu Cz Ga Gr It Ju Rm Si Tu.
\par 

\par 
278}
\par