{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 137 Cauline leaves conspicuously smaller than basal; uppermost 
\par 
    uppermost 3-fid with entire segments, or simple .............. {\b 26. macrophyllus}
\par 
137 Cauline leaves about as large as basal; uppermost 3-fid 
\par 
    with lobed and dentate segments ............................................ {\b 25. carpaticus} 
\par 
131 Achene neither keeled nor sulcate
\par 
138 Sepals glabrous ................................................................ {\b 29. marschlinsii}
\par 
138 Sepals pubescent
\par 
139 Leaves hairy beneath
\par 
140 Basal leaves hairy beneath only; beak of achene 0·8-1 mm, 
\par 
    hooked ...................................................................................... {\b 30. dissectus}
\par 
140 Basal leaves hairy on both surfaces; beak of achene 1·5-2 mm, 
\par 
    circinate ............................................................................. {\b 31. radinotrichus}
\par 
139 Leaves glabrous or subglabrous beneath
\par 
141 Basal leaves with shortly stipitate segments; flowers 
\par 
    usually solitary ......................................................................... {\b 27. demissus}
\par 
141 Basal leaves not divided to base; flowers usually several ....... {\b 28. hayekii}
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28 Subgen. {\b Ranunculus.} Usually terrestrial plants. Leaves various but very rarely divided into capillary segments. Flowers yellow or white, rarely red or purple. Achenes very rarely transversely rugose.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28 Sect. RANUNCULUS. Honey-leaves yellow; nectary covered by a flap which is more or less free laterally. Achenes glabrous, distinctly beaked, compressed. Receptacle in fruit not more than 3 times its length in flower.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28 (A) Pedicel terete. Sepals deflexed. Receptacle glabrous.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. R. velutinus }Ten., {\i Ind. Sem. Horti Neap.} 12 (1825). Perennial 40-80 cm. Petioles and lower part of stems patent-pubescent; otherwise appressed-sericeous. Basal leaves broadly ovate, deeply 3-fid; segments cuneate-obovate, 3-lobed and dentate; cauline leaves small, linear. Pedicels slender. Flowers 15-25 mm in diameter. Head of achenes depressed-globose; achenes compressed, strongly bordered; beak very short, straight. 2n = 14.{\i  Damp places. C. & E. Mediterranean region.} Al Bu Co Ga Gr It Ju Sa Si Tu.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. R. constantinopolitanus }(DC.) D'Urv.,{\i  Mém. Soc. Linn. Paris}{\b  1}: 317 (1822) ({\i R. villosus} subsp. {\i constantinopolitanus} (DC.) Jelen.). Perennial c. 45 cm, densely patent-pubescent below, appressed-pubescent above. Basal leaves triangular-ovate, 3-fid to ¾; segments broadly ovate, again cut into dentate lobes; cauline leaves small, linear. Flowers 15-25 mm in diameter. Head of achenes globose; achenes 4-5 mm, ovate, rounded; beak 1 mm, falcate.{\i  S.E. Europe.} Bu Gr Ju Rm Rs(K) Tu.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28 (B) Pedicel sulcate. Sepals patent. Receptacle pubescent.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 3. R. polyanthemos }L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 554 (1753) ({\i R. meyerianus} Rupr.). A usually much-branched perennial 10-130 cm. Petioles and lower part of stems patent-pubescent or glabrescent, appressed-pubescent above. Basal leaves (3-)5-fid; segments cut into linear-lanceolate or linear, dentate lobes; cauline leaves like the basal, but smaller. Flowers 18-25 mm in diameter; honey-leaves 7-14 mm, golden-yellow. Head of achenes globose; achenes 3-5 mm, compressed, bordered; beak c. 0·5 mm, curved.{\i  Europe, except the west and parts of the south.} Al Au Be Bu Co Cz Da Fe Ga Ge Gr Ho Hu It Ju No Po Rm Rs(N, B, C, W, K, E) Su Tu.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28 Species{\b  3} and{\b  4} are very closely related and their precise delimitation and that of their subspecies is still uncertain.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Basal leaves deeply 3-fid; stems up to 130 cm . ({\b c}) subsp. {\b polyanthemoides}
\par 
1 Basal leaves 5-fid; stems rarely more than 60 cm
\par 
2 Stems usually much-branched; plant 30-60 cm ...... ({\b a}) subsp. {\b polyanthemos}
\par 
2 Stems simple or little-branched; plant 10-30 cm ............. ({\b b}) subsp. {\b thomasii}
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b polyanthemos}: Rarely more than 60 cm. Basal leaves 5-fid; segments all more or less equal, more or less pubescent. 2n = 16.{\i  From Norway, C. Germany and Albania eastwards}.
\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b thomasii} (Ten.) Tutin, {\i Feddes Repert.}{\b  69}: 53 (1964) ({\i R. thomasii} Ten.): Stems 10-30 cm, simple or little-branched. Basal leaves 5-fid; middle segments usually longest. 2n = 16. {\i S. Italy}.
\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b c}) Subsp. {\b polyanthemoides} (Boreau) Ahlfvengren in Neuman,{\i  Sver. Fl. }502 (1901) ({\i R. polyanthemoides} Boreau): Up to 130 cm. Basal leaves very deeply 3-fid; middle segment very long, narrow, cuneate, 3-lobed, densely pubescent. 2n = 16. • {\i Scattered through Europe from C. Fennoscandia to N. Greece.}
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28 Subsp. ({\b c}) has often been placed under {\b 4} on vegetative characters, but can be distinguished with certainty by the achene, which has a short beak and closely resembles that of {\b 3}.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 4. R. serpens }Schrank, {\i Baier. Fl.}{\b  2}: 101 (1789) ({\i R. amansii} Jordan, {\i R. mixtus} Jordan, {\i R. tuberosus} Lapeyr.,{\i  R. nemorosus} DC., {\i R. breyninus} auct., non Crantz). Like {\b 3} but basal leaves 3-fid, with broadly ovate, lobed and dentate segments; honey-leaves 15-20 mm; achenes with beak c. 1·5 mm, strongly curved. {\i Woods and scrub. • Much of Europe, but absent from most of the north and the islands.} Al Au Be Bu Co Cz Da Ga Ge Gr He Ho Hs It Ju Po Rm Rs(B, C, W, E) Su.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Stems becoming procumbent and rooting at nodes; 
\par 
  lower cauline leaves resembling the basal ....................... ({\b a}) subsp. {\b serpens}
\par 
1 Stems always erect, never rooting at nodes; lower cauline leaves with
\par 
  narrow, ± entire segments
\par 
2 All basal leaves pentagonal in outline; segments lobed 
\par 
  and dentate .................................................................. ({\b b}) subsp. {\b nemorosus}
\par 
2 Outer basal leaves orbicular in outline, more divided 
\par 
  and with narrow lobes .................................. ({\b c}) subsp. {\b polyanthemophyllus}
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b serpens} ({\i R. nemorosus} proles{\i  radicescens} (Jordan) Rouy & Fouc., {\i R. radicescens} Jordan): Biennial 10-20 cm; stems at first erect, later procumbent and rooting at the nodes, patent-pubescent below. Basal leaves pentagonal in outline, deeply 3-fid; segments obovate-cuneate, lobed and dentate; lower cauline leaves resembling the basal. 2n = 16.{\i  From C. Germany to the S. Alps}.
\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b nemorosus} (DC.) G. López,{\i  Anal. Jard. Bot. Madrid }{\b 41}: 470 (1985): Erect perennial 20-80 cm. Stem sparsely appressed or slightly patent-pubescent. Basal leaves pentagonal in outline, deeply 3-fid; segments obovate-cuneate, lobed and dentate; cauline leaves with narrow, more or less entire segments. 2n = 16. {\i Throughout the range of the species}.
\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b c}) Subsp. {\b polyanthemophyllus} (Walo Koch & H. Hess) M. Kerguélen, {\i Lejeunia }{\b 120}: 149 (1987) ({\i R. polyanthemophyllus} Walo Koch & H. Hess): Like subsp. ({\b b}) but often 50-100 cm; leaves orbicular in outline, divided more or less to base and with narrower lobes; middle segment often stipitate; later leaves similar to those of subsp. ({\b a}). 2n = 16.{\i  Alps and adjacent regions}.
\par 

\par 
273}
\par