{\rtf1\ansi \deff4\deflang1033{\fonttbl{\f4\froman\fcharset0\fprq2 Times New Roman;}}{\colortbl;\red0\green0\blue0;\red0\green0\blue255;\red0\green255\blue255;\red0\green255\blue0;\red255\green0\blue255;\red255\green0\blue0;\red255\green255\blue0;\red255\green255\blue255;\red0\green0\blue128;\red0\green128\blue128;\red0\green128\blue0;\red128\green0\blue128;\red128\green0\blue0;\red128\green128\blue0;\red128\green128\blue128;\red192\green192\blue192;}{\stylesheet{\widctlpar \f4\fs20\lang2057 \snext0 Normal;}{\*\cs10 \additive Default Paragraph Font;}}{\info{\author dddd}{\operator dddd}{\creatim\yr1998\mo11\dy11\hr16\min45}{\revtim\yr1998\mo11\dy11\hr16\min46}{\version2}{\edmins1}{\nofpages4}{\nofwords925}{\nofchars5273}{\*\company  }{\vern57431}}\widowctrl\ftnbj\aenddoc\hyphcaps0 \fet0\sectd \linex0 {\*\pnseclvl1\pnucrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl2\pnucltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl3\pndec\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl4\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl5\pndec\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl6\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl7\pnlcrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl8\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl9\pnlcrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}
\pard\plain \li200\ \f4\fs20\lang2057 {\fs28     internodes, their segments rarely parallel to the main axis
\par 32 Leaf-segments lying in 1 plane; leaves circular in outline .. }{\b\fs28 132. circinatus}{\fs28 
\par 32 Leaf-segments not lying in 1 plane
\par 33 Honey-leaves rarely exceeding 5 mm, not contiguous;
\par    nectaries lunate
\par 34 Achene more than 1\'b75 mm .............................................. }{\b\fs28 130. trichophyllus}{\fs28 
\par 34 Achene less than 1 mm ............................................................... }{\b\fs28 131. rionii}{\fs28 
\par 33 Honey-leaves usually exceeding 5 mm, contiguous;
\par    nectaries not lunate
\par 35 Immature achene glabrous; mature achene winged ................ }{\b\fs28 126. peltatus}{\fs28 
\par 35 Immature achene pubescent (sometimes minutely so);   mature achene unwinged
\par 36 Pedicel in fruit usually less than 50 mm; honey-leaves rarely 
\par    more than 10 mm; nectaries circular ....................................... }{\b\fs28 129. aquatilis}{\fs28 
\par 36 Pedicel in fruit usually more than 50 mm; honey-leaves 
\par    usually more than 10 mm; nectaries elongate, \'b1 pyriform
\par 37 Achene more than 1\'b75 mm ...................................................... }{\b\fs28 126. peltatus}{\fs28 
\par 37 Achene less than 1 mm .............................................. }{\b\fs28 128. sphaerospermus}{\fs28 
\par 1  Flowers yellow
\par 38 Aerial leaves (including the cauline) entire, serrate,
\par    crenate or dentate, but not lobed
\par 39 Achene puberulent ....................................................................... }{\b\fs28 86. ficaria}{\fs28 
\par 39 Achene glabrous or rarely hispid
\par 40 Sepals 3 ................................................................................. }{\b\fs28 87. ficarioides}{\fs28 
\par 40 Sepals 5
\par 41 Cauline leaves at least as wide as long, entire below,
\par    increasingly dentate towards the sometimes almost 3-lobed apex
\par 42 Basal leaves not developed at anthesis .......................................... }{\b\fs28 89. thora}{\fs28 
\par 42 Basal leaves present at anthesis ............................................... }{\b\fs28 90. hybridus}{\fs28 
\par 41 Cauline leaves distinctly longer than wide, not becoming 
\par   conspicuously more strongly dentate towards apex, rarely absent
\par 43 Leaves mostly crowded at base of stem; cauline small and few, or absent
\par 44 Lower leaves linear to narrowly lanceolate, sessile
\par 45 Roots fibrous; leaves not cucullate at apex;
\par    honey-leaves 5 ....................................................................... }{\b\fs28 117. gramineus}{\fs28 
\par 45 Roots tuberous; leaves cucullate at apex; honeyleaves 8-14 .}{\b\fs28 118. abnormis}{\fs28 
\par 44 Lower leaves ovate to suborbicular, petiolate
\par 46 Lower leaves cuneate at base .......................................... }{\b\fs28 116. bupleuroides}{\fs28 
\par 46 Lower leaves rounded to subcordate at base
\par 47 Roots fibrous; stolons present; petiole c. twice as long as lamina
\par    ................................................................................................. }{\b\fs28 85. cymbalaria}{\fs28 
\par 47 Roots tuberous; stolons absent; petiole shorter than lamina ......}{\b\fs28 88. bullatus}{\fs28 
\par 43 All or most of leaves cauline
\par 48 Flowers sessile or subsessile
\par 49 Leaves abruptly narrowed at base; beak about as long as achene
\par    ............................................................................................... }{\b\fs28 111. lateriflorus}{\fs28 
\par 49 Leaves gradually narrowed at base; beak c. \'bd as 
\par    long as achene ....................................................................... }{\b\fs28 112. nodiflorus}{\fs28 
\par 48 Flowers all distinctly pedicellate
\par 50 Achene less than 1 mm; flowers 3-8 mm in diameter
\par 51 Submerged leaves divided into filiform segments; 
\par    lowest aerial leaves often shallowly 3-lobed ...................... }{\b\fs28 113. polyphyllus}{\fs28 
\par 51 Submerged leaves absent; lowest leaves spathulate, 
\par    entire ................................................................................. }{\b\fs28 104. batrachioides}{\fs28 
\par 50 Achene more than 1 mm; flowers 5-50 mm in diameter
\par 52 Stems filiform, procumbent; flowers solitary;       
\par    achene up to 1\'b75 mm .................................................................. }{\b\fs28 103. reptans}{\fs28 
\par 52 Stems stouter, usually erect; flowers rarely solitary;
\par    achene more than 1\'b75 mm
\par 53 Flowers 30-50 mm in diameter (rarely less); achene 2\'b75 mm; 
\par    plant at least 50 cm ...................................................................... }{\b\fs28 105. lingua}{\fs28 
\par 53 Flowers up to 15(-20) mm in diameter; achene 1\'b75-2 mm; 
\par    plant rarely more than 50 cm 
\par 54 Achene smooth
\par 55 Perennial; pedicels sparsely appressed-pubescent ............... }{\b\fs28 102. flammula}{\fs28 
\par 55 Annual; pedicels glabrous ...................................................... }{\b\fs28 108. fontanus}{\fs28  
\par 54 Achene granulate or tuberculate
\par 56 Sepals longer than honey-leaves
\par 57 Pedicels sulcate, not thickened in fruit, the lower shorter 
\par    than subtending leaves ............................................................ }{\b\fs28 107. thracicus}{\fs28 
\par 57 Pedicels terete, \'b1 thickened in fruit, the lower about as long
\par    as subtending leaves ................................................................. }{\b\fs28 110. revelieri}{\fs28 
\par 56 Sepals equalling or shorter than honey-leaves
\par 58 Sepals shorter than honey-leaves; lower pedicels at 
\par    least as long as subtending leaves .............................. }{\b\fs28 106. ophioglossifolius}{\fs28 
\par 58 Sepals equalling honey-leaves; lower pedicels shorter than 
\par    subtending leaves ..................................................................... }{\b\fs28 109. longipes}{\fs28 
\par 38 At least some aerial leaves distinctly lobed or even more
\par    deeply divided
\par 59 Stems creeping, rooting at nodes; leaves not crowded at
\par    base of stem (small arctic plants, except }{\b\fs28 6}{\fs28 )
\par 60 Honey-leaves 3 ................................................................... }{\b\fs28 80. hyperboreus}{\fs28 
\par 60 Honey-leaves 5 or more 
\par 61 Sepals 3 ................................................................................ }{\b\fs28 83. lapponicus}{\fs28 
\par 61 Sepals 5
\par 62 Flowers 20-30 mm in diameter; achene c. 3 mm .......................... }{\b\fs28 6. repens}{\fs28 
\par 62 Flowers c. 10 mm in diameter; achene c. 1\'b75 mm .................... }{\b\fs28 82. gmelinii}{\fs28 
\par 59 Stems not creeping and rooting at nodes; leaves mostly crowded
\par    at base; plant sometimes with stolons from a well-marked rosette
\par 63 Roots of 2 kinds, some fibrous, some fleshy, 
\par    forming fusiform to ovoid tubers
\par 64 Sepals 3 ................................................................................. }{\b\fs28 87. ficarioides}{\fs28 
\par 64 Sepals 5
\par 65 Sepals deflexed in flower
\par 66 Leaves or leaf-segments linear-lanceolate, entire .................... }{\b\fs28 50. illyricus}{\fs28 
\par 66 Leaf-segments cuneate, variously cut or lobed, or leaves 
\par    suborbicular and shallowly lobed
\par 67 Achene tuberculate, with a compressed appendage at base .. }{\b\fs28 49. isthmicus}{\fs28 
\par 67 Achene without an appendage
\par 
\par 270}
\par }