{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 103 Basal leaves several; cauline 1 (2); 
\par 
    achene 3-4 mm; beak long .................................................... {\b 91. brevifolius}
\par 
102 Most leaves ± regularly lobed all round, not wider than long
\par 
104 Cauline leaves divided to base into linear or linear-
\par 
    lanceolate, entire segments
\par 
105 Sepals pubescent ............................................. ({\b 70-75}).{\b  auricomus }group
\par 
105 Sepals villous ............................................................................ {\b 78. nivalis}
\par 
104 Cauline leaves less divided, or segments wider
\par 
106 Stems slender, flexuous; upper cauline leaves simple, 
\par 
    bract-like, or cauline leaves absent
\par 
107 Hairs all appressed; sepals deflexed;
\par  
    achene smooth ............................................................ {\b 100. cymbalariifolius}
\par 
107 Hairs at base of stems and petioles patent; sepals patent;  
\par 
    achene strongly veined ............................................................. {\b 101. weyleri}
\par 
106 Stems stout, erect; upper cauline leaves at least 3-lobed
\par 
108 Flowers not more than 10 mm in diameter; stem rarely 
\par 
    exceeding 4 cm, about as long as basal leaves at anthesis ..... {\b 77. pygmaeus}
\par 
108 Flowers usually at least 15 mm in diameter;  
\par 
    stem 8-60 cm,much longer than basal leaves at anthesis
\par 
109 Basal leaves reniform, deeply lobed; head of achenes cylindrical; 
\par 
    beak about as long as achene ....................................................... {\b 78. nivalis}
\par 
109 Basal leaves cuneate, shallowly lobed; head of achenes 
\par 
    broadly ovoid; beak about ½ as long as achene .................... {\b 79. sulphureus}
\par 
98  Achene ± strongly compressed
\par 
110 Achene distinctly spiny or muricate with either numerous or long 
\par 
    projections (annual)
\par 
111 Honey-leaves 2-3 times as long as sepals .......................... {\b 37. marginatus}
\par 
111 Honey-leaves equalling or slightly longer than sepals
\par 
112 Achene up to c. 3 mm
\par 
113 Receptacle pubescent .............................................................. {\b 38. trilobus}
\par 
113 Receptacle glabrous
\par 
114 Pedicel not thickened in fruit; achene more than twice 
\par 
    as long as beak ...................................................................... {\b 41. parviflorus}
\par 
114 Pedicel greatly thickened in fruit; achene at most twice   
\par 
    as long as beak ............................................................................... {\b 42. chius}
\par 
112 Achene c. 7 mm; receptacle pubescent
\par 
115 Sepals deflexed; leaves shallowly lobed .............................. {\b 39. muricatus}
\par 
115 Sepals patent; leaves, except the lowest, deeply lobed .......... {\b 40. arvensis}
\par 
110 Achene smooth, punctulate or with few, small, obtuse tubercles 
\par 
    (usually perennial)
\par 
116 Receptacle glabrous
\par 
117 Sepals deflexed at anthesis
\par 
118 Leaf-segments cuneate-obovate .............................................. {\b 1. velutinus}
\par 
118 Leaf-segments broadly ovate ............................... {\b 2. constantinopolitanus}
\par 
117 Sepals not deflexed at anthesis
\par 
119 Honey-leaves orange-yellow; basal leaves usually 3-lobed to about 4;
\par 
    stock truncate ......................................................................... {\b 7. lanuginosus}
\par 
119 Honey-leaves golden-yellow; basal leaves
\par 
    usually more deeply divided, or rhizome stout, creeping
\par 
120 Achene at most twice as long as beak; leaf-segments ± stipitate
\par 
121 Leaves ± sericeous beneath; achene twice as long as beak .... {\b 11. serbicus}
\par 
121 Leaves pubescent to nearly glabrous beneath;
\par 
    achene as long as beak ................................................................. {\b 12. brutius}
\par 
120 Achene at least 4 times as long as beak; leaf-segments sessile
\par 
122 Filaments glabrous (rarely with a few hairs near base);
\par 
    plant often with short rhizome .......................................................... {\b 8. acris}
\par 
122 Filaments pubescent; plant with a stout, long, ± horizontal rhizome
\par 
123 Beak of achene usually at least 0·8 mm .............................. {\b 9. granatensis}
\par 
123 Beak of achene 0·5-0·7 mm ................................................ {\b 10. strigulosus}
\par  
116 Receptacle pubescent
\par 
124 Sepals deflexed at anthesis
\par 
125 Annual
\par 
126 Honey-leaves pale yellow; achene 2·5-3 mm; beak 0·5 mm ... {\b 35. sardous}
\par 
126 Honey-leaves deep yellow; achene 3-4 mm; beak 1 mm .. {\b 37. marginatus}
\par 
125 Perennial
\par 
127 Pedicels terete; sepals at first patent, later ± strongly 
\par 
    deflexed ............................................................................ {\b 26. macrophyllus}
\par 
127 Pedicels sulcate; sepals strongly deflexed soon after anthesis
\par 
128 Basal leaves suborbicular-cordate, incised crenate ....... {\b 36. cordiger}
\par 
128 Basal leaves 3-partite
\par 
129 Cauline leaves (except the lowest) small and bract-like
\par 
    ............................................................................................. {\b 32. neapolitanus}
\par 
129 Several of the lower cauline leaves similar to the basal, but smaller
\par 
130 Basal leaves lobed to ¾; segments united at base;
    beak of achene c. 1 mm ............................................................ {\b 33. pratensis}
\par 
130 Basal leaves lobed to base; middle segment often stipitate;
    beak of achene c. 0·5 mm ......................................................... {\b 34. bulbosus}
\par 
124 Sepals not deflexed at anthesis
\par 
131 Achene strongly keeled or sulcate
\par 
132 Pedicel sulcate
\par 
133 Stolons present ............................................................................ {\b 6. repens}
\par 
133 Stolons absent
\par 
134 Leaves divided into linear- or oblong-lanceolate lobes .. {\b 3. polyanthemos}
\par 
134 Leaves divided into cuneate-obovate segments with ovate, dentate lobes
\par 
135 Middle segment of basal leaves sessile ..................................... {\b 4. serpens}
\par 
135 Middle segment of basal leaves long-stipitate ....................... {\b 5. caucasicus}
\par 
132 Pedicel terete
\par 
136 Plant rarely more than 15 cm; achene with keeled but not 
    sulcate margin ..................................................... ({\b 13-24}). {\b montanus} group
\par 
136 Plant often at least 30 cm, achene with keeled and sulcate margin
\par 

\par 
272}
\par