{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 13-24. R. montanus }group. Glabrous or pubescent perennials 5-50 cm. Rhizome often with fibres and sometimes with hairs. Basal leaves 3- to 5(-7)-lobed; segments obovate, dentate; cauline leaves deeply 3- to 5-lobed with narrower, usually entire segments. Flowers 1-3(-5), 20-40 mm in diameter. Achenes 2·5-3·5 mm, compressed, sharply keeled; beak 0·5-2·5 mm, hooked.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28 There are a number of closely related species in the mountains of C., E. & S. Europe. The following key may help with their identification.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28 Literature: E. Landolt, {\i Ber. Schweiz. Bot. Ges.}{\b  64}: 9-83 (1954);{\b  66}: 92-117 (1956).
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 All leaves glabrous or nearly so
\par 
2 Stems glabrescent at base; beak 1/3-1/2 as long as
\par 
   achene (Corse) .................................................................... {\b 17. clethraphilus}
\par 
2 Stems pubescent at base; beak not more than 1/3 as long as achene
\par 
3 Segments of cauline leaves linear ........................................ {\b 16. carinthiacus}
\par 
3 Segments of cauline leaves linear-lanceolate or wider
\par 
4 Beak 1/4-1/3 as long as achene ................................................ {\b 18. montanus}
\par 
4 Beak of achene very short ............................................. {\b 19. pseudomontanus}
\par 
1 Leaves pubescent, except occasionally the first basal ones
\par 
5 Beak very short, appressed to achene; receptacle pubescent 
\par 
  at insertion of stamens; segments of cauline leaves linear
\par 
  .................................................................................................. {\b 23. oreophilus}
\par 
5 Beak 1/4-2/3 as long as achene; receptacle usually glabrous at insertion
\par 
  of stamens or, if pubescent, segments of cauline leaves not linear
\par 
6 Apex of rhizome with numerous hairs 3-4 mm; cauline leaves often
\par 
  semi-amplexicaul (Pyrenees) ........................................................ {\b 13. gouanii}
\par 
6 Rhizome glabrous or rarely with few short hairs, sometimes with fibres
\par 
7 Hairs of sepals at least 2 mm; beak at least ½ as long as achene 
\par 
  (S.W. Alps, Spain) ....................................................................... {\b 24. aduncus}
\par 
7 Hairs of sepals less than 2 mm; beak usually less than ½ as long as
\par 
  achene
\par 
8 Segments of cauline leaves linear (or, if lanceolate, widest near base)
\par 
9 Beak of achene slender; lateral segments of basal leaves 
\par 
  divided  for c. ½ of their length ............................................ {\b 22. grenierianus}
\par 
9 Beak of achene rather stout and rigid, lateral segments of basal leaves
\par 
  usually divided for more than ½ of their length 
\par 
10 Leaves distinctly pubescent ............................................. {\b 14. ruscinonensis} 
\par 
10 Leaves sparsely pubescent to subglabrous ........................... {\b 15. sartorianus}
\par 
8  Segments of cauline leaves not linear, widest near the middle
\par 
11 Leaves sparsely pubescent; beak of achene slender ............... {\b 18. montanus}
\par 
11 Leaves rather densely pubescent; beak of achene stout, rigid
\par 
12 Receptacle usually pubescent at insertion of stamens 
\par 
   (Balkan peninsula) ................................................................ {\b 20. concinnatus}
\par 
12 Receptacle glabrous at insertion of stamens (N.E. Italy) .......... {\b 21. venetus}
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 13. R. gouanii }Willd.,{\i  Sp. Pl. }{\b 2}({\b 2}): 1322 (1800). Pubescent. Rhizome apex with hairs 3-4 mm, usually with fibres. Cauline leaves usually semi-amplexicaul. Sepals rather densely pubescent. Honey-leaves 10-25 mm. Beak at least 1/3 as long as the achene, rigid. 2n = 16. •{\i  Pyrenees and Cordillera Cantabrica.} Ga Hs.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 14. R. ruscinonensis }Landolt,{\i  Ber. Schweiz. Bot. Ges.}{\b  66}: 101 (1956). Pubescent. Rhizome without hairs, usually without fibres at apex. Cauline leaves not amplexicaul. Sepals rather densely pubescent. Honey-leaves 8-15 mm. Beak c. 1/3 as long as the achene, rigid. 2n = 16. •{\i  C. & E. Pyrenees.} Ga Hs.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 15. R. sartorianus }Boiss. & Heldr. in Boiss.,{\i  Diagn. Pl. Or. Nov.}{\b  3}({\b 1}): 8 (1853). Like {\b 14} but sparsely pubescent to subglabrous; rhizome with fibres at apex; honey-leaves up to 20 mm. 2n = 16, 32.{\i  Italy and Balkan peninsula.} Al Bu Gr Ju.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28 Plants from Appennini and the mountains of C. & S. Italy, like {\b 15} but with appressed-pubescent basal leaves, the segments of the single cauline leaf lanceolate, and the beak c. 1/5 as long as the achene have been called {\b R. apenninus} (Chiov.) Pignatti, {\i Gior. Bot. Ital. }{\b 116}: 94 (1983), and plants from the same area like {\b 15} but with the basal leaves more strongly pubescent have been called {\b R. pollinensis} (N. Terracc.) Chiov.,{\i  Bull. Soc. Bot. Ital.}{\b  1892}: 279 (1892); their status is uncertain.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 16. R. carinthiacus }Hoppe in Sturm, {\i Deutschl. Fl. Abth. }{\b 1} ({\b 12/46}), no. 10 (1826). Rhizome usually without fibres. Stems pubescent at base. Leaves glabrous but ciliate, the basal deeply lobed. Sepals slightly pubescent, sometimes only at base. Honey-leaves 5-15 mm. Beak of achenes very short, appressed. 2n = 16. •{\i  Mountains of S. & S.C. Europe.} ?Al Au Bu Ga Ge He Hs It Ju.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 17. R. clethraphilus }Litard.,{\i  Bull. Acad. Int. Géogr. Bot.} ({\i Le Mans}) {\b 19}: 94 (1909). Like {\b 16} but stems more or less glabrous at base; basal leaves obtusely dentate; beak 1/3-1/2 as long as the achene. •{\i  Corse.} Co.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 18. R. montanus }Willd., {\i Sp. Pl.}{\b  2}({\b 2}): 1321 (1800) ({\i R. geraniifolius }sensu Schinz & Thell.). Leaves glabrous or sparsely pubescent; segments of cauline leaves linear-lanceolate to cuneiform or elliptical, dentate, often semi-amplexicaul. Sepals finely pubescent. Honey-leaves 7-20 mm. Receptacle glabrous at insertion of the stamens. Beak 1/4-1/3 as long as the achene. 2n = 32.{\i  Somewhat calcicole. • Alps, Jura, Schwarzwald.} Au Ga Ge He It Ju.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 19. R. pseudomontanus }Schur, {\i Verh. Naturf. Ver. Brunn}{\b  15}({\b 2}): 42 (1877). Like {\b 18} but achene with a very short beak. 2n = 16, 32. •{\i  Carpathians, Balkan peninsula.} Bu Cz Gr Ju Po Rm Rs(W).
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 20. R. concinnatus }Schott,{\i  Österr. Bot. Wochenbl.}{\b  7}: 182 (1857) ({\i R. croaticus} Schott). Like {\b 18} but leaves pubescent; beak of achene stouter and more rigid; receptacle usually pubescent at insertion of the stamens. • {\i W. part of Balkan peninsula}. Al Ju.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 21. R. venetus }Huter ex Landolt,{\i  Feddes Repert.}{\b  70}: 3 (1964). Like {\b 18} but leaves pubescent; beak of achene stouter and more rigid. 2n = 32.{\i  S.E. Alps.} It.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 22. R. grenierianus }Jordan in F.W. Schultz,{\i  Arch. Fl. Fr. Allem.} 304 (1854). Rhizome often with abundant fibres. Leaves densely pubescent; segments of cauline leaves linear to lanceolate, widest near base. Sepals finely pubescent. Honey-leaves 5-15 mm. Beak up to 1/2 as long as the achene. 2n = 16. {\i Calcifuge. • Alps}. Au Ga Ge He It.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 23. R. oreophilus }Bieb.,{\i  Fl. Taur.-Cauc. }{\b 3}: 383 (1819) ({\i R. hornschuchii }Hoppe). Rhizome with fibres and hairs in upper part. Basal
\par 

\par 
275}
\par