{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 Willk., subsp. {\i broteri} (Freyn) Vasc., {\i R. broteri }Freyn,{\i  R. occidentalis} Freyn): Plant 20-80 cm, robust; stock not or scarcely swollen and corm-like, usually with abundant fibres; roots thick, fleshy, fusiform or cylindrical. Middle segments of basal leaves stipitate. Pedicel sulcate near the top, striate below. Receptacle elongate-conical. Achenes 2·5-4 mm, smooth. 2n = 16. Damp places. S. Europe, extending to Hungary.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 35. R. sardous }Crantz,{\i  Stirp. Austr. }{\b 2}: 84 (1763) ({\i R. philonotis} Ehrh., {\i R. pseudobulbosus} Schur; incl. subsp. {\i xatardii} (Lapeyr.) Rouy & Fouc.). More or less pubescent annual 10-45 cm, with the habit of {\b 34} but without fleshy roots and with a corm-like stock not or feebly developed. Flowers 12-25 mm in diameter. Honey-leaves pale yellow. Achenes 2·5-3 mm, smooth or minutely punctate, with small, obtuse tubercles near the margin, or sometimes smooth; beak c. 0·5 mm, upward curving. 2n = 16.{\i  From Scotland and N. Spain eastwards to S.C. Russia.} Al Au Be Bl Br Bu Co Cz Da Ga Ge Gr He Ho Hs Hu It Ju Po Rm Rs(B, C, W, K) Sa Si Su [No].
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 36. R. cordiger }Viv., {\i Fl. Cors.} 8 (1824) (incl.{\i  R. cordiger} subsp. {\i diffusus} (Moris) Arrigoni). Like {\b 35} but perennial; basal leaves suborbicular-cordate, incised-crenate, appressed-pubescent and long-petiolate; petioles broadly winged at base.{\i  Stream sides and other wet places,} 700-1600{\i  m.  Corse, Sardegna.} Co Sa.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 37. R. marginatus }D'Urv.,{\i  Mém. Soc. Linn. Paris}{\b  1}: 318 (1822) (incl.{\i  R. angulatus} C. Presl). Like {\b 35} but honey-leaves 3-4 mm, golden-yellow; margin of achenes wider; beak c. 1 mm, lanceolate and 2-veined. 2n = 16.{\i  S.E. Europe; Sicilia.} Al Cr Gr Ju Rs(K) Si Tu [Br]
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28 The achenes vary from almost smooth, to strongly tuberculate in var. {\i trachycarpus} (Fischer & C.A. Meyer) Aznav. ({\i R. trachycarpus} Fischer & C.A. Meyer).
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 38. R. trilobus }Desf.,{\i  Fl. Atl. }{\b 1}: 437 (1798). Nearly glabrous annual 10-50 cm. Lowest leaves simple; the next 3-partite, the segments simple, cuneate-obovate, dentate; upper with more numerous, linear-oblong lobes. Flowers 10-15 mm in diameter. Honey-leaves about as long as the sepals. Achenes c. 2 mm, with numerous small tubercles; beak short, triangular. 2n = 32.{\i  Damp, often disturbed ground. S. Europe.} Al Az Bl Co Ga Gr Hs It Lu Sa Si.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 39. R. muricatus }L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 555 (1753). More or less glabrous annual up to c. 50 cm. Leaves all similar, coarsely crenate-dentate and often shallowly lobed. Honey-leaves little longer than the sepals. Achenes 7-8 mm, ovate, spiny, with a broad, smooth margin; beak 2-3 mm, nearly straight. 2n = 32, 48, 64.{\i  Damp, often disturbed ground. S. Europe.} Al Bl Bu Co Cr Ga Gr Hs It Ju Lu Rm Rs(K) Sa Si Tu [Az Br].
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b R. cornutus} DC., {\i Reg. Veg. Syst. Nat. }{\b 1}: 300 (1817) ({\i R. lomatocarpus} Fischer & C.A. Meyer), from S.W. Asia, like {\b 39} but with honey-leaves 2-3 times as long as the sepals, and achenes tuberculate, has been recorded from Turkey-in-Europe, but requires confirmation.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28 Sect. ECHINELLA DC. Nectary covered by an entire, truncate scale, attached laterally or free to base. Achenes beaked, strongly bordered and with spines, hooked hairs or tubercles.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 40. R. arvensis }L.,{\i  Sp. Pl.} 555 (1753). More or less pubescent annual 15-60 cm. Lowest leaves simple, the others 3-lobed and often again divided into narrow, entire or dentate segments. Pedicel terete. Flowers 4-12 mm in diameter, pale greenish-yellow. Sepals patent. Receptacle pubescent. Achenes 6-8 mm, few (4-8), in 1 whorl, spiny or tuberculate, rarely only ribbed-reticulate, with a broad sulcate border; beak 3-4 mm, straight. 2n = 32.{\i  Cultivated or disturbed ground. S.,W. & C. Europe, extending to S.E. Sweden and E. Ukraine.} Al Au Be Bl Br Bu Co Cr Cz Da Ga Ge Gr Hb He Ho Hs Hu It Ju Lu Po Rm Rs(B, C, W, K) Sa Si Su Tu [No].
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 41. R. parviflorus }L. in Loefl.,{\i  Iter Hisp.} 291 (1758). Pubescent, spreading to decumbent annual 5-40 cm. Lower leaves 3- to 5-lobed; segments obovate-cuneate, dentate; upper simple or with entire, oblong segments. Flowers 3-6 mm in diameter. Sepals deflexed. Receptacle glabrous. Achenes 2-3 mm, bordered, with hooked spines; beak short, hooked at apex. 2n = 32.{\i  Mediterranean region and W. Europe, northwards to N. England and eastwards to the middle Danube.} Az Bl Br Co Ga Gr Hb Hs It Ju Lu Sa Si [Be].
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 42. R. chius }DC.,{\i  Reg. Veg. Syst. Nat.}{\b  1}: 299 (1817). Like {\b 41} but leaves 3-lobed; middle segment entire to 3(-5)-dentate; fruiting pedicel greatly thickened; beak at least ½ as long as the achene.{\i  Lowland grassland and scrub. S. Europe.} Bu Co Cr Gr It Ju Rs(K) Sa Si Tu.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28 Sect. RANUNCULASTRUM DC. Roots of 2 sorts, some tuberous and some fibrous. Achenes compressed, keeled. Receptacle elongating in fruit and becoming more or less cylindrical.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28 (A) Sepals deflexed at flowering.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 43. R. gracilis }E.D. Clarke, {\i Travels}{\b  2}({\b 2}): 336 (1814) ({\i R. chaerophyllos }sensu Hayek, non L., {\i R. agerii }Bertol.). Simple or little-branched perennial with ovoid tubers. Stock usually without fibres. Basal leaves glabrous or slightly patent-pilose, the outer suborbicular, shallowly 3-lobed, the inner more deeply cut into obovate-cuneate, dentate segments. Achenes ovoid; beak somewhat curved, nearly as long as the achene. 2n = 16. {\i S. Europe eastwards from Sicilia}. Bu Cr Gr It Ju Si Tu.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 44. R. oxyspermus }Willd., {\i Sp. Pl.}{\b  2}({\b 2}): 1328 (1800). Like {\b 43} but tubers fusiform; all the leaves patent-hirsute, mostly conspicuously longer than wide, deeply lobed with deeply divided segments; achenes tapering into a straight, sharp beak longer than the achene. 2n = 16.{\i  S.E. Europe.} Bu Ju Rm Rs(W, K, E).
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 45. R. psilostachys }Griseb.,{\i  Spicil. Fl. Rumel.}{\b  1}: 304 (1843). Like {\b 43} but tubers fusiform; leaves sericeous beneath, mostly conspicuously longer than wide; achenes verrucose. 2n = 16, 32. •{\i  Balkan peninsula, extending northwards to Hungary}. Al Bu Gr Hu Ju Tu.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 46. R. rumelicus }Griseb., {\i op. cit. }305 (1843). Like {\b 43} but tubers oblong; leaves sericeous beneath, distinctly longer than wide; achenes tuberculate; beak straight. 2n = 16, 24.{\i  Balkan peninsula, Kriti.} Bu Cr Gr Ju Tu.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 47. R. monspeliacus }L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 553 (1753) ({\i R. cylindricus} Jordan). Whitish-lanate or sericeous perennial 20 50 cm, with cylindrical or fusiform tubers. Basal leaves variable, ovate-cordate, more or less deeply 3-lobed and dentate to 3-fid with oblong-cuneate, laciniate, stipitate segments. Flowers 25-30 mm in diameter. Receptacle glabrous. Head of achenes cylindrical. Achenes ovoid, sparsely pubescent; beak c. ½ as long as the achene, curved. 2n = 16. •{\i  W. Mediterranean region.} ?Bl Co Ga Hs It ?Sa Si [Ho Su].
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 48. R. miliarakesii }Halácsy,{\i  Magyar Bot. Lapok}{\b  11}: 116 (1912).
\par 

\par 
277}
\par