{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 60. R. millii }Boiss. & Heldr. in Boiss.,{\i  Fl. Or. }{\b 1}: 35 (1867). Like {\b 59} but tubers ovoid; honey-leaves 7-12, oblong-ovate; achenes c. 2 mm; beak strongly hooked, c. ¼ as long as the achene. {\i Dry hills. • S. Greece. }Gr.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 61. R. nigrescens }Freyn in Willk. & Lánge,{\i  Prodr. Fl. Hisp. }{\b 3}: 921 (1880). Somewhat pubescent, erect, little-branched perennial up to 10-40 cm, with cylindrical tubers. Basal leaves c. 2 cm across, reniform, 3-fid to the middle, crenate, rather thick and rugose, nearly or quite glabrous; cauline leaves few, all bract-like. Flowers 1 or 2, c. 25 mm in diameter. Head of achenes c. 12 mm. Achenes glabrous, orbicular; beak shorter than achene, curved. •{\i  N. Spain, N. & C. Portugal}. Hs Lu.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 62. R. cortusifolius }Willd.,{\i  Enum. Pl. Horti Berol.} 558 (1809) ({\i R. megaphyllus} Steudel). Robust, densely villous perennial up to 100 cm, with fusiform tubers. Basal leaves up to c. 30 cm wide, coriaceous, orbicular-cordate, shallowly lobed; segments nearly parallel-sided, shallowly lobed and dentate at apex; lower cauline leaves resembling basal but smaller; upper sessile, bract-like. Inflorescence corymbose. Flowers up to 50 mm in diameter. Receptacle nearly glabrous. Achenes 3 mm, glabrous, smooth; beak 1 mm, curved.{\i  Açores.} Az. ({\i Madeira, Islas Canarias.})
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 63. R. spicatus }Desf., {\i Fl. Atl. }{\b 1}: 438 (1798) (incl.{\i  R. aspromontanus} Huter, {\i R. blepharicarpos} Boiss., {\i R. rupestris} Guss.,{\i  R. spicatus} subsp. {\i aspromontanus} (Huter) Greuter & Burdet,{\i  R. spicatus} subsp. {\i blepharicarpos} (Boiss.) Grau,{\i  R. spicatus} subsp. {\i rupestris} (Guss.) Maire). Pubescent perennial up to c. 40 cm, with fusiform tubers. Basal leaves reniform or orbicular, shallowly 3-lobed; middle segment smaller than the lateral; all more or less shallowly lobed and crenate, thin, densely appressed-hirsute on both surfaces. Flowers 30-40 mm in diameter, few. Receptacle pubescent. Achenes obovate, glabrous or with short setae; beak c. ½ as long as the achene, broad-based, recurved and hooked.{\i  S. Spain; S.W. Italy, Sicilia}. Hs It Si.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28 Three subspecies have been recognized in Europe, with the typical subspecies confined to N. Africa, but these are very weakly characterized and are not worth maintaining.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 64. R. creticus }L.,{\i  Sp. Pl.} 550 (1753). Branched, patent-pubescent perennial up to 50 cm. Basal leaves reniform, crenate and shallowly lobed; cauline leaves 3-fid; segments lanceolate, entire or dentate at apex. Flowers 20-30 mm in diameter, numerous. Receptacle nearly glabrous. Achenes 4-5 mm, pubescent, compressed; beak c. 0·5 mm, hooked. 2n = 16.{\i  Rocky places. S. Aegean region.} Cr Gr.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 65. R. thasius }Halácsy, {\i Österr. Bot. Zeitschr.}{\b  42}: 412 (1892). Slender, flexuous, much-branched, more or less glabrous perennial, with oblong tubers. Basal leaves orbicular-cordate, 3-fid; segments divided into ovate, obtuse lobes. Flowers numerous. Achenes about as long as the stout, slightly curved beak.{\i  E. Greece; Aegean region.} Gr.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28 Outside Europe known only from the E. Aegean island of Ikaria.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 66. R. subhomophyllus }(Halácsy) Vierh.,{\i  Österr. Bot. Zeitschr.}{\b  84}:131 (1935) ({\i R. cadmicus} auct., non Boiss.). Slender, not or little-branched, more or less glabrous perennial, with oblong tubers. Basal leaves orbicular or wider than long, 3-sect to base; segments with obtuse lobes. Flowers 1 or 2; honey-leaves 5-7 mm. Achene longer than the slender, hooked beak.{\i  Rocky places on limestone. S. Aegean region.} Cr Gr.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 67. R. incomparabilis }Janka,{\i  Österr. Bot. Zeitschr.}{\b  22}: 174 (1872). Like {\b 66} but tubers cylindrical to fusiform; stems unbranched; leaves 3-sect to c. 4/5; honey-leaves 7-9 mm, broader; achene with longer hooked beak. 2n = 16.{\i  Damp rock-ledges and crevices on schist and granite. • C. part of Balkan peninsula.} Bu Gr Ju.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 68. R. sprunerianus }Boiss.,{\i  Diagn. Pl. Or. Nov.}{\b  1}({\b 1}): 64 (1843). Much-branched, patent-pubescent to subglabrous perennial, with cylindrical tubers. Basal leaves orbicular-cordate, 3- to 5-fid. Flowers numerous. Achenes with tubercle-based hairs; beak about as long as the achene, nearly straight but hooked at apex. 2n = 16, 32.{\i  Balkan peninsula and Aegean region.} Bu Cr Gr Ju Tu.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 69. R. asiaticus }L.,{\i  Sp. Pl.} 552 (1753) ({\i Cyprianthe asiatiea} (L.) Freyn). Pubescent perennial with tuberous roots. Outer basal leaves 3-lobed and dentate; inner 3-sect; segments stipitate, pinnatisect. Flowers 30-50 mm in diameter; honey-leaves white, less often yellow, red or purple. Head of achenes c. 10 mm. Achenes ovate, attenuate into a wide, hooked beak. 2n = 16.{\i  S. Aegean region.} Cr Gr.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28 Sect. AURICOMUS Spach. Roots all fibrous. Achenes slightly compressed, often puberulent; receptacle not elongating in fruit.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    ({\b 70-75}). {\b R. auricomus} group. Perennial herbs with simple to deeply palmately divided, reniform to suborbicular-cordate basal leaves; cauline leaves smaller, sessile, deeply dissected or rarely simple. Pedicels terete. Sepals patent, pubescent. Honey-leaves yellow, often unequal or some or all lacking. Achenes slightly compressed, puberulent (rarely glabrous), borne on peg-like projections from the glabrous or pubescent receptacle.{\i  Most of Europe but absent from much of the Mediterranean region}.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28 Species{\b  70-75} include a small number of sexual diploids and a large number of polyploids which are facultative or obligate apomicts and which have perhaps arisen from hybrids between the sexual species. Most of the apomicts are very local but a few have a fairly wide distribution. Detailed investigations have been made in certain geographical areas, but much work remains to be done before a complete understanding of the group can be attained.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28 Literature: E. Borchers-Kolb,{\i  Mitt. Bot. Staatssamm.} ({\i München}){\b  19}: 363-429 (1983). P.A. Haas,{\i  Ber. Bayer. Bot. Ges.}{\b  29}: 5-12 (1952);{\b 30}: 27-32 (1954). A. Jasiewicz,{\i  Fragm. Fl. Geobot. }{\b 2}: 62-110 (1956). E. Julin & J.A. Nannfeldt,{\i  Ark. Bot.}{\b  6}: 163-241 (1967). G. Marklund,{\i  Mem. Soc. Fauna Fl. Fenn.}{\b  16}: 45-53 (1939). G. Marklund & A. Rousi,{\i  Evolution }{\b 15}: 510-522 (1961). E.I. Nyárády,{\i  Bul. Grad. Bot. Cluj }{\b 13}, no. 1-4 (1934). A. Rousi, {\i Ann. Bot. Soc. Zool.-Bot. Fenn. Vanamo}{\b  29}({\b 2}) (1956). M. Romanowa,{\i  Trudy Petergof. Est.-Nauc.} Inst. no. 8 (1932). Z,. Schiller,{\i  Math. Term. Értesitö }{\b 35}: 361 447 (1917). O. Schwarz, {\i Mitt. Thür. Bot. Ges.}{\b  1}({\b 1}): 120-143 (1949). An extensive bibliography is given in J. Jalas & J. Suominen,{\i  Atlas Florae Europaeae}{\b  8}: 161-176 (1989).
\par z

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28 The treatment here is very conservative and includes only the principal species that have been recognized in Europe. A detailed synonymy and a valuable synthesis of the distribution of some of the segregate taxa can be found in J. Jalas & J. Suominen, {\i loc. cit.} (1989).
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Achenes glabrous
\par 
2 Outer basal leaves deeply lobed .................................................... {\b 74. affinis}
\par 

\par 
279}
\par