{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 5. R. caucasicus }Bieb., {\i Fl. Taur.-Cauc. }{\b 2}: 27 (1808). A slender, pubescent perennial c. 30 cm. Stock erect, with fibres. Basal leaves with 3 segments; middle segments long-stipitate; lateral segments usually 3-lobed, the lobe on the lower side downward-directed and more or less covering the petiole; all lobes cuneate-obovate, dentate; cauline leaves less divided, with narrower lobes. Flowers 10-20 mm in diameter. Achenes c. 4 mm, strongly compressed, 2-veined on upper margin; beak c. 1 mm, stout, curved, 2-veined at base. 2n = 16. {\i Woods and mountain meadows. Krym.} Rs(K).
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 6. R. repens }L.,{\i  Sp. Pl.} 554 (1753) ({\i R. oenanthifolius} Ten. & Guss.,{\i  R. pubescens} Lag.). A nearly glabrous to somewhat pubescent perennial 15-60 cm. Stolons long, rooting at the nodes. Basal leaves triangular-ovate, 3-partite; middle lobe long-stipitate; segments usually cut into 3-dentate lobes; cauline leaves smaller and less divided. Flowers 20-30 mm in diameter. Head of achenes globose; achenes c. 3 mm, compressed, bordered; beak c. 1·5 mm, falcate. 2n = 32.{\i  Damp places, especially on disturbed ground. Almost throughout Europe}. All except Bl Cr Sb.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28 A very variable species in need of detailed investigation.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28 (C) Pedicel terete. Sepals patent. Receptacle glabrous.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 7. R. lanuginosus }L.,{\i  Sp. Pl.} 554 (1753) ({\i R. umbrosus} Ten.). A pubescent perennial 30-50 cm; stock truncate. Stem with long patent hairs. Basal leaves usually about as wide as long, 3(-5)-lobed to c. ¾; segments broadly ovate, irregularly dentate; cauline leaves similar but smaller. Flowers (15-)20-30(-40) mm in diameter. Honey-leaves deep orange-yellow. Head of achenes globose; achenes 4-5 mm, compressed, bordered; beak c. 1·5 mm, broad, strongly recurved. 2n = 28. {\i Woods. • C. & S. Europe from S.E. France to Romania, and extending to Denmark and Estonia.} Al Au Bu Co Cz Da Ga Ge Gr He Hu It Ju Po Rm Rs(B, ?C, W) Sa Si Tu.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 8. R. acris }L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 554 (1753) ({\i R. acer} auct.,{\i  R. stevenii} auct., non Andrz. ex Besser). Perennial 10-100 cm, more or less glabrous, appressed-pubescent or with stiff patent or deflexed hairs on stem. Stock truncate, oblique, or forming a stout, creeping rhizome. Basal leaves more or less deeply divided into 3-7 sessile segments, which are ovate-cuneate in outline, dentate and simple or again divided; cauline leaves resembling the basal but smaller. Flowers 15-25 mm in diameter. Honey-leaves golden-yellow. Head of achenes globose; achenes 2-3·5 mm, broadly elliptical or suborbicular; beak short, hooked.{\i  Grassland. Most of Europe}. All except Az Bl Cr Lu Rs(K) Si ?Tu; introduced in Sa Sb.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28 This very variable species is divisible into a number of subspecies that differ in the presence or absence of a rhizome, the shape and dissection of the leaves, pubescence, and the number of flowers in the inflorescence. Intermediates occur between the various taxa where their distributions overlap.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Stock a stout ± horizontal rhizome; plant often
\par 
  more than 50 cm .............................................................. ({\b d}) subsp. {\b friesianus}
\par 
1 Stock short, truncate; plant usually less than 50 cm
\par 
2 Plant usually more than 20 cm; basal leaves much-divided, 
\par 
  lobes narrow; flowers numerous ............................................. ({\b a}) subsp. {\b acris}
\par 
2 Plant less than 20 cm; basal leaves with 3(-5) wide segments with 
\par 
  a few coarse teeth; flowers 1-3
\par 
3 At least spring leaves glabrous; 
\par 
  flowers usually 1 or 2 ........................................................ ({\b b}) subsp. {\b pumilus}
\par 
3 Leaves pubescent, petioles with deflexed hairs; 
\par 
  flowers 1-3(-5) ................................................................... ({\b c}) subsp. {\b borealis}
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b acris} ({\i R. stevenii} auct. angl., hung. et roman., non Andrz. ex Besser): Plant 20-50 cm, appressed-pilose (sometimes villous below), with short truncate rootstock. Basal leaves much-divided; leaf-lobes linear-lanceolate. Inflorescence with numerous flowers. 2n = 14.{\i  Mainly in meadows. Throughout most of the range of the species, but mainly on mountains in the south}.
\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b pumilus} (Wahlenb.) Á. & D. Löve, {\i Taxon}{\b  34}: 164 (1985): Plant 10-20 cm, somewhat glaucous. Basal leaves with 3 segments with a few coarse teeth; spring leaves glabrous. Flowers 1 or 2(3). 2n = 14.{\i  Fennoscandia, Iceland, Scotland.}
\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b c}) Subsp. {\b borealis} (Regel) Nyman,{\i  Consp. }12 (1878) ({\i R. borealis} Trautv., nom. illeg., {\i R. glabriusculus} Rupr., {\i R. stevenii} sensu Hiitonen, non Andrz. ex Besser): Like subsp. ({\b b}) but all leaves pubescent; flowers 1-3(-5). 2n = 14.{\i  N.E. Europe, southwards to} 54°{\i  N. in C. Ural}.
\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b d}) Subsp. {\b friesianus} (Jordan) Rouy & Fouc.,{\i  Fl. Fr.}{\b  1}: 103 (1893) (subsp. {\i despectus} Laínz, {\i R. stevenii} auct. gall. non Andrz. ex Besser): Plant 50-100 cm, with a stout, more or less horizontal rhizome. Basal leaves much-divided; leaf-lobes ovate to linear-lanceolate. Inflorescence with numerous flowers.{\i  C. Europe, and locally in S. Europe; introduced elsewhere}.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 9. R. granatensis }Boiss.,{\i  Diagn. Pl. Or. Nov.}{\b  3}({\b 1}): 8 (1853) ({\i R. acris} subsp. {\i granatensis} (Boiss.) Nyman,{\i  R. stevenii} sensu Freyn). Perennial 40-100(-120) cm, with a stout more or less horizontal rhizome. Leaves coriaceous, thick, strigose; lobes ovate or ovate-oblong, with few teeth. Flowers numerous, 15-25 mm in diameter. Honey-leaves golden-yellow. Sepals with more or less appressed, whitish hairs all of about the same length. Filaments pubescent. Achenes with more or less straight beak 0·8-1·5 mm. 2n = 28.{\i  C.& S.E.Spain.} Hs.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 10. R. strigulosus }Schur, {\i Enum. Pl. Transs.} 17 (1866) ({\i R. stevenii} auct. ross., non Andrz. ex Besser, {\i R. acris} subsp. {\i strigulosis} (Schur) Hyl.). Like {\b 9} but leaf-lobes narrower, with broader sinuses; sepals with more or less patent reddish hairs, short at base and long at apex of sepal; beak of achenes 0·5-0·7 mm. 2n = 28.{\i  E. & E.C. Europe, northwards to White Russia}. Bu Cz Hu Ju ?Po Rm Rs (?C, W, E).
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 11. R. serbicus }Vis., {\i Mem. Ist. Veneto}{\b  9}: 168 (1858) (?{\i R. kladnii} Schur). Perennial 40-120 cm; rhizome long, stout. Leaves sericeous, at least when young; basal leaves with 3 cuneate, sometimes stipitate, segments which are variously cut and dentate; cauline leaves resembling the basal but smaller. Filaments pubescent. Beak rather shorter than the achene, nearly straight. 2n = 28. {\i Damp and shady places.• Balkan peninsula, S.W. Italy.} Al Bu Gr It Ju ?Rm [Su] .
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 12. R. brutius }Ten.,{\i  Prodr. Fl. Nap.}{\b  1}: lxi (1811) ({\i R. calabrus} Grande). Patent-pubescent perennial 30-50 cm, with short-creeping stock. Leaves subglabrous; basal leaves large, pentagonal-reniform in outline, 3-partite or pedately 5-partite; segments often stipitate, 2- or 3-fid and strongly serrate; cauline leaves resembling the basal but smaller and sessile. Filaments glabrous. Achenes compressed, keeled; beak about as long as the achene, slender, circinate.{\i  Woods. S. part of Balkan peninsula; S.W. Italy}. Gr It Tu.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b R. crimaeus} Juz.,{\i  Not. Syst.} ({\i Leningrad}) {\b 22}: 5 (1950), from Krym, appears to be closed related to {\b 12}, from which it is said to differ in its more dissected leaves and the shorter beak of the achene.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28 (D) Pedicel terete. Sepals patent. Receptacle pubescent.
\par 

\par 
274}
\par