{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 68 Pedicels sulcate
\par 
69 All but the lowest cauline leaves small and bract-like ...... {\b 32. neapolitanus}
\par 
69 Several of the cauline leaves similar to basal, but smaller
\par 
70 Middle segment of leaf sessile; beak of achene c. 1 mm ........ {\b 33. pratensis}
\par 
70 Middle segment of leaf usually stipitate;
\par 
   beak of achene c. 0·5 mm .......................................................... {\b 34. bulbosus}
\par 
68 Pedicels terete
\par 
71 Leaves appressed-pubescent or sericeous
\par 
72 Tubers ovoid or shortly oblong .............................................. {\b 46. rumelicus}
\par 
72 Tubers fusiform or cylindrical
\par 
73 Achene glabrous, verrucose ............................................... {\b 45. psilostachys}
\par 
73 Achene slightly pubescent, not verrucose ....................... {\b 47. monspeliacus}
\par 
71 Leaves not appressed-pubescent
\par 
74 Leaf-segments deeply divided into numerous linear-lanceolate 
\par 
   lobes ...................................................................................... {\b 48. miliarakesii}
\par 
74 Leaf segments obtusely lobed or incise-serrate
\par 
75 Leaves longer than wide; beak of achene straight ............. {\b 44. oxyspermus}
\par 
75 Leaves usually wider than long; beak of achene curved
\par 
76 Leaves sericeous, deeply divided;
\par 
    middle segment stipitate ................................................... {\b 47. monspeliacus}
\par 
76 Leaves not sericeous, usually not divided to base ..................... {\b 43. gracilis}
\par 
65 Sepals not deflexed in flower
\par 
77 Basal leaves glabrous, pedately 3- to 5-partite; segments
\par 
   linear-lanceolate, entire or deeply 2-lobed .................................. {\b 51. pedatus}
\par 
77 Basal leaves not as above
\par 
78 Achene circular, flat, winged; beak very short, hooked  ...{\b 52. platyspermus}
\par 
78 Achene not as above
\par 
79 Anthers purplish-black ............................................................. {\b 69. asiaticus}
\par 
79 Anthers yellow
\par 
80 Stock swollen, usually densely and persistently fibrous
\par 
81 Lobes of basal leaves c. 1 mm wide, linear ........... {\b 55. pseudomillefoliatus}
\par 
81 Lobes of basal leaves more than 1 mm wide
\par 
82 Beak of achene curved or distinctly hooked ............................. {\b 54. barceloi}
\par 
82 Beak of achene straight (often somewhat hooked at tip)
\par 
83 Flowers 1-8; receptacle glabrous; beak about as long  
\par 
   as achene .................................................................................. {\b 53. paludosus}
\par 
83 Flowers usually solitary; receptacle pubescent to subglabrous; 
\par 
   beak shorter than achene .......................................................... {\b 56. gregarius}
\par 
80 Stock not swollen and densely and persistently fibrous
\par 
84 Basal leaves ± lobed for up to c. ¾ of their length
\par 
85 Basal leaves shallowly lobed; segments contiguous or overlapping
\par 
86 Basal leaves coriaceous, rugose
\par 
87 Leaves c. 2 cm across, ± glabrous; flowers few, c. 25 mm 
\par 
   in diameter .............................................................................. {\b 61. nigrescens}
\par 
87 Leaves c. 15 cm across, densely appressed-villous; 
\par 
   flowers numerous,  c. 40 mm in diameter ........................... {\b 62. cortusifolius}
\par 
86 Basal leaves thin, not rugose
\par 
88 Leaves c. 8 cm across; flowers several ..................................... {\b 64. creticus}
\par 
88 Leaves c. 5 cm across; flowers 1(2) ......................................... {\b 63. spicatus}
\par 
85 Basal leaves lobed to c. ¾; segments distant
\par 
89 Plant stout; basal leaves ± patent-pubescent ..................... {\b 68. sprunerianus}
\par 
89 Plant slender; basal leaves appressed-pubescent or 
\par 
   nearly or quite glabrous
\par 
90 Basal leaves appressed-pubescent
\par 
91 Honey-leaves at least 15 mm or more ...................................... {\b 63. spicatus}
\par 
91 Honey-leaves c. 10 mm .................................................. {\b 57. ollissiponensis}
\par 
90 Basal leaves nearly or quite glabrous
\par 
92 Stems much-branched; beak about as long as achene, stout,
\par 
    curved .......................................................................................... {\b 65. thasius}
\par 
92 Stems simple or subsimple; beak shorter than achene, slender, hooked
\par 
93 Honey-leaves 5-7 mm; leaves divided to base ............ {\b 66. subhomophyllus}
\par 
93 Honey-leaves 7-9 mm; leaves divided up to 4/5 of 
\par 
   their length ....................................................................... {\b 67. incomparabilis}
\par 
84 Basal leaves lobed nearly or quite to base
\par 
94 Segments of basal leaves dentate or lobed but not 2- or
\par 
   3-pinnatisect ..................................................................... {\b 57. ollissiponensis}
\par 
94 Segments of basal leaves 2- or 3-pinnatisect
\par 
95 Honey-leaves copper-coloured beneath (Kriti) ......................... {\b 58. cupreus}
\par 
95 Honey-leaves yellow on both surfaces
\par 
96 Honey-leaves 7-12 ........................................................................ {\b 60. millii}
\par 
96 Honey-leaves 5
\par 
97 Receptacle pubescent at insertion of stamens ................ {\b 57. ollissiponensis}
\par 
97 Receptacle glabrous at insertion of stamens ...................... {\b 59. millefoliatus}
\par 
63 Roots all fibrous; fibres sometimes thick but not obviously tuberous
\par 
98 Achene not or slightly compressed, with strongly convex sides
\par 
99 Annual; head of achenes cylindrical; achenes 70-100, c. 1 mm
\par 
   ................................................................................................... {\b 81. sceleratus}
\par 
99 Perennial; head of achenes globose; achenes fewer and larger
\par 
100 Achene puberulent
\par 
101 Basal and cauline leaves markedly dissimilar . ({\b 70-75}).{\b  auricomus }group
\par 
101 Basal and cauline leaves ± similar ...................................... {\b 76. polyrhizos}
\par 
100 Achene glabrous
\par 
102 Most leaves entire at base and then increasingly strongly dentate 
\par 
    to the wide apex, wider than long
\par 
103 Basal leaves usually 2; cauline 2 or 3; achene 2-3 mm;
\par 
    beak short .................................................................................. {\b 90. hybridus}
\par 

\par 
271}
\par