{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 leaves pubescent; young folded lamina deflexed. Sepals usually finely patent-pubescent. Honey-leaves 7-15 mm. Receptacle pubescent at insertion of the stamens. Beak of achene very short, appressed. 2n = 16.{\i  Mountains of C. & S. Europe, eastwards from} 6°{\i  E.} Au Co Cz Ga Ge He It Ju Po Rm Rs(W, K).
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 24. R. aduncus }Gren. in Gren. & Godron,{\i  Fl. Fr. }{\b 1}: 32 (1847) ({\i R. villarsii} auct., ?an DC.). Rhizome glabrous and usually without fibres. Leaves pubescent, lower cauline petiolate or with sheathing base. Sepals with long hairs more than 2 mm. Honey-leaves 8-15 mm. Beak at least ½ as long as the achene, stout. 2n = 16. •{\i  S.W. Alps; E. Spain.} Ga Hs It.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 25. R. carpaticus }Herbich,{\i  Sel. Pl. Rar. Galic.} 15 (1836) ({\i R. dentatus} (Baumg.) Freyn). Glabrescent or appressed-pubescent perennial 15-40 cm. Rhizome creeping. Basal leaves 1-3, up to 15 cm wide, 3- to 5-fid; segments broad, rhombic-ovate, dentate; cauline leaves similar, shortly petiolate. Sepals pubescent. Honey-leaves c. 20 mm. Achenes c. 3 mm, broadly obovate, sharply keeled; beak short, curved. 2n = 16. •{\i   Carpathians}. Cz Rm Rs(W).
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 26. R. macrophyllus }Desf.,{\i  Fl. Atl.}{\b  1}: 437 (1798) ({\i R. byzantinus} P.H. Davis, {\i R. palustris} auct., non L. ex Sm.). Robust, pubescent perennial 30-60 cm. Stock stout, erect, surrounded by fibres. Basal leaves c. 4-7 × 5-10 cm, pentagonal-orbicular, deeply cordate, 3- to 5-partite; segments wide, irregularly incised and crenate-dentate; upper cauline leaves 3-fid with entire segments, or undivided. Flowers 25-30 mm in diameter. Achenes 4 mm, compressed, sharply keeled, bordered, smooth, minutely pitted, or with scattered bulbous-based hairs; beak c. 1 mm, stout, more or less curved. 2n = 16.{\i  W. Mediterranean region, S. Portugal}. Bl Co Hs Lu Sa [Ga].
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 27. R. demissus }DC.,{\i  Reg. Veg. Syst. Nat.}{\b  1}: 275 (1817). Glabrous or sparsely pubescent perennial up to c. 20 cm. Rhizome oblique, crowned with fibres. Basal leaves orbicular, 3- to 5-partite; segments shortly stipitate, divided into linear-oblong, obtuse lobes; cauline leaves sessile; segments linear, entire. Stems slender, decumbent. Flowers usually solitary. Sepals pubescent. Achenes 2·5 mm, broadly obovate, not keeled; beak very short, hooked. 2n = 16.{\i  Damp and shady places in the mountains. S.E. Spain; W. part of Balkan peninsula}. Al ?Gr Hs Ju.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 28. R. hayekii }Dörfler,{\i  Denkschr. Akad. Wiss. Math.-Nat. Kl. }({\i Wien}){\b  94}: 146 (1918). Like {\b 27} but basal leaves less deeply divided; cauline leaves entire or 3- to 5-fid, with lanceolate segments; flowers usually several; achenes c. 3 mm.{\i  Mountain screes. • Balkan peninsula; local.} Al Bu ?Ju.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 29. R. marschlinsii }Steudel, {\i Nomencl. Bot.} ed. 2, {\b 2}: 434 (1841). Like {\b 27} but basal leaves reniform; segments united at base and irregularly dentate at apex; sepals glabrous; achenes 1·25 mm. 2n = 16. •{\i  Mountains of Corse.} Co.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 30. R. dissectus }Bieb.,{\i  Fl. Taur.-Cauc.}{\b  2}: 25 (1808). More or less erect perennial 10-20 cm, usually with long, white hairs below. Basal leaves ovate-orbicular, cut into oblong-lanceolate lobes, hairy beneath; petioles short. Flowers solitary or few, 20-30 mm in diameter. Sepals pubescent, obtuse. Achenes 3-3·5 mm, elliptical, smooth, compressed, not keeled; beak 0·8-1 mm, hooked. 2n = 16, 16+4B.{\i  Mountains of Krym}. Rs(K). ({\i S.W. Asia.})
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28 Represented in Europe by subsp. {\i dissectus} only; several other subspecies occur in Anatolia.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 31. R. radinotrichus }Greuter & Strid,{\i  Willdenowia}{\b  11}: 267 (1981). Rhizomatous perennial with thick, fibrous roots. Basal leaves divided into 3 obovate segments with a few teeth at the distal end, densely white-sericeous. Cauline leaves 1 or 2, inconspicuous. Stems up to 12 cm, erect, unbranched. Flowers solitary. Sepals pilose; honey-leaves 7-10 mm, broadly obovate, yellow. Achenes orbicular, compressed, smooth, glabrous; beak 1·5-2 mm, circinate.{\i  Limestone cliffs and screes,} 2000-2300{\i  m. • W. Kriti }({\i Levka Ori}).
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28 (E) Pedicel sulcate. Sepals deflexed. Receptacle pubescent.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 32. R. neapolitanus }Ten.,{\i  Ind. Sem. Horti Neap.} 11 (1825) ({\i R. eriophyllus }C. Koch,{\i  R. heucherifolius} sensu Arcangeli, non C. Presl, {\i R. panormitanus} Tod., {\i R. bulbosus} subsp. {\i neapolitanus} (Ten.) H. Lindb.). Patent-pubescent perennial 20-50 cm, without a corm-like stock but often with thick, fusiform roots. Basal leaves 3-partite; segments cuneate-obovate, the lateral 2-lobed, acutely dentate; cauline leaves mostly bract-like. Flowers 20-30 mm in diameter. Achenes orbicular, smooth; beak 0·5-0·75 mm, triangular to somewhat uncinate. 2n = 16.{\i  Damp grassland. Italy and Sicilia; S.E. Europe.} Al Bu Cr Gr It Ju Rs(K) Si Tu.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 33. R. pratensis }C. Presl in J. & C. Presl,{\i  Del. Prag.} 9 (1822). Like {\b 32} but more robust, with a more or less corm-like stock; stems appressed-pubescent, often sparsely so; cauline leaves not all small and bract-like; achenes often tuberculate and sparsely hispid; beak 0·8-1·2 mm, uncinate. •{\i  Sardegna, Sicilia}. Sa Si.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 34. R. bulbosus }L., {\i Sp. Pl. }554 (1753) ({\i R. heucherifolius} C. Presl). Pubescent perennial up to 80 cm. Basal leaves 3-partite, variously dentate and lobed; middle segment abruptly contracted into a stalk, or cuneate and sessile; lower cauline leaves resembling the basal but smaller; upper sessile with linear-lanceolate lobes. Flowers 20-30 mm in diameter. Achenes 2·4 mm; margin keeled and grooved; beak short, curved.{\i  Much of Europe but absent from much of the north and east.} Au Be Bl Br Bu Co Cz Da Fe Ga Ge Hb He Ho Hs Hu It Ju Lu No Po Rm Rs(B, C, W) Sa ?Si Tu.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Stock not or scarcely swollen and corm-like; roots thick,
\par 
  fleshy ..................................................................................... ({\b c}) subsp. {\b aleae}
\par
1 Stock conspicuously swollen and corm-like; roots slender
\par 
2 Leaf-bases persistent, sheathing; leaves sparsely pubescent
\par 
  or glabrescent above ..................................................... ({\b b}) subsp. {\b castellanus}
\par 
2 Leaf-bases not persistent or sheathing; leaves usually
\par 
  pubescent above ............................................................... ({\b a}) subsp. {\b bulbosus}
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b bulbosus} (incl. subsp. {\i bulbifer} (Jordan) P. Fourn.,{\i  R. bulbifer} Jordan): Plant up to 80 cm, appressed- or patent-pubescent below. Stock conspicuously swollen and corm-like, usually without fibres; roots not swollen. Leaves more or less densely hairy above; middle segment of basal leaves usually stipitate. Pedicel strongly sulcate. Receptacle subglobose. Achenes 2-3 mm, finely punctate. 2n = 16.{\i  Dry grassland. Widespread in N., W. & C. Europe}.
\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b castellanus} (Freyn) P.W. Ball & Heywood,{\i  Feddes Repert.}{\b  66}: 151 (1962) ({\i R. castellanus} Freyn): Like subsp. ({\b a}) but leaf-bases persistent, very widely sheathing; basal leaves small, cordate-ovate or widely pentagonal in outline, sparsely hairy or glabrescent above; branches short, divaricate.{\i  Mountain grassland, }1400-2000{\i  m. • N.W. Spain}.
\par 
 ({\b c}) Subsp. {\b aleae} (Willk.) Rouy & Fouc.,{\i  Fl. Fr.}{\b  1}: 106 (1893) ({\i R. aleae} Willk.; incl. subsp. {\i adscendens} (Brot.) J. Neves,{\i  R. adscendens} Brot., subsp. {\i gallecicus} (Willk.) P.W. Ball & Heywood, {\i R. gallecicus}
\par 

\par 
276}
\par