{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 19.      DRYOPTERIDACEAE}
\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  ({\i Aspidiaceae})
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc  Edit. †D.H. Valentine.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Rhizome dictyostelic, with opaque scales. Petiole with 5-7 vascular strands; rhachis grooved, interrupted to admit grooves of costae. Sori superficial; spores bilateral.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Indusium reniform ..................................................................... {\b 3. Dryopteris}
\par
1 Indusium peltate
\par
2 Veins free; pinnae not more than 1·5 cm wide ....................... {\b 1. Polystichum}
\par
2 Veins anastomosing; pinnae 1·5-4 cm wide ............................. {\b 2. Cyrtomium}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 1.              Polystichum}                 Roth
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc  By †D.H. Valentine.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Rhizome short, ascending. Leaves tufted; lamina 1- to 3-pinnate, the ultimate segments with acuminate, bristle-pointed teeth; veins mostly free. Sori orbicular; indusium peltate.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Leaves pinnate; pinnae undivided ................................................. {\b 1. lonchitis}
\par
1 Leaves usually 2- or 3-pinnate; pinnae divided
\par
2 Pinnules distinctly stalked, not decurrent .................................... {\b 3. setiferum}
\par
2 Pinnules sessile or subsessile, decurrent
\par
3 Leaves rigid; pinnules glabrous above ....................................... {\b 2. aculeatum}
\par
3 Leaves soft; pinnules hairy above ................................................... {\b 4. braunii}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. P. lonchitis} (L.) Roth, {\i Tent. Fl. Germ.}{\b  3}({\b 1}): 71 (1799) ({\i Aspidium lonchitis} (L.) Swartz, {\i Dryopteris lonchitis} (L.) O. Kuntze). Rhizome short. Leaves 15-60 cm, short, rigid, persistent; lamina 2-6 cm wide, coriaceous, linear-lanceolate, pinnate; pinnae 15-50 on each side, sometimes overlapping, slightly curved, very shortly stalked, auricled on the upper side at the base, undivided; margin serrate. Indusium irregularly dentate.  2n = 82.{\i  In open, rocky and often montane habitats. Much of Europe, but very local in the former U.S.S.R.} Al Au Be Br Bu Co Cr Cz Fa Fe Ga Ge Gr Hb He *Ho Hs Hu Is It Ju No Po Rm Rs (N, B, W, K) Su.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 The hybrid between {\b 1} and {\b 2} ({\i P.} ×{\i  illyricum} (Borbás) Hahne) is widely distributed in W., S. & C. Europe.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b P. munitum} (Kaulfuss) C. Presl, {\i Tent. Pteridogr.} 83 (1836), from W. North America, like {\b 1} but the lamina 6-18 cm wide, lanceolate, and the pinnae narrower, with forward-directed or incurved teeth, is cultivated for ornament and is occasionally naturalized in W. Europe.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. P. aculeatum} (L.) Roth,{\i  Tent. Fl. Germ.}{\b  3}({\b 1}): 79 (1799) ({\i P. lobatum} (Hudson) Bast.,{\i  P. aculeatum} subsp.{\i  lobatum} (Hudson) Vollmann,{\i  Dryopteris lobata} (Hudson) Schinz & Thell.,{\i  Aspidium lobatum} (Hudson) Swartz). Rhizome thick, woody. Leaves 30-90 cm, rigid, usually persistent; lamina 5-22 cm wide, lanceolate, pinnate or 2-pinnate; pinnae up to 50 on each side, pinnate or pinnatifid; pinnules serrate, sessile or subsessile, obliquely decurrent; the proximal acroscopic pinnule of each pinna longer than the rest, the proximal side straight, the distal acutely auricled, the 2 sides forming an acute angle at the base. Indusium thick. 2n = 164.{\i  Much of Europe, except the east and extreme north.} Al Au Be Br Bu Co Cz †Da †Fe Ga Ge Gr Hb He Ho Hs Hu It Ju No Po Rm Rs(B, C, W, K) Su ?Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 3. P. setiferum} (Forskål) Woynar, {\i Mitt. Naturw. Ver. Steierm}.{\b  49:} 181 (1913) ({\i P. aculeatum} auct., non (L.) Roth,{\i  P. aculeatum} subsp.{\i  angulare} (Kit. ex Willd.) Vollmann,{\i  D. setifera} (Forskål) Woynar,{\i  P. angulare} (Kit. ex Willd.) C. Presl, {\i Aspidium aculeatum} sensu Swartz). Rhizome thick, woody. Leaves 30-120 cm, soft, usually not persistent; lamina 10-25 cm wide, lanceolate, 2-pinnate; pinnae up to 40 on each side; pinnules serrate, distinctly stalked, not decurrent; proximal acroscopic pinnule scarcely longer than the rest, the proximal side rounded below, the distal obtusely auricled, the 2 sides forming an obtuse angle at the base. Indusium thin. 2n = 82.{\i  S., W. & C. Europe.} Al Au Az Be Bl Br Bu Co Cr Ga Ge Gr Hb He ?Ho Hs Hu It Ju Lu Rm Rs (K) Sa Si Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 The hybrid between{\b  2} and {\b 3} ({\i P.} ×{\i  bicknellii }(Christ) Hahne) is found with the parents in many places in W. & C. Europe; the plants are often vigorous and infertile.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 4. P. braunii} (Spenner) Fée, {\i Mém. Fam. Foug.}{\b  5:} 278 (1852) ({\i P. paleaceum} auct., non (Borkh.) O. Schwarz,{\i  Dryopteris braunii }(Spenner) Underw., {\i Aspidium braunii} Spenner). Leaves up to 80 cm, soft, usually dying in autumn; lamina up to 20 cm wide, oblong-lanceolate, generally 2-pinnate; pinnae up to 40 on each side; pinnules up to 15 on each side, softly hairy above, the margins serrate; proximal acroscopic pinnule not larger than the rest; pinnules sessile or subsessile, obliquely decurrent, not or scarcely auricled, acutely angled at the base. 2n = 164.{\i  Woodland and shady places. S. & C. Norway; C. Europe, extending locally to C. Spain and E. Russia}. Au Cz Ga Ge He Hs Hu It Ju No Po Rm Rs (B, C, W, E) Su.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 The hybrid between{\b  2} and{\b  4} ({\i P}. ×{\i  luerssenii} (Dörfler) Hahne) is fairly widely distributed in C. Europe.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 2.              Cyrtomium}              C. Presl
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc  By J.R. Akeroyd.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Like{\i  Polystichum} but leaves 1-pinnate, the pinnae large, often falcate, usually entire; veins anastomosing; ultimate segments without bristle-pointed teeth.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. C. falcatum} (L. fil.) C. Presl,{\i  Tent. Pteridogr}. 86 (1836) ({\i Polystichum falcatum} (L. fil.) Diels). Stems with large, dark scales. Leaves 20-80 cm, coriaceous, the upper surface shining; petiole ¼-½ as long as the lamina. Pinnae 5-12 × (1·5-)2-4 cm, ovate-lanceolate, falcate, acuminate, shortly stalked. {\i Cultivated for ornament, and locally naturalized in W. Europe, especially by the sea.} [Az Be Br Ga Hb Ho.] ({\i E. Asia.})
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b C. fortunei} J. Sm.,{\i  Ferns Brit. Foreign }286 (1866) ({\i P. falcatum} auct., non (L. fil.) Diels), from Japan, like {\b 1} but with smaller and narrower, finely toothed pinnae, has been reported to be naturalized in Açores and in S. Europe.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 3.               Dryopteris}                  Adanson
\par 

\pard\f0\fs24\qc  By V.H. Heywood (Ed.1)  revised by C.R. Fraser-Jenkins (Ed.2)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Rhizome short, erect or ascending, densely covered with broad, soft, often fimbriate scales. Leaves tufted, 1- to 4-pinnate; veins free. Sori orbicular; indusium reniform.
\par

\par
27}
\par