{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 3. A. vulgaris} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 533 (1753) ({\i A. collina} Jordan, {\i A. longisepala }Zimmeter,{\i  A. mollis }Timb.-Lagr., {\i A. nemoralis} Jordan). Stems 30-70(-100) cm, subglabrous to eglandular- or glandular-hairy. Basal leaves 2-ternate; leaflets 2- or 3-fid, usually glabrous above, hairy beneath. Flowers nodding, usually violet or blue, occasionally red or white. Perianth-segments 18-25 × 10-12 mm; limb of honey-leaf 6-13 × 9-12 mm, the spur 5-22 × 7-9 mm, strongly hooked, rarely curved. Stamens occasionally somewhat exserted; staminodes obtuse. Follicles 15-25 mm, glandular-pubescent.{\i  W., C. & S. Europe, extending to W. Ukraine.} Al Au Be Br Co Cz Ga Ge Gr Hb He Ho Hs Hu It Ju Lu Po *Rm Rs(B, C) Si [Az *Da *Fe No Rs(N, W, K, E) *Su].
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Several subspecies can be recognized within this polymorphic species; for further information on the variation see P.A. Munz, {\i Op. cit}. (1946)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Leaves densely glandular-pubescent; follicles viscid . ({\b b}) subsp.{\b  nevadensis}
\par
1 Leaves glabrous, eglandular- or slightly glandular-pubescent;
\par
  follicles glandular-pubescent, but not viscid
\par
2 Perianth-segments usually at least 20 × 8 mm ................. ({\b a}) subsp.{\b  vulgaris}
\par
2 Perianth-segments usually less than 20 × 8 mm
\par
3 Limb of honey-leaf about as long as spur;
\par
  leaves 2-ternate .................................................................. ({\b c}) subsp.{\b  dichroa}
\par
3 Limb of honey-leaf distinctly longer than spur; leaves
\par
  1(2)-ternate ............................................................................. ({\b d}) subsp.{\b  paui}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b vulgaris} (incl. subsp.{\i  hispanica} (Willk.) Heywood): Stems subglabrous to slightly glandular-pubescent. Leaves usually glabrous on the upper surface. Perianth-segments 18-30(-35) × 8-12(-16) mm, ovate to ovate-lanceolate. Limb of honey-leaf 5-8(-12) × 5-8 mm; spur 7-22 mm. Follicles glandular-pubescent. 2n = 14. {\i Throughout the range of the species}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b nevadensis }(Boiss. & Reuter) Díaz,{\i  Anal. Jard. Bot. Madrid }{\b 41: }211 (1984) ({\i A. nevadensis} Boiss. & Reuter): Stems and leaves densely glandular-pubescent. Flowers blue. Perianth-segments 14-25(-35) × 5-9(-12) mm, lanceolate, with a greenish apex. Limb  of  honey-leaves  7-15(-20) × 6-9(-13) mm;  spur 10-18(-21) mm, somewhat curved. Follicles viscid.{\i  S. Spain}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b c}) Subsp.{\b  dichroa} (Freyn) Díaz,{\i  loc. cit.} (1984) ({\i A. dichroa} Freyn): Stems glandular-pubescent, especially above. Leaves subglabrous to somewhat glandular-pubescent. Perianth-segments 11-20 × 4-8 mm, lanceolate, blue, usually with a white apex; limb of honey-leaf 5-10 × 5-9 mm, white; spur 9-15(-17) mm. Follicles glandular-pubescent. 2n = 14. •{\i  W. Spain, Portugal; naturalized in Açores}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b d}) Subsp. {\b paui }(Font Quer) O. Bolòs& Vigo,{\i  Butll. Inst. Catalana Hist. Nat.}{\b  38}: 65 (1974) ({\i A. paui} Font Quer): Stems and leaves glabrous to glandular-pubescent; leaves 1(2)-ternate. Perianth-segments 10-22 × 5-7 mm, elliptic-lanceolate, usually with a white apex; limb of honey-leaf 6-11 (-13) × 4 7 mm, blue or white; spur 5-13 mm. Follicles glandular-pubescent. •{\i  Mountains of N.E. Spain} ({\b Tarragona}).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b A. barbaricina} Arrigoni & Nardi,{\i  Boll. Soc. Sarda Sci. Nat.}{\b  16}: 265 (1977), from a single locality on Sardegna, is similar to {\b 3}({\b a}) but has white flowers and a curved spur. Its status is uncertain.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 4. A. pancicii} Degen, {\i Magyar Bot. Lapok}{\b  4}: 118 (1905). like {\b 3}({\b c}) but leaves 3-ternate, densely glandular-pubescent; staminodes acute. •{\i  E. Jugoslavia.} Ju.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 5. A. nuragica} Arrigoni & Nardi,{\i  Boll. Soc. Sarda Sei. Nat. }{\b 17}: 215 (1978). like {\b 3}({\b a}) but more or less glabrous, slightly glandular-puberulent above; stems 20-35 cm; flowers scarcely nodding, blue, the spur 11-13 mm, more slender; staminodes mucronate. 2n = 14. {\i Shady rocks. • Sardegna} ({\i S.E. of Oliena}). Sa.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   {\b 6. A. viscosa} Gouan, {\i Fl. Monsp.} 267 (1764). Stems glandular-hairy, viscid. Basal leaves 1- or 2-ternate; leaflets 2- or 3-fid, glandular-hairy; cauline leaves few, small. Flowers nodding, blue to white. Perianth-segments 18-27 × 8-12 mm, ovate-lanceolate; limb of honey-leaf (7-)10-14 × 6-9 mm, the spur (10-)15-23 mm, strongly hooked. Staminodes acute. Follicles glandular-pubescent. •{\i  N.E. Spain, S. France.} Ga Hs.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp.{\b  viscosa} : Stems 30-120 cm. Stamens exserted. Follicles 22-28 mm.{\i  Woods. S. France}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp.{\b  hirsutissima} (Lapeyr.) Breistr.,{\i  Bull. Soc. Bot. Fr. }{\b 128}, Lettres Bot.: 66 (1981) ({\i A. hirsutissima} (Lapeyr.) Timb.-Lagr. ex Gariod; incl. {\i A. montisicciana} Font Quer): Stems 10 35 cm. Stamens not exserted. Follicles 12-20 mm.{\i  S. France, N.E. Spain}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 7. A. ottonis} Orph. ex Boiss.,{\i  Diagn. Pl. Or. Nov.}{\b  3}({\b 1}): 11 (1854). Stems (10-)15-45 cm, glandular-hairy, often branched. Basal leaves 1- or 2-ternate; leaflets 2- or 3-fid, almost glabrous to rather densely glandular-pubescent. Flowers nodding, bicolorous. Perianth-segments 18 × 8-9 mm, pale blue-violet; limb of honey-leaf 13-20 × 8 mm, the spur 13-14 × 3-4 mm, pale violet, strongly hooked. Follicles 11-19 mm, glandular-pubescent.{\i  Damp, shady rock-ledges and screes. • S.part of Balkan peninsula; C. Appennini.} Al Gr It Ju.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Limb of honey-leaf at least 15 mm, truncate at apex;
\par
  follicles 15-19 mm .............................................................. ({\b a}) subsp. {\b ottonis}
\par
1 Limb of honey-leaf less than 15 mm, rounded or subtruncate at apex;
\par
  follicles 11-15 mm
\par
2 Flowering-stems usually at least 20 cm, branched; leaves
\par
  ± glabrous .......................................................................... ({\b b}) subsp. {\b amaliae}
\par
2 Flowering-stems not more than 20 cm, unbranched;
\par
  leaves densely pubescent .................................................. ({\b c}) subsp.{\b  taygetea}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b ottonis} (incl. var.{\i  unguisepala} Borbás): Flowering stems 15-30 cm. Leaves sparsely glandular-pubescent. Limb of honey-leaf 16-20 mm, truncate at apex, whitish or pale blue. Stamens exserted. Follicles 15-19 mm. 2n = 14.{\i  C. & S. Greece; C. Italy}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp.{\b  amaliae} (Heldr. ex Boiss.) Strid,{\i  Mount. Fl. Gr.}{\b  1}: 227 (1986) ({\i A. amaliae} Heldr. ex Boiss.): Flowering stems 20-45 cm. Leaves more or less glabrous. Limb of honey-leaf 13-14 mm, rounded or subtruncate at apex, white. Stamens not exserted. Follicles 12-15 mm.{\i  S. part of Balkan peninsula.}
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b c}) Subsp.{\b  taygetea} (Orph.) Strid,{\i  op. cit. }228 (1986) ({\i A. taygetea} Orph.): Like subsp. ({\b b}) but flowering stems 10-20 cm, unbranched; leaves rather densely glandular- and eglandular-pubescent; limb of honey-leaf cream; follicles 11-14 mm, densely glandular-pubescent.{\i  S. Greece} ({\i Taïyetos}).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Plants similar to subsp. ({\b a}) from S.W. Italy (Monte Terminio), with glabrous leaves and somewhat larger flowers with spurs curved but not hooked, have been described as{\b  A. champagnatii} Moraldo, Nardi & La Valva, {\i Webbia }{\b 35}: 84 (1981).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 8. A. dinarica} G. Beck,{\i  Ann. Naturh. Mus. (Wien)}{\b  6}: 341 (1891).
\par

\par
288}
\par