{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 Pedicels slender in fruit, longer than fruiting receptacle ................ {\b 1. minimus}
\par
Pedicels becoming much thickened in fruit, shorter than
\par
  fruiting receptacle ............................................................................ {\b 2. sessilis}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. M. minimus} L.,{\i  Sp. Pl.} 284 (1753). Glabrous. Leaves linear, entire, in a basal rosette. Flowers pale greenish-yellow. Perianth-segments 3-4 mm, linear-oblong, spurred at the base. Honey-leaves with a short, oblong limb. Pedicels 5-12 cm, slender in fruit, longer than the fruiting receptacle. Achenes 1-1·5 mm, keeled, very shortly beaked. 2n = 16, 28. {\i Open habitats, especially when seasonally flooded. Most of Europe, but rare in the extreme north and south and in the islands.} Au Be Bl Br Bu Cz Da Fe Ga Ge Gr He Ho Hs Hu It Ju No Po Rm Rs(N, B, C, W, K, E) Si Su Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. M. sessilis} S. Watson,{\i  Proc. Amer. Acad. Arts Sci. }{\b 17}: 362 (1882) ({\i M. breviscapus} Huth,{\i  M. heldreichii} Leveillé). like {\b 1} but the pedicels much thickened in fruit, shorter than the fruiting receptacle; beak of achene longer, straight.{\i  Seasonally flooded ground. Mediterranean region; very local.} Ga †Gr Hs Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 22.          Aquilegia}                L.
\par     

\pard\f0\fs24\qc   By J. Cullen & V.H. Heywood (Ed.1) revised by J.R. Akeroyd (Ed.2)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Perennial herbs with erect, woody stock. Leaves 1- to 3-ternate. Flowers hermaphrodite. Perianth-segments 5, petaloid. Honey-leaves 5, more or less tubular, each with a flat limb and a backwardly directed nectar-secreting spur. Stamens numerous, the innermost represented by scarious staminodes. Carpels free. Follicles several, free.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Many species and hybrids are cultivated for ornament.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 The European species are in need of revision, and the following account must be regarded as provisional.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Literature: P.A. Munz, {\i Gentes Herb.}{\b  7}: 1-150 (1946).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Flowers yellow ................................................................................ {\b 11. aurea}
\par
1 Flowers violet, purple, blue or white
\par
2 Spur shorter than limb of honey-leaf
\par
3 Perianth-segments 22-40 × 16-22 mm ................................. {\b 2. transsilvanica}
\par
3 Perianth-segments less than 20 × 11 mm
\par
4 Spur straight or slightly curved; basal leaves 2-ternate ............. {\b 12. kitaibelii}
\par
4 Spur strongly hooked; basal leaves ternate (rarely alternate)
\par
5 Flowers violet-blue; perianth-segments elliptic-ovate ............... {\b 1. litardierei}
\par
5 Flowers pale blue to white; perianth-segments elliptic-lanceolate
\par
  ......................................................................................................... {\b 3. vulgaris}
\par
2 Spur at least as long as limb of honey-leaf
\par
6 Flowers bicolorous
\par
7 Limb of honey-leaf at least 9 mm
\par
8 Basal leaves 2-ternate; perianth-segments 18-24 mm .................... {\b 7. ottonis}
\par
8 Basal leaves 1-ternate; perianth-segments 25-30 mm .................. {\b 8. dinarica}
\par
7 Limb of honey-leaf usually not more than 9 mm
\par
9 Leaves 3-ternate, with numerous glandular hairs on both surfaces
\par
  ........................................................................................................ {\b 4. pancicii}
\par
9 Leaves 1- or 2-ternate, with few glandular hairs
\par
10 Spur strongly hooked; stems usually at least 30 cm ................... {\b 3. vulgaris}
\par
10 Spur straight or slightly curved; stems not more than 30 cm . {\b 16. pyrenaica}
\par
6  Flowers concolorous
\par
11 Stamens exserted at least 1 mm beyond limb of honey-leaf
\par
12 Spur strongly hooked
\par
13 Perianth-segments 15-24 mm; leaves glabrous beneath ................. {\b 9. atrata}
\par
13 Perianth-segments 25-35 mm; leaves pubescent beneath ........ {\b 10. nigricans}
\par
12 Spur straight or somewhat curved
\par
14 Limb of honey-leaf 5-9 mm; spur 6-12 mm ........................... {\b 16. pyrenaica}
\par
14 Limb of honey-leaf usually 8-20 mm; spur more than 8 mm
\par
15 Perianth-segments greenish at apex; honey-leaves pale blue ..... {\b 3. vulgaris}
\par
15 Perianth-segments not greenish at apex; honey-leaves
\par
   purple to violet ................................................................................. {\b 18. grata}
\par
11 Stamens not exserted beyond limb of honey-leaf, or
\par
   exserted for less than 1 mm
\par
16 Plant subscapose; all cauline leaves ± undivided, linear, sessile
\par
17 Perianth-segments 9-14 mm wide; staminodes 6-7 mm ........ {\b 15. bertolonii}
\par
17 Perianth-segments 7-8 mm wide; staminodes c. 5 mm
\par
18 Leaves glabrous beneath; limb of honey-leaf 8-10 mm ........ {\b 13. einseleana}
\par
18 Leaves pubescent beneath; limb of honey-leaf 11-13 mm ..{\b 14. thalictrifolia}
\par
16 Plant not subscapose; cauline leaves divided like the basal leaves
\par
19 Spur strongly hooked
\par
20 Flowers scarcely nodding; spur less than 15 mm ...................... {\b 5. nuragica}
\par
20 Flowers nodding; spur at least 15 mm
\par
21 Staminodes obtuse; stamens exserted ......................................... {\b 3. vulgaris}
\par
21 Staminodes acute; stamens not or somewhat exserted ................ {\b 6. viscosa}
\par
19 Spur straight or somewhat curved, but never strongly hooked
\par
22 Follicles 10-18 mm ................................................................ {\b 16. pyrenaica}
\par
22 Follicles 20-30 mm
\par
23 Spur 15-17 mm; styles 10-15 mm ........................................... {\b 17. bernardii}
\par
23 Spur 18-25 mm; styles 6-7 mm .................................................... {\b 19. alpina}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. A. litardierei} Briq.,{\i  Prodr. Fl. Corse}{\i  1}: 589 (1910). Stems up to 12 cm, ascending, simple, glabrous below, with sparse, long eglandular hairs above. Basal leaves ternate; leaflets 3-fid, crenate, subglabrous above, with short eglandular hairs beneath. Flowers violet-blue, nodding. Perianth-segments 14 × 7 mm, elliptic-ovate; limb of honey-leaf c. 12 × 7 mm, the spur up to 8 mm, hooked. Stamens slightly exserted. Follicles puberulent. •{\i  Corse.} Co.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Not seen since its original discovery in 1908.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. A. transsilvanica} Schur, {\i Verh. Mitt. Siebenb. Ver. Naturw.}{\b  4}: 31 (1853). Stems 15-45 cm, subglabrous below, with long eglandular hairs above. Basal leaves 2-ternate; leaflets 2- or 3-fid or more, glabrous above, with sparse, short eglandular hairs beneath. Flowers blue-violet, nodding. Perianth-segments 22-40 ×16-22 mm; limb of honey-leaf 20-24 mm, the spur strongly hooked. Follicles pubescent. •{\i  Carpathians.} Rm Rs(W).
\par

\par
287}
\par