{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 cauline leaves similar but smaller, sessile or shortly petiolate. Sepals with abundant, reddish-brown hairs beneath. Achenes 2·5 mm, glabrous; beak c. 1·5 mm, nearly straight. 2n = 16. {\i  Snow-lies; calcifuge. Arctic and subarctic Europe, W. Fennoscandia; higher mountains of C. Europe; Pyrenees; Sierra Nevada.} Au Cz Fa Fe Ga Ge He Hs Is It No Po Rm Rs(N) Sb Su.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b R. kamchaticus }DC., {\i Reg. Veg. Syst. Nat. }{\b 1}: 302 (1817) ({\i Oxygraphis glacialis} (Fischer) Bunge) occurs in N. Ural just within Europe. It is a glabrous perennial up to 6 cm, with broadly ovate, entire or weakly and remotely dentate leaves in a basal rosette. The solitary flowers have 5 broadly ovate sepals which are appressed to the 11-15, narrowly oblong, yellow honey-leaves.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Sect. INSULARES Tutin. Roots fleshy, cylindrical. Honey-leaves yellow, caducous. Receptacle pubescent. Achenes ovoid, with a sulcate border, smooth; beak short, curved.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 100. R. cymbalariifolius} Balbis ex Moris, {\i Stirp. Sard.}{\b  1}: 2 (1827) ({\i R. balbisii} Moris). Caespitose, appressed-pilose perennial up to c. 5 cm. Basal leaves up to c. 1 cm, orbicular, 3-lobed usually to half-way or less; segments ovate, strongly crenate, cauline leaves small, few, near the base of the slender, strigose pedicels. Petioles enlarged and sheathing at base. Flowers c. 10 mm in diameter, solitary. Sepals deflexed, shortly pubescent. Honey-leaves narrowly elliptical, not contiguous, pale glossy yellow. Achenes smooth, strongly keeled; beak short, curved. 2n = 16. •{\i  Sardegna.} Sa.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 101. R. weyleri} Marès,{\i  Bull. Soc. Bot. Fr.}{\b  12: }232 (1865). like {\b 100} but plant up to 20 cm, with patent hairs at base of stems and petioles; leaves up to 2 cm, ovate-elliptical, deeply 3-lobed; segments often stipitate; petioles not enlarged and sheathing at base; sepals patent; achenes rough, with prominent veins. 2n = 16. •{\i  Islas Baleares} ({\i Mallorca}). Bl.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Sect. FLAMMULA Webb. Roots fibrous. Leaves all simple. Honey-leaves usually yellow, caducous. Receptacle glabrous. Achenes slightly compressed; beak very short.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 102. R. flammula} L.,{\i  Sp. Pl.} 548 (1753). Usually glabrous perennial 5-80 cm, erect, or creeping and rooting at the nodes. Leaves variable, orbicular to subulate, entire or serrate; the lower petiolate; the upper smaller and sessile. Flowers 1 to many, 7-20 mm in diameter. Pedicel sparsely appressed-pubescent, sulcate. Achenes glabrous, minutely pitted, weakly bordered; beak very short. {\i Wet places. Most of Europe, but rare in the Mediterranean region}. All except Bl Cr Is Rs(K) Sb Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Lamina of basal leaves suborbicular-cordate, fleshy;
\par
  stems not rooting at nodes ................................................. ({\b c}) subsp.{\b  minimus}
\par
1 Lamina of basal leaves at least twice as long as wide, thin;
\par
  stems often rooting at nodes
\par
2 Basal leaves persistent; lamina ovate to lanceolate ......... ({\b a}) subsp.{\b  flammula}
\par
2 Basal leaves caducous; lamina subulate or very small ...... ({\b b}) subsp. {\b scoticus}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp.{\b  flammula} : Stem erect to procumbent, often rooting at the nodes; internodes 4-7 cm. Basal leaves about twice as long as wide, usually cuneate or rounded at base, thin. Achenes c. 1½ times as long as wide. 2n = 32.{\i  Throughout the range of the species}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp.{\b  scoticus} (E.S. Marshall) Clapham in Clapham, Tutin & E.F. Warburg,{\i  Fl. Brit. Is.} 91 (1952) ({\i R. scoticus} E.S. Marshall): Like subsp. ({\b a}) but stems always erect; basal leaves caducous; petioles long; lamina subulate or very narrow, obtuse to rounded; flowers few, usually 1; honey-leaves more or less truncate. •{\i  N. Scotland, W. Ireland}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b c}) Subsp.{\b  minimus }(Ar. Benn.) Padmore, {\i Watsonia}{\b  4: }21 (1957): Stem more or less procumbent, not rooting at the nodes; internodes 0·5-2 cm. Basal leaves suborbicular-cordate, thick and fleshy. Achenes scarcely longer than wide. 2n = 32. •{\i  N. Scotland, W. Ireland}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 103. R. reptans} L.,{\i  Sp. Pl.} 549 (1753) ({\i R. flammula }subsp.{\i  reptans} (L.) Syme). Like small forms of {\b 102} but with very slender, always procumbent stems rooting at every node; leaves all petiolate, spathulate to narrowly elliptical; flowers 5(-10) mm in diameter, solitary. 2n = 32, 48.{\i  N. Europe, extending southwards locally to C. Italy, Bulgaria and N. Ukraine}. Au †Br Bu ?Cz Da Fa Fe Ga Ge He Is It No ?Po Rs(N, B, C, W, E) Su.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Hybrids between {\b 102} and {\b 103},{\b  R.} ×{\b  levenensis} Druce ex Gornall, {\i Watsonia}{\b  14}: 383 (1987), occur in N. Europe and W. Alps, and also in N. Britain outside the present range of {\b 103}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 104. R. batrachioides} Pomel,{\i  Nouv. Mat. Fl. Atl.} 249 (1874) ({\i R. xantholeucos} Cosson & Durieu). Slender, branched, glabrous annual 3-6 cm. Leaves spathulate, entire. Flowers 5-8 mm in diameter. Sepals patent. Achenes 0·5 mm, ovoid, keeled- beak very short, slender.{\i  Wet places. C. Spain, Sardegna; local}. Hs Sa. ({\i N.W. Africa.})
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 The plants from Spain, with smaller flowers and shorter peduncles, have been described as subsp.{\b  brachypodus }G. López,{\i  Anal. Jard. Bot. Madrid}{\b  41}: 470 (1985).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 105. R. lingua} L.,{\i  Sp. Pl.} 549 (1753). Robust, stoloniferous perennial 50-120 cm. Basal leaves ovate, cordate, long-petiolate, soon withering; cauline leaves oblong-lanceolate, shortly petiolate to sessile; all more or less serrate. Flowers (20-)30-50 mm in diameter, few; pedicels terete. Achenes c. 2·5 mm, glabrous, minutely pitted, bordered; beak short and wide. 2n = 128. {\i Marshes and shallow water. Most of Europe but rare in the Mediterranean region and the far north}. Al Au Be Br Bu Cz Da Fe Ga Ge Hb He Ho Hs Hu It Ju No Po Rm Rs(N, B, C, W, E) Si Su Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 106. R. ophioglossifolius} Vill.,{\i  Hist. Pl. Dauph. }{\b 3: }731 (1789). Annual 10-40 cm. Basal leaves ovate or suborbicular, cordate, long-petiolate; upper leaves smaller, narrower, shortly petiolate or sessile; all entire or obscurely serrate; lower pedicels as long as subtending leaves. Flowers 5-9 mm in diameter, numerous; pedicel somewhat sulcate, appressed-pubescent. Sepals glabrous. Honey-leaves obovate, nearly twice as long as the sepals. Achenes c. 1·5 mm, compressed, minutely tuberculate; beak c. 1/10 as long as the achene. 2n = 16. {\i Wet places. S. & W. Europe, northwards to England; Gotland.} Al Bl Br Bu Co Cr Ga Gr Hs Hu It Ju Lu Rm Rs (W, K) Sa Si Su Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 107. R. thracicus} Aznav., {\i Bull. Soc. Bot. Fr.}{\b  46}: 136 (1899). like {\b 106} but lower leaves ovate-elliptical, not cordate; lower pedicels shorter than the subtending leaves; honey-leaves shorter than the sepals.{\i  Wet places. C. Greece; Turkey-in-Europe}. Gr Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 108. R. fontanus} C. Presl in J. & C. Presl,{\i  Del. Prag.} 6 (1822). like {\b 106} but smaller and more or less procumbent, rooting at the lower nodes; glabrous; flowers smaller; achenes smooth, with longer beak. 2n = 48.{\i  C. Mediterranean region; Balkan peninsula}. Al Bu Co Gr It Ju Si.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 109. R. longipes} Lange ex Cutanda,{\i  Fl. Comp. Madrid }103
\par

\par
283}
\par