{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 82. R. gmelinii} DC.,{\i  Reg. Veg. Syst. Nat.}{\b  1}: 303 (1817). Creeping, floating or decumbent, rooting at the nodes. Leaves orbicular or reniform, with 3-5 cuneate segments divided into linear lobes. Flowers few, c. 10 mm in diameter. Achenes c. 1·5 mm, ovoid; beak slender. 2n = 16, 32.{\i  N. Russia}. Rs(N, C).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Sect. COPTIDIUM (Prantl) Tutin. Perennial. Roots fibrous. Sepals 3. Honey-leaves 6-8, yellow. Achenes scarcely compressed, the upper part filled with spongy tissue; beak long, slender. Receptacle scarcely enlarging in fruit.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 83. R. lapponicus} L.,{\i  Sp. Pl.} 553 (1753) ({\i R. altaicus }Laxm.). Slender, creeping, rooting at the nodes. Leaves reniform in outline, 3-partite; lateral segments spreading; all obovate-cuneate, shallowly lobed and crenate-dentate. Flowers axillary, solitary, long-pedicellate. Sepals deflexed. Honey-leaves yellow. Achenes 3-4·5 mm, ovoid-fusiform, constricted about the middle, keeled; beak hooked, scarcely shorter than the achene. 2n = 16. {\i N. Europe southwards to C. Sweden and C. Ural}. Fe No Rs (N, C) Sb Su.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Sect. PALLASIANTHA (L. Benson) Tutin. Like Sect.{\i  Coptidium} but with reddish or white honey-leaves, the upper part of the achenes not filled with spongy tissue, and the receptacle distinctly enlarged in fruit.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 84. R. pallasii} Schlecht.,{\i  Animadv. Ranunc.}{\b  1}: 15 (1819). like {\b 83} but leaves deeply 3-lobed, obovate-cuneate in outline; lobes narrow, entire; flowers larger, with 6-12, reddish-violet or white honey-leaves; achenes 5-7 mm. 2n = 32.{\i  Arctic Russia, Spitsbergen.} Rs(N) Sb.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b R.} × {\b spitzbergensis} Hadac,{\i  Norges Svalb.-Ishavs-Undersok. Skr.}{\b  87}: 36 (1944) ({\i R. pallasii }var.{\i  minimus} Rupr.), from Spitsbergen and arctic Russia, with narrow, spreading, usually yellow leaf-lobes, is a hybrid between{\b  83} and {\b 84}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Sect. HALODES (A. Gray) L. Benson. Perennial. Roots fibrous. Sepals 5. Honey-leaves 5, yellow; margins of nectary-scale free from honey-leaf. Achenes compressed, veined or striate. Receptacle elongating in fruit.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 85. R. cymbalaria} Pursh, {\i Fl.Amer.Sept.}{\b 2}: 392(1814). Slender, with ascending stems and creeping stolons. Leaves obtuse, reniform or truncate at base, crenate or dentate. Scapes up to 25 cm, 1- to 10-flowered. Flowers 6-9 mm in diameter, bright yellow. Achenes thin-walled, obovate, longitudinally ribbed; beak very asymmetrical, short, slender.{\i  Naturalized on coasts of Fennoscandia.} [Fe No Su.] ({\i North America, N. Asia.})
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Sect. FICARIA (Schaeffer) Boiss. Some roots tuberous, some fibrous. Leaves broadly ovate, cordate. Flowers yellow. Sepals 3. Honey-leaves 8-12. Achenes ovoid, scarcely compressed, keeled; beak minute.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 86. R. ficaria} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 550 (1753) ({\i Ficaria verna} Hudson,{\i  F. ranunculoides} Roth, {\i F. degenii} Hervier). Perennial 5-40 cm. Some roots fibrous, some forming fusiform tubers. Leaves broadly ovate, cordate, obtusely angled, shallowly crenate or rarely dentate. Flowers 15-50 mm in diameter. Honey-leaves ovate. Receptacle pubescent. Achenes c. 2·5 mm, ovoid, keeled, pubescent.{\i  Mostly in shady places. Almost throughout Europe, but rare in the north-east.} All except Az Is Sb; only naturalized in Fa.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Stems at anthesis very short, the leaves crowded at base;
\par
  achenes hirsute ............................................................. ({\b b}) subsp.{\b  calthifolius}
\par
1 Stems elongated at anthesis, leaves not crowded in a rosette;
\par
  achenes puberulent or pubescent
\par
2 Bulbils present in the leaf-axils after anthesis
\par
3 Flowers up to c. 20 mm in diameter, with obovate-oblong,
\par
  not overlapping honey-leaves ......................................... ({\b c}) subsp.{\b  bulbilifer}
\par
3 Flowers more than 20 mm in diameter, with broadly obovate,
\par
  overlapping honey-leaves .......................................... ({\b d}) subsp.{\b  ficariiformis}
\par
2 Bulbils not present in the leaf-axils
\par
4 Sepals green, with narrow scarious margin; flowers 20-30 mm in
\par
  diameter; achenes puberulent ............................................... ({\b a}) subsp.{\b  ficaria}
\par
4 Sepals yellowish-white; flowers 30-50 mm in diameter;
\par
  achenes pubescent .................................................. ({\b e}) subsp.{\b  chrysocephalus}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b ficaria} : Plant up to 30 cm, rather stout. Leaves not in a rosette. Basal sinus of leaves usually wide. Bulbils absent. Flowers 20-30 mm in diameter. Sepals herbaceous. Achenes well developed, puberulent. 2n = 16.{\i  W. Europe, eastwards to S. Italy}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp.{\b  calthifolius} (Reichenb.) Arcangeli,{\i  Comp. Fl. Ital.} 11 (1882) ({\i Ficaria calthifolia} Reichenb.): Plant small. Stems at anthesis very short. Leaves crowded in a rosette. Basal sinus of leaves narrow. Flowers up to 20 mm in diameter. Sepals green, with a narrow scarious margin. Achenes well developed, hirsute.{\i  S.C. & E. Europe}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b c}) Subsp. {\b bulbilifer} Lambinon,{\i  Bull. Jard. Bot. Nat. Belg.}{\b  51}: 462 (1981) ({\i R. ficaria }subsp.{\i  bulbifer }Lawalrée, nom. illeg.): Plant up to 30 cm, rather slender. Leaves not in a rosette. Basal sinus of leaves usually wide. Bulbils present in leaf-axils. Flowers up to 20 mm in diameter. Sepals herbaceous. Achenes mostly sterile, puberulent. 2n = 32.{\i  N. & C. Europe, extending locally to Spain, Albania and E.C. Russia}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b d}) Subsp.{\b  ficariiformis} (F.W. Schultz) Rouy & Fouc.,{\i  Fl. Fr. }{\b 1}: 73 (1893) ({\i R. calthifolius} (Guss.) Jordan,{\i  R. ficariiformis} F.W. Schultz,{\i  Ficaria grandiflora} Robert): Plant very robust. Bulbils present in leaf-axils. Flowers 30-50 mm in diameter. Sepals yellowish-white. Achenes pubescent.{\i  S. Europe}.
\par
 ({\b e}) Subsp.{\b  chrysocephalus} P.D. Sell, {\i Bot. Jour. Linn. Soc.}{\b  106: }117 (1991): Like subsp. ({\b d}) but bulbils absent.{\i  Greece, Kriti}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 87. R. ficarioides} Bory & Chaub.,{\i  Nouv. Fl. Pelop.} 34 (1838). like {\b 86} but smaller (up to c. 7 cm); pedicels shorter than the basal leaves; leaves coarsely crenate-dentate or shallowly lobed; sepals yellowish; achenes glabrous. 2n = 16.{\i  Damp places in the mountains. Greece; Karpathos}. Cr Gr.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Plants from Karpathos have small and slender leaves and smaller flowers (var.{\i  gracilis} W. Barbey).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Sect. PHYSOPHYLLUM Freyn. Roots tuberous. Leaves all basal. Receptacle ovoid. Achenes inflated.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 88. R. bullatus} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 550 (1753). Perennial. Leaves ovate, crenate, hispid beneath, more or less bullate. Pedicels 5-25 cm, pubescent, 1- or 2-flowered. Flowers c. 25 mm in diameter, scented. Sepals greenish, pubescent. Honey-leaves 5-12, oblong, yellow. Receptacle glabrous. Achenes narrowly bordered; beak short, curved. 2n = 16.{\i  Mediterranean region, Portugal.} Bl Co Cr Gr Hs It Lu Sa Si.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Unusual in the genus in Europe in flowering in autumn.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Sect. THORA DC. Roots tuberous. Leaves broader than long. Receptacle ovoid. Achenes scarcely compressed, strongly veined.
\par

\par
281}
\par