{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 C.D.K. Cook,{\i  R. saniculifolius }Viv.): Laminate leaves with (3-)5(-7) deep, cuneate segments; segments of capillary leaves somewhat rigid. Pedicels usually less than 50 mm at anthesis, shorter than the petiole of the subtending leaf. Sepals 2·5-4·5 mm, usually reflexed. Honey-leaves less than 10 mm. Achenes glabrous or somewhat pubescent, not winged. 2n = 16, 32, 40.{\i  In eutrophic and brackish water. S. Europe.}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 127. R. penicillatus} (Dumort.) Bab.,{\i  Man. Brit. Bot.} ed. 7, 7 (1874) ({\i Batrachium carinatum} Schur, {\i B. kaufmannii} (Clerc) V. Krecz.). like {\b 126} but always perennial, larger, more robust; capillary leaves often longer than the internodes.{\i  Usually in flowing water. Throughout much of Europe but distribution imperfectly known.} Al Be Br Bu Co Cz Da Ga Ge Gr Hb ?He Ho Hs Hu It Lu Po Rs (N, B, C, W) ?Sa Su.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 This species is both genetically and phenotypically variable. On the basis of cultivation experiments, S.D. Webster, {\i Watsonia}{\b  17}: 1 -22 (1988), has recognized the following two subspecies in N.W. Europe, but more information is required on their distribution elsewhere.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp.{\b  penicillatus} : Plant with both laminate and capillary leaves (laminate leaves present in summer). Capillary leaves on mature stems longer than the internodes; segments subparallel, flaccid. Pedicel in fruit exceeding the petiole of the opposed leaf. 2n = 32, 48. {\i Almost throughout the range of the species}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp.{\b  pseudofluitans} (Syme) S. Webster, {\i Watsonia}{\b  17}: 20 (1988) ({\i R. aquatilis }subsp.{\i  peltatus} var.{\i  pseudofluitans} Syme, {\i R. pseudofluitans} (Syme) Newbould ex Baker & Foggitt, {\i R. kauffmannii} Clerc,{\i  R. sphaerospermus} auct. angl., non Boiss. & Blanche,{\i  R. vaginatus} Freyn, {\i R. calcareus} Butcher): Plant with capillary leaves only. Leaves on mature stems shorter to longer than the internodes; segments divergent or subparallel, rigid or flaccid. 2n = 16, 24, 32, 40, 48.{\i  Britain, W. France, Iberian peninsula; Greece; probably more widespread in W. Europe}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 128. R. sphaerospermus} Boiss. & Blanché in Boiss.,{\i  Diagn. Pl. Or. Nov.}{\b  3}({\b 5}): 6 (1856) ({\i R. peltatus} subsp. {\i sphaerospermus} (Boiss. & Blanche) Meikle). like {\b 126} but without laminate leaves; achenes not more than 1 mm, subglobose.{\i  S. part of Balkan peninsula.} Bu Gr Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 129. R. aquatilis} L.,{\i  Sp. Pl.} 556 (1753) ({\i R. capillaceus} Thuill.,{\i  R. heterophyllus} Weber, {\i R. diversifolius} Gilib.,{\i  R. radians} Revel,{\i  Batrachium gilibertii} V. Krecz.). like {\b 126} but segments of laminate leaves with dentate margins; pedicel in fruit rarely more than 50 cm and usually shorter than the petiole of the opposed leaf; honey-leaves up to c. 10 mm; nectaries circular. 2n = 48. {\i  Most of Europe, but rare in the north and east.} All except Az Bl Fa Is Lu Rs(N, K, E) Sb Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 130. R. trichophyllus} Chaix in Vill.,{\i  Hist. Pl. Dauph.}{\b  1}: 335 (1786) ({\i R. paucistamineus} Tausch, {\i R. brattius} G. Beck, {\i R. divaricatus} Schrank,{\i  R. flaccidus} Pers.,{\i  Batrachium divaricatum} (Schrank) Wimmer, {\i R. drouetii} F.W. Schultz ex Godron, {\i B. trichophyllum} (Chaix) van den Bosch). Annual or perennial without laminate leaves. Capillary leaves rarely more than 4 cm. Pedicel in fruit usually less than 40 mm. Honey-leaves rarely more than 5 mm, not contiguous. Achenes more than 2 mm, ovate.{\i  Most of Europe.} All except Az Fa Sb.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp.{\b  trichophyllus} : Robust, erect, rooting only at the lower internodes. Flowers chasmogamous. 2n = 32, 40, 48.{\i  Throughout the range of the species}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp.{\b  eradicatus} (Laest.) C.D.K. Cook, {\i Mitt. Bot. Staatssamm.} ({\i München}){\b  6}: 622 (1967) ({\i R. eradicatus} (Laest.) Nevski,{\i  R. confervoides} Fries,{\i  Batrachium eradicatum} (Laest.) Fries, {\i R. lutulentus} Perr. & Song.): Delicate, procumbent, rooting at most internodes. Flowers usually cleistogamous. 2n = 16, 32. {\i N. Europe; Alps; mountains of Spain and Portugal}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 131. R. rionii} Lagger,{\i  Flora }({\i Regensb}.){\b  31}: 49 (1848) ({\i Batrachium rionii} (Lagger) Nyman). like {\b 130}({\b a}) but short-lived annual; achenes not more than 1 mm, subglobose. 2n = 16.{\i  E. & C. Europe, extending southwards to N.W. Greece}. Au Cz Ga Ge Gr He Hu †It Ju Rm Rs(W, K, E).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 132. R. circinatus} Sibth.,{\i  Fl. Oxon.} 175 (1794) ({\i R. divaricatus} sensu Coste, non Schrank, {\i R. capillaceus} Thuill.,{\i  Batrachium foeniculaceum} auct., non (Gilib.) V. Krecz.). Perennial without laminate leaves. Capillary leaves c. 3 cm, circular or reniform in outline; segments rigid, divergent, lying in 1 plane. Honey-leaves rarely more than 10 mm, contiguous. Receptacle pubescent. 2n = 16.{\i  Much of Europe, but rare in the north and the Mediterranean region.} Au Be Br Cz Da Fe Ga Ge Hb He Ho Hu It Ju Po Rm Rs(N, B, C, W, E) ?Si Su.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 133. R. fluitans} Lam.,{\i  Fl. Fr.}{\b  3: }184 (1779). Perennial without laminate leaves. Capillary leaves usually more than 8 cm and frequently more than 25 cm, rarely more than 3-fid; segments not diverging, collapsing when removed from water. Receptacle nearly or quite glabrous. 2n = 16, 24, 32. •{\i   From Scotland and Sweden southwards to Sardegna and Romania.} Au Be Br Co Cz Da Ga Ge Hb He Ho Hu It Po Rm Rs(B, W) Sa Su.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 20.             Ceratocephala}             Moench
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc  By †T.G. Tutin.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Like{\i  Ranunculus} but achenes with an empty cell on either side of the seed, with an acuminate, more or less up-curved beak 2-3 times as long as the achene.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 Beak of achene falcate, broad; empty cells distant ............................. {\b 1. falcata}
\par
Beak of achene nearly straight, narrow; empty cells nearly
\par
  touching ...................................................................................... {\b 2. testiculata}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. C. falcata} (L.) Pers.,{\i  Syn. Pl.}{\b  1}: 341 (1805) ({\i Ranunculus falcatus} L.). Pubescent annual 2-10 cm. Leaves 3-fid, the lobes forked into linear-oblong segments. Flowers 10-15 mm in diameter, solitary. Honey-leaves yellow; nectaries c. 1/3 as long as the honey-leaf. Receptacle elongate in fruit. Achenes 9-10 mm, numerous, with broad, falcate beak and empty cells distant.{\i  Cultivated fields and waste places. S. Europe.} †Au Bu Ga Gr Hs ?Hu It Ju Rs(K, E) Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. C. testiculata} (Crantz) Roth,{\i  Enum. }{\b 1}: 1014 (1827) ({\i C. orthoceras} DC., {\i Ranunculus testiculatus} Crantz). like {\b 1} but less hairy and rather glaucous; flowers 5-10 mm in diameter; achenes 5-6 mm, with narrow, nearly straight beak and empty cells nearly touching.{\i  Cultivated fields and waste places. E.C. & E. Europe.} Au Bu Cz Hu Ju ?Po Rm Rs(C, W, K, E).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 21.           Myosurus}              L.
\par  

\pard\f0\fs24\qc   By †T.G. Tutin (Ed.1) revised by J.R. Akeroyd (Ed.2)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Small annuals. Flowers solitary, small. Perianth-segments 5 or more. Honey-leaves 5-7, tubular, sometimes absent. Stamens few. Achenes numerous; receptacle greatly elongated in fruit.
\par

\par
286}
\par