{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 (1861) (R. dichotomiflorus Freyn). like {\b 106} but the basal leaves mostly elliptical or lanceolate, rarely ovate; lower pedicels 1/3-1/2 as long as the leaves; honey-leaves oblong, about as long as the sepals. Beak c. ¼ as long as the achene. •{\i  Spain, N. Portugal.} Hs Lu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 110. R. revelieri} Boreau,{\i  Mém. Soc. Acad.} ({\i Angers}){\b  1}: 85 (1857). Annual 10-20 cm. Leaves lanceolate, petiolate. Pedicels terete, thickened in fruit; lower about as long as the leaves. Sepals usually pubescent beneath, longer than the honey-leaves. Achenes 1·5 mm, minutely tuberculate, scarcely compressed; beak very short. 2n = 32.•{\i  Corse, Sardegna, S.E. France }({\i Var}). Co Ga Sa.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b revelieri} : Pedicels stout, fistular. Sepals densely pubescent beneath.{\i  Corse, Sardegna.}
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp.{\b  rodiei }(Litard.) Tutin,{\i  Feddes Repert.}{\b  69}: 55 (1964). Pedicels less stout, scarcely fistular. Sepals glabrous or with few scattered hairs beneath.{\i  S.E. France} ({\i Var}).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Sect. MICRANTHUS (Ovcz.) A. Nyárády. Like Sect.{\i  Flammula} but flowers sessile or nearly so, not more than 3 mm in diameter, yellow. Achenes tuberculate; beak ½ as long to as long as the achene.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 111. R. lateriflorus} DC., {\i Reg. Veg. Syst. Nat.}{\b  1}: 251 (1817). Much-branched annual 5-25 cm. Lower leaves ovate, broadly cuneate at base; petioles very long; upper leaves narrower, with shorter petioles; all remotely denticulate. Flowers 2·5-3 mm in diameter, sessile at the nodes or in the dichotomies of the stem, pale yellow. Sepals glabrous, yellow. Honey-leaves about as long as the sepals. Achenes 25-30, c. 2·5 mm, narrowed into a beak about as long as the achene, curved at tip. 2n = 16. {\i Wet or seasonally flooded ground. C., S. & S.E. Europe}. †Au Bu Cr Cz Ga Gr Hs Hu It Ju Rm Rs(W, K, E) Si Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 112. R. nodiflorus} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 549 (1753). like {\b 111} but leaves narrower, tapering gradually into the petiole, entire or slightly serrulate; achenes 12-28; beak c. ½ as long as the achene. • {\i S.W. Europe.} Co Ga Hs Lu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Sect. XANTHOBATRACHIUM (Prantl) Ovcz. Like Sect.{\i  Flammula} but submerged leaves with filiform, verticillate segments; flowers 3-6 mm in diameter, yellow; achenes less than 1 mm; beak almost absent.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 113. R. polyphyllus} Waldst. & Kit. ex Willd.,{\i  Sp. Pl.}{\b  2}({\b 2}): 1331 (1800). Plant 10-15 cm, creeping then ascending. Stems stout, divaricately branched. Aerial leaves entire or 3-lobed, more or less elliptical in outline; lamina 5-10 mm. Flowers 3-6 mm in diameter. Achenes numerous, minutely papillose.{\i  E.C. & E. Europe.} Cz Hu Rm Rs(C, W, E).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Sect. RANUNCELLA (Spach) Freyn. Roots fibrous or rarely tuberous. Leaves entire, more or less parallel-veined. Flowers yellow, white or pinkish. Achenes more or less compressed, veined, keeled.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 114. R. pyrenaeus} L.,{\i  Mantissa Alt. }248 (1771) ({\i R. plantagineus} All., nom. illeg.). Perennial 5-15 cm. Stock fibrous. Leaves linear to lanceolate; cauline leaves few, sessile. Flowers 1-10; pedicels glabrous below, pubescent above. Flowers 10-20 mm in diameter, white. Sepals glabrous, whitish. Honey-leaves obovate, often imperfect or some lacking. Receptacle ovoid, pubescent. Achenes inflated, nearly smooth; beak short, nearly straight. •{\i  Pyrenees, mountains of Spain. }Ga Hs.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp.{\b  pyrenaeus} : Stems often branched. Leaves linear; cauline 1-3. Flowers 10-20 mm in diameter. 2n = 16.{\i  Pyrenees and N. & E. Spain}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp.{\b  angustifolius }(DC.) Rouy & Fouc.,{\i  Fl. Fr.}{\b  1}: 81 (1893) ({\i R. alismoides} Bory): Stems usually simple. Leaves lanceolate; cauline 0 or 1. Flowers 10-13 mm in diameter. 2n = 16.{\i  S. Spain} ({\i Sierra Nevada}).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 115. R. keupferi} Greuter & Burdet,{\i  Willdenowia}{\b  16}: 452 (1987) ({\i R. pyrenaeus} subsp.{\i  plantagineus }(All.) Rouy & Fouc.). Perennial 5-30(-40) cm, more robust than {\b 114}. Leaves lanceolate; cauline leaves few, sessile. Flowers 1-10; pedicels hirsute or tomentose. Flowers 10-30 mm in diameter, white. Sepals glabrescent, yellowish-green. Honey-leaves obovate, often imperfect or lacking. Receptacle ovoid to spherical. Achenes inflated, strongly veined; beak recurved. 2n = 16, 24, 32, 40.{\i  Alps, Corse}. Au Co Ga He It.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 116. R. bupleuroides} Brot., {\i Fl. Lusit.}{\b  2}: 365 (1804). like {\b 114} but up to 50 cm, more branched; basal leaves ovate or lanceolate-ovate with slender petioles; plant glabrous except for petioles and base of stem; flowers pale yellow; achenes transversely rugose 2n = 16.{\i  Dry places; somewhat calcifuge.• N.W. Spain, Portugal }Hs Lu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 117. R. gramineus} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 549 (1753). Glaucous, glabrous or pubescent perennial 20-50 cm. Stock stout, fibrous. Basal leaves linear to lanceolate, flat, sessile; cauline leaves few, small, sessile. Pedicels 1- to few-flowered. Flowers c. 20 mm in diameter, deep yellow. Sepals glabrous, yellowish. Honey-leaves broadly obovate. Receptacle ovoid, glabrous. Achenes 3 mm, slightly compressed, keeled, veined; beak 0·5 mm, stout, nearly straight. 2n = 16.{\i  S.W. Europe extending to C. France and C. Italy.} Ga He Hs It Lu Sa.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 118. R. abnormis} Cutanda & Willk., {\i Linnaea}{\b  30}: 83 (1859). Perennial. Roots tuberous. Stem 50-20 cm, glabrous or pubescent. Leaves linear-lanceolate, cucullate at apex; cauline leaves small, sessile. Pedicels 1- to 3-flowered, more or less pubescent. Flowers 20-25 mm in diameter, yellow. Sepals yellowish, more or less pubescent. Honey-leaves 8-14, oblong-obovate. Receptacle oblong, glabrous. Achenes ovate, slightly compressed, smooth; beak very short, curved. 2n = 16. •{\i  W.C. & N.W. Spain, N. Portugal.} Hs Lu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 119. R. parnassiifolius} L.,{\i  Sp. Pl.} 549 (1753). Perennial (4-)10-20(-30) cm. Basal leaves entire, ovate-cordate or broadly lanceolate, at first pubescent at base, on margins and beneath; main veins usually 7; petioles not widened into the lamina; cauline leaves amplexicaul. Pedicels pubescent above, 1- to several-flowered. Flowers 20-30 mm in diameter, white or reddish. Sepals glabrous or pubescent. Honey-leaves broadly ovate. Achenes smooth or with raised veins, inflated; beak very short, hooked. 2n = 16, 32, 40. •{\i  Alps, Pyrenees, N. Spain.} Au Ga Ge He Hs It.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Basal leaves hairy beneath; sepals densely villous;
\par
  achenes strongly veined ............................................... ({\b b}) subsp.{\b  cabrerensis}
\par
1 Basal leaves glabrous beneath, except sometimes at base; sepals glabrous
\par
  or sparsely hairy; achenes smooth or with inconspicuous veins
\par
2 Petals unequal or absent; stamens fewer than carpels
\par
  ..................................................................................... ({\b c}) subsp.{\b  heterocarpus}
\par
2 Petals ± equal; stamens more than carpels
\par
3 Basal leaves uniformly hairy above; peduncles mostly
\par
  less than 15 mm in fruit ........................................... ({\b a}) subsp.{\b  parnassiifolius}
\par
3 Basal leaves more densely hairy on the veins than
\par

\par
284}
\par