{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 2 Outer basal leaves crenate .......................................................... {\b 75. degenii}
\par 
1 Achenes puberulent
\par 
3 Scale-like sheaths present at base outside foliage leaves
\par 
4 Basal leaves usually 2 or 3, at least some lobed or coarsely
\par 
  dentate ............................................................................................. {\b 71. fallax}
\par 
4 Basal leaves usually 1 or 2, serrate-crenate but not lobed
\par 
5 Basal leaves pubescent beneath; segments of cauline
\par 
  leaves dentate; beak of achene long ........................................ {\b 70. cassubicus}
\par 
5 Basal leaves glabrous beneath; segments of cauline
\par 
  leaves entire or slightly dentate; beak of achene short ........ {\b 72. monophyllus}
\par 
3 Scale-like sheaths absent
\par 
6 Basal leaves usually at least 5; segments of cauline leaves
\par 
  usually entire ............................................................................ {\b 73. auricomus}
\par 
6 Basal leaves usually 2 or 3; segments of cauline leaves
\par 
  dentate and often lobed ................................................................... {\b 71. fallax}
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 70. R. cassubicus }L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 551 (1753) (incl. {\i R. flabellifolius} Heuffel & Reichenb., ?{\i R. allemannii} Br.-Bl.). Tall (c. 40 cm), stout. Scale-like sheaths present. Basal leaves 1 or 2, up to 10 cm wide, orbicular-cordate, serrate-crenate, pubescent beneath; segments of cauline leaves dentate. Receptacle densely pubescent. Beak of achene long. 2n = 16, 24, 32, 40, 44, 48, 64.{\i  C. & E. Europe.} Au Bu Cz Fe Ge He Hu It Ju Po Rm Rs(N, B, C, W, E) Su.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 71. R. fallax }(Wimmer & Grab.) Sloboda,{\i  Rostlinnictví} 679 (1852) ({\i R. megacarpus} Walo Koch, pro parte). Stems c. 40 cm, stout. Scale-like sheaths small and soon decaying. Basal leaves 2 or 3, at least some lobed or coarsely dentate, pubescent beneath; segments of cauline leaves dentate or lobed. Receptacle more or less pubescent. Achenes densely pubescent; beak medium. 2n = 16, 32(-34). •{\i  C. & E. Europe, extending to Sweden}. Au Bu Cz Fe Ge He Hu ?It Ju Po Rm Rs(N, C, W) Su.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28 Intermediate between{\b  70} and {\b 73}.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 72. R. monophyllus }Ovcz., {\i Not. Syst.} ({\i Leningrad}) {\b 3}: 54 (1922). Like {\b 71} but stems c. 20 cm, slender; scale-like sheaths larger and persistent; basal leaves glabrous beneath; segments of cauline leaves entire or slightly dentate; achenes sparsely and shortly pubescent. 2n = 32.{\i  Fennoscandia and N.E. Russia.} Fe No Rs(N, C, E) Su.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 73. R. auricomus }L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 551 (1753) ({\i R. binatus} Kit.). Variable in size. Scale-like sheaths absent. Basal leaves commonly 5 or more, some or all deeply 3- to 5-lobed, usually glabrous beneath; cauline leaves with narrow, usually entire segments. Receptacle pubescent or glabrous. Achenes densely pubescent; beak short. 2n = 32(-34), 40, 48.{\i  Widespread in Europe.} All except Al Az Bl Cr Lu Sa Si Tu.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 74. R. affinis }R. Br. in Parry,{\i  Jour. Voy. N.W. Pass. }({\i Suppl. App}.) 265 (1824) ({\i R. auricomus} var.{\i  glabratus} Lynge, {\i R. pedatifidus} auct., non Sm.). Scale-like sheaths absent. Basal leaves deeply 3- to 5-lobed; cauline leaves with linear segments. Achenes glabrous.{\i  Arctic Europe}. Rs(N) Sb.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 75. R. degenii }Kümmerle & Jáv., {\i Bot. Közl. }{\b 19}: 19 (1921). Scale-like sheaths absent. Outer basal leaves crenate, the inner divided to 3; cauline leaves with narrowly oblanceolate, entire segments. Achenes glabrous. •{\i  N.E. Albania, S.W. Jugoslavia. }Al Ju.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28 A similar plant with densely pubescent achenes occurs in S. Jugoslavia.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 76. R. polyrhizos }Stephan ex Willd., {\i Sp. Pl.}{\b  2}({\b 2}): 1324 (1800). Almost glabrous perennial 8-15 cm. Basal leaves 3-lobed or 3-sect; segments narrow, not markedly different from the smaller, sessile, 3- to 5-sect cauline leaves. Sepals patent. Receptacle pubescent. Achenes puberulent.{\i  Moldavia; E. Ukraine, S.E. Russia.} Rs(C, W, E).
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 77. R. pygmaeus }Wahlenb., {\i Fl. Lapp.} 175 (1812). Nearly glabrous perennial 1·5-4(-7) cm with a stout stock. Stems simple. Basal leaves reniform in outline, 3-lobed; segments wide, obtuse, the lateral usually shallowly lobed; cauline leaves usually sessile, 3(-5)-lobed, the segments ovate-lanceolate, entire, obtuse. Flowers 5-10 mm in diameter. Sepals villous at base. Achenes c. 1 mm, ovoid, smooth; beak short, hooked. 2n = 16, 32. {\i N. Europe, southwards to }59°{\i  N. in Norway; E. Alps; W. Carpathians}. Au Cz Fe He Is It No Po Rs(N) Sb Su.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 78. R. nivalis }L.,{\i  Sp. Pl.} 553 (1753). Usually unbranched perennial 8-15(-25) cm. Basal leaves orbicular-reniform in outline, deeply pedately lobed; cauline leaves sessile, with linear-lanceolate, entire lobes. Receptacle nearly glabrous, cylindrical. Sepals patent, villous. Achenes ovoid, smooth; beak about as long as the achene, slender. 2n = 40, 48, 56.{\i  Arctic Europe, extending southwards to} 62°{\i  N. in Norway.} Fe No Rs(N) Sb Su.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 79. R. sulphureus }C.J. Phipps,{\i  Voy. N. Pole} 202 (1774) ({\i R. altaicus} sensu Resvoll-Holmsen, non Laxm.). Like {\b 78} but stouter; basal leaves cuneate, shallowly lobed; receptacle densely pubescent, ovoid; sepals with abundant, brown hairs; beak ½ as long as the achene. 2n = 96.{\i  Arctic Europe, extending southwards to} 59° {\i N. in Ural.} Fe No Rs(N) Sb Su.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28 Sect. HECATONIA (Lour.) DC. Marsh- or water-plants. Nectary-scale often forked or completely surrounding the nectary. Achenes small, scarcely compressed; beak usually very short.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 80. R. hyperboreus }Rottb., {\i Skr. Kiobenhavnske Selsk. Lard. Vid. }{\b 10}: 458 (1770). Small, slender, creeping or floating, nearly glabrous perennial. Leaves 5-lobed, ovate; petioles short. Flowers c. 5 mm in diameter, solitary, axillary.{\i  Arctic and subarctic Europe, southwards to} 61°{\i  N. in Norway}. Fe Is No Rs(N) Sb Su.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b hyperboreus}: Scarcely caespitose; leaf-lobes ovate, divaricate; head of achenes 4-5 mm in diameter. 2n = 32.{\i  Throughout the range of the species}.
\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b arnellii} Scheutz,{\i  Kungl. Svenska Vet.-Akad. Handl.} nov. ser.,{\b  22}({\b 10}): 75 (1888) ({\i R. samojedorum} Rupr.): Somewhat caespitose; leaf-lobes linear-oblong, not divaricate; head of achenes c. 2 mm in diameter.{\i  Arctic Russia}.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 81. R. sceleratus }L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 551 (1753). Stout, erect, more or less glabrous annual up to 60 cm. Basal leaves reniform, 3-lobed, the lateral lobes often again lobed, all crenate; upper cauline leaves sessile, up to 3-lobed; segments entire. Flowers 5-10 mm in . diameter, numerous. Sepals deflexed, pubescent beneath. Receptacle pubescent, much elongated in fruit. Achenes c. 1 mm, ovoid, glabrous but faintly rugose; beak very short, obtuse. {\i Almost throughout Europe.} All except Az Cr Fa Is Sa Sb.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b sceleratus}. Stems more or less glabrous. Sepals and honey-leaves 5. 2n = 32. {\i Throughout the range of the species}.
\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b reptabundus} (Rupr.) Hultén,{\i  Bot. Not.}{\b  1947}: 352 (1947) ({\i R. reptabundus} Rupr.): Stems densely pubescent. Sepals 3 or 4; honey-leaves 5 or absent. {\i N. Russia}.
\par 

\par 
280}
\par