{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 89. R. thora} L.,{\i  Sp. Pl.} 550 (1753) ({\i R. tatrae }Borbás; incl. {\i R. scutatus} Waldst. & Kit.). Perennial 10-30(-50) cm. Leaves glaucous, glabrous; the lower reniform, entire at base and then increasingly coarsely serrate to apex; basal petiolate, appearing after flowering; the lower cauline sessile; the upper cauline small, lanceolate, mostly 3-lobed. Flowers 1 to several, 10-20 mm in diameter, yellow. Sepals glabrous. Honey-leaves ovate. Receptacle sparsely hairy. Achenes c. 4 mm, few, glabrous, subglobose; beak short, hooked. 2n = 16. Calcicole. •{\i  Mountains of C. & S. Europe, from N.W. Spain to E. Carpathians.} Al Au Cz Ga He Hs It Ju Po Rm Rs(W).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 90. R. hybridus} Biria,{\i  Hist. Renonc.} 38 (1811). like {\b 89} but smaller; basal leaves usually 2, present at flowering, truncate or broadly cuneate at base, coarsely dentate at apex, otherwise entire; flowers 12-25 mm in diameter; achenes 2-3 mm. •{\i  E. Alps, extending to W. Jugoslavia}. Au Ge It Ju ?Rm.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 91. R. brevifolius} Ten.,{\i  Prodr. Fl. Nap.}{\b  1}: lxviii (1815). like {\b 89} but smaller; basal leaves usually several; cauline leaves 1(2), 3-sect, smaller; flowers 15-25 mm in diameter; achenes 3-4 mm; beak long, curved. 2n = 16.{\i  Damp, stony ground on limestone. C. Italy; Balkan peninsula and Kriti.} Al Cr Gr It Ju.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Plants from Greece and Kriti have been called subsp.{\b  pindicus} (Hausskn.) E. Mayer,{\i  Razpr. Mat.-Prir. Akad. Ljubljani}{\b  5}: 26 (1959), on the basis of more numerous, more deeply lobed basal leaves and smaller achenes, but these differences are not consistent.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Sect. LEUCORANUNCULUS Boiss. Roots fibrous. Basal leaves lobed. Honey-leaves white (rarely pink), caducous. Receptacle glabrous. Achenes subglobose, smooth; beak long, nearly straight.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 92. R. alpestris} L.,{\i  Sp. Pl.} 553 (1753) ({\i R. caballeroi} Losa & P. Monts.). Glabrous, caespitose perennial 3-15 cm. Leaves shiny; basal leaves several, 3- to 5-lobed; cauline leaves 1 or 2. Flowers 15-25 mm in diameter, solitary or 2 or 3. Sepals glabrous. Honey-leaves obcordate. Achenes c. 1·5 mm, glabrous, obovoid; beak slender. {\i Calcicole. • Mountains of C. & S. Europe.} Au Cz Ga Ge He Hs It Ju Po Rm.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp.{\b  alpestris} : Plant caespitose. Leaves shiny; basal leaves usually 5-lobed, deeply crenate with obtuse teeth; cauline leaves 1 or 2, the lower 3-fid. Flowers c. 20 mm in diameter, often 2 or 3. Honey-leaves emarginate. 2n = 16.{\i  Almost throughout the range of the species}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp.{\b  traunfellneri} (Hoppe) P. Fourn., {\i Quatre Fl. Fr.} 354 (1936). Plant not caespitose, usually smaller. Leaves dull; basal leaves usually 3-lobed, lobes deeply divided with obtuse to subacute teeth; cauline leaf 1, usually linear, simple. Flowers c. 15 mm in diameter, solitary. Honey-leaves emarginate to truncate. 2n = 16. {\i S.E. Alps}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b R. cacuminis} Strid & Papanicolaou,{\i  Ann. Mus. Goulandris}{\b  4}: 221 (1978), from moist rocks above 2500 m on Kaimakcalan on the border between Greece and Jugoslavia, differs from{\b  92}({\b b}) by the somewhat swollen roots, acute teeth of leaf-margin, and slightly smaller achenes, and may represent a third subspecies.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 93. R. crenatus} Waldst. & Kit.,{\i  Pl. Rar. Hung.}{\b  1}: 9 (1799) (incl.{\i  R. magellensis} Ten.). Perennial 5-15 cm, glabrous. Basal leaves petiolate, suborbicular, weakly cordate, crenate, sometimes 3-lobed at apex, obscurely veined; cauline leaves 1 or 2, lanceolate to linear, bract-like. Flowers 1 or 2, 20-25 mm in diameter. Sepals narrowly ovate. Honey-leaves broadly ovate or oblong, obcordate. Achenes 1·5-2 mm, glaucous, ovoid; beak about as long as the achene, slender, hooked at apex. 2n = 16. •{\i  E. Alps; C. Appennini, S. & E. Carpathians, Balkan peninsula.} Al Au Bu It Ju Rm Rs(W).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 94. R. bilobus} Bertol.,{\i  Misc. Bot. }{\b 19}: 5 (1858). like {\b 93} but basal leaves with prominent veins; sepals wider; honey-leaves emarginate or more deeply notched. 2n = 16.{\i  Rocks and stony grassland; calcicole. •  S.E. Alps.} It.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Sect. ACONITIFOLII Tutin. Roots fibrous. Basal leaves lobed. Honey-leaves white, caducous. Receptacle pubescent. Achenes subglobose, veined; beak short, curved.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 95. R. aconitifolius} L.,{\i  Sp. Pl.} 551 (1753). Perennial up to c. 50 cm. Leaves palmately 3- to 5-lobed; lobes serrate-dentate, the middle one free to base; cauline leaves sessile. Pedicels 1-3 times as long as subtending leaf, pubescent above. Flowers 10-20 mm in diameter. Sepals reddish or purple beneath, glabrous, caducous. Honey-leaves 5, ovate, weakly obcordate. Achenes 5 mm, slightly compressed; beak slender. 2n = 16. •{\i  C. Europe, extending to C. Spain, N. Italy and W. Jugoslavia}. Au Cz Ga Ge He Hs It Ju.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 96. R. platanifolius} L.,{\i  Mantissa} 79 (1767). like {\b 95} but often larger (up to 130 cm); leaves 5- to 7-lobed, the middle lobe not free to base; pedicels 4-5 times as long as the subtending leaves, nearly or quite glabrous above. 2n = 16. •{\i  C. & S. Europe, Belgium, W. Fennoscandia.} Al Au Be Bu Co Cz Ga Ge Gr He Hs It Ju No Po Rm Rs(W) Sa Su.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 97. R. seguieri} Vill., {\i Prosp. Pl. Dauph.} 50 (1779). Perennial 8-20 cm, at first pubescent, later glabrescent. Basal leaves palmately 3- to 5-lobed, the segments again divided; cauline leaves similar but smaller. Flowers up to 25 mm in diameter. Sepals glabrous. Honey-leaves emarginate. Achenes c. 4 mm, broadly ovoid; beak slender. {\i Calcicole. • Alps, Cordillera Cantabrica, C. Appennini; S.W. Jugoslavia.} Au Ga He Hs It Ju.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp.{\b  seguieri} : Slightly pubescent. Flowers 20-25 mm in diameter. Achenes inflated. 2n = 16.{\i  Throughout the range of the species except Jugoslavia}.
\par
 ({\b b}) Subsp.{\b  montenegrinus} (Halácsy) Tutin,{\i  Feddes Repert.}{\b  69}: 55 (1964). Tomentose. Flowers smaller. Achenes ovate, sulcate.{\i  S.W. Jugoslavia}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Sect. ACETOSELLIFOLII Tutin. Roots tuberous, fusiform. Leaves all basal, palmately 5- to 7-veined, hastate. Honey-leaves white, caducous. Receptacle glabrous. Achenes keeled on inner margin, veined; beak very short.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 98. R. acetosellifolius} Boiss.,{\i  Biblioth. Univ. Genève} nov. ser., {\b 13}: 406 (1838). Glabrous perennial 3-20 cm. Stock stout, fibrous. Stems decumbent or ascending, simple or divaricately branched. Leaves hastate and irregularly laciniate at base; middle lobe the longest. Flowers 15-25 mm in diameter. Honey-leaves obovate. Achenes subglobose; beak curved. 2n = 16.{\i  Damp grassland,} 2400-3000{\i  m. S. Spain} ({\i Sierra Nevada}). Hs.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Sect. CRYMODES (A. Gray) Tutin. Roots fibrous. Leaves deeply lobed. Honey-leaves white to purple, persistent. Receptacle glabrous. Achenes strongly compressed and winged on 2 sides.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 99. R. glacialis} L.,{\i  Sp. Pl.} 553 (1753) ({\i Oxygraphis vulgaris} Freyn). Perennial 4-25 cm, usually glabrous except for the sepals. Stem stout, erect or ascending. Basal leaves thick, 3-sect; segments usually stipitate, deeply divided into elliptical or oblong lobes;
\par

\par
282}
\par