{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28\li200    elsewhere above; peduncles mostly more than 15 mm in fruit
\par
  .......................................................................................... ({\b d}) subsp. {\b favargeri}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp.{\b  parnassiifolius} : Basal leaves rounded to subcordate at base, glabrous beneath, more or less uniformly hairy above. Sepals glabrous or sparsely hairy. Honey-leaves 5, subequal, white or pinkish. Peduncles mostly less than 15 mm in fruit. Achenes more or less smooth.{\i  E. Pyrenees}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp.{\b  cabrerensis} Rothm.,{\i  Bol. Soc. Esp. Hist. Nat.}{\b  34}: 148 (1934): Basal leaves cordate at base, hairy on both surfaces. Sepals densely villous. Honey-leaves 5, subequal, white. Peduncles mostly less than 15 mm in fruit. Achenes with prominent venation. {\i Mountains of N.W. Spain}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b c}) Subsp.{\b  heterocarpus} Küpfer,{\i  Boissiera }{\b 23}: 192 (1975): Basal leaves cuneate to subcordate at base, hairy on both surfaces, more densely so on the veins than elsewhere above. Sepals glabrous or sparsely hairy. Honey-leaves 0-5, unequal in size, white. Peduncles mostly more than 15 mm in fruit. Achenes smooth. {\i Throughout most of the range of the species.}
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b d}) Subsp.{\b  favargeri} Küpfer,{\i  op. cit. }191 (1975): Basal leaves rounded to cordate at base, glabrous beneath, more densely so on the veins than elsewhere above. Sepals glabrous or sparsely hairy. Honey-leaves 5, white. Peduncles mostly more than 15 mm in fruit. Achenes smooth.{\i  W. Pyrenees; Picos de Europa}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 120. R. wettsteinii} Dörfler,{\i  Anzeig. Akad. Wiss.} ({\i Wien}){\b  55}: 282 (1918). like {\b 119} but petiole widened gradually into the lamina; main veins usually 5; leaves often coarsely 2- to 4-dentate; sepals pubescent; achenes with prominent venation. •{\i   W.Jugoslavia} ({\i N.E. of Korab}). Ju.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 This plant, known only from the type collection, should perhaps be treated as a subspecies of {\b 119}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 121. R. amplexicaulis} L., {\i Sp. Pl}. 549 (1753). Perennial 8-30 cm. Basal leaves ovate-lanceolate; cauline leaves amplexicaul. Pedicels glabrous, 1- to several-flowered. Flowers c. 20 mm in diameter, white. Sepals glabrous, greenish, caducous. Honey-leaves obovate-orbicular. Achenes inflated, strongly veined; beak curved. 2n = 16. •{\i  Pyrenees, mountains of N. & C. Spain.} Ga Hs.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Subgen. {\b Batrachium }(DC.) A. Gray. Aquatic plants. Leaves all with a broad lamina (laminate) or all divided into capillary segments (capillary), or of both kinds. Honey-leaves white, sometimes with yellow claw. Achenes transversely rugose. Hybrids occur between most species in the subgenus.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Literature: C.D.K. Cook,{\i  Mitt. Bot. Staatssamm.} ({\i München}){\b  6}: 47-237 (1966).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 122. R. hederaceus} L.,{\i  Sp. Pl.} 556 (1753). Procumbent annual to perennial growing on mud or in shallow water. Leaves all laminate, 1-3·5 cm wide, reniform or suborbicular-cordate, with 3(-5), shallow, semi-orbicular or triangular, obtuse, entire segments which are widest at their base. Honey-leaves up to 4·5 mm, scarcely longer than the sepals, not contiguous. Receptacle glabrous. Achenes glabrous; beak lateral to subterminal. 2n = 16.  •{\i W. Europe, extending eastwards to C. Germany and S. Sweden.} Be Br Da Ga Ge Hb Ho Hs Lu †No †Rs(B) Su.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 123. R. omiophyllus} Ten.,{\i  Fl. Nap. }{\b 4}: 338 (1830) ({\i R. lenormandii }F.W. Schultz,{\i  R. homoiophyllus} auct.). like {\b 122} but leaf-segments narrowest at their base, with wide, shallow crenations; honey-leaves up to 7 mm, about twice as long as the sepals; beak of achene subterminal. 2n = 16, 32. {\i W. Europe, northwards to Scotland, S.W. Italy and Sicilia.} Br Ga Hb †Ho Hs It Lu Si.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 124. R. tripartitus} DC.,{\i  Icon. Pl. Gall. Rar.}{\b  1}: 15 (1808) ({\i R. obtusiflorus} (DC.) Moss,{\i  R. petiveri} Koch; incl. {\i R. lutarius} (Revel) Bouvet). Annual or perennial growing on mud or in water. Laminate leaves up to 4 cm wide, reniform or suborbicular, with 3(-5) cuneate, distant, entire or crenate segments. Capillary leaves with very slender, sometimes compressed segments, absent in terrestrial plants. Honey-leaves up to 6 mm, not more than twice as long as the sepals. Receptacle globose, pubescent. Achenes glabrous; beak lateral or subterminal. 2n = 40, 42, 44, 46, 48. {\i W. Europe, northwards to Britain and the Netherlands; S. Aegean} ({\i Mykonos}). †Be Br Ga Ge Gr Hb Ho Hs Lu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 125. R. ololeucos} Lloyd,{\i  Fl. Loire-Inf.} 3 (1844) (incl.{\i  R. lusitanicus} Freyn). like {\b 124} but honey-leaves usually more than 6 mm, more than twice as long as the sepals, contiguous. 2n = 16. •{\i W. Europe, from S. Spain to the Netherlands}. Be Ga Ge Ho Hs Lu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 126. R. peltatus} Schrank,{\i  Baier. Fl.}{\b  2}: 103 (1789). Annual or perennial with either laminate or capillary leaves, or both. Laminate leaves semi-orbicular with a truncate base, to orbicular, with 3-7 usually crenate segments. Capillary leaves shorter than the internodes. Honey-leaves (3-)6-15 mm, contiguous; nectaries more or less pyriform. Receptacle pubescent. Achenes usually more than 2 mm, ovate.{\i  Most of Europe, but rare in the east}. All except Al Az Fa Is Rs(W, K, E) Sb.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Laminate leaves with 3(-5) segments; achene usually with
\par
  dorsal wing ........................................................................ ({\b b}) subsp. {\b baudotii}
\par
1 Laminate leaves with 3-7 segments; achene without wing
\par
2 Achenes usually hairy, with lateral or subterminal beak;
\par
  pedicels usually more than 50 mm at anthesis ................... ({\b a}) subsp.{\b  peltatus}
\par
2 Achenes glabrous, with subterminal to terminal beak;
\par
  pedicels usually less than 50 mm at anthesis .................... ({\b c}) subsp.{\b  fucoides}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp.{\b  peltatus} ({\i R. petilleri} auct., non Koch, {\i R. floribundus} Bab., {\i Batrachium dichotomum} Schmalh., {\i B. langei} F.W. Schultz,{\i  B. triphyllos} (Wallr.) Dumort.,{\i  R. capillaceus} Thuill., {\i R. carinatus} Schur,{\i  R. diversifolius} sensu Willk. & Lange, non Gilib.,{\i  R. trichophyllus }Wallr.): Laminate leaves with (3-)5(-7) shallow segments; segments of capillary leaves rigid or flaccid. Pedicels usually more than 50 mm at anthesis, longer than the petiole of the subtending leaf. Sepals 3-6 mm, patent. Honey-leaves usually more than 10 mm. Achenes pubescent or hispid, rarely glabrous (var. {\i microcarpus} Meikle), not winged. 2n = 16, 32, 48.{\i  Throughout most of the range of the species}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp.{\b  baudotii} (Godron) Meikle ex C.D.K. Cook,{\i  Anal. Jard. Bot. Madrid}{\b  40}: 473 (1984) ({\i R. baudotii} Godron,{\i  R. confusus} Godron, {\i R. hololeucos} auct., {\i R. leontinensis} Freyn, {\i R. dubius} Freyn): Laminate leaves with 3(-5) deep, cuneate segments; segments of capillary leaves rigid. Pedicels usually more than 50 mm at anthesis, longer than the petiole of the subtending leaf. Sepals 2·5-4·5 mm, patent or reflexed. Honey-leaves 5·5-10 mm. Receptacle elongating in fruit. Achenes glabrous, with dorsal wing. 2n = 32.{\i  Usually in brackish water. Coasts of W. & S. Europe and the Baltic region; locally inland in W. & C. Europe}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b c}) Subsp.{\b  fucoides} (Freyn) Muñoz Garmendia,{\i  Anal. Jard. Bot. Madrid}{\b  41}: 477 (1985) ({\i R. peltatus} subsp.{\i  saniculifolius} (Viv.)
\par

\par
285}
\par