{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 Stems up to 20 cm, with patent, villous hairs in the lower ½. Basal leaves ternate; leaflets more or less deeply 3-partite, greyish, covered with soft, patent hairs. Flowers nodding, bicolorous. Perianth-segments 25-30 mm, intense blue; limb of honey-leaf 11-20 × 11 mm, white or bluish inside, the spur 13-15 mm, blue, hooked. Follicles glandular-pubescent.{\i  Calcareous rocks and screes,} 1200-2000 {\i m. W. Jugoslavia; N. Albania.} Al Ju.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 9. A. atrata} Koch, {\i Flora} ({\i Regensb.}){\b  13}: 119 (1830) ({\i A. atroviolacea} Avé-Lall.). Stems 40-80 cm, densely pilose, at least above. Basal leaves 2-ternate; leaflets 2- or 3-fid, more or less glabrous. Flowers nodding, dark purple-violet. Perianth-segments 15-24 × 8-9 mm; limb of honey-leaf 8-12 × 7-9 mm, the spur 10-15 × 4 mm, hooked. Stamens long-exserted. Follicles glandular-pubescent. 2n = 14. •{\i  Alps, Appennini}. Au Ga Ge He It Ju.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 A number of variants of this species have been described, but they seem of doubtful status.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 10. A. nigricans} Baumg.,{\i  Enum. Stirp. Transs}{\b . 2}: 104 (1816) ({\i ?A. ullepitschii} Pax). like {\b 9} but stems glandular-hairy; leaves and leaflets smaller; perianth-segments 25-35 mm; limb of honey-leaf 11-14 × 8-10 mm, the spur 13-15 × 5-6 mm. •{\i  C. & S.E. Europe.} Au Bu Gr Hu It Ju Po Rm Rs(W).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp.{\b  nigricans} : Stems 40-80 cm. Flowers numerous, purplish. 2n = 14.{\i  Throughout the range of the species}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp.{\b  subscaposa} (Borbás) Soó,{\i  Acta Geobot. Hung.}{\b  5}: 206 (1943) ({\i A. subscaposa} Borbás): Stems up to 30 cm. Flowers 1-3, bright blue.{\i  Romania.}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b A. blecicii} Podobnik,{\i  Biosistematika}{\b  12}: 16 (1986), from Crna Gora, like subsp. ({\b a}) but with larger, bicolorous flowers, may be another subspecies of {\b 10}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 11. A. aurea} Janka,{\i  Österr. Bot. Zeitschr}{\b . 22}: 174 (1872). Stems 10-40 cm, subglabrous to densely hairy. Basal leaves 2-ternate; leaflets 2- or 3-fid, glabrous above, pubescent beneath. Flowers suberect, yellow. Perianth-segments 20-30 × 10-15 mm; limb of honey-leaf 15-20 × 10 12 mm, the spur 13-15 × 4 mm, hooked. Follicles pubescent.{\i  • S.E. Jugoslavia, S.W. Bulgaria.} Bu ?Gr Ju.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 12. A. kitaibelii} Schott, {\i Verh. Zool.-Bot. Ges. Wien}{\b  3}: 129 (1853). Stems 15-30 cm, glandular-hairy, densely so above. Basal leaves alternate; leaflets hairy above and beneath. Flowers suberect, red- to blue-violet. Perianth-segments 16-20 × 8-11 mm; limb of honey-leaf 10-13 × 7-10 mm, the spur 5-10 × 3-4 mm, straight or slightly curved, not hooked. Follicles glandular-pubescent. •{\i  N.W. Jugoslavia.} Ju.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 13. A. einseleana} F.W. Schultz, {\i Arch. Fl. Fr. Allem. }135 (1848) ({\i A. aquilegioides} auct.). Stems 10-45 cm, subscapose, subglabrous below, sparsely glandular above. Basal leaves 2-ternate; leaflets shallowly 2- or 3-fid, subglabrous above, glabrous beneath; cauline leaves more or less entire, linear. Flowers nodding, blue-violet. Perianth-segments 15-19 × 7-8 mm; limb of honey-leaf 8-10 × 6-9 mm, the spur 7-10 × 2-3 mm, straight. Staminodes c. 5 mm. Follicles glandular-pubescent. •{\i  C. & E. Alps}. Au Ge He It Ju.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 14. A. thalictrifolia} Schott & Kotschy,{\i  Verh. Zool.-Bot. Ges. Wien}{\i  3}: 130 (1853). like {\b 13} but the leaves, petioles and stems glandular-pubescent; perianth-segments c. 20 mm; limb of honey-leaf 11-13 × 7-9 mm, the spur 8-11 × 3-4 mm. 2n = 14.{\i  Shady rocks. • N. Italy}. It.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 15. A. bertolonii} Schott, {\i op. cit.} 127 (1853) ({\i A. reuteri }Boiss.). Stems 10-30 cm, subscapose, glandular-pubescent above. Basal leaves 2-ternate, the leaflets 2- to 30-fid; cauline leaves more or less entire, linear. Flowers nodding, blue-violet. Perianth-segments 18-33 × 9-14 mm; limb of honey-leaf 10-14 × 6-8 mm, the spur 10-14 × 3-4 mm, straight or somewhat curved. Staminodes 6-7 mm. Follicles pubescent. 2n = 14. •{\i  S.E. France, N.W. Italy.} Ga It.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   {\b 16. A. pyrenaica} DC. in Lam. & DC.,{\i  Fl. Fr.} ed. 3, {\b 5}: 640 (1815). Stems 10-30 cm, subglabrous to glandular-pubescent, sometimes subscapose. Basal leaves usually 2-ternate; leaflets 2- or 3-fid, glabrous to glandular-pubescent; cauline leaves simple or 3-fid, the segments linear. Flowers 1-6, usually bright blue, nodding. Spur at least as long as the limb of the honey-leaf, straight or slightly curved. Follicles 10-18 mm, glandular-pubescent. •{\i  Pyrenees, Spain.} Ga Hs.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 A variable species that has been divided into a number of separate species by many authors.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Limb of honey-leaf usually at least 9 × 8 mm ............... ({\b a}) subsp.{\b  pyrenaica}
\par
1 Limb of honey-leaf usually not more than 9 × 8 mm
\par
2 Stamens exserted; leaves usually 2-ternate ................. ({\b d}) subsp. {\b cazorlensis}
\par
2 Stamens not exserted; leaves 1-ternate
\par
3 Stems usually not more than 15 cm, simple, subglabrous
\par
  below ................................................................................. ({\b b}) subsp.{\b  discolor}
\par
3 Stems usually at least 15 cm, branched, glandular
\par
  pubescent throughout ...................................................... ({\b c}) subsp.{\b  guarensis}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp.{\b  pyrenaica} (incl. {\i A. aragonensis} Willk.): Stems 10-30(-35) cm, simple, glandular-pubescent above, glabrous or subglabrous below. Leaves (1)2-ternate, subglabrous. Flowers bright blue. Perianth-segments ovate to ovate-lanceolate; limb of honey-leaf 9-15(-17) × 8-11(-12) mm; spur 14-20(-25) mm, straight or slightly curved. Stamens not exserted. 2n = 14.{\i  Pyrenees and E. part of Cordillera Cantabrica}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp.{\b  discolor} (Levier & Leresche) Pereda & Laínz,{\i  Bol. Inst. Estud. Astur.} ({\i Supl. Ci}.) {\b 5}: 12 (1962) ({\i A. discolor} Levier & Leresche): Stems 5-15(-20) cm, simple, glandular-pubescent above, subglabrous below. Leaves 1-ternate, glabrous or subglabrous. Perianth-segments ovate-lanceolate, blue; limb of honey-leaf 5-9(-10) × 4-5 mm, blue or white; spur 6-12 mm, straight. Stamens not exserted. 2n = 14.{\i  W. part of Cordillera Cantabrica}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b c}) Subsp.{\b  guarensis} (Losa) Rivas Martínez,{\i  Bol. Soc. Esp. Hist. Nat., Secc. Biol.}{\b  65}: 108 (1967) ({\i A. guarensis} Losa): Stems 15-30 cm, branched, glandular-pubescent throughout. Leaves 1-ternate, puberulent. Perianth-segments lanceolate, blue or bluish-white; limb of honey-leaf 6-9 × 3-5 mm; spur 9-12 mm, straight or curved. Stamens not exserted. 2n = 14. {\i C. Pyrenees.}
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b d}) Subsp.{\b  cazorlensis} (Heywood) Galiano & Rivas Martínez, {\i loc. cit.} (1967) ({\i A. cazorlensis} Heywood): Stems 15-30 cm, usually branched, subglabrous or glandular-pubescent. Leaves (1)2-ternate, subglabrous to glandular-pubescent. Flowers bright blue. Perianth-segments lanceolate; limb of honey-leaf 5-8(-9) × 5-8 mm; spur 6-12 mm, slightly curved. Stamens exserted. 2n = 14. {\i S.E. Spain} ({\i Sierra de Cazorla, Sierra de Segura}).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 17. A. bernardii} Gren. & Godron,{\i  Fl. Fr. }{\b 1}: 45 (1847). Stems 50-80 cm, glabrous below, glandular-pubescent above. Basal leaves 2-ternate; leaflets 2- or 3-fid or more, glabrous. Flowers nodding, pale blue. Perianth-segments 25-35 × 15 mm; limb of honey-leaf
\par

\par
289}
\par