{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 Literature: C.R. Fraser-Jenkins,{\i  Bol. Soc. Brot.} ser. 2, {\b 15:} 176-236 (1982). C.R. Fraser-Jenkins & T. Reichstein in G. Hegi,{\i  Ill. Fl. Mittel-Eur.} ed. 3, {\b 1}({\b 1}): 136-169 (1984).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Leaves 1(2)-pinnate
\par
2 Leaves eglandular
\par
3 Sterile and fertile leaves similar in size; pinnae at 
\par
  least 20 on each side ................................................... ({\b 1-3}). {\b filix-mas} group
\par
3 Fertile leaves longer and more erect than sterile;
\par
  pinnae 10-20 on each side .............................................................. {\b 19. cristata}
\par
2 Leaves with at least a few glands
\par
4 Leaves usually not more than 20 cm, narrowly lanceolate .......... {\b 18. fragrans}
\par
4 Leaves more than 20 cm, lanceolate to oblong
\par
5 Leaves with scattered glands; pinnule-lobes ± obtuse
\par
  ..................................................................................... ({\b 1-3}).{\b  filix-mas} group
\par
5 Leaves densely glandular; pinnule-teeth acute .............................. {\b 5. tyrrhena}
\par
1 Leaves 2- to 4-pinnate
\par
6 Leaves glandular on both surfaces
\par
7 Pinnule-teeth with setaceous apex
\par
8 Pinnules not crowded or crispate ................................................. {\b 10. expansa}
\par
8 Pinnules distinctly crowded, crispate ....................................... {\b 15. crispifolia}
\par
7 Pinnule-teeth acute, but without setaceous apex
\par
9 Lamina 3- or 4-pinnate, smelling of coumarin when crushed ...... {\b 14. aemula}
\par
9 Lamina 2- or 3-pinnate, not smelling of coumarin when crushed
\par
10 Lamina narrowly lanceolate or narrowly triangular ...................... {\b 7. villarii}
\par
10 Lamina triangular-lanceolate to deltate
\par
11 Lamina 2-pinnate, densely glandular above; leaves not 
\par
   persisting in winter .................................................................. {\b 6. submontana}
\par
11 Lamina 2- or 3-pinnate, slightly glandular above; leaves 
\par
   persisting in winter ........................................................................... {\b 8. pallida}
\par
6  Leaves eglandular or glands restricted to the lower surface
\par
12 Pinnule-teeth with setaceous apex
\par
13 Petiole-scales concolorous
\par
14 Lamina narrowly lanceolate or ovate-lanceolate;
\par
   pinnules ± crowded ................................................................. {\b 17. carthusiana}
\par
14 Lamina broadly triangular-lanceolate; pinnules not crowded
\par
15 Lamina thin, pale or yellowish-green ........................................ {\b 10. expansa}
\par
15 Lamina thick, usually dark green ........................................... {\b 16. guanchica}
\par
13 Petiole-scales with darker base or central stripe
\par
16 Lamina 2-pinnate indusium eglandular ....................................... {\b 11. remota}
\par
16 Lamina 3-pinnate; indusium usually with glands
\par
17 Spores rugulose-cristate, spinulose ........................................ {\b 16. guanchica}
\par
17 Spores tuberculate
\par
18 Proximal basiscopic pinnule of basal pinna at least ½ 
\par
   as long as pinna; spores with acute tubercles pale brown ........... {\b 10. expansa}
\par
18 Proximal basiscopic pinnule of basal pinna usually less than ½ 
\par
   as long as pinna; spores with obtuse tubercles, dark brown
\par
19 Petiole-scales ovate-lanceolate; spores 44-50 µm ........................ {\b 9. dilatata}
\par
19 Petiole-scales lanceolate to linear-lanceolate; spores 34-40 µm . {\b 12. azorica}
\par
12 Pinnule-teeth acute but without setaceous apex
\par
20 Leaves (1)2-pinnate, the fertile longer and more erect 
\par
   than the sterile ............................................................................... {\b 19. cristata}
\par
20 Leaves all at least 2-pinnate, the fertile and sterile similar in size
\par
21 Lamina ovate-lanceolate, pale green ......................................... {\b 4. caucasica}
\par
21 Lamina triangular-lanceolate to deltate, pale or dark green 
\par
22 Lamina broadly triangular or deltate, pale green ........................... {\b 8. pallida}
\par
22 Lamina narrowly triangular-lanceolate, ± dark green
\par
23 Petiole-scales dense throughout, brown or pale brown with dark
\par
   base and usually a dark central stripe ............................................ {\b 11. remota}
\par
23 Petiole-scales dense below, scattered above, reddish-brown,
\par
   concolorous .................................................................................... {\b 13. corleyi}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    ({\b 1-3}). {\b D. filix-mas} group. Rhizome erect. Leaves (15-)30-120(-150) cm; fertile leaves similar to sterile leaves, pinnate with deeply pinnatifid pinnae, or 2-pinnate; pinnae 20-35 on each side; teeth not mucronate.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Point of insertion of secondary rhachis blackish; pinnules or 
\par
  ultimate segments ± parallel-sided .................................................... {\b 2. affinis} 
\par
1 Point of insertion of secondary rhachis not blackish; pinnules 
\par
  or ultimate segments with somewhat curved sides, denticulate,
\par
  crenate, serrate or lobed all round
\par
2 Pinnule-teeth acute; indusium not inflexed .................................. {\b 1. filix-mas}
\par
2 Pinnule-teeth obtuse; indusium distinctly inflexed ........................ {\b 3. oreades}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. D. filix-mas} (L.) Schott,{\i  Gen. Fil.} t. 9 (1834) ({\i Nephrodium filix-mas} (L.) L.C.M. Richard,{\i  Polystichum filix-mas} (L.) Roth,{\i  Polypodium filix-mas} L.). Rhizome stout; crowns 1 to many. Leaves (15-)30-130(-150) × 5-25 cm, not persisting in winter; petiole ¼-½ as long as the lamina, pale brown, somewhat scaly; scales pale brown; point of insertion of secondary rhachis not blackish; lamina oblong- to elliptical-lanceolate, flat or recurved at apex, mid to light green, not shining; pinnae linear- to oblong-lanceolate, sessile, deeply pinnatifid to pinnate, flat or recurved at margin; pinnules or their ultimate segments oblong to oblong-lanceolate, acutely denticulate, crenate-serrate or lobed all round, rounded at apex; teeth acute. Sori 1·5 mm in diameter, (2)3-6 on each pinnule; indusium not glandular, not inflexed or embracing the sporangia when young. 2n = 164.{\i  Almost throughout Europe}. All except Az Bl Cr Sb
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. D. affinis} (Lowe) Fraser-Jenkins,{\i  Fern Gaz. }{\b 12:} 56 (1979) ({\i D. paleacea} auct. ,{\i  D. filix-mas} auct., pro parte). Like{\b  1} but leaves often persisting in winter; petiole and rhachis densely covered with reddish to brown or pale brown scales; point of insertion of secondary rhachis usually blackish; lamina usually dark green, shining; pinnules or their ultimate segments parallel-sided, obliquely truncate, acute or rounded at apex, denticulate only at apex; indusium usually inflexed and embracing the sporangia when young.{\i  Much of Europe, but absent from most of the north and east}. Au Az Be Br Bu Co Cz Da Ga Ge Hb He Ho Hs Hu It Ju Lu No Po Rm Rs(W, K)Sa Si Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Pinnule-teeth obtuse; indusium thick, ± persistent
\par
2 Leaves persisting in winter; axes of lamina not glandular
\par
  .............................................................................................. ({\b a}) subsp.{\b  affinis}
\par
2 Leaves not persisting in winter; axes of lamina glandular,  
\par
  at least when young ..................................................... ({\b c}) subsp.{\b  cambrensis}
\par
1 Pinnule-teeth acute; indusium thin, deciduous
\par

\par
28}
\par