{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 3 Pinnule lobes oblong .......................................................... ({\b b}) subsp. {\b borreri}
\par
3 Pinnule lobes rounded to acute .......................................... ({\b d}) subsp. {\b persica}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b affinis} ({\i D. pseudomas} sensu J. Holub & Pouzar pro parte): Leaves persisting in winter. Scales dense, narrow, glossy, usually with a dark base. Lamina very glossy. All pinnae symmetrical. Pinnules rounded to rounded-truncate, usually with few obtuse teeth, these sometimes prominent. Lowest basiscopic pinnule of lowest pinna 1/2-2/3 adnate to costa. Indusium inflexed, thick and persistent. 2n = 82.{\i  S.W. & W.C. Europe}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b borreri} (Newman) Fraser-Jenkins, {\i Willdenowia }{\b 10:} 110 (1980) ({\i D. borreri} (Newman) Newman ex Oberholzer & Tavel,{\i  D. mediterranea} Fomin,{\i  D. paleacea} (D. Don) Hand.-Mazz. pro parte, non (Swartz) C. Chr.): Leaves mostly not persisting in winter. Scales more or less dense, narrow and wide intermixed, pale or with a dark base. Lamina paler and less coriaceous and shining than that of subsp. ({\b a}). Pinnules truncate to subacute, with prominent, acute teeth. Lowest basiscopic pinnule of lowest pinna usually longer, with oblong side-lobes, stalked. Indusium thinner and less inflexed than subsp. ({\b a}), shrivelling rapidly. 2n = 123.{\i  Almost throughout the range of the species}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b c}) Subsp.{\b  cambrensis} Fraser-Jenkins,{\i  Sommerfeltia }{\b 6:} XI (1987) (incl. subsp.{\i  stilluppensis} sensu Fraser-Jenkins, non Sabr.): Leaves not persisting in winter. Scales dense, lanceolate, reddish- or yellowish-brown, without a dark base. Lamina glossy, glandular on the axis, at least when young. All pinnae more or less symmetrical, tapering. Pinnules rounded, with obtuse teeth. Indusium highly inflexed but shrivelling later. 2n = 123.{\i  Calcifuge. Throughout the range of the species except parts of C. & S. Europe}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b d}) Subsp.{\b  persica }(Lowe) Fraser-Jenkins, {\i Willdenowia} {\b 10:} 113 (1980): Scales wider, pale. Lamina pale green, slightly glossy. Pinnules narrow, rounded to acute, with long, acute teeth; point of insertion of secondary rhachis only faintly blackish. Indusium curved down but not inflexed, soon shrivelling.{\i  Mainly in E. Europe}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 3. D. oreades} Fomin,{\i  Monit. Jard. Bot. Tiflis }{\b 18:} 20 (1910) ({\i D. abbreviata} auct.). Like {\b 1} but crowns usually many, crowded; leaves 25-60(-120) cm; lamina with scattered, minute glands beneath, pale to greyish-green, not shining; tips of pinnae curving upwards; apical teeth blunt, flabellate; margin of indusium inflexed, often glandular. 2n = 82. {\i Calcifuge. W. & W.C. Europe, extending to N.C. Italy.} Br Co Ga *Ge Hb Hs It Lu Sa.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 4. D. caucasica} (A. Braun) Fraser-Jenkins & Corley,{\i  Fern Gaz. }{\b 10:} 22 (1971). Rhizome erect, unbranched; plant with more delicate habit than {\b 1-3}. Leaves up to 100 cm, eglandular, not persistent in winter; petiole ¼-½ as long as the lamina; scales sparse, lanceolate to linear-lanceolate, brown, concolorous. Lamina ovate-lanceolate to elliptical, 2-pinnate, pale green; pinnules narrowly lanceolate, with acute teeth. Sori 1-2 mm in diameter; indusium lacerate, glandular. 2n = 82.{\i  Montane forests. From Turkey-in-Europe to Krym; local}. ?Rm Rs (W, K) Tu. ({\i Anatolia, Caucasus}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 5. D. tyrrhena} Fraser-Jenkins & Reichstein,{\i  Fern Gaz.}{\b  11:} 177 (1975). Rhizome stout. Leaves 30-60 cm, persisting in winter; petiole densely glandular; scales ovate-lanceolate, pale or reddish; lamina lanceolate, pinnate, coriaceous, greyish-green, densely glandular, scented. Pinnae not usually crowded; pinnules oblong-lanceolate, shallowly to deeply lobed, with long, acute teeth. Sori usually not more than 2 on each pinnule, usually less than 1 mm; indusium glandular, persistent. 2n = 164.{\i  Siliceous rocks and screes. Mountains of W. Mediterranean region; local.} Co Ga Hs It Sa.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 6. D. submontana} (Fraser-Jenkins & Jermy) Fraser-Jenkins,{\i  Candollea}{\b  32:} 311 (1977) ({\i D. villarii} auct., non (Bellardi) Woynar ex Schinz & Thell. pro parte). Rhizome procumbent or ascending. Leaves 15-40 × 5-15 cm, tufted, forming 1 or a few crowns; petiole long, pale yellow to greenish-yellow above the black base; scales concolorous, reddish-brown; lamina triangular-lanceolate or deltate, dull green, densely covered with yellowish glandular hairs, fragrant, 2-pinnate; pinnae 15-25 on each side, ovate- to oblong-lanceolate, sessile, pinnate; pinnules pinnatilobed to subpinnate, often with long, acute teeth near the tips. Sori in 2 rows on each fertile pinnule; indusium glandular. 2n = 164.{\i  Calcareous rocks and rock-crevices. S. & S.C. Europe; N. Britain}. Al Br Ga Gr Hs It Ju Rm.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 7. D. villarii} (Bellardi) Woynar ex Schinz & Thell.,{\i  Viert. Naturf. Ges. Zürich}{\b  60:} 339 (1915) ({\i D. rigida} (Swartz) A. Gray,{\i  Nephrodium villarii} (Bellardi) G. Beck,{\i  Polystichum rigidum} (Swartz) DC.). Like {\b 6} but fronds narrowly lanceolate or narrowly triangular; petiole short; pinnule-teeth long, acute. 2n = 82.{\i  Mountains of C. Europe and Balkan peninsula.} Al Au Bu Ga Ge Gr He It Ju ?Po.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 8. D. pallida} (Bory) C. Chr. ex Maire & Petitmengin,{\i  Étude Pl. Vasc. Réc. Grèce}{\b  2:} 238 (1908) ({\i D. villarii} subsp.{\i  pallida} (Bory) Heywood,{\i  D. pallida }(Bory) Fomin,{\i  Polystichum rigidum} var.{\i  australe }Willk. non Ten.). Like{\b  6} but leaves more broadly triangular or deltate, pale green, not or only slightly glandular above, almost 3-pinnate, persisting in winter; pinnule-teeth wider.{\i  Calcicole. Mediterranean region, mainly in the east}. Al Bl †Co Cr Gr It Ju Sa Si.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp.{\b  pallida} : Leaves usually more than 25 cm; lamina triangular-lanceolate; petiole shorter than or equalling the lamina. 2n = 82.{\i  C. & E. Mediterranean region}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp.{\b  balearica} (Litard.) Fraser-Jenkins, {\i Candollea }{\b 32:} 314 (1977): Leaves up to 25 cm; lamina deltate; petiole equalling or longer than the lamina. 2n = 82.{\i  Islas Baleares} ({\i Mallorca}).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 9. D. dilatata} (Hoffm.) A. Gray,{\i  Man. Bot.} 631 (1848) ({\i D. austriaca} auct., {\i Polystichum dilatatum} (Hoffm.) Schumacher). Rhizome erect or ascending. Leaves 10-150(-180) × 4-40 cm; petiole from ½ as long as to as long as the lamina; scales ovate-lanceolate, bicolorous, dark brown or blackish in the centre, pale brown at the margin; lamina triangular-ovate to -lanceolate, 3-pinnate, usually dark green with a few glands beneath; pinnae 15-25 on each side, stalked, triangular-ovate or -lanceolate, pinnate; pinnules oblong-ovate to -lanceolate, pinnate; the proximal basiscopic pinnule of the basal pinna nearly always less than ½ as long as the pinna; third-order pinnules ovate to oblong, toothed, sometimes pinnately lobed, the apex setaceous. Sori 0·5-1 mm in diameter; indusium with stalked glands; spores 44-50 µm. dark brown, with dense, obtuse tubercles. 2n = 164.{\i  Most of Europe, but rare in the Mediterranean region and the south-east}. All except ?Al Bl Cr Is Rs(N, E) Sa Sb Si.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 10. D. expansa} (C. Presl) Fraser-Jenkins & Jermy,{\i  Fern Gaz. }{\b 11:} 338 (1977) ({\i D. assimilis} S. Walker). Like {\b 9} but lamina thin, pale green; proximal basiscopic pinnule of the basal pinna at least ½ as long as the pinna; lower third-order pinnules falcate, decurrent, less setaceous; spores pale brown, with less dense, acute tubercles. 2n = 82. {\i N. Europe; mountains of C. & S. Europe southtwards to C. Portugal, Corse and C. Greece}. Au Be Br Bu Co Cz Da Fa Fe Ga Ge Gr He Ho Hs Hu Is It Ju Lu No Po Rm Rs (N, B, C, W, K) Sb Su.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 11. D. remota} (A. Braun ex Döll) Druce,{\i  List Br. Pl.} 87 (1908). Like{\b  9} but scales narrowly lanceolate; lamina narrowly triangular-lanceolate, 2-pinnate, the pinnules deeply pinnatifid below, more or
\par

\par
29}
\par