{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 with a few leaflets divided; segments 9-16(-21), narrowly to broadly elliptical to ovate or orbicular, glabrous or pubescent beneath. Flowers 8-14 cm in diameter, red or rarely white. Follicles (2)3-5(6), 2-4 cm, usually villous, rounded at apex, with a sessile stigma. {\i S. Europe, extending northwards to N.C. France and Austria.} Al Bu Co Ga Gr Hs It Ju Rm Rs(K) Sa Si [Au Br].
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Flowers white or pinkish-white ..................................... ({\b d}) subsp.{\b  hellenica}
\par
1 Flowers pink to red
\par
2 Lower leaves with 9 or 10(11) broadly elliptical to orbicular leaflets
\par
3 Leaflets broadly ovate to orbicular, with undulate margins,
\par
  glabrous beneath ............................................................. ({\b b}) subsp. {\b triternata}
\par
3 Leaflets elliptical to broadly elliptical with plane margins,
\par
  pubescent beneath ................................................................ ({\b c}) subsp.{\b  russoi}
\par
2 Lower leaves usually with more than 12 narrowly elliptical to
\par
   ovate leaflets
\par
4 At least stem and petioles without hairs; leaflets elliptical
\par
  to ovate ............................................................................. ({\b a}) subsp.{\b  mascula}
\par
4 Stem and petioles and lower surface of leaves pubescent;
\par
  leaflets narrowly elliptical ................................................. ({\b e}) subsp.{\b  arietina}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp.{\i  mascula} : Leaves glabrous or pubescent beneath; lower leaves with 9-16(-21) elliptical to ovate leaflets. Flowers red. Filaments purple. 2n = 20.{\i  From C. France to E. Greece}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp.{\b  triternata} (Pallas ex DC.) Stearn & P.H. Davis,{\i  Peonies of Greece }107 (1984) ({\i P. triternata} Pallas ex DC., {\i P. daurica} Andrews, {\i P. taurica} auct.): Leaves glabrous beneath; leaflets usually 9, broadly ovate to suborbicular, with undulate margins. Flowers pale purplish-red. Filaments yellow. Follicles 2 or 3.{\i  Romania; Krym}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b c}) Subsp.{\b  russoi} (Biv.) Cullen & Heywood,{\i  Feddes Repert.}{\b  69}: 35 (1964) ({\i P. russi} Biv.,{\i  P. ovatifolia }Rouy & Fouc.,{\i  P. corallina }var.{\i  pubescens} Moris, {\i P. corsica} Sieber): Leaves sparsely pubescent beneath; lower leaves with 9 or 10 broadly elliptical leaflets. Flowers purplish-pink. Filaments white or pink. 2n = 10. •{\i  Mediterranean region, from C. Spain to W. Greece, mainly in the islands.}
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b d}) Subsp.{\b  hellenica} Tzanoudakis,{\i  Kytt. Meleti Gen.} Paeonia{\i  Ell.} 36 (1977) ({\i P. flavescens} C. Presl): Leaves glabrous or pubescent beneath; lower leaves with 9-13 broadly ovate or elliptical leaflets. Flowers white. Filaments purplish. 2n = 20.{\i  S. & S.E. Greece}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b e}) Subsp.{\b  arietina} (G. Anderson) Cullen & Heywood, {\i Feddes Repert.}{\b  69}: 35 (1964) ({\i P. arietina }G. Anderson): Leaves pubescent beneath; lower leaves with 12-15 narrowly elliptical leaflets. Flowers red. Filaments purple.{\i  S.E. Europe}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 9. P. coriacea} Boiss.,{\i  Elenchus} 7 (1838). like {\b 8}({\b a}) but stems 50-100 cm; leaves coriaceous; follicles 2(3), somewhat longer (3·5-4·5 cm), glabrous, with the apex attenuate into the stigma. {\i S. Spain; Corse, Sardegna.} Co Hs Sa.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 10. P. cambessedesii} (Willk.) Willk. in Willk. & Lange, {\i Prodr. Fl. Hisp.}{\b  3}: 976 (1880), in obs., et Willk.,{\i  Ill. Fl. Hisp.}{\b  1}: 104, t. 65 (1883). Stems 20-50 cm. Lower leaves biternate; leaflets lanceolate to ovate, occasionally elliptical, glabrous above and beneath, flushed with purple beneath. Flowers 6-10 cm in diameter, red. Follicles 5-8, c. 6 cm, glabrous, purplish. 2n = 10. •{\i  Islas Baleares. }Bl.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 63.     BERBERIDACEAE}
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc  Edit D.A. Webb.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Shrubs or herbs. Leaves alternate or basal. Flowers hermaphrodite, (2)3-merous. Perianth-segments 6-9, in 3 or 4 whorls, at least the inner ones petaloid; honey-leaves 4-6, petaloid or nectariform. Stamens 4-6, opposite the honey-leaves; anthers dehiscing by apically-hinged valves. Carpel solitary, superior.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Shrubs; fruit a berry
\par
2 Leaves simple ............................................................................... {\b 5. Berberis}
\par
2 Leaves pinnate .............................................................................{\b  6. Mahonia}
\par
1 Herbs; fruit dry
\par
3 Stamens 4; ovules numerous, on 2 lateral placentae ..............{\b  4. Epimedium}
\par
3 Stamens 6; ovules 2-8, on a basal placenta
\par
4 Leaves all basal; honey-leaves flat, petaloid ............................ {\b 3. Bongardia}
\par
4 Stem ± leafy; honey-leaves small, convolute
\par
5 Several cauline leaves on each stem, most of them with an
\par
  axillary raceme; fruit 20-40 mm ................................................... {\b 1. Leontice}
\par
5 Each flowering stem with a single cauline leaf and raceme;
\par
  fruit c. 5 mm ................................................................... {\b 2. Gymnospermium}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 1.            Leontice}               L.
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc  By W.T. Stearn & D.A. Webb.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Glabrous herbs with tuberous rhizome. Leaves 2- or 3-ternate, not all basal. Flowers in terminal and axillary, bracteate racemes.
Perianth-segments 6(-8), conspicuous, petaloid, yellow; honey-leaves 6, much smaller, convolute. Stamens 6. Fruit 1- to 4-seeded, with inflated, membranous pericarp, dehiscing irregularly by decay. Seeds without aril.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. L. leontopetalum} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 312 (1753). Stem 20-50(-80) cm, erect, branched above. Leaves up to 20 cm wide, the lower with long petioles, the upper sessile, all 2- or 3-ternate; ultimate segments broadly obovate, entire. Racemes usually numerous, in axils of upper leaves, pedunculate, with conspicuous bracts, of which the lower are often compound or lobed. Flowers 15-40, on long pedicels, crowded at first, later distant. Perianth-segments c. 8 mm, ovate-oblong; honey-leaves 1·5 mm, less than ½ as long as the stamens. Fruit 20-40 mm, ovoid. 2n = 16. {\i Ploughed fields and waste places. S.E. part of Balkan peninsula, Aegean region}. Bu Cr Gr Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 2.       Gymnospermium}               Spach
\par 

\pard\f0\fs24\qc  By W.T. Stearn & D.A. Webb.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Like{\i  Leontice}, but each stem with 1 basal and 1 cauline leaf and a single raceme; fruit dehiscing apically by rounded lobes before the seeds are ripe; seeds with a membranous aril.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. G. altaicum} (Pallas) Spach,{\i  Hist. Veg.} ({\i Phan}.){\b  8}: 67 (1838)
\par

\par
294}
\par