{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 4 Leaves without minute bristles along the veins of upper surface
\par
5 Segments of lower leaves fewer than 15;
\par
  petals blackish-red ..................................................................... {\b 4. parnassica}
\par
5 Segments of lower leaves usually more than 15; petals pink to red
\par
6 Leaves green or brownish and pubescent beneath;
\par
  filaments red .............................................................................. {\b 5. officinalis}
\par
6 Leaves glaucous and glabrous beneath;
\par
  filaments greenish-white to yellow ................................................ {\b 7. broteroi}
\par
4 Leaves with minute bristles along the veins of upper surface
\par
7 Ultimate leaf-segments narrowly triangular, deltate or subulate;
\par
  filaments yellow ............................................................................ {\b 2. anomala}
\par
7 Ultimate leaf-segments broadly triangular;
\par
  filaments pink or red .................................................................... {\b 3. peregrina}
\par
3 Most leaflets undivided; lower leaves with lanceolate, elliptical,
\par
  ovate or orbicular segments
\par
8 Leaflets ovate to orbicular; margins undulate .............................. {\b 8. mascula}
\par
8 Leaflets lanceolate to ovate; margins not undulate
\par
9 Follicles 5-8, c. 6 cm, glabrous, purple ............................. {\b 10. cambessedesii}
\par
9 Follicles fewer than 5, less than 6 cm, glabrous or pubescent,
\par
  sometimes reddish but not purple
\par
10 Follicles (3·5-)4·5 cm, glabrous, with apex attenuate into
\par
   the stigma ..................................................................................... {\b 9. coriacea}
\par
10 Follicles 2·5-4 cm, usually pubescent, with obtuse or
\par
   rounded apex and sessile stigma
\par
11 Leaves glabrous beneath; leaflets 2-4 cm wide .......................... {\b 7. broteroi}
\par
11 Leaflets usually pubescent beneath; leaflets 5-10 cm wide ........ {\b 8. mascula}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. P. tenuifolia} L., {\i Syst. Nat.} ed. 10, {\b 2}: 1079 (1759). Stems 20-40 cm. Leaves divided into numerous linear segments, each less than 5 mm wide, glabrous above, pubescent beneath. Flowers 6-8 cm in diameter, red, appearing to rest on the leaves. Filaments yellow. Follicles 2 or 3, c. 2 cm, tomentose. 2n = 10.{\i  S.E. Europe.} Bu Ju Rm Rs(C, W, K, E).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. P. anomala} L.,{\i  Mantissa Alt.} 247 (1771). Stems 50-100 cm. Leaf-segments numerous, the ultimate segments deltate or subulate, more than 5 mm wide, glabrous beneath, with minute bristles along the main veins on the upper surface. Flowers 7-13 cm in diameter, red. Filaments yellow. Follicles 3-5, c. 2 cm. 2n = 10.{\i  N.E. Russia.} Rs(N, C). ({\i N. Asia.})
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Most European plants of this species belong to var.{\i  intermedia} (C.A. Meyer) B. Fedtsch., with villous follicles, and are regarded by some Russian authors as var.{\i  intermedia} (C.A. Meyer) Krylov of{\i  P. hybrida} Pallas. Var.{\i  anomala,} with glabrous follicles, is restricted in Europe to parts of Ural.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 3. P. peregrina} Miller,{\i  Gard. Dict.} ed. 8, no. 3 (1768) ({\i P. decora} G. Anderson). Stems 30-50 cm, glabrous. Lower leaves divided into 17-30 narrowly elliptical segments, the ultimate segments short, broadly triangular, spreading, giving the apex of the leaflet a serrate appearance, sparsely villous to glabrous beneath, with minute bristles along the main veins above. Flowers 7-13 cm in diameter, dark red, less widely open than in other species. Filaments pink or red. Follicles 2 or 3, 2-3·5 cm, tomentose. 2n = 10, 20.{\i  Balkan peninsula, E. Romania, Moldavia; one station in C. Italy.} Al Bu Gr It Ju Rm Rs(W) Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 4. P. parnassica} Tzanoudakis,{\i  Kytt. Meleti Gen. Paeonia Ell.} 43 (1977) ({\i P. arietina} auct., non G. Anderson). Stems 30-65 cm pubescent. Lower leaves divided into 9-13 obovate to narrowly elliptical or lanceolate segments, densely pilose beneath, giving a greyish-green appearance; ultimate segments acute or acuminate, entire. Flowers 8-12 cm in diameter, blackish-red. Filaments purplish. Follicles 2 or 3, tomentose. 2n = 20. •{\i  Mountains of S.C. Greece.} Gr.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 5. P. officinalis} L.,{\i  Sp. Pl.} 530 (1753). Lower leaves divided into 17-30 segments, pubescent beneath, glabrous above; petiole deeply channelled on the upper surface. Flowers 7-13 cm in diameter, red. Filaments red. Follicles 2 or 3, 2-3·5 cm, usually tomentose, sometimes glabrous.{\i  S. & S.C. Europe.} Al Ga He Hs Hu It Ju Lu Rm [Ge].
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 At least the central leaflet divided almost to base
\par
2 Most of the leaflets divided almost to base .................. ({\b a}) subsp.{\b  officinalis}
\par
2 Only the central leaflet divided almost to base ............... ({\b b}) subsp.{\b  banatica}
\par
1 Leaflets divided not more than 1/3 of the distance to base
\par
3 Follicles pubescent; stems and petioles floccose ............... ({\b c}) subsp.{\b  villosa}
\par
3 Follicles glabrous; stems and petioles pubescent ....... ({\b d}) subsp.{\b  microcarpa}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp.{\b  officinalis} : Stems and petioles floccose. Most leaflets divided almost to base. Follicles tomentose. 2n = 20. {\i From S.E. France to Albania}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp.{\b  banatica} (Rochel) Soó,{\i  Növényföldrajz} 146 (1945) ({\i P. banatica} Rochel). Like subsp. ({\b a}) but only the central leaflet deeply divided. 2n = 20.{\i  Hungary, Jugoslavia, Romania.}
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b c}) Subsp. villosa (Huth) Cullen & Heywood, Feddes Repert. 69: 34 (1964): Stems and petioles floccose. Leaflets divided to not more than 3 of the distance to base. Follicles tomentose. From S. France to C. Italy.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b d}) Subsp.{\b  microcarpa} (Boiss. & Reuter) Nyman,{\i  Consp. }22 (1878) ({\i P. microcarpa} Boiss. & Reuter, {\i P. humilis }Retz., {\i P. officinalis} subsp.{\i  humilis} (Retz.) Cullen & Heywood,{\i  P. paradoxa} G. Anderson): Stems and petioles pubescent. Leaflets divided to not more than 1/3 of the distance to base. Follicles glabrous.{\i  S.W. Europe}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 6. P. clusii} F.C. Stern,{\i  Bot. Mag.}{\b  162}: t. 9594 (1940) ({\i P. officinalis} var.{\i  glabra }(Boiss.) Hayek). Stems 20-30 cm. Lower leaves with 30 or more narrowly oblong to narrowly elliptical, acute segments, glabrous above and beneath, or slightly pubescent beneath. Flowers 7-10 cm in diameter, white, rarely flushed with pink. Filaments pink. Follicles 2-5, c. 3 cm, densely tomentose. 2n = 10, 20.{\i  Kriti and Karpathos.} Cr.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Outside Europe, known only from the E. Aegean islands, where the plants have been distinguished as {\b P. rhodia} Stearn, {\i Gard. Chron.}, ser. 3,{\b 110}: 159 (1941) (subsp.{\i  rhodia} (Stearn) Tzan.).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 7. P. broteroi} Boiss. & Reuter,{\i  Diagn. Pl. Nov. Hisp. }4 (1842) ({\i P. lusitanica} auct., non Miller). Stems up to 50 cm. Lower leaves divided into (9-)17-20 narrowly elliptical, glabrous segments. Flowers 8-13 cm in diameter, purplish-pink. Filaments greenish-white to yellow. Follicles 2-4, 3-4 cm, densely tomentose. 2n = 10. •{\i  S., C. & W. Spain; Portugal.} Hs Lu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 8. P. mascula} (L.) Miller,{\i  Gard. Dict.} ed. 8, no. 1 (1768) ({\i P. corallina} Retz., {\i P. caucasica }(Schipcz.) Schipcz.; incl. {\i P. banatica} auct., non Rochel). Stems 20-80 cm. Leaves simply biternate, or
\par

\par
293}
\par