{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Plants with very sparse indumentum, strongly glaucous
\par
  ................................................................................... ({\b c}) subsp.{\b  laevigatum}
\par
1 Plants with more or less dense indumentum, green or
\par
  only slightly glaucous
\par
2 Latex white or cream, brown to black when dry; lobes of
\par
  upper leaves usually wider than 1·5 mm ........................ ({\b a}) subsp.{\b  dubium}
\par
2 Latex yellow or turning yellow, red when dry; if latex colourless,
\par
  petals white; if latex white, lobes of upper leaves
\par
  usually narrower than 1·5 mm ......................................... ({\b b}) subsp.{\b  lecoqii}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp.{\b  dubium} : Upper leaves sessile with cuneate base, rarely shortly petiolate. Petals red, mostly without basal spot. Latex white or cream, black to brown when dry. 2n = 42. {\i Throughout the range of the species}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b lecoqii} (Lamotte) Syme,{\i  Engl. Bot.} ed. 3, {\b 1}: 30 (1863) ({\i P. lecoqii} Lamotte; incl. {\i P. albiflorum} (Besser) Pacz.): Upper leaves usually shortly petiolate. Petals red or (var. {\b albiflorum} Besser) white, often with basal black spot. Latex yellow or turning yellow, red when dry; if colourless, petals white; if white, lobes of upper leaves narrower than 1·5 mm. 2n = 28. {\i W., C. & S. Europe.}
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b c}) Subsp.{\b  laevigatum} (Bieb.) Kadereit,{\i  Notes Roy. Bot. Gard. Edinb.}{\b  45}: 244 (1989) ({\i P. laevigatum} Bieb.,{\i  P. maeoticum }Klokov,{\b  P. nothum} Steven): Like subsp. ({\b a}) but with very sparse indumentum, strongly glaucous. Petals red, with often very large, basal black spot.{\i  S.E. Europe}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 4. P. arenarium} Bieb.,{\i  Fl. Taur.-Cauc.}{\b  3}: 364 (1819). Plant 10-70 cm, erect. Leaves 1- to 3-pinnatipartite, finely divided; ultimate segments often less than 1 mm wide. Upper leaves usually shortly petiolate. Pedicels appressed- or sometimes patent-setose above. Flower-buds patent- or retrorse-setose; sepals with usually conspicuous apical process. Petals 18-45 mm, red, with usually large, basal black spot. Anthers brown or green. Capsule 1-1·8 × 0·5-0·8 cm, 2-2·8 times as long as wide, obovoid. Disc at least as wide as capsule, with 7-9 rays. 2n = 14.{\i  S.E. Russia, W. Kazakhstan}. Rs(E). ({\i S.W. Asia.})
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 5. P. guerlekense} Stapf,{\i  Denkschr. Akad. Wiss. Math.-Nat. Kl.} ({\i Wien}) {\b 51}: 359 (1886) ({\i P. stipitatum} Fedde). Plant 20-40 cm, erect, usually with distinct red tinge. Leaves pinnatipartite to pinnatisect. Terminal lobe of lower leaves much bigger than lateral, usually less than twice as long as wide; upper leaves sessile, lateral lobes usually becoming smaller towards leaf apex. Pedicels appressed- or patent-setose. Flower-buds patent-setose. Petals 30-38 mm, red, with or without basal or sub-basal black spots. Anthers brown. Capsule 0·8-1·7 × 0·3-0·7 cm, 1·8-4 times as long as wide, narrowly obovoid to obpyriform, narrowing gradually into clavate base. Disc narrower to wider than capsule, with 5-9 rays. 2n = 14.{\i  S. Aegean region.} Cr Gr.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 6. P. rhoeas} L.,{\i  Sp. Pl. }507 (1753) (incl. {\i P. insignitum} Jordan,{\i  P. intermedium }G. Beck,{\i  P. roubiaei }Vig.,{\i  P. trilobum} Wallr., {\i P. commutatum} Fischer & C.A. Meyer, {\i P. strigosum }(Boenn.) Schur,{\i  P. tenuissimum} Fedde,{\i  P. tumidulum} Klokov). Plant 10-60 cm, erect or ascending. Leaves pinnatifid to pinnatipartite. Terminal lobe of lateral leaves usually more than twice as long as wide; upper leaves sessile, 3-fid with larger middle than basal lobes. Pedicels patent- or (var.{\i  strigosum} Boenn.) appressed-setose. Flower-buds patent- or appressed-setose. Petals 13-50 mm, red, with or without basal black or black and distally white spot. Anthers brown or rarely yellow. Capsule 0·5-1·6 × 0·4-1·4 cm, 1-2 times as long as wide, usually broadly obovoid, cylindrical or almost globose, sometimes shortly stipitate, usually more or less abruptly contracted at base. Disc usually wider than capsule, sometimes slightly umbonate, with 6-16 rays. 2n = 14.{\i  Throughout most of Europe as a weed of cultivation and probably native in the south, but only as a casual in the north.} All except Fa Is Rs(N) Sb.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Sect. PAPAVER. Annuals with few to many setose hairs. Leaves incised to pinnatipartite; upper cauline leaves amplexicaul. Filaments filiform or clavate, pale to dark violet. Capsules glabrous.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 7. P. somniferum} L.,{\i  Sp. Pl.} 508 (1753). Plant 15-150 cm, erect, often strongly glaucous. Leaves serrate, dentate, incised or pinnatipartite. Lower leaves usually petiolate; upper leaves sessile, with amplexicaul base. Pedicels glabrous or patent- or appressed-setose. Flower-buds glabrous or patent- or appressed-setose. Petals 20-80 mm, white to violet, darker at base but without distinct basal spot. Filaments filiform or clavate. Anthers yellow to green or brown. Capsule 1·4-9·5 × 0·8-6·5 cm, 1-2 times as long as wide, ovoid, ellipsoidal, cylindrical or globose, distinctly stipitate, dehiscent or not. Disc not wider than capsule, with 5-18(-22) rays.{\i  Cultivated since ancient times in most of Europe except the extreme north for its medicinal and narcotic latex} ({\i Opium}) {\i and its seeds, which are used as a condiment and a source of oil, and more recently grown for ornament; widespread as a naturalized alien or as a casual, but probably native in parts of the Mediterranean region.} Bl Co ?Cr Ga Hs It Lu Sa Si [Az Br Ge Hb Hu Ju Rm Rs(B, C, W, K, E) Si Tu]; casual elsewhere.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp.{\b  somniferum} (incl. subsp.{\i  hortense} (Hussenot) Corb., subsp.{\i  songaricum }Basil.): Subglabrous, strongly glaucous, usually unbranched. Upper leaves usually little divided. Sepals glabrous. Filaments clavate, pale violet. Capsule often indehiscent. 2n = 22. {\i Cultivated and naturalized throughout most of the range of the species.}
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp.{\b  setigerum} (DC.) Arcangeli, {\i Comp. Fl. Ital.} 25 (1882) ({\i P. setigerum }DC.): With more or less densely setose indumentum, weakly glaucous. Upper leaves usually pinnatifid. Sepals with at least some setae. Filaments filiform or clavate, dark violet. Capsules always dehiscent. 2n = (22), 44.{\i  Mainly W. Mediterranean region, where it is probably native}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Subsp. ({\b a}) is very variable in shape and colour of petals, shape and size of capsules, colour of seeds, etc.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Sect. ARGEMONIDIUM Spach. Annuals with few to many setose or arachnoid hairs. Leaves strongly dissected, the lower petiolate and the upper sessile. Filaments usually clavate, dark violet. Capsules usually setose.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 8. P. hybridum} L., {\i Sp. Pl}. 506 (1753). ({\i P. hispidum} Lam., {\i P. siculum} Guss.). Plant 5-60 cm, erect or ascending, usually with arachnoid hairs below, setose hairs above. Leaves 1- to 3- pinnatipartite. Pedicels usually appressed-setose. Flower-buds more or less patent-setose. Petals 18-25 mm, pink with distinct basal black spot. Anthers blue. Capsule 0·7-1·7 × 0·5-1·1 cm, obovoid to ellipsoidal to subglobose, with patent setae. Disc vaulted, narrower than capsule, with 5-10 rays. 2n = 14.{\i  Native in S. Europe, and widespread as a weed of cultivation further north.} Al Bl Bu Co Cr Ga Gr Hs *Hu It Ju Lu No *Rm Rs(K) Sa Si Tu [Br ?Ge Hb Rs(W)].
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 9. P. apulum} Ten.,{\i  Fl. Neap. Prodr. App. Quinta }16 (1826). Plant 10-55 cm, erect or ascending, setose throughout. Leaves 1- to 3-pinnatipartite. Pedicels appressed-setose. Flower-buds more or less patent-setose. Petals 16-35 mm, pale reddish or ange to bluish
\par

\par
299}
\par