{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 ({\i Leontice altaica} Pallas; incl.{\i  L. odessana }(DC.) Fischer ex G. Don fil.). Stems 5-20 cm, slender, each with a long-petiolate basal leaf and a subsessile cauline leaf immediately below the inflorescence. Leaves ternate, the primary divisions divided palmately into 4-7 entire, oblong, obtuse segments 15-35 mm long. Raceme short, with 6-12 flowers. Perianth-segments 8-10 mm, oblong; honey-leaves shorter than the stamens. Fruit 5-6 mm, subglobose, pendent; seeds 1-4, remaining attached for some time after dehiscence of the fruit.{\i  Black Sea region, from S. Ukraine to E. Romania; one station in S. Greece}. Gr Rm Rs(W).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 In spite of the wide geographical separation, typical material from the Altai Mountains agrees well with plants from Europe, and the separation of the latter at more than varietal level does not seem to be justified.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 3.            Bongardia}             C.A. Meyer
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc  By W.T. Stearn  & D.A. Webb.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Like{\i  Leontice,} but leaves all basal, pinnatisect; perianth-segments small; honey-leaves large, petaloid.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. B. chrysogonum} (L.) Griseb., {\i Spicil. Fl. Rumel.}{\b  1: }294 (1843) ({\i Leontice chrysogonum }L.). Tuber large, subglobose. Leaves 10-25 cm, all basal, spreading horizontally, deeply pinnatisect into 7-17 sessile, oblong-cuneate segments, which are usually 3- to 5-toothed at the apex but sometimes bifid to the base, glaucous-green, often reddish near the rhachis. Stem up to 60 cm, the upper ½ consisting of a large panicle with ascending branches. Perianth-segments 6, small, suborbicular, sepaloid, caducous; honey-leaves 8-12 × 3·5-5 mm, irregularly crenate distally, petaloid, golden yellow. Fruit c. 15 mm, ovoid.{\i  Ploughed fields. S. Greece} ({\i N. Peloponnisos}); ?{\i S. Aegean region} ({\i Astipalaia}). Gr. ({\i S.W. Asia.})
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 4.             Epimedium}                 L.
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc  By W.T. Stearn & D.A. Webb.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Rhizomatous herbs. Leaves compound. Flowers 2-merous, in panicles. Perianth-segments 8, the outer 4 sepaloid, the inner 4 petaloid. Honey-leaves 4, flat proximally and tubular distally (slipper-shaped). Stamens 4. Fruit many-seeded, dry, dehiscing into 2 unequal valves.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Literature: W.T. Stearn,{\i  Jour. Linn. Soc. London} ({\i Bot}.){\b  51}: 409 (1938).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Inflorescence shorter than cauline leaf; inner perianth-segments
\par
  dark red .......................................................................................... {\b 1. alpinum}
\par
1 Inflorescence over-topping cauline leaf; inner perianth
\par
  segments pink ............................................................................ {\b 2. pubigerum}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. E. alpinum} L., {\i Sp. Pl. }117 (1753). Stems 15-30 cm, numerous, arising from a slender, extensively creeping rhizome, each bearing a single leaf which over-tops the lax, terminal, nodding panicle; basal leaves also present. Leaves 2- or 3-ternate; leaflets 5-10, ovate, cordate, acute, spinose-ciliate, pubescent beneath at first but glabrous at maturity. Outer 4 perianth-segments pinkish-grey, caducous; inner 4 dull, dark red, longer; honey-leaves bright yellow, lying in the concavity of the inner perianth-segments. 2n = 12.{\i  Shady places. Foothills and lower slopes of mountains, from N. & C. Italy to Austria and Albania; cultivated for ornament in W. & C. Europe, and locally naturalized.} Al Au It Ju [Be Br Da Ga Ge Ho].
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. E. pubigerum} (DC.) Morren & Decne,{\i  Ann. Sci. Nat.} ser. 2, {\b 2}: 355 (1834). like {\b 1} but with shorter, stouter rhizome; mature leaflets usually white-pubescent beneath; inflorescence more erect, raising the flowers above the leaves; inner perianth-segments pale pink. 2n = 12. {\i Thrace}. Bu Tu. ({\i Anatolia and Caucasus.})
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 5.           Berberis}                  L.
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc  By J.R. Akeroyd & D.A. Webb.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Shrubs; wood bright yellow. Leaves on long shoots (in European species) transformed into spines, simple or palmately divided to the base into 3 or 5. Foliage-leaves simple (deciduous in European species), clustered on short shoots in the axils of the spines. Flowers in racemes, sometimes condensed to small, umbel-like clusters. Perianth-segments usually 9; the 3 outermost (sometimes interpreted as bracteoles) small and sepaloid, the 6 inner bright yellow, petaloid; honey-leaves petaloid, similar to the inner perianth-segments. Stamens 6, usually sensitive to touch. Fruit a 2-seeded  berry.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Numerous species, mostly from E. Asia or temperate South America, are cultivated for ornament.{\b  B. darwinii} Hooker,{\i  Hook}. 1c.{\b  7}: t. 672 (1844), from southern Chile, with evergreen, spiny leaves, bright orange flowers and pruinose black berries, has been reported as locally naturalized in W. Ireland and W. Scotland.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Literature: C.K. Schneider,{\i  Bull. Herb. Boiss.} ser. 2, {\b 5}: 33-48 133-148, 391-403, 449-464, 655-670, 800-831 (1905); 8: 192-204, 258-266 (1908). L.W.S. Ahrendt,{\i  Jaur. Linn. Soc. London} ({\i Bot.}) {\b 57}: 1-410 (1961).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 Plant not suckering; racemes usually more than 15 mm .................. {\b 1. vulgaris}
\par
Plant suckering; racemes not more than 15 mm ................................ {\b 2. cretica}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. B. vulgaris} L.,{\i  Sp. Pl.} 330 (1753). Plant 30-300 cm. Spines usually 3-fid; segments 5-25 cm. Leaves 8-40(-60) mm, elliptical-obovate to elliptical, usually spinulose-serrate. Racemes 10-50 mm, pendent, with 5-30 flowers. Honey-leaves 3-6 mm. Berry 5-10 × 3-5 mm, oblong; stigma sessile or very shortly stipitate.{\i  W., C. & S.E. Europe, extending to Estonia and E.C. Russia; extensively naturalized elsewhere}. Al Au Be Bu Co Cz Ga Ge Gr He *Ho Hs Hu It Ju *Po Rm Rs(B, C, W, K, E) Sa Si [Br Da Fe Hb No Rs(N) Su Tu].
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 The limits of the native range of this species cannot be precisely determined. On the one hand, it has been extensively planted originally for its edible fruit and more recently for ornament, and has become naturalized; on the other hand, in some regions attempts to extirpate it (as the intermediate host of the Wheat Rust{\i  Puccinia graminis}) have been more or less successful.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 A variable species that can be divided into a number of subspecies, which have been treated as distinct species by some authors.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Honey-leaves 4·5-6 mm; berry orange-red;
\par
  stigma sessile .................................................................... ({\b a}) subsp. {\b vulgaris}
\par
1 Honey-leaves 3-4 mm; berry dark red to black;
\par
  stigma very shortly stipitate
\par
2 Plant not more than 60 cm; leaves spinulose-serrate ..... ({\b b}) subsp.{\b  aetnensis}
\par
2 Plant up to 150 cm; leaves entire or with up to 6
\par
  marginal teeth ................................................................... ({\b c}) subsp.{\b  australis}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp.{\b  vulgaris} : Plant 150-300 cm; twigs yellowish. Spines
\par

\par
295}
\par