{\rtf1\ansi \deff4\deflang1033{\fonttbl{\f4\froman\fcharset0\fprq2 Times New Roman;}}{\colortbl;\red0\green0\blue0;\red0\green0\blue255;\red0\green255\blue255;\red0\green255\blue0;\red255\green0\blue255;\red255\green0\blue0;\red255\green255\blue0;\red255\green255\blue255;\red0\green0\blue128;\red0\green128\blue128;\red0\green128\blue0;\red128\green0\blue128;\red128\green0\blue0;\red128\green128\blue0;\red128\green128\blue128;\red192\green192\blue192;}{\stylesheet{\widctlpar \f4\fs20\lang2057 \snext0 Normal;}{\*\cs10 \additive Default Paragraph Font;}}{\info{\author dddd}{\operator dddd}{\creatim\yr1998\mo10\dy28\hr15\min5}{\revtim\yr1998\mo10\dy28\hr15\min6}{\version2}{\edmins1}{\nofpages3}{\nofwords746}{\nofchars4254}{\*\company  }{\vern57431}}\widowctrl\ftnbj\aenddoc\hyphcaps0 \fet0\sectd \linex0 {\*\pnseclvl1\pnucrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl2\pnucltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl3\pndec\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl4\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl5\pndec\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl6\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl7\pnlcrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl8\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl9\pnlcrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}
\pard\plain \ \f4\fs20\lang2057 {\fs28    }{\b\fs28 1. L. nobilis}{\fs28  L.,}{\i\fs28  Sp. Pl.}{\fs28  369 (1753). Shrub or small tree 2-20 m, with slender, glabrous twigs. Leaves 5-10 \'d7 2-4(-7\'b75) cm, narrowly oblong-lanceolate, acute or acuminate, glabrous. Male flowers with 8-12 stamens, all or most with 2 glands at base. Female flowers with 2-4 staminodes. Fruit 10-15 mm, ovoid, black when ripe. 2n = 42.}{\i\fs28  Mediterranean region; cultivated elsewhere, and locally naturalized.}{\fs28  Al *Bl Co Cr Ga Gr *Hs It Ju *Lu Sa Si Tu [Az Rs(K)].
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 2. L. azorica}{\fs28  (Seub.) Franco,}{\i\fs28  Anais Inst. Sup. Agron.}{\fs28  (}{\i\fs28 Lisboa}{\fs28 )}{\b\fs28  23}{\fs28 : 96 (1960) (}{\i\fs28 L. canariensis}{\fs28  Webb & Berth., non Willd.,}{\i\fs28  Persea azorica}{\fs28  Seub.). like }{\b\fs28 1}{\fs28  but twigs usually stout, densely tomentose-hirsute when young; leaves 5-10(-17) \'d7 3-8 cm, suborbicular to lanceolate, tomentose-hirsute beneath, at least on the midrib, when young.}{\i\fs28  A\'e7ores}{\fs28 . Az. (}{\i\fs28 Madeira, Islas Canarias.}{\fs28 )
\par 
\par }
\pard \qc\ {\fs28  }{\b\fs28 2.            Persea}{\fs28                Miller
\par }{\fs24  By  †T.G. Tutin.
\par 
\par }
\pard \ {\fs28 Inflorescence with a long peduncle. Perianth 6-lobed; flowers hermaphrodite or polygamous. Stamens 9; staminodes 3; anthers opening by 4 valves, those of the third whorl extrorse.
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 1. P. indica}{\fs28  (L.) Sprengel, }{\i\fs28 Syst. Veg.}{\b\fs28  2}{\fs28 : 268 (1825) (}{\i\fs28 Laurus indica}{\fs28  L.). Tree up to 20 m, with a broad, rounded crown and stout twigs, finely sericeous when young. Leaves 8-25 \'d7 3-8 cm, lanceolate, obtuse or acute, glabrous. Perianth finely sericeous. Fruit c. 20 mm, ellipsoidal, bluish-black when ripe.}{\i\fs28  Naturalized in A\'e7ores.}{\fs28  [Az.] (}{\i\fs28 Madeira, Islas Canarias}{\fs28 .)
\par 
\par }
\pard \qc\ {\fs36 RHOEADALES
\par 
\par }{\fs28  }{\b\fs28 66.        PAPAVERACEAE }{\fs28  (Incl. }{\i\fs28 Fumariaceae}{\fs28 )
\par }{\fs24  Edit. J.R. Edmondson
\par 
\par }
\pard \ {\fs28 Herbs with or without latex. Leaves usually spirally arranged, variously dissected. Flowers hermaphrodite, actinomorphic or zygomorphic, hypogynous. Sepals 2(3), caducous. Petals 4-6. Stamens 2, 4 or numerous, whorled. Ovary superior, 1-celled, 2-celled or imperfectly many-celled; carpels 2 to many.
\par 
\par }{\b\fs28 Argemone mexicana}{\fs28  L., }{\i\fs28 Sp. Pl.}{\fs28  508 (1753), a glaucous, spiny annual up to 80 cm with large, solitary, pale yellow to orange flowers, is cultivated for ornament. It has been reported to be naturalized in S. Europe, but rarely persists.
\par 
\par }
\pard \li200\ {\fs28 1 Corolla actinomorphic
\par 2 Sap watery; sepals connate, forming a hood ........................ }{\b\fs28 6. Eschscholzia}{\fs28 
\par 2 Latex present; sepals free
\par 3 Capsule less than 10 times as long as wide, narrowed at base
\par 4 Style absent; stigmas on a sessile disc at top of ovary ................. }{\b\fs28 1. Papaver}{\fs28 
\par 4 Style short; stigmas distinct ................................................... }{\b\fs28 2. Meconopsis}{\fs28 
\par 3 Capsule more than 10 times as long as wide, \'b1 parallel sided
\par 5 Flowers violet; capsule opening by 2-4 valves ......................... }{\b\fs28 3. Roemeria}{\fs28 
\par 5 Flowers yellow or red; capsule opening by 2 valves
\par 6 Flowers solitary; petals at least 2 cm; capsule 2-celled ............ }{\b\fs28 4. Glaucium}{\fs28 
\par 6 Flowers in a simple umbel; petals up to 1 cm;
\par   capsule 1-celled ..................................................................... }{\b\fs28 5. Chelidonium}{\fs28 
\par 1 Corolla zygomorphic or bisymmetrical
\par 7 Corolla weakly zygomorphic; petals not spurred or saccate ... }{\b\fs28 7. Hypecoum}{\fs28 
\par 7 Corolla strongly zygomorphic or bisymmetrical; upper petal spurred or
\par   saccate at base
\par 8 Corolla bisymmetrical .................................................................. }{\b\fs28 8. Dicentra}{\fs28 
\par 8 Corolla zygomorphic
\par 9 At least the upper fruits 2- to many-seeded, dehiscent
\par 10 Plant annual; tendrils present ........................................... }{\b\fs28 16. Ceratocapnos}{\fs28 
\par 10 Plant usually perennial; tendrils absent
\par 11 Style deciduous, translucent
\par 12 Plant much-branched but not forming dense cushion;
\par    fruit 3- to 14-seeded ......................................................... }{\b\fs28 11. Pseudofumaria}{\fs28 
\par 12 Plant forming dense cushion; fruit usually 2-seeded ......... }{\b\fs28 12. Sarcocapnos}{\fs28 
\par 11 Style persistent, green
\par 13 Inflorescence racemose; bracts conspicuous ........................... }{\b\fs28 9. Corydalis}{\fs28 
\par 13 Inflorescence cymose; bracts inconspicuous ........................ }{\b\fs28 10. Capnoides}{\fs28 
\par 9  All fruits 1-seeded, indehiscent
\par 14 Upper petal saccate; stigma 3-fid, the middle lobe deeply
\par    notched, the lateral patent or deflexed ................................. }{\b\fs28 14. Platycapnos}{\fs28 
\par 14 Upper petal spurred; stigma 2-lobed, with a small tooth between lobes
\par 15 Cauline leaves numerous; flowers in racemes ......................... }{\b\fs28 13. Fumaria}{\fs28 
\par 15 Cauline leaves few; flowers in corymbs ............................ }{\b\fs28 15. Rupicapnos}{\fs28 
\par 
\par }
\pard \qc\ {\fs28  Subfam.     }{\b\fs28 Papaveroideae}{\fs28 
\par 
\par }
\pard \ {\fs28 Latex usually present. Flowers solitary or umbellate, actinomorphic. Sepals entire; petals entire, not spurred. Stamens numerous. Capsule dehiscing by pores or longitudinal valves.
\par 
\par }
\pard \qc\ {\fs28  }{\b\fs28 1.        Papaver}{\fs28               L.
\par }{\fs24 By A.B. Mowat & S.M. Walters (Ed.1) revised by J.W. Kadereit (Ed.2)
\par 
\par }
\pard \ {\fs28 Annual, biennial or perennial herbs with latex. Sepals 2 or 3, usually caducous. Petals 4 or 6, usually entire, often bright red, crumpled in bud, usually caducous. Stigmas 4-16, sessile over the placentae. Capsule clavate to globose, opening by valves or pores below the stigmatic disc, or disc deciduous. Seeds reniform, without aril.
\par 
\par Literature: Sect.}{\i\fs28  Meconella}{\fs28 : F. Markgraf,}{\i\fs28  Phyton}{\fs28  (}{\i\fs28 Austria}{\fs28 ) }{\b\fs28 7}{\fs28 : 302-314 (1958); G. Knaben, }{\i\fs28 Op. Bot}{\fs28 . (}{\i\fs28 Lund}{\fs28 )}{\b\fs28  2: }{\fs28 1-74 (1959);}{\b\fs28  3}{\fs28 : 1-96 (1959); U. R\'e4ndel,}{\i\fs28  Feddes Repert.}{\b\fs28  84}{\fs28 : 655-732 (1974); J. W.
\par 
\par 297}
\par }