{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 6-18 mm. Leaves 25-60 mm, spinulose-serrate. Racemes 30-50 mm, with (12-)15-30 flowers. Honey-leaves 4·5-6 mm. Berry bright orange-red; stigma sessile. 2n = 28. {\i Throughout the range of the species, but rare in the Mediterranean region}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b aetnensis} (C. Presl) Rouy & Fouc., {\i Fl. Fr.}{\b  1}: 148 (1893) (incl. {\i B. boissieri }C.K. Schneider): Plant 30-60 cm; twigs reddish. Spines 12-25 mm. Leaves 15-45 mm, spinulose-serrate. Racemes 20-30 mm, with 3-15 flowers. Honey-leaves 3-4 mm. Berry blackish-red; stigma very shortly stipitate. 2n = 28. •{\i  Mountains of Corse, Sardegna, Sicilia and S. Italy}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b c}) Subsp.{\b  australis} (Boiss.) Heywood, {\i Feddes Repert.}{\b  64}: 49 (1961) ({\i B. hispanica} Boiss. & Reuter): Plant 60-150 cm; twigs dark purple. Spines 12-20 mm. Leaves 8-30 mm, entire or with 1-6 marginal teeth. Racemes 10-25 mm, with 3-10 flowers. Honey-leaves 3-4 mm. Berry bluish-black; stigma very shortly stipitate. 2n = 28.{\i  Mountains of S. Spain, above} 1000{\i  m.}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Plants with characters intermediate between subspp. ({\b a}) and ({\b b}) in the Alps and S. France have been described as {\i B. vulgaris} var.{\i  alpestris }Rikli.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Plants with characters intermediate between subspp. ({\b a}) and ({\b c}) in E. & C. Spain have been described as subsp.{\b  seroi} O. Bolòs& Vigo,{\i  Butll. Inst. Catalana Hist. Nat.} ({\i Ser. Bot}.) {\b 38}: 65 (1974) ({\i B. garciae} Pau).
\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. B. cretica} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 331 (1753). like {\b 1} but plant suckering; leaves nearly always entire; racemes 7-15 mm, scarcely exceeding the leaves, with 3-8(-12) flowers; honey-leaves c. 4·5 mm, longer than the inner perianth-segments; fruit 6-8 mm, bluish-black.{\i  Mountains of C. & S. Greece and the Aegean region.} Cr Gr.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 6.            Mahonia}             Nutt.
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc By D.A. Webb.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Like{\i  Berberis} but with unarmed stems and pinnate, evergreen leaves.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. M. aquifolium} (Pursh) Nutt.,{\i  Gen. N. Amer. Pl.}{\b  1}: 212 (1818) ({\i Berberis aquifolium} Pursh). Plant 50-100(-200) cm, suckering. Stems stout, sparingly branched. Leaves evergreen, composed of 5-9(-13) leaflets; leaflets 4-8 × 2-4 cm, ovate, distantly spinose-dentate, coriaceous, dark green, shining. Racemes 5-8 cm, suberect, in groups of 3-5; flowers yellow. Honey-leaves c. 8 mm, slightly exceeding the inner perianth-segments. Berries globose, black, strongly bluish-pruinose.{\i  Frequently cultivated, especially in W. & C. Europe, and locally naturalized}. [Au Be Br Cz Da Ga Ge Ho Hs Hu No Rs(W, K) Su.] ({\i W. North America.})
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 64.        MAGNOLIACEAE}
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc  Edit †T.G. Tutin.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Trees or shrubs with alternate, simple leaves. Stipules large, deciduous, leaving annular scars at the nodes. Flowers actinomorphic, hermaphrodite, large, solitary. Perianth-segments free, arranged in whorls of 3-6, usually not differentiated into sepals and petals. Stamens numerous, spirally arranged. Carpels unilocular, numerous, spirally arranged. Fruiting carpels dry or fleshy, with 1 or several seeds, usually dehiscent. Embryo minute; endosperm copious .
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Apart from{\i  Liriodendron}, several species of{\i  Magnolia,} with entire leaves which are not truncate or emarginate at the apex, and with dehiscent fruiting carpels from which the seeds hang on long, silky threads, are cultivated for ornament.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 1.         Liriodendron}                 L.
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc  By †T.G. Tutin.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Deciduous trees. Leaves with a broad, truncate or emarginate apex and 1 or 2 large lobes on each side; stipules enclosing the bud and each of the young leaves. Perianth petaloid . Fruiting carpels brown, densely imbricate, each with a terminal wing, indehiscent ultimately separating from the axis.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. L. tulipifera} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 535 (1753). Glabrous tree up to 60 m. Leaves 7-12 cm; petiole 5-10 cm. Flowers campanulate. Perianth-segments 4-5 cm, greenish-white, the inner with a broad, orange band near the base. Fruit 5-8·5 cm; fruiting carpels up to 5 cm.{\i  Planted for timber and as an ornamental tree.} [Au Da Ge It Rs(W, K).] ({\i E. North America}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 65.       LAURACEAE}
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc  Edit. †T.G. Tutin
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Trees or shrubs. Leaves evergreen, entire, gland-dotted, alternate. Dioecious, or flowers hermaphrodite or polygamous; flowers actinomorphic, small, greenish. Perianth deeply 4- to 6-lobed. Stamens usually in 4 whorls; anthers dehiscing by apically hinged valves. Ovary superior, 1-celled; style simple. Fruit a berry.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 Inflorescence subsessile; perianth 4-lobed ........................................ {\b 1. Laurus}
\par
Inflorescence long-pedunculate; perianth 6-lobed ............................. {\b 2. Persea}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 1.        Laurus}                 L.
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc  By †T.G. Tutin.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Dioecious. Inflorescence subsessile. Perianth 4-lobed. Stamens 8-12; anthers all introrse, opening by 2 valves.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Leaves oblong-lanceolate, glabrous; young twigs glabrous .............. {\b 1. nobilis}
\par
Leaves suborbicular to lanceolate, tomentose-hirsute beneath,
\par
 at least on the midrib, when young; young twigs densely
\par
 tomentose-hirsute ............................................................................. {\b 2. azorica}
\par

\par
296}
\par