{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 15-20 × 15 mm, the spur 15-17 mm, straight or somewhat curved. Follicles 20-25 mm, glandular-pubescent; styles 10-15 mm. 2n = 14. •{\i  Corse.} Co.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b A. nugorensis} Arrigoni & Nardi,{\i  Boll. Soc. Sarda Sci. Nat.}{\b  17}: 220 (1978), described from the mountains of E.C. Sardegna, is like {\b 17} but the whole plant is pubescent and the flowers are somewhat smaller.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 18. A. grata} Zimmeter,{\i  Jahresb. Staats-ober-Realschule Steyr}{\b  5}: 46 (1875). Stems 15-45 cm, glandular-hairy. Basal leaves 2-ternate; leaflets 3-fid, glandular-pubescent above and beneath. Flowers nodding, purplish-violet. Perianth-segments c. 30 × 9-11 mm; limb of honey-leaf 6-10 mm, the spur 14-20 mm, straight. Stamens exserted. Follicles glandular-pubescent. 2n = 14. •{\i  Jugoslavia.} Ju.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 19. A. alpina} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 533 (1753). Stems 15-80 cm, with long, sparse hairs below, densely pubescent above. Basal leaves alternate; leaflets 2- or 3-fid, subglabrous. Flowers nodding, bright blue. Perianth-segments 30-45 × 14-22 mm; limb of honey-leaf 14-17 × 8-11 mm, the spur 18-25 × 6-7 mm, straight to curved. Follicles 20-28 mm; styles 6-7 mm. •{\i  Alps, N. Appennini}. Au Ga He It.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 23.              Thalictrum}              L.
\par  

\pard\f0\fs24\qc  By †T.G. Tutin (Ed.1) revised by J.R. Akeroyd (Ed.2)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Perennial herbs. Leaves 2- or 3-pinnate or -ternate, stipulate and sometimes with stipels. Flowers small, in panicles or racemes. Perianth-segments 4 or 5, usually caducous. Honey-leaves absent. Stamens numerous, conspicuous. Achenes few, stipitate or sessile, ribbed, angled or winged.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Literature: J.C. Lecoyer, {\i Bull. Soc. Bot. Belg.}{\b  24}: 78-325 (1885).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Filaments enlarged above, at least as wide as the anthers
\par
2 Filaments at least twice as wide as the anthers ......................... {\b 3. uncinatum}
\par
2 Filaments about as wide as the anthers
\par
3 Achenes pendent, 3-angled, winged; most leaflets about
\par
  as wide as long ................................................................... {\b 1. aquilegiifolium}
\par
3 Achenes erect, ribbed but not winged; most leaflets nearly
\par
  twice as wide as long ................................................................ {\b 2. calabricum}
\par
1 Filaments filiform, much narrower than the anthers
\par
4 Inflorescence a simple raceme ..................................................... {\b 7. alpinum}
\par
4 Inflorescence a panicle
\par
5 Perianth-segments at least 8 mm, white
\par
6 Leaves evenly spaced along stem; achenes 2-6;
\par
  roots not tuberous .......................................................................... {\b 6. orientale}
\par
6 Leaves crowded at base of stem; achenes (6-)10-30;
\par
  roots tuberous ............................................. {\b 5. tuberosum}
\par
5 Perianth-segments c. 3 mm, greenish, purplish or yellowish
\par
7 Achenes c. 10 mm, with anastomosing ribs ......................... {\b 4. macrocarpum}
\par
7 Achenes less than 5 mm, with longitudinal ribs only
\par
8 Leaves 3- or 4-ternate, about as wide as long
\par
9 Plant not or scarcely glandular ......................................................... {\b 9. minus}
\par
9 Plant densely glandular
\par
10 Stigma fimbriate; achenes compressed, strongly ribbed ........... {\b 8. foetidum}
\par
10 Stigma not fimbriate; achenes not or scarcely compressed,
\par
   ± weakly ribbed ................................................................................ {\b 9. minus}
\par
8  Leaves 2- or 3-pinnate, distinctly longer than wide
\par
11 Stamens pendent; anthers apiculate ........................................... {\b 10. simplex}
\par
11 Stamens erect; anthers not or very shortly apiculate
\par
12 Rhizome not far-creeping; stipels absent on young leaves ....... {\b 11. lucidum}
\par
12 Rhizome far-creeping; stipels present on young leaves
\par
13 Leaflets of upper leaves dentate or lobed;
\par
   inflorescence oblong-ovoid; stem not shining
\par
14 Plant not glaucous; leaflets without prominent veins beneath ... {\b 14. flavum}
\par
14 Plant glaucous; leaflets with prominent veins beneath
\par
   ......................................................................................... {\b 15. speciosissimum}
\par
13 Leaflets of upper leaves entire; inflorescence wide, with patent
\par
   branches; stem shining
\par
15 Plant green or slightly glaucous; achenes 1·8-2·3 mm ........... {\b 12. morisonii}
\par
15 Plant glaucous, bluish; achenes 4-4·5 mm ........................... {\b 13. maritimum}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 (A) Stamens longer than the perianth; filaments widened towards the top.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. T. aquilegiifolium} L.,{\i  Sp. Pl.} 547 (1753). Glabrous perennial 40-150 cm, with a short stock. Leaves 2- or 3-ternate, with stipels; leaflets obovate-cuneate, dentate. Panicle much-branched, rather dense, corymbose. Flowers usually numerous, erect. Filaments as wide as the anthers, lilac or whitish. Achenes c. 7 mm, long-pedicellate, pendulous, with 3 winged angles; beak short, appressed. 2n = 14.{\i  C., E. & S. Europe, extending to S. Sweden}. Al Au Bu Cz Fe Ga Ge Gr He Hs Hu It Ju Po Rm Rs(N,B,C,W)Su Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. T. calabricum} Sprengel, {\i Pugillus}{\b  1}: 37 (1813). like {\b 1} but leaves without stipels; flowers few; achenes shortly pedicellate, 7- or 8-ribbed, not winged. 2n = 42.{\i  Deciduous woods. • S.W. Italy; Sicilia.} It Si.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 3. T. uncinatum} Rehmann,{\i  Spraw. Kom. Fizyogr. Krakow.}{\b 7}: 90 (1873) ({\i T. petaloideum,} auct., non L.). Glabrous perennial 15-40 cm. Leaves 2- or 3-pinnate, with stipels; leaflets suborbicular, entire or 3-lobed, sessile, glaucous. Panicle compact and umbel-like. Flowers erect. Filaments white, much wider at top than the anthers. Achenes 3-4 mm, sessile, ovoid-ellipsoidal, ribbed; beak c. 1 mm, hooked.{\i  • W. Ukraine} ({\i Upper Dnestr valley}). Rs(W).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b T. podolicum} Lecoyer,{\i  Bull. Soc. Bot. Belg.}{\b  24}: 173 (1885), was described from a single collection from the same region and has not been rediscovered. It is said to differ from {\b 3} in having the leaves pubescent on the veins beneath, a broad pyramidal inflorescence, yellowish filaments, and achenes with a curved, not hooked beak.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 (B) Stamens longer or shorter than the perianth; filaments filiform.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 (a) Carpels longer than the stamens and perianth-segments.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 4. T. macrocarpum} Gren.,{\i  Séances Publiq. Acad. Sci. Besançon}{\b  1838}: 117 (1838). Glabrous perennial 20-80 cm, with a short stock. Basal leaves 3- or 4-ternate, without stipels; leaflets broadly ovate, coarsely dentate. Panicle with divaricate branches. Flowers yellowish, few, long-pedicellate, erect. Achenes 1-5, sessile, erect, compressed; beak long, curved. {\i Damp limestone rocks. • W. & C. Pyrenees.} Ga Hs.
\par

\par
290}
\par