{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Leaflets of upper leaves linear-lanceolate to linear,
\par
  entire ................................................................................ ({\b d}) subsp.{\b  galioides}
\par
1 Leaflets of upper leaves oblong- to ovate-cuneate, lobed or dentate
\par
2 Inflorescence a lax, ovoid-pyramidal panicle .................. ({\b c}) subsp.{\b  gallicum}
\par
2 Inflorescence narrowly ovoid or oblong
\par
3 Leaflets of upper leaves oblong-cuneate .......................... ({\b a}) subsp.{\b  simplex}
\par
3 Leaflets of upper leaves obovate-cuneate .......................... ({\b b}) subsp.{\b  boreale}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b simplex} ({\i T. strictum} Ledeb.): Leaflets oblong-cuneate, lobed or dentate. Inflorescence usually leafy to apex. Flowers numerous; pedicels short. 2n = 56. {\i Throughout the range of the species except the extreme north}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp.{\b  boreale} (F. Nyl.) Á. & D. Löve,{\i  Bot. Not.}{\b  114}: 52 (1961) ({\i T. boreale} F. Nyl.): Leaflets ovate-cuneate, lobed or minutely dentate. Inflorescence very leafy except at apex. Flowers few; pedicels long. Stigma papillose. 2n = 56. •{\i  N. Fennoscandia}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b c}) Subsp.{\b  gallicum} (Rouy & Fouc.) Tutin, {\i Feddes Repert.}{\b  69}: 55 (1964) ({\i T. gallicum} Rouy & Fouc.): Leaflets obovate-cuneate, usually 3-lobed, the margins recurved. Inflorescence with rather long, patent or ascending branches. Flowers numerous; pedicels long.{\i  • N. & E. France}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b d}) Subsp. {\b galioides} (Nestler) Korsh.,{\i  Tent. Fl. Russ. Or.}{\b  1}: 41 (1898) ({\i T. galioides} Nestler; incl. subsp.{\i  bauhinii }(Crantz) Tutin,{\i  T. bauhinii} Crantz): Leaflets linear, entire. Inflorescence leafless at apex. Flowers numerous; pedicels short.{\i  From Estonia to S.E. France and S. Romania}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Plants from S. Bulgaria, like subsp. ({\b a}) but hairy on the upper part of the stems, petioles and lower surfaces of the leaves, and with more erect flowers, have been called subsp.{\b  rhodopaeum }(Rech. fil.) Panov ex Kozuharov & Petrova,{\i  Ann. Bot. Fenn.}{\b  25}: 390 (1988); their status is uncertain.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 (iv) Perianth-segments shorter than the stamens; stamens erect; anthers not or shortly apiculate.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 11. T. lucidum} L.,{\i  Sp. Pl.} 546 (1753) ({\i T. angustifolium }auct.; incl. {\i T. bulgaricum} Velen.). Caespitose perennial 60-120 cm. Leaves mostly sessile, 2- or 3-pinnate, without stipels; leaflets of lower leaves ovate-cuneate to linear-oblong, those of upper leaves lanceolate to linear, all entire, or 2- or 3-lobed at apex. Inflorescence ovoid, the branches long, ascending. Flowers yellowish, in rather dense clusters. Achenes oblong-ovoid, with 8-10 strong ribs; beak short. 2n = 28.{\i  C. & E. Europe.} Al Au Bu Cz Ge Gr Hu ?It Ju Po Rm Rs(N, B, C, W, E) Tu [Fe Rs(K)].
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 12. T. morisonii} C.C. Gmelin, {\i Fl. Bad.}{\b  4}: 422 (1826) ({\i T. exultatum} Gaudin,{\i  T. angustifolium} auct., {\i T. lucidum} auct. hisp., non L.). Perennial 50-190 cm, with far-creeping rhizome. Stem shiny. Leaves 2- or 3-pinnate, with stipels when young; leaflets of lower leaves obovate-cuneate, lobed, those of upper leaves linear to linear-lanceolate, entire. Inflorescence ovoid, the branches long, patent. Flowers yellow, not densely clustered. Anthers shortly apiculate. Achenes 1·8-2·3 mm, broadly ovoid, with 8-10 strong ribs; beak short. •{\i  C. Mediterranean region; Alps and N. Italy.} Co Ga He Hs It.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp.{\b  morisonii} : Leaves glabrous and eglandular beneath. {\i Alps and N. Italy}.
\par
 ({\b b}) Subsp.{\b  mediterraneum} (Jordan) P.W. Ball,{\i  Feddes Repert.}{\b  66}: 153 (1962) ({\i T. mediterraneum} Jordan): Leaves pubescent or sparsely glandular beneath.{\i  C. Mediterranean region}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 13. T. maritimum} Dufour,{\i  Bull. Bot. Soc. Fr.}{\b  7}: 221 (1860). like {\b 12} but plant glabrous, glaucous, bluish; stems 60-80 cm, more slender; leaflets of lower leaves mostly narrowly elliptical; anthers not apiculate; achenes 4-4·5 mm, fusiform. By saline and brackish lagoons. •{\i  E. Spain} ({\i  Valencia and Castellon provs}.). Hs.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 14. T. flavum} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 546 (1753). Perennial 50-130 cm, not glaucous, with far-creeping rhizomes and stolons. Stem angled and somewhat winged, not shiny, often with adventitious roots at base. Leaves 2- or 3-pinnate, with stipels when young; leaflets obovate-cuneate to oblong, 3- or 4-lobed at apex, without prominent veins beneath. Inflorescence narrowly oblong-ovoid. Flowers yellow, in dense clusters. Achenes ovoid, with 6 ribs. 2n = 84.{\i  Much of Europe, but local in the south.} Al Au Be Br Bu Cz Da Fe Ga Ge Hb He Ho Hs Hu It Ju No Po Rm Rs(N, B, C, W, E) Su.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 15. T. speciosissimum} L. in Loefl., {\i Iter Hisp.}{\b  303}: 57 (1758) (incl. {\i T. glaucum} Desf., {\i T. flavum} subsp.{\i  glaucum} (Desf.) Batt., {\i T. costae} Timb.-Lagr. ex Debeaux). like {\b 14} but up to 180 cm, glaucous; leaflets with prominent veins beneath; inflorescence sometimes broadly corymbose.{\i  Spain and Portugal.} Hs Lu.
\par

\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 62.       PAEONIACEAE}
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc  Edit. D.A. Webb.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Perennial herbs or shrubs. Leaves alternate, exstipulate. Flowers usually solitary, hermaphrodite, actinomorphic, hypogynous. Sepals 5, free. Petals 5-10(-13), free. Stamens numerous. Carpels 2-8, free, borne on a fleshy disc. Fruit a group of 2-8 follicles, each with several seeds.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 1.            Paeonia}                L.
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc  By J. Cullen & V.H. Heywood (Ed.1) revised by J.R. Akeroyd (Ed.2)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Robust perennials, with erect, tuberous stock and fleshy roots. Leaves large, simply biternate or further divided. Flowers 6-14 cm in diameter; petals white, pink or red in the European species. Stamens numerous. Follicles spreading horizontally; seeds in 2 rows.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 A number of species and hybrids are widely cultivated for ornament.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Literature: F.C. Stern, {\i A Study of the Genus} Paeonia. London. 1946. W.T. Stearn & P.H. Davis,{\i  Peonies of Greece.} Kifissia. 1984.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Segments of lower leaves more than 40, each segment less
\par
  than 5 mm wide ........................................................................... {\b 1. tenuifolia}
\par
1 Segments of lower leaves fewer than 40,
\par
  each segment more than 5 mm wide
\par
2 Petals white, occasionally flushed with pink .................................... {\b 6. clusii}
\par
2 Petals red or deep pink
\par
3 Most leaflets divided; lower leaves with narrowly elliptical to
\par
  lanceolate segments
\par

\par
292}
\par