{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 Kadereit,{\i  Bot.Jahrb.}{\b  112: }79-97 (1990). Sect.{\i  Pseudopilosa}: W. Vent{\i  et. al.}, {\i Feddes Repert.}{\b  77}: 47-56 (1968) . Sect. {\i Macrantha}: P. Goldblatt,{\i  Ann. Missouri Bot. Gard.}{\b  61}: 264-296 (1974). Sect.{\i  Papaver}: J.W. Kadereit,{\i  Bot. Jahrb}{\b . 106} :221-244(1986); {\b 108} : 1-16 (1986). Sect. {\i Argemonidium} : J.W. Kadereit,{\i  Notes Roy. Bot. Gard. Edinb.}{\b  44}: 25-43 (1986). Sect.{\i  Rhoeadium} : J.W. Kadereit, {\i Notes Roy. Bot. Gard. Edinb.}{\b  45}: 225-286 (1989).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Scapose perennial (arctic-alpine)
\par
2 Capsule narrowly obovoid to cylindrical (arctic or subarctic Europe)
\par
3 Flower-buds narrowly ovoid, usually less than 5 mm broad;
\par
  stamens 30-40 ........................................................................ {\b 13. lapponicum}
\par
3 Flower-buds broadly ellipsoidal to subglobose, usually more
\par
  than 5 mm broad; stamens 20-30 .............................................. {\b 14. radicatum}
\par
2 Capsule ellipsoidal to obovoid (C. or S. Europe)
\par
4 Stamens not longer than ovary; petals not overlapping
\par
  in flower .......................................................................... {\b 15. lapeyrousianum}
\par
4 Stamens at least as long as ovary; petals overlapping
\par
  in flower ....................................................................................... {\b 16. alpinum}
\par
1 Annual, biennial or perennial with at least some cauline leaves
\par
5 Perennial; non-flowering stems present
\par
6 Stamens pale yellow; petals 2-3 cm, light orange, without
\par
  basal black spot; capsule clavate ............................................ {\b 11. rupifragum}
\par
6 Stamens dark violet; petals 5-9 cm, dark orange, usually
\par
  with basal black spot; capsule broadly obovoid to subglobose
\par
  .......................................................................................... {\b 12. pseudoorientale}
\par
5 Annual; all stems bearing flowers
\par
7 Filaments clavate; capsule usually setose; stigmatic disc convex
\par
8 Mature capsule at least twice as long as wide, often without
\par
  setae in lower part; sepals with short subapical processes ....... {\b 10. argemone}
\par
8 Mature capsule at most twice as long as wide, usually with setae
\par
  throughout; sepals without subapical processes
\par
9 Setae patent in all parts of capsule; stigmatic disc not vaulted
\par
  between stigmatic rays; petals usually with a small,
\par
  basal black spot ........................................................................... {\b 8. hybridum}
\par
9 Lower part of capsule with ± appressed setae; mature stigmatic
\par
  disc strongly vaulted between stigmatic rays; petals without
\par
  a basal black spot ............................................................................ {\b 9. apulum}
\par
7 Filaments filiform or clavate; capsules not setose; stigmatic
\par
  disc flat or rarely umbonate
\par
10 Upper cauline leaves amplexicaul; petals white to violet
\par
   ................................................................................................. {\b 7. somniferum}
\par
10 Upper cauline leaves not amplexicaul; petals red
\par
11 Sepals with ± conspicuous subapical processes; ultimate
\par
   segments of upper leaves usually less than 1 mm wide ............ {\b 4. arenarium}
\par
11 Sepals very rarely with subapical processes and then inconspicuous;
\par
   if present, ultimate segments of upper leaves more than 1 mm wide
\par
12 Anthers light yellow; upper leaves with cuneate to rounded
\par 
   base and basal pair of large, acute, triangular, antrorse lobes,
\par
   or leaves entire or with usually 1 pair of recurved lobes
\par
13 Sepal-margin never dark violet; upper leaves very rarely entire,
\par
   usually with many strongly antrorse lobes or teeth .............. {\b 1. pinnatifidum}
\par
13 Sepal-margin usually dark violet; upper leaves often entire
\par
   or with a single pair of recurved lobes ..................... {\b 2. purpureomarginatum}
\par
12 Anthers dull yellowish-brown or greenish; upper leaves not as above
\par
14 Terminal segment of basal leaves much larger than lateral segments,
\par
   usually less than twice as long as wide; plants usually with distinct
\par
   red tinge on axis and leaves, at least on some cauline setae;
\par
   capsules gradually narrowing into clavate base ..................... {\b 5. guerlekense}
\par
14 Terminal segment of basal leaves variable, if much larger
\par
   than lateral segments, then usually more than twice as long as wide;
\par 
   plants usually without red tinge, if with tinge, then capsules
\par
    ± abruptly contracted at base
\par
15 Pedicel setae always densely appressed; capsules usually much
\par
   more than twice as long as wide; stigmatic disc not
\par
   wider than capsule ......................................................................... {\b 3. dubium}
\par
15 Pedicel setae usually patent, sometimes loosely appressed;
\par
   capsules usually less than twice as long as wide;
\par
   stigmatic disc usually wider than capsule ....................................... {\b 6. rhoeas}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Sect. RHOEADIUM Spach. Annuals with few to many usually setose hairs. Leaves pinnatisect to pinnatipartite; upper cauline leaves not amplexicaul; lower leaves petiolate. Filaments filiform, dark violet. Capsule glabrous.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. P. pinnatifidum} Moris, {\i Fl. Sard.}{\b  1}: 74 (1837). Plant 10-85 cm, erect. Leaves incised to pinnatipartite, the lower sometimes pinnatisect. Upper leaves sessile with cuneate or rounded base, with a large basal pair of acute, triangular lobes. Pedicels appressed-setose above. Flower-buds densely appressed-setose. Petals 14-30 mm, without distinct basal spots. Anthers pale yellow. Capsule 1-2·7 × 0·4-0·8 cm, 2½-4 times as long as wide, clavate, distinctly contracted below pores. Disc narrower than capsule, with 4-9 rays. 2n = 28.{\i  W. Mediterranean region; Açores.} Az Bl Co Ga Hs It Sa Si.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. P. purpureomarginatum} Kadereit,{\i  Notes Roy. Bot. Gard. Edinb}{\b . 45}: 235 (1989). Plant 8-45 cm, erect. Leaves entire to bipinnatipartite. Upper leaves sessile, often entire or with 1 pair of recurved basal lobes, less often with more than 1 pair of lobes. Pedicels sparsely appressed-setose above. Flower-buds subglabrous; sepals with dark violet margin. Petals 10-20 mm, without distinct basal spots. Anthers pale yellow. Capsule 1-1·8 × 0·5-0·7 cm, 2-2½ times as long as wide, ellipsoidal to obovoid, distinctly contracted below pores. Disc narrower than capsule, mostly slightly concave, with marginal dark violet marks and 4-7 rays. 2n = 28. {\i S. Greece, S. Aegean region.} Cr Gr.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 3. P. dubium} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 1196 (1753) (incl.{\i  P. obtusifolium} Desf., {\i P. modestum} Jordan,{\i  P. hirtodubium} Fedde). Plant 10-90 cm, erect. Leaves pinnatifid to pinnatipartite. Upper leaves shortly petiolate to sessile, tripartite with pinnatifid to pinnatisect lobes. Pedicels appressed-setose above. Flower-buds glabrous to densely appressed-setose. Petals 10-40 mm, red or white without or with basal black spots. Anthers dull yellow, brown or green. Capsule 0·8-2·6 × 0·4-1·1 cm, 2-4½ times as long as wide, narrowly obovoid to clavate. Disc not wider than capsule, with 4-11 rays.{\i  Throughout Europe, except parts of the north.} All except Cr Fa Fe Is No Rs(N, C) Sb.
\par

\par
298}
\par