{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28  (b) Carpels shorter than the stamens and perianth-segments.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  (i) Perianth-segments longer than the stamens.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 5. T. tuberosum} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 545 (1753). Glabrous perennial 20-50 cm, with a short stock and ovoid tuberous roots. Leaves mostly basal, 2- or 3-pinnate, without stipels; leaflets suborbicular-cuneate, dentate. Flowers yellowish-white, few, erect. Perianth-segments usually 8-15 mm. Achenes 7-12, sessile, fusiform, sulcate; beak short.{\i  Dry rocky places. • N. & E. Spain, Pyrenees, Corbières}. Ga Hs.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 6. T. orientale} Boiss., {\i Ann. Sci. Nat.} ser. 2, {\i Bot.}{\b  16}: 349 (1841). Glabrous perennial 10-30 cm, shortly rhizomatous, with fibrous roots. Leaves like those of{\b  5} but mostly cauline. Flowers few, erect, white. Perianth-segments not more than 10 mm. Achenes 2-6, subsessile, narrowly oblong, sulcate; beak short.{\i  S. Greece} ({\i foothills of Taïyetos}). Gr. ({\i S. Anatolia, N. Syria.})
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  (ii) Perianth-segments shorter than the stamens; anthers not or scarcely apiculate.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 7. T. alpinum} L.,{\i  Sp. Pl.} 545 (1753). Glabrous perennial 5-20 cm, with a short stock. Leaves almost all basal, 2-ternate, without stipels; leaflets suborbicular, dentate. Flowers few, purplish-green, at first pendent, later erect, in a simple raceme. Achenes 2 or 3, pendent, narrowly oblong, ribbed, shortly stalked; beak short, curved. 2n = 14.{\i  N. & N.W. Europe, southwards to Italy and C. Ural; locally on mountains of C. & S. Europe from Sierra Nevada to E. Carpathians.} Au Br Fa Fe Ga Hb He Hs Is It Ju No Rm Rs(N, C) Su.
\par

\par
 (iii) Perianth-segments shorter than the stamens; stamens pendent; anthers apiculate.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 8. T. foetidum} L., {\i loc. cit. }(1753) ({\i T. alpestre} Gaudin). Glandular, foetid, shortly rhizomatous perennial 20-40 cm, with some long eglandular hairs. Basal leaves 3- or 4(5)-ternate, without stipels; leaflets 2-4 mm, suborbicular or broadly ovate, irregularly dentate in the upper ½. Inflorescence with long branches. Flowers yellow, pendent. Filaments slightly thickened. Stigma minutely fimbriate. Achenes c. 10, sessile, erect, compressed, ovoid, strongly ribbed; beak nearly as long as the achene. 2n = 14.{\i  Mountains of E., C. & S. Europe,from E. Spain to C. Ural.} Au Bu Cz Ga Gr He Hs Hu It Ju Rm Rs(C, W).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 The plants from the Pyrenees and Spain lack eglandular hairs and have been called subsp. {\b valentinum} O. Bolòs& vigo,{\i  Butll. Inst. Catalana Hist. Nat. }{\b 38}: 65 (1974), but are probably worth only varietal rank.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 9. T. minus} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 546 (1753) ({\i T. silvaticum} Koch). Glabrous or glandular perennial 15-150 cm, subcaespitose or rhizomatous. Basal leaves 3- or 4-ternate, without stipels; leaflets suborbicular or broadly ovate, irregularly lobed or dentate in the upper ½. Inflorescence with long branches. Flowers yellowish, pendent, becoming erect. Filaments filiform. Achenes 3-15, erect, sessile, not or slightly compressed, broadly ovoid to narrowly oblong-ovoid, the ribs not very strong; beak much shorter than the achene.{\i  Most of Europe.} All except Az Bl Cr Fa Is Sb Tu; only as an alien in Fe.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Species {\b 9-15} form a variable complex and it is sometimes difficult to identify a given specimen with certainty. Many more or less uniform populations have been described as species but they appear generally to be connected with one another by numerous intermediates. The variation-pattern is complicated by the common occurrence of the plants in small isolated populations which may, in rhizomatous species, often consist of single clones. All the populations which have been examined cytologically are polyploid, and inbreeding or possible apomixis may occur.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 The following grouping of {\b 9} into subspecies should be regarded as provisional, in the absence of thorough experimental and cytological investigation.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Leaves crowded at or below middle of stem; leaflets with
\par
  prominent veins beneath ............................................... ({\b b}) subsp. {\b olympicum}
\par
1 Leaves ± evenly spaced; leaflets without prominent veins beneath
\par
2 Plant densely glandular, at least on lower surface of
\par
  leaflets ............................................................................ ({\b c}) subsp.{\b  pubescens}
\par
2 Plant not or scarcely glandular
\par
3 Branches of leaf-rhachis terete or flattened ............. ({\b d}) subsp.{\b  pseudominus}
\par
3 Branches of leaf-rhachis strongly ribbed
\par
4 Stigma minutely papillose; inflorescence many flowered .. ({\b a}) subsp.{\b  minus}
\par
4 Stigma strongly fimbriate; inflorescence few-flowered  .({\b e}) subsp.{\b  kemense}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp.{\b  minus} ({\i T. elatum} Jacq., {\i T. flexuosum} Bernh., {\i T. majus} Crantz, {\i T. minus} subsp. {\i majus }(Crantz) Rouy & Fouc.): Stems 25-120 cm. Leaves evenly spaced; leaflets 4-30 mm wide. 2n = 42. {\i Widespread except in the north}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp.{\b  olympicum }(Boiss. & Heldr.) Strid,{\i  Mount. Fl. Gr.}{\b  1}: 229 (1986) (subsp.{\i  saxatile} Schinz & R. Keller, non Hooker fil.,{\i  T. minus} sensu Hayek, non L.,{\i  T. saxatile} DC.): Stems 15-50(-80) cm. Leaves crowded at or below the middle of the stem; leaflets coriaceous, with veins prominent beneath. 2n = 42. {\i  C., E. & S.E. Europe.}
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b c}) Subsp. pubescens (Schleicher ex DC.) Rouy & Fouc., {\i Fl. Fr. }{\b 1}: 14 (1893) ({\i T. minus} sensu Willk. & Lange, non L.; incl. subsp. {\i madritense }(Pau) P. Monts.): Plant densely glandular at least on the lower surface of the leaflets; leaflets 4-15 mm, about as long as wide. {\i S. France and Spain}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b d}) Subsp. pseudominus (Borbás) Soóin Soó& Jáv., Magyar Nov. Ke'z. 1: 226 (1951) (T. pseudominus (Borbás) Jáv.): Plant glaucous; stems 10-40 cm. Branches of the leaf-rhachis terete or flattened, not ribbed; leaflets 10-20 mm wide. {\i E.C. Europe.}
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b e}) Subsp.{\b  kemense} (Fries) Cajander in Mela,{\i  Suomen Kasvio} ed. 5, 276 (1906) ({\i T. kemense} Fries): Stems up to 60 cm. Inflorescence narrow. Flowers few. Stigma strongly fimbriate. 2n = 70. {\i N.E. Europe}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Plants from coastal sands in N.W. Europe, with glaucous leaves that are densely glandular especially beneath, are similar to subsp. ({\b d}) but have somewhat smaller leaflets. They have been called subsp. {\i arenarium} (Butcher) Clapham in Clapham, Tutin & E.F. Warburg,{\i  Fl. Brit. Is.} 107 (1952).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 10. T. simplex} L., {\i Mantissa} 78 (1767). Glabrous perennial 20-120 cm, with a long rhizome. Basal leaves 2- or 3-pinnate, without stipels; leaflets ovate-cuneate to linear, lobed or dentate to entire. Inflorescence usually narrowly oblong, with short branches. Flowers yellowish, pendent, becoming erect. Fruit ellipsoidal, ribbed; stigma sagittate.{\i  Much of continental Europe, but absent from the islands and most of the west.} Au Bu Cz Da Fe Ga Ge He Hu It Ju No Po Rm Rs(N, B, C, W, ?K, E) Su.
\par

\par
291}
\par