{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}
\pard\f0\fs36\qc {\b PSILOTOPSIDA}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 1.      PSILOTACEAE}
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc  Edit. D.M. Moore.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Perennials without true roots or leaves. Sporangia fused in triplets to form synangia, borne at base of 2-lobed sporophylls; homosporous, the spores monolete. Prothallus small, cylindrical, colourless, with mycorrhiza.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Mainly tropical and sub-tropical.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 1.               Psilotum}              Swartz
\par      

\pard\f0\fs24\qc  By N.A. Burges.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Stem branched dichotomously. Leaf-like appendages small, inconspicuous.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b 1. P. nudum} (L.) Beauv.,{\i  Prodr. Aethéog.} 112 (1805) ({\i P. triquetrum} Swartz). Rhizome short, creeping, wiry, much-branched. Stem 10-25 cm × 1·5-2 mm, unbranched below, with dense, dichotomous branching above, triquetrous or flattened. Leaf-like appendages 1-1·5 mm, narrowly triangular. Synangia 1-1·5 mm, exindusiate, capsule-like, composed of (2)3(4) globose sporangia subtended by a forked bract. {\i Crevices of sandstone cliffs. S.W. Spain} ({\i near Algeciras}). Hs. ({\i Tropics and subtropics.})
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 The Spanish plants have been described as var. {\i molesworthae} Iranzo, Prada & Salvo on account of their small size and thick stems, but similar plants are found throughout the range of the species.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs36\qc {\b LYCOPSIDA}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc {\b 2.       LYCOPODIACEAE}
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc Edit. †D.H. Valentine & D.M. Moore.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Herbaceous or suffruticose perennials, with more or less elongated branches bearing small, spirally arranged leaves which are without veins or with a midrib only; ligule absent. Homosporous; sporangia at the base of scale- or leaf-like sporophylls, frequently in cones. Prothallus subterranean, mostly saprophytic and mycorrhizal.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Stems ascending, regularly divided dichotomously into branches
\par
  of equal length; sporophylls not in terminal cones ........................ {\b 1. Huperzia}
\par
1 Stems creeping, with short lateral branches; sporophylls in terminal cones
\par
2 Leaves opposite and decussate, somewhat scale-like;
  branches dorsiventral  ........................................................... {\b 4. Diphasiastrum}
\par
2 Leaves spirally arranged or in whorls; branches radial
\par
3 Leaves linear-subulate, angular, curved upwards; sporophylls similar 
  to leaves but somewhat broader and toothed at base .............. {\b 2. Lycopodiella}
\par
3 Leaves flat, lanceolate, appressed or deflexed, not usually subulate;
\par
  sporophylls ovate to broadly lanceolate, with scarious,
\par
  toothed margins ....................................................................... {\b 3. Lycopodium}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 1.               Huperzia}                 Bernh.
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc   †W. Rothmaler 
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Stems short, ascending and divided dichotomously into branches of equal length. Leaves and sporophylls similar, in alternating zones in the upper branches; sporangia reniform, pedunculate; spores foveolate-punctate. Prothallus holosaprophytic, subterranean, large and cylindrical.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b 1. H. selago} (L.) Bernh. ex Schrank & C.F.P. Mart.,{\i  Hort. Monac}. 3 (1829) ({\i Lycopodium selago} L.). Stem 5-30 cm, erect. Leaves imbricate, in many rows on the stem, appressed or patent, linear to ovate-lanceolate, usually entire, often bearing in their axils bud-like gemmae.{\i  Europe southwards to N. Spain and N. Greece; mainly on mountains except in the north}. All except Bl Cr Gr Lu Rs(K, E) Sa Si Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp.{\b  selago} : Stem 10-30 cm, 6-12 mm wide. Leaves green, patent, linear-lanceolate. Sporangia usually well-developed. 2n = 264, c. 272.{\i  Somewhat calcifuge. Throughout the range of the species}.
\par
 ({\b b}) Subsp.{\b  arctica} (Grossh. ex Tolm.) Á. & D. Löve,{\i  Bot. Not.}{\b  114:} 35 (1961) ({\i H. arctica} (Grossh. ex Tolm.) Sipliv., {\i Lycopodium appressum} (Desv.) Petrov., {\i L. recurvum} Kit. ex Willd.): Stem 5-10 cm, 5-6 mm wide. Leaves yellow-green, imbricate, appressed, ovate-lanceolate. Sporangia absent or less frequently developed than in subsp. ({\b a}). 2n = 90.{\i  N. Europe, rock outcrops, dry hummocks in bogs; mossy tundra. Iceland, Fennoscandia and N. Russia extending S. to Scotland}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Plants from Açores, with numerous fine teeth on the leaf-margins, and without gemmae, have been called {\b H. dentata} (Herter) J. Holub, {\i Folia Geobot. Phytotax.} ({\i Praha}) {\b 20:} 72 (1985) ({\i H. selago} subsp.{\i  dentata }(Herter) Valentine).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 2.             Lycopodiella}               J. Holub
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc  †W. Rothmaler (Ed. 1) revised by A.C. Jermy (Ed. 2)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Leaves subulate, curved upwards; sporophylls similar, but somewhat broadened and toothed at the base, forming a terminal cone. Sporangia opening at the base; spores reticulate. Prothallus
\par

\par
3}
\par