{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 5. H. pseudograndiflorum} Petrovic,{\i  Addit. Fl. Agri Nyss.} 25 (1886). Plant 5-40 cm, green or glaucous. Most or all ultimate leaflets lanceolate. Inflorescence decumbent to erect with 1-18(-28) flowers. Sepals 2·5-5 × 1-2·5 mm, erose, entire or dentate. Petals lemon-yellow; outer petals (6·5-)8-11 × (4-)8-10(-11) mm, not or shortly unguiculate, distinctly 3-lobed, not or scarcely longer than wide, the lateral lobes flat; inner petals with or without black spots, the lateral lobes obovate, obtuse, not exceeding central lobe; central lobe 4-6(-7·5) × 1·5-3 mm, obovate, fimbriate with truncate base. Filaments of median stamens narrowly triangular. Pollen yellowish-white. Fruit erect to patent, not torulose, more or less arcuate, 1·5-2·5 mm at widest septa. 2n = 16.{\i  Usually ruderal. Balkan peninsula.} Bu Gr Ju Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 6. H. procumbens} L.,{\i  Sp. Pl.} 124 (1753) (incl.{\i  H. ponticum} Velen.). Plant up to 40 cm, green or glaucous. Ultimate leaflets linear to lanceolate, with 1 lateral tooth. Inflorescence decumbent to erect, with 1-7(-14) flowers. Sepals 2-7 × 1-2·2 mm, erose, entire or dentate. Petals lemon-yellow or yellowish-orange; outer petals 4-12 × 1·5-11·5 mm, unguiculate, rhombic to distinctly 3-lobed, usually as long as or longer than wide, the lateral lobes flat; inner petals without black spots, the lateral lobes obovate, obtuse, varying in length relative to central lobe; central lobe 2-5 × 1-3 mm, obovate, with truncate base. Filaments of median stamens narrowly ovate. Pollen yellowish-white. Fruit scarcely torulose, more or less arcuate, 1-3·5 mm at widest septa; seeds dark brown. 2n = 16.{\i  Seashores and sandy habitats. S. Europe}. Bl Bu Co Cr Ga Gr Hs It Ju Lu Sa Si Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 A very variable species. Plants from the Kikladhes (Mikonos and Rhinia), with up to 14 strongly scented flowers per inflorescence and slightly larger anthers, have been described as subsp.{\b  fragrantissimum} Å. E. Dahl,{\i  Pl. Syst. Evol.}{\b  163}: 254 (1989). They are self-incompatible, and hybrids with subsp.{\i  procumbens} (which is usually self-compatible) show reduced fertility.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  Subfam.   {\b Fumarioideae  }
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Usually glabrous herbs. Sepals 2, free or absent. Inflorescence racemose or cymose, bracteate. Corolla transversely zygomorphic or bisymmetrical. Upper exterior petal spurred or saccate. Stamens 6, united into two groups of 3.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc {\b 8.           Dicentra}              Bernh.
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc  By D.A. Webb & J.R. Akeroyd.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Perennial herbs with ternate leaves and cymose inflorescence. Outer petals alike, saccate at the base. Fruit a 2-valved capsule with several seeds; style persistent. Seeds with an aril in Europe.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Literature: K.R. Stearn, {\i Brittonia}{\b  13}: 1-57 (1961).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 Stems leafy; outer petals more than 20 mm, with spathulate,
\par
    deflexed apex ........................................................................... {\b 1. spectabilis}
\par
Stems leafless, or with a single leaf subtending inflorescence;
\par
    outer petals less than 20 mm, with ovate, spreading apex .......... {\b 2. formosa}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. D. spectabilis} (L.) Lemaire,{\i  Fl. Serres Jard. Eur.} ser. 1, {\b 3}: t.258 (1847). Stems 30-40 cm, leafy, reddish. Leaves biternate; leaflets often ternatisect; ultimate segments obovate-cuneate, irregularly dentate. Cymes 18-25 cm, raceme-like, nearly horizontal, with 7-12 pendent flowers. Outer petals c. 25 × 9 mm, bright reddish-pink, cucullate, with broad, gibbous base and narrow, spathulate, deflexed apex. Inner petals about as long as outer, but not deflexed at apex and therefore projecting beyond them, white, keeled, sharply constricted near the middle; apices coherent. Filaments geniculate at junction of free and fused portions. 2n = 36.{\i  Cultivated for ornament, naturalized in Czechoslovakia and perhaps elsewhere. }[Cz.] ({\i E. Asia}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. D. formosa} (Haw.) Walpers, {\i Repert. Bot. Syst.}{\b  1: }118 (1841). Stems 20-40 cm, usually leafless, arising from slender, fleshy rhizome. Leaves mostly basal, biternate, glaucous beneath; leaflets ternatisect; ultimate segments oblong, deeply and irregularly dentate. Cymes 5-10 cm, compound, 5- to many-flowered, nodding. Outer petals c. 16 × 4 mm, pink to pinkish-purple, with ovate, obtuse, spreading apex. Inner petals slightly shorter than outer, the same colour and not projecting beyond them.{\i  Cultivated for ornament, naturalized in shady places in N.W. Europe.} [Br Da Ho.] ({\i W. North America.})
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b D. eximia }(Ker-Gawler) Torrey,{\i  Fl. N. York}{\b  1}: 46 (1843), a native of North America, and differing from 2 in its narrower outer petals and more conspicuous inner petals, is cultivated for ornament and may be becoming naturalized in Scotland.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 9.          Corydalis}                Vent.
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc  By A.B. Mowat & A.O. Chater (Ed.1) revised by A.O. Chater(Ed.2)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Glabrous annuals to perennials with pinnate or ternate leaves and racemose inflorescences. Bracts usually conspicuous. Flowers zygomorphic. Sepals absent. Petals 4, the 2 inner similar, oblong, broadened and coherent at apex; the 2 outer dissimilar, the lower usually somewhat saccate at base, expanded into broad limb at apex, the upper with distinct spur at base and a more or less expanded limb at apex. Style persistent; stigma flattened, with marginal papillae. Fruit an oblong, 2-valved capsule with many seeds. Seeds with conspicuous aril.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Literature: M. Ryberg, {\i Acta Horti Berg.}{\b  16}({\b 7}): 233-240 (1953);{\b  17}({\b 5}): 115-175 (1955). K. v. Poellnitz,{\i  Feddes Repert.}{\b  44: }154-157 (1938); {\b 45}: 96-112 (1938). F. Fedde in Engler & Prantl, {\i Naturl. Pflanzenfam.} ed. 2, {\b 17B}: 123 (1936). M. Liden,{\i  Op. Bot.}{\b  88}: 21-29 (1986);{\i  Notes Roy. Bot. Gard. Edinb.}{\b  45}: 349-363 (1988).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Annual or biennial, or perennial with rhizomatous stock; stems leafy
\par
2 Racemes 5- to 8-flowered, lax ................................................... {\b 1. capnoides}
\par
2 Racemes 20- to 30-flowered, capitate ............................................. {\b 2. nobilis}
\par
1 Perennial with tuberous stock; stems, or each branch of stem,
\par
  with 1 or 2(3) leaves
\par
3 Stem without a conspicuous scale below lowest leaf
\par
4 Racemes 1- to 3-flowered; leaves opposite ................................... {\b 3. uniflora}
\par
4 Racemes with more than 5 flowers; leaves alternate
\par
5 Stems at least 10 cm; corolla 20-30 mm ............................................ {\b 4. cava}
\par
5 Stems usually less than 10 cm; corolla 17-21 mm .................... {\b 5. parnassica}
\par
3 Stem with a conspicuous scale below lowest leaf
\par
6 All bracts entire ........................................................................ {\b 8. intermedia}
\par
6 At least the lower bracts dissected or 3-fid
\par
7 Lower pedicels less than 5 mm ...................................................... {\b 9. pumila}
\par
7 Lower pedicels more than 5 mm
\par

\par
303}
\par