{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Bracts entire or divided into entire segments
\par
2 Leaves 2-ternate; upper bracts often entire; corolla yellow
\par
  or yellowish-purple ....................................................... ({\b b}) subsp.{\b  slivenensis}
\par
2 Leaves 3-ternate; upper bracts ± divided; corolla usually
\par
  purple or pink ........................................................................ ({\b a}) subsp.{\b  solida}
\par
1 Bracts divided into lobate or dentate segments
\par
3 Outer petals obtuse; style very short, straight; pedicels
\par
  4-8 mm ........................................................................... ({\b d}) subsp. {\b densiflora}
\par
3 Outer petals emarginate; style long, usually geniculate at base;
\par
  pedicels 5-15 mm ................................................................. ({\b c}) subsp. {\b incisa}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp.{\b  solida }(incl. subsp.{\i  laxa} (Fries) Nordstedt, {\i C. laxa} Fries): Stem (7-)10-25(-30) cm. Leaves (2)3-ternate; segments obovate to oblanceolate, obtuse. Racemes short, 5-20(-25)flowered, rarely lax. Bracts shallowly to deeply palmatisect or distally dentate. Corolla 18-23 mm, purple, rarely white, red, pink or purplish-blue; lower petal usually prominently gibbous at base, broadly emarginate. Fruit 11-20 mm. 2n = 16, 24, 32. {\i Deciduous forests. Almost throughout the range of the species.}
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp.{\b  slivenensis} (Velen.) Hayek,{\i  Prodr. Fl. Penins. Balcan.}{\b  1: }364 (1925): Stem 6-15(-20) cm. Leaves 2-ternate with broadly obovate segments. Racemes (3-)5-10(-20)-flowered. Bracts about as long as or longer than pedicels, shallowly toothed or lobed, or entire. Corolla 20-25 mm, pale yellow to pale purple, the lower petal broadly emarginate. Fruit 10-15 mm. •{\i  Bulgaria, Jugoslavia}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b c}) Subsp. {\b incisa} Liden,{\i  Notes Roy. Bot. Gard. Edinb.}{\b  45: }351 (1989) ({\i C. solida} subsp{\i . densiflora} (C. Presl) Hayek pro parte): Stem 6-15(-20) cm. Leaves 3-ternate with lobed leaflets; ultimate segments narrowly oblong to linear-lanceolate. Racemes (3-)8- to 22-flowered, longer and narrower than in the other subspecies. Bracts large, deeply divided into narrow lobes, these again lobed or dentate into acute segments. Corolla 21-27 mm, usually pale pink; lower petal emarginate, often with a small apiculus in the sinus. 2n = 16.{\i • Mountains of Balkan peninsula}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b d}) Subsp.{\b  densiflora} (C. Presl) Hayek,{\i  Prodr. Fl. Penins. Balcan.}{\b  1}: 364 (1925) ({\i C. densiflora} C. Presl): Leaves often 2-ternate with leaflets very broad and apically incised or deeply divided into lanceolate segments. Racemes very dense. Bracts short and broad; lobes apically divided into short lobules. Pedicels 4-8 mm. Corolla 16-21 mm; lower petal 10-13 mm, broadly obtuse, cuneate. Fruit short and broad with very short, straight style.{\i  S. Italy, Sicilia}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 11. C. integra} W. Barbey & Major in Stefani, Major & W. Barbey,{\i  Samos} 30 (1892) ({\i C. wettsteinii }Adamovic, {\i C. solida} subsp.{\i  wettsteinii} (Adamovic) Hayek): like {\b 10} but stems not more than 20 cm; fruit 13-30 mm, linear. 2n = 16.{\i  Aegean region; S. Bulgaria}. Bu Gr.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b C. zetterlundii} Liden,{\i  Willdenowia }{\b 21}: 178 (1991), has been described from Makedonija. It is said by its author to differ from {\b 10} by its bracts, fruits and seeds, but to be most closely related to {\b 11}, differing in its bracts, pedicels and outer petals.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 10.             Capnoides}            Miller   
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc  By M. Lidén.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Like {\i Corydalis }but always annual or biennial; inflorescence a cyme, with inconspicuous bracts; fruit narrowly linear; seeds with elaiosome.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. C. sempervirens} (L.) Borkh., {\i Arch. Bot. (Roemer)}{\b  1}: 44 (1797) ({\i Corydalis sempervirens} (L.) Pers.). Stems 10-100 cm, erect, branched above, glaucous. Leaves 1- to 3-pinnate, glaucous, petiolate, the upper subsessile. Cymes c. 10-flowered, lax, or inflorescence sometimes almost paniculate. Bracts 3-5 mm, much shorter than pedicels, lanceolate, sometimes toothed. Corolla 11-18 mm, white to pinkish-purple, yellow at apex; spur 3-4 mm, saccate; style persistent. Fruit 30-50 mm, erect, purple. 2n = 16.{\i  Naturalized in Norway}. [No.] ({\i North America}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 11.          Pseudofumaria}         Medicus
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc  By M. Lidén.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Glabrous perennials, densely branched with leafy angular stems and 2- or 3-pinnate leaves. Inflorescence racemose with short, linear scarious bracts. Flowers zygomorphic; outer petals broadly winged apically; upper petal with short, blunt spur; style deciduous. Fruit 3- to 13-seeded; seeds with elaiosome.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 Flowers yellow; fruit pendent ............................................................... {\b 1. lutea}
\par
Flowers white or cream tipped yellow; fruit erect ................................. {\b 2. alba}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. P. lutea} (L.) Borkh.,{\i  Arch. Bot. (Roemer) }{\b 1}: 45 (1797) ({\i Corydalis lutea} (L.) DC.). Stems 10-40 cm, erect. Leaves green above, glaucous beneath. Racemes (4-)6- to 20-flowered, dense at first, later elongating. Bracts oblong-lanceolate, entire, much shorter than pedicels. Corolla 14-20 mm, yellow; spur 2-4 mm. Fruit c. 10 mm, pendent; seeds 1·5 mm, smooth. 2n = 64. {\i Rocks and walls; usually on limestone. • Southern foothills of S.W. & C. Alps; cultivated for ornament and widely naturalized elsewhere.} He It [Au Be Br Cz Da Ga Ge Hb Ho No Po Rs(B) Su].
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   {\b 2. P. alba} (Miller) Liden,{\i  Op. Bot.}{\b  88}: 32 (1986) ({\i Corydalis ochroleuca} Koch). like {\b 1} but leaves 3-pinnate, usually glaucous on both surfaces; petiole narrowly but distinctly winged; corolla cream or white, the inner petals tipped yellow, fruit erect.{\i  Italy and W. part of Balkan peninsula; naturalized in W. & C. Europe}. Al ?Gr It Ju [Be Ga Ge Ho].
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Bracts at least 1/3 as long as pedicel; seeds smooth, shiny
\par
  ...................................................................................... ({\b c}) subsp.{\b  leiosperma}
\par
1 Bracts less than 1/3 as long as pedicel; seeds tuberculate, dull
\par
2 Plant usually more than 10 cm; leaves thin ........................... ({\b a}) subsp.{\b  alba}
\par
2 Plant not more than 10 cm; leaves fleshy .......................... ({\b b}) subsp.{\b  acaulis}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp.{\b  alba} : Stems up to 40 cm. Leaflets thin, acute. Bracts less than 1/3 as long as pedicels. Corolla 14-17 mm. Fruit 3- to 11-seeded; seeds 1·6 mm, tuberculate, dull. 2n = 32.{\i  N.W. part of Balkan peninsula, N. & C. Italy; widely naturalized elsewhere}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp.{\b  acaulis} (Wulfen) Liden, {\i loc. cit.} (1986) ({\i Corydalis acaulis} (Wulfen) Pers.). Like subsp. ({\b a}) but stems 5-10 cm, glaucous. Leaves fleshy, fragile, with obtuse leaflets. Corolla 13-16 mm. Fruit 3- to 7-seeded. {\i W. Jugoslavia}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b c}) Subsp.{\b  leiosperma} (Conrath) Liden, {\i loc. cit}. (1986) ({\i Corydalis ochroleuca} subsp.{\i  leiosperma} (Conrath) Hayek, {\i C. leiosperma }Conrath). Like subsp. ({\b a}) but stems 10-20 cm; bracts at least 1/3 as long as pedicels; corolla 13-16 mm; fruit 8- to 13-seeded; seeds 1-2 mm, smooth, shiny. 2n = 32.  {\i W. part of Balkan peninsula.}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 12.             Sarcocapnos}               DC.
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc  By V.H. Heywood.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Caespitose, perennial herbs with entire or 1- to 3-ternatisect or pinnatisect leaves. Flowers in racemes, zygomorphic, white, yellow or pale pink, in short corymb-like racemes with long, slender pedicels. Upper petal spurred or gibbous; style caducous. Fruit ovate-elliptical, compressed, indehiscent, usually 2-seeded; valves 3-veined.
\par

\par
305}
\par