{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 16. P. alpinum} L.,{\i  Sp. Pl.} 507 (1753) (incl. subsp.{\i  kerneri} (Hayek) Fedde,{\i  P. kerneri} Hayek,{\i  P. alpinum} subsp.{\i  rhaeticum }(Leresche) Markgraf,{\i  P. rhaeticum} Leresche, {\i P. pyrenaicum }subsp.{\i  rhaeticum }(Leresche) Fedde,{\i  P. alpinum} subsp. {\i corona-sancti-stephani} (Zapal.) Borza,{\i  P. corona-sancti-stephani} Zapal., {\i P. alpina} subsp. {\i degenii} (Urum. & Jáv.) Markgraf,{\i  P. pyrenaicum }subsp. {\i degenii} Urum. & Jáv., {\i P. alpinum }subsp. {\i sendtneri} (A. Kerner ex Hayek) Schinz & R. Keller,{\i  P. sendtneri} A. Kerner ex Hayek,{\i  P. pyrenaicum} subsp.{\i  sendtneri }(A. Kerner ex Hayek) Fedde,{\i  P. alpinum }subsp. {\i ernestimayeri} Markgraf, subsp.{\i  tatricum }E.I. Nyárády, {\i P. occidentale} (Markgraf) H. Hess, Landolt & Hirzel). Plants 4-23 cm. Leaves 1- to 3-pinnatipartite, glabrous to densely setose. Pedicel and flower buds appressed- to half-appressed- or patent-setose. Petals 10-30 mm, white, yellow, sulphur-yellow or orange-red, overlapping in flower. Stamens as long as to longer than ovary. Capsules 0·7-1·6 × 0·4-0·7 cm, narrowly to broadly ellipsoidal to obovoid; disc acute or obtuse, with 4-6 rays. 2n = 14.{\i  Mountains of C. & S. Europe.} Au Bu Cz Ga He ?Hs It Ju Po Rm.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 In view of the limited degree of morphological differentiation in the{\i  P. alpinum} complex, the recognition of its constituent taxa at specific rank is scarcely justified. Often difficult to identify material without a knowledge of its geographical provenance, its treatment is discussed fully by J.W. Kadereit, {\i Bot. Jahrb.}{\b  112}: 79-97 (1990).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 2.          Meconopsis}              Vig.
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc  By A.B. Mowat (Ed.1) revised by J.W. Kadereit (Ed.2)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Perennials with yellow latex. Sepals usually 2, free, caducous. Petals usually 4, entire, crumpled in bud, caducous. Stigmas on usually distinct style over placentae. Capsule opening by short valves. Seeds ovoid to reniform, without aril.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. M. cambrica} (L.) Vig.,{\i  Hist. Pavots Argém.} 48 (1814). Plant 30-60 cm, erect, glabrous or sparsely pubescent. Leaves pinnatifid to pinnatisect, all usually petiolate. Flowers solitary, long-pedicellate, in axils of upper leaves. Pedicel and flower-buds glabrous or pubescent. Petals 2-4 cm, yellow. Anthers and filaments yellow. Capsule 2·0-4·0 × 0·7-1·1 cm, ovoid to ellipsoid-oblong, ribbed, glabrous. 2n = 14, 22, 28, 56. {\i Shady places. W. Europe; cultivated for ornament there and elsewhere, and sometimes naturalized.} Br Ga Hb Hs [Da No].
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 3.        Roemeria}             Medicus
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc  By A.B. Mowat (Ed.1) revised by J.W. Kadereit (Ed.2)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Annuals with yellow latex. Sepals 2, free, caducous. Petals 4, entire, crumpled in bud, caducous. Stigmas 3 or 4, sessile over the placentae. Capsule linear, opening by 2-4 long valves from top to bottom. Seeds reniform, without aril.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Literature: J.W. Kadereit,{\i  Flora}{\b  179: }135-153 (1987).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. R. hybrida} (L.) DC.,{\i  Reg. Veg. Syst. Nat.}{\b  2}: 92 (1821) ({\i R. violacea} Medicus). Erect or ascending annual 20-45 cm, usually with arachnoid indumentum, sometimes with some setae. Leaves 1- to 3-pinnatipartite. Lower leaves petiolate, upper sessile. Pedicels and flower-buds usually with few arachnoid hairs. Petals 9-30 mm, violet, darker at base but without distinct basal spot. Anthers violet or yellow. Capsule 4·5-9·5 × 0·2-0·4 cm, rarely shorter, linear, usually with setae only in upper ½ but sometimes throughout. 2n = 22, 24.{\i  S. Europe; casual elsewhere.} ?Al Bl Co Cr Ga Gr Hs It Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Only subsp.{\b  hybrida} occurs in Europe. Subsp.{\b  dodecandra} (Forskål) Maire in Jahandiez & Maire,{\i  Cat. Pl. Maroc}{\b  2}: 257 (1932), with shorter capsules setose throughout, is widespread in S.W. Asia.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 4.           Glaucium}              Miller
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc  By A.B. Mowat (Ed.1) revised by J.R. Akeroyd (Ed.2)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Glaucous; latex yellow. Sepals free. Petals 4, entire. Stigma 2-lobed, sessile over placentae. Capsule linear, 2-celled, opening from above almost to base by 2 valves. Seeds embedded in septum, without aril.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 Petals yellow; capsule glabrous, but often tuberculate ..................... {\b 1. flavum}
\par
Petals orange or reddish; capsule hispid .................................. {\b 2. corniculatum}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. G. flavum} Crantz,{\i  Stirp. Austr. }{\b 2}: 133 (1763). Sparsely pubescent biennial or perennial. Stems 30-90 cm. Basal leaves 15-35 cm, lyrate-pinnatifid; lower segments smaller and more or less entire, the upper coarsely dentate; cauline leaves smaller, ovate, lobed, amplexicaul. Flowers solitary, terminal or axillary. Sepals more or less pubescent. Petals 3-4 cm, yellow, broadly obovate. Stamens yellow. Ovary tuberculate, at least towards apex. Capsule 10-30 cm, often curved, glabrous. 2n = 12.{\i  Sandy and gravelly seashores; also as a ruderal. Coasts of S. & W. Europe, northwards to S. Norway locally naturalized in C. Europe}. Al Be Bl Br Bu Co Cr Da Ga Ge Gr Hb Ho Hs It Ju Lu No Rm Rs(K) Sa Si Tu [Cz ?Ge He].
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Plants from S.E. Europe, with deeper yellow petals and capsules smooth in lower part and slightly constricted between the seeds, have been distinguished as{\b  G. leiocarpum} Boiss.,{\i  Fl. Or. }{\b 1}: 122 (1867). Experimental studies by W.B. Turrill, {\i Kew Bull. }{\b 1933: }174 184 (1933), suggest that they are best treated as{\i  G. flavum }var.{\i  leiocarpum} (Boiss.) Stoj. & Stefanov.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. G. corniculatum} (L.) J.H. Rudolph,{\i  Fl. Jen. Pl. }13 (1781) ({\i G. grandiflorum} sensu Hayek, non Boiss. & Huet). Pubescent annual, rarely biennial. Stems 30-40 cm. Leaves lyrate-pinnatifid; segments unequal, dentate; basal leaves petiolate, upper sessile. Flowers solitary, terminal or axillary. Petals up to 3(-4) cm, obovate, orange or reddish, often with dark spot at base. Stamens with dark anthers; filaments yellow. Capsule up to 20 cm, usually straight, pubescent.{\i  Waste places and cultivated ground. S. Europe, extending northwards to Czechoslovakia and N. Ukraine; sometimes naturalized elsewhere}. Bl Bu Co Cr Ga Gr Hs Hu It Ju Lu Rm Rs(C, W, K, E) Sa Si Tu [Au Cz Ge He].
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 5.          Chelidonium}             L.
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc  By A.B. Mowat.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Latex orange. Sepals free. Petals 4, entire. Stigma 2-lobed; style very short. Capsule linear, 1-celled, opening from below by 2 valves. Aril crested.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Literature: A. Krahulcová,{\i  Folia Geobot. Phytotax.} ({\i Praha}) {\b 17}: 237-268 (1982).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. C. majus} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 505 (1753). Glaucous, sparsely pubescent perennial. Stems 30-90 cm. Leaves pinnate; leaflets 5-7, ovate to oblong, the terminal usually 3-lobed, the lateral often with a stipule-like lobe at base on lower side, all crenate or (var. {\i laciniatum} (Miller) Syme) deeply incised. Inflorescence an umbel of 2-6 flowers. Petals up to 1 cm, obovate, bright yellow. Stamens yellow; filaments expanded above. Capsule 3-5 cm, more or less straight, glabrous; aril white. 2n = 12.{\i  Shady banks and walls. Europe, except}
\par

\par
301}
\par