{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 gose when dry; apex subacute. 2n = 32.{\i  Islands of W. Mediterranean region; rare on the mainland.} Bl Co Ga It Sa Si.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 16. F. bastardii} Boreau in Duchartre,{\i  Rev. Bot.}{\b  2}: 359 (1847). Raceme usually 15- to 25-flowered, longer than peduncle. Bracts 1/3-1/2 as long as the suberect or erecto-patent, thickened fruiting pedicels. Sepals 2-3 × 1-2 mm, more or less serrate. Corolla 9-12 mm, pale pink with apex of inner petals and sometimes wings of the upper dark purple; upper petal narrow and laterally compressed; lower petal with narrow, patent margin. Fruit 2-2·5 × 2-2·5 mm, ovoid, slightly keeled and usually rugose when dry; with wide, flattish base and more or less obtuse apex. 2n = 48.{\i  S. & W. Europe.} Bl Br Co Ga Gr Hb Hs It Ju Lu Sa Si.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 17. F. martinii} Clavaud, {\i Actes Soc. Linn. Bordeaux}{\b  42}: lxix (1889) ({\i F. reuteri }subsp.{\i  martinii} (Clavaud) Soler). Raceme up to 20-flowered, much longer than peduncle. Bracts 1/2-2/3 as long as the arcuate-deflexed, becoming erecto-patent, fruiting pedicels. Sepals 3-5 × 1·5-2·5 mm, subentire. Corolla 11-13 mm, pink; wings of upper petal and apex of inner blackish-red; lower petal with very narrow, patent margin. Fruit 2·5-2·7 × 2-2·5 mm, subglobose, obscurely keeled, nearly smooth when dry; apex more or less acute. 2n = 48.  •{\i W. Europe, from S. England to N. Portugal.} Br Ga Hs Lu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 18. F. sepium} Boiss. & Reuter in Boiss.,{\i  Diagn. Pl. Or. Nov.}{\b  2}({\b 1}): 16 (1853) ({\i F. gaditana} Hausskn.). Raceme 6- to 16(-19)flowered, shorter than to about as long as peduncle. Bracts subequalling or shorter than the erecto-patent fruiting pedicels. Sepals 3-5 × 1·5-3 mm, subentire. Corolla 12-14 mm, pinkish-white, apex often tinged red; wings of upper petal and apex of inner dark purple; lower petal with very narrow erect or subpatent margin. Fruit 2·2 × 2 mm, subglobose, keeled, smooth or slightly rugose when dry; apex very obtuse. 2n = 32.{\i  S.W. Spain, Portugal}. Hs Lu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 19. F. muralis} Sonder ex Koch,{\i  Syn. Fl. Germ.} ed. 2, 1017 (1845) ({\i F. media} sensu Merino). Raceme about as long as or longer than peduncle. Bracts ½ as long as to about as long as the more or less erect fruiting pedicels. Sepals 3-5 × 1·5-3 mm. Corolla pink; wings of upper petal and tips of inner ones blackish-red; lower petal with narrow, erect margin. Fruit obscurely keeled. 2n = 48.{\i  W. Europe.} Az Be Bl Br Da Ga Ge Hb Hs Lu No Si [Da Ho].
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Corolla 10-12 mm; fruit 2·2-2·5 × c. 2 mm, obscurely rugose
\par
  when dry ............................................................................. ({\b b}) subsp.{\b  boraei}
\par
1 Corolla 9-10 mm; fruit c. 2 × 2 mm, smooth when dry
\par
2 Racemes fewer than 15-flowered; sepals dentate; fruit
\par
  subacute at apex ................................................................ ({\b a}) subsp.{\b  muralis}
\par
2 Racemes up to 20-flowered; sepals subentire; fruit truncate
\par
  at apex  ............................................................................ ({\b c}) subsp.{\b  neglecta}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp.{\b  muralis} : Plant slender. Raceme usually with fewer than 15 flowers. Sepals dentate. Corolla 9-10(-11) mm. Fruit c. 2 × 2 mm, subglobose-ovoid, smooth when dry; apex subacute. 2n = 48. {\i Almost throughout the range of the species}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b boraei} (Jordan) Pugsley,{\i  Jour. Bot.} ({\i London}) {\b 40}: 180 (1902) ({\i F. boraei }Jordan): Plant slender or robust. Raceme with fewer than 15 flowers. Sepals dentate. Corolla 10-12 mm. Fruit 2·2-2·5 × c. 2 mm, more or less obovoid, often obscurely rugulose when dry; apex obtuse. 2n = 48.{\i  Almost throughout the range of the species.}
\par
2 ({\b c}) Subsp.{\b  neglecta} Pugsley,{\i  Jour. Bot.} ({\i London}) {\b 50}, Suppl. 1: 24 (1912): Plant robust. Raceme with up to 20 flowers. Sepals subentire. Corolla c. 10 mm. Fruit c. 2 × 2 mm, shortly obovoid nearly smooth when dry; apex almost truncate. •{\i  S.W. England} ({\i W. Cornwall}).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 20. F. reuteri} Boiss.,{\i  Diagn. Pl. Or. Nov.}{\b  2}({\b 8}): 13 (1849) ({\i F. apiculata} Lange). like {\b 19} but racemes with very short peduncles; pedicels erect; sepals 3·5-4·5 × 2-2·5(-3) mm, subentire; corolla 9-11 mm, the upper petal narrow and acute fruit smooth when dry; apex with persistent apiculus. 2n = 48.{\i  Spain and Portugal.} Hs Lu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 21. F. petteri} Reichenb.,{\i  Icon. Fl. Germ. }{\b 3}: 1 (1838). Raceme shortly pedunculate or subsessile. Bracts about equalling the fruiting pedicels. Sepals usually more or less dentate. Corolla pink wings of upper petal and apex of inner dark purple; lower petal with very narrow, erect margin. Fruit ovoid, subglobose-ovoid or turbinate, obscurely keeled, more or less rugose when dry; apex obtuse, but sometimes apiculate.{\i  S. Europe.} Al Bu Cr Ga Gr Hs It Ju Lu Rm.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp.{\b  petteri} : Raceme usually 12- to 18-flowered; fruiting pedicels patent or erecto-patent. Sepals 3·5-4·5 × 2-2·5 mm. Corolla 9-10·5 mm. Fruit 2·5-2·7 × c. 2 mm. •{\i   Jugoslavia}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp.{\b  thuretii} (Boiss.) Pugsley,{\i  Jour. Linn. Soc. London} ({\i Bot}.) {\b 50}: 550 (1937) ({\i F. thuretii }Boiss., {\i F. pikermiana} Boiss. & Heldr.): Raceme 15- to 35-flowered. Fruiting pedicels arcuate recurved. Sepals 2·5-3 × 1·5-2 mm. Corolla 7-10 mm. Fruit c. 2 × 1·7-2 mm.{\i  Throughout the range of the species}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 22. F. calcarata} Cadevall, {\i Mem. Real Acad. Ci. Artes Barcelone Ser. 3,}{\b  5}({\b 12}): 12 (1905) ({\i F. transiens} P.D. Sell, F. reuteri auct., non Boiss.,{\i  F. petteri} subsp.{\i  calcarata} (Cadevall) Lindén & Soler). like {\b 21}({\b b}) but sepals subentire; corolla 9-10 mm, often paler; fruit 2-2·2 × 1·5-1·7 mm, more or less acute, apical pits narrower. 2n = 32.{\i  S.W. Europe.} Ga Hs Lu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Sect. FUMARIA. Leaf-segments flat or channelled, relatively narrow, from oblong or lanceolate to linear or setaceous. Peduncles usually short. Corolla not more than 9 mm and generally much smaller; wings of upper petal sometimes patent; lower petal more or less spathulate.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 23. F. kralikii} Jordan, {\i Cat. Jard. Dijon} 19 (1848) ({\i F. anatolica} Boiss.). Raceme 10- to 20-flowered; peduncle very short. Bracts more or less equalling the recurved fruiting pedicels. Sepals 2-3 × 1·5-2 mm, dentate. Corolla 5-6(-8) mm, pale pink with wings of upper petal and apex of inner petals dark purple; lower petal with patent margin. Fruit c. 1·7 × 1·7 mm, subglobose, nearly smooth or slightly rugose when dry; apex obtuse. 2n = 32.{\i  S.E. Europe.} Al Bu Gr Rm Rs(K) ?Sa Tu [Ga].
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 24. F. mirabilis} Pugsley,{\i  Jour. Linn. Soc. London} ({\i Bot}.){\b  47}: 432 (1927). Raceme 8- to 15(-25)-flowered, sessile. Bracts longer than the erect fruiting pedicels. Sepals 2·5-3 × c. 1·5 mm, shallowly serrate, long-persistent. Corolla 7·5-9 mm, pink; inner petals tipped dark purple. Fruit 2-2·2 × 2·5-2·7 mm, subrotund, keeled, tuberculate-rugose when dry; apex obtuse or slightly retuse. 2n = 64. {\i S.E. Spain} ({\i Cabo de Gata}). Hs. ({\i N. Africa}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 25. F. faurei} (Pugsley) Liden,{\i  Lagascalia}{\b  9}: 133 (1980) ({\i F. mirabilis} var. {\i faurei }Pugsley, {\i F. mirabilis} auct., non Pugsley). Raceme 15- to 30-flowered, subsessile or shortly pedunculate. Bracts about equalling or just exceeding the erecto-patent fruiting pedicels. Sepals 2-2·2 × 1-1·2 mm, irregularly dentate. Corolla 7-8·5 mm,
\par

\par
309}
\par