{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 21 Fruiting pedicels ± erect .................................................... {\b 14. macrosepala}
\par
20 Sepals not more than 3 mm wide, usually narrower than
\par
   corolla
\par
22 Fruit more than 3 mm long and wide
\par
23 Sepals 3·5-5·5 × 1-2 mm .............................................................. {\b 1. agraria}
\par
23 Sepals 2·5-3 × 0·5-1 mm ...................................................... {\b 8. macrocarpa}
\par
22 Fruit not more than 3 mm long and wide
\par
24 Sepals 1·5-2 mm
\par
25 Corolla white or pale pink; bracts 1/3 to 1/2 as long as fruiting
\par
   pedicels ........................................................................................ {\b 7. amarysia}
\par
25 Corolla purplish-pink; bracts ½ to as long as fruiting
\par
   pedicels ....................................................................................... {\b 30. ragusina}
\par
24 Sepals more than 2 mm
\par
26 Fruit ± smooth when dry
\par
27 Raceme shorter than or equalling peduncle
\par
28 Sepals obtuse to subacute; pedicels often arcuate-recurved
\par
29 Corolla usually white or cream (rarely flushed with pink, or
\par
   deep red); upper petal laterally compressed; wings
\par
   not exceeding keel ..................................................................... {\b 9. capreolata}
\par
29 Corolla purplish; upper petal not laterally compressed;
\par
   wings exceeding keel ................................................................. {\b 13. purpurea}
\par
28 Sepals acute to acuminate; pedicels erect or erecto-patent
\par
30 Corolla 12-14 mm, pinkish-white .............................................. {\b 18. sepium}
\par
30 Corolla 9-12 mm, pink .............................................................. {\b 19. muralis}
\par
27 Raceme longer than peduncle
\par
31 Sepals 2·5-3 mm
\par
32 Fruit 2-2·5 × 2-2·5 mm ............................................................. {\b 16. bastardii}
\par
32 Fruit c. 2 × 1·7-2 mm ................................................................... {\b 21. petteri}
\par
31 Sepals 3-4·5 mm
\par
33 Sepals subentire
\par
34 Corolla more than 11 mm ......................................................... {\b 17. martinii}
\par
34 Corolla less than 11 mm
\par
35 Sepals c. 3 × 1·5-2 mm .............................................................. {\b 19. muralis}
\par
35 Sepals 3·5-4·5 × 2-2·5 mm .......................................................... {\b 20. reuteri}
\par
33 Sepals dentate
\par
36 Raceme at least as long as peduncle .......................................... {\b 19. muralis}
\par
36 Raceme sessile or with very short peduncle ................................ {\b 21. petteri}
\par
26 Fruit rugose when dry
\par
37 Pedicels arcuate-recurved
\par
38 Flowers creamy-white, sometimes flushed red
\par
39 Fruit 2-2·7 × 2-2·7 mm, tuberculate-rugose, keeled, emarginate
\par
   .................................................................................................... {\b 10. flabellata}
\par
39 Fruit 2-2·2 × 2-2·2 mm, finely rugose, scarcely keeled, obtuse
\par
   or subacute at apex ....................................................................... {\b 11. munbyi}
\par
38 Flowers reddish, pink or purple
\par
40 Sepals 2·5-3 mm
\par
41 Fruit more than 1·7 mm wide ...................................................... {\b 21. petteri}
\par
41 Fruit less than 1·7 mm wide .................................................... {\b 22. calcarata}
\par
40 Sepals 3-6·5 mm
\par
42 Sepals 4·5-6·5 mm, entire; corolla purple or whitish-purple ....{\b 13. purpurea}
\par
42 Sepals 2-4 mm, dentate; corolla white or reddish
\par
43 Corolla 12-14 mm, white or reddish .......................................... {\b 11. munbyi}
\par
43 Corolla 10-12 mm, pink ......................................................... {\b 12. melillaica}
\par
37 Pedicels erect or patent
\par
44 Sepals 2-3 × 1-2 mm
\par
45 Corolla white, sometimes becoming tinged with pink
\par
46 Fruit 2·5-3 × 2·5-3 mm ................................................................. {\b 6. judaica}
\par
46 Fruit 2-2·2 × 1·5-1·7 mm ............................................................ {\b 15. bicolor}
\par
45 Corolla pink
\par
47 Corolla 9-13 mm
\par
48 Raceme usually shorter than peduncle; apex of fruit subacute .. {\b 15. bicolor}
\par
48 Raceme longer than peduncle; apex of fruit obtuse ................. {\b 16. bastardii}
\par
47 Corolla 7·5-9 mm ..................................................................... {\b 24. mirabilis}
\par
44 Sepals 3-5 × 1-3 mm
\par
49 Corolla white or pinkish-white
\par
50 Fruit slightly rugose when dry, with obtuse apex ...................... {\b 18. sepium}
\par
50 Fruit distinctly rugose when dry, with emarginate beak
\par
51 Sepals 1-2 mm wide; wings of upper petals not blotched with
\par
   dark purple ...................................................................................... {\b 1. agraria}
\par
51 Sepals 2-3 mm wide; wings of upper petal blotched with dark
\par
   purple, with a white margin .................................................... {\b 2. occidentalis}
\par
49 Corolla pink
\par
52 Corolla 9-10·5 mm ....................................................................... {\b 21. petteri}
\par
52 Corolla 10·5-14 mm
\par
53 Wings of upper petal pale pink; sepals subentire or
\par
   denticulate .................................................................................... {\b 3. rupestris}
\par
53 Wings of upper petal dark purple or red; sepals dentate
\par
54 Sepals 4-5 × 2·5-3 mm ............................................................... {\b 19. muralis}
\par
54 Sepals 3-4 × 1·5-2 mm
\par
55 Corolla 12-14 mm; upper petal obtuse; fruit subglobose
\par
   to obovoid .................................................................................... {\b 4. barnolae}
\par
55 Corolla 10-12 mm; upper petal subacute; fruit subglobose-
\par
   quadrate .................................................................................... {\b 5. gaillardotii}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Sect. CAPREOLATAE Hammar. Leaf-segments flat and relatively broad, from broadly ovate to oblong or lanceolate. Corolla at least 9 mm (except {\b 21}({\b b})), the wings of the upper petal turned upwards, the lower petal not or obscurely spathulate.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. F. agraria} Lag., {\i Gen. Sp. Nov.} 21 (1816). Raceme 14- to 25(-30)-flowered, longer than peduncle. Bracts about 2/3 as long to as long as the patent fruiting pedicels. Sepals 3·5-5·5 × 1-2 mm, dentate to subentire. Corolla 12-16 mm, white or pinkish-white, only the inner petals with dark purple apices; lower petal with patent margin. Fruit 2·5-3·5 × 2·5-3·5 mm, ovoid, strongly keeled, rugose when dry; apex with emarginate beak. 2n = 80.{\i  Mediterranean region, S. Portugal.} Bl ?Co *Ga *Gr Hs It ?Ju Lu Sa Si.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. F. occidentalis} Pugsley,{\i  Jour. Bot. }({\i London}){\b  42}: 218 (1904). Raceme 12- to 20-flowered, as long as peduncle. Bracts shorter than or nearly as long as the suberect fruiting pedicels. Sepals 4-5·5 × 2-3 mm, incise-dentate. Corolla 12-14 mm, pinkish-white; apex of inner petals dark purplish; wings of upper petal dark purplish with white margin; lower petal with patent or slightly deflexed margin. Fruit c. 3 × 3 mm, subglobose, distinctly keeled, tuberculate-rugose when dry; apex with short, emarginate beak. 2n = 112. •{\i  S.England}. Br.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 3. F. rupestris} Boiss. & Reuter,{\i  Pugillus} 4 (1852) ({\i F. arundana} Boiss. ex Willk. & Lange). Raceme 6- to 15(-20)-flowered, longer than the rather short peduncle. Bracts equalling the suberect
\par

\par
307}
\par