{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 less eglandular; apex of third-order pinnules acute or setaceous; indusium eglandular; some spores abortive. 2n = 123.{\i  Moist, shady places in the mountains. W. & C. Europe, extending eastwards to Macedonia.} Au †Br Cz Ga Ge Hb He Hs Hu It Ju Po Rm Rs(W).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 12. D. azorica} (Christ) Alston, {\i Bol. Soc. Brot. }{\b 30:} 14 (1956). Like {\b 9} but scales lanceolate to linear-lanceolate; lamina dark green; pinnules with prominent, spinulose teeth, the scales beneath more conspicuous; proximal basiscopic pinnule of the basal pinna shorter; third-order pinnules oblong; spores 34-40 µm. 2n = 82.•{\i  Açores}. Az.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 13. D. corleyi} Fraser-Jenkins, {\i Bol. Soc. Brot.} ser. 2, {\b 55:} 248 (1982). Leaves 30-60 cm; petiole 1/3-1/2 as long as the lamina, densely scaly below; scales lanceolate, reddish-brown, concolorous. Lamina 2-pinnate (3-pinnate below), narrowly triangular-lanceolate, with stalked glands beneath; pinnules adnate to the rhachis, the lobes obtuse, obscurely and remotely dentate. Indusium thick, dark reddish-brown, the margin curved down, eglandular. 2n = 82. •{\i  N. Spain} ({\i Oviedo prov}.). Hs.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 14. D. aemula} (Aiton) O. Kuntze,{\i  Revis. Gen. }{\b 2:} 812 (1891) ({\i Lastrea aemula} (Aiton) Brackenr.). Rhizome erect or ascending. Leaves 15-60 cm, tufted; petiole about as long as the lamina, purplish-black at least below; scales narrowly lanceolate, concolorous, reddish-brown; lamina triangular-ovate to -lanceolate, bright green, with minute sessile glands on both surfaces, fragrant, 3- or 4-pinnate; pinnae 15-20 on each side, stalked, triangular-ovate to -lanceolate, pinnate; pinnules triangular-ovate to lanceolate or oblong, the basal very shortly stalked, the others sessile, pinnate; pinnules of the third or fourth order somewhat concave with upturned margins, pinnately toothed. Sori 0·5-1 mm in diameter; indusium with sessile glands. 2n = 82.{\i  W. Europe, from Açores and N.W. Spain to N. Scotland.} Az Br Ga Hb Hs.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 15. D. crispifolia} Rasbach, Reichstein & Vida,{\i  Bot. Jour. Linn. Soc.}{\b  74:} 266 (1977). Like {\b 14} but leaves strongly glandular-viscid; scales with dark central stripe or dark brown; pinnae crowded; pinnules sessile, usually crispate. 2n = 123. •{\i  Açores}. Az.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 16. D. guanchica} Gibby & Jermy, {\i Bot. Jour. Linn. Soc.}{\b  74:} 256 (1977). Like {\b 14} but leaves 3-pinnate; petiole purplish-black below only; scales lanceolate, brown or somewhat reddish-brown, sometimes with darker central stripe; lamina broadly triangular-lanceolate, with few glands, dark green; pinnae crowded; pinnules with rather long stalks. 2n = 123.{\i  Calcifuge. S. Spain, W. Portugal}. Hs Lu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 17. D. carthusiana} (Vill.) H.P. Fuchs,{\i  Bull. Soc. Bot. Fr.} {\b 105}: 339 (1958) ({\i D. spinulosa} (O.F. Mueller) O. Kuntze, {\i Polystichum spinulosum} (O.F. Mueller) DC., {\i Polypodium spinulosum} O.F. Mueller). Rhizome procumbent or creeping. Leaves 12-60 × 5-25 cm, stiffly erect; petiole about as long as the lamina; scales pale brown, concolorous; lamina narrowly lanceolate or ovate-lanceolate, light to yellowish-green, with minute glandular hairs beneath, 3-pinnate or almost so, with crowded lobes; pinnae 15-25 on each side, triangular-ovate or -lanceolate, shortly stalked, pinnate; pinnules pinnate or almost so, more or less flat, the teeth setaceous. Sori 0·5-1 mm in diameter, in 2 rows on each fertile pinnule; indusium eglandular. 2n = 164. {\i Most of Europe, but rare in the Mediterranean region}. Al Au Be Br Bu Co Cz Da Fe Ga Ge Hb He Ho Hs Hu It Ju No Po Rm Rs(N, B, C, W, K, E) Su Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 18. D. fragrans} (L.) Schott, {\i Gen. Fil.} t. 9 (1834). Rhizome short and thick, more or less vertical. Leaves (5-)10-20(-40) × 2-4 cm, tufted; petiole up to 1/3 as long as the lamina; scales concolorous, shining, brown or reddish; lamina narrowly lanceolate, green, covered with minute glands, scented, pinnate; pinnae 15-40 on each side, lanceolate, deeply pinnatifid, often inrolled at the margin. 2n = 82. {\i Rocks and screes. Arctic Finland} ({\i Utsjoki});{\i  N. Ural.} Fe Rs(N). ({\i N. Asia; Japan; North America.})
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 19. D. cristata} (L.) A. Gray, {\i Man. Bot.} 631 (1848) ({\i Polystichum cristatum} (L.) Roth). Rhizome procumbent or creeping. Leaves of 2 kinds, the sterile 15-30 × 3-8·5 cm, patent, the fertile 30-60 × 14-20 cm, erect; petiole of sterile leaves ½ as long as the lamina, of fertile leaves almost equalling the lamina; scales pale brown; lamina linear- to oblong-lanceolate, 1- or 2-pinnate, glabrous; pinnae 10-20 on each side, triangular-ovate or oblong to lanceolate, shortly stalked, deeply pinnatifid or pinnate; pinnules oblong, obtuse, pinnately lobed or serrate. Sori in 2 rows on each fertile pinnule; indusium eglandular. 2n = 164.{\i  Mesotrophic mires. From subarctic Finland southwards to E. Spain and C. Romania.} Au Be Br Cz Da Fe Ga Ge He Ho Hs Hu It Ju No Po Rm Rs(N,B,C, W, K, E) Su.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 20.       LOMARIOPSIDACEAE} 
\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  ({\i Elaphoglossaceae})
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc  Edit. †D.H. Valentine and D.M. Moore.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Rhizome polystelic, with dark, clathrate scales. Leaves dimorphic; petiole with 5-7 vascular strands. Sporangia occupying the whole fertile surface, and not in distinct sori; spores bilateral.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 A predominantly tropical family.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 1.              Elaphoglossum}              Schott ex Sm.
\par 

\pard\f0\fs24\qc  By †T.G. Tutin.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Epiphytic. Sterile leaves simple and entire, coriaceous, with scales on both surfaces; veins free; fertile leaves smaller and narrower than the sterile; petioles longer.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. E. semicylindricum} (Bowdich) Benl,{\i  Bot. Macar.}{\b  6:} 59 (1980) ({\i E. hirtum} auct., non Swartz). Leaves 10-40 × 1-3 cm, oblong, narrowed at the base and at the subacute to rounded apex; petiole 2-10 cm, covered, like the lamina, with brown, fimbriate scales. {\i Epiphytic on} Erica scoparia{\i  subsp.} azorica.{\i  Açores.} Az. ({\i Madeira.})
\par

\par
30}
\par