{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 {\i the extreme north, but in some districts only as an escape from gardens.} All except Cr Fa Is Sb; only as a naturalized alien in Hb and perhaps elsewhere.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 6.             Eschscholzia}               Cham. 
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc  By A.B. Mowat.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Latex absent. Sepals connate, forming a hood which is shed when the flower opens, leaving 2 rims at base of ovary. Petals 4, entire. Capsule ribbed, opening from below by 2 valves, which separate from the placentae. Aril absent.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. E. californica} Cham. in Nees, {\i Horae Phys. Berol.} 74 (1820). Glaucous, glabrous annual or perennial. Stems 20-60 cm, erect or spreading. Leaves ternately divided; ultimate segments linear. Flowers solitary, long-pedicellate, terminal. Petals 1-6 cm, orange to yellow, darker at base, obovate. Stamens yellow; filaments not expanded. Capsule 7-10 cm, straight, glabrous. {\i Widely cultivated for ornament and locally naturalized in S.W. Europe; a frequent casual elsewhere.} [Bl Co Ga]. ({\i S.W. United States.})
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  Subfam.    {\b Hypecooideae}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Latex absent. Flowers solitary or in cymes. Sepals free. Corolla slightly  zygomorphic; petals not spurred. Capsule linear, usually straight.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 7.             Hypecoum}                L.
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc  By A.B. Mowat & †T.G. Tutin (Ed.1) revised by Å.E. Dahl(Ed.2)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Glabrous, often glaucous annuals. Basal leaves lanceolate, pinnate; ultimate leaflets narrow. Sepals 2, free. Petals 4, at least the inner pair 3-lobed. Stamens 4. Stigmas 2; style short. Capsule a striate lomentum, usually breaking up into 1-seeded portions. Seeds rugose, without aril.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Literature: Å.E. Dahl,{\i  Pl. Syst. Euol. }{\b 163}: 227-280 (1989).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Fruit pendent; plant smelling strongly of curry on drying ........ {\b 1. pendulum}
\par
1 Fruit erect; plant not smelling strongly of curry on drying
\par
2 Central lobe of inner petals unguiculate; inner filaments linear
\par
  to narrowly elliptical; fruit 1-2 mm wide ....................................... {\b 2. littorale}
\par
2 Central lobe of inner petals not unguiculate; inner filaments narrowly
\par
  triangular or ovate; fruit 1·5-3·5 mm wide
\par
3 All or most ultimate leaflets of upper primary leaf-segments
\par
  wider towards the 3-fid apex, often with 1 to several lateral teeth;
\par
  pollen orange-yellow.
\par
4 Outer petals not more than 6 mm wide, always longer than wide;
\par
  lateral lobes often involute ......................................................... {\b 3. torulosum}
\par
4 Outer petals usually at least 6 mm wide, as wide as or wider
\par
  than long; lateral lobes flat ............................................................ {\b 4. imberbe}
\par
3 All or most ultimate leaflets of upper primary leaf-segments not wider
\par
  towards the entire apex, with 0(1) lateral teeth; pollen yellowish-white
\par
5 Filaments of median stamens narrowly triangular; outer
\par
  petals shortly unguiculate or not ................................ {\b 5. pseudograndiflorum}
\par
5 Filaments of median stamens narrowly ovate; outer petals
\par
  distinctly unguiculate .............................................................. {\b 6. procumbens}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. H. pendulum} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 124 (1753) ({\i H. tetragonum} Bertol.). Plant 5-40 cm, greyish-green to glaucous. Ultimate leaflets linear. Inflorescence erect, with 1-15 flowers. Sepals (1-)2-3(-5) × 1-2·5 mm, ovate, acute, entire to dentate, caducous. Petals pale yellow, the outer (3-)5-8(-9) × (1·5-)2·5-5(-6) mm, rhombic, with more or less involute margins and keeled apex; inner petal with black spots, the lateral lobes not exceeding ½ length of lamina of central lobe; central lobe 1-2·5 × 1-2·5 mm, circular-elliptical, unguiculate. Filaments linear-elliptical, sometimes with black spots. Pollen yellow. Fruit 2-3 mm wide, pendent, straight, not thickened at septa, rectangular in section; seeds pale brown. 2n = 16, 32.{\i  Cultivated and waste ground, sometimes in saline habitats. Mediterranean region; rare in C. Europe}. Bl Ga Ge Gr Ju Hs.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. H. littorale} Wulfen in Jacq., {\i Collect. Bot.}{\b  2}: 205 (1789) ({\i H. geslinii} Cosson & Kralik,{\i  H. deuteroparviflorum} Fedde). Plant 5-20(-25) cm, glaucous. Ultimate leaflets usually linear, cuneate at base, the apex acute, with 0 to several lateral teeth. Inflorescence decumbent, with (2-)5-10(-25) flowers. Sepals (1·5-)3-4 × 1-1·6 mm, persistent, entire, crenulate or dentate. Petals yellow; outer petals 6-8·5(-9·5) × 2-4·5 mm, rhombic to shallowly 3-lobed, concave, the apical lobe greenish dorsally; inner petals without black spots, the lateral lobes c. 1/2 as long as lamina of central lobe; central lobe 1·2 × 1·5 mm, ovate-elliptical, unguiculate. Filaments linear, without black spots. Pollen yellow. Fruit 1-2 mm wide, compressed, erect, more or less arcuate, not thickened at septa; seeds dark brown. 2n = 32. {\i Sandy ground near the sea. S.W. Spain, S. Portugal.} Hs Lu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 3. H. torulosum} Å. E. Dahl,{\i  Pl. Syst. Evol.}{\b  163}: 268 (1989) ({\i H. littorale} G.C. Clementi, non Wulfen,{\i  H. glaucescens} auct., non Guss.). Plant 5-12(-16) cm, glaucous. Ultimate leaflets of upper primary leaf-segments dilated towards the 3-fid apex, often with 1 to several lateral teeth. Inflorescence decumbent to erect, with 1-7 flowers. Sepals 2-5 × 1-2 mm, persistent, entire, crenulate or dentate, sometimes with a 2-fid or 3-fid apex. Petals lemon-yellow; outer petals (4-)5-8 × 3-6 mm, unguiculate, distinctly 3-lobed, always longer than wide, the lateral lobes involute giving petal a rhombic appearance; inner petals with black spots, the lateral lobes linear, usually not exceeding central lobe; central lobe 1·7-3·3 × 1-2·8 mm, obovate, not unguiculate. Filaments of median stamens narrowly triangular, without black spots. Pollen orange-yellow. Fruit strongly torulose, 2-3·5 mm wide at widest septa; seeds dark brown. 2n = 16.{\i  Sand-dunes. Coasts of Black Sea and Mediterranean region}. Bu Co Cr Ga Gr It Rm Rs(W, K, E) Si Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 4. H. imberbe} Sm. in Sibth. & Sm.,{\i  Fl. Graec. Prodr.}{\b  1}: 107 (1806) ({\i H. grandiflorum} Bentham,{\i  H. glaucescens} Guss.,{\i  H. aequilobum} auct., non Viv.). Plant 1-40 cm, green or glaucous. Ultimate leaflets linear to flabellate, with 1 to several lateral teeth. Inflorescence erect, with 1-18 flowers. Sepals 2·5-6 × 1·3-3 mm, entire, erose or dentate, seldom 2-fid. Petals orange-yellow; outer petals 6·5-13 × 5-13·5 mm, distinctly 3-lobed, usually somewhat longer than wide, the lateral lobes flat, obtuse. Inner petals with black spots, the lateral lobes obovate, obtuse, sometimes exceeding central lobe; central lobe 4-6 5(-9) × 1·7-3·5(-5·5) mm, obovate, fimbriate with truncate base. Filaments of median stamens narrowly triangular, without black spots. Pollen orange-yellow. Fruit erect, only slightly torulose, more or less arcuate, 2-3·5 mm at widest septa; seeds dark brown. 2n = 16.{\i  Cultivated ground, pastures and waste places. S. Europe}. Al Bl Co Ga Gr Hs It Ju Lu Sa Si.
\par

\par
302}
\par