{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 fruiting pedicels. Sepals 3-5·5 × 1-2 mm, narrowly lanceolate, subentire or slightly dentate. Corolla 10-14 mm, pale pink; apex of inner petals dark purple; margin of lower petal commonly almost absent, rarely narrow and patent. Fruit 2·5-2·75 × 2-2·5 mm, subglobose-ovoid, slightly keeled, tuberculate-rugose when dry; apex more or less acute, obscurely apiculate. 2n = 64.{\i  S. Spain. }Hs.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 4. F. barnolae} Sennen & Pau, {\i Treb. Inst. Catalana Hist. Nat.}{\b  3: }63 (1917) ({\i F. bella} P.D. Sell,{\i  F. major} Badaro, non Roth,{\i  F. agraria} sensu Coste, non Lag.). Racemes 10- to 25-flowered, the upper ones very often shorter than peduncle. Bracts more or less equalling the suberect fruiting pedicels. Sepals 3-3·5 × 1·5-2 mm, irregularly incise-dentate. Corolla 12-14 mm, pink; apex of inner petals and wings of upper one dark purple; lower petal with broad, patent margin. Fruit 2·5-3 × 2·5-3 mm, subglobose to obovoid, slightly keeled, densely tuberculate-rugose when dry; apex very obtuse or subtruncate. 2n = 80.{\i  Mediterranean region.} Bl Co Ga Hs It *Ju Sa.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 5. F. gaillardotii} Boiss.,{\i  Fl. Or. }{\b 1}: 139 (1867). like {\b 4} but sepals 3-4 × c. 2 mm; corolla 10-12(-13) mm, paler, the upper petal with narrower wings and larger spur; fruiting pedicels short and thick; fruit subglobose-quadrate and more markedly keeled. 2n = 112.{\i  Mediterranean region}. Al Bl Cr Gr Hs It Ju Sa Si.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 6. F. judaica} Boiss.,{\i  Diagn. Pl. Or. Nov.}{\b  2}({\b 8}): 15 (1849). Raceme 8- to 29-flowered, often slightly longer than peduncle. Bracts 1/3-1/2 as long as the suberect fruiting pedicels. Sepals 2-3 × 1-1·5 mm, more or less dentate. Corolla 9-13 mm, white, rarely becoming tinged with pink; apex of inner petals dark purple; lower petal with rather broad, patent margin. Fruit 2·5-3 × 2·5-3 mm, subglobose, obscurely keeled, tuberculate-rugose when dry, often with black-spotted apical pits; apex very obtuse or slightly emarginate.{\i  Mediterranean region, westwards to Sicilia.} Al Cr Gr It Ju ?Si.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp.{\b  judaica} : Raceme 8- to 16(-29)-flowered. Sepals 2-3 × 1-1·5 mm. Corolla 9-12 mm, white, not rostellate and often straight. Fruit 2·5-3 × 2·5-3 mm. 2n = 48.{\i  Almost throughout the range of the species}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b insignis} (Pugsley) Liden,{\i  Op. Bot}{\b . 88}: 48 (1986). Raceme up to 12-flowered. Sepals 2-3 × 1-1·5 mm. Corolla 12-13 mm, white, curved upwards and rostellate at apex. Fruit 2·7-3 × 2·5-2·7 mm. •{\i  W. Jugoslavia}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 7. F. amarysia} Boiss. & Heldr. in Boiss., {\i Fl. Or.}{\b  1}: 138 (1867) ({\i F. judaica} subsp. {\i amarysia} (Boiss. & Heldr.) Liden). like {\b 6} but raceme up to 20-flowered; sepals 1·5-2 × c. 1 mm; corolla 9-11 mm, white or pale pink, not rostellate and often straight; fruit 2-2·5 × 2-2·5 mm. 2n = 48. •{\i  S. Greece.} Gr.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 8. F. macrocarpa} Parl., {\i Pl. Nov.} 5 (1842). Raceme 4- to 10(-15)-flowered, about as long as or shorter than peduncle. Bracts ½ as long as to longer than the patent fruiting pedicels. Sepals (1-)2·5-3 × 0·5-1 mm, strongly dentate. Corolla 9-11 mm, white or pale pink without any dark purple colouring or on adaxial side only; lower petal with patent margin. Fruit 3-4 × 3-4 mm, subglobose, obscurely keeled, strongly rugose when dry; apex very obtuse. 2n = 16.{\i  Mediterranean region, westwards to Sicilia.} Cr Gr Ju si.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 9. F. capreolata} L.,{\i  Sp. Pl.} 701 (1753). Raceme up to 25(-35)flowered, shorter than peduncle. Fruiting pedicels usually rigidly arcuate-recurved. Sepals more or less dentate. Corolla 10-14 mm, creamy-white or pinkish, rarely deep red; wings of upper petal and apex of inner petals blackish-red; lower petal with very narrow, erect margin. Fruit usually smooth, obscurely keeled. {\i S., W. & S.C. Europe}. Al Be Bl Br Co Cr Ga Gr Hb He Hs It Ju Lu Sa Si Tu [Az Cz Ge Ho Po].
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp.{\b  capreolata} : Bracts usually shorter than fruiting pedicels. Sepals 4-6 × 2-4 mm. Fruit 2 × 2 mm or smaller, subglobose; apex very obtuse but not truncate. 2n = 64.{\i  Throughout the range of the species, except Britain and Ireland}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp.{\b  babingtonii} (Pugsley) P.D. Sell,{\i  Feddes Repert.}{\b  68}: 176 (1963) ({\i F. capreolata} var. {\i babingtonii} Pugsley). Bracts more or less equalling fruiting pedicels. Sepals frequently narrower. Upper petals more acute. Fruit 2·5 × 2·5 mm, often truncate at apex and more or less rectangular in outline, smooth or somewhat rugulose. 2n = 64. •{\i  Britain and Ireland}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 10. F. flabellata} Gaspar.,{\i  Rendic. Accad. Sci. Fis. Mat.} ({\i Napoli}) {\b 1}: 51 (1842). like {\b 9} but raceme 10- to 30-flowered, at first as long as, then longer than, peduncle; sepals 3-5 × 1·5-2·5(-3) mm; lower petal with wide, patent margin; fruit 2-2·7 × 2-2·7 mm, keeled, densely tuberculate-rugose when dry; apex emarginate. 2n = 64.{\i  C. & E. Mediterranean region.} Al Bl Co Gr It Ju Sa Si.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 11. F. munbyi} Boiss. & Reuter, {\i Pugillus} 5 (1852). like {\b 9} but raceme up to 25-flowered; sepals 2-4 × 1·5-2·5 mm; corolla 12-14 mm, white, often flushed purplish-red; lower petal with narrow, suberect margin; fruit 2-2·2 × 2-2·2 mm, scarcely keeled, finely rugose; apex obtuse or subacute. 2n = c. 72(-75).{\i  E. Spain }({\i Islas Columbretes}). Hs. ({\i N.W. Africa}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 12. F. melillaica} Pugsley,{\i  Jour. Linn. Soc. London} ({\i Bot}.) {\b 50}: 547 (1937). like {\b 9} but sepals 3·5-4 × 2·5-2·7 mm, deeply incise-dentate; corolla 10-12 mm, pink; fruit 2-2·5 × 2-2·5 mm, rugose. 2n = 72-75.{\i  S.E. Spain.} Hs. ({\i Morocco}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 13. F. purpurea} Pugsley, {\i Jour. Bot.} ({\i London}) {\b 40}: 135 (1902). Raceme up to 25-flowered, about as long as peduncle. Bracts as long as or longer than the sometimes rigidly patent-recurved fruiting pedicels. Sepals 4·5-6·5 × 2-3 mm, entire. Corolla 10-13 mm, purple or whitish-purple; wings of upper petal and apex of inner petals darker purple; lower petal with narrow, erect margin. Fruit 2·5 × 2·5 mm, more or less quadrate, faintly rugose when dry; apex truncate. 2n = 80. •{\i  Britain and Ireland; Guernsey}. Br Ga Hb.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 14. F. macrosepala} Boiss., {\i Elenchus} 8 (1838) (incl.{\i  F. malacitana} Hausskn. & Fritze). Raceme 4- to 11-flowered, dense, shorter than peduncle. Bracts as long as or longer than the more or less erect fruiting pedicels. Sepals 4-7 × 3-5 mm, wider than corolla, subentire. Corolla 10-14 mm, white, often tinged with pinkish-red; wings of upper petal and apex of inner petals dark purple; lower petal with narrow, erect margin. Fruit 2·5-3 × 2-2·75 mm, ellipticovate or subglobose, rugulose when dry; apex subacute and mucronulate or obtuse. 2n = 32.{\i  Mostly limestone cliffs and screes, }300-2000 {\i m. S. Spain.} Hs.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 The European plants are subsp.{\i  macrosepala}; it and other subspecies occur in N.W. Africa.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 15. F. bicolor} Sommier ex Nicotra, {\i Fum. Ital. }55 (1897). Raceme 8- to 15(-20)-flowered, shorter than or equalling peduncle. Bracts ¼-½ as long as the more or less suberect fruiting pedicels. Sepals 2-2·5 × c. 1 mm, more or less dentate. Corolla 10-13 mm, white or pinkish-white, finally all pink; apex of inner petals dark purple; lower petal with narrow, patent margin. Fruit 2-2·2 × 1·5-1·7(-2) mm, subglobose-ovoid, obscurely keeled, ru
\par

\par
308}
\par