{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 8 Ripe fruit 2-3 times as long as pedicel
\par
9 Flowers purple; ultimate leaf-segments narrowly oblong .......... {\b 6. paczoskii}
\par
9 Flowers white or cream, rarely suffused with pale purple;
\par
  ultimate leaf-segments linear-lanceolate .................................. {\b 7. angustifolia}
\par
8 Ripe fruit about as long as pedicel
\par
10 Fruit elliptical ............................................................................... {\b 10. solida}
\par
10 Fruit linear .................................................................................. {\b 11. integra}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 (A) Annual, biennial, or rhizomatous perennial herbs. Stems usually branched, with many leaves.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. C. capnoides} (L.) Pers.,{\i  Syn. Pl.}{\b  2}: 270 (1806) ({\i C. gebleri} Ledeb.; incl.{\i  C. alba} Mansfeld). Robust, ascending or erect annual or biennial up to 40 cm. Leaves 2-ternate, all petiolate; ultimate segments 3-fid or variously dissected. Racemes 5- to 8-flowered, lax. Lower bracts compound, like the upper leaves; upper bracts entire. Corolla 11-16 mm, cream or white, yellow at apex; spur 5-7 mm, slender; style persistent, straight. Fruit 20-30 mm, slender. 2n = 16.{\i  E. Alps }({\i local}) ;{\i  Carpathians; N.E. Russia.} Au Cz *It Po Rm Rs(N, ?C) [Fe].
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. C. nobilis} (L.) Pers., {\i Syn. Pl.}{\b  2}: 269 (1806). Robust, rhizomatous perennial 30-50 cm. Leaves 2- or 3-pinnate, glaucous. Racemes 20- to 30-flowered, capitate. Bracts cuneate, dissected, much longer than pedicels. Lower pedicels 5-15 mm. Corolla c. 20 mm, yellow or white; spur c. 7 mm. Fruit 10-20 mm. Seeds black, shiny. 2n = 16.{\i  Cultivated for ornament, and naturalized in Finland and Sweden.} [Fe Su.] ({\i C. Asia.})
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 (B) Perennials with tuberous stock. Stems simple, or with 1 or 2 branches, with 1-3 leaves on each stem or branch. Racemes terminal.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 3. C. uniflora} (Sieber) Nyman,{\i  Syll.} 185 (1855) ({\i C. rutifolia }(Sm.) DC. subsp. {\i uniflora} (Sieber) Cullen & P.H. Davis).Stem 5-15 cm, erect, without a scale below leaves; tuber solid. Leaves opposite, usually 2-ternate, glaucous. Raceme 1- to 3-flowered. Bracts broadly ovate, entire. Corolla 20-25 mm, whitish to pale pink, veined with purple; spur 10-13 mm. {\i Stony places above} 1500{\i  m. • Kriti.} Cr.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 4. C. cava} (L.) Schweigger & Koerte, {\i Fl. Erlang}{\b . 2}: 44 (1811) ({\i C. bulbosa }auct., non DC.). Stem 10-35 cm, erect, without a scale below lowest leaf. Leaves 2-ternate, usually alternate. Raceme 10- to 20-flowered, more or less dense. Bracts ovate, entire. Corolla 20-30 mm; spur curved at apex; ovary at anthesis gradually narrowed into straight style. Fruit 20-25 mm, 3-4 times as long as pedicels, pendent when ripe.{\i  Much of Europe, but absent from the islands and rare in the west and north}. Al Au Be Bu Cz Da Ga Ge Gr He Hs Hu It Ju Lu Po Rm Rs(B, C, W, K, E) Su [Ho].
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp.{\b  cava }(incl. subsp{\i . blanda} (Schott) Chater): Tuber hollow. Leaves 2- or 3-ternate, glaucous or green; median leaflets long-cuneate at base, usually more or less sessile; segments dentate. Corolla purplish or sometimes white. 2n = 16. {\i Almost throughout the range of the species}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp.{\b  marschalliana} (Pallas) Chater,{\i  Feddes Repert}{\b . 69}: 56 (1964) ({\i C. marschalliana} (Pallas) Pers.): Tuber often solid. Leaves 2-ternate, glaucous, rarely green; median leaflets shortly stalked; segments more or less entire. Corolla whitish, cream or yellow, rarely purplish. 2n = 32.{\i  S.E. Europe}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 5. C. parnassica} Orph. & Heldr. ex Boiss., {\i Diagn. Pl. Or. Nov.}{\b  2}({\b 6}): 9 (1859). like {\b 4} but stems 3-7 cm; leaves 3-4 cm, fleshy, glaucous, the segments lanceolate; racemes 5- to 12-flowered; corolla 17-21 mm; fruit 15-20 mm. 2n = 16.{\i  Calcareous screes above }1800{\i  m. • S. & C. Greece}. Gr.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 6. C. paczoskii} N. Busch, {\i Trudy Tifliss. Bot. Sada}{\b  9} suppl.: 55 (1903). Tuber solid. Stem 10-20 cm, erect, simple or branched, with an ovate scale below lowest leaf. Leaves usually 3-ternate; segments narrowly oblong. Racemes 4- to 10-flowered, lax. Lower bracts 3- to 8-fid, the upper mostly 3-fid. Corolla 15-25 mm, purple; spur straight; style straight. Fruit 17-25 mm, 2-3 times as long as pedicels. 2n = 16. •{\i  S. Ukraine.}  Rs(W, K).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 7. C. angustifolia} (Bieb.) DC., {\i Reg. Veg. Syst. Nat.}{\b  2}: 120 (1821). like {\b 6} but leaf-segments linear-lanceolate; lower bracts always 3-fid, the upper 3-fid or entire; corolla 20-30 mm, yellow or cream.{\i  Naturalized near St. Pétersburg.} [Rs(C).] ({\i Caucasus}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b C. bracteata} (Stephan) Pers., {\i Syn. Pl. }{\b 2}: 269 (1807), native in Siberia, is also reported as an alien and perhaps naturalized near St. Pétersburg. It is like {\b 6} but is more robust with broader, yellow petals and less deeply divided bracts.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 8. C. intermedia} (L.) Merat, {\i Nouv. Fl. Env. Paris} 272 (1812) ({\i C. fabacea} Pers.). Tuber solid. Stem 7-20 cm, erect, with an ovate scale below lowest leaf. Leaves 2-ternate with variously dissected segments. Racemes 1- to 8-flowered, dense. Bracts ovate, entire. Pedicels c. 5 mm. Corolla 10-17 mm, purple, rarely white; spur straight or curved; ovary at anthesis gradually narrowed into straight, persistent style. Fruit 15-20 mm, ovate-lanceolate. 2n = 16, 20, 40. • {\i Woods. N. & C. Europe, extending to C. Spain, S. Italy and the middle Volga.} Au Cz Da Fe Ga Ge He Hs Hu It Ju No Po Rm Rs(N, B, C, W) ?Si Su.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Robust plants, similar to {\b 8} but with 5- to 15-flowered racemes, broader outer petals and long-attenuated fruit, have been described from Sweden as {\b C. gotlandica} Liden,{\i  Nordic Jour. Bot.}{\b  11}: 132 (1991).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 9. C. pumila} (Host) Reichenb., {\i Fl. Germ. Excurs.} 698 (1832) ({\i C. fabacea} var{\i . digitata} Gren. & Godron). Tuber solid. Stem 7-20 cm, erect, with an ovate scale near base. Leaves 2-ternate. Racemes (3)4- to 12-flowered, dense. Bracts cuneate, digitate. Pedicels usually less than 5 mm. Corolla 12-17 mm, purplish; spur almost straight; ovary at anthesis gradually narrowed into straight, persistent style. Fruit 15-20 mm. 2n = 16.{\i  Woods. • From S. Fennoscandia to N. Greece}. Au Co Cz Da Ge Gr Hu It Ju No Po Rm Sa Su.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 10. C. solida}(L.) Clairv., {\i Man. Herb. Suisse }371 (1811)({\i C. bulbosa} (L.) DC.,{\i  C. halleri} Willd., {\i C. tenuis} Schott, Nyman & Kotschy; incl. {\i C. tenella }Ledeb. ex Nordm.). Tuber solid. Stem 10-30 cm, erect, with ovate scale near base. Leaves 2(3)-ternate. Racemes (4-)10- to 20-flowered, usually dense. Lower bracts always lobed. Pedicels 5-15 mm. Corolla 15-25(-30) mm; spur usually slightly curved; style often geniculate. Fruit 15-20 mm, broadly elliptical, pendent when ripe.{\i  Most of Europe except the northwest and most of the islands}. Al Au Be Bu Co Cz Fe Ga Ge Gr He Ho Hs Hu It Ju Po Rm Rs(N, B, C, W, E) Si Su Tu [Br Da No].
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Very variable. Four subspecies are given below, but the treatment is provisional, especially because of the occasional close similarity between specimens of subspp. ({\b a}) and ({\b b}), and because of the very great variability of subsp. ({\b a}).
\par

\par
304}
\par