{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 Literature: V.H. Heywood, {\i Bull. Brit. Mus. }({\i Bot.}) {\b 1}({\b 4}): 90-92 (1954).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Flowers 5-6 mm; upper petal gibbous but not spurred .......... {\b 3. baetica}
\par
1 Flowers 12-20 mm; upper petal spurred
\par
2 Flowers 12-17 mm; sepals ovate; leaves 2- or 3-ternatisect
\par
  or pinnatisect ........................................... {\b 1. enneaphylla}
\par
2 Flowers 15-20 mm; sepals ovate-lanceolate; leaves 1- or
\par
  2-ternatisect or ± simple ................................ {\b 2. crassifolia}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. S. enneaphylla} (L.) DC., {\i Reg. Veg. Syst. Nat.}{\b  2}: 129 (1821). Stems 5-15 cm, much-branched, woody at base. Leaves 2- or 3-ternatisect or pinnatisect, long-petiolate; the segments ovate-rounded, obtuse, often apiculate, the terminal often reniform-cordate. Pedicels slender. Flowers 12-17 mm, white to yellowish, purple-tipped; upper petal spurred, the spur much shorter than rest of corolla. Sepals ovate. 2n = c. 32. {\i Shady, calcareous rock-crevices. C. & E. Spain; E. Pyrenees.} Ga Hs.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. S. crassifolia} (Desf.) DC.,{\i  op. cit.}{\b  2}: 130 (1821) (incl.{\i  S. speciosa} Boiss.). like {\b 1} in habit but more robust; leaves usually more fleshy, 1- or 2-ternatisect or more or less simple; flowers 15-20 mm, usually pinkish; sepals ovate-lanceolate. 2n = c. 32.{\i  Rock-crevices in the mountains. S. & S.E. Spain}. Hs.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 The European plants have been distinguished as subsp. {\b speciosa} (Boiss.) Rouy,{\i  Bull. Soc. Bot. Fr. }{\b 31}: 53 (1884). They differ from plants from N. Africa in their laxer habit and larger flowers and fruits.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b S. saetabensis} Mateo & Figuerola,{\i  Fl. Analit. Prols Valencia }371 (1987), from E. Spain (Valencia prov.), is more or less intermediate in morphology between {\b 1} and {\b 2} and may represent stable hybrid plants.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 3. S. baetica} (Boiss. & Reuter) Nyman,{\i  Consp.} 26 (1878). like {\b 1} but leaves simple or ternatisect, glaucous; flowers 5-6 mm, white to yellowish; upper petal not spurred. {\i Rock-crevices; usually calcicole. • S. Spain}. Hs.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp.{\b  baetica} : Leaves ternatisect, thin; segments 2- to 5(-7)-partite, cordate. 2n = 32.{\i  Almost throughout the range of the species}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp.{\b  integrifolia }(Boiss.) Nyman,{\i  Consp. Suppl.}{\b  2}: 17 (1889) ({\i S. integrifolia} (Boiss.) Cuatrec., {\i S. baetica} var.{\i  integrifolia} (Boiss.) Lange): Leaves simple, more or less ovate, somewhat fleshy, cuneate to subcordate.{\i  La Sagra; Sierra de Magina}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 13.          Fumaria}             L.
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc  By P.D. Sell.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Annuals with erect, diffuse or climbing stems. Leaves cauline, 2- to 4-pinnatisect. Inflorescence racemose, bracteate, with short pedicels. Sepals 2, lateral. Corolla zygomorphic, consisting of a spurred upper petal, 2 inner petals, and a lower one. Fruit 1-seeded, indehiscent, showing 2 apical pits in the mesocarp when dry.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 In W. Europe mostly weeds of arable land, but in S. & E. Europe found also in rocky, sandy and grassy places.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 In this account the measurement of the corolla is that of the largest flowers; cleistogamous or more or less depauperate corollas produced by plants grown in an unfavourable environment are not considered.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Orientation of the wings of the upper petals and the margins of the lower petals can only be determined with certainty when the plant is fresh.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Literature: H.W. Pugsley,{\i  Jour. Bot}. ({\i London}) {\b 50}, Suppl. 1: 1-76 (1912); {\i Jour. Linn. Soc. London} ({\i Bot}.) {\b 44}: 233-354 (1919);{\b  47}: 427-469 (1927); {\b 49}: 93-113 (1932);{\b  49}: 517-529 (1934); {\b 50}: 541-559 (1937). A. Soler,{\i  Lagascalia}{\b  11}: 141-228 (1983). M. Liden, {\i Op. Bot.}{\b  88}: 5-133 (1986).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Corolla not more than 9 mm
\par
2 Sepals 0·2-1·5 × 0·2-0·7 mm, up to 1/5 as long as corolla
\par
3 Bracts equalling or longer than pedicels;
\par
  corolla usually white ................................................................. {\b 39. parviflora}
\par
3 Bracts shorter than pedicels; corolla pink
\par
4 Pedicels 4 mm; bracts not more than 1/3 as long as pedicels  {\b 34. schleicheri}
\par
4 Pedicels up to 3 mm; bracts more than 1/3 as long as pedicels
\par
5 Fruit 2-2·2 × 2-2·2 mm; bracts 3/4 as long as pedicels
\par
6 Spur of corolla long and straight ............................................... {\b 36. vaillantii}
\par
6 Spur of corolla short and ascending ...................................... {\b 38. pugsleyana}
\par
5 Fruit 1·7-2 × 1·7-2 mm; bracts ½ as long as pedicels
\par
7 Raceme 20- to 35-flowered; upper petals not dorsally compressed,
\par
  with wings turned upwards ..................................................... {\b 35. microcarpa}
\par
7 Raceme 6- to 15-flowered; upper petals dorsally compressed,
\par
  with wings patent ..................................................................... {\b 37. schrammii}
\par
2 Sepals 1·5-3·5 × 0·7-3 mm, more than ¼ and often more than
\par
  1/3 as long as corolla
\par
8 Sepals 1·5-2 × 0·7-1 mm
\par
9 Corolla 7-9 mm ....................................................................... {\b 29. officinalis}
\par
9 Corolla 4·5-7 mm
\par
10 Fruit subglobose, rounded-obtuse or emarginate at apex
\par
11 Corolla c. 4·5 mm ................................................................... {\b 27. bracteosa}
\par
11 Corolla 6-7 mm ....................................................................... {\b 32. caroliana}
\par
10 Fruit ovoid, subacute at apex
\par
12 Corolla 4-5 mm; sepals c. 1·5 × 0·7 mm ..................................... {\b 31. jankae}
\par
12 Corolla 6-7 mm; sepals 1·5-2 × 1-1·2 mm .............................. {\b 33. segetalis}
\par
8  Sepals 2-3·5 × 1-3 mm
\par
13 Bracts shorter than fruiting pedicels
\par
14 Fruit 2-2·5 × 1·7-2 mm, subglobose or ovoid ......................... {\b 28. rostellata}
\par
14 Fruit 2 × 2·5-3 mm, wider than long
\par
15 Raceme longer than peduncle; sepals 2·5-3·5 × 1-1·5 mm; upper petal
\par
   obtuse; apical pits of fruit without black spots ........................ {\b 29. officinalis}
\par
15 Raceme scarcely longer than peduncle; sepals 2 × 1·5 mm;
\par
   upper petal subacute; apical pits of fruit black-spotted .............. {\b 30. ragusina}
\par
13 Bracts as long as or longer than fruiting pedicels
\par
16 Fruiting pedicels arcuate-recurved
\par
17 Fruit nearly smooth when dry .................................................... {\b 23. kralikii}
\par
17 Fruit rugose when dry .................................................................. {\b 21. petteri}
\par
16 Fruiting pedicels erect or patent
\par
18 Sepals 2-2·2 mm ........................................................................... {\b 25. faurei}
\par
18 Sepals 2·5-3·5 mm
\par
19 Corolla 7·5-9 mm ..................................................................... {\b 24. mirabilis}
\par
19 Corolla 6-7 mm ...................................................................... {\b 26. densiflora}
\par
1  Corolla at least 9 mm
\par
20 Sepals more than 3 mm wide, wider than corolla
\par
21 Fruiting pedicels arcuate-recurved .......................................... {\b 9. capreolata}
\par

\par
306}
\par