{\rtf1\ansi \deff4\deflang1033{\fonttbl{\f4\froman\fcharset0\fprq2 Times New Roman;}}{\colortbl;\red0\green0\blue0;\red0\green0\blue255;\red0\green255\blue255;\red0\green255\blue0;\red255\green0\blue255;\red255\green0\blue0;\red255\green255\blue0;\red255\green255\blue255;\red0\green0\blue128;\red0\green128\blue128;\red0\green128\blue0;\red128\green0\blue128;\red128\green0\blue0;\red128\green128\blue0;\red128\green128\blue128;\red192\green192\blue192;}{\stylesheet{\widctlpar \f4\fs20\lang2057 \snext0 Normal;}{\*\cs10 \additive Default Paragraph Font;}}{\info{\author dddd}{\operator dddd}{\creatim\yr1998\mo11\dy11\hr16\min46}{\revtim\yr1998\mo11\dy11\hr16\min46}{\version2}{\edmins0}{\nofpages3}{\nofwords1005}{\nofchars5733}{\*\company  }{\vern57431}}\widowctrl\ftnbj\aenddoc\hyphcaps0 \fet0\sectd \linex0 {\*\pnseclvl1\pnucrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl2\pnucltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl3\pndec\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl4\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl5\pndec\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl6\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl7\pnlcrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl8\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl9\pnlcrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}
\pard\plain \ \f4\fs20\lang2057 {\fs28 red, darker at base but without distinct basal black spot. Anthers violet. Capsule 0\'b76-1\'b73 \'d7 0\'b74-0\'b77 cm, ellipsoidal to subglobose, with more or less appressed setae below and patent setae above. Disc conspicuously vaulted between rays, narrower than capsule, with 4-6 rays. 2n = 12. \bullet }{\i\fs28  Mediterranean region,from N.W. Italy to E. Bulgaria and Kriti.}{\fs28  Al Br Cr Gr It Ju Si.
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 10. P. argemone}{\fs28  L., }{\i\fs28 Sp. Pl.}{\fs28  506 (1753). Plant 10-75 cm, erect or ascending, arachnoid below and setose above. Leaves 1- to 3-pinnatipartite. Pedicels usually appressed-setose. Flower-buds almost glabrous or more or less patent-setose; sepals usually with inconspicuous apical processes. Petals 10-30 mm, reddish or ange with distinct basal black spot. Anthers blue, green or yellow. Capsule 0\'b79-2\'b75 \'d7 0\'b73-0\'b76 cm, narrowly obovoid to ellipsoidal or cylindrical, with patent to half-appressed setae mainly above. Disc vaulted to distinctly pointed, with 4-6 rays, not wider than capsule.}{\i\fs28  Native in S. Europe, and widespread as a weed of cultivation further north.}{\fs28  Al Au Be Br Co Cr Cz Da Ga Ge Gr Hb He Ho Hs Hu It Ju Lu Po Rm Rs(B, C, W, K) Sa Su Tu.
\par 
\par  (}{\b\fs28 a}{\fs28 ) Subsp.}{\b\fs28  argemone}{\fs28  : Plants mostly tall and erect. Capsules usually longer than 1\'b75 cm. Stigmatic disc vaulted, margin without teeth or teeth not subdividing pores. 2n = 40, 42.}{\i\fs28  Throughout the range of the species, except Aegean region.}{\fs28 
\par  (}{\b\fs28 b}{\fs28 ) Subsp.}{\b\fs28  nigrotinctum}{\fs28  (Fedde) Kadereit, }{\i\fs28 Notes Roy. Bot. Gard. Edinb.}{\b\fs28  44}{\fs28 : 37 (1986) (}{\i\fs28 P. nigrotinctum}{\fs28  Fedde): Plants usually smaller, up to 25 cm; stems often ascending. Capsules usually shorter than 1\'b75 cm, ellipsoidal. Stigmatic disc pointed, teeth on margin subdividing pores. 2n = 14.}{\i\fs28  S. Aegean region}{\fs28 .
\par 
\par Sect. PSEUDOPILOSAM. Popov ex K. G\'fcnther. Subscapose perennials, more or less densely setose-hairy. Leaf vernation revolute; leaves pinnatifid to pinnatisect. Filaments pale yellow, filiform. Petals orange. Capsule usually clavate, glabrous.
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 11. P. rupifragum}{\fs28  Boiss. & Reuter,}{\i\fs28  Pugillus}{\fs28  6 (1852). Plant 10-60 cm, erect or ascending. Leaves pinnatifid to pinnatisect, usually petiolate, usually setose on veins of lower surface and teeth. Pedicel glabrous or half-appressed-setose. Flower-buds glabrous. Petals 20-28 mm, orange, without distinct basal spot. Anthers light yellow. Capsule 1\'b73-2\'b75 \'d7 0\'b74-0\'b77 cm, clavate. Disc as wide as capsule, with 5-8 rays. 2n = 14, 28.}{\i\fs28  Crevices of mountain rocks. S. Spain}{\fs28  (}{\i\fs28 near Grazalema}{\fs28 ). Hs.
\par 
\par }{\b\fs28 P. atlanticum}{\fs28  (Ball) Cosson, }{\i\fs28 Ill. Fl. Atl.}{\b\fs28  1}{\fs28 : 11 (1882), from Morocco, with more or less densely appressed-setose leaves, pedicels and sepals, is reported to be locally naturalized in Austria, Britain and Denmark.
\par 
\par Sect. MACRANTHA Elkan. Robust perennials, densely setose-hairy. Leaves pinnatisect to pinnatipartite. Filaments dark violet, clavate. Petals orange or orange-red. Capsule usually subglobose, glabrous.
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 12. P. pseudoorientale}{\fs28  (Fedde) Medw.,}{\i\fs28  Izv. Kavkaz. Muz.}{\b\fs28  11}{\fs28 : 204 (1918) (}{\i\fs28 P. orientale}{\fs28  auct., non L.). Plant 40-100 cm, erect. Leaves pinnatisect to pinnatipartite. Lower leaves petiolate, upper leaves sessile. Pedicels usually appressed-setose. Flower-buds with or without dentate to entire subtending bracts, usually erect during development, with subpatent, slender setae. Petals 4 or 6, 50-90 mm, usually with distinct basal spots. Anthers violet. Capsule 2\'b70-2\'b75 \'d7 1\'b75-2\'b75 cm, broadly obovoid to subglobose. Disc at least as wide as capsule, with 9-19 rays. 2n = 42. }{\i\fs28 Widely cultivated for ornament, and occasionally more or less naturalized.}{\fs28  [Cz Ga Hu.]
\par 
\par Most cultivated material in this section must be referred to }{\b\fs28 12}{\fs28 . Two other species, }{\b\fs28 P. bracteatum}{\fs28  Lindley,}{\i\fs28  Coll. Bot.}{\fs28  t. 23 (1821), with dark red petals, 3-8 bracts subtending the flowers, and calyx setae with broadly triangular bases, and }{\b\fs28 P. orientale}{\fs28  L., }{\i\fs28 Sp. Pl.}{\fs28  508 (1753), with ebracteate flowers, and petals usually unmarked, or petals with pale violet to white marks, are sometimes cultivated.
\par 
\par Sect. MECONELLA Spach (Sect.}{\i\fs28  Scapiflora}{\fs28  Reichenb.). Scapose, erect, often caespitose perennials with more or less densely setose indumentum. Leaves pinnatifid to pinnatipartite. Filaments filiform, yellow, sometimes with dark tinge. Petals white, yellow or sometimes reddish or ange. Capsule cylindrical to obovoid or ellipsoidal, setose, dehiscing by valves.
\par 
\par Cultivars referable to the Asiatic }{\i\fs28 P. nudicaule}{\fs28  L., sensu lato (}{\i\fs28 P. croceum}{\fs28  Ledeb.), are widely grown for ornament, and sometimes become locally naturalized. They are robust plants with flowering stems up to 50 cm, large flowers (up to 6 cm), and broadly lobed leaves. They all have a chromosome number of 2n = 14.
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 13. P. lapponicum}{\fs28  (Tolm.) Nordh., }{\i\fs28 Bergens Mus. Aarb., Naturv. Rekke}{\b\fs28  2}{\fs28 : 45 (1931). Plants 15-30 cm. Leaves 1- or 2-pinnatipartite. Pedicel half-appressed-setose throughout, or appressed-setose below and patent-setose above. Flower-buds densely patent-setose. Petals 15-17 mm, yellow, caducous. Stamens 30-40. Capsule 1\'b71-1\'b78 \'d7 0\'b75-0\'b76 cm, narrowly obovoid to cylindrical. Disc with 5 or 6 rays. 2n = 56.}{\i\fs28  Arctic Europe and Ural.}{\fs28  No Rs(N, C.).
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 14. P. radicatum}{\fs28  Rottb., }{\i\fs28 Skr. Ki\'f8benhavnske Selsk. Laerd. Vid.}{\b\fs28  10}{\fs28 : 455 (1767) (}{\i\fs28 P. steindorssonianum}{\fs28  \'c1. L\'f6ve, }{\i\fs28 P. chibinense}{\fs28  N. Semen., }{\i\fs28 P. radicatum}{\fs28  subsp.}{\i\fs28  relictum}{\fs28  (E. Lundstr\'f6m) Tolm., }{\i\fs28 P. relictum}{\fs28  (E. Lundstr\'f6m) Nordh.,}{\i\fs28  P. radicatum}{\fs28  subsp.}{\i\fs28  intermedium}{\fs28  (Nordh.) Knaben, subsp.}{\i\fs28  oeksendalense}{\fs28  Knaben, subsp.}{\i\fs28  subglobosum}{\fs28  Nordh., subsp.}{\i\fs28  hyperboreum }{\fs28 Nordh., subsp. }{\i\fs28 macrostigma}{\fs28  (Nordh.) Nordh., subsp.}{\i\fs28  ovatilobum}{\fs28  Tolm., subsp. }{\i\fs28 dahlianum}{\fs28  (Nordh.) R\'e4ndel,}{\i\fs28  P. dahlianum }{\fs28 Nordh.,}{\i\fs28  P. jugoricum}{\fs28  (Tolm.) Stankov,}{\i\fs28  P. radicatum}{\fs28  subsp.}{\i\fs28  brachyphyllum}{\fs28  Tolm., subsp. }{\i\fs28 polare}{\fs28  Tolm. pro max. parte,}{\i\fs28  P. polare}{\fs28  (Tolm.) Perf.). Plants 6-20 cm. Leaves pinnatifid to pinnatipartite. Pedicel half-appressed to patent-setose. Flower buds densely patent-setose. Petals 13-18 mm, white or yellow, persistent or sometimes caducous. Stamens 20-30. Capsule 1-1\'b78 \'d7 0\'b76-0\'b77 cm, obovoid to cylindrical. Disc with 5 or 6 rays. 2n = 70.}{\i\fs28  Arctic and subarctic Europe, southwards to}{\fs28  61\'b0 30'}{\i\fs28  N. in Norway}{\fs28 . Fa Is No Rs(N) Sb Su.
\par 
\par This is a highly variable species in which ten subspecies have been recognized in Europe. Subsp.}{\i\fs28  dahlianum}{\fs28  (Nordh.) R\'e4ndel, from Svalbard and Arctic Europe, is often treated at specific rank.
\par 
\par }{\b\fs28 P. laestadianum}{\fs28  (Nordh.) Nordh.,}{\i\fs28  Bot. Not.}{\b\fs28  1939}{\fs28 : 693 (1939), from Arctic Norway and Sweden, originally described as a subspecies of}{\b\fs28  14}{\fs28 , is distinguished as an independent species by its relatively tall size and persistent petals. This taxon seems to have 2n = 56 chromosomes.
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 15. P. lapeyrousianum}{\fs28  Guterm.,}{\i\fs28  \'d6sterr. Bot. Zeitschr.}{\b\fs28  122}{\fs28 : 268 (1974) (}{\i\fs28 P. suaveolens}{\fs28  Lapeyr., nom. illeg.; incl.}{\i\fs28  P. suaveolens}{\fs28  subsp.}{\i\fs28  endressii}{\fs28  Ascherson). Plants 5-12 cm. Leaves 1- or 2-pinnatipartite. Pedicel appressed-setose. Flower-buds patent-setose. Petals 6-14 mm, yellow, not overlapping in flower. Stamens shorter to as long as ovary. Capsules 0\'b78-1\'b72 \'d7 0\'b74-0\'b77 cm, narrowly to broadly ellipsoidal; disc acute, with 5 or 6 rays. 2n = 14. }{\i\fs28 Pyrenees; Sierra Nevada.}{\fs28  Ga Hs.
\par 
\par 300}
\par }