{\rtf1\ansi \deff4\deflang1033{\fonttbl{\f4\froman\fcharset0\fprq2 Times New Roman;}}{\colortbl;\red0\green0\blue0;\red0\green0\blue255;\red0\green255\blue255;\red0\green255\blue0;\red255\green0\blue255;\red255\green0\blue0;
\red255\green255\blue0;\red255\green255\blue255;\red0\green0\blue128;\red0\green128\blue128;\red0\green128\blue0;\red128\green0\blue128;\red128\green0\blue0;\red128\green128\blue0;\red128\green128\blue128;\red192\green192\blue192;}{\stylesheet{\widctlpar 
\f4\fs20\lang2057 \snext0 Normal;}{\*\cs10 \additive Default Paragraph Font;}}{\info{\author dddd}{\operator dddd}{\creatim\yr2000\mo3\dy31\hr15\min3}{\revtim\yr2000\mo3\dy31\hr15\min4}{\version2}{\edmins1}{\nofpages3}{\nofwords690}{\nofchars3937}
{\*\company  }{\vern57431}}\widowctrl\ftnbj\aenddoc\hyphcaps0 \fet0\sectd \linex0 {\*\pnseclvl1\pnucrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl2\pnucltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl3\pndec\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang
{\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl4\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl5\pndec\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl6\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl7
\pnlcrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl8\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl9\pnlcrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}\pard\plain \qc\nowidctlpar \f4\fs20\lang2057 {\fs28  
}{\b\fs28 21.    DAVALLIACEAE}{\fs28 
\par }{\fs24 Edit. \'86D.H. Valentine.
\par 
\par }\pard \nowidctlpar {\fs28 
Rhizome polystelic, with broad dorsal and ventral meristeles, and with clathrate scales. Leaves distant, in 2 ranks, articulated to the rhizome; petiole with several vascular strands. Sori submarginal, with indusium; spores bilateral.
\par 
\par }\pard \qc\nowidctlpar {\fs28  }{\b\fs28 1.               Davallia}{\fs28                Sm.
\par }{\fs24 By A. Lawalrée.
\par 
\par }\pard \nowidctlpar {\fs28 
Rhizome rather stout, with ciliate scales. Lamina deltate to narrowly ovate, rather finely divided, coriaceous, glabrous; veins free. Indusium attached at the base and sides, cup-shaped, almost reaching the margin of the ultimate segments.
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 1. D. canariensis}{\fs28  (L.) Sm., }{\i\fs28 M\'e9m. Acad. Sci.}{\fs28  (}{\i\fs28 Turin}{\fs28 ) }{\b\fs28 5:}{\fs28 
 414 (1793). Rhizome with bright chestnut-coloured scales. Leaves 10-60 cm, solitary; petiole with scales at the base only, about equalling the lamina; lamina glabrous, deltate, 3- or 4-pinnate; ultimate segments l
anceolate or ovate-oblong, mostly bidentate.}{\i\fs28  On rocks, walls and trees. Portugal and W. Spain; A\'e7ores}{\fs28 . Az Hs Lu.
\par 
\par 
\par }\pard \qc\nowidctlpar {\fs28  }{\b\fs28 22.      BLECHNACEAE}{\fs28 
\par }{\fs24 Edit.\'86D.H. Valentine.
\par 
\par }\pard \nowidctlpar {\fs28 
Rhizome dictyostelic, with clathrate scales. Petiole with 2 vascular strands; veinlets, branching and anastomosing, forming a row of areolae on each side of the costae. Sori discrete in areola, or forming a coenosorus along the costae; indusium present; s
pores bilateral.
\par 
\par }{\b\fs28 Doodia caudata}{\fs28  (Cav.) R. Br., }{\i\fs28 Prodr. Fl. Nov. Holl.}{\fs28  151 (1810), from Australia and New Zealand, resembling}{\i\fs28  Blechnum spicant}{\fs28 
 in habit, but with finely dentate-serrate pinnae and discrete sori, has been reported from A\'e7ores as an escape from cultivation, and is becoming naturalized.
\par 
\par }\pard \li200\nowidctlpar {\fs28 Leaf pinnate, not producing young plants vegetatively ................ }{\b\fs28 1. Blechnum}{\fs28 
\par Leaf 2-pinnatifid, producing young plants vegetatively on
\par  distal part .................................................................................. }{\b\fs28 2. Woodwardia}{\fs28 
\par 
\par }\pard \qc\nowidctlpar {\fs28  }{\b\fs28 1.                 Blechnum}{\fs28                  L.
\par }{\fs24 By A. Lawalrée.
\par 
\par }\pard \nowidctlpar {\fs28 
Rhizome short, oblique. Leaves dimorphic; lamina pinnate, coriaceous, glabrous, the pinnules entire or crenate; sterile leaves with free veins. Sori long and linear, forming a coenosorus which occupies practically the entire length of the pinnae of the fe
rtile leaves; indusium firm, linear.
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 1. B. spicant}{\fs28  (L.) Roth,}{\i\fs28  Ann. Bot.}{\fs28  (}{\i\fs28 Usteri}{\fs28 )}{\b\fs28  10:}{\fs28  56 (1794) (}{\i\fs28 B. homophyllum}{\fs28  (Merino) Samp.,}{\i\fs28  Lomaria spicant}{\fs28  (L.) Desv.). Leaves 8-70 \'d7
 3-7 cm, oblong-lanceolate, attenuate at the base, with 20-60 pinnae on each side. Sterile leaves patent, with pinnae 3-5 mm wide; fertile leaves erect, with pinnae 1-2 mm wide. 2n =  68. }{\i\fs28 
Usually calcifuge. Europe, eastwards to Latvia and the E. Carpathians; local in the Mediterranean region}{\fs28 . All except ?Bl Rs (N, C, K, E) Sb.
\par 
\par }{\b\fs28  B. occidentale}{\fs28  L., }{\i\fs28 Sp. Pl.}{\fs28  ed. 2, 1524 (1763), from tropical America, with non-dimorphic, lanceolate, pinnatisect leaves, is becoming naturalized in A\'e7ores.
\par 
\par }\pard \qc\nowidctlpar {\fs28  }{\b\fs28 2.                Woodwardia}{\fs28               Sm.
\par }{\fs24 By A. Lawalr\'e9e.
\par 
\par }\pard \nowidctlpar {\fs28 Plant lar
ge. Rhizome ascending. Leaves all similar; lamina coriaceous, 2-pinnatifid; veins anastomosing to form areolae but free towards the margin of the lamina. Sori arranged in 1 or more rows on the outer side of the areolae, parallel and close to the midrib.

\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 1. W. radicans}{\fs28  (L.) Sm.,}{\i\fs28  M\'e9m. Acad. Sci.}{\fs28  (}{\i\fs28 Turin}{\fs28 )}{\b\fs28  5}{\fs28 : 412 (1793). Leaves up to 2\'b7
5 m, arcuate, producing young plants vegetatively from buds on the distal part; lamina equalling petiole, deltate or ovate-lanceolate, pinnate; pinnae up to 30 cm, deeply and 
regularly pinnatifid; segments falcate, acuminate, serrulate. Sori oblong, in 2 rows along either side of the midrib of the pinnules; indusium coriaceous.}{\i\fs28  Damp, shady places. S. Europe, from A\'e7ores to Kriti.}{\fs28  Az Co Cr Hs It Lu Si.

\par 
\par }\pard \qc\nowidctlpar {\fs28  }{\b\fs28 23.       MARSILEACEAE}{\fs28 
\par }{\fs24  Edit.\'86D.H. Valentine.
\par 
\par }\pard \nowidctlpar {\fs28 
Semi-aquatic plants. Rhizome slender, creeping, hairy, bearing leaves and roots at each node. Leaves alternate, 2-ranked, filiform or cruciformly 4-foliolate. Sporocarps tough and stony, borne singly in the leaf-axils or on stalks ad
nate to the petiole, and containing sori of megasporangia and microsporangia, each sorus surrounded by an indusium; annulus lacking or rudimentary. Female prothallus many-celled; male prothallus minute.
\par 
\par }\pard \li200\nowidctlpar {\fs28 Leaves 4-foliolate ............................................................................ }{\b\fs28 1. Marsilea}{\fs28 
\par Leaves simple, filiform .................................................................... }{\b\fs28 2. Pilularia}{\fs28 
\par 
\par }\pard \qc\nowidctlpar {\fs28  }{\b\fs28 1.                 Marsilea}{\fs28                 L.
\par }{\fs24  By J.A. Crabbe (Ed.1) revised by J.R. Akeroyd.(Ed.2)
\par 
\par }\pard \nowidctlpar {\fs28 
Leaves long-petiolate; lamina cruciform, consisting of 2 contiguous pairs of opposite, sessile, obdeltate to cuneate leaflets; veins flabellate, anastomosing. Sporocarps brown to blackish with brown hairs, 2-chambered, dehiscent along the ventral suture i
nto 2 valves, stalked or sessile; each chamber with several sori within a delicate indusium.
\par 
\par 31}
\par }
