{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 21 Siliqua 1·5-3 mm wide; radicle incumbent .............................. {\b 20. Hesperis}
\par
21 Siliqua 1·2-1·5 mm wide; radicle accumbent ............................ {\b 26. Clausia}
\par
15 Stigma entire, capitate or shallowly 2-lobed
\par
22 Petals yellow, sometimes with purple or brown veins
\par
23 Valves of the siliqua with 3-7 distinct longitudinal veins
\par
24 Cauline leaves cordate-amplexicaul, entire ........................... {\b 84. Conringia}
\par
24 Cauline leaves not cordate-amplexicaul, usually toothed or lobed
\par
25 Siliqua with a short stipitate segment at the base, separated
\par
   from the rest of the siliqua by an articulation
\par
26 Racemes bracteate, at least in the lower ½ ................. {\b 106. Enarthrocarpus}
\par
26 Racemes ebracteate ............................................................. {\b 107. Raphanus}
\par
25 Siliqua without a short stipitate segment at the base
\par
27 Siliqua clavate at the apex, constricted in the middle;
\par
   stigma sessile .......................................................................... {\b 2. Lycocarpus}
\par
27 Siliqua not clavate at the apex, usually with a distinct beak or style
\par
28 Sepals erect (calyx closed)
\par
29 Siliqua (including beak) more than 20 mm .............................. {\b 92. Coincya}
\par
29 Siliqua (including beak) less than 20 mm
\par
30 Siliqua patent to deflexed ......................................................... {\b 92. Coincya}
\par
30 Siliqua erect and appressed ................................................ {\b 93. Hirschfeldia}
\par
28 Sepals patent or erecto-patent
\par
31 Siliqua not beaked, with a style not exceeding 2(-4) mm .... {\b 1. Sisymbrium}
\par
31 Siliqua with a beak at least 7 mm .............................................. {\b 89. Sinapis}
\par
23 Valves of the siliqua 1-veined, sometimes with reticulate
\par
   lateral veins, or without veins
\par
32 Siliqua not more than 7 times as long as wide
\par
33 Siliqua beaked .......................................................................... {\b 88. Brassica}
\par
33 Siliqua not conspicuously beaked
\par
34 Leaves pinnate .......................................................................... {\b 37. Rorippa}
\par
34 Leaves simple .............................................................................. {\b 57. Draba}
\par
32 Siliqua more than 7 times as long as wide
\par
35 Siliqua strongly compressed, the valves flat
\par
36 Valves coiling spirally from the base on dehiscence ........... {\b 40. Cardamine}
\par
36 Valves not coiling spirally on dehiscence
\par
37 At least the basal leaves sinuate-dentate ..................................... {\b 42. Arabis}
\par
37 All leaves entire ..................................................................... {\b 84. Conringia}
\par
35 Siliqua terete or 4-angled, the valves convex
\par
38 Valves with the median vein weak or absent
\par
39 Siliqua attenuate; seeds mucilaginous when moistened ..... {\b 36. Sisymbrella}
\par
39 Siliqua not attenuate; seeds not mucilaginous
\par
40 Seeds in 1 row in each loculus ................................................ {\b 35. Barbarea}
\par
40 Seeds in 2 rows in each loculus ................................................ {\b 37. Rorippa}
\par
38 Valves with distinct median vein
\par
41 Seeds in 2 or more rows in each loculus ............................... {\b 87. Diplotaxis}
\par
41 Seeds in 1 row in each loculus, rarely somewhat 2-rowed towards the apex
\par
42 Cauline leaves simple, entire, amplexicaul
\par
43 Sepals erect; all leaves simple, entire .................................... {\b 84. Conringia}
\par
43 Sepals erecto-patent or patent; lower leaves lobed,
\par
   sinuate-dentate or sinuate-crenate .............................................. {\b 88. Brassica}
\par
42 Cauline leaves toothed or lobed, rarely entire, then not amplexicaul
\par
44 Leaves all or nearly all basal .................................................... {\b 88. Brassica}
\par
44 Flowering stem leafy
\par
45 Valves of the siliqua rounded on the back; seeds globose ....... {\b 88. Brassica}
\par
45 Valves of the siliqua keeled; seeds ovoid, ellipsoidal or oblong
\par
46 Valves of the siliqua not or only slightly torulose .................. {\b 35. Barbarea}
\par
46 Valves of the siliqua torulose .............................................. {\b 91. Erucastrum}
\par
22 Petals white, pink or purple
\par
47 Small, much-branched shrub with crowded, pinnatisect leaves
\par
   divided into ± fleshy segments; filaments of the inner stamens
\par
   united in pairs ................................................................ {\b 86. Euzomodendron}
\par
47 Habit and leaves not as above; filaments free
\par
48 Valves of the siliqua with 3-7 distinct longitudinal veins
\par
49 Leaves reniform to triangular-ovate, dentate, cordate;
\par
   plant smelling of garlic when crushed .......................................... {\b 6. Alliaria}
\par
49 Leaves longer than wide, entire to pinnate, not cordate;
\par
   plant not smelling of garlic
\par
50 Lower segment of fruit indehiscent, either sterile and stipitate
\par
   or very small with 0-2 seeds .................................................. {\b 107. Raphanus}
\par
50 Lower segment of most fruits dehiscent, with 2 or more seeds
\par
51 Petals white with violet veins; siliqua at least 2 cm,
\par
   erecto-patent ............................................................................... {\b 92. Coincya}
\par
51 Petals purple; siliqua not more than 2 cm, erect and closely
\par
   appressed to the stem ................................................................. {\b 98. Erucaria}
\par
48 Valves of the siliqua 1-veined, sometimes with reticulate
\par
   lateral veins, or without veins
\par
52 Siliqua with a distinct transverse articulation, the lower
\par
   segment sometimes sterile and stipitiform .................................... {\b 99. Cakile}
\par
52 Siliqua not transversely articulated
\par
53 Siliqua not more than 7 times as long as wide
\par
54 Siliqua indehiscent, oblong-pyriform; leaves suborbicular to
\par
   ovate, cordate ...................................................................... {\b 12. Sobolewskia}
\par
54 Siliqua dehiscent, not oblong-pyriform;
\par

\par
314}
\par