{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}
\pard\f0\fs28\li200 14 Ovules not more than 30 in each loculus; siliqua rarely
\par   more than 60 mm ..................................................................... {\b 8. austriacum}
\par 14 Ovules 40-60 in each loculus; siliqua 40-100(-180) mm
\par 15 Uppermost leaves pinnatisect, with the terminal lobe
\par   linear ...................................................................................... {\b 12. altissimum}
\par 15 Uppermost leaves entire or hastate, with the terminal lobe oblong or
\par   lanceolate ................................................................................... {\b 13. orientale}
\par 13 Pedicel thinner than the siliqua, rarely more than 0·5 mm in diameter
\par   at the base
\par 16 Inflorescence very contracted, the young siliquae distinctly
\par   overtopping the flowers and buds; anthers c. 0·7 mm .......................... {\b 3. irio}
\par 16 Inflorescence elongate, the young siliquae not or scarcely
\par   overtopping the flowers; anthers 1-3 mm
\par 17 Siliqua less than 15 mm, usually strongly contorted ............. {\b 8. austriacum}
\par 17 Siliqua more than 15 mm, straight or only slightly contorted
\par 18 Septum of the siliqua white or yellowish, opaque; stem glabrous
\par   or with short, upwardly curving hairs; seeds 1-1·5 mm
\par 19 Valves of the siliqua with slender veins; septum not or only
\par   slightly foveolate; petals usually less than 6·5 mm .................. {\b 8. austriacum}
\par 19 Valves of the siliqua with prominent, usually very thick veins;
\par   septum foveolate; petals more than 6·5 mm ...... ({\b 9-11}). {\b crassifolium} group
\par 18 Septum of the siliqua ± hyaline; stem glabrous or hispid
\par 20 Seeds 0·7-1 mm; petals 4-7 mm
\par 21 Stem and leaves pubescent, at least in the lower part;
\par   basal leaves not distinctly larger than the cauline,
\par   often dead at anthesis ..................................................................... {\b 4. loeselii}
\par 21 Stem and leaves glabrous or subglabrous; basal leaves 15-35 cm,
\par   persistent, much larger than the cauline .................................... {\b 5. assoanum}
\par 20 Seeds 1-1·5 mm; petals 6-10 mm
\par 22 Lower leaves deeply pinnatisect with c. 4 pairs of lobes;
\par   siliqua not more than 1 mm in diameter, the values ± distinctly
\par   3-veined .............................................................................. {\b 6. polymorphum}
\par 22 Lower leaves triangular-hastate with prominent basal lobes;
\par   siliqua up to 1·2 mm in diameter, the valves with weak lateral
\par   veins ............................................................................................ {\b 7. volgense}
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28 Sect. KIBERA (Adanson) DC. Inflorescence bracteate. Petals white. Valves of the siliqua with a median vein and reticulate lateral veins.
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28 {\b 1. S. supinum} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 657 (1753) ({\i Braya supina }(L.) Koch). Annual 5-35 cm, shortly pubescent with patent hairs. Leaves sinuate-pinnatisect , the terminal lobe oblong to obovate, the laterals linear to oblong; lobes often shallowly lobed or coarsely toothed. Pedicels 1-2 mm in flower, 2-4 mm in fruit. Petals mm; anthers 0·5-0·7 mm. Siliqua 10-30 × 1·5-2 mm, obtuse, pubescent; style 1-2·5 mm. 2n = 42. • {\i From Spain to N.W. Russia; local and in many regions transitory}. †Be Ga †Ge He †Ho Hs .s(B, C) Su.
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28 Sect. NORTA (Adanson) DC. Leaves simple. Inflorescence ebracteate. Petals yellow. Valves of the siliqua 3-veined.
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. S. strictissimum} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 660 (1753). Perennial 50-100(-150) cm, glabrescent or shortly pubescent. Leaves ovate or lanceolate, acute to acuminate, dentate or entire. Pedicels (4-)8-15 mm; Petals 4·5-10 mm; stamens 4-7 mm; anthers 1-2 mm. Siliqua (15-)30-80 × 0·7-2 mm. Seeds 1·5-3 mm. 2n = 28. •{\i  From France and Italy eastwards to E.C. Russia and Bulgaria; introduced further west.} Al Au Bu Cz Ga Ge He Hu It Ju Po Rm Rs(C, W, E) [Br Hb ?Hs].
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28 Sect. IRIO DC. Inflorescence ebracteate. Petals yellow. Valves of the siliqua 3-veined.
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 3. S. irio} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 659 (1753). Annual up to 60 cm, glabrescent or with long, curved hairs. Lower leaves sinuate-pinnatifid, the terminal lobe larger than the laterals; cauline leaves lobed or entire and hastate, shortly petiolate. Inflorescence condensed, the young siliquae overtopping the flowers and buds; pedicels 3-6 mm in flower, up to 20 mm in fruit. Petals 2·5-3 5(-6) mm; anthers c. 0·7 mm. Siliqua 25-65 × 0·7-1·2 mm, torulose; style 0·3-0·7 mm; septum more or less hyaline. Seeds 0·7-1·1 mm. 2n = 14, 42.{\i  Native in S. Europe; widely naturalized elsewhere.} *Au Bl Bu Co Cr Ga Gr He Hs It Ju Lu *Rm Sa Si Tu [Br Cz Hb Ho Hu Rs(B, C, W)].
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 4. S. loeselii} L.,{\i  Cent. Pl. }{\b 1: }18 (1755) ({\i S. laeselii} auct.). Annual 20-100(-180) cm, usually more or less hispid. Leaves lyrate- or sinuate-pinnatisect, the terminal lobe triangular-ovate to oblong; upper shortly petiolate. Pedicels 5-14 mm. Petals 4-7 mm; anthers c. 1·5 mm. Siliqua (10-)15-45 × 0·6-1 mm; style 0·5-1·2 mm; septum more or less hyaline. Seeds 0·7-1 mm. 2n = 14.{\i  C. & E. Europe, westwards to Germany and Italy; often introduced in the west and north.} Au Bu Cz Ge Gr Hu It Ju Po Rm Rs(B, C, W, K, E) Tu [Be Br Da Ga He Ho Hs Su].
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 5. S. assoanum} Loscos & Pardo, {\i Ser. Pl. Arag.} 6 (1863). like {\b 4} but the stem glabrous or shortly pubescent at the base; leaves glabrous or subglabrous; basal leaves 15-35 cm, much larger than the cauline, the terminal lobe oblong-elliptical; cauline leaves often simple; petals 4-6 mm; anthers c. 1 mm.{\i  E. & C. Spain}. Hs.
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 6. S. polymorphum} (Murray) Roth, {\i Man. Bot.}{\b  2}: 946 (1830) ({\i S. junceum} Bieb.). Annual or perennial 20-100 cm, glabrescent, or hispid at the base. Lower leaves pinnatisect, the terminal lobe large, ovate, the laterals linear; upper leaves entire, linear. Petals 6-9 mm; anthers 1·5-3 mm. Siliqua (12-)20-40 × 0·7-1 mm, the style rarely more than 0·7 mm; septum more or less hyaline. Seeds 1-1·5 mm. {\i E. & E.C. Europe}. Bu Hu Po Rm Rs(C, W, K, E) [Rs(N)].
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 7. S. volgense} Bieb. ex E. Fourn.,{\i  Rech. Fam. Crucif.} 97 (1865). like {\b 6} but rhizomatous perennial, more or less glabrous or shortly pubescent at the base; lower leaves ovate or elliptic-triangular, hastate, with prominent basal lobes; petals 6-10 mm; siliqua 25-60 × 0·7-1·2 mm, the style 0·4-1 mm; valves with weak lateral veins. 2n = 14.{\i  S.E. Russia; locally naturalized elsewhere.} Rs(E) [Br Cz Ge Po Rs(B, C, W)].
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28 The leaves of this species are sometimes entire.
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 8. S. austriacum} Jacq., {\i Fl. Austr. }{\b 3: }35 (1775) ({\i S. pyrenaicum} (L.) Vill., non L., {\i S. multisiliquosum} Willk.). Biennial or perennial 10-100 cm, almost glabrous or with upward-curving, setose hairs. Leaves entire to sinuate-pinnatisect. Petals 3-7(-8) mm; anthers
\par
\par 319}
\par