{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 pale pink; apex of inner petals dark purple; lower petal with rather broad, patent margin. Fruit 2-2·5 × 2·2-2·5 mm, subglobose, obscurely keeled, rugose when dry; apex very obtuse. 2n = 80. {\i Often on gypsaceous soils. S., C. & E. Spain, S. Portugal.} Hs Lu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 26. F. densiflora} DC., {\i Cat. Pl. Horti Monsp. }113 (1813) ({\i F. micrantha }Lag.). Raceme 15- to 30(-35)-flowered, much exceeding the very short or obsolete peduncle. Bracts normally exceeding the erecto-patent fruiting pedicels. Sepals (2-)2·5-3·5 × (1·5-)2-3 mm, subentire or laciniate. Corolla 6-7 mm, pink; wings of upper petal and apex of inner blackish-red; lower petal with patent margin, subspathulate. Fruit 2-2·5 × 2-2·5 mm, subglobose, keeled, rugose when dry; apex rounded-obtuse. 2n = 32.{\i  W. & S. Europe, extending to N.E. Romania}. Al Be Bl Br Bu Co Ga Gr Hb Hs It Ju Lu Rm Sa Si Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 27. F. bracteosa} Pomel, {\i Nouv. Mat. Fl. Atl.} 239 (1874). Raceme 15- to 36-flowered, longer than the short peduncle. Bracts as long as or longer than the erecto-patent fruiting pedicels. Sepals 1·5-2·5 × 1-1·2 mm, dentate or subentire. Corolla c. 4·5 mm, deep pink. Fruit 2-2·2 × 2-2·2 mm, subrotund, strongly keeled, rugose when dry; apex emarginate. 2n = 16.{\i  S.E. Spain} ({\i Almeria, Malaga});{\i  Islas Baleares.} Bl Hs. ({\i N. Africa, S.W. Asia}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 28. F. rostellata} Knaf, {\i Flora} ({\i Regensb}.){\b  29}: 290 (1846). Raceme 15- to 30( 40)-flowered, longer than the short peduncle. Bracts 1/2 to 1/3 as long as the patent fruiting pedicels. Sepals 2-3 × 1-1·5 mm, dentate. Corolla 5-7(-9) mm, purplish-pink; wings of upper petal and apex of inner ones blackish-purple; lower petal with patent margin, spathulate. Fruit 2-2·5 × 1·7-2 mm, subglobose to ovoid, keeled, nearly smooth or faintly rugulose when dry; apex subtruncate.{\i  C. & S.E. Europe.} Al Au Bu Cz Ge Gr Hu Ju Po Rm Rs(C, W) Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 29. F. officinalis} L.,{\i  Sp. Pl.} 700 (1753). Raceme longer than peduncle. Bracts ½ as long to nearly as long as the erecto-patent fruiting pedicels. Sepals 1·5-3·5 × 0·7-1·5 mm, irregularly dentate. Corolla 7-9 mm, purplish-pink; wings of upper petal and apex of inner ones blackish-red; lower petal with patent margin, spathulate. Fruit c. 2 × 2·5-3 mm, more or less obreniform, obscurely keeled, rugose when dry; apex truncate or slightly emarginate.{\i  Almost throughout Europe}. All except Az Sb; only as a casual in Fa Is.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp.{\b  officinalis} : Raceme normally more than 20-flowered. Sepals 2·5-3·5 × 1-1·5 mm. 2n = 32. {\i Throughout the range of the species.}
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b wirtgenii} (Koch) Arcangeli,{\i  Comp. Fl. Ital.} 27 (1882) ({\i F. wirtgenii} Koch): Raceme 10- to 20(-24)-flowered. Sepals 1·5-2 × 0·7-1 mm. 2n = 48. {\i W., C. & S. Europe}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 30. F. ragusina} (Pugsley) Pugsley, {\i Jour. Linn. Soc. London} ({\i Bot}.){\b  49}: 524 (1934). like {\b 29} but habit more slender; foliage less dissected; peduncle not much shorter than raceme; sepals 2 × 1·5 mm, subglobose-ovate; corolla c. 9 mm; upper petal usually subacute or shortly rostellate; fruit rounded-truncate or truncate and mucronulate at apex; apical pits black-spotted. •{\i  Jugoslavia and Albania.} Al Ju.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 31. F. jankae} Hausskn.,{\i  Flora} ({\i Regensb}.){\b  56}: 491 (1873). like {\b 29} but sepals c. 1·5 × 0·7 mm; corolla 4-5 mm; fruit c. 2 × 2·5 mm, ovoid, acuminate. •{\i  N.W. Romania }({\i Sacueni}). Rm.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 32. F. caroliana} Pugsley, {\i Jour. Linn. Soc. London} ({\i Bot}.){\b  47: }448 (1927). Raceme 10- to 15(-20)-flowered, much longer than the short peduncle. Bracts about ½ as long as the suberect fruiting pedicels. Sepals 1·5-2 × 0·7-1 mm, irregularly incise-dentate. Corolla 6-7 mm, pink; inner petals with dark purple apex; lower petal obovate-spathulate, with patent margin. Fruit c. 2 × 2·5 mm, subglobose, obscurely keeled, rugose when dry; apex rounded-obtuse with a short apiculus when young. •{\i  N. France} ({\i near Arras}). Ga.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 33. F. segetalis} (Hammar) Coutinho,{\i  Fl. Port.} 246 (1913). Raceme 12- to 20(-36)-flowered, sessile. Bracts slightly shorter than or equalling the erecto-patent fruiting pedicels. Sepals 1·5-2 × 1-1·2 mm, dentate. Corolla 6-7 mm, pink or pale pink, rarely almost white, the inner petals tipped dark purple. Fruit 2-2·4 × 2-2·4 mm, triangular-ovoid with a broad base, finely rugose when dry; apex subacute. 2n = 48.{\i  S. Spain}. Hs. ({\i N. Africa}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 34. F. schleicheri} Soyer-Willemet, {\i Observ. Pl. Fr.} 17 (1828). Raceme usually 12- to 25-flowered, at first equalling but later exceeding peduncle. Bracts about 1/3 as long as the suberect fruiting pedicels. Sepals 0·5-1 × 0·2-0·7 mm, irregularly incise-dentate. Corolla 5-6 mm, deep pink; wings of upper petal and apex of inner dark purple; lower petal with patent margin. Fruit c. 2 × 2 mm, subglobose, keeled, obscurely rugose when dry; apex rounded-obtuse and apiculate.{\i  C. Europe, extending to S. France, Bulgaria and E. Russia}. Au Bu Cz Ga Ge ?Gr He Hu It Ju Po Rm Rs(C, W, K, E).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 35. F. microcarpa} (Hausskn.) Pugsley,{\i  Jour. Linn. Soc. London} ({\i Bot}.) {\b 44}: 312 (1919). like {\b 34} but with dwarfer and more erect habit; raceme 20- to 35-flowered; bracts ½ as long as pedicels; flowers smaller and less deeply coloured; fruit c. 1·75 × 1·75 mm.{\i  S.E. Russia} ({\i near Volgograd}). Rs(E).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 36. F. vaillantii} Loisel. in Desv., {\i Jour. Bot. Rédigé}{\b  2}: 358 (1809). Lobes of leaves not channelled. Raceme usually 6- to 20(-25)flowered, longer than the short peduncle. Bracts about ¾ as long as the more or less erect fruiting pedicels. Sepals 0·7-1 × 0·3-0·5 mm, more or less laciniate-dentate. Corolla 5-6 mm, pale to deep pink; apex of inner petals and wings of upper petal often tinged with blackish-red; lower petal with patent margin, spathulate; spur long and straight. Fruit 2-2·2 × 2-2·2 mm, subglobose, obscurely keeled, granular-rugose when dry; apex rounded and mucronulate when young. 2n = 32.{\i  Most of Europe, but rare N. of} 55°{\i  N}. Al Au Be Br Co Cz Da Fe Ga Ge Gr He Ho Hs Hu It Ju Po Rm Rs(B, C, W, K, E) Si Su Tu [Lu].
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 37. F. schrammii} (Ascherson) Velen.,{\i  Fl. Bulg. }22 (1891) ({\i F. vaillantii} subsp.{\i  schrammii} (Ascherson) Hausskn.). like {\b 36} but leaf-segments narrower; raceme 6- to 15-flowered, more or less sessile; flower paler; fruit 1·7-2 × 1·7-2 mm; apex obtuse and apiculate. {\i Scattered through Europe from France and Spain to Greece and Ukraine}. Al Bu Ga Ge Gr He Hs Hu Rs(W).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Perhaps not specifically distinct from {\b 36}, but in some respects intermediate between {\b 34} and {\b 36}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 38. F. pugsleyana} (Maire ex Pugsley) Liden, {\i Anal. Jard. Bot. Madrid}{\b  41}: 222 (1984) ({\i F. schrammii} var.{\i  pugsleyana} Maire ex Pugsley). Raceme 5- to 15-flowered, sessile. Bracts about ¾ as long as the thickened, short fruiting pedicels. Sepals 0·2-0·7 × 0·1-0·5 mm, linear-lanceolate and entire or broader and of 2 or 3 lobes. Corolla 5-6 mm, white, often suffused pinkish-red; lower petal spathulate; spur very short and ascending. Fruit 2-2·2 × 2-2·5 mm, ovoid, densely and finely rugose when dry; apex strongly apiculate. 2n = 32.{\i  S. Spain} ({\i Almeria and Malaga}). Hs. ({\i Morocco}.)
\par

\par
310}
\par