{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28\li200     at least the cauline leaves distinctly longer than wide
\par
55 Seeds in 1 row in each loculus
\par
56 Basal leaves ovate to orbicular; petals 2-4 mm ......................... {\b 7. Eutrema}
\par
56 Basal leaves ovate or obovate; petals 4-11 mm .......................... {\b 42. Arabis}
\par
55 Seeds in 2 rows in each loculus
\par
57 Stem hairy, at least at the base; radicle incumbent ...................... {\b 10. Braya}
\par
57 Stem glabrous; radicle accumbent
\par
58 Leaves pinnate ..................................................................... {\b 38. Nasturtium}
\par
58 Leaves simple .............................................................................. {\b 57. Draba}
\par
53 Siliqua more than 7 times as long as wide
\par
59 Valves flat, the siliqua strongly compressed
\par
60 Valves coiling spirally from the base on dehiscence ........... {\b 40. Cardamine}
\par
60 Valves not coiling spirally on dehiscence
\par
61 Petals pale yellow or yellowish
\par
62 Leaves sinuate-dentate ................................................................ {\b 42. Arabis}
\par
62 Leaves entire .......................................................................... {\b 84. Conringia}
\par
61 Petals white, pink or purple
\par
63 Cauline leaves sessile .................................................................. {\b 42. Arabis}
\par
63 At least the middle and lower cauline leaves distinctly petiolate
\par
64 Valves of the siliqua smooth, not torulose .................................. {\b 42. Arabis}
\par
64 Valves of the siliqua ± torulose ...................................... {\b 41. Cardaminopsis}
\par
59 Valves convex, the siliqua not strongly compressed
\par
65 Valves with the median vein weak or absent
\par
66 Siliqua 30-60 mm; pedicels not more than 3 mm in fruit,
\par
   almost as thick as the siliqua ................................................ {\b 36. Sisymbrella}
\par
66 Siliqua not more than 30 mm; pedicels up to 10 mm or more
\par
   in fruit, thinner than the siliqua ............................................. {\b 38. Nasturtium}
\par
65 Valves with a distinct median vein
\par
67 Seeds in 2 rows in each loculus
\par
68 Siliqua without a beak, the style very short; cauline
\par
   leaves with rounded auricles at the base .............................. {\b 9. Thellungiella}
\par
68 Siliqua with a distinct beak or style up to 7 mm; cauline
\par
   leaves cuneate or hastate at the base ....................................... {\b 87. Diplotaxis}
\par
67 Seeds in 1 row in each loculus
\par
69 Siliqua with a beak at least 5 mm ............................................ {\b 88. Brassica}
\par
69 Siliqua not beaked, the style up to 3·5 mm
\par
70 Cauline leaves sessile, cordate-amplexicaul .......................... {\b 84. Conringia}
\par
70 Cauline leaves not amplexicaul
\par
71 Most flowers subtended by a bract ...................................... {\b 1. Sisymbrium}
\par
71 Most flowers ebracteate
\par
72 Petals emarginate, sometimes only shallowly; inner sepals
\par
   saccate at the base ................................................................ {\b 3. Murbeckiella}
\par
72 Petals entire or absent; inner sepals not saccate at the base
\par
73 Basal leaves truncate or cordate at the base; seeds c. 3 mm,
\par
   winged .......................................................................................... {\b 7. Eutrema}
\par
73 Basal leaves attenuate at the base; seeds less than 1 mm,
\par
   not winged .............................................................................. {\b 8. Arabidopsis}
\par
13 Hairs stellate, branched, or a mixture of branched and unbranched
\par
74 Stigma deeply 2-lobed, the lobes sometimes erect and connate to
\par
   form a beak on the siliqua
\par
75 Lobes of the stigma with a dorsal swelling or horn ............... {\b 28. Matthiola}
\par
75 Lobes of the stigma without a swelling or horn
\par
76 Style at least ½ as long as the rest of the siliqua ................. {\b 32. Chorispora}
\par
76 Style much less than ½ as long as the rest of the siliqua
\par
77 Petals yellow
\par
78 Sepals not saccate; filaments of the inner stamens connate
\par
   in pairs; siliqua articulated ........................................... {\b 25. Sterigmostemum}
\par
78 Inner sepals strongly saccate at the base; filaments all free;
\par
   siliqua not articulated
\par
79 Hairs all medifixed; style at least 2 mm in fruit ................... {\b 18. Erysimum}
\par
79 Hairs various, but not all medifixed; style not exceeding
\par
   1 mm in fruit ............................................................................. {\b 20. Hesperis}
\par
77 Petals white, pink or violet, rarely reddish
\par
80 Filaments of the inner stamens connate in pairs; seeds in
\par
   2 rows in each loculus ............................................................ {\b 24. Leptaleum}
\par
80 All filaments free; seeds in 1 row in each loculus
\par
81 Lobes of the stigma free .......................................................... {\b 20. Hesperis}
\par
81 Lobes of the stigma erect, connate ....................................... {\b 21. Malcolmia}
\par
74 Stigma capitate, retuse or slightly 2-lobed
\par
82 Siliqua with 2 or 4 horns at the apex
\par
83 Siliqua with 2 horns at the apex; petals white ....................... {\b 29. Notoceras}
\par
83 Siliqua with 4 horns at the apex; petals yellow ...................... {\b 30. Tetracme}
\par
82 Siliqua without horns at the apex
\par
84 Leaves 2- to 4-pinnatisect
\par
85 Petals shorter than the sepals; siliqua 0·5-1 mm wide;
\par
   seeds 0·8-1 mm ....................................................................... {\b 4. Descurainia}
\par
85 Petals exceeding the sepals; siliqua 1·2-1·5 mm wide;
\par
   seeds c. 2 mm .......................................................................... {\b 5. Hugueninia}
\par
84 Leaves entire to pinnatisect
\par
86 Petals yellow
\par
87 Siliqua with mostly medifixed hairs lying transversely across it
\par
   ...................................................................................................... {\b 19. Syrenia}
\par
87 Hairs on siliqua not as above
\par
88 Cauline leaves cuneate to truncate at the base, not amplexicaul;
\par
   plant sometimes scapose (see also {\b 42})
\par
89 Seeds in 2 rows in each loculus; siliqua 3-7 times as long
\par
   as wide ........................................................................................... {\b 57. Draba}
\par

\par
315}
\par