{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28\li200      rarely obovate; plant scapose, rarely with few cauline leaves ...... {\b 57. Draba}
\par
123 Leaves ovate, cordate or truncate at the base; cauline
\par
    leaves present ........................................................................ {\b 62. Cochlearia}
\par
121 Petals white, lilac, pink or reddish
\par
124 Silicula longitudinally 6-veined, the veins in 2 groups of
\par
    3 which diverge from the base ............................................. {\b 34. Litwinowia}
\par
124 Silicula not longitudinally 6-veined
\par
125 Plant grey-pubescent .......................................................... {\b 60. Petrocallis}
\par
125 Plant green, glabrous or sparsely hairy
\par
126 Silicula with a short, broad, obtuse beak; petals unequal,
\par
    the inner distinctly longer than the outer ............................... {\b 103. Calepina}
\par
126 Silicula not beaked, but sometimes with a persistent style;
\par
     petals ± equal
\par
127 Robust plants up to 100 cm; roots fusiform ....................... {\b 39. Armoracia}
\par
127 Slender plants up to 40 cm; roots not fusiform
\par
128 Filaments with a tooth-like appendage at the base
\par
    (Balkan peninsula) ........................................................... {\b 53. Bornmuellera}
\par
128 Filaments without appendages
\par
129 Petals deeply bifid .................................................................. {\b 59. Erophila}
\par
129 Petals entire or emarginate
\par
130 Valves of the silicula ± flat ........................................................ {\b 57. Draba}
\par
130 Valves of the silicula convex
\par
131 Sepals persistent in fruit; valves of the silicula not
\par
    veined .................................................................................. {\b 64. Rhizobotrya}
\par
131 Sepals deciduous; valves of the silicula usually with distinct
\par
    veins, at least below
\par 
132 Filaments straight ............................................................... {\b 62. Cochlearia}
\par
132 Filaments strongly curved ...................................................... {\b 63. Kernera}
\par
118 Hairy, at least some of the hairs branched or stellate
\par
133 Sepals erect (calyx closed)
\par
134 Silicula indehiscent, subglobose or sometimes compressed,
\par
    reticulate-rugose ........................................................................... {\b 66. Neslia}
\par
134 Silicula dehiscent, variously shaped, not reticulate-rugose
\par
135 Silicula stipitate .................................................................. {\b 47. Alyssoides}
\par
135 Silicula sessile
\par
136 Petals pink, purple or violet ................................................... {\b 43. Aubrieta}
\par
136 Petals yellow or white
\par
137 Silicula compressed (petals short-clawed) ............................... {\b 50. Fibigia}
\par
137 Silicula inflated
\par
138 Seeds usually numerous; cauline leaves usually with amplexicaul
\par
    auricles; branched hairs dendritic or with only 2 or 3 rays .... {\b 65. Camelina}
\par
138 Seeds not more than 8 in each loculus; cauline leaves attenuate
\par
    at the base; hairs stellate, with more than 4 rays, or lepidote
\par
139 Petals 10-12 mm .................................................................... {\b 48. Degenia}
\par
139 Petals less than 9 mm ............................................................ {\b 49. Alyssum}
\par
133 Sepals patent or erecto-patent (calyx open)
\par
140 Petals deeply 2-lobed
\par
141 Scapigerous; leaves mainly in a basal rosette ........................ {\b 59. Erophila}
\par
141 Not scapigerous; cauline leaves present
\par
142 Flower-buds globose; basal leaves with the petioles enlarged
\par
    at the base and persistent ............................................................ {\b 52. Aurinia}
\par
142 Flower-buds oblong or ellipsoidal; basal leaves, if present,
\par
    with the petioles not enlarged at the base and persistent  ..........{\b 51. Berteroa}
\par
140 Petals entire or emarginate
\par
143 Petals yellow
\par
144 Valves of the silicula reticulately veined; cauline leaves
\par
    sagittate-amplexicaul ..................................................... {\b 11. Chrysochamela}
\par
144 Valves of the silicula not reticulately veined;
\par
    cauline leaves not sagittate-amplexicaul
\par
145 Petals at least 12 mm; seeds and ovules 4-8 in
\par
    each loculus ........................................................................... {\b 47. Alyssoides}
\par
145 Petals not more than 8 mm
\par
146 Seeds and ovules numerous in each loculus; plant dwarf,
\par
    ± scapose, usually perennial ......................................................... {\b 57. Draba}
\par
146 Seeds and ovules 1 or 2(-8) in each loculus; plant with a
\par
    leafy stem ................................................................................... {\b 52. Aurinia}
\par
143 Petals white, pink or purple
\par
147 Silicula indehiscent, longitudinally 4-veined; pedicels stout,
\par
    about as thick as the silicula .................................................. {\b 33. Euclidium}
\par
147 Silicula dehiscent, not longitudinally 4-veined; pedicels
\par
    much thinner than the silicula
\par
148 Hairs nearly all medifixed
\par
149 Silicula glabrous; filaments with a short tooth at
\par
    the base ............................................................................. {\b 53. Bornmuellera}
\par
149 Silicula pubescent, sometimes becoming ± glabrous;
\par
    filaments without appendages ................................................. {\b 54. Lobularia}
\par
148 Hairs stellate or dendritic
\par
150 Ovules and seeds 1 or 2 in each loculus
\par
    (seeds usually winged) ............................................................... {\b 52. Aurinia}
\par
150 Ovules and seeds at least 4 in each loculus
\par
151 Filaments of the inner stamens winged ........................... {\b 56. Schivereckia}
\par

\par
317}
\par