{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 67.     CAPPARACEAE}
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc  Edit. V.H. Heywood.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Herbs, shrubs or trees. Leaves simple, or ternate to palmate, alternate, stipulate or not; stipules sometimes spinose. Flowers solitary or in racemes, actinomorphic or more usually zygomorphic, hermaphrodite. Sepals 4. Petals 4. Stamens 6 to many. Ovary 1, superior, on a gynophore; carpels 2. Fruit a 2-valved, unilocular capsule, or a berry.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Leaves all simple; flowers solitary; fruit a berry ........................ {\b 1. Capparis }
\par
1 At least some leaves compound; flowers in racemes; fruit a capsule
\par
2 Petals entire; stamens 6 .................................................................{\b  2. Cleome}
\par
2 Petals bifid; stamens 12 or more ................................................. {\b 3. Polanisia}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 1.          Capparis}              L.
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc By V.H. Heywood (Ed.1) revised by R.N. Highton & J.R. Akeroyd (Ed.2)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Shrubs with simple leaves, and usually with spinose stipules. Flowers solitary, showy, zygomorphic; petals white or pink; stamens numerous. Fruit a berry borne on a long gynophore.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Literature: M. Zohary, {\i Bull. Res. Counc. Israel}{\b  8D}: 49-64 (1960). M. Jacobs, {\i Blumea}{\b  12}: 385-541 (1965).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. C. spinosa} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 503 (1753) (incl. {\i C. ovata} Desf., {\i C. sicula} Duh.). Stems trailing or ascending, branched. Leaves petiolate, ovate to suborbicular, obtuse or emarginate, mucronate, sometimes obscurely. Stipules setaceous to spinose, often recurved, but sometimes weakly developed. Flowers 5-7 cm in diameter, slightly zygomorphic. Fruit 1-4 cm, oblong to somewhat pyriform.{\i  Rocks, walls and other dry places. Mediterranean region and Krym}. Al *Bl Co Cr *Ga Gr Hs It Ju Rs(K) Sa Si Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 A very variable species with variants treated as species or varieties by different authors. The treatment here follows R.N. Higton & J.R. Akeroyd,{\i  Bot. Jour. Linn. Soc.}{\b  106}: 104-112 (1991).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp.{\b  spinosa} : Leaves obovate, ovate or elliptical, rarely cordate at the base, obtuse to acuminate with mucro of varying length, glabrous to densely pubescent, chartaceous. Stipules at least 2 mm, often spinose, conspicuous.{\i  Throughout the range of the species.}
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp.{\b  rupestris} (Sm.) Nyman,{\i  Consp.} 68 (1878) ({\i C. rupestris} Sm., {\i C. inermis }Turra): Branches more pendent. Leaves ovate to suborbicular, rounded to cordate at the base, obtuse or emarginate with mucro vestigial (less than 0·25 mm), glabrous to sparsely pubescent, coriaceous or fleshy. Stipules less than 2 mm, setaceous, inconspicuous. Ovary longer and narrower.{\i  Coastal rocks and cliffs, usually on limestone. almost throughout the range of the species}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 The common plant in Europe is subsp. ({\b a}) var. {\i canescens} Cosson ({\i C. ovata }var.{\i  canescens} (Cosson) Heywood), with leaves obovate or elliptical, petiole sulcate and midrib immersed on the adaxial surface. The flowers are somewhat smaller and more strongly zygomorphic than those of var.{\i  spinosa}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 There has been selection for large flower-buds in subsp. ({\b a}), which is probably introduced in the western part of its range, for their use as a condiment (Capers).
\par

\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 2.          Cleome}              L.
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc  By A.O. Chater & J.R. Akeroyd.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Erect, usually glandular-pubescent, viscid annuals with exstipulate, simple or ternate leaves. Flowers in long, bracteate racemes; sepals 4, deciduous; petals 4, contracted into a distinct claw, more or less dimorphic; stamens 6. Receptacle short. Fruit a linear, 2-valved, many-seeded capsule on a long gynophore.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Literature: A. Carlström,{\i  Willdenowia }{\b 14}: 119-130 (1984).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Ripe fruit more than 50 mm; upper bracts at least as long
\par
  as pedicels ...................................................................................... {\b 3. violacea}
\par
1 Ripe fruit less than 50 mm; upper bracts c. 1/3 as long as pedicels
\par
2 Sepals and pedicels glandular-pubescent;
\par
  sepals lanceolate, acuminate ............................................ {\b 1. ornithopodioides}
\par
2 Sepals and pedicels glabrous or with a few ± sessile glands;
\par
  sepals oblong, obtuse or cuspidate ................................................... {\b 2. iberica}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. C. ornithopodioides} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 672 (1753) (incl. {\i C. aurea }Celak., non Torrey & A. Gray). Plant glandular-pubescent, at least on pedicels and sepals. Stems 15-50 cm, erect, usually branched. Leaves petiolate, ternate, except for the uppermost which are simple; leaflets oblong-lanceolate, entire. Bracts of upper flowers c. 1/3 as long as pedicels. Sepals lanceolate, acuminate, unequal. Petals c. 3 mm, whitish or yellow, sometimes red-striped, slightly dimorphic. Ripe fruit 15-25 × 1·5-2·5 mm, torulose, deflexed.{\i  Open, sandy and stony habitats. S. part of Balkan peninsula.} Al Bu Gr Ju Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. C. iberica} DC.,{\i  Prodr.}{\b  1}: 240 (1824) ({\i C. ornithopodioides} L. subsp.{\i  canescens} (Steven ex DC.) Tzvelev). like {\b 1} but glabrous or sparsely glandular-pubescent; sepals oblong, obtuse or cuspidate, subequal.{\i  Open, often disturbed habitats. S.E. Russia, Krym; Turkey-in-Europe.} Rs(W, K) Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 3. C. violacea} L.,{\i  Sp. Pl.} 672 (1753). like {\b 1} but the middle and upper cauline leaves simple; leaflets linear or linear-lanceolate; upper bracts at least as long as pedicels; petals violet, spotted with yellow, rarely entirely yellow, strongly dimorphic (the longer petals 4-6 mm); ripe fruit 50-100 × 2 mm, not torulose. {\i S. & W. Spain, Portugal}. Hs Lu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 3.           Polanisia}          Rafin.
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc  By J.R. Akeroyd.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Like {\i Cleome} but stamens 12-16; capsule linear to oblong, sessile or on a very short gynophore.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. P. trachysperma} Torrey & A. Gray,{\i  Fl. N. Amer.}{\b  1}: 669 (1840) ({\i P. dodecandra }(L.) DC. var.{\i  trachysperma} (Torrey & Gray) Iltis). Stems 20-50 cm, erect. Leaves petiolate, ternate; leaflets 3-7 cm, elliptical or oblong, obtuse, entire. Petals 8-12 mm, yellowish-white, bifid, the blade usually shorter than the claw. Stamens 12-16; filaments unequal, up to 20 mm, long-exserted, purple. Fruit 3-7 cm, erect, linear to oblong. Seeds c. 2 mm, areolate.{\i  Naturalized in N.W. & N.C. Italy.} [It.] ({\i North America}.)
\par

\par
312}
\par