{\rtf1\ansi \deff4\deflang1033{\fonttbl{\f4\froman\fcharset0\fprq2 Times New Roman;}}{\colortbl;\red0\green0\blue0;\red0\green0\blue255;\red0\green255\blue255;\red0\green255\blue0;\red255\green0\blue255;\red255\green0\blue0;\red255\green255\blue0;\red255\green255\blue255;\red0\green0\blue128;\red0\green128\blue128;\red0\green128\blue0;\red128\green0\blue128;\red128\green0\blue0;\red128\green128\blue0;\red128\green128\blue128;\red192\green192\blue192;}{\stylesheet{\widctlpar \f4\fs20\lang2057 \snext0 Normal;}{\*\cs10 \additive Default Paragraph Font;}}{\info{\author dddd}{\operator dddd}{\creatim\yr1998\mo11\dy11\hr16\min48}{\revtim\yr1998\mo11\dy11\hr16\min49}{\version2}{\edmins1}{\nofpages4}{\nofwords864}{\nofchars4928}{\*\company  }{\vern57431}}\widowctrl\ftnbj\aenddoc\hyphcaps0 \fet0\sectd \linex0 {\*\pnseclvl1\pnucrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl2\pnucltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl3\pndec\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl4\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl5\pndec\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl6\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl7\pnlcrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl8\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl9\pnlcrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}
\pard\plain \li200\ \f4\fs20\lang2057 {\fs28 151 Filaments of the inner stamens not winged ............................... }{\b\fs28 57. Draba}{\fs28 
\par 116 Silicula angustiseptate (compressed at right-angles to the septum)
\par 152 Fruit didymous, reniform or cordate
\par 153 Cauline leaves sessile, amplexicaul; petals 2\'b75-4 mm ........... }{\b\fs28 81. Cardaria}{\fs28 
\par 153 Cauline leaves shortly petiolate; petals 0\'b75-2 mm ............. }{\b\fs28 82. Coronopus}{\fs28 
\par 152 Fruit not didymous, reniform or cordate, but sometimes obcordate
\par 154 Outer petals conspicuously larger than the inner
\par 155 Style distinct, at least 0\'b75 mm
\par 156 Seeds 2 or 3 in each loculus ............................................ }{\b\fs28 71. Jonopsidium}{\fs28 
\par 156 Seeds solitary in each loculus ..................................................... }{\b\fs28 77. Iberis}{\fs28 
\par 155 Style inconspicuous, up to 0\'b73 mm
\par 157 Annual; stigma 2-lobed ........................................................ }{\b\fs28 73. Teesdalia}{\fs28 
\par 157 Caespitose perennial; stigma capitate ............................ }{\b\fs28 76. Teesdaliopsis}{\fs28 
\par 154 Petals (when present) equal in size
\par 158 Filaments with a wing or tooth-like appendage
\par 159 Leaves usually pinnatifid, mostly confined to a basal rosette;
\par     sepals erectopatent .................................................................. }{\b\fs28 73. Teesdalia}{\fs28 
\par 159 Leaves entire, not \'b1 confined to a basal rosette;
\par     sepals erect .......................................................................... }{\b\fs28 75. Aethionema}{\fs28 
\par 158 Filaments not appendaged
\par 160 Valves of fruit winged or strongly keeled
\par 161 Inflorescence bracteate, at least at the base
\par 162 Flowers white, pink or purple ......................................... }{\b\fs28 71. Jonopsidium}{\fs28 
\par 162 Flowers yellow ..................................................................... }{\b\fs28 72. Bivonaea}{\fs28 
\par 161 Inflorescence ebracteate
\par 163 Seeds 2-8 in each loculus ........................................................ }{\b\fs28 74. Thlaspi}{\fs28 
\par 163 Seeds solitary in each loculus
\par 164 Style 0\'b77-3 mm ........................................................................ }{\b\fs28 74. Thlaspi}{\fs28 
\par 164 Style short or absent ............................................................. }{\b\fs28 80. Lepidium}{\fs28 
\par 160 Valves of fruit not winged or keeled, or with a weak keel
\par 165 Fruits triangular-obcordate ..................................................... }{\b\fs28 67. Capsella}{\fs28 
\par 165 Fruits not triangular-obcordate
\par 166 Leaves simple, entire or with a few teeth or shallow lobes
\par 167 Valves of fruit convex, not strongly compressed ............... }{\b\fs28 62. Cochlearia}{\fs28 
\par 167 Valves of fruit \'b1 strongly compressed .......................... }{\b\fs28 69. Hymenolobus}{\fs28 
\par 166 Leaves pinnate or pinnatisect
\par 168 Perennial; seeds 1 or 2 in each loculus ............................... }{\b\fs28 68. Pritzelago}{\fs28 
\par 168 Annual or biennial
\par 169 Seeds 3-10 in each loculus; hairs unbranched when present
\par     .......................................................................................... }{\b\fs28 69. Hymenolobus}{\fs28 
\par 169 Seeds 1 or 2 in each loculus; hairs stellate when present
\par     ............................................................................................... }{\b\fs28 70. Hornungia}{\fs28 
\par 
\par }
\pard \qc\ {\fs28  }{\b\fs28 1.            Sisymbrium}{\fs28           L.
\par }{\fs24  By P.W. Ball.
\par 
\par }
\pard \ {\fs28 Annuals to perennials; glabrous or with unbranched hairs. Leaves entire to pinnate. Sepals not saccate at the base; petals yellow, rarely white, entire. Fruit a siliqua; valves usually 3-veined; style distinct or indistinct; stigma more or less 2-lobed. Seeds small (usually less than 2\'b75 mm).
\par 
\par Many of the widespread lowland species occur as weeds, and are often of uncertain status in many parts of Europe.
\par 
\par Literature: O.E. Schulz in Engler,}{\i\fs28  Pflanzenreich}{\b\fs28  86}{\fs28  (}{\b\fs28 IV.105}{\fs28 ): 46-157 (1924).
\par 
\par }
\pard \li200\ {\fs28 1 Inflorescence bracteate, at least in the lower part
\par 2 Petals white; valves of the siliqua with a distinct median vein and reticulate lateral veins ............................................................ }{\b\fs28 1. supinum}{\fs28 
\par 2 Petals pale yellow; valves of the siliqua 3-veined
\par 3 Petals 2\'b75-3\'b75 mm; style almost as thick as the siliqua ......... }{\b\fs28 16. runcinatum}{\fs28 
\par 3 Petals 1\'b75-2\'b75 mm; style distinctly thinner than the siliqua
\par 4 Pedicels 0\'b75-1 mm in fruit; siliqua straight to recurved;
\par   style 0\'b75-1 mm ..................................................................... }{\b\fs28 14. polyceratium}{\fs28 
\par 4 Pedicels 2-3 mm in fruit; siliqua \'b1 straight; style 1-2 mm ..... }{\b\fs28 15. confertum}{\fs28 
\par 1 Inflorescence ebracteate (rarely lowest 1-3 flowers bracteate)
\par 5 Siliqua not more than 20 mm, closely appressed to the stem
\par 6 Siliqua (7-)10-20 mm, straight, conical-cylindrical;
\par   petals 2-4 mm ............................................................................ }{\b\fs28 18. officinale}{\fs28 
\par 6 Siliqua 7-10 mm, curved or twisted, strongly compressed at the apex;
\par   petals c. 1\'b75 mm ............................................................. }{\b\fs28 19. cavanillesianum}{\fs28 
\par 5 Siliqua usually more than 20 mm, not closely appressed to the stem
\par 7 Lower leaves ovate, entire or dentate
\par 8 Annual; petals less than 3 mm, not exceeding the sepals .... }{\b\fs28 17. erysimoides}{\fs28 
\par 8 Biennial or perennial; petals more than 3 mm, exceeding the sepals
\par 9 Lower pedicels 5-15 mm in fruit; petals 4\'b75-10 mm ........... }{\b\fs28 2. strictissimum}{\fs28 
\par 9 Lower pedicels 3-6 mm in fruit; petals 3-5 mm ....................... }{\b\fs28 8. austriacum}{\fs28 
\par 7 At least the lower leaves deeply lobed or divided
\par 10 Petals less than 3 mm, shorter than or only slightly exceeding
\par    the sepals; anthers c. 0\'b75 mm
\par 11 Pedicels 3-6 mm in flower, up to 20 mm in fruit, and much thinner
\par    than the siliqua ..................................................................................... }{\b\fs28 3. irio}{\fs28 
\par 11 Pedicels 1-2 mm in flower, up to 5 mm in fruit, and almost as
\par    thick as the siliqua
\par 12 Lower leaves lyrate-pinnatifid, the lateral lobes obovate to
\par    lanceolate; stamens c. 3 mm, longer than the petals ............ }{\b\fs28 17. erysimoides}{\fs28 
\par 12 Lower leaves sinuate-pinnatifid, the lateral lobes \'b1 triangular;
\par    stamens c. 1\'b75 mm, shorter than the petals .............................. }{\b\fs28 15. confertum}{\fs28 
\par 10 Petals 3 mm or more, distinctly exceeding the sepals;
\par    anthers (0\'b77-)1-3 mm
\par 13 Pedicel about as thick as the siliqua, usually at least
\par    0\'b77 mm in diameter at the base
\par 
\par 318}
\par }