{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 89 Seeds in 1 row in each loculus; siliqua at least 10 times as
\par
   long as wide
\par
90 Scapose annual; siliqua not more than 0·8 mm wide ............ {\b 58. Drabopsis}
\par
90 Flowering stem leafy; siliqua usually more
\par
   than 0·8 mm wide .................................................................... {\b 18. Erysimum}
\par
88 Cauline leaves sagittate or cordate, amplexicaul; plant never scapose
\par
91 Siliqua not more than 6 times as long as wide ............. {\b 11. Chrysochamela}
\par
91 Siliqua at least 10 times as long as wide
\par
92 Siliqua pubescent ................................................................. {\b 8. Arabidopsis}
\par
92 Siliqua glabrous .......................................................................... {\b 42. Arabis}
\par
86 Petals white, pink or purple
\par
93 Plant ± densely covered with medifixed hairs ...................... {\b 18. Erysimum}
\par
93 Plant with unbranched, branched or stellate hairs, sometimes
\par
   mixed with a few medifixed
\par
94 Style at least 2·5 mm ............................................................... {\b 43. Aubrieta}
\par
94 Style not more than 2 mm
\par
95 Siliqua less than 10 times as long as wide
\par
96 Seeds in 1 row in each loculus
\par
97 Siliqua torulose ............................................................................ {\b 10. Braya}
\par
97 Siliqua not or scarcely torulose .................................................. {\b 42. Arabis}
\par
96 Seeds in 2 rows in each loculus
\par
98 Radicle incumbent; hairs unbranched and bifid .......................... {\b 10. Braya}
\par
98 Radicle accumbent; usually with at least some stellate or
\par
   branched hairs ................................................................................ {\b 57. Draba}
\par
95 Siliqua at least 10 times as long as wide
\par
99 Valves of the siliqua flat, rarely keeled
\par
100 Valves of the siliqua ± torulose, with a distinct median vein
\par
    ........................................................................................ {\b 41. Cardaminopsis}
\par
100 Valves of the siliqua not torulose, without a median vein ....... {\b 42. Arabis}
\par
99  Valves of the siliqua rounded or angled
\par
101 Siliqua pubescent, at least when immature
\par
102 At least some hairs unbranched or bifid, patent,
\par
    hispid .................................................................................. {\b 22. Neotorularia}
\par
102 Hairs all stellate and ± appressed ........................................... {\b 23. Maresia}
\par
101 Siliqua glabrous
\par
103 Petals ± emarginate; inner sepals ± saccate at the base ... {\b 3. Murbeckiella}
\par
103 Petals entire or truncate; inner sepals not saccate at the base
\par
104 Siliqua up to 1 mm wide ..................................................... {\b 8. Arabidopsis}
\par
104 Siliqua at least 1 mm wide ......................................................... {\b 10. Braya}
\par
12 Fruit a silicula, less than 3 times as long as wide
\par
105 Silicula with a transverse articulation, the lower segment sometimes
\par
    sterile and stipitate
\par
106 Leaves and flowers all basal; pedicels elongating and curving
\par
    downwards to bury the fruit ..................................................... {\b 104. Morisia}
\par
106 Plant with obvious aerial stem; pedicels not curving downwards
\par
    to bury the fruit
\par
107 Upper segment of fruit oblong-ovoid, mostly at least twice as
\par
    long as wide ................................................................................. {\b 99. Cakile}
\par
107 Upper segment of fruit globose or ovoid globose
\par
108 Upper segment of fruit not beaked; style absent .................. {\b 102. Crambe}
\par
108 Upper segment of fruit beaked, or with a distinct persistent style
\par
109 Cauline leaves amplexicaul, with acute auricles ................. {\b 103. Calepina}
\par
109 Cauline leaves not amplexicaul
\par
110 Petals white; upper segment of fruit with a pungent beak  {\b 101. Didesmus}
\par
110 Petals yellow; upper segment of fruit not pungent
\par
111 Upper segment of fruit variously ribbed, but not winged,
\par
    usually glabrous or with appressed hairs ............................. {\b 100. Rapistrum}
\par
111 Upper segment of fruit with 8 longitudinal winged ribs,
\par
    sparsely hispid ......................................................................... {\b 105. Guiraoa}
\par
105 Silicula not articulated
\par
112 Silicula didymous, flat
\par
113 Petals yellow; style long ...................................................... {\b 78. Biscutella}
\par
113 Petals white or pink; stigma sessile ................................ {\b 79. Megacarpaea}
\par
112 Silicula not didymous (rarely didymous, then not flat)
\par
114 Silicula with 3 loculi, the upper 2 side by side, sterile,
\par
    the lower 1-seeded .................................................................. {\b 13. Myagrum}
\par
114 Silicula without 2 sterile loculi side by side
\par
115 Silicula with 4 longitudinal wings or ridges or covered with
\par
    irregular protuberances ................................................................ {\b 16. Bunias}
\par
115 Silicula without 4 wings or ridges and not covered with
\par
    irregular protuberances
\par
116 Silicula latiseptate (compressed parallel to the septum which is
\par
    therefore as wide as the widest diameter of the silicula),
\par
    rarely indehiscent
\par
117 Small, scapose aquatic; ovary surrounded at the base by a
\par
    glandular ring .......................................................................... {\b 83. Subularia}
\par
117 Terrestrial or, if aquatic, not scapose; ovary without a glandular ring
\par
118 Glabrous or with unbranched hairs
\par
119 Sepals erect or nearly so (calyx closed)
\par
120 Petals at least 10 mm, red, purple or rarely white; silicula
\par
     at least 20 mm .......................................................................... {\b 45. Lunaria}
\par
120 Petals less than 10 mm, yellow or white; silicula not more
\par
    than 12 mm ............................................................................. {\b 65. Camelina}
\par
119 Sepals patent or erecto-patent (calyx ± open)
\par
121 Petals yellow
\par
122 Plant with at least some leaves pinnate, pinnatifid or
\par
    coarsely toothed ......................................................................... {\b 37. Rorippa}
\par
122 Leaves usually entire
\par
123 Leaves linear to narrowly spathulate,
\par

\par
316}
\par