{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 68.      CRUCIFERAE}
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc  Edit. P.W. Ball, V.H. Heywood & J.R. Akeroyd.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Annual to perennial herbs, rarely small shrubs. Leaves alternate, exstipulate. Flowers usually hermaphrodite, actinomorphic, hypogynous. Sepals 4, free, in 2 decussate pairs. Petals 4, rarely absent, free, clawed, imbricate or contorted, alternating with the sepals. Stamens usually 6, rarely 4, 2 or 0, tetradynamous (an outer pair with short filaments, and 2 inner pairs, 1 posterior and 1 anterior, with long filaments); filaments sometimes winged or with a tooth-like appendage. Nectarial glands of various sizes, shapes, colours and dispositions around the base of the stamens and ovary. Ovary of 2 carpels, syncarpous, with 2 parietal placentas, usually bilocular through the formation of a membranous false septum by the union of outgrowths of the placentas, sometimes transversely plurilocular. Stigma capitate to bilobed. Fruit usually a dehiscent capsule opening by 2 valves from below, called a{\i  siliqua} when at least 3 times as long as wide or a {\i silicula} if less than 3 times as long as wide; sometimes indehiscent, breaking into 1-seeded portions or not; rarely transversely articulate with dehiscent and indehiscent segments; sometimes dividing at maturity into 1-seeded portions ({\i lomentum}).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 There is great diversity in the form and structure of the fruit in this family, often affording an easy means of identification, especially in genera which possess a distinctive siliqua or silicula. The seeds are always inserted in 2 rows in each loculus, but where the diameter of the seed is approximately the same as that of the fruit they appear to be in 1 row, and are so described below. Unless otherwise stated, descriptions of pedicels refer to those of the infructescence.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 The following notes of diagnostic features of particular genera may assist in identification.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Flowers zygomorphic: {\i Iberis, Teesdalia, Teesdaliopsis, Jonopsidium} (1 sp.), {\i Calepina.}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Spiny small shrubs: {\i Alyssum} (2 spp.), {\i Vella}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Filaments of the inner stamens connate in pairs: {\i Leptaleum, Sterigmostemum, Euzomodendron, Vella, Boleum}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Many species in this family, especially among the annuals, are found in Europe principally or exclusively as weeds of cultivation or as ruderals. In many cases it is difficult to determine the native range and to discriminate between naturalized and casual status, and the information on the status of such plants given below must in many cases, therefore, be regarded as tentative.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Fruit with 2 segments, the upper flat, foliaceous or lingulate,
\par
  the lower with 1 or 2 seeds
\par
2 Annual herbs; filaments free
\par
3 Fruit erect or erecto-patent, 12-35 mm .......................................... {\b 90. Eruca}
\par
3 Fruit pendent or patent, not more than 8 mm ........................ {\b 94. Carrichtera}
\par
2 Small shrubs; filaments of the inner stamens united in pairs
\par
4 Lower segment of fruit glabrous or sparsely setose;
\par
  ovary shortly stipitate ...................................................................... {\b 95. Vella}
\par
4 Lower segment of fruit densely setose; ovary sessile ................. {\b 97. Boleum}
\par
1 Fruit without a terminal, flat, foliaceous or lingulate segment,
\par
  often not segmented or with more than 2 segments
\par
5 Fruit covered with conical spines 1-3 mm long ...................... {\b 96. Succowia}
\par
5 Fruit not covered with conical spines
\par
6 Fruit pendent, flat or ± hemispherical, not more than 12 times as
\par
  long as wide
\par
7 Fruit strongly compressed, convex beneath, concave with incurved
\par
  margins above so as to be ± hemispherical ............................. {\b 15. Tauscheria}
\par
7 Fruit not convex beneath and not concave with incurved margins above
\par
8 Hairs branched or stellate; petals yellow .................................. {\b 55. Clypeola}
\par
8 Plant glabrous or with a few unbranched or medifixed hairs
\par
9 Petals yellow; fruit with a wide, often inflated wing surrounding
\par
  the loculus; loculus usually with a distinct longitudinal rib  {\b 14. Isatis}
\par
9 Petals white, pink or violet; fruit not winged or with a very
\par
  narrow wing, without a longitudinal rib
\par
10 Petals less than 5 mm, white; fruit up to 10(-13) mm,
\par
   reticulately veined or emarginate ................................................ {\b 46. Peltaria}
\par
10 Petals at least 5 mm, pink or violet; fruit at least 10 mm,
\par
   neither reticulately veined nor emarginate ................................... {\b 44. Ricotia}
\par
6  Fruit erect or patent, rarely pendent and ± flattened, but then
\par
   more than 12 times as long as wide (see also 87)
\par
11 Pedicels pendent, with the fruit erect or erecto-patent on the
\par
   end of the pedicel .................................................................. {\b 17. Goldbachia}
\par
11 Pedicels various, but never pendent with the fruit erect or
\par 
   erecto-patent
\par
12 Fruit a siliqua, at least 3 times as long as wide
\par
13 Glabrous or with unbranched hairs only
\par
14 Fruit ± compressed laterally, with 2 triangular wings at
\par
   the apex, indehiscent ....................................................... {\b 61. Andrzeiowskia}
\par
14 Fruit compressed dorsally, or with convex valves
\par
15 Stigma deeply 2-lobed, the lobes often erect or connivent
\par
16 Petals not more than 10 mm; fruits of 2 kinds, the lower ones articulate,
\par
   indehiscent, the upper ones opening by 2 valves ........... {\b 31. Diptychocarpus}
\par
16 Petals at least 10 mm; fruits all similar
\par
17 Plant scapose ............................................................................... {\b 27. Parrya}
\par
17 Flowering stem leafy
\par
18 Plant glabrous; leaves entire ............................................... {\b 85. Moricandia}
\par
18 Plant pubescent or glandular, rarely glabrous and then with
\par
   toothed leaves
\par
19 Siliqua with a beak 5-30 mm
\par
20 Siliqua with a beak 12-30 mm, almost as long as the rest of
\par
   the siliqua; seeds in 1 row in each loculus ............................. {\b 32. Chorispora}
\par
20 Siliqua with a beak 5-12 mm, shorter than the rest of the
\par
   siliqua; seeds in 2 rows in each loculus ......................................... {\b 90. Eruca}
\par
19 Siliqua not beaked, but with a style less than 3 mm
\par

\par
313}
\par