{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 39. F. parviflora} Lam.,{\i  Encycl. Méth. Bot.}{\b  2}: 567 (1788) ({\i F. caespitosa} Loscos). Lobes of leaves very narrowly linear, channelled. Raceme 7(-10)- to 15(-22)-flowered, subsessile. Bracts as long as or longer than the fruiting pedicels. Sepals 0·5-0·7 × 0·5-0·7 mm, laciniate-dentate. Corolla white, occasionally flushed pink; lower petal spathulate with patent margin. Fruit 1·6-2·3 × 1·7-2·5 mm, subglobose, distinctly keeled and often subacute. 2n = 32. {\i W., S. & S.C. Europe, extending locally to C. Ukraine}. Be Bl Br Bu Co Cr Ga Ge Gr Hs Hu It Ju Lu Rm Rs(W) Sa Si Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 14.         Platycapnos}              (DC.) Bernh.
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc  By †T.G. Tutin (Ed.1) revised by M. Lindén (Ed.2)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Annual or short-lived perennials. Leaves 2-pinnatisect, the segments linear. Inflorescence a subglobose, oblong or ovoid raceme. Flowers zygomorphic, very shortly pedicellate; upper petal basally saccate; style deciduous. Fruit a 1-seeded nut, elliptical, strongly compressed.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Perennial; flowering stems leafless above .................................... {\b 3. saxicola}
\par
1 Annual; flowering stems leafy above
\par
2 Flowers 5-6 mm; racemes rounded to ovoid ................................ {\b 1. spicatus}
\par
2 Flowers 7-8 mm; racemes oblong ............................................. {\b 2. tenuilobus}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. P. spicatus} (L.) Bernh.,{\i  Linnaea}{\b  8}: 471 (1833) ({\i Fumaria spicata} L.). More or less glaucous annual. Stems up to 30 cm, stout, branched, leafy. Ultimate leaf-segments 4-5 × 0·4-0·5 mm, mucronulate. Racemes 2·5-5 cm, subglobose to ovoid; bracts lanceolate to ovate, about twice as long as pedicels; pedicels recurved in fruit. Flowers 5-6 mm, whitish or yellowish, dark purple at apex of petals; sepals 1/6-1/3 as long as petals, entire or denticulate, caducous. Fruit ovate, flat or convex, obtuse, mucronate. 2n = 32.{\i  Cultivated ground. S.W. Europe, extending eastwards to S. Italy.} Bl Ga Hs It Lu Si.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Subsp.{\b  echeandiae} (Pau) Heywood,{\i  Feddes Repert.}{\b  64}: 51 (1961) ({\i P. echeandiae} Pau), poorly defined by subglobose racemes, short sepals, and fruit with convex sides, has been recognized from E. and S.E. Spain.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. P. tenuilobus} Pomel,{\i  Bull. Soc. Sci. Phys. Algerie}{\b  11}: 240 (1874). like {\b 1} but racemes somewhat laxer, oblong; flowers 7-8 mm; stigma appendages curved.{\i  E., C. & S. Spain, just extending into S. France}. Ga Hs.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp.{\b  tenuilobus} : Leaflets divaricate. Racemes long, up to 80-flowered. Fruit convex and smooth. 2n = 32.{\i  Dry places. Throughout the range of the species}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp.{\b  parallelus} Liden, {\i Anal. Jard. Bot. Madrid}{\b  41}: 222 (1984): Leaflets parallel. Racemes shorter. Fruit alveolate. {\i Screes. S. Spain }({\i Malaga} prov.). Hs.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 3. P. saxicola} Willk.,{\i  Bot. Zeit.}{\b  1848}: 367 (1848). Glaucous perennial, with stems up to 20 cm arising from a slender, vertical stock. Cauline leaves few. Ultimate leaf-segments 8-10 × 0·6-0·9 mm, with acute, somewhat hooded apex. Racemes 1-1·5 cm, subglobose; bracts ovate, about as long as pedicels; pedicels arcuate in fruit. Petals 5 mm, pale pink or lilac, dark purple at apex; sepals 1/2-2/3 as long as petals, entire; stigma without appendage. Fruit obovate, slightly rugulose, slightly emarginate. 2n = 28.{\i  Mountain screes above }2000{\i  m. S.E. Spain} ({\i Granada and Jaen provs}.). Hs.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 15.           Rupicapnos}             Pomel
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc  By V.H. Heywood.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Flowers in corymbose racemes. Pedicels elongate and deflexed in fruit. Upper petal spurred. Fruit a more or less globose, 1-seeded, thickened, rugose, tuberculate nut, lacking apical germination pores.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. R. africana} (Lam.) Pomel,{\i  Nouv. Mat. Fl. Atl. }240 (1874) ({\i Fumaria africana} Lam.). Glaucous annual to short-lived perennial with elongate root and thick, branched, decumbent stock. Leaves mainly basal, more or less fleshy, very long-petiolate, 2-pinnatisect into oblong-elliptical or cuneate lobes. Flowers 13-16 mm, white to pinkish; spur c. 4 mm. Fruit 3-3·75 × c. 3 mm, shortly mucronate. 2n = 32.{\i  Crevices in limestone cliffs. S.W. Spain}. Hs. ({\i N.W. Africa}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 The European plants belong to subsp. {\b decipiens} (Pugsley) Maire in Jahandiez & Maire,{\i  Cat. Pl. Maroc}{\b  2}: 261 (1932) ({\i Rupicapnos decipiens} Pugsley, {\i Fumaria africana} auct. hisp., non Lam.). Subsp. {\i africana} and other subspecies occur in N.W. Africa.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 16.         Ceratocapnos }              Durieu
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc  By P.W. Ball (Ed.1) revised by M. Lindén (Ed.2)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Slender, climbing or scrambling annuals. Leaves 1- or 2-ternate or -pinnate, the upper with tendrils. Flowers small, zygomorphic, in leaf-opposed racemes. Style deciduous.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 All fruits 2- to 4-seeded, smooth ................................................. {\b 1. claviculata}
\par
At least some fruits 1-seeded, with muricate ribs ...................... {\b 2. heterocarpa}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. C. claviculata} (L.) Liden,{\i  Anal. Jard. Bot. Madrid}{\b  41}: 221 (1984) ({\i Corydalis claviculata} (L.) DC.). Delicate, climbing, much-branched annual 20-100 cm. Racemes 6- to 10-flowered, dense. Bracts 1-3 mm, oblong-lanceolate. Lower pedicels 1-2 mm. Corolla 5-6 mm; spur short, saccate. Fruit 6-9 mm, 2- to 4-seeded, smooth, the apex triangular.{\i  Shady places; calcifuge. •  W. Europe, extending eastwards to E. Denmark.} Be Br Da Ga Ge Hb Ho Hs Lu No [Su].
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp.{\b  claviculata} : Plant glaucous. Petals white. Fruit glabrous. 2n = 32. {\i Throughout the range of the species}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b picta }(Samp.) Liden,{\i  loc. cit.} (1984) ({\i Corydalis claviculata} subsp.{\i  picta} P. Silva & Franco): Plant not glaucous. Outer petals pinkish-violet. Fruit puberulent. {\i N. Portugal} ({\i Vila-Nova-de-Paiva}).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. C. heterocarpa} Durieu in Parl.,{\i  Gior. Bot. Ital.}{\b  1}({\b 1}): 336 (1844) ({\i Corydalis heterocarpa} (Durieu) Ball). like {\b 1} but racemes 5- to 12-flowered; corolla purple; fruit dimorphic, the lower 3·5-4 mm, 1-seeded, with muricate ribs, the upper 10-12 mm, 2- to 5-seeded, smooth, with curved beak. 2n = 32.{\i  Stony ground and cliffs. Portugal, S. Spain.} Hs Lu. ({\i N.W. Africa}.)
\par

\par
311}
\par