{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 Plants of this genus are rarely seen and seem to be becoming rarer. All five species occur in habitats subject to periodic shallow inundation such as water-meadows and rice-fields. Submerged, floating and terrestrial forms, usually sterile, are sometimes found.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Sporocarps ± sessile; nodes crowded ............................................. {\b 3. strigosa}
\par
1 Sporocarps pedicellate; nodes ± distinct
\par
2 Sporocarp not sulcate; pedicels 10-20 mm, 2- to 4-branched, 
\par
  rarely simple ............................................................................... {\b 1. quadrifolia}
\par
2 Sporocarp sulcate; pedicels usually less than 10 mm, simple
\par
3 Leaflets 8-17 mm
\par
4 Sporocarps 2-3 mm, cuboid ....................................................... {\b 2. aegyptiaca}
\par
4 Sporocarps 3-4·5 mm, elliptic-rectangular ...................................... {\b 4. azorica}
\par
3 Leaflets 3-8(-11) mm
\par
5 Leaflets deeply crenate or lobed at apex ................................... {\b 2. aegyptiaca}
\par
5 Leaflets entire or shallowly crenate at apex .................................. {\b 5. batardae}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. M. quadrifolia} L., {\i Sp. Pl}. 1099 (1753) ({\i M. quadrifoliata} L.). Usually far-creeping, with internodes more than 1 cm. Leaves glabrous; petiole 7-20 cm; leaflets (5-)10-20 mm, obdeltate, with entire to slightly undulate, rounded apex. Sporocarps 1 or 2 (3) near the base of the petiole, 3-5 mm, ellipsoidal, with small basal teeth, pedicellate; stalks 1-2 cm, erect, 2- to 4-branched, rarely simple, usually partly connate, adnate to the petiole. S. Europe; northwards to c. 48° N. in France and E. Russia. Al Au Bu Cz Ga Ge He Hs Hu It Ju Lu †Po Rm Rs(W, E).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. M. aegyptiaca} Willd., Sp. Pl. 5(1): 540 (1810). Usually subcaespitose, with internodes less than 1 cm. Leaves sparsely hairy or glabrous, dimorphic; some leaves with leaflets 2-5 mm, narrowly cuneate, with deeply crenate to lobed, rounded apex, on petioles 1-4 cm; other leaves with leaflets 8-15 mm, cuneate to obdeltate, with crenate to entire, rounded apex, on petioles 4-6(-9) cm. Sporocarps 2-3 mm, axillary, cuboid, with a strigose-hairy sulcus in the apex, base and sides, with prominent upper basal teeth and no lower basal teeth; pedicels c. 5 mm, simple, erect.{\i  Lower Volga}. Rs(E). ({\i Egypt and S.W. Asia}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 3. M. strigosa} Willd., {\i Sp. Pl.}{\b  5}({\b 1}): 539 (1810) ({\i M. pubescens }Ten., {\i ?M. aegyptiaca} var.{\i  lusitanica} Coutinho, {\i M. fabri} Dunal). Usually caespitose, with crowded nodes and copious brown-sericeous buds. Leaves sparsely hairy or glabrous; petiole 2·5-30 cm; leaflets 5-15 mm, cuneate to obdeltate, with entire to crenulate, rounded apex. Sporocarps 3-5 mm, axillary, obovoid, laterally flattened, with conspicuous raphe and obscure basal teeth, more or less sessile, crowded, often imbricate, brown-sericeous.{\i  S. Europe; very local}. Bl Ga It Rs(E) Sa.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 4. M. azorica} Launert & Paiva in A. & R. Fernandes,{\i  Icon. Select. Fl. Azor.}{\b  1}({\b 2}): 159 (1983). Subcaespitose, with internodes up to 3·5 cm. Leaves sparsely hairy when young, later becoming glabrous; petiole 2·5-12 cm; leaflets 8-17 mm, obdeltate, with rounded, entire apex. Sporocarps 2 or 3 together, 3·5-4·5 mm, elliptic-rectangular, somewhat flattened, with prominent basal teeth, densely appressed-sericeous; pedicels robust, erect, curved, simple. •{\i  Açores} ({\i Terceira}). Az.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 5. M. batardae} Launert, {\i Bol. Soc. Brot.} ser. 2, {\b 56:} 101 (1983) ({\i M. strigosa} auct., non Willd.). Far-creeping, with internodes 0·5-2 cm. Leaves more or less glabrous; petioles 1·5-10 cm; leaflets 3-8(-11) mm, flabellate, with entire or irregularly crenate apex. Sporocarps 2 or 3 together, 3-4·5 mm, subglobose, flattened, often with basal teeth obscure; pedicels 2-8 mm, erect, simple. •{\i  W. Spain; C. Portugal.} Hs Lu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 2.                 Pilularia}                 L.
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc  By J.A. Crabbe.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Leaves filiform, subulate, entire. Sporocarps globose, blackish, with brown hairs, 2- or 4-chambered, dehiscent into as many valves as chambers.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Commonly semi-aquatic, but submerged and terrestrial forms, usually sterile, also occur.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 Sporocarps c. 3 mm in diameter, erect, subsessile, 4-chambered; 
\par
  leaves usually at least 50 × 1 mm .............................................. {\b 1. globulifera}
\par
Sporocarps c. 0·75 mm in diameter, deflexed, long-stalked, 
  2-chambered; leaves usually not more than 40 × 0·3 mm ................ {\b 2. minuta}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. P. globulifera} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 1100 (1753). Caespitose or creeping,with internodes up to 4 cm. Leaves usually at least 5 cm, 1 mm wide. Sporocarps 4-chambered, c. 3 mm in diameter, erect, subsessile; megaspores ovoid, constricted above the middle, 15-20 in each chamber.{\i  Shallow water, marshy ground, pools and lake margins. • W. Europe, northwards to} 61°{\i  N., extending very locally eastwards to Finland, Poland, Czechoslovakia and S.E. Italy.} Be Br Cz Da Fe Ga Ge Hb He Ho Hs It Ju Lu No Po Rs(?C, E) Su.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. P. minuta} Durieu ex A. Braun,{\i  Monatsber. Koenigl. Akad.} ({\i Berlin}){\b  1863:} 435 (1864). Caespitose or creeping, with internodes up to 1 cm. Leaves usually not more than 4 cm, 0·3 mm wide. Sporocarps 2-chambered, c. 0·75 mm in diameter, deflexed, on stalks 2-3 times their length; megaspores globose, not constricted, solitary in each chamber.{\i  In seasonally wet hollows and at margins of ditches. • W. Mediterranean region, S. Portugal; very local}. Bl Co Ga Lu Sa Si.
\par

\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 24.    SALVINIACEAE}
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc  Edit. †D.H. Valentine & D.M. Moore.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Stems slender, branched, floating. Leaves in whorls of 3, very hairy; 2 of the leaves entire, floating, the third submerged. Heterosporous; sori at the base of the submerged leaves, stalked, surrounded by a thin-walled, hairy indusium, and consisting of either numerous microsporangia or a few megasporangia, or occasionally mixed.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 1.               Salvinia}                  Séguier 
\par   

\pard\f0\fs24\qc  By A. Lawalrée.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Aquatic plants. Floating leaves covered with stellate hairs; submerged leaves finely divided and root-like. Microsporangia producing 64 microspores; megasporangia with 1 megaspore; prothalli developing inside the floating spores.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 The only genus.
\par

\par
32}
\par