{\rtf1\ansi \deff4\deflang1033{\fonttbl{\f4\froman\fcharset0\fprq2 Times New Roman;}}{\colortbl;\red0\green0\blue0;\red0\green0\blue255;\red0\green255\blue255;\red0\green255\blue0;\red255\green0\blue255;\red255\green0\blue0;\red255\green255\blue0;\red255\green255\blue255;\red0\green0\blue128;\red0\green128\blue128;\red0\green128\blue0;\red128\green0\blue128;\red128\green0\blue0;\red128\green128\blue0;\red128\green128\blue128;\red192\green192\blue192;}{\stylesheet{\widctlpar \f4\fs20\lang2057 \snext0 Normal;}{\*\cs10 \additive Default Paragraph Font;}}{\info{\author dddd}{\operator dddd}{\creatim\yr1998\mo11\dy11\hr16\min50}{\revtim\yr1998\mo11\dy11\hr16\min51}{\version2}{\edmins1}{\nofpages4}{\nofwords977}{\nofchars5569}{\*\company  }{\vern57431}}\widowctrl\ftnbj\aenddoc\hyphcaps0 \fet0\sectd \linex0 {\*\pnseclvl1\pnucrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl2\pnucltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl3\pndec\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl4\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl5\pndec\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl6\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl7\pnlcrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl8\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl9\pnlcrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}
\pard\plain \li200\ \f4\fs20\lang2057 {\fs28    on the back and without a prominent mid-vein ................. }{\b\fs28 44. leucanthemum}{\fs28 
\par 59 Siliqua 0\'b78-2 mm wide, the valves with a prominent mid-vein
\par 60 Sepals 2-6 mm
\par 61 Siliqua erecto-patent; leaves 4-15 mm wide, sinuate-dentate;
\par    seeds 1\'b77-2\'b71 mm ............................................................... }{\b\fs28 52. hieracifolium}{\fs28 
\par 61 Siliqua erect; leaves 2-5 mm wide, entire or denticulate;
\par    seeds 1\'b72-1\'b78 mm ........................................................... }{\b\fs28 53. marschallianum}{\fs28 
\par 60 Sepals 6-8\'b75(-10) mm
\par 62 Leaves 5-30 mm wide, the middle cauline not more than 6 times
\par    as long as wide; siliqua erect to erecto-patent, diverging at
\par    an angle of 10-30\'b0 ................................................................ }{\b\fs28 51. hungaricum}{\fs28 
\par 62 Leaves 1\'b75-6 mm wide, the middle cauline at least 6 times
\par    as long as wide; siliqua erect ..................................................... }{\b\fs28 54. virgatum}{\fs28 
\par 56 Anthers at least 2 mm
\par 63 Petals 5-10 mm wide
\par 64 Siliqua with mainly 3- or 4-fid hairs; cauline leaves
\par    sinuate-dentate to pinnatisect ............................................... }{\b\fs28 48. carniolicum}{\fs28 
\par 64 Siliqua with 2(3)-fid hairs; cauline leaves denticulate
\par    to sinuate-dentate
\par 65 Lower cauline leaves sessile or shortly petiolate;
\par    siliqua 0\'b78-1\'b72 mm wide; style 1-2 mm .................................... }{\b\fs28 46. odoratum}{\fs28 
\par 65 Lower cauline leaves long-petiolate; siliqua 1\'b72-1\'b75 mm wide;
\par    style c. 1 mm ........................................................................... }{\b\fs28 47. witmannii}{\fs28 
\par 63 Petals not more than 5 mm wide
\par 66 Style 3-6(-10) mm; siliqua strongly laterally compressed, with
\par    keeled or winged valves ........................................................ }{\b\fs28 55. cuspidatum}{\fs28 
\par 66 Style not more than 2\'b75 mm; siliqua-valves not keeled or winged
\par 67 Middle cauline leaves sinuate-pinnatifid to pinnatisect,
\par    most divided to at least half-way to the mid-vein
\par 68 Usually biennial; petals 3-5 mm wide siliqua with mainly
\par    stellate hairs ......................................................................... }{\b\fs28 49. kuemmerlei}{\fs28 
\par 68 Perennial with branched, woody stock; petals 2-3 mm wide;
\par    siliqua with mainly bifid hairs ............................................... }{\b\fs28 50. pectinatum}{\fs28 
\par 67 Middle cauline leaves entire to coarsely sinuate-dentate, not
\par    divided to more than 1/3 of the way to the mid-vein
\par 69 Hairs on the leaves mostly 4- or 5-fid ................................. }{\b\fs28 42. horizontale}{\fs28 
\par 69 Hairs on the leaves (2)3(4)-fid
\par 70 Siliqua with numerous bifid as well as trifid hairs
\par 71 Leaves with numerous bifid as well as trifid hairs ................ }{\b\fs28 41. exaltatum}{\fs28 
\par 71 Leaves with mainly stellate hairs ........................................... }{\b\fs28 46. odoratum}{\fs28 
\par 70 Siliqua with mainly stellate hairs
\par 72 Leaves with numerous bifid as well as stellate hairs
\par 73 Leaves 50-90 mm; siliqua patent (70-90\'b0) .............................. }{\b\fs28 35. creticum}{\fs28 
\par 73 Leaves 15-60 mm; siliqua erect to erectopatent (10-40\'b0)
\par 74 Hairs on leaves mainly trifid ................................................. }{\b\fs28 38. asperulum}{\fs28 
\par 74 Hairs on leaves mainly bifid ............................................ }{\b\fs28 39. crepidifolium}{\fs28 
\par 72 Leaves with mainly stellate hairs
\par 75 Calyx with stellate hairs; anthers not exceeding 2\'b72 mm,
\par    stellate-hairy ......................................................................... }{\b\fs28 51. hungaricum}{\fs28 
\par 75 Calyx with bifid as well as stellate hairs; anthers 2-3 mm, glabrous
\par    ............................................................................................... }{\b\fs28 40. leptostylum}{\fs28 
\par 
\par }
\pard \ {\fs28   (}{\b\fs28 1-5}{\fs28 ). }{\i\fs28 E. cheiri}{\fs28  group. Perennials. with a stout, branched, woody stock, or dwarf shrubs, usually with persistent leaf-rosettes hairs almost all bifid. Leaves lanceolate to narrowly obovate. Pedicels 4-20 mm in fruit. Petals yellow, sometimes variegated with red or purple in cultivars of}{\b\fs28  3}{\fs28 , with bifid hairs on the back; median nectaries absent. Siliqua 20-100 mm; style 0\'b75-4 mm, with distinctly 2-lobed stigma. the lobes usually at least 1 mm.
\par 
\par A closely related group of taxa native to the Aegean region.
\par 
\par }
\pard \li200\ {\fs28 1 Seeds narrower than the width of the siliqua, so clearly in
\par   2 rows in each loculus; style stout; sepals with dark glands ............. }{\b\fs28 3. cheiri}{\fs28 
\par 1 Seeds almost as wide as the siliqua, so \'b1 in 1 row in each loculus;
\par   style thin; sepals eglandular
\par 2 Leaves sparsely to moderately pubescent, distinctly petiolate,
\par   the longest petioles c. \'bd as long as the lamina
\par 3 Lower part of stems without broad, persistent leaf-scars;
\par   inflorescence lateral, without or with few branches;
\par   flowers 2-30 on each branch ......................................................... }{\b\fs28 4. senoneri}{\fs28 
\par 3 Lower part of stems with broad, persistent leaf-scars;
\par   inflorescence terminal, usually with several branches,
\par   flowers 25-70 on each branch ........................................................ }{\b\fs28 5. naxense}{\fs28 
\par 2 Leaves densely pubescent, sessile or with a short petiole
\par 4 Petals 20-27 \'d7 8-12 mm; siliqua \'b1 square in transverse section,
\par   with a thick, prominent mid-vein on each valve ....................... }{\b\fs28 2. corinthium}{\fs28 
\par 4 Petals 13-22 \'d7 5-8\'b75 mm; siliqua \'b1 terete, with a weak mid-vein
\par    on each valve .............................................................................. }{\b\fs28 1. candicum}{\fs28 
\par 
\par }
\pard \ {\b\fs28 1. E. candicum}{\fs28  Snogerup,}{\i\fs28  Op. Bot.}{\fs28  (}{\b\fs28 Lund}{\fs28 )}{\b\fs28  13}{\fs28 : 34 (1967). Small shrub 25-50 cm. Leaves 20-120 \'d7 3-13 mm, entire or with a few serrations, densely pubescent; petiole much shorter than the lamina. Inflorescence usually simple, with not more than 25 flowers. Petals 5-8\'b75 mm wide. Siliqua 20-60 mm, somewhat compressed with a thin mid-vein on each valve. Style 1\'b75 4 mm. Seeds in 1 row in each loculus. \bullet }{\i\fs28  S. Aegean region.}{\fs28  Cr.
\par 
\par  (}{\b\fs28 a}{\fs28 ) Subsp.}{\b\fs28  candicum}{\fs28  : Inflorescence simple. Sepals 8-11\'b75 mm; petals 19-22 mm. Siliqua 4-4\'b75 mm wide. Seeds 5-6 mm.}{\i\fs28  Kriti}{\fs28 .
\par  (}{\b\fs28 b}{\fs28 ) Subsp.}{\b\fs28  carpathum}{\fs28  Snogerup,}{\i\fs28  op. cit.}{\fs28  38 (1967): Inflorescence sometimes branched. Sepals 7-8\'b75 mm; petals 13-20 mm. Siliqua 2\'b75-4 mm wide. Seeds 3\'b75-5\'b75 mm.}{\i\fs28  Karpathos and Saria}{\fs28 .
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 2. E. corinthium}{\fs28  (Boiss.) Wettst.,}{\i\fs28  \'d6sterr. Bot. Zeitschr.}{\b\fs28  39}{\fs28 : 283 (1889) (}{\i\fs28 Cheiranthus corinthius}{\fs28  Boiss.). Small shrub or sub shrub 25-75 cm. Leaves 25-90 \'d7 2\'b75-14 mm, entire, densely pubescent; petiole much shorter than the lamina. Inflorescence usually simple, with 5-25(-50) flowers; pedicels 4-8 mm in fruit. Sepals 7-10\'b75 mm; petals 20-27 \'d7 8-12 mm. Siliqua 30-80 \'d7 3-4\'b75 mm, square in transverse section, the valves with a broad, conspicuous mid-vein; style 1-4 mm. Seeds 4-6 mm, in 1 row in each loculus. \bullet }{\i\fs28  S. Greece. }{\fs28 Gr.
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 3. E. cheiri}{\fs28  (L.) Crantz, }{\i\fs28 Class. Crucif.}{\fs28  116 (1769) (}{\i\fs28 Cheiranthus cheiri}{\fs28  L.). Perennial or small shrub 25-80 cm (sometimes biennial in cultivation); lower part of stems often with conspicuous leaf-scars. Leaves 40-220 \'d7 6-20 mm, entire or with a few short teeth, sparsely
\par 
\par 328}
\par }