{\rtf1\ansi \deff4\deflang1033{\fonttbl{\f4\froman\fcharset0\fprq2 Times New Roman;}}{\colortbl;\red0\green0\blue0;\red0\green0\blue255;\red0\green255\blue255;\red0\green255\blue0;\red255\green0\blue255;\red255\green0\blue0;\red255\green255\blue0;\red255\green255\blue255;\red0\green0\blue128;\red0\green128\blue128;\red0\green128\blue0;\red128\green0\blue128;\red128\green0\blue0;\red128\green128\blue0;\red128\green128\blue128;\red192\green192\blue192;}{\stylesheet{\widctlpar \f4\fs20\lang2057 \snext0 Normal;}{\*\cs10 \additive Default Paragraph Font;}}{\info{\author dddd}{\operator dddd}{\creatim\yr1998\mo11\dy5\hr12\min19}{\revtim\yr1998\mo11\dy5\hr12\min20}{\version2}{\edmins1}{\nofpages4}{\nofwords867}{\nofchars4943}{\*\company  }{\vern57431}}\widowctrl\ftnbj\aenddoc\hyphcaps0 \fet0\sectd \linex0 {\*\pnseclvl1\pnucrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl2\pnucltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl3\pndec\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl4\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl5\pndec\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl6\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl7\pnlcrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl8\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl9\pnlcrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}
\pard\plain \ \f4\fs20\lang2057 {\fs28 abruptly contracted into a very short style.}{\i\fs28  Saline habitats. S.E. Russia}{\fs28  (}{\i\fs28 Ozero El'ton}{\fs28 ). Rs(E). (}{\i\fs28 C. & S.W. Asia.}{\fs28 )
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 4. A. toxophylla}{\fs28  (Bieb.) N. Busch in Kusn., N. Busch & Fomin, }{\i\fs28 Fl. Cauc. Crit.}{\b\fs28  3}{\fs28 (}{\b\fs28 4}{\fs28 ): 457 (1909) (}{\i\fs28 Sisymbrium toxophyllum}{\fs28  (Bieb.) C.A. Meyer). Biennial or perennial 10-45 cm, subglabrous to densely tomentose with stellate hairs. Basal leaves usually sinuate-dentate; cauline denticulate or entire, sagittate-amplexicaul. Petals 4-8 mm, white; anthers c. 1 mm. Siliqua 10-25 mm, glabrous; style 0\'b75-0\'b78 mm. 2n = 24.}{\i\fs28  Saline habitats. From S.W. Ukraine to E. Russia and W. Kazakhstan}{\fs28 . Rs(W, ?K, E).
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 5. A. pumila}{\fs28  (Stephan) N. Busch in Kusn., N. Busch & Fomin, }{\i\fs28 loc. cit.}{\fs28  (1909) (}{\i\fs28 Sisymbrium pumilum}{\fs28  (Stephan) Boiss.). Annual up to 50 cm, with bi- to multifid hairs. Basal leaves dentate to dentate-pinnatifid; cauline denticulate, sagittate-amplexicaul at the base. Petals 2-3 mm, yellow; anthers c. 0\'b725 mm. Siliqua 10-25(-35) mm, more or less pubescent with stellate hairs; style 0\'b72-0\'b78 mm. 2n = 32.}{\i\fs28  Saline habitats. S.E. Russia, W. Kazakhstan.}{\fs28  Rs(E). (}{\i\fs28 S.W. Asia}{\fs28 .)
\par 
\par }
\pard \qc\ {\b\fs28 9.             Thellungiella}{\fs28               O.E. Schulz
\par }{\fs24  By P.W. Ball.
\par 
\par }
\pard \ {\fs28 Glabrous annual or biennial. Leaves usually entire. Sepals not saccate at the base. Petals white or pink. Fruit a siliqua; valves 1-veined; style very short; stigma slightly 2-lobed. Seeds in 2 rows in each loculus, small (c. 0\'b75 mm).
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 1. T. salsuginea}{\fs28  (Pallas) O.E. Schulz in Engler,}{\i\fs28  Pflanzenreich }{\b\fs28 86}{\fs28 (}{\b\fs28 IV.105}{\fs28 ): 252 (1924) (}{\i\fs28 Sisymbrium salsugineum}{\fs28  Pallas). Plant erect, divaricately branched, up to 35 cm. Cauline leaves oblong-ovate, obtuse with rounded auricles. Pedicels 4-8 mm in fruit, patent or erecto-patent. Petals 3-4 mm. Siliqua 12-16 \'d7 0\'b77-1 mm, linear. }{\i\fs28 Saline habitats. S.E. Russia; perhaps only casual.}{\fs28  *Rs (E). (}{\i\fs28 N. & C. Asia, W. North America.}{\fs28 )
\par 
\par }
\pard \qc\ {\fs28  }{\b\fs28 10.               Braya}{\fs28                Sternb. & Hoppe
\par }{\fs24  By P.W. Ball.
\par 
\par }
\pard \ {\fs28 Perennials; hairs of 2 kinds, branched and unbranched. Leaves undivided. Sepals not saccate at the base; petals white or purplish, truncate. Fruit a siliqua or silicula; valves 1-veined; style short; stigma slightly 2-lobed. Seeds in 1 or 2 rows in each loculus, small (c. 1 mm). Radicle incumbent.
\par 
\par Literature: O.E. Schulz in Engler,}{\i\fs28  Pflanzenreich}{\b\fs28  86}{\fs28  (}{\b\fs28 IV.105}{\fs28 ): 226-238 (1924).
\par 
\par }
\pard \li200\ {\fs28 1 Cauline leaves 0 or 1; siliqua 4-10 \'d7 1-3 mm, elliptical or
\par   oblong-ovate .......................................................................... }{\b\fs28 3. purpurascens}{\fs28 
\par 1 Cauline leaves 1 to several; siliqua 8-15 \'d7 1-1\'b77 mm, linear or
\par   broadly linear
\par 2 Siliqua 5-11 \'d7 1-1\'b77 mm, 4-7 times as long as wide ....................... }{\b\fs28 1. alpina}{\fs28 
\par 2 Siliqua 8-15 \'d7 1-1\'b72 mm, 7-12 times as long as wide ................... }{\b\fs28 2. linearis}{\fs28 
\par 
\par }
\pard \ {\fs28    }{\b\fs28 1. B. alpina}{\fs28  Sternb. & Hoppe,}{\i\fs28  Denkschr. Bayer. Bot. Ges. Regensb.}{\b\fs28  1}{\fs28 : 66 (1815). Laxly caespitose; flowering stems up to 10 cm. Cauline leaves 1 to several; lower leaves lanceolate, entire or denticulate. Petals 3-4 mm. Siliqua 5-11 \'d7 1-1\'b77 mm, 5-7 times as long as wide, broadly linear; style 0\'b72-0\'b73 mm. Seeds and ovules 12-18. }{\i\fs28 Usually calcicole;}{\fs28  2000-3000}{\i\fs28  m. \bullet  E. Alps.}{\fs28  Au It.
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 2. B. linearis}{\fs28  Rouy, }{\i\fs28 Ill. Pl. Eur. Rar.}{\b\fs28  11}{\fs28 : 84 (1899) (}{\i\fs28 B. glabella}{\fs28  auct. scand., non Richardson). like }{\b\fs28 1}{\fs28  but flowering stems up to 20 cm; lower leaves linear; siliqua 8-15 \'d7 1-1\'b72 mm, 7-12 times as long as wide, linear; style 0\'b72-0\'b78 mm; seeds and ovules up to 24. 2n = 42.}{\i\fs28  Calcareous screes and gravel. Mountains of Norway and Sweden from}{\fs28  67\'b0}{\i\fs28  to}{\fs28  70\'b0}{\i\fs28  N}{\fs28 . No Su.
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 3. B. purpurascens}{\fs28  (R. Br.) Bunge in Ledeb., }{\i\fs28 Fl. Ross.}{\b\fs28 1}{\fs28  195 (1841). Laxly caespitose; flowering stems up to 10 cm. Cauline leaves 0 or 1; lower leaves oblong-linear, entire or remotely dentate. Petals 3-4(-5) mm. Siliqua 4-10 \'d7 1-3 mm, elliptical or oblong-ovate; style 0\'b77-1 mm. 2n = 56.}{\i\fs28  Calcicole. Arctic and subarctic Europe.}{\fs28  Is No Rs(N) Sb.
\par 
\par }
\pard \qc\ {\fs28  }{\b\fs28 11.           Chrysochamela }{\fs28            (Fenzl)Boiss.
\par }{\fs24  By P.W. Ball.
\par   
\par }
\pard \ {\fs28 Annual; hairs branched. Leaves undivided. Sepals not saccate at the base; petals pale yellow. Fruit a siliqua or silicula; valves with a distinct median vein; style short; stigma subcapitate. Seeds in 2 rows in each loculus, small (c. 0\'b725 mm), mucilaginous when moistened.
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 1. C. draboides}{\fs28  Woronow,}{\i\fs28  Acta Horti Petrop.}{\b\fs28  43}{\fs28 : 397 (1931). 10-25 cm, pubescent below, glabrous above. Leaves linear to oblong, the cauline sagittate, amplexicaul. Petals c. 1 mm. Silicula 5-7 \'d7 c. 2 mm, oblong to elliptic-oblong, obtuse; valves with a median vein and reticulate lateral veins. \bullet }{\i\fs28  S. Ural}{\fs28  (}{\i\fs28 near Sterlitamak}{\fs28 ). Rs(E).
\par 
\par }
\pard \qc\ {\fs28  }{\b\fs28 12.              Sobolewskia}{\fs28                Bieb.
\par }{\fs24  By P.W. Ball.
\par 
\par }
\pard \ {\fs28 Perennial; glabrous or with sparse unbranched hairs. Leaves simple. Sepals patent, not saccate at the base; petals white. Fruit an indehiscent siliqua; valves with a median vein; style very short; stigma subcapitate. Seeds large (up to 5 mm).
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 1. S. sibirica}{\fs28  (Willd.) P.W. Ball, }{\i\fs28 Feddes Repert.}{\b\fs28  68}{\fs28 : 194 (1963) (}{\i\fs28 S. lithophila}{\fs28  Bieb., }{\i\fs28 Cochlearia sibirica}{\fs28  Willd.). Plant 20-40 cm, glabrous or papillose, with woody rhizome. Leaves suborbicular to ovate-cordate, crenate or serrate. Petals 3\'b75-5 mm. Siliqua 5-10 mm, 1\'b75-2\'b75 mm in diameter at the apex, oblong-pyriform. Seeds 3\'b75-5 mm.}{\i\fs28  Rocky and stony places. \bullet  Krym.}{\fs28  Rs(K).
\par 
\par }
\pard \qc\ {\fs28  }{\b\fs28 13.                 Myagrum}{\fs28                   L.
\par }{\fs24  By P.W. Ball.
\par 
\par }
\pard \ {\fs28 Glabrous annual. Cauline leaves sessile, amplexicaul. Sepals erect, the inner slightly saccate at the base; petals yellow, not clawed. Ovules 2, one aborting. Fruit an indehiscent, 1-seeded silicula with 3 loculi; the upper 2 loculi side by side, sterile, the lower containing the seed.
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 1. M. perfoliatum}{\fs28  L.,}{\i\fs28  Sp. Pl.}{\fs28  640 (1753). Plant 15-100 cm, glaucous. Basal leaves petiolate, oblanceolate, sinuate-dentate to pinnatifid; cauline leaves sessile, oblong-lanceolate, entire or denticulate, sagittate- to cordate-amplexicaul. Petals 3-5 mm. Silicula 5-8 mm, more or less compressed, broadly clavate; seeds c. 3 mm.}{\i\fs28  Probably native in S. & S.C. Europe; frequently naturalized or casual elsewhere.}{\fs28  Al Bu Ga Ge Gr Hs Hu It Ju Rm Rs(K) ?Sa Tu [Au Cz He It No Si Su].
\par 
\par 323}
\par }