{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 14.                 Isatis}                  L.
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc  By P.W. Ball & J.R. Akeroyd
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Annuals to perennials; glabrous or with unbranched hairs, glaucous. Cauline leaves simple, entire, usually amplexicaul. Sepals not saccate; petals yellow, shortly clawed. Fruit an indehiscent 1(2) seeded silicula with a wide, often inflated, wing surrounding the loculus; loculus usually with a distinct longitudinal rib; stigma sessile .
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 A difficult genus requiring revision. Species {\b 4-8} are all very similar and some are probably better regarded as subspecies of {\b 7}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Cauline leaves attenuate at the base, not amplexicaul ................. {\b 3. sabulosa}
\par
1 Cauline leaves amplexicaul
\par
2 Silicula orbicular-elliptical, not more than twice as long as wide,
\par
  rounded at the base and apex or emarginate at the apex
\par
3 Perennial; cauline leaves cordate at the base; silicula 15-25 mm
\par
  .......................................................................................................... {\b 1. allionii}
\par
3 Annual; cauline leaves sagittate at the base; silicula 8-10 mm
\par
  ...................................................................................................... {\b 2. platyloba}
\par
2 Silicula at least twice as long as wide, attenuate at the base
\par
  or apex, or at both
\par
4 Annual; silicula 6-8 times as long as wide ................................. {\b 9. lusitanica}
\par
4 Biennial or perennial; silicula 2-5 times as long as wide
\par
5 Central rib of silicula conspicuously 3-ridged ............................... {\b 5. costata}
\par
5 Central rib of silicula simple
\par
6 Silicula 2-3 times as long as wide
\par
7 Central rib of silicula very wide ................................................. {\b 4. laevigata}
\par
7 Central rib of silicula slender (see also{\b  7}) .................................... {\b 6. praecox}
\par
6 Silicula mostly at least 3 times as long as wide
\par
8 Silicula narrowly elliptical, obovate or oblanceolate;
\par
  cauline leaves with acute auricles ................................................. {\b 7. tinctoria}
\par
8 Silicula oblong; cauline leaves with obtuse auricles .................... {\b 8. arenaria}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. I. allionii} P.W. Ball, {\i Feddes Repert.}{\b  69: }57 (1964) ({\i I. alpina} All. et auct. mult., non Vill.). Perennial with branched rhizome and vegetative shoots; flowering stems 10-30 cm. Cauline leaves with obtuse auricles. Petals (3-)4-5 mm. Silicula 15-25 × 8-13 mm, orbicular-elliptical, sometimes subcordate at the base.{\i  Calcareous rocks and screes. • S.W. Alps; C. Appennini.} Ga It.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. I. platyloba} Link ex Steudel,{\i  Nomencl. Bot. }{\b 1}: 440 (1821). Annual 30-100 cm. Basal leaves obovate-spathulate, obtuse; cauline leaves with acute auricles. Petals 2-2·5 mm. Silicula 8-10 mm, orbicular-elliptical, emarginate or obcordate.{\i  Granite cliffs. • W.C. Spain} ({\i near Perena}); {\i N.E. Portugal} ({\i Miranda do Douro}). Hs Lu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 3. I. sabulosa} Steven ex Ledeb., {\i Fl. Ross.}{\b  1}: 212 (1841). Biennial 40-80 cm. Cauline leaves attenuate at the base, without auricles. Petals 4·5-6 mm. Silicula 17-30 × 4-9 mm, linear-oblong to oblanceolate.{\i  Sandy soils. N.W. shore of Caspian Sea}. Rs(E).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 4. I. laevigata} Trautv.,{\i  Del. Sem. Horti Kiov.}{\b  1840}: 6 (1840). Biennial 50-100 cm. Cauline leaves with acute auricles. Petals 2-2·5 mm. Silicula 6-11 × 2·5-5 mm, elliptical, 2-3 times as long as wide, glabrous; central rib wide and thick.{\i  Steppes. S.E. Russia.} Rs(E). ({\i C. Asia})
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 5. I. costata} C.A. Meyer in Ledeb., {\i Fl. Altaica}{\b  3}: 204 (1831). Biennial up to 120 cm. Cauline leaves with acute auricles. Petals 2·5-3 mm. Silicula 9-14 × 3-5 mm, oblong-obovate, c. 3 times as long as wide, glabrous or pubescent; central rib wide, distinctly 3-ridged.{\i  Dry, stony places. S.E. Russia; Krym}. Rs(K, E).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 6. I. praecox} Kit. ex Tratt.,{\i  Arch. Gewächsk. }{\b 1}: 40 (1812) (incl.{\i  I. lasiocarpa} Ledeb.). Biennial 50-100 cm. Cauline leaves with acute auricles. Petals 2·5-3 mm. Silicula 7-14 × 3-6 mm, obovate-elliptical, 2-3 times as long as wide, glabrous or pubescent; central rib slender.{\i  E., C. & S.E. Europe.} Bu Cz Hu It Ju Rm Rs(W, E).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Plants intermediate between{\b  6} and{\b  7} are not infrequent.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 7. I. tinctoria} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 670 (1753) ({\i I. alpina} Vill.; incl. {\i I. canescens} DC.,{\i  I. taurica} Bieb., {\i I. vermia} Papanicolaou). Biennial 50-120 cm. Basal leaves oblong-lanceolate, subacute; cauline leaves with acute auricles. Petals 2·5-4 mm. Silicula 11-27 × 3-7(-10) mm, usually oblong-obovate or elliptic-obovate, (2½-)3-5 times as long as wide, glabrous to tomentose, or hirsute; central rib usually slender. 2n = 28.{\i  Often ruderal. Native to S.W. Asia and possibly to parts of S.E. Europe; cultivated since ancient times as a source of dye} ({\i Woad}),{\i  and widely naturalized elsewhere in Europe}. All except Az Bl Cr Fa Hb Is Sb.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 This species is very variable, particularly in the size, shape and pubescence of the silicula, and has been divided up into a number of taxa at different rank. There is no general consensus as to the specific limits of{\b  7}, and the characters used to separate segregate species overlap considerably. The following provisional treatment is based on P.H. Davis,{\i  Notes Roy. Bot. Gard. Edinb.}{\b  26}: 11-25 (1964).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Perennial; silicula with prominent central rib, pubescent ... ({\b d}) subsp. {\b athoa}
\par
1 Usually biennial; silicula usually with slender central rib,
\par
  glabrous to puberulent
\par
2 Silicula 15-22(-27) × 4-7(-10) mm ................................. ({\b a}) subsp.{\b  tinctoria}
\par
2 Silicula 9-15 × 2·5-4 mm
\par
3 Silicula 12-15 mm, usually puberulent ....................... ({\b b}) subsp.{\b  tomentella}
\par
3 Silicula c. 10 mm, glabrous or puberulent .................. ({\b c}) subsp. {\b corymbosa}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp.{\b  tinctoria} : Plant usually biennial, up to 120 cm. Silicula 15-22(-27) × 4-7(-10) mm, glabrous to puberulent; central rib usually slender. 2n = 28. {\i Throughout the range of the species.}
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b tomentella} (Boiss.) P.H. Davis, {\i Notes Roy. Bot. Gard. Edinb.}{\b  26}: 22 (1964) ({\i I. tomentella} Boiss.): Like subsp. ({\b a}) but silicula 12-15 mm, usually puberulent; central rib slender.{\i  Greece; Krym}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b c}) Subsp.{\b  corymbosa} (Boiss.) P.H. Davis,{\i  loc. cit.} (1964) ({\i I. corymbosa} Boiss.): Like subsp. ({\b a}) but silicula c. 10 mm, usually glabrous; central rib slender.{\i  Greece.} ({\i Anatolia.})
\par

\pard\f0\fs28 ({\b d}) Subsp.{\b  athoa} (Boiss.) Papanicolaou in Strid,{\i  Mount. Fl. Gr.}{\b  1}: 238 (1986) ({\i I. athoa }Boiss.): Perennial with vegetative shoots; stems 20-50(-80) cm. Silicula 10-16 × 3·5 mm, puberulent; central rib prominent. 2n = 28.{\i  Calcareous, rocky grassland. • N. Greece} ({\i Athos}).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 I. littoralis Steven ex DC., {\i Reg. Veg. Syst. Nat.}{\b  2}: 568 (1821), from S. Ukraine, has the silicula 15-27 × 5-10 mm, truncate or emarginate, with a prominent central rib, but cannot be separated satisfactorily from subsp. ({\b a}).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b I. vermia} Papanicolaou,{\i  Nordic Jour. Bot.}{\b  2}: 555 (1982), from
\par

\par
324}
\par