{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 53-69 (1979). C. Favarger, {\i Bull. Soc. Neuchâtel. Sci. Nat.}{\b  103}: 85-90 (1980). A. Polatschek, {\i Ann. Naturh. Mus.} ({\i Wien}) {\b 78}: 171-182 (1974) (Italy);{\b  82: }352-362 (1979) (Spain); {\i Ann. Mus. Goulandris}{\b  1}: 113-126 (1973) (Crete). A. Polatschek in F. Ehrendorfer, {\i Liste der Gefässpflanzen Mitteleuropas} ed. 2, 106. Stuttgart. 1973 (C. Europe). A. Polatschek in A. Strid, {\i Mount. Fl. Gr.}{\b  1}: 239-247. Cambridge. 1986 (Greece). S. Snogerup, {\i Op. Bot.} ({\i Lund}) {\b 13}: 1-70 (1967); {\b 14}: 1-86 (1967) (Greece and Aegean region).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Annual; anthers not more than 1·2(-1·6) mm (see also {\b 55})
\par
2 Petals 6-10 mm; style 2-5 mm; siliqua patent ......................... {\b 56. repandum}
\par
2 Petals (2-)3-6 mm; style 0-1·5 mm; siliqua erect to erecto-patent
\par
3 Pedicels not more than 4 mm in flower, almost as thick as
\par
  the siliqua in fruit ........................................................................ {\b 57. incanum}
\par
3 Pedicels 4-8 mm in flower, distinctly thinner than the
\par
  siliqua in fruit .................................................................... {\b 58. cheiranthoides}
\par
1 Perennial or biennials; anthers 1-4 mm
\par
4 Hairs on leaves mostly bifid
\par
5 Petals purple
\par
6 Petals with bifid hairs on the back; stem with very dense
\par
  sessile leaves up to the inflorescence ...................................... {\b 20. cazorlense}
\par
6 Petals glabrous; stem either not densely leafy, or densely
\par
  leafy only at the base; lower leaves petiolate
\par
7 Style 2-3(-4) mm
\par
8 Pedicel and siliqua erecto-patent, not appressed to the stem
\par
  ........................................................... {\b 26. linifolium}
\par
8 Pedicel and siliqua erect, ± appressed to the stem .................... {\b 27. baeticum}
\par
7 Style 4-7·5 mm
\par
9 Perennial with branched stock and persistent basal leaf-rosettes;
\par
  pedicels 2-2·5 mm in flower, up to 4 mm in fruit ........................ {\b 28. popovii}
\par
9 Biennial without persistent basal leaf-rosettes;
\par
  pedicels c. 3·5 mm in flower, 4-5 mm in fruit ........................... {\b 29. favargeri}
\par
5 Petals yellow, rarely reddish or purple on the back, or variegated
\par
10 Petals glabrous on the back
\par
11 Petal-limb 5-10 mm wide
\par
12 Style less than 2 mm
\par
13 Plant with long, leafy procumbent shoots at the base . {\b 14. linariifolium}
\par
13 Plant with simple or shortly branched stock
\par
14 Plant usually without leaf-rosettes; upper cauline leaves often
\par
   with axillary fascicles ............................................................. {\b 13. nevadense}
\par
14 Plant with basal leaf-rosettes; upper cauline leaves without axillary
\par
   fascicles
\par
15 Sepals 6·5-7 mm; basal and lower leaves long-petiolate ........... {\b 10. jugicola}
\par
15 Sepals 7-16 mm; basal and lower leaves mostly short-petiolate
\par
16 Style 0·5-1·5 mm ....................................................................... {\b 6. sylvestre}
\par
16 Style (1·2-)1·5-2 mm .................................................................. {\b 25. duriaei}
\par
12 Style at least 2 mm
\par
17 Siliqua 1·5-2·3 mm wide; seeds 3-4 mm; style (2·5-)3-8 mm .... {\b 24. humile}
\par
17 Siliqua 0·7-1·5(-2) mm wide; seeds 1·5-3 mm; style 2-3(-5) mm
\par
18 Biennial or short-lived perennial, without or with
\par
   few leaf-rosettes at the base; seeds 1·5-2 mm ......................... {\b 13. nevadense}
\par
18 Rhizomatous perennial, usually with much-branched stock bearing
   numerous leaf-rosettes; seeds 2-3 mm
\par
19 Basal and lower leaves with petiole about ½ as long as the lamina
\par
   ................................................................................................ {\b 7. montosicola}
\par
19 Basal and lower leaves shortly petiolate .................................... {\b 24. duriaei}
\par
11 Petal-limb 2·5-5 mm wide
\par
20 Style 0·5-2 mm
\par
21 Plant with stout, little-branched, woody stock, often 5-10 mm in
\par
   diameter; leaves 6-9 mm wide, very crowded ....................... {\b 17. metlesicsii}
\par
21 Plant with slender, often branched stock, usually less than 5 mm in
\par
   diameter; cauline leaves not more than 5 mm wide, not crowded
\par
22 Plant with long, procumbent leafy stems at the base ........ {\b 14. linariifolium}
\par
22 Plant with leaf-rosettes at the base, sometimes dead at anthesis
\par
23 Plant with much-branched, woody rhizome, the branches long,
\par
   procumbent and bearing persistent leaf-rosettes .......................... {\b 24. duriaei}
\par
23 Plant with short-branched rhizome with ± erect branches, often without
\par
   persistent leaf-rosettes 
24 Siliqua 0·7-1 mm wide, erecto-patent (c. 50°) ........... {\b 12. pseudorhaeticum}
\par
24 Siliqua 1-1·3 mm wide, erecto-patent (15-40°) .................... {\b 13. nevadense}
\par
20 Style at least 2 mm
\par
25 Plant with woody rhizome with long procumbent branches
   bearing numerous  leaf-rosettes ................................................... {\b 24. duriaei}
\par
25 Plant biennial or perennial with short-branched, ± erect rhizome
\par
26 Cauline leaves obtuse, green, about 5-8 times as long as wide;
\par
   siliqua c. 2 mm wide .......................................................... {\b 25. penyalarensis}
\par
26 Cauline leaves acute, grey or greyish-green, at least 10 times
\par
   as long as wide; siliqua 0·7-1·3 mm wide
\par
27 Angles of the siliqua glabrescent, otherwise the siliqua
\par
   densely hairy ............................................................................ {\b 11. rhaeticum}
\par
27 Siliqua uniformly pubescent ................................................. {\b 13. nevadense}
\par
10 Petals with hairs on the back, mostly at the centre of the
\par
   limb and at the top of the claw
\par
28 Petals yellow with buff or purple on the back; calyx 4-5(-6) mm;
\par
   siliqua 6-24 mm ......................................................................... {\b 22. mutabile}
\par
28 Petals yellow, rarely somewhat variegated with buff or purple;
\par
   calyx (5-)6-16 mm; siliqua usually (20-)30-100 mm
\par
29 Siliqua 2-6 mm wide; style very distinctly 2-lobed, the lobes
\par
   usually at least 1 mm; median nectaries absent ............. ({\b 1-5}).{\b  cheiri} group
\par
29 Siliqua 0·5-2 mm wide; style not or only shortly 2-lobed;
\par
   median nectaries usually present
\par
30 Siliqua ± patent, forming an angle of at least 50° with the
\par
   inflorescence axis
\par
31 Stock covered with dense petiole remains .............................. {\b 18. comatum}
\par

\par
326}
\par