{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 to moderately pubescent; petiole much shorter than the lamina. Inflorescence usually branched, with up to 60 flowers on each branch; pedicels 5-20 mm in fruit. Sepals 9·5-14 mm, with dark glands; petals 22-35 × 10-20 mm, yellow or orange-yellow, sometimes variegated with red or purple. Siliqua 40-100 × (4-)5-6(-7) mm, with a conspicuous mid-vein on the valves; style 0·5-4 mm, stout. Seeds 2·5-4 mm, in 2 rows in each loculus. 2n = 14.{\i  Cultivated for ornament, and widely naturalized on walls, cliffs and rocks in C., W. & S. Europe; not known in the wild}. [Al Au Be Bl Br Cz Ga Ge Gr Hb He Ho Hs Hu It Ju Lu Rm Sa Si Tu.]
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Probably derived by selection and hybridization from two or more of the native species of {\b 1-5}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 4. E. senoneri} (Heldr. & Sart.) Wettst.,{\i  Österr. Bot. Zeitschr.}{\b  39}: 283 (1889) ({\i Cheiranthus senoneri} Heldr. & Sart.). Small shrub 15-50 cm, without conspicuous leaf-scars on the lower parts of the stems. Leaves 15-50 × 2·5-16 mm, entire or serrate, sparsely to moderately pubescent; petiole distinct, up to ½ as long as the lamina. Inflorescence simple or with few branches, with 2-30 flowers per branch; pedicels 4-11 mm in fruit. Sepals 6·5-11 mm; petals 12·5-27 × 3-12·5 mm. Siliqua 30-85 × 2-4 mm, compressed, with a narrow mid-vein on the valves; style 1-3·5 mm. Seeds 2·5-5·5 mm, in 1 row in each loculus.{\i  Kikladhes.} Gr.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Plants from Amorgos have been recognized as a distinct subspecies, subsp. {\b amorginum} Snogerup,{\i  Op. Bot.} ({\i Lund}) {\b 13}: 55 (1967), but they cannot be satisfactorily distinguished on the basis of morphology.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 5. E. naxense} Snogerup, {\i Op. Bot.} ({\i Lund}) {\b 13}: 45 (1967). Small shrub 30-70 cm, with conspicuous, broad, persistent leaf-scars on the lower parts of the stems. Leaves 50-140 × 5-23 mm, serrate (sometimes minutely), sparsely to moderately pubescent; petiole distinct, up to 1/2 as long as the lamina. Inflorescence terminal, branched, with 25-70 flowers per branch; pedicels 5-13 mm in fruit. Sepals 8-11 mm; petals 15-24 × 5-9 mm. Siliqua 40-90 × 2·5-4 mm, compressed, with a narrow mid-vein on the valves. Seeds 4·5-5·5 mm, in 1 row in each loculus. •{\i  Kikladhes }({\i Naxos}). Gr.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 6. E. sylvestre} (Crantz) Scop., {\i Fl. Carn.} ed. 2, {\b 2}: 28 (1772) ({\i E. cheiranthus} Pers.). Perennial, with branched stock bearing leaf-rosettes; hairs 2(3)-fid. Leaves 20-120 × 1·5-7 mm, linear or linear-lanceolate, entire or with few teeth. Pedicels 2·5-5 mm in flower, up to 8 mm in fruit. Petals 12-23 × 4·5-7 mm, yellow, glabrous or sparsely pubescent on the back. Siliqua 33-80 × 1-1·5 mm; style 0·5-1·5 mm. Seeds c. 2 mm. •{\i  E. Alps and N.W. Jugoslavia}. Au It Ju.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp.{\b  sylvestre} : Flowering stems 10-40 cm, green or brown at the base. Leaves not more than 3·5 mm wide, linear, sessile or very shortly petiolate. Sepals 9-16 mm, with most hairs bifid; petals 16-23 mm. Siliqua erecto-patent (20-30°); style 0·8-1·5 mm. 2n = 14.{\i  Almost throughout the range of the species}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp.{\b  aurantiacum} (Leybold) P.W. Ball,{\i  Bot. Jour. Linn. Soc.}{\b  103}: 203 (1990) ({\i E. aurantiacum} (Leybold) Leybold): Flowering stems 25-65 cm, often violet at the base. Leaves linear-lanceolate, the lower distinctly petiolate. Sepals 7-10 mm, with some trifid hairs; petals 12-19 mm, always glabrous. Siliqua erecto-patent to more or less patent (45-75°); style 0·5-1 mm. 2n = 14.{\i  Foothills of Alps, N. of Lago di Garda}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 7. E. montosicola} Jordan in Billot,{\i  Annot.} 123 (1858). like {\b 6} but basal leaves with petiole about ½ as long as the lamina, sometimes sinuate-dentate or -lobed; lower cauline leaves shortly petiolate; sepals 8-10 mm; petals 17-20 × 5-7 mm, usually sparsely pubescent on the back; siliqua 60-90 × 1·3-2 mm, erecto-patent (20-30°); style (1-)2-2·5 mm. 2n = 28. •{\i  S.W. Alps} ({\i Hautes-Alpes, Isere}). Ga.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 8. E. majellense} Polatschek,{\i  Ann. Naturh. Mus.} ({\i Wien}) {\b 78}: 177 (1974). Perennial, with branched stock bearing leaf-rosettes; stems 8-30 cm in flower, up to 40 cm in fruit; hairs 2(3)-fid. Leaves 10-60(-80) × 1-6(-8) mm, linear to oblanceolate, the basal petiolate, the rest sessile, entire or the lower sinuate-dentate. Pedicels 1·5-4 mm in flower, up to 4(-6) mm in fruit, more or less patent. Sepals 8-13 mm; petals 15-21 × 5-9 mm, yellow, pubescent on the back. Siliqua 40-90 × 1-1·3 mm, erecto-patent (c. 50°), grey with glabrescent angles; style (1-)1·5-3 mm. 2n = 22, 28. •{\i  C. & S.Appennini.} It.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 9. E. bonannianum} C. Presl,{\i  Fl. Sic.}{\b  1}: 78 (1826). like {\b 8} but pedicels 1-2 mm in flower, up to 4·5 mm in fruit; sepals 6-8·5 mm; petals 14-18 × 3-4(-4·5) mm; siliqua 25-60 mm, erecto-patent (20-50°); style 2-4 mm. 2n = 22, 24. •{\i  Mountains of N. & E. Sicilia.} Si.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 10. E. jugicola} Jordan,{\i  Diagn. }{\b 1}: 173 (1864) ({\i E. pumilum} (Murith) Gaudin, non (Hornem.) DC.). Caespitose perennial with numerous basal leaf-rosettes; stems 6-25 cm in flower, up to 30 cm in fruit; hairs 2(3)-fid. Leaves 10-50 × 2-5 mm, linear-spathulate to lanceolate, usually denticulate, the basal with petiole at least 1/2 as long as the lamina. Pedicels 1·5-2 mm in flower, up to 5(-7) mm in fruit, erecto-patent. Sepals 6·5-7 mm; petals 14-20 × 5-10 mm, yellow, glabrous. Siliqua 25-55 × 1-1·2 mm, erect (10-20°); style 1-1·8 mm. 2n = 18. •{\i  S.W. Alps.} Ga ?He It.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 11. E. rhaeticum} (Schleicher ex Hornem.) DC.,{\i  Reg. Veg. Syst. Nat.}{\b  2}: 503 (1821) ({\i E. helveticum} auct., non (Jacq.) DC., {\i E. lanceolatum} auct. ital.). Perennial with shortly branched stock, with or without basal leaf-rosettes; stems up to 70 cm in flower, up to 110 cm in fruit; hairs 2(3)-fid. Leaves 30-75 × 2-6 mm, linear-lanceolate, entire or denticulate, with clusters of small leaves in the upper axils. Pedicels 2·5-3 mm in flower, up to 6 mm in fruit. Sepals 7·5-9 mm; petals 16-20 × 4-5 mm, yellow, glabrous. Siliqua 45-60 × c. 1 mm, erecto-patent (25-35°), grey with glabrescent angles; style 2·6-3·2 mm. 2n = 56, c. 59. •{\i  Alps}. Au Ga He It.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 12. E. pseudorhaeticum} Polatschek,{\i  Ann. Naturh. Mus.} ({\i Wien}) {\b 78}: 179 (1974). like {\b 11} but sepals 7-12 mm; petals 13-18·5 × 3·5-5 mm; siliqua 35-100 × 0·7-1 mm, erecto-patent (c. 50°); style 0·5-1·5(-2) mm. 2n = 14. •{\i  Mountains of C. Italy}. It.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 13. E. nevadense} Reuter, {\i Cat. Graines Jard. Bot. Genève}{\b  1855}: 4 (1855) ({\i E. grandiflorum} auct. eur., non Desf., {\i E. lanceolatum} R. Br., nom. illeg.,{\i  E. longifolium} DC., nom. illeg.,{\i  E. australe} Gay, nom. illeg., {\i E. bocconei }(All.) Pers., nom. illeg.). Biennial or perennial, usually without basal leaf-rosettes; stems 10-60 cm in flower, up to 70 cm or more in fruit; hairs 2(3)-fid. Leaves 20-80(-110) mm, linear to lanceolate, entire to denticulate, often with fascicles of small leaves in the upper axils. Pedicels 1-4 mm in flower, up to 6 mm in fruit. Sepals 7-11 mm; petals 12-17(-20) × 3-5(-6) mm, yellow, glabrous. Siliqua 20-70 × 0·7-1·2(-1·4) mm; style 1-3·5(-9) mm. Seeds c. 2 mm.{\i  S.W. Europe.} ?Bl ?Co Ga Hs It Lu ?Sa.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 A difficult complex considered by A. Polatschek,{\i  loc. cit.} (1979),
\par

\par
329}
\par