{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}
\pard\f0\fs28 Sect. OXYCARPUS Paol. Inflorescence ebracteate. Petals yellow, drying to white; stamens longer than the petals. Siliqua patent.
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 17. S. erysimoides} Desf.,{\i  Fl. Atl.}{\b  2}: 84 (1798). Annual 10-80 cm, glabrous or shortly pubescent. Leaves lyrate-pinnatifid, rarely entire, ovate-lanceolate, serrate. Pedicels 1-2 mm in flower, up to 5 mm in fruit. Petals 1-3 mm; anthers c. 0·5 mm. Siliqua 20-50 × 0·7-1·3 mm, attenuate into the style; style not more than 1 mm. Seeds 0·8-1·2 mm.{\i  W. Mediterranean region.} Bl Hs *Lu Sa [Az].
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28 Sect. VELARUM DC. Inflorescence ebracteate. Petals yellow. Siliqua closely appressed to the stem.
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 18. S. officinale} (L.) Scop.,{\i  Fl. Carn. }ed. 2, {\b 2}: 26 (1772) ({\i Chamaeplium officinale} (L.) Wallr.). Annual or biennial 5-100(-130) cm. Lower leaves pinnatisect, more or less ovate in outline, with a large terminal lobe. Pedicels 1-2 mm. Petals 2-4 mm; anthers c. 0·7 mm; ovary with 10-20 ovules. Siliqua (7-)10 20 × 1-1·6 mm, conical-cylindrical, straight, attenuate into the style; style 0·5-2 mm. Seeds 1-1·7 mm. 2n = 14.{\i  Europe northwards to c.} 68°{\i  N.} All except Fa Sb; introduced in Is.
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 19. S. cavanillesianum} Castroviejo & Valdés-Bermejo,{\i  Anal. Inst. Bot. Cavanilles }{\b 34}: 327 (1977) ({\i S. matritense }P.W. Ball & Heywood, non Pau,{\i  S. corniculatum} Cav., non Lam.). like {\b 18} but the lower leaves oblong in outline, the terminal lobe only slightly larger than the laterals; petals c. 1·5 mm; ovary with 6 or 7 ovules; siliqua 7-10 mm, curved or contorted, the apex compressed. 2n = 14. •{\i  C. Spain}. Hs.
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 2.            Lycocarpus}              O.E. Schulz
\par
\pard\f0\fs24\qc  By P.W. Ball.
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28 Like {\i Sisymbrium }but the siliqua clavate at the apex, constricted in the middle; stigma sessile.
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. L. fugax} (Lag.) O.E. Schulz in Engler,{\i  Pflanzenreich}{\b  86} ({\b IV.105}): 164 (1924) ({\i Sisymbrium fugax }Lag.). Subglabrous or pubescent annual 10-40 cm. Leaves sinuate-pinnatifid. Racemes ebracteate; pedicels 2-5 mm in fruit, only slightly thinner than the siliqua. Petals 2·5-4 mm, yellow. Siliqua 8-20 mm, 1 mm in diameter at the base, the apex up to 1-2 mm in diameter. Seeds 0·5-0·8 mm. •{\i  S.E. Spain.} Hs.
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 3.            Murbeckiella}             Rothm.
\par
\pard\f0\fs24\qc  By A.O. Chater.
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28 Perennials; glabrous, or with stellate or long, unbranched hairs. Leaves entire to pinnatisect. Sepals unequal, the inner more or less saccate at the base; petals white, emarginate. Fruit a siliqua; valves with a distinct median vein; style very short; stigma slightly 2-lobed. Seeds small (not more than 1·5 mm), often winged at the apex. ({\i Phryne} sensu O.E. Schulz.)
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28  Literature: W. Rothmaler,{\i  Bot. Not. }{\b 1939}: 467-476 (1939). R. Fernandes,{\i  Mem. Soc. Brot. }{\b 6}: 79-91 (1950). O.E. Schulz in Engler,{\i  Pflanzenreich}{\b  86} ({\b IV.105}): 169-175 (1924).
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Basal leaves entire to crenate; pedicels 3-8 mm in fruit
\par 2 Cauline leaves 6-9; stems leafy to the apex ............................. {\b 1. pinnatifida}
\par 2 Cauline leaves 3-5; stems leafy only in lower 2 ............................... {\b 2. boryi}
\par 1 Basal leaves pinnatifid; pedicels 5-15 mm in fruit
\par 3 Cauline leaves 4-8, pinnatifid, with 4-6 lobes on each side .......... {\b 3. zanonii}
\par 3 Cauline leaves 2 or 3, subentire to dentate ..................................... {\b 4. sousae}
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. M. pinnatifida} (Lam.) Rothm.,{\i  Bot. Not. }{\b 1939}: 469 (1939) ({\i Braya pinnatifida} (Lam.) Koch, {\i Sisymbrium pinnatifidum} (Lam.) DC., {\i S. dentatum }All., {\i Arabis pinnatifida} Lam.). Plant sparsely to densely covered with stellate hairs; stems more or less densely leafy throughout. Basal leaves 1-2 cm, entire to repand-dentate; cauline leaves 6-9, pinnatifid, with 4-6 lobes on each side. Pedicels 3-4 mm in fruit. Sepals 1·5-2·5 mm; petals 3·5-4 mm, slightly emarginate. Siliqua 10-30 × 1 mm; style 0·25 mm, conical. Seeds 1 × 0·5 mm, wingless or winged only at the apex. 2n = 16. •{\i  Mountain rocks. W. Europe, from C. Pyrenees to c.} 8°{\i  E. in W.C. Alps.} Ga He Hs It.
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. M. boryi} (Boiss.) Rothm., {\i loc. cit.} (1939) ({\i Braya pinnatifida }sensu Willk. pro parte; incl. {\i M. glaberrima} (Rothm.) Rothm.). Plant sparsely to densely covered with stellate hairs, or with only unbranched hairs, sometimes subglabrous; stems sparsely leafy up to the middle. Basal leaves 1·5-3 cm, entire or sinuate-dentate; cauline leaves 3-5, pinnatifid, with 1-6 lobes on each side. Pedicels 3-8 mm in fruit. Sepals 2-3·5 mm; petals 3·5-8 mm, deeply emarginate. Siliqua 10-35 × 0·5-1 mm; style 0·5 mm. Seeds 1-1·5 × 0·5-0·75 mm, winged all round or only at the apex.{\i  C. & S. Spain, C. Portugal.} Hs Lu.
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 3. M. zanonii} (Ball) Rothm., {\i op. cit.} 471 (1939) ({\i Sisymbrium zanonii }(Ball) Gay). Plant usually densely covered with stellate hairs; stems leafy to the apex. Basal leaves 2-5 cm, pinnatifid; cauline leaves 4-8, pinnatifid, with 4-6 lobes on each side. Pedicels 5-14 mm in fruit. Sepals 2·5 mm; petals 5-7 mm, emarginate. Siliqua 20-50 × 0·75 mm, somewhat patent; style 0·5-1 mm, cylindrical. Seeds 0·8 × 0·5 mm, wingless or winged only at the apex.{\i  N. Appennini}. It.
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 4. M. sousae} Rothm., {\i op. cit.} 474 (1939). Plant glabrous or with sparse stellate hairs; stems leafless or with 2 or 3 leaves. Basal leaves 4-7 cm, pinnatifid, with 2-4 lobes on each side; cauline leaves 2 or 3, subentire or sinuate-dentate. Pedicels 10-15 mm in fruit. Sepals 3-3·5 mm; petals 6-7 mm, slightly emarginate. Siliqua 40-55 × 1 mm; style 0·5 mm, conical. Seeds 1 × 0·6 mm, winged all round. •{\i  C. & N. Portugal} ({\i Serra de Lousa, Serra de Marao}). Lu.
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 4.             Descurainia}              Webb & Berth.
\par
\pard\f0\fs24\qc  By P.W. Ball.
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28 Annual or biennial; hairs of 2 kinds, dendritic and unbranched. Leaves 2- to 4-pinnatisect. Sepals not saccate; petals pale yellow, smaller than the sepals. Fruit a siliqua; valves with a distinct median vein; style very short; stigma subcapitate. Seeds small (not more than 1 mm), not mucilaginous when moistened.
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. D. sophia} (L.) Webb ex Prantl in Engler & Prantl,{\i  Naturl. Pflanzenfam.}{\b  3}({\b 2}): 192 (1891) ({\i Sisymbrium sophia} L.). Plant 20-100 cm. Cauline leaves with linear or oblong lobes. Pedicels 5-50 mm in fruit. Sepals 2-3 mm; stamens usually exceeding the sepals. Siliqua 8-45 × 0·5-1 mm, usually erecto-patent, torulose; valves reticulately veined. Seeds 0·8-1·1 mm. 2n = 28.{\i  Usually ruderal. Throughout Europe northwards to c. }70°{\i  N., but doubtfully native in much of the north.} All except Az Fa Sa Sb.
\par
\par 321}
\par