{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 N. Greece (Vermion), is autumn-flowering and has angled stems and silicula 9-14 × 3-4 mm, glabrous, with a slender central rib. The chromosome number is 2n = 28. It is more or less intermediate between subspp. ({\b b}) and ({\b c}) and requires further study.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 8. I. arenaria} Aznav.,{\i  Bull. Soc. Bot. Fr.}{\b  46}: 138 (1899). Perennial with vegetative rosettes and flowering stems 30-70 cm. Cauline leaves with obtuse auricles. Petals 3-4 mm. Silicula 15-25 × 5-8 mm, oblong, glabrous or pubescent; central rib slender.{\i  Maritime sands. Turkey} ({\i near Kilyos, N. of Istanbul}). Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Endemic to the coasts of the Bosporus region.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 9. I. lusitanica} L.,{\i  Sp. Pl}. 670 (1753) ({\i I. aleppica} Scop.). Annual 20-70(-90) cm. Basal leaves pinnately lobed, glabrous or puberulent; cauline leaves with acute auricles. Petals 3-5 mm. Silicula (12-)15-28 × (1-)2·5-5 mm, linear-oblanceolate, 6-8 times as long as wide, truncate or retuse, usually somewhat pubescent. {\i Karpathos.} Cr. ({\i S.W. Asia; N.W. Africa.})
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 15.             Tauscheria}            Fischer ex DC.
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc  By P.W. Ball.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Annual; hairs unbranched. Leaves simple, entire, the cauline amplexicaul. Sepals erect, not saccate; petals yellow, not clawed. Fruit an indehiscent, more or less hemispherical, 2-seeded silicula.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. T. lasiocarpa} Fischer ex DC.,{\i  Reg. Veg. Syst. Nat.}{\b  2}: 563 (1821). Glabrous except for the inflorescence, glaucous, 15-40 cm. Basal leaves cuneate, the cauline cordate-amplexicaul. Pedicels curved downwards in fruit. Silicula 3-5 × 2·5-4 mm, pubescent, strongly compressed, convex beneath, concave with incurved margins above so as to be more or less hemispherical; apex with upwardly curving beak.{\i  Dry places. S.E. Russia.} Rs(E). ({\i N. & C. Asia.})
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 16.                Bunias}                  L.
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc  By P.W. Ball.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Annuals to perennials; glabrous or with glandular, unbranched or branched hairs. Leaves entire to pinnatisect. Sepals erecto-patent, the inner not or scarcely saccate at the base; petals white or yellow. Fruit an indehiscent silicula with irregular longitudinal wings, ridges or protuberances, and with 1-4 1-seeded loculi; style distinct; stigma capitate.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Petals white; silicula 3-4 mm ............................................. {\b 3. cochlearioides}
\par
1 Petals yellow; silicula 5-12 mm
\par
2 Silicula 10-12 mm, with 4 irregularly dentate or lobed
\par
  longitudinal wings; petals usually 8-13 mm .................................. {\b 1. erucago}
\par
2 Silicula 5-10 mm, unwinged, but with small, irregular
\par
  protuberances; petals 4-8 mm ...................................................... {\b 2. orientalis}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. B. erucago} L.,{\i  Sp. Pl}. 670 (1753) ({\i B. tricornis} Lange). Hispid, glandular annual or biennial 30-60(-100) cm. Lower leaves entire to sinuate-pinnatifid or pinnatisect; upper leaves entire or dentate. Petals (6-)8-13 mm, yellow, obcordate. Silicula 10-12 mm, quadrangular, with irregularly dentate or lobed wings on the angles; loculi 4; style 3-5 mm.{\i  Ruderal. S. Europe; often introduced elsewhere}. Al Bu Co Cr Ga Gr He Hs It Ju Lu Sa Si Tu [Au Cz Ge *Rm].
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. B. orientalis} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 670 (1753). Glabrous or sparsely glandular biennial or perennial 25-120 cm. Lower leaves pinnate with 1 or 2 pairs of lateral leaflets and a large, pinnatifid terminal leaflet, sometimes entire; upper leaves entire to pinnatifid. Petals 4-8 mm, yellow, entire or truncate. Silicula 5-10 mm, asymmetrically ovoid and covered with small, irregular protuberances; loculi 1 or 2; style 0·5-2 mm. 2n = 14.{\i  E. Europe, extending westwards to Hungary; often naturalized as a weed elsewhere.} Bu Hu Ju Po Rm Rs(N, C, W, K, E) [Au Be Br Cz Da Fe Ga Ge He Ho It No Rs(B) Su].
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 3. B. cochlearioides} Murray,{\i  Novi Comment. Gotting. }{\b 8}: 42 (1778). Glabrous or sparsely pubescent biennial 15-30 cm. Leaves dentate to lyrate-pinnatifid. Petals 3-4 mm, white, entire or truncate. Silicula 3-4 mm, orbicular-ovate with 4 longitudinal ridges; loculi 2; style c. 1 mm.{\i  S.E. Russia}. Rs(E). ({\i W. Asia.})
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 17.            Goldbachia}           DC.
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc  By P.W. Ball.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Glabrous annuals. Leaves entire, sinuate, the cauline amplexicaul. Sepals erect, not saccate; petals white to purple, not clawed. Fruit an articulated silicula or siliqua, sometimes with only 1 segment; segments 1-seeded; style distinct; stigma shortly 2-lobed.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. G. laevigata} (Bieb.) DC.,{\i  Reg. Veg. Syst. Nat.}{\b  2}: 577 (1821). Plant 5-40 cm. Leaves oblong to obovate, the basal petiolate, the cauline with acute auricles. Pedicels curved downwards in fruit. Petals 4-6 mm. Silicula 10-12 × 2-4 mm, erect, 4-angled, attenuate at the base and apex, with 1-3 segments.{\i  Semi-deserts. S.E. Russia; rarely as a casual elsewhere.} Rs(E). ({\i C. & S.W. Asia}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 18.              Erysimum}             L.
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc  By P.W. Ball.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Annuals to perennials, with branched hairs. Sepals erect, the inner usually saccate at the base; petals yellow, rarely purple or brownish, long-clawed; median nectaries usually present. Fruit a siliqua valves usually 1-veined, the hairs not lying transversely across the valves; style distinct, not more than 1/3 as long as the rest of the siliqua, rarely absent; stigma usually weakly 2-lobed. Seeds in 1(2) rows in each loculus. (Incl.{\i  Cheiranthus }L.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Descriptions of the hairs apply primarily to those found on the leaves. Usually the stem has a higher proportion of hairs with fewer branches than is found on the leaves, but other parts of the plant have hairs similar to those found on the leaves unless otherwise stated. In virtually all species a few stellate hairs can be found on the style of the fruit, even those in which the hairs are consistently only medifixed (bifid) elsewhere on the plant.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Descriptions of fruit attitude refer only to the angle at which the siliqua diverges from the inflorescence axis, not the pedicel. The pedicel may arise at the same or at a somewhat larger angle.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 A difficult genus which, despite a number of recent publications, is still not understood. The following account is based primarily on the published work of A. Polatschek ({\i loc. cit.} below).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Species groups have generally not been utilized because in many instances groups cannot be clearly defined or keyed out. However the following species form difficult complexes and particular care is needed when determining members of these:{\b  6-13},{\b  26-29}, {\b 35-42}, {\b 46-50}, {\b 51-54}. In addition {\b 14-25} are not always clearly distinct from{\b  6-13}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Literature: C. Favarger & M. Goodhue, {\i Bull. Soc. Neuchâtel. Sci. Nat.}{\b  100: }93-105 (1977). C. Favarger, {\i Anal. Inst. Bot. Cavanilles}{\b  35}: 361-393 (1978). P. Correvon & C. Favarger, {\i Pl. Syst. Evol. }{\b 131}
\par

\par
325}
\par