{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 31 Stock not densely covered with petiole remains
\par
32 Calyx 8-13 mm; petals 5-9 mm wide ..................................... {\b 8. majellense}
\par
32 Calyx up to 9 mm; petals 2-4(-5) mm wide
\par
33 Biennial, usually without persistent leaf-rosettes at the base
\par
34 Siliqua with mainly stellate hairs; at least the lower leaves
\par
   coarsely sinuate-dentate ............................................................. {\b 35. creticum}
\par
34 Siliqua with mainly bifid hairs; leaves entire or dentate
\par
35 Pedicels as thick as the siliqua, both at an angle of
\par
   c. 90° to the axis ........................................................................ {\b 33. graecum}
\par
35 Pedicels somewhat thinner than the siliqua, both at an angle
\par
   of 60-90° to the axis ............................................................ {\b 34. crassistylum}
\par
33 Perennial, usually with persistent leaf-rosettes at the base
\par
   or with the remains of old flowering stem
\par
36 Plant with numerous persistent leaf-rosettes; siliqua dorsally
\par
   compressed ................................................................................ {\b 15. pusillum}
\par
36 Plant without or with few basal leaf-rosettes; siliqua square
\par
   in transverse section
\par
37 Plant with long, procumbent leafy shoots; siliqua erecto-
\par
   patent (30-50°) .................................................................... {\b 14. linariifolium}
\par
37 Plant without sterile leafy shoots or with few basal rosettes;
\par
   siliqua patent (60-70°) ........................................................... {\b 16. drenowskii}
\par
30 Mature siliqua erect or erecto-patent
\par
38 Siliqua and pedicel erect, closely appressed to the axis
\par
39 Leaves filiform, canaliculate, grey ................................. {\b 19. myriophyllum}
\par
39 Leaves flat, green, the basal oblanceolate .................................. {\b 21. raulinii}
\par
38 Siliqua and pedicel not closely appressed to the axis
\par
40 Pedicels 6-10 mm in flower, up to 16 mm in fruit .............. {\b 30. ucrainicum}
\par
40 Pedicels not more than 6(-8) mm in flower, up to 8(-11) mm in fruit
\par
41 Petals (4·5-)5-9 mm wide
\par
42 Style 0·8-1·5(-1·8) mm
\par
43 Petals glabrous or sparsely pubescent; siliqua erecto-
\par
   patent (20-30°) ............................................................................ {\b 6. sylvestre}
\par
43 Petals pubescent; siliqua erecto-patent to patent (30-60°) ..... {\b 18. comatum}
\par
42 Style 1·5-2·5 mm
\par
44 Sepals not more than 9 mm; petals not more than 16 mm;
\par
   siliqua dorsally compressed ...................................................... {\b 15. pusillum}
\par
44 Sepals 8-13 mm; petals 15-21 mm; siliqua ± square in transverse section
\par
45 Cauline leaves without small axillary shoots;
\par
   siliqua 1·3-2 mm wide ........................................................... {\b 7. montosicola}
\par
45 Cauline leaves usually with short axillary shoots;
\par
   siliqua 1-1·3 mm wide .............................................................. {\b 8. majellense}
\par
41 Petals 2-5 mm wide
\par
46 Biennial with a simple taproot and a basal leaf-rosette,
\par
   usually dead at anthesis
\par
47 Sepals (7·5-)9-11 mm, conspicuously saccate; stem usually with numerous,
\par
   very dense leaf-remains at the base
\par
48 Cauline leaves 6-9 mm wide, oblong, the upper with short
\par
   axillary shoots ........................................................................ {\b 17. metlesicsii}
\par
48 Cauline leaves 1-6(-8) mm wide, linear or linear-lanceolate,
\par
   the upper without short axillary shoots ..................................... {\b 18. comatum}
\par
47 Sepals 5-9(-9·5) mm, not or only weakly saccate at the base
\par
49 Pedicels 1-2 mm in flower, up to 5 mm in fruit;
\par
   style 1·5-4·5 mm ...................................................................... {\b 31. krynkense}
\par
49 Pedicels (2-)3-6(-8) mm in flower, up to 11 mm in fruit;
\par
   style 0·5-2·5 mm
\par
50 Siliqua 0·5-1 mm wide; plant usually densely grey-pubescent {\b 32. diffusum}
\par
50 Siliqua 1-1·5 mm wide; plant usually green and not densely
\par
   pubescent ................................................................................ {\b 36. calycinum}
\par
46 Perennial, usually with branched stock bearing conspicuous
\par
   leaf-rosettes, or with leafy shoots
\par
51 Pedicels (2-)3-5 mm in flower, up to 11 mm in fruit; siliqua usually
\par
   glabrescent on the angles
\par
52 Plant with long, procumbent leafy shoots; pedicels not more
\par
   than 7 mm in fruit ................................................................ {\b 14. linariifolium}
\par
52 Plant without long, procumbent leafy shoots; pedicels up
\par
   to 11 mm in fruit
\par
53 Siliqua 30-55 mm, with numerous trifid as well as bifid hairs;
\par
   sepals c. 2·5 mm wide, with frequent trifid hairs ................... {\b 36. calycinum}
\par
53 Siliqua (50-)60-100 mm, without or with few trifid hairs;
\par
   sepals c. 1 mm wide, with few trifid hairs ............................ {\b 37. olympicum}
\par
51 Pedicels 0·5-2(-2·5) mm in flower, up to 4·5 mm in fruit;
\par
   siliqua glabrescent or pubescent on the angles
\par
54 Petals 9-14 mm ....................................................................... {\b 15. pusillum}
\par
54 Petals 14-18 mm
\par
55 Siliqua ± glabrescent on the angles; style 2-4 mm ............ {\b 9. bonannianum}
\par
55 Siliqua pubescent on the angles; style 1·8-2·5 mm ................. {\b 15. pusillum}
\par
4  Hairs on the leaves stellate or with numerous stellate hairs
\par
   mixed with bifid hairs
\par
56 Anthers 1-2 mm
\par
57 Caespitose perennial with branched, woody stock bearing numerous
\par
   persistent leaf-rosettes; leaves with numerous bifid as well
\par
   as stellate hairs ....................................................................... {\b 45. pulchellum}
\par
57 Biennial or short-lived perennial, without or with few persistent
\par
   leaf-rosettes at the base; leaves with almost all hairs stellate
\par
58 Siliqua patent or deflexed .......................................................... {\b 43. aureum}
\par
58 Siliqua erect or erecto-patent
\par
59 Siliqua 0·4-0·8 mm in diameter, the valves rounded
\par

\par
327}
\par