{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 5.             Hugueninia}            Reichenb.
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc  By P.W. Ball.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Perennial; hairs more or less stellate. Leaves 2-pinnatisect. Sepals not saccate at the base; petals yellow, exceeding the sepals. Fruit a siliqua; valves 1-veined; style very short; stigma slightly 2-lobed. Seeds c. 2 mm, not winged, mucilaginous when moistened.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. H. tanacetifolia} (L.) Reichenb., {\i Fl. Germ. Excurs.} 691 (1832) ({\i Sisymbrium tanacetifolium} L.). Stout, tomentose, pubescent or subglabrous perennial 30-70 cm. Lower leaves up to 30 cm, long-petiolate; segments 8-10 pairs, broadly linear to lanceolate, serrate to pinnatifid, the ultimate lobes 4-10 mm wide. Petals c. 4 mm. Siliqua 6-15 × 1·2-1·5 mm, oblong-oblanceolate, erecto-patent; valves with a strong mid-vein. Seeds c. 2 mm. •{\i  S.W. Alps, eastwards to c.} 7° 45' {\i E.; C. Pyrenees, mountains of N. Spain}. Ga He Hs It.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp.{\b  tanacetifolia} : Stem and lower surface of leaves grey pubescent or subglabrous; segments of the lower leaves with 4-8(-10) pairs of teeth or lobes. Pedicels 5-8 mm in fruit.{\i  S.W. Alps}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp.{\i  suffruticosa} (Coste & Soulié) P.W. Ball,{\i  Feddes Repert.}{\b  68}: 194 (1963): Stem and lower surface of leaves grey tomentose; segments of the lower leaves with 1-4(5) pairs of teeth or lobes. Pedicels 7-11 mm in fruit.{\i  Pyrenees and mountains of N. Spain}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 6.            Alliaria}                  Scop.
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc  By P.W. Ball.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Biennial, more rarely perennial; hairs unbranched. Basal leaves undivided. Sepals not saccate at the base; petals white. Fruit a siliqua; valves 3-veined; style distinct; stigma more or less entire. Seeds large (2·5-4·5 mm).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. A. petiolata} (Bieb.) Cavara & Grande,{\i  Boll. Orto Bot. Napoli}{\b  3}: 418 (1913) ({\i A. officinalis} Andrz. ex Bieb.,{\i  Sisymbrium alliaria} (L.) Scop.). Plant up to 120 cm, smelling of garlic when crushed. Leaves reniform to triangular-ovate, cordate, crenate to coarsely sinuate dentate, the basal long-petiolate. Pedicels 2·5-13 mm in fruit, about as thick as the siliqua. Petals 4-8(-9) mm. Siliqua 20-70 × 1·5-3·5 mm, patent or erecto-patent. 2n = 36, 42.{\i  Europe from about} 68°{\i  N. southwards, but rarer in the extreme south.} All except Az Bl Cr Fa Is Rs(N) Sa Sb.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 7.            Eutrema}                 R.Br.
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc  By P.W. Ball.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Perennial; glabrous or with very sparse unbranched hairs. Basal leaves simple. Sepals not saccate at the base; petals white. Fruit a siliqua; valves 1-veined; style distinct; stigma slightly 2-lobed. Seeds large (c. 3 mm), winged.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. E. edwardsii} R. Br., {\i Chloris Melv.} 9 (1823). Plant 5-40 cm, rhizomatous. Basal leaves ovate to orbicular, broadly cuneate to cordate at the base, usually entire, long-petiolate; cauline leaves oblong-ovate to linear-lanceolate, cuneate, more or less sessile; all fleshy. Petals 2-4 mm. Siliqua 6-20 × 1·5-3 mm, linear or oblong, erecto-patent; style 0·25-0·9 mm. 2n = 42. {\i Arctic Europe}. Rs(N) Sb.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 8.             Arabidopsis}           (DC.) Heynh.
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc  By P.W. Ball.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Annual to perennial; glabrous or with unbranched and branched hairs. Leaves entire to pinnatifid. Sepals not saccate at the base; petals white, pale purple or yellow, sometimes absent. Fruit a siliqua; valves 1-veined; style short; stigma subcapitate. Seeds small (less than 1 mm). ({\i Stenophragma} Celak, {\i Hylandra} Á. Löve.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Literature: O.E. Schulz in Engler,{\i  Pflanzenreich}{\b  86} ({\b IV.105}): 268-285 (1924).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 The limits of this genus are uncertain. For a full discussion of the problem see N. Hylander,{\i  Bull. Jard. Bot. Bruxelles}{\b  27}: 591-604 (1957), F. Laibach,{\i  Planta }{\b 51: }148-166 (1958), and Á. Löve,{\i  Svensk Bot. Tidskr.}{\b  55}: 211-217 (1961). It seems probable that{\i  Cardaminopsis} should be combined with {\i Arabidopsis}, and some species of{\i  Arabidopsis} may have to be removed from the enlarged genus. Schulz's delimitation is maintained here.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Cauline leaves sagittate-amplexicaul at the base; most hairs bifid
\par
  or stellate
\par
2 Petals 4-8 mm, white; siliqua glabrous .................................... {\b 4. toxophylla}
\par
2 Petals 2-3 mm, yellow; siliqua pubescent with stellate hairs ........ {\b 5. pumila}
\par
1 Cauline leaves cuneate at the base; most hairs unbranched and
\par
  bifid or absent
\par
3 Glabrous; petals absent; siliqua abruptly contracted into a
\par
  very short style ............................................................................... {\b 3. parvula}
\par
3 Pubescent or hispid, at least at the base; petals 2 mm or
\par
  more; siliqua ± attenuate into style
\par
4 Petals 2-4(-4·5) mm; anthers 0·3-0·5 mm; siliqua 5-20(-30) ×
\par
  0·5-0·8 mm, laterally compressed .................................................. {\b 1. thaliana}
\par
4 Petals 4 mm or more; anthers 0·5-0·8 mm; siliqua
\par
  20-30 × 0·7-1 mm, not strongly compressed .................................. {\b 2. suecica}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. A. thaliana} (L.) Heynh. in Holl & Heynh.,{\i  Fl. Sachs. }{\b 1}: 538 (1842) ({\i Sisymbrium thalianum }(L.) Gay). Annual or biennial up to 40(-70) cm, sparsely pubescent in the lower parts with mostly unbranched hairs on the stem and 2(3)-fid hairs on the leaves. Basal leaves entire to dentate; cauline usually entire, sessile, cuneate at the base. Petals 2-4(-4·5) mm, white; stamens 4-6; anthers 0·3-0·5 mm. Siliqua 5-20(-30) × 0·5-0·8 mm, glabrous, attenuate into style 0·3-0·5 mm. 2n = 10.{\i  Open habitats. Europe northwards to c.} 68°{\i  N.} All except Az Fa Is Sb.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. A. suecica} (Fries) Norrlin,{\i  Meddel. Soc. Fauna Fl. Fenn}{\b  2}: 12 (1878) ({\i Arabis suecica} Fries, {\i Cardaminopsis suecica} (Fries) Hiitonen, {\i Hylandra suecica} (Fries) A. Löve). like {\b 1} but usually not more than 20 cm; basal leaves dentate to pinnatifid; the lower cauline usually dentate; petals 4-8 mm; anthers 0·5-0·8 mm; siliqua 20-30 × 0·7-1 mm; style 0·3-0·7 mm. 2n = 26.{\i  Gravelly places. Fennoscandia and Baltic region.} Fe *Ge *No Rs(C) Su [Rs(N, B)].
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 This species, intermediate between {\b 1} and {\i Cardaminopsis arenosa} (L.) Hayek, is very probably an allopolyploid derived from these two species. It is often confused with{\i  C. arenosa} but may be distinguished by the dentate to pinnatifid (not pinnatipartite) basal leaves, the always white flowers, the petals without teeth on the claw, and the siliqua not strongly compressed.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 3. A. parvula} (Schrenk) O.E. Schulz in Engler,{\i  Pflanzenreich}{\b  86} ({\b IV.105}): 269 (1924). like {\b 1} but stem 3-15 cm, glabrous; leaves fleshy; sepals 2 mm; petals absent; siliqua 6-15 mm, torulose,
\par

\par
322}
\par