{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 1-2 mm. Siliqua up to 60 × 0·5-1·5 mm; septum yellowish, opaque. Seeds 1-1·5 mm. •{\i  W.C. & S.W. Europe, from c.} 15°{\i  E. to the Iberian peninsula.} Au Be Cz Ga Ge He Hs It *Lu [Ho Rs(W)].
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Middle and upper cauline leaves entire or dentate
\par
2 Basal leaves pinnatifid or pinnatisect;
\par
  sepals 2-3 mm ............................................................ ({\b c}) subsp.{\b  contortum}
\par
2 Basal leaves entire or sinuate-pinnatifid;
\par
  sepals 1·5-2·5 mm .................................................... ({\b d}) subsp. {\b hispanicum}
\par
1 Middle and upper cauline leaves pinnatifid
\par
3 Siliqua 7-15 mm, strongly contorted .................... ({\b b}) subsp.{\b  chrysanthum}
\par
3 Siliqua (10-)15-50 mm, not or slightly contorted
\par
4 Stem glabrous or sparsely setose; siliqua 0·7-1·7 mm in
\par
  diameter .................................................................... ({\b a}) subsp. {\b austriacum}
\par
4 Stem densely setose; petals 3-5·5 mm; siliqua 0·7-1 mm
\par
  in diameter ................................................................. ({\b c}) subsp. {\b contortum}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp.{\b  austriacum} ({\i S. acutangulum }DC.): Stem glabrous or sparsely setose. Basal leaves pinnatifid or pinnatisect; middle and upper cauline leaves pinnatifid. Sepals (2-)25-4 mm; petals (3·5-)4-7 mm. Siliqua (10-)15-50 × 0·7-1·7 mm, not or slightly contorted.{\i  Throughout the range of the species except for parts of the Iberian peninsula; frequently casual elsewhere}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b chrysanthum} (Jordan) Rouy & Fouc., {\i Fl. Fr.}{\b  2}: 17 (1895) ({\i S. pyrenaicum} auct.,{\i  S. contortum} auct. gall., non Cav.): Stem and leaves as in subsp. ({\b a}). Sepals 1·5-3 mm; petals 3·5-4·5 mm. Siliqua 7-15 × 0·8-1·4 mm, strongly contorted.{\i  C. & W. Pyrenees, mountains of N. Spain}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b c}) Subsp. contortum (Cav.) Rouy & Fouc., {\i op. cit. }19 (1895) ({\i S. contortum} Cav.): Stem densely setose. Basal leaves pinnatifid or pinnatisect; middle and upper cauline leaves entire or dentate, rarely pinnatifid. Sepals 2-3 mm; petals 3-5·5 mm. Siliqua 15-50 × 0·5-1(-1·2) mm, slightly contorted.{\i  N. & C. Spain}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b d}) Subsp.{\b  hispanicum }(Jacq.) P.W. Ball & Heywood,{\i  Feddes Repert.}{\b  64}: 17 (1961) ({\i S. hispanicum} Jacq.): Stems usually more or less glabrous. Basal leaves entire or sinuate-pinnatifid; middle and upper cauline leaves entire. Sepals 1·5-2·5 mm; petals 3-4·5 mm. Siliqua 15-35 × 0·5-1 mm, not or slightly contorted.{\i  C. & S.E. Spain}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    ({\b 9-11}).{\b  S. crassifolium} group. Stem glabrescent or with upward-curving hairs. Lower leaves sinuate-pinnatifid to pinnatisect. Petals 6·5-11 mm, pale yellow. Siliqua usually 1-1·5 mm in diameter, the valves with very prominent veins; style up to 2 mm; septum thick, opaque, foveolate. Seeds 1-1·5 mm.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Inflorescence condensed, at least the upper flowers overtopping
\par
  the buds; valves of the siliqua with very thick veins .............. {\b 9. crassifolium}
\par
1 Inflorescence lax; valves of the siliqua with thin but prominent veins
\par
2 Seeds ovate-oblong; lower leaves usually sinuate-pinnatifid, the lateral
\par
  lobes triangular; uppermost leaves dentate or entire ............... {\b 10. laxiflorum}
\par
2 Seeds cylindrical; lower leaves sinuate-pinnatisect, the lateral
\par
  lobes oblong- to ovate-triangular; uppermost leaves usually with
\par
  linear lobes at the base ............................................................ {\b 11. arundanum}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 9. S. crassifolium} Cav.,{\i  Descr. Pl.} 437 (1803) ({\i S. granatense} Boiss.). Biennial or perennial 30-70(-100) cm. Lower leaves sinuate-pinnatifid, the lateral lobes usually triangular; uppermost leaves dentate to entire. Inflorescence condensed; pedicels 2-6 mm, up to 12 mm in fruit. Siliqua 35-90 mm, the valves with very thick, broad veins. Seeds ovoid-oblong to oblong. {\i Spain & Portugal}. Hs Lu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 10. S. laxiflorum} Boiss.,{\i  Elenchus} 9 (1838). like {\b 9} but inflorescence lax; pedicels 1·5-4 mm in flower, up to 10 mm in fruit; valves of the siliqua with slender, very prominent veins. •{\i  Mountains of S. Spain.} Hs.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 11. S. arundanum} Boiss.,{\i  Voy. Bot. Midi Esp.}{\b  2}: 30 (1839). like {\b 9} but lower leaves sinuate-pinnatisect, the lateral lobes ovate- to oblong-triangular; upper leaves with linear lobes at their base; racemes lax; seeds cylindrical. •{\i  Mountains of S. Spain}. Hs.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Sect. SISYMBRIUM. Inflorescence ebracteate. Petals yellow. Siliqua patent, with 80-120 seeds.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 12. S. altissimum} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 659 (1753) ({\i S. sinapistrum }Crantz,{\i  S. pannonicum} Jacq.). Annual up to 100 cm, usually hispid at the base. First-formed basal leaves minute, oblong-obovate, subentire; later-formed basal and lower cauline leaves sinuate-pinnatifid; upper pinnate, with linear lobes. Pedicels 4-10 mm. Outer sepals with a short horn at the apex; petals 5-11 mm, pale yellow; anthers 1-2 mm. Siliqua (35-)50-100 × 1-1·5 mm; style 0·5-2·5 mm, cylindrical, with shortly 2-lobed stigma. Seeds 0·7-1·2 mm. 2n = 14. {\i C. & E.C. Europe; widely naturalized elsewhere}. Al Bu Gr Hu Ju Po Rm Rs(*B, C, W, K, E) Tu [Au Be Br Cz Da Fe Ga Ge He Ho Hs Is *It Lu No Rs(N) *Si Su].
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 13. S. orientale} L.,{\i  Cent. Pl.}{\b  2}: 24 (1756) ({\i S. columnae} Jacq., {\i S. longesiliquosum} Willk.; incl. {\i S. costei} Fouc. & Rouy). like {\b 12} but the stem softly pubescent; upper leaves petiolate, simple, 3-lobed or hastate, the terminal lobe linear or lanceolate; sepals usually without a short horn at the apex; petals (6-)7-10 mm; style and stigma 0·2-3·5 mm, clavate, the apex about as thick as the siliqua. 2n = 14. {\i S. Europe; widely naturalized elsewhere.} Al Bl Bu Co Cr Ga Gr *Hu Hs *It Ju *Rm *Sa *Si Tu [Au Be Br Cz ?Ge Hb He Ho No Po Rs(W, *K) Su].
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Sect. CHAMAEPLIUM (Wallr.) Thell. Inflorescence usually bracteate. Petals pale yellow. Valves of the siliqua 3-veined.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 14. S. polyceratium} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 658 (1753) ({\i Chamaeplium polyceratium} (L.) Wallr.). Usually glabrous, foetid annual up to 75 cm. Lower leaves sinuate-pinnatifid, the lobes triangular. Inflorescence bracteate to the apex; flowers usually fasciculate; pedicels 0·5-1 mm in fruit. Petals 1·5-2 mm, equalling or slightly exceeding the sepals; anthers 0·3-0·5 mm. Siliqua 10-25 × 0·7-1·2 mm, straight to recurved, torulose; style 0·5-1 mm, thinner than the siliqua. Seeds 0·6-1 mm.{\i  S. Europe.} Al Bl Bu Co Cr Ga Gr It Ju Sa Si Tu [Lu].
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 15. S. confertum} Steven ex Turcz., {\i Bull. Soc. Nat. Moscou}{\b  27}({\b 2}): 304 (1854) ({\i S. anomalum} Aznav.,{\i  S. austriacum} subsp. {\i thracicum }Aznav., {\i S. lagascae} Amo). like {\b 14} but the inflorescence often ebracteate in the upper part; pedicels 2-3 mm in fruit; petals 2-2·5 mm; siliqua up to 45 mm, usually more or less straight; style 1-2 mm.{\i  Krym; Turkey-in-Europe.} Rs(K) Tu. ({\i S.W. Asia}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 16. S. runcinatum} Lag. ex DC.,{\i  Reg. Veg. Syst. Nat. }{\b 2}: 478 (1821) ({\i Chamaeplium runcinatum} (Lag. ex DC.) Hayek). like {\b 14} but the lower cauline leaves subentire to sinuate-pinnatifid, the lobes oblong; flowers usually solitary; petals 2·5-3·5 mm; siliqua 10-35 × 1-2 mm, straight or slightly recurved; style 1-2 mm, almost as thick as the siliqua. 2n = 56.{\i  S.W. Europe; sometimes casual elsewhere.} Ga Hs Lu.
\par

\par
320}
\par