{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 3·5-5 mm wide; siliqua up to 40 mm; style 4·5-6 mm. 2n = 56. •{\i  S.E. Spain }({\i Sierra de Cazorla, Sierra de Pozo}). Hs.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 30. E. ucrainicum} Gay,{\i  Erysim. Nov. 3} (1842) ({\i E. cretaceum} (Rupr.) Schmalh.). Perennial with shortly branched stock; stems 25-50 cm, with dense persistent petiole-remains at the base; hairs 2(3)-fid. Leaves 20-30 × 1-3 mm, linear or linear-lanceolate, entire, grey. Pedicels 5-10 mm in flower, up to 16 mm in fruit. Sepals 6-10 mm; petals 12-18 × 3·5-6 mm, yellow, pubescent on the back. Siliqua 20-60 × 1-1·3 mm, erect (c. 10°), always with some trifid hairs; style 0·5-2·5 mm.{\i  Don Basin.} Rs(C, E).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 31. E. krynkense} Lavrenko,{\i  Ind. Sem. Horti Charkov}{\b  1925}: 7 (1926). like {\b 30} but biennial; stems up to 80 cm, with sparse petiole remains; pedicels 1-2 mm in flower, up to 5 mm in fruit; siliqua 15-40 mm, with style 1·5-4·5 mm. •{\i  S.E. Ukraine} ({\i near Donetsk}). Rs(E)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Known from only a single locality.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 32. E. diffusum} Ehrh.,{\i  Beitr. Naturk.}{\b  7}: 157 (1792) ({\i E. canescens} Roth,{\i  E. australe} auct. balcan.). Biennial or short-lived perennial; stems up to 120 cm; hairs 2(3)-fid. Leaves 15-70 × 2-8 mm, rarely wider, linear to linear-lanceolate, entire or sinuate-denticulate, grey. Pedicels 3-6 mm in flower, up to 9 mm in fruit. Sepals 6-8(-9) mm; petals (9-)10-15 × 2·5-4 mm, yellow, pubescent on the back. Siliqua (20-)35-80 × 0·5-1 mm, erect or erecto-patent (10-30°), square in transverse section, grey-green or grey with glabrescent angles; style 0·5-1·8 mm. 2n = 28, 70, 72. {\i  C. & S.E. Europe.} Al Au Bu Cz Gr Hu Ju ?Po Rm Rs(C, W, K, E) ?Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Plants with 2n = 28 have narrow, usually entire leaves, the petals (9-)10-12(-13) mm and the style c. 0·5 mm. Those with 2n = 70, 72 have broader, usually denticulate leaves, the petals (13-)1415 mm and the style 0·8-1·8 mm. These two entities are sympatric in C. Europe, but nothing is known of their occurrence in other areas.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 In the Balkan peninsula plants with patent siliquae sometimes occur, these being determined as either {\b 32} or {\b 33}. They appear to resemble {\b 34} more closely, a species which is supposedly endemic to S. Italy.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 33. E. graecum} Boiss. & Heldr. in Boiss., {\i Diagn. Pl. Or. Nov.}{\b  3}({\b 1}): 27 (1853). Biennial; stems up to 50 cm in flower, up to 100 cm in fruit; hairs 2(3)-fid. Leaves 15-90 × 1·5-7 mm, linear to oblanceolate, entire or sinuate-denticulate, greyish-green. Pedicels 2-4 mm in flower, 4-5(-8) mm in fruit and as thick as the siliqua. Sepals 6-8 mm; petals 9-13 × 2·5-3·5 mm, yellow, pubescent on the back; anthers sometimes hairy. Siliqua 30-90 × 0·8-1·1 mm, patent (70-90°), square in transverse section, grey with glabrescent angles; style 0·5-2 mm. 2n = 24. •{\i  S.E. Greece, W. Kriti.} Cr Gr.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Records of this species from elsewhere in the Balkan peninsula are erroneous.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 34. E. crassistylum} C. Presl,{\i  Fl. Sic.}{\b  1}: 77 (1826) ({\i E. canescens} auct. ital.,{\i  E. diffusum }auct. ital.,{\i  E. graecum} auct. ital.). Biennial or short-lived perennial; stems 20-35 cm in flower, up to 70 cm or more in fruit; hairs 2(3)-fid. Leaves 20-90 × 0·5-4 mm, linear to linear-spathulate, entire, greyish-green. Pedicels 3-4 mm in flower, up to 5·5 mm in fruit, sometimes almost as thick as the siliqua. Sepals 4·5-8 mm; petals 11-13 × 2·8-4 mm, yellow, pubescent on the back. Siliqua 30-80 × c. 1 mm, erecto-patent to patent (60-70°), greyish-green with glabrescent angles; style c. 1 mm. 2n = 42. •{\i  S. Italy}. It.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Similar plants, usually determined as {\b 32} or {\b 33}, occur in the central part of the Balkan peninsula.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 35. E. creticum} Boiss. & Heldr. in Boiss.,{\i  Diagn. Pl. Or. Nov.}{\b  3}({\b 1}): 26 (1853). Biennial; stems 10-45 cm in flower, up to 60 cm in fruit; hairs 2- or 3(-5)-fid. Leaves 50-90 × 3-10 mm, entire to sinuate-dentate, grey. Pedicels 1·5-4 mm in flower, up to 7·5 mm in fruit. Sepals 6-8·5 mm; petals 9-14 × 3-4·5 mm, yellow, pubescent on the back. Siliqua 30-65 × 1-1·4 mm, patent (70-90°), grey with glabrescent angles, most hairs tri- or quadrifid; style 0·5-1·2 mm. 2n = 14.{\i  E. Kriti.} Cr.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   {\b 36. E. calycinum} Griseb.,{\i  Spicil. Fl. Rumel.}{\b  1}: 260 (1843). like {\b 35} but sometimes branched at the base and perhaps then perennial; hairs 2(3)-fid; leaves entire to denticulate; pedicels up to 10 mm in fruit; petals 2·5-3 mm wide, with (2)3-fid hairs on the back; siliqua erecto-patent (20-35°), with bi- or trifid hairs; style 1·3-2·5 mm. •{\i  N. Greece} ({\i Athos}). Gr.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 37. E. olympicum} Boiss., {\i Fl. Or. }{\b 1}: 191 (1867). Perennial with branched woody stock, without leaf-rosettes; stems 15-35 cm; hairs 2(3)-fid. Leaves 15-120 × 1-4 mm, linear, entire or the lower sinuate-denticulate. Pedicels (2-)3-5 mm in flower, up to 11 mm in fruit. Sepals 6-8 mm; petals 11-14 × 3-5 mm, yellow, pubescent on the back, with mainly bifid hairs. Siliqua (50-)60-100 × 1-1·5 mm, erect (10-20°), rarely erecto-patent (c. 35°), grey with glabrescent angles; hairs mostly bifid; style 1(-2) mm. 2n = 56. •{\i  E.C. Greece} ({\i Olimbos}). Gr.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 38. E. asperulum} Boiss. & Heldr. in Boiss.,{\i  Diagn. Pl. Or. Nov.}{\b  3}({\b 6}): 11 (1859). Biennial; stems 10-50 cm in flower, up to 70 cm in fruit; hairs bi- or trifid. Leaves 15-50 × 2-6 mm, linear-lanceolate, sinuate-dentate to entire, grey. Pedicels 2-6 mm in flower, up to 8 mm in fruit. Sepals 6-8 mm; petals 12-16 × 2·5-4 mm, yellow, pubescent on the back, with mainly trifid hairs. Siliqua 30-80 × 1-1·5 mm, erect or erecto-patent (10-40°), grey with glabrescent angles, hairs tri- or quadrifid; style 0·5-2 mm. 2n = 24. •{\i  Albania and C. & S. Greece.} Al Gr.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Plants from W.C. Greece (Evritania) are intermediate between {\b 37} and {\b 38}. They appear to be biennial, with mainly bifid hairs on the leaves and petals, and with mixed bifid and trifid hairs on the siliqua. Their status is not clear.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 39. E. crepidifolium} Reichenb.,{\i  Pl. Crit.}{\b  1}: 8 (1823) ({\i E. banaticum} sensu E.I. Nyárády). Biennial or short-lived perennial; stems 15-60 cm, or more in fruit; hairs 2- to 4-fid. Leaves 15-60 × 2-10 mm, linear to linear-lanceolate, sinuate-dentate or the upper entire, green or greyish-green. Pedicels 1-4 mm in flower, up to 6 mm in fruit. Sepals 5-8(-9) mm; petals 10-18 × 2-4 mm, yellow, pubescent on the back with mainly tri- or quadrifid hairs. Siliqua 25-60 × 0·8-2(-2·5) mm, erect or erecto-patent (10-30°) with tri- or quadrifid hairs; style 0·8-2(-2·5) mm.  •{\i  C. & S.E. Europe.} Cz Ge Hu Rm.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 40. E. leptostylum} DC.,{\i  Reg. Veg. Syst. Nat.}{\b  2}: 494 (1821). like {\b 39} but leaves oblong-lanceolate with tri- or quadrifid hairs, green; pedicels up to 7 mm in fruit; sepals 7-9 mm; petals 15-18 mm, with orbicular-obovate limb; siliqua erect; style c. 2 mm.{\i  From Moldavia to the Caspian Sea.} Rs(W, K, E).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Possibly not distinct from {\b 39}.
\par

\par
333}
\par