{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Flowers white
\par
2 Lower leaves with only unbranched hairs, or glabrous ... ({\b c}) subsp.{\b  candida}
\par
2 Lower leaves with branched and unbranched hairs ...... ({\b d}) subsp.{\b  voronovii}
\par
1 Flowers purple
\par
3 Lower leaves with mainly unbranched hairs ............... ({\b a}) subsp.{\b  matronalis}
\par
3 Lower leaves with numerous branched hairs .............. ({\b b}) subsp.{\b  cladotricha}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp.{\b  matronalis} ({\i H. oblongipetala} Borbás; incl. {\i H. sibirica }L.): {\i Italy, S. France, ?N. Spain; widespread as an alien}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp.{\b  cladotricha} (Borbás) Hayek,{\i  Prodr. Fl. Penins. Balcan.}{\b  1}: 416 (1925) ({\i H. cladotricha} Borbás; incl.{\i  H. obtusa} Moench):{\i  Balkan peninsula and Romania}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b c}) Subsp.{\b  candida} (Kit.) Hegi & E. Schmid in Hegi,{\i  Ill. Fl. Mitteleur.}{\b  4}({\b 1}): 467 (1919) ({\i H. candida} Kit., {\i H. nivea} auct. gall., non Baumg.; incl.{\i  H. moniliformis} Schur): {\i Mountains, from the Carpathians to Pyrenees}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b d}) Subsp.{\b  voronovii} (N. Busch) P.W. Ball, {\i Feddes Repert. }{\b 68}: 194 (1963) ({\i H. voronovii} N. Busch): {\i Krym}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Plants of subsp ({\b a}) from Italy are usually glandular-pubescent while those from France are eglandular. The latter is the plant usually cultivated and naturalized.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 4. H. elata} Hornem., {\i Hort. Hafn.} suppl., 74 (1819) ({\i H. sibirica }auct. ross., non L.). Indumentum of numerous long and short unbranched hairs, and glandular hairs; branched hairs more or less absent from the lower part of the plant. Lower leaves serrate to lyrate; upper leaves sessile, semi-amplexicaul, entire to dentate. Pedicels glandular-pubescent. Petals purple. Siliqua glabrous or hairy.{\i  E. & S. Russia, E. Ukraine}. Rs(C, W, E).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 5. H. sylvestris} Crantz, {\i Stirp. Austr.}{\b  1}: 34 (1762) ({\i H. runcinata }Waldst. & Kit.). Indumentum dense, of short unbranched, branched and glandular hairs. Lower leaves lyrate; upper leaves sessile, semi-amplexicaul, more or less serrate. Petals purple or pinkish. Siliqua glabrous. {\i Woods and scrub.  • C. & S.E. Europe.} Al Au Bu Cz Gr Hu Ju Po Rm Rs(W, K)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp.{\b  sylvestris} (incl. {\i H. siliqua-glandulosa} (Rohlena) Dvorak): Pedicels glandular-pubescent.{\i  E.C. Europe, extending southwards to Macedonia.}
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp. velenovskyi (Fritsch) Borza,{\i  Consp. Fl. Roman.} 124 (1947) ({\i H. suaveolens} (Andrz.) Steudel): Pedicels and often the whole inflorescence glabrous. {\i S.E. Europe}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 6. H. theophrasti} Borbás,{\i  Magyar Bot. Lapok}{\b  1: }267 (1902) ({\i H. matronalis} sensu Halácsy, non L.; incl.{\i  H. macedonica} Adamovic, {\i H. graeca} Dvorak,{\i  H. rechingeri} Dvorak, {\i H. verroiana} Dvorak). like {\b 5}({\b a}) but eglandular, with long unbranched hairs; lower leaves dentate; pedicels and usually the siliqua densely glandular.{\i  Woods, grassy and rocky places. • Balkan peninsula.} Al Bu Gr Ju Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 A variable species divided by F. Dvorak,{\i  Preslia }{\b 38}: 57-64 (1966), into several closely related species. The characters used to separate these do not seem to be sufficiently consistent to recognize the taxa at specific rank.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 7. H. oblongifolia} Schur,{\i  Enum. Pl. Transs.} 52 (1866). Indumentum of unbranched and branched hairs, eglandular. Leaves dentate, the cauline semi-amplexicaul, the lower often glabrous. Pedicels glabrous or hairy at the base. Petals purple. Siliqua glabrous. •{\i  E. Carpathians.} Rm.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 8. H. steveniana} DC.,{\i  Reg. Veg. Syst. Nat.}{\b  2}: 452 (1821). Indumentum of long and short unbranched and branched hairs, eglandular. Lower leaves usually lyrate; upper leaves more or less sessile, semi-amplexicaul, dentate to entire. Pedicels densely pubescent. Petals pale purple, sometimes almost white. Siliqua more or less pubescent. •{\i  Krym.} Rs(K).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 9. H. pycnotricha} Borbás & Degen,{\i  Magyar Bot. Lapok }{\b 1}: 269 (1902). Indumentum of short branched hairs, with a few unbranched hairs, eglandular. Leaves dentate to entire, the cauline sessile, slightly amplexicaul. Pedicels pubescent. Petals purple. Siliqua sparsely pubescent at the base, glabrous at the apex.{\i  C. & S. Russia, E. & S. Ukraine; Thrace; E. Czechoslovakia.} Bu Cz Rs(C, W, K, E) Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 10. H. dinarica} G. Beck in Dörfler,{\i  Jahres-Kat. Wien. Bot. Tauscht Jer.}{\b  1894}: 6 (1894) (incl. {\i H. degeniana }Borbás). Indumentum of long and short unbranched and branched hairs and glandular hairs. Leaves dentate, the cauline sessile, semi-amplexicaul. Pedicels glandular-pubescent, rarely glabrous. Petals white. Siliqua glabrous.{\i  Stony places and woods. • E.C. & S.E. Europe.} Al Bu Cz Gr Ju Rm.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 11. H. vrabelyiana} (Schur) Borbás,{\i  Magyar Bot. Lapok}{\b  2}: 21 (1903). Indumentum of long and short unbranched hairs and glandular hairs, with few branched hairs. Leaves dentate, the cauline sessile, semi-amplexicaul. Pedicels pubescent. Petals white. Siliqua pubescent. 2n = 24.  •{\i  Mountains of N. Hungary} ({\i Bukk hegyseg}). Hu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 12. H. nivea} Baumg.,{\i  Enum. Stirp. Transs.}{\b  2}: 278 (1816). Indumentum of long and short unbranched and branched hairs, the latter absent from the lower part of the plant. Leaves dentate to entire, the cauline sessile, semi-amplexicaul. Pedicels pubescent. Petals white. Siliqua glabrous or pubescent. •{\i  Carpathians.} Cz Rm Rs(W)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 13. H. inodora} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} ed. 2, 927 (1763) ({\i H. subsinuata} Borbás). Indumentum dense, of long and short unbranched and branched hairs, eglandular. Leaves coarsely sinuate-dentate or serrate, the cauline sessile, semi-amplexicaul. Pedicels densely pubescent or glabrous. Petals white. •{\i  Alpes Maritimes.} Ga.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 21.               Malcolmia}             R.Br.
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc By P.W. Ball & J.R. Akeroyd
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Annuals to perennials; hairs variable or plant subglabrous. Sepals erect, the inner usually saccate at the base; petals pink to violet, rarely white, long-clawed; median nectaries absent. Fruit a siliqua; valves 3-veined; style absent or indistinct; stigma deeply 2-lobed or retuse, the lobes erect and connate. Seeds in 1 row in each loculus. ({\i Wilckia }Scop.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Literature: A.L. Stork,{\i  Op. Bot.} ({\i Lund}){\b  33}: 1-118 (1972);{\i  Svensk Bot. Tidskr.}{\b  66}: 239-256 (1972).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Sepals not or only slightly saccate at the base
\par
2 Lower pedicels 2-7 mm in fruit; siliqua 12-35 × 1 mm, torulose,
\par
  terete, with appressed hairs ..................................................... {\b 3. ramosissima}
\par
2 Lower pedicels 0-2 mm in fruit; siliqua usually larger,
\par
  not torulose, ± 4-angled, glabrous or with patent hairs
\par

\par
337}
\par