{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 41. E. exaltatum} Andrz. ex Besser, {\i Enum. Pl. Volhyn.} 71 (1822) ({\i E. hieracifolium} var.{\i  exaltatum }(Andrz. ex Besser) Hayek). Biennial or perhaps sometimes perennial; stems 40-120 cm, with dense petiole-remains at the base; hairs bi- or trifid. Leaves 40-90 × 3-10 mm, oblong-lanceolate, subentire to sinuate-dentate. Pedicels 4-10 mm. Sepals 7·5-10 mm; petals 12-19 × 3·5-4·5 mm, yellow, pubescent on the back, with mainly trifid hairs. Siliqua 60-100 × 1-1·2 mm, erect to erecto-patent (10-20°), grey with glabrescent angles; style 1·5-2·5 mm. •{\i  From Moldavia to N. Bulgaria.} Bu Rm Rs(W).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Clearly distinct from {\b 52} with anthers 2·2-3·5 mm. This species is part of a difficult complex consisting of species{\b  35-42.} The distinction between it and{\b  39} and {\b 40} needs to be more thoroughly investigated. Little is known of the range of variability found in {\b 40} and {\b 41}, and it is possible that they will be found to be conspecific.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 42. E. horizontale} P. Candargy,{\i  Bull. Soc. Bot. Fr.}{\b  44}: 154 (1897) ({\i E. smyrnaeum }auct.). Biennial; stems up to 60 cm; hairs (3)4- to 5(6)-fid. Basal leaves pectinate-pinnatifid, usually dead at anthesis; cauline leaves 30-60 × 3-7(-10) mm, oblong, sinuate-dentate to entire, green. Pedicels 2-4 mm in flower, up to 8 mm in fruit. Sepals 6-8 mm; petals 12-14 × 3-3·5 mm, yellow, pubescent on the back. Siliqua 40-70 × 1-1·5 mm, patent (70-90°), grey with glabrescent angles; style 0·5-1·5 mm. {\i  Turkey-in-Europe}. Tu. ({\i E. Aegean Islands}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Some specimens from Turkey-in-Europe have erect (c. 10°) siliquae, but are otherwise very similar to {\b 42}. Not certainly distinct from{\b  E. smyrnaeum} Boiss. & Balansa in Boiss., {\i Diagn. Pl. Or. Nov.}{\b  3}({\b 5}): 23 (1856), from W. Anatolia, which has bi- or trifid hairs, petals 13-17 × 4-4·5 mm, and the siliqua 45-80 mm, erecto-patent (30-60°), grey, with tri- or quadrifid hairs.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 43. E. aureum} Bieb.,{\i  Fl. Taur.-Cauc.}{\b  2}: 117 (1808) (incl.{\i  E. sylvaticum} Bieb.). Biennial; stems 40-100 cm; hairs (2)3- or 4-fid. Leaves oblong to oblong-lanceolate, sinuate-dentate or serrate to denticulate, green. Pedicels 6-15 mm in fruit. Sepals 4·5-6 mm; petals 8-12 × c. 3 mm, yellow, pubescent on the back. Siliqua 20-50 × 1-2 mm, patent or deflexed (80° or greater), more or less square in transverse section; style (0·5-)1·5-3 mm. C. & S. Russia, Ukraine. Rs(C, W, E).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 44. E. leucanthemum} (Stephan) B. Fedtsch.,{\i  Acta Horti Petrop.}{\b  23}: 413 (1905) ({\i E. versicolor} Andrz. ex DC.). Biennial; stems 10-65 cm; hairs (2)3- or 4-fid. Leaves 20-30 × c. 2 mm, linear or linear-oblong, the basal runcinate, usually dead at anthesis, the upper runcinate, serrate or subentire. Pedicels 1·5-3 mm in flower, up to 5 mm in fruit. Sepals 4·5-6 mm; petals 8-12 × c. 2 mm, pale yellow or whitish, sparsely pubescent on the back or glabrous. Siliqua 18-45 × 0·4-0·8 mm, erect (0-10°), terete; style c. 1 mm.  {\i  E. & S. Russia, Ukraine.} Rs(C, W, K, E).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 45. E. pulchellum} (Willd.) Gay, {\i Erysim. Nov. }10 (1842) (incl.{\i  E. korabense} Kümmerle & Jáv.). Caespitose perennial with branched stock and numerous leaf-rosettes; stems 5-15 cm; hairs bi- to quadrifid. Leaves 3-6 mm wide, oblong-spathulate or -lanceolate, entire to sinuate-dentate, green. Pedicels c. 2 mm in flower. Sepals 5-7 mm; petals 11-16 × 3·5-5 mm, yellow, pubescent on the back. Siliqua 20-30 × c. 1 mm, erect (10-20°), sparsely pubescent, green; style 1·5-4 mm.{\i  Grassland. Mountains of E. Albania, S. Jugoslavia, Bulgaria.} Al Bu Ju.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 46. E. odoratum} Ehrh., {\i Beitr. Naturk.}{\b  7}: 157 (1792) ({\i E. pannonicum }Crantz, {\i E. erysimoides} (L.) Fritsch ex Janchen, non (Kar. & Kir.) O. Kuntze,{\i  E. pallescens} Herbich, {\i E. aureum} auct. roman., non Bieb.). Biennial; stems 20-80 cm in flower, up to 130 cm in fruit; hairs (2)3(4)-fid. Leaves 20-75 × 4-15 mm, elliptical to obovate, sinuate-dentate, the lower sessile or shortly petiolate, the basal usually dead at anthesis. Pedicels 2·5-8 mm in flower, up to 11 mm in fruit. Sepals 6-10 mm; petals 12-18 × 4-8 mm, yellow, pubescent on the back. Siliqua (20-)40-70 × 0·8-1·2 mm, usually erect (10-20°), glabrescent to pubescent with glabrescent angles, the hairs mostly bifid; style 1-2 mm. 2n = 24.  •{\i  C. Europe, extending to E. France, N. Italy and S. Bulgaria}. ?Al Au Bu Cz Ga Ge Hu It Ju Po Rm Rs(W) [He].
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Records from the central part of the Balkan peninsula may be erroneous due to confusion with{\b  49}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 47. E. witmannii} Zawadzki, {\i Enum. Pl. Galic. Bucow.} 81, 194 (1835) (incl. subsp.{\i  pallidivorum} (Jáv.) Jáv., subsp.{\i  transsilvanicum} (Schur) P.W. Ball, {\i E. transsilvanicum} Schur, {\i E. baumgartenianum} Schur). Biennial; stems 10-50 cm; hairs bi- or trifid. Leaves 20-70 × 3-15 mm, linear to oblong-lanceolate, sinuate-dentate, rarely almost entire, the lower and often the middle leaves long-petiolate. Pedicels 3-6 mm in flower, up to 10 mm in fruit. Sepals 8-12 mm; petals 15-24 × 5-9 mm, yellow or pale greenish-yellow, pubescent on the back. Siliqua (25-)40-120 × 1-1·5 mm, erecto-patent to patent, the hairs on the angles mostly bifid; style c. 1 mm. 2n = 14.  •{\i  Carpathians, Hungary and N.W. Bulgaria. }Bu Cz Hu Po Rm Rs(W).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 48. E. carniolicum} Dolliner,{\i  Flora} ({\i Regensb.}){\b  10: }254 (1827) ({\i E. pannonicum} var. {\i sinuatum} (Neilr.) Janchen). Biennial; stems 10-60 cm; hairs bi- or trifid. Leaves 20-50 × 4-12 mm, linear-oblong to oblong, pectinate-pinnatifid to sinuate-dentate, the basal usually persistent, the lower and middle leaves sessile or very shortly petiolate. Pedicels 3-8 mm in flower, up to 11 mm in fruit. Sepals 8·5-12 mm; petals 16-24 × 5-10 mm, yellow, pubescent on the back. Siliqua 60-110 × c. 1·5 mm, erecto-patent (20-30°), sparsely pubescent; style 0·5-1 mm. 2n = 32. W.  •{\i  Jugoslavia, S.E. Austria.} Au Ju.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 49. E. kuemmerlei} Jáv.,{\i  Bot. Közl. }{\b 19}: 20 (1921). like {\b 48} but hairs mostly tri- or quadrifid; sepals 5-8 mm; petals (9-)10-14 × 3-5 mm; siliqua 30-80 × 1-1·5 mm; style 0·8-2 mm. 2n = 14.  •{\i  W. part of the Balkan peninsula, from C. Jugoslavia to N. Greece.} Al Gr Ju.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 50. E. pectinatum} Bory & Chaub. in Bory,{\i  Expéd. Sci. Morée}{\b  3}: 189 (1832). Perennial with branched, woody stock, usually without basal leaf-rosettes; stems 10-50(-80) cm; hairs (2)3(-5)fid. Lower and middle leaves 15-50 × 3·5-6 mm, pinnatifid to pinnatisect, sessile. Pedicels 1-2(-4) mm in flower, up to 5 mm in fruit. Sepals 4·5-6·5 mm; petals 10-13 × 2-3 mm, yellow, pubescent on the back. Siliqua 20-45 × 0·8-1·2 mm, erect (0-10°), grey with glabrescent angles, the hairs 2(3)-fid; style 0·5-2 mm. 2n = 12. •{\i  S. Greece }({\b Peloponnisos}). Gr.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Records from elsewhere in the Balkan peninsula are referable to {\b 49}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 51. E. hungaricum} Zapal.,{\i  Bull. Int. Acad. Sci. Cracovie, ser. B}{\b  1913}: 49 (1913) (incl. {\i E. wahlenbergii} (Ascherson & Engler) Simonkai,{\i  E. pieninicum} (Zapal.) Pawl.). Usually biennial; stems 30-100 cm; hairs mostly tri- or quadrifid. Leaves 20-90 × 5-30 mm, linear- to oblong-lanceolate, entire to sinuate dentate, green. Pedicels 3-5 mm in flower, up to 15 mm in fruit.
\par

\par
334}
\par