{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 green. Pedicels 0·5-1 mm in flower, up to 4 mm in fruit. Sepals 4-5 mm; petals 7-11 × 1·5-3·5 mm, yellow on the upper surface, buff or purple and pubescent on the back; anthers pubescent. Siliqua 6-24 × 1-4·5 mm, patent (60-80°); style 1-4 mm. 2n = 14. •{\i  Kriti.} Cr.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 23. E. humile} Pers., {\i Syn. Pl.}{\b  2}: 200 (1806) ({\i E. decumbens} (Schleicher ex Willd.) Dennst., {\i E. ochroleucum} DC., nom. illeg., {\i E. dubium} (Suter) Thell., non DC.). Perennial with branched, woody stock forming mats with leaf-rosettes; stems 10-30 cm in flower, up to 40 cm in fruit; hairs 2(3)-fid. Leaves 20-80 × 2-8 mm, linear to linear-oblanceolate, entire or denticulate, green, the basal distinctly petiolate. Pedicels 3-7 mm in flower, up to 10 mm in fruit. Sepals 9-12 mm; petals 16-27 × 5-10 mm, yellow, glabrous. Siliqua 45-90 × 1·5-2·3 mm, erecto-patent (20-30°); style 3-8 mm. Seeds 3-4·5 mm. •{\i  S.W. Alps.} Ga He.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   {\b 24. E. duriaei} Boiss., {\i Diagn. Pl. Or. Nov.}{\b  3}({\b 1}): 26 (1854) (incl. {\i E. procumbens} auct., pro parte, {\i E. ochroleucum }auct., pro parte). Perennial with branched, woody stock, caespitose or forming mats, with leaf-rosettes; stems up to 40 cm in flower, up to 60 cm in fruit; hairs 2(3)-fid. Leaves 10-60 × 1-10 mm, linear to lanceolate, entire or denticulate, green, the lower shortly petiolate. Pedicels 1·5-4 mm in flower, up to 6 mm in fruit. Sepals 7-10(-12) mm; petals 12-20 mm, yellow, glabrous. Siliqua 25-110 × 1-1·5 mm, erect to erecto-patent (10-45°). Seeds 2-3 mm. •{\i  Pyrenees and mountains of N. Spain.} Ga Hs.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Often included in {\b 23}, but clearly distinguished by the smaller flowers, narrower fruit and smaller seeds.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Cytologically very variable and divided by Polatschek,{\i  op. cit. }(1979), into four species, each with a different chromosome number. However Correvan & Favarger, {\i op. cit.} (1979), demonstrated that plants with different chromosome numbers could hybridize to give offspring with various levels of fertility. They also reported plants with anomalous chromosome numbers, especially in the Pyrenees. Morphologically the four taxa are difficult to distinguish, so they are here treated at subspecific rank.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Style 3-3·5(-5) mm ..................................................... ({\b d}) subsp. {\b gorbeanum}
\par
1 Style 1-3 mm
\par
2 Petals 3-4(-5·5) mm wide; middle and upper leaves with clusters of small
\par
  leaves in their axils; hairs on leaves all bifid ..................... ({\b a}) subsp.{\b  duriaei}
\par
2 Petals (4-)5-8 mm wide; middle and upper leaves usually without
\par
  axillary clusters of leaves; hairs on leaves 2(3)fid
\par
3 Stock with short, erect branches; style 1·5-3 mm; siliqua distinctly
\par
  4-angled in transverse section .................................... ({\b b}) subsp.{\b  pyrenaicum}
\par
3 Stock with long, often procumbent branches; style 1·2-2(-3) mm;
\par
  siliqua rounded in transverse section ............................ ({\b c}) subsp.{\b  neumannii}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp.{\b  duriaei} : Stock with erect or procumbent branches. Leaves 1-4 mm wide, linear to linear-lanceolate, the middle and upper with short axillary shoots; hairs all bifid. Sepals 7-8 mm; petals 12-13 × 3-4 mm. Siliqua 25-65 × c. 1 mm, rounded in transverse section; style 1·5-2 mm. 2n = 14.{\i  N. Spain} ({\i Oviedo and Leon}).
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp.{\b  pyrenaicum} (O. Bolòs& Vigo) P.W. Ball,{\i  Bot. Jour. Linn. Soc.}{\b  103: }207 (1990) ({\i E. pyrenaicum} Jordan, non (L.) Vill., {\i E. seipkae }Polatschek): Stock shortly branched. Leaves 1·5-7 mm wide, lanceolate, the hairs 2(3)-fid. Sepals c. 9 mm; petals 15-21 × 5-7 mm. Siliqua 40-110 × c. 1-2 mm, square in transverse section; style 1·5-3 mm. 2n = 26, 28, 34, 51.{\i  Pyrenees}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b c}) Subsp.{\b  neumannii} (Polatschek) P.W. Ball, {\i op. cit.} 207 (1990) ({\i E. neumannii} Polatschek): Like subsp. ({\b b}) but stock with some long, procumbent branches; sepals 8-10 mm; petals 14-18 × (4-)5-8 mm; siliqua 1-1·5 mm wide, rounded in transverse section; style 1·2-2(-2·5) mm. 2n = 26, 28.{\i  N. Spain }({\i Santander, Oviedo, Leon}).
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b d}) Subsp.{\b  gorbeanum} (Polatschek) P.W. Ball, {\i op. cit.} 207 (1990) (E. gorbeanum Polatschek): Stock with long, procumbent branches. Leaves 2·5-10 mm wide, lanceolate. Sepals  8-10(-12) mm; petals  15-18 × 4·5-7 mm.  Siliqua 35-50 × c. 1·2 mm, square in transverse section; style 3-3·5(-4) mm. 2n = 42. {\i N. Spain} ({\i Pena Gorveya, Vizcaya prov}.).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Subsp. ({\b c}) is reported also from Logroño, but the plants are relatively robust and have the style c. 3 mm long. A few collections from Picos de Europa are distinctive in having short, axillary shoots on the stem.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 25. E. penyalarensis} (Pau) Polatschek,{\i  Ann. Naturh. Mus.} ({\i Wien}) {\b 82}: 349 (1979). Perennial with branched, woody stock with leaf-rosettes; stems up to 20 cm in flower, up to 25 cm in fruit; hairs 2(-4)-fid. Leaves 25-45 × 3-7 mm, spathulate to obovate, obtuse, entire or denticulate, the lower petiolate, green. Pedicels 2·5-3·5 mm in flower, up to 4 mm in fruit. Sepals 8-11 mm; petals 15-16 × 3-5 mm, yellow, glabrous. Siliqua 35-70 × c. 2 mm, erecto-patent (20-40°), square in transverse section; style 3-4·5 mm. 2n = 48. •{\i  C. Spain.} Hs.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Perhaps only a subspecies of {\b 24}, but somewhat disjunct in distribution from that species.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 26. E. linifolium} (Pers.) Gay, Erysim. Nov. 3 (1842). More or less caespitose perennial with branched, woody stock; stems up to 60 cm in flower, up to 70 cm in fruit; hairs 2(3)-fid. Leaves 20-90 × 1-6 mm, linear to lanceolate, usually sinuate-dentate, green. Pedicels 1·5-3 mm in flower, up to 7 mm in fruit. Sepals 6-9 mm; petals 12-18 × 5-5·5 mm, purple, glabrous. Siliqua 35-75 × 1-1·7 mm, erecto-patent (c. 20°); style 2-3 mm. 2n = 14. N. Portugal, C. Spain. Hs Lu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 27. E. baeticum} (Heywood) Polatschek,{\i  Ann. Naturh. Mus.} ({\b Wien}) {\b 82}: 329 (1979) ({\i E. linifolium} subsp.{\i  baeticum} Heywood). like {\b 26} but usually biennial, with unbranched stock; petals 14-20 mm; siliqua erect (0-10°); style 2-4(-5) mm. 2n = 28. •{\i  S. Spain.} Hs.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Some specimens are clearly perennial with the remains of old flowering stems, a branched, woody stock and persistent basal leaf-rosettes. These sometimes occur with plants which are clearly biennial.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 28. E. popovii} Rothm., {\i Feddes Repert.}{\b  49}: 180 (1940). Perennial with branched, woody stock and leaf-rosettes; stems up to 20 cm in flower, up to 60 cm in fruit; hairs 2(3)-fid. Leaves 25-60 × 1·5-5 mm, oblanceolate, entire or sinuate-denticulate. Pedicels 1-2·5 mm in flower, up to 4 mm in fruit. Sepals c. 9 mm; petals 14-16 × 4-4·5 mm, purple, glabrous. Siliqua 20-40 × 1-1·4 mm, erect (c. 10°); style 4-7·5 mm. 2n = 42. •{\i  S.E. Spain} ({\i Sierra de Alfacar, Cerro Jabalcuz}). Hs.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 29. E. favargeri} Polatschek,{\i  Ann. Naturh. Mus.} ({\i Wien}){\b  82}: 334 (1979). like {\b 28} but biennial, up to 90 cm, sometimes branched at the base; pedicels c. 3·5 mm in flower, up to 5 mm in fruit; petals
\par

\par
332}
\par