{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 to consist of at least 7 species in the Iberian peninsula. Favarger,{\i  loc. cit.} (1978), considered the group to consist of a single species with several subspecies, but he did not propose any formal classification. The following treatment is conservative.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 The name{\b  E. grandiflorum} Desf.,{\i  Fl. Atl.}{\b  2}: 85 (1798), has been applied to this species in recent years, but this North African species appears distinct from this complex, being more similar morphologically to{\b  8} and {\b 9}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Style 1-1·8 mm, with mainly trifid hairs;
\par
  cauline leaves 0·8-2 mm wide ............................ ({\b c}) subsp. {\b gomez-campoi}
\par
1 Style (1·5-)2·6 mm or more, with numerous bifid as well as
\par
  some trifid hairs; cauline leaves variable, often much wider
\par
2 Petals 9-12 mm; style 4-6(-9) mm ..................................... ({\b d}) subsp. {\b fitzii}
\par
2 Petals 12-20 mm; style 1·5-4(-5) mm
\par
3 Petals (14-)17-20 mm; seeds 2-2·5 mm; cauline leaves with
\par
  excurrent tip (S.W. Spain) .............................................. ({\b b}) subsp.{\b  rondae}
\par
3 Petals 12-17(-18) mm; seeds 1·5-2 mm; cauline leaves without
\par
  an excurrent tip
\par
4 Larger cauline leaves at least 5 mm wide, green . ({\b e}) subsp. {\b merxmuelleri}
\par
4 Larger cauline leaves not more than 4(-5) mm wide, green to grey
\par
5 Siliqua 0·8-1 mm wide, erect (0-20°);
\par
  sepals 7-8 mm ................................................ ({\b f}) subsp.{\b  mediohispanicum}
\par
5 Siliqua 1-1·4 mm wide, usually erecto-patent (15-30°); sepals (7-)8-11 mm
\par
6 Perennial, rarely biennial; stem and leaves green or
\par
  greyish-green; sepals 8-11 mm .............................. ({\b g}) subsp.{\b  collisparsum}
\par
6 Biennial or short-lived perennial; stem and leaves grey or
\par
  greyish-green; sepals 8-9 mm ................................... ({\b a}) subsp.{\b  nevadense}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp.{\b  nevadense} : Biennial or short-lived perennial. Leaves 1-5 mm wide, linear or lanceolate, usually entire, grey or greyish-green. Sepals 8-9 mm; petals 13-16(-18) × 3·5-6 mm. Siliqua 30-60 × 1-1·2 mm, erecto-patent (15-30°), the valves with a weak mid-vein; style (1·6-)2-3·5 mm. 2n = 14. •{\i  S. Spain}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp.{\b  rondae} (Polatschek) P.W. Ball,{\i  Bot. Jour. Linn. Soc.}{\b  103}: 206 (1990) ({\i E. rondae} Polatschek): Like subsp. ({\b a}) but leaves 2·5-8 mm wide, lanceolate or oblanceolate, with excurrent tip, sinuate-denticulate; sepals 8-11 mm; petals (14-)17-20 × 4-5 mm; siliqua (35-)50-75 mm, erect (0-10°), with distinct mid-vein on the valves; style 3-5 mm. 2n = 28. •{\i  S.W. Spain.}
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b c}) Subsp. {\b gomez-campoi} (Polatschek) P.W. Ball,{\i  op. cit.} 205 (1990) ({\i E. gomez-campoi} Polatschek): Usually perennial. Leaves 0·8-2 mm wide, linear or linear-lanceolate, usually entire, grey. Sepals 8-9 mm; petals 12-16 × 3·5-5 mm. Siliqua 33-75 × 1-1·3 mm, erecto-patent (25-40°); style 1-1·8 mm, with mainly trifid hairs. 2n = 14. •{\i  E. Spain}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b d}) Subsp. {\b fitzii} (Polatschek) P.W. Ball,{\i  op. cit.} 205 (1990) ({\i E. fitzii }Polatschek): Like subsp. ({\b c}) but sepals 6-7·5 mm; petals 9-12 × 2·5-3·5 mm; siliqua 22-26 × 0·7-1 mm, erect (0-10°); style 4-6·5(-9) mm, with mainly bifid hairs. 2n = 14. •{\i  S.E. Spain} ({\i Sierra de Pandera}).
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b e}) Subsp.{\b  merxmuelleri} (Polatschek) P.W. Ball,{\i  op. cit.} 206 (1990) ({\i E. merxmuelleri} Polatschek, {\i E. helveticum} sensu Samp., non (Jacq.) DC.): Biennial or short-lived perennial. Leaves (1·5-)4-10 mm wide, lanceolate, entire or shallowly sinuate-denticulate, green. Sepals c. 9 mm; petals 12-14 × 3-5 mm. Siliqua 20-60 × c. 1 mm, erecto-patent to erect (10-30°), the valves weakly veined; style 2-3 mm. 2n = 14. •{\i  W. Spain, E. Portugal}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b f}) Subsp. {\b mediohispanicum} (Polatschek) P.W. Ball,{\i  op. cit.} 205 (1990) ({\i E. mediohispanicum} Polatschek): Usually biennial. Leaves 1-4 mm wide, linear-lanceolate or lanceolate, entire or sinuate-denticulate, grey. Sepals 7-8 mm; petals 13-17 × 3-5 mm. Siliqua 30-50 × 0·8-1 mm, erect (0-20°), the valves distinctly veined; style 2·5-4 mm. 2n = 28. •{\i  C. & N.C. Spain from N. Granada and Murcia provinces to the W. Pyrenees}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b g}) Subsp.{\b  collisparsum} (Jordan) P.W. Ball, {\i op. cit.} 205 (1990) ({\i E. collisparsum} Jordan): Biennial or perennial. Leaves 2-5 mm wide, linear-lanceolate, green or greyish-green, entire or sinuate-denticulate. Sepals 8-11 mm; petals 14-16 × 3·5-5 mm. Siliqua 25-70 × c. 1 mm, usually erecto-patent (15-30°); style (1·5-)2-3 mm. 2n = 14.{\i  From E. Pyrenees to S.E. France and N.W. Italy}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 In S. France there is considerable variation in density of indumentum, flower size and siliqua posture. It may be possible to recognize other subspecies in this area.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 14. E. linariifolium} Tausch, {\i Flora} ({\i Regensb}.) {\b 14}: 212 (1831) ({\i E. linearifolium} auct., non Moench). Perennial with branched, woody stock bearing long, procumbent leafy shoots; stems 10-40 cm in flower, up to 45 cm in fruit; hairs 2(3)-fid. Leaves 20-60 × (0·5-)2·5-5 mm, linear to oblanceolate, entire to sinuate-dentate. Pedicels 2-4 mm in flower, up to 7 mm in fruit. Sepals 6-9 mm; petals 12-18 × 4-5 mm, yellow, glabrous or sparsely pubescent on the back. Siliqua 40-80 × 1-1·5 mm, erecto-patent (30-50°), grey, sometimes with glabrescent angles; style 0·5-2 mm. Seeds 1·5-2 mm. 2n = 14.{\i  Limestone slopes, cliffs and rocks. • Mountains of W. part of Balkan peninsula.} Al Ju.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Not always clearly distinct from {\b 15} in the southern part of its range.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 15. E. pusillum} Bory & Chaub. in Bory, {\i Expéd. Sci. Morée}{\b  3}: 190 (1832) ({\i E. boryanum} Boiss. & Spruner,{\i  E. trichophyllum} Halácsy). Perennial with branched, woody stock bearing leaf-rosettes or long, procumbent leafy shoots; stems up to 30 cm in flower, up to 40 cm in fruit; hairs 2(3)-fid. Leaves 10-110 mm, linear to linear-spathulate, entire to sinuate-denticulate, rarely sinuate-dentate. Pedicels 0·5-2 mm in flower, up to 4 mm in fruit. Sepals 5-9 mm; petals 9-15(-16) × 2·5-5(-6) mm, yellow, pubescent on the back. Siliqua 20-60(-90) mm, compressed; style 0·5-4 mm. Seeds 1·5-3 mm. •{\i  S. part of Balkan peninsula; Aegean region}. Al Bu Gr Ju.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Siliqua spreading at an angle of 45-90° to the axis
\par
2 Plant with thick, woody stock with long branches; siliqua
\par
  20-90 × 1-1·6 mm, with glabrescent angles .............. ({\b d}) subsp.{\b  rechingeri}
\par
2 Plant usually caespitose with short, slender, branched
\par
  stock or with short leafy shoots; siliqua 20-45 × 0·8-1·3 mm,
\par 
  the angles persistently pubescent
\par
3 Siliqua spreading at an angle of 50-80° to the axis; stock with
\par
  short leafy branches; siliqua tapering to the style .......... ({\b c}) subsp.{\b  hayekii}
\par
3 Siliqua spreading at an angle of 40-50° to the axis;
\par
  stock with leaf-rosettes; siliqua abruptly contracted
\par
  to the style .................................................................... ({\b a}) subsp.{\b  pusillum}
\par
1 Siliqua arising at an angle of 0-45° to the axis
\par
4 Style 0·5-1·5 mm, the siliqua tapering to the style;
\par
  stock usually without persistent leaves .................. ({\b f}) subsp.{\b  microstylum}
\par

\par
330}
\par