{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 4 Style 1-4 mm, the siliqua abruptly contracted to the style;
\par
  stock usually with persistent leaf-rosettes or with long leafy shoots
\par
5 Stock with long leafy shoots, sometimes also with leaf
\par
  rosettes .................................................................. ({\b e}) subsp. {\b cephalonicum}
\par
5 Stock with leaf-rosettes only
\par
6 Stamens sparsely hairy; stigma about as thick as the style;
\par
  petals 3-4 mm wide ........................................................ ({\b g}) subsp.{\b  parnassi}
\par
6 Stamens glabrous; stigma capitate, wider than the style;
\par
  petals usually 2-3 mm wide
\par
7 Style (1·5-)2·5-4 mm; basal leaves runcinate to coarsely sinuate-dentate
\par
  (often dead at anthesis); siliqua 1·5-2 mm wide ............. ({\b b}) subsp. {\b atticum}
\par
7 Style 1-2(-3) mm; all basal leaves entire or denticulate;
\par
  siliqua 0·8-1·5 mm wide ............................................... ({\b a}) subsp.{\b  pusillum}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp.{\b  pusillum} : Stock with numerous leaf-rosettes; leaves 0·5-4 mm wide, entire or sinuate-denticulate. Sepals 5-7 mm; petals 9-14 × 2-3·5 mm. Siliqua 25-50 × 0·5-1(-1·5) mm, erectopatent to patent (10-50°), abruptly contracted to the style, style 1-2(-3) mm. 2n = 14.{\i  S. Greece}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp.{\b  atticum} (Heldr. & Sart. ex Boiss.) P.W. Ball, {\i Bot. Jour. Linn. Soc.}{\b  103}: 210 (1990) ({\i E. atticum }Heldr. & Sart. ex Boiss.): Like subsp. ({\b a}) but leaves 1-4(-6) mm wide, the basal coarsely sinuate-dentate or runcinate, the rest mostly entire; sepals 6-9 mm; siliqua 1·5-2 mm wide, usually erect (10-20°); style (1·5-)2·5-3·5 mm. 2n = 14.{\i  S.E. Greece}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b c}) Subsp.{\b  hayekii} Jáv. & Rech. fil.,{\i  Ann. Naturh. Mus.} ({\i Wien}) {\b 43}: 296 (1929): Stock much-branched with leaf-rosettes and long leafy shoots. Leaves 1-4 mm wide, entire. Sepals 5·5-7 mm; petals 10-13 × 3-4 mm. Siliqua 20-45 × 0·8-1·3 mm, patent (50-70°), with pubescent angles, tapering to the style; style 1-2·5 mm.{\i  Kikladhes}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b d}) Subsp.{\i  rechingeri} (Jáv.) P.W. Ball, {\i loc. cit.} (1990) ({\i E. rechingeri} Jáv.): Like subsp. ({\b c}) but the stock with long, woody branches; siliqua 20-90 × 1·2-1·6 mm, pubescent with glabrescent angles; style 1·5-3 mm.{\i  Limnos}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b e}) Subsp.{\b  cephalonicum} (Polatschek) P.W. Ball, {\i loc. cit.} (1990) ({\i E. cephalonicum }Polatschek): Stock branched, with leaf-rosettes and long leafy shoots. Leaves 1·5-4 mm wide, denticulate or sinuate-denticulate. Sepals 5-9 mm; petals (11-)12-15(-16) × 3·5-5(-6) mm. Siliqua (20-)30-60(-80) × 1·2-14 mm, erectopatent (15-30°), abruptly contracted to the style; style 1·8-2·5 mm. 2n = 26, 28, 30.{\i  Mountains of N.W. & C. Greece and S. Albania}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b f}) Subsp.{\b  microstylum} (Hausskn.) Hayek,{\i  Prodr. Fl. Penins. Balcan.}{\b  1}: 379 (1925): Stock branched, but usually without leaf-rosettes; leaves 1-3 mm wide, usually entire. Sepals 6-7 mm; petals 9-12 × 2·5-4 mm.  Siliqua 25-75 × 1-1·3 mm, erecto-patent (15-25°), tapering to the style; style 0·5-1·5 mm. 2n = 14.{\i  Mountains of C. & N. Greece, S. Jugoslavia, S.W. Bulgaria and S. Albania}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b g}) Subsp.{\b  parnassi} (Boiss. & Heldr.) Hayek, {\i op. cit. }380 (1925) ({\i E. parnassi} (Boiss. & Heldr.) Hausskn.): Laxly caespitose with some basal leaf-rosettes; leaves 0·7-2 mm wide, entire or subentire. Sepals 5-7 mm; petals 9-12 × 3-4 mm; anthers with a few hairs. Siliqua 25-50 × 1-2 mm, more or less erect (10-20°), abruptly contracted to the style; style 2-4 mm, with a minute stigma. 2n = 18.{\i  S.C. Greece} ({\i Parnassos}).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Subsp. ({\b e}) appears to be the source of records of {\b 14} from Greece.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Subsp. ({\b g}) is distinguished from the other subspecies by the hairs on the anthers and by the chromosome number.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 16. E. drenowskii} Degen,{\i  Magyar Bot. Lapok}{\b  33}: 73 (1934) ({\i E. helveticum} auct. bulg., non (Jacq.) DC.). Perennial with shortly branched stock, with or without basal leaf-rosettes; stems 10-25 cm; hairs 2(3)-fid. Leaves 20-40 × 1-5 mm, linear to linear-oblanceolate, entire or minutely denticulate, greyish-green. Pedicels 2-3·5 mm in flower, up to 6 mm in fruit. Sepals
\par
(5-)6-9 mm; petals (10-)11-14 × 3-4(-5) mm, yellow, pubescent on the back. Siliqua 33-70 × c. 1 mm, patent (60-70°), grey with glabrescent angles; style 1·5-2·5 mm. 2n = 14.•{\i   S. Bulgaria, N.E. Greece}. Bu Gr.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 17. E. metlesicsii} Polatschek, {\i Ann. Naturh. Mus.} ({\i Wien}) {\b 78}: 178 (1974) ({\i E. suffruticosum} auct., non Sprengel, {\i E. elatum} auct., non Pomel, nec Nutt., {\i E. murale} auct., non Desf., {\i E. lanceolatum} auct. ital. pro parte). Biennial with long, stout, woody stock, often with dense petiole remains; stems 15-45 cm in flower, up to 60 cm in fruit, with numerous crowded leaves; hairs 2(3)-fid. Leaves 60-90 × 6-9 mm, oblong, entire or sinuate-denticulate, greyish-green. Pedicels 2-3 mm in flower, up to 6 mm in fruit. Sepals 10-11 mm; petals 14-18 × 3·5-5 mm, pale yellow, glabrous or pubescent on the back; anthers sparsely hairy. Siliqua 60-80 × c. 1 mm, erecto-patent (35-50°); style 1·3-1·7 mm. 2n = 14. •{\i  Sicilia }({\i E. of Palermo}). Si.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 18. E. comatum} Pancic, {\i Fl. Princ. Serb.} 131 (1874) ({\i E. banaticum} auct., {\i E. saxosum} E.I. Nyárády). Biennial, perhaps sometimes perennial, with stout, woody stock, usually covered with dense petiole remains; stems 5-40 cm in flower, up to 60 cm in fruit, usually with dense crowded leaves; hairs 2(3)-fid. Leaves (10-)30-90 × 1-6(-8) mm, linear to linear-lanceolate, entire, green to grey. Pedicels 2·5-6 mm in flower, up to 8 mm in fruit. Sepals 7·5-11 mm; petals 13-19 × 3·5-5·5 mm, yellow, pubescent on the back. Siliqua 40-100 × 1·1-1·7 mm, erecto-patent to patent (30-60°); style 0·8-2 mm. 2n = 14. •{\i  From S.W. Romania to S. Jugoslavia.} Bu ?Gr Ju Rm.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 19. E. myriophyllum} Lange, {\i Vid. Meddel. Dansk Naturh. Foren. Kjøbenhavn}{\b  1881}: 102 (1882). Biennial, with simple, woody stock with dense persistent leaf remains; stems 10-30 cm in flower, up to 60 cm in fruit, with numerous crowded leaves; hairs bifid. Leaves 18-50 × 1-2·5 mm, linear-lanceolate to filiform, entire, grey or white, erect and appressed to the stem. Pedicels 1·5-2 mm in flower, up to 6(-9) mm in fruit. Sepals 7-11 mm- petals 11-17 × 2-4·5 mm, yellow, pubescent on the back. Siliqua 20-45 × 0·8-1·5 mm, erect (0-10°), appressed to the stem; style 2·5-4 mm. 2n = 28. •{\i  S. Spain.} Hs.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 20. E. cazorlense} (Heywood) J. Holub, {\i Folia Geobot. Phytotax.} ({\i Praha}){\b  9}: 273 (1974) ({\i E. linifolium} subsp. {\i cazorlense }Heywood). like {\b 19} but petals purple; style (3-)4-7 mm. 2n = 28. •{\i  S.E. Spain}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 21. E. raulinii} Boiss.,{\i  Fl. Or.}{\b  1}: 192 (1867). Biennial; stems up to 30 cm in flower, up to 60 cm in fruit; hairs 2(-4)-fid. Leaves 20-80 × 1-10 mm, oblanceolate to linear, the lower sinuate or denticulate, the rest entire, green. Pedicels 1-2·5 mm in flower, up to 6 mm in fruit. Sepals 6-8 mm; petals 11-17 × 3-5·5 mm, yellow, pubescent on the back. Siliqua 20-50 × 1-1·3 mm, erect (0-10°). appressed to the stem; style 2-4 mm. 2n = 12. •{\i  W. Kriti.} Cr.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   {\b 22. E. mutabile} Boiss. & Heldr. in Boiss.,{\i  Diagn. Pl. Or. Nov.}{\b  2}({\b 8}): 24 (1849). Laxly caespitose perennial with thin, procumbent stems, without leaf-rosettes; stems up to 10 cm in flower, up to 20 cm in fruit; hairs 2(-4)-fid. Lower leaves up to 20 × 4 mm, oblanceolate, petiolate; upper leaves 4-10 × c. 1 mm, linear, entire,
\par

\par
331}
\par