{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}
\pard\f0\fs28 Sepals 6-8·5(-10) mm; petals (8-)10-15(-20) × 3-4 mm, yellow, pubescent on the back. Siliqua 45-90 × 0·9-1·9 mm, erect or erectopatent (10-30°); style 0·8-2 mm.  •{\i   W. & N.E. Carpathians}. Au Cz Po Rm ?Rs(W).
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 52. E. hieracifolium} L.,{\i  Cent. Pl.}{\b  1}: 18 (1755) ({\i E. strictum }P. Gaertner, B. Meyer & Scherb.). Biennial or short-lived perennial; stems 30-70 cm in flower, up to 120 cm in fruit; hairs 3(4)-fid. Leaves 25-90 × 4-15 mm, linear- to oblong-lanceolate, sinuate-dentate, green. Pedicels 2·5-5 mm in flower, up to 10 mm in fruit. Sepals 4-6 mm; petals (7-)8-10(-12) × 2-3·5 mm, yellow, pubescent on the back; anthers 1·2-2 mm. Siliqua (20-)30-60 × 0·8-1·5 mm, erecto-patent (10-30°), usually grey; style 1-2 mm. 2n = 32. •{\i  N., C. & E. Europe, extending westwards to Belgium and E. France}. Al Au Be Bu Cz Da Fe Ga Ge Ho ?Hu Is Ju No Po Rm Rs(N, B, C, W, E) Su.
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28 The southern and eastern limits of the distribution of this species are uncertain owing to confusion with {\b 53} and {\b 54}.
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 53. E. marschallianum} Andrz. ex Bieb.,{\i  Fl. Taur.-Cauc.}{\b  3}: 441 (1819) ({\i E. durum} J. & C. Presl). like {\b 52} but biennial; hairs tri- or quadrifid; leaves 15-40 × 2-5 mm, linear or linear-oblong, entire or denticulate, grey; sepals 2-5 mm; petals 5-8·5(-9) × 2-5 mm; siliqua 20-75 × 1-1·8 mm, erect (0-10°), usually grey with glabrescent angles; style 0·5-1·5 mm. {\i E.C. & E. Europe.} Au Cz Ge Po Rs(N, B, C, W, E).
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 54. E. virgatum} Roth, {\i Catalecta Bot.}{\b  1}: 75 (1797). like {\b 52} but leaves 15-50 × 1·5-6 mm, linear-elliptical or -lanceolate, entire or denticulate; pedicels 2-3·5 mm in flower, up to 8 mm in fruit; sepals 6-8(-9) mm; petals 9-14 × 2-4 mm, glabrous; siliqua erect (0-10°). 2n = 48. •{\i  Alps.} Au Ge He It Ju.
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 55. E. cuspidatum} (Bieb.) DC.,{\i  Reg. Veg. Syst. Nat.}{\b  2}: 493 (1821) ({\i Syrenia cuspidata }(Bieb.) Reichenb.; incl.{\i  E. goniocaulon} auct., {\i E. pulchellum} auct. turc., {\i ?E. tetovense }Rohlena). Annual or biennial; stems 20-70(-100) cm; hairs tri- or quadrifid. Lower leaves oblong or ovate-lanceolate, sinuate-dentate or dentate, green. Pedicels 1-3 mm in flower, up to 5 mm in fruit. Sepals 5-7 mm; petals 9-13 × 2·5-4 mm, yellow, pubescent on the back. Siliqua 10-30 × 2·5-3·5 mm, strongly laterally compressed, erect, grey with glabrescent angles; valves keeled or narrowly winged on the back; style 3-6(-10) mm.{\i  S.E. Europe.} Al Bu Gr Ju Rm Rs(W, K, E) Tu.
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 56. E. repandum} L.,{\i  Demonstr. Pl. }17 (1753) ({\i E. patens} Loscos). Annual; stems up to 35(-60) cm; hairs bi- or trifid. Lower leaves 10-70 × 1-1·3 mm, linear to lanceolate, entire to sinuate-dentate, green. Pedicels 1-3 mm in flower, up to 5(-7) mm in fruit. Sepals 3-6 mm; petals 6-10 × 1-2 mm, yellow, pubescent on the back. Siliqua 30-100 × 1-1·5 mm, patent (c. 90°), green; style 2-5 mm, about as wide as the siliqua. 2n = 16. {\i C., E. & S. Europe}. Al Au Bu Cz Ge Gr Hu Ju Po Rm Rs(C, W, K) Tu [He].
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28 A sometimes frequent casual in most other countries.
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 57. E. incanum} G. Kunze,{\i  Flora} ({\i Regensb}.) {\b 29}: 753 (1846) (incl. {\i E. aurigeranum} Jeanb. & Timb.-Lagr., {\i E. kunzeanum} Boiss. & Reuter). Annual; stems up to 60 cm in flower, up to 75 cm in fruit; hairs bi- or trifid. Leaves 10-60 × 1·5-9 mm, linear-lanceolate or lanceolate, the basal pinnatifid, usually dead at anthesis, the cauline subentire to sinuate-dentate, green. Pedicels 0·5-4 mm in flower, 1·5-6 mm in fruit. Sepals 2 5-4(-5) mm; petals 3-6(-9) × 0·5-1(-2) mm, yellow, slightly pubescent on the back. Siliqua 15-60 × 0·7-1·1 mm, erect to erecto-patent (10-60°), grey; style c. 0·5 mm. 2n = 16.{\i  C., S. & E. Spain, extending northwards to the Pyrenees.} Ga Hs.
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 58. E. cheiranthoides} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 661 (1753). Annual or rarely biennial; stems up to 100 cm; hairs (2)3- to 5-fid. Lower leaves oblong-lanceolate, entire to sinuate-dentate, green. Pedicels 4-8 mm in flower, up to 16 mm in fruit, slender, patent (75-90°). Sepals 2-4 mm; petals (2-)3-6 × 1-2 mm, yellow, pubescent on the back. Siliqua 10-50 × 1-1·5 mm, erecto-patent (45-60°), green; style up to 1·5 mm. {\i Throughout much of Europe, but absent from much of the south.} Au Be Br Cz Da Fe Ga Ge Hb He Ho Hu Is Ju No Po Rm Rs(N, B, C, W, E) Su.
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp.{\b  cheiranthoides} : Annual, usually 20-50 cm, sparsely pubescent; base of the stem 2-6 mm in diameter, with 5-10 internodes between the basal rosette and the inflorescence; cauline leaves acute or subacute, widest at the middle, erecto-patent. 2n = 16.{\i  Throughout the range of the species except the extreme north}.
\par
\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp.{\i  altum} Ahti, {\i Arch. Soc. Zool.-Bot. Fenn. Vanamo}{\b  16}: 24 (1962): Biennial, usually 40-100 cm, densely pubescent; base of the stem up to 15 mm in diameter, with 20-40 internodes between the basal rosette and the inflorescence; cauline leaves acuminate, widest near the base, appressed to the stem. 2n = 16. {\i  Fennoscandia and N. Russia, southwards to c.} 55°{\i  N.}
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 19.             Syrenia}            Andrz.
\par          
\pard\f0\fs24\qc  By P.W. Ball.
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28 Like{\i  Erysimum} but median nectaries absent; hairs on the siliqua usually medifixed, lying transversely across the valves; seeds in 2 rows in each loculus.
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Pedicels 3-5 mm in flower, up to 6 mm in fruit, about 1/2 as
\par  long as the calyx and siliqua ........................................................ {\b 3. siliculosa}
\par 1 Pedicels less than 3 mm in flower, up to 3(-5) mm in fruit,
\par  not more than 1/ 3 as long as the calyx and siliqua
\par 2 Siliqua compressed laterally; valves narrowly winged on the back;
\par  style 6-12 mm, about as long as the siliqua ................................... {\b 4. montana}
\par 2 Siliqua square in cross-section; valves keeled but not winged;
\par  style 3-7 mm, usually shorter than the siliqua
\par 3 Siliqua 5-20(-25) mm; pedicels not more than 2 mm;
\par  hairs medifixed .................................................................................... {\b 1. cana}
\par 3 Siliqua 15-40 mm; pedicels 2-5 mm; hairs medifixed and trifid .. {\b 2. talijevii}
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. S. cana} (Piller & Mitterp.) Neilr., {\i Aufz. Ung. Slav. Gefäss., Nachtr.} 73 (1870) ({\i S. angustifolia} (Ehrh.) Reichenb., {\i S. ucrainica} Klokov, {\i Erysimum canum} (Piller & Mitterp.) Polatschek). Biennial 25-80 cm; hairs medifixed. Leaves linear, entire, grey or grey-green. Pedicels 0·5-2 mm. Sepals 6-10 mm, saccate at the base; petals (10-)12-22 × 3-6 mm, pale yellow, glabrous on the back; anthers 2-3 mm. Siliqua 5-25(-30) × 1·5-4 mm, square in cross-section, white, with green angles; valves keeled; style 3·5-7 mm. Seeds 1-1·8 mm.{\i  Sandy soils. E. & E.C. Europe, from Czechoslovakia and Jugoslavia to S. Russia.} Bu Cz Hu Ju Rm Rs(C, W, K, E).
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. S. talijevii} Klokov,{\i  Trav. Inst. Bot.} ({\i Charkov}) {\b 1}:  107 (1936). like {\b 1} but (35-)50-90 cm; hairs medifixed and trifid; pedicels 1·5-2 mm in flower, up to 5 mm in fruit; siliqua 15-40 mm; style 3-7 mm.  •{\i  E. Ukraine; ?S. Russia. }Rs(E).
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 3. S. siliculosa} (Bieb.) Andrz. ex C.A. Meyer in Ledeb.,{\i  Fl}.
\par
\par 335}
\par