{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 bi- to quadrifid hairs. Hairs on calyx usually bifid. Flowers 4-12(-14) mm in diameter; petals white, pink, violet or purplish, yellowish at the base of limb. Siliqua 20-45 mm, patent, curved. 2n = 16.{\i  E. Greece}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b c}) Subsp.{\i  bicolor} (Boiss. & Heldr.) A.L. Stork,{\i  op. cit.} 39 (1972) ({\i M. bicolor} Boiss. & Heldr., {\i M. graeca} sensu Hayek pro parte): Basal leaves entire to serrulate, with a sparse indumentum of bi- to quadrifid hairs. Hairs on calyx usually bifid. Flowers 3-9 mm in diameter; petals white to pink or violet, yellowish at the base of limb. Siliqua 10-30(-40) mm, erecto-patent, straight. 2n = 16. {\i  S., W. & W.C. Greece; S. Albania}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 9. M. orsiniana} (Ten.) Ten., {\i Fl. Nap.}{\b  5}: 67 (1835) ({\i M. chia} auct. balcan.). Annual to biennial 10 60 cm, with bi- to quadrifid hairs. Leaves oblong to obovate or ovate, dentate to shallowly lobed, the basal cordate (but soon dead). Inflorescence bracteate in the lower part; pedicels 5-10 mm in fruit. Sepals with bi- to quadrifid hairs. Siliqua 25-75 mm; stigma 1-2·5 mm.{\i  Shady, usually calcareous rocks. Mountains of Balkan peninsula; C. Appennini.} Al Bu Gr It Ju.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp.{\b  orsiniana}: Sepals 3-5 mm; petals 4-10 mm, usually entire. Siliqua 25-35 mm. •{\i  C. Appennini}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp.{\b  angulifolia} (Boiss. & Orph.) A.L. Stork,{\i  Svensk Bot. Tidskr.}{\b  66}: 245 (1972) ({\i M. angulifolia} Boiss. & Orph., {\i M. illyrica} Hayek, {\i M. cymbalaria} Heldr. & Sart.,{\i  M. maritima} var. {\i serbica} sensu Hayek, {\i M. orsiniana} auct. balcan., {\i M. serbica} Pancic): Sepals 6-10 mm; petals 11-25 mm, emarginate. Siliqua 35-75 mm.{\i  Throughout the range of the species except Italy}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Many plants from Albania and N.W. Greece are intermediate between subspp. ({\b a}) and ({\b b}).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 10. M. macrocalyx} (Halácsy) Rech. fil., {\i Ann. Naturh. Mus.} ({\i Wien}) {\b 43}: 29 (1929). Annual up to 40 cm, with bi- to quadrifid hairs. Basal leaves ovate to ovate-orbicular, cuneate at the base, entire or dentate. Sepals (8-)10-17 mm, with bifid hairs; petals 15-30 × 5-10 mm, pink or purple. Siliqua 50-80 mm; stigma 5-10 mm. •{\i  W. Aegean region.} Gr.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp.{\b  macrocalyx}: Inflorescence ebracteate (or bracteate in the lower part only). {\i N. Sporadhes}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp.{\b  scyria} (Rech. fil.) P.W. Ball,{\i  Feddes Repert.}{\b  68}: 181 (1963) ({\i M. scyria} Rech. fil.): Inflorescence bracteate, usually almost to the apex. 2n = 16.{\i  Skiros, Evvoia, Andros}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 11. M. chia} (L.) DC.,{\i  Reg. Veg. Syst. Nat.}{\b  2}: 440 (1821). Annual up to 20 cm, with bi- to quadrifid hairs. Leaves ovate-oblong, the basal cuneate, entire or dentate. Inflorescence ebracteate; pedicels 4-10 mm in fruit. Sepals with bifid hairs; petals 6-10 × 1·5-2(-2·5) mm, pale pink to violet. Siliqua 25-70 × c. 1 mm, erecto-patent; stigma 0·5-1·5 mm.{\i  Greece and Aegean region, generally near the coast.} Cr Gr Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 22.             Neotorularia}            Hedge & J. Léonard
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc  By P.W. Ball (Ed.1) revised by R.R. Mill (Ed.2)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Like {\i Malcolmia} but always annuals; hairs unbranched and bifid; inner sepals not saccate at the base; style distinct; stigma capitate or retuse. ({\i Torularia} (Cosson) O.E. Schulz, non Bonnemaison.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Literature: O.E. Schulz in Engler,{\i  Pflanzenreich}{\b  86} ({\b IV.105}): 213-226 (1924). J. Léonard, {\i Bull. Jard. Bot. Nat. Belg.}{\b  56}: 389-395 (1986).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 Petals white; siliqua 10-25 mm; pedicels 0·5-1 mm in fruit ............ {\b 1. torulosa}
\par
Petals pink; siliqua 20-35 mm; pedicels (1-)2-8 mm in fruit
\par
   ............................................................................................ {\b 2. contortuplicata}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. N. torulosa} (Desf.) Hedge & J. Léonard,{\i  Bull. Jard. Bot. Nat. Belg.}{\b  56}: 395 (1986) ({\i Malcolmia torulosa} (Desf.) Boiss., {\i Torularia torulosa} (Cosson) O.E. Schulz). Stem up to 30 cm, hispid with unbranched and bifid hairs. Basal leaves dentate or pinnatifid, the upper cauline sometimes pectinate-pinnatifid. Pedicels not more than 1 mm. Petals 2·5-4 mm, white. Siliqua 10-25 mm, usually erect, straight or contorted, torulose; style up to 0·5 mm.{\i  Krym }({\i Sudak}). Rs (K). ({\i C. & S.W. Asia; N. Africa}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b N. rossica} (O.E. Schulz) Hedge & J. Léonard,{\i  op. cit. }394 (1986) ({\i T. rossica} O.E. Schulz), described from E.C. Russia (near Uljanovsk), is said to differ from {\b 1} in having the hairs all bifid, leaves entire or denticulate, petals absent and siliqua c. 10 mm.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. N. contortuplicata} (Stephan ex Willd.) Hedge & J. Léonard,{\i  op. cit.} 393 (1986) ({\i T. contortuplicata} (Stephan ex Willd.) O.E. Schulz,{\i  Malcolmia contortuplicata} (Stephan) Boiss.). Stem 5-30 cm, hispid. Basal leaves sinuate-pinnatifid, the upper cauline usually more or less entire. Pedicels (1-)2-8 mm in fruit. Petals 3-8 mm, pink. Siliqua 20-35 mm, erecto-patent, straight or spirally coiled; style 1-1·5 mm.{\i  S.E. Russia} ({\i near Astrakhan'}). Rs(E). ({\i Caucasus; C. Asia}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 23.                 Maresia}                Pomel
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc  By P.W. Ball.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Like {\i Malcolmia} but always annuals; hairs stellate; inner sepals slightly saccate at the base; style distinct; stigma capitate or emarginate.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. M. nana} (DC.) Batt. in Batt. & Trabut, {\i Fl. Algér.} ({\i Dicot}.) 68 (1888) ({\i Malcolmia nana} (DC.) Boiss., {\i M. binervis} (C.A. Meyer) Boiss., {\i M. confusa} Boiss.,{\i  M. parviflora }auct. pro parte). Shortly pubescent, 5-20 cm. Leaves oblong or linear-oblong, entire or sinuate-dentate. Petals 4-5·5 mm, violet to pink. Siliqua 10-28 × c. 0·7 mm, terete, torulose; style 0·5-1 mm. 2n = 26. {\i  Maritime sands. Mediterranean and shores of Black Sea northwards to S.E. Bulgaria.} Al Bl Bu Co Cr Ga Gr Hs It Si Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Often confused with{\i  Malcolmia ramosissima} (Desf.) Thell., from which it can be distinguished by the style and stigma, and by the septum of the siliqua being 2-veined with broad hyaline margins.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 24.              Leptaleum}                  DC.
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc  By P.W. Ball.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Annuals; hairs branched and unbranched. Sepals erect, not saccate; petals white, becoming reddish, not clawed; filaments of the inner stamens connate in pairs. Fruit a tardily dehiscent siliqua; valves with a distinct median vein; style very short; stigma 2-lobed, the lobes erect, connate at the apex. Seeds in 2 rows in each loculus.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. L. filifolium} (Willd.) DC., {\i Reg. Veg. Syst. Nat.}{\b  2}: 511 (1821). Sparsely pubescent or glabrescent annual 5-15 cm. Leaves linear or filiform, entire or pinnatisect with 3-5 filiform lobes. Pedicels 2-3 mm in fruit. Petals 6-10 mm, linear. Siliqua 15-30 × 1·5-3 mm, compressed; valves with reticulate-striate lateral veins. Seeds c. 0·75 mm.{\i  Steppes. N. of Astrakhan, on borders of S.E. Russia and Kazakhstan}. Rs(E). ({\b C. & S.W. Asia.})
\par

\par
339}
\par