{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 3 Siliqua densely hispid; stigma acute; lower pedicels usually
\par
  1-2 mm in  fruit .............................................................................. {\b 4. africana}
\par
3 Siliqua with short, sparse, patent hairs or glabrous; stigma retuse;
\par
  lower pedicels 0-1 mm in fruit ................................................ {\b 5. taraxacifolia}
\par
1 At least 2 of the sepals strongly saccate at the base
\par
4 Cauline hairs with numerous rays, usually very crowded
\par
5 Basal leaves ± sessile; siliqua 30-65 mm, not torulose .................. {\b 1. littorea}
\par
5 Basal leaves shortly petiolate; siliqua 20-40 mm, torulose ............. {\b 2. lacera}
\par
4 Cauline hairs with 2-4 rays, not crowded
\par
6 Calyx (8-)10-17 mm; style 5-10 mm in fruit ........................ {\b 10. macrocalyx}
\par
6 Calyx not more than 10 mm; style not more than 5 mm in fruit
\par
7 Racemes bracteate, at least in the lower part .............................. {\b 9. orsiniana}
\par
7 Racemes ebracteate
\par
8 Indumentum entirely of tri- or quadrifid hairs (each ray not
\par
  more than 0·15 mm) ......................................................................... {\b 8. graeca}
\par
8 Indumentum including numerous bifid hairs (each ray at least 0·25 mm)
\par
9 Style more than 1·5 mm in fruit; petals 10-25 mm; sepals 5-16 mm
\par
10 Pedicels in fruit 0·5-1 mm in diameter at their base,
\par
   distinctly narrower than the siliqua ............................................. {\b 6. maritima}
\par
10 Pedicels in fruit 1-2·5 mm in diameter at their
\par
   base, about as wide as the siliqua ................................................. {\b 7. flexuosa}
\par
9 Style not more than 1·5 mm in fruit; petals 4·5-12 mm; sepals 3-6 mm
\par
11 Petals pink with yellow base; siliqua 10-45 mm ........................... {\b 8. graeca}
\par
11 Petals entirely pink or violet; siliqua (25-)30-70 mm,
\par
    patent or erecto-patent ...................................................................... {\b 11. chia}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. M. littorea} (L.) R. Br. in Aiton,{\i  Hort. Kew.} ed. 2,{\b  4}: 121 (1812). Perennial 10-40 cm, woody, with numerous non-flowering stems, densely white-pubescent or -tomentose; hairs stellate. Leaves entire to sinuate-dentate, more or less sessile. Petals 14-22 mm, purple. Siliqua 30-65 × 1-1·5 mm, not torulose, the apex attenuate; stigma 2-6 mm. 2n = 20. {\i .S.W. Europe.} Ga Hs It Lu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. M. lacera} (L.) DC., {\i Reg. Veg. Syst. Nat.}{\b  2}: 445 (1821) (incl. {\i M. patula} DC.). Annual or perennial up to 40 cm, grey-green, pubescent or tomentose; hairs stellate. Basal leaves entire to sinuate-pinnatifid, shortly petiolate. Petals 8-16 mm, purple. Siliqua 20-40 × 0·7-1·2 mm, torulose; stigma 2·5-6 mm. {\i C. & S. Spain and Portugal.} Hs Lu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 3. M. ramosissima} (Desf.) Thell.,{\i  Fl. Adv. Montpellier} 285 (1912) ({\i Hesperis ramosissima }Desf., {\i M. parviflora }(DC.) DC., {\i M. arenaria} auct. hisp.). Annual 5-20 cm; hairs stellate. Leaves oblong, entire or sinuate-dentate. Pedicels 2-7 mm in fruit. Sepals 2·5-5 mm, not saccate; petals 4-8 mm, violet or pink. Siliqua 15-35 × c. 1 mm, terete, torulose, pubescent; septum almost completely opaque; stigma 1-2 mm. 2n = 14.{\i  Mediterranean region, Portugal.} Bl Co Ga Gr Hs It Lu Sa.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Often confused with{\i  Maresia nana} (DC.) Batt., from which it can most readily be distinguished by the stigma and the almost completely opaque septum of the siliqua.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 4. M. africana} (L.) R. Br. in Aiton,{\i  Hort. Kew}. ed. 2, {\b 4}: 121 (1812). Annual up to 40 cm, with branched or stellate hairs; branches usually shorter than the main stem. Leaves lanceolate, entire or sinuate-dentate. Pedicels 1-2 mm in fruit. Sepals 3-5 mm, not saccate; petals (5-)8-10(-12) mm, violet. Siliqua 25-65 × 1-1·5 mm, patent, rigid, more or less 4-angled, densely hispid; stigma 0·5-1·5 mm, acute.{\i  S. Europe; naturalized or casual elsewhere. }Cr Gr Hs Rs(W, K) Si Tu [Cz Ga Hu].
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 5. M. taraxacifolia} Balbis,{\i  Cat. Stirp. Hort. Bot. Taur.} App. 4, 10 (1814). like {\b 4} but not more than 15 cm, with unbranched and branched hairs or subglabrous; branches often longer than the main stem; leaves serrate to pinnatisect; pedicels 0-1 mm; petals 6-8 mm, white or pale bluish-pink; siliqua (15-)30-60 × (1-)1·5-2 mm, glabrous or with short patent hairs; stigma retuse. {\i S.E. Russia.} Rs(E).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 6. M. maritima} (L.) R. Br. in Aiton,{\i  Hort. Kew}. ed. 2, {\b 4: }121 (1812). Annual 10-35 cm, with bi- to quadrifid hairs. Leaves obovate to oblong, cuneate at the base, entire or dentate. Inflorescence ebracteate; pedicels 4-15 × 0·5-0·8(-1) mm in diameter in fruit, thinner than the siliqua. Sepals 6-10 mm, with medifixed hairs; petals 12-25 mm, pink to violet. Siliqua 35-80 × 1-2 mm, with mostly medifixed hairs; stigma 2-5 mm. •{\i  S. & W. Greece, S. Albania; naturalized on maritime sands elsewhere in S. Europe.} Al Gr [Bl Co Ga Hs *It Ju Si].
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Widely cultivated for ornament, and often occurring as a casual.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 7. M. flexuosa} (Sm.) Sm. in Sibth. & Sm.,{\i  Fl. Graeca}{\b  7}: 33, t. 634 (1830) ({\i M. maritima} auct. eur. merid.; incl.{\i  M. naxensis} Rech. fil.). like {\b 6} but the pedicels 1-2·5 mm in diameter at the base, about as wide as the siliqua; siliqua up to 3 mm in diameter; stigma 1·5-4 mm. 2n = 16.{\i  Sea-shores and maritime cliffs. Greece and the Aegean region; naturalized elsewhere in S. Europe, where it has been confused with}{\b  6}. Cr Gr *It Tu [Ga].
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 8. M. graeca} Boiss. & Spruner in Boiss.,{\i  Diagn. Pl. Or. Nov. }{\b 1}({\b 1}): 71 (1843). Annual 5-30 cm; hairs bi- to quadrifid. Leaves ovate-oblong to oblong-lanceolate, entire to lyrate-pinnatifid, cuneate at the base. Inflorescence ebracteate; pedicels 3-10 mm in fruit. Petals 4-17 mm, purple, violet or pink. Siliqua 10-50 × 1-1·5 mm; stigma 0·5-2·5(-3) mm. •{\i  C., S. & N.W. Greece; one station in S. Albania.} Al Gr.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 A very variable species. Three subspecies can be recognized, although they intergrade in C. Greece.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Basal leaves densely covered with tri- or quadrifid hairs;
\par
  hairs on calyx tri- or quadrifid ............................................ ({\b a}) subsp.{\b  graeca}
\par
1 Basal leaves with sparse indumentum of bi- to quadrifid hairs;
\par
  hairs on calyx usually bifid
\par
2 Leaves usually lyrate-pinnatifid; siliqua patent, curved
\par
  ........................................................................................... ({\b b}) subsp.{\b  hydraea}
\par
2 Leaves entire to serrulate; siliqua erecto-patent,
\par
  straight ............................................................................... ({\b c}) subsp.{\b  bicolor}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp.{\b  graeca} : Basal leaves lyrate-pinnatifid, densely covered with tri- or quadrifid hairs. Hairs on calyx tri- or quadrifid. Flowers (6-)9-16 mm in diameter; petals purple, white at the base of limb. Siliqua 20-50 mm, patent, curved. 2n = 16.{\i  E.C. Greece} ({\i Attiki}).
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp.{\i  hydraea} (Heldr. & Halácsy) A.L. Stork, {\i Op. Bot. }({\i Lund}) {\b 33}: 40 (1972) ({\i M. hydraea} Heldr. & Halácsy): Basal leaves lyrate-pinnatifid (sometimes dentate), with sparse indumentum of
\par

\par
338}
\par