{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 Literature: T.K.J. Herzog, {\i Hedwigia}{\b  74:} 257-284 (1935).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. S. natans} (L.) All.,{\i  Fl. Pedem.}{\b  2:} 289 (1785). Annual, with slender, branching stems. Floating leaves 10-14 × 6-9 mm, with 3-5 lateral veins on each side, papillae 0·2-0·8 mm; submerged leaves 2-7 cm. Sori up to 3 mm, in groups of 3-8; those with megasporangia spherical. 2n = 18.{\i  C. & S.E. Europe, extending westwards to N.E. Spain and northwards to} 58°{\i  N. in E.C. Russia.} †Be Bu Cz †Ga Ge Gr †Ho Hs Hu It Ju Po Rm Rs(B, C, W, K, E) Si Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Plants with leaf-papillae 2-3 mm and leaves 15 × 15-20 mm. recorded from Spain can be referred to{\b  S. molesta} D. Mitch., {\i Brit. Fern Gaz. }{\b 10:} 251 (1972).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 25.      AZOLLACEAE}
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc  Edit. †D.H. Valentine & D.M. Moore.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Stems slender, branched, floating; roots simple. Leaves small, 2-ranked, imbricate, bilobed. Heterosporous; sori in groups of 2 or 4 on the lower lobe of the first leaf of each branch, surrounded by an indusium; larger sori with several microsporangia, smaller sori with 1 megasporangium.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 1.                 Azolla}                  Lam.
\par   

\pard\f0\fs24\qc  By A. Lawalrée (Ed.1) revised by A.C. Jermy (Ed.2).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Small aquatic plants. Leaves always harbouring the blue-green alga {\i Anabaena}, the upper lobe herbaceous, the lower larger and hyaline. Microsporangia producing several groups of microspores (massulae), often covered with specialized hairs (glochidia); megasporangia producing a single megaspore with 3 floats, which germinates at the water surface to produce a small prothallus.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 The only genus.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Literature: A.H. Pieterse, L. de Lange & J.P. van Vliet,{\i  Acta Bot. Neerl. }{\b 26}({\b 6}): 433 449 (1977); M. Follieri, {\i Webbia}{\b  31}({\b 1}): 97-104 (1977).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 Leaf-trichomes 1-celled; glochidia non-septate .......................... {\b 1. filiculoides}
\par
Leaf-trichomes 2-celled; glochidia septate .................................... {\b 2. mexicana}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. A. filiculoides} Lam.,{\i  Encycl. Méth. Bot.}{\b  1:} 343 (1783) ({\i A. caroliniana }Willd., non auct.). Plant 1-10 cm in diameter, elliptical to suborbicular, subglaucous, green, becoming crimson-red in autumn. Upper lobe of leaf 1·5-2·5 × 0·7-1·4 mm, subacute or obtuse, with a membranous margin; leaf-trichomes 1-celled. Microsporangial sori 2 mm; massulae 5-8; glochidia non-septate.{\i  Naturalized in W., C. & S. Europe}. [Be Br Bu Cz Ga Ge Gr Hb Ho Hs Hu It Lu Rm Sa.] ({\i North and South America}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. A. mexicana} C. Presl,{\i  Abh. Böhm. Ges. Wiss.} ({\b 5}){\b 3}:150 (1845) ({\i A. caroliniana} auct., non Willd.). Like {\b 1} but leaves less glaucous, olive-green becoming brownish-red in autumn; leaf-trichomes 2-celled; massulae 3-6; glochidia septate.{\i  Naturalized in W., C. & S. Europe.} [Cz Ga Ge Ho Hs Hu It Ju Lu Rm Rs(W).] ({\i North and Central America}.)
\par

\par
33}
\par