{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}
\pard\f0\fs28 {\i Altaica}{\b  3}: 162 (1831). Biennial 40-80 cm; hairs medifixed. Leaves linear, entire, grey-green. Pedicels 3-5 mm in flower, up to 6 mm in fruit. Sepals 7-10(-12) mm, saccate at the base; petals (13-)15-18(-20) mm, pale yellow. Siliqua 5-10(-12) × 2-3 mm, square in cross-section; valves keeled; style 5-10(-12) mm, about as long as the siliqua. {\i  S. & S.E. Russia; S. & E. Ukraine}. Rs(C, K, E)
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 4. S. montana} (Pallas) Klokov in Klokov & Wissjul.,{\i  Fl. RSSUcr.}{\b  5}: 505 (1953) ({\i S. sessiliflora} Ledeb., {\i S. aucta} Klokov,{\i  S. dolichostylos} Klokov, {\i Erysimum sessiliflora }R. Br.). Biennial 30-90 cm; hairs medifixed. Leaves linear, entire, grey-green. Pedicels 0·5-1(-2) mm in flower, up to 2(-2·5) mm in fruit. Sepals (6-)8-13 mm, saccate at the base; petals 15-21 × 3-7 mm, pale yellow. Siliqua 6-15 × 2-4 mm, laterally compressed, white with green angles; valves narrowly winged; style 6-12(-14) mm. Seeds c. 1 mm. {\i  S. Russia; S. Ukraine.} Rs(C, K, E).
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 20.                Hesperis}               L.
\par
\pard\f0\fs24\qc  By P.W. Ball.
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28 Biennials to perennials; glabrous or with unbranched, branched or glandular hairs. Sepals erect, the inner saccate at the base; petals yellow, purple or white, long-clawed. Fruit a siliqua; valves with a distinct median and lateral veins; style short; stigma deeply 2-lobed, the lobes erect, free. Seeds in 1 row in each loculus. Radicle incumbent.
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28 Literature: V. Borbás,{\i  Magyar Bot. Lapok}{\b  1}: 161 et seq. (1902);{\b 2}: 12-23 (1903). N. Tzvelev, {\i Not. Syst.} ({\i Leningrad}){\b  19}: 114-155 (1959).
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Flowers yellow, sometimes purple or suffused with purple
\par 2 Lower pedicels usually 40-90 mm in fruit; petal-limb
\par  2-4 mm wide, linear-lanceolate ......................................................... {\b 1. tristis}
\par 2 Lower pedicels usually less than 20 mm in fruit; petal-limb
\par  3-9 mm wide, usually ovate-oblong .............................................. {\b 2. laciniata}
\par 1 Flowers purple, pink or white
\par 3 Stems hispid; pedicels usually much shorter than the calyx......... {\b 2. laciniata}
\par 3 Stems not hispid; pedicels ± equalling the calyx .. ({\b 3-13}). {\b matronalis }group
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. H. tristis} L.,{\i  Sp. Pl.} 663 (1753). Stout, hispid biennial or perennial 25-50(-70) cm; indumentum of branched, unbranched and glandular hairs. Leaves ovate-lanceolate to lanceolate, entire to denticulate; cauline leaves subcordate. Lower pedicels 40-90 mm in fruit. Sepals 9-15 mm; petals 20-25(-30) mm, yellow, rarely purplish; limb 2-4 mm wide, narrowly lanceolate. Siliqua 40-180 × 2·5-4·5 mm; valves flat; style c. 0·5 mm. 2n = 14.{\i  Dry, sunny places and scrub. C. & E. Europe.} Au Bu Cz Hu Ju Rm Rs(C, W, K, E) ?Tu.
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. H. laciniata} All.,{\i  Fl. Pedem.}{\b  1}: 271 (1785) ({\i H. dalmatica} E. Fourn., {\i ?H. dauriensis} Amo; incl. {\i H. glutinosa }Vis.). Biennial or perennial 10-80 cm; indumentum of branched, unbranched and often glandular hairs. Leaves pinnatifid to sinuate-dentate, the cauline sessile. Pedicels shorter than the sepals in flower, up to 15 mm in fruit. Sepals 5-12 mm; petals 15-30(-40) mm, yellow variably suffused with purple, or entirely purple; limb 3-9 mm wide, oblong to obovate. Siliqua 50-150 × 1·5-3(-4) mm; valves flat; style c. 1 mm. {\i Cliffs and rocks. S. Europe. }Al Bu Ga Gr Hs It Ju Lu Sa Si.
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp.{\b  laciniata} (incl. subsp{\i . spectabilis} (Jordan) Rouy & Fouc.): Plant usually glandular-pubescent. Siliqua pubescent.{\i  Almost throughout the range of the species}.
\par
\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp.{\b  secundiflora} (Boiss. & Spruner) Breistr.,{\i  Mem. Soc. Bot. Fr.}{\b  1952}: 84 (1952) (incl. subsp.{\i  scabricarpa }(Boiss.) Dvorak): Plant eglandular-pubescent. Siliqua glabrous.{\i  S. part of Balkan peninsula}.
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28 Subsp. ({\b a}) is variable and often divided into a number of subsidiary taxa. A variant that has been called subsp.{\i  spectabilis} (Jordan) Rouy & Fouc., with the petals 25-40 × 5-9 mm and purple, is often confused with {\b 3}. It generally occurs only in the southern half of the range of subsp. ({\b a}).
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28    ({\b 3-13}).{\b  H. matronalis} group. Biennials or perennials 40-120 cm; hairs branched, unbranched and sometimes glandular. Pedicels 5-20 mm in fruit, about equalling the sepals in flower. Sepals 5-8(-10) mm; petals 14-25 mm, white or purple; limb 3-7 mm wide, oblong to obovate. Siliqua 25-100 × 1·5-3 mm; valves rounded; style 1·5-2·5 mm.
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28 A group of closely related taxa of which the status is in many cases doubtful.
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Middle and upper cauline leaves ± shortly petiolate,
\par  never amplexicaul ...................................................................... {\b 3. matronalis}
\par 1 Middle and upper cauline leaves sessile, ± amplexicaul
\par 2 Flowers white
\par 3 Upper leaves and upper part of stem glandular
\par 4 Leaves with numerous branched hairs, usually densely glandular
\par  ...................................................................................................... {\b 10. dinarica}
\par 4 Leaves with mainly unbranched hairs, sparsely glandular .... {\b 11. vrabelyiana}
\par 3 Plant entirely eglandular
\par 5 Stem and leaves green, glabrous or pubescent;
\par  leaves dentate to entire ..................................................................... {\b 12. nivea}
\par 5 Stem and leaves white-tomentose; leaves coarsely
\par  sinuate-dentate or serrate .............................................................. {\b 13. inodora}
\par 2 Flowers pink or purple
\par 6 Plant eglandular
\par 7 Calyx and pedicels glabrous .................................................. {\b 7. oblongifolia}
\par 7 Calyx and pedicels pubescent
\par 8 Stem and leaves with long unbranched hairs ............................ {\b 8. steveniana}
\par 8 Stem and leaves without conspicuous, long unbranched hairs {\b 9. pycnotricha}
\par 6 Plant glandular-pubescent
\par 9 Plant without long unbranched hairs .......................................... {\b 5. sylvestris}
\par 9 Plant with long unbranched hairs
\par 10 Plant sparsely pubescent, green; siliqua eglandular ......................... {\b 4. elata}
\par 10 Plant grey-tomentose; siliqua usually glandular .................... {\b 6. theophrasti}
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 3. H. matronalis} L.,{\i  Sp. Pl.} 663 (1753). Indumentum variable, glandular or eglandular, rarely glabrous. Lower leaves serrate to lyrate; upper leaves entire or dentate, shortly petiolate to subsessile, not amplexicaul. Petals purple or white. 2n = 24.{\i  Damp or shaded habitats. Scattered through C. & S. Europe but absent from the extreme south and much of the west; widely cultivated for ornament, and locally naturalized throughout a large part of Europe.} Al Au Bu Cz Ga *Hs Hu It Ju Po Rm Rs(W, K) Tu [Be Br Co Da Fe Ge Hb He Ho Is No Rs(B) Sa Si Su].
\par
\par 336}
\par