{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 Seeds usually in 1 row in each loculus, most with more than 12
\par
      depressions across the width ............................................ {\b 2. microphyllum}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. N. officinale} R. Br. in Aiton,{\i  Hort. Kew.} ed. 2,{\b  4}: 111 (1812) ({\i Rorippa nasturtium-aquaticum} (L.) Hayek). Perennial 10-100 cm with fleshy, hollow stems, procumbent and rooting at the lower nodes, upwards ascending, sometimes floating; more or less glabrous. Leaves petiolate, often auriculate, pinnate, with 2-9 pairs of lobes, which are rounded to broadly elliptical and more or less entire. Pedicels 8-12 mm, patent to somewhat reflexed. Petals 3·5-5(-6) mm, white to pale purplish, about twice as long as the sepals. Fruit 10-18(-24) × 2-2·7(-3) mm, straight or curved; style 0·5-1·8(-2) mm. Seeds in 2 distinct rows in each loculus, with c. 25 polygonal depressions on each face. 2n = 32. {\i Wet places. Europe, northwards to Scotland, S. Sweden and to }c. 55°{\i  N. in Russia.} All except Fa Fe Is No Rs(N) Sb;{\i  doubtfully native in Az}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. N. microphyllum} (Boenn.) Reichenb., {\i Fl. Germ. Excurs.} 683 (1832) ({\i N. uniseriatum} Howard & Manton,{\b Rorippa microphylla} (Boenn.) Hyl.). like {\b 1} but racemes often longer in fruit; flowers somewhat larger (petals 4-5·5 mm); fruit 15-30 × (1-)1·3-2 mm; seeds usually in 1 row in each loculus, with c. 100 depressions on each face. 2n = 64. {\i Wet places. Mainly in W. Europe but extending eastwards to Sweden and Poland.} Be Br Cz Da Ga Ge Gr Hb He Ho Hs It Ju Po Su.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 The distribution of {\b 2} is still imperfectly known; at least in Denmark and the Netherlands it is much commoner than {\b 1}. The hybrid {\b 1 × 2} ({\i R.} × {\i sterilis} Airy Shaw, with 2n = 48) is fairly common. It propagates vegetatively and also spreads outside the range of the parent species. Both {\b 1} and{\b  1} × {\b 2} are cultivated as a salad (Water-cress), and this may obscure their native distribution.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 39.          Armoracia}  P. Gaertner, B. Meyer & Scherb.
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc  By P.W. Ball.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Glabrous perennials. Leaves simple to pinnatifid. Sepals not saccate; petals white, shortly clawed. Fruit a subglobose to ellipsoidal silicula; valves weakly reticulate-veined; style short; stigma capitate to slightly 2-lobed. Seeds in 2 rows in each loculus.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 Silicula 4-6 mm; ovules usually 4-6 in each loculus ...................... {\b 1. rusticana}
\par
Silicula 10-15 mm; ovules c. 10 in each loculus ........................ {\b 2. macrocarpa}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. A. rusticana} P. Gaertner, B. Meyer & Scherb., {\i Fl. Wetter. }{\b 2}: 426 (1800) ({\i A. lapathifolia }auct., {\i Cochlearia armoracia} L., {\i Nasturtium armoracia} (L.) Fries). Plant with stout, branched stock and fleshy, fusiform roots. Stems up to 1 m or more. Basal leaves with lamina 30-50 cm, ovate or ovate-oblong, crenate-serrate, petiole up to 50 cm; cauline leaves sessile or shortly petiolate, the lower often pinnatifid, the upper crenulate or entire. Petals 5-8 mm. Silicula rarely developed, 4-6 mm, globose or ovoid; ovules 4-6 in each loculus. 2n = 32. {\i Cultivated as a condiment} ({\i Horse-radish}),{\i  and naturalized throughout much of Europe; origin unknown}. [Al Au Be Br Bu Cz Da Fe Ga Ge Hb He Ho Hs Hu It Ju No Po Rm Rs(N, B, C, W, E) Si Su Tu].
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. A. macrocarpa} (Waldst. & Kit.) Kit. ex Baumg.,{\i  Enum. Stirp. Transs.}{\b  2}: 240 (1816). like {\b 1} but the basal leaves usually entire; cauline leaves lanceolate, the lower serrate, the upper crenate; silicula 10-15 mm, ovoid or ellipsoidal; ovules c. 10 in each loculus. 2n = 32.{\i  Marshes. • C. Danube basin.} Cz Hu Ju Rm.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 40.           Cardamine}             L.
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc By M.G. Jones (Ed.1) revised by J.R. Akeroyd;
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc {\i  C. amara} & {\i C. pratensis}, K. Marhold (Ed.2)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Annuals to perennials; glabrous or with simple hairs. Leaves simple to pinnate. Inner sepals saccate or not. Petals white, pink or purple (rarely pale yellow). Fruit a strongly compressed siliqua; valves coiling spirally from the base at dehiscence, veinless or with an indistinct median vein; style short or distinct; stigma slightly 2-lobed. Seeds in 1 row in each loculus. (Incl.{\i  Dentaria} L.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Literature: O.E. Schulz,{\i  Bot. Jahrb. }{\b 32}: 280-623 (1903).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Petioles with small, amplexicaul auricles
\par
2 Petals pink or violet, caducous; leaves ternate or pinnate,
\par
  with large, lanceolate leaflets ................................................... {\b 26. chelidonia}
\par
2 Petals white, not caducous (rarely absent); leaves various,
\par
  with small, ovate or obovate leaflets
\par
3 Lower leaves entire or ternate ................................................. {\b 20. resedifolia}
\par
3 Lower leaves pinnate
\par
4 Petals 2-4·5 mm, scarcely exceeding the sepals, sometimes absent;
\par
  siliqua with a subsessile stigma ................................................. {\b 28. impatiens}
\par
4 Petals 4-11 mm, at least twice as long as the sepals;
\par
  siliqua with a flattened beak
\par
5 Sepals apiculate; funicle of seeds slender ................................. {\b 22. maritima}
\par
5 Sepals obtuse; funicle of seeds broad, flattened ........................... {\b 25. graeca}
\par
1 Petioles without auricles
\par
6 Petals not more than 5 mm, sometimes absent
\par
7 Plant entirely glabrous
\par
8 All leaves simple and entire, oblong-spathulate .................... {\b 21. bellidifolia}
\par
8 At least some leaves pinnate
\par
9 Basal leaves entire to 3-lobed; petals at least 4 mm; siliqua
\par
  usually 1·5-1·8 mm wide ................................................................ {\b 19. glauca}
\par
9 Basal leaves pinnate with 3-5 pairs of lateral leaflets; petals
\par
  not more than 2·5 mm; siliqua 0·8 mm wide ............................ {\b 27. parviflora}
\par
7 Plant at least sparsely hairy
\par
10 Lowest leaves not in a rosette; rhizome with numerous stolons . {\b 13. amara}
\par
10 Lowest leaves in distinct rosette; rhizome not giving rise to stolons,
\par
   or  absent
\par
11 Pedicels 4-8 mm at anthesis; siliqua 20-40 mm ................. {\b 29. caldeirarum}
\par
11 Pedicels not more than 3 mm at anthesis; siliqua not more than 25 mm
\par
12 Most flowers with 6 stamens; stem usually hairy, flexuous;
\par
   cauline leaves (3)4-10 ................................................................ {\b 30. flexuosa}
\par
12 Most flowers with 4 or 5 stamens; stem glabrous, not flexuous;
\par
   cauline leaves 0-4(5) ..................................................................... {\b 31. hirsuta}
\par
6  Petals more than 5 mm
\par
13 Leaves in a whorl below the inflorescence
\par
14 Leaves pinnate
\par
15 Rhizome scale-leaves 2-3 mm, appressed; petals purple .... {\b 4. quinquefolia}
\par
15 Rhizome scale-leaves 5-8 mm, concave; petals yellow ............ {\b 5. kitaibelii}
\par
14 Leaves ternate or digitate
\par
16 Petals yellowish or white; stamens ± exserted, longer than
\par
   the petal-claw ........................................................................ {\b 6. enneaphyllos}
\par

\par
346}
\par