{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp.{\b  aspera} ({\i Rorippa aspera} (L.) Maire, {\i Nasturtium asperum} (L.) Boiss.): Pedicels 3-8(-10) mm. Petals 3-7 mm. Siliqua 15-20(-26) × 2-2·5 mm, relatively thick and short, narrowing from below the middle to the apex, more or less scabrid. Seeds in 2 rows in each loculus.{\i  Moist, sandy soil, often near streams. • Most of Spain except the south, Portugal; S. & W. France}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp.{\b  praeterita} Heywood, {\i Feddes Repert.}{\b  69}: 143 (1964) ({\i Sisymbrium laevigatum} Willd.): Pedicels 3-8(-10) mm. Petals 3-7 mm. Siliqua 25-30 × 1·7 mm, more or less linear, slightly attenuate at the apex, almost smooth. Seeds in 2 rows in each loculus.{\i  Alluvial gravels and damp soils. Pyrenees and S.W. France.}
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b c}) Subsp. {\b boissieri } (Cosson) Heywood,{\i  Bull. Brit. Mus.} ({\i Bot.}) {\b 1}: 107 (1954) ({\i Nasturtium boissieri} Cosson, {\i Rorippa aspera} prol. {\i boissieri} Samp., {\i Nasturtium asperum} subsp.{\i  boissieri} (Cosson) Coutinho): Pedicels (8-)10-15 mm. Petals 7-12 mm. Siliqua 25-50 × 2-2·5 mm, narrowing from below the middle to the apex, more or less scabrid. Seeds in 2 rows in each loculus.{\i  Damp, grassy or rocky places, usually in the mountains. S. Spain, Portugal} ({\i around Lisboa}).
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b d}) Subsp. {\b pseudoboissieri }(Degen) Heywood, {\i op. cit.} 108 (1954) ({\i Sisymbrium pseudoboissieri} Degen): Like subsp. ({\b c}) but seeds in 1 row in each loculus.{\i  Damp turf and near streams, on calcareous soil in mountains. • S.E. Spain} ({\i Sierra de Cazorla}).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Species {\b 2 }is highly polymorphic in Spain, where populations are largely intermediate between subspp. ({\b a}) and ({\b b}).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 37.          Rorippa}             Scop.
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc By †D.H. Valentine (Ed.1) revised by B. Jonsell (Ed.2)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Annuals to perennials; glabrous or with unbranched hairs. Leaves simple to pinnate. Sepals non-saccate; petals yellow. Fruit a siliqua or silicula; valves veinless or with a weak median vein; style short but distinct; stigma flat to slightly 2-lobed. Seeds in 1 or 2 rows in each loculus.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Literature: B. Jonsell,{\i  Symb. Bot. Upsal}.{\b  19}: 1-222 (1968).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Petals shorter than or ± equalling sepals
\par
2 Inflorescence with numerous branches forming a corymb .......... {\b 7. prolifera}
\par
2 Inflorescence not corymbose
\par
3 Sepals less than 1·6 mm; fruit-valves thin ................................... {\b 9. islandica}
\par
3 Sepals at least 1·6 mm; fruit-valves rather thick ........................ {\b 10. palustris}
\par
1 Petals at least 1½ times as long as the sepals
\par
4 All leaves entire or irregularly toothed, with conspicuous
\par
  auricles .......................................................................................... {\b 1. austriaca}
\par
4 At least some leaves pinnatifid to pinnate, with or without
\par
  conspicuous auricles
\par
5 Basal leaf-rosette present at anthesis; seeds finely reticulate
\par
6 Fruit not more than 6 mm, broadly ellipsoidal ......................... {\b 11. pyrenaica}
\par
6 Fruit at least 6 mm, lanceolate to linear
\par
7 Fruit 10-20 × c. 1 mm; petals (3-)4-5 mm .............................. {\b 12. lippizensis}
\par
7 Fruit 6-10 × c. 2 mm; petals less than 3 mm ............................... {\b 13. thracica}
\par
5 Basal leaf-rosette withered at anthesis
\par
8 Cauline leaves with conspicuous auricles ........................ {\b 2.}×{\b   armoracioides}
\par
8 Cauline leaves not or only slightly auriculate
\par
9 Uppermost cauline leaves undivided .......................................... {\b 3. amphibia}
\par
9 Uppermost cauline leaves more or less pinnatifid
\par
10 Fruit less than 5 mm ............................................................. {\b 8. brachycarpa}
\par
10 Fruit at least 5 mm
\par
11 Cauline leaves ± pinnatifid with long and broad terminal lobe;
\par
   style more than 1·2 mm in fruit .................................................... {\b 4.}× {\b  anceps}
\par
11 Cauline leaves pinnate with short and narrow terminal lobe;
\par
   style not more than 1·2 mm in fruit
\par
12 Fruit at least 8 mm, linear ........................................................ {\b 5. sylvestris}
\par
12 Fruit not more than 8 mm, narrowly ellipsoidal ........................... {\b 6. kerneri}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. R. austriaca} (Crantz) Besser,{\i  Enum. Pl. Volhyn.} 103 (1822) ({\i Nasturtium austriacum} Crantz). Perennial 30-100 cm, stoloniferous, nearly glabrous. Leaves elliptical, simple, entire or irregularly toothed, sessile with clasping auricles. Pedicels 7-15 mm, ascending, sometimes recurved in outer part. Petals 3-4·5 mm, about 1½ times as long as the sepals. Fruit globose, c. 3 mm (often not setting seed and much smaller); style 1-2 mm. 2n = 16.{\i  C. & E. Europe, frequently naturalized or casual further west and north.} Al Au Bu Cz Ge Hu Ju Po Rm Rs(C, W, K, E) Tu [Br Da Fe Ga He Ho It No Su].
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. R.} × {\b  armoracioides }(Tausch) Fuss, {\i Fl. Transsilv. Exc. }47 (1866) ({\i R. austriaca} × {\i sylvestris, R. cracoviensis} Zapal). Perennial 40-80 cm, stoloniferous, finely hairy below. Leaves pinnatifid pinnatisect with large terminal lobe, sometimes simple, irregularly toothed, petiolate, with clasping auricles. Pedicels straight, horizontal-ascending. Petals 3-4·5 mm, about twice as long as the sepals. Fruit 3·5-9 × 1·5-2 mm, oblong-ellipsoidal, often setting good seed; style 1-1·5 mm. 2n = 32, 40.{\i  C., E. & N. Europe}. Au Br Cz Da Fe Ga Ge Hu Ju No Po Rm Rs(B, C, W, E) Su; probably elsewhere.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 This plant spreads independently of the parent species along rivers and on rather dry, cultivated ground. It is very variable and forms a series of intermediates between {\b 1} and {\b 5}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 3. R. amphibia} (L.) Besser,{\i  op. cit.} 27 (1822) ({\i Nasturtium amphibium }(L.) R. Br.). Perennial 40-120 cm with prostrate, rooting basal stem parts, glabrous. Lowest leaves pectinate, caducous; upper leaves pinnatifid to simple, elliptical, irregularly toothed, usually without auricles. Pedicels 6-17 mm, deflexed from the base. Petals 3·5-5·5 mm, about twice as long as the sepals. Fruit 2·5-6 × 1·7-3 mm (often not setting seed and much smaller), oblong-ovoid; style 1-2·5 mm. 2n = 16, 32.{\i  Wet places. Much of Europe, but rare in the north and the Mediterranean region.} Al Au Be Br Bu Co Cz Da Fe Ga Ge Gr Hb He Ho Hs Hu It Ju Lu Po Rm Rs(N, B, C, W, K, E) Sa?Si Su Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 4. R.} × {\b  anceps} (Wahlenb.) Reichenb.,{\i  Icon. Fl. Germ. }{\b 2}: 15 (1837-8) ({\i R. amphibia} ×{\i  sylvestris, R. prostrata} (J.P. Bergeret) Schinz & Thell., {\i R. hybrida} Klokov, {\i Nasturtium anceps} (Wahlenb.) Reichenb.,{\i  N. stenocarpum} Godron). Perennial 35-100 cm, glabrous or finely hairy below. Leaves pinnatisect-pinnatifid, with large terminal lobe, auricles small or absent. Pedicels horizontal-deflexed. Petals 3·5-5·5 mm, about twice as long as the sepals. Fruit 5-10 × 1·2-2·5 mm, oblong-ellipsoidal, setting good seed; style 1·2-3 mm. 2n = 32, 40.{\i  Much of Europe, but absent from many islands and most of the Mediterranean region.} Au Be Br Cz Da Fe Ga Ge Hb He Ho Hs Hu It Ju Lu Po Rm Rs(C, W, K, E) Su [Be Br ?Fe Rs(N, B)].
\par

\par
344}
\par