{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 30.                 Tetracme}            Bunge
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc  By P.W. Ball.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Annuals; hairs branched. Sepals patent, not saccate; petals yellow, clawed. Fruit a siliqua with 4 horns at the apex; valves 3-veined; style very short; stigma more or less capitate. Seeds in 1 row in each loculus.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. T. quadricornis} (Willd.) Bunge,{\i  Del. Sem. Horti Dorpat}. 8 (1836). Plant 5-20 cm, grey-tomentose. Leaves linear-oblong, entire or remotely dentate. Pedicels 1-1·5 mm in fruit, clavate. Siliqua 6-10 × 1-1·5 mm, patent and curved, torulose; horns 0·5-2·5 mm, divergent.{\i  S.E. Russia; rarely as a casual elsewhere.} Rs(E). ({\i C. Asia}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 31.             Diptychocarpus}          Trautv.
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc  By P.W. Ball.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Annuals; hairs unbranched. Sepals erect, the inner saccate at the base; petals white or purplish, not clawed. Fruits dimorphic; the upper siliquae dehiscent, compressed, with winged seeds, the lower indehiscent, articulated, with the seeds not winged; style distinct; stigma 2-lobed.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. D. strictus} (Fischer) Trautv.,{\i  Bull. Soc. Nat. Moscou}{\b  33}({\b 1}): 108 (1860). Plant 10-50 cm, sparsely pubescent. Leaves linear to oblong, the basal dentate to pinnatisect. Petals 7-10 mm, linear. Upper siliquae 35-80 × 2·5-4 mm, obtuse, with style 3-5 mm, the lower 25-60 × 2·5-4 mm, fleshy, gradually attenuate into the style.{\i  Saline soils. W. Kazakhstan.} Rs(E). ({\i C. & S.W. Asia}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 32.              Chorispora}              R.Br. ex DC.
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc  By P.W. Ball.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Annuals; hairs glandular, and sometimes also eglandular, branched or unbranched. Sepals erect, the inner saccate at the base; petals purple, clawed. Fruit an articulated siliqua, breaking into 2-seeded segments; style at least ½ as long as the rest of the siliqua; stigma 2-lobed. Seeds in 1 row in each loculus.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. C. tenella} (Pallas) DC.,{\i  Reg. Veg. Syst. Nat.}{\b  2}: 435 (1821). Plant 10-60 cm, with sparse glandular and sometimes longer unbranched and branched, eglandular hairs. Leaves lanceolate, entire or serrate, the lower often pinnatifid. Petals 10-12 mm, entire. Siliqua 15-30 × 1·5-3 mm (excluding beak), more or less cylindrical, torulose; beak 12-30 mm.{\i  Waste places. S.E. Europe; casual elsewhere.} Bu Ju Rm Rs(C, W, K, E).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 33.                Euclidium}              R. Br.
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc  By P.W. Ball.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Annuals; hairs of 2 kinds, branched and unbranched. Sepals erecto-patent, not saccate; petals white, not clawed. Fruit an indehiscent, 2-seeded silicula, longitudinally 4-veined; style long; stigma 2-lobed.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. E. syriacum} (L.) R. Br. in Aiton,{\i  Hort. Kew.} ed. 2,{\b  4}: 74 (1812). Plant 10-40 cm, densely grey-pubescent throughout. Leaves lanceolate to ovate-oblong, sinuate-dentate, the basal often pinnatifid. Petals c. 1-1·5 mm, emarginate. Silicula 2·5-4 mm, obliquely ellipsoidal or ovoid; style 1-2 mm. {\i Waste places. Ruderal. E. & E.C. Europe; rarely casual elsewhere.} Au Bu Cz Hu Ju Rm Rs(C,W, K, E).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 34.               Litwinowia}                Woronow
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc  By P.W. Ball.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Like{\i  Euclidium} but all the hairs unbranched; inner sepals slightly saccate at the base; silicula compressed, longitudinally 6-veined; stigma subentire.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. L. tenuissima} (Pallas) Woronow ex Pavlov,{\i  Fl. Centr. Kazakhstana }{\b 2}: 302 (1935) ({\i Euclidium tataricum} (Willd.) DC., {\i Vella tenuissima} Pallas). Slender, hispid annual 10-30 cm. Leaves linear- or oblong-lanceolate, the basal dentate to lyrate-pinnatisect. Petals 2·5-5 mm, entire. Silicula 2·5-3 × 2·5-3 mm, broadly obovate or almost orbicular, glabrous, with the 6 veins in two lateral groups of 3 which diverge from the base; style 2-3 mm, often persistent.{\i  Steppes. S.E. Russia.} Rs(E). ({\i W. & C. Asia}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 35.               Barbarea}               R.Br.
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc  By P.W. Ball.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Biennials to perennials (rarely annuals); glabrous or with unbranched hairs. Leaves pinnatifid or pinnatisect, the cauline auriculate. Inner sepals slightly saccate at the base; petals yellow, indistinctly clawed. Fruit a siliqua, terete to 4-angled; valves usually with a strong median vein and reticulate lateral veins; style distinct; stigma entire or slightly 2-lobed. Seeds in 1 row in each loculus.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 All species occur usually in wet or damp habitats, and some are weeds or ruderals.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Inflorescence bracteate, at least in the lower ½ .......................... {\b 7. bracteosa}
\par
1 Inflorescence ± completely ebracteate
\par
2 Infructescence corymbose (Greece) .............................................. {\b 9. conferta}
\par
2 Infructescence elongate, racemose
\par
3 Siliqua hairy; style (2-)3-5 mm .............................................. {\b 10. longirostris}
\par
3 Siliqua glabrous; style usually less than 3 mm
\par
4 Uppermost leaves simple, dentate
\par
5 Style 2-4 mm in fruit; buds glabrous ............................................. {\b 1. vulgaris}
\par
5 Style usually not more than 2 mm in fruit; buds pubescent ............. {\b 2. stricta}
\par
4 Uppermost leaves pinnatifid or pinnatisect
\par
6 Basal leaves with 6-10 pairs of lateral lobes ..................................... {\b 3. verna}
\par
6 Basal leaves simple or with 1-5(6) pairs of lateral lobes
\par
7 Style 0·5-2 mm in fruit
\par
8 Petals 7-10 mm; siliqua 30-60(-90) mm ....................................... {\b 8. rupicola}
\par
8 Petals less than 7 mm; siliqua 10-30 mm
\par
9 Pedicels stout, not more than ¼ of the length of the siliqua; siliqua
\par
  c. 2 mm in diameter; style usually less than 1·5 mm ................. {\b 4. intermedia}
\par
9 Pedicels slender, 1/4-1/3 of the length of the siliqua;
\par
  siliqua 1-1·5 mm in diameter; style at least 1·5 mm ......................... {\b 5. sicula}
\par
7 Style at least 2 mm in fruit
\par
10 Valves of the siliqua without a median vein ............................. {\b 6. bosniaca}
\par
10 Valves of the siliqua with a distinct median vein
\par
11 Pedicels in fruit not more than ¼ of the length of the siliqua;
\par
   siliqua 15-30(-40) × 1-2 mm ........................................................ {\b 1. vulgaris}
\par
11 Pedicels in fruit 1/4-1/3 of the length of the siliqua;
\par
   siliqua 10-20 × 1-1·5 mm ................................................................ {\b 5. sicula}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. B. vulgaris} R. Br. in Aiton, {\i Hort. Kew}. ed. 2, {\b 4}: 109 (1812)
\par

\par
342}
\par