{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 green, lyrate-pinnate, long-petiolate; lower cauline leaves with (0)1-6 pairs of ovate to orbicular-reniform, sinuate, lateral leaflets, decreasing in size from the very large, reniform, terminal leaflet 3-7 cm wide. Petals 8-13 mm; anthers yellow. Siliqua 15-30(-40) × 1·4-2 mm; style (1·5-)2·5 mm, gradually attenuate.{\i  Streamsides and wet meadows. Mountains of S. Europe.} Al Bu Ga Gr Hs It Ju [Br]
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 A variable species that requires critical evaluation across its range. The subspecies below must be regarded as provisional.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Lower leaves usually pubescent, with 2-4(5) pairs of lateral
\par
  leaflets .................................................................................... ({\b c}) subsp.{\b  acris}
\par
1 Lower leaves glabrous, with 1-3 pairs of lateral leaflets
\par
2 Petals reddish-violet; siliqua about as long as the pedicel
\par
  ..................................................................................... ({\b a}) subsp.{\b  raphanifolia}
\par
2 Petals white; siliqua about twice as long as the pedicel
\par
  .................................................................................... ({\b b}) subsp.{\b  barbareoides}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp.{\b  raphanifolia} (incl. subsp{\i . merinoi }(Laínz) Laínz, subsp. {\i gallaecica} Laínz): Leaves glabrous, the lower with 1-3 pairs of lateral leaflets. Petals reddish-violet. Infructescence short and dense; siliqua strict, about as long as the pedicel; stigma much wider than the style. 2n = 44, 46.{\i  • N. Spain to S. France}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b barbareoides} (Halácsy) Strid,{\i  Mount. Fl. Gr. }{\b 1}: 257 (1986) ({\i C. barbareoides} Halácsy,{\i  C. amara} subsp. {\i barbareoides} (Halácsy) Stoj. & Stefanov): Like subsp. ({\b a}) but petals white; siliqua about twice as long as the pedicel. •{\i  C. & N. Greece; Albania}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b c}) Subsp.{\b  acris} (Griseb.) O.E. Schulz,{\i  Bot. Jahrb.}{\b  33}: 497 (1903) ({\i C. acris} Griseb.): Leaves often pubescent, the lower with 2-4(5) pairs of lateral leaflets. Petals lilac. Infructescence long and lax; siliqua patent, twice as long as the pedicel; stigma scarcely wider than the style.{\i  Balkan peninsula}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Plants from Italy are in some respects intermediate between subspp. ({\b b}) and ({\b c}). The more widespread variant, from the Appennini, has dense compound racemes, white petals, and patent siliquae 35-40 × 1 mm; the other, from Calabria, has a simple raceme, violet petals, and erecto-patent siliquae 14-25 × 1·5 mm.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 15. C. pratensis} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 656 (1753). Perennial; rhizome usually short and non-stoloniferous; stem usually erect, simple, glabrous. Basal leaves usually forming a rosette, with (0-)2-8(-15) pairs of ovate to orbicular or reniform, sessile or shortly stalked lateral leaflets and a larger or equal terminal leaflet, sparsely hairy, rough-surfaced, often bearing adventitious shoots; cauline leaves 2-18, pinnatisect or pinnate, with roundish, ovate, lanceolate to linear leaflets or segments, usually glabrous; leaves usually dull or grey-green. Sepals 2·2-6·0 mm; petals 5-16(-19) × 2·5-10(-12) mm, emarginate to rounded, white, lilac or purple. Siliqua 10-50 × 0·5-2 mm; style short, 0·25-0·8 mm wide, flattened, not attenuate; stigma conspicuous, enlarged.{\i  Almost throughout Europe}. Al Au Az Be Br Bu Co Cz Da Fe Ga Ge Gr Hb He Ho Hs Hu It Ju Lu No Po Rm Rs(N, B, C, W, E) Su ?Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 A variable species that can be divided into a number of subspecies, many of them treated at specific rank by some authors. The following treatment is provisional.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Rhizome stoloniferous; stem ascending; basal leaflets not
\par
  in a rosette ...................................................................... ({\b c}) subsp.{\b  crassifolia}
\par
1 Rhizome not stoloniferous; stem erect; basal leaves in a
\par
  rosette
\par
2 Leaves thick, with impressed veins ........................ ({\b d}) subsp. {\b polemonioides}
\par
2 Leaves thin, with raised veins
\par
3 Ends of some roots tuberous; basal leaves simple or with
\par
   3-5 leaflets ..................................................................... ({\b b}) subsp.{\b  granulosa}
\par
3 Ends of roots not tuberous; basal leaves mostly with
\par
  more than 5 leaflets
\par
4 All cauline leaves pinnate, leaflets distinctly stalked ...... ({\b g}) subsp. {\b dentata}
\par
4 At least upper cauline leaves pinnatisect
\par
5 At least some basal leaves hairy
\par
6 Hairs on rhachis of basal leaves patent (90°) ................ ({\b a}) subsp.{\b  pratensis}
\par
6 Hairs on rhachis of basal leaves appressed
\par
7 Flowers white or pale lilac; anthers yellow before dehiscence
\par
  ......................................................................................... ({\b e}) subsp. {\b matthioli}
\par
7 Flowers purple; anthers purplish before dehiscence ....... ({\b f}) subsp. {\b rivularis}
\par
5 All basal leaves glabrous (sometimes shrivelled at anthesis)
\par
8 Lower segments of mid-cauline leaves somewhat deflexed
\par
  ........................................................................................ ({\b e}) subsp.{\b  matthioli}
\par
8 Lower segments of mid-cauline leaves slightly ascending
\par
9 Terminal leaflet of basal leaves approximately the same size
\par
  as lateral ones; anthers purplish before dehiscence ............ ({\b f}) subsp. rivularis
\par
9 Terminal leaflet of basal leaves distinctly larger than
\par
  lateral ones; anthers yellow before dehiscence ................. ({\b a}) subsp. pratensis
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp.{\b  pratensis} : Stem 15-50 cm, simple or branched. Basal leaves with 1-10(-15) pairs of lateral leaflets, the terminal leaflet usually larger than the lateral ones; cauline leaves 2-10(-13), the lower with 2-8(-11) pairs of lateral segments or leaflets. Petals 6-17 mm, white, or pale lilac. Siliqua 15-40 × 0·9-1·6(-1·9) mm. 2n = 16, 30, 32, 38, 44, 48, 56 (other aneuploid chromosome numbers also occur). {\i Throughout the range of the species except the extreme north and parts of the south-east}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp.{\b  granulosa} (All.) Arcangeli,{\i  Comp. Fl. Ital.} ed. 2, 260 (1894) ({\i C. granulosa} All.): Ends of some roots tuberous; stem up to 40 cm, simple. Basal leaves simple or with 1 or 2 pairs of leaflets; cauline leaves 1-3, with 1 or 2 pairs of lateral segments. Petals white, 8-12 mm. 2n = 16. {\i Wet meadows. • N.W. & N. Italy}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b c}) Subsp.{\b  crassifolia} (Pourret) P. Fourn., {\i Quatre Fl. Fr. }413 (1936) ({\i C. crassifolia} Pourret): Rhizome stoloniferous; stem 10-15 cm, ascending. Basal leaves not forming a rosette, simple or ternate; cauline leaves 1-3, with 1-3 pairs of lateral segments. Petals 6-8 mm, purplish. Siliqua 12-16 × 1-2 mm. •{\i  Pyrenees}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b d}) Subsp.{\i  polemonioides} Rouy in Rouy & Fouc.,{\i  Fl. Fr.} 234 (1893) ({\i C. nymanii} Gand.): Plant usually caespitose. Stem 5-20(-35) cm. Basal leaves with 4-6(-10) pairs of lateral leaflets cauline leaves with 2-4(-7), the lower with 5-7(-10) pairs of lateral segments or leaflets; leaflets thick with impressed veins and often bearing adventitious shoots. Petals 9-13 mm, pale lilac. Siliqua (10-)15-25 × (1·2-)1·4-2·0 mm. 2n = 56, 60, 62, 64, 68, 72, 80, 90.{\i  N. Europe}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b e}) Subsp.{\b  matthioli} (Moretti) Nyman, {\i Consp.} 36 (1878) ({\i C. matthioli} Moretti, {\i C.pratensis} L. var. {\i hayneana }Welw.): Plant simple or caespitose. Stem 11-50 cm, usually much-branched. Basal leaves with (2-)5-8 pairs of lateral leaflets, terminal leaflet larger than the lateral ones; cauline leaves (2)3-14(-18), the lower
\par

\par
349}
\par