{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 leaves 6-10 mm; leaves all digitate or ternate, glabrous except for the margins; petals (14-)18-22 mm, white or pale purple; siliqua 2·5-4 mm wide. 2n = 48. {\i Mountain woods. • W. & C. Europe, from the Pyrenees to S. Germany and N. Jugoslavia.} Au Ga Ge He Hs It Ju.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 4. C. quinquefolia} (Bieb.) Schmalh., {\i Fl. Sred. Juz. Ross. }{\b 1}: 51 (1895). Perennial 15-40 cm; rhizome slender at the apex but in older parts 5-7 mm in diameter, with deltate, membranous, appressed scale-leaves 2-3 mm. Leaves usually 3, in a lax whorl, pinnate, with 2 or 3 pairs of ciliate (rarely entirely glabrous), irregularly biserrate, lanceolate leaflets. Petals 14-18 mm, deep purple, twice as long as the stamens. Siliqua 35-50 × 2·5 mm.{\i  E. Europe.} Bu Rm Rs(C, W, K, E) Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 5. C. kitaibelii} Becherer,{\i  Ber. Schweiz. Bot. Ges.}{\b  43}: 57 (1934) ({\i C. polyphylla} (Waldst. & Kit.) O.E. Schulz, non D. Don). Perennial 20-30(-50) cm; rhizome 3-6 mm in diameter, with concave scale-leaves 5-8 mm. Leaves 3(-5), more or less whorled, pinnate, with 2-6 pairs of serrate, lanceolate leaflets. Petals 15-22 mm, pale yellow, twice as long as the stamens. Siliqua 40-65 × 2·5-3 mm. 2n = 48. {\i Woods. • Alps and adjacent regions; Appennini; N.W. Jugoslavia}. He It Ju.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 The hybrid between {\b 3} and {\b 5} ({\i C.} × {\i killiasii} Brugger) occurs where the parent species grow together.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 6. C. enneaphyllos} (L.) Crantz,{\i  Class. Crucif.} 127 (1769). Perennial 20-30 cm; rhizome nodular, up to 6 mm in diameter, with inconspicuous scale-leaves 1-2 mm. Leaves 2-4 in a lax whorl, ternate or sometimes digitate, with ovate-lanceolate, irregularly biserrate leaflets. Flowers somewhat pendent; petals 12-16 mm, pale yellow or white, scarcely exceeding the stamens. Siliqua 40-75 × 3·5-4 mm. 2n = 52-54, 80.{\i  Mountain woods. •  From the W. Carpathians and E. Alps to S. Italy and S. Jugoslavia.} Al Au Cz Ge Hu It Ju Po Rm.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 7. C. glanduligera} O. Schwarz, {\i Feddes Repert.}{\b  46}: 188 (1939) ({\i Dentaria glandulosa} Waldst. & Kit.). Perennial 12-25 cm; rhizome 4-6 mm in diameter, with deltate scale-leaves 2-3 mm, but slender (1-2 mm) and non-scaly in parts. Leaves usually 3 in a single whorl, ternate, with lanceolate, irregularly biserrate leaflets with ciliate margins. Petals 12-22 mm, purple, twice as long as the stamens. Siliqua 35-60 × 2-3 mm. 2n = 48.{\i  Mainly in} Fagus{\i  woods. Carpathians and adjacent parts of E.C. Europe}. Cz Hu Ju Po Rm Rs(W) [Au].
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 8. C. waldsteinii} Dyer,{\i  Kew Handlist Herb. Pl.} 97 (1891) ({\i Dentaria trifolia }Waldst. & Kit., {\i C. savensis} O.E. Schulz). Perennial 20-40 cm; rhizome 3-5 mm in diameter, brown, with distant, deltate scale-leaves 4-5 mm. Leaves 3 or more, remote, ternate, with subsessile, obtuse, narrowly rhombic to ovate or almost lanceolate-acuminate leaflets, obscurely apiculate-dentate, glabrous or somewhat hairy. Petals 10-12 mm, white; anthers violet. Siliqua 20-35 × 2 mm. {\i Woods. • N. Jugoslavia, extending to S. Austria and S. Hungary}. Au Hu Ju.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Subgen.{\b  Cardamine}. Annuals or biennials, or perennials with rhizome on the surface of the ground, with scale-leaves few or absent. Cotyledons sessile or subsessile.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 9. C. macrophylla} Willd.,{\i  Sp. Pl.}{\b  3}({\b 1}): 484 (1800). Perennial 30-100 cm, with a long horizontal rhizome c. 2 mm in diameter. Basal leaves 10-25 cm, with 2-4 pairs of subsessile, ovate lateral leaflets and a somewhat larger terminal leaflet; cauline leaves 5-8, with narrower leaflets; leaflets apiculate-crenate to serrate, appressed-hairy. Petals (6-)8-11 mm, pale pink to purple. Siliqua 25-40 × 1·5-2·5 mm, sparsely hairy; beak 1·5-3·5 mm. 2n = 80.{\i  N.E. Russia.} Rs(N, C).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 10. C. trifida} (Lam. ex Poiret) B.M.G. Jones, {\b Feddes Repert.}{\b  69}: 57 (1964) ({\i C. tenuifolia }(Ledeb.) Turcz.). Perennial 7-30 cm; rhizome short, c. 5 mm in diameter, not scaly, bearing adventitious roots some of which are swollen at the apex to form flattened tubers. Basal leaves pinnate with 1 or 2 pairs of ovate to orbicular, stalked, crenate-lobed or trifid leaflets, withered at anthesis; cauline leaves 1-4, mostly ternate with linear leaflets. Petals (6-)8-10(-13) mm, lilac or white. Siliqua 22-35 × 1·5-2 mm. 2n = 32.{\i  C. & E. Russia; very local.} Rs(C). ({\i Altai and N.E. Asia.})
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 11. C. trifolia} L.,{\i  Sp. Pl.} 654 (1753). Perennial 20-30 cm; rhizome 2-4 mm in diameter, nodular, creeping, branched, with remote scale-leaves; stem simple. Rhizomal leaves ternate; leaflets broadly rhombic to suborbicular, obscurely dentate-apiculate, sparsely hairy above and purplish beneath, long-petiolate; cauline leaves 0-3, small, sessile, simple or ternate. Petals 9-11 mm, white or pink; anthers yellow. Siliqua 20-25 × 2 mm. 2n = 16.{\i  Mountain woods. • C. Europe from the French Jura to the W. Carpathians, extending southwards to N.C. Italy and C. Jugoslavia.} Au Cz Ga Ge He Hu It Ju Po.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 12. C. asarifolia} L.,{\i  loc. cit.} (1753). Perennial 20-40 cm; rhizome horizontal, short, stout, stoloniferous. Lower leaves reniform, sinuate or somewhat apiculate-crenate, long-petiolate; upper leaves similar, shortly petiolate; rarely some cauline leaves ternate with rounded segments. Petals 6-10 mm, white; anthers violet. Siliqua 20-30 × 1·5-2 mm.{\i  Stream sides and other damp places; calcifuge. • Pyrenees; Alps; N. Appennini}. Ga He Hs It.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 13. C. amara} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 656 (1753). Perennial 10-60 cm; rhizome short, horizontal, with numerous stolons; stem angular, simple or branched. Basal leaves not in a rosette; lower cauline leaves pinnate with 2-11 pairs of ovate to orbicular, shortly stalked leaflets and a somewhat larger terminal leaflet; upper cauline leaves shortly petiolate with 2-5 pairs of lanceolate to ovate, angular leaflets. Petals 5-11 mm, white, rarely purplish; anthers blackish-violet or rarely yellowish-white. Siliqua 20-40 × 1-2 mm; style 0·5-2·5 mm; stigma narrower than the style.{\i  Damp places and streamsides. Most of Europe, but rare in the north and extreme south.} Au Be Br Bu Co Cz Da Fe Ga Ge Hb He Ho Hs Hu It Ju Lu No Po Rm Rs(N, B, C, W, E) Su.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp.{\b  amara} : Plant usually sparsely hairy at the base of the stem; rhizome slender; stem simple or branched with (2)3-14(-24) leaves, the leaves not congested under the inflorescence; lower cauline leaves with 2-6(7) pairs of leaflets. 2n = 16, 32.{\i  Throughout the range of the species}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b opicii} (J. & C. Presl) Celak.,{\i  Prodr. Fl. Bohm}. 449 (1875) ({\i C. opicii} J. & C. Presl): Plant glabrous or densely hairy; rhizome thick; stem simple with (10-)13 46(-53) leaves, the leaves congested under the inflorescence; lower cauline leaves with (4)5-9(-11) pairs of leaflets. 2n = 16. {\i Mountains of C. Europe}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Tetraploid plants require further study.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 14. C. raphanifolia} Pourret, {\i Mém.  Acad. Sci. Toulouse}{\b  3}: 310 (1788) ({\i C. latifolia }Vahl, non Lej.). Perennial 30-80 cm; rhizome long, horizontal; stem robust, glabrous. Leaves large, thick, clear
\par

\par
348}
\par