{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 This plant grows largely independently of the parent species, spreading along river systems. It forms a series of intermediates between {\b 3} and {\b 5}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 5. R. sylvestris} (L.) Besser,{\i  Enum. Pl. Volhyn.} 27 (1822) ({\i Nasturtium sylvestre} (L.) R. Br.). Ascending perennial 15-90 cm, with extensive stolons, often mat-forming, glabrous. Leaves petiolate, pinnate-pinnatifid with short terminal lobe; lobes lanceolate-rhombic, entire, toothed or lobulate. Pedicels 4-12 mm, erecto-patent. Petals 2·5-5·5 mm, about twice as long as the sepals. Fruit 9-22 × 1-1·2 mm (often not setting seed and much shorter and narrower), linear, sometimes curved; style 0·5-1·2 mm. 2n = 32, 40, 48.{\i  Almost throughout Europe.} All except Az Bl Fa ?Sa Sb; introduced in Fe Is No.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 6. R. kerneri} Menyh.,{\i  Kal. Vid. Noven. }39 (1877). like {\b 5} but 30-50 cm, erect, with short stolons; leaves pinnate with lanceolate lobes; pedicels 8-10 mm, patent; petals c.4 mm; fruit 4-9 mm, narrowly ellipsoidal; style c. 1 mm. 2n = 16. {\i Saline habitats. E.C. Europe and N. part of Balkan peninsula.} Bu Cz Hu Ju.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 7. R. prolifera} (Heuffel) Neilr.,{\i  Aufz. Ung. Slav. Gefäss. }263 (1866). Annual to perennial 40-80 cm. Leaves auriculate, pinnate with 2-5 pairs of oblong-lanceolate, coarsely toothed or entire lobes. Racemes clustered in a corymb with densely set siliquae on very thin pedicels 4·5-8 mm. Petals 2-3 mm, equalling or slightly longer than the sepals. Fruit 4·5-9 × c. 1 mm, linear; style 0·5-0·8 mm.{\i  S.E. Europe.} Al Bu Gr Ju Rm Rs(W, E) Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   {\b 8. R. brachycarpa} (C.A. Meyer) Hayek, {\i Prodr. Fl. Penins. Balcan. }{\b 1: }390 (1925), quoad basion. ({\i Nasturtium brachycarpum }C.A. Meyer). Annual to short-lived perennial 15-40 cm, erect and somewhat flexuous, glabrous. Leaves lyrate-pinnatifid, the upper pinnate with 2-7 pairs of rhombic-linear lobes. Pedicels 5-9 mm, patent-ascending. Petals 2·5-4 mm, about  1½ times as long as the sepals. Fruit 3-4·5 × 0·9-1·3 mm, narrowly ellipsoidal; style 0·6-1 mm.{\i  C. & S. Russia, Ukraine}. Rs(C, W, K, E).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 In addition to {\b 2} and {\b 4}, a number of other hybrids involving most of species {\b 1-8} have been reported, and some have been treated as species in Floras. They are partly fertile and back-cross products appear to be frequent.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 9. R. islandica} (Oeder) Borbás,{\i  Balaton Növényföldr.}{\b  2: }392 (1900) ({\i R. terrestris} (Curtis) Fuss). Annual 5-30 cm, decumbent to ascending, glabrous. Leaves petiolate, not auriculate, pinnatisect with 3-5 pairs of lobes. Petals 1-1·5(-1·7) mm, about equalling the sepals. Fruit 6-12 × 2-3 mm, shortly cylindrical, 2-3 times as long as the patent-deflexed pedicels; valves of fruit thin; style 0·3-0·7 mm. Seeds finely colliculate. 2n = 16. {\i W.C. & S. Europe extending to S.E. Russia.} Au Br Ga Gr Hb He Hs Is It Ju No Rs (?C, W, E).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp.{\b  islandica} : Leaf-segments finely serrate or entire. Epidermal cells of seed about as high as broad. {\i W., C. & S. Europe}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp.{\b  dogadovae} (Tzvelev) Jonsell,{\i  Symb. Bot. Upsal.}{\b  19}: 156 (1968): Leaf-segments toothed or incised. Epidermal cells of seed much higher than broad.{\i  S. Russia, Ukraine}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 10. R. palustris} (L.) Besser,{\i  Enum. Pl. Volhyn.} 27 (1822) ({\i Nasturtium palustre} (L.) DC.,{\i  R. islandica }auct.). Annual to short lived perennial 10-110 cm, ascending to erect, usually glabrous. Leaves more or less petiolate, auriculate, pinnatisect to lyrate-pinnatifid with 2-6 pairs of serrate lobes. Petals (1·4 )1·5-2·8 mm, about equalling the sepals. Fruit 5-12 × 1·7-3 mm, shortly cylindrical to oblong-ellipsoidal, often curved, slightly shorter to twice as long as the horizontal to deflexed pedicels; valves of fruit rather thick; style 0·4-1 mm. Seeds coarsely colliculate. 2n = 32. {\i Europe, except S. part of Balkan peninsula and many of the islands.} Au Be Br Bu Cz Da Fa Fe Ga Ge Hb He Ho Hs Hu It Ju Lu No Po Rm Rs(N, B, C, W, K, E) Su.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 The sterile hybrid between{\b  3} and {\b 10} is fairly frequent, while that between {\b 5} and {\b 10}, in spite of numerous alleged reports, is very rare.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 11. R. pyrenaica} (Lam.) Reichenb., {\i Icon. Fl. Germ.}{\b  2}: 15 (1837) ({\i Nasturtium pyrenaicum} (Lam.) R. Br., {\i R. stylosa} (Pers.) Mansfeld & Rothm.). Perennial 5-40 cm, shortly pubescent at the base. Lower leaves in a rosette, with long petiole, ovate, entire, or lyrate-pinnatifid with roundish segments; cauline leaves more or less sessile, with narrow, amplexicaul auricles, pinnate with 2-8 pairs of linear segments. Petals 2-4 mm. Fruit 2-6 × 1·5-2 mm, shorter than or equalling the pedicels; style 0·7-2 mm. 2n = 16.{\i  C. & S. Europe, northwards to S. France.} Al *Be Bu Cz Ga *Ge Gr He Hs It Ju Lu Rm Rs(W).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Very variable in the shape of the fruit, which may be subglobose, ellipsoidal or subcylindrical. Plants with subcylindrical fruits from Spain and the Pyrenees have been called{\b  R. hispanica} (Boiss. & Reuter) Willk. in Willk. & Lange,{\i  Prodr. Fl. Hisp.}{\b  3}: 845 (1880).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 12. R. lippizensis} (Wulfen) Reichenb.,{\i  Icon. Fl. Germ.}{\b  2}: 15 (1837) ({\i Nasturtium lippizense} (Wulfen) DC.). Perennial 10-20 cm, shortly pubescent at the base. Lower leaves in a rosette, with long petioles, orbicular-ovate, entire, or pinnatifid with 1-4 pairs of narrow lateral lobes and a large terminal lobe; cauline leaves sessile, with narrow, amplexicaul auricles, pinnatifid with 1-4 pairs of linear to lanceolate lobes. Petals (3-)4-5 mm. Fruit 10-20 × c. 1 mm, longer than the erect or ascending pedicels; style 0·5-1·5 mm. 2n = 32.{\i  Balkan peninsula and N.W. Jugoslavia.} Al Bu Gr Ju Tu [It].
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 13. R. thracica} (Griseb.) Fritsch, {\i Verh. Zool.-Bot. Ges. Wien}{\b  44}: 316 (1894). Perennial 15-40 cm, shortly pubescent at the base; stem erect, somewhat branched above. Lower leaves in a rosette, petiolate, all lyrate-pinnatifid with an orbicular terminal lobe and few or no lateral lobes; upper cauline leaves auriculate, with 4-8 pairs of narrowly linear lobes. Petals 2-2·5 mm. Fruit 6-10 × c. 2 mm, narrowly lanceolate, shorter than or more or less equalling the patent pedicels; style 2 mm. 2n = 32.{\i  Balkan peninsula.} Bu Gr Ju ?Rm Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Species {\b 11-13} form a group clearly deviating from the rest of the genus, as evident from their distinctly reticulate seeds. Their relationship and status are not fully clear. While {\b 11} seems distinct though variable, {\b 12} and {\b 13} may perhaps constitute one variable species.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 38.              Nasturtium}               R.Br.
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc  By †D.H. Valentine.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Perennials; glabrous or with few unbranched hairs. Leaves pinnate to pinnatisect. Petals white, rarely pale purplish. Fruit a siliqua valves with weak median vein; style short; stigma capitate, slightly 2-lobed. Seeds in 1 or 2 rows in each loculus. Radicle accumbent.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 Seeds in 2 rows in each loculus, most with fewer than 12 depressions
\par
  across the width ........................................................................... {\b 1. officinale}
\par

\par
345}
\par