{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 (B. iberica (Willd.) DC., {\i B. lyrata }Ascherson; incl.{\i  B. arcuata }(Opiz ex J. & C. Presl) Reichenb., {\i B. macrophylla} Halácsy). Usually glabrous biennial or perennial up to 100 cm. Basal leaves with 1-5(6) pairs of lateral lobes, rarely simple; uppermost leaves simple, dentate, rarely pinnatifid. Pedicels 3-6 mm in fruit, slender. Buds glabrous; petals 5-8 mm. Siliqua 15-30(-40) × 1-2 mm; valves with distinct median vein; style 2-3·5(-4) mm. 2n = 16, 18. {\i Throughout Europe except for some islands.} All except Az Bl Cr Fa Sb; introduced in Is.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 A variable species with many infraspecific taxa described.{\b  B. lepuznica} E.I. Nyárády, {\i Bul. Grad. Bot. Univ. Cluj}{\b  14}: 97 (1934), from Romania (Muntii Retezatului), with upper leaves pinnatifid, pedicels 6-8 mm in fruit, siliqua 15-20 mm, and style c. 3 mm, is probably a variant of {\b 1}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b B. balcana} Pancic,{\i  Srpska Kralj. Bot. Basta Beograd}{\b  1888}: 6 (1888), from the central part of the Balkan peninsula, differs from {\b 1} only by the pinnatifid upper leaves, pedicels 6-8 mm, and slightly longer style.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. B. stricta} Andrz. in Besser,{\i  Enum. Pl. Volhyn. }72 (1822). More or less glabrous biennial up to 100 cm. Basal leaves usually with 1 or 2 pairs of lateral lobes; uppermost leaves simple, sinuate-dentate. Pedicels 3-7 mm in fruit, stout. Buds pubescent; petals 3·5-6 mm. Siliqua 18-30(-35) × 1·5-2 mm; valves with distinct median vein; style 0·5-1·6(-2·3) mm. 2n = 16.{\i  C., E. & N. Europe; introduced elsewhere and of uncertain status in a number of countries}. Au *Br Bu Cz Da Fe Ge Ho Hu It Ju No Po Rm Rs(N, B, C, W, E) Su [Be Ga Hb].
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 3. B. verna} (Miller) Ascherson, {\i Fl. Brandenb.}{\b  1}: 36 (1860) ({\i B. praecox} (Sm.) R. Br., {\i Campe verna} (Miller) A.A. Heller). Glabrous or sparsely pubescent biennial up to 75 cm. Basal leaves usually with 6-10 pairs of lateral lobes; uppermost leaves pinnatifid. Pedicels 2-8 mm in fruit, stout. Petals 5-8 mm. Siliqua 30-70 × 1·5-2 mm; valves with distinct median vein; style 0·6-2 mm. {\i S.W. Europe; cultivated as a salad, and for the oil from its seeds, and naturalized elsewhere}. Az Co Ga Hs It Lu Sa [Au Br Da Hb He Ho Rs(W)].
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 4. B. intermedia} Boreau,{\i  Fl. Centre Fr.}{\b  2}: 48 (1840) ({\i B. pinnata} Lebel, {\i B. sicula }auct., non C. Presl, {\i B. sicula} var. {\i prostrata} (Gay) Gren. & Godron). Glabrous or sparsely pubescent biennial up to 60 cm. Basal leaves with 2-5(6) pairs of lateral lobes; uppermost leaves pinnatifid. Pedicels 3-6 mm in fruit, stout. Petals 4-6 mm. Siliqua 10-30(-35) × 2 mm; valves with distinct median vein; style 0·6-1·7 mm. {\i S. & C. Europe from S. Germany to N. Portugal and S. Jugoslavia; frequently introduced elsewhere}. Au Ga Ge Hs It Ju Lu [Be Br Da Hb He Ho Po].
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 5. B. sicula} C. Presl in J. & C. Presl, {\i Del. Prag.} 17(1822). like {\b 4} but smaller (up to 40 cm); basal leaves with (1)2-4 pairs of lateral lobes; pedicels (3-)4-8 mm in fruit, slender; siliqua 10-20 × 1-1·5 mm; style 1·5-2·8(-3·5) mm. •{\i  S. Italy, Sicilia; Greece.} Gr It Si.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 6. B. bosniaca} Murb.,{\i  Lunds Univ. Arsskr.}{\b  27}: 169 (1891). like {\b 4} but the pedicels 4-6 mm in fruit, slender; valves of the siliqua without a median vein; style 2-4 mm. •{\i  C. Jugoslavia }({\b Bosna}). Ju.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 7. B. bracteosa} Guss., {\i Fl. Sic. Prodr.}{\b  2}: 257 (1828) ({\i ?B. intermedia} var. {\i gautieri} Rouy & Fouc.). Glabrous biennial or perennial up to 50 cm. Lower leaves with 2-4 pairs of lateral lobes; upper leaves pinnatifid. Racemes bracteate at least in the lower ½; pedicels 2-4(-6) mm in fruit. Petals 4-5 mm. Siliqua 15-30 × 1-2 mm; valves with distinct median vein; style 0·5-2 mm. 2n = 16. {\i C. Mediterranean region, extending to Bulgaria}. Al Bu Ga Gr It Ju Si.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   {\b 8. B. rupicola} Moris, {\i Stirp. Sard.}{\b  1}: 55 (1827). Glabrous perennial up to 45 cm. Lower leaves simple or with up to 2 pairs of lateral lobes; upper leaves pinnatifid. Pedicels 6-12 mm in fruit. Petals 7-10 mm. Siliqua 30-60(-90) × 1·5-2·5 mm; style 1-2 mm. 2n = 16.{\i  Wet, siliceous rocks. • Corse, Sardegna.} Co Sa.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 9. B. conferta} Boiss. & Heldr. in Boiss.,{\i  Fl. Or., Suppl.,} 36 (1888). Glabrous biennial up to 30 cm. Upper leaves pinnatifid. Pedicels 2-4 mm. Petals c. 5 mm. Infructescence corymbose; siliqua 24-30 mm; valves with distinct median vein; style 2-3 mm.  •{\i Mountains of C. & S. Greece} ({\i Peristeri, Killini}). Gr.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 10. B. longirostris} Velen.,{\i  Sitz.-Ber. Böhm. Ges. Wiss.}{\b  29}: 1 (1898). Perennial 20-50 cm, hirsute. Basal leaves with 2 or 3 pairs of lateral lobes; upper pinnatifid. Pedicels 4-6 mm in fruit. Petals 6-9 mm. Siliqua 10-20 × 1·5-2 mm, hirsute; style (2-)3-5 mm. •{\i  C. part of Balkan peninsula.} Al Bu Gr Ju.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 36.             Sisymbrella}                Spach
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc  By V.H. Heywood.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Annuals to short-lived perennials; glabrous or with unbranched hairs. Leaves lyrate to pinnatisect. Inner sepals saccate at the base; petals yellow or white. Fruit a siliqua, attenuate at the apex; valves without distinct median vein; style distinct; stigma capitate. Seeds in 1 or 2 rows in each loculus.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Differs from {\i Nasturtium} and {\i Rorippa} in the attenuate siliqua and in the seeds becoming mucilaginous when moistened.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Literature: V.H. Heywood,{\i  Bull. Brit. Mus.} ({\i Bot}.){\b  1}: 106-110 (1954). R. virot, {\i Cahiers Nat. Paris.} nov. ser.{\b  15}: 89-96 (1959).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 Petals white; stems with unbranched hairs, smooth .......................... {\b 1. dentata}
\par
Petals yellow; stems ± glabrous or scabrid ......................................... {\b 2. aspera}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. S. dentata} (L.) O.E. Schulz in Engler, {\i Pflanzenreich}{\b  86}({\b IV. 105}): 144 (1924) ({\i Sisymbrium bursifolium }L., {\i Barbarea dentata} (L.) Paol.). Stems 10-40 cm, with unbranched hairs. Leaves lyrate to deeply pinnatifid, the terminal lobe longer than the laterals. Pedicels 2-3 mm, thick. Petals c. 5 mm, white. Siliqua 30-60 mm. Seeds in 1 row in each loculus. •{\i  S.W. Italy, Sicilia.} It Si.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. S. aspera} (L.) Spach, {\i Hist. Veg.} ({\i Phan.}){\b  6}: 426 (1838) ({\i Nasturtium asperum} (L.) Boiss.). Stems 10-40 cm, smooth or scabrid with white tubercles. Leaves pectinate-pinnatisect. Pedicels long or short. Petals yellow. Siliqua 15-50 mm. Seeds in 1 or 2 rows in each loculus.{\i  S.W. Europe.} Ga Hs Lu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Seeds in 1 row in each loculus ........................... ({\b d}) subsp.{\b  pseudoboissieri}
\par
1 Seeds in 2 rows in each loculus
\par
2 Petals 7-12 mm; pedicels (8-)10-15 mm; siliqua 25-50 mm
\par
  .......................................................................................... ({\b c}) subsp.{\b  boissieri}
\par
2 Petals 3-7 mm; pedicels 3-8(-10) mm; siliqua 15-25(-30) mm
\par
3 Siliqua 15-20(-26) × 2-2·5 mm, ± scabrid ......................... ({\b a}) subsp.{\b  aspera}
\par
3 Siliqua 25-30 × 1·7 mm, ± linear, almost entirely smooth
\par
  ........................................................................................ ({\b b}) subsp.{\b  praeterita}
\par

\par
343}
\par