{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 16 Petals purple; stamens included, about as long as the
\par
   petal-claw .............................................................................. {\b 7. glanduligera}
\par
13 Leaves not in a whorl below the inflorescence
\par
17 All leaves simple and entire
\par
18 Leaves reniform, more than 10 mm wide ............................... {\b 12. asarifolia}
\par
18 Leaves oblong-spathulate, less than 10 mm wide ............... {\b 21. bellidifolia}
\par
17 At least some leaves compound
\par
19 Rhizome present, long, or giving rise to slender stolons
\par
20 Basal leaves simple, reniform
\par
21 Plant up to 15 cm; siliqua 12-16 mm ...................................... {\b 15. pratensis}
\par
21 Plant at least 20 cm; siliqua 20-40 mm
\par
22 Middle cauline leaves ternate, with rounded segments .......... {\b 12. asarifolia}
\par
22 Middle cauline leaves, if present, with 1-3 pairs of narrowly
\par
   ovate or oblong leaflets .................................................................. {\b 17. tenera}
\par
20 Basal leaves compound
\par
23 Axils of upper leaves with brownish-purple bulbils ................. {\b 1. bulbifera}
\par
23 Axils of leaves without bulbils
\par
24 Leaves all ternate or digitate
\par
25 Leaflets serrate; petals more than 13 mm; siliqua more
\par
   than 2·5 mm wide .................................................................. {\b 3. pentaphyllos}
\par
25 Leaflets obscurely dentate; petals less than 13 mm; siliqua
\par
   less than 2·5 mm wide
\par
26 Rhizome with scale-leaves only; cauline leaves 3 or more;
\par
   anthers violet ............................................................................ {\b 8. waldsteinii}
\par
26 Rhizome with foliage leaves (or withered petioles) as well
\par
   as scale-leaves; cauline leaves 0-3; anthers yellow ...................... {\b 11. trifolia}
\par
24 At least some leaves pinnate
\par
27 Rhizome 4-10 mm in diameter; petals 14-20 mm; siliqua more
\par
   than 3 mm wide ....................................................................... {\b 2. heptaphylla}
\par
27 Rhizome usually less than 4 mm in diameter or absent;
\par
   petals 5-13 mm; siliqua less than 3 mm wide
\par
28 Leaflets crenate-apiculate or serrate, with appressed hairs;
\par
   ovary and siliqua sparsely hairy ............................................ {\b 9. macrophylla}
\par
28 Leaflets crenate to entire, pubescent (especially on the margin)
\par
   or glabrous; ovary and siliqua glabrous
\par
29 Rhizome without stolons; stems usually 30-80 cm
\par
30 Cauline leaves with 1-6 pairs of leaflets, the terminal leaflet
\par
   distinctly larger; siliqua 1·4-2 mm wide .............................. {\b 14. raphanifolia}
\par
30 Cauline leaves with 4-9 pairs of leaflets, the terminal
\par
   leaflet slightly larger; siliqua 1-1·5 mm wide ........................... {\b 16. uliginosa}
\par
29 Rhizome with stolons; stems rarely more than 30 cm
\par
31 Anthers yellow; stigma conspicuous ....................................... {\b 15. pratensis}
\par
31 Anthers blackish-violet or rarely yellowish-white;
\par
   stigma indistinct ............................................................................. {\b 13. amara}
\par
19 Rhizome absent, or short, not giving rise to stolons or plant
\par
   annual to biennial
\par
32 Ovary and siliqua with appressed hairs; seeds c. 3 mm ............ {\b 23. carnosa}
\par
32 Ovary and siliqua glabrous; seeds 1-2 mm
\par
33 Lowest leaves simple, sometimes 3- to 5-lobed
\par
34 Lowest leaves in a rosette; stems not flexuous;
\par
   petals 8-12 mm .......................................................................... {\b 15. pratensis}
\par
34 Lowest leaves not in a rosette; stems flexuous; petals 4-8 mm
\par
35 Plant not glaucous; leaflets of upper leaves lobed;
\par
   infructescence always symmetrical ............................................ {\b 18. plumieri}
\par
35 Plant glaucous; leaflets of upper leaves entire;
\par
   infructescence usually secund ....................................................... {\b 19. glauca}
\par
33 Lowest leaves ternate, pinnate or pinnatipartite
\par
36 Cauline leaves mostly ternate; some roots forming apical tubers {\b 10. trifida}
\par
36 Cauline leaves pinnate to pinnatifid; roots not forming apical tubers
\par
37 Siliqua c. 4 mm wide .......................................................... {\b 24. monteluccii}
\par
37 Siliqua 1-2·5 mm wide
\par
38 Leaflets with a few prominent apiculate teeth;
\par
   pedicels hairy ........................................................................ {\b 29. caldeirarum}
\par
38 Leaflets subentire; pedicels glabrous
\par
39 Leaves all similar, lyrate-pinnate, with the terminal leaflet at
\par
   least twice as large as the lateral leaflets; all leaflets orbicular
\par
   to reniform; siliqua without a thickened border ................... {\b 14. raphanifolia}
\par
39 Leaves dissimilar; the lower pinnate, with the terminal
\par
   leaflet only a little larger than the lateral leaflets;
\par
   at least the upper cauline leaves with oblong to linear-lanceolate
\par
   leaflets; siliqua with a thickened border .................................... {\b 15. pratensis}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Subgen.{\b  Dentaria} (L.) Hooker fil. Perennials; rhizome subterranean, with scale-leaves. Cotyledons petiolate.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. C. bulbifera} (L.) Crantz, {\i Class. Crucif. }127 (1769) ({\i Dentaria bulbifera} L.). Perennial 25-70 cm; rhizome 2-5 mm in diameter, with fleshy, deltate scale-leaves. Leaves alternate, more than 6; lower leaves pinnate, with 1-3 pairs of lanceolate, serrate leaflets; uppermost leaves simple. Small brownish-purple bulbils present in the upper leaf-axils. Petals 12-20 mm, pale purple. Siliqua 15-35 × 2-2·5 mm (formed occasionally, mainly in the southern part of its range). 2n = 96.{\i  Woods. Much of Europe, but local in the west and south.} Al Au Be Br Bu Cz Da Fe Ga Ge Gr He It Ju No Po Rm Rs(B, C, W, K) Su Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. C. heptaphylla} (Vill.) O.E. Schulz, {\i  Feddes Report.}{\b  46}: 116 (1939) ({\i C. pinnata} (Lam.) R. Br.,{\i  C. baldensis} Fritsch). Perennial 30-60 cm; rhizome 4-10 mm in diameter, with lunate scale-leaves 1-2 mm. Leaves usually 3 or more, remote, pinnate; lower leaves with 3-5 pairs of ovate-lanceolate, serrate, sparsely hairy or glabrescent leaflets; uppermost leaves with 2 or 3 pairs of similar leaflets. Petals 14-20 mm, white, pink or purplish. Siliqua 40-80 × 3·5-5 mm. 2n = 48.{\i  Woods. W. Europe, extending to S.W. Germany and S.W. Italy.} Ga Ge He Hs It.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 The hybrid between {\b 2} and {\b 3} ({\i C. × digenea }Gremli) occurs where the parent species grow together. It is sterile and morphologically intermediate between the parents, and spreads vegetatively.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 3. C. pentaphyllos} (L.) Crantz,{\i  Class. Crucif.} 127 (1769) (Dentaria pentaphyllos L., D. digitata Lam.) like {\b 2} but rhizome 1·5-2·5 mm in diameter, with triangular, trifid, concave scale
\par

\par
347}
\par