{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 (1812) ({\i M. glandulosa} Vis.). Densely white-tomentose, stout biennial (rarely annual or perennial) 8-60 cm, woody at the base. Leaves sinuate-dentate to pinnatifid, the lobes oblong, obtuse; uppermost leaves entire. Lower pedicels 4-15(-18) mm in fruit. Sepals 8-12 mm;  petals  17-25 × 3-8 mm,  pale  purple.  Siliqua 50-150 × 3-5 mm, erecto-patent, compressed, the valves with large, conspicuous, stipitate yellow or black glands; stigma narrower than the siliqua, without conspicuous horns. 2n = 28. {\i Coasts of S. & W. Europe.} . Al Bl Br Co Cr Ga Gr †Hb Hs It Ju Lu Sa Si Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 3. M. odoratissima} (Bieb.) R. Br. in Aiton,{\i  loc. cit.} (1812). Densely white-tomentose perennial 15-75 cm, woody at the base. Leaves usually sinuate to sinuate-pinnatisect. Pedicels 3-5(-8) mm in fruit. Sepals 6-15 mm; petals 20-30 × 3-5 mm, brown or yellow tinged with purple. Siliqua 85-180 × 2-4 mm, erecto-patent, compressed; stigma capitate, as wide as or wider than the siliqua, without conspicuous horns. 2n = 12.{\i  N.E. Bulgaria; Krym.} Bu Rs(K). ({\i Caucasus, Iran}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 4. M. tatarica} (Pallas) DC.,{\i  Reg. Veg. Syst. Nat.}{\b  2}: 170 (1821). like {\b 3} but the stem subglabrous to grey-tomentose; leaves irregularly serrate or incised; pedicels 2-3(-5) mm in fruit; siliqua 50-150 × 2-3 mm, glabrous or sparsely pubescent; stigma narrower than the siliqua. {\i S.E. Russia, W. Kazakhstan.} Rs(E).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 5. M. fragrans} (Fischer) Bunge,{\i  Del. Sem. Horti Dorpat.} 8 (1839). Subglabrous to grey-tomentose perennial 20-50 cm, woody at the base. Leaves subentire to sinuate-pinnatisect. Pedicels 3-8(-18) mm in fruit. Sepals 10-12 mm; petals 18-25 × 2·5-3(-4) mm, dull yellow tinged with purple. Siliqua 75-130 × 2·5-3 mm, erecto-patent, compressed; stigma conical, narrower than the siliqua, without horns.{\i  S. Ukraine to W. Kazakhstan.} Rs(W, E)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 6. M. fruticulosa} (L.) Maire in Jahandiez & Maire,{\i  Cat. Pl. Maroc.}{\b  2}: 311 (1932) ({\i M. tristis }R. Br.,{\i  M. provincialis} (L.) Markgraf,{\i  M. thessala }Boiss. & Orph.,{\i  Cheiranthus fruticulosus} L.). Sparsely pubescent to densely white-tomentose perennial up to 60 cm, woody at the base. Leaves linear or oblong, entire to sinuate-pinnatifid. Pedicels 0-3(-8) mm in fruit. Sepals 6-14 mm; petals 12-28 mm, yellow to purplish-violet. Siliqua 25-120 × 1-2(-3) mm, more or less cylindrical; stigma without horns or with horns up to 3 mm. {\i S. Europe}. Al Bl Bu Ga Gr He Hs It Ju Lu Si Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Siliqua 2-3 mm wide; valves 3- to 5-veined ................ ({\b c}) subsp.{\b  perennis}
\par
1 Siliqua 1-2 mm wide; valves 1- to 3-veined
\par
2 Siliqua patent or deflexed, eglandular; plant with branched
\par
  stock, lax ................................................................... ({\b a}) subsp.{\b  fruticulosa}
\par
2 Siliqua ± erect with yellow glandular hairs; plant caespitose
\par
  ...................................................................................... ({\b b}) subsp.{\b  valesiaca}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b fruticulosa} (incl.{\i  M. varia }(Sm.) DC. pro parte):Plant with branched stock, lax. Siliqua 1-2 mm wide, patent or deflexed, eglandular; valves 1- to 3-veined. 2n = 12, 24. {\i Throughout the range of the species except the Alps}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b valesiaca} (Gay ex Gaudin) P.W. Ball, {\i Feddes Repert.}{\b  66}: 157 (1962) ({\i M. varia} (Sm.) DC. pro parte): Plant caespitose. Siliqua 1-2 mm wide, more or less erect, with yellow glandular hairs; valves 1- to 3-veined. 2n = 12, 24. •{\i  Pyrenees, N. & E. Spain; S. Alps; Balkan peninsula}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b c}) Subsp.{\b  perennis} (P. Conti) P.W. Ball,{\i  loc. cit.} (1962) ({\i M. perennis} P. Conti): Plant caespitose. Siliqua 2-3 mm wide, eglandular, more or less erect; valves 3- to 5-veined. 2n = c. 12.{\i  N. Spain }({\i Picos de Europa}).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 7. M. longipetala} (Vent.) DC.,{\i  Reg. Veg. Syst. Nat.}{\b  2: }174 (1821). Annual, rarely overwintering, up to 50 cm. Lower leaves sinuate-dentate to pinnatifid. Lower pedicels not more than 3 mm in fruit. Sepals 8-12 mm; petals 15-25 × 2-7 mm; nectaries filiform. Siliqua 50-150 × 1-2(-2·5) mm, cylindrical; horns 2-10 mm. {\i C. & S. Greece, S. Aegean region.} Gr [Rs(W, K)].
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp.{\b  longipetala} ({\i M. oxyceras} DC., {\i Cheiranthus longipetalus} Vent.): Petal-limb 2-4 mm wide, yellowish. Horns of the siliqua usually patent or recurved.{\i  Naturalized in S. Ukraine}.
\par
 ({\b b}) Subsp.{\b  bicornis} (Sm.) P.W. Ball,{\i  Feddes Repert.}{\b  68}: 194 (1963) ({\i M. bicornis} (Sm.) DC.): Petal-limb 3-7 mm wide, pink or purple. Horns of the siliqua curved upwards.{\i  C. & S. Greece; S. Aegean region}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Subsp.{\b  pumilio} (Sm.) P.W. Ball,{\i  loc. cit}. (1963) ({\i M. pumilio} (Sm.) DC.), with shorter, broader siliqua with obtuse horns, was once recorded from the S. Aegean region (Sikinos), probably in error.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 8. M. lunata} DC.,{\i  Reg. Veg. Syst. Nat.}{\b  2}: 176 (1821). Annual 10-50 cm. Leaves sinuate-dentate to entire. Pedicels up to 4 mm in fruit. Sepals 6-12 mm; petals (12-)15-25 × 3-6 mm, oblong-obovate, purple; nectaries very small. Siliqua 30-70 × 1-2 mm, cylindrical, patent or deflexed, torulose; horns 2-4 mm, subobtuse, curved upwards.{\i  S. Spain}. Hs.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 9. M. parviflora} (Schousboe) R. Br. in Aiton, {\i Hort. Kew}. ed. 2,{\b  4}: 121 (1812). Annual up to 20 cm. Lower leaves sinuate-dentate to pinnatisect. Sepals 4-6 mm; petals 6-10(-12) × 1-2 mm, purple or brownish-purple; nectaries very small. Siliqua 25-70 × 1·5-2 mm, slightly torulose; horns 1·5 mm, straight, acute. 2n = 12. {\i S. Spain S. Portugal.} ?Bl Hs Lu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 10. M. tricuspidata} (L.) R. Br. in Aiton,{\i  Hort. Kew.} ed. 2,{\b  4}: 120 (1812). Annual 7-40 cm. Leaves sinuate-crenate to pinnatisect, the lobes ovate, rounded at the apex. Lower pedicels 2-5 mm in fruit. Sepals 7-11 mm; petals 15-22 mm, purple. Siliqua 25-100 × 2-3 mm, patent or deflexed, cylindrical; stigma-lobes connate to form a third horn, the 3 horns equal, 2-6 mm, triangular, acute. 2n = 14.{\i  Maritime sands, rarely inland. Mediterranean region.} Al Bl Co Cr Ga Gr Hs It Sa Si Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 29.              Notoceras}              R. Br.
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc  By P.W. Ball.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Annuals; hairs bifid. Sepals erecto-patent, not saccate; petals white, not clawed. Fruit a short, tardily dehiscent siliqua with 2 horns at the apex; valves keeled or narrowly winged; style distinct; stigma capitate. Seeds in 1 row in each loculus.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. N. bicorne} (Aiton) Amo,{\i  Fl. Iber.}{\b  6}: 536 (1873) ({\i N. canariense} R. Br.). Procumbent or erect, up to 30 cm. Leaves lanceolate to linear-lanceolate, entire. Racemes short, dense, leaf-opposed; pedicels up to 2 mm in fruit, stout. Siliqua 4-6 × c. 1·5 mm, erect, valves torulose; horns 0·5-1 mm.{\i  Dry places. S.E. Spain.} Hs ({\i N. Africa; S.W. Asia}.)
\par

\par
341}
\par