{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 25.              Sterigmostemum}             Bieb.
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc  By P.W. Ball.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Annuals; hairs branched. Sepals erect, not saccate; petals yellow, with a short, broad claw; filaments of the inner stamens connate in pairs. Fruit an articulated siliqua, breaking irregularly into 2-seeded segments; style short; stigma 2-lobed, the lobes erect. Seeds in 1 row in each loculus.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. S. tomentosum} (Willd.) Bieb.,{\i  Fl. Taur.-Cauc. }{\b 3}: 444 (1819). Plant 20-40 cm, grey-tomentose. Leaves entire to pinnatisect with lanceolate lobes. Pedicels 5-10 mm. Petals 6-10 × 3-5 mm, truncate. Siliqua 20-60 × 1·5-2 mm, cylindrical, torulose. Seeds c. 2 mm, olive-green.{\i  Saline or sandy soils. S.E. Russia, W. Kazakhstan.} Rs(E). ({\i C. & S.W. Asia.})
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 26.               Clausia}                Trotzky
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc  By P.W. Ball.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Perennials; hairs unbranched, glandular or not. Sepals erect, the inner saccate at the base; petals long-clawed. Fruit a tardily dehiscent siliqua; valves with a distinct median and lateral veins; style short; stigma 2-lobed, the lobes erect, free. Seeds in 1 row in each loculus. Radicle accumbent.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. C. aprica} (Stephan ex Willd.) Trotzky,{\i  Ind. Sem. Horti Casan.} (1834) ({\i Hesperis aprica }(Stephan) Poiret). Rhizomatous perennial up to 40 cm. Leaves oblong to oblanceolate, entire to dentate. Sepals 5-10 mm; petals 10-20 × 4-9 mm. Siliqua 30-80 × 1·2-1·5 mm; style 1·5-1·8 mm.{\i  Calcareous hills. From N. Ukraine to C. Ural.} Rs(C, W, E).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 27.                 Parrya}                R.Br.
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc  By  P.W. Ball.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Perennials. Sepals erect, not saccate; petals white or purplish, clawed. Fruit a siliqua; valves with distinct median vein; style very short; stigma 2-lobed, the lobes erect, connate. Seeds in 2 rows in each loculus.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. P. nudicaulis} (L.) Boiss., {\i Fl. Or.}{\b  1}: 159 (1867). Glabrous or glandular-tomentose, with long, stout rhizome; flowering stems scapose, up to 40 cm. Leaves broadly spathulate to linear-oblong, entire or serrate. Pedicels 1·5 cm. Petals 12-20 mm, obovate, emarginate. Siliqua 20-65 × 3·5-5·5 mm, compressed, shortly stipitate, attenuate at base and apex. Seeds 4·5-5 × 3-4·5 mm (including wing), elliptical, broadly winged.{\i  Arctic Russia}. Rs(N) ?Sb. ({\i Arctic Asia and America}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b Eremoblastus caspicus} Botsch.,{\i  Bot. Zur.}{\b  65}: 425 (1980), has recently been described from W. Kazakhstan.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 28.                Matthiola}               R.Br.
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc  By P.W. Ball.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Annuals to perennials; hairs branched. Sepals erect, the inner saccate at the base; petals purple, white, or yellowish, long-clawed. Fruit a siliqua; valves 1-veined; style absent; stigma deeply 2-lobed, the lobes erect, each with a dorsal swelling or horn. Seeds in 1 row in each loculus. A number of species are cultivated for ornament.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Literature: P. Conti,{\i  Mém. Herb. Boiss. }{\b 1}({\b 18}): 6-86 (1900).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Siliqua with 3 ± equal triangular horns at the apex, all at
\par
  least 2 mm long ...................................................................... {\b 10. tricuspidata}
\par
1 Siliqua without conspicuous horns or with only 2 longer
\par
  than 2 mm
\par
2 Siliqua compressed, at least 2 mm wide, without horns or with
\par
  horns not more than 1·5 mm; lower pedicels up to 25 mm in fruit
\par
3 Siliqua with large, conspicuous blackish or yellowish glands,
\par
  easily visible even when immature ................................................. {\b 2. sinuata}
\par
3 Siliqua without conspicuous glands, but usually with minute
\par
  glandular hairs
\par
4 Stigma conical in fruit; petals 2·5-3 mm wide ............................. {\b 5. fragrans}
\par
4 Stigma 2-lobed in fruit; petals usually 3-12 mm wide
\par
5 Petals white, pink or purple; lower pedicels at least 7 mm
\par
  in fruit; stigma narrower than the siliqua ......................................... {\b 1. incana}
\par
5 Petals yellowish- or brownish-purple; lower pedicels
\par
  usually less than 7 mm
\par
6 Leaves ± sinuate to sinuate-pinnatisect; stigma at least
\par
  as wide as or wider than the siliqua;
\par
  lower pedicels 3-5(-8) mm in fruit ......................................... {\b 3. odoratissima}
\par
6 Leaves irregularly serrate or divided; stigma narrower than the siliqua;
\par
  lower pedicels 2-3(-4) mm in fruit .................................................. {\b 4. tatarica}
\par
2 Siliqua ± cylindrical, usually not more than 2 mm in diameter;
\par
  stigmatic horns usually more than 1·5 mm;
\par
  pedicels not more than 3(-8) mm
\par
7 Perennial, with vegetative leaf-rosettes and often a long,
\par
  woody stock .............................................................................. {\b 6. fruticulosa}
\par
7 Annual or rarely biennial, without vegetative leaf-rosettes,
\par
  but sometimes woody at the base
\par
8 Petals 6-10(-12) × 1-2 mm; sepals 4-6 mm ............................... {\b 9. parviflora}
\par
8 Petals (12-)15-25 × 2-7 mm; sepals at least 6 mm
\par
9 Petals linear, yellowish; horns of siliqua recurved or patent ... {\b 7. longipetala}
\par
9 Petals obovate or oblong, pink or purple; horns of siliqua curved upwards
\par
10 Nectaries filiform; siliqua not or only slightly torulose ..........{\b 7. longipetala}
\par
10 Nectaries small, inconspicuous; siliqua ± torulose ........................ {\b 8. lunata}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. M. incana} (L.) R. Br. in Aiton,{\i  Hort. Kew}. ed. 2,{\b  4}: 119 (1812). Stout perennial 10-80 cm, woody at the base. Leaves entire, rarely sinuate-pinnatifid. Lower pedicels 7-25 mm in fruit. Sepals 9-15 mm; petals 20-30 × 4-12 mm, purple, pink or white. Siliqua 45-160 × 3-5 mm, erecto-patent, compressed; stigma narrower than the siliqua, without conspicuous horns.{\i  Coasts of S. & W. Europe; often naturalized or casual elsewhere}. Al Az Br Co Ga *Gr *Hs It Ju Sa Si *Tu [Bl Co Ho Lu].
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp.{\b  incana} ({\i M. annua} (L.) Sweet, {\i M. fenestralis }(L.) R. Br.): Plant densely white-tomentose to subglabrous. Lower leaves 5-22 mm wide, linear-lanceolate, rarely oblong-lanceolate, obtuse or subacute. Sepals 9-13 mm. 2n = 14.{\i  Throughout the range of the species}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp.{\b  rupestris} (Rafin.) Nyman,{\i  Consp.} 30 (1878) ({\i M. rupestris} (Rafin.) DC., {\i M. undulata} Tineo; incl. {\i M. incana} subsp. {\i pulchella} (P. Conti) Greuter & Burdet): Plant glabrescent or sparsely pubescent. Lower leaves up to 25-40 mm wide, lanceolate, acute or acuminate. Sepals 11-15 mm. •{\i  S. Italy, Sicilia}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28     {\b 2. M. sinuata} (L.) R. Br. in Aiton,{\i  Hort. Kew}. ed. 2,{\b  4}: 120
\par

\par
340}
\par