{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 often sparsely ciliate; petals c.4 mm, white or lilac; siliqua 70-120 × 1·5-2 mm, compressed-tetragonous, patent or unilaterally deflexed; seeds in 1 or 2 rows in each loculus. {\i Greece and S. Jugoslavia.} Gr Ju. ({\i S.W. Asia.})
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 3. A. brassica} (Leers) Rauschert,{\i  Feddes Repert.}{\b  83}: 648 (1973) ({\i A. brassicaeformis} Wallr., {\i A. pauciflora} (Grimm) Garcke,{\i  Turritis brassica} Leers, {\i Fourraea alpina} (L.) Greuter & Burdet). Perennial 30-100 cm, glabrous and glaucous. Basal leaves ovate, entire, long-petiolate; cauline leaves sessile, panduriform; upper lanceolate, auriculate and amplexicaul. Petals 4-7 mm, white or pink. Siliqua 30-80 × 1·5-2 mm, somewhat compressed, erect; pedicels patent.{\i  S.W., S. & S.C. Europe, eastwards to Jugoslavia.} Au Be Co Cz Ga Ge He Hs It Ju.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    ({\b 4-10}).{\b  A. hirsuta} group. Plant stiffly erect with stem tapering upwards. Basal leaves attenuate-petiolate, entire to dentate; cauline leaves ovate to linear-lanceolate, subentire to serrate-dentate. Flowers (15-)25-60; petals 4-6.(-8) mm, white. Infructescence compact; siliquae 18-60(-70) × 0·6-1·9 mm, erect, not exceeding the open flowers; pedicels erect to patent; valves flat to somewhat torulose; style obconical or stigma sessile. Seeds winged at least at the apex.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Biennial; cauline leaves sagittate at the base
\par
2 Auricles spreading; base of stem with numerous unbranched hairs
\par
  and few bi- or trifid hairs ............................................................... {\b 5. sagittata}
\par
2 Auricles amplexicaul; base of stem with numerous bi- or trifid
\par
  hairs and few or no unbranched hairs
\par
3 Pedicels not more than 7 mm in fruit;
\par
  seeds winged at the apex .......................................................... {\b 4. planisiliqua}
\par
3 Pedicels up to 20 mm in fruit; seeds winged all round ................. {\b 6. borealis}
\par
1 Usually perennial; cauline leaves cordate or rounded at the base
\par
4 Siliqua at least 40 mm
\par
5 Stem appressed-hairy below; siliqua 40-55 mm ............................. {\b 8. sadina}
\par
5 Stem glabrous; siliqua 60-70 mm .................................................. {\b 10. juressi}
\par
4 Siliqua 15-40 mm
\par
6 Petals not more than 6 mm; pedicels 3-8 mm in fruit ..................... {\b 7. hirsuta}
\par
6 Petals at least 6 mm; pedicels 6-12 mm in fruit .............................. {\b 9. allionii}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 4. A. planisiliqua} (Pers.) Reichenb., {\i Icon. Fl. Germ.}{\b  2}: 13 (1847) ({\i A. gerardii} Besser ex Koch, {\i A. lusitanica }Boiss.). Biennial (30-)50-80 cm, branched above, frequently reddish; lower part of the stem with small, almost sessile bi- or trifid hairs whose long branches are appressed; upper part glabrous. Cauline leaves 20-55, sagittate with appressed auricles; at least the lower leaves with bi- or trifid hairs whose branches are shorter than their stalks. Petals 4-5 mm. Siliqua 30-50 × 0·6-0·9 mm, torulose; pedicels 3-7 mm, erect; valves with weak median vein or almost veinless; style c. 1 mm, cylindrical. Seeds winged at the apex. 2n = 16.{\i  Calcareous fens. Most of Europe except Scandinavia and the islands}. Au Co Cz Ga Ge He †Ho Hs Hu It Ju Po Rm Rs(N, B, C, W, K, E) Sa [Su].
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 5. A. sagittata} (Bertol.) DC. in Lam. & DC., {\i Fl. Fr.} ed. 3,{\b  5}: 592 (1815). Biennial 35-80 cm, branched above; lower part of the stem with mostly patent unbranched hairs, the upper part glabrous. Cauline leaves 15-30, cordate to sagittate with spreading auricles, pubescent with simple or bifid hairs. Petals 5-6·5 mm. Siliqua 25-50 × 0·8-1·1 mm, erect; pedicels 4-6 mm; valves with a distinct median vein; style c. 0·5 mm, obconical, or stigma sessile. Seeds narrowly winged, at least at the apex. 2n = 12, 16.{\i  Dry, calcareous slopes. C., S. & E. Europe.} Al Au ?Be Co Cz Ga Ge Gr He Ho Hu It Ju Rm Rs(N, B, C, K, E) Sa Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 The hybrid between this species and {\b 7} is sterile.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 6. A. borealis} Andrz. ex Ledeb., {\i Fl. Altaica}{\b  3}: 25 (1831). Like {\b 5} but the lower part of the stem with numerous bi- or trifid and a few unbranched hairs; leaves and upper part of stem pubescent with bi- to 5-fid hairs; auricles amplexicaul; siliqua 40-65 × 0·5-1·5 mm; pedicels 5-20 mm; style 0·5-0·8 mm; seeds distinctly winged all round.{\i  Dry, calcareous slopes. N. Russia}. Rs(N).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 7. A. hirsuta} (L.) Scop., {\i Fl. Carn.} ed. 2,{\b  2}: 30 (1772) ({\i A. ciliata }R. Br.). Short-lived perennial, rarely biennial, (4-)10-60(-110) cm, often with several flowering stems and branched above; lower part of stem with mostly patent, unbranched or bifid hairs, sometimes glabrous, the upper part usually with bi- to 5-fid hairs. Cauline leaves 10-22(-30), subcordate, rounded or truncate at the base. Petals 4-5·5 mm. Siliqua 15-40 × 1-1·9 mm; pedicels 3-8 mm, erect; valves with distinct median vein; style c. 0·5 mm, conical, or stigma sessile. Seeds 0·8-1·3(-1·5) mm, usually winged all round. 2n = 32. {\i Calcicole. Most of Europe.} All except Az Cr Fa Gr Is Sb.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 A very variable species with many local taxa described. Plants from the Carpathians and the N. part of the Balkan peninsula have been distinguished as{\b  A. hornungiana} Schur, {\i Enum. Pl. Transs.} 43 (1866). They have a shorter stem, narrower cauline leaves and a broader siliqua.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Glabrous plants from sand-dunes in W. Ireland have been distinguished as var.{\i  brownii} (Jordan) Titz ({\i A. brownii }Jordan), but similar plants occur in other parts of Europe, especially Scandinavia.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 8. A. sadina} (Samp.) Coutinho, Fl. Port. 253 (1913). Like {\b 7} but hairs of lower part of stem bi- to quadrifid, appressed; petals 5-8 mm; siliqua 40-55 mm, erecto-patent. •{\i  C. Portugal} ({\i Estremadura}).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 9. A. allionii} DC. in Lam. & DC.,{\i  Fl. Fr.} ed. 3,{\b  4}: 676 (1805) ({\i A. glabrata} Wahlenb.; incl. {\i A. sudetica }Tausch,{\i  A. constricta} Griseb.). Perennial 10-45 cm, usually unbranched; stem glabrous. Basal leaves glabrous or sparsely pubescent with simple and bifid hairs on the margin and veins beneath; cauline leaves c. 10, subcordate, glabrous except for the ciliate margin. Petals 6-7 mm. Siliqua 25-35 × 1·2-1·8 mm, erect; pedicels 6-12 mm; valves with distinct median vein. Seeds almost unwinged. 2n = 16.{\i  Wet alpine rocks. S.W. Alps, Carpathians and mountains of the Balkan peninsula.} Al Au Bu Cz Ga Ge Gr It Ju Po Rs(W).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 10. A. juressi} Rothm., Agron. Lusit. 2: 79 (1940). Like {\b 9} but siliqua 60-70 × 1·5 mm, rigid, torulose, obtuse; pedicels up to 15 mm. 2n = 32. N. Portugal (Serra de Geres). Lu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 11. A. ciliata} Clairv.,{\i  Man. Herb. Suisse} 222 (1811) ({\i A. arcuata} R.J. Shuttlew., {\i A. corymbiflora} Vest). Biennial or perennial 6-30 cm, stiffly erect, pubescent with mostly unbranched and bifid hairs, or glabrous. Basal leaves shortly attenuate-petiolate, obovate, denticulate, with unbranched or bi- to quadrifid hairs, or glabrous with branched hairs along the margin; cauline leaves 3-9, rounded at the base, ovate to elliptical, entire or denticulate. Flowers c. 30; petals 3·5-5 mm, white. Infructescence somewhat compact; siliqua 12-22(-30) × 1-1·3 mm, more or less erect, exceeding the flowers when mature, often arcuate; pedicels 4-7 mm, erecto-patent; valves
\par

\par
354}
\par