{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 sepals, leaflets deeply lobed with obtuse segments, petals 10-12 mm, siliqua 40-55 × 1·4-1·8 mm, and beak 8-15 mm, is perhaps a subspecies of {\b 22}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 23. C. carnosa} Waldst. & Kit.,{\i  Pl. Rar. Hung.}{\b  2}: 137 (1803). Perennial 20-30 cm, puberulent above. Leaves 4-6, thick, with appressed hairs, pinnate with 3-7 pairs of entire, obovate-cuneate leaflets. Sepals apiculate; petals 6-9 mm, white with indistinct yellow claw. Siliqua 20-30(-40) × 2-3 mm, strigose; style 1-3 mm. Seeds 2·5-3 mm, on a broad funicle.{\i  Mountain screes. • Balkan peninsula, mainly in the west.} Al Gr Ju.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 24. C. monteluccii} Br.-Catt. & Gubell.,{\i  Webbia}{\b  39}: 398 (1986). Erect annual or sometimes biennial 10-20(-30) cm, glabrous or subglabrous. Leaves 2- or 3-pinnatipartite, with 2-4 pairs of lateral leaflets; petioles not auriculate at the base. Petals 10-12 mm, obcordate, emarginate. Siliqua (25-)35-50 × c. 4 mm, somewhat secund; style 5-8 mm. Seeds on a broad funicle. 2n = 16.  •{\i C. & S. Italy; Sicilia} ({\i Madonie}). It Si.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 25. C. graeca} L.,{\i  Sp. Pl.} 655 (1753). Annual or biennial 10-30 cm, glabrous or hairy. Leaves pinnate; lower leaves with 4 or 5 pairs of cuneate-obovate leaflets, each with 3 or more obtuse lobes; upper cauline leaves with 2 or 3 pairs of 3-lobed or entire, lanceolate leaflets; petioles auriculate at the base. Sepals obtuse; petals (3-)4-6 mm, white. Siliqua 35-50 × (2·5-)3-4 mm, glabrous, papillose or setose, somewhat secund; style 4-8 mm, winged. Seeds on a broad funicle. 2n = 16, 18.{\i  S. Europe from Corse eastwards.} Al Bu Co Cr Gr It Ju Rm Rs(K) Si Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 26. C. chelidonia} L., {\i loc. cit.} (1753). Annual to perennial 20-50 cm, almost glabrous. Leaves pinnate with 1-3 pairs of lanceolate to ovate-lanceolate, incised or lobed leaflets 2·5-3 cm wide; petioles auriculate at the base. Petals 5-9 mm, pink or violet, caducous. Siliqua 30-40 × 1·5 mm, setose; style 2-3 mm. Seeds on a broad funicle. •{\i  Woods. C. part of Mediterranean region.} Co It Ju si.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 27. C. parviflora} L.,{\i  Syst. Nat}. ed. 10,{\b  2}: 1131 (1759). Annual 7-30(-40) cm, glabrous. Leaves pinnate, the lower with 3-5 pairs, the upper with 5-8 pairs of linear to linear-oblong, cuneate, entire leaflets. Petals 1·8-2·5 mm, obovate, white. Siliqua (8-)12-20 × 0·8 mm, erect on patent pedicels. Seeds 0·7-0·8 × 0·5 mm, narrowly winged. 2n = 16. {\i Usually in seasonaly flooded places. Widespread in Europe, but local; absent from the islands and the Balkan peninsula.} Au Bu Cz Fe Ga Ge Hs Hu It Lu Po Rm Rs(N, B, C, W, ?K, E) Su.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 28. C. impatiens} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 655 (1753). Biennial up to 80 cm, more or less glabrous. Rosette-leaves not persistent; lower cauline leaves petiolate, with 3-5 pairs of ovate, 2- to 5-lobed leaflets; upper leaves sessile with (3-)5-11 pairs of dentate, lateral leaflets and a somewhat larger terminal leaflet; leaves auriculate at the base, ciliate, otherwise glabrous. Petals narrow, white, usually scarcely exceeding the sepals, sometimes absent; anthers greenish. Siliqua 10-30 mm. Seeds 1·1-1·4 × 0·8-0·9 mm, unwinged. 2n = 16.{\i  Woods. Widespread in Europe, but absent from some areas, especially many of the islands.} Al Au Be Br Bu Co Cz Da Fe Ga Ge Gr Hb He Ho Hs Hu It Ju No Po Rm Rs(N, B, C, W, K, E) Su Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp.{\b  impatiens} : Stem 25-60 cm. Upper cauline leaves with 5-9 pairs of lanceolate lateral leaflets. Petals 2-3 mm. Siliqua 1-1·2 mm wide, erecto-patent. 2n = 16. {\i Throughout the range of the species except parts of the south-east}.
\par

\par
 ({\b b}) Subsp.{\b  pectinata} (Pallas ex DC.) Stoj. & Stefanov,{\i  Fl. Balg.} ed. 3, 509 (1948) ({\i C. pectinata }Pallas ex DC.): Stem 15-30 cm. Upper cauline leaves with 3 or 4 pairs of ovate-lanceolate lateral leaflets. Petals 3·5-4·5 mm. Siliqua 0·8-1·2 mm wide, almost horizontal.{\i  Bulgaria, N. and C. Greece}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 29. C. caldeirarum} Guthnick in Seub.,{\i  Fl. Azor.} 43 (1844). Biennial or perennial 15-50 cm, sparsely hairy. Lowest leaves in a rosette, pinnate with 5 or 6 pairs of obliquely ovate lateral leaflets, and an ovate, truncate, distinctly stalked terminal leaflet; cauline leaves 3-6, similar to the lowest leaves but with 2-4 pairs of leaflets; leaflets coarsely crenate-dentate with apiculate teeth. Pedicels 4-8 mm at anthesis. Petals 4-7 mm, white, greatly exceeding the sepals. Siliqua 20-40 × 1-1·2 mm, on patent pedicels; style 1-2 mm, cylindrical. Seeds 1·2 × 0·8 mm.{\i  Damp, shady places. • Açores.} Az.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 30. C. flexuosa} With. in Stokes,{\i  Arr. Br. Pl.} ed. 3,{\b  3}: 578 (1796) ({\i C. sylvatica} Link). Biennial to perennial, occasionally annual, 10-50 cm; stem flexuous, hairy, especially at the base. Lowest leaves pinnate, with 2-7(8) pairs of ovate to reniform lateral leaflets and a somewhat larger terminal leaflet; cauline leaves 4-10, larger than the basal, with 2-6(7) pairs of ovate-lanceolate leaflets; leaflets dentate to entire. Pedicels 2-3 mm at anthesis. Petals 2·5-4(-5) mm, about twice as long as the sepals; stamens 6 (sometimes fewer). Siliqua (8-)12-25 × 1-1·5 mm, erecto-patent, scarcely overtopping the flowers; style 1-1·5 mm, conical. Seeds 1-1·4 × 0·8-0·9 mm. 2n = 32, c. 50.{\i  Damp, usually shady places. Europe, from about} 25°{\i  E. westwards}. All except Az Bl Cr Gr Is Rs(N, C, K, E) Sb Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 31. C. hirsuta} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 655 (1753) ({\i C. umbrosa }DC., non Lej.,{\i  C. multicaulis} Hoppe). Annual 3-30 cm; stem usually glabrous. Lowest leaves in a distinct rosette, pinnate, with 1-6(7) pairs of obovate to orbicular lateral leaflets and a larger, reniform terminal leaflet; cauline leaves 0-4(5), smaller than the basal leaves, with 2-5 pairs of smaller leaflets; leaflets angular, hairy on the upper surface. Pedicels 1-2 mm at anthesis. Petals 2·5-4(-5) mm or absent, about twice as long as the sepals; stamens 4 or 5(6). Siliqua 10-25 × 0·8-1·4 mm, erect, overtopping the flowers; style 0·2-1 mm, conical. Seeds 0·7-1·2 × 0·7-0·8 mm. 2n = 16.{\i  Throughout Europe except the arctic and N. Russia}. All except Rs(N) Sb.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 41.           Cardaminopsis}   (C.A. Meyer) Hayek
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc  By B.M.G. Jones (Ed.1) revised by J.R. Akeroyd (Ed.2)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Annuals to perennials; glabrous or with branched and unbranched hairs. Leaves simple to pinnatisect. Inner sepals slightly saccate; petals white, pinkish or purplish. Fruit a strongly compressed siliqua; valves more or less torulose, with a distinct median vein; style short; stigma capitate. Seeds in 1 row in each loculus.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Several of the species in this genus are known to be interfertile.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Basal leaves orbicular, or pinnate with an orbicular terminal
\par
  leaflet ................................................................................................ {\b 5. halleri}
\par
1 Basal leaves lanceolate to obovate, subentire to pinnatisect
\par
2 Cauline and basal leaves similar in shape and size (or the
\par
  cauline somewhat larger) ............................................................... {\b 4. croatica}
\par
2 Cauline and basal leaves dissimilar in shape and size
\par
3 Basal leaves shallowly pinnatifid to serrate, or almost entire;
\par
  cauline leaves entire ........................................................................ {\b 2. petraea}
\par
3 Basal leaves pinnatisect; cauline leaves pinnatifid or
\par
  distinctly serrate-dentate
\par

\par
351}
\par