{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 7 Plant usually glabrous; basal leaves as wide as long,
\par
  obtuse; petals 6-7 mm, white ............................................... {\b 34. pedemontana}
\par
6 At least the upper cauline leaves sessile or shortly
\par
  attenuate-petiolate
\par
8 Infructescence conspicuously unilateral; siliqua pendent
\par
  or deflexed .................................................................................... {\b 16. pendula}
\par
8 Infructescence not conspicuously unilateral; siliqua
\par
  erect to patent
\par
9 Annual, the lower leaves withered by anthesis or
\par
  shortly after flowering
\par
10 Cauline leaves attenuate at the base; siliqua always puberulent {\b 19. parvula}
\par
10 Cauline leaves cordate or auriculate-amplexicaul at
\par
   the base; siliqua often glabrous
\par
11 Petals pale violet; siliqua 1·5-2 mm wide; pedicels short, thick ... {\b 20. verna}
\par
11 Petals white; siliqua 1·5 mm wide or less; pedicels slender
\par
12 Petals 2-4 mm; siliqua less than 1 mm wide;
\par
   pedicels up to 5 mm ......................................................................... {\b 17. recta}
\par
12 Petals 4-6 mm; siliqua more than 1 mm wide;
\par
   pedicels more than 5 mm ................................................................. {\b 18. nova}
\par
9  Biennial, the lower leaves present at anthesis but withering during the
\par
   ripening of the fruit; or perennial with vegetative leaf-rosettes
\par
13 Leaves entire, with medifixed hairs
\par
14 Hairs covering both sides of the leaves;
\par
   cauline leaves lanceolate ............................................ {\b 23. ferdinandi-coburgi}
\par
14 Hairs restricted to the margin and veins of the lower surface;
\par
   cauline leaves ovate to oblong
\par
15 Basal leaves acuminate; cauline leaves ovate, subcordate at
\par
   the base ................................................................................... {\b 21. procurrens}
\par
15 Basal leaves obtuse; cauline leaves oblong, attenuate-
\par
   petiolate ................................................................................. {\b 22. vochinensis}
\par
13 Leaves dentate to entire, pubescent to glabrous, but never with
\par
   medifixed hairs
\par
16 Leaves apiculate; plant glabrous, except for unbranched, setiform hairs
\par
   on the leaf-margins; siliqua 3-4 times as long as wide.......... . {\b 24. scopoliana}
\par
16 Leaves acute to obtuse; plant pubescent, or if glabrous, the leaf-margin
\par
   with some branched hairs; siliqua many times as long as wide
\par
17 Cauline leaves cordate, auriculate or sagittate
\par
18 Flowers yellowish; siliquae patent on erect pedicels ............... {\b 28. subflava}
\par
18 Flowers white or pink; siliquae not patent on erect pedicels
\par
19 Pedicels erect in fruit; siliquae usually closely appressed
\par
   to the axis of the infructescence .................................. ({\b 4-10}).{\b  hirsuta} group
\par
19 Pedicels patent in fruit; siliquae not appressed
\par
20 Plant entirely glabrous and glaucous .......................................... {\b 3. brassica}
\par
20 Plant pubescent
\par
21 Biennial without vegetative leaf-rosettes; petals 4-6 mm .............. {\b 18. nova}
\par
21 Perennial with vegetative leaf-rosettes; petals 6-18 mm ............. {\b 32. alpina}
\par
17 Cauline leaves rounded at the base to attenuate-petiolate
\par
22 Cauline leaves 1-4; flowers 3-10(-12)
\par
23 Stem pilose; petals pink .............................................................. {\b 13. cretica}
\par
23 Stem glabrous or pubescent, not pilose; petals white, pale blue or
\par
   yellowish, rarely pink
\par
24 Leaves sinuate-dentate, coriaceous; hairs mostly unbranched .... {\b 27. scabra}
\par
24 Leaves dentate towards the apex or entire, soft or brittle;
\par
   hairs mostly branched
\par
25 Basal leaves with 1 or 2 obscure apical teeth, or ± entire;
\par
   petals white or pink; siliqua up to 2·2 mm wide, green .............. {\b 29. caerulea}
\par
25 Basal leaves with 1 or 2 obscure apical teeth, or ± entire;
\par
   petals white or pink; siliqua up to 2·2 mm wide, green
\par
26 Lowermost cauline leaf rounded at the base; infructescence compact;
\par
   siliqua at least 1·5 mm wide ......................................................... {\b 30. pumila}
\par
26 Lowermost cauline leaf attenuate at the base; infructescence lax;
\par
   siliqua up to 1·2 mm wide ..................................................... {\b 12. serpillifolia}
\par
22 Cauline leaves 4 or more; flowers usually more than 10
\par
27 Plant glabrous, dark green and shining, rarely leaves somewhat
\par
   hairy on the surface or margin; siliqua 25-50 × 1·8-2·2 mm;
\par
   seeds broadly winged all round ...................................................... {\b 31. soyeri}
\par
27 Plant pubescent or, if glabrous, dull green; siliqua more than
\par
   50 mm long or less than 1·8 mm wide; seed unwinged or narrowly
\par
   winged on edges or at apex
\par
28 Pedicels erecto-patent to patent in fruit; seeds unwinged
\par
29 Hairs all or mostly unbranched or bifid
\par
30 Siliqua not more than 30 mm; flowers c. 30 ................................ {\b 11. ciliata}
\par
30 Siliqua usually more than 30 mm; flowers 3-12 ......................... {\b 13. cretica}
\par
29 Hairs mostly stellate ............................................................ {\b 12. serpillifolia}
\par
28 Pedicels erect in fruit; seed winged at least at the apex
\par
31 Apex of leaves acute or obtuse; flowers usually more than 20;
\par
   petals 4-7(-8) mm ....................................................... ({\b 4-10}).{\b  hirsuta} group
\par
31 Apex of leaves rounded; flowers not more than 20;
\par
   petals 6-10 mm ............................................................................. {\b 14. collina}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. A. glabra} (L.) Bernh.. {\i Syst. Verz. Erfurt}{\b  1}: 195 (1800) ({\i A. perfoliata} Lam., {\i Turritis glabra} L.; incl. {\i A. pseudotunitis} Boiss. & Heldr.). Biennial to perennial 60-120 cm, unbranched and stiffly erect, pubescent below. Basal leaves oblong to lanceolate, sinuate-dentate to lyrate, with stellate hairs; cauline leaves ovate-lanceolate, sagittate, glabrous (or the lower sparsely pubescent) and glaucous. Petals 4-8 mm, cream or whitish. Infructescence strict; siliqua 40-80 × 1-1·5(-1·7) mm, somewhat compressed, with prominent median veins; pedicels 6-25 mm, erect. Seeds usually in 2 rows in each loculus. 2n = 12, 16, 32.{\i  Most of Europe except the extreme north and south.} Al Au Br Bu ?Co Cz Da Fe Ga Ge Gr He Ho Hs Hu It Ju Lu No Po Rm Rs(N, B, C, W, K, E) Si Su Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. A. laxa} Sm. in Sibth. & Sm.,{\i  Fl. Graec. Prodr.}{\b  2}: 28 (1813) ({\i A. doefleri }Halácsy, {\i Turritis laxa} (Sm.) Hayek). Like {\b 1} but 50-80 cm, often branched above; cauline leaves oblong, cordate,
\par

\par
353}
\par