{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 rosettes, the cauline attenuate at the base, oblong; petals 5-7 mm; siliqua 8-15 × 1·3-2 mm; pedicels not more than 10 mm. •{\i  S.E. Alps. }Au It Ju.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 23. A. ferdinandi-coburgi} J. Kellerer & Sünd. in Sünd., {\i Allgem. Bot. Zeitschr.}{\b  1903}: 62 (1904). Like {\b 21} but the basal leaves long-petiolate, narrowly oblong to lanceolate; cauline leaves lanceolate; leaves pubescent on both surfaces; siliqua 15-20 × 0·8 mm. 2n = 18.{\i  Calcareous rocks. • S.W. Bulgaria} ({\i Pirin}). Bu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 24. A. scopoliana} Boiss.,{\i  Ann. Sci. Nat}. ser. 2, {\b 17}: 56 (1842). Perennial 3-10 cm, without stolons, glabrous except for the leaf-margins. Basal leaves up to 15 mm, attenuate-petiolate, obovate, acuminate, entire, setose-ciliate; cauline leaves attenuate at the base, oblong. Petals 7-11 mm, white. Infructescence compact; siliqua 6-10 × 2-2·5 mm, subterete, erect; valves keeled.{\i  Calcareous rocks. • S.E. Alps and mountains of W. part of Balkan peninsula.} Al ?It Ju.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 25. A. bryoides} Boiss., {\i loc. cit.} 55 (1842). Perennial 2-6 cm, tomentose. Basal leaves attenuate at the base, ovate, acuminate, the lamina usually densely pubescent, the hairs unbranched, ciliate at the apex; cauline leaves absent. Flowers 3-6; petals 6-7 mm, white. Infructescence lax; siliqua 10-20 × 1·5 mm; style up to 1 mm. 2n = 16. {\i Mountain rocks. • S. part of Balkan peninsula.} Al Gr Ju.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 26. A. longistyla} Rech. fil.,{\i  Feddes Repert.}{\b  43}: 150 (1938). Scapose perennial 6-15 cm; almost glabrous; stems several from the rosette, glabrous except at the base. Leaves attenuate-petiolate, obovate-lanceolate, fleshy, denticulate, glabrous. Petals 3 4 mm, cuneate, white. Siliqua 12-18 × c. 1·5 mm; pedicels 3-6 mm, patent; style 1·5-2 mm. •{\i  Karpathos.} Cr.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 27. A. scabra} All.,{\i  Auct. Syn. Stirp. Horti Taur.} 22 (1773) ({\i A. stricta} Hudson). Perennial 5-25 cm, scabrid, with simple and a few branched hairs. Flowering stems often several from the rosette, unbranched. Basal leaves dark green, glossy, attenuate-petiolate, obovate, sinuate-dentate with 2-8 teeth; cauline leaves 1-4(5), rounded to cuneate at the base. Flowers 3-9(-12); petals 5-8 mm, yellowish or white. Siliqua 35-50 × 1·5-1·8 mm, erect; pedicels patent. 2n = 16. •{\i  Mountains of N. Spain, Pyrenees, S.W. Alps, Jura; one station in S.W. England.} Br Ga He Hs.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 28. A. subflava} B.M.G. Jones, {\i Feddes Repert.}{\b  69}: 60 (1964) ({\i A. ochroleuca} Boiss. & Heldr., non (Lam.) Lam.). Like {\b 27} but 10-30 cm; pubescent on the upper surface of leaves and on veins beneath, the hairs branched; basal leaves runcinate-pinnatifid; cauline leaves 2-5, sagittate; siliqua 20-30 × c. 1 mm, patent; pedicels erect. •{\i  Mountains of S. Greece.} Gr.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 29. A. caerulea} (All.) Haenke in Jacq., {\i Collect. Bot.}{\b  2}: 56 (1789). Perennial 5-15 cm, pubescent or glabrous. Basal leaves attenuate-petiolate, obovate, with 2-5 distinct, obtuse, apical teeth; cauline leaves 1-3, cuneate at the base. Flowers 4-10; petals 4-5 mm, pale blue. Infructescence compact; siliqua 10-30 × 24-32 mm, strict, at first exceeding the flowers, bluish when immature. 2n = 16.{\i  Alpine rocks and moraines. • Alps.} Au Ga Ge He It Ju.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 30. A. pumila} Jacq.,{\i  Fl. Austr.}{\b  3}: 44 (1775). Perennial 5-18 cm, usually pubescent below. Leaves with branched hairs, at least on the margin; basal leaves attenuate-petiolate, obovate, with 1 or 2 faint teeth, or entire; cauline leaves 1-4, rounded at the base, oblong-ovate. Flowers 3-10; petals 6-7 mm, white. Siliqua 20-40 × 2 mm, at first exceeding the flowers; pedicels 4-9 mm, erect. •{\i  Alps, Appennini.} Au Ga Ge He It Ju.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 31. A. soyeri} Reuter & Huet,{\i  Ann. Sci. Nat.} ser. 3, {\b 19}: 251 (1853) ({\i A. bellidifolia} Jacq., non Crantz,{\i  A. jacquinii} G. Beck). Perennial 15-50 cm, almost glabrous; leaves occasionally pubescent. Basal leaves dark green and glossy, attenuate-petiolate, obovate, denticulate; cauline leaves 4-10, rounded at the base, ovate to oblong-lanceolate, entire. Flowers 10-20; petals 5·5-7 mm, white. Infructescence compact; siliqua 25-50 × 1·8-2·2 mm; pedicels 8-15 mm; valves with a distinct median vein. •{\i  Pyrenees, Alps, W. Carpathians.} Au Cz Ga Ge He Hs It Ju Po Rm.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp.{\b  soyeri} : Stem sparsely hairy. Leaves thin, ciliate on the margin with simple hairs; cauline leaves more or less amplexicaul.{\i  Pyrenees}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp.{\b  subcoriacea }(Gren.) Breistr.,{\i  Bull. Soc. Sci. Dauph.}{\b  61}: 615 (1947) (subsp. {\i jacquinii} (G. Beck) B.M.G. Jones): Stem glabrous; leaves fleshy, glabrous. Cauline leaves not amplexicaul. 2n = 16.{\i  Alps, W. Carpathians}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 32. A. alpina} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 664 (1753) ({\i A. merinoi} Pau, {\i A. pieninica} Woloszczak). Perennial 5-40 cm; branched below, with vegetative rosettes and unbranched flowering stems. Basal leaves attenuate-petiolate, oblong or obovate, dentate; cauline leaves ovate to lanceolate. Outer sepals conspicuously saccate at the base; petals 6-18 mm, white (rarely pink). Infructescence lax; siliqua 20-70 × 1·5-2·5 mm, patent.{\i  Much of Europe.} Al Au Br Bu Co Cr Cz Fe Ga Ge Gr He Hs Hu Is It Ju No Po Rm Rs(N, W, K) Sb Si Su [Be].
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp.{\b  alpina} : Plant erect or ascending, with few rosettes, green, usually sparsely and coarsely stellate-hairy. Cauline leaves cordate to auriculate at the base. Sepals 3-5 mm; petals 6-10 × 2-3·5 mm. Siliqua 20-40 mm; valves with an indistinct median vein. Seeds conspicuously winged. 2n = 16, 32.{\i  Moist, montane rocks and gravels; tundra. Almost throughout the range of the species}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp.{\b  caucasica} (Willd.) Briq.,{\i  Prodr. Fl. Corse}{\b  2}({\b 1}): 48 (1913) ({\i A. caucasica }Willd.,{\i  A. albida} Steven,{\i  A. flavescens }Griseb.): Plant procumbent, with many rosettes, greyish-green, usually softly and densely pubescent. Cauline leaves auriculate to sagittate. Sepals 5-8 mm; petals 9-18 × 5-8 mm. Siliqua 40-70 mm; valves with a distinct median vein. Seeds usually wingless. 2n = 16. {\i Dry rocks. S. Europe; widely cultilvated for ornament, and naturalized elsewhere}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 33. A. cebennensis} DC., {\i Reg. Veg. Syst. Nat.}{\b  1}: 234 (1817). Perennial 40-80 cm, sparsely stellate-pubescent, branched above. Basal leaves petiolate-ovate, longer than wide, coarsely dentate, with an acute apex and cuneate or truncate base; uppermost cauline leaves attenuate-petiolate. Petals 7-10 mm, pale or deep violet or white, somewhat patent. Siliqua 30-45 × 1-1·5 mm; pedicels patent.  •{\i Mountains of S. France.} Ga.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 34. A. pedemontana} Boiss., {\i Diagn. Pl. Or. Nov.}{\b  1}({\b 1}): 69 (1843). Like {\b 33} but 15-30 cm, smaller in all its parts, glabrous or almost so; basal leaves lyrate-pinnatifid to hederiform or orbicular, as wide as long, with an obtuse apex; petals 6-7 mm, white. •{\i  N.W. Italy} ({\i Alpi Cozie}). It.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Species{\b  33} and {\b 34 }may be better placed in {\i Cardaminopsis}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 43.              Aubrieta}              Adanson
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc  By J.R. Akeroyd & P.W. Ball.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Perennial herbs; hairs stellate or both stellate and simple or forked, rarely glabrous. Leaves simple. Inner sepals saccate; petals pink,
\par

\par
356}
\par