{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 purple or violet, long-clawed. Filaments of the outer stamens with a dentate appendage. Fruit a siliqua, rarely a silicula; valves with a median vein; style distinct; stigma capitate. Seeds in 2 rows in each loculus.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 All the species are montane or alpine, occurring on rocks and screes and in open coniferous woods.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Species limits within the genus are critical, and the characters used to define the species require experimental investigation. Some species are known to hybridize readily in cultivation, but the majority are allopatric, so that hybrids do not often occur in the wild.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Several species and hybrids are cultivated widely for ornament.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Literature: J. Mattfeld, {\i Blatt. Staudenk. }{\b 1}: fols. 1-7 (1937); {\i Quart. Bull. Alp. Gard. Soc.}{\b  7}:157-181, 217-227 (1939). D. Phitos,{\i  Candollea}{\b  25}: 69-87 (1970).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Siliqua with both stellate and distinctly longer simple and
\par
  forked hairs .................................................................................. {\b 1. deltoidea}
\par
1 Siliqua with stellate hairs only, sometimes with a few forked
\par
  and simple hairs that are not distinctly longer
\par
2 Siliqua not more than 12 mm
\par
3 Sepals 4-5·5 mm; petals white or pinkish ................................ {\b 4. erubescens}
\par
3 Sepals 6-8 mm; petals purple or violet
\par
4 Stem and leaves hairy, green or greyish-green; siliqua
\par
  usually reticulately veined ........................................................... {\b 2. columnae}
\par
4 Stem and leaves densely hairy, whitish-grey; siliqua not
\par
  reticulately veined ............................................................................. {\b 3. scyria}
\par
2 Siliqua more than 12 mm
\par
5 Siliqua 2½-4 times as long as wide, not more than 16 mm long
\par
  ...................................................................................................... {\b 2. columnae}
\par
5 Siliqua 5-15 times as long as wide, up to 35(-45) mm long
\par
6 Siliqua-valves usually reticulately veined; sepals 5-7·5 mm ......... {\b 5. gracilis}
\par
6 Siliqua-valves not or scarcely reticulately veined;
\par
  sepals 7-14 mm .............................................................................. {\b 6. thessala}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. A. deltoidea} (L.) DC., {\i Reg. Veg. Syst. Nat.}{\b  2}: 294 (1821) (incl. {\i A. intermedia} Heldr. & Orph. ex Boiss.). Caespitose to straggling. Leaves linear-spathulate to obovate-cuneate or rhombic, entire or with 1-3 pairs of teeth. Sepals 6-10 mm; petals 12-28 mm, reddish-purple to violet, rarely white. Siliqua 6-16(-22) × 2·5-4·5 mm, 2-5(-7) times as long as wide, not or only slightly reticulately veined, with long unbranched and forked as well as stellate hairs; style 4-8 mm. 2n = 16. {\i  S. part of Balkan peninsula and Aegean region; Sicilia} ({\i Madonie});{\i  widely cultivated for ornament and naturalized in S. & W. Europe.} Bu Cr Gr Ju Si [Br Ga Hs]
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 A variable species with a number of varieties, some of which may merit subspecific rank. A full account of these is given in Phitos, {\i Candollea}{\b  25}: 69-87 (1970).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. A. columnae} Guss.,{\i  Pl. Rar.} 266 (1826). More or less caespitose to straggling. Leaves variable. Sepals 5·5-8 mm; petals 11-18 mm, purple or violet. Siliqua 5-16 × 2-4·5 mm, 2½-4 times as long as wide, with stellate hairs only, the valves usually reticulately veined; style 3-10 mm. •{\i  S. Europe, from C. Italy to Bulgaria and Romania}. Al Bu It Ju Rm.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Leaves oblong-spathulate, ± entire; style 7-10 mm in fruit
\par
  ......................................................................................... ({\b a}) subsp. {\b columnae}
\par
1 Leaves obovate-cuneate or rhombic, usually with 1(2) pairs
\par
  of teeth; style 3-7 mm in fruit
\par
2 Plant straggling; leaves with 1(2) pairs of wide teeth near
\par
  the apex, sometimes entire .................................................. ({\b b}) subsp.{\b  italica}
\par
2 Plant ± caespitose; leaves with a pair of small teeth near
\par
  the apex ............................................................................. ({\b c}) subsp.{\b  croatica}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp.{\b  columnae} : More or less caespitose, with slender stems. Leaves oblong-spathulate, usually entire. Petals 11-17 mm. Siliqua 5-12 × 2-4·5 mm; style 7-10 mm. •{\i  C. & S. Appennini}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b italica} (Boiss.) Mattf.,{\i  Blatt. Staudenk.}{\b  1}: fols. 1-7 (1937): Straggling, with stout, long stems. Leaves broadly obovate-cuneate, with 1(2) pairs of wide teeth near the apex or entire. Petals 15-18 mm. Siliqua 8-11 × 3-4 mm; style 4-6 mm. {\i S. Italy} ({\i Monte Gargano}).
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b c}) Subsp.{\b  croatica }(Schott, Nyman & Kotschy) Mattf.,{\i  loc. cit.} (1937) ({\i A. croatica} Schott, Nyman & Kotschy): More or less caespitose. Leaves broadly obovate-cuneate or rhombic, with a pair of short teeth just below the apex, the central tooth wider than long. Petals 12-18 mm. Siliqua 7-16 × 2·5-4·5 mm; style 3-7 mm. • {\i Albania, W. Jugoslavia; S.W. Romania}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Plants from S. Bulgaria (Pirin Planina) have been described as subsp.{\b  pirinica} Assenov in Jordanov,{\i  Fl. Rep. Pop. Bulg.}{\b  4}: 707 (1970). They differ from{\b  2} by the leaves with 1-3 pairs of teeth and petals 14-20 mm, and would thus seem to be closer to 1; they have a chromosome number of 2n = 16. Their status is uncertain.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 3. A. scyria} Halácsy, {\i Österr. Bot. Zeitschr.}{\b  60}: 115 (1910). Caespitose, the whole plant whitish-grey, with dense, more or less appressed hairs. Leaves obovate-cuneate, entire or denticulate at the apex. Sepals 6-8 mm; petals 11-14 mm, purple. Siliqua 6-10(-12) × 2·5-3·5 mm, with stellate hairs, not reticulately veined; style 2·5-3·5 mm. •{\i  W. Aegean region} ({\i Skiros}). Gr.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 4. A. erubescens} Griseb.,{\i  Spicil. Fl. Rumel. }{\b 1}: 268 (1843). Laxly caespitose. Leaves oblong-spathulate, entire or with a pair of small teeth. Sepals 4-5·5 mm; petals 8-11 mm, white or pinkish. Siliqua 7-12 × 2-3·5 mm, 2-4 times as long as wide, with stellate hairs, strongly compressed; style 4-7 mm. 2n = 16.{\i  Calcareous rocks. • N. Greece} ({\i Athos}). Gr.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 5. A. gracilis} Spruner ex Boiss.,{\i  Diagn. Pl. Or. Nov. }{\b 1}({\b 1}): 74 (1843). More or less caespitose. Leaves linear-lanceolate to oblong-obovate, entire or with a few teeth. Sepals 5-7·5 mm; petals 12-18 mm. Siliqua 13-35(-45) mm, (3½-)6-16 times as long as wide, the valves usually reticulately veined; style 4-7 mm. •{\i  S. half of Balkan peninsula.} Al ?Bu Gr.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Plant glabrous or subglabrous; petals violet .............. ({\b c}) subsp.{\b  glabrescens}
\par
1 Plant hairy; petals purple
\par
2 Leaves linear to lanceolate, 3-7½ times as long as wide .. ({\b a}) subsp.{\b  gracilis}
\par
2 Leaves broadly lanceolate to oblong-obovate, 2-3( 4)
\par
  times as long as wide ....................................................... ({\b b}) subsp.{\b  scardica}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp.{\b  gracilis}: Leaves linear to lanceolate, 3-7½ times as long as wide, hairy; hairs stellate and forked, with simple hairs or the margins. Petals purple. 2n = 16.{\i  C. Greece}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp.{\b  scardica} (Wettst.) Phitos, {\i Candollea}{\b  25}: 84 (1970) ({\i A. scardica} (Wettst.) L.-A. Gustavsson): Leaves broadly lanceolate to oblong-obovate, 2-3(-4) times as long as wide, hairy; hair stellate or both stellate and forked, sometimes with simple hairs on
\par

\par
357}
\par