{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 somewhat rounded on the back, with a distinct median vein; style conical. Seeds unwinged. 2n = 16.{\i  Alpine rocks, slopes and gravels.• Pyrenees, Appennini and mountains of C. Europe.} Al Au Cz Ga Ge He Hs It Ju Po ?Rm [Da].
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 12. A. serpillifolia} Vill.,{\i  Prosp. Pl. Dauph.} 39 (1779) (incl. {\i A. nivalis} Guss.). Biennial or perennial 5-25 cm, laxly caespitose; stem slender, usually flexuous, glabrous or minutely stellate-pubescent. Basal leaves long-petiolate, oblong, stellate-pubescent or glabrous, with unbranched and bifid hairs on the margin; cauline leaves 3-5, oblong-ovate, entire, the lower attenuate, the upper rounded at the base. Flowers 7-16; petals 4-6 mm, white or rarely pink. Infructescence more or less lax; siliqua 15-30 × 1-1·2 mm, equalling the flowers when immature; valves flat, with indistinct vein. Seeds unwinged. •{\i  Mountains of S. Europe, extending northwards through the Alps to the French Jura}. Al Ga He Hs It Ju.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp.{\b  serpillifolia} : Stem pubescent at the base. Leaves pubescent. Petals 5-6 mm, white. Siliqua 20-30 mm; pedicels 3-4·5 mm. {\i Pyrenees, Jura, Alps.}
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp.{\b  nivalis} (Guss.) B.M.G. Jones, {\i Feddes Repert.}{\b  69}: 60 (1964) ({\i A. nivalis }Guss.,{\i  A. surculosa }N. Terracc.). Leaves more or less glabrous with a ciliate margin. Petals 4-5 mm, white or pink. Siliqua 15-25 mm; pedicels 2-3 mm.{\i  C. & S. Appennini and W. part of Balkan peninsula.}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 13. A. cretica} Boiss. & Heldr. in Boiss.,{\i  Diagn. Pl. Or. Nov.}{\b  1}({\b 8}): 20 (1849) ({\i A. serpillifolia }subsp. {\i cretica} (Boiss. & Heldr.) B.M.G. Jones). Like {\b 12}({\b a}) but stem pilose; leaves with mostly unbranched hairs; flowers 3-12; petals 5-7 mm, pink; siliqua 35-40 × c. 1·2 mm. 2n = 16.  •{\i Kriti.} Cr.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 14. A. collina} Ten.,{\i  Prodr. Fl. Nap.} xxxix (1811) ({\i A. muralis} Bertol., {\i A. rosea} DC.). Perennial 10-30 cm, pale green, often branched; stem pubescent below, glabrous above or with tri- to 6-fid, stalked hairs. Basal leaves attenuate-petiolate, obovate, obtusely and deeply dentate, rounded at the apex, with branched hairs (sometimes setose on the margin); cauline leaves 6-14, rounded at the base, oblong to ovate, the uppermost lanceolate, scarcely broader than the stem. Flowers 8-18; petals 6-10 × 2-4 mm, erect, cuneate to spathulate, white to pink or purplish. Infructescence strict; siliqua 30-90 × 1·2-2·2 mm; pedicels 4-12 mm, valves with an indistinct median vein; style 0·5-2 mm. 2n = 16.{\i  • S. & S.C. Europe.} Al Bl Bu Co Ga Gr He Hs It Ju Sa Si [Be].
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Very variable and divided by some authors into three distinct species. Intermediates, however, are common. Further study may permit the recognition of subspecies.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 15. A. turrita} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 665 (1753). Biennial or perennial 20-80 cm, pubescent. Basal leaves long-petiolate, obovate, regularly sinuate or denticulate; cauline leaves sessile, with a cordate, amplexicaul base, panduriform below to oblong above, the apex obtuse. Petals 6-9 mm, pale yellow. Infructescence elongate, unilateral; siliqua 80-140 × 2-2·7 mm, with thickened margins, at first erect, arcuate when ripe; pedicels erect. 2n = 16.{\i  C. & S. Europe.} Al Au Be Bu Co Cz Ga Ge Gr He Hs Hu It Ju Rm Rs(C, W, K) Si [Br]
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 16. A. pendula} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 665 (1753). Hispid biennial 50-90 cm. Lower leaves long-petiolate, rhombic, the upper sessile, auriculate and amplexicaul, oblong-lanceolate. Petals 3-4 mm, white. Siliqua 50-80 × 2-3 mm, unilaterally deflexed; pedicels 15-25 mm, slender, deflexed; valves with a prominent median vein. Seeds in 1 or 2 rows in each loculus.{\i  S.E. Russia.} Rs(C, W, E).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b A. mollis }Steven, {\i Mém. Soc. Nat. Moscou }{\b 3}: 270 (1812) ({\i A. christiani }N. Busch), from the Caucasus, like {\b 16} but perennial, with larger flowers, and siliqua erect to patent and not more than 55 mm, has been reported in error from Bulgaria.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 17. A. recta} Vill.,{\i  Hist. Pl. Dauph. }{\b 3}: 319 (1788) ({\i A. auriculata }sensu DC., non Lam.). Annual 10-30 cm; stem simple or branched above; pubescent, the hairs 2- to 5-fid. Basal leaves petiolate, ovate or obovate, entire; cauline leaves 5-14, 6-20 mm, sessile, auriculate, ovate to oblong, rounded at the apex. Flowers 7-40; pedicels up to 5 mm at anthesis; petals 2-3·5 mm, white. Infructescence lax, flexuous; siliqua 10-35 × 0·6-1 mm, glabrous to puberulent, patent; pedicels 2-5 mm; style up to 0·5 mm. Seeds up to 1 mm, unwinged, brown. {\i Europe, except the north and many of the islands.} Al Au Bu Cr Cz Ga Ge Gr He Hs Hu It Ju Po Rm Rs(B, C, W, K, E) Sa Si [Be].
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 18. A. nova} Vill.,{\i  Prosp. Pl. Dauph.} 39 (1779) ({\i A. saxatilis} All.,{\i  A. auriculata} Lam.). Like {\b 17} but often biennial, 20-50 cm, unbranched; cauline leaves 10-40 mm, ovate to lanceolate, acute; pedicels more than 3 mm at anthesis; petals 4-6 mm; infructescence straight; siliqua 25-70 × 1·5 mm; pedicels slender, 5-16 mm; style 0·5-1 mm; seeds 1·2-1·5 mm, narrowly winged. •{\i  Pyrenees, Alps, Jura and Balkan peninsula.} Au Bu Ga He Hs It Ju.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b A. reverchonii} Freyn in Willk.,{\i  Suppl. Prodr. Fl. Hisp.} 302 (1893), from E.C. Spain, is like {\b 18} but up to 70 cm, branched above, the leaves dentate, and seeds c. 0·5 mm, unwinged. Its status is doubtful.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 19. A. parvula} Dufour in DC.,{\i  Reg. Veg. Syst. Nat.}{\b  2}: 228 (1821). Like {\b 17} but 10-20 cm; cauline leaves 10-25 mm, attenuate at the base, ovate; flowers subsessile at anthesis; infructescence rigid, slightly flexuous, more elongate; siliqua 20-30 × 1·5-2 mm, erect, stellate-puberulent; pedicels 2-4 mm, as thick as the siliqua; seeds dark brown.{\i  C. & S. Spain.} Hs. ({\i N.W. Africa.})
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 20. A. verna} (L.) R. Br. in Aiton,{\i  Hort. Kew.} ed. 2, {\b 4}: 105 (1812). Annual 5-40 cm, frequently with several flowering stems from the rosette. Basal leaves petiolate, ovate or obovate; cauline leaves few (often only 1 or 2), 6-20 mm, cordate at the base, ovate, serrate. Flowers up to 10; pedicels less than 2 mm at anthesis; petals 5-8 mm, pale violet with a yellowish claw, or white. Infructescence lax, flexuous; siliqua (25-)45-60 × (1-)1·5-2 mm erecto-patent, glabrous to puberulent; pedicels thick; stigma sessile. Seeds up to 1 mm, narrowly winged, brown. {\i Mediterranean region.} Al Bl Co Cr Ga Gr Hs It Ju Sa Si Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 21. A. procurrens} Waldst. & Kit.,{\i  Pl. Rar. Hung.}{\b  2: }154 (1803). Perennial 8-30 cm, with long stolons; stems glabrous or with sparse, medifixed hairs. Basal leaves 20-30 mm, obovate to oblanceolate, acuminate, entire, glabrous except for the margin and the veins of the lower surface which have medifixed hairs; cauline leaves rounded at the base, ovate. Petals 8-10 mm, white. Infructescence lax; siliqua 12-35 × 1-1·5 mm, patent; pedicels more than 10 mm.{\i  Carpathians and mountains of the Balkan peninsula.} Bu Cz Ju Rm.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 22. A. vochinensis} Sprengel, {\i Pugillus }{\b 1}: 46 (1813). Like {\b 21} but without long stolons; stem pubescent, with appressed, medifixed hairs; basal leaves not more than 15 mm, obtuse, in compact
\par

\par
355}
\par