{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 the margins. Petals purple. 2n = 32.{\i  Throughout most of the range of the species}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b c}) Subsp.{\b  glabrescens} (Turrill) Akeroyd,{\i  Bot. Jour. Linn. Soc.}{\b  106}: 100 (1991) ({\i A. glabrescens} Turrill): Leaves lanceolate to elliptical, 2-5½ times as long as wide, glabrous or with a few short, simple, forked or stellate hairs on the margins. Petals violet.{\i  Serpentine rocks and screes. N.W. Greece} ({\i Smolikas}).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 6. A. thessala} Boissieu,{\i  Bull. Soc. Bot. Fr.}{\b  43}: 288 (1896). Laxly caespitose. Leaves obovate to broadly spathulate, 2-3½ times as long as wide, with 1-3 pairs of teeth. Sepals 7-14 mm; petals 12-20 mm, purple. Siliqua 14-26 × 2-4 mm, 5-10 times as long as wide, scarcely compressed, with stellate hairs, sometimes with a few short, forked hairs, not or only slightly reticulately veined; style 5-9 mm.{\i  Limestone rocks. • N. Greece} ({\i Olimbos}). Gr.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 44.            Ricotia}                L.
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc  By P.W. Ball.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Annuals or perennials; glabrous or with unbranched hairs. Leaves entire to pinnatisect. Sepals erect, the inner saccate at the base; petals pink or violet, clawed. Fruit a pendent siliqua or latiseptate silicula; style short; stigma capitate.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Literature: B.L. Burtt,{\i  Kew Bull.}{\b  1951}: 123-132 (1951).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 Petals 10-12 mm; fruit 5-8 times as long as wide, not winged .......... {\b 1. cretica}
\par
Petals c. 5 mm; fruit about twice as long as wide, with a narrow
\par
    marginal wing ............................................................................. {\b 2. isatoides}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   {\b 1. R. cretica} Boiss. & Heldr. in Boiss.,{\i  Diagn. Pl. Or. Nov.}{\b  2}({\b 8}): 29 (1849). Annual 10-25 cm. Leaves 2-pinnatifid or -pinnatisect, the upper with ovate or elliptical segments. Petals 10-12 mm, pink or violet. Siliqua 30-50 × 8-9 mm, 5-8 times as long as wide, not winged. Seeds up to 10.{\i  Calcareous screes and stony ground. • Kriti.} Cr.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. R. isatoides} (W. Barbey) B.L. Burtt,{\i  Kew Bull. }{\b 1951}: 131 (1951) ({\i Peltaria isatoides} W. Barbey). Fleshy perennial 15-20 cm. Leaves entire, crenate or pinnatifid with 3-5 lobes. Petals c. 5 mm, pale violet or with violet veins. Silicula 10-12 × 6-8 mm, about twice as long as wide, with very narrow marginal wing. Seeds usually solitary.{\i  Calcareous screes. • Karpathos.} Cr.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 45.            Lunaria}               L.
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc  By P.W. Ball.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Biennials or perennials; hairs simple. Leaves simple, toothed. Sepals erect, the inner saccate at the base; petals long-clawed. Fruit a strongly compressed, latiseptate silicula; style long; stigma slightly lobed.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Upper leaves sessile or subsessile .................................................... {\b 3. annua}
\par
1 Upper leaves distinctly petiolate
\par
2 Saccate base of sepal less than 1 mm; carpophore of
\par
  silicula 25-40 mm; leaves ± spinulose-dentate ............................. {\b 1. rediviva}
\par
2 Saccate base of sepal c. 2·5 mm; carpophore of silicula
\par
  c. 1 mm; leaves crenate-dentate ................................................... {\b 2. telekiana}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. L. rediviva} L., {\i Sp. Pl}. 653 (1753). Perennial up to 140 cm. Leaves ovate, acuminate, spinulose-dentate, the uppermost distinctly petiolate. Saccate base of sepal less than 1 mm; petals (10-)12-20 mm, lilac to violet. Silicula 35-90 × 15-35 mm, elliptical, rarely ovate-elliptical, subacute at the base and apex; valves glabrous on the margin; carpophore (20-)25-40 mm; style 1-7 mm. 2n = 30.{\i  • Most of Europe except the extreme north and south.} Al Au Be Bu Cz Da Ga Ge He Hs Hu It Ju Lu Po Rm Rs(B, C, W) Sa Su.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. L. telekiana} Jáv., {\i Magyar Bot. Lapok}{\b  19}: 1 (1922). Like {\b 1} but the leaves dentate-crenate; saccate base of sepal c. 2·5 mm; petals c. 12 mm; silicula 30-50 mm; valves densely ciliate on the margin; carpophore c. 1 mm. • {\i N.E. Albania} ({\i Hekurave, Shkelzen}). Al.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 3. L. annua} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 653 (1753) ({\i L. biennis} Moench). Annual to perennial up to 100 cm. Leaves ovate to lanceolate, acuminate, coarsely and irregularly dentate, the upper sessile or subsessile. Petals 15-25 mm, purple, rarely white. Silicula 20-70 × (10-)15-35 mm, oblong-elliptical to suborbicular, rounded at the base and apex; carpophore (3-)5-20 mm; style 4-10(-12) mm. •{\i  S.E. Europe and Italy; cultivated and naturalized or casual elsewhere.} Al Bu Cr Gr It Ju Rm [Au Be Br Co Ga Ge He Ho Hs Hu Lu No Po Rs(W) Su]
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Frequently cultivated for ornament, particularly for the white, shining, persistent septum of the silicula.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp.{\b  annua} : Annual to biennial, without fusiform tubers. {\i Origin unknown; cultivated and naturalized in many parts of Europe}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp.{\b  pachyrhiza} (Borbás) Hayek,{\i  Prodr. Fl. Penins. Balcan.}{\b  1}: 425 (1925) ({\i L. annua} subsp. {\i corcyrea} (DC.) Vierh.): Perennial, with fusiform tubers. {\i S.E. Europe and Italy}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 46.             Peltaria}               Jacq.
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc  By P.W. Ball.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Perennials; glabrous or with a few bifid hairs. Leaves simple, entire. Sepals patent, not saccate; petals white, shortly clawed. Fruit a pendent, indehiscent, strongly compressed, latiseptate silicula; style short; stigma capitate. (Incl.{\i  Leptoplax} O.E. Schulz.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Upper leaves amplexicaul, sessile; silicula rounded at the apex .......{\b 1. alliacea}
\par
Upper leaves cuneate at the base, shortly petiolate; silicula
\par
  deeply emarginate ..................................................................... {\b 2. emarginata}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. P. alliacea} Jacq.,{\i  Enum. Stirp. Vindob.} 117 (1762) ({\i P. perennis} (Ard.) Markgraf). Stem 20-60 cm, glabrous. Cauline leaves ovate or lanceolate, cordate-sagittate, sessile, amplexicaul. Petals 3·5-4·5 mm. Silicula 6-10 × 5-9 mm, orbicular to ovate-elliptical, distinctly reticulately veined when mature. •{\i  From E. Austria to S. Romania and Albania.} Al Au Hu Ju Rm.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. P. emarginata} (Boiss.) Hausskn.,{\i  Mitt. Thür. Bot. Ver}. nov. ser. {\b 3-4}: 111 (1893) ({\i Leptoplax emarginata} (Boiss.) O.E. Schulz, {\i Ptilotrichum emarginatum} Boiss.). Like {\b 1} but often sparsely hairy; cauline leaves oblong-spathulate, cuneate, shortly petiolate; petals c. 3 mm; silicula deeply emarginate, obscurely reticulately veined when mature.{\i  Rocky and stony ground on serpentine. • C. & E. Greece.} Gr.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 This species frequently forms hybrids with {\i Bornmuellera baldaccii} (Degen) Heywood and {\i B. tymphaea} (Hausskn.) Hausskn.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 47.            Alyssoides}              Miller
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc  By V.H. Heywood & P.W. Ball.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Perennials; hairs branched or stellate. Sepals erect or erecto-patent,
\par

\par
358}
\par