{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}
\pard\f0\fs28 with 2-14 pairs of lateral segments or leaflets. Petals 5-9(-12) mm, usually less than 5·5 mm wide, white, rarely pale lilac. Siliqua (12-)25-34 × 0·5-1·3 mm. 2n = 16.{\i  C. & S. Europe, northwards to the Alps and Carpathians}.
\par
\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b f}) Subsp.{\b  rivularis }(Schur) Nyman, {\i loc. cit.} (1878) ({\i C. rivularis }Schur): Stem 12-30(-45) cm, usually simple. Basal leaves with 5-11 pairs of lateral leaflets, terminal leaflet usually the same size as the lateral ones; cauline leaves (3)4-12, the lower with (6)7-10 pairs of lateral segments or leaflets. Petals 6·5-10·5 mm, purple. Siliqua 15-25 × 1·5-2(-2·5) mm. 2n = 16, 24. •{\i  Wet mountain meadows in S. Romania and Bulgaria.}
\par
\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b g}) Subsp.{\b  dentata} (Schultes) Celak., {\i Prodr. Fl. Böhm.} 450 (1875) ({\i C. palustris }(Wimmer & Grab.) Peterm., {\i C. dentata }Schultes): Stem (20-)30-50 cm. Basal leaves with 3-12 pairs of lateral leaflets; cauline leaves 5-12, the lower with 3-10 pairs of lateral leaflets; leaflets of cauline leaves often deciduous. Petals (9-)12-16(-19) mm, whitish. Siliqua (20-)30-50 × 1·1-1·5(-2) mm. 2n = 56, 64, 72, 76, 80, 84, c. 96 (other aneuploid numbers occur through hybridization). {\i Wet places. N. Europe, extending locally southwards to N. Bulgaria}.
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28 Diploid and tetraploid (2n = 16, 32) plants of subsp. ({\b a}), occurring in the E. Carpathians, Alps, Appennines, Massif Central, Vosges and perhaps Pyrenees, resemble subsp. ({\b f}) but are clearly distinct in the shape of hairs on the basal leaves and the colour of anthers. Previously treated as {\i C. rivularis} Schur ({\i C. crassifolia }auct., non Pourret), they require further study.
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28 Plants from E. Czechoslovakia, E. Hungary, W. Ukraine and Romania that are like subsp. ({\b e}) but have larger flowers, the petals (8-)9-15(-16·5) mm, usually more than 5·5 mm wide, larger pollen grains, and a chromosome number of 2n = 32, have been called{\b  C. majovskii} Marhold & Záborský,{\i  Preslia }{\b 58}: 194 (1986).
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28 Plants from Belgium and N. & E. France, like subsp. ({\b a}) but usually taller, with petals 14-17 mm, have been described as{\b  C. pratensis} L. subsp.{\b  picra} De Langhe & D'hose,{\i  Gorteria}{\b  8}: 48 (1976). These plants are diploid (2n = 16) and, in common with the apparently distinct diploid central European{\b  C. nemorosa }Lej., {\i Fl. Spa} 62 (1813), require further study.
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 16. C. uliginosa} Bieb.,{\i  Fl. Taur.-Cauc.}{\b  3}: 438 (1819). Perennial with erect, leafy stems up to 50 cm; rhizome long, without stolons. Basal leaves not forming a distinct rosette; leaves pinnate with 4-9 pairs of oblong to narrowly elliptical leaflets, the terminal leaf slightly larger (especially that of the basal leaves), glabrous to pubescent, rather fleshy and glaucous. Petals 8-11 mm, white or rarely pale yellowish, sometimes with purplish claw. Siliqua 20-35 × 1-1-5 mm, rather strict.{\i  Damp, marshy ground. Turkey-in-Europe }({\i N. of Istanbul}). *Tu. ({\i S.W. Asia.})
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 17. C. tenera} J.G. Gmelin ex C.A. Meyer, {\i Verz. Pfl. Cauc.} 179 (1831). Almost glabrous perennial 25-40 cm, with short, slender rhizome; long stolons from the axils of the lowest leaves. Basal leaves 2-4 cm wide, simple, reniform; lower cauline leaves few, with 1-3(4) remote pairs of narrowly ovate or oblong, sessile lateral leaflets and a distinctly larger terminal leaflet; uppermost cauline leaf simple. Pedicels 12-15 mm, patent to recurved at anthesis, patent in fruit. Petals 8-14 mm, narrowly cuneate, white, dark pink or violet. Siliqua 30-40 × 1·2 mm; style 0·5-1 mm. 2n = 16.{\i  Woods. Krym.} Rs(K).
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 18. C. plumieri} Vill.,{\i  Prosp. Pl. Dauph.} 38 (1779). Biennial or perennial 5-12(-20) cm; almost glabrous but not glaucous. Lowest leaves hederiform with 3-5 obtuse lobes; intermediate cauline leaves ternate with stalked, obovate lateral leaflets and a long terminal leaflet; upper cauline leaves pinnate with ternate, obtuse leaflets. Petals 6-8 mm, rounded or slightly emarginate at the apex, white. Siliqua 18-25 × (0·5-)1-1·5 mm, erect; style 1-2 mm.{\i  Shady rocks and screes. • S. Europe, from S.E. France to N. Greece.} Al Co Ga Gr It.
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 19. C. glauca} Sprengel in DC.,{\i  Reg. Veg. Syst. Nat.}{\b  2}: 266 (1821). Annual to perennial (5-)12-25 cm; entirely glabrous and glaucous. Lowest leaves entire to 3-lobed; intermediate leaves pinnate with 1-3 pairs of ovate-elliptical, obtuse, equal, sessile lateral leaflets, and an obovate, entire or 3-lobed, subsessile terminal leaflet; upper leaves smaller, imparipinnate with 2-5 pairs of oblong to linear, entire and acute leaflets. Petals 4-8 mm, deeply emarginate, white. Siliqua (10-)20-35 × (0·8-)1·5-1·8 mm, secund; style 1-2 mm. 2n = 16.{\i  S. Europe, from the S. Carpathians to N. Greece and Sicilia.} Al Bu Gr It Ju Rm Si.
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28 Variable; some alpine plants are dwarf and smaller in all their parts, with leaves in perennial rosettes and strict infructescences.
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28 C. pancicii Hayek,{\i  Denkschr. Akad. Wiss. Math.-Nat. Kl.} ({\i Wien}) {\b 94: }149 (1918), from S. Italy, Albania and Jugoslavia, with 4-8 pairs of leaf-segments and petals 4-5 mm, may represent a subspecies of {\b 19}.
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 20. C. resedifolia} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 656 (1753) ({\i C. gelida} Schott). Perennial (2-)5-15(-23) cm; glabrous. Leaves thick, usually trifoliate, auriculate at the base of the petiole, the lowest spathulate; intermediate leaves trifid or ternate with ovate-lanceolate lateral lobes and an ovate, obtuse terminal lobe; upper 3- to 7-lobed. Petals 5-6 mm, entire, white. Siliqua 12-22 × 1-1·4 mm, strictly erect; style absent. Seeds broadly winged. 2n = 16.{\i  Screes; usually calcifuge. Mountains of C. & S. Europe.} Au Bu Co Cz Ga Ge He Hs It Ju Po Rm.
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 21. C. bellidifolia} L.,{\i  Sp. Pl.} 654 (1753). Glabrous perennial 1-8(-11) cm. Leaves all similar in shape, thick, entire (occasionally 2-lobed); rosette-leaves long-spathulate, the cauline sometimes absent. Petals 3·5-5 mm, white. Siliqua 10-25 × 1-1·5 mm, strictly erect; style 0·5-1·5 mm. Seeds wingless or narrowly winged.{\i  Arctic and subarctic Europe; Alps; Pyrenees.} Au Fe Ga Ge He Hs Is It No Rs(N) Sb Su.
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp.{\b  bellidifolia} : Cauline leaves 0 or 1(-3), on petioles longer than the lamina. Flowers 2-8. Siliqua 10-25 × 1-1·5 mm, purplish-brown. Seeds 1·5 × 1 mm, narrowly winged. 2n = 16. {\i Arctic and subarctic Europe.}
\par
\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp.{\b  alpina} (Willd.) B.M.G. Jones, {\i Feddes Repert.}{\b  69}: 59 (1964) ({\i C. alpina} Willd.): Cauline leaves (1)2 or 3(4), subsessile or on petioles less than 1/2 as long as the lamina. Flowers 3-8. Siliqua 10-15 × c. 1 mm, brown. Seeds 1·2 × 0·7 mm, unwinged. 2n = 16.{\i  Alps and Pyrenees}.
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 22. C. maritima} Portenschl. ex DC., {\i Reg. Veg. Syst. Nat.}{\b  2: }266 (1821). Annual or biennial 12-30 cm, subglabrous to pubescent. Leaves glabrous, pinnate with cuneate-obovate, subsessile leaflets, frequently lobed or incised, auriculate at the base of the petiole. Sepals glabrous, apiculate; petals (4-)7-11 mm, white. Siliqua 20-40 × 2-3 mm, glabrous, patent; style (3-)5-7(-10) mm. Seeds on a narrow funicle. •{\i  N. & W. Jugoslavia.} Ju.
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28 {\b C. fialae} Fritsch,{\i  Österr. Bot. Zeitschr. }{\b 47}: 44 (1897), from Jugoslavia (Hercegovina), with hairy stems, leaves, pedicels and
\par
\par 350}
\par