{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 4 Stem hairy; pedicels 3-5 mm at anthesis ....................................... {\b 1. arenosa}
\par
4 Stem glabrous or subglabrous; pedicels 5-8 mm at anthesis ........ {\b 3. neglecta}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. C. arenosa} (L.) Hayek,{\i  Fl. Steierm.}{\b  1}: 478 (1908) ({\i C. suecica} sensu Lawalrée,{\i  Arabidopsis arenosa} (L.) Lawalrée, {\i Arabis arenosa} (L.) Scop.). Annual to perennial, without stolons. Stem 5-80 cm, erect, robust, usually branched above and below, hairy. Basal leaves pinnatisect; cauline leaves lanceolate, pinnatifid to dentate. Flowers numerous; pedicels 3-5 mm at anthesis. Petals 6-8 mm, with a pair of small teeth on the claw. Siliqua 10-45 × 1 mm; pedicels 5-13 mm, patent. 2n = 16+0-4B, 18-19, 28, 30 32, 32+0-1B, 34, 39-40, 42.{\i  Most of Europe except the south-west, the islands and part of the Mediterranean region.} Au Be Bu Cz Da Fe Ga Ge He Ho Hu It Ju No Po Rm Rs(N, B, C, W, E) Su.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Sometimes confused with {\i Arabidopsis suecica} (Fries) Norrlin, which has the basal leaves dentate to pinnatifid, petals without teeth on the claw, and the siliqua not strongly dorsally compressed.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp.{\b  arenosa} : Often annual or biennial. Basal leaves with terminal segment distinctly larger than the lateral segments; lateral segments 1-6 pairs. Corolla white or pale lilac. Seeds very narrowly winged or wingless.{\i  N. Europe; naturalized as a ruderal further south}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b borbasii} (Zapal.) Pawl.,{\i  Fl. Tatr.}{\b  1}: 339 (1956): Usually perennial. Basal leaves with terminal segment scarcely larger than the lateral segments; lateral segments 4-9 pairs. Corolla bright lilac. Seeds conspicuously winged. •{\i  C. Europe, extending northwards to Denmark}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Further subspecies can perhaps be recognized in this polymorphic species. For an account of the cytological variation see J. Mesicek,{\i  Preslia }{\b 42}: 225-248 (1970).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. C. petraea} (L.) Hiitonen in Hyl.,{\i  Fort. Skand. Vaxt.} ed. 3, 62 (1941) ({\i Arabis septentrionalis} N. Busch,{\i  Arabidopsis petraea} (L.) Lam.; incl.{\i  C. hispida }(L.) Hayek). Perennial, stoloniferous; stem 5-30(-45) cm, sparsely branched, glabrous, or hairy below with simple and forked hairs. Basal leaves long-petiolate, pinnatifid to serrate, sparsely hairy or glabrous; cauline leaves few, lanceolate, entire or toothed. Flowers few; pedicels 2-6 mm at anthesis. Petals 3-7(-9) mm, white or purplish. Siliqua 10-45 × 1-1·5(-2) mm; pedicels 4-15 mm, patent or ascending. 2n = 16, 32.{\i  Rocks and gravelly ground in the mountains, but sometimes at sea-level. N. & C. Europe.} Au Br Cz Fa Ge Hb Hu Is It No Po ?Rm Rs(N, W) Su.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Plants from C. Europe are sometimes regarded as a separate species,{\b  C. hispida} (L.) Hayek,{\i  Fl. Steierm.}{\b  1}: 478 (1908), and those from N.E. Russia are distinguished as{\b  C. septentrionalis} (N. Busch) O.E. Schulz in Engler & Prantl,{\i  Naturl. Pflanzenfam}. ed. 2, {\b 17b}: 541 (1936), but the characters separating them from {\b 2} are by no means clear.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   {\b 3. C. neglecta} (Schultes) Hayek, {\i Fl. Steierm.}{\b  1}: 480 (1908). Perennial; stem 5-20 cm, sparsely branched, glabrous. Basal leaves petiolate, lyrate-pinnatifid, with few lobes or almost entire; cauline leaves ovate, entire or with 1 or 2 basal lobes; all leaves thick, coriaceous, glabrous or sparsely hairy. Flowers few; pedicels 5-8 mm at anthesis. Petals 5-6 mm, purple, somewhat cuneate. Siliqua 15-25 × c. 1·5 mm; pedicels 8-12 mm, ultimately deflexed. 2n = 16, 32. •{\i  Carpathians.} Cz Po Rm Rs(W).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 4. C. croatica} (Schott, Nyman & Kotschy) Jáv., {\i Magyar Fl.} 435 (1924). Perennial; stem 8-18 cm, erect, flexuous, divaricately branched, glabrous. Leaves all long-petiolate, obovate, denticulate to entire (lowest sometimes lyrate-pinnatifid), glabrous or sparsely hairy, glaucous and fleshy. Flowers few; pedicels 4-8 mm at anthesis. Petals 4-6 mm, pinkish or purple. Siliqua 18-50 × 1 mm, widely patent; pedicels 7-10 mm in fruit, deflexed or horizontal. Rocks. •{\i  N.W. Jugoslavia }({\i Velebit}). Ju.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 5. C. halleri} (L.) Hayek, {\i Fl. Steierm.}{\b  1}: 479 (1908) ({\i Arabidopsis halleri }L.). Perennial, stoloniferous. Stem 10-50 cm, ascending, hairy or glabrous. Basal leaves long-petiolate, simple or pinnate, with 1-7 orbicular lateral leaflets, the terminal larger; cauline leaves shortly petiolate, oblong to ovate. Flowers rather numerous. Petals 4-6 mm, white or lilac. Siliqua 10-25 × 1 mm, patent; pedicels slender. 2n = 16.{\i  Mountains of C. Europe, extending to the S.W. Alps and Crna Gora.} Au Cz Ga Ge He It Ju Po Rm Rs(W) [Be].
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp.{\b  halleri} : Stolons few, short; flowering stems 20-40 cm, numerous, branched at the base and frequently also above. Basal leaves usually pinnate, the lower cauline oblong, dentate. Petals white or lilac. Pedicels 5-10 mm in fruit.{\i  Throughout the range of the species}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp.{\b  ovirensis} (Wulfen) Hegi & E. Schmid in Hegi,{\i  Ill. Fl. Mitteleur.}{\b  4}({\b 1}): 424 (1919) ({\i C. ovirensis} (Wulfen) O. Schwarz): Stolons numerous, slender and elongate; flowering stems 10-20 cm, few, only sparsely branched above. Basal leaves simple or pinnate with weakly developed lateral leaflets; lower cauline leaflets orbicular to ovate, entire or crenate. Petals lilac or purplish. Pedicels 10-14 mm in fruit. S.E. Alps; Carpathians; N. part of Balkan peninsula.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Intermediates between subspp. ({\b a}) and ({\b b}) occur in the Tatra.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 42.         Arabis}              L.
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc By B.M.G. Jones (Ed.1) revised by J.K. Akeroyd (Ed.2)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Annuals or perennials; hairs simple, dendritic or stellate; rarely the plant glabrous. Leaves simple. Inner sepals often slightly saccate at the base; petals usually white, pink or purple. Fruit a siliqua; valves flat, sometimes with a median vein; style distinct; stigma capitate or emarginate. Seeds usually in 1 row in each loculus, usually winged. (Incl.{\i  Turritis }L.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Cauline leaves absent
\par
2 Plant conspicuously pubescent; petals 6-7 mm;
\par
  style not more than 1 mm ............................................................ {\b 25. bryoides}
\par
2 Plant subglabrous or glabrous; petals 3-4 mm; style 1·5-2 mm
\par
  ................................................................................................... {\b 26. longistyla}
\par
1 At least 1 cauline leaf present
\par
3 Basal leaves pubescent; all the cauline leaves glaucous and
\par
  usually glabrous
\par
4 Cauline leaves sagittate; petals cream; siliqua usually not more
\par
  than 70 mm ....................................................................................... {\b 1. glabra}
\par
4 Cauline leaves cordate at the base; petals white or lilac;
\par
  siliqua at least 70 mm ........................................................................... {\b 2. laxa}
\par
3 Basal and at least the lower cauline leaves with a similar indumentum,
\par
  or glabrous
\par
5 Siliqua usually more than 9 cm, distinctly arcuate at maturity ...... {\b 15. turrita}
\par
5 Siliqua up to 9 cm, straight or scarcely arcuate at maturity
\par
6 All leaves (except the uppermost cauline leaves) long-petiolate,
\par
  cuneate or truncate (mountains of S. France and N.W. Italy)
\par
7 Plant usually pubescent; basal leaves longer than wide, acute;
\par
  petals 7-10 mm, violet or white ............................................ {\b 33. cebennensis}
\par

\par
352}
\par