{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 the inner saccate at the base; petals yellow, long-clawed. Fruit a latiseptate silicula; valves inflated, without a conspicuous median vein; style long; stigma capitate or emarginate. Seeds 4-8 in each loculus, usually winged. ({\i Vesicaria} Lam.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 Silicula stipitate; sepals erect ........................................................ {\b 1. utriculata}
\par
Silicula sessile; sepals erecto-patent .................................................. {\b 2. cretica}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. A. utriculata} (L.) Medicus, {\i Philos. Bot.}{\b  1: }189 (1789) (incl. {\i A. graeca} (Reuter) Jáv.). Woody and much-branched at the base; stems 40 cm, simple. Leaves green, those of non-flowering branches petiolate, densely crowded, rosulate, oblong-spathulate, with stellate hairs, those of flowering stems sessile, lanceolate, glabrous, sometimes ciliate. Sepals 8-12 mm; petals 16-20 mm; limb suborbicular, entire. Silicula 10-15 mm, ovoid-globose; valves strongly inflated; style 7-10 mm, filiform. 2n = 16.{\i  Rocks and crevices. S.W. & W.C. Alps, Appennini, Balkan peninsula, S. Romania.} Al Bu Ga Gr It Ju Rm [Ge].
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Plants from the central part of the Balkan peninsula with bifid hairs on the cauline leaves and long patent hairs on the pedicels are regarded as var.{\i  bulgarica }(Sagorski) Hayek ({\i A. bulgarica} (Sagorski) Assenov). Other variable characters in this complex are the shape of the petals and the length of the pedicels but they do not correlate with the indumentum characters, and no satisfactory division can be made.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. A. cretica} (L.) Medicus, {\i Philos. Bot.}{\b  1}: 189 (1789) ({\i Alyssum creticum} L., {\i Lutzia cretica} (L.) Greuter & Burdet). Diffuse, woody and much-branched at the base with many leaf-rosettes, grey or white with appressed stellate hairs; flowering stems up to 20 cm. Leaves oblanceolate to obovate. Sepals 7-11 mm; petals 12-20 mm, entire. Silicula 10-15 mm, globose or ovoid-globose, densely stellate-pubescent; valves strongly inflated; style c. 2 mm.{\i  Rocks, cliffs and walls. • Kriti and Karpathos; Astipalea.} Cr Gr.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Recorded from Rodhos in the E. Aegean islands but perhaps only introduced there.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 48.            Degenia}              Hayek
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc  By R. Domac.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Perennials; hairs stellate. Sepals erect, the inner slightly saccate at the base; petals yellow, long-clawed. Fruit a latiseptate, ellipsoidal silicula; valves inflated; style long; stigma slightly 2-lobed. Seeds 2 in each loculus, broadly winged.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. D. velebitica} (Degen) Hayek,{\i  Österr. Bot. Zeitschr.}{\b  60}: 93 (1910). Caespitose, silver-grey perennial with non-flowering rosettes. Stems up to 10 cm. Leaves few, linear-lanceolate. Petals 10-12 mm. Silicula covered with dense, stellate hairs. 2n = 16. {\i Screes and among boulders. • N.W. Jugoslavia} ({\i Velebit}). Ju.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 49.            Alyssum}               L.
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc  By P.W. Ball & T.R. Dudley
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Annuals to perennials, rarely small shrubs; hairs branched or stellate, sometimes mixed with unbranched hairs or the indumentum lepidote. Flowering stems terminal. Basal leaves usually similar to the cauline; petioles of basal leaves not grooved, not persistent or swollen at the base. Flower-buds ellipsoidal or oblong-ellipsoidal; sepals erect, not saccate at the base; petals yellow (white or purplish in Sect.{\i  Ptilotrichum}), entire to shallowly bifid; filaments of the long stamens usually winged or toothed, those of the short stamens usually with an appendage. Fruit a latiseptate silicula; valves without a conspicuous median vein; style distinct but often short; stigma capitate or emarginate. Seeds 1 or 2(-8) in each loculus, often winged or margined. (Incl.{\i  Ptilotrichum} C.A. Meyer.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 The indumentum is described as dimorphic when it is composed of appressed stellate hairs mixed with long, patent, unbranched or branched hairs, or with stellate hairs with some long, patent rays. The measurements given for the diameter of the stellate hairs are for the usually peltate tops of these hairs. Basal leaves are those at the base of non-flowering rosettes or stems.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Most species occur in dry, rocky, stony, or sandy places or on cliffs, although species{\b  10-20} often occur as weeds.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 A taxonomically difficult genus in which the status and circumscription of many of the taxa differ widely in published treatments, particularly in the perennial species of Sect.{\i  Alyssum }and in Sect. {\i Odontarrhena}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Literature: Sect. {\i Alyssum}: J. Baumgartner, {\i Jahresb. Landes-Lehrersem. Wiener-Neustadt}{\b  34}: 1-35 (1907); {\b 35}: 1-58 (1908); {\b 36}: 1-38 (1909);{\i  Jahresb. Landes-Lehrersem. Baden bei Wien}{\b  48}: 1-18 (1911). Sect.{\i  Odontarrhena} : E.I. Nyárády,{\i  Bul. Grad. Bot. Univ. Cluj}{\b  7}: 1-51, 65-160 (1927);{\b  8}: 152-156 (1928); {\b 9}: 1-68 (1929);{\i  Anal. Acad. Rep. Pop. Române} ({\i Sect. Geol., Geogr., Biol.}) ser. A, {\b 1}({\b 3}): 1-133 (1949). Sect.{\i  Ptilotrichum}: T.R. Dudley,{\i  Jour. Arnold Arb.}{\b  45}: 358-373 (1964).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Petals white, rarely pink or purple (Sect.{\i  Ptilotrichum})
\par
2 Petals purple; plant 2-5 cm ..................................................... {\b 10. purpureum}
\par
2 Petals white or rarely pink; plant usually at least 12 cm
\par
3 Branches becoming spiny at the apex
\par
4 Spines simple; petals abruptly contracted into claw ............ {\b 8. macrocarpum}
\par
4 Spines branched; petals gradually narrowed into claw .............. {\b 9. spinosum}
\par
3 Branches not spiny at the apex
\par
5 Silicula pubescent or lepidote ................................................. {\b 1. pyrenaicum}
\par
5 Silicula glabrous
\par
6 Style less than 1/10 as long as the silicula ................................ {\b 6. longicaule}
\par
6 Style more than 1/10 as long as the silicula
\par
7 Silicula cochleariform ................................................................. {\b 5. baeticum}
\par
7 Silicula not cochleariform
\par
8 Leaves broadly spathulate
\par
9 Style 1-1·5 mm, less than ¼ as long as the silicula ............ {\b 7. cadevallianum}
\par
9 Style 2-4 mm, 1/3-1/2 as long as the silicula..........................  {\b 2. reverchonii}
\par
8 Leaves oblong or linear
\par
10 Seeds narrowly winged; infructescence lax, elongate ... {\b 3. lapeyrousianum}
\par
10 Seeds broadly winged; infructescence short, dense,
\par
   corymbose ................................................................................. {\b 4. ligusticum}
\par
1  Petals yellow
\par
11 Ovules and seeds 4-8 in each loculus .................................... {\b 11. linifolium}
\par
11 Ovules and seeds 1 or 2 in each loculus
\par
12 Ovules and seeds usually solitary in each loculus (Sect.{\i  Odontarrhena})
\par
13 Leaves bicolorous, green or greyish-green on the upper surface,
\par
   grey or white beneath
\par
14 Silicula very densely pubescent, the hairs completely covering the valves
\par

\par
359}
\par