{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 45 Seeds winged; silicula 4-6 mm .............................................. {\b 56. bertolonii}
\par
45 Seeds not winged; silicula 2·3-3·6 mm ............................. {\b 63. obtusifolium}
\par
43 Silicula very densely pubescent, the valves completely covered
\par
   by the hairs
\par
46 Petals 3-3·5 mm; sepals 2-2·5 mm
\par
47 Flowering stems ± erect or ascending; basal leaves obovate-spathulate
\par
   to suborbicular; petiole of cauline leaves 3-5 mm (Ukraine, Russia)
\par
   .................................................................................................. {\b 64. obovatum}
\par
47 Flowering stems usually procumbent; basal leaves oblanceolate to
\par
   obovate-spathulate; petiole of cauline leaves not more
\par
   than 2 mm (Alps) ........................................................................ {\b 67. alpestre}
\par
46 Petals 2-3 mm; sepals usually not more than 2 mm
\par
48 Largest cauline leaves near the apex of the stem and distinctly
\par
   larger than the basal ............................................................... {\b 69. nebrodense}
\par
48 Largest cauline leaves near the base of the stem, smaller than
\par
   or about equalling the basal
\par
49 Leaves of non-flowering stems flat; hairs on the silicula 20- to
\par
   25-rayed (Ukraine, Russia) ...................................................... {\b 64. obovatum}
\par
49 Leaves on non-flowering stems plicate; hairs on the silicula
\par
   mostly 12- to 16-rayed ...................................................... {\b 68. serpyllifolium}
\par
12 Ovules and seeds 2 in each loculus
\par
50 Sepals with a tuft of long, divergent-rayed, stellate hairs at the apex
\par
51 Raceme ± elongate in fruit; short stamens with a long (1·5-2 mm)
\par
   appendage; style 2·5-5 mm ........................................................ {\b 45. doerfleri}
\par
51 Raceme corymbose in fruit; short stamens with a small appendage;
\par
   style not more than 3 mm ....................................................... {\b 46. taygeteum}
\par
50 Sepals without a tuft of hairs at the apex
\par
52 Silicula glabrous or glabrescent
\par
53 Indumentum of leaves lepidote .................................................. {\b 43. idaeum}
\par
53 Indumentum of leaves consisting of branched or stellate hairs
\par
54 Style 1·5-3·5 mm
\par
55 Petals 3·5-4 mm; leaves oblong-spathulate; annual ............ {\b 17. smyrnaeum}
\par
55 Petals 6-7 mm; leaves linear-oblong or linear-lanceolate, acute;
\par
   perennial ...................................................................................... {\b 25. lenense}
\par
54 Style not more than 1(-1·5) mm
\par
56 Upper leaves forming an involucre around the inflorescence;
\par
   silicula ovate, the valves inflated; petals 3-3·5 mm .................. {\b 16. foliosum}
\par
56 Upper leaves not forming an involucre; silicula ± orbicular, the valves
\par
   inflated in the middle, with strongly flattened margin; petals 2-3 mm
\par
57 Stellate hairs 0·2-0·3 mm in diameter; sepals deciduous .... {\b 15. desertorum}
\par
57 Stellate hairs more than 0·3 mm in diameter;
\par
   sepals persistent ......................................................................... {\b 18. minutum}
\par
52 Silicula pubescent
\par
58 Indumentum of the inflorescence or the silicula consisting of
\par
   long patent hairs, often mixed with appressed stellate hairs
\par
59 Anthers less than 0·5 mm; annual
\par
60 Filaments without appendage; indumentum dimorphic only on the silicula
\par
61 Petals 2·5-3 mm; seeds 1·25-1·5 mm, without wing .......... {\b 12. dasycarpum}
\par
61 Petals 3-4 mm; seeds 1·5-1·9 mm,
\par 
   with wing c. 0·2 mm wide .......................................................{\b 14. granatense}
\par
60 Filaments winged or with appendage; indumentum ±
\par 
   dimorphic on all parts of the plant
\par
62 Petals attenuate towards the base; style 0·7-1·3 mm .................... {\b 20. minus}
\par
62 Petals constricted at the middle; style 1·2-2·5 mm .................. {\b 22. hirsutum}
\par
59 Anthers more than 0·5 mm; biennial or perennial
\par
63 Erect biennial up to 80 cm; middle cauline leaves usually at
\par
   least 10 mm wide; hairs 5- to 7-rayed, sparse ....................... {\b 29. wierzbickii}
\par
63 Perennial up to 40(-60) cm; middle cauline leaves usually less
\par
   than 10 mm wide, the hairs 8- to many-rayed
\par
64 Raceme short and dense in fruit
\par
65 Petals entire; silicula without flattened margin; seeds 2·5 mm,
\par
   narrowly winged ...................................................................... {\b 42. lassiticum}
\par
65 Petals deeply emarginate; silicula with flattened margin;
\par
   seeds 1·5-2 mm, not winged ........................................................ {\b 25. lenense}
\par
64 Raceme elongate in fruit
\par
66 Petals entire; filaments of the long stamens entire; plants
\par
   densely caespitose or pulvinate (Bulgaria and Romania) ........ {\b 31. pulvinare}
\par
66 Petals ± emarginate; filaments of the long stamens usually
\par
   with 1 or 2 teeth; plants diffuse or laxly caespitose
\par
67 Seeds 3-3·5 mm; sepals ± persistent (Krym) ................... {\b 30. calycocarpum}
\par
67 Seeds 1·5-2 mm; sepals deciduous .............................................. {\b 24. repens}
\par
58 Indumentum of the inflorescence and silicula consisting of
\par
   appressed hairs
\par
68 Petals up to 3·5 mm
\par
69 Perennial; style usually 2-3·5 mm
\par
70 Silicula 3-5 mm .................................................................... {\b 32. montanum}
\par
70 Silicula 2·5-3 mm ................................................................ {\b 33. fastigiatum}
\par
69 Annual; style 0·3-1·8(-2) mm
\par
71 Raceme subumbellate in fruit; silicula ovate, the valves
\par
   inflated .................................................................................. {\b 19. umbellatum}
\par
71 Raceme not umbellate in fruit; silicula orbicular to elliptical,
\par
   the valves with a flattened margin
\par
72 Sepals persistent; style 0·3-0·6 mm ....................................... {\b 13. alyssoides}
\par
72 Sepals deciduous; style 0·5-1·6 mm
\par
73 Plant up to 40 cm; style 0·7-1·6 mm ............................................ {\b 20. minus}
\par
73 Plant not more than 12 cm; style 0·5-0·8 mm ........................... {\b 21. siculum}
\par
68 Petals more than 3·5 mm
\par
74 Annual 20-60 cm; pedicels 7-20 mm in fruit; raceme very long
\par
   and lax in fruit .......................................................................... {\b 23. rostratum}
\par
74 Perennial 5-25 cm; pedicels up to 8 mm in fruit, if longer,
\par
   then raceme short and dense in fruit
\par
75 Seeds at least 4 mm; wing 0·5-0·8 mm wide ............................ {\b 44. handelii}
\par
75 Seeds up to 3 mm; wing up to 0·5 mm wide
\par

\par
361}
\par