{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 15 Silicula attenuate at the apex; style 1·5-3 mm in
\par
   fruit, glabrous (Krym) .......................................................... {\b 66. longistylum}
\par
15 Silicula subacute or obtuse to emarginate; style not
\par
   more than 1·5(-2) mm in fruit, usually pubescent
\par
16 Petals 3·5-4 mm; hairs on the silicula c. 0·5 mm in
\par
   diameter .................................................................................. {\b 50. argenteum}
\par
16 Petals 2-3 mm; hairs on the silicula c. 0·3 mm in diameter
\par
17 Leaves of non-flowering stems flat ....................................... {\b 65. tortuosum}
\par
17 Leaves of the non-flowering stems plicate ..................... {\b 68. serpyllifolium}
\par
14 Silicula glabrous or pubescent, the valves visible beneath the hairs
\par
18 Silicula acute or subacute
\par
19 Basal leaves 4-7 mm wide, broadly obovate; plant with numerous
\par
   non-flowering rosettes ......................................................... {\b 55. smolikanum}
\par
19 Basal leaves up to 4 mm wide, spathulate or obovate-spathulate;
\par
   plant with long nonflowering stems
\par
20 Seeds not winged; style of silicula 1·5-3 mm ..................... {\b 66. longistylum}
\par
20 Seeds winged; style of silicula not more than 2 mm
\par
21 Basal and cauline leaves similar, obovate-spathulate;
\par
   seeds 2·5-3 mm  ................................................................... {\b 54. robertianum}
\par
21 Basal and cauline leaves dissimilar, the basal spathulate, the cauline
\par
   oblanceolate, larger than the basal; seeds 1·8-2 mm ............... {\b 56. bertolonii}
\par
18 Silicula obtuse, truncate or emarginate
\par
22 Petals 3-3·5 mm; sepals 2-2·5 mm
\par
23 Petals emarginate; silicula pubescent ........................................ {\b 48. murale}
\par
23 Petals entire; silicula glabrous or sparsely pubescent
\par
24 Basal leaves linear-oblanceolate; upper cauline leaves similar,
\par
   up to 3·5 mm wide .................................................................. {\b 53. heldreichii}
\par
24 Basal leaves spathulate; upper cauline leaves oblanceolate,
\par
   up to 5 mm wide ....................................................................... {\b 56. bertolonii}
\par
22 Petals 2-3 mm; sepals 1·5-2 mm
\par
25 Filaments with a multi-dentate appendage; septum of the silicula
\par
   frequently asymmetrical in outline ......................................... {\b 51. fallacinum}
\par
25 Filaments with an entire or 1- or 2-dentate appendage;
\par
   septum of the silicula symmetrical in outline
\par
26 Valves of the silicula asymmetrically inflated .............. {\b 58. corymbosoides}
\par
26 Valves of the silicula flat or symmetrically inflated
\par
27 Valves of the silicula not undulate
\par
28 Basal leaves linear-oblanceolate; cauline leaves up to
\par
   3·5 mm wide ........................................................................... {\b 53. heldreichii}
\par
28 Basal leaves oblanceolate to obovate-spathulate or spathulate;
\par
   cauline leaves up to 6 mm wide
\par
29 Silicula broadly obovate, pubescent; valves not inflated;
\par
   seeds c. 3 mm ............................................................................... {\b 49. tenium}
\par
29 Silicula suborbicular, glabrous; valves inflated;
\par
   seeds c. 1·7 mm ...................................................................... {\b 57. markgrafii}
\par
27 Valves of the silicula usually undulate
\par
30 Branches of the inflorescence distant, very unequal;
\par
   pedicels ± straight, rigid ............................................................... {\b 48. murale}
\par
30 Branches of the inflorescence subumbellate.;
\par
   pedicels strongly curved, flexuous
\par
31 Silicula 4-6 × 3·5-4·5 mm, sparsely pubescent or glabrescent;
\par
   leaves of non-flowering stems linear-oblanceolate ............... {\b 53. heldreichii}
\par
31 Silicula smaller, pubescent; leaves of non-flowering stems
\par
   obovate-spathulate to oblanceolate-spathulate ............................. {\b 48. murale}
\par
13 Leaves concolorous, but the cauline sometimes differing from
\par
   the basal in colour
\par
32 Silicula glabrous or glabrescent
\par
33 Petals 2·5-3 mm; basal leaves orbicular-spathulate ................ {\b 52. corsicum}
\par
33 Petals 3-3·5 mm; basal leaves spathulate or oblanceolate ...... {\b 56. bertolonii}
\par
32 Silicula pubescent
\par
34 Hairs on the leaves at least 0·5 mm in diameter
\par
35 Seeds with or without wing; leaves all oblanceolate, the cauline ±
\par
   decreasing in size towards the apex of the stem ........................ {\b 61. caliacrae}
\par
35 Seeds not winged; cauline and basal leaves usually conspicuously
\par
   different in shape, at least the basal obovate- to orbicular-spathulate,
\par
   the cauline ± increasing in size towards the apex of the stem
\par
36 Sepals c. 2 mm; silicula (3·5-)4 6 mm; seeds c. 1·75 mm ... {\b 69. nebrodense}
\par
36 Sepals up to 1·5 mm; silicula 2-4 mm; seeds c. 1·5 mm
\par
37 Stellate hairs on silicula 0·4-0·7 mm in diameter; stellate hairs
\par
   on leaves of non-flowering stems with unequal rays up to
\par
   1·5 mm in diameter ................................................................... {\b 60. sibiricum}
\par
37 Stellate hairs on silicula 0·2-0·4 mm in diameter; stellate
\par
   hairs on leaves of non-flowering stems with equal rays not
\par
   more than 0·5 mm long ........................................................ {\b 62. borzaeanum}
\par
34 Hairs on leaves not more than 0·4 mm in diameter
\par
38 Silicula 2-2·5 mm wide
\par
39 Plant 1-3 cm, procumbent; largest cauline leaves 3-4
\par
   × 1·5 mm (Kriti) ................................................................... {\b 70. fragillimum}
\par
39 Plant at least 6 cm, procumbent to erect; cauline leaves
\par
   larger than 3-4 × 1·5 mm
\par
40 Silicula glabrous or sparsely pubescent ................................. {\b 56. bertolonii}
\par
40 Silicula densely grey- or white-pubescent
\par
41 Silicula subacute ............................................................. {\b 68. serpyllifolium}
\par
41 Silicula truncate to emarginate
\par
42 Basal leaves obtuse; silicula 2-3 mm ................................. {\b 62. borzaeanum}
\par
42 Basal leaves ± acute; silicula 3-4 mm ................................... {\b 65. tortuosum}
\par
38 Silicula at least 2·5 mm wide
\par
43 Silicula sparsely pubescent, the valves easily visible beneath the hairs
\par
44 Cauline leaves shorter than the basal;
\par
   racemes simple (Evvoia) ........................................................... {\b 59. euboeum}
\par
44 Cauline leaves longer than the basal; racemes compound
\par

\par
360}
\par