{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 40. A. stribrnyi} Velen.,{\i  Fl. Bulg.} 640 (1891) ({\i A. mildeanum} Podp.). Grey or silvery, diffuse perennial 6-20 cm, with few, long non-flowering stems. Basal leaves spathulate or obovate, subobtuse; cauline leaves oblanceolate, subobtuse or acute; hairs 0·6-0·7 mm in diameter, multiradiate. Raceme elongate in fruit; pedicels up to 8 mm, patent. Sepals 3·5-4·5 mm, persistent; petals 5·5-6·5 mm, emarginate. Silicula 4-5 mm, orbicular, truncate, densely pubescent; valves inflated, with a flattened margin; style 2-3·5 mm. Seeds c. 1·7 mm; wing absent or narrow.{\i  C. part of Balkan peninsula. }Bu Ju Rm Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 41. A. sphacioticum} Boiss. & Heldr. in Boiss.,{\i  Diagn. Pl. Or. Nov.}{\b  2}({\b 8}): 35 (1849). Silvery or grey perennial; flowering stems 5-10 cm, with procumbent non-flowering stems. Basal leaves obovate-orbicular to obovate; upper leaves linear or oblong, imbricate and appressed to the stem; hairs c. 0·5 mm in diameter, multi-radiate. Raceme short and dense in fruit; pedicels 10-15 mm, patent or deflexed. Sepals 3-4 mm; petals 5·5-6 mm, entire. Silicula 5-7 mm, obcordate to obovate or orbicular, emarginate, pubescent; valves inflated, with a flattened margin; style 3-4 mm. Seeds 2·5-3 mm, wider than long; wing 0·2-0·5 mm wide.{\i  Screes. • Kriti} ({\i Levka Ori}). Cr.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 42. A. lassiticum} Halácsy, {\i Consp. Fl. Graec. Suppl.}{\b  1},10 (1908). White, dwarf shrub; flowering stems 10-20 cm, stout, with procumbent non-flowering stems. Basal leaves obovate, acute; cauline leaves linear-oblanceolate to obovate, obtuse; hairs c. 0·5 mm in diameter, very dense. Raceme short and dense in fruit; pedicels 4·5-6·5 mm, erecto-patent, with dimorphic indumentum. Sepals 45 mm; petals 6 mm, entire. Silicula 6-7 mm, orbicular, obtuse or truncate, densely pubescent; valves inflated; style 3·5-4 mm. Seeds 2·5 mm, orbicular, narrowly winged. •{\i  E. Kriti} ({\i Dhikti}). Cr.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 43. A. idaeum} Boiss. & Heldr. in Boiss., {\i Diagn. Pl. Or. Nov.}{\b  2}({\b 8}): 35 (1849). Diffuse, procumbent, grey-green to white perennial with simple flowering stems up to c. 5 cm. Leaves obovate-orbicular to ovate-oblong; hairs c. 0·3 mm in diameter, lepidote. Raceme short and dense in fruit; longest pedicels 4-5 mm, erectopatent. Sepals 2·5-3·5 mm; petals 4-6 mm, entire. Silicula 5-7 mm, orbicular or ovate-orbicular, retuse, glabrous or minutely lepidote; valves inflated, with a scarcely flattened margin; style c. 2 mm. Seeds 2-2·5 mm; wing 0·1-0·2 mm wide. •{\i  E. Kriti.} Cr.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Incorrectly reported from the Kikladhes (Andros).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 44. A. handelii} Hayek,{\i  Beih. Bot. Centr.}{\b  45}: 279 (1928). Laxly caespitose, silvery-grey or grey-green perennial 5-15 cm, with elongate non-flowering stems. Leaves obovate, long-petiolate; hairs c. 0·3 mm in diameter, multi-radiate. Raceme short and dense in fruit; pedicels 6-9 mm, patent. Sepals 3·5-4 mm; petals 7-8 mm. Silicula 8-9 mm, obovate or broadly elliptical, subacute to truncate, pubescent; valves inflated; style 2-3 mm. Seeds 4-5 mm; wing 0·5-0·8 mm wide.{\i  Limestone screes and rocks above} 2000{\i  m. • N. Greece} ({\i Olimbos}). Gr.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 45. A. doerfleri} Degen, {\i Denkschr. Akad. Wiss. Math.-Nat. Kl.} ({\i Wien}) {\b 64}: 708 (1897). Densely caespitose, white or silvery perennial 5-12 cm. Leaves linear-lanceolate to linear, acute, lepidote. Raceme slightly elongate in fruit; pedicels 3·5-5 mm, erecto-patent. Sepals 4-6 mm, with a tuft of long, divergent-rayed hairs at the apex; petals 8-9 mm; short stamens with free appendage 1·5-2 mm. Silicula 4-7·5 mm, elliptical, emarginate, white; valves inflated, with flat margin; style 2·5-5 mm. Seeds c. 2 mm, not winged.{\i  Limestone screes and rocks. • Macedonia and C. Greece; local.} Gr Ju.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 46. A. taygeteum} Heldr., {\i Sched. Herb. Graec. Norm.} no. 1405 (1897). Like {\b 45} but the raceme not elongating in fruit; short stamens with a small appendage at the base; silicula elliptical to elliptic-orbicular, entire or shallowly emarginate; style up to 3 mm. •{\i  S. & C. Greece} ({\i Taïyetos, Giona}). Gr.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 47. A. densistellatum} T.R. Dudley,{\i  Notes Roy. Bot. Gard. Edinb.}{\b  24}: 160 (1962) ({\i A. praecox }auct. graec., non Boiss.). Diffuse to subcaespitose, grey or grey-green perennial up to 10 cm, the non-flowering stems with leaf-rosettes. Basal leaves obovate-spathulate, acute, with petiole up to 4 mm; cauline oblanceolate; hairs c. 0·7 mm in diameter, multi-radiate. Raceme elongate in fruit; pedicels 3-5 mm, patent. Sepals 3-4 mm; petals 5-6 mm, deeply emarginate or almost bifid. Silicula 4·5-6 mm, orbicular-elliptical, emarginate, grey-green; valves dimorphic, one strongly convex, with scarcely flattened margin, the other flat or slightly convex, with a wide flattened or deflexed margin; style 2·5-3·5 mm. Seeds c. 2 mm; wing 0·0-1 mm wide.{\i  Serpentine rocks and stones. • Greece} ({\i C. & N. Evvoia}). Gr.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Sect. ODONTARRHENA (C.A. Meyer) Koch. Perennials. Inflorescence a simple or compound raceme. Filaments with wings or appendages. Ovules solitary in each loculus.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 48. A. murale} Waldst. & Kit.,{\i  Pl. Rar. Hung. }{\b 1}: 5 (1799) ({\i A. argenteum} auct. balcan., {\i A. argenteum} sensu E.I. Nyárády, non All., {\i A. decipiens} E.I. Nyárády, {\i A. gracile} Form.,{\i  A. orphanides} Janka ex E.I. Nyárády, {\i A. punctatum }E.I. Nyárády). Caespitose perennial 25-70 cm, with long non-flowering stems or dense leaf-rosettes. Basal leaves obovate- or oblanceolate-spathulate; cauline leaves usually 10-20 × 3-6 mm, lanceolate or oblanceolate, grey-green above, white or grey beneath, larger then the basal leaves. Petals 2-3·5 mm, entire, rarely emarginate. Silicula 2·5-5 × 1·5-4 mm, obtuse to emarginate, pubescent, the hairs with 6-10(-13) rays; valves flat, but often undulate; style 0·5-2 mm. Seeds c. 3 mm; wing 0·2-0·8 mm wide. 2n = 30.{\i  S.E. Europe}. Al Bu Gr Ju Rm Rs(W, K) [Au Ge].
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 A very variable species. The following is a key to some of the more distinct variants that have been described, but many intermediates occur and their distributions do not permit a satisfactory subspecific treatment.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Plant densely hirsute; hairs with long, spreading rays ................. {\b A. pichleri}
\par
1 Plant appressed-pubescent; hairs with appressed rays
\par
2 Style of silicula 0·5-1 mm; inflorescence subumbellate; pedicels
\par
   filiform, flexuous ..................................................................{\b  A. chalcidicum}
\par
2 Style of silicula (0·8-)1-2 mm; inflorescence corymbose,
\par
  the branches not congested; pedicels stout, rigid
\par
3 Hairs on the silicula at least 0·35 mm in diameter, ± dense;
\par
  leaves acute .....................................................................................{\b  A. murale}
\par
3 Hairs on the silicula 0·2-0·3 mm in diameter, sparse;
\par
  cauline leaves ± obtuse
\par
4 Decumbent; silicula elliptic- to orbicular-obovate ...............{\b  A. degenianum}
\par
4 Usually erect; silicula elliptical or orbicular
\par
5 Petals 2-2·5 mm, obtuse, sparsely pubescent;
\par
  style glabrous ....................................................................... {\b A. chlorocarpum}
\par
5 Petals 3-3·5 mm, emarginate; style sparsely pubescent ....... {\b A. subvirescens}
\par

\par
366}
\par