{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 c. 2 mm; petals c. 3·5 mm. Silicula 3·5-4·5 × 2·5-3 mm, elliptical, obovate or rarely suborbicular, obtuse, greyish-green; valves asymmetrically inflated; style 1·2-2 mm. Seeds 1·5-1·7 mm; wing absent or up to 0·3 mm wide. •{\i  E. Greece} ({\i Evvoia}). Gr.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 60. A. sibiricum} Willd., {\i Sp. Pl.}{\b  3}({\b 1}): 465 (1800) ({\i A. suffrutescens} (Boiss.) Halácsy, {\i A. montanum} subsp. {\i epirotium} (Baumg.) Hayek, {\i A. epirotium }(Baumg.) E.I. Nyárády,{\i  A. halacsyi} E.I. Nyárády, {\i A. lepidulum }E.I. Nyárády,{\i  A. minutiflorum }Boiss., {\i A. murale} subsp.{\i  dramense} E.I. Nyárády,{\i  A. novakii} E.I. Nyárády). Plant 5-20 cm, erect or procumbent, stout and woody at the base, with non-flowering rosettes or short stems. Basal leaves up to 7(-15) × 3·5 mm, spathulate, grey-green to white; cauline leaves oblanceolate to suborbicular, grey-green, the largest near the apex of the stem; hairs with unequal, often patent rays up to 1·5 mm in diameter. Sepals 1-1·5 mm; petals 2-2·5 mm. Silicula 3-4 × 2-3·5 mm, broadly obovate, obtuse or emarginate, grey; hairs 0·4-0·7 mm in diameter, with 10-14 unequal rays; valves asymmetrically inflated; style 0·8-1·1 mm. Seeds c. 1·5 mm, not winged.{\i  Balkan peninsula.} Al Gr Ju Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 61. A. caliacrae} E.I. Nyárády, {\i Bul. Grad. Bot. Univ. Cluj }{\b 6}: 92 (1926) ({\i A. obtusifolium }subsp. {\i cordatocarpum} E.I. Nyárády, {\i A. eximeum} (E.I. Nyárády) E.I. Nyárády, {\i A. racemosum} (E.I. Nyárády) E.I. Nyárády). Plant 10-30 cm, procumbent or ascending, woody at the base, with short or elongate non-flowering stems. Leaves up to 7 × 3 mm, the smallest near the apex of the stem, oblanceolate, white; hairs 0·5-1 mm in diameter. Sepals 1·9-2 mm; petals 2-2·8 mm. Silicula 3-5 × 2·5-4 mm, obovate to obovate-orbicular, emarginate, grey-green, punctate; hairs 0·4-0·5 mm in diameter, persistent; valves asymmetrically inflated; style 0·6-1·5 mm. Seeds c. 1·5 mm; wing absent or 0·2-0·5 mm wide.{\i  S.E. Europe.} Bu Gr Ju Rm Rs(K).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 62. A. borzaeanum} E.I. Nyárády, {\i op. cit.} 90 (1926). Plant 10-30 cm, ascending or erect, with short or long non-flowering stems. Basal leaves 6-7 × 3-5 mm, obovate-spathulate to suborbicular, obtuse; cauline leaves oblanceolate, the largest near the apex of the stem, whitish; hairs 0·4-1·0 mm in diameter. Sepals c. 1·5 mm; petals 2-2·3 mm. Silicula 2-3 × 2-3 mm, obcordate, grey; hairs 0·2-0·4 mm in diameter, easily displaced; valves asymmetrically inflated; style c. 1 mm. Seeds c. 1·5 mm, not winged.{\i  Black Sea coasts.} Bu Rm Rs(W, K).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 63. A. obtusifolium} Steven ex DC.,{\i  Reg. Veg. Syst. Nat.}{\b  2}: 305 (1821) ({\i A. tortuosum} subsp.{\i  savranicum} E.I. Nyárády pro parte). Plant up to 30(-35) cm, ascending, with long non-flowering stems. Basal leaves (5-)7-10 × 4·5-5(-6) mm, spathulate to suborbicular, obtuse; cauline leaves 10-15 × 3-4 mm, oblanceolate-spathulate, white. Sepals 2-3 mm; petals 2·5-3·5 mm. Silicula 2·3-3·6 × 2·5-3·3 mm, elliptical to suborbicular, rarely obovate, obtuse or truncate, sparsely pubescent; valves asymmetrically inflated; style 1-1·5 mm. Seeds not winged.{\i  S.E. Europe.} Bu Gr Rm Rs(K).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b obtusifolium} : Stem 10-30(-35) cm. Basal leaves 7-10 mm, spathulate. 2n = 32. {\i Throughout the range of the species except Thasos}.
\par
 ({\b b}) Subsp.{\b  helioscopioides} E.I. Nyárády,{\i  Bul. Grad. Bot. Univ. Cluj }{\b 7}: 167 (1927): Stem 5-10 cm. Basal leaves 5-7 mm, suborbicular, very crowded. • {\i  Thasos}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 64. A. obovatum} (C.A. Meyer) Turcz.,{\i  Bull. Soc. Nat. Moscou}{\b  1}: 57 (1837) ({\i A. fallax} E.I. Nyárády,{\i  A. odessanum} E.I. Nyárády). Like subsp. ({\b a}) but plant not more than 10(-15) cm, with short non-flowering stems; basal leaves 6-8 × c. 3 mm, obovate-spathulate to suborbicular; cauline leaves smaller; silicula 3·5-5 × 2·5-3·5 mm, elliptical, densely white-pubescent; hairs c. 0·3 mm in diameter, 20-to 25-rayed.{\i  S. Ukraine, S.E. Russia.} Rs(W, E).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 65. A. tortuosum} Willd., {\i Sp. Pl. }{\b 3}({\b 1}): 466 (1800) ({\i A. grintescui} E.I. Nyárády). Plant 6-35(-60) cm, procumbent or ascending, with few, long non-flowering stems. Largest leaves 9-25 × 2-5 mm, spathulate or oblanceolate, more or less acute, grey or white; cauline leaves sometimes larger than the basal. Sepals c. 2 mm; petals c. 2·5 mm. Silicula 3-4 × 2-2·5 mm, elliptical or elliptic-obovate, truncate or emarginate, densely grey-pubescent; valves usually asymmetrically inflated; style 0·5-1 mm, pubescent. Seeds c. 1·5 mm, not winged. 2n = 32.{\i  E. & E.C. Europe.} Bu Cz Gr Hu Ju Rm Rs(C, W, K, E) Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 66. A. longistylum} (Sommier & Levier) Grossh. in Grossh. & Schischkin,{\i  Sched. Herb. Pl. Or. Exsicc.}{\b  1}: 18 (1924) ({\i A. tortuosum} var.{\i  longistylum} (Sommier & Levier) N. Busch, {\i A. cuneipetalum} E.I. Nyárády). Like {\b 65} but the petals 3-3·5 mm; silicula 4-6 × 2·5-3 mm, attenuate towards the apex; style 1·5-3 mm, glabrous.{\i  Krym.} Rs(K). ({\i Caucasus.})
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 67. A. alpestre} L., {\i Mantissa} 92 (1767). Plant 5-15(-20) cm, usually procumbent, with numerous non-flowering rosettes. Leaves 4-7 × 1·5-3·5 mm, oblanceolate or obovate-spathulate, white or rarely grey-green. Sepals 2-2·5 mm; petals 3-3·5 mm, entire. Silicula 2·5-4·5 × 2·5-3·5 mm, elliptical, subacute to emarginate, white-pubescent; hairs 12- to 16-rayed; valves asymmetrically inflated; style 0·7-1·7 mm. Seeds 1·5-2 mm, not or narrowly winged. •{\i  S.W. & C. Alps, eastwards to }7° 50'{\i  E. }Ga He It.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 68. A. serpyllifolium} Desf.,{\i  Fl. Atl}{\b . 2}: 70 (1798) ({\i A. argenteum} sensu E.I. Nyárády, non All.,{\i  A. mijasense} E.I. Nyárády, {\i A. pyrenaicum} (Jordan & Fourr.) E.I. Nyárády). Plant up to 30 cm, procumbent to erect, with numerous non-flowering rosettes or short stems. Leaves up to 18 × 4 mm, oblanceolate or obovate-spathulate, grey or white beneath, grey or grey-green above, plicate on the non-flowering stems. Sepals 1·5-2 mm; petals 2-2·5(-3) mm, entire. Silicula 2·5-4·5 × (1·5-)2-3·5 mm, broadly elliptical or elliptic-rhombic to obovate, usually subacute, densely white-pubescent; hairs 12- to 16-rayed; valves asymmetrically inflated; style 0·8-1·5 mm. Seeds 1·3-1·8 mm, not or only narrowly winged. 2n = 32.{\i  S.W. Europe.} Ga Hs Lu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Very variable and possibly divisible into a number of subspecies.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 69. A. nebrodense} Tineo, {\i Pl. Rar. Sic. Pug.} 12 (1817). Plant 3-12(-16) cm, procumbent, caespitose, with numerous, short non-flowering stems. Basal leaves orbicular-spathulate, obtuse, white; cauline leaves up to 8-9 × 3 mm, usually spathulate, grey-green. Sepals 2 mm; petals 2·5-3 mm. Silicula (3·5-)4-6 × 2·5-4 mm, elliptical, obtuse or emarginate, white-pubescent; hairs 12- to 16-rayed; valves asymmetrically inflated; style 0·7-2 mm. Seeds c. 1·75 mm, not winged. {\i Calcareous rocks and screes. • Sicilia; C. Greece.} Gr Si.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp.{\b  nebrodense}: Stems somewhat woody at the base. Stellate hairs on leaves 0·5-0·75 mm in diameter, those on the silicula 0·25-0·5 mm in diameter.{\i  Sicilia} ({\i Madonie}).
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b tenuicaule} Hartvig in Strid,{\i  Mount. Fl. Gr.}{\b  1}: 300 (1986): stems not woody at the base, more slender than those of subsp. ({\b a}). Stellate hairs on leaves 0·4-0·5 mm in diameter, those on
\par

\par
368}
\par