{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 elliptical to lanceolate, acute, green; hairs c. 0 5 mm in diameter, 5- to 7-rayed. Raceme dense in fruit; pedicels up to 10-13 mm, erecto-patent, with long patent hairs. Sepals 2·5-4 mm; petals 5-7 mm, truncate. Silicula 4-6 mm, orbicular or orbicular-ovate, pubescent, emarginate; valves inflated, flattened on the margin; style 3-4·5 mm. Seeds c. 3 mm; wing c. 0·1 mm wide. •{\i  C. Danube basin.} Bu Ju Rm.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 30. A. calycocarpum} Rupr.,{\i  Mém. Acad. Sci. Pétersb.}{\b  15}({\b 2}): 103 (1869). Erect perennial 15-35 cm; indumentum dimorphic on the inflorescence, grey-white; non-flowering stems more or less long. Lower leaves obovate or obovate-orbicular, obtuse, the upper oblanceolate. Raceme elongate in fruit; pedicels up to 9 mm, patent or erecto-patent. Sepals 2·5-4 mm; petals 4-7 mm. Silicula 4·5-6·5 mm, orbicular or orbicular-ovate, densely pubescent; valves inflated, with flattened margin; style 2-3·5 mm. Seeds c. 3 mm, winged.{\i  Dry, rocky slopes. • Krym.} Rs(K).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 31. A. pulvinare} Velen.,{\i  Sitz.-Ber. Böhm. Ges. Wiss. }{\b 1889}: 30 (1889). Caespitose perennial 6-15 cm, with numerous rosettes and short non-flowering stems; indumentum dimorphic, grey. Basal leaves oblanceolate or spathulate, the upper lanceolate-spathulate, long-petiolate; hairs c. 1 mm in diameter. Racemes elongate in fruit; pedicels up to 8 mm. Sepals 3-4 mm; petals 5-6 mm, obovate, abruptly attenuate into claw. Silicula 4-5·5 mm, elliptical to suborbicular, pubescent; valves inflated, with a flattened margin; style 3-5 mm. Seeds c. 1·5 mm, broadly winged. 2n = 32. •{\i  C. part of Balkan peninsula southwards to C. Greece; Romania.} Bu Gr Ju Rm.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 32. A. montanum} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 650 (1753) (incl. {\i A. thessalum} Halácsy, {\i A. vourinonense} T.R. Dudley & Rech. fil.). Procumbent to erect, green to almost white perennial 5-25 cm, with non-flowering rosettes or short stems. Basal leaves oblong or oblanceolate-spathulate, the upper linear or linear-spathulate; hairs 0·4-0·7 mm in diameter, 6- to 24-rayed. Raceme elongate in fruit; pedicels 4-6 mm, patent or erecto-patent. Sepals 2·5-3·5 mm; petals emarginate. Silicula 3-5·5 mm; valves inflated, with flattened margin. Seeds 1·5-2 mm; wing 0·2-0·4 mm wide.{\i  Most of Europe except the north, much of the west and the islands}. Al Au Bu Cz Ga Ge Gr He Hs Hu It Ju Po Rm Rs(B, C, W, K, E) Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp.{\b  montanum} ({\i A. thessalum} Halácsy): Procumbent or ascending with numerous non-flowering rosettes. Petals 4·5-6 mm; long stamens with a unilateral appendage. Silicula 3·5-5·5 mm, orbicular; style 1-3 mm. 2n = 16.{\i  Stony or rocky places, usually in the mountains. C. & S. Europe}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp.{\b  gmelinii} (Jordan) E. Schmid in Hegi,{\i  Ill. Fl. Mitteleur.}{\b  4}({\b 1}): 451 (1919) ({\i A. gmelinii }Jordan): Ascending or erect with few non-flowering rosettes. Petals usually 3·5-4 mm; long stamens with a bilateral appendage. Silicula 3-5 mm, obovate-orbicular; style 2-3·5 mm. 2n = 32.{\i  Sandy places, usually lowland. C. & E. Europe}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Subsp. ({\b a}) is very variable and possibly divisible into a number of other subspecies.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Dwarf plants from S. Spain (Sierra Nevada) which are like {\b 32}({\b a}) but with the basal leaves lanceolate or linear-lanceolate, the cauline linear, and hairs (0·5-)0·7-1 mm in diameter have been named{\b  A. nevadense} Wilmott ex P.W. Ball & T.R. Dudley,{\i  Jour. Arnold Arb.}{\b  45}: 364 (1964).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 33. A. fastigiatum} Heywood, {\i Bull. Brit. Mus. }({\i Bot}.) {\b 1}: 92 (1954). Like {\b 32}({\b a}) but the stems 15-25 cm, numerous, erect, fastigiate; sepals 2-3 mm; petals 3-4·5 mm, deeply emarginate; silicula 2·5-3 mm; style 1·5-2·5 mm. • {\i S.E. Spain} ({\i Sierra de Cazorla}). Hs.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 34. A. gustavssonii} Hartvig in Strid,{\i  Mount. Fl. Gr.}{\b  1}: 293 (1986). Like {\b 32}({\b a}) but caespitose, the flowering stems 2-5(-8) cm, ascending to erect; raceme condensed in fruit; pedicels 2·5-4 mm; sepals c. 2 mm; petals 3·5-4 mm, entire; silicula with sparse, 8- to 12-rayed stellate hairs; seeds wingless or very narrowly winged.{\i  Limestone rocks and screes,} 1850-2500 {\i m. • C. Greece.} Gr.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 35. A. diffusum} Ten., {\i Cat. Pl. Horti Neap}. app., ed. 1: 58 (1815). Diffuse, grey-green perennial up to 10 cm, with long, procumbent non-flowering stems. Basal leaves obovate or elliptical; upper leaves elliptical, cuneate or lanceolate; hairs 0·7-1 mm in diameter, sparse. Raceme elongate in fruit; pedicels 4-5 mm. Sepals 3-4 mm; petals 5-7 mm, emarginate. Silicula 4-6 mm, orbicular to ovate-orbicular; valves inflated, with a flattened margin; style 2·5-3·5 mm. Seeds 1·5-2 mm; wing c. 0·3 mm wide, or absent. •{\i  Mountains of S.W. Europe; C. & S. Italy.} Ga ?Gr Hs It.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28     {\b 36. A. cuneifolium} Ten.,{\i  Prodr. Fl. Nap.} xxxvii (1811) ({\i A. brigantiacum} Jordan & Fourr.). Grey or almost white, caespitose perennial 5-15 cm with numerous non-flowering rosettes, and diffuse, flexuous flowering stems. Basal leaves oblong-obovate, attenuate into the petiole; cauline leaves usually narrower, obtuse or subacute; hairs c. 0·6 mm in diameter, multi-radiate, very crowded. Raceme very short and dense in fruit; pedicels up to 6 mm, patent. Sepals 3-4 mm; petals 5-8 mm, emarginate. Silicula (3-)5-7 × 3·5-4·5 mm, orbicular-elliptical, truncate, densely grey-pubescent; valves inflated, with a flattened margin; style 2-4 mm. Seeds 1·5-3 mm; wing c. 0·3 mm. •{\i  Mountains of S. Europe from the E. Pyrenees to the C. Appennini; very local.} Ga Hs It.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Similar plants have been reported from Macedonia but their identity requires confirmation.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 37. A. arenarium} Loisel.,{\i  Fl. Gall.} 401 (1807) ({\i A. loiseleurii} P. Fourn.). Like {\b 36} but the basal leaves suborbicular; cauline leaves ovate-spathulate, obtuse; silicula 5-8 mm, suborbicular, emarginate. Maritime sands. •{\i  S.W. France and N. Spain.} Ga Hs.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 38. A. atlanticum} Desf., {\i Fl; Atl.}{\b  2}: 71 (1798). Greyish-white, caespitose perennial 5-15 cm, with numerous non-flowering rosettes. Basal leaves oblong-obovate or oblong-oblanceolate, obtuse or subacute, not obviously petiolate; cauline leaves linear-oblanceolate; hairs c. 0·6 mm in diameter, multi-radiate, very crowded. Raceme short and crowded in fruit; pedicels 4-7 mm, patent or erecto-patent. Sepals 3·5-5·5 mm; petals 6-8 mm. Silicula 3-5·5 mm, orbicular-truncate or emarginate, pubescent; valves inflated, with a flattened margin; style 2·5-3 mm. Seeds c. 1·7 mm; wing 0.01 mm wide.{\i  S. & E. Spain.} Hs.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 39. A. moellendorfianum} Ascherson ex G. Beck,{\i  Ann. Naturh. Mus.} ({\i Wien}) {\b 2}: 73 (1887) ({\i ?A. galicicae} (Form.) Hayek). Silvery- or grey-lepidote, caespitose perennial 5-15 cm, with non-flowering rosettes or short stems. Leaves oblong-spathulate to orbicular-obovate, petiolate; hairs c. 0·4 mm in diameter. Raceme elongate in fruit; pedicels 5-7 mm, patent or erecto-patent. Sepals 2-2·5 mm; petals 5-6 mm, emarginate. Silicula 4·5-5 mm, orbicular, truncate or emarginate, densely lepidote; valves inflated, with a flattened margin; style 2-2·5 mm. Seeds c. 1·7 mm; wing c. 0·2 mm wide. • {\i W. Jugoslavia.} Ju.
\par

\par
365}
\par