{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}
\pard\f0\fs28\li200 76 Hairs on the leaves not more than 5- to 10-rayed
\par 77 Silicula elliptical or elliptic-orbicular, distinctly longer
\par   than wide ................................................................................. {\b 26. scardicum}
\par 77 Silicula ± orbicular
\par 78 Basal leaves linear-lanceolate to oblanceolate-spathulate,
\par   the cauline linear or linear-spathulate; hairs on leaves usually
\par   not more than 0·5-0·7 mm in diameter ................................... {\b 32. montanum}
\par 78 Basal leaves obovate to elliptical, the cauline elliptical,
\par   cuneate; hairs on leaves 0·7-1 mm in diameter ......................... {\b 35. diffusum}
\par 76 At least some hairs on leaves 10- to many-rayed
\par 79 Lower pedicels shorter than the silicula;
\par   valves of silicula dissimilar .............................................. {\b 47. densistellatum}
\par 79 Lower pedicels equalling or longer than the silicula;
\par   valves of silicula similar
\par 80 Lower pedicels 10-15 mm in fruit, often deflexed ........... {\b 41. sphacioticum}
\par 80 Lower pedicels less than 10 mm in fruit, patent or erecto-patent
\par 81 Silicula at least 6 mm, elliptical or elliptic-orbicular, rarely
\par   rarely suborbicular
\par 82 Silicula densely grey-pubescent
\par 83 Basal leaves oblong-obovate; silicula elliptic-orbicular,
\par   truncate ................................................................................. {\b 36. cuneifolium}
\par 83 Basal leaves suborbicular; silicula suborbicular,
\par   emarginate ............................................................................... {\b 37. arenarium}
\par 82 Silicula green, sparsely pubescent
\par 84 Petals glabrous; silicula 6-6·5 mm; basal leaves oblong-obovate,
\par   gradually attenuate into petiole .......................................... {\b 27. wulfenianum}
\par 84 Petals pubescent on the back; silicula 6·5-8 mm; basal leaves
\par   orbicular-obovoid-ovate, abruptly contracted into petiole ......... {\b 28. ovirense}
\par 81 Silicula not more than 6 mm, orbicular, rarely elliptic-orbicular
\par 85 Basal leaves ± abruptly contracted into petiole
\par 86 Hairs on the leaves c. 0·4 mm in diameter ............... {\b 39. moellendorfianum}
\par 86 Hairs on the leaves 0·5-0·7 mm in diameter
\par 87 Basal leaves suborbicular, the cauline ovate-spathulate ....... {\b 37. arenarium}
\par 87 Basal leaves broadly spathulate to obovate, the cauline oblanceolate
\par   or spathulate
\par 88 Lower pedicels 11/2-2 times as long as the orbicular silicula;
\par   non-flowering stems long .......................................................... {\b 40. stribrnyi}
\par 88 Lower pedicels about equalling the elliptic-orbicular silicula;
\par   non-flowering stems very short, terminated by a rosette ..... {\b 36. cuneifolium}
\par 85 Basal leaves gradually attenuate towards base, not obviously petiolate
\par 89 Petals 6-8 mm; leaves usually white or grey ........................ {\b 38. atlanticum}
\par 89 Petals 3-6 mm; leaves usually green or grey-green
\par 90 Silicula 2·5-3 mm ................................................................ {\b 33. fastigiatum}
\par 90 Silicula 3-5·5 mm
\par 91 Silicula with dense, 12- to 24-rayed stellate hairs ................ {\b 32. montanum}
\par 91 Silicula with sparse, 8- to 12-rayed stellate hairs .............. {\b 34. gustavssonii}
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28 Sect. PTILOTRICHUM (C.A. Meyer) Hooker fil. Perennial herbs or small shrubs. Filaments usually not toothed or winged. Petals white, pink or purple. Ovules 1 or 2 in each loculus.
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. A. pyrenaicum} Lapeyr.,{\i  Hist. Abr. Pyr. }371 (1813) ({\i Ptilotrichum pyrenaicum} (Lapeyr.) Boiss.). Small, caespitose shrub up to 50 cm, with a woody stock branched above, and bearing clusters of leaves or erect flowering stems up to 20 cm. Leaves obovate-lanceolate, attenuate at the base, silvery with stellate hairs. Flowers in a dense corymb; petals c. 6 mm, white, obovate-orbicular, abruptly contracted into a claw. Silicula 6-8 mm, rhomboid-obovoid, compressed, pubescent; style about as long as the silicula. Seeds winged.{\i  Limestone cliffs. • E. Pyrenees} ({\i Font de Comps}). Ga.
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. A. reverchonii} (Degen & Hervier) Greuter & Burdet, {\i Willdenowia }{\b 13}: 86 (1983) ({\i Ptilotrichum reverchonii} Degen & Hervier). Like {\b 1} but the leaves broadly spathulate; petals very shortly clawed; silicula glabrous; style 1/3-1/2 as long as the silicula.{\i  Limestone cliffs. • S.E. Spain} ({\i Sierra de Cazorla and adjacent mountains}). Hs.
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 3. A. lapeyrousianum} Jordan,{\i  Obs. Pl. Crit.}{\b  1}: 5 (1846) ({\i Ptilotrichum lapeyrousianum} (Jordan) Jordan,{\i  P. peyrousianum} Willk.). Small, caespitose shrub up to 30 cm, with branched, woody stock. Flowering stems 7·5-15 cm, erect. Leaves oblong to oblong-lanceolate, obtuse, attenuate at the base, silvery with appressed stellate hairs. Inflorescence racemose; petals 3-4 mm, white, obovate. Infructescence lax, elongate; silicula 4-6 mm, glabrous; style up to 1/4 as long as the silicula. Seeds winged.{\i  Limestone cliffs and screes. • E. Pyrenees,} Ga Hs.
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 4. A. ligusticum} Breistr., {\i Bull. Soc. Sci. Dauph.}{\b  61}: 616 (1947) {\i Ptilotrichum halimifolium} Boiss., {\i Alyssum halimifolium} auct., non L.). but with the siliculae in short, dense, corymbose clusters; 1/3-1/2 as long as the silicula; seeds broadly winged.{\i  Rocks. • S.E. France, N.W. Italy}. Ga It.
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 5. A. baeticum} (Küpfer) Greuter & Burdet, {\i Willdenowia }{\b 13}: 85 (1983) ({\i Hormathophylla baetica} Küpfer). Small shrub 15-30(-40) cm, silvery-grey with appressed stellate hairs. Flowering stems 5-10 cm, not or slightly branched. Leaves 4-12(-16) × 1·5 4(-6) mm, oblong-spathulate, gradually tapering to a short petiole. Inflorescence dense; petals 4·5-5 × 2-2·5(-3) mm, white or creamy-white. Infructescence 5-10 cm, lax; silicula elliptical, cochleariform, glabrous; style 0·7-1·2 mm. Seeds 2·2-2·6 × 1·7-2 mm, with narrow wing, mucilaginous. 2n = 22.  •{\i S.E. Spain.}Hs.
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 6. A. longicaule} Boiss. {\i Biblioth. Univ. Genève} ser. 2, {\b 13}: 407 (1838) ({\i Ptilotrichum longicaule} (Boiss.) Boiss.). Laxly caespitose perennial, woody at the base. Stems (12-)20-60 cm, fragile. Basal leaves obovate-spathulate, acute, attenuate into the petiole; cauline leaves few, linear-lanceolate; all grey with dense, appressed stellate hairs. Petals 2-4 × 0·5-1 mm, white. Silicula 4-6 mm, sessile
\par
\par 362}
\par