{\rtf1\ansi \deff4\deflang1033{\fonttbl{\f4\froman\fcharset0\fprq2 Times New Roman;}}{\colortbl;\red0\green0\blue0;\red0\green0\blue255;\red0\green255\blue255;\red0\green255\blue0;\red255\green0\blue255;\red255\green0\blue0;\red255\green255\blue0;\red255\green255\blue255;\red0\green0\blue128;\red0\green128\blue128;\red0\green128\blue0;\red128\green0\blue128;\red128\green0\blue0;\red128\green128\blue0;\red128\green128\blue128;\red192\green192\blue192;}{\stylesheet{\widctlpar \f4\fs20\lang2057 \snext0 Normal;}{\*\cs10 \additive Default Paragraph Font;}}{\info{\author dddd}{\operator dddd}{\creatim\yr1998\mo11\dy11\hr16\min51}{\revtim\yr1998\mo11\dy11\hr16\min52}{\version2}{\edmins1}{\nofpages4}{\nofwords1008}{\nofchars5750}{\*\company  }{\vern57431}}\widowctrl\ftnbj\aenddoc\hyphcaps0 \fet0\sectd \linex0 {\*\pnseclvl1\pnucrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl2\pnucltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl3\pndec\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl4\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl5\pndec\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl6\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl7\pnlcrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl8\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl9\pnlcrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}
\pard\plain \li200\ \f4\fs20\lang2057 {\fs28 0\'b75-1 mm. Seeds 1\'b75-1\'b77 mm, narrowly winged. 2n = 16. }{\i\fs28 S. & E. Europe.}{\fs28  Bu Cr Gr Hs It Ju Lu Rm Rs(C, W, K, E) Si Tu.
\par 
\par }
\pard \ {\fs28    }{\b\fs28 19. A. umbellatum}{\fs28  Desv., }{\i\fs28 Jour. Bot. Appl.}{\b\fs28  3}{\fs28 : 173 (1814). Grey annual up to 10 cm. Leaves linear or linear-oblong. Raceme subumbellate in fruit, dense; pedicels 3-5 mm, erecto-patent. Sepals 2-2\'b72 mm, deciduous; petals c. 3 mm, emarginate. Silicula 4-5\'b75 mm, ovate, pubescent; valves inflated; style 0\'b77-1\'b72 mm. Seeds 1\'b77-2\'b71 mm, narrowly winged. 2n = 16.}{\i\fs28  S.E. Europe.}{\fs28  Bu Cr Gr Ju Rs(K) Tu.
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 20. A. minus}{\fs28  (L.) Rothm.,}{\i\fs28  Feddes Repert.}{\b\fs28  50}{\fs28 : 77 (1941) (}{\i\fs28 A. campestre}{\fs28  auct., }{\i\fs28 A. micranthum}{\fs28  C.A. Meyer,}{\i\fs28  A. micropetalum }{\fs28 Fischer & C.A. Meyer; incl. }{\i\fs28 A. parviflorum}{\fs28  Bieb.). Grey-green annual up to 40 cm. Leaves oblong-obovate to oblong-lanceolate. Raceme elongate in fruit; pedicels 3-6 mm, erecto-patent. Sepals 1\'b75-2\'b75 mm, caducous; petals 2-3\'b75 mm, gradually attenuate towards the base, entire to emarginate; filaments of the short stamens 1\'b75-2\'b75 mm, with connate appendages; nectaries 0\'b71 mm. Silicula 3\'b75-6 mm, suborbicular, pubescent; valves inflated, with flattened margin; style 0\'b77-1\'b76 mm. Seeds 1\'b77-2 mm; wing up to 0\'b74 mm wide.}{\i\fs28  S. & E. Europe.}{\fs28  Al Bu Cr Ga Gr Hs It Ju Lu Rm Rs(C, W, K, E) Sa Si Tu.
\par 
\par  (}{\b\fs28 a}{\fs28 ) Subsp.}{\b\fs28  minus}{\fs28  : Short stamens with appendages \'bd as long as the filament. Pedicels and silicula with only stellate hairs; style pubescent. 2n = 16.}{\i\fs28  Almost throughout the range of the species}{\fs28 .
\par  (}{\b\fs28 b}{\fs28 ) Subsp.}{\b\fs28  strigosum}{\fs28  (Banks & Solander) Stoj. in Jordanov, }{\i\fs28 Fl. Rep. Pop. Bulg.}{\b\fs28  4}{\fs28 : 503 (1970) (}{\i\fs28 A. strigosum}{\fs28  Banks & Solander, }{\i\fs28 A. cephalotes}{\fs28  auct. balcan.): Short stamens up to \'be as long as the filament. Pedicels and silicula with bifid as well as stellate hairs; style glabrous or sparsely pubescent. 2n = 16.}{\i\fs28  Mainly in S.E. Europe.}{\fs28 
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 21. A. siculum}{\fs28  Jordan,}{\i\fs28  Diagn. }{\b\fs28 1}{\fs28 : 202 (1864). Like }{\b\fs28 20}{\fs28 (}{\b\fs28 a}{\fs28 ) but not more than 12 cm; sepals deciduous; style 0\'b75-0\'b78 mm; nectaries 0\'b73-0\'b76 mm. 2n = 48. }{\i\fs28 Mountains of C. & S. Greece; Sicilia.}{\fs28  Gr Si.
\par 
\par Perhaps an allopolyploid derived from }{\b\fs28 13}{\fs28  and }{\b\fs28 20}{\fs28 .
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 22. A. hirsutum}{\fs28  Bieb.,}{\i\fs28  Fl. Taur.-Cauc.}{\b\fs28  2}{\fs28 :106 (1808). Annual up to 40 cm. Leaves ovate- to lanceolate-oblong. Raceme long and dense in fruit; pedicels 4-5 mm, erecto-patent. Sepals 2-3\'b75 mm, deciduous, petals 3-5 mm, constricted at the middle, bifid; filaments of the short stamens 2\'b75-3 mm, with usually free appendages as long as the filament. Silicula 5-7 mm, orbicular, with appressed stellate hairs and patent, tubercle-based, unbranched or bifid hairs with unequal branches; valves inflated, with flattened margin; style 1\'b72-2\'b75 mm. Seeds 1\'b77-2\'b75 mm; wing 0\'b72-0\'b75 mm wide. 2n = 46.}{\i\fs28  S.E. Europe.}{\fs28  Bu Ju Rm Rs(W, K, E).
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 23. A. rostratum}{\fs28  Steven,}{\i\fs28  M\'e9m. Acad. Sci. P\'e9tersb. }{\b\fs28 3}{\fs28 : 295 (1809-10). Grey or grey-green annual or biennial 20-60 cm. Lower leaves obovate-spathulate, the upper oblong-lanceolate. Raceme very long and lax in fruit; pedicels 7-20 mm, erecto-patent. Sepals 2\'b75-3\'b75 mm, deciduous; petals 4\'b75-6 mm, emarginate, densely pubescent on the back. Silicula 2\'b75-5\'b75 mm, orbicular-ovate, pubescent; valves inflated, with flattened margin; style 2-3 mm. Seeds c. 2 mm; wing 0\'b73-0\'b75 mm wide.}{\i\fs28  S.E. Europe.}{\fs28  Ju Rm Rs(W, K, E).
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 24. A. repens}{\fs28  Baumg.,}{\i\fs28  Enum. Stirp. Transs.}{\b\fs28  2}{\fs28 : 237 (1816) (}{\i\fs28 A. virescens}{\fs28  Hal\'e1csy). Diffuse or erect perennial up to 60 cm, the non-flowering stems terminated by rosettes; indumentum dimorphic, grey-green. Basal leaves obovate-spathulate; cauline leaves lanceolate or linear-lanceolate, acute. Raceme elongate in fruit; pedicels 4\'b75-10 mm, patent. Sepals 2\'b75-4 mm; petals 4\'b75-7 mm, emarginate, usually glabrous on the back. Silicula 3-6 mm, suborbicular to orbicular-obovate, pubescent, truncate or emarginate; valves inflated, with a narrow, flattened margin; style 1\'b75-3\'b75 mm. Seeds 1\'b75-2 mm; wing usually 0\'b71-0\'b72 mm wide. }{\i\fs28 S.E.& E.C. Europe.}{\fs28  Al Au Bu Gr Ju Rm Rs(K) Tu.
\par 
\par  (}{\b\fs28 a}{\fs28 ) Subsp.}{\b\fs28  repens}{\fs28  (}{\i\fs28 A. transsilvanicum}{\fs28  Schur): Stems usually not.more than 15 cm, procumbent or ascending. Petals 5-7 \'d7 2-3 mm. Silicula up to 6 mm, suborbicular. 2n = 16.}{\i\fs28  E.C. Europe}{\fs28 .
\par 
\par  (}{\b\fs28 b}{\fs28 ) Subsp.}{\b\fs28  trichostachyum}{\fs28  (Rupr.) Hayek,}{\i\fs28  Prodr. Fl. Penins. Balcan. }{\b\fs28 1}{\fs28 : 436 (1925) (}{\i\fs28 A. trichostachyum }{\fs28 Rupr.): Stems up to 50 cm, erect or ascending. Petals 4-6 \'d7 1\'b75-2\'b75 mm. Silicula 3\'b75-4\'b75 mm, orbicular-obovate. 2n = 48.}{\i\fs28  Balkan peninsula; Krym}{\fs28 .
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 25. A. lenense}{\fs28  Adams,}{\i\fs28  M\'e9m. Soc. Nat. Moscou}{\b\fs28  5}{\fs28 : 110 (1817) (}{\i\fs28 ?A. fischerianum}{\fs28  DC.). Ascending perennial 10-30 cm, grey; hairs long, patent. Leaves linear-oblong or linear-lanceolate, acute. Raceme short and dense in fruit; pedicels 5-9 mm, erecto-patent. Sepals 3-4 mm; petals 6-7 mm, deeply emarginate; long stamens with a long tooth on the filament. Silicula (3-)4-7 mm, oblong-obovate or obovate, emarginate, glabrescent; valves inflated, flattened on the margin; style 1\'b75-3(-3\'b75) mm. Seeds 1\'b75-2 mm, not winged.}{\i\fs28  C. & E. Russia.}{\fs28  Rs(?N, C, W, E).
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 26. A. scardicum}{\fs28  Wettst.,}{\i\fs28  Biblioth. Bot.}{\fs28  (}{\i\fs28 Stuttgart}{\fs28 )}{\b\fs28  26}{\fs28 : 24 (1892). Green or grey-green, diffuse perennial 5-20 cm, with short or long non-flowering stems. Lower leaves elliptic-oblanceolate, obtuse; cauline leaves linear; hairs 0\'b74-0\'b76 mm in diameter, 5- to 9-rayed. Raceme short or long in fruit; pedicels up to 8 mm, patent. Sepals 2\'b75-3\'b75 mm; petals 4\'b75-6 mm, entire. Silicula 3-6(-7) \'d7 2-4 mm, elliptical to elliptic-orbicular, densely pubescent; valves inflated, with a flattened margin; style 3-4 mm. Seeds c. 1-7 mm; wing c. 0\'b72 mm wide. 2n = 32. }{\i\fs28 Stony places and cliffs,}{\fs28  1700-2800}{\i\fs28  m. \bullet  Balkan peninsula}{\fs28 . Al Bu Gr Ju.
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 27. A. wulfenianum}{\fs28  Bernh. in Willd.,}{\i\fs28  Enum. Pl. Horti Berol. Suppl.,}{\fs28  44 (1814). Erect or procumbent, diffuse, grey-green to almost white perennial up to 20 cm; non-flowering stems with rosettes. Basal leaves oblong-obovate, obtuse, gradually attenuate into the petiole; cauline leaves oblanceolate, larger than the basal; hairs c. 0\'b75 mm in diameter, 10- to 20-rayed. Raceme elongate in fruit; pedicels up to 8 mm, patent. Sepals 2\'b77-3\'b72 mm; petals 5\'b75-6\'b75 mm, obcordate, glabrous. Silicula 6-6\'b75 \'d7 3-4 mm, elliptical, obtuse, sparsely pubescent; valves inflated; style 2-3 mm. Seeds c. 2\'b77 mm; wing 0\'b72 mm wide. \bullet }{\i\fs28  S.E. Alps.}{\fs28  Au It Ju.
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 28. A. ovirense}{\fs28  A. Kerner, }{\i\fs28 Sched. Fl. Exsicc. Austro-Hung. }{\b\fs28 2}{\fs28 : 99 (1882). Procumbent, diffuse, green or grey-green perennial up to 12 cm; non-flowering stems with rosettes. Basal leaves orbicular-obovate, abruptly contracted into the petiole; cauline leaves oblong-lanceolate, obtuse, about the same size as the basal; hairs c. 0\'b75 mm in diameter, 10- to 16-rayed. Raceme elongate in fruit; pedicels 6-7 mm, erecto-patent. Sepals 3\'b75-4 mm; petals 6-8 mm, entire or emarginate, stellate-pubescent on the back. Silicula 6\'b75-8 \'d7 3\'b75-6 mm, elliptical or obovate, obtuse, sparsely pubescent; valves inflated, with flattened margin; style 2\'b75-3 mm. Seeds c. 2\'b75 mm.}{\i\fs28  Screes. \bullet  S.E. Alps and W. Jugoslavia. }{\fs28 Au It Ju.
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 29. A. wierzbickii}{\fs28  Heuffel, }{\i\fs28 Flora}{\fs28  (}{\i\fs28 Regensb}{\fs28 .) }{\b\fs28 18}{\fs28 : 242 (1835). Robust, erect, green or grey-green biennial or short-lived perennial 40-80 cm; non-flowering stems usually absent. Leaves ovate-
\par 
\par 364}
\par }