{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 obovoid, glabrous; style up to 0·5 mm. Seeds broadly winged.{\i  Limestone rocks and cliffs. • S. Spain.} Hs.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 7. A. cadevallianum} Pau, {\i Mem. Mus. Ci. Nat. Barcelona,} ({\i Bot.}) {\b 1: }9 (1925) ({\i Ptilotrichum cadevallianum} (Pau) Heywood, {\i Hormathophylla cadevalliana} (Pau) T.R. Dudley). Like {\b 6} but leaves suborbicular or obovate-spathulate; petals 4-6 × 2-3 mm; silicula up to 9 mm, shortly stipitate; style 1-1·5 mm. •{\i  S. Spain} ({\i El Maimon, near Velez Rubio}). Hs.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 8. A. macrocarpum} DC., {\i Reg. Veg. Syst. Nat.}{\b  2}: 321 (1821) ({\i Ptilotrichum macrocarpum }(DC.) Boiss.). Small, much-branched shrub, the branches intertwined and becoming more or less spiny. Stems up to 20 cm. Leaves oblong to oblong-ovate, obtuse, crowded at the base of the flowering branches or forming non-flowering rosettes, silvery-green to white, with stellate hairs. Petals 5-6 mm, white, abruptly contracted into a claw. Silicula 8-10 mm, suborbicular, inflated, glabrous; style 1/3-1/2 as long as the silicula. Seeds 2-4 in each loculus, broadly winged. {\i Limestone rocks. • S.France} ({\i from }1° 30'{\i  to }4° 45' {\i E}.) Ga.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 9. A. spinosum} L.,{\i  Sp. Pl.} 650 (1753) ({\i Ptilotrichum spinosum }(L.) Boiss.). Small, convex, much-branched shrub up to 60 cm, the branches becoming spiny with branched spines. Leaves of non-flowering rosettes obovate-spathulate; those of the flowering branches linear-lanceolate; all silvery, with appressed stellate hairs. Petals c. 3 mm, white or purplish, gradually narrowing into a claw. Silicula 4-6 mm, obovoid, glabrous; style 1/6-1/4 as long as the silicula. Seeds 2 in each loculus, broadly winged. {\i Rocks and screes. E. & S. Spain, S. France.} Ga Hs.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 10. A. purpureum} Lag. & Rodr.,{\i  Anal. Ci. Nat. }{\b 5: }275 (1802) ({\i Ptilotrichum purpureum} (Lag. & Rodr.) Boiss.). Small, inconspicuous, densely caespitose, spineless perennial 2-5 cm, half hidden in screes. Leaves spathulate to linear, whitish or greyish, with stellate hairs. Petals 3-4 mm purple. Silicula 4-5 mm, ellipsoid, stellate-hairy; style 1/3-1/2 as long as the silicula.{\i  Screes. • Mountains of S. & S.E. Spain.} Hs.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Sect. MENIOCUS (Desv.) Hooker fil. Annual. Inflorescence a simple raceme. Filaments with appendages. Ovules 4-8 in each loculus.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 11. A. linifolium} Stephan ex Willd.,{\i  Sp. Pl. }{\b 3}({\b 1}): 467 (1800) ({\i Meniocus linifolius} (Stephan ex Willd.) DC.). Erect or ascending, densely grey-pubescent annual up to 35 cm. Leaves linear. Raceme elongate in fruit; pedicels 2·5-7 mm, patent or erecto-patent. Sepals 1·5-2 mm; petals 2-3 mm, emarginate. Silicula 4-7 × 3-4·5 mm, elliptical or obovate-elliptical, glabrous; valves slightly convex; style (0·1-)0·3-0·6 mm. Seeds 1·2-1·3 mm, 4-6(-8) in each loculus, not winged.{\i  S.E. Europe; E. & S. Spain.} Hs Ju Rm Rs(C, W, K, E) Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Sect. PSILONEMA (C.A. Meyer) Hooker fil. Annuals or rarely biennials. Inflorescence a simple raceme. Filaments without appendages, sometimes the filaments of the longer stamens with a filiform nectary at the base. Ovules 2 in each loculus.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 12. A. dasycarpum} Stephan ex Willd.,{\i  Sp. Pl.}{\b  3}({\b 1}): 469 (1800). Erect grey-pubescent annual 10-25 cm. Leaves oblong-lanceolate to obovate. Raceme short and dense in fruit. Sepals c. 2 mm, more or less persistent; petals 2·5-3 mm. Silicula 3-3·5 × 2·5-3 mm, elliptical or orbicular-elliptical, pubescent, the indumentum dimorphic; valves inflated, with flattened margin; style (1-)1·5-1·8(-2) mm. Seeds 1·25-1·5 mm, not winged.{\i  S.E. Russia}. Rs(E).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 13. A. alyssoides} (L.) L., {\i Syst. Nat.} ed. 10,{\b  2}: 1130 (1759) ({\i A. calycinum} L., {\i A. conglobatum} Fil. & Jáv., {\i Clypeola alyssoides} (L.) L.). Erect or ascending, grey-pubescent annual or biennial 5-30(-40) cm. Lower leaves obovate to oblanceolate, the upper narrower. Fruiting raceme long, or short and dense; pedicels 2-4 mm, patent. Sepals 2-2·5 mm, persistent; petals 3-4 mm, emarginate. Silicula 3-4(-4·5) mm, orbicular, pubescent; valves inflated, with flattened margin; style 0·3-0·6 mm. Seeds 1·2-2 mm, narrowly winged. 2n = 32.{\i  Most of Europe, but only as an introduction in the north.} Al Au Be Bu Co Cz Ga Ge Gr He Ho Hs Hu It Ju Lu Po Rm Rs(B, C, W, K, E) Sa ?Si Tu [Br Da Fe No Rs(N) Su].
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 14. A. granatense} Boiss. & Reuter,{\i  Pugillus }9 (1852) ({\i A. hispidum }Loscos & Pardo, {\i A. marizii} Coutinho). Annual up to 20 cm; indumentum monomorphic, dimorphic on the silicula, grey. Leaves elliptic-lanceolate or oblong. Raceme long and dense in fruit; pedicels 2·5-4 mm, erecto-patent. Sepals 2-3 mm, persistent; petals 3-4 mm, emarginate. Silicula 3-5 mm, orbicular or orbicular-elliptical, obtuse or emarginate; valves inflated, with flattened margin; style 0·7-1·5 mm. Seeds 1·5-1·9 mm; wing c. 0·2 mm wide.{\i  E. & S. Spain; Portugal.} Hs Lu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Sect. ALYSSUM. Annuals to perennials. Inflorescence a simple raceme. Most filaments winged or with appendages. Ovules 2 in each loculus.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 15. A. desertorum} Stapf,{\i  Denkschr. Akad. Wiss. Math.-Nat. Kl.} ({\i Wien}) {\b 51}: 302 (1886) ({\i A. minimum} auct.). Grey-green annual up to 20 cm. Cauline leaves linear-lanceolate. Raceme long and dense in fruit; pedicels 2-5 mm, erecto-patent. Sepals 1·5-2 mm, deciduous; petals 2-3 mm, entire or emarginate. Silicula 3-4·5(-5) mm, ovate-orbicular or orbicular, emarginate, glabrous; valves inflated, with flattened margin; style 0·5-1 mm. Seeds 1-1·4 mm, narrowly winged. 2n = 32.{\i  E., E.C. & S.E. Europe}. Al Au Bu Cz Gr Hu Ju Rm Rs(B, C, W, K, E) Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 16. A. foliosum} Bory & Chaub. in Bory, {\i Expéd. Sci. Morée }{\b 3}: 185 (1832). Grey-green annual up to 10 cm. Lower leaves ovate-orbicular, long-petiolate, the upper oblong. Raceme subumbellate in fruit, upper leaves forming an involucre. Sepals 2-2·5 mm, persistent; petals 3-3·5 mm, linear, emarginate. Silicula 4-5(-6·5) mm, ovate, glabrous; valves inflated; style 0·7-1 mm. Seeds 2-2·5 mm, narrowly winged.{\i  Greece; Aegean region.} Cr Gr Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 17. A. smyrnaeum} C.A. Meyer,{\i  Bull. Sci. Acad. Imp. Sci. Pétersb. }{\b 7}: 132 (1840). Grey-pubescent annual up to 10 cm. Leaves oblong-spathulate. Raceme short in fruit. Sepals 2·5-3·5 mm, persistent; petals 3·5-4 mm, emarginate. Silicula 3·5-4·5 mm, ovate or orbicular, glabrous, turgid; style c. 2 mm. Seeds without or with a narrow wing.{\i  S.E. Europe.} Cr Gr Rs(K) Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 18. A. minutum} Schlecht. ex DC., {\i Reg. Veg. Syst. Nat.}{\b  2}: 316 (1821) ({\i A. compactum} De Not., {\i ?A. marginatum} Steudel; incl.{\i  A. psilocarpum }Boiss.,{\i  A. ponticum} Velen.). Annual up to 12 cm; indumentum dimorphic, grey-green. Leaves obovate to oblong. Raceme more or less elongate in fruit, dense; pedicels 4-6 mm, erecto-patent or erect. Sepals c. 2 mm, persistent; petals 2·3-3 mm, emarginate, densely pubescent. Silicula 3-4 mm, orbicular, emarginate, glabrous; valves inflated, with flattened margin; style
\par

\par
363}
\par