{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 the silicula 0·18-0·25 mm in diameter. Pedicels somewhat shorter in fruit than in subsp. ({\b a}).{\i  S.C. Greece} ({\i Vardhousia}).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 70. A. fragillimum} (Bald.) Rech. fil.,{\i  Denkschr. Akad. Wiss. Math.-Nat. Kl.} ({\i Wien}) {\b 105}({\b 2}): 77 (1943) ({\i A. nebrodense }var. {\i fragillimum} (Bald.) Halácsy). Like {\b 69} but plant 1-3 cm; basal leaves lanceolate- to orbicular-spathulate, subacute; cauline leaves 3-4 × 0·5-1·5 mm, orbicular- to linear-spathulate; silicula 3·5-5 × 2-2·5 mm, sparsely pubescent; hairs (16-)18- to 23-rayed. •{\i  Kriti.} Cr.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 50.            Fibigia}                 Medicus
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc By P.W. Ball.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Perennials; hairs mostly stellate, rarely a few simple. Sepals erect; petals yellow, shortly clawed. Fruit a strongly compressed latiseptate silicula; valves flat, not veined; style long; stigma more or less capitate. Seeds 2-8 in each loculus, winged.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Plant usually more than 30 cm, without numerous vegetative
\par
  shoots at the base; sepals 4·5-7 mm; raceme usually more
\par
  than 10 cm in fruit ......................................................................... {\b 1. clypeata}
\par
1 Plant usually less than 30 cm, with numerous vegetative shoots
\par
  at the base; sepals 7-10 mm; raceme less than 10 cm in fruit
\par
2 Leaves with lanate indumentum; silicula at least 9 mm wide,
\par
  not more than twice as long as wide ......................................... {\b 2. lunarioides}
\par
2 Leaves with tomentose indumentum; silicula not more than 8 mm wide,
\par
  usually at least twice as long as wide ........................................... {\b 3. triquetra}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. F. clypeata} (L.) Medicus, {\i Pflanzengatt.}{\b  1}: 91 (1792) ({\i Farsetia clypeata} (L.) R. Br.). Stems 30-75 cm. Lower leaves oblong or oblanceolate, usually green or grey-green, with lanate indumentum. Raceme 10-20 cm in fruit; pedicels 2-5 mm. Sepals 4·5-7 mm; petals 8-13 mm. Silicula 14-28 × 9-13 mm, elliptical. 2n = 16.{\i  N. & C. Italy; Balkan peninsula southwards to N.E. Greece; Krym.} Al Bu Gr It Ju Rs(K) [Au Ga].
\par

\par
{\b F. eriocarpa} (DC.) Boiss.,{\i  Fl. Or.}{\b  1}: 258 (1867), from N.W., C. & S. Greece, differs from{\b  1} only in the long unbranched hairs on the silicula, and is probably not specifically distinct.
\par

\par
   {\b 2. F. lunarioides} (Willd.) Sm. in Sibth. & Sm.,{\i  Fl. Graeca}{\b  7}: 22 (1830). Stems 5-30 cm, woody at the base, subcaespitose, with numerous leafy shoots. Lower leaves obovate-lanceolate to linear-spathulate, with ash-white, lanate indumentum. Raceme not more than 5 cm in fruit; pedicels 5-15 mm. Sepals 7-9 mm; petals 12-16 mm. Silicula 12-22 × 9-18 mm, elliptical to orbicular.{\i  Cliffs. • Kikladhes, Kriti.} Cr Gr.
\par

\par
   {\b 3. F. triquetra} (DC.) Boiss. ex Prantl in Engler & Prantl,{\i  Naturl. Pflanzenfam.}{\b  3}({\b 2}): 196 (1891). Stems 5-20 cm, woody at the base, subcaespitose, with numerous leafy shoots. Lower leaves obovate to oblanceolate, with very closely appressed, silver-grey indumentum. Raceme up to 8 cm in fruit; pedicels 3-10 mm. Sepals 8-10 mm; petals 13-19 mm. Silicula 12-17 × 5-8 mm, elliptical or elliptic-oblong. {\i Cliffs. • W. Jugoslavia}. Ju.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 51.              Berteroa}               DC.
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc  By P.W. Ball.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Annuals to perennials; hairs stellate and sometimes also simple. Sepals erect to erecto-patent, not saccate at the base; petals white or pale yellow, sometimes becoming reddish, deeply bifid; outer filaments with a tooth at the base, the inner broad towards the base or toothed. Fruit a latiseptate silicula; valves flat or somewhat inflated, without a conspicuous median vein; style distinct; stigma capitate. Seeds 2-6 in each loculus, sometimes winged.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 All species occur in sandy, stony or rocky places, or as ruderals.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Petals pale yellow; silicula about as long as wide, orbicular
\par
   or obovate-orbicular .................................................................. {\b 3. orbiculata}
\par
1 Petals white or very pale cream, sometimes becoming reddish;
\par
  silicula 1·5-3 times as long as wide, elliptical or elliptic-orbicular
\par
2 Style 0·5-1 mm (Crna Gora) ............................................................ {\b 5. gintlii}
\par
2 Style 1-4 mm
\par
3 Silicula inflated; seeds margined, but not conspicuously
\par
   winged ............................................................................................ {\b 4. incana}
\par
3 Silicula flat; seeds winged
\par
4 Silicula pubescent with stellate hairs;
\par
  style usually at least 2 mm ............................................................. {\b 1. obliqua}
\par
4 Silicula ± glabrous; style 1-2 mm .............................................. {\b 2. mutabilis}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. B. obliqua} (Sm.) DC., {\i Reg. Veg. Syst. Nat.}{\b  2}: 292 (1821) ({\i B. mutabilis} auct. ital., pro parte,{\i  Alyssum mutabile} auct. ital., pro parte; incl. {\i B. stricta} f.{\i  pindicola} (Halácsy) Hayek). Biennial or perennial 10-50 cm. Leaves lanceolate. Petals 5-8 mm, white becoming reddish. Silicula 8-12 × 4-5 mm, elliptical, flat, pubescent with stellate and sometimes with unbranched hairs; style 1·5-4 mm. Seeds broadly winged.{\i  Balkan peninsula southwards from c.} 43°{\i  N.; C. & S. Italy}. Al Bu Gr It Ju Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. B. mutabilis} (Vent.) DC., {\i loc. cit.} (1821). Like {\b 1} but leaves lanceolate to obovate-elliptical; petals 4-6 mm; silicula 6-12 × 3·5-5 mm, more or less glabrous; style 1-2 mm. 2n = 16. {\i Balkan peninsula; S. Italy}. Al Bu Gr It Ju Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Possibly only a subspecies of {\b 1}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 3. B. orbiculata} DC., {\i op. cit}. 293 (1821) ({\i B. samolifolia }sensu Hayek). Biennial or perennial 10-100 cm. Leaves oblong to ovate, entire or sinuate-dentate. Petals 4-7 mm, pale yellow. Silicula 7-11 × 6-9 mm, orbicular to obovate-orbicular, flat, pubescent with stellate hairs; style 2-4 mm. Seeds winged. 2n = 16.{\i  Macedonia, E. Albania. ?• Al Gr Ju.}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 4. B. incana} (L.) DC.,{\i  op. cit.} 291 (1821) ({\i Alyssum incanum} L., {\i Farsetia incana} (L.) R. Br.; incl.{\i  B. stricta} Boiss. & Heldr.). Annual to perennial up to 70 cm. Basal leaves obovate; cauline leaves lanceolate or oblong, usually entire. Petals 4·5-7·5 mm, white. Silicula 4-10 mm, elliptical or ovate, inflated, with convex valves, pubescent; style 1-4 mm. Seeds not winged, sometimes margined. 2n = 16. {\i C. & E. Europe, extending to Denmark and Italy, but precise native distribution uncertain owing to widespread introduction.} Al Au Bu Cz Da Ge Gr He Hu It Ju Po Rm Rs(N,B,C,W,K,E)Tu[Be Br Fe Ga Ho Hs No Su].
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 5. B. gintlii} Rohlena, {\i Sitz.-Ber. Böhm. Ges. Wiss. }{\b 1904}: 24 (1905). Like {\b 4} but the silicula ovate-elliptical, pubescent with stellate hairs when young, more or less glabrous when mature; style 0·5-1 mm; seeds winged. •{\i  Crna Gora.} Ju.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 52.            Aurinia }              (L.) Desv.
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc  By J.R. Akeroyd.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Perennials, more or less woody at the base; hairs stellate, branched
\par

\par
369}
\par