{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b A. chalcidicum} Janka, {\i Österr. Bot. Zeitschr.}{\b  22}: 175 (1872). {\i W. & C. part of Balkan peninsula}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b A. chlorocarpum} Hausskn.,{\i  Mitt. Thür. Bot. Ver.} nov. ser., {\b 3-4}: 113 (1893). 2n = 16. {\i W. & C.part of Balkan peninsula.}
\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b A. degenianum }E.I. Nyárády,{\i  Bul. Grad. Bot. Univ. Cluj }{\b 7}: 74 (1927).{\i  S. Bulgaria} ({\i Rodopi}); {\i Samothraki}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b A. murale} sensu stricto. {\i Throughout the range of the species}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b A. pichleri} Velen.,{\i  Fl. Bulg. }38 (1891).{\i  E.part of Balkan peninsula, S. Romania}.
\par
{\b A. subvirescens }Form., {\i Verh. Naturf. Ver. Brunn}{\b  37}: 195 (1898).{\i  C. part of Balkan peninsula.}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 49. A. tenium} Halácsy,{\i  Consp. Fl. Graec. }{\b 1}: 93 (1900). Like {\b 48} but leaves obovate-spathulate or broadly spathulate, very obtuse; silicula usually broadly obovate; valves not undulate. •{\i  S. Greece and Kikladhes.} Gr.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 50. A. argenteum} All.,{\i  Melang. Philos. Math. Soc. Roy. Turin} ({\i Misc. Taur}.){\b  5}: 73 (1774). Plant 15-50 cm, erect, with long non-flowering stems. Cauline leaves 10-15(-20) × 3-4 mm, oblanceolate, greenish above, grey beneath, much larger than the basal leaves. Inflorescence lax. Petals 3·5-4 mm, entire. Silicula 35-6 × 2-4 mm, variable in shape, the apex usually obtuse, densely pubescent; hairs c. 0·5 mm in diameter, the rays 15-22; style 1-1·5(-2) mm. Seeds c. 2·5 mm; wing 0·5-0·8 mm wide. •{\i  S.W. Alps.} It.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 51. A. fallacinum} Hausskn., {\i Mitt. Thür. Bot. Ver.} nov. ser.,{\b  3 4}: 114 (1893) ({\i A. baldaccii} Vierh. ex E.I. Nyárády). Plant 20-50 cm, with long non-flowering stems. Cauline leaves 15-25 × 2-2·5 mm, oblanceolate, obtuse, greenish above, white beneath; basal leaves slightly smaller. Petals 2·5-3 mm; filaments with a multi-dentate appendage. Silicula 4-4·5 × 2·5-3·3 mm, broadly elliptical to obovate, obtuse or emarginate, septum frequently asymmetrical in outline; valves asymmetrically inflated, sparsely pubescent; hairs with c. 15 rays; style 1-1·5 mm. Seeds 1·5-2 mm; wing c. 0·2 mm. •{\i  Greece and Kriti.} Cr Gr.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 52. A. corsicum} Duby, {\i Bot. Gall.}{\b  1}: 34 (1828). Plant 30-60 cm, grey, with numerous non-flowering rosettes on branched, woody stems. Basal leaves up to 15 × 7 mm, orbicular-spathulate, obtuse or emarginate; cauline leaves up to 35 × 7 mm, obovate to oblong-spathulate. Sepals c. 2 mm, subglabrous; petals 2·5-3 mm. Silicula 3-4 mm, obovate, obtuse, glabrous; style c. 1 mm. Seeds 1·8-2 mm, narrowly winged. 2n = 16.{\i  Naturalized in Corse.} [Co]. ({\i W. Anatolia.})
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 53. A. heldreichii} Hausskn., {\i Mitt. Thür. Bot. Ver}. nov. ser., {\b 3-4}: 113 (1893). Plant 15-40 cm, with numerous, long non-flowering stems. Basal leaves linear-oblanceolate, obtuse, greyish-green above, silvery beneath; cauline leaves up to 30 × 3·5 mm, similar but greenish. Sepals c. 2 mm; petals c. 3 mm. Silicula 4-6 × 3·5-4·5 mm, obovate or orbicular, green, sparsely pubescent or glabrescent; hairs c. 9-rayed; valves flat or symmetrically inflated; style 0·7-1·5 mm. Seeds c. 2 mm; wing 0·2-0·3 mm wide. •{\i  C. & N. Greece.} Gr.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 54. A. robertianum} Bernard ex Gren. & Godron,{\i  Fl. Fr.}{\b  1}: 117 (1847). Plant 20-40 cm, procumbent, much-branched at the base, with long non-flowering stems. Leaves up to 8 × 4 mm, obovate-spathulate, obtuse, greenish above, grey beneath. Sepals c. 2 mm, usually subglabrous; petals 3-4 mm. Silicula 5-6 × 3-4 mm, broadly obovate to rhombic, acute, sparsely pubescent, green; style c. 2 mm. Seeds 2·5-3 mm; wing c. 0·25 mm wide. 2n = 16. •{\i  Corse, Sardegna}. Co Sa.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Plants from Sardegna have been described as{\b  A. tavolarae} Briq.,{\i  Prodr. Fl. Corse}{\b  2}: 58 (1913). They have slightly larger sepals and petals, the sepals and silicula pubescent, and seeds c. 1·5 mm.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 55. A. smolikanum} E.I. Nyárády,{\i  Bul. Gravd. Bot. Units Cluj}{\b  9}: 43 (1928). Plant up to 15 cm, pulvinate; lower stem stout, woody, branched; non-flowering rosettes numerous. Basal leaves 7-11(-15) × 4-7 mm, broadly obovate, obtuse or truncate, grey-green above, white beneath; cauline leaves smaller. Sepals 2-2·5 mm; petals 3-4 mm, with orbicular limb. Silicula 5-6 × 2·5-3 mm, narrowly elliptical, acute or subacute, green, glabrous or sparsely pubescent; style 1·7 mm. Seeds winged. •{\i  N.W. Greece and S. Albania.} Al Gr.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 56. A. bertolonii} Desv.,{\i  Jour. Bot. Appl.}{\b  3}: 172 (1814) ({\i A. rigidum }(E.I. Nyárády) E.I. Nyárády). Plant (10-)20-35 cm, erect, woody at the base; non-flowering stems long. Basal leaves up to 12 × 3 mm, spathulate, green above, almost white beneath, rarely green on both surfaces; upper cauline leaves up to 25 × 5 mm, oblanceolate. Sepals c. 2 mm; petals 3-3·5 mm, entire. Silicula 4-6 mm, variable, usually elliptical or orbicular-obovate, subacute or truncate, glabrous or sparsely pubescent; hairs 0·2-0·3 mm in diameter; valves asymmetrically or symmetrically inflated; style 0·8-2 mm. Seeds 1·8-2 mm, winged. •{\i  N. & C. Italy and N.W. part of Balkan peninsula.} Al Gr It Ju.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp.{\b  bertolonii} : Silicula 2·3-3 mm wide. Seed-wing c. 0·2 mm wide. {\i Italy}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp.{\b  scutarinum} E.I. Nyárády,{\i  Bul. Gravd. Bot. Univ. Cluj}{\b  7}: 87 (1927) ({\i A. balkanicum} E.I. Nyárády,{\i  A. janchenii} E.I. Nyárády, {\i A. kosaninum} E.I. Nyárády,{\i  A. nebrodense} auct. balcan., non Tineo): Silicula 2·8-5·5 mm wide. Seed-wing up to 0·5 mm wide. 2n = 16.{\i  N.W. part of Balkan peninsula}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 57. A. markgrafii} O.E. Schulz, {\i Ber. Deutsch. Bot. Ges.}{\b  49}: 422 (1926). Plant 20-50 cm, erect, with non-flowering rosettes or short stems; cauline hairs 1-3 mm in diameter, 3- to 5(-9)-rayed. Cauline leaves up to 22 × 2-6 mm, oblanceolate, greenish above, grey beneath, distinctly larger than the basal. Sepals c. 1·5 mm; petals 2-2·5 mm, entire. Silicula 2-3·4 × 1·7-3·4 mm, suborbicular, glabrous; valves symmetrically inflated; style 1-1·2 mm. Seeds c. 1·7 mm; wing 0·2-0·3 mm wide. •{\i  Albania, and adjacent mountains of Jugoslavia.} Al Ju.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 58. A. corymbosoides} Form., {\i Verh. Naturf. Ver. Brunn}{\b  34}: 329 (1895) ({\i A. rhodopense} Form.,{\i  A. rechingeri} E.I. Nyárády,{\i  A. vranjanum }E.I. Nyárády). Erect, short-lived perennial (5-)15-35 cm, with long non-flowering stems. Cauline leaves 12-16 × 1·8-2·8 mm, usually oblanceolate, acute or subobtuse, greenish above, grey-green beneath; basal leaves 4·5-6 × 1·6-2·3 mm, obtuse. Sepals 1·5-2 mm, pubescent; petals 2-3 mm. Silicula 2·5-4 × 2-2·8 mm. elliptical to obovate, obtuse or emarginate, pubescent, rarely glabrescent; hairs 0·3 mm in diameter, 5- to 7-rayed; valves asymmetrically inflated; style 0·5-1 mm. Seeds c. 1·5 mm, not or very narrowly winged. 2n = 32. •{\i  S. & E. part of Balkan peninsula; Romania.} Bu Gr Ju Rm.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 59. A. euboeum} Halácsy, {\i Consp. Fl. Graec.}{\b  1}: 93 (1900). Plant erect, 8-25 cm, woody and leafless at the base, with long non-flowering stems. Basal leaves up to 18 × 5 mm, oblanceolate or obovate, greyish-white; cauline leaves smaller, grey-green. Sepals
\par

\par
367}
\par