{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 39. D. cinerea} Adams, {\i Mém. Soc. Nat. Moscou}{\b  5}: 103 (1817) ({\i D. magellanica} subsp.{\i  cinerea} (Adams) Elis. Ekman; incl. {\i D. arctica }J. Vahl). Like {\b 37} but cauline leaves 0-5, densely stellate-canescent in all parts; silicula (3-)6-9 mm, elliptical, inflated, with stellate hairs; style 0·2-1 mm. 2n = 48, 80. {\i Arctic Europe.} Fe No Rs(N) Sb.
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28 A variable species.
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28 {\b D. dovrensis} Fries,{\i  Summa Veg. Scand.} 32 (1846) from S. Norway (Dovrefjell), with some forked as well as stellate hairs on the silicula, the style 0·4-0·5 mm, and a chromosome number of 2n = 64, is sometimes placed here.
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 40. D. incana} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 643 (1753) ({\i D. bernensis} Moritzi,{\i  D. stylaris} Gay ex Koch, {\i D. thomasii} Koch). Robust biennial, sometimes perennial, with erect, simple or branched, usually leafy, hairy stems up to 35 cm. Basal leaves up to 3 cm, lanceolate, subobtuse, canescent with unbranched, branched, and stellate hairs on the lower surface. Inflorescence 10- to 40-flowered; pedicels 2-3 mm in fruit, suberect. Petals 2·5-5 mm, white; filaments not or little dilated at the base. Silicula 5-15 mm, oblong, elliptical or lanceolate, often somewhat twisted, glabrous or hairy; style up to 0·5 mm. 2n = 32.{\i  N. Europe and in the mountains of W. & C. Europe from the Pyrenees to the E. Alps.} Au Br Da Fa Fe Ga Hb He Hs Is No Rs(N, B)
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28 A variable species.
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28 The Asian species{\b  D. lanceolata} Royle, {\i Ill. Bot. Himal. Mount. }{\b 1}: 72 (1834), a perennial with a narrow, stellate-hairy silicula, has been recorded from N.W. Russia (near Murmansk). This may, however, represent the North American species {\b D. cana }Rydb., {\i Bull. Torrey Bot. Club}{\b  29}: 241 (1902) ({\i D. lanceolata} auct.). Another plant of this complex, a perennial with a lanceolate, acute, glabrous silicula, has also been described from N.W. Russia (shores of the White Sea) as {\b D. valida} Pissjauk. in Pojark.,{\i  Fl. Murmansk.}{\b  3}: 370 (1956), non Goodding (1940).
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28 Sect. DRABELLA DC. Annuals, biennials or perennials, with leafy stems and small, pale yellow to white flowers. Style very short.
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 41. D. muralis} L., {\i Sp. Pl}. 642 (1753). Erect annual or biennial 10-50 cm, with slender taproot; stem simple or branched, more or less stellate-hairy. Cauline leaves broadly ovate, semi-amplexicaul; basal leaves obovate-cuneate. Inflorescence many-flowered. Petals 1·5-3 mm, white. Silicula 3-6 mm, oblong-elliptical, glabrous; pedicels patent, as long as or slightly longer than the silicula. 2n = 32.{\i  Dry, open ground and walls. • Most of Europe from C. Fennoscandia southwards, but probably as an alien in parts of the north.} All except Az Bl Fa Is Rs(N) Sa Sb Si; only as a casual in Po Rs(C).
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 42. D. nemorosa} L.,{\i  Sp. Pl}. 643 (1753). Like {\b 41} but always annual; stem with stellate and simple hairs; cauline leaves oblong-ovate to broadly ovate, often remote; petals c. 2 mm, pale yellow, fading to whitish; silicula with short, simple hairs, rarely glabrous; pedicels much longer than the silicula; stigma subsessile.{\i  Much of Europe, but absent from much of the north-west, and local in the Mediterranean region.} Au Cz Fe Ga Ge He Hs It Ju No Po Rm Rs(N, B, C, W, K, E) Su.
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 43. D. lutescens} Cosson,{\i  Not. Pl. Crit. }147 (1852). Slender annual up to 12 cm; stem simple or branched from the base, hairy. Cauline leaves sessile, ovate, cuneate at the base. Silicula longer than the pedicels, rough with unbranched hairs.{\i  S. Spain} ({\i Granada prov}.). ?Ga Hs. ({\i Morocco}.)
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 44. D. crassifolia} R.C. Graham,{\i  Edinb. New Philos Jour.}{\b  7}. 182 (1829). Perennial, with glabrous, usually leafless, flowering stem up to 6 cm. Basal leaves oblong-spathulate, rather thick, glabrous or with a few unbranched or branched hairs. Inflorescence 3- to 9-flowered. Petals pale yellow, narrow, scarcely longer than the sepals. Silicula 4-7 mm, glabrous; stigma subsessile.{\i  Arctic Scandinavia.} No Su. ({\i Greenland, North America}.)
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28 Perhaps better included in Sect. Draba.
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 58.                 Drabopsis}                 C. Koch
\par
\pard\f0\fs24\qc  By J.R. Akeroyd.
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28 Like {\i Draba} but scapose annuals; petals yellowish; seeds in 1 row in each loculus.
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28 Literature: J. Léonard,{\i  Publ. Cairo Univ. Herb.}{\b  7-8}: 295-297 (1977).
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. D. nuda} (Bél.) Stapf, {\i Denkschr. Akad. Wiss. Math.-Nat. Kl.} ({\i Wien}) {\b 51}: 298 (1886) ({\i D. verna} C. Koch). Stem 1-2 cm, pubescent. Leaves up to 6 mm, spathulate to oblong-spathulate, entire, with branched hairs especially on margins. Sepals c. 1·5 mm; petals c. 2 mm. Siliqua up to 8 mm, pubescent.{\i  Open, stony ground, }1800{\i  m. W. Kriti} ({\i Levka Ori}). Cr. ({\i S.W. Asia.})
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28 The plants from Kriti are smaller in their parts than those from Asia, and the siliqua in the latter is frequently glabrous.
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 59.             Erophila}                DC.
\par
\pard\f0\fs24\qc  By S.M. Walters.
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28 Like {\i Draba} but annual or overwintering scapose herbs with basal leaf-rosette; petals deeply bifid.
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28 A taxonomically difficult genus in which there is no general agreement as to specific limits. Local populations often consist of self-pollinating pure lines exhibiting some morphological distinctness, and many such variants have been distinguished at specific or infraspecific rank. The cytotaxonomic investigations of Ö. Winge, {\i Compt. Rend. Trav. Lab. Carlsb.} ({\i Ser. Physiol}.){\b  23}: 41-73 (1940), were mainly conducted on material from N.W. Europe. These, and recent work by S.A. Filfilan and T.T. Elkington on British material, have been used in the account given in A.R. Clapham et al., {\i Fl. Brit. Is}. ed. 3, 90 91 (1987), which distinguished three species. Unfortunately it does not seem possible to apply this taxonomy to the variation in Europe as a whole, and the treatment given here, whilst taking this recent work into account, remains essentially based on that of F. Markgraf in Hegi, {\i Ill. Fl. Mitteleur.} ed. 2,{\b  4}({\b 1}): 320 327 (1960 1962), where full references to the earlier literature are given.
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28\li200 Leaves spathulate to lanceolate; seeds 0·3-0·8 mm, numerous ........... {\b 1. verna}
\parLeaves linear; seeds 0·75-1 mm, few ............................................... {\b 2. minima}
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. E. verna} (L.) Chevall.,{\i  Fl. Gen. Env. Paris}{\b  2}: 898 (1827) ({\i Draba verna} L.; incl. {\i Erophila stenocarpa} Jordan, {\i E. vulgaris} DC.). Stems solitary or several, up to 20 cm. Leaves in a basal rosette, spathulate to lanceolate, obtuse or acute, entire or distally toothed, variably clothed with branched and stalked-stellate hairs, sometimes mixed with unbranched hairs. Inflorescence racemose, initially dense, later elongating; pedicels 1·5-6 mm in flower, slender, elongating in fruit. Sepals 1·5-2·5 mm; petals 1·5-6 mm, white or reddish. Silicula 3-12 mm, usually flat, linear or narrowly
\par
\par 377}
\par