{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 15. D. dedeana} Boiss. & Reuter in Boiss., {\i Voy. Bot. Midi Esp.} {\b 2}: 718 (1845) (incl. {\i D. cantabrica }Willk., {\i D. zapateri }Willk.). Densely pulvinate, with very woody stock; scape villous, elongating after flowering, rather lax in fruit. Petals 4-6 mm, white, broadly obovate, emarginate, much longer than the stamens. Silicula hispid; style c. 0·5 mm. 2n = 32. •{\i  Mountains of N. & E. Spain.} Hs.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 A variant with yellow petals and 2n = 16 has been described as{\b  D. cantabriae} (Laínz) Laínz, {\i Candollea}{\b  24}: 259 (1969).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 16. D. sauteri} Hoppe,{\i  Flora} ({\i Regensb.}){\b  6}: 425 (1823). Laxly caespitose, with decumbent, rather elongated, branched stems, clothed with yellowish, appressed, scale-like, persistent leaf-bases, and terminating in lax rosettes; scape glabrous, up to 3 cm. Petals 4-6 mm, yellow. Silicula 3-7 mm, flat, usually glabrous and often somewhat asymmetrical; style 0·3-0·6 mm. 2n = 32. •{\i  N.E. Alps.} Au Ge.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 17. D. heterocoma} Fenzl, {\i Pugillus} 13 (1842). Densely pulvinate, with narrow, hairy, incurved leaves; scape 3-10 cm, glabrous. Inflorescence becoming lax in fruit. Petals 5-6 mm, yellow, obovate-cuneate, much longer than the stamens. Silicula 3·5-5 × 3 mm, ovoid, inflated, densely hairy; style 0·5 mm.{\i  Karpathos.} Cr. ({\i Anatolia}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Sect. CHRYSODRABA DC. Scapose perennials. Leaves lanceolate to obovate, not rigid, often more or less densely hairy. Flowers yellow.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    ({\b 18-23}). {\b D. alpina} group. Densely rosulate, scapose perennials. Leaves elliptic-oblong, variably clothed with unbranched, branched and stellate hairs. Inflorescence dense. Petals yellow, rarely cream. Silicula 5-11 × 2·5-4 mm.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 A taxonomically complex group confined to the Arctic, and particularly variable in Spitsbergen. The following treatment attempts to utilize the work of E. Ekman,{\i  Svensk Bot. Tidskr.}{\b  35}: 135 (1941), and A. Tolmatchev in Komarov,{\i  Fl. URSS}{\b  8}: 390-401 (1939).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Inflorescence elongating considerably after flowering;
\par
  style not more than 0·2 mm
\par
2 Petals 2-3 mm, pale yellow or cream .......................................... {\b 22. adamsii}
\par
2 Petals c. 5 mm, bright yellow ..................................................... {\b 23. glacialis}
\par
1 Inflorescence not or only slightly elongating after flowering;
\par
  style at least 0·2 mm
\par
3 Silicula glabrous or subglabrous
\par
4 Petals bright yellow; leaves entire ................................................. {\b 18. alpina}
\par
4 Petals pale yellow; leaves often denticulate ................................ {\b 19. gredinii}
\par
3 Silicula hairy
\par
5 Branched and stellate hairs on underside of leaf obviously stalked;
\par
  filaments slightly dilated at the base ....................................... {\b 20. corymbosa}
\par
5 Branched and stellate hairs on underside of leaf nearly sessile;
\par
  filaments broadly dilated at the base ........................................ {\b 21. kjellmanii}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 18. D. alpina} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 642 (1753). Scape up to 15 cm, hairy, more or less dense in fruit. Leaves usually rather densely hairy, with some simple hairs beneath, entire. Petals 3·5-5 mm, bright yellow. Silicula lanceolate- or ovate-elliptical, glabrous; style 0·2-0·75 mm. 2n = 62-64, 80.{\i  Arctic and subarctic Europe.} Fe Is No Rs(N) Sb Su.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 19. D. gredinii} Elis. Ekman,{\i  Svensk Bot. Tidskr.}{\b  27}: 102 (1933). Like {\b 18} but leaves usually sparsely hairy and often denticulate; petals pale yellow.{\i  Spitsbergen.} Sb. ({\i Greenland}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 20. D. corymbosa} R. Br. ex DC., {\i Reg. Veg. Syst. Nat.}{\b  2}: 343 (1821) ({\i D. bellii }Holm, {\i D. macrocarpa} Adams). Scape up to 15 cm. Leaves with stalked, stellate and branched hairs on lower surface. Petals 3·5-5 mm, bright or pale yellow; filaments slightly dilated at the base. Silicula hairy. Style 0·2-0·75 mm. {\i Spitsbergen.} Sb. ({\i Circumpolar}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 21. D. kjellmanii} Lid ex Elis. Ekman, {\i Svensk .Bot. Tidskr. }{\b 25}: 478 (1931). Like {\b 20} but the lower surface of leaves with nearly sessile stellate hairs; filaments broadly dilated at the base.{\i  Spitsbergen, Vajgal}. Rs(N) Sb.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 22. D. adamsii} Ledeb.,{\i  Fl. Ross.}{\b  1}: 147 (1842) ({\i D. oblongata} auct., non R. Br. ex DC.). Scape up to 20 cm in fruit, with more or less elongated infructescence. Leaves with stellate hairs on the lower surface. Petals 2-3 mm, scarcely longer than the sepals, pale yellow or cream. Silicula hairy; style up to 0·2 mm. {\i Spitsbergen.} Sb. ({\i Circumpolar}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 23. D. glacialis} Adams,{\i  Mém. Soc. Nat. Moscou}{\b  5}: 106 (1817). Like {\b 22} but leaves more densely stellate-hairy; petals c. 5 mm, bright yellow; silicula subglabrous.{\i  Arctic Russia; ?arctic Norway.} ?No RS(N)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 24. D. ladina} Br.-Bl.,{\i  Verh. Schweiz. Naturf. Ges.}{\b  1919}({\b 2}): 117 (1920). Scape up to 5 cm, subglabrous. Leaves linear-lanceolate, entire, rather sparsely hairy with branched and stellate hairs, particularly beneath, and with sparse cilia. Inflorescence not elongating in fruit. Petals 3·5-5 mm, pale yellow, slightly pubescent. Silicula 6-10 mm, ovate-lanceolate, subglabrous, ciliate; style 0·7-1·2 mm. 2n = 32.{\i  Calcareous mountain rocks,} 2600-3050{\i  m. • E. Switzerland.} He.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 A remarkable endemic, which is a tetraploid possibly derived from {\b 1} × {\b 31} or {\b 33}, but has been referred by some authors to the arctic complex of species {\b 18-23}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 25. D. sibirica} (Pallas) Thell.,{\i  Mitt. Bot. Mus. Zürich}{\b  28}: 318 (1906). Stem long, slender, creeping, producing erect or ascending scape with 8-20 yellow flowers. Leaves oblong-lanceolate, acute, variably clothed with appressed, medifixed hairs (also present towards the base of the scape). Petals 4-6 mm, obovate-cuneate, yellow with brownish veins; stamens 2-2·5 mm. Silicula 4-7·5 × 1·5-2 mm, oblong-ellipsoidal, often somewhat curved, glabrous; style 0·5-0·75 mm. 2n = 16.{\i  E. & C. Russia.} Rs(N, C, W) [Rs(B)].
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Very different in habit from all other species in Europe.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Sect. DRABA. Caespitose biennials or perennials with erect flowering stems and variably hairy leaves, often canescent. Cauline leaves usually present. Flowers usually rather small; petals white or cream, longer than the stamens; filaments sometimes slightly dilated at the base.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 26. D. stellata} Jacq., {\i Enum. Stirp. Vindob.} 113 (1762) ({\i D. austriaca }Crantz). Stem up to 10 cm, stellate-hairy below. Basal leaves 4-8 mm, oblanceolate, mostly entire, stellate-canescent and ciliate; cauline leaves 0-3, often toothed. Inflorescence 3- to 12-flowered. Petals 4·5-8 mm; filaments slightly dilated at the base. Silicula 4-10 cm, lanceolate-elliptical, glabrous; style 1-2 mm; stigma capitate. 2n = 16.{\i  Calcareous mountain rocks. • N.E. Alps.} Au.
\par

\par
375}
\par