{\rtf1\ansi \deff4\deflang1033{\fonttbl{\f4\froman\fcharset0\fprq2 Times New Roman;}}{\colortbl;\red0\green0\blue0;\red0\green0\blue255;\red0\green255\blue255;\red0\green255\blue0;\red255\green0\blue255;\red255\green0\blue0;\red255\green255\blue0;\red255\green255\blue255;\red0\green0\blue128;\red0\green128\blue128;\red0\green128\blue0;\red128\green0\blue128;\red128\green0\blue0;\red128\green128\blue0;\red128\green128\blue128;\red192\green192\blue192;}{\stylesheet{\widctlpar \f4\fs20\lang2057 \snext0 Normal;}{\*\cs10 \additive Default Paragraph Font;}}{\info{\author dddd}{\operator dddd}{\creatim\yr1998\mo11\dy5\hr12\min20}{\revtim\yr1998\mo11\dy5\hr12\min20}{\version2}{\edmins0}{\nofpages4}{\nofwords950}{\nofchars5420}{\*\company  }{\vern57431}}\widowctrl\ftnbj\aenddoc\hyphcaps0 \fet0\sectd \linex0 {\*\pnseclvl1\pnucrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl2\pnucltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl3\pndec\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl4\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl5\pndec\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl6\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl7\pnlcrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl8\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl9\pnlcrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}
\pard\plain \ \f4\fs20\lang2057 {\fs28 Variable in habit, size of flower and silicula, hairiness of silicula, style-length, and other characters, but the many named taxa are hardly sufficiently geographically differentiated to merit subspecific rank. A possible exception is subsp.}{\b\fs28  zmudae }{\fs28 Zapal.,}{\i\fs28  Rozpr. Wydz. Mat.-Przyr. Polsk. Akad. Um.}{\fs28  (}{\i\fs28 Biol}{\fs28 . ) ser. 3, }{\b\fs28 12}{\fs28  B : 230 (1912), from the Carpathians, with a silicula up to 12 mm and style 6 mm.
\par }
\pard \qc\ {\fs28 
\par }
\pard \ {\b\fs28 D. brachystemon}{\fs28  DC.,}{\i\fs28  Reg. Veg. Syst. Nat.}{\b\fs28  2: }{\fs28 334 (1821) (}{\i\fs28 D. bertolonii }{\fs28 sensu Thell. quoad pl. pyren., non Nyman), with stamens only 2-2\'b75 mm, and small, usually hairy siliculae, is recorded from the E. Pyrenees and the Alps (Monte Rosa). It is very rare and its relationship to 1 or to other species is obscure.
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 2. D. hoppeana}{\fs28  Reichenb. in Moessler,}{\i\fs28  Handb.}{\fs28  ed. 2,}{\b\fs28  2}{\fs28 : 1132 (1828) (}{\i\fs28 D. zahlbrueckneri}{\fs28  Host). Like }{\b\fs28 1}{\fs28  but 1-5 cm, densely caespitose; petals 2\'b75-4 mm; infructescence subcapitate; style (0\'b75-)0\'b77-1\'b73 mm. 2n = 16.}{\i\fs28  Mountain rocks above }{\fs28 2200}{\i\fs28  m. \bullet  Alps}{\fs28 . Au Ga Ge He It.
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 3. D. aspera}{\fs28  Bertol.,}{\i\fs28  Amoen.}{\fs28  384 (1819) (}{\i\fs28 D. armata }{\fs28 Schott, Nyman & Kotschy; incl. }{\i\fs28 D. longirostra}{\fs28  Schott, Nyman & Kotschy, }{\i\fs28 D. bertolonii}{\fs28  Nyman). Like }{\b\fs28 1}{\fs28  but scape hispid; leaves c. 1 mm wide; inflorescence usually 4- or 5-flowered; silicula inflated; style 3-7 mm. 2n = 16. \bullet }{\i\fs28  Mountain rocks. \bullet   Mountains of N. part of Balkan peninsula, C. & S. Italy and Sicilia; E.C. Pyrenees.}{\fs28  Al Ga It Ju si.
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 4. D. dolomitica}{\fs28  Buttler,}{\i\fs28  Mitt. Bot. Staatssamm. M\'fcnchen}{\b\fs28  8}{\fs28 : 541 (1969). Caespitose; scape 1-4\'b75 cm, glabrous. Leaves 1\'b75-4 mm wide, oblanceolate, ciliate but otherwise glabrous. Inflorescence 2-to 6(-12)-flowered, dense, corymbose. Petals 3-4 mm, yellow to whitish. Silicula 3\'b75-7 mm, narrowly ovate, glabrous; style 0\'b73-0\'b78 mm. 2n = 32. \bullet }{\i\fs28  S.E. Alps}{\fs28  (}{\i\fs28 Dolomiti}{\fs28 );}{\i\fs28  C. Alps}{\fs28  (}{\i\fs28 Brenner}{\fs28 ). Au It.
\par 
\par A tetraploid derived from }{\b\fs28 2}{\fs28  \'d7 }{\b\fs28 37}{\fs28 .
\par 
\par    (}{\b\fs28 5-8}{\fs28 ).}{\b\fs28  D. lasiocarpa}{\fs28  group. Caespitose; scape up to 15 cm. Leaves linear to linear-oblong, setose-ciliate. Petals 3-9 mm, yellow. Silicula 3-10(-15) mm, elliptical; style 2-7 mm.
\par 
\par A group of similar taxa which some authors do not accept as distinct species.
\par 
\par }
\pard \li200\ {\fs28 1 Silicula 3-4(-6) mm ....................................................................... }{\b\fs28 5. scardica}{\fs28 
\par 1 Silicula 6-13 mm
\par 2 Scape villous
\par 3 Petals 6-9 mm; style 4-7 mm ...................................................... }{\b\fs28 6. cuspidata}{\fs28 
\par 3 Petals 4 6(-8) mm; style 2-3 mm ................................................ }{\b\fs28 8. lasiocarpa}{\fs28 
\par 2 Scape glabrous
\par 4 Petals 6-7 mm; style at least 3 mm .................................................... }{\b\fs28 7. athoa}{\fs28 
\par 4 Petals 4-6(-8) mm; style 0\'b72-2\'b75 mm ......................................... }{\b\fs28 8. lasiocarpa}{\fs28 
\par 
\par }
\pard \ {\fs28    }{\b\fs28 5. D. scardica}{\fs28  (Griseb.) Degen & D\'f6rfler,}{\i\fs28  Denkschr. Akad. Wiss. Math.-Nat. Kl.}{\fs28  (}{\b\fs28 Wien}{\fs28 ) }{\b\fs28 64}{\fs28 : 70 (1897). Somewhat laxly caespitose; scape 2-5(-10) cm, glabrous. Leaves 1-2 mm wide, linear. Petals c. 4 mm, yellow. Silicula 3-4(-6) mm, inflated, usually glabrous; style 3\'b75-5 mm. \bullet }{\i\fs28  Mountains of Balkan peninsula}{\fs28 . Al Bu Gr Ju.
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 6. D. cuspidata}{\fs28  Bieb., }{\i\fs28 Fl. Taur.-Cauc. }{\b\fs28 3}{\fs28 : 424 (1819). Pulvinate; scape 2-7 cm, densely villous with some hairs up to 1 mm long. Leaves 6-15 mm, narrowly linear. Inflorescence compact but elongating considerably in fruit. Petals 6-9 mm. Silicula 6-10 mm, more or less inflated, densely hairy with mostly unbranched hairs; style 4-7 mm.}{\i\fs28  Mountain rocks. Krym}{\fs28 . Rs(K).
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 7. D. athoa}{\fs28  (Griseb.) Boiss.,}{\i\fs28  Diagn. Pl. Or. Nov.}{\b\fs28  3}{\fs28 (}{\b\fs28 1}{\fs28 ): 33 (1853) (}{\i\fs28 D. affinis}{\fs28  sensu Hal\'e1csy, non Host). Rather robust; scape up to 12 cm, glabrous. Leaves 7-9 \'d7 1\'b75-3 mm wide, broadly linear, the surface glabrous to hispid. Inflorescence compact, elongating somewhat in fruit. Petals c. 7 mm. Silicula 6-10 \'d7 2\'b75-3 mm, glabrous to setose; style 3 mm. 2n = 16. \bullet }{\i\fs28  Greece and W. part of Balkan peninsula}{\fs28 . Al Gr Ju.
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 8. D. lasiocarpa}{\fs28  Rochel,}{\i\fs28  Sched. Pl. Hung. Exsicc.}{\fs28  (1810) (}{\i\fs28 D. aizoon}{\fs28  Wahlenb.; incl. }{\i\fs28 D. compacta }{\fs28 Schott, Nyman & Kotschy, }{\i\fs28 D. elongata }{\fs28 Host). Robust, usually densely caespitose; scape up to 15 cm. Leaves 5-20 \'d7 2-3 mm wide, broadly linear, the surface glabrous. Inflorescence fairly compact even in fruit. Petals 3-8 mm. Silicula 4-10(-13) \'d7 2-3\'b75 mm, flat, glabrous to hispid-setose especially on margins; style (0\'b75-)2-2\'b75 mm. 2n = 16.}{\i\fs28  Carpathians and mountains of Balkan peninsula; E. Austria.}{\fs28  Al Au Bu Cz Gr Hu Ju Rm.
\par 
\par Plants from S. Albania and C. Greece with a villous scape 1-7 cm and a densely hispid-setose silicula have been distinguished as subsp.}{\b\fs28  dolichostyla}{\fs28  (O.E. Schulz) Buttler in Strid,}{\i\fs28  Mount. Fl. Gr.}{\b\fs28  1}{\fs28 : 311 (1986).
\par 
\par }{\b\fs28 D. boueana}{\fs28  Zahlbr. ex O.E. Schulz in Engler,}{\i\fs28  Pflanzenreich}{\b\fs28  89}{\fs28 (}{\b\fs28 IV.105}{\fs28 ): 47 (1927), described from Crna Gora and N. Albania, is a rather slender, dwarf plant with shorter leaves and smaller flowers and fruit than }{\b\fs28 8}{\fs28 , which it otherwise closely resembles. It needs further study.
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 9. D. lacaitae}{\fs28  Boiss., }{\i\fs28 Fl. Or., Suppl. }{\fs28 53 (1888). Densely caespitose, with filiform, ascending scape up to 15 cm. Leaves 1\'b75-2\'b75 mm wide, broadly linear, obtuse, sparsely hispid or ciliate. Inflorescence at first dense, later elongating; pedicels (4-)7-9 mm, slender. Petals c. 4 mm, obovate, rather pale yellow; stamens c. 2\'b75 mm. Silicula 6-9 \'d7 2\'b75-3 mm, oblong-elliptical, setose; style 0\'b725-0\'b77 mm. 2n = 16.}{\i\fs28  Mountain rocks. \bullet  S. & C. Greece.}{\fs28  Gr.
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 10. D. haynaldii}{\fs28  Stur,}{\i\fs28  \'d6sterr. Bot. Zeitschr.}{\b\fs28  11}{\fs28 : 186 (1861). Pulvinate; scape up to 6 cm, 3- to 8-flowered. Leaves 5-7 \'d7 1 mm, linear, acute. Petals 4-4\'b75 mm; stamens 3-3\'b75 mm. Silicula 5-7 \'d7 2-3 mm, broadly ovoid, inflated towards the base, more or less densely hispid; style 1-2 mm. 2n = 16. \bullet }{\i\fs28  S. Carpathians}{\fs28 . Rm.
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 11. D. hispanica}{\fs28  Boiss., }{\i\fs28 Elenchus}{\fs28  13 (1838) (}{\i\fs28 D. atlantica}{\fs28  Pomel). Dwarf, pulvinate, with short, distinctly hairy scape. Petals 5-9 mm, yellow, distinctly longer than the stamens. Silicula slightly inflated at the base, densely hispid with unbranched and branched hairs; style usually 2-4 mm. 2n = 16.}{\i\fs28  Mountain rocks above }{\fs28 1400}{\i\fs28  m. E. & S. Spain.}{\fs28  Hs.
\par 
\par Somewhat variable in the size of the flower and fruit, and length of the style.
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 12. D. parnassica}{\fs28  Boiss. & Heldr. in Boiss.,}{\i\fs28  Diagn. Pl. Or. Nov.}{\b\fs28  3}{\fs28 (}{\b\fs28 1}{\fs28 ): 34 (1853). Like }{\b\fs28 11}{\fs28  but scape with long villous hairs; style less than 2 mm. 2n = 16. \bullet }{\i\fs28  Mountains of C. Greece}{\fs28 . Gr.
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 13. D. loiseleurii}{\fs28  Boiss., }{\i\fs28 op. cit.}{\b\fs28  3}{\fs28 (}{\b\fs28 1}{\fs28 ): 34 (1854) (}{\i\fs28 D. bertolonii}{\fs28  sensu Thell. quoad pl. cors., non Nyman). Like }{\b\fs28 11}{\fs28  but silicula flat, scabrid, with hairs less than 0\'b725 mm; style c. 1 mm. 2n = 16.}{\i\fs28  Siliceous rocks above}{\fs28  2300}{\i\fs28  m. \bullet  Corse.}{\fs28  Co.
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 14. D. cretica}{\fs28  Boiss. & Heldr. in Boiss.,}{\i\fs28  op. cit.}{\b\fs28  2}{\fs28 (}{\b\fs28 8}{\fs28 ): 27 (1849). Like }{\b\fs28 11}{\fs28  but petals 3\'b75-4\'b75 mm; silicula densely stellate-hairy; style 0\'b775 mm. 2n = 16. \bullet  }{\i\fs28  Mountains of Kriti.}{\fs28  Cr.
\par 
\par 374}
\par }