{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 or lepidote. Basal leaves considerably larger than the cauline; petioles of basal leaves grooved on the upper surface, with persistent, swollen bases. Flowering stems usually axillary. Flowerbuds globose. Sepals erecto-patent, not saccate at the base; petals yellow or white, emarginate to deeply bifid, sometimes entire; filaments not winged or toothed, with very small, suborbicular appendage at the base. Fruit a latiseptate, usually globose silicula; valves without a conspicuous median vein; style short; stigma capitate. Seeds (1)2-6(-8) in each loculus, usually winged. ({\i Alyssum} Sect.{\i  Aurinia} (Desv.) Koch; incl.{\i  Lepidotrichum} Velen. & Bornm.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Literature: T.R. Dudley,{\i  Jour. Arnold Arb.}{\b  45}: 390-400 (1964).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Petals white; seeds 1 or 2 in each loculus
\par
2 Petals entire; stems 5-20 cm, unbranched .................................... {\b 8. rupestris}
\par
2 Petals deeply bifid; stems usually more than 20 cm,
\par
  divaricately branched ............................................................. {\b 9. uechtritziana}
\par
1 Petals yellow; seeds 2-6 in each loculus
\par
3 Silicula at least 6 mm
\par
4 Seeds (excluding wing) less than 3 mm;
\par
  valves of silicula flat ...................................................................... {\b 5. saxatilis}
\par
4 Seeds (excluding wing) 3-4·5 mm; valves of silicula inflated
\par
5 Sepals 1·5-2·5 mm .......................................................................... {\b 2. gionae}
\par
5 Sepals 2·5-3·5 mm ....................................................................... {\b 3. leucadea}
\par
3 Silicula less than 6 mm
\par
6 Seeds 2 in each loculus
\par
7 Valves of silicula inflated; seeds less than 2 mm, the
\par
  wing not more than 0·3 mm ............................................................ {\b 4. petraea}
\par
7 Valves of silicula flat; seeds 2-3 mm, the wing at least 0·3 mm .. {\b 5. saxatilis}
\par
6 Seeds (2-)4-8 in each loculus
\par
8 Stems less than 15 cm; valves of silicula almost flat .................. {\b 6. moreana}
\par
8 Stems usually more than 15 cm; valves of silicula inflated
\par
9 Petals c. 4 mm, bifid; seeds 2-4 in each loculus ...................... {\b 1. corymbosa}
\par
9 Petals 5-8 mm, emarginate; seeds 4-8 in each loculus .................. {\b 7. sinuata}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. A. corymbosa} Griseb.,{\i  Spicil. Fl. Rumel. }{\b 1}: 271 (1843) ({\i Alyssum corymbosum} (Griseb.) Boiss.). Stems 20-50 cm; hairs branched or more or less stellate. Basal leaves oblanceolate to lanceolate or obovate, entire or sinuate-dentate. Inflorescence corymbose. Sepals (1·5-)2-2·5 mm; petals c. 4 mm, bifid, yellow. Silicula (3·5-)4·5-5·5 mm, orbicular to elliptic-orbicular, glabrous; valves strongly inflated; style 1-2 mm. Seeds 1·7-2·5 mm, 2-4 in each loculus; wing 0·2-0·5 mm wide. 2n = 16.{\i  Rocks. • W. & S. part of Balkan peninsula}. Al Gr Ju.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. A. gionae} (Quézel & Contandriopoulos) Greuter & Burdet,{\i  Willdenowia}{\b  13}: 86 (1983) ({\i Alyssum gionae} Quézel & Contandriopoulos). Like {\b 1} but basal leaves longer, oblanceolate to linear-lanceolate; inflorescence more or less paniculate; petals 4-5·5 mm; silicula 6-11(-13) mm; seeds 3-4·5 mm, (2-)4(-6) in each loculus, the wing (0·2-)0·5-1 mm wide. 2n = 16.{\i  Limestone rocks above} 1800{\i  m. • N.W. & C. Greece.} Gr.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Perhaps only subspecifically distinct from {\b 1}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 3. A. leucadea} (Guss.) C. Koch, {\i Hort. Dendrol. }23 (1853) ({\i Alyssum leucadeum} Guss.; incl. {\i A. medium} Host). Plant 10-40 cm, usually woody at the base; hairs stellate. Basal leaves oblong lanceolate, entire or sinuate-dentate. Inflorescence racemose. Sepals 2·5-3·5 mm; petals 5-6 mm, deeply emarginate, yellow. Silicula 7-10 mm, globose or ovoid-globose, glabrous; valves inflated; style 1-2 mm. Seeds 3-4 mm, 4(-6) in each loculus; wing 0·5-0·7 mm wide. {\i Cliffs and rocks. • Coasts of the Adriatic.} It Ju.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 4. A. petraea} (Ard.) Schur,{\i  Enum. Pl. Transs.} 61 (1866) ({\i Alyssum petraeum }Ard., {\i A. gemonense} L., {\i A. edentulum} Waldst. & Kit.; incl. {\i A. microcarpum} Vis.). Stems 15-60 cm; hairs branched or more or less stellate. Basal leaves obovate-oblong, sinuate or pinnatifid. Inflorescence racemose. Sepals c. 2 mm; petals 4-4·5 mm, bifid, yellow. Silicula 3-5 mm, elliptical to obovate, glabrous; valves inflated but with narrow flattened margin; style 1-1·5 mm. Seeds 1·5-1·8 mm, 2 in each loculus; wing 0·1(-0·3) mm wide. •{\i  From N. Italy to Romania and N. Greece}. Al Gr It Ju Rm [Au Ga Ge].
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 5. A. saxatilis} (L.) Desv., {\i Jour. Bot. Appl.}{\b  3}: 162 (1815) ({\i Alyssum saxatile} L.). Plant 10-40(-50) cm, often woody at the base; hairs stellate. Basal leaves obovate to oblanceolate, sinuate-pinnatifid to entire. Inflorescence corymbose. Sepals 2-3(-4) mm; petals 3-6(-8) mm, yellow, emarginate or bifid. Silicula glabrous; valves almost flat. Seeds 2-2·7 mm, 2 in each loculus; wing 0·3-1·1 mm wide.{\i  Limestone rocks. C. & S.E. Europe, extending to S.W. Italy.} Al Au Bu Cr Cz Ge Gr Hu It Ju Po Rm Rs(W, E) Tu [Ga].
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Silicula usually longer than wide, with rounded apex;
\par
  basal leaves entire to somewhat dentate .......................... ({\b a}) subsp.{\b  saxatilis}
\par
1 Silicula wider than long or as wide as long, with emarginate
\par
  or truncate apex; basal leaves usually dentate to sinuate-pinnatifid
\par
2 Silicula not more than 6 × 6 mm .................................. ({\b b}) subsp.{\b  orientalis}
\par
2 Silicula usually more than 6 × 6 mm ....................... ({\b c}) subsp.{\b  megalocarpa}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp.{\b  saxatilis} : Basal leaves entire to somewhat dentate. Silicula 3·5-5(-6) × 2·5-4(-5) mm, usually longer than wide, rounded at the apex; style 0·3-0·8 mm. 2n = 16, 48. •{\i  C. Europe and N. part of Balkan peninsula; widely cultivated for ornament, and occasionally becoming naturalized}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b orientalis} (Ard.) T.R. Dudley, {\i Jour. Arnold Arb.}{\b  45}: 394 (1964) ({\i Alyssum orientale} Ard.): Basal leaves dentate or sinuate-pinnatifid, sometimes entire. Silicula 3·5-5·5 × 3·5-6 mm, wider than or as wide as long, emarginate or truncate at the apex; style 0·5-1·5 mm. 2n = 16. {\i Balkan peninsula, mainly in the S. part.}
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b c}) Subsp.{\b  megalocarpa} (Hausskn.) T.R. Dudley,{\i  op. cit. }397 (1964) ({\i Alyssum orientale} var.{\i  megalocarpum} Hausskn.): Basal leaves dentate or sinuate-pinnatifid, sometimes entire. Silicula 6-9 × 6·5-10 mm, wider than or as wide as long, emarginate or truncate at the apex; style 1-2·5 mm. 2n = 16.{\i  S. Italy; Aegean region}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Intermediates between subspp. ({\b b}) and ({\b c}) occur in the Ionioi Nisoi and on the coasts of S. Greece.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 6. A. moreana} Tzanoudakis & Iatroú, Bot. Chron. 1: 22 (1981) (Alyssum orientale Ard. var. alpinum Halácsy). Like {\b 5}({\b a}) but with stouter rootstock; flowering stems up to 12 cm, unbranched; basal leaves oblanceolate to spathulate, entire or obscurely sinuate-dentate, greyish green; inflorescence a simple raceme; seeds 3-6 in each loculus. 2n = 16. Limestone rocks, 1500-2000 m. S. Greece (N. Peloponnisos). Gr.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 7. A. sinuata} (L.) Griseb.,{\i  Spieil. Fl. Rumel.}{\b  1}: 271 (1843) ({\i Alyssum sinuatum} L., {\i Alyssoides sinuata} (L.) Medicus, {\i Vesicaria}
\par

\par
370}
\par