{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 elliptical to obovate or suborbicular, glabrous. Seeds 0·3-0·8 mm, numerous. 2n = 14-64.{\i  Rocks, walls, sandy soils and disturbed ground. Throughout Europe except the Arctic}. All except Az Fa Sb.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Silicula not more than 5 mm, broadly obovate or suborbicular
\par
  ........................................................................................ ({\b d}) subsp.{\b  spathulata}
\par
1 Silicula often more than 5 mm, oblanceolate, elliptical or linear
\par
2 Leaves with many unbranched and a few branched hairs
\par
  ............................................................................................ ({\b c}) subsp.{\b  praecox}
\par
2 Leaves with many stellate and branched hairs, but few or
\par
  no unbranched hairs
\par
3 Silicula oblanceolate or elliptical; pedicels usually more
\par
  than 12 mm in fruit ............................................................... ({\b a}) subsp.{\b  verna}
\par
3 Silicula linear; pedicels often less than 12 mm in fruit
\par
  ...................................................................................... ({\b b}) subsp.{\b  macrocarpa}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp.{\b  verna }(incl. {\i E. cuneifolia} Jordan,{\i  E. krockeri} Andrz.,{\i  E. majuscula} Jordan, {\i E. stenocarpa} Jordan, {\i Draba obconica} (De Bary) Hayek): Stems solitary or several, up to 20 cm in fruit. Leaves broadly lanceolate or elliptical, more or less densely stellate-hairy on upper surface, with few or no unbranched hairs. Sepals 1-2 mm; petals c. 2·5 mm. Silicula 5-10 mm, elliptical or oblanceolate; pedicels (5-)10-25 mm in fruit.{\i  Widespread in W., C. & N. Europe, and probably throughout the range of the species, but less common in S. & S.E. Europe}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp.{\b  macrocarpa} (Boiss.) Walters, {\i Feddes Repert.}{\b  69}: 57 (1964) ({\i E. macrocarpa} Boiss., {\i Draba macrocarpa} Boiss. & Heldr.): Like subsp. ({\b a}) but silicula 7-12 mm, linear; pedicels 4-15 mm in fruit.{\i  E. Mediterranean region}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b c}) Subsp.{\b  praecox} (Steven) Walters,{\i  loc. cit}. (1964) ({\i Draba praecox} Steven; incl. {\i E. adriatica} Degen,{\i  E. verna} subsp.{\i  oblongata} (Jordan) Janchen): Stems often solitary, up to 9 cm in fruit. Leaves obovate-lanceolate, more or less densely covered on upper surface with unbranched hairs, often with a few branched or stellate hairs. Sepals 1-1·5 mm; petals 2-2·5 mm. Silicula 4-6 mm, elliptical or oblanceolate; pedicels 2-12 mm in fruit.{\i  Mainly in the Mediterranean region; rather rare in N. & C. Europe}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b d}) Subsp.{\b  spathulata} (A.F. Lang) Walters,{\i  Feddes Repert.}{\b  69}: 57 (1964) ({\i E. spathulata} A.F. Lang; incl. {\i E. boerhaavii} (Van Hall) Dumort.): Stems usually several, up to 10 cm in fruit. Leaves obovate-spathulate, more or less densely clothed with mixed stalked-stellate and dendritic hairs. Sepals 1-1·5 mm; petals c. 2 mm. Silicula 4-5 mm, broadly obovate or suborbicular; pedicels 3-18 mm in fruit. {\i Distribution like that of subsp.} ({\b a}).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Diploid plants, with 2n = 14 ({\i E. simplex }Winge), may be referable to subsp. ({\b a}).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Plants with intermediate chromosome numbers ({\i E. duplex} Winge) seem to be mainly referable to subspp. ({\b a}) or ({\b d}).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 The high polyploid taxon described by Winge, {\i E. quadruplex} Winge, {\i Compt. Rend. Trav. Lab. Carlsb}. ({\i Ser. Physiol}.){\b  23}: 71 (1940), with 2n = 52-64, a more robust plant with a single stem, and narrowly cuneate, usually toothed leaves, has been equated with {\b E. glabrescens }Jordan,{\i  Pug. Pl. Nov.} 10 (1852), but the validity of this distinction on a European scale seems doubtful.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b E. setulosa }Boiss. & Blanché in Boiss.,{\i  Diagn. Pl. Or. Nov.}{\b  3}({\b 5}): 31 (1856), described from Syria and recorded from Thrace (near Alexandroupolis and Edirne), is like subsp. ({\b c}) but is more sparsely hairy and has a narrower silicula.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. E. minima} C.A. Meyer, {\i Verz. Pfl. Cauc.} 184 (1831). Like {\b 1} but stems not more than 10 cm; leaves linear, clothed with unbranched hairs only; sepals c. 1 mm; silicula 3-5 × 2-3 mm, obovoid, more or less inflated; seeds 0·75-1 mm, few.{\i  Greece}. Gr. ({\i Anatolia.})
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 60.            Petrocallis}            R.Br.
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc  By S.M. Walters.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Like {\i Draba} but leaves digitately lobed; hairs all unbranched; ovary with 2 ovules in each loculus.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. P. pyrenaica} (L.) R. Br. in Aiton,{\i  Hort. Kew.} ed. 2, {\b 4}: 93 (1812) ({\i Draba pyrenaica} L.). Caespitose, often pulvinate perennial, resembling many species of {\i Draba} or{\i  Saxifraga} in habit; scape usually 2-3 cm, hairy. Leaves 4-6 mm, in compact rosettes, digitately 3(-5)-lobed, ciliate, stiff and greyish. Corymbs few-flowered. Petals 4-5 mm, pale lilac or pink, rarely white; anthers yellow. Silicula obovate to elliptical, glabrous, with 1(2) seeds in each loculus. 2n = 14.{\i  Mountain rocks and screes; calcicole. • Pyrenees, Alps, Carpathians.} Au Cz Ga Ge He Hs It Ju ?Rm.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 61.             Andrzeiowskia}          Reichenb.
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc  By P.W. Ball.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Glabrous annuals. Leaves pinnate. Sepals erect, not saccate; petals white; stamens without appendages. Fruit an indehiscent siliqua with 2 triangular wings at the apex; style long; stigma capitate. Seeds c. 5 in each loculus.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. A. cardamine} Reichenb., {\i Pl. Crit. }{\b 1}: 15 (1823) ({\i A. cardaminifolia} Prantl, pro parte). Stems 25-60 cm. Leaves with up to 5 pairs of ovate-oblong, crenate segments, and a larger terminal segment; petiole with amplexicaul, suborbicular auricles. Petals 2-2·5 mm. Siliqua 12-20 mm, linear, keeled; style longer than the wings.{\i  Wet places. Thrace.} Gr Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc {\b 62.              Cochlearia}                L.
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc By A.O. Chater & V.H. Heywood (Ed.1) revised by
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc P.S. Wyse Jackson & J.R. Akeroyd (Ed.2)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Annual to perennial herbs, glabrous or with unbranched hairs. Leaves simple. Raceme bracteate or not. Sepals erecto-patent; petals short-clawed; filaments straight. Fruit a laterally compressed, swollen silicula with convex valves; valves membranous when ripe with dorsal mid-vein distinct.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Literature: E. Pobedimova,{\i  Nov. Syst. Pl. Vasc.} ({\i Leningrad}){\b  6}: 67-106 (1970);{\b  7}: 167-195 (1971). R. Vogt,{\i  Mitt. Bot. Staatssamm. München}{\b  23}: 393 421 (1987).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Stems fistular, usually more than 50 cm tall and more than
\par
    5 mm in diameter
\par
2 Pedicels in fruit 1½-2 times as long as the silicula;
\par
  seeds less than 1 mm, 15-30 in a silicula .................................... {\b 9. glastifolia}
\par
2 Pedicels in fruit 3-4 times as long as the silicula;
\par
  seeds 1-1·5 mm, 6-8 in a silicula ....................................... {\b 10. megalosperma}
\par
1 Stems not fistular, not more than 50 cm tall and less
\par
  than 5 mm in diameter
\par
3 Uppermost cauline leaves linear ............................................. {\b 7. aragonensis}
\par
3 Uppermost cauline leaves oblong to ovate, or absent
\par
4 Silicula ± truncate at the apex .................................. ({\b 2-4}).{\b  officinalis} group
\par
4 Silicula not truncate at the apex
\par
5 Upper cauline leaves mostly petiolate, never auriculate; annual .....{\b 1. danica}
\par

\par
378}
\par