{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 16 Leaves 1-2·5 mm wide, straight; silicula 6-9 mm, flat ................ {\b 9. lacaitae}
\par
16 Leaves less than 1 mm wide, incurved; silicula 3·5-5 mm,
\par
   inflated ................................................................................... {\b 17. heterocoma}
\par
15 Infructescence subcapitate
\par
17 Silicula distinctly hairy .......................................... ({\b 5-8}).{\b  lasiocarpa} group
\par
17 Silicula subglabrous or glabrous
\par
18 Leaves 0·5-1·5 mm wide; style (0·5-)0·7-1·3 mm .................... {\b 2. hoppeana}
\par
18 Leaves 1·5-4 mm wide; style (0·3-)0·4-0·8 mm ...................... {\b 4. dolomitica}
\par
13 Style more than 1 mm (usually more than 1·5 mm) in fruit
\par
19 Style less than 3 mm in fruit
\par
20 Leaves 1·5-4 mm wide ........................................... ({\b 5-8}). {\b lasiocarpa }group
\par
20 Leaves less than 1·5 mm wide
\par
21 Leaves usually at least 1 mm wide; silicula usually glabrous, flat
\par
22 Scape 5-10 cm; petals 4-6 mm ................................................... {\b 1. aizoides}
\par
22 Scape 1-5 cm; petals 2·5-4 mm ................................................ {\b 2. hoppeana}
\par
21 Leaves less than 1 mm wide; silicula densely hairy,
\par
    ± inflated at the base ................................................................. {\b 10. haynaldii}
\par
19 Style at least 3 mm in fruit
\par
23 Silicula flat
\par
24 Leaves ciliate, otherwise glabrous; silicula usually glabrous ..... {\b 1. aizoides}
\par
24 Leaves ± hispid-setose all over; silicula (or siliqua)
\par
   usually densely setose ...............................................({\b 5-8}).{\b  lasiocarpa} group
\par
23 Silicula ± inflated ................................................... ({\b 5-8}).{\b  lasiocarpa} group
\par
1  Annual, biennial or perennial, usually with ± leafy stems;
\par
   flowers usually white or cream
\par
25 Annual (sometimes overwintering), rarely perennial; style less than 0·2
\par
   mm, or absent
\par
26 Pedicels in fruit shorter than the silicula
\par
27 Stem and silicula hairy ............................................................ {\b 43. lutescens}
\par
27 Stem and silicula glabrous ..................................................... {\b 44. crassifolia}
\par
26 Pedicels in fruit as long as or longer than the silicula
\par
28 Silicula glabrous; cauline leaves cordate at the base,
\par
   amplexicaul .................................................................................. {\b 41. muralis}
\par
28 Silicula usually hairy; cauline leaves ± cuneate at the base,
\par
    not or scarcely amplexicaul ..................................................... {\b 42. nemorosa}
\par
25 Perennial, more rarely biennial; style usually more than 0·2 mm
\par
29 Stem glabrous
\par
30 Infructescence compact, corymbose
\par
31 Petals at least 1½ times as long as the sepals ...................... {\b 4. dolomitica}
\par
31 Petals scarcely exceeding the sepals ..................................... {\b 44. crassifolia}
\par
30 Infructescence ± elongated
\par
32 Silicula lanceolate-elliptical; style usually less than 0·4 mm
\par
   ................................................................................................ {\b 35. fladnizensis}
\par
32 Silicula elliptical; style 0·4-0·8 mm ............................................ {\b 36. dorneri}
\par
29 Stem hairy (sometimes only sparsely so)
\par
33 Style 1-2 mm in fruit ................................................................... {\b 26. stellata}
\par
33 Style less than 1 mm in fruit
\par
34 Leaves densely clothed with very small stellate hairs only;
\par
   a few cilia present
\par
35 Silicula (or siliqua) usually glabrous, flat
\par
35 Silicula with stellate hairs, strongly inflated ............................... {\b 39. cinerea}
\par
34 Unbranched and branched hairs present on leaves; stellate
\par
   hairs present or not
\par
36 Silicula hairy
\par
37 Leaves linear, keeled, rigid ....................................................... {\b 15. dedeana}
\par
37 Leaves lanceolate or ovate-lanceolate to obovate, not keeled,
\par
   soft in texture
\par
38 Whole plant canescent with a dense stellate tomentum
\par
39 Plant laxly caespitose; cauline leaves 0-3(4) ......................... {\b 33. tomentosa}
\par
39 Plant forming a dense mat; cauline leaves 1-8 ...................... {\b 34. korabensis}
\par
38 Plant not completely canescent; stellate hairs relatively sparse
\par
40 Often scapose; silicula 3-6(-7) mm ........................................ {\b 28. norvegica}
\par
40 Rarely scapose; silicula (5-)7-15 mm
\par
41 Silicula straight; petals cream; filaments dilated at the base ..... {\b 37. glabella}
\par
41 Silicula often somewhat twisted; petals white; filaments not
\par
   or slightly dilated at the base ......................................................... {\b 40. incana}
\par
36 Silicula glabrous (or with sparse cilia)
\par
42 Stem with minute stellate hairs only (rarely with a few unbranched
\par
   or branched hairs)
\par
43 Basal leaves hairy; petals 4-6 mm, cream ................................. {\b 37. glabella}
\par
43 Basal leaves sometimes glabrous; petals 3-4 mm, white ........... {\b 38. pacheri}
\par
42 Stem with hairs of various types, always including some branched ones
\par
44 Infructescence corymbose or subcapitate ............................ {\b 29. subcapitata}
\par
44 Infructescence ± elongate
\par
45 Pedicels suberect in fruit; infructescence therefore very narrow
\par
46 Stem 1-5(-10) cm; silicula 4-7 mm, straight .......................... {\b 28. norvegica}
\par
46 Stem up to 35 cm; silicula 5-15 mm, often  somewhat twisted ... {\b 40. incana}
\par
45 Pedicels erecto-patent in fruit; infructescence therefore broader
\par
47 Pedicels and upper part of stem glabrous ................................ {\b 30. siliquosa}
\par
47 Pedicels and stem at least sparsely hairy
\par
48 Rosette-leaves entire ..................................................................... {\b 31. dubia}
\par
48 Rosette-leaves coarsely toothed ........................... {\b 32. kotschyi}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Sect. AIZOPSIS DC. Scapose, caespitose perennials, often densely pulvinate. Leaves rigid, entire, linear or narrowly spathulate, rosulate, ciliate. Flowers yellow (except in {\b 15}).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. D. aizoides} L.,{\i  Mantissa} 91 (1767) ({\i D. affinis} Host). Caespitose; scape usually 5-10 cm, glabrous. Leaves 0·5-1·5 mm wide, linear to narrowly oblong, ciliate but otherwise glabrous. Inflorescence initially more or less condensed, later rather lax, 4- to 20-flowered. Petals 4-6 mm, yellow, obovate-cuneate, equalling the stamens. Silicula 5-12 mm, ellipsoidal, flat, usually glabrous; style 1-4(-6) mm. 2n = 16. •{\i  Mountains of C. & S. Europe; Britain} ({\i coast of S.W. Wales}). Au Be *Br Cz Ga Ge He Hs It Ju Po Rm Rs(W).
\par

\par
373}
\par