{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 5 Upper cauline leaves sessile or auriculate; usually biennial or perennial
\par
6 Petals pale yellow ............................................................................. {\b 5. tatrae}
\par
6 Petals white or lilac
\par
7 Silicula 2-4 times as long as wide, oblong-ellipsoidal
\par
  or ellipsoidal ................................................................................ {\b 7. fenestrata}
\par
7 Silicula less than twice as long as wide, ovoid-ellipsoidal
\par
8 Leaves mostly truncate or cordate at the base; silicula not
\par
  more than 7 mm ........................................................ ({\b 2-4}). {\b officinalis} group
\par
8 Leaves cuneate at the base; silicula 8-15 mm ................................ {\b 6. anglica}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. C. danica} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 647 (1753). Slender, somewhat fleshy annual to biennial; stems 1·5-20(-30) cm, ascending. Basal leaves long-petiolate, lamina c. 1 cm wide, orbicular to triangular-cordate; cauline leaves mostly petiolate, the lower ones palmately 3- to 7-lobed. Petals 2-3·5(-4) mm, lilac or white. Silicula 3-6 × 2·5-4 mm, ovoid-globose to ellipsoidal, often attenuate at both ends, finely reticulately veined when mature. 2n = 42.{\i  Coastal habitats, more rarely on disturbed ground inland. • W. & N. Europe.} Be Br Da Fe Ga Ge Hb Ho Hs Lu No Rs(B) Su.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    ({\b 2-4}). {\b C. officinalis} group. Biennial or perennial, rarely annual, usually somewhat fleshy. Basal leaves long-petiolate, reniform or ovate-cordate, more rarely truncate to cuneate; cauline leaves sessile or only the lowest petiolate, the upper often auriculate. Petals (2-)4-9 mm, white or lilac. Silicula globose to ovoid-ellipsoidal or obovoid.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Basal leaves ovate, truncate to cuneate at the base, usually
\par
  longer than wide; silicula ± truncate at the apex .......................... {\b 4. aestuaria}
\par
1 Basal leaves usually reniform, cordate at the base (sometimes
\par
  truncate), about as long as wide; silicula not truncate at the apex
\par
2 Plant with leafy stems ............................................................... {\b 2. officinalis}
\par
2 Plant scapose or subscapose ................................................. {\b 3. groenlandica}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. C. officinalis} L., {\i loc. cit. }(1753). Stems 5-50 cm. Basal leaves usually reniform. Raceme usually lax in fruit; pedicels usually longer than the silicula. Petals 2-8 mm; lateral veins free or anastomosing to form only 1 mesh on each side of the mid-vein. Silicula 2·5-7 mm, ovoid to globose, rounded or attenuate at both ends.{\i  Coasts of N.W. Europe; also in W. & C. Europe mainly in the mountains. }Au Be Br Cz Da Fa Ga Ge Hb He Ho Hs Is No Po Rm Rs(W) Su [It]
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Plant not more than 10 cm; leaves usually less than 1·5 cm
\par
   wide; petals often lilac ....................................................... ({\b c}) subsp.{\b  scotica}
\par
1 Plant usually more than 10 cm; leaves usually at least
\par
  1·5 cm wide; petals usually white
\par
2 Basal leaves distinctly fleshy, entire; silicula usually
\par
  subglobose ..................................................................... ({\b a}) subsp.{\b  officinalis}
\par
2 Basal leaves not markedly fleshy, sometimes obscurely
\par
  lobed; silicula usually ovoid or ellipsoidal, rarely subglobose
\par
  ........................................................................................ ({\b b}) subsp.{\b  pyrenaica}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp.{\b  officinalis} (?incl. {\i C. atlantica} Pobed.): Stems often more than 10 cm. Lamina of basal leaves 1·5-9(-12) cm wide, orbicular to reniform, entire, cordate at the base. Sepals green; petals 4-8 mm, white. Silicula 3-6 × 2·5-5 mm, usually subglobose, sometimes ovoid or ellipsoidal. 2n = 24. {\i N.W. Europe, mainly coastal}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp.{\b  pyrenaica} (DC.) Rouy & Fouc.,{\i  Fl. Fr.}{\b  2}: 200 (1895) ({\i C. pyrenaica }DC.; incl. {\i C. alpina} (Bab.) H.C. Watson, {\i C. excelsa} Zahlbr., {\i C. macrorrhiza }(Schur) Pobed., {\i C. borzaeana} (Coman & E.I. Nyárády) Pobed.): Stems 5-40 cm. Lamina of basal leaves 1-4(-6) cm wide, reniform, sometimes obscurely lobed, less fleshy than those of subspp. ({\b a}) and ({\b c}), cordate at the base. Sepals green; petals 4·5-8 mm, white. Silicula 3-7 × 2-5 mm, ovoid or ellipsoidal, attenuate at both ends, less commonly globose. 2n = 12, 24, 48.{\i  Wet, flushes and beside streams, mainly in the mountains. • C. & W. Europe}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b c}) Subsp. {\b scotica} (Druce) P.S. Wyse Jackson,{\i  Bot. Jour. Linn. Soc. }{\b 106}: 119 (1991) ({\i C. scotica} Druce,{\i  C. groenlandica} auct., non L.): Stems up to 10 cm. Lamina of basal leaves 0·6-1·6 mm wide, reniform to triangular-ovate, entire, often truncate at the base, more fleshy and darker green than in subspp. ({\b a}) and ({\b b}). Sepals green to purplish; petals 2-3(-4) mm, often lilac. Silicula 2·5-3·5 × 1·5-2·5 mm, ovoid to broadly ellipsoidal or globose. 2n = 24. {\i Maritime rocks and sands. • Scotland; N. & W. Ireland; S.W. England} ({\i Isles of Scily}).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Small plants from above 800 m in N. Britain with a low growth habit, somewhat woody at the base, and dark green, suborbicular basal leaves, have been called{\b  C. micacea} E.S. Marshall,{\i  Jour. Bot.} ({\i London}){\b  32}: 289 (1894). They are morphologically very difficult to separate satisfactorily from subsp. ({\b b}), although chromosome counts of 2n = 26 support the recognition of a distinct taxon.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b C. polonica} A. Fröhlich, {\i Pl. Polon. Exsicc}. ser. 2, cent. {\b 3}: 11 (1936), from damp sand by streams in S. Poland (near Olkusz), a perennial with more or less erect stems 15-50 cm, is similar to {\b 2}({\b b}) but differs principally by the petals 5·5-9·5 mm, and a chromosome number of 2n = 36. It may merit recognition as another subspecies of{\b  2}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 3. C. groenlandica} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 647 (1753) (incl.{\i  C. islandica} Pobed.). Stems many, 3-30(,-50) cm, procumbent or ascending, stout, usually leafless. Basal leaves reniform to ovate-cordate. Petals 3 mm, oblong, contracted at the base into a distinct claw, white, rarely reddish. Silicula 3·5-5 mm, ovoid, ellipsoid-ovoid or obovoid. 2n = 14.{\i  Maritime shingle and cliffs. Arctic and subarctic Europe}. Is No Rs(N) Sb.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 4. C. aestuaria} (Lloyd) Heywood,{\i  Feddes Repert.}{\b  70}: 5 (1964) ({\i C. officinalis }var.{\i  aestuaria} Lloyd). Perennial up to 40 cm. Basal leaves broadly ovate, truncate to somewhat cuneate at the base, usually slightly longer than broad. Pedicels in fruit longer than the silicula. Petals 4-9 mm, white. Silicula 4-6 mm, obovoid or subglobose, narrowed at the base, truncate and sometimes slightly emarginate at the apex. 2n = 12. •{\i  Atlantic coasts of France and N. Spain.} Ga Hs.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 5. C. tatrae} Borbás, {\i Pallas Nagy Lexikona }{\b 10}: 28 (1875). Perennial. Basal leaves ovate, cordate or truncate at the base. Raceme lax in fruit; lower pedicels usually longer than but not more than twice as long as the silicula; pedicels somewhat thickened. Petals pale yellowish; lateral veins not anastomosing, or rarely forming a single mesh on each side of the mid-vein. Silicula obovoid-ellipsoidal, narrowed at the base, rounded at the apex. 2n = 42.{\i  Granite rocks.• W. Carpathians} ({\i Tatra}). Cz Po.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 6. C. anglica} L.,{\i  Syst. Nat}. ed. 10,{\b  2}: 1128 (1759). Robust biennial to perennial up to 40 cm. Basal leaves long-petiolate,
\par

\par
379}
\par