{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 {\i sinuata} (L.) Cav.). Stems 15-50 cm, little-branched, woody only at the extreme base, sparsely to densely grey-pubescent. Leaves oblanceolate to lanceolate, the lower often sinuate-dentate. Sepals 3-4 mm; petals 5-8 mm, emarginate, pale yellow. Silicula 7-12 mm, globose or ellipsoidal; valves strongly inflated; style 2-4 mm. Seeds 4-8 in each loculu,s, usually winged.{\i  Rocks and cliffs. • W. part of Balkan peninsula; S.E. Italy}. Al Gr It Ju.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 8. A. rupestris} (Heynh.) Cullen & T.R. Dudley,{\i  Jour. Arnold Arb.}{\b  45}: 399 (1964) ({\i Alyssum rupestre }Ten., non Willd., {\i Ptilotrichum rupestre} (Heynh.) Boiss.,{\i  P. cyclocarpum} auct., non Boiss.,{\i  P. cyclocarpum }subsp.{\i  pindicum} Hartvig). Caespitose; stems 5-20 cm, unbranched, woody at the base. Basal leaves lanceolate or linear; cauline leaves linear; all silvery-tomentose with stellate hairs. Petals 5 mm, entire, white. Silicula 5 mm, obovoid-globose, lepidote or glabrous; style 0·5 mm. Seeds 1 or 2 in each loculus, very narrowly winged.{\i  Calcareous screes and cliffs. Mountains of C. Italy and W. part of Balkan peninsula.} Al Gr It Ju.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 9. A. uechtritziana} (Bornm.) Cullen & T.R. Dudley, {\i op. cit.} 398 (1964) ({\i Lepidotrichum uechtritzianum} (Bornm.) Velen.). Stems 20-60 cm, divaricately branched, grey-pubescent; hairs lepidote. Basal leaves oblong-lanceolate, entire; cauline leaves linear. Inflorescence very lax in fruit; pedicels 4-6 mm. Petals 4-5 mm, deeply bifid, white. Silicula 2-4 × 2-2·5 mm, elliptic-orbicular, appressed to the axis of the inflorescence; style c. 1 mm. Seeds 1 or 2 in each loculus, not winged.{\i  Maritime sands. Black Sea coasts of Bulgaria and Turkey-in-Europe.} Bu Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 53.              Bornmuellera}               Hausskn.
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc By V.H. Heywood (Ed.1) revised by J.R. Akeroyd (Ed.2)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Perennial herbs or small shrubs; hairs bi- to 6-fid, rarely the plant glabrous. Sepals erecto-patent, not saccate at the base; petals entire, white; filaments with a tooth-like appendage at the base. Fruit a latiseptate silicula; valves flat or inflated, without a conspicuous median vein; style short; stigma capitate or emarginate. Seeds 1 or 2 in each loculus, winged or not.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Leaves not more than 3 mm wide, linear to linear-lanceolate
\par
   or oblanceolate ............................................................................ {\b 2. baldaccii}
\par
1 Leaves (3-)4-8 mm wide, oblong-spathulate
\par
2 Leaves glabrous above, sparsely hairy beneath; silicula
\par
  4 mm, ± compressed ........................................................................ {\b 1. dieckii}
\par
2 Leaves densely hairy; silicula (3·5-)5-7 mm, inflated ............... {\b 3. tymphaea}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. B. dieckii} Degen,{\i  Österr. Bot. Zeitschr.}{\b  50}: 313 (1900) ({\i Ptilotrichum dieckii} (Degen) Hayek). Leaves oblong-spathulate, glabrous above, with sparse bifid hairs beneath. Infructescence branched, dense; silicula 4 mm, ovoid, somewhat compressed.{\i  Rocks. • S. Jugoslavia} ({\i near Prizren}). Ju.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. B. baldaccii} (Degen) Heywood,{\i  Feddes Repert.}{\b  69}: 61 (1964) ({\i Ptilotrichum baldaccii }Degen). Flowering stems up to 10 cm, leafless. Basal leaves 5-12(-15) × 1-3 mm, linear to linear-lanceolate, green, glabrous or sparsely hairy with bi- to 6-fid hairs, densely crowded. Petals 3-4(-4·5) mm. Infructescence unbranched; pedicels patent or deflexed; silicula 4-6(-7) mm, ovoid, inflated. Seeds unwinged.{\i  Serpentine rocks,} 1600-2000 {\i m. • N. Greece, S. & C. Albania.} Al Gr.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Plants from N. Greece (Lingos mountains) which are sparsely hairy, the hairs mostly bifid, have been distinguished as subsp. rechingeri Greuter, Candollea 30: 19 (1975).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 3. B. tymphaea} (Hausskn.) Hausskn.,{\i  Mitt. Thür. Bot. Ver.} nov. ser. {\b 11}: 72 (1897) ({\i Ptilotrichum tymphaeum} (Hausskn.) Halácsy). Flowering stems up to 25 cm. Basal leaves 20-40 × 3-8 mm, oblong-spathulate, densely grey-hairy with bifid hairs. Petals 3·5-4·5 mm. Infructescence branched; pedicels patent; silicula (3·5-)5-7 mm, inflated. Seeds winged.{\i  Serpentine rocks. • N. Greece.} Gr.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 54.             Lobularia}                 Desv.
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc  By P.W. Ball.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Annuals or perennials; hairs bifid. Sepals patent, not saccate at the base; petals usually white, entire; filaments not winged and without appendages. Fruit a latiseptate silicula; valves slightly inflated, with a more or less distinct median vein; style distinct; stigma capitate. Seeds 1-5 in each loculus.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 Silicula obovate or suborbicular; valves convex; seeds 1 in each
\par
   loculus ......................................................................................... {\b 1. maritima}
\par
Silicula ovate; valves flat; seeds 4 or 5 in each loculus ..................... {\b 2. libyca}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. L. maritima} (L.) Desv., {\i Jour. Bot. Appl.}{\b  3}: 162 (1815) ({\i L. strigulosa} (G. Kunze) Willk., {\i Koniga maritima }(L.) R. Br., {\i Alyssum maritimum} (L.) Lam.). Greyish-white, more or less pubescent perennial (5-)10-40 cm, branched at the base. Leaves linear-lanceolate, acute, rarely obtuse. Petals 2·5-4 mm. Silicula 2-4 mm, obovate or suborbicular; valves convex, pubescent or glabrescent. Seeds 1 in each loculus. 2n = 24.{\i  Dry, open habitats. S. Europe; widely cultivated for ornament elsewhere, and often naturalized or casual.} Al Bl Co Cr Ga Hs It Lu Sa Si †Au Be Br Cz Da Gr Ho Hu Ju No Po Rm Rs(K)].
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Plants in cultivation often do not perennate, and may have purple or pink petals.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. L. libyca} (Viv.) Webb & Berth.,{\i  Phyt. Canar.} {\b 1}: 90 (1837) ({\i Koniga libyca} (Viv.) R. Br., {\i Alyssum libyca} (Viv.) Cosson). Like {\b 1} but annual; leaves obtuse; silicula 3-7 mm, ovate; valves flat; seeds 4 or 5 in each loculus.{\i  Maritime sands. S. Spain; Sicilia; Kikladhes} ({\i Thira}). Gr Hs *Si. ({\i From Islas Canarias to Iran}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 55.             Clypeola}                  L.
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc  By P.W. Ball.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Annuals; hairs branched or stellate. Sepals erecto-patent, not saccate; petals yellow, shortly clawed. Fruit an indehiscent, compressed, 1-seeded, pendent silicula; style short; stigma obtuse.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Literature: M. Breistroffer,{\i  Candollea}{\b  7}: 140 166 (1936); 10: 241-280 (1946). D.A. Chaytor & W.B. Turrill,{\i  Kew Bull.}{\b  1935}: 1-24 (1935).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Silicula 2-5 mm, glabrous or pubescent; petals 1-2 mm .............. {\b 1. jonthlaspi}
\par
Silicula 5·5-6 mm, with a very dense, long, white indumentum;
\par
 petals c. 3 mm ............................................................................... {\b 2. eriocarpa}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. C. jonthlaspi} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 652 (1753) ({\i C. pyrenaica} Bord.; incl. {\i C. microcarpa} Moris). Plant 2-20(-30) cm, erect, grey-pubescent. Leaves linear-oblanceolate to obovate. Raceme elongate in fruit; pedicels 1·5-3 mm. Petals 1-2 mm, glabrous. Silicula 2-5 mm, obovate- or elliptic-orbicular, with a distinct wing, entire or
\par

\par
371}
\par