{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 notched, pubescent or glabrous; style up to 0·25 mm. S. Europe. Al Bl Bu Co Cr Ga Gr He Hs It Ju Rm Rs(K) Sa Si Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Variable in the size and pubescence of the silicula, but most of the variants occur sporadically throughout the range of the species. Some of these variants are recognized as subspecies by Breistroffer, loc. cit. (1936, 1946).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. C. eriocarpa} Cav., Descr. Pl. 401 (1802). Like {\b 1} but petals c. 3 mm, stellate-pubescent on the back; silicula 5·5-6 mm, orbicular, scarcely winged, crenulate, with a very dense, long, white indumentum; style c. 0·5 mm. C. & S. Spain. Hs.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 56.             Schivereckia}            Andrz.
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc  By A.O. Chater.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Perennials; hairs stellate, minute. Sepals patent, the inner slightly saccate at the base; petals white; filaments of the inner stamens winged, the wing with a short tooth at the apex. Fruit a latiseptate silicula; valves convex; style distinct; stigma capitate or slightly 2-lobed. Seeds 4-7 in each loculus.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Literature: M. Alexeenko, {\i Not. Syst.} ({\i Leningrad}) {\b 9}({\b 4-12}): 215-231 (1946);{\i  Trudy Nauc.-Issled. Inst. Biol.} ({\i Har'kov}) {\b 13}: 95 (1950). M.V. Kazakova,{\i  Biol. Nauki}{\b  4}: 57-62 (1984).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 Cauline leaves semi-amplexicaul, with 1-4 teeth on each side;
\par
 plant densely caespitose .................................................................. {\b 1. podolica}
\par
Cauline leaves narrowed at the base, not or scarcely amplexicaul,
\par
  entire (rarely with 1 tooth on each side); plant usually laxly
\par
  caespitose ....................................................................................... {\b 2. doerfleri}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. S. podolica} (Besser) Andrz. in DC.,{\i  Reg. Veg. Syst. Nat.}{\b  2}: 300 (1821) ({\i S. berteroides }Fischer ex Alexeenko, {\i S. kuznezovii} Alexeenko, {\i S. mutabilis} (Alexeenko) Alexeenko). Densely caespitose; flowering stems up to 25 cm, simple or branched. Basal leaves rosulate, oblanceolate to oblong-spathulate, usually with 2-5 teeth on each side; cauline leaves oblong-ovate, semi-amplexicaul, with 1-4 teeth on each side. Raceme up to 30-flowered. Sepals 2-2·5 mm; petals 3-5 × 1·5-2·25 mm. Silicula 2-6 × 2-2·75 mm; style 0·75-2 mm; stigma capitate, entire. Seeds 0·75-1 × 0·5-1 mm, dark brown, rugulose. •{\i  E. Russia and N. Ukraine; N.E. Romania.} Rm Rs(N, C, W, E).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 A number of species have been described by Alexeenko, {\i loc. cit.} (1946, 1950), which are in many ways intermediate between 1 and 2. Studies by M.V. Kazakova,{\i  loc. cit.} (1984), suggest that these are best included under{\b  1}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. S. doerfleri} (Wettst.) Bornm.,{\i  Feddes Repert.}{\b  17}: 36 (1921) ({\i S. podolifa} sensu Boiss., non (Besser) Andrz., {\i Draba doerfleri }Wettst.). Laxly caespitose; flowering stems up to 15 cm, simple or branched. Basal leaves more or less rosulate, oblanceolate, entire (or rarely with 1 or 2 teeth on each side); cauline leaves linear-lanceolate, attenuate at the base, obtuse, entire (rarely with 1 tooth on each side). Raceme up to 15-flowered. Sepals 2-2·25 mm; petals 4-6 × 2-3 mm. Silicula 4-5·5 × 2-4 mm; style 0·5-1 mm; stigma shortly 2-lobed. Seeds c. 1 mm.{\i  Rocky and grassy places. S.W. Jugoslavia; S. Albania.} Al Ju. ({\i Anatolia}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 57.              Draba }                  L.
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc  By S.M. Walters (Ed.1) revised by J.R. Akeroyd (Ed.2)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Annuals to perennials. Leaves simple, entire or dentate. Sepals erecto-patent, the inner not or only slightly saccate at the base; petals white or yellow, entire or emarginate; filaments not or only slightly dilated at the base. Fruit a latiseptate silicula or siliqua; valves more or less flat, with a median vein in the lower ½; stigma capitate. Seeds in 2 rows in each loculus, not winged. Radicle accumbent.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Most of the species are arctic or montane, growing in open, rocky or gravelly places. Several are widely grown for ornament as rock-plants in gardens.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 The nature and density of the indumentum is used a great deal in the taxonomy of{\i  Draba}. The hairs may be unbranched, branched, stellate or medifixed. The leaves are nearly always ciliate even when they are otherwise glabrous. The length of the stem given in the description refers to the fruiting stage; there is often considerable elongation after flowering.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 The limits and particularly the rank of many described taxa are disputable, and further experimental studies are needed in the genus.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Literature: O.E. Schulz in Engler,{\i  Pflanzenreich}{\b  89}({\b IV.105}): 1-396 (1927). K.-P. Buttler,{\i  Mitt. Bot. Staatssamm. München}{\b  6}: 275-362 (1967);{\b  8: }539-566 (1969). G.A. Mulligan, {\i Canad. Jour. Bot.}{\b  54}: 1386-1393 (1976).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Perennial, usually scapose; flowers yellow, rarely white
\par
2 Plant with numerous long, procumbent leafy stems; hairs on
\par
  leaves and base of stem medifixed ................................................ {\b 25. sibirica}
\par
2 Plant without long, procumbent leafy stems, often densely
\par
  caespitose; hairs not medifixed
\par
3 Leaves lanceolate to obovate, not keeled, soft in texture,
\par
  without stiff cilia
\par
4 Leaves with unbranched hairs only .......................................... {\b 44. crassifolia}
\par
4 Leaves with some branched and stellate hairs
\par
5 Style not more than 0·7(-0 9) mm (Arctic) ................. ({\b 18-23}).{\b  alpina }group
\par
5 Style 0·7-1·2 mm (Alps) ................................................................. {\b 24. ladina}
\par
3 Leaves linear or more rarely lanceolate or oblanceolate,
\par
  keeled, ± rigid, with stiff cilia
\par
6 Scape hairy
\par
7 Petals about equalling the stamens
\par
8 Scape hispid with hairs not more than 0·5 mm ................................ {\b 3. aspera}
\par
8 Scape villous with some long hairs up to 1 mm ....... ({\b 5-8}). {\b lasiocarpa} group
\par
7 Petals distinctly longer than the stamens
\par
9 Silicula densely stellate-hairy ........................................................ {\b 14. cretica}
\par
9 Silicula with unbranched or branched hairs only
\par
10 Scape villous with hairs c. 1 mm
\par
11 Style 1-1·5 mm ...................................................................... {\b 12. parnassica}
\par
11 Style 0·3-0·8 mm ....................................................................... {\b 15. dedeana}
\par
10 Scape hispid with hairs mostly not more than 0·75 mm
\par
12 Style 2-4 mm; silicula ± inflated at the base ........................... {\b 11. hispanica}
\par
12 Style c. 1 mm; silicula flat ..................................................... {\b 13. loiseleurii}
\par
6  Scape glabrous
\par
13 Style not more than 1 mm in fruit
\par
14 Plant laxly caespitose, with ± elongated stems clothed with
\par
   scale-like leaf-remains below the rosette ...................................... {\b 16. sauteri}
\par
14 Plant densely caespitose or pulvinate, without obvious
\par
   persistent scale-like leaf-remains
\par
15 Infructescence ± elongate
\par

\par
372}
\par