{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs36\qc {\b CONIFEROPSIDA}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs36\qc CONIFERALES
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 26.        PINACEAE}
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc  Edit. D.M. Moore.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Monoecious; resiniferous trees, rarely shrubs, with spirally arranged leaves. Flowers (cones) made up of numerous spirally arranged scales. Scales of male cones (microsporophylls) bearing 2 pollen-sacs on the lower surface. Scales of female cones (megasporophylls) made up of 2 parts - an upper ovuliferous scale (conescale) bearing 2 ovules on the upper surface, and a lower, subtending scale (bract). Fruit a usually woody cone. Seeds usually winged.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Short shoots absent; leaves all solitary
\par
2 Leaves borne on persistent, peg-like projections or cushions
\par
3 Leaves petiolate; resin-canal 1, median ............................................ {\b 3. Tsuga}
\par
3 Leaves sessile; resin-canals 0-2, lateral ............................................. {\b 4. Picea}
\par
2 Leaves not borne on peg-like projections, but leaving disc-like scars
\par
4 Leaf-scars circular, not at all projecting; female cone erect .............. {\b 1. Abies}
\par
4 Leaf-scars elliptical, slightly projecting; female cone deflexed
\par
  or pendent ................................................................................ {\b 2. Pseudotsuga}
\par
1 Short shoots present, bearing fascicles of 2 or more leaves
\par
5 Leaves on long shoots scale-like, not green; short shoots much 
\par
  reduced, bearing 2-5 green leaves ...................................................... {\b 7. Pinus}
\par
5 Leaves on long shoots similar to those on short shoots; short shoots
\par
   prominent, bearing many densely clustered leaves
\par
6 Leaves deciduous; bracts exceeding ovuliferous scales in flower;
\par
  female cones not more than 4 cm ........................................................ {\b 5. Larix}
\par
6 Leaves evergreen; bracts minute or absent;
\par
  female cones more than 4 cm ........................................................... {\b 6. Cedrus}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 1.                Abies}                 Miller
\par      

\pard\f0\fs24\qc  By A.O. Chater.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Evergreen trees with regularly whorled branches. Short shoots absent. Leaves spirally arranged, linear, flattened, grooved above, rarely 4-sided; resin-canals 2, longitudinal, either marginal (in the hypodermis), or median (in the mesophyll); leaf-scars circular, not at all projecting. Male cones in leaf-axils on under-surface of twigs. Female cones ripening in the first year, erect, cylindrical to ovoid; scales falling from the persistent axis when ripe.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 The descriptions of twigs and leaves apply only to vegetative, lateral twigs and to the leaves on them.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 In addition to the species described below, {\b A. balsamea} Miller,{\i  Gard. Dict.} ed. 8, no. 3 (1768), from N.E. North America, and{\b  A. homolepis} Siebold & Zucc.,{\i  Fl. Jap.}{\b  2:} 17 (1842), from Japan, are occasionally grown on a small scale in experimental plantations. Both resemble {\b 6} in the bilateral arrangements of leaves on the twigs: {\i A. homolepis} may be distinguished by the glabrous young twigs and resinous buds;{\i  A. balsamea} by the resinous buds, sparsely pubescent young twigs and median resin-canals.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Most of the species described, and several others, are cultivated for ornament in parks and gardens.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Literature: J. Mattfeld,{\i  Mitt. Deutsch. Dendrol. Ges.} ({\i Jahrb}.) {\b 1925} 1-37 (1925). J. do Amaral Franco,{\i  Abetos}. Lisboa, 1950.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Leaves rigid, acute
\par
2 Leaves 15-35 mm; resin-canals marginal;
\par
  bracts exserted from female cone ............................................. {\b 8. cephalonica}
\par
2 Leaves 10-15 mm; resin-canals median;
\par
  bracts included in female cone ........................................................ {\b 9. pinsapo}
\par
1 Leaves flexible, emarginate or obtuse
\par
3 Leaves glaucous above (with several longitudinal rows of stomata); 
\par
  twigs with reddish pubescence
\par
4 Twigs brown; resin-canals marginal; female cone 12-20 cm;
\par
  bracts long-exserted from cone, deflexed ........................................ {\b 1. procera}
\par
4 Twigs ashy-grey; resin-canals median; female cone 5-10 cm; 
\par
  bracts included in cone ................................................................ {\b 3. lasiocarpa}
\par
3 Leaves dark or bright green above (with longitudinal rows of 
\par
  stomata only at apex, or absent); twigs with whitish or brownish,
\par
  but not reddish, pubescence, or ± glabrous
\par
5 Leaves less than 15 mm (Sicilia) ............................................ {\b 7. nebrodensis}
\par
5 Leaves at least 15 mm
\par
6 Buds resinous, small; female cone 5-10 cm; bracts included in cone
\par
7 Twigs olive-green; leaves 1·5-2·5 mm wide;
\par 
  resin-canals marginal ....................................................................... {\b 2. grandis}
\par
7 Twigs silvery-grey; leaves 1-1·3 mm wide;
\par
  resin-canals median ......................................................................... {\b 4. sibirica}
\par
6 Buds not resinous; female cone 10-20 cm; bracts exserted from cone
\par
8 Crown compact; twigs sparsely pubescent; each stomatiferous 
\par
  band on the under-surface of leaves composed of 8-10 rows of stomata; 
  female cone 4-5 cm wide ...................................................... {\b 5. nordmanniana}
\par
8 Crown wide; twigs densely pubescent; each stomatiferous band on 
\par
  the under-surface of leaves composed of 6-8 rows of stomata; 
\par
  cone 3-4 cm wide .................................................................................. {\b 6. alba}
\par

\par
   {\b 1. A. procera} Rehder,{\i  Rhodora}{\b  42:} 522 (1940) ({\i A. nobilis} Lindley, non A. Dietr.). Up to 80 m; trunk stout. Young twigs densely covered with reddish pubescence; buds resinous only at the apex. Leaves on the upper surface of the twigs appressed and curving upwards, not leaving a parting. Leaves 10-35 × 1-1·5 mm, obtuse; resin-canals marginal. Female cone 12-20 × 5-8 cm; bracts long-exserted and deflexed, almost completely concealing the cone.
\par

\par
37}
\par