{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}
\pard\f0\fs28 {\b D. simonkaiana} Jáv.,{\i  Bot. Közl.}{\b  9}: 281 (1910), from one station in the S. Carpathians in Romania, differs from{\b  26} principally in its petals 3-4 mm, 2-lobed stigma 0·7-1 mm, and a chromosome number of 2n = 32. It is probably not specifically distinct from {\b 26}.
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 27. D. nivalis} Liljeblad, {\i Kungl. Svenska Vet.-Akad. Handl.}{\b  1793}: 208 (1793). Densely pulvinate, with flowering stems up to 5 cm. Basal leaves obovate-cuneate, usually entire, with a dense covering of uniform, minute stellate hairs, and variably developed cilia; cauline leaves often absent. Inflorescence dense, 2- to 5(-9)flowered; pedicels very short. Petals 2·5-3 mm. Silicula 49 × 2 mm, usually glabrous; style 0·2-0·3 mm. 2n = 16. {\i Arctic and subarctic Europe southwards to c.} 61° {\i N. in Norway}. Fe Is No Rs(N) Sb Su.
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 28. D. norvegica} Gunnerus,{\i  Fl. Norv.}{\b  2}: 106 (1772) (incl. {\i D. rupestris }R. Br.). Very variable in habit, with somewhat hairy, slender, often flexuous stems 1-5(-10) cm. Basal leaves oblong-lanceolate, entire or 1- to 3-toothed, ciliate and variably covered with unbranched and branched hairs; cauline leaves 0-3. Inflorescence at first dense, but typically with remote basal flower, rather lax in fruit. Petals 2·5-3·8 mm. Silicula 4-7 mm, lanceolate-elliptical, glabrous or hairy, suberect on a short pedicel; style up to 0·5 mm. 2n = 48.{\i  Arctic and subarctic Europe southwards to Scotland; N.E. Alps (local).} Au Br Fa Fe Is No Rs(N) Sb Su.
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 29. D. subcapitata} simmons, {\i Vasc. Pl. Ellesmereland} 87 (1906) ({\i D. pauciflora} sensu O.E. Schulz, vix R. Br.). Dwarf, with a scapose, subcapitate or corymbose infructescence; stem pubescent. Leaves with numerous branched hairs and long silky hairs, sometimes subglabrous on upper side. Petals 2-3 mm. Silicula 4-8 mm, elliptical, usually glabrous; style up to 0·3 mm.{\i  Arctic Islands} ({\i Spitsbergen, Bjornoya, Vajgal}). Rs(N) Sb. ({\i Circumpolar}.)
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 30. D. siliquosa} Bieb., {\i Fl. Taur.-Cauc.}{\b  2}: 94 (1808) ({\i D. carinthiaca} Hoppe, {\i D. johannis }Host). Caespitose, often rather laxly so, with stems up to 5-15(-20) cm. Stem glabrous above, sometimes glabrous throughout (var. {\i glabrata} (Koch) Sauter). Basal leaves lanceolate, usually entire, covered with branched and stellate hairs, ciliate towards the base; cauline leaves 0-3. Inflorescence 4- to 8-flowered. Petals 2-4 mm. Silicula 3-8 mm, rather narrowly oblong-elliptical, glabrous; style not more than 0·4 mm; stigma capitate. 2n = 16.{\i  Mountains of C. & S. Europe}. Au Bu Cz Ga Ge He Hs It Rm Rs(W).
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28 A variable species.
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 31. D. dubia} Suter,{\i  Fl. Helv.}{\b  2}: 46 (1802) ({\i D. tomentosa} sensu Hegi, non Clairv., {\i D. laevipes} DC.). Laxly caespitose with stems up to 16 cm, stellate-hairy throughout. Basal leaves narrowly obovate; cauline leaves 0-3(-4); leaves entire. Petals 3-5 mm. Silicula 5-14 mm, oblong-elliptical, sometimes slightly hairy; style 0·1-0·4(-0·8) mm; stigma emarginate. 2n = 16. •{\i  Mountains of C. & S. Europe from the Sierra Nevada and Pyrenees to the E. Alps and W. Carpathians} ({\i Tatra}). Au Co Cz Ga Ge He Hs It Ju Po.
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28 A variable species. Plants from the Pyrenees have been referred to subsp. {\b laevipes} (DC.) Br.-Bl.,{\i  Commun. Stat. Int. Géobot. Médit. Alp.}{\b  87}: 226 (1945), which is of dwarfer and more slender habit, with rather large flowers and pedicels elongate in fruit.
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 32. D. kotschyi} Stur,{\i  Österr. Bot. Zeitschr.}{\b  9}: 33 (1859). Like {\b 31} but stem up to 10 cm, lax, ascending, flexuous; basal leaves lanceolate to elliptical; cauline leaves ovate, toothed. 2n = 32. •{\i  S. & E. Carpathians}. Rm.
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28 Records from Austria refer to 28.
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 33. D. tomentosa} Clairv.,{\i  Man. Herb. Suisse} 217 (1811). Like {\b 31} but stem up to 10 cm; dense indumentum of stellate hairs extending to the pedicels; silicula ovate, hairy, often slightly inflated when ripe. 2n = 16. •{\i  Mountains of C. & S. Europe}. Au Bu Cz Ga Ge He It Ju Po.
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28 Plants from the E. Pyrenees have been distinguished as{\b  D. subnivalis} Br.-Bl.,{\i  Commun. Stat. Int. Géobot. Médit. Alp}{\b . 87}: 226 (1945). They differ from {\b 33} in the slender habit, narrower leaves, lanceolate silicula 4·5-10·5 mm, and somewhat longer style. They have a chromosome number of 2n = 32.
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 34. D. korabensis} Kümmerle & Degen ex Jáv.,{\i  Bot. Közl.}{\b  19}: 22 (1921) ({\i D. tomentosa} auct. bulg., non Clairv.). Plant forming a dense mat; stem up to 16 cm. Basal leaves ovate-lanceolate, densely stellate-hairy; cauline leaves 1-8. Silicula ovate-lanceolate to elliptical, hairy; style 0·4-0·6(-0·9) mm. 2n = 32. •{\i  Mountains of N. part of Balkan peninsula}. Al Bu Ju.
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 35. D. fladnizensis} Wulfen in Jacq., {\i Mise. Austr. Bot.}{\b  1}: 147 (1779) ({\i D. wahlenbergii} Hartman). Flowering stem up to 8 cm, usually subglabrous. Cauline leaves usually 1(2); basal leaves linear-spathulate, obtuse, ciliate, otherwise glabrous, or variably covered with usually simple hairs. Inflorescence 2- to 12-flowered. Petals 2-3·5 mm, white. Silicula 2·5-7·5 mm, lanceolate-elliptical, glabrous; style c. 0·2 mm. 2n = 16. {\i Arctic Europe and mountains of Scandinavia and S. & C. Europe,from the Pyrenees to the E. Carpathians.} Au Cz Fe Ga Ge He Is It No Rm Rs(N, C) Sb Su.
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28 Very variable and divided by some authors into several species. In northern Europe, the North American species{\b  D. lactea} Adams{\i  Mém. Soc. Nat. Moscou}{\b  5}: 104 (1817), is recognized as distinct on the basis of having basal leaves with some branched hairs and usually no cauline leaves, petals 3-5 mm, and style up to 0·5 mm. In the Alps, however, this distinction does not seem to be practicable.
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 36. D. dorneri} Heuffel, {\i Österr. Bot. Zeitschr.}{\b  8}: 25 (1858). Like {\b 35} but basal leaves acute, glabrous on the surfaces, with the margins ciliate; cilia unbranched near the base of the leaf, branched towards the leaf-apex; cauline leaves 0-3; silicula elliptical; style 0·4-0·8 mm. 2n = 32. •{\i  S. Carpathians} ({\i Muntii Retezatului}). Rm.
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 37. D. glabella} Pursh,{\i  Fl. Amer. Sept.}{\b  2}: 434 (1814) ({\i D. hirta} auct., {\i D. daurica} DC., {\i D. magellanica }auct., non Lam.; incl. {\i D. cacuminum} Elis. Ekman). Robust, laxly caespitose perennial; stem up to 30 cm, often flexuous, usually simple, stellate-canescent at least below, with up to 10 somewhat toothed cauline leaves. Basal leaves up to 2 cm, oblanceolate, acute, entire or with 1 or 2 small teeth ciliate and rather densely stellate-canescent. Inflorescence 8- to 30-flowered. Petals 4-6 mm, white or cream; filaments dilated at the base. Silicula 6-14 mm, ovate-lanceolate, flat, glabrous or with simple hairs; style 0·2-0·5 mm. 2n = 64.{\i  Arctic and subarctic Europe, southwards to }61°{\i  N. in Norway.} Fe Is No Rs(N) Sb Su.
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 38. D. pacheri} Stur,{\i  Österr. Bot. Wochenbl.}{\b  5}: (49-50), 156 (1855) ({\i D. norica }Widder). Like {\b 37} but stems not more than 20 cm; basal leaves sometimes glabrous; cauline leaves 0-7; petals 3-4 mm, white; silicula glabrous. 2n = 64. •{\i  Mountains of E. Austria; Tatra; very local}. Au Cz.
\par
\par 376}
\par