{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 ovate, obovate or oblong, cuneate at the base, almost entire. Pedicels about equalling the silicula. Petals 5-10 mm, white. Silicula 8-15 mm, ellipsoidal or ovoid-ellipsoidal, often strongly compressed laterally, with long, narrow septum. 2n = 48, 54.{\i  Muddy shores, salt-marshes and saline meadows. • Coasts of W. Europe, extending to S.E. Sweden.} Br Da Ga Ge Hb Ho Hs No Su.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Hybrids and back-crosses between {\b 2}({\b a}) and {\b 6}, with basal leaves generally truncate at the base and petals 4-6 mm, frequently occur throughout the range of {\b 6}, often in the absence of one or both parents.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 7. C. fenestrata} R. Br. in J. Ross, {\i Voy. Disc. Baffin }app. 3, 163 (1819) (incl. {\i C. arctica} Schlecht.). Biennial or perennial up to 15 cm. Basal leaves usually ovate, cordate or truncate at the base. Pedicels usually equalling the silicula. Petals 2·5-6 mm, white, rarely purplish. Silicula 5-8 mm, oblong-ellipsoidal or narrowly ellipsoidal, 2-4 times as long as wide; style 0·2-0·5 mm. {\i Arctic and subarctic Europe.} Fa No Rs(N) Sb.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 There has been much confusion between{\b  7} and small plants of {\b 3}, and the assignment of some records is uncertain.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 8. C. aragonensis} Coste & Soulié,{\i  Bull. Géogr.  Bot.} ({\i Le Mans}) {\b 21}: 7 (1911). Biennial with slender, branched stems 10-40 cm. Basal leaves 4-8 mm, as broad as long, ovate-cordate, entire or with a small callose tooth on either side and at the apex; cauline leaves lanceolate to linear. Petals 3-5 mm, white or violet. Silicula 3-6(-8) mm, oblong-ellipsoidal or ellipsoidal, 2-4 times as long as wide, attenuate at both ends, with narrow septum; valves caducous; style c. 1 mm.{\i  Calcareous screes. • Mountains of N.E. Spain}. Hs.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 9. C. glastifolia} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 648 (1753). Robust annual or perennial, with single stem 50-100(-150) cm, fistular, leafy. Basal leaves oblong to elliptical; cauline leaves oblong-lanceolate, auriculate-amplexicaul. Pedicels in fruit 1½-2 times as long as the silicula. Petals 3-4·5 mm, obovate, white. Silicula 2·5-4 mm, globose or broadly ellipsoidal; style 0·3-0·4 mm. Seeds 0·7-0·9 mm, ellipsoidal, echinate, 15-30 in a silicula. •{\i  C. & E. Spain; naturalized elsewhere in S. Europe}. Hs ?Lu [Ga It ,Ju].
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 10. C. megalosperma} (Maire) Vogt, {\i Mitt. Bot. Staatssamm. München }{\b 23}: 199 (1987) ({\i C. glastifolia} var.{\i  megalosperma} Maire). Like {\b 9} but pedicels in fruit 3-4 times as long as the silicula; silicula 2-3·2 mm; style 0·2-0·3 mm; seeds 1-1·5 mm, verrucose, 6-8 in a silicula.{\i  Mountains of S. Spain}. Hs.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 63.               Kernera}                 Medicus
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc  By A.O. Chater & V.H. Heywood
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Like{\i  Cochlearia} but filaments curved; valves of fruit rigid when ripe, with mid-vein absent or present only in the lower part.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   {\b 1. K. saxatilis} (L.) Reichenb. in Moessler,{\i  Handb}. ed. 2, {\b 2}: 1142 (1828) ({\i Cochlearia saxatilis} L.). Perennial; stems 10-30(-40) cm, usually branched. Basal leaves petiolate, entire to deeply toothed, obovate-lanceolate to spathulate, obtuse or narrowed to the apex; cauline leaves lanceolate or ovate, narrowed to the base or sagittate and amplexicaul. Raceme many-flowered. Petals 2-4 mm, white. Silicula 2-4·5 mm, ovoid and stipitate, or ovoid-globose to ellipsoid-ovoid and sessile; valves smooth, with a more or less prominent mid-vein. Septum hyaline and slender, or spongy. {\i Mountains of S. & C. Europe.} Al Au Bu Co Cz Ga Ge Gr He Hs It Ju Rm Po.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp.{\b  saxatilis }(incl. {\i K. auriculata} (Lam.) Reichenb., {\i K. decipiens} (Willk.) Nyman): Stems usually more than 15 cm. Leaves variable in shape, entire to lobed, usually pubescent; cauline leaves often auriculate. Silicula usually more than 2 mm, often stipitate; mid-vein usually present. 2n = 16, 32.{\i  Throughout the range of the species, except S.E. Spain}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp.{\b  boissieri} (Reuter) Nyman, {\i Consp.} 51 (1878) ({\i K. boissieri} Reuter): Stems up to 15 cm. Basal leaves broadly spathulate, usually entire, glabrous; cauline leaves rarely auriculate. Silicula usually not more than 22 mm, not stipitate; mid-vein rarely present. •{\i  S.E. Spain}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 64.             Rhizobotrya}            Tausch
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc  By V.H. Heywood
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Like {\i Cochlearia} but raceme bracteate; sepals persistent, surrounding the fruit; filaments of stamens curved; valves of the siliqua without mid-vein.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. R. alpina} Tausch,{\i  Flora} ({\i Regensb}.) {\b 19}: 34 (1836) ({\i Cochlearia brevicaulis} Facch.,{\i  Kernera alpina} (Tausch) Prantl). Caespitose perennial; stems 2-4 cm. Leaves oblong-spathulate, obtuse, long-petiolate. Inflorescence condensed. Petals 2 mm, white. Siliqua c. 2·5 mm ovate, obtuse. 2n = 14.{\i  Dolomitic rocks, }1900 2800{\i  m. S.E. Alps} ({\i W. Dolomiti}). It.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 65.           Camelina }           Crantz
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc By R.D. Meikle (Ed.1) revised by J.R. Akeroyd (Ed.2)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Annuals or biennials; hairs unbranched or branched. Cauline leaves sessile, often auriculate. Inflorescence ebracteate. Sepals erect; petals yellow or white. Fruit a more or less inflated silicula; style distinct. Seeds numerous, in 2 rows in each loculus.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Literature: N. Zinger, {\i Trav. Mus. Bot. Acad. Pétersb.}{\b  6}: 1-303 (1909). Z. Mirek, {\i Fragm. Fl. Geobot. }{\b 27}: 445-507 (1981).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Seeds 0·8-1·5 mm; stem and leaves with dense, unbranched or
\par
  branched and unbranched hairs
\par
2 Petals less than 5 mm; basal leaves withered by anthesis ....... {\b 2. microcarpa}
\par
2 Petals 6-9 mm; basal leaves usually persistent at anthesis .......... {\b 3. rumelica}
\par
1 Seeds (1·5-)1·6-3 mm; stem and leaves glabrous or with
\par
  branched hairs (rarely also with unbranched hairs)
\par
3 Silicula 10-12 mm ........................................................................ {\b 4. alyssum}
\par
3 Silicula 6-10 mm
\par
4 Leaves entire or denticulate ............................................................. {\b 1. sativa}
\par
4 Leaves deeply toothed or lobed .................................................... {\b 4. alyssum}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. C. sativa} (L.) Crantz,{\i  Stirp. Austr.}{\b  1}: 17 (1762) ({\i C. glabrata }(DC.) Fritsch, {\i C. pilosa} (DC.) Vassilcz.,{\i  C. sativa} auct. ital.,{\i  Myagrum sativum} L.). Erect, unbranched or sparingly branched annual 30-80(-100) cm; stems and leaves subglabrous (or hairy, var. pilosa DC.). Leaves 3-9 cm, lanceolate or narrowly oblong, entire or remotely denticulate, the cauline sessile, with acute auricles. Petals 4-5·5 mm, yellow. Raceme elongate in fruit, rather dense; pedicels 1-2 cm in fruit, ascending. Silicula usually 7-9 mm; valves strongly convex, not very rigid or woody and often flattened in dried specimens. Seeds 1-2·5 mm. 2n = 40. {\i Cultivated land, especially flax}
\par

\par
380}
\par