{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 3 Plant usually 10-20 cm
\par
4 Ripe fruit usually 7-9 mm, obcordate; angle at base of
\par
  notch not more than 90° .............................................................. {\b 15. praecox}
\par
4 Ripe fruit usually 5-8 mm, triangular-obcordate; angle
\par
   at base of notch more than 90° ..................................................... {\b 16. jankae}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 15. T. praecox} Wulfen in Jacq., {\i Collect. Bot.}{\b  2}: 124 (1789) ({\i T. affine} sensu Boiss., non Schott & Kotschy). Stems (5-)10-20(-35) cm, erect, glabrous, more or less glaucous. Rosette-leaves oblong to broadly ovate, petiolate, often violet beneath; cauline leaves ovate-oblong, amplexicaul with obtuse auricles; all entire or sinuate-denticulate, coriaceous. Inflorescence much elongating in fruit. Sepals 2-3 mm, violet-tipped; petals 5-7 mm, narrow, white. Silicula usually 7-9 mm, narrowly obcordate; angle at base of notch not more than 90°; style (1-)2-3·5 mm, always exceeding the notch at least slightly. Seeds 2-4 in each loculus.{\i  Stony, shady slopes and dry grassland. S. Europe,from S.E. France to Krym.} Al Au Bu Ga Gr It Ju Rs(K) Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp.{\b  praecox}: Rosette-leaves oblong to broadly ovate; cauline leaves ovate. Style (1-)2-3·5 mm. 2n = 14.{\i  Throughout the range of the species}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp.{\b  cuneifolium} (Griseb. ex Pant.) Clapham,{\i  Feddes Repert.}{\b  70}: 4 (1964) ({\i T. cuneifolium} Griseb. ex Pant.): Rosette-leaves ovate-cuneate to spathulate; cauline leaves oblong. Style 2-4 mm.{\i  S. Jugoslavia, Albania and S.W. Bulgaria.}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b T. albanicum} (F.K. Meyer) Greuter & Burdet,{\i  Willdenowia}{\b  13}: 95 (1983) and{\i  T. cikaeum} (F.K. Meyer) Greuter & Burdet,{\i  loc. cit.} (1983), from the mountains of Albania, may represent variants of {\b 15}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 16. T. jankae} A. Kerner, {\i Österr. Bot. Zeitschr.}{\b  17}: 35 (1867) (incl. {\i T. hungaricum} Dvorakova). Like {\b 15} but somewhat taller; silicula usually 5-8 mm, triangular-obcordate; angle at base of notch more than 90°; style 1-1·5(-2·5) mm, about equalling or only slightly exceeding the notch; seeds 3-10 in each loculus. 2n = 14, 28. •{\i  Czechoslovakia, Hungary.} Cz Hu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 17. T. goesingense} Halácsy,{\i  Österr. Bot. Zeitschr.}{\b  30}:173 (1880) ({\i T. tymphaeum} Hausskn.; incl.{\i  T. umbrosum} Waisb.). Stock with many very short stolons (longer in shade), the numerous leaf-rosettes densely crowded; stems up to 40 cm, erect. Rosette-leaves 4-10 cm, elliptical to obovate-spathulate, petiolate; cauline leaves ovate-oblong, sagittate-amplexicaul; all glaucous, entire or almost so. Inflorescence commonly branched. Petals 6-8 mm, white. Silicula narrowly obovate to triangular, very narrowly winged below, the wing broadening upwards into apical lobes of varying form, with a notch between them, or into a broad truncate apex; style (1·5-)3 mm, much-exserted. Seeds 3-6 in each loculus. Stony and shady slopes or mountain grassland. 2n = 56. •{\i  Balkan peninsula and E.C. Europe.} Al Au Bu Hu Ju.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 18. T. epirotum} Halácsy, {\i Consp. Fl. Graec.}{\b  1}: 109 (1900). Stock with many short stolons up to 10 mm; stems 3-6 cm, erect. Rosette-leaves obovate, shortly petiolate; cauline leaves oblong with obtuse auricles. Inflorescence remaining compact in fruit. Petals white, twice as long as the yellowish sepals. Silicula obovate, with narrow wing; style 1-2 mm, exceeding the shallow notch. Seeds 1 or 2 in each loculus.{\i  Serpentine screes above} 2000{\i  m. • N.W. Greece.} Gr.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 19. T. ochroleucum} Boiss. & Heldr. in Boiss.,{\i  Diagn. Pl. Or. Nov.}{\b  2}({\b 8}): 39 (1849) ({\i T. balcanicum} Janka). Stock with many short stolons up to 4(-6) cm bearing crown of leaves 5-15 mm; stems 10-20(-35) cm, ascending, slender. Rosette-leaves ovate to oblong, gradually and shortly petiolate; cauline leaves oblong, amplexicaul with obtuse auricles; all entire or somewhat denticulate. Inflorescence elongating in fruit. Petals 5-8·5 mm, white, becoming pale yellow when dry, 2-2 1/2 times as long as the green or reddish sepals; anthers yellow. Silicula 6-10 mm, obcordate, broadly winged; style 2-5 mm, long-exserted from the shallow notch. Seeds 1-4 in each loculus. 2n = 14.{\i  Grassy mountain slopes. Balkan peninsula.} Al Bu Gr Ju.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 A variable species that is probably divisible into several subspecies.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b T. tymphaeum} Hausskn.,{\i  Mitt. Thür. Bot. Ver.}{\b  3-4}:115 (1893) ({\i T. pindicum} Hausskn.), from N. & C. Greece and S. Albania, usually on serpentine, is similar to {\b 19} but has rather stout stolons 1·5-4·5 cm, bearing crown of leaves, more robust stems up to 40 cm, and a longer fruiting raceme. It is probably not specifically distinct from {\b 19}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b T. lutescens} Velen., {\i Sitz.-Ber. Böhm. Ges. Wiss.}{\b  1903} ({\b 28}): 2 (1904), a non-stoloniferous, somewhat glaucous, glabrous perennial, with erect stems 12-15 cm, and obovate, abruptly petiolate rosette-leaves, from N. Greece (Macedonia), is possibly not distinct from {\b 19}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 20. T. montanum} L.,{\i  Sp. Pl.} 647 (1753) ({\i T. lotharingum} Jordan). Mat-forming perennial, the branches of the stock usually elongated, but sometimes shorter and covered with dead leaf-bases; stems (7-)10-30 cm, erect, glabrous. Rosette-leaves with lamina 1-2·5 cm, ovate to orbicular, rather abruptly narrowed into the long petiole; cauline leaves ovate-oblong, amplexicaul with rounded or subacute auricles; all entire or sinuate-denticulate, more or less coriaceous, glabrous, somewhat glaucous. Inflorescence elongating in fruit. Sepals 2-3 mm; petals 5-7 mm, with limb 3 mm wide and narrow claw, much exceeding the stamens, white; anthers pale yellowish. Silicula (4-)7-8 mm, obcordate, broadly winged above, with rounded apical lobes and a wide notch; style 1·5-2 mm, exceeding the notch. Seeds 1(2) in each loculus, smooth, dull. 2n = 28.{\i  Cliff-ledges, screes, shaded rocky slopes and open grassland, mainly on limestone. C. Europe, extending to E. Pyrenees and S. Jugoslavia.} Au Be Cz Ga Ge He ?It Ju.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    ({\b 21-23}). {\b T. alpinum} group. Mat-forming to caespitose perennials, the stock with elongated and stolon-like or quite short branches; stems erect, glabrous. Rosette-leaves 1-2·5 cm, long-petiolate; cauline leaves amplexicaul; all glabrous, more or less coriaceous, entire or nearly so. Sepals 2-3 mm; petals 4-8 mm, much exceeding the stamens, white; anthers yellowish. Silicula about twice as long as wide; wing up to 0·5 mm wide, not or shallowly notched; style long-exserted. Seeds 2-8 in each loculus.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 All plants of this group occur in mountain screes, grassland and rocky slopes.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Petals 3·5-5 mm; seeds 3-8 in each loculus ................................ {\b 23. kovatsii}
\par
1 Petals 5-8 mm; seeds 1-3 in each loculus
\par
2 Petals 5 mm; style 1-1·5 mm; inflorescence usually not
\par
  more than 3 cm in fruit ................................................................. {\b 22. alpestre}
\par
2 Petals 6-7 mm; style 2-3 mm; inflorescence usually more
\par
  than 3 cm in fruit ......................................................................... {\b 21. alpinum}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 21. T. alpinum} Crantz,{\i  Stirp. Austr. }{\b 1}: 25 (1762). Stem usually 10-15 cm. Inflorescence more than 3 cm in fruit. Petals 6-7 mm.
\par

\par
387}
\par