{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp.{\b  bursa-pastoris}: Silicula usually only slightly emarginate; style c. 0·25 mm. 2n = 32.{\i  Throughout the range of the species}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp.{\b  thracica }(Velen.) Stoj. & Stefanov, {\i Fl. Balg}. ed. 3, 513 (1948) ({\i C. thracica} Velen.): Silicula deeply emarginate; style c. 0·75 mm. •{\i  S. Bulgaria}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Numerous variants of this species have been described by Almquist, {\i loc. cit. }(1921).
\par

\par
{\b C. heegeri} Solms-Laub., {\i Bot. Zeit. }{\b 58}: 167 (1900) ({\i Solmsiella heegeri} (Solms-Laub.) Borbás), a profusely branched plant with an ellipsoidal, not compressed silicula, is an atavistic mutant of{\b  1} first noted in 1897 in W. Germany. It became extinct in the original locality, but was cultivated in botanic gardens, and was later found naturalized near Berlin.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. C. rubella} Reuter,{\i  Compt. Rend. Soc. Hallér.}{\b  2}: 18 (1854). Plant sparsely hairy or glabrous. Flowers scentless. Sepals usually reddish at least at the apex, glabrous; petals 1·5-2 mm, shorter than or scarcely exceeding the sepals, usually reddish at least on margins. Silicula c. 6 × 6 mm, distinctly attenuate at the base, usually fairly deeply emarginate at the apex; lateral margins concave; apical lobes obtuse; style c. 0·25 mm. {\i S. Europe; naturalized in C. Europe, and occasionally casual elsewhere.} Al Bl *Br Co Ga Hs It Ju Lu Sa Si ?Tu [Au Ge He].
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Sterile plants intermediate between {\b 1} and {\b 2}, presumably of hybrid origin, have been called{\i  C. gracilis} Gren., {\i Mém. Soc. Émul. Doubs} ser. 3, {\b 2}: 403 (1858) ({\i C. gelmii} J. Murr). Fertile intermediates also sometimes occur, and there is much difference of opinion as to whether {\b 2} should be recognized even at subspecific rank. Specimens of {\b 1} with reddish sepals have frequently been identified as {\b 2}, but this character is variable even within a single plant.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 3. C. grandiflora} (Fauché & Chaub.) Boiss., {\i Diagn. Pl. Or. Nov.}{\b  1}({\b 1}): 76 (1843). Plant up to 75 cm, sparsely hairy. Flowers fragrant. Sepals green, glabrous; petals 4-5 mm, c. 2½ times as long as the sepals, white. Silicula c. 6 × 6 mm, scarcely attenuate at the base, deeply emarginate at the apex; lateral margins straight; apical lobes very obtuse; style 0·25-0·7 mm.{\i  Rocky limestone slopes and as a ruderal. • Greece and Albania; naturalized in N. Italy}. Al Gr [It].
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 4. C. orientalis} Klokov, {\i Bull. Soc. Nat. Voronèje}{\b  1}: 122 (1926). Plant densely hairy in lower part, greyish-green. Sepals green; petals 1·5-2 mm, less than twice as long as the sepals, pale yellowish. Silicula 5-6 × 4-4·5 mm, deeply emarginate at the apex; style 0·25-0·5 mm.{\i  S. Russia, W. Ukraine.} Rs(W, E).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 68.              Pritzelago}             O. Kuntze
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc  By V.H. Heywood & B.M.G. Jones.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Small perennials; glabrous or with branched and unbranched hairs. Inflorescence ebracteate. Petals white, clawed. Fruit an angusti-septate silicula, elliptical to lanceolate. Seeds 1 or 2 in each loculus. ({\i Hutchinsia} auct., non R. Br., {\i Noccaea} auct., non Moench.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Literature: G. Melchers, {\i Österr. Bot. Zeitschr.}{\b  81}: 81 (1932). F.K. Meyer, {\i Wiss. Zeitschr. Friedrich-Schiller Unils, Math. Nat. Reihe}{\b  31}: 267-276 (1982).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. P. alpina} (L.) O. Kuntze,{\i  Revis. Gen. Pl.}{\b  1}: 35 (1891) ({\i Hutchinsia alpina} (L.) R. Br.,{\i  Noccaea alpina} (L.) Reichenb.). Stock branched; stems up to 15 cm. Basal leaves pinnatisect. Petals 3-5 mm.{\i  Rocks and stony ground. Mountains of C. & S. Europe, southwards to N. Spain, C. Italy and Macedonia.} Al Au Cz Ga Ge He Hs It Ju Lu Po Rm.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Flowering stems flexuous, leafy ................................ ({\b b}) subsp.{\b  auerswaldii}
\par
1 Flowering stems ± leafless, straight
\par
2 Petals 3 mm wide, abruptly contracted into the claw;
\par
  style 1 mm ........................................................................... ({\b a}) subsp.{\b  alpina}
\par
2 Petals 1-2 mm wide, gradually attenuate into the claw;
\par
  stigma sessile ............................................................... ({\b c}) subsp.{\b  brevicaulis}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b alpina}: Flowering stems 5-12 cm, sparsely hairy. Leaves all basal, glabrous, with 5-9 ovate-lanceolate segments. Petals 4-5 × 3 mm. Silicula 4-6 × 1·5-2 mm, ovate, acute. 2n = 12. Calcicole.{\i  Alps and Jura; Pyrenees; N. & C. Italy}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp.{\b  auerswaldii} (Willk.) Greuter & Burdet,{\i  Willdenowia}{\b  15}: 68 (1985): Like subsp. ({\b a}) but flowering stems up to 15 cm, flexuous, leafy. Cauline leaves with lanceolate to linear segments. •{\i  N. Spain} ({\i Cordillera Cantabrica}).
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b c}) Subsp.{\b  brevicaulis} (Hoppe) Greuter & Burdet,{\i  op. cit.} 69 (1985): Flowering stems 2-5 cm, glabrous. Leaves with 3-7 ovate-lanceolate segments. Petals 3-4 × 1-2 mm. Silicula 3·5-4 × 1-2 mm, obtuse. 2n = 12.{\i  Alps and Balkan peninsula}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Plants from the Pyrenees and S.W. Alps with leaves like subsp. ({\b c}) but fruits like subsp. ({\b a}) have been distinguished as {\i Hutchinsia affinis} Gren. ex F.W. Schultz,{\i  Arch. Fl. Fr. Allem.} 274 (1853).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 69.            Hymenolobus}              Nutt.
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc  By V.H. Heywood.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Like{\i  Pritzelago} but all hairs unbranched and seeds 3-10 in each loculus.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Literature: R. Pampanini,{\i  Nuovo Gior. Bot. Ital.}{\b  16}: 36 (1909).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Stems up to 15(-30) cm; seeds 0·4-0·6 mm ............................... {\b 1. procumbens}
\par
Stems not more than 6 cm; seeds 0·6-0·8 mm ............................ {\b 2. pauciflorus}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. H. procumbens} (L.) Nutt. in Torrey & A. Gray,{\i  Fl. N. Amer. }{\b 1}: 117 (1838) ({\i Hornungia procumbens} (L.) Hayek, {\i Hutchinsia procumbens} (L.) Desv., {\i Capsella  procumbens} (L.) Fries). Annual or biennial with sparse unbranched hairs; stems 2-15(-30) cm, procumbent or erect, branched. Lower leaves deeply lyrate-pinnatifid to entire; upper leaves entire. Petals 1-3 mm, spathulate, equalling or slightly exceeding the sepals. Silicula 2-5 mm, elliptical to obovate or orbicular; valves translucent, with reticulate veins. Seeds 0·4-0·6 mm. 2n = 12, 24. {\i Saline habitats. Mainly S. Europe, extending northwards to C. Germany}. Au Bl Co Ga Ge Gr He Hs It Ju Lu Rm Rs(W, K, E) Sa Si.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 An extremely variable species. A distinctive variant, var.{\i  revelieri }(Jordan) Heywood ({\i H. procumbens} subsp. {\i revelieri} (Jordan) Greuter & Burdet), with leaves all ovate-elliptical, entire, petals c. 1·5 mm, and silicula 3 mm, orbicular, occurs in Italy, Sicily, Corse and Malta. Other variants, about which there is wide disagreement in their characters, make the distinction between {\b 1} and{\b  2} difficult, and some authors have treated these two species as subspecies.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. H. pauciflorus} (Koch) Schinz & Thell., {\i Viert. Naturf. Ges. Zürich}{\b  66}: 285 (1921) ({\i Capsella pauciflora} Koch). Like {\b 1} but stems 2-6 cm, erect; leaves 3-lobed or entire, spathulate; inflorescence few-flowered; silicula orbicular to elliptical; seeds 0·6-0·8 mm. •{\i  Cevennes; Alps; Calabria and Sicilia; isolated localities in E. Spain}. Au Ga He Hs It Si.
\par

\par
382}
\par