{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\i Planted for timber in N. & W. Europe}. [Br Da Ge Hb No.] ({\i W. North America.})
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. A. grandis} (D. Don) Lindley,{\i  Penny Cycl.}{\b  1:} 30 (1833). Up to 75 m; trunk fairly stout. Young twigs sparsely puberulent; buds resinous. Leaves on the upper surface of the twigs pointing horizontally outwards, leaving a distinct parting. Leaves 20-60 × 1·5-2·5 mm, emarginate. Female cone 5-10 × 3-4 cm; bracts included.{\i  Planted for timber in N. & C. Europe}. [Br Cz Da Ge Hb He It No.] ({\i W. North America}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 3. A. lasiocarpa} (Hooker) Nutt.,{\i  N. Amer. Sylva}{\b  3:} 138 (1849). Up to 48 m; crown narrowly pyramidal; trunk slender. Young twigs with reddish pubescence; buds resinous. Leaves on upper surface of the twigs pointing forwards and curving upwards, not leaving a parting. Leaves 15-40 × 2 mm, flexible, obtuse or slightly emarginate; resin-canals median. Female cone 5-10 × 3·5 cm; bracts included.{\i  Occasionally planted for timber in N. Europe.} [Is Su.] ({\i W. North America.})
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 4. A. sibirica} Ledeb.,{\i  Fl. Altaica }{\b 4: }202 (1833). Up to 30 m; crown pyramidal; trunk slender. Young twigs sparsely pubescent; buds very resinous. Leaves on the sides of the twigs spreading horizontally; those on the upper surface pointing forwards and upwards, and not leaving a parting. Leaves 15-30 × 1-1·3 mm, thin, flexible, rounded at the apex or slightly emarginate; resin-canals median. Female cone 6-8 × 3 cm; bracts ½ as long as cone-scales, included.{\i  Forming extensive forests in N.E. Russia, westwards to c. }41°{\i  E. and southwards to c.} 55°{\i  N. Planted for timber in other parts of N. Europe}. Rs(N, C) [Da Fe Is]. (N. Asia.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   {\b 5. A. nordmanniana} (Steven) Spach,{\i  Hist. Vég.} ({\i Phan.}) {\b 11:} 418 (1841). Up to 70 m; trunk stout. Young twigs sparsely pubescent; buds not resinous. Leaves on the upper surface of the twigs spreading forwards and upwards, not leaving a parting. Leaves 15-35 × 1·5-2 mm, emarginate; resin-canals marginal. Female cone 12-18 × 4-5 cm; bracts exserted and deflexed. {\i Planted for timber in C. Europe and occasionally elsewhere.} [Au Cz Da It Lu Rm Su Tu.] ({\i W. Caucasus, N. Anatolia.})
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 6. A. alba} Miller, {\i Gard. Dict}. ed. 8, no. 1 (1768) ({\i A. pectinata} (Lam.) DC.). Up to 50 m; crown pyramidal; trunk stout. Young twigs densely pubescent; buds not resinous. Leaves on the sides of the twigs spreading horizontally; those on the upper surface pointing outwards and upwards, leaving a distinct parting. Leaves 15-30 × 1·5-2 mm, thick, flexible, emarginate at the apex; resin-canals marginal. Female cone 10-20 × 3-4 cm; bracts exserted, deflexed. 2n = 24.{\i  • C. & S. Europe, mainly in the mountains, extending eastwards to White Russia; doubtfully native in N.W. France. Planted for timber in N. & W. Europe.} Al Au Bu Co Cz Ga Ge Gr He Hs Hu It Ju Po Rm Rs(C, W) [Be Br Da Lu No Su].
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b A. pardei }Gaussen,{\i  Bull. Soc. Hist. Nat. Toulouse}{\b  57:} 357 (1929), is cultivated in France, and may perhaps occur wild in Calabria. It is very like {\b 6} but has median resin-canals.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 7. A. nebrodensis} (Lojac.) Mattei,{\i  Boll. Orto Bot. Palermo}{\b  7:} 64 (1908) ({\i A. alba} subsp.{\i  nebrodensis} (Lojac.) Nitz.). Up to 15 m; crown broad, somewhat flattened; trunk stout. Young twigs more or less glabrous; buds resinous. Leaves all patent, dense, spreading evenly from the sides and upper surfaces of the twigs, often leaving a parting on the underside. Leaves 8-13 × 2 mm, thick, rigid, obtuse, rarely apiculate; resin-canals marginal. Female cone c. 20 × 5 cm; bracts exserted, deflexed.{\i  About 20 native trees in N. Sicilia} ({\i Le Madonie}).{\i  Formerly forming extensive forests on the mountains of N. Sicilia, and now being replanted}. Si.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Some authors regard this taxon as only a variant of{\b  6}, but in the present state of knowledge it seems best to treat it as a species. Trees intermediate between{\b  6} and{\b  7} have been recorded from S.W. Italy (Calabria).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 8. A. cephalonica} Loudon, {\i Arbor. Fruticet. Brit.}{\b  4:} 2325 (1838). Up to 30 m; crown pyramidal; trunk fairly stout. Young twigs glabrous; buds very resinous. Leaves all patent, dense, spreading evenly from the sides and upper surfaces of the twigs, less dense and often leaving a parting on the underside. Leaves 15-35 × 2-2·5 mm, thick, rigid, acute and pungent, rarely subobtuse; resin-canals marginal. Female cone 12-16 × 4-5 cm; bracts exserted, deflexed. 2n = 24. •{\i  Mountains of Greece,} 750-1700{\i  m; planted for timber in Italy.} ?Al Gr [It].
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b A. borisii-regis} Mattf.,{\i  Notizbl. Bot. Gart. Berlin}{\b  9:} 235 (1925), is the name applied to trees in the Balkan peninsula from S. Bulgaria to S. Greece. They are of varying form, but always more or less intermediate between {\b 6} and {\b 8}. They have a chromosome number of 2n = 24. The young twigs are densely pubescent, the buds are resinous, and the leaves are usually like those of 8 in shape and in arrangement. They may be of hybrid origin; cones are very rarely produced.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 9. A. pinsapo} Boiss., {\i Biblioth. Univ. Genève} ser. 2, {\b 13:} 402, 406 (1838). Up to 30 m; crown pyramidal; trunk stout. Young twigs glabrous; buds resinous. Leaves patent, spreading evenly all round the twigs. Leaves 10-15 mm, thick, rigid, acute; resin-canals median. Female cone 10-16 × 3-4 cm; bracts less than ½ as long as the cone-scales, included.{\i  North-facing slopes on limestone mountains, }1000-2000{\i  m. • S.W. Spain} ({\i near Ronda});{\i  occasionally planted for timber elsewhere}. Hs [Au Lu].
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b A.} ×{\b  insignis} Carrière ex Bailly,{\i  Revue Hort.} ({\i Paris}) {\b 1890:} 230 (1890), a hybrid between{\b  9} and{\b  5}, first raised in France in 1872, is very common as an ornamental tree in parks throughout Europe. It is like {\b 9} but the young twigs are pubescent, the leaves are 10-33 × 1·5-2·5 mm, acute or obtuse, less dense, and often leaving a parting on the underside of the twigs, the female cone is 11-20 × 3·5-5 cm, and at least the lower bracts are slightly exserted.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 2.                Pseudotsuga}             Carrière 
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc  By J. Do Amaral Franco.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Like {\i Abies} but branches irregularly whorled; resin-canals 2, marginal; leaf-scars elliptical, slightly projecting; female cones deflexed, pendent, ovoid or cylindrical; scales persistent; bracts exserted, deeply trifid.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. P. menziesii} (Mirbel) Franco, {\i Conif. Duar. Nom.} 4 (1950) ({\i P. douglasii} (Lindley) Carrière, {\i P. taxifolia} Britton). Tree up to 100 m, with ridged, dark reddish-brown bark on adult trees. Twigs pubescent. Leaves 20-35 mm, entire at the apex, fragrant when bruised. Female cone 5-10 × 2-3·5 cm, ovoid.{\i  Extensively planted for timber in many parts of Europe.} [Au Be Br Bu Cz Da Fe Ga Ge Gr Hb He It Ju Lu Po Rm Su.] ({\i W. North America}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 3.                 Tsuga}              (Antoine) Carrière
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc  By J. Do Amaral Franco.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Evergreen trees with irregularly whorled branches. Short shoots
\par

\par
38}
\par