{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 6, the filaments with a white basal scale. Fruit an angusti-septate silicula, obtuse or obcordate, with thin-walled valves, narrowly winged in the upper part; style very short or absent. Seeds (1)2 in each loculus.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 Basal leaves with obtuse lobes; petals unequal, the outer
\par
 1½-2 times as long as the sepals; style short .............................. {\b 1. nudicaulis}
\par
Basal leaves with acute lobes, or entire; petals ± equal, as long
\par
 as the sepals; style absent ...................................................... {\b 2. coronopifolia}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. T. nudicaulis} (L.) R. Br. in Aiton,{\i  Hort. Kew.} ed. 2,{\b  4}: 83 (1812). Stem 5-45 cm, often with ascending basal branches. Basal leaves 1-5 cm, petiolate, narrowly lyrate-pinnatifid, with few short, acute or obtuse lateral lobes and a broader, often 3-lobed, terminal segment; cauline leaves (if present) less lobed or more or less entire. Petals unequal, the inner slightly longer than the sepals, the outer 1½-2 times as long. Silicula 3-4(-4·5) mm; style absent or up to 0·3 mm. 2n = 36.{\i  W. & C. Europe, extending to Sweden, White Russia and Jugoslavia.} Au Be Br Cz Da Ga Ge Hb He Ho Hs Hu ?It Ju Lu No Po ?Rm Rs(B, C, W) ?Si Su.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. T. coronopifolia} (J.P. Bergeret) Thell.,{\i  Feddes Repert.}{\b  10}: 289 (1912) ({\i T. lepidium} DC., {\i T. nudicaulis} var. {\i regularis} (Sm.) Fiori). Like {\b 1} but more slender; rosette-leaves narrowly oblanceolate, usually pinnatifid with acute lobes; petals subequal, as long as the sepals; silicula not more than 3 mm, style absent. 2n = 36.{\i  S. Europe.} Bu Co Cr Ga Gr Hs It Ju Lu Sa Si Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 74.         Thlaspi }            L.
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc  By †A.R. Clapham (Ed.1) revised by J.R. Akeroyd (Ed.2)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Annuals or perennials, with sessile, more or less amplexicaul cauline leaves; hairs unbranched or absent. Inflorescence racemose, ebracteate. Sepals erect, not saccate; petals usually white or purplish, shortly clawed; stamens without appendages. Fruit an angusti-septate silicula, with or without an apical notch, the valves keeled and usually winged; stigma capitate, somewhat 2-lobed. Seeds 1-8 in each loculus. (Incl.{\i  Noccaea} Moench.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 In species described as having violet anthers, the violet coloration may not appear until a late stage of dehiscence.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 A difficult genus requiring revision. It has been treated as a number of smaller genera by F.K. Meyer,{\i  Feddes Repert.}{\b  84}: 449-470 (1973)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b T. macrophyllum} Hoffm., {\i Comment. Soc. Phys.-Med. Mosq.}{\b  1}: 7 (1805) ({\i Pachyphragma macrophyllum} (Hoffm.) N. Busch), from the Caucasus and N.E. Turkey, a more or less glabrous, rhizomatous perennial smelling of garlic, with large, long-petiolate, ovate to reniform or suborbicular leaves, flowering stems 15-40 cm, and white petals 8-9 mm, is cultivated for ornament and naturalized at one locality in S.W. England and perhaps elsewhere.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Annual, without non-flowering leaf-rosettes
\par
2 Style long, exceeding the notch of the ripe fruit ................. {\b 24. macranthum}
\par
2 Style very short, included within the notch of the ripe fruit
\par
3 Upper cauline leaves ovate, cordate-amplexicaul at the base; seeds smooth
\par
4 Silicula 5-7 mm, with wing up to 1·5 mm wide;
\par
  seeds 3 or 4 in each loculus ..................................................... {\b 3. perfoliatum}
\par
4 Silicula usually more than 7 mm, with wing 2·5-3·5 mm wide;
\par
  seeds 6-8 in each loculus ....................................................... {\b 4. kotschyanum}
\par
3 Upper cauline leaves lanceolate to oblong, hastate- or
\par
  agittate-amplexicaul at the base; seeds ridged or alveolate
\par
5 Fruit usually more than 10 mm, broadly elliptical to suborbicular,
\par
  broadly winged all round ................................................................ {\b 1. arvense}
\par
5 Fruit not more than 10 mm, obovate, narrowly winged below,
\par
  broadly winged above ................................................................. {\b 2. alliaceum}
\par
1 Biennial to perennial, usually with non-flowering leaf-rosettes
\par
6 Style included within the notch of the ripe fruit, or stigma sessile
\par
7 Petals 5-7 mm .......................................................... ({\b 15-19}). {\b praecox} group
\par
7 Petals 1-4·5 mm
\par
8 Plant more than 10 cm
\par
9 Petals up to 2 mm; anthers white or whitish
\par
10 Raceme elongating in fruit ................................ ({\b 5-8}).{\b  caerulescens }group
\par
10 Raceme remaining short and compact in fruit ..................... {\b 9. brevistylum}
\par
9  Petals more than 2 mm; anthers yellow, sometimes becoming reddish to dark
\par
   violet after dehiscence
\par
11 Main stem with long decumbent or ascending basal  branches .. {\b 10. rivale}
\par
11 Main stem without long basal branches ........ ({\b 5-8}). {\b caerulescens} group
\par
8  Plant not more than 10 cm
\par
12 Apical notch of fruit acute at the base .......................................... {\b 10. rivale}
\par
12 Apical notch of fruit rounded at the base
\par
13 Petals 3-4·5 mm ................................................. ({\b 5-8}). {\b caerulescens} group
\par
13 Petals 2 mm .......................................................................... {\b 9. brevistylum}
\par
6  Style equalling or exceeding the notch of the ripe fruit, or notch absent
\par
14 Ripe fruit strongly keeled but not winged; notch very narrow
\par
   or absent; inflorescence scarcely elongating in fruit
\par
15 Petals white (Spain) .............................................................. {\b 27. nevadense}
\par
15 Petals purple
\par
16 Plant caespitose; rosette-leaves spathulate, dentate;
\par
   all cauline leaves alternate .................................................. {\b 26. bellidifolium}
\par
16 Plant with stolons; rosette-leaves elliptical to suborbicular;
\par
   lower cauline leaves opposite ............................................. {\b 25. cepaeifolium}
\par
14 Ripe fruit distinctly, though sometimes very narrowly, winged;
\par
   notch broad or absent; inflorescence usually elongating in fruit
\par
17 Sepals 1-2(-2·2) mm; petals about equalling or shorter
\par
   than the stamens .................................................. ({\b 5-8}). {\b caerulescens} group
\par
17 Sepals (1·5-)2-3 mm; petals exceeding the stamens
\par
18 Petals 2-4 mm
\par
19 Plant 10-50 cm; raceme elongating in fruit ....... ({\b 5-8}).{\b  caerulescens} group
\par
19 Plant 1-2(-4) cm; raceme not or scarcely elongating in fruit
\par
   ........................................................................................... {\b 12. microphyllum}
\par
18 Petals 4-8·5 mm
\par
20 Roots tuberous; flowers violet (Greece) ................................ {\b 14. bulbosum}
\par
20 Roots not tuberous; flowers white or purplish
\par
21 Wing of fruit 0·5(-1) mm wide, so forming a very shallow
\par
   notch which is much exceeded by the style ............ ({\b 21-23}).{\b  alpinum} group
\par
21 Wing of fruit-valve more than 1 mm wide; notch very variable
\par
   in depth and width
\par

\par
384}
\par