{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 70.            Hornungia }           Reichenb.
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc  By V.H. Heywood.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Small annuals; hairs stellate or absent. Inflorescence ebracteate. Petals white, short-clawed. Fruit an angustiseptate silicula, elliptical to oblong-ovate. Seeds 1 or 2 in each loculus, mucilaginous.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Petals scarcely exceeding the sepals; silicula 2-2·5(-3) mm ............. {\b 1. petraea}
\par
Petals twice as long as the sepals; silicula 3 mm ....................... {\b 2. aragonensis}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. H. petraea} (L.) Reichenb.,{\i  Deutschl. Fl.}{\b  1}: 33 (1837) ({\i Hutchinsia petraea} (L.) R. Br.). Stems 2-15 cm, slender. Leaves all pinnate; basal leaves rosulate, petiolate, with 3-15 or more ovate, lanceolate or obovate, acute segments; cauline leaves few, sessile. Petals 0·5-1 mm, as long as or slightly longer than the sepals. Silicula 2-2·5(-3) mm, narrowly elliptical to ovate or obovate; valves compressed, with distinct median vein. 2n = 12. {\i Dry, open habitats. S., W. & C. Europe, extending to Sweden, Estonia and Ukraine}. Al Au Be Bl Br Bu Co Cr Cz Ga Ge Gr He Hs Hu It Ju Lu No Rs(B, W, K) Sa Si Su Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. H. aragonensis} (Loscos & Pardo) Heywood, {\i Feddes Repert.}{\b  66}: 155 (1962) ({\i Hutchinsia aragonensis} (Loscos & Pardo) Loscos & Pardo, {\i H. petraea} var. {\i aragonensis} Loscos & Pardo). Like {\b 1} but petals twice as long as the sepals, broadly obovate, long-clawed; silicula 3 mm, ovate-lanceolate. •{\i  Mountains of N.E. Spain} ({\i Aragon, W. Cataluna}). Hs.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 71.            Jonopsidium}            Reichenb.
\par 

\pard\f0\fs24\qc  By V.H. Heywood.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Slender, glabrous annuals. Inflorescence leafy, or bracteate at the base. Sepals patent; petals white, purple or pink; stamens free, without appendages. Fruit an angustiseptate silicula, the valves keeled. Seeds 2-6 in each loculus, covered with transparent papilliform glands. (Incl. {\i Pastorea }Tod.,{\i  Minaea }Lojac.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Literature: A. Chiarugi,{\i  Nuovo Gior. Bot. Ital.} nov. ser.,{\b  34}: 1452-1459 (1928).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Petals equal
\par
2 Petals usually lilac or purple, 2-3 times as long as the calyx;
\par
  petiole of basal leaves several times as long as the lamina .............. {\b 1. acaule}
\par
2 Petals white, 1½ times as long as the calyx; petiole of basal
\par
  leaves not longer than the lamina .............................................. {\b 2. albiflorum}
\par
1 Petals unequal
\par
3 Sepals with a translucent margin; style 0·5 mm ........................ {\b 5. savianum}
\par
3 Sepals with a white margin; style 1 mm
\par
4 Silicula 5-7 × 5-7 mm; 10-12 siliculae developed on each
\par
  side of the raceme ....................................................................... {\b 3. prolongoi}
\par
4 Silicula 3-4 × 2-2·5 mm; 16-20 siliculae developed on each
\par
  side of the raceme ......................................................................... {\b 4. abulense}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Sect. JONOPSIDIUM (Sect. {\i Ionopsis} (DC.) Cosson). Inflorescence leafy. Petals equal. Septum of the silicula with a membranous margin.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. J. acaule} (Desf.) Reichenb., {\i Pl. Crit. }{\b 7}: 26, t. 649 (1829). Plant caespitose, stemless or sometimes with short stem. Basal leaves rounded-ovate, entire or 3-lobed. Flowers usually solitary, borne on long pedicels in the axils of the basal leaves. Petals 4-5 mm, lilac or purple, sometimes white, 2-3 times as long as the calyx. Silicula obovoid-orbicular Seeds 2-5 in each loculus. 2n = 24. • {\i Portugal. Cultivated in gardens, and naturalized in parts of S. Europe.} Lu [Ga Hs].
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Sect. PASTORAEA (Tod.) Cosson. Inflorescence with leaf-like bracts. Petals equal. Septum of silicula without a membranous margin.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. J. albiflorum} Durieu in Duchartre,{\i  Rev. Bot. }{\b 2}: 433 (1847) ({\i Bivonaea albiflora} (Durieu) Prantl). Stem 5-15 cm, simple or branched from the base. Basal leaves entire or sinuate-dentate. Petals c. 2 mm, white, 1½ times as long as the calyx. Silicula oblong. Seeds 5 or 6 in each loculus.{\i  Calcifuge. S.E. Italy} ({\i Puglia}),{\i  Sicilia}. It Si. ({\i N.W. Africa}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Sect. MINAEA (Lojac.) Batt. Inflorescence bracteate at the base only. Petals unequal. Septum of silicula with a membranous margin.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 3. J. prolongoi} (Boiss.) Batt.,{\i  Bull. Soc. Bot. Fr.}{\b  43}: 259 (1896) ({\i Bivonaea prolongoi} (Boiss.) Samp., {\i Thlaspi prolongoi} Boiss.). Plant with many stems, 5-15 cm. Basal leaves in lax rosette, oblong-spathulate, shortly petiolate, irregularly toothed. Inflorescence racemose, the ultimate racemes subcorymbose, becoming very lax; 10-12 siliculae developed on each side of the raceme; pedicels horizontal, equalling or shorter than the fruits. Sepals narrowly white-margined; petals 4-5 mm, white. Silicula 4-7 × 4 7 mm, more or less orbicular; style 1 mm. Seeds 2 or 3 in each loculus. 2n = 22.{\i  Calcicole. S. Spain}. Hs. ({\i N.W. Africa.})
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 4. J. abulense} (Pau) Rothm.,{\i  Cavanillesia}{\b  7}: 112 (1935) ({\i J. heterospermum} sensu Chiarugi, pro parte,{\i  J. prolongoi} subsp.{\i  abulense} (Pau) Laínz,{\i  Bivonea abulensis} (Pau) Samp., {\i Thlaspi abulense} Pau, {\i Thlaspi montanum} sensu Coutinho, {\i Thlaspi prolongoi} prol. {\i abulense} (Pau) Samp.). Like {\b 3} but petals 2-3 mm; 16-20 siliculae developed on each side of the raceme; pedicels 1½-3 times as long as the silicula; silicula 3-4 × 2-2·5 mm.{\i  Calcifuge. • N. & C. Spain, N.E. & C. Portugal}. Hs Lu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 5. J. savianum} (Caruel) Ball ex Arcangeli, {\i Comp. Fl. Ital.} 58 (1882) ({\i Bivonea saviana }Caruel). Like {\b 3} but stems not more than 10 cm; ultimate racemes of the inflorescence not becoming very lax; sepals with translucent margin; petals 3-4 mm; pedicels slightly deflexed in fruit; silicula retuse at the apex, attenuate at the base; style 0·5 mm. 2n = 32. •{\i  C. Italy; local.} It.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 72.        Bivonaea}            DC.
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc  By P.W. Ball.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Like{\b  Jonopsidium} but petals yellow; valves of the silicula winged; seeds smooth, without papilliform glands.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. B. lutea} (Biv.) DC.,{\i  Reg. Veg. Syst. Nat.}{\b  2}: 555 (1821). Stem 4-20 cm, simple or branched from the base. Basal leaves oblong-spathulate, shortly petiolate, entire or toothed. Petals c. 3 mm, equal, 1½ times as long as the sepals. Silicula 5-7 mm, obovoid-oblong, emarginate; wing 1-2 mm wide.{\i  Sicilia; Sardegna}. Sa Si. ({\i N.W. Africa.})
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 73.        Teesdalia}            R.Br.
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc  By †J. de Carvalho  e Vasconcellos.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Annuals; glabrous or with unbranched hairs. Leaves mostly basal, usually pinnatifid. Sepals erecto-patent; petals white; stamens 4 or
\par

\par
383}
\par