{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 Silicula narrowly triangular-obcordate, with or without a very shallow notch; style 2-3 mm. Seeds (1)2 or 3 in each loculus. 2n = c. 54. •{\i  Alps.} Au Ga He It.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp.{\b  alpinum} : Branches of stock long, stolon-like. Rosette-leaves ovate to suborbicular, often violet beneath; cauline leaves oblong, obtuse. Style 2 mm.{\i  E. & C. Alps}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp.{\b  sylvium }(Gaudin) P. Fourn., {\i Quatre Fl. Fr. }394 (1936) ({\i T. sylvium} Gaudin): Branches of stock usually short, not stolon-like; plant caespitose. Rosette-leaves oblong-spathulate; cauline leaves broadly ovate. Style 2-3 mm. 2n = 14.{\i  C. & S.W. Alps}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 22. T. alpestre} Jacq.,{\i  Enum. Stirp. Vindob.} 116, 260 (1762) ({\i T. kerneri} Huter, {\i T. minimum} Ard.). Stock with elongated branches, the plant forming lax mats; stems usually 5-10 cm, erect. Rosette-leaves orbicular, the lamina abruptly contracted into the petiole; cauline leaves ovate, acute; all glaucous. Inflorescence rarely more than 3 cm in fruit. Petals 5 mm. Silicula 6 mm, narrowly obovate; apex truncate or with shallow notch; style 1-1·5 mm. Seeds 1-3 in each loculus. 2n = 14. •{\i  S.E. Alps, N. & C. Jugoslavia.} Au It Ju.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 23. T. kovatsii} Heuffel, {\i Flora} ({\i Regensb}.) {\b 36}: 624 (1853) ({\i T. avalanum} Pancic, {\i T. affine} Schott & Kotschy, {\i T. trojagense} Zapal.). Stock with stoloniferous branches; stems 8-25(-60) cm, erect. Rosette-leaves broadly elliptical to suborbicular, long-petiolate; cauline leaves ovate-oblong, obtuse, with obtuse auricles. Inflorescence much elongating in fruit. Sepals 2-2·5 mm; petals (3·5-)4-5 mm, white. Silicula 5-7 mm, narrowly obovate to triangular-obcordate, emarginate above; style 1-2 mm, exceeding the notch. Seeds 3-8 in each loculus. 2n = 14.{\i  Carpathians; Balkan peninsula. }Al Bu Ju Rm Rs(W).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b T. cochleariforme} DC.,{\i  Reg. Veg. Syst. Nat.}{\b  2: }381 (1821), from near the boundary of Europe in C. Ural (Kysstym region) and possibly not occurring within European Russia, is like {\b 23} but has larger, unequal petals (the outer 5-6·5 mm, the inner 6-7·5 mm), the silicula 5-9·5 mm, and the style 1-2·25 mm.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 24. T. macranthum} N. Busch,{\i  Acta Horti Bot. Univ. Jurjev.}{\b  6}: 142 (1906). Annual 10-40 cm, glabrous, glaucous; stems branched at the base. Basal leaves obovate-elliptical, usually entire, petiolate; cauline leaves ovate-lanceolate, with amplexicaul auricles. Petals 6-7 mm; anthers yellow. Silicula 7-10 mm, obovate-oblong or -cuneate, emarginate at the apex; style long, exceeding the notch. Seeds 2-6 in each loculus, smooth.{\i  Krym}. Rs(K). ({\i N.W. Caucasus}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Sect. APTERYGIUM Ledeb. Silicula narrowly obovate, strongly keeled but not winged, with or without a shallow notch; style exserted from the notch. Seeds smooth.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 25. T. cepaeifolium} (Wulfen) Koch in Röhling,{\i  Deutschl. Fl.} ed. 3, {\b 4}: 534 (1833) ({\i T. rotundifolium} subsp. {\i cepaeifolium} (Wulfen) Rouy & Fouc., {\i T. cepaeifolium} (Wulfen) Koch). Stock usually with long stolons. Petals purple. Style usually 1-2 mm.{\i  Mountains from E. France to Italy and N. Jugoslavia}. Au Ga Ge He It Ju.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp.{\b  cepaeifolium} : Basal leaves c. 1 cm, not distinctly rosulate; upper cauline leaves numerous, crowded, not or very slightly auriculate; all smaller than in subsp. ({\b b}), obovate to suborbicular, sinuate-dentate. Inflorescence elongating up to c. 3 cm in fruit. Style 1-2 mm. Seeds 4-6 in each loculus.{\i  On calcareous and metalliferous scree. •  S.E. Alps}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp.{\i  rotundifolium} (L.) Greuter & Burdet, {\i Willdenowia}{\b  15}: 71 (1985) ({\i T. rotundifolium} (L.) Gaudin, non Tineo, {\i T. lereschianum} Rouy & Fouc., {\i T. limosellifolium} Reuter; incl. subsp. {\i grignense} (F.K. Meyer) Greuter & Burdet): Basal leaves in a more or less distinct rosette; cauline leaves distant, auricled, the lower opposite; all more or less entire. Inflorescence remaining compact in fruit. Seeds 1-4 in each loculus. 2n = 14. {\i Throughout the range of the species}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 In addition to the typical widespread calcicolous plant, several distinctive endemic variants of subsp. ({\b b}) occur on igneous rocks and siliceous soils in the W. Alps, among them var. {\i limosellifolium} Burnat, var.{\i  lereschianum }Burnat, var.{\i  corymbosum} (Gay) Gaudin (subsp.{\i  corymbosum} (Gay) Gremli, non {\i T. corymbosum} Molina), and subsp.{\i  cenisium} Rouy & Fouc.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 26. T. bellidifolium} Griseb.,{\i  Spicil. Fl. Rumel.}{\b  2}: 505 (1845). Plant densely caespitose; stock with very short branches. Basal leaves rosulate, oblong-spathulate, dentate; cauline leaves alternate. Petals dark purple; anthers yellow. Silicula obovate-oblong, truncate. Seeds 2 in each loculus. Alpine pastures. •{\i  N. part of Balkan peninsula}. Al Bu ?Gr Ju.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 27. T. nevadense} Boiss. & Reuter, {\i Pugillus} 11 (1852). Caespitose perennial with much-branched stock and crowded leaf-rosettes; stems 5-10 cm. Rosette-leaves 0·5-1·5 cm, petiolate, elliptical to obovate; cauline leaves linear-oblong, acute, amplexicaul with short, rounded auricles, more or less erect; all more or less entire. Inflorescence up to 4 cm in fruit. Petals 6-7 mm, twice as long as the sepals, white. Silicula 7-9 mm, narrowly obovate-oblong with distinct but narrow wing, truncate or very slightly emarginate above; style 1·5-2·5 mm, exserted. Seeds 2-4 in each loculus.{\i  Screes and rock-crevices. • Spain }({\i Sierra Nevada; Sierra de Guadarrama}). Hs.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 75.        Aethionema}            R.Br.
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc  By A.O. Chater (Ed.1) revised by J.R. Akeroyd (Ed.2)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Glabrous, annuals or perennials, with entire, sessile leaves. Inflorescence racemose. Sepals erect, the lateral saccate at the base; petals entire; the 4 inner stamens with winged and bent filaments, the wing sometimes ending in a tooth above. Silicula flattened and winged, bilocular and angustiseptate, with 1-4 seeds in each loculus, opening by 2 valves, or unilocular, 1-seeded and indehiscent.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Petals at least 6 mm, yellow; style 2·5-3·5 mm .......................... {\b 3. cordatum}
\par
1 Petals not more than 6 mm, not yellow; style less than 2·5 mm
\par
2 Silicula entire, subacute at the apex ....................................... {\b 1. orbiculatum}
\par
2 Silicula emarginate at the apex
\par
3 Annual; upper leaves cordate-amplexicaul ................................. {\b 5. arabicum}
\par
3 Perennial; upper leaves not cordate-amplexicaul
\par
4 At least the lower leaves obtuse .................................. ({\b 6-9}).{\b  saxatile} group
\par
4 All leaves acute or subacute
\par
5 Silicula 4-5 mm, orbicular, 1-seeded .................................... {\b 2. polygaloides}
\par
5 Silicula more than 5 mm, ovate-obcordate, 4-seeded ............... {\b 4. iberideum}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. A. orbiculatum} (Boiss.) Hayek,{\i  Prodr. Fl. Penins. Balcan.}{\b  1}: 472 (1925) ({\i Crenularia orbiculata} Boiss.). Suffruticose perennial . 2-10 cm, arising from woody rootstock. Leaves opposite, crowded, 4-8(-13) mm, ovate-orbicular, obtuse, thick. Sepals 2-2·8 mm;
\par

\par
388}
\par