{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 {\i fields. Throughout Europe, but doubtfully native in most territories, and often only casual.} Al Au Be Br Bu Co Cr Cz Da Fe Ga Ge Gr He ?Hs Ho Hu It No Po Rm Rs(N, B, C, W, K, E) Sa Si Su.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Variable in habit, hairiness and size and shape of the silicula.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. C. microcarpa} Andrz. ex DC.,{\i  Reg. Veg. Syst. Nat. }{\b 2}: 517 (1821) ({\i C. sylvestris} Wallr., {\i C. sativa} auct. ital.). Annual or biennial, like {\b 1} in general appearance but often less robust, with rather densely hairy stems and leaves; indumentum of long unbranched hairs mixed with short branched hairs. Petals 2·5-4 mm, pale yellow. Raceme very elongate in fruit and rigid with numerous siliculae; pedicels 1-1·5(-2) cm in fruit, ascending. Silicula c. 57 mm; valves less strongly convex than in 1, usually hard and woody and not flattened in dried specimens. Seeds 0·8-1·4 mm. 2n = 40.{\i  Cultivated land and waste places. Throughout Europe, but in many regions only as a casual.} Au Be Br Bu Cr Cz Da Fe Ga Ge Gr He Ho Hu Is It Ju No Po Rm Rs(N, B, C, W, K, E) Su.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 A variable species, considered by some authors to be a subspecies of {\b 1}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 3. C. rumelica} Velen., {\i Sitz.-Ber. Böhm. Ges. Wiss.}{\b  1887}: 448 (1887) ({\i C. albiflora} Kotschy, {\i C. sativa} auct. ital.,{\i  C. sativa} var. {\i hirsuta} Boiss., {\i C. sylvestris} var. {\i mediterranea} Pau). Erect annual or biennial 15-40(-60) cm, usually with several patent or ascending branches; lower part of plant more or less densely hispidulous, the upper part glabrous or subglabrous. Basal leaves forming a distinct rosette, usually persistent until anthesis or later. Petals 5-9 mm, whitish or very pale yellow. Raceme elongate in fruit, often rather lax; pedicels 0·7-1(-1·4) cm in fruit, ascending or sometimes almost patent. Silicula 5-8 mm; valves rather compressed, rigid and woody. Seeds 1·2-1·5 mm. 2n = 12, 26.{\i  Cultivated land and waste places. S. & E.C. Europe, but probably native only in parts of the southeast.} Al Bu Gr Ju Tu [Au Ga Hs Hu It Rm Rs(W, K)].
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 4. C. alyssum} (Miller) Thell., {\i Verz. Tausch Säm. Früchte Zürich}{\b  1906}: 10 (1906) ({\i C. foetida} (Schkuhr) Fries, {\i C. linicola }C. Schimper & Spenner, {\i C. macrocarpa} Wierzb. ex Reichenb., {\i C. dentata} (Willd.) Pers., {\i C. pinnatifida} Hornem, {\i C. sativa} auct. ital., {\i C. sativa }var. {\i sublinicola} N. zinger, {\i Myagrum alyssum} Miller). Slender, erect, sparingly branched annual 15-60(-100) cm; stems and leaves subglabrous. Leaves deeply toothed or lobed (sometimes subentire, var. integrifolia (Fries) Hayek). Petals 4-6 mm, pale yellow. Raceme rather short and lax in fruit; pedicels 1·5-3(-4) cm in fruit, patent, erecto-patent or sometimes flexuous. Silicula 6-12 mm, depressed-globose, with a flattened or rounded apex; valves strongly convex, not hard or woody. Seeds 1·5-2·8(-3) mm. 2n = 40. {\i A weed of flax-fields. Widespread in Europe.} Au Be Bu Co Cz Da Fe Ga Ge He Ho Hu It Ju No Po Rm Rs(N, B, C, W, K, E) Su.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 66.           Neslia}          Desv.
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc  By P.W. Ball.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Annuals; hairs branched. Leaves simple. Inflorescence an ebracteate raceme. Sepals erect, not saccate; petals yellow; stamens without appendages. Fruit an indehiscent, latiseptate silicula; style distinct; stigma minute, slightly 2-lobed. Seeds 1-3. ({\i Vogelia} Medicus, non J.F. Gmelin.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Literature: P.W. Ball, {\i Feddes Repert.}{\b  64}: 11-13 (1961).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. N. paniculata} (L.) Desv., {\i Jour. Bot. Appl.}{\b  3}: 162 (1814) ({\i Vogelia paniculata} (L.) Hornem.). Pubescent annual 15-80 cm. Leaves oblong or lanceolate, entire or remotely dentate, the basal petiolate, the cauline sessile, amplexicaul, with acute auricles. Petals 2-3 mm. Pedicels 5-13 mm in fruit. Silicula 1·5-3 mm in diameter, subglobose or compressed and almost lenticular, reticulate-rugose; style 0·7-1·1 mm.{\i  Most of Europe except the extreme north, but of doubtful status in many territories}. Al Au Bl Bu Co Cr Cz *Da Ga Ge Gr He Hs Hu It Ju Lu Po Rm Rs(N, B, C, W, K, E)Sa Si*Su Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp.{\b  paniculata}: Silicula usually broader than long, not apiculate (excluding the often persistent style), with truncate base and 2 longitudinal ribs on the margin. 2n = 14.{\i  Throughout the range of the species except parts of the Mediterranean region}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp.{\b  thracica} (Velen.) Bornm., {\i Österr. Bot. Zeitschr.}{\b  44}: 125 (1894) ({\i N. apiculata} Fischer, C.A. Meyer & Avé-Lall., {\i N. paniculata} auct. eur. merid.): Silicula about as long as broad, apiculate, with carpophore and 4 longitudinal ribs.{\i  S. Europe; a rare casual elsewhere}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 These two subspecies have been very much confused so that their precise distribution is uncertain. Plants intermediate between subspp. ({\b a}) and ({\b b}) occur where the two subspecies meet (approximately 43-48° N.).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 67.               Capsella}            Medicus
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc  By A.O. Chater.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Annuals or biennials; glabrous or with branched and unbranched hairs. Basal leaves entire to pinnatifid; cauline leaves sagittate-amplexicaul. Inflorescence racemose, ebracteate. Sepals erect, not saccate; petals white, pink or yellowish; stamens without appendages. Fruit an angusti-septate silicula, usually triangular-obcordate; valves keeled, reticulately veined; style distinct; stigma minute, capitate. Seeds up to 12 in each loculus.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 This account treats as species the four taxa most readily recognized in Europe. Within them there is extreme polymorphism; autogamy is frequent, and all are ruderals. Species {\b 1} is especially polymorphic, and its variants incorporate many of the characters of the other three species, particularly as regards the shape and size of the silicula.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 The species are usually plants of cultivated or waste ground.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Literature: E. Almquist,{\i  Acta Horti Berg. }{\b 7}: 41-95 (1921). G.H. Schull, {\i Amer. Jour. Bot.}{\b  10}: 221-228 (1923).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Petals not or scarcely exceeding the sepals,
\par
  usually reddish-tinged ..................................................................... {\b 2. rubella}
\par
1 Petals usually distinctly exceeding the sepals, white or yellowish
\par
2 Petals pale yellowish; lower part of plant
\par
  densely grey-hairy ....................................................................... {\b 4. orientalis}
\par
2 Petals white; whole plant sparsely hairy or glabrous
\par
3 Petals 4-5 mm .......................................................................... {\b 3. grandiflora}
\par
3 Petals 2-3 mm (rarely absent) ............................................. {\b 1. bursa-pastoris}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. C. bursa-pastoris} (L.) Medicus, {\i Pflanzengatt.} 85 (1792) ({\i Thlaspi bursa-pastoris} L.). Plant sparsely hairy, especially below, or glabrous. Flowers scentless. Sepals green, sometimes reddish or purplish, often pubescent; petals 2-3 mm, 1½-2 times as long as the sepals, white (rarely absent). Silicula 4-10 × 4-9 mm, usually longer than wide, scarcely attenuate at the base; lateral margins usually straight or convex; apical lobes usually subacute. 2n = 16, 32.{\i  Throughout Europe as a ruderal; native range unknown.} All territories.
\par

\par
381}
\par