{\rtf1\ansi \deff4\deflang1033{\fonttbl{\f4\froman\fcharset0\fprq2 Times New Roman;}}{\colortbl;\red0\green0\blue0;\red0\green0\blue255;\red0\green255\blue255;\red0\green255\blue0;\red255\green0\blue255;\red255\green0\blue0;\red255\green255\blue0;\red255\green255\blue255;\red0\green0\blue128;\red0\green128\blue128;\red0\green128\blue0;\red128\green0\blue128;\red128\green0\blue0;\red128\green128\blue0;\red128\green128\blue128;\red192\green192\blue192;}{\stylesheet{\widctlpar \f4\fs20\lang2057 \snext0 Normal;}{\*\cs10 \additive Default Paragraph Font;}}{\info{\author dddd}{\operator dddd}{\creatim\yr1998\mo11\dy11\hr16\min53}{\revtim\yr1998\mo11\dy11\hr16\min53}{\version2}{\edmins0}{\nofpages4}{\nofwords1037}{\nofchars5914}{\*\company  }{\vern57431}}\widowctrl\ftnbj\aenddoc\hyphcaps0 \fet0\sectd \linex0 {\*\pnseclvl1\pnucrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl2\pnucltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl3\pndec\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl4\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl5\pndec\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl6\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl7\pnlcrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl8\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl9\pnlcrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}
\pard\plain \li200\ \f4\fs20\lang2057 {\fs28 22 Stock with stolon-like branches; plant matforming ............. }{\b\fs28 20. montanum}{\fs28 
\par 22 Stock with short branches; plant \'b1 caespitose
\par 23 Anthers yellow ...................................................... (}{\b\fs28 15-19}{\fs28 ).}{\b\fs28  praecox}{\fs28  group
\par 23 At least some anthers violet
\par 24 Inflorescence almost sessile; style 0\'b77-1\'b72 mm .............. }{\b\fs28 12. microphyllum}{\fs28 
\par 24 Inflorescence distinctly stalked; style 1-5 mm
\par 25 Flowers white; style 1-2\'b75 mm ................................................ }{\b\fs28 11. graecum}{\fs28 
\par 25 Flowers purplish; style 3-5 mm .............................................. }{\b\fs28 13. stylosum}{\fs28 
\par 
\par }
\pard \ {\fs28 Sect. NOMISMA DC. Silicula suborbicular, strongly compressed, broadly winged, with a deep and narrow notch; stigma subsessile. Seeds concentrically ridged.
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 1. T. arvense}{\fs28  L., }{\i\fs28 Sp. Pl.}{\fs28  646 (1753). Annual 10-60 cm, erect, glabrous, more or less foetid. Basal leaves oblanceolate to obovate, petiolate; upper cauline leaves lanceolate to oblong with sagittate-amplexicaul base; all entire or sinuate-dentate. Sepals 1\'b75-3 mm, narrow; petals 3-5 mm, white; stamens shorter than the petals; anthers yellow. Silicula (6-)9-18 mm in diameter, broadly elliptical to almost orbicular, broadly winged all round; pedicels (5-)8-13 mm, ascending; style c. 0\'b73 mm, included within the deep, narrow notch. Seeds 3-8 in each loculus, concentrically ridged. 2n = 14. }{\i\fs28 Weed of arable land and waste places. Most of Europe, except the extreme north and much of the Mediterranean region, but doubtfully native in a large part of this area.}{\fs28  All except Az Co Cr Fa Sa Sb Si; perhaps only casual in Is.
\par 
\par Sect. THLASPI. Silicula obovate or orbicular, plano-convex, narrowly to broadly winged, with or without a notch; style included to exserted. Seeds alveolar to smooth.
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 2. T. alliaceum}{\fs28  L.,}{\i\fs28  Sp. Pl.}{\fs28  646 (1753). Annual 20-60 cm, erect, with a few long hairs at the base of the stem, smelling of garlic. Basal leaves not forming a rosette, lanceolate to oblong-obovate, petiolate, sinuate-dentate to almost lyrate; upper cauline leaves oblong with sagittate-amplexicaul base, entire to sinuate-dentate; all glabrous and glaucous. Sepals c. 1\'b75 mm; petals 2\'b75-3 mm, white; stamens shorter than the petals; anthers yellow. Silicula 5-10 mm, narrowly obcordate-obovate, convex beneath, narrowly winged below, more broadly winged above; style c. 0\'b73 mm, included within the shallow notch. Seeds 3-5 in each loculus, alveolate. }{\i\fs28 Weed of arable land and waste places. C. & S. Europe.}{\fs28  Al Au ?Co Ga Ge Hs Hu It Ju Rm Rs(W) Si Tu [Br Po].
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 3. T. perfoliatum}{\fs28  L., }{\i\fs28 Sp. Pl.}{\fs28  646 (1753) (}{\i\fs28 T. rotundifolium }{\fs28 Tineo; incl. }{\i\fs28 T. tinei}{\fs28  Nyman). Annual 5-20(-30) cm, glabrous, glaucous. Basal leaves forming a loose rosette, obovate, petiolate; upper cauline leaves ovate-cordate, sessile, with rounded, amplexicaul auricles; all entire or sinuate-denticulate. Sepals 1-1\'b77 mm, with broad, white margins; petals 1\'b75-3 mm, white; stamens shorter than the petals; anthers yellow. Silicula 3-7 mm, broadly obcordate, convex beneath; wing wider above, up to 1\'b75 mm wide; style c. 0\'b73 mm, included within the wide and fairly deep notch. Seeds 3 or 4 in each loculus, almost smooth. 2n = 14, 42, 70.}{\i\fs28  In open vegetation on limestone, loess and base-rich loams, and a weed of arable land and waste places. Europe northwards to c.}{\fs28  60\'b0}{\i\fs28  N. in Sweden.}{\fs28  All except Az Fa Fe Hb Is No Sb.
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 4. T. kotschyanum}{\fs28  Boiss. & Heldr. in Boiss., }{\i\fs28 Diagn. Pl. Or. Nov.}{\b\fs28  1}{\fs28 (}{\b\fs28 8}{\fs28 ): 39 (1849). Glabrous annual, 5-20 cm. Basal leaves soon withering. Cauline leaves ovate, obtuse, entire, with acute to obtuse, cordate-amplexicaul auricles. Sepals 1\'b72-1\'b76 mm; petals 1\'b74-2\'b75 mm, white; anthers yellow. Silicula 8-11(-14) mm, orbicular, broadly winged (2\'b75-3\'b75 mm wide) above; stigma sessile; notch narrow. Seeds 6-8 in each loculus, smooth.}{\i\fs28  Calcareous rocky grassland, c.}{\fs28  2100}{\i\fs28  m. E.C. Greece }{\fs28 (}{\i\fs28 Oiti}{\fs28 ). Gr. (}{\i\fs28 S.W. Asia}{\fs28 .)
\par 
\par    (}{\b\fs28 5-8}{\fs28 ).}{\b\fs28  T. caerulescens}{\fs28  group. Biennials or perennials 10-50 cm, with shortly branched stock and crowded leaf-rosettes. Basal leaves rosulate, petiolate; cauline leaves sessile, auriculate-amplexicaul. Inflorescence a compact, almost corymbose raceme, usually much elongating in fruit. Sepals 1-2(-2\'b72) mm; petals 1-5 mm, white or purplish; stamens about equalling or exceeding the petals. Silicula 5-10(-12) \'d7 3-6 mm; wing narrow below, but usually broadening upwards and forming a notch variable in width and depth; style variable in length. Seeds (2-)4-6 in each loculus.
\par 
\par }
\pard \li200\ {\fs28 1 Petals \'b1 equalling or up to 1 1/3 times as long as the sepals
\par   .............................................................................................. }{\b\fs28 5. brachypetalum}{\fs28 
\par 1 Petals at least 1\'bd times as long as the sepals
\par 2 Anthers reddish to deep violet, at least after dehiscence ....... }{\b\fs28 6. caerulescens}{\fs28 
\par 2 Anthers remaining yellowish even after dehiscence
\par 3 Fruit very narrowly winged all round;
\par   style much exceeding the notch .............................................. }{\b\fs28 7. stenopterum}{\fs28 
\par 3 Fruit broadly winged above; style included within or about
\par   equalling the notch
\par 4 Raceme elongating considerably in fruit ............................... }{\b\fs28 6. caerulescens}{\fs28 
\par 4 Raceme scarcely elongating in fruit ............................................ }{\b\fs28 8. dacicum}{\fs28 
\par 
\par }
\pard \ {\fs28    }{\b\fs28 5. T. brachypetalum}{\fs28  Jordan,}{\i\fs28  Obs. Pl. Crit.}{\b\fs28  3}{\fs28 : 5 (1846). Biennial 20-50 cm, glabrous, glaucous. Leaves entire or denticulate, the basal elliptical, the cauline oblong with obtuse to subacute auricles. Sepals 1-1\'b75 mm; petals white, equalling or slightly exceeding the sepals; stamens somewhat exceeding the petals; anthers whitish. Raceme much elongating in fruit. Silicula 6-9 mm, narrowly obcordate, broadly winged above, with rounded apical lobes and a deep notch usually exceeding the short style. Seeds 4-6 in each loculus. Mountain woods and pastures; usually calcifuge. \bullet }{\i\fs28  Pyrenees to S.W. Alps; C. Appennini.}{\fs28  Ga He Hs It [Su].
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 6. T. caerulescens}{\fs28  J. & C. Presl,}{\i\fs28  Fl. Cechica}{\fs28  133 (1819) (}{\i\fs28 T. alpestre}{\fs28  L., non Jacq., }{\i\fs28 T. guadinianum}{\fs28  Jordan, }{\i\fs28 T. huteri}{\fs28  A. Kerner, }{\i\fs28 T. mureti}{\fs28  Gremli, }{\i\fs28 T. occitanicum}{\fs28  Jordan, }{\i\fs28 T. pratulorum}{\fs28  Gand., }{\i\fs28 T. rhaeticum}{\fs28  Jordan, }{\i\fs28 T. virgatum}{\fs28  Gren. & Godron, }{\i\fs28 T. villarsianum}{\fs28  Jordan, }{\i\fs28 T. vogesiacum}{\fs28  Jordan, }{\i\fs28 T. vulcanorum}{\fs28  Lamotte, }{\i\fs28 T. suecicum}{\fs28  Jordan). Biennial or perennial 10-50 cm, glabrous, often glaucous. Leaves entire or denticulate, the basal elliptical to obovate-spathulate, the cauline oblong-cordate. Sepals (1\'b71-)1\'b74-2\'b72 mm; petals white or purplish, 1\'bd-3 times as long as the sepals and equalling or somewhat exceeding the stamens; anthers usually reddish to dark violet, at least after dehiscence, but sometimes remaining yellowish. Raceme much elongating in fruit. Silicula 4-8\'b75(-10) mm, narrowly to broadly obcordate with wing broadening upwards, with or without a notch; style included or exserted. Seeds (2)3-6 in each loculus.}{\i\fs28  Often on soils rich in heavy metals. S., W. & C. Europe, eastwards to Poland and Jugoslavia; naturalized in parts of N. Europe.}{\fs28  Au Be Br Cz Ga Ge He Ho Hs Hu It Ju Po [Da Fe Is No Su].
\par 
\par  (}{\b\fs28 a}{\fs28 ) Subsp.}{\b\fs28  caerulescens}{\fs28  (incl. subsp.}{\i\fs28  occitanicum}{\fs28  (Jordan) La\'ednz): Usually biennial and monocarpic. Petals 2-3(-4) mm, white or purplish. Silicula 4-9 mm, broadly winged above, with rounded or subacute apical lobes and a distinct notch, or truncate at the
\par 
\par 385}
\par }