{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 apex; style 0·4-1·5 mm, equalling or exceeding the notch. 2n = 14, 21, 28.{\i  Throughout the range of the species.}
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp. {\i virens} (Jordan) Hooker fil.,{\i  Stud. Fl. Brit. Is.} 38 (1870) ({\i T. virens }Jordan): Perennial, laxly caespitose, not glaucous. Petals 3·5-4 mm, white. Silicula 5-6 × 3-4 mm, rather narrowly winged all round; apex truncate or with a very shallow notch; style (1·5-)1·75-2·5(-4) mm, long-exserted.{\i  Grassland. • S.W. Alps}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Subsp. ({\b a}) is very variable; many local variants have been given specific or subspecific status, among them{\b  T. lereschii} Reuter,{\i  Compt. Rend. Soc. Hallér.}{\b  2}: 17 (1854) ({\i T. alpestre} subsp.{\i  lereschii} (Reuter) Thell.),{\b  T. salisii} Brugger,{\i  Zeitschr. Ferdinand. Tirol} ({\i Innsbruck}) ser. 3, {\b 9}: 45 (1860),{\b  T. sylvestre} Jordan,{\i  Obs. Pl. Crit.}{\b  3}: 9 (1846) ({\i T. alpestre} subsp. {\i sylvestre }(Jordan) Hooker),{\b  T. occitanicum} Jordan,{\i  op. cit.} 12 (1846), {\b T. oligospermum} (Merino) Greuter & Burdet, {\i Willdenowia }{\b 13}: 96 (1983), and{\b  T. calaminare} (Lej.) Lej. & Court.,{\i  Comp. Fl. Belg.}{\b 2}: 307 (1831) ({\i T. alpestre} subsp. {\i calaminare} (Lej.) O. Schwarz).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 7. T. stenopterum} Boiss. & Reuter in Boiss., {\i Diagn. Pl. Or. Nov}{\b . 2}({\b 8}): 40 (1849). Perennial 30-60 cm, caespitose. Leaves entire, the basal obovate, the cauline oblong, cordate. Petals white, twice as long as the sepals; anthers yellow. Silicula narrowly obcordate, cuneate below; wing narrow above, very narrow below; style more than twice as long as the shallow notch. Seeds 2 in each loculus. 2n = 28.{\i  Grassland and mountain woods. • N. & C. Spain.} Hs.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 8. T. dacicum} Heuffel,{\i  Österr. Bot. Zeitschr.}{\b  8}: 26 (1858) ({\i T. korongianum} Czetz.). Perennial 5-25(-35) cm, glabrous. Leaves entire, the basal elliptic or obovate, the cauline more or less broadly elliptical, sagittate-amplexicaul. Petals white, at least 1½ times as long as the sepals; anthers yellow. Raceme scarcely elongating in fruit. Silicula broadly winged, with a wide, shallow notch; style at most equalling the notch. Seeds 3 or 4 in each loculus. •{\i  E. & S. Carpathians.} Rm Rs(W).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp.{\b  dacicum}: Petals 3 mm. Raceme 1-2(-5) cm in fruit. Silicula 6-9 mm; style more than ½ as long as the notch.{\i  Throughout the range of the species}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp.{\b  banaticum} (Uechtr.) Jáv.,{\i  Magyar Fl.} 406 (1924) ({\i T. banaticum} Uechtr.): Petals c. 4-5 mm. Raceme 2·5-10 cm in fruit. Silicula 9-12 mm; style not more than ½ as long as the notch.{\i  S. Carpathians.}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 9. T. brevistylum} (DC.) Mutel, {\i Fl. Fr. }{\b 1}: 99 (1834). Glabrous biennial 2-10(-20) cm. Leaves small, thick, glaucous; rosette-leaves broadly elliptical to obovate, long-petiolate; cauline leaves oblong-cordate, obtuse, the lower petiolate, the upper sessile. Sepals c. 1 mm; petals 2 mm; stamens shorter than the petals; anthers white, becoming greyish. Raceme short and compact in fruit. Silicula narrowly obovate, the wing very narrow below but broadening upwards to become ½ the width of the valve; stigma subsessile at the base of the wide, rounded, apical notch. Seeds 3 or 4 in each loculus. {\i Mountain rocks and pastures, }1000-2400{\i  m. • Corse and Sardegna.} Co Sa.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 10. T. rivale} J. & C. Presl,{\i  Del. Prag.} 12 (1822) ({\i T. pygmaeum} Jordan). Like {\b 9} but erect main stem often with long decumbent or ascending basal branches; petals 2·5-3·5(-4) mm, 1½-2 times as long as the sepals and about equalling the stamens; anthers yellow; apical notch of ripe fruit acute (45-90°); stigma sessile or style up to 0·5 mm, included within the notch. 2n = 26. {\i Mountain rocks and pastures. S. Albania, N. & C. Greece; S. Italy, Sicilia.} Al Gr It ?Sa si.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 11. T. graecum} Jordan,{\i  Obs. Pl. Crit.}{\b  3}: 30 (1846) ({\i T. taygeteum} Boiss.). Caespitose perennial 2-14(-20) cm, with shortly branched stock, sometimes with short stolons. Rosette-leaves obovate to elliptical, long-petiolate; cauline leaves oblong-amplexicaul; all sinuate-denticulate, rarely entire. Sepals 2-3 mm; petals 4·5-6·5 mm, white, much exceeding the stamens; anthers violet. Raceme elongating in fruit. Silicula broadly winged above; style 1-2·5 mm, much exceeding the shallow apical notch. Seeds 2-4 in each loculus. 2n = 14.{\i  Stony, calcareous ground.  • Mountains of S. Greece.} Gr.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 12. T. microphyllum} Boiss. & Orph. in Boiss., {\i Diagn. Pl. Or. Nov.}{\b  3}({\b 6}): 19 (1859). Dwarf, caespitose perennial 1-2(-4)cm. Rosette-leaves 3-9(-13) mm, obovate, entire or denticulate, petiolate. Inflorescence almost sessile. Sepals 1·5-2·3 mm, violet; petals 3-5 mm, white, c. 3 times as long as the sepals; anthers violet. Racemes not or scarcely elongating in fruit. Silicula broadly winged; style 0·7-1·2 mm, exceeding the shallow apical notch. Seeds 1-4 in each loculus. 2n = 14.{\i  Rocky grassland and cliffs often near snow-patches, above }1900{\i  m. • Albania, Jugoslavia, N. & C. Greece.} Al Gr Ju.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b T. creticum} (Degen & Jáv.) Greuter & Burdet, {\i Willdenowia }{\b 13}: 95 (1983) ({\i T. microphyllum} subsp.{\i  creticum} Degen & Jáv.), from the high mountains of Kriti, with petals 4-5 mm and style 0·3-0·5 mm, is a rarely collected plant that is perhaps more closely related to {\b 11}. Further study is required to establish whether it should be treated as a distinct species.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 13. T. stylosum} (Ten.) Mutel,{\i  Fl. Fr.}{\b  1}: 99 (1834). Dwarf, caespitose perennial 1-2·5(-6) cm. Rosette-leaves 5-10 mm, elliptic-spathulate, petiolate. Petals 5 mm, purplish; anthers violet. Silicula rather broadly winged; style 3-5 mm, much exceeding the small apical notch.{\i  Mountain pastures; calcicole.  • C. & S. Appennini}. It.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 14. T. bulbosum} Spruner ex Boiss.,{\i  Diagn. Pl. Or. Nov.}{\b  1}({\b 1}): 74 (1843). Caespitose perennial 5-15 cm, with stout, woody stock and several tuberous, long-tapering roots. Stems many, ascending. Rosette-leaves broadly ovate, abruptly petiolate; cauline leaves ovate-oblong with obtuse auricles; all glabrous, glaucous. Petals 6-8 mm, twice as long as the sepals, dark violet or purplish; anthers bright violet. Silicula obcordate, broadly winged above; style 1-2 mm, exceeding the wide apical notch. Seeds (2-)4 or 5, in each loculus.{\i  Mountain woods. C. Greece.} Gr.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    ({\b 15-19}).{\b  T. praecox} group. More or less densely caespitose perennials. Stock much-branched, with crowded leaf-rosettes and usually 2 or more flowering stems. Petals 5-7(-8 5) mm, white, 2 or more times as long as the sepals; stamens much shorter than the petals; anthers yellowish even after dehiscence. Silicula obcordate to triangular, broadly winged above; apex with a wide notch, or truncate. Seeds 2-10 in each loculus.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Style 2-5 mm, more than ½ as long as the ripe fruit;
\par
  petals white, becoming distinctly yellow when dry ............. {\b 19. ochroleucum}
\par
1 Style 1-4 mm; petals white, not becoming distinctly yellow when dry
\par
2 Inflorescence often branched; petals 6-8 mm ...................... {\b 17. goesingense}
\par
2 Inflorescence simple; petals 5-7 mm
\par
3 Plant 3-6 cm .............................................................................. {\b 18. epirotum}
\par

\par
386}
\par