{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 petals white with pink stripes. Silicula 3·5-5 mm, ovate, cordate at the base, narrowed to the subacute, entire apex, 1-seeded; style (0·1-)0·3-0·5 mm. 2n = 24.{\i  Limestone mountain rocks. • N. Greece }({\i Athos}). Gr.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. A. polygaloides} DC.,{\i  Reg. Veg. Syst. Nat.}{\b  2}: 562 (1821) ({\i Crenularia polygaloides} (DC.) Boiss.). Suffruticose perennial with short stems. Leaves alternate (the lower sometimes opposite), 5-8 mm, subacute; lower leaves ovate, the upper oblong-linear. Petals pale purplish. Silicula 4-5 mm, suborbicular, emarginate at the apex, 1-seeded; style less than 2 mm.{\i  E. Greece} ({\i Poros, Evvoia}). Gr.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 3. A. cordatum} (Desf.) Boiss.,{\i  Fl. Or. }{\b 1}: 350 (1867). Suffruticose perennial with erect, simple stems 5-20 cm. Lower leaves opposite, ovate, cordate-amplexicaul, obtuse; upper leaves alternate, acute. Sepals 4 mm; petals 6·5-8 mm, yellow. Silicula c. 7 mm, obovate, truncate at the apex, 4-seeded; style 2·5-3·5 mm.{\i  Limestone rocks. C. & S. Greece} ({\i Oiti, Chelmos Oros}). Gr. ({\i S.W. Asia.})
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 4. A. iberideum} (Boiss.) Boiss.,{\i  op. cit.}{\b  1}: 351 (1867). Suffruticose perennial with erect or ascending, branched stems 5-7 cm; lower part of stems densely clothed with leaves and their remains. Leaves elliptical, acute, the lower 3-5 mm, the upper 6-8 mm. Sepals 2 mm, petals 5 mm, white. Silicula 7 mm, ovate-obcordate and emarginate, 4-seeded; style 0·5-0·7 mm. Mountain rocks.{\i  E. Greece} ({\i C. Evvoia}). Gr. ({\i Anatolia.})
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 5. A. arabicum} (L.) Andrz. ex O.E. Schulz in Engler & Prantl,{\i  Naturl. Pflanzenfam.} ed. 2, {\b 17b}: 442 (1936) ({\i A. buxbaumii} (Fischer ex Hornem.) DC.,{\i  A. cappadocicum} Sprengel). Annual with slender, simple or branched stems 10-15 cm. Lower leaves c. 15 mm, ovate, acute, the upper ovate, acute, cordate-amplexicaul at the base. Petals 2-3 mm, purplish. Silicula 6-12 mm, suborbicular, emarginate at the apex, with up to 6 seeds, very densely crowded, imbricate; style 0·5-1 mm, shorter than notch. {\i Dry, rocky places. Thrace.} Bu Tu. ({\i S.W. Asia}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    ({\b 6-9}).{\b  A. saxatile} group. Perennials, often woody at the base; stems 5-35 cm, ascending to erect, usually simple. Lower leaves often opposite, obtuse (rarely retuse), the upper acute or obtuse. Petals white, pink, purplish or lilac. Silicula 1- to 8-seeded, emarginate at the apex. {\i S. & S.C. Europe.} Al Bu Cr Cz Ga Ge Gr He Hs Hu It Ju Rm Sa Si.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 All siliculae unilocular, usually 1-seeded
\par
2 Plant slightly woody at the base; silicula orbicular;
\par
  style less than 0·5 mm ................................................................ {\b 6. carlsbergii}
\par
2 Plant strongly woody at the base; silicula obovate to
\par
  obcordate; style more than 0·5 mm .................................................. {\b 7. retsina}
\par
1 At least a few siliculae bilocular
\par
3 Raceme somewhat lax; siliculae variably uni- and bilocular ........ {\b 8. saxatile}
\par
3 Raceme dense; siliculae almost all unilocular ..................... {\b 9. thomasianum}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 6. A. carlsbergii} Strid & Papanicolaou,{\i  Bot. Not. }{\b 133}: 521 (1980). Short-lived perennial with ascending to suberect, usually simple stems 6-10 cm. Leaves 6-10 mm, obtuse, rather thick, glaucous; lower leaves opposite, ovate-orbicular to broadly elliptical, obtuse, the upper alternate, ovate to broadly oblong. Sepals 2-2·6 mm; petals 3·5-5·5 mm, pale pink. Silicula 5-6 mm, orbicular, emarginate at the apex, 1-seeded; style 0·3-0·4 mm.{\i  Limestone screes, }2100-2400{\i  m. • S. Greece} ({\i Taïyetos}). Gr.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 7. A. retsina} Phitos & Snogerup,{\i  Bot. Not. }{\b 126}: 142 (1973). Suffruticose perennial up to 20 cm, arising from woody rootstock. Leaves opposite, crowded, 5-15 mm, spathulate to obovate or elliptical, obtuse to slightly retuse, thick, glaucous. Sepals 2·7-3·2 mm; petals 4-6 mm, white or purplish. Silicula 4-5 mm, obovate to obcordate, emarginate at the apex, usually 1-seeded; style 1-1·3 mm. 2n = 24.{\i  Crevices of limestone cliffs. • C. Aegean region} ({\i Skiros}). Gr.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 8. A. saxatile} (L.) R. Br. in Aiton, {\i Hort. Kew}. ed. 2,{\b  4}: 80 (1812) ({\i A. creticum} Boiss. & Heldr.,{\i  A. subcapitatum} Bornm.; incl.{\i  A. gracile} DC., {\i A. pyrenaicum} Bout.). Perennial up to 35 cm, ascending or erect, simple or branched. Lower leaves more than 5 mm, ovate to suborbicular or oblong and obtuse, the upper narrower, often acute. Sepals 1-3(-3·8) mm; petals 2-6·5(-8·5) mm, white, purplish or lilac. Silicula 5-10 mm, obovate to suborbicular, emarginate, sometimes a little broader than long, up to 8-seeded, in lax or rather dense racemes; unilocular siliculae 3-6·5 mm, the wing 1-3 mm wide at the apex; bilocular fruits 4·5-10 mm, the wing 1·5-4 mm wide at the apex; style 0·2-2 mm, usually shorter than but sometimes equalling or exceeding notch.{\i  S. & S.C. Europe, mainly in the mountains}. Al Bu Cr Cz Ga Ge Gr He Hs Hu It Ju Rm Sa Si.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 A very variable species; some variants have been treated as species in regional floras. The account below is based on the study by I.A. Andersson{\i  et al., Willdenowia }{\b 13}: 3-42 (1983).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Lower leaves distinctly petiolate; leaves up to 20 mm
\par
  ...................................................................................... ({\b b}) subsp.{\b  scopulorum}
\par
1 Lower leaves usually sessile or subsessile; leaves usually not
\par
  more than 15 mm
\par
2 Plant strongly woody at the base; cauline leaves broadly
\par
  elliptical to suborbicular, fleshy ........................................ ({\b e}) subsp.{\b  creticum}
\par
2 Plant slightly woody at the base; cauline leaves oblong,
\par
  obovate or elliptical, rarely fleshy
\par
3 Sepals 1-1·6 mm; cauline leaves at least 3½ times as
\par
  long as wide ....................................................................... ({\b a}) subsp.{\b  saxatile}
\par
3 Sepals more than 1·6 mm; cauline leaves 2-4 times as long as wide
\par
4 Cauline leaves obtuse .................................................. ({\b c}) subsp.{\b  ovalifolium}
\par
4 Cauline leaves acute ......................................................... ({\b d}) subsp.{\b  graecum}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp.{\b  saxatile}: Slightly woody at the base. Leaves 5-15 mm, at least 3½ times as long as wide, coriaceous, rather thin, the lower obtuse, the upper acute. Sepals 1-1·6 mm; petals 1·8-3·2(-4) mm. Most siliculae bilocular; style 0·2-0·4(-0·5) mm. 2n = 24, 48.{\i  Stony ground, usually in the mountains. Throughout the range of the species, except S. part of Balkan peninsula and Aegean region}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp.{\b  scopulorum} (Ronniger) I.A. Andersson{\i  et al., Willdenowia }{\b 13}: 9 (1983) ({\i A. saxatile} var.{\i  scopulorum} Ronniger): Strongly woody at the base. Leaves 10-20 mm, 3-5½ times as long as wide, fleshy, the lower distinctly petiolate, obtuse. Sepals 1·7-2·2 mm; petals 4-5 mm. At least 40 % of siliculae unilocular; style 0·4-0·6 mm.{\i  Limestone cliffs by the sea. • W. Jugoslavia }({\i near Dubrovnik}).
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b c}) Subsp.{\b  ovalifolium} (DC.) Nyman,{\i  Consp}. 63 (1878) ({\i A. ovalifolium} (DC.) Boiss.): Variable in habit, but usually somewhat woody at the base. Leaves 6-14 mm, 1½-3 times as long as wide, obtuse, coriaceous. Sepals 1·7-2·6 mm; petals (2·3-)3-5 mm. Usually most siliculae bilocular; style 0·3-0·7(-0·9) mm.{\i  Limestone mountains cliffs. Spain, S.W. France; Sardegna}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b d}) Subsp.{\b  graecum} (Boiss. & Spruner) Hayek,{\i  Prodr. Fl}.
\par

\par
389}
\par