{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 14. I. umbellata} L.,{\i  Sp. Pl.} 649 (1753) ({\i I. roseopurpurea} Sagorski). Erect, glabrous annual 20-70 cm, corymbosely branched above. Leaves linear-lanceolate, acuminate, entire or almost so. Inflorescence dense, umbellate even in fruit. Petals pink to purplish. Silicula up to 10 mm, ovate, broadly winged from the base; lobes triangular, acuminate, erect; notch deep, acute. Bushy and rocky places, on calcareous and serpentine soils. •{\i  Mediterranean region; widely cultivated for ornament, and naturalized elsewhere.} Al Ga Gr It Ju [Au Az Be Br Cz Ge He Ho Hs Hu Lu Po Rm].
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 15. I. ciliata} All.,{\i  Auct. Fl. Pedem. }15 (1789). Erect annual or short-lived perennial 20-30 cm, often branched above. Leaves linear-spathulate, entire. Inflorescence dense, umbellate even in fruit. Petals white to pale purple. Silicula up to 6 mm, rectangular-elliptical, broadly winged from the base; lobes triangular, acute or obtuse, erect; notch deep, acute.•{\i  S.E. France; C. Spain}. Ga Hs.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b I. simplex} DC. in Lam. & DC.,{\i  Fl. Fr}. ed. 3,{\b  5}: 597 (1815) ({\i I. taurica }DC.), from Krym and S. Russia (near Taganrog), appears to differ only in its more spathulate leaves.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 16. I. fontqueri} Pau,{\i  Mem. Mus. Ci. Nat. Barcelona} ({\i Bot}.){\b  1}({\b 1}): 22 (1922) ({\i I. pinnata }sensu Boiss., non L.). Annual, simple or branched from the base; stems up to 15 cm, erecto-patent, more or less branched, slender, very shortly puberulent. Leaves spathulate to linear-spathulate, with 1 or 2 pairs of teeth near the apex, or subentire, the lower obtuse, attenuate into a rather long petiole, caducous. Inflorescence a short, dense corymb. Petals white or lilac. Silicula 5 mm, broadly orbicular, truncate at the base, winged from the base; lobes subacute, erect, irregularly serrulate (at least in the upper part); notch shallow; style much exserted.{\i  Mountains of S. Spain} ({\i Malaga prov}.). Hs.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 17. I. pinnata} L.,{\i  Cent. Pl.}{\b  1}: 18 (1755). Erect annual 10-30 cm, rugose-papillose, scarcely pubescent, corymbose above; branches long, straight, leafless. Leaves obovate-oblong, pinnatifid or pinnatisect, with 1-3 pairs of linear segments. Inflorescence a short, usually dense, convex corymb; flowers fragrant. Petals white to lilac. Silicula 5-6 mm, almost square, glabrous; lobes entire, obtuse (or acute, var.{\i  rollii} (Ten.) Fiori), erect; notch shallow. 2n = 14. {\i Cereal fields. S. Europe.} Bl Ga Gr He Hs It Ju Rs(K) ?Si [Au Be Cz Ge Rm].
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 18. I. crenata} Lam.,{\i  Encycl. Méth. Bot.}{\b  3}: 223 (1789) ({\i I. pectinata} Boiss., {\i I. bourgaei} Boiss.). Erect, hispid annual; stems 15-30 cm, 1 or several, corymbosely branched above; branches long, straight, leafless. Leaves all, or at least the lower, linear-spathulate, pectinate-toothed, the upper narrower, entire. Inflorescence a many-flowered, dense, convex corymb. Petals white. Silicula c. 5 mm, almost square, winged only in the upper part, papillose-verrucose; lobes broad, triangular, acute; notch deep, acute. 2n = 14. {\i Dry, calcareous or gypsaceous soils. • C. & S. Spain.} Hs.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 19. I. odorata} L.,{\i  Sp. Pl.} 649 (1753) ({\i I. acutiloba} Bertol.). Diffuse, very shortly hispid annual; stems 15-30 cm, numerous, arising from the base, flexuous, leafy. Leaves linear-spathulate, pinnatifid with 1 or 2 pairs of segments near the apex. Inflorescence a flat, dense corymb, shortly stalked and, surrounded by the upper leaves. Petals white, the outer ones scarcely radiating. Silicula ovate, glabrous; lobes erect, acute, entire; notch acute.{\i  Limestone mountain slopes. Greece, Turkey-in-Europe, Kriti.} Cr Gr Tu [Be]. ({\i N. Africa, S.W. Asia.})
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 20. I. sampaiana} Franco & P. Silva, {\i Feddes Repert.}{\b  68}: 195 (1963) ({\i I. pectinata} auct. lusit., non Boiss.). Procumbent hispid annual; stems up to 20 cm, numerous. Leaves spathulate (except sometimes the upper), regularly pectinate-pinnatifid with 3 or 4 pairs of oblong, subobtuse segments. Inflorescence a flat corymb, not very dense in fruit. Petals white, the outer ones strongly radiating. Silicula 5 × 4 mm, ovate-rectangular, glabrous or very rarely papillose-verrucose; lobes large, acute, entire, erect; notch obtuse.{\i  Calcareous soils. • Coast of S.W. Portugal}. Lu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 78.           Biscutella}              L.
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc  By †E. Guinea & V.H. Heywood.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Annuals, perennials or small shrubs with entire to pinnatifid leaves. Petals usually clawed, yellow. Fruit a strongly compressed, didymous silicula, indehiscent but with the 1-seeded loculi eventually breaking away from the axis; valves glabrous or with simple or clavate hairs; style long. Seeds unwinged.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 The taxonomy of this genus is made difficult by the relative uniformity of most of the floral and fruiting characters and by the unreliability of those that do vary. Reliance has to be placed on vegetative features, but there is inadequate knowledge about their range of plasticity. The two available monographs differ widely in their treatment, the one taking a broad, the other a narrow view of the species. The narrow species concept is adopted here, largely to force attention on the variation in the genus, so that a future synthetic treatment may be possible. Most of the species recognized here have a characteristic facies and a well-circumscribed distribution. Admittedly intermediates between some of them occur, but to treat them as subspecies would make the classification unwieldy and such treatment has been deferred until further information may be available.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Literature: E. Malinowski,{\i  Bull. Int. Acad. Sci. Cracovie}{\b  1910}: 139 (1910). B. Machatschki-Laurich,{\i  Bot. Arch.} ({\i Königsberg}) {\b 13}:1115 (1926). J.D. Olowokudejo & V.H. Heywood,{\b  Pl. Syst. Evol. }{\b 145}: 291-309 (1984).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Petals up to 15 mm, long-clawed, patent; silicula with a translucent
\par
  margin  (Sect.{\i  Iondraba})
\par
2 Silicula not emarginate at the apex, the wings excurrent on
\par
  the style ..................................................................................... {\b 39. auriculata}
\par
2 Silicula emarginate at the apex, the wings not excurrent on
\par
  the style ................................................................................. {\b 40. cichoriifolia}
\par
1 Petals not more than 8 mm, short-clawed, erect; silicula
\par
  with a narrow membranous margin
\par
3 Petals gradually attenuate at the base, not auriculate
\par
4 Filaments with a wide membranous wing ...................................... {\b 34. lyrata}
\par
4 Filaments unwinged
\par
5 Leaves lyrate
\par
6 Annual; silicula 3·5-5 × 7-10 mm ............................................. {\b 36. maritima}
\par
6 Perennial; silicula 6-7 × 11-13 mm ...................................... {\b 38. raphanifolia}
\par
5 Leaves toothed or entire, not lyrate
\par
7 Infructescence lax; pedicels patent ............................................... {\b 35. baetica}
\par
7 Infructescence dense; pedicels erecto-patent .............................. {\b 37. didyma}
\par
3 Petals abruptly contracted into a claw, auriculate-dilated above the base
\par
8 Leaves tomentose
\par
9 Silicula 9-11 × 16-19 mm ....................................................... {\b 10. vincentina}
\par
9 Silicula 3-7 × 7-12 mm
\par
10 Basal leaves 1·5-2 cm wide; petals 3 mm; sepals 1·5 mm .. {\b 18. sclerocarpa}
\par

\par
393}
\par