{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 Sect. BISCUTELLA (Sect.{\i  Thlaspidium} DC.). Lateral sepals not saccate or spurred; petals small or medium, short-clawed, or gradually attenuate at the base, erect. Silicula with a narrow membranous margin.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Ser.{\i  Laevigatae} Malinovski. Perennial. Petals abruptly contracted into a claw, auriculate-dilated above the claw. All nectaries extrastaminal.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. B. laevigata} L.,{\i  Mantissa Alt}. 255 (1771). Stems 10-50(-70) cm, simple or branched. Basal leaves 1·5-13 × 0·3-2 cm, forming an obvious rosette or not, linear- to ovate-lanceolate, ovate or rarely spathulate, entire, sinuate-dentate or denticulate, glabrous or hairy; cauline leaves 2-10, resembling the basal leaves or small, linear, entire. Flowers in lax or dense racemes. Petals 4-8 mm, clawed. Silicula 4-8(-15) × 8-14(-30) mm, glabrous or hairy; style 2-6 mm.{\i  Usually on rocks or stony ground. C. & S. Europe, extending northwards to Belgium.} Au Be Cz Ga Ge He Hs Hu It Ju Po Rm Rs(W).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 One of the most polymorphic species in the European flora. Studies by I. Manton,{\i  Zeitschr. Indukt. Abstamm. Vererbungslehre}{\b  47}: 41-57 (1933);{\i  Ann. Bot.} nov. ser.{\b  1}: 439-462 (1937), have shown that the group contains a series of both diploid and tetraploid populations. Diploids, with 2n = 18, are known from a few localities at low altitudes from France (? and Portugal and Spain) to the Balkan peninsula; tetraploids, with 2n = 36, are found mainly in the Alps and the mountains of S. & S.E. Europe. Morphological differentiation of the populations is weak, and they are best regarded as subspecies of a single species. Union of all the diploids into one species and all the tetraploids into another as suggested by Manton has not proved feasible.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 The more distinct taxa are keyed below. This treatment is a modification of that given by Machatschki-Laurich, {\i loc. cit.} (1926), and is similar to the one adopted by Markgraf in Hegi,{\i  Ill. Fl. Mitteleur}. ed 2,{\b  4}({\b 1}): 395-401 (1963).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Plant glabrous, shining; petals 7 mm .................................. ({\b n}) subsp.{\b  lucida}
\par
1 At least the leaves hairy; petals usually less than 7 mm
\par
2 Leaves hispid
\par
3 Silicula up to 15 × 30 mm; basal leaves rigid ........ ({\b m}) subsp.{\b  montenegrina}
\par
3 Silicula less than 15 mm; basal leaves not rigid
\par
4 Basal leaves ovate to cuneate-lanceolate, narrowed towards the base but
\par
  not petiolate, forming a rosette which is ± appressed to the ground
\par
5 Basal leaves ovate or spathulate, rounded;
\par
  silicula 6-7 × 12-13 mm ......................................................... (1) subsp.{\b  illyrica}
\par
5 Basal leaves cuneate-lanceolate or obovate, apiculate;
\par
  silicula 5(-8) × 10(-12) mm ............................................. ({\b b}) subsp.{\b  austriaca}
\par
4 Basal leaves lanceolate or linear-lanceolate, petiolate, erect
\par
6 Stems pubescent or glabrous at the base ........................ ({\b j}) subsp.{\b  tirolensis}
\par
6 Stems hispid at the base
\par
7 Basal leaves up to 13 × 2 cm, lanceolate, sinuate dentate;
\par
  stems branched ................................................................ ({\b a}) subsp.{\b  laevigata}
\par
7 Basal leaves 3-5 × c. 0·3 cm, linear-lanceolate, entire;
\par
  stems unbranched ....................................................... ({\b k}) subsp.{\b  angustifolia}
\par
2 Leaves finely pubescent
\par
8 Leaves deeply sinuate-dentate
\par
9 Basal leaves up to 8 × 1·2 cm, lanceolate ............................ ({\b h}) subsp.{\b  varia}
\par
9 Basal leaves 3-4 × 0·5-0·7(-1) cm, linear to oblong .....({\b i}) subsp.{\b  subaphylla}
\par
8 Leaves dentate, subentire or entire
\par
10 Basal leaves subentire or with acute teeth; cauline leaves few, minute
\par
11 Basal leaves with acute teeth, pubescent ......................... ({\b c}) subsp.{\b  kerneri}
\par
11 Basal leaves subentire, ± glabrous .............................. ({\b d}) subsp.{\b  hungarica}
\par
10 Basal leaves entire or somewhat denticulate; cauline leaves numerous
\par
12 Basal leaves up to 8 × 1-1·5 cm, entire ................... ({\b g}) subsp.{\b  guestphalica}
\par
12 Basal leaves not more than 5 × 0·8(-1) cm, dentate
\par
13 Basal leaves lanceolate, with acute teeth, ± long petiolate;
\par
   stems branched .................................................................. ({\b e}) subsp.{\b  gracilis}
\par
13 Basal leaves oblong, with obtuse teeth, shortly petiolate;
\par
   stems unbranched ........................................................... ({\b f}) subsp. {\b tenuifolia}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp.{\b  laevigata} (subsp.{\i  longifolia} (Vill.) Rouy & Fouc.,{\i B. longifolia }Vill.): 2n = 36.{\i  Almost throughout the range of the species}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp.{\b  austriaca} (Jordan) Mach.-Laur.,{\i  Bot. Arch.} ({\i Konigsberg}) 13: 67 (1926) ({\i B. austriaca} Jordan): 2n = 18.{\i  N.E. Alps, S. & E. Carpathians, N. Hungary}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b c}) Subsp.{\b  kerneri} Mach.-Laur.,{\i  op. cit.} 68 (1926): 2n = 18.{\i  E.C. Europe}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b d}) Subsp.{\b  hungarica} Soó,{\i  Acta Bot. Acad. Sci. Hung.}{\b  10}: 373 (1964):{\i  Hungary}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b e}) Subsp.{\b  gracilis} Mach.-Laur.,{\i  op. cit.} 69 (1926): 2n = 18.{\i  C. Europe, from S.W. Poland to N.W. Jugoslavia}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b f}) Subsp.{\b  tenuifolia} (Bluff & Fingerh.) Mach.-Laur.,{\i  loc. cit.} (1926): 2n = 18.{\i  C. Germany}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b g}) Subsp.{\b  guestphalica} Mach.-Laur.,{\i  op. cit.} 70 (1926): 2n = 18. {\i N.C. Germany} ({\i Wesergebirge}).
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b h}) Subsp.{\b  varia} (Dumort.) Rouy & Fouc.,{\i  Fl. Fr.}{\b  2}: 110 (1895) ({\i B. varia }Dumort., {\i B. alsatica} Jordan): 2n = 18.{\i  W. Germany, N.E. France, S.E. Belgium}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b i}) Subsp.{\b  subaphylla} Mach.-Laur.,{\i  Bot. Arch.} ({\i Konigsberg}) {\b 13}: 70 (1926): 2n = 18.{\i  E. France, S. & W. Germany, Switzerland}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b j}) Subsp.{\b  tirolensis} (Mach.-Laur.) Heywood,{\i  Feddes Repert.}{\b  69}: 147 (1964) ({\i B. laevigata} var. {\i tirolensis} Mach.-Laur.):{\i  E. Alps}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b k}) Subsp.{\b  angustifolia} (Mach.-Laur.) Heywood,{\i  loc. cit.} (1964):{\i  E. Alps, ?Hungary, Jugoslavia}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b l}) Subsp.{\b  illyrica} Mach.-Laur.,{\i  Bot. Arch.} ({\i Konigsberg}) {\b 13}: 67 (1926): {\i Jugoslavia; isolated localities in Czechoslovakia and Hungary}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b m}) Subsp.{\b  montenegrina }Rohlena,{\i  Sitz.-Ber. Böhm. Ges. Wiss. }{\b 1903}: 17 (1903):{\i  Crna Gora}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b n}) Subsp.{\b  lucida} (Balbis ex DC.) Mach.-Laur.,{\i  Bot. Arch.} ({\i Konigsberg}) {\b 13}: 66 (1926) ({\i B. lucida} Balbis ex DC.): 2n = 36.{\i  E. Alps, C. Appennini, N.W. Jugoslavia}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. B. scaposa} Sennen ex Mach.-Laur.,{\i  Bot. Arch.} ({\i Konigsberg}) {\b 13}: 93 (1926) ({\i B. strictifolia} Pau, {\i B. subscaposa }Sennen). Stems 40-60 cm, simple or branched. Basal leaves 5-10 × 1-2 cm, lanceolate, obovate-lanceolate or subspathulate, sinuate-dentate with 3-5 acute or obtuse teeth on each side, more or less densely setose; cauline leaves few, minute. Petals 4 mm. Silicula 4-8 × 8-11 mm. 2n = 18. •{\i  C. & N.W. Spain; E. Pyrenees.} Ga Hs.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 3. B. flexuosa} Jordan, {\i Diagn. }{\b 1}({\b 1}): 300 (1864). Stems 40-65 cm, simple or branched, robust. Basal leaves 6-11 × 1·5-2 cm, subspathulate or oblong-obovate, remotely sinuate-dentate, petiolate, setose, the apex somewhat obtuse; cauline leaves few, semi-
\par

\par
395}
\par