{\rtf1\ansi \deff4\deflang1033{\fonttbl{\f4\froman\fcharset0\fprq2 Times New Roman;}}{\colortbl;\red0\green0\blue0;\red0\green0\blue255;\red0\green255\blue255;\red0\green255\blue0;\red255\green0\blue255;\red255\green0\blue0;
\red255\green255\blue0;\red255\green255\blue255;\red0\green0\blue128;\red0\green128\blue128;\red0\green128\blue0;\red128\green0\blue128;\red128\green0\blue0;\red128\green128\blue0;\red128\green128\blue128;\red192\green192\blue192;}{\stylesheet{\widctlpar 
\f4\fs20\lang2057 \snext0 Normal;}{\*\cs10 \additive Default Paragraph Font;}}{\info{\author dddd}{\operator dddd}{\creatim\yr2000\mo1\dy1\hr14\min49}{\revtim\yr2000\mo1\dy1\hr14\min54}{\version4}{\edmins5}{\nofpages4}{\nofwords923}{\nofchars5262}
{\*\company  }{\vern57431}}\widowctrl\ftnbj\aenddoc\hyphcaps0 \fet0\sectd \linex0 {\*\pnseclvl1\pnucrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl2\pnucltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl3\pndec\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang
{\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl4\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl5\pndec\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl6\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl7
\pnlcrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl8\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl9\pnlcrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}\pard\plain \nowidctlpar \f4\fs20\lang2057 {\i\fs28 
Penins. Balcan. }{\b\fs28 1}{\fs28 : 472 (1925) (}{\i\fs28 A. graecum}{\fs28  Boiss. & Spruner,}{\i\fs28  A. glaucescens}{\fs28  Hal\'e1csy, }{\i\fs28 A. saxatile}{\fs28  subsp.}{\i\fs28  oreophilum}{\fs28 
 I.A. Andersson et al.): Plant 5-13 cm, somewhat woody at the base. Leaves 5-12 mm, 2-4 times as long as wide, acute to subacute, coriaceous to somewhat fleshy. Sepals 1\'b78-2\'b75(-3\'b73) mm; petals 3-6\'b75(-8\'b7
5) mm. Most siliculae bilocular; style 0\'b73-0\'b79(-2) mm. 2n = 24, c. 36.}{\i\fs28  Rocky and stony ground. S. part of Balkan peninsula, N. Aegean region}{\fs28 .
\par  (}{\b\fs28 e}{\fs28 ) Subsp.}{\b\fs28  creticum }{\fs28 (Boiss. & Heldr.) I.A. Andersson}{\i\fs28  et al., Willdenowia}{\b\fs28  13}{\fs28 : 18 (1983) (}{\i\fs28 A. creticum}{\fs28 
 Boiss. & Heldr.): Long-lived perennial 3-10 cm, strongly woody at the base. Leaves 4-10 mm, 1\'bd-2\'bd times as long as wide, broadly elliptical to suborbicular, obtuse to subacute, fleshy. Sepals 1\'b75-2\'b75 mm; petals 2\'b75-4\'b7
8 mm. Usually at least 40 % of siliculae unilocular; style 0\'b73-0\'b79 mm. 2n = 24.}{\i\fs28  Limestone cliffs and stony ground. S. Aegean region; S.E. Peloponnisos.}{\fs28 
\par 
\par Var.}{\i\fs28  ovalifolium}{\fs28  of subsp. (}{\b\fs28 c}{\fs28 ), a compact plant up to c. 20 cm with mainly bilocular siliculae, is widespread. Var.}{\i\fs28  monospermum }{\fs28 (R. Br.) Thell. (}{\i\fs28 A. monospermum}{\fs28 
 R. Br.), a taller plant with mainly unilocular siliculae, occurs on the northern slopes of the Pyrenees.
\par 
\par Plants from E.C. Greece have larger floral parts and longer styles in fruit than plants from the rest of the range of subsp. (}{\b\fs28 d}{\fs28 ), and have been distinguished as subsp. }{\b\fs28 oreophilum}{\fs28  I.A. Andersson}{\i\fs28 
 et al., Willdenowia}{\b\fs28  13}{\fs28 : 14 (1983). The existence of intermediate populations makes it very difficult to separate these two variants and they are best subsumed within subsp. (}{\b\fs28 d}{\fs28 ).
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 9. A. thomasianum}{\fs28  Gay,}{\i\fs28  Ann. Sci. Nat}{\fs28 . ser. 3,}{\b\fs28  4}{\fs28 : 81 (1845). Like }{\b\fs28 8}{\fs28 
 but usually smaller and more compact; stems up to 13 cm; raceme very dense with almost all siliculae unilocular; unilocular siliculae 7-10 mm, the wing 3-5 mm wide at the apex; bilocular siliculae 10-12 mm, the wing 4\'b75-5 mm wide at the apex; style 0
\'b76-0\'b78 mm. 2n = 24.}{\i\fs28  Open habitats on schistose soil. S.W. Alps}{\fs28  (}{\i\fs28 Val d' Aosta}{\fs28 ) . It.
\par 
\par Similar plants are known from the mountains of Algeria (Djuradjura), but their status is uncertain.
\par 
\par }\pard \qc\nowidctlpar {\fs28  }{\b\fs28 76.          Teesdaliopsis}{\fs28              Willk.) Gand.
\par }{\fs24  By V.H. Heywood.
\par 
\par }\pard \nowidctlpar {\fs28 Inflorescence corymbose-racemose; flowers zygomorphic. Petals white; outer petals large, radiating; inner petals small. Fruit an angustiseptate silicula, scarcely winged at the apex, emarginate. Seed single, pendent.
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 1. T. conferta}{\fs28  (Lag.) Rothm.,}{\i\fs28  Feddes Repert. }{\b\fs28 49}{\fs28 : 178 (1940) (}{\i\fs28 Iberis conferta}{\fs28 
 Lag.). Caespitose, suffruticose, glabrous perennial. Leaves in crowded rosettes, lanceolate, acute, entire. Flowering branches 5-15 cm, leafless, lateral; non-flowering branches terminal. Silicula 5 \'d7
 4 mm, ellipsoid-obovoid; valves with a thick median vein; style very short. \bullet }{\i\fs28  Mountains of N.W. Spain and N. Portugal}{\fs28 . Hs Lu.
\par 
\par }\pard \qc\nowidctlpar {\fs28  }{\b\fs28 77.             Iberis}{\fs28                    L.
\par }{\fs24  By A.R. Pinto da Silva & J. do Amaral Franco.
\par 
\par }\pard \nowidctlpar {\fs28 Annuals or perennials, rarely dwarf shrubs; glabrous or with unbranched hairs. Inflorescence corymbose or racemose, often elongating in fruit. Sepals not saccate; petals white, pink or purple, the 2 outer 
much larger than the 2 inner; median nectaries absent. Fruit an angusti-septate silicula; valves keeled and usually winged at the apex; style long; stigma capitate. Seeds solitary in each loculus, often winged.
\par 
\par All species are usually found in calcareous habitats.
\par 
\par The following key refers to well-developed plants only. The perennial species sometimes flower in the first year and may then appear to be annual.
\par 
\par }\pard \li200\nowidctlpar {\fs28 1 Silicula much wider than long; flowering in winter ........... }{\b\fs28 1. semperflorens}{\fs28 
\par 1 Silicula longer than wide or suborbicular; flowering in
\par   spring and summer
\par 2 Perennial with woody or herbaceous stems, usually with
\par   non-flowering rosettes
\par 3 Siliculae in racemes
\par 4 Leaves 2\'b75-5 mm wide, oblong-spathulate, flat, obtuse;
\par   flowering stems lateral .......................................................... }{\b\fs28 2. sempervirens}{\fs28 
\par 4 Leaves 1-2 mm wide, linear, semi-cylindrical on the non-
\par   flowering shoots, \'b1 flat on the flowering stems, acute,
\par   mucronulate; flowering stems terminal ......................................... }{\b\fs28 3. saxatilis}{\fs28 
\par 3 Siliculae in corymbs
\par 5 Plant 10-40 cm, usually with erect stems (low altitudes, up to 800 m)
\par 6 Cauline leaves linear to narrowly linear-spathulate, entire ......... }{\b\fs28 4. contracta}{\fs28 
\par 6 Cauline leaves oblong-lanceolate or \'b1 broadly spathulate,
\par   often denticulate at least at the apex
\par 7 Outer petals 8-10 mm; cauline leaves up to 6 mm wide ........ }{\b\fs28 8. procumbens}{\fs28 
\par 7 Outer petals 10-18 mm; cauline leaves up to 12 mm wide
\par 8 Stems glabrous; seeds c. 5 mm ................................................ }{\b\fs28 9. gibraltarica}{\fs28 
\par 8 Stems pubescent; seeds c. 2\'b75 mm .............................................. }{\b\fs28 10. nazarita}{\fs28 
\par 5 Dwarf plants up to 15 cm, usually diffuse with ascending stems
\par   (high mountains, 800-2800 m)
\par 9 Silicula 6-8 mm, rectangular-elliptical, with wide, erect,
\par   acute lobes ........................................................................................ }{\b\fs28 5. pruitii}{\fs28 
\par 9 Silicula 3-5 mm, broadly ovate
\par 10 Silicula with short, convergent, \'b1 obtuse lobes ...................... }{\b\fs28 6. spathulata}{\fs28 
\par 10 Silicula with acute, very divergent lobes ................................... }{\b\fs28 7. aurosica}{\fs28 
\par 2  Annual, without non-flowering rosettes
\par 11 Siliculae in racemes
\par 12 Leaves all pinnatifid to dentate (rarely entire), \'b1 ciliate;
\par    silicula 3-5 mm .............................................................................. }{\b\fs28 11. amara}{\fs28 
\par 12 Upper leaves entire, linear-lanceolate to linear, glabrous;
\par    silicula (5-)6-9 mm ...................................................................... }{\b\fs28 12. linifolia}{\fs28 
\par 11 Siliculae in corymbs or umbels
\par 13 Silicula with irregularly serrulate lobes .................................. }{\b\fs28 16. fontqueri}{\fs28 
\par 13 Silicula with entire lobes
\par 14 Leaves entire or shallowly toothed
\par 15 Leaves linear- to obovate-spathulate
\par 16 Lower cauline leaves at least 3 mm wide, obovate-oblong to
\par    oblong-spathulate, often toothed ..................................................... }{\b\fs28 5. pruitii}{\fs28 
\par 16 Lower cauline leaves not more than 3 mm wide,
\par    linear-spathulate ............................................................................. }{\b\fs28 15. ciliata}{\fs28 
\par 15 Leaves narrowly linear to linear-lanceolate
\par 17 Silicula 3-5 mm, with small, acute or acuminate, divergent
\par    lobes forming a shallow notch; leaves narrowly linear ................. }{\b\fs28 13. stricta}{\fs28 
\par 
\par 390}
\par }