{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 17. B. arvernensis} Jordan,{\i  op. cit.} 298 (1864). Like {\b 16} but stems 10-30 cm, leafy; raceme dense, corymbose; petals 6 mm; style up to 4 mm. 2n = 18.{\i  Volcanic debris and rocks. • S.C. France} ({\i Puy-de Dome}). Ga.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 18. B. sclerocarpa} Revel,{\i  Congr. Sci. Fr.} ({\i Rodez}) {\b 40}({\b 1}): 262 (1874). Rhizome long, woody, terminating in a rosette or divided and producing rosette-bearing branches; stems up to 30 cm. Basal leaves 5-7 × 1·5-2 cm, more or less tomentose, laxly rosulate, subpinnatifid, with 3-6 large obtuse teeth on each side; cauline leaves several, semi-amplexicaul. Inflorescence branched, lax. Sepals 1·5 mm; petals 3 mm. Silicula 3·5-4 × 7 mm. 2n = 18. •{\i  S. & S.C. France. }Ga.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 19. B. divionensis} Jordan,{\i  Diagn. }{\b 1}: 305 (1864). Rhizome long, woody, terminating in a rosette or divided and producing rosette-bearing branches; stems up to 25 cm. Basal leaves 5-7 × 1-1·5 cm, densely puberulent or canescent, densely rosulate, cuneate or spathulate, with 1-3 large, opposite, acute teeth on each side; apex subacute; cauline leaves few. Inflorescence branched, somewhat dense. Petals 6 mm. Silicula 6-7 × 9-11 mm. 2n = 18.{\i  Limestone rocks. • E.C. France }({\i near Dijon}). Ga.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 20. B. controversa} Boreau, {\i Fl. Centre Fr}. ed. 3, {\b 2}: 56 (1857). Like {\b 19} but basal leaves 9-13 × 1·5 cm, obovate-oblong, with 3-5 subopposite teeth; silicula 6-7 × 10-12 mm. 2n = 18. •{\i  C. France.} Ga.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 21. B. brevicaulis} Jordan,{\i  Diagn. }{\b 1}: 303 (1864). Like {\b 19} but stems 10-20 cm; basal leaves oblong or lanceolate-cuneate, subpinnatifid with 1-3 acute lobes on each side, the apex subacute; inflorescence lax; petals 4-5 mm; silicula 3-4 × 6-9 mm. 2n = 18. •{\i  S.W. Alps. }Ga It.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    ({\b 22-27}).{\b  B. coronopifolia} group. Stems (20-)30-60(-80) cm. Basal leaves pinnatifid or pinnatilobed, glabrous to hirsute but not tomentose .
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Stems intricately branched from the base; cauline leaves numerous
\par
2 Leaves pinnatilobed, the lobes ovate; petals 4-5 mm;
\par
  silicula 4-5 × 8·5-9 mm ............................................................... {\b 23. intricata}
\par
2 Leaves pinnatifid, the lobes ovate-oblong; petals 5-6 mm;
\par
  silicula 6-7 × 9-11 mm .............................................................. {\b 27. polyclada}
\par
1 Stems not intricately branched from the base; cauline leaves
\par
  usually few to several
\par
3 Leaf-lobes large, 5-7 on each side, unequal ........................... {\b 26. pinnatifida}
\par
3 Leaf-lobes small, 2-4(5) on each side
\par
4 Leaf-lobes ± equal, 2 or 3 on each side ............................. {\b 22. coronopifolia}
\par
4 Leaf-lobes unequal, 3-5 on each side
\par
5 Basal leaves 4-6 cm; silicula 7 × 10-11 mm ........................... {\b 24. apricorum}
\par
5 Basal leaves 8-9 cm; silicula 5-6 × 8-9 mm .............................. {\b 25. granitica}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 22. B. coronopifolia} L.,{\i  Mantissa Alt.} 255 (1771) ({\i B. lima }Reichenb., {\i B. tarraconensis} Sennen). Stems up to 30 cm, hispid to hirsute. Basal leaves 3-4 × 1·5 cm, hispid or hirsute, laxly rosulate, pinnatifid, with 2-4 long, remote, somewhat acute lobes on each side; lower cauline leaves about as large as the basal, with large teeth, the upper linear-setaceous. Inflorescence several times branched. Sepals 2·5 mm; petals 5 mm. Silicula 5-7 × 9-13 mm. 2n = 18. •{\i  S. & S.C. France and E. Spain; N. Italy.} Ga Hs It.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 23. B. intricata} Jordan, {\i Diagn. }{\b 1}: 308 (1864). Stems up to 50 cm, intricately branched from the base, the branches open and patent in a corymbose manner, hirsute below. Basal leaves 6-8 × 1·5-2 cm, pubescent, oblong, pinnatilobed, with 3-5 ovate, slightly acute lobes on each side; cauline leaves lobed or dentate. Raceme quite dense, elongating during anthesis. Petals 4·5 mm. Silicula 5 × 9 mm. •{\i  S.E. France} ({\i S. & W. of Lyon}). Ga.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 24. B. apricorum} Jordan, {\i op. cit.} 307 (1864). Stems 35-40 cm, sparsely hispid or hirsute. Basal leaves 4-6 × 1-1·5 cm, hispid-setose, oblong-spathulate, with 3 or 4 large, obtuse teeth on each margin; cauline leaves semi-amplexicaul, with large teeth. Sepals 2-3 mm; petals 5-6 mm. Silicula 7 × 10-11 mm.{\i  Dry places. • S.E. France.} Ga.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 25. B. granitica} Boreau ex Perard, {\i Bull. Soc. Bot. Fr. }{\b 16}: 353 (1869). Like {\b 24} but basal leaves 6-9 × 1·5-2 cm, lanceolate, with 3-5 large teeth on each margin interspersed with smaller teeth; silicula 5 × 9 mm.{\i  Siliceous rocks.• S.C. France.} Ga ?Hs.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 26. B. pinnatifida} Jordan,{\i  Diagn. }{\b 1}: 312 (1864). Stems 30-50 cm, with erecto-patent branches. Basal leaves up to 6 cm, hispid, oblong, pinnatifid, with 4 or 5(-7) very unequal, oblong lobes, interspersed with a few smaller lobes; cauline leaves similar. Raceme somewhat dense, elongating in fruit. Petals 5 mm. Silicula 5-8 mm.{\i  Dry places.• S. France}. Ga.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 27. B. polyclada} Jordan,{\i  loc. cit.} (1864). Like {\b 23} but basal leaves obovate-oblong to oblong-subpinnatifid, with 3-5 ovate-oblong or oblong lobes on each side, hispid; petals 5-6 mm; silicula 6-7 × 9-11 mm.{\i  Rocks. • S.E. France, westwards to Narbonne}.Ga.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 28. B. lusitanica} Jordan,{\i  op. cit.} 315 (1864). Stems 40-60 cm, stout, erect, branched, hispid. Basal leaves up to 8 cm, regularly and deeply toothed, with 3-6 teeth on each side; cauline leaves numerous or few. Sepals 2·5 mm; petals 5 mm. Silicula 6-10 × 11-14 mm. 2n = 54. •{\i  Portugal; W. Spain.} Hs Lu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 A large-fruited variant, with silicula 8-12 × 14-18 mm, has been described from Portugal (Estremadura).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 29. B. mediterranea} Jordan,{\i  op. cit.} 313 (1864) ({\i B. stricta }Jordan). Stems 40-70 cm, robust, hispid below, branched from about the middle, with patent branches. Basal leaves rosulate 6-8 × 1-2 cm, linear-oblong, pinnatifid, with 3-6 remote teeth on each side, sometimes interspersed with smaller teeth; lower cauline leaves numerous, upper cauline leaves few. Raceme rather dense. Sepals 2·5-3 mm; petals 4-5 mm. Silicula 6-7 × 9-12 mm . 2n = 18.{\i  Dry places. • S. France, E. Spain.} Ga Hs.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 30. B. nicaeensis} Jordan, {\i op. cit.} 314 (1864). Stems 40-50 cm, strict, hirsute and scabrid below, with erecto-patent branches above. Basal leaves up to 13 × 2 cm, hispid, scabrid, lanceolate, acute, with 4-6 short lobes on each side; cauline leaves numerous. Petals 6 mm. Silicula 6-7 × 11-12 mm.{\i  Dry places. • S.E. France; N.W. & C. Italy.} Ga It.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 31. B. intermedia} Gouan,{\i  Obs. Bot.} 42 (1773) ({\i B. pyrenaica} Huet). Stems 10-20 cm. Basal leaves 2-3·5 × 1-1·5 cm, hispid or rarely subglabrous, obovate, or cuneate, very obtuse and subentire or sinuate-lobed, with 1-3 lobes on each side; cauline leaves few, small. Petals 4·5 mm. Silicula 5-6 × 9-10 mm. 2n = 18. •{\i  Pyrenees; N. & C. Spain. }Ga Hs.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 32. B. guillonii} Jordan,{\i  Diagn. }{\b 1}: 302 (1864). Stems 40-60 cm, slightly pubescent, with patent branches. Basal leaves deeply
\par

\par
397}
\par