{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 sinuate-dentate, with triangular-acute, sinuate lobes; cauline leaves numerous, more or less pinnatifid or deeply toothed. Sepals 2·5-3 mm; petals 4-6 mm. Silicula 6-7 × 10-12 mm.{\i  Dry places. • W. France.} Ga.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 33. B. valentina} (L.) Heywood, {\i Feddes Repert.}{\b  66}: 155 (1962) ({\i B. stenophylla} Dufour, {\i B. tenuicaulis} Jordan, {\i Sisymbrium valentinum} L.). Rhizome woody; stems 30-50 cm, simple or slightly branched, hispid below. Basal leaves 6-8 × 0·2-0·5 cm (excluding the teeth), linear, deeply toothed, with 1 or 2 acute teeth on each side (or entire), usually with setiform hairs or subglabrous; cauline leaves few, linear-setaceous. Sepals 2-3 mm; petals 5-6 mm. Silicula 3·5-6 × 6-11 mm. 2n = 18.{\i  Dry places. C., E. & S. Spain.} Hs.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Variable in the size and toothing of the leaves, and in the indumentum.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Smaller, less woody plants with subentire or shallowly toothed basal leaves and glabrous stems have been called{\b  B. atropurpurea} Mateo & Figuerola, {\i Fl. Analit. Prov. Valencia} 370 (1987). They are probably not specifically distinct from {\b 33}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Ser.{\i  Lyratae} Malinovski. Annuals or rarely perennials. Petals gradually attenuate at the base, not auriculate. Lateral nectaries intrastaminal .
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 34. B. lyrata} L.,{\i  Mantissa Alt.} 254 (1771) ({\i B. microcarpa} DC., {\i B. scutulata} Boiss. & Reuter). Annual; stems 15-40 cm, slender, with divaricate branches as long as the main stem arising from the base. Raceme rather dense, elongating in fruit. Basal leaves few, up to 10 × 1·5 cm, lyrate or sinuate-dentate, the apex obtuse. Sepals 2 mm; petals 4 mm; filaments with a wide membranous wing below or above the middle. Silicula 2·5-4 mm. 2n = 12.{\i  Schistose soils. S.W. Spain} ({\i Cádiz prov.}). Hs. ({\i N.W. Africa}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 35. B. baetica} Boiss. & Reuter in Boiss.,{\i  Diagn. Pl. Or. Nov.}{\b  3}({\b 1}): 42 (1853) ({\i B. apula} auct. non L.). Annual; stems 15-50 cm, simple or branched. Basal leaves 6(-10) × 1·8-3 cm, usually rosulate, obovate-cuneate, sinuate-dentate or denticulate with acute teeth, roughly hairy, mainly on the veins. Raceme dense, elongating greatly in fruit; pedicels patent. Sepals 2 mm; petals 4-4·5 mm; filaments filiform. Silicula 3-5 × 6-9·5 mm. 2n = 16.{\i  Dry places. S. Spain.} Hs.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 36. B. maritima} Ten.,{\i  Prodr. Fl. Nap. }38 (1811) ({\i B. lyrata} auct., non L.). Annual; stems up to 60 cm, simple or branched. Basal leaves up to 18 × 5-6 cm, numerous, densely rosulate, lyrate, attenuate into petiole; terminal lobe broadly ovate; all lobes entire or toothed, hairy. Raceme rather dense, elongate in fruit. Sepals 3 mm; petals 6 mm; filaments filiform. Silicula 3·5-5 × 7-10 mm. 2n = 16.{\i  Dry places. • W. Italy, Sardegna, Sicilia.} It Sa Si.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 37. B. didyma} L.,{\i  Sp. Pl.} 653 (1753) ({\i B. apula} L.,{\i  B. ciliata} DC., {\i B. columnae} Ten.). Annual; stems up to 40 cm, simple or branched. Basal leaves up to 8 × 2·5 cm, rosulate or not, obovate-cuneate, dentate or denticulate. Raceme dense even in fruit; pedicels erect. Sepals 2 mm; petals 4 mm; filaments filiform. Silicula 4·5-7 × 9-12·5 cm. 2n = 16.{\i  Dry places. C. & E. Mediterranean region}. Al Co Cr Gr It Ju Sa Si.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b B. eriocarpa} DC.,{\i  Ann. Mus. Hist. Nat.} ({\i Paris}) {\b 18}: 298 (1811), probably native in N.W. Africa, and doubtfully distinct from{\b  37}, has been recorded in error from Italy and Corse.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 38. B. raphanifolia} Poiret, {\i Voy. Barb. }{\b 2}:198 (1789) ({\i B. radicata} Cosson & Durieu). Perennial with woody rhizome; stems up to 1 m, branched, hirsute below. Basal leaves up to 24 × 6 cm, laxly rosulate, lyrate-pinnatipartite, with a large terminal, ovate, toothed segment and 2-6 small, entire or sinuate-dentate lobes on each margin. Raceme lax; pedicels erecto-patent. Sepals 2 mm; petals 5 mm; filaments more or less filiform. Silicula 6-7 × 11-13 mm. 2n = 16.{\i  S.W. Italy; Sicilia.} It Si. ({\i N.W. Africa}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Sect. JONDRABA Reichenb. ({\i Jondraba} Medicus). Lateral sepals saccate or spurred at the base; petals large, long-clawed, the limb patent. Silicula with a translucent margin.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 39. B. auriculata} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 652 (1753). Stems 25-50 cm, hispid below, glabrous or subglabrous above. Basal leaves oblong, sinuate-dentate (or subentire, var. erigerifolia DC.), long-petiolate; cauline leaves auriculate-amplexicaul, sessile. Raceme many-flowered, remaining compact in fruit. Sepals with a short spur; petals up to 15 mm. Silicula 7-10 × 12-18 mm, broadly cordate, not emarginate at the apex, the wings excurrent on the style; style up to 10 mm. 2n = 16.{\i  Cultivated fields and dry places. • W. Mediterranean region; Portugal.} Bl Ga Hs ?It Lu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 40. B. cichoriifolia} Loisel.,{\i  Fl. Gall.} 167 (1810) ({\i B. hispida} DC.). Like {\b 39} but stems villous or hispid above; raceme elongating in fruit; spur of sepals long and slender; silicula emarginate at both the base and the apex, the wings not excurrent on the style. 2n = 16.{\i  Rocks and dry places. • S. Europe,from the Pyrenees to Crna Gora, extending northwards to the Jura.} Ga He Hs It Ju.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 79.         Megacarpaea}          DC.
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc  By D.A. Webb.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Perennial; hairs unbranched. Sepals not saccate. Fruit a large, angusti-septate, deeply 2-lobed silicula; lobes flat, broadly winged, 1-seeded.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. M. megalocarpa} (Fischer ex DC.) Schischkin ex B. Fedtsch. in Komarov,{\i  Fl. URSS}{\b  8}: 543 (1939) ({\i M. laciniata} DC.). Stem 20-40 cm, branched above; hairs stiff or crisped. Basal leaves up to 15 cm, petiolate, oblong-elliptical in outline, pinnatisect with many irregularly and acutely toothed lobes; cauline leaves similar but smaller and sessile. Inflorescence a panicle. Flowers irregularly monoecious, those in the apical part of each branch male, in the basal part female. Female flowers without perianth; male flowers with sepals and with petals c. 10 mm, linear-oblong. Intermediate flowers sometimes present, with smaller, white petals and variously developed stamens and gynoecium. Lobes of silicula 15-20 mm in diameter, suborbicular; wing 4-6 mm wide.{\i  Dry steppes and semideserts. S.E. Russia, W. Kazakhstan.} Rs(E). ({\i C. Asia}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 80.         Lepidium}              L.
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc By †J. de Carvalho e Vasconcellos (Ed.1) revised by
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc   J.R. Akeroyd & T.C.G. Rich (Ed.2)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Annuals to perennials, sometimes small shrubs; papillose or with usually unbranched hairs. Flowers small, in dense, terminal, ebracteate racemes. Sepals not saccate; petals white (rarely yellow or absent); stamens 2, 4 or 6. Fruit an angusti-septate silicula; valves strongly keeled, winged; style short or absent. Seeds usually 2, one pendent from the apex of each loculus.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 In addition to the species described below, several others occur in Europe as casuals.
\par

\par
398}
\par