{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 Literature: A. Thellung,{\i  Neue Denkschr. Schweiz. Naturf. Ges.} {\b  41}: 1-340 (1907). B. Jonsell, {\i Bot. Not.}{\b  128}: 20-46 (1975).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Wing of the silicula connate with the lower part of the style;
\par
  silicula at least 4 mm
\par
2 Middle and upper cauline leaves cuneate at the base
\par
3 Pedicels 1-2 mm in fruit ............................................................. {\b 5. spinosum}
\par
3 Pedicels (2-)3-6 mm in fruit .......................................................... {\b 6. sativum}
\par
2 Middle and upper cauline leaves amplexicaul
\par
4 Annual or biennial; silicula densely covered with small,
\par
  scale-like vesicles; style usually not projecting beyond
\par
  the apical notch of the wing ........................................................ {\b 1. campestre}
\par
4 Perennial; silicula with few or no vesicles; style projecting
\par
  beyond the apical notch of the wing
\par
5 Plant grey-pubescent; silicula hairy, at least when young .............. {\b 4. hirtum}
\par
5 Plant sparsely or shortly hairy; silicula usually glabrous
\par
  even when young
\par
6 Pedicels glabrous in fruit ............................................................... {\b 2. villarsii}
\par
6 Pedicels hairy in fruit ......................................................... {\b 3. heterophyllum}
\par
1 Wing of the silicula not connate with the style; silicula
\par
  usually less than 4 mm
\par
7 Silicula ± conspicuously winged and notched; style usually
\par
  shorter than or equalling notch
\par
8 Small shrub; all leaves linear, entire ......................................... {\b 7. subulatum}
\par
8 Annual or biennial; at least the lower and middle cauline
\par
  leaves toothed or pinnately divided
\par
9 Petals longer than the sepals
\par
10 Upper cauline leaves pinnatifid; silicula c. 1·5 mm ...... {\b 8. cardamines}
\par
10 Upper cauline leaves entire to dentate; silicula 2-4 mm .. {\b 9. virginicum}
\par
9  Petals shorter than the sepals or absent
\par
11 Upper cauline leaves pinnatifid; stem with long,
\par
   unbranched hairs .................................................................... {\b 11. bonariense}
\par
11 Upper cauline leaves entire or dentate; stem glabrous,
\par
   papillose or with scale-like trichomes
\par
12 Pedicels erect, appressed to stem, glabrous  .............. (vide {\b 13. africanum})
\par
12 Pedicels erecto-patent, not appressed to stem, papillose
\par
   at least on upper side
\par
13 Most cauline leaves entire or subentire; silicula
\par
   with entire or slightly notched apex
\par
14 Stem papillose; silicula usually more than 3 mm;
\par
   sepals c. 1 mm ...................................................................... {\b 10. densiflorum}
\par
14 Stem glabrous; silicula less than 3 mm;
\par
   sepals 0·5-0·75 mm ............................................................. {\b 14. pinnatifidum}
\par
13 Middle cauline leaves often pinnatifid or dentate;
\par
   silicula distinctly notched at the apex
\par
15 Silicula not more than 2 mm wide
\par
16 Petals 0 or very minute; pedicels papillose all round ............... {\b 12. ruderale}
\par
16 Petals 1/2 -2/3 as long as the sepals; pedicels
\par
   papillose on the upper side ...................................................... {\b 13. africanum}
\par
15 Silicula at least 2 mm wide
\par
17 Apex of infructescence with curved, somewhat appressed papillae
\par
   ................................................................................................... {\b 9. virginicum}
\par
17 Apex of infructescence with minute, straight papillae ...... {\b 10. densiflorum}
\par
7  Silicula usually not winged, entire or slightly notched; if
\par
   notched, style longer than notch
\par
18 Petals yellow; leaves strongly dimorphic, the lower 2 or
\par
   3-pinnatifid, the upper suborbicular, entire, with broad, rounded
\par
   lobes completely enclosing the stem and overlapping .......... {\b 15. perfoliatum}
\par
18 Petals white; leaves not strongly dimorphic, the upper
\par
   without broad, rounded lobes enclosing the stem
\par
19 Annual or biennial; petals usually shorter than the sepals .{\b 14. pinnatifidum}
\par
19 Perennial; petals equalling or longer than the sepals
\par
20 Cauline leaves linear to linear-spathulate or pinnatisect,
\par
   with narrow lobes
\par
21 Basal leaves pinnatisect, linear to linear-lanceolate,
\par
   with narrow lobes; petals about twice as long as the sepals;
\par
   silicula c. 2 × 1-1·25 mm ............................................................. {\b 18. lyratum}
\par
21 Basal leaves oblanceolate to oblong, dentate or pinnately lobed
\par
   with broad lobes; petals equalling or up to 1½ times as
\par
   long as the sepals; silicula 2·5-4 × 1·5-3 mm ................... {\b 19. graminifolium}
\par
20 Cauline leaves ovate, elliptical or lanceolate, entire
\par
22 Stem papillose; ripe silicula distinctly reticulate-alveolate
\par
   ............................................................................................ {\b 16. cartilagineum}
\par
22 Stem glabrous; ripe silicula smooth or faintly reticulate
\par
   .................................................................................................. {\b 17. latifolium}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Sect. LEPIA (Desv.) DC. Middle and upper cauline leaves amplexicaul. Silicula broadly winged above, the wing connate with the lower part of the style. Stamens 6.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. L. campestre} (L.) R. Br. in Aiton,{\i  Hort. Kew}. ed. 2,{\b  4}: 88 (1812). Annual or biennial 20-60 cm, densely and shortly hairy. Basal leaves petiolate, ovate to obovate, obtuse, entire to slightly lobed; upper cauline leaves numerous, ovate to oblong, more or less dentate, with narrow, acute auricles. Sepals c. 1·5 mm; petals 1·5-2·6 mm; anthers yellow. Pedicels 5-6 mm in fruit, shortly hairy. Silicula 4-6·5 × 3·5-5·5 mm, sparsely to densely covered with small, scale-like vesicles, otherwise glabrous; style 0·1-0·7 mm, not or only slightly projecting beyond the apical notch. 2n = 16.{\i  Throughout Europe except for a few islands and much of the north-east.} All except Az Bl Cr Fa Rs(N) Sa Sb; only as a casual in Is.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. L. villarsii} Gren. & Godron,{\i  Fl. Fr.}{\b  1}: 150 (1847). Perennial 15-45 cm, grey-green, sparsely hairy. Basal leaves long-petiolate, obovate or broadly elliptical, entire; middle and upper cauline leaves numerous, narrowly triangular. Sepals 2-2·5 mm; petals almost twice as long as the sepals; anthers violet. Pedicels 5-7 mm in fruit, glabrous. Silicula 4-7 × 2·5-5 mm, winged for about ¼ of its total length, usually glabrous; style at least 1 mm, projecting beyond the apical notch. •{\i  French Alps and mountains of N.E. Spain}. Ga Hs.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b villarsii} ({\i L. pratense} (Serres ex Gren. & Godron) Rouy & Fouc.): Apex of silicula broad, distinctly notched even when young.{\i  Mountain grassland. French Alps}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp.{\b  reverchonii} (Debeaux) Breistr., {\i Bull. Soc. Sci. Dauph.}{\b  61}: 640 (1947) ({\i L. reverchonii} Debeaux): Apex of silicula gradually narrowed into the style when young, rarely with a slight notch when mature. {\i  Mountains of E. & N.E. Spain}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Plants with leaves glabrous or subglabrous, pedicels 5-6 mm in fruit, and silicula c. 7 × 6 mm, from S.E. Spain, have been called {\b L. ramburei} Boiss., {\i Voy. Bot. Midi Esp. }{\b 2}: 52 (1939), and may represent a third subspecies.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 3. L. heterophyllum} Bentham, {\i Cat. Pl. Pyr. Bas-Languedoc} 95
\par

\par
399}
\par