{\rtf1\ansi \deff4\deflang1033{\fonttbl{\f4\froman\fcharset0\fprq2 Times New Roman;}}{\colortbl;\red0\green0\blue0;\red0\green0\blue255;\red0\green255\blue255;\red0\green255\blue0;\red255\green0\blue255;\red255\green0\blue0;\red255\green255\blue0;\red255\green255\blue255;\red0\green0\blue128;\red0\green128\blue128;\red0\green128\blue0;\red128\green0\blue128;\red128\green0\blue0;\red128\green128\blue0;\red128\green128\blue128;\red192\green192\blue192;}{\stylesheet{\widctlpar \f4\fs20\lang2057 \snext0 Normal;}{\*\cs10 \additive Default Paragraph Font;}}{\info{\author dddd}{\operator dddd}{\creatim\yr1998\mo11\dy11\hr16\min54}{\revtim\yr1998\mo11\dy11\hr16\min55}{\version2}{\edmins1}{\nofpages4}{\nofwords995}{\nofchars5674}{\*\company  }{\vern57431}}\widowctrl\ftnbj\aenddoc\hyphcaps0 \fet0\sectd \linex0 {\*\pnseclvl1\pnucrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl2\pnucltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl3\pndec\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl4\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl5\pndec\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl6\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl7\pnlcrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl8\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl9\pnlcrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}
\pard\plain \li200\ \f4\fs20\lang2057 {\fs28 17 Silicula 7-10 mm, with erect, acuminate lobes forming an acute,
\par    deep notch; leaves linear-lanceolate ........................................ }{\b\fs28 14. umbellata}{\fs28 
\par 14 Leaves all, or at least the lower ones, pectinate-toothed,
\par    pinnatifid or pinnatisect with linear segments
\par 18 Stems erect, branched above; flowering-branches long, straight,
\par    leafless; corymbs convex
\par 19 Leaves pinnatifid or pinnatisect with linear segments; silicula
\par    glabrous; plants rugose-papillose or scarcely pubescent ............. }{\b\fs28 17. pinnata}{\fs28 
\par 19 Leaves pectinate-toothed; silicula papillose-verrucose;
\par     plant hispid .................................................................................. }{\b\fs28 18. crenata}{\fs28 
\par 18 Stems diffuse and branched from the base; flowering branches flexuous
\par    and leafy, or leafless for a short distance only; corymbs flat
\par 20 Lower leaves pinnatifid with 1 or 2 pairs of segments;
\par     outer petals scarcely radiating .................................................... }{\b\fs28 19. odorata}{\fs28 
\par 20 Lower leaves regularly pectinate-pinnatifid with 3 or
\par    4 pairs of segments; outer petals distinctly radiating ........... }{\b\fs28 20. sampaioana}{\fs28 
\par 
\par }
\pard \ {\fs28    }{\b\fs28 1. I. semperflorens}{\fs28  L.,}{\i\fs28  Sp. Pl.}{\fs28  648 (1753). Small, evergreen, procumbent, diffuse, glabrous shrub up to 80 cm, branched above, with herbaceous flowering stems. Leaves thick, entire, flat; lower leaves 30-70 \'d7 7-18 mm, broadly spathulate; upper leaves oblong-spathulate and much smaller. Inflorescence corymbose, but elongating in fruit. Petals white. Silicula 5-8 \'d7 10-14 mm, ovate-rhombic, very narrowly winged; notch almost absent. 2n = 22 (44).}{\i\fs28  Rock-crevices on maritime cliffs. \bullet  Sicilia and W. coast of Italy; cultivated elsewhere for ornament, and sometimes naturalized.}{\fs28  It Si [Rm].
\par 
\par The only winter-flowering species.
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 2. I. sempervirens}{\fs28  L., }{\i\fs28 loc. cit.}{\fs28  (1753) (}{\i\fs28 I. garrexiana}{\fs28  All., }{\i\fs28 I. serrulata}{\fs28  Vis.). Small, evergreen, procumbent, diffuse, glabrous shrub with herbaceous, flexuous, lateral shoots 10-25 cm. Leaves 2\'b75-5 mm wide, oblong-spathulate, obtuse, entire, thick, flat. Inflorescence racemose, elongating in fruit. Petals white, sometimes flushed with lilac. Silicula 6-7 mm, orbicular-ovate, broadly winged from the base; lobes subobtuse; notch acute. 2n = 22.}{\i\fs28  Rock-crevices on high mountains. Mediterranean region; cultivated elsewhere for ornament, and occasionally naturalized}{\fs28 . Al Cr Ga Gr Hs It Ju [Br Rm]
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 3. I. saxatilis}{\fs28  L.,}{\i\fs28  Cent. Pl.}{\b\fs28  2}{\fs28 : 23 (1756). Small, evergreen,procumbent, diffuse shrub with straight, terminal flowering branches. Leaves up to 20 mm, semi-cylindrical on the non-flowering shoots but flat on the flowering stems, entire, linear, rather acute, mucronulate, at first ciliate but soon glabrous. Inflorescence corymbose in flower but elongating in fruit. Petals white. Silicula 5-8(-9) \'d7 4\'b75-6(-7) mm, obovate, broadly winged from the base; lobes rounded. \bullet }{\i\fs28 S. Europe.}{\fs28  Ga Gr He Hs It Ju Rm RS(K)
\par 
\par  (}{\b\fs28 a}{\fs28 ) Subsp.}{\b\fs28  saxatilis}{\fs28  (}{\i\fs28 I. vermiculata}{\fs28  Willd., }{\i\fs28 I. zanardinii}{\fs28  Vis.): Glabrous, up to 15 cm, with reddish twigs. Leaves up to 1\'b75 mm wide. Silicula with a shallow notch. 2n = 22.}{\i\fs28  Rock-crevices. Throughout the range of the species}{\fs28 .
\par  (}{\b\fs28 b}{\fs28 ) Subsp.}{\b\fs28  cinerea}{\fs28  (Poiret) P.W. Ball & Heywood, }{\i\fs28 Feddes Repert.}{\b\fs28  64}{\fs28 : 62 (1961) (}{\i\fs28 I. cinerea}{\fs28  Poiret, }{\i\fs28 I. subvelutina}{\fs28  DC., }{\i\fs28 I. latealata}{\fs28  Porta & Rigo): Greyish-green, velutinous, up to 40 cm. Leaves up to 2 mm wide. Notch of silicula acute.}{\i\fs28  Gypsaceous hills. C. & S. Spain}{\fs28 .
\par 
\par Subglabrous plants that otherwise resemble subsp. (}{\b\fs28 b}{\fs28 ), from E. Spain (Valencia prov.), have been called subsp.}{\b\fs28  valentina}{\fs28  Mateo & Figuerola, }{\i\fs28 Fl. Analit. Prov. Valencia}{\fs28  370 (1987).
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 4. I. contracta}{\fs28  Pers.,}{\i\fs28  Syn. Pl.}{\b\fs28  2}{\fs28 : 186 (1806). Laxly caespitose perennial with a woody stock bearing numerous, erect, herbaceous, puberulent stems 15-30 cm. Leaves up to 30 \'d7 2 mm, rather fleshy, usually ciliolate at the base, lower ones oblong-cuneate, with a few teeth near the apex, the cauline linear to narrowly linear-spathulate, entire. Inflorescence corymbose. Silicula 4-6 mm, orbicular-obovate, broadly winged from the base; lobes triangular, subacute; notch acute or obtuse.}{\i\fs28  W. & C. Iberian peninsula}{\fs28 . Hs Lu.(}{\i\fs28 N. Africa}{\fs28 .)
\par 
\par  (}{\b\fs28 a}{\fs28 ) Subsp.}{\b\fs28  contracta}{\fs28  (}{\i\fs28 I. linifolia}{\fs28  Loefl., non L., }{\i\fs28 I. reynevalii}{\fs28  Boiss. & Reuter): Petals deep purple. 2n = 14. }{\i\fs28 Dry, calcareous places. \bullet  C. Spain and E. Portugal}{\fs28 .
\par  (}{\b\fs28 b}{\fs28 ) Subsp. welwitschii (Boiss.) Moreno, }{\i\fs28 Collect. Bot.}{\fs28  (}{\b\fs28 Barcelona}{\fs28 ) }{\b\fs28 15}{\fs28 : 348 (1984) (}{\i\fs28 I. welwitschii }{\fs28 Boiss., }{\i\fs28 I. linifolia}{\fs28  subsp. }{\i\fs28 welwitschii}{\fs28  (Boiss.) Franco & P. Silva): Petals white or pink. 2n = 14.}{\i\fs28  Sandy, acid soils near the sea. \bullet  S.W. Spain, W. & S. Portugal}{\fs28 .
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 5. I. pruitii}{\fs28  Tineo, }{\i\fs28 Pl. Rar. Sic. Pug.}{\b\fs28  1}{\fs28 : 11 (1817) (incl. }{\i\fs28 I. carnosa}{\fs28  Waldst. & Kit., non Willd., }{\i\fs28 I. lagascana }{\fs28 DC., }{\i\fs28 I. tenoreana}{\fs28  DC., }{\i\fs28 I. integerrima}{\fs28  Moris,}{\i\fs28  I. jordanii}{\fs28  Boiss.,}{\i\fs28  I. granatensis}{\fs28  Boiss. & Reuter,}{\i\fs28  I. candolleana}{\fs28  Jordan, }{\i\fs28 I. spruneri}{\fs28  Jordan, }{\i\fs28 I. petraea}{\fs28  Jordan, }{\i\fs28 I. epirota}{\fs28  Hal\'e1csy, }{\i\fs28 I. grossii}{\fs28  Pau, }{\i\fs28 I. thracica}{\fs28  Stefanov, }{\i\fs28 I. contracta}{\fs28  sensu Willk., }{\i\fs28 I. glabrescens}{\fs28  Porta, }{\i\fs28 I. hegelmaieri}{\fs28  Willk., }{\i\fs28 I. paularensis}{\fs28  Pau). Low, caespitose, procumbent-ascending perennial or annual 3-15 cm. Leaves rather fleshy, entire or with a few teeth near the apex, obtuse, the lower obovate-spathulate, the upper narrower. Inflorescence corymbose, rather dense in fruit. Petals white to lilac. Silicula 6-8 mm, rectangular-elliptical, broadly winged; lobes triangular-acute, erect; notch deep, acute. 2n = 22.}{\i\fs28  Rock-crevices on high mountains. Mediterranean region.}{\fs28  Al Bu Ga Gr Hs It Ju Sa Si.
\par 
\par Extremely variable in habit and duration. Many variants have received specific names and some appear to be of restricted distribution.
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 6. I. spathulata}{\fs28  J.P. Bergeret,}{\i\fs28  Phytonomat. }{\b\fs28 3}{\fs28 : 3 (1784) (}{\i\fs28 I. nana}{\fs28  All.,}{\i\fs28  I. carnosa }{\fs28 Willd., }{\i\fs28 ?I. pilosa}{\fs28  Desv.). Small, glabrous or more or less pubescent perennial with 1 or more erect or ascending, simple stems 3-10 cm, leafy to the apex. Leaves rather fleshy, entire to sublobulate-dentate, obtuse, the lower broadly spathulate, the upper obovate-spathulate. Inflorescence a short, dense corymb. Petals purplish to white. Silicula 4-5 \'d7 5-5\'b75 mm, broadly ovate, narrowly winged; lobes short, subobtuse, convergent; notch very acute. }{\i\fs28 Rock-crevices and gravelly places on high mountains }{\fs28 (1500-2800 }{\i\fs28 m}{\fs28 ). \bullet }{\i\fs28  Pyrenees; Alpi Marittime; Appennini Ligure.}{\fs28  Hs It.
\par 
\par  (}{\b\fs28 a}{\fs28 ) Subsp.}{\b\fs28  spathulata}{\fs28  : Stems, leaves and pedicels more or less pubescent. Leaves entire or with 1 or 2 teeth near the apex. Pyrenees.
\par  (}{\b\fs28 b}{\fs28 ) Subsp.}{\b\fs28  nana}{\fs28  (All.) Heywood,}{\i\fs28  Feddes Repert.}{\b\fs28  69}{\fs28 : 61 (1964) (}{\i\fs28 I. nana}{\fs28  All.): Stems, leaves and pedicels glabrous. Much of leaf-margin distinctly and obtusely denticulate to sublobulate-dentate.}{\i\fs28  Alpi Marittime; Appennini Ligure}{\fs28 .
\par 
\par }{\b\fs28 I. bernardiana}{\fs28  Gren. & Godron, }{\i\fs28 Fl. Fr.}{\b\fs28  1}{\fs28 : 138 (1847), from the Pyrenees, is of uncertain affinity and may be another subspecies of}{\b\fs28  6}{\fs28 . It is annual or biennial, with linear-oblong, crenate or entire leaves, violet petals and a broadly ovate, hispid silicula contracted at the apex and with narrow, erect, acute lobes.
\par 
\par 391}
\par }