{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 10 Basal leaves usually more than 2 cm wide; petals at least 4 mm;
\par
   sepals 2-3·5 mm
\par
11 Inflorescence 10-15 cm; sepals c. 2 mm ................................. {\b 9. frutescens}
\par
11 Inflorescence less than 8 cm; sepals 3-3·5 mm ................ {\b 11. sempervirens}
\par
8  Leaves glabrous to hirsute, not tomentose
\par
12 Leaves more than 4 times as long as wide
\par
13 Leaves deeply toothed, lobed or pinnatifid
\par
14 Stems not more than 30 cm
\par
15 Silicula 3-4 × 6-9 mm
\par
16 Inflorescence dense, corymbose; petals 6 mm .................... {\b 17. arvernensis}
\par
16 Inflorescence lax; petals 4-5 mm ......................................... {\b 21. brevicaulis}
\par
15 Silicula 6-7 × 9-12 mm
\par
17 Petals 6 mm
\par
18 Basal leaves 5-7 cm, with 1-3 opposite teeth ...................... {\b 19. divionensis}
\par
18 Basal leaves 9-13 cm, with 3-5 subopposite teeth .............. {\b 20. controversa}
\par
17 Petals 4-5 mm
\par
19 Basal leaves polymorphic, spathulate, triangular or lanceolate
\par
   ..................................................................................................... {\b 7. gredensis}
\par
19 Basal leaves all lanceolate or linear to oblong .......................... {\b 1. laevigata}
\par
14 Stems 30-70 cm
\par
20 Basal leaves 0·2-0·5 cm wide, excluding teeth ....................... {\b 33. valentina}
\par
20 Basal leaves more than 0·5 cm wide
\par
21 Cauline leaves absent or all minute ............................................ {\b 2. scaposa}
\par
21 Cauline leaves well developed, but decreasing in size towards
\par
   apex of stem
\par
22 Silicula 4-6 × 7-9(-10) mm
\par
23 Basal leaves with 2-4 remote teeth on each side;
\par
   petals 4 mm ................................................................................. {\b 16. lamottii}
\par
23 Basal leaves with 3-5 remote teeth each side interspersed with
\par
   smaller teeth; petals 5-6 mm .......................... ({\b 22-27}).{\b  coronopifolia }group
\par
22 Silicula 6-10 × 9-14 mm
\par
24 Basal leaves ± spathulate; sinuate-dentate ................................. {\b 3. flexuosa}
\par
24 Basal leaves linear-oblong or lanceolate; pinnatifid or deeply toothed
\par
25 Basal leaves deeply toothed but not pinnatifid
\par
26 Stem branches erect; basal leaves dentate, hispid .................. {\b 28. lusitanica}
\par
26 Stem branches patent; basal leaves sinuate-dentate,
\par
   sparsely tomentose ..................................................................... {\b 32. guillonii}
\par
25 Basal leaves ± pinnatifid
\par
27 Stems up to 70 cm, with patent branches; petals 4-5 mm  {\b 29. mediterranea}
\par
27 Stems up to 50 cm, with erecto-patent branches;
\par
   petals 6 mm ............................................................................. {\b 30. nicaeensis}
\par
13 Leaves entire or slightly sinuate-dentate
\par
28 Basal leaves up to 0·5 cm wide (excluding teeth)
\par
29 Plant 7-15 cm; silicula 3 × 6 mm ............................................. {\b 12. glacialis}
\par
29 Plant usually more than 15 cm; silicula 3·5-8 × 6-14 mm
\par
30 Basal leaves 3-5 cm .................................................................. {\b 1. laevigata}
\par
30 Basal leaves 6-8 cm ................................................................ {\b 33. valentina}
\par
28 Basal leaves more than 0·5 cm wide
\par
31 Basal leaves spathulate, without 2 glands at the base, the indumentum
\par
   often villous ............................................................................... {\b 8. neustriaca}
\par
31 Basal leaves various, if spathulate, then polymorphic or with
\par
   2 glands at the base, the indumentum not villous
\par
32 Stems not more than 30 cm
\par
33 Raceme dense, corymbose .................................................. {\b 17. arvernensis}
\par
33 Raceme dense or lax, not corymbose
\par
34 Leaves with 2 glands at the base ............................................... {\b 1. laevigata}
\par
34 Leaves without 2 glands at the base ......................................... {\b 7. gredensis}
\par
32 Stems usually more than 30 cm
\par
35 Leaves with 2 glands at the base; stems usually ± leafy ........... {\b 1. laevigata}
\par
35 Leaves without glands at the base; stems sparingly leafy
\par
36 Basal leaves pubescent to hirsute (on volcanic debris) ............. {\b 16. lamottii}
\par
36 Basal leaves setose
\par
37 Cauline leaves absent or minute .................................................. {\b 2. scaposa}
\par
37 Cauline leaves present, the lower similar to basal leaves .......... {\b 3. flexuosa}
\par
12 Leaves not more than 4 times as long as wide
\par
38 Stems at least 30 cm
\par
39 Basal leaves ± regularly toothed ............................. ({\b 4-6}).{\b  variegata} group
\par
39 Basal leaves pinnatifid or pinnatilobed
\par
40 Leaf-lobes intermixed with small lobes
\par
41 Petals 5-6 mm; silicula c. 5 mm .................. ({\b 22-27}). {\b coronopifolia} group
\par
41 Petals 4-5 mm; silicula 6-7 mm ........................................ {\b 29. mediterranea}
\par
40 Leaf-lobes without smaller lobes intermixed
\par
42 Basal leaves 4-6 cm ...................................... ({\b 22-27}).{\b  coronopifolia }group
\par
42 Basal leaves 6-8 cm
\par
43 Silicula not more than 5 mm ......................... ({\b 22-27}).{\b  coronopifolia} group
\par
43 Silicula 6-7 mm
\par
44 Stems intricately branched from the base; petals 5-6 mm
\par
   ......................................................................... ({\b 22-27}).{\b  coronopifolia }group
\par
44 Stems branched from about the middle; petals 4-5 mm ... {\b 29. mediterranea}
\par
38 Stems not more than 30 cm
\par
45 Basal leaves 1-3 cm, less than 1 cm wide
\par
46 Silicula not more than 6 mm wide; basal leaves narrowly
\par
   linear to oblong .......................................................................... {\b 12. glacialis}
\par
46 Silicula at least 7 mm wide; basal leaves obovate-lanceolate
\par
   ................................................................................................... {\b 13. brevifolia}
\par
45 Basal leaves 2-8 cm, at least 1 cm wide
\par
47 Petals 3 mm; silicula 3·5-4 × 7 mm ..................................... {\b 18. sclerocarpa}
\par
47 Petals at least 4 mm; silicula 5-7 × 8-13 mm
\par
48 Basal leaves pinnatifid or pinnatilobed ......... ({\b 22-27}).{\b  coronopifolia} group
\par
48 Basal leaves sinuate-dentate to ± lobed, but not pinnatifid
\par
49 Basal leaves 2-3·5 mm ......................................................... {\b 31. intermedia}
\par
49 Basal leaves at least 4 mm
\par
50 Silicula 6 × 10 mm; basal leaves polymorphic ........................ {\b 7. gredensis}
\par
50 Silicula 5 × 8-9 mm; basal leaves cuneate or obovate-oblong, 
   not polymorphic
\par
51 Basal leaves with 1 or 2 teeth on each side, and 3 lobes
\par
   at the apex ................................................................................. {\b 14. fontqueri}
\par
51 Basal leaves with 3 or 4 teeth on each side ............................... {\b 15. rotgesii}
\par

\par
394}
\par