{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 absent. Leaves spirally arranged, linear, flattened or tetragonal, distinctly petiolate; resin-canal 1; leaves borne on prominent, persistent cushions. Male cones in leaf-axils of previous year's twigs. Female cones ripening in the first year, pendent, ovoid or cylindrical; scales persistent; bracts rarely exserted.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 Buds globose; leaves with white stomatal bands occupying
\par
    almost the whole of lower surface ......................................... {\b 1. heterophylla}
\par
Buds ovoid; leaves with narrow, white stomatal bands on
\par
    lower surface ............................................................................ {\b 2. canadensis}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. T. heterophylla} (Rafin.) Sarg.,{\i  Silva N. Amer. }{\b 12:} 73 (1899) ({\i T. mertensiana} auct.). Tree up to 70 m, with a narrow, pyramidal crown. Buds globose. Leaves 6-20 mm, flattened, with 2 broad, white stomatal bands, occupying almost the whole of the lower surface, obtuse. Female cone 20-25 mm, pale or reddish-brown.{\i  Occasionally planted for timber in N.W. Europe.} [Br Da Ga Ge Hb No.] ({\i W. North America.})
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. T. canadensis} (L.) Carrière, {\i Traité Gén. Conif.} 189 (1855) ({\i T. americana} (Miller) Farwell). Tree up to 30 m, with a broad, pyramidal crown. Buds ovoid. Leaves 8-18 mm, with 2 narrow, white stomatal bands on lower surface. Female cone 15-20 mm, pale chestnut-brown. {\i Occasionally planted for timber.} [Ge.] ({\i North America}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 4.               Picea}                A. Dietr.
\par  

\pard\f0\fs24\qc  By J. Do Amaral Franco.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Evergreen trees with regularly whorled branches. Short shoots absent. Leaves spirally arranged, linear, flattened, or tetragonal; resin-canals 0-2; leaves borne on persistent, peg-like projections. Male cones in leaf-axils of previous year's twigs. Female cones ripening in the first year, ovoid or cylindrical; scales persistent; bracts minute, not exserted.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Leaves flattened, with 2 white stomatal bands only on the upper surface
\par
2 Leaves 15-25 mm, pungent; female cone 6-10 cm ..................... {\b 6. sitchensis}
\par
2 Leaves 8-18 mm, obtuse and mucronulate; female cone 3-6 cm .. {\b 7. omorika} 
\par
1 Leaves tetragonal, with stomatal bands on all 4 sides
\par
3 Twigs glabrous or with scattered, minute pubescence
\par
4 Female cone 3·5-5 cm; leaves with a strong, unpleasant
\par
  smell when crushed ........................................................................... {\b 3. glauca}
\par
4 Female cone 6-18 cm; leaves not smelling unpleasantly when crushed
\par
5 Female cone 10-18 cm; leaves dark green ......................................... {\b 1. abies}
\par
5 Female cone 6-10 cm; leaves bluish-green ................................... {\b 5. pungens}
\par
3 Twigs densely and shortly pubescent
\par
6 Leaves 6-10 mm, obtuse .............................................................. {\b 2. orientalis}
\par
6 Leaves 10-25 mm, acute
\par
7 Twigs orange-brown; leaves 10-18 mm; scales rhombic-obovate or 
\par
  obovate,  with rounded and entire or emarginate apex ........................ {\b 1. abies}
\par
7 Twigs pale yellowish-brown; leaves 15-25 mm; scales rhombic-
\par
  oblong,narrowed, truncate and erose at apex .......................... {\b 4. engelmannii}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. P. abies} (L.) Karsten,{\i  Deutsche Fl.} 324 (1881) ({\i Pinus abies} L.). Up to 60 m. Twigs usually orange-brown. Leaves tetragonal, with stomatal bands on all 4 sides, pungent, dark green.{\i  N. Europe, extending southwards in the mountains to N. Greece and Bulgaria; widely planted elsewhere for timber}. Al Au Bu Cz Fe Ga Ge Gr He Hu It Ju No Po Rm Rs(N, B, C, W) Su [Be Br Da Hb Ho Hs].
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp.{\b  abies} ({\i Abies excelsa} (Lam.) Poiret,{\i  Picea excelsa} (Lam.) Link, {\i P. vulgaris} Link): Up to 60 m. Twigs glabrous or with scattered, minute hairs. Leaves 10-25 mm. Female cone 10-18 × 2·5-4 cm, cylindrical; scales rhombic-obovate, with truncate, and erose or emarginate apex. 2n = 22, 24. •{\i  Throughout the range of the species in Europe; cultivated as a forest tree in N., C. & W. Europe}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp.{\b  obovata }(Ledeb.) Hultén,{\i  Svensk Bot. Tidskr.}{\b  43:} 388 (1949) ({\i P. obovata} Ledeb., {\i P. abies} subsp.{\i  europaea} (Tepl.) Hyl.): Up to 30(-50) m. Twigs densely pubescent with short hairs. Leaves 10-18 mm. Female cone 6-8 cm, cylindric-ovoid; scales obovate, with rounded, sometimes emarginate apex. 2n = 24.{\i  N.E. Europe; locally in the Alps}.
\par

\parz

\pard\f0\fs28 Plants somewhat intermediate between subspp. ({\b a}) and ({\b b}) (subsp.{\i  alpestris} (Brügger) Domin, subsp.{\i  fennica} (Regel) Parfenov) occur in the Alps and N.E. Europe.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. P. orientalis} (L.) Link, {\i Linnaea}{\b  20:} 294 (1847). Up to 40(-60) m. Twigs densely pubescent, pale brown. Leaves 6-10 mm, tetragonal, with stomatal bands on all 4 sides, obtuse, dark green, shining, densely crowded and appressed. Female cone 6-9 cm, cylindric-ellipsoid; scales obovate, rounded and entire at the apex.{\i  Occasionally planted for timber on a small scale.} [Au Be It Tu.] ({\i S.W. Asia}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 3. P. glauca} (Moench) Voss,{\i  Mitt. Deutsch. Dendrol. Ges.}{\b  16:} 93 (1908). Up to 30 m. Twigs glabrous, greyish or pale brown. Leaves 8-18 mm, tetragonal, with stomatal bands on all 4 sides, acute or subacute, bluish-green, with a strong unpleasant smell when crushed. Female cone 3·5-5 cm, cylindric-oblong; scales suborbicular, rounded and entire at the apex.{\i  Planted for timber in N. Europe.} [Au Be Da Fe Is No.] ({\i N. North America.})
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 4. P. engelmannii} Parry ex Engelm., {\i Trans. Acad. Sci. St. Louis}{\b  2:} 212 (1863). Up to 50 m. Twigs minutely glandular-pubescent, pale yellowish-brown. Leaves 15-25 cm, tetragonal, with stomatal bands on all 4 sides, acute, usually bluish-green, with an unpleasant smell when crushed. Female cone 3·5-7·5 cm, cylindric-oblong scales rhombic-oblong, narrowed, truncate and erose at the apex.{\i  Planted for timber, mainly in N. Europe.} [Au Be Da Fe Is No. ({\i W. North America.})
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b P. mariana }(Miller) Britton, E.E. Sterns & Poggenb., {\i Prelim. Cat.} 71 (1888), from N. North America, a tree up to 30 m, with densely pubescent twigs, leaves 6-18 mm, glaucous, and female cone 2-3·5 cm, has been planted experimentally for timber in Europe.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b P. rubens} Sarg.,{\i  Silva N. Amer.}{\b  12:} 33 (1899), from N.E. North America, a tree up to 30 m, with densely pubescent twigs, leaves 10-15 mm, dark or yellowish-green, and female cone 3-4 cm, has also been planted experimentally.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 5. P. pungens} Engelm.,{\i  Gard. Chron.} nov. ser.,{\b  11:} 334 (1879). Up to 30(-50) m. Twigs glabrous, becoming yellowish-brown. Leaves 20-30 mm, tetragonal, with stomatal bands on all 4 sides, rigid, pungent, bluish-green. Female cone 6-10 cm, cylindric-oblong; scales rhombic-oblong, narrowed and erose at the apex. {\i Planted for timber, mainly in N. & C. Europe.} [Au Cz Ga He Is It No.] ({\i W.C. North America}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b P. asperata} Masters,{\i  Jour. Linn. Soc. London }({\i Bot.}) {\b 37:} 419 (1906),
\par

\par
39}
\par