{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 amplexicaul, the lower like the basal leaves, the upper linear, entire. Silicula 6-7 × 9-12 mm.{\i  Schistose rocks. • E. & C. Pyrenees.} Ga Hs.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    ({\b 4-6}).{\b  B. variegata} group. Glabrous or pubescent, rhizomatous perennials 40-100 cm, with broadly obovate, more or less toothed basal leaves.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Silicula 5-7 × 7·5-10 mm; sepals 2-2·5 mm ............................... {\b 4. variegata}
\par
Silicula 8-13 × 10-20 mm; sepals 3-4 mm
\par
2 Cauline leaves few; silicula 11 × 20 mm ............................. {\b 5. megacarpaea}
\par
2 Cauline leaves numerous; silicula 8 × 12 mm ............................... {\b 6. foliosa}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 4. B. variegata} Boiss. & Reuter in Boiss., {\i Diagn. Pl. Or. Nov.}{\b  3}({\b 1}): 44 (1853) ({\i B. laevigata }auct. hisp. pro parte, non L.). Rhizome woody, covered with remains of old leaves; stems 40-70 cm. Basal leaves laxly rosulate, obovate to obovate-oblong, more or less abruptly contracted into petiole, regularly and deeply toothed or irregularly sinuate-dentate or crenate, pubescent or subglabrous; cauline leaves semi-amplexicaul. Sepals 2-2·5 mm; petals 4-5 mm. Silicula 5-7 × 7·5-10 mm. 2n = 54.{\i  Dry places and mountain rocks. • S. Spain}. Hs.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 5. B. megacarpaea} Boiss. & Reuter, {\i loc. cit}. (1853). Stems up to 1 m. Basal leaves 7-10(-20) x 2-2·5(-6) cm, densely rosulate, sinuate-dentate, attenuate into petiole, with long and short hairs on upper surface; cauline leaves few, the lower resembling the basal in shape and size, abruptly decreasing in size at about the middle of the stem, the upper linear, entire. Sepals 3-4 mm; petals 6-8 mm. Silicula 8-13 × 13-20 mm. 2n = 54.{\i  Limestone rocks. • S. Spain.} Hs.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 6. B. foliosa} Mach.-Laur.,{\i  Bot. Arch. }({\i Konigsberg}) {\b 13}: 97 (1926). Like {\b 5} but basal leaves not rosulate, up to 6 × 1-2 cm, remotely and regularly toothed; cauline leaves numerous; silicula 5-8 × 10-12 mm. 2n = 54.{\i  Crevices of limestone rocks. • S.W. Spain} ({\i Serrania de Ronda}). Hs.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 7. B. gredensis} Guinea, {\i Anal. Inst. Bot. Cavanilles}{\b  21}: 398 (1963). Stems up to 30 cm, erect, pubescent. Basal leaves polymorphic, spathulate, triangular or lanceolate, entire, 2-dentate or 2- to 4-lobulate, the apex obtuse; cauline leaves few, oblong to oblanceolate, entire or toothed. Raceme very long. Sepals 2 mm; petals 4 mm. Silicula 6 × 10 mm. 2n = 18.{\i  Granite rocks. • W.C. Spain} ({\i Sierra de Gredos}). Hs.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 8. B. neustriaca} Bonnet,{\i  Bull. Soc. Dauph. Ech. Pl}{\b . 6}: 222 (1879). Stems 20-40 cm, simple or branched. Basal leaves 4-8 × 1-1·5 cm, erect, spathulate, slightly sinuate-dentate with 3 more or less equal teeth on each side, pubescent or villous, attenuate into a long petiole; cauline leaves broad, entire or dentate. Raceme dense, compact in flower, elongating in fruit. Sepals 2-5 mm; petals 4 mm. Silicula 6-7 × 10-11 mm. •{\i  N.E. France }({\i Seine Valley}). Ga.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 9. B. frutescens} Cosson, {\i Not. Pl. Crit.} 27 (1849) ({\i B. 'suffrutescens' }Willk., sphalm.). Rhizome black, woody; whole plant covered with dense, white tomentum; stems simple or branched, up to 50 cm. Basal leaves 20 × 6 cm, ovate and sinuate-dentate or lyrate; cauline leaves sessile or amplexicaul, the lower resembling the basal leaves. Inflorescence much-branched. Sepals 2 mm; petals 4 mm. Silicula 3·5-4 × 7 mm, with oblique valves, the margin continuous, with small swellings. 2n = 18.{\i  S.W. Spain; Islas Baleares.} Bl Hs.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b B. incana} Ten., {\i Fl. Neap. Prodr. App. Quinta }19 (1826), from S. Italy (Puglia and Calabria), like {\b 9} but with leaves oblong, regularly sinuate-dentate, with obtuse teeth, densely white-strigose, and silicula glabrous, the margin subundulate, has been seldom collected; its status is uncertain.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 10. B. vincentina} (Samp.) Rothm. ex Guinea,{\i  Feddes Repert.}{\b  69}: 148 (1964) ({\i B. laevigata} prol. {\i vincentina} Samp.). Rhizome thick, woody; stems 20-30 cm, erect. Basal leaves 5-6 × 1·5-2·5 cm, numerous, densely rosulate, obovate to obovate-oblong, sinuate-undulate, tomentose; cauline leaves minute. Raceme dense, elongating in fruit. Sepals 4 mm; petals 6 mm. Silicula very large, 9-11 × 16-19 mm, with a membranous margin.{\i  Sandy soil. • S.W. Portugal.} Lu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 11. B. sempervirens} L., {\i Mantissa Alt.} 255 (1771) (incl. {\i B. montana} Cav.,{\i  B. tomentosa }Lag. ex DC.,{\i  B. rosularis} Boiss. & Reuter,{\i  B. gibraltarica }Wilmott ex Guinea, {\i B. laevigata} auct. hisp. pro parte). Rhizome thick, woody, simple or branched, producing 1-several rosettes of leaves; stems up to 50 cm, simple or branched. Basal leaves 3-12 × 1-5 cm, oblong-lanceolate to broadly obovate or elliptic-spathulate, subentire to deeply sinuate-dentate, usually densely villous or tomentose; cauline leaves few, the lower resembling the basal in size and shape, the upper minute, linear. Raceme more or less dense-flowered. Sepals 3-3·5 mm; petals 5-7 mm. Silicula 4-7 × 7·5-12 mm. 2n = 18.{\i  Limestone rocks. S. & S.E. Spain; Islas Baleares.} Bl Hs.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 12. B. glacialis} (Boiss. & Reuter) Jordan,{\i  Diagn. }{\b 1}({\b 1}): 310 (1864) ({\i B. sempervirens} auct., non L.,{\i  B. secunda} Jordan). Rhizome long, thick and woody; stems 7-15 cm. Basal leaves 1-3 × 0·5 cm, densely rosulate, usually narrowly linear, rarely oblong, densely villous, the apex obtuse; cauline leaves 1-3, minute. Silicula 3 × 6 mm. 2n = 18.{\i  Mountains of S. Spain.} Hs.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 13. B. brevifolia} (Rouy & Fouc.) Guinea,{\i  Anales Inst. Bot. Cavanilles}{\b  21}: 394 (1963). Rhizomatous perennial 10-20 cm. Basal leaves 2 × 0·7 cm, densely rosulate, obovate-lanceolate, sinuate-dentate (rarely subentire), with 2 or 3 obtuse teeth on each side, sparsely hairy, the apex obtuse; cauline leaves few or absent. Silicula 3-4 × 7-8 mm.{\i  C. Pyrenees.} Ga ?Hs.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 14. B. fontqueri} Guinea & Heywood,{\i  loc. cit.} (1963) ({\i B. cuneata} (Font Quer) Font Quer ex Mach.-Laur., non Lag.). Rhizomatous perennial up to 20 cm. Basal leaves 4 × 1·5-2 cm, sparsely pubescent, laxly rosulate, cuneate, with 1 or 2 teeth on either side and 3-lobed at the apex, narrowed to the base. Petals 4 mm. Silicula 5 × 8-9 mm.{\i  Limestone rocks and screes, c.} 1300{\i  m. N.E. Spaits} ({\i near Tortosa}). Hs.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 15. B. rotgesii} Fouc.,{\i  Bull. Soe. Bot. Fr.}{\b  47}: 85 (1900). Stems 18-26 cm, slender, branched. Basal leaves 4-5 × 1·5-1·7 cm, obovate-oblong, deeply sinuate-dentate, with 3 or 4 obtuse teeth on each side, sparsely hispid. Petals 4-4·5 mm. Silicula 5 × 8·5 mm. 2n = 18.{\i  Schistose rocks. • Corse.} Co.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 16. B. lamottei} Jordan,{\i  Diagn. }{\b 1}({\b 1}): 302 (1864). Rhizome long, woody, producing rosette-bearing branches; stems 25-40 cm, slender, simple or branched, hairy below, glabrous above. Basal; leaves (4-)8-9 × 1-1·5 cm, pubescent to hirsute, more or less densely rosulate, linear-lanceolate to oblanceolate-spathulate, sinuate-dentate, with 2-4 remote teeth on each side, obtuse or subacute at the apex, attenuate into a long petiole at the base; cauline leaves few, semi-amplexicaul. Raceme long. Sepals 2 mm; petals 4 mm. Silicula 4-6 × 7-10 mm; style 2·5 mm. 2n = 18.{\i  Volcanic debris. • S.C. France. }Ga.
\par

\par
396}
\par