{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b I. bubanii} Deville, {\i Bull. Soc. Bot. Fr.}{\b  6}: 69 (1859), from rock-crevices in the French Pyrenees, is like {\b 6} but up to 18 cm, more robust, erect, with leaves all oblong-spathulate, petals twice as long, pink, and silicula 3-4 × 4 mm.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 7. I. aurosica} Chaix in Vill., {\i Hist. Pl. Dauph.}{\b  1}: 349 (1786). Small perennial with stems 4-15 cm, leafless above. Leaves rather fleshy, the lower oblong-spathulate, entire or with 1 or 2 teeth on either side near the apex, the upper entire. Inflorescence a short corymb, dense even in fruit. Silicula 4-5 mm, broadly ovate, broadly winged above; lobes acute, horned, very divergent, much shorter than the style; notch shallow.{\i  Gravelly places on mountains} (800-2600{\i  m}). • {\i S.W. Alps; N. Spain.} Ga Hs.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp.{\b  aurosica}: Subglabrous. Upper leaves linear-spathulate, acute, glabrous. Petals purple-lilac. •{\i  S.W. Alps}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp.{\b  cantabrica} Franco & P. Silva,{\i  Feddes Repert.}{\b  68}: 195 (1963): Sparsely hirsute. Upper leaves oblong-spathulate, obtuse, strongly ciliate. Petals white. •{\i  N. Spain} ({\i Vizcaya}).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 8. I. procumbens} Lange, {\i Ind. Sem. Horto Haun.}{\b  1861}: 29 (1861) ({\i I. contracta }auct. lusit., {\i I. sempervirens} auct. lusit., non L.). Bushy, puberulent perennial, with a woody stock from which arise both vegetative and flowering flexuous stems 10-30 cm. Leaves up to 25 × 6 mm, broadly spathulate, fleshy, entire or with 1 or 2 pairs of teeth near the apex, subobtuse, hispid or glabrous above. Inflorescence corymbose, flat in flower, contracted in fruit. Petals lilac or rarely white, the outer 8-10 mm. Silicula ovate, broadly winged from the base; lobes triangular, acute or obtuse; notch acute. •{\i  Portugal and N.W. Spain.} Hs Lu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp.{\b  procumbens} : Usually pulvinate, flowering profusely. Corymbs with 35-40 flowers. Silicula 6-7·5 mm. {\i Sea-shores. Throughout the range of the species}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp.{\b  microcarpa} Franco & P. Silva, {\i Feddes Repert.}{\b  68}: 195 (1963): Lax, with fewer stems. Corymbs with 20-25 flowers. Silicula 4-6 mm.{\i  Hills near the sea. W. Portugal} ({\i from Cabo Mondego to Serra de Arrabida}).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 9. I. gibraltarica} L.,{\i  Sp. Pl.} 649 (1753). Evergreen, densely caespitose, glabrous perennial with a woody stock from which arise leaf-rosettes and numerous ascending flowering stems 15-40 cm. Leaves fleshy, entire or with 1-4 teeth on either side near the apex, subobtuse, the lower up to 25 × 12 mm, broadly spathulate, the upper smaller. Inflorescence 40-50 mm in diameter, corymbose, flat in flower but contracted in fruit. Petals lilac to white, the outer 15-18 mm. Silicula 10-12 × 8-10 mm, orbicular, broadly winged from the base; lobes triangular, acute; notch deep, acute. Seeds c. 5 mm, winged. 2n = 14.{\i  Shady rock-crevices. Gibraltar}. Hs. ({\i Morocco}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 10. I. nazarita} Moreno,{\i  Trab. Dep. Bot. Fisiol. Veg.}{\b  12}: 95 (1983). Like {\b 9} but smaller, the flowering stems up to 30 cm, pubescent; leaves oblong-lanceolate, denticulate; silicula 6 × 5 mm, broadly elliptical; seeds c. 2·5 mm, unwinged. 2n = 14. •{\i  S. Spain} ({\i Andalucia}). Hs.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 11. I. amara} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 649 (1753) ({\i I. pinetorum} Pau). Erect, leafy annual 10-40 cm, corymbosely branched above, more or less hairy below. Leaves spathulate, distantly pinnatifid or toothed, sometimes entire, more or less ciliate. Inflorescence corymbose, elongating in fruit. Petals white or purplish. Silicula 3-5 mm, suborbicular; lobes triangular, erect or more or less divergent; notch acute or shallow.{\i  Corn-fields and dry hillsides, mainly on calcareous or dolomitic soils. Europe eastwards to Germany and Italy.} Be Br Ga Ge He Ho Hs It [Au ?Cz Hu It Lu Po Rm Rs(C, W, K, E)].
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 A variable species of which a number of cultivars are used for ornament (e.g.{\i  I. coronaria} hort.). Some of them probably arose through hybridization with {\b 14}. At least two subspecies can be recognized.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp.{\b  amara}: Lobes of the silicula erect, forming a deep, narrow notch.{\i  Throughout the range of the species}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp.{\b  forestieri }(Jordan) Heywood,{\i  Feddes Repert.}{\b  69}: 61 (1964) ({\i I. forestieri} Jordan): Lobes of the silicula more or less divergent, forming a shallow, broad notch.{\i  Pyrenees ; E.C. Spain}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 12. I. linifolia} L., {\i Syst. Nat}. ed. 10, 1129 (1759). Erect, glabrous annual or biennial up to 80 cm, branched above. Leaves 15-25(-50) × 3-4 mm, linear-lanceolate to linear, acuminate, the basal somewhat toothed, the cauline entire. Inflorescence shortly racemose, more or less dense, elongating in fruit. Petals white to purplish, the outer usually strongly radiating. Silicula ovate, more or less winged from the base; lobes acuminate, divergent; notch shallow.{\i  Bushy and rocky places and calcareous slopes. • From S. Germany to N.E. Spain and W. Jugoslavia.} Ga He Hs It Ju [Be].
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Silicula c. 5 mm
\par
2 Silicula scarcely winged at the base; lobes short ............... ({\b c}) subsp.{\b  prostii}
\par
2 Silicula broadly winged from the base; lobes long .......... ({\b d}) subsp.{\b  violletii}
\par
1 Silicula 6 mm or more
\par
3 Silicula winged from the base; lobes long ....................... ({\b a}) subsp.{\b  linifolia}
\par
3 Silicula scarcely winged at the base; lobes short ............ ({\b b}) subsp.{\b  timeroyi}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp.{\b  linifolia} ({\i I. intermedia} Guersent, {\i I. ciliata} sensu Willk., non All., {\i I. dunalii }(Bubani) Cadevall): Silicula 6-9 mm, winged from the base; lobes long.{\i  Throughout the range of the species}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp.{\b  timeroyi} (Jordan) Moreno,{\i  Collect. Bot.}{\b  15}: 349 (1984): Silicula 6-9 mm, scarcely winged at the base; lobes short.{\i  S. France}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b c}) Subsp.{\b  prostii} (Soyer-Willemet ex Godron) Moreno, {\i op. cit. }348 (1984): Silicula c. 5 mm, scarcely winged at the base; lobes short{\i . France, Spain}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b d}) Subsp. {\i violletii} (Soyer-Willemet ex Godron) Valdés{\i  Willdenowia }{\b 15}: 67 (1985) ({\i I. violletii} Soyer-Willemet ex Godron). Silicula c. 5 mm, broadly winged from the base; lobes long.{\i  E. France}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 13. I. stricta} Jordan, {\i Diagn.}{\b  1}: 278 (1864) ({\i I. leptophylla} Jordan). Erect, glabrous annual 30-60 cm; stems slender, branched above. Leaves linear, the cauline narrower, mucronate. Inflorescence corymbose even in fruit, small, dense. Petals rather small, pink to lilac. Silicula 3-5 mm, suborbicular; notch shallow.{\i  Dry, calcareous soils. • S.E. France and Liguria.} Ga It.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp.{\b  stricta}: Basal leaves shallowly toothed. Silicula ovate, winged from about the middle, the lobes acuminate, 2 as long as the style.{\i  France} ({\i Hautes-Alps}).
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp. {\i leptophylla} (Jordan) Franco & P. Silva, {\i Feddes Repert.}{\b  68}: 195 (1963) ({\i I. linifolia} L. pro parte, non Loefl.): Basal leaves almost entire. Silicula suborbicular, winged only above the middle; lobes acute, much shorter than the style.{\i  Throughout the range of the species}.
\par

\par
392}
\par