{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 hemisaprophytic, napiform, with green foliaceous appendages at the apex. ({\i Lepidotis} Beauv., {\i Palhinhaea} Franco & Vasc.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200  Erect stems more than 15 cm, woody, much-branched; spikes
\par
   0·5-1 cm, ovoid, clustered on the smallest branches ........................ {\b 1. cernua}
\par
Erect stems to 15 cm, herbaceous, simple; 5 spikes at least
\par
   1·5 cm, oblong, solitary ................................................................. {\b 2. inundata}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b 1. L. cernua} (L.) Pichi Serm., {\i Webbia}{\b  22:} 166 (1968) ({\i Lycopodium cernuum} L.,{\i  Lepidotis cernua} (L.) Beauv.). Main stem subterranean, creeping, woody, with erect, branched shoots up to 35 cm, the lower branches often rooting at tips. Fertile spikes 0·5-1 cm, ovoid, yellowish, at the end of short branches, ultimately nodding, with appressed, dentate sporophylls. {\i Açores.} *Az [Lu Si]. ({\i Tropics}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b 2. L. inundata} (L.) J. Holub,{\i  Preslia}{\b  36:} 21 (1964) ({\i Lycopodium inundatum} L.,{\i  Lepidotis inundata} (L.) Opiz). Stem above ground, short, creeping, herbaceous, usually with few or no branches, producing a single, erect, simple stem with curved, acute leaves, 4-6 mm, bearing a terminal cone 1·5-3(-5) cm; sporophylls subappressed. 2n = 156.{\i  Moors, wet heaths and dunes. Most of Europe, except the Mediterranean region and much of E. Russia.} Au Az Br Bu Cz Da Fe Ga Ge Hb He Ho Hs It Ju Lu No Po Rm Rs(N, B, C, W, E) Su.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 3.              Lycopodium}                     L.
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc  †W. Rothmaler (Ed. 1) revised by A.C. Jermy (Ed. 2)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Leaves flat, linear to lanceolate, appressed or deflexed. Sporophylls different from the other leaves, broadly ovate to broadly lanceolate, with scarious, toothed margins. Sporangia opening at the apex; spores markedly muricate-reticulate. Prothallus holosaprophytic, disciform or tuberous, without appendages.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 Cones sessile; leaves and sporophylls without a long, white
\par
   hair at the apex ........................................................................... {\b 1. annotinum}
\par
Cones pedunculate; at least the young leaves and sporophylls
\par
   with a long, white hair at the apex ................................................ {\b 2. clavatum}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. L. annotinum} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 1103 (1753). Stems procumbent, widely creeping, branched; branches erect to ascending. Leaves 3-10 mm, linear-lanceolate to subulate, appressed to deflexed. Cones terminal on erect branches, sessile, solitary; sporophylls acute. 2n = 68.{\i  Heaths, mountain grassland and dwarf heath on mountains. N. Europe, extending southwards in the mountains to the Pyrenees, N. Appennini and S. Carpathians}. Au Be Br Bu Cz Da Fe Ga Ge He Ho Hs Hu It No Po Rm Rs(N, B, C, W, ?E) Su.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp.{\b  annotinum} : Branches 10-15 mm wide, ascending. Leaves 5-10 mm, linear-lanceolate or linear, patent or deflexed, thin, dull green, coarsely toothed, the apex acute. Cones 1·5-3 cm. {\i Throughout the range of the species}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp.{\b  alpestre} (Hartman) Á. & D. Löve, {\i Nucleus} ({\i Calcutta}) {\b 1} ({\b 1}): 7 (1958) ({\i L. dubium} auct., non Zoega, {\i L. pungens} La Pylaie ex Komarov) : Branches 3-7 mm wide, erect. Leaves 3-7 mm, linear-subulate, patent to appressed, thick, nearly entire, the apex acuminate. Cones 0·5-1·5 cm. {\i Arctic and subarctic Europe southwards to 60° N}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. L. clavatum} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 1101 (1753). Stems long, procumbent; branches ascending. Leaves 3-5 mm, bright green, linear, acute, subappressed, prolonged apically as a hyaline hair 2-3 mm (sometimes deciduous in older leaves). Cones 1-4, 2·5-6 cm; peduncles 1·5-15 cm, with remote, yellowish, bract-like leaves; sporophylls ovate, with a long, hyaline hair at the apex. 2n = 68.{\i  Heaths, moors and mountain grassland. N. & C. Europe, extending locally southwards to C. Portugal, C. Italy and Bulgaria}. Au Be Br Bu Cz Da Fe Ga Ge Hb He Ho Hs Hu Is It Ju Lu No Po Rm Rs (N, B, C, W, E) Su.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Subsp.{\b  monostachyon} (Grev. & Hooker) Selander,{\i  Acta Phytogeogr. Suec.}{\b  28:} 7 (1950), a variant smaller in all its parts, leaves yellow-green, cones 1(2), 1-2·5 cm long, peduncles less than 3 cm, is common in the north of Fennoscandia, S. to 65° N.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 4.                 Diphasiastrum}               J. Holub
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc †W. Rothmaler (Ed. 1) revised by A.C. Jermy (Ed. 2)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Stems long, creeping, dorsiventral; branches forked several times and usually flabellate. Leaves 4-ranked, opposite and decussate, somewhat scale-like, the lateral leaves carinate. Cones terminal, the sporophylls different from the leaves; sporangia opening at the apex; spores markedly muricate-reticulate. Prothallus holosaprophytic. ({\i Diphasium} auct., non C. Presl)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Literature: J. Dostál in G. Hegi,{\i  Ill. Fl. Mitteleur.} ed. 3, {\b 1}({\b 1}): 28-42 (1984). I. Kukkonen,{\i  Ann. Bot. Fenn.}{\b  4:} 441-470 (1967).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Main stems subterranean; branches not or only slightly flattened;
\par
  all leaves ± equal in width ........................................................ {\b 2. tristachyum}
\par
1 Main stems usually above ground; branches flattened; lateral leaves
\par
  keeled, wider than dorsal and ventral leaves
\par
2 Ventral leaves sessile, subulate to triangular-lanceolate;
\par
  cones pedunculate ................................................................. {\b 1. complanatum}
\par
2 Ventral leaves petiolate, trullate or ovate; cones sessile ............... {\b 3. alpinum}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   {\b 1. D. complanatum} (L.) J. Holub, {\i Preslia}{\b  47:} 108 (1975) ({\i Lycopodium complanatum} L., {\i Diphasium complanatum} (L.) Rothm., {\i L. anceps} Wallr.). Main stems far-creeping, subterranean, bearing erect, much-branched shoots; finer branches 2-3 mm wide, obviously flattened. Lateral leaves wider than the dorsal, usually appressed; ventral leaves 0·5-1·5 mm on the finer sterile branches, 1/5 as wide as the branches. Cones 1-4(5), pedunculate; sporophylls broadly ovate, as long as wide, acuminate, the acumen 1/4-1/3 as long as the sporophyll; spores c. 30 µm in diameter. 2n = 46, 48.{\i  N. & C. Europe, extending locally southwards to Spain, N. Italy, Bulgaria and S. Ural; Açores}. Au Az Be Bu Cz Da Fe Ga Ge He Ho Hs Hu It Ju No Po Rm Rs(N, B, C, W, E) Su.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Besides{\i  D. complanatum} sensu stricto three closely related taxa, undoubtedly formed through hybridization with {\b 2} and {\b 3} and sometimes treated as hybrids, are included here as subspecies.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Ventral leaves 1/5 as wide as branches; free apex of lateral 
\par
  leaves c. 1/6 as long as the leaf ................................ ({\b a}) subsp.{\b  complanatum}
\par
1 Ventral leaves 1/4-1/3 as wide as branches; free apex of 
\par
  lateral leaves c. 1/2 as long as the leaf
\par
2 Width of ventral leaf 1/3 width of branch ........................... ({\b b}) subsp.{\b  issleri}
\par
2 Width of ventral leaf 1/5-1/4 width of branch
\par
3 At least some main stems subterranean; peduncles usually 
\par
  more than 5 cm; cones several ............................................ ({\b c}) subsp.{\b  zeilleri}
\par
3 Main stems, if present, above ground; peduncles less than 5 cm; cone
\par
  usually solitary ................................................................. ({\b d}) subsp.{\b  montellii}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 ({\b a}) Subsp.{\b  complanatum} : Main stem above ground. Ventral leaves 0·5-1 mm, 1/5 as wide as branches, subulate-triangular,
\par

\par
4}
\par