{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 (1826) ({\i L. smithii }Hooker). Perennial herb up to 50 cm, shortly hairy. Basal leaves petiolate, oblanceolate or elliptical, entire; upper cauline leaves sessile, narrowly triangular-ovate, with acute auricles; all shortly hairy to glabrous. Sepals c. 2 mm; petals 1½-3½ times as long as the sepals; anthers violet. Pedicels 2-6 mm in fruit, hairy. Silicula 4-7 × 3-6 mm, ovate, usually glabrous, with few or no vesicles, winged for about 1/3 of the total length, usually with a small apical notch, rarely entire; style 0·4-1 mm, projecting beyond the notch. 2n = 16.{\i  Dry, more or less open habitats; somewhat calcifuge. • W. Europe, extending eastwards to Czechoslovakia.} Br Cz Da Ga Hb Hs Lu [Be Ge Ho No Su].
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 4. L. hirtum} (L.) Sm.,{\i  Comp. Fl. Brit.} ed. 3, 98 (1818). Like {\b 3} but usually strongly grey-pubescent; anthers yellow (blackish-red in subsp. ({\b d})); silicula hairy, at least when young; wings up to ½ of the total length of the silicula.{\i  Dry places. Mediterranean region. }Co Cr Ga Gr Hs It Si.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Anthers blackish-red; pedicels not more than 3 mm in fruit
\par
  ........................................................................................... ({\b d}) subsp.{\b  stylatum}
\par
1 Anthers yellow; pedicels more than 3 mm in fruit
\par
2 Silicula less than 5 mm, very narrowly winged .............. ({\b e}) subsp.{\b  oxyotum}
\par
2 Silicula 5-8 mm, ± distinctly winged
\par
3 Style 1·5-2 mm, much exceeding the notched apex of the silicula;
\par
  sepals 2-2·5 mm
\par
4 Silicula abruptly contracted towards the apex; raceme short
\par
  ...................................................................................... ({\b c}) subsp.{\b  petrophilum}
\par
4 Silicula gradually narrowed towards the apex; raceme long
\par
  .................................................................................... ({\b f}) subsp.{\b  calycotrichum}
\par
3 Style not more than 1·5 mm and only just exceeding the notched
\par
  apex of the silicula; sepals 1·5-2 mm
\par
5 Stems usually ascending; raceme short ............................... ({\b a}) subsp.{\b  hirtum}
\par
5 Stems procumbent; racemes long ................................ ({\b b}) subsp.{\b  nebrodense}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp.{\b  hirtum} ({\i L. scapiflorum} (Viv.) P. Fourn.): Stems usually ascending, very hairy. Raceme short. Sepals 1·5-2 mm; anthers yellow. Pedicels 5-6 mm in fruit. Silicula 6-7 × 4-4·6 mm, ovate, winged for about 1/2 of its total length; style projecting just beyond the notched or truncate apex.{\i  Almost throughout the range of the species}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp.{\b  nebrodense }(Rafin.) Thell.,{\i  Viert. Naturf. Ges. Zürich}{\b  51}: 154 (1906) ({\i L. microstylum} Boiss. & Heldr., {\i L. nebrodense }(Rafin.) Guss.): Stems procumbent, glabrous to grey-pubescent. Raceme long. Sepals c. 1·5 mm; anthers yellow. Pedicels 4-6 mm in fruit. Silicula 6-8 × 4-5 mm, elliptical, winged for about 1/3 of its total length, the wings rounded or obtuse; style short, just exceeding the notched apex. •{\i  C. & E. Mediterranean region.}
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b c}) Subsp.{\b  petrophilum} (Cosson) Thell., {\i loc. cit. }(1906) ({\i L. petrophilum} Cosson): Stems diffuse or ascending, hairy. Raceme short. Sepals 2-2·5 mm; anthers yellow. Pedicels 4-5 mm in fruit. Silicula 5-6 × 3-4 mm, ovate, acuminate, sharply keeled and winged above the middle; style c. 2 mm, exceeding the notched apex. •{\i  S. Spain }({\i Granada prov}.)
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b d}) Subsp. {\b stylatum} (Lag. & Rodr.) Thell.,{\i  op. cit.} 155 (1906) ({\i L. stylatum} Lag. & Rodr.): Stems ascending, grey-pubescent (or rarely green and glabrous). Raceme very short, often subcorymbose. Sepals c. 1·5 mm; anthers blackish-red. Pedicels 2-3 mm in fruit. Silicula 4-6 × 2-2·5 mm, narrowly elliptical, narrowly winged; style c. 2 mm, much exceeding the slightly notched apex. •{\i  S. Spain }({\i Sierra Nevada}).
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b e}) Subsp.{\b  oxyotum} (DC.) Thell.,{\i  op. cit.} 156 (1906) ({\i L. humifusum} (Loisel.) Req.): Stems ascending, hairy. Raceme short. Sepals 1·5-2 mm; anthers yellow. Pedicels 3-4 mm in fruit. Silicula c. 4·5 × 3·5 mm, orbicular-elliptical or obovate, very narrowly winged; style short, just exceeding the notched apex. •{\i  Corse; Kriti.}
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b f}) Subsp.{\b  calycotrichum} (G. Kunze) Thell.,{\i  loc. cit.} (1906) ({\i L. calycotrichum} G. Kunze): Stems procumbent or ascending, hairy. Raceme very long. Sepals c. 2·5 mm; anthers yellow. Pedicels 4-6 mm in fruit. Silicula c. 7 × 4 mm, narrowly elliptical or ovate, winged for 1/5-1/2 of its total length; style 1·5-2 mm, much exceeding the slightly notched apex.{\i  S. & E. Spain}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Sect. LEPIOCARDAMON Thell. Cauline leaves not amplexicaul. Silicula obovate, very deeply notched, broadly winged above. Stamens 6.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 5. L. spinosum} Ard.,{\i  Animadv. Bot. Spec. Alt. }34 (1763) ({\i L. carrerassii} Rodr., {\i L. cornutum} Sm.). Glabrous annual or biennial. Basal and lower cauline leaves pinnately divided, the lobes linear and lobed again at the base; middle and upper cauline leaves linear or linear-oblanceolate. Sepals 1-1·5 mm, white-margined; petals 1½ times as long as the sepals. Branches of inflorescence spiny in fruit. Pedicels 1-2 mm in fruit. Silicula 5-6 × c. 3 mm, obovate, very deeply notched at the apex, glabrous, the wings very wide above; style not exceeding notch.{\i  Dry grassland. E. Mediterranean region; E. Bulgaria.} Bu Cr Gr Tu [Bl Hs].
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Sect. CARDAMON DC. Cauline leaves not amplexicaul. Silicula broadly emarginate, winged above. Stamens (4-)6.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 6. L. sativum} L.,{\i  Sp. Pl.} 644 (1753). Usually glabrous, often glaucous annual with a single, erect stem 20-100 cm. Basal leaves long-petiolate, lyrate, with toothed obovate to linear lobes; upper cauline leaves linear, entire. Sepals 1-1·8 mm; petals up to twice as long as the sepals, sometimes pink or reddish. Pedicels (2-)3-6 mm in fruit. Silicula 5-6·5 × 3-6 mm, ovate or broadly elliptical to orbicular, glabrous; style 0·2-0·8 mm, included in the deep apical notch.{\i  Cultivated throughout Europe as a salad} ({\i Cress});{\i  frequent as a casual and locally naturalized.} ({\i Egypt and W. Asia}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 It is impossible from the available information to distinguish between naturalized and casual distribution.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Sect. DILEPTIUM DC. Cauline leaves not amplexicaul. Silicula not winged, or, if narrowly winged above, then with the style quite free and not exceeding the apical notch. Stamens 2-4.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 7. L. subulatum} L.,{\i  Sp. Pl.} 644 (1753) ({\i L. lineare} DC.). Dwarf shrub 10-20 cm, more or less glaucous and much-branched. All leaves linear, rigid, channelled and very acute, with varying numbers of short, stiff hairs. Sepals c. 1 mm; petals c. 1½ times as long as the sepals; anthers yellow. Pedicels 2-4 mm in fruit, erecto-patent, glabrous or hairy. Silicula 2-2·5 × 1·5-2 mm; style not exceeding the apical notch.{\i  Gypsaceous and saline soils. Spain.} Hs.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Plants from S., C. & E. Spain tend to be more hairy and glaucous and have smaller fruits and longer pedicels than those from elsewhere.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 8. L. cardamines} L.,{\i  Cent. Pl. }{\b 1}: 17 (1755). Glaucous biennial; stem erect, branched, densely puberulent with short, crispate hairs. Basal leaves lyrate-pinnatifid; cauline leaves numerous, pinnate with large terminal and 1 or 2 lateral lobes. Sepals c. 1 mm; petals twice as long as the sepals. Pedicels c. 4 mm in fruit, minutely hairy.
\par

\par
400}
\par