{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 6 Upper cauline leaves sessile or petiolate, not amplexicaul
\par
  at the base
\par
16 Siliqua appressed to stem .............................................................. {\b 19. nigra}
\par
16 Siliqua erecto-patent to recurved
\par
17 Siliqua distinctly stipitate, the gynophore 1·5-4·5 mm
\par
18 Lower leaves not lyrate; beak of siliqua 0·5-2·5 mm; plant
\par
   usually not woody at the base ...................................................... {\b 1. elongata}
\par
18 Lower leaves ± lyrate; beak of siliqua 2-7 mm; plant usually
\par
   woody at the base ................................................................... {\b 14. fruticulosa}
\par
17 Siliqua sessile or very shortly stipitate, the gynophore less than 1·5 mm
\par
19 Beak of the siliqua nearly as long as the valves; flowers nodding
\par
   after anthesis ............................................................................. {\b 16. barrelieri}
\par
19 Beak of siliqua shorter than the valves; flowers remaining erect
\par
   after anthesis
\par
20 Petals 5-7 × 1·5 mm, small and narrow; beak of siliqua 10-20 mm
\par
   ................................................................................................ {\b 17. tournefortii}
\par
20 Petals 6-13 × 2-7·5 mm, conspicuous; beak of siliqua 2-10 mm
\par
21 Lower leaves runcinate-pinnatifid, with 7-10 pairs of lobes
\par
   .................................................................................................... {\b 16. barrelieri}
\par
21 Lower leaves lyrate-pinnatifid to pinnatisect, with 1-8 pairs of lobes
\par
22 Sepals glabrous or with few scattered hairs at the apex
\par
23 Sepals erecto-patent; siliqua sessile, the beak 5-10 mm ............. {\b 13. juncea}
\par
23 Sepals suberect; siliqua stipitate, the beak 2-7 mm .............. {\b 14. fruticulosa}
\par
22 Sepals shortly villous
\par
24 Lower leaves with 5-8 pairs of lobes; terminal lobe sinuate-dentate,
\par
   not callose ............................................................................... {\b 14. fruticulosa}
\par
24 Lower leaves with 3-5 pairs of lobes; terminal lobe unequally
\par
   crenate-callose ............................................................................. {\b 15. cadmea}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. B. elongata} Ehrh.,{\i  Beitr. Naturk. }{\b 7}: 159 (1792). Biennial or short-lived perennial. Lower leaves petiolate, obovate to elliptical, sinuate-pinnatifid or entire, covered with curved bristles on both surfaces. Petals 7-10 mm, yellow. Siliqua 15-22 mm, attenuate into a seedless beak 0·5-2·5 mm, with gynophore 1·5-4·5 mm.{\i  S.E. & E.C. Europe; naturalized elsewhere as a weed or ruderal.} Au Bu Cz Hu Ju *Po Rm Rs(W, K, E) [Da Ga Ge Ho It Rs(C)].
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp.{\b  elongata} ({\i B. elongata} subsp.{\i  armoracioides} (Czern.) Ascherson & Graebner): Leaves sinuate-pinnatifid. 2n = 22. {\i Western part of the range of the species.}
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b integrifolia} (Boiss.) Breistr.,{\i  Bull. Soc. Sci. Dauph.}{\b  60}: 139 (1944) (as preprint p. 13 (1942)) ({\i B. elongata} subsp. {\i persica} (Boiss. & Hohen.) Thell.,{\i  B. persica} Boiss. & Hohen.,{\i  B. armoracioides} Czern.): Leaves entire.{\i  S. Russia, Ukraine; one station in S.E. Poland.}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. B. nivalis} Boiss. & Heldr. in Boiss., {\i Diagn. Pl. Or. Nov.}{\b  3}({\b 1}): 32 (1856) ({\i Brassicella nivalis} (Boiss. & Heldr.) O.E. Schulz, {\i Rhynchosinapis nivalis} (Boiss. & Heldr.) Heywood, {\i Hutera nivalis} (Boiss. & Heldr.) Gómez-Campo, {\i Coincya nivalis }(Boiss. & Heldr.) Greuter & Burdet). Glabrous or subglabrous, caespitose perennial, somewhat woody at the base; stems 10-50 cm, usually unbranched. Cauline leaves few, small, linear, often absent. Sepals 4-5 mm, obtuse; petals 8-11 mm, yellow. Pedicels erecto-patent. Siliqua 25-60 × 1·5-2 mm, somewhat curved, constricted between the seeds; beak 1-3 mm, without seeds. Seeds 10-18 mm.{\i  Limestone scree, usually above} 1800{\i  m. N. Greece; S.W. Bulgaria; local}. Bu Gr.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp.{\b  nivalis}: Basal leaves deeply pinnatifid to lyrate-pinnatifid, the lamina abruptly attenuate into the petiole; beak of siliqua 1·5-3 mm. 2n = 20.{\i  N. Greece} ({\i Olimbos}).
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp.{\b  jordanoffii} (O.E. Schulz) Akeroyd & Leadlay, {\i Bot. Jour. Linn. Soc.}{\b  106}: 102 (1991) ({\i B. jordanoffi} O.E. Schulz): Basal leaves coarsely dentate to shallowly pinnatifid, the lamina gradually attenuate into the petiole; beak of siliqua 1-1·5 mm. 2n = 22. {\i S.W. Bulgaria} ({\i Pirin Planina}).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 3. B. balearica} Pers.,{\i  Syn. Pl.}{\b  2}: 206 (1806). Glabrous small shrub with long, thick, woody stock; flowering stems up to 30 cm. Leaves mostly basal, long-petiolate, lyrate or pinnatilobed, resembling those of{\i  Quercus robur}. Petals 10-15 mm, yellow. Siliqua 20-60 × 2-2·5 mm, linear, terete, constricted at intervals, terminating in a 0- or 1-seeded beak 1·5-3 mm. 2n = 32. •{\i  Islas Baleares} ({\b Mallorca}). Bl.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 4. B. macrocarpa} Guss., {\i Ind. Sem. Horto Boccad.}{\b  1824/5}: 3 (1825). Glabrous small shrub; stems 30-60 cm. Basal leaves 10-18 × 4-10 cm, lyrate-pinnatifid or pinnatilobed, the lobes crenate-dentate, petioles up to 8 cm; cauline leaves oblong to lanceolate, entire or shallowly toothed. Petals 10-15 mm, yellow. Siliqua 20-40 × 5-12 mm, -very thick and fleshy; valves thick and woody, 1-veined, boat-shaped, attenuate into a conical, 0- to 2-seeded beak 8-13 mm.{\i  Maritime rocks. • W. Sicilia }({\i Isole Egadi}). Si.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b B. drepanensis} (Caruel) Damanti,{\i  Nat. Sicil. }{\b 10}({\b 4}): 91 (1891), from the adjacent mainland of Sicilia near Trapani, is like {\b 4} but with densely tomentose leaves and more slender fruits with a shorter beak. It may not be specifically distinct from {\b 4}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 5. B. oleracea} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 667 (1753) ({\i B. sylvestris} (L.) Miller). Glabrous biennial to perennial up to 300 cm; lower part of stems somewhat woody. Basal leaves up to 40 cm, usually petiolate, lyrate-pinnatipartite, crenate; cauline leaves ovate-lanceolate or oblong, entire, sessile (petiolate in some cultivars). Petals 15-30 mm, pale yellow. Siliqua 35-85(-100) × 2-4(-5) mm, linear-terete, with a short conical beak 4-8(-10) mm, as wide as the valves at the base, (0)1(2)-seeded. 2n = 18.{\i  Maritime cliffs. • Europe, extending to E. Italy. Widely cultivated as a vegetable. }*Br Ga Hs It [Bu Cz Ge Ju].
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Many cultivars have been derived from {\b 5} and related cross-fertile species. There is great diversity in their taxonomic treatment, some authors regarding the wild plants as a separate species, {\b B. sylvestris} (L.) Miller, {\i Gard. Dict.} ed. 8, no. 4 (1768), while others regard the cultivars as subspecies and varieties of 5; Lizgunova ({\i Bull. Appl. Bot. Pl.-Breed.} ({\i Leningrad}) {\b 32}: 37-70 (1959)) recognizes five separate cultivated species with numerous subspecies. Some of the cultivars occur as escapes.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp.{\b  oleracea} : Terminal lobe of basal leaves usually entire. 2n = 18.{\i  Atlantic coasts; naturalized elsewhere}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp.{\b  robertiana} (Gay) Bonnier & Layens, {\i Tabl. Syn. Pl. Vasc}. 21 (1894) ({\i B. oleracea} subsp.{\i  pourretii }Fouc. & Rouy; incl.{\i  B. montana} Pourret): Terminal lobe of basal leaves usually pinnatifid. 2n = 18.{\i  Mediterranean coasts}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 6. B. rupestris} Rafin.,{\i  Caratt.} 77 (1810). Glabrous, branched small shrub; stems up to 150 cm. Basal leaves 20-40 cm, lyrate-pinnatisect, with terminal lobe pinnatipartite, more or less acute;
\par

\par
406}
\par