{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 erect. Lower leaves long-petiolate, lyrate-pinnatifid, with 2-8 pairs of rounded or obtuse lobes, hispid; upper leaves smaller, pinnatilobed to entire. Sepals suberect; petals 6-10 mm, yellow. Siliqua 15-40 × 1·5-2 mm, constricted at intervals, stipitate, the gynophore 1-3 mm; beak 2-7 mm, 0- or 1-seeded.{\i  Ruderal. Mediterranean region.} Ga Hs It Sa Si.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b fruticulosa} : Usually biennial to perennial, woody at the base. Sepals glabrous or sparsely hairy. 2n = 16.{\i  Throughout the range of the species}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b cossoniana} (Boiss. & Reuter) Maire in Jahandiez & Maire, {\i Cat. Pl. Maroc}{\b  2}: 287 (1932) ({\i B. cossoniana} Boiss. & Reuter): Annual, scarcely woody at the base. Sepals densely villous. 2n = 32.{\i  S. Spain.} ({\i N.W. Africa}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 15. B. cadmea} Heldr. ex O.E. Schulz in Engler, {\i Pflanzenreich}{\b  70}({\b IV.105}): 63 (1919). Like {\b 14}({\b b}) but basal and lower cauline leaves shortly petiolate, pinnatipartite, with 3-5 pairs of irregularly crenate, callose-tipped lobes; siliqua with short, broad, 1-seeded beak.{\i  Clayey hills. • C. Greece }({\i near Thivai}). Gr.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b B. procumbens} (Poiret) O.E. Schulz,{\i  Bot. Jahrb. }{\b 54} Beibl. {\b 119}: 55 (1916) ({\i Sinapis procumbens} Poiret), like {\b 15} but with spreading or ascending stems, the lower part of the inflorescence bracteate, and the siliqua distinctly hairy, was recorded from C. Italy (Arcipelago Toscano) but is apparently extinct there; it has recently been reported as an alien in Corse.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 16. B. barrelieri} (L.) Janka, {\i Term. Fuz.}{\b  6}: 179 (1882) ({\i B. laevigata} Lag., {\i B. sabularia} Brot.). Annual, rarely perennial; stems up to 50 cm. Lower leaves numerous, rosulate, very shortly petiolate, runcinate-pinnatifid, with 7-10 pairs of lanceolate, acuminate lobes, hispid, especially along the thick, white mid-vein, and ciliate. Cauline leaves few, sessile, more or less entire, glabrous. Sepals erect, sparsely hispid or glabrous; petals 7-12 mm, obovate, yellow with livid veins, or whitish. Siliqua 25-60 × 1·5-2·5 mm, constricted at intervals, very shortly stipitate, attenuate into a 0- to 2-seeded beak 5-30 mm long.{\i  Sandy soils. S.W. Europe.} Bl Hs Lu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp.{\b  barrelieri} : Petals 9-12 mm. Beak much shorter than the valvar portion of the siliqua, 0- or 1-seeded.{\i  Throughout the range of the species}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp.{\b  oxyrrhina} (Cosson) Regel in Regel et al.,{\i  Ind. Sem. Horti Petrop.}{\b  1856}: 34 (1857) ({\i B. oxyrrhina} Cosson): Petals 7-8 mm. Beak nearly as long as the valvar portion of the siliqua or longer, usually 2-seeded. 2n = 18. {\i S. Spain, S. Portugal}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 17. B. tournefortii} Gouan,{\i  Obs. Bot.} 44 (1773). Like {\b 16} but leaf-lobes  obtuse; sepals suberect; petals 5-7 mm, narrowly oblong-obovate, pale yellow, usually violaceous at the base, becoming whitish; siliqua 35-65 × 2·5-3 mm; beak 10-20 mm, 1/3-1/2 as long as the valvar portion. 2n = 20.{\i  Mainly on maritime sands. Mediterranean region}. Cr Gr Hs It ?Lu Sa Si.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 18. B. souliei} (Batt.) Batt., {\i Bull. Soc. Bot. Fr.}{\b  40}: 262 (1893). Annual 10-40 cm, many-stemmed and branched from the base. Lower leaves petiolate, obovate or oblong, sinuate-dentate, obtuse at the apex, glabrous or sparsely hairy, ciliate; upper leaves amplexicaul at the base. Petals 5-7 mm, yellow. Siliqua 5-12 × 1-2 mm, attenuate into a filiform, seedless beak, and borne on patent or recurved pedicels 5-15(-40) mm.{\i  Dry, waste places. Sicilia.} Si.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 The European plant is subsp.{\b  amplexicaulis} (Desf.) Greuter & Burdet,{\i  Willdenowia}{\b  13}: 86 (1983) ({\i B. amplexicaulis} (Desf.) Pomel, non Hochst. ex A. Richard). Subsp.{\i  souliei} occurs in N.W. Africa.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 19. B. nigra} (L.) Koch in Röhling,{\i  Deutschl. Fl.} ed. 3,{\b  4}: 713 (1833). Annual; stems up to 200 cm, branched from the middle or from near the base. Lower leaves lyrate-pinnatisect, with 1-3 pairs of lateral lobes and a much larger terminal lobe, hispid on both surfaces; upper leaves linear-oblong, entire or sinuate, glabrous; all leaves petiolate. Petals 7-13 mm, yellow. Siliqua 8-30 × 1·5-4·5 mm, attenuate into a slender, seedless beak. Pedicels 2·5-6 mm in fruit, appressed to the stem. 2n = 16.{\i  Most of Europe but commonest in the centre and south; perhaps native in parts of S. & W. Europe. Cultivated for its seeds which are used as a condiment} ({\i Black mustard}). All except Bl Is Sb.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 20. B. gravinae} Ten.,{\i  Prodr. Fl.} Nap. xxxix (1811). Caespitose perennial; stems 10-30-(50) cm, usually simple, hispid or pubescent. Basal leaves densely rosulate, shortly petiolate, oblong or obovate, lyrate, sinuate-dentate or pinnatifid; terminal lobe obovate, obtuse, crenate-dentate, somewhat fleshy; cauline leaves few, subsessile, slightly dentate. Raceme 25- to 40-flowered. Petals 9 mm, yellow. Siliqua 20-50 × 2·5-3 mm, subterete, attenuate into a seedless beak 2·5-4 mm. Seeds globose.{\i  Calcareous rocks. C. & S. Appennini.} It.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 21. B. repanda} (Willd.) DC.,{\i  Reg. Veg. Syst. Nat.}{\b  2}: 598 (1821) ({\i Diplotaxis saxatilis} DC.). Laxly to densely caespitose perennial; stems up to 50 cm, usually leafless, glabrous or hairy. Basal leaves 1-15 cm, entire to pinnatipartite. Raceme 2- to 45-flowered. Petals 7-30 mm, yellow. Siliqua 10-80 × 1-4·5 mm, variable in shape and proportions, gradually or abruptly attenuate into a seedless beak. Seeds ellipsoidal. 2n = 20.{\i  Usually in rocky or stony places. S.W. Europe.} Ga Hs It.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Very variable. A key is given below to the more important geographical variants, but anomalous populations occur in the Pyrenees and neighbouring regions.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Petals 15-25(-30) mm
\par
2 Petals cuneate, the apex truncate; leaves glaucous, fleshy
\par
  ......................................................................................... ({\b d}) subsp. {\b maritima}
\par
2 Petals obovate, the apex rounded; leaves green, membranous
\par
  .......................................................................................... ({\b c}) subsp.{\b  galissieri}
\par
1 Petals not more than 14 mm
\par
3 Siliqua 1-2 mm wide
\par
4 Plants densely caespitose with woody, branched stock;
\par
  siliqua usually more than 30 mm ...................................... ({\b e}) subsp.{\b  confusa}
\par
4 Plants laxly caespitose, with the stock ± unbranched; siliqua 10-30 mm
\par
5 Stems 30-60 cm; raceme 10- to 30-flowered ................ ({\b j}) subsp.{\b  nudicaulis}
\par
5 Stems 10-15 cm; raceme 2- to 8-flowered .................. ({\b k}) subsp.{\b  almeriensis}
\par
3 Siliqua 2·5-4·5 mm wide
\par
6 Raceme 2- to 8(-12)-flowered; siliqua 20-30(-60) × 3-3·5 mm, abruptly
\par
  contracted into the beak; leaves sinuate-dentate ................ ({\b a}) subsp.{\b  repanda}
\par
6 Racemes with 12-35 flowers, or, if fewer-flowered, siliqua less than 3 mm
\par
  wide; siliqua (20-)25-80 × 2-4·5 mm, gradually attenuate into the beak
\par
7 Siliqua not more than 2·5 mm wide ................................ ({\b b}) subsp.{\b  saxatilis}
\par
7 Siliqua at least 2·5 mm wide
\par
8 Leaves 2-4(-6) cm, entire or slightly toothed, or, if pinnatipartite,
\par
  1·5-2 cm .......................................................................... ({\b i}) subsp.{\b  latisiliqua}
\par

\par
408}
\par