{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 stamens united in pairs. Fruit a linear-lanceolate siliqua, dorsally compressed; valves more or less convex, with 3-5 equidistant, parallel veins, attenuate into a triangular to lanceolate, seedless beak.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. E. bourgaeanum} Cosson, {\i Not. Pl. Crit.} 145 (1852). Small, erect shrub 20-50 cm, much branched at the base. Leaves crowded, pinnatisect into 2 or 3 pairs of linear, obtuse, somewhat fleshy segments, rarely undivided, with scattered, patent, setiform hairs. Flowers in ebracteate racemes on short pedicels, showy. Petals 12-16 mm, whitish, with brown veins. Siliqua 20-40 × 3-4 mm, ascending, glabrous; beak up to 10 mm.{\i  Dry, calcareous soils. • S. Spain }({\i Almeria prov}.). Hs.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 87.          Diplotaxis}            DC.
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc By V.H. Heywood (Ed.1) revised by J.R. Akeroyd & J.B. Martínez-Laborde (Ed.2)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Annuals to perennials. Leaves entire to pinnatipartite. Sepals erecto-patent; petals clawed, usually yellow. Gynophore usually short. Fruit an elongate, linear siliqua with a short beak; valves compressed, with a prominent median vein. Seeds usually in 2 rows in each loculus, ovoid or ellipsoidal. (Incl.{\i  Pendulina} Willk.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Literature: O.E. Schulz in Engler, {\i Pflanzenreich }{\b 70}({\b IV.105}): 149-180 (1919). R. Negre, {\i Mém. Soc. Sci. Nat. Phys. Maroc Bot.} nov. ser., no. 1 (1960). R.B. Fernandes,{\i  Bol. Soc. Brot.} ser. 2,{\b  58}: 235-248 (1985).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Mature siliqua pendent; gynophore usually at least 2 mm,
\par
  conspicuous ........................................................................................ {\b 5. harra}
\par
1 Mature siliqua erecto-patent or rarely patent; gynophore
\par
  usually less than 2 mm
\par
2 Petals white, violet-veined or violet after anthesis ..................... {\b 8. erucoides}
\par
2 Petals yellow, sometimes violet-veined
\par
3 Petals 3-4 mm; outer stamens sterile .......................................... {\b 10. viminea}
\par
3 Petals 4-15 mm; outer stamens fertile
\par
4 Leaves foetid when crushed; petal venation pinnate
\par
  and looped at margin; beak of siliqua seedless
\par
5 Plant scapose or subscapose ........................................................ {\b 11. muralis}
\par
5 Stems and branches leafy
\par
6 Perennial; leaves entire to pinnatisect ........................................ {\b 6. tenuifolia}
\par
6 Annual or biennial; leaves pinnatisect to bipinnatisect ................ {\b 7. cretacea}
\par
4 Leaves not foetid; petal venation not pinnate and looped
\par
  at margin; beak of siliqua with 1 or 2 seeds or dried ovules,
\par
   more rarely seedless
\par
7 Petals pale yellow; seeds ± spherical .............................................. {\b 3. siifolia}
\par
7 Petals sulphur-yellow; seeds ellipsoidal
\par
8 Seeds in (2)3 or 4 rows in each loculus; leaves with short, thin,
\par
  patent hairs on adaxial surface, glabrous on the abaxial ............... {\b 2. siettiana}
\par
8 Seeds in 1 or 2 rows in each loculus;
\par
   leaf pubescence not as above or none
\par
9 Short-lived perennial; beak of siliqua usually without seeds ...... {\b 4. ibicensis}
\par
9 Annual; leaves more or less pubescent; beak of siliqua
\par
   usually with 1 or 2 seeds
\par
10 Stems and leaves conspicuously hirsute; leaves pinnatilobed to
\par
   pinnatisect ...................................................................................... {\b 9. virgata}
\par
10 Stems and leaves with sparse, short, conical hairs; leaves pinnatisect
\par
   to bipinnatisect, the upper ones with linear segments ................. {\b 1. catholica}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. D. catholica} (L.) DC.,{\i  Reg. Veg. Syst. Nat. }{\b 2}: 632 (1821) ({\i Hugueninia balearica} (Porta) O.E. Schulz). Annual, sometimes overwintering, 5-90 cm, green or subglaucous. Stems glabrous or with deflexed hairs at the base. Leaves glabrous or sparsely hispid at the margin; basal leaves (including juvenile) usually 1- or 2-pinnatisect, the segments with acute lobes. Petals 7-8(-12) mm, sulphur-yellow. Siliqua (14-)20-25(-45) × 1·5-2 mm, torulose or not, seeds in 2 rows; beak 2-5 mm with (0)1 or 2 seeds. 2n = 18. {\i  S.W. Europe.} Bl Hs Lu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. D. siettiana} Maire,{\i  Bull. Soc. Hist. Nat. Afr. Nord}{\b  24}: 198 (1933). Like {\b 1} but leaf-lobes obtuse; petals 9-10 mm; siliqua 3-4 mm wide; seeds in 3 or 4 rows; beak seedless. 2n = 16.{\i  Sandy soil. • S.E. Spain} ({\i Isla de Alboran});{\i  perhaps extinct.} Hs.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 3. D. siifolia} G. Kunze,{\i  Flora} ({\i Regensb.}){\b  29}: 685 (1846). Like {\b 1} but leaves with short conical hairs on both surfaces, lyrate-pinnatisect; segments unequal, more or less entire or dentate, the terminal much larger than the lateral. 2n = 20. {\i  S. Portugal, S. Spain.} Hs Lu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Often treated as a subspecies of {\b 1}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b D. vicentina} (Coutinho) Rothm., {\i Agron. Lusit.}{\b  2}: 84 (1940), from S. Portugal (Cabo de S. vicente), with more or less leafless stems, petals up to 6 mm and globose seeds, appears to be a coastal ecotypic variant of {\b 3}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 4. D. ibicensis} (Pau) Gómez-Campo,{\i  Anal. Jard. Bot. Madrid }{\b 38}: 32 (1981) ({\i D. catholica} var.{\i  ibicensis} Pau). Like {\b 1} but short-lived perennial; juvenile leaves lobate to pinnatifid, the segments with obtuse lobes; petals 5-6 mm; seeds in 1 or 2 rows; beak with 0 or 1 seeds. 2n = 16.{\i  Limestone rocks by the sea; mainly on small islands. • Islas Baleares; one station off Cabo de S. Antonio}. Bl Hs.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 5. D. harra} (Forskål) Boiss.,{\i  Fl. Or. }{\b 1}: 388 (1867) (incl.{\i  Pendulina intricata }Willk.,{\i  P. webbiana} Willk.,{\i  P. hispida} auct. hisp.). Subglaucous, more or less fleshy, suffruticose perennial, glabrous or hispid. Lower leaves toothed, lobed or pinnatipartite, the lobes entire or toothed. Petals 6-10 mm, bright yellow. Siliqua 12-60 × 1·8-3 mm; gynophore 2·5-7 mm, conspicuous. 2n = 26.{\i  W. Mediterranean region.} Hs Si.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b crassifolia} (Rahn.) Maire,{\i  Bull. Soc. Hist. Nat. Afr. Nord}{\b  24}: 198 (1933) ({\i D. crassifolia} (Rahn.) DC.): Lower leaves elliptical, 2-4 times as long as wide, acute to obtuse, cuneate at the base, somewhat lobed to dentate; teeth irregular, distinct, acute to subacute.{\i  Sicilia}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp.{\b  lagascana} (DC.) O. Bolòs& vigo,{\i  Fl. Països Catal.}{\b  2}: 57 (1990) ({\i D. lagascana} DC., {\i Pendulina lagascana} (DC.) Amo): Lower leaves oblong, (3-)4-6 times as long as wide, lobed or pinnati-partite, entire to obscurely toothed.{\i  S.E. Spain.}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Subsp.{\i  harra}, from N.W. Africa and S.W. Asia, does not occur in Europe.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 6. D. tenuifolia} (L.) DC.,{\i  Reg. Veg. Syst. Nat.}{\b  2}: 629 (1821). Perennial, but sometimes flowering in the first year, 20-80 cm, woody at the base. Lower leaves not forming a rosette, petiolate, pinnatipartite with 4-8 segments, glabrous or with some hairs at the margin, foetid when crushed. Petals 7·5-15 mm, sulphur-yellow. Siliqua 20-60 × 1-2·5 mm, borne erect on patent pedicels 1-5 cm; gynophore 0·5-6·5 mm. 2n = 22.{\i  W., S. & C. Europe; naturalized or casual elsewhere.} Al Au Be Bl Bu Co Cz Ga Ge He Ho Hs Hu It Ju Lu Po Rm Rs(K) Sa Si Tu [*Br Da Fe No Rs(B, W) Su].
\par

\par
404}
\par