{\rtf1\ansi \deff4\deflang1033{\fonttbl{\f4\froman\fcharset0\fprq2 Times New Roman;}}{\colortbl;\red0\green0\blue0;\red0\green0\blue255;\red0\green255\blue255;\red0\green255\blue0;\red255\green0\blue255;\red255\green0\blue0;\red255\green255\blue0;\red255\green255\blue255;\red0\green0\blue128;\red0\green128\blue128;\red0\green128\blue0;\red128\green0\blue128;\red128\green0\blue0;\red128\green128\blue0;\red128\green128\blue128;\red192\green192\blue192;}{\stylesheet{\widctlpar \f4\fs20\lang2057 \snext0 Normal;}{\*\cs10 \additive Default Paragraph Font;}}{\info{\author dddd}{\operator dddd}{\creatim\yr1998\mo11\dy11\hr16\min55}{\revtim\yr1998\mo11\dy11\hr16\min56}{\version2}{\edmins1}{\nofpages4}{\nofwords976}{\nofchars5565}{\*\company  }{\vern57431}}\widowctrl\ftnbj\aenddoc\hyphcaps0 \fet0\sectd \linex0 {\*\pnseclvl1\pnucrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl2\pnucltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl3\pndec\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl4\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl5\pndec\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl6\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl7\pnlcrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl8\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl9\pnlcrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}
\pard\plain \ \f4\fs20\lang2057 {\fs28    }{\b\fs28 7. D. cretacea}{\fs28  Kotov, }{\i\fs28 Ukr. Bot. Zur. }{\b\fs28 3}{\fs28 : 17 (1926). Annual or biennial 40-60(-80) cm; stems much-branched, with deflexed hairs in the lower part, glabrous above. Leaves mostly basal, pinnati-partite or pinnatisect; segments obtuse. Petals 7-9 mm, yellow. Siliqua 30-40 \'d7 2-2\'b75 mm, with short (0\'b75-1 mm), fleshy style; gynophore 1 mm. \bullet }{\i\fs28  Bare, chalky slopes. Donets basin}{\fs28  }{\i\fs28 (N.E. Ukraine and adjacent parts of Russia).}{\fs28  Rs(C, E).
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 8. D. erucoides}{\fs28  (L.) DC.,}{\i\fs28  Reg. Veg. Syst. Nat. }{\b\fs28 2}{\fs28 : 631 (1821) (incl.}{\i\fs28  D. valentina}{\fs28  Pau,}{\i\fs28  D. virgata}{\fs28  var. }{\i\fs28 platystylos}{\fs28  (Willk.) Willk.). Annual or overwintering 5-50 cm; stems 1 or many, erect or ascending, leafy. Leaves of two types, the lower 5-15 cm, in a lax basal rosette, oblong-lyrate or pinnatisect, with 6-10 lobes, or the lowermost more or less entire or irregularly toothed; upper leaves sessile, more or less amplexicaul; all with sparse, slender hairs. Petals (5-)7-13 mm, white, violet-veined or becoming violet after anthesis. Siliqua (10-)18-50 \'d7 1\'b75-3 mm, ascending, with a usually 1-seeded, conical beak up to 6 mm and almost as wide as the valves; gynophore more or less absent. 2n = 14.}{\i\fs28  S.W. Europe, extending eastwards to S.E. Italy; one station in the Danube delta. A frequent casual in C. Europe.}{\fs28  Bl Co Ga Hs It Lu Rm Sa Si.
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 9. D. virgata}{\fs28  (Cav.) DC.,}{\i\fs28  loc. cit.}{\fs28  (1821). Annual 5-90 cm, yellowish- or reddish-green; stems erect or ascending, densely setose-hispid below. Leaves almost all basal in a rosette, or stems and branches leafy; petiolate or sessile, pinnatipartite, pinnatilobed or sinuate-dentate. Petals 5-8 mm, sulphur-yellow, often violet-veined. Siliqua 15-40 \'d7 1-2 mm, erect or erecto-patent; beak 3-7 mm, long-attenuate, 1-seeded or seedless. 2n = 18.}{\i\fs28  C. & S. Spain; Portugal.}{\fs28  Hs Lu.
\par 
\par Plants from E. & S.E. Spain have been called}{\b\fs28  D. gomez-campoi}{\fs28  Mart\'ednez-Laborde,}{\i\fs28  Willdenowia }{\b\fs28 21}{\fs28 : 66 (1991) (}{\i\fs28 D. platystylos}{\fs28  auct., non Willk.,}{\i\fs28  D. virgata}{\fs28  var.}{\i\fs28  platystylos}{\fs28  (Willk.) Willk.); they are generally smaller, with the beak of the siliqua 1-4 mm, compressed and as broad as the valves, and 2n = 16, and may represent at least a subspecies of }{\b\fs28 9}{\fs28 .
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 10. D. viminea}{\fs28  (L.) DC.,}{\i\fs28  op. cit. }{\fs28 635 (1821). Slender annual 5-30 cm, glabrous or slightly hairy. Leaves confined to a basal rosette, petiolate, lyrate-pinnatilobed with entire lobes (or spathulate and toothed, var.}{\i\fs28  integrifolia}{\fs28  Guss.). Petals 3-4 mm, sulphur- or lemon-yellow. Siliqua 10-35(-40) \'d7 1\'b72-1\'b78 mm, erecto-patent, borne on spreading pedicels; beak short (1-2 mm), narrow. 2n = 20.}{\i\fs28  S. Europe; often casual and locally naturalized in C. Europe.}{\fs28  Az Bl Bu Ga Gr Hs It Ju Lu Sa Si Rs(K) Tu [Ge Rm].
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 11. D. muralis}{\fs28  (L.) DC.,}{\i\fs28  op. cit.}{\fs28  634 (1821) (incl.}{\i\fs28  D. scaposa }{\fs28 DC.). Foetid annual, biennial or perennial 10-50 cm, usually many-stemmed; stems glabrous or sparsely hispid below. Leaves usually more or less confined to a basal rosette, with petioles up to 3 cm, lyrate-pinnatipartite, pinnatifid or sinuate-dentate, sometimes spathulate, entire. Cauline leaves 0-4(-6); when present, subsessile, coarsely toothed. Petals 4-7\'b75(-8\'b75) mm, bright sulphur-yellow or sometimes becoming violet. Siliqua (12-)18-45 \'d7 1\'b75-2\'b75(-3) mm, erecto-patent; gynophore absent; beak more or less conical, seedless. 2n = 42, ?44.}{\i\fs28  W.C. & S. Europe}{\fs28 . Al Bl Co Ga Ge Gr He Ho Hs Hu It Ju Lu Po Rm Rs(K) Sa Si Tu [Br Da Hb Su].
\par 
\par Extremely variable in habit and leaf-shape. This species is probably an allotetraploid derived from }{\b\fs28 6}{\fs28  and }{\b\fs28 10}{\fs28 .
\par 
\par }
\pard \qc\ {\fs28  }{\b\fs28 88.          Brassica}{\fs28              L.
\par }{\fs24  By V.H. Heywood (Ed.1)  revised by J.R. Akeroyd (Ed.2)
\par 
\par }
\pard \ {\fs28 Annuals to perennials or small shrubs. Leaves entire to pinnatipartite. Sepals erect or patent, the inner larger than the outer; petals yellow or white, clawed. Gynophore short or absent. Fruit a siliqua with a long or short beak; valves convex, with a prominent median vein. Seeds usually in 1 row in each loculus, at least in the basal \'bd of the siliqua, globose or rarely ellipsoidal.
\par 
\par Literature: O.E. Schulz in Engler,}{\i\fs28  Pflanzenreich}{\b\fs28  70}{\fs28 (}{\b\fs28 IV.105}{\fs28 ): 21-84 (1919). M. Onno, }{\i\fs28 \'d6sterr. Bot. Zeitschr.}{\b\fs28  82}{\fs28 : 309-334 (1933).
\par 
\par }
\pard \li200\ {\fs28 1 Cauline leaves very few or absent
\par 2 Small shrub with long, thick, woody stock ................................. }{\b\fs28 3. balearica}{\fs28 
\par 2 Perennial herb, usually caespitose
\par 3 Leaves all basal; seeds ellipsoidal
\par 4 Siliqua \'b1 straight, broadest in the middle ................................... }{\b\fs28 21. repanda}{\fs28 
\par 4 Siliqua usually somewhat curved, broadest towards the
\par   apex ........................................................................................ }{\b\fs28 22. glabrescens}{\fs28 
\par 3 A few cauline leaves often present; seeds globose or subglobose
\par 5 Plant glabrous or subglabrous; siliqua up to 2 mm wide ................ }{\b\fs28 2. nivalis}{\fs28 
\par 5 Plant hairy; siliqua more than 2 mm wide ................................. }{\b\fs28 20. gravinae}{\fs28 
\par 1 Stems \'b1 leafy
\par 6 Upper cauline leaves amplexicaul at the base
\par 7 Siliqua 5-12 mm; beak filiform .................................................... }{\b\fs28 18. souliei}{\fs28 
\par 7 Siliqua more than 15 mm; beak conical
\par 8 Siliqua 5-12 mm wide, with thick, woody valves;
\par   seeds \'b1 biseriate ....................................................................... }{\b\fs28 4. macrocarpa}{\fs28 
\par 8 Siliqua 2-5 mm wide, with herbaceous valves; seeds uniseriate
\par 9 Sepals erecto-patent; annual (sometimes biennial) with herbaceous stems
\par 10 Open flowers usually not overtopping the buds of the inflorescence;
\par    petals 11-18 mm ............................................................................. }{\b\fs28 11. napus}{\fs28 
\par 10 Open flowers usually overtopping the buds of the inflorescence;
\par    petals 5-12 mm ................................................................................. }{\b\fs28 12. rapa}{\fs28 
\par 9  Sepals connivent; biennial or perennial with woody stems
\par 11 Lower leaves pubescent to tomentose
\par 12 Siliqua 25-40(-55) mm, tetragonal, abruptly contracted into beak.}{\b\fs28 7. villosa}{\fs28 
\par 12 Siliqua 40-80 mm, terete, gradually attenuate into beak ............... }{\b\fs28 8. incana}{\fs28 
\par 11 Leaves glabrous or with sparse hairs
\par 13 Basal leaves undivided, broadly ovate, spathulate or suborbicular,
\par    sinuate-crenate or -dentate to pinnatifid
\par 14 Petiole at least \'bd as long as the lamina; cauline leaves
\par    usually truncate at the base .......................................................... }{\b\fs28 9. insularis}{\fs28 
\par 14 Petiole not more than 1/3 as long as the lamina; cauline leaves
\par    usually auriculate at the base ........................................................ }{\b\fs28 10. cretica}{\fs28 
\par 13 Basal leaves lyrate-pinnatipartite or -pinnatisect
\par 15 Basal leaves lyrate-pinnatipartite, the terminal lobe entire or
\par    pinnatifid, obtuse; siliqua terete ................................................... }{\b\fs28 5. oleracea}{\fs28 
\par 15 Basal leaves lyrate-pinnatisect, the terminal lobe pinnatipartite,
\par    \'b1 acute; siliqua tetragonal ............................................................ }{\b\fs28 6. rupestris}{\fs28 
\par 
\par 405}
\par }