{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 Silicula c. 2-2·3 × 1·5-2 mm, ovate, glabrous; style very short, scarcely exceeding the small apical notch.{\i  Gypsaceous and saline soils. C. Spain}. Hs.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 9. L. virginicum} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 645 (1753). Annual or biennial, usually branched above; stem 30-50 cm, erect; papillae curved or appressed. Basal leaves up to 8 cm, rough with short bristles, lyrate; middle and upper cauline leaves sharply toothed to entire, ciliate. Sepals 0·6-1 mm; petals longer than the sepals, or absent. Pedicels 2·5-5 mm in fruit, papillose on the upper side, glabrous beneath. Silicula 2-4 × 2-4 mm, more or less orbicular, narrowly winged above, the apical notch broad but shallow; style 0·1-0·2 mm, not exceeding the notch.{\i  Widely naturalized in Europe.} [Al Az Be Cz Da Fe Ga Ge He Hs Hu It Ju Lu No Po Rm Su.({\i North America}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 10. L. densiflorum} Schrader,{\i  Ind. Sem. Horti Gotting.} 4 (1832) ({\i L. apetalum} sensu N. Busch in Komarov, non Willd.; incl. {\i L. neglectum} Thell.,{\i  L. virginicum} subsp. {\i neglectum} (Thell.) P. Fourn.). Annual or biennial; stem single, erect, branched above; papillae straight. Basal leaves long-petiolate, elliptical, usually deeply toothed; upper cauline leaves linear to linear-lanceolate, entire or remotely toothed, ciliate. Sepals c. 1 mm; petals filiform, shorter than the sepals or absent. Pedicels 3-5·5 mm in fruit, papillose on the upper side, glabrous beneath. Silicula 2·5-4 × 2-3 mm, ovate to obovate, narrowly winged in the upper 1/3, narrowly notched; style very short. {\i Widely naturalized in Europe}. [Au Be Cz Da Fe Ga Ge He Hu It No Po Rs(C, W, E) Si Su. ({\i North America.})
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 11. L. bonariense} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 645 (1753). Unbranched annual or biennial; stem with long, unbranched hairs. All leaves 1- or 2-pinnate and more or less hairy. Sepals 0·5-0·9 mm; petals shorter than the sepals. Pedicels (2-)3-4·5 mm in fruit, with long papillae on the upper side. Silicula 2-3·5(-4) × 2-3 mm, ovate or orbicular, narrowly winged above, with narrow, shallow apical notch.{\i  Naturalized in W. & C. Europe.} [Be Ge Ho Hs Hu.] ({\i S.E. South America}. )
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 12. L. ruderale} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 645 (1753) ({\i L. ambiguum} Lange). Annual or biennial, more or less foetid, with a single, erect or ascending stem 10-30 cm, minutely papillose. Basal leaves 5-8 cm, long-petiolate, 2- or 3-pinnatisect; upper cauline leaves linear, obtuse, entire. Sepals 0·7-0·9 mm; petals 0 or very inconspicuous. Pedicels 2-4 mm in fruit, papillose all round. Silicula (1·5-)2-2·5 × 1·5-2 mm, ovate or elliptical, almost wingless, deeply notched; style c. 0·1 mm and not exceeding notch. 2n = 16, 28, 32. {\i Throughout most of Europe but perhaps native only in the south.} All except Az Co Hb ?Sa Sb Si.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 13. L. africanum} (Burm. fil.) DC., {\i Reg. Veg. Syst. Nat}{\b . 2}: 552 (1821). Annual; stem papillose above. Basal leaves oblanceolate, subpinnate; upper cauline leaves lanceolate to oblanceolate, acute, dentate. Sepals 0·5-0·75 mm; petals 1/2-1/3 as long as the sepals. Pedicels 2-4 mm in fruit, erecto-patent, papillose above; petals absent or up to 0·5 mm. Silicula 2-3 × 1·5-2 mm, ovate to elliptical, the apical notch shallow and narrow; style very short. {\i  Naturalized in W. Europe.} [Be Ga Ge He Ho.] ({\i E.C. & S. Africa}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 In Europe only subsp.{\i  africanum} occurs. Subsp.{\b  divaricatum} (Solander) Jonsell, {\i Bot. Not.}{\b  128}: 41 (1975) ({\i L. divaricatum} Solander), from S. Africa, is perhaps present as a casual.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b L. schinzii} Thell.,{\i Viert. Naturf. Ges. Zürich}{\b  51}: 167 (1906), like {\b 13} but the stem with scale-like trichomes, lower cauline leaves pinnatifid, with entire or rarely toothed segments, and pedicels erect, glabrous and appressed to the stem, has been reported to be naturalized in Europe but is probably only casual.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 14. L. pinnatifidum} Ledeb., {\i Fl. Ross. }{\b 1}: 206 (1841). Like {\b 13} but sometimes biennial; stem glabrous; cauline leaves almost entire, oblanceolate-spathulate; silicula 2-2·75 × 1·75-2·3 mm, broadly elliptical to suborbicular, with an entire to slightly notched apex. {\i Saline places. S.E. Russia.} Rs(E).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Sect. LEPIDIUM. Silicula not or very slightly winged, not or slightly notched. Stamens 6.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 15. L. perfoliatum} L., {\i Sp. Pl}. 643 (1753). Annual or biennial with single, erect, sparsely hairy stem 20-40 cm. Leaves strongly dimorphic, the basal long-petiolate, 2- or 3-pinnatifid, with linear segments; upper cauline leaves ovate to subrotund, more or less acute, entire, the broad, rounded lobes completely enclosing the stem and overlapping. Sepals c. 1 mm; petals pale yellow, narrowly spathulate, only a little longer than the sepals. Pedicels 4-5 mm in fruit, ascending, glabrous. Silicula usually c. 4 × 4 mm, very narrowly winged above; style short, equalling or exserted from the small apical notch. 2n = 16.{\i  Native in C., E. & S.E. Europe; naturalized or casual elsewhere.} Al Au Bu Cz Gr Hu Ju Po Rm Rs(C, W, K, E) Tu [Be Da Ga Ge He Hs].
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 16. L. cartilagineum} (J. Mayer) Thell., {\i Viert. Naturf. Ges. Zürich }{\b 51}: 173 (1906). Perennial; stems 5-30 cm, very flexuous, branched above, papillose. Leaves leathery-succulent, broadly elliptical, ovate, lanceolate or linear-lanceolate, more or less obtuse, entire, cuneate at the base; cauline leaves sometimes with a sagittate base. Sepals c. 1·25 mm; petals about twice as long as the sepals. Pedicels c. 4 mm, thickened in fruit. Silicula 2·5-3 × 2·5-3 mm, ovate, distinctly reticulate-alveolate when ripe; style short, exserted. {\i Saline areas of C. & E. Europe. }Au ?Cz Ge Hu Ju Po Rm Rs(C, W, K, E).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b cartilagineum} (incl.{\i  L. crassifolium} Waldst. & Kit.,{\i  L. pumilum} Boiss. & Balansa): Plant usually 20-30 cm, branched. Leaves broadly elliptical or ovate, the cauline with distinct auricles at the base. 2n = 16.{\i  Throughout the range of the species}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp.{\i  pumilum} (Boiss. & Balansa) Hedge in Rech. fil.,{\i  Fl. Iran. }{\b 57}: 67 (1968): Plant 5-15 cm, little branched. Leaves lanceolate or linear-lanceolate, the cauline without or with minute auricles at the base.{\i  Jugoslavia; Ukraine}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b L. borysthenicum} Kleopow,{\i  Jour. Inst. Bot. Acad. Sci. Ukr.}{\b  21-22}: 251 (1939) (from C. & E. Ukraine), with stems 30-40 cm, basal leaves 10-16 × 0·3-0·6 cm, and {\b L. syvaschicum }Kleopow,{\i  loc. cit.} (1939) (from S. Ukraine), with stems up to 25 cm, basal leaves 4-8 × 0·5-1·3 cm, oblong-elliptical, may represent further subspecies of {\b 16}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 17. L. latifolium} L.,{\i  Sp. Pl.} 644 (1753). Perennial with creeping rhizome; stems 50-130 cm, erect, glabrous, much-branched above. Leaves coriaceous, the basal and lower cauline up to 30 cm, long-petiolate, ovate, toothed or sometimes pinnatilobed, glabrous or sparsely hairy; upper leaves sessile, ovate to lanceolate, entire. Flowers in a large, dense, pyramidal panicle. Sepals 0·9-1·5 mm, broadly white-margined; petals 1·8-2·5 mm, up to twice as long as the sepals, with rounded-obovate limb. Pedicels 4-5 mm in fruit. Silicula 1·5-2·5 × c. 2 mm, elliptical to orbicular, not winged or notched; style c. 0·2 mm, with a capitate stigma. 2n = 24. {\i Most of Europe but rare in the north.} All except Bl Cr Fa Fe Is No Rs(N) Sb.
\par

\par
401}
\par