{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 petiole about as long as the lamina. Siliqua 35-50(-70) × 3-5 mm, 4-angled, attenuate into a slender beak 3-6(-12) mm. 2n = 18.{\i  Calcareous rocks.• W. Italy; Sicilia.} It Si.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 7. B. villosa} Biv.,{\i  Stirp. Rar. Sic. Descr.}{\b  4}: 20 (1816) (incl. {\i B. tinei} Lojac.). Like {\b 6} but terminal lobe of basal leaves more or less undivided, obtuse, pubescent, villous or white-tomentose; petiole shorter than the lamina; siliqua 25-40(-55) mm, abruptly contracted into beak 5 mm.{\i  Calcareous rocks. • Sicilia.} Si.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Usually very distinct from{\b  6} but transitional variants are known.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 8. B. incana} Ten.,{\i  Prodr. Fl. Nap.} xxxix (1811). Perennial, woody at the base, branched; stems up to 100 cm, glabrous except at the base. Basal leaves up to 40 cm, pubescent to tomentose, shortly petiolate, lyrate, with the terminal lobe undivided, usually obtuse. Petals 16-18 mm, yellow. Siliqua 40-80 × 2-3 mm, linear, constricted at intervals, terete, gradually attenuate into the beak.{\i  Calcareous rocks, usually coastal. • W. & S. Italy, Sicilia; W. Jugoslavia.} Al It Ju Si.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 In the islands of the Adriatic a number of endemic variants, distinguished principally by fruit characters, have been recognized as species: {\b B. botteri} Vis.,{\i  Fl. Dalm.}{\b  3}: 135 (1850), with siliqua 30-40 × 4-5 mm;{\b  B. cazzae} Ginzberger & Teyber, {\i Österr. Bot. Zeitschr.}{\b  19}: 238 (1921), with siliqua 35-50(-60) × 3-3·5 mm; and{\b  B. mollis} Vis.,{\i  Fl. Dalm.}{\b  3}: 359 (1852), with siliqua 40-60 × 3-4 mm. Their status is uncertain.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 9. B. insularis} Moris,{\i  Fl. Sard.}{\b  1}: 168 (1837) ({\i B. oleracea} subsp.{\i  insularis} (Moris) Rouy & Fouc.). Perennial up to 150 cm. Basal leaves 10-15 cm, lyrate or spathulate; terminal lobe broad and rounded or narrowly elongate, crenate or dentate, glabrous or with a few hairs on margins; petiole usually at least ½ as long as the lamina. Cauline leaves usually truncate at the base. Petals white or pale yellow. Siliqua 30-70(-90) × 3-5 mm, linear, attenuate into beak 5-10 mm, which is narrower than the siliqua. 2n = 18. •{\i  Corse, Sardegna; Sicilia} ({\i Pantellaria}). Co Sa Si.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 10. B. cretica} Lam., {\i Encycl. Méth. Bot.}{\b  1}: 747 (1785). Like {\b 9} but petioles of the basal leaves not more than 1/3 as long as the lamina; cauline leaves usually auriculate at the base; beak usually as broad as the siliqua at the base.{\i  S.E. Greece and Aegean region.} Cr Gr.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Subsp.{\i  botrytis} (L.) O. Schwarz (Cauliflower) is regarded as having been derived from this species in cultivation.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Petals usually white; stem branched mainly in upper part ... ({\b b}) subsp.{\b  nivea}
\par
1 Petals yellow, whitish- or brownish-yellow; stem branched from near base
\par
2 Seeds faintly reticulate ...................................................... ({\b a}) subsp.{\b  cretica}
\par
2 Seeds distinctly reticulate ............................................... ({\b c}) subsp.{\b  laconica}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp.{\b  cretica} : Plant short, the stem branching from the base. Basal leaves with short petiole (petiole rarely absent), pinnatifid or almost entire. Petals yellow, rarely whitish. Seeds faintly reticulate.{\i  S.E. Greece}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp.{\b  nivea} (Boiss. & Spruner) M. Gustafsson & Snogerup, {\i Bot. Chron. }{\b 3}: 8 (1983) ({\i B. nivea} Boiss. & Spruner): Plant up to 150 cm, the stem branched mainly in the upper part. Basal leaves with long petiole, lyrate or entire. Petals white, rarely yellowish-white. Seeds distinctly reticulate.{\i  N.E. Peloponnisos; Kriti.}
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b c}) Subsp.{\b  laconica} M. Gustafsson & Snogerup, {\i loc. cit}. (1983): Plant 50-100 cm, the stem branched from near the base. Basal leaves petiolate, crenate-serrate, deeply pinnatifid, or lyrate with prominent, rounded lobes. Petals whitish- to pale brownish-yellow. Seeds distinctly reticulate. 2n = 18.{\i  Limestone cliffs. • S.E. Greece}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 11. B. napus} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 666 (1753). Annual or biennial, with slender or stout, often fusiform or tuberous taproot; stems up to 150 cm. Basal leaves lyrate, sometimes ciliate, petiolate, glaucous and glabrous, or with a few bristly hairs especially along the veins, upper cauline leaves sessile, more or less entire, amplexicaul. Open flowers usually not overtopping buds of inflorescence. Sepals erecto-patent; petals 11-18 mm, yellow, sometimes tinged with pink. Siliqua 35-95(-110) × (2·5-)3·5 mm, suberect to spreading, attenuate into a slender beak 5-25(-30) mm. 2n = 38.{\i  Known only from cultivation; cultivated in most European countries, and widely naturalized}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Several cultivars are extensively cultivated. There are numerous different classifications of these, and interpretations of their relationship to the wild subspecies. A summary is given in E.N. Sinskaja,{\i  Bull. Appl. Bot. Pl.-Breed.} ({\i Leningrad}){\b  33}: 233-250 (1960). These include subsp.{\i  pabularia} (DC.) Janchen (Leaf-rape), an annual with crispate, dissected leaves; and subsp. {\i rapifera} Metzger (incl. var.{\i  napobrassica }(L.) Reichenb.) (Swede), a biennial with a thickened, more or less globose, edible stem-base and taproot, with pinkish-yellow flowers.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Subsp.{\i  napus} (subsp. {\i oleifera} DC.), an annual or biennial with a non-tuberous root and lyrate-pinnatifid leaves, is grown as a fodder crop (Rape) and for the oil extracted from its seeds.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 It is thought that crosses of 5({\b a}) (2n = 18) with{\b  11} (2n = 20) gave rise to subsp.{\i  pabularia} (2n = 38), from which subsp.{\i  napus} (2n = 38) and subsp.{\i  rapifera} (2n = 38) and other cultivars were derived.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 12. B. rapa} L.,{\i  Sp. Pl.} 666 (1753) ({\i B. campestris} L.,{\i  B. asperifolia} Lam.). Like {\b 11} but basal leaves bright green, with setiform hairs; open flowers usually overtopping buds of the inflorescence; petals 5-12 mm, bright yellow. {\i Weed or ruderal in much of Europe; native distribution not known.} *[Al Bl Br Bu Co Cz Da Fe Ge Gr Hb Ho Hs Hu Is It Ju No Rm Rs(K, E) Sa Si Su.]
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp.{\b  rapa} : Taproot tuberous. 2n = 20.{\i  Cultivated for the edible taproot} ({\i Turnip}),{\i  and sometimes escaping}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp.{\b  sylvestris} (L.) Janchen in Janchen & Wendelberger,{\i  Kleine Fl. Wien }55 (1953): Taproot non-tuberous. 2n = 20.{\i  Throughout the range of the species.}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Subsp.{\b  oleifera} DC.,{\i  Prodr. }{\b 1}: 214 (1824), is grown as a fodder crop (Turnip rape) and for the oil extracted from its seeds. It differs from subsp. ({\b a}) by its larger, reddish-brown (rather than grey or blackish) seeds.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 13. B. juncea} (L.) Czern.,{\i  Consp. Pl. Charc.} 8 (1859). Annual up to 150 cm; branches long, erecto-patent. Lower leaves petiolate, lyrate-pinnatisect, with 1-3 pairs of lobes on each side and a larger, sparsely setose, terminal lobe; upper leaves subentire, shortly petiolate, glabrous. Sepals erecto-patent; petals 6-13 mm. Siliqua (20-)30-60 × 2-5 mm, constricted at intervals, sessile, attenuate into a tapering, seedless beak 5-10 mm.{\i  Cultivated for its seeds in S. Russia; naturalized in S. Europe and a casual elsewhere.} [Bu Hs Rm Rs(E).] ({\i S. & E. Asia})
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 14. B. fruticulosa} Cyr.,{\i  Pl. Rar. Neap.}{\b  2}: 7 (1792). Annual to perennial, usually becoming woody at the base; stems up to 50 cm,
\par

\par
407}
\par