{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 from W. China, intermediate in most respects between {\b 1} and {\b 5}, has been planted experimentally for timber in Europe.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 6. P. sitchensis} (Bong.) Carrière, {\i Traité Gén. Conif. }260 (1855) ({\i P. falcata} (Rahn.) Valck.-Suringar,{\i  P. menziesii} (Douglas) Carrière). Up to 40(-60) m. Leaves 15-25 mm, flattened, with 2 broad, white stomatal bands above, dark green beneath, pungent. Female cone 6-10 × 2·5-3 cm, cylindric-oblong; scales rhombic-oblong.{\i  Cultivated for timber in N.W. & C. Europe.} [Au Br Ga Ge Hb Ho Is No.] ({\i W. North America}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 7. P. omorika} (Pancic) Purkyne,{\i  Österr. Monatsschr. Forstwes.}{\b  27:} 446 (1877) ({\i Pinus omorika }Pancic). Up to 30 m, of very slender habit. Leaves 8-18 mm, flattened, with 2 broad, white stomatal bands above, dark green beneath, obtuse and mucronulate. Female cone 3-6 × 1·5-2·5 cm, ovoid-oblong; scales suborbicular, denticulate. •{\i  C. Jugoslavia} ({\i Drina basin});{\i  cultivated for timber in Britain and some Scandinavian countries.} Ju [Br Da Su].
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 5.              Larix}                 Miller
\par   

\pard\f0\fs24\qc  By J. do Amaral Franco.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Deciduous trees with irregularly whorled branches. Twigs of 2 kinds: long shoots bearing scattered leaves; and persistent spurlike shoots bearing tufts of leaves. All leaves linear, usually flattened and thin. Resin-canals 2. Female cones ripening in the first year, subglobose to oblong; scales rounded, persistent; bracts exceeding ovuliferous scales in flower, hidden or exserted at maturity.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 In addition to the species described below, {\b L. laricina} (Duroi) C. Koch,{\i  Dendrologie}{\b  2}({\b 2}): 262 (1873), from E. North America, is cultivated on a small scale in Europe. It is like {\b 4} but with somewhat shorter leaves, and the young branches usually glaucous.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Young shoots glaucous; leaves with 2 distinct, white stomatal 
\par
  bands beneath; cone-scales recurved at the apex ......................... {\b 1. kaempferi}
\par
1 Young shoots not glaucous; leaves without white stomatal bands beneath
\par
2 Female cone-scales glabrous outside ............................................ {\b 4. gmelinii}
\par
2 Female cone-scales puberulent or shortly tomentose outside
\par
3 Female cone-scales straight, about twice as long as the bracts .......{\b 2. decidua}
\par
3 Female cone-scales slightly incurved at apex, convex, about 3 
\par
  times as long as the bracts ................................................................ {\b 3. sibirica}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. L. kaempferi} (Lamb.) Carrière,{\i  Fl. Serres Jard. Eur. }{\b 11:} 97 (1856) sec. Franco, {\i Anais Inst. Sup. Agron.} ({\i Lisboa}) {\b 19:} 18 (1952) ({\i L. leptolepis} (Siebold & Zucc.) Endl.,{\i  L. japonica} Carrière). Up to 30 m. Twigs yellowish- or reddish-brown, glaucous. Leaves 15-25 mm, with 2 conspicuous, white stomatal bands beneath. Female cones 1·5-3·5 cm, ovoid; scales numerous, the upper edge recurved, slightly pubescent.{\i  Planted for timber, mainly in N.W. Europe.} [Au Be Br Da Fe Ga Ge Hb Ho Rs(B) Su.] ({\i Japan}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. L. decidua} Miller,{\i  Gard. Dict.} ed. 8, no. 1 (1768) ({\i L. europaea }DC., {\i L. larix} (L.) Karsten,{\i  Pinus larix} L.). Up to 35 m. Twigs yellowish, glabrous. Leaves 20-30 mm, thin and soft, with 2 greenish stomatal bands beneath. Female cone 2-3·5 cm, ovoid; scales 40-50, rounded, loosely appressed, softly pubescent. •{\i  Alps; W. Carpathians; planted elsewhere for timber and locally naturalized.} Au Cz Ga Ge He *Hu It Po Rm Rs(W) [Be Br Fe Hb *Ju No Rs(B) Su].
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Plants with smaller cones and more concave, rounded scales from Poland and N.W. Ukraine, have sometimes been treated as subsp.{\b  polonica} (Racib.) Domin,{\i  Pl. Cechosl. Enum. }12 (1936) ({\i L. polonica} Racib.). Other variants have been described in detail by K. Siman in Klika{\i  et al., Jehlicnaté }95-126 (1953).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 A hybrid between {\b 2} and {\b 1} ({\i L}. ×{\i  eurolepis} A. Henry) is planted for timber in parts of Europe.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 3. L. sibirica} Ledeb.,{\i  Fl. Altaica }{\b 4:} 204 (1833) ({\i L. russica }(Endl.) Sabine ex Trautv.). Up to 40 m. Twigs light yellowish-grey, more or less hairy. Leaves up to 35 mm, thin and soft with 2 greenish stomatal bands beneath. Female cone c. 3·5 cm; scales c. 30, becoming erecto-patent, finely tomentose outside.{\i  N.E. Russia, westwards to c.} 37°{\i  E. and southwards to c. }52°{\i  N.; planted for timber in N. Sweden and Finland.} Rs(N, C) [Fe Su].
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 4. L. gmelinii} (Rupr.) Kuzen., {\i Trav. Mus. Bot. Acad. Pétersb. }{\b 18:} 41 (1920). Up to 30 m. Twigs yellowish or reddish, often pubescent. Leaves c. 30 mm, bright green, with 2 greenish stomatal bands beneath. Female cone 2-2·5 cm, ovoid; scales c. 20, glabrous outside.{\i  Planted for timber in N. Europe}. [Da Fe No.] ({\i E. Asia.})
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 6.               Cedrus}                 Trew
\par  

\pard\f0\fs24\qc  By J. do Amaral Franco.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Like {\i Larix} but leaves evergreen, usually 3-sided; female cones ripening in the second year, the scales falling from the persistent axis when ripe; bracts minute.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 Leading shoot pendent; leaves up to 50 mm; female cone
\par
   rounded at apex .............................................................................. {\b 1. deodara}
\par
Leading shoot stiff, erect; leaves not more than 30 mm; 
\par
   female cone truncate or umbilicate at apex ................................... {\b 2. atlantica}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. C. deodara} (D. Don) G. Don fil. in Loudon,{\i  Hort. Brit.} 388 (1830) ({\i Pinus deodara} D. Don). Up to 60 m or more, with pendent leading shoot. Twigs densely hairy. Leaves 20-50 mm, usually green. Male cone 5-12 cm. Female cone 7-14 × 5-9 cm, broadly ellipsoidal, rounded at the apex.{\i  Planted for timber in S. Europe.} [Ga Gr It Lu.] ({\i Afghanistan and N.W. Himalaya.})
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. C. atlantica} (Endl.) Carrière,{\i  Traité Gén. Conif.} 285 (1855) ({\i Pinus cedrus} L.). Up to 40 m, with stiff leading shoot. Young twigs downy. Leaves 10-30 mm, green or glaucous. Male cone 3-5 cm. Female cone 5-8 × 3-5 cm, subcylindrical, truncate or umbilicate at the apex. Planted for timber in S. Europe. [Ga Gr It Lu.] (Algeria, Morocco.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b C. libani} A. Richard in Bory,{\i  Dict. Class. Hist. Nat.}{\b  3:} 399 (1823), from S. Anatolia and Lebanon, is frequently planted as an ornamental tree, but not on a large scale. It differs from 2 in its glabrous young twigs, dark green leaves, and female cone 9-15 cm. It is perhaps only subspecifically distinct from{\b  2}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 7.            Pinus}               L.
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc  By †H. Gaussen, V.H. Heywood & A.O. Chater
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Evergreen trees or shrubs with regularly whorled branches. Twigs of 2 kinds: long shoots bearing scale-like leaves, and deciduous short shoots bearing acicular leaves in clusters of 2-5(-8). Resin-canals 2 or more, varying in position. Male cones catkin-like,
\par

\par
40}
\par