{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 Plants from near the Baltic in Sweden seem to differ in having dark purple sepals and narrower, more toothed upper cauline leaves with a longer, acute apex. Specimens from Greece and Sicilia have the underside of the leaves densely covered with stellate hairs and are apparently referable to var. {\i velutinum} Hayek ex Thell. Further study may indicate that both these variants should be regarded as subspecies.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 18. L. lyratum} L.,{\i  Sp. Pl.} 644 (1753). Perennial up to 30 cm, sometimes woody at the base; stems very flexuous, glabrous. Leaves linear to linear-lanceolate, pinnate or pinnatisect, the upper cauline sometimes entire and bract-like. Sepals c. 1 mm; petals about twice as long as the sepals. Silicula c. 2 × 1-1·5 mm, ovate, acute.{\i  S.E. Russia, Krym.} Rs(K, E).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp.{\b  lacerum} (C.A. Meyer) Thell.,{\i  Neue Denkschr. Schweiz. Ges. Naturw.}{\b  41}: 166 (1906) (incl. {\i L. turczaninovi} Lipsky, {\i L. meyeri} Claus): Plant woody at the base. Basal leaves pinnatipartite, the lobes remote, narrow; cauline leaves small, often bract-like, linear and entire, or the lower with a few linear, obtuse pinnae. Style 1/4-2/3 as long as the ovary when in flower, 1/8-1/4 as long as the silicula. •{\i  Throughout the range of the species}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp.{\b  coronopifolium} (Fischer) Thell.,{\i  op. cit.} 167 (1906) ({\i L. coronopifolium} Fischer): Plant not woody at the base. Basal and cauline leaves linear to narrowly linear-lanceolate, 1-pinnatisect, with a long, narrow terminal lobe and 2 to many narrow lateral lobes, long-petiolate; numerous linear bract-like leaves on the branches. Style 1/2-2/3 as long as the ovary when in flower, c. 1/2 as long as the silicula.{\i  S.E. Russia}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Subsp.{\i  lyratum} occurs in the Caucasus and S.W. Asia.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 19. L. graminifolium} L.,{\i  Syst. Nat.} ed. 10,{\b  2}: 1127 (1759). Perennial with erect glabrous or sparsely hairy stems up to 50 cm, branched above. Basal leaves up to 10 cm, long-petiolate, oblanceolate to oblong, toothed or pinnately lobed; upper cauline leaves linear or linear-spathulate. Sepals 0·5-1·4 mm, narrowly white-margined above the middle; petals up to 1½ times as long as the sepals, with obovate-spathulate limb. Pedicels 2·5-4 mm in fruit. Silicula 2·5-4 × 1·5-3 mm, acute to acuminate, not notched, not or scarcely winged; style c. 0·2 mm, exceeding the notch. {\i  S. & C. Europe, extending northwards to the Netherlands.} Al Au Bl Bu Co Cz Ga Ge Gr He Ho Hs Hu It Ju Rm Rs(K) Sa Si Tu [Be Br].
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp.{\b  graminifolium }({\i L. iberis} L.): Perennial, sometimes woody; almost or quite glabrous. Basal leaves incise-dentate to pinnately lobed, long-petiolate. Sepals greenish. 2n = 48.{\i  Throughout the range of the species.}
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp.{\b  suffruticosum} (L.) P. Monts., {\i Feddes Repert.}{\b  69}: 6 (1964) ({\i L. suffruticosum} L.): Perennial with woody rhizome protruding above the surface of the ground; stem, branches and pedicels minutely hairy. Basal leaves very long-petiolate, with a few teeth near the apex. Sepals usually purplish.{\i  W. Mediterranean region.}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 81.            Cardaria}            Desv.
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc  By P.W. Ball.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Like{\i  Lepidium }but the inflorescence a dense corymbose panicle; silicula cordate, indehiscent.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Literature: G.A. Mulligan & C. Frankton,{\i  Canad. J. Bot.}{\b  40}: 1411-1426 (1962).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. C. draba} (L.) Desv., {\i Jour. Bot. Appl. }{\b 3}: 163 (1814) ({\i Lepidium draba} L.) Glabrous to pubescent perennial 15-60(-90) cm, producing adventitious buds on the roots. Leaves obovate to ovate-oblong, sinuate-dentate, the basal cuneate, petiolate, the cauline sessile, amplexicaul. Petals 2·5-4 mm, white. Silicula 3-4·5 × 3·5-5 mm, emarginate, inflated. 2n = 62, 64. {\i Cultivated and wasteground. Probably native in S. Europe, but established throughout most of Europe as a weed.} Al *Au Bl Bu Co Cr Ga Gr Hs *Hu It Ju *Lu Rm Rs(W, K, E) Sa Si Tu [Be Br Cz Da Fe Ge Hb He Ho No Po Rs(B, C) Su].
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 The common plant in Europe is subsp.{\i  draba.} Subsp. {\b chalepensis} (L.) O.E. Schulz in Engler & Prantl,{\i  Naturl. Pflanzenfam}. ed. 2,{\b  17b}: 417 (1936) ({\i C. chalepensis} (L.) Hand.-Mazz., {\i Lepidium chalepense} L., {\i L. draba} subsp. {\i chalepense} (L.) Thell.), from S.W. Asia, with the fruit more or less cuneate at the base, occurs as a casual.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 82.          Coronopus}            Haller
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc  By P.W. Ball
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Glabrous or with unbranched hairs. Raceme leaf-opposed. Sepals patent; petals white, small or absent; stamens 2-6. Fruit an angusti-septate silicula, indehiscent or breaking in 2 halves; valves subglobose, verrucose or reticulate. Seeds 2. ({\i Senebiera} DC.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Silicula c. 1·5 × 2-3 mm, emarginate ........................................... {\b 3. didymus}
\par
1 Silicula 2-3 × 3-4·5 mm, rounded or apiculate
\par
2 Perennial; pedicels at least 2·5 mm, longer than the silicula ......... {\b 1. navasii}
\par
2 Annual or biennial; pedicels not more than 2 mm, shorter
\par
  than the silicula .......................................................................... {\b 2. squamatus}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. C. navasii} Pau, {\i Butll. Inst. Catalana Hist. Nat. }{\b 22}: 31 (1922). Diffuse perennial up to 30 cm. Leaves ovate or lanceolate-pinnatifid. Inflorescence elongate in fruit. Pedicels at least 2·5 mm longer than the silicula. Petals c. 2 mm. Silicula c. 2·5 × 3 mm ovoid. •{\i  S. Spain} ({\i Sierra de Gador}). Hs.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Possibly not distinct from{\b  C. violaceus} (Munby) O. Kuntze, {\i Revis. Gen.}{\b  1}: 27 (1891), from N.W. Africa.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. C. squamatus} (Forskål) Ascherson,{\i  Fl. Brandenb.}{\b  1}: 62 (1860) ({\i C. procumbens} Gilib., {\i C. ruellii} All., {\i Senebiera coronopus} (L.) Poiret). Procumbent annual or biennial up to 40 cm. Lower leaves pinnati-partite, the segments usually pinnatifid. Raceme usually crowded in fruit. Pedicels up to 2 mm. Petals 1-2 mm, longer than the sepals; fertile stamens 6. Silicula 2-3 × 3-4·5 mm, almost reniform, apiculate, strongly reticulate or ridged, or verrucose; style 0·3-0·5 mm.{\i  Ruderal. W., C. & S. Europe, northwards to c.} 66°{\i  N. in Fennoscandia; status uncertain in the northern part of its range.} All except Bl Fa Is Rs(N, C, E) Sb.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 3. C. didymus} (L.) Sm.,{\i  Fl. Brit.}{\b  2}: 691 (1800) ({\i C. pinnatifida} DC., {\i Senebiera didyma} (L.) Pers.). Procumbent or ascending annual or biennial up to 40 cm. Lower leaves pinnatipartite, the segments usually pinnatifid. Raceme somewhat elongate in fruit. Pedicels 1·5-3·5 mm, usually longer than the silicula. Petals c. 0·5 mm, shorter than the sepals, sometimes absent; fertile stamens usually 2. Silicula 1·3-1·7 × 2-3 mm, emarginate, reticulate; style absent, or up to 0·2 mm and included in notch. 2n = 32.{\i  Ruderal. Naturalized in W., C. & S. Europe; a common casual elsewhere.} [Al Au Az Be Bl Br Co Cz Ga Ge Gr Hb He Ho Hs Hu It Lu Po Rm Sa Si.] ({\i ?South America}.)
\par

\par
402}
\par