{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 8 Leaves 4·5-10 cm, sinuately lobed, pinnatifid to pinnatipartite
\par
9 Leaves 4·5-8 cm, deeply pinnatipartite, the lobes rounded, denticulate
\par
  ........................................................................................ ({\b f}) subsp. {\b cantabrica}
\par
9 Leaves 6-10 cm, sinuate-lobed to pinnatifid, with the lobes entire
\par
10 Siliqua 40-60 × 3·5-4 mm, pendent ............................ ({\b g}) subsp.{\b  cadevallii}
\par
10 Siliqua 50-80 × 2·5-3 mm, patent or ascending ......... ({\b h}) subsp.{\b  blancoana}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp.{\b  repanda} : Stems 2-10(-15) cm. Leaves 5-40 mm, spathulate or obovate, sinuate-dentate, rarely pinnatifid. Raceme 2- to 12-flowered. Siliqua 20-30(-60) × 3-3·5 mm. 2n = 20. •{\i  S.W. Alps}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp.{\b  saxatilis} (DC.) Heywood,{\i  Feddes Repert.}{\b  69}: 151 (1964) ({\i Diplotaxis saxatilis} DC., {\i D. humilis} Gren. & Godron): Stems 2-16 cm. Leaves 2-6 cm, usually pinnatipartite. Raceme 2- to 10-flowered. Siliqua 20-50 × 2-2·5 mm. 2n = 20. •{\i  S. France} ({\i near Aix-en-Provence and Montpellier}).
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b c}) Subsp.{\b  galissieri} (Giraud.) Heywood, {\i Feddes Repert.}{\b  69}: 150 (1964) ({\i Diplotaxis galissieri} Giraud.): Stems 30-40 cm. Leaves 6-10 cm, pinnatipartite; petiole usually longer than the lamina. Raceme up to 35-flowered, dense. Siliqua 40-55 × 2·5-3 mm. •{\i  S. France} ({\i Ariege}).
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b d}) Subsp.{\b  maritima} (Rouy) Heywood, {\i Feddes Repert}{\b . 66}: 153 (1962) ({\i Diplotaxis maritima} Rouy): Distinguishable from the other subspecies by its fleshy, glaucous leaves, and compact, many-flowered corymb of conspicuous flowers, with broad, cuneate petals, truncate at the apex.{\i  Maritime rocks. • E. Spain} ({\i Alicante prov}.).
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b e}) Subsp.{\b  confusa} (Emberger & Maire) Heywood,{\i  loc. cit.} (1962) ({\i B. saxatilis} subsp. {\i confusa} Emberger & Maire, {\i B. humilis} sensu Willk. pro parte,{\i  Diplotaxis brassicoides} Rouy pro parte): Densely caespitose with woody, branched stock; stems 10-35 cm. Leaves 3-8 cm, sinuate-dentate to pinnatifid. Raceme 10- to 30-flowered. Siliqua 30-50 × 1-2 mm.{\i  Mountains of S. and S.E. Spain}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b f}) Subsp.{\b  cantabrica} (Font Quer) Heywood,{\i  Feddes Repert.}{\b  69}: 151 (1964): Stems 10-20 cm. Leaves 4·5-8 cm, pinnatipartite or pinnatisect. Raceme 15- to 25-flowered. Siliqua 25-35 × 3-4 mm. 2n = 20. {\i Limestone rocks. • N.W. Spain }({\i Pena Major}).
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b g}) Subsp. {\b cadevallii} (Font Quer) Heywood,{\i  Feddes Repert.}{\b  66}: 154 (1962): Stems 30-35 cm. Leaves 8-10 cm, pinnatifid or pinnati-partite. Raceme 10- to 30-flowered. Siliqua 40-60 × 3·5-4 mm, pendent.{\i  Limestone rocks. • N.E. Spain}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b h}) Subsp. {\b blancoana} (Boiss.) Heywood,{\i  Feddes Repert.}{\b  66}: 153 (1962) ({\i Brassica blancoana} Boiss., {\i Diplotaxis saxatilis} var.{\i  longifolia} (Rouy) Willk.,{\i  D. brassicoides} Rouy pro parte): Stems 30-45 cm. Leaves 6-10 cm, sinuate to pinnatifid. Raceme 10- to 20-flowered. Siliqua 50-80 × 2·5-3 mm.{\i  Rocks and screes. • Mountains of S.E. Spain}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b i}) Subsp. {\b latisiliqua} (Boiss. & Reuter) Heywood,{\i  loc. cit.} (1962) ({\i Brassica latisiliqua} Boiss. & Reuter, {\i Diplotaxis brassicoides} Rouy pro parte): Stems 10-30 cm. Leaves 2-4(-6) cm, entire, slightly toothed or pinnatipartite. Raceme 8- to 20-flowered. Siliqua 25-50 × 2·5-3·5 mm.{\i  Mountains of S. Spain }({\i Sierra Nevada, Sierra Tejeda}).
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b j}) Subsp. {\b nudicaulis} (Lag.) Heywood,{\i  Feddes Repert}{\b . 69}: 151 (1964) ({\i Brassica barrelieri} auct. hisp. mult., non (L.) Janka): Slightly caespitose habit with slender stock. Stems 30-60 cm. Leaves pinnatipartite. Raceme 10- to 30-flowered. Siliqua 20-30 × 1-2(-2·5) mm. 2n = 20.{\i  C. Spain}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b k}) Subsp. {\b almeriensis} Gómez-Campo, {\i Anal. Inst. Bot. Cavanilles}{\b  33}: 154 (1976): Similar to subsp. ({\b j}) in habit, but sometimes biennial. Stems 10-15 cm. Leaves subentire to shallowly pinnatifid. Raceme 2- to 8-flowered. Siliqua 20-25 × c. 1·5 mm.{\i  Stony, calcareous ground. • S.E. Spain} ({\i N.W. of Velez Blanco}).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Similar plants to subsp. ({\b c}) occur in the Aragonese Pre-Pyrenees.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Plants similar to subsp. ({\b e}) but with wider fruits occur in the Spanish Pyrenees.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 22. B. glabrescens} Poldini,{\i  Gior. Bot. Ital. }{\b 107}: 181 (1973). Caespitose perennial, arising from branched, woody stock; stems 10-25 cm, erect, usually leafless, glabrous, reddish. Leaves 2-9 cm, pinnatipartite, glabrous except for a marginal setose hair on each of the lobes. Raceme 2- to 12-flowered. Petals 7-10 mm, yellow. Siliqua 25-60 × 1·5-3 mm, subclavate, somewhat curved, attenuate into the seedless beak 3-5 mm. Seeds ellipsoidal. Calcareous river gravels. •{\i  N.E. Italy} ({\i Rivers Meduno and Cellina, north of Pordenone}). It.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 89.           Sinapis}             L.
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc  By A.O. Chater.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Annuals or perennials. Leaves pinnatifid or pinnatisect. Sepals patent, equal or subequal; petals yellow, clawed. Fruit a siliqua with a long beak; valves distinctly 3- to 7-veined. Seeds in 1 row in each loculus, globose.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Siliqua with (7)8-17 seeds; beak cylindrical or conical, not or scarcely
\par
  compressed, shorter than to about equalling valvar portion of siliqua
\par
2 Siliqua at least 25 mm, glabrous or with short, stiff,
\par
  deflexed hairs ................................................................................ {\b 1. arvensis}
\par
2 Siliqua not more than 25 mm, densely covered with long, fine,
\par
  ascending higher ........................................................................ {\b 2. pubescens}
\par
1 Siliqua with 4-8 seeds; beak strongly compressed, usually longer than
\par
  valvar portion of siliqua
\par
3 Sepals more than 4·5 mm; leaves variably covered with short, stiff
\par
  hairs, but scarcely scabrid .................................................................... {\b 3. alba}
\par
3 Sepals less than 4·5 mm; leaves scabrid with short, stiff hairs .... {\b 4. flexuosa}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. S. arvensis} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 668 (1753) (incl.{\i  S. orientalis} L., {\i S. schkuhriana} Reichenb., {\i Brassica arvensis} (L.) Rabenh., non L.,{\i  B. sinapistrum} Boiss.). Annual; stems up to 80 cm, usually hispid at least below, sometimes glabrous. Leaves up to 20 cm, usually hispid; lower leaves stalked, lyrate, with large, coarsely toothed terminal lobe, usually with several smaller lateral lobes; upper leaves more or less sessile, usually simple, ovate to lanceolate. Petals 10-16 × 5-8 mm. Siliqua 25-45(-55) × (1·5-)2·5-4 mm, patent to erect; valves glabrous or with short, stiff, deflexed hairs; beak 7-16 mm, straight. Seeds (7)8-13, reddish-brown or blackish. 2n = 18.{\i  Usually a weed of arable land. Probably native in the Mediterranean region, but introduced throughout Europe, rarer in the north.} All except Az Sb but only casual in Fa Is.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 A very variable species. Var.{\i  orientalis} (L.) Koch & Ziz, with hairy siliqua-valves, is as widespread as the typical form.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. S. pubescens} L.,{\i  Mantissa} 95 (1767) ({\i Brassica pubescens} (L.) Ard.). Perennial; stems up to 80 cm, densely pubescent or villous. Leaves appressed-pubescent; lower stalked, lyrate-pinnatisect; upper sessile, oblong, less divided or simple. Siliqua 15-25 × 2-2·5 mm, erect, covered to the apex with long, fine, ascending
\par

\par
409}
\par