{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 83.          Subularia }            L.
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc  By †T.G. Tutin.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Glabrous, scapigerous annual. Sepals erect; petals white, sometimes absent; stamens 6, without appendages; ovary surrounded by a fleshy ring. Fruit a silicula; valves strongly convex. Seeds in 2 rows, 2-6 in each loculus.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Literature: G.A. Mulligan & J.A. Calder,{\i  Rhodora}{\b  66}: 127-135 (1964).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. S. aquatica} L.,{\i  Sp. Pl.} 642 (1753). Leaves 2-7 cm, numerous, rosulate, subulate, terete, entire. Flowers 2-12. Sepals caducous. Pedicels eventually 2-5 mm. Silicula 2-5 × 1·5-2·5 mm, elliptic oblong. 2n = 28 + O- 4B, c. 36.{\i  In shallow water in base-poor pools and lakes. N. Europe, extending locally southwards in the mountains to the Pyrenees and Bulgaria.} Be Br Bu Da Fa Fe Ga Ge Hb †Ho Hs Is No Rs(N, B, C, E) Su.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 84.         Conringia}           Adanson
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc  By P.W. Ball.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Glabrous annuals. Leaves simple, glaucous. Inflorescence a raceme. Inner sepals saccate; petals pale yellow to greenish-white. Fruit a siliqua; valves 1- or 3-veined; style short; stigma slightly 2-lobed. Seeds in 1 row in each loculus.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Literature: O.E. Schulz in Engler, {\i Pflanzenreich}{\b  84}({\b IV.105}): 84-94 (1923).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Siliqua strongly compressed, torulose; petals with violet veins
\par
  .................................................................................................. {\b 3. planisiliqua}
\par
1 Siliqua 4- or 8-angled, not torulose; petals without violet veins
\par
2 Valves of the siliqua 1-veined; petals (7-)8-14 mm ................... {\b 1. orientalis}
\par
2 Valves of the siliqua 3-veined; petals 6-8(-10) mm .................... {\b 2. austriaca}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. C. orientalis} (L.) Dumort., {\i Fl. Belg.} 123 (1827) ({\i Erysimum orientale} (L.) R. Br.). Plant 10 60(-80) cm. Basal leaves obovate, shortly petiolate; cauline leaves obovate to elliptical, sessile, cordate-amplexicaul . Pedicels 4-9 mm in flower, 6-20 mm in fruit. Petals (7-)8-14 mm, yellowish- or greenish-white. Siliqua (4·5-)6-14 cm, strongly 4-angled, the valves 1-veined; style 0·8-3·5 mm, cylindrical. Seeds 2-3 mm. 2n = 14.{\i  C. & E. Europe; frequently naturalized or casual elsewhere.} Al Au Bu Cz Ge Gr Hu It Ju Po Rm Rs(C, W, K, E) ?Si Tu [Bl Cz Da Fe Ga He Ho Hs Is No Rs(N) Sb]
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. C. austriaca} (Jacq.) Sweet,{\i  Hort. Brit.} 25 (1826) ({\i Goniolobium austriacum} (Jacq.) G. Beck). Like {\b 1} but up to 100 cm; cauline leaves obovate-oblong; pedicels 2-5 mm in flower, 2-9 mm in fruit; petals 6-8(-10) mm, lemon-yellow; siliqua 5-8(-10) cm, 8-angled, the valves 3-veined. 2n = 28.{\i  S.E. & E.C. Europe, extending westwards to Austria and Sardegna.} Au Bu Gr Hu It Ju Rm Rs(K) Sa.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 3. C. planisiliqua} Fischer & C.A. Meyer,{\i  Ind. Sem. Hort. Petrop.}{\b  3}: 32 (1837). Plant 15-50 cm. Basal leaves oblong, shortly petiolate; cauline leaves oblong-ovate to -elliptical, cordate amplexicaul, obtuse, mucronate. Pedicels 5-15 mm in fruit. Petals 6-8 mm, pale yellow with violet veins. Siliqua 4-9 cm, torulose, strongly compressed, the valves without veins; style 1-2 mm. Seeds 1-2 mm.{\i  N.W. Greece} ({\i lower slopes of Timfi Oros}). *Gr.({\i S.W. Asia}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 85.       Moricandia }             DC.
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc  By V.H. Heywood.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Glabrous annuals or perennials. Leaves simple, fleshy. Inflorescence corymbose. Inner sepals saccate at base; petals purple, rarely whitish. Fruit a siliqua; valves with a distinct mid-vein; style short; stigma 2-lobed. Seeds in 1 or 2 rows in each loculus.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Literature: O.E. Schulz in Engler,{\i  Pflanzenreich}{\b  84}({\b IV.105}): 64-72 (1923). A. de Bolos,{\i  Anal. Inst. Bot. Cavanilles}{\b  6}({\b 2}): 451 461 (1946).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Upper cauline leaves minute, triangular-ovate, very acute to
\par
  acuminate; petals 12 mm, whitish ................................................... {\b 3. foetida}
\par
1 Upper cauline leaves cordate, ± acute; petals 18-22 mm, usually
\par
  purple-violet
\par
2 Outer sepals markedly horned at the apex; raceme 20- to
\par
  40-flowered; seeds up to 2·5 mm, uniseriate ..................... {\b 2. moricandioides}
\par
2 Outer sepals scarcely horned at the apex; raceme 10- to
\par
  20(-25)-flowered; seeds c. 1 mm, biseriate ................................... {\b 1. arvensis}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. M. arvensis} (L.) DC.,{\i  Reg. Veg. Syst. Nat.}{\b  2}: 626 (1821) ({\i Brassica arvensis} L.). Short-lived perennial up to 65 cm, with branched stems. Lower leaves obovate, repand-crenate, obtuse at the apex, narrowed at the base; upper cauline leaves cordate, entire, widened and amplexicaul at the base, more or less acute. Raceme with 10-20 large, showy flowers, becoming lax. Petals c. 20 mm, violet-purple. Siliqua 30-80 × 2-3 mm, compressed, 4-angled. Seeds c. 1 mm, biseriate, brown. 2n = 28. {\i Calcicole. Mediterranean region.} Bl Co Gr Hs It Si.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b M. longirostris} Pomel,{\i  Nouv. Mat. Fl. Atl.} 367 (1875), recorded from S. Italy and Sicilia, which differs in its longer siliquae (up to 12 cm), with longer, often recurved beaks and very numerous seeds, may deserve recognition as a subspecies.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. M. moricandioides} (Boiss.) Heywood,{\i  Feddes Repert.}{\b  66}: 154 (1962) ({\i Moricandia ramburei} Webb,{\i  Brassica moricandioides} Boiss.). Like {\b 1} but raceme with more numerous flowers; outer sepals with a pronounced cucullate prolongation up to 1·2 mm; siliqua 80-130 mm, more or less terete; seeds 2-2·5 mm (1-1·5 mm in var.{\i  microsperma}), uniseriate, distinctly winged, the wing narrow or broad. •{\i  S.C. & E. Spain.} Hs.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Two fairly well-marked variants sometimes cause difficulty in identifying this species: var.{\i  microsperma} (Willk.) Heywood has more shortly cucullate sepals and seeds less than 2 mm, and var.{\i  cavanillesiana} (Font Quer & A. Bolos) Heywood has seeds broadly crispate-winged.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 3. M. foetida} Bourgeau ex Cosson, {\i Not. Pl. Crit.} 143 (1852). Stems much branched from the base. Lower leaves obovate; upper cauline leaves minute, triangular-ovate, very acute to acuminate. Raceme 5- to 12-flowered; sepals all obtuse; petals 12 mm, whitish. Siliqua 40-60 × 1·5-2 mm, compressed, 4-angled, long-pedicellate. Seeds c. 1·5 mm, brownish, uniseriate, distinctly white-margined.{\i  Base-rich soils. • S. & S.E. Spain.} Hs.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Plants combining the characters of {\b 2} and {\b 3} are found in the region of Murcia.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 86.         Euzomodendron}       Cosson
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc  By V.H. Heywood.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Sepals erect, hispid; petals very long-clawed; filaments of the inner
\par

\par
403}
\par