{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. R. rugosum} (L.) All., {\i  Fl. Pedem. }{\b 1}: 257 (1785). Annual 15-60(-100) cm, hispid below, often glabrous above. Lower leaves pinnate; upper usually dentate, sessile to petiolate. Petals 6-10 mm, pale yellow. Silicula 3-10 mm; upper segment 3-6 mm (including beak), ovoid to globose, abruptly contracted into a filiform beak 1-3(-5) mm; lower segment (0·7-)1·2-3 mm, cylindrical to ellipsoidal.{\i  S. Europe; naturalized or casual in much of C. & N. Europe.} Al Az Bl Bu Co Cr Ga Gr Hs It Ju Lu Rs(K, E) Sa Si Tu [Au Be Br Cz Ge Hb He Ho Hu Po Rm Rs(C, W)].
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 A variable species, with several variants treated at subspecific rank or as species. The following subspecies are more or less distinct, although intermediates occur.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b rugosum}: Pedicels 1·5-3·2 mm, thick (up to 1·3 mm in diameter). Lower segment of the fruit 1-1½ times as wide as the pedicel, obconical, not constricted above; upper segment obovoid, usually deeply ribbed and rugose. 2n = 16. {\i S. Europe; widely naturalized elsewhere}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp.{\b  orientale} (L.) Arcangeli, Comp. Fl. Ital. 49 (1882) ({\i R. orientale} (L.) Crantz; incl. {\i R. rugosum} subsp. {\i linnaeanum} Rouy & Fouc., {\i R. linnaeanum} Boiss. & Reuter, nom. illeg.,{\i  R. hispanicum} (L.) Crantz): Pedicels 2-3·5 mm, slender (up to 0·7 mm in diameter). Lower segment of the fruit 1½-2 times as wide as the pedicel, ellipsoidal, constricted above; upper segment broadly ellipsoidal, usually shallowly ribbed and slightly rugose.{\i  Mediterranean region; widely naturalized or casual elsewhere}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Plants of subsp. ({\b b}) with the lower segment of the fruit sterile, 0·7-1·2 mm, and less than 1½ times as wide as the pedicel, have been called subsp.{\b  linnaeanum} Rouy & Fouc.,{\i  Fl. Fr.}{\b  2}: 73 (1895), but the variation between them and subsp. ({\b b}) is continuous, and they probably do not merit formal taxonomic recognition. The lower segment of the fruit of subsp. ({\b a}) is usually fertile.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 101.        Didesmus}          Desv.
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc  By P.W. Ball.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Like {\i Rapistrum} but petals white; upper segment of silicula as wide as the lower segment, tetragonal; beak long, pungent.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. D. aegyptius} (L.) Desv., {\i Jour. Bot. Appl.}{\b  3}:160 (1814). Erect annual 10-40 cm, sparsely hispid. Leaves oblong-elliptical, dentate to lyrate-pinnatisect with 2-5 pairs of lobes, or rarely 2-pinnatisect. Pedicels 3-5 mm in fruit. Sepals 3·5 4·5 mm; petals 6-10 mm, slightly emarginate. Silicula 6-10 mm; lower segment with 4-6 swellings at the base; upper segment ovoid, often tetragonal; beak 2·5-4 mm.{\i  S. Aegean region.} Cr Gr.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 102.         Crambe}              L.
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc  By P.W. Ball.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Annuals to perennials; glabrous or with unbranched hairs. Sepals erecto-patent; petals white, with a short claw or cuneate at the base; filaments of inner stamens usually with a tooth-like appendage. Fruit a transversely articulate silicula; lower segment short, sterile, forming a stalk together with the gynophore; upper segment ovoid to globose, indehiscent, caducous, with a single pendent seed; stigma sessile.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Literature: O.E. Schulz in Engler,{\i  Pflanzenreich}{\b  79}({\b IV.105}): 228-249 (1919).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Lower segment of silicula longer than the upper; filaments
\par
  of the inner stamens without appendage ..................................... {\b 8. filiformis}
\par
1 Lower segment of silicula shorter than the upper; filaments
\par
  of the inner stamens usually with a tooth-like appendage
\par
2 Annual; lower leaves with a large, ± reniform terminal lobe and
\par
   0-2 pairs of small lateral lobes ................................................... {\b 7. hispanica}
\par
2 Stout perennial; lower leaves entire to 2-pinnatisect, the terminal
\par
  lobe neither reniform nor much larger than the lateral lobes
\par
3 Plant densely hispid ....................................................... ({\b 2-5}).{\b  tataria }group
\par
3 Plant glabrous or sparsely hispid
\par
4 Petals 6-10 mm; upper segment of silicula 7-12 mm
\par
5 Upper segment of silicula not 4-angled; lower cauline leaves
\par
  pinnatifid or irregularly toothed ................................................... {\b 1. maritima}
\par
5 Upper segment of silicula 4-angled; lower cauline leaves
\par
  1- or 2- pinnatisect .......................................................... ({\b 2-5}).{\b  tataria} group
\par
4 Petals not more than 6 mm; upper segment of silicula less than 7 mm
\par
6 Lower segment of silicula slender (less than 0·5 mm in diameter);
\par
  pedicels slender (c. 0·3 mm in diameter) ................................. {\b 6. koktebelica}
\par
6 Lower segment of silicula relatively stout (more than
\par
  0·5 mm in diameter); pedicels relatively stout
\par
  (c. 0·5 mm or more in diameter) ..................................... ({\b 2-5}).{\b  tataria }group
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. C. maritima} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 671 (1753) ({\i C. pontica} Steven ex Rupr.). Stout, glabrous, glaucous perennial 30-75 cm, with branched, fleshy stock. Lower leaves sinuate-dentate to irregularly pinnatifid. Petals 6-10 mm. Lower segment of silicula 1-4 mm, stout; upper segment 7-12 mm, globose to ovoid; pedicels 8-26 mm; seeds 4-5 mm. 2n = 30, 60.{\i  Maritime sand and shingle. Atlantic, Baltic and Black Sea coasts of Europe; sometimes naturalized elsewhere.} Be Br Bu Da Fe Ga Ge Hb Ho Hs No Rm Rs(B, W, K, E) Su Tu [Au Cz Hu].
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    ({\b 2-5}). {\b C. tataria }group. Stout perennials up to 150 cm, with a fleshy, fusiform stock branched at the apex. Petals (3-)3·5-7 mm. Lower segment of silicula c. 1 mm, stout; upper segment (3-)3·5-8 mm; pedicels relatively stout (c. 0·5 mm or more in diameter). Seeds 2-3·5 mm.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Upper segment of silicula 7-9 mm; petals 5-7 mm
\par
2 Plant glabrous or sparsely hispid; upper segment of
\par
  silicula 4-angled ........................................................................ {\b 4. grandiflora}
\par
2 Plant densely hispid; upper segment of silicula not 4-angled ......... {\b 5. aspera}
\par
1 Upper segment of silicula 3-7 mm; petals 3-6 mm
\par
3 Leaves pinnatifid or pinnatisect, the ultimate divisions
\par
  obtuse ............................................................................................... {\b 2. tataria}
\par
3 Leaves 2-pinnatisect, the ultimate divisions acute ................... {\b 3. steveniana}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. C. tataria} Sebeók,{\i  Medico-Bot. Tatar.} 7 (1779) (incl. {\b C. pinnatifida} R. Br.,{\i  C. litwinowii} Grossh., {\i C. tatarica} Pallas). Plant subglabrous to densely hispid. Lower leaves pinnatifid to pinnatisect, the ultimate divisions obtuse; primary segments ovate to triangular in outline. Petals (3-)3·5-6 mm; inner stamens with appendage not more than 0·8 mm. Upper segment of silicula 3-6(-7) mm, 4-angled or not; pedicels usually less than 12 mm. 2n = 30.{\i  E. Europe, extending westwards to N.E. Italy and Czechoslovakia}. Au Bu Cz Hu It Ju Rm Rs(W, K, E).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 3. C. steveniana} Rupr., {\i Mém. Acad. Sci. Pétersb.} ser. 7, {\b 15}({\b 2}): 136 (1869). Like {\b 2} but the leaves 2-pinnatisect, the ultimate divisions acute, the primary segments oblong or linear in outline;
\par

\par
415}
\par