{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 each side, the two basal lobes deflexed and clasping the stem. Raceme ebracteate or rarely the lowest flower with a bract. Sepals 5 mm, patent; petals c. 9 mm, yellow; limb broadly obovate. Siliqua 23-45 × 1·2-1·5 mm, patent, with a short gynophore; beak 3-6 mm, with 1(2) seeds. 2n = 16.{\i  S.W. Europe, extending to N. France and S. Germany; doubtfully native farther east, but widely naturalized.} *Al Ga Ge He Hs *Hu It *Ju Lu [Au Cz Po Rm].
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 3. E. palustre} (Pirona) Vis.,{\i  Linnaea }{\b 28}: 365 (1857). Like {\b 2} but glabrous; lower cauline leaves pectinate-pinnatisect, with 10-18 lobes on each side; beak without seeds. {\i Marshes and rice-fields. • N.E. Italy}. It.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Perhaps not specifically distinct from{\b  2}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 4. E. gallicum} (Willd.) O.E. Schulz,{\i  Bot. Jahrb. }{\b 54} Beibl. {\b 119}: 56 (1916) ({\i E. pollichii }Schimper & Spenner). Like {\b 2} but basal lobes of cauline leaves not deflexed or clasping the stem; raceme bracteate below; sepals erect to patent; petals 6-10 mm, pale yellow or whitish; siliqua 1·2-1·8 mm wide, not stipitate; beak cylindrical, seedless. 2n = 30.{\i  • C. & S.W. Europe.} Au Cz Ga Ge He Ho Hs Hu It [Be Br Da No Po Rm Rs(N, B) Su].
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 92.           Coincya}           Rouy
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc  By V.H. Heywood (Ed.1) revised by E.A. Leadlay & J.R. Akeroyd (Ed.2)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Annual to perennial, rhizomatous or with fusiform taproot; glabrous or with simple hairs. Inflorescence racemose, ebracteate. Sepals erect, the inner saccate at the base; petals clawed, yellow or whitish, sometimes with violet or reddish veins. Fruit a linear siliqua terminating in an ensiform or attenuate beak with 1-6(-11) seeds; valves convex, 3-veined; stigma capitate. Seeds in 1 row in each loculus, numerous. ({\i Hutera} Porta, {\i Rhynchosinapis} Hayek, {\i Brassicella} Fourr. ex O.E. Schulz)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Literature: O.E. Schulz in Engler,{\i  Pflanzenreich}{\b  70}({\b IV.105}): 106-116 (1919) (sub{\i  Brassicella}). E.A. Leadlay & V.H. Heywood, {\i Bot. Jour. Linn,. Soc.}{\b  102}: 313-398 (1990).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Leaves simple, oblong-elliptical or spathulate, entire or
\par
  repand-dentate; inflorescence a dense corymb ................................ {\b 1. richeri}
\par
1 Leaves pinnately divided; inflorescence lax
\par
2 Beak of siliqua shorter than valvar portion; petal with yellow or
\par
  sometimes violet or brownish veins
\par
3 Annual to short-lived perennial; basal leaves pinnatisect
\par
  (rarely lyrate); siliqua 1·5-2·5(-3) mm wide ................................ {\b 5. monensis}
\par
3 Biennial to perennial; basal leaves lyrate; siliqua 2·5-4 mm wide {\b 6. wrightii}
\par
2 Beak of siliqua as long as or longer than valvar portion;
\par
  petals with violet or brownish veins
\par
4 Annual, branched at the base; beak of siliqua curved ............. {\b 2. transtagana}
\par
4 Biennial to perennial, branched above; beak of siliqua straight
\par
5 Stems hispid below; beak of siliqua 20-55 mm, not inflated ....{\b 3. longirostra}
\par
5 Stems tomentose-lanate below; beak of siliqua 13-27 mm, inflated
\par
  ....................................................................................................... {\b 4. rupestris}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. C. richeri} (Vill.) Greuter & Burdet,{\i  Willdenowia}{\b  13}: 87 (1983) ({\i Brassicella richeri} (Vill.) O.E. Schulz,{\i  Rhynchosinapis richeri}(Vill.) Heywood, {\i Brassica richeri} Vill.). Glabrous, sometimes scapose perennial, with branched, stoloniferous stock; flowering stems 15-40 cm (up to 70 cm in fruit), unbranched. Leaves lanceolate to elliptical or spathulate, entire or repand-dentate. Raceme densely corymbose. Sepals 8 mm, obtuse; petals 14-18(-20) mm, yellow. Siliqua 20-60(-80) × 2·5-5 mm, erecto-patent or slightly pendent, straight; veins of valves often anastomosing; beak 7-20 mm, with 1-4 seeds. 2n = 24. {\i Alpine meadows and rocks, }1750-2500{\i  m. • S.W. Alps}. Ga It.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. C. transtagana} (Coutinho) M. Clemente & J.E. Hernández-Bermejo,{\i  Lagascalia}{\b  14}: 138 (1986) ({\i Brassicella valentina} O.E. Schulz pro parte, {\i Brassica longirostra} var. {\i transtagana} (Coutinho) Samp. {\i Sisymbrium valentinum} auct., non L., {\i Rhynchosinapis hispida} (Cav.) Heywood subsp. {\i transtagana} (Coutinho) Heywood,{\i  Coincya hispida} subsp. {\i transtagana} (Coutinho) Greuter & Burdet). Annual, divaricately branched from the base, hispid-arachnoid; stems 15-40 cm. Leaves pinnatipartite or pinnatisect, with 5-9 pairs of very narrow pinnatipartite to entire lobes, the terminal lobe equalling the laterals. Petals 14-16·5 mm, pale yellow or whitish, with violet veins. Siliqua 20-50 × 1·5-2 mm; apex of valves retuse; beak 15-30 mm, recurved, up to as long as the valvar portion, with 3-5 seeds.{\i  Rocky and disturbed ground. • S.W. Spain, S. Portugal.} Hs Lu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 3. C. longirostra} (Boiss.) Greuter & Burdet,{\i  Willdenowia}{\b  13}: 87 (1983) ({\i Brassica longirostra} Boiss., {\i Brassicella valentina} O.E. Schulz pro parte, {\i Rhynchosinapis longirostra} (Boiss.) Heywood, {\i Sinapis longirostra} (Boiss.) Boiss ex Amo). Biennial to short-lived perennial stems 20-100 cm, branched, hispid below. Leaves pinnatipartite or pinnatisect, velutinous; lobes pinnatifid to dentate. Petals 15-20 mm, pale yellow, with violet-brown veins. Siliqua (10-)30-65 mm, patent to deflexed, puberulent; beak 20-55 mm, with 2-7(-11) seeds, considerably longer than the valvar portion. 2n = 24. {\i  Rocky slopes. • S. Spain }({\i Sierra Morena}). Hs.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 4. C. rupestris} Porta & Rigo ex Rouy in Deyrolle,{\i  Naturaliste} ({\i Paris}){\b  2}: 248 (1891) ({\i Hutera rupestris} Porta & Rigo ex Porta). Biennial to short-lived perennial; stems 20-100 cm, erect, divaricately branched, tomentose-lanate below. Leaves pinnatipartite to pinnatisect, with 4-9 pairs of pinnatifid to dentate-crenate lobes, the terminal lobe larger than the laterals, tomentose to velutinous. Inflorescence corymbose. Petals 12-20 mm, yellow, with brownish veins. Siliqua 18-35 mm, straight or recurved, glabrous; beak 13-27 mm, inflated, usually longer than the valvar portion.{\i  Rocks and screes,} 800-1200{\b  m. • S. Spain; very local}. Hs.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp.{\b  rupestris} : Valvar portion of the siliqua 5-8(-10) mm; beak 4-8 mm wide, pyriform, with 4-6(-8) seeds. 2n = 24. {\i Calcicole. S. Spain} ({\i Sierra de Alcaraz, ?Sierra de Cazorla}).
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp.{\b  leptocarpa} (González-Albo) Leadlay, {\i Bot. Jour. Linn. Soc.}{\b  102}: 364 (1990) ({\i Hutera leptocarpa} González-Albo, {\i Coincya leptocarpa} (González-Albo) Greuter & Burdet): Valvar portion of the siliqua (4-)7-17 mm; beak 2-4·5 mm wide, moniliform, with 3-6 seeds. 2n = 24.{\i  Calcifuge. S. Spain }({\i Sierra Morena}).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 5. C. monensis} (L.) Greuter & Burdet,{\i  Willdenowia}{\b  13}: 87 (1983) ({\i Rhynchosinapis monensis} (L.) Dandy ex Clapham, {\i Brassica monensis} (L.) Hudson). Annual to perennial, prostrate to erect; stems up to 100 cm, usually branched and hispid below. Leaves pinnatisect to pinnatipartite or rarely lyrate-pinnatisect, with 3-9(-11) pairs of pinnatipartite to dentate lobes. Petals (7-)10-22(-26) mm, yellow, sometimes with brown or purple veins. Siliqua (10-)30-90 × 1·5-2·5(-3) mm, straight, rarely curved; beak
\par

\par
411}
\par