{\rtf1\ansi \deff4\deflang1033{\fonttbl{\f4\froman\fcharset0\fprq2 Times New Roman;}}{\colortbl;\red0\green0\blue0;\red0\green0\blue255;\red0\green255\blue255;\red0\green255\blue0;\red255\green0\blue255;\red255\green0\blue0;
\red255\green255\blue0;\red255\green255\blue255;\red0\green0\blue128;\red0\green128\blue128;\red0\green128\blue0;\red128\green0\blue128;\red128\green0\blue0;\red128\green128\blue0;\red128\green128\blue128;\red192\green192\blue192;}{\stylesheet{\widctlpar 
\f4\fs20\lang2057 \snext0 Normal;}{\*\cs10 \additive Default Paragraph Font;}}{\info{\author dddd}{\operator dddd}{\creatim\yr1998\mo11\dy11\hr16}{\revtim\yr2000\mo10\dy18\hr14\min23}{\version2}{\edmins1}{\nofpages4}{\nofwords977}{\nofchars5572}
{\*\company  }{\vern57431}}\widowctrl\ftnbj\aenddoc\hyphcaps0 \fet0\sectd \linex0 {\*\pnseclvl1\pnucrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl2\pnucltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl3\pndec\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang
{\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl4\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl5\pndec\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl6\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl7
\pnlcrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl8\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl9\pnlcrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}\pard\plain \widctlpar \f4\fs20\lang2057 {\fs24 

\par }{\fs28 clustered at the base of the young twigs. Female cones (referred to below as ' cones ') ripening in the second or third year, eventually falling in their entiret
y, cylindrical to ovoid; ovuliferous scales woody; bracts minute; the exposed part of the scales (apophysis) with a prominent protuberance (umbo), usually ending in a spine or prickle.
\par 
\par In addition to the species described below, many others are grown for ornament in parks and gardens.
\par 
\par Literature: H. Gaussen, }{\i\fs28 Les Gymnospermes}{\fs28 , Fasc. VI, ch. XI, }{\i\fs28 Pinus}{\fs28  (1960). J. Klika}{\i\fs28  et al., Jehlicnat\'e9}{\fs28 . Praha, 1953. N.T. Mirov,}{\i\fs28  The Genus Pinus.}{\fs28  New York, 1967.
\par 
\par }\pard \li200\widctlpar {\fs28 1 Leaves in groups of 5
\par 2 Seeds winged; leaf with 2-4 marginal resin-canals
\par 3 Young shoots with fine, reddish-brown hairs; 
\par   apophysis not swollen .................................................................... }{\b\fs28 18. strobus}{\fs28 
\par 3 Young shoots glabrous or subglabrous; apophysis swollen
\par 4 Leaves not rigid, pendent; cone 15-25 cm, straight ............... }{\b\fs28 16. wallichiana}{\fs28 
\par 4 Leaves rigid, directed forwards to apex of branches;
\par   cone 8-15 cm, curved ....................................................................... }{\b\fs28 17. peuce}{\fs28 
\par 2 Seeds not winged; leaf with 2 or 3 median resin-canals
\par 5 Bud-scales dull; cone less than 1\'bd times as long as wide; 
\par   seeds with hard husk ...................................................................... }{\b\fs28 14. cembra}{\fs28 
\par 5 Bud-scales shiny; cone more than 1\'bd times as long as wide;
\par   seeds with fragile husk .................................................................. }{\b\fs28 15. sibirica}{\fs28 
\par 1 Leaves in groups of 2 or 3
\par 6 Leaves in groups of 3, rarely mixed with some in pairs
\par 7 Winter buds cylindrical, resinous; leaves stout; 
\par   umbo with strong, persistent mucro ............................................ }{\b\fs28 5. ponderosa}{\fs28 
\par 7 Winter buds ovoid, not resinous; leaves slender; \'b5m.o with small,
\par   caducous mucro, or not mucronate
\par 8 Leaves not more than 15 cm; bud-scales closely appressed;
\par   cone 7-14 cm, strongly asymmetrical ............................................... }{\b\fs28 3. radiata}{\fs28 
\par 8 Leaves 20-30 cm; bud-scales free, deflexed;
\par   cone 10-20 cm, symmetrical .................................................... }{\b\fs28 12. canariensis}{\fs28 
\par 6 Leaves in pairs
\par 9 Seeds wingless or with wing less than 1 mm .................................. }{\b\fs28 13. pinea}{\fs28 
\par 9 Seeds with well-developed wing more than 1 mm
\par 10 Twigs grey in first year
\par 11 Leaves more than 1 mm wide; resin-canals median ............. }{\b\fs28 10. heldreichii}{\fs28 
\par 11 Leaves less than 1 mm wide; resin-canals submarginal,
\par    rarely median ........................................................................... }{\b\fs28 11. halepensis}{\fs28 
\par 10 Twigs not grey in first year
\par 12 Buds not resinous; scales recurved at apex
\par 13 Resin-canals marginal or submarginal; cone 5-12 \'d7 4 cm .... }{\b\fs28 11. halepensis}{\fs28 
\par 13 Resin-canals median; cone 8-20 \'d7 5-8 cm .................................. }{\b\fs28 2. pinaster}{\fs28 
\par 12 Buds resinous; scales not recurved at apex
\par 14 Resin-canals median
\par 15 Leaves 30-70 \'d7 1 mm, strongly twisted; cone asymmetrical ...... }{\b\fs28 1. contorta}{\fs28 
\par 15 Leaves usually more than 80 \'d7 1\'b75 mm, not or scarcely twisted; 
\par    cone \'b1 symmetrical ............................................................................ }{\b\fs28 6. nigra}{\fs28 
\par 14 Resin-canals marginal or submarginal
\par 16 Cone strongly curved; leaves dark green ................................. }{\b\fs28 4. banksiana}{\fs28 
\par 16 Cone not curved; leaves bright green or glaucous
\par 17 Leaves glaucous; cone dull, acute, pendent .............................. }{\b\fs28 7. sylvestris}{\fs28 
\par 17 Leaves bright green; cone shining, obtuse, patent
\par 18 Erect tree up to 25 m; cone 5-7 cm; apophysis very prominent, 
\par    recurved and hooked ..................................................................... }{\b\fs28 9. uncinata}{\fs28 
\par 18 Shrub up to 3 m; cone 2-5 cm; apophysis flat or concavo-convex,
\par    not recurved and hooked ................................................................... }{\b\fs28 8. mugo}{\fs28 
\par 
\par }\pard \widctlpar {\fs28 Subgen.}{\b\fs28  Pinus}{\fs28  (subgen.}{\i\fs28  Diploxylon}{\fs28  (Koehne) Pilger). Leaves mostly in groups of 2 or 3 (rarely 5-8), with 2 fibro-vascular bundles; scale-leaves decurrent; umbo dorsal.
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 1. P. contorta}{\fs28  Douglas ex Loudon,}{\i\fs28  Arbor. Fruticet. Brit.}{\b\fs28  4:}{\fs28 
 2292 (1838). Tree 6-10 m; bark dark brown, with numerous scales; branches short, contorted. Twigs glabrous, clear green in first year, then orange or brown. Leaves 2\'b75-7 cm \'d7 0\'b79-1\'b7
5 mm, acute, in pairs, twisted; resin-canals median. Cone 2-6 \'d7 2-3 cm, narrowly ovoid to ovoid-conical, symmetrical, pale brownish-yellow, shining; apophyses near base of cone pyramidal; umbo with slender, fragile mucro. Seeds 4-5 mm; wing c. 8 mm.}{
\i\fs28  Cultivated for timber in N. Europe and occasionally elsewhere.}{\fs28  [Be Br Cz Da Fe Ge Hb Is It No Rm Su.] (}{\i\fs28 W. North America}{\fs28 .)
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 2. P. pinaster}{\fs28  Aiton, }{\i\fs28 Hort. Kew.}{\b\fs28  3:}{\fs28  367 (1789) (}{\i\fs28 Pinus maritima}{\fs28 
 Lam.). Tree up to 40 m; bark becoming deeply fissured, reddish-brown. Buds oblong, fusiform, not resinous. Twigs glabrous, reddish-brown. Leaves 10-25 cm \'d7 2 mm, in pairs, green, rigid and spiny; resin-canals 2-9, median. Cone 8-22 \'d7
 5-8 cm, ovoid-conical, symmetrical or almost so, light brown, shining; apophysis rhomboidal, keeled, with prominent, prickly umbo. Seeds 7-8 mm; wing up to 3 mm. 2n = 24. }{\i\fs28 
S.W. Europe, extending eastwards to C. Italy; sometimes planted elsewhere for timber, sand-binding or shelter.}{\fs28  Co Ga Hs It *Lu Sa Si [Be Br Gr Ju Tu].
\par 
\par The following two subspecies have been recognized but the distinguishing characters of subsp. (}{\b\fs28 b}{\fs28 ) may be partly the result of phenotypic modification due to cultivation of the Mediterranean plant on Atlantic coasts.
\par 
\par  (}{\b\fs28 a}{\fs28 ) Subsp.}{\b\fs28  pinaster}{\fs28  (}{\i\fs28 P. mesogeensis}{\fs28  Fieschi & Gaussen, }{\i\fs28 P. hamiltonii }{\fs28 Ten.): Leaves 18-25 cm; resin-canals more than 2 under the sheath. Cone 14-22 cm.}{\i\fs28 
 C. & W. Mediterranean region}{\fs28 .
\par  (}{\b\fs28 b}{\fs28 ) Subsp.}{\b\fs28  atlantica}{\fs28  H. del Villar,}{\i\fs28  Bol. Soc. Esp. Hist. Nat. }{\b\fs28 33:}{\fs28  427 (1933): Leaves 10-20 cm; resin-canals 2 under the sheath. Cone 9-18 cm.}{\i\fs28 
 S. France; Atlantic coast of Spain, Portugal}{\fs28 .
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 3. P. radiata}{\fs28  D. Don,}{\i\fs28  Trans. Linn. Soc. London}{\fs28  (}{\i\fs28 Bot}{\fs28 .) }{\b\fs28 17:}{\fs28  442 (1836) (}{\i\fs28 P. insignis}{\fs28 
 Douglas). Tree up to 40 m; bark becoming thick, fissured, dark brown. Buds ovoid-cylindrical, resinous. Twigs glabrous, reddish-brown. Basal sheath of short shoots less than 15 mm. Leaves 10-15 cm, in groups of 3, slender, acute, densely crowded; resin-c
anals median. Cone 7-14 \'d7 5-8 cm, ovoid-conical, very asymmetrical, sessile or shortly stalked, deflexed; apophyses on upper side of cone rounded; \'b5m.o with small, caducous mucro. Seeds c. 7 mm; wing c. 20 mm.}{\i\fs28 
 Planted for timber or shelter in W. Europe.}{\fs28  [Az Br Ga Hb Hs It Lu.] (}{\i\fs28 S. California.}{\fs28 )
\par 
\par }{\b\fs28 P. rigida}{\fs28  Miller, }{\i\fs28 Gard. Dict.}{\fs28  ed. 8, no. 10 (1768), from E. North America, a tree up to 25 m with numerous epicormic shoots, stiff leaves 7-14 cm, and cone 3-7 cm, has been planted in several countries on a small scale.

\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 4. P. banksiana}{\fs28  Lamb.,}{\i\fs28  Descr. Gen. Pinus}{\b\fs28  1:}{\fs28  7, t. 3 (1803)
\par 
\par 41}
\par }