{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 5-25(-35) mm, with (0)1-5 seeds.{\i  Open habitats, often on rocks or sand; somewhat calcifuge. W. Europe, extending eastwards to W.C. Italy; mainly in the mountains.} Be Br Co Ga Ge Hs It Lu Sa [Ho].
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 A very variable species that includes a number of ecological and geographical variants. For an account of the taxa that have been recognized, see E.A. Leadlay & V.H. Heywood,{\i  Bot. Jour. Linn. Soc.}{\b  102}: 313-398 (1990). Several of these have been treated at specific or subspecific rank in regional Floras but the characters that have been used to separate them show considerable overlap. The following subspecies can be distinguished.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Plant densely hispid or puberulent; leaves pinnatisect
\par
2 Plant puberulent (sometimes slightly hispid below);
\par
  basal leaves withered by anthesis ..................................... ({\b d}) subsp.{\b  puberula}
\par
2 Plant hispid; basal leaves usually present at anthesis
\par
3 Veins of petals usually yellow ........................................ ({\b b}) subsp.{\b  recurvata}
\par
3 Veins of petals often violet or brownish ....................... ..... ({\b c}) subsp.{\b  hispida}
\par
1 Plant glabrous to sparsely hispid; leaves pinnatisect or lyrate
\par
4 Stems up to 100 cm, usually erect;
\par
  petals (12-)15-22 mm ....................................................... ({\b b}) subsp.{\b  recurvata}
\par
4 Stems not more than 60 cm, procumbent to ascending; petals 10-15(-20) mm
\par
5 Leaves pinnatisect; beak of siliqua with (0-)1-5 seeds; seeds 1·3-2 mm
\par
  ........................................................................................... ({\b a}) subsp.{\b  monensis}
\par
5 Leaves often lyrate; beak of siliqua with 1 or 2 seeds; seeds 0·8-1·2 mm
\par
  ........................................................................................ ({\b e}) subsp.{\b  nevadensis}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp.{\b  monensis} : Biennial to short-lived perennial; stock sometimes rhizomatous or stoloniferous; stems 10-60 cm, procumbent to ascending, glabrous to sparsely hispid below. Leaves mostly basal, with 4-9 pairs of dentate to somewhat pinnatifid lobes, slightly hispid. Petals 10-20 mm, yellow. Siliqua 25-75(-80) mm; beak (5-)8-26 mm, with (0)1-5 seeds. Seeds 1·3-2 mm. 2n = 24.{\i  Maritime sands. • W. Britain and Isle of Man.}
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b recurvata }(All.) Leadlay,{\i  Bot. Jour. Linn. Soc.}{\b  102}: 370 (1990) ({\i Sinapis recurvata} All., {\i S. cheiranthus} subsp.{\i  recurvata }(All.) Arcangeli, {\i Rhynchosinapis cheiranthos} (Vill.) Dandy subsp. {\i cheiranthos, R. erucastrum} (L.) Dandy ex Clapham & subsp.{\i  cintrana} (Coutinho) Franco & P. Silva,{\i  R. johnstonii} (Samp.) Heywood, {\i R. granatensis} (O.E. Schulz) Heywood, {\b R. pseuderucastrum }(Brot.) Franco subsp. {\i setigera }(Gay ex Lange) Heywood, {\i Brassicella erucastrum} O.E. Schulz pro parte, {\i B. valentina} O.E. Schulz var. {\i granatensis} O.E. Schulz, {\i Brassica cheiranthos} Vill., {\i B. erucastrum} O.E. Schulz pro parte, {\i B. monensis} auct., non (L.) Hudson,{\i  B. johnstonii} Samp., {\i B. setigera} (Gay ex Lange) Willk., {\i B. pulverula} Pau, {\i Coincya cheiranthos} (Vill.) Greuter & Burdet,{\i  C. johnstonii} (Samp.) Greuter & Burdet, {\i C. erucastrum} subsp.{\i  setigera} (Gay ex Lange) Greuter & Burdet, {\i C. granatensis} (O.E. Schulz) Greuter & Burdet, {\i Sinapis setigera} Gay ex Lange): Annual to short-lived perennial; stems 10-100 cm, usually erect, sparsely to densely hispid below (rarely glabrous). Leaves pinnatisect or pinnatipartite to lyrate, with 3-9 pairs of lobes, sparsely to densely hispid, sometimes coriaceous and glaucous. Petals 12-26 mm, yellow. Siliqua 30-80(-85) mm; beak 8-22(-35) mm, with 1-3(4) seeds. Seeds 0·8-1·4(-1·6) mm. 2n = 24, 48. {\i Sandy and rocky habitats}. {\i Throughout most of the range of the species; naturalized in Britain}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b c}) Subsp.{\b  hispida} (Cav.) Leadlay,{\i  op. cit.} 381 (1990) ({\i Rhynchosinapis hispida} (Cav.) Heywood, {\i Coincya hispida} (Cav.) Greuter & Burdet,{\i  Brassicella valentina} O.E. Schulz pro parte, {\i Brassica valentina }DC.,{\i  Sisymbrium valentinum} auct., non L.): Annual to short-lived perennial. Stems 10-100 cm, erect, hispid, especially below. Leaves pinnatisect or pinnatipartite, with 5-11 pairs of pinnati-partite to pinnatifid lobes, hispid. Petals whitish to yellow, often with brown or violet veins. Siliqua 30-70(-80) mm, straight or rarely curved; beak 5-20 mm, with 1-4 seeds. Seeds 0·8-1·4 mm. 2n = 24. {\i Ruderal. • N. & C. Spain; C. Portugal.}
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b d}) Subsp.{\b  puberula} (Pau) Leadlay,{\i  op. cit.} 383 (1990) ({\i Brassica puberula} Pau, {\i Coincya puberula} (Pau) Greuter & Burdet): Annual to short-lived perennial; stems 20-60 cm, little-branched, densely puberulent, sometimes sparsely hispid below. Basal leaves withered by anthesis; leaves pinnatisect to pinnati-partite, puberulent or sparsely hispid. Petals 7-18 mm, yellow. Siliqua 20-50(-65) mm; beak 7-16 mm, with 1 or 2 seeds. Seeds 0·8-1·2 mm. 2n = 24. {\i Usually ruderal. • N. Spain; N.W. Portugal.}
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b e}) Subsp.{\b  nevadensis} (Willk.) Leadlay, {\i op. cit.} 384 (1990) ({\i Rhynchosinapis cheiranthos} subsp.{\i  nevadensis} (Willk.) Heywood, {\i Coincya cheiranthos} subsp. {\i nevadensis} (Willk.) Greuter & Burdet, {\i Brassica cheiranthos} var.{\i  nevadensis} Willk.): Subscapose biennial to perennial; stems 10-25(-40) cm, prostrate, glabrous or sparsely hispid below. Leaves forming persistent rosette, lyrate to pinnatisect, with entire to dentate lobes, sparsely setose. Petals 10-15 mm, yellow. Siliqua 15-50 mm; beak 5-12 mm, with 1(2) seeds. Seeds 0·8-1·2 mm. 2n = 24.{\i  Rocks, screes and stony slopes;} 2300-3200{\i  m. S. Spain }({\i Sierra Nevada, Sierra de los Filabres}).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 6. C. wrightii} (O.E. Schulz) Stace,{\i  Watsonia}{\b  17}: 443 (1989) ({\i Rhynchosinapis wrightii} (O.E. Schulz) Dandy ex Clapham). Biennial to perennial, somewhat woody at the base; stems 20-100 cm, densely pubescent at least below. Leaves lyrate, with 1-5(6) pairs of pinnatifid to dentate lobes, appressed-pubescent, especially beneath. Petals 14-20 mm, yellow. Ovary sparsely pubescent. Siliqua (20-)40-80 × 2·5-4 mm, straight to somewhat curved; beak 7-16 mm, with 1-3 seeds. 2n = 24.{\i  Cliffs and stony slopes. • S.W. England} ({\i Lundy}). Br.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 93.           Hirschfeldia}               Moench
\par 

\pard\f0\fs24\qc  By †T.G. Tutin (Ed.1) revised by J.R. Akeroyd (Ed.2).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Like {\i Sinapis} but the sepals almost erect, the inner pair slightly saccate; siliqua with a short, swollen beak; valves 3-veined when mature but obscurely veined when dry; seeds subglobose-ovoid.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. H. incana} (L.) Lagrèze-Fossat,{\i  Fl. Tarn Gar.} 19 (1847) ({\i Sinapis incana} L.). Annual to biennial; stem up to 1·5 m, usually much-branched, leafy, densely white-hairy to somewhat glabrous below. Lower leaves runcinate-pinnatifid, with an ovate, obtuse, shallowly dentate terminal lobe, the upper simple, more or less sessile. Petals 5-10 mm, pale yellow, sometimes with dark veins. Siliqua 7-17 × 1-1·5(-1·8) mm, erect and appressed to the stem, 2-valved; beak c. ½ as long as the valves, swollen at the base, usually with 1 seed. Seeds 2-6 in each loculus. 2n = 14.{\i  S. Europe; becoming widely naturalized further north.} Al Bl Co Cr Ga Gr Hs It Ju Lu Sa Si Tu [Au Be Br Da Ge Hb He Ho].
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Often confused with{\i  Brassica nigra,} which never has a seed in the beak.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 94.           Carrichtera}                 DC.
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc  By V.H. Heywood.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Annual; hairs unbranched. Inflorescence leaf-opposed. Sepals erect; filaments free. Fruit a transversely articulate, deflexed silicula lower segment ellipsoidal, with 2 naviculiform, 3-veined valves upper segment sterile, strongly compressed, foliaceous, cochleariform.
\par

\par
412}
\par