{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. C. annua} (L.) DC.,{\i  Mém. Mus. Hist. Nat.} ({\i Paris}){\b  7}: 250 (1821) ({\i C. vellae} DC., {\i Vella annua} L.). Stems 5-40(-60) cm, branched from the base, with setiform, deflexed hairs; hairs and branches pungent in fruit. Leaves 2- or 3-pinnatisect, with obtuse, linear segments. Raceme with 10-15(-20) flowers. Petals 6-8 mm, pale yellow, violet-veined. Silicula 5-8 mm, deflexed or patent, on pedicels 2-3 mm; lower segment bilocular. Seeds 3 or 4 in each loculus.{\i  Mediterranean region.} Bl Cr Gr Hs Sa Si.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 95.            Vella}              L.
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc  By V.H. Heywood.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Small, much-branched shrubs with sessile, entire leaves; hairs unbranched. Flowers in lax, spicate racemes. Sepals erect; petals long-clawed, yellow, sometimes violet-veined; filaments of inner stamens connate in pairs. Fruit a transversely articulate silicula; the lower segment 2-valved, ellipsoidal, subdidymous; valves convex, 3-veined; the upper segment sterile, strongly compressed, in the form of a foliaceous, lingulate beak, 5-veined. Seeds 1(2) in each loculus.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Literature: O.E. Schulz in Engler, {\i Pflanzenreich}{\b  84}({\b IV.105}): 11 47 (1923).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 Plant spineless, with obovate or obovate-lanceolate leaves;
\par
    raceme with 10-40 flowers ................................................ {\b 1. pseudocytisus}
\par
Plant very spiny, with linear to linear-lanceolate leaves;
\par
    raceme with 3-5 flowers ............................................................... {\b 2. spinosa}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. V. pseudocytisus} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 641 (1753). Shrub 30-100 cm; setose-hispid or glabrous (var.{\i  badalii} (Pau) Heywood). Leaves obovate or obovate-lanceolate, somewhat coriaceous. Raceme with 10-40 flowers. Petal-limb 3-4 mm wide, orbicular or shortly obovate, with indistinct veins. Lower segment of silicula 3·5-4·5 × 3 mm, sparsely setose, hispid or glabrous, bilocular; upper segment obtuse.{\i  C., E. & S.E. Spain.} Hs.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp.{\b  pseudocytisus} ({\i V. monosperma} Menéndez Amor): Leaves densely hispid; silicula with short dense hairs on valves. 2n = 68. •{\i  Madrid and Almeria provs}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b paui }Gómez-Campo,{\i  Bot. Jour. Linn. Soc.}{\b  82}: 174 (1981) ({\i  V. badalii} Pau ex Pau): Leaves glabrous, except on margin; silicula glabrous. 2n = 34. •{\i  Teruel and Zaragoza provs}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. V. spinosa} Boiss.,{\i  Biblioth. Univ. Genève} ser. 2,{\b  13}: 407 (1838). Very spiny, caespitose, intricately branched shrub, 10-100 cm; stems with scattered long, patent hairs, the upper branches dichotomously branched and transformed into rigid, patent spines. Lower leaves linear-lanceolate; upper leaves linear; all setose-ciliate at the margin. Raceme with 3-5 flowers. Petal-limb 4-6 mm, obovate, strongly violet-veined. Lower segment of silicula 4·5-5·5 × 2·5-3 mm, glabrous, bilocular; upper segment acuminate.{\i  Limestone mountains. • S. & S.E. Spain.} Hs.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 96.         Succowia}        Medicus
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc  By P.W. Ball.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Hairs unbranched. Sepals erect, not saccate; petals shortly clawed, yellow. Fruit a 2-seeded silicula, covered with long, conical spines; style long, conical.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. S. balearica} (L.) Medicus,{\i  Pflanzengatt.}{\b  1}: 65 (1792). Glabrous or scabrid annual 20-70 cm. Leaves ovate, pinnatisect, the segments dentate to 2-pinnatifid. Petals 7-10 mm. Silicula 3-6 mm in diameter, spines 1-3 mm; style 4-8 mm. Seeds c.2 mm, pitted. 2n = 36.{\i  W. Mediterranean region}. Bl Co Hs It Sa Si.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 97.         Boleum}             Desv.
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc  By V.H. Heywood.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Hairs unbranched. Flowers in short, dense racemes, later elongating. Sepals erect; petals long-clawed, pale yellow, with reddish-brown veins and claw; stamens without appendages, the inner united in pairs. Fruit transversely articulate, the lower segment ovoid-globose, 2-valved, septate, indehiscent, the upper in the form of a sterile, lingulate beak.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. B. asperum} (Pers.) Desv.,{\i  Jour. Bot. Appl.}{\b  3}: 163 (1814). Densely setose shrub up to 50 cm with a woody stock and erect, fasciculate, leafy stems and branches. Leaves 10-25 × 2-3·5 mm, linear-lanceolate, entire, or sometimes deeply pinnatifid with 1 or 2 pairs of narrow lobes. Lower segment of fruit deeply sculpted and covered with long, white, setiform, unicellular hairs, 2-locular, with 1 seed in each loculus.{\i  Saline soils. • E. Spain.} Hs.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 98.          Erucaria}         Gaertner
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc  By V.H. Heywood.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Annual or biennial; hairs unbranched. Sepals erect; petals with a long claw, lilac. Fruit a transversely articulate siliqua with both segments fertile, the lower 2-valved and dehiscent, the upper abruptly contracted into the style.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. E. hispanica} (L.) Druce,{\i  Rep. Bot. Exch. Club Brit. Is.}{\b  3}: 418 (1914) ({\i E. myagroides }(L.) Halácsy,{\i  E. tenuifolia} DC., {\i E. aleppica} Gaertner). Annual or biennial; stem erect, glabrous or slightly hairy at the base. Leaves petiolate, pinnatisect with linear to oblong lobes, pinnatifid, or entire. Petals 10-15 mm. Siliqua 1-2 cm, longitudinally veined, appressed to the axis; lower segment elongate, cylindrical, with 2-4 seeds; upper segment compressed, ensiform, obtuse or truncate at the apex, with 1-3 seeds; style 2-5 mm, filiform.{\i  Cultivated land and waste places. S. Greece and Aegean region}. Cr Gr [Hs ?It].
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 99.          Cakile}              Miller
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc  By P.W. Ball.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Glabrous, glaucous annuals, with succulent leaves. Petals clawed, violet, pink or white. Fruit a transversely articulate siliqua; upper segment larger, ovoid, more or less 4-angled, not attenuate into style, with 1(2) seeds; lower obconical, not evidently 2-valved, usually with a single seed, indehiscent.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Literature: E.G. Pobedimova, {\i Nov. Syst. Pl. Vasc.} ({\i Leningrad}){\b  1964}: 90- 128 (1964). P.W. Ball,{\i  Feddes Repert}{\b . 69}: 35-40 (1964). J.E. Rodman,{\i  Contr. Gray Herb.}{\b  205}: 3-146 (1974). R. Elven & T. Gjelsas, {\i Blyttia}{\b  39}: 87-106 (1981).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 There is considerable diversity of opinion as to the number of taxa that can be recognized in Europe and as to the rank to which these should be assigned.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Lower segment of silicula with 2 lateral projections near the apex
\par
  ....................................................................................................... {\b 1. maritima}
\par
1 Lower segment of silicula without lateral projections
\par
2 Pedicels 5-10 mm in fruit; upper segment of silicula 14-20 mm, terete
\par
  ....................................................................................................... {\b 1. maritima}
\par

\par
413}
\par