{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 Carpels 3-7, superior, free and uniovulate or united into a unilocular ovary which is open above, with numerous ovules on parietal placentae. Fruit a capsule open at the top or consisting of 4-7 1-seeded, radiating carpels. Seeds suborbicular or reniform, without endosperm.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Literature: M.S. Abdallah & H.C.D. de Wit, {\i  Belmontia}{\b  8}: 1-416 (1978).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 Fruit a unilocular capsule with numerous seeds ............................... {\b 1. Reseda}
\par
Fruit of 4-7, ± free, stellate-patent, 1-seeded carpels ................ {\b 2. Sesamoides}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 1.           Reseda}             L.
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc  By P.F. Yeo.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Annuals to perennials. Leaves entire, toothed or pinnatifid. Petals usually with dilated base (claw) and lobed distal portion (limb); bases of stamens forming a disc which is often produced dorsally; carpels and stigmas 3 or 4; ovary unilocular; capsule opening more widely at maturity.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Leaf-shape is very plastic in most species. It is necessary to observe carefully the shape and dissection of the petals when using the key and care should be taken to distinguish between the upper and the lateral petals.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 All leaves entire or with a few minute, hyaline teeth near the base
\par
2 Pedicels not more than 2·5 mm
\par
3 Sepals and petals 4; leaves entire, at least some of them more
\par
  than 4 mm wide ................................................................................ {\b 1. luteola}
\par
3 Sepals and petals 6; leaves less than 3 mm wide, mostly with some
\par
  minute teeth near the base
\par
4 Leaves with 2-5 pairs of teeth near the base (always some leaves
\par
  with more than 2 pairs) .................................................................... {\b 5. virgata}
\par
4 Leaves with 1 or 2 pairs of teeth near the base
\par
5 Sepals 1-1·5 mm; petals 2-3 mm; capsule 1·5-3 × 2-3·5 mm .. {\b 4. complicata}
\par
5 Sepals 1·5-2 mm; petals 3·5-5 mm; capsule 3-4 × 4-5 mm
\par
6 Leaves up to 60 mm, linear; lateral branches not reduced to
\par
  axillary fascicles of leaves on the main stems ................................. {\b 2. glauca}
\par
6 Leaves not more than 12 mm, lanceolate; stems with axillary
\par
  fascicles of leaves ........................................................................ {\b 3. gredensis}
\par
2 Pedicels at least 5 mm
\par
7 Leaves linear, not more than 1 mm wide ........................................ {\b 5. virgata}
\par
7 Leaves oblanceolate to spathulate, at least 4 mm wide
\par
8 Upper petals 3-lobed; capsule 3-5 times as long as wide ........ {\b 19. lanceolata}
\par
8 Upper petals with numerous divisions; capsule less than 3 times
\par
  as long as wide
\par
9 Capsule  13-14 × 5·5-9 mm, obovoid-cylindrical;
\par
  leaves spathulate ....................................................................... {\b 11. phyteuma}
\par
9 Capsule 9-11 × 7-11 mm, subglobose; leaves oblanceolate
\par
  to obovate ..................................................................................... {\b 15. odorata}
\par
1 Some leaves ternate or pinnatifid
\par
10 Filaments persistent until fruit is ripe; carpels 4
\par
11 Sepals and petals 6; petal-limb rectangular or triangular,
\par
   not more than twice as long as the claw ............................... {\b 10. suffruticosa}
\par
11 Sepals and petals 5, rarely 6; petal-limb cuneate, at least
\par
   3 times as long as the claw
\par
12 Petals without a distinct claw ................................................... {\b 9. decursiva}
\par
12 Petals (at least the 2 upper) with a distinct claw
\par
13 Capsule 8-16 mm; inflorescence rarely longer than the leafy
\par
   part of the stem ................................................................................... {\b 6. alba}
\par
13 Capsule 4-6 mm; inflorescence usually much longer than the leafy
\par
   part of the stem
\par
14 Stamens 10-12, shorter than the petals ......................................... {\b 7. undata}
\par
14 Stamens 13-20, as long as or exceeding the petals ........................... {\b 8. paui}
\par
10 Filaments caducous long before fruit is ripe; carpels 3
\par
15 Limb of the 2 upper petals 3-lobed, the lateral lobes entire
\par
   or shallowly cleft
\par
16 Lateral lobes of upper petal shorter than the claw; capsule
\par
   3-5 times as long as wide ........................................................ {\b 19. lanceolata}
\par
16 Lateral lobes of upper petals longer than the claw; capsule not
\par
   more than 2½ times as long as wide
\par
17 Most of the leaf-segments widest in middle; bracts persistent;
\par
   capsule 12-15 mm, nodding ....................................................... {\b 20. jacquinii}
\par
17 Many of the leaf-segments linear; bracts usually caducous;
\par
   capsule 6-12 mm, rarely nodding .................................................... {\b 18. lutea}
\par
15 Limb of the 2 upper petals (5-)9- to 19-lobed
\par
18 Bracts caducous; pedicels capillary; flowers pendent ................. {\b 17. stricta}
\par
18 Bracts persistent; pedicels not capillary; flowers not pendent
\par
19 Petal-lobes spathulate
\par
20 Capsule 9-11 × 7-11 mm, subglobose ....................................... {\b 15. odorata}
\par
20 Capsule 7-13 × 5-6 mm, ovoid or obovoid ............................. {\b 16. orientalis}
\par
19 Petal-lobes linear or linear-oblanceolate
\par
21 Capsule almost square in outline
\par
22 Leaf-segments oblanceolate to narrow-lanceolate; pedicels 5-8 mm;
\par
   capsule 8-10 mm ......................................................................... {\b 13. inodora}
\par
22 Leaf-segments broadly lanceolate; pedicels 3-4·5 mm;
\par
   capsule 10-12 mm .................................................................... {\b 14. tymphaea}
\par
21 Capsule obovoid or broadly cylindrical
\par
23 Sepals strongly accrescent in fruit, finally 5-13 × 1·25-1·5(-3·5) mm;
\par
   lateral lobes of upper petals unilaterally pinnatifid ................. {\b 11. phyteuma}
\par
23 Sepals not strongly accrescent in fruit, finally 4-6 × 0·3-1·25 mm;
\par
   limb of upper petals digitate
\par
24 Leaves or leaf-segments usually not more than 8 mm wide; few leaves
\par
   entire and petiolate; terminal lobe of pinnatifid leaves usually
\par
   less than ½ as long as the leaf ........................................................ {\b 12. media}
\par
24 Leaves or leaf-segments up to 7-12 mm wide; many leaves entire
\par
   and petiolate; terminal lobe of ternate or pinnatifid leaves at
\par
   least ½ as long as the leaf
\par
25 Pedicels 5-8 mm ........................................................................ {\b 13. inodora}
\par
25 Pedicels less than 5 mm ......................................................... {\b 14. tymphaea}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Sect. LUTEOLA Dumort. Biennials. Leaves entire. Sepals and petals 4. Filaments persistent. Carpels 3.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. R. luteola} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 448 (1753). Erect, 50-130 cm. Leaves mostly 25-120 × 4-15 mm. Pedicels c. 1 mm. Petals yellow, the upper one clawed, with 4- to 8-lobed limb; the two laterals and the lower one clawed or clawless with entire or 4-lobed limb. Capsule
\par

\par
418}
\par