{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 3-4 × 5-6 mm. 2n = 24, 28. {\i Stony and sandy places. S., W. and parts of C. Europe; formerly cultivated as a source of dye, and naturalized northwards to S. Sweden}. Al Az Be Bl Bu Co Cr Cz Da Ga Gr Ho Hs It Ju Lu Rm Rs(K) Sa Si Tu *[Au Br Ge Hb He Hu Po Rs(B) Su].
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Sect. GLAUCORESEDA DC. Perennials. Leaves entire, with small whitish teeth near the base. Sepals 6; petals white or whitish, the limb cuneate; the two upper 3- or 5-lobed; the two laterals narrower, entire to 3-lobed; the two lower entire or 2-lobed; claw distinct in upper petals. Filaments persistent. Carpels 4. Capsule wider than long.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. R. glauca} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 449 (1753). Stems 10-40 cm, numerous, with short branches. Leaves 15-60 × 1-2 mm, linear, with 0-2 pairs of teeth, glaucous. Bracts 1-3 mm; pedicels 1·5-2·5 mm. Sepals 2 mm; petals 3·5-5 mm, with the limbs of the upper ones wide, 3-lobed to 1/3 of their length, the lobes toothed. Capsule 3-4 × 4-5 mm. 2n = 28.{\i  Alpine and subalpine pastures, rocks and screes. • E. & C. Pyrenees, Cordillera Cantabrica.} Ga Hs.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 3. R. gredensis} (Cutanda & Willk.) Müller Arg. in DC., {\i Prodr. }{\b 16}({\b 2}): 582 (1868). Like {\b 2} but stems 10-25 cm, with axillary fascicles of leaves; leaves 3-12 × 0·5-1(-1·5) mm, lanceolate or narrow-lanceolate. 2n = 28.{\i  Montane pastures and gravelly places. • W.C. Spain} ({\i Sierra de Gredos}). Hs.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 4. R. complicata} Bory, {\i Ann. Gen. Sci. Phys.} ({\i Bruxelles}) {\b 3}: 13 (1820). Like {\b 2} but stems 40-70 cm; stems and branches arcuate-ascending; leaves 15-25 × 1-2·5 mm; bracts 0·5 mm; sepals 1-1·5 mm; petals 2-3 mm, the upper with (3-)5 deeper and narrower lobes; capsule 1·5-3 × 2-3·5 mm, subsessile. 2n = 28.{\i  Montane pastures and damp, gravelly places. • S. Spain} ({\i Sierra Nevada}). Hs.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 5. R. virgata} Boiss. & Reuter,{\i  Diagn. Pl. Nov. Hisp.} 6 (1842). Stems 20-60 cm, erect, branched above. Leaves 15-40 × 0·5-1 mm, with 2-5 pairs of teeth. Bracts 2 mm; pedicels 1·5-2(-5·5) mm. Sepals 1·5 mm; petals 3 mm, the upper as in 2 but with proportionately narrower limb and smaller claw. Capsule 3 × 4 mm. 2n = 28. {\i Waste sandy, fields and roadsides. • C. Spain, N. Portugal.} Hs Lu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Sect. LEUCORESEDA DC. Leaves pinnatifid; lobes usually varying irregularly in length. Sepals 5 or 6; petals 5 or 6 (two upper, two lateral, one or two lower), white, more or less clawed. Filaments persistent. Carpels 4.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 6. R. alba} L.,{\i  Sp. Pl.} 449 (1753) ({\i R. fruticulosa} L., {\i R. suffruticulosa} L.). Annual to perennial (10-)30-80 cm, erect, branching above. Leaf-lobes 5-15 on each side, entire. Pedicels 1-8 mm. Sepals 5 or 6, (1·5-)3-4 mm; petals 5 or 6, 3·5-6 mm; limb triangular, 3-5 times as long as claw, lobed to 1/3-2/3 of its length; lobes 3, the lateral often again lobed. Stamens 10-12, shorter than the petals. Capsule 8-16 mm, narrowly obovate or elliptical, constricted at the apex. 2n = 40.{\i  Disturbed ground. S. Europe, eastwards to Kriti; occasionally cultivated for ornament and naturalized in parts of C. & N.W. Europe.} Bl Co Cr Ga Gr Hs It Ju Lu Sa Si *Tu [Br Cz Ge Hb Rm].
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 7. R. undata} L.,{\i  Syst. Nat.} ed. 10, {\b 2}: 1046 (1759) ({\i R. gayana} Boiss., {\i R. leucantha} Hegelm. ex Lange). Like {\b 6} but stems less leafy above; pedicels 1·5-3 mm; sepals 5, 1·5-2·5 mm; petals 5, 3-4·5 mm, the lower bilobed; capsule 4-6 × 3·5 mm, turbinate or subglobose. 2n = 20. {\i Dry places. • S., E. & C. Spain.} Hs.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 8. R. paui} Valdés-Bermejo & Kaercher,{\i  Anal. Jard. Bot. Madrid}{\b  41}: 198 (1984). Like {\b 6} but stamens 13-20, as long as or exceeding the petals; petal-limb obovate or subtriangular, petal-claw strongly dilated, concave. 2n = 20. •{\i  S.E. Spain.} Hs.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 9. R. decursiva} Forskål, {\i Fl. Aegypt.} lxvi (1775) ({\i R. propinqua} R. Br.). Annual or biennial up to 20 cm. Leaf-lobes 5-15 on each side, entire. Pedicels 1-2·5 mm. Sepals 5, 2-2·5 mm; petals 5, 3-4·5 mm; dilation of claw indistinct or absent; lower petal retuse or shallowly bilobed. Capsule 4·5-7 × 4·5 mm, turbinate or elliptical, usually constricted below the prominent stigmatic lobes.{\i  Maritime sands. S. Spain} ({\b near Gibraltar}). Hs. ({\b N. Africa, S.W. Asia.})
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 10. R. suffruticosa} Loefl.,{\i  Reise Span. Länd. }113 (1766) ({\i R. baetica} (Müller Arg.) Gay ex Lange,{\i  R. macrostachya} Lange). Biennial or perennial 25-220 cm, robust, papillose. Leaf-lobes c. 25 on each side, usually pinnatifid or toothed. Pedicels 0·5-1·5 mm. Sepals 6; petals 6; claw and limb rectangular or triangular; limb subentire or 1- or 2-cleft, 1-2 times as long as the claw. Capsule 11-14 × 5-8 mm, obovoid. 2n = 20.{\i  Dry places. • S., C. & E. Spain, N.E. Portugal}. Hs Lu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Sect. RESEDA (Sect.{\i  Resedastrum} Duby). Leaves entire or pinnatifid. Sepals 6; petals 6, clawed, the two upper with limb 3-lobed; lateral lobes multifid or subentire; mid-lobe narrow, often indistinct; the two lateral petals similar, but with the lower lateral lobe absent or reduced; the two lower petals with the limb usually entire. Filaments usually caducous. Carpels 3.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 11. R. phyteuma} L.,{\i  Sp. Pl}. 449 (1753) ({\i R. aragonensis} Loscos & Pardo,{\i  R. litigiosa} Sennen & Pau). Annual to perennial 10-50 cm, with ascending branches near the base. Leaves 50-100 × 5-15 mm, spathulate, long-cuneate, sometimes some with 1(2) lobes on each side. Bracts 2·5-3 mm. Sepals accrescent, 3-4·5 × c. 0·75 mm at anthesis, 5-13 × 1·25-1·5(-3·5) mm in fruit; petals 3-5 mm, white, the upper with claw investing disc; limb inserted dorsally on the claw below the middle, stipitate, the lateral lobes pinnatifid, each with 5-9 linear-oblanceolate segments. Capsule 13-14 × 5·5-9 mm, nodding, obovoid-cylindrical. 2n = 12, 24. {\i Cultivated and disturbed ground. S. Europe, extending northwards to} 47°{\i  N. in France}. Al Bl Co Ga Gr He Hs Hu It Ju Lu Po Rm [Au Cz Ge].
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 12. R. media} Lag.,{\i  Gen. Sp. Nov.} 17 (1816) ({\i R. macrosperma} Reichenb.). Like {\b 11} but many leaves with 1-4(-8) pairs of lobes and small terminal lobe; the entire leaves 30-50 × 4-8 mm; the intermediate and upper leaves more shortly cuneate or rounded at the base; bracts 1·5-2·5 mm; sepals finally 4-6 mm; upper petals with claw less incurved and limb sessile, digitate; capsule 13-16 × 6-8·5 mm, nodding. 2n = 12.{\i  Dry places. S.W. Europe.} *Az Bl Hs Lu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 13. R. inodora} Reichenb.,{\i  Icon. Fl. Germ.}{\b  2}: 22 (1838). Biennial or perennial 20-60 cm; stems erect, branched above. Leaves mostly 50-80 × 7-12 mm, lanceolate, erect, some of the upper with 1 or 2 pairs of lateral lobes and a large terminal lobe. Bracts 3 mm; pedicels 5-8 mm, patent. Sepals finally 5 mm; petals 3 mm, the upper with limb inserted dorsally on the claw above the middle; limb sessile, digitate, with c. 11-17 linear-oblanceolate segments. Orientation of capsule variable; capsule 8-10(-13) mm. {\i Cultivated ground and waste places. • S.E. Europe, westwards to N.E. Italy.} Bu Hu It Ju Rm Rs(C, W, K, E) [Ho].
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Similar plants from S. Jugoslavia and N. Greece ({\i R. inodora }var. {\i macrocarpa }Fischer & C.A. Meyer), which perhaps deserve sub
\par

\par
419}
\par