{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 inner stamens with appendage c. 1 mm long; upper segment of silicula 6-7 mm, apiculate.{\i  Krym.} Rs(?W, K). ({\i Caucasus.})
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 4. C. grandiflora} DC.,{\i  Reg. Veg. Syst. Nat.}{\b  2}: 652 (1821). Like {\b 2} but the ultimate divisions of the leaves acute; petals 5·5-7 mm; upper segment of the silicula 7-8 mm; pedicels up to 18 mm.{\i  Krym.} Rs(K). ({\i Caucasus}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 5. C. aspera} Bieb.,{\i  Fl. Taur.-Cauc.}{\b  2}: 90 (1808). Plant densely hispid. Leaves deeply pinnatifid to 2-pinnatisect. Petals 5-7 mm. Upper segment of silicula 7-9 mm, not 4-angled; pedicels up to 13 mm.{\i  • S.E. Russia, S. & E. Ukraine}. Rs(K, E).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 This species has been erroneously recorded from a number of other territories. Such plants usually have the upper segment of the silicula smaller and 4-angled and are included here in{\b  2}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b C. gibberosa} Rupr.,{\i  Mém. Acad. Sci. Pétersb.} ser. 7, {\b 15}({\b 2}): 136 (1869), has been recorded from S.E. Russia (near the northern margin of the Caucasus). It is like {\b 5} but 30-50 cm (not 40-100 cm); upper segment of silicula smooth, obtuse (not rugose-tuberculate and slightly apiculate). It is doubtful if it is specifically distinct from{\b  5}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 6. C. koktebelica} (Junge) N. Busch in Kusn., N. Busch & Fomin,{\i  Fl. Cauc. Crit.}{\b  3}({\b 4}): 294 (1908) ({\i C. mitridatis} Juz., {\i C. orientalis} var.{\i  koktebelica} (Junge) O.E. Schulz). Stout perennial 150-250 cm, hispid at the base; stock fusiform. Lower leaves subentire to sinuate, with dentate lobes, sparsely setose to glabrous beneath. Petals 4-6·5 mm. Lower segment of silicula 0·5-1 mm, slender; upper segment 4-4·5 mm, more or less globose, very obscurely angled; pedicels slender (c. 0·3 mm in diameter).{\i  S.E. Krym. }Rs(K). ({\i N.W. Caucasus}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Possibly a subspecies of{\b  C. orientalis }L.,{\i  Sp. Pl.} 671 (1753), which is widespread in Anatolia.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 7. C. hispanica} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 671 (1753). Slender, usually densely hispid annual 25-100 cm. Lower leaves lyrate-pinnatisect, with large reniform-orbicular terminal lobe, and 0-2 pairs of small lateral lobes. Petals 3-4 mm. Lower segment of silicula c. 1 mm; upper segment 3-4·5 mm, globose; pedicels 4-12 mm.{\i  Mediterranean region, S. Portugal.} Al Co Gr Hs It Ju Lu Sa Si.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 8. C. filiformis} Jacq.,{\i  Icon. Pl. Rar.}{\b  3}: 8 (1795) ({\i C. reniformis} Desf.). Slender, densely hispid perennial 30-100 cm. Lower leaves lyrate-pinnatifid, with more or less orbicular terminal lobe and 3-6 or more pairs of lateral lobes. Petals 3-6 mm. Lower segment of silicula 2-3 mm; upper segment 1-2 mm, globose; pedicels 2-3 mm.{\i  S. Spain.} Hs. ({\i N. Africa}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 103.            Calepina}            Adanson
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc  By P.W. Ball.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Like {\i Crambe} but glabrous annual or biennial; flowers zygomorphic; filaments without appendages; silicula ovoid-globose ending in a short, thick beak; lower segment absent.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. C. irregularis} (Asso) Thell. in Schinz & R. Keller,{\i  Fl. Schweiz} ed. 2, {\b 1}: 218 (1905) ({\i C. corvini} (All.) Desv.). Plant 15-80 cm. Basal leaves obovate, entire to lyrate-pinnatifid, petiolate; cauline leaves amplexicaul with acute, patent auricles. Shorter petals c. 2 mm, the longer 2·5-3 mm. Silicula 2·5-4 × 2-3 mm, ovoid-globose to ellipsoidal, shortly beaked, 4-veined, and reticulate-rugose when dry. 2n = 28. {\i S. Europe and parts of C. & W. Europe; naturalized elsewhere.} Al Be Bu Co *Cr Ga Gr He *Ho Hs Hu It Ju Lu Rm Rs(K) Sa Si Tu [Au Ge].
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 104.           Morisia}               Gay
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc  By †T.G. Tutin.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Sepals suberect; petals yellow; stamens without appendages. Fruit a transversely articulate silicula; the lower segment bilocular, larger than the upper.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. M. monanthos} (Viv.) Ascherson in W. Barbey,{\i  Fl. Sard. Comp.} 173 (1885) ({\i M. hypogaea} Gay). Pubescent perennial; stock stout. Leaves rosulate, oblong-lanceolate in outline, pinnatisect. Flowers solitary. Petals 9-12 mm. Pedicels 5-25 mm, erect at flowering, elongating up to 60 mm, curving downwards and burying the fruit. Lower segment of fruit subglobose, bilocular, eventually dehiscing by 2 valves, with 3-5(-12) seeds; the upper segment 3 × 3 mm, ovoid-conical, indehiscent, with 1 or 2 seeds. 2n = 14. {\i Sandy places. • Corse, Sardegna.} Co Sa.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 105.            Guiraoa}           Cosson
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc  By V.H. Heywood.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Raceme narrow, ebracteate. Sepals erecto-patent; petals yellow, with long claw; filaments without appendages. Fruit an erect, transversely articulate silicula; upper segment bilocular, larger than the lower.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. G. arvensis} Cosson,{\i  Not. Pl. Crit.} 98 (1851). Annual, with erect, simple or branched stems up to 60 cm, with deflexed white hairs below. Lower leaves oblong, irregularly toothed or pinnatifid; upper leaves linear. Raceme elongating during flowering. Petals 6-9 mm. Pedicels 6-8 mm in fruit. Lower segment of fruit c. 2 mm, cylindrical, as thick as the pedicel, bilocular, with 1 seed in each loculus; upper segment c. 6 × 4-5 mm, eventually deciduous, subglobose, with 8 prominent, winged ribs, bilocular, indehiscent, with 1 or 2 seeds, attenuate into the conical beak. 2n = 18.{\i  Dry places. • S.E. Spain.} Hs.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 106.       Enarthrocarpus}         Labill.
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc  By V.H. Heywood.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Annuals, with unbranched hairs. Raceme bracteate. Sepals erectopatent; petals clawed, yellow, with violet veins. Fruit a transversely articulate, non-septate siliqua; the lower segment 2-valved, indehiscent, seedless or with 1 or 2 seeds; the upper segment linear, elongate, caducous, with 3-15 seeds, constricted between the seeds and separating into 1-seeded portions.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Literature: O.E. Schulz in Engler,{\i  Pflanzenreich}{\b  70}({\b IV.105}): 210-218 (1919). A. Béguinot,{\i  Nuovo Gior. Bot. Ital.} nov. ser., {\b 21}: 361 (1914).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 Petals 10-13 mm; raceme bracteate only at the base; lower segment
\par
       of fruit 1-6 mm, seedless or with 1 seed .................................. {\b 1. arcuatus}
\par
Petals 6-7 mm; raceme bracteate almost to the apex; lower segment
\par
       of fruit 7-14 mm, with 2 or 3 seeds ............................................ {\b 2. lyratus}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. E. arcuatus} Labill.,{\i  Icon. Pl. Syr.}{\b  5}: 4 (1812). Stems up to 50 cm, hispid; branches procumbent or ascending. Lower leaves usually rosulate, petiolate, lyrate- or runcinate-pinnatipartite; lateral lobes alternate, oblong, with few teeth. Raceme bracteate at the base only. Petals 10-13 mm. Siliqua 3-9 cm, recurved, shortly
\par

\par
416}
\par