{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 setose; lower segment 1-6 mm, usually 1-seeded; upper segment much longer, with 3-15 seeds; beak 5-10 mm, conical.{\i  Maritime sands and rocks. Bulgaria, Greece and Aegean region}. Bu Cr Gr.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. E. lyratus} (Forskål) DC.,{\i  Reg. Veg. Syst. Nat.}{\b  2}: 661 (1821). Like {\b 1} but raceme bracteate almost to the apex; petals 6-7 mm; lower segment of siliqua 7-14 mm, with 2 or 3 seeds; upper segment twice as long, with 3-6 seeds; beak 4-5 mm.{\i  Cultivated ground. S. Greece} ({\i Methoni, S. Peloponnisos}). *Gr. ({\i E. Mediterranean}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b E. pterocarpus} (Pers.) DC.,{\i  Reg. Veg. Syst. Nat. }{\b 2}: 661 (1821), from N. Africa, may be becoming naturalized in Malta. It has racemes bracteate to the apex, the lower segment of the fruit with 1 or 2 seeds, the upper segment broadly winged, with up to 10 seeds, and the beak 7-13 mm.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 107.        Raphanus}          L.
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc  By A.O. Chater.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Annuals to perennials. Raceme ebracteate. Sepals erect; petals abruptly contracted into claw; filaments without appendages. Fruit a transversely articulate siliqua; lower segment very short, slender, seedless, indehiscent; upper circular in section, indehiscent, straight-sided, or lomentaceous (at least in part), or constricted between the seeds but not breaking up into 1-seeded portions; beak narrow, seedless.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Literature: A. Thellung in Hegi,{\i  Ill. Fl. Mitteleur.}{\b  4}({\b 1}): 272-286 (1918). O.E. Schulz in Engler, {\i Pflanzenreich}{\b  70}({\b IV.105}): 194-210 (1919).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b R. sativus}  L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 669 (1753), cultivated for its edible root (Radish), is of unknown origin; many cultivars exist, and the plant is a frequent casual over much of Europe. The root is thick, napiform or cylindrical, and the siliqua is 20-90 × 8-15 mm, not lomentaceous, and not or scarcely constricted between the (1-)5-12 seeds. Some of its variants are transitional to the wild plants in Europe and hybrids probably occur. Similar hybrids between {\i R. sativus} and{\b  1}({\b a}) have been demonstrated in North America by C.A. Panatsos & H.G. Baker,{\i  Genetica}{\b  38}: 243-274 (1967).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. R. raphanistrum} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 669 (1753) ({\i R. sylvestris} Lam.). Plant usually more or less hispid; stem 15-150 cm, erect, branched. Basal and lower cauline leaves lyrate; upper usually entire. Sepals 5-10 mm, elliptic-lanceolate, obtuse; petals about twice as long as the sepals, white, yellow, lilac or violet. Pedicels 1-5 cm in fruit. Siliqua erecto-patent. Seeds 1·5-4 mm, ovoid to subglobose, usually reticulate.{\i  Throughout Europe, but only as an alien in the extreme north.} All territories except Sb.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 The following treatment is largely based on that of Thellung,{\i  loc. cit.} (1918); the distribution-pattern, especially in the cases of subspp. ({\b a}) and ({\b e}), is confused by widespread introductions.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Siliqua less than 5 mm in diameter
\par
2 Siliqua 4 mm in diameter; seeds 2-5 ............................... ({\b c}) subsp.{\b  rostratus}
\par
2 Siliqua 1·5-4 mm in diameter; seeds 4-11
\par
3 Siliqua 3-4 mm in diameter ...................................... ({\b a}) subsp.{\b  raphanistrum}
\par
3 Siliqua 1·5-2 mm in diameter .................................... ({\b b}) subsp.{\b  microcarpus}
\par
1 Siliqua at least 5 mm in diameter
\par
4 Leaves with contiguous lateral lobes ........................... ({\b d}) subsp. {\b maritimus}
\par
4 Leaves with distant lateral lobes
\par
5 Petals 15-25 mm, pale lilac with darker veins ................ ({\b c}) subsp.{\b  rostratus}
\par
5 Petals 10-15 mm, white or yellowish ................................. ({\b e}) subsp.{\b  landra}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp.{\b  raphanistrum} ({\i R. raphanistrum} subsp.{\i  segetum }Clavaud): Annual or biennial. Lateral lobes of basal and lower cauline leaves distant. Petals 12-20 mm, usually white or yellow, usually dark-veined. Siliqua 30-90 × 3-4 mm, lomentaceous at least above, with 3-8 segments separated by irregular, long, rather shallow constrictions; segments usually longer than wide, strongly veined; beak 6-30 mm. 2n = 18. {\i A weed of cultivated fields. Throughout Europe, but probably not native in N. Europe and rare or absent in the extreme north}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp.{\b  microcarpus} (Lange) Thell. in Hegi,{\i  Ill. Fl. Mitteleur.}{\b  4}({\b 1}): 275 (1918) ({\i R. microcarpus} Lange): Like subsp. ({\b a}) but leaves and petals smaller; petals white or reddish; siliqua 25-35 × 1·5-2 mm, with deeper constrictions and beak 5-10 mm. {\i Weed of cultivated fields. C. & W. Spain; Portugal; Açores}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b c}) Subsp.{\b  rostratus} (DC.) Thell. in Hegi,{\i  op. cit.} 279 (1918) ({\i R. rostratus} DC.): Annual. Lateral lobes of basal and lower cauline leaves very small and distant. Petals 15-25 mm, pale lilac, with darker veins. Siliqua 30-130 × 4-6 mm, lomentaceous at least above, with 2-7 segments separated by irregular, very long, rather shallow constrictions; segments usually longer than wide, strongly veined; beak 15-75 mm.{\i  Sea-shores. Aegean region}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b d}) Subsp.{\b  maritimus} (Sm.) Thell. in Hegi,{\i  op. cit.} 278 (1918) ({\i R. maritimus} Sm.): Usually perennial; root napiform. Basal leaves usually in a distinct rosette; lateral lobes often irregular in size, contiguous. Petals 15-25 mm, yellow, scarcely veined. Siliqua 15-45 × 5-8 mm, lomentaceous at least above, with 1-6 segments separated by deep constrictions of irregular length; segments as wide or wider than long; beak 6-20 mm. 2n = 18.{\i  Sandy and rocky sea-shores. Coasts of W. Europe northwards to N. Britain; W. Mediterranean region; Black Sea}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b e}) Subsp. {\b landra} (Moretti ex DC.) Bonnier & Layens,{\i  Tabl. Syn. Pl. Vasc.} 21 (1894) ({\i R. landra} Moretti ex DC.): Like subsp. ({\b d}) but sometimes annual; root slender; lateral lobes of basal leaves distant, not interspersed with smaller lobes; petals 10-15 mm, white or yellowish; siliqua 25-60 × 5-8 mm; beak 15-40 mm. 2n = 18.{\i  Weed of fields and waste places, rarely on the coast. Mediterranean region and Açores, but absent from most of the Aegean region. Probably only casual in several localities further north and on the W. Black Sea coast}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 The petals of subsp. ({\b a}) are often yellow in the northern and white in the southern part of the range.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Plants from Britain and France with the siliqua c. 3 mm wide are intermediate between subspp. ({\b a}) and ({\b b}).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Populations intermediate between subspp. ({\b a}) and ({\b d}), of hybrid origin, occur frequently on the coasts of N.W. Europe.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 69.         RESEDACEAE}
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc  Edit J.R. Edmondson.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Annual to perennial herbs, rarely woody, with alternate, simple or pinnatifid leaves. Flowers in terminal, bracteate racemes or spikes. Sepals 4-8; petals 4-8, free, entire or laciniate; stamens 7-25, inserted on a hypogynous or perigynous, often eccentric disc.
\par

\par
417}
\par