{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 2 Pedicels not more than 5(-8) mm in fruit; upper segment of
\par
  silicula 7-15 mm, 4-angled ........................................................... {\b 2. edentula}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. C. maritima} Scop.,{\i  Fl. Carn.} ed. 2, {\b 2}: 35 (1772) ({\i C. monosperma} Lange). Plant 15-60 cm, usually decumbent. Leaves subentire to pinnatisect. Petals 5-14 mm. Silicula 12-25(-30) mm; lower segment often with 2 lateral, more or less deflexed projections at the apex; upper segment 4-angled to terete, often expanding into a broad membranous margin at the base.{\i  Coasts of Europe.} All except Au Az He Hu; introduced in Cz.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 A variable species that is divisible into at least 4 subspecies in Europe.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Leaves 1- or 2-pinnatisect, the primary segments mostly 8-20 times
\par
  as long as wide
\par
2 Lower segment of silicula ± concave at the apex (when viewed in the plane
\par
  of the projections); projections usually less than 0·5 mm
\par
  ............................................................................................. ({\b b}) subsp.{\b  euxina}
\par
2 Lower segment of silicula not concave at the apex (when viewed in the
\par
  plane of the projections); projections often exceeding 1 mm,
\par 
  conspicuous, deflexed ......................................................... ({\b c}) subsp.{\b  baltica}
\par
1 Leaves subentire to pinnatisect, the primary divisions rarely
\par
  more than 6 times as long as wide
\par
3 Lower segment of silicula flat at the apex (when viewed in the
\par
  plane of the projections); projections less than 0·5 mm,
\par
  sometimes obscure ........................................................... ({\b a}) subsp.{\b  maritima}
\par
3 Lower segment of silicula ± concave at the apex (when viewed in the plane
\par
  of the projections); projections often exceeding 1 mm, conspicuous
\par
  ....................................................................................... ({\b d}) subsp.{\b  aegyptiaca}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp.{\b  maritima }({\i C. maritima} subsp.{\i  integrifolia} (Hornem.) Hyl.): Leaves subentire to pinnatisect, the primary segments not more than 5 times as long as wide. Pedicels 1·5-5(-7) mm in fruit. Lower segment of the silicula flat (when viewed in the plane of the projections) and convex (when viewed in the plane at right-angles to the projections); projections usually less than 0·5 mm, sometimes obscure. Upper segment of the silicula expanding into a membranous margin at the base. 2n = 18. {\i W. & N.W. Europe from C. Portugal to c.} 68°{\i  N. in Norway; rarely in the Baltic and Mediterranean regions in the vicinity of ports, where it is probably introduced}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp{\b . euxina} (Pobed.) E.I. Nyárády in Savul.,{\i  Fl. Rep. Pop. Române}{\b  3}: 480 (1955) ({\i C. euxina }Pobed.): Leaves 1- or 2-pinnatisect, the primary segments up to 15 times as long as wide. Pedicels 2-4·5 mm in fruit. Lower segment of the silicula more or less concave at the apex (when viewed in the plane of the projections), with projections usually less than 0·5 mm; articulating surface with 2 erect triangular teeth. Upper segment of the silicula expanding into a membranous margin at the base. 2n = 18.{\i  Black Sea region}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b c}) Subsp.{\b  baltica} (Jordan ex Rouy & Fouc.) Hyl. ex P.W. Ball,{\i  Feddes Repert.}{\b  69}: 37 (1964) ({\i C. baltica} Jordan ex Pobed.): Like ({\b b}) but primary leaf segments 10-20 times as long as wide; pedicels 3-5 mm in fruit; lower segment of the silicula not concave at the apex, with deflexed projections usually exceeding 1 mm; articulating surface without erect teeth. 2n = 18. {\i Baltic region and S.E. Norway}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b d}) Subsp.{\b  aegyptiaca} (Willd.) Nyman,{\i  Consp.} 29 (1878): Leaves subentire to pinnatisect, the primary divisions rarely more than 6 times as long as wide. Pedicels 1·5-6 mm in fruit. Lower segment of the silicula more or less concave at the apex (when viewed in the plane of the projections), with deflexed projections usually exceeding 0·5 mm; articulating surface sometimes with 2 erect triangular teeth. Upper segment of the silicula expanding into a membranous margin at the base. 2n = 18.{\i  Mediterranean region and S. Portugal}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Populations in the Aegean region are mostly intermediate between subspp. ({\b b}) and ({\b d}).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Subsp. ({\b d}) is not always clearly distinct from subsp. ({\b a}) on the basis of the fruit characters given above. However, these subspecies are apparently distinct phytochemically (J.E. Rodman,{\i  Syst. Bot.}{\b 1}:137-148 (1976)), and in nectary structure (M. Clemente & J.E. Hernández-Bermejo,{\i  Anal. Inst. Bot. Cavanilles}{\b  35}: 279-296 (1978)). The situation is further complicated by the occurrence of plants apparently identical with ({\b a}) in the vicinity of ports in the Mediterranean region.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 In subsp. ({\b a}) the lower segment of the silicula is often sterile, and resembles an extension of the pedicel.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Plants in which the apex of the lower segment of the silicula is flat, without projections, and in which the upper segment is contracted to a flat base without a membranous margin, have been referred to {\b C. edentula} subsp.{\b  islandica} (Gand.) Á. & D. Löve, Bot. Not. {\b 114}: 52 (1961) ({\i C. arctica} Pobed.,{\i  C. lapponica} Pobed.), but may justify recognition as a fifth subsp. of{\i  C. maritima.} Reported from N. Russia, N. Norway, Svalbard, Faeröer and Iceland, intermediates between it and subsp. ({\b a}) are frequent in N. Norway between 66° N. and 68° N.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. C. edentula} (Bigelow) Hooker,{\i  Fl. Bor.-Amer.}{\b  1}: 59 (1830) ({\i C. americana} Nutt.). Plant up to 60 cm. Leaves subentire to pinnatisect. Pedicels 1·5-5(-8) mm in fruit. Petals 4·5-8 mm. Silicula 12-25 mm; lower segment flat at the apex, without lateral projections; upper segment 7-15 mm, 4(-8)-angled, tapered towards a flat base, without a membranous margin.{\i  Açores.} *Az. ({\i E. North America.})
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 100.        Rapistrum}        Crantz
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc  By †J. de Carvalho e Vasconcellos (Ed.1) revised by J.R. Akeroyd (Ed.2)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Annuals to perennials, with unbranched hairs. Sepals erectopatent; petals yellow, with a short claw. Fruit a transversely articulate silicula; lower segment cylindrical, with (0)1-3 seeds upper segment ovoid to globose, wider than the lower, indehiscent, caducous at maturity, with a single erect seed; beak conical or filiform.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 Biennial or perennial; upper segment of fruit gradually attenuate
\par
  into a beak 0·5-1 mm ..................................................................... {\b 1. perenne}
\par
Annual; upper segment of fruit abruptly contracted into a beak
\par
   1-3(-5) mm .................................................................................. {\b 2. rugosum}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. R. perenne} (L.) All.,{\i  Fl. Pedem.}{\b  1}: 258 (1785) ({\i R. diffusum,} All.). Biennial or perennial 20-80 cm, densely hispid below glabrous above. Lower leaves pinnate or pinnatipartite, coarsely serrate; upper pinnatifid or dentate, sessile or shortly petiolate. Petals 5-7 mm, bright yellow. Silicula 5-10 mm; upper segment 3-4·5 mm (including beak), ovoid, strongly longitudinally ribbed, gradually attenuate into a conical beak 0·5-1 mm; lower segment narrower, usually more or less cylindrical, about ½ as long as the pedicel.{\i  Probably native in parts of C. & E. Europe; casual and often naturalized elsewhere in C. & W. Europe.} Au Bu Cz Ge Hu It Ju Rm Rs(C, W, E) [Br Ga He Po].
\par

\par
414}
\par