{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 hairs; beak 9-12 mm, curved. Seeds usually 12-17, blackish. 2n = 18. {\i C. & S. Italy, Sardegna and Sicilia; formerly in S.E. France.} ?Al †Ga It Sa Si.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 3. S. alba} L.,{\i  Sp. Pl.} 668 (1753). Annual; stems up to 80 cm, usually with stiff, deflexed hairs (rarely glabrous). Leaves usually hispid but not scabrid, all petiolate. Petals 8-15 mm. Siliqua 20-40 × 3-6·5 mm, patent; beak 10-30 mm, flat, attenuate. Seeds 4-8.{\i  Usually a weed of cultivated land. Perhaps native in much of Europe but widespread as an alien in other parts.} All except Sb but only casual in Az Fa Fe Is Rs(N).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp.{\b  alba} ({\i Brassica foliosa} (Willd.) Samp.): Leaves lyrate-pinnatifid or -pinnate. Siliqua 20-40 × 3-4 mm; valves usually hispid; beak 10-30 mm. 2n = 24. {\i Throughout the range of the species}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b dissecta} (Lag.) Bonnier,{\i  Fl. Compl. Fr.}{\b  1}: 58 (1912) ({\i S. dissecta} Lag.): Leaves 2-pinnatifid, not lyrate; terminal lobe oblong-ovate, not or scarcely larger than the oblong-linear lateral lobes. Siliqua 25-30 × 3·5-6·5 mm; valves slightly hairy or glabrous; beak 10-20 mm.{\i  Mostly in flax-fields. S. Europe; sometimes casual further north}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Subsp. ({\b a}) is widely cultivated as a forage crop and for the condiment obtained from the seeds (White mustard).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 4. S. flexuosa} Poiret in Lam.,{\i  Encycl. Méth. Bot.}{\b  4}: 341 (1797) ({\i S. hispida} Schousboe). Like {\b 3} but the stems more strongly hispid; leaf-surfaces scabrid with very rough, short hairs; pedicels shorter in fruit; sepals and petals smaller; siliqua 25-50 × 2·5-4 mm; beak 15-30 mm, often curved, scarcely attenuate; seeds usually 7 or 8, greyish-brown.{\i  S. Spain.} Hs.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 90.     Eruca}              Miller
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc  By †T.G. Tutin.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Like{\i  Sinapis} but the sepals erect, unequal, the inner somewhat saccate at the base; valves of the siliqua 1-veined; seeds in 2 rows in each loculus.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. E. vesicaria} (L.) Cav.,{\i  Descr. Pl}. 426 (1802) ({\i E. sativa} Miller). Foetid, usually hispid annual 20-100 cm. Leaves lyrate-pinnatifid (rarely pinnate), with a large terminal lobe and 3-5 narrow lateral lobes on each side. Petals 15-24 mm, whitish or yellowish with violet veins. Siliqua 12-35(-40) × 3-6 mm, erect; beak ensiform, seedless; pedicels short.{\i  Mediterranean region; cultivated as a salad plant} ({\i Rocket}){\i  and often naturalized, so that the native distribution is obscured.} Bl Bu Co Cr Ga *Gr He Hs Hu It *Ju Lu Rm Rs(C, W, K, E) Sa Si Tu [Au Cz Ge No Po].
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b vesicaria} : Sepals all cucullate, persistent until the fruit is nearly ripe; anthers subacute. 2n = 22.{\i  Spain, Islas Baleares.}
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp.{\b  sativa }(Miller) Thell. in Hegi,{\i  Ill. Fl. Mitteleur.}{\b  4}({\b 1}): 201 (1918) ({\i E. longirostris} Uechtr., {\i E. orthosepala} (Lange) Lange): Sepals caducous, the inner not cucullate; anthers obtuse. 2n = 22.{\i  Throughout the range of the species}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 91.            Erucastrum}          C. Presl
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc  By †T.G. Tutin (Ed.1) revised by J.R. Akeroyd (Ed.2)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Annuals or perennials. Flowers in terminal racemes. Sepals erect to patent, the inner somewhat saccate; petals yellow, clawed. Lateral nectaries semilunar or bilobed. Fruit a linear, torulose siliqua; valves keeled, strongly 1-veined, with a lateral network of smaller veins; beak more or less conical, with 0-3 seeds. Seeds ovoid or oblong, in 1 row in each loculus.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Literature: C. Gómez-Campo,{\i  Anal. Jard. Bot. Madrid}{\b  40}: 63-72 (1983).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Leaves somewhat fleshy, the upper cauline conspicuously different
\par
  from the basal ............................................................................... {\b 1. virgatum}
\par
1 Leaves not fleshy, the upper cauline similar to the basal
\par
2 Raceme bracteate below; siliqua not stipitate ............................. {\b 4. gallicum}
\par
2 Raceme ebracteate; siliqua stipitate
\par
3 Plant somewhat hairy; lower cauline leaves lyrate-pinnatisect
\par
  with 6-8 lobes on each side ................................................ {\b 2. nasturtiifolium}
\par
3 Plant glabrous; lower cauline leaves pectinate-pinnatisect,
\par
  with 10-18 lobes on each side ........................................................ {\b 3. palustre}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. E. virgatum} (J. & C. Presl) C. Presl,{\i  Fl. Sic.}{\b  1}: 94 (1826) ({\i E. pubescens} (L.) Willk.; incl.{\i  E. laevigatum} (L.) O.E. Schulz, {\i E. pseudosinapis} Lange, {\i Brassica baetica }Boiss.,{\i  Sinapis laevigata }L.). Biennial or perennial, often somewhat glaucous; stem 30-150 cm, much-branched. Basal and lower cauline leaves lyrate to pinnatisect, hispid to subglabrous; upper cauline leaves smaller, more or less linear, entire. Sepals patent; petals 6-11 mm. Siliqua 10-35 × 1-2 mm, erect to erecto-patent; beak 3-8 mm, with 0-2 seeds. •{\i  S.E. Spain; S.W. Italy, Sicilia.} Hs It Si.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Siliqua not more than 2·5 cm, ± erect
\par
2 Siliqua contracted at base of beak; beak about as thick
\par
  as valvar portion ............................................................... ({\b a}) subsp.{\b  virgatum}
\par
2 Siliqua not contracted at base of beak; beak usually thicker
\par
  than valvar portion ................................................... ({\b b}) subsp. {\b brachycarpum}
\par
1 Siliqua usually at least 2·5 cm, erecto-patent
\par
3 Annual or biennial; lower leaves deeply pinnatisect; siliqua
\par
  usually more than 3 cm ............................................ ({\b c}) subsp.{\b  pseudosinapis}
\par
3 Usually perennial; lower leaves lyrate; siliqua usually
\par
  less than 3 cm ................................................................... ({\b d}) subsp.{\b  baeticum}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp.{\b  virgatum} : Biennial or perennial. Lower leaves lyrate. Siliqua 1-2 cm, erecto-patent, contracted at the base of the beak; beak 3 mm. 2n = 14.{\i  S.W. Italy, Sicilia}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp.{\b  brachycarpum} (Rouy) Gómez-Campo, {\i Anal. Jard. Bot. Madrid}{\b  40}: 68 (1983): Usually perennial. Lower leaves lyrate. Siliqua 1·5-2·5 cm, more or less erect, not contracted at the base of the beak; beak often nearly as long as, and usually thicker than, the valvar portion. 2n = 14.{\i  E. Spain} ({\i Alicante to Castellon}).
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b c}) Subsp.{\b  pseudosinapis} (Lange) Gómez-Campo,{\i  loc. cit.} (1983) ({\i Sinapis pseudosinapis} Lange): Annual or biennial. Lower leaves deeply pinnatisect, the terminal segment narrowed. Siliqua 2·5-3·5 cm, erecto-patent, not contracted at the base of the beak; beak up to ½ as long as the valvar portion. 2n = 14, 28.{\i  S.E. Spain }({\i Granada to Murcia}).
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b d}) Subsp.{\b  baeticum} (Boiss.) Gómez-Campo,{\i  loc. cit.} (1983) ({\i Sinapis baeticum} Boiss., {\i E. baeticum} (Boiss.) Nyman): Usually perennial. Lower leaves lyrate. Siliqua 1·5-3 cm, erecto-patent, not contracted at the base of the beak; beak up to ½ as long as the valvar portion. 2n = 14. {\i S. Spain }({\i Malaga prov. to Gibraltar});{\i  one station in Alicante prov}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. E. nasturtiifolium} (Poiret) O.E. Schulz,{\i  Bot. Jahrb.}{\b  54} Beibl. {\b 119}: 56 (1916) ({\i E. obtusangulum} (Schleicher) Reichenb. fil., {\i Brassica erucastrum} L.,{\i  B. nasturtiifolium} Poiret,{\i  B. obtusangula} Bertol., {\i Hirschfeldia obtusangula} (Reichenb.) Fritsch). Annual to perennial 20-80 cm, densely hispid with deflexed hairs at least below. Basal leaves lyrate-pinnatisect with c. 3 lobes on each side; cauline leaves similar to the basal but smaller, the upper with 6-8(-12) lobes on
\par

\par
410}
\par