{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 Literature: H.R. Tölken,{\i  Contr. Bolus Herb.}{\b  8}: 1-595 (1977).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 The characteristic habitat of the native European species is ground flooded in winter and dry in summer.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Several shrubby species of {\i Crassula} from South Africa are widely cultivated, and of these {\b C. lactea }Aiton,{\i  Hort. Kew.} ed. 1, {\b 1}: 306 (1789), and {\b C. multicava} Lemaire,{\i  Revue Hort.} ({\i Paris}) {\b 11}: 97 (1862) ({\i C. quadrifida} Baker), are reported as escaped in Açores and are perhaps becoming naturalized. {\b C. decumbens} Thunb.,{\i  Prodr. Pl. Cap.} 54 (1794), a small annual species from South Africa, occurs locally as a weed in bulb-fields in S.W. England (Isles of Scilly), and may be naturalized.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Flowers 5-merous; petals red (N.E. Spain) .............................. {\b 6. campestris}
\par
1 Flowers 3- or 4-merous; petals white or pink
\par
2 Petals shorter than the sepals; follicles 2-seeded
\par
3 Leaves lanceolate, mucronate; flowers pedicellate ........................... {\b 1. alata}
\par
3 Leaves ovate, subacute; flowers sessile ........................................... {\b 2. tillaea}
\par
2 Petals longer than the sepals; follicles usually with more than 2 seeds
\par
4 Leaves obtuse; flowers in cymes ................................................ {\b 5. vaillantii}
\par
4 Leaves acute; flowers solitary
\par
5 Stems less than 8 cm; flowers subsessile ..................................... {\b 3. aquatica}
\par
5 Stems usually more than 8 cm; flowers distinctly pedicellate ...... {\b 4. helmsii}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. C. alata} (Viv.) A. Berger in Engler & Prantl,{\i  Natürl. Pflanzenfam}. ed. 2,{\b  18a}: 389 (1930) ({\i Tillaea alata} Viv.). Stems 3-10 cm, procumbent, ascending or erect, winged. Leaves 3-7 mm, lanceolate, mucronate. Flowers 3- or 4-merous, on slender pedicels up to 2·5 mm, forming dense cymes in the leaf-axils. Petals 0·8-1·5 mm, lanceolate, acuminate, shorter than the sepals, white or pink. Follicles 2-seeded.{\i  Kriti and Kikladhes.} Cr Gr.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. C. tillaea} Lester-Garland, {\i Fl. Jersey} 87 (1903) ({\i C. muscosa} Roth, non L., {\i Tillaea muscosa} L.). A minute, moss-like plant; stems 1-5 cm, procumbent or ascending. Leaves 1-2 mm, ovate, concave, crowded, almost imbricate. Flowers 3-merous (rarely 4-merous), sessile in small groups in the leaf-axils. Petals 1 mm, shorter than the sepals, narrowly lanceolate, white or pale pink. Follicles usually 2-seeded.{\i  S. & W. Europe, extending locally to N.E. Germany}. Az Be Bl Br Bu Co Cr Ga Ge Gr Ho Hs It Lu Sa Si Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 3. C. aquatica} (L.) Schönl. in Engler & Prantl,{\i  Naturl. Pflanzenfam. }{\b 3} ({\b 2a}): 37 (1890) ({\i Tillaea aquatica} L.). Stems 2-6 cm, decumbent, rooting. Leaves 4-6 mm, linear, acute. Flowers usually 4-merous, subsessile, solitary in the leaf-axils. Petals rather longer than the sepals, ovate-oblong, obtuse, white. Follicles with numerous seeds. 2n = 42.{\i  N. & C. Europe.} Au Br Cz Da Fe Ge Is No Po Rs(N, B, C) Su [Lu].
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 4. C. helmsii} (Kirk) Cockayne,{\i  Trans. Proc. N.Z. Inst.}{\b  39}: 349 (1907) ({\i Tillaea helmsii} Kirk). Stems 10-30 cm, aquatic or creeping, rooting at the nodes. Leaves 4-20 mm, linear-lanceolate to ovate-lanceolate, acute. Flowers 4-merous, solitary in the leaf-axils; pedicels 2-8 mm, recurved. Petals slightly longer than the sepals, ovate, obtuse, white or pale pink. Follicles 2- to 5-seeded.{\i  Margins of ponds. Widely naturalized in Britain.} [Br.] ({\i Australia and New Zealand}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 5. C. vaillantii} (Willd.) Roth,{\i  Enum.}{\b  1}: 992 (1827) ({\i Tillaea vaillantii} Willd.). Stems 2-6 cm, erect or ascending. Leaves linear-oblong, obtuse. Flowers 4-merous, on slender pedicels longer than the leaves, forming small, irregular cymes. Petals longer than the sepals, ovate-lanceolate, acute, pink or white. Follicles with numerous seeds.{\i  S. Europe, extending northwards to N. France, S. Ukraine and the lower Volga; rare and local over most of its range.} Bl Co Cr Ga Gr Hs It Lu Rs(W, E) Sa si.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 C. peduncularis (Sm.) Meigen, {\i Bot. Jahrb. }{\b 17}: 239 (1893) ({\i C. bonariensis} (DC.) Camb.), introduced from South America, has been reported as naturalized in rice-fields in C. Portugal. It is like {\b 5} but with pale, hyaline petals and much longer pedicels.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 6. C. campestris} (Ecklon & Zeyher) Endl. in Walpers,{\i  Repert. Bot. Syst.}{\b  2}: 253 (1843). Stems 2-7 cm, ascending to erect. Leaves 3-5 mm, lanceolate-subulate, acute. Flowers 5-merous, in axillary groups, subsessile. Petals 1 mm, shorter than the sepals, red. Follicles 2-seeded. 2n = 16. {\i Dry, siliceous rocks. Naturalized at one station in N.E. Spain} ({\i near Barcelona}). [Hs.] ({\i Southern Africa.})
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 2.         Kalanchoe}         Adanson
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc  By D.A. Webb.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Perennials with opposite leaves. Flowers 4-merous, in cymes; corolla tubular, with short lobes; stamens 8, inserted near the base of the corolla. (Incl.{\i  Bryophyllum }Salisb.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. K. pinnata} (Lam.) Pers.,{\i  Syn. Pl.}{\b  1}: 446 (1805) ({\i Bryophyllum calycinum} Salisb.,{\i  B. pinnatum }(Lam.) Oken). Stems 1 m or more, erect, woody at the base. Leaves petiolate, simple, ternate or pinnate; leaflets up to 10 cm, ovate, crenate, often with young plants arising on the margins between the crenations. Flowers pendent, in compound cymes. Calyx 3 cm, tubular, with short, triangular lobes; corolla similar but 4-5 cm, and with longer, more acute lobes; both pale green mottled with red. Follicles erect.{\i  Cultivated as a house-plant, and naturalized in Açores.} [Az.] ({\i Madagascar}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 3.        Umbilicus}                DC.
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc  By D.A. Webb.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Perennials, with tuberous or rhizomatous rootstock. Basal leaves petiolate, usually suborbicular, at least 2 cm in diameter, glabrous. Cauline leaves much smaller. Flowers 5-merous, numerous, in a terminal, bracteate raceme or panicle. Calyx small; corolla tubular or campanulate, sympetalous; lobes more or less erect. Stamens (5-)10, epipetalous; filaments short. Follicles slender.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Lobes of corolla at least as long as the tube
\par
2 Flowers 9-13 mm; lobes of corolla about equalling the tube ......... {\b 3. erectus}
\par
2 Flowers 3-6 mm; lobes of corolla considerably longer than the tube
\par
3 Flowers 4-6 mm, obconical; carpels gradually tapered to a
\par
  straight, fairly long style ........................................................... {\b 1. parviflorus}
\par
3 Flowers 3-4 mm, campanulate or subglobose; carpels abruptly
\par
  narrowed to a very short, curved style ..................................... {\b 2. chloranthus}
\par
1 Lobes of corolla considerably shorter than the tube
\par
4 Corolla bright yellow, conspicuously constricted at the mouth
\par
  of the tube; stamens usually 5 ................................................ {\b 6. heylandianus}
\par
4 Corolla pale yellow, greenish or reddish, scarcely constricted
\par
  at the mouth of the tube; stamens 10
\par

\par
423}
\par