{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 {\i other species. N. & C. Europe, and very rarely in the south. }Au Be Br Cz Da Fe Ga Ge Gr Hb He Ho Hs †Hu It Ju No Po Rm Rs(N, B, C, W, K, E) Su.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b D. × obovata} Mert. & Koch in Röhling,{\i  Deutschl. Fl.} ed. 3,{\b  2}: 502 (1826) ({\i D. anglica} ×{\i  rotundifolia}), is fairly frequent, but sterile. Its leaves are rather like those of {\b 3}, but the scape is apparently terminal, the capsule very small, and the seeds empty.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 3. D. intermedia} Hayne in Dreves, {\i Bot. Bilderb.}{\b  3}: t. 3, fig. B (1798) ({\i D. longifolia} auct., non L.). Plants gregarious, from pseudodichotomous branching of the stem with subsequent decay; sometimes forming floating mats. Leaves inclined or almost erect; lamina c. 7 × 4 mm, obovate; petiole 2·5-4 cm, glabrous. Scape 2-3 cm, scarcely as long as the leaves, ascending, obviously lateral, from the axil of one of the lower leaves of the current year, bearing 3-7 flowers. Petals 5 mm. Capsule longitudinally grooved. Testa granular, close-fitting. 2n = 20.{\i  Usually on peat or }Sphagnum,{\i  or in shallow bog-pools. N., W. & C. Europe. }Au Be Br Cz Da Fe Ga Ge Hb He Ho Hs It Ju Lu No Po Rm Rs(N, B, C) Su.
\par

\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 3.          Drosophyllum}           Link
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc  By D.A. Webb.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Leaves with glandular, digestive hairs, as in{\i  Drosera.} Flowers 5-merous, in a corymbose cyme. Petals yellow. Stamens 10, styles 5.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. D. lusitanicum} (L.) Link in Schrader, {\i Neues Jour. Bot.}{\b  1}({\b 2}): 53 (1805). Stem slender, ascending, sometimes branched. Leaves 10-20 × 0·2-0·3 cm, numerous, alternate, crowded, narrowly linear, tapering from the sheathing base to the filiform apex, covered throughout with red-tipped glandular hairs. Scape 15-30 cm, erect, bearing a corymb of 5-10 flowers. Petals 18-25 mm, broadly obovate, bright yellow. {\b Dry places; calcifuge. S. Spain and Portugal.} Hs Lu.
\par

\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs36\qc ROSALES
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 72.      CRASSULACEAE}
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc  Edit. D.A. Webb
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Annual, biennial or perennial herbs, rarely small shrubs. Leaves undivided, exstipulate, more or less succulent. Flowers regular, usually in cymes, less often in spikes or racemes or solitary in the leaf-axils. Sepals 3 to c. 20, united or free; petals as many, united or free; stamens hypogynous or epipetalous, equal in number to the petals or, more frequently, twice as many. Carpels superior, equal in number to the petals, free or slightly connate at the base, developing into follicles. Scale-like nectaries usually present between the stamens and carpels.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 No really satisfactory basis for the division of the family into genera has yet been proposed; Berger's treatment in Engler & Prantl, {\i Natürl. Pflanzenfam.} ed. 2, {\b 18a}: 352 483 (1930), has been followed with slight modifications.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Stamens equal in number to the petals
\par
2 Leaves opposite, connate; petals 3 or 4 (rarely 5) ....................... {\b 1. Crassula}
\par
2 Leaves not connate; petals 5 (rarely 4) ........................................ {\b 10. Sedum}
\par
1 Stamens twice as many as the petals
\par
3 Corolla-tube longer than, or only slightly shorter than the lobes
\par
4 Annual
\par
5 Stamens and style included; corolla-tube nearly as wide as long
\par
  .................................................................................................... {\b 5. Mucizonia}
\par
5 Stamens and style exserted; corolla-tube very long and narrow
\par
  ..................................................................................................... {\b 4. Pistorinia}
\par
4 Perennial
\par
6 Leaves mostly cauline; inflorescence cymose ......................... {\b 2. Kalanchoe}
\par
6 Leaves mostly basal; cauline leaves much smaller; inflorescence racemose
\par
7 Basal leaves suborbicular, with long petioles ........................... {\b 3. Umbilicus}
\par
7 Basal leaves oblong-spathulate, sessile .................................... {\b 13. Rosularia}
\par
3 Petals free, or united for considerably less than ½ their length
\par
8 Petals 4 or 5
\par
9 Leaves mostly basal; cauline leaves much smaller; inflorescence racemose
\par
10 Basal leaves petiolate, not spiny; corolla tubular, with erect lobes
\par
   ................................................................................................... {\b 3. Umbilicus}
\par
10 Basal leaves sessile, with a terminal spine; corollalobes spreading
\par
   ................................................................................................ {\b 12. Orostachys}
\par
9 Leaves mostly cauline; inflorescence cymose
\par
11 Flowers usually 5-merous, hermaphrodite; rhizome slender and
\par
   leafless, or absent ......................................................................... {\b 10. Sedum}
\par
11 Flowers usually 4-merous, unisexual; rhizome stout, with persistent
\par
    scale-leaves .............................................................................. {\b 11. Rhodiola}
\par
8 Petals more than 5
\par
12 Annual
\par
13 Flowers yellow; leaves flat ....................................................... {\b 9. Aichryson}
\par
13 Flowers pink, white or blue; leaves ± terete .............................. {\b 10. Sedum}
\par
12 Perennial
\par
14 Leaves subulate .......................................................................... {\b 10. Sedum}
\par
14 Leaves broad, flat on upper surface
\par
15 Soft-wooded shrub with erect, perennial stems ........................ {\b 8. Aeonium}
\par
15 Acaulescent in vegetative phase; flowering stems annual
\par
16 Petals entire, patent ........................................................... {\b 6. Sempervivum}
\par
16 Petals ± fimbriate, erect ........................................................... {\b 7. Jovibarba}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 1.          Crassula}          L.
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc  By D.A. Webb & J.R. Akeroyd.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Small, glabrous annuals (outside Europe including perennials and shrubs), with opposite, connate, often reddish leaves. Flowers 3- to 5-merous. Petals free. Stamens equal in number to the petals. (Incl.{\i  Tillaea }L.)
\par

\par
422}
\par