{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\par

\pard\f0\fs36\qc SARRACENIALES
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc {\b 70.       SARRACENIACEAE }  
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc  Edit. D.A. Webb
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Perennial, insectivorous herbs. Flowers regular, hermaphrodite. Sepals and petals free; stamens numerous, hypogynous; ovary superior. Fruit a capsule.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 1.            Sarracenia}             L.
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc  By D.A. Webb.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Leaves all basal, each in the form of a hollow, curved, inverted cone, with the orifice partly covered by a broad flap or hood. (In the fluid contained in the leaf, insects are trapped, and the organic matter released by their decay is absorbed.) Flowers solitary on long peduncles, closely subtended by 3 bracts. Sepals and petals 5; ovary 5-celled; style expanded at the apex into a large, peltate disc which fills the centre of the flower. Seeds numerous.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Literature: J.M. Macfarlane in Engler,{\i  Pflanzenreich}{\b  34}({\b IV.110}): 27-38 (1908).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. S. purpurea} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 510 (1753). Leaves up to 20 cm, numerous, green, suffused or marbled with dark red, the outer ones spreading almost horizontally, all strongly winged on the adaxial side; terminal flap reniform, nearly erect, covered on the inner side with downwardly pointing hairs. Peduncles 20-60 cm; flowers nodding. Sepals 3 × 2 cm, ovate to rhombic, dark purplish-red outside, pale green inside; petals 3 × 1·5 cm, obovate, tapered to a short claw, purplish-red on both surfaces; apical disc of style c. 3 cm in diameter, pentagonal, greenish.{\i  Wet peat-bogs. Planted and thoroughly naturalized in a few places in W. Switzerland and C. Ireland}. [Hb He.] ({\i North America}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc {\b 71.   DROSERACEAE}          
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc  Edit. D.A. Webb
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Perennial, insectivorous herbs. Flowers regular, hermaphrodite, usually 5-merous. Sepals united at the base; petals free; stamens hypogynous; ovary superior, 1-celled; styles 2-5. Fruit a capsule.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Literature: L. Diels in Engler,{\i  Pflanzenreich} {\b  26}({\b IV.112}): 1-136 (1906).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Rootless aquatic with whorled leaves .....................................{\b  1. Aldrovanda}
\par
1 Roots present; leaves alternate or basal
\par
2 Flowers white; stamens equal in number to the petals .................. {\b 2. Drosera}
\par
2 Flowers yellow; stamens twice as many as the petals ........ {\b 3. Drosophyllum}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc {\b 1.       Aldrovanda}        L.
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc  By D.A. Webb.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Stems submerged, rootless. Leaves whorled. Flowers axillary; stamens 5; styles 5.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. A. vesiculosa} L.,{\i  Sp. Pl.} 281 (1753). Leaves 10-15 mm, in crowded whorls of 6-9; each with a cuneate basal part, and terminating in 4-6 setaceous segments and an orbicular lobe, 1 hinged along the midrib, which can close rapidly to entrap and digest small animals. Flowers shortly pedicellate, rarely produced in Europe and usually cleistogamous. Petals 4-5 mm, greenish-white. Perennation by persistent terminal buds.{\i  Usually in shallow, still water. Dispersed irregularly and sparsely over a large part of Europe, mainly in the centre and east; declining over much of its European range}. †Au †Bu Cz Ga Ge He Hu It Ju Po Rm Rs(C, W, E).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc {\b 2.       Drosera}           L.
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc  By D.A. Webb.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Small plants of wet places. Leaves all basal; upper surface of lamina covered with long, red, gland-tipped, motile hairs, which entrap and digest insects. Scape slender, bearing a slender, spike-like, ebracteate cyme. Flowers usually 5-merous, sometimes 4- or 6-8 merous, open for a short time only, sometimes cleistogamous. Petals white; stamens equal in number to the petals. Carpels usually 3; styles free, deeply bifid.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Scape clearly lateral, scarcely longer than the leaves .............. {\b 3. intermedia}
\par
1 Scape apparently terminal, considerably longer than the leaves
\par
2 Lamina orbicular; petiole hairy .............................................. {\b 1. rotundifolia}
\par
2 Lamina linear-oblanceolate; petiole glabrous ................................ {\b 2. anglica}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. D. rotundifolia} L., {\i Sp. Pl}. 281 (1753). Plants solitary. Leaves usually spreading horizontally, sometimes semi-erect; lamina 5-8 mm, orbicular or slightly wider than long; petiole 15-30 mm, hairy. Scape 4-8 cm, apparently terminal, arising from the axil of the highest leaf, bearing 6-10(-15) flowers. Petals 3·5-4·5 mm. Capsule smooth. Testa reticulate, very loose-fitting. 2n = 20.{\i  Usually on peat or} Sphagnum.{\i  Europe, except for some of the islands and the extreme south.} Au Be Br Bu Co Cz Da Fa Fe Ga Ge Hb He Ho Hs Hu Is It Ju Lu No Po Rm Rs(N, B, C, W, K, E) Su.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. D. anglica} Hudson,{\i  Fl. Angl.} ed. 2, 135 (1778) ({\i D. longifolia} L.). Plants solitary, larger than 1 and 3. Leaves erect or inclined; lamina c. 30 × 7 mm, linear-oblanceolate; petiole 5-10 cm, glabrous. Scape apparently terminal, as in 1, but 10-18 cm, bearing 3-6 flowers. Petals 4·5-6 mm. Capsule smooth. Testa reticulate, loose-fitting. 2n = 40. {\i Wet places; more tolerant of basic conditions than the}
\par

\par
421}
\par