{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 21 Rosette-leaves oblanceolate, acuminate;
\par
   flowers 13- or 14-merous .......................................................... {\b 13. kosaninii}
\par
21 Rosette-leaves obovate-spathulate to oblong, abruptly mucronate;
\par
   flowers 11- to 13-merous ..................................................... {\b 16. marmoreum}
\par
20 Stolons slender, flowers 9- to 12-merous
\par
22 Rosettes c. 3-5 cm in diameter; flowers 11- or 12 merous;
\par
    stolons long ...................................................................... {\b 14. macedonicum}
\par
22 Rosettes c. 3 cm in diameter; flowers 9- to 11 merous;
\par
   stolons short ............................................................................ {\b 17. nevadense}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. S. wulfenii} Hoppe ex Mert. & Koch in Röhling, {\i Deutschl. Fl.} ed. 3, {\b 3}: 386 (1831). Stolons long, stout, woody. Rosettes 4-5(-9) cm in diameter; inner leaves connivent. Leaves c. 30 × 12 mm, oblong-spathulate, cuspidate, glabrous except for cilia, glaucous; margins somewhat involute towards the apex. Flowering stem 15-25 cm. Flowers 11- to 15-merous; petals 10 × 1-2 mm, lemon-yellow, with a basal purple spot; filaments purple. 1500-2700{\i  m; usually calcifuge.  • E. Alps; N.W. Jugoslavia. }Au He It Ju.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp.{\b  wulfenii}: Rosette-leaves glabrous on both surfaces. 2n = 36.{\i  E. Alps}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp.{\b  juvanii} (Strgar) Favarger & J. Parnell, {\i Bot. Jour. Linn. Soc.}{\b  103}: 217 (1990) ({\i S. juvanii} Strgar): Rosette-leaves glandular-pubescent on both surfaces. 2n = 36. {\i  E. Slovenja}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. S. grandiflorum} Haw.,{\i  Revis. Pl. Succ.} 66 (1821) ({\i S. gaudinii} Christ). Stolons 10-20 cm, stout. Rosettes 2-5 cm in diameter, rather lax and flat. Leaves oblong-cuneate, cuspidate, densely pubescent, dark green, with a reddish-brown apex, with strong resinous or foetid odour. Flowering stem 10-20 cm. Flowers 12- to 14-merous; petals 10-18 × 2-3 mm, yellow with a basal purple spot; filaments purple. 2n = 80.{\i  Calcifuge. • W.C. part of S. Alps, from Susa to Simplon.} He It.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 3. S. ciliosum} Craib,{\i  Kew Bull.}{\b  1914}: 379 (1914) ({\i S. borisii} Degen & Urum.). Stolons slender. Rosettes 2-3·5(-5) cm in diameter, depressed-globose. Leaves c. 10 × 4 mm, oblong-oblanceolate, acute, strongly incurved, pubescent, bearing towards the apex stiff cilia 2-4 mm long, which are interwoven with those of adjoining leaves. Flowering stem 4-10 cm. Flowers 12- to 14 merous; petals 10-12 × 1·5 mm, lemon-yellow; filaments white (rarely purple). 2n = 34. •{\i  Macedonia.} Bu Gr Ju.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 The plants from the western end of the range (mountains S.E. of Ohrid) show some approach to{\b  4}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 4. S. octopodes} Turrill,{\i  Gard. Chron.} ser. 3, {\b 102}: 303 (1937). Stolons usually long, slender. Rosettes 2-2·5 cm in diameter. Leaves 7 × 3 mm, more or less erect, oblanceolate to obovate pubescent, with cilia becoming longer towards the reddish-brown apex. Flowering stem up to 9 cm, slender. Flowers few, 9-merous (rarely 10-merous); sepals purplish; petals 8 × 1·5 mm, pale yellow, tinged with lilac at the base; filaments purple. 2n = 34. •{\i  S.W. Makedonija} ({\i Baba Planina}). Ju.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b S. thompsonianum} Wale, {\i Quart. Bull. Alp. Gard. Soc.}{\b  8}: 210 (1940), is probably a hybrid between {\b 4} and {\b 14}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 5. S. zeleborii} Schott, {\i Österr. Bot. Wochenbl.}{\b  7}: 245 (1857) ({\i S. ruthenicum} auct., non{\i  Schnittspahn} & C.B. Lehm.). Stolons short. Rosettes c. 3-5 cm in diameter, more or less globose. Leaves c. 20 × 8 mm, oblong-obovate, shortly apiculate, ciliate, grey-green. Flowering stem c. 10-15 cm. Flowers 12- to 14-merous; calyx teeth ovate to ovate-lanceolate; petals 9 × 1·5 mm, bright greenish-yellow, lilac at the base; filaments purple; nectarial scales less than 0·2 mm, truncate or emarginate. 2n = 64.{\i  Dry places in the mountains. • S.E. Europe, from E. Jugoslavia to S. Bulgaria and N.W. Ukraine.} Bu Ju Rm Rs(W).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 6. S. ruthenicum} Schnittspahn & C.B. Lehm.,{\i  Flora }({\i Regensb}.) {\b 38}: 5 (1855). Stolons 3-5 cm. Rosettes c. 8 cm in diameter, closed or open. Leaves c. 50 × 15 mm, oblong-obovate, shortly apiculate ciliate, green. Flowering stem c. 15-30 cm. Flowers 12- to 14-merous; calyx-teeth narrowly lanceolate; petals c. 10 × 1·5 mm, bright greenish-yellow; filaments white to pink; nectarial scales c. 0·5 mm, rounded.{\i  Dry places; mainly lowland. • S.E. Europe, from Romania to C. Russia.} ?Bu Rm Rs(C, W).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 For a discussion of the taxonomy and nomenclature of{\b  5} and {\b 6} see C.W. Muirhead, {\i Notes Roy. Bot. Gard. Edinb. }{\b 26}: 279-285 (1965).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 7. S. kindingeri} Adamovic,{\i  Denkschr. Akad. Wiss. Math.-Nat. Kl.} ({\i Wien}) {\b 74}: 125 (1904). Stolons short, few. Rosettes 4-6·5 cm in diameter, open. Leaves 20-25(-40) × 5-8(-15) mm, spathulate, shortly acuminate, pale green, glandular-hairy, unequally ciliate. Flowering stem 20-25 cm, stout, softly hairy. Flowers numerous 12- to 14-merous; petals c. 10 × 2 mm, pale yellow or cream, tinged with pink or purple towards the base; filaments pale, with purple streaks. •{\b  Macedonia.} Gr Ju.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 8. S. leucanthum} Pancic, {\i Elem. Fl. Bulg.} 30 (1883). Stolons 5-8 cm, stout. Rosettes 2·5-5 cm in diameter, subglobose, forming a loose mat. Leaves c. 20 × 8 mm, oblong-spathulate, apiculate, finely pubescent, unequally ciliate (the shorter cilia c. 0·3 mm, the longer c. 1·5 mm), dark green with a dark red apex. Flowering stem 15-20 cm. Flowers 11- to 13-merous; petals c. 10 × 1 mm, pale greenish-yellow; filaments pale (rarely pink), almost glabrous. 2n = 64. •{\i  Mountains of Bulgaria. }Bu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 9. S. pittonii} Schott, Nyman & Kotschy,{\i  Analecta Bot. }19 (1854). Like {\b 8} but with stolons 2-3 cm, and rosettes crowded in dense tufts; leaves somewhat smaller, more densely pubescent and often grey-green; cilia c. 0·1 and 0·5 mm, mostly bearing a red gland; flowering stem 12-15 cm; flowers 9- to 12-merous. 2n = 64. {\i Serpentine rocks. • E. Alps} ({\i near Kraubath in C. Steiermark}). Au.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 10. S. arachnoideum} L.,{\i  Sp. Pl.} 465 (1753). Rosettes small, compact, crowded, more or less covered above by an arachnoid veil of long, flexuous, interwoven hairs, which are the greatly elongate apical cilia of the leaves. Leaves 7-12 × 3-5 mm, oblanceolate to oblong-obovate, apiculate, pubescent. Flowering stem 4-12 cm; cauline leaves red-tipped, with an apical tuft of arachnoid hairs. Flowers usually 8- to 10-merous; petals 7-10 × 3 mm, broadly lanceolate or rhombic, bright reddish-pink with a purple mid-vein; filaments purple.{\i  Usually calcifuge. • Alps, Appennini, Pyrenees, Cordillera Cantabrica; Corse.} Au Co Ga Ge He Hs It.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Very variable. Two rather ill-defined subspecies may be recognized; they have some geographical basis but show considerable overlap, and intermediates are common.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp.{\b  arachnoideum} (subsp. {\i doellianum} (C.B. Lehm.) Schinz & R. Keller): Rosettes not more than 1·5 cm in diameter, ovoid or globose; arachnoid hairs variable in quantity, sometimes rather scanty. 2n = 32, 64.{\i  Mainly in the eastern part of the range}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b tomentosum} (C.B. Lehm. & Schnittspahn) Schinz
\par

\par
426}
\par