{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 5 Flowers usually pendent; raceme occupying more-than ½ the stem;
\par
   corolla lobes ovate, mucronate ............................ {\b 4. rupestris}
\par
5 Flowers horizontal; raceme occupying not more than ½ the stem;
\par
   corolla-lobes lanceolate, acuminate .................... {\b 5. horizontalis}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. U. parviflorus} (Desf.) DC.,{\i  Prodr.}{\b  3}: 400 (1828) ({\i Cotyledon parviflora} Desf.). Stem 10-35 cm, erect or ascending, often flexuous. Basal leaves 2-5 cm in diameter, orbicular, cordate or subpeltate, sinuate or subentire. Flowers 4-6 mm, erect or horizontal, obconical, in a dense, usually narrow panicle. Bracts minute, about equalling the pedicels. Sepals ½ as long as the corolla. Corolla yellow, with lanceolate, acute lobes 1½-2 times as long as the tube. Carpels gradually tapered to a nearly straight style.{\i  Rocks. S. Greece; Kriti.} Cr Gr.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. U. chloranthus} Heldr. & Sart. ex Boiss., {\i Fl. Or. }{\b 2}: 768 (1872) ({\i Cotyledon chlorantha} (Heldr. & Sart. ex Boiss.) Halácsy). Like {\b 1} but leaves more often peltate; flowers 3-4 mm, campanulate or subglobose, horizontal or somewhat drooping, in a laxer and more diffuse panicle; carpels abruptly narrowed to a very short, deflexed style.{\i  Rocks and walls. S. & W. parts of Balkan peninsula, Aegean region.} Gr Ju.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 3. U. erectus} DC. in Lam. & DC.,{\i  Fl. Fr.} ed. 3,{\b  4}: 384 (1805) ({\i U. umbilicus-veneris} sensu Stoj. & Stefanov, {\i Cotyledon umbilicus-veneris} L.; incl. {\i U. lassithiensis} Gand., {\i Cotyledon lassithiensis} (Gand.) Hayek). Stem 20-60 cm, stout, erect, simple. Basal leaves up to 7 cm in diameter, deltate-orbicular, cordate, sinuate-crenate; cauline leaves progressively smaller, with shorter petioles, dentate. Flowers very numerous, more or less erect, in a dense raceme 8-25 cm, sometimes branched at the base; pedicels 1-3 mm. Bracts usually narrow-lanceolate, small, entire or with a tooth on each side, but sometimes (var.{\i  lassithiensis} (Gand.) Stoj.) broad, leafy, dentate. Sepals linear-lanceolate. Corolla 9-13 mm, tubular, bright or greenish-yellow, drying red-brown; lobes narrow-lanceolate, acuminate, about equalling the tube.{\i  Damp or shady rocks. S. part of Balkan peninsula; S. Italy.} Al Bu Cr Gr It Ju Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 4. U. rupestris} (Salisb.) Dandy in Riddelsd., Hedley & Price,{\i  Fl. Gloucestershire }611 (1948) ({\i U. pendulinus} DC., {\i U. vulgaris} Knoche pro parte,{\i  Cotyledon umbilicus-veneris} auct., non L.,{\i  C. pendulina} (DC.) Batt.). Stem 20-50 cm, erect. Basal leaves orbicular, peltate, concave above, sinuate-crenate; cauline leaves progressively smaller, mostly reniform, dentate, the uppermost sometimes linear. Bracts usually linear, about equalling the pedicels, but occasionally large and leaf-like. Pedicels 3-9 mm. Flowers 7-10 mm, tubular, usually pendent; raceme fairly dense, sometimes branched at the base, occupying more than ½ the stem. Sepals ovate, acuminate. Corolla whitish-green or straw-coloured, sometimes tinged with pink; tube about 4 times as long as the ovate, mucronate lobes. Carpels tapered to a fairly long style.{\i  Rocks and walls, rarely on trees; somewhat calcifuge. S. & W. Europe, northwards to Scotland.} Al Az Bl Br Bu Co Cr Ga Gr Hb Hs It Ju Lu Sa Si Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 A very variable species; some of the variants resemble {\b 3}, {\b 5} and {\b 6} in single characters and have caused much confusion. The most distinct is {\i U. neglectus} (Coutinho) Rothm. & P. Silva, {\i Agron. Lusit.}{\b  2}: 88 (1940) ({\i Cotyledon neglecta} Coutinho), from Portugal, S. Spain and Islas Baleares, which possibly deserves subspecific status. It is a robust plant, with basal leaves often cordate rather than peltate, and a narrow corolla approaching that of {\b 5}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b U. intermedius} Boiss.,{\i  Fl. Or.}{\b  2}: 769 (1872) ({\i Cotyledon intermedia} (Boiss.) Stefanov), from S.W. Asia, like {\b 4 }but with a shorter raceme, short pedicels and slightly more pointed corolla-lobes, has been recorded in error from the Balkan peninsula (Bulgaria and Thrace).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 5. U. horizontalis} (Guss.) DC.,{\i  Prodr.}{\b  3}: 400 (1828) ({\i Cotyledon horizontalis} Guss., {\i C. umbilicus-veneris} auct., non L., {\i Umbilicus vulgaris} Knoche pro parte). Like {\b 4} but the raceme occupying not more than 2 the stem; cauline leaves more numerous and crowded, many of them usually linear; flowers narrower and somewhat shorter (c. 7 × 3 mm), subsessile, horizontal; corolla-lobes triangular, lanceolate, acuminate, dull crimson. 2n = 24.{\i  Rocks and walls. Mediterranean region, Bulgaria, Açores}. Al Az Bl Bu Co Cr Gr Hs It Ju Sa si.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 The plants from Spain are sometimes separated as {\b U. gaditanus} Boiss.,{\i  Diagn. Pl. Or. Nov.}{\b  1}({\b 6}): 58 (1846), and are in some features transitional to {\b 4}, but neither their taxonomic status nor their correct name can be ascertained with certainty from the material available.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 6. U. heylandianus} Webb & Berth., {\i Phyt. Canar.}{\b  1}: 176 (1840) ({\i U. praealtus} (Mariz) Samp.,{\i  U. erectus} sensu Willk., non DC., {\i Cotyledon coutinhoi} (Mariz) Coutinho, {\i C. strangulata} Font Quer, {\i C. praealta }(Mariz) Samp.). Stem 60-100 cm, stout, erect. Leaves as in {\b 4}. Raceme 12-35 cm, dense, simple, somewhat secund. Bracts 6-10 mm, linear. Flowers horizontal or drooping; pedicels 2-4 mm at anthesis, often longer in fruit. Sepals small, ovate-lanceolate. Corolla 10-12 mm, bright yellow; tube distinctly 5-angled and constricted at the mouth; lobes ovate-lanceolate, acuminate, about 1/3 as long as the tube. Stamens usually reduced to {\b 5.} Carpels obtuse, with a short style.{\i  Shady places. Spain; Portugal; very local.} Hs Lu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 4.          Pistorinia}              DC.
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc  By D.A. Webb.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Erect annuals with alternate leaves. Flowers 5-merous, shortly stalked, in a dense, subcorymbose cyme. Corolla infundibuliform, with a long, narrow tube. Stamens 10, exserted.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Corolla-lobes pink; tube cylindrical, expanded abruptly into
\par
    the limb ...................................................................................... {\b 1. hispanica}
\par
Corolla-lobes yellow; tube somewhat conical, expanded gradually
\par
    into the limb .............................................................................. {\b 2. breviflora}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. P. hispanica} (L.) DC.,{\i  Prodr. }{\b 3}: 399 (1828) ({\i Cotyledon hispanica }L., {\i Sedum hispanicum }(L.) Hamet, non L.). Plant 5-15 cm, glabrous below, glandular-pubescent above. Leaves 6-10 mm, oblong, terete, very obtuse, suberect. Sepals 2-5 mm, linear, acute. Corolla (12-)20-25 mm, reddish-brown outside, pink inside, pubescent; tube of uniform diameter (c. 1·5 mm), expanded abruptly into the deeply 5-lobed limb. Styles long and slender, equalling the stamens.{\i  Sandy and gravelly places. Spain and Portugal.} Hs Lu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. P. breviflora} Boiss., {\i Elenchus} 74 (1838) ({\i P. salzmannii }Boiss.). Like {\b 1} but more robust and more densely hairy; leaves up to 20 mm, subacute; corolla yellow, tinged with brownish-red on the tips of the lobes and the outside of the tube, with a broader, conical tube 3 mm wide at its upper end. {\i S. Spain.} Hs. ({\i N.W. Africa.})
\par

\par
424}
\par