{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 & Thell. in Schinz & R. Keller,{\i  Fl. Schweiz} ed. 4, 325 (1923) ({\i S. tomentosum }C.B. Lehm. & Schnittspahn): Rosettes 1·5-2·5 cm in diameter, somewhat flattened above; arachnoid hairs always abundant and persistent. Leaves broader towards the apex than those of subsp. ({\b a}). 2n = 32, 64. {\i  Mainly in the south-western part of the range}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 11. S. montanum} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 465 (1753) ({\i S. candollei} Rouy & Camus). Stolons slender, with persistent leaves. Rosette-leaves usually c. 10 × 3 mm (rarely larger), oblanceolate, acute, pubescent above and beneath and ciliate with very short, subequal hairs, dull green, viscid. Flowering stem 5-10(-20) cm, bearing 2-8(-13) flowers, which are usually 11- to 13-merous. Petals 12-20 × 2 mm, vinous red (rarely yellowish); filaments nearly glabrous, pale. {\i Calcifuge. • Pyrenees, Alps, Appennini; Carpathians; Corse.} Au Co Cz Ga He Hs It Po Rm Rs(W) [No].
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Rosettes not more than 2 cm in diameter ...................... ({\b a}) subsp. {\b montanum}
\par
1 Rosettes usually more than 2 cm in diameter
\par
2 Leaves entirely green, obovate-cuneate, up to 7 mm wide ({\b b}) subsp. {\b burnatii}
\par
2 Leaves tipped with red, oblanceolate, c. 3 mm wide ...... ({\b c}) subsp. {\b stiriacum}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b  montanum} : Rosettes not more than 2 cm in diameter. Leaves oblanceolate, not acuminate, entirely green; cilia scarcely longer than hairs on leaf-surface. Petals 12-15 mm. 2n = 42.{\i  Throughout most of the range of the species}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b burnatii} Wettst. ex Hayek in Hegi,{\i  Ill. Fl. Mitteleur.}{\b  4}({\b 2}): 554 (1922): Rosettes up to 8 cm in diameter. Leaves obovate-cuneate, up to 7 mm wide, entirely green. 2n = 42. {\i S.W. Alps}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b c}) Subsp. {\b stiriacum} Wettst. ex Hayek in Hegi,{\i  loc. cit. }(1922) ({\i S. braunii} Funck): Rosettes 2-4·5 cm in diameter. Leaves oblanceolate, distinctly acuminate, reddish at the apex; cilia distinctly longer than hairs on leaf-surface. Petals 16-20 mm. 2n = 84.{\i  E. Austria}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Plants from the Carpathians, somewhat intermediate in appearance between subspp. ({\b b}) and ({\b c}) and with 2n = 42, have been named subsp. {\b carpaticum} Wettst. ex Hayek in Hegi,{\i  loc. cit.} (1922). Their status is uncertain.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 12. S. dolomiticum} Facch., {\i Zeitschr. Ferdinand. Tirol} ({\i Innsbruck}) ser. 3, {\b 5}: 56 (1855). Stolons 2 cm, slender. Rosettes 2-4 cm in diameter, subglobose. Leaves 10-15 × 3-5 mm, oblong-lanceolate, acuminate, sparsely pubescent, bright green with a brownish apex; apical cilia coarser than the lateral. Flowering stem c. 10 cm, bearing 12-20 flowers; cauline leaves 10-20 × 3-5 mm. Flowers usually 10- to 12-merous; petals 9-10 × 2 mm, deep reddish-pink, with a central stripe of reddish-brown above and of green beneath; filaments more or less glabrous. 2n = 72. •{\i  Dolomite and basalt rocks,} 1600-2500{\i  m. S.E. Alps.} It.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 13. S. kosaninii} Praeger, {\i Bull. Inst. Jard. Bot. Univ. Beograd}{\b  1}: 210 (1930). Stolons up to 12 cm, stout, leafy. Rosettes 4-8 cm in diameter, open. Leaves 15-40 × 7-15 mm, oblanceolate, shortly acuminate, densely pubescent, dark green with a red apex; cilia about twice as long as the other hairs. Flowering stem c. 15 cm; cauline leaves 15-35 × 5-8 mm. Flowers 13- or 14-merous. Sepals very hairy; petals 10 × 1 mm, purple, paler beneath and with a narrow white margin; filaments slightly hairy at the base.{\i  Calcicole. • Mountains of S. Jugoslavia.} Ju.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 14. S. macedonicum} Praeger, {\i op. cit.} 212 (1930). Stolons 4-7 cm, giving a loose mat of flattish rosettes 3-5 cm in diameter. Leaves 15-20 × 5 mm, broadly oblanceolate, shortly acuminate, densely but minutely pubescent, reddish towards the apex; cilia as in {\b 13. Flowering} stem 7-10 cm. Inflorescence compact, corymbose. Flowers 11- or 12-merous; petals 8-10 mm, dull pinkish-lilac. Filaments lilac, almost glabrous. 2n = 34.{\i  • S.W. Jugoslavia} ({\i N.W. Makedonija}). ?Al Ju.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 15. S. cantabricum} J.A. Huber,{\i  Feddes Repert. }{\b 33}: 364 (1934). Stolons up to 6 cm, stout. Rosettes 2-5 cm in diameter, open. Leaves 20-35 × 10 mm, oblong-obovate, mucronate, more or less pubescent, dark green with a red apex; cilia about twice as long as the other hairs. Flowering stem up to 16 cm. Flowers 15-30, 9- to 12-merous; sepals obtuse; petals 9-10 × 2 mm, red, pink or white; filaments glabrous or pubescent. •{\i  N. & C. Spain.} Hs.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Three subspecies may be recognized; although geographically separated they show some morphological overlap.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Red apex of leaves less than 2 mm, not conspicuous . ({\b b}) subsp. {\b urbionense}
\par
1 Red apex of leaves more than 2 mm, conspicuous
\par
2 Filaments pubescent; leaves densely pubescent ....... ({\b a}) subsp. {\b cantabricum}
\par
2 Filaments glabrous; leaves sparsely pubescent .... ({\b c}) subsp. {\b guadarramense}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b cantabricum }: Red apex of leaves more than 2 mm; leaf densely pubescent and with numerous apical cilia. Filaments pubescent. 2n = 68, 72.{\i  Cordillera Cantabrica}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp.{\b  urbionense} M.C. Sm.,{\i  Lagascalia }{\b 10}: 21 (1981): Red apex of leaves less than 2 mm; leaf densely pubescent and with numerous apical cilia. Filaments glabrous or pubescent. 2n = 82.{\i  Sierra de Urbion}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b c}) Subsp. {\b guadarramense} M.C. Sm., {\i op. cit.} 20 (1981). Red apex of leaves more than 2 mm; leaf sparsely pubescent and with few apical cilia. Filaments glabrous.{\i  Sierra de Guadarrama}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b S. giuseppii} Wale,{\i  Quart. Bull. Alp. Gard. Soc.}{\b  9}: 115 (1941), from N. Spain (Cordillera Cantabrica), appears to be a hybrid between {\b 10} and {\b 15}({\b a}).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 16. S. marmoreum} Griseb.,{\i  Spicil. Fl. Rumel. }{\b 1}: 329 (1843) ({\i S. tectorum} auct. eur. orient., non L.; incl.{\i  S. ballsii} Wale, {\i S. banaticum} Domokos, {\i S. erythraeum} Velen., {\i ?S. italicum} Ricci, {\i S. reginae-amaliae} Heldr. & Guicc. ex Halácsy, {\i S. schlehanii} Schott). Stolons short or long. Rosettes 3-6 cm in diameter, open. Leaves 15-25 × 9-15 mm, obovate, mucronate, densely and finely pubescent (sometimes glabrous when mature), usually with stout, deflexed marginal cilia, dull green to purplish-grey, often tinged with red. Flowering stem 10-20 cm; cauline leaves 20-30 mm, oblong-lanceolate, acuminate. Inflorescence up to 7 cm wide. Flowers 11- to 13-merous; petals 10 mm, red with white margin; filaments usually purple, hairy at the base. 2n = 34. •{\i  S.E. & E.C. Europe; S. & C. Italy.} Al Bu Cz Gr Hu ?It Ju Rm Rs(W).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Very variable, especially in leaf-colour and persistence of pubescence on the leaves. The variation is, however, largely continuous and reticulate, and it does not seem possible to recognize infraspecific taxa, except perhaps at varietal level.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b S. balcanicum} Stoj.,{\i  Izv. Bot. Inst.} ({\i Sofia}) {\b 2}: 263 (1951), from C. Bulgaria, is said to differ principally in its pale lilac petals and more or less glabrous leaves. It is not clear from the information
\par

\par
427}
\par