{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b d}) Subsp.{\b  arenaria} (Koch) J. Parnell,{\i  loc. cit. }(1990) {\i J. arenaria }(Koch) Opiz,{\i  Diopogon hirtus} subsp. {\i arenarius} (Koch) H. Huber,{\i  Sempervivum arenarium} Koch): Rosettes 0·5-2 cm in diameter, their leaves usually widest at or below the middle, sometimes with red apex, glandular-ciliate but otherwise glabrous; cauline leaves similar. Sepals glandular-puberulent on surface.{\i  Calcifuge. E. Alps, eastwards from} c. 11° 45' E.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 8.            Aeonium}        Webb & Berth.
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc  By D.A. Webb.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Perennials, with erect, somewhat woody stems and alternate leaves crowded into terminal rosettes. Flowers 9- to 11-merous, in a panicle. Petals free, yellow. Stamens twice as many as the sepals.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. A. arboreum} (L.) Webb & Berth.,{\i  Phyt. Canar.}{\b  1}: 185 (1840) ({\i Sempervivum arboreum} L.). Stem 50-80 cm, stout, with suberect branches, marked by conspicuous leaf-scars. Leaves c. 6 × 2 cm, oblanceolate-cuneate, ciliate-denticulate but otherwise glabrous, bright shining green. Flowers numerous, in a compact, ovoid panicle. Petals 6-7 mm, bright yellow.{\i  Cultivated for ornament, and widely naturalized on rocks and walls near the coast in S. Europe}. [Bl Ga Gr Hs Lu Sa Si.] (Morocco.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 9.           Aichryson}       Webb & Berth.
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc  By D.A. Webb.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Annuals; leaves alternate, entire, petiolate, caducous. Flowers 6- to 10-merous, in a dichotomous cyme. Petals free, yellow. Stamens twice as many as the petals.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 Petals usually 8; branches ± horizontal .......................................... {\b 1. villosum}
\par
Petals usually 10; branches suberect, pseudodichotomous ...... {\b 2. dichotomum}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. A. villosum} (Aiton) Webb & Berth.,{\i  Phyt. Canar. }{\b 1}: 181 (1840) ({\i Sempervivum villosum} Aiton). Plant up to 15 cm, bushy, with horizontal branches. Stem and leaves softly and densely glandular-hairy. Leaves spathulate-rhombic; lamina 15-20 mm. Flowers usually 8-merous, pedicellate, in a lax cyme. Petals 5-6 mm, ovate, bright golden-yellow.{\i  Rocks. Açores.} Az. ({\i Madeira}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. A. dichotomum} (DC.) Webb & Berth.,{\i  loc. cit.} (1840) ({\i Sempervivum dichotomum} DC.,{\i  S. annuum} Coutinho). Like {\b 1} but often up to 30 cm; stems usually reddish, with suberect, pseudodichotomous branches; and petals usually 10, paler yellow. {\i Naturalized in Portugal} ({\i Serra de Sintra}). [Lu.] ({\i Islas Canarias.})
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 10.             Sedum}                 L.
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc  By D.A. Webb, J.R. Akeroyd & H. 't Hart.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Leaves usually alternate, seldom crowded into rosettes, and rarely (in European species) into the dense, globose rosettes characteristic of{\i  Sempervivum}. Inflorescence usually cymose. Flowers hermaphrodite, usually 5-merous, but sometimes 4- or 6- to 9-merous. Petals free or slightly connate at the base, usually patent. Stamens usually twice as many as the petals, sometimes equal in number. Carpels equal in number to the petals.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 The habit of most species is characteristic, but it is difficult to frame a definition of the genus which delimits it clearly from{\i  Crassula, Sempervivum,} and other genera, and the assignment of some species is still disputed.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 In addition to those described below several cultivated species are locally naturalized near gardens.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Most European species occur on dry, rocky or stony ground.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Literature: R. Ll. Praeger,{\i  Jour. Roy. Hort. Soc.}{\b  46}: 1-134 (1921). H. Froderstrom,{\i  Acta Horti Gothob.}{\b  5}: Bihang 1-75 (1930), {\b 6}: Bihang 1-111 (1931),{\b  7}: Bihang 1-126, {\b 10}: Bihang 1-262 (1936). H. 't Hart, {\i Biosystematic Studies in the} acre- {\i group and the Series} Rupestria {\i Berger of the Genus }Sedum ({\i Crassulaceae}). Utrecht, 1978;{\i  Fl. Medit. }{\b 1}: 31-61 (1991).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Leaves flat, at least 8 mm wide
\par
2 Petals bright yellow
\par
3 Erect shrub with very stout stems ............................................. {\b 1. praealtum}
\par
3 Stems usually herbaceous except at the extreme base, fairly slender
\par
4 Stems erect, usually all flowering ................................................... {\b 2. aizoon}
\par
4 Stems procumbent at the base, bearing non-flowering and
\par
  flowering shoots .......................................................................... {\b 3. hybridum}
\par
2 Petals red, purple or whitish
\par
5 Petals 10-12 mm, erect ................................................................. {\b 7. spurium}
\par
5 Petals 3-5 mm, patent
\par
6 Follicles stellate-patent ............................................................. {\b 45. stellatum}
\par
6 Follicles erect
\par
7 Flowers whitish ......................................................................... {\b 4. telephium}
\par
7 Flowers pink or purple
\par
8 Leaves dentate ........................................................................... {\b 4. telephium}
\par
8 Leaves entire
\par
9 Leaves opposite .............................................................................. {\b 5. ewersii}
\par
9 Leaves alternate .................................................................. {\b 6. anacampseros}
\par
1 Leaves less than 8 mm wide, often ± terete
\par
10 Petals yellow, cream or greenish-white
\par
11 Follicles erect
\par
12 Flowers 5-merous
\par
13 Petals up to 12 mm, bright yellow ....................................... {\b 10. montanum}
\par
13 Petals 5 mm, greenish yellow ..................................................... {\b 49. rubens}
\par
12 Flowers 6- to 9-merous
\par
14 Flowers few, in lax, unilateral cymes; non-flowering shoots
\par
   in midsummer leafless except for a terminal summer-dormant bud
\par
15 Leaves of the non-flowering shoots amplexicaul, with a broad,
\par
   3-lobed, hyaline spur; petals 6-8 mm ................................. {\b 13. amplexicaule}
\par
15 Leaves of the non-flowering shoots not amplexicaul,
\par 
   with a short, truncate spur; petals 8-12 mm ............................ {\b 14. pruinatum}
\par
14 Flowers numerous, in crowded cymes;
\par
  plant without summer-dormant buds
\par
16 Living leaves on non-flowering shoots confined to a terminal,
\par
   tassel-like cluster at anthesis; dead leaves persistent
\par
   on lower part of shoot ......................................................... {\b 12. forsterianum}
\par
16 Living leaves on non-flowering shoots not confined to a
\par
   terminal cluster; dead leaves mostly not persistent
\par
17 Petals greenish-white to very pale yellow
\par
18 Sepals 2·5 mm, glabrous; petals patent ................................... {\b 8. sediforme}
\par
18 Sepals 5-7 mm, glandular-puberulent; petals erect
\par
   throughout anthesis ............................................................. {\b 9. ochroleuchum}
\par
17 Petals bright yellow
\par

\par
429}
\par