{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 5.          Mucizonia}         (DC.) A. Berger
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc  By D.A. Webb.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Diffuse or erect annuals with alternate leaves. Flowers 5-merous. Corolla campanulate, with the lobes about equalling the tube. Stamens 10, included.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 Leaves 2-4 mm, imbricate; stem seldom branched ......................... {\b 1. sedoides}
\par
Leaves 12-18 mm, patent, distant; bushy, with freely branched
\par
 stem .................................................................................................. {\b 2. hispida}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. M. sedoides} (DC.) D.A. Webb,{\i  Feddes Repert.}{\b  64}: 22 (1961) ({\i Cotyledon sedoides} DC.,{\i  C. sediformis} Lapeyr., {\i Sedum candollei} Hamet, {\i S. sedoides }(DC.) Rothm., non Hamet,{\i  Umbilicus sedoides} (DC.) DC.). Glabrous; usually gregarious, forming dense tufts. Stem 2-6 cm, erect. Leaves 2-4 mm, numerous, oblong, obtuse, concavo-convex, imbricate. Flowers erect, subsessile, in a crowded terminal cyme, their lower part concealed by leaves. Corolla 6-7 mm, purplish-pink; lobes erect, longer than the tube.{\i  Rocks and stony ground. • Pyrenees, and higher mountains of Spain and Portugal}. Ga Hs Lu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. M. hispida} (Lam.) A. Berger in Engler & Prantl,{\i  Natürl. Pflanzenfam.} ed. 2, {\b 18a}: 420 (1930) ({\i Cotyledon hispida} Lam., {\i C. mucizonia} Ortega, {\i Sedum hispidum} (Lam.) Hamet, {\i S. mucizonia} (Ortega) Hamet,{\i  Umbilicus hispidus} (Lam.) DC.). Usually glandular-pubescent, at least in the inflorescence, but sometimes glabrous. Stem 8-15 cm, diffuse, branched from the base. Leaves 12-18 mm, oblong, terete, streaked with red. Flowers long-stalked, in lax cymes. Corolla 8-13 mm, yellowish-green tinged with pink; lobes rather shorter than the tube.{\i  Rocks and walls. C. & S. Spain and Portugal.} Hs Lu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 6.            Sempervivum}              L.
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc  By C. Favarger and F. Zesiger (Ed.1) revised by J. Parnell & C. Favarger (Ed.2)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Perennials with monocarpic rosettes; vegetative reproduction by axillary stolons. Leaves alternate, entire, sessile, ciliate, usually glandular-pubescent, very fleshy. Flowers 8- to 16-merous, in a terminal cyme. Sepals lanceolate, united at the base, pubescent. Petals free, patent, pink, purple or yellowish, narrowly lanceolate, pubescent. Stamens twice as many as petals; filaments usually pubescent at least at the base. Ovary pubescent; style distinct, usually curved. Seeds pyriform, finely striate.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 The habitat of all species, unless otherwise indicated, is in rocky places, mainly in the mountains.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Hybrids in this genus are very common both in natural habitats and in cultivation. The most widespread are{\i  S}. ×{\i  barbulatum} Schott ({\b 10} × {\b 11}),{\i  S}. × {\i fauconnettii} Reuter ({\b 10} ×{\b  18}), and {\i S}. × {\i schottii} C.B. Lehm. & Schnittspahn ({\b 11} ×{\b  18}). The hybrids usually occur only in the presence of both parents, but in the French Jura, the{\i  locus classicus} of{\i  S}. ×{\i  fauconnettii,} one of the parents ({\b 10}) is not now present.{\i  S. funckii} Braun ex Koch, a triple hybrid between {\b 10}, {\b 11} and {\b 18}, probably of garden origin, is naturalized in a few places in Austria, Germany and Belgium.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Literature: R.L. Praeger, {\i An Account of the Sempervivum Group}. London. 1932.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Upper surface of petals yellowish, at least in the apical ½
\par
2 Leaves usually glabrous except for marginal cilia, glaucous,
\par
  purplish-red at the base .................................................................. {\b 1. wulfenii}
\par
2 Leaves glandular-pubescent, not glaucous, not purplish-red at the base
\par
3 Cilia of rosette-leaves 2-4 mm, stiff, interwoven with those
\par
  of neighbouring leaves .................................................................. {\b 3. ciliosum}
\par
3 Cilia of rosette-leaves less than 2 mm, not interwoven
\par
4 All leaf-hairs (including cilia) subequal
\par
5 Rosette-leaves 8-15 mm wide .............................................. {\b 2. grandiflorum}
\par
5 Rosette-leaves 3 4(-6) mm wide ............................................ {\b 11. montanum}
\par
4 Some leaf-hairs (including cilia) distinctly longer than others
\par
6 Petals not tinged with purple or pink
\par
7 Stolons usually 5-8 cm; some cilia more than 1 mm .............. {\b 8. leucanthum}
\par
7 Stolons usually 2-3 cm; all cilia less than 1 mm ........................... {\b 9. pittonii}
\par
6 Petals tinged with pink or purple towards the base
\par
8 Flowering stem not more than 10 cm; flowers 9- or 10-merous {\b 4. octopodes}
\par
8 Flowering stem 10-30 cm; flowers 12- to 14-merous
\par
9 Petals pale yellow or cream-coloured ....................................... {\b 7. kindingeri}
\par
9 Petals bright greenish-yellow
\par
10 Flowering stem c. 10-15 cm; nectarial scales less than 0-2 mm,
\par
   truncate to emarginate ................................................................. {\b 5. zeleborii}
\par
10 Flowering stem c. 15-30 cm, nectarial scales c. 0·5 mm,
\par
   rounded at the apex ................................................................. {\b 6. ruthenicum}
\par
1  Upper surface of petals predominantly red, pink or purple
\par
11 Mature leaves glabrous, apart from marginal cilia and sometimes
\par
   a few fairly long hairs on the surface
\par
12 Rosettes c. 3 cm in diameter; leaves not more than 7 mm wide (S. Spain)
\par
   ................................................................................................. {\b 17. nevadense}
\par
12 Rosettes usually more than 3 cm in diameter; leaves more than 7 mm wide
\par
13 Young leaves puberulent on both surfaces ........................ {\b 16. marmoreum}
\par
13 Young leaves glabrous except for marginal cilia
\par
14 Leaves with a well-defined reddish-brown spot near the apex;
\par
    petals 7-8 mm ......................................................................... {\b 19. calcareum}
\par
14 Leaves variably suffused with red towards the apex, but
\par
   without a well-defined spot; petals 9-10 mm ............................ {\b 18. tectorum}
\par
11 Mature leaves pubescent on both surfaces
\par
15 Apical cilia of leaves extremely long and flexuous, interwoven
\par
   to form an arachnoid tomentum over the rosette .............. {\b 10. arachnoideum}
\par
15 Apical cilia short, not arachnoid
\par
16 Cilia of rosette-leaves scarcely longer than the other hairs;
\par
   petals 12-20 mm ..................................................................... {\b 11. montanum}
\par
16 Cilia of rosette-leaves at least twice as long as the other hairs;
\par
   petals 7-11 mm
\par
17 Rosette-leaves sparsely pubescent
\par
18 Stem usually more than 20 cm, bearing at least 40 flowers;
\par
   leaves without a conspicuous tuft of cilia at the apex ............... {\b 18. tectorum}
\par
18 Stem 8-16 cm, bearing 12-30 flowers; leaves usually with
\par
   a conspicuous tuft of cilia at the apex
\par
19 Rosette-leaves 10-15 mm, acuminate, bright green .......... {\b 12. dolomiticum}
\par
19 Rosette-leaves c. 25 mm, mucronate, dark green .............. {\b 15. cantabricum}
\par
17 Rosette-leaves densely pubescent
\par
20 Stolons stout; flowers 11- to 14-merous
\par

\par
425}
\par