{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 specific rank, differ in often being papillose and in having stems 20-30 cm, sometimes ascending. They also resemble {\b 14} and {\i R. alopecuros} Boiss. from S.W. Asia.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 14. R. tymphaea} Hausskn.,{\i  Mitt. Thür. Bot. Ver.}{\b  1887}: 10 (1887). Perennial, like {\b 13} but stems ascending or erect; inflorescence longer; pedicels 3-4·5 mm; capsule 10-12(-17) × 8-9 mm, slightly nodding, obovoid or almost square in outline above the abruptly tapered base; stigmatic lobes smaller.{\i  Gravelly places and rocks. • Greece} ({\i local and mainly in the west}). Gr.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 15. R. odorata} L.,{\i  Syst. Nat.} ed. 10, {\b 2}: 1046 (1759). Annual to perennial 10-50 cm, with ascending branches near the base. Leaves oblanceolate to obovate, sometimes the upper with 2 or 3 lobes. Sepals attaining 4-5 mm; petals 4-4·5 mm, the upper with claws flat; limb inserted near apex of claw, digitate; segments c. 9-15, spathulate. Capsule 9-11 × 7-11 mm, nodding, subglobose.{\i  Commonly cultivated for its fragrant flowers, and locally naturalized in S. & C. Europe; sometimes found as a casual further north.} [Au Bl Cz Ga Hs It Rm Rs.] (?Libya.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 16. R. orientalis} (Müller Arg.) Boiss.,{\i  Fl. Or.}{\b  1}: 427 (1867). Annual 20-70 cm. Lower leaves up to 100 × 11 mm, oblanceolate, obtuse, petiolate; the upper pinnatifid with 1 or 2 pairs of lobes, the lobes mostly 1·5-3·5 mm wide, ovate-lanceolate to linear. Sepals 3-4·5 mm; petals like those of {\b 15} but 3-3·5 mm. Capsule 7-13 × 5-6 mm, nodding, ovoid or obovoid.{\i  S.E. Greece} ({\i Salamis}); {\i W. Kriti }({\i Gavdhos}). Cr Gr.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 17. R. stricta} Pers.,{\i  Syn. Pl. }{\b 2}: 10 (1806). Biennial; stems 30-50 cm, erect, with long, erect branches. Leaves with 1 or 2 pairs of often bifid pinnae; segments up to 6 mm wide. Bracts caducous; pedicels filiform; flowers pendent. Sepals 1-1·5 mm, ovate; petals 2-3 mm, yellow; limb of the upper shorter than the claw, 5-partite, of the lower bilobed, with lobes 1- or 2-lobulate at the base. Capsule 7-16 mm, erect, obovoid or cylindrical. 2n = 24.{\i  Gypsaceous soils. E. & C..Spain.} Hs.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 18. R. lutea} L.,{\i  Sp. Pl.} 449 (1753) ({\i R. ramosissima} Pourret ex Willd., {\i R. gracilis} Ten., {\i R. reyeri} Porta & Rigo; incl.{\i  R. truncata} Fischer & C.A. Meyer). Annual to perennial, bushy. Leaves mostly pinnatifid, with 1 or 2(-4) pairs of pinnae (or leaves sometimes bi or ternate); segments elongate. Bracts usually caducous. Petals yellow; lateral lobes of the upper falcate, subentire; mid-lobe shorter; limb of the lower entire or with 2 or 3 linear-spathulate lobes. Capsule 6-12 × 4·5-5·5 mm, rarely nodding, oblong, oblong-obovoid or ellipsoidal, rarely subglobose (var.{\i  vivantii} (P. Monts.) Fernández Casas). 2n = 24, 48.{\i  Cultivated and disturbed ground. S. & W. Europe; probably a naturalized alien further north and east.} Al Au Bl Bu Co Cr Ga Gr Ho Hs It Ju Lu Po Rm ?Sa ?Si Tu *[Be Br Cz Da Ge Hb He Hu Rs(N, C, W, K, E)].
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 19. R. lanceolata} Lag.,{\i  Gen. Sp. Nov}. 17 (1816) ({\i R. constricta} Lange). Erect annual or biennial 40-120 cm. Leaves mostly 20-90 × 4-18 mm, oblanceolate or spathulate, sometimes some with 1 or 2 lateral lobes. Bracts caducous; pedicels 3-7(-18) mm. Sepals 6-8; petals white, similar to those of {\b 18}, but limb of the upper with lateral lobes wide, shorter than the claw; limb of the lower entire. Capsule 16-28 × 5-6 mm. 2n = 24.{\i  Dry places. S. & E. Spain.} Hs.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 20. R. jacquinii} Reichenb.,{\i  Icon. Fl. Germ.}{\b  2}: 22 (1838). Annual or biennial, branched at the base. Leaves 20-50 × 5-20 mm subsessile, spathulate, obtuse, some with 1(2) pairs of oblong to elliptical lobes. Bracts persistent. Petals 4 mm, the upper with lateral lobes shallowly to deeply crenate. Capsule 12-15 × 6·5 mm, nodding, obovoid. {\i Dry places. • E. Pyrenees; S. France} ({\i Cevennes}). Ga Hs.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b R. arabica} Boiss.,{\i  Diagn. Pl. Or. Nov.}{\b  1}({\b 1}): 6 (1843), differing from {\b 20} by its annual habit, persistent filaments and capsule 6-12 mm, subglobose to broadly ovoid, has been recorded once from E. Kriti (Sitia).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 2.             Sesamoides}               Ortega
\par 

\pard\f0\fs24\qc  By V.H. Heywood (Ed.1)  revised by J.R. Akeroyd (Ed.2)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Usually perennials, often woody at the base, with simple leaves. Flowers in terminal, bracteate racemes. Calyx 5- or 6-lobed. Petals 5 or 6, the upper two multilaciniate, the others less divided. Stamens 7-15 on an eccentric, urceolate, hypogynous disc. Carpels 4-7 on a short gynophore, more or less free, stellate-patent in fruit, more or less dorsally gibbous making the style lateral or subterminal. ({\i Astrocarpa} Necker ex Dumort.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 Calyx-lobes narrow, obtuse, at least as long as the tube,
\par
     with narrow sinuses ........................................................................ {\b 1. clusii}
\par
Calyx-lobes broadly triangular, acute, shorter than the tube,
\par
     with broad sinuses .............................................................. {\b 2. purpurascens}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. S. clusii} (Sprengel) Greuter & Burdet,{\i  Willdenowia}{\b  19}: 47 (1989) ({\i Reseda sesamoides} L., {\i Astrocarpa sesamoides} (L.) DC., {\i A. suffruticosa} Lange,{\i  A. minor} Lange, {\i S. pygmaea} (Scheele) O. Kuntze). Many-stemmed perennial with a more or less woody base; stems 5-15 cm. Leaves lanceolate to linear-lanceolate, the basal ones in dense rosettes. Calyx divided to at least 2-way into narrow, obtuse lobes separated by narrow sinuses. Stamens 7-12; filaments usually glabrous, sometimes papillose-hairy. Carpels 4-6, obovoid, the style subterminal, overtopping the dorsal gibbosity of the carpel. 2n = 20.{\i  S.W. Europe,from N.W. Spain to Sardegna and N.W. Italy.} Co Ga Hs It Sa.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. S. purpurascens} (L.) G. López,{\i  Anal. Jard. Bot. Madrid}{\b  42}: 321 (1986) ({\i Reseda purpurascens} L., {\i Astrocarpa purpurascens} (L.) Dumort.,{\i  S. canescens} auct., non (L.) O. Kuntze, {\i A. cochleariformis} Nyman). Like {\b 1} but rosettes lax; calyx-lobes broadly triangular, acute, with broad sinuses, shorter than the tube; stamens 10-15; carpels 4-5; style lateral, not overtopping the dorsal gibbosity of the carpel. 2n = 20, 40, 60.{\i  S.W. Europe.} Co Ga Hs It Lu Sa.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 A very variable species divided into several subspecies or varieties by different authors ({\i vide} M.S. Abdallah & H.C.D. de Wit,{\i  op. cit. }354-362 (1978)).
\par

\par
420}
\par