{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 ({\i P. divaricata} (Aiton) Sudworth). Tree up to 25 m; bark becoming reddish-brown and forming thick scales; branches usually irregularly arranged. Buds ovoid, very resinous. Twigs glabrous, green in first year, then brownish. Leaves 2-4(-5) cm, in pairs, rigid, acute or obtuse, twisted; resin-canals marginal. Cone 2-5 × 1·5-2·5 cm, long-conical, very curved, erect, yellowish, shining, persistent; apophysis flat or convex; umbo without mucro. Seeds 3-6 mm; wing 8-12 mm. {\i Planted for timber in C. Europe and rarely elsewhere}. [Au Cz Da Ge Rm.] ({\i N.C. & N.E. North America.})
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 5. P. ponderosa} Douglas ex P. & C. Lawson, {\i Agric. Man.} 354 (1836). Tree up to 75 m; bark becoming very thick, yellowish or dark reddish-brown. Buds cylindrical, resinous. Twigs glabrous, at first brownish or greenish, becoming blackish. Basal sheath of short shoots more than 15 mm. Leaves 10-25 cm × 1·5 mm, in groups of 3 (rarely 2 or 5), rigid, curved, densely crowded, deep yellowish-green, very aromatic; resin-canals median. Cone 8-15 × 3·5-5 cm, ovoid, symmetrical, subsessile, patent or slightly deflexed; apophysis concave or plane; umbo with strong, erect, persistent mucro. Seeds c. 8 mm; wing c. 18 mm. {\i Occasionally planted for timber in C. & S. Europe.} [Au Ge Gr It Rm.] ({\i W. North America.})
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b P. jeffreyi} Grev. & Balf. in A. Murray,{\i  Bot. Exped. Oreg.}{\b  8:} 2 (1853), from W. North America, a tree up to 60 m, with nonresinous buds, glaucous twigs, greyish- to bluish-green leaves 12-20 cm, cone 15-25 cm, and the umbo with a recurved mucro, is also occasionally cultivated, sometimes under the name of{\i  P. ponderosa}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b P. sabiniana }Douglas, {\i Trans. Linn. Soc. London }({\i Bot.}){\b  16:} 749 (1833), from California, a tree up to 25 m, with lax habit, sparse, pale green leaves 20-30 cm, and cone 15-25 cm, is cultivated for timber on a small scale in Europe.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 6. P. nigra} Arnold,{\i  Reise Mariazell} 8 (1785) ({\i P. maritima} Miller). Tree up to 50 m; bark grey to dark brown. Buds ovoid or cylindrical-ovoid, acute, slightly resinous. Twigs glabrous, pale brown to orange-brown. Leaves 4-19 cm × 1-2 mm, in pairs, light or dark green, somewhat rigid, flexuous, straight or curved; 1-5 layers of hypodermal cells; resin-canals 3-17, median. Cone 3-8 × 2-4 cm, yellowish- or light brown, shining, subsessile; apophysis slightly or obtusely keeled; umbo mucronate. 2n = 24.{\i  S. Europe, extending northwards to Austria and S. Carpathians; extensively planted in N. Europe} ({\i especially subsp.} ({\b c})){\i  for timber or shelter.} Al Au Bu Co Ga Gr Hs It Ju Rm Rs(K) Si Tu [Be Br Cz Da Ge Hb He Ho Su].
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Very variable, with many geographical variants which are often not clearly separable. Much of the variation follows a clinal pattern ({\i vide} P. Fukarek,{\i  Rad. Polj. Sum. Fakult. Sarajevu}{\b  3}({\b 2}): 1-92 (1958) for a detailed account). The following subspecies, which are sometimes regarded as distinct species, deserve recognition.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Leaves ± flexible; 1 or 2(3) rows of slightly thickened hypodermal cells
\par
2 Leaves 1·2-1·9 mm wide, somewhat pungent; 1 or 2(3) rows of 
\par
  hypodermal cells .................................................................. ({\b c}) subsp. {\b laricio}
\par
2 Leaves 1-1·2 mm wide, not pungent; 1 row of hypodermal cells
\par
  ....................................................................................... ({\b b}) subsp.{\b  salzmannii}
\par
1 Leaves ± rigid; 2-5 rows of strongly thickened hypodermal cells
\par
3 Leaves 4-7 cm ............................................................... ({\b d}) subsp.{\b  dalmatica}
\par
3 Leaves 7-18 cm
\par
4 Leaves straight or incurved; leaf-sheath 10-16 mm ............. ({\b a}) subsp.{\b  nigra}
\par
4 Leaves twisted or irregularly curved; leaf-sheath (15-)18-26 mm
\par
  ........................................................................................ ({\b e}) subsp.{\b  pallasiana}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp.{\b  nigra} ({\i P. nigricans} Host): Tall tree with pyramidal crown. Leaves 8-16 cm × 1·5-2 mm, rigid, pungent; 2 or 3 rows of hypodermal cells. Cone 5-8 cm; apophysis somewhat keeled.{\i  From Austria to C. Italy and Greece}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b salzmannii }(Dunal) Franco,{\i  Dendrologia Florestal }56 (1943) ({\i P. pyrenaica} sensu Willk.,{\i  P. clusiana} Clemente, {\i P. salzmannii} Dunal): Medium-sized tree with narrow, pyramidal or cylindrical crown. Leaves 8-16 cm × 1-2 mm, not pungent; 1 row of hypodermal cells. Cone 4-6 cm; apophysis somewhat keeled.{\i  Cevennes, Pyrenees, C. & E. Spain}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b c}) Subsp.{\b  laricio} (Poiret) Maire,{\i  Bull. Soe. Hist. Nat. Afr. Nord }{\b 19:} 66 (1928) ({\i P. laricio} Poiret): Tall tree with narrow, ovoid-elongate crown. Leaves 8-16 cm × 1·2-2 mm, slightly pungent twisted; 1(2) rows of hypodermal cells. Cone 6-8 cm, yellowish-brown; apophysis obtusely keeled.•{\i  Corse; Calabria, Sicilia}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b d}) Subsp.{\b  dalmatica} (Vis.) Franco, {\i Dendrologia Florestal} 55 (1943): Small tree with broadly pyramidal crown. Leaves 4-7 cm × 1·5-1·8 mm, quite rigid; 3-5 rows of hypodermal cells. Cone 3·5-4·5 cm. •{\i  Coastal region and islands of W. Jugoslavia}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b e}) Subsp.{\b  pallasiana} (Lamb.) Holmboe,{\i  Bergens Mus. Skr.} ser. 2, {\b 1}({\b 2}): 29 (1914) ({\i P. pallasiana} Lamb.): Medium-sized tree with broadly ovoid crown. Leaves 12-18 cm × 1·6-2·2 mm; 2-5 rows of hypodermal cells. Cone 5-12 cm.{\i  Balkan peninsula; S. Carpathians; Krym}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Trees of subsp. ({\b c}) from Calabria and Sicilia are characterized by the more lax leaves with 2(3) rows of hypodermal cells, brown cone and only slightly keeled apophysis.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Plants from N.W. Romania are sometimes regarded as a distinct species,{\b  P. banatica} (Georgescu & Ionescu) Georgescu & Ionescu,{\i  Feddes Repert.}{\b  41:} 183 (1936).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b P. resinosa} Aiton, {\i Hort. Kew.}{\b  3:} 367 (1789), from E. North America, a tree up to 50 m, with reddish-brown bark, leaves 12-17 cm, marginal resin-canals, and cone 4-6 cm, is cultivated for timber on a small scale in Europe.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 7. P. sylvestris} L.,{\i  Sp. Pl.} 1000 (1753). Tree up to 40 m; bark dark brown on lower part of trunk, pale ochreous-red and flaking on upper part of trunk. Buds acute, more or less resinous. Twigs glabrous, yellowish-green at first, becoming greyish-brown. Leaves 3-7 cm × 2 mm, in pairs, glaucous, twisted; resin-canals submarginal. Cone 3-6 × 2-3·5 cm, dull yellowish-brown, acute, pendent, caducous; apophysis flat, or shortly pyramidal on back of cone, weakly keeled; umbo muticous. Seeds 3-5 mm; wing c. 10 mm. 2n = 24.{\i  N. & C. Europe, extending southwards in the mountains to S. Spain, Macedonia and Krym}. Al Au Br Bu Cz Fe Ga Ge Gr He *Ho Hs Hu It Ju *Lu No Po Rm Rs(N,B,C,W,K,E) Su [Be Da *Hb Ho Is Tu].
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 More than 150 variants have been described. Some have been regarded as subspecies, but much of the variation follows clinal patterns and it is not possible to give a consistent formal treatment of it. The variants may, however, be conveniently arranged in the following geographical groups:
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\i Group I} (var.{\i  lapponica} Fries). Crown narrow, branched; bark with small, thin scales.{\i  N. Fennoscandia}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\i Group II} (var.{\i  rigensis} (Desf.) Ascherson & Graebner; var.
\par

\par
42}
\par