{\rtf1\ansi \deff4\deflang1033{\fonttbl{\f4\froman\fcharset0\fprq2 Times New Roman;}}{\colortbl;\red0\green0\blue0;\red0\green0\blue255;\red0\green255\blue255;\red0\green255\blue0;\red255\green0\blue255;\red255\green0\blue0;\red255\green255\blue0;\red255\green255\blue255;\red0\green0\blue128;\red0\green128\blue128;\red0\green128\blue0;\red128\green0\blue128;\red128\green0\blue0;\red128\green128\blue0;\red128\green128\blue128;\red192\green192\blue192;}{\stylesheet{\widctlpar \f4\fs20\lang2057 \snext0 Normal;}{\*\cs10 \additive Default Paragraph Font;}}{\info{\author dddd}{\operator dddd}{\creatim\yr1998\mo11\dy11\hr16\min56}{\revtim\yr1998\mo11\dy11\hr16\min57}{\version2}{\edmins1}{\nofpages4}{\nofwords1033}{\nofchars5890}{\*\company  }{\vern57431}}\widowctrl\ftnbj\aenddoc\hyphcaps0 \fet0\sectd \linex0 {\*\pnseclvl1\pnucrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl2\pnucltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl3\pndec\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl4\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl5\pndec\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl6\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl7\pnlcrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl8\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl9\pnlcrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}
\pard\plain \ \f4\fs20\lang2057 {\fs28 available whether it should be considered a distinct species or a variant of }{\b\fs28 16}{\fs28 .
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 17. S. nevadense}{\fs28  Wale,}{\i\fs28  Quart. Bull. Alp. Gard. Soc. }{\b\fs28 9}{\fs28 : 109 (1941). Stolons short, slender. Rosettes c. 3 cm in diameter. Leaves 12-18 \'d7 5-7 mm, obovate, mucronate, glandular-puberulent when young, sometimes glabrous at maturity; cilia stout, often bent. Flowering stem 3-7(-12) cm, stout; cauline leaves imbricate. Inflorescence compact, but sometimes with additional flowers in axils of upper leaves. Flowers 9- to 11-merous; calyx puberulent, with some longer hairs; petals reddish-pink, occasionally with a darker central band; filaments hairy in lower \'bd; anthers reddish-pink. 2n = 108. \bullet  1650-2150}{\i\fs28  m. S. Spain}{\fs28  }{\i\fs28 (Sierra Nevada}{\fs28 ). Hs.
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 18. S. tectorum}{\fs28  L., }{\i\fs28 Sp. Pl.}{\fs28  464 (1753) (incl. }{\i\fs28 S. arvernense}{\fs28  Lecoq & Lamotte, }{\i\fs28 S. glaucum}{\fs28  Ten., }{\i\fs28 S. andreanum}{\fs28  Wale,}{\i\fs28  S. alpinum}{\fs28  Griseb. & Schenk, }{\i\fs28 S. schottii}{\fs28  Baker, non C.B. Lehm. & Schnittspahn). Stolons up to 4 cm, stout. Rosettes usually large (3-8 cm in diameter), open. Leaves 20-40 \'d7 10-15 mm, oblong-lanceolate to obovate, with a stout, pungent mucro, glabrous or with a few scattered hairs on the surface, dark or somewhat glaucous green, variably tinged with red; cilia conspicuous, white. Flowering stem 20-50 cm, stout, hairy; lower cauline leaves glabrous apart from the cilia, the upper ones pubescent. Inflorescence large, with from 40 to over 100 usually 13-merous flowers. Sepals acute; petals 9-10 \'d7 2 mm, ciliate and pubescent beneath, dull pink or purple, glabrous or slightly pubescent at the base. 2n = 36, 40, 72. \bullet }{\i\fs28  Mountains of W., C. & S. Europe, from C. Pyrenees to S.E. Alps and S. Appennini}{\fs28 . Au Ga Ge He Hs It Ju [Su].
\par 
\par Extremely variable, and divided variously by different authors into species, subspecies and varieties. Much of the variation is phenotypic, and a large part of the genetically determined variation, both in wild and cultivated plants, may be presumed to arise from hybridization with }{\b\fs28 19}{\fs28  and perhaps }{\b\fs28 11}{\fs28 .
\par 
\par A cultivar to which the Linnean type is referable, distinguished by its large size and frequent partial sterility, has been extensively cultivated in most of Europe, especially on the roofs of cottages as a charm against fire, and is perhaps locally naturalized.
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 19. S. calcareum}{\fs28  Jordan,}{\i\fs28  Obs. Pl. Crit.}{\b\fs28  7}{\fs28 : 26 (1849) (}{\i\fs28 S. arvernense}{\fs28  sensu Coste, pro parte). Like }{\b\fs28 18}{\fs28 , in which it is sometimes included, but distinct from all variants of the latter in its usually broad, glabrous (rarely pubescent when young), glaucous or pale green rosette-leaves with a well-defined purple-brown apical spot on both surfaces, its broad-based, subamplexicaul cauline leaves, all glabrous, and its pale pink or greenish-white, 10- to 12-merous flowers with obtuse sepals and petals 7-8 mm. 2n = 38. \bullet }{\i\fs28  Limestone rocks. S.W. Alps.}{\fs28  Ga It.
\par 
\par }
\pard \qc\ {\fs28  }{\b\fs28 7.         Jovibarba}{\fs28          Opiz
\par }{\fs24  By C. Favarger & F. Zesiger (Ed.1) revised by J. Parnell & C. Favarger (Ed.2)
\par 
\par }
\pard \ {\fs28 Perennials, like }{\i\fs28 Sempervivum}{\fs28  in habit, but with 6-merous (rarely 5- or 7-merous), campanulate flowers, and erect, pale yellow petals, keeled dorsally and fringed with glandular hairs. (}{\i\fs28 Diopogon}{\fs28  Jordan & Fourr.)
\par 
\par }
\pard \li200\ {\fs28 Stolons absent; rosette-leaves spinose-mucronate; petals ciliate,
\par    dorsally keeled but not winged .................................................... }{\b\fs28 1. heuffelii}{\fs28 
\par Stolons present; rosette-leaves not spinose-mucronate; petals
\par    fimbriate, with the dorsal keel produced into a wing .................. }{\b\fs28 2. globifera}{\fs28 
\par 
\par }
\pard \ {\fs28    }{\b\fs28 1. J. heuffelii}{\fs28  (Schott) \'c1. & D. L\'f6ve,}{\i\fs28  Bot. Not. }{\b\fs28 114}{\fs28 : 39 (1961) }{\i\fs28 J. velenovskyi}{\fs28  (Ceschm.) J. Holub, }{\i\fs28 Sempervivum heuffelii}{\fs28  Schott,}{\i\fs28  S. patens}{\fs28  Griseb. & Schenk, }{\i\fs28 S. hirtum}{\fs28  auct., non L., }{\i\fs28 Diopogon heuffelii}{\fs28  (Schott) H. Huber). Rosettes 5-7(-12) cm in diameter, open, with patent leaves 25-60 \'d7 10-15 mm, oblong-obovate, spinose-mucronate, dark or glaucous green with white margins, ciliate with stiff, often deflexed hairs. Stolons absent; vegetative reproduction by division of the rosette. Flowering stem 10-20 cm. Sepals glandular-ciliate; petals 10-12 mm, oblong-obovate, usually tricuspidate, ciliate but scarcely fimbriate, keeled, but not dorsally winged. Styles 2 mm, relatively stout. 2n = 38.  }{\i\fs28 Mountain rocks; calcicole. \bullet  E. Carpathians and mountains of Balkan peninsula.}{\fs28  Al Bu Gr Ju Rm.
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 2. J. globifera}{\fs28  (L.) J. Parnell,}{\i\fs28  Bot. Jour. Linn. Soc.}{\b\fs28  103}{\fs28 : 219 (1990) (}{\i\fs28 Sempervivum globiferum}{\fs28  L.). Rosettes 1-7 cm in diameter, open or closed. Leaves 8-20 \'d7 3-7(-10) mm, patent, erect or incurved, lanceolate to obovate-oblanceolate, often acuminate but not spinose-mucronate, ciliate, usually glandular-pubescent on the surface. Stolons present. Sepals usually hairy, but sometimes glandular-puberulent or glabrous; petals 12-17 mm, fimbriate, with dorsal keel produced into a wing. Styles usually c. 4 mm. 2n = 38. }{\i\fs28  Mountain rocks; or on dry, sandy or stony ground in the lowlands. \bullet  C. & S.E. Europe, southwards to N. Albania, and extending to the S.W. Alps and to N.W. & C. Russia.}{\fs28  Al Au Cz Ga Ge Hu It Ju ?No Po Rm Rs(?N, B, C, W).
\par 
\par }
\pard \li200\ {\fs28 1 Sepals minutely glandular-puberulent on surface
\par 2 Rosette-leaves glandular-pubescent on surface ............... (}{\b\fs28 c}{\fs28 ) subsp. }{\b\fs28 allionii}{\fs28 
\par 2 Rosette-leaves glabrous on surface ................................ (}{\b\fs28 d}{\fs28 ) subsp. }{\b\fs28 arenaria}{\fs28 
\par 1 Sepals not glandular-puberulent on surface, although sometimes
\par   with some longer hairs
\par 3 Surface of sepals glabrous; rosette leaves widest above
\par   the middle ........................................................................ (}{\b\fs28 a}{\fs28 ) subsp. }{\b\fs28 globifera}{\fs28 
\par 3 Surface of sepals usually \'b1 hairy; rosette-leaves widest at
\par   or below the middle ............................................................... (}{\b\fs28 b}{\fs28 ) subsp. }{\b\fs28 hirta}{\fs28 
\par 
\par }
\pard \ {\fs28  (}{\b\fs28 a}{\fs28 ) Subsp. }{\b\fs28 globifera }{\fs28 (}{\i\fs28 Jovibarba sobolifera}{\fs28  (sims) Opiz, }{\i\fs28 Diopogon hirtus}{\fs28  subsp. }{\i\fs28 borealis}{\fs28  H. Huber,}{\i\fs28  Sempervivum soboliferum}{\fs28  Sims): Rosettes 1-3 cm in diameter, their leaves widest above the middle, often with red apex, glandular-ciliate but otherwise glabrous; cauline leaves similar, or somewhat broader. Surface of sepals glabrous.}{\i\fs28  Calcifuge; usually at low altitudes. Throughout most of the range of the species}{\fs28 .
\par  (}{\b\fs28 b}{\fs28 ) Subsp.}{\b\fs28  hirta}{\fs28  (L.) J. Parnell, }{\i\fs28 loc. cit.}{\fs28  (1990)}{\i\fs28  U. hirta}{\fs28  (L.) Opiz, }{\i\fs28 J. hirta}{\fs28  subsp. }{\i\fs28 glabrescens}{\fs28  (Sabr.) So\'f3& J\'e1v., Diopogon hirtus (L.) H.P. Fuchs ex H. Huber subsp. }{\b\fs28 hirtus}{\fs28 , Sempervivum hirtum L., S. hirtum subsp. }{\b\fs28 preissianum}{\fs28  Dost\'e1l & subsp. }{\b\fs28 tatrense}{\fs28  Dost\'e1l): Rosettes 2\'b75-5 cm in diameter, their leaves widest at or below the middle, without red apex, glandular-ciliate but otherwise glabrous; cauline leaves broader. Surface of sepals usually hairy.}{\i\fs28  Somewhat calcicole; mainly in the mountains. Throughout most of the southern part of the range of the species}{\fs28 .
\par  (}{\b\fs28 c}{\fs28 ) Subsp.}{\b\fs28  allionii}{\fs28  (Jordan & Fourr.) J. Parnell,}{\i\fs28  loc. cit.}{\fs28  (1990) }{\i\fs28 J. allionii}{\fs28  (Jordan & Fourr.) D.A. Webb, }{\i\fs28 J. hirta}{\fs28  subsp. }{\i\fs28 allionii}{\fs28  (Jordan & Fourr.) So\'f3,}{\i\fs28  Diopogon allionii }{\fs28 Jordan & Fourr., }{\i\fs28 D. hirtus}{\fs28  subsp. }{\i\fs28 allionii}{\fs28  (Jordan & Fourr.) H. Huber, }{\i\fs28 Sempervivum allionii}{\fs28  (Jordan & Fourr.) Nyman, }{\i\fs28 S. hirtum}{\fs28  sensu Coste et auct. ital., non L.): Rosettes 1\'b75-2\'b75 cm in diameter, their leaves often with a red apex, glandular-puberulent; cauline leaves similar. Surface of sepals glandular-puberulent.}{\i\fs28  Calcifuge. S.W. Alps; S.E. Alps }{\fs28 (}{\i\fs28 K\'e4rnten}{\fs28 ).
\par 
\par 428}
\par }