{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 or white. Stamens 10. Follicles whitish, erect. 2n = 22, 44. •{\i  Mountains of S. Greece and Kriti.} Cr Gr.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 35. S. tymphaeum} Quézel & Contandriopoulos, {\i Taxon}{\b  16}: 240 (1967). Like {\b 34} but rosettes solitary, globose, densely and minutely glandular-puberulent; pedicels up to 8 mm; sepals up to 3 mm, lanceolate; petals acute, with only one dark stripe; follicles yellowish-brown, stellate-patent. 2n = 14.{\i  Limestone rocks. • Mountains of N. Greece. }Gr.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 36. S. hirsutum} All., {\i Fl. Pedem.}{\b  2}: 122 (1785) ({\i Rosularia hirsuta} (All.) Eggli). Densely glandular-hairy perennial with caespitose non-flowering shoots and terminal, erect flowering stems 5-12 cm. Leaves 5-15 mm, alternate, terete, oblanceolate. Flowers 5(6)-merous, pedicellate; buds nodding. Petals 5-7 mm, ovate, acuminate or apiculate, white or pinkish. Follicles erect, pubescent on inner side, white.{\i  Usually calcifuge. S.W. Europe, extending to N. France and N. Italy.} Ga Hs It Lu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp.{\b  hirsutum}: Leaves not more than 10 mm. Cyme with not more than 15 flowers. Petals not more than 6 × 2·5 mm, usually with a red mid-vein, free or scarcely united at the base. Styles straight. {\i Throughout the range of the species}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp.{\b  baeticum} Rouy, {\i Bull. Soc. Bot. Fr.}{\b  34}: 441 (1887) ({\i S. winkleri} (Willk.) Wolley-Dod,{\i  Umbilicus winkleri} Willk.): Leaves up to 15 mm, forming large, densely caespitose rosettes, almost with the habit of Sempervivum. Cyme with up to 24 flowers. Petals c. 9 × 4·5 mm, pure white or with green veins, united for ¼ of their length. Styles curved outwards. 2n = 58. {\i S. Spain.}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Subsp. ({\b b}) is very distinct in its extreme form, but apparently connected to subsp. ({\b a}) in S. & C. Spain by a full range of intermediates.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 37. S. villosum} L.,{\i  Sp. Pl.} 432 (1753). Usually perennial with small leafy offsets, but sometimes biennial or annual; usually glandular-pubescent, but occasionally glabrous in subarctic Europe (var.{\i  glabratum }Rostrup); stem 5-15 cm, erect. Leaves 4-7 mm, alternate, erect, linear-oblong, semiterete. Flowers 5-merous, stalked, in a small, lax panicle; lower bracts leaf-like; buds erect. Petals 4-6 mm, acute, lilac or pale pink. Stamens 10, rarely 5. Follicles erect, whitish or dark purplish-brown. 2n = 30.{\i  Wet places. W. & C. Europe, extending to W. Finland, White Russia and N. Italy}. Au Br Co Cz Fa Fe Ga Ge He Hs Is It Ju No Po ?Rm Rs(B, C) Sa Su.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b S. campanulatum} (Willk.) F. Fernández & Cantó,{\i  Lazaroa}{\b  6}: 187 (1985) differs from{\b  37} mainly by the somewhat larger, obtuse perianth-segments. It is probably best retained as {\i S. villosum} var.{\i  campanulatum} Willk.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 38. S. creticum} C. Presl, {\i Isis} ({\i Oken}){\b  21}: 273 (1828) ({\i S. hierapetrae} Rech. fil.). Perennial or biennial; stem 3-15(-20) cm, erect, usually simple, or branched from near the base, glandular-pubescent. Leaves up to 4 mm, alternate, mostly in a basal rosette, oblong-spathulate, flat, glandular-pubescent or glabrous. Flowers 5(6)-merous, on short pedicels, in a narrow, densely glandular-pubescent panicle which occupies most of the stem. Petals 5-7 mm, lanceolate, acute, greenish-white, tinged with pink. Stamens 10. Follicles erect, pubescent. 2n = 22. {\i Kriti, Karpathos.} Cr.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 39. S. cepaea} L.,{\i  Sp. Pl.} 431 (1753) ({\i S. spathulatum} Waldst. & Kit.). Annual or biennial, perhaps sometimes perennial; stem 15-40 cm, weak, erect or ascending, pubescent. Leaves mostly opposite or whorled, obovate or oblanceolate-spathulate, flat, glabrous, the lower ones petiolate. Flowers 5-merous, pedicellate, in a long, diffuse panicle. Petals 5 mm, obovate-ovate, aristate, pale pink or white with a red, pubescent mid-vein. Follicles erect, longitudinally grooved, whitish. 2n = 20, 22. {\i Shady places. S. & S.C. Europe, mainly in the mountains.} Al Bu Co Ga Gr He Hs It Ju Rm Sa Si [Ge Ho].
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 40. S. lagascae} Pau, {\i Not. Bot. Fl. Esp.}{\b  6}: 53 (1895) ({\i S. villosum} auct. lusit.). Bushy annual 6-15 cm high and about as wide, glandular-pubescent all over. Leaves 6-9 mm, alternate, broadly linear, terete. Flowers 5-merous, numerous, on rather long pedicels. Sepals 2 mm, ovate-lanceolate. Petals c. 7 mm, ovate-oblong, pale pink, yellowish at the connate base. Stamens 10. Follicles erect, whitish; styles fairly long.{\i  C. & S. Spain, Portugal}. Hs Lu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 41. S. pedicellatum} Boiss. & Reuter,{\i  Diagn. Pl. Nov. Hisp.} 13 (1842). Glabrous annual or sometimes perennial; stem 3-12 cm, erect, much branched above. Leaves 2-5 mm, alternate, patent, ovoid-cylindrical, glaucous. Flowers 5-merous, rather few, pedicellate, in a lax cyme. Petals 3 mm, elliptical, white with a pink dorsal line. Stamens 10. Follicles erect, brown; styles straight, rather short. Seeds pyriform, brown.{\i  Gravelly places in the mountains. • N. Portugal & C. Spain}. Hs Lu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Plants from Portugal differ from those from C. Spain in their smaller, more strongly ridged seeds, and their usually more compact habit, and have been separated as subsp. {\b lusitanicum} (Mariz) Laínz,{\i  Aport. Fl. Gallega}{\b  6}: 16 (1968) ({\i S. willkommianum} R. Fernandes).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 42. S. arenarium} Brot.,{\i  Fl. Lusit. }{\b 2}: 212 (1805). Glabrous annual, branched from the base, with ascending branches. Leaves 3-5 mm, ovoid, spurred. Flowers 5-merous, subsessile, in short, spreading cymes, the bracts leaf-like. Sepals often unequal. Petals c. 3 mm, white tinged with pink. Stamens 10. Styles straight, rather short. Seeds orange-brown to red. •{\i  Portugal, W. & C. Spain.} Hs Lu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Often included under 26 but apparently quite distinct in its annual habit.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 43. S. atratum} L.,{\i  Sp. Pl.} ed. 2, 1673 (1763). Glabrous annual; stem 3-12 cm, with erect branches. Leaves 3-9 mm, alternate, oblong or obovoid-clavate, tapered and flattened towards the base. Flowers 5- or 6-merous, shortly pedicellate, in a crowded corymb. Stamens 10-12. Follicles stellate-patent; styles short, deflexed.{\i  Somewhat calcicole. • Mountains of C. & S. Europe, from the French Jura and Carpathians to N. Spain, Calabria and Greece.} Al Au Bu Cz Ga Ge Gr He Hs It Ju Po Rm Rs(W).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp.{\b  atratum} : Dwarf, with stem unbranched below. Petals cream-coloured, lined or suffused with red, acute, only slightly exceeding the sepals. Plant usually dark red. 2n = 16.{\i  Throughout the range of the species, but rare in the Balkan peninsula.}
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b carinthiacum} (Hoppe ex Pacher) D.A. Webb,{\i  Feddes Repert.}{\b  69}: 62 (1964): Taller, with stem usually branched from the base. Petals pale greenish-yellow, scarcely tinged with red, obtuse, twice as long as the sepals. Plant greenish, only slightly flushed with red. 2n = 32.{\i  E. Alps and Balkan peninsula}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 44. S. confertiflorum} Boiss.,{\i  Diagn. Pl. Or. Nov.}{\b  1} ({\b 3}): 15 (1843). Glabrous annual; stem 2-8(-10) cm, erect or ascending. Leaves 4 6(-10) mm, alternate, oblong-linear, semiterete. Flowers 5-merous, subsessile, in a crowded corymb. Sepals glandular
\par

\par
435}
\par