{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 A very variable plant, especially in the size and shape of the leaves. Some segregates, especially {\b S. micranthum} DC. in Lam. & DC.,{\i  Fl. Fr.} ed. 3, {\b 5}: 523 (1815) ({\i S. album} subsp. {\i micranthum} (DC.) Syme), from S.W. & S.C. Europe, with short stems, small flowers and rather short leaves, are sufficiently striking to have been given specific or subspecific rank, but intermediate plants are so numerous as to make their diagnosis impossible.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 24. S. gypsicola} Boiss. & Reuter, {\i Diagn. Pl. Nov. Hisp.} 14 (1842). Like {\b 23} in habit, inflorescence and flowers, but with flatter, ovate-rhombic, greyish, densely puberulent leaves, closely imbricate in 5 rows on the sterile shoots. 2n = 68, 102. {\i C. & S. Spain}. Hs.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 25. S. subulatum} (C.A. Meyer) Boiss.,{\i  Fl. Or.}{\b  2}: 783 (1872). Like larger variants of{\b  23} but erect flowering shoots glabrous throughout; often taller, with linear-subulate, acuminate leaves 10 × 1·5 mm; inflorescence more compact, with shorter pedicels; petals 5-6 mm; styles almost equalling the ovaries. 2n = 18. {\i  S.E. Russia.} Rs(E). ({\i S.W. Asia}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 26. S. anglicum} Hudson,{\i  Fl. Angl.} ed. 2,196 (1778). Glabrous, laxly caespitose perennial with creeping stems bearing short non-flowering shoots and flowering stems up to 15 cm, but usually much less. Leaves 3-5 mm, cylindrical, ovoid or subglobose, gibbous, spurred, alternate, often pink. Flowers 5-merous, usually rather crowded in a small cyme with 2 or 3 branches and leaf-like bracts. Sepals free, spurred. Petals 2·5-4·5 mm, acute to acuminate, pink or white. Stamens 10, with blackish anthers. Follicles red, stellate-patent. Seeds orange-brown to red. {\i Calcifuge. W. Europe, extending to S.W. Sweden}. Br Ga Hb Hs Lu No Su.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Variable in the southern part of its range; three subspecies, differing chiefly in size, can be recognized.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Flowering stems 10-15 cm; leaves c. 5 mm;
   cymes lax ..................................................................... ({\b b}) subsp. {\b pyrenaicum}
\par
1 Flowering stems seldom more than 7 cm; leaves 3-4(-5) mm;
\par
   cymes short, dense
\par
2 Flowering stems 2-3·5 cm, very slender;
\par
  petals c. 3 mm ......................................................... ({\b c}) subsp. {\b melanantherum}
\par
2 Flowering stems 3-7 cm, stouter; petals 4-4·5 mm .......... ({\b a}) subsp. {\b anglicum}
\par

\par
 ({\b a}) Subsp.{\b  anglicum} : Flowering stems 3-7 cm, slender. Leaves 3-4(-5) mm. Cymes short, dense. Petals 4-4·5 mm. 2n = 120, c. 144. ......149{\i  N. Spain to Sweden}.
\par
 ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b pyrenaicum} Lange,{\i  Ind. Sem. Horto Haun.}{\b  1857}: 27 (1857) ({\i S. pyrenaicum} Lange): Flowering stems 10-15 cm. Leaves c. 5 mm. Cymes lax. Petals 2·5-4·5 mm. 2n = 24-36. •{\i  S. France, N. Spain, Portugal.}
\par
 ({\b c}) Subsp.{\b  melanantherum} (DC.) Maire in Jahandiez & Maire, {\i Cat. Pl. Maroc }{\b 2}: 324 (1932) ({\i S. melanantherum} DC.): Flowering stems 2-3·5 cm, very slender (more slender than those of subsp. ({\b a})). Cymes short, dense. Petals c. 3 mm. 2n = 26. {\i Mountains of S. Spain.}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 27. S. stefco} Stefanov, {\i God. Sof. Univ.} ({\i Agro.-Les. Fak}.){\b  24}({\b 2}): 105 (1946). Small, glabrous perennial; flowering stems 7-10 cm. Leaves 4-5 × 1·5 mm, cylindrical, alternate, bright pink. Flowers 4-merous, shortly stalked, in a rather dense cyme. Petals 4-5 mm, acute, suberect, pale pink. Stamens 8. Follicles stellate-patent; styles very short. Seeds brown. 2n = 14.•  {\i  Mountains of S.W. Bulgaria and N. Greece.} Bu Gr.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 28. S. dasyphyllum} L.,{\i  Sp. Pl}. 431 (1753) ({\i S. nebrodense} Gaspar.). Perennial 3-12 cm, glandular-pubescent at least on the inflorescence and sometimes all over, usually pruinose and ringed with greyish-pink. Leaves ovoid or suborbicular, flattened on upper surface, mostly opposite, loosely imbricate on the non-flowering shoots. Flowers 5- or 6-merous, stalked, in small bracteate cymes. Petals 3 mm, white streaked with pink. Stamens 10 or 12. Follicles nearly erect; style short, turned sharply outwards. Seeds ovoid, pale brown. 2n = 28, 42, 56.{\i  S. Europe and parts of C. Europe; naturalized in the north-west.} Al Au Bl Bu Co Ga Ge Gr He Hs It Ju Rm Sa Si [Be Br Da Hb Ho].
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 29. S. brevifolium} DC.,{\i  Rapp. Voy. Bot.}{\b  2}: 79 (1808) ({\i S. cineritium} Pau). Like {\b 28} but quite glabrous, with wiry, somewhat woody stems; leaves globose, usually opposite, closely imbricate in 4 rows on the non-flowering shoots, rarely alternate; styles longer; seeds brown, pyriform. {\i S.W. Europe.} Co Ga Hs Lu Sa.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 30. S. monregalense} Balbis,{\i  Mém. Acad. Sci.} ({\i Turin}) {\b 7}: 339 (1804) ({\i S. cruciatum} Desf.). Perennial, with suberect non-flowering shoots and erect flowering stems 7-15 cm high, glandular-pubescent above. Leaves 6 mm, opposite below, in whorls of 4 above, oblong-lanceolate, flat on upper surface, obtuse, glabrous. Flowers 5-merous, on long pedicels in a lax panicle. Petals white, lanceolate, acuminate, with pubescent mid-vein. Stamens 10. Follicles suberect, with long, straight styles.{\i  Shady mountain rocks. • S.W. Alps; Appennini; Corse.} Co Ga It.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 31. S. magellense} Ten.,{\i  Prodr. Fl. Nap.} xxvi (1811). Glabrous perennial with ascending flowering stems 6-15 cm. Leaves 6-10 mm, alternate or opposite, obovate-oblong, flat, obtuse. Flowers 5-merous, pedicellate; inflorescence simple, racemose. Petals lanceolate, acute, whitish. Stamens 10. Follicles erect, obtuse, shortly mucronate. 2n = 28, 30.{\i  Mountains of S.E. Europe, extending to C. Italy.} Al Bu Cr Gr It Ju.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Plants from S. Italy and the Balkan peninsula differ from the typical plants of C. Italy in their smaller, broader and constantly opposite leaves, and have been distinguished as subsp. {\b olympicum} (Boiss.) Greuter & Burdet in Greuter, Burdet & Long,{\i  Med Checklist }{\b 3}: 24 (1986).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 32. S. alsinifolium} All.,{\i  Fl. Pedem. }{\b 2}: 119 (1785). Delicate, glandular-pubescent annual; flowering stems 10-15 cm, weak and spreading. Leaves 10-15(-20) mm, alternate, oblong to elliptical, relatively thin, the lower petiolate. Flowers 5-merous, on long, slender pedicels, in a leafy, very lax panicle. Petals 5-6 mm, ovate-rhombic, acuminate, white. Stamens 10; filaments 3·5-5 mm. Follicles whitish, erect, pubescent. 2n = 26.{\i  Shady, schistose rocks and caves. • N.W. Italy.} It.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 33. S. fragrans} 't Hart,{\i  Bot. Helvet. }{\b 93}: 277 (1983). Like {\b 32} but perennial, with short, rosette-like non-flowering shoots; leaves elliptical to suborbicular; petals 3-5 mm; filaments 2-3 mm. 2n = 20.{\i  Shady, calcareous rocks and caves. Maritime Alps.} Ga It.
\par

\par
   {\b 34. S. tristriatum} Boiss., {\i Diagn. Pl. Or. Nov.}{\b  2}({\b 10}): 16 (1849). Glandular-pubescent perennial, with caespitose, rosette-like non-flowering shoots; flowering stems 2-10 cm, ascending, arising in the axils of lower leaves of the rosette. Rosette-leaves oblong-spathulate, almost flat; cauline leaves obovate, semiterete, alternate. Flowers 5(6)-merous, borne in groups of 4-7(-15) in a lax cyme on each flowering shoot. Sepals 1-2 mm, ovate-triangular. Petals narrowly ovate-elliptical, aristate, pale pink with darker stripes,
\par

\par
434}
\par