{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 narrower petals than are found in the plants of northern Europe, and have been distinguished as subsp. {\b neglectum} (Ten.) Rouy & Camus, {\i Fl. Fr.}{\b  7}: 112 (1901), but the two subspecies are connected by a wide band of intermediates in S.C. Europe.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 16. S. urvillei} DC.,{\i  Prodr.}{\b  3}: 408 (1828) ({\i S. sartorianum} Boiss.,{\i  S. sartorianum} subsp. {\i stribrnyi} (Velen.) D.A. Webb, S. sartorianum subsp. {\i hillebrandtii} (Fenzl) D.A. Webb, S. sartorianum subsp. {\i ponticum} (Velen.) D.A. Webb, S. laconicum sensu Stoj. & Stefanov). Glabrous; stems 5-20 cm, erect or ascending. Leaves 4-8(-15) mm, conical to oblong-linear, spurred, rather densely imbricate on the usually clavate non-flowering shoots; lower part of the stems clothed with rather coriaceous dead leaves which are white in their basal ½ but black or grey towards the apex. Cymes with 3-8(-15) flowers. Follicles brown. Seeds reddish-brown. 2n = 32, 48, 64, 80, 96, 112, 128.{\i  Danube basin and Balkan peninsula.} Al Au Bu Cz Gr Hu Ju Rm Rs(It) Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Very variable, but representing an almost continuous range of variation. Plants with more numerous flowers in each cyme and pale yellowish-brown seeds have been described as {\i S. hillebrandtii} Fenzl. They occur in the Danube basin and may deserve recognition as a subspecies of 16.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 17. S. laconicum} Boiss. & Heldr. in Boiss., Diagn. Pl. Or. Nov. 1(6): 55 (1846). Glabrous. Leaves 5-8 mm, more or less terete, broadly linear or narrowly ellipsoidal, acute with hyaline papillae at the apex. Flowering stems 4-15 cm, simple, bearing below the usually small and crowded terminal cyme one or more small, subsidiary, axillary cymes of 1-3 flowers. Petals 3-5 mm, apiculate-aristate, bright yellow with a red mid-vein or red streaks. Follicles erecto-patent, with white margins. Seeds pale brown. 2n = 16. {\i  Mountains of Greece and Kriti.} Cr Gr.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Var.{\i  insulare }Rech. fil. ({\i S. idaeum} D.A. Webb), from the mountains of Kriti (Levka Ori), is perennial with flowering stems 1-4(-6) cm and an inflorescence with fewer flowers, sometimes having red anthers.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 18. S. grisebachii} Boiss. & Heldr. in Boiss.,{\i  Diagn. Pl. Or. Nov.}{\b  3}({\b 2}): 61 (1856) ({\i S. racemiferum} (Griseb.) Halácsy). Glabrous, with erect or ascending, sometimes numerous, slender flowering stems usually 2-5 cm, and a few short non-flowering shoots. Leaves 5-6 mm, linear-oblong to oblanceolate, semiterete, bearing at the apex a few large, hyaline papillae. Petals 4-6 mm, about 1½ times as long as the sepals, pale yellow. Styles slender. Seeds reddish-brown. •{\i  From E. Albania to S.W. Bulgaria and E.C. Greece; S. Carpathians.} Al Bu Gr Ju Rm.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 A variable species in which at least two subspecies can be recognized.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b grisebachii }(incl. {\i S. kostovii} Stefanov): Annual or perennial. Flowering stems up to 15 cm. Inflorescence lax with up to 35 flowers. 2n = 16, 32.{\i  Mostly in the lowlands. Bulgaria and N. Greece}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp.{\b  flexuosum} (Wettst.) Greuter & Burdet in Greuter, Burdet & Long,{\i  Med-Checklist}{\b  3}: 20 (1986) ({\i S. flexuosum} Wettst.,{\i  S. horakii} (Rohlena) Rohlena): Perennial. Stems not more than 6 cm, bearing about 8 flowers. 2n = 16.{\i  Mountains, usually above} 1500 {\i m. Throughout most of the range of the species}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 19. S. alpestre} Vill.,{\i  Prosp. Pl. Dauph.}{\b  49} (1779) ({\i S. repens} Schleicher, {\i S. erythraeum} Griseb.). Non-flowering shoots numerous, very short; flowering stems 5-8 cm, ascending. Leaves 4-6 mm, somewhat flattened, oblong- to elliptic-oblanceolate, very shortly spurred, often streaked with red. Flowers in short, dense, terminal cymes. Petals 3·5-4 mm (only slightly exceeding the sepals), oblong, subacute, dull yellow. Follicles dark red, gibbous, stellate-patent, with a double wing on the adaxial side; styles very short, deflexed. Seeds pale brown. 2n = 16. {\i  Somewhat calcifuge. Mountains of C. & S. Europe,from the Vosges and the Carpathians to the Pyrenees, Sardegna and Macedonia.} Au Bu Co Cz Ga Ge Gr He Hs It Ju Po Rm Rs(W) Sa.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 20. S. tuberiferum} Stoj. & Stefanov,{\i  Notizbl. Bot. Gart. Berlin }{\b 11}: 1013 (1934). Stems up to 12 cm, sparingly branched, arising from subterranean, tuberous rhizome. Leaves minutely hyaline-papillose; on the non-flowering shoots 3-4 mm, lanceolate-spathulate; on the flowering stems 6-8 mm, oblong-linear, with a 3-lobed, whitish spur. Flowers shortly pedicellate, in a rather lax cyme. Petals oblong-lanceolate, acuminate, at least twice as long as the sepals, pale yellow. Follicles brown, distinctly gibbous, stellate-patent; styles fairly long, upturned. Seeds brown. 2n = 32. • {\i Mountains of W. Bulgaria and N. Greece; local}. Bu Gr.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 21. S. sexangulare} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 430 (1753) ({\i S. boloniense} Loisel.,{\i  S. mite} auct.). Glabrous, laxly caespitose; flowering stems 6-15 cm. Leaves 3-6 mm, bright green, cylindrical-linear, spurred, closely imbricate on the non-flowering shoots, usually in 5 or 6 regular rows. Flowers subsessile in moderately lax cymes with spreading branches. Petals 4-5 mm, acute or acuminate, bright yellow. Follicles dark brown, nearly symmetrical, erecto-patent; styles long and slender. Seeds 0·3 mm, subglobose, pale brown. 2n = 74, 111, 148, 185.{\i  Mainly in C. Europe, extending locally to C. France, C. Italy, S.W. Jugoslavia and W. Ukraine; doubtfully native in S. Fennoscandia.} ?Al Au Be ?Bu Cz *Da *Fe Ga Ge ?Gr He Ho Hu It Ju Po Rm Rs(*B, C, W) *Su [Br].
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 An outlying population in N.E. Bulgaria has been distinguished as{\b  S. tschernokolevii} Stefanov ex Valev in Jordanov,{\i  Fl. Rep. Pop. Bulg.}{\b  4}: 629 (1970), but the differences scarcely justify specific separation.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Plants from the mountains of C. Greece that have somewhat compressed, oblong-ellipsoidal glaucous leaves, slightly larger sepals and narrower petals, and a chromosome number of 2n = 44, have been distinguished as{\b  S. apoleipon} 't Hart, {\i Willdenowia }{\b 13}: 310 (1983).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 22. S. borissovae} Balk.,{\i  Not. Syst.} ({\i Leningrad}) {\b 15}: 85 (1953). Like {\b 21} but leaves grey-green and minutely papillose, ellipsoid-oblong and not or shortly spurred; petals pale yellow; follicles larger; seeds 0·7 mm, 2-3 times as long as wide.{\i  Granite rocks. • S. Ukraine} ({\i near Dolinsky}). Rs(W).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   {\b 23. S. album} L.,{\i  Sp. Pl.} 432 (1753) ({\i S. vermiculifolium} P. Fourn.; incl.{\i  S. athoum} DC.,{\i  S. serpentini} Janchen). Laxly caespitose perennial, densely glandular-pubescent at base, with creeping, woody stems bearing short non-flowering shoots and erect flowering stems 5-18 cm. Leaves 4-20 mm, subterete but somewhat flattened on upper surface, obtuse, scarcely spurred, linear-cylindrical to ovoid-globose, usually reddish, patent or suberect, alternate. Flowers 5-merous, shortly stalked, in a freely branched, rather dense, bracteate subcorymbose cyme. Sepals united at the base. Petals 2-4 mm, subacute, white (rarely pink). Stamens 10. Follicles whitish-pink, erect. 2n = 34, 51, 68, 102, 136.{\i  Europe, except for parts of the north and east.} All except Az Fa Is Rs(N, C, E) Sb; only as a naturalized alien in Hb.
\par

\par
433}
\par