{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 19 Sepals 5-7 mm; inflorescence erect in bud .......................... {\b 10. montanum}
\par
19 Sepals 3-4 mm; inflorescence usually drooping in bud ........... {\b 11. rupestre}
\par
11 Follicles ± patent
\par
20 Perennial ...................................................................... ({\b 15-22}). {\b acre} group
\par
20 Annual or biennial
\par
21 Petals 2-3 times as long as the sepals; stamens 10 ................... {\b 46. annuum}
\par
21 Petals scarcely exceeding the sepals; stamens usually 5 ......... {\b 47. litoreum}
\par
10 Petals blue, pink or pure white
\par
22 Stamens equal in number to the petals
\par
23 Flowers sessile or subsessile
\par
24 Leaves ciliate-denticulate ........................................................ {\b 48. aetnense}
\par
24 Leaves glabrous, entire
\par
25 Leaves linear to elliptical, patent ............................................... {\b 49. rubens}
\par
25 Leaves ovoid, imbricate ..................................................... {\b 50. caespitosum}
\par
23 Flowers distinctly pedicellate
\par
26 Biennial; leaves glandular-pubescent ...................................... {\b 37. villosum}
\par
26 Annual; leaves glabrous
\par
27 Leaves ovoid or subglobose .............................................. {\b 51. andegavense}
\par
27 Leaves linear-oblong ............................................................. {\b 52. nevadense}
\par
22 Stamens twice as many as the petals
\par
28 Perennial (except 32), with leafy non-flowering shoots
\par
29 Plant glabrous throughout
\par
30 Flowers 4-merous ......................................................................... {\b 27. stefco}
\par
30 Flowers 5- to 9-merous
\par
31 Leaves distinctly flattened, at least on upper side
\par
32 Flowers 5-merous; styles c. 0·25 mm; follicles erect .......... {\b 31. magellense}
\par
32 Flowers 6- to 9-merous; styles e. 0·75 mm; follicles
\par
   stellate-patent ........................................................................ {\b 53. hispanicum}
\par
31 Leaves ± terete
\par
33 Leaves of non-flowering shoots opposite, 4-ranked ........... {\b 29. brevifolium}
\par
33 Leaves of non-flowering shoots alternate
\par
34 Leaves subulate, acuminate .................................................. {\b 25. subulatum}
\par
34 Leaves linear to ovoid-globose, obtuse
\par
35 Leaves spurred ........................................................................ {\b 26. anglicum}
\par
35 Leaves scarcely spurred ...................................................... {\b 29. brevifolium}
\par
29 Plant pubescent or puberulent-papillose in part
\par
36 Leaves mostly opposite or whorled
\par
37 Leaves ovoid, never whorled ............................................ {\b 28. dasyphyllum}
\par
37 Leaves oblong-lanceolate, the upper whorled ................. {\b 30. monregalense}
\par
36 Leaves all alternate
\par
38 Leaves glabrous ........................................................................... {\b 23. album}
\par
38 Leaves pubescent or puberulent-papillose
\par
39 Leaves not much longer than wide
\par
40 Leaves semiterete, puberulent-papillose, sessile .................... {\b 24. gypsicola}
\par
40 Leaves flat, glandular-pubescent, the lower petiolate
\par
41 Plant annual; petals 5-6 mm ............................................... {\b 32. alsinifolium}
\par
41 Plant perennial; petals 3-5 mm ................................................. {\b 33. fragrans}
\par
39 Leaves at least twice as long as wide
\par
42 Flowers 6- to 9-merous; follicles stellate-patent ................. {\b 53. hispanicum}
\par
42 Flowers 5(6)-merous; follicles erect
\par
43 Leaves flat .......................................................................... {\b 32. alsinifolium}
\par
43 At least the cauline leaves terete or semi-terete
\par
44 Peduncles arising from axils of rosette-leaves
\par
45 Sepals ovate-triangular; follicles erect ................................. {\b 34. tristriatum}
\par
45 Sepals oblong; follicles stellate-patent ............................... {\b 35. tymphaeum}
\par
44 Peduncles terminal
\par
46 Buds drooping; carpels white; on dry rocks ............................ {\b 36. hirsutum}
\par
46 Buds erect; carpels green or purple; in wet places .................. {\b 37. villosum}
\par
28 Annual or biennial; no non-flowering shoots present at flowering season
\par
47 Petals blue ............................................................................. {\b 55. caeruleum}
\par
47 Petals white, pink or purple
\par
48 Leaves dentate or crenate ....................................................... {\b 45. stellatum}
\par
48 Leaves entire
\par
49  Leaves mostly opposite or whorled ........................................... {\b 39. cepaea}
\par
49 Leaves alternate
\par
50 Leaves pubescent
\par
51 Leaves oblong-spathulate, flat ................................................. {\b 38. creticum}
\par
51 Leaves linear to linear-oblong, terete or semiterete
\par
52 Flowers 6- to 9-merous; follicles stellate-patent ................. {\b 53. hispanicum}
\par
52 Flowers 5-merous; follicles erect
\par
53 Biennial; inflorescence rather compact and narrow;
\par
   flowers stellate ........................................................................... {\b 37. villosum}
\par
53 Annual; inflorescence lax and broad; flowers campanulate .... {\b 40. lagascae}
\par
50 Leaves glabrous
\par
54 Leaves terete, at least in apical ½
\par
55 Pedicels much longer than the calyx ................................. {\b 41. pedicellatum}
\par
55 Pedicels to as long as the calyx
\par
56 Leaves ovoid or ellipsoidal; branches diffuse, ascending ..... {\b 42. arenarium}
\par
56 Leaves oblong or obovoid-clavate, flattened towards the base;
\par
    branches erect ............................................................................. {\b 43. atratum}
\par
54 Leaves flat, at least on upper surface
\par
57 Leaves oblong-spathulate ........................................................ {\b 38. creticum}
\par
57 Leaves linear
\par
58 Flowers 6- to 9-merous; follicles stellate-patent ................. {\b 53. hispanicum}
\par
58 Flowers 5-merous; follicles ± erect
\par
59 Sepals united for ½ their length; petals subacute ........... {\b 44. confertiflorum}
\par
59 Sepals free almost to base; petals acuminate
\par
60 Plant glandular-pubescent above ................................................ {\b 49. rubens}
\par
60 Plant usually glabrous ............................................................. {\b 54. pallidum}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b 1. S. praealtum} A. DC. in DC. & A. DC., {\i Not. Pl. Rar. Jard. Bot. Genève}{\b  10}: 21 (1847). Bushy, evergreen, glabrous shrub up to 75 cm; stems thick, terete, green above, grey and woody below. Leaves c. 6 × 1·5 cm, oblanceolate, obtuse, thick but flattened. Flowers 5-merous, subsessile, in large, terminal panicles. Petals 6-9 mm, lanceolate, acute, bright yellow. Stamens 10. Follicles suberect, yellowish.{\i  Cultivated for ornament in parts of the Mediterranean region, and naturalized on coastal rocks in S.E. France and N.W. Italy}. [Ga It.] ({\i Mexico}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. S. aizoon} L.,{\i  Sp. Pl}. 430 (1753). Perennial; stems 30-40 cm,
\par

\par
430}
\par