{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 few, erect. Leaves 5-8 cm, alternate, lanceolate-cuneate, subacute, unequally serrate or dentate. Flowers 5-merous, in dense, compound, terminal cymes, subtended by leaves. Sepals tapered to a subulate apex: Petals 7-10 mm, acuminate, golden-yellow. Stamens 10.{\i  Locally naturalized from gardens in N. & C. Europe.} [Cz Fe Ga Ge No Su.] ({\i N. Asia.})
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 3. S. hybridum} L.,{\i  Sp. Pl.} 431 (1753). Perennial; stems woody, branched, creeping and rooting, with short non-flowering shoots and ascending flowering stems 15-20 cm. Leaves 2-3 cm, oblong-cuneate, obtuse, obtusely dentate; teeth reddish. Flowers 5-merous, numerous, in lax, terminal corymbs. Sepals obtuse. Petals 6-9 mm, acute, golden-yellow. Stamens 10.{\i  C. & S. Ural; naturalized from gardens elsewhere in N. & C. Europe.} Rs(C) [Au Cz Da Fe Ga Ge Hu No Su]. ({\i N. Asia.})
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 4. S. telephium} L., {\i Sp. Pl. }430 (1753) ({\i S. complanatum} sensu Rouy & Camus). Perennial, with tuberous roots; stems 15-80 cm, usually simple. Leaves 2-8 cm, suborbicular to narrowly oblong. Flowers 5-merous, in large, dense, terminal corymbs. Petals 3-5 mm, ovate-lanceolate, acute. Stamens 10, equalling or slightly exceeding the petals. Follicles erect; styles rather short. 2n = 24, 30, 36, 48 (other numbers reported from garden plants).{\i  Almost throughout Europe.} All except Az Bl Cr Fa Is Sb Si.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 A polymorphic complex which may be divided in Europe into four subspecies. Intermediates, some of them garden hybrids subsequently naturalized, are not uncommon, and the considerable confusion in taxonomy and nomenclature does not permit precise distributional data for the subspecies to be given. Typical members of subspp. ({\b b}), ({\b c}) and ({\b d}) appear to be characterized by chromosome numbers of 2n = 24, 48, and 48 respectively, but no counts are available for plants with intermediate characters; counts of 2n = 36 and 48 have been reported for subsp. ({\b a}).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Leaves ± ovate, sessile, often amplexicaul, usually subentire;
\par
  flowers usually greenish- or yellowish-white
\par
2 Stems 30-80 cm, erect; leaves 5-10 cm, oblong-ovate,
\par
  green or glaucous ............................................................. ({\b c}) subsp. {\b maximum}
\par
2 Stems decumbent or procumbent, 15-40 cm; leaves 2-4 cm,
\par
  suborbicular, pruinose-glaucous ...................................... ({\b d}) subsp. {\b ruprechtii}
\par
1 Leaves ± oblong, usually strongly dentate, not amplexicaul,
\par
  at least the lower ones cuneate at the base; flowers usually
\par
  purplish-red or lilac
\par
3 Upper leaves truncate at the base, sessile;
\par
  follicles dorsally grooved ............................................... ({\b a}) subsp. {\b telephium}
\par
3 Upper leaves cuneate at the base, sometimes stalked;
\par
  follicles not grooved ............................................................ ({\b b}) subsp. {\b fabaria}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp.{\b  telephium} ({\i S. purpurascens} Koch, {\i S. complanatum} sensu Coutinho, {\i S. purpureum} Schultes): Stems 25-60 cm, erect. Leaves 5-8 cm, narrowly ovate-oblong, irregularly dentate, the upper truncate, the lower cuneate; not glaucous, often red-spotted. Flowers purplish-red or lilac, rarely white. Carpels grooved on outer side.{\i  Chiefly in C. & E. Europe}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp.{\b  fabaria }(Koch) Kirschleger,{\i  Fl. Alsace }{\b 1}: 284 (1852) ({\i S. fabaria} Koch,{\i  S. carpaticum} G. Reuss): Stems 20-40 cm, erect. Leaves 4-7 cm, oblong-lanceolate, dentate, cuneate, the lower ones stalked; not glaucous. Flowers purplish-red or lilac. Carpels not grooved. {\i Chiefly in W. & C. Europe}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b c}) Subsp.{\b  maximum} (L.) Krocker, {\i Fl. Siles. }{\b 2}: 64 (1790) ({\i S. maximum} (L.) Suter,{\i  S. stepposum} Boiss.,{\i  S. haematodes} Miller): Stems 30-80 cm, erect. Leaves 4-10 cm, ovate or broadly oblong bluntly dentate or subentire, truncate or cordate-amplexicaul, alternate, opposite or whorled, sometimes glaucous. Flowers greenish- or yellowish-white, rarely purple.{\i  Much of Europe, but local in the west}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b d}) Subsp.{\b  ruprechtii} Jalas,{\i  Ann. Bot. Soc. Zool.-Bot. Fenn. Vanamo}{\b  26}: 33 (1954) ({\i S. telephium} sensu Boriss.): Stems 15-40 cm, decumbent or procumbent. Leaves 2-5 cm, suborbicular, dentate or subentire, cordate-amplexicaul, opposite, glaucous-pruinose. Flowers whitish. {\i N.E. Europe.}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 5. S. ewersii} Ledeb.,{\i  Icon. Pl. Fl. Ross.}{\b  1}: 14 (1829). Perennial, with procumbent woody stems from which arise ascending non-flowering and flowering shoots 10-20 cm. Leaves 15-20 mm, broadly ovate to orbicular, subentire, cordate, opposite, glaucous, spotted. Flowers 5-merous, in a dense, convex corymb. Petals 4-5 mm, acute, pink or mauve. Stamens 10. Follicles erect, with short, out-turned styles.{\i  Naturalized from gardens in Fennoscandia.} [Fe No Su.] ({\i C. Asia, Himalaya}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 6. S. anacampseros} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 430 (1753). Perennial; non-flowering shoots procumbent, with terminal leaf-rosettes; flowering stems 15-25 cm, ascending. Leaves 12-25 mm, alternate, ovate-elliptical, obtuse, entire, glaucous. Inflorescence and flowers as in 5, but flowers sometimes 4-merous; petals glaucous-lilac outside and dull, deep red inside; styles straight. 2n = 36.{\i  Calcifuge. • Pyrenees, S.W. Alps, Appennini.} Ga He Hs It [No].
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 7. S. spurium} Bieb.,{\i  Fl. Taur.-Cauc.}{\b  1}: 352 (1808) ({\i S. oppositifolium} Sims). Perennial; stems procumbent, rooting; non-flowering shoots short; flowering stems longer, procumbent or ascending. Leaves c. 25 × 12 mm, obovate or rhombic-cuneate, shortly petiolate, crenate or bluntly dentate towards the apex. Flowers 5-merous, subsessile, in rather dense corymbs. Sepals subulate, obtuse. Petals 10-12 mm, erect, linear-oblong, acuminate reddish-purple, pink or white. Stamens 10. 2n = 28.{\i  Naturalized from gardens in many parts of Europe}. [Au Be Br Cz Da Fe Ga Ge Hb He Ho Hs Hu It No Po Rs(K) Su] ({\i Caucasus}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 8. S. sediforme} (Jacq.) Pau,{\i  Actas Mem. Prim. Congr. Nat. Esp. Zaragoza} 246 (1909), non Hamet ( {\i S. altissimum} Poiret, {\i S. nicaeense} All., {\i S. ochroleucum} auct.). Robust, glabrous, somewhat glaucous perennial with ascending flowering stems 25-60 cm and shorter non-flowering shoots, both woody at the base. Leaves oblong or narrowly ellipsoidal, thick but somewhat flattened on the upper surface, usually apiculate or mucronate, shortly spurred, suberect closely imbricate in spiral rows on the non-flowering shoots. Inflorescence without bracts, erect and subglobose in bud, with strongly recurved branches, concave in fruit. Flowers 5- to 8-merous, on very short pedicels. Sepals c. 2·5 mm, ovate, obtuse or mucronate, glabrous. Petals 5-8 mm, patent, greenish-white or straw-coloured. Stamens 10-16. Follicles erect, pale yellow or greenish-white. 2n = 32, 64, 96. {\i Mediterranean region, extending to Portugal, N. Spain and C. France.} Al Bl Co Cr Ga Gr Hs It Ju Lu Sa Si Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 9. S. ochroleucum} Chaix in Vill.,{\i  Hist. Pl. Dauph.}{\b  1}: 325 (1786) ({\i S. anopetalum} DC.). Fairly robust perennial, with short, more or less procumbent non-flowering shoots and erect or ascending flowering stems 15-40 cm, both woody at the base. Leaves 10-15 mm, terete, linear-cylindrical, acuminate, spurred, suberect, loosely imbricate on the non-flowering shoots. Inflorescence bracteate, erect in bud, corymbose, with branches scarcely re-
\par

\par
431}
\par