{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\i septentrionalis }Schott). Tall tree with conical crown, slender, straight trunk and thin bark.{\i  Baltic coast}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\i Group III} (var.{\i  scotica} (Willd.) Schott). Crown long remaining pyramidal, rounded only in old trees; bark thin at least above.{\i  Scotland}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\i Group IV} (var.{\i  aquitana} Schott; var.{\i  brigantiaca} Gaussen; var.{\i  catalaunica} Gaussen; var.{\i  hercynica} Münch; var.{\i  iberica} Svob.; var. {\i pyrenaica} Svob.; var. {\i vindelica} Schott). Crown conical; trunk straight; branches at right-angles to trunk; bark thin, with large scales.{\i  Mountains of W. Europe from C. Spain to C. Germany and the W. Alps}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\i Group V} (var.{\i  batava} Schott; var.{\i  borussica} Schott; var.{\i  carpatica} Klika; var.{\i  engadinensis} Heer; var.{\i  haguenensis} Loudon; var. {\i ilyrica} Svob.; var.{\i  nevadensis} Christ; var.{\i  pannonica }Schott; var. {\i rhodopaea} Svob.; var. {\i romanica} Svob.; var.{\i  sarmatica} Zapal.; var.{\i  vocontiana} Guinier & Gaussen). Trunk crooked; branches at an acute angle to the trunk; crown broad, rounded; bark thick, deeply fissured.{\i  Lowlands, and foothills of mountain ranges of C. Europe, extending eastwards to Russia and southwards to the N. Appennini; Sierra Nevada}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Var.{\i  uralensis} Fischer, from Ural, and var.{\i  cretacea} (Kalenicz.) Fomin, from Ukraine, are eastern variants of uncertain affinities.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b P. kochiana} Klotzsch ex C. Koch,{\i  Linnaea}{\b  22:} 296 (1849) is like{\b  7} but has leaves 1 mm wide and a slightly shining cone with strongly keeled apophyses and a shortly mucronate umbo. It occurs in Ukraine (where it has been called{\i  P. fominii} Kondrat. or{\b  P. hamata} (Steven) D. Sosn.). The status of this plant is uncertain; it is perhaps not clearly separable from P. armena C. Koch,{\i  Linnaea}{\b  22}: 297 (1849), from Caucasus.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 8. P. mugo} Turra, {\i Gior. Ital. Sci. Nat. Agric. Arti Commerc. }{\b 1:} 152 (1764) ({\i P. montana} Miller, {\i P. mughus} Scop.; incl.{\i  P. pumilio} Haenke). Shrub with thick, decumbent, ascending or erect branches up to 3·5 m. Twigs green at first, becoming brown. Buds ovoid-cylindrical, very resinous. Leaves 3-8 cm × 1·5-2 mm, in pairs, bright green. Cone 2-5 × 1·5-2·5 cm, shining, subsessile, symmetrical, obtuse; apophysis flat, or convex above and concave below; umbo central or below the middle, with a small mucro. •{\i  Mountains of C. Europe and the Balkan peninsula; C. Appennini. Planted for sand-binding and shelter in N. Europe}. Al Au Bu Cz Ga Ge He It Ju Po Rm Rs(W) [Da].
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 9. P. uncinata} Miller ex Mirbel in Buffon, {\i Hist. Nat. Pl.}{\b  10:} 213 (1806) (incl.{\i  P. rotundata} Link). Like {\b 8} but usually a tree with an erect trunk up to 85 m; cone 5-7 × 2-3 cm; apophysis very prominent, recurved and hooked, or rounded and hooded; umbo excentric. •{\i  C. & S.W. Alps; Pyrenees; C. Spain.} Au Ga Ge He Hs It.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  There has been widespread introgressive hybridization between{\b  8} and {\b 9}, giving rise on the one hand to a variant of {\b 8} with erect branches, cone 4-5 × 2·5 mm, apophyses convex above and concave below, and an excentric umbo, sometimes recognized as{\i  P. mugo }var.{\i  pumilio} (Haenke) Zenari; and on the other hand to a variant of{\b  9} with shrubby habit and rounded or hooded apophyses, sometimes recognized as{\i  P. uncinata} var. {\i rotundata} (Link) Antoine.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 10. P. heldreichii} Christ, {\i Verh. Naturf. Ges. Basel}{\b  3}: 549 (1863). Tree up to 20 m; crown rounded-pyramidal; bark ashy-grey, flaking to leave yellowish patches. Twigs glabrous, grey only in the first year, then brown. Buds not resinous. Leaves 6-9 cm × 1·5 mm, in pairs, rigid, more or less pungent, with 2-6 layers of hypodermal cells; resin-canals 2-11, median. Cone 7-8 × 2·5 cm, slightly shining; apophysis somewhat thickened, pyramidal, with conspicuous ridges and a very short, straight mucro. Seeds c. 7 mm; wing c. 25 mm. •{\i  Mountains of C. & W. part of Balkan peninsula; S. Italy}. Al Gr Ju.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Var.{\i  heldreichii}, which has a flat apophysis, and 2 or 3 layers of hypodermal cells in the leaf, occurs only in N. Greece (Olimbos). The more widespread variant is var.{\i  leucodermis} (Antoine) Markgraf ex Fitschen ({\i P. leueodermis} Antoine).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 11. P. halepensis} Miller, {\i Gard. Dict.} ed. 8, no. 8 (1768). Tree up to 20 m; crown rounded; bark silvery-grey, becoming reddish-brown and deeply fissured. Twigs glabrous. Buds not resinous. Leaves in pairs, with 1-3 layers of hypodermal cells; resin-canals 3-8, submarginal (sometimes with 1 or 2 median). Cone 5-12 × 4 cm, shining, brown; apophysis convex. Seeds 7-8 mm; wing c. 20 mm.{\i  Mediterranean region; Krym.} Al Bl Co Cr Ga Gr Hs It Ju Rs(K) Sa Si [Lu].
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp.{\b  halepensis} : Trunk and branches often crooked. Twigs light grey for many years. Leaves 6-10(-15) cm × 0·7 mm, slender, clear green. Cones pendent; peduncle 1-2 cm. 2n = 24.{\i  Mediterranean region eastwards to Macedonia; naturalized in Portugal}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp.{\b  brutia} (Ten.) Holmboe,{\i  Bergens Mus. Skr.} ser. 2, {\b 1}({\b 2}): 29 (1914) ({\i P. brutia} Ten.,{\i  P. pityusa} Steven): Trunk and branches straight. Twigs reddish-yellow or greenish. Leaves 12-18 cm × 1-1·5 mm, thick, rigid, dark green. Cones erect or ascending; peduncle very short or absent.{\i  S.E. Europe, from Kriti to Krym}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b P. stankewiczii} (Suk.) Fomin, {\i Monit. Jard. Bot. Tiflis}{\b  34:} 21 (1914), from Krym, is similar to subsp. ({\b b}) but differs in a number of minor features such as solitary cones and wing of seed 25-27 mm. It is probably best treated as a variety of subsp. ({\b b}).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 12. P. canariensis} Sweet ex Sprengel,{\i  Syst. Veg.}{\b  3:} 887 (1826). Tree up to 30 m; bark becoming thick, slightly fissured, reddish-brown. Twigs glabrous, yellow. Buds ovoid, not resinous; scales broadly white-fringed. Leaves 20-30 cm × 1 mm, in groups of 3, slender, acute, densely crowded; resin-canals submarginal. Cone 10-20 × 4-7 cm, ovoid-conical, shortly stalked, deflexed; apophysis depressed-pyramidal; umbo not mucronate. Seeds c. 12 mm; wing c. 20 mm.{\i  Planted for timber in Italy and to a smaller extent elsewhere in the Mediterranean region.} [It.] ({\i Islas Canarias}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b P. taeda} L., {\i Sp. Pl. }1000 (1753), from S. & S.E. North America, a tree up to 50 m, with glaucous twigs, rigid leaves 12-25 cm, submarginal resin-canals, and cone 6-10 cm, is cultivated for timber on a small scale in Europe.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 13. P. pinea} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 1000 (1753). Tree up to 30 m, parasol-shaped; bark greyish-brown, flaking to leave reddish or ange patches. Twigs glabrous, greyish-green, becoming brown. Buds not resinous; scales white-fringed. Leaves 10-20 cm × 1·5-2 mm in pairs, acute; resin-canals submarginal. Cone 8-14 × 10 cm. shining, brown; apophysis weakly pyramidal. Seeds 15-20 × c. 7-11 mm; wing less than 1 mm, caducous; husk hard. {\i Mediterranean region and Portugal}. Al Bl Co Ga *Gr Hs *It *Ju Lu Sa Si *Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 The seeds, extracted from the husk, are the pine-nuts of commerce.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28       Subgen. {\b Haploxylon}      (Koehne) Pilger.

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Leaves in groups of 5, with 1 fibro-vascular bundle; scale-leaves not decurrent; umbo terminal.
\par

\par
43}
\par