{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 33 Inflorescence diffuse, with divaricate branches .................... {\b 65. haenseleri}
\par
33 Inflorescence relatively compact, with suberect branches ... {\b 66. dichotoma}
\par
32 Lower leaves not lobed or with very short, broad lobes
\par
34 Cauline leaves fairly numerous, sessile, at least the lower
\par
   somewhat pinnatifid ................................................................. {\b 67. carpetana}
\par
34 Cauline leaves (if present) shortly petiolate, entire or
\par
   shortly 3-toothed at the apex ...................................................... {\b 68. cintrana}
\par
30 Petals glabrous
\par
35 Basal leaves deeply dissected, with 3 primary lobes, which
\par
   are stalked, or at least narrowed at the base
\par
36 Stems erect, forming a fairly compact tuft;
\par
   nearly all the leaves basal ...................................................... {\b 70. gemmulosa}
\par
36 Stems diffuse, ascending, leafy ........................................... {\b 71. bourgaeana}
\par
35 Basal leaves divided for not more than 2/3 of the distance
\par
   to the base; lobes broad-based
\par
37 Petals 7-16 mm
\par
38 Leaves crenate, but scarcely lobed; flowering stem usually
\par
   branched only in upper ½ ......................................................... {\b 63. granulata}
\par
38 Leaves distinctly 3-lobed; flowering stem usually branched
\par
   from near the base ........................................................................ {\b 64. corsica}
\par
37 Petals 2-6 mm
\par
39 Lower leaves obovate ............................................................ {\b 65. haenseleri}
\par
39 Lower leaves reniform to semicircular
\par
40 Plant up to 15 cm; leaves with truncate or cordate base,
\par
   mostly 5-lobed; petals white or pink, rarely red ........................ {\b 60. rivularis}
\par
40 Plant not more than 4 cm; leaves somewhat tapered to the petiole,
\par
   mostly 3-lobed; petals red ...................................................... {\b 61. hyperborea}
\par
29 Basal leaves without bulbils in their axils
\par
41 Leaves sessile, not lobed, usually coriaceous, often lime-encrusted
\par
42 Leaves opposite
\par
43 Sepals not ciliate .......................................................................... {\b 42. retusa}
\par
43 Sepals ciliate
\par
44 Leaves hard and rigid, usually lime-encrusted, keeled beneath;
\par
   petals usually contiguous ..................................................... {\b 41. oppositifolia}
\par
44 Leaves fairly soft, rather fleshy, rarely lime-encrusted,
\par
   not keeled beneath; petals narrow, widely separated .................... {\b 43. biflora}
\par
42 Leaves alternate or basal
\par
45 Calyx campanulate or urceolate, enclosing and largely concealing
\par
   the petals
\par
46 Petals yellow ........................................................................ {\b 40. corymbosa}
\par
46 Petals pink or purple
\par
47 Most of the flowers sessile; inflorescence not branched
\par
   ............................................................................... ({\b 35-37}).{\b  porophylla} group
\par
47 Most of the flowers distinctly pedicellate; inflorescence often branched
\par
48 Inflorescence sparingly branched, with 1 or 2 flowers on
\par
   each primary branch ...................................................................... {\b 38. media}
\par
48 Inflorescence freely branched, with 3 or 4 flowers on each
\par
   primary branch ........................................................................... {\b 39. stribrnyi}
\par
45 Calyx cup-shaped or saucer-shaped, not concealing the petals
\par
49 Larger leaves at least 15 mm long
\par
50 Rosette solitary, without offsets; plant monocarpic
\par
51 Leaves glaucous, lime-encrusted, subacute; flowers white ... {\b 44. longifolia}
\par
51 Leaves dull green, not lime-encrusted, apiculate;
\par
   flowers dull pink ...................................................................... {\b 53. florulenta}
\par
50 Flowering rosettes producing offsets, which persist after
\par
   the flowering rosette has died
\par
52 Leaves spathulate, obtuse ...................................................... {\b 46. cochlearis}
\par
52 Leaves linear to oblong; if somewhat expanded near the apex,
\par
   then subacute
\par
53 Leaves ± entire; hyaline margin very narrow or absent; hydathodes opening
\par
    on the margin, not on the upper surface
\par
54 Lower branches of panicle bearing 5 or more flowers ................{\b 45. callosa}
\par
54 Lower branches of panicle bearing 1-4 flowers ........................ {\b 47. crustata}
\par
53 Leaves with a distinct, toothed or crenate hyaline margin;
\par
   hydathodes opening near the margin, but clearly on the upper surface
\par
55 Flowering stem branched from below the middle, and usually from
\par
   near the base; primary branches of inflorescence with more than
\par
   12 flowers, which are not crowded together near the apex  ..... {\b 50. cotyledon}
\par
55 Flowering stem branched from the middle or above it; primary
\par
   branches of inflorescence with not more than 12 flowers, which
\par
   are crowded together near the apex
\par
56 Basal leaves tending to curve downwards near the apex, giving
\par
   a flat or slightly convex rosette; most of the lower branches
\par
   of the panicle with at least 5 flowers .............................................. {\b 48. hostii}
\par
56 Basal leaves tending to curve upwards, giving a concave,
\par
   sometimes almost hemispherical rosette; lower branches of the
\par
   panicle with 1-3 (rarely 4) flowers ......................................... {\b 49. paniculata}
\par
49 All leaves less than 15 mm long
\par
57 Petals purple or deep pink
\par
58 Flowers solitary; leaves with 1-5 hydathodes ................... {\b 41. oppositifolia}
\par
58 Flowers 5-14, in a terminal cyme; leaves with 9-13 hydathodes
\par
   ..................................................................................................... {\b 27. scardica}
\par
57 Petals white, sometimes with red spots
\par
59 Leaves mucronate to apiculate
\par
60 Leaves not more than 5 mm long
\par
61 Mucro of leaves sharply incurved .................................... {\b 26. tombeanensis}
\par
61 Mucro of leaves straight
\par
62 Central part of leaf-margin finely toothed ................................ {\b 27. scardica}
\par
62 Central part of leaf-margin entire
\par
63 Leaves distinctly keeled beneath, curved outwards near
\par
   apex .......................................................................................... {\b 24. marginata}
\par
63 Leaves convex beneath but scarcely keeled, suberect
\par
   even at apex ....................................................................... {\b 25. diapensioides}
\par
60 Leaves at least 6 mm long
\par

\par
439}
\par