{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 papillose, connate in their lower ½ Petals 3-4 mm, subacute, white. Stamens 10. Follicles suberect, glandular-papillose; styles fairly long, straight.{\i  N.E. Greece}. Gr. ({\i Turkey}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 45. S. stellatum} L.,{\i  Sp. Pl.} 431 (1753). Glabrous annual; stem 3-15 cm, stout, erect or ascending. Leaves 10-15 mm, flat, with a short, broad petiole and suborbicular lamina, crenate or bluntly dentate, the upper alternate, the lower often opposite. Flowers 5-merous (rarely 4-merous), sessile. Sepals broadly linear, accrescent, papillose at the apex. Petals 4-5 mm, acute, white or pink. Stamens 8 or 10. Follicles stellate-patent; styles very short. 2n = 10. {\i Mediterranean region.} Al Bl Co Ga Gr It Ju Sa Si.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 46. S. annuum} L., {\i Sp. Pl. }432 (1753). Glabrous annual or biennial, often spotted or streaked with red; stem simple or branched from the base with ascending, eventually flexuous branches 4-20 cm. Leaves c. 6 mm, alternate, distant, linear-oblong, thick but flattened on both surfaces, with a whitish, truncate spur. Flowers 5-merous, subsessile or on short pedicels, in a lax, compound cyme. Petals oblanceolate, acute to acuminate, twice as long as the sepals, yellow. Stamens 10. Follicles green or red, stellate-patent. Seeds orange-red. 2n = 22, 24. {\i  N. Europe, and in most of the mountain ranges of C. & S. Europe.} Al Au Bu Co Cz Fe Ga Ge Gr He Hs Is It Ju No Rm Rs(N, B, W) Su.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Normally biennial in Fennoscandia; apparently annual in C. Europe. Var.{\i  perdurans} Murb. ({\i S. zollikoferii} F. Hermann & Stefanov), a perennial variant with decumbent branches that root in the soil, occurs sporadically in populations in the Balkan peninsula and the Carpathians.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 47. S. litoreum} Guss., {\i Pl. Rar.} 185 (1826) (incl.{\i  S. praesidis }Runemark & Greuter). Glabrous annual; stem 4-15 cm, simple or with erect branches. Leaves 10-20 mm, alternate, obovate-spathulate, flattish, shortly spurred. Flowers 5-merous, subsessile, in long, lax cymes. Petals 2·5-4 mm, equalling or slightly exceeding the sepals, lanceolate, acute to acuminate, pale yellow. Stamens 5, rarely 10. Follicles erecto-patent; styles short. 2n = 20, 40, 60.{\i  E. & C. Mediterranean region.} Co Cr Gr It Ju Sa Si [Ga].
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 48. S. aetnense} Tineo in Guss.,{\i  Fl. Sic. Syn.}{\b  2}: 826 (1845). Somewhat glaucous annual; stem 2-6 cm, erect, with short, ascending branches. Leaves 3-4 mm, alternate, erect-appressed, terete, conical-oblong, ciliate-denticulate, with a scarious spur at the base. Flowers 4- or 5-merous, sessile, axillary. Sepals ciliate. Petals 2-3 mm, white or pink. Stamens 4 or 5. Follicles erect, dark red. 2n = 26.{\i  • S. Europe; very local.} Al Bu Hs Ju Rs(W, K) Si.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 49. S. rubens} L.,{\i  Sp. Pl. }432 (1753) ({\i Crassula rubens} (L.) L.). Erect annual 2-15 cm, glandular-pubescent above, somewhat glaucous and usually reddish. Leaves 10-20 mm, alternate, or in whorls of 4 below, patent, linear, semiterete. Flowers 5-merous, sessile, in a leafy, corymbose cyme. Petals 5 mm, sharply acuminate. Follicles usually divergent at the base but suberect in upper part, glandular-tuberculate; styles long, straight.{\i  S. & W. Europe, extending to Switzerland and S.W. Germany}. Al Be Bl Bu Co Cr Ga Ge Gr He Hs It Ju Lu Rm Rs(K) Sa Si.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) subsp.{\b  rubens} : Petals white or pink. Stamens 5(-10). Follicles somewhat spreading. 2n = 20, 40-42, 60, 80, 94, 100. Throughout the range of the species.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b delicum} Vierh.,{\i  Verh. Zool.-Bot. Ges. Wien}{\b  69}: 224 (1919) ({\i S. delicum} (Vierh.) A. Carlström): Petals greenish-yellow. Stamens 10. Follicles erect. •{\i  S. Greece, Kikladhes}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 50. S. caespitosum} (Cav.) DC.,{\i  Prodr.}{\b  3}: 406 (1828) ({\i S. rubrum} (L.) Thell., non Royle ex Edgew.). Glabrous, usually reddish annual; stem 2-5 cm, erect. Leaves 3-6 mm, alternate, imbricate subterete, broadly ovoid. Flowers 4- or 5-merous, sessile in short cymes. Petals 3 mm, mucronate, white tinged with pink. Stamens 4 or 5. Follicles patent, glabrous. 2n = 12. {\i S. & S.C. Europe.} Bu Co Cr Ga Gr Hs Hu It Ju Rm Rs(K) Sa Si.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 51. S. andegavense} (DC.) Desv.,{\i  Obs. Pl. Angers} 150 (1818). Glabrous annual; stem 3-7 cm, usually erect, branched above. Leaves alternate (or lower opposite), ovoid or subglobose, imbricate, shortly spurred. Flowers 4- or 5-merous, on short pedicels in a corymbose cyme. Petals broadly ovate, mucronate, whitish or pink. Stamens 4 or 5. Follicles erect, rugose, dark brown; styles short. Seeds pyriform, brown.{\i  S.W. Europe, extending to N.W. France and C. Italy }({\i Capraia, Isole Ponziane}). Co Ga Hs It Lu Sa.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 52. S. nevadense} Cosson,{\i  Not. Pl. Crit.}{\b  2}: 163 (1849). Glabrous annual; stem 4-10 cm, erect. Leaves erect, semiterete, linear-oblong, not spurred. Flowers 5-merous, pedicellate, in a raceme-like cyme. Petals 3-4 mm, acute, connate at the base, white or pale pink. Stamens 5. Follicles erect, with short, straight styles.{\i  Mountains of S., E. & N. Spain.} Hs.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 53. S. hispanicum} L., {\i Amoen. Acad.}{\b  4}: 273 (1759) ({\i S. glaucum} Waldst & Kit., {\i S. sexfidum} Bieb.). Usually annual, but sometimes biennial or perennial; glabrous or wholly or partly covered with glandular hairs; stem 7-15 cm, branched, ascending. Leaves 7-18 mm, alternate, linear, semiterete, subacute, glaucous. Flowers 6- or 7(-9)-merous, subsessile, numerous, in unilateral bracteate cymes, the bracts leaf-like. Petals 5-7 mm, lanceolate, acuminate, white with pink mid-vein. Follicles stellate-patent, smooth or with glandular hairs, pale pink or whitish. 2n = 14, 28, 42.{\i  S.E. Europe, extending to Sicilia, Switzerland and E. Carpathians; occasionally naturalized further north. }Al Au Bu Cr Gr He Hu It Ju Rm Rs(W) Si Tu [Ge Su].
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 54. S. pallidum} Bieb.,{\i  Fl. Taur.-Cauo. }{\b 1}: 353 (1808). Like {\b 52} but usually glabrous; flowers 5-merous; petals rather smaller, pink, suberect; follicles usually suberect, dark red, glandular-tuberculate.{\i  S. part of Balkan peninsula; ?Aegean region; Krym.} Al Bu ?Cr ?Gr Ju Rs(K) Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 55. S. caeruleum} L.,{\i  Mantissa Alt.} 241 (1771) ({\i S. heptapetalum} Poiret). Bushy, erect annual 5-20 cm, often pubescent above, usually strongly tinged with red. Leaves c. 10 mm, alternate, terete, linear-oblong. Flowers many, usually 7-merous, on slender pedicels in a broad, lax panicle. Petals lanceolate, sky-blue, white at the base. Stamens twice as many as the petals. Follicles erecto-patent; styles long, straight.{\i  Islands of W. Mediterranean.} Co Sa Si.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 11.             Rhodiola}                L.
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc  By D.A. Webb.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Dioecious perennials with a thick, fleshy rhizome, bearing persistent, broad-based scale-leaves and flowering stems with alternate leaves and flowers in terminal cymes. Flowers usually 4-merous. Petals free. Stamens 8. Carpels 4. Follicles erect.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 Leaves at least 5 mm wide, flat ............................................................ {\b 1. rosea}
\par
Leaves less than 2 mm wide, terete .............................................. {\b 2. quadrifida}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. R. rosea} L.,{\i  Sp. Pl.} 1035 (1753) ({\i Sedum rosea} (L.) Scop.,
\par

\par
436}
\par