{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 {\i S. rhodiola} DC.,{\i  S. scopolii} Simonkai; incl. {\i R. arctica} Boriss., {\i R. iremelica} Boriss, {\i R. scopolii} Simonkai.). Rhizome fragrant when cut. Flowering stems 5-35 cm × 2-6 mm, erect, not persistent when dead. Leaves orbicular-ovate to linear-oblong, usually dentate, broad-based, sometimes amplexicaul, glabrous, rather glaucous. Cyme somewhat corymbose. Petals 3-4 mm, usually dull yellow, sometimes absent. Male flowers with conspicuous but abortive carpels. Follicles reddish. 2n = 22.{\i  N. Europe, and in most of the mountains of C. Europe, southwards to the Pyrenees, N. Italy and Bulgaria.} Au Br Bu Cz Fa Fe Ga Hb He Hs Is It Ju No Po Rm Rs(N, C, W) Sb Su.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Very variable. Variation in leaf-shape shows some geographical consistency (long and narrow in the south, usually short and broad in the north), but variation in other features is poorly correlated, and a satisfactory basis for division into subspecies is not yet apparent.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. R. quadrifida} (Pallas) Fischer & C.A. Meyer,{\i  Enum. Pl. Nov.} 69 (1841) ({\i Sedum quadrifidum} Pallas). Flowering stems 3-12 cm × 0·5-1 mm, erect, wiry, numerous, persistent when dead. Leaves 5-10 cm × 1-1·5 mm, narrowly linear, terete, acute. Cyme small, few-flowered. Petals 4 mm, yellow, often tipped with red. Follicles dark red.{\i  Mossy and stony tundra. N.E. Russia}. Rs(N, C). ({\i N Asia}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 The plants from Tibet and Himalaya often cited under this name appear to be very different.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 12.       Orostachys}           (DC.) Fischer ex Sweet
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc  By D.A. Webb.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Glabrous biennials with leaves in a compact, subglobose, basal rosette, from the centre of which an unbranched flowering stem arises in the second year. Leaves with a whitish cartilaginous border towards the apex, and a terminal spine. Flowers 5-merous, in a long, dense thyrsoid raceme. Petals slightly connate at the base, patent. Stamens 10. Follicles free, erect; styles slender, straight.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 Flowers subsessile, petals greenish-yellow; anthers yellow ............. {\b 1. spinosa}
\par
Pedicels of lower flowers 3-8 mm; petals white or pink;
\par
    anthers dark purple ................................................................... {\b 2. thyrsiflora}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. O. spinosa} (L.) Sweet, {\i Hort. Brit.} ed. 2, 225 (1830) ({\i Sedum spinosum} L.). Rosette-leaves 15-25 × 3-5 mm, oblong, tapered suddenly to a terminal spine 2-4 mm. Stem 10-30 cm; cauline leaves alternate, similar to the basal leaves but smaller. Raceme 5-20 cm, very dense; pedicels 0-1 mm. Petals 4 mm, lanceolate, acute, greenish-yellow. Anthers yellow. Follicles 5-6 mm.{\i  Dry rocks and stony ground. E. Russia} ({\i S. Ural}). Rs(E). ({\i N. & C. Asia.})
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. O. thyrsiflora} (DC.) Fischer ex Sweet, {\i loc. cit. }(1830). Like {\b 1} but rosette-leaves 6-8 mm, broadly elliptical or suborbicular, with a shorter spine; cauline leaves strongly keeled, almost triquetrous; raceme broader and laxer, the lower flowers clearly pedicellate; petals white or pinkish; anthers dark purple.{\i  Dry rocks and stony ground. E. Russia.} Rs(C, E). ({\i C. Asia}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 13.        Rosularia}             (DC.) Stapf
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc  By D.A. Webb.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Perennials, with a basal rosette of sessile leaves and several peduncles arising from their axils. Flowers as in {\i Umbilicus}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Literature: U. Eggli, {\i Bradleya}{\b  6}, suppl.: 1-119 (1988).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. R. serrata} (L.) A. Berger in Engler & Prantl,{\i  Natürl. Pflanzenfam.} ed. 2, {\b 18a}: 465 (1930) ({\i Cotyledon serrata} L., {\i Umbilicus serratus} (L.) DC.). Leaves 10-30 × 5-8 mm, oblong-spathulate, obtuse or subacute, glabrous; margin cartilaginous, verrucose-denticulate or almost entire. Peduncles 10-18 cm, ascending, hairy above. Flowers 6-8 mm, pedicellate, in narrow panicles. Corolla pale purplish-red to whitish, tubular-campanulate, with erect, lanceolate, acuminate lobes somewhat longer than the tube. Styles slender, straight. 2n = 18.{\i  Limestone rocks. Kriti and Karpathos.} Cr. ({\i E. Aegean islands, Anatolia.})
\par

\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 73.      SAXIFRAGACEAE}
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc  Edit. D.A. Webb
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Herbs, mostly perennial. Flowers 4- or 5-merous, usually in cymes (rarely solitary or in racemes). Petals usually 4 or 5; sometimes absent. Stamens twice as many as the sepals, or rarely equal in number or fewer. Carpels 2; united below but usually divergent above; styles free. Ovary superior, semi-inferior or almost inferior. Fruit a capsule. Seeds numerous.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b Darmera peltata} (Torrey ex Bentham) Voss, {\i Gärtn. Zentral-Bl. }{\b 1}: 645 (1899) ({\i Saxifraga peltata} Torrey ex Bentham, {\i Peltiphyllum peltatum} (Torrey ex Bentham) Engler, nom. illeg.), from California, a robust, rhizomatous perennial with peltate, orbicular leaves and corymbs of white or pink flowers, is cultivated for ornament, and is becoming locally naturalized in damp, shady places in Britain.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Petals absent .................................................................... {\b 3. Chrysosplenium}
\par
1 Petals present
\par
2 Stamens 3; petals filiform ............................................................ {\b 5. Tolmeia}
\par
2 Stamens 10; petals not filiform
\par
3 Petals laciniate-pinnatifid .............................................................. {\b 4. Tellima}
\par
3 Petals entire or emarginate
\par
4 Leaves not more than 6 cm wide; hypanthium united with lower
\par
  part of ovary, or absent ................................................................ {\b 1. Saxifraga}
\par
4 Leaves 10-15 cm wide; ovary superior, free from the
\par
  basin-shaped hypanthium ............................................................. {\b 2. Bergenia}
\par

\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 1.          Saxifraga}              L.
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc  By D.A. Webb.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Herbs, sometimes rather woody at the base; usually perennial, rarely annual or biennial. Leaves simple, but often deeply dissected and sometimes apparently ternate; usually alternate or basal, rarely opposite, exstipulate; foliar glands (other than hydathodes), if present, superficial or on hairs, not immersed as in{\i  Bergenia}. Flowers 5-merous, usually in cymes or panicles, rarely solitary in leaf-axils. Petals present; stamens 10; ovary superior or, more often, semi-inferior or inferior; placentation axile.
\par

\par
437}
\par