{\rtf1\ansi \deff4\deflang1033{\fonttbl{\f4\froman\fcharset0\fprq2 Times New Roman;}}{\colortbl;\red0\green0\blue0;\red0\green0\blue255;\red0\green255\blue255;\red0\green255\blue0;\red255\green0\blue255;\red255\green0\blue0;\red255\green255\blue0;\red255\green255\blue255;\red0\green0\blue128;\red0\green128\blue128;\red0\green128\blue0;\red128\green0\blue128;\red128\green0\blue0;\red128\green128\blue0;\red128\green128\blue128;\red192\green192\blue192;}{\stylesheet{\widctlpar \f4\fs20\lang2057 \snext0 Normal;}{\*\cs10 \additive Default Paragraph Font;}}{\info{\author dddd}{\operator dddd}{\creatim\yr1998\mo11\dy11\hr16\min57}{\revtim\yr1998\mo11\dy11\hr16\min58}{\version2}{\edmins1}{\nofpages4}{\nofwords1013}{\nofchars5777}{\*\company  }{\vern57431}}\widowctrl\ftnbj\aenddoc\hyphcaps0 \fet0\sectd \linex0 {\*\pnseclvl1\pnucrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl2\pnucltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl3\pndec\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl4\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl5\pndec\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl6\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl7\pnlcrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl8\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl9\pnlcrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}
\pard\plain \ \f4\fs20\lang2057 {\fs28 curved. Flowers 5- to 8-merous, subsessile. Sepals 5-7 mm, triangular-lanceolate, acuminate, glandular-puberulent. Petals 8-10 mm, cream or greenish-white, erect throughout anthesis. Follicles greenish, erect. 2n = 34, 68, 102. }{\i\fs28 S. Europe.}{\fs28  Al Bu Ga Gr He Hs It Ju Rm.
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 10. S. montanum}{\fs28  Perr. & Song.,}{\i\fs28  Billotia }{\b\fs28 1}{\fs28 : 77 (1864) (}{\i\fs28 S. ochroleucum }{\fs28 subsp. }{\b\fs28 montanum}{\fs28  (Perr. & Song.) D.A. Webb, }{\i\fs28 S. rupestre}{\fs28  auct., non L.). Like }{\b\fs28 9}{\fs28  but flowers usually 5-merous; petals up to 12 mm, bright yellow, patent throughout anthesis. 2n = 34, 51. \bullet }{\i\fs28  Pyrenees, Appennini, Alps and adjacent regions; Hungary.}{\fs28  Au Ga He Hs Hu It Ju.
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 11. S. rupestre}{\fs28  L., }{\i\fs28 Sp. Pl.}{\fs28  431 (1753) (}{\i\fs28 S. reflexum}{\fs28  L., }{\i\fs28 S. albescens}{\fs28  Haw.). Perennial; stems procumbent, intricate, somewhat woody; flowering stems 15-35 cm, ascending; non-flowering shoots much shorter. Leaves linear-terete, suberect (the upper ones sometimes recurved), apiculate, spurred, evenly distributed on the non-flowering shoots; dead leaves not persistent. Inflorescence bracteate, subglobose and usually drooping, in bud, concave in fruit. Flowers (5-)7(-9)-merous. Sepals 3-4 mm, lanceolate, subacute, glabrous or sparsely glandular-puberulent. Petals 6-7 mm, linear-lanceolate, patent, bright (rarely pale) yellow. Stamens 10-18.  Follicles yellow, erect. 2n = 88, 112. \bullet }{\i\fs28  From S. Fennoscandia southwards to the Pyrenees, Sicilia and N. Greece. }{\fs28 Al Be Co Cz Da Fe Ga Ge Gr He Ho Hs Hu It Ju No Po Rm Rs(B, C) Sa Si Su [Br Hb].
\par 
\par There has been much confusion in the literature between }{\b\fs28 9}{\fs28 , }{\b\fs28 10}{\fs28  and }{\b\fs28 11}{\fs28 , and many records, especially from the Balkan peninsula, require confirmation.
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 12. S. forsterianum}{\fs28  Sm. in Sowerby,}{\i\fs28  Engl. Bot.}{\b\fs28  26}{\fs28 : t. 1802 (1808) (}{\i\fs28 S. elegans}{\fs28  Lej., }{\i\fs28 S. pruinatum}{\fs28  auct., non Link ex Brot.,}{\i\fs28  S. rupestre}{\fs28  auct.). Like }{\b\fs28 11}{\fs28  but leaves flat on the upper surface and aggregated on the non-flowering shoots into dense, cone-like terminal rosettes, the rest of the shoots bearing numerous, persistent dead leaves; inflorescence ebracteate, sometimes flat-topped; sepals 2-3 mm, oblong-lanceolate, obtuse. 2n = 48, 60, 72, 96.}{\i\fs28  Often in damper places than}{\fs28  }{\b\fs28 11}{\fs28 .}{\i\fs28  W. Europe.}{\fs28  *Az Be Br Ga Ge \'86Ho Hs Lu [Hb].
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 13. S. amplexicaule}{\fs28  DC.,}{\i\fs28  Rapp. Voy. Bot.}{\fs28  80 (1808) (}{\i\fs28 S. tenuifolium}{\fs28  (Sm.) Strobl). Slender perennial with ascending non-flowering shoots covered with erect, imbricate, terete, glaucous leaves, tapered to a long, filiform apex, and expanded at the base into a broad, amplexicaul, 3-lobed spur. In midsummer those on the lower part of the shoot withered; those near the apex persistent as a compact, summer-dormant bud which unfolds and roots in autumn. Flowering stems 7-20 cm, erect; leaves less crowded and with a smaller spur. Flowers 5- to 8(-12)-merous, rather few, subsessile, in lax, unilateral bracteate cymes drooping in bud. Petals 6-8 mm, yellow with red mid-vein. Stamens 10-16(-24). Follicles yellow, erect. 2n = 24, 48, 60, 72. }{\i\fs28  Mediterranean region, extending to Bulgaria, Portugal and N. Spain.}{\fs28  Bu Cr Ga Gr Hs It Ju Lu Sa Si Tu.
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 14. S. pruinatum}{\fs28  Link ex Brot.,}{\i\fs28  Fl. Lusit.}{\b\fs28  2}{\fs28 : 209 (1805). Like }{\b\fs28 13}{\fs28  but strongly pruinose throughout; non-flowering shoots long, slender and procumbent, the leaves with a truncate (not 3-lobed) spur and an acuminate but scarcely filiform apex; the leaves of summer-dormant buds in 5 rows; inflorescence erect in bud; petals 8-12 mm, straw-coloured; follicles whitish. 2n = 26-28, 30, 36. \bullet }{\i\fs28  Portugal.}{\fs28  Lu.
\par 
\par    (}{\b\fs28 15-22}{\fs28 ). }{\b\fs28 S. acre}{\fs28  group. Perennials with short non-flowering shoots and flowering stems up to 20 cm, but often less. Leaves 3-10(-15) mm, obtuse to subacute, usually thick, often more or less terete, usually spurred at the base. Inflorescence a terminal cyme, the bracts often leaf-like. Flowers 5-merous. Sepals unequal. Petals yellow, patent. Stamens 10. Follicles gibbous, stellate-patent.
\par 
\par This group represents a complex that is still imperfectly understood. The treatment given here is provisional, and much more observation of the very varied populations of the Balkan peninsula, both in cultivation and in the field, is needed before the status and relationships of the various taxa can be fully resolved.
\par 
\par }
\pard \li200\ {\fs28 1 Leaves ovate to triangular-lanceolate, widest below the middle
\par 2 Persistent dead leaves (if present) entirely white,
\par   soft and papery ................................................................................... }{\b\fs28 15. acre}{\fs28 
\par 2 Persistent dead leaves white at the base, grey or black towards
\par   the apex, rather coriaceous ............................................................ }{\b\fs28 16. urvillei}{\fs28 
\par 1 Leaves linear, oblong, narrowly elliptical or oblanceolate,
\par    widest at or above the middle
\par 3 One or more small, axillary cymes of single flowers present
\par   on flowering stem below the terminal cyme ............................ }{\b\fs28 17. laconicum}{\fs28 
\par 3 Flowers confined to the terminal cyme
\par 4 Leaves with a few fairly large, hyaline papillae at
\par   the apex ................................................................................... }{\b\fs28 18. grisebachii}{\fs28 
\par 4 Leaves smooth or finely papillose, but without large papillae at the apex
\par 5 Leaves widest above the middle ................................................. }{\b\fs28 19. alpestre}{\fs28 
\par 5 Leaves widest at the middle, or of uniform width throughout their length
\par 6 Non-flowering shoots c. 5 mm in diameter, thickened below ground or
\par   arising from cylindrical tubers, covered with whitish scale-leaves;
\par   leaves on flowering stem with a 3-lobed spur ....................... }{\b\fs28 20. tuberiferum}{\fs28 
\par 6 Underground stems slender, not forming tubers; leaves with
\par   an entire spur or none 7 Leaves light green, smooth, c. 4 times
\par   as long as wide ...................................................................... }{\b\fs28 21. sexangulare}{\fs28 
\par 7 Leaves dull bluish-green, minutely papillose, c. 2\'bd times
\par   as long as wide ........................................................................ }{\b\fs28 22. borissovae}{\fs28 
\par 
\par }
\pard \ {\fs28    }{\b\fs28 15. S. acre}{\fs28  L., }{\i\fs28 Sp. Pl. }{\fs28 432 (1753) (}{\i\fs28 S. neglectum}{\fs28  Ten.). Glabrous, laxly caespitose, with short non-flowering shoots and flowering stems 5-12 cm. Leaves 3-6 mm, thick, elliptical in section, broadest below the middle (usually triangular-ovoid, rarely subconical), obtuse, with short, obtuse spur, rather densely imbricate on the non-flowering shoots; usually deciduous (if persistent after death, then pure white, soft and papery). Flowers 5-merous, pedicellate or subsessile, in small cymes with usually spreading branches. Sepals free, spurred. Petals 5-9 mm, acute to acuminate, bright yellow, patent. Stamens 10. Follicles gibbous, stellate-patent, yellowish-white, with long slender styles. 2n = 40, 60, 80, 100, 120.}{\i\fs28  Almost throughout Europe.}{\fs28  All except Az Bl Sa Sb Tu; only as an alien in Co.
\par 
\par Very variable in size, leaf-shape, and size of inflorescence and flowers. Many local populations have been given specific or subspecific rank, but their supposedly diagnostic features can usually be matched in regions very remote from those from which they were described. Most of the plants from the Mediterranean region have longer, more acute leaves, more numerous flowers and
\par 
\par 432}
\par }