{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 Plants of this genus are frequently cultivated, especially in C. & N.W. Europe. The majority of garden plants are complex hybrids, often of uncertain origin; among the species which have certainly contributed to such hybrids are {\b 24, 29, 31, 32, 63, 78, 79, 80, 85} and {\b 98}. The species or primary hybrids most commonly cultivated are {\b 3, 18, 20, 21, 29, 32, 36, 41, 44, 50} and{\b  84}; also{\b  24} ×{\b  32}, {\b 24} ×{\b  33},{\b  29} × {\b 32}, {\b 29} ×{\b  34}, {\b 32} ×{\b  33} and {\b 44} × {\b 45}.
\par

\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 The non-European species most widely cultivated is{\b  S. stolonifera} Meerb., {\i Afbeeld. Zeldz. Gewass}. t. 23 (1777) ({\i S. sarmentosa} L.), from China and Japan, with orbicular leaves, long, filiform stolons and strongly zygomorphic flowers. It has been reported as occasionally naturalized on walls in W., C. & S. Europe.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Literature: A. Engler & E. Irmscher,{\i  Pflanzenreich}{\b  67} & {\b 69} ({\b IV.117}): 1-709 (1916-19). H.W. Pugsley,{\i  Jour. Linn. Soc. London }({\i Bot}.) {\b 50}: 267-289 (1936). D.A. Webb,{\i  Proc. Roy. Irish Acad.}{\b  53B}: 207-240 (1950). I.K. Ferguson & D.A. Webb, {\i Bot. Jour. Linn. Soc.}{\b  63}: 295-311 (1970). K. Kaplan,{\i  Biblioth. Bot.} ({\i Stuttgart}) {\b 134} (1981). D.A. Webb & R.J. Gornall, {\i Saxifrages of Europe.} London. 1989.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Flowers entirely replaced by bulbils or leafy buds
\par
2 Leaves reniform; petiole slender ................................................... {\b 62. cernua}
\par
2 Leaves oblanceolate; petiole broad, scarcely distinct ................ {\b 12. foliolosa}
\par
1 At least 1 flower present in inflorescence
\par
3 Ovary superior, or nearly so (united to the hypanthium for less than 1/3
\par
  of its height)
\par
4 Sepals deflexed, at least in fruit
\par
5 Petals yellow or orange
\par
6 Leaves linear-lanceolate, entire; petals 9-16 mm ......................... {\b 1. hirculus}
\par
6 Leaves reniform to orbicular, crenate or lobed;
\par
  petals 5-7 mm .............................................................................. {\b 4. sibthorpii}
\par
5 Petals white, often with red or yellow spots
\par
7 Leaves with a narrow hyaline margin
\par
8 Petals without red spots; ovary almost white; leaves usually
\par
  entire in basal 1/3 of lamina ........................................................ {\b 15. cuneifolia}
\par
8 Petals usually with red spots; ovary pink (rarely green); leaves
\par
  toothed or crenate almost to the base of lamina ...... ({\b 16-21}).{\b  umbrosa }group
\par
7 Leaves without a hyaline margin
\par
9 Basal leaves with a long, slender petiole .................................. {\b 9. nelsoniana}
\par
9 Basal leaves with a short, broad petiole or none
\par
10 Flowers few; inflorescence largely composed of leafy buds
\par
   crowded towards the ends of the branches ................................ {\b 12. foliolosa}
\par
10 Flowers numerous; leafy buds, if present in the inflorescence,
\par
   distributed throughout a lax panicle
\par
11 Lower bracts large and leaf-like; most of the basal leaves
\par
   with 5-10 teeth on each side ............................................................ {\b 10. clusii}
\par
11 All bracts small; most of the basal leaves with 3-5 teeth
\par
   on each side ................................................................................. {\b 11. stellaris}
\par
4  Sepals erect or patent, even in fruit
\par
12 Leaves linear to oblong-lanceolate
\par
13 Plant with long, leafless, filiform stolons ................................ {\b 2. flagellaris}
\par
13 Plant without stolons; procumbent shoots leafy
\par
14 Axillary buds on leafy shoots not conspicuous at
\par
   flowering time ........................................................................ {\b 56. bronchialis}
\par
14 Axillary buds on leafy shoots conspicuous at flowering time
\par
15 Leaves of non-flowering shoots straight, much longer than their
\par
   axillary buds; leaves of flowering stems c. 10 mm, patent ........... {\b 54. aspera}
\par
15 Leaves of non-flowering shoots incurved, scarcely longer than
\par
   their axillary buds; leaves of flowering stems not more than
\par
   5 mm, nearly erect ..................................................................... {\b 55. bryoides}
\par
12 Leaves reniform to suborbicular
\par
16 Flowers solitary, in the axils of foliage-leaves on diffuse stems
\par
17 Petals 2-3 mm, white or pale yellow ....................................... {\b 5. hederacea}
\par
17 Petals 4·5-6 mm, bright yellow .............................................. {\b 3. cymbalaria}
\par
16 Flowers in terminal cymes or panicles, or solitary at the apex
\par
   of an erect stem
\par
18 Flower solitary, with bulbils below it ......................................... {\b 62. cernua}
\par
18 Flowers in a cyme or panicle; inflorescence without bulbils
\par
19 Petals with red spots
\par
20 Largest leaves not more than 25 mm wide, with 5-11 crenations
\par
    or teeth ....................................................................................... {\b 14. taygetea}
\par
20 Largest leaves at least 25 mm wide, with at least 15
\par
   crenations or teeth ................................................................. {\b 13. rotundifolia}
\par
19 Petals without red spots
\par
21 Basal leaves not palmately lobed, or very slightly lobed,
\par
    with dentate lobes; flowers numerous, in a lax panicle ........{\b 13. rotundifolia}
\par
21 Basal leaves clearly palmately lobed, with entire lobes;
\par
   flowers not more than 7, in a fairly compact cyme
\par
22 Petals 8-14 mm .......................................................................... {\b 58. sibirica}
\par
22 Petals 6-7 mm .......................................................................... {\b 59. carpatica}
\par
3  Ovary inferior or semi-inferior (united to the hypanthium
\par
   for at least 1/3 of its height)
\par
23 Petals bright yellow or orange
\par
24 Larger leaves at least 7 mm wide ............................................... {\b 52. mutata}
\par
24 Leaves not more than 6 mm wide
\par
25 Leaves fleshy and fairly soft, usually with a single
\par
   hydathode ................................................................................... {\b 57. aizoides}
\par
25 Leaves stiff and hard, with 3-7 hydathodes
\par
26 Stamens at least as long as the petals; leaves apiculate
\par
27 Flowering stem, pedicels and hypanthium villous ............ {\b 31. juniperifolia}
\par
27 Flowering stem, pedicels and hypanthium glabrous ................... {\b 32. sancta}
\par
26 Stamens shorter than the petals; leaves obtuse or shortly mucronate
\par
28 Inflorescence usually with not more than 6 flowers; most of
\par
   the leaves with a short, erect point ........................................... {\b 34. aretioides}
\par
28 Inflorescence usually with more than 6 flowers; leaves obtuse,
\par
   or with a short, incurved point ................................... {\b 33. ferdinandi-coburgi}
\par
23 Petals white, greenish, pink, purple, red or pale yellow
\par
29 Bulbils present, at or below ground-level, in the axils of
\par
   the basal leaves
\par
30 Petals glandular-hairy on upper surface, at least towards the base
\par
31 Bulbils present in the axils of cauline leaves and bracts ......... {\b 69. bulbifera}
\par
31 Bulbils confined to the axils of the lower leaves
\par
32 Lower leaves deeply lobed, with oblong or oblanceolate lobes
\par

\par
438}
\par