{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 9. S. nelsoniana} D. Don, {\i Trans. Linn. Soc. London }({\i Bot}.) {\b 13}: 355 (1821) ({\i S. punctata} auct., non L.). Rhizome underground; leaves all basal, reniform, coarsely crenate, slightly fleshy, subglabrous; petiole long. Flowering stem 20-40 cm, glandular-hairy above, bearing a usually lax panicle of small flowers. Sepals deflexed; petals 3 mm, oblong, white or pale pink. Stamens often partly replaced by petaloid staminodes. Ovary superior.{\i  N.E. Russia.} Rs(N). ({\i N. Asia and N.W. America.})
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 The European plant belongs to subsp. {\b aestivalis} (Fischer & C.A. Meyer) D.A. Webb,{\i  Feddes Repert.}{\b  69}: 154 (1964).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Very similar to {\b 18} in most characters; it is best distinguished by the absence of a hyaline margin to the leaf, and by the leaf-hairs, which are all filamentous and uniseriate, whereas in {\b 18} many of them are multiseriate and broad-based.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 10. S. clusii} Gouan,{\i  Obs. Bot.} 28 (1773). Stem very short. Leaves 4-12 cm, suberect or spreading, in a lax rosette, obovate-cuneate, coarsely and irregularly dentate, with rather numerous long, eglandular hairs; petiole broad but distinct. Flowering stem 12-30 cm, fragile, divaricately branched from the middle or below, to give a broad, diffuse panicle of numerous flowers; lower bracts usually large and leaf-like. Sepals deflexed; petals white, unequal (the 3 upper longer, with a conspicuous claw, and with 2 yellow spots). Ovary superior.{\i  Damp, shady rocks and by mountain streams. • S.W. Europe.} Ga Hs Lu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp.{\b  clusii} : Plant not viviparous.{\i  Cévennes, Pyrenees}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b lepismigena} (Planellas) D.A. Webb,{\i  Feddes Repert.}{\b  68}: 199 (1963) ({\i S. lepismigena} Planellas, {\i S. paui} Merino): Plant viviparous, with many of the flowers replaced by leafy buds. Usually more hairy and more robust than subsp. ({\b a}).{\i  N. & C. Portugal, N.W. Spain}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Plants intermediate between subspp. ({\b a}) and ({\b b}), with the leafy buds few and inconstant, are found in N. Spain (Asturias).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 11. S. stellaris} L.,{\i  Sp. Pl.} 400 (1753). Densely or laxly caespitose; stem horizontal, usually short. Leaves usually in rosettes, obovate or somewhat spathulate, tapered to the base but scarcely with distinct petiole, hispid, slightly fleshy but not coriaceous. Flowering stem 4-20 cm, leafless, not fragile, branched in upper part, with usually suberect branches, giving a lax but fairly narrow panicle; bracts small. Sepals deflexed; petals 3-7 mm, lanceolate, occasionally unequal as in 10, white with 2 yellow spots; anthers pink. Ovary superior.{\i  By mountain streams and other damp places. In all the major mountain-ranges of Europe, and at low altitudes in the extreme north.} Au Br Bu Co Fa Fe Ga Ge Gr Hb He Hs Is It Ju Lu No Rm Rs(N, W) Su.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Very variable in habit. Two rather ill-defined subspecies may be recognized, but transitional forms are found in the Carpathians and elsewhere.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp.{\b  stellaris} : Plant densely caespitose, with few rosettes; leaves rather hairy; petals 5-7 mm; pedicels not more than twice as long as capsule. 2n = 28.{\i  N. Europe}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp.{\b  alpigena} Temesy,{\i  Phyton} ({\i Austria}){\b  7}: 40 (1957): Plant laxly caespitose, with more numerous rosettes and with creeping, sometimes leafy stems; leaves almost glabrous, usually smaller; petals 3-5 mm; pedicels more than twice as long as capsule. 2n = 28, 56. {\i Mountains of C. & S. Europe, from the Vosges and the Carpathians to S. Spain, N. Appennini and N. Greece}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 In both subspecies viviparous plants are known, with many of the flowers replaced by leafy buds as in {\b 10}({\b b}); these are less fleshy and bulbil-like than in {\b 12}, and are dispersed throughout the lax panicle. Such plants are known from S.E. Austria & Slovenija, W. Ireland, and possibly elsewhere.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 12. S. foliolosa} R. Br.,{\i  Chloris Melv.} 17 (1823) ({\i S. stellaris} var.{\i  comosa} Retz.,{\i  S. foliosa} auct.). Like smaller plants of 11 but rosettes usually solitary; leaves rather narrower, glabrous except at the margins; inflorescence narrow, with few, rather short branches bearing usually a single, terminal flower (sometimes several or none), the remaining flowers being replaced by small, reddish bulbils with fleshy, incurved leaves, densely crowded towards the ends of the panicle branches. 2n = 56.{\i  Arctic and subarctic Europe}. Fe Is No Rs(N) Sb Su.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Sect. COTYLEA Tausch ({\i Miscopetalum} (Haw.) Sternb.). Evergreen perennials with underground rhizome or stock. Leaves alternate, mostly basal, long-petiolate, entire to crenate, dentate or slightly lobed. Flowering stem leafy; flowers in a panicle. Sepals erect or patent; petals white, usually with red or yellow spots. Ovary superior.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 13. S. rotundifolia} L.,{\i  Sp. Pl.} 403 (1753) (incl. {\i S. olympica} Boiss., {\i S. heucherifolia} Griseb. & Schenk). Rhizome short, bearing lax rosettes of reniform-orbicular, crenate or coarsely dentate leaves, 30-85 mm wide, with at least 13 teeth or crenations, usually somewhat hairy. Petiole long, slender. Flowering stem 15-60(-100) cm, rather stout, usually with a few dentate or slightly lobed cauline leaves and a rather narrow panicle of numerous flowers. Petals 6-11 mm, narrowly oblong to broadly elliptical, with a distinct claw, white, usually spotted with yellow at the base and with red higher up. Ovary green or pink. Styles very short, divergent.{\i  Damp or shady places in or near the mountains of C. & S. Europe. }Al Au Bu Co Cr Cz Ga Ge Gr He Hs It Ju Rm Sa Si [Be Br]
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp.{\b  rotundifolia} (incl.{\i  S. heucherifolia} Griseb. & Schenk,{\i  S. lasiophylla} Schott, {\i S. repanda} auct., vix Willd.): Petiole narrow right up to junction with lamina. Lamina with a narrow cartilaginous border. 2n = 22. Almost throughout the range of the species, but rare in the extreme south.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b chrysosplenifolia} (Boiss.) D.A. Webb in Jordanov, {\i Fl. Rep. Pop. Bulg.}{\b  4}: 658 (1970) ({\i S. chrysosplenifolia} Boiss.): Lamina of basal leaves decurrent along the petiole, which is broadened at the top; margin of lamina not cartilaginous, usually ciliate. 2n = 22. •{\i  S. part of Balkan peninsula and Aegean region}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 14. S. taygetea} Boiss. & Heldr. in Boiss.,{\i  Diagn. Pl. Or. Nov.}{\b  2}({\b 10}): 19 (1849). Like {\b 13}({\b a}) but smaller (stem seldom 20 cm); basal leaves 15-25 mm wide, with 5-9 broad, shallow crenations, or subacute teeth; cauline leaves few and small; petals 7-9 mm, white with numerous red spots; ovary crimson. 2n = 22. •{\i  Exposed mountain rocks. S. & W. Greece, Albania, Crna Gora}. Al Gr Ju.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Sect. GYMNOPERA D. Don ({\i Robertsonia} (Haw.) Engler). Evergreen perennials. Leaves alternate, mostly in basal rosettes connected by short stolons or rhizomes, petiolate, crenate or dentate, somewhat succulent and coriaceous, without calcareous incrustation. Stem scapose; flowers numerous, in panicles. Sepals deflexed; petals white, usually spotted with yellow at the base and red higher up. Ovary superior.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 15. S. cuneifolia} L.,{\i  Sp. Pl.,} ed. 2, 574 (1762). Laxly caespitose, with procumbent stems bearing small rosettes of glabrous,
\par

\par
444}
\par