{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 hairs, often in proximal ½ only. Flowers subsessile. Petals 5-7 mm; sepals glandular-ciliate. •{\i  E. Alps; E. & S. Carpathians}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b d}) Subsp. {\b blepharophylla} (A. Kerner ex Hayek) Engler & Irmscher, {\i loc. cit. }(1919) ({\i S. blepharophylla} A. Kerner ex Hayek): Compact, often with columnar leafy shoots. Leaves 3-5 mm, opposite, broadly obovate, with marginal hairs extending to the rounded apex, those at the apex being the longest. Flowering stem short but distinct. Marginal hairs on sepals very long, non-glandular; petals 5-8 mm.{\i  E. Alps, mainly in Austria.}
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b e}) Subsp. {\b speciosa} (Dörfler & Hayek) Engler & Irmscher,{\i  op. cit. }639 (1919) ({\i S. speciosa} (Dörfler & Hayek) Dörfler & Hayek): Fairly compact. Leaves 4-5 mm, broadly obovate to suborbicular, with short marginal hairs mainly in proximal part; apex broad, rounded, with a wide cartilaginous margin. Petals 8-12 mm. •{\i  C. Appennini}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Plants generally similar to subsp. ({\b a}) but with glandular cilia on the sepals are found in the Alps, Pyrenees and Sierra Nevada, and have been distinguished as subsp. {\i glandulifera} Vacc., but they are united to subsp. ({\b a}) by too many intermediates to make recognition as a subspecies probable. Plants from unusually low altitude on the shores of the Bodensee, usually submerged in spring and early summer, have been named subsp. {\i amphibia} (Sünd.) Br.-Bl., but their rather slight morphological distinction was probably due to their peculiar environment. They appear to be now extinct.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 42. S. retusa} Gouan, {\i Obs. Bot.} 28 (1773) ({\i S. purpurea }All.). Leafy shoots numerous, short, crowded, forming a low but very compact cushion. Leaves 2-4 × 1·5-2 mm, opposite, oblong, obtuse, entire, the basal ½ erect, somewhat membranous, often purple, the upper ½ sharply bent outwards, keeled beneath, flat and dark, shining green. Calcareous incrustation variable. Flowering stem 5-50 mm, bearing a small, umbel-like cyme of 1-3(-5) flowers. Petals 4-5 × 2-2·5 mm, widely separated, pinkish-purple. Stamens longer than the petals; anthers orange. 2n = 26. {\i Usually above} 1800 {\i m, often on exposed, snow-free rocks or screes. Pyrenees, Alps, Carpathians, Bulgaria; rather local.} Au Bu Cz Ga He Hs It Po Rm.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b retusa} ({\i S. baumgartenii} Schott,{\i  S. wulfeniana} Schott): Sepals and hypanthium glabrous; peduncles 1·5 cm or less, with 1-3 flowers; petals c. 4 mm.{\i  Mainly calcifuge. Throughout the range of the species, except for parts of S.W. Alps}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp. augustana (Vacc.) P. Fourn., {\i Quatre Fl. Fr.} 474 (1936): Sepals and hypanthium densely glandular-pubescent; peduncles 2-5 cm, with 2-5 flowers; petals c. 5 mm.{\i  Mainly calcicole. S.W. Alps, eastwards to Monte Rosa}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 43. S. biflora} All.,{\i  Auct. Syn. Stirp. Horti Taur.} 34 (1773) (incl. {\i S. macropetala} A. Kerner). Stems procumbent to ascending, forming a mat or loose cushion. Leaves 5-9 × 3-6 mm, opposite, broadly obovate to suborbicular, obtuse, sessile, scarcely coriaceous and seldom lime-encrusted, usually with a single hydathode, often reddish beneath. Flowers solitary or 2-5(-8) in terminal corymbose cymes. Sepals ciliate, glandular-pubescent; petals reddish-purple or dull white; disc yellow, conspicuous; filaments whitish, shorter than the petals; anthers pink to orange, eventually black. {\i Damp screes, moraines and river-gravels, usually above} 2000{\i  m. Alps; one station in N.W. Greece.} Au Ga Ge Gr He It.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 The typical plant has oblanceolate petals, 5-6 × 2 mm. In var.{\i  kochii} Kittel (subsp. {\i macropetala} (A. Kerner) Rouy & Camus) the petals are broadly elliptical, 6-9 × 4-5 mm, although variation in petal-size seems to be continuous, and other supposedly correlated characters are very variable. Some of these plants may be hybrids between {\b 43} and {\b 41}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b biflora} : Leaves with a single hydathode; calcareous incrustation usually absent. Sepals and upper cauline leaves hairy. Flowers usually 2 or more; pedicels very short, so that the flowers are partly overlapped by the leaves. Ovary without hooked bristles. 2n = 26. {\i Alps}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp.{\b  epirotica} D.A. Webb, {\i Bot. Jour. Linn. Soc. }{\b 95}: 237 (1987): Leaves often with 3-5 hydathodes; calcareous secretion plentiful. Sepals and upper cauline leaves glabrous beneath. Flowers solitary, on pedicels long enough to carry them clear of the leaves. Upper part of ovary with several stout, hooked, bristles. {\i N.W. Greece} ({\i near Timfi Oros}).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Sect. LIGULATAE Haw. ({\i Aizoonia} Tausch). Leaves mostly basal in compact rosettes, coriaceous, usually glaucous, entire or finely toothed, usually lime-encrusted. Flowers in terminal panicles; after flowering the rosette bearing the panicle dies. Petals white, rarely orange or pink. Ovary semi-inferior to almost inferior.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 44. S. longifolia} Lapeyr.,{\i  Fig. Fl. Pyr.} 26 (1801). Plant long lived, without offsets, and therefore monocarpic. Leaves 30-100 × 3-8 mm, linear, somewhat expanded below the subacute apex, entire or weakly erose-crenate, glabrous, glaucous, lime-encrusted, very numerous, forming a large, flat, regular rosette. Flowering stem 25-50 cm, stout, branched from near the base to form a large pyramidal panicle with very many flowers. Pedicels and hypanthium glandular-hairy. Petals 5-6 mm, white, rarely with fine red spots. 2n = 28.{\i  Mountain cliffs; calcicole. Pyrenees and E. Spain.} Ga Hs.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 45. S. callosa} Sm. in Dickson,{\i  Coll. Dried Pl.}{\b  3}: no. 63 (1791). Leaves entire or feebly erose-crenate, glaucous, lime-encrusted, often dark red near the base; rosettes proliferating by short stolons which produce new rosettes. Flowering stem 15-40 cm. Flowers numerous, in a long, fairly narrow panicle, which usually occupies about ½ the flowering stem. Pedicels slender, often reddish, Petals 7-9 mm, white, often with crimson spots.{\i  Limestone rocks. • W. Mediterranean region.} Ga Hs It Sa Si.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp.{\b  callosa} ({\i S. lingulata} Bellardi): Leaves 25-90 × 2·5-6 mm, linear or oblanceolate, usually subacute. Peduncle and inflorescence eglandular, or with a few scattered glandular hairs. 2n = 28.{\i  Maritime Alps, Appennini, Sardegna, Sicilia}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b catalaunica} (Boiss.) D.A. Webb,{\i  Feddes Repert.}{\b  68}: 208 (1963) ({\i S. catalaunica} Boiss.): Leaves 15-45 × 8-9 mm, oblanceolate, often acute. Inflorescence rather densely covered by subsessile glands. Peduncle glabrous or with glandular hairs.{\i  N.E. Spain; S.E. France} ({\i hills near Marseille}).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Typical plants of subsp. ({\b a}), with long, narrow, linear leaves, are restricted to the eastern part of the Maritime Alps and the N. & C. Appennini. Plants from the western Maritime Alps, and from the C. & S. Appennini and the islands, with broader, usually shorter, oblanceolate leaves may be distinguished as var.{\i  australis} (Moric.) D.A. Webb ({\i S. australis} Moric.; incl.{\i  S. lantoscana} Boiss.).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 The plant from near Marseille is transitional to subsp. ({\b a}), but seems best placed in subsp. ({\b b}).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 46. S. cochlearis} Reichenb.,{\i  Fl. Germ. Excurs.} 559 (1832). Like {\b 45}({\b a}) but smaller and more delicate; leaves 8-40 × 2·5-6 mm, spathulate, with an expanded, suborbicular apical part; flowering stem usually 10-25 cm, with a small, open panicle of 15-25(-60)
\par

\par
448}
\par