{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 95 Leaves covered with long, arachnoid hairs ...................... {\b 107. arachnoidea}
\par
95 Leaves ± glabrous ................................................................. {\b 108. paradoxa}
\par
94 Leaves not more than 10 mm wide, longer than wide
\par
96 Leaf-segments furrowed on upper surface
\par
97 Leaf-segments obtuse or acute, glandular-pubescent ................. {\b 85. exarata}
\par
97 Leaf-segments mucronate, ± glabrous ....................................... {\b 86. hariotii}
\par
96 Leaf-segments flat on upper surface
\par
98 Petals linear, much narrower than the sepals
\par
99 Some of the leaf-segments or undivided leaves acute to
\par
   apiculate ................................................................................... {\b 116. sedoides}
\par
99 All leaf-segments and undivided leaves obtuse ....................... {\b 117. aphylla}
\par
98 Petals ovate to oblong, as wide as the sepals or only slightly narrower
\par
100 Leafy shoots ± procumbent ;some of the leaf-segments mucronate;
\par
    petals mucronate or emarginate .............................................. {\b 116. sedoides}
\par
100 Leafy shoots ± erect; leaf-segments and petals obtuse ............ {\b 85. exarata}
\par 
91  Petals white, pink or bright red
\par
101 Mature leaves glabrous, though often with sessile glands
\par
102 Leaf-segments broadly triangular, 4-8 mm wide at the base  {\b 100. cuneata}
\par
102 Leaf-segments linear-oblong to lanceolate, 1-3 mm wide at the base
\par
103 All leaf-segments obtuse or subacute
\par
104 Leaf-segments usually not more than 2 mm wide, parallel-sided,
\par
    furrowed on upper surface; petals 3·5-5 mm ..................... {\b 95. pentadactylis}
\par
104 Leaf-segments usually more than 2 mm wide, often with curved
\par
    margins, flat on upper surface; petals 7-14 mm .......................... {\b 96. fragilis}
\par
103 Some of the leaf-segments mucronate or apiculate
\par
105 Larger leaves with (9-)11-17 segments; segments often recurved,
\par
    crowded and overlapping ......................................................... {\b 98. trifurcata}
\par
105 Leaves with not more than 11 segments, which are not recurved,
\par
    crowded or overlapping
\par
106 Leaf-segments oblong to elliptical, 1½-2½ times as
\par
    long as wide ............................................................................. {\b 97. camposii}
\par
106 Leaf-segments linear, 3-6 times as long as wide .............. {\b 99. canaliculata}
\par
101 Mature leaves hairy, at least on margin or on petiole
\par
    (hairs sometimes very short and visible only with a lens)
\par
107 Leafy shoots bearing conspicuous, usually more or less dormant,
\par
    axillary buds at flowering time
\par
108 Petals 11-20 mm
\par
109 Leaves deeply divided, with 3 primary lobes which are narrowed
\par
    to a stalklike base ..................................................................... {\b 72. biternata}
\par
109 Leaves palmately lobed, the lobes not narrowed at the base ....... {\b 76. rigoi}
\par
108 Petals 4-10(-12) mm
\par
110 Leaf-segments mucronate or apiculate
\par
111 Dormant axillary buds stalked, their outer leaves entirely
\par
    scarious ............................................................................... {\b 78. continentalis}
\par
111 Dormant axillary buds ± sessile, their outer leaves partly
\par
    herbaceous .............................................................................. {\b 79. hypnoides}
\par
110 Leaf-segments obtuse to acute
\par
112 Leaves deeply divided, with 3 primary lobes which are stalked
\par
    or narrowed at the base ........................................................ {\b 71. bourgaeana}
\par
112 Leaves palmately lobed, the lobes not narrowed at the base
\par
113 Dormant buds with dense white, woolly hairs; petals turning
\par
    pink after pollination ............................................................... {\b 75. erioblasta}
\par
113 Dormant buds hairy, but without dense white, woolly hairs;
\par
    petals remaining white
\par
114 Sepals 2 × 1·5 mm; petals plane; inflorescence usually with
\par
    at least 4 flowers ................................................................... {\b 73. globulifera}
\par
114 Sepals 4 × 3 mm; margins of petals deflexed; inflorescence
\par
    with 1-3 flowers ..................................................................... {\b 74. reuteriana}
\par
107 Leafy shoots without conspicuous, dormant axillary buds at
\par
    flowering time
\par
115 Petals conspicuously emarginate, often unequal
\par
116 Biennial; basal leaves divided almost to the base; petals
\par
    8-10 mm, contiguous ................................................................ {\b 105. petraea}
\par
116 Perennial; basal leaves divided not more than half-way to
\par
    the base; petals 4-8 mm, not contiguous ..................................... {\b 106. berica}
\par
115 Petals equal, not or only slightly emarginate
\par
117 Annual or biennial
\par
118 Basal leaves reniform, with long, clearly defined
\par
    petiole ................................................................................ {\b 104. latepetiolata}
\par
118 Basal leaves oblanceolate, with short, scarcely distinct
\par
    petiole ........................................................... ({\b 120-123}). {\b tridactylites }group
\par
117 Perennial
\par
119 Petals at least 7 mm
\par
120 Leaves with more than 11 ultimate segments
\par
121 Plant aquatic; flowering stems 2-5 mm in diameter ............. {\b 101. aquatica}
\par
121 Plant terrestrial; flowering stems less than 2 mm in diameter
\par
122 Stems woody at the base, spreading, forming a lax
\par
    cushion ................................................................................. {\b 91. geranioides}
\par
122 Stems not woody at the base, forming a compact tuft ............ {\b 103. irrigua}
\par
120 Leaves with not more than 11 ultimate segments
\par
123 Some of the leaves entire
\par

\par
441}
\par