{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28\li200      strongly scented; cushions seldom more than 10 cm in diameter
\par
145 Calyx and hypanthium dark red; petals often red-veined .. {\b 83. nevadensis}
\par
145 Calyx and hypanthium green; petals not red-veined
\par
146 Petals not more than 5 mm; leaves very sparsely hairy ........... {\b 85. exarata}
\par
146 Petals more than 5 mm; leaves densely hairy
\par
147 Rosettes ± flat, with patent leaves; some leaves usually with 5 lobes,
\par
    and sometimes with 7; petals up to 10 mm, pure white ............. {\b 80. rosacea}
\par
147 Rosettes ± concave, with ascending or semi-erect leaves; leaves
\par
    mostly with 3 and never more than 5 lobes; petals dull white, slightly
\par
    tinged with green or yellow, not more than 6-5 mm ............... {\b 81. cespitosa}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Sect. CILIATAE Haw. ({\i Hirculus} Tausch). Evergreen perennials. Leaves alternate, entire, without calcareous incrustation. Petals yellow. Ovary superior to ¼-inferior.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. S. hirculus} L.,{\i  Sp. Pl}. 402 (1753) ({\i S. autumnalis} L.). Plant laxly caespitose or shortly stoloniferous; stem 20-35 cm, erect, leafy below. Leaves 10-25 mm, lanceolate, obtuse, tapered to a long, sheathing petiole, hairy, especially towards the base, with long, red-brown hairs. Flowers solitary or 2-4 in a lax corymb. Sepals deflexed in fruit; petals 9-16 mm, bright yellow, sometimes with red spots, and with 2 prominent callosities near the base. 2n = 32. {\i Bogs and other wet places. N., E. & C. Europe, rapidly becoming rarer in the western and southern parts of its range}. Au Br †Cz Da Fe Ga Ge Hb He †Ho Is ?It No Po Rm Rs(N,B,C,W,E)Sb Su.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Possibly extinct in Au, Ga and He.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. S. flagellaris} Willd. in Sternb.,{\i  Revis. Saxifr.} 25 (1810) ({\i S. platysepala }Trautv.). Stem 5-20 cm, erect, emitting from its base filiform, epigeal stolons up to 15 cm long, each terminating in a leaf-rosette. Leaves mainly in a basal rosette, oblong-lanceolate, sessile, the upper densely, the lower sparsely glandular-hairy. Flowers usually solitary, terminal. Sepals suberect; petals 7-9 mm, obovate-oblong, bright yellow, without basal callosities; ovary about ¼-inferior. 2n = 32.{\i  Spitsbergen; Vajgac.} Rs(N) Sb.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 The European plant, which has a circumpolar-arctic distribution, belongs to subsp.{\b  platysepala} (Trautv.) Porsild. Other subspecies occur in W. North America, and in Asia from the Caucasus and Himalaya to the Bering Strait.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Sect. CYMBALARIA Griseb. Usually annuals. Stems diffuse, ascending, leafy. Leaves mostly alternate, palmately lobed to entire, long-petiolate. Petals white, yellow or orange. Ovary superior or very nearly so.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 3. S. cymbalaria} L.,{\i  Sp. Pl.} 405 (1753). Stems weak, sometimes decumbent, slightly hairy below. Leaves glabrous, somewhat fleshy, shining, reniform or orbicular, petiolate, with 7-9 triangular, subacute teeth. Flowers axillary, pedicellate. Sepals patent; petals 5 mm, yellow.{\i  Romania }({\b E. Carpathians, near Bacau}). Rm. ({\i S.W. Asia, N. Africa.})
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 The plants from Romania belong to var.{\i  cymbalaria.} Var.{\i  huetiana} (Boiss.) Engler & Irmscher ({\i S. huetiana} Boiss.), from S.W. Asia, with smaller flowers and bluntly crenate or subentire leaves, is often cultivated and is locally naturalized in parts of Europe. It has a chromosome number of 2n = 18.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 4. S. sibthorpii} Boiss., {\i Diagn. Pl. Or. Nov.}{\b  1}({\b 3}): 22 (1843). Stems decumbent, glabrous or with a few glandular hairs. Leaves fleshy, shining, reniform, broadly crenate, stalked. Flowers axillary, pedicellate, often deflexed in fruit. Sepals deflexed; petals 5-7 mm, orange-yellow. 2n = 18.{\i  Damp or shady rocks above }1500 {\i m. Greece.} Gr.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 5. S. hederacea} L.,{\i  Sp. Pl.} 405 (1753). Stems ascending or decumbent. Leaves mainly basal, reniform to ovate, petiolate, crenate or slightly lobed, shining, sparingly glandular-hairy. Flowers solitary on filiform pedicels. Sepals erect or patent; petals 3 mm, white or very pale yellow.{\i  Damp or shady rocks. E. Mediterranean region, westwards to Sicilia.} Cr Gr Ju Si.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Sect. MICRANTHES (Haw.) D. Don ({\i Boraphila} Engler, pro parte). Evergreen perennials. Leaves mostly basal, entire, crenate or toothed, somewhat fleshy or coriaceous. Petals usually white. Ovary superior to semi-inferior.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 6. S. hieracifolia} Waldst. & Kit. ex Willd., {\i Sp. Pl.} 2(1): 641 (1799). Stem underground, usually simple. Leaves all basal, 3-7 × 1-3 cm, ovate-elliptical, entire or obtusely dentate, ciliate, tapered to a short, winged petiole. Scape 10-40 cm, densely glandular-pubescent, purplish-red, bearing a narrow, congested panicle of numerous subsessile flowers; bracts rather large and leaf-like. Sepals deflexed in fruit; petals 1·5-3 mm, ovate-oblong, about equalling the sepals, greenish tinged with purplish-red. 2n = 112, 120.{\i  Damp rocks or tundra, or by mountain streams. Arctic Europe; Carpathians; very locally in mountains elsewhere} ({\i Norway, Steiermark, Auvergne}). Au Cz Ga No Po Rm Rs(N) Sb.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 7. S. nivalis} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 401 (1753). Rhizome often branched, with several leaf-rosettes. Leaves 15-35 mm, ovate-oblong to rhombic, crenate or obtusely dentate, hairy on margins only, often dark red beneath; petiole broad, usually short. Scape 5-20 cm, densely glandular-pubescent, with some longer, white, crisped hairs below; inflorescence a small, often capitate, congested panicle of almost sessile flowers; bracts small. Sepals erect; petals c. 3 mm, suborbicular, somewhat exceeding the sepals, white or pink. 2n = 60.{\i  Arctic and subarctic Europe, extending locally southwards to N. Wales; one station in S.W. Poland.} Br Fa Fe Hb Is No Po Rs(N) Sb Su.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 8. S. tenuis} (Wahlenb.) K.A.H. Sm. ex Lindman,{\i  Svensk Fanerogamfl.} 300 (1918). Like {\b 7} but leaves 10-15 mm; scape seldom more than 12 cm and not more than 1 mm in diameter, pubescent, and without the longer hairs below; bracts somewhat larger; flowers usually more distinctly pedicellate in a laxer cyme. 2n = 20.{\i  Damp tundra, flushes and late snow-patches. Arctic and subarctic Europe.} Fa Fe Is No Rs(N) Sb Su.
\par

\par
443}
\par