{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 124 Leafy shoots mostly procumbent; leaf-segments apiculate  {\b 79. hypnoides}
\par
124 Leafy shoots ± erect, forming a cushion;
\par
    leaf-segments obtuse ........................................................... {\b 84. cebennensis}
\par
123 All leaves lobed
\par
125 Petals oblanceolate, usually at least 10 mm, and at least
\par
    2½ times as long as wide ................................................... {\b 89. pedemontana}
\par
125 Petals obovate, not more than 10 mm, and not more than twice
\par
    as long as wide
\par
126 Flowering stems terminal ........................................................ {\b 80. rosacea}
\par
126 Flowering stems axillary
\par
127 Leafy shoots ± erect, forming a compact tuft;
\par
    leaf-segments apiculate .............................................................. {\b 90. babiana}
\par
127 Leafy shoots procumbent or ascending, forming a wide mat;
\par
    leaf-segments subacute to shortly mucronate ....................... {\b 102}. ×{\b  capitata}
\par
119 Petals not more than 7 mm
\par
128 Leaves crenate to shortly toothed on lateral margins, but not lobed
\par
129 Flowering stem up to 2 mm in diameter, the lower part ± villous
\par
    ........................................................................................................ {\b 7. nivalis}
\par
129 Flowering stem not more than 1 mm in diameter, the lower part
\par
    shortly glandular-pubescent or almost glabrous ............................. {\b 8. tenuis}
\par
128 Leaves distinctly lobed or shortly 3-toothed at the apex
\par
130 Leaf-segments furrowed on upper surface
\par
131 Hairs on leaves and calyx not more than 0·15 mm, the stalk scarcely
\par
    longer than the diameter of the gland, giving a finely verrucose
\par
    rather than a pubescent appearance
\par
132 Plant forming cushions up to 30 cm in diameter; leaves fresh green;
\par
    petals distinctly longer than wide, not contiguous ............. {\b 92. moncayensis}
\par
132 Plant forming cushions seldom more than 10 cm in diameter; leaves rather
\par
    dark green; petals almost as wide as long, contiguous .............. {\b 94. intricata}
\par
131 Hairs on leaves and calyx mostly at least 0·3 mm, with the stalk
\par
    considerably longer than the gland, giving a pubescent appearance
\par
133 Leaves with rather short, sometimes few glandular hairs; petals about
\par
    twice as long as wide, not contiguous ......................................... {\b 85. exarata}
\par
133 Leaves densely covered with rather long glandular hairs;
\par
    petals about 1½ times as long as wide, usually contiguous
\par
134 Leaves rather dark green; rosettes up to 20-25 mm in diameter;
\par
    leaves on flowering stems usually lobed ................................ {\b 82. pubescens}
\par
134 Leaves fresh green; rosettes not more than 15 mm in diameter;
\par
    leaves on flowering stems usually entire ............................ {\b 84. cebennensis}
\par
130 Leaf-segments not furrowed on upper surface
\par
135 Leafy shoots very short or absent, or if well developed then
\par
    diffuse or procumbent; habit of plant not cushion-like
\par
136 Leaves cordate (N. Europe) .................................................... {\b 60. rivularis}
\par
136 Leaves cuneate or truncate
\par
137 Young stems and petioles covered with long, viscid,
\par
    arachnoid hairs .................................................................. {\b 107. arachnoidea}
\par
137 Plant without long, viscid, arachnoid hairs
\par
138 Leafy shoots very short, rosette like ........... ({\b 109-112}). {\b androsacea} group
\par
138 Leafy shoots long, ± procumbent
\par
139 Inflorescence usually elongated, with more than 6 flowers
\par
    ............................................................................................... {\b 102.} ×{\b  capitata}
\par
139 Inflorescence fairly compact, with 1-6 flowers
\par
140 Flowering stems arising from a rosette ................................... {\b 80. rosacea}
\par
140 Flowering stems arising from the axils or the apex of a
\par
    procumbent leafy shoot
\par
141 Most of the leaf-segments acute or mucronate ................ {\b 87. praetermissa}
\par
141 All leaf-segments obtuse ................................................ {\b 88. wahlenbergii}
\par
135 Leafy shoots at least 2 cm long, ± erect, crowded together
\par
    to form a fairly compact cushion
\par
142 Leaf-segments apiculate or mucronate
\par
143 Flowering stems axillary ......................................................... {\b 90. babiana}
\par
143 Flowering stems terminal ........................................................ {\b 80. rosacea}
\par
142 Leaf-segments subacute to obtuse
\par
144 Glandular hairs on leaves mostly not more than 0·15 mm;
\par
    foliage with a strong spicy scent; plant forming cushions
\par
    up to 20 cm in diameter ......................................................... {\b 93. vayredana}
\par
144 Glandular hairs on leaves mostly more than 0·15 mm; foliage not
\par

\par
442}
\par