{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 orbicular-spathulate leaves, entire or bluntly toothed in upper 2, tapered gradually to a broad, sparsely ciliate petiole. Peduncles 15 cm, glandular-pubescent, slender. Panicle small; petals 2·5-4 mm, white, usually without red spots. Ovary green or pale pink; styles very short, erect.{\i  Woods and shady rocks, mostly} 800-1700 {\i m. • Pyrenees and N. Spain; Cévennes; Alps; N. Appennini; E. Carpathians; N.W. Jugoslavia.} Au Ga He Hs It Ju Rm.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp.{\b  cuneifolia} : Plant diffuse, with fairly long stolons (rosettes usually 3-6 cm apart). Leaves not more than 20(-25) mm, including petiole, nearly entire. Panicle with not more than 10 flowers. 2n = 22.{\i  Maritime Alps, N. Appennini}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp.{\b  robusta }D.A. Webb,{\i  Bot. Jour. Linn. Soc. }{\b 97}: 355 (1988): Plant fairly compact, with short stolons (rosettes usually less than 2 cm apart). Larger leaves at least 25 mm, including petiole, distinctly crenate-dentate. Panicle with usually more than 10 flowers. 2n = 22.{\i  Almost throughout the range of the species, but rare in the area of subsp.} ({\b a}).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 16-21. S. umbrosa} group. Laxly or somewhat densely caespitose, with short, procumbent stems. Leaves mainly in basal rosettes, reniform to obovate-cuneate, dentate or crenate, with narrow hyaline margin. Petals c. 4 mm, white, with 2 yellow and usually several crimson spots. Anthers and ovary pink.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 The three species included in this group are not difficult to distinguish, but the situation is confused by their hybrids, which are common in nature and widely diffused from garden culture. Secondary hybrids certainly occur, and introgressive hybridization has taken place in several areas.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Petiole subcylindrical, not much wider than thick; leaves usually
\par
  hairy on both surfaces .................................................................... {\b 18. hirsuta}
\par
1 Petiole distinctly flattened; leaves usually glabrous at least on
\par
  lower surface
\par
2 Petiole densely ciliate but glabrous on upper surface, usually
\par
  shorter than the oblong, slightly crenate lamina ......................... {\b 17. umbrosa}
\par
2 Petiole rather sparsely hairy, usually at least as long as the lamina
\par
3 Lamina sharply dentate; petiole very sparsely ciliate, glabrous
\par
  on upper surface ...................................................................... {\b 16. spathularis}
\par
3 Lamina crenate or obtusely dentate; petiole rather densely
\par
  ciliate, or with some hairs on upper surface
\par
4 Leaves rather deeply dentate or crenate, without conspicuous
\par
  cartilaginous margin .................................................................... {\b 19.} × {\b polita}
\par
4 Teeth or crenations broad and low; cartilaginous margin conspicuous
\par
5 Petiole narrow, considerably longer than the lamina; lamina
\par
  sometimes slightly hairy .............................................................. {\b 20.} ×{\b  geum}
\par
5 Petiole very broad, only slightly longer than the glabrous lamina
\par
  .................................................................................................... {\b 21.} ×{\b  urbium}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 16. S. spathularis} Brot.,{\i  Fl. Lusit. }{\b 2}: 172 (1805) ({\i S. umbrosa }auct. lusit., non L.). Rather laxly caespitose. Leaves erecto-patent, orbicular, spathulate or obovate-cuneate, coarsely dentate; petiole broad and flat, longer than the lamina, very sparsely ciliate. Petals with numerous red spots. Ovary large, bright pink; styles divergent. 2n = 28.{\i  Somewhat calcifuge. • N. Portugal and N.W. Spain; Ireland.} Hb Hs Lu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 17. S. umbrosa} L., {\i Sp. Pl}. ed. 2, 574 (1762). Densely caespitose, with flat rosettes. Leaves patent, obovate-oblong, with broad, rather low crenations and a conspicuous cartilaginous border; petiole broad and flat, scarcely as long as the lamina, densely ciliate. Petals with numerous red spots. Ovary rather small, bright pink; styles suberect. 2n = 28.{\i  Shady banks, stream sides and mountain grassland. • W. & C. Pyrenees.} Ga Hs [?Au Br Da].
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 18. S. hirsuta} L.,{\i  Syst. Nat.} ed. 10, {\b 2}: 1026 (1759) ({\i S. geum} auct., non L.). Laxly caespitose. Leaves somewhat fleshy, scarcely coriaceous, reniform, orbicular or ovate-oblong, crenate or rarely serrate-dentate, usually hispid on both surfaces, often red beneath; petiole narrow, hairy. Petals usually with few, rather weak red spots. Ovary pale pink. •{\i  Pyrenees and N. Spain; S.W. Ireland; occasionally naturalized elsewhere.} Ga Hb Hs [Br].
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp.{\b  hirsuta} : Lamina reniform or orbicular, cordate, much shorter than the petiole, with 17-25 crenations or teeth. 2n = 28.{\i  Shady places, or by mountain streams. Throughout the range of the species}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp.{\b  paucicrenata} (Leresche ex Gillot) D.A. Webb{\i  Feddes Repert.}{\b  68}: 201 (1963): Leaves 10-30 mm, oblong-elliptical, with only 7-11 crenations; petiole equalling or shorter than the lamina. 2n = 28.{\i  Exposed limestone rocks and screes. W. Pyrenees and N. Spain}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Subsp. ({\b b}) is a dwarf, very distinct ecotypic variant, but connected to subsp. ({\b a}) by intermediates.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 19. S}. × {\b  polita} (Haw.) Link, {\i Enum. Hort. Berol. Alt. }{\b 1}: 414 (1821) ({\i S. hirsuta} ×{\i  spathularis}). Leaves usually suborbicular to broadly obovate, slightly hairy; petiole moderately narrow, rather hairy. 2n = 28.{\i  Common wherever the parent species group together, and grading imperceptibly into both. •  N. Spain and W. Ireland} ({\i including districts in Ireland where }S. hirsuta{\i  does not now exist}). Hb Hs.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 20. S.} × {\b  geum} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 401 (1753) ({\i S. hirsuta} ×{\i  umbrosa} ; {\i S. hirsuta} auct., non L., {\i S. umbrosa} auct. eur. med. non L.). Intermediate between the parents and variable, but usually with the lamina nearer that of {\b 17} (broadly oblong, with low crenations and a conspicuous cartilaginous border) and the petiole nearer that of {\b 18} (long, hairy, and fairly narrow). 2n = 28. •{\i  Occasional, with the parents, in the Pyrenees; widely cultivated and naturalized in many places in W. & C. Europe.} Ga Hs [Au Be ?Br Ge It].
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 21. S.}×{\b   urbium} D.A. Webb, {\i Feddes Repert. }{\b 68}: 199 (1963) ({\i S. spathularis} ×{\i  umbrosa}, {\i S. umbrosa }auct., non L.). Exactly intermediate between the parents; usually sterile and therefore constant, but fertile variants are known. 2n = 28. {\i Unknown in nature, as the parent species are allopatric; of obscure garden origin, widely cultivated in Britain and Ireland, less often elsewhere. Naturalized in Britain, Ireland and France}. [Br Ga Hb.]
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Sect. PORPHYRION Tausch (incl.{\i  Kabschia} Engler). Evergreen perennials, forming cushions or mats. Leaves small, opposite or alternate, usually hard and coriaceous, entire or finely toothed, usually with calcareous incrustation. Flowers solitary or in small cymes, arising terminally from a leaf-rosette which does not die after flowering. Ovary semi-inferior to almost inferior.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Subsect.{\i  Kabschia} (Engler) Rouy & Camus. Leaves alternate. Petals conspicuous, usually white or yellow, exceeding the usually patent sepals.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 22. S. caesia} L.,{\i  Sp. Pl.} 399 (1753). Leafy shoots densely caespitose, forming dense cushions, each shoot terminating in a small leaf-rosette. Leaves 3-6 mm, oblong-spathulate to elliptical,
\par

\par
445}
\par