{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 14. P. cembra} L.,{\i  Sp. Pl.} 1000 (1753). Tree up to 25 m; bark reddish-grey, becoming scaly on old trees. Twigs strongly pubescent with orange-brown tomentum. Bud-scales dull, with white, membranous margin. Leaves 5-8 cm × 1 mm. Cone 5-8 × 3·5-5 cm, less than 1½ times as long as wide. Seeds 12(-14) mm; wing absent, or less than 1 mm and caducous; husk hard. •{\i  Alps and Carpathians; occasionally planted for timber in N. Europe}. Au Cz Ga Ge He It Po Rm Rs(W) [Fe Is No Su].
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 15. P. sibirica} Du Tour,{\i  Nouv. Dict. Hist. Nat.}{\b  18:} 18 (1803) ({\i P. cembra} subsp.{\i  sibirica} (Du Tour) Krylov). Like {\b 14} but up to 40 m; bud-scales shining, brown; leaves 6-13 cm × 0·8-1·2 mm cone 6-13 × 5-8 cm, more than 1½ times as long as wide; seed with fragile husk.{\i  N.E. Russia, westwards to} 50°{\i  E.} Rs(N, C). ({\i N. Asia.})
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 16. P. wallichiana} A.B. Jackson,{\i  Kew Bull.}{\b  1938:} 85 (1938) ({\i P. excelsa }Wall., non Lam.,{\i  P. chylla} O. Schwarz,{\i  P. griffithii} McClell.). Tree up to 50 m; bark greyish-brown and smooth on young trees, becoming shallowly fissured on old trees. Twigs glabrous, yellowish-green at first, becoming brownish-yellow. Leaves 8-20 cm × 0·7 mm, flexible, pendent. Cone 15-25 × 3 cm, cylindrical, straight, becoming pendent. Seeds 8-9 × 5-6 mm; wing 10-20 mm.{\i  Planted for timber in Italy}. [It.] ({\i Himalaya.})
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 17. P. peuce} Griseb., {\i Spicil. Fl. Rumel.}{\b  2:} 349 (1845). Tree up to 30 m; crown narrowly and densely pyramidal; bark grey, fissured with small scales. Twigs glabrous. Leaves 7-12 cm × 0·7 mm, rigid acute, densely crowded, forwardly directed. Cone 8-15 × 2·5 cm more or less curved. Seeds 8 × 5 mm; wing 15 mm. •{\i  Mountains of Balkan peninsula from} c. 41°{\i  to} 43°{\i  N}. Al Bu Gr Ju.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 18. P. strobus} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 1001 (1753). Tree up to 50 m; crown pyramidal at first, later becoming broader; bark greyish-green and smooth on young trees, becoming brown and fissured on old trees. Twigs becoming glabrous, or remaining pubescent below leaf-traces. Leaves 5-14 cm, slender, flexible, patent. Cone 8-20 × 3-4 cm, cylindrical, often curved near the apex, pendent. Seeds 5-8 mm; wing 18-25 mm.{\i  Planted for timber, especialy in C. Europe.} [Au Be Bu Cz Da Ga Ge He It Po Rm Rs(C) Su Tu.] ({\i E. & C. North America}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b P. aristata} Engelm.,{\i  Amer. Jour. Sci. Arts} ser. 2,{\b  34:} 331 (1862), from S.W. United States, a procumbent shrub or small tree up to 15 m, with leaves 20-40 mm, covered with conspicuous resinous exudate, and cone 4-9 cm, is cultivated for timber on a small scale in Europe.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b  27.       TAXODIACEAE}
\par     

\pard\f0\fs24\qc  Edit. D.M. Moore.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Monoecious; resiniferous trees, rarely shrubs, with spirally arranged leaves. Male and female cones made up of numerous spirally arranged scales. Scales of male cones (microsporophylls) bearing 2-8 pollen-sacs on the lower surface. Scales of female cones (megasporophylls) bearing 2-12 ovules on the upper surface; subtending scale (bract) indistinct, wholly or partially united with the cone-scale. Female cone more or less woody in fruit. Seeds winged.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Leaves of lateral twigs linear to linear-oblong, flat, distichous
\par
2 Evergreen; leaves dark green ......................................................... {\b 1. Sequoia}
\par
2 Deciduous; leaves pale green ..................................................... {\b 3. Taxodium}
\par
1 All leaves subulate
\par
3 Leaves radially arranged, appressed or slightly patent at the apex,
\par
  triangular in section; female cone 3-8 cm, ovoid .............. {\b 2. Sequoiadendron}
\par
3 Leaves in 5 ranks, patent, incurved, quadrangular in section; 
\par
  female cone 1·5-3 cm, subglobose .......................................... {\b 4. Cryptomeria}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 1.           Sequoia}                 Endl.
\par     

\pard\f0\fs24\qc  By V.H. Heywood.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Evergreen trees with irregularly whorled branches. Winter-buds scaly. Leaves of 2 kinds: those on the leading and cone-bearing twigs spirally arranged, subulate, scale-like, keeled above, appressed or slightly patent; those on the lateral twigs distichous linear to linear-oblong, flat, with 2 white stomatal bands beneath. Female cones persistent, ripening in the second year; cone-scales 15-20.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. S. sempervirens} (D. Don) Endl., {\i Syn. Conif.} 198 (1847). Up to 100 m, often suckering freely from the base, trunk 3-4·5 m in diameter; outer bark thick, exfoliating in dark brown plates, revealing the inner, bright red bark. Leaves of lateral twigs 6-25 × 2-3 mm, acute, often falcate, dark green above; leaves of leading and cone-bearing twigs 6 mm, incurved and with a sharp callose point at the apex, decurrent at the base. Female cone 18-25 × 12 mm, ovoid; scales expanded into a rhomboidal disc, rarely with a mucro. Seeds 3-5 on each scale.{\i  Planted for ornament and occasionally for timber.} [Ba Ga It.] ({\i W. North America.})
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 2.         Sequoiadendron}            Buchholz
\par  

\pard\f0\fs24\qc  By V.H. Heywood.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Like Sequoia, but winter-buds naked; leaves of 1 kind only, radially arranged, narrowly lanceolate, appressed or slightly patent at the apex; female cone-scales 25-40.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. S. giganteum} (Lindley) Buchholz,{\i  Amer. Jour. Bot. }{\b 26:} 536 (1939) ({\i Seqoia gigantea} Decne, non Endl., {\i S. wellingtonia} Seem.). Up to 80 m, with narrow pyramidal crown; trunk up to 7 m in diameter above the thickened, buttressed base; bark thick and spongy, reddish-brown. Leaves c. 1 cm, becoming longer on older twigs, ovate to lanceolate, flat above, convex beneath, broadly decurrent at the base. Female cone 3-5(-8) × 2-3·5(-4·5) cm, terminal, ovoid; scales expanded into a rhomboidal disc, with a depression in the middle often bearing a slender mucro. Seeds 3-7 on each scale.{\i  Planted for ornament and occasionally for timber.} [Au Ga.] ({\i California}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 3.            Taxodium}            L.C.M. Richard
\par 

\pard\f0\fs24\qc  By V.H. Heywood.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Deciduous trees. Winter-buds scaly. Lateral twigs deciduous with the leaves. Leaves flat, linear; those of the persistent terminal twigs spirally arranged; those of the deciduous lateral twigs distichous and somewhat longer. Male cones in terminal panicles. Female cones globose, ripening in the first year.
\par

\par
44}
\par