{\rtf1\ansi \deff4\deflang1033{\fonttbl{\f4\froman\fcharset0\fprq2 Times New Roman;}}{\colortbl;\red0\green0\blue0;\red0\green0\blue255;\red0\green255\blue255;\red0\green255\blue0;\red255\green0\blue255;\red255\green0\blue0;\red255\green255\blue0;\red255\green255\blue255;\red0\green0\blue128;\red0\green128\blue128;\red0\green128\blue0;\red128\green0\blue128;\red128\green0\blue0;\red128\green128\blue0;\red128\green128\blue128;\red192\green192\blue192;}{\stylesheet{\widctlpar \f4\fs20\lang2057 \snext0 Normal;}{\*\cs10 \additive Default Paragraph Font;}}{\info{\author dddd}{\operator dddd}{\creatim\yr1998\mo11\dy11\hr16\min58}{\revtim\yr1998\mo11\dy11\hr16\min58}{\version2}{\edmins0}{\nofpages3}{\nofwords1002}{\nofchars5712}{\*\company  }{\vern57431}}\widowctrl\ftnbj\aenddoc\hyphcaps0 \fet0\sectd \linex0 {\*\pnseclvl1\pnucrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl2\pnucltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl3\pndec\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl4\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl5\pndec\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl6\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl7\pnlcrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl8\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl9\pnlcrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}
\pard\plain \ \f4\fs20\lang2057 {\fs28 flowers. 2n = 28.}{\i\fs28  Limestone rocks. Maritime Alps; Liguria.}{\fs28  Ga It.
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 47. S. crustata}{\fs28  Vest,}{\i\fs28  Bot. Zeit.}{\fs28  (}{\i\fs28 Regensburg}{\fs28 ) }{\b\fs28 3}{\fs28 : 314 (1804) (}{\i\fs28 S. incrustata}{\fs28  auct.). Leaves 15-60 \'d7 2-4 mm, linear, entire, glaucous and lime-encrusted, in flat, densely caespitose rosettes. Flowering stem 12-30 cm; panicle smaller and with fewer flowers than in }{\b\fs28 45}{\fs28 , occupying about \'bd the stem or less, each branch bearing 1-3 flowers. Pedicels glandular-hairy; hypanthium and calyx usually glabrous. Petals 4-6 mm, white, sometimes with red spots. 2n = 28. }{\i\fs28 Limestone rocks. E. Alps, extending southwards to C. Jugoslavia.}{\fs28  Au It Ju.
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 48. S. hostii}{\fs28  Tausch, }{\i\fs28 Syll. Pl. Nov. Ratisbon.}{\fs28  (}{\i\fs28 K\'f6nigl. Baier. Bot. Ges.}{\fs28 ) }{\b\fs28 2}{\fs28 : 240 (1828). Rosettes rather distant. Leaves 30-100 \'d7 4-10 mm, linear-oblong, tending to curve downwards at the apex, finely serrate, somewhat glaucous, lime-encrusted. Flowering stem 25-60 cm; panicle rather shorter than the peduncle, its primary branches with (3-)5-12 flowers. Petals 5-8 mm, white, usually with numerous red spots. 2n = 28.}{\i\fs28  Calcicole. E. Alps, mainly on S. side.}{\fs28  Au ?Cz ?Hu It Ju [No].
\par 
\par  (}{\b\fs28 a}{\fs28 ) Subsp.}{\b\fs28  hostii}{\fs28  (subsp. }{\i\fs28 dolomitica}{\fs28  Br.-Bl.; incl.}{\i\fs28  S. altissima}{\fs28  A. Kerner): Basal leaves up to 10 cm, and usually at least 6 mm wide, with obtuse, rounded apex; marginal teeth distinct. Primary branches of panicle with at least 5 flowers.}{\i\fs28  From}{\fs28  10\'b0 30'}{\i\fs28  E. in Austria to c.}{\fs28  15\'b0}{\i\fs28  E. in Slovenija}{\fs28 .
\par  (}{\b\fs28 b}{\fs28 ) Subsp.}{\b\fs28  rhaetica}{\fs28  (A. Kerner) Br.-Bl. in Hegi,}{\i\fs28  Ill. Fl. Mitteleur.}{\b\fs28  4}{\fs28 (}{\b\fs28 2}{\fs28 ): 590 (1922): Leaves not more than 50 \'d7 3-7 mm, with acute apex; marginal teeth often obscure. Primary branches of panicle with 3-5 flowers.}{\i\fs28  Italian Alps from}{\fs28  9\'b0 15'}{\i\fs28  to}{\fs28  10\'b0 45' }{\i\fs28 E}{\fs28 .
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 49. S. paniculata}{\fs28  Miller,}{\i\fs28  Gard. Dict. }{\fs28 ed. 8, no. 3 (1768) (}{\i\fs28 S. aizoon}{\fs28  Jacq.). Rosettes rather crowded. Leaves (5-)12 40(-60) \'d7 2-8 mm, more or less upwardly curved at the apex, forming hemispherical rosettes, obovate to oblong-lingulate, obtuse or acute, finely serrate, glaucous and usually lime-encrusted. Flowering stem (4-)12-30 cm, branched only in its upper 1/3 to form a small panicle; branches patent or suberect, 1- to 3(4)-flowered, glandular-hairy. Petals 4-6 mm, white or pale cream, sometimes with small red spots. 2n = 28.}{\i\fs28  Throughout the mountains of C. & S. Europe, from the Vosges and C. Poland to N. Spain, S. Italy and C. Greece; also very locally in Norway.}{\fs28  Al Au Bu Co Cz Ga Ge Gr He Hs Hu Is It Ju No Po Rm Rs(W).
\par 
\par Very variable in size and in leaf-shape. Subsp.}{\b\fs28  cartilaginea}{\fs28  (Willd.) D.A. Webb, }{\i\fs28 Feddes Repert.}{\b\fs28  68}{\fs28 : 208 (1963), with apiculate or acuminate leaves, occurs in the Caucasus and Anatolia; certain plants from the Balkan peninsula approach this subspecies.
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 50. S. cotyledon}{\fs28  L., }{\i\fs28 Sp. Pl}{\fs28 . 398 (1753) (incl. }{\i\fs28 S. montavoniensis}{\fs28  A. Kerner). Leaves 20-80 \'d7 6-20 mm, oblong to oblanceolate, finely and regularly serrate, only slightly glaucous, sparsely lime-encrusted. Flowering rosette 7-12 cm, usually accompanied by small, rather distant daughter-rosettes. Flowering stem 15-70 cm, branched from near the base to form a large, pyramidal panicle of very numerous flowers. Pedicels and calyx glandular-hairy. Petals 6-10 mm, white. 2n = 28.}{\i\fs28  Rocks; calcifuge. \bullet  S. Alps; C. Pyrenees; W. Fennoscandia and Iceland.}{\fs28  Au Ge He ?Hs Is It No Su.
\par 
\par The populations from N. Europe, the Alps and the Pyrenees differ slightly, but scarcely enough to justify the recognition of subspecies.
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 51. S. valdensis}{\fs28  DC. in Lam. & DC.,}{\i\fs28  Fl. Fr.}{\fs28  ed. 3, }{\b\fs28 5}{\fs28 : 517 (1815). Leafy shoots erect, densely caespitose, terminating in small leaf-rosettes, forming a deep, hard, rather irregular cushion. Leaves 4-12 mm, linear to oblanceolate-spathulate, obtuse, entire, very glaucous and lime-encrusted; upper surface irregularly pitted. Flowering stem 5-12 cm; cauline leaves longer than those of the rosettes. Flowers 5-12, in a corymbose panicle. Petals 5-6 mm, white. 2n = 28.}{\i\fs28  Rock-crevices; generally calcicole. S.W. Alps, from}{\fs28  44\'b0 30'}{\i\fs28  to}{\fs28  45\'b0 30'}{\i\fs28  N.}{\fs28  Ga It.
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 52. S. mutata}{\fs28  L., }{\i\fs28 Sp. Pl.,}{\fs28  ed. 2, 570 (1762). Flowering rosettes 5-13 cm in diameter, sometimes solitary, so that the plant is monocarpic, but more often producing a few daughter rosettes on offsets. Leaves 20-70 \'d7 7-15 mm, oblong-oblanceolate, obtuse, dark green, not glaucous, shining, not lime-encrusted, with a conspicuous hyaline margin, entire distally but fimbriate-ciliate towards the base. Petals 5-8 mm, linear, acute, orange; floral disc and top of ovary red. \bullet }{\i\fs28  Alps and adjacent regions; W. & S. Carpathians}{\fs28 . Au Cz Ga He It Rm.
\par 
\par  (}{\b\fs28 a}{\fs28 ) Subsp.}{\b\fs28  mutata}{\fs28  : Flowering stem 20-50 cm, stout, bearing a lax, densely glandular-hairy panicle; peduncle short but distinct. 2n = 28.}{\i\fs28  Alps and adjacent regions ; Tatra}{\fs28 .
\par  (}{\b\fs28 b}{\fs28 ) Subsp.}{\b\fs28  demissa}{\fs28  (Schott & Kotschy) D.A. Webb,}{\i\fs28  Feddes Repert.}{\b\fs28  68 }{\fs28 : 209 (1963) (}{\i\fs28 S. demissa}{\fs28  Schott & Kotschy): Peduncle very short or absent, so that each rosette bears numerous racemes or slightly branched panicles 6-20 cm.}{\i\fs28  S. Carpathians}{\fs28  (25\'b0}{\i\fs28  to}{\fs28  26\'b0 }{\i\fs28 E}{\fs28 .).
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 53. S. florulenta}{\fs28  Moretti, }{\i\fs28 Gior. Fis.}{\fs28  (}{\i\fs28 Brugnat}{\fs28 ) ser. 2,}{\b\fs28  6}{\fs28 : 468 (1823). Monocarpic; rosettes solitary, very slow-growing and with persistent dead leaves, so that the rosette eventually forms a low cylinder. Leaves 30-60 \'d7 4-7 mm in mature plants, but considerably shorter in young ones, oblanceolate, apiculate or mucronate, coriaceous, dull, dark green, not lime-encrusted; hydathodes inconspicuous; margin cartilaginous, ciliate except near the apex. Inflorescence a long, narrow, glandular-hairy, thyrsoid panicle, shortly pedunculate. Petals 5-7 mm, oblanceolate, acute, flesh coloured. Carpels often 3; sometimes 5 in the terminal flower. 2n = 28.}{\i\fs28  Shady, vertical rocks above}{\fs28  1900}{\i\fs28  m.; calcifuge. Central part of Maritime Alps; rare and apparently decreasing}{\fs28 . Ga It.
\par 
\par Sect. TRACHYPHYLLUM (Gaudin) Koch. Evergreen, mat-forming perennials with procumbent to decumbent leafy shoots. Leaves narrow, stiff, entire, not lime-encrusted. Flowering stem terminal, leafy. Sepals patent, even in fruit; petals white to pale yellow, sometimes with red or orange spots. Ovary superior.
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 54. S. aspera}{\fs28  L., }{\i\fs28 Sp. Pl}{\fs28 . 402 (1753) (incl. }{\i\fs28 S. etrusca }{\fs28 Pignatti). Leafy shoots long, procumbent, forming a loose mat. Leaves patent, oblong-lanceolate, aristate, glabrous except for stiff marginal cilia; axillary buds conspicuous but considerably shorter than the leaves. Flowering stem 8-20 cm, erect, nearly glabrous, with 2-5 (rarely more) flowers in a lax cyme; lower cauline leaves c. 10 mm, patent. Petals 4-7 mm, with a very short but distinct claw, white or cream-coloured, usually yellow at the base and often with red or orange spots higher up. 2n = 26.}{\i\fs28  Rocks and stony places, mostly }{\fs28 1200-2200 }{\i\fs28 m; somewhat calcifuge. Alps, N. Appennini and Alpi Apuane; E. Pyrenees}{\fs28 . Au Ga He Hs It.
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 55. S. bryoides}{\fs28  L.,}{\i\fs28  Sp. Pl.}{\fs28  400 (1753) (}{\i\fs28 S. aspera}{\fs28  subsp. }{\i\fs28 bryoides}{\fs28  (L.) Engler & Irmscher). Like }{\b\fs28 54}{\fs28  but with shorter and much more densely matted leafy shoots, bearing smaller, incurved leaves which scarcely exceed the axillary buds; flowers solitary, on stems 3-8 cm,
\par 
\par 449}
\par }