{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28    ({\b 35-37}).{\b  S. porophylla} group. Leaves linear to spathulate. Flowers subsessile in a spike-like cyme. Calyx and hypanthium dull pink to deep crimson-purple. Petals purplish-pink, about equalling the sepals.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 A troublesome complex of closely related taxa, very variously treated by different authors.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Leaves scarcely expanded towards the apex, acute or apiculate,
\par
  not more than 2·5 mm wide ................................................ {\b 37. sempervivum}
\par
1 Leaves oblanceolate to spathulate, obtuse or mucronate,
\par
  usually more than 2·5 mm wide
\par
2 Leaves 4-15 × 2-3 mm; flowers 4-7(-12); inflorescence dull pink,
\par
  often tinged with green ............................................................ {\b 35. porophylla}
\par
2 Leaves 12-35 × 3-8 mm; flowers 10-20; inflorescence bright
\par
  red or dark purplish-red ................................................... {\b 36. federici-augusti}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 35. S. porophylla} Bertol. in Desv.,{\i Jour. Bot. Appl.}{\b  4}: 76 (1814) ({\i S. media} auct. ital. non Gouan). Rosettes fairly flat. Leaves 4-15 × 2-3 mm, oblanceolate, mucronate, with 5-11 hydathodes. Flowering stem 3-8 cm, with 4-7(-12) flowers. Calyx and hypanthium dull, rather pale pink, sometimes tinged with green, rarely red.{\i  Limestone rocks and screes above} 1000{\i  m. C. & S. Italy.} It.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 36. S. federici-augusti} Biasol., {\i Relaz. Viaggio} 109 (1841) ({\i S. frederici-augusti} auct., {\i S. media} subsp. {\i porophylla} sensu Hayek, pro parte; incl.{\i  S. porophylla} var. {\i montenegrina} (Halácsy & Bald.) Engler & Irmscher). Rosettes regular, flat. Leaves 12-35 × 3-8 mm, oblanceolate to spathulate, usually mucronate. Flowering stem 7-20 cm, with 10-20 flowers. Inflorescence bright or dark red.{\i  Limestone rocks. Balkan peninsula, from central Crna Gora to E.C. Greece.} Al Gr Ju.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp.{\b  federici-augusti} : Leaves not more than 18 mm, obovate-oblanceolate, rather gradually widened at the apex. Inflorescence dark purplish-red, with usually not more than 15 flowers. Flowering stem fairly slender. Mainly in the north-western part of the range of the species, and mostly at high altitudes.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp.{\b  grisebachii} (Degen & Dörfler) D.A. Webb,{\i  Bot. Jour. Linn. Soc.}{\b  95}: 235 (1987) ({\i S. grisebachii} Degen & Dörfler): Leaves up to 35 mm, spathulate, widened rather abruptly at the apex. Inflorescence crimson to bright red, with up to 20 flowers. 2n = 26.{\i  Mainly in the south-eastern part of the range of the species, and descending to lower altitudes}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 37. S. sempervivum} C. Koch,{\i  Linnaea }{\b 19}: 40 (1846) ({\i S.porophylla} var.{\i  sibthorpiana} (Griseb.) Engler & Irmscher; incl.{\i  S. media }subsp. {\i porophylla} sensu Hayek, pro parte). Rosettes rather squarrose. Leaves 5-20 × 1-3 mm, linear to narrowly oblong, acute or apiculate. Flowering stem 6-20 cm, with 8-20 flowers. Inflorescence dark purplish-crimson. 2n = 12.{\i  Limestone rocks, usually above }1800{\i  m. Balkan peninsula, from Crna Gora and C. Bulgaria southwards}. Al Bu Gr Ju.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 38. S. media} Gouan,{\i  Obs. Bot. }27 (1773). Rosettes somewhat squarrose. Leaves 6-17 × 2-4 mm, linear-oblong to oblanceolate, acute. Flowering stem 3-12 cm, with a raceme-like inflorescence of 2-12 flowers, all pedicellate, but with pedicels varying from 3 to 25 mm. Inflorescence reddish-pink, often tinged with green. Petals 2·5-3·5 mm, bright pinkish-purple, about equalling the sepals. 2n = 26.{\i  Rocks ; somewhat calcicole. • E. Pyrenees, westwards to} 0° 20'{\i  E.} Ga Hs.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 39. S. stribrnyi} (Velen.) Podp., {\i Verh. Zool.-Bot. Ges. Wien }{\b 52}: 652 (1902) ({\i S. media} subsp. {\i stribrnyi} (Velen.) Hayek). Rosettes more or less flat. Leaves 12-25 × 3-6 mm, oblanceolate to somewhat spathulate, obtuse or shortly mucronate, glaucous, usually with abundant calcareous incrustation. Flowering stem 3-9 cm, usually branched from near the middle to give a lax panicle of 8-25 clearly pedicellate flowers. Inflorescence deep crimson. Petals 3-4 mm, slightly exceeding the sepals, purple. 2n = 26.{\i  Mountain rocks; calcicole. • Bulgaria and N. Greece.} Bu Gr.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 40. S. corymbosa} Boiss., {\i Diagn. Pl. Or. Nov.}{\b  1}({\b 3}): 17 (1843) ({\i S. luteo-viridis} Schott & Kotschy). Rosettes flat. Leaves 7-22 × 2·5-4 mm, linear-oblong to subspathulate, acute to mucronate, often purple beneath. Flowering stem 3-10 cm, bearing a rather crowded panicle of 2-12 shortly pedicellate flowers. Inflorescence usually pale green, but in strongly illuminated plants deep crimson. Petals 3 mm, shorter than the sepals, pale yellow.{\i  Limestone rocks above} 1500{\i  m. E. & S. Carpathians; Bulgaria and N. Greece.} Bu Gr.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Subsect.{\i  Oppositifoliae} Hayek. Leaves usually opposite, with or without calcareous incrustation. Flowering stem short, with 1-3 flowers. Sepals patent, not concealing the purple, pink or white petals.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 41. S. oppositifolia} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 402 (1753). Stems woody, branched, more or less procumbent, forming a mat or low, lax cushion. Leaves 1·5-5(-8) × 1-2 mm, oblong to obovate, obtuse or subacute, narrowed at the base but scarcely petiolate, keeled beneath, hard and rigid, dull, dark green, usually crowded and imbricate; hydathodes 1-3(-5); calcareous incrustation moderate. Flowering stem 1-2(-5) cm; flower solitary. Sepals 2-4 mm, ciliate; petals 5-12(-20) × 2-7 mm, pale pink to deep purple, fading to violet.{\i  Arctic and subarctic Europe, and on most of the mountain ranges southwards to the Sierra Nevada, C. Italy and N.W. Greece}. Al Au Br Bu Cz Fa Fe Ga Ge Gr Hb He Hs Is It Ju No Po Rm Rs(N) Sb Su.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Leaves mostly alternate ................................................. ({\b b}) subsp. {\b paradoxa}
\par
1 Leaves mostly opposite
\par
2 Leaves 1·5-2 × 0·7-1·3 mm; flowers subsessile ........ ({\b c}) subsp. {\b rudolphiana}
\par
2 Leaves at least 2·5 × 1·5 mm; flowering stem developed
\par
3 Leaf-margin ciliate to the apex, the apical hairs the longest
\par
  ................................................................................ ({\b d}) subsp. {\b blepharophylla}
\par
3 Cilia absent from apex of leaf, or, if present, shorter than
\par
  those near the base
\par
4 Leaves ciliate almost to the apex; cartilaginous margin not
\par
  widened at the apex ................................................... ({\b a}) subsp. {\b oppositifolia}
\par
4 Leaf-apex not ciliate, but with a wide cartilaginous margin
\par
  ........................................................................................... ({\b e}) subsp. {\b speciosa}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp.{\b  oppositifolia} (incl.{\i  S. latina} (N. Terracc.) Hayek, {\i S. murithiana} Tiss.,{\i  S. pulvinata} Small): Rather lax in habit. Leaves 2·5-8 mm, opposite, except sometimes on upper part of flowering stem, ciliate almost to the apex, with longest hairs at the base. Flowering stem 1-2(-5) cm. Hairs on sepals usually eglandular.{\i  Almost throughout the range of the species, but rare in the Pyrenees and C. Appennini}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp.{\b  paradoxa} D.A. Webb,{\i  Bot. Jour. Linn. Soc.}{\b  95}: 237 (1987): Like subsp. ({\b a}) but leaves alternate, except rarely on a few of the weaker shoots. Flowers usually fairly large. Pyrenees.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b c}) Subsp.{\b  rudolphiana} (Hornsch.) Engler & Irmscher,{\i  Pflanzenreich}{\b  69}({\b IV.117}): 638 (1919) ({\i S. rudolphiana} Hornsch.): Leafy shoots densely crowded to give a dense, flat cushion. Leaves 1·5-2 × 0·7-1·3 mm, opposite, subacute, with slender marginal
\par

\par
447}
\par