{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 obtuse, arcuate-recurved from near the base, very glaucous and lime-encrusted, without hyaline border, ciliate near the base. Flowering stem 4-10 cm, very slender, with 2-5 flowers. Calyx and pedicels glandular-hairy; lower part of flowering stem often nearly glabrous. Petals 4-6 mm, broadly obovate, white. 2n = 26.{\i  Rocks, screes and stony ground; calcicole. • Mountains of C. & S. Europe, from the Alps and W. Carpathians to the Pyrenees, C. Appennini and Crna Gora.} Au Cz Ga Ge He Hs It Ju Po.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 23. S. squarrosa} Sieber,{\i  Flora }({\i Regensb}.) {\b 4}: 99 (1821). Like {\b 22} but leafy shoots more densely packed, giving deeper, harder cushions; leaves slightly smaller, linear-oblong, subacute, suberect in lower part and arcuate-recurved only near the apex; flowering stem usually densely glandular-hairy towards the base and nearly glabrous in the inflorescence. 2n = 26.{\i  Limestone rocks. S.E. Alps}. Au It Ju.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 24. S. marginata} Sternb., {\i Revis. Saxifr. Suppl. I,} 1 (1822) (incl.{\i  S. boryi} Boiss & Heldr., {\i S. rocheliana} Sternb.). Densely caespitose, with rosette-like or columnar leafy shoots. Leaves 3-13 × 1-5 mm, very variable, linear-oblong to obovate-spathulate, more or less obtuse (rarely shortly mucronate), glandular-ciliate towards the base, with a distinct hyaline border throughout, plane or recurved distally. Flowering stem 3-12 cm, leafy, pubescent, bearing a compact corymbose cyme of 2-8 flowers. Petals 5-13 mm, obovate, white, or rarely pale pink.{\i  Mountain rocks; calcicole. Balkan peninsula, S. Carpathians, C. & S. Italy}. Al Bu Gr It Ju Rm.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 The contrast between the extreme varieties of this species (var.{\i  rocheliana} (Sternb.) Engler & Irmscher, with flat rosettes of leaves c. 10 × 3·5 mm, and var.{\i  coriophylla }(Griseb.) Engler, with columnar shoots of imbricate, recurved leaves c. 5 × 1 mm) has led many authors to treat them as species or subspecies, but they are connected to each other and to the type by a full range of intermediates, and are not clearly separated geographically. Extreme examples of var.{\i  coriophylla} can scarcely be distinguished from {\b 25}.
\par

\par                                                

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 25. S. diapensioides} Bellardi, {\i App. Fl. Pedem.} 21 (1792). Leafy shoots numerous, columnar, caespitose, forming a deep, rigid cushion. Leaves 4-6 × 1-1·5 mm, suberect, densely imbricate, oblong, obtuse, thick, glaucous, glabrous except for a few cilia near the base; margin hyaline. Flowering stem 3-7 cm, glandular-hairy, bearing 2-6 flowers. Petals c. 8 × 5 mm, white. 2n = 26. {\i Mountain rocks; calcicole. • S.W. Alps, eastwards to Monte Rosa.} Ga He It.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 26. S. tombeanensis} Boiss. ex Engler,{\i  Monogr. Gatt. Saxifr.} 268 (1872). Like {\b 25} but differing chiefly in the leaves, which are slightly shorter, lanceolate, elliptical or rhombic, cucullate, with a distinct incurved mucro, thinner, scarcely glaucous, seldom lime-encrusted and more conspicuously ciliate. Petals often up to 12 mm. Mountain rocks; calcicole. 2n = 26.{\i  Italian Alps,from} 10° 30' {\i to} 11° 15' {\i E.} It.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 27. S. scardica} Griseb.,{\i  Spicil. Fl. Rumel. }{\b 1}: 332 (1843). Leafy shoots up to 5 cm, forming a rather dense cushion. Leaves 5-15 × 2-4 mm, oblong, mucronate, convex below and keeled near the apex; margin hyaline, serrulate or ciliate except near the apex, somewhat glaucous. Flowering stem 4-12 cm, with a compact cyme of 5-14 flowers. Petals 7-12 mm, white or pale pink, rarely crimson. 2n = 26.{\i  Limestone rocks and screes. • Mountains of Balkan peninsula, from Crna Gora to S. Greece}. Al Gr Ju.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 28. S. spruneri} Boiss.,{\i  Diagn. Pl. Or. Nov.}{\b  1}({\b 3}): 18 (1843). Leafy shoots numerous, caespitose, columnar, forming large cushions. Leaves 4-6 mm, obovate-oblong, obtuse, ciliate in basal 2, with a narrow, hyaline border in apical 2, glandular-hairy on lower surface, erect, appressed. Flowering stem 4 8 cm, with 6-12 flowers in a somewhat corymbose cyme. Petals c. 5 × 2·5 mm, white. 2n = 28.{\i  Crevices of limestone rocks, mostly above }2000{\i  m. • Mountains of C. Greece and S. Bulgaria.} ?Al Bu Gr ?Ju.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 29. S. burseriana} L.,{\i  Sp. Pl.} 400 (1753). Leafy shoots short, forming a low cushion or thick mat. Leaves 6-12 × 1·5-2 mm, linear-subulate, tapering from the base to an acute, pungent apex, glaucous, with a narrow, hyaline margin. Flowers solitary; peduncles 2-5 cm, reddish. Petals 7-15 × 5-10 mm, white. 2n = 26.{\i  Rocks and screes; calcicole. • E. Alps,from} 10° 20'{\i  E. eastwards}. Au Ge It Ju.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 30. S. vandellii} Sternb.,{\i  Revis. Saxifr.} 34 (1810). Leafy shoots numerous, columnar, caespitose, forming a dense, hard, deep cushion. Leaves 8-11 × 1·5-2 mm, suberect, lanceolate-subulate, strongly apiculate, pungent, keeled below, not glaucous, ciliate-denticulate towards the base; margin hyaline. Flowering stem 4-8 cm, bearing 3-8 flowers in a compact corymb. Petals c. 9 × 4 mm, oblanceolate-cuneate, white. 2n = 26.{\i  Limestone cliffs. • Italian Alps, from} 9° 15'{\i  to }10° 45'{\i  E}. It.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 31. S. juniperifolia} Adams in Weber fil. & Mohr,{\i  Beitr. Naturk.}{\b  1}: 53 (1806) ({\i S. juniperina }Bieb.; incl.{\i  S. pseudosancta} Janka). Leafy shoots numerous, crowded, forming a compact cushion. Leaves 10-14 × 1·5-2·5 mm, strongly mucronate or apiculate, not glaucous or lime-encrusted, with a narrow hyaline border, which is denticulate below but entire in the apical 1/{\b 2. Flowering} stem 3-6 cm, leafy, bearing 4-8 flowers in an oblong cyme. Pedicels and hypanthium villous. Petals 5-6 × 2-3 mm, obovate-cuneate, acute, suberect, bright yellow, shorter than the stamens.{\i  Damp or shady mountain rocks. Bulgaria.} Bu ?Ju. ({\i Caucasus}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 32. S. sancta} Griseb., {\i Spicil. Fl. Rumel. }{\b 1}: 333 (1843) ({\i S.juniperifolia} subsp. {\i sancta} (Griseb.) D.A. Webb). Like {\b 31} but leaves seldom more than 10 mm, with longer and stouter marginal hairs, which extend at least ¾ of the way to the apex; flowering stem and inflorescence glabrous; cyme corymbose or more or less spherical; petals about equalling the stamens.{\i  Crevices in marble rocks, }1450-2050{\i  m. N. Greece }({\i Athos, Pangaion, ?Olimbos}). Gr.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 33. S. ferdinandi-coburgi} J. Kellerer & Sünd., {\i Allgem. Bot. Zeitschr.}{\b  1901}: 116 (1901). Shoots numerous, columnar, caespitose, forming a dense, hard cushion. Leaves 5-7 × 1-1·5 mm, suberect, linear-oblong, with a short, incurved mucro and a narrow hyaline border, scarcely glaucous but with abundant calcareous incrustation, glabrous except for a few cilia at the base. Flowering stem 3-7 cm, with usually 7-13 flowers. Sepals red; petals 5-7 mm, longer than the stamens, bright yellow. 2n = 26.{\i  Mountains of Bulgaria and N. Greece.} Bu Gr.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 34. S. aretioides} Lapeyr., {\i Fig. Fl. Pyr.} 28 (1801). Like {\b 33} but leaves slightly shorter and wider, obtuse or with a straight mucro; inflorescence with only 3-5(-7) flowers; petals somewhat narrower. •{\i  Pyrenees, Cordillera Cantabrica.} Ga Hs.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Subsect. Engleria (Sünd.) Gornall. Leafy shoots short, crowded. Leaves alternate, entire, glaucous, lime-encrusted. Petals pink, purple or yellow, largely enclosed and concealed by erect, densely glandular-pubescent sepals.
\par

\par
446}
\par