{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 64 Stem with 1 or 2 flowers ....................................................... {\b 29. burseriana}
\par
64 Stem with 3-14 flowers
\par
65 Leaves deep green, without calcareous incrustation,
\par
   triangular-lanceolate, apiculate ................................................. {\b 30. vandellii}
\par
65 Leaves glaucous, usually with calcareous incrustation, oblong to
\par
   obovate-elliptical, mucronate
\par
66 Central part of leaf-margin finely toothed ................................ {\b 27. scardica}
\par
66 Central part of leaf-margin entire .......................................... {\b 24. marginata}
\par
59 Leaves obtuse to subacute
\par
67 Petals 7-12 mm
\par
68 Pedicels glabrous, or with a few very shortly stalked glands
\par
   .................................................................................................. {\b 46. cochlearis}
\par
68 Pedicels densely glandular-pubescent
\par
69 Leaves usually more than 1·5 mm wide, broadest above the middle
\par
   .................................................................................................. {\b 24. marginata}
\par
69 Leaves usually less than 1·5 mm wide, broadest at or below
\par
   the middle ........................................................................... {\b 25. diapensioides}
\par
67 Petals 3-6 mm
\par
70 Leaves finely toothed in distal ½ .......................................... {\b 49. paniculata}
\par
70 Leaves entire in distal ½
\par
71 Leaves glandular-hairy beneath ................................................ {\b 28. spruneri}
\par
71 Leaves glabrous except for a few marginal hairs near the base
\par
72 Upper surface of leaf irregularly pitted with hydathodes ....... {\b 51. valdensis}
\par
72 Upper surface of leaf smooth, except for regular rows of
\par
   hydathodes near the margin
\par
73 Leaves curved outwards from near the base; upper part of
\par
   flowering stems more densely pubescent than lower part ............. {\b 22. caesia}
\par
73 Leaves curved outwards only near the apex; lower part of
\par
   flowering stems more densely pubescent than upper part ....... {\b 23. squarrosa}
\par
41 Leaves often lobed or petiolate; if sessile and undivided,
\par
   then soft or fleshy, not coriaceous; very seldom lime-encrusted
\par
74 Leaves opposite ........................................................................... {\b 44. biflora}
\par
74 Leaves alternate or basal
\par
75 Leaves linear-oblong, fleshy; flowers dark red ........................ {\b 54. aizoides}
\par
75 Leaves not fleshy
\par
76 Leaves all entire
\par
77 Petals inconspicuous, dull in colour and scarcely longer than the sepals
\par
78 Leaves 10-30 mm wide; flowering stem leafless .................. {\b 6. hieracifolia}
\par
78 Leaves not more than 5 mm wide;
\par
   flowering stem usually with some leaves
\par 
79 Some of the leaves apiculate .................................................. {\b 116. sedoides}
\par
79 All leaves obtuse or subacute
\par
80 Flowering stems not more than 2·5 cm, scarcely exceeding
\par
   the leafy shoots ........................................................................ {\b 114. facchinii}
\par
80 Flowering stems at least 4 cm; flowers standing well above the
\par
   level of the leaves
\par
81 Petals tapered gradually to a narrow base, emarginate
\par
   at the apex ........................................................................ {\b 115. presolanensis}
\par
81 Petals not tapered at the base, rounded at the apex
\par
82 Leafy shoots fairly long, forming a rounded cushion;
\par
   basal leaves withered ................................................................... {\b 85. exarata}
\par
82 Leafy shoots very short, forming a thick mat rather than a cushion,
\par
    with all leaves appearing ± basal .................. ({\b 109-112}). {\b androsacea} group
\par
77 Petals conspicuous, larger than the sepals and usually pure white
\par
83 Dormant axillary buds on leafy shoots conspicuous at flowering time
\par
84 Leaves obovate, obtuse; petals turning pink after
\par
   pollination ................................................................................ {\b 75. erioblasta}
\par
84 Leaves linear-oblong, apiculate; petals remaining white ......... {\b 77. conifera}
\par
83 Leafy shoots without conspicuous summer dormant axillary buds
\par
85 Leaves sparingly ciliate or completely glabrous
\par
86 Leaves 3-6 mm wide; flowering stem with 1 or 2 cauline leaves
\par
   and 1-3 flowers ............................................... ({\b 109-112}).{\b  androsacea} group
\par
86 Leaves 1-2 mm wide; flowering stems with 4-7 cauline
\par
   leaves and 3-9 flowers
\par
87 Leaves and sepals apiculate ...................................................... {\b 119. tenella}
\par
87 Leaves and sepals obtuse ........................................................ {\b 118. glabella}
\par
85 Leaves ± hairy on the surface
\par
88 Annual; petals 2-3 mm ................................ ({\b 120-123}).{\b  tridactylites} group
\par
88 Perennial; petals 4-7 mm
\par
89 Leaves firm, usually with calcareous incrustation and with
\par
   hyaline margin; inflorescence with 6-12 flowers ....................... {\b 28. spruneri}
\par
89 Leaves soft, without calcareous incrustation or hyaline margin;
\par
   inflorescence with 1-4 flowers
\par
90 Leafy shoots up to 10 cm, numerous, crowded, forming a compact cushion;
\par
   leaves mostly less than 2·5 mm wide; petals contiguous ...... {\b 113. muscoides}
\par
90 Leafy shoots short, relatively few, forming a dense but low mat;
\par
   leaves mostly more than 2·5 mm wide; petals not contiguous
\par
   ......................................................................... ({\b 109-112}).{\b  androsacea }group
\par
76 Some of the leaves toothed, crenate or lobed
\par
91 Petals greenish, cream-coloured, dull or pale yellow or dark red
\par
92 All leaves in a basal rosette ................................................... {\b 6. hieracifolia}
\par
92 Plant with leafy stems and without basal rosette
\par
93 Leaves divided to base into 3 lobes, each further subdivided
\par
   ............................................................................................. {\b 95. pentadactylis}
\par
93 Leaves not divided to base
\par
94 Larger leaves more than 10 mm wide, usually wider than long
\par

\par
440}
\par