{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. T. distichum} (L.) L.C.M. Richard,{\i  Ann. Mus. Hist. Nat.} ({\i Paris}) {\b 16:} 298 (1810). Tree up to 50 m, with a rather narrow outline, often with conspicuous buttresses at the base of the trunk. Bark reddish-brown, fibrous, peeling. Leaves up to 20 mm, acute, channelled above. Male cones purplish, in slender panicles. Female cone 15-30 mm in diameter; some of the scales sterile, others bearing 2 irregularly trigonous seeds.{\i  Planted for timber in S. and S.C. Europe, especialy on alluvial land}. [Bu Ga Ge It Rm.] ({\i S.E. United States}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 4.          Cryptomeria}               D. Don
\par 

\pard\f0\fs24\qc  By J. do Amaral Franco.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Evergreen pyramidal trees with irregularly whorled, rigid branches. Leaves spirally arranged, subulate, incurved, decurrent.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Female cones persistent, ripening in the first year; cone-scales 20-30.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. C. japonica} (L. fil.) D. Don,{\i  Trans. Linn. Soc. London} ({\i Bot.}) {\b 18:} 167 (1841). Up to 40 m, with short ascending branches forming a narrow, dense crown; bark reddish-brown, exfoliating in long shreds. Leaves 5-20 mm, in 5 ranks, bright green, gradually shortening towards the apex of the twig. Female cone 1·5-3 cm, subglobose; scales thick, cuneate, persistent, furnished with the recurved point of the adnate bract on the back and with pointed processes at the apex. Seeds 2-5 on each scale.{\i  Planted for ornament and occasionally for timber; naturalized in Açores}. [Az.] ({\i C. & S. Japan}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 In Açores this species sometimes produces suckers from the base.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 28.       CUPRESSACEAE}
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc  Edit. D.M. Moore.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Monoecious or dioecious; resiniferous trees or shrubs with opposite or whorled, usually scale-like, leaves. Male and female cones made up of opposite or whorled scales. Scales of male cones (microsporophylls) bearing 3-5 pollen-sacs on the lower surface. Scales of female cones (megasporophylls) bearing 2 to many erect ovules on the upper surface, and completely adnate to the subtending bract. Fruit a more or less woody cone, or the scales becoming fleshy and the fruit berry-like, indehiscent. Seeds winged or not.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Fruit indehiscent, berry-like, with fleshy, coalescent scales
\par
  ....................................................................................................... {\b 5. Juniperus}
\par
1 Fruit a dehiscent cone with ± woody scales 
\par
2 Female cone-scales 4, in a single whorl .................................... {\b 4. Tetraclinis} 
\par
2 Female cone-scales in 3-8 pairs 
\par
3 Ripe female cone-scales flat, oblong, imbricate ............................... {\b 3. Thuja} 
\par
3 Ripe female cone-scales peltate, valvate
\par
4 Twigs terete or 4-angled; seeds narrowly winged,
\par
  6-20 on each scale ....................................................................... {\b 1. Cupressus}
\par
4 Twigs flattened; seeds broadly winged, up to 5 on each scale
\par
  ............................................................................................. {\b 2. Chamaecyparis}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 1.           Cupressus}           L.
\par  

\pard\f0\fs24\qc  By J. do Amaral Franco.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Monoecious trees (rarely shrubs). Twigs terete or 4-angled. Leaves opposite, decussate, scale-like, appressed and imbricate on adult plants, acicular and patent on young plants and rarely on leading shoots. Female cones solitary, terminal on young twigs, ripening in the second year, globose to ellipsoid-globose; cone-scales in 3-7 pairs, peltate, woody. Seeds flattened, 6-20 on each scale, narrowly winged.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 In addition to the species described below, {\b C. torulosa} D. Don,{\i  Prodr. Fl. Nepal }155 (1825), has been planted for timber on a small scale in Italy. It has obtuse, appressed leaves, and a cone c. 12 mm in diameter, with 4-6 pairs of scales.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Leaves obtuse, closely appressed; female cone green when young;
\par
  cone-scales 8-14
\par
2 Leaves on lateral twigs 0·5-1 mm; male cone 4-8 mm; ripe female cone
\par
  yellowish-grey ........................................................................ {\b 1. sempervirens}
\par
2 Leaves on lateral twigs 1-2 mm; male cone 3-5 mm;
\par            
  ripe female cone brown ............................................................. {\b 2. macrocarpa}
\par
1 Leaves acute to acuminate, free at the apex; female cone glaucous when
\par
  young; cone-scales 6-8
\par
3 Leaves greyish when young, emitting a disagreeable odour when rubbed;
\par
  female cone up to 30 mm ............................................................. {\b 4. arizonica}
\par
3 Leaves green to glaucous, not emitting a disagreeable odour;
\par
  female cone 10-15 mm ................................................................ {\b 3. lusitanica}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. C. sempervirens} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 1002 (1753) ({\i C. horizontalis} Miller). Tree up to 30 m. Leaves 0·5-1 mm, dark green, obtuse. Male cone 4-8 mm; female 25-40 mm, ellipsoid-oblong (rarely globose), green when young and shining yellowish-grey when ripe, with 8-14 shortly and obtusely mucronate scales. Seeds 8-20 on each scale.{\i  Native in Kriti and perhaps elsewhere in the E. Mediterranean; long planted throughout S. Europe, and naturalized in many districts.} Cr *Gr [*Al Bl Bu Co Ga He Hs It *Ju Lu Rs(K) Sa Si Tu].
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 There are two well-known varieties: var. {\i sempervirens}, with upright branches forming a fastigiate crown, is the most commonly cultivated; var.{\i  horizontalis} (Miller) Aiton, with patent-ascending branches forming a pyramidal crown, is the wild plant on Kriti and is much less common in cultivation.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. C. macrocarpa} Hartweg,{\i  Jour. Hort. Soc. London }{\b 2:} 187 (1847). Tree up to 25 m, with erecto-patent branches, forming a pyramidal crown when young, broad and flat-topped in old trees. Leaves 1-2 mm. Male cone 3-5 mm; female cone 20-35 mm, globose to ellipsoidal, shining brown when ripe, with 8-14 shortly and obtusely mucronate scales. Seeds 8-20 on each scale.{\i  Planted for shelter and ornament, and occasionally for timber, in W. & S. Europe especially near the sea.} [Br Ga Hb Hs It Lu Si.] ({\i S. California}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 3. C. lusitanica} Miller, {\i Gard. Dict}. ed. 8, no. 3 (1768) ({\i C. glauca} Lam.). Tree up to 30 m, with spreading branches and more or less pendent leading shoot and twigs, forming a pyramidal crown on young trees, usually flat-topped on old ones. Leaves 1·5-2 mm, green to glaucous, acute to acuminate. Male cone 4-6 mm; female cone 10-15 mm, globose, glaucous when young but shining brown
\par

\par
45}
\par