{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 terminal flowering stems, and the growth of the following year has its origin in axillary buds towards the base of the previous year's growth. The foliage, therefore, forms a flat turf rather than a mat or cushion, and all the leaves appear to be more or less basal.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Petals dull yellow ...................................................................... {\b 112. seguieri}
\par
1 Petals white
\par
2 Larger leaves 6-9 mm wide; inflorescence with 3-7 flowers ... {\b 110. depressa}
\par
2 Leaves not more than 6 mm wide; inflorescence with 1-3 flowers
\par
3 Leaves mostly 3-lobed, densely covered with short glandular hairs;
\par
  flowering stem 2-4 cm .................................................................. {\b 111. italica}
\par
3 Many of the leaves usually entire, with fairly long, mainly non-glandular
\par
  hairs on the margin alone; flowering stem up to 10 cm ........ {\b 109. androsacea}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 109. S. androsacea} L.,{\i  Sp. Pl.} 399 (1753). Leaves 8-30 × 3-6 mm, including the scarcely distinct petiole, oblanceolate-spathulate, mostly entire, but occasionally some or all are very shortly 3-lobed, furnished with fairly long, mostly eglandular hairs on the margins; the upper surface of mature leaves more or less glabrous. Flowering stem 2-10 cm, bearing 1 or 2 cauline leaves and 1-3 flowers. Petals 4-7 mm, oblong to narrowly obovate, white. 2n = 16, 56, 66, 88, c. 112, c. 120, c. 128, 154, c. 192, 206-220.{\i  Snow-patches and damp, stabilized screes, mainly} 2000-2800{\i  m. Mountains of C. & S. Europe, from Auvergne and the W. Carpathians to the Pyrenees and S.W. Bulgaria}. Al Au Bu Cz Ga Ge He Hs It Ju Po Rm Rs(W)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 110. S. depressa} Sternb.,{\i  Revis. Saxifr}. 42 (1810). Leafy shoots rather longer than in other species of the group. Leaves 10-30 × 6-9 mm, including the usually ill-defined petiole, broadest near the apex, which is divided into 3 short, obtuse lobes, densely glandular-pubescent. Flowering stem up to 10 cm, with or without a cauline leaf and with 3-7 flowers. Petals 4-5 mm, oblong, white. {\i Shady ledges and damp screes, }2000-2850{\i  m, mostly on porphyritic volcanic rock. • S. Alps} ({\i Alpi Dolomitiche}). It.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 111. S. italica} D.A. Webb,{\i  Feddes Repert.}{\b  68}: 209 (1963) ({\i S. tridens} (Jan ex Engler) Engler & Irmscher, non Haw.). Like {\b 110} but smaller in all its parts; leafy shoots c. 1 cm; leaves 6-15 × 2-4 mm, without a distinct petiole, oblanceolate, mostly shortly 3-lobed; flowering stem 2-4 cm with 1 or 2 cauline leaves and 1-3 flowers. 2n = 64, 66.{\i  Limestone rocks and screes,} 2000-2500{\i  m. C. Appennini.} It.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 112. S. seguieri} Sprengel,{\i  Fl. Hal.} 40 (1807). Leaves 10-25 × 1-3 mm, oblanceolate, entire, obtuse, densely glandular-pubescent. Flowering stem 2-7 mm, usually with 1 cauline leaf and 1-3 flowers. Petals 2-3 mm, dull, pale yellow, narrower than the sepals but usually slightly longer. 2n = 66.{\i  Damp screes and stony slopes, often in late snow-lies,} 2000-3000{\i  m; somewhat calcifuge. • Alps.} Au Ga He It.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 113. S. muscoides} All.,{\i  Auct. Syn. Stirp. Horti Taur.} 35 (1773) ({\i S. planifolia }auct., non Lapeyr.). Shoots short, erect, crowded, forming a dense, soft cushion. Leaves 6 × 1·5 mm, linear-lanceolate, entire, obtuse, glandular-pubescent but not very viscid; dead leaves persistent, conspicuously silvery-grey in apical ½ when dry. Flowering stem 5 cm or less, with several leaves and 1-3 flowers. Petals 4 mm, broadly obovate, contiguous, obtuse or truncate, white or pale lemon-yellow. 2n = 38.{\i  Rocks and screes, usually above} 2200{\i  m; somewhat calcicole. • Alps,from Monte Viso to Hohe Tauern.} Au Ga He It.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 114. S. facchinii} Koch,{\i  Flora} ({\i Regensb}.){\b  25}: 624 (1842). Like {\b 113} but forming smaller cushions; flowering stem very short, scarcely projecting above leafy shoots, and often 1-flowered; petals oblong-cuneate, 2 × 1 mm or less, scarcely exceeding the sepals, dull yellow tinged to a variable extent with dull purplish-red. {\i Rocks and screes above }1800{\i  m; calcicole. • S. Alps} ({\i Alpi Dolomitiche}). It.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 115. S. presolanensis} Engler, {\i Pflanzenreich}{\b  67}({\b IV.117}): 302 (1916). Leafy shoots numerous, erect, columnar, with numerous persistent dead leaves, forming a deep, soft, dense cushion. Leaves c. 15 mm including petiole, elongate-spathulate or oblanceolate, entire, obtuse to acute, pale green, rather densely covered with long, viscid, glandular hairs; dead leaves greyish-white in apical ½ when dry. Flowering stem 6-12 cm, slender, weak, viscid, bearing 2-8 flowers in a lax cyme. Petals 3-4 mm, widely separated, oblong-cuneate, emarginate, often with excurrent mid-vein, dull greenish-yellow. 2n = 16.{\i  Vertical, shaded limestone rocks, }1800-2000{\i  m. N. Italy} ({\i Alpi Bergamasche}). It.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 116. S. sedoides} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 405 (1753). Leafy shoots procumbent, forming a loose mat. Leaves 6-12 × 2-4 mm, oblanceolate to narrowly oblong, tapered to a broad, scarcely distinct petiole, acute to apiculate at the apex, or shortly 3-lobed, with fairly long glandular hairs, mainly on the margins. Flowering stem 1-7 cm, with 1-6 flowers in a lax cyme. Petals 1·5-3 mm, narrower than the sepals and about as long, dull yellow. Ovary inferior. 2n = 64.{\i  Snow-patches and shady screes; calcicole. • E. Alps; C. Appennini; mountains of W. Jugoslavia and N. Albania}. Al Au It Ju.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Three subspecies may be recognized, though intermediate plants are frequent in some areas.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Flowering stems with 3-5 cauline leaves and 3-6 flowers
\par
  ...................................................................................... ({\b b}) subsp. {\b hohenwartii}
\par
1 Flowering stems without cauline leaves (rarely with 1 or 2)
\par
  and with 1-3 flowers
\par
2 Petals lanceolate to narrowly ovate, acute, shorter
\par
  than the sepals ................................................................... ({\b a}) subsp. {\b sedoides}
\par
2 Petals linear, truncate or emarginate, longer than the sepals
\par
  ............................................................................................... ({\b c}) subsp. {\b prenja}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp.{\b  sedoides} : Leaves nearly all entire. Cauline leaves usually absent. Flowers 1-3; petals lanceolate to narrowly ovate, acute, shorter than the sepals. {\i Northern and western parts of E. Alps; Appennini.}
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp.{\b  hohenwartii} (Vest ex Sternb.) O. Schwarz,{\i  Mitt. Thür. Bot. Ges.}{\b  1}: 104 (1949) ({\i S. hohenwartii} Vest ex Sternb.): Some leaves usually 3-lobed. Flowering stem with 3-5 leaves and 3-6 flowers. Petals linear, acute, equalling or exceeding the sepals.{\i  Eastern and southern parts of E. Alps}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b c}) Subsp.{\b  prenja} (G. Beck) G. Beck, {\i Fl. Bosn. Herceg. }474 (1923) ({\i S. prenja} G. Beck): Some leaves 3-lobed. Cauline leaves absent; flowers 1-3. Petals linear, truncate or emarginate, longer than the sepals.{\i  Balkan peninsula}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 117. S. aphylla} Sternb., {\i Revis. Saxifr.} 40 (1810). Like {\b 116} but rather more compact in habit, with fairly short leafy shoots; leaves mostly with 3 short, obtuse lobes at the apex, sparsely glandular-pubescent; flowering stem terminal and axillary, with no cauline leaves and a single flower; petals narrow-linear, slightly exceeding
\par

\par
457}
\par