{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 with lower leaves c. 5 mm, suberect. 2n = 26.{\i  More strictly calcifuge than }{\b 54},{\i  and usually at a greater altitude. • Mountains of Europe, from Auvergne and the Carpathians to the Pyrenees, S. Alps and Bulgaria}. Au Bu Cz Ga Ge He Hs Hu It Po Rm Rs(W).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 56. S. bronchialis} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 400 (1753) (incl.{\i  S. spinulosa} Adams). Leafy shoots procumbent or decumbent, forming a dense mat or low cushion. Leaves 8-15 mm, loosely imbricate, linear-subulate to oblong-lanceolate, mucronate, shortly ciliate, without conspicuous axillary buds. Flowering stem 6-15 cm, nearly glabrous, bearing several flowers in a corymbose cyme. Petals 3-6 mm, elliptical, without a claw, pale yellow with red spots in upper ½.{\i  N. Ural.} Rs(N). ({\i N. Asia; North America.})
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Sect. XANTHIZOON Griseb. Evergreen perennials. Leaves fleshy, narrow, more or less entire, sometimes lime-encrusted. Flowering stem terminal, leafy; flowers in a fairly small, lax cyme. Petals yellow to red. Ovary semi-inferior.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 57. S. aizoides} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 403 (1753) ({\i S. autumnalis} auct., vix L.; incl.{\i  S. aizoidoides} Miégeville). Laxly caespitose, with leafy, ascending flowering stem up to 25 cm, but often much less; non-flowering shoots much shorter. Leaves 10-25 × 2-4 mm, linear-oblong, sessile, entire or rarely very shortly 3-lobed at the apex, acute, glabrous or spinose-ciliate in proximal 1, convex below, flat or convex above. Petals 3-7 mm, narrow, bright yellow or orange, often spotted with red, rarely dark red all over. 2n = 26.{\i  Damp, stony places and by mountain streams; more rarely in crevices of limestone rocks. Arctic and subarctic Europe, and southwards in the mountains to the Pyrenees, C. Italy and N. Greece.} Al Au Br Bu Cz Fe Ga Ge Gr Hb He Hs Is It Ju No Po Rm Rs(N, W) Sb Su.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Sect. MESOGYNE Sternb. Perennials, usually winter-dormant, with bulbils in the axils of the basal leaves and sometimes in the inflorescence. Leaves herbaceous, the basal with slender petiole and palmately lobed lamina. Flowers solitary or in a small, terminal cyme. Petals white or pink. Ovary superior to 1/3-inferior.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 58. S. sibirica} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} ed. 2, 577 (1762) (incl.{\i  S. mollis} Sm.). Stems 7-20 cm, erect or ascending, flexuous. Leaves reniform, petiolate, palmately 5- to 9-lobed, with triangular-ovate lobes, glabrous or slightly hairy, the basal ones with axillary bulbils. Flowers 2-7. Petals 8-14 × 4-6 mm, white. Ovary superior or very slightly sunk in hypanthium.{\i  Rocky slopes and open woods. E. Russia; S.E. Bulgaria and N.E. Greece.} Bu Gr Rs(C, E). ({\i N. & C. Asia}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 59. S. carpatica} Sternb.,{\i  Revis. Saxifr. Suppl. II}, 32 (1831) ({\i S. carpathica} Reichenb.). Like {\b 58} but slightly smaller in its vegetative parts; flowers 1-4; petals 6-7 mm, impure white, sometimes tinged with pink; styles stout, very short. 2n = c. 48.{\i  Damp and shady rocks and stabilized screes; calcifuge. Carpathians; mountains of S.W. Bulgaria.} Bu Cz Po Rm Rs(W).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 60. S. rivularis} L.,{\i  Sp. Pl.} 404 (1753). Delicate, slender plant forming small tufts. Basal leaves 5-12(-20) × 9-17(-30) mm, semicircular to reniform with 3-7 obtuse lobes, subglabrous; axillary bulbils often germinating early to give rise to slender stolons. Flowering stem 3-15 cm, glandular-hairy, with 2-5 flowers. Petals 3·5-5 mm, white, sometimes tinged with pink. Ovary  inferior; styles very short, stout. 2n = 52.{\i  Wet, mossy tundra, streamsides and under overhanging rocks. Arctic and subarctic Europe, southwards to C. Scotland and S. Norway}. Br Fa Fe Is No Rs(N) Sb Su.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 61. S. hyperborea} R. Br.,{\i  Chloris Melv.} 16 (1823). Like {\b 60} but smaller and often suffused with red; stolons absent; basal leaves mostly 3-lobed, with truncate or shortly cuneate base; flowering stem seldom more than 4 cm; petals c. 25 mm, deep pink or red. 2n = 26. {\i Arctic Europe, southwards to Iceland.} Is No ?Rs(N) Sb.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Not always easy to distinguish from {\b 60}; many records are ambiguous, and the distribution is imperfectly known.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 62. S. cernua} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 403 (1753) ({\i S. bulbifera} auct. ross., non L.). Plants solitary or in small tufts. Basal leaves 5-18 × 9-25 mm, semicircular or reniform, with 3-7 short, subacute lobes, glabrous except at the base of the petiole. Flowering stem 3-30 mm; cauline leaves numerous, the lower lobed and the upper entire, each with a red or purplish-black axillary bulbil. Flowers solitary, terminal, sometimes abortive. Petals 7-12 mm, white; ovary superior to ¼-inferior. 2n = 36, c. 56, 60, 64.{\i  Damp or shady places. Arctic and subarctic Europe, southwards to c. }57°{\i  N. in Scotland and Ural; locally in the Alps and Carpathians}. Au Br Cz Fe He Is It No Po Rm Rs(N, C) Sb Su.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b S.} ×{\b  opdalensis} Blytt, {\i Christ. Vidensk.-Sels. Forh.}{\b  1892}: 52 (1892), a hybrid between {\b 62} and {\b 60}, is locally frequent in parts of Norway and Sweden. It is more like {\b 62} in general habit, but has smaller petals and green cauline bulbils.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Sect. SAXIFRAGA. Usually perennial; habit varied, but usually with numerous leafy shoots, forming a mat or cushion. Leaves alternate, fairly soft, often lobed or crenate, without calcareous incrustation. Petals usually white, more rarely pale or dull yellow, pink or red. Ovary semi-inferior to inferior.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Subsect.{\i  Saxifraga}. Always perennial. Most of the leaves lobed, or boldly crenate.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Series {\i Saxifraga.} Evergreen or summer-dormant, with bulbils in the axils of the basal leaves, rarely also of the upper leaves. Petals white, rarely tinged with pink.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 63. S. granulata} L.,{\i  Sp. Pl.} 403 (1753). Leaves mostly basal, petiolate, reniform, crenate, rarely dentate, often rather fleshy, hairy at least on the petiole, subtending numerous small, subterranean, axillary bulbils. Cauline leaves similar to the basal but with shorter petioles and without bulbils; sometimes absent. Stem up to 50 cm, erect, usually simple in lower ½ branched above; lower bracts usually large and leaf-like. Flowers in a lax cyme. Sepals triangular-ovate or oblong; petals 9-16 × 3-8 mm, white, glabrous. {\i Grassland and rocky places. N., C. & W. Europe, extending eastwards to N.W. Russia, N.W. Ukraine, W. Hungary and Sicilia.} Au Be Br Cz Da Fe Ga Ge Hb He Ho Hs Hu It Ju Lu No Po Rs(N, B, C) ?Sa Si Su.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Very variable, especially in size, degree of hairiness, extent of branching of stem, and width of petals; variable also in habitat, growing often in dry, rocky situations in S. Europe and often in damp grassland in N. & C. Europe. Although many local populations have a characteristic facies, there is little constant correlation of characters over wide areas, nor is habitat consistently correlated with form. One regional population of very distinct facies is here recognized as a subspecies, but intermediate variants, linking it to the variable subsp. {\i granulata}, are not uncommon.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp.{\b  granulata} (incl.{\i  S. glaucescens} Boiss. & Reuter): Basal leaves 18-40 mm wide, rarely less, crenate or obtusely dentate (rarely slightly 3-lobed), glabrous or hairy. Stem usually stout; branching variable, but most often from about the middle;
\par

\par
450}
\par