{\rtf1\ansi \deff4\deflang1033{\fonttbl{\f4\froman\fcharset0\fprq2 Times New Roman;}}{\colortbl;\red0\green0\blue0;\red0\green0\blue255;\red0\green255\blue255;\red0\green255\blue0;\red255\green0\blue255;\red255\green0\blue0;\red255\green255\blue0;\red255\green255\blue255;\red0\green0\blue128;\red0\green128\blue128;\red0\green128\blue0;\red128\green0\blue128;\red128\green0\blue0;\red128\green128\blue0;\red128\green128\blue128;\red192\green192\blue192;}{\stylesheet{\widctlpar \f4\fs20\lang2057 \snext0 Normal;}{\*\cs10 \additive Default Paragraph Font;}}{\info{\author dddd}{\operator dddd}{\creatim\yr1998\mo11\dy11\hr16\min59}{\revtim\yr1998\mo11\dy11\hr16\min59}{\version2}{\edmins0}{\nofpages4}{\nofwords1026}{\nofchars5849}{\*\company  }{\vern57431}}\widowctrl\ftnbj\aenddoc\hyphcaps0 \fet0\sectd \linex0 {\*\pnseclvl1\pnucrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl2\pnucltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl3\pndec\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl4\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl5\pndec\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl6\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl7\pnlcrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl8\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl9\pnlcrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}
\pard\plain \ \f4\fs20\lang2057 {\fs28  (}{\b\fs28 e}{\fs28 ) Subsp.}{\b\fs28  ampullacea }{\fs28 (Ten.) D.A. Webb,}{\i\fs28  loc. cit.}{\fs28  (1987) (}{\i\fs28 S. ampullacea }{\fs28 Ten.): Leaves fleshy, subglabrous, undivided or with 3 very short, subparallel lobes, not sulcate; petiole not distinct from undivided part of lamina. Inflorescence with 1-3 flowers. Petals 4-5 mm, obovate, nearly contiguous, white. \bullet }{\i\fs28  Higher peaks of C. Appennini}{\fs28 .
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 86. S. hariotii}{\fs28  Luizet & Souli\'e9,}{\i\fs28  Bull. Soc. Bot. Fr.}{\b\fs28  58}{\fs28 : 638 (1912). Leafy shoots up to 6 cm, but often less, more or less erect, forming a dense to rather lax cushion. Leaves 5-9 mm, undivided or with 3 conspicuously sulcate, mucronate segments, subglabrous to sparsely glandular-hairy. Flowering stem 3-7 cm, with or without a single cauline leaf, and with a narrow panicle of 3-12 flowers. Petals c. 4 mm, oblong, not contiguous, creamy-white, usually with reddish-brown veins.}{\i\fs28  Limestone rocks and screes,}{\fs28  1600-2500}{\i\fs28  m. \bullet  W. Pyrenees}{\fs28 . Ga Hs.
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 87. S. praetermissa}{\fs28  D.A. Webb, }{\i\fs28 Feddes Repert.}{\b\fs28  68}{\fs28 : 204 (1963) (}{\i\fs28 S. ajugifolia }{\fs28 auct., non L.). Leafy shoots decumbent, forming a lax mat or low cushion. Leaves up to 15 \'d7 10 mm (including petiole), sparsely hairy; lamina with 3-5 oblong-oblanceolate, usually acute or mucronate lobes. Flowering stem 6-15 cm, slender, arising from the axils of the leafy shoots, usually 4-7 cm below the apex; cauline leaves few and small. Flowers 1-3. Petals 4-5 mm, oblong-elliptical, white. Capsule long and narrow.}{\i\fs28  Fine screes and rock-debris, usually in late snow-lies, above}{\fs28  1500}{\i\fs28  m; somewhat calcifuge. Pyrenees, Picos de Europa.}{\fs28  Ga Hs.
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 88. S. wahlenbergii}{\fs28  Ball,}{\i\fs28  Bot. Zeit.}{\b\fs28  4}{\fs28 : 401 (1846) (}{\i\fs28 S. perdurans}{\fs28  Kit.). Glabrous except for a few inconspicuous, fleshy, appressed hairs on lower side of leaves and in inflorescence. Stems decumbent, forming a mat or low cushion. Leafy shoots short; leaves 7-12 \'d7 3-5 mm; petiole broad, confluent with the cuneate lamina, which is divided distally into 3-5 short, oblong-triangular, obtuse lobes. Flowering stem 4-7 cm, slender, terminal but appearing axillary because of the growth of an axillary shoot from near the base. Petals 4-5 mm, white. Capsule long and narrow. 2n = 66.}{\i\fs28  Damp, grassy slopes,}{\fs28  1000-2500}{\i\fs28  m. \bullet  W. Carpathians.}{\fs28  Cz Po.
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 89. S. pedemontana}{\fs28  All.,}{\i\fs28  Fl. Pedem. }{\b\fs28 2}{\fs28 : 73 (1785). Stems woody at the base; leafy shoots ascending to suberect, forming rather lax cushions. Leaves somewhat fleshy or coriaceous; lamina shortly glandular-pubescent; petiole with much longer, partly non-glandular hairs. Petiole 6-18 mm; lamina 8-15 \'d7 9-20 mm, divided into 3-9 segments. Flowering stem 5-18 cm, terminal, sparingly branched above to give a narrow panicle of 2-12 flowers; cauline leaves few, often absent. Flowers infundibuliform. Petals 10-21 \'d7 4-8 mm, oblanceolate, white, sometimes veined or tinged with red. Styles 5-7 mm, suberect.}{\i\fs28  Shady rocks. S. Europe, mainly in the mountains, extending northwards to the Ukrainian Carpathians.}{\fs28  Bu Co Ga Gr It Ju Rm Rs(W) Sa.
\par 
\par Very variable, and composed of four geographically isolated populations in Europe; a fifth is found in N. Africa. Each of these has a generally distinctive facies, but variation is sufficient to bring about overlap of all characters, and they are therefore given subspecific rather than specific rank.
\par 
\par }
\pard \li200\ {\fs28 1 Leaf-segments obtuse to subacute, usually not more than
\par   twice as long as wide, seldom divaricate
\par 2 Leaves somewhat fleshy or coriaceous; segments subacute;
\par   flowering stem up to 18 cm; petals 15-21 mm .......... (}{\b\fs28 a}{\fs28 ) subsp. }{\b\fs28 pedemontana}{\fs28 
\par 2 Leaves soft and fairly thin; segments obtuse; flowering
\par   stem seldom more than 8 cm; petals 9-15 mm ................... (}{\b\fs28 b}{\fs28 ) subsp. }{\b\fs28 cymosa}{\fs28 
\par 1 Leaf-segments acute to mucronate, rarely obtuse, usually
\par    more than twice as long as wide, often divaricate
\par 3 Rosette-leaves incurved in bud, usually sparsely hairy;
\par   petiole usually shorter than the lamina ......................... (}{\b\fs28 c}{\fs28 ) subsp. }{\b\fs28 cervicornis}{\fs28 
\par 3 Rosette-leaves not incurved in bud, usually fairly densely hairy;
\par   petiole usually longer than the lamina ................................. (}{\b\fs28 d}{\fs28 ) subsp. }{\b\fs28 prostii}{\fs28 
\par 
\par }
\pard \ {\fs28  (}{\b\fs28 a}{\fs28 ) Subsp.}{\b\fs28  pedemontana}{\fs28  : Robust, and larger in all its parts than the other subspecies. Lamina flabelliform, tapered gradually into a fairly narrow petiole; segments short and fairly wide, subacute. Flowering stem up to 18 cm. Petals 15-21 \'d7 6-8 mm, sometimes tinged with pink at the base. 2n = 42. \bullet  }{\i\fs28 S.W. Alps.}{\fs28 
\par  (}{\b\fs28 b}{\fs28 ) Subsp. }{\b\fs28 cymosa}{\fs28  Engler in Engler & Prantl,}{\i\fs28  Naturl. Pflanzenfam.}{\b\fs28  3}{\fs28 (}{\b\fs28 2a}{\fs28 ): 55 (1891) (}{\i\fs28 S. cymosa}{\fs28  auct., nom. invalid.): Leaves soft and fairly thin; lamina tapered gradually into a wide petiole; segments short and wide, forwardly directed, obtuse. Flowering stem seldom more than 8 cm. Petals 9-15 \'d7 3-5 mm. \bullet }{\i\fs28  E. & S. Carpathians; mountains of the Balkan peninsula from E.C. Jugoslavia to N. Greece}{\fs28 .
\par  (}{\b\fs28 c}{\fs28 ) Subsp. }{\b\fs28 cervicornis}{\fs28  (Viv.) Engler in Engler & Prantl,}{\i\fs28  loc. cit.}{\fs28  (1891) (}{\i\fs28 S. cervicornis}{\fs28  Viv.): Leaves somewhat coriaceous; lamina semicircular, narrowed suddenly into a slender petiole; segments 2\'bd-4 times as long as wide, divaricate, obtuse to mucronate; rosette-leaves incurved when young. Flowering stem up to 15 cm. Petals 10-13 \'d7 4-5 mm. 2n = 26, 42, 44. \bullet }{\i\fs28  Corse, Sardegna}{\fs28 .
\par  (}{\b\fs28 d}{\fs28 ) Subsp.}{\b\fs28  prostii}{\fs28  (Sternb.) D.A. Webb,}{\i\fs28  Feddes Repert.}{\b\fs28  68}{\fs28 : 205 (1963) (}{\i\fs28 S. ajugifolia}{\fs28  L., nom. ambiguum, }{\i\fs28 S. prostii}{\fs28  Sternb., }{\i\fs28 S. pedatifida}{\fs28  auct., vix Sm.): Lamina cuneate; segments 2-3 times as long as wide, not divaricate, acute to mucronate; rosette-leaves not incurved. Flowering stem up to 18 cm. Petals 9-12 \'d7 2\'b75-4 mm. 2n = 32. \bullet  }{\i\fs28 S. France}{\fs28  (}{\i\fs28 Cevennes}{\fs28 ).
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 90. S. babiana}{\fs28  D\'edaz & Fern\'e1ndez Prieto, }{\i\fs28 Anal. Jard. Bot. Madrid }{\b\fs28 39}{\fs28 : 249 (1983). Leafy shoots numerous, erect, crowded, forming a dense cushion; young leaves erect, forming a brush-like tuft. Leaves up to 37 mm (including petiole), furnished with rather long glandular hairs, at least on the petiole and sometimes all over. Lamina deeply divided into 3 primary lobes, each consisting of 3 short, strongly apiculate segments. Lower side of petiole crimson, at least towards the base. Flowering stem 10-20 cm, slender, ascending, axillary; cauline leaves c. S. Flowers 5-9. Petals 6-8 mm white.}{\i\fs28  Limestone rocks, }{\fs28 1050-1750}{\i\fs28  m. \bullet  N.W. Spain }{\fs28 (}{\i\fs28 W. part of Cordillera Cantabrica}{\fs28 ). Hs.
\par 
\par The typical plant has leaves glandular-hairy all over, and with the petiole crimson up to the lamina. Var. }{\i\fs28 septentrionalis }{\fs28 D\'edaz & Fern\'e1ndez Prieto, which is at least as common, has the hairs and the crimson pigment confined to the base of the petiole. It may possibly have arisen by introgression from}{\b\fs28  98}{\fs28 .
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 91. S. geranioides}{\fs28  L., }{\i\fs28 Cent. Pl.}{\b\fs28  1}{\fs28 : 10 (1755). Stems woody, branched, bearing lax cushions of light green foliage. Leaves herbaceous; petiole up to 40 mm, slender; lamina 15 \'d7 25 mm, semicircular to suborbicular, divided rather deeply into 3 primary lobes which are further divided, giving 13-27 triangular-lanceolate, acute segments. Lamina glandular-puberulent with very short hairs (c. 0\'b715 mm). Flowering stem 15-25 cm, terminal, bearing a corymb of up to 20 slightly scented, campanulate flowers. Sepals up to 7 mm in fruit; petals 12 \'d7 4 mm, oblanceolate, white. 2n = c. 52.}{\i\fs28  Rocks and screes; calcifuge. \bullet  E. Pyrenees and N.E. Spain.}{\fs28  Ga Hs.
\par 
\par 454}
\par }