{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 3.           Chrysosplenium}             L.
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc  By S. Pawlowska.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Perennials. Leaves petiolate, entire or crenate, exstipulate. Flowers small, 4-merous, in terminal, leafy, corymbose cymes. Petals absent. Stamens 8 (rarely 4). Ovary partly or almost wholly inferior, 1-locular, surmounted by a conspicuous disc.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Literature: H. Hara,{\i  Jour. Fac. Sci. Tokyo Univ.} ({\i Bot}.){\b  7}: 1-90 (1957).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Leaves alternate
\par
2 Stamens 8; plant somewhat hairy ......................................... {\b 1. alternifolium}
\par
2 Stamens 4; plant almost glabrous ............................................ {\b 2. tetrandrum}
\par
1 Leaves opposite
\par
3 Capsule asymmetrical, much exceeding the sepals; seeds suborbicular,
\par
  furnished with conspicuous, bristle-like papillae ........................... {\b 5. dubium}
\par
3 Capsule symmetrical, scarcely exceeding the sepals; seeds ovoid,
\par
  very minutely papillose
\par
4 Plant hairy, at least in lower part; leaves crenulate ............ {\b 3. oppositifolium}
\par
4 Plant glabrous; leaves ± entire ...................................................... {\b 4. alpinum}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. C. alternifolium} L.,{\i  Sp. Pl. }398 (1753). Somewhat hairy, at least towards the base. Stems up to 20 cm, 3-angled, arising from a mainly underground rhizome. Leaves mostly basal, orbicular-reniform, deeply cordate, with numerous crenations or shallow lobes; petiole long. Cauline leaves alternate; bracts yellowish. Sepals c. 2 mm, patent, ovate, obtuse, yellowish. Stamens {\b 8. Filaments} and styles much shorter than the sepals. Disc slightly 8-lobed. Seeds smooth, shining, brown or almost black. 2n = 48. {\i Damp and shady places. Much of Europe, but absent from the extreme north and west and most of the Mediterranean region.} Au Be Br Bu Cz Da Fe Ga Ge Gr He Ho ?Hs Hu It Ju No Po Rm Rs(N, B, C, W, E) Su.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. C. tetrandrum} (N. Lund) Th. Fries,{\i  Bot. Not.}{\b  1858}: 193 (1858). Like {\b 1} but very nearly or quite glabrous; creeping stems epigeal, leafy; leaves with fewer crenations; inflorescence smaller, with green bracts; sepals green, erect, suborbicular- or triangular-ovate; stamens 4 (opposite the sepals); disc 4-lobed. 2n = 24.{\i  Wet places. Arctic Europe, extending southwards to} 66° {\i N. in Finland}. Fe No Rs(N) Sb Su.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 3. C. oppositifolium} L.,{\i  Sp. Pl.} 398 (1753). Laxly caespitose, with decumbent, rooting, leafy stems but without underground rhizome; hairy, at least towards the base. Leaves opposite, orbicular-ovate, crenulate or sinuate, truncate or shortly cuneate at the base, somewhat hairy on upper surface, thin, dark glaucous-green; petiole rather long. Flowering stem up to 20 cm, 4-angled. Flowers c. 4 mm in diameter. Sepals ovate or triangular-ovate, yellow. Stamens 8; filaments slightly shorter than the sepals. Capsule free from hypanthium in its upper 1/3 only. Seeds blackish, covered with glandular hairs about twice as long as thick. 2n = 42.{\i  Damp and shady places. • W. Europe and parts of C. Europe, extending eastwards to W. Poland and C. Czechoslovakia.} Be Br Cz Da Ga Ge Hb He Ho Hs It ?Ju Lu No Po.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 4. C. alpinum} Schur, {\i Verh. Mitt. Siebenb. Ver. Naturw.}{\b  10}: 133 (1859) ({\i C. oppositifolium} auct. roman., non. L.). Like {\b 3} but usually more densely caespitose and quite glabrous; leaves thicker, often wider than long, bright yellowish-green; petioles shorter; flowering stem up to 10(-15) cm; sepals suborbicular, often wider than long, with cucullate apex; seeds verrucose with very short hairs, which are scarcely longer than their diameter.{\i  Mountain springs and flushes. • E. Carpathians.} Rm Rs(W).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 5. C. dubium} Gay ex Ser. in DC., {\i Prodr.}{\b  4}: 48 (1830) ({\i C. macrocarpum} auct. eur. medit., non Cham.). Glabrous, stoloniferous. Leaves opposite, ovate or suborbicular, crenate, cuneate or rounded at the base; petiole equalling or shorter than the lamina. Flowering stem up to 15 cm. Sepals 1·5-2 mm, yellowish-green. Stamens 8. Disc distinctly 8-lobed. Filaments and styles much shorter than the sepals. Capsule deeply bilobed, with unequal lobes, free from hypanthium in its upper 2/3, considerably longer than the sepals. Seeds suborbicular, furnished with conspicuous, bristle-like papillae in longitudinal rows. {\i Mountains of S. Italy}. It. ({\i N. Africa and S.W. Asia.})
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 4.         Tellima}            R.Br.
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc  By D.A. Webb.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Perennial herbs. Leaves simple, palmately lobed, stipulate. Flowers 5-merous, regular, in lax racemes. Petals laciniate-pinnatifid. Stamens 10. Ovary semi-inferior, 1-locular.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. T. grandiflora} (Pursh) Douglas ex Lindley, {\i Bot. Reg.} t. 1178 (1828). Basal leaves long-petiolate; lamina up to 10 cm, suborbicular, cordate, somewhat obscurely 5- to 9-lobed, the lobes irregularly dentate or crenate. Petiole densely and upper surface of lamina sparsely hirsute. Cauline leaves few, smaller, shortly petiolate. Raceme 15-25 cm, secund, glandular-pubescent. Hypanthium 5 mm, campanulate, united below to lower part of the ovary. Petals cream, often reddish later. {\i Woods and shady walls. Naturalized in Britain and Ireland, and locally elsewhere.} [Br Da Ge Hb.] ({\i W. North America.})
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 5.       Tolmiea}      Torrey & A. Gray
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc  By D.A. Webb.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Perennial herbs. Leaves simple, palmately lobed, stipulate. Flowers zygomorphic, in lax racemes. Petals 4, filiform, entire. Stamens 3. Ovary superior, 1-locular.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. T. menziesii} (Pursh) Torrey & A. Gray, {\i Fl. N. Amer. }{\b 1}: 582 (1840). Basal leaves long-petiolate; lamina up to 10 cm, broadly ovate to suborbicular, cordate, somewhat obscurely 5- to 7-lobed, the lobes irregularly dentate or crenate. Petiole densely and upper surface of lamina sparsely hirsute. Cauline leaves smaller, shortly petiolate. Raceme 10-30 cm, secund, glandular-pubescent. Hypanthium 5-9 mm, tubular, split down upper side almost to the base, free from the ovary. Petals dark reddish-brown. Capsule 9-14 mm, protruding through the slit in the hypanthium.{\i  Shady habitats. Naturalized in Britain.} [Br.] ({\i W. North America.})
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Cultivated as a house-plant. Leafy buds can arise from the leaf-sinus, especially in cultivated plants, and serve as a means of vegetative reproduction.
\par

\par
459}
\par