{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 the sepals, greenish-yellow. 2n = c. 62, 64.{\i  Screes, snow-lies and stony ground, usually on limestone, mostly} 2100-2800{\i  m. • C. & E. Alps, mostly in the northern part}. Au Ge He It.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 118. S. glabella} Bertol., {\i Gior. Arcad. Sci.} ({\i Roma}){\b  21}: 192 {\i bis} (1824). Shoots short, decumbent or ascending, laxly caespitose. Leaves c. 8 mm, glabrous, narrowly spathulate, entire, obtuse. Flowering stem 3-10 cm, sparingly glandular-pubescent, with several flowers in a corymbose cyme. Sepals glabrous; petals 2·5 mm, obovate-orbicular, white.{\i  Shady slopes and gullies on limestone, mostly} 2000-2500{\i  m. • Balkan peninsula; C. Appennini}. Al Gr It Ju.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 119. S. tenella} Wulfen in Jacq.,{\i  Collect. Bot. }{\b 3}: 144(1791). Leafy shoots 5-10 cm, procumbent, forming a rather dense mat. Leaves 10 × 1-2 mm, linear-subulate, aristate, with a narrow hyaline margin, usually ciliate, especially near the base. Flowering stem 5-15 cm, erect, slender, glabrous, with 2-8 flowers in a lax cyme. Petals 3 mm, creamy-white, obovate. 2n = 66.{\i  Shady rocks and screes; calcicole. • S.E. Alps.} Au It Ju.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Subsect.{\i  Tridactylites} (Haw.) Gornall. Erect annuals or biennials, more or less glandular-hairy. Leaves entire or shortly 3- to 5-lobed. Flowers small, on long pedicels, forming a lax, leafy panicle. Petals white (rarely yellowish or red), obtuse, truncate or slightly emarginate. Ovary almost completely inferior.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b 120-123. S. tridactylites} group. The characters of the group are those of the subsection.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Spring-flowering annual; basal leaves entire, not forming
\par
  a distinct rosette .................................................................... {\b 120. tridactylites}
\par
1 Biennial (though sometimes flowering in the first autumn);
\par
  basal leaves mostly lobed and forming a distinct rosette,
\par
  at least up to the beginning of anthesis
\par
2 Capsule subglobose to broadly ellipsoidal, rounded at the base
\par
3 Basal rosette withering just before anthesis; pedicels
\par
  10-20 mm, very slender ................................................................. {\b 122. blavii}
\par
3 Basal rosette persisting until near the end of anthesis;
\par
  pedicels 2-8 mm ................................................................... {\b 121. adscendens}
\par
2 Capsule obovoid, tapered at the base
\par
4 Lobes of basal leaves forwardly-directed; most pedicels
\par
  not more than 5 mm; seeds finely tuberculate ...................... {\b 121. adscendens}
\par
4 Lobes of basal leaves somewhat divergent; pedicels up to
\par
  8 mm; seeds coarsely papillose ................................................ {\b 123. osloensis}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 120. S. tridactylites} L., {\i Sp. Pl}. 404 (1753). Annual, varying greatly in size according to situation. Basal leaves spathulate, entire, not forming a rosette, and withering before anthesis; cauline leaves cuneate, entire or divided distally into 3-5 triangular-oblong lobes. Flowers in a very diffuse, leafy cyme; lower pedicels 10-20 mm, the upper shorter. Petals 2·5-3 mm, entire or slightly emarginate. Seeds coarsely papillose. 2n = 22. {\i Walls, talus, railway-tracks and other open habitats; somewhat calcicole. Most of Europe except the north-east and extreme north}. All except Az Fa Is Rs(N, E) Sb.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 121. S. adscendens} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 405 (1753) ({\i S. controversa} Sternb.). Biennial. Basal leaves 6-15 mm, mostly oblanceolate-cuneate with 3 forwardly-directed lobes, but some may be entire or 5-lobed; they form a compact rosette which persists until anthesis. Flowering stem 4-25 cm, rather stout, with several cauline leaves similar to the basal and a fairly compact panicle. Pedicels not more than 3 mm in flower and 7 mm in fruit. Petals 3-5 mm, white, rarely tinged with yellow or red. Seeds finely tuberculate. {\i Fennoscandia, N. Russia, Estonia; mountains of C. & S. Europe, from the W. Carpathians to the Pyrenees, Sicilia and S. Greece.} Al Au Bu Cz Fe Ga Gr He Hs It Ju No Po Rm Rs(N, B, W) Si Su.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp.{\b  adscendens} ({\i S. tridactylites} subsp. {\i adscendens} (L.) Blytt; incl.{\i  S. adscendens} subsp. {\i discolor} (Velen.) Kuzmanov): Plant robust, up to 25 cm, with few, suberect branches. Sepals at least 1½ times as long as wide. Capsule of most of the flowers considerably longer than wide, tapered at the base rather gradually into the pedicel. 2n = 22. {\i Throughout the range of the species except the extreme south}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp. parnassica (Boiss. & Heldr.) Hayek,{\i  Prodr. Fl. Penins. Balcan. }{\b 1}: 638 (1925) ({\i S. tridactylites} subsp. {\i parnassica} (Boiss. & Heldr.) Engler & Irmscher): Plant 10-15 cm, and rather less robust. Sepals scarcely longer than broad. Capsule of all flowers subglobose and rounded or truncate at the base. Greece and S. Albania; C. & S. Italy and Sicilia.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 122. S. blavii} (Engler) G. Beck,{\i  Ann. Naturh. Mus.} ({\i Wien}) {\b 2}: 93 (1887) ({\i S. tridactylites} subsp. {\i blavii} (Engler) Engler & Irmscher, {\i S. adscendens} subsp. {\i blavii} (Engler) Hayek). Biennial. Basal leaves not more than 12 mm, oblanceolate, entire or shortly 3-lobed, forming a rather ill-defined rosette and withering shortly before anthesis; cauline leaves similar but larger. Stem 5-20 cm, slender, with ascending, somewhat flexuous branches. Pedicels 10-20 mm, mostly very slender. Petals 5 × 3·5 mm, broadly obovate, contiguous or overlapping. Capsule rounded or truncate at the base. Seeds coarsely papillose. {\i Limestone rocks and screes, }1000-2000{\i  m. • W. Jugoslavia and N. Albania.} Al Ju.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 123. S. osloensis} Knaben, {\i Nytt Mag. Bot. }{\b 3}: 118 (1954). A natural amphidiploid hybrid between {\b 120} and {\b 121}({\b a}), resembling {\b 120} in its long pedicels, rather small petals and coarsely papillose seeds, but closer to {\b 121} in the shape of leaves and capsule.{\i  Moist or shady rocks. Sweden and E. Norway.} No Su.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 This plant usually behaves as a biennial, but sometimes flowers in its first autumn as well as in the following summer.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 2.          Bergenia}                 Moench
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc  By D.A. Webb.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Perennials, with stout, fleshy rhizome. Leaves large, somewhat coriaceous, exstipulate, punctulate with totally immersed glands. Flowers 5-merous. Petals entire. Stamens 10. Ovary superior, surrounded by but free from a basin-shaped hypanthium; carpels 2, united only at the base.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. B. crassifolia} (L.) Fritsch, {\i Verh. Zool.-Bot. Ges. Wien}{\b  39}: 587 (1889). Glabrous, with creeping rhizome c. 2 cm in diameter. Leaves 15-30 cm, all basal, thick, shining, broadly obovate to oblong, obscurely sinuate-crenate or remotely denticulate, punctulate on both surfaces; petiole sheathing at the base. Flowering stem up to 30 cm, leafless, with numerous drooping flowers in a rather dense panicle. Petals 10-12 mm, obovate, tapered to a broad claw, erect, bright purplish-pink. Styles exceeding stamens.{\i  Cultivated for ornament, and locally naturalized}. [Au Ga Ge.] ({\i N. & C. Asia.})
\par

\par
458}
\par