{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 branches suberect, giving a rather narrow inflorescence. Sepals triangular-ovate; petals 11-16 × 4-8 mm. 2n = 32-60, perhaps usually 52. {\i Throughout the range of the species}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp.{\b  graniticola} D.A. Webb, {\i Feddes Repert.}{\b  68}: 207 (1963) ({\i S. granulata} var.{\i  gracilis }Lange, pro parte): Leaves 8-12 mm wide, regularly and rather deeply crenate, hairy. Stem 7-25 cm, slender; branching very variable; branches usually flexuous, somewhat patent. Sepals oblong; petals 7-13 × 3-5 mm.{\i  Calcifuge, usually on granite. • C. Spain, N. Portugal}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 64. S. corsica} (Ser.) Gren. & Godron,{\i  Fl. Fr.}{\b  1}: 642 (1849) ({\i S. russii} auct., non J. & C. Presl, {\i S. granulata }subsp. {\i russii} Engler & Irmscher). Like {\b 63}({\b a}), but basal leaves more or less 3-lobed, with deeply crenate lobes, and stems branched at least from the middle and often from near the base, with rather patent branches, giving a much more diffuse inflorescence.{\i  Shady rocks, walls and screes. W. Mediterranean region, from Corse and Sardegna to E. Spain}. Bl Co Hs Sa.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp.{\b  corsica }({\i S. granulata} subsp. {\i russii} Engler & Irmscher, non{\i  S. russii} J. & C. Presl): Plant rather delicate in habit; basal leaves seldom divided more than half-way to base; stems branched almost from base. 2n = 52, 62-66.{\i  Corse, Sardegna}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b cossoniana} (Boiss.) D.A. Webb,{\i  Feddes Repert.}{\b  68}: 203 (1963) ({\i S. cossoniana} Boiss.): Plant rather robust; basal leaves divided about 2/3 the distance to the base with overlapping lobes; lower 1/3 of stem often unbranched. 2n = 64-66.{\i  E. Spain}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Plants from Islas Baleares are intermediate between the two subspecies. Some of those from Sardegna are intermediate between {\b 63}({\b a}) and {\b 64}({\b a}).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 65. S. haenseleri} Boiss. & Reuter, Diagn. Pl. Nov. Hisp. 13 (1842). A delicate plant forming small tufts; rather like members of Subsect. Tridactylites in habit, but with bulbils in the axils of the basal leaves, which are cuneate-obovate, rather deeply divided into 3-7 oblong lobes, shortly petiolate, glandular-hairy. Flowering stem 6-15(-30) cm, slender, branched usually from below the middle to form a lax cyme with long pedicels. Petals 5-6 mm, white, often glandular-hairy on the upper side near the base, but sometimes glabrous.{\i  Shady but dry limestone rocks and debris. • Mountains of S. Spain.} Hs.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 66. S. dichotoma} Willd. in Sternb.,{\i  Revis. Saxifr.} 51 (1810) (incl.{\i  S. arundana} Boiss.,{\i  S. kunzeana} Willk.). Basal leaves glandular-hairy, petiolate; lamina up to 20 × 30 mm, but often much less, deeply divided into 5-15 oblong-oblanceolate to obovate-cuneate, obtuse segments. Cauline leaves similar, but smaller and sessile. Flowering stem 6-25 cm, branched usually above the middle, to give a narrow but fairly lax cyme of 2-7 flowers. Petals 6-10 mm, white, veined or tinged with pink, glandular-hairy.{\i  Spain and Portugal}. Hs Lu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp.{\b  dichotoma} : Basal leaves 10-30 mm wide. Flowering stem 12-25 mm, fairly stout. 2n = 32+2B.{\i  Mountains of S. & E. Spain}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp.{\b  albarracinensis} (Pau) D.A. Webb,{\i  Feddes Repert.}{\b  68}: 207 (1963) ({\i S. albarracinensis }Pau): Basal leaves 4-10 mm wide, rather less deeply divided than in subsp. ({\b a}). Flowering stem 6-10 cm, slender. •{\i  E. & C. Spain, N.E. Portugal}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 67. S. carpetana} Boiss. & Reuter, {\i Diagn. Pl. Nov. Hisp.} 12 (1842). Basal leaves reniform-cordate to ovate; axillary bulbils present but usually few. Lower cauline leaves ovate, sessile, pinnately lobed, the upper smaller and entire. Flowering stem 12-25 mm, branched above the middle to give a compact cyme of 4-13 flowers. Petals 8-12 mm, white, glandular-hairy. {\i Grassland, mostly below }1500{\i  m. S. Europe, from N.E. Portugal to the Aegean region.} Al Bu Cr Gr Hs It Ju Lu Si.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp.{\b  carpetana} (incl.{\i  S. blanca} Willk.): Basal leaves mostly short-stalked, ovate, with cuneate to truncate base, deeply crenate or lobed, generally similar to the lower cauline leaves; a few of the first-formed are, however, sometimes like the basal leaves of subsp. ({\b b}). Inflorescence few-flowered, very compact.{\i  Spain and Portugal.}
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b graeca} (Boiss. & Heldr.) D.A. Webb,{\i  Bot. Jour. Linn. Soc.}{\b  95}: 243 (1987) ({\i S. graeca} Boiss. & Heldr., {\i S. granulata} subsp. {\i graeca} (Boiss. & Heldr.) Engler,{\i  S. bulbifera} var.{\i  pseudogranulata }Lacaita,{\i  S. atlantica} Boiss. & Reuter): Basal leaves nearly all orbicular to reniform, cordate, with long, slender petiole. Inflorescence larger and less compact than in subsp. ({\b a}).{\i  S. Italy, Balkan peninsula, Aegean region; rarely in Spain}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Plants intermediate between subspp. ({\b a}) and ({\b b}) are found in Sicilia.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 68. S. cintrana} Kuzinsky ex Willk.,{\i  Österr. Bot. Zeitschr. }{\b 39}: 318 (1889) ({\i S. hochstetteri} (Engler) Coutinho,{\i  S. granulata} L. subsp. {\i hochstetteri} (Engler) Engler & Irmscher). Stem 10-17 cm, erect, branched, rather stout. Basal leaves suborbicular or rhombic, rounded or cuneate at base, obscurely crenate, hairy, with rather large, subterranean, axillary bulbils. Cauline leaves similar in shape but shortly petiolate, few, sometimes absent. Petals c. 10 mm, white, glandular-hairy on the upper surface.{\i  Limestone rocks and walls. Portugal} ({\i N. & W. of Lisboa, from Sintra to Bombarral}). Lu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 69. S. bulbifera} L.,{\i  Sp. Pl.} 403 (1753) ({\i S. russii} J. & C. Presl). Stem 20-40 cm, erect, simple, arising from a rather large bulb. Basal leaves reniform, crenate, cordate, petiolate, glandular-hairy. Cauline leaves 10-20, ovate, incised-dentate, cuneate, the lower shortly stalked, the upper sessile. Small bulbils present in the axils of cauline leaves and bracts. Flowers rather few, in a small, compact cyme. Petals 7-10 mm, white, glandular-hairy on the upper surface. 2n = 28. •{\i  C. & S. Europe, from Czechoslovakia, Switzerland and Sardegna eastwards.} Al Au Bu Co Cz Gr He Hu It Ju Rm Rs(W) Sa Si Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 70. S. gemmulosa} Boiss., {\i Biblioth. Univ. Genève}, ser. 2, {\b 13}: 409 (1838). Rather densely caespitose; stem and leaves often reddish. Leaves mostly basal, with their axillary bulbils at ground-level, glabrous or somewhat hairy. Petiole long, slender; lamina up to 15 × 18 mm, but usually much less, ternately lobed or divided, with the ultimate segments oblanceolate-cuneate and tapered to a narrow, stalk-like base. Flowering stem 5-15 cm, erect. Petals 5-8 mm, broadly obovate, white, glabrous. 2n = c. 64. {\i Crevices of ultrabasic igneous rocks, }450-1200{\i  m. S. Spain} ({\i Malaga and Sevilla provs.}). Hs.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 71. S. bourgaeana} Boiss. & Reuter in Boiss.,{\i  Diagn. Pl. Or. Nov. }{\b 3}({\b 2}): 71 (1856) ({\i S. boissieri }Engler). Stems woody at the base, ascending or decumbent, branched, forming a loose cushion, with reddish, winter-dormant, bulbil-like buds at the base and in the lower leaf-axils. Leaves glandular-hairy, ovate or semicircular in outline, very deeply ternatisect (usually appearing ternate), the principal divisions crenate, dentate or ternately lobed; ultimate lobes fairly broad-based; petiole long, with a broad, sheathing base. Flowers rather numerous, cup-shaped, in lax, leafy cymes. Petals 4-7(-10) mm, white, glabrous. 2n = 64. {\i Damp, shady, limestone rocks. • S.W. Spain }({\i mountains west of Ronda}). Hs.
\par

\par
451}
\par