{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 mucronate, making it hard to distinguish them from {\b 96}({\b b}). It might, perhaps, be better to reduce {\b 97} to a third subspecies of {\b 96}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 98. S. trifurcata} Schrader, {\i Hort. Gotting. }13 (1809). Glabrous and with sessile glands, as in{\b  95-97}; occasionally very viscid, but more usually not at all. Leafy shoots numerous, forming a compact, rather hard cushion. Leaves 10-20(-30) mm wide, reniform to semicircular, with (9-)11-17 flat, triangular, apiculate segments, which are often crowded and sometimes overlapping, the lateral ones usually falcate-recurved. Flowering stem 8-30 cm, axillary. Flowers 5-15, in a lax cyme. Petals 8-11 mm, elliptic-oblong. 2n = 28.{\i  Limestone rocks, walls and roofs. • N. Spain, from }1° 30' {\i to }7° {\i W}. Hs.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 99. S. canaliculata} Boiss. & Reuter ex Engler,{\i  Monogr. Gatt. Saxifr.} 169 (1872) ({\i S. paui} Merino). Like {\b 98} but always very viscid leaves rhombic to semicircular, with 5-11 linear-oblong, straight, apiculate segments, broadly and deeply channelled above, not overlapping or falcate-recurved; flowering stem terminal, not more than 15 cm; petals broadly obovate, contiguous, reflexed at the apex. 2n = 52.{\i  Limestone rocks. • W. part of Cordillera Cantabrica}. Hs.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 100. S. cuneata} Willd., {\i Sp. Pl. }{\b 2}({\b 1}): 658 (1799). Glabrous and with sessile glands, as in {\b 95-99}; usually viscid. Leafy shoots forming a fairly lax cushion. Leaves up to 22-26 mm, rigid and rather coriaceous, rhombic to flabelliform, divided about half-way into 3 broadly triangular to ovate, obtuse or mucronate lobes, which sometimes bear short secondary lobes. Flowering stem 7-30 cm, axillary, bearing a narrow panicle of 7-15 flowers. Petals 5-7 mm, obovate, white. 2n = 28, 36.{\i  Limestone rocks, screes and walls,} 750-1900{\i  m. • W. Pyrenees and N. Spain, westwards to }4° 45'{\i  W.} Ga Hs.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 101. S. aquatica} Lapeyr., {\i Fig. Fl. Pyr.} 53 (1801) ({\i S. adscendens} auct., non L.). Larger and coarser in habit than most other species. Leafy shoots decumbent, freely branched, forming deep mats of foliage up to 2 m across. Leaves furnished with fairly long hairs; petiole up to 35 mm; lamina up to 25 × 35 mm, more or less semicircular, deeply 3-lobed; the lobes repeatedly but not very deeply divided, giving 15-27 triangular, acute segments. Flowering stem 25-60 cm, 2-3(-5) mm in diameter, axillary, with numerous cauline leaves and narrow panicle with numerous, rather crowded flowers. Petals 7-9 mm, narrowly obovate, white (rarely pale yellow). 2n = 28, 66.{\i  Margins of fast-flowing streams on siliceous rocks, }1500-2400{\i  m. • E. & C. Pyrenees.} Ga Hs.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 102. S.}×{\b   capitata }Lapeyr., {\i op. cit.} 55 (1801) ({\i S. aquatica} × {\i praetermissa}). Intermediate between the parent species, but in most characters closer to {\b 101}. Leaves 12-20 mm wide, rhombic, mostly 5- to 7-lobed. Flowering stem 15-25 cm, usually few, not more than 2 mm in diameter; panicle lax, often nodding, with 7-25 flowers. Petals 6-7 mm. Margins of mountain streams; fairly frequent where both parents grow together, and sometimes seen in the vicinity of one parent only.{\i  Pyrenees.} Ga Hs.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Although this hybrid is fertile it flowers sparingly, and may be distinguished at a distance from {\b 101} by this character, as well as by its less robust growth and foliage.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 103. S. irrigua} Bieb., {\i Fl. Taur.-Cauc.}{\b  2}: 460 (1808). Leafy shoots few, forming a dense tuft. Leaves up to 40 mm wide, with usually numerous, rather long hairs, 3-lobed almost to the base, the lobes again divided, giving 9-25 elliptical, oblong or triangular, subacute segments. Petiole long and broad. Flowering stem 10-30 cm usually branched in the upper ½ only, bearing a panicle of numerous flowers. Sepals 4-5 mm, linear-oblong; petals 12-15 mm, oblanceolate, white. 2n = 44. {\i Damp or shady places in the mountains. • Krym.} Rs(K).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 104. S. latepetiolata} Willk. in Willk. & Lange,{\i  Prodr. Fl. Hisp.}{\b  3}: 120 (1874). A glandular-hairy, somewhat viscid biennial, consisting in the first year of a hemispherical dome of regularly arranged leaves; from the centre of this arises in the second year a stout, reddish flowering stem 15-30 cm, branched from near the base to form a narrowly pyramidal, many-flowered panicle. Petiole of basal leaves 15-50 × 3-4 mm, stiff and rather brittle; lamina 8-15 × 10-27 mm, reniform, divided half-way to the base into 5-7 cuneate, truncate to mucronate lobes. Petals 7-10 mm, narrowly obovate, white. Ovary almost completely inferior. 2n = c. 66.{\i  Vertical limestone rocks, usually shaded but often dry. • E. Spain} ({\i Valencia region});{\i  local}. Hs.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 105. S. petraea} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} ed. 2, 578 (1762) ({\i S. alpina }Degen). Biennial, perhaps rarely perennial, covered with soft, glandular hairs. Leaves of basal rosette petiolate, semicircular or rhombic in outline, divided almost to the base into numerous toothed lobes; cauline leaves much less deeply divided. Stems 10-30 cm, weak often decumbent, with numerous, long, divaricate, interwoven branches, forming a very lax, wide, leafy panicle. Petals 8-10 mm, contiguous, sometimes slightly unequal, emarginate, white. Seeds papillose. {\i Shady rocks; calcicole. • Southern foothills of the E. Alps}. It Ju.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 106. S. berica} (Béguinot) D.A. Webb,{\i  Feddes Repert.}{\b  68}: 202 (1963) ({\i S. petraea} var. {\i berica }Béguinot). Like {\b 105} but usually perennial; hairs shorter; basal leaves regularly crenate or dentate, or divided less than half-way to the base into 5-11 entire lobes; leaves often tinged with brown; petals 4-8 mm, not contiguous, usually very unequal; seeds smooth.{\i  Shady recesses in limestone rocks. • N. Italy }({\i Colli Berici, near Vicenza}). It.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 107. S. arachnoidea} Sternb.,{\i  Revis. Saxifr.} 23 (1810). Stems weak, decumbent; whole plant covered with an intricate tomentum of long, viscid, arachnoid hairs. Leaves rhombic or ovate-cuneate, very variable, mostly palmately 3- to 7-lobed; lobes obtuse; petioles short. Flowers on long pedicels in small terminal cymes. Petals 3 mm, translucent, dirty white or straw-coloured. Ovary inferior. 2n = 56.{\i  Caverns in limestone rocks. • S. Alps} ({\i a small region N.W. of Lago di Garda}). It.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 108. S. paradoxa} Sternb., {\i Revis. Saxifr. }22 (1810) ({\i Zahlbrucknera paradoxa} (Sternb.) Reichenb.). Nearly glabrous, with fragile, ascending or decumbent stems. Leaves reniform, palmately lobed or crenate, petiolate, shining, thin. Flowers in small, lax, leafy, axillary cymes. Petals 1·5 mm, linear-oblong, pale green, similar to the sepals but smaller, not narrowed at the base. Ovary inferior, surmounted by a large disc. 2n = 64.{\i  Shady recesses in non-calcareous rocks. • Foothills of S.E. Alps} ({\i Kärnten, Steiermark, Slovenja}). Au Ju.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Subsect.{\i  Holophyllae} Engler & Irmscher. Evergreen perennials, usually of small size; leaves entire or shortly 3-lobed at the apex. Leafy shoots forming cushions or mats. Bulbils and summer dormant buds absent. Petals white or pale yellow.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 109-112. S. androsacea} group. A group of four closely related species of distinctive habit. The leafy shoots are short, with
\par

\par
456}
\par