{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 72. S. biternata} Boiss., {\i Voy. Bot. Midi Esp.}{\b  2}: 231 (1840). Stems woody, decumbent, bearing leafy shoots up to 15 cm, forming a very lax cushion. Leaves very deeply 3-lobed, the lobes narrowbased and those of larger leaves themselves deeply 3-lobed, velvety with rather long glandular hairs; many of them bear in their axils summer-dormant, bulbil-like buds up to 8 × 6 mm. Flowering stem up to 10 cm, terminal and axillary, with usually 2-6 narrowly campanulate flowers in a lax cyme. Petals 12-20 mm, white, glabrous. 2n = 66.{\i  Dry limestone cliffs,} 1000-1100{\i  m. S. Spain} ({\i S. & E. of Antequera}). Hs.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Series {\i Gemmiferae} (Willk.) S. Pawl. Evergreen perennials without bulbils, usually with summer-dormant buds in the axils of the leafy shoots. Leaves lobed or entire. Petals white, rarely tinged with pink, glabrous.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 73. S. globulifera} Desf.,{\i  Fl. Atl.}{\b  1}: 342 (1798) (incl. {\i S. granatensis} Boiss. & Reuter, {\i S. gibraltarica }Boiss. & Reuter). Leafy shoots erect or spreading, forming a lax cushion. Leaves up to 8 × 17 mm but usually much less, semicircular in outline, rather deeply lobed with 3-7 acute lobes, glandular-hairy; petiole longer than the lamina. Summer-dormant axillary buds numerous, c. 3 mm wide, obconical, usually stalked, hairy but not white-villous. Flowering stem 7-12 cm, slender, bearing 2-7(-11) flowers. Sepals 2 mm; petals 5-7 mm, white.{\i  Limestone rocks and cliffs. S. Spain,from }4° 35'{\i  to }5° 30' {\i W.} Hs.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 74. S. reuteriana} Boiss., {\i Voy. Bot. Midi Esp.}{\b  2}: 730 (1845). Like {\b 73} but leaves rather larger (up to 12 × 20 mm) and with the primary lobes divided, giving 5-11 segments in all; summer-dormant buds 4-6 mm wide; flowering stem 2-5 cm, with 1-3(4) flowers; sepals 4 mm; petals 8-10 mm, with the margins deflexed near the apex, somewhat greenish-white. {\i Limestone cliffs. S. Spain }({\i mountains S. & E. of Antequera}). Hs.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 75. S. erioblasta} Boiss. & Reuter in Boiss., {\i Diagn. Pl. Or. Nov.}{\b  3}({\b 2}): 67 (1856). Leafy shoots short, densely caespitose, forming a compact cushion. Leaves 3-6 mm, entire or shortly 3-lobed with obtuse lobes, glandular-hairy. Summer-dormant buds very numerous, subglobular, sessile, usually densely white-villous at the apex. Flowering stem c. 5 cm, slender, with 3-5 flowers. Petals 3·5-5 mm, white at first, becoming bright pink after pollination. 2n = 32-34. {\i Limestone rocks and screes,} 1300-2250{\i  m. S. Spain, from} 2° 50' {\i to} 4° 05' {\i W}. Hs.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 76. S. rigoi} Porta,{\i  Atti Accad. Agiati} ser. 2,{\b  9}: 26 (1891). Leafy shoots short, ascending, rather densely caespitose. Leaves with a long petiole, ciliate with subarachnoid hairs; lamina with 3-5 obtuse or subacute lobes furnished with shorter glandular hairs. Summer-dormant buds numerous, obovoid, stalked, their outer leaves ciliate with long white hairs. Flowering stem c. 6 cm, bearing 2 or 3 large, campanulate flowers. Petals 12-15 × 5 mm, white. •{\i  Mountains of S.E. Spain} ({\i Granada and Jaen provs.}). Hs.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 77. S. conifera} Cosson & Durieu,{\i  Bull. Soc. Bot. Fr. }{\b 11}: 332 (1864). Shoots 1-3 cm, procumbent, forming a close mat. Leaves 3-7 mm, linear-lanceolate, strongly apiculate, pale, silvery green; those of the dormant buds fimbriate and ciliate with long arachnoid hairs, the remainder ciliate with short glandular hairs. Summer dormant buds numerous, 9-12 mm, oblong-conical. Flowering stem 4-9 cm, slender, bearing 3-7 flowers. Petals 3-4 mm, white. {\i Limestone rocks and gravel,} 1000-2400{\i  m. • N. Spain} ({\i Cordillera Cantabrica}). Hs.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 78. S. continentalis} (Engler & Irmscher) D.A. Webb,{\i  Proc. Roy. Irish Acad.}{\b  53B}: 222 (1950) ({\i S. hypnoides} auct. gall. et iber., non L., {\i S. hypnoides} subsp. {\i continentalis} Engler & Irmscher). Leafy shoots long, slender, procumbent, bearing entire to 5-lobed leaves, with terminal and numerous axillary summer-dormant buds, which expand in autumn into rosettes of leaves with 5-13 lobes. Entire leaves narrow-linear, almost filiform; lobed leaves semicircular, with linear to elliptic-lanceolate, strongly apiculate, often recurved segments. Dormant buds shortly stalked, narrowly ellipsoidal, their outer leaves consisting of silvery, completely scarious scales. Flowering stem 8-25 cm, slender, with a small panicle of 4-11 flowers. Petals 4-8 mm, white. 2n = 26, 52.{\i  Rocks, walls and screes,} 700-1700{\i  m. • S.W. Europe, from S.E. France to N. Portugal.} Ga Hs Lu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 79. S. hypnoides} L.,{\i  Sp. Pl.} 405 (1753) ({\i S. hypnoides} subsp. {\i boreali-atlantica} Engler & Irmscher). Like {\b 78} but leaf-segments linear to narrowly oblong, not recurved; summer-dormant buds sessile, with the outer leaves partly herbaceous, often absent; petals 7-10(-12) mm. 2n = 26, 52. {\i Grassland, screes, streamsides and mountain-ledges. • N.W. Europe, from Iceland to N.E. France}. Be Br Fa Ga Hb Is No.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Subsect.{\i  Triplinervium} (Gaudin) Gornall. Evergreen perennials, without bulbils or summer-dormant buds. Most of the leaves lobed.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 80. S. rosacea} Moench,{\i  Méth.} 106 (1794) ({\i S. decipiens} Ehrh.,{\i  S. cespitosa} auct. eur. med., non L., {\i S. cespitosa} subsp. {\i decipiens} (Ehrh.) Engler & Irmscher, {\i S. groenlandica} sensu P. Fourn., non L.). Very variable in foliage and habit; leafy shoots varying from short and suberect, forming a compact cushion, to procumbent and rather long, forming a loose mat. Leaves 8-25 mm, petiolate; lamina rhombic-cuneate, usually 5-lobed, densely hairy to nearly glabrous, but always with some hairs, at least on the petiole. Flowering stem 4-25 cm, fairly stout, with 1-4 cauline leaves and 2-6 flowers erect in bud. Petals 6-10 × 3-7 mm, pure white.{\i  Rocks, screes and grassy ledges. • N.W. & C. Europe; local.} Be †Br Cz Fa Ga Ge Hb Is Po.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Most of the hairs on lamina glandular .................................... ({\b c}) subsp. {\b hartii}
\par
1 Hairs on lamina eglandular or absent
\par
2 Leaf-segments obtuse, acute or slightly mucronate ............ ({\b a}) subsp. {\b rosacea}
\par
2 Leaf-segments strongly mucronate to apiculate .......... ({\b b}) subsp. {\b sponhemica}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp.{\b  rosacea} : Leafy shoots procumbent to suberect. Leaves subglabrous to densely hairy with non-glandular hairs; segments obtuse, acute or shortly mucronate, fairly broad. Seeds variable. 2n = 52, 56, 64. {\i S. & C. Germany and E. France; Ireland; Iceland and Faeroer; extinct in Britain}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b sponhemica }(C.C. Gmelin) D.A. Webb, {\i Feddes Repert.}{\b  68}: 210 (1963) ({\i S. sponhemica} C.C. Gmelin): Leafy shoots ascending to erect. Leaves rather sparsely furnished with non-glandular hairs; segments strongly mucronate to apiculate, narrow. Seeds coarsely papillose. 2n = 50, 52.{\i  Belgium, E. France and W. Germany; Czechoslovakia and S.W. Poland}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b c}) Subsp.{\b  hartii} (D.A. Webb) D.A. Webb,{\i  Bot. Jour. Linn. Soc.}{\b  95}: 246 (1987) ({\i S. hartii} D.A. Webb): Leafy shoots suberect. Leaves patent, forming flat rosettes, usually rather densely glandular-hairy; segments 5-7, subacute, fairly broad. Seeds finely tuberculate. 2n = c. 50.{\i  N.W. Ireland} ({\i Arranmore Island}).
\par

\par
452}
\par