{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 Dwarf plants, mainly from high altitudes, with greyish leaves bearing much longer hairs, have been described as var.{\i  palmata} (Lapeyr.) Engler & Irmscher, but it is possible that they are hybrids.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 92. S. moncayensis} D.A. Webb,{\i  Feddes Repert.}{\b  68}: 201 (1963). Leafy shoots long and very numerous, forming soft, fairly dense, deep cushions up to 150 cm across of light green, slightly scented foliage. Plant covered with very short glandular hairs (0·15-0·2 mm) giving a verruculose rather than pubescent appearance to the naked eye. Petiole 8-13 mm; lamina 8-11 × 9-15 mm, deeply divided into 3 primary lobes, which are narrowly oblong to oblanceolate, obtuse and deeply sulcate; the lateral lobes occasionally bear short secondary lobes. Flowering stem 5-10 cm, terminal; inflorescence with 3-7 primary branches, each bearing 3-5 flowers. Petals 6-7 mm, broadly oblong. Ovary almost inferior, surmounted by a bright yellow nectariferous disc. 2n = c. 60.{\i  Shady, siliceous rocks at} 1000-1600 {\i m. • Mountains of N.E. Spain.} Hs.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 93. S. vayredana} Luizet, {\i Bull. Soc. Bot. Fr.}{\b  60}: 413 (1913). Like {\b 92} but foliage with a much stronger spicy or balsamic scent; leaves somewhat smaller, and with 3-9 acute segments, which are not sulcate; panicle smaller and more compact, with not more than 9 flowers; petals obovate. 2n = c. 64. {\i Shady, siliceous rocks and screes, }700-1600 {\i m. N.E. Spain} ({\i Sierra de Montseny}). Hs.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 94. S. intricata} Lapeyr.,{\i  Fig. Fl. Pyr.} 58 (1801) ({\i S. nervosa} Lapeyr., {\i S. mixta} Lapeyr., pro parte). Stems woody; leafy shoots short, forming small tufts or cushions. Leaves rather rigid, darkish green, very shortly glandular-pubescent, with hairs as in{\b  92} and {\b 93}. Lamina 5-7 × 5-10 mm, with 3-5(-9) linear-oblong, obtuse, sulcate segments. Flowering stem 5-10 cm, bearing a panicle of 3-12 flowers. Petals 4-6 mm, broadly obovate to suborbicular, contiguous, patent, white. 2n = 34.{\i  Exposed, often dry, siliceous rocks. E. & C. Pyrenees; one station in the Cordillera Cantabrica.} Ga Hs.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 95. S. pentadactylis} Lapeyr.,{\i  op. cit.} 64 (1801). Glabrous; leaves, shoots, flowering stem and hypanthia covered with sessile glands and often viscid. Stems woody at the base; leafy shoots rather few, forming small cushions. Petiole usually longer than the lamina, which is divided to the base into 3 lobes, each further divided into 2 or 3 segments; segments 3-10 × 0·5-1·5 mm, linear to oblong, obtuse, sulcate. Flowering stem 7-17 cm, terminal, bearing 5-50 flowers. Petals 3·5-5 mm, obovate to oblong. Ovary inferior.{\i  Rocks, usually shady, but often dry, usually above }1800{\i  m. • E. Pyrenees and mountains of N. & C. Spain.} Ga Hs.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 A variable species, of which the circumscription is still rather uncertain. The following treatment is provisional; more information is needed, especially about subspp. ({\b c}) and ({\b d}).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Petals c. 3·5 mm, greenish-yellow ................................ ({\b d}) subsp. {\b almanzorii}
\par
1 Petals usually 4·5-5 mm, white
\par
2 Petiole longer than the lamina ................................... ({\b a}) subsp. {\b pentadactylis}
\par
2 Petiole about as long as the lamina
\par
3 Leaves fairly soft; petiole not wider than the widest leaf-segment;
\par
  calcifuge ................................................................... ({\b b}) subsp. {\b willkommiana}
\par
3 Leaves hard and rigid; petiole much wider than leaf-segments,
\par
  sometimes nearly as wide as the lamina; calcicole ................. ({\b c}) subsp. {\b losae}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp.{\b  pentadactylis} : Cushions small, rather lax; leaves dark green, hard and rigid; petiole c. 1 mm wide, longer than the lamina; leaf-segments 1-1·5 mm wide, linear-oblong, divaricate. Petals c. 4·5 mm, usually contiguous, white. 2n = 16+5B.{\i  Siliceous rocks. Pyrenees, and rarely in the mountains further south.}
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp.{\b  willkommiana }(Boiss. ex Engler) Rivas Martínez, {\i Anal. Inst. Bot. Cavanilles}{\b  21}: 229 (1963): Cushions larger, fairly compact; leaves medium green, fairly soft; petiole c. 1·5 mm wide, about equalling, or shorter than, the lamina; leaf-segments 1·5-2 mm wide, oblong, divaricate. Petals c. 5 mm, white. 2n = 32.{\i  Siliceous rocks. Mountains of N. & C. Spain, from the Cordillera Cantabrica and the Cordillera Iberica to the Sierra de Gredos}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b c}) Subsp.{\b  losae} (Sennen) D.A. Webb,{\i  Bot. Jour. Linn. Soc.}{\b  95}: 249 (1987) ({\i S. losae} Sennen, {\i S. pentadactylis} subsp. {\i losana} (Sennen) Malagarriga): Cushions small, very compact, with more or less columnar leafy shoots. Leaves hard and rigid; petiole about equalling the lamina and sometimes nearly as wide, much wider than any of its segments, which are short and forwardly directed. Petals probably c. 4 mm, white.{\i  Limestone rocks, mostly at c. }1000{\i  m. Mountains of N.E. Spain, from Alava prov. to Teruel prov}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b d}) Subsp. {\b almanzorii} Vargas,{\i  Anal. Jard. Bot. Madrid}{\b  43}: 457 (1987): Petiole much longer than the lamina, and much wider than its segments, which are 0·5-1 mm wide, short and slightly divaricate. Petals 3·5 × 1·5 mm, not contiguous, greenish-yellow. {\i Siliceous rocks. Sierra de Gredos}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 96. S. fragilis} Schrank,{\i  Pl. Rar. Horti Monac.}, t. 92 (1822) ({\i S. corbariensis} Timb.-Lagr.). Glabrous and with sessile glands, as in {\b 95}, but only slightly viscid. Stems woody at the base, sparingly branched, forming rather lax cushions. Leaves shining, rigid, brittle and rather coriaceous, 12-35 mm wide, divided almost to the base into 3 primary lobes; these are further divided, giving 5-9(-13) narrowly oblong, flat (not sulcate), obtuse to subacute segments. Flowering stem 10-22 cm, with 5-20 flowers. Petals 7-14 × 4-7 mm, white.{\i  Limestone rocks and screes, usually shaded, up to }2000{\i  m, but mostly below }1000{\i  m. • E. Spain and S. France}. Ga Hs.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp.{\b  fragilis} ({\i S. geranioides} subsp. {\i corbariensis} (Timb.Lagr.) Rouy & Camus): Leaves 18-30 mm, wide, usually with 7-11 segments. Flowering stem 10-25 cm. Petals 9-13 mm, oblanceolate; stamens at least 3 mm longer than the sepals. 2n = 60-66. S. France (Corbieres) and N.E. Spain.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp.{\b  valentina} (Willk.) D.A. Webb,{\i  Bot. Mag. }{\b 180}: 186 (1975) ({\i S. valentina} Willk., {\i S. corbariensis} subsp. {\i valentina} (Willk.) D.A. Webb): Leaves 12-25 mm wide, usually with 3-7 segments. Flowering stem 6-15 cm. Petals 7-11 mm, obovate-elliptical; stamens exceeding the sepals by 1 mm or less. 2n = 64. {\i E. Spain, from C. Teruel to E. Jaen.}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Between c. 40° 30' and 42° N. plants intermediate between the two subspecies are common. It is to such plants that the name {\i S. paniculata} Cav. (non Miller) was originally given.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 97. S. camposii} Boiss. & Reuter,{\i  Pugillus} 47 (1852). Like {\b 96}({\b b}) but leaves more rigid, seldom more than 10 mm wide, with 3-5(-9) acute to mucronate or shortly apiculate segments. 2n = 64.{\i  Shady limestone rocks and screes,} 900-2100{\i  m. • S. & S.E. Spain,from the eastern edge of Malaga prov. to the Sierra de Alcaraz.} Hs.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 The typical plant is found mainly on the south-western part of the range; it has a cuneate lamina, usually with 5 segments, tapered gradually to a broad petiole. Plants referable to var.{\i  leptophylla} Willk. (subsp. {\i leptophylla} (Willk.) D.A. Webb) occur in the central and north-eastern parts of the range; they have a narrow petiole and a nearly semicircular lamina, often wider than long. In plants of this variety many of the leaf-segments are feebly or obscurely
\par

\par
455}
\par