{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 Subsp. ({\b c}) is intermediate between subsp. ({\b a}) and{\b  81}, but closer to the former.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 81. S. cespitosa} L.,{\i  Sp. Pl.} 404 (1753) ({\i S. groenlandica} L.). Leafy shoots short, more or less erect, forming lax or rather dense cushions. Leaves mostly 3-lobed (rarely simple or 5-lobed), cuneate, with a broad but distinct petiole and oblong, obtuse or subacute lobes, densely covered with rather short glandular hairs; young leaves somewhat incurved. Flowering stem 2-10 cm, bearing 1-3(-5) flowers. Petals c. 6 mm, dull white, often slightly greenish or cream-coloured. Seeds very finely tuberculate. 2n = 78, 80.{\i  Arctic and subarctic Europe, extending locally southwards in the mountains to} 53°{\i  N. in Britain and} 50°{\i  N. in C. Ural}. Br Fa Fe Is No Rs(N, C) Sb Su.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 82. S. pubescens} Pourret,{\i  Mém. Acad. Sci. Toulouse}{\b  3}: 327 (1788) ({\i S. mixta} Lapeyr., pro parte). Very variable in habit; usually densely caespitose in compact cushions, but sometimes lax and spreading. Rosette-leaves rather deeply 5-fid (less often 3-fid) with parallel-sided, obtuse, sulcate segments, rather dark green, densely covered with long glandular hairs. Cauline leaves usually divided into narrow segments, rarely entire. Petals 4-6 mm, broadly obovate, usually contiguous or overlapping.{\i  Siliceous rocks and screes, mostly above }2400{\i  m. E. & C. Pyrenees.} Ga Hs.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp.{\b  pubescens} (subsp. {\i pourretiana} Engler & Irmscher, {\i S. obscura} Gren. & Godron): Habit usually relatively lax, with short leafy shoots on which the dead leaves do not persist for long. Leaves 10-18 mm, with long, narrow petiole and deeply sulcate segments 3-4 times as long as wide, often somewhat divergent. Petals pure white; anthers yellow; top of ovary green. 2n = 28. {\i Screes, often in late snow patches. E. Pyrenees}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp.{\b  iratiana} (F.W. Schultz) Engler & Irmscher in Engler,{\i  Pflanzenreich}{\b  67}({\b IV.117}): 401 (1916) ({\i S. iratiana} F.W. Schultz,{\i  S. groenlandica} auct. pyren., non L.): Habit very compact, with long, slender, columnar leafy shoots, on which the dead leaves persist for many years. Leaves 4-10 mm, with short, broad petiole and nearly parallel segments, twice as long as wide, less deeply sulcate than in subsp. ({\b a}). Petals sometimes veined with red; anthers and top of ovary reddish. {\i Exposed rocks. C. Pyrenees}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 83. S. nevadensis} Boiss.,{\i  Diagn. Pl. Or. Nov.}{\b  3}({\b 2}): 67 (1856) ({\i S. pubescens} subsp. {\i nevadensis} (Boiss.) Engler & Irmscher). Like {\b 82}, and intermediate in habit between the two subspecies, but differing by its leaves with usually 3 non-sulcate segments; calyx deep purplish-red; petals often red-veined; anthers red or orange. 2n = 58.{\i  Shady rocks and screes above} 2600{\i  m. S. Spain} ({\i Sierra Nevada}). Hs.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 84. S. cebennensis} Rouy & Camus, {\i Fl. Fr. }{\b 7}: 55 (1901) ({\i S. prostiana} (Ser.) Luizet). Leafy shoots numerous, slender, forming a fairly large, domed, compact but soft cushion. Leaves (including petiole) c. 12 mm, light green, mostly 3-lobed, but sometimes 5-lobed or entire, rather densely covered with glandular hairs; segments sulcate, obtuse. Flowering stem 5-8 cm, with 3 or 4 usually entire cauline leaves and 2 or 3 flowers. Petals 6-8 mm, broadly obovate, contiguous, pure white. 2n = 26, 32. {\i Shady limestone rocks. S. France} ({\i Cevennes}). Ga.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 85. S. exarata} Vill.,{\i  Prosp. Pl. Dauph.} 47 (1779) ({\i S. muscoides }Wulfen, non All.; incl.{\i  S. varians} Sieber,{\i  S. moschata} Wulfen,{\i  S. tenuifolia} Rouy & Camus,{\i  S. adenophora} C. Koch). Leafy shoots numerous, more or less erect, forming a fairly dense but sometimes rather flat cushion. Leaves 4-20 mm, usually with fairly distinct petiole, subglabrous to rather densely glandular-hairy. Lamina usually 3-lobed; more rarely 5- to 7-lobed or entire; lobes oblong, obtuse. Flowering stem 3-10 cm, branched in upper 1/3 to give a small, often corymbose cyme of up to 8 flowers. Petals variable in size, shape and colour. 2n = 20, 22, 24, 26, 28, 32, 34, 36, 44, 48, 52, c. 68.{\i  Rocks, screes and mountain slopes with semi-open vegetation. Mountains of C. & S. Europe, from the Riesengebirge} ({\i Krkonose}) {\i southwards to N. Spain, C. Italy and S. Greece.} Al Au Bu Cz Ga Ge Gr He Hs It Ju Po Rm.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Very variable. The taxa treated below as subspp. ({\b a}) and ({\b c}) are treated by most authors as separate species, but the supposed correlation of distinguishing characters is so imperfect that many specimens cannot be assigned to either. The arrangement here proposed must be considered provisional, and it may be that some other subspecies deserve recognition, but it deals with the variation on a European scale in a manner not attempted by most national Floras.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 No clear correlation between chromosome number and morphology or geographical distribution is as yet apparent.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Leaf-segments sulcate
\par
2 Petals 4-6 mm, broadly obovate, nearly contiguous, white
\par
  .............................................................................................. ({\b a}) subsp. {\b exarata}
\par
2 Petals 3·5-4·5 mm, oblong to narrowly elliptical, widely
\par
  separated, pale, dull yellow ..................................... ({\b b}) subsp. {\b pseudoexarata}
\par
1 Leaf-segments not sulcate
\par
3 Petals 3-4 mm, oblong to narrowly elliptical, widely separated,
\par
  yellowish, sometimes tinged with red ............................. ({\b c}) subsp. {\b moschata}
\par
3 Petals 4-5 mm, obovate, nearly contiguous, white
\par
4 Inflorescence usually with 3-5 flowers; leaves not fleshy,
\par
  entire to 5-lobed, usually with distinct petiole .................. ({\b d}) subsp. {\b lamottei}
\par
4 Inflorescence usually with 1-3 flowers; leaves fleshy undivided or with
\par
  very short, parallel lobes; petiole not distinct .............. ({\b e}) subsp. {\b ampullacea}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp.{\b  exarata} (incl. subsp. {\i leucantha} (Thomas) Br.-Bl.): Leaves rather densely glandular-hairy, with 3-5(-7) sulcate, often widely divergent segments. Petals 4-6 mm, broadly obovate, nearly contiguous, white or pale cream.{\i  Somewhat calcifuge. S.W. & C. Alps; Balkan peninsula from Crna Gora to Greece; perhaps locally elsewhere}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp.{\b  pseudoexarata} (Br.-Bl.) D.A. Webb,{\i  Bot. Jour. Linn. Soc.}{\b  95}: 247 (1987) ({\i S. moschata} subsp. {\i pseudoexarata} Br.-Bl.). Leaves moderately densely glandular-hairy, with usually 3 sulcate, slightly divergent segments. Petals 3·5-4·5 mm, oblong to narrowly elliptical, widely separated, pale, dull yellow. •{\i  E. & S.C. Alps; N. Appennini; S. part of Balkan peninsula}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b c}) Subsp.{\b  moschata} (Wulfen) Cavillier in Burnat, {\i Fl. Alp. Marit.}{\b  5}: 81 (1913) ({\i S. moschata} Wulfen, {\i S. planifolia} Lapeyr.). Leaves subglabrous to moderately densely glandular-hairy, entire or with 3 subparallel segments, which are not sulcate. Petals 3-4 mm, oblong to narrowly elliptical, widely separated, yellowish, sometimes tinged with red.{\i  Somewhat calcicole. Throughout most of the range of the species but apparently absent from the Appennini and the S. part of the Balkan peninsula}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b d}) Subsp.{\b  lamottei} (Luizet) D.A. Webb, {\i Bot. Jour. Linn. Soc.}{\b  95}: 248 (1987) ({\i S. lamottei} Luizet). Leaves fairly thin, entire to 5-lobed, sparsely glandular-hairy. Inflorescence usually with 3-5 flowers. Petals 4-5 mm, obovate, nearly contiguous, white. •{\i  S.C. France }({\i Auvergne}).
\par

\par
453}
\par