{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 76.         ESCALLONIACEAE}
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc  Edit. D.A. Webb
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Shrubs with alternate, simple, exstipulate leaves. Flowers hermaphrodite, 5-merous, regular. Petals free; stamens {\b 5. Ovary} inferior, of 2 carpels; placentae parietal, but large, so that the central cavity of the ovary is occluded. Fruit a capsule.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 1.          Escallonia}       Mutis ex L. fil.
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc  By D.A. Webb.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Evergreen shrubs. Flowers in racemes or panicles. Petals with their claws juxtaposed to form a tube; limb patent or revolute. Stigma capitate or somewhat 2-lobed. Seeds numerous.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. E. rubra} (Ruiz & Pavón) Pers.,{\i  Syn. Pl.}{\b  1}: 235 (1805). Up to 3 m, branches glandular-pubescent. Leaves 2-6 cm, obovate, subsessile, biserrate, glabrous. Flowers 8-18 mm in diameter, in small panicles. Corolla bright pinkish-red. Stamens very slightly exserted.{\i  Cultivated for ornament, and as a hedge-plant in coastal districts, in W. & S. Europe, and locally naturalized}. [Br Ga Hb.] ({\i Chile and Argentina.})
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 The variety most widely cultivated is var.{\i  macrantha} (Hooker & Arnott). Reiche, which differs from var.{\i  rubra} in its larger, more viscid and aromatic leaves, larger flowers and glandular-pubescent calyx.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 77.       GROSSULARIACEAE}
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc  Edit. D.A. Webb
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Deciduous shrubs with alternate, exstipulate leaves. Flowers regular, 5-merous, in racemes or small axillary clusters. Petals free. Stamens 5. Ovary inferior; styles 2, united below. Fruit a berry.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 1.          Ribes}           L.
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc  By D.A. Webb.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Small or medium-sized shrubs. Leaves palmately 3- or 5-lobed. Petals small, often greenish.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b R. aureum }Pursh,{\i  Fl. Amer. Sept.}{\b  1}: 164 (1814), from W. North America, with bright yellow flowers and glabrous leaves, is cultivated for ornament, and is becoming locally naturalized in W. & C. Europe. {\b R. sanguineum} Pursh, {\i loc. cit.} (1814), also from W. North America, with conspicuous red or pink flowers, is frequently planted in hedges, and may perhaps be locally naturalized.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Literature: E. de Janczewski,{\i  Mém. Soc. Phys. Hist. Nat. Genève }{\b 35}: 199 (1907).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Flowers in axillary clusters of 1-3
\par
2 Leaves usually more than 20 mm wide; spines usually present;
\par
  bracteoles present ....................................................................... {\b 6. uva-crispa}
\par
2 Leaves rarely 15 mm wide; spines and bracteoles absent ............ {\b 7. sardoum}
\par
1 Flowers in racemes
\par
3 Flowers functionally dioecious; bracts 4-10 mm; leaves not more
\par
  than 6 cm wide; axis of inflorescence glandular-hairy
\par
4 Buds ovoid, obtuse; fruit glandular-hairy .................................... {\b 9. orientale}
\par
4 Buds elongate, acute; fruit glabrous ............................................. {\b 8. alpinum}
\par
3 Flowers hermaphrodite; bracts 1-2 mm; larger leaves 7-15 cm wide;
\par
  axis of inflorescence without glandular hairs
\par
5 Leaves covered beneath with sessile, aromatic glands .................. {\b 5. nigrum}
\par
5 Leaves without sessile glands
\par
6 Sepals ciliate; leaves up to 15 cm wide ...................................... {\b 4. petraeum}
\par
6 Sepals not (or very sparsely) ciliate; leaves 6-10 cm wide
\par
7 Sepals ligulate, deflexed ......................................................... {\b 1. multiflorum}
\par
7 Sepals obovate or spathulate, erect or patent
\par
8 Receptacle nearly flat, with a raised ring;
\par
  anther lobes widely separated ......................................................... {\b 2. rubrum}
\par
8 Receptacle basin-shaped, without a raised ring;
\par
  anther-lobes contiguous on inner side .......................................... {\b 3. spicatum}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. R. multiflorum} Kit. ex Roemer & Schultes, {\i Syst. Veg. }{\b 5}: 493 (1819). Plant 1·5-2 m. Leaves c. 10 × 10 cm, usually glabrous; petiole pubescent. Racemes drooping, up to 12 cm, with 30-50 yellowish-green flowers. Bracteoles 1 mm. Receptacle pelviform with, between the stamens and styles, a raised ring bearing 5 large protuberances. Sepals ligulate, deflexed; petals much shorter, also deflexed. Fruit red, acid, glabrous.{\i  Damp woods or shady places in the mountains. • Balkan peninsula, C. Italy, Sardegna}. Bu Gr It Ju Sa.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. R. rubrum} L.,{\i  Sp. Pl}. 200 (1753) ({\i R. vulgare} Lam., {\i R. sylvestre} (Lam.) Mert. & Koch,{\i  R. sativum} Syme). Plant 1-1·5 m. Leaves c. 6 × 7 cm, cordate, nearly glabrous. Racemes inclined or drooping, rather lax, with 10-20 pale green flowers, slightly tinged with purple. Receptacle nearly flat, with a raised ring between stamens and styles. Sepals orbicular-spathulate, patent; petals very small. Anther-lobes separated by a connective as wide as themselves. Fruit red, acid, glabrous. 2n = 16.{\i  Cultivated throughout Europe for its fruits} ({\i Red Currants}),{\i  and naturalized in many countries; native only in the west.} Be *Br Ga Ge Ho It.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 3. R. spicatum} Robson in With. (ed. Stokes), {\i Arr. Br. Pl. }ed. 3,{\b  2}: 265 (1796) ({\i R. rubrum} sensu Jancz. et auct. recent. nonnull., non L.; incl.{\i  R. pubescens} (Hartman) T. Hedl., {\i R. hispidulum} (Jancz.) Pojark., {\i R. heteromorphum} Topa, {\i R. scandicum }T. Hedl., {\i R. schlechtendalii} Lange). Like {\b 2} and often confused with it, but leaves usually larger and less cordate, varying from glabrous to tomentose on lower surface; receptacle pelviform, without a raised ring; anthers about as long as wide, with the lobes almost contiguous on their inner face. 2n = 16. {\i Damp woods and streamsides. N. & E. Europe; sometimes cultivated in the east, but rarely naturalized outside its native territory.} *Au Br Da Fe ?Ge No Po Rm Rs(N, B, C, W, E) Su [Cz].
\par

\par
461}
\par