{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 up to 20 m, with grey bark and a pyramidal crown, glabrous except for puberulent inflorescence. Leaves 7-13 × 3-6 cm, elliptic-oblong, acute, cuneate at the base, shining green, thin, usually undulate. Flowers fragrant, in few-flowered umbellate cymes. Petals white, oblong. Capsule 10-12 mm, obovoid, glabrous, orange when ripe, with 2 valves.{\i  Widely cultivated for ornament in S. & W. Europe, extensively naturalized in Açores and locally elsewhere.} [Az ?Ga Lu.] ({\i S.E. Australia.})
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 79.    PLATANACEAE}
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc  Edit. †T.G. Tutin & J.R. Edmondson
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Trees with scaling bark. Monoecious; flowers arranged in globose, unisexual capitula. Perianth 4- or 6-merous, arranged in 2 whorls. Stamens 4-6, opposite the outer perianth-segments. Ovary superior; carpels 3-6, free, each with 1(2) pendulous, orthotropous ovules.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 1.       Platanus}            L.
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc  By †T.G. Tutin
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Leaves alternate; lamina palmately lobed; petiole with dilated base, enclosing the bud. Filaments of stamens very short. Carpels in fruit obpyramidal, indehiscent, surrounded at the base by long hairs.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 Leaves lobed to beyond the middle, cuneate at the base;
\par
  female capitula usually 3-6 .......................................................... {\b 1. orientalis}
\par
Leaves lobed at most to the middle, truncate or cordate at
\par
   the base; female capitula usually 2 ............................................. {\b 2. acerifolia}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. P. orientalis} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 999 (1753). Up to 30 m. Leaves 5- to 7-lobed; central lobe much longer than its width at the base; all lobes coarsely dentate, rarely entire. Capitula (2)3-6(7) on a long pendulous axis.{\i  Damp woods and streamsides. Balkan peninsula southwards from c.} 42°{\i  N.; Kriti, S. Italy and Sicilia; often planted elsewhere}. Al Bu Cr Gr It Ju Si *Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. P. acerifolia} (Aiton) Willd.,{\i  Sp. Pl.}{\b  1}({\b 1}): 474 (1797) ({\i P. hybrida} auct., an Muenchh.?,{\i  P. hybrida} auct., an Brot.?,{\i  P. cuneata} Willd.). Like {\b 1} but leaves lobed at most to the middle; central lobe little longer than its width at the base; capitula nearly always 2. 2n = 42.{\i  Commonly planted in much of Europe, especially as a roadside tree and in cities; widely naturalized in S. Europe}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 The origin and taxonomic status of this plant have been much discussed but are still uncertain. Some authors consider it to be a hybrid, which arose in S.W. Europe in the seventeenth century, between {\b 1} and {\i P. occidentalis} L. from North America. Others regard it as a cultivar of {\b 1}. It is fully fertile.
\par

\par
463}
\par