{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 74.     PARNASSIACEAE}
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc  Edit. D.A. Webb.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Perennial herbs with undivided leaves. Flowers solitary, 5-merous. Stamens 5, alternating with 5 staminodes. Ovary superior; carpels 4; placentae parietal. Fruit a capsule.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 1.         Parnassia}           L.
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc  By D.A. Webb.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Leaves mostly basal. Stigmas 4, sessile. Seeds numerous.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. P. palustris} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 273 (1753). Glabrous and somewhat glaucous. Stem 5-40 cm, erect, usually bearing a single sessile leaf. Remaining leaves basal, petiolate, ovate to deltate-orbicular, cordate, often spotted with red beneath. Flowers 15-30 mm in diameter. Petals white, with darker, semi-transparent veins; staminodes spathulate, terminating in 9-13 linear processes tipped with greenish-yellow glands.{\i  Wet places. Most of Europe, but rare in the south}. Al Au Be Br Bu Cz Da Fe Ga Ge Gr Hb He Ho Hs Hu Is It Ju No Po Rm Rs(N, B, C, W, E) Su.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 A variable species, in which the relation between phenotypic, ecotypic and geographical variation, and their relation to chromosome number, is not yet clear. Two European subspecies may be recognized, but intermediates are found in the Alps and elsewhere.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b palustris} : Cauline leaf ovate-orbicular, cordate amplexicaul, not far below the middle of the stem. Sepals considerably shorter than the petals or capsule. 2n = 18, 36. {\i Throughout the range of the species, except the extreme north}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp.{\b  obtusiflora} (Rupr.) D.A. Webb, {\i Feddes Repert.}{\b  64}: 25 (1961) ({\i P. obtusiflora} Rupr.): Cauline leaf often absent; if present, near the base of the stem and usually somewhat deltate, with truncate base, not amplexicaul. Sepals nearly as long as the petals and capsule. 2n = 36.{\i  Arctic and subarctic Europe}.
\par

\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 75.      HYDRANGEACEAE }
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc  By D.A. Webb.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Deciduous shrubs with opposite, simple, exstipulate leaves. Flowers regular. Petals 4 or 5, free. Ovary inferior, 2- to 4-locular. Fruit a capsule opening at the top. Seeds numerous.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Flowers in corymbs, the outermost sterile with much
\par
  enlarged sepals ........................................................................... {\b 3. Hydrangea}
\par
1 Flowers in racemes or panicles, all fertile and similar
\par
2 Sepals and petals 4; stamens c. 25; styles 4, united except
\par
  at the apex ............................................................................... {\b 1. Philadelphus}
\par
2 Sepals and petals 5; stamens 10; styles 3, free .............................. {\b 2. Deutzia}
\par

\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 1.        Philadelphus}       L.
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc  By D.A. Webb.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Sepals and petals 4. Stamens numerous. Ovary 4-locular; styles united except at the apex.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Literature: S.Y. Hu,{\i  Jour. Arnold Arb.}{\b  36}: 52-109 (1955).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. P. coronarius} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 470 (1753) ({\i P. pallidus} Hayek ex C.K. Schneider). Plant 1-3 m, with numerous slender, dark brown twigs. Leaves 5-8 cm, ovate to oblong-elliptical, acuminate, remotely and finely toothed, shortly stalked, glabrous or sparsely hairy beneath. Flowers in short terminal racemes, strongly scented. Sepals triangular, acute; petals 12-18 mm, oblong-elliptical, creamy white. Stamens c. 25, shorter than the petals.{\i  Scrub or woodland on warm slopes. N. & C. Italy; Austria}. Au It [Cz Ga Rm].
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 The plant has been a favourite in European gardens for centuries, and its origin is subject to some doubt. Stations where it is undoubtedly native are very few, and the cultivated plant, on which the Linnaean species is based, differs somewhat from wild specimens.
\par

\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 2.          Deutzia}          Thunb.
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc  By D.A. Webb.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Sepals and petals 5. Stamens 10. Ovary 3-locular; styles free.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. D. scabra} Thunb., {\i Nova Gen. Pl.}{\b  1}: 20 (1781) ({\i D. crenata }Siebold & Zucc.). Plant 2-3 m; principal branches erect, with peeling bark. Leaves 4-8 cm, ovate, acute, finely serrate, shortly stalked, scabrid on both surfaces with white, stellate hairs. Flowers in small, erect panicles. Calyx and hypanthium tomentose. Petals 6-10 mm, suberect, oblong or narrow-elliptical, white, often tinged with pink outside. Filaments broad, usually with conspicuous shoulders or lobes near the top.{\i  Cultivated for ornament, and locally naturalized in C. Europe.} [Au.] ({\i China and Japan.})
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 3.             Hydrangea}              L.
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc  By D.A. Webb.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Sepals and petals 4 or 5. Stamens 10. Ovary 3-locular; styles free.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. H. macrophylla} (Thunb.) Ser. in DC.,{\i  Prodr.}{\b  4}: 15 (1830). Plant 1-3 m, with stout, pale green branches. Leaves 10-20 cm, ovate to obovate, shortly petiolate, acute to acuminate, serrate, almost glabrous. Flowers in large, terminal corymbs; some of the outer flowers sterile, up to 4 cm in diameter, consisting mainly of a greatly enlarged calyx; remaining flowers perfect, with 5 short, triangular sepals; petals 5, 3-4 mm, narrowly ovate, blue or pink. Stamens longer than the petals.{\i  Widely cultivated for ornament and as a hedge-plant; locally naturalized in Açores.} [Az.] Japan.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 The plant naturalized in Europe belongs to var.{\i  normalis }Wilson. The species was originally described from a variant in which all the flowers are enlarged and sterile.
\par

\par
460}
\par