{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 Variable in pubescence, leaf-shape and inflorescence. Several local populations have been described as species or subspecies, but the diagnoses are usually unsatisfactory in view of the variability of the species elsewhere. It seems probable that the arctic and subarctic populations ({\b R. glabellum} (Trautv. & C.A. Meyer) T. Hedl., {\i Bot. Not.}{\b  1901}: 98 (1901)), with nearly glabrous leaves, and those of E. European Russia ({\b R. hispidulum} (Jancz.) Pojark.,{\i  Bull. Appl. Bot. Pl.-Breed.} ({\i Leningrad}){\b  22}: 339 (1929)), with small, usually glandular-hairy leaves, may be entitled to subspecific rank.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 4. R. petraeum} Wulfen in Jacq., {\i Mise. Austr. Bot.}{\b  2}: 36 (1781) ({\i R. carpaticum }Schultes). Plant 1-3 m. Leaves up to 15 × 15 cm, glabrous or pubescent, sometimes bullate above and glandular beneath. Racemes c. 10 cm, horizontal or drooping, with 20-35 pinkish, campanulate flowers. Sepals ciliate, orbicular-spathulate, the lower part erect, the upper patent; petals ½ as long as the sepals. Upper part of ovary protruding above the disc. Fruit dark purplish-red, acid.{\i  Woods and scrub. Mountains of C. Europe, extending southwards to the Pyrenees, C. Italy and Bulgaria.} Au Bu Cz Ga Ge He Hs Hu It Ju Po Rm Rs(W).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 5. R. nigrum} L.,{\i  Sp. Pl. }201 (1753). Plant 1-2 m. Leaves up to 10 cm wide, glabrous above, slightly pubescent and with numerous sessile, aromatic glands beneath. Racemes drooping. Flowers campanulate, reddish- or brownish-green. Sepals oblong, recurved, pubescent; petals smaller, erect, whitish. Fruit up to 12 mm in diameter, black, sweetish and aromatic. 2n = 16.{\i  Damp woods. Most of Europe, except the Mediterranean region; native certainly in C. & E. Europe; cultivated for its fruits} ({\i Black Currants}), {\i and widely naturalized in the west, where its native limits are hard to ascertain.} *Au *Be *Br Bu *Cz *Da Fe Ga Ge *Ho *Hu It Ju *No Po Rm Rs(N, B, C, W, E) Su [Co Hb He].
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 6. R. uva-crispa} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 201 (1753) ({\i R. grossularia} L., {\i Grossularia reclinata} (L.) Miller). Plant 1-1·5 m, freely and intricately branched, and armed at the nodes with stout spines, usually in groups of 3 (very rarely absent). Leaves 2-5 cm wide, rarely more rather deeply lobed, glabrous or pubescent. Flowers in axillary clusters of 1-3; pedicels with 2 bracteoles near the middle. Sepals 5-7 mm, ligulate, pale or pinkish-green; petals white, smaller. Fruit c. 10 mm in diameter, green, yellow or purplish-red, usually hispid. 2n = 16.{\i  Hedges and wood-margins. Native in S., C. & W. Europe; extensively cultivated for its fruits} ({\i Gooseberries}), {\i and frequently naturalized by bird-dispersal in other areas}. Au Be Br Bu Cr Cz Ga Ge Gr He Ho Hs Hu It Ju Po Rm Rs(W) [Co Da Fe Hb Lu No Rs(N, B, C) Su].
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 7. R. sardoum} U. Martelli, {\i Malpighia}{\b  8}: 384 (1894). Plant c. 1 m, without spines. Leaves 10-15 mm wide, ovate to semi-circular, shortly 3-lobed, with numerous subsessile glands; petiole wide, sheathing, glandular-ciliate. Flowers solitary, axillary; pedicels short, bracteoles absent. Sepals greenish-yellow, ovate, deflexed; petals minute. Fruit bright red, glabrous.{\i  Calcareous rocks,} 1000-1200{\i  m. • Sardegna} ({\i near Oliena}). Sa.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 8. R. alpinum} L.,{\i  Sp. Pl.} 200 (1753) ({\i R. lucidum} Kit.). Plant 1-2 m. Leaves 2-6 cm, usually longer than wide, rather deeply 3-lobed, glabrous or sparsely hairy. Buds up to 10 mm, acute. Dioecious, but with rudimentary organs of the other sex. Flowers in glandular-hispid racemes (longer in male plants), each flower subtended by a conspicuous bracteole 4-8 × 1-2 mm. Flowers small, rotate, greenish; sepals elliptical. Fruit scarlet, glabrous, insipid. 2n = 16. {\i Wood-margins and by mountain streams. N. & C. Europe, extending southwards in the mountains to N. Spain, C. Italy and Bulgaria}. Au Br Bu Cz Da Fe Ga Ge He Hs Hu It Ju No Po Rm Rs(N, B, C) Su.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 9. R. orientale} Desf., {\i Hist. Arb.}{\b  2}: 88 (1809). Like {\b 8} but with shorter, ovoid, obtuse buds; leaves usually as wide as long, and more thickly covered with glandular hairs; fruit paler and glandular-hispid.{\i  C. & S. Greece}. Gr. ({\i W. & C. Asia}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 78.     PITTOSPORACEAE}
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc  Edit. †T.G. Tutin & J.R. Edmondson
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Trees or shrubs. Leaves simple, usually entire, alternate, exstipulate. Flowers regular, usually hermaphrodite, solitary or in cymes. Sepals 5, imbricate; petals 5, imbricate, often connate by the claws; limb recurved or patent. Stamens 5, hypogynous, free. Ovary superior, with 2, rarely 3-5 carpels. Fruit a capsule or berry.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 1.        Pittosporum}               Gaertner
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc  By J. do Amaral Franco (Ed.1) revised by D.A. Webb & J.R. Akeroyd (Ed.2)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Leaves often clustered at the ends of the shoots, usually evergreen. Flowers solitary or in terminal, corymbose or umbellate cymes. Fruit a capsule, with 2-4 leathery or woody valves. Seeds not winged, immersed in a viscid substance.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Petals blackish-purple; leaves white-tomentose beneath ........{\b 1. crassifolium}
\par
1 Petals white or yellowish; leaves glabrous
\par
2 Shrub; leaves obovate, obtuse .......................................................... {\b 2. tobira}
\par
2 Tree; leaves elliptic-oblong, acute ............................................ {\b 3. undulatum}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. P. crassifolium} Banks & Solander ex A. Cunn., {\i Ann. Nat. Hist.}{\b  4}: 106 (1839). An erect shrub or small tree up to 10 m, with black bark and a subfastigiate crown. Leaves 5-8 × 2-3 cm obovate-oblong to oblong, obtuse to subacute, with revolute margins, dark green above and white-tomentose beneath, very coriaceous. Flowers in few-flowered umbellate cymes. Petals blackish-purple, oblong. Capsule 12-20 mm, subglobose, white-tomentose, with 3 or 4 woody valves.{\i  Cultivated for ornament and shelter in parts of W. Europe; naturalized in S.W. England} ({\i Isles of Scilly}). [Br.] ({\i New Zealand}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. P. tobira} (Thunb.) Aiton fil.,{\i  Hort. Kew.} ed. 2, {\b 2}: 27 (1811). Shrub up to 5 m. Leaves 4-10 × 2-5 cm, obovate, coriaceous, glabrous. Flowers in small, subterminal corymbs, c. 2·5 cm in diameter, very fragrant. Petals broadly oblong, creamy white, later yellow. Capsule 10-12 mm, subglobose, with 3 valves.{\i  Widely cultivated for ornament in S. Europe; naturalized in Açores and parts of the Mediterranean region}. [Az Ga.] ({\i E. Asia}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b 3. P. undulatum} Vent., {\i Descr. Pl. Jard. Cels} t. 76 (1802). Tree
\par

\par
462}
\par