{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 when fully ripe, with 6-8 usually prominently mucronate scales. Seeds 8-10 on each scale.{\i  Planted for timber and ornament in S. Europe.} [Ga Hs It Lu.] ({\i Mexico and Guatemala.})
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 A very polymorphic species, varying greatly in habit and leaf-colour.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 4. C. arizonica} E.L. Greene,{\i  Bull. Torrey Bot. Club}{\b  9:} 64 (1882). Tree up to 30 m, with a narrow, pyramidal crown on young trees, becoming broad and open when older. Leaves greyish when young, becoming glaucous later, resinous-glandular, emitting a disagreeable odour when crushed. Female cone up to 30 mm.{\i  Planted for timber in Italy, and on a smaller scale elsewhere in S. Europe.} [It.] ({\i N. Mexico and S.W. United States}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 2.       Chamaecyparis}           Spach
\par       

\pard\f0\fs24\qc  By †T.G. Tutin.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Like {\i Cupressus} but with flattened twigs; female cones ripening in the first year or rarely early in the second, globose; seeds up to 5 on each scale. Seedlings and occasional branches of older plants of all species produce acicular, patent leaves.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. C. lawsoniana} (A. Murray) Parl.,{\i  Ann. Mus. Firenze} nov. ser., {\b 1:} 181 (1866) ({\i Cupressus lawsoniana} A. Murray). Tree up to 65 m. Leaves opposite and decussate, the lateral ones larger than the others, all closely appressed, acute, with translucent glands, and with white markings beneath. Male cone pink or red; female cone c. 8 mm in diameter, globose, yellowish-brown when ripe; scales 8, each with a central depression in which is a projecting ridge. Seeds 2-4(5) on each scale, ovoid, with conspicuous resinous tubercles, winged.{\i  Widely planted for timber and shelter, and locally naturalized}. [Au Br Da Ga Ge Hb It Lu No Rm Tu.] ({\i W. United States}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Other commonly cultivated species are{\b  C. obtusa} (Siebold & Zucc.) Siebold & Zucc. in Endl.,{\i  Syn. Conif.} 63 (1847), from Japan, with obtuse, minutely glandular leaves with white X- or Y-shaped markings beneath;{\b  C. pisifera} (Siebold & Zucc.) Siebold & Zucc. in Endl.,{\i  op. cit.} 64 (1847), from Japan, with acute, obscurely glandular leaves with white markings beneath, and cone 5-6 mm in diameter; and{\b  C. nootkatensis} (D. Don) Spach,{\i  Hist. Vég.} ({\i Phan}.){\b  2:} 333 (1834), from W. North America, with dull green, eglandular leaves without white markings, and with cones which ripen early in the second year.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 3.            Thuja}                 L.
\par      

\pard\f0\fs24\qc  By †T.G. Tutin.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Like{\i  Cupressus} but twigs flattened; female cones oblong or conical, ripening in the first year; scales thin and flexible; seeds up to 5 on each scale.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. T. plicata} D. Don in Lamb.,{\i  Descr. Gen. Pinus}{\b  2:} 19 (1824). Tree up to 65 m. Trunk not branched from the base. Leaves opposite and decussate, ovate, acute or obtuse, appressed, eglandular or with an obscure gland, usually with faint white markings beneath. Female cone c. 12 mm, conical, brown when ripe; scales 10-12, thin, with a thickened process on the inner side, projecting beyond the thin, triangular, deflexed apex. Seeds 2 or 3 per scale, elliptical, winged.{\i  Planted for timber, and locally naturalized}. [Au Br Da Ge It Lu No.] ({\i W. North America}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b T. occidentalis} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 1002 (1753), from E. North America, is also sometimes planted, mainly in C. Europe. It has conspicuously glandular leaves which are yellowish- or bluish-green and without white markings beneath; the female cones are oblong and bright brown when ripe.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b T. orientalis} L.,{\i  loc. cit.} (1753), from China, is occasionally planted, mainly for ornament. It usually has several basal branches as long as the main stem, entirely green leaves, the female cone with 6(-8) thick scales, each with a stout hooked or recurved apical boss, and seeds without a wing. It has a chromosome number of 2n = 22.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 4.          Tetraclinis}            Masters
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc  By †T.G. Tutin.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Monoecious tree. Buds concealed by the leaves. Twigs flattened. Leaves in groups of 4, the lateral ones larger than the others, all adnate to the twig except at the scale-like apex. Female cones solitary; scales 4, in a single whorl, valvate, woody. Seeds with 2 wide wings.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 The only species.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. T. articulata} (Vahl) Masters,{\i  Jour. Roy. Hort. Soc.}{\b  14:} 250 (1892). Pyramidal tree 12-15 m. Cone 8-12 mm in diameter; scales glaucous, triangular, 2 obtuse and 2 acute at the apex, deeply grooved, with a small spine near the apex.{\i  S.E. Spain} ({\i near Cartagena});{\i  Malta.} Hs Si. ({\i N.W. Africa}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 5.         Juniperus}                    L.
\par  

\pard\f0\fs24\qc  By J. do Amaral Franco.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Monoecious or dioecious trees or shrubs. Leaves opposite or in whorls of 3, acicular or scale-like, always acicular in young plants; frequently all scale-like in mature plants, or all acicular, or a combination of both. Female cones axillary or terminal, ripening in the first, second or third year, usually ovoid to globose, indehiscent, berry-like; cone-scales fleshy, coalescent. Seeds ovoid or oblong, angled or terete, 1-12 in each cone, never winged.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 All leaves in whorls of 3, acicular, rigid, jointed at the base; 
\par
  cones axillary
\par
2 Male cones in axillary fascicles; female cone 20-25 mm; 
\par
  seeds united to form a stone .......................................................... {\b 1. drupacea}
\par
2 Male flowers solitary, axillary; female cone 6-15 mm, seeds free
\par
3 Leaves with 1 broad stomatal band above (which is rarely divided by a
\par
  faint midrib in the basal 1/2); cone 6-9 mm, black when ripe .... {\b 2. communis}
\par
3 Leaves with 2 stomatal bands above; cone 6-15 mm, reddish-brown 
\par
  to dark purple when ripe
\par
4 Leaves loosely set, patent ........................................................... {\b 3. oxycedrus}
\par
4 Leaves closely set, strongly incurved and subimbricate ............. {\b 4. brevifolia}
\par
1 Leaves of 2 kinds: in juvenile plants acicular and patent, 
\par
  in adult plants scale-like and imbricate (rarely acicular and then
\par 
  not jointed at the base); cones terminal
\par
5 Acicular leaves usually in whorls of 3; scale-like leaves obtuse, 
\par
  with a narrow but distinct scarious border;
\par
  ripe female cone dark red ............................................................ {\b 5. phoenicea}
\par
5 Acicular leaves decussate (in whorls of 3 on leading shoots); 
\par
  scale-like leaves without a scarious border; ripe female cone
\par 
  dark purple or blackish
\par
6 Ripe female cone 4-6 mm
\par
7 Scale-like leaves appressed, not free at the apex, obtuse to subacute;
\par
  female cone subglobose, on short, recurved stalk; shrub .................. {\b 9. sabina}
\par

\par
46}
\par