{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 7 Scale-like leaves free at the apex, acute to acuminate; female
\par
  cone ovoid, on erect or patent stalk; tree up to 30 m ................ {\b 10. virginiana}
\par
6 Ripe female cone 7-12 mm
\par
8 Twigs 0·6-0·8 mm, wide, terete; scale-like leaves 1-1·5 mm, acute; 
\par
  seeds 4-6 .......................................................................................... {\b 8. excelsa}
\par
8 Twigs 1 mm wide, quadrangular; scale-like leaves 1·5-2 mm, acute or
\par
  acuminate; seeds 1-4
\par
9 Twigs distichously arranged; female cone dark purple,
\par
  pruinose; seeds 2-4 ........................................................................ {\b 6. thurifera}
\par
9 Twigs irregularly arranged; female cone almost black;
\par
  seeds 1 or 2, rarely 3 ................................................................ {\b 7. foetidissima}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. J. drupacea} Labill.,{\i  Icon. Pl. Syr.}{\b  2:} 14, t. 8 (1791) ({\i Arceuthos drupacea} (Labill.) Antoine & Kotschy). Dioecious tree up to 20 m, with a broad, pyramidal crown (but assuming a columnar habit in cultivation). Leaves 10-25 × 2-4 mm, linear-lanceolate, acuminate, patent, with 2 white bands above. Female cone 20-25 mm, ripening in the second year, ovoid to subglobose, brown or bluish-black, pruinose. Seeds 3, minute, united to form a single large stone.{\i  S. Greece} ({\i on and north of Parnon Oros}). Gr. ({\i Anatolia and Syria}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. J. communis} L.,{\i  Sp. Pl.} 1040 (1753). Dioecious tree or shrub. Leaves with a single white stomatal band above, which is rarely divided by a faint midrib in the basal ½. Female cone 6-9 mm, ripening in the second or third year, ovoid to globose, green in the first year, then pruinose, and black when fully ripe. Seeds free, usually 3.{\i  Throughout Europe, but mainly on mountains in the south}. All except Az Bl Cr Sb ?Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Leaves 10-15 mm, closely set, upturned or upcurved, acute to obtuse,
\par
  mucronate, with a broad, white stomatal band ..................... ({\b c}) subsp.{\b  alpina}
\par
1 Leaves up to 20 mm, loosely or closely set, acuminate-subulate, patent
\par
2 Leaves 1-1·5 mm wide, loosely set, linear, with a glaucous
\par
  stomatal band ................................................................. ({\b a}) subsp.{\b  communis}
\par
2 Leaves 1·3-2 mm wide, closely set, linear-oblong, 
\par
  with a broad, white stomatal band ......................... ({\b b}) subsp.{\b  hemisphaerica}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b communis}: Tree up to 15 m or shrub. Leaves up to 20 × 1-1·5 mm, loosely set, linear, with a glaucous stomatal band. 2n = 22.{\i  Almost throughout the range of the species}.
\par
 ({\b b}) Subsp.{\b  hemisphaerica} (J. & C. Presl) Nyman, {\i Consp}. 676 (1881) ({\i J. depressa} Steven): Shrub. Leaves up to 20 × 1·3-2 mm, closely set, linear-oblong, with a broad, white stomatal band.{\i  S. Europe, mainly on mountains}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b c}) Subsp.{\b  alpina} (Suter) Celak., {\i Prodr. Fl. Böhm.} 17 (1867) (subsp.{\b  nana} Syme, {\i J. alpina} S.F. Gray,{\i  J. sibirica} Burgsd.,{\i  J. nana} Willd., nom. illeg.): Shrub, usually spreading and mat-like. Leaves 10-15 × 1-2 mm, closely set, upturned and upcurved, acute to obtuse, mucronate, with a broad, white stomatal band. 2n = 22.{\i  Higher mountains of Europe; at low altitudes in the North, including coastal rocks and cliffs on Atlantic coasts}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 A population from S.W. England (Lizard peninsula) is intermediate between subspp. ({\b a}) and ({\b c}).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 3. J. oxycedrus} L.,{\i  Sp. Pl.} 1038 (1753). Dioecious shrub or tree up to 15 m. Leaves patent, with 2 glaucous bands above. Female cone ripening in the second year, globose to pyriform, reddish, yellowish when unripe. Seeds free, usually 3. {\i S. Europe}. Al Bl Bu Co Cr Ga Gr Hs It Ju Lu Rs(K) Sa Si Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Leaves usually acute; tree up to 15 m .................................. ({\b b}) subsp.{\b  badia}
\par
1 Leaves ± spinous at apex; shrub up to 4 m
\par
2 Leaves not more than 2 mm wide; female cone 8-10 mm,
\par
  shining (sometimes scarcely pruinose when young) ..... ({\b a}) subsp.{\b  oxycedrus}
\par
2 Leaves up to 2·5 mm wide; female cone 12-15 mm,
\par
   dull (pruinose when young) ........................................ ({\b c}) subsp.{\b  macrocarpa}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp.{\b  oxycedrus} ({\i J. rufescens} Link, nom. illeg.): Erect shrub up to 4 m; branches upright, sometimes pendulous. Leaves 8-15 × 1-1·5 mm, acuminate-subulate. More or less spinous at apex. Female cone 8-10 mm, reddish, not pruinose. 2n = 22.{\i  Dry hills or plains, scrub or clearings in Mediterranean woods, up to} 1900{\i  m. Almost throughout the range of the species}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp.{\b  badia} (H. Gay) Debeaux,{\i  Rev. Bot. Bull. Mens. Soc. Fr. Bot.} ({\i Toulouse}){\b  11:} 412 (1893): Tree up to 15 m, pyramidal, with patent branches, pendulous at the tip. Leaves 12-20 × 1·2-2 mm, usually acute, sometimes shorter, 8-12 mm, and subobtuse, mostly on male plants. Female cone 10-13 mm, more or less pruinose when young, purplish-brown when ripe. {\i Dry continental woods, rarely in semi-evergreen woods. Inland regions of Spain, N.E. and C.E. Portugal}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b c}) Subsp. {\b macrocarpa} (Sm.) Ball,{\i  Jour. Linn. Soc. London} ({\b Bot.}) {\b 16:} 670 (1878) ({\i J. macrocarpa} Sm., {\i J. umbilicata} Godron): Like subsp. ({\b a}) but small, erect to prostrate shrub; leaves up to 2·5 mm wide; ripe female cone 12-15 mm, dull (pruinose when young). {\i Maritime sands and rocky places. Mediterranean region and Bulgaria; rather local}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 4. J. navicularis} Gand.,{\i  Bull. Soc. Bot. Fr.}{\b  57:} 55 (1910) ({\i J. oxycedrus} subsp.{\i  rufescens} auct. lusit., subsp.{\i  transtagana} Franco). Small, upright, dense shrub up to 2 m. Leaves 4-12 × 1-1·5 mm, patent, acute to obtuse, dense, with 2 white stomatal bands above. Female cone 7-10 mm, ripening in the second year, globose, reddish or yellowish, not pruinose when young, coral-red when ripe. Maritime sands and evergreen scrub. •{\i  S.W. Portugal, S. Spain.} Hs Lu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 5. J. brevifolia} (Seub.) Antoine,{\i  Kupress.-Gatt.} 16 (1857). Dioecious erect shrub or small tree with a broad, pyramidal crown. Leaves 3-10 × 1-2 mm, closely set, strongly incurved and subimbricate, linear-lanceolate to ovate-linear, with 2 broad, white stomatal bands above. Female cone 8-10 × 6-8 mm, ripening in the second year, subglobose, green and pruinose when young, dark reddish-brown when ripe. Seeds 3, free, ovoid, triquetrous.{\i  Mountain slopes up to} 1500 {\i m. Açores}. Az.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 6. J. phoenicea} L.,{\i  Sp. Pl.} 1040 (1753) ({\i J. oophora }G. Kunze). Monoecious small tree up to 8 m, or shrub (procumbent on seashores). Twigs 1 mm wide, terete, scaly. Juvenile leaves 5-14 × 0·5-1 mm, acicular, patent, acute, mucronate, with 2 stomatal bands above and beneath; adult leaves 0·7-1 mm, scale-like, ovate-rhombic, closely appressed, obtuse to somewhat acute, with an oblong, furrowed gland on the back, and a distinct scarious border. Female cone 8-14 mm, ripening in the second year, globose to ovoid, blackish when very young, later green or yellowish and not or slightly pruinose, dark red when ripe. Seeds 3-9, free. {\i Mediterranean region and Portugal; mainly near the coast}. Al Bl Co Cr Ga Gr Hs It Ju Lu Sa Si.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp.{\b  phoenicea} : Scale-leaves obtuse or subacute. Female cone 8-12 mm, usually globose.{\i  Throughout most of the range of the species}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp.{\b  turbinata }(Guss.) Nyman,{\i  Consp.} 676 (1881): Scale-leaves acute. Female cone 12-14 mm, ovoid.{\i  Coastal sands of W. Mediterranean region}.
\par

\par
47}
\par