{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 7. J. thurifera} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 1039 (1753). Dioecious pyramidal tree up to 20 m. Twigs 1 mm wide, quadrangular, scaly, distichously arranged. Leaves all decussate; adult leaves 1·5-2 mm, appressed but free at their incurved, acuminate or acute apices, with an oblong, furrowed gland on the back, and an entire or slightly toothed, but not scarious, border. Female cone 7-8 mm, ripening in the second year, pruinose when young, dark purple when fully ripe. Seeds 2-4, free.{\i  Mountains of S.W. Europe}. Co Ga Hs.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 This species has been cited by several authors as native in Portugal and Greece. The former records should be referred to{\b  5}, the latter to {\b 7}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 8. J. foetidissima} Willd.,{\i  Sp. Pl}.{\b  4}({\b 2}): 853 (1806) ({\i J. sabinoides} Griseb.). Monoecious or dioecious tree up to 17 m, with a straight stem, and a narrow, conical crown. Twigs 1 mm wide, distinctly quadrangular, scaly, irregularly arranged. Leaves foetid when crushed, all decussate; adult leaves 1·5 mm, ovate-rhombic, free at their acuminate apices, mostly eglandular, the border entire, not scarious. Female cone 7-12 mm, ripening in the second year globose, pruinose when young, dark reddish-brown to nearly black when ripe. Seeds 1 or 2(3), free.{\i  Mountains of S. and W. parts of Balkan peninsula; Krym.} Al Gr Ju Rs(K).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 9. J. excelsa} Bieb.,{\i  Beschr. Länd. Terek Casp. }204 (1800) ({\i J. isophyllos} C. Koch). Monoecious or dioecious tree up to 20 m with a conical crown when young, later broad and open. Twigs 0·6-0·8 mm wide, terete, scaly. Juvenile leaves 5-6 mm, very few; scale-like leaves 1-1·5 mm, ovate-rhombic, closely appressed acute, with a central, ovate or linear gland on the back, entire, the border not scarious. Female cone 8 mm, ripening in the second year, globose, slightly pruinose, dark purplish-brown when ripe. Seeds 4-6, free.{\i  Balkan peninsula; Krym}. Al Bu Gr Ju Rs(K).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 10. J. sabina} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 1039 (1753). Dioecious shrub, usually low and spreading. Twigs 0·6-0·8 mm wide, quadrangular. Leaves strongly foetid, all decussate; adult leaves 1-1·25 mm, ovate appressed, obtuse to subacute, with an elliptical gland on the back entire, the border not scarious. Female cone 4-6 mm, ripening in the autumn of the first year or in the following spring, usually depressed-globose, bluish-black, pruinose; stalk short, recurved scaly. Seeds usually 2, free. 2n = 22. •{\i  Mountains of S. & C. Europe; also at low altitudes in S.E. Russia.} Al Au Bu Cz Ga Ge Gr He Hs It Ju Po Rm Rs(C, W, K, E).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 11. J. virginiana} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 1039 (1753). Dioecious pyramidal tree up to 30 m. Twigs 0·6-0·8 mm in diameter, very slender. Leaves all decussate; the juvenile 5-6 mm, often present on adult trees, long, spiny-pointed; adult leaves 0·5-1·5 mm, appressed but free at their acute or acuminate apices, often with a small gland on the back, entire and without a scarious border. Female cone 4-6 mm, ripening in the first year, ovoid, glaucous, brownish-violet when ripe; stalk erect or patent. Seeds 1 or 2, free.{\i  Planted for timber in parts of C. & S. Europe}. [Ga Hu It Rm.] ({\i North America}.)
\par

\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs36\qc {\b TAXOPSIDA}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs36\qc TAXALES
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 29.        TAXACEAE}
\par                  

\pard\f0\fs24\qc  Edit. D.M. Moore.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Usually dioecious, evergreen trees or shrubs with spirally arranged, linear, flattened leaves; not resiniferous. Male flowers axillary, solitary or in small spikes. Female flowers axillary, solitary or 2, with 1 or more sterile scales; ovuliferous scale terminal, bearing a solitary, erect ovule. Seeds partly or wholly surrounded by an aril.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 1.           Taxus}                     L.
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc  By J. do Amaral Franco.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Twigs irregularly alternate. Male flowers solitary, each consisting of 6-14 peltate anthers with 4-8 pollen-sacs. Female flower consisting of several imbricate scales, the uppermost fertile. Seeds ovoid, partly surrounded by a fleshy, usually scarlet, aril, ripening the first year.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. T. baccata} L.,{\i  Sp. Pl.} 1040 (1753). Shrub or tree up to 20 m with a wide, pyramidal crown. Leaves 10-30 mm, the margins recurved, dark, glossy green above, with 2 pale green stomatal bands beneath. Seeds 6-7 mm. 2n = 24.{\i  Europe, except the east and extreme north, extending northwards to} c. 63°{\i  N. in Norway and eastwards to Estonia and Krym; only on mountains in the Mediterranean region.} All except Cr Fa Is Rs(N, E) Sb; doubtfully native in Ho.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Cultivated for centuries; the many cultivars differ in habit, leaf characters and aril-colour. A key to and descriptions of these are given in G. Krüssman,{\i  Manual of Cultivated Conifers,} 281-288 (London, 1985).
\par

\par
48}
\par