{\rtf1\ansi \deff4\deflang1033{\fonttbl{\f1\froman\fcharset2\fprq2 Symbol;}{\f4\froman\fcharset0\fprq2 Times New Roman;}}{\colortbl;\red0\green0\blue0;\red0\green0\blue255;\red0\green255\blue255;\red0\green255\blue0;\red255\green0\blue255;\red255\green0\blue0;\red255\green255\blue0;\red255\green255\blue255;\red0\green0\blue128;\red0\green128\blue128;\red0\green128\blue0;\red128\green0\blue128;\red128\green0\blue0;\red128\green128\blue0;\red128\green128\blue128;\red192\green192\blue192;}{\stylesheet{\widctlpar \f4\fs20\lang2057 \snext0 Normal;}{\*\cs10 \additive Default Paragraph Font;}}{\info{\author dddd}{\operator dddd}{\creatim\yr1998\mo11\dy11\hr16\min1}{\revtim\yr1998\mo11\dy11\hr16\min4}{\version2}{\edmins3}{\nofpages3}{\nofwords721}{\nofchars4114}{\*\company  }{\vern57431}}\widowctrl\ftnbj\aenddoc\hyphcaps0 \fet0\sectd \linex0 {\*\pnseclvl1\pnucrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl2\pnucltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl3\pndec\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl4\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl5\pndec\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl6\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl7\pnlcrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl8\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl9\pnlcrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}
\pard\plain \ \f4\fs20\lang2057 {\fs24 
\par }
\pard \qc\ {\b\fs36  GNETOPSIDA}{\fs36 
\par 
\par GNETALES
\par 
\par }{\fs28  }{\b\fs28 30.             EPHEDRACEAE}{\fs28 
\par }{\fs24  Edit. J.R. Edmondson}{\fs28 
\par 
\par }
\pard \ {\fs28 Shrubs with opposite or verticillate leaves, usually reduced to short, more or less coalescent sheaths, 1-2(-3) mm; not resiniferous. Inflorescences axillary; strobili sessile or on short shoots. Fruit a globose or ovoid syncarp, the bracts fleshy at maturity, red, or rarely yellow.
\par 
\par }
\pard \qc\ {\fs28  }{\b\fs28 1.            Ephedra}{\fs28             L.
\par }{\fs24  \'86F. Markgraf (Ed.1) revised by H. Freitag & M. Maier-Stolte (Ed.2)
\par 
\par }
\pard \ {\fs28 Twigs green. Male strobilus with 2-8(-12) pairs of free bracts, each with an axillary flower of 2 united scales surrounding a column bearing a few 2- or 3-celled microsporangia, the microsporangia dehiscing by apical, horizontal slits. Female strobilus of 2 or 3 pairs of more or less connate bracts surrounding 1 or 2 naked apical flowers; ovules orthotropous, with integument prolonged into a slender tube.
\par 
\par Literature: O. Stapf, }{\i\fs28 Denkschr. Akad. Wiss. Math.-Nat. Kl.}{\fs28  (}{\i\fs28 Wien}{\fs28 )}{\b\fs28  56}{\fs28 (}{\b\fs28 2}{\fs28 ): 1-112 (1889). F. Widder,}{\i\fs28  Phyton}{\fs28  (}{\i\fs28 Austria}{\fs28 ) }{\b\fs28 1: }{\fs28 71-75 (1948). H. Riedl, }{\i\fs28 Scient. Pharmac.}{\b\fs28  35:}{\fs28  225-228 (1967). H. Freitag & M. Maier-Stolte, }{\i\fs28 Taxon}{\b\fs28  38:}{\fs28  545-556 (1989).
\par 
\par }
\pard \li200\ {\fs28 1 Often gynodioecious; pith white .................................................. }{\b\fs28 1. foeminea}{\fs28  
\par 1 Dioecious; pith brown
\par 2 Twigs often fragile when dry; leaves and bracts ciliolate; bracts of
\par    female strobilus connate almost to apex .......................................... }{\b\fs28 2. fragilis}{\fs28 
\par 2 Twigs usually not fragile; leaves and bracts glabrous; bracts of female
\par     strobilus connate to }{\fs28 {\field{\*\fldinst SYMBOL 177 \\f "Symbol" \\s 14}{\fldrslt\f1\fs28}}}{\fs28  1/3 or 1/2
\par 3 Twigs 0\'b77-1\'b70 mm wide; male strobilus globose, with 2-4 pairs    of flowers; fruit 1-seeded ................................................................. }{\b\fs28 3. major}{\fs28 
\par 3 Twigs 1\'b70-1\'b75 mm wide; male strobilus ovoid or cylindrical,    with 4-8(-12) pairs of flowers; fruit 2-seeded ............................  }{\b\fs28 4. distachya}{\fs28 
\par 
\par }
\pard \ {\fs28    }{\b\fs28 1. E. foeminea}{\fs28  Forsk\'e5l,}{\i\fs28  Fl. Aegypt. }{\fs28 170 (1775) (}{\i\fs28 E. fragilis}{\fs28  subsp.}{\i\fs28  campylopoda}{\fs28  (C.A. Meyer) Ascherson & Graebner). Often gynodioecious; climbing up to 3(-5) m, or procumbent; twigs usually pendent. Predominantly male strobilus subsessile, ovoid, with 4-8 pairs of flowers, the 2 terminal ones often female; male flowers with 4-6 microsporangia. Female strobilus stipitate; peduncles 2-10(-20) mm, usually reflexed; innermost pair of bracts connate almost to apex, the margins not ciliolate. Tube of integument 0\'b75-1 mm, straight. Fruit 2-seeded, the seed concealed by bracts. }{\i\fs28 E. Mediterranean region}{\fs28 . Al Bu Cr Gr It Ju Tu.
\par 
\par     }{\b\fs28 2. E. fragilis}{\fs28  Desf.,}{\i\fs28  Fl. Atl.}{\b\fs28  2:}{\fs28  372 (1799) (}{\i\fs28 E. altissima}{\fs28  sensu Willk., non Desf.). Dioecious; more or less erect shrub to 1\'b75(-2) m; main branches spreading, rarely scandent; twigs readily disarticulating at nodes. Male strobilus subsessile, ovoid, with 4-8 pairs of flowers, the flowers with 4-6 microsporangia. Female strobilus stipitate, 1- or 2-flowered; peduncles 2-4 mm; innermost pair of bracts connate almost to apex. Tube of integument 0\'b75-1\'b75(-2) mm, straight. Seed or seeds concealed by bracts.}{\i\fs28  Mediterranean region; S. Portugal.}{\fs28  Bl Hs Lu Si.
\par 
\par     }{\b\fs28 3. E. major}{\fs28  Host,}{\i\fs28  Fl. Austr.}{\b\fs28  2:}{\fs28  671 (1831) (}{\i\fs28 E. nebrodensis}{\fs28  Tineo ex Guss.,}{\i\fs28  E. scoparia}{\fs28  Lange). Dioecious; shrub up to 2 m, with 1 trunk-like stem; twigs 0\'b77-1(-1\'b72) mm wide. Male strobilus sessile, globose, with 2-4 pairs of flowers; flowers with 6-8 microsporangia. Female strobilus shortly stipitate, 1-flowered. Tube of integument 0\'b76-1 mm, straight. Fruit 1-seeded, the seed emergent.}{\i\fs28  Mediterranean region}{\fs28 . Al Ga Gr Hs It Ju Sa Si Tu.
\par 
\par  (}{\b\fs28 a}{\fs28 ) Subsp.}{\b\fs28  major}{\fs28  : Twigs rough. Female strobilus with innermost bracts connate for c. 1/3 their length. 2n = 14.}{\i\fs28  Almost throughout the range of the species}{\fs28 .
\par  (}{\b\fs28 b}{\fs28 ) Subsp.}{\b\fs28  procera}{\fs28  (Fischer & C.A. Meyer) Bornm.,}{\i\fs28  Bot. Jahrb.}{\b\fs28  140:}{\fs28  Beibl. 185 (1928) (}{\i\fs28 E. procera}{\fs28  Fischer & C.A. Meyer): Twigs smooth. Female strobilus with innermost bracts connate for c. \'bd their length. }{\i\fs28 Mountains of Greece and S. Jugoslavia}{\fs28 .
\par 
\par     }{\b\fs28 4. E. distachya}{\fs28  L., }{\i\fs28 Sp. Pl.}{\fs28  1040 (1753) (}{\i\fs28 E. vulgaris}{\fs28  L.C.M. Richard). Dioecious; shrub up to 0\'b75 m, with numerous stems from subterranean rhizome; twigs (1-)1\'b72-1\'b75 mm wide, usually somewhat papillose-scabrid. Male strobilus usually stalked, ovoid to cylindrical, with 4-8 pairs of flowers; flowers with 6-8 microsporangia. Female strobilus stipitate, 2-flowered, the innermost bracts connate for c. \'bd their length. Seeds emergent.}{\i\fs28  S. Europe, extending northwards to N.W. France, S. Slovakia, C. Ukraine and}{\fs28  c. 56\'b0}{\i\fs28  N. in E. Russia}{\fs28 . Al Bu Co Cz Ga Gr He Hs Hu It Ju Rm Rs(C, W, K, E) Sa Si Tu.
\par 
\par  (}{\b\fs28 a}{\fs28 ) Subsp. }{\b\fs28 distachya}{\fs28  : Microsporangia mostly stipitate. Tube of integument 0\'b77-1\'b72 mm, straight. 2n = 24, 28.}{\i\fs28  Almost throughout the range of the species}{\fs28 .
\par  (}{\b\fs28 b}{\fs28 ) Subsp.}{\b\fs28  helvetica}{\fs28  (C.A. Meyer) Ascherson & Graebner, }{\i\fs28 Syn. Mitteleur. Fl.}{\b\fs28  1:}{\fs28  260 (1897): Microsporangia mostly sessile. Tube of integument (1-)1\'b72-2 mm, twisted, rarely straight.}{\i\fs28  Rocks. \bullet   Alps}{\fs28 .
\par 
\par Plants from E. Europe with smoother stems and somewhat smaller seeds have been referred to subsp.}{\b\fs28  monostachya}{\fs28  (L.) H. Riedl, }{\i\fs28 Scient. Pharmac. }{\b\fs28 35:}{\fs28  228 (1967).
\par 
\par 49}
\par }