{\rtf1\ansi \deff4\deflang1033{\fonttbl{\f4\froman\fcharset0\fprq2 Times New Roman;}}{\colortbl;\red0\green0\blue0;\red0\green0\blue255;\red0\green255\blue255;\red0\green255\blue0;\red255\green0\blue255;\red255\green0\blue0;\red255\green255\blue0;\red255\green255\blue255;\red0\green0\blue128;\red0\green128\blue128;\red0\green128\blue0;\red128\green0\blue128;\red128\green0\blue0;\red128\green128\blue0;\red128\green128\blue128;\red192\green192\blue192;}{\stylesheet{\widctlpar \f4\fs20\lang2057 \snext0 Normal;}{\*\cs10 \additive Default Paragraph Font;}}{\info{\author dddd}{\operator dddd}{\creatim\yr1998\mo11\dy5\hr15\min50}{\revtim\yr1998\mo11\dy5\hr15\min52}{\version2}{\edmins2}{\nofpages3}{\nofwords864}{\nofchars4929}{\*\company  }{\vern57431}}\widowctrl\ftnbj\aenddoc\hyphcaps0 \fet0\sectd \linex0 {\*\pnseclvl1\pnucrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl2\pnucltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl3\pndec\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl4\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl5\pndec\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl6\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl7\pnlcrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl8\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl9\pnlcrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}
\pard\plain \ \f4\fs20\lang2057 {\fs28 appressed, the apex acute; free apex of lateral leaves c. 1/6 as long as the leaf, squarrose. Cones 1-3(4); peduncles 5-18 cm; spores c. 30 \'b5m. }{\i\fs28 Throughout the range of the species}{\fs28 .
\par  (}{\b\fs28 b}{\fs28 ) Subsp.}{\b\fs28  issleri}{\fs28  (Rouy) Jermy,}{\i\fs28  Fern Gaz.}{\b\fs28  13:}{\fs28  260 (1989) (}{\i\fs28 D. \'d7 issleri}{\fs28  (Rouy) J. Holub): Main stem above ground. Ventral leaves 1-1\'b75 mm, 1/3 as wide as branches, lanceolate, the apex obtuse, more or less appressed; free apex of lateral leaves c. 1/2 as long as the leaf, falcate. Cones 1(-3); peduncles 5-10 cm; spores 32-38 \'b5m. C. Europe extending westwards to C. France and Britain.
\par  (}{\b\fs28 c}{\fs28 ) Subsp.}{\b\fs28  zeilleri}{\fs28  (Rouy) Kukkonen,}{\i\fs28  Ann. Bot. Fenn.}{\b\fs28  23:}{\fs28  265 (1986) (}{\i\fs28 D. \'d7 zeilleri}{\fs28  (Rouy) J. Holub): Main stem at least in part subterranean. Ventral leaves 1-1\'b75 mm, 1/3 as wide as branches, lanceolate-triangular, the apex acute, more or less appressed; free apex of lateral leaves c. 1/2 as long as the leaf, falcate. Cones 2-5(6); peduncles 5-18 cm; spores 32-38 \'b5m.}{\i\fs28  E.C. & N.E. Europe; C. France}{\fs28 .
\par  (}{\b\fs28 d}{\fs28 ) Subsp.}{\b\fs28  montellii}{\fs28  (Kukkonen) Kukkonen, }{\i\fs28 Ann. Bot. Fenn.}{\b\fs28  21:}{\fs28  210 (1984). Like subsp. (}{\b\fs28 c}{\fs28 ) but with main stem usually above ground, cones usually solitary and peduncles less than 5 cm.}{\i\fs28  N. Fennoscandia and N. Russia}{\fs28 .
\par 
\par Plants from A\'e7ores similar in morphology to subsp. (}{\b\fs28 b}{\fs28 ) have been called}{\i\fs28  D. madeirense}{\fs28  (Wilce) J. Holub, }{\i\fs28 Preslia}{\b\fs28  47:}{\fs28  108 (1975) (}{\i\fs28 Lycopodium madeirense}{\fs28  Wilce,}{\b\fs28  Diphasium madeirense}{\fs28  (Wilce) Rothm.) and require further investigation.
\par 
\par   }{\b\fs28 2. D. tristachyum}{\fs28  (Pursh) J. Holub, }{\i\fs28 Preslia}{\b\fs28  47:}{\fs28  108 (1975) (}{\i\fs28 Diphasium tristachyum}{\fs28  (Pursh) Rothm., }{\i\fs28 D. complanatum }{\fs28  subsp.}{\i\fs28  chamaecyparissus}{\fs28  (A. Braun ex Mutel) Celak.}{\i\fs28  Lycopodium chamaecyparissus}{\fs28  A. Braun ex Mutel). Stems deeply subterranean; erect shoots repeatedly branched and caespitose; finer branches 1\'b72-1\'b75(-2) mm wide, somewhat flattened. Lateral leaves as wide as dorsal; ventral leaves on the finer sterile branches 1-1\'b75 mm long, 1/3-1/4 as wide as the branches. Cone pedunculate; sporophylls broadly ovate, acuminate; spores c. 30 \'b5m. 2n = 46. }{\i\fs28 C. Europe, extending to S. Fennoscandia, C. Russia, Romania and C. Italy}{\fs28 . Au Be Cz Da Fe Ga Ge He Ho Hu It Ju No Po Rm Rs(B, C) Su.
\par 
\par   }{\b\fs28 3. D. alpinum}{\fs28  (L.) J. Holub,}{\i\fs28  op. cit.}{\fs28  107 (1975) (}{\i\fs28 Lycopodium alpinum}{\fs28  L.,}{\i\fs28  Diphasium alpinum}{\fs28  (L.) Rothm.). Stems above ground, procumbent, elongated, with ascending, densely caespitose, glaucous branches; finer branches slightly flattened or cylindrical. Ventral leaves of the sterile branches 2-2\'b75 \'d7 0\'b75 mm, petiolate, lanceolate. Cone 1\'b75 cm, sessile; sporophylls twice as long as the sporangia, lanceolate, acute; spores c. 45 \'b5m in diameter. 2n = 46, 48-50.}{\i\fs28  Moors and heaths. N. & C. Europe, extending to N.W. Spain, N. Appennini and S.W. Bulgaria}{\fs28 . Au \'86Be Br Bu Cz Da Fa Fe Ga Ge Hb He Hs Is It Ju No Po Rm Rs(N, C, W) Su.
\par 
\par }
\pard \qc\ {\fs28  }{\b\fs28 3.        SELAGINELLACEAE}{\fs28 
\par }{\fs24 Edit. \'86D.H. Valentine & D.M. Moore
\par 
\par }
\pard \ {\fs28 Stems erect or creeping. Leaves numerous, simple, small, 1-veined, with a ligule on the adaxial surface. Heterosporous; sporangia grouped in strobili; individual sporangia solitary at the base of the sporophylls, unilocular; spores tetrahedral.
\par 
\par }
\pard \qc\ {\fs28  }{\b\fs28 1.              Selaginella}{\fs28               Beauv.
\par }{\fs24 By A. Lawalrée.
\par 
\par }
\pard \ {\fs28 Leaves all similar and spirally arranged, or dimorphic and 4-ranked, the lower patent, the upper appressed and pointing forwards. Strobili terminal; megasporangia at the base and microsporangia at the apex of the strobilus.
\par 
\par The only genus; sometimes divided into several genera.
\par 
\par }
\pard \li200\ {\fs28 1 Leafy stems radially symmetrical; leaves all similar .............. }{\b\fs28 1. selaginoides}{\fs28 
\par 1 Leafy stems dorsiventral; leaves of 2 sizes
\par 2 Stems usually at least 30 cm, appearing articulated
\par   where branches occur ................................................................. }{\b\fs28 5. kraussiana}{\fs28 
\par 2 Stems less than 30 cm, not appearing articulated
\par 3 Strobili on erect peduncles; median leaves of upper plane acute
\par   ........................................................................................................ }{\b\fs28 2. helvetica}{\fs28 
\par 3 Strobili sessile; median leaves of upper plane cuspidate
\par 4 Leaves slightly asymmetrical; stems much-branched ............... }{\b\fs28 3. denticulata}{\fs28 
\par 4 Leaves markedly asymmetrical; stems little-branched ..................... }{\b\fs28 4. apoda}{\fs28 
\par 
\par }
\pard \ {\fs28  }{\b\fs28 1. S. selaginoides}{\fs28  (L.) Beauv. ex Schrank & C.F.P. Mart.,}{\i\fs28  Hort. Monac.}{\fs28  3 (1829) (}{\i\fs28 S. spinulosa}{\fs28  A. Braun,}{\i\fs28  S. albarracinensis}{\fs28  Pau, }{\i\fs28 S. spinosa}{\fs28  Beauv.). Sterile branches horizontal and short, radially symmetrical; fertile branches 3-15 cm, erect. Leaves 1-3 mm, all similar, spirally arranged, with 1-5 large teeth on each side. Strobili 1-5 cm, not well differentiated from the rest of the branch, stout, yellowish. 2n = 18.}{\i\fs28  N. Europe, southwards to }{\fs28 52\'b0}{\i\fs28  N. in Ireland; C. & S. Europe from Czechoslovakia to N. Spain and S.W. Bulgaria.}{\fs28  Al Au Br Bu Cz Da Fa Fe Ga Ge Hb He Hs Is It Ju No Po Rm Rs(N,B, C, W) Su.
\par 
\par   }{\b\fs28 2. S. helvetica}{\fs28  (L.) Spring,}{\i\fs28  Flora}{\fs28  (}{\i\fs28 Regensb}{\fs28 .)}{\b\fs28  21}{\fs28 (}{\b\fs28 1}{\fs28 ): 149 (1838). Stem 3-10 cm, creeping, flattened and dorsiventral, not articulated. Leaves up to 3 mm, dimorphic, 4-ranked, weakly denticulate or subentire. Strobili up to 5 cm, solitary or paired, on erect peduncles, sharply differentiated from the rest of the branch. 2n = 18.}{\i\fs28  C. & S.E. Europe.}{\fs28  Al Au Bu Cz Ga Ge Gr He Hu It Ju Po Rm Rs(W) Tu.
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 3. S. denticulata}{\fs28  (L.) Spring, }{\i\fs28 loc. cit.}{\fs28  (1838). Stem 4-10 cm, creeping, flattened and dorsiventral, not articulated, very slender, much-branched. Leaves up to 2\'b75 mm, dimorphic, 4-ranked, the lower larger, ovate, acuminate, markedly dentate and slightly asymmetrical. Strobili not more than 2 cm, sessile, not sharply defined at the base. 2n = 18.}{\i\fs28  Mediterranean region; Portugal}{\fs28 . Al Bl Co Cr Ga Gr Hs It Ju Lu Sa Si.
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 4. S. apoda}{\fs28  (L.) Spring in C.F.P. Mart., }{\i\fs28 Fl. Brasil.}{\b\fs28  1}{\fs28 (}{\b\fs28 2}{\fs28 ): 119 (1840) (}{\i\fs28 S. apus }{\fs28 Spring). Stem less than 30 cm, dorsiventral, creeping, not articulated, little-branched. Leaves up to 3 mm, dimorphic, 4-ranked, denticulate, markedly asymmetrical. Strobili 0\'b75-2(-3) cm, sessile. }{\i\fs28 Naturalized in Germany}{\fs28  (}{\i\fs28 Berlin}{\fs28 ). [Ge.] (}{\i\fs28 North America.}{\fs28 )
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 5. S. kraussiana}{\fs28  (G. Kunze) A. Braun,}{\i\fs28  Ind. Sem. Horti Berol}{\fs28 .
\par 
\par 5}
\par }
