{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\par

\pard\f0\fs36\qc SALICALES
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 31.             SALICACEAE}
\par            

\pard\f0\fs24\qc  Edit. J.R. Edmondson.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Dioecious. Trees or shrubs. Leaves alternate, very rarely opposite; stipules present. Flowers subtended by bracts and arranged in catkins; perianth absent; glands present, sometimes nectariferous. Male flowers with 2 to many stamens; filaments filiform, free or more or less united. Female flowers with 1 unilocular carpel with 2-4 parietal placentae; ovules numerous, ascending, anatropous. Fruit a capsule dehiscing by 2-4 valves. Seeds numerous, very small, each with a tuft of long hairs.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Literature: R.D. Meikle,{\i  Willows and Poplars of Great Britain and Ireland.} London, 1984.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 Buds with 1 outer scale; bracts entire ........................... {\b 1. Salix}
\par
Buds with several outer scales; bracts dentate or 
\par
   ciliate-fimbriate ........................................... {\b 2. Populus}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 1.              Salix}                L.
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc  By K.H. Rechinger (Ed.1) revised by J.R. Akeroyd (Ed.2)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Buds with 1 outer scale. Leaves variously shaped. Flowers primarily entomophilous, appearing before or after the leaves, each flower with 1 or 2 small nectaries and subtended by an entire bract. Stamens usually 2, 3 or 5. Capsule 2-valved.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Although sections have been described in this genus they will not be indicated in the text, since most of them are represented only by a single species or species-group in Europe (with the exception of Sect.{\i  Capreae}, species {\b 38-41}).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Hybridization plays a very important role in{\i  Salix}. Most hybrids are highly fertile, and in some regions hybrid swarms obscure the limits of the species. Complex hybrids are also known. On the other hand certain taxa of evidently hybrid but uncertain origin are fairly well stabilized. These have not been included in the key but are mentioned after the species to which they show most resemblance. It is not possible to provide a separate key for non-flowering plants as there is too much parallel variation in most species in indumentum, leaf-shape, leaf-margin, etc.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 The key is therefore based on the rather unrealistic assumption that the plant to be named is represented by branches bearing male catkins, female catkins, and leaves, and that data on its habit and habitat are also available.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Leaf-characters refer to{\i  adult} leaves unless otherwise stated. Catkin-characters refer to the {\i female} catkins unless otherwise stated.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Literature: N.J. Andersson, {\i Kungl. Svenska Vet.-Akad. Handl}. n.s.{\b  6}({\b 1}): 1-180 (1867). N.J. Andersson in DC., {\i Prodr}. {\b 16}({\b 2}): 191-323 (1868). R. Buser,{\i  Ber. Schweiz. Bot. Ges.}{\b  50:} 567-788 (1940). A. & E.G. Camus, {\i Jour. Bot.} ({\i Paris}) {\b 18:}177-213, 245-296, 367-372 (1904); {\b 19:} 1-68, 87-144 (1905); {\b 20:} 1-116 (1906). B. Floderus in Holmberg, {\i Skand. Fl.}{\b  1}({\b b,1}): 6-160 (1931). E.F. Linton, {\i Jour. Bot.} ({\i London}) {\b 51:} suppl. (1913). A.K. Skvortsov, {\i Proc. Study Fauna Fl. U.S.S.R., N.S. Sect. Bot.}{\b  15} ({\b XXIII}): 1-262 (1968). A. Toepffer, {\i Ber. Bayer. Bot. Ges.}{\b  15: }17-233 (1915). F. wimmer,{\i  Salices Europaeae} 1866.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Low shrub of the arctic or high mountains; catkins from terminal or
\par
  subterminal buds (if catkins absent, see also {\b 17-23} and {\b 54-55})
\par
2 Woody stem subterranean, with slender, herbaceous leaf and flower-bearing
\par
  aerial stems
\par
3 Leaves orbicular or reniform, usually emarginate at apex, 
\par
  crenate-serrate; ovary glabrous ...................................................... {\b 7. herbacea}
\par
3 Leaves broadly elliptical; margin entire or shallowly sinuate 
\par
  near the base; ovary tomentose .......................................................... {\b 8. polaris}
\par
2 Woody stem above ground
\par
4 Leaves with 2-5 pairs of lateral veins, usually orbicular 
\par
5 Petiole 5-15 mm; capsule tomentose ............................................ {\b 6. reticulata}
\par
5 Petiole 2-3 mm; capsule glabrous .......................................... {\b 11. nummularia}
\par
4 Leaves with 7-8 pairs of lateral veins, usually ovate, obovate or narrower
\par 
6 Ovary villous
\par
7 Bracts dark; leaves with prominent lateral veins
\par
8 Stipules much shorter than the petioles, often inconspicuous;
\par
  leaves ovate or obovate, ± entire ..................................................... {\b 15. arctica}
\par
8 Stipules much longer than the very short petioles, especially on the
\par
  terminal leaves; leaves narrowly lanceolate, densely  
\par
  glandular-serrate ............................................................................. {\b 16. pulchra}
\par
7 Bracts uniformly pale; lateral veins of leaves not prominent
\par
9 Stipules absent; petiole 3-5 mm; bracts ferruginous, hairy on 
\par
  both surfaces ............................................................................... {\b 19. pyrenaica}
\par
9 Stipules as long as the petiole; petiole less than 3 mm or almost
\par
  absent; bracts almost black in their upper part, ciliate ................... {\b 20. reptans}
\par
6 Ovary not villous
\par
10 Leaves hairy, at least when young; catkins large, dark purple; 
\par
   ovary with short, crisped hairs ............................ ({\b 12-14}). {\b myrsinitess} group
\par
10 Leaves usually glabrous, even when young; catkins small, 
\par
   greenish or yellowish; ovary glabrous
\par
11 Plant procumbent to ascending; leaves 0·5-1·1 cm wide; 
\par
   catkins with more than 10 flowers ..................................................... {\b 9. retusa}
\par
11 Plant extremely compact; leaves 0·2-0·4 cm wide;
\par
   catkins with 3-8 flowers .......................................................... {\b 10. serpillifolia}
\par
1  Trees and shrubs mainly of lower latitude or altitude; 
\par
   catkins from lateral buds
\par
12 Usually trees; bracts uniformly pale; flowers with 2 or more
\par
   nectaries, or male flowers with 2 and female with 1.
\par
13 Twigs long, slender, pendent ................................................... {\b 4. babylonica}
\par
13 Twigs not pendent
\par
14 Mature leaves ± densely covered with persistent, silky hairs ............. {\b 3. alba}
\par
14 Mature leaves glabrous
\par
15 Leaves finely and evenly serrate with yellow glands, 
\par
   very glossy above; stamens (4)5(-12) ......................................... {\b 1. pentandra}
\par

\par
53}
\par