{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 15 Leaves rather coarsely and unevenly serrate with white teeth, 
\par
   not very glossy above; stamens 2 or 3
\par
16 Stipules usually caducous; bark of old stems not flaking off;
\par
   twigs easily breaking off .................................................................. {\b 2. fragilis}
\par
16 Stipules persistent; bark of old stems flaking off; 
\par
   twigs not easily breaking off ........................................................... {\b 5. triandra}
\par
12 Usually shrubs; bracts often with dark apex and paler base; 
\par
   flowers with 1 nectary
\par
17 Filaments connate, at least in part
\par
18 Low shrubs not more than 1 m; leaves suborbicular or up to 
\par
   twice as long as wide; catkins less than 2 cm
\par
19 Leaves elliptical or obovate; ovary sessile or subsessile ............... {\b 62. caesia}
\par
19 Leaves suborbicular; pedicel c. 2 mm ................................ {\b 64. tarraconensis}
\par
18 Tall shrubs up to 6 m; leaves 3-15 or more times as long 
\par
   as wide; catkins usually at least 2 cm
\par
20 Leaves lanate beneath at maturity; ovary glabrous ................. {\b 57. elaeagnos}
\par
20 Leaves ± glabrous beneath at maturity; ovary hairy
\par
21 Young twigs and leaves ± densely sericeous ..................... {\b 61. wilhelmsiana}
\par
21 Young twigs (and usually leaves) ± glabrous
\par
22 Leaves with prominent veins beneath ......................................... {\b 60. caspica}
\par
22 Leaves without prominent veins beneath
\par
23 Leaves narrowed, cuneate or narrowly rounded at base, often 
\par
   alternate and often petiolate ........................................................ {\b 58. purpurea}
\par
23 Leaves semi-amplexicaul or truncate at base, most or all 
\par
   opposite and sessile or subsessile ....................................... {\b 59. amplexicaulis}
\par
17 Filaments free (rarely connate in abnormal flowers)
\par
24 Leaves usually at least 4 times as long as wide, glabrous, or lower
\par
   surface with silky, appressed hairs all longitudinally arranged
\par
25 Young twigs with a bluish waxy bloom; mature leaves glabrous, serrate;
\par
   ovary glabrous
\par
26 Leaves oblong-lanceolate to -ovate, acute or shortly acuminate; 
\par
   lateral veins 8-12 pairs; bracts, including hairs, 
\par
   about as long as ovary ............................................................. {\b 64. daphnoides}
\par
26 Leaves lanceolate to linear-lanceolate, long-acuminate; 
\par
   lateral veins 15 or more pairs; bracts, including hairs, 
\par
    c. ½ as long as ovary ................................................................. {\b 65. acutifolia}
\par
25 Young twigs without a waxy bloom; leaves sericeous beneath, 
\par
   entire; ovary sericeous
\par
27 Usually low shrubs of swamps, bogs or damp sand; style short; 
\par
   catkins rarely up to 2·5 cm .................................................. {\b 48. rosmarinifolia}
\par
27 Tall riverside shrubs or small trees; style ± long; 
\par
   catkins more than 2·5 cm ............................................................ {\b 56. viminalis}
\par
24 Leaves usually less than 4 times as long as wide, rarely 5 times,
\par
   glabrous, or with dull grey tomentum, or white lanate tomentum of short,
\par
   irregularly arranged hairs, or somewhat sericeous beneath
\par
28 Ovary glabrous
\par
29 Branches persistently lanate ...................................... ({\b 21-23}). {\b lanata} group
\par
29 Branches not lanate
\par
30 Pedicel less than ½ as long as ovary, often ± absent
\par
31 Leaves with thick, waxy bloom over the whole lower surface, 
\par
   including apex ................................................................................. {\b 31. glabra}
\par
31 Leaves with waxy bloom beneath, disappearing towards apex, 
\par
   or entirely lacking
\par
32 Twigs with a bluish, waxy bloom ......................................... {\b 64. daphnoides}
\par
32 Twigs without a bluish, waxy bloom
\par
33 Petiole 10-30 mm
\par
34 Leaves about twice as long as wide, sericeous beneath
\par
   when young ........................................................................... {\b 32. crataegifolia}
\par
34 Leaves scarcely longer than wide, glabrous ........................... {\b 53. pyrolifolia}
\par
33 Petiole not more than 10 mm
\par
35 Procumbent shrub; stipules absent ................................................ {\b 47. repens}
\par
35 Ascending or erect shrub or tree, 1-4 m; stipules often well developed
\par
36 Young twigs usually whitish-pubescent; catkins lax,
\par
   subsessile, or peduncle to 15 mm ..................... ({\b 27-30}).{\b  myrsinifolia} group
\par
36 Young twigs not pubescent; catkins densely flowered, 
\par
   peduncle to 30 mm ......................................................................... {\b 52. hastata}
\par
30 Pedicel at least ½ as long as ovary
\par
37 At least the main stems creeping; leaves rarely more than 2 cm,
\par
   usually entire
\par
38 Leaves usually rounded at both ends, finally glabrous; 
\par
   veins not or scarcely prominent above .................................. {\b 46. myrtilloides}
\par
38 Leaves usually narrowed at both ends, ± persistently sericeous, 
\par
   at least beneath; veins fine but prominent above ............................ {\b 47. repens}
\par
37 Main stems erect; leaves more than 2 cm, never entire
\par
39 Twigs and underside of leaves persistently pubescent; 
\par
   inflorescence-axis densely hairy .............................................. {\b 33. pedicellata}
\par
39 Young twigs and leaves glabrous or subglabrous; 
\par
   inflorescence-axis with scattered, short hairs .............................. {\b 34. silesiaca}
\par
28 Ovary not glabrous
\par
40 Stipules absent or small and caducous
\par
41 Twigs glabrous or glabrescent
\par
42 Leaves with a dull bloom on both surfaces ................................... {\b 62. caesia}
\par
42 Leaves ± shiny above, ± glaucous beneath
\par
43 Robust, erect shrubs, usually more than 2 m ... ({\b 24-26}).{\b  phylicifolia} group
\par
43 Low alpine shrubs or sub shrubs, not more than 2 m
\par
44 Leaves ± serrate, glabrous or with sparse hairs .. ({\b 49-51}).{\b  arbuscula} group
\par
44 Leaves entire, with numerous long, appressed hairs beneath
\par
45 Bracts uniformly pale, ferruginous .......................................... {\b 19. pyrenaica}
\par
45 Bracts black towards apex ............................................................ {\b 47. repens}
\par
41 Twigs pubescent or lanate
\par
46 Leaves with sericeous hairs
\par
47 Leaves ± obtuse; capsule 10-12 mm ............................................ {\b 17. glauca}
\par
47 Leaves subacute; capsule 6-7(-10) mm ............................ {\b 18. glaucosericea}
\par
46 Leaves tomentose on 1 or both surfaces
\par
48 Shrub or tree to 6 m; pedicel well developed;
\par
    filaments hairy ........................................................................... {\b 45. xerophila}
\par

\par
54}
\par