{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 48 Shrub, 0·5-4 m; ovary sessile or subsessile; filaments glabrous
\par
49 Leaves green above, white beneath; catkins becoming pedunculate,
\par
   elongated and ± lax at maturity ................................................... {\b 54. helvetica}
\par
49 Leaves grey or greyish on both surfaces; catkins sessile, 
\par
   remaining dense at maturity ...................................................... {\b 55. lapponum}
\par
40 Stipules well developed, caducous or not
\par
50 Leaves with sericeous hairs, at least beneath, or glabrescent
\par
51 Catkins with long, leafy peduncles
\par
52 Procumbent shrubs up to 50 cm; leaves glabrescent ................... {\b 20. reptans}
\par
52 Erect shrubs 1-3 m; leaves with ± sericeous, persistent hairs
\par
53 Leaves ± obtuse or rounded; lateral veins 5-7 pairs ..................... {\b 17. glauca}
\par
53 Leaves subacute; lateral veins 7-9(-14) pairs .................... {\b 18. glaucosericea}
\par
51 Catkins sessile or subsessile, or without leafy peduncles
\par
54 Shrub or small tree 2-3 m ....................................................... {\b 43. cantabrica}
\par
54 Low shrub to 1(-2) m
\par
55 Leaves slightly pubescent when young, soon glabrous;
\par
   bracts greenish-yellow ............................................................... {\b 44. starkeana}
\par
55 Leaves persistently and densely sericeous beneath;
\par
   bracts dark-tipped ............................................................................ {\b 47. repens}
\par
50 Leaf indumentum not sericeous
\par
56 Branches persistently lanate
\par
57 Filaments glabrous; ovary pubescent only when young
\par
   ..................................................................................... ({\b 21-23}). {\b lanata }group
\par
57 Filaments with long hairs towards base; ovary with persistent, 
\par
   dense hairs ...................................................................................... {\b 37. laggeri}
\par
56 Branches not persistently lanate, sometimes pubescent
\par
58 Leaves 3-5 times as long as wide; stipules patent,
\par
   with deflexed apex ..................................................................... {\b 42. salviifolia}
\par
58 Leaves normally up to 3 times as long as wide; stipules 
\par
   never patent with deflexed apex
\par
59 2- to 4-year-old twigs with numerous very prominent ridges
\par
   beneath the bark
\par
60 Buds and twigs of the previous year pubescent
\par
61 Ridges beneath the bark short, discontinuous; leaves finally 
\par
     ± glabrous above, and with sparse, grey, persistent indumentum 
\par
     beneath ................................................................................... {\b 35. aegyptiaca}
\par
61 Ridges beneath the bark long, continuous; leaves persistently 
\par
   but sparsely pubescent above, and with dense, grey, felted,
\par
   persistent indumentum beneath ..................................................... {\b 38. cinerea}
\par
60 Buds and twigs of the previous year ± glabrous
\par
62 Catkins 2-5 cm; leaves at least 3 cm, not rugose, sparsely
\par
   pubescent beneath; hairs, especially along the veins,
\par
   rust-coloured ............................................................................ {\b 39. atrocinerea}
\par
62 Catkins 1-2·5 cm; leaves c. 2-3 cm, rugose, grey, ± tomentose 
\par
   beneath ............................................................................................. {\b 40. aurita}
\par
59 2- to 4-year-old twigs without or with few, scarcely prominent 
\par
   ridges beneath the bark
\par
63 Leaves ± glabrous beneath; shrub less than 1 m
\par
64 Twigs and leaves ± glabrous; petiole up to 5 mm;  
\par
   filaments glabrous ...................................................................... {\b 44. starkeana}
\par
64 Twigs and leaves hairy; petiole 6-8 mm; filaments hairy ........ {\b 45. xerophila}
\par
63 Leaves persistently hairy beneath; tree, or shrub more than 1 m
\par
65 Leaves 1½-2 times as long as wide, ovate or obovate to 
\par
   ovate-oblong; no ridges beneath the bark ....................................... {\b 41. caprea}
\par
65 Leaves usually more than twice as long as wide, obovate to 
\par
   oblanceolate or narrowly elliptical; scattered ± indistinct ridges
\par
   usually present beneath the bark 
\par
66 Stipules usually absent ............................................................. {\b 45. xerophila}
\par
66 Stipules well developed
\par
67 Twigs greyish-brown or grey, with flat leaf-scars; 
\par
   mature leaves rather thick, the veins closely reticulate,
\par
   impressed above, prominent beneath .................................. {\b 36. appendiculata}
\par
67 Twigs blackish with protruding leaf-scars; mature leaves thin, 
\par
   the veins widely reticulate, ± prominent above, scarcely prominent  
\par
   beneath ........................................................................................... {\b 37. laggeri}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Subgen. {\b Salix.} Trees or tall shrubs. Leaves lanceolate, gradually acuminate. Catkins on leafy peduncles arising from lateral buds of the previous year. Bracts concolorous, yellowish. Stamens 2 or more, free. Male flowers with 2 nectaries; female flowers with 1 or 2 nectaries.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. S. pentandra} L.,{\i  Sp. Pl.} 1016 (1753). Shrub or small tree up to 7 m. Twigs glabrous, shining, not fragile. Leaves 5-12 cm, ovate or elliptical, 2-4 times as long as wide, acuminate, rounded or broadly cuneate at base, finely and very regularly serrate, with yellow marginal glands, glabrous, dark green and glossy above, paler beneath, somewhat coriaceous when mature, sticky and fragrant when young; petiole with 1-3 pairs of glands near the top. Stipules small, caducous. Catkins 2-5 × 1-1·5 cm, appearing with the leaves, cylindrical. Stamens (4)5-8(-12). Female flowers with 2 nectaries. {\i Wet places. Most of Europe, but rare in the south.} Al Au Br Bu Cz Da Fe Ga Ge ?Gr Hb He Ho Hs Hu It Ju No Po Rm Rs(N, B, C, W, E) Su [Be].
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. S. fragilis} L.,{\i  Sp. Pl.} 1017 (1753). Tree up to 25 m, often pollarded, sometimes shrubby. Bark greyish, becoming fissured but not flaking off. Twigs glabrous and olive, very fragile at the junctions. Leaves 6-15 × 1·5-4 cm, lanceolate, usually 4½-9 times as long as wide, long-acuminate, usually asymmetrical at apex, cuneate at base, rather coarsely serrate, glabrous and shiny above, with a glaucous bloom or, less often, paler green beneath; petiole with usually 2 glands at the top. Stipules usually caducous. Catkins 3-7 × c. 1 cm, appearing with the leaves, drooping, rather dense, cylindrical. Stamens 2(3), free; anthers yellow. Female flowers usually with 2 nectaries. 2n = 76. {\i Wet places. Most of Europe except the Arctic, but rare in the Mediterranean region and probably introduced in much of the north.} Al Au Be Bu Co Cz Ga Ge Gr He Ho Hs Hu It Ju Po Rm Rs(B, C, W, K, E) Sa Si Tu [Az Bl *Br Da Fe Hb Lu No Rs(N) Su]
\par

\par
55}
\par