{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 The hybrid between{\b  2} and {\b 3} ({\i S.} ×{\i  rubens} Schrank) is probably the most frequent of all {\i Salix} hybrids. It often resembles 2, from which it differs, {\i inter alia,} in the sericeous pubescence of the young leaves, and the narrower, more gradually tapering leaves. It is commoner and more widespread than pure{\i  S. fragilis} and more frequently cultivated.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Several derivatives of this hybrid, some of them of garden origin, are naturalized in Britain. They are distinguished from each other chiefly by leaf-characters and by the length of the catkins and ovaries. One of them, {\i S.} ×{\i  rubens} nothovar.{\i  basfordiana} (Scaling ex Salter) Meikle, is readily identified by its glossy, orange-yellow or sometimes reddish twigs, bright green tapering leaves 9-15 × 1·5-2 cm, with finely but sharply serrate margins, long, usually drooping catkins 5-12 cm, and ovary subsessile or shortly pedicellate, exceeding the sparsely hairy bract.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b S. excelsa} S.G. Gmelin,{\i  Reise Russl. }{\b 3:} 308 (1774), is very like {\b 2} ×{\b  3} but has stouter catkins, and wider, often slightly brownish, unbearded bracts.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 3. S. alba} L., {\i Sp. Pl. }1021 (1753). Tree up to 25 m, often pollarded. Branches ascending, appearing silvery-grey in life. Bark greyish, not flaking. Twigs sericeous when young, later glabrous and brown or olive, not easily breaking off. Leaves 5-10(-12) cm, usually 5½-7½ times as long as wide, acuminate, not or slightly asymmetrical at apex, cuneate at base, finely serrate, covered with white, silky, appressed hairs on both surfaces; petiole usually with a few glands. Stipules caducous. Catkins 3-5 cm, appearing with the leaves, dense, cylindrical. Bracts uniformly yellowish. Stamens 2, free; anthers yellow. Female flowers usually with 1 nectary.{\i  Most of Europe but mainly as an introduction in the north; often planted}. Al Au Be *Br Bu Co *Cr Cz. Ga Ge Gr He Ho Hs *Hu It Ju Lu Po Rm Rs(*N, B, C, W, K, E) Sa Si Tu [Da Fe Hb No Su].
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Twigs bright yellow or orange ......................................... ({\b c}) subsp.{\b  vitellina} 
\par
1 Twigs brown or grey
\par
2 Leaves dull, bluish-green beneath, soon becoming glabrous
\par
   .......................................................................................... ({\b b}) subsp.{\b  caerulea}
\par
2 Leaves not bluish-green, covered with + persistent, silky, appressed hairs
\par
3 Leaves dark green, somewhat glabrous above; ovary subsessile                
\par
   ................................................................................................. ({\b a}) subsp.{\b  alba}
\par
3 Leaves silky on both surfaces, densely covered with long, appressed, silky
\par
   hairs; ovary on a short but distinct pedicel ........................ ({\b d}) subsp. {\b micans}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b alba} : Twigs brown or yellowish-brown, erect. Leaves covered on both surfaces with appressed, silky hairs, the upper surface more or less glabrescent. Ovary subsessile. {\i Throughout most of the range of the species}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b caerulea} (Sm.) Rech. fil.,{\i  Österr. Bot. Zeitschr.}{\b  110:} 338 (1963) ({\i S. caerulea} Sm.): Twigs brown or grey, erect. Leaves bluish-green, somewhat larger, soon becoming more glabrous, more conspicuously toothed than in subsp. ({\b a}).{\i  Frequently planted in Britain (where it is used in the manufacture of cricket-bats) and perhaps elsewhere, and occasionally naturalized}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b c}) Subsp. {\b vitellina} (L.) Arcangeli,{\i  Comp. Fl. Ital.} 626 (1882): Twigs bright yellow or orange, thin, sometimes pendent. Leaves paler green and indumentum less dense than in subsp. ({\b a}). Catkin-scales somewhat longer than in subsp. ({\b a}). {\i Frequently planted}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b d}) Subsp.{\b  micans }(N.J. Andersson) Rech. fil., {\i loc. cit.} (1963) ({\i S. micans} N.J. Andersson): Like subsp. (a) but leaves with very long, persistent hairs on both surfaces, therefore very shiny; ovary distinctly pedicellate.{\i  Greece}. ({\i Caucasus}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 4. S. babylonica} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 1017 (1753) ({\i S. elegantissima} C. Koch). Tree up to 20 m. Twigs long, pendent, drooping almost to the ground. Leaves 8-16 × 0·8-1·5 cm, narrowly lanceolate or linear-lanceolate, acuminate, serrulate, glabrous at maturity; petiole 3-5 mm. Catkins up to 2 × 0·3-0·4 cm, subsessile, curved. Bracts concolorous, glabrescent. Female flowers with 1 nectary. Ovary glabrous, sessile; stigma emarginate.{\i  Widely planted and sometimes more or less naturalized. Present occurrences uncertain}. ({\i China}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Several hybrids are now more commonly cultivated and are more hardy.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  The hybrid between {\b 3}({\b c}) and{\b  4} ({\i S. chrysocoma} Dode) is frequently planted and combines the sericeous indumentum and the yellow twigs of the former with the 'weeping ' growth of the latter. It is more hardy than pure{\i  S. babylonica}. The hybrid between {\b 4} and {\b 3} ({\i S.} × {\i sepulcralis} Simonkai) is frequently cultivated;{\b  2} ×{\b  4} ({\i S.} ×{\i  pendulina} Wenderoth) is also cultivated, but less frequently.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 5. S. triandra} L.,{\i  Sp. Pl.} 1016 (1753) ({\i S. amygdalina} L.). Shrub or small tree up to 10 m. Bark smooth, greyish, flaking off in patches. Twigs glabrous, greenish- or reddish-brown. Leaves 4-11(-15) cm usually 3½-7½ times as long as wide, oblong-ovate or -lanceolate, acute or shortly acuminate (not asymmetrical), rounded or cuneate at base, serrate, glabrous, dark green and somewhat shining above glaucous or pale green beneath; petiole with 2 or 3 small glands at the top. Stipules large, persistent. Catkins appearing with the leaves, erect, cylindrical; male 3-5(-7) cm, slender; female rather shorter and denser than the male. Stamens 3, free. Female flowers with 1 nectary.{\i  River-banks. Most of Europe, except the Arctic; local in the Mediterranean region.} Al Au Be Br Bu Cz Fe Ga Ge Gr Hb He Ho Hs Hu It Ju Lu No Po Rm Rs(N, B, C, W, K, E) Su.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b triandra} ({\i S. ligustrina }Host, {\i S. triandra} subsp.{\i  concolor} (Koch) A. Neumann ex Rech. fil.): Leaves pale green beneath petiole 1/8-1/2 as long as the leaf. 2n = 38.{\i  Common in the lowlands of N.W. Europe.}
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp.{\b  discolor} (Koch) Arcangeli,{\i  Comp. Fl. Ital}. 626 (1882): Leaves glaucous or whitish beneath; petiole 1/6-1/5 as long as the leaf. {\i Common in the south and east of the area of the species and in the valleys of the Alps}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Subsp. ({\b a}) more frequently forms hybrids than subsp. ({\b b}). The hybrid with {\b 56} is one of the most frequent in N.W. Europe as a planted shrub, but is extremely rare elsewhere.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 The native distribution of the two subspecies is difficult to define precisely because they are frequently cultivated. Var. {\i villarsiana} (Flügge) Rouy is characterized by short, shiny branches and small, ovate or elliptical leaves, rounded at base, white beneath. It seems to be common in some valleys of the W. Alps and, though related to subsp. ({\b b}), perhaps represents another geographical subspecies.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Subgen. {\b Chamaetia} Dumort. Creeping or procumbent shrubs. Leaves orbicular or ovate. Catkins usually on leafless peduncles arising from terminal buds of the previous year. Bracts concolorous. Stamens 2, free. Flowers with 1 or 2 nectaries.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 6. S. reticulata} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 1018 (1753). Dwarf shrub with a creeping and rooting stem, the twigs up to 20 cm with few leaves. Leaves 1-3(-5) cm, less than twice as long as wide, rounded to retuse at apex, cordate (rarely cuneate) at base, entire, coriaceous, dark green, subglabrous and rugose with impressed veins above,
\par

\par
56}
\par