{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 whitish, subglabrous and prominently reticulate-veined beneath; lateral veins 2-5 pairs; petiole 5-15 mm. Stipules absent. Catkins 1·2-3·5 cm, appearing with the leaves, on peduncles up to 2·5 cm. Bracts obovate, light brown, villous within. Capsule ovoid, sessile or subsessile, tomentose; style short. 2n = 38.{\i  Somewhat calcicole. Arctic and subarctic Europe and in the high mountains southwards to the Pyrenees, Maritime Alps and Makedonija.} Al Au Br Bu Cz Fe Ga Ge He Hs It Ju No Po Rm Rs(N, C) Sb Su.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 7. S. herbacea} L.,{\i  loc. cit.} (1753). Dwarf shrub with long, creeping, branched underground stems. Aerial twigs usually 2-3 cm, with 2-5 leaves. Leaves 0·5-2 cm, orbicular or reniform, less than 1½ times as long as wide and sometimes wider than long, rounded or emarginate, cordate or rounded at base, crenate-serrate, glabrous, bright green and shining, the veins prominent on both surfaces; petioles up to 5 mm. Stipules usually absent. Catkins 0·5-1·5 cm, 2- to 12-flowered, appearing with the leaves. Bracts more or less obovate, yellowish-green, usually glabrous. Female flowers with 1 or 2 nectaries; style short. 2n = 38.{\i  Arctic and subarctic Europe, extending southwards in the mountains to C. Spain, C. Appennini and Macedonia.} Al Au Br Bu Cz Fa Fe Ga Ge Hb He Hs Is It Ju No Po Rm Rs(N, W) Sb Su.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Hybridizes frequently with several species in Scandinavia, Iceland and Scotland but very rarely in other areas. The influence of{\b  7} in the hybrids is always very evident in habit and leaf-shape.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 8. S. polaris} Wahlenb.,{\i  Fl. Lapp.} 261 (1812). Dwarf shrub; stems underground; aerial twigs very slender. Leaves 1·5 × 1·2 cm, broadly elliptical, dark green, very shiny above, paler green beneath, entire or shallowly sinuate near base; lateral veins 3 or 4 pairs, slightly reticulate; petiole relatively long. Stipules absent. Catkins c. 15-flowered. Bracts firm, rather large, more or less urceolate, purplish-black, with rather dense, long, straight hairs. Filaments purple, smooth. Ovary subsessile, hairy; style long. {\i Arctic Europe, extending southwards to} 60°{\i  N. in Norway and Ural.} Fe No Rs(N, C) Sb Su.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Hybridizes freely with {\b 7} in N. Fennoscandia.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 9. S. retusa} L.,{\i  Syst. Nat.} ed. 10, {\b 2:} 1287 (1759) (incl.{\i  S. kitaibeliana} Willd.). Stem procumbent to ascending, glabrous, dark. Leaves 0·8-3·5 × 0·5-1·1 cm, rounded, more or less truncate or emarginate at apex, glabrous, green on both surfaces, almost entire; petiole 1-2 mm. Catkins up to 2-4 × 1 cm, with more than 10 flowers, cylindrical, developing with the leaves. Style 1/8-1/6 as long as the glabrous ovary. 2n = 114, 152. {\i • Alps, Pyrenees, Appennini, Carpathians, Balkan peninsula}. Al Au Bu Cz Ga Ge ?Gr He Hs It Ju Po Rm Rs(W).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Hybrids of {\b 9} are locally frequent and always similar in habit and in leaf-characters to this species. The influence of the other parent is evident mainly in the terminal leaves of elongated shoots.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 10. S. serpillifolia} Scop.,{\i  Fl. Carn.} ed. 2, {\b 2:} 255 (1772). Like {\b 9} but more compact, completely appressed to the soil; leaves 0·4-1 × 0·2-0·4 cm, imbricate, acute or emarginate; petiole c. 0·5 cm; catkins 0·5 cm, globose, with 3-8 flowers, developed after the leaves; style c. ¼ as long as the ovary. 2n = 38. Usually calcicole. •{\i  Alps.} Au Ga Ge He It Ju.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 11. S. nummularia} N.J. Andersson in DC.,{\i  Prodr.}{\b  16:} 298 (1868) ({\i S. rotundifolia} auct., non Trautv.). Dwarf, spreading shrub; stems and twigs above the surface, often very long, not rooting. Vegetative stems usually with c. 4 leaves. Leaves 0·5-1·5 cm, orbicular, with a subcordate base and emarginate apex, entire or finely serrate in the lower part, sometimes hairy when young, later entirely glabrous, light green, prominently reticulate above; lateral veins 4 or 5; petiole 2-3 mm. Stipules usually absent. Catkins {\i c.} 3-flowered. Bracts thin, pale, with scattered, short, hooked hairs. Filaments glabrous. Female flowers with 1 nectary. Ovary subsessile, glabrous; style long.{\i  Arctic Russia, extending southwards to C. Ural}. Rs(N).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 ({\b 12-14}){\b . S. myrsinitess} group. Branches up to 40 cm, procumbent or ascending, thick, crooked, knotty. Leaves green and shiny on both surfaces, with reticulate veins slightly prominent on both surfaces, and long, straight hairs more or less evanescent but persisting mainly on the margins. Catkins large, dense, dark purple, appearing with the leaves. Ovary covered with short, somewhat crooked, evanescent hairs.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 The three closely related species are geographically isolated, except that {\b 13} and {\b 14} overlap in parts of the E. Alps and slight intergradation may be observed locally ({\i vide} Samuelsson, {\i Viert. Naturf. Ges. Zürich}{\b  67:} 247-250 (1922)).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Leaf-margins entire; catkins slender; stems procumbent ................. {\b 14. alpina} 
\par
1 Leaf-margins glandular-serrate; catkins stout; stems ascending
\par
2 Dead leaves deciduous ..............................................................{\b 13. breviserrata}
\par
2 Dead leaves persistent until the end of the following growing season
\par
   .....................................................................................................{\b 12. myrsinites}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 12. S. myrsinitess} L.,{\i  Sp. Pl.} 1018 (1753). More or less ascending. Leaves shiny on both surfaces, dark green, the margin glandular-serrate, dead leaves persisting until the end of the following growing season. Ovary sparsely hairy, becoming glabrous. 2n = 152, 190. {\i Fennoscandia and N. Russia; Scotland.} Br Fe No Rs(N) Su.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 This species hybridizes freely with {\b 17} and {\b 27}. These hybrids usually inherit the shiny green lower surface of the leaves and the purplish flowers of {\b 12}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 13. S. breviserrata} B. Flod., {\i Ark. Bot.}{\b  29}({\b 18}): 44 (1940) ({\i S. myrsinitess} subsp. {\i serrata} (Neilr.) Schinz & Thell.). More or less ascending. Dead leaves deciduous; margin of leaves densely glandular-serrate. Catkins stout. Capsule broad; style short.• {\i Alps; a few localities in N. Spain and N. & C. Italy}. Au Ga Ge He Hs It.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 14. S. alpina} Scop., {\i Fl. Carn.} ed. 2, {\b 2:} 255 (1772) ({\i S. jacquinii} Host). More or less procumbent. Dead leaves deciduous; margin of leaves entire. Catkins slender. Capsule narrow; style long. •{\i  E. Alps; Carpathians; one station in S. Jugoslavia.} Au Cz Ge It Ju Po Rm Rs(W).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 15. S. arctica} Pallas, {\i Fl. Ross.}{\b  1}({\b 2}): 86 (1788). Twigs glabrous, shiny. Leaves 3-4 × 2-3 cm, ovate or obovate, rounded or broadly cuneate at the base, thick, leathery, hairy only when young, with more or less reticulate veins slightly prominent beneath and slightly impressed above. Stipules shorter than the petiole, often conspicuous. Catkins c. 5 × 1 cm; peduncles leafy, long. Bracts brownish, rounded at apex. Ovary densely covered with long, white hairs; style long, filiform, more or less cleft; stigma bifid. {\i Iceland and Færöer; arctic and subarctic Russia; Ural}. Fa Is Rs(N, C).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 16. S. pulchra} Cham., {\i Linnaea}{\b  6:} 543 (1831). Low shrub; twigs
\par

\par
57}
\par