{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 procumbent or more or less ascending, dark purplish-brown, shiny. Leaves narrowly lanceolate, glandular-serrate (sometimes indistinctly), glabrous on both surfaces, finely reticulate; petiole short. Stipules 3-10 mm, glandular-serrate, narrow, acute, tapering towards base, much longer than the petioles, especially in terminal well-developed leaves. Catkins 4-5 × 1·5 cm; peduncles leafless. Bracts dark, acute. Ovary covered with long, silky hairs; style long; stigma narrow, long.{\i  N.E. Russia.} Rs(N). ({\i Arctic Asia and America.})
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Subgen. {\b Caprisalix} Dumort. Shrubs or small trees. Catkins sessile or on leafy peduncles, from lateral buds of the previous year. Bracts often with dark apex. Stamens 2, free or united. Male and female flowers with a single nectary.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 17. S. glauca} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 1019 (1753). Leaves obovate or oblanceolate to ovate, more or less obtuse, thin, rather bright green, decolorizing rather easily on drying; indumentum moderately dense, of somewhat sericeous, slightly intricate, hairs; lateral veins 5 or 6(7) pairs; petiole short. Stipules usually absent. Pedicel distinct, as long as the nectary. Capsule 10-12 mm.{\i  Arctic and subarctic Europe, extending southwards to S. Norway and S. Ural}. Fe Is No Rs(N, C) Sb Su.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Stipules present, lanceolate .............................................. ({\b c}) subsp.{\b  stipulifera}
\par
1 Stipules usually absent
\par
2 Shrub or small tree; leaves obovate ....................................... ({\b a}) subsp.{\b  glauca}
\par
2 Prostrate shrub; leaves oblong or ovate ........................ ({\b b}) subsp.{\b  callicarpaea}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b glauca} : Shrub or small tree. Leaves obovate, more or less obtuse; lateral veins 5 or 6(7) pairs. Stipules usually absent. Style usually only divided at apex.{\i  N. & W. Fennoscandia ; Ural}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp.{\b  callicarpaea }(Trautv.) Böcher in Böcher, Holmen & Jakobsen, {\i Grønlands Fl.} 138 (1957) ({\i S. callicarpaea} Trautv., S. cordifolia Pursh subsp. callicarpaea (Trautv.) Á. Löve): Usually prostrate shrub. Leaves oblong or ovate, more or less obtuse; lateral veins 5-7 pairs. Stipules usually absent. Style often divided to base. 2n = 114, 190.{\i  Iceland, Svalbard}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b c}) Subsp.{\b  stipulifera} (B. Flod. ex Häyrén) Hütonen, {\i Suomen Kasvio} 272 (1933) ({\i S. stipulifera} B. Flod. ex Häyrén): Shrub. Leaves obovate or oblanceolate, rounded at apex; lateral veins 5-7 pairs. Lanceolate stipules present. Capsule 8-10(-12) mm. 2n = 152.{\i  N. Fennoscandia, arctic Russia}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 18. S. glaucosericea} B. Flod., {\i Svensk Bot. Tidskr.}{\b  37:} 169 (1943) ({\i S.glauca} auct. alp.,{\i  S. sericea} Vill., non Marshall). Leaves 5·5-7·5 × 1·5-2·2 cm, oblanceolate, subacute, pale green and somewhat shiny above, glaucous beneath, sericeous with appressed hairs on both surfaces; lateral veins 7-9(-14) pairs. Stipules usually absent. Capsule 6-7(-10) mm. 2n = 190. •{\i  Alps.} Au Ga He It.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 19. S. pyrenaica} Gouan,{\i  Obs. Bot.} 77, no. 8 (1773) ({\i S. ciliata} DC.). Low shrub up to 50 cm, with ascending, reddish-brown glabrescent twigs. Leaves ovate-elliptical, rarely obovate, with more or less rounded base, slightly shiny and with few, long hairs above, somewhat glaucous and with numerous, long, appressed hairs beneath, glabrescent but hairs persistent at the entire margin; lateral veins 8 pairs; petiole 3-5 mm, pubescent. Stipules absent. Catkins lax-flowered, terminal on leafy, more or less elongated peduncles. Bracts 2 mm, obovate, obtuse, ferruginous, long-hairy on both surfaces. Capsule ovoid, obtuse, tomentose, somewhat glabrescent near the base; pedicel 0·5 mm; style bifid. •{\i  Pyrenees.} Ga Hs.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 20. S. reptans} Rupr., {\i Beitr. Pfl. Russ. Reich.}{\b  2:} 54 (1845). Twigs procumbent, glabrescent, green, suffused with red. Leaves ovate to lanceolate, entire, sometimes almost cordate at base, glabrescent and glaucous beneath. Stipules as long as the very short petiole, entire, elliptical, with straight apex. Catkins dense-flowered, on leafy peduncles. Bracts almost black in the upper part, obovate or ovate, ciliate. Capsule tomentose, large; style short, bifid.{\i  Arctic and subarctic Russia.} Rs(N). ({\i Arctic Asia.})
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    ({\b 21-23}). {\b S. lanata} group. Shrubs up to 3 m. Twigs, persistently lanate. Stipules persistent. Leaves with whitish-grey tomentum, becoming glabrous, not blackening on drying. Catkins with short peduncles. Ovary glabrous (sometimes pubescent when young).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Stipules entire; leaf-margin undulate, eglandular ........................... {\b 21. lanata}
\par
1 Stipules toothed; leaf-margin flat, densely glandular
\par
2 Ovary glabrous ...................................................................... {\b 22. glandulifera}
\par
2 Ovary pubescent when young ........................................... {\b 23. recurvigemmis}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 21. S. lanata} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 1019 (1753) ({\i S. chrysanthos} Vahl). Leaves 3·5-7 cm, thick, broadly ovate or obovate to suborbicular, more or less cordate at base and with a short, deflexed apex, bright yellow, hairy when young; margin entire, eglandular, undulate; lateral veins 5 or 6 pairs. Stipules wide, subobtuse, entire. Peduncles with scale-like leaves. Bracts ovate, obtuse, becoming blackish-brown, golden-hairy. Nectaries long, narrow, entire or shallowly cleft. Stamens yellow. Stigma-lobes long, filiform, entire, yellow or brownish.{\i  N. Europe, from arctic Russia to C. Scotland.} Br Fe Is No Rs(N, C) Su.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Hybridizes freely with {\i S. hastata} and{\i  S. caprea}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 22. S. glandulifera} B. Flod.,{\i  Bot. Not.}{\b  1930:} 338 (1930). Like {\b 21} but leaves usually oblanceolate, with 6-8 pairs of lateral veins; margin flat, densely glandular; stipules long, acute, with sharp glandular teeth. 2n = 38.{\i  Arctic Europe.} Fe No Rs(N) Su.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 23. S. recurvigemmis} A. Skvortsov, {\i Not. Syst}. ({\i Leningrad}) {\b 18:} 37 (1957). Like{\b  21} but a procumbent shrub 1·5-2 m; bud-scales persistent; ovary pubescent when young. {\i N.E. Russia.} Rs(N, C).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    ({\b 24-26}).{\b  S. phylicifolia} group. Shrub up to 5 m. Twigs dark, shiny, glabrous or becoming so with age. Leaves glabrous at maturity, more or less shiny above, more or less glaucous beneath, not blackening on drying. Catkins subsessile or shortly pedunculate, appearing with the leaves, rather lax in fruit. Ovary sericeous; pedicel 2-4 times as long as the nectary.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 This is one of the most difficult groups in {\i Salix}. It is the more complicated because of the strong tendency to hybridize with {\b 17} and {\b 27} as well as with species {\b 38-41}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Leaves sericeous when young, becoming glabrous later; 
\par
  decorticated wood with short distinct ridges .................................. {\b 25. bicolor}
\par
1 Leaves almost glabrous even when young;
\par
  decorticated wood without ridges
\par
2 Leaves with short glandular teeth, shiny above ..................... {\b 24. phylicifolia}
\par
2 Leaves entire or with very indistinct crenulate-glandular
\par
  teeth .................................................................................. {\b 26. hegetschweileri}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 24. S. phylicifolia} L.,{\i  Sp. Pl. }1016 (1753) (incl.{\i  S. hibernica} Rech. fil.). Ridges on decorticated wood absent. Buds narrow, acute, dark brown. Leaves obovate-lanceolate to ovate or narrowly elliptical, tapering at both ends, shiny above, with short glandular
\par

\par
58}
\par