{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 teeth. Catkins 1·5-4(-10) × 1-1·5 cm. Filaments entirely glabrous. Capsule up to 7 mm. 2n = 114.{\i  N. Europe, southwards to England and S. Ural.} Br ?Bu Fa Fe Hb Is No Rs(N, B, C) Su.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   {\b 25. S. bicolor} Willd.,{\i  Berlin. Baumz.} 339 (1796) ({\i S.phylicifolia }auct., {\i S. schraderiana} Willd., {\i S. weigeliana} Willd., {\i S. cantabrica} Rech. fil.). Ridges on decorticated wood short but distinct. Buds short, yellowish or orange; scale persistent after opening of bud. Leaves obtuse, sericeous on both surfaces when young, punctate, less shiny above than in {\b 24}. Catkins and capsule shorter than in {\b 24}. Filaments often sparsely hairy near the base. •{\i  From N. Germany to N. Spain and Bulgaria; mainly in the mountains but absent from the Alps}. Cz Ga Ge Hs Po Rm Rs(W).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 26. S. hegetschweileri} Heer in Hegetschw.,{\i  Fl. Schweiz} 963 (1840) ({\i S. bicolor} subsp.{\i  rhaetica }(N.J. Andersson) B. Flod., {\i S. hastata-weigeliana} Wimmer pro parte, {\i S. phylicifolia} var.{\i  rhaetica} A. Kerner, {\i S. phylicifolia} sensu Sm., non L., {\i S. phylicifolia-hastata} Wimmer). Ridges on decorticated wood absent. Buds 6(-8) mm, chestnut-brown, rarely yellowish. Young twigs more or less felted, later becoming glabrous. Leaves obovate or ovate, often tapering towards base, with very indistinct, scattered glandular teeth (rarely entire or with more numerous glands), completely glabrous; petiole 3-6 mm. Catkins 1·5-2·4(-4) × 1·8 cm. Filaments with crispate hairs in lower ½. Capsule c. 4 mm.{\i  Alps. }Au Ga He It.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    ({\b 27-30}). {\b S. myrsinifolia} group. Shrub or small tree 1-4 m. Twigs pubescent, often glabrescent, blackish- to brownish-green. Leaves green and rather dull above, paler green or glaucous, pubescent or almost glabrous beneath, usually turning black on drying. Stipules usually rather large, semi-cordate. Catkins rather lax; peduncles short, leafy. Ovary glabrous.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 This is probably the most polymorphic group in the genus as to size, outline, serration and pubescence of leaves. The circumscription of the group here follows Enander,{\i  Salic. Scand. Exsicc. }{\b 3:} 9 (1910), and excludes all plants with a hairy ovary. Plants showing this character usually show one or more correlated characters pointing to hybridization with {\b 24} and {\i S. myrsinitess} in Scandinavia, with{\i  S. atrocinerea} and{\i  S. phylicifolia} in Britain, or with {\i S. cinerea} or other members of the {\i Capreae} in other parts of Europe. One of the more reliable vegetative characters of {\b 27} is the waxy bloom fading towards the apex on the lower surface of leaves.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Adult leaves ± glaucous beneath (but always green at apex), 
\par
  going black on drying; twigs slender; catkins appearing before
\par
  the leaves; style and stigma long, slender .............................. {\b 27. myrsinifolia}
\par
1 Adult leaves ± green beneath, going black less easily on drying;
\par
  twigs thicker and more nodose; catkins appearing with the leaves;
\par
  style and stigma often shorter and thicker
\par
2 Indumentum of short hairs, soon ± evanescent; peduncle short, 
\par
  with few leaves ..................................................................... {\b 30. mielichhoferi}
\par
2 Indumentum of young twigs and young leaves of rather dense, 
\par
  whitish hairs; peduncle long, with many leaves
\par
3 Leaves ± elliptical, green or somewhat glaucous beneath;
\par
  often a tree ..................................................................................... {\b 28. borealis}
\par
3 Leaves obovate or oblanceolate, bluish and dull beneath;
\par
  shrub ............................................................................................ {\b 29. apennina}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 27. S. myrsinifolia} Salisb.,{\i  Prodr. }394 (1796) ({\i S. nigricans} Sm.).Often a shrub. Twigs slender. Young twigs whitish-pubescent, often glabrescent. Leaves orbicular-ovate to lanceolate, often glaucous beneath (but the apex always green), serrate or subentire, going black on drying; veins slender and not prominent. Catkins shortly pedunculate or subsessile, appearing before the leaves. Style 0·7-1·5 mm; stigma 0·3-0·6 mm; both slender. 2n = 114. {\i Europe southwards to Pyrenees, Corse and W. Bulgaria}. Au Br Bu ?Co Cz *Da Fe Ga Ge He †Hu †It Ju No Po Rs(N, B, C, W, E) Su.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 The following hybrids occur frequently:
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\i S. cinerea} ×{\i  myrsinifolia.} Often like {\b 27} but more hairy, decorticated wood with ridges, and ovary more or less hairy.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\i S. myrsinifolia} ×{\i  phylicifolia}. Often like{\b  27} but less hairy, waxy bloom of lower surface of the leaf more pronounced, and ovary more or less hairy.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\i S. myrsinifolia} ×{\i  myrsinitess.} Leaves more or less green and shiny on both surfaces; catkins purplish.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\i S. atrocinerea} × {\i myrsinifolia.} Like{\b  27} or intermediate; decorticated wood with ridges; ovary hairy; indumentum sometimes tending to be ferruginous on the lower surface of the leaf.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 28. S. borealis} Fries,{\i  Bot. Not.}{\b  1840:} 193 (1840). Like{\b  27} but often a tree; twigs thicker and more nodose; young twigs with whiter and denser indumentum; leaves more coriaceous, larger, often more or less elliptical, often deeply serrate with large glands, going black less easily on drying; less glaucous beneath, with longer and whiter hairs; veins thicker, reticulation more prominent; petiole thicker, with long hairs; stipules larger; catkins with longer, thicker, more woolly peduncles, appearing with the leaves; style and stigma often shorter and thicker.{\i  N. Fennoscandia and N. Russia.} Fe No Rs(N) Su.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 29. S. apennina} A. Skvortsov, {\i Nov. Syst. Pl. Vasc.} ({\i Leningrad}{\b  1965:} 90 (1965) ({\i S. nigricans} auct. ital., non Sm.). Like {\b 27} but always a shrub; leaves obovate or oblanceolate, bluish and dull on the lower surface; peduncles of catkins usually 3-15 mm (rarely subsessile); style 0·2-0·9 mm; stigma 0·2-0·4 mm. 2n = 114.{\i  Damp woods and marshes. • Appennini; Sicilia.} It Si.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 30. S. mielichhoferi} Sauter, {\i Flora} ({\i Regensb.}) {\b 32:} 662 (1849). Shrub. Twigs thicker and more nodose than in {\b 27}. Indumentum of young leaves and young twigs consisting of short hairs which soon disappear. Leaves lanceolate to obovate, almost entire, green beneath, with thick, prominent reticulation, scarcely going black on drying. Catkins with a short, few-leaved peduncle, appearing with the leaves. •{\i  E. Alps.} Au It.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 31. S. glabra} Scop.,{\i  Fl. Carn.} ed. 2,{\b  2:} 255 (1772). Erect shrub up to 1·5 m. Twigs dark brown, entirely glabrous even when young. Leaves broadly elliptical or obovate, sometimes oblanceolate, crenulate-serrate to coarsely dentate, coriaceous, glossy, with thick, waxy bloom over whole lower surface, glabrous even when young, reticulation fine but prominent on both surfaces. Stipules rarely developed, semi-cordate, serrate. Catkins 7 × 1 cm; peduncles up to 20 mm, with small obovate, serrate leaves. Ovary entirely glabrous; pedicel c. 1/3 as long as the ovary. 2n = 114. •{\i  E. Alps}. Au Ge He It Ju.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 The hybrid with {\b 27} ({\i S.} ×{\i  subglabra} A. Kerner) is not infrequent and can be recognized by the young and adult leaves which are more or less hairy, at least along the midrib, and by the waxy bloom of the lower surface of the leaf which fades out below the apex.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 32. S. crataegifolia} Bertol. in Desv.,{\i  Jour. Bot. Appl.}{\b  2:} 76
\par

\par
59}
\par