{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 1859, app. 22 (1860) ({\i S. azorica} Baker). Stem 25-100 cm, creeping, flattened and dorsiventral, with false articulations where branches occur. Leaves up to 4 mm, dimorphic, 4-ranked, finely denticulate, asymmetrical. Strobili not more than 2 cm, sessile, 2n = 20. {\i Açores; naturalized in S. & W. Europe.} *Az [Be Br Co Ga Hb Hs It Lu Si]. ({\i Tropical and southern Africa}.)
\par

\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b  4.              ISOETACEAE}
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc Edit. †D.H. Valentine.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Stem short, 2- or 3-lobed. Leaves in a rosette; leaf-base spathulate, with a membranous margin, with a delicate ligule on the adaxial surface at the point where the leaf narrows. Heterosporous; megaspores tetrahedral; microspores bilateral, in separate sporangia.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 1.               Isoetes}                 L.
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc By A.C. Jermy & J.R. Akeroyd.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Aquatic or terrestrial plants. Leaves terete or trigonous, subulate, occasionally flat and linear; stomata usually absent in aquatic species. Sporangia solitary, sessile at the base of leaf, naked or covered with a thin tissue (velum).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Literature: P. Berthet & M. Lecocq, {\i Pollen et Spores }{\b 19:} 341-359 (1977). C. Prada,{\i  Acta Bot. Malac.}{\b  8: }73-99 (1983).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Leaf-bases dark, shiny and persistent; plant terrestrial (if
\par
   submerged then only for a short period in winter)
\par
2 Megaspores 320-560 µm. tuberculate ............................................. {\b 10. histrix}
\par
2 Megaspores 600-800 µm. reticulate ................................................ {\b 11. duriei}
\par
1 Leaf-bases not dark, rarely persistent; plant normally submerged
\par
3 Mature sporangium not covered by velum
\par
4 Megaspores minutely papillose, with inconspicuous ridges;
  microspores smooth .......................................................................... {\b 5. setacea}
\par
4 Megaspores verrucose, with prominent ridges; microspores spinose
\par
5 Leaves 10-25 cm; plant amphibious .......................................... {\b 6. heldreichii}
\par
5 Leaves 30-100 cm; plant aquatic .......................................... {\b 7. malinverniana}
\par
3 At least 1/3 of mature sporangium covered by velum
\par
6 Megaspores reticulate; ligule long, subulate ................................... {\b 3. azorica}
\par
6 Megaspores not reticulate; ligule short, triangular
\par
7 Megaspores rugose ........................................................................ {\b 1. lacustris}
\par
7 Megaspores spinose or tuberculate
\par
8 Megaspores with sharp tubercles or spines, at least on proximal face;
\par
  stems 2-lobed ............................................................................ {\b 2. echinospora}
\par
8 Megaspores with papillae or rounded tubercles; stem 3-lobed (rarely
\par
  4-lobed)
\par
9 Megaspores with numerous regular papillae on lower face; 
\par
  microspores smooth or minutely papillose ..................................... {\b 4. boryana}
\par
9 Megaspores with scattered tubercles of various sizes on lower face;
\par
  microspores ± spinose
\par
10 Aquatic; leaves up to 80 cm; megaspores 580-650 µm ........... {\b 8. longissima}
\par
10 Amphibious; leaves not more than 60 cm;
    megaspores 325-480 µm .................................................................. {\b 9. velata}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. I. lacustris} L.,{\i  Sp. Pl.} 1100 (1753). Aquatic; stem 2-lobed. Leaves 8-25(-40) cm × 3-5 mm, erect or rarely patent and recurved, stout, subterete, tapering abruptly at apex; membranous margin wide at base, abruptly narrowing above sporangium; ligule short, triangular. Sporangium only partially covered by velum; megaspores 530-700 µm. rugose; microspores yellowish-brown, smooth or with fine, irregular furrows. 2n = 110.{\i  Up to 8 m deep in lakes and pools. N. Europe, extending locally southwards to N. Spain and White Russia}. Br Cz Da Fa Fe Ga Ge Hb He Ho Hs Is ?It No Po Rs(N, B, C) Su.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Plants from high mountain lakes in the E. Pyrenees, described as{\b  I. brochonii} Motelay, {\i Actes Soc. Linn. Bordeaux}{\b  45:} 45, t. 2 (1892), are possibly only a variant of {\b 1} and have been confused with an undescribed alloploid (duodecaploid) species resulting from {\b 1} ×{\b  2}. The latter has tuberculate megaspores 500-700 µm, the tubercles fusing in short ridges on the lower face.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   {\b 2. I. echinospora} Durieu,{\i  Bull. Soc. Bot. Fr.}{\b  8:} 164 (1861) ({\i I. tenella} Léman ex Desv., {\i I. setacea} auct., non Lam.; incl.{\i  I. braunii} Durieu, non Unger). Like {\b 1} but the leaves 5-20 cm, subulate, compressed, gradually tapered, flaccid, more often patent or recurved; megaspores 360-460 µm. with long, narrow spines. 2n = 22.{\i  In more oligotrophic water than }{\b 1}. {\i N. Europe, extending very locally southwards to N.E. Spain and C. Greece}. Be Br Bu Cz Da Fa Fe Ga Ge Gr Hb He Ho Hs Is It No Po Rs(N, B, C) Su.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b 3. I. azorica} Durieu ex Milde,{\i  Fil. Eur.} 278 (1867). Aquatic; stem 2-lobed. Leaves 8-30 cm, slender, flexuous; membranous margin narrow at base; ligule long, subulate. Sporangium partially covered by velum; megaspores 350-490 µm. reticulate; microspores brown, more or less spinose.{\i  In pools and small lakes. • Açores.} Az.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b 4. I. boryana} Durieu, Bull.{\i  Soc. Bot. Fr.}{\b  8:} 164 (1861). Aquatic; stem 3-lobed. Leaves 10-20 cm, loosely inserted, but otherwise very like those of {\b 1}; ligule deltate. Velum almost or completely covering sporangium; megaspores 375-600 µm. granulate with occasional large papillae on upper faces and numerous regular papillae on lower face; microspores reddish-brown, smooth or very minutely scabrid.{\i  Shallow lakes.} •{\i  Coast of S.W. France}. Ga.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   {\b 5. I. setacea} Lam.,{\i  Encycl. Méth. Bot.}{\b  3:} 314 (1789) ({\i I. delilei} Rothm.). Aquatic; stem 3-lobed. Leaves 12-40 cm × 1-2 mm, often numerous, firm, tapering to apex; membranous margin up to 5 mm wide at base, narrowing abruptly just above sporangium and continuing up leaf for c. 1/4 its length; ligule ovate. Sporangium without velum; megaspores 440-580 µm. minutely papillose, the ridges narrow and inconspicuous; microspores minutely scabrid.{\i  Ponds and small lakes.} •{\i  W. Europe}. ?Co Ga Hs Lu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   {\b 6. I. heldreichii} Wettst., {\i Verh. Zool.-Bot. Ges. Wien }{\b 36:} 239, t. 8 (1886). Amphibious; stem 3-lobed. Leaves 10-25 cm × 0·5-1·5 mm, few, flexuous; basal membranous margin narrow, extending up leaf for 1/6 its length; ligule obovate-acute. Sporangium without velum; megaspores c. 660 µm. tuberculate;
\par

\par
6}
\par