{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 (1813). Procumbent or erect shrub up to 1 m. Twigs covered at first with long hairs, becoming glabrous, dark purple. Leaves 6·5-11·5 × 3·5-4 cm, elliptical, bright green above with silky hairs beneath, ultimately glabrous; lateral veins 8-12(-20) pairs. Female catkins 5(-12) × 0·8-1 cm; axis almost glabrous. Bracts reddish-brown, with long, white, silky hairs near apex. Ovary 5 mm, glabrous; pedicel short; style 1·5(-2) mm. {\i Limestone and metamorphic rocks. • N. Italy} ({\i Alpi Apuane}). It.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 33. S. pedicellata} Desf.,{\i  Fl. Atl.}{\b  2:} 362 (1799) ({\i S. aurita }var.{\i  pedicellata} (Desf.) Fiori,{\i  S. cinerea} var.{\i  pedicellata} (Desf.) Moris, S. nigricans var. pedicellata (Desf.) Bertol.). Tall shrub or tree up to 10 m. Decorticated wood with numerous prominent ridges. Young twigs grey-tomentose, the older ones gradually becoming glabrous. Leaves oblong or obovate-lanceolate, dentate, crenate or nearly entire, thinly pubescent beneath, glabrescent above; lateral veins at least 10-12 pairs, connected by a fine reticulation, prominent beneath, impressed above. Stipules large, semi-cordate, dentate, deciduous. Bracts with short hairs. Catkins 3-6 × 1-1·5 cm. Ovary glabrous; pedicel 3-4 mm; style short or moderately long.{\i  W. Mediterranean region.} Co Hs ?It Sa Si.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Plants similar in vegetative characters but with a hairy ovary are probably of hybrid origin.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Plants from N.E. Sicilia with lanceolate leaves more densely pubescent beneath, reniform stipules and distinctly stipitate capsules have recently been described as{\b  S. gussonei} Brullo & Spampinato,{\i  Willdenowia }{\b 18:} 5 (1988).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 34. S. silesiaca} Willd.,{\i  Sp. Pl.}{\b  4}({\b 2}): 660 (1806). Shrub up to 3 m. Twigs slightly pubescent when young, or almost glabrous from the beginning. Decorticated wood sometimes with scattered ridges 5(-10) mm. Leaves oblanceolate, more or less broadly cuneate towards the base, almost glabrous and green on both surfaces or bluish-green beneath; reticulation prominent beneath; apex flat, triangular; margin serrate, crenate or nearly entire. Stipules reniform or semi-cordate, irregularly glandular-sinuate, more or less equalling the petiole. Catkins 1·5-3·5 × 0·5-1 cm; peduncles short. Bracts dark reddish-brown, bearded with long, white hairs. Ovary glabrous; pedicel equalling the bract, later elongating slightly.{\i  Riversides and damp clearings. • Sudety, Carpathians, Balkan peninsula}. Bu Cz Ju Po Rm Rs(W).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Absent from the Alps; records from Steiermark are referable to {\i S. appendiculata }× {\i caprea.} Hybridizes freely with {\i S. aurita, S. caprea }and locally with{\i  S. lapponum}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 35. S. aegyptiaca} L.,{\i  Cent. Pl.}{\b  1:} 32 (1755) ({\i S. medemii} Boiss.). Tall shrub up to 4 m, occasionally a tree. Decorticated wood with numerous short, prominent ridges. Young twigs reddish, with dense grey tomentum, persistent on older branches. Leaves lanceolate, cuneate or rounded at base, thick, crispate-serrate; lamina with short, sparse, grey, persistent indumentum and prominent reticulation beneath, glabrescent above; lateral veins c. 15 pairs; petiole 5-10(-15) mm, thick, tomentose. Stipules semihastate, serrate, acute, deciduous. Catkins 5-6 × 1(-1·5) cm. Ovary tomentose; pedicel c. 2 mm; style 0·5(-1) mm.{\i  N.E. Greece} ({\i near Komotini}). *Gr. ({\i Mountains of Asia}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 36. S. appendiculata} Vill.,{\i  Hist. Pl. Dauph. }{\b 3}({\b 2}): 775 (1789) ({\i S. grandifolia }Ser., {\i S. aurita} var.{\i  grandiflora} (Ser.) Fiori). Tall shrub or small tree with short divaricate branches. Decorticated wood with few, sometimes indistinct, elevated ridges. Twigs pubescent with short hairs, more or less glabrescent. Leaves variable in size and shape, obovate to oblanceolate, more or less glabrescent above and permanently pubescent beneath; margin roughly erose-dentate to entire; veins deeply impressed above, and very prominent beneath; petiole c. 10 mm. Stipules well developed, semi-cordate, coarsely serrate. Catkins up to 3 × 1 cm, lax-flowered. Filaments with few, long hairs near the base. Pedicel as long as or longer than the grey-pubescent ovary. •{\i  Mountains of Europe from S.W. Czechoslovakia to the Pyrenees, S. Italy and S.W. Bulgaria}. ?Al Au Bu Cz Ga Ge He It Ju.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Absent from Sudety and Carpathians; records of {\b 36} from here are referable to {\b 34} or its hybrids.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\i S. appendiculata} hybridizes freely, especially with {\i S. caprea} (to give{\i  S.} ×{\i  macrophylla }A. Kerner) but also with many subalpine species. The influence of {\i S. appendiculata} is usually shown in the rugose leaves, broadest above the middle, and the dense, very prominent reticulation of the lower surface.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 37. S. laggeri} Wimmer, {\i Flora} ({\i Regensb}.) {\b 37:} 162 (1854) ({\i S. albicans} Bonjean,{\i  S. pubescens }Schleicher). Shrub 2-3 m. Twigs divergent, thick, knotty, dark brown to blackish, woolly-felted with long, white hairs when young, glabrescent only in the second or third year. Leaves narrowly elliptical to oblong-lanceolate, tending to turn black on drying, lanate-pubescent above, deeply green and almost shiny when mature, woolly-felted with greyish-white hairs beneath; petiole 6-20 mm. Stipules semi-sagittate, cuneate-serrate. Catkins 2-3·8 × 1·2-1·7 cm. Filaments with long hairs in lower ½ or near the base only. Ovary densely covered with whitish hairs.{\i  Alps}. Au Ga He It.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 38. S. cinerea} L.,{\i  Sp. Pl.} 1021 (1753) ({\i S. aurita} var.{\i  cinerea} (L.) Fiori). Shrub up to 6 m. Twigs rather stout, shortly and persistently pubescent, grey. Decorticated wood with narrow continuous ridges. Leaves up to 11 × 4 cm, 2-3½ times as long as wide, lanceolate or oblanceolate, apiculate or rounded, cuneate at base, persistently pubescent beneath and grey or somewhat glaucous above; margin often somewhat undulate, distantly crenate-serrate or subentire; petiole up to 15 mm. Stipules usually well developed, semi-cordate, toothed. Catkins appearing before the leaves, dense, subsessile, finally 3·5-5 cm. 2n = 76.{\i  Most of Europe except the extreme north, but local in the west and the Mediterranean region.} Al Au Be Br Bu Cz Da Fe Ga Ge Gr Hb Ho Hs Hu It Ju No Po Rm Rs(N, B, C, W, E) Su Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Very local in most of W. Europe, where records are mostly referable to{\b  39} or its hybrids.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 39. S. atrocinerea} Brot.,{\i  Fl. Lusit.}{\b  1:} 31 (1804) ({\i S. cinerea }auct. eur. occid., {\i S. oleifolia }Sm., {\i S. acuminata} Thuill., non Sm.,{\i  S. aurita} auct. lusit., non L., {\i S. caprea} auct. lusit., non L., {\i S. cinerascens }Link, {\i S. incerta }Lapeyr., {\i S. rufinervis} DC.). Tall shrub or small tree up to 10 m. Young twigs somewhat pubescent, glabrescent, shining in the second year. Decorticated wood with ridges. Leaves obovate or oblong-oblanceolate, slightly denticulate to almost entire, soon glabrescent above and somewhat shiny, glaucous, with very short, curved, ferruginous hairs beneath; lateral veins 8-15 pairs. Catkins 2-5 cm, appearing before the leaves, cylindrical, dense, sessile or subsessile; axis grey-hairy. Capsule tomentose. 2n = 76. {\i W. Europe.} Be Br Co Ga Hb Ho Hs Lu Sa [Az].
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Subsp. {\b catalaunica} R. Görz, {\i Cavanillesia}{\b  2:} 142 (1930) from E. Spain (Cataluña) is said to have a petiole 3-5(-8) mm, leaves
\par

\par
60}
\par