{\rtf1\ansi \deff4\deflang1033{\fonttbl{\f4\froman\fcharset0\fprq2 Times New Roman;}}{\colortbl;\red0\green0\blue0;\red0\green0\blue255;\red0\green255\blue255;\red0\green255\blue0;\red255\green0\blue255;\red255\green0\blue0;\red255\green255\blue0;\red255\green255\blue255;\red0\green0\blue128;\red0\green128\blue128;\red0\green128\blue0;\red128\green0\blue128;\red128\green0\blue0;\red128\green128\blue0;\red128\green128\blue128;\red192\green192\blue192;}{\stylesheet{\widctlpar \f4\fs20\lang2057 \snext0 Normal;}{\*\cs10 \additive Default Paragraph Font;}}{\info{\author dddd}{\operator dddd}{\creatim\yr1998\mo11\dy11\hr16\min4}{\revtim\yr1998\mo11\dy11\hr18\min59}{\version2}{\edmins0}{\nofpages4}{\nofwords1023}{\nofchars5835}{\*\company  }{\vern57431}}\widowctrl\ftnbj\aenddoc\hyphcaps0 \fet0\sectd \linex0 {\*\pnseclvl1\pnucrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl2\pnucltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl3\pndec\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl4\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl5\pndec\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl6\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl7\pnlcrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl8\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl9\pnlcrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}
\pard\plain \ \f4\fs20\lang2057 {\fs24 
\par }{\fs28 with rounded base and sinuate-dentate margin, very short style, and very indistinct stigma; it somewhat resembles}{\i\fs28  S. aurita}{\fs28 .
\par 
\par }{\i\fs28 S. atrocinerea}{\fs28  hybridizes freely with}{\b\fs28  40}{\fs28  and }{\b\fs28 41}{\fs28  and evidently also with }{\b\fs28 38}{\fs28  wherever they meet.
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 40. S. aurita}{\fs28  L., }{\i\fs28 Sp. Pl.}{\fs28  1019 (1753). Shrub 1-2(-3) m, with numerous patent branches. Twigs rather slender, soon glabrous, brown, usually angular and with wide-angled branching. Decorticated wood with ridges. Leaves 2-3 cm, c. 1\'bd-2\'bd times as long as wide, obovate, shortly cuspidate with the cusp often obliquely recurved, more or less cuneate at base, undulate, toothed to subentire, distinctly rugose, dull grey-green and more or less pubescent above, more or less grey-tomentose beneath. Stipules large and conspicuous, more or less reniform, persistent. Catkins 1-2\'b75 cm, appearing before the leaves, subsessile, cylindrical. 2n = 76. }{\i\fs28 Europe, except the Arctic and most of the Mediterranean region.}{\fs28  Al Au Be Br Bu Co Cz Da Fe Ga Ge ?Gr Hb He Ho Hs Hu ?It Ju No Po Rm Rs(N, B, C, W, E) Su.
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 41. S. caprea}{\fs28  L., }{\i\fs28 Sp. Pl.}{\fs28  1020 (1753) (}{\i\fs28 S. coaetanea}{\fs28  (Hartman) B. Flod.). Shrub or small tree 3-10 m; bark coarsely fissured. Twigs rather stout, those of the previous year glabrous or subglabrous. Decorticated wood without ridges. Leaves 5-10 cm, 1\'bd-2 times as long as wide, usually broadly ovate to ovate-oblong, rounded at base, more or less obtuse or shortly acuminate, sinuate-dentate or almost serrate, dark green and finally almost glabrous above, persistently softly and densely grey-tomentose beneath; lateral veins 6-9 pairs, forming almost a right-angle with the midrib, very prominent on the lower surface; petiole long. Stipules usually large, semi-cordate. Catkins appearing before the leaves, dense, subsessile. Male catkins 2-3\'b75 \'d7 1\'b75-2 cm, oblong-ovoid. Female catkins finally 3-7 cm, lax. Bracts blackish at the apex. Both male and female flowers with 1 nectary. 2n = 38.}{\i\fs28  Most of Europe.}{\fs28  Al Au Be Br Bu Co Cz Da Fe Ga Ge Gr Hb He Ho Hs Hu It Ju No Po Rm Rs(N, B, C, W, K, E) Si Su Tu.
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 42. S. salviifolia}{\fs28  Brot., }{\i\fs28 Fl. Lusit.}{\b\fs28  1:}{\fs28  29 (1804) (}{\i\fs28 S. oleifolia}{\fs28  auct. hisp.). Tall shrub or tree up to 6 m. Young twigs grey-tomentose, indumentum persistent on the old ones. Decorticated wood with prominent ridges. Leaves linear-lanceolate or -oblong, 3-5 times as long as wide, gradually attenuate towards base, shortly acuminate and almost rounded towards apex, white tomentose on both surfaces, tomentum dense and persistent beneath, thinner above; margin slightly serrate or almost entire; lateral veins numerous; petiole up to 6 mm. Stipules semi-cordate, serrate or crenate, patent, with deflexed apex. Fruiting catkins 3-4 \'d7 1 cm. Capsule tomentose; pedicel short; style very short. \bullet }{\i\fs28  Spain and Portugal}{\fs28 . Hs Lu.
\par 
\par The capsule is hairy according to the original description and in the majority of specimens seen. Similar plants but with glabrous capsules have been seen from the Sierra Morena and the Guadalquivir valley.
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 43. S. cantabrica}{\fs28  Rech. fil.,}{\i\fs28  \'d6sterr. Bot. Zeitschr.}{\b\fs28  109:}{\fs28  374 (1962). Shrub 2-3 m. Young twigs covered with shiny hairs, the older twigs glabrescent. Decorticated wood with scattered but distinct ridges. Leaves broadly lanceolate, rounded or rarely cuneate at the base, acute at apex, more or less entire, with indumentum of silky appressed hairs, denser beneath; midrib prominent; veins scarcely impressed above and scarcely prominent beneath; petiole short. Stipules lanceolate, acute, shorter than the petiole. Ovary sericeous tomentose; pedicel shorter than the bract.}{\i\fs28  Along mountain rivers. \bullet  N. Spain }{\fs28 (}{\i\fs28 Cordillera Cantabrica}{\fs28 ). Hs.
\par 
\par Only female flowers are known.
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 44. S. starkeana}{\fs28  Willd., }{\i\fs28 Sp. Pl.}{\b\fs28  4}{\fs28 (}{\b\fs28 2}{\fs28 ): 677 (1806) (}{\i\fs28 S. livida}{\fs28  Wahlenb.). Low shrub, rarely up to 1 m, with ascending branches. Twigs slender, pale and glabrous in the first year. Buds appressed, greenish-orange-yellow, with flattened apex. Leaves broadly lanceolate to orbicular-obovate, slightly pubescent and reddish when young, soon glabrous, bright green, more or less shiny above, pale green or greyish with very prominent veins beneath; margin glandular-serrate; lateral veins 5-7 pairs. Stipules well developed, broadly elliptical or semi-reniform, with glandular margin. Catkins 1\'b75-3 \'d7 0\'b75-1 cm, lax; pedicel almost as long as the ovary, densely covered with grey-white hairs. Bracts lanceolate, usually greenish-yellow. Filaments glabrous. Stigma erect, ovoid, more or less urceolate. }{\i\fs28 N.E. Europe, extending locally to Norway, S.W. Germany and N. Romania}{\fs28 . Cz Fe Ge No Po Rm Rs(N, B, C, W) Su.
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 45. S. xerophila}{\fs28  B. Flod.,}{\i\fs28  Bot. Not.}{\b\fs28  1930: }{\fs28 334 (1930) (}{\i\fs28 S. cinerascens}{\fs28  N.J. Andersson,}{\i\fs28  S. livida }{\fs28 var.}{\i\fs28  cinerascens }{\fs28 Wahlenb., }{\i\fs28 S. sphacelata}{\fs28  Sommerf.). Like }{\b\fs28 44}{\fs28  but sometimes a tree, up to c. 6 m, with erect branches; twigs dull, more or less woolly; buds somewhat patent, conical, reddish-brown; leaves oblanceolate, grey-woolly with appressed, somewhat curved hairs, the margin entire and lateral veins 7 or 8 pairs; stipules usually absent; bracts obovate, brown; filaments hairy; stigma lobes divergent, cylindrical, usually deeply cleft, longer.}{\i\fs28  N. Fennoscandia and N. Russia southwards to S. Ural}{\fs28 . Fe No Rs(N, C) Su.
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 46. S. myrtilloides}{\fs28  L., }{\i\fs28 Sp. Pl. }{\fs28 1019 (1753). Low shrub with subterranean creeping stem. Twigs 30-50 cm, erect, brown, with short, evanescent hairs. Leaves orbicular to narrowly elliptical with short, sometimes plicate apex, usually more or less rounded at both ends, dull green above, paler beneath; veins not prominent; margin entire and more or less reflexed; petiole up to 5 mm. Catkins c. 2 cm. Nectaries \'bd as long as the bracts. Ovary glabrous; style short. }{\i\fs28 Swamps and peat-bogs. N., C. & E. Europe southwards to C. Romania}{\fs28 . Au Cz Fe Ge He No Po Rm Rs(N, B, C, W) Su.
\par 
\par The hybrid with }{\b\fs28 40}{\fs28  (}{\i\fs28 S}{\fs28 . \'d7 }{\i\fs28 rugulosa}{\fs28  N.J. Andersson) is frequent and can be recognized by the more or less crenate, rugose leaves with more prominent reticulation and more or less pubescent ovary.}{\b\fs28  46}{\fs28  \'d7}{\b\fs28  47}{\fs28  (}{\i\fs28 S}{\fs28 . \'d7 }{\i\fs28 finnmarchica }{\fs28 Willd.) is also frequent.
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 47. S. repens}{\fs28  L., }{\i\fs28 Sp. Pl.}{\fs28  1020 (1753). Low shrub with creeping stem. Branches procumbent or ascending, sometimes erect (var.}{\i\fs28  fusca}{\fs28  Wimmer & Grab.). Previous year's twigs slender, pale, glabrous. Leaves ovate-elliptical or obovate, finally glabrous at least above, sericeous beneath; margin more or less entire, flat and glandular. Stipules present or absent. Catkins up to 2\'b75 cm, cylindrical. Bracts flat, with dark apex. Style relatively long. Pedicel, capsule and filaments glabrous or hairy. 2n = 38. \bullet }{\i\fs28  N., W. & C. Europe extending to E. Jugoslavia}{\fs28 . Au Be Br Cz Da Fe Ga Ge Hb He Ho Hs ?It Ju Lu No Rs(N, B, C) Su.
\par 
\par  (}{\b\fs28 a}{\fs28 ) Subsp.}{\b\fs28  repens}{\fs28  : Plant procumbent. Leaves ovate-elliptical, more or less glabrous above, sericeous beneath; lateral veins 4-6 pairs. Stipules absent. Pedicel, filaments and capsule glabrous. 2n = 38.}{\i\fs28  Swamps, heaths and sand-dunes. Throughout the range of the species}{\fs28 .
\par  (}{\b\fs28 b}{\fs28 ) Subsp.}{\b\fs28  arenaria }{\fs28 (L.) Hiitonen,}{\i\fs28  Suomen Kasvio}{\fs28  267 (1933) (}{\i\fs28 S. arenaria}{\fs28  L.): Plant ascending to erect. Leaves obovate, densely sericeous beneath or on both surfaces; lateral veins 5-8 pairs.
\par 
\par 61}
\par }