{\rtf1\ansi \deff4\deflang1033{\fonttbl{\f4\froman\fcharset0\fprq2 Times New Roman;}}{\colortbl;\red0\green0\blue0;\red0\green0\blue255;\red0\green255\blue255;\red0\green255\blue0;\red255\green0\blue255;\red255\green0\blue0;\red255\green255\blue0;\red255\green255\blue255;\red0\green0\blue128;\red0\green128\blue128;\red0\green128\blue0;\red128\green0\blue128;\red128\green0\blue0;\red128\green128\blue0;\red128\green128\blue128;\red192\green192\blue192;}{\stylesheet{\widctlpar \f4\fs20\lang2057 \snext0 Normal;}{\*\cs10 \additive Default Paragraph Font;}}{\info{\author dddd}{\operator dddd}{\creatim\yr1998\mo11\dy11\hr16\min6}{\revtim\yr1998\mo11\dy11\hr16\min7}{\version2}{\edmins1}{\nofpages4}{\nofwords1008}{\nofchars5748}{\*\company  }{\vern57431}}\widowctrl\ftnbj\aenddoc\hyphcaps0 \fet0\sectd \linex0 {\*\pnseclvl1\pnucrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl2\pnucltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl3\pndec\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl4\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl5\pndec\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl6\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl7\pnlcrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl8\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl9\pnlcrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}
\pard\plain \ \f4\fs20\lang2057 {\fs24 
\par }{\fs28 Stipules often present. Pedicel, filaments and capsule usually hairy. }{\i\fs28 Usually on sand-dunes. Atlantic coasts of Europe}{\fs28 .
\par 
\par }{\b\fs28 40}{\fs28  \'d7}{\b\fs28  47}{\fs28  (}{\i\fs28 S.}{\fs28  \'d7}{\i\fs28  ambigua}{\fs28  Ehrh.) is common wherever the parents meet.
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 48. S. rosmarinifolia}{\fs28  L.,}{\i\fs28  Sp. Pl.}{\fs28  1020 (1753). Previous year's twigs slender, sparsely covered with short hairs, often with crowded basal shoots. Leaves more or less erect, thin, almost linear, dark green, finally more or less glabrous above, covered with silky hairs beneath; margin entire or slightly sinuate, finely glandular, flat; lateral veins 10-12 pairs. Stipules absent. Catkins globose. Bracts hairy. Filaments glabrous. Capsule hairy. 2n = 38. }{\i\fs28 Bogs and swamps. C. & E. Europe extending to N. France, Denmark and N. Italy}{\fs28 . Au \'86Bu Cz Da Fe Ga Ge Hu It Ju Po Rm Rs(N, B, C, W, E) Su.
\par 
\par    (}{\b\fs28 49-51}{\fs28 ). }{\b\fs28 S. arbuscula}{\fs28  group. Shrubs up to 2 m. Twigs glabrous. Leaves shiny above, glaucous beneath, never turning black on drying. Stipules minute or absent. Ovary hairy. Pedicel shorter than the nectary or absent.
\par 
\par The pedicel-character is useful for distinguishing these species from the}{\i\fs28  S. phylicifolia}{\fs28  group, which are rather similar in leaf-characters but have the pedicel 2-4 times as long as the nectary.
\par 
\par }
\pard \li200\ {\fs28 1 Leaves 3-5 cm, obovate to elliptical, indistinctly and 
\par   remotely crenate-serrate, sometimes subentire;
\par    peduncle long ...................................................................... }{\b\fs28 51. waldsteiniana}{\fs28 
\par 1 Leaves usually not more than 3 cm, lanceolate or elliptic-
\par   lanceolate, densely and regularly serrate; peduncle short
\par 2 Leaves subacutely serrate with small glands;
\par   lateral veins 7-12 pairs ............................................................... }{\b\fs28 49. arbuscula}{\fs28 
\par 2 Leaves acutely serrate, with large, white glands;
\par   lateral veins 5-10 pairs ................................................................... }{\b\fs28 50. foetida}{\fs28 
\par 
\par }
\pard \ {\fs28    }{\b\fs28 49. S. arbuscula}{\fs28  L., }{\i\fs28 Sp. Pl. }{\fs28 1018 (1753). Leaves 0\'b75-3(-5) cm, elliptic-lanceolate, acute, densely and regularly serrate, the teeth with small glands; lateral veins 7-12 pairs. Catkins 1\'b73-1\'b78 \'d7 0\'b74-0\'b75 cm, c. 3 times as long as wide, appearing with the leaves; peduncle short.}{\i\fs28  Fennoscandia and N. Russia; Scotland}{\fs28 . Br Fe No Rs(N) Su.
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 50. S. foetida}{\fs28  Schleicher in Lam. & DC.,}{\i\fs28  Fl. Fr.}{\fs28  ed. 3, }{\b\fs28 3:}{\fs28  296 (1805) (}{\i\fs28 S. myrsinitess}{\fs28  var.}{\i\fs28  arbuscula}{\fs28  (L.) Fiori). Leaves 0\'b75-3 cm, elliptic-lanceolate, small, densely and acutely serrate, with large, white glands; lateral veins 5-10 pairs. Catkins 1\'b73-1\'b78 \'d7 0\'b74-0\'b75 cm, 2\'bd-3 times as long as wide; peduncle short. \bullet }{\i\fs28  Alps; Pyrenees; ?C. Appennini}{\fs28 . Au Ga He It.
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 51. S. waldsteiniana}{\fs28  Willd., }{\i\fs28 Sp. Pl.}{\b\fs28  4}{\fs28 (}{\b\fs28 2}{\fs28 ): 679 (1806) (}{\i\fs28 S. prunifolia}{\fs28  Sm.). Leaves 3-5 cm, with cuneate base, obovate to elliptical, indistinctly and remotely crenate-serrate, sometimes subentire. Catkins 1\'b74-3\'b75 \'d7 0\'b75-0\'b78 cm, 4-5 times as long as wide; peduncle long. \bullet }{\i\fs28  C. & E. Alps, N. part of Balkan peninsula}{\fs28 . Al Au Bu Ge He It Ju.
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 52. S. hastata}{\fs28  L.,}{\i\fs28  Sp. Pl.}{\fs28  1017 (1753). Ascending or erect shrub up to 2\'b75 m. Branches greenish or brownish, shiny, glabrous. Leaves very variable in size and outline, rather thin, not shiny, pale and dull green above, paler but without a bloom beneath, somewhat hairy when young, soon glabrous; venation finely reticulate but scarcely prominent; margin entire or more or less finely serrate; petiole up to 1 cm. Stipules often well developed, obliquely ovate, serrate. Female catkins 6(-10) \'d7 1(-2) cm, dense-flowered; peduncle up to 3 cm, leafy. Bracts with long, white hairs. Pedicel 1/3 as long as the ovary. Nectaries \'bd as long as the pedicel. 2n = c. 110. }{\i\fs28 N. & C. Europe, locally on mountains in the south}{\fs28 . Al Au Bu Cz Da Fe Ga Ge He Hs It Ju No Po Rm Rs(N, C, ?W) Su.
\par 
\par A polymorphic species of wide distribution, divisible into at least three subspecies, treated as varieties by some authors.
\par 
\par }
\pard \li200\ {\fs28 1 Petiole 2-3 mm; leaves orbicular ........................................ (}{\b\fs28 b}{\fs28 ) subsp.}{\b\fs28  vegeta}{\fs28 
\par 1 Petiole more than 3 mm; leaves broadly elliptical, obovate or narrower
\par 2 Leaves broadly elliptical or obovate, finely serrate .......... (}{\b\fs28 a}{\fs28 ) subsp.}{\b\fs28  hastata}{\fs28 
\par 2 Leaves lanceolate, entire ........................................ (}{\b\fs28 c}{\fs28 ) subsp.}{\b\fs28  subintegrifolia}{\fs28 
\par 
\par }
\pard \ {\fs28  (}{\b\fs28 a}{\fs28 ) Subsp. }{\b\fs28 hastata}{\fs28  (incl.}{\i\fs28  S. hastatella}{\fs28  Rech. fil.): Shrub 0\'b75-1 m. Leaves broadly elliptical or obovate, finely serrate; petiole 4-10 mm.}{\i\fs28  Throughout most of the range of the species}{\fs28 .
\par  (}{\b\fs28 b}{\fs28 ) Subsp.}{\b\fs28  vegeta}{\fs28  N.J. Andersson, }{\i\fs28 Kungl. Svenska Vet.-Akad. Handl.}{\b\fs28  6}{\fs28 (}{\b\fs28 1}{\fs28 ): 172 (1867): Shrub 1-2 m. Leaves orbicular, finely serrate; petiole 2-3 mm.}{\i\fs28  Lowlands of S. Fennoscandia and parts of C. Europe}{\fs28 .
\par  (}{\b\fs28 c}{\fs28 ) Subsp. }{\b\fs28 subintegrifolia}{\fs28  (B. Flod.) B. Flod. in Holmberg,}{\i\fs28  Skand. Fl. }{\b\fs28 1}{\fs28 (}{\b\fs28 b,1}{\fs28 ): 120 (1931): Shrub 2-2\'b75 m. Leaves lanceolate, entire; petiole 4-10 mm.}{\i\fs28  North part of the range of the species}{\fs28 .
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 53. S. pyrolifolia}{\fs28  Ledeb.,}{\i\fs28  Fl. Altaica }{\b\fs28 4:}{\fs28  270 (1833). Tall shrub or tree up to 5 m. Branches rather thick, reddish-brown, smooth and shiny, or with scattered hairs. Leaves c. 5 \'d7 4 cm, thin, orbicular-ovate or -elliptical, whitish and glabrous with prominent venation beneath; lateral veins forming an angle of 60\'b0- 85\'b0 with the midrib; petiole up to 3 cm, slender, often brown or pink beneath like the midrib. Stipules up to 1-1\'b75 cm wide, orbicular-reniform. Catkins small, c. 100-flowered; peduncle much reduced and often almost leafless. Capsule 3-4 mm, yellowish-brown, glabrous; style c. 1 mm, stigma short; pedicel usually hairy.}{\i\fs28  N. Finland, N. Russia and Ural}{\fs28 . Fe Rs(N, C).
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 54. S. helvetica}{\fs28  Vill., }{\i\fs28 Hist. Pl. Dauph.}{\b\fs28  3}{\fs28 (}{\b\fs28 2}{\fs28 ): 783 (1789). Shrub 0\'b75-4 m. Twigs greyish-brown, rather slender, becoming glabrous and chestnut-brown. Indumentum dense, white. Leaves not crowded at ends of twigs, often asymmetrical, obovate or obovate-oblanceolate, shortly acuminate or rounded at apex, glabrescent (especially along midrib), and greenish and shiny on upper surface, white-tomentose beneath, therefore distinctly discolorous, the base rounded, rarely cordate. Stipules small, caducous. Catkins 1\'bd-3 times as long as wide, somewhat slender and lax-flowered, very elongate when ripe, peduncle short, leafless. Ovary ovoid, obtuse, sparsely tomentose, rather dull; style 0\'b78-1\'b75 mm, 1/3-1/2 as long as the ovary; stigma distinctly quadrifid. \bullet }{\i\fs28  Alps; W. Carpathians}{\fs28 . Au Cz Ga He It Po.
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 55. S. lapponum}{\fs28  L., }{\i\fs28 Sp. Pl.}{\fs28  1019 (1753) (incl. }{\i\fs28 S. marrubifolia}{\fs28  Tausch ex N.J. Andersson). Like }{\b\fs28 54}{\fs28  but indumentum, especially of leaves and ovary, less dense, grey; leaves crowded at ends of the twigs, elliptical or broadly lanceolate, tapering gradually or abruptly at the base, moderately hairy above, and therefore the upper and lower surfaces almost concolorous; catkins stout, dense-flowered, scarcely becoming laxer when ripe, sessile, with caducous leaves at the base; ovary very long, sericeous with crisped and patent hairs; style 1\'b72-2\'b75 mm, filiform, 1/2-2/3 as long as the ovary; stigma distinctly quadrifid.}{\i\fs28  N. Europe, extending southwards locally in the mountains to the Pyrenees and Bulgaria.}{\fs28  Br Bu Cz Fe Ga Ge Hs No Po Rm Rs(N, B, C, W) Su.
\par 
\par 62}
\par }