{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 56. S. viminalis} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 1021 (1753) ({\i S. veriviminalis} Nasarow,{\i  S. rossica} Nasarow, {\i S. gmelinii} auct.,{\i  S. linearis} Turcz.). Shrub or small tree 3-5(-10) m. Twigs long, straight, flexible, very leafy; young twigs grey-pubescent. Buds acute or obtuse. Leaves up to 1·5 cm wide when mature, narrow, linear to oblanceolate with very narrow, cuneate or rounded base, entire, green above, sericeous beneath; margin reflexed; lateral veins usually (15-)20-35 pairs. Catkins appearing before or with the leaves. Bracts hairy, pale brown, darker at the apex, not concealing the ovary. Flowers with 1 nectary. Style to about ½ as long as the ovary. {\i C. & E. Europe, extending westwards to France and so southwards to S. Jugoslavia; widely naturalized elsewhere.} Au Be Cz Ga Ge *Gr He Ho Hu Ju Po *Rm Rs(N, B, C, W, E) *Tu [Br Da Fe Hb Hs It Lu No Su].
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b S. pseudolinearis} Nasarow in Komarov, {\i Fl. U.R.S.S.}{\b  5:} 137 (1936), from C. & E. Russia, is doubtfully distinct from {\b 56.} It has leaves 0·2-0·4(-0·6) cm, narrowly linear-lanceolate, sericeous on both surfaces, glabrescent above, with wide, reflexed margins and short, almost entirely black bracts.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Plants showing intermediate characters between {\b 56} and {\b 38-41} occur quite frequently, mainly in W. & N. Europe. They have long leaves, more or less sericeous beneath, with many lateral veins, all characters inherited from{\i  S. viminalis}. Three taxa are often referred to by binary names because their parents are not known with certainty, and must be mentioned here, since they behave like species (vide R.D. Meikle, {\i Watsonia }{\b 2:} 243-248 (1952)).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Leaves 9-11 × 2·5-4 cm, broadly lanceolate-ovate; stigma 
\par
  shorter than style ...............................................................{\b  S}. ×{\b  calodendron}
\par
1 Leaves 10-13 × 1·5-3 cm, narrowly lanceolate; stigma as 
\par
  long as or longer than style
\par
2 Bracts light brown, acute; leaves 1·5-2·5 cm wide, silky
\par
  pubescent beneath .................................................................. {\b S}. ×{\b  stipularis}
\par
2 Bracts dark brown, subobtuse; leaves 2-3 cm wide, thinly 
\par
  pubescent or subglabrous beneath ......................................{\b  S}. × {\b dasyclados}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b S.} ×{\b  calodendron }Wimmer, {\i Salices Eur.} 187 (1866) ({\i S. acuminata} Sm., non Miller).{\i  Often cultivated and escaping.} [Br ?Da Ge Hb.] (Possibly{\b  38} ×{\b  41} ×{\b  56}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b S.} ×{\b  stipularis} Sm. in Sowerby,{\i  Engl. Bot. }{\b 17:} t. 1214 (1803) ({\i S.} ×{\i  smithiana} Willd.). {\i Cultivated and occasionally escaping}. [Br Ge Rs(W).] (Possibly {\b 39} × {\b 56}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b S}. ×{\b  dasyclados} Wimmer, {\i Flora} ({\i Regensb}.){\b  32:} 25 (1849).{\i  Cultivated and occasionally escaping}. [Au Cz Da Fe Ge Ho Po Rs(N, C, E) Su.] (Possibly {\b 38} × {\b 41} × {\b 56}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 57. S. elaeagnos} Scop., {\i Fl. Carn}. ed. 2,{\b  2:} 257 (1772) ({\i S. incana} Schrank). Shrub up to 6 m, or rarely a tree up to 16 m. Twigs slender, yellowish- to reddish-brown, thinly covered with whitish hairs when young. Leaves erect, linear-lanceolate to narrowly linear, tapering at both ends, densely lanate on both surfaces when young, more or less glabrescent above, remaining lanate beneath, not shiny; margin deflexed, finely glandular-serrate, mainly in the apical part; veins more or less impressed above, slightly prominent beneath, often not visible because of the dense indumentum; petiole up to 5 mm. Stipules usually absent. Catkins up to 6 × 0·8 cm; peduncle up to 1 cm, with small, lanceolate leaves. Bracts about ½ as long as the ovary. Filaments united at base or up to the middle, hairy near base. Ovary glabrous; pedicel about ¼ as long as the ovary.{\i  Damp, sandy or gravelly soils. S. Europe extending northwards to S. Poland; naturalized further north}. Al Au Bu Co Cz Ga Ge Gr He Hs Hu It Ju Po Rm Rs(W) [Ho].
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp.{\b  elaeagnos} : Leaves up to 12 × 2 cm, linear-lanceolate or linear. 2n = 38. {\i Throughout most of the range of the species}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b angustifolia} (Cariot) Rech. fil.,{\i  Österr. Bot. Zeitschr. }{\b 104:} 314 (1957). Leaves c. 12 × 0·5-1 cm, very narrowly linear.{\i  S. France and Spain; frequently cultivated elsewhere}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Hybrids of {\b 57} are not rare, especially along some of the rivers coming from the Alps; the most prominent characters inherited from {\b 57} are the long, narrow, curved catkins and the leaves with more or less parallel margins, lanate on the lower surface.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 58. S. purpurea} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 1017 (1753). Rather slender shrub up to 5 m. Bark bitter. Twigs slender, straight, glabrous, shining, usually purplish at first, becoming greenish- or yellowish-grey. Leaves 3-12 cm, 3-15 times as long as wide, sometimes opposite, at least near the ends of twigs, obovate-oblong to oblanceolate-linear, acute or acuminate, very finely serrate, glabrous, dull and slightly bluish-green above, paler and often glaucous beneath. Stipules small, caducous. Catkins 1·5-4·5 cm, appearing before the leaves, dense, cylindrical, suberect to spreading, subsessile. Bracts blackish at the apex. Stamens 2, completely united and appearing as 1. Ovary pubescent. {\i Wet places. Most of Europe, except Fennoscandia and the N. part of the U.S.S.R.} Al Au Be Br Bu Co Cz Ga Ge Gr Hb He Ho Hs Hu It Ju Po Rm Rs(B, C, W, K) Sa Si [Da No Su].
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b purpurea} : Leaves alternate throughout (exceptionally 1 or 2 pairs opposite at the base of the terminal shoots), narrowly lanceolate-lingulate, cuneate at base, serrate only above the middle, c. 10 times as long as wide on long twigs, c. 5 times as long as wide on short twigs; petiole c. ½ the length of the leaf.{\i  Widespread, particularly in the mountains}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp.{\b  lambertiana} (Sm.) A. Neumann ex Rech. fil.,{\i  Österr. Bot. Zeitschr.}{\b  110:} 341 (1963): At least some leaves opposite, more or less broadly lingulate, narrowly rounded at base, serrate for almost their whole length, 4-8 times as long as wide on long twigs, c. 4 times as long as wide on short twigs; petiole 1/20-1/15 the length of the leaf. {\i Widespread, mainly in the lowlands}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b 56} × {\b 58} ({\i S.} ×{\i  rubra} Hudson) is a frequent hybrid.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\i S}. × {\i forbyana} Sm., an exceptionally vigorous bush, is probably {\i S. atrocinerea} × {\i purpurea }× {\i viminalis} ; it has yellowish twigs and dark green, lustrous leaves (resembling the leaves of{\i  S. triandra}). The female catkins are like those of{\i  S. purpurea}; the male plant is extremely rare.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b S. vinogradovii} A. Skvortsov,{\i  Nov. Syst. Pl. Vasc.} ({\i Leningrad}) {\b 1966: }55 (1966), which apparently replaces {\b 58} from Ukraine eastwards, is a shrub 1-3 m, with leaves all alternate, shorter and more ovoid buds, and catkins sessile or on pedicels not more than 6 mm. It may represent a third subspecies of {\b 58}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 59. S. amplexicaulis} Bory,{\i  Expéd. Sci. Morée }{\b 3:} 277 (1832). Like{\b  58}({\b b}) but most or all leaves opposite, often smaller, sessile or subsessile, truncate or semi-amplexicaul at the base.{\i  Balkan peninsula; S.W. Italy}. Al Bu Gr It Ju Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 60. S. caspica} Pallas,{\i  Fl. Ross.}{\b  1}({\b 2}): 74 (1788) ({\i S. volgensis} N.J. Andersson). Twigs brown when young, usually becoming yellowish-white, shiny, glabrous. Leaves 5-8(-12) × 0·4-1 cm, narrowly linear-lanceolate, very acute, strict, serrate (rarely almost entire), 8-10 times as long as wide, glabrous at maturity; veins prominent beneath. Stipules absent. Catkins c. 2·5 cm. Ovary whitish-sericeous, finally somewhat glabrous, subsessile or with a very short pedicel.{\i  S.E. Russia.} Rs(E). (W. & C. Asia.)
\par

\par
63}
\par