{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 61. S. wilhelmsiana} Bieb., {\i Fl. Taur.-Cauc.}{\b  3:} 627 (1819) ({\i S. augustifolia} Willd.). Young twigs more or less densely silky, rarely almost glabrous, very thin, flexible, often forming almost a right-angle with the stem. Leaves 2-6 × 0·4-1 cm, c. 5 times as long as wide, linear, entire or finely glandular-serrate, densely covered with silky hairs when young, shiny, finally more or less glabrous; petiole very short. Stipules usually absent. Catkins 2-3 cm, slender. Bracts very acute. Ovary densely sericeous; stigma sessile. {\i S.E. Russia} ({\i near the mouth of Terek R.}). Rs(E). ({\i S.C. Asia}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 62. S. caesia} Vill., {\i Hist. Pl. Dauph.}{\b  3}({\b 2}): 768 (1789) ({\i S. myrtilloides }Willd., non L.). Shrub up to 1 m. Twigs entirely glabrous, brown and dull when young. Leaves elliptical or obovate, twice as long as wide, shortly acuminate, sometimes plicate at the apex, rounded or subcordate at the base, entire or with very few remote marginal glands, rigid, with a dull bloom on both surfaces; petiole 2-3 mm. Stipules minute. Catkins 1-1·5(-2) cm; nectary about as long as the bract. Stamens free or more or less united. Ovary woolly or more or less appressed-sericeous; sessile or subsessile. {\i Alps}. Au Ga He It.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 63. S. tarraconensis} Pau in Font Quer, {\i Treb. Inst. Catalana Hist. Nat.} {\b 1915:} 7 (1915). Shrub up to 1 m. Young twigs grey-hairy, becoming glabrous in second year. Leaves 0·5-3 cm, suborbicular or elliptic-obovate, up to 1½ times as long as wide, with a small, oblique, deflexed apex, rounded or cordate at base, glabrous above except along midrib, greyish or glaucescent and subglabrous or with only very short hairs beneath; margin irregularly sinuate-crenate; lateral veins 4 or 5(6) pairs; petiole 0·5-2(-7) mm. Stipules present only on elongate shoots. Catkins 0·5-1 cm. Nectary much shorter than the bract. Stamens united for at least ½ their length; filaments glabrous. Ovary grey-hairy; pedicel c. 2 mm; style 0·3-0·4 mm.{\i  Calcareous rocks, }900-1400{\i  m. Spain }({\i S.E. Cataluña}). Hs.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 64. S. daphnoides} Vill.,{\i  Prosp. Pl. Dauph.} 51 (1779). Tall shrub or tree 7-10 m. Twigs with a bluish, waxy bloom. Leaves 5-10 cm, 2½-4 times as long as wide, oblong-lanceolate or oblong-ovate, acute or acuminate, glandular-serrulate, soon glabrous, dark green and shining above, glaucous beneath; lateral veins 8-12 pairs; petiole 2-4 mm. Stipules large, semi-cordate. Catkins 3-4 cm, appearing before the leaves, subsessile, cylindrical, dense. Bracts blackish at apex, obovate, hairy. Ovary ovoid-conical, glabrous, subsessile; style long, slender. 2n = 38. •{\i  From S. Norway southwards to S. France and S. Romania.} Au Cz Ga Ge He Hs It Ju No *Po Rm Rs(N, B, C) Su.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 65. S. acutifolia} Willd., {\b Sp. Pl.}{\b  4}({\b 2}): 668 (1806) ({\i S. daphnoides} subsp.{\i  acutifolia} (Willd.) Blytt & O.C. Dahl). Tall shrub, rarely a tree. Leaves 6-15 cm, more than 5 times as long as wide, lanceolate to linear-lanceolate, long and sharply acuminate, serrate, dark green and shiny above, pale to grey-green and dull beneath, only the very young ones with a faint, sericeous indumentum; lateral veins 15 or more pairs; petiole up to 15 mm. Stipules lanceolate, acuminate, serrate. Catkins appearing before the leaves, covered with long, whitish, shiny hairs before flowering; peduncles short. Bracts c. ½ as long as the ovary. Pedicel c. 1/3 as long as the ovary. 2n = 38.{\i  Most of European Russia, extending westwards to Lithuania and S.W. Ukraine; Finland}. Fe Rs(N, C, W, E).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 2.            Populus}               L.
\par         

\pard\f0\fs24\qc  By J. do Amaral Franco.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Deciduous trees. Buds with several unequal scales. Leaves usually ovate or triangular, entire, dentate or lobed. Petiole usually long, terete or flattened. Flowers anemophilous, appearing before the leaves, in pendent, stalked catkins, each flower with a stalked, cupshaped disc and subtended by a toothed or laciniate bract. Stamens 4 to many. Capsule 2- to 4-valved. Seeds numerous, minute.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Many hybrids, most of them of recent origin, are now planted for pulp-wood or ornament in Europe.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Pistillate flowers long-pedicellate, with caducous disc; 
\par
  leaves very variable, some, particularly towards end of long
\par
  shoots, lanceolate or linear-lanceolate ...................................... {\b 11. euphratica}
\par
1 Pistillate flowers subsessile, with persistent disc;  
\par
  leaves variable but never lanceolate
\par
2 Leaves of long shoots densely tomentose beneath, those of 
\par
  short shoots less tomentose or subglabrous
\par
3 Leaves of long shoots palmately lobed, white-tomentose beneath; 
\par
  bracts dentate ........................................................................................ {\b 1. alba}
\par
3 Leaves of long shoots with wide, irregularly serrate teeth, 
\par
  grey-tomentose beneath; bracts laciniate ................................. {\b 2}. ×{\b  canescens}
\par
2 Leaves not tomentose beneath (sometimes thinly tomentose when
\par
  very young)
\par
4 Leaves without a translucent margin
\par
5 Petiole strongly compressed
\par
6 Leaves cuneate or truncate at base, coarsely dentate;
\par
  buds grey-tomentose .............................................................. {\b 3. grandidentata}
\par
6 Leaves rounded or subcordate at base, sinuately crenate-dentate;
\par
  buds glabrous, slightly viscid .......................................................... {\b 4. tremula}
\par
5 Petiole terete
\par
7 Leaves rhombic-elliptical to obovate, cuneate at base;
\par
  petiole 0·5-2·5 cm; twigs glabrous ................................................... {\b 5. simonii}
\par
7 Leaves deltate-ovate, usually cordate; petiole 3-6 cm;
\par
  twigs hairy .................................................................................... {\b 6. candicans}
\par
4 Leaves with a translucent margin, sometimes very narrow
\par
8 Leaves with a very narrow, translucent margin; petiole terete,
\par
  though sometimes grooved on upper side ............................ {\b 7}. ×{\b  berolinensis}
\par
8 Leaves with an obvious translucent margin; petiole laterally flattened
\par
9 Leaves 10-18 cm, deltate-ovate to ovate, densely ciliate;
\par
  stamens 30-60 ............................................................................. {\b 10. deltoides}
\par
9 Leaves 7-10 cm, rhombic or deltate, ciliate or not; stamens 15-30
\par

\par
10 Lamina not ciliate, without glands at base; trunk usually with 
\par
   large bosses ........................................................................................ {\b 8. nigra}
\par
10 Lamina shortly ciliate, usually with 1 or 2 glands at base; 
\par
   trunk without bosses .............................................................. {\b 9}. ×{\b  canadensis}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Sect. POPULUS (Sect. {\i Leuce} Duby). Bark smooth, becoming rough on old trunks; buds tomentose, or glabrous and viscid; terminal bud present; leaves tomentose or glabrous, without a translucent margin, more or less dimorphic; bracts ciliate, tardily deciduous.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. P. alba} L.,{\i  Sp. Pl.} 1034 (1753) ({\i P. bolleana} Lauche, {\i P. nivea} A. Wesmael). Up to 30(-40) m, with a broad crown, suckering freely. Bark white on young stems. Twigs and buds white-tomentose. Leaves of long shoots 6-12 cm, ovate, with 3-5 coarsely toothed
\par

\par
64}
\par