{\rtf1\ansi \deff4\deflang1033{\fonttbl{\f4\froman\fcharset0\fprq2 Times New Roman;}}{\colortbl;\red0\green0\blue0;\red0\green0\blue255;\red0\green255\blue255;\red0\green255\blue0;\red255\green0\blue255;\red255\green0\blue0;\red255\green255\blue0;\red255\green255\blue255;\red0\green0\blue128;\red0\green128\blue128;\red0\green128\blue0;\red128\green0\blue128;\red128\green0\blue0;\red128\green128\blue0;\red128\green128\blue128;\red192\green192\blue192;}{\stylesheet{\widctlpar \f4\fs20\lang2057 \snext0 Normal;}{\*\cs10 \additive Default Paragraph Font;}}{\info{\author dddd}{\operator dddd}{\creatim\yr1998\mo11\dy11\hr16\min7}{\revtim\yr1998\mo11\dy11\hr16\min8}{\version2}{\edmins1}{\nofpages4}{\nofwords1001}{\nofchars5711}{\*\company  }{\vern57431}}\widowctrl\ftnbj\aenddoc\hyphcaps0 \fet0\sectd \linex0 {\*\pnseclvl1\pnucrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl2\pnucltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl3\pndec\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl4\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl5\pndec\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl6\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl7\pnlcrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl8\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl9\pnlcrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}
\pard\plain \ \f4\fs20\lang2057 {\fs24 
\par }{\fs28 lobes, dark green above, white-tomentose beneath; leaves of short shoots ovate to elliptic-oblong, sinuate-dentate, usually greyish beneath. Stamens 5-10. Fruiting catkins 8-10 cm. 2n = 38.}{\i\fs28  S., C. & E. Europe; often planted elsewhere}{\fs28 . Al Au Bu Co Cz Ga Ge Gr Hs Hu It Ju Po Rm Rs(C, W, E) Sa Si Tu [Az Be Br Da He Ho Lu].
\par 
\par A fastigiate variant (cv. 'Roumi' = f.}{\i\fs28  pyramidalis}{\fs28  (Bunge) Dippel) is commonly planted as a street tree.
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 2. P.}{\fs28  \'d7}{\b\fs28  canescens}{\fs28  (Aiton) Sm.,}{\i\fs28  Fl. Brit.}{\b\fs28  3:}{\fs28  1080 (1804) (}{\i\fs28 P. alba}{\fs28  \'d7}{\i\fs28  tremula, P. alba-tremula}{\fs28  E.H.L. Krause,}{\i\fs28  P. bachofenii }{\fs28 Wierzb. ex Rochel,}{\i\fs28  P. hybrida}{\fs28  Reichenb.). Like }{\b\fs28 1}{\fs28  but often taller; leaves of long shoots deltate-ovate, cordate, grey-tomentose beneath; leaves of short shoots suborbicular to ovate, glabrescent. Stamens 8-15. 2n = 38.}{\i\fs28  C. Europe, extending to S. Italy and the Netherlands; widely planted and naturalized elsewhere.}{\fs28  Al Au *Br Bu Cz Ga Ge He Ho Hu It Ju Po Rm Rs(C, W, E) Tu [Be Da Gr Hb Hs].
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 3. P. grandidentata}{\fs28  Michx, }{\i\fs28 Fl. Bor.-Amer. }{\b\fs28 2:}{\fs28  243 (1803). Up to 20 m, with a rather narrow crown. Young twigs and buds grey-tomentose. Leaves of long shoots 7-10 cm, ovate, acuminate, truncate to cuneate at base, coarsely dentate, grey-tomentose beneath when very young, then glabrous; leaves of short shoots elliptical. Stamens 6-12. Fruiting catkins 3\'b75-6 cm.}{\i\fs28  Extensively planted in Austria.}{\fs28  [Au.] (}{\i\fs28 North America}{\fs28 .)
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 4. P. tremula}{\fs28  L., }{\i\fs28 Sp. Pl}{\fs28 . 1034 (1753). Up to 20 m, short-lived, suckering freely. Bark greyish. Buds glabrous, slightly viscid. Leaves 2-8 cm, suborbicular, sinuately crenate-dentate, thin, glaucescent beneath; petiole up to 6 cm, strongly flattened; leaves on young plants and suckers up to 15 cm, ovate. Stamens 5-12(-15). Fruiting catkins up to 12 cm.}{\i\fs28  Most of Europe, but in the south only on mountains.}{\fs28  All except Az Bl Cr Fa Lu Sb Si.
\par 
\par The hybrid between }{\b\fs28 2}{\fs28  and}{\b\fs28  4}{\fs28  (}{\i\fs28 P}{\fs28 . \'d7}{\i\fs28  hybrida}{\fs28  Bieb.) occurs occasionally in the areas where the parents are found together, and is also sometimes found in cultivation.
\par 
\par The hybrid between }{\b\fs28 P. tremuloides }{\fs28 Michx,}{\i\fs28  Fl. Bor.-Amer.}{\b\fs28  2}{\fs28 : 243 (1803), from North America, and }{\b\fs28 4}{\fs28  is widely planted in Finland and Sweden and to a lesser extent in Austria.
\par 
\par Sect. TACAMAHACA Spach. Bark rough and furrowed; buds large, very viscid, with a strong balsam-like odour; terminal bud present; leaves whitish (but not tomentose) beneath, without a translucent margin, often dimorphic.
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 5. P. simonii}{\fs28  Carri\'e8re,}{\i\fs28  Revue Hort.}{\fs28  (}{\i\fs28 Paris}{\fs28 ) }{\b\fs28 1867:}{\fs28  360 (1867) (}{\i\fs28 P. przewalskii}{\fs28  Maxim.). Up to 15 m, with a narrow crown. Twigs slender, terete, glabrous, reddish-brown. Leaves 4-12 \'d7 3-8 cm, rhombic-elliptical to obovate, abruptly acuminate, cuneate at base, crenulate, glabrous; petiole 0\'b75-2\'b75 cm, reddish. Stamens 8. }{\i\fs28 Planted for timber in C. Europe; occasionally for ornament elsewhere.}{\fs28  [Au Cz Ga Ge Ho Hu Ju Rm Rs.] (}{\i\fs28 N. China}{\fs28 .)
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 6. P. candicans}{\fs28  Aiton, }{\i\fs28 Hort. Kew. }{\b\fs28 3:}{\fs28  406 (1789) (}{\i\fs28 P}{\fs28 . \'d7 }{\i\fs28 gileadensis}{\fs28  Rouleau, }{\i\fs28 P. tacamahaca}{\fs28  auct.,}{\i\fs28  P. balsamifera}{\fs28  auct., non L.). Up to 25 m or more, with a broad, open crown, often suckering. Twigs stout, angled, hairy, brown. Leaves 6-16 cm, deltate-ovate, acuminate, usually cordate at base, crenate-serrate, ciliate, densely pubescent on the veins beneath; petiole 3-6 cm, terete. Fruiting catkins 7-16 cm.}{\i\fs28  Planted for timber, and occasionally naturalized.}{\fs28  [Br Da Ge He Ho Hu Po Rs Su.]
\par 
\par Of unknown origin; perhaps a hybrid between}{\b\fs28  P. balsamifera}{\fs28  L.,}{\i\fs28  Sp. Pl.}{\fs28  1034 (1757), from North America and temperate Asia, and }{\b\fs28 10}{\fs28 . It has been known in cultivation since before 1755, but only as female plants.
\par 
\par }{\b\fs28 P. trichocarpa}{\fs28  Torrey & A. Gray ex Hooker,}{\i\fs28  Hook. Ic.}{\fs28  t. 878 (1852), from W. North America, is also planted. It is like }{\b\fs28 6}{\fs28  but has truncate to subcordate leaf-bases and acutely angled twigs.
\par 
\par Sect. AIGEIROS Duby. Bark on adult trunks furrowed; buds viscid, the terminal present; leaves deltate, ovate or rhombic-ovate, green on both surfaces, with a well-defined translucent margin; bracts glabrous, soon deciduous.
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 7. P}{\fs28 . \'d7}{\b\fs28  berolinensis}{\i\fs28  C. Koch, Wochenschr. G\'e4rtn. Pflanzenk.}{\b\fs28  8:}{\fs28  239 (1865) (}{\i\fs28 P. laurifolia}{\fs28  \'d7}{\i\fs28  nigra}{\fs28  cv. 'Italica'). Columnar tree up to 25 m. Twigs slightly angular, somewhat pubescent, yellowish-brown, later yellowish-grey. Leaves 7-12 \'d7 4-7 cm, ovate or rhombic-ovate, long-acuminate, crenate-serrate. Catkins 4-7 cm. Stamens }{\i\fs28 c}{\fs28 .15. }{\i\fs28 Of garden origin; planted for shelter in C. & E. Europe}{\fs28 .
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 8. P. nigra}{\fs28  L., }{\i\fs28 Sp. Pl}{\fs28 . 1034 (1753) (}{\i\fs28 P. thevestina}{\fs28  Dode). Up to 30 m, with a broad, uneven crown, rarely suckering; trunk usually with large bosses. Twigs terete, first yellowish, later greyish. Leaves not ciliate and without glands at base; those on long shoots 5-10 \'d7 4-8 cm, rhombic-ovate, long-acuminate, minutely crenate-serrate; those on short shoots smaller and broader, often more deltate. Stamens 20-30. Fruiting catkins 10-15 cm. Capsule 2-valved. 2n = 38. }{\i\fs28 Usually beside rivers or lakes. Much of Europe but absent from a large part of the north and rare in the south-west; often planted and sometimes naturalized.}{\fs28  Al Au Br Bu Co Cz Ga Ge Gr Hb Ho Hs Hu It Ju Po Rm Rs (N, C, W, K, E) Sa Si Tu [Az Be Da Lu Rs(B)].
\par 
\par }
\pard \li200\ {\fs28 1 Twigs and leaves glabrous ................................................... (}{\b\fs28 a}{\fs28 ) subsp.}{\b\fs28  nigra}{\fs28 
\par 1 Twigs and leaves hairy
\par 2 Twigs and young leaves pubescent;
\par   leaves of short shoots not caudate ................................ (}{\b\fs28 b}{\fs28 ) subsp.}{\b\fs28  betulifolia}{\fs28 
\par 2 Twigs and young leaves hispid;
\par   leaves of short shoots caudate ........................................... (}{\b\fs28 c}{\fs28 ) subsp.}{\b\fs28  caudina}{\fs28 
\par 
\par }
\pard \ {\fs28  (}{\b\fs28 a}{\fs28 ) Subsp.}{\b\fs28  nigra}{\fs28 : Tree with broad, uneven crown; twigs, leaves and catkin-axis glabrous; leaves of short shoots acute. }{\i\fs28 C. & E. Europe; cultivated elsewhere throughout the range of the species, and sometimes naturalized}{\fs28 .
\par  (}{\b\fs28 b}{\fs28 ) Subsp.}{\b\fs28  betulifolia}{\fs28  (Pursh) W. Wettst.,}{\i\fs28  Schriftenreihe \'d6sterr. Ges. Holzforsch.}{\fs28  5 (1952) (}{\i\fs28 P. betulifolia}{\fs28  Pursh,}{\i\fs28  P. nigra}{\fs28  var. }{\i\fs28 betulifolia}{\fs28  (Pursh) Torrey): Like subsp. (}{\b\fs28 a}{\fs28 ) but twigs, young leaves and catkin-axis pubescent. \bullet }{\i\fs28  W. Europe; sometimes naturalized}{\fs28 .
\par  (}{\b\fs28 c}{\fs28 ) Subsp.}{\b\fs28  caudina}{\fs28  (Ten.) Bug.,}{\i\fs28  Arboret. K\'f3rnickie}{\b\fs28  12:}{\fs28  146 (1967): Like subsp. (}{\b\fs28 a}{\fs28 ) but twigs, leaves and catkin-axis hispid; leaves of short shoots caudate.}{\i\fs28  Mediterranean region}{\fs28 .
\par 
\par Cv. 'Italica' (}{\i\fs28 P. italica}{\fs28  (Duroi) Moench,}{\i\fs28  P. pyramidalis}{\fs28  Rozier) (Lombardy Poplar), is widely planted, often in avenues. It is characterized by a narrow columnar habit (wider in pistillate trees), and somewhat smaller leaves than subsp. (}{\b\fs28 a}{\fs28 ).
\par 
\par Cv. ' Plantierensis ' (}{\i\fs28 P. fastigiata}{\fs28  var.}{\i\fs28  plantierensis}{\fs28  Simon-Louis,}{\i\fs28  P. nigra}{\fs28  var.}{\i\fs28  elegans}{\fs28  Bailey) is like subsp. (}{\b\fs28 a}{\fs28 ) cv. ' Italica ' in habit but differs in the pubescence of twigs, leaves and catkin-axis.}{\i\fs28  Planted as a street tree and along rivers}{\fs28 .
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 9. P}{\fs28 . \'d7}{\b\fs28  canadensis}{\fs28  Moench, }{\i\fs28 Verz. Ausl. B\'e4ume Weissenst. }{\fs28 81 (1785) (}{\i\fs28 P. deltoides}{\fs28  \'d7}{\i\fs28  nigra}{\fs28 , }{\i\fs28 P. bachelieri}{\fs28  Solemacher, }{\i\fs28 P. monilifera}{\fs28  auct., non Aiton,}{\i\fs28  P. regenerata}{\fs28  A. Henry,}{\i\fs28  P. robusta}{\fs28  C.K. Schneider,}{\i\fs28  P. serotina}{\fs28  Hartig,}{\i\fs28  P. marilandica}{\fs28  Bosc ex Poiret, }{\i\fs28 P. virginiana}{\fs28  auct.,}{\i\fs28  P. fremontii}{\fs28  auct. germ.,}{\i\fs28  P. gelrica}{\fs28  (Houtzagers) Houtzagers). Like }{\b\fs28 8}{\fs28 
\par 
\par 65}
\par }