{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 but much quicker-growing; trunk without bosses; twigs almost terete or slightly angled; leaves crenate-serrate, shortly ciliate; stamens 15-25.{\i  Originated probably in France c. 1750; planted almost throughout Europe for shelter and for timber.}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Several clones are known in cultivation, which apparently arose independently in different places; the most important are:
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 (i) cv. ' Serotina ' (var.{\i  serotina} (Hartig) Rehder): Staminate, up to 40 m tall, with broad crown, glabrous twigs and deltate leaves.{\i  The oldest cultivar; extensively planted in W. & C. Europe}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 (ii) cv. ' Serotina de Selys ': Like (i) but fastigiate.{\i  Arose in Belgium before 1818}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 (iii) cv. 'Regenerata' (var.{\i  regenerata} (A. Henry) Rehder): Pistillate, very similar to (i) but coming into leaf 2 weeks earlier.{\i  Arose in France c. 1814; extensively planted in C. Europe.}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 (iv) cv. ' Marilandica ' (var. {\i marilandica} (Bosc ex Poiret) Rehder): Pistillate, differing from (i) in its more spreading branches; leaves rhombic-ovate, coming into leaf earlier.{\i  Much cultivated in C. Europe}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 (v) cv. ' Gelrica ': Staminate, very quick-growing tree with reddish shoots, coming into leaf between (i) and (iv). {\i Extensively planted in C. Europe and the Netherlands}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 (vi) cv. ' Italia 214 ': Pistillate, with erecto-patent branches; young shoots red, glabrous; leaves large, deltate.{\i  Extensively planted in S. Europe}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 (vii) cv. 'Robusta' ({\i P}. × {\i robusta} C.K. Schneider): Like (i) but with pubescent twigs and petioles.{\i  Extensively planted in C. & N.W. Europe}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 (viii) cv. 'Campeador': Pistillate, with broad, obovoid crown; twigs glabrous, light brown; leaves large, caudate-deltate.{\i  Extensively planted in Spain and Portugal}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 A closely related species,{\b  P. monilifera} Aiton,{\i  Hort. Kew.}{\b  3:} 406 (1789) ({\i P. canadensis }Michx fil., non Moench,{\i  P. deltoides }var.{\i  monilifera} (Aiton) A. Henry), from Canada and N.E. United States, is like {\b 9} but twigs slightly angled or almost terete, leaves 7-12 cm, broadly ovate, wider than long, cuspidate, shallowly cordate at base, and thinner. It is very rarely cultivated in Europe, though its name is commonly applied erroneously to both {\b 9} and {\b 10}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 10. P. deltoides} Marshall,{\i  Arbust. Amer.} 106 (1785) ({\i P. angulata }Aiton,{\i  P. canadensis} auct., non Moench,{\i  P. carolinensis} Moench{\i  P. deltoides} var.{\i  missouriensis} (A. Henry) A. Henry,{\i  P. monilifera} auct., non Aiton). A quick-growing tree up. to 30 m, with erecto-patent branches forming a broad crown. Twigs often strongly angled, first greenish, later greyish-brown. Leaves 10-18 cm deltate-ovate to ovate but longer than wide, acute, usually truncate at base, firm, densely ciliate, crenately glandular-serrate. Stamens 30-60. Fruiting catkins 15-20 cm. Capsule 3- or 4-valved. {\i Planted for timber and along roadsides, and naturalized in several places}. [Au Az Be Br Bu Ga Ge Ho Hs Hu It Ju Lu.] ({\i S.E. United States}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Sect. TURANGA Bunge. Terminal bud absent; leaves very variable; stamens 8-12; pistillate flowers with a laciniate disc.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 11. P. euphratica} Olivier, {\i Voy. Emp. Othoman} ed. min.,{\b  6:} 319 (1807) ({\i P. illicitana} Dode). Up to 15 m, with slender branches. Bark greyish. Leaves leathery, glabrous, glaucous-green, entire or coarsely dentate, more or less dimorphic, the ' juvenile' linear to linear-lanceolate, the 'adult' deltate-rhombic to reniform. Female flowers with long pedicels, in very lax catkins. Capsule 2- or 3-valved.{\i  Saline soils. Naturalized in S.E. Spain} ({\i near Elche, Alicante prov.}). [Hs.] ({\i N. Africa; S.W. & C. Asia}.)
\par

\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs36\qc MYRICALES
\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 32.            MYRICACEAE}
\par       

\pard\f0\fs24\qc  Edit. N.A. Burges.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Usually dioecious shrubs or small trees. Flowers in catkins, solitary in the axils of bracts. Male flowers usually without bracteoles; stamens 2-16. Female flowers with 2 or more bracteoles; ovary superior, 1-celled; style short.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 1.               Myrica}               L.
\par          

\pard\f0\fs24\qc  By N.A. Burges.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Leaves alternate, simple, often gland-dotted, with strong aromatic scent. Fruit a drupe or nut.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 The only genus.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Catkins borne on leafless upper part of stems, below which the 
\par
  current year's growth occurs ................................................................. {\b 1. gale}
\par
1 Catkins borne among the leaves or in the axils of fallen leaves
\par
2 Evergreen; leaves oblanceolate; catkins branched ............................... {\b 2. faya}
\par
2 Deciduous; leaves elliptical to obovate; catkins unbranched . {\b 3. caroliniensis}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. M. gale} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 1024 (1753). Usually dioecious, but plants may change sex from year to year. Deciduous shrub up to 2·5 m. Twigs with scattered, yellowish glands. Leaves 2-6 cm, oblanceolate, cuneate at base, more or less serrate near apex, pubescent beneath, with shining, yellow, fragrant glands on both surfaces. Catkins unbranched, borne on leafless branches of upper part of stems which subsequently die. Fruit dry, compressed. 2n = 48.{\i  Bogs and fens. N.W. Europe, extending to S. Portugal, Poland and N.W. Russia}. Be Br Da Fe Ga Ge Hb Ho Hs Lu No Po Rs(N, B) Su.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. M. faya} Aiton,{\i  Hort. Kew.}{\b  3:} 397 (1789). Evergreen shrub or small tree up to 8 m. Twigs with small, ferruginous, peltate hairs. Leaves 4-11 cm, oblanceolate, cuneate at base, entire, with revolute margins, glabrous, without conspicuous glands. Catkins axillary on the leafy part of the stem, more or less branched. Fruit a drupe, but only slightly fleshy.{\i  Açores; naturalized in W. Portugal.} Az [Lu]. ({\i Madeira, Islas Canarias}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 3. M. caroliniensis} Miller,{\i  Gard. Dict}. ed. 8, no. 3 (1768) ({\i M. pennsylvanica} Loisel.). Deciduous shrub up to 3 m. Twigs grey-pubescent and glandular. Leaves 3-10 cm, elliptical to obovate,
\par

\par
66}
\par