{\rtf1\ansi \deff4\deflang1033{\fonttbl{\f4\froman\fcharset0\fprq2 Times New Roman;}}{\colortbl;\red0\green0\blue0;\red0\green0\blue255;\red0\green255\blue255;\red0\green255\blue0;\red255\green0\blue255;\red255\green0\blue0;\red255\green255\blue0;\red255\green255\blue255;\red0\green0\blue128;\red0\green128\blue128;\red0\green128\blue0;\red128\green0\blue128;\red128\green0\blue0;\red128\green128\blue0;\red128\green128\blue128;\red192\green192\blue192;}{\stylesheet{\widctlpar \f4\fs20\lang2057 \snext0 Normal;}{\*\cs10 \additive Default Paragraph Font;}}{\info{\author dddd}{\operator dddd}{\creatim\yr1998\mo11\dy11\hr16\min8}{\revtim\yr1998\mo11\dy11\hr16\min9}{\version2}{\edmins1}{\nofpages3}{\nofwords845}{\nofchars4820}{\*\company  }{\vern57431}}\widowctrl\ftnbj\aenddoc\hyphcaps0 \fet0\sectd \linex0 {\*\pnseclvl1\pnucrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl2\pnucltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl3\pndec\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl4\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl5\pndec\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl6\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl7\pnlcrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl8\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl9\pnlcrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}
\pard\plain \ \f4\fs20\lang2057 {\fs24 
\par }{\fs28 cuneate at base, usually crenate-dentate towards apex, pubescent and with shining, yellow glands on both surfaces. Catkins in the axils of leaves that have fallen, unbranched. Fruit a subglobose drupe.}{\i\fs28  Naturalized in S. England and the Netherlands}{\fs28 . [Br Ho.] (}{\i\fs28 E. North America}{\fs28 .)
\par 
\par 
\par }
\pard \qc\ {\fs36 JUGLANDALES
\par 
\par }{\fs28  }{\b\fs28 33.          JUGLANDACEAE}{\fs28 
\par          }{\fs24  Edit. D.M. Moore.
\par 
\par }
\pard \ {\fs28 Monoecious; deciduous trees with alternate, imparipinnate leaves. Male flowers in catkins borne on twigs of the previous year; perianth present or absent; stamens 3-40. Female flowers usually few, borne on twigs of the current year; perianth 3- to 5-lobed. Ovary inferior, unilocular or incompletely 2- or 4-celled; ovule 1. Fruit a drupe or nut.
\par 
\par }
\pard \li200\ {\fs28 1 Twigs with continuous pith; catkins 3 or more together;
\par   perianth of male flowers absent or very small ................................... }{\b\fs28 2. Carya}{\fs28 
\par 1 Twigs with septate pith; catkins solitary; perianth of male
\par   flowers present
\par 2 Buds sessile, with scales; leaves aromatic;
\par   fruit a large drupe ............................................................................ }{\b\fs28 1. Juglans}{\fs28 
\par 2 Buds stipitate, usually naked; leaves not aromatic;
\par    fruit a winged nut ...................................................................... }{\b\fs28 3. Pterocarya}{\fs28 
\par 
\par }
\pard \qc\ {\fs28  }{\b\fs28 1.              Juglans}{\fs28                 L.
\par    }{\fs24  By  †T.G. Tutin.
\par 
\par }
\pard \ {\fs28 Twigs with septate pith. Buds with scales, sessile. Leaves aromatic. Male catkins solitary, many-flowered, pendent. Female flowers in few-flowered terminal racemes. Fruit a large drupe; mesocarp indehiscent.
\par 
\par }
\pard \li200\ {\fs28 1 Leaflets usually 7-9, almost entire ...................................................... }{\b\fs28 1. regia}{\fs28 
\par 1 Leaflets usually 11-23, serrate
\par 2 Leaf-scars without a prominent pubescent band on their upper edge;
\par   fruit finely pubescent; stone 4-celled at base ...................................... }{\b\fs28 2. nigra}{\fs28 
\par 2 Leaf-scars with a prominent pubescent band on their upper edge;
\par   fruit viscid and pubescent; stone 2-celled at base ............................ }{\b\fs28 3. cinerea}{\fs28 
\par 
\par }
\pard \ {\fs28    }{\b\fs28 1. J. regia}{\fs28  L., }{\i\fs28 Sp. Pl.}{\fs28  997 (1753). Tree up to 30 m; bark grey, smooth, eventually becoming fissured but not scaling. Leaflets 7-9, 6-15 cm, obovate or elliptical, acute or acuminate, glabrescent. Male catkins 5-15 cm. Fruit 4-5 cm, subglobose, green, gland-dotted, glabrous; stone ovoid, acute, wrinkled, easily splitting.}{\i\fs28  Possibly native in Greece and elsewhere in the Balkan peninsula, widely cultivated for its fruits (Walnuts) and timber and locally naturalized in S. & W. Europe.}{\fs28  Al *Au Bu Cr Gr *It Ju Rm *Si [Br Co Ga He Hs Hu Lu Rs(W, K, E) Sa ?Tu].
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 2. J. nigra}{\fs28  L.,}{\i\fs28  Sp. Pl.}{\fs28  997 (1753). Tree up to 50 m; bark brown, fissured. Leaf-scars without a prominent pubescent band on their upper edge. Leaflets 15-23, 6-12 cm, ovate-oblong to ovate-lanceolate, acuminate, irregularly serrate, glabrescent above, pubescent and glandular beneath. Male catkins 5-15 cm. Fruit 3\'b75-5 cm, globose or slightly obovoid, pubescent; stone ovoid, acute, strongly ridged, not splitting.}{\i\fs28  Extensively planted for timber in parts of C. & E. Europe}{\fs28 . [Au Cz Da Ge It Rm.] (}{\b\fs28 E. North America}{\fs28 .)
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 3. J. cinerea}{\fs28  L., }{\i\fs28 Syst. Nat.}{\fs28  ed. 10,}{\b\fs28  2:}{\fs28  1272 (1759). Tree up to 30 m; bark grey, deeply fissured. Leaf-scars with a prominent pubescent band on their upper edge. Leaflets 11-19, 6-12 cm, oblong-lanceolate, acuminate, appressed-serrate, finely pubescent above, pubescent and glandular beneath. Male catkins 5-8 cm. Fruit 4-6\'b75 cm, ovoid-oblong, pubescent, viscid; stone ovoid-oblong with 4 prominent and 4 less-prominent, sharp ridges and many broken ridges between them, not splitting.}{\i\fs28  Occasionally planted for timber.}{\fs28  [Da Rm.] (}{\i\fs28 E. North America}{\fs28 .)
\par 
\par }
\pard \qc\ {\fs28  }{\b\fs28 2.             Carya}{\fs28               Nutt.
\par           }{\fs24  By  †T.G. Tutin.
\par 
\par }
\pard \ {\fs28 Twigs with continuous pith. Buds with scales, sessile. Leaves not aromatic. Male catkins 3 or more together, many-flowered, pendent. Female flowers in 2- to 10-flowered terminal racemes. Fruit a large drupe; mesocarp dehiscing more or less completely into 4 valves.
\par 
\par }
\pard \li200\ {\fs28 1 Bud-scales 4-6, valvate, bright yellow;
\par   fruit 4-winged in upper half ..................................................... }{\b\fs28 1. cordiformis}{\fs28 
\par 1 Bud-scales 6-12, imbricate, not bright yellow; fruit unwinged 
\par   or slightly winged near apex
\par 2 Bark not scaling; buds 8-12 mm; fruit slightly winged near apex ...}{\b\fs28 2. glabra}{\fs28 
\par 2 Bark scaling; buds 13-25 mm; fruit unwinged ................................. }{\b\fs28 3. ovata}{\fs28 
\par 
\par }
\pard \ {\fs28    }{\b\fs28 1. C. cordiformis}{\fs28  (Wangenh.) C. Koch,}{\i\fs28  Dendrologie}{\b\fs28  1:}{\fs28  597 (1869) (}{\i\fs28 C. amara}{\fs28  (Michx fil.) Nutt.). Tree up to 30 m; bark light brown, scaly. Bud-scales 4-6, valvate, bright yellow. Leaflets 5-9, 8-15 cm, ovate-lanceolate to lanceolate, acuminate, serrate, pubescent beneath when young. Fruit 2-3\'b75 cm, obovoid to subglobose, 4-winged in upper \'bd; pericarp thin, splitting to below the middle; stone grey, almost smooth.}{\i\fs28  Planted for timber in Germany}{\fs28 . [Ge.] (}{\i\fs28 E. North America}{\fs28 .)
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 2. C. glabra}{\fs28  (Miller) Sweet,}{\i\fs28  Hort. Brit.}{\fs28  97 (1826) (}{\i\fs28 C. porcina}{\fs28  (Michx fil.) Nutt.). Tree up to 40 m; bark grey, fissured, not scaly. Buds 8-12 mm; scales more than 6, imbricate, not yellow. Leaflets usually 5, 8-15 cm, oblong to oblong-lanceolate, acuminate, serrate, almost glabrous. Fruit c. 2\'b75 \'d7 2 cm, usually obovoid, slightly winged near apex; pericarp usually splitting to the middle only; stone pale brown, nearly smooth.}{\i\fs28  Planted for timber in Germany.}{\fs28  [Ge.] (}{\i\fs28 E. North America.}{\fs28 )
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 3. C. ovata}{\fs28  (Miller) C. Koch, }{\i\fs28 Dendrologie}{\fs28  }{\b\fs28 1:}{\fs28  598 (1869) (}{\i\fs28 C. alba}{\fs28  (L.) Nutt.). Tree up to 40 m; bark grey, splitting into long scales. Twigs light reddish-brown, glabrescent. Buds 13-25 mm; scales 10-12, imbricate, dark; inner scales becoming 6-8 \'d7 2\'b75-4 cm, yellowish or purplish when the buds open. Leaflets 5-7, 10-20 cm, the 3 upper much larger than the lower, all elliptical to oblong-lanceolate, acuminate, serrate, densely ciliate, pubescent and glandular beneath when young, later glabrous or subglabrous.
\par 
\par 67}
\par }