{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Fruit 3·5-6 cm, subglobose to broadly ovoid, not winged; pericarp splitting to base; stone white, slightly angled.{\i  Planted for timber in C. Europe}. [Cz Ge Rm.] ({\i E. North America}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b C. tomentosa} (Poiret) Nutt., {\i Gen. N. Amer. Pl.}{\b  2:} 221 (1818) and{\b  C. laciniosa} (Michx fil.) Loudon,{\i  Hort. Brit.}{\b  1:} 384 (1830), from E. North America, have been planted on an experimental scale in Germany. They are like{\b  3} in having large buds and angled stones, but in {\i C. tomentosa} the bark is not scaly and the twigs are tomentose for most of the summer, while {\i C. laciniosa} has pale orange twigs and 7-9 leaflets.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 3.                 Pterocarya}              Kunth
\par        

\pard\f0\fs24\qc  By †T.G. Tutin.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Twigs with septate pith. Buds naked, stipitate. Leaves not aromatic. Male catkins solitary, many-flowered, pendent. Female flowers numerous, in pendent catkins. Fruit a winged nut.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. P. fraxinifolia} (Poiret) Spach,{\i  Hist. Vég.} ({\i Phan.}) {\b 2:} 180 (1834). Tree up to 30 m, freely suckering, with deeply fissured bark. Leaflets 11-20 pairs, sharply serrate. Fruit with semi-orbicular wings.{\i  Widely planted, though never on a large scale}. ({\i S.W. Asia}.)
\par

\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs36\qc FAGALES
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 34.         BETULACEAE}
\par            

\pard\f0\fs24\qc Edit. S.M. Walters.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Monoecious; deciduous trees or shrubs. Leaves alternate, simple. Stipules caducous. Male flowers 3 in the axil of each bract, in pendent catkins; perianth present. Female flowers 2 or 3 in the axil of each bract, in erect catkins; perianth absent; ovary bilocular; styles 2. Fruit a flattened nutlet, usually winged, borne in a dense, cylindrical or cone-like catkin of scales formed from the accrescent, fused bracts and bracteoles.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 Fruiting catkin cylindrical or narrowly ovoid; scales 3-lobed, 
\par
  falling with the fruit; stamens 2, bifid below the anthers .................. {\b 1. Betula}
\par
Fruiting catkin ovoid, cone-like; scales 5-lobed, woody and persistent;
\par
  stamens 4, entire (but with shortly forked connective) ...................... {\b 2. Alnus}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 1.            Betula}               L.
\par         

\pard\f0\fs24\qc  By S.M. Walters.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Catkins with 2 bracteoles to each group of flowers in the axil of a bract. Male flowers with 2 stamens, bifid from below the anthers; perianth minute. Female flowers 3 to each bract. Fruiting catkins cylindrical or narrowly ovoid; scales 3-lobed, falling with fruit.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 The taxonomy of European{\i  Betula} is much disputed, and the following treatment does no more than provide a basic framework. For more detailed study the bibliography provided by Natho is very useful.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Several other species are grown for ornament, especially{\b  B. papyrifera} Marshall,{\i  Arbust. Amer. }19 (1785), from North America, a tree up to 30 m with ovate, subglabrous leaves 4-10 cm, and{\b  B. utilis} D. Don,{\i  Prodr. Fl. Nepal.} 58 (1825) ({\i B. jacquemontii} Spach), from E. Asia, a tree up to 20 m, often with very white, peeling bark, and ovate, hairy leaves 4-12 cm.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Literature: P. Ascherson & K.O. P.P. Graebner,{\i  Syn. Mitteleer. Fl.}{\b  4:} 386-412 (1910). K.B. Ashburner & S.M. Walters in S.M. Walters et al., eds.,{\i  Eur. Garden Fl.}{\b  3:} 49-55 (1989). G. Natho, {\i Feddes Repert.}{\b  61:} 211-273 (1959). K.H. Rechinger in Hegi,{\i  Ill. Fl. Mitteleur}. ed. 2,{\b  3}({\b 1}): 141-173 (1957). H. Winkler in Engler,{\i  Pflanzenreich}{\b  19}({\b IV. 61}): 56-101 (1904).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Trees or large shrubs, usually more than 3 m; young male catkins 
\par
  in winter pendent and unprotected
\par
2 Young twigs glabrous, with numerous peltate resin glands; 
\par
  leaves usually sharply biserrate with prominent primary teeth; 
\par
  nutlet glabrous ................................................................................. {\b 1. pendula}
\par
2 Young twigs usually without resin-glands, often hairy; 
\par
  leaves irregularly serrate, without prominent primary teeth;
\par
  nutlet puberulent at apex ............................................................. {\b 2. pubescens}
\par
1 Small shrubs not more than 3 m; young male catkins in winter 
\par
  erect, protected by bud-scales
\par
3 Leaves longer than broad, acute or subacute .................................. {\b 3. humilis}
\par
3 Leaves ± orbicular, obtuse or truncate ................................................ {\b 4. nana}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. B. pendula} Roth, {\i Tent. Fl. Germ.}{\b  1:} 405 (1788) ({\i B. alba} sensu Coste, non L.,{\i  B. verrucosa} Ehrh.; incl.{\i  B. aetnensis} Rafin.). Tree up to 30 m; bark smooth and silvery-white except towards the base, where it is usually dark and more or less dissected into rectangular bosses. Young twigs glabrous, with numerous appressed, peltate resin-glands; twigs usually very slender and pendent. Leaves 2-7 cm, ovate-deltate, acuminate, sharply biserrate with prominent primary teeth, subglabrous when mature, thin. Male catkins 3-6 cm. Fruiting catkin 1·5-3·5 × 1 cm; scales with cuneate base, and with wide, more or less recurved lateral lobes and a deltate, obtuse median lobe. wing of fruit 2-3 times as wide as the narrowly ovoid glabrous nutlet. 2n = 28.{\i  Mainly on sandy or peaty soils. Most of Europe, but rare in much of the south}. All except Az Bl Cr Fa Is Sa Sb ?Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Rather variable, especially in leaf-shape and habit. Lindquist ({\i Svensk Bot. Tidskr}{\b . 41:} 62 (1947)) distinguishes from the typical plant a northern var.{\i  lapponica} with smooth bark (even in old trees), less pendent twigs and somewhat larger scales and fruits, which may merit subspecific distinction.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b B. oycoviensis} Besser,{\i  Prim. Fl. Galic.}{\b  2:} 289 (1809), described from S.E. Poland, resembles {\b 1} and has the same chromosome number, but is of shrubby habit, has 3 or 4 (not about 2) leaves on the flowering twigs, and leaves with almost equal teeth. Other shrubby variants have been described from Scandinavia and elsewhere; some at least seem to be of hybrid origin (see{\b  2}).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. B. pubescens} Ehrh.,{\i  Beitr. Naturk.}{\b  6:} 98 (1791). Like{\b  1} but small tree or shrub 1-20 m; bark brownish or greyish, not dissected into rectangular bosses; young twigs without resin-glands, not or only slightly pendent; leaves coarsely serrate, usually pubescent at
\par

\par
68}
\par