{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 least in axils of veins beneath; scales with slightly ascending lateral lobes and narrowly oblong or triangular-lanceolate median lobe; fruit with wing 1-1½ times as wide as the ovoid nutlet; apex of nutlet minutely puberulent.{\i  Mainly on peaty soils of moorland and mountains. Most of Europe, but rare in the Mediterranean region and the south-east.} Au Be Br Cz Da Fe Ga Ge Hb He Ho Hs Hu Is It Ju Lu No Po Rm Rs(N, B, C, W, E) Su.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Extremely variable. The following subspecies have often been treated as species.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Young twigs glabrous or subglabrous ......................... ({\b c}) subsp.{\b  carpatica}
\par
1 Young twigs distinctly puberulent or glandular
\par
2 Shrub up to 12 m; wing of fruit about as wide 
\par
  as nutlet .......................................................................... ({\b d}) subsp.{\b  tortuosa}
\par
2 Tree or tall shrub more than 5 m; wing of fruit 1-1½ 
\par
  times as wide as nutlet
\par
3 Young twigs puberulent, not glandular ..................... ({\b a}) subsp.{\b  pubescens}
\par
3 Young twigs glabrous or puberulent, glandular .........({\b b}) subsp. {\b celtiberica}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp.{\b  pubescens} ({\i B. concinna} Gunnarsson,{\i  B. pubescens }subsp.{\i  suecica} Gunnarsson,{\i  ?B. subarctica} Orlova): Tree or tall shrub, usually more than 5 m. Young twigs distinctly puberulent. Leaves 3-5 cm. wing of fruit 1-1½ times as wide as the nutlet. 2n = 56.{\i  Usually lowland; northwards to c.} 70°{\i  N. in Finland and N. Russia}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp.{\b  celtiberica} (Rothm. & Vasc.) Rivas Martínez,{\i  Trab. Dep. Bot. Fisiol. Veg. }{\b 3:} 78 (1971) ({\i B. celtiberica} Rothm. & Vasc.): Small tree or tall shrub up to 10 m. Young twigs glabrous or puberulent, glandular. Leaves 3-5 cm. wing of fruit c. 1½ times as wide as the nutlet. 2n = 56. •{\i  Mountains of N. & C. Spain and N. Portugal}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b c}) Subsp.{\b  carpatica }(Willd.) Ascherson & Graebner,{\i  Fl. Nordostd. Flachl.} 253 (1898) ({\i B. carpatica} Waldst. & Kit. ex Willd., {\i B. pubescens} subsp.{\i  odorata} (Bechst.) E.F. Warburg; incl.{\i  B. odorata} Bechst., {\i B. coriacea} Gunnarsson, {\i B. murithii} Gaudin): Small tree or shrub up to 8 m. Young twigs and leaves glabrescent. Leaves often less than 3 cm. wing of fruit about as wide as the nutlet. 2n = 56.{\i  Arctic Europe, and southwards, mainly in the mountains, to the Pyrenees and Carpathians}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b d}) Subsp.{\b  tortuosa} (Ledeb.) Nyman, {\i Consp.} 672 (1881) ({\i B. tortuosa} Ledeb.; incl.{\i  B. kusmisscheffi }(Regel) Suk.): Shrub up to 12 m, with many interlacing branches. Young twigs and leaves distinctly puberulent. Leaves less than 3 cm. wing of fruit about as wide as the nutlet. 2n = 56.{\i  Arctic Europe; mountains of Scandinavia; Iceland}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Plants intermediate between subsp. ({\b b}) and{\b  1} occur in the W. Pyrenees.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b B. borysthenica} Klokov, {\i Jour. Bot. Acad. Sci. Ukr. }{\b 3:}17 (1946), seems to fall within subsp. ({\b c}). It grows on alluvial river-sand in C. Ukraine and S.E. Russia.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Plants very similar to those of subsp. ({\b d}) from the Arctic occur in Scotland and in the Alps, but require further investigation.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Hybrids between {\b 1} and {\b 2} ({\i B}. × {\i  aurata} Borkh.) have been recorded frequently, but cytotaxonomic investigation has shown that the first-generation triploid hybrid, which is highly sterile, occurs rarely, and that most of the putative hybrids have the chromosome number of the tetraploid species. It seems likely that such plants are the complex products of hybridization; they are particularly common in regions such as Britain where most natural forest has been destroyed.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b B. obscura} A. Kotula,{\i  Jahresb. Schles. Ges. Vaterl. Kult}{\b . 65:} 314 (1888) ({\i B. atrata} Domin), from Poland, Czechoslovakia and W. Ukraine, is probably of such hybrid origin, resembling {\b 1} in most characters except the dark-coloured bark.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b B. callosa} Noto, {\i Tromso Mus. Aarshefter}{\b  24:} 23 (1901), described originally from Norway, and reported from other parts of Fennoscandia and Iceland, differs from {\b 2} principally in its ovoid, subsessile female catkins (cylindrical and pedunculate in {\b 2}) and the long, narrow lobes of the catkin-scales. Its relationships are not clear.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 3. B. humilis} Schrank,{\i  Baier. Fl.}{\b  1:} 421 (1789). Small, much-branched shrub, rarely more than 2 m; twigs and leaves variably puberulent, sometimes subglabrous. Leaves 1-3 × 0·5-2·5 cm, ovate or ovate-orbicular, acute or subacute at apex, rather thick in texture; margin coarsely serrate or crenate. Fruiting catkin 8-15 mm, erect; scales with 3 subequal lobes, the 2 lateral ascending and often slightly shorter than the median lobe; wing of fruit narrow, 1/3-1/2 as wide as the nutlet. 2n = 28.{\i  Bogs and fens. C. & E. Europe, from N. Germany and N. Russia to N.E. Switzerland and C. Romania.} Au †Cz Ge He Po Rm Rs(N, B, C, W, E).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 4. B. nana} L.,{\i  Sp. Pl. }953 (1753). Dwarf shrub rarely more than 1 m, with spreading or procumbent branches; twigs pubescent; mature leaves glabrous. Leaves 5-15 mm, more or less orbicular, deeply crenate, thick in texture. Fruiting catkin 5-10 mm, erect; scales with 3 equal, erect lobes at apex; wing of fruit very narrow, c. 1/6-1/4 as wide as the nutlet. 2n = 28.{\i  Moorland and bogs. N. & C. Europe, from the arctic southwards to S.C. France, E. Carpathians and C. Russia; local and mainly on mountains in the southern part of its range}. Au Br Cz Fe Ga Ge He Is †It No Po Rm Rs(N, B, C) Sb Su.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Hybrids of{\b  3} and{\b  4} inter se and with{\b  1} and{\b  2} are all recorded.{\b  B. sukaczewii} Soczava,{\i  Oc. Fitosoc. Fitogeog.} 393 (1929), described from N. Ural, is apparently{\b  4} × {\b 2}({\b c}).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 2.             Alnus}                 Miller
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc  By P.W. Ball.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Catkins with 2 bracteoles to each group of flowers in the axil of each bract. Male flowers with 4 stamens and 4(5)-partite perianth; anther-lobes somewhat separated by the shortly forked connective. Female flowers 2 in axil of each bract. Fruiting catkin cone-like, ovoid or ellipsoidal, the scales 5-lobed, thick and woody, long-persistent.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Buds sessile; catkins appearing with the leaves, in inflorescences 
\par
  with 2 or 3 leaves at base ................................................................... {\b 1. viridis}
\par
1 Buds short-stalked; catkins appearing before the leaves, 
\par
  without leaves at the base of the inflorescence
\par
2 Inflorescence with 1-3 female catkins; leaves crenate-dentate ....... {\b 5. cordata}
\par
2 Inflorescence with 3-8 female catkins; leaves serrate or laciniate
\par
3 Leaves serrulate, with reddish-brown hairs especially in
\par
  axils of veins ..................................................................................... {\b 3. rugosa}
\par
3 Leaves distinctly biserrate, glabrous or with yellow or grey hairs
\par
4 Leaves obtuse or retuse; young twigs viscid; bark dark brown,
\par
  fissured; female catkins distinctly pedunculate ............................ {\b 2. glutinosa}
\par
4 Leaves acuminate to subacute; young twigs not viscid;
\par

\par
69}
\par