{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 microspores spinose, narrowly winged.{\i  Schistose soil of lake margin.• C. Greece (S. end of Pindhos range, near Palaiokastron).} Gr.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   {\b 7. I. malinverniana} Cesati & De Not.,{\i  Ind. Sem. Horti Genuensis}{\b  1858:} 36 (1858). Aquatic; stem 3-lobed. Leaves 30-100 cm, numerous, subulate at apex; stomata absent or few; base with wide membranous margin extending up leaf for 6 its length; ligule triangular. Sporangium without velum; megaspores 540-610 µm. with large, cylindrical or conical tubercles, the ridges prominent; microspores minutely scabrid. 2n = 44.{\i  Rapidly flowing water of irrigation channels. • N.W. Italy; local.} It.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b 8. I. longissima} Bory,{\i  Compt. Rend. Acad.} ({\i Paris}) {\b 18:} 1165 (1844) ({\i I. velata} subsp.{\i  longissima} (Bory) Greuter & Burdet). Aquatic; stem 3-lobed. Leaves 40-80 cm, flaccid, green; membranous margin at base extending 3-4 cm above sporangium. Sporangium almost or completely covered by velum; megaspores 580-650 µm. with large and small tubercles; microspores spinulose. 2n = 44.{\i  Rapidly flowing water. N.W. Spain} ({\i Galicia}). Hs.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   {\b 9. I. velata} A. Braun in Bory & Durieu, {\i Expl. Sci. Algér. Bot.}{\b  1:} 19, t. 37, f. 1 (1850) ({\i I. variabilis} Legrand,{\i  I. dubia} Genn.). Amphibious; stem 3-lobed. Leaves 5-40(-60) cm, erect, firm, tapering to apex; membranous margin at base usually at least 1 mm wide, extending up leaf for 1/4-1/3 its length; leaf-bases usually persisting, forming a ' bulb ' of brown, papery scales; ligule triangular-ovate. Sporangium usually almost or completely covered by velum; megaspores 300-480 µm. with scattered large and small tubercles, which sometimes fuse to form a more or less prominent wart on each of the upper faces; microspores reddish-brown, scabrid or with short spines.{\i  Shallow lake-margins and seasonal pools. W. Mediterranean region; Portugal}. Bl Co Ga Hs It Lu Sa Si.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 A very variable species in which a number of subspecies can be recognized.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Megaspores with few, often indistinct, tubercles ........ ({\b b}) subsp.{\b  asturicense}
\par
1 Megaspores distinctly tuberculate (although tubercles scattered)
\par
2 Basal margin of leaf less than 1 mm wide (leaves very slender);
\par
  sporangium about 2/3 covered by velum ....................... ({\b c}) subsp.{\b  tegulensis}
\par
2 Basal margin of leaf at least 1 mm wide; sporangium almost or
\par
   completely covered by velum
\par
3 Leaves often more than 18 cm, ± robust; 
\par
  megaspores more than 380 µm ............................................. ({\b a}) subsp.{\b  velata}
\par
3 Leaves up to 18 cm, slender; megaspores c. 300 µm ... ({\b d}) subsp.{\b  tenuissima}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b velata }({\i I. baetica }Willk.): Leaves 5-30 cm, yellowish-green. Sporangium almost or completely covered by velum; megaspores 380-480 µm. tuberculate. 2n = 22.{\i  Throughout the range of the species}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b asturicense} (Laínz) Rivas Martínez & Prada, {\i Lazaroa}{\b  2:} 237 (1980): Leaves 7-15 cm, green; stomata few. Sporangium almost or completely covered by velum; megaspores 325-410 µm. 2n = 22. •{\i  N.W. Spain}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28 ({\b c}) Subsp. {\b tegulensis} Batt. & Trabut,{\i  Fl. Algér. Tunisie} 407 (1905) ({\i I. tegulensis} Genn., nom. illeg., {\i I. tiguliana} Genn.): Leaves 5-30 cm, very slender, green; basal margin less than 1 mm wide. Sporangium about 2/3 covered by velum; megaspores 400-440 µm. {\i Sardegna; Sicilia}. ({\i N. Africa.})
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b d}) Subsp.{\b  tenuissima} (Boreau) O. Bolòs & Vigo,{\i  Butll. Inst. Catalana Hist. Nat. }{\b 38:} 64 (1974) ({\i I. tenuissima} Boreau, {\i I. viollaei} Hy): Leaves 5-18 cm, slender, green. Sporangium almost or completely covered by velum; megaspores c. 300 µm. • {\i S. France}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   {\b 10. I. histrix} Bory, {\i Compt. Rend. Acad.} ({\i Paris}) {\b 18:} 1167 (1844) ({\i I. delalandei} Lloyd,{\i  I. phrygia} Hausskn.; incl.{\i  I. chaetureti} Mendes). Terrestrial; stem 3-lobed. Leaves 5-20 cm × 0·5-1 mm, more or less flat, linear; stomata numerous; membranous margin wide at base, narrowing abruptly just above sporangium but continuing up the leaf for 1-2 cm; leaf-bases persistent over several years as black, shiny, horny scales with central, short, broad lobe and 2 longer, lateral, often spine-like lobes. Sporangium completely covered by velum; megaspores 360-560 µm. with small tubercles which often become confluent, especially on the basal surface; microspores brown, spinulose-fibrillose. 2n = 20.{\i  Sandy places, where water lies in winter. Mediterranean region and W. Europe, northwards to }50°{\i  N. in S.W. England.} Br Co Cr Ga Gr Hs It Ju Lu Sa Si.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   {\b 11. I. duriei} Bory, {\i op. cit.} 1166 (1844). Like {\b 11} but the leaves 8-15 cm, firm, often recurved; megaspores 600-800 µm. reticulate with prominent ridges; microspores minutely papillose.{\i  In similar, but often damper, habitats to} {\b 10}.{\i  Mediterranean region} ({\i mainly in the west});{\i  Portugal}. Bl Co Ga Gr Hs It Lu Sa Si.
\par

\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs36\qc {\b   SPHENOPSIDA}
\par

\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b   5.           EQUISETACEAE }
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc Edit. †D.H. Valentine & D.M. Moore.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Rhizomes subterranean, far-creeping. Stems grooved and regularly jointed. Leaves in whorls, united at the base into a sheath. Homosporous; cones composed of sporangiophores; sporangia borne beneath the peltate heads of the sporangiophores; spores spherical with 4 elaters, green. Prothallus green.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 1.               Equisetum}                L.
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc By †T.G. Tutin.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Stems erect, usually with a hollow in the centre surrounded by 2 rings of alternating smaller cavities. Free portions of leaves small, scarious. Cones borne at the ends of the main stems and rarely of the branches also. (Incl.{\i  Hippochaete} Milde.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 The only genus. Several hybrids are widespread and sometimes locally common, and can occur in the absence of one or both parents.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Cones on pale brown stems, appearing before green stems
\par
2 Sheaths with 20-30 teeth; cone 4-8 cm ...................................... {\b 10. telmateia}
\par
2 Sheaths with 6-12 teeth; cone 1-4 cm ............................................. {\b 9. arvense}
\par

\par
7}
\par