{\rtf1\ansi \deff4\deflang1033{\fonttbl{\f4\froman\fcharset0\fprq2 Times New Roman;}}{\colortbl;\red0\green0\blue0;\red0\green0\blue255;\red0\green255\blue255;\red0\green255\blue0;\red255\green0\blue255;\red255\green0\blue0;\red255\green255\blue0;\red255\green255\blue255;\red0\green0\blue128;\red0\green128\blue128;\red0\green128\blue0;\red128\green0\blue128;\red128\green0\blue0;\red128\green128\blue0;\red128\green128\blue128;\red192\green192\blue192;}{\stylesheet{\widctlpar \f4\fs20\lang2057 \snext0 Normal;}{\*\cs10 \additive Default Paragraph Font;}}{\info{\author dddd}{\operator dddd}{\creatim\yr1998\mo11\dy11\hr16\min9}{\revtim\yr1998\mo11\dy11\hr16\min9}{\version2}{\edmins0}{\nofpages4}{\nofwords931}{\nofchars5307}{\*\company  }{\vern57431}}\widowctrl\ftnbj\aenddoc\hyphcaps0 \fet0\sectd \linex0 {\*\pnseclvl1\pnucrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl2\pnucltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl3\pndec\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl4\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl5\pndec\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl6\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl7\pnlcrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl8\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl9\pnlcrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}
\pard\plain \ \f4\fs20\lang2057 {\fs24 
\par }{\fs28   bark grey or yellowish, smooth; female catkins \'b1 sessile ................. }{\b\fs28 4. incana}{\fs28 
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 1. A. viridis}{\fs28  (Chaix) DC. in Lam. & DC.,}{\i\fs28  Fl. Fr.}{\fs28  ed. 3, }{\b\fs28 3:}{\fs28  304 (1805) (}{\i\fs28 A. alnobetula}{\fs28  (Ehrh.) Hartig). Shrub 0\'b75-2\'b75(-4) m; buds sessile. Twigs glabrous or puberulent, greenish- or reddish-brown. Leaves elliptical to suborbicular, cuneate to subcordate at base, biserrate, viscid when young. Catkins appearing with the leaves, in inflorescences with 2 or 3 leaves at base. Fruiting catkins 8-15 \'d7 4-8 mm, usually 3-5 in a slender, pedunculate raceme. Nutlet with broad, membranous wing. }{\i\fs28 Mountain slopes, especially near streams. C. Europe, Corse and Balkan peninsula; N.E. Russia.}{\fs28  Au Bu Co Cz Ga Ge He Hu It Ju Po Rm Rs(N, C, W).
\par 
\par This species shows considerable variation in the shape and size of the leaf, and in indumentum. At least 3 subspecies can be recognized in Europe.
\par 
\par }
\pard \li200\ {\fs28 1 Leaves broadly ovate or suborbicular, obtuse or with a very 
\par   short acumen; lower surface glabrous or with tufts of
\par   hairs in axils of veins ................................................. (}{\b\fs28 c}{\fs28 ) subsp. }{\b\fs28 suaveolens}{\fs28 
\par 1 Leaves elliptical or ovate, acute or acuminate; lower 
\par   surface usually pubescent, at least on the veins
\par 2 Leaves 1-5(-9) cm, usually \'b1 cuneate at base, with 4-8 
\par   pairs of lateral veins .......................................................... (}{\b\fs28 a}{\fs28 ) subsp.}{\b\fs28  viridis}{\fs28 
\par 2 Leaves 3-8(-12) cm, cuneate to subcordate at base, with 
\par   7-10 pairs of lateral veins .............................................. (}{\b\fs28 b}{\fs28 ) subsp.}{\b\fs28  fruticosa}{\fs28 
\par 
\par }
\pard \ {\fs28  (}{\b\fs28 a}{\fs28 ) Subsp. }{\b\fs28 viridis}{\fs28 : Leaves 1-5(-9) cm, elliptical or ovate, acute or acuminate, usually more or less cuneate at base, with 4-8 pairs of lateral veins; lower surface usually pubescent, at least on the veins. 2n = 28. \bullet }{\i\fs28  Mountains of C. Europe and Balkan peninsula}{\fs28 .
\par  (}{\b\fs28 b}{\fs28 ) Subsp.}{\b\fs28  fruticosa}{\fs28  (Rupr.) Nyman,}{\i\fs28  Consp.}{\fs28  672 (1881): Leaves 3-8(-12) cm, elliptical or ovate, acute or acuminate, cuneate to subcordate at base, with 7-10 pairs of lateral veins; lower surface pubescent, at least on the veins.}{\i\fs28  N.E. Russia.}{\fs28  (}{\i\fs28 N. Asia and North America.}{\fs28 )
\par  (}{\b\fs28 c}{\fs28 ) Subsp.}{\b\fs28  suaveolens}{\fs28  (Req.) P.W. Ball,}{\i\fs28  Feddes Repert.}{\b\fs28  68:}{\fs28  186 (1963): Leaves 1-4\'b75 cm, broadly ovate or suborbicular, obtuse or with a very short acumen, cuneate or sometimes subcordate at base, with 6-8 pairs of lateral veins; lower surface glabrous or with tufts of hairs in the axils of the veins. \bullet }{\i\fs28  Corse}{\fs28 .
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 2. A. glutinosa}{\fs28  (L.) Gaertner,}{\i\fs28  Fruct. Sem. Pl.}{\b\fs28  2:}{\fs28  54 (1790). Tree or shrub up to 20(-35) m, with dark brown, fissured bark; buds short-stalked. Young twigs viscid, usually glabrous. Leaves (3-)4-10 cm, obovate-elliptical to suborbicular, obtuse or retuse, cuneate or rounded at base, biserrate, green on lower surface, usually glabrous except for tufts of yellowish hairs in the axils of the veins; lateral veins 5-8 pairs. Fruiting catkins 10-30 mm, ovoid, pedunculate, 3-5 in a raceme. Nutlet narrowly winged. 2n = 28.
\par 
\par }{\i\fs28 Usually beside water or on wet soils. Europe, except the extreme north and south}{\fs28 . All except Bl Cr Fa Is Sb; naturalized alien in Az.
\par 
\par }{\b\fs28 2}{\fs28  \'d7 }{\b\fs28 4}{\fs28  (}{\i\fs28 A.}{\fs28  \'d7}{\i\fs28  pubescens }{\fs28 Tausch) is not uncommon in the areas where the species grow together. It usually has the young twigs pubescent, leaves obtuse to shortly acuminate, usually pubescent at least on the veins, and the female catkins shortly pedunculate.
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 3. A. rugosa}{\fs28  (Duroi) Sprengel,}{\i\fs28  Syst. Veg.}{\fs28  ed. 16, }{\b\fs28 3:}{\fs28  848 (1826) (}{\i\fs28 A. serrulata }{\fs28 (Aiton) Willd.). Shrub or small tree up to 10 m. Young twigs reddish-brown, pubescent, soon becoming glabrous, glutinous. Leaves 5-10 cm, elliptical or obovate, acute or obtuse, rounded or subcordate at base, serrulate, with reddish-brown hairs especially in the axils of the veins; lateral veins 8-13 pairs. Fruiting catkins 10-15 \'d7 8-10 mm, ovoid, 4-10 in a raceme, the upper sessile, the lower shortly pedunculate. Nutlet narrowly winged.}{\i\fs28  Frequently planted and naturalized, mainly in C. Europe.}{\fs28  [Cz Da Ge Po Su.] (}{\i\fs28 E. North America.}{\fs28 )
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 4. A. incana}{\fs28  (L.) Moench, }{\i\fs28 Meth.}{\fs28  424 (1794). Tree or shrub up to 30 m, with smooth bark; buds shortly stalked. Young twigs pubescent or tomentose. Leaves 3-8(-13) cm, ovate-lanceolate to ovate-orbicular, cuneate, biserrate, grey-green on lower surface, puberulent or tomentose at least when young; lateral veins 7-12 pairs. Fruiting catkins 11-17 \'d7 9-12 mm, ovoid or suborbicular, sessile, 3-5 in a raceme.}{\i\fs28  N.E. Europe and Fennoscandia; C. Europe; locally in the mountains of S. Europe. Planted and widely naturalized in N.W. Europe}{\fs28 . Al Au Bu Cz Fe Ga Ge ?Gr He Hu It Ju No Po Rm Rs(N, B, C, W, E) Su [Az *Be Br Da Hb *Ho Hs].
\par 
\par  (}{\b\fs28 a}{\fs28 ) Subsp.}{\b\fs28  incana}{\fs28  : Bark grey, opaque. Leaves acuminate, usually tomentose on the lower surface. wing of nutlet c. 0\'b75 mm wide. 2n = 28.}{\i\fs28  Throughout the range of the species.}{\fs28 
\par  (}{\b\fs28 b}{\fs28 ) Subsp. }{\b\fs28 kolaensis}{\fs28  (Orlova) \'c1. & D. L\'f6ve,}{\i\fs28  Bot. Not. }{\b\fs28 114:}{\fs28  51 (1961) (}{\i\fs28 A. kolaensis }{\fs28 Orlova): Bark yellow, translucent. Leaves obtuse or shortly acute, glabrous or pubescent on the veins on the lower surface. wing of nutlet c. 1 mm wide. \bullet }{\i\fs28  N. & W. Fennoscandia}{\fs28 .
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 5. A. cordata}{\fs28  (Loisel.) Loisel.,}{\i\fs28  Fl. Gall.}{\fs28  ed. 2,}{\b\fs28  2:}{\fs28  317 (1828) (}{\i\fs28 A. cordifolia}{\fs28  Ten.). Tree up to 15 m; buds shortly stalked. Young twigs viscid, usually glabrous. Leaves 2-12 cm, ovate or suborbicular, obtuse or shortly acuminate, truncate or cordate at base, crenate-dentate, usually glabrous or with tufts of hairs in the axils of the veins; lateral veins 5-8 pairs. Fruiting catkins 15-30 mm, oblong-ovoid, solitary or up to 3 in a raceme. Nutlet narrowly winged. \bullet }{\i\fs28  Corse and S. Italy; N.W. Albania; sometimes planted in S.W. Europe and elsewhere}{\fs28 . Al Co It [Az Hs] .
\par 
\par This species shows some variation in shape and size of leaf. Plants from Italy and Albania usually have acute or acuminate leaves 6-12 cm, while those from Corse have obtuse leaves 3-7 cm.
\par 
\par 
\par }
\pard \qc\ {\fs28  }{\b\fs28 35.       CORYLACEAE}{\fs28 
\par              }{\fs24  Edit.  †T.G. Tutin.
\par 
\par }
\pard \ {\fs28 Deciduous trees or shrubs. Leaves alternate, simple; stipules caducous. Flowers monoecious, inconspicuous, anemophilous. Male flowers 1 in the axil of each bract in pendent catkins; bracteoles 2, united with the bract, or 0; perianth absent. Female flowers 2 in the axil of each bract; bracteoles present; perianth small, irregularly lobed; ovary 2-locular, inferior; styles 2. Fruit a nut, subtended or surrounded by an involucre formed from the accrescent bract and bracteoles.
\par 
\par }
\pard \li200\ {\fs28 1 Buds ovoid, obtuse; leaves usually with fewer than 8 pairs 
\par   of veins; fruits in clusters of 1-4 ..................................................... }{\b\fs28 3. Corylus}{\fs28 
\par 
\par 70}
\par }