{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Buds fusiform, acute; leaves with 9 or more pairs of veins; 
\par
  fruits numerous, in pendent spikes
\par
2 Bark grey, smooth; male catkins appearing in spring; nut 
\par
  subtended by a 3-lobed or serrate involucre .................................. {\b 1. Carpinus}
\par
2 Bark brown, scaly, rough; male catkins visible throughout the 
\par
  winter; nut enclosed in an entire, apiculate involucre .......................{\b  2. Ostrya}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 1.           Carpinus}              L.
\par             

\pard\f0\fs24\qc By †T.G. Tutin.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Buds fusiform, acute. Leaves with 9 or more pairs of veins. Male flowers without bracteoles. Infructescence lax. Nut small, subtended by the lobed or serrate, strongly veined involucre.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 Leaves 4-10 cm; involucre 3-lobed .................................................... {\b 1. betulus}
\par
Leaves 2·5-6 cm; involucre not lobed ............................................. {\b 2. orientalis}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. C. betulus} L., {\i Sp. Pl. }998 (1753). Tree up to 25 m, with fluted trunk and smooth, grey bark. Leaves 4-10 cm, ovate, acuminate, biserrate, rounded to subcordate at base, pubescent on the veins beneath. Catkins up to 5 cm, pendent. Infructescence 5-14 cm; involucre 3-lobed, the mid-lobe c. 3·5 cm, much longer than the laterals, oblong; margin entire or serrate. 2n = 64.{\i  C. & S.E. Europe, extending to S. Italy, N.E. Spain, S. England, S. Sweden and C. Ukraine.} Al Au Be Br Bu Cz Da Ga Ge Gr He Ho Hs Hu It Ju Po Rm Rs(B, C, W, E) Su Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. C. orientalis} Miller, {\i Gard. Dict.} ed. 8, no. 3 (1768) ({\i C. duinensis} Scop.). Shrub or small tree. Leaves 2·5-6 cm, ovate or elliptical, acute, biserrate, cuneate to rounded at base, sparsely pubescent on the veins beneath. Infructescence 3-5 cm; involucre c. 2 cm, triangular-ovate, serrate but not lobed.{\i  S.E. Europe, extending westwards to Sicilia}. Al Bu Gr Hu It Ju Rm Rs(K) Si Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 2.            Ostrya}              Scop.
\par          

\pard\f0\fs24\qc By †T.G. Tutin.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Buds fusiform, acute. Leaves with 9 or more pairs of veins. Male flowers without bracteoles. Infructescence compact. Fruit a small nut, enclosed in the entire, apiculate involucre.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. O. carpinifolia} Scop.,{\i  Fl. Carn.} ed. 2, {\b 2:} 244 (1772) ({\i O. virginiana }(Miller) C. Koch. subsp.{\i  carpinifolia} (Scop.) Briq.). Small tree with brownish, fissured bark. Leaves 5-8 cm, ovate, acuminate, very sharply biserrate, cuneate to subcordate at base,hairy when young, glabrescent. Catkins up to 10 cm, pendent. Infructescence 3-4·5 cm, subcylindrical, resembling that of Humulus; involucre elliptical, with puberulent mucro.{\i  S. Europe, from S.E. France to Thrace, extending northwards to S. Austria}. Al Au Bu Co Ga Gr He †Hu It Ju Sa Si Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 3.           Corylus}               L.
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc  By †T.G. Tutin.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Buds ovoid, obtuse. Leaves usually with fewer than 8 pairs of veins. Male flowers with 2 bracteoles. Female inflorescence short, budlike; stigmas red. Fruit a large nut, surrounded by a more or less tubular involucre which is dentate or laciniate above.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Involucre constricted at apex ......................................................... {\b 3. maxima}
\par
1 Involucre not constricted at apex
\par
2 Stipules obtuse; involucre about as long as nut, divided into
\par
   ± ovate, irregularly dentate or laciniate lobes ............................... {\b 1. avellana}
\par
2 Stipules acuminate; involucre much longer than nut, divided 
\par
  into long-acuminate, serrate lobes ................................................... {\b 2. colurna}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. C. avellana} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 998 (1753). Shrub up to 6 m, with smooth, brown bark. Leaves suborbicular, acuminate, biserrate, often shallowly lobed, cordate at base; stipules oblong, obtuse. Catkins up to 8 cm, pendent. Infructescence of 1-4 nuts; involucre about as large as the nut, divided to half-way or a little more, into more or less ovate, usually irregularly dentate or laciniate lobes about as long as the nut; nut 1·5-2 cm, brown, with a hard, woody shell. 2n = 22.{\i  Europe, except some islands and the extreme north and north-east}. All except Bl Fa Is Sb; doubtfully native in Cr. naturalized in Az.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. C. colurna} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 999 (1753). Like {\b 1} but usually a tree, up to 20 m; stipules lanceolate, acuminate; catkins up to 12 cm; involucre much longer than the nut, divided almost to base into many long-acuminate, serrate lobes.{\i  Balkan peninsula S.W. Romania.} Al Bu Gr Ju Rm Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 3. C. maxima} Miller, {\i Gard. Dict.} ed. 8, no. 2 (1768) ({\i C. tubulosa }Willd.). Like {\b 1} but a shrub or small tree; involucre about twice as long as the nut, contracted above the nut and dentate at apex. {\i W. Jugoslavia; doubtfully native in Greece; cultivated for its nut (Hazelnuts or Filberts) elsewhere.} *Gr Ju [Au Br Cz].
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Regarded by some authors as a variant or cultivar of {\b 1} or one of its hybrids.
\par

\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 36.         FAGACEAE}
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc  Edit. S.M. Walters
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Monoecious; trees or shrubs. Leaves simple, alternate. Male flowers in catkins or heads; perianth 4- to 7-lobed; stamens 8-20(-40), usually twice as many as perianth-lobes. Female flowers 1-3, surrounded by an involucre of scales (cupule); perianth 4- to 6-lobed; styles 3 or 6. Fruit a 1-seeded nut, in groups of 1-3, surrounded by the accrescent cupule.
\par

\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Male flowers in pendent heads or 1-3 in axils of leaves;
\par
  buds fusiform; nut triquetrous
\par
2 Male flowers numerous in pendent heads; ripe cupule c. 2·5 cm ...... {\b 1. Fagus}
\par
2 Male flowers usually solitary; ripe cupule c. 1 cm ................... {\b 2. Nothofagus}
\par
1 Male flowers in long, erect or pendent catkins; buds ovoid;
\par
  nut oblong to subglobose
\par
3 Male catkins erect, with female flowers in lower part; 
\par
  cupule completely enclosing nuts .................................................. {\b 3. Castanea}
\par
3 Male catkins pendent; female flowers in separate inflorescences; 
\par
  cupule enclosing only lower ½ of nut .............................................. {\b 4. Quercus}
\par

\par
71}
\par