{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 1.               Fagus}                 L.
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc  By †T.G. Tutin (Ed.1) revised by J.R. Akeroyd (Ed.2)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Deciduous trees. Buds fusiform. Flowers anemophilous. Male flowers in long-pedunculate, pendent heads; perianth 4- to 7-lobed; stamens 8-16. Female flowers usually in pairs in each stipitate, 4-partite cupule; perianth 4- or 5-lobed; styles 3, elongate. Nuts 1 or 2, triquetrous.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. F. sylvatica} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 998 (1753). Tree up to 40 m; bark grey, smooth. Buds acute, reddish-brown. Leaves 4-9 cm, ovate-elliptic, acute, ciliate and silky, at least on the veins. Male flowers numerous; peduncles 5-6 cm. Nut 12-18 mm, brown; cupule c. 2·5 cm. {\i Forming woods, usually on well-drained soils, often on mountains in the south; widely planted elsewhere. S.W. &
\pard\f0\fs28  C. Europe, extending to S. Sweden.} Al Au Be Br Bu Co Cz Da Ga Ge Gr He Ho Hs Hu It Ju No Po Rm Rs(B, W, K, E) Si Su Tu [Hb].
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp.{\b  sylvatica} : Tree up to 30 m. Leaves 4-9 cm, with 5-8 pairs of veins. Perianth of male flowers divided almost to base. Cupule with all scales subulate. 2n = 24.{\i  Almost throughout the range of the species}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b orientalis} (Lipsky) Greuter & Burdet,{\i  Willdenowia}{\b  11:} 279 (1981) ({\i F. orientalis} Lipsky); Tree up to 40 m. Leaves 9-12(-14) cm, with 8-12 pairs of lateral veins. Perianth of male flowers divided for not more than 1/3 of its length. Cupule with linear-oblong scales above and spathulate scales below.{\i  At lower elevations and in more sheltered sites than subsp.} ({\b a}).{\i  S.E. Europe from C. Greece to S.E. Russia.}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Plants intermediate between subspp. ({\b a}) and ({\b b}) that occur in E., E.C. and S.E. Europe have been described as species under the names {\b F. taurica} Popl., {\i Österr. Bot. Zeitschr.}{\b  77:} 41 (1928), and {\b F. moesiaca }(K. Malý) Czech., {\i Annu. Soc. Dendrol. Pologne}{\b  5:} 52 (1933).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 2.           Nothofagus}             Blume
\par  

\pard\f0\fs24\qc  By J.R. Akeroyd.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Deciduous or evergreen trees. Buds fusiform. Flowers anemophilous. Male flowers axillary, solitary or in 2- or 3-flowered clusters, sessile or subsessile; perianth campanulate; stamens 8-40. Female flowers usually 3 in each 4-partite cupule; styles 3, short. Nuts (1-)3, mostly triquetrous.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 A genus restricted to Australasia and temperate South America; several species are grown in Europe for ornament or timber; all are somewhat calcifuge.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 Leaves with 8-11 pairs of lateral veins; cupule-scales narrowly
\par
 triangular, with single terminal gland ............................................... {\b 1. obliqua}
\par
Leaves with 14-18 pairs of lateral veins; cupule-scales dendritic,
\par
 glandular ............................................................................................ {\b 2. procera}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. N. obliqua} (Mirbel) Örsted, {\i Vidensk. Selsk. Skr. }{\b 5:} 354 (1873). Tree up to 30 m; bark greyish. Leaves 3-8 cm, ovate to oblong, obtuse, irregularly serrate, with 8-9(-11) pairs of lateral veins, subglabrous, dark green above, paler beneath; petiole 3-6 mm, puberulent. Male flowers usually solitary; stamens 30-40. Cupule 8-10 mm in fruit, puberulent; scales narrowly triangular, with a single terminal gland. Nuts slightly shorter than the cupule, the 2 outer triquetrous, the central flattened. {\i Planted for timber in Britain and Germany, and sometimes naturalized}. [Br Ge.] ({\i Chile.})
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. N. procera} (Poeppig & Endl.) Örsted, {\i loc. cit.}  (1873). Like {\b 1} but usually not more than 20 m; leaves 4-10 cm, somewhat narrower, shallowly dentate, with 14-18 pairs of lateral veins, puberulent, pale or yellowish-green above; petiole pubescent; cupule-scales dendritic, glandular.{\i  Planted for timber in Britain and Germany, and sometimes naturalized}. [Br Ge.] ({\i Chile}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 3.            Castanea}             Miller 
\par       

\pard\f0\fs24\qc  By †T.G. Tutin.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Deciduous trees or shrubs. Buds ovoid. Flowers entomophilous, scented, in erect catkins, male in the upper, female in the lower part of the same catkin. Male flowers with 6-partite perianth; stamens 10-20. Female flowers usually 3 in each cupule; ovary 6-locular; styles 7-9. Nuts large, brown, coriaceous, 1-3 together in a spiny cupule which dehisces irregularly by 2-4 valves.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 Usually a tree; leaves 10-25 cm, coarsely and very sharply serrate
\par
   ............................................................................................................ {\b 1. sativa}
\par
Usually a shrub; leaves 8-16 cm, crenate-serrate ............................... {\b 2. crenata}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. C. sativa} Miller,{\i  Gard. Dict.} ed. 8, no. 1 (1768) ({\i C. vulgaris} Lam.). Tree up to 30 m; bark brownish-grey with longitudinal, often spirally curved, fissures. Buds obtuse, the terminal absent. Leaves 10-25 cm, oblong-lanceolate, acute or acuminate, glabrescent but lepidote beneath, at least near the veins. Nut 2-3·5 cm, brown with a paler base, shining; cupule green, covered with long, branched, sparsely pubescent spines.{\i  In woods on well-drained soils, often on mountain slopes; usually calcifuge. Probably native in parts of the Balkan peninsula and more doubtfully in Italy and S.C. Europe; widely cultivated for its nuts} ({\i Chestnuts}){\i  and timber, and naturalized in W. Europe and locally elsewhere}. Al *Au *Co *Cr *Cz Gr *Hu *It Ju *Sa *Si Tu [Be Br Bu Da Ga Ge Hb He Ho Hs Lu Rm Rs(W, K) Su].
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. C. crenata} Siebold & Zucc.,{\i  Abh. Akad. Wiss.} ({\i München}) {\b 4}({\b 3}): 224 (1846). Like {\b 1} but usually a shrub up to c. 10 m; leaves elliptical or oblong-lanceolate, acuminate, crenate-serrate; spines of the cupule almost glabrous.{\i  Planted for timber in S. Europe}. [Hs It Lu.] ({\i Japan.})
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 4.            Quercus}                L.
\par         

\pard\f0\fs24\qc  By †O. Schwarz.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Trees, rarely shrubs. Buds ovoid. Leaves usually dentate, sinuate or pinnately lobed, rarely entire; evergreen (persisting for more than a year), semi-evergreen (persisting green through the winter, but falling in spring), or deciduous (withering in autumn, though sometimes not falling until spring). Flowers anemophilous. Male catkins slender, pendent; bracts minute, caducous; flowers numerous, with usually 6-lobed perianth and 6-12 stamens. Female catkins with few flowers, each solitary in an involucre. Nut oblong or ellipsoidal, the base enclosed by the enlarged cupule.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 In the descriptions and key, ' lateral veins ' indicates those which run to the apices of the teeth or lobes; in some species intercalary veins, which run to the sinuses or do not reach the margin, may also be present.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 In many species leaf-shape is very variable, and the leaves of leading shoots or of young trees may differ considerably from the descriptions given below.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Within each subgenus most species are interfertile. Hybrids are therefore common in regions where related species grow together, and much of the intraspecific variation is due to introgressive hybridization.
\par

\par
72}
\par