{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Literature: A. Camus,{\i  Les Chênes: Monographie du genre }Quercus{\b  1-3}. Paris, 1936-54. O. Schwarz,{\i  Cavanillesia}{\b  8:} 65-100 (1936). O. Schwarz,{\i  Feddes Repert.} (Sonderbeih. D.) 1-200 (1936-9). J. de Carvalho e Vasconcellos & J. do Amaral Franco,{\i  Anais Inst. Sup. Agron.} ({\i Lisboa}) {\b 21:} 1-135 (1954). C. vicioso, {\i Revision de Genero Quercus en España}. Madrid, 1950.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Leaves evergreen, coriaceous
\par
2 Mature leaves glabrous; veins prominent above but not beneath; 
\par
  petiole 1-4 mm ............................................................................... {\b 3. coccifera}
\par
2 Mature leaves tomentose beneath; veins ± immersed above, 
\par
  prominent beneath; petiole 6-15 mm
\par
3 Midrib of leaf straight; bark not thick and corky .................................. {\b 4. ilex}
\par
3 Midrib of leaf somewhat sinuous; bark very thick, corky .................. {\b 5. suber}
\par
1 Leaves deciduous or semi-evergreen, seldom very coriaceous
\par
4 Fruits ripening in the second year (situated on leafless part of twig)
\par
5 Involucral scales all closely appressed
\par
6 Leaves 10-15 cm wide, lobed not more than half-way to midrib; 
\par
  involucre 18-25 mm wide ................................................................... {\b 1. rubra}
\par
6 Leaves 5-10 cm wide, lobed more than half-way to midrib; 
\par
  involucre 10-15 mm wide .............................................................. {\b 2. palustris}
\par
5 At least some involucral scales patent or deflexed
\par
7 Mature leaves glabrous and shining; petiole 2-5 mm ...................... {\b 6. trojana}
\par
7 Mature leaves pubescent or scabrid, dull; petiole usually at least 10 mm
\par
8 Teeth or lobes of leaf aristate; upper surface of                 
\par
  leaf smooth ................................................................................. {\b 7. macrolepis}
\par
8 Teeth or lobes of leaf obtuse or slightly mucronate;
\par
  upper surface of leaf rough .................................................................. {\b 8. cerris}
\par
4 Fruits ripening in the first year (situated among the leaves)
\par
9 Scales of fruiting involucre concrescent except for their small,
\par
  triangular apices; fruits usually distant, on a fairly long peduncle
\par
10 Leaves with 8-14 pairs of straight, parallel lateral veins; 
\par
   intercalary veins absent ......................................................... {\b 13. hartwissiana}
\par
10 Leaves with 5-9 pairs of often rather irregular lateral veins;
\par
   intercalary veins usually present
\par
11 Leaves glabrous; lateral veins mostly straight ............................... {\b 14. robur}
\par
11 Leaves greyish-puberulent beneath; lateral veins arising at 
\par
   an acute angle with the midrib, but then curving outwards 
\par
   towards margin .................................................................. {\b 15. pedunculiflora}
\par
9 Scales of fruiting involucre distinct, not concrescent; 
\par
  fruits usually crowded; peduncle short or almost absent
\par
12 Leaves semi-evergreen
\par
13 Low shrub, seldom more than 50 cm; leaves subsessile ......... {\b 22. lusitanica}
\par
13 Tree or tall shrub; petiole at least 4 mm
\par
14 Young twigs and leaves with abundant, floccose,
\par
   caducous hairs ......................................................................... {\b 20. canariensis}
\par
14 Indumentum of young twigs and leaves variable, but not floccose 
\par
   and caducous ................................................................................. {\b 21. faginea}
\par
12 Leaves deciduous
\par
15 Young twigs tomentose; petiole not grooved
\par
16 Leaves with usually more than 8 pairs of parallel lateral veins;
\par
   intercalary veins ± absent; indumentum brownish ..................... {\b 16. frainetto}
\par
16 Leaves with usually fewer than 8 pairs of lateral veins, 
\par
   which are not strictly parallel, and often mixed with intercalary veins; 
\par
   indumentum white or grey
\par
17 Scales of involucre ovate-lanceolate, ± acute, appressed ...... {\b 19. pubescens}
\par
17 Scales of involucre narrowly lanceolate, obtuse, not appressed
\par
18 Leaves densely white-pubescent beneath ................................ {\b 17. pyrenaica}
\par
18 Leaves greyish-green beneath ................................................... {\b 18. congesta}
\par
15 Young twigs glabrous, or sericeous; petiole grooved
\par
19 Leaves with c. 10 pairs of lateral veins; intercalary veins absent;
\par
   fruiting peduncles with appressed hairs ................................................ {\b 9. mas}
\par
19 Leaves with 6-8 pairs of lateral veins; intercalary veins usually
\par
   present, at least near base of leaf; fruiting peduncles glabrous
\par
20 Scales of involucre not tuberculate; mature leaves pubescent  
\par
   beneath, at least in the vein-axils .................................................. {\b 11. petraea}
\par
20 Scales of involucre strongly tuberculate;
   mature leaves glabrous beneath
\par
21 Leaves somewhat coriaceous, regularly sinuate;
\par
   involucre brownish .................................................................... {\b 10. polycarpa}
\par
21 Leaves thin, deeply and irregularly lobed; 
\par
   involucre greyish ................................................................... {\b 12. dalechampii}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Subgen.{\b  Erythrobalanus} (Spach) Örsted. Leaves deciduous (in species described below). Fruit ripening in second year; endocarp tomentose.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. Q. rubra} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 996 (1753) ({\i Q. borealis} Michx). Deciduous tree up to 25 m; twigs glabrous, not pendent, dark red; buds 6 mm, reddish-brown. Leaves 12-20 × 10-15 cm, ovate to obovate, lobed about half-way to midrib, with 7-11 pairs of lobes, each with 1-3 aristate teeth, glabrous except for slight pubescence in vein-axils beneath; petiole 25-50 mm. Involucre of fruit shallow, 18-25 mm wide; scales thin, ovate, closely appressed, finely pubescent. {\i Planted for timber and shelter, especially in C. Europe, sometimes naturalized}. [Au Be Cz Da Ga Ge Gr He Ho Hs Hu It Lu Po Rm Rs(W, K) Su.] ({\i E. North America}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. Q. palustris} Muenchh., {\i Hausv.}{\b  5:} 253 (1770). Like{\b  1} but the twigs somewhat pendent; buds 3 mm, pale brown; leaves 10-15 × 5-10 cm, obovate, more deeply lobed, with jaggedly toothed lobes; tufts of hairs in vein-axils conspicuous; involucre 10-15 mm wide.{\i  Planted for timber, mainly in E.C. Europe, but much less commonly than}{\b  1}. [Au Da Ge Hu Rm.]{\i  E. North America.})
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Subgen. {\b Sclerophyllodrys} O. Schwarz. Leaves evergreen, thick in texture. Fruit ripening in first or second year; endocarp tomentose.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 3. Q. coccifera} L.,{\i  Sp. Pl.} 995 (1753) ({\i Q. mesto} Boiss.,{\i Q. pseudococcifera }Webb; incl.{\i  Q. calliprinos }Webb). Evergreen shrub up to 3 m (rarely small tree); young twigs puberulent. Leaves 1·5-4 cm, thin but rigid, broadly ovate or oblong, with cordate or rounded base, spinose-dentate, undulate, dark green with prominent veins above, pale green and smooth beneath, glabrous at maturity; petiole 1-4 mm. Fruit ripening in the second year; scales of involucre rigid, subspinous, usually patent. 2n = 24. {\i Mediterranean region} ({\i but absent from much of Italy});{\i  Portugal.} Al Bl Bu Cr Ga Gr Hs It Ju Lu Sa Si Tu.
\par

\par
73}
\par