{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 4. Q. ilex} L.,{\i  Sp. Pl}. 995 (1753) ({\i Q. avellaniformis} Colmeiro & E. Boutelou,{\i  Q. gracilis} Lange, {\i Q. smilax} L.). Evergreen tree up to 25 m, or shrub; twigs and buds grey-tomentose. Leaves 3-7 cm, thick but not rigid, with cuneate or rounded base, entire, mucronate-dentate or spinose-serrate, glabrescent and smooth above, grey-tomentose and with prominent veins beneath; midrib straight; petiole 6-15 mm. Stipules subulate. Perianth-lobes lanceolate; anthers mucronate. Fruit ripening in the first year; involucral scales appressed, flat.{\i  Mediterranean region, extending to N. Spain and W. France. Planted elsewhere in W. & S. Europe, and sometimes naturalized}. Al Bl Co Cr Ga Gr Hs It Ju Lu Sa Si [Br He Rs(K)] .
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp.{\b  ilex}: Leaves oblong-ovate to lanceolate, dark green above, with 7-11 pairs of lateral veins. Stipules thick, densely hairy. Perianth-lobes subacute; fruit bitter. 2n = 24.{\i  Throughout the range of the species except Portugal and most of Spain}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp.{\b  rotundifolia} (Lam.) T. Morais, {\i Bol. Soc. Brot.,} ser. 2, {\b 14:} 122 (1940) ({\i Q. rotundifolia }Lam., {\i Q. ballota} Desf.): Leaves suborbicular or broadly ovate, greyish-glaucous above, with 5-8 pairs of lateral veins. Stipules membranous, wider, glabrescent. Perianth-lobes obtuse; fruit sweet; involucral scales shorter and thicker. 2n = 24.{\i  Spain and Portugal}.
\par

\par
Subgen. {\b Cerris }(Spach) Örsted. Leaves evergreen or deciduous. Fruit usually ripening in second year; endocarp glabrous.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 5. Q. suber} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 995 (1753) (incl. {\i Q. occidentalis} Gay). Evergreen tree up to 20 m, with thick, corky bark; twigs tomentose. Leaves 3-7 cm, ovate-oblong, sinuate-dentate, dark green above, grey-tomentose beneath; midrib sinuous; petioles 8-15 mm. Fruit ripening in the first year in spring-flowering trees, but some trees flower in autumn and ripen their fruits late in the following summer. Upper involucral scales long and patent, the lower usually shorter and more appressed. 2n = 24. {\i Usually calcifuge. S. Europe, from Portugal to S.E. Italy.} Co Ga Hs It Lu Sa Si.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 The bark is the cork of commerce.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 6. Q. trojana} Webb in Loudon,{\i  Gard. Mag.} ({\i Loudon}) {\b 15:} 590 (1839) ({\i Q. macedonica} DC.). Semi-evergreen or deciduous tree up to 15 m; young twigs puberulent. Leaves 3-7(-10) cm, obovate-oblong, sinuate-dentate with 8-14 pairs of mucronate or subaristate teeth, shining and subglabrous on both surfaces when mature; petiole 2-5 mm. Fruit ripening in the second year; involucre with lowest scales appressed, the middle ones deflexed and the upper erect or incurved.{\i  Balkan peninsula} ({\i mainly in the west});{\i  S.E. Italy}. Al Bu Gr It Ju Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 7. Q. macrolepis} Kotschy,{\i  Eichen} t. 16 (1862) ({\i Q. aegilops} auct.). Semi-evergreen tree; twigs tomentose. Leaves 6-10 cm, tomentose beneath, smooth above, acute, subcordate, with 3-7 pairs of large, triangular, aristate lobes, often secondarily lobed; petiole 15-40 mm. Fruit ripening in the second year; involucre large and woody, with wide, thick, flat, usually patent scales.{\i  S. part of Balkan peninsula; Aegean region; S.E. Italy}. Al *Cr Gr It Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Formerly widely cultivated for use in tanning, which has obscured the native distribution.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 8. Q. cerris} L.,{\i  Sp. Pl.} 997 (1753). Deciduous tree up to 35 m; twigs rough, more or less hairy; buds surrounded by linear, persistent stipules. Leaves oblong to obovate, rounded or subcordate at the base, with 4-7 pairs of lobes or teeth, subglabrous but dull and slightly scabrid above, pubescent or subglabrous beneath; petiole 8-15 mm. Fruit ripening in the second year; scales of involucre subulate, patent.{\i  S. & S.C. Europe westwards to S.E. France; naturalized in N.W. Europe.} Al Au Bu Cz Ga *Ge Gr He Hu It Ju Rm Si Tu [Br].
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b Q. crenata} Lam.,{\i  Encycl.Méth. Bot. }{\b 1:} 724 (1785) ({\i Q. pseudosuber} G. Santi), which is found occasionally in S. Europe from S.E. France to N.W. Jugoslavia and Sicilia, is probably a hybrid between{\b  8} and{\b  5}. It is like {\b 7} but with smaller, mucronate lobes to the leaf, and smaller involucre, with narrower and softer scales.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Subgen. {\b Quercus} (Subgen.{\i  Lepidobalanus} (Endl.) Örsted). Leaves deciduous or semi-evergreen. Fruit ripening in the first year; endocarp glabrous.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 9. Q. mas} Thore, {\i Essai Chlor. Länd.} 381 (1803). Deciduous tree; twigs, buds and lower surface of leaves at first silky-hairy, later more or less glabrous. Leaves 8-18 cm, oblong-ovate, cuneate at the base, sinuately lobed, with 8-10 pairs of rather narrow, forwardly-directed lobes; no intercalary veins; petiole 15-25 mm. Fruiting peduncle silky-hairy; scales of involucre broadly ovate, obtuse, asymmetrically tuberculate. •{\i N. Spain. }?Ga Hs.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 10. Q. polycarpa} Schur, {\i Verh. Mitt. Siebenb.}{\b  1851:} 170 (1851) ({\i Q. dshorochensis} auct., non C. Koch). Small deciduous tree; twigs, buds and mature leaves glabrous. Leaves 6-10 cm, somewhat coriaceous, elliptical, sinuate, with 7-10 pairs of equal, shallow obtuse lobes; a few intercalary veins sometimes present near the base; petiole 15-35 mm. Scales of involucre broadly ovate, acute, strongly tuberculate, puberulent, brownish. {\i S.E. Europe, extending northwards to C. Czechoslovakia}. Au Bu Cz Gr Hu Ju Rm Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 11. Q. petraea} (Mattuschka) Liebl., {\i Fl. Fuld.} 403 (1784) ({\i Q. sessiliflora} Salisb., {\i Q. sessilis} Ehrh., {\i Q. dshorochensis} C. Koch). Deciduous tree up to 40 m; twigs glabrous. Leaves 7-12 cm, obovate, cuneate at the base, very finely appressed-hairy beneath, and with persistent tufts of brownish hairs in the vein-axils, sinuately lobed with 5-8 pairs of rounded lobes; intercalary veins often present; petiole 18-25 mm. Scales of involucre ovate-lanceolate, thin, not tuberculate, pubescent. 2n = 24.{\i  Forming often pure woods, usually on somewhat poor soils. W., C. & S.E. Europe, southwards to C. Spain and S. Albania, northwards to 60° N. in Norway}. Al Au Be Br Bu Co Cz Da Ga Ge Hb He Ho Hs Hu It Ju No Po Rm Rs(B, C, W, K, E) Si Su Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 12. Q. dalechampii} Ten.,{\i  Ind. Sem. Horti Neap.} 15 (1830). Deciduous tree; twigs and mature leaves glabrous. Leaves thin, oblong to ovate-lanceolate, pinnately lobed with 4-7 pairs of rather narrow, subacute lobes; petiole 15-30 mm. Scales of involucre subrhombic, tuberculate, shortly pubescent, greyish.{\i  S.E. Europe, extending to S.E. Czechoslovakia and W. Italy.} Au Bu Cz Gr Hu It Ju Rm ?Si.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 13. Q. hartwissiana} Steven, {\i Bull. Soc. Nat. Moscou}{\b  30}({\b 1}): 387 (1857). Small deciduous tree up to 10 m; twigs glabrous, reddish. Leaves broadly obovate to oblong, with asymmetrically subcordate base, sinuate-dentate with 7-10 pairs of teeth, dark, shining green and glabrous above, sparsely brownish-pubescent beneath; lateral veins straight and parallel, without intercalary veins; petiole 13-22 mm. Peduncle long, with distant fruits; involucre not more than 12 × 12 mm, thin-walled; scales thin, concrescent except for the scarious apices. {\i S.E. Bulgaria and Turkey}. Bu Tu. ({\i N. Anatolia and W. Caucasus}.)
\par

\par
74}
\par