{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 14. Q. robur} L.,{\i  Sp. Pl.} 996 (1753) ({\i Q. pedunculata} Ehrh.). Deciduous tree up to 45 m, glabrous except sometimes for pubescence on young twigs and lower surface of young leaves. Leaves usually obovate, with 5-7 pairs of lobes; lateral veins making a variable angle with the midrib, with several intercalary veins; petiole 5 mm or less. Peduncle usually long; scales of involucre flat, puberulent, concrescent except for the apices.{\i  Native and dominant in woods on a variety of soils, especially ' brown earth ' soils. Most of Europe, except much of the north-east and parts of the Mediterranean region.} All except Az Bl Cr Fa Is Sa Sb Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp.{\b  robur} (incl. {\i Q. robur} subsp.{\i  broteroana} O. Schwarz,{\i  Q. estremadurensis} O. Schwarz): Leaves thin, usually glabrous, but occasionally puberulent beneath when young; lobes usually broad and deep. Involucre variable in size, usually c. 12 mm wide; scales grey-green, concrescent except for a very small apex. 2n = 24. {\i Throughout the range of the species}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp. brutia (Ten.) O. Schwarz,{\i  Notizbl. Bot. Gart. Berlin}{\b  13:} 13 (1936) ({\i Q. brutia} Ten.): Twigs and lower surface of leaves pubescent when young. Leaves rather coriaceous, with long lobes and deep, narrow sinuses. Involucre up to 23 mm wide, thick and woody; scales largely concrescent, but with patent, acute apices.•{\i  W. part of Balkan peninsula; S. Italy}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 In Britain and Ireland, and perhaps elsewhere in N.W. Europe, there has been extensive introgressive hybridization between {\b 14}({\b a}) and {\b 11}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 15. Q. pedunculiflora} C. Koch, {\i Linnaea}{\b  22:} 324 (1849) ({\i Q. haas} auct. eur., non Kotschy). Like {\b 14}({\b b}) but leaves somewhat glaucous above and with persistent yellow-grey tomentum beneath; petiole up to 20 mm; involucral scales verrucose, more concrescent, and pubescent with yellowish hairs.{\i  S.E. Europe}. Bu Gr Ju Rm ?Rs(K) Tu. ({\i E. Anatolia, S.W. Caucasus.})
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 16. Q. frainetto} Ten.,{\i  Prodr. Fl. Nap.} Suppl. 2: lxxii (1813) ({\i Q. farnetto} Ten.,{\i Q. conferta }Kit.). Deciduous tree up to 30 m; twigs tomentose; buds large, surrounded by persistent stipules. Leaves 10-20 cm, crowded towards the apex of twig, obovate, tapered to the auricled base, deeply pinnatifid with 7-9 pairs of oblong, often lobed segments, pubescent beneath with grey or brownish hairs; lateral veins parallel, with few intercalary veins; petiole 2-6 mm. Involucre 6-12 × 12-15 mm; scales oblong, obtuse, pubescent, loosely imbricate.{\i  Balkan peninsula, extending northwards to N.W. Romania; S. & C. Italy.} Al Bu *Cz Gr *Hu It Ju Rm Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 17. Q. pyrenaica} Willd., {\i Sp. Pl.}{\b  4}({\b 1}): 451 (1805) ({\i Q. toza} Bast.). Deciduous tree up to 20 m, with numerous suckers; twigs tomentose, pendent. Leaves 8-16 cm, obovate or broadly oblong, deeply pinnatifid with 4-8 pairs of narrow, acute segments, more or less glabrous above, densely white-pubescent beneath; petiole up to 22 mm. Involucre usually not more than 15 × 14 mm; scales narrowly lanceolate, obtuse, loosely imbricate. 2n = 24.{\i  W. Europe northwards to N.W. France.} Ga Hs Lu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 18. Q. congesta} C. Presl in J. & C. Presl,{\i  Del. Prag.} 32 (1822). Deciduous tree or tall shrub; twigs tomentose. Leaves up to 14 cm, ovate to obovate-oblong, sinuate-lobed or pinnatifid, with 6-8 pairs of lobes, grey-green beneath with variably persistent pubescence; intercalary veins present. Peduncles up to 4 cm. Scales of involucre linear-lanceolate, erect but not appressed.•{\i  S.W. Italy and Sicilia; Sardegna.} It Sa Si.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 19. Q. pubescens} Willd., {\i Berlin. Baumz.} 279 (1796) ({\i Q. lanuginosa }Thuill.; incl. {\i Q. infectoria }Olivier, {\i Q. virgiliana }(Ten.) Ten.,{\i Q. brachyphylla} Kotschy, {\i Q. apennina} auct.). Deciduous tree up to 25 m, or shrub; twigs densely tomentose or pubescent. Leaves 4-12(-16) cm, sinuate to pinnatifid, densely tomentose beneath when young, sometimes glabrescent; petiole 12-15 mm. Fruits subsessile or shortly stalked; involucre up to 15(-20) × 14 mm; scales lanceolate, pubescent, appressed.{\i  W., C. & S. Europe, extending eastwards to Krym}. Al Au Be Bu Co Cr Cz Ga Ge Gr He Hs Hu It Ju *Po Rm Rs(W, K) Sa Si Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 A very variable species in need of further study. The following subspecies can be recognized.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Leaves very variable in size and toothing; 
\par
  involucre ± obconical .................................................... ({\b b}) subsp. {\b anatolica}
\par
1 Leaves ± uniform; involucre hemispherical
\par
2 Leaves usually at least 6 cm; 
\par
  scales of involucre subequal ........................................ ({\b a}) subsp. {\b pubescens}
\par
2 Leaves rarely more than 6 cm; 
\par
  scales of involucre unequal ............................................. ({\b c}) subsp.{\b  palensis}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp.{\b  pubescens} : Tree up to 25 m, or shrub 3-4 m. Leaves 6-12(-16) cm, pinnately lobed. Involucre hemispherical; scales subequal, more or less obtuse. 2n = 24.{\i  Throughout the range of the species, except Spain and Pyrenees}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp.{\b  anatolica} O. Schwarz,{\i  Feddes Repert.}{\b  33:} 336 (1934) ({\i Q. crispata} Steven): Shrub or small tree up to 6 m. Leaves 3-6 cm, variable in outline from subentire to deeply pinnatifid, glabrescent. Involucre more or less obconical; scales subequal, attenuate, apex acute.{\i  E. part of Balkan peninsula; Krym}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b c}) Subsp.{\b  palensis} (Palassou) O. Schwarz, {\i Notizbl. Bot. Gart. Berlin }{\b 13:} 16 (1936): Shrub or tree. Leaves 4-7 cm, sinuate-dentate or shallowly lobed, persistently tomentose beneath. Involucre hemispherical; scales unequal, the lower short, thickened and more or less fused; the upper longer, free, cuspidate. •{\i  Pyrenees; N.E. Spain}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b Q. sicula} Borzi in Lojac., {\i Fl. Sic.}{\b  2}({\b 2}): 374 (1907) ({\i Q. borzii} A. Camus), from Sicilia, is said to have a larger cupule and fruit 30-35 × 22-28 mm, but is otherwise similar to {\b 19}. It has not been reported recently.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b Q. cerrioides }Willk. & Costa, {\i Linnaea }{\b 30:} 123 (1859), from E. Spain, with toothed, ovate leaves usually more than 6 cm, is probably derived from {\b 19} by hybridization with {\b 21}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 20. Q. canariensis} Willd., {\i Enum. Pl. Horti Berol. }975 (1809). Semi-evergreen tree up to 30 m; twigs and young leaves densely floccose-tomentose, eventually glabrescent. Leaves 6-18 cm, elliptic-ovate, with 9-14 pairs of subacute teeth, glaucous beneath lateral veins parallel; petiole 8-30 mm. Peduncle short; lower scales of involucre ovate-lanceolate, tuberculate, the upper much smaller, loosely appressed.{\i  Spain and S. Portugal.} Hs Lu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 In N. Spain extensively hybridized with {\b 19}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 21. Q. faginea} Lam.,{\i  Encycl.Méth. Bot. }{\b 1:} 725 (1785) ({\i Q. lusitanica} auct., non Lam.; incl.{\i  Q. valentina} Cav., ,{\i Q. alpestris} Boiss.). Semi-evergreen shrub or tree up to 20 m. Leaves 4-10 cm, ovate, elliptical or obovate-oblong, sinuate-dentate with 5-12 pairs of more or less forwardly-directed triangular teeth, glabrescent and somewhat shining above, usually more or less tomentose beneath; petiole 4-20 mm. Involucre up to 25 × 12 mm; scales all broadly lanceolate or ovate. 2n = 24.{\i  Spain and Portugal}. Hs Lu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 22. Q. lusitanica} Lam., {\i Encycl.Méth. Bot.}{\b  1:} 719 (1785)
\par

\par
75}
\par