{\rtf1\ansi \deff4\deflang1033{\fonttbl{\f4\froman\fcharset0\fprq2 Times New Roman;}}{\colortbl;\red0\green0\blue0;\red0\green0\blue255;\red0\green255\blue255;\red0\green255\blue0;\red255\green0\blue255;\red255\green0\blue0;\red255\green255\blue0;\red255\green255\blue255;\red0\green0\blue128;\red0\green128\blue128;\red0\green128\blue0;\red128\green0\blue128;\red128\green0\blue0;\red128\green128\blue0;\red128\green128\blue128;\red192\green192\blue192;}{\stylesheet{\widctlpar \f4\fs20\lang2057 \snext0 Normal;}{\*\cs10 \additive Default Paragraph Font;}}{\info{\author dddd}{\operator dddd}{\creatim\yr1998\mo11\dy11\hr16\min10}{\revtim\yr1998\mo11\dy11\hr16\min10}{\version2}{\edmins0}{\nofpages3}{\nofwords868}{\nofchars4950}{\*\company  }{\vern57431}}\widowctrl\ftnbj\aenddoc\hyphcaps0 \fet0\sectd \linex0 {\*\pnseclvl1\pnucrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl2\pnucltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl3\pndec\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl4\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl5\pndec\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl6\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl7\pnlcrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl8\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl9\pnlcrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}
\pard\plain \ \f4\fs20\lang2057 {\fs24 
\par }{\fs28 (}{\i\fs28 Q. fruticosa}{\fs28  Brot., }{\i\fs28 Q. humilis }{\fs28 Lam.). Semi-evergreen, stoloniferous shrub up to 2 m, but usually much less; twigs purplish-brown, shining. Leaves 3-5 cm, coriaceous, glabrescent, obovate-oblong with cuneate, entire base and 4-6 pairs of forwardly-directed teeth in the distal part; petiole very short. Involucre 6-12 \'d7 8-12 mm. 2n = 24.}{\i\fs28  Portugal and S.W. Spain.}{\fs28  Hs Lu.
\par 
\par 
\par }
\pard \qc\ {\fs36 URTICALES
\par 
\par }{\fs28  }{\b\fs28 37.           ULMACEAE}{\fs28 
\par    }{\fs24  Edit. \'86T.G. Tutin and S.M. Walters
\par 
\par }
\pard \ {\fs28 Deciduous trees, rarely shrubs, without latex. Leaves alternate, simple, usually asymmetrical at base. Flowers all hermaphrodite or male and hermaphrodite. Perianth herbaceous; stamens erect in bud. Fruit a drupe or samara.
\par 
\par }
\pard \li200\ {\fs28 1 Bark fissured; leaves 2-serrate; flowers all hermaphrodite; 
\par   fruit a samara ..................................................................................... }{\b\fs28 1. Ulmus}{\fs28 
\par 1 Bark not fissured; leaves simply serrate; flowers male and hermaphrodite;
\par   fruit a drupe
\par 2 Bark scaling; perianth-segments connate; drupe dry ..................... }{\b\fs28 2. Zelkova}{\fs28 
\par 2 Bark not scaling; perianth-segments free; drupe fleshy .................... }{\b\fs28 3. Celtis}{\fs28 
\par 
\par }
\pard \qc\ {\fs28  }{\b\fs28 1.             Ulmus}{\fs28                  L.
\par         }{\fs24  By \'86T.G. Tutin.
\par 
\par }
\pard \ {\fs28 Bark fissured. Flowers all hermaphrodite, appearing before the leaves on the previous year's growth. Perianth-segments connate. Anthers purplish-red. Fruit a samara, winged all round but the wing emarginate at the apex.
\par 
\par There is considerable intraspecific variation in habit and leaf-shape which, combined with frequent vegetative propagation in }{\b\fs28 3}{\fs28  and }{\b\fs28 4}{\fs28 , often gives rise to more or less distinctive local populations, such as the taxa known as }{\i\fs28 U. angustifolia}{\fs28  (Weston) Weston, }{\i\fs28 U. coritana}{\fs28  Melville, and}{\i\fs28  U. plotii}{\fs28  Druce. Some of these have been given specific rank but intermediates between them, presumably due to hybridization, occur freely, and they are probably best treated as varieties. In addition, trees presumed to be hybrids between}{\b\fs28  1}{\fs28  and }{\b\fs28 4}{\fs28  (}{\i\fs28 U}{\fs28 . \'d7}{\i\fs28  hollandica}{\fs28  Miller) are commonly found. Species and putative hybrids, both often represented by selected clones, are frequently planted as ornamental trees.
\par 
\par During recent years populations of }{\i\fs28 Ulmus}{\fs28  in W. Europe have been devastated by a disease caused by the fungus }{\i\fs28 Ophiostoma ulmi}{\fs28  (}{\i\fs28 Ceratocystis ulmi}{\fs28 ).
\par 
\par Literature: R.H. Richens,}{\i\fs28  Elm.}{\fs28  Cambridge, 1983.
\par 
\par }
\pard \li200\ {\fs28 1 Pedicels 3-6 times as long as flowers; fruits ciliate, 
\par   pendulous on long pedicels ................................................................. }{\b\fs28 6. laevis}{\fs28 
\par 1 Pedicels shorter than flowers; fruits not ciliate, subsessile
\par 2 Base of longer side of leaf forming a rounded lobe \'b1 overlapping 
\par   and concealing the short petiole; upper surface of lamina scabrid;
\par   seed central in the fruit
\par 3 Fruit glabrous .................................................................................... }{\b\fs28 1. glabra}{\fs28 
\par 3 Fruit pubescent in the middle ......................................................... }{\b\fs28 2. elliptica}{\fs28 
\par 2 Base of longer side of leaf not overlapping or concealing the petiole;
\par   seed distinctly above the middle of the fruit
\par 4 Leaves suborbicular, scabrid to glabrescent above, with base of 
\par   long side rounded; fruit orbicular ..................................................... }{\b\fs28 3. procera}{\fs28 
\par 4 Leaves obovate to oblanceolate, usually smooth above, with base of long
\par   side making a 90\'b0 turn into the petiole; fruit narrowly to broadly obovate
\par 5 Young twigs glabrous or sparsely pubescent; leaves \'b1 glabrous 
\par   beneath, serrate ................................................................................... }{\b\fs28 4. minor}{\fs28 
\par 5 Young twigs densely white-pubescent; leaves densely grey-pubescent
\par   beneath, crenate-serrate ................................................................ }{\b\fs28 5. canescens}{\fs28 
\par 
\par }
\pard \ {\fs28    }{\b\fs28 1. U. glabra}{\fs28  Hudson,}{\i\fs28  Fl. Angl.}{\fs28  95 (1762) (}{\i\fs28 U. montana}{\fs28  With.,}{\i\fs28  U. scabra}{\fs28  Miller). Tree up to 40 m, without suckers. Twigs stout, hispid when young. Leaves suborbicular or broadly obovate to elliptical; lateral veins 12-18 pairs. Fruit 15-20 mm; seed central. 2n = 28.}{\i\fs28  Most of Europe, but rare in the north-east and much of the Mediterranean region}{\fs28 . Al Au Be Br Bu Co Cz Da Fe Ga Ge Gr Hb He Ho Hs Hu It Ju No Po Rm Rs(N, B, C, W, K, E) Su.
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 2. U. elliptica}{\fs28  C. Koch,}{\i\fs28  Linnaea}{\b\fs28  22:}{\fs28  599 (1849). Like }{\b\fs28 1}{\fs28  but leaves broader, ciliate; bud-scales with ferruginous hairs; fruit pubescent in the middle.}{\i\fs28  Ukraine, Krym; planted elsewhere.}{\fs28  Rs(W, K).
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 3. U. procera}{\fs28  Salisb.,}{\i\fs28  Prodr.}{\fs28  391 (1796). Tree up to c. 30 m, suckering. Twigs rather stout, persistently pubescent. Leaves suborbicular to ovate; lateral veins 10-12 pairs. Fruit 10-17 mm; seed above the middle. \bullet }{\i\fs28  W. & S. Europe}{\fs28  (}{\i\fs28 distribution imperfectly known}{\fs28 ). *Br Bu Ga Gr Hs Hu Ju Rm [Az Hb].
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 4. U. minor}{\fs28  Miller, }{\i\fs28 Gard. Dict.}{\fs28  ed. 8, no. 6 (1768) (}{\i\fs28 U. carpinifolia}{\fs28  G. Suckow, }{\i\fs28 U. campestris}{\fs28  auct., non L.,}{\i\fs28  U. diversifolia}{\fs28  Melville,}{\i\fs28  U. foliacea}{\fs28  sensu Hayek, }{\i\fs28 U. stricta}{\fs28  (Aiton) Lindley,}{\i\fs28  U. glabra}{\fs28  Miller, non Hudson). Tree up to 30(-40) m, suckering. Twigs usually slender, glabrous. Leaves obovate, ovate or oblanceolate, serrate; lateral veins 7-12 pairs. Fruit 7-17 mm; seed above the middle. 2n = 28.}{\i\fs28  Most of Europe, from England, S. Sweden and C. Ural southwards.}{\fs28  Al Au Be *Br Bu Co Cr Cz Da Ga Ge Gr He Ho Hs Hu It Ju Lu Po Rm Rs(B, C, W, K, E) Su Tu [Bl].
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 5. U. canescens}{\fs28  Melville,}{\i\fs28  Kew Bull.}{\b\fs28  1957:}{\fs28  499 (1958) (}{\i\fs28 U. minor}{\fs28  subsp.}{\i\fs28  canescens}{\fs28  (Melville) Browicz & Zielinski). Like }{\b\fs28 4}{\fs28  but the twigs in the first year densely and softly white-pubescent; leaves ovate-elliptical, crenate-serrate, densely greyish-pubescent; lateral veins 12-16(-18) pairs.}{\i\fs28  C. & E. Mediterranean region.}{\fs28  Cr Gr It Ju Sa Si [Rm].
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 6. U. laevis}{\fs28  Pallas,}{\i\fs28  Fl. Ross.}{\b\fs28  1}{\fs28 (}{\b\fs28 1}{\fs28 ): 75 (1784) (}{\i\fs28 U. effusa }{\fs28 Willd., }{\i\fs28 U. pedunculata }{\fs28 Foug.). Tree up to 35 m. Twigs softly pubescent or glabrous. Leaves suborbicular to ovate, glabrous or softly pubescent beneath; lateral veins 12-19 pairs. Fruit 10-12 mm; seed central. 2n = 28. }{\i\fs28 C., E. & S.E. Europe, extending westwards to C. France and northwards to S.E. Sweden}{\fs28  (}{\i\fs28 \'d6land}{\fs28 ). Al Au Be Bu Co Cz Fe Ga Ge ?Gr Hu Ju Po Rm Rs(N, B, C, W, E) Su Tu [He It].
\par 
\par 76}
\par }