{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 2.               Zelkova}              Spach
\par      

\pard\f0\fs24\qc  By †T.G. Tutin.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Bark smooth, scaling. Flowers male and hermaphrodite, appearing with the leaves on the young growth. Perianth-segments connate. Anthers yellow. Drupe dry.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. Z. abelicea} (Lam.) Boiss., {\i Fl. Or.}{\b  4:} 1159 (1879) ({\i Z. cretica }(Sm.) Spach). Shrub 3-5 m. Twigs slender, hispid. Leaves up to c. 2·5 cm, subsessile, ovate, obtuse, coarsely 7- or 9-dentate. Flowers white, scented. Drupe pubescent.{\i  Rocky mountain slopes. • Kriti.} Cr.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 3.             Celtis}              L.
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc  By †T.G. Tutin.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Bark smooth, not scaling. Flowers male and hermaphrodite, appearing with the leaves on the young growth. Perianth-segments free. Anthers yellow. Drupe fleshy.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Leaves entirely glabrous, even when young;
\par
  endocarp weakly reticulate ............................................................. {\b 3. glabrata}
\par
1 Leaves pubescent beneath, at least when young
\par
2 Leaves crenate or with broad, subobtuse teeth;
\par
  endocarp with 4 ridges ............................................................... {\b 4. tournefortii}
\par
2 Leaves sharply serrate; endocarp reticulate
\par
3 Leaves rounded or cordate at base;
\par
  endocarp strongly reticulate-rugose ............................................... {\b 1. australis}
\par
3 Leaves cuneate at base; endocarp weakly reticulate ................... {\b 2. caucasica}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. C. australis} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 1043 (1753). Tree up to 25 m, with grey bark. Leaves 4-15 × 1·5-6 cm, lanceolate to ovate-lanceolate, serrate, long-acuminate, rounded or cordate at base, scabrid above, pubescent beneath. Peduncle up to 3·5 cm. Drupe 9-12 mm in diameter, globose, glabrous, brownish-black when ripe; endocarp strongly reticulate-rugose. {\i S. Europe}. Al Bl Bu Co Ga Gr Hs It Ju Lu Rm Sa Si [He].
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. C. caucasica} Willd.,{\i  Sp. Pl.}{\b  4}({\b 2}): 994 (1806). Like{\b  1} but usually smaller; leaves rhombic-ovate, cuneate at base, smooth above; peduncle up to 1·7 cm; drupe reddish-brown when ripe; endocarp weakly reticulate.{\i  E. Bulgaria; one station in S. Jugoslavia.} Bu Ju. ({\i W. Asia}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 3. C. glabrata} Steven ex Planchon, {\i Ann. Sci. Nat.} ser. 3, {\b 10:} 285 (1848). Small tree or shrub 3-4 m. Leaves 4-6 × c. 4 cm, rhombic-ovate, cuspidate, serrate, cuneate at base, entirely glabrous, yellowish-green. Drupe globose; endocarp weakly reticulate.{\i  S. Krym}. Rs(K).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 4. C. tournefortii} Lam.,{\i  Encycl.Méth. Bot.}{\b  4:} 138 (1797) (incl.{\i  C. aspera }(Ledeb.) Steven,{\i  C. aetnensis} Strobl). Shrub or small tree 1-6 m. Leaves 5-7 × 2·5-4 cm, ovate, crenate or with broad subobtuse teeth, subcordate at base, scabrid to almost smooth on the upper surface, pubescent beneath, dark green. Drupe obovoid, brownish-yellow when ripe; endocarp with 4 ridges.{\i  S. Europe from Sicilia to Krym}. Cr Gr Ju Rs(K) Si.
\par

\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 38.         MORACEAE}
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc  Edit. †T.G. Tutin & S.M. Walters
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Trees or shrubs with latex. Monoecious or dioecious. Leaves alternate (rarely opposite); stipules caducous. Flowers usually densely spicate, capitate or enclosed in a fleshy, urceolate receptacle. Flowers with 3- or 4-partite perianth. Male flowers with 3 or 4 stamens opposite the perianth-segments. Female flowers with ovary 1- or 2-locular, superior; styles 1(2). Ovule anatropous or campylotropous. Fruit a drupelet often surrounded by the fleshy perianth; drupelets often crowded into syncarps.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Leaves entire; branches spiny ........................................................ {\b 3. Maclura}
\par
1 Leaves dentate or lobed; branches not spiny
\par
2 Stipule-scar encircling the stem; stamens straight in bud;
\par
  fruits borne on the inside of a fleshy pyriform structure ..................... {\b 4. Ficus}
\par
2 Stipule-scar not encircling the stem; stamens inflexed in bud;
\par
   fruits borne on a short axis
\par
3 Buds with 3-6 scales; syncarp cylindrical or ovoid .......................... {\b 2. Morus}
\par
3 Buds with 2 or 3 scales; syncarp globose ............................... {\b 1. Broussonetia}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 1.          Broussonetia}              L'Hér. ex Vent.
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc By †T.G. Tutin.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Not spiny; leaves toothed or lobed; buds with 2 or 3 scales. Dioecious. Male flowers in catkin-like inflorescences; perianth 4-partite; stamens 4, inflexed in bud. Female flowers in dense, globose, tomentose heads; perianth denticulate, with 4 very small teeth, forming a layer of pulp in fruit.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. B. papyrifera} (L.) Vent., {\i Tabl. Règne Végét. }{\b 3:} 548 (1799). Small tree; young twigs villous. Leaves 7-20 cm, ovate, serrate, sometimes lobed, scabrid above, grey-tomentose beneath. Syncarps c. 2 cm in diameter, orange, with red drupelets.{\i  Planted in S. Europe and sometimes naturalized.} [Ga Hs It Rm Sa Si.] ({\i E. Asia}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 2.              Morus}                 L.
\par    

\pard\f0\fs24\qc  By †T.G. Tutin.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Not spiny; leaves dentate or lobed; buds with 3-6 scales. Monoecious or dioecious. Flowers of both sexes in short, dense spikes. Perianth of male flowers 4-partite; stamens 4, inflexed in bud. Perianth of female flowers with 4 almost or quite free segments, becoming fleshy in fruit.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 Leaves pubescent beneath; syncarp subsessile ...................................... {\b 1. nigra}
\par
Leaves almost glabrous beneath; peduncle about as long as syncarp ..... {\b 2. alba}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. M. nigra} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 986 (1753). Tree up to 10 m, with stout, rough branches. Leaves 6-20 cm, broadly ovate-cordate, dentate or lobed, scabrid above, pubescent beneath. Syncarp 2-2·5 cm, subsessile, dark purple, very acid until completely ripe.{\i  Widely cultilvated for its fruit} ({\i Mulberry}),{\i  and locally naturalized in S. Europe.}[Al Bu Cr Gr Hs It Rm.] ({\i C. Asia}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b M. rubra} L.,{\i  loc. cit.} (1753), from E. & C. North America, like {\b 1} but up to 20 m, the leaves truncate or subcordate at base, the
\par

\par
77}
\par