{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 peduncle about ½ as long as the slightly larger syncarp, is cultivated in Turkey-in-Europe.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. M. alba} L.,{\i  loc. cit.} (1753). Tree up to 15 m, with slender, smooth branches. Leaves 6-18 cm, ovate, rounded or cordate at base, dentate or lobed, usually smooth above, glabrous, or pubescent on the veins only beneath. Peduncle about as long as the syncarp. Syncarp 1-2·5 cm, white, pinkish or purplish, edible long before it is ripe.{\i  Cultivated throughout S. Europe as food for silk worms and as a roadside tree, and frequently naturalized in S.E. Europe and occasionally elsewhere}. [Al Au Bu Cr Gr Hs Rm Rs(W, K, E).] ({\i China.})
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 3.              Maclura }               Nutt.
\par    

\pard\f0\fs24\qc  By †T.G. Tutin.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Spiny; leaves entire. Dioecious. Perianth 4-partite. Male flowers pedicellate, cymose-paniculate; stamens 4, inflexed in bud. Female flowers in subglobose or somewhat elongated heads.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. M. pomifera} (Rafin.) C.K. Schneider, {\i Ill. Handb. Laubholzk. }{\b 1:} 806 (1906) ({\i M. aurantiaca} Nutt.). Tree. Leaves 5-12 cm, ovate, acuminate. Syncarp 10-14 cm in diameter, subglobose, orange. {\i Cultivated as a hedge plant and for ornament, and locally naturalized in S. Europe.} [It Rm Rs(K).] ({\i North America.})
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 4.              Ficus}                    L.
\par   

\pard\f0\fs24\qc  By †T.G. Tutin.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Not spiny; leaves usually lobed; buds enclosed in the connate stipules. Stipules caducous, leaving a circular scar. Monoecious. Flowers enclosed within a fleshy urceolate structure. Stamens 4, straight in bud.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Literature: I.J. Condit & J. Enderud, {\i Hilgardia}{\b  25:} 1-663 (1 956).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. F. carica} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 1059 (1753). Spreading, deciduous shrub or small tree. Leaves 10-20 cm long and wide, usually palmately lobed, usually cordate at base, scabrid, sparsely hispid beneath. Syncarp 5-8 cm, pyriform, greenish- or brownish-violet. 2n = 26.{\i  Extensively cultivated and widely naturalized in S. Europe; perhaps native in the southern parts of the C. and E. Mediterranean region.} *Al *Bl *Co Cr *Ga Gr *Hs It *Ju Sa Si *Tu [Au Az Br Cz He Hu Lu Rs(K)]. ({\i S.W. Asia}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Many cultivars exist and the wild plant (var. {\i caprificus} Risso) also shows considerable variability. The syncarps (Figs) are eaten both fresh and dried.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b F. elastica} Roxb. ex Hornem.,{\i  Hort. Hafn. Suppl. }7 (1819), with entire, glossy, evergreen leaves, is commonly grown as a houseplant and, in the Mediterranean region, as a street tree.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b F. benghalensis} L.,{\i  Sp. Pl.} 1059 (1753), with massively spreading branches, an extensive system of prop-roots, and ovate, entire leaves, is grown as a shade tree in warmer parts of the Mediterranean region.
\par

\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 39.        CANNABACEAE }
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc  Edit. †T.G. Tutin & J.R. Edmondson
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Herbs without latex. Usually dioecious. Male flowers pedicellate; perianth 5-partite; stamens erect in bud. Female flowers sessile; perianth undivided; fruit an achene enclosed in the persistent perianth.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Climber; female inflorescence cone-like ......................................... {\b 1. Humulus}
\par
Erect herb; female inflorescence not cone-like ................................ {\b 2. Cannabis}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 1.            Humulus}                 L.
\par  

\pard\f0\fs24\qc  By †T.G. Tutin (Ed.1) revised by J.R. Akeroyd (Ed.2)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Climbers. Inflorescences pendent, glandular; the male much-branched; the female cone-like.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Leaves 3- to 5-lobed; inflorescence distinctly enlarged in fruit ......... {\b 1. lupulus}
\par
Leaves 5- to 7-lobed; inflorescence scarcely enlarged in fruit ........ {\b 2. scandens}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. H. lupulus} L.,{\i  Sp. Pl.} 1028 (1753). Stems up to 6 m, rough with deflexed hairs. Leaves opposite, broadly ovate-cordate, usually deeply 3- to 5-lobed and coarsely dentate; lobes acuminate, petiole shorter than to about as long as the lamina. Male flowers c. 5 mm in diameter. Female inflorescence 15-20 mm, enlarging in fruit; flowers subtended by persistent ovate, acute, pale green bracts. Cone-like infructescence c. 30 mm. 2n = 20.{\i  Most of Europe.} All except Az Bl Cr Fa Is Sb. Not native in Hb.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 The infructescences (Hops) are widely used in brewing and the plant is consequently cultivated and often naturalized, so that its natural distribution is now obscured.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. H. scandens} (Loureiro) Merr., Trans.{\i  Amer. Philos. Soc.,} nov. ser.,{\b  24:} 138 (1935) ({\i H. japonicus }Siebold & Zucc.). Like {\b 1} but annual; stems rougher; leaves deeply and palmately 5- to 7-lobed, petiole longer than blade; inflorescence scarcely enlarging in fruit; bracts ovate-orbicular, cordate, cuspidate, green,{\i  Cultivated for ornament, and naturalized in N. Italy, W. Hungary and perhaps elsewhere}. [Hu It.] ({\i E. Asia.})
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 2.           Cannabis}                L.
\par   

\pard\f0\fs24\qc  By †T.G. Tutin (Ed.1) revised by J.R. Akeroyd (Ed.2)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Erect herb. Inflorescences erect, glandular; the male much-branched; the female racemose.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Literature: E. Small & A. Cronquist,{\i  Taxon }{\b 25:} 405 435 (1976).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. C. sativa} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 1027 (1753). Stems up to 2·5 m. Leaves usually alternate, except the lower, 3- to 9-palmatisect; lobes lanceolate, acute, serrate. Nut smooth, not articulated at the base. 2n = 20.{\i  Native on alluvial sands in S.E. Russia; widely cultivated for its fibre (Hemp), oil and narcotic resin (Marijuana), and naturalized in a large part of Europe; a frequent casual elsewhere}. Rs(E) [Au Be Bu Co Cz Ga Ge Gr He Hs Hu It Ju Po Rm Rs(C) Sa Si]. ({\i S. & W. Asia}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 A variable species, with a long history of domestication and selection by man. Var.{\i  spontanea }Vavilov ({\i C. ruderalis} Janisch.), which is found as a weed of cultivated fields in S.E. Russia and Romania, differs in its smaller nut, with a marbled surface, distinctly articulated at the base and easily detached.
\par

\par
78}
\par