{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 40.         URTICACEAE}
\par      

\pard\f0\fs24\qc  Edit. J.R. Edmondson.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Herbs, small shrubs or rarely climbers, without latex. Leaves opposite or alternate, simple, usually stipulate. Flowers usually unisexual. Perianth 4- or 5-merous, often persistent. Male flowers with (1-)4 or 5 stamens opposite the perianth-segments and inflexed in bud, often with rudimentary ovary. Female flowers often with small staminodes; ovary superior, 1-locular, sometimes adnate to perianth; style simple; ovule 1, orthotropous. Fruit an achene. Seeds usually with endosperm.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b Boehmeria nivea} (L.) Gaud.-Beaup. in Freyc.,{\i  Voy. Bot.} 499 (1830), from China, a herb or shrub 50-200 cm, with leaves 6-30 cm, alternate, stipulate and white-tomentose beneath, is cultivated in S. Europe for fibre and ornament, and is perhaps locally naturalized.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Leaves densely white-pubescent beneath; female flowers 
\par
  without perianth; male flowers with 1 stamen and 3- to 5-toothed
\par 
  cylindrical perianth ..................................................................... {\b 5. Forsskalea}
\par
1 Leaves green beneath; female flowers with perianth enclosing
\par
  the achene, male flowers with 4 stamens and deeply lobed perianth
\par
2 Leaves opposite, variously toothed or lobed, rarely entire
\par
3 Leaves 10 mm or more, usually serrate and with stinging hairs ...... {\b 1. Urtica}
\par
3 Leaves up to 5 mm, entire, without stinging hairs .............................. {\b 2. Pilea}
\par
2 Leaves alternate, entire
\par
4 Flowers solitary; stems very slender, creeping and rooting
\par
  at the nodes ................................................................................... {\b 4. Soleirolia}
\par
4 Flowers clustered, stems not creeping or rooting at the nodes .... {\b 3. Parietaria}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 1.            Urtica}              L.
\par   

\pard\f0\fs24\qc  By P.W. Ball (Ed.1) revised by D.V. Geltman (Ed.2)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Annual or perennial herbs, with stinging hairs. Leaves opposite, usually variously toothed or deeply lobed; stipules 4, free or connate in pairs. Inflorescence axillary, spike-like, with clustered ultimate branches. Flowers unisexual, plants monoecious or dioecious. Perianth 4-merous. Female flowers with more or less unequal perianth-segments, the 2 larger enclosing the achene.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Literature: D.V. Geltman,{\i  Bot. Zurn. }{\b 71:} 1480-1490 (1986).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Leaves 3- to 5-lobed; lobes serrate ............................................. {\b 7. cannabina}
\par
1 Leaves entire to serrate, but not lobed
\par
2 Female flowers in long-pedunculate, globose lateral heads ....... {\b 11. pilulifera}
\par
2 All flowers in spike-like lateral racemes (rarely in few-
\par
  flowered clusters)
\par
3 Plants with male and female flowers in the same raceme; 
\par
  petiole of lower leaves usually at least ½ as long as the lamina
\par
4 Perennial; racemes 1-6 cm; perianth-segments of the female 
\par
  flowers subequal in fruit .............................................................. {\b 1. atrovirens}
\par
4 Annual; racemes not more than 2 cm; outer perianth-segments 
\par
  of the female flowers shorter than the ½ inner in fruit ....................... {\b 9. urens}
\par
3 Plants usually dioecious, or with male and female flowers in separate
\par
  racemes; petiole of lower leaves not more than ½ as long as the lamina
\par
5 Stipules connate in pairs at least to ¾; raceme-axis usually not
\par
  branched, male with the flowers usually inserted unilaterally 
\par
  on inflated peduncles ........................................................... {\b 10. membranacea}
\par
5 Stipules free or connate at base only, raceme-axis usually branched;
\par
  peduncles of the male racemes not inflated
\par
6 Female racemes shorter than petiole of subtending leaf; 
\par
  patent or pendent; male racemes erecto-patent; perianth glabrous
\par
  in fruit; leaves cuneate to subtruncate at base ................................ {\b 8. rupestris}
\par
6 All racemes pendent or patent, longer than the petiole;
\par
  perianth hispid in fruit; leaves truncate, rounded to subcordate at base
\par
7 Fruit narrowly elliptical, 1·6-2 mm; stipules broadly triangular, 
\par
  upper connate at base ................................................................... {\b 2. kioviensis}
\par
7 Fruit ovate or ovate-elliptical, 1·1-1·3 mm; stipules oblong,
\par
  always free ....................................................................... ({\b 3-6}). {\b dioica} group
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. U. atrovirens} Req. ex Loisel.,{\i  Mém. Soc. Linn. Paris}{\b  6:} 432 (1827). Perennial 30-100 cm, dull green; monoecious. Leaves 2-7 cm, lanceolate, ovate or suborbicular, cordate or cuneate at base, serrate; petiole about as long as the lamina; stipules 4 at each node. Racemes longer than the petiole, with both male and female flowers, patent or pendent in fruit. Female flowers with perianth-segments subequal, pubescent. 2n = 26. • {\i W. Mediterranean region}. Bl Co It Sa.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. U. kioviensis} Rogow.,{\i  Bull. Soc. Nat. Moscou }{\b 16:} 324 (1843). Monoecious; leaves and stems bright green, glabrescent; stem up to 200 cm, often branched and rooting at the lower nodes; stipules green, broadly triangular, upper connate at base; perianth of female flowers more or less glabrous, the 2 outer segments 1/2-2/3 as long as the 2 inner. 2n = ?22, 26. In aquatic vegetation or in very damp woods. C. & E. Europe. Au Bu Cz Ge Hu Rm Rs(C, W, E).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    ({\b 3-6}). {\b U. dioica} group. Perennial 30-150(-250) cm, with long rhizome, usually dioecious. Leaves (1-)3-12(-15) cm, ovate to lanceolate, acuminate, rounded, obtuse or cordate at base, serrate; petiole not more than ½ as long as the lamina; stipules 4 at each node. Racemes up to 10 cm, usually exceeding the subtending petiole, patent or pendent in fruit. Female flowers pubescent or hispid, with outer perianth-segments less than ½ as long as the inner.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Four taxa probably meriting specific rank can be recognized, although sometimes intermediate forms may be found.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Lamina with stinging hairs, often also ± pilose ................................ {\b 6. dioica}
\par
1 Lamina without stinging hairs
\par
2 Lamina and stem-internodes glabrous or nearly so ....................... {\b 3. sondenii}
\par
2 Lamina (at least beneath) and stem-internodes pubescent
\par
3 Lamina sparsely pilose, often only on nerves beneath lowest 
\par
  node of inflorescence at the 7th-14th whorl ...................................... {\b 6. dioica}
\par
3 Lamina (at least beneath) densely pubescent; lowest node of 
\par
  inflorescence at the 13th-20th whorl
\par
4 Indumentum consisting of hairs 0·4-0·7 mm long;
\par

\par
79}
\par