{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 1 Cones appearing at the same time as, or present on, green stems
\par
3 Branches whorled
\par
4 Main stem 10-20 mm in diameter, branched to apex, whitish, 
\par
  almost smooth, with 20-40 fine ribs ............................................ {\b 10. telmateia}
\par
4 Main stem rarely more than 7 mm in diameter, green; 
\par
  ribs well marked, less than 20
\par
5 Sheaths of main stem with broad, subacute teeth, some being 
\par
  laterally joined and appearing fewer than the grooves;
\par 
  branches with secondary branches ............................................. {\b 7. sylvaticum}
\par
5 Sheaths of main stem with distinct, subulate teeth clearly equal 
\par
  in number to the grooves; branches simple
\par
6 Central hollow at least 4/5 the diameter of the stem;
\par
  teeth not keeled .............................................................................. {\b 5. fluviatile}
\par
6 Central hollow less than 2/3 the diameter of the stem; 
\par
  teeth with 1 or 2 keels
\par
7 Lowest internode of branches much shorter than sheath on main stem;
\par
  branches hollow
\par
8 Stem usually with 5-10 grooves; central hollow less than 
\par
  ½ the diameter of stem; cone obtuse ............................................... {\b 6. palustre}
\par
8 Stem with 8-20 grooves; central hollow more than 1/2 the 
\par
  diameter of stem; cone apiculate .......................................... {\b 2. ramosissimum}
\par
7 Lowest internode of branches longer than sheath on main stem;
\par
  branches solid
\par
9 Central hollow c. ¼ the diameter of main stem; branches 
\par
  mostly 4-angled, ascending or suberect ........................................... {\b 9. arvense}
\par
9 Central hollow c. ½ the diameter of main stem; branches 
\par
  mostly 3-angled, horizontal or recurved ......................................... {\b 8. pratense}
\par
3 Branches absent or not in obvious whorls
\par
10 Cone apiculate; stems usually persistent; stomata below level
\par
   of other epidermal cells
\par
11 Teeth of leaf-sheaths caducous .................................................... {\b 1. hyemale}
\par
11 Teeth of leaf-sheaths persistent
\par
12 Stem freely branched; central hollow c. ½ the diameter 
\par
   of main stem ......................................................................... {\b 2. ramosissimum}
\par
12 Stem simple or branched only from base; central hollow c. 1/4 the
\par
   diameter of main stem, or absent
\par
13 Main stem with central hollow c. ¼ the diameter of main stem; 
\par
   sheaths with 6-8 teeth ................................................................ {\b 3. variegatum}
\par
13 Main stem solid; sheaths with 3 or 4 teeth ................................ {\b 4. scirpoides}
\par
10 Cone obtuse; stems not persistent; stomata superficial
\par
14 Central hollow at least 4/5 the diameter of main stem;
\par
   teeth without ribs ........................................................................... {\b 5. fluviatile}
\par
14 Central hollow less than 2/3 the diameter of main stem; teeth with ribs
\par
15 Outermost cavities about the same size as the central hollow;
\par
   branches hollow, their lowest internodes much shorter than
\par
   sheath on main stem ........................................................................ {\b 6. palustre}
\par
15 Outermost cavities smaller than the central hollow; branches solid, 
\par
   their lowest internodes longer than sheath on main stem ................ {\b 9. arvense}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Subgen. {\b Hippochaete} (Milde) Baker. Stomata sunk below level of other epidermal cells. Cones apiculate. Stems all alike, hard, usually persistent.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. E. hyemale} L.? {\i Sp. Pl.} 1062 (1753) ({\i Hippochaete hyemalis} (L.) Bruhin). Stem 30-100 cm × 4-6 mm, persistent, simple; ridges with 2 rows of tubercles; grooves 10-30; sheaths about as long as broad, whitish with a black band at top and bottom; teeth very soon caducous; central hollow 2/3 or more the diameter of the stem. Cone 8-15 mm. 2n = c. 216. {\i Damp or shady places. Most of Europe, but rare in the Mediterranean region}. Al Au Be Br Bu ?Co Cz Da Fa Fe Ga Ge Gr Hb He Ho Hs Hu Is It Ju No Po Rm Rs (N, B, C, W, E) Su Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    The following hybrids, both of which have abortive spores, occur locally, sometimes in the absence of the parents.{\b  E.} ×{\b  moorei} Newman,{\i  Phytologist} ({\i Newman}) {\b 5:} 19 (1854) ({\i E. occidentale} (Hy) Coste,{\i  Hippochaete} ×{\i  moorei} (Newman) H.P. Fuchs) is like {\b 1} but has more slender, not persistent, stems, ridges with irregular tubercles or cross-bands, and the teeth of leaf-sheaths more persistent. It is probably{\b  1} × {\b 2}.{\b  E}. x{\b  trachyodon} A. Braun,{\i  Flora} ({\i Regensb}.) {\b 22:} 305 (1839) ({\i Hippochaete} ×{\i  trachyodon} (A. Braun) Börner) is intermediate between {\b 1} and{\b  3}, and is probably a hybrid.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. E. ramosissimum} Desf., {\i Fl. Atl.}{\b  2:} 398 (1799) ({\i Hippochaete ramosissima} (Desf.) Börner; incl.{\i  E. campanulatum} Poiret). Stem 10-100 cm × 3-9 mm, usually dying in autumn, freely branched, with scattered tubercles; grooves 8-20; sheaths green, becoming brown with a dark band at the bottom; teeth dark, with a narrow, scarious border; central hollow 1/2-2/3 the diameter of the stem. Branches hollow; lowest internode much shorter than sheath on main stem. Cone 6-12 mm. 2n = c. 216.{\i  C. & S. Europe, extending locally northwards to the Netherlands and C. Ural}. Al Au Az Bl Bu Co Cr Cz Ga Ge Gr He Ho Hs Hu It Ju Lu Po Rm Rs(*B, C, W, K, E) Sa Si Tu [Br].
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 3. E. variegatum} Schleicher,{\i  Ann. Bot.} ({\i Usteri}){\b  21:} 124 (1797) ({\i Hippochaete variegata} (Schleicher) Bruhin). Stem 10-30(-50) cm, up to 3 mm in diameter, persistent, simple, or branched from the base; ridges finely sulcate, with 2 rows of minute tubercles; grooves 4-10; sheaths green with a black band at the apex; teeth broadly scarious with a dark centre; central hollow c. 1/4 the diameter of the stem. Cone 5-7 mm. 2n = c. 216.{\i  N., W. & C. Europe, extending to S. Romania and C. Ukraine}. Au Be Br Cz Da Fa Fe Ga Ge Gr Hb He Ho Hs Hu Is It Ju No Po Rm Rs(N, B, C, W) Sb Su.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 4. E. scirpoides} Michx, {\i Fl. Bor.-Amer.}{\b  2:} 281 (1803). Like {\b 3} but stem up to 20 cm × 1-1·5 mm, with 3 or 4 wide, deeply sulcate ridges, so that it appears to be 6- to 8-angled; tubercles large, in 1 row on each angle; central hollow absent. 2n = c. 216.{\i  N.E. Europe, extending westwards to Norway and locally southwards to S.E. Russia.} Fe Is No Rs(N, B, C, E) Sb Su.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Subgen.{\b  Equisetum}. Stomata not sunk below the other epidermal cells. Cones obtuse. Fertile and sterile stems sometimes dissimilar, never persistent.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 5. E. fluviatile} L.,{\i  Sp. Pl.} 1062 (1753) ({\i E. limosum} L.,{\i  E. heleocharis} Ehrh.). Rhizome glabrous. Stem 30-150 cm × 2-12 mm, simple or with irregularly whorled branches; ridges very narrow, smooth; grooves 10-30; sheaths green, closely applied to stem; teeth black, at least at the apex, not ribbed; central hollow at least 4/5 the diameter of the stem. Cone 10-20 mm. 2n = c. 216.{\i  Marshes and shallow water. Most of Europe, but rare in much of the south.} Al Au Be Br Bu Cz Da Fa Fe Ga Ge Gr Hb He Ho Hs Hu Is It Ju No Po Rm Rs(N, B, C, W, E) Su.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b E.} × {\b litorale} Kühlew. ex Rupr.,{\i  Beitr. Pfl. Russ. Reich. }{\b 4:} 91 (1845) ({\b 5} × {\b 9}) is like {\b 5} but with stems more deeply grooved, the
\par

\par
8}
\par