{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    upper internodes 1·4-2 times longer than subtending petiole, 
\par
  stipules 1-2 mm wide .............................................................. {\b 4. galeopsifolia}
\par
4 Indumentum consisting of hairs 0·25-0·3 mm long, upper 
\par
  internodes shorter to slightly longer than subtending petiole,
\par
   stipules 3-4 mm wide ................................................................. {\b 5. pubescens}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 3. U. sondenii} (Simmons) Avr. ex Geltman,{\i  Nov. Syst. Pl. Vasc.} ({\i Leningrad}) {\b 25:} 76 (1988) ({\i U. gracilis} auct. non Aiton). Lamina and stem-internodes glabrous, bright green to yellow-green, lanceolate to ovate-lanceolate, cuneate, rounded, more or less cordate at base. Stipules 1-2 mm wide. 2n = 26.{\i  By rivers and in damp woods. N. & E. Europe.} Fe No Rs(N, C, W, E) Su.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 4. U. galeopsifolia} Wierzb. ex Opiz,{\i  Naturalientausch }{\b 9: }107 (1825). Lamina without stinging hairs, densely pubescent at least beneath, dark green, ovate to ovate-lanceolate, rounded, cordate or cuneate at base. Stipules 1-2 mm wide. Lowest node of inflorescence at the 13th-20th whorl. 2n = 26, 52. {\i Damp habitats, especialy Alnus woodlands, swampy river valleys. W., C. & E. Europe.} ?Au Br Bu Cz ?Ge ?Hb Ho Hu ?Po Rm Rs(C, B, W, E) ?Su.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 5. U. pubescens} Ledeb.,{\i  Fl. Altaica}{\b  4:} 240 (1833). Like{\b  4} but indumentum shorter, 0·25-0·3 mm long; upper internodes shorter or only slightly longer than the subtending petioles, marginate teeth deeper; stipules 3-4 mm wide. 2n = 26.{\i  Damp vegetation in Volga delta and lower Dnepr.} Rs(W, E).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 6. U. dioica} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 984 (1753). Lamina usually with stinging hairs, often also more or less pilose, if not, only sparsely pilose, mainly on nerves, ovate to ovate-lanceolate, rounded, cuneate or cordate at base. Stipules 1-2(-3) mm wide. Lowest node of inflorescence at the 7th-14th whorl. 2n = 48, 52, rarely 26.{\i  Nitrophilous habitats, ruderal places, damp woods. Throughout Europe, but only as an introduced weed in some districts.} All except Az Bl Cr Sb.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 7. U. cannabina} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 984 (1753). Stem up to 200 cm, with stinging hairs confined to the inflorescence; leaves 3- to 5-lobed, with serrate lobes; racemes erecto-patent.{\i  Doubtfully naturalized in Russia and Ukraine; sometimes planted elsewhere}. [Rs(C, W, E).] ({\i C. & N. Asia.})
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 8. U. rupestris} Guss., {\i Cat. Pl. Boccad.} 83 (1821). Perennial 30-100 cm; usually dioecious. Leaves 2-10 cm, ovate-acuminate, cuneate or truncate at base, serrate; petiole not more than 1 as long as the lamina; stipules 4 at each node. Racemes unisexual; female not more than 2 cm, shorter than the subtending petiole, patent or pendent in fruit; male 2-8 cm, erecto-patent. Female flowers with subglabrous perianth-segments. •{\i  Sicilia.} Si.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b U. morifolia} Poiret in Lam.,{\i  Encycl.Méth. Bot.}{\b  12:} 223 (1816), from Madeira and Islas Canarias, a woody perennial with small, long-pedunculate racemes, may be becoming naturalized in Açores.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 9. U. urens} L.,{\i  Sp. Pl.} 984 (1753). Annual 5-60(-80) cm, clear green; monoecious. Leaves 1-4(-6) cm, ovate, rounded to cuneate at base, usually deeply serrate; petiole as long as the lamina; stipules 4 at each node. Racemes not more than 2 cm, usually not longer than the subtending petiole, appearing as few-flowered axillary clusters, with numerous female and few male flowers, erecto-patent in fruit. Perianth-segments of female flowers ciliate on the margin, glabrous or sparsely hispid on the back. 2n = 24, 26, 52.{\i  Mainly on cultivated or disturbed soil. Throughout Europe, but doubtfully native in much of the north}. All except Az Fa Sb.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 10. U. membranacea} Poiret in Lam.,{\i  Encycl.Méth. Bot.}{\b  4:} 638 (1798) ({\i U. dubia} Forskål, nom. illegit.,{\i  U. caudata} Vahl, non Burm. fil.). Annual 15-80 cm; monoecious. Leaves 2-6(-10) cm, ovate, subcordate at base, serrate; petiole almost as long as the lamina; stipules connate in pairs. Racemes unisexual, the lower female, shorter than the petiole, the upper male, longer than the petiole, erecto-patent; flowers inserted unilaterally on an inflated axis. 2n = 26.{\i  Mediterranean region and W. Europe, northwards to N. France; Açores.} Az Bl Co Cr Ga Gr Hs It Ju Lu Sa Si Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 11. U. pilulifera} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 983 (1753) ({\i U. dodartii} L.). Annual 30-100 cm; monoecious. Leaves 2-6 cm, ovate, truncate to subcordate at base, serrate or entire; petiole almost as long as the lamina; stipules 4 at each node. Racemes unisexual; female long-pedunculate with flowers in globose heads; male spicate. Female flowers with inflated perianth. 2n = 24. {\i S. Europe ;formerly a frequent casual further north, but now very rare.} Al Bl Bu Co Cr Ga Gr Hs It Ju Lu Rs(W, K) Sa Si Tu [Ge].
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 2.              Pilea}              Lindley
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc  By P.W. Ball.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Annual herbs without stinging hairs. Leaves opposite, entire, fleshy; stipules apparently absent. Inflorescence axillary, globose. Flowers uni- or bisexual; female flowers with 3-lobed perianth, 1 lobe larger, cucullate, enclosing the achene.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. P. microphylla} (L.) Liebm.,{\i  Danske Vid. Selsk.} ser. 5, {\b 2:} 296 (1851). Stems up to 40 cm, procumbent, fleshy, much-branched, glabrous. Leaves 1·5-5 mm, obovate to elliptical, obtuse. Inflorescence contracted, globose, shorter than the subtending leaves; flowers minute. {\i Naturalized in the Balkan peninsula}. [Gr Ju.] ({\i Tropical America}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 3.               Parietaria}            L.
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc  By P.W. Ball.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Annual or perennial herbs, sometimes woody at the base, without stinging hairs. Leaves alternate, entire; stipules absent. Flowers hermaphrodite or unisexual, in axillary, bracteate, 3- to many-flowered cymes, 1 or more in each leaf-axil. Perianth green, cylindrical and 4-toothed in female flowers, 4-partite in hermaphrodite and male flowers. Achenes enclosed in the perianth and sometimes in the bracts.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Bracts becoming brown, hard and connate, forming a 5-lobed 
\par
  involucre around the achene; leaves rarely more than 1 cm .............. {\b 7. cretica}
\par
1 Bracts remaining herbaceous, free or slightly connate at the base; 
\par
  leaves often more than 1 cm
\par
2 Bracts shorter than the perianth in fruit
\par
3 Annual; stem sparsely pubescent; petiole of lower leaves usually 
\par
  equalling or longer than lamina; achenes brown or olive ......... {\b 3. mauritanica}
\par
3 Perennial; stem usually densely pubescent; petiole of lower 
\par
  leaves shorter than lamina; achenes black
\par
4 Erect, usually more than 30 cm; leaves 3-12 cm; bracts
\par
  completely free ............................................................................ {\b 1. officinalis}
\par
4 Procumbent or ascending, rarely more than 40 cm; leaves not more 
\par
  than 5 cm; bracts shortly connate at base ......................................... {\b 2. judaica}
\par
2 Bracts equalling or exceeding the perianth in fruit
\par

\par
80}
\par