{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 5 Perianth-lobes incurved and connivent at the apex in fruit; 
\par
  achenes symmetrical at the apex ................................................... {\b 4. lusitanica}
\par
5 Perianth-lobes patent or erect, not connivent in fruit;
\par
  achenes asymmetrically apiculate
\par
6 Leaves ovate to ovate-orbicular; lobes of perianth ± patent ............ {\b 5. debilis}
\par
6 Leaves lanceolate; lobes of perianth erect ............................. {\b 6. pensylvanica}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. P. officinalis} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 1052 (1753) ({\i P. erecta }Mert. & Koch). Perennial; stem 30-100 cm, erect, simple or slightly branched, densely pubescent. Leaves 3-12 cm, ovate-lanceolate or elliptical, long-acuminate; petiole shorter than the lamina. Bracts free, shorter than the perianth. Achenes black. 2n = 14.{\i  Damp, shady rocks and banks. C. & S.E. Europe, extending to Corse and C. France.} Al Au Co Cz Ga Ge Gr He *Ho Hu It Ju Rm Rs(W, K) Sa Si Tu [Be Da Po Su].
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. P. judaica} L.,{\i  Fl. Palaest. }32 (1756) ({\i P. officinalis} auct., non L.,{\i  P. diffusa }Mert. & Koch,{\i  P. ramiflora} Moench). Like {\b 1} but the stem usually not more than 40 cm, procumbent or ascending, much-branched; leaves up to 5 cm, ovate-acuminate; bracts shortly connate at base. 2n = 26. {\i S.W. & W.C. Europe}. Al *Au Az Be Bl Br Bu Co Cr Ga Ge Gr Hb He Ho Hs It Ju Lu Rm Rs(K) Sa Si Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 3. P. mauritanica} Durieu in Duchartre,{\i  Rev. Bot.}{\b  2:} 427 (1847). Annual, erect or diffuse; stem 5-40 cm, sparsely pubescent. Leaves up to 5 cm, ovate-acuminate; petioles of the lower leaves usually equalling or longer than the lamina. Bracts shorter than the perianth; perianth 2-3 mm in fruit. Achenes brown or olive. {\i S. half of Iberian peninsula; Islas Baleares; .Sicilia.} Bl Hs Lu Si.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 4. P. lusitanica} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 1052 (1753). Slender, diffuse annual 5-30 cm. Leaves up to 4 cm, broadly ovate-acuminate to ovate-orbicular. Bracts equalling or longer than the perianth; perianth not more than 1·5 mm, the lobes incurved at apex and connivent in fruit. Achenes brown or olive, the apex symmetrical. {\i Shady rocks and walls. S. & S.E. Europe.} Bl Bu Co Cr Ga Gr Hs It Ju Lu Rm Rs(W, K) Sa Si.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Leaves usually 2-4 cm; bracts scarcely accrescent ........... ({\b b}) subsp.{\b  serbica}
\par
1 Leaves usually less than 2 cm; bracts conspicuously accrescent
\par
2 Petiole shorter than the lamina; bracts linear ................. ({\b a}) subsp.{\b  lusitanica}
\par
2 Petiole longer than the lamina; bracts ovate or ovate-lanceolate
\par
  ..................................................................................... ({\b c}) subsp. {\b chersonensis}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp.{\b  lusitanica} : Leaves not more than 2 cm; petiole shorter than the lamina. Bracts linear, conspicuously accrescent. 2n = 16. {\i S. Europe}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b serbica} (Pancic) P.W. Ball, {\i Feddes Repert.}{\b  68:} 186 (1963) ({\i P. serbica} Pancic). Leaves (1-)2-4 cm; petiole about as long as the lamina. Bracts lanceolate, scarcely accrescent.{\i  N. part of Balkan peninsula and Romania}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b c}) Subsp.{\b  chersonensis} (A.F. Láng & Szov.) Chrtek in Rech. fil.,{\i  Fl. Iran.}{\b  105:} 10 (1974) ({\i P. chersonensis} A.F. Láng & Szov.): Leaves usually less than 2 cm; petiole longer than the lamina. Bracts ovate to ovate-lanceolate, conspicuously accrescent. {\i Ukraine}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 5. P. debilis} G. Forster, {\i Fl. Ins. Austral. Prodr.} 73 (1786) ({\i P. micrantha }Ledeb.). Like{\b  4} but stem up to 50 cm, usually stouter; leaves up to 6 cm; perianth 1-2 mm in fruit, the lobes patent, not connivent; achenes asymmetrically apiculate.{\i  S. Ural; naturalized in Açores}. Rs(C) [Az]. ({\i Widespread in the S. Hemisphere and in parts of Asia, N. Africa and Central America}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 6. P. pensylvanica} Muhl. ex Willd., {\i Sp. Pl. }{\b 4}({\b 2}): 955 (1806). Annual; stems 20-50 cm, erect, usually sparingly branched. Leaves 2-6 cm, lanceolate, acuminate. Bracts longer than the perianth; perianth 1·8-2·5 mm in fruit, the lobes erect, not connivent. Achenes pale brown, asymmetrically apiculate. {\i Shady places. Naturalized in Germany} ({\i Berlin}). [Ge.] ({\i North America}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 7. P. cretica} L.,{\i  Sp. Pl.} 1052 (1753). A diffuse or ascending annual or perennial up to 50 cm. Leaves up to 1 cm, ovate or elliptical. Bracts of each cyme becoming brown and connate, forming a 5-lobed involucre around the fruit. Achenes brown.{\i  Greece and Aegean region; also on small islands W. & S. of Sicilia.} Cr Gr Si.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 4.             Soleirolia}          Gaud.-Beaup.
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc  By P.W. Ball.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Like{\i  Parietaria} but creeping and rooting at the nodes; flowers solitary, surrounded by an involucre of 1 bract and 2 bracteoles; achene enclosed by the perianth and involucre. ({\i Helxine} Req., non L.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. S. soleirolii} (Req.) Dandy, {\i Feddes Repert.}{\b  70:} 1 (1964) ({\i Helxine soleirolii} Req.,{\i  Parietaria soleirolii }(Req.) Sprengel, {\i S. corsica} Gaud.-Beaup.). Pubescent, very slender perennial 5-20 cm. Leaves 2-6 mm, suborbicular, 3-veined. Flowers unisexual, the lower female, the upper male. 2n = 20.•{\i  Islands of W. Mediterranean region; often cultivated and naturalized in W. Europe.} *Bl Co It Sa [Az Br Ga Hb Ho Lu].
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 5.             Forsskalea}                L.
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc  By P.W. Ball.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Perennial herbs, woody at the base. Leaves alternate, crenate-dentate; stipules free. Inflorescence axillary, cymose, bracteate; flowers unisexual. Male flowers with tubular, 3- to 5-toothed perianth; stamen 1. Female flowers without perianth; ovary woolly.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. F. tenacissima} L.,{\i  Opobalsam. Decl.} 18 (1764) ({\i F. cossoniana }Webb). Hispid, ascending or diffuse, up to 60 cm. Leaves up to 15 mm, obovate to obovate-orbicular, crenate-dentate, cuneate at the base, densely white-pubescent beneath; stipules persistent, scarious. Cymes 1- to 5-flowered; bracts (2)3(4), up to 10 mm, longer than the cymes and forming an involucre, densely covered with long, silky hairs.{\i  Sandy ground. S.E. Spain.} Hs. ({\i N. Africa.})
\par

\par
81}
\par