{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}
\par
\pard\f0\fs36\qc PROTEALES
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 41.         PROTEACEAE}
\par
\pard\f0\fs24\qc  Edit. N.A. Burges.
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28 Leaves simple, exstipulate. Flowers hermaphrodite, usually in bracteate racemes, spikes or clusters. Perianth 4-merous, in a single petaloid whorl; segments united in bud, separating wholly or partly at anthesis. Stamens 4, opposite the perianth-segments, with which their filaments are usually connate. Ovary superior, unilocular; style and stigma 1. Seeds without endosperm.
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28 A large family, predominantly of the southern hemisphere; not native to Europe, but including many species cultivated in gardens.
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 1.            Hakea}               Schrader
\par 
\pard\f0\fs24\qc  By P.W. Ball (Ed.1) revised by N.A. Burges (Ed.2)
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28 Shrubs or small trees. Flowers zygomorphic, pedicellate, in dense axillary racemes or clusters; bracts deciduous. Perianth coiled in bud, partly straightening after anthesis; segments eventually free proximally but sometimes remaining connate distally, each consisting of a narrow claw and an orbicular-spathulate, concave limb, on the inner side of which is an apparently sessile anther. Stigma large, oblique. Fruit a woody, 2-valved follicle, tardily dehiscent; seeds 2, winged.
\par
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28\li200 Leaves c. 1 mm in diameter, terete, pungent ...................................... {\b 1. sericea}
\parLeaves 5-20 mm wide, flat, not pungent ....................................... {\b 2. salicifolia}
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. H. sericea} Schrader, {\i Sert. Hannov.} 27 (1797) ({\i H. acicularis} (Sm. ex Vent.) Knight). Shrub up to 3 m. Leaves 2-7 × 0·1 cm, stiff, terete, pungent, glabrous when mature. Flowers in axillary clusters; perianth 4-5 mm, white or pale pink. Fruit 2-3 cm, rough.{\i  Planted for reclamation of arid land in Spain and Portugal, and locally naturalized.} [Hs Lu.] ({\i E. Australia.})
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. H. salicifolia} (Vent.) B.L. Burtt, {\i Kew Bull. }{\b 1941:} 33 (1942) ({\i H. saligna} (Andrews) Knight). Tall shrub up to 4 m. Leaves 5-10 × 0·5-2 cm, flat, narrowly elliptical or lanceolate to linear-oblong. Perianth white. Fruit 3 cm, obliquely pyriform, rough.{\i  Planted for reclamation of arid land in Spain and Portugal, and locally naturalized}. [Hs Lu.] ({\i S.E. Australia, Tasmania}.)
\par
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs36\qc SANTALALES
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 42.       SANTALACEAE}
\par
\pard\f0\fs24\qc  Edit. S.M. Walters
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28 Herbaceous or woody plants. Leaves alternate, simple, linear, oblong or lanceolate, exstipulate, deciduous or evergreen. Flowers small, hermaphrodite or unisexual. Perianth 3- to 5-lobed or -partite, tubular to campanulate-rotate. Stamens 3-5, opposite lobes of the perianth. Ovary inferior, 1-celled. Style 1; stigma capitate or lobed. Fruit a small green nut or a drupe. Seed solitary, with abundant endosperm. Hemiparasites, growing on the roots of herbs or shrubs.
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Herbs; perianth-segments united; fruit a small green nut ............. {\b 3. Thesium}
\par 1 Woody plants; perianth-segments free; fruit a drupe
\par 2 Plant with a woody rhizome; stigma capitate; perianth 4- or
\par  5-partite; flowers hermaphrodite ................................................. {\b 1. Comandra}
\par 2 Shrubs without a rhizome; stigma 3- or 4-lobed; perianth 3- or 
\par  4-partite; dioecious ............................................................................ {\b 2. Osyris}
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 1.             Comandra}             Nutt.
\par   
\pard\f0\fs24\qc  By R. Hendrych.
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28 Rhizome woody. Flowers hermaphrodite, with a solitary bract. Perianth 4- or 5-partite, campanulate. Stamens 4 or 5. Stigma capitate. Fruit a globose drupe surmounted by the persistent, dry perianth.
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28 Literature: M.A. Piehl,{\i  Mem. Torrey Bot. Club}{\b  22:} 1-97 (1965).
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. C. elegans} (Rochel ex Reichenb.) Reichenb. fil.,{\i  Icon. Fl. Germ.}{\b  11:} 11 (1849) ({\i Thesium elegans} Rochel ex Reichenb.). Plant with a persistent woody rhizome; stems erect, simple or branched. Leaves oblong. Inflorescence cymose, terminal, few-flowered flowers cream-coloured or greenish.{\i  Balkan peninsula; Romania.} Bu Gr Ju Rm Tu.
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 2.             Osyris}                 L.
\par  
\pard\f0\fs24\qc  By R. Hendrych.
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28 Dioecious; shrubs, without a rhizome. Leaves linear-lanceolate to lanceolate, evergreen. Perianth 3- or 4-partite. Male flowers in lateral few-flowered cymes; stamens 3 or 4. Female flowers solitary and terminal on short branches; stigma 3-lobed. Fruit a globose drupe.
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28\li200 Bracts foliaceous, persistent; drupe 5-7 mm ........................................... {\b 1. alba}
\parBracts small, caducous; drupe 7-10 mm ................................... {\b 2. quadripartita}
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. O. alba} L.,{\i  Sp. Pl.} 1022 (1753) ({\i ?O. mediterranea} Bubani). Stems up to 130 cm, with many slender, spreading branches. Leaves coriaceous, with a single mid-vein; lateral veins obscure or absent. Bracts similar to upper cauline leaves, persistent. Flowers yellowish; perianth 3-partite. Drupe 5-7 mm, red.{\i  S. Europe.} Al Bl Bu Co Cr Ga Gr Hs It Ju Lu Sa Si Tu.
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. O. quadripartita} Salzm. ex Decne,{\i  Ann. Sci. Nat.} ser. 2, {\b 6:}
\par
\par 82}
\par