{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 65 (1836) ({\i O. lanceolata} Steudel & Hochst. ex A. DC.). Like {\b 1} but stems up to 300 cm; leaves very coriaceous, with pinnate venation; bracts small, caducous; perianth 3- or 4-partite; drupe 7-10 mm. 2n = 40. {\i S. half of Iberian peninsula; Islas Baleares.} Bl Hs Lu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 3.               Thesium}                L.
\par      

\pard\f0\fs24\qc  By R. Hendrych.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Perennials, rarely annuals, without a rhizome, but often with a woody stock and sometimes producing slender stolons; stems procumbent to erect, simple or branched. Leaves linear to lanceolate, mostly entire, 1- to 5-veined, green or yellowish-green. Inflorescence a panicle with few-flowered branches, or a raceme. Flowers hermaphrodite, on short branches, with a bract and usually with 2 bracteoles. Perianth tubular to campanulate-rotate, 4- or 5-lobed, usually white inside and yellowish-green or green outside. Stamens 4 or 5. Stigma capitate. Fruit a small green nut surmounted by the persistent, dry perianth.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Literature: R. Hendrych, {\i Acta Univ. Carol.} ({\i Biol.}) Suppl.{\b  1970:} 293-358 (1972);{\i  Preslia}{\b  48:} 107-112 (1976).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Bracteoles 0
\par
2 Stock slender, stoloniferous; persistent perianth shorter
\par
  than nut ..................................................................................... {\b 1. ebracteatum}
\par
2 Stock thick, not stoloniferous; persistent perianth 2-3 times 
\par
  as long as nut .............................................................................. {\b 25. rostratum}
\par
1 Bracteoles 2
\par
3 Plant puberulent-hispid ....................................................... {\b 18. macedonicum}
\par
3 Plant glabrous, rarely minutely papillose-puberulent 
\par
4 Persistent perianth at least ½ as long as nut
\par
5 Bract ± equalling flower ......................................................... {\b 16. hispanicum}
\par
5 Bract at least twice as long as flower
\par
6 Persistent perianth 2-3 times as long as nut
\par
7 Perianth usually 5-lobed; flowers not secund; nut ovoid-
\par
  ellipsoidal or ellipsoidal .......................................................... {\b 22. pyrenaicum}
\par
7 Perianth usually 4-lobed; flowers ± secund; nut subglobose ...... {\b 23. alpinum}
\par
6 Persistent perianth ½ as long to as long as nut
\par
8 Persistent perianth usually ± equalling nut; inflorescence
\par
  spreading ................................................................................. {\b 22. pyrenaicum}
\par
8 Persistent perianth about ½ as long as nut;
\par
  inflorescence subsecund ......................................................... {\b 24. corsalpinum}
\par
4 Persistent perianth not more than ½ as long as nut
\par
9 Small but prominent extra lobes of the disc present between 
\par
  persistent perianth lobes
\par
10 Plant not stoloniferous; inflorescence at least 5 cm, 
\par
   many-flowered; leaves 3·5-5 cm ............................................ {\b 19. auriculatum}
\par
10 Plant stoloniferous; inflorescence 2-3 cm, few-flowered; 
\par
   leaves usually 2 cm or less .................................................... {\b 20. kernerianum}
\par
9 Small but prominent extra lobes of the disc not present between 
\par
  persistent perianth-lobes
\par
11 Bract ± equalling flower
\par
12 Stem less than 10 cm; plant stoloniferous ............................ {\b 16. hispanicum}
\par
12 Stem usually more than 10 cm, if less, then plant not stoloniferous
\par
13 Annual; inflorescence a raceme ................................................ {\b 10. dollineri}
\par
13 Perennial; inflorescence paniculate
\par
14 Leaves linear, 1-veined ........................................................... {\b 7. humifusum}
\par
14 Leaves narrowly elliptical or lanceolate, at least some 3-veined
\par
15 Leaves 1- to 3-veined, often stiff and yellowish-green; 
\par
   plant usually stoloniferous ....................................................... {\b 2. linophyllon}
\par
15 Leaves distinctly 3- to 5-veined, always flaccid and dark green; 
\par
   plant usually not stoloniferous ...................................................... {\b 3. bavarum}
\par
11 Bract distinctly longer than, rarely shorter than, flower
\par
16 Nut reticulately veined (sometimes indistinctly so)
\par
17 Annual; fruiting stems ascending to erect, densely           
\par
   covered with nuts ........................................................................... {\b 17. humile}
\par
17 Perennial; fruiting stems procumbent to ascending, sparsely 
\par
   covered with nuts
\par
18 Perianth ± infundibuliform; nut distinctly reticulately veined ...... {\b 5. bergeri}
\par
18 Perianth campanulate-rotate; nut indistinctly reticulately veined
\par
19 Stems usually more than 10 cm; bracteoles ± equalling
\par
   flower or fruit .......................................................................... {\b 4. procumbens}
\par
19 Stems less than 10 cm; bracteoles much shorter than
\par
   flower or fruit ........................................................................... {\b 12. vlachorum} 
\par
16 Nut longitudinally veined only
\par
20 Plant stoloniferous
\par
21 Stems robust, rigid; inflorescence usually a panicle; 
\par
   leaves mostly 3-veined ............................................................. {\b 2. linophyllon}
\par
21 Stems slender and rather weak; inflorescence a raceme; leaves 1-veined
\par
22 Flower shortly pedicellate; stems mostly 10-20 cm .................... {\b 8. italicum}
\par
22 Flower subsessile; stems mostly less than 10 cm
\par
23 Fruiting branches (at least in the lower part of the 
\par
   inflorescence) mostly 3 mm or longer ......................................... {\b 13. parnassi}
\par
23 Fruiting branches very short or absent .................................... {\b 15. kyrnosum}
\par
20 Plant not stoloniferous
\par
24 Leaves lanceolate, distinctly 3- to 5-veined ................................ {\b 3. bavarum}
\par
24 Leaves mostly linear-oblong, rarely narrowly sublanceolate to 
\par
   linear, 1-veined (rarely indistinctly 3-veined)
\par
25 Inflorescence a raceme; branches 1-flowered
\par
26 Fruiting pedicel thickened .............................................. {\b 11. brachyphyllum}
\par
26 Fruiting pedicel not thickened
\par
27 Annual or perennial; stems ± robust, rigid; perianth infundibuliform;
\par
   bracteoles equalling or conspicuously longer than nut ............... {\b 10. dollineri}
\par
27 Always perennial; stems thin, slender; perianth infundibuliform-
\par
   campanulate; bracteoles mostly shorter than nut ....................... {\b 14. sommieri}
\par
25 Inflorescence a panicle; branches several- to many-flowered, 
\par
   at least in lower part of inflorescence
\par
28 Perianth infundibuliform; panicle-branches racemose
\par
29 Bract usually 3-4 times as long as flower ..................................... {\b 9. arvense}
\par
29 Bract twice as long as flower ................................................... {\b 21. refractum}
\par
28 Perianth broadly campanulate; panicle-branches often paniculate
\par
30 Stems usually more than 20 cm, ascending to
\par

\par
83}
\par