{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200   erect, robust, rigid; bracts, bracteoles and ultimate 
\par
   branches not scabrid ................................................................. {\b 6. divaricatum}
\par
30 Stems usually less than 20 cm, decumbent to somewhat ascending, 
\par
   slender, not rigid; bracts, bracteoles and ultimate   
\par
   branches scabrid ........................................................................ {\b 7. humifusum}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. T. ebracteatum} Hayne in Schrader,{\i  Jour. für die Bot.}{\b  1800} ({\b 1}): 33 (1800). Perennial; stock slender, stoloniferous. Stems 10 15(-25) cm, ascending to erect, simple or rarely with a single branch below the inflorescence. Leaves linear-oblong, 1-veined. Inflorescence racemose. Bract about 3 times as long as flower or fruit; bracteoles absent. Perianth broadly campanulate, 5-lobed. Nut ellipsoidal, twice as long as the persistent perianth. 2n = 24. {\i E. & E.C. Europe, extending to N.W. Germany, E. Denmark and Estonia}. Au Cz Da Ge ?It Po Rm Rs(B, C, W, E).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. T. linophyllon} L.,{\i  Sp. Pl.} 207 (1753) ({\i T. linifolium} Schrank,{\i  T. intermedium} Schrader, {\i T. linophyllon} var.{\i  linifolium} (Schrank) Fiori). Perennial; usually stoloniferous. Stems 10-30 cm, ascending to erect, usually simple. Leaves narrowly elliptical, 1- to 3-veined, often rather stiffly and yellowish-green. Inflorescence lax, paniculate. Bract more or less equalling to twice as long as flower or fruit; bracteoles shorter than flower or fruit. Nut ellipsoidal, 4-6 times, as long as the persistent perianth. 2n = 24. •{\i  From E. France to Ukraine, northwards to Latvia and southwards to S. Italy and C. Greece}. Al Au Bu Cz Ga Ge Gr He Hu It Ju Po Rm Rs(B, C, W).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 3. T. bavarum} Schrank, {\i Baier. Reise} 129 (1786) ({\i T. montanum} Ehrh. ex Hoffm., {\i T. linophyllon} var.{\i  bavarum} (Schrank) Fiori). Perennial; usually not stoloniferous. Stems c. 25-60 cm, erect, usually simple. Leaves lanceolate, distinctly 3- to 5-veined, always flaccid and dark green. Inflorescence, bract and bracteoles more or less as in {\b 2}. Nut broadly ellipsoidal, 4-5 times as long as the persistent perianth. 2n = 24.{\i  C. Europe, Balkan peninsula, Romania, N. & C. Italy.} Al Au Bu Cz Ga Ge Gr He Hu It Ju Rm.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Plants intermediate between {\b 2} and {\b 3} occur on mountains in N. & C. Greece, and the two species are perhaps only subspecifically distinct.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 4. T. procumbens} C.A. Meyer, {\i Verz. Pfl. Cauc.} 40 (1831). Perennial. Stems 10-25 cm, more or less procumbent, usually simple. Leaves linear, 1-veined. Bract longer than flower or fruit; bracteoles more or less equalling flower or fruit. Perianth campanulate-rotate, 5-lobed. Nut ovoid, indistinctly reticulately veined, 3-4 times as long as the persistent perianth.{\i  Ukraine and S.C. Russia.} Rs(C, W).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 5. T. bergeri} Zucc., {\i Abh. Bayer. Akad. Wiss.}{\b  2:} 324 (1837). Perennial. Stems 5-15 cm, decumbent, procumbent or ascending, simple or branched. Leaves linear to oblong-linear, not fleshy, entire, 1-veined. Inflorescence a raceme; flowers often subsessile. Bract 4 or more times as long as flower or fruit; bracteoles more or less equalling flower or fruit. Perianth more or less infundibuliform, 5-lobed. Nut subglobose, distinctly reticulately veined, 5 times as long as the persistent perianth. 2n = 16.{\i  S. part of Balkan peninsula; Aegean region.} Al Cr Gr Ju Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 6. T. divaricatum} Jan ex Mert. & Koch in Röhling,{\i  Deutschl. Fl.} ed. 3, {\b 2:} 285 (1826) ({\i T. divaricatum} subsp.{\i  vandasii} Rohlena, {\i T. linophyllon }var.{\b  divaricatum} (Jan ex Mert. & Koch) Fiori; incl. {\i T. nevadense }Willk.). Perennial; not stoloniferous. Stems 15-25(-35) cm, ascending to erect, robust, rigid, much-branched. Leaves narrowly linear, 1-veined. Inflorescence paniculate. Bract and bracteoles usually shorter than flower or fruit. Perianth broadly campanulate, 5-lobed. Nut ovoid to subglobose, 5 times as long as the persistent perianth. 2n = 16. {\i S. Europe, extending northwards to} 49°{\i  N. in France.} Al Bl Bu Ga Gr ?He Hs It Ju Lu Sa Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 7. T. humifusum} DC. in Lam. & DC.,{\i  Fl. Fr.,} ed. 3,{\b  5:} 366 (1815) ({\i T. divaricatum} auct., {\i T. divaricatum }var.{\i  humifusum} Duby). Perennial; not stoloniferous. Stems 10-20 cm, decumbent or long-ascending, slender, weak, branched. Leaves linear, 1-veined. Inflorescence paniculate. Bract usually equalling flower or fruit; bracteoles shorter, distinctly scabrid. Perianth broadly campanulate, 5-lobed. Nut almost subglobose, 4-5 times as long as the persistent perianth. 2n = 16.{\i  France and S.E. England; locally elsewhere in W. Europe.} Be Br ?Co Ga †Ho Hs.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 8. T. italicum} A. DC. in DC., {\i Prodr.}{\b  14:} 644 (1857) ({\i T. humifusum} subsp.{\i  italicum }(A. DC.) Rouy,{\i  T. linophyllum} var.{\i  italicum }(A. DC.) Fiori). Perennial; stoloniferous. Stems 10-20 cm, ascending to erect, simple or slightly branched. Leaves c. 3 cm, linear, 1-veined. Inflorescence a long raceme. Bract 5-6 times as long as flower or fruit; bracteoles only slightly longer than flower or fruit. Perianth infundibuliform, 5-lobed. Nut more or less ovoid, 3 times as long as the persistent perianth. •{\i  Sardegna}. Sa.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 9. T. arvense} Horvatovszky, {\i Fl. Tyrnav.} 27 (1774) ({\i T. ramosum }Hayne, {\i T. linophyllon} var.{\i  ramosum} (Hayne) Fiori; incl.{\i  T. bulgaricum }Velen.). Perennial; not stoloniferous. Stems (10-)15-25(-30) cm, ascending to erect. Leaves linear-oblong to linear, 1(-3)-veined, often subsecund. Inflorescence usually a panicle with long, racemose branches. Bract 3-4 times as long as flower or fruit; bracteoles equalling flower or fruit. Perianth infundibuliform, (4-)5-lobed. Nut ellipsoidal, 3 times as long as the persistent perianth.{\i  E., S.E. & E.C. Europe}. Al Au Bu Cz Gr Hu It Ju Rm Rs(C, W, K, E) Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 10. T. dollineri} Murb.,{\i  Lunds Univ. Arsskr.}{\b  27:} 43 (1891) ({\i T. humile} auct. eur. med., non Vahl). Annual to perennial; not stoloniferous. Stems 6-15 cm, decumbent, ascending or erect, simple or branched. Leaves linear to oblong-linear, 1-veined, sometimes secund. Inflorescence few- or many-flowered, flowers often subsessile. Perianth infundibuliform, 5-lobed. Nut more or less ovoid-globose, 4 times as long as the persistent perianth. •{\i  E.C. Europe, extending to Krym and S. Bulgaria.} Au Bu Cz Hu Ju Rm Rs(W, K).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Plant annual ..................................................................... ({\b a}) subsp.{\b  dollineri}
\par
1 Plant perennial
\par
2 Leaves thin, distinctly 1-veined ....................................... ({\b b}) subsp.{\b  simplex}
\par
2 Leaves rigid, thickened, indistinctly 1-veined ........... ({\b c}) subsp.{\b  moesiacum}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b dollineri} : Annual. Stem single, horizontally branched from near middle. Bract and bracteoles more or less equalling flower or fruit.{\i  From Czechoslovakia to N.E. Bulgaria}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp. simplex (Velen.) Stoj. & Stefanov, {\i Fl. Baulg.,} ed. 2, 312 (1933) ({\i T. simplex} Velen.). Perennial. Stems several, unbranched. Leaves thin, distinctly 1-veined. Bract and bracteoles much longer than flower or fruit. {\i Almost throughout the range of the species}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b c}) Subsp.{\b  moesiacum} (Velen.) Stoj. & Stefanov,{\i  loc. cit. }(1933) ({\i T. moesiacum }Velen.). Perennial. Stems several or many, un-
\par

\par
84}
\par