{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 branched. Leaves rigid, thickened, indistinctly 1-veined. Bract and bracteoles much longer than flower or fruit.{\i  Bulgaria}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 11. T. brachyphyllum} Boiss., {\i Diagn. Pl. Or. Nov. }{\b 1}({\b 5}): 48 (1844). Perennial; not stoloniferous. Stems 5-15 cm, decumbent to ascending, simple. Leaves c. 1 cm, linear-oblong, 1-veined, minutely papillose. Inflorescence a raceme with subsessile or shortly stalked flowers. Bract 5-8 times as long as flower or fruit; bracteoles more or less equalling the flower or fruit. Perianth broadly campanulate, 5-lobed. Nut ellipsoidal, only longitudinally, not reticulately, veined, 5-6 times as long as the persistent perianth.{\i  Mountains of Krym, Kuban, and C. & N. Greece.} Gr Rs(K, E).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 12. T. vlachorum} Aldén,{\i  Nordic Jour. Bot.}{\b  1:} 709 (1982). Like{\b  11} but shortly stoloniferous; stems 2-6 cm, procumbent to ascending, with scattered, short leaves; leaves linear-oblong to elliptic-oblong; inflorescence racemose or subspicate; bracts up to 2½ times as long as fruit; bracteoles much shorter than fruit; nut with rather broad, longitudinal veins, somewhat anastomosing, 4-5 times as long as the persistent perianth. {\i Serpentine rocks and screes. • N.W. Greece} ({\i Grammos Oros}). Gr.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Known only from the type collection.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 13. T. parnassi} A. DC. in DC., {\i Prodr.}{\b  14:} 643 (1857) ({\i T. linophyllon }var.{\i  parnassi} (A. DC.) Fiori,{\i  T. linophyllon} var.{\i  ramosum} (Hayne) Fiori). Perennial; stoloniferous. Stems 5-10(-15) cm, ascending to erect, simple, weak, slender. Leaves c. 1 cm, oblong-linear to linear, 1-veined. Inflorescence a short, rather few-flowered raceme, often with subsessile flowers. Bract usually twice as long as flower or fruit; bracteoles almost equalling flower or fruit. Perianth infundibuliform, 5-lobed. Nut subglobose, 4 times as long as the persistent perianth. 2n = 14. •{\i  Mountains of W. part of Balkan peninsula, C. & S. Italy and Sicilia.} Al Gr It Ju Si.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 14. T. sommieri} Hendrych,{\i  Preslia}{\b  36:} 118 (1964). Perennial; not stoloniferous. Stems 10-20 cm, shortly ascending to suberect, simple, weak. Leaves 1-2·5 cm, oblong to sublanceolate, 1-veined. Inflorescence simple, racemose, rather few-flowered; branches 1-flowered. Bract twice as long as flower; bracteoles shorter than flower. Perianth infundibuliform-campanulate, 5-lobed. Nut ellipsoidal, 4 times as long as the persistent perianth.•{\i  Alpi Apuane, N. Appennini.} It.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 15. T. kyrnosum} Hendrych,{\i  Novit. Bot. Inst. Bot. Univ. Carol. Prag.}{\b  1964:} 21 (1964). Perennial. Stems 5-10 cm, ascending, simple. Leaves 1·5-2·5 cm, linear, 1-veined. Inflorescence racemose to subspicate, few-flowered. Bract 5-7 times as long as flower; bracteoles subequalling flower. Perianth campanulate-infundibuliform, 5-lobed. Nut ellipsoidal to globose-ellipsoidal, 4 times as long as the persistent perianth.•{\i  Corse. }Co.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 16. T. hispanicum} Hendrych,{\i  Folia Geobot. Phytotax. }({\i Praha}) {\b 1:} 74 (1966). Perennial; with long stolons. Stems up to 7 cm, shortly ascending, simple. Leaves up to 1 cm, narrowly oblong, 1-veined. Inflorescence simple, racemose, short, few-flowered; branches 1-flowered. Bract as long as flower; bracteoles shorter than flower. Perianth infundibuliform-campanulate, 5-lobed. Nut unknown.•{\i  N. Spain }({\i Picos de Europa}). Hs.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 17. T. humile} Vahl, {\i Symb. Bot.}{\b  3:} 43 (1794). Annual. Stems 5-20 cm, ascending to erect, usually branched from base with long, simple branches. Leaves linear or narrowly linear, rather fleshy, denticulate, 1-veined. Inflorescence often subspicate, sometimes paniculate. Bract 2-5 times as long as flower or fruit; bracteoles usually equalling flower or fruit. Perianth infundibuliform, 5-lobed. Nut subglobose, reticulately veined, 5-6 times as long as the persistent perianth. 2n = 18. {\i S. Europe.} Bl Co Cr Gr Hs It Ju Lu Sa si.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 18. T. macedonicum} Hendrych,{\i  Biol. Glasn.} ({\i Zagreb}){\b  17:} 13 (1964). Perennial; not stoloniferous; whole plant puberulent-hispid. Stems 7-15 cm, prostrate to suberect, unbranched. Leaves linear, 1-2·5 cm, 1-veined. Inflorescence racemose to subspicate; branches 1- or 2-flowered. Bract 5-7 times as long as flower; bracteoles equalling flower. Perianth subcampanulate, 5-lobed. Nut ellipsoidal, longitudinally and indistinctly subreticulately veined, 5-6 times as long as the persistent perianth.•{\i  S. Jugoslavia} ({\i Nidze Planina}). Ju.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 19. T. auriculatum} Vandas,{\i  Sitz.-Ber. Böhm. Ges. Wiss. }{\b 1890/ 1891:} 279 (1890). Perennial; not stoloniferous. Stems c. 25-30 cm, ascending to erect, simple, or branched above. Leaves narrowly linear, 1-veined. Inflorescence paniculate with long, racemose or subspicate branches; flowers often subsessile and often more or less secund. Bract and bracteoles equalling flowers; bract enlarging in fruit to 6 or more times as long as fruit. Perianth broadly campanulate, 5-lobed. Nut ellipsoidal, 4-5 times as long as the persistent perianth, which has small but prominent extra lobes of the disc between the 5 lobes. •{\i  Mountains of Jugoslavia and N. Albania.} Al Ju.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 20. T. kernerianum} Simonkai, {\i Enum. Fl. Transs.} 478 (1887). Perennial; stoloniferous. Stems up to 15 cm, ascending, simple. Leaves up to 1·5 cm, linear-oblong, 1-veined. Inflorescence short, few-flowered, subspicate. Bract at least twice as long as flower or fruit; bracteoles shorter than flower or fruit. Perianth campanulate. Nut and perianth-lobes as in {\b 19}. •{\i  S. & E. Carpathians; local.} Rm.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 21. T. refractum} C.A. Meyer in Bong. & C.A. Meyer,{\i  Verz. .Saisang-Nor}  58 (1841). Perennial. Stems 10-50 cm, suberect, much-branched in the upper ½. Leaves 4-7 cm, linear-lanceolate, 1-veined (rarely indistinctly 3-veined). Inflorescence paniculate. Bract twice as long as flower; bracteoles shorter than flowers or equalling them. Perianth infundibuliform, 5-lobed. Persistent perianth 3-4 times shorter than the ellipsoidal nut.{\i  C. & S. Ural.} Rs(C). ({\i Siberia and C. Asia}.)
\par

\par
   {\b 22. T. pyrenaicum} Pourret, {\i Mém. Acad. Sci. Toulouse}{\b  3:} 331 (1788) ({\i T. pratense} Ehrh. ex Schrader,{\i  T. alpinum} var.{\i  pyrenaicum} (Pourret) Fiori). Perennial. Stems 10-20(-30) cm, ascending to erect, simple or branched. Leaves more or less linear, 1-veined. Inflorescence racemose or paniculate; flowers not secund. Bract usually at least twice as long as flower or fruit; bracteoles equalling flower or fruit. Perianth tubular-campanulate. Nut ovoid-ellipsoidal or ellipsoidal. •{\i  W. & C. Europe; C. Italy}. Au Be Cz Ga Ge He †Ho Hs It Ju Lu Po.
\par

\par
 ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b pyrenaicum} : Perianth 3-4 mm, mostly 5-lobed (rarely 4-lobed in isolated flowers); persistent perianth equalling the nut. 2n = 14. {\i Throughout the range of the species.}
\par
 ({\b b}) Subsp.{\b  grandiflorum} (Richter) Hendrych, {\i Novit. Bot. Inst. Bot. Univ. Carol. Prag.}{\b  1964:} 9 (1964) ({\i T. pyrenaicum} subsp.{\i  alpestre} O. Schwarz, {\i T. grandiflorum }(A. DC.) Hand.-Mazz.): Perianth at least 5 mm, mostly 5-lobed, but often 4-lobed; persistent perianth about twice as long as the nut.{\i  E. Alps and mountains of N.W. Jugoslavia.}
\par

\par
85}
\par