{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 23. T. alpinum} L., {\b Sp. Pl.} 207 (1753) (incl.{\i  T. tenuifolium} Sauter ex Koch). Perennial. Stems 10-20(-30) cm, ascending to erect, simple or slightly branched. Leaves linear to linear-oblong, 1-veined. Inflorescence racemose, rarely paniculate; flowers often subsessile, usually more or less secund. Bract at least 2-3 times as long as flower or fruit; bracteoles equalling flower or fruit. Perianth subtubular, 4(5)-lobed. Persistent perianth 2-3 times as long as the subglobose nut. 2n = 12. {\i C. & S. Europe; local in N. Europe from Sweden to N.W. Russia.} Al Au Bu Cz †Da Ga Ge He Hs It Ju Po Rm Rs(B, C, W) Su.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 24. T. corsalpinum} Hendrych,{\i  Novit. Bot. Inst. Bot. Univ. Carol. Prag.}{\b  1964:} 21 (1964). Perennial. Stems 8-15(-20) cm, ascending, little-branched. Leaves linear, 1-veined. Inflorescence a simple, subsecund raceme. Bract 4-8 times as long as flower; bracteoles equalling flower. Perianth infundibuliform, (4)5-lobed. Persistent perianth ½ as long as the subglobose to ellipsoidal nut. {\i  Corse.} Co.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 25. T. rostratum} Mert. & Koch in Röhling,{\i  Deutschl. Fl}. ed. 3, {\b 2:} 287 (1826). Perennial; stock stout, woody, not stoloniferous. Stems 10-30 cm, ascending to erect, with some non-flowering branches. Leaves linear, 1-veined. Inflorescence racemose. Bract up to 4 times as long as flower or fruit; bracteoles absent. Perianth tubular, 5-lobed. Persistent perianth 2(-3) times as long as the ovoid-globose fruit. 2n = 26. •{\i  C. Europe.} Au Cz Ge He It Ju.
\par

\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 43.        LORANTHACEAE}
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc  Edit. V.H. Heywood & J.R. Edmondson.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Small shrubs, hemiparasitic on gymnosperms and woody angiosperms. Leaves opposite or whorled, entire, sometimes scale-like. Flowers actinomorphic, unisexual (in European species), usually 4-merous; perianth in 1 or 2 whorls, the inner more or less petaloid, with the parts free or connate. Stamens epipetalous, opposite the petals. Ovary inferior; ovules usually not differentiated from the placenta; style simple or 0. Fruit a berry, rarely dry and dehiscent. Seed solitary, without testa; embryos 1-3.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Leaves scale-like, connate in pairs, forming a sheath round 
\par
  the stem; perianth in 1 whorl ................................................ {\b 3. Arceuthobium}
\par
1 Leaves not scale-like, not connate; perianth in 2 whorls
\par
2 Inflorescence racemose or spicate .............................................. {\b 1. Loranthus}
\par
2 Inflorescence cymose, sessile or very shortly pedunculate ............ {\b 2. Viscum}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 1.               Loranthus}             L.
\par    

\pard\f0\fs24\qc  By P.W. Ball.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Leaves opposite, pinnately- or slightly parallel-veined, coriaceous. Inflorescence racemose or spicate. Perianth in 2 whorls. Calyx-teeth small; petals 4-6. Stamens inserted at the base of the petals; anthers dehiscing longitudinally. Fruit a yellowish, viscid berry.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 A predominantly tropical and subtropical genus with only one species in Europe.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. L. europaeus} Jacq.,{\i  Enum. Stirp. Vindob. }55 (1762). Stem up to 50 cm, dull brown. Leaves 1-5 cm, obovate-oblong, obtuse, dull green. Berry up to 10 mm, pyriform-globose, yellow. 2n = 18. {\i On members of the} Fagaceae.{\i  S.E. & E.C. Europe; Italy and Sicilia.} Al Au Cz Ge Gr Hu It Ju ?Po Rm Rs(W, K) Si Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 2.                Viscum}               L.
\par            

\pard\f0\fs24\qc  By P.W. Ball.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Leaves opposite or whorled, with 3-7 parallel veins, coriaceous. Inflorescence cymose, the flowers crowded. Perianth in 2 whorls. Calyx 4-toothed in female flowers, absent in male flowers. Petals usually 4. Stamens almost completely connate with the petals; anthers opening by pores. Fruit a white, yellow or red, viscid berry.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Literature: K.F. von Tubeuf, {\i Monographie der Mistel.} München. 1923.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 Inflorescence shortly pedunculate; berry red ................................. {\b 1. cruciatum}
\par
Inflorescence sessile; berry white or yellow ........................................ {\b 2. album}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. V. cruciatum} Sieber ex Boiss., {\i Voy. Bot. Midi Esp. }{\b 2:} 274 (1840). Stem up to 60 cm, yellowish-green. Leaves 2-4 cm, often whorled, obovate-oblong, obtuse, yellowish-green. Cymes shortly pedunculate. Berry 6-10 mm, red. {\i On various dicotyledonous trees and shrubs. S. Spain; one station in E. Portugal.} Hs Lu. ({\i N. Africa}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. V. album} L.,{\i  Sp. Pl}. 1023 (1753) (incl.{\i  V. laxum} Boiss. & Reuter). Stem up to 100 cm, yellowish-green. Leaves 2-8 cm, opposite, rarely whorled, obovate-oblong, obtuse, yellowish-green. Cymes sessile. Berry 6-10 mm, globose or pyriform, white or occasionally yellow. 2n = 20.{\i  On various trees. Most of Europe, northwards to S. Sweden and eastwards to} 41°{\i  E. in S. Russia.} All except Az Fa Fe Hb Is Rs(N) Sa Sb.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 The following subspecies are variously treated as forms, varieties, subspecies or species in Floras, and there is no general agreement as to their status and relationships.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Edges of the seed straight; embryos usually 2 or 3
\par
  (on dicotyledons) ............................................................... ({\b a}) subsp. {\b album}
\par
1 Edges of the seed convex; embryos 1(2) (on conifers)
\par
2 Leaves up to 8 cm, not more than 3 times as long as wide
\par
  ........................................................................................... ({\b b}) subsp.{\b  abietis}
\par
2 Leaves not more than 4(-6) cm, up to 5 times as long as wide
\par
  ..................................................................................... ({\b c}) subsp.{\b  austriacum}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp.{\b  album}: Leaves variable. Berry usually white, globose; edges of the seed straight; embryos 2 or 3. On dicotyledonous trees. {\i Throughout the range of the species}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp.{\b  abietis} (Wiesb.) Abromeit in Wünsche,{\i  Pfl. Deutschl.} ed. 12, 182 (1928) ({\i  V. laxum} var.{\i  abietis} (Wiesb.) Hayek): Leaves up to 8 cm, not more than 3 times as long as broad. Berry usually white, pyriform; edges of the seed convex; embryos 1(2). {\i On} Abies{\i  spp. C. & S. Europe}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b c}) Subsp.{\b  austriacum} (Wiesb.) Vollmann,{\i  Fl. Bayern} 212 (1914) ({\i V. laxum} Boiss. & Reuter var.{\i  pini }(Wiesb.) Hayek): Like subsp. ({\b b}) but leaves 2-4(-6) cm, up to 6 times as long as wide; berry usually yellow.{\i  On} Pinus{\i  and} Larix{\i  spp. C. Europe and locally in S. Europe}.
\par

\par
86}
\par