{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 3.            Arceuthobium}           Bieb.
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc  By P.W. Ball & J.R. Akeroyd
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Leaves opposite, scale-like, connate in pairs, forming a sheath around the stem. Perianth in 1 whorl. Male flowers solitary, sessile. Perianth 2- to 5-lobed. Stamens sessile; anthers dehiscing transversely. Female flowers solitary or in pairs, pedicellate; perianth of 2 short teeth. Fruit green, dry, dehiscing explosively. ({\i Razoumofskya} Hoffm.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Literature: F.G. Hawksworth & D. Wiens, {\i Kew Bull.}{\b  31:} 71-80 (1976).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Stems 1-3 mm wide at base; male flowers mostly 3-merous .......... {\b 1. oxycedri}
\par
Stems 5-9 mm wide at base; male flowers mostly 4-merous ......... {\b 2. azoricum}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. A. oxycedri} (DC.) Bieb.,{\i  Fl. Taur.-Cauc. }{\b 3:} 629 (1819) ({\i Razoumofskya oxycedri} (DC.) F.W. Schultz). Stems up to 20 cm, 1-3 mm wide at the base, yellowish-green, articulate. Leaves up to 5 mm, triangular. Male flowers on short terminal branches, c. 2 mm, mostly 3-merous; female flowers terminal and axillary. Fruit ovate-oblong, shortly pedicellate. {\i Usually on} Juniperus{\i  spp. S. Europe.} Al Bu Ga Gr Hs Ju Rs(K) Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. A. azoricum} Wiens & F.G. Hawksworth,{\i  Kew Bull.}{\b  31:} 73 (1976) ({\i A. oxycedri} auct., non (DC.) Bieb.). Like {\b 1} but stems 5-9 mm wide at the base; male flowers c. 2·5 mm, mostly 4-merous; female flowers in whorls.{\i  On} Juniperus brevifolia.{\i  Açores}. Az.
\par

\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs36\qc ARISTOLOCHIALES
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 44.       ARISTOLOCHIACEAE }
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc  Edit. J.R. Edmondson.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Herbs or woody climbers. Leaves alternate, entire, exstipulate. Flowers solitary or in axillary clusters, hermaphrodite, actinomorphic or zygomorphic, usually 3-merous. Perianth in 1 whorl, more or less petaloid, forming a tube, 1- or 3-lobed at the apex; stamens 6 or 12 in 1 or 2 whorls, free or connate with the stylar column. Ovary inferior, 6-locular; placentation axillary; styles usually 6, free or connate to form a column with a 6-lobed stigma; ovules numerous. Fruit a capsule.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 Perianth actinomorphic, with short tube, persistent in fruit; 
\par
  flowers terminal ............................................................................... {\b 1. Asarum}
\par
Perianth zygomorphic, with long tube, deciduous;
\par
  flowers axillary ........................................................................ {\b 2. Aristolochia}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 1.            Asarum}                   L.
\par     

\pard\f0\fs24\qc  By P.W. Ball & J.R. Akeroyd
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Herbs with creeping rhizome. Flowers solitary and terminal. Perianth actinomorphic, 3-lobed, persistent in fruit. Stamens 12, in 2 whorls, free or almost so; filaments short. Fruit subglobose, dehiscing irregularly.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Literature: I. Kukkonen & P. Uotila,{\i  Ann. Bot. Fenn. }{\b 14:} 131-142 (1977).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. A. europaeum} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 442 (1753). Stems 2-10 cm, pubescent, with 2-5 leaves and brown ovate scales 1-2 cm. Leaves 2·5-10 cm, reniform to cordate; petiole longer than the lamina. Perianth 10-15 mm, brownish-purple, pubescent on the outside; lobes 5-8 mm, more or less deltate, acuminate. 2n = 26, 40.{\i  From S. Finland southwards to S. France, Italy and Makedonija}. Al Au Be Bu Cz Fe Ga Ge He Hu It Ju Po Rm Rs (N,B,C,W,K,E) Su [Br Da Ho No Su].
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Leaves wider than long, obtuse; 
  lower surface pubescent ................................................ ({\b a}) subsp.{\b  europaeum}
\par
1 Leaves about as wide as long, subacute; lower surface
\par
  sparsely pubescent to glabrous
\par
2 Leaves sparsely hairy beneath; epidermis of upper surface
\par
  not or very weakly papillose .............................................. ({\b b}) subsp.{\b  italicum}
\par
2 Leaves subglabrous or glabrous beneath; epidermis of 
\par
  upper surface papillose ................................................. ({\b c}) subsp.{\b  caucasicum}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b europaeum} : Leaves reniform, sometimes subcordate, obtuse; lower surface pubescent; stomata present on upper surface; epidermis of upper surface usually without papillae. 2n = 26.{\i  Almost throughout the range of the species.}
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp.{\b  italicum} Kukkonen & Uotila, {\i Ann. Bot. Fenn. }{\b 14:} 139 (1977): Leaves cordate, subacute; lower surface sparsely pubescent; stomata absent on upper surface; epidermis of upper surface without or with very weak papillae. •{\i  C. & N. Italy; Crna Gora}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b c}) Subsp.{\b  caucasicum} (Duchartre) Soó,{\i  Acta Bot. Acad. Sci. Hung.}{\b  12:} 11 (1966) ({\i A. europaeum} var.{\i  caucasicum} Duchartre,{\i  A. europaeum} var.{\i  intermedium }C.A. Meyer,{\i  A. ibericum }Steven ex Woronow): Leaves cordate, subacute, lower surface glabrous or subglabrous; stomata absent on upper surface; epidermis of upper surface papillose.{\i  S.W. Alps}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 2.             Aristolochia }           L.
\par 

\pard\f0\fs24\qc  By P.W. Ball (Ed.1) revised by E. Nardi & J.R. Akeroyd(Ed.2)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Perennial herbs or woody climbers. Flowers axillary. Perianth zygomorphic, deciduous, the base swollen (utricle), the upper part narrower, more or less cylindrical (tube), with single, entire lobe (limb), rarely absent or 3-lobed. Stamens usually 6, in 1 whorl, connate with stylar column. Fruit a septicidal capsule.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b A. macrophylla} Lam.,{\i  Encycl.Méth. Bot.}{\b  1:} 252 (1783) ({\i A. durior} Hill,{\i  A. sipho} L'Hér.), from North America, a woody climber with cordate leaves up to 30 cm and perianth brownish with a 3-lobed limb, is cultivated for ornament, and is reported to be naturalized in Germany.
\par

\par
87}
\par