{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 Literature: P.H. Davis & M.S. Khan,{\i  Notes Roy. Bot. Gard. Edinb.}{\b  23:} 515-546 (1961). E. Nardi, {\i Webbia }{\b 38:} 221-300 (1984);{\b  45:} 31-69 (1991). E. Nardi & C.N. Nardi,{\i  Bot. Helvet. }{\b 97:}155-165 (1987).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Flowers 2 or more together in the axil of a leaf ........................... {\b 5. clematitis}
\par
1 Flowers solitary
\par
2 Stem usually climbing, woody; leaves evergreen, coriaceous
\par
3 Ovary and pedicels pubescent ................................................ {\b 1. sempervirens}
\par
3 Ovary and pedicels glabrous ............................................................ {\b 2. baetica}
\par
2 Stem not climbing, herbaceous; leaves not coriaceous
\par
4 Perianth without conspicuous limb, the apex clavate,
\par
  with a small pore ..................................................................... {\b 18. microstoma}
\par
4 Perianth with large conspicuous limb at least 1/5 as long as tube
\par
5 Perianth-tube strongly curved, 10-20 mm in diameter; utricle
\par
  oblong-cylindrical
\par
6 Leaves not more than 7·5 × 8 cm; limb of perianth ovate, 
\par
  with basal auricles 2-5 mm wide ....................................................... {\b 3. cretica}
\par
6 Leaves up to 16 × 13 cm; limb of perianth obovate, with basal 
\par
  auricles up to 20 mm wide .................................................................... {\b 4. hirta}
\par
5 Perianth-tube usually ± straight, less than 5 mm in diameter; 
\par
  utricle usually ± globose
\par
7 Leaves with cartilaginous teeth or papillae on the margin and 
\par
  lower surface; tubers numerous, fasciculate, cylindrical ............ {\b 6. pistolochia}
\par
7 Leaves without cartilaginous teeth or papillae (rarely with the
\par
  margin undulate or spinulose); tuber solitary, globose or elongate
\par
8 Leaves sessile or with petiole not more than 5 mm, sometimes amplexicaul
\par
9 Plant usually robust, up to 100 cm; flowers (2-)3-6 cm;
\par
  perianth-tube not striped .................................................................. {\b 7. rotunda}
\par
9 Plant slender, up to 30 cm; flowers 1-3 cm; perianth-tube striped
\par
10 Flowers brownish-yellow with brownish stripes; limb reddish .... {\b 8. bianorii}
\par
10 Flowers yellowish-green with faint violet stripes;
\par
   limb brownish-violet ............................................................ {\b 16. merxmuelleri}
\par
8  Leaves with petioles mostly more than 5 mm, not amplexicaul
\par
11 At least some leaves acute; flowers yellow ................................... {\b 19. sicula}
\par
11 Leaves obtuse to subacute; flowers variously coloured
\par
12 Tuber globose; capsule ovoid-oblong to pyriform
\par
13 Stems at least 15 cm; flowers (2-)2·5-7·5 cm .......... ({\b 13-15}). {\b pallida} group
\par
13 Stems less than 15 cm; flowers 2-3 cm ............................. {\b 16. merxmuelleri}
\par
12 Tuber elongate; capsule globose or pyriform
\par
14 Pedicels about equalling petioles; capsule 1·5-3 cm 
\par
15 Leaves ovate-triangular; perianth-tube widest near apex 
\par
   .............................................................................. ({\b 9-11}).{\b  paucinervis }group
\par
15 Leaves ovate-reniform; perianth-tube widest in 
\par
   middle part ................................................................ ({\b 13-15}).{\b  pallida} group
\par
14 Pedicels shorter than petioles; capsule usually less than 1·5 cm
\par
16 Flowers brownish to purplish; limb greenish with reddish or 
\par
   violet-brown stripes ................................................................... {\b 12. parvifolia}
\par
16 Flowers greyish-green; limb with reddish-brown stripes .......... {\b 17. tyrrhena}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. A. sempervirens} L.,{\i  Sp. Pl.} 961 (1753) (incl. {\i A. altissima} Desf.). Evergreen; stems up to 5 m, climbing or rarely procumbent. Leaves up to 10 × 6 cm, triangular-ovate, cordate, glabrous, coriaceous, the basal sinus shallow, the lobes not more than 1/7 as long as the leaf. Flowers 2-5 cm, yellow, striped with purple, the limb purple or dull brownish-purple, tube strongly curved; ovary and pedicels shortly pubescent. Capsule 1-4 cm, ovoid or oblong. 2n = 14.{\i  S. & W. Greece, Kriti; Sicilia; naturalized elsewhere in S. Europe}. Cr Gr Si [Ga It Sa].
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. A. baetica} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 961 (1753). Like {\b 1} but leaves glaucous, the basal sinus deep and usually narrow, the lobes up to ¼ as long as the leaf; flowers brownish-purple to reddish; ovary and pedicels glabrous.{\i  S. & E. Spain; S. Portugal.} Hs Lu.
\par

\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 3. A. cretica} Lam.,{\i  Encycl. Méth. Bot. }{\b 1:} 255 (1783). Stems 30-60 cm, erect or decumbent, pubescent. Leaves 1-7·5 × 1-8 cm, reniform to triangular-ovate, about as long as wide; petioles not more than 5 cm. Flowers 5-18 cm, dull purple; utricle oblong, strongly inflated; tube 10-20 mm in diameter, strongly curved, limb ovate, with basal auricles narrow, emarginate to 2-lobed. Capsule 3-6 cm, ovate-oblong. 2n = 10.•{\i  Kriti and Karpathos. }Cr.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 4. A. hirta} L.,{\i  Sp. Pl.} 961 (1753) ({\i A. bodamae }Dingler, {\i A. pontica} auct., non Lam.). Like {\b 3} but leaves up to 12-16 × 8-13 cm, longer than wide, subdeltate to ovate; petiole up to 3-5 cm; flowers blackish-purple, the limb obovate, with broad, obtuse to bilobed basal auricles. {\i E. Thrace: Samothraki.} Gr Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 5. A. clematitis} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 962 (1753). Stems up to 100 cm, subsimple, glabrous; stock creeping, much divided. 3-15 cm, deltate to broadly ovate, obtuse; petiole 1·5-5 cm. Flowers 2-3 cm, 2-8(-12) together in the axils of the leaves, yellow, the limb brownish; pedicels very short. Capsule 2-5 cm, ovoid to pyriform. 2n = 14.{\i  Formerly cultivated as a medicinal herb throughout most of Europe, and widely naturalized from c.} 60°{\i  N. southwards; probably native in the east and south-east}. Al Au Be Bl Bu Co Cz Ga Ge Gr He Ho Hs Hu It Ju Po Rm Rs(B, C, W, K, E) Si Tu [Br No].
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 6. A. pistolochia} L.,{\i  Sp. Pl}. 962 (1753). Stems 20-80 cm, simple or branched, pubescent; stock of numerous, fibrous, cylindrical, 1-3(-5) cm, ovate-triangular, the margin and lower surface with cartilaginous teeth or papillae; petiole 1-5 mm. Flowers 2-5 cm, brownish, the limb dark purple. Capsule 2-3 cm, globose to pyriform. {\i S.W. Europe.} Ga Hs Lu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 7. A. rotunda} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 962 (1753). Stems 15-100 cm, simple or branched, glabrescent. Leaves 2-8(-13) cm, ovate-orbicular, amplexicaul; petiole not more than 0·5 cm. Flowers (2-)3-6 cm, yellow, the limb dark brown; pedicels longer than the petioles. Capsule 1-2 cm, globose.{\i  S. Europe.} Al Bl Bu Co Ga Gr He Hs It Ju Sa Si Tu.
\par

\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp.{\b  rotunda} : Tuber globose or ovoid. Leaves up to 13 cm. Capsule 1-2 cm; seeds 4-6 mm. 2n = 12. {\i Throughout the region of the species except Sardegna}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp.{\b  insularis} (Nardi & Arrigoni) Gamisans, {\i Vasc. Corse} 93 (1985): Tuber cylindrical. Leaves 2-8 cm. Capsule
\par

\par
88}
\par