{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 1-1·5 cm; seeds 2-4 mm. 2n = 12. •{\i  Sardegna, Corse, locally in Greece and Italy}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Plants from calcareous gravels in N.W. Jugoslavia (island of Pag), like subsp. ({\b a}) but smaller in all their parts, have been called subsp.{\b  reichsteinii} Nardi,{\i  Bot. Helvet.}{\b  97:} 162 (1987).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 8. A. bianorii} Sennen & Pau,{\i  Butll. Inst. Catalana Hist. Nat. }{\b 11:} 19 (1912). Stems 10-30 cm, branched, glabrous; tuber cylindrical or ovoid. Leaves 0·5-3·5 × 0·5-2 cm, ovate-oblong to ovate-triangular, cordate; petiole 0·1-0·4 cm. Flowers 1-3 cm, brownish-yellow, with brownish stripes, the limb reddish; pedicels equalling or longer than the petioles. Capsule 0·5-1·0 cm, globose. 2n = 12. •{\i  Islas Baleares }({\i Mallorca, Minorca}). Bl.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    ({\i 9-11}).{\b  A. paucinervis} group ({\i A. longa} auct., non L.). Stems 20-90 cm, usually branched, glabrescent; tuber cylindrical. Leaves 2-6(-9) cm, ovate-triangular; petiole up to 1·5 cm. Flowers 2-5(-6) cm, brownish or yellowish-green, the limb brownish-purple; pedicels about equalling the petioles. Capsule 1·5-3 cm, globose to pyriform.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 These species, together with{\b  A. fontanesii} Boiss. & Reuter,{\i  Pugillus} 108 (1852) ({\i A. longa} L.), from Algeria, form a complex group that requires further study, especially in N. Africa.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Leaves glabrous above, pubescent beneath;
\par
  perianth not striped ................................................................... {\b 11. navicularis}
\par
1 Leaves pubescent on both surfaces; perianth striped
\par
2 Perianth-tube straight, longer than limb ................................... {\b 9. paucinervis}
\par
2 Perianth-tube somewhat curved, equalling or shorter than limb ...... {\b 10. clusii}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 9. A. paucinervis} Pomel,{\i  Bull. Soc. Sei. Phys. Algére}{\b  11: }136 (1874). Leaves pubescent on both surfaces. Perianth striped; tube up to 3 cm, straight, slightly enlarged at apex; limb shorter than the tube. 2n = 36. {\i S.W. France, Iberian peninsula, Islas Baleares.} Bl Ga Hs Lu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 10. A. clusii} Lojac.,{\i  Fl. Sic.}{\b  2}({\b 2}): 314 (1907). Leaves pubescent on both surfaces. Perianth striped; tube up to 1·8 cm, somewhat curved, much enlarged at apex; limb longer than the tube. 2n = 12. •{\i  S. Italy, Sicilia, Malta.} It Si.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 11. A. navicularis} Nardi, {\i Webbia }{\b 38:} 261 (1984) ({\i A.pallida} auct., non Willd.). Leaves pubescent beneath, glabrous above. Perianth not striped; tube up to 2 cm, somewhat curved, slightly enlarged at apex; limb about equalling the tube. 2n = 24.{\i  Sardegna, Sicilia} ({\i Isole Egadi}). Sa Si.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 12. A. parvifolia} Sm. in Sibth. & Sm.,{\i  Fl. Graec. Prodr.}{\b  2:} 222 (1816). Stems 10-40 cm, simple or branched, pubescent; tuber oblong or fusiform. Leaves 1-3 cm, ovate-oblong, cordate; petiole 0·1-1 cm. Flowers 1·5-8·5 cm, brownish to purplish; limb up to twice as long as the tube, greenish with reddish or violet-brown stripes. Capsule 1-2 cm, globose. 2n = 12.{\i  S. Aegean region; S. Greece.} Cr Gr.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    ({\b 13-15}). {\b A. pallida} group. Stems 15-60 cm, simple or branched, glabrous to puberulent. Leaves 2-7 cm, ovate-reniform, obtuse to retuse; petiole up to 1·5(-2·5) cm. Flowers (2-)2·5-7·5 cm, green, yellow, greyish or pale brown, with brownish or purplish stripes, the limb often darker. Capsule 2-3 cm, ovoid-oblong to pyriform.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Tuber cylindrical; perianth-tube dilated in middle part .............. {\b 15. elongata}
\par
1 Tuber globose; perianth-tube dilated in upper part
\par
2 Perianth-limb usually equalling or longer than, and broader
\par
  than, the tube ................................................................................... {\b 13. pallida}
\par
2 Perianth-limb shorter than, and narrower than, the tube
\par
3 Perianth usually not more than 3·5 cm .......................................... {\b 13. pallida}
\par
3 Perianth usually at least 3·5 cm ......................................................... {\b 14. lutea}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 13. A. pallida} Willd.,{\i  Sp. Pl.}{\b  4}({\b 1}): 162 (1805) ({\i A. macedonica} Bornm.,{\i  A. melanoglossa} Bornm., non Speg.). Tuber globose. Flowers 2-6·5 cm. Perianth-tube straight; limb usually longer and broader than the tube.{\i  S. Europe.} Al Bu Ga Gr Hs It Ju.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp.{\b  pallida} : Flowers 2·5-6·5 cm. Perianth-limb 1-3 cm, longer than the tube. 2n = 10. {\i Throughout the range of the species except Spain}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b castellana} Nardi,{\i  Webbia}{\b  42:} 15 (1988): Flowers 2-3·5(-4) cm. Perianth-limb 0·5-1·5 cm, shorter than the tube. 2n = 10. •{\i  C. Spain} ({\i Estremadura, Sierra de Gredos}).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Similar to {\b 14 }but distinguished by the smaller flowers.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 14. A. lutea} Desf., {\i Ann. Mus. Hist. Nat.} ({\i Paris}) {\b 10:} 295 (1807) ({\i A. croatica} Horvatic). Tuber globose. Flowers (2·5-)3·5-7·5 cm. Perianth-tube straight; limb shorter and narrower than the tube. 2n = 8.{\i  S. Europe from Italy to Turkey-in-Europe.} Au Bu Gr Hu It Ju Rm Si Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 15. A. elongata} (Duchartre) Nardi, {\i Webbia}{\b  38:} 294 (1984) ({\i A.pallida} var.{\i  elongata} Duchartre). Tuber cylindrical. Flowers 2·5-6·5 cm. Perianth-tube dilated in the middle; limb shorter and narrower than the tube. 2n = 10. •{\i  S. part of Balkan peninsula}. Al Gr.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 16. A. merxmuelleri} Greuter & E. Mayer, {\i Bot. Jahrb.}{\b  107: }321 (1985). Stems 5-12 cm, usually simple, glabrous. Leaves 1·5-3 cm, broadly triangular, retuse, puberulent (especially beneath); petiole up to 0·5 cm. Flowers 2-3 cm, yellowish-green, often with faint violet stripes, the limb brownish-violet; pedicels very short. {\i On serpentine soil. • C. Jugoslavia} ({\i N.E. of Djakova}). Ju.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 17. A. tyrrhena} Nardi & Arrigoni,{\i  Boll. Soe. Sarda Sci. Nat.}{\b  22:} 347 (1983). Stems up to 40 cm, simple or branched, puberulent; tuber narrowly cylindrical. Leaves 2-4 cm, ovate to ovate-reniform, cordate, obtuse to rounded, glabrous beneath; petiole 0·5-4 cm. Flowers 2-4 cm, greyish-green, the limb reddish-brown; pedicels shorter than the petioles. Capsule 0·8-1·2 cm, subglobose. 2n = 26.{\i  Rocky and stony places. • Sardegna, Corse.} Co Sa.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 18. A. microstoma} Boiss. & Spruner in Boiss., {\i Diagn. Pl. Or. Nov.}{\b  1}({\b 5}): 50 (1844). Stems 10-40 cm, simple or branched, pubescent; tuber cylindrical. Leaves 1-4·5 cm, ovate-oblong, cordate; petiole 0·2-2 cm. Flowers 1·5-3 cm, clavate with apical pore, brownish; limb very small or absent. Capsule 1-2 cm, globose. •{\i  S. & C. Greece}. Gr.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 19. A. sicula} Tineo in Guss.,{\i  Fl. Sic. Syn.}{\b  2:} 878 (1845). Stems up to 50 cm, usually simple; tuber globose. Leaves 2-12 cm, ovate-triangular to ovate, cordate, acute to acuminate; petiole 1-7 cm. Flowers 2-3 cm, yellow. Capsule 1-1·5 cm, subglobose. 2n = 16.{\i  Woods in the mountains. • Sicilia. }Si.
\par

\par
89}
\par