{\rtf1\ansi \deff4\deflang1033{\fonttbl{\f4\froman\fcharset0\fprq2 Times New Roman;}}{\colortbl;\red0\green0\blue0;\red0\green0\blue255;\red0\green255\blue255;\red0\green255\blue0;\red255\green0\blue255;\red255\green0\blue0;\red255\green255\blue0;\red255\green255\blue255;\red0\green0\blue128;\red0\green128\blue128;\red0\green128\blue0;\red128\green0\blue128;\red128\green0\blue0;\red128\green128\blue0;\red128\green128\blue128;\red192\green192\blue192;}{\stylesheet{\widctlpar \f4\fs20\lang2057 \snext0 Normal;}{\*\cs10 \additive Default Paragraph Font;}}{\info{\author dddd}{\operator dddd}{\creatim\yr1998\mo11\dy5\hr15\min55}{\revtim\yr1998\mo11\dy5\hr15\min55}{\version2}{\edmins0}{\nofpages3}{\nofwords792}{\nofchars4517}{\*\company  }{\vern57431}}\widowctrl\ftnbj\aenddoc\hyphcaps0 \fet0\sectd \linex0 {\*\pnseclvl1\pnucrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl2\pnucltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl3\pndec\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl4\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl5\pndec\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl6\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl7\pnlcrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl8\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl9\pnlcrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}
\pard\plain \ \f4\fs20\lang2057 {\fs28 central hollow 1/3 the diameter of the stem, more branches, and loose sheaths with teeth black at the apex. It is recorded from numerous localities in N. & C. Europe.
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 6. E. palustre}{\fs28  L., }{\i\fs28 Sp. Pl.}{\fs28  1061 (1753). Rhizome glabrous. Stem 10-60 cm \'d7 1-3 mm, simple or more often branched, the branches with rounded ridges; ridges stout, rough; grooves (4-)6-10(-12); sheaths green, rather loose; teeth green, with blackish apex and wide, scarious margin, 1-ribbed; central hollow less than \'bd the diameter of the stem, about as large as the outer cavities. Cone 10-30 mm. 2n = c. 216.}{\i\fs28  Marshes, bogs and other wet places. Almost throughout Europe, but rare in parts of the south.}{\fs28  All except Az Bl Cr Rs(K) Sa Sb Si.
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 7. E. sylvaticum}{\fs28  L.,}{\i\fs28  Sp. Pl.}{\fs28  1061 (1753). Rhizome glabrous. Sterile stems 10-80 cm \'d7 1-4 mm, regularly and abundantly branched, branches recurved, usually again branched; ridges nearly smooth; grooves 10-18; sheaths green below; teeth united into 3-6 wide, obtuse lobes; central hollow c. \'bd the diameter of the main stem. Fertile stems usually shorter and less branched. Cone 15-25 mm. 2n = c. 216.}{\i\fs28  Much of Europe but very rare in the Mediterranean region.}{\fs28  Au Be Br Bu Cz Da Fe Ga Ge Gr Hb He Ho Hs Hu Is It Ju No Po Rm Rs(N, B, C, W, E) Su.
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 8. E. pratense}{\fs28  Ehrh., }{\i\fs28 Hannover. Mag.}{\b\fs28  19:}{\fs28  138 (1784). Rhizome glabrous. Sterile stems 10-60 cm \'d7 1-2 mm, regularly and abundantly branched, branches patent or recurved, simple; ridges rough; grooves 8-20; sheaths mostly green; central hollow at least \'bd the diameter of the main stem. Fertile stems usually shorter, developing short branches after the spores are ripe; sheaths numerous, yellowish-white, with 10-20 pale teeth. Cone 15-40 mm. 2n = c. 216. }{\i\fs28 Woods and streamsides. N., C. & E. Europe, southwards to S.E. Jugoslavia}{\fs28 . Au ?Be Br Cz Da Fa Fe ?Ga Ge Hb He Is It Ju No Po Rm Rs(N, B, C, W, ?K, E) Su.
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 9. E. arvense}{\fs28  L., }{\i\fs28 Sp. Pl}{\fs28 . 1061 (1753). Rhizome pubescent. Sterile stems 10-80 cm \'d7 (1-)3-5 mm, usually regularly and abundantly branched, branches ascending or suberect, simple, with sharp, acute ridges; grooves (4-)6-19; sheaths green; central hollow less than \'bd the diameter of the main stem. Fertile stems appearing before the sterile, usually shorter, simple, pale brown, dying after the spores are shed; sheaths 4-6, pale brown, with darker teeth. Cone (4-)10-40 mm. 2n = c. 216.}{\i\fs28  Often in drier habitats than the other species; a serious weed in some areas. Throughout Europe, but somewhat local in the south and east.}{\fs28  All territories.
\par 
\par In small arctic plants, the fertile stems become green, at least below, and branch irregularly after the spores are shed.
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 10. E. telmateia}{\fs28  Ehrh., }{\i\fs28 Hannover. Mag.}{\b\fs28  18:}{\fs28  287 (1783) (}{\i\fs28 E. maximum}{\fs28  auct.,}{\i\fs28  E. majus}{\fs28  Gars.). Rhizome pubescent. Sterile stems (15-)50-200 cm \'d7 10-20 mm, regularly and abundantly branched, ivory-white; branches green, patent, simple; ridges smooth; grooves 20-40, fine; sheaths pale below, dark at top; central hollow at least 2/3 the diameter of the main stem. Fertile stems appearing before the sterile, shorter, simple, pale brown, dying after the spores are shed; sheaths numerous, pale brown, with dark teeth. Cone 40-80 mm. 2n = c. 216. }{\i\fs28 W., C. & S. Europe, northwards to N. Scotland, and extending locally eastwards to E. Ukraine}{\fs28 . All except Fa Fe Is No Rs(N, C, E) Sb.
\par 
\par 
\par }
\pard \qc\ {\fs36 FILICOPSIDA
\par 
\par }
\pard \ {\fs28 Measurements given for leaf-length in the Filicopsida refer to the whole leaf, including the petiole.
\par 
\par }
\pard \qc\ {\fs28  }{\b\fs28 6.         OPHIOGLOSSACEAE}{\fs28 
\par       }{\fs24  Edit. \'86D.H. Valentine & D.M. Moore
\par 
\par }
\pard \ {\fs28 Rhizome short, fleshy, without scales. Leaves not circinate in bud, consisting of a sterile lamina and a fertile spike or panicle of spikes. Homosporous; sporangia large, thick-walled, sessile, without an annulus and opening by a transverse slit. Prothallus subterranean, tuber-like, saprophytic, with mycorrhiza.
\par 
\par Literature: R. Clausen,}{\i\fs28  Mem. Torrey Bot. Club}{\b\fs28  19}{\fs28 (}{\b\fs28 2}{\fs28 ): 1-177 (1938).
\par 
\par  Lamina linear to ovate, entire, with reticulate venation; 
\par   fertile spike with sunken and coalescent sporangia .............. }{\b\fs28 1. Ophioglossum}{\fs28 
\par Sterile and fertile parts of leaf both \'b1 compound, the veins dichotomous,
\par   free; fertile spike with subsessile free sporangia ...................... }{\b\fs28 2. Botrychium}{\fs28 
\par 
\par }
\pard \qc\ {\fs28  }{\b\fs28 1.             Ophioglossum}{\fs28                L.
\par }{\fs24 By \'86W. Rothmaler (Ed. 1) revised by J.R. Akeroyd (Ed. 2)
\par 
\par }
\pard \ {\fs28 Lamina undivided, somewhat fleshy, with reticulate veins. Fertile spikes linear, with 2 rows of sunken and coalescent sporangia.
\par }
\pard \li200\ {\fs28 1 Leaves usually single; lamina at least 2 cm wide ........................ }{\b\fs28 4. vulgatum}{\fs28 
\par 1 Leaves often 2 or 3 together; lamina usually less than 3 \'d7 2 cm
\par 2 Lamina attenuate at base; veins without free endings .............. }{\b\fs28 1. lusitanicum}{\fs28 
\par 2 Lamina cuneate at base; veins in the larger meshes with free endings
\par 3 Leaves (1)2 or 3; lamina not apiculate ......................................... }{\b\fs28 2. azoricum}{\fs28 
\par 3 Leaves 1 or 2(3); lamina apiculate ......................................... }{\b\fs28 3. polyphyllum}{\fs28 
\par 
\par }
\pard \ {\fs28   }{\b\fs28 1. O. lusitanicum}{\fs28  L., }{\i\fs28 Sp. Pl.}{\fs28  1063 (1753). Leaves 1-3 together; lamina 1-3 \'d7 0\'b72-0\'b77 cm, erect, sessile or stalked, attenuate at the base, lanceolate to linear-lanceolate, obtuse, net-veined, with no fine secondary meshes and no included free vein-endings. Fertile spike with 5-10 sporangia on each side; spores smooth. 2n = 250-260.}{\i\fs28  Mainly coastal. Mediterranean region and W. Europe.}{\fs28  Az Bl Br Co Cr Ga Gr Hs It Ju Lu Sa Si Tu.
\par 
\par   }{\b\fs28 2. O. azoricum}{\fs28  C. Presl,}{\i\fs28  Tent. Pteridogr. Suppl.}{\fs28  49 (1845) (}{\i\fs28 O. vulgatum}{\fs28  subsp.}{\i\fs28  ambiguum}{\fs28  (Cosson & Germ.) E.F. Warburg,
\par 
\par 9}
\par }