{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 45.         RAFFLESIACEAE}
\par             

\par\f0\fs28\qc  ({\i Cytinaceae})
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc  Edit. D.A. Webb.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Perennial herbs without chlorophyll, parasitic on the roots of other plants. Flowers unisexual. Perianth consisting of a single, more or less petaloid whorl. Ovary inferior; fruit a berry.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 1.                  Cytinus}                  L.
\par 

\pard\f0\fs24\qc  By D.A. Webb & J.R. Akeroyd
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Parasitic (in Europe) on members of the Cistaceae. Stem simple, stout, with fleshy scale-leaves. Flowers subsessile, in a dense spike, the lower female, the upper male. Perianth tubular, with 4 spreading lobes. Stamens 8, united into a column. Style single; stigma capitate. Seeds numerous, embedded in a sweet, viscid pulp.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 Perianth and fruit yellow ................................................................ {\b 1. hypocistis}
\par
Perianth white or pale pink; fruit white ................................................. {\b 2. ruber}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. C. hypocistis} (L.) L.,{\i  Syst. Nat.} ed. 12,{\b  2:} 602 (1767). Stem 3-7 cm, rarely longer. Scale-leaves densely imbricate, ovate-oblong, ciliate, yellow, orange or red. Flowers 5-10(-18), each subtended by 2 usually pubescent bracteoles of the same colour as the leaves; perianth usually pubescent, bright yellow. Fruit yellow.{\i  S. & W. Europe, northwards to c.} 46°{\i  N. in W. France}. Al Bl Co Cr Ga Gr Hs It Ju Lu Sa Si Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Perianth c. 12 mm, scarcely exceeding the bracteoles
\par
  ......................................................................................... ({\b a}) subsp. {\b hypocistis}
\par
1 Perianth at least 16 mm, distinctly exceeding the bracteoles
\par
2 Flowers usually more than 12 in number ..................... ({\b d}) subsp.{\b  pityusensis}
\par
2 Flowers less than 12 in number
\par
3 Scale-leaves usually yellow or orange; 
\par
  flowers often more than 20 mm .................................... ({\b b}) subsp.{\b  macranthus}
\par
3 Scale-leaves usually red; flowers c. 18 mm .................... ({\b c}) subsp. {\b orientalis}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp.{\b  hypocistis} : Scale-leaves usually yellow or orange. Flowers 5-10. Perianth c. 12 mm, scarcely exceeding the bracteoles.{\i  On white-flowered species of cistus; perhaps also on} Halimium{\i  species. Throughout the range of the species}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp.{\b  macranthus} Wettst.,{\i  Ber. Deutsch. Bot. Ges.}{\b  35:} 95 (1910): Scale-leaves usually yellow or orange. Flowers 5-10. Perianth 20-25 mm, distinctly exceeding the bracteoles.{\i  On} Halimium{\i  species. Portugal; W. Spain}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b c}) Subsp. {\b orientalis} Wettst., {\i op. cit. }97 (1910): Scale-leaves usually red. Flowers 5-10. Perianth c. 18 mm, distinctly exceeding the bracteoles.{\i  On} Cistus parviflorus.{\i  S. Greece & Kriti; rare}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b d}) Subsp{\b . pityusensis} Finschow,{\i  Veröff. Überseemus. Bremen A,}{\b  4:} 110 (1974): Scale-leaves red or yellow. Flowers 13-18. Perianth c. 18 mm, distinctly exceeding the bracteoles.{\i  On }Cistus clusii. •{\i  Islas Baleares} ({\i Ibiza}).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. C. ruber} (Fourr.) Komarov,{\i  Fl. URSS}{\b  5:} 442 (1936) ({\i C. hypocistis} subsp.{\i  kermesinus }(Guss.) Wettst.). Like {\b 1} but with stem up to 12 cm; scale-leaves and bracteoles deep crimson or bright red; perianth c. 12-15 mm, slightly exceeding the bracteoles, ivory-white or pale pink. Fruit white. {\i On pink-flowered species of} Cistus.{\i  Mediterranean region and Portugal}. Bl Co Cr Ga Gr Hs It Lu Sa Si Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs36\qc BALANOPHORALES
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 46.         BALANOPHORACEAE}
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc  Edit. D.A. Webb
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Herbs without chlorophyll, parasitic on the roots of other plants. Flowers usually unisexual, in dense, spicate or capitate inflorescences. Fruit a small, 1-seeded nut; seed with abundant endosperm and minute embryo.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 1.             Cynomorium}              L.
\par    

\pard\f0\fs24\qc  By D.A. Webb.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Perennial. Male, female and hermaphrodite flowers present. Perianth of 1-5 linear to cuneate or oblanceolate segments, partly fused to the ovary in female and hermaphrodite flowers. Stamen 1, epigynous. Style and stigma 1.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Literature: J. Léonard,{\i  Bull. Jard. Bot. Nat. Belg. }{\b 56:} 301-304 (1986).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. C. coccineum} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 970 (1753). Plant dark red to purplish-black. Stems 15-30 cm, arising from a branched, underground rhizome, erect, stout, fleshy, bearing numerous triangular-lanceolate scale-leaves. Inflorescence 6-12 × 2-4 cm, terminal, cylindrical-clavate, with a stout, fleshy axis on which are numerous dense, subcapitate cymes subtended by triangular-peltate, deciduous bracts.{\i  Parasitic on various plants, usually in saline habitats. Mediterranean region, mainly in the west; S. Portugal; very local}. Bl Co Hs It Lu Sa Si.
\par

\par
90}
\par