{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\par

\pard\f0\fs36\qc POLYGONALES
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 47.       POLYGONACEAE}
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc  Edit. D.A. Webb.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Herbs, shrubs or climbers. Leaves nearly always alternate; stipules often united to form a membranous sheath (ochrea). Flowers hermaphrodite or unisexual; perianth 3- to 6-merous, herbaceous, often enlarging and becoming membranous in fruit. Stamens usually 6-9. Ovary superior, unilocular; styles 2-4; ovule solitary, basal. Fruit a trigonous or lenticular nut.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Erect, much-branched shrubs
\par
2 Stamens 12 or more ................................................................ {\b 11. Calligonum}
\par
2 Stamens 6- 8
\par
3 Leaves at least 2 cm; flowers in panicles ........................................ {\b 8. Rumex}
\par
3 Leaves less than 2 cm; flowers in short racemes ..................... {\b 12. Atraphaxis}
\par
1 Herbs, dwarf shrubs or woody climbers
\par
4 Perianth-segments 3 or 4
\par
5 Perianth-segments 3; stamens 3 ................................................... {\b 1. Koenigia}
\par
5 Perianth-segments 4; stamens 6 ....................................................... {\b 6. Oxyria}
\par
4 Perianth-segments 5 or 6
\par
6 Woody climbers
\par
7 Leaves 3-6 cm wide, cordate ......................................................... {\b 3. Fallopia}
\par
7 Leaves less than 3 cm wide, not cordate .......................... {\b 10. Muehlenbeckia}
\par
6 Herbs or dwarf shrubs
\par
8 Outer fruiting perianth-segments with 3 stout spines ........................ {\b 9. Emex}
\par
8 Outer fruiting perianth-segments not spiny
\par
9 Leaves palmately lobed; stamens 9 ................................................. {\b 7. Rheum}
\par
9 Leaves not palmately lobed; stamens 8 or fewer
\par
10 Perianth-segments 6, the inner much larger than the outer in fruit
\par
   ........................................................................................................ {\b 8. Rumex}
\par
10 Perianth-segments 5, equal in fruit or the outer larger
\par
11 Outer perianth-segments winged or keeled in fruit
\par
12 Twining annuals; stigmas compact, subsessile ............................ {\b 3. Fallopia}
\par
12 Erect, rhizomatous perennials; stigmas fimbriate; styles fairly long
\par
   .................................................................................................... {\b 4. Reynoutria}
\par
11 Outer perianth-segments not winged or keeled in fruit
\par
13 Leaves deltate-cordate, about as wide as long; fruit at least twice as
\par
   long as perianth ......................................................................... {\b 5. Fagopyrum}
\par
13 Leaves distinctly longer than wide, never deltate and rarely cordate;
\par
   fruit included in the perianth or protruding for less than ½ its length
   ................................................................................................... {\b 2. Polygonum}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 1.              Koenigia}               L.
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc †T.G. Tutin.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Annual herbs. Leaves usually subopposite. Perianth-segments 3, sepaloid. Stamens 3, alternating with 3 gland-like staminodes. Styles 2.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. K. islandica} L.,{\i  Mantissa} 35 (1767). Stems 1-6 cm, erect, reddish. Leaves 3-5 mm, broadly elliptical; petiole c. 1 mm; stipules hyaline. Flowers in terminal and axillary clusters; perianth-segments c. 1 mm, pale green. 2n = 14, 28. {\i Open habitats. Arctic Europe, extending southwards in the mountains to }56° 30'{\i  N. in Scotland}. Br Fa Fe Is No Rs(N) Sb Su.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 2.              Polygonum}              L.
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc  D.A. Webb & A.O. Chater (Ed. 1) revised by J.R. Akeroyd (Ed. 2)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Herbs or dwarf shrubs. Leaves variously shaped, always distinctly longer than wide. Perianth-segments usually more or less equal, free or united in lower part, petaloid at least in part, not winged or keeled. Stamens 8, rarely fewer. Stigmas 2 or 3. Nut lenticular or trigonous, not winged, enclosed in the persistent perianth or protruding from it for less than ½ its length.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 The sections set out below are often elevated to generic rank, by reason mainly of constant differences in the structure of the pollen. Differences in habit, ochrea, inflorescence, floral parts and chromosome number show some correlation with the differences in pollen structure, but not with sufficient constancy to provide satisfactory generic diagnoses.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 A number of hybrids have been reported, especially in Sect. {\i Persicaria} ; none appears to be widespread. Some, at least, of these supposed hybrids are referable either to one of the parents or to a third species, but it appears that{\b  28} can hybridize with {\b 25}, {\b 26} and {\b 29}, and {\b 23} with {\b 25} and {\b 28}. These hybrids are intermediate in appearance between the parents.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 In addition to the species described below, several robust, perennial species are cultivated in gardens. Among these{\b  P. molle} D. Don,{\i  Prodr. Fl. Nepal.} 72 (1825), from the Himalaya, and{\b  P. weyrichii} Friedrich Schmidt Petrop. in Maxim.,{\i  Prim. Fl. Amur.} 234 (1859), from Sakhalin and Japan, are perhaps becoming naturalized.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Flowers in wide, diffuse panicles; perianth usually white or cream (Sect.
\par
  {\i Aconogonon})
\par
2 Leaves not more than 3 cm wide, cuneate at the base; ochreae hyaline,
\par
  evanescent
\par
3 Branches few, ascending; nut 4-5 mm, exceeding the perianth ... {\b 41. alpinum}
\par
3 Branches many, divaricate; nut 3-4 mm, enclosed within the perianth
\par
  ..................................................................................................... {\b 42. laxmannii}
\par
2 Leaves 2-8 cm wide, ± truncate at the base; ochreae brown, persistent
\par
4 Flowers white, in lax panicles; leaves 3-8 cm wide, glabrous or with
\par
  brownish tomentum beneath ................................................ {\b 43. polystachyum}
\par
4 Flowers usually pink, in dense panicles; leaves 2-4 cm wide, with dense
\par
  pinkish-brown tomentum beneath ...................................... {\b 44. campanulatum}
\par

\par
91}
\par