{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Flowers in spikes or axillary clusters; perianth often pink or green
\par
5 Ochreae entire or fimbriate but scarcely lacerate; flowers usually in
\par
  dense spikes, rarely in lax, leafless spikes
\par
6 Rhizomatous perennial
\par
7 Rhizome extensively creeping; styles 2, rarely 3, united in lower part
\par
8 Ochreae not ciliate; spikes stout, dense .................................. {\b 31. amphibium}
\par
8 Ochreae ciliate; spikes slender, rather lax ....................... {\b 32. hydropiperoides}
\par
7 Rhizome short, stout; styles 3, free (Sect.{\i  Bistorta})
\par
9 Leaf-margin revolute; lower flowers of spike usually replaced
\par
  by bulbils ................................................................................... {\b 40. viviparum}
\par
9 Leaf-margin plane; bulbils not present
\par
10 Petiole of lower leaves winged; upper leaves not amplexicaul ...{\b 38. bistorta}
\par
10 Petiole of lower leaves not winged; upper leaves amplexicaul 
\par
   .............................................................................................. {\b 39. amplexicaule}
\par
6  Annual, or perennial with rooting branches or epigeal stolons
\par
11 Stem furnished, at least in lower part, with recurved prickles
\par
   ................................................................................................... {\b 37. sagittatum}
\par
11 Stem without prickles
\par
12 Ochreae and petioles densely hairy
\par
13 Stems not more than 30 cm, decumbent; inflorescence capitate
\par
   .................................................................................................... {\b 36. capitatum}
\par
13 Stems at least 50 cm, erect; inflorescence spicate
\par
14 Leaves lanceolate to ovate-lanceolate, whitish; flowers pink
\par
   .................................................................................................... {\b 30. lanigerum}
\par
14 Leaves ovate, green; flowers reddish ........................................ {\b 33. orientale}
\par
12 Ochreae and petioles glabrous or sparsely hairy
\par
15 Spikes dense and stout, with the flowers crowded and overlapping
\par
16 Peduncles bearing numerous subsessile, yellow glands;
\par
   perianth dull pink or greenish-white .................................... {\b 29. lapathifolium}
\par
16 Peduncles without glands; perianth bright or pale pink 
\par
17 Leaves lanceolate ..................................................................... {\b 28. persicaria} 
\par
17 Leaves ovate or triangular
\par
18 All leaves broadly ovate, turning blue on drying; ochreae ± hyaline;
\par
   inflorescence not capitate ......................................................... {\b 34. tinctorium}
\par
18 Upper leaves triangular, not turning blue on drying; ochreae brown;
\par
   inflorescence capitate ................................................................ {\b 35. nepalense}
\par
15 Spikes lax and slender, with each flower distinctly visible
\par
19 Cleistogamous flowers present in axils of many of the leaves;
\par
   perianth furnished with many glands ...................................... {\b 26. hydropiper}
\par
19 No cleistogamous flowers present; perianth without or with few glands 
\par
20 Ochreae with a few short cilia or none ..................................... {\b 24. foliosum}
\par
20 Ochreae conspicuously ciliate
\par
21 Usually perennial, with epigeal stolons or rooting, decumbent branches;
\par
   larger leaves often 10 cm or more .......................................... {\b 27. salicifolium}
\par
21 Annual; leaves seldom more than 8 cm
\par
22 Leaves linear-lanceolate to linear-oblong, seldom more than
   8 mm wide; nut 1·8-2·5 mm ............................................................ {\b 23. minus}
\par
22 Leaves lanceolate, usually more than 10 mm wide;
\par
   nut 2·8-4 mm ...................................................................................... {\b 25. mite}
\par
5  Ochreae usually becoming deeply lacerate; flowers in small, subsessile
\par
   axillary clusters, or in lax, slender, often leafy spikes 
\par
   (Sect.{\i  Polygonum})
\par
23 Annual; stems scarcely woody at the base
\par
24 Perianth-segments shorter than the tube; leaves very narrowly linear,
\par
   almost subulate ...................................................................... {\b 10. salsugineum}
\par
24 Perianth-segments at least as long as the tube;
   leaves linear to elliptical
\par
25 Bracts all leaf-like, longer than the flowers
\par
26 Nut punctulate, dull, enclosed in the perianth or slightly
   exceeding it ........................................................ ({\b 17-20}).{\b  P. aviculare} group
\par
26 Nut glossy, distinctly exceeding the perianth
\par
27 Leaves very glaucous and minutely papillose;
   sap with acid taste. ..................................................................... {\b 22. acetosum}
\par
27 Leaves green or slightly glaucous, not papillose; sap without acid taste
\par
28 Leaves more than 2 mm wide; nut usually more
   than 2·5 mm .......................................................................... {\b 15. oxyspermum}
\par
28 Leaves less than 2 mm wide; nut not more than 2·5 mm . {\b 16. graminifolium}
\par
25 At least the upper bracts inconspicuous and shorter than the flowers
\par
29 Perianth pink or white
\par
30 Leaves oblong to ovate, not more than 3 times as long as wide
\par
   .................................................................................................. {\b 9. floribundum}
\par
30 Leaves linear-lanceolate, about 5 times as long as wide ........ {\b 13. arenarium}
\par
29 Perianth green, sometimes with pink or white margins
\par
31 Nut 3-5 mm, shorter than the perianth ....................................... {\b 11. bellardii}
\par
31 Nut 1·5-3 mm, equalling or slightly exceeding the perianth
\par
32 Flowers subsessile, crowded towards the ends of the branches;
\par
   nut 2-3 mm ................................................................................... {\b 12. patulum}
\par
32 Flowers distinctly pedicellate, not crowded towards the
   ends of the branches; nut 1·5-2 mm ......................................... {\b 14. albanicum}
\par
23 Perennial; stems woody at the base
\par
33 Ochreae in inflorescence longer than the internodes, those in middle part
\par
   of the stem usually at least ½ as long as the internodes
\par
34 Stock forming a dense, branched, woody mat; stems 3-6 cm 
\par
   (mountains of Kriti) ......................................................................... {\b 7. idaeum}
\par
34 Stock sparingly branched; stems usually more than 10 cm
\par
35 Ochreae with 8-12 strong, branched veins; nut 3·5-5 mm ...... {\b 6. maritimum}
\par
35 Ochreae with not more than 8 faint veins; nut 2-3 mm
\par
36 Leaves usually more than 5 mm wide; 
\par
   perianth becoming hard in fruit ................................................... {\b 8. cognatum}
\par
36 Leaves not more than 5 mm wide; perianth becoming scarious in fruit
\par
37 Leaves linear to linear-oblong, acute; nut 2-3 mm .................... {\b 5. romanum}
\par
37 Leaves oblong to lanceolate, obtuse or subacute;
\par
   nut 1·5-2 mm ............................................................................... {\b 21. longipes}
\par

\par
92}
\par