{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 33 Ochreae shorter than all internodes (except on unexpanded young
\par
   stems) and much shorter than those in middle part of the stem
\par
38 At least the upper bracts scarious and shorter than the flowers,
\par
   or bracts caducous
\par
39 Perianth less than 4 mm; ochreae ± truncate ............................ {\b 1. scoparium}
\par
39 Perianth 4-5 mm; ochreae lacerate ......................................... {\b 3. tenoreanum}
\par
38 Bracts all leaf-like, at least as long as the flowers and
   usually longer, not caducous
\par
40 Bracts much shorter than the lower leaves
\par
41 Stem 30-100 cm; leaves 2-4 cm .......................................... {\b 2. equisetiforme}
\par
41 Stem 10-25 cm; leaves less than 2 cm ........................................ {\b 4. icaricum}
\par
40 Bracts scarcely shorter than the lower leaves
\par
42 Leaves more than 6 mm wide ............................................ {\b 15. oxyspermum}
\par
42 Leaves less than 6 mm wide
\par
43 Leaves linear to linear-oblong, acute; nut 2-3 mm .................... {\b 5. romanum}
\par
43 Leaves oblong to lanceolate, obtuse or subacute; nut 1·5-2 mm
\par
   ...................................................................................................... {\b 21. longipes}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Sect. POLYGONUM. Herbs or dwarf shrubs. Leaves small; ochreae silvery- or whitish-hyaline, at least in upper part, usually eventually lacerate. Flowers axillary, solitary or in small clusters, forming very lax spikes. Perianth petaloid to more or less sepaloid; stamens 3-8; styles 3 (rarely 2), usually short; nut usually trigonous.
\par
 
\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. P. scoparium} Req. ex Loisel., {\i Mém. Soc. Linn. Paris}{\b  6:} 410 (1827). Perennial, with a branched, woody stock. Stems 50-120 cm, erect, sparingly branched. Leaves elliptical, caducous. Ochreae 3-5 mm, much shorter than the internodes, reddish-brown, more or less truncate. Flowers pink or white, solitary or in pairs, in very lax terminal spikes; bracts scarious, shorter than the flowers. Nut glossy, scarcely exceeding the perianth. 2n = 20.{\i  Damp, open habitats. • Corse; Sardegna.} Co Sa.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. P. equisetiforme} Sm. in Sibth. & Sm.,{\i  Fl. Graec. Prodr. }{\b 1:} 269 (1809). Perennial with a branched, woody stock. Stems 30-100 cm, procumbent or ascending, usually branched. Leaves 2-4 cm, oblong to linear, acute, with wrinkled margins, the lower often caducous. Ochreae hyaline, brownish towards the base, much shorter than the internodes. Flowers pink or white, in axillary clusters of 2-3, forming long, usually lax, terminal spikes; bracts herbaceous, equalling or slightly exceeding the flowers but much smaller than the lower leaves. Perianth 2·5-4 mm; styles 2-3. Nut 2-2·5 mm, glossy. 2n = 20. {\i Chiefly ruderal. S. Europe; local}. Az Bu Cr Gr Hs Lu *Si Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b P. papillosum} Hartvig, {\i Willdenowia}{\b  19:} 75 (1989), from serpentine soils in C. Greece, like {\b 2} but with stems erect, leaves 1-2 cm and conspicuously papillose-veined, and perianth-segments 2-3 mm, is related to {\b 1-4}. This group of species requires further investigation.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 3. P. tenoreanum} Nardi & Raffaelli, {\b Webbia}{\b  31:} 516 (1977) ({\i P. elegans }Ten., non Aiton fil.,{\i  P. equisetiforme} var. {\i elegans }Fiori). Like {\b 2} but stems up to 150 cm, erect; leaves all caducous, margins revolute but not wrinkled; inflorescence usually more branched, the branches slender; bracts absent or inconspicuous; perianth 4-5 mm; nut 2·5-4 mm. 2n = 20. {\i Open habitats, often on clay soils. S. Italy}. It.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 4. P. icaricum} Rech. fil., {\i Magyar Bot. Lapok}{\b  33:} 8 (1934). Like{\b  2 }but smaller and more condensed; stock stouter, with very numerous crowded, erect, sparingly branched, slender stems 10-25 cm; leaves 7-15 mm, persistent; flowers solitary or in pairs in much shorter spikes; nut c. 2 mm.{\i  Rock-crevices. N. Aegean region} ({\i Samothraki}). Gr.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Recorded elsewhere only from Ikaria.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 5. P. romanum} Jacq.,{\i  Obs. Bot.}{\b  3:} 8 (1768). Perennial with woody stock. Stems (20-)40-100 cm, procumbent or ascending, densely leafy above, usually with leafy shoots in the leaf-axils. Leaves 10-30 × 1-5 mm, linear to linear-oblong, acute, somewhat glaucous; margins plane. Ochreae hyaline, with rather faint veins, much shorter than the internodes, at least in the middle of the stem. Flowers white or pink, in numerous axillary clusters; bracts leaflike. Nut 2-3 mm, finely striate, dull.{\i  Chiefly ruderal.• C. & S. Italy; S. France; Islas Baleares.} Bl Ga It.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Leaves 1-2 mm wide ................................................... ({\b b}) subsp. {\b balearicum}
\par
1 Leaves 2-5 mm wide
\par
2 Pedicels longer than the perianth; perianth-segments patent
\par
  .......................................................................................... ({\b a}) subsp.{\b  romanum}
\par
2 Pedicels ± equalling the perianth; perianth-segments suberect
\par
  ............................................................................................ ({\b c}) subsp.{\b  gallicum}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp.{\b  romanum} : Stems 40-100 cm, procumbent or weakly ascending, much branched. Leaves 10-20(-30) × 2-5 mm. Pedicels longer than the perianth. Perianth-segments patent; nut 2-3 mm. {\i C. & S. Italy}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b balearicum }Raffaelli & L. Villar, {\i Collect. Bot. }({\i Barcelona}){\b  17:} 50 (1988): Like subsp. ({\b a}) but stems 20-60 cm, more slender, little-branched; leaves 1-2 mm wide. {\i Islas Baleares} ({\i Mallorca}).
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b c}) Subsp. {\i gallicum} (Raffaelli) Raffaelli & L. Villar, {\i loc. cit}. (1988): Stems 20-60 cm, ascending, little branched. Leaves 10-15(-20) × 2-4 mm. Pedicels more or less equalling the perianth. Perianth-segments suberect; nut c. 2 mm. {\i Coast of S. France} ({\i Herault}).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 6. P. maritimum} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 361 (1753). Perennial, with stout, woody stock. Stems 10-50 cm, procumbent, branched, stout. Leaves 5-25 mm, narrowly elliptical, acute, glaucous, often blackening on drying; margins revolute. Ochreae reddish-brown at the base, with 8-12 conspicuous, branched veins, silvery-hyaline distally, longer than most of the internodes. Flowers pink or whitish, solitary or in axillary clusters of 2-4; bracts leaf-like. Nut 3·5-5 mm, equalling or slightly exceeding the perianth, glossy. 2n = 20.{\i  Maritime sand and shingle. Shores of Atlantic, Mediterranean and Black Sea, northwards to S.E. Ireland.} Al Az Bl Br Bu Co Cr Ga Gr Hb Ho Hs It Ju Lu Rm Rs(K) Sa Si Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 7. P. idaeum} Hayek,{\i  Prodr. Fl. Penins. Balcan.}{\b  1:} 110 (1924). Like {\b 6} but much condensed; stock forming a dense, woody mat; stems 3-6 cm; leaves 3-12 mm, elliptical, obtuse, with prominent veins on lower surface; ochreae silvery-hyaline throughout; flowers solitary.{\i  Clayey depressions on limestone mountains. • Kriti.} Cr.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 8. P. cognatum} Meissner,{\i  Monogr. Gen. Poyg. Prodr.} 91 (1826) ({\i P. alpestre} C.A. Meyer). Perennial, with a branched, woody stock. Stems 5-30 cm, procumbent. Leaves 10-20 × 5-9 mm, oblong, subacute or mucronate. Ochreae hyaline, usually longer than the internodes. Flowers solitary or in axillary clusters of 2-5; bracts as large as the lower leaves. Perianth pinkish; tube at least as long as the segments, becoming hard in fruit. Nut 3 mm, glossy, included in the perianth.{\i  Locally naturalized as a ruderal.} [Bu Ga.] ({\i S.W. Asia.})
\par

\par
93}
\par