{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 9. P. floribundum} Schlecht. ex Sprengel,{\i  Syst. Veg.}{\b  2:} 257 (1825). Annual. Stems long, stout, freely branched. Leaves 7-25 mm, oblong or ovate, subacute. Flowers in axillary clusters of 3-10, most of them aggregated into numerous, fairly dense, stout, spike-like racemes at the ends of the branches; lower bracts leaflike, upper ones shorter than the flowers. Pedicels slender, longer than the perianth; perianth 2 mm, pink, with patent segments, enclosing the lenticular nut.{\i  Dry steppes and semi-deserts. S.E. Russia}. Rs(E). ({\i W. Asia}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 10. P. salsugineum} Bieb., {\i Beschr. Länd. Terek Casp. }169 (1800). Erect, bushy annual with very slender, branched stems 5-20 cm. Leaves 3-12 mm, narrowly linear, almost subulate, very few. Ochreae reddish-brown. Flowers subsessile, solitary in the axils of minute scarious bracts. Perianth pink or yellowish; segments shorter than the tube. Nut long and narrow, exceeding the perianth, dull.{\i  Gypsaceous and saline habitats. S.E. Russia and Krym.} Rs(C, K, E)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b P. samarense} H. Gross,{\i  Bot. Jahrb. }{\b 49:} 340 (1913), and{\b  P. aschersonianum} H. Gross,{\i  op. cit.} 341 (1913), described from S.E. Russia, both differ principally from {\b 10} by the somewhat longer leaves and glossy nut. They may be variants of {\b 10} or hybrids between {\b 10} and {\b 17} or {\b 20}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 11. P. bellardii} All., {\i Fl. Pedem. }{\b 2:} 207 (1785) ({\i P. patulum} auct., non Bieb.; incl.{\i  P. kitaibelianum} Sadler, {\i P. novoascanicum} Klokov). Annual. Stem 20-100 cm, erect, usually much-branched. Leaves 25-45 mm, linear-lanceolate to elliptic-oblong, caducous. Flowers solitary or in axillary clusters of 2-4, subsessile, forming lax spikes; lower bracts leaf-like, the upper scarious and shorter than the flowers. Perianth 3-5 mm, divided almost to the base; segments greenish, erect. Nut 3-5 mm, glossy, not exceeding the perianth. 2n = 20.{\i  Cultivated ground. C. & S. Europe, extending northwards to c. }49°{\i  N. in France and c.} 55°{\i  N. in S. Ural.} Al Au Bl Bu Co Cz Ga Gr Hs Hu It Ju Rm Rs(C, W, K, E) Sa Si Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 12. P. patulum} Bieb.,{\i  Fl. Taur.-Cauc. }{\b 1:} 304 (1808) ({\i P. gracilius} (Ledeb.) Klokov,{\i  P. bellardii} auct., non L.,{\i  P. bordzilowskii} Klokov,{\i  P. cretaceum }Komarov,{\i  P. kotovii} Klokov,{\i  P. spectabile} Lehm. ). Like {\b 11} but more slender; leaves smaller and narrower, the uppermost linear; inflorescence more compact, with flowers crowded towards the ends of the branches; nut (1·5-)2-3 mm, equalling or slightly exceeding the perianth.{\i  Dry and sandy habitats, and as a ruderal. E.C. & S.E. Europe}. Hu Rm Rs(C, W, K, E).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 13. P. arenarium} Waldst. & Kit.,{\i  Pl. Rar. Hung.}{\b  1:} 69 (1801). Annual. Stems 20-50 cm, diffusely branched from the base, procumbent or ascending. Leaves linear-lanceolate, acute, usually caducous. Bracts small, inconspicuous. Perianth pink and white, conspicuous, with patent segments. Nut 2 mm.{\i  Mainly in cultivated ground, especially on sandy soils. S. & E. Europe, northwards to }53°{\i  N. in E. Russia.} Al Bu Cz Ga Gr Hu It Ju Rm Rs(C, W, K, E) Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp.{\b  arenarium} (incl. {\i P. pseudoarenarium} Klokov,{\i  P. janatae} Klokov, {\i P. venantianum }G.C. Clementi): Flowers rather distant, solitary or in pairs on the main branches, clustered and forming short, condensed terminal spikes on the lateral branches. Nut glossy. 2n = 20. {\i S.E. & E.C. Europe}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp.{\b  pulchellum} (Loisel.) Thell., {\i Fl. Adv. Montpellier} 186 (1912) ({\i P. pulchellum} Loisel.): Flowers solitary or in pairs, forming lax spikes throughout the inflorescence. Nut dull or scarcely glossy. 2n = 20.{\i  Mediterranean region, mainly in the east}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 14. P. albanicum} Jáv., {\i Bot. Közl. }{\b 19:}18 (1920). Annual. Stems 10-50 cm, diffusely branched from the base, erect. Leaves lanceolate to linear-lanceolate, acute, with a single vein, caducous. Flowers solitary or paired, rarely in clusters of 3; bracts inconspicuous, only the lowermost exceeding the flowers. Perianth 1·3-2 mm; segments longer than the tube, green with white or pink margins, connivent. Nut 1·5-2 mm, dark brown, rather glossy, distinctly exceeding the perianth. {\i Serpentine soils. • W. part of Balkan peninsula; local.} Al Gr Ju.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 15. P. oxyspermum} C.A. Meyer & Bunge ex Ledeb.,{\i  Ind. Sem. Hort. Dorpat.,} suppl. 2, 5 (1824). Annual to perennial. Stems 10-100 cm, procumbent, rather stout and sometimes woody at the base. Leaves 10-30 mm, elliptical to linear-lanceolate; margins scarcely revolute. Ochreae much shorter than the internodes, mostly hyaline, with 4-6(-8) simple veins. Flowers in axillary clusters of 2-6, rarely solitary; bracts leaf-like. Nut glossy, exceeding the perianth.{\i  Maritime sand and shingle. Coasts of most of Europe, but rare in the south-west.} Br Bu Da Fe Ga Ge Gr Hb Hs It No Po Rm Rs(N, B, W, K) Sa Si Su Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Leaves linear-lanceolate, green; nut usually more than 5 mm,
\par
  pale or greenish-brown ............................................. ({\b a}) subsp.{\b  oxyspermum}
\par
1 Leaves elliptical, green or glaucous; nut usually not more
\par
  than 5 mm, dark brown
\par
2 Nut up to 5·5 mm, distinctly exceeding the perianth .............. ({\b b}) subsp.{\b  raii}
\par
2 Nut not more than 3 mm, slightly exceeding the perianth
\par
  ............................................................................................ ({\b c}) subsp.{\b  robertii}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b oxyspermum} : Annual or biennial, green. Leaves linear-lanceolate. Perianth-segments with deep red margins; nut 5-6·5 mm, pale or greenish-brown, distinctly exceeding the perianth. 2n = 40.{\i  Baltic; Kattegat; S. Norway}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp.{\b  raii }(Bab.) D.A. Webb & Chater,{\i  Feddes Repert.}{\b  68:} 188 (1963) ({\i P. raii} Bab., {\i P. robertii} auct., non Loisel.; incl.{\i  P. norvegicum} Säm. ex Lid,{\i  P. mesembricum} Chrtek): Annual to perennial, green or somewhat glaucous. Leaves usually elliptical, very variable in width. Perianth-segments with white or pale pink margins; nut 2·5-5·5 mm, dark brown, exceeding the perianth. 2n = 40.{\i  N. Europe, from N.W. France to arctic Russia.}
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b c}) Subsp.{\b  robertii} (Loisel.) Akeroyd & D.A. Webb,{\i  Bot. Jour. Linn. Soc.}{\b  97:} 344 (1988). Perennial, rather woody at the base, green or somewhat glaucous. Leaves elliptical. Perianth-segments with white margins; nut 2·5-3·5 mm, dark or blackish-brown, slightly exceeding the perianth. 2n,= 40. {\i W. & C. Mediterranean region,from N.E. Spain to N.E. Italy and Sicilia.}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Plants from the Black Sea and N. Aegean coasts, which have been called {\i P. mesembricum} Chrtek, {\i Preslia }{\b 32:} 367 (1960), appear to be annual, with greyish-green or silvery leaves, ochreae with 6-8 veins, and white margins to the perianth. The nut is similar to that of subsp. ({\b b}), but in some cultivated specimens can approach that of subsp. ({\b a}). In spite of the geographical disjunction there are no constant differences between this and subsp. ({\b b}).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 16. P. graminifolium} Wierzb. ex Heuffel, {\i Verh. Zool.-Bot. Ges. Wien}{\b  8:} 190 (1858). Annual. Stems 10-30 cm, branched, slender, decumbent. Leaves 10-20 × 1-1·5 mm, linear, subacute. Ochreae brownish, caducous, with c. 6 veins. Flowers solitary or in axillary clusters of 2 or 3 near the ends of the branches, subsessile. Perianth 1·5-2 mm, the segments longer than the tube. Nut 2-2·5 mm, exceeding the perianth, glossy. •{\i  Lower and middle Danube valley}. Cz Hu Ju Rm.
\par

\par
94}
\par