{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 ({\b 17-20}).{\b  P. aviculare} group. Annuals. Stems erect, ascending or procumbent, 10-60 cm. Leaves variable in shape and size, entire, acute to obtuse, green or somewhat glaucous. Ochreae silvery-hyaline, often brownish near the base, with few, faint veins, lacerate. Flowers solitary or in axillary clusters of 2-6; bracts leaflike. Perianth-segments greenish with white, pink or reddish margins. Nut 1·5-4 mm, punctulate, dull, included in or slightly exserted from the perianth.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 A complex of variable, closely related species which are widespread in ruderal and other open habitats. Many taxa have been treated as species by different authors, but four principal variants can be distinguished. The treatment below follows B.T. Styles,{\i  Watsonia}{\b  5:} 177-214 (1962) and M. Raffaelli, {\i Webbia}{\b  35:} 361-406 (1982).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Perianth-tube usually at least ½ as long as the segments;
\par 
  leaves uniform in size; plant usually procumbent .................... {\b 20. arenastrum}
\par
1 Perianth-tube less than ½ as long as the segments; leaves on the main
\par
  stem much longer than those on the branches
\par
2 Larger leaves 1-5 mm wide; perianth-segments narrow,
\par
  not overlapping .......................................................................... {\b 19. rurivagum}
\par
2 Larger leaves usually 5-20 mm wide; perianth-segments broad, overlapping
\par
3 Larger leaves lanceolate to ovate; petiole included in the ochrea;
\par
  nut 2·5-3·5 mm ............................................................................ {\b 17. aviculare}
\par
3 Larger leaves obovate; petiole distinct, partly exserted from
\par
  the ochrea; nut 3·5-4·5 mm ............................................................ {\b 18. boreale}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 17. P. aviculare} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 362 (1753) ({\i P. monspeliense} Pers., {\i P. heterophyllum} Lindman,{\i  P. littorale} auct.). Leaves 15-50 × 5-18 mm, lanceolate to ovate, acute to subacute, those on the main stem much larger than those on the branches. Ochreae silvery-hyaline, usually less than ½ as long as the internodes; petioles very short, included in the ochreae. Perianth-tube very short, the segments with pink or white margins, wide and overlapping. Nut 2·5-3·5 mm, included in the perianth. 2n = 60.{\i  Throughout Europe.} All territories, but only as a casual in Sb.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 18. P. boreale} (Lange) Small, Bull. {\i Torrey Bot. Club}{\b  21:} 479 (1894). Like {\b 17} but leaves obovate, those on the main stems 25-50 × 5-20 mm, those on the branches much smaller; petioles well exserted from the ochreae; perianth-segments with conspicuous, bright pink margins; nut 3·5-4·5 mm. 2n = 40.{\i  N.W. Europe, from N. Scotland northwards}. Br Fa Fe Is No Su.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 19. P. rurivagum} Jordan ex Boreau,{\i  Fl. Centre Fr.} ed. 3,{\b  2:} 560 (1857). Like {\b 17} but usually erect; leaves linear to linear-lanceolate, acute or acuminate, those on the main stem 15-35 × 1-5 mm; ochreae longer (up to 12 mm), reddish-brown or brownish below; flowers few; perianth-segments narrow, scarcely or not overlapping, reddish; nut 2·5-3·5 mm, slightly exserted from the perianth. 2n = 60.{\i  Usually a weed in cultivated fields. S., W. & W.C. Europe, extending northwards to Sweden}. Au Be Bl Br Bu Co Cz Da Ga Ge Gr ?Ho Hs It Ju Lu Sa Si Su.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b P. neglectum }Besser,{\i  Enum. Pl. Volhyn.} 45 (1821), originally described from Lithuania, is said to differ in its more or less uniformly sized leaves, its frequently procumbent habit, and its smaller nut. Plants from Russia and from C. Europe have been referred here, but the status of the taxon is not clear.{\i  P. scythicum} Klokov in Kotov,{\i  Fl. RSS Ucr.}{\b  4:} 650 (1952) from the S. Ukraine is very similar.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 20. P. arenastrum} Boreau, {\i Fl. Centre Fr. ed. 3,}{\b  2:} 559 (1857) ({\i P. aequale} Lindman,{\i  P. littorale} auct.,{\i  P. aviculare} auct.; incl. {\i P. propinquum} Ledeb.,{\i  P. microspermum} Jordan ex Boreau,{\i  P. calcatum} Lindman,{\i  P. acetosellum} Klokov). Stems usually less than 30 cm, procumbent, freely branched, forming a mat. Leaves 5-20 × 2-5 mm, elliptical or lanceolate, more or less uniform in size, often obtuse. Ochreae silvery-hyaline with few, faint veins, less than ½ as long as the internodes. Flowers solitary or in few-flowered axillary clusters. Perianth-tube at least ½ as long as the segments. Nut 1·5-2·5 mm, included in the perianth, often with 1 side much narrower than the other 2. 2n = 40.{\i  Often in trampled habitats. Throughout most of Europe except the extreme north; precise distribution still unknown}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 21. P. longipes} Halácsy & Charrel,{\i  Österr. Bot. Zeitschr.}{\b  90:}164 (1890). Like {\b 20} but perennial, somewhat woody at the base; stems up to 60 cm, with long internodes; leaves oblong to lanceolate, obtuse or subacute, greyish-green, crowded on the upper part of stems or on short, lateral branches; bracts usually smaller than the leaves; perianth 1·5-2 mm; nut 1·5-2 mm, finely punctulate-striate, rather glossy, usually slightly exceeding the perianth.{\i  Dry, open ground. • S. part of Balkan peninsula and Aegean region.} Al Cr Gr Ju Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Similar plants from Sicilia and Calabria that have been called{\b  P. gussonei} Tod.,{\i  Fl. Sicula Exsicc}. 102, 172 (1864), require further investigation.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 22. P. acetosum} Bieb.,{\i  Fl. Taur.-Cauc. }{\b 1:} 304 (1808). Annual. Stems procumbent or ascending, branched; sap with acid taste. Ochreae silvery-hyaline, with very faint veins. Leaves 2-3 cm, linear-oblong, obtuse, rarely acute, somewhat fleshy, veinless, covered with minute, white tubercles and appearing glaucous. Flowers in clusters of 3-7. Perianth bluish-green; segments with white margins. Nut 1·7-3 mm, slightly glossy. {\i W. Kazakhstan; S.E. Russia}. Rs(E). ({\i S.W. Asia.})
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Sect. PERSICARIA (Miller) DC. Herbs. Ochreae usually brownish, entire or ciliate but not lacerate. Flowers in spikes; bracts few and inconspicuous. Perianth usually petaloid; stamens 5-8; styles 2, rarely 3, united below. Nut lenticular or trigonous. (Incl. Sect.{\i  Cephalophilon} Meissner,{\i  Echinocaulon} Meissner.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 23. P. minus} Hudson,{\i  Fl. Angl.} 148 (1762). Glabrous annual. Stems 10-40 cm, slender, decumbent or ascending, more rarely erect. Ochreae with long cilia. Leaves 25-75 × 3-9 mm, usually 6-9 times as long as wide, narrowly oblong-lanceolate, subsessile. Spikes slender, lax, often interrupted below, erect. Perianth 2-2·5 mm, deep pink (rarely white). Nut 1·8-2·5 mm, black, glossy. 2n = 40. {\i Wet places. From N. Spain and Macedonia northwards to} 67°{\i  N.in Russia.} Au Be Br Bu Cz Da Fe Ga Ge Gr Hb He Ho Hs Hu It Ju No Po Rm Rs(N, B, C, W, K, E) Su [Lu].
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 24. P. foliosum} H. Lindb., {\i Meddel. Soc. Fauna Fl. Fenn.}{\b  23: }3 (1900). Like {\b 23} but ochreae with short cilia or none; leaves linear, c. 10 times as long as wide; inflorescence sparser and more leafy; perianth and nut 1·5-2 mm. 2n = 20.{\i  Wet places. Fennoscandia; N.W. Russia.} Fe No Rs(?B, C, ?E) Su.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 25. P. mite} Schrank,{\i  Baier. Fl.}{\b  1:} 668 (1789). Glabrous annual. Stems 10-60 cm, slender, erect. Ochreae with long cilia. Leaves 3-10 × 0·5-2 cm, usually less than 6 times as long as wide, elliptic-lanceolate, subsessile. Inflorescence lax, slender, interrupted. Perianth 3-4·5 mm, pink (rarely white), often with a few glands. Nut
\par

\par
95}
\par