{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 2·8-4 mm, black, glossy, lenticular or trigonous. 2n = 40. {\i Damp places and lake shores. Most of Europe except the north}. Al Au Be Br Bu Co Cz Ga Ge Gr *Hb He Ho Hs Hu It Ju Po Rm Rs(B, C, W) Sa Si ?Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Like{\b  26} in general habit and leaf-shape but easily distinguished by the glossy nut and the absence of cleistogamous flowers, and usually fewer and less conspicuous glands on the perianth. It is usually distinguishable from {\b 23 }by the dimensions of the leaves and the size of the nut, but a few plants (possibly hybrids) are difficult to assign to either species and many records are ambiguous.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 26. P. hydropiper} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 361 (1753). A glabrous, acrid-tasting annual. Stems 20-80 cm, more or less erect. Ochreae fringed with a few short cilia. Leaves 5-12 × 1-2·5 cm, lanceolate, acute or acuminate, subsessile. Flowers in numerous, usually very lax, slender, nodding spikes; a cleistogamous flower is also present in many of the leaf-axils. Perianth 3-5 mm, pink or greenish-white, covered with flat, transparent glands that become brownish and raised on drying. Nut c. 3 mm, punctulate, dull. 2n = 20. {\i Damp places; calcifuge and somewhat nitrophilous. Europe, except the extreme north, Islas Baleares and Kriti.} All except Bl Cr Fa Is Sb.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 27. P. salicifolium} Brouss. ex Willd.,{\i  Enum. Pl. Horti Berol. }{\b 1:} 428 (1809) ({\i P. serrulatum} Lag., {\i P. serrulatoides} H. Lindb.). Perennial, with rooting, procumbent or decumbent branches. Stems 30-70 cm, ascending, rather stout. Ochreae strongly ciliate. Leaves 7-15 cm, linear-lanceolate, glabrous except for stiff hairs on the margins and the veins beneath. Flowers pink, in long, lax, very slender spikes. Nut 2-2·5 mm, black, glossy, usually trigonous.{\i  Wet places and river-banks. S. Europe}. Al Bl Bu Co Cr Ga Gr Hs It Lu Sa Si Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 28. P. persicaria} L., {\i Sp. Pl. }361 (1753). Annual. Stems 20-80 cm, erect or ascending. Ochreae shortly ciliate. Leaves up to 15 × 3·5 cm, lanceolate, often with a large, blackish spot, glabrous, or occasionally tomentose beneath. Spikes cylindrical, dense, usually stout. Perianth c. 3 mm, pink or white. Nut black, glossy, usually lenticular. 2n = 22, 44.{\i  Cultivated ground and waste places. Throughout Europe, but doubtfully native in some territories}. All except Cr Sb.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 29. P. lapathifolium} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 360 (1753) ({\i P. andrzejowskianum} Klokov,{\i  P. hypanicum} Klokov,{\i  P. incanum} F.W. Schmidt,{\i  P. paniculatum} Andrz., {\i P. zaporoviense} Klokov; incl. {\i P. nodosum} Pers., {\i P. scabrum} Moench and {\i P. linicola }Sutulov). Annual. Stems up to 80 cm, procumbent or erect, simple or branched, sometimes spotted with red. Ochreae entire or very shortly ciliate. Leaves ovate to linear-lanceolate, acute or obtuse, sometimes with a large, blackish spot, glabrous or densely tomentose beneath, with pellucid, often yellow glands visible from lower surface. Spikes stout and usually dense; peduncles, and sometimes also pedicels and perianth, bearing yellow, subsessile glands. Perianth dull pink or greenish-white. Nut black, glossy, usually lenticular. 2n = 22.{\i  Cultivated ground, waste places, river-gravels and beside lakes and ponds. Throughout Europe}. All except Cr Is Sb.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Extremely variable, especially in habit, colour of foliar glands and of perianth, and in indumentum. Its widespread dissemination as a weed has obscured any geographical pattern which may have existed, and there is scarcely any correlation of these characters that remains constant over a wide area. Furthermore, it is known that some of the characters, especially of habit and tomentum, which are partly determined genetically, are also very plastic phenotypically.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   The only variant which is known both to retain its characteristics in cultivation and to show a well-defined geographical distribution is{\b  P. brittingeri} Opiz, {\i Naturalientausch}{\b  8:} 74 (1824) ({\i P. danubiale} A. Kerner), which grows on river-alluvia in the basins of the upper Danube and Rhine and perhaps elsewhere. It has procumbent, much-branched stems with very short internodes, and broadly elliptical or ovate leaves, densely tomentose beneath and with colourless glands. It may merit recognition as subsp. {\i brittingeri }(Opiz) Rech. fil.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 P. nodosum Pers., {\i Syn. Pl.}{\b  1:} 440 (1805) is a commonly recurring variant with glabrous leaves, yellow foliar glands, red-spotted stems, and pink flowers in a rather lax spike; it is characteristic of river-gravels and cultivated land in some regions. Similarly,{\b  P. tomentosum} Schrank,{\i  Baier. Fl.}{\b  1:} 669 (1789) ({\i P. pallidum} With.), with a low habit, densely tomentose leaves and greenish-white flowers, is often seen on drying mud or as a weed in fields. In both cases, however, it is possible to find plants with some of these characteristics perfectly developed and others not at all, and it seems doubtful whether anything is gained by giving them taxonomic rank without further biosystematic study.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b   P. pennsylvanicum} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 362 (1753), from North America, like {\b 29} but somewhat more robust and erect, the peduncles usually with stipitate glands, and the perianth pink to purplish-pink, is a frequent casual in Britain and probably elsewhere.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 30. P. lanigerum} R. Br.,{\i  Prodr. Fl. Nov. Holl.} 419 (1810). Villous perennial; stems 80-200 cm, erect, stout, rooting at lower nodes. Leaves 10-25 × 2-6 cm, shortly petiolate, lanceolate to ovate-lanceolate, cuneate at base, acuminate, densely white-hairy especially beneath. Flowers pink, in slender, dense spikes up to 7 cm. Nut lenticular, glossy.{\i  River-banks. S. Kriti} ({\i near Phaistos}). *Cr. ({\i Old World Tropics, extending to Egypt and the Jordan Valley}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 31. P. amphibium} L., {\i Sp. Pl. }361 (1753). Perennial, with slender, far-creeping rhizome. Stems erect, ascending or floating, usually much-branched. Leaves of aquatic plants floating, long-stalked, oblong-ovate, truncate or subcordate at the base, glabrous; those of terrestrial plants oblong-lanceolate, rounded at the base, pubescent or appressed-hispid. Ochreae not ciliate. Spikes 2·5 × 1 cm, terminal, obtuse; flowers deep pink. Styles 2, long; nut lenticular, glossy. 2n = 66, 88, 94-96.{\i  Damp places or as an aquatic. Most of Europe, but rare in the extreme south}. All except Az Bl Cr Sb.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 32. P. hydropiperoides} Michx,{\i  Fl. Bor.-Amer.}{\b  1:} 239 (1803). Perennial, with slender, far-creeping rhizome. Stems 20-40 cm, decumbent or ascending; ochreae fringed with long cilia. Leaves 5-20 mm wide, linear-lanceolate, cuneate, glabrous. Flowers pink, in slender, lax, usually branched spikes. Nut trigonous, glossy. {\i Damp places. Açores.} Az. ({\i North and South America.})
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 33. P. orientale} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 362 (1753). Densely pubescent annual. Stem 50-100 cm, erect, stout. Leaves up to 20 cm, ovate-acuminate, stalked, sometimes slightly cordate. Ochreae with green, leaf-like lobes on their distal margin. Flowers reddish-pink, in long, slender, moderately dense, branched spikes. Nut 3 mm, lenticular, glossy. 2n = 22.{\i  Cultivated for ornament, and locally naturalized, mainly in C. & S.E. Europe; a frequent casual elsewhere} [Al Ge ?Gr It Ju Rm Rs(C).] ({\i E. & S.E. Asia}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 34. P. tinctorium} Aiton,{\i  Hort. Kew.}{\b  2:} 31 (1789). Annual. Stems 30-80 cm, erect, usually simple, reddish. Ochreae more or less hyaline, ciliate. Leaves 4-10 × 3-4 cm, broadly ovate, glabrous,
\par

\par
96}
\par