{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 petiolate, turning dark bluish-green on drying. Flowers pink, in short, rather dense spikes, forming a terminal, leafy panicle. Nut trigonous, glossy.{\i  Formerly cultivated in several countries as a dye-plant, and reported to be naturalized in Ukraine}. [Rs(W).] ({\i China}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 35. P. nepalense} Meissner, {\i Monogr. Gen. Polyg. Prodr. }84 (1826). Sparsely hairy annual. Stems 5-40 cm, decumbent to weakly ascending, much branched, rooting at the lower nodes. Lower leaves ovate, auriculate-amplexicaul, acuminate; upper leaves triangular, cordate, acute; petiole winged. Ochreae with stiff, deflexed, white hairs at the base. Inflorescence capitate; bracts membranous. Perianth pink; nut 1-2 mm, lenticular or trigonous, yellowish to dark brown, dull, included within the perianth. {\i Naturalized in N. Italy; casual elsewhere.} [It.] ({\i Tropical Asia and Africa.})
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 36. P. capitatum} Buch.-Ham. ex D. Don, {\i Prodr. Fl. Nepal. }73 (1825). Glandular-pubescent perennial. Stems up to 30 cm, decumbent, rooting at the lower nodes. Leaves 20-50 × 10-25 mm, ovate to elliptical, acute. Inflorescence 5-10 mm, capitate, dense; peduncles 10-30 mm. Perianth pink; nut c. 2 mm, trigonous.{\i  Cultivated for ornament, and naturalized in Açores and N. Portugal}. [Az Lu.] ({\i Himalaya}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 37. P. sagittatum} L.,{\i  Sp. Pl.} 363 (1753). Annual. Stems 50-100 cm, weak, scrambling by numerous, hooked prickles. Leaves 3-6 cm, oblong-sagittate, glabrous. Flowers whitish, in small, long-stalked, subcapitate spikes. Nut glossy, trigonous.{\i  Naturalized in S.W. Ireland} ({\i Kerry}). [Hb.] ({\i E. Asia, North America}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Sect. BISTORTA (Scop.) D. Don. Perennial herbs with short, stout rhizomes. Ochreae brown, not lacerate. Flowers in fairly dense, terminal spikes. Perianth petaloid; stamens 6-8; styles 3, long and slender. Nut trigonous.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 38. P. bistorta} L.,{\i  Sp. Pl.} 360 (1753). Rhizome stout, contorted. Stems 20-100 cm, erect, simple. Lower leaves 5-15 cm, ovate, obtuse, truncate at base; petioles long, broadly winged in upper part. Upper leaves triangular-lanceolate, acute or acuminate. Flowers bright pink, in a dense, cylindrical, terminal spike 20-70 × 10-15 mm. Nut 4-6 mm, glossy. 2n = 44.{\i  Damp, grassy places. Throughout a large part of Europe, but only on mountains in the south and absent as a native from most of Fennoscandia.} Al Au Be Br Bu Cz Ga Ge Gr He Ho Hs Hu It Ju Lu Po Rm Rs (N,B,C,W,K,E) [Da *Fe Hb No Su].
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 39. P. amplexicaule} D. Don, {\i Prodr. Fl. Nepal.} 70 (1825). Stems 60-100 cm, erect. Leaves large, ovate-acuminate, cordate; the lower petiolate, the upper sessile-amplexicaul. Flowers deep red, in dense but rather slender, cylindrical spikes. Nut 4-5 mm, rarely produced in Europe.{\i  Cultivated for ornament, and naturalized in Britain and Ireland.} [Br Hb.] ({\i Himalaya.})
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 40. P. viviparum} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 360 (1753). Rhizome not contorted. Stems 5-40 cm, erect, simple. Leaves up to 10 cm but usually less, oblong- to linear-lanceolate, tapered at both ends; margins revolute. Flowers pale pink or white, in a slender, moderately dense, terminal spike 20-60 × 5-10 mm, in the lower part of which the flowers are usually replaced by brown or deep purple bulbils. Nut rarely produced. 2n = 66, 77, 88, 99, c. 132.{\i  N. Europe, and on mountains in C. and parts of S. Europe}. Al Au Br Bu Cz †Da Fa Fe Ga Ge Hb He Hs Is It Ju No Po Rm Rs(N, B, C, W) Sb Su.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Sect. ACONOGONON Meissner. Perennial herbs. Flowers in diffuse, terminal panicles. Perianth petaloid; stamens 8; styles 3. Nut trigonous.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 41. P. alpinum} All.,{\i  Mélang. Philos. Math. Soc. Roy. Turin} ({\i Misc. Taur}.) {\b 5:} 94 (1774) ({\i P. undulatum} Murray). Stems 30-80 cm, erect, arising from a short, creeping underground rhizome. Leaves 10-30 mm wide, oblong-lanceolate, tapered at both ends. Ochreae mainly hyaline, soon disappearing. Flowers white or pale pink, in a diffuse panicle. Perianth-segments subequal. Styles very short, with large capitate stigmas. Nut 4-5 mm, exceeding the perianth, trigonous, pale brown, glossy.{\i  Usually calcifuge. S., C. & E. Europe, mainly in the mountains.} Al Au Bu Co Ga Gr He Hs It Ju Rm Rs(*N, C, W, E) [Br Da]
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 42. P. laxmannii} Lepechin, {\i Nova Acta Acad. Petrop. }{\b 10:} 414(1797). Like{\b  41} but stems 10-30(-50) cm, divaricately branched from the base; leaves 3-8 mm wide, densely hairy (sometimes glabrous); nut 3-4 mm, included in the perianth.{\i  River-gravels. N.E. Russia.} Rs(N). ({\i Siberia}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 43. P. polystachyum} Wall. ex Meissner in Wall.,{\i  Pl. Asiat. Rar.}{\b  3:} 61 (1832) ({\i Reynoutria polystachya} (Meissner) Moldenke). Stems 60-120 cm, stout, erect, arising from a creeping underground rhizome. Leaves 10-20 × 3-8 cm, oblong-lanceolate, acuminate, truncate or shortly cuneate at the base, glabrous or hairy beneath, usually with red veins. Ochreae brown, thick, persistent, entire. Flowers white, in lax, somewhat leafy panicles with a red axis. Inner perianth-segments broadly obovate to orbicular; outer ones smaller, elliptical. Styles long and slender; stigmas small. Nut rarely produced in Europe.{\i  Cultivated for ornament, and naturalized in C. & N.W. Europe.} [Au Br Da Ga Ge Hb He Ho No Su.] ({\i Himalaya}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 44. P. campanulatum} Hooker fil.,{\i  Fl. Brit. India}{\b  5:} 51 (1886). Stoloniferous; stems up to 100 cm, erect, much branched, stout. Leaves 5-12 × 2-4 cm, lanceolate to ovate or ovate-elliptical, cuneate at the base, acute, with conspicuous whitish to pinkish-brown tomentum beneath. Inflorescence a compact, terminal panicle; flowers heterostylous. Perianth 4-5 mm, pink or white; nut c. 2 mm, brown, glossy, included in the perianth.{\i  Cultivated for ornament, and naturalized in Britain and Ireland}. [Br Hb.] ({\i Himalaya and W. China}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 3.              Fallopia}             Adanson
\par     

\pard\f0\fs24\qc  D.A. Webb.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Stem twining or procumbent; leaves deltate or cordate-sagittate, petiolate. Ochreae truncate. Flowers in lax, spike-like or paniculate terminal and lateral inflorescences. Perianth-segments 5(6); the outer 3 larger, keeled or winged. Stamens 8. Stigmas capitate, subsessile. Not triquetrous, not exceeding the perianth. ({\i Bilderdykia} Dumort.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Woody perennial; inflorescence paniculate ......................... {\b 3. baldschuanica}
\par
1 Annual; inflorescence narrow, scarcely branched
\par
2 Fruiting pedicels 1-3 mm; nut finely punctate, dull ................ {\b 1. convolvulus}
\par
2 Fruiting pedicels 5-8 mm; nut smooth, glossy ......................... {\b 2. dumetorum}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. F. convolvulus} (L.) Á. Löve, {\i Taxon }{\b 19:} 300 (1970). ({\i Polygonum convolvulus} L., {\i Bilderdykia convolvulus} (L.) Dumort.,{\i  Fagopyrum convolvulus} (L.) H. Gross). Puberulent or slightly mealy annual. Stem up to 1 m, angular, twining or spreading. Leaves
\par

\par
97}
\par