{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 2-6 cm, acuminate. Flowers in narrow, spike-like inflorescences. Pedicels not more than 3 mm, even in fruit, articulated above the middle. Perianth-segments greenish-white, accrescent, the outer keeled or slightly winged in fruit, rarely with broad wings (var.{\i  subalatum} (Lej. & Court.) Kent) as in{\b  2}. Nut 4-5 mm, finely punctate, dull black. 2n = 40.{\i  Cultivated ground and waste places. Throughout Europe, but certainly introduced in the extreme north and perhaps elsewhere.} All except Is Sb.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. F. dumetorum} (L.) J. Holub, {\i Folia Geobot. Phytotax.} ({\i Praha}){\b  6:} 176 (1971) ({\i Polygonum dumetorum} L.,{\i  Bilderdykia dumetorum} (L.) Dumort., {\i Fagopyrum dumetorum} (L.) Schreber). Like {\b 1} but often taller; pedicels 5-8 mm in fruit, articulated at or below the middle and usually deflexed; outer perianth-segments broadly winged in fruit, the wings decurrent on the pedicel; nut 2·5-3 mm, smooth and glossy. 2n = 20. {\i Usually in hedges or among native vegetation. Most of Europe except the extreme north and many of the islands.} Al Au Be Br Bu Co Cz Da Fe Ga Ge Gr He Ho Hs Hu It Ju Lu No Po Rm Rs (N, B, C, W, K, E) Si Su.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 3. F. baldschuanica} (Regel) J. Holub, {\i loc. cit.} (1971) ({\i Polygonum baldschuanicum} Regel, {\i Bilderdykia baldschuanica} (Regel) D.A. Webb, {\i Fagopyrum baldschuanicum} auct.). A vigorous, woody climber, up to 6 m or more. Leaves 3-8 cm, cordate, obtuse to acuminate. Flowers in diffuse, drooping, terminal and axillary panicles. Perianth-segments white or pink in flower, pink in fruit, the outer with decurrent wings. Nut black, glossy. {\i Cultivated for ornament, and occasionally naturalized.} [Au Br Cz Hs Rm.] ({\i Tadzhikistan}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Some cultivated plants with white perianth-segments have been referred by many authors to{\b  F. aubertii} (Louis Henry) J. Holub, {\i loc. cit.} (1971) ({\i Bilderdykia aubertii} (Louis Henry) Moldenke,{\i  Polygonum baldschuanicum} auct., non Regel,{\i  Reynoutria aubertii} (Louis Henry) Moldenke,{\i  Polygonum aubertii} Louis Henry), from W. China. This has been distinguished by the shiny, somewhat undulate leaves, and erect panicles of flowers that show little or no pink coloration even in fruit. It seems very doubtful, however, that it is specifically distinct from {\b 3}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 4.              Reynoutria}                Houtt.
\par  

\pard\f0\fs24\qc  D.A. Webb.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Perennials with extensive subterranean rhizomes and stout, erect, annual stems. Plants functionally dioecious (rarely polygamous), but with conspicuous rudiments of stamens in the female and of gynoecium in the male flowers. Flowers in relatively small axillary panicles. Perianth accrescent; segments 5, the outer 3 keeled, eventually winged. Stamens 8. Styles 3, distinct; stigmas fimbriate. ({\i Fallopia} pro parte.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 Leaves seldom more than 12 cm, acuminate-cuspidate,
   truncate at the base; flowers white ................................................ {\b 1. japonica}
\par
Leaves usually more than 15 cm, acute or somewhat acuminate,
   somewhat cordate at the base; flowers greenish .................... {\b 2. sachalinensis}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. R. japonica} Houtt., {\i Natuurl. Hist.} ({\i Handleid}.){\b  2}({\b 8}): 640 (1777) ({\i Tiniaria japonica} (Houtt.) Hedberg, {\i Polygonum cuspidatum }Siebold & Zucc.). Stems 1-2·5 m, numerous, robust, glaucous, often reddish, branched above, forming a dense thicket. Leaves 5-15 cm, broadly ovate-triangular, acuminate-cuspidate, truncate at base, petiolate. Flowers white, in clusters of 2-4, arranged in axillary panicles 8-12 cm long, with slender, rather lax branches. Nut 4 mm, glossy. 2n = 44, 88.{\i  Cultivated for ornament, and extensively naturalized.} [Au Be Br Bu Cz Da Fe Ga Ge Hb He Ho Hs Hu It Ju Lu No Po Rm Rs(B, C) Su.] ({\i Japan.})
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. R. sachalinensis} (Friedrich Schmidt Petrop.) Nakai in T. Mori,{\i  Enum. Pl. Corea} 135 (1922) ({\i Polygonum sachalinense} Friedrich Schmidt Petrop.). Like {\b 1} but with stouter stems, often more than 3 m; leaves 15-40 cm, ovate-oblong, acute or slightly acuminate, somewhat cordate; panicles shorter with stouter, denser branches, the flowers greenish, usually in clusters of 4-7, sometimes polygamous. 2n = 44.{\i  Naturalized from gardens as} {\b 1}{\i  but much less frequently}. [Au Be Br Bu Cz Da Fe Ga Ge Hb Ho Po Rs(B, W) Su.] ({\i E. Asia.})
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 The hybrid between{\b  1} and {\b 2 }({\i R.} ×{\i  bohemica} Chrtek & Chrtková) is established in England and Czechoslovakia, and perhaps elsewhere.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 5.              Fagopyrum}                Miller 
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc  D.A. Webb.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Erect annuals or perennials with hollow stems. Leaves triangular-sagittate, cordate. Ochreae short, truncate, entire. Flowers heterostylous, andromonoecious, in narrow, terminal and axillary, raceme-like panicles; pedicels equalling the perianth, articulated above the middle. Perianth campanulate, with 5 segments, not accrescent. Stamens 8, alternating with yellow nectaries on the disc. Styles 3, long and slender; stigmas capitate, small. Nut triquetrous, greatly exceeding the perianth.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 Perianth 3-4 mm; nut with smooth faces and angles ................... {\b 1. esculentum}
\par
Perianth 2 mm; nut with rugose faces and sinuate-dentate angles ...{\b 2. tataricum}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. F. esculentum} Moench, {\i Méth.} 290 (1794) ({\i F. vulgare} T. Nees,{\i  F. sagittatum} Gilib., {\i Polygonum fagopyrum} L.). Plant 15-60(-100 cm), glabrous or puberulent, tinged with red at maturity. Leaves up to 7 × 6 cm, usually slightly longer than wide, entire or sinuate, dark green, the lower stalked, the upper sessile. Axillary panicles short and compact, on long peduncles. Perianth-segments 3-4 mm, greenish-white tipped with pink, or sometimes all pink. Nut 5-6 mm, dark brown, dull at maturity, with smooth faces and acute, entire angles. 2n = 16. {\i Formerly extensively cultivated (but now considerably less so) as a grain crop in most of Europe except Fennoscandia,  and naturalized as a ruderal through much of Europe.} [Probably all except Cr Fa Gr Hb Is Rs(N) Sb Tu.] ({\i E.C. Asia.})
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b 2. F. tataricum} (L.) Gaertner, {\i Fruct. Sem. Pl.}{\b  2:} 182 (1790) ({\i Polygonum tataricum }L.). Like {\b 1} but often taller, glabrous, seldom tinged with red; leaves usually wider than long, lighter green; panicles longer and laxer; perianth-segments 2 mm, usually entirely green; nut irregularly rugose with obtuse, sinuate-dentate angles. 2n = 16.{\i  Formerly cultilvated in much of Europe, though less often than} {\b 1}, {\i and widely distributed as a ruderal, and as a weed in cultures of}{\b  1}. [Be Da Fe Ga He Ho Ju No Po Rm Rs(N, W, C, E) Su], casual elsewhere. ({\i C. Asia}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 With the decrease in the cultivation of {\b 1}, this species has probably disappeared from much of its former area of distribution.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b F. dibotrys} (D. Don) Hara,{\i  Fl. East. Himalaya} 69 (1966), from the Himalaya, is perennial and up to 120 cm with larger leaves, and flowers in lax, axillary and terminal panicles. It is cultivated for
\par

\par
98}
\par