{\rtf1\ansi \deff4\deflang1033{\fonttbl{\f4\froman\fcharset0\fprq2 Times New Roman;}}{\colortbl;\red0\green0\blue0;\red0\green0\blue255;\red0\green255\blue255;\red0\green255\blue0;\red255\green0\blue255;\red255\green0\blue0;\red255\green255\blue0;\red255\green255\blue255;\red0\green0\blue128;\red0\green128\blue128;\red0\green128\blue0;\red128\green0\blue128;\red128\green0\blue0;\red128\green128\blue0;\red128\green128\blue128;\red192\green192\blue192;}{\stylesheet{\widctlpar \f4\fs20\lang2057 \snext0 Normal;}{\*\cs10 \additive Default Paragraph Font;}}{\info{\author dddd}{\operator dddd}{\creatim\yr1998\mo11\dy11\hr16\min11}{\revtim\yr1998\mo11\dy11\hr16\min11}{\version2}{\edmins0}{\nofpages4}{\nofwords865}{\nofchars4933}{\*\company  }{\vern57431}}\widowctrl\ftnbj\aenddoc\hyphcaps0 \fet0\sectd \linex0 {\*\pnseclvl1\pnucrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl2\pnucltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl3\pndec\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl4\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl5\pndec\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl6\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl7\pnlcrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl8\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl9\pnlcrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}
\pard\plain \ \f4\fs20\lang2057 {\fs24 
\par }{\fs28 ornament, and may be becoming naturalized at a few localities on the coasts of W. Europe.
\par 
\par }
\pard \qc\ {\fs28  }{\b\fs28 6.               Oxyria}{\fs28                  Hill
\par     }{\fs24  †T.G. Tutin.
\par 
\par }
\pard \ {\fs28 Perennial herbs. Perianth-segments in 2 whorls of 2, the inner accrescent in fruit but not tuberculate. Stamens 6. Stigmas 2. Fruit lenticular, broadly winged.
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 1. O. digyna}{\fs28  (L.) Hill,}{\i\fs28  Hort. Kew.}{\fs28  158 (1768). Glabrous, up to 30 cm. Leaves 1-4 cm, almost all basal, reniform, petiolate. Inflorescence branched, leafless. Pedicels slender, articulated about the middle, thickened towards the top. Outer perianth-segments spreading or deflexed, the inner appressed. 2n = 14.}{\i\fs28  Somewhat calcifuge. Arctic Europe, and on mountains southwards to Corse and C.Greece}{\fs28 .Al Au Br Bu Co Cz Fe Ga Ge Gr Hb He Hs Is It Ju No Po Rm Rs (N, W) Sb Su.
\par 
\par }
\pard \qc\ {\fs28  }{\b\fs28 7.                Rheum}{\fs28                    L.
\par }{\fs24  D.A. Webb.
\par 
\par }
\pard \ {\fs28 Robust perennial herbs with a woody rhizome. Leaves mostly basal, large, palmately lobed. Ochreae loose, persistent, not ciliate. Flowers hermaphrodite, in a panicle. Perianth-segments 6, free, equal, not accrescent. Stamens 9. Stigmas 3, subsessile. Fruit with 3 membranous wings.
\par 
\par Several species from temperate Asia are occasionally cultivated in gardens for their decorative foliage, and may be naturalized locally.}{\b\fs28  R. palmatum}{\fs28  L., }{\i\fs28 Syst. Nat.}{\fs28  ed. 10, 1010 (1759), from W. China, and}{\b\fs28  R. officinale}{\fs28  Baillon, }{\i\fs28 Adansonia}{\b\fs28  10:}{\fs28  246 (1872), }{\b\fs28 11:}{\fs28  229 (1874), from the Himalaya, were formerly much cultivated as purgatives.}{\b\fs28  R}{\fs28 . \'d7}{\b\fs28  hybridum}{\fs28  J.A. Murray,}{\i\fs28  Novi Comment. Gotting.}{\b\fs28  2}{\fs28 (}{\b\fs28 5}{\fs28 ): 50 (1775), is cultivated extensively in Britain and occasionally elsewhere in N.W. Europe for its edible petioles (Rhubarb); it is a hybrid derived from}{\b\fs28  R. rhabarbarum}{\fs28  L.,}{\i\fs28  Sp. Pl.}{\fs28  372 (1753), from Mongolia and neighbouring territories.
\par 
\par  Stem with a single leaf; inflorescence compact, subglobose .......... }{\b\fs28 1. tataricum}{\fs28  
\par Stem with several leaves; inflorescence diffuse, pyramidal ...... }{\b\fs28 2. rhaponticum}{\fs28 
\par 
\par }{\b\fs28 1. R. tataricum}{\fs28  L. fil.,}{\i\fs28  Suppl.}{\fs28  229 (1781). Basal leaves up to 50 cm wide, ovate to orbicular, cordate, entire, glabrous above, finely tuberculate on the lower surface and petiole. Stems stout, inclined, each bearing a single leaf. Inflorescence condensed, subglobose. Perianth-segments 3 mm, yellowish, with brown veins. Fruit c. 11 \'d7 9 mm, dark brown, with rather narrow wings.}{\i\fs28  Dry, open places. S.E. Russia, Ukraine}{\fs28 . Rs (W, E). (}{\i\fs28 C. Asia.}{\fs28 )
\par 
\par }{\b\fs28 2. R. rhaponticum}{\fs28  L.,}{\i\fs28  Sp. Pl.}{\fs28  371 (1753). Like }{\b\fs28 1}{\fs28  in general habit, but leaves glabrous throughout and with undulate margin; stems with several leaves; panicle pyramidal, diffuse, somewhat leafy; fruit much smaller. 2n = 22. }{\i\fs28 Wet mountain rocks. \bullet  S.W. Bulgaria}{\fs28  (}{\i\fs28 Rila Planina}{\fs28 );}{\i\fs28  S. Norway}{\fs28  (}{\i\fs28 near Aurland}{\fs28 ). *Bu No.
\par 
\par Closely related taxa, which have been considered to be conspecific, are found in Siberia and C. Asia; they are sometimes cultivated.
\par 
\par }
\pard \qc\ {\fs28  }{\b\fs28 8.             Rumex}{\fs28                  L. 
\par }{\fs24  K.H. Rechinger (Ed. 1) revised by J.R. Akeroyd. (Ed. 2)
\par 
\par }
\pard \ {\fs28 Herbs, rarely shrubs, usually with long, stout roots, sometimes rhizomatous. Leaves alternate; ochreae tubular. Flowers hermaphrodite or unisexual, arranged in whorls on simple or branched inflorescences, anemophilous. Perianth-segments in 2 whorls of 3, the outer remaining small and thin, the inner becoming enlarged and often hardened in fruit. Valves (fruiting inner perianth-segments) sometimes developing marginal teeth or dorsal tubercles as they mature. Stamens in 2 whorls of 3; anthers basifixed. Fruit a trigonous nut.
\par 
\par Literature: K.H. Rechinger,}{\i\fs28  Beih. Bot. Centr.}{\b\fs28  49}{\fs28 (}{\b\fs28 2}{\fs28 ): 1-132 (1932). }{\i\fs28 Feddes Repert.}{\b\fs28  31:}{\fs28  225-283 (1933). }{\i\fs28 Candollea }{\b\fs28 12:}{\fs28  9-152 (1949).
\par 
\par }
\pard \li200\ {\fs28 1 Shrub up to 2 m; leaves broadly ovate to suborbicular ........ }{\b\fs28 3. lunaria}{\fs28 
\par 1 Herb (sometimes woody at base), or dwarf shrub up to 70 cm;  leaves usually distinctly longer than wide
\par 2 At least some leaves hastate or sagittate, with \'b1 acute basal lobes;
\par   flowers usually unisexual 3 Valves \'b1 equalling nut
\par 4 Basal lobes of leaves conspicuous, sometimes numerous ........... }{\b\fs28 1. acetosella}{\fs28 
\par 4 Basal lobes of leaves minute ................................................. }{\b\fs28 2. graminifolius}{\fs28  
\par 3 Valves distinctly longer than nut
\par 5 Basal leaves narrowly linear, without or with indistinct lobes
\par   ................................................................................................. }{\b\fs28 2. graminifolius}{\fs28 
\par 5 Basal leaves various, if narrowly linear, then distinctly   sagittate or hastate
\par 6 Annual; valves usually more than 13 mm wide (S. Greece) .... }{\b\fs28 16. vesicarius}{\fs28 
\par 6 Perennial; valves not more than 13 mm wide
\par 7 Outer perianth-segments free, appressed to base of inner ones
\par 8 Valves usually at least 9 \'d7 10 mm; ochreae of inflorescence large, 
\par   persistent; leaves often sinuate-crenate, sometimes pinnatisect 
\par   ....................................................................................................... }{\b\fs28 4. tingitanus}{\fs28 
\par 8 Valves less than 9 \'d7 10 mm; ochreae of inflorescence evanescent;  leaves not sinuate-crenate or pinnatisect 
\par 9 Leaves narrowly linear ........................................................... }{\b\fs28 5. suffruticosus}{\fs28  
\par 9 Leaves scutate or hastate, about as long as wide ........................... }{\b\fs28 6. scutatus}{\fs28 
\par 7 Outer perianth-segments united at base, deflexed
\par 10 Inflorescence usually lax, simple or with lateral branches sparingly
\par     branched 
\par 11 Ochreae \'b1 entire
\par 12 Stem not more than 20 cm, with at most 2 small cauline leaves;   valves 3 mm wide ............................................................................. }{\b\fs28 8. nivalis}{\fs28 
\par 12 Stem usually more than 20 cm; cauline leaves numerous, large;   valves (3-)3\'b75-4\'b75 mm wide ........................................................... }{\b\fs28 9. alpestris}{\fs28  
\par 11 Ochreae fimbriate
\par 13 Cauline leaves few, 6-12 times as long as wide, with   long basal lobes ......................................................................... }{\b\fs28 10. nebroides}{\fs28 
\par 13 Cauline leaves fairly numerous, 2-6(-10) times as long as wide,   with short basal lobes
\par 14 Roots tuberous; valves 5-8 \'d7 5-8 mm ....................................... }{\b\fs28 7. tuberosus}{\fs28 
\par 
\par 99}
\par }