{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc {\b 19.               Gonocytisus}              Spach 
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc By V.H. Heywood.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Unarmed shrubs. Leaves 3-foliolate. Flowers in terminal, leafless racemes. Calyx campanulate, bilabiate, membranous, the upper lip divided to the base, with asymmetrical teeth; corolla yellow, not persistent in fruit; stamens monadelphous; stigma extrorse, subcapitate. Legume compressed, dehiscent, unwinged. Seeds estrophiolate.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. G. angulatus} (L.) Spach, {\i  Ann. Sci. Nat.} ser. 3 (Bot.), {\b 3}: 153 (1845) ({\i  Genista angulata} (L.) Lam.). Erect, up to 5 m. Branches terete; twigs distinctly ridged, becoming terete, sparsely appressed puberulent. Leaflets 4-22 × 1-6 mm, narrowly elliptical to ovate-oblong, acute or obtuse, apiculate, appressed-hairy on both surfaces, the upper glabrescent; petioles usually absent or rudimentary, up to 1 mm in larger leaves. Pedicels 1-2 mm, with 2 caducous bracteoles. Standard 4-5·5 mm, oblong; keel longer than standard. Legume 10-15 mm, ovoid to rhomboid, mucronulate, appressed-pubescent, the margins slightly thickened.{\i   Cliffs and dry hillsides. Turkey-in-Europe} ({\i  S. half of Gelibolu peninsula}). Tu. ( {\i  W. & S. Anatolia.})
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc {\b 20.                  Lygos}                 Adanson
\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc ({\i  Retama} Boiss.)
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc By V.H. Heywood.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Unarmed shrubs. Leaves simple, soon deciduous. Flowers in racemes. Calyx urceolate, campanulate or turbinate, bilabiate; corolla white to yellow; stamens monadelphous; style filiform, incurved. Legume ovoid to globose, indehiscent or finally incompletely dehiscent along ventral suture. Seeds 1(-2).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Literature: M. Zohary, {\i  Bull. Res. Counc. Israel} Sect. D, Bot.{\b  7D}: 1-12 (1959) (sub {\i  Retama}).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Corolla 5-8 mm, yellow ........................................................ {\b 1. sphaerocarpa} 
\par
 Corolla 10-17 mm, white, sometimes becoming cream coloured 
\par
  on drying 
\par
2 Keel cuspidate; legume obovoid, with a short mucro ........... {\b 2. monosperma} 
\par
2 Keel obtuse or acute, rarely acuminate; legume obovoid- 
\par
  ellipsoid, attenuate into a beak ......................................................... {\b 3. raetam}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. L. sphaerocarpa} (L.) Heywood,{\i   Feddes Repert.}{\b  79}: 53 (1968) ({\i  Retama sphaerocarpa} (L.) Boiss.). Up to 2 m, much-branched. Branches erect or ascending, glabrous. Leaves linear to linear-lanceolate, sericeous-pubescent, deciduous. Racemes dense. Calyx 3 mm, glabrous or pubescent, persistent in fruit; upper lip 2-lobed, the lower with 3 long teeth. Corolla 5-8 mm, yellow; standard suborbicular, glabrous or sparsely hairy; wings lanceolate, shorter than the obtuse keel. Legume 7-9 mm, ovoid to globose, muticous or shortly apiculate, smooth.{\i   Dry places, mainly on sandy soils. E. Portugal, C. & S. Spain.} Hs Lu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. L. monosperma} (L.) Heywood,{\i   Feddes Repert. }{\b 79}: 53 (1968) ({\i  Retama monosperma} (L.) Boiss.). Stems up to 3 m, erect, divaricately-branched. Branches pendent, sericeous when young. Leaves linear-lanceolate, the later ones linear-subspathulate, all sericeous-pubescent, deciduous. Racemes lax. Calyx 3·5 mm, urceolate or campanulate, glabrous, circumscissilely caducous after anthesis; the upper lip with 2 triangular teeth, the lower with 3 linear-subulate teeth, the teeth often ciliate. Corolla 10-12 mm, white; standard rhombic-ovate, hairy; wings oblong, obtuse, as long as or shorter than the cuspidate-acuminate keel. Legume 12-16 mm, obovoid, with a short mucro directed towards the ventral suture, rugose when mature.{\i   Maritime sands. S.W. Spain, S. Portugal.} Hs Lu ?Sa.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 3. L. raetam} (Forskål) Heywood,{\i   Feddes Repert. }{\b 79}: 53 (1968) ({\i  Retama raetam} (Forskål) Webb & Berth.). Stems up to 2 m, erect, much-branched. Branches deflexed, pubescent. Leaves linear, sericeous, deciduous. Racemes dense. Calyx urceolate-campanulate, circumscissilely caducous after anthesis; the upper lip with 2 broadly triangular teeth, the lower with 3 short lanceolate teeth. Corolla 15-17 mm, white, becoming cream-coloured on drying; standard ovate-oblong; wings oblong, longer than the obtuse keel. Legume 10-20 mm, obovate-ellipsoid, attenuate into a beak.{\i   Maritime sands. S. Sicilia.} Si. ({\i  N. Africa, S.W. Asia.})
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 The above description refers to subsp. {\b gussonei} (Webb) Heywood,{\i   Feddes Repert.}{\b  79}: 53 (1968) ({\i  Retama gussonii }Webb), the European representative of this species. It is distinguished from the other subspecies by its larger corolla and its short keel.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc {\b 21.              Spartium}              L.
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc By V.H. Heywood.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Unarmed shrubs. Leaves 1-foliolate. Flowers in lax, terminal, leafless, many-flowered racemes. Calyx spathe-like, split above, irregularly unilabiate (rarely bilabiate), with 5 short teeth; corolla yellow; stamens monadelphous. Legume linear-oblong, dehiscent, subseptate between the seeds. Seeds numerous, estrophiolate.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. S. junceum} L., {\i  Sp. Pl.} 708 (1753). Up to 3 m (or more in cultivation). Branches cylindrical, striate, medullated, flexible, glaucous-green, glabrous. Leaves 10-30 × 2-5 mm, sparse, oblong-linear to lanceolate, glabrous above, appressed-sericeous beneath, subsessile, caducous. Flowers showy, sweet-scented, borne singly; pedicels with a small caducous bract at the base and two bracteoles at the apex. Corolla 20-25 mm. Legume flat, sericeous, becoming glabrous. Seeds 10-18.{\i   Mediterranean region and S.W. Europe.} Al Az Bl Co Cr Ga Gr Hs It Ju Lu Sa Si Tu [Bu Rm Rs (K)].
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc {\b 22.               Petteria}            C. Presl
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc By P.E. Gibbs.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Unarmed shrubs. Leaves 3-foliolate. Flowers in terminal, erect, leafless racemes. Calyx campanulate-tubular, bilabiate; upper lip divided to about two thirds, lower 3-toothed; corolla yellow; stamens monadelphous. Legume linear-oblong, dehiscent, straight or slightly curved, somewhat inflated. Seeds 5-9, estrophiolate.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. P. ramentacea} (Sieber) C. Presl, {\i  Abh. Böhm. Ges. Wiss.} ser.5, {\b 3}: 570 (1845) Erect, up to 2 m. Branches 2-3 mm wide, terete or obscurely angled, glabrous;twigs loosely appressed-hairy when young, later subglabrous. Leaves petiolate; petioles 15-50 mm; leaflets 20-70 × 12-30 mm, elliptical to obovate, rounded, occasionally slightly emarginate, dull green on both surfaces, glabrous above, with appressed hairs along the mid-vein and margins beneath. Inflorescence 4-7 cm, 10- to 20-flowered. Calyx appressed-hairy. Standard 16-20 × 10-15 mm, pentagonal, emarginate. Legume 35-50 × 8-10 mm, stipitate or sessile, light brown, glabrous, the margins slightly thickened, the apex mucronate or mucronulate. Seeds orange-brown.{\i   Mountain scrub. •  Jugoslavia and N. Albania.} Al Ju.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc {\b  23.                   Erinacea}          Adanson
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc By P.E. Gibbs.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Spiny shrubs with opposite or alternate branches. Leaves simple, sometimes 3-foliolate, shortly petiolate. Flowers 1-3, in axillary or subterminal clusters. Calyx inflated-campanulate, bilabiate;
\par

\par
101}
\par