{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28\qc {\b 31.                Wisteria}                   Nutt.
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc By P.W.Ball.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Climbing, deciduous shrubs. Leaves imparipinnate; stipels often present; stipules caducous. Flowers in pendent, terminal racemes. Calyx campanulate, slightly bilabiate; corolla violet, rarely white; stamens diadelphous. Legume linear or oblong, compressed, tardily dehiscent. Seeds 1-8.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. W. sinensis} (Sims) Sweet, {\i  Hort. Brit.} 121 (1826). Climbing up to 10 m. Leaflets 3-6 pairs, 5-8 × 2-3 cm, ovate-oblong, acuminate, glabrescent. Racemes 15-30 cm; pedicels densely pubescent. Corolla c. 25 mm. Legume 10-15 cm, velutinous. {\i  Commonly cultivated for ornament and locally naturalized.} [Ga.] ({\i  E. Asia.})
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b  W. floribunda} (Willd.) DC.,{\i   Prodr.}{\b  2}: 390 (1825) ({\i  W. multijuga }Van Houtte), from Japan, with 6-9 pairs of leaflets, racemes 20-50 cm and pedicels sparsely pubescent, is also commonly cultivated. It is often confused with {\b 1} and may also be naturalized.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc {\b 32.             Galega}                  L.
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc By P.W. Ball.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Perennial herbs. Leaves imparipinnate; stipules small, free. Flowers in axillary racemes. Calyx campanulate, with 5 subequal teeth; corolla white to blue-violet; keel subobtuse; stamens monadelphous. Legume cylindrical, torulose, dehiscent. Seeds numerous.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 Stipules ½-sagittate; corolla white to pale purplish-blue; 
\par
   legume patent or erecto-patent .................................................. {\b 1. officinalis}
\par
Stipules ovate or ovate-orbicular; corolla blue-violet; 
\par
   legume deflexed ......................................................................... {\b 2. orientalis}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. G. officinalis} L.,{\i   Sp. Pl.} 714 (1753) (incl.{\i   G. patula} Steven). Stems 40-150 cm, glabrous or sparsely pubescent. Leaflets 4-8 pairs, 15-50 × 4-15 mm, oblong, elliptical or lanceolate, acute or obtuse, mucronate, glabrous or pubescent beneath; stipules ½-sagittate. Calyx glabrous or sparsely pubescent, the teeth about as long as tube; corolla 10-15 mm, white to pale purplish-blue. Legume 20-50 × 2-3 mm, patent or erecto-patent.{\i   E., C. & S. Europe; cultivated for fodder and for ornament and naturalized elsewhere}. Al Au Bu Cz Ga Ge Gr Hs Hu It Ju Po Rm Rs (W, K, E) Tu [Be Br He Lu].
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. G. orientalis} Lam.,{\i   Encycl. Méth. Bot.}{\b  2}: 596 (1788). Like {\b 1} but leaflets 30-60 × 10-25 mm, acuminate; stipules ovate or ovate-orbicular; calyx pubescent, the teeth shorter than tube; corolla blue-violet; legume deflexed. {\i  Cultivated for fodder and locally naturalized.} [Au Ga.] ({\i  Caucasus.})
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc {\b 33.                   Colutea}                  L.
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc By K Browicz.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Deciduous shrubs. Leaves imparipinnate; leaflets entire. Stipules small. Flowers in axillary racemes. Calyx campanulate, slightly bilabiate; corolla yellow or orange-red; stamens diadelphous; stigma large, inserted obliquely on the inner edge of the style and surrounded by hairs. Legume very inflated, with papery walls, indehiscent or dehiscent near the apex. Seeds numerous, reniform smooth.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Literature: K. Browicz, {\i  Monogr. Bot.} ({\i  Warszawa}) {\b 14}: 1-136 (1963).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Keel beaked; legume curved upwards at the apex; corolla
\par
  orange-red .................................................................................... {\b 4. orientalis}
\par
1 Keel without beak; legume not curved upwards at the apex; 
\par
  corolla yellow
\par
2 Wings longer than the keel, with a distinct spur on the lower 
\par
  edge ................................................................................................ {\b 3. cilicica} 
\par
2 Wings as long as or shorter than the keel, rarely slightly longer 
\par
  but then rounded on the lower edge, without a spur
\par
3 Ovary glabrous, or if pubescent then the surface visible;
\par
  leaflets variable, elliptical, obovate or ovate ........................... {\b 1. arborescens}
\par
3 Ovary tomentose, the indumentum completely covering the 
\par
  surface; leaflets always elliptical ................................................. {\b 2. atlantica}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. C. arborescens} L., {\i  Sp. Pl.} 723 (1753). Much-branched shrub up to 6 m. Young shoots puberulent or subglabrous, later occasionally glabrous. Leaflets (3-)4-5(-6) pairs, up to 30 × 20 mm, broadly elliptical, more rarely obovate or ovate. Inflorescence 3- to 8-flowered, puberulent when young, glabrescent. Corolla 16-20 mm, yellow. Legume 5-7 × 3 cm. Seeds up to 4 × 3·5 mm. {\i  Dry slopes and open woods; somewhat calcicole. S. & S.C. Europe, extending to N.C. France; frequently cultivated in gardens and naturalized in N.W. & N.C. Europe.} Al Au Bu Co Cz Ga Ge Gr He Hs Hu It Ju Rm Sa Si ?Tu [Be Br].
\par
 
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b arborescens} (incl.{\i   C. melanocalyx} sensu Hayek pro parte): Ovary completely glabrous, or very slightly pubescent along the ventral suture.{\i   From E. France and Italy eastwards}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b gallica} Browicz,{\i   Monogr. Bot.} ({\i  Warszawa}) {\b 14}: 128 (1963): Ovary sparsely pubescent.{\i   From Austria and Jugoslavia westwards}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  The hybrid {\b 1 }×{\b  4} ({\i  C.} ×{\i   media} Willd.) is commonly cultivated and is occasionally naturalized. It is variable and may resemble either parent in certain characters.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. C. atlantica} Browicz, {\i  Monogr. Bot.} ({\i  Warszawa}) {\b 14}: 127 (1963) ({\i  C. arborescens} auct. hisp. pro parte). Like {\b 1}({\b b}) but young shoots tomentose, the hairs persisting in the second year, and the ovary silvery-tomentose; leaflets 10-15(-18) × 7-9(-10) mm, always elliptical; inflorescence 1- to 3(-4)-flowered.{\i   C. & S. Spain}. Hs.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Plants intermediate between {\b 1} ({\b b}) and {\b 2} occur in C. Spain.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 3. C. cilicica} Boiss. & Balansa in Boiss., {\i  Diagn. Pl. Or. Nov.}{\b  3}({\b 5}): 83 (1856) ({\i  C. melanocalyx} sensu Hayek pro parte). Like {\b 1}(a) but corolla up to 22 mm; wings distinctly longer than keel and with a distinct spur on the lower edge; ovary completely glabrous.{\i   Sunny slopes and open oakwoods. N.E. Greece; Krym; Turkey-in-Europe}. Gr Rs (K) Tu. ({\i  Caucasus, Anatolia.})
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Plants intermediate between {\b 1} and {\b 3} occur in C. Greece.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 4. C. orientalis} Miller, {\i  Gard. Dict.} ed. 8, no. 3 (1768) ({\i  C. cruenta} Aiton). Shrub up to 3 m. Young shoots slender, completely glabrous. Leaflets 3-4 pairs, up to 18 × 15 mm, broadly obovate or orbicular, bluish-green. Corolla 11-13 mm, orange-red; keel with a small beak, darker at the apex; wings falcate, shorter than keel. Ovary glabrous. Legume up to 4 × 2 cm, narrowing and curved upwards towards the apex, dehiscing at the apex. Seeds up to 2·5 mm.{\i   Often cultivated in gardens, and occasionally naturalized in S. Europe.} [Ju Rs (K).] ({\i  Caucasian region.})
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc {\b 34.                Eremosparton}            Fischer & C.A. Meyer 
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc By P.W. Ball.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Junciform shrubs with green stems and minute, scarious leaves. Flowers solitary, axillary. Calyx campanulate, with 5 subequal teeth; corolla violet; stamens diadelphous. Legume broadly ovate or suborbicular, compressed, dehiscent. Seeds 1-2.
\par

\par
107}
\par