{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 11 Terminal spine of leaf equalling or shorter than terminal
\par
   pair of leaflets
\par
12 Leaflets sparsely hairy or glabrescent ....................................... {\b 60. creticus}
\par
12 Leaflets densely hairy .......................................................... {\b 62. arnacantha}
\par
9  Bracteoles almost as long as calyx and equally hairy;
\par
   calyx usually 10 mm or more
\par
13 Stipules and the stems beneath them almost glabrous
\par
14 Calyx less than 15 mm ............................................................. {\b 63. parnassi}
\par
14 Calyx more than 15 mm .......................................................... {\b 64. thracicus}
\par
13 Stipules and the stems beneath them densely tomentose
\par
15 Bracts ovate, navicular ............................................................. {\b 65. trojanus}
\par
15 Bracts linear-oblanceolate, ± plane ......................................... {\b 64. thracicus}
\par
1  Leaves with the rhachis not ending in a spine, imparipinnate
\par
16 Annual with slender stock; sterile shoots absent at time of flowering
\par
17 Hairs on leaves or stems medifixed, with one arm much shorter 
\par
   than the other, usually straight and appressed
\par
18 Standard less than 5 mm; legume triangular-ovate ................ {\b 21. epiglottis}
\par
18 Standard more than 5 mm; legume not triangular-ovate
\par
19 Valves of legume sharply keeled; leaflets obtuse or sub acute ... {\b 22. edulis}
\par
19 Valves of legume not keeled; leaflets truncate or emarginate
\par
20 Legume 10-20 × 5-7 mm, inflated ................................... {\b 23. cymbicarpos}
\par
20 Legume 20-50 × 2-3 mm, not inflated .................................... {\b 24. hamosus}
\par
17 Most hairs on leaves or stems simple, basifixed
\par
21 Legume curved to form a ± complete ring, flattened, blackish
\par
   .......................................................................................... {\b 1. contortuplicatus}
\par
21 Legume not forming a complete ring, not blackish
\par
22 Valves of legume with a distinct keel
\par
23 Leaflets 10-15 pairs; legume usually more than 6 mm wide .... {\b 2. boeticus}
\par
23 Leaflets less than 10 pairs; legume less than 6 mm wide
\par
24 Legume c. 5 mm wide; standard striped; keel exceeding wings
\par
   ..................................................................................................... {\b 3. striatellus}
\par
24 Legume 2-3 mm wide; standard not striped; keel shorter than wings
\par
25 Legume with very strong, raised, reticulate venation ............. {\b 5. reticulatus}
\par
25 Legume with faint, reticulate venation or smooth ................. {\b 19. oxyglottis}
\par
22 Valves of legume not or obscurely keeled 
\par
26 Calyx at least 8 mm; standard at least 15 mm
\par
27 Calyx 8-9 mm; standard 15-18 mm
\par
28 Legume more than 35 mm .................................................... {\b 10. peregrinus}
\par
28 Legume less than 35 mm .................................................. {\b 11. pamphylicus} 
\par
27 Calyx 10-13 mm; standard 20-25 mm; legume less than 35 mm
\par
29 Legume straight, weakly rugose-tuberculate, with a straight 
\par
   beak ......................................................................................... {\b 12. haarbachii}
\par
29 Legume curved, strongly tuberculate, with a hooked beak ... {\b 13. suberosus}
\par
26 Calyx less than 8 mm; standard less than 15 mm
\par
27 Calyx 8-9 mm; standard 15-18 mm
\par
30 Leaflets 1-4 pairs ...................................................................... {\b 4. arpilobus}
\par
30 Leaflets more than 4 pairs
\par
31 Legume covered with contorted lamellae .............................. {\b 20. echinatus}
\par
31 Legume not covered with lamellae
\par
32 Legume linear, not widened at base, curved
\par
33 Peduncles not more than 0·3 cm ........................................... {\b 8. scorpioides}
\par
33 Peduncles more than 0·3 cm
\par
34 Standard with an abrupt, long, acute apex ............................... {\b 6. ankylotus}
\par
34 Standard rounded or emarginate
\par
35 Standard 12-14 mm; calyx-teeth at least as long as tube ... {\b 9. longidentatus} 
\par
35 Standard 9-10 mm; calyx-teeth shorter than tube .................... {\b 7. stalinskyi}
\par
32 Legume lanceolate or linear-lanceolate, widened at base, ± straight
\par
36 Most peduncles more than 1 cm 
\par
37 Legumes stellately patent at maturity; standard 5-6 mm .... {\b 16. polycatinus}
\par
37 Legume erect or erecto-patent at maturity; standard 9-11 mm ...... {\b 17. stella}
\par
36 Most peduncles less than 1 cm
\par
38 Legume erect at maturity; flowers 5-10 ................................. {\b 18. sesameus}
\par
38 Legume patent at maturity; flowers 4-6
\par
39 Legume with short, appressed hairs only ............................. {\b 15. tribuloides} 
\par
39 Legume with both short, appressed hairs and long, patent or 
\par
   ascending hairs ........................................................................... {\b 14. sinaicus}
\par
16 Perennial, with stout stock; sterile shoots present at time of flowering
\par
40 Most hairs simple, basifixed
\par
41 Acaulescent or almost so, the peduncles or racemes arising
\par
   from a rosette of leaves
\par
42 Calyx strongly inflated in fruit and c. 15 mm wide; 
\par
   standard 35-45 mm ................................................................ {\b 66. physocalyx}
\par
42 Calyx not strongly inflated in fruit and less than 15 mm wide; 
\par
   standard less than 35 mm 
\par
43 Plant with usually appressed hairs which are white when dry
\par
44 Standard 15-20 mm; peduncles longer than leaves .......... {\b 32. austraegaeus}
\par
44 Standard 10-14 mm; peduncles not longer than leaves ......... {\b 39. depressus}
\par
43 Plant with usually patent hairs which are pale brown when dry
\par
45 Standard hairy on back
\par
46 Calyx 12-25 mm; standard (19-)23-30 mm ...... ({\b 45-47}). {\b dasyanthus} group
\par
46 Calyx 9-10 mm; standard 15-22 mm ............. ({\b 54-57}).{\b  nummularius} group
\par
45 Standard glabrous
\par
47 Most leaflets more than 12 pairs
\par
48 Most peduncles more than ½ as long as leaves; legume less 
\par
   than 15 mm .............................................................................. {\b 33. turolensis}
\par
48 Most peduncles less than ½ as long as leaves; legume at least 
\par
   15 mm .................................................................... ({\b 48-53}). {\b exscapus} group
\par
47 Most leaflets less than 12 pairs
\par
49 Legume sparsely hairy or glabrous ...................... ({\b 48-53}). {\b exscapus} group
\par
49 Legume densely hairy ................................... ({\b 54-57}).{\b  nummularius} group
\par
41 Caulescent, with leaves separated by well-developed inter nodes 
\par
50 Calyx becoming inflated in fruit; corolla persistent
\par
51 Peduncles more than 2 cm ...................................................... {\b 73. ajubensis}
\par
51 Peduncles not more than 2 cm
\par
52 Calyx-teeth less than 1/2 as long as tube ................................. {\b 67. ponticus}
\par
52 Calyx-teeth more than 1/2 as long as tube
\par
53 Bracts longer than calyx; calyx-teeth longer than tube ... {\b 70. alopecuroides}
\par
53 Bracts not longer than calyx; calyx-teeth equalling or shorter 
\par
   than tube
\par
54 Leaflets 17-27 pairs; standard 5-9 mm wide
\par
55 Peduncles 1(-2) cm .............................................................. {\b 69. alopecurus} 
\par
55 Racemes sessile ................................................................. {\b 72. centralpinus} 
\par
54 Leaflets 11-15 pairs; standard 9-11 mm wide
\par
56 Leaflets less than 10 mm ............................................................ {\b 71. grossii}
\par
56 Most leaflets more than 10 mm ............................................... {\b 68. vulpinus}
\par
50 Calyx not becoming inflated in fruit; corolla not persistent
\par
57 Corolla uniformly yellow, or greenish- or whitish yellow
\par
58 Standard at least 17 mm
\par
59 Standard hairy on back ..................................... ({\b 45-47}). {\b dasyanthus }group
\par
59 Standard glabrous
\par
60 Legume grooved beneath
\par
61 Legume curved, strongly tuberculate, with a hooked beak ... {\b 13. suberosus}
\par
61 Legume straight, weakly rugose-tuberculate, with a straight 
\par
   beak ......................................................................................... {\b 12. haarbachii}
\par
60 Legume not grooved beneath
\par
62 Standard 18-20 mm; legume lanate, with patent hairs .......... {\b 33. turolensis}
\par

\par
109}
\par