{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 numerous, dark red. 2n = 14.{\i  N. Europe.} †Br Fe No Rs (N, B, C) Su.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 4. R. saxatilis} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 494 (1753). Stems 10-50 cm, the vegetative stems procumbent, terete, hairy, armed with small, straight prickles, often rooting at the apex, dying back nearly to their bases, from which arise the flowering-stems in the following year. Leaves ternate, ovate-elliptical, unevenly serrate, glabrescent above, slightly hairy beneath; stipules ovate. Inflorescence a 3- to 10-flowered corymb. Sepals lanceolate, acuminate, shortly pubescent; petals erect, narrow, small, white; stamens erect, white, exceeding the styles. Drupelets 2-6, red, shining. 2n = 28.{\i  Most of Europe, but rare in the south-west.} Al Au Be Br Bu Cz Da Fa Fe Ga Ge Gr Hb He Ho Hs Hu Is It Ju No Po Rm Rs (N, B, C, W, E) Su.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Subgen.{\b  Anoplobatus} Focke. Stems biennial, woody, unarmed. Leaves simple, palmately lobed. Flowers hermaphrodite. Fruit red or orange; receptacle flat.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 5. R. odoratus} L.,{\i  Sp. Pl.} 494 (1753). Stems up to 300 cm, erect, glandular, hairy. Leaves up to 25 cm, 5-lobed, cordate at base, biserrate, hairy beneath. Inflorescence many-flowered; flowers 3-5 cm in diameter, fragrant. Petals purplish-pink. Drupelets small, red, hairy.{\i  Cultivated for ornament and often more or less naturalized.} [Be Br Cz Fe Ga Hb Rm Rs.] ({\i E. North America.})
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Subgen.{\b  Idaeobatus} Focke. Stems biennial, woody, armed. Leaves ternate or pinnate. Flowers hermaphrodite. Fruit red or orange, pubescent, separating from the convex receptacle when ripe.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 6. R. spectabilis} Pursh, {\i Fl. Amer. Sept.}{\b  1}: 348 (1814). Stems 100-200 cm, erect, with numerous prickles. Leaves usually ternate; leaflets ovate, incise-serrate, thin, subglabrous beneath. Flowers 2·5 cm in diameter, usually solitary on lateral, leafy branches. Sepals triangular-ovate, pubescent; petals bright purple. Fruit large, orange, edible.{\i  Cultivated for ornament and sometimes more or less naturalized.} [Br Ga Ge Ho.] ({\i W. North America.})
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 7. R. idaeus} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 492 (1753). Suckering by adventitious buds from the roots; stems 100-150 cm, erect, terete, pruinose, often armed with numerous weak prickles. Leaves usually pinnate with 5-7 leaflets or ternate, glabrescent above, white-tomentose beneath; terminal leaflet ovate or oblong, sometimes slightly lobed, cordate, shortly acuminate; stipules filiform, ciliate. Inflorescence of few-flowered, leafy, terminal and axillary racemes, the axis eglandular, with sparse acicles; flowers c. 1 cm in diameter, nodding. Sepals lanceolate, tomentose; petals narrow, erect, glabrous, white; stamens white, erect. Fruit red or orange. 2n = 14.{\i  Most of Europe, but only on mountains in the south}. All except Az Bl Cr Fa Is Lu Sb Tu; introduced in Sa.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Many variants, some unarmed or with simple leaves, are widely cultivated for their edible fruits (raspberry).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b  R. loganobaccus} L. H. Bailey,{\i  Gentes Herb. }{\b 1}: 155 (1923) originated in 1881 in a Californian garden as a cross between {\i R. idaeus} subsp.{\i  strigosus} (Michx) Focke and{\i  R. ursinus} subsp. {\i vitifolius} Cham. & Schlecht., and is widely cultivated for its fruit (loganberry); it has robust, long-arching stems, large pinnate leaves with 5 leaflets, somewhat patent petals, large, purplish-red fruits which adhere to the receptacle, and 2n = 42.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b  R. illecebrosus }Focke, {\i Abh. Nat. Ver. Bremen}{\b  16}: 278 (1899), from Japan, with short, erect, more or less herbaceous stems, pinnate leaves, white petals and red, ellipsoid-globose fruits, is cultivated for its fruit and is reported as locally naturalized in N. Europe.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 8. R. sachalinensis} Léveillé, {\i Feddes Repert.}{\b  6}: 352 (1909) ({\i R. idaeus} subsp.{\i  sachalinensis} (Léveillé) Focke). Like {\b 7} but leaves all ternate; inflorescence-axis glandular, with abundant acicles; fruit rather dry velutinous.{\i  N.E. Russia.} Rs (N, C). ({\i Siberia}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 9. R. phoenicolasius} Maxim., {\i Bull. Acad. Imp. Sci. Pétersb.}{\b  17}: 160 (1872). Stems 200-300 cm, erect, densely covered with reddish, glandular bristles and sparse, slender prickles. Leaves usually ternate; leaflets broadly ovate, coarsely biserrate, slightly hairy above, white-tomentose beneath. Inflorescence a short, terminal raceme; flowers c. 1 cm in diameter. Sepals large, enclosing the young fruit, lanceolate, glandular-hairy; petals curved inwards, pink. Fruit c. 2 cm, ovoid, red, sweet.{\i  Cultivated for ornament and for the edible fruit and occasionally naturalized.} [Au Br Cz Ge He.] ({\i E. Asia.})
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Subgen. {\b Rubus}. Stems biennial, woody. Leaves ternate, digitate or pedate, with 5-7 leaflets. Flowers hermaphrodite. Fruit black or red, more or less coherent and adherent to the convex receptacle.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Sect. RUBUS. The only section in Europe. Most species occur in open woodland, scrub, hedgebanks and neglected meadows.
\pard\f0\fs28   Subsect.{\i  Suberecti }P. J. Mueller. Stems usually suberect, glabrous, often suckering from the base and rarely rooting apically, often angled; prickles subequal; stalked glands usually absent. Leaves usually more or less green beneath. Inflorescence usually a raceme or corymb. Sepals green externally, often with white margin; petals often hairy. Fruit black or reddish-black. Flowering early.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 10. R. nessensis} W. Hall,{\i  Trans. Roy. Soc. Edinb.}{\b  3}: 21 (1794) ({\i R. suberectus} G. Anderson ex Sm.). Stems up to 300 cm, erect, glaucous, with rather short, conical, often purplish-black prickles. Leaflets 5(-7), plane, shining, thin, glabrescent; terminal leaflet ovate, acuminate, cordate, evenly and simply serrate; basal leaflets subsessile; petiole slightly sulcate above. Inflorescence subracemose, unarmed or bearing weak, falcate prickles; flowers large. Petals white, sometimes red-flushed externally, glabrous; stamens exceeding styles. Fruit dark red. 2n = 28.{\i  Heaths, mountains and upland woods. Most of Europe except the Mediterranean region and the extreme north.} Au Be Br Cz Da Ga Ge He Hb Ho Hu It Ju No Po Rm Rs (B, C, W) Su.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 11. R. scissus} W. C. R. Watson,{\i  Jour. Bot.} ({\i London}) {\b 75}: 162 (1937) ({\i R. fissus} auct. mult., non Lindley). Stems 50-150 cm, ascending, thinly pubescent, not pruinose, with numerous, scattered, subulate, yellowish prickles. Leaflets usually 7, imbricate, plicate, thick, densely pubescent beneath; terminal leaflet ovate-cordate, shortly acuminate, usually unevenly serrate; petiole distinctly sulcate above. Inflorescence short. Sepals patent to erect, green, with a white margin, often bearing a single pricklet; petals usually 10-15, narrowly obovate, pubescent, white, sometimes pink in bud; stamens shorter than styles; carpels and receptacle pubescent. Fruit dark red, partly abortive. 2n = 28. {\i Heaths and upland woods. N. & N.C. Europe.} Be Br ?Cz Da Ga Hb Ho Hu No Po Rs (B) Su.
\par

\par
10}
\par