{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}
\pard\f0\fs28 upper lip with 2 teeth; lower with 3 teeth, the teeth 1/3 as long as the tube; corolla blue-violet; stamens monadelphous. Legume narrowly oblong, dehiscent. Seeds (1-)4-6, estrophiolate.
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. E. anthyllis} Link, Handb.{\b  2}: 156 (1831) ({\i  E. pungens} Boiss.). Hummock-forming, 10-30 cm; branches with stout spines. Leaves c. 5 mm, narrowly oblanceolate. Corolla 16-18 mm. Legume 12-20 mm, glandular-villous.{\i   Stony mountain slopes; usually calcicole. Spain, mainly in the south and east, just extending to France in E. Pyrenees.} Ga Hs.
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28\qc {\b  24.              Ulex}             L.
\par
\pard\f0\fs24\qc By E. Guinea and D.A. Webb.
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28 Very spiny shrubs. Leaves usually alternate, exstipulate, 3-foliolate on seedlings, but on mature plants reduced to scale-like or narrow, usually spine-like phyllodes. Flowers axillary, solitary or in small clusters, sometimes aggregated into racemes or umbel-like inflorescences; bracteoles 2, immediately below the flower. Calyx more or less yellow, persistent, divided to the base into 2 lips; upper lip with 2 teeth, the lower with 3 teeth; corolla yellow, persistent; stamens monadelphous. Legume broadly ovoid to linear-oblong, hairy, dehiscent, scarcely exserted from calyx. Seeds 1-6, strophiolate.
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28 Most of the branches may be classified as long or short shoots, though a few are intermediate; the short shoots have usually 2-8 nodes.{\i   Primary phyllodes} are those borne on long shoots; {\i  secondary phyllodes} are those borne on short shoots. The part of a short shoot beyond the last node is here called the terminal spine; the lateral branches of the shoot, which may or may not bear nodes, are the {\i  lateral spines}.
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28 In spite of recent monographic work, the taxonomy of this genus is very imperfectly understood. It seems possible that hybridization is more frequent than has generally been supposed.
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28 Literature: G. Sampaio,{\i   Brotéria }({\i  Bot.}) {\b 21}: 142-168 (1924). W. Rothmaler,{\i   Bot. Jahrb. }{\b 72}: 69-116 (1941). C. Vicioso, {\i  Revisión del Género} 'Ulex' {\i  en España}. Madrid. 1962.
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Bracteoles at least 2 mm wide; calyx with ± patent hairs ......... {\b 1. europaeus}
\par 1 Bracteoles not more than 1·5 mm wide; calyx usually with 
\par  appressed hairs or glabrescent (rarely villous)
\par 2 Most of the secondary phyllodes less than half as long as the 
\par  lateral spines which they subtend; primary phyllodes not more 
\par  than 5 mm, narrow, rigid, often glabrous
\par 3 Short shoots and spines with persistent, appressed hairs ........... {\b 7. argenteus}
\par 3 Short shoots and spines glabrous, or with crispate or patent hairs
\par 4 All petals exceeding the calyx, calyx 5-6·5 mm ..................... {\b 6. micranthus}
\par 4 Standard and keel about equalling the calyx; wings shorter; 
\par  calyx at least 6·5 mm ............................................................... {\b 5. parviflorus}
\par 2 Most of the secondary phyllodes more than half as long as the lateral 
\par  spines which they subtend; primary phyllodes at least 5 mm, ± leaf-like, 
\par  usually villous
\par 5 Plant pale green; short shoots erecto-patent; phyllodes soft and 
\par  flexible (W.C. Portugal) .................................................................. {\b 4. densus}
\par 5 Plant dark green; short shoots diverging at right angles when 
\par  mature; phyllodes ± rigid
\par 6 Calyx usually less than 10 mm; standard exceeding calyx by 
\par  less than 2 mm; petals clear yellow .................................................. {\b 2. minor} 
\par 6 Calyx usually at least 10 mm; standard exceeding calyx by 2·5- 
\par  3·5 mm; petals deep golden-yellow ................................................... {\b 3. gallii}
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. U. europaeus} L.,{\i   Sp. Pl.} 741 (1753). 60-200 cm, with main stems erect or ascending, densely branched in younger parts but eventually bare at the base; young twigs and spines somewhat glaucous. Twigs hirsute to tomentose, with grey to reddish-brown hairs. Primary phyllodes c. 8 mm. Terminal spines 12-25(-30) mm, stout, straight, glabrous. Bracteoles 2-7 mm wide. Calyx 12-16(-20) mm, with more or less patent hairs. Petals 15-20 mm, clear yellow; wings straight, longer than keel. Legume 11-20 mm, densely villous. Flowering season variable, but chiefly in spring or late winter. {\i  Usually on well-drained, neutral or moderately acid soils. W. Europe, extending eastwards to Italy; cultivated elsewhere for fodder, bedding and hedges, and widely naturalized.} Br Co Ga Ge Hb He Ho Hs It Lu [Au Az Be Cz Da No Su].
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b europaeus}: Bracteoles 2-4 mm wide, ovate, subacute. 2n = 96.{\i   Throughout the range of the species}.
\par
\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b latebracteatus} (Mariz) Rothm.,{\i   Bot. Jahrb.}{\b  72}: 115 (1941): Bracteoles 4-7 mm wide, suborbicular, obtuse. 2n = 64.{\i   N.W. Spain and N. & C. Portugal, mainly near the coast}.
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. U. minor} Roth,{\i   Catalecta Bot. }{\b 1}: 83 (1797) ({\i  U. nanus} T.F. Forster ex Symons). 10-100(-150) cm, with main stems often procumbent; young twigs and spines not glaucous. Twigs hirsute with reddish-brown hairs. Primary phyllodes c. 5 mm, villous, scarcely pungent; secondary phyllodes more than half as long as lateral spines. Spines usually slender and rather weak, straight or slightly curved, villous at base, the terminal mostly 8-15 mm. Bracteoles c. 0·5 mm wide. Calyx 6-9·5(-11) mm, appressed-pubescent. Petals clear yellow; wings and keel equal, about equalling calyx; standard 1-2 mm longer than calyx. Legume c. 8 mm, villous. Seeds 2-6. Flowers in late summer and autumn. 2n = 32. •{\i    W. Europe, northwards to England.} Br Ga Hs Lu [Az].
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 3. U. gallii}  Planchon,{\i   Ann. Sci. Nat.} ser. 3 (Bot.),{\b  11}: 213 (1849). Like {\b 2} but usually taller and more robust and often with stouter and slightly longer spines; bracteoles c. 0·75 mm wide; calyx (9-)10-13(-14) mm; corolla deep golden-yellow; wings and keel usually slightly exceeding calyx, and standard exceeding it by 2·5-3·5 mm. 2n = 80.{\i   Calcifuge. • W. Europe, from Scotland to N.W. Spain. }Br Ga Hb Hs.
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 4. U. densus} Welw. ex Webb,{\i   Ann. Sci. Nat.} ser. 3 (Bot.), {\b 17}: 291 (1852). 20-50 cm, with numerous erect stems, forming a compact, dense bush. Young twigs, phyllodes and spines hirsute to villous with white or pale brown hairs. Primary phyllodes 5-8 mm, narrowly triangular, leaf-like except for a short spine at the apex; secondary phyllodes more than half as long as lateral spines. Spines slender and rather weak, straight, the terminal 8-20 mm. Flowers mostly in terminal, subumbellate racemes; bracteoles ovate-elliptical, c. 0·5 mm wide. Calyx 11-16 mm, appressed pubescent or subglabrous; standard equalling or slightly exceeding calyx; wings c. 2 mm shorter than calyx and slightly shorter than keel. Seeds 1-2. 2n = 64.{\i   Dry calcareous soils. •  W.C. Portugal.} Lu.
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 5. U. parviflorus} Pourret,{\i   Mém. Acad. Toulouse}{\b  3}: 334 (1788). Up to 150 cm but often less; habit very variable. Long shoots villous, crispate-pubescent or glabrescent; short shoots and spines crispate-pubescent to glabrous. Primary phyllodes 2-5(-6) mm, deltate-acuminate to narrowly triangular, pubescent or glabrous; secondary phyllodes mostly less than half as long as lateral spines. Spines straight or recurved, the terminal 4-30 mm. Bracteoles up to 1·5 mm, narrowly ovate to suborbicular. Calyx 6·5-12(-14) mm, appressed-pubescent when young, often more or less glabrescent, rarely with long, patent hairs. Standard and keel about equalling calyx; wings shorter. Seeds 1-3. 2n = 32, 64, 96.{\i   S.W. Europe, from Portugal to S. France.} Bl Ga Hs Lu.
\par
\par 102}
\par