{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28   {\b 1. E. aphyllum} (Pallas) Fischer & C. A. Meyer,{\i   Enum. Pl. Nov. }{\b 1}: 76 (1841). Stems 50-100 cm, erect, glabrous or pubescent. Leaves 1-3 mm, linear-oblong, obtuse. Pedicels 4-6 mm. Calyx pubescent, the teeth broadly triangular; corolla 5-7 mm. Legume 6-10 × 5-7 mm, tomentose. {\i  Sandy deserts. S.E. Russia, W. Kazakhstan.} Rs (E). ({\i  W.C. Asia.})
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc {\b 35.              Halimodendron}           Fischer ex DC.  
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc By P.W. Ball.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Shrubs. Leaves paripinnate, with a persistent, usually spine-tipped, rhachis; leaflets 1 or 2 pairs; stipules subulate, spinose. Flowers in axillary racemes. Calyx pelviform, with 5 short teeth; corolla pale purple; stamens diadelphous. Legume oblong to obovoid, inflated, shortly beaked, dehiscent. Seeds few.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. H. halodendron} (Pallas) Voss in Voss & Siebert, {\i  Vilmorin's Blumeng.} ed. 3,{\b  1}: index [35] (1896). Grey or bluish spinose shrub up to 2 m. Leaflets 15-35 × 5-10 mm, oblong-obovate or oblanceolate, glabrous or sericeous. Inflorescence 1- to 3-flowered; peduncles 3-4 cm. Calyx persistent; corolla 14-18 mm. Legume 10-30 × 3-5 mm, yellowish. {\i  Steppes and maritime sands. S.E. Ukraine, S.E. Russia.} Rs (W, E). ({\i  C. & S.W. Asia}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc {\b 36.                  Caragana}               Fabr.
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc By P.W. Ball.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Trees or shrubs. Leaves paripinnate, often with spine-tipped rhachis; stipules small, deciduous or sometimes persistent and spinose. Flowers solitary or fasciculate; pedicels articulate. Calyx tubular or campanulate, with 5 subequal teeth; corolla usually yellow; stamens diadelphous. Legume linear, sometimes inflated, usually acute, dehiscent. Seeds usually numerous.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Leaflets 4-6 pairs; rhachis 30-70 mm ..................................... {\b 1. arborescens} 
\par
1 Leaflets 2 pairs; rhachis not more than 15 mm 
\par
2 Flowers often fasciculate; calyx campanulate, about as long as 
\par
  wide, slightly gibbous at base ........................................................... {\b 2. frutex}
\par
2 Flowers solitary; calyx tubular, much longer than wide, 
\par
  strongly gibbous at base ............................................................ {\b 3. grandiflora}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. C. arborescens} Lam.,{\i   Encycl. Méth. Bot. }{\b 1}: 615 (1785). Shrub or small tree up to 7 m. Leaflets 4-6 pairs, 10-35 × 5-13 mm, obovate or elliptic-oblong, glabrescent; rhachis 30-70 mm, deciduous. Flowers usually in fascicles of 2-5; pedicels 15-60 mm. Calyx campanulate, slightly gibbous at base; teeth 1-1·5 mm, broadly triangular; corolla 15-22 mm. Legume 30-60 × 3-5 mm, acute.{\i   Planted for ornament and occasionally naturalized.} [Ga.] ({\i  N. Asia.})
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. C. frutex} (L.) C. Koch, {\i  Dendrologie}{\b  1}: 48 (1869) (incl. {\i  C. mollis} (DC.) Besser). Glabrous or pubescent dwarf shrub up to 1 m (-3 m in cultivation). Leaflets 2 pairs, 5-25 × 2-15 mm, obovate with spinescent apex; rhachis up to 15 mm, persistent or not. Flowers solitary or in fascicles of 2-3; pedicels 15-20 mm. Calyx campanulate, slightly gibbous at base; teeth 1-1·5 mm, broadly triangular; corolla 15-25 mm. Legume 25-45 × 3-4 mm, acute.{\i   E. Europe, from E. Bulgaria to C. Russia and W. Kazakhstan.} Bu Rm Rs (C, W, K. E).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 3. C. grandiflora} (Bieb.) DC., {\i  Prodr.}{\b  2}: 268 (1825) (incl.{\i   C. scythica} (Komarov) Pojark.). Pubescent dwarf shrub up to 0·5(-1) m. Leaflets 2 pairs, 4-7 × 1-2 mm, linear-oblanceolate with spinescent apex; rhachis up to 5 mm, persistent, spinescent. Flowers solitary; pedicels 5-8 mm. Calyx tubular, much longer than wide, strongly gibbous at base; teeth 1·5-2 mm, triangular lanceolate; corolla 18-25 mm. Legume 20-25 × c. 2·5 mm, acuminate.{\i   S. Ukraine, Moldavia.} Rs (W, E).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  The plant described above is var.{\i   scythica} Komarov, endemic to Europe. Var. {\i  grandiflora,} from the Caucasus and S.C. Asia, differs only in being larger in all its parts.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc {\b 37.                  Calophaca}            Fischer
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc By P.W. Ball.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Dwarf shrubs. Leaves imparipinnate; stipules scarious or herbaceous, adnate to the petiole. Flowers in axillary racemes. Calyx tubular, with 5 subequal teeth; corolla yellow; stamens diadelphous. Legume oblong, terete, dehiscent, stipitate-glandular when young. Seeds usually 1-2.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. C. wolgarica} (L. fil.) Fischer, {\i  Cat. Jard. Gorenk.} ed. 2, 68 (1812). Dwarf shrub up to 1 m. Leaflets 6-8 pairs, 3-15 × 3-10 mm, ovate-elliptical to suborbicular, grey-pubescent beneath; stipules scarious. Racemes 4- to 6-flowered, glandular hairy. Calyx glandular; corolla 20-25 mm. Legume 20-30 × c. 5 mm. {\i  Dry places. • S.E. Russia, S. & E. Ukraine.} Rs (W, K, E).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc {\b 38.                   Astragalus}              L.
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc By A.O. Chater.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Annual or perennial herbs or small shrubs. Leaves imparipinnate or paripinnate, sometimes terminating in a spine; leaflets entire. Flowers in racemes or axillary clusters, sessile or pedicellate. Calyx infundibuliform, tubular or campanulate, sometimes inflated in fruit, with distinct, equal or unequal teeth; keel not mucronate at apex (very rarely adaxially mucronate); stamens 10, diadelphous (very rarely 5, monadelphous); stigma and style glabrous. Legume usually dehiscent, very varied in shape and texture, glabrous or hairy, unilocular to bilocular. Seeds 1-many.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 In this account descriptions of peduncles and racemes refer to their appearance at anthesis; when the length of the peduncle is compared with the length of the leaf, the leaf subtending it is intended.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Leaves with the rhachis ending in a spine, paripinnate or the
\par
  terminal leaflet caducous
\par
2 Hairs on leaves and stems medifixed
\par
3 Standard 11-12 mm; leaflets 3-5 pairs .................................... {\b 78. balearicus}
\par
3 Standard more than 12 mm; leaflets more than 5 pairs
\par
4 Hairs on calyx and legume ascending or almost patent ............ {\b 80. sirinicus}
\par
4 Hairs on calyx and legume ± appressed
\par
5 Leaflets narrowly elliptical to linear; calyx-teeth 1/4-1/2
\par
  as long as tube ...................................................................... {\b 77. angustifolius}
\par
5 Leaflets oblong or elliptical; calyx-teeth 1/5-1/4 
\par
  as long as tube ....................................................................... {\b 79. massiliensis}
\par
2 Hairs on leaves and stems simple
\par
6 Flowers in shortly pedunculate racemes; calyx not hidden by its 
\par
  indumentum, not splitting to the base in fruit
\par
7 Calyx strongly inflated in fruit, more than 10 mm wide ................ {\b 74. clusii}
\par
7 Calyx scarcely inflated in fruit, less than 10 mm wide
\par
8 Calyx-teeth equalling tube ................................................. {\b 75. sempervirens}
\par
8 Calyx-teeth twice as long as tube ........................................... {\b 76. giennensis}
\par
6 Flowers sessile or subsessile in axils of leaves;
\par
  calyx hidden by its dense, villous indumentum,
\par
  splitting to the base in fruit
\par
9 Bracteoles absent, or much shorter than calyx and less hairy;
\par
  calyx usually less than 10 mm
\par
10 Standard with acute auricles at base of limb ....................... {\b 61. granatensis} 
\par
10 Standard with rounded auricles at base of limb 
\par
11 Terminal spine of leaf much longer than terminal pair of
\par
   leaflets ......................................................................................... {\b 60. creticus}
\par

\par
108}
\par