{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28\qc {\b 28.                Lupinus}             L.
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc By J. do Amaral Franco & A.R. Pinto da Silva.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Annual or perennial herbs, rarely shrubs. Leaves usually digitate, petiolate; stipules adnate to the base of the petiole. Flowers in terminal racemes. Calyx bilabiate, divided almost to the base; corolla variously coloured; wings connate at apex; keel beaked; stamens monadelphous. Legume dehiscent, compressed, usually constricted between the seeds. Seeds 3-12, with a sunken hilum.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Annuals; seeds usually more than 5 mm, dull
\par
2 Upper lip of the calyx shallowly bidentate; seeds 8-14 mm ............. {\b 5. albus}
\par
2 Upper lip of the calyx 2-partite; seeds not more than 10 mm
\par
3 Corolla yellow, cream, pale pink or lilac; flowers regularly 
\par
  arranged in distant whorls
\par
4 Corolla bright yellow; leaflets sparsely appressed-villous above .....{\b 1. luteus}
\par
4 Corolla at first cream becoming pale pink or lilac;
\par
  leaflets glabrous above except along the margins ..................... {\b 2. hispanicus}
\par
3 Corolla blue or bluish; flowers alternate or irregularly whorled
\par
5 Corolla 15-17 mm; legume 13-20 mm wide .................................... {\b 6. varius}
\par
5 Corolla 10-14 mm; legume not more than 12 mm wide
\par
6 Leaflets 2-5 mm wide, linear; lower lip of calyx 6-7 mm .... {\b 3. angustifolius}
\par
6 Leaflets 5-15 mm wide, obovate;
\par
   lower lip of calyx 10-12 mm  ...................................................{\b 4. micranthus}
\par
1 Perennial herbs, rarely shrubs; seeds not more than 5 mm, shining
\par
7 Shrub 100-300 cm; leaflets 5-10 mm wide;
\par
  corolla usually yellow ................................................................. {\b 10. arboreus}
\par
7 Perennial herbs up to 150 cm; leaflets 10-30 mm wide;
\par
  corolla never yellow 
\par
8 Leaflets 9-17, 70-150 × 15-30 mm; upper lip of calyx entire .{\b 9. polyphyllus}
\par
8 Leaflets 6-11, 15-60 × 8-15 mm; upper lip of calyx emarginate
\par
9 Stems glabrous or pubescent; upper lip of calyx 4-6 mm ........... {\b 7. perennis}
\par
9 Stems villous or hirsute; upper lip of calyx c. 8 mm ............. {\b 8. nootkatensis}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. L. luteus} L.,{\i   Sp. Pl.} 722 (1753). Hairy annual 25-80 cm. Leaflets 40-60 × 8-12 mm, obovate-oblong, mucronate, sparsely villous; stipules dimorphic, those of the lower leaves 8 mm, subulate, those of the upper leaves 22-30 × 2-4 mm, linear-obovate. Racemes 5-16 cm; flowers regularly verticillate, scented; peduncle 4-12 cm. Upper lip of calyx 6-7 mm, 2-partite, the lower 10 mm, shallowly 3-dentate. Corolla 13-16 mm, bright yellow. Legume 40-50 × 10 mm, densely villous, black. Seeds 4-6, 6-8 × 4·5-6·5 mm, orbicular-quadrangular, compressed, smooth and dull, black marbled with white, with a white curved line on each side.{\i   Light, acid soils. Iberian peninsula, Italy and islands  S W. Mediterranean. Widely cultivated elsewhere for fodder and green manure, and sometimes naturalized}. Co Hs It Lu Sa Si [Az Be Bu Cz Ga Ge Ho Hu Ju Po Rm Rs (C, W)].
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28     {\b 2. L. hispanicus} Boiss. & Reuter, {\i  Diagn. Pl. Nov. Hisp.}{\b  10} (1842). Like {\b 1} but leaflets not mucronate, glabrous above except along the margins; stipules of the upper leaves often falcate; flowers not scented; corolla at first cream, becoming pale pink or lilac; seeds 4·5-6 mm, light red-brown with darker spots, with a dark, curved line on each side. 2n = 52.{\i   Light, acid soils. • N. & C. Portugal, W. Spain.} ?Gr Hs Lu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 3. L. angustifolius} L., {\i  Sp. Pl.} 721 (1753). Shortly hairy annual 20-80 cm. Leaflets 10-50 × 2-5 mm, linear to linear-spathulate, glabrous above and sparsely villous beneath; stipules linear-subulate. Racemes 10-20 cm; flowers alternate; peduncle 1-3 cm. Upper lip of calyx c. 4 mm, 2-partite, the lower 6-7 mm, irregularly 3-dentate to subentire. Corolla 11-13 mm, blue. Legume shortly hirsute, yellow to black. Seeds 4-6, ellipsoid, smooth and dull, yellow-brown, dark brown or grey with yellow spots.{\i   Light, acid soils. S. Europe}. Bu Co Cr Ga Gr Hs It ?Ju Lu Sa Si Tu [Au Az Cz Ge He Hu Po Rm Rs (C, W)].
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b angustifolius} (incl.{\i   L. leucospermus} Boiss.): Plant 50-80 cm; leaflets 30-40 × 4-5 mm, flat, linear-spathulate; legume 40-60 × 8-13 mm; seeds 6-8 × 4-7 mm.{\i   Inland loamy soils. Throughout the range of the species, except Sardegna}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b reticulatus} (Desv.) Coutinho,{\i   Fl. Port. }315 (1913) ({\i  L. reticulatus} Desv.): Plant 20-40 cm; leaflets 10-20 × 2 mm. conduplicate, linear; legume 35-45 × 6-8 mm; seeds 4·5-5 × 3-3·5 mm.{\i   Maritime sands, rarely inland. S.W. Europe and W. Mediterranean region; naturalized in Jugoslavia}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 4. L. micranthus} Guss.,{\i   Fl. Sic. Prodr.}{\b  2}: 400 (1828) ({\i  L. hirsutus} sensu L. 1763 pro parte, et auct., non L. 1753). Brown-hirsute annual 10-40 cm. Leaflets 15-70 × 5-15 mm, obovate-cuneate to obovate-oblong, mucronate, sparsely hirsute; stipules linear-subulate. Racemes up to 12 cm; lower flowers alternate, the upper irregularly verticillate; peduncle up to 1·5 cm. Upper lip of calyx 6 mm, 2-partite, the lower 10-12 mm, deeply 3-dentate. Corolla 10-14 mm, blue, the standard white in the middle and the keel blackish-violet at apex. Legume 30-50 × 10-12 mm, hirsute, red-brown. Seeds 3-4, 5-8 mm, orbicular-quadrangular, compressed, smooth and dull, pinkish-grey to brown, with dark veins and dots.{\i   Acid soils. Mediterranean region, C. & S. Portugal.} Al Bl Co Cr Ga Gr Hs It Ju Lu Sa Si Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28     {\b 5. L. albus} L., {\i  Sp. Pl.} 721 (1753). Shortly hairy annual up to 120 cm. Leaflets of the lower leaves 25-35 × 14-18 mm, obovate, of the upper leaves 40-50 × 10-15 mm, obovate-cuneate, all mucronulate, nearly glabrous above, sparsely villous beneath; stipules setaceous. Racemes 5-10 cm, sessile, flowers alternate. Calyx 8-9 mm, both lips shallowly dentate. Corolla 15-16 mm, white to blue. Legume 60-100 × 11-20  mm, becoming longitudinally rugulose, shortly-villous, glabrescent, yellow. Seeds 4-6, 8-14 mm, orbicular-quadrangular, compressed or depressed, smooth and dull, light yellow, sometimes with dark variegation.{\i   Acid soils. S. part of Balkan peninsula and Aegean region; widely cultivated elsewhere.} Al Bu Cr Gr Ju Tu [Au Az Co Cz Ga Ge He Hs Hu It Lu Rm Sa Si].
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b albus} ({\i  L. termis} Forskål): Corolla white, the keel pale blue at apex; legume 80-100 × 17-20 mm; seeds 12-14 mm, unspotted.{\i   Cultivated in C. & S. Europe for its edible seeds and for fodder}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b graecus} (Boiss. & Spruner) Franco & P. Silva,{\i   Feddes Repert.}{\b  79}: 52 (1968) ({\i  L. graecus} Boiss. & Spruner): Corolla deep blue; legume 60-70 × 11-13 mm; seeds 8-9 mm, dark variegated.{\i   •  Balkan peninsula and Aegean region}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 6. L. varius} L.,{\i   Sp. Pl.} 721 (1753). Sericeous or hirsute annual up to 50 cm. Leaflets 25-35 × 6-9 mm, oblong-obovate, mucronulate, sericeous to softly villous; stipules linear-subulate. Racemes up to 10 cm; flowers irregularly verticillate; peduncle 1-4 cm. Upper lip of calyx c. 8 mm, 2-partite, the lower 10-12 mm, shallowly 3-dentate to subentire. Corolla 15-17 mm, blue, the standard with a white and yellow or pale purple blotch. Legume 40-50 × 13-20 mm, softly hirsute, dark red-brown. Seeds 3-4, orbicular, compressed, tuberculate-scabrid, iridescent, brown and black-marbled on cream and purple, with a black, curved
\par

\par
105}
\par