{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 Very variable, especially in S. Spain and S. Portugal: more than 15 variants have been given binomials. The most conspicuous differences between individuals (habit, length and shape of spines, arrangement of flowers) are often found within a single population; other characters (size of flowers, indumentum of various parts) show a confusing amount of reticulation. The treatment below must be regarded as only a provisional attempt to chart the pattern of variation.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Calyx with long, patent hairs, at least in bud .................. ({\b c}) subsp. {\b funkii}
\par
1 Calyx appressed-pubescent
\par
2 Short shoots and spines densely crispate-pubescent . ({\b d}) subsp. {\b eriocladus}
\par
2 Short shoots and spines ± glabrous
\par
3 Calyx usually less than 10 mm; long shoots glabrous or
\par
  crispate-pubescent but not villous ............................ ({\b a}) subsp. {\b parviflorus} 
\par
3 Calyx at least 10 mm; long shoots often villous
\par
  throughout their first year .............................................. ({\b b}) subsp. {\b jussiaei}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b parviflorus}: Short shoots and spines more or less glabrous; long shoots crispate-pubescent to subglabrous. Calyx 6·5-9·5(-11·5) mm, appressed-pubescent when young.{\i   Almost throughout the range of the species.} 
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b jussiaei} (Webb) D. A. Webb, {\i  Feddes Repert.}{\b  74}: 5 (1967) ({\i  U. jussiaei }Webb): Like subsp. ({\b a}) but long shoots often villous as well as crispate-pubescent; calyx 10-12(-14) mm. •{\i   Portugal and W. Spain; local}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b c}) Subsp. {\b funkii} (Webb) Guinea, {\i  Feddes Repert. }{\b 74}: 5 (1967) ({\i  U. willkommii }var.{\i   funkii} Webb): Like subsp. ({\b a}) but calyx 9-11 mm, with long, patent, white hairs, at least when young.{\i   S. Spain.} ({\i  N.W. Africa}.)
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b d}) Subsp. {\b eriocladus} (C. Vicioso) D. A. Webb,{\i   Feddes Repert.}{\b  74}: 5 (1967) ({\i  U. eriocladus} C. Vicioso,{\i   U. ianthocladus} Webb, excl. var.{\i   calycotomoides} Webb): Long shoots, short shoots and spines grey-pubescent with crispate hairs. Calyx 6·5-12·5 mm, appressed-pubescent with blackish hairs when young. •{\i    S.E. Portugal, S.W. Spain}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 6. U. micranthus} Lange, {\i  Vid. Meddel. Dansk Naturh. Foren. Kjøbenhavn}{\b  1877-78}: 235 (1878).20-50(-80) cm; main stems erecto-patent or arcuate, rather sparingly branched, dark green, forming a rather open bush. Young twigs puberulent with very short, tightly crispate hairs; phyllodes and spines glabrous. Primary phyllodes 2-3·5 mm, with broad, deltate base and long, spinose apex; secondary phyllodes less than half as long as the lateral spines. Spines recurved, rather stout, the terminal 7-12 mm. Flowers distributed along the branches; bracteoles c. 0·75 mm wide, broadly ovate. Calyx 5-6·5 mm, appressed-pubescent. Petals 6·5-9 mm, all exceeding the calyx. Seeds 1-2. 2n = 32.{\i   Heaths on acid soils. •  N.W. Portugal, just extending to N.W. Spain}. Hs Lu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 7. U. argenteus} Welw. ex Webb,{\i   Ann. Sci. Nat}. ser. 3 (Bot.), {\b 17}: 291 (1852). (10-)25-120 cm; habit variable. Young twigs and spines covered with short, persistent, whitish, appressed hairs. Primary phyllodes 2-4·5 mm, linear-oblong; secondary phyllodes less than half as long as lateral spines. Bracteoles 0·6-2 mm, ovate. Calyx 7-14 mm, appressed-pubescent or sericeous. Standard about equalling calyx; wings 1·5-2·5 mm shorter. Seeds usually 2. 2n = 64, ?96. •{\i    S. Portugal; one locality in S.E. Spain.} Hs Lu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Three taxa, within the limits of the species as here defined, are usually recognized, and are treated as subspecies below. There are, however, many plants, especially in the neighbourhood of Faro (S. Portugal), which do not fit well into any of the subspecies and require further investigation.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Calyx 8·5-14 mm; bracteoles 1·2-2 mm; plant silvery-glaucous
\par
  ...........................................................................................({\b c}) subsp. {\b erinaceus} 
\par
1 Calyx 6-12 mm; bracteoles 0·5-1 mm
\par
2 Calyx 6-9 mm; plant somewhat glaucous ...................... ({\b a}) subsp. {\b argenteus}
\par
2 Calyx 10-12 mm; plant not glaucous .......................... ({\b b}) subsp. {\b subsericeus}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b argenteus}: Low-growing; more or less glaucous. Terminal spines 5-9 mm. Bracteoles 0·5-1 mm, narrower than pedicel. Calyx (6-)7-8(-9) mm, with short and often sparse hairs. Quercus{\i  -woods and scrub. S. Portugal} ({\i  Algarve and S.W. Alentejo}).
\par                                           

\pard\f0\fs28 ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b subsericeus} (Coutinho) Rothm.,{\i   Bot. Jahrb.}{\b  72}: 96 (1941): Like subsp. ({\b a}) but taller and not glaucous; calyx 10-12 mm.{\i   Sandy soil near the sea. S. Portugal} ({\i  around Faro}).
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b c}) Subsp. {\b erinaceus} (Welw. ex Webb) D. A. Webb,{\i   Feddes Repert.}{\b  74}: 6 (1967) ({\i  U. erinaceus} Welw. ex Webb): Plant silvery-glaucous. Terminal spines 10-20(-35) mm. Bracteoles 1·2-2 mm, as wide as the pedicel. Calyx (8·5-)9·5-12(-14) mm, sometimes with longer and more abundant hairs than in the other subspecies. {\i  Rocky headlands. S.E. Spain} ({\i  Cabo de Gata}),{\i   S.W. Portugal} ({\i  Cabo de São Vicente}).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc {\b  25.                Stauracanthus}            Link 
\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc (Incl. {\i  Nepa} Webb)
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc By E. Guinea & D.A. Webb
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Like{\i   Ulex }but with leaves often opposite or subopposite; calyx tubular at the base, at least in bud, and with the upper lip sometimes deeply 2-fid; legume conspicuously exserted from calyx.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Literature: As for {\b Ulex}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 Phyllodes spine-tipped; standard much longer than calyx;
\par
    legume 8-12 mm .......................................................................... {\b 1. boivinii}
\par
Phyllodes scale-like, not spine-tipped; standard about 
\par
     equalling calyx; legume 15-25 mm ....................................... {\b 2. genistoides}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. S. boivinii} (Webb) Samp.,{\i   Lista Esp. Herb. Port., Ap.}{\b  3}: 8 (1914) ({\i  Ulex boivinii }Webb, {\i  Nepa boivinii} (Webb) Webb). 20-50 cm, densely and intricately branched. Twigs and spines glabrous or appressed-pubescent with brownish hairs. Short shoots somewhat zig-zag, freely branched. Primary phyllodes 2-3 mm, lanceolate-acuminate, spine-tipped. Spines straight, rather slender, the terminal 3-4 mm, the lateral often branched. Flowers borne mainly on short shoots; bracteoles c. 1 mm, ovate-lanceolate. Calyx 5-7(-9) mm, densely sericeous with brown hairs tubular in basal half up to anthesis but later cleft nearly to the base; upper lip shortly 2-toothed. Standard and keel densely sericeous, much longer than calyx. Legume 8-12 mm, ovate-oblong. Seeds 2.  2n = c. 128.{\i   Sandy or gravelly places near the coast. S.W. Spain, S. Portugal.} Hs Lu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. S. genistoides} (Brot.) Samp.,{\i   Ann. Sci. Acad. Polyt. Porto}{\b  7}: 53 (1912) ({\i  Ulex genistoides} Brot.). 30-100 cm, laxly and diffusely branched. Branches and spines opposite or subopposite, sericeous with silvery hairs. Primary phyllodes 1-1·5 mm, scalelike, not spine-tipped. Spines straight, the terminal 5-17 mm, the lateral often branched. Flowers in relatively spine-free racemes or small panicles, on long or short shoots. Calyx 9-16 mm, densely sericeous with golden-brown hairs, shortly tubular at the base; upper lip deeply 2-fid. Standard and keel about as long as calyx. Legume 15-25 mm, linear-oblong. Seeds 3-6. 2n = 48. {\i   Sandy soils. S. & W. Portugal,  S.W. Spain}. Hs Lu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b genistoides}: Spines slender, often flexuous. Bracteoles 1-2 mm wide, linear-lanceolate to broadly ovate. Calyx
\par

\par
103}
\par