{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28  Sect. ACANTHOSPARTUM Spach. Shrubs with opposite branches, the branches terminated by a spine. Leaves 3-foliolate, opposite or alternate. Standard rhombic, shorter than or exceeding the keel. Legume ovoid-acuminate. Seeds 1-2.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 54. G. acanthoclada} DC., {\i  Prodr.}{\b  2}: 146 (1825). Erect shrub; older branches with prominent pulvini. Leaflets 5-10 × 1-3 mm, narrowly oblanceolate. Flowers borne singly in the axil of each bract, subopposite, towards the ends of branches. Bracts leaf-like, the uppermost simple. Calyx 2·5-5 mm, sparsely sericeous, the lips almost as long as tube. Standard 6-10 mm, sericeous, shorter than the keel.{\i   Greece and Aegean region.} Cr Gr.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Sect. FASSELOSPARTUM  P. Gibbs. Shrubs with opposite and alternate branches and axillary spines. Leaves simple or 3-foliolate. Standard rhombic, shorter than the keel. Legume ovoid, acuminate. Seeds 1-2.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 55. G. fasselata} Decne, {\i  Ann. Sci. Nat.} ser. 2 (Bot.),{\b  4}: 360 (1835) ({\i  G. sphacelata} Spach). Shrub up to 150 cm; pulvini obscure and scale-like. Leaflets 3-15 × 1-3 mm, narrowly oblanceolate, sericeous. Flowers borne singly or in lax clusters in the axil of each bract, on spines or unarmed branches. Bracts leaf-like; bracteoles minute. Calyx 4-5 mm, glabrous, the lips about 1/3 as long as tube. Standard 6-7 mm, glabrous.{\i   S. Aegean region }({\i  Karpathos, Kasos}). Cr. ({\i  E. Mediterranean region}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Sect. CEPHALOSPARTUM Spach. Unarmed shrubs with opposite and alternate branches. Leaves simple or 3-foliolate. Standard ovate, equalling or shorter than the keel. Legume oblong or ovoid-acuminate.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 56. G. umbellata} (L'Hér.) Poiret in Lam., {\i  Encycl. Méth. Bot., Suppl.}{\b  2}: 715 (1812). Caespitose shrub 20-60 cm; branches mostly opposite. Leaves 5-15 × 2-3 mm, simple, narrowly elliptical, sericeous. Flowers in heads of 4-16. Bracts leaf-like. Calyx c. 5 mm, with dense patent hairs. Standard 8-12 mm, broadly ovate, densely sericeous or with sub-patent hairs. Legume narrowly oblong. Seeds 2-5.{\i   S. & S.E. Spain}. Hs.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc {\b 17.              Chamaespartium}         Adanson 
\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc ({\i  Genistella} Ortega,{\i   Pterospartum} (Spach) Willk.)
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc By P.E. Gibbs.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Unarmed dwarf shrubs, the young stems distinctly winged and flattened (cladodes). Leaves simple or absent. Flowers in congested, terminal racemes. Calyx tubular, bilabiate; upper lip deeply 2-fid, lower with 3 distinct teeth; corolla yellow, the standard broadly ovate, equalling the wings and keel. Legume narrowly oblong, dehiscent. Seeds 2-5, with or without a strophiole.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Literature: C. Vicioso,{\i   Genisteas Españolas }{\b 1}: 136-146 ({\i  Publ. Inst. For. Inv. Exper. Madrid} No. 67). Madrid. 1953. (Sub {\i  Genistella.})
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 Plant with simple, elliptical leaves; wings of the stem
\par
   entire at the nodes ......................................................................... {\b 1. sagittale} 
\par
Plant without leaves; wings of the stem 3-toothed or
\par
   3-lobed at the nodes ................................................................ {\b 2. tridentatum}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. C. sagittale} (L.) P. Gibbs,{\i   Feddes Repert.}{\b  79}: 54 (1968) ({\i  Genista sagittalis} L.,{\i   Genistella sagittalis} (L.) Gams, {\i  Pterospartum sagittale} (L.) Willk.). Plant with procumbent, woody, mat-forming stems, and usually erect, herbaceous, simple or little-branched flowering stems 10-50 wings constricted at the nodes, but entire, without teeth or lobes. Leaves 5-20 × 4-7 mm, elliptical, glabrous or subglabrous above, pubescent beneath. Calyx 5-8 mm, sericeous; corolla 10-12 mm, the standard usually glabrous. Legume 14-20 × 4-5 mm, pubescent. Seeds estrophiolate. •{\i    C. Europe, extending to S.E. Belgium and southwards locally in the mountains to S. Spain, Calabria and Greece.} Al Au Be Bu Cz Ga Ge Gr He Hs Hu It Ju Rm Rs (W) [Po].
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Plants from S. France, with more or less procumbent, sericeous flowering stems and smaller flowers with a sericeous standard, are sometimes treated as a separate subspecies ({\i  Genista delphinensis} Verlot).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. C. tridentatum} (L.) P. Gibbs,{\i   Feddes Repert.}{\b  79}: 54 (1968) ({\i  Genistella tridentata} (L.) Samp.,{\i   Pterospartum tridentatum} (L.) Willk.; incl.{\i   P. cantabricum} (Spach) Willk.{\i   P. lasianthum} (Spach) Willk., {\i  P. stenopterum }(Spach) Willk. Erect or procumbent, much-branched shrub 30-70 cm; wings undulate, rather coriaceous, contracted at each node to form 3 teeth or lobes. Leaves absent. Calyx 4-7 mm, sericeous; corolla 8-12 mm, the standard glabrous to densely sericeous. Legume 10-12 × c. 4 mm, pubescent. Seeds strophiolate.{\i   Heaths and scrub on acid soils.  • W. part of the Iberian peninsula.} Hs Lu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc {\b 18.            Echinospartum}           (Spach) Rothm.
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc By P.E. Gibbs.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Small shrubs with opposite spiny branches. Leaves 3-foliolate, shortly petiolate or sessile. Calyx inflated, campanulate, bilabiate; upper lip deeply 2-fid; lower with 3 prominent teeth; all teeth as long as or longer than the tube; corolla yellow; stamens monadelphous. Legume ovoid-acuminate, dehiscent, villous. Seeds 1-3.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Literature: W. Rothmaler,{\i   Bot. Jahrb. }{\b 72}: 79-84 (1941).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Flowers in terminal clusters of 3-9 ......................................... {\b 3. lusitanicum} 
\par
1 Flowers 2 on each branch, sometimes with a further 2 lower down 
\par
2 Flowering branch without a terminal spine;
\par
  standard glabrescent or sparsely sericeous .................................. {\b 1. horridum} 
\par
2 Flowering branch terminated by a small spine;
\par
  standard densely sericeous ............................................................ {\b 2. boissieri}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. E. horridum} (Vahl) Rothm., {\i  Bot. Jahrb.}{\b  72}: 80 (1941) ({\i  Genista horrida} (Vahl) DC.). Up to 40 cm, spiny. Leaves 4-9 mm, narrowly oblanceolate, sericeous beneath, glabrescent above; pulvini prominent. Flowers usually 2 on each branch, opposite. Calyx 7-12 mm, sparsely sericeous; teeth acute. Standard 12-16 mm, glabrescent to sparsely sericeous. Legume 9-14 × 4-4·5 mm 2n = 44.{\i   Exposed mountain rocks and slopes; calcicole. •  Pyrenees and S.C. France.} Ga Hs.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. E. boissieri} (Spach) Rothm.,{\i   op. cit.} 83 (1941) ({\i  Genista boissieri} Spach). Like {\b 1} but flowering branches terminated by a small spine; flowers sometimes 4 on each branch with the lower 2 remote; calyx with sparse to dense hairs and teeth with a filiform apex; standard densely sericeous. 2n = 44.{\i   Exposed mountain slopes; calcicole. •  S.E. Spain}. Hs.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 3. E. lusitanicum} (L.) Rothm.,{\i   op. cit. }82 (1941) ({\i  Genista lusitanica} L.). Like {\b 1} but up to 200 cm; flowers in terminal dusters of 3-9; calyx 10-18 mm; standard 12-20 mm; legume 15-20 × 4-7 mm.{\i   Exposed mountain rocks and slopes; calcifuge. • W. part of Iberian peninsula.} Hs Lu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b lusitanicum}: Calyx and standard densely sericeous or with patent hairs. 2n = c. 52.{\i   W.C. Spain, C. Portugal.} 
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b barnadesii} (Graells) C. Vicioso,{\i   Bol. Inst. Estud. Astur.} ({\i  Supl. Ci}.) ser. C, {\b 5}: 41 (1962) ({\i  Genista barnadesii} Graells): Calyx sparsely to densely sericeous; standard glabrous or sparsely sericeous. 2n = c. 52.{\i   W. Spain}.
\par

\par
100}
\par