{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 line on each side.{\i   Light, acid soils. Mediterranean region, Portugal.} Al Co Cr Gr Hs It Ju Lu Si [Au ?Ge Rm].
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b varius}: Stems and leaflets sericeous and calyx densely villous, the hairs red-brown; racemes up to 6 cm; legume 13-15 mm wide; seeds 7-9 mm. 2n = 32. {\i  Western part of the range of the species.}
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b orientalis} Franco & P. Silva,{\i   Feddes Repert. }{\b 79}: 52 (1968) ({\i  L. digitatus} Forskål, {\i  L. pilosus} L.): Stem and calyx hirsute and leaflets softly villous, the hairs white; racemes 5-10 cm; legume 18-20 mm wide; seeds 10-12 mm.{\i   Greece and Aegean region. }({\i  Syria to Egypt}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28     {\b 7. L. perennis} L., {\i  Sp. Pl.} 721 (1753). Stout perennial 20-70 cm; stems glabrous or pubescent. Leaflets 7-11, 15-50 × 8-12 mm, oblanceolate, glabrous above, sparsely pubescent beneath; stipules setaceous. Racemes up to 30 cm, lax; flowers alternate or verticillate; peduncle up to 10 cm. Upper lip of calyx 4-6 mm, emarginate, lower lip c. 8 mm, entire. Corolla 12-16 mm, purple-blue, pink or white or parti-coloured; keel ciliate. Legume 30-50 mm, pubescent. Seeds 4-6.{\i   Cultivated for ornament and for fodder, mostly in C. Europe, and sometimes naturalized}. [Au Cz Ga ?Ju No Rm.] ({\i  E. North America.})
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28     {\b 8. L. nootkatensis} Donn ex Sims,{\i   Bot. Mag. }{\b 32}: t. 1311 (1810). Like {\b 7} but usually stouter, with villous or hirsute stems; leaflets 6-8, 20-60 × 10-15 mm; upper lip of calyx c. 8 mm, lower lip 8-10 mm. 2n = 48.{\i   Naturalized in Norway and Scotland.} [Br No.] ({\i  N.W. North America, N.E. Asia.})
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Possibly only a subspecies of{\b  7}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 9. L. polyphyllus} Lindley,{\i   Bot. Reg. }{\b 13}: t.1096 (1827). Minutely pubescent, stout, usually unbranched perennial 50-150 cm. Leaflets 9-17, 70-150 × 15-30 mm, obovate-lanceolate, mostly glabrous above, sparingly sericeous beneath stipules subulate. Racemes 15-60 cm, rather dense; flowers verticillate;  peduncle 3-8 cm. Lips of calyx entire. Corolla 12-14 mm, blue, purple, pink or white; keel glabrous. Legume 25-40 mm, sparsely hairy, brown. Seeds 5-9, c. 4 mm, variously spotted.{\i   Cultivated for ornament and for fodder in a large part of Europe, and widely naturalized.} [Au Cz Da Fe Ga Ge He Ho Hu Ju No Po Rm Rs (C) Su.] ({\i  W. North America}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  The hybrid {\b 9} × {\b 10} ({\i  L.} ×{\i   regalis} Bergmans) is frequently cultivated for ornament in C. & N. Europe and often occurs as a casual. It may be locally naturalized.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 10. L. arboreus} Sims, {\i  Bot. Mag.}{\b  18}: t. 682 (1803). Much branched shrub 100-300 cm. Leaflets 5-12, 20-60 × 5-10 mm, obovate-oblong, mucronate, strigose beneath, strigose or glabrous above; stipules subulate. Racemes 10-30 cm, lax; flowers alternate or subverticillate, scented; peduncle 4-10 cm. Upper lip of calyx emarginate, the lower entire. Corolla 14-17 mm, usually yellow, sometimes white, purple to blue or variegated. Legume 40-80 mm, strigose, brown. Seeds 8-12, 4-5 mm, ellipsoid, dark brown, more or less mottled, with a pair of spots near micropyle.{\i   Naturalized near the sea in Britain and Ireland.} [Br Hb.] ({\i  California}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc {\b 29.               Argyrolobium}                 Ecklon & Zeyher 
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc By P.W. Ball.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Herbs or small shrubs. Leaves 3-foliolate; stipules free from the petiole. Flowers in terminal fascicles or short racemes. Calyx deeply bilabiate, the lips longer than the tube; upper lip deeply 2-fid; lower lip 3-toothed; corolla yellow; wings free; keel obtuse; stamens monadelphous. Legume linear or oblong, compressed, dehiscent. Seeds 4-10 (in European spp.).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 Stem and lower surface of leaflets densely appressed silvery-
\par
   sericeous; leaflets elliptical to lanceolate ....................................... {\b 1. zanonii}
\par
Stem and leaflets hirsute, green; leaflets ovate or obovate ....... {\b 2. biebersteinii}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. A. zanonii} (Turra) P. W. Ball,{\i   Feddes Repert.}{\b  79}: 41 (1968) ({\i  A. linnaeanum} Walpers, {\i  A. argenteum} (L.) Willk., non (Jacq.) Ecklon & Zeyher, {\i  Cytisus argenteus} L., {\i  C. zanonii} Turra). Stems up to 25 cm, procumbent, woody at base, silvery-sericeous with dense appressed hairs. Leaflets 5-20 × 3-6(-8) mm, those of the lower leaves elliptical, of the upper lanceolate, glabrous or sparsely hairy above, densely sericeous beneath. Flowers solitary or up to 3 in small terminal fascicles. Corolla 9-12 mm. Legume 15-35 × 4·5-5·5 mm somewhat torulose, sericeous-villous. 2n = 48.{\i   Dry open places. S. Europe from Albania westwards, extending northwards to} 46° {\i  N. in France.} Al Bl Co Ga Hs It Ju Lu Sa ?Si.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b  A. dalmaticum} (Vis.) Ascherson & Graebner,{\i   Syn. Mitteleur. Fl.}{\b  6}({\b 2}): 234 (1907) ({\i  Chamaecytisus dalmaticus} Vis.), described from W. Jugoslavia, is a dubious species probably known only from the original collection. It has diadelphous stamens and is considered by some authors to be an abnormal plant of 1.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. A. biebersteinii} P. W. Ball,{\i   Feddes Repert.}{\b  79}: 41 (1968) ({\i  A. calycinum }Jaub. & Spach, nom. illegit.,{\i   A. pauciflorum} (Bieb. ex Willd.) Hayek, non Ecklon & Zeyher,{\i   Cytisus pauciflorus }Bieb. ex Willd.). Like {\b 1} but diffuse shrub 30-50 cm, hirsute, green; leaflets 15-25 × 6-17 mm, ovate or obovate; flowers 2-10 in fascicles or short racemes; legume hirsute.{\i   Krym.} ?Ju Rs (K). ({\i  S. W. Asia}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc {\b  30.                   Robinia }                 L.
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc By P.W. Ball.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Deciduous trees or shrubs. Leaves imparipinnate; stipels often present; spinose stipules usually present. Flowers in pendent axillary racemes. Calyx campanulate, slightly bilabiate; corolla white, pink or purple; stamens diadelphous. Legume linear or oblong, compressed, dehiscent. Seeds 3-10.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 Tree up to 25 m; racemes many-flowered; flowers 15-20 mm . {\b 1. pseudacacia}
\par
Stoloniferous shrub up to 1 m; racemes 3- to 5-flowered;
\par
  flowers c. 25 mm ............................................................................. {\b 2. hispida}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. R. pseudacacia} L., {\i  Sp. Pl}. 722 (1753). Tree up to 25 m. Leaflets 3-10 pairs, 25-45 × 12-25 mm, elliptical or ovate, glabrous or subglabrous; usually with stipular spines. Racemes 10-20 cm, many-flowered. Corolla 15-20 mm, white, the base of the standard yellow. Legume 5-10 × c. 1 cm, glabrous. {\i  Commonly planted for ornament and for stabilizing dry soil. Extensively naturalized in S. & W. Europe and more locally in C. & E. Europe}. [Al Au Be Br Bu Cz Ga Ge Gr He Ho Hs Hu It Ju Rm Sa Si Tu.] ({\i  C.& E. North America}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b R. viscosa} Vent., {\i  Descr. Pl. Jard. Cels} t. 4 (1800), from S.E. North America, is often planted in C. & S. Europe and may be locally naturalized. It is like {\b 1} but with glandular-viscid twigs, petioles and peduncles; racemes 5-8 cm, 6- to 18-flowered; corolla purple, and legume sparsely glandular-hispid.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. R. hispida} L., {\i  Mantissa} 101 (1767). Stoloniferous, usually hispid shrub up to 1 m. Leaflets 3-6 pairs, 20-35 × 15-30 mm, ovate-oblong to suborbicular. Racemes 3- to 5-flowered. Corolla c. 25 mm, pink or purple. Legume 5-8 cm, glandular-hispid.{\i   Planted for ornament and hedges and locally naturalized in S. Europe}. [Ga.] ({\i  S.E. North America}.)
\par

\par
106}
\par