{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 9-13 mm. Standard subglabrous to moderately hairy. •{\i   Throughout the range of the species in Europe.}

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b spectabilis} (Webb) Rothm.,{\i   Bot. Jahrb.}{\b  72}: 88 (1941). Spines rather stout, rigid. Bracteoles 2-4·5 mm wide, more or less orbicular. Calyx 10-16 mm.{\i   Standard very hairy. S.W. Portugal} ({\i  S.W. part of Baixo Alentejo}). ( {\i  W. Morocco.})
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc {\b 26.               Adenocarpus}            DC.
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc By P.E. Gibbs.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Unarmed shrubs with alternate branches. Leaves 3-foliolate, sometimes fasciculate. Flowers in terminal racemes or clusters. Calyx tubular, bilabiate, sometimes with glandular tubercules; upper and lower lips prominent, the upper deeply bifid, the lower with three distinct teeth; corolla orange-yellow. Legume oblong, dehiscent, with glandular tubercles. Seeds numerous, estrophiolate. 

\pard\f0\fs28   Literature: C. Vicioso, {\i  Genísteas Españolas}{\b  2} ({\i  Bol. Inst. For. Inv. Exper. Madrid} No. 72). Madrid. 1955.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Leaflets 1-1·5 mm wide, very narrowly elliptical, markedly 
\par
  involute and appearing linear ................................................... {\b 4. decorticans}
\par
1 Leaflets usually more than 3 mm wide, obovate, oblanceolate
\par
  or ovate, the margin not, or only slightly involute
\par
2 Pedicel 7-15 mm; standard 15-23 mm ..................................... {\b 3. hispanicus}
\par
2 Pedicel not more than 5 mm; standard 10-16 mm
\par
3 Bracteoles 2-4 mm, ovate or lanceolate; calyx 8-11 mm,
\par
  the lower teeth 1/3 to 1/2 the total length of the lip ................... {\b 2. telonensis} 
\par
3 Bracteoles 1 mm or less, linear; calyx 5-8 mm, the lower 
\par
  teeth not more than 1/3 the total length of the lip .................. {\b 1. complicatus}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28     {\b 1. A. complicatus} (L.) Gay,{\i   Ann. Sci. Nat.} ser. 2 (Bot.),{\b  6}: 125 (1836) (incl. {\i  A. commutatus} Guss.,{\i   A. intermedius} DC., {\i  A. villosus} Boiss.). Erect, up to 4 m; twigs and leaves sparsely to densely sericeous or with patent hairs. Leaflets 5-25 × 2-7 mm, oblanceolate. Bracteoles c. 1 mm, linear (sometimes absent); pedicels 3-5 mm. Calyx 5-7 mm, with or without glandular tubercules, subglabrous or sericeous, lower teeth not more than 1/3 the total length of the lip. Standard 10-15 mm, sericeous. Legume 15-45 × 4-6 mm, narrowly oblong, glandular-tuberculate.{\i   Woods and scrub. S.W. Europe and Mediterranean region, extending to N.W. France.} Ga Gr Hs It Lu Si.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Very variable in degree of pubescence, size of calyx and leaves, and presence or absence of glandular tubercles on the calyx. The following subspecies may be recognized although their distributions do not form a very satisfactory geographical pattern and there is much morphological intergradation.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Calyx densely glandular-pubescent; twigs villous, glabrescent
\par
  ................................................................................. ({\b a}) subsp. {\b complicatus}
\par
1 Calyx eglandular, very rarely with a few glands
\par
2 Twigs and calyx densely villous .................................... ({\b b}) subsp. {\b aureus}
\par
2 Twigs and calyx shortly pubescent, sometimes glabrescent
\par
  ................................................................................. ({\b c}) subsp. {\b commutatus}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b complicatus} ({\i  A. divaricatus} var. {\i  graecus }(Griseb.) Boiss.,{\i   A. intermedius} DC.):{\i   N.W. & C. Portugal, N. & C. Spain, W. France, S. Italy, Sicilia, E. Greece}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b aureus} (Cav.) C. Vicioso,{\i   Anal. Inst. Bot. Cavanilles}{\b  6}({\b 2}): 43 (1946) ({\i  A. villosus} Boiss.):{\i   C. Portugal, C. Spain, C. Italy}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b c}) Subsp. {\b commutatus} (Guss.) Coutinho,{\i   Fl. Port.} 320 (1913) ({\i  A. commutatus} Guss.):{\i   Mediterranean region, E. Portugal.}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. A. telonensis} (Loisel.) DC. in Lam. & DC.,{\i   Fl. Fr}. ed. 3, {\b 5}: 550 (1815) ({\i  A. grandiflorus} Boiss.). Erect, up to 1 m. Leaflets 3-8 × 1-4 mm, densely clustered along the branches, sparsely sericeous beneath, glabrous above. Flowers in clusters of 2-7; bracteoles 2-4 mm, ovate or lanceolate; pedicels 2-3 mm. Calyx 8-11 mm, densely sericeous; lower teeth 1/3-1/2 the total length of the lip. Standard 13-16 mm, broadly ovate, sericeous. Legume 15-30 × 4-5 mm, narrowly oblong, sericeous and glandular.{\i   Scrub. S. France, C. & S. Spain, S. Portugal}. Ga Hs Lu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 3. A. hispanicus} (Lam.) DC. in Lam. & DC.,{\i   op. cit. }549 (1815). Erect, up to 2 m. Leaflets 15-30 × 3-8 mm, oblanceolate, acuminate, sericeous on both surfaces. Flowers in congested racemes; bracteoles absent; pedicels 7-15 mm. Calyx 8-12 mm, with semipatent hairs and glandular papillae, especially on the teeth. Standard 15-23 mm, broadly ovate, sericeous. Legume 20-50 × 8-10 mm, oblong, densely glandular-tuberculate.{\i   C. & S.W. Spain, S. Portugal.} Hs Lu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b hispanicus}: Leaves sparsely hairy above; calyx with numerous glandular papillae, especially on the teeth; standard sparsely hairy.{\i   W.C. Spain}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b argyrophyllus} Rivas Goday,{\i   Ann. Inst. Bot. Cavanilles}{\b  12}({\b 2}): 307 (1954): Leaves densely silvery-white; hairy above; calyx with few or no glandular papillae; standard densely pubescent.{\i   S.W. Spain, S. Portugal}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 4. A. decorticans} Boiss., {\i  Biblioth. Univ. Genève} ser. 2, {\i  13}: 407 (1838). Erect, up to 3 m. Leaflets 9-18 × 1-1·5 mm, very narrowly elliptical and markedly involute, sericeous on both surfaces. Flowers in racemes; bracteoles absent; pedicels 4-8 mm. Calyx c. 8 mm, densely sericeous, not glandular. Standard c. 15 mm, broadly ovate, sericeous. Legume 20-60 × 8-10 mm, oblong, densely glandular-tuberculate.{\i   Mountains of S. Spain.} Hs.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc {\b 27.              Lotononis}                (DC.) Ecklon & Zeyher
\par
 
\pard\f0\fs28\qc ({\i  Amphinomia} DC.)
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc By P.W. Ball.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Unarmed shrubs. Leaves 3-foliolate or 5-foliolate, digitate, alternate or subopposite. Flowers solitary or in terminal or rarely in axillary inflorescences. Calyx weakly bilabiate, the upper lip deeply 4-toothed, the lower 1-toothed; corolla yellow; stamens monadelphous, the 5 shorter with dorsifixed anthers, the 5 longer with basifixed anthers. Legume oblong, compressed, dehiscent. Seeds numerous.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 A large genus occurring mainly in Africa and S.W. Asia.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 Leaves 5-foliolate; calyx 8-10 mm .............................................. {\b 1. lupinifolia}
\par
Leaves 3-foliolate; calyx 6-7 mm ............................................... {\b 2. genistoides}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. L. lupinifolia} (Boiss.) Bentham,{\i   London Jour. Bot.} ({\i  Hooker}){\b 2}: 607 (1843). Grey-pubescent to silvery-sericeous, caespitose dwarf shrub up to 20 cm. Leaflets 5, 5-10 × 1-4 mm, linear to obovate lanceolate, silvery-sericeous beneath. Flowers in sessile to shortly pedunculate, 2- to 4-flowered, usually axillary clusters. Calyx 8-10 mm; corolla c. 12 mm, sericeous; standard about as long as keel. Legume 12-15 × 4-5 mm, up to twice as long as persistent calyx.{\i   Dry places. S. Spain. }Hs.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. L. genistoides} (Fenzl) Bentham,{\i   loc. cit.} (1843) ({\i  Amphinomia genistoides} (Fenzl) Hayek). Like {\b 1} but leaflets 3, 5-8 × 1-4 mm, oblong-oblanceolate to obovate; flowers in 1- to 3-flowered clusters; calyx 6-7 mm;  corolla 8-9 mm; standard shorter than keel; legume only slightly longer than the persistent calyx.{\i   Dry scrub. S.E. Bulgaria, N.E. Greece}. Bu Gr. ({\i  Anatolia}.)
\par

\par
104}
\par