{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 64. A. thracicus} Griseb.,{\i   Spicil. Fl. Rumel.}{\b  1}: 55 (1843). Like {\b 63}({\b a}) but not forming tussocks; leaves up to 9 cm; stipules tomentose, at least in the centre; racemes with up to 7 flowers; corolla white; standard 17-20 mm. •{\i    S.E. part of Balkan peninsula}. Bu Gr Ju Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b  A. monachorum} Sirj., {\i  Feddes Repert.}{\b  47}: 242 (1939), from Athos, appears to be intermediate between {\b 63}({\b a}) and{\b  64}; it is like {\b 64} but has glabrous stipules, calyx 20-23 mm and standard 20-24 mm.{\b  A. jankae} Degen & Bornm.,{\i   Magyar Bot. Lapok}{\b  18}: 17 (1919), from S. Bulgaria, appears to be intermediate between {\b 64} and {\b 65}; it is like {\b 64} but has the leaflets hairy above, and the bracts ovate. The relationship between these two taxa and {\b 63}({\b a}), {\b 64} and {\b 65} is obscure.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 65. A. trojanus} Steven ex Fischer, {\i  Syn. Astrag. Trag.} 88 (1853). Like {\b 63}({\b a}) but not forming tussocks; stipules usually tomentose; bracts ovate, navicular; calyx 11-14 mm; corolla white; standard 18-22 mm. {\i  Turkey-in-Europe} ({\i  S. part of Gelibolu peninsula}.) Tu. ({\i  W. Anatolia}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Subgen. {\b Calycophysa} Bunge. Perennials; hairs simple. Leaves usually imparipinnate; stipules adnate to petiole for up to ½ their length, free or almost free from each other. Flowers suberect, often in dense, subcapitate racemes. Calyx more or less inflated and not splitting to the base in fruit. Corolla persistent. Legume included in calyx.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 66. A. physocalyx} Fischer, {\i  Bull. Sci. Acad. Imp. Sci. Pétersb.}{\b  2}: 74 (1837). Caespitose, acaulescent, with branched stock. Leaves 15-20 cm, imparipinnate; leaflets 15-22 pairs, ovate or elliptical, acute, sparsely hairy. Peduncle very short; racemes with 1-5 flowers; bracts 5-8 mm, ovate. Calyx 15-17 mm at anthesis, 25 × 15 mm and vesicular-inflated in fruit. Corolla yellow; standard 35-45 mm. Legume 12-15 mm, oblong-lanceolate, glabrous. 2n = 16. •{\i    S.W. Bulgaria} ({\i  Kulata}). {\i  Extinct in its only other known locality} ({\i  Plovdiv}). Bu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 67. A. ponticus} Pallas, {\i  Spec. Astrag.} 14 (1800). Stems 50-100 cm, stout, erect, sparsely hairy. Leaves 10-30 cm, imparipinnate; leaflets 15-25 pairs, oblong-elliptical, glabrous except on mid-vein beneath. Peduncles up to 1 cm; racemes ovoid; bracts as long as calyx. Calyx 10-15 mm, pubescent with short hairs, slightly inflated in fruit, the teeth less than ½ as long as tube. Corolla yellow. Standard 15-22 mm; wings slightly longer than keel. Legume ovoid-compressed, sparsely hairy. {\i  S.E. Europe, from Bulgaria to S.E. Russia.} Bu Rm Rs (W, K, E).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 68. A. vulpinus} Willd., {\i  Sp. Pl.}{\b  3}: 1259 (1802). Stems 15-40 cm, stout, erect, sparsely hairy. Leaves 7-20(-25) cm, imparipinnate; leaflets 12-15 pairs, broadly ovate or obcordate, with short, dense hairs beneath, subglabrous above; stipules glabrous. Peduncles up to 1 cm; racemes ovoid or oblong; bracts 2/3 as long as calyx. Calyx 15-25 mm, villous with long, dense hairs, slightly inflated in fruit, the teeth about as long as tube. Corolla yellowish; standard 22-28 mm, the limb 9-11 mm wide; wings not or scarcely longer than keel. Legume ovoid, with long, dense hairs.{\i   S.E. Russia and W. Kazakhstan.} Rs (E).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 69. A. alopecurus} Pallas,{\i   Spec. Astrag.} 11 (1800). Stems 50-100 cm, stout, erect, densely hairy. Leaves 20-30 cm imparipinnate; leaflets 17-27 pairs, lanceolate to ovate-lanceolate, glabrous above, sparsely hairy beneath; stipules hairy. Peduncles up to 1(-2) cm; racemes ovoid or oblong; bracts as long as calyx. Calyx 12-17 mm, villous with long, dense hairs, slightly inflated in fruit, the teeth 2/3-3/4 as long as tube. Corolla pale yellow; standard 18-23 mm, the limb 5-7 mm wide; wings slightly longer than keel. Legume ovoid-globose, with long, dense hairs.{\i   S. Ural.} Rs (C). ({\i  N. & W. Asia.})
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 70. A. alopecuroides} L., {\i  Sp. Pl.} 755 ({\i  A. narbonensis }Gouan). Stems 15-75 cm, stout, erect, densely hairy to subglabrous. Leaves 15-20 cm, imparipinnate; leaflets 12-15 pairs, oblong-elliptical to oblong, densely hairy to subglabrous beneath, glabrous above; stipules usually hairy. Peduncles up to 2 cm; racemes globose; bracts slightly longer than calyx. Calyx 12-17 mm, villous with long, dense hairs, slightly inflated in fruit, the teeth slightly longer than tube. Corolla pale yellow; standard 22-27 mm; wings slightly shorter than keel. Legume triangular ovate, strongly laterally compressed, with long, dense hairs. •{\i   E., C. & S. Spain, extending northwards into S. France }({\i  Herault, Aude}). Ga Hs.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 71. A. grossii} Pau, {\i  Mem. Mus. Ci. Nat. Barcelona} ({\i  Bot.}) {\b 1}({\b 3}): 16 (1925). Stems 20-30 cm, stout, erect, sparsely hairy. Leaves 10-20 cm, imparipinnate; leaflets 11-12 pairs, 5-7 mm, oblong, subglabrous; stipules glabrous. Peduncles 1-2 cm; racemes oblong; bracts c. ½ as long as calyx. Calyx c. 15 mm, villous, slightly inflated in fruit, the teeth slightly shorter than tube. Corolla pale yellow; standard c. 25 mm. Legume unknown. •{\i   S.E. Spain} ({\i  Sierra de Gador, near Almeria}). Hs.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   The status of this plant is uncertain; it may be only a variant of {\b 70}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 72. A. centralpinus} Br.-Bl.,{\i   Feddes Repert.}{\b  79}: 49 (1968) ({\i  A. alopecuroides} auct., non L.). Stems 50-100 cm, stout, erect, densely hairy. Leaves 20-30 cm, imparipinnate; leaflets 20-30 pairs, elliptic- to ovate-lanceolate, sparsely hairy beneath, glabrous above; stipules glabrous or hairy. Racemes ovoid, sessile; bracts equalling calyx. Calyx 14-20 mm, villous with long, dense hairs, slightly inflated in fruit, the teeth c. 2/3 as long as tube. Corolla yellow; standard 15-20 mm; wings equalling keel. Legume ovoid-compressed, with long, dense hairs. •{\i   S.W. Alps; S. Bulgaria} ({\i  W. Rodopi}). Bu Ga It.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 73. A. ajubensis} Bunge, {\i  Astrag. Geront.}{\b  1}: 61 (1868) ({\i  A. durhamii} Turrill). Stems 50-100 cm, stout, erect, glabrous. Leaves 10-20 cm, imparipinnate; leaflets 10-15 pairs, oblong-lanceolate, glabrous above, subglabrous beneath; stipules glabrous. Peduncles 3-8 cm; racemes globose; bracts c. ½ as long as calyx. Calyx 17-19 mm, villous with long, dense hairs, slightly inflated in fruit, the teeth as long as tube. Corolla yellow; standard 20-23 mm; wings about equalling keel. Legume obovoid, with long, dense hairs.{\i   Turkey-in-Europe} ({\i  Gelibolu peninsula}). Tu. ({\i  S.W. Asia.})
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 74. A. clusii} Boiss., {\i  Diagn. Pl. Or. Nov. }{\b 2}({\b 9}): 101 (1849) ({\i  A. tumidus} Willd. pro parte). Caespitose, spiny; stems 10-15 cm, woody. Leaves 3-5 cm, paripinnate, the rhachis ending in a spine; leaflets 4-8 pairs, linear-lanceolate to obovate, densely hairy on both surfaces; stipules densely hairy. Peduncles short; racemes with 2-3 flowers; bracts ovate, acuminate; bracteoles present. Calyx c. 10 mm at anthesis, densely appressed-hairy, c. 20 × 15 mm and vesicular-inflated in fruit. Corolla whitish; standard 15-20 mm. Legume obovoid, densely hairy. •{\i    S. & E. Spain}. Hs.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 75. A. sempervirens} Lam.,{\i   Encycl. Méth. Bot. }{\b 1}: 320 (1783). Sometimes caespitose, spiny; stems 5-40 cm, woody at base, procumbent or ascending. Leaves 2-7 cm, paripinnate, the rhachis ending in a spine; leaflets 4-10 pairs, linear-oblanceolate; stipules adnate to petiole for c. ½ their length. Peduncles short; racemes with (3-)4-8 flowers; bracts ovate- to linear-lanceolate, acuminate;
\par

\par
118}
\par