{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 111 Calyx 2·5-3 mm ................................................................. {\b 89. tenuifolius}
\par
111 Calyx more than 3 mm
\par
112 Leaflets more than 10 mm wide ............................................. {\b 85. roemeri}
\par
112 Leaflets less than 10 mm wide
\par
113 Calyx teeth more than ½ as long as tube ........................... {\b 94. onobrychis}
\par
113 Calyx-teeth not more than ½ as long as tube
\par
114 Legume not more than 2 mm wide, usually more than 
\par
    20 mm long ....................................................................... {\b 116. subuliformis}
\par
114 Legume more than 2 mm wide, usually less than 20 mm long
\par
115 Leaflets 2-6 × 0·5-1 (-1·5) mm (Atlantic coasts) ................ {\b 91. baionensis}
\par
115 Leaflets larger
\par
116 Peduncles shorter than leaves
\par
117 Legume 2·5-3 mm wide; calyx 7-9 mm, the teeth 1/3-2/3 as 
\par
    long as tube ........................................................................ {\b 92. tenuifoliosus}
\par
117 Legume 3·5-4 mm wide; calyx 4-5 mm, the teeth c. ¼ as 
\par
    long as tube .............................................................................. {\b 90. arenarius}
\par
116 Peduncles equalling or longer than leaves
\par
118 Keel mucronate at apex ............................................ {\b 30. pseudopurpureus}
\par
118 Keel not mucronate 
\par
119 Standard with ovate limb ...................................................... {\b 95. leontinus} 
\par
119 Standard with linear-oblong limb
\par
120 Racemes with less than 10 flowers ................................... {\b 93. mesopterus}
\par
120 Racemes with more than 10 flowers ................................. {\b 94. onobrychis}
\par
109 Stipules free from each other, except sometimes those at base of stem
\par
121 Calyx 2-4 mm; standard not more than 12 mm
\par
122 Calyx-teeth triangular-ovate, up to ¼ as long as tube........ . {\b 86. austriacus}
\par
122 Calyx-teeth linear-lanceolate, ½-¾ as long as tube
\par
123 Standard more than 9 mm; leaflets 2·5-6 mm wide;
\par
    branches erecto-patent .......................................................... {\b 88. clerceanus}
\par
123 Standard less than 9 mm; leaflets 0·5-1(-2·5) mm wide; 
\par
    branches strict ............................................................................ {\b 87. sulcatus}
\par
121 Calyx at least 5 mm; standard more than 12 mm
\par
124 Stems herbaceous throughout
\par
125 Corolla yellow ............................................................................. {\b 84. asper}
\par
125 Corolla violet, purple or whitish
\par
126 Leaflets less than 10 mm wide ............................................. {\b 95. leontinus}
\par
126 Leaflets more than 10 mm wide .............................................. {\b 85. roemeri}
\par
124 Stems woody at least at base
\par
127 Legume 50-70 mm ............................................................ {\b 119. pugionifer}
\par
127 Legume less than 50 mm
\par
128 Leaflets of longer leaves 0·5-1 mm wide, setaceous
\par
129 Racemes subumbellate ................................................... {\b 117. corniculatus}
\par
129 Racemes oblong, lax
\par
130 Corolla lilac or purplish; leaflets hairy above ...................... {\b 118. muelleri}
\par
130 Corolla usually yellow; leaflets glabrous above ........... {\b 116. subuliformis}
\par
128 Leaflets of longer leaves more than 1 mm wide, not setaceous
\par
131 Legume at least 10 times as long as wide
\par
132 Leaves 5-10 cm; calyx 7-9 mm;
\par
      bracts 0·5-1 mm (Ural) ................................................... {\b 115. karelinianus} 
\par
132 Leaves 1-5 cm; calyx 9-11 mm; bracts 1-2 mm 
\par
133 Leaflets 4-6 pairs, silvery;
\par 
      peduncles 4-5 times as long as leaves ...........................{\b 113. sericophyllus}
\par
133 Leaflets 5-7 pairs, green; peduncles up to 3 times as long as 
\par
    leaves ................................................................................... {\b 114. apollineus} 
\par
131 Legume less than 10 times as long as wide 
\par
134 Leaflets 2-4 pairs 
\par
135 Calyx 9-12 mm, not becoming inflated; corolla white 
\par
136 Calyx-teeth 1·5-2·5 mm, 1/5-1/4 as long as tube ................... {\b 126. zingeri}
\par
136 Calyx-teeth 3-4 mm, 1/3-1/2 as long as tube ........................ {\b 125. glaucus}
\par
135 Calyx 12-15 mm, becoming ± inflated in fruit; corolla yellow
\par
137 Bracts ovate-acuminate; standard 22-27 mm ........................ {\b 132. medius}
\par
137 Bracts linear-lanceolate; standard 18-23 mm .................... {\b 131. albicaulis} 
\par
134 Leaflets mostly more than 4 pairs
\par
138 Legume with very closely appressed hairs (Spain)
\par
139 Legume curved; leaflets convolute ................................. {\b 130. hegelmaieri}
\par
139 Legume straight; leaflets plane ......................................... {\b 129. hispanicus}
\par
138 Legume with ascending to patent hairs
\par
140 Legume equalling the calyx (or only the beak exceeding the 
\par
    calyx), with almost patent hairs ........................................... {\b 127. vesicarius}
\par
140 Legume exceeding the calyx, with ascending hairs
\par
141 Racemes dense, ovoid, usually less than 5 cm
\par
142 Peduncles not exceeding leaves .......................................... {\b 120. cornutus}
\par
142 Peduncles at least 1½ times as long as leaves
\par
143 Standard emarginate at apex; leaflets linear to linear-lanceolate 
\par
    ................................................................................................... {\b 128. peterfii}
\par
143 Standard rounded at apex; leaflets lanceolate to oblong-lanceolate 
\par
144 Calyx-teeth 1·5-2·5 mm, 1/5-1/4 as long as tube ................... {\b 126. zingeri}
\par
144 Calyx-teeth 3-4 mm, 1/3-1/2 as long as tube ........................ {\b 125. glaucus}
\par
141 Racemes lax, elongate, usually more than 5 cm
\par
145 Corolla white or yellowish; calyx-teeth (2-)3-4 mm
\par
146 Corolla white; calyx not inflated after anthesis ................ {\b 124. pallescens}
\par
146 Corolla yellowish; calyx slightly inflated after anthesis ....... {\b 128. peterfii} 
\par
145 Corolla violet; calyx-teeth usually less than 3 mm
\par
147 Peduncles 2-3 times as long as leaves ............................... {\b 123. macropus}
\par
147 Peduncles less than twice as long as leaves
\par
148 Calyx 10-15 mm; legume 3·5-4 mm wide; 
\par
    standard emarginate at apex .............................................. {\b 121. brachylobus}
\par
148 Calyx 8-10 mm; legume usually 2-3 mm wide; 
\par
    standard rounded at apex ............................................................ {\b 122. varius}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Subgen. {\b Trimeniaeus} Bunge. Usually annuals; hairs usually simple. Leaves imparipinnate.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. A. contortuplicatus} L., {\i  Sp. Pl.} 758 (1753). Stems up to 50 cm, ascending or erect. Leaves 2-10 cm; leaflets 6-10 pairs, ovate or obovate, emarginate, densely hairy beneath, sparsely so above. Peduncles ½ as long as leaves; racemes dense, with 5-12 flowers Calyx c. 5 mm, the teeth almost twice as long as tube. Corolla yellow; standard c. 6 mm; keel longer than wings. Legume c. 7 mm in diameter, curved to form a usually complete ring, membranous, blackish, hairy.{\i   E.C. Europe, extending to N. Bulgaria and S.E. Russia.} Bu ?Cz Hu It Ju Rm Rs (W K E)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. A. boeticus} L.,{\i   Sp. Pl.}758 (1753). Stems up to 60 cm, erect. Leaves 5-20 cm; leaflets 10-15 pairs narrowly oblong to oblong-obovate, truncate or emarginate, sparsely hairy beneath, glabrous above, rarely some hairs medifixed. Peduncles ½ as long as leaves; racemes dense, with 5-15 flowers. Calyx 5-7 mm, the teeth as long as tube. Corolla yellow; standard 12-14 mm; wings longer than keel. Legume 20-40 × (5-)7-8 mm, oblong, triangular in
\par

\par
111}
\par