{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 linear. Corolla yellow; standard 10-12 mm, obtuse; wings 9-10 mm; keel 8-9 mm. Legume 20-30 × 10-15 mm, ovoid, flattened above, very strongly inflated beneath, densely blackish hairy at first but glabrescent.{\i   E. & C. Pyrenees, Alps, Carpathians; C. Sweden}. Au Cz Ga Ge He Hs It Ju Po Rm Su.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 37. A. umbellatus} Bunge, {\i  Astrag. Geront.}{\b  1}: 24 (1868). Stems 2-5 cm, stout, erect, hairy. Leaves 3-6 cm; leaflets 3-4(-5) pairs, ovate, obtuse, usually densely hairy beneath, glabrous above; stipules 5-10 × 3-7 mm. Peduncles slightly longer than leaves; racemes umbellate, with 5-10 flowers. Calyx 7-9 mm, the teeth 1/5-1/4 as long as tube, triangular. Corolla white; standard 16-18 mm; wings and keel both 13-17 mm. Legume 12-18 × 7-10 mm, ovoid-ellipsoid, inflated, densely black-hairy to maturity. {\i  Arctic Russia.} Rs (N). ({\i  Arctic Asia and America}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 38. A. alpinus} L., {\i  Sp. Pl.} 760 (1753) ({\i  Phaca alpina} L. pro parte,{\i   P. astragalina} L.). Stems (4-)8-30 cm, procumbent or ascending, slender. Leaves 4-8(-12) cm; leaflets 7-12 pairs, elliptical, acute or obtuse, sparsely hairy on both surfaces or glabrous above; stipules 3-5 mm, sometimes shortly connate around stem. Peduncles 1-2 times as long as leaves; racemes 2-3 cm, lax, with 5-15 flowers. Calyx 4-5 mm, the teeth lanceolate. Standard 10-14 mm. Legume 8-15 × 3-4 mm, scarcely inflated, blackish-hairy but later glabrescent. {\i  N. Europe, southwards on the mountains to} 56° 30' {\i  N. in Scotland; Pyrenees; Alps; Carpathians.} Au Br Cz Fe Ga Ge He Hs It Ju No Po Rm Rs (N) Su.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b alpinus}: Calyx-teeth almost as long as tube. Corolla whitish; keel bluish-violet, almost as long as standard and c. 1 mm longer than wings. Legume 10-15 mm, oblong, almost completely unilocular. 2n = 16.{\i   Throughout the range of the species except for much of arctic Europe}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b arcticus} Lindman, {\i  Svensk Fanerogamfl.} ed. 2, 384 (1926) ({\i  A. subpolaris} Boriss. & Schischkin): Calyx-teeth ½ as long as tube. Corolla purplish-violet; keel c. 1 mm shorter than both standard and wings. Legume 8-11 mm, ovoid, often with septum reaching ½ way across. 2n = 16. {\i  Arctic Europe}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  The differences between the subspecies are much more distinct in E. European Russia than in Fennoscandia, where there is less satisfactory correlation of characters.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 39. A. depressus} L.,{\i   Cent. Pl.}{\b  2}: 29 (1756). Acaulescent with branched stock, or stems up to 10 cm, procumbent; hairs medifixed with one arm very short, or almost simple. Leaves 2-30 cm; leaflets 6-14 pairs, obovate to obcordate, appressed-hairy beneath, glabrous above; stipules 4-13 mm, not connate. Peduncles 1-6 cm, never exceeding leaves; racemes oblong, with 6-14 flowers. Calyx (3-)4-6 mm, the teeth 2/3 as long as tube, lanceolate. Corolla whitish or bluish-purple; standard 10-12(-14) mm, emarginate. Legume (6-)15-22 × 3-4 mm, linear-lanceolate, valves slightly keeled, appressed-hairy but glabrescent, faintly reticulately veined, bilocular. 2n = 16.{\i   Mountains of S. Europe, extending northwards to N.E. Switzerland.} Al Bu Cr Ga Gr He Hs It Ju Rm Si.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  One of the most variable species, particularly in size of parts; no useful subdivision has yet been made.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 40. A. norvegicus} Weber, {\i  Pl. Min. Cogn. Dec.} 13 (1784) ({\i  A. oroboides} Hornem.). Stems (5-)20-40 cm, stout, erect, glabrous, or sparsely hairy below. Leaves 5-10 cm; leaflets (5-)6-7(-8) pairs, oblong-ovate, usually emarginate, glabrous, but hairy beneath when young; stipules 5-8 mm, ovate-lanceolate. Peduncles 1½-2 times as long as leaves; racemes oblong, dense, with 10-30 flowers. Calyx 4-6 mm, the teeth c. ¼ as long as tube, triangular, obtuse. Corolla pale violet; standard 10-12 mm, weakly emarginate; wings and keel both 8-10 mm. Legume c. 10 × 4 mm, ovoid, compressed, blackish-hairy when young.{\i   Arctic Europe, extending to mountains of Fennoscandia and S. Ural; Carpathians;} E. Alps. Au Cz No ?Rm Rs (N, C) Su.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 41. A. australis} (L.) Lam., {\i  Fl. Fr.}{\b  2}: 637 (1778) ({\i  Phaca australis} L.; incl. {\i  A. krajinae} Domin). Stems 10-30 cm, ascending. Leaves 2-10 cm; leaflets 4-6(-9) pairs, narrowly elliptical to ovate-lanceolate, acute, subglabrous to densely appressed-hairy on both surfaces; stipules 4-10 mm, ovate to lanceolate. Peduncles 1½-2 times as long as leaves; racemes elongate, with 8-15 flowers. Calyx 4-7 mm, the teeth ½ as long as tube. Corolla yellowish-white or white; standard 10-15 mm, sometimes dark violet at apex; wings 8-12 mm, entire or 2-lobed at apex; keel 7-8 mm, dark violet at apex. Legume 10-30 × 5-9 mm, oblong-ovoid, inflated, glabrous. 2n = 32,48. {\i   Mountains of Europe, from the Carpathians and C. Ural southwards to the Pyrenees, C. Appennini and W. & C. Bulgaria; one lowland station in subarctic Russia}. Au Bu Cz Ga Ge He Hs It Ju Po Rm Rs (N, C, W).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 42. A. lusitanicus} Lam.,{\i   Encycl. Méth. Bot. }{\b 1}: 312 (1783). Stems 30-70 cm, stout, erect. Leaves 8-12(-18) cm; leaflets 8-10 pairs, oblong-lanceolate to elliptical, apiculate, appressed-tomentose-sericeous beneath. Peduncles ¼-¾ as long as leaves; racemes oblong, dense, with many flowers. Calyx 10-15 mm, the teeth ¼-½ as long as tube. Corolla white; standard 20-35 mm. Legume 50-70 × 10-20 mm, oblong, slightly inflated, reddish brown or blackish, tomentose or puberulent.{\i   Portugal and S.W. Spain; S. Greece} ({\i  Peloponnisos}). Hs Gr Lu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b lusitanicus}: Leaflets glabrous above; calyx-teeth 1/3- 1/2 as long as tube; legume usually more than 60 mm.{\i   Portugal and S.W. Spain.} ({\i  N. W. Africa.})
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b orientalis} Chater & Meikle,{\i   Feddes Repert.}{\b  79}: 48 (1968): Leaflets appressed-tomentose-sericeous above; calyx teeth 1/4-1/3 as long as tube; legume usually less than 60 mm.{\i   Peloponnisos.} ({\i  S.W. Asia.})
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 43. A. glycyphyllos} L., {\i  Sp. Pl.} 758 (1753). Stems 30-100 (-150) cm, procumbent. Leaves 10-20 cm; leaflets (3-)4-6(-7) pairs, ovate or broadly elliptical, obtuse, often apiculate, sparsely appressed-hairy beneath, glabrous above; stipules 15-20 mm, lanceolate. Peduncles usually less than ½ as long as leaves; racemes oblong, dense, with many, suberect flowers. Calyx 5-6 mm, glabrous or with black hairs on the teeth; teeth 1/3-1/2 as long as tube. Corolla pale cream; standard 11-15 mm, emarginate. Legume 30-40 × 4-5 mm, linear-oblong, slightly curved, slightly compressed laterally, glabrous. 2n = 16.{\i   Most of Europe except the extreme north, but mainly on mountains in the south.} Al Au Be Br Bu Co Cz Da *Fe Ga Ge Gr Hb He Ho Hs Hu It Ju Lu No Po Rm Rs (B, C, W, K, E) Su Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 44. A. glycyphylloides} DC., {\i  Prodr.}{\b  2}: 292 (1825). Like {\b 43} but stems erect or ascending; leaflets 5-8 pairs; stipules 10-15 mm, ovate-lanceolate; calyx 6-8 mm, densely blackish-hairy throughout; corolla yellow or whitish-yellow; standard truncate; legume 20-25 × 4-5 mm, oblong-lanceolate.{\i   Balkan peninsula; Krym.} Bu Gr Ju Rs (K).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Plants from Srbija with leaflets patent-hairy beneath, very narrow, membranous (not herbaceous) stipules, longer calyx-teeth and almost straight legumes have been called {\b A. serbicus} Pancic ex G. Beck,{\i   Fl. Bosn. Herceg. }{\b 3}: 278 (1927). It is not clear how constant these characters are and whether they are always correlated.
\par

\par
115}
\par