{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 Subgen. {\b Astragalus }(Subgen.{\i   Caprinus }Bunge). Perennials, usually densely hairy; hairs simple, usually flexuous or patent and pale brown when dry. Leaves imparipinnate; stipules usually free from each other, sometimes partly adnate to petiole. Flowers pedicellate, suberect. Calyx tubular, not inflated in fruit, the mouth not oblique. Legume semi-bilocular to bilocular.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  This subgenus contains many species of narrow geographical range, differing from each other in a combination of minor, often overlapping characters. Most of them have here been aggregated into 3 groups.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    ({\b 45-47}). {\b A. dasyanthus }group. Leaves 15-35 cm; leaflets 8-20 pairs, 10-30 × 5-12 mm, ovate-oblong to elliptic-lanceolate, sparsely to densely hairy beneath, sparsely hairy above; stipules 12-25 mm, lanceolate to ovate. Peduncles up to ½ as long as leaves. Calyx 12-15(-25) mm, the teeth about equalling tube. Corolla yellow; standard 17-30 mm, hairy. Legume 13-20 × c. 8 mm, ovoid, trigonous, villous, semi-bilocular.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Caulescent; standard 17-21 mm ............................................ {\b 45. dasyanthus}
\par
1 Acaulescent with branched stock; standard more than 21 mm
\par
2 Racemes with 4-10 flowers; pedicels 3-6 mm ........................ {\b 46. pubiflorus} 
\par
2 Racemes with 10-30 flowers; pedicels c. 2·5 mm .................... {\b 47. tanaiticus}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 45. A. dasyanthus} Pallas,{\i   Reise}{\b  3}: 749 (1776). Stems (3-) 20-45 cm, ascending or erect. Leaflets 11-20 pairs. Peduncles 10-20 cm; racemes dense, with 10-30 flowers; bracts equalling calyx; pedicels c. 1 mm. Standard 17-21 mm. Legume c. 20 mm. •{\i    S.E. Europe, extending northwards to Hungary and to} c. 53° N.{\i   in C. Russia.} Bu ?Cz Hu Ju Rm Rs (C, W, E).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 46. A. pubiflorus} DC., {\i  Astrag.} 216 (1802) ({\i  A. exscapus} auct. ross., non L.). Acaulescent, with branched stock. Leaflets 8-14 pairs. Peduncles c. 1 cm; racemes dense, with 4-10 flowers; bracts equalling calyx; pedicels 3-6 mm. Standard 23-30 mm. Legume c. 15 mm. •{\i    Ukraine and adjacent regions of S.C. Russia; outlying stations in E. Romania and Bulgaria.} Bu Rm Rs (W, K, E).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 47. A. tanaiticus} C. Koch,{\i   Linnaea}{\b  24}: 94 (1851). Acaulescent, with branched stock. Leaflets 12-18 pairs. Peduncles 5-10 cm; racemes lax, with 10-30 flowers; bracts 2/3 as long as calyx; pedicels c. 2·5 mm. Standard 23-30 mm. Legume c. 15 mm.•{\i     S. & E. Ukraine and S. Russia.} Rs (W, E).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b 48-53}). {\b A. exscapus} group. Acaulescent or almost so, with branched stock. Leaves 7-30 cm; leaflets 6-30 pairs, narrowly oblong to orbicular-ovate; stipules 10-20 mm, ovate- to linear-lanceolate. Peduncles up to 1/2 as long as leaves, or racemes subsessile; pedicels 3-7 mm; bracts 2/3 as long as or equalling calyx. Calyx-teeth 1/3-2/3 as long as tube. Corolla yellow; standard glabrous. Legume trigonous, semi-bilocular.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Standard 30-35 mm; calyx 15-20 mm ................................. {\b 48. longipetalus}
\par
1 Standard less than 30 mm; calyx not more than 15 mm
\par
2 Leaflets ovate to ovate-elliptical
\par
3 Legume 15-25 mm, densely villous .......................................... {\b 49. exscapus}
\par
3 Legume c. 30 mm, sparsely hairy or glabrous ............................... {\b 50. huetii}
\par
2 Leaflets oblong-ovate or narrower
\par
4 Legume glabrous ..................................................................... {\b 53. wolgensis}
\par
4 Legume hairy
\par
5 Leaflets 10-15 pairs; legume c. 15 mm wide, ovoid .................... {\b 51. utriger}
\par
5 Leaflets 15-30 pairs; legume 5-10 mm wide, oblong-ovoid .... {\b 52. henningii}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 48. A. longipetalus} Chater,{\i   Feddes Repert. }{\b 79}: 48 (1968) ({\i  A. longiflorus} Pallas pro parte). Leaflets 8-16 pairs, 5-20 × 3-8 mm, ovate or orbicular-ovate, hairy beneath, glabrous above. Peduncles 2-15 cm; racemes with 6-10 flowers. Calyx 15-20 mm; tube glabrous, rarely sparsely hairy; teeth often hairy. Standard 30-35 mm; wings 25-30 mm; keel 20-25 mm. Legume 20-25 × 15 mm, oblong to broadly ovoid, glabrous; beak short, abrupt.{\i   S.E. Russia and W. Kazakhstan.} Rs (E).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 49. A. exscapus} L.,{\i   Mantissa Alt.} 275 (1771). Acaulescent, with branched stock or rarely with short, poorly developed stems. Leaflets 12-19 pairs, 10-25 × 5-10 mm, elliptic-ovate, sparsely or densely hairy on both surfaces. Peduncles very short, rarely up to ½ as long as leaves; racemes with 3-10 flowers. Calyx 12-15 mm, densely hairy. Standard 20-30 mm; wings 15-20 mm; keel 12-15 mm. Legume 15-25 × 7-10 mm, oblong, densely villous; beak very short. {\i  C. Europe, extending to S. Alps; S.E. Spain; Albania; Bulgaria and N.E. Greece.} Al Au Bu Cz Ge Gr He Hs Hu It Rm.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   {\b A. ictericus} Dingler,{\i   Flora }({\i  Regensb.}){\b  64}: 381 (1881), and {\b A. maroniensis} Dingler, {\i  op. cit.} 382 (1881), both described from N.E. Greece, are perhaps variants of {\b 49}, but more information is required; the type specimens have been destroyed.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 50. A. huetii} Bunge,{\i   Astrag. Geront.}{\b  1}: 37 (1868). Leaflets 6-13 pairs, 8-20 × 3·5-10 mm, ovate, subglabrous beneath, glabrous above. Peduncles very short or up to 5 cm. Calyx 11-15 mm, sparsely hairy. Standard 20-30 mm; wings 17-22 mm; keel 15-18 mm. Legume c. 30 × 10 mm, oblong, acuminate, glabrous or sparsely hairy; beak long. •{\i    Sicilia.} Si.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 51. A. utriger} Pallas,{\i   Spec. Astrag.} 75 (1800). Leaflets 10-15 pairs, 5-20 × 4-10 mm, ovate- to lanceolate-oblong, sparsely hairy beneath, glabrous above. Peduncles 1-5 cm; racemes with 3-7 flowers. Calyx 12-15 mm, densely hairy. Standard 20-25 mm; wings 17-20 mm; keel 13-17 mm. Legume 15-30 × 15 mm, ovoid, acuminate, densely villous.{\i   Krym.} Rs (K). ({\i  N. W. Caucasus.})
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 52. A. henningii} (Steven) Boriss. in Komarov, {\i  Fl. URSS}{\b  12}: 199 (1946). Leaflets 15-30 pairs, 8-20 × 1·5-6 mm, linear-lanceolate to oblong, hairy on both surfaces or glabrous above. Peduncles 1-5(-15) cm; racemes with 2-7 flowers. Calyx 10-15 mm, densely hairy. Standard 18-23 mm; wings 15-19 mm; keel 13-18 mm. Legume 15-30 × 5-10 mm, oblong-ovoid, acuminate, sparsely hairy. •{\i   S.E. Russia and S. Ukraine.} Rs (W, E).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 53. A. wolgensis} Bunge, {\i  Astrag. Geront.}{\b  1}: 36 (1868). Leaflets 10-20 pairs, 5-15 × 3-7 mm, lanceolate- to ovate-oblong, subglabrous or sparsely hairy on both surfaces. Peduncles up to 15 cm; racemes with 3-7 flowers. Calyx 10-15 mm, sparsely hairy. Standard 20-25 mm; wings 17-22 mm;  keel 15-20 mm. Legume 15-25 × 7-15 mm, ovoid or oblong-ovoid, acute, glabrous; beak short.{\i   E.C. & S.C. Russia.} Rs (C, E).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    ({\b 54-57}). {\b A. nummularius} group.  Acaulescent, with branched stock. Leaves 3-25 cm; leaflets 8-12 pairs, ovate-elliptical to suborbicular; stipules 7-20 mm, lanceolate. Peduncles up to 5 cm; racemes with 3-10 flowers; pedicels 3-7 mm; bracts 1/2-2/3 as long as tube. Calyx villous, the teeth 1/3 as long as or up to slightly longer than tube. Corolla yellow; standard glabrous or sparsely hairy. Legume laterally compressed or trigonous, semi-bilocular.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Calyx-teeth shorter than tube
\par
2 Legume keeled on back; leaflets truncate or emarginate ... {\b 54. nummularius}
\par
2 Legume grooved on back; leaflets obtuse ............................... {\b 55. hellenicus}
\par
1 Calyx-teeth as long as or longer than tube
\par
3 Leaves 10-25 cm; standard 20-23 mm .................................... {\b 56. anatolicus}
\par
3 Leaves 3-6 cm; standard c. 15 mm ..................................... {\b 57. tremolsianus}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 54. A. nummularius} Lam.,{\i   Encycl. Méth. Bot.}{\b  1}: 317 (1783). Leaves 5-10 cm; leaflets 4-12 × 3-8 mm, ovate or suborbicular,
\par

\par
116}
\par