{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 62 Standard more than 20 mm; legume glabrous or tomentose
\par
63 Leaflets ovate or cordate-orbicular; legume tomentose ............ {\b 58. graecus}
\par
63 Leaflets linear-lanceolate; legume glabrous .......................... {\b 59. drupaceus}
\par
58 Standard less than 17 mm
\par
64 Legume ovoid-globose; upper stipules connate ............................ {\b 25. cicer}
\par
64 Legume not ovoid-globose; upper stipules free 
\par
65 Legume less than 18 mm  ................................................. {\b 34. galegiformis} 
\par
65 Legume more than 18 mm
\par
66 Leaflets less than 7 mm wide; legume usually more than
\par
   10 mm wide ....................................................................... {\b 36. penduliflorus}
\par
66 Leaflets at least 7 mm wide; legume usually less than 10 mm wide
\par
67 Legume slightly inflated; calyx-teeth c. 0·5 mm, broadly 
\par
   triangular .................................................................................... {\b 35. frigidus}
\par
67 Legume not inflated; calyx-teeth more than 1 mm, linear
\par
68 Stipules 15-20 mm; calyx 5-6 mm, glabrous or with hairs only 
\par
   on teeth ............................................................................... {\b 43. glycyphyllos}
\par
68 Stipules 10-15 mm; calyx 6-8 mm, densely hairy ....... {\b 44. glycyphylloides}
\par
57 Corolla not uniformly yellow, but violet or purple at least in 
\par
   part (rarely white)
\par
69 Stipules connate around the stem for at least 1/3 of their length
\par
70 Standard not or scarcely exceeding calyx; leaflets densely 
\par
   hairy above ............................................................................... {\b 31. setosulus}
\par
70 Standard distinctly exceeding calyx; leaflets sparsely hairy or 
\par
   glabrous above 
\par
71 Standard 9-12 mm
\par
72 Legume more than 9 mm, at least twice as long as calyx . {\b 29. bourgaeanus}
\par
72 Legume less than 9 mm, scarcely longer than calyx .................... {\b 26. glaux}
\par
71 Standard more than 12 mm
\par
73 Stems caespitose, woody at base; calyx 12-13 mm .......... {\b 32. austraegaeus}
\par
73 Stems ascending, not woody at base; calyx 6-10 mm
\par
74 Legume 7-8 mm; upper stipules 2·5-5 mm ............................... {\b 27. danicus}
\par
74 Legume 10-15 mm; upper stipules 5-10 mm
\par
75 Keel mucronate at apex .............................................. {\b 30. pseudopurpureus}
\par
75 Keel not mucronate at apex ................................................... {\b 28. purpureus}
\par
69 Stipules free from each other (rarely connate around stem for 
\par
   less than 1/3 of their length)
\par
76 Standard 20-35 mm;legume 50-70 mm .............................. {\b 42. lusitanicus}
\par
76 Standard less than 20 mm; legume less than 50 mm 
\par
77 Young legume glabrous ........................................................... {\b 41. australis} 
\par
77 Young legume hairy
\par
78 Calyx 7-9 mm; standard 16-18 mm .................................... {\b 37. umbellatus}
\par
78 Calyx less than 7 mm; standard less than 16 mm
\par
79 Internodes shorter than stipules ............................................ {\b 39. depressus}
\par
79 Internodes longer than stipules
\par
80 Leaflets usually 6-7 pairs; calyx-teeth triangular, obtuse .....{\b 40. norvegicus}
\par
80 Leaflets usually 7-12 pairs; calyx-teeth lanceolate, ± acute ...... {\b 38. alpinus}
\par
40 Most hairs on leaves and stems medifixed (sometimes with one 
\par
   arm very short) or forked from the base 
\par
81 Hairs on leaves flexuous and erecto-patent
\par
82 Calyx-teeth as long as or longer than tube
\par
83 Calyx more than 9 mm; standard more than 15 mm
\par
84 Leaflets 4-7 pairs; bracts c. 12 mm .......................................... {\b 104. lacteus}
\par
84 Leaflets 8-20 pairs; bracts c. 5 mm ............................. {\b 103. dolichophyllus}
\par
83 Calyx less than 9 mm; standard less than 15 mm
\par
85 Legume included in calyx; corolla red ...................................... {\b 99. autranii}
\par
85 Legume exserted from calyx; corolla yellowish, tinged with 
\par
   blue ......................................................................................... {\b 100. agraniotii}
\par
82 Calyx-teeth much shorter than tube
\par
86 Calyx less than 10 mm; standard c. 15 mm ................................ {\b 98. idaeus}
\par
86 Calyx at least 10 mm; standard at least 18 mm
\par
87 Legume less than 6 mm wide, oblong or linear, peduncles 
\par
   usually equalling leaves
\par
88 Leaflets less than 7 pairs ........................................................ {\b 101. arcuatus}
\par
88 Leaflets more than 7 pairs .................................................... {\b 102. reduncus}
\par
87 Legume more than 6 mm wide, ovoid; racemes usually sessile
\par
89 Surface of leaves hidden by dense, erecto-patent hairs
\par
90 Standard constricted in middle ......................................... {\b 107. testiculatus}
\par
90 Standard not constricted in middle ..................................... {\b 108. rupifragus}
\par
89 Surface of leaves not hidden by indumentum, which consists of 
\par
   ± parallel hairs
\par
91 Legume glabrous; calyx-teeth c. ½ as long as tube ........ {\b 106. wilmottianus}
\par
91 Legume densely hairy; calyx-teeth c. ¼ as long as tube ......... {\b 105. baldaccii}
\par
81 Hairs on leaves ± straight, appressed
\par
92 Flowers pendent at anthesis
\par
93 Leaflets 15-20 pairs; stems 40-80 cm ....................................... {\b 83. falcatus}
\par
93 Leaflets 6-14 pairs; stems up to 30 cm
\par
94 Stipules free from each other;  
\par
   calyx-teeth 2/3 as long as tube ................................................ {\b 39. depressus}
\par
94 Stipules connate around stem; calyx-teeth less than ½ as long tube 
\par
95 Legume 4-5 mm wide, semi-lunate .................................... {\b 82. algarbiensis}
\par
95 Legume 2-3 mm wide, oblong-lanceolate ............................... {\b 81. odoratus} 
\par
92 Flowers patent to erect
\par
96 Acaulescent or almost so, with branched stock, the racemes 
\par
   arising from a rosette of leaves
\par
97 Calyx-teeth as long as or longer than tube
\par
98 Legume included in calyx; corolla red ..................................... {\b 99. autranii}
\par
98 Legume exserted from calyx; corolla yellowish, tinged with 
\par
   blue ......................................................................................... {\b 100. agraniotii}
\par
97 Calyx-teeth much shorter than tube
\par
99 Racemes sessile
\par
100 Legume glabrous; calyx-teeth c. ½ as long as tube ...... {\b 106. wilmottianus}
\par
100 Legume densely hairy; calyx-teeth c. ¼ as long as tube ..... {\b 105. baldaccii}
\par
99 Racemes distinctly pedunculate
\par
101 Corolla yellow, sometimes tinged with violet
\par
102 Leaves not more than 3 cm; calyx c. 7 mm ............................... {\b 98. idaeus}
\par
102 Most leaves more than 3 cm; calyx at least 8 mm
\par
103 Most leaflets more than 3 mm wide; standard at least 20 mm .. {\b 97. helmii}
\par
103 Leaflets 1·5-3 mm wide; standard 16-19 mm ........................... {\b 133. fialae}
\par
101 Corolla white, purplish, violet or reddish, but never yellow
\par
104 Legume globose, strongly inflated and membranous ......... {\b 109. physodes}
\par
104 Legume not inflated and membranous
\par
105 Most leaves with at least 10 pairs of leaflets ........... {\b 110. monspessulanus}
\par
105 Most leaves with less than 10 pairs of leaflets 
\par
106 Leaves 2-3 cm; stipules 1-2 mm .................................. {\b 113. sericophyllus} 
\par
106 Leaves more than 3 cm; stipules more than 2 mm
\par
107 Standard 13-18 mm; legume 8-10 × 3-4 mm ....................... {\b 95. leontinus}
\par
107 Standard 19 mm or more; legume 10-25 × 4-8 mm
\par
108 Calyx 12-13 mm .................................................................. {\b 111. spruneri}
\par
108 Calyx 7-11 mm ..................................................................... {\b 112. incanus}
\par
96  Caulescent, with leaves separated by well-developed internodes
\par
109 Stipules connate around the stem for at least part of their length 
\par
110 Ovary and legume glabrous; leaflets orbicular to ovate, very 
\par
    remote ......................................................................................... {\b 96. amarus}
\par
110 Ovary and legume (at least when young) hairy; leaflets not as above 
\par

\par
110}
\par