{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28     {\b 25. A. cicer} L., {\i  Sp. Pl. }757 (1753). Stems (5-)25 60(-100) cm, robust, ascending or suberect. Leaves (6-)9-13 cm; leaflets (8-)10-15 pairs, lanceolate to ovate-lanceolate, with appressed, short, often sparse hairs on both surfaces, rarely subglabrous above. Peduncles 1/2-2/3 as long as leaves. Calyx 7-10 mm, the teeth almost ½ as long as tube. Corolla yellow; standard 14-16 mm. Legume 10-15 mm, ovoid-globose, inflated, membranous, with short, black and white hairs.{\i   From Belgium and N.C. Russia southwards to N. Spain, Bulgaria and Krym; occasionally naturalized further north.} Au Be Bu Cz Ga Ge He Hs Hu It Ju Po Rm Rs (B, C, W, K, E).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 26. A. glaux} L.,{\i   Sp. Pl.} 759 (1753) (incl.{\i   A. granatensis} Lange, non Lam.). Stems 5-30 cm, robust, ascending. Leaves 3-5 cm; leaflets 12-15 pairs, linear- to obovate-oblong, hairy beneath, glabrous or subglabrous above. Peduncles ½ as long as or up to a little longer than leaves, sparsely to densely hairy with appressed or patent hairs; racemes globose, with many flowers. Calyx c. 5 mm, the teeth as long as tube. Corolla purplish; standard 10-12 mm. Legume 5-8 mm, ovoid-trigonous, sulcate beneath, hard, white-villous; beak short, hooked.{\i   Dry pastures. S.W. Europe.} Ga Hs Lu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 27. A. danicus} Retz., {\i  Obs. Bot.}{\b  3}: 41 (1783) ({\i  A. hypoglottis} auct., ?non L.). Stems 8-30 cm, slender, ascending. Leaves 4-10 cm; leaflets 6-13 pairs, oblong-ovate or oblong, obtuse or emarginate, sparsely hairy on both surfaces; upper stipules 2·5-5 mm. Peduncles 1½-2 times as long as leaves; racemes globose to ovoid-oblong, with many flowers. Calyx 6-8 mm, the teeth 2/5-1/2 as long as tube. Corolla purplish or bluish-violet; standard 15-18 mm. Legume 7-8 × 5 mm, ovoid, inflated, white-villous. 2n = 16.{\i   From Ireland and subarctic Russia southwards to the S.W. Alps, Austria and C. Ukraine; rather local.} Au Br Cz Da Ga Ge Hb It Po Rs (N, B, C, W, E) Su.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 28. A. purpureus} Lam.,{\i   Encycl. Méth. Bot.}{\b  1}: 314 (1783) (incl. {\i  A. gremlii }Burnat). Stems 10-40 cm, slender, ascending, sometimes with some hairs medifixed. Leaves 4-8 cm; leaflets 7-15 pairs, elliptic-oblong, emarginate, hairy beneath, subglabrous above; upper stipules 5-10 mm. Peduncles 1-2 times as long as leaves; racemes globose, with many flowers. Calyx 8-10 mm, the teeth  2/3 as long as tube. Corolla purplish, rarely whitish; standard c. 18 mm, deeply emarginate. Legume 10-15 mm, ovoid, inflated, white-villous.{\i   S. & W. Europe, from W. France and E. Spain to the west part of the Balkan peninsula; mainly in mountains.} Al Ga Hs It Ju.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 29. A. bourgaeanus} Cosson, {\i  Not. Pl. Crit.} 160 (1852). Like {\b 28} but caespitose, stems 5(-15) cm; peduncles up to 1 cm, much shorter than leaves; calyx c. 4 mm; standard 9-10 mm, scarcely emarginate; legume 10-12 mm, cylindric-ovate, subtrigonous, with more closely appressed hairs. •{\i    E. Spain.} Hs.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 30. A. pseudopurpureus} Gusuleac, {\i  Bul. Fac. Sti. Cernauti}{\b  6}: 291 (1933). Like {\b 28} but corolla bluish-violet; standard weakly emarginate; keel mucronate at apex on adaxial side.{\i   Limestone rocks. •  E. Carpathians} ({\i  near Targu Mures and Bacau}). Rm.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 31. A. setosulus} Gontsch., {\i  Not. Syst.} ({\i  Leningrad}) {\b 10}: 33 (1947). Stems 3-10 cm, suberect. Leaves 2·5-4 cm; leaflets 6-8 pairs, lanceolate or oblanceolate, subobtuse, densely hairy on both surfaces. Peduncles ½ as long as to equalling leaves; racemes ovoid, with many flowers. Calyx 12-16 mm, the teeth 1½-2 times as long as tube. Corolla purplish; standard 14-16 mm, obtuse. Legume 9-10 mm, oblong, with dense, ascending hairs. •{\i    Krym }({\i  mountains above Alusta}). Rs (K).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 32. A. austraegaeus} Rech. fil., {\i  Phyton }({\i  Austria}) {\b 1}: 202 (1949) ({\i  A. tauricola} auct., non Boiss.). Acaulescent, with branched stock, or stems up to 5 cm. Leaves 4-12 cm; leaflets 12-16 pairs, oblong-ovate, acute, densely hairy beneath with appressed or ascending hairs, sparsely so above. Peduncles 1-1½ times as long as leaves; racemes oblong. Calyx 12-13 mm, the teeth c. ¾ as long as tube. Corolla yellowish, violet at apex; standard 15-22 mm, attenuate and emarginate at apex. Legume 8-10 mm, ovoid-trigonous, with dense, semi-appressed, white hairs; beak curved.{\i   S. Aegean region} ({\i  Karpathos, Kasos}). Cr. ({\i  Rodhos}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 33. A. turolensis} Pau, {\i  Not. Bot. Fl. Esp. }{\b 1}: 20 (1887) ({\i  A. aragonensis} Freyn). Acaulescent, with branched stock, or stems up to 20 cm. Leaves 4-8 cm; leaflets 12-17 pairs, elliptic-oblong, obtuse, densely hairy beneath with ascending hairs, sparsely hairy above. Peduncles ½-1½ times as long as leaves; racemes ovate-oblong. Calyx 12-13 mm, the teeth 2/3 as long as tube. Corolla yellow; standard 18-20 mm, slightly attenuate and emarginate. Legume c. 10 mm, ovoid-trigonous, brown-lanate.{\i   E. Spain} ({\i  Prov. Teruel and Cuenca}). Hs. ({\i  N. Africa}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Subgen. {\b Phaca} (L.) Bunge. Perennials, usually sparsely hairy or subglabrous; hairs simple, white, usually appressed. Leaves imparipinnate; stipules usually free from each other, but sometimes partly adnate to petiole. Flowers pedicellate, usually more or less pendent at anthesis. Calyx campanulate, not inflated in fruit, the mouth oblique.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 34. A. galegiformis} L., {\i  Sp. Pl.} 756 (1753). Stems 40-100 cm, stout, erect. Leaves 10-20 cm; leaflets 11-16 pairs, elliptic- or lanceolate-oblong, obtuse or acute, sparsely hairy beneath, glabrous above; stipules 7-10 mm. Peduncles ½ as long as leaves; racemes 10-20 cm. Calyx 5-6 mm, the teeth 1/3 as long as tube. Corolla yellow; standard 14-15 mm, weakly emarginate. Legume 10-16 mm, linear-lanceolate, slightly curved, triangular in transverse section, glabrous, stipitate.{\i   W. Ukraine; Romania.} Rm Rs (W). ({\i  Caucasus.})
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 35. A. frigidus} (L.) A. Gray,{\i   Proc. Amer. Acad. Arts Sci.}{\b  6}: 219 (1864) ({\i  Phaca frigida} L.). Stems 10-35 cm, stout, erect, usually unbranched, glabrous. Leaves 5-15 cm; leaflets 3-8 pairs, 7-15 mm wide, ovate or broadly elliptical, glabrous above; stipules 10-20 × 5-10 mm. Peduncles 1-1½ times as long as leaves; racemes 2-5 cm, with 5-20 flowers. Calyx 5-6 mm, the teeth c. 1/10 as long as tube, broadly triangular. Corolla yellowish-white; standard 12-14 mm, emarginate; wings and keel both 11-13 mm. Legume 20-30 × 6 mm, ellipsoid, flattened above, slightly inflated beneath, densely black- or white-hairy at first but glabrescent.{\i   N. Europe; mountains of C. Europe.} Au Cz Fa Ga Ge He It No Po Rm Rs (N) Su.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b frigidus}: Stems 10-35 cm; leaflets 4-8 pairs, sparsely hairy or glabrous beneath; calyx often reddish, sparsely white-hairy on tube, densely black-hairy on teeth. 2n = 16. {\i  Throughout the range of the species}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b grigorjewii} (B. Fedtsch.) Chater,{\i   Feddes Repert.}{\b  79}: 47 (1968) ({\i  A. grigorjewii} B. Fedtsch.): Stems 10-15 cm; leaflets 3-4 pairs, sparsely or densely hairy beneath; calyx green, sparsely white-hairy on tube, densely white-hairy on teeth. •{\i    N. Russia} ({\i  Poluostrov Kanin}).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 36. A. penduliflorus} Lam., {\i  Fl. Fr.}{\b  2}: 636 (1778) ({\i  Phaca alpina} L. pro parte). Stems 20-50 cm, stout, erect, usually branched, hairy at least below. Leaves 5-10 cm; leaflets 7-15 pairs, 3-6 mm wide, elliptical to oblong-lanceolate, sparsely hairy on both surfaces or glabrous above; stipules 7-10 × 3 mm. Peduncles 1-1½ times as long as leaves; racemes 2-4 cm, with 5-20 flowers. Calyx 5-7 mm, the teeth 1/5-1/3 as long as tube, triangular-lanceolate or
\par

\par
114}
\par