{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 only from the original gatherings on Sardegna and satisfactory material has not been traced. The specimens named{\i   A. verrucosus} that have been seen are all referable to {\b 2} or {\b 13}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 14. A. sinaicus} Boiss.,{\i   Diagn. Pl. Or. Nov.}{\b  2}({\b 9}): 57 (1849). Stems up to 10 cm, procumbent or ascending. Leaves 3-8 cm; leaflets 7-10 pairs, oblong or elliptical, obtuse, rarely emarginate, densely hairy on both surfaces. Peduncles very short; racemes dense, with 4-6 flowers. Calyx 4-6 mm, the teeth 2/3 as long to as long as tube. Corolla violet, rarely pale yellow; standard 7-8 mm. Legumes 8-15 × 2·5-4 mm, stellately patent, lanceolate-oblong, almost straight, laterally compressed, but slightly dorsiventrally compressed at base; beak straight or curved; valves not keeled, densely hairy with both short, appressed hairs and long, patent or ascending hairs.{\i   Greece and Aegean region; S. Jugoslavia; Krym.} Cr Gr Ju Rs (K).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 15. A. tribuloides} Delile,{\i   Descr. Égypte, Hist. Nat. }{\b 2}: 70 (1813). Like {\b 14} but stems up to 20 cm; leaflets 5-10 pairs; peduncles 0·1-0·3(-1) cm; corolla whitish or violet-tinged; legume 5-10 × 2-4 mm, more strongly dorsiventrally compressed at base; valves with only short, appressed hairs.{\i   S.E. Russia} ({\i  near Astrakhan}). Rs (E). ({\i  W. & C. Asia; India; Egypt}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 16. A. polyactinus} Boiss.,{\i   Fl. Or.}{\b  2}: 226 (1872) ({\i  A. cruciatus} auct. hisp., non Link). Stems 2-12 cm, procumbent or ascending. Leaves 2·5-4 cm; leaflets 6-11 pairs, linear to linear-elliptical, densely hairy beneath, sparsely so above. Peduncles (0·2-)1-2 cm, the lower up to half as long as leaves, the upper much shorter; racemes dense, with 6-14 flowers. Calyx 3·5-5 mm, the teeth 2/3 as long as tube. Corolla yellow; standard 5-6 mm. Legumes 10-12 × 3-4 mm, stellately patent even when mature, linear-lanceolate, slightly curved, laterally compressed, expanded and somewhat dorsiventrally flattened at base; beak straight or curved; valves densely hairy with both short, appressed and long, ascending hairs.{\i   S.E. & E. Spain}. Hs. ({\i  N.W. Africa}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 17. A. stella} Gouan, {\i  Obs. Bot. }50 (1773). Stems up to 20 cm, procumbent or ascending. Leaves 2-8 cm; leaflets 9-11 pairs, oblong to obovate, obtuse or emarginate, sparsely or densely hairy on both surfaces. Peduncles ½ as long as to slightly longer than leaves; racemes dense, with 7-12 flowers. Calyx 5-6 mm, the teeth slightly shorter than tube. Corolla yellowish; standard 9-11 mm. Legumes (7-)10-15 × 3-4 mm,erect or suberect, lanceolate, almost straight, laterally compressed, scarcely dorsi-ventrally compressed at base; beak c. 2 mm, curved; valves densely hairy with appressed or ascending hairs.{\i   W. Mediterranean region; one station in S. Portugal; twice recorded from Greece}. Ga Gr Hs Lu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 18. A. sesameus} L.,{\i   Sp. Pl.} 759 (1753). Like {\b 17} but stems up to 30 cm, more robust; leaflets usually only sparsely hairy; racemes subsessile, with 5-10 flowers; calyx-teeth as long as tube; standard 8-9 mm, sometimes bluish; legumes strictly erect, with less dense, appressed hairs.{\i   C. & W. Mediterranean region, extending to S. Portugal and S. Bulgaria.} Bu Ga Gr Hs It Ju Lu Sa Si.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 19. A. oxyglottis} Steven ex Bieb.,{\i   Fl. Taur.-Cauc. }{\b 2}: 192 (1808). Stems up to 15 cm, procumbent or ascending. Leaves 2-7 cm; leaflets 5-8 pairs, cuneate, emarginate, sparsely hairy beneath, usually glabrous above. Peduncles shorter than leaves, sometimes only 0·2 cm; racemes dense, with 4-8 flowers. Calyx c. 2·5 mm, the teeth ½ as long as tube. Corolla pink; standard 5-8 mm. Legumes 10-15 × 3 mm, stellately patent, linear-lanceolate and acute, not expanded or flattened at base, quadrangular in section with the sides concave; valves sharply keeled, faintly reticulate or almost smooth, glabrous or with appressed hairs.{\i   S.E. Russia; Krym}. Rs (K, E). ({\i  S.W. & C. Asia}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 20. A. echinatus} Murray, {\i  Prodr. Stirp. Gotting.} 222 (1770) ({\i  A. pentaglottis }L.). Stems up to 60 cm, ascending. Leaves 4-8 cm; leaflets 6-9 pairs, obovate or oblong, emarginate or truncate, sparsely (rarely densely) hairy beneath, subglabrous or glabrous above. Peduncles equalling or exceeding leaves; racemes very dense, with 10-15 flowers. Calyx 6-7 mm, the teeth as long as tube. Corolla purplish; standard c. 9 mm. Legume 12-15 × 6 mm, ovate, laterally compressed; beak usually hooked; valves not keeled, covered with contorted lamellae and hairs.{\i   Mediterranean region, S. Portugal.} Cr Ga Gr Hs It Lu Si.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Subgen. {\b Epiglottis} (Bunge) Willk. Annuals; hairs medifixed, straight, appressed, with one arm much shorter than the other. Leaves imparipinnate.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 21. A. epiglottis} L., {\i  Sp. Pl.} 759 (1753). Stems 5-25(-50) cm, ascending. Leaves 2-4 cm; leaflets 5-10 pairs, hairy on both surfaces. Racemes dense, with 7-12 flowers. Calyx 2·5-3 mm. Corolla yellow; standard 3 mm; stamens 5. Legume 7-9 mm, triangular-ovate, dorsiventrally flattened and broadly cordate at base, laterally compressed near apex, densely hairy.{\i   Mediterranean region, C. & S. Portugal.} Cr Gr Hs It Lu Sa Si [†Ga].
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b epiglottis}: Leaflets 5-7(-9) pairs, narrowly elliptic-ovate. Peduncles less than 1 cm, shorter than leaves and shorter than the globose infructescence.{\i   Throughout the range of the species}. 
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b asperulus} (Dufour) Nyman, {\i  Consp. }196 (1878) ({\i  A. asperulus} Dufour): Leaflets up to 10 pairs, narrowly elliptical. Peduncles equalling leaves and at least twice as long as the oblong infructescence.{\i   S. Spain}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 22. A. edulis} Durieu ex Bunge,{\i   Astrag. Geront.}{\b  1}: 9 (1868). Stems up to 40 cm, ascending or erect. Leaves 5-8 cm; leaflets 6-8 pairs, elliptical, obtuse, hairy beneath, glabrous or subglabrous above. Peduncles equalling leaves; racemes lax, with 5-10 flowers. Calyx 4-5 mm. Corolla usually yellow; standard c. 9 mm; stamens 10. Legume 15-20 × 5-7 mm, oblong, triangular in transverse section with convex sides and concave base; valves very sharply keeled, strongly reticulately veined, subglabrous. {\i  S.E. Spain} ({\i  near Almeria}). Hs. ({\i  N.W. Africa}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 23. A. cymbicarpos} Brot.,{\i   Phyt. Lusit.} 63 (1800). Stems up to 25 cm, procumbent. Leaves 5-10 cm; leaflets 7-10 pairs, cuneate or oblong-obovate, emarginate, hairy beneath, glabrous above. Peduncles absent or up to as long as leaves; racemes lax, with 2-5 flowers. Calyx c. 5 mm. Corolla white; standard c. 7 mm; stamens 10. Legume 10-20 × 5-7 mm, elliptical, slightly curved, inflated; beak long, curved; valves not keeled, rugose, with short appressed hairs. {\i  Damp sandy pastures. Portugal; C. Spain.} Hs Lu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 24. A. hamosus} L., {\i  Sp. Pl}. 758 (1753). Stems up to 60 cm, leaves 5-10(-15) cm; leaflets 9-11 pairs, oblong-obovate, emarginate or truncate, hairy beneath, glabrous or subglabrous above. Peduncles ½ as long as leaves; racemes fairly dense, with 5-14 flowers. Calyx 5-6 mm. Corolla yellow; standard 7-8 mm; stamens 10. Legume 20-50 × 2-3 mm, linear, acuminate at apex, curved for about a semicircle, laterally compressed; beak short; valves not keeled, almost smooth, with short appressed hairs.{\i   S. Europe}. Al Bl Bu Co Cr Ga Gr Hs It Ju Lu Rm Rs (K, E) Sa Si Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Subgen. {\b Hypoglottis} Bunge. Perennials; hairs simple (rarely a few hairs medifixed.) Leaves imparipinnate; stipules connate for 1/3-1/2 of their length, forming a sheath round the stem opposite the petiole. Flowers subsessile, in dense heads. Calyx not inflated in fruit, the mouth not oblique.
\par

\par
113}
\par