{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 transverse section, grooved beneath; beak hooked; valves keeled, with short, appressed hairs.{\i   Sandy places. Mediterranean region, S. Portugal.} Bl Co Cr Ga Gr Hs It Ju Lu Sa Si.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 3. A. striatellus} Pallas ex Bieb.,{\i   Fl. Taur.-Cauc.}{\b  2}: 189 (1808). Stems up to 20 cm, ascending. Leaves 3-7 cm; leaflets 6-8 pairs, oblong-cuneate, truncate or emarginate, glabrous. Peduncles ½ as long to as long as leaves; racemes lax, with 2-5 flowers. Calyx 3·5-4 mm, the teeth almost as long as tube. Corolla whitish; standard 7-11 mm, purple-striped; keel longer than wings. Legume 15-30 × 5 mm, oblong-lanceolate, curved to as much as a semicircle, ovate-triangular in transverse section, grooved beneath; beak straight; valves sharply keeled, glabrous.{\i   Krym, and adjacent coast of Ukraine.} Rs (W, K). ({\i  W. Asia.})
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 4. A. arpilobus} Kar. & Kir.,{\i   Bull. Soc. Nat. Moscou }{\b 15}: 336 (1842). Stems up to 15 cm, procumbent. Leaves 2-7 cm; leaflets 1-3(-4) pairs, suborbicular to oblong, emarginate, hairy on both surfaces. Peduncles absent or up to almost twice as long as leaves; racemes lax, with 2-5(-8) flowers. Calyx 2·5-3·4 mm, the teeth 2/3 as long as tube. Corolla usually whitish; standard c. 7 mm, often violet; wings equalling keel. Legume 15-25 × 3 mm, linear, curved to as much as a semicircle, oblong in transverse section, grooved beneath; beak incurved; valves very obtusely keeled, almost smooth, with short, dense, appressed hairs.{\i   S.E. Russia} ({\i  Oz. Baskuncak}). Rs (E). ({\i  W.C. Asia.})
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 5. A. reticulatus} Bieb.,{\i   Fl. Taur.-Cauc. }{\b 3}: 491 (1819). Stems up to 10(-20) cm, ascending or erect. Leaves 3-7 cm; leaflets 5-7 pairs, cuneate, emarginate, sparsely hairy or subglabrous beneath, glabrous above. Peduncles ½ as long as leaves; racemes dense, with 3-5 flowers. Calyx 2-3 mm, the teeth almost as long or as long as tube. Corolla whitish; standard 5-6 mm; wings longer than keel. Legume 10-20 × 2-3 mm, linear-subulate, slightly curved, quadrangular in transverse section, slightly grooved beneath; beak straight; valves distinctly but obtusely keeled, with very strong, raised, reticulate venation, glabrous.{\i   S.E. Russia} ({\i  Krasnoarmejsk, near Volgograd}). Rs (E). ({\i  N. Kazakhstan.})
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 6. A. ankylotus} Fischer & C. A. Meyer,{\i   Ind. Sem. Horti Petrop.}{\b  2} ({\i  Animadv}.): 27 (1835). Acaulescent, or stems up to 1(-5) cm. Leaves 3-8 cm; leaflets 5-7 pairs, narrowly oblong, obtuse, rarely truncate, hairy on both surfaces. Peduncles ½ as long as or longer than leaves; racemes fairly dense, with 3-6 flowers. Calyx c. 6 mm, the teeth 1/3 as long as tube. Corolla whitish; standard c. 9 mm, with an abrupt, long, acute point; wings longer than keel. Legume 20-30 × 3-4 mm, linear, slightly curved, cordate in transverse section; beak 3-4 mm, hooked; valves not keeled, faintly reticulately veined, with short appressed and longer ascending hairs.{\i   S.E. Russia, W. Kazakhstan}. Rs (E).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 7. A. stalinskyi} Sirj.,{\i   Feddes Repert.}{\b  53}: 75 (1944) ({\i  A. brachymorphus} Nikif.). Like {\b 6} but stems often up to 5(-20) cm, procumbent; leaflets subacute to emarginate; racemes sometimes subsessile; calyx-teeth 2/3 as long as tube; standard lingulate, obtuse or emarginate; legume 15-25 × 3-4 mm; beak 2-3 mm.{\i   Lower Volga.} Rs (E). ({\i  W.C. Asia}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 8. A. scorpioides} Pourret ex Willd., {\i  Sp. Pl.} 3: 1280 (1802). Stems 5-30 cm, ascending or erect. Leaves 3-8 cm; leaflets 7-8 pairs, oblong or ovate-oblong, emarginate or truncate, sparsely hairy on both surfaces or glabrous above. Peduncles up to 0·3 cm; flowers solitary or 2-3 together. Calyx 6-7 mm, the teeth 1/2-2/3 as long as tube. Corolla bluish or yellowish; standard 9-11 mm; wings longer than keel. Legume 30-50 × 2·5-4 mm, linear, curved slightly or to as much as a semicircle, cordate in transverse section; beak 1-2 mm, hooked; valves not keeled, slightly rugose, with short appressed hairs.{\i   Corse; S.C. Spain. }Co Hs †It.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 9. A. longidentatus} Chater,{\i   Feddes Repert.}{\b  79}: 47 (1968) ({\i  A. mauritanicus} Cosson, non Steven). Stems up to 30 cm, ascending. Leaves 5-10 cm; leaflets (4-)6-8 pairs, oblong-obovate, truncate or emarginate, sparsely hairy beneath, glabrous above. Peduncles slightly shorter than leaves; racemes with 5-12 flowers. Calyx 5-6·5 mm, the teeth as long as or longer than tube. Corolla pink or pale purple; standard 12-14 mm; wings longer than keel. Legume 25-35 × 5 mm, linear-oblong and acute, slightly curved, narrowly cordate in section; valves not keeled, densely hairy with long, patent hairs.{\i   S.E. Spain }({\i  Sierra Alhamilla}). Hs. ({\i  N.W. Africa.})
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 10. A. peregrinus} Vahl,{\i   Symb. Bot. }{\b 1}: 57 (1790). Stems up to 50 cm, robust, procumbent. Leaves 3-10 cm; leaflets 8-10 pairs, oblong or obovate, emarginate or truncate, hairy beneath, usually glabrous above. Peduncles equalling or slightly shorter than leaves; racemes lax, with 3-5 flowers. Calyx 8-9 mm, the teeth 2/3-3/4 as long as tube. Corolla white; standard 15-18 mm; wings longer than keel. Legume 40-60 × 7 mm, linear-lanceolate, straight or scarcely curved, circular in transverse section, grooved beneath; beak straight; valves not keeled, rugose-tuberculate, with sparse, appressed hairs.{\i   Kriti} ({\i  Koufonisi}). Cr. ({\i  N. Africa}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 11. A. pamphylicus} Boiss., {\i  Fl. Or.}{\b  2}: 239 (1872). Stems 5-20 cm, procumbent or ascending. Leaves 2-8 cm; leaflets 8-12 pairs, oblong-cuneate, obtuse to emarginate, hairy beneath, glabrous above. Peduncles almost as long as leaves; racemes dense, with 2-6 flowers. Calyx 8-9 mm, the teeth ½ as long as tube. Standard c. 18 mm. Legume 20-30 × 5-6 mm, oblong-linear, slightly curved, circular in transverse section, deeply grooved beneath; beak short; valves not keeled, weakly tuberculate-reticulate, sparsely hairy.{\i   S. Greece} ({\i  E. Peloponnisos}). Gr. ({\i  S. Anatolia}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 12. A. haarbachii} Spruner ex Boiss., {\i  Diagn. Pl. Or. Nov.}{\b  1} ({\b 2}): 50 (1843). Annual to perennial; stems 5-50 cm, robust, procumbent or ascending. Leaves 4-10 cm; leaflets 8-12 pairs, oblong to obovate, emarginate, hairy beneath, subglabrous above. Peduncles equalling or longer than leaves; racemes dense, with 7-18 flowers. Calyx 10-13 mm, the teeth 2/3 as long as tube. Corolla yellowish; standard 20-25 mm, lanceolate, acuminate. Legume 25-30 × 10-15 mm, ovate-oblong, straight, dorsiventrally compressed, with a deep, rounded groove beneath; beak short, straight; valves not keeled, weakly rugose-tuberculate, sparsely to densely lanate.{\i   E Bulgaria and N.E. Greece; Kriti.} Bu Cr Gr.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 13. A. suberosus} Banks & Solander in A. Russell,{\i   Nat. Hist. Aleppo} ed. 2, {\b 2}: 260 (1794). Like {\b 12} but leaflets usually truncate; legume 20-25 × 8 mm, obovate, slightly curved, with a shallow, angled groove beneath; beak long, hooked; valves strongly tuberculate.{\i   Sardegna.} Sa. ({\i  S.W. Asia.})
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  A. verrucosus Moris,{\i   Stirp. Sard. }{\b 1}: 12 (1827), is like {\b 12} but has the legume 20-25 mm, with a shallow groove beneath, and the valves strongly tuberculate; it differs from {\b 13} chiefly in the wider, more abruptly beaked legume and the membranous stipules connate for more than ½ their length (not foliaceous and connate only at the base as in {\b 13}).{\b  A. maritimus} Moris,{\i   Fl. Sard.}{\b  1}: 523 (1837), is like {\b 12} but has the legume c. 12 mm, slightly curved, and more strongly tuberculate; it differs from {\b 13} chiefly in the stouter stems and smaller legumes. Both seem to be known
\par

\par
112}
\par