{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 truncate or emarginate, lanate on both surfaces. Racemes subsessile. Calyx 9-10(-13) mm, the teeth 1/3-1/2 as long as tube. Standard 15-22 mm, glabrous or sparsely hairy; wings 10-18 mm; keel 7-15 mm. Legume 12-20 mm, oblong-ovate, laterally compressed, keeled on back, sparsely hairy. •{\i    E. Kriti.} Cr.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 55. A. hellenicus} Boiss.,{\i   Fl. Or.}{\b  2}: 292 (1872). Leaves 5-10 cm; leaflets 7-20 × 5-15 mm, ovate to ovate-elliptical, obtuse, densely sericeous on both surfaces. Peduncles very short. Calyx 10-15 mm, the teeth 1/3-1/2 as long as tube. Standard 20-27 mm, glabrous; wings 15-20 mm; keel 10-17 mm. Legume 15-22 mm, ovate, compressed-trigonous, with a dorsal groove, densely hairy.{\i   S. Greece.} Gr. ({\i  Anatolia.})
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 56. A. anatolicus} Boiss., {\i  Diagn. Pl. Or. Nov.}{\b  1}({\b 2}): 77 (1843). Leaves 10-25 cm; leaflets 10-30 × 7-15 mm, ovate, obtuse, sparsely hairy or subglabrous on both surfaces. Peduncles 1-4 cm. Calyx 10-12 mm, the teeth as long as or slightly longer than tube. Standard 20-23 mm, glabrous; wings 15-18 mm; keel 13-16 mm. Legume 20-25 mm, oblong-ovoid, trigonous, without a dorsal groove, sparsely hairy.{\i   Turkey-in-Europe} ({\i  Gelibolu peninsula}). Tu. ({\i  W. Anatolia.})
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 57. A. tremolsianus} Pau, {\i  Mem. Mus. Ci. Nat. Barcelona} ({\i  Bot}.) {\b 1}({\b 3}): 17 (1925). Leaves 3-6 cm; leaflets 5-10 × 2-8 mm, oblong to suborbicular, obtuse, glabrous above, sparsely hairy beneath. Peduncles very short. Calyx c. 10 mm, the teeth slightly longer than tube. Standard c. 15 mm, glabrous. Legume c. 10 mm, oblong-ovoid, trigonous, densely hairy. •{\i   S.E. Spain} ({\i  Sierra de Gador, near Almeria}). Hs.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 58. A. graecus} Boiss. & Spruner in Boiss.,{\i   Diagn. Pl. Or. Nov.}{\b  1}({\b 2}): 57 (1843). Stems 30-40 cm, stout, erect, with patent hairs. Leaves 15-30 cm; leaflets 20-35 pairs, 5-15 × 5-10 mm, ovate or cordate-orbicular, lanate beneath, glabrous above; stipules 15-30 mm, linear-lanceolate. Peduncles up to 2 cm; racemes confined to middle part of stem, with 5-10 flowers. Calyx 13-20 mm, lanate, the teeth c. ½ as long as tube. Corolla yellow; standard 30-40 mm, glabrous. Legume 25-30 mm, oblong-ovate, slightly laterally compressed, tomentose. •{\i   C. & S. Greece.} Gr.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 59. A. drupaceus} Orph. ex Boiss.,{\i   Diagn. Pl. Or. Nov.}{\b  3}({\b 2}): 32 (1856). Like {\b 58} but smaller in all its parts; leaves 8-17 cm; leaflets 8-25 pairs, 5-15 × 2-5 mm, linear-lanceolate; stipules 10-15 mm; peduncles very short; racemes with 3-5 flowers; calyx 11-15 mm, the teeth almost as long as tube; standard 20-30 mm; legume 10-17 mm, glabrous.•{\i    S. Greece} ({\i  Peloponnisos}). Gr.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Subgen.{\b  Tragacantha }Bunge. Perennials, woody at the base; hairs simple. Leaves paripinnate, the rhachis ending in a sharp spine; stipules adnate to petiole for at least ½ their length, but free from each other. Flowers in dense, sessile racemes in the axils of leaves, partly concealed by the stipules, usually confined to the middle of the stem. Calyx not inflated in fruit, hidden by its dense, villous indumentum, the teeth splitting to the base in fruit. Legume c. 5 mm, ovoid-ellipsoid, villous.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 60. A. creticus} Lam., {\i  Encycl. Méth. Bot. }{\b 1}: 321 (1783). Forming large,  hemispherical tussocks. Leaves 2-5 cm; leaflets (5-)6-7 pairs, 5-12 × 0·5-2 mm, linear-lanceolate; stipules glabrous. Flowers in pairs in axils of leaves; bracts navicular, lanceolate; bracteoles absent. Calyx 6-10 mm, the teeth slightly shorter than or almost as long as tube. Standard 10-15 mm, the limb oblong, sometimes slightly constricted in the middle, with rounded auricles at base.{\i   Mountains of S. part of Balkan peninsula; Kriti}. Al Cr ?Ju Gr.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b creticus}: Leaflets densely hairy on both surfaces, the upper most pair much shorter than the terminal spine of the leaf. Corolla yellowish; standard 10-12 mm; wings 8-11 mm; keel 7-11 mm.{\i   Kriti}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b rumelicus} (Bunge) Maire & Petitmengin, {\i  Mat. Étude Fl. Géogr. Bot. Or.}{\b  2}: 15 (1907): Leaflets sparsely hairy or glabrescent, the uppermost pair longer than the terminal spine of the leaf. Corolla pinkish-lilac, rarely yellowish. Standard 13-15 mm; wings 12-13 mm; keel 10-12 mm. •{\i    Balkan peninsula.}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 61. A. granatensis} Lam., {\i  Encycl. Méth. Bot.}{\b  1}: 321 (1783). Forming large, hemispherical tussocks. Leaves 2-4 cm; leaflets 4-9 pairs, 5-10 × 0·5-2 mm, linear-lanceolate; stipules glabrous or tomentose in the centre. Flowers 4-7, in axils of leaves; bracts navicular, linear-lanceolate; bracteoles shorter than calyx, linear oblanceolate, and much less hairy than calyx, or absent. Calyx 5-9 mm, the teeth slightly shorter than tube. Standard 12-15 mm, the limb oblong, with acute auricles at base.{\i   Sicilia; C. & S. Spain.} Hs Si.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b granatensis} ({\i  A. siculus} subsp.{\i   plumosus} Arcangeli;{\i   A. boissieri} Fischer): Leaflets densely grey-tomentose on both surfaces. Calyx-teeth linear-lanceolate, more or less abruptly aristate at apex. Corolla whitish-yellow, the standard with pinkish veins.{\i   N. Sicilia} ({\i  Nebrodi});{\i   C. & S. Spain}. 
\par

\pard\f0\fs28 ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b siculus} (Biv.) Franco & P. Silva, {\i  Feddes Repert.}{\b  79}: 49 (1968) ({\i  A. siculus} Biv.): Leaflets glabrescent, or appressed-hairy at maturity. Calyx-teeth linear-subulate, gradually narrowed to apex. Corolla pinkish, the standard with darker veins. •{\i    Sicilia} ({\i  Etna}).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 62. A. arnacantha} Bieb.,{\i   Fl. Taur.-Cauc.}{\b  2}: 205 (1808). Like {\b 61} ({\b a}) but leaflets 4-5(-6) pairs; flowers in pairs in axils of leaves; corolla whitish-yellow or pink; standard 14-18 mm, the limb with rounded auricles at base. •{\i    Krym; E. Bulgaria.} Bu Rs (K)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 63. A. parnassi} Boiss., {\i  Diagn. Pl. Or. Nov.}{\b  2}({\b 9}): 80 (1849). Forming large hemispherical tussocks. Leaves 1·5-7 cm; leaflets 5-8(-15) pairs, 5-10 × 1-3 mm, linear-lanceolate to elliptical stipules glabrous or subglabrous. Bracts linear-oblanceolate, bracteoles almost as long as calyx, linear-subulate, villous like the calyx. Calyx 10-12 mm, the teeth about as long as the tube. Corolla purplish or pink, rarely yellowish; standard with ovate limb. {\i  S. part of Balkan peninsula; Calabria.} Al Gr It Ju Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Leaflets moderately hairy on both surfaces, the terminal pair 
\par
  shorter than terminal spine of leaf .............................. ({\b c}) subsp. {\b cylleneus} 
\par
1 Leaflets sparsely hairy beneath, glabrous above, the terminal 
\par
  pair longer than terminal spine of leaf
\par
2 Standard 14-17 mm ..................................................... ({\b a}) subsp. {\b parnassi}
\par
2 Standard 18-24 mm ..................................................... ({\b b}) subsp. {\b calabrus}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b parnassi}: Leaflets sparsely hairy beneath, glabrous above, the terminal pair longer than the terminal spine of the leaf. Racemes with 3-4 flowers. Standard 14-17 mm, with acute aurides at base. •{\i   From N.W. Macedonia and Thrace to S.C. Greece}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28    ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b calabrus} (Fiori) Chater,{\i   Feddes Repert.}{\b  79}: 49 1968) ({\i  A. calabrus} Fiori): Like subsp. ({\b a}) but racemes with up to 6 flowers; standard 18-24 mm. •{\i   Calabria}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28    ({\b c}) Subsp. {\b cylleneus} (Boiss. & Heldr. ex Fischer) Hayek, {\i  Prodr. Fl. Penins. Balcan. }{\b 1}: 781 (1926): Leaflets moderately hairy on both surfaces, the terminal pair usually slightly shorter than the terminal spine of the leaf. Standard 14-20 mm, with subacute or obtuse auricles at base. •{\i   S. Greece }({\i  mountains of N. Peloponnisos}).
\par

\par
117}
\par