{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 bracteoles absent. Calyx 7-15 mm, villous, slightly inflated in fruit, the teeth as long as tube. Corolla white to purple, rarely yellow; standard longer than wings. Legume ovoid, densely hairy.{\i   Mountains of S. Europe, extending northwards to C. Switzerland}. Ga Gr He Hs It.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Standard c. 1½ times as long as calyx
\par
2 Not caespitose; standard 16-20 mm ................ ({\b a}) subspec. {\b sempervirens}
\par
2 Caespitose; standard 10-12 mm ...................... ({\b b}) subspec. {\b cephalonicus}
\par
1 Standard equalling calyx
\par
3 Corolla pale purplish or yellow; bracts with weak lateral veins
\par
  ....................................................................................... ({\b c}) subsp. {\b muticus}
\par
3 Corolla purple; bracts without lateral veins ............ ({\b d}) subsp. {\b nevadensis}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b sempervirens} ({\i  A. aristatus} L'Hér.): Not caespitose. Leaflets 6-10 pairs, sparsely to densely hairy beneath, sparsely hairy or subglabrous above. Bracts ovate-lanceolate, with prominent, branched or anastomosing lateral veins. Corolla whitish to pale purplish; standard c. 1½ times as long as calyx. •{\i   From the Alps and Appennini to N.E. Spain; ?C. part of Balkan peninsula.} 

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b cephalonicus} (C. Presl) Ascherson & Graebner,{\i   Syn. Mitteleur. Fl. }{\b 6}({\b 2}): 779 (1909): More or less caespitose. Leaflets 6-7 pairs, usually densely hairy on both surfaces. Bracts ovate-lanceolate, with prominent, anastomosing lateral veins. Corolla whitish, rarely pale purplish; standard c. 1½ times as long as calyx. {\i  Greece}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b c}) Subsp. {\b muticus} (Pau) Rivas Goday & Borja, {\i  Anal. Inst. Bot. Cavanilles}{\b  19}: 406 (1961): Caespitose. Leaflets 6-7 pairs, usually obtuse, densely appressed-hairy on both surfaces. Bracts lanceolate, with weak lateral veins. Corolla pale purplish or yellow; standard about equalling calyx. •{\i   E.C. Spain.} 
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b d}) Subsp. {\b nevadensis} (Boiss.) P. Monts.,{\i   Collect. Bot.} ({\i  Barcelona}) {\b 2}: 266 (1949): Caespitose. Leaflets 6-7 pairs, acute, densely appressed-hairy on both surfaces. Bracts linear-lanceolate, with a single, central vein. Corolla purple; standard about equalling calyx. •{\i   S. Spain}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 76. A. giennensis} Heywood,{\i   Feddes Repert.}{\b  79}: 50 (1968). Like {\b 75}(d) but more robust, with stronger spines; leaflets 6-9 pairs, less densely hairy; peduncles c. 1 cm; bracts lanceolate or linear-lanceolate, with 1-2 distinct lateral veins; calyx-teeth about twice as long as tube; corolla pale purplish. •{\i   S.E. Spain }({\i  Prov. Jaen}). Hs.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Subgen. {\b Cercidothrix} Bunge. Perennials, sometimes suffruticose; hairs usually medifixed. Leaves imparipinnate; rhachis sometimes spine-like and then terminal leaflet caducous; stipules free, adnate to the petiole, or connate to each other around the stem. Flowers erecto-patent to erect, or pendent, usually subsessile. Calyx tubular, not inflated in fruit.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 77. A. angustifolius} Lam., {\i  Encycl. Méth. Bot.}{\b  1}: 321 (1783). Caespitose, forming dense tussocks, spiny; stems 5-20 cm, woody at base. Leaves 2·5-6 cm, the spine-like rhachis slender, leaflets 6-10 pairs, 2-7 × 0·75-2 mm, narrowly elliptical to linear, acute or subobtuse, usually densely appressed-hairy on both surfaces; stipules glabrous or hairy. Peduncles very short or up to slightly longer than leaves; racemes ovoid, with 3-12 flowers; bracts 4-8 mm, linear-lanceolate. Calyx 5-9 mm, appressed-hairy, the teeth ¼-½ as long as tube. Corolla white; standard 13-23 mm; wings 10-20 mm; keel 8-15 mm, sometimes purplish. Legume 10-15 mm, exceeding calyx, oblong-lanceolate, triquetrous, with short, dense, appressed hairs. •{\i   Mountain rocks. Balkan peninsula, Thasos, Kriti}. Al Bu Cr Gr Ju.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Two subspecies may be recognized. There is also clinal variation in certain characters, particularly in the length of the calyx teeth, which decreases towards the south.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b angustifolius}: Leaves 2·5-4 cm, the rhachis not strongly pungent. Peduncles equalling or shorter than leaves; racemes with 3-8 flowers.{\i   Throughout the range of the species}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b pungens} (Willd.) Hayek,{\i   Prodr. Fl. Penins. Balcan.}{\b  1}: 790 (1926): Leaves 4-6 cm, the rhachis strongly pungent. Peduncles longer than leaves; racemes with 6-12 flowers.{\i   N. Greece}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 78. A. balearicus} Chater,  {\i  Feddes Repert.}{\b  79}: 51 (1968) ({\i  A. poterium }auct., non Vahl). Like {\b 77} but smaller in all its parts; leaves 1-3 cm; leaflets 3-5 pairs, usually sparsely hairy on both surfaces; stipules glabrous; bracts 1-4 mm; racemes with 1-5 flowers; calyx 4-5 mm; standard 11-12 mm; legume 7-9 mm, lanceolate, with sparse, appressed hairs. •{\i    Islas Baleares}. Bl.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 79. A. massiliensis} (Miller) Lam., {\i  Encycl.Méth.Bot.}{\b 1}: 320 (1783)  ({\i  A. tragacantha} L. pro parte) . Usually laxly caespitose and not forming dense tussocks, spiny; stems 10-30 cm, woody at base. Leaves 2-7 cm, the spine-like rhachis stout; leaflets 6-12 pairs, 4-6 × 1·5-2·5 mm, oblong or elliptical, obtuse or truncate and mucronate, densely hairy beneath, densely or sparsely so above; stipules densely appressed-hairy. Peduncles up to 3 cm; racemes with 3-8 flowers; bracts 3-4 mm, ovate-lanceolate. Calyx 5-7 mm, appressed-hairy, the teeth 1/5-1/4 as long as tube. Corolla white; standard 13-17 mm; wings 11-15 mm; keel 9-13 mm. Legume 9-10 mm, oblong, acute, with short, dense, more or less appressed hairs; beak absent or less than 2 mm. •{\i    S.W. Europe.} Co Ga Hs ?It Lu Sa ?Si.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 80. A. sirinicus} Ten., {\i  Fl. Neap. Prodr. App. Quinta} 23 (1826). Like {\b 79} but more densely caespitose; leaflets often subacute; stipules glabrous; racemes with up to 15 flowers; bracts 5-8 mm; calyx 6-10 mm, patent-hairy, with teeth up to ½ as long as tube; corolla yellowish, tinged with violet; standard 14-19 mm; legume 10-13 mm, with dense erecto-patent hairs or glabrescent; beak up to 3 mm. •{\i    C. Mediterranean region and C. & S.W. part of Balkan peninsula}. Al Co Ga Gr It Ju Sa.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b sirinicus} (incl. {\i  A. angustifolius} subsp.{\i   tymphresteus} (Boiss. & Spruner) Hayek): Leaflets obtuse to subacute. Racemes with 8-15 flowers; peduncles 1-3 cm, c. ½ as long as leaves; bracts 6-8 mm. Calyx-teeth c. ½ as long as tube. Standard 14-17 mm. Legume with dense erecto-patent hairs persistent to maturity; beak 2-3 mm.{\i   Appennini, Balkan peninsula.}

\pard\f0\fs28  Often confused with {\b 77}({\b a}) in the Balkan peninsula; they can best be distinguished by the pubescence on the legume and calyx. 
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b genargenteus} (Moris) Arcangeli, {\i  Comp. Fl. Ital. }187 (1882): Leaflets obtuse, mucronate. Peduncles very short; racemes with 3-5 flowers; bracts c. 5 mm. Calyx teeth 1/4-1/3 as long as tube. Standard 17-19 mm. Legume glabrescent; beak less than 2 mm.{\i   Corse, Sardegna}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 81. A. odoratus} Lam.,{\i   Encycl. Méth. Bot. }{\b 1}: 311 (1783). Stems up to 30 cm, ascending or erect. Leaves 4-12 cm; leaflets 9-14 pairs, 10-17 mm, lanceolate to elliptic-oblong, obtuse or acute, slightly hairy beneath, glabrous above; stipules connate. Peduncles about equalling leaves; racemes dense; flowers pendent. Calyx 4-5 mm, the teeth c. ¼ as long as tube. Corolla whitish or yellow; standard 9-12 mm. Legume 8-10 × 2-3 mm, oblong-lanceolate, laterally compressed, smooth, with sparse appressed hairs, glabrescent. {\i   N.E. Greece and S.E. Jugoslavia.} Gr Ju. ({\i  S.W. Asia.})
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Occasionally recorded elsewhere as a casual, and perhaps naturalized in C. Italy.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 82. A. algarbiensis} Cosson ex Bunge,{\i   Astrag. Geront. }{\b 1}: 9 (1868). Like {\b 81} but leaflets oblong-cuneate, truncate or emargin-
\par

\par
119}
\par