{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 dentate or serrate. Peduncles shorter than or equalling leaves, (1-)2- to 5-flowered. Calyx strongly gibbous at base, the teeth distinctly unequal; corolla 25-28 mm, white with violet spot on standard. Legume c. 25 × c. 12 mm. Seeds 3-4.{\i   S. Albania; S.E. Bulgaria and Turkey-in-Europe.} Al Bu Tu. ({\i  Anatolia}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 4. C. graecum} Orph. ex Boiss.,{\i   Diagn. Pl. Or. Nov. }{\b 3}({\b 2}): 43 (1856). Erect, pubescent perennial 20-50 cm. Lower leaves imparipinnate, upper leaves paripinnate, terminated by a tendril; leaflets 3-8 pairs, 8-18 × 4-10 mm, oblong, elliptical or obovate, deeply toothed. Peduncles slightly shorter than leaves, 1- to 4-flowered. Calyx strongly gibbous at base, the teeth subequal, longer than tube; corolla 20-22 mm, white. Legume 20-30 × 7-9 mm. •{\i   S. Greece.} Gr.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc {\b 49.                    Vicia}                   L.
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc By P.W.Ball.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Annual or perennial herbs, often climbing by means of tendrils. Leaves paripinnate, usually with a tendril, very rarely imparipinnate; stipules usually small, herbaceous. Flowers solitary, axillary or in axillary fascicles or racemes. Calyx actinomorphic to bilabiate; keel obtuse; stamens diadelphous; style pubescent all round or on the lower side, or glabrous. Legume more or less oblong, compressed, dehiscent. Seeds usually 2 or more.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Several species in this genus are important fodder plants. The most frequently utilized are {\b 21}, {\b 27}, {\b 28}, {\b 45}, {\b 46}, {\b 54} and {\b 55}, but many other species are cultivated locally, especially in S. Europe.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b V. dennesiana} H. C. Watson in Godman, {\i  Nat. Hist. Açores }155 (1870), was a pubescent perennial with 8-12 pairs of leaflets, 10- to 25-flowered, pedunculate racemes, brown corolla (purple in bud) c. 25 mm, standard shorter than wings and keel (the wings recurved at the apex), glabrous legume c. 50 × 10 mm and the hilum comprising c. 1/3 of the circumference of the seed. It was found only once, on damp earthy cliffs on Açores (São Miguel), and is known to have become extinct soon after its discovery, though it persisted in cultivation for some years.{\i   Vide} J. D. Hooker,{\i   Bot. Mag.}{\b  113}: t. 6967 (1887).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Inflorescence sessile or with the peduncle shorter than flowers
\par
2 Standard pubescent on the back
\par
3 Calyx-teeth subequal; corolla 14-22 mm ................................ {\b 45. pannonica}
\par
3 Calyx-teeth unequal; corolla 18-30 mm ...................................... {\b 52. hybrida}
\par
2 Standard glabrous on the back
\par
4 All leaves without a tendril, the rhachis terminated by a short mucro
\par
5 Corolla white with black wings, rarely purple; legume 80 mm or 
\par
  more, pubescent ................................................................................. {\b 55. faba}
\par
5 Corolla yellow; legume not more than 50 mm, glabrous
\par
6 Leaflets 1-4 pairs, at least 15 mm wide ................................... {\b 39. oroboides}
\par
6 Leaflets 7-13 pairs, not more than 10 mm wide ..................... {\b 40. truncatula}
\par
4 At least the upper leaves with a tendril
\par
7 Mouth of the calyx-tube oblique or the calyx-teeth unequal,
\par
  the lowest tooth much longer than the upper teeth
\par
8 Standard yellow sometimes suffused with purple; wings yellow 
\par
  sometimes with black tip
\par
9 Legume glabrous except for the pubescent margin; wings
\par
  greenish-yellow with black tip; keel purple .............................. {\b 50. melanops}
\par
9 Legume densely hairy, rarely completely glabrous; wings and 
\par
  keel yellow sometimes with a purple tinge ....................................... {\b 51. lutea}
\par
8 Standard and wings purple
\par
10 Leaflets not more than 3 mm wide, linear, usually with 3 acute 
\par
   points at the apex ...................................................................... {\b 49. peregrina}
\par
10 Leaflets at least 4 mm wide, ovate, elliptical or lanceolate, 
\par
   obtuse or emarginate, mucronate
\par
11 Perennial; leaflets 3-9 pairs; legume 5-8 mm wide, glabrous .... {\b 42. sepium}
\par
11 Annual; leaflets 1-3 pairs; legume 10-15 mm wide, pubescent 
\par
   on the margin ........................................................................ {\b 54. narbonensis}
\par
7 Mouth of the calyx-tube not oblique, the calyx-teeth equal or 
\par
  subequal
\par
12 Standard and keel yellow sometimes tinged with purple
\par
13 Corolla 23-35 mm; wings yellow sometimes with black tip; 
\par
   legume pubescent ................................................................... {\b 43. grandiflora}
\par
13 Corolla 18-22 mm; wings blue; legume glandular ................ {\b 44. barbazitae} 
\par
12 Corolla purple sometimes with whitish wings and keel, never 
\par
   yellowish
\par
14 Corolla not more than 10 mm; seeds tuberculate
\par
15 Legume 15-30 × 3-4 mm, with a short curved beak; leaflets of 
\par
   upper leaves shortly mucronate ............................................. {\b 47. lathyroides}
\par
15 Legume 30-40 × 4-5 mm, with a long straight beak; leaflets of 
\par
   upper leaves long-mucronate .................................................... {\b 48. cuspidata}
\par
14 Corolla usually more than 10 mm; seeds smooth
\par
16 Leaflets 1-3 pairs; wings and keel whitish .............................. {\b 53. bithynica}
\par
16 Leaflets of the upper leaves 3-many pairs; wings and keel purple
\par
17 Perennial; upper leaves usually with a simple tendril; hilum 
\par
   1/5-1/4 of the circumference of the seed .................................. {\b 41. pyrenaica}
\par
17 Annual; upper leaves with a branched tendril; hilum 1/6-1/5 of 
\par
   the circumference of the seed ......................................................... {\b 46. sativa}
\par
1  Inflorescence pedunculate, the peduncle much longer than the flowers
\par
18 Each pair of stipules dimorphic, one linear, the other palmatifid,  
\par
   with subulate segments ............................................................. {\b 27. articulata}
\par
18 Stipules of each pair ± identical
\par
19 Calyx-teeth equal, all equalling or longer than tube
\par
20 Leaves without tendril; legume torulose ..................................... {\b 28. ervilia}
\par
20 At least the upper leaves with a tendril; legume not torulose
\par
21 Calyx-teeth about twice as long as tube; legume long-stipitate
\par
   .................................................................................................... {\b 30. vicioides}
\par
21 Calyx-teeth not more than 1½ times as long as tube; legume 
\par
   not or only shortly stipitate
\par
22 Corolla 6-10 mm; seeds 3-6
\par
23 Perennial; leaflets 3-6 pairs; stipules entire ................................ {\b 23. glauca}
\par
23 Annual; leaflets 5-10 pairs; stipules dentate .......................... {\b 29. leucantha}
\par
22 Corolla 2-4(-5) mm; seeds usually 2
\par
24 Lower stipules linear-lanceolate, usually dentate; legume 
\par
   usually pubescent ......................................................................... {\b 31. hirsuta}
\par
24 Lower stipules linear-setaceous, entire; legume glabrous
\par
   ....................................................................................................... {\b 32. meyeri}
\par
19 Calyx-teeth unequal, at least the upper shorter than tube
\par
25 All leaves without a tendril
\par
26 Corolla purple, blue or white
\par
27 Leaflets 1-3 pairs ............................................................................ {\b 9. sicula}
\par
27 Leaflets 6 or more pairs
\par
28 Villous-sericeous; corolla 18-25 mm; legume villous ............... {\b 7. argentea}
\par
28 Glabrous or pubescent; corolla 12-15(-20) mm; legume glabrous
\par
29 Leaflets entire, mucronate ............................................................ {\b 1. orobus}
\par
29 Leaflets minutely denticulate, obtuse ................................ {\b 2. montenegrina}
\par
26 Corolla yellow, sometimes with reddish or purplish tinge
\par
30 Leaflets 1-4 pairs, 15-45 mm wide ........................................ {\b 39. oroboides}
\par
30 Leaflets 6 or more pairs, not more than 10 mm wide
\par
31 Racemes 20- to 30-flowered; corolla 7-13 mm; plant glabrous
\par
   ................................................................................................... {\b 5. ochroleuca}
\par
31 Racemes not more than 20-flowered; corolla 12-25 mm; plant 
\par
   sparsely pubescent
\par
32 Leaflets obtuse, mucronate; racemes 3- to 8-flowered .......... {\b 40. truncatula}
\par
32 Leaflets acute; racemes 6- to 20-flowered
\par
33 Lower calyx-teeth shorter than tube; legume glabrous .......... {\b 3. sparsiflora}
\par
33 Lower calyx-teeth about equalling tube; legume sparsely
\par 
   pubescent  ................................................................................. {\b 4. pinetorum}
\par

\par
129}
\par