{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28\qc {\b  44.                  Apios}                   Fabr.
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc By P.W. Ball.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Twining perennial herbs with tuberous roots. Leaves imparipinnate; leaflets 3-9, stipellate; stipules small. Flowers in axillary racemes. Calyx campanulate, bilabiate; corolla purple, the keel coiled or strongly recurved; stamens diadelphous; style glabrous; stigma terminal. Legume linear, compressed, dehiscent. Seeds numerous.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. A. americana} Medicus, {\i  Vorl. Churpf. Phys.-Ökon. Ges.}{\b  2}: 355 (1787) ({\i  A. tuberosa} Moench). Stem 30-120 cm, glabrous or pubescent. Leaflets 3-10 cm, ovate or ovate-lanceolate. Racemes usually with more than 20 flowers. Calyx 3-5 mm; corolla 10-12 mm, brownish-purple or pale purple. Legume 6-12 cm. Seeds c. 6 mm, dark brown. {\i  Cultivated locally in S. Europe for its edible tubers and sometimes elsewhere as a curiosity or for ornament, and occasionally naturalized}. [Ga Ge It.] ({\i  C., S. & E. North America}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc {\b  45.                  Phaseolus}               L.
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc By P.W. Ball.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Annual or perennial, usually climbing herbs. Leaves 3-foliolate; stipels present; stipules small. Flowers in axillary racemes. Calyx campanulate, bilabiate; corolla variously coloured; keel with a spirally coiled beak; stamens diadelphous; style hairy on the inside; stigma oblique. Legume linear-oblong, dehiscent. Seeds usually numerous.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 Racemes shorter than leaves, with not more than 6 flowers ........... {\b 1. vulgaris}  
\par
Racemes longer than leaves, many-flowered ............................... {\b 2. coccineus}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. P. vulgaris} L.,{\i   Sp. Pl.} 723 (1753). Annual up to 4 m. Leaflets 5-10 × 4-6 cm, ovate or ovate-orbicular, acuminate. Racemes shorter than leaves, up to 6-flowered. Corolla 10-18 mm, white, pink or purple; beak of keel forming 2 turns of a spiral. Legume up to 50 × 2·5 cm, brown.{\i   Cultivated for the edible legume (French bean) and seeds throughout Europe; often occurring as a relict of cultivation.} ({\i  South America.})
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. P. coccineus} L., {\i  Sp. Pl.} 724 (1753). Like {\b 1} but perennial; racemes many-flowered, longer than leaves; corolla 15-30 mm, scarlet, sometimes with white wings and keel; beak of keel forming 1-1½ turns of a spiral.{\i   Cultivated for the edible legume} ({\i  Runner bean}){\i   and seeds, and for ornament, throughout Europe; often occurring as a relict of cultivation.} ({\i  Tropical America.})
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc {\b  46.                    Vigna}                 Savil
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc By P.W. Ball.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Like{\i   Phaseolus} but the keel with a recurved, not spirally coiled, beak.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. V. unguiculata} (L.) Walpers,{\i   Repert. Bot. Syst.}{\b  1}: 779 (1842) ({\i   V. sinensis }(L.) Savi ex Hassk.). Glabrous or subglabrous annual 30-200 cm, usually not twining. Leaflets 5-16 cm, ovate-lanceolate. Racemes 2- to 12-flowered. Calyx 7-8 mm; corolla 20-25 mm, white or pale yellow with pink base, or pink or pale red. Legume 15-30 × 0·5-1 cm, pendent. Seeds 10-15, 10-15 mm.{\i   Cultivated in S. Europe for the edible seed and for fodder.} ({\i  Tropical Africa}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b V. cylindrica} (L.) Skeels,{\i   U.S. Dept. Agric. Bur. Pl. Ind. Bull.}{\b  282}: 32 (1913), with the legume 6-15 cm, erect or ascending, and seeds c. 4 mm, is also cultivated in S.W. Europe for the edible seed.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc {\b 47.                   Glycine}               Willd.
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc By P.W. Ball.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Erect or twining herbs. Leaves 3-foliolate; stipels present; stipules small. Flowers in axillary racemes. Calyx campanulate or tubular-campanulate, somewhat bilabiate; corolla usually purple, not or only slightly exceeding calyx, the keel not coiled at apex; stamens diadelphous or monadelphous; style glabrous. Legume linear or oblong, constricted between the seeds and septate, dehiscent. Seeds 2-4.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Literature: F. J. Hermann, {\i  U.S. Dept. Agric. Techn. Bull. }{\b 1268}: 1-82 (1962).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. G. max} (L.) Merr., {\i  Interpr. Rumph. Herb. Amb.} 274 (1917) ({\i  G. hispida} (Moench) Maxim.). Erect annual 30-200 cm, hispid with reddish-brown hairs. Leaflets 3-15 cm, ovate-elliptical. Racemes 5- to 8-flowered. Calyx (4-)5-7 mm; corolla (4·5-)6-7 mm, violet, pink or white. Legume 25-80 × 8-15 mm, pendent. Seeds 2-4, 6-11 mm.{\i   Cultivated in S.E. Europe for the extraction of oil, for the edible seeds, and for fodder}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 The origin of this species (the soya-bean of commerce) is not known. It has possibly been derived from {\b G. soja} Siebold & Zucc.,{\i   Abh. Akad. Wiss.} ({\i  München}) {\b 4}({\b 2}): 119 (1846) ({\i  G. ussuriensis} Regel & Maack), a native of E. Asia.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc {\b 48.                 Cicer}                  L. 
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc By P.W. Ball.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Annual or perennial herbs with glandular hairs. Leaves usually imparipinnate, rarely paripinnate and terminated by a tendril; stipules herbaceous. Flowers solitary or in axillary racemes. Calyx gibbous at base, bilabiate, but sometimes the teeth subequal; corolla white or violet; stamens diadelphous; style glabrous. Legume ovate or oblong, dehiscent. Seeds 1-4.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Corolla 25-28 mm; calyx-teeth distinctly unequal ................... {\b 3. montbretii} 
\par
1 Corolla 10-22 mm; calyx-teeth subequal 
\par
2 Upper leaves terminated by a tendril; corolla 20-22 mm; calyx 
\par
  strongly gibbous at base ................................................................ {\b 4. graecum} 
\par
2 Upper leaves terminated by a leaflet; corolla 7-12 mm; calyx 
\par
  slightly gibbous at base 
\par
3 Peduncles shorter than leaves; corolla 10-12 mm; calyx-teeth at 
\par
  least twice as long as tube ........................................................... {\b 1. arietinum} 
\par
3 Peduncles at least twice as long as leaves; corolla 7-10 mm; 
\par
  calyx-teeth only slightly longer than tube ..................................... {\b 2. incisum}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. C. arietinum} L.,{\i   Sp. Pl.} 738 (1753). Erect, pubescent annual 20-50(-100) cm. Leaves imparipinnate; leaflets 3-8 pairs, 8-18 × 3-10 mm, ovate or elliptical, deeply toothed. Peduncles shorter than leaves, 1-flowered. Calyx slightly gibbous at base, the teeth subequal, at least twice as long as tube; corolla 10-12 mm, pale purple or white. Legume 20-30 × 10-15 mm. Seeds 1-2. {\i  Widely cultivated for the edible seed and persisting as an escape from cultivation in S. Europe.} [Ga It.] ( ? {\i  S.W. Asia}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. C. incisum} (Willd.) K. Malý in Ascherson & Graebner,{\i   Syn. Mitteleur. Fl.}{\b  6}({\b 2}): 900 (1909). Procumbent or ascending, sparsely pubescent perennial 10-30 cm. Leaves imparipinnate; leaflets 1-3 pairs, 2-10 × 1-5 mm, 3- to 5-fid. Peduncles at least twice as long as leaves, 1- to 2-flowered. Calyx slightly gibbous at base, the teeth subequal, slightly longer than the tube; corolla 7-10 mm, violet. Legume c. 10 mm. Seeds 1-2.{\i   Screes. S. Greece, Kriti.} Cr Gr. ({\i  S.W. Asia}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 3. C. montbretii} Jaub. & Spach, {\i  Ann. Sci. Nat.} ser. 2 ({\i  Bot}.), {\b 18}: 229 (1842). Erect, pubescent perennial 25-40 cm. Leaves imparipinnate; leaflets 6-8 pairs, 12-25 × 5-10 mm, oblong,
\par

\par
128}
\par