{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 flowers pendent after anthesis. Corolla violet-blue; standard 8-12 mm. Legume 8-15 mm, pendent, narrowly oblong, with short appressed hairs. 2n = 16.{\i   Mountains of Fennoscandia; Pyrenees; Alps; one station in E. Albania. }Al Au Fe Ga He It Ju No Su.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. O. deflexa} (Pallas) DC., {\i  Astrag.} 96 (1802). Like {\b 1} but leaflets 11-16 pairs; stipules free; racemes oblong; corolla whitish. 2n = 16. {\i  Arctic Norway }({\i  S.W. Finnmark}.). No.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  In Europe only as subsp.{\b  norvegica} Nordh.,{\i   Svensk Bot. Tidskr.}{\b  58}: 159 (1964). Subsp.{\b  deflexa}, from N. Asia, has 15-25 pairs of leaflets and bluish or purplish corolla.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 3. O. jacquinii} Bunge, {\i  Arb. Naturf.-Ver. Riga}{\b  1}: 226 (1847) ({\i  O. montana }subsp.{\i   jacquinii} (Bunge) Hayek,{\i   Astragalus montanus} L. pro parte). Stems 5-40 cm, stout. Leaflets 14-20 pairs, ovate-lanceolate to lanceolate, sparsely hairy; stipules connate at the base, and adnate to petiole for up to 1/3 of their length. Racemes subglobose, slightly elongating after flowering. Calyx-teeth c. 1/4 as long as tube. Corolla purplish-violet; standard 10-13 mm. Legume 20-30 × 8 mm, lanceolate-ovoid, acuminate, suberect, with hairs 0·35-0·65 mm; carpophore equalling or longer than calyx-tube. •{\i    Alps; French Jura.} Au Ga Ge He It.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 4. O. carpatica} Uechtr.,{\i   Österr. Bot. Zeitschr.}{\b  14}: 218 (1864). Acaulescent. Leaflets mostly more than 12 pairs, lanceolate, subglabrous; stipules free. Scapes 10-20 cm; racemes subglobose. Calyx-teeth 1/3-1/2 as long as tube. Corolla bright blue; standard 10-16 mm. Legume 20-25 × 8 mm, narrowly ovoid, with sparse hairs 0·2-0·25 mm; carpophore equalling or longer than calyx tube. •{\i    Carpathians. }Cz Po Rm Rs (W).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 5. O. gaudinii} Bunge, {\i  Arb. Naturf.-Ver. Riga}{\b  1}: 226 (1847) ({\i  Astragalus triflorus} var.{\i   gaudinii} (Bunge) Gams). Acaulescent with slender scape, grey-sericeous. Leaflets 10-12 pairs, lanceolate; stipules free from each other, but shortly adnate to petiole. Scapes 3-10 cm; racemes ovoid. Calyx-teeth c. ½ as long as tube. Corolla pale lilac-blue; standard 10-15 mm. Legume c. 25 × 5 mm, narrowly oblong, patent or pendant, hairy; carpophore c. ½ as long as calyx-tube. •{\i    S.W. & W.C. Alps}. Ga He It.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 6. O. amethystea} Arvet-Touvet, {\i  Ess. Pl. Dauph.} 24 (1871) ({\i  Astragalus montanus} L. pro parte). Acaulescent with stout scape, densely lanate. Leaflets 13-20 pairs, elliptic-lanceolate; stipules free from each other but shortly adnate to petiole. Racemes ovoid. Calyx-teeth at least ½ as long as tube. Corolla pale purplish, becoming dull grey-lilac; standard 10-14 mm. Legume 18 × 7-8 mm, shortly ovoid, apiculate, densely hairy; carpophore c. ½  as long as calyx-tube. 2n = 16. •{\i    S.W. Alps; E. Pyrenees} ({\i  Sierra de Cadi}). Ga Hs ?It.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Hybrid swarms with {\b 3} occur in the Alps.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 7. O. pyrenaica} Godron & Gren. in Gren. & Godron,{\i   Fl. Fr. }{\b 1}: 449 (1849) ({\i  O. montana} subsp. {\i  samnitica} (Arcangeli) Hayek). Acaulescent with stout scape, shortly tomentose. Leaflets 12-20 pairs, oblong-elliptic or lanceolate; stipules free from each other but shortly adnate to petiole. Scapes 3-20 cm; racemes ovoid globose, with 8-20 flowers. Calyx-teeth usually more than ½ as long as tube. Corolla purplish- or bluish-violet; standard 10-12 mm. Legume 15-20 × 5-7 mm, narrowly ovoid, acuminate, sparsely hairy; carpophore usually c. ½ as long as calyx-tube. 2n = 16.{\i   Calcicole. •  Mountains of S. & S.C. Europe.} ?Al Au Ga ?Gr He Hs It Ju Rm.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Plants of hybrid origin intermediate between {\b 3} and {\b 7} are frequently found.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 8. O. triflora} Hoppe in Sturm,{\i   Deutschl. Fl.} Abt. 1, Band 12, Heft 49 (1827) ({\i  Astragalus triflorus} (Hoppe) Gams, non A. Gray). Like {\b 7} but more slender, with more appressed indumentum; leaflets usually less than 12 pairs, ovate-lanceolate; racemes with 3-5 flowers; calyx-teeth c. ½ as long as tube; legume 15-17 × 5 mm, lanceolate; carpophore c. ½ as long as calyx-tube.  •{\i   E. Alps.} Au ?It.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 9. O. mertensiana} Turcz., {\i  Bull. Soc. Nat. Moscou}{\b  13}: 68 (1840). More or less acaulescent. Leaflets 1-2 pairs, elliptic- or linear-lanceolate, subglabrous; stipules almost free from each other but adnate to petiole for at least half their length. Scapes 2·5-7 cm; racemes ovoid, with 2-4 flowers. Calyx-teeth c. ½ as long as tube; corolla reddish- or whitish-violet; standard 12-15 mm. Legume 15-20 × 5-6 mm, oblong, acuminate, hairy, usually unilocular; carpophore c. ½ as long as calyx-tube. {\i  N.E. Russia.} Rs (N).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  (B) Legume with a septum arising from the ventral suture; rarely also with a septum from the dorsal suture.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 10. O. hippolyti} Boriss., {\i  Sovetsk. Bot. }{\b 1936} ({\b 4}): 121 (1936). Acaulescent. Leaflets 17-25 pairs, oblong-lanceolate, sparsely hairy beneath, subglabrous above; stipules free from each other but adnate to petiole. Scapes 25-40 cm; racemes 5-10 cm, with 10-25 erect flowers. Calyx-teeth much shorter than tube. Corolla pale yellowish; standard 18-20 mm, subentire to emarginate at apex. Legume 15-25 × 4-5 mm, narrowly ovoid. •{\i   E. Russia }({\i  near Belebej, Baskirskaja A.S.S.R.}). Rs (E).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 11. O. campestris} (L.) DC.,{\i   Astrag.} 74 (1802) ({\i  Astragalus campestris} L.). Acaulescent, with appressed or erecto-patent hairs. Leaflets 10-15 pairs, elliptical or lanceolate; stipules many veined, connate for ¼-¾ of their length and adnate to petiole for 1/3-1/2 of their length. Scapes 5-20 cm; racemes ovoid, with 5-15 flowers. Corolla light yellow to whitish or light violet; standard 15-20 mm; keel often violet or blackish-violet at apex with tooth 1-1·5(-2) mm. Legume 14-18 × 6-8 mm, ovoid to oblong cylindrical, erect, with appressed or semi-patent hairs up to 1 mm. 2n = 48.{\i   N. Europe, and mountains of C. & S. Europe.} Au Br Bu Cz Fe Ga He Hs It Ju No Po Rm Rs (B, C, N, W) Su.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Limb of standard narrowly elliptical, more than twice as long as wide; 
\par
  calyx-teeth (0·8-)1·5(-2) mm .......................................... ({\b b}) subsp. {\b tiroliensis} 
\par
1 Limb of standard elliptical, broadly elliptical or obovate, not
\par
  more than twice as long as wide
\par
2 Calyx-teeth (1·5-)2(-3) mm; legume ovoid ................... ({\b a}) subsp. {\b campestris} 
\par
2 Calyx-teeth (2-)3(-4) mm; legume oblong-cylindrical ....... ({\b c}) subsp. {\b sordida}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    ({\b a}) Subsp . {\b campestris}: Calyx 7-10 mm, the teeth (1·5-) 2 (-3) mm . Corolla usually yellowish; standard 1 1/5-1 1/3 times as long as wings; limb of standard emarginate, elliptical, broadly elliptical or obovate, usually less than twice as long as wide. Legume ovoid. 2n = 48. {\i  Throughout most of the range of the species, but northwards only to S.E. Sweden.} Au Br Bu Cz Ga He Hs It Ju Po Rm Rs (B, W) Su.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28    ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b tiroliensis} (Sieber ex Fritsch) Leins & Merxm.,{\i   Mitt. Bot. Staatssamm.} ({\i  München}){\b  6}: 27 (1966) ({\i  O. tiroliensis} Sieber ex Fritsch): Calyx 6-8 mm, the teeth (0·8-)1·5(-2) mm. Corolla usually light violet or whitish; standard 1¼-1½ times as long as wings; limb of standard narrowly ovate, more than twice as long as wide. Legume ovoid. •{\i   E. & C. Alps. }Au He It.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28    ({\b c}) Subsp. {\b sordida} (Willd.) Hartman fil. in Hartman,{\i   Handb. Skand. Fl.} ed.11, 305 (1879) ({\i  O. sordida} (Willd.) Pers.): Calyx 7-13 mm, the teeth (2-)3(-4) mm. Corolla yellowish or light violet; standard 1 1/5-1 1/3 times as long as wings; limb of standard elliptical, broadly elliptical or obovate, usually less than twice as long as wide. Legume oblong-cylindrical, somewhat curved. 2n = 48. {\i   N. & E. Fennoscandia and arctic Russia.} Fe No Rs (N, C).
\par

\par
125}
\par