{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28linear-lanceolate, plane; standard 23-30 mm; legume 15-30 mm, 1½-2 times as long as calyx, with dense, closely appressed hairs. •{\i   S.E. Spain.} Hs.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 130. A. hegelmaieri} Willk., {\i  Suppl. Prodr. Fl. Hisp.} 235 (1893). Like {\b 127}({\b a}) but more suffruticose at base; leaflets linear, convolute; standard 20-25 mm; legume 15-25 mm, slightly curved, with dense, closely appressed hairs. Grassy slopes. •{\i   S.E. Spain }({\i  near Crevillente}). Hs.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Further information is required about this plant, and no material of it has been traced; it is perhaps conspecific with {\b 129}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 131. A. albicaulis} DC.,{\i   Astrag.} 166 (1802). Stems 5-20 cm, erect, woody at base, densely hairy with appressed, white hairs. Leaves 2-6 cm; leaflets 3-4 pairs, oblong or ovate, with appressed hairs on both surfaces; stipules 2-3 mm, not connate. Peduncles 2-3 times as long as leaves; racemes 2-7 cm, lax, with 10-20 flowers; bracts 3-5 mm, linear-lanceolate. Calyx 12-15 mm, with ascending hairs, the teeth 1/4-2/3 as long as tube, subulate. Corolla yellowish; standard 18-23 mm, emarginate at apex. Legume 10-15 × 3-4 mm, equalling calyx, oblong, with dense almost patent hairs.{\i   S.E. Russia and W. Kazakhstan.} Rs (C, E).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 132. A. medius} Schrenk,{\i   Bull. Phys.-Math. Acad. Pétersb}{\b . 2} :196 (1843). Like {\b 131} but leaflets 2-4 pairs; bracts ovate, acuminate; calyx-teeth lanceolate; standard 22-27 mm.{\i   S. Ural.} Rs (C).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 133. A. fialae} Degen,{\i   Österr. Bot. Zeitschr.}{\b  50}: 242 (1900). Acaulescent, with branched stock, woody at base. Leaves 1·5-5(-10) cm; leaflets 8-12 pairs, 4-12 × 1·5-3 mm, linear-oblong to elliptic-lanceolate, densely appressed-hairy on both surfaces or less so above; stipules 4-7 mm, not connate. Peduncles ½ as long or up to as long as leaves; racemes dense; bracts 3-10 mm, ovate to linear. Calyx 9-10 mm, with dense, almost patent hairs, the teeth ¼-½ as long as tube. Corolla yellowish, tinged with violet; standard 16-19 mm. Legume 10-12 mm, oblong, straight, with dense, ascending hairs. •{\i    S. Jugoslavia and N. Albania.} Al Ju.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc {\b 39.               Oxytropis}               DC. 
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc By P. Leins & H. Merxmuller
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Perennial, acaulescent or caulescent herbs. Leaves imparipinnate (in European spp.); stipules adnate to petiole, free or connate. Flowers in axillary racemes. Calyx tubular, with subequal teeth; corolla violet, purple, white or pale yellow; keel with a tooth at apex on abaxial side; stamens diadelphous. Legume oblong to ovoid, dehiscent, stipitate or sessile, unilocular, semi-bilocular or almost completely bilocular. Seeds several.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Literature: W. Gutermann & H. Merxmuller, {\i  Mitt. Bot. Staatssamm.} ({\i  München}){\b  4}: 199-275 (1961). P. Leins & H. Merxmuller, {\i  op. cit.}{\b  6}: 19-31 (1966).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Leaflets 1-2 pairs .................................................................... {\b 9. mertensiana} 
\par
1 Leaflets more than 2 pairs 
\par
2 Legume unilocular, on a carpophore at least ½ as long as 
\par
  calyx tube, usually not splitting the calyx 
\par
3 Caulescent
\par
4 Stipules connate for at least half their length; 
\par
  legume pendent ........................................................................... {\b 1. laponnica}
\par
4 Stipules ± free from each other
\par
5 Legume pendent; corolla whitish ................................................... {\b 2. deflexa}
\par
5 Legume ± erect; corolla purplish-violet ...................................... {\b 3. jacquinii}
\par
3 Acaulescent
\par
6 Carpophore equalling or longer than calyx-tube
\par
7 Scape with short, appressed hairs; legume 20-25 × 8 mm,
\par
  with hairs 0·2-0·25 mm long ........................................................ {\b 4. carpatica}
\par
7 Scape with long, ± patent hairs; legume 15-20 × 5-7 mm, with 
\par
  hairs c. 1 mm long ...................................................................... {\b 7. pyrenaica}
\par
6 Carpophore c. ½ as long as calyx-tube
\par
8 Corolla pale blue to pale purple
\par
9 Scape 0·6 mm in diameter; leaflets mostly 10-12 pairs, 
\par
  lanceolate; legume narrowly oblong ............................................. {\b 5. gaudinii}
\par
9 Scape c. 1 mm in diameter; leaflets mostly 13-20 pairs, 
\par
  elliptic-lanceolate; legume shortly ovoid ................................. {\b 6. amethystea}
\par
8 Corolla deep purplish-violet
\par
10 Scape stout, with patent hairs, usually with more than
\par
  7 flowers ....................................................................................  {\b 7. pyrenaica}
\par
10 Scape slender, with appressed hairs, with 3-5 flowers ................. {\b 8. triflora}
\par
2 Legume at least semi-bilocular, with a septum developing inwards
\par
  from the ventral suture, ± sessile and usually ± splitting the calyx 
\par
11 Legume with both ventral and dorsal septum, almost completely bilocular 
\par
12 Both septa ± equally wide, or the dorsal somewhat narrower;
\par
   inflorescence elongating after flowering ....................................... {\b 18. halleri} 
\par
12 Dorsal septum wider than ventral; inflorescence not elongating
\par
   .................................................................................................... {\b 19. uralensis}
\par
11 Legume with only a ventral septum, semi-bilocular
\par
13 Whole plant, including legume, viscid, covered with sessile, 
\par
   aromatic glands .............................................................................. {\b 24. fetida}
\par
13 Plant eglandular, or with a few glands only on margins of
\par
   stipules or at the base of the bracts
\par
14 Caulescent; calyx-teeth equalling or longer than tube
\par
15 Corolla purple 
\par
16 Inflorescence oblong, many-flowered; standard 8-10 mm; 
\par
   stipules ovate, more or less connate with each other ............. {\b 23. floribunda}
\par
16 Inflorescence capitate, few-flowered; standard c. 14 mm; 
\par
   stipules lanceolate to ovate-lanceolate, free ............................. {\b 22. purpurea}
\par
15 Corolla light yellow; stipules narrowly triangular, free 
\par
17 Standard 12-14 mm; legume 15-20 mm ...................................... {\b 20. pilosa}
\par
17 Standard 16-18 mm; legume 20-30 mm .................................... {\b 21. pallasii}
\par
14 Acaulescent; calyx-teeth distinctly shorter than tube
\par
18 Limb of standard obtusely 2-lobed; limb of wings orbicular .. {\b 17. ambigua}
\par
18 Limb of standard subentire to emarginate; limb of wings 
\par
   oblong or obovate 
\par
19 Leaflets 17-25 pairs; raceme 5-10 cm
\par
20 Corolla pale yellowish; bracts c. 5 mm ................................... {\b 10. hippolyti}
\par
20 Corolla purplish; bracts 7-12 mm .......................................... {\b 16. songorica} 
\par
19 Leaflets mostly less than 17 pairs; racemes usually less than 5 cm 
\par
21 Stipules adnate to petiole for at least 1/3 of their length
\par
22 Stipules many-veined; leaflets 10-15 pairs; tooth of
\par
   keel 1-1·5(-2) mm ................................................................... {\b 11. campestris}
\par
22 Stipules 1-veined; leaflets 6-8 pairs; tooth of keel c. 0·5 mm ..... {\b 12. prenja}
\par
21 Stipules adnate to petiole for not more than 1/4 of their length
\par
23 Tooth of keel 1 mm; legume oblong-ovoid, with short,
\par
   appressed hairs ............................................................................. {\b 15. spicata}
\par
23 Tooth of keel c. 0·5 mm; legume with patent hairs c. 3 mm long 
\par
24 Corolla light yellow, becoming reddish near apex; legume 
\par
   ovoid ......................................................................................... {\b 13. urumovii} 
\par
24 Corolla lilac; legume narrowly ellipsoid ................................. {\b 4. foucaudii}
\par

\par
(A) Legume unilocular, without septa.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. O. lapponica} (Wahlenb.) Gay, {\i  Flora} ({\i  Regensb.}) {\b 10}: 30 (1827) ({\i  Astragalus lapponicus} (Wahlenb.) Burnat). Stems up to 10 cm. Leaflets 8-14 pairs, lanceolate or oblong-lanceolate, appressed-hairy on both surfaces; stipules connate with each other for at least half their length and quite shortly adnate to petiole. Racemes subglobose, scarcely elongating after flowering;
\par

\par
124}
\par