{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b  O. nuriae} Sennen, Bol. Soc. Iber. Ci. Nat. 26: 120 (1926) (O. halleri var. ochroleuca Costa), from the E. Pyrenees, is like {\b 11}(a) but has 8-10 pairs of leaflets and 3-6 flowers only. It may represent a further subspecies of {\b 11}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b O. gmelinii} Fischer ex Boriss., {\i  Sovetsk. Bot. }{\b 1936}({\b 4}): 120(1936), from C. Ural, is like {\b 11}(a) but has the limb of the standard rounded at apex. It is probably not a distinct species.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 12. O. prenja} (G. Beck) G. Beck in Reichenb. & Reichenb. fil.,{\i   Icon. Fl. Germ.}{\b  22}: 124 (1903). Acaulescent; scape and petioles with appressed to semi-patent hairs. Leaflets 6-8 pairs, oblong-ovate, appressed-hairy; stipules 1-veined, connate at the base, adnate to petiole for at least ½ of their length. Scapes up to 10 cm; racemes globose. Corolla purple; standard 15-19 mm, emarginate at apex; tooth of keel c. 0·5 mm. Legume c. 15 mm, ovoid. •{\i    Mountains of S. W. Jugoslavia and N. Albania.} Al Ju.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 13. O. urumovii} Jáv.,{\i   Magyar Bot. Lapok }{\b 19}: 34 (1922) ({\i  O. campestris} subsp. {\i  dinarica} Murb.). Acaulescent; scape and petioles with patent hairs. Leaflets 8-15 pairs, ovate-lanceolate, densely villous-sericeous on both surfaces; stipules many-veined, connate, and adnate to petiole for less than ¼ of their length. Scapes 5-20 cm; racemes ovoid, with (4-)6-10(-15) flowers. Corolla light yellow, soon becoming reddish at the apex; standard 10-14 mm, the limb elliptical or broadly elliptical; tooth of keel c. 0·5 mm. Legume 10-15 × 4 mm, ovoid, with dense, white, erecto-patent hairs up to 3 mm long. •{\i    W. Jugoslavia and Albania; S.W. Bulgaria.} Al Bu Ju.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 14. O. foucaudii} Gillot,{\i   Bull. Soc. Bot. Fr.}{\b  42}: 517 (1895) ({\i  O. lazica} auct., non Boiss.). Like {\b 13} but 3-10 cm; leaflets 12-16 pairs; corolla lilac; legume 15-18 × 4 mm, narrowly ellipsoid. 2n = 32. •{\i   Pyrenees.} Ga Hs.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 15. O. spicata} (Pallas) O. & B. Fedtsch., {\i  Beih. Bot. Centr.}{\b  22}({\b 2}): 218 (1907). Acaulescent. Leaflets 12-17 pairs, oblong-lanceolate, sparsely hairy above, more densely so beneath; stipules adnate to petiole for less than ¼ of their length. Scapes 25-35 cm; racemes oblong, dense, with many, erect flowers. Calyx 5-8 mm; corolla purple; standard 15-18 mm, the limb orbicular, abruptly contracted into claw; tooth of keel 1 mm. Legume (10-)15-20 mm, oblong-ovoid, with short, dense, appressed, black and white hairs.{\i   S.E. Russia.} Rs (E).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 16. O. songorica} (Pallas) DC.,{\i   Astrag. }73 (1802). Like {\b 15} but leaflets 18-24 pairs; racemes lax, with patent flowers; calyx 4-12 mm; standard with limb oblong-obovate, gradually narrowed into claw. {\i  S.E. Russia.} Rs (E).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 17. O. ambigua} (Pallas) DC., {\i  Astrag.} 70 (1802). Acaulescent. Leaflets 12-16 pairs, oblong-ovate to lanceolate, appressed-hairy on both surfaces; stipules many-veined, adnate to petiole in lower part. Scapes 15-30 cm; racemes ovoid, with many flowers. Corolla purple; standard 17-21 mm, the limb obovate, bluntly 2-lobed; limb of wings orbicular. Legume 15-20 × 5 mm, oblong-ovoid, with appressed black and white hairs.{\i   S.E. Russia}. Rs (E). ({\i  N. Asia}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 18. O. halleri} Bunge ex Koch, {\i  Syn. Fl. Germ.} ed. 2, 200 (1843) ({\i  O. sericea} (DC.) Simonkai, non Nutt.,{\i   Astragalus sericeus} Lam. pro parte). Acaulescent, appressed- to patent-hairy. Leaflets (8-) 10-14(-18) pairs, ovate-lanceolate to lanceolate; stipules free or somewhat connate, shortly adnate to petiole. Scapes 4-30 cm; racemes ovoid, elongating after flowering, with 5-15 flowers. Corolla blue to purple, rarely paler; standard 15-20 mm; tooth of keel 1-1·5 mm. Legume 15-20 × 5-6 mm, ovoid to narrowly ellipsoid, with short, dense appressed hairs; ventral and dorsal septa equal in width, or the ventral wider. •{\i    Pyrenees, Alps, Carpathians; Scotland; one station in E. Albania.} Al Au Br Cz Ga He Hs It Po Rm.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b halleri}: Scapes usually 1-2 mm in diameter; scapes and petioles with appressed or erecto-patent hairs, sometimes only sparsely hairy. Corolla bluish-purple. 2n = 32.{\i   Pyrenees, Alps, Carpathians; Scotland.}    
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b velutina} (Sieber) O. Schwarz, {\i  Mitt. Thür. Bot. Ges. }{\b 1}: 107 (1949): Scapes usually 2-3 mm in diameter; scapes and petioles villous with dense, patent hairs. Corolla pale purplish. 2n = 16.{\i   C. Alps}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Plants from E. Albania (Korab), with the stipules 1- or 2-veined and the legume with an extremely narrow dorsal septum, have been described as {\b 0. sericea} subsp.{\b  korabensis} Kümmerle & Jáv., {\i  Bot. Közl.}{\b  19}: 24 (1920). Further investigation is required as these plants may not be correctly placed in this species.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 19. O. uralensis} (L.) DC.,{\i   Astrag.} 63 (1802). Like {\b 18} but racemes not elongating after flowering; dorsal septum of legume wider than the ventral.{\i   Ural}. Rs (C).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 20. O. pilosa} (L.) DC.,{\i   Astrag.} 91 (1802) ({\i  Astragalus pilosus} L.). Stems 20-50 cm; stock and petioles with patent hairs. Leaflets (7-)9-13(-15) pairs, oblong or linear-oblong, with appressed hairs; stipules narrowly triangular, free from each other, very shortly adnate to petiole. Racemes ovoid to oblong, with many flowers. Corolla light yellow; standard 12-14 mm, the limb broadly ovate. Legume 15-20 mm, narrowly ovoid to narrowly cylindrical, with long, dense, erecto-patent hairs, with a ventral septum only. 2n = 16.{\i   C. & E. Europe, northwards to Estonia and extending to S. Sweden, the S.W. Alps, C. Italy and C. Jugoslavia}. Au Bu Cz Ga Ge He Hu It Ju Po Rm Rs (B, C, W, K, E) Su.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Var.{\b  pygmaea} G. Beck in Reichenb. & Reichenb. fil.,{\i   Icon. Fl. Germ. }{\b 22}: 120 (1903), is a dwarf variant of {\b 20}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 21. O. pallasii} Pers., {\i  Syn. Pl.}{\b  2}: 334 (1807). Like {\b 20} but standard 16-18 mm; legume 20-30 mm.{\i   Krym}. Rs ( ?W, K).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 22. O. floribunda} (Pallas) DC.,{\i   Astrag. }94 (1802). Grey-hairy; stems 2-15 cm. Leaflets (5-)8-12 pairs, lanceolate or oblong; stipules ovate, more or less connate, very shortly adnate to petiole. Racemes oblong, dense, with many flowers. Corolla purple; standard 8-10 mm, the limb broadly ovate. Legume 15-20(-25) × 2·5-4 mm, narrowly cylindrical, with erecto-patent black and white hairs, with a narrow, ventral septum only.{\i   S.E. Russia, W. Kazakhstan.} Rs (E).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b  O. cretacea} Basil. in Komarov,{\i   Fl. URSS}{\b  13}: 544 (1948), from W. Kazakhstan (near Ural'sk), is like {\b 22} but has stems 15-25 cm, dimorphic leaves and ovoid racemes. The legume is unknown so its relationships are uncertain.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 23. O. purpurea} (Bald.) Markgraf, {\i  Feddes Repert.} ({\i  Beih}.){\b  45}: 130, 192 (1927) . Like {\b 22} but stipules lanceolate to ovate-lanceolate, free; racemes capitate; standard c. 14 mm. •{\i    Albania, N. Greece.} Al Gr.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 24. O. fetida} (Vill.) DC., {\i  Astrag.} 60 (1802) ({\i  Astragalus fetidus} Vill.). Acaulescent, viscid with aromatic, sessile glands. Leaflets 15-25 pairs, thick, lanceolate or oblong-lanceolate; stipules adnate to petiole for ½ their length. Scapes 3-15 cm; racemes ovoid, with 3-7 flowers. Corolla yellowish; standard cylindrical, often somewhat curved, glandular, with a ventral septum only. 2n = 16. {\i   S.W. & W.C. Alps.} Ga He. It.
\par

\par
126}
\par