{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 hairs, the teeth c. 1/6 as long as tube. Corolla violet; standard 15-20 mm. Legume 10-25 mm, globose to ovoid, membranous and strongly inflated, glabrous. {\i  S.E. Russia and W. Kazakhstan; Krym. }Rs (K, E).
\par

\par
{\b 110. A. monspessulanus} L., {\i  Sp. Pl.} 761 (1753). Acaulescent, with branched stock. Leaves (3-)7-20 cm; leaflets (7-)10-20 pairs, 5-10 × 1·5-5 mm, suborbicular to oblong, obtuse, sparsely appressed-hairy beneath, glabrous above. Peduncles 1-2 times as long as leaves; racemes ovoid or oblong, with 7-30 flowers; bracts 3-10 mm, linear-lanceolate. Calyx 9-16 mm, the teeth ¼-¾ as long as tube. Corolla purplish or red, rarely whitish, standard 20-30 mm, entire to 2-lobed at apex. Legume 25-45 × 3-6 mm, linear, cylindrical, acute, slightly curved (rarely for as much as a semicircle), scarcely rugose, sparsely appressed-hairy, glabrescent.{\i   S. Europe, extending to W. Ukraine.} Al Bu Ga Gr He Hs It Ju Rm Rs (W) Si ?Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Both the following subspecies are extremely variable.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b monspessulanus} (incl. var. {\i  atticus }(Nyman) Hayek): Leaflets ovate to oblong. Corolla purplish-violet, rarely whitish. Legume 4-5 times as long as calyx and usually c. 10 times as long as wide. 2n = 16.{\i   Throughout the range of the species.}
\par

\pard\f0\fs28   {\b A. teresianus} Sennen & Elias,{\i   Bol. Soc. Iber. Ci. Nat.}{\b  26}: 911 (1927), a dwarf, caespitose plant from N.C. Spain, is probably not more than varietally distinct from{\b  110}({\b a}).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b illyricus} (Bernh.) Chater,{\i   Feddes Repert.}{\b  79}: 51 (1968) ({\i  A. illyricus} Bernh.): Leaflets orbicular to ovate. Corolla red or flesh-coloured. Legume 2-3 times as long as calyx and usually c. 5 times as long as wide. {\i  Balkan peninsula, extending to Trieste.}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 111. A. spruneri} Boiss., {\i  Diagn. Pl. Or. Nov.}{\b  1}({\b 2}): 79 (1843). Like {\b 110}({\b b}) but leaflets 5-8(-12) pairs; calyx 12-18 mm; corolla white, pale purplish or violet; legume 12-20 × 5-7 mm, c. 3 times as long as wide, obovoid or oblong-obovoid, curved, strongly rugose.{\i   Balkan peninsula, mainly in the south and east; S.E. Romania; Kikhlades.} Al Bu Gr Ju Rm Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 112. A. incanus} L., {\i  Syst. Nat.} ed. 10,{\b  2}: 1175 (1759). Acaulescent, with branched stock. Leaves 4-10 cm; leaflets 6-10(-14) pairs, 5-9 × 1·5-5 mm, elliptical or oblong to suborbicular, more or less densely appressed-hairy and silvery beneath, usually less densely so and green above. Peduncles about equalling or slightly longer than leaves; racemes subglobose to ovoid, with 6-20 flowers; bracts 2-7 mm, linear-lanceolate. Calyx 7-11 mm, appressed-hairy, the teeth c. ¼ as long as tube. Corolla whitish to purple; standard 19-24 mm. Legume 10-25 × 4-8 mm, inflated-oblong to oblong-cylindrical, straight or slightly curved, appressed-hairy. 2n = 16.{\i   S.W. Europe.} ?Bl Ga Hs.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Legume less than 5 mm wide, cylindrical 
\par
2 Legume 15-20 mm, not spotted; leaflets acute ............ ({\b a}) subsp. {\b incanus} 
\par
2 Legume 20-25 mm, purple-spotted; leaflets obtuse and 
\par
  mucronate .................................................................... ({\b b}) subsp. {\b incurvus} 
\par
1 Legume more than 5 mm wide, inflated-oblong 
\par
3 Legume 15-20 mm; leaflets obtuse or emarginate
\par
  ........................................................................... ({\b c}) subsp. {\b nummularoides} 
\par
3 Legume 10-15 mm; leaflets mucronate ................ ({\b d}) subsp. {\b macrorhizus}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b incanus}: Leaflets oblong or obovate, acute. Standard emarginate. Legume 15-20 × 4 mm, not spotted. •{\i   S. France, E., C. & S. Spain.}    
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b incurvus} (Desf.) Chater,{\i   Feddes Repert.}{\b  79}: 51 (1968) ({\i  A. incurvus} Desf.): Leaflets suborbicular, obtuse and mucronate. Standard emarginate. Legume 20-25 × 4 mm, purple-spotted.{\i   C. & S.E. Spain}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b c}) Subsp. {\b nummularioides} (Desf. ex DC.) Maire in Jahandiez & Maire, {\i  Cat. Pl. Maroc}{\b  2}: 414 (1932) ({\i  A. nummularioides} Desf. ex DC.): Leaflets elliptical to suborbicular, obtuse or emarginate. Standard obtuse or subacute. Legume 15-20 × 6-8 mm, not spotted.{\i   Mountains of S.E. Spain.}
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b d}) Subsp. {\b macrorhizus} (Cav.) Chater,{\i   Feddes Repert. }{\b 79}: 52 (1968) ({\i  A. macrorhizus} Cav.): Leaflets elliptical to suborbicular, obtuse and mucronate. Standard emarginate. Legume 10-15 × 7-8 mm, not spotted.{\i   E., C. & S. Spain}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 113. A. sericophyllus} Griseb.,{\i   Spicil. Fl. Rumel.}{\b  1}: 52 (1843). Stems 1-2 cm, woody at base. Leaves 2-3 cm; leaflets 4-6 pairs, 5-8 × 1-2·5 mm, narrowly elliptical, subacute, densely appressed hairy, silvery; stipules 1-2 mm. Peduncles 4-5 times as long as leaves; racemes lax, with 8-15 flowers. Calyx c. 10 mm, with appressed black and patent white hairs, the teeth c. ¼ as long as tube, linear. Corolla reddish-purple and whitish; standard 18-20 mm. Legume c. 25 × 2 mm, linear, straight, acute, with dense, appressed or ascending hairs. •{\i    S. part of Balkan peninsula.} Al Gr Ju.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 114. A. apollineus} Boiss. & Heldr. in Boiss., {\i  Diagn. Pl. Or. Nov.}{\b  3}({\b 2}): 27 (1856). Like {\b 113} but stems up to 5 cm; leaflets 5-7 pairs, elliptical to oblong, obtuse or truncate, less densely hairy and not silvery; peduncles 2-3 times as long as leaves; corolla violet; legume 30-40 mm. •{\i   S.C. Greece} ({\i  Parnassos}). Gr.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 115. A. karelinianus} M. Popov in Komarov,{\i   Fl. URSS}{\b  12}: 695 (1946). Stems 10-20 cm, erect, woody at base. Leaves 5-10 cm leaflets 5-7 pairs, 5-10 × 1-2 mm, linear-lanceolate, appressed-hairy on both surfaces; stipules 3-4 mm, not connate. Peduncles 1½-2 times as long as leaves; racemes dense, with 5-10 flowers; bracts 0·5-1 mm, ovate. Calyx 7-9 mm, the teeth 1/5-1/4 as long as tube, linear-subulate. Corolla whitish or violet, rarely yellowish; standard c. 20 mm, the limb c. 6 times as long as claw. Legume 20-30 × 2-3 mm, linear-subulate, almost straight, with ascending hairs. •{\i    C. & S. Ural. }Rs (C).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 116. A. subuliformis} DC., {\i  Astrag. }134 (1802) ({\i  A. subulatus} Pallas, non Desf.; incl.{\i   A. ucrainicus} M. Popov & Klokov, {\i  A. pseudotataricus} Boriss.). Stems up to 5(-10) cm, erect, woody at base. Leaves 2-6 cm; leaflets 2-7 pairs, 4-15 × 0·5-1 mm, narrowly linear to oblong, appressed-hairy beneath, glabrous above; stipules 1-2 mm, free or connate only near the base of stem. Peduncles 1-1½ times as long as leaves; racemes very lax, with 3-10 flowers; bracts 0·5-1 mm, ovate. Calyx 8-12 mm, the teeth 1/6-1/5 as long as tube, linear-subulate. Corolla yellowish (rarely whitish or violet); standard 17-23 mm, the limb c. 4 times as long as claw. Legume 15-35 × 1·5-2 mm, linear-subulate, straight, with dense, appressed hairs. {\i  S.E. Europe, from Macedonia to S.E. Russia, where it extends northwards to} c. 53°{\i   N}. Ju Rm Rs (C, W, K, E) Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 117. A. corniculatus} Bieb.,{\i   Cent. Pl.}{\b  1}: t. 45 (1810). Like {\b 116} but leaflets densely hairy on both surfaces; stipules 2-3 mm; racemes dense, umbelliform; corolla violet; calyx teeth 1/4-1/3 as long as tube, lanceolate; legume often slightly curved. •{\i    S. Ukraine, Moldavia, S.E. Romania.} Rm Rs (W, K).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 118. A. muelleri} Steudel & Hochst.,{\i   Flora} ({\i  Regensb.}) {\b 10}: 72 (1827) ({\i  A. vegliensis} Sadler ex Ascherson & Graebner). Like {\b 116} but leaflets densely hairy on both surfaces; peduncles 2-3 times as long as leaves; corolla lilac or purplish. •{\i    Coasts of Jugoslavia; C. Italy}. It Ju.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 119. A. pugionifer} Fischer ex Bunge, {\i  Astrag. Geront.}{\b  1}: 125 (1868). Stems 25-40 cm, erect, woody at base. Leaves 5-7 cm;
\par

\par
122}
\par