{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 ate; corolla yellow; calyx-teeth 1/3-1/2 as long as tube; legume 8-12 × 4-5 mm, semi-lunate, rugose, glabrous. •{\i   S. Spain and S. Portugal.} Hs Lu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Placed by Bunge in Subgen. {\i  Epiglottis,} but clearly a perennial and closely related to {\b 81}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 83. A. falcatus} Lam., {\i  Encycl. Méth. Bot. }{\b 1}: 310 (1783). Like {\b 81} but stems 40-80 cm, erect; leaves 8-17 cm; leaflets 15-20 pairs, 15-25 mm, oblong, densely hairy beneath; only the lowest stipules connate; corolla yellow; legume 15-25 mm, oblong and acute, slightly curved, laterally compressed, with persistent, appressed hairs.{\i   C. & S.E. Russia.} Rs (C, E) [*Rm].
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 84. A. asper} Jacq.,{\i   Misc. Austr. Bot.}{\b  2}: 335 (1781). Stems 20-60 cm, stout, herbaceous, erect; branches strict. Leaves 5-10 cm; leaflets 8-15 pairs, 15-30 mm, linear-lanceolate, sparsely appressed-hairy on both surfaces or subglabrous; stipules not connate. Peduncles 1-2 times as long as leaves; racemes long, dense; bracts 4-8 mm, linear-lanceolate. Calyx 8-14 mm, the teeth 1/3-1/2 as long as tube. Corolla yellow; standard 15-20 mm. Legume 12-25 × 3 mm, linear-lanceolate and acuminate, straight or curved at apex, with appressed hairs.{\i   E.C. Europe and south part of U.S.S.R., extending southwards to N. Bulgaria.} Au Bu Cz Hu Rm Rs (C, W, K, E).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 85. A. roemeri} Simonkai, {\i  Term.-Tud. Közl.} ({\i  Pótfüz}.) {\b 19}: 138 (1892). Stems 50-70 cm, stout, herbaceous, erect. Leaves 7-12 cm; leaflets 4-6 pairs, 25-60 mm, elliptical or lanceolate, sparsely appressed-hairy beneath, subglabrous above; stipules not or only shortly connate round stem. Peduncles about twice as long as leaves; racemes ovoid-oblong; bracts c. 3 mm, linear-lanceolate. Calyx 8-10 mm, the teeth almost as long as tube; corolla whitish lilac; standard 20-25 mm. Legume 15-20 × 5-8 mm, oblong-lanceolate, straight, densely appressed-hairy; beak short, curved.{\i   Calcareous rocks and screes. •  E. Carpathians}. Rm.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 86. A. austriacus} Jacq., {\i  Enum. Stirp. Vindob.} 263 (1762). Often some hairs simple. Stems 10-60 cm, slender, erect or ascending; branches erecto-patent. Leaves 3-7 cm; leaflets 5-10 pairs, 5-15 × 0·75-2·5 mm, usually linear, subglabrous; stipules connate only near base of stem. Peduncles equalling or slightly longer than leaves; racemes long, lax, with 7-25 flowers; bracts 0·5-1 mm, ovate; calyx 2-3 mm, the teeth c. ¼ as long as tube, triangular-ovate. Corolla blue and violet; standard 5-8 mm. Legume 5-12 × 1·5-2·5 mm, linear-oblong and acute, appressed-hairy.{\i   E.C. & E. Europe, from Austria to S. Ural, extending locally southwards to N. Bulgaria and Krym; S.W. Alps; N.E. Spain.} Au Bu Cz Ga Hs Hu It Ju Rm Rs (C, W, K, E).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 87. A. sulcatus} L., {\i  Sp. Pl.} 756 (1753). Stems 25-80 cm, erect; branches strict. Leaves 5-7 cm; leaflets 6-11 pairs, 10-30 × 0·5-1 mm, linear to linear-oblong, sparsely hairy beneath; stipules not connate. Peduncles 1-1½ times as long as leaves; racemes long, lax, with 5-20 flowers; bracts 1-2·5 mm, triangular-lanceolate. Calyx 2·5-4 mm, the teeth ½-¾ as long as tube, linear-lanceolate. Corolla pale lilac; standard 7-8 mm. Legume 8-12 × 2 mm, narrowly oblong and acute, straight, sparsely appressed-hairy, unilocular, rarely semi-bilocular.{\i   From E. Austria eastwards to S. Ural and W. Kazakhstan.} Au Cz Hu Rm Rs (C, W, E).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 88. A. clerceanus} Iljin & Krasch.,{\i   Not. Syst.} ({\i  Leningrad}) {\b 5}: 113 (1924). Like {\b 87} but stems suberect; branches erecto-patent; leaflets 5-8 pairs, 2·5-6 mm wide, ovate-oblong; standard 10-12 mm; legume 10-20 × 3 mm, bilocular or almost so. •{\i   S. Ural} ({\i  near Sterlitamak}). Rs (E).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 89. A. tenuifolius} L.,{\i   Sp. Pl.} ed. 2, 1065 (1763) ({\i  A. scopiformis} Ledeb., {\i  A. tauricus} Pallas pro parte). Subcaespitose, woody at base; stems 1-7 cm, many. Leaves 3-8 cm; leaflets 5-7 pairs, 5-15 × 0·5-1(-2·5) mm, linear-setaceous, with short, white, appressed hairs on both surfaces; stipules connate. Peduncles 1-2 times as long as leaves; racemes oblong, lax, with 10-25 flowers; bracts c. 1 mm, triangular-ovate. Calyx 2·5-3 mm, the teeth c. 1/3 as long as tube, triangular-lanceolate. Corolla whitish or pale lilac; standard 6-7 mm. Legume oblong-conical and acuminate, with appressed hairs.{\i   S.E. part of U.S.S.R., from Krym to Baskirskaja A.S.S.R.} Rs (C, K, E).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 90. A. arenarius} L., {\i  Sp. Pl.} 759 (1753). Stems 15-30 cm, slender, procumbent or ascending, woody at base. Leaves 3-5 cm; leaflets 2-9 pairs, 10-20(-30) × 2-4 mm, lanceolate or linear, with appressed hairs on both surfaces; stipules 3-6 mm, connate. Peduncles c. 2/3 as long as leaves; racemes oblong, lax, with 3-8 flowers; bracts 1-2 mm, linear-lanceolate. Calyx 4-5 mm, the teeth c. ¼ as long as tube, triangular. Corolla purplish or lilac, rarely whitish or yellowish; standard 13-17 mm. Legume 12-20 × 3·5-4 mm, oblong and acute or truncate, with short appressed hairs, sometimes glabrescent; beak short. •{\i    U.S.S.R., from} c. 49° to 61°{\i   N., N.C. Europe eastward to C. Germany and extending to S. Sweden; locally naturalized elsewhere}. Cz Ge Po Rs (N, B, C, W, E) Su [Fe Ge].
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 91. A. baionensis} Loisel.,{\i   Fl. Gall.} 474 (1807). Like {\b 90} but leaflets 2-6 × 0·5-1(-1·5) mm, oblong-linear; peduncles usually equalling leaves; corolla pale blue; standard 12-14 mm; legume 8-10 × 4 mm, truncate.{\i   Maritime sands. •  Coasts of W. France and N. Spain.} Ga Hs.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 92. A. tenuifoliosus} Maire,{\i   Bull. Soc. Hist. Nat. Afr. Nord }{\b 39}: 134 (1949) ({\i  A. tenuifolius} Desf., non L.). Like {\b 90} but leaflets 5-10 × 1-2 mm; racemes with up to 12 flowers; calyx 7-9 mm, the teeth 1/3-2/3 as long as tube, linear to lanceolate; standard up to 20 mm; legume 2·5-3 mm wide, linear, long-acute.{\i   S.E. Spain} ({\i  Murcia}). Hs. ({\i  N. Africa}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 93. A. mesopterus} Griseb.,{\i   Spicil. Fl. Rumel.}{\b  1}: 49 (1843). Like {\b 90} but leaflets 10-12 pairs; peduncles twice as long as leaves; corolla purplish; calyx c. 6 mm. {\i  Stony places. •  N.E. Greece and Turkey-in-Europe}. Gr Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 94. A. onobrychis} L.,{\i   Sp. Pl.} 760 (1753) (incl. {\i  A. skorpilii} Velen.,{\i   A. sofianus} Velen.,{\i   A. pancicii} Heuffel, {\i  A. borysthenicus} Klokov, {\i  A. circassicus} Grossh.). Stems 10-60 cm, procumbent and ascending, woody at base. Leaves 3-10 cm; leaflets 8-15 pairs, 4-15 × 1-3(-5) mm, elliptic-lanceolate, acute or subobtuse, appressed-hairy on both surfaces; stipules 1·5-12 mm, connate. Peduncles 1-3 times as long as leaves; racemes ovoid or oblong, with usually more than 10 flowers; bracts 2-4 mm, lanceolate. Calyx 6-8 mm, the teeth ¼-¾ as long as tube, linear to lanceolate. Corolla pale or dark violet, rarely white or yellowish; standard 15-30 mm, the limb linear-oblong. Legume 7-15 mm, ovoid lanceolate to oblong, acute, compressed, densely appressed hairy; beak distinct.{\i   Europe, northwards to S. France, Austria and C. Ural.} Al Au Bu Cz Ga †Ge Gr He Hs Hu It Ju Po Rm Rs (C, W, K, E) Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Extremely variable throughout almost the whole of its range. {\b A. onobrychioides} Bieb.,{\i   Tabl. Prov. Casp.} 117 (1798) ({\i  A. cephalotes} Pallas) from the Caucasus, is like {\b 94} but has suberect stems 3-8 cm, linear-lanceolate or subulate bracts 7-10 mm, and calyx 9-12 mm, with the teeth almost as long as tube. It appears to be quite distinct; it has been doubtfully reported from the Lower Don.
\par

\par
120}
\par