{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28\qc {\b  40.                Biserrula}             L.
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc By P.W. Ball.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Annual herbs. Leaves imparipinnate; stipules small, free. Flowers in axillary racemes. Calyx campanulate, with 5 subequal teeth; keel obtuse; stamens diadelphous, only 5 fertile. Legume oblong, indehiscent, dorsiventrally compressed, each valve sinuate-dentate on the back. Seeds numerous.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28     {\b 1. B. pelecinus} L., Sp. Pl. 762 (1753). Stems 10-40 cm, shortly pubescent. Leaflets 7-15 pairs, 5-10 × 1-5 mm, linear-oblong to obovate-orbicular, emarginate. Corolla 4-6 mm, blue or pale yellow with blue tip. Legume 10-40 × 4-8 mm, brown. Mediterranean region, extending to S. Bulgaria and S. Portugal. Al Bl Bu Co Cr Ga Gr Hs It Lu Sa Si.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc {\b  41.               Glycyrrhiza}           L.
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc By P.F. Yeo.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Perennial herbs, with some or all parts of the plant glandular and often viscid. Leaves imparipinnate. Stipules membranous, caducous. Calyx weakly bilabiate; corolla whitish-violet, rarely pale yellow; stamens diadelphous or monadelphous. Legume compressed or constricted between the seeds, indehiscent or tardily dehiscent, usually brown. Seeds 1-8.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Corolla 4-6 mm; raceme (excluding peduncle) not more than 20 
\par
  mm at anthesis; capitate at anthesis and in fruit ............................ {\b 5. echinata} 
\par
1 Corolla 7 mm or more; raceme (excluding peduncle) usually more 
\par
  than 20 mm; rarely capitate at anthesis, not capitate in fruit 
\par
2 Plant not more than 25 cm, scabrid; legume strongly curved,
\par
  terete, constricted between the seeds, glabrous ................................ {\b 4. aspera}
\par
2 Plant usually more than 25 cm, rarely scabrid; legume straight 
\par
  or nearly so, compressed, sometimes setose
\par
3 Standard pale yellow; legume c. 14 mm, fusiform, densely setose .{\b 1. foetida}
\par
3 Standard pale violet or whitish; legume usually more than 15 mm, 
\par
  linear-oblong, straight or slightly curved, setose to glabrous
\par
4 Leaflets 9-17, 20-40(-55) mm, elliptical to oblong-ovate, obtuse, 
\par
  sometimes mucronate; legume straight, with straight sutures .......... {\b 2. glabra}
\par
4 Leaflets 5-11,10-20(-30) mm, broadly elliptical to obovate, acute
\par
  or obtuse; legume slightly curved, with undulate sutures ....... {\b 3. korshinskyi}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28     {\b 1. G. foetida} Desf.,{\i   Fl. Atl.}{\b  2}: 170 (1799). Stem 25-50 cm. Leaflets 9-11, 10-35 mm, obovate, elliptical or ovate-lanceolate, apex acute or obtuse, mucronate. Racemes about equalling the leaves, dense or lax. Corolla 7-10 mm; standard pale yellow. Legume 14 mm, fusiform, densely covered with glandular bristles and with sessile and short-stalked glands. Seeds 2-3.{\i   Sandy soil. S. Spain.} Hs. ({\i  N.W. Africa.})
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28     {\b 2. G. glabra} L., {\i  Sp. Pl}. 742 (1753) ({\i  G. glandulifera }Waldst. & Kit.). Stem 50-100 cm. Stem and petioles pubescent, sometimes scabrid. Leaflets 9-17, 20-40(-55) mm, elliptical, ovate or oblong, obtuse, sometimes mucronate, often viscid. Racemes exceeded by their subtending leaves at least at anthesis, lax, elongate. Corolla 8-12 mm. Legume up to 30 mm, linear-oblong, compressed, straight, glabrous or glandular-setose, the sutures straight. Seeds (2-)3-5.{\i   Dry open habitats. S. & E. Europe, but doubtfully native in the south-west. Cultivated as a source of liquorice and frequently naturalized.} Al Bu Cr *Ga Gr *Hs It Ju Rm Rs (C, W, K, E) Sa Si Tu [Au Cz He Hu Lu].
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  The name {\b G. glandulifera} Waldst. & Kit., {\i  Pl. Rar. Hung.}{\b  1}: 20 (1800), has been given to variants with glandular-setose legumes.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28     {\b 3. G. korshinskyi} Grigoriev,{\i   Bull. Jard. Bot. URSS}{\b  29}: 94 (1930). Erect or ascending, up to 70 cm. Leaflets 5-11, 10-20(-30) mm, broadly elliptical to obovate, acute or obtuse. Racemes about equalling the leaves rather lax. Corolla 10-13 mm. Legume (10-)15-25(-30) mm linear-oblong, compressed, slightly curved, covered with sessile and short-stalked glands, the sutures undulate. Seeds usually 4-7. {\i   Saline steppes and meadows. S.E. Russia}. Rs (C, E). ({\i  W.C. Asia}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28     {\b 4. G. aspera} Pallas,{\i   Reise }{\b 1}: 499 (1771). Plant scabrid. Stem 10-25 cm, flexuous, ascending. Leaflets 7-9, 5-30 mm, obovate or elliptical, mucronate, the terminal much the largest. Racemes about equalling the leaves. Corolla 10-18 mm. Legume 30-35 mm, strongly curved, terete, constricted between the seeds, glabrous. Seeds up to 8.{\i   Steppes. S.E. Russia, W. Kazakhstan.} Rs (E). ({\i  C. & S.W. Asia.})
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28     {\b 5. G. echinata} L.,{\i   Sp. Pl.} 741 (1753) (incl.{\i   G. macedonica} Boiss. & Orph., {\i  G. inermis} Boros). Stem up to 130 cm. Leaflets 5-13, 5-45 mm, obovate to lanceolate, mucronate. Racemes (excluding the peduncles) at anthesis 12-20 mm, much exceeded by their subtending leaves, capitate. Corolla 4-6 mm. Legume 12-16 mm, elliptical, compressed, more or less densely glandular-setose or sometimes glabrous. Seeds 1-3.{\i   Cultivated for liquorice. S.E. Europe, extending to Hungary and S. Italy}. Bu Cr Gr Hu It Ju Rm Rs (W, K, E) Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc {\b  42.                Amorpha}                   L. 
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc By P.W. Ball.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Deciduous shrubs, rarely herbs. Leaves imparipinnate; stipules small, caducous. Flowers in a terminal spike or a cluster of spikes. Calyx campanulate, with 5 teeth; standard blue, whitish, or purple; wings and keel absent; stamens diadelphous. Legume short, indehiscent. Seeds 1(-2).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   {\b 1. A. fruticosa} L.,{\i   Sp. Pl.} 713 (1753). Shrub up to 6 m. Leaflets 5-12 pairs, 15-40 × 8-20 mm, ovate or elliptical, pubescent or subglabrous, glandular-punctate. Inflorescence 7-15 cm. Standard c. 6 mm, blue or purplish. Legume 7-9 mm, glandular punctate.{\i   Planted for ornament and naturalized locally in C. & S. Europe.} [Al Au Bu Cz Ga He It Ju Rm.] ({\i  C. & E. North America}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc {\b  43.                  Psoralea }                 L.
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc By P.W. Ball.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Perennial herbs or shrubs. Leaves 3-foliolate (in European spp.), glandular-punctate; stipules small, free. Flowers in axillary heads or racemes, with a pair of 3-fid bracts at the base. Calyx campanulate, with 5 unequal teeth; corolla blue-violet to white; keel obtuse; stamens monadelphous. Legume indehiscent. Seeds 1.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 Leaflets entire; flowers in heads ................................................. {\b 1. bituminosa} 
\par
Leaflets dentate; flowers in racemes ........................................... {\b 2. americana}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. P. bituminosa} L., {\i  Sp. Pl.} 763 (1753). Stems 20-100 cm, sparsely to densely pubescent, smelling of bitumen. Leaflets 10-60 × 3-20(-30) mm, linear-lanceolate to ovate-orbicular, entire. Flowers in heads; peduncles usually longer than the leaves. Corolla 15-20 mm, blue-violet. Legume ovoid, compressed, with a falcate beak up to 15 mm long.{\i   S. Europe.} Al Bl Bu Co Cr Ga Gr Hs It Ju Lu Rm Rs (K) Sa Si Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. P. americana} L.,{\i   Sp. Pl.} 763 (1753) ({\i  P. dentata} DC.). Like {\b 1} but leaflets 8-50 × 6-35 mm, rhombic-orbicular to ovate, dentate; flowers in racemes; peduncles about equalling the leaves; corolla c. 8 mm, white, the keel often with a violet tip; legume not beaked.{\i   S. Italy, Sicilia; S.W. part of the Iberian peninsula.} Hs It Lu Si.
\par

\par
127}
\par