{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b  R. incurvatus }Bab., {\i Ann. Nat. Hist.} ser. 2, {\b 2}: 36 (1848). 2n = 28. Br Hb Hs. In Britain this species may have persistently tomentose leaves, and is placed by Watson near {\b 23}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 18. R. pedatifolius} Genev.,{\i  Mem. Soc. Acad.} ({\i Angers}){\b  8}: 93 (1860) ({\i R. clethraphilus} Genev.). Stems slender, angled, sulcate, brown and shining, glabrous, with rather few, subulate, yellowish prickles. Leaflets 3-5, glabrous above, shortly and densely pubescent beneath, those of the upper leaves sometimes grey-tomentose beneath; terminal leaflet elliptic-obovate, shortly acuminate, unevenly serrate. Inflorescence moderately long, with numerous, weak, straight prickles and a few glands and acicles; flowers c. 2·5 cm in diameter. Sepals somewhat deflexed or patent, appendiculate, grey-tomentose or pubescent; petals elliptical, fimbriate, pink; stamens white (sometimes drying pink), exceeding styles; carpels and receptacle pubescent. 2n = 28. {\i W. Europe, extending to N. Italy.} Br ?Cz Ga Hs It.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 19. R. gratus} Focke in Alpers,{\i  Verz. Gefässpfl. Landdr. Stade} 26 (1875). Stems robust, arching, sulcate, red, glabrescent, with a few patent or falcate prickles. Leaflets 5, large, green, glabrescent beneath; terminal leaflet ovate to obovate, acuminate, coarsely, unevenly and doubly dentate, usually entire at base. Inflorescence short and broad, pyramidal, leafy, pubescent, eglandular, almost unarmed, with weak subulate pricklets; peduncles long, ascending; flowers large, the petals, stamens and styles pink or pink at the base. Sepals appressed to fruit, greenish-grey, with white margin; filaments very long, investing the styles; anthers and receptacle usually hairy. Fruit large. 2n = 28.{\i  N.W. & C. Europe.} Be Br Cz Da Ga Ge Hb Ho Hu Po.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Related species include:
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b  R. sciocharis} (Sudre) W. C. R. Watson,{\i  Jour. Ecol.}{\b  33}: 339 (1946) ({\i R. sciaphilus }Lange, non P. J. Mueller & Lefevre). 2n = 28. Br Da Ge.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 20. R. chaerophyllus} Sagorski & W. Schultze, {\i Deutsche Bot. Monatsschr.}{\b  12}: 1 (1894). Stems robust, angled, purple, slightly hairy, bearing mainly sessile glands and numerous rather unequal prickles, the largest broad-based and falcate. Leaflets 5, large, imbricate, pubescent beneath; terminal leaflet broad, orbicularovate to elliptical, shortly acuminate, more or less cordate at base, coarsely and unevenly serrate or biserrate. Inflorescence pyramidal, leafy, with long, patent, few-flowered branches, the axis hairy, with unequal prickles, numerous stalked glands and acicles; flowers up to 3 cm in diameter. Sepals patent or appressed to fruit, green-tomentose, with white margins, sometimes with acicles and glands; petals elliptic-oblanceolate, white or pinkish; stamens white, exceeding the greenish styles. Fruit rather large. {\i W. & C. Europe.} Be Br Cz Da Ga Ge Hb Ho Hs Po.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 21. R. hypomalacus} Focke,{\i  Syn. Rub. Germ.} 274 (1877). Stems angled, sparsely pubescent, with a few long, subulate, yellow prickles and sometimes with a few pricklets, acicles and stalked glands. Leaflets 3-5, large, softly pubescent to glabrescent beneath; terminal leaflet elliptical or oblong, acuminate, subcordate, coarsely serrate. Inflorescence subracemose, rather few-flowered leafy, often with long, ascending, paniculate lower branches, the axis with numerous hairs, sessile glands and acicles, and a few stalked glands; peduncles short, 2- to 3-flowered; flowers c. 2·5 cm in diameter. Sepals erecto-patent, slightly tomentose, and with short hairs, long acicles and a few glands; petals elliptical or obovate, white or pale pink; stamens usually white, equalling or exceeding the green styles; anthers sometimes slightly pubescent; carpels and receptacle pubescent.{\i  N. W. & C. Europe.} Au Be Br Cz Da Ge Hb Ho.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Related species include:
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b  R. bracteosus} Weihe ex Lej. & Court.,{\i  Comp. Fl. Belg.}{\b  2}: 162 (1831). Be Br Ge Rm.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 22. R. arrhenii} (Lange) Lange, {\i Haandb. Danske Fl.} ed. 2, 347 (1859). Stems rather weak, slender, terete, pubescent, usually eglandular; prickles numerous, small, yellow-based, deflexed. Leaflets 3-5, bright green, pubescent beneath; terminal leaflet elliptical, acuminate, finely and evenly serrate, subcordate to cuneate at base. Inflorescence very long, often pendent, lax, the branches erecto-patent, hairy or tomentose and with sparse glands and numerous fine, straight or falcate prickles. Sepals patent to erect, green, with white margins, hairy, appendiculate, sometimes aciculate and with sparse glands; petals ovate or orbicular, pink or white; stamens much shorter than styles; carpels glabrous or hairy. 2n = 28.{\i  N.W. & W.C. Europe}. Be Br Cz Da Ge Ho.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 23. R. sprengelii} Weihe,{\i  Flora} ({\i Regensb}.) {\b 2}: 17 (1819) ({\i R. borreri} Bell Salter). Stems terete, hairy, occasionally with a few pricklets and stalked glands; prickles slender, falcate or subuncinate. Leaflets 3-5, usually hairy beneath; terminal leaflet ovate, obovate or elliptical, acuminate, unevenly and sharply biserrate, entire at base. Inflorescence short, sub-corymbose, lax, with a hairy axis and patent branches and pedicels bearing small hooked prickles. Sepals more or less appressed to fruit, appendiculate, grey-tomentose and pubescent, sometimes slightly glandular or aciculate; petals crumpled, narrowly obovate-oblong, bright pink; stamens pink, about equalling the pink styles; carpels and receptacle hairy. Fruit rather small. 2n = 28.{\i  N.C. Europe, extending to S. Sweden and Ireland}. Be Br Cz Da Ga Ge Hb Ho Hu Po Su.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Related species include:
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b  R. drejeri }G. Jensen in Lange,{\i  Icon. Pl. Fl. Dan.}{\b  51}: 7 (1883). Da.       
\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b  R. euchloos} Focke in Ascherson & Graebner, {\i Syn. Mitteleur. Fl.}{\b  6}({\b 1}): 470 (1902) ({\i R. orthoclados }A. Ley, non Boulay). ?Be Br Cz Hu. Watson equates this species with {\i R. bracteosus} Weihe ex Lej. & Court.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28 
{\b  R. hemistemon} P. J. Mueller ex Genev.,{\i  Mem. Soc. Acad.} ({\i Angers}){\b  24}: 314 (1868). Cz Ga Ge He.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 24. R. myricae} Focke in Alpers,{\i  Verz. Gefässpfl. Landdr. Stade} 27 (1875). Stems procumbent to arcuate, slightly angled, nearly glabrous, with a few equal, subulate, prickles. Leaflets 3-5, hairy on both surfaces; terminal leaflet ovate-elliptical, acuminate, more or less cordate at base, unevenly dentate. Inflorescence with many ternate leaves, the lower branches many-flowered, the upper 1- to 3-flowered; axis only slightly hairy, with very few prickles; pedicels tomentose. Sepals appressed to young fruit, cuspidate, tomentose; petals orbicular or oblong, white; stamens white, much shorter than or just equalling the green styles; receptacle hairy; carpels glabrous.{\i  N.C. & N.W. Europe; Romania.} Be Cz Ga Ge He Ho Rm.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Related species include:
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  R. cuiedensis E. I. Nyárády in Savul., Fl. Rep. Pop. Române 4: 900 (1956). Rm.                 
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  R. moldavicus E. I. Nyárády in Savul., op. cit. 899 (1956). Rm.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 25. R. chlorothyrsos} Focke, {\i Abh. Nat. Ver. Bremen}{\b  2}: 462 (1871). Stems low-arching or procumbent, angled at least above, densely hairy, sometimes with a few glands and acicles; prickles
\par

\par
12}
\par