{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 leaflets 3-4 pairs, 10-20 × 2-3 mm, linear, appressed-hairy on both surfaces; stipules 2-3 mm, not connate. Peduncles about twice as long as leaves; racemes lax, with 5-10 flowers; bracts 3-4 mm, linear. Calyx 14-18 mm, the teeth 1/4-1/3 as long as tube, linear-subulate. Corolla white, tinged with pale purple; standard c. 25 mm. Legume 50-70 × 2 mm, linear, straight, appressed-hairy.  •{\i   N. Macedonia and Thrace.} Bu Ju Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 120. A. cornutus} Pallas,{\i   Reise}{\b  1}: 499 (1771). Stems up to 40(-100) cm, erect, woody at base. Leaves (3-)5-9 cm; leaflets 4-9 pairs, 10-35 × 1-7 mm, broadly obovate to linear-oblong, appressed-hairy on both surfaces; stipules 3-9 mm, not connate. Peduncles about as long as leaves; racemes 2-4(-5) cm, ovoid, dense, with 10-40 flowers; bracts 3-5 mm, linear. Calyx 7-12 mm, the teeth 1/4-1/3 as long as tube, linear-subulate. Corolla violet; standard 18-20 mm, emarginate. Legume 10-18 × 3-4 mm, oblong, straight, with dense, ascending hairs.{\i   S.E. Europe, from N.E. Bulgaria to S. Ural and W. Kazakhstan}. Bu Rm Rs (C, W, E).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 121. A. brachylobus} DC.,{\i   Prodr. }{\b 2}: 285 (1825). Like {\b 120} but peduncles c. 1-1½ times as long as leaves; racemes 6-15 cm, elongate, lax; calyx 10-15 mm, the teeth 1/5-1/4 as long as tube; standard 18-26 mm.{\i   Krym, S.E. Russia, W. Kazakhstan}. Rs (K, E).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 122. A. varius} S. G. Gmelin,{\i   Reise Russl.}{\b  1}: 116 (1770) ({\i  A. virgatus} Pallas). Stems 10-50 cm, erect, woody at base. Leaves 4-8 cm; leaflets 5-11 pairs, 10-25 × 1·5-5 mm, linear to oblong-lanceolate, appressed-hairy on both surfaces; stipules 2-5 mm, not connate. Peduncles 1-1½ times as long as leaves; racemes 8-20 cm, lax, with 15-20 flowers; bracts 2-3 mm, linear. Calyx 8-10 mm, the teeth 1/5-1/4 as long as tube, linear-subulate. Corolla violet; standard 15-20 mm, rounded at apex. Legume 12-20 × 2-3 mm, linear-oblong, straight, with dense, usually ascending hairs.{\i   S. part of U.S.S.R., extending to E. Hungary and E. Bulgaria.} Bu Hu Rm Rs (C, W, E).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 123. A. macropus} Bunge, {\i  Astrag. Geront. }{\b 1}: 125 (1868). Like {\b 122} but peduncles 2-3 times as long as leaves; racemes 5-8 cm denser, with 8-15 flowers; corolla paler violet; standard 20-25 mm. {\i  S.C. & S.E. Russia, W. Kazakhstan.} Rs (C, E).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 124. A. pallescens} Bieb., {\i  Fl. Taur.-Cauc.}{\b  3}: 489 (1819). Like {\b 122} but peduncles 2-3 times as long as leaves; racemes 3-8 cm, lax, with 5-12 flowers; calyx 11-15 mm, the teeth 1/3(-1/2) as long as tube; corolla white; standard 18-23 mm. •{\i    S. & E. Ukraine and adjacent parts of S.E. Russia.} Rs (W, E).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 125. A. glaucus} Bieb.,{\i   Fl. Taur.-Cauc.}{\b  2}: 186 (1808) ({\i  A. dealbatus} Pallas pro parte). Stems up to 10 cm, erect, woody at base, with sparse, appressed, white hairs or subglabrous. Leaves 3-6 cm; leaflets 3-6 pairs, 10-25 × 3-6 mm, lanceolate to oblong-lanceolate, appressed-hairy on both surfaces; stipules 3-5 mm, not connate. Peduncles about twice as long as leaves; racemes 2-5 cm, ovoid, dense, with 8-20 flowers; bracts 3-5 mm, linear lanceolate. Calyx 9-12 mm, the teeth 3-4 mm, 1/3-1/2 as long as tube, subulate. Corolla whitish; standard 18-25 mm, rounded at apex. Legume 10-15 × 3-4 mm, oblong, straight, with dense, ascending hairs. •{\i   E. Romania} ({\i  Dobruja}); {\i  Krym.} Rm Rs (K).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 126. A. zingeri} Korsh., {\i  Acta Horti Petrop.}{\b  11}: 297 (1890). Like {\b 125} but stems up to 25 cm, with denser, appressed hairs; stipules 1-2 mm; leaflets often glabrous above; calyx teeth 1·5-2·5 mm, 1/5-1/4 as long as tube, triangular-lanceolate; standard emarginate; legume up to 20 mm. {\i  S.E. Russia, W. Kazakhstan.} Rs (C, E).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Subgen.{\b  Calycocystis} Bunge. Perennials; hairs medifixed. Leaves imparipinnate. Calyx more or less inflated in fruit; corolla not persistent.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28 A largely Asiatic subgenus, characterized by the strong inflation of the calyx in fruit, but the European representatives show this to only a slight degree. Species {\b 127}-{\b 133} are extremely close to each other, and may also easily be confused with {\b 125} and {\b 126}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 127. A. vesicarius} L., {\i  Sp. Pl}. 760 (1753). Stems up to 25 cm erect, woody at base, sparsely to densely hairy with appressed, white hairs. Leaves 4-8 cm; leaflets (4-)5-10 pairs, linear-lanceolate to oblong, rarely linear, more or less densely hairy with appressed, white hairs on both surfaces; stipules 2-4 mm, not connate. Peduncles 2-3 times as long as leaves; racemes 2-5 cm, with usually 10-20 flowers; bracts 3-5 mm, lanceolate. Calyx 8-14 mm, with dense, ascending or patent, white and black hairs, the teeth 1/6-1/2 as long as tube, triangular-lanceolate to linear. Standard 17-23 mm. Legume 8-15 × 3-5 mm, equalling (or only beak exceeding) the calyx, oblong, acute, densely hairy with almost patent hairs.{\i   S.E. & E.C. Europe, extending from N. W. Greece and Bulgaria to E. Austria and Ukraine; S.W. Alps; N. & C. Italy; S. Spain.} Al Au Bu Cz Ga Gr Hs Hu It Ju Rm Rs (?C, W, K).
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  In need of further study; three subspecies are recognized here, but others probably occur in E. Europe.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Flowers concolorous, yellow ..................................... ({\b c}) subsp. {\b pastellianus} 
\par
1 Flowers bicolorous 
\par
2 Standard entire at apex; bracts linear ........................ ({\b b}) subsp. {\b carniolicus} 
\par
2 Standard emarginate at apex; bracts lanceolate .......... ({\b a}) subsp. {\b vesicarius}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b vesicarius} (incl.{\i   A. albidus }Waldst. & Kit.): Stems up to 5(-10) cm. Leaflets oblong to lanceolate, densely hairy. Calyx 8-14 mm, with patent or ascending white hairs, and short or long, patent or appressed black hairs. Corolla bicolorous, the standard purplish or violet, the wings and keel paler or whitish; standard emarginate at apex. 2n = 16.{\i   Throughout the range of the species except most of the Balkan peninsula.}
\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Plants from Albania and N.W. Greece with linear leaves perhaps represent another subspecies.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b carniolicus} (A. Kerner) Chater,{\i   Feddes Repert.}{\b  79}: 52 (1968) ({\i  A. carniolicus} A. Kerner): Stems up to 15 cm. Leaflets oblong to lanceolate, sparsely hairy. Calyx 8-10 mm, with sparse ascending, white hairs and more numerous short, appressed, black hairs. Corolla bicolorous, the standard purplish or violet, the wings and keel paler or whitish; standard entire at apex. 2n = 32. • {\i  W. part of the Balkan peninsula, extending to Trieste.}   
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b c}) Subsp. {\b pastellianus} (Pollini) Arcangeli,{\i   Comp. Fl. Ital.} 186 (1882): Stems up to 25 cm. Leaflets oblong-elliptical, intermediate in pubescence between subspp. ({\b a}) and ({\b b}). Calyx 10-11 mm, with very sparse, ascending, white hairs and numerous short, appressed, black hairs. Corolla uniformly yellowish; standard entire or rarely weakly emarginate at apex. •{\i   Valleys of E. Italian Alps; ?Bulgaria.}
\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b  A. tarchankuticus} Boriss., {\i  Not. Syst.} ({\i  Leningrad}) {\b 14}: 222 (1951), from Krym, and {\b A. pseudoglaucus} Klokov,{\i   Not. Syst.} ({\i  Leningrad}){\b  15}: 50 (1953), from S. Ukraine, are perhaps to be included in this subspecies; the status of the plants from Bulgaria is also uncertain.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 128. A. peterfii} Jáv., {\i  Sched. Fl. Hung. Exsicc. }{\b 4}: 38 (1916). Like {\b 127}({\b a}) but stems up to 20 cm; leaflets linear or linear-lanceolate racemes sometimes up to 15 cm; corolla yellowish; legume 15-25 mm, 1½-2 times as long as calyx, with dense ascending hairs.{\i   Steep, grassy slopes. • C. Romania} ({\i  Suatu}). Rm.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 129. A. hispanicus} Cosson ex Bunge, {\i  Astrag. Geront. }{\b 1}: 135 (1868). Like {\b 127}(a) but stems up to 20 cm; leaflets linear or
\par

\par
123}
\par