{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 95. A. leontinus} Wulfen in Jacq., {\i  Misc. Austr. Bot. }{\b 2}: 59 (1781). Stems up to 20 cm, slender; sometimes acaulescent. Leaves 5-12 cm; leaflets 5-10 pairs, 5-15 × 2-5 mm, ovate to narrowly elliptical, obtuse or truncate, usually densely appressed-hairy beneath, subglabrous above; stipules 3-8 mm, connate or free. Peduncles 1½-2 times as long as leaves; racemes ovoid, with 10-20 flowers; bracts 3-5 mm, linear-lanceolate. Calyx 5-8 mm, the teeth 1/4-1/3 as long as tube. Corolla violet to pale purplish, rarely whitish; standard 13-18 mm, the limb ovate. Legume 8-10 × 3-4 mm, ovoid-oblong, scarcely compressed, densely or sparsely appressed-hairy. 2n = 32. •{\i    Alps and mountains of N.W. Jugoslavia.} Au Ga He It Ju.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 96. A. amarus} Pallas,{\i   Spec. Astrag. }8 (1800). Stems 10-40 cm, erect, woody at base. Leaves 5-15 cm; leaflets 3-5(-7) pairs, 5-12 × 3-12 mm, very remote, orbicular (rarely ovate), subglabrous; stipules connate. Peduncles about as long as leaves; racemes very lax, with 7-20 flowers; bracts 3-5 mm, lanceolate. Calyx 10-12 mm, glabrous, the teeth c. 1/6 as long as tube. Standard 20-30 mm. Legume 10-16 × 4-5 mm, oblong, acute, slightly curved, glabrous; beak straight. {\i   S.E. Russia & W. Kazakhstan.} Rs (E).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 97. A. helmii} Fischer ex DC., {\i  Prodr.}{\b  2}: 301 (1825). Acaulescent, with branched stock. Leaves 3-8 cm; leaflets 4-7 pairs, 7-15 × 3-8 mm, elliptical, acute, densely appressed-hairy on both surfaces. Peduncles equalling leaves; racemes capitate, with 5-10 flowers; bracts 2-4 mm, linear-lanceolate. Calyx 8-10 mm, densely hairy, the teeth 2/5-1/2 as long as tube, linear-subulate. Corolla yellowish; standard 20-25 mm. Legume 10-15 × c. 5 mm, ovoid-oblong, densely patent-hairy.{\i   Stony places. E.C. Russia.} Rs (C, E).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 98. A. idaeus} Bunge,{\i   Astrag. Geront.}{\b  1}: 107 (1868). Acaulescent, with branched stock. Leaves up to 3 cm; leaflets 6-12 pairs, 3-6 × 1-2 mm, oblong-elliptical, densely sericeous with subappressed hairs on both surfaces. Peduncles shorter than or equalling leaves; racemes capitate. Calyx c. 7 mm, densely hairy, the teeth c. ½ as long as tube. Corolla yellow; standard c. 15 mm. Legume unknown.{\i   Mountain rocks. Kriti.} Cr.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 99. A. autranii} Bald.,{\i   Bull. Herb. Boiss. }{\b 3}: 196 (1895). Like {\b 98} but leaflets 4-9 pairs, elliptic-lanceolate; peduncles longer than leaves; calyx-teeth slightly longer than tube; corolla red; legume included in calyx, villous. •{\i    Albania}. Al.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 100. A. agraniotii} Orph. ex Boiss.,{\i   Diagn. Pl. Or. Nov.}{\b  3}({\b 2}): 29 (1856). Dwarf, densely caespitose, acaulescent, with branched stock. Leaves 1-1·5 cm; leaflets 4-8 pairs, c. 3 × 1·5 mm, elliptical, densely sericeous with subappressed hairs on both surfaces. Peduncles shorter than or slightly longer than leaves; racemes capitate. Calyx 5-6 mm, densely hairy, the teeth longer than the tube. Corolla yellowish, tinged with blue; standard c. 10 mm. Legume 6-7 mm, exceeding calyx, ovoid, densely villous. {\i  Mountain rocks. • S. Greece} ({\i  Malevo}). Gr.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 101. A. arcuatus} Kar. & Kir.,{\i   Bull. Soc. Nat. Moscou }{\b 14}: 407 (1841). Stems up to 7 mm, procumbent, woody at base. Leaves 1·5-2 cm; leaflets 2-4 pairs, 5-10 × 1·5-3 mm, linear-lanceolate to oblanceolate, with flexuous erecto-patent hairs, dense beneath and sparser above; stipules 3-4 mm. Peduncles from slightly shorter than to twice as long as leaves; racemes subglobose, with 5-7 flowers; bracts 1-2 mm, ovate-lanceolate. Calyx 8-13 mm, the teeth c. 1/5 as long as tube. Corolla purplish; standard 17-25 mm. Legume 15-30 × c. 3 mm, linear, curved, with dense, erecto-patent hairs.{\i   W. Kazakhstan.} Rs (?C, E).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 102. A. reduncus} Pallas, {\i  Spec. Astrag.} 109 (1800). Subacaulescent, with branched stock. Leaves 3-20 cm; leaflets 5-10(-20) pairs, 3-12 × 2-5 mm, oblong-ovate, with flexuous erecto-patent hairs, dense beneath and sparser above; stipules 4-7 mm. Peduncles equalling or slightly exceeding leaves; racemes ovoid, with 5-20 flowers; bracts 3-5 mm, linear lanceolate. Calyx 11-13 mm, densely hairy, the teeth ¼-½ as long as tube. Corolla yellowish, rarely violet; standard 17-27 mm. Legume 10-20(-25) × c. 4 mm, oblong or oblong-lanceolate, acute, curved, with dense, erecto-patent hairs. •{\i    S. Ukraine and S.E. Russia.} Rs (W, K, E).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 103. A. dolichophyllus} Pallas,{\i   Spec. Astrag. }84 (1800). Acaulescent, with branched stock, or stems up to 2 cm. Leaves 5-15 cm; leaflets 8-15(-20) pairs, 5-15 × 1·5-5 mm, oblong or lanceolate, with dense, flexuous, erecto-patent hairs on both surfaces. Peduncles very short or absent; racemes with 5-20 flowers; bracts c. 5 mm, linear. Calyx 10-13 mm, villous, the teeth slightly longer than tube. Corolla pale yellowish; standard 20-30 mm, emarginate at apex. Legume 6-12 × 4-5 mm, ovoid-oblong, obtuse, with dense, erecto-patent, short hairs; beak c. 3 mm.{\i   S. part of U.S.S.R., northwards to} c. 51° {\i  N., and just extending into E. Romania}. Rm Rs (C, W, K, E).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 104. A. lacteus} Heldr. & Sart. ex Boiss.,{\i   Diagn. Pl. Or. Nov.}{\b  3}({\b 2}): 31 (1856). Like {\b 103} but leaflets 4-7 pairs, more remote; racemes with 3-5 flowers; bracts c. 12 mm, lanceolate; calyx-teeth equalling tube; corolla white; standard c. 20 mm, truncate at apex. •{\i   S. Greece} ({\i  Parnon Oros}). Gr.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 105. A. baldaccii} Degen, {\i  Österr. Bot. Zeitschr.}{\b  46}: 415 (1896). Acaulescent, with branched stock. Leaves 4-7 cm; leaflets 4-9 pairs, 6-9 × 1-3 mm, ovate-elliptical to lanceolate, densely hairy with more or less appressed hairs on both surfaces. Peduncles absent. Calyx 10-14 mm, densely appressed-hairy, the teeth c. ¼ as long as tube. Corolla whitish, tinged with lilac; standard 23-25 mm. Legume 12-15 × 5-6 mm, ovoid-oblong, densely hairy. •{\i    S. Albania, C. & N. Greece.} Al Gr.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 106. A. wilmottianus} Stoj.,{\i   Bull. Soc. Bot. Bulg.}{\b  1}: 73 (1926). Like {\b 105} but calyx-teeth c. ½ as long as tube; corolla purplish; legume ovoid, glabrous. •{\i    W. Bulgaria.} Bu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 107. A. testiculatus} Pallas, {\i  Spec. Astrag.} 82 (1800). Acaulescent, with branched stock, or rarely with stems up to 6 cm. Leaves 3-10 cm; leaflets 7-12 pairs, 3-15 × 1-5 mm, oblong or elliptical, with very dense, rather long, erecto-patent hairs. Peduncle very short or absent; racemes with 3-10 flowers. Calyx 10-12 mm, with dense patent hairs, the teeth ¼-½ as long as tube. Corolla whitish, pale violet or purplish; standard 18-27 mm, the limb oblong-obovate, constricted in the middle, emarginate. Legume 10-20 × 7-10 mm, ovate, compressed, with dense patent hairs, usually pendent; peduncle elongating up to c. 3 cm in fruit. {\i   S.E. part of U.S.S.R., from Krym to C. Ural.} Rs (C, K, E).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 108. A. rupifragus} Pallas, {\i  Spec. Astrag.} 86 (1800). Like {\b 107} but more often caulescent, with stems up to 5(-20) cm; calyx 10-16 mm; limb of standard oblong-elliptical, not constricted in the middle; legume usually sessile, erect.{\i   Stony places. S.E. Russia, Krym}. Rs (C, K, E).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 109. A. physodes} L., {\i  Sp. Pl.} 760 (1753) (incl. {\i  A. suprapilosus} Gontsch.). Acaulescent, with branched stock. Leaves 5-15 cm; leaflets 8-15 pairs, 5-12 × 2-4 mm, lanceolate or oblong elliptical, sparsely appressed-hairy beneath, sparsely hairy to glabrous above. Peduncles c. 2/3 as long as leaves; racemes ovoid, with many flowers. Calyx 7-10 mm, with short, erecto-patent
\par

\par
121}
\par