{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 13 Lowest tooth of the calyx distinctly shorter than tube
\par
14 Leaflets (3-)4-5 pairs; legume 30-35 × 5-5·5 mm;
\par
   seeds smooth .............................................................................. {\b 11. incurvus} 
\par
14 Leaflets 2-3 pairs; legume 40-70 × 7-11 mm; seeds tuberculate
\par
   ................................................................................................... {\b 26. cirrhosus} 
\par
7 All leaves with only 1 pair of leaflets; rarely some with 2 pairs 
\par
  and then the flowers solitary 
\par
15 Racemes (3-)5- to many-flowered 
\par
16 Stipules less than ½ as wide as stem ...................................... {\b 32. sylvestris}
\par
16 Stipules at least ½ as wide as stem 
\par
17 Margin of leaflets undulate; calyx-teeth only slightly unequal, 
\par
   the lowest tooth not more than 1½ times as long as the upper 2
\par
   .................................................................................................. {\b 31. undulatus} 
\par
17 Margin of leaflets not undulate; calyx-teeth very 
\par
   unequal, the lowest tooth at least twice as long as the upper 2 
\par
18 Leaflets not more than twice as long as wide, the lateral veins 
\par
   not extending more than about ½-way to the apex ............. {\b 30. rotundifolius} 
\par
18 Leaflets more than twice as long as wide, with 3 or more 
\par
   parallel veins ± reaching the apex ............................................. {\b 33. latifolius} 
\par
15 Racemes 1- to 3(-4)-flowered 
\par
19 Corolla yellow, sometimes with a pinkish tinge 
\par
20 Corolla 7-12 mm; legume 5-7 mm wide; seeds rugulose
\par
   ....................................................................................... {\b 47. hierosolymitanus}
\par
20 Corolla 12 mm or more; legume 7-12 mm wide 
\par
21 Calyx-teeth equalling or slightly longer than tube; corolla 
\par
   12-18 mm; seeds tuberculate or papillose .................................... {\b 46. annuus} 
\par
21 Calyx-teeth 2-3 times as long as tube; corolla 18-25 mm; seeds 
\par
   smooth ......................................................................................... {\b 48. gorgoni} 
\par
19 Corolla variously coloured, but never yellow 
\par
22 Corolla 20 mm or more 
\par
23 Peduncles not more than 60 mm; legume with 2 wings on the 
\par
   dorsal suture ................................................................................. {\b 44. sativus} 
\par
23 Peduncles more than 70 mm; legume not winged 
\par
24 Pubescent, at least on the calyx and legume ............................ {\b 37. odoratus} 
\par
24 Glabrous 
\par
25 Leaflets 1-4 mm wide, linear-lanceolate; calyx-teeth longer
\par
   than tube ............................................................................. {\b 35. tremolsianus} 
\par
25 Leaflets 4-18 mm wide, lanceolate to ovate; calyx-teeth shorter 
\par
   than tube .................................................................................. {\b 36. tingitanus}
\par
22 Corolla less than 20 mm 
\par
26 Calyx-teeth not or only slightly longer than tube 
\par
27 Leaflets 5-12 mm; corolla blue; seeds smooth ................... {\b 25. neurolobus} 
\par
27 Leaflets 15-90 mm; corolla crimson with blue wings, or 
\par
   orange-red; seeds tuberculate or reticulate-rugose 
\par
28 Sparsely pubescent; corolla crimson with pale blue wings; 
\par
   legume tuberculate and densely pubescent ................................. {\b 49. hirsutus} 
\par
28 Glabrous; corolla orange-red; legume glabrescent but 
\par
   persistently pubescent on the suture ......................................... {\b 42. setifolius} 
\par
26 Calyx-teeth 1½-3 times as long as tube 
\par
29 Corolla red; legume with 2 wings on the dorsal and ventral 
\par
   sutures ................................................................................. {\b 45. amphicarpos} 
\par
30 Legume with 2 keels on the dorsal suture; peduncles 10-30 mm .{\b 43. cicera}
\par
30 Legume with 2 wings on the dorsal suture; peduncles 30-60 mm
\par
   ....................................................................................................... {\b 44. sativus}
\par
3  Stem not winged
\par
31 At least the upper leaves with a tendril
\par
32 Corolla 25-30 mm; legume 60-90 mm .............................. {\b 29. grandiflorus}
\par
32 Corolla less than 25 mm; legume less than 60 mm
\par
33 Racemes 2- to many-flowered; calyx-teeth ± distinctly unequal
\par
34 Corolla yellow ..................................................... ({\b 20-22}). {\b pratensis} group
\par
34 Corolla purple or bluish
\par
35 Leaflets 1 pair ........................................................................ {\b 27. tuberosus}
\par
35 Leaflets 2-5 pairs
\par
36 Leaflets linear, oblong or lanceolate, distinctly parallel-veined, 
\par
   the lateral veins extending ± to the apex ................................... {\b 23. palustris}
\par
36 Leaflets lanceolate-elliptical to orbicular-elliptical, pinnately 
\par
   veined
\par
37 Stipules 10-20 mm wide, triangular-hastate; legume 6-10 mm wide
\par
   .................................................................................................... {\b 4. japonicus}
\par
37 Stipules 2-10 mm wide, linear-lanceolate to orbicular-ovate, 
\par
   semi-sagittate; legume 4·5-5·5 mm wide .................................... {\b 10. humilis}
\par
33 Flowers solitary, very rarely 2 together; calyx-teeth usually equal
\par
38 Peduncles 2-5 mm; seeds smooth, with hilum less than 1/20 of 
\par
   the circumference ............................................................... {\b 41. inconspicuus}
\par
38 Peduncles 5-70 mm; seeds with hilum more than 1/20 of the 
\par
   circumference
\par
39 Legume 7-11 mm wide, pubescent when immature; seeds 2-3, 
\par
   coarsely reticulate-rugose; peduncles not aristate .................... {\b 42. setifolius}
\par
39 Legume 3-7 mm wide, glabrous; seeds 8-15; peduncles usually 
\par
   aristate
\par
40 Peduncles 5-20 mm; legume 4-7 mm wide, with prominent 
\par
   longitudinal veins; seeds smooth or slightly rugose ............... {\b 39. sphaericus}
\par
40 Peduncles 20-70 mm; legume 3-4 mm wide, with indistinct 
\par
   reticulate venation; seeds tuberculate ...................................... {\b 40. angulatus} 
\par
31 All leaves without a tendril
\par
41 Flowers solitary, with peduncles 2-10 mm; calyx-teeth ± equal
\par
42 Pubescent; leaflets of upper leaves 7-20 mm; legume 5-7 mm 
\par
   wide, glabrous ............................................................................ {\b 38. saxatilis}
\par
42 Glabrous; leaflets of upper leaves 25-40 mm; legume 2-5 mm 
\par
   wide, densely pubescent when young ................................ {\b 41. inconspicuus}
\par
41 Flowers in racemes, rarely solitary and then with peduncles 
\par
   more than 10 mm and calyx-teeth unequal
\par
43 Corolla pale cream, yellow or orange-yellow, sometimes with 
\par
   a red or purple tinge
\par
44 Leaflets pinnately veined; stipules 2-12 mm wide, lanceolate to 
\par
   ovate ......................................................................... ({\b 5-8}). {\b laevigatus} group
\par
44 Leaflets distinctly parallel-veined; stipules 0·5-2(-4) mm wide, 
\par
   linear or linear-lanceolate, semi-sagittate, semihastate or sagittate
\par
45 Corolla yellow; leaflets 1 pair, 8-20 mm; legume black 
\par
   ................................................................................ ({\b 20-22}).{\b  pratensis} group
\par
45 Corolla cream or pale yellow sometimes with a red or purple tinge; 
\par
   leaflets 1-5 pairs, usually more than 20 mm; legume pale brown 
\par
46 Calyx glabrous or ciliate on the margin; style filiform ....... {\b 15. pannonicus}
\par
46 Calyx pubescent or villous; style dilated at apex
\par
47 Pubescent; leaflets 1-3 pairs; legume glabrous ..................... {\b 16. pallescens}
\par
47 Villous; leaflets 3-5 pairs; legume villous ................................ {\b 17. pancicii}
\par
43 Corolla red-purple, purple or bluish
\par
48 Stipules 8-20 mm wide, usually hastate or sagittate, almost as 
\par
   large as the leaflets
\par
49 Leaflets 2-5 pairs; calyx-teeth less than twice as long as tube; 
\par
   legume 6-10 mm wide ............................................................... {\b 4. japonicus}
\par
49 Leaflets 1 pair; calyx-teeth 2-3 times as long as tube; legume 
\par
   3-5 mm wide ............................................................................ {\b 24. laxiflorus}
\par
48 Stipules 0·5-8 mm wide
\par
50 Leaflets pinnately veined or very feebly parallel veined, the 
\par
   lateral veins much weaker than midrib
\par
51 Legume covered with brown glands; racemes 6- to 30-flowered
\par
   ........................................................................................................ {\b 2. venetus}
\par
51 Legume eglandular; racemes 1- to 10-flowered
\par
52 Leaflets acuminate; stipules 10-25 mm ........................................ {\b 1. vernus}
\par
52 Leaflets obtuse or subacute; stipules 4-10 mm
\par
53 Leaflets 3-6(-11) pairs; legume black ............................................. {\b 3. niger}
\par
53 Leaflets 1 pair; legume pale reddish-brown ............................... {\b 28. roseus}
\par
50 Leaflets parallel-veined, the lateral veins reaching ± to the 
\par
   apex of the leaflets
\par

\par
137}
\par