{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28  Sect. VICIA. Leaflets usually more than 3 pairs; flowers solitary, axillary or in few-flowered, sessile or shortly pedunculate racemes; corolla usually large (more than 10 mm); style pubescent on the lower side beneath the stigma.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 39. V. oroboides} Wulfen in Jacq., {\i  Collect. Bot.}{\b  4}: 323 (1791). Glabrescent or sparsely pubescent perennial 25-50 cm. Leaves without a tendril; leaflets 1-4 pairs, 40-80 × 15-45 mm, ovate, acute. Racemes 2- to 12-flowered, subsessile, or shortly pedunculate. Calyx-teeth subequal, about equalling tube; corolla 14-19 mm, pale yellow. Legume 20-40 × 6-9 mm, black, glabrous. Seeds c. 15;  hilum ¾ of the circumference. 2n = 14.{\i   Meadows and mountain woods; calcicole. E. Alps, extending to W. Hungary and C. Jugoslavia.} Au Hu It Ju.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 40. V. truncatula} Fischer ex Bieb.,{\i   Fl. Taur.-Cauc. }{\b 3}: 473 (1819). Sparsely pubescent perennial 30-50 cm. Leaves without a tendril; leaflets 7-13 pairs, 10-35 × 3-10 mm, elliptic- or linear-oblong, obtuse, mucronate. Racemes 3- to 8-flowered, subsessile or shortly pedunculate. Calyx-teeth unequal, shorter than tube; corolla 17-20 mm, pale yellow with reddish tinge. Legume 25-30 × c. 7 mm, dull brown, glabrous. Seeds 2-5; hilum ½ of the circumference.{\i   Lower Danube basin.} Bu Ju Rm. ({\i  Caucasus}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 41. V. pyrenaica} Pourret,{\i   Mem. Acad. Toulouse }{\b 3}: 333 (1788). Glabrous or subglabrous, procumbent, stoloniferous perennial 5-30 cm. Leaflets 3-6 pairs, 4-12 × 2-6 mm, oblong to suborbicular, truncate or emarginate, mucronate; tendrils usually unbranched; stipules entire. Flowers solitary. Calyx-teeth equal, shorter than tube; corolla 16-25 mm, bright violet-purple. Legume 25-50 × 4-6 mm, black, glabrous. Seeds 6-12; hilum 1/5-1/4 of the circumference.{\i   Alpine pastures and screes. • Mountains of Spain and S. France.} Ga Hs.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 42. V. sepium} L., {\i  Sp. Pl.} 737 (1753). Usually pubescent perennial 30-100 cm. Leaflets 3-9 pairs, 7-30 × 4-14 mm, ovate to ovate-oblong, obtuse or emarginate, mucronate; stipules more or less entire, spotted. Flowers 2-6 together, sometimes shortly pedunculate. Calyx-teeth unequal, shorter than tube; corolla 12-15 mm, dull bluish-purple. Legume 20-35 × 5-8 mm, black, glabrous. Seeds 3-7; hilum ½-¾ of the circumference. 2n = 14.{\i   Almost throughout Europe.} All except Al Az Bl Co Cr Fa Sb Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 43. V. grandiflora} Scop.,{\i   Fl. Carn.} ed. 2,{\b  2}: 65 (1772). Pubescent annual 30-60 cm. Leaflets 3-7 pairs, 10-20 × 2-8 mm, linear to suborbicular; stipules toothed at base. Flowers 1-2(-4) together, very shortly pedunculate. Calyx-teeth equal, shorter than tube; corolla 23-35 mm, yellow, sometimes with purple tinge, wings sometimes black at tip. Legume 30-50 × 6-8 mm, black, pubescent. Seeds c. 15; hilum 2/3-3/4 of the circumference. {\i  C. & S.E. Europe, extending westwards to Italy and Sicilia.} Al Au Bu ?Cr Cz Gr Hu It Ju Rm Rs (W, K, E) Si Tu [Ge Po].
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 44. V. barbazitae} Ten. & Guss.,{\i   Ind. Sem. Horti Neap.}{\b  1839} : 12 (1839). Like {\b 43} but calyx-teeth about as long as tube; corolla 18-22 mm, yellow with blue wings; legume brown, glandular, glabrous at ends; hilum 1/6 of the circumference.{\i   Balkan peninsula and C. Mediterranean region; local.} Bu Co Ga Gr It Ju Si.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 45. V. pannonica} Crantz,{\i   Stirp. Austr.} ed. 2, {\b 2}: 393 (1769). Pubescent annual 10-60 cm. Leaflets 4-10 pairs, 8-30 × 2-7 mm, oblong or linear-oblong, obtuse or truncate, mucronate; stipules entire, spotted. Flowers (1-)2-4 together. Calyx-teeth subequal, shorter than tube; corolla 14-22 mm, purple or yellow; standard pubescent on back. Legume 20-35 × 7-11 mm, yellow, pubescent. Seeds 2-8; hilum 1/4-1/6 of the circumference.{\i   Europe, extending northwards to C. France, Czechoslovakia and N. Ukraine.} Al Au Bu Cz Ga Gr Hs Hu It Ju Rm Rs (?C, W, K) Tu [Ge He Ho].
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b pannonica}: Corolla pale yellow; limb of standard shorter than claw; seeds black.{\i   From Ukraine to Czechoslovakia, N. Italy and Greece}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b striata} (Bieb.) Nyman, {\i  Consp. }209 (1878) (subsp. {\i  purpurascens }(DC.) Arcangeli, {\i  V. purpurascens} DC.): Corolla dirty purple; limb of standard about as long as claw; seeds black marbled with brown.{\i   Throughout the range of the species except the north-eastern part.}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 46. V. sativa} L., {\i  Sp. Pl.} 736 (1753). Pubescent annual up to 80 cm. Leaflets 3-8 pairs, 6-20(-30) × 1-6 mm, linear to obcordate, acute to emarginate, mucronate; stipules dentate, usually with a dark spot. Flowers 1-2(-4) together. Calyx-teeth equal, longer or shorter than tube; corolla (8-)10-30 mm, purple. Legume 25-70 × (3-)4-10 mm, yellow-brown to black, glabrous or pubescent, breaking the calyx when mature. Seeds 6-12; hilum 1/6-1/5 of the circumference.{\i   Throughout Europe to} 69° {\i  N. in Russia.} All territories, but only as an alien in Fa Is Sb.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Frequently cultivated for fodder.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  A very variable species often divided into a number of species or subspecies. The most recent work by Mettin & Hanelt,{\i   Kulturpfl.}{\b  12}: 163-225 (1964), and Yamamoto,{\i   Mem. Fac. Agric. Kagawa Univ.}{\b  21}: 1-104 (1966), shows that the species has considerable variation in the basic chromosome number. The different chromosome numbers are largely correlated with morphology, and artificially raised hybrids show a fairly high degree of sterility, although this varies somewhat according to the parent plants used. Despite the sterility, evidence was obtained to show that gene exchange between plants of different chromosome number could occur with reasonable facility and this is supported by the almost continuous range of variation found in herbarium specimens. It is therefore proposed to treat this variation at subspecific rather than specific rank.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 At least some leaflets toothed or incised ........................... ({\b d}) subsp. {\b incisa}
\par
1 All leaflets entire, or at most crenate-dentate at apex
\par
2 Plant with underground stems bearing apetalous flowers and
\par
  white, 1- to 2-seeded legumes. .................................... ({\b b}) subsp. {\b amphicarpa}
\par
2 Plant without underground stems
\par
3 Corolla (8-)10-18 mm; calyx-teeth shorter than tube;
\par
  legume black or very dark brown ........................................... ({\b a}) subsp. {\b nigra}
\par
3 Corolla 18-30 mm; calyx-teeth as long as or longer than tube;
\par
  legume yellow-brown to dark brown, rarely almost black
\par
4 Legume 4·5-6 mm wide .................................................... ({\b c}) subsp. {\b cordata}
\par
4 Legume 6-11 mm wide
\par
5 Legume contracted between the seeds, brown or yellow-brown; 
\par
  seeds 3·5-6·5 mm ................................................................. ({\b e}) subsp. {\b sativa}
\par
5 Legume not contracted between the seeds, dark brown or
\par
  almost black; seeds 5·5-8 mm ...................................... ({\b f}) subsp. {\b macrocarpa}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b nigra} (L.) Ehrh.,{\i   Hannover. Mag. }{\b 1780}({\b 15}): 229 (1780) ({\i  V. angustifolia} L., {\i  V. cuneata} Guss., {\i  V. heterophylla} C. Presl,{\i   V. pilosa }Bieb.): Leaflets linear to oblong-cuneate, acute, obtuse or truncate. Calyx-teeth shorter than tube; corolla (8-)10-18  mm; standard light reddish-purple, the wings similar or somewhat darker. Legume 25-55 × (2·5-)3-6 mm, not contracted between the seeds, black or brownish-black, usually glabrous. Seeds 2-4 mm. 2n = 12, 14.{\i   Throughout the range of the species.}
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b amphicarpa} (Dorthes) Ascherson & Graebner,{\i   Syn. Mitteleur. Fl.}{\b  6}({\b 2}): 974 (1909) ({\i  V. amphicarpa} Dorthes): Plant with underground stems bearing minute apetalous flowers and white, irregularly ovate 1- or 2-seeded legumes c. 15 mm. Leaflets linear, acute to obcordate. Calyx-teeth shorter than tube; corolla 20-25 mm; standard dark reddish-purple, the wings much
\par

\par
134}
\par