{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 Racemes 1- to 6-flowered. Calyx somewhat gibbous at base; calyx-teeth unequal, shorter or the lower longer than tube; corolla 9-20 mm, white or yellowish, purple at tip. Legume 20-30 × 5·5-8 mm, brown, glabrous or sparsely pubescent. Seeds 4-5; hilum 1/15 of the circumference.{\i   S. Aegean region.} Cr Gr.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b cretica}: Racemes usually equalling or shorter than leaves; calyx 3·5-5(-6) mm; corolla 9-16 mm.{\i   Throughout the range of the species except for most of the Kikladhes}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b aegaea} (Halácsy) P. W. Ball, {\i  Feddes Repert.}{\b  79}: 42 (1968): Racemes longer than leaves; calyx 5·5-8 mm; corolla 18-20 mm.{\i   Kikladhes.}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 26. V. monantha} Retz.,{\i   Obs. Bot.}{\b  3}: 39 (1783) ({\i  V. calcarata} Desf.). Subglabrous annual 30-60 cm. Leaflets 5-8 pairs, 10-25 × 1-6 mm, linear-oblong; stipules bipartite, lobes entire. Calyx teeth unequal, shorter than tube; corolla pale purple. Legume 20-50 × 6-12 mm, yellow, glabrous. Seeds 3-7; hilum 1/6 of the circumference.{\i   Mediterranean region.} Bl Gr Hs It Sa Si [Ga].
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b monantha}: Racemes 1- to 2-flowered; corolla 10-15 mm; legume 20-35 × 6-8·5 mm; seeds less than 3·5 mm, brown.{\i   Throughout the range of the species}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b triflora} (Ten.) B. L. Burtt & P. Lewis,{\i   Kew Bull.}{\b  1949}: 510 (1950): Racemes 2- to 4-flowered; corolla 14-20 mm; legume 30-50 × 8·5-12 mm; seeds more than 3·5 mm, blackish.{\i   S. Italy; Lampedusa; Greece.}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 27. V. articulata} Hornem.,{\i   Enum. Pl. Hort. Haun.} 41 (1807) ({\i  V. monanthos} (L.) Desf., non Retz.; incl.{\i   V. smyrnaea} Boiss.). Glabrous annual 20-70 cm. Leaflets 5-9 pairs, 10-25 × 1-4 mm, linear-oblong; each pair of stipules dimorphic, one simple, linear, the other palmatifid with 8-17 linear-subulate segments. Racemes 1- or 2-flowered. Calyx-teeth slightly unequal, longer than tube; corolla 8-17 mm, white or pale blue, sometimes with black tip. Legume 15-35 × 6-10 mm, yellow, glabrous. Seeds 2-4; hilum 1/10 of the circumference.{\i   S. Europe.} Bu Gr Hs It Ju Lu Sa Si [Au Cz Ga Ge Po Rm].
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Sect. ERVUM (L.) S. F. Gray. Leaflets usually numerous (more than 4 pairs); flowers few, in long-pedunculate racemes; calyx not gibbous at base; corolla usually less than 10 mm; style glabrous or equally pubescent all round.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 28. V. ervilia} (L.) Willd., {\i  Sp. Pl. }3: 1103 (1802). Glabrous or pubescent annual 15-50(-70) cm. Leaves without tendril; leaflets 8-15(-20) pairs, 5-15 × 1-4 mm, oblong or linear; stipules entire or palmatifid. Racemes 1- to 4-flowered. Calyx-teeth equal, longer than tube; corolla 6-9(-12) mm, white tinged with red or purple. Legume 10-30 × 4-6 mm, yellow, glabrous, torulose. Seeds 2-4; hilum 1/12 of the circumference.{\i   S. Europe.} Al Bu Cr Ga Gr It Ju Lu Tu [Au Cz Ge He].
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 29. V. leucantha} Biv.,{\i   Stirp. Rar. Sic. Descr.}{\b  1}: 9 (1813). Glabrous or pubescent annual 30-50 cm. Leaflets 5-10 pairs, 5-15 × 1-5 mm, oblong or linear; stipules dentate. Racemes 2- to 12-flowered. Calyx-teeth equal, longer than the tube; corolla 6-10 mm, pale purple, white at base. Legume 15-30 × 5-10 mm, pale brown, pubescent or subglabrous, beaked. Seeds 3-6. {\i  C. Mediterranean region.} ?Bl It Ju Sa Si. ({\i  N.W. Africa}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 30. V. vicioides} (Desf.) Coutinho,{\i   Fl. Port.} 363 (1913) ({\i  V. erviformis} Boiss.). Pubescent annual 15-50 cm. Racemes 5- to 20-flowered. Calyx-teeth subequal, twice as long as tube; corolla 4-8 mm, pale purple. Legume 13-16 × 5-10 mm, yellowish, glabrous or sparsely sericeous, long-stipitate. Seeds 2. {\i   S. Spain, S. Portugal}. Hs Lu. ({\i  N.W. Africa.})
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 31. V. hirsuta} (L.) S. F. Gray,{\i   Nat. Arr. Brit. Pl.}{\b  2}: 614 (1821). Pubescent annual 20-70 cm. Leaflets 4-10 pairs, 5-20 × 1-3(-5) mm, linear- or ovate-oblong; stipules entire, the lower linear-lanceolate, often with 2-4 setaceous teeth. Racemes 1- to 8-flowered, almost equalling leaves. Calyx-teeth equal, longer than tube; corolla 2-4(-5) mm, dirty white with purplish tinge. Legume 6-11 × 3-5 mm, black, usually pubescent. Seeds usually 2; hilum 1/3 of the circumference. 2n = 14.{\i   Almost throughout Europe}. All except Cr Fa Sb; introduced in Is.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 32. V. meyeri} Boiss.,{\i   Fl. Or.}{\b  2}: 595 (1872). Like {\b 31} but subglabrous; leaflets 0·5-1·5 mm wide; stipules all linear-setaceous, ciliate; racemes shorter than leaves; legume glabrous.{\i   Krym.} Rs (K).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 33. V. durandii} Boiss., {\i  Diagn. Pl. Or. Nov.}{\b  2}({\b 9}): 116 (1849) (V. baetica Lange). Densely pubescent annual 30-60 cm. Leaflets 6-10 pairs, 7-15 × 2-3 mm, lanceolate to elliptic-ovate; stipules entire. Racemes 5- to 8-flowered, longer than leaves. Calyx-teeth unequal, the lower longer than tube; corolla c. 8 mm, pale purple. Legume 20-40 × 8-14 mm, glabrous. Seeds 3-5.{\i   S.W. Spain}. Hs. ({\i  N.W. Africa}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 34. V. disperma} DC.,{\i   Cat. Pl. Horti Monsp. }154 (1813). Sparsely pubescent annual 10-50 cm. Leaflets 5-10 pairs, 8-12 × 1·5-4·5 mm, linear to elliptical; stipules entire. Racemes (1-)2 to 6-flowered, shorter than leaves. Calyx-teeth unequal, the lower slightly longer than tube; corolla 4-5 mm, pale purple. Legume 12-20 × 5-8 mm, brown, glabrous. Seeds usually 2; hilum 1/7-1/6 of the circumference. {\i  S.W. Europe}. Az Bl Co Ga Hs It Lu Sa Si.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 35. V. tenuissima} (Bieb.) Schinz & Thell., {\i  Viert. Naturf. Ges. Zürich }{\b 58}: 70 (1913) ({\i  V. gracilis} Loisel., Banks & non Solander). Subglabrous annual 15-60 cm. Leaflets 2-5 pairs, (6-)10-25 × 1-3 mm, linear; stipules entire. Racemes (1-)2- to 5-flowered, longer than leaves. Calyx-teeth unequal, shorter than tube; corolla (5-)6-9 mm, pale purple. Legume 12-17 × 3-4 mm, brown, glabrous or pubescent. Seeds 4-6; hilum 1/12-1/8 of the circumference.{\i   S. & W. Europe northwards to C. England.} Al Az Be Bl Br Ga Gr He Ho Hs It Ju Lu Rm Rs (K) Sa Si Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 36. V. tetrasperma} (L.) Schreber,{\i   Spicil. Fl. Lips.} 26 (1771). Subglabrous annual 10-60 cm. Leaflets 3-6(-8) pairs, 5-20 × 0·5-3 mm, linear or linear-oblong; stipules entire. Racemes 1- or 2-flowered about equalling leaves. Calyx-teeth unequal, shorter than tube; corolla 4-8 mm, pale purple. Legume 9-16 × 3-5 mm, brown, usually glabrous. Seeds 3-5; hilum 1/5 of the circumference. 2n = 14.{\i   Throughout Europe northwards to} c. 62°{\i   N. in Fennoscandia and Russia.} All except Az Co Cr Fa Is Sb.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 37. V. pubescens} (DC.) Link,{\i   Handb.}{\b  2}: 190 (1831). Like {\b 36} but sparsely pubescent; leaflets 3-5 pairs, 10-20 × 3-5 mm, elliptical to ovate-oblong; racemes up to 6-flowered, sometimes longer than leaves; lower calyx-teeth equalling or longer than tube; legume 12-16 × 3-4 mm, usually pubescent; hilum 1/12-1/10 of the circumference.{\i   S. Europe.} Bl Bu Co Cr Gr Hs It Ju Lu Rs (K) Sa Si.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 38. V. bifoliolata} Rodr.,{\i   Bull. Soc. Bot. Fr.}{\b  25}: 239 (1878). Glabrous annual 20-80 cm. Leaflets 1 pair, 10-14 × 0·7-1·5 mm, linear or linear-oblong; stipules entire. Racemes (1-)2-flowered, longer than leaves. Calyx-teeth unequal, shorter than tube; corolla 4-8 mm, purple. Legume 10-20 × 4-5 mm, brown, glabrous, stipe longer than calyx. Seeds 1-6; hilum 1/6 of the circumference. •{\i   Islas Baleares} ({\i  Menorca}). Bl.
\par

\par
133}
\par