{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 glabrous. Seeds c. 4. 2n = 12.{\i   From S.E. Czechoslovakia to S. Italy and S.E. Bulgaria; local.} Bu Cz Hu It Ju Rm.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 4. V. pinetorum} Boiss. & Spruner in Boiss.,{\i   Diagn. Pl. Or. Nov. }{\b 1}({\b 2}): 104 (1843). Sparsely pubescent perennial 30-50 cm. Leaflets 10-16 pairs, 10-20 × 3-7 mm, elliptic-lanceolate, acute. Racemes 8- to 20-flowered. Calyx-teeth unequal, the lower about as long as tube; corolla 12-19 mm, yellow. Legume 15-18 × 3·5-4 mm, dark brown, sparsely pubescent. Seeds c. 6; hilum 1/5-1/6 of the circumference. •{\i    S. Aegean region.} Cr Gr.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 5. V. ochroleuca} Ten.,{\i   Fl. Nap.}{\b  1}, Prodr. 42 (1811). Glabrous perennial 30-60 cm. Leaflets 7-12 pairs, linear to oblong or elliptical. Racemes 20- to 30-flowered. Calyx-teeth unequal, shorter than tube; corolla 7-13 mm, pale yellow or yellow-green. Legume 15-30 × 5·5-7·5 mm, brown, glabrous. Seeds c. 6; hilum 1/9-1/8 of the circumference.{\i   N.W. part of the Balkan peninsula, Italy, Sicilia.} Al Ju It Si.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b ochroleuca}: Leaflets (15-)20-45 × 3-9 mm, linear or oblong; calyx 2·7-4 mm. 2n = 12.{\i   Italy, Sicilia}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b dinara} (Borbás) K. Malý ex Rohlena,{\i   Sitz.-Ber. Böhm. Ges. Wiss}. ({\i  Math.-Nat. Kl.}) {\b 1912}({\b 1}): 36 (1913): Leaflets 10-20 × 2-5 mm, usually elliptical; calyx 2·4-3 mm.{\i   W. Jugoslavia, N. Albania}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 6. V. pisiformis} L.,{\i   Sp. Pl.} 734 (1753). Glabrous perennial 100-200 cm. Leaflets 3-5 pairs, 15-40(-60) × 15-40 mm, ovate or ovate-orbicular, obtuse, mucronate. Racemes 8- to 30-flowered. Calyx-teeth unequal, shorter than tube; corolla 13-20 mm, yellow. Legume 25-40 × 6-10 mm, pale brown, glabrous. Seeds 6-7; hilum ½ of the circumference.{\i   C. & E. Europe, extending to S.E. Norway, E. France, N. Italy and C. Jugoslavia.} Al Au Bu Cz Ga Ge He Hu It Ju No Po Rm Rs (C, W, K, E) Su.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 7. V. argentea} Lapeyr., {\i  Hist. Abr. Pyr}. 417 (1813). Villous-sericeous perennial 10-40 cm. Leaves without a tendril, usually with a terminal leaflet; leaflets 7-9 pairs, 8-16 × 1-4 mm, linear, obtuse; stipules entire. Racemes 3- to 7-flowered. Calyx-teeth unequal, the lower longer than the tube; corolla 18-25 mm, white with violet veins. Legume 22-30 × 7·5-10 mm, brown, villous. Seeds 4-7; hilum c. 1/10 of the circumference. •{\i    Pyrenees.} Ga Hs.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 8. V. serinica} Uechtr. & Huter,{\i   Österr. Bot. Zeitschr.}{\b  55}: 81 (1905) ( {\i  V. argentea }auct. ital., non Lapeyr). Like {\b 7} but grey-hirsute; leaves with a simple or branched tendril; leaflets 8-11 pairs, linear-lanceolate, mucronate; racemes 4- to 10-flowered; legume hirsute. •{\i   S. Italy} ({\i  Monte del Papa, near Lagonegro}). It.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 9. V. sicula} (Rafin.) Guss.,{\i   Fl. Sic. Syn.}{\b  2}: 292 (1844). Glabrous perennial 40-80 cm. Leaves without a tendril; leaflets 1-3 pairs, 20-50 × 1-3 mm, linear, acute. Racemes 15- to 25-flowered. Calyx-teeth unequal, shorter than tube; corolla 15-20 mm, pale purple. Legume 25-50 × 4-10 mm, glabrous, yellow. Seeds c. 6.{\i   S. Italy, Sicilia.} ?Gr It Si.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   {\b 10-13.  V. cracca} group. Perennial up to 200 cm. Leaflets 5-20 pairs; stipules entire. Racemes 8- to 40-flowered. Calyx-teeth unequal; corolla purple, violet or blue; limb of the standard equalling or longer than claw. Legume brown, glabrous. Seeds 4-8.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  A critical group of species not yet fully understood and frequently misidentified. Flower-colour may be of taxonomic importance in the group, but it is not clear from the information available to what extent the colour varies in each species.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Corolla 8-12(-13) mm; limb of the standard about as long as claw
\par
2 Stems glabrous or pubescent with appressed hairs; lower
\par
  calyx-teeth about as long as tube ................................................... {\b 10. cracca}
\par
2 Stems densely pubescent with patent hairs; lower calyx-teeth
\par
  c. 1½ times as long as tube ............................................................ {\b 11. incana} 
\par
1 Corolla (10-)12-18 mm; limb of the standard longer than claw   
\par
3 Leaflets 2-6 mm wide, linear-lanceolate ................................. {\b 12. tenuifolia} 
\par
3 Leaflets 1-2 mm wide, linear to setaceous .............................. {\b 13. dalmatica}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 10. V. cracca} L.,{\i   Sp. Pl.} 735 (1753). Stems glabrous or pubescent with appressed hairs. Leaflets 6-15 pairs, 5-30 × 1-6 mm, linear to ovate-oblong. Racemes 10- to 30-flowered, dense. Lower calyx-teeth almost equalling tube; corolla 8-12 mm, bluish-violet; limb of the standard about equalling claw. Legume 10-25 × 4-6 mm, with stipe shorter than calyx. Seeds with hilum 1/4-1/3 of the circumference. 2n = 14, 27, 28, 30.{\i   Almost throughout Europe.} All except Az Bl ?Lu Sb.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b V. oreophila} Zertová, {\i  Nov. Bot. Horti Bot. Univ. Carol. Prag.}{\b  1962}: 51 (1962), described from mountains in Czechoslovakia, and probably occurring elsewhere in the mountains of C. & S. Europe and in Scandinavia, is probably best treated as a subspecies of {\b 10}. It is smaller, with the stems 5-30 cm, the leaflets 6-10 pairs, lanceolate, the racemes shorter than the leaves and the corolla 10-13 mm. It has 2n = 28.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   {\b 11. V. incana} Gouan,{\i   Fl. Monsp.} 189 (1765) ({\i  V. cracca} subsp.{\i   gerardii} Gaudin, {\i  V. gerardii} All.) Like {\b 10} but stems densely pubescent with patent hairs; leaflets 10-22 pairs; racemes 20- to 40-flowered; lower calyx-teeth c. 1½ times as long as tube; legume with stipe equalling or longer than calyx. 2n = 12.{\i   Mountains of C. & S. Europe}. Al Au Bu Co Cz Ga Gr He Hs It Ju Lu Si.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   {\b 12. V. tenuifolia} Roth, {\i  Tent. Fl. Germ.}{\b  1}: 309 (1788) (incl. {\i  V. boissieri} Freyn, {\i  V. elegans} Guss.). Stems glabrous or appressed-pubescent. Leaflets 5-13 pairs, 10-30(-40) × 2-6 mm, linear or linear-oblong. Racemes 15- to 30-flowered, usually dense. Lower calyx-teeth shorter than or sub-equal to the tube; corolla (10-)12-18 mm, purple, pale lilac or bluish-lilac; limb of the standard longer than claw. Legume 20-35 × 5-8 mm. Seeds with hilum 1/5-1/4 of the circumference. 2n = 24.{\i   C., S. & E. Europe, extending to 60 N. in Sweden; often occurring as a casual in W. & N. Europe and perhaps locally naturalized.} Al Au Be Bu Co ?Cr Cz Da Ga Ge ?Gr He Hs Hu It Lu Ju Po Rm Rs (N, B, C, W, K, E) Sa Si Su Tu [Br Ho].
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Many of the records from S.E. Europe are probably referable to {\b 13}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   {\b 13. V. dalmatica} A. Kerner,{\i   Sched. Fl. Exsicc. Austro-Hung.}{\b  4}: 2 (1886) ({\i  V. tenuifolia} subsp.{\i   stenophylla} Velen.). Like {\b 12} but leaflets 1-2(-2·5) mm wide, linear or setaceous, and racemes 8 to 20-flowered, lax. 2n = 12. {\i  S.E. Europe, extending northwards to Hungary.} Al Bu Cr Gr Hu It Ju Rm Rs (K).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   {\b 14. V. sibthorpii} Boiss.,{\i   Diagn. Pl. Or. Nov.}{\b  2}({\b 9}): 122 (1849). Densely villous perennial 30-100 cm. Leaflets 6-12 pairs, 5-20 × 2-6 mm, elliptical, oblong-elliptical or linear-elliptical; stipules entire. Racemes 8- to 25-flowered. Calyx-teeth unequal, the lower about equalling the tube; corolla 12-15 mm, bluish-purple, sometimes with white wings; limb of standard equalling or longer than claw. Legume 12-20 × 5-6 mm, brown, villous. Seeds 4-8; hilum 1/6 of the circumference.{\i   Greece and Aegean region.} Cr Gr ?.Ju.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   {\b 15. V. cassubica} L.,{\i   Sp. Pl.} 735 (1753). Pubescent or subglabrous perennial 30-60(-100) cm. Leaflets 5-16 pairs, 7-30 × 3-10 mm, linear-lanceolate to oblong or elliptical; stipules
\par

\par
131}
\par