{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 25 At least the upper leaves with a long, usually branched tendril
\par
34 Corolla 4-9 mm, whitish or pale purple; racemes 1- to 8-flowered
\par
35 Leaflets 1 pair ........................................................................ {\b 38. bifoliolata}
\par
35 Leaflets 2 or more pairs
\par
36 Seeds usually 2; racemes shorter than leaves .......................... {\b 34. disperma}
\par
36 Seeds 3-6; racemes equalling or longer than leaves
\par
37 Stem densely pubescent; legume 20-40 × 8-14 mm ................. {\b 33. durandii}
\par
37 Stem glabrous or sparsely pubescent; legume not more than 17 × 5 mm 
\par
38 Lower calyx-teeth as long as or longer than tube; leaflets
\par
   3-5 mm wide ............................................................................ {\b 37. pubescens}
\par
38 Lower calyx-teeth shorter than tube; leaflets 0·5-3 mm wide
\par
39 Racemes (1-)2- to 5-flowered, longer than leaves; hilum 1/12- 
\par
   1/8 of the circumference of the seed ....................................... {\b 35. tenuissima}
\par
39 Racemes 1- or 2-flowered, about equalling leaves; hilum 1/5 of 
\par
   the circumference of the seed ................................................ {\b 36. tetrasperma}
\par
34 Corolla 9 mm or more; rarely smaller and then violet, with 10- 
\par
   to 40-flowered racemes
\par
40 Corolla yellow; leaflets 15-40 mm wide ................................. {\b 6. pisiformis}
\par
40 Corolla white, purple, violet or blue, rarely with yellowish 
\par
   wings; leaflets usually less than 15 mm wide
\par
41 Stipules denticulate to serrate, or bipartite
\par
42 Stipules bipartite, the lobes entire; racemes shorter than leaves
\par
   .................................................................................................. {\b 26. monantha}
\par
42 Stipules denticulate to serrate, not bipartite; racemes usually 
\par
   longer than leaves
\par
43 Leaflets 2-3 pairs; racemes 1- to 3-flowered .......................... {\b 53. bithynica}
\par
43 Leaflets 3 or more pairs; racemes (2-)4- to 20- flowered
\par
44 Calyx-tube strongly gibbous at base; limb of standard about 
\par
   1/2 as long as claw .............................................................. {\b 22. benghalensis}
\par
44 Calyx-tube not or slightly gibbous at base; limb of standard 
\par
   about as long as claw
\par
45 Stipules lunate; hilum 1/2-2/3 of the circumference of the seeds
\par
46 Leaflets 5-12 pairs; corolla white with purple veins; legume 
\par
   black .......................................................................................... {\b 16. sylvatica}
\par
46 Leaflets 3-5 pairs; corolla blue or purple; legume brown ... {\b 20. dumetorum}
\par
45 Stipules 1/2-sagittate; hilum not more than 1/3 of the 
\par
   circumference of the seed
\par
47 Corolla 10-15 mm ...................................................................... {\b 24. biennis}
\par
47 Corolla 15-24 mm
\par
48 Leaflets 1-4 mm wide; corolla violet with pale keel; hilum 
\par
   1/4-1/3 of the circumference of the seed .......................... {\b 18. onobrychoides}
\par
48 Leaflets 4-9 mm wide; corolla white with bluish veins on the 
\par
   standard; hilum 1/10 of the circumference of the seed ............. {\b 19. altissima}
\par
41 Stipules entire
\par
49 Calyx strongly gibbous at base; limb of the standard about 1/2 
\par
   as long as claw
\par
50 Legume not or only shortly stipitate, the stipe not exceeding
\par
   the calyx; leaflets 1-6 pairs ........................................................... {\b 25. cretica}
\par
50 Legume stipitate, the stipe exceeding the calyx; leaflets 4-12 pairs
\par
51 Corolla reddish-purple, usually black at tip; racemes shorter 
\par
   than or equalling leaves ...................................................... {\b 22. benghalensis}
\par
51 Corolla violet or purple, sometimes with white or yellow 
\par
   wings; racemes usually longer than leaves ................................... {\b 21. villosa}
\par
49 Calyx only slightly gibbous at base; limb of the standard 
\par
   usually as long as or longer than claw
\par
52 Corolla (17-)18 mm or more; racemes not more than 12-flowered
\par
53 Plant densely hirsute; legume hirsute .......................................... {\b 8. serinica}
\par
53 Plant glabrous or pubescent; legume glabrous or sparsely 
\par
   pubescent
\par
54 Corolla violet; leaflets 4-11 pairs, 10-35 mm ............... {\b 18. onobrychioides} 
\par
54 Corolla white or yellowish with purple tip; leaflets 1-6 pairs, 
\par
   4-10 mm ........................................................................................ {\b 25. cretica}
\par
52 Corolla not more than 18 mm; racemes up to 40 flowered
\par
55 Racemes 1- to 6-flowered; leaflets 1-6 pairs .............................. {\b 25. cretica}
\par
55 Racemes 4- to 40-flowered; leaflets 4 or more pairs
\par
56 Plant villous; legume villous .................................................. {\b 14. sibthorpii}
\par
56 Plant glabrous or pubescent; legume glabrous or sparsely pubescent
\par
57 Racemes shorter than or equalling leaves
\par
58 Corolla white with violet tip and veins; leaflets mostly 3-6 
\par
   pairs; seeds 4-6 ............................................................................. {\b 24. biennis}
\par
58 Corolla purple, violet or blue; leaflets 5 or more pairs
\par
59 Legume 4-6 mm wide; seeds 6-8; lower tooth of calyx ± equalling 
\par
   tube ............................................................................ ({\b 10-13}).{\b  cracca }group
\par
59 Legume 6-8 mm wide; seeds 1-3; lower tooth of calyx 
\par
   distinctly shorter than tube ....................................................... {\b 15. cassubica}
\par
57 Racemes exceeding leaves
\par
60 Corolla 8-12 mm; limb of the standard about as long as claw; 
\par
   legume 4-6 mm wide ...............................................  ({\b 10-13}).{\b  cracca }group
\par
60 Corolla (10-)12-18 mm; legume 6-8 mm wide
\par
61 Limb of the standard longer than claw; leaflets 6-20 pairs; 
\par
   tendrils usually branched ........................................... ({\b 10-13}).{\b  cracca} group
\par
61 Limb of the standard shorter than claw; leaflets 4-8 pairs; 
\par
   tendrils usually simple ........................................................... {\b 17. multicaulis}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Sect. CRACCA  S.F. Gray. Leaflets usually numerous (more than 5 pairs); flowers usually numerous in long-pedunculate racemes; calyx bilabiate, somewhat gibbous at base; corolla usually large (more than 10 mm); style equally pubescent all round.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. V. orobus} DC. in Lam. & DC.,{\i   Fl. Fr.} ed. 3, {\b 5}: 577 (1815). Pubescent perennial up to 60 cm. Leaves shortly mucronate at apex without a tendril; leaflets 6-15 pairs, 8-23 × 3-8 mm, oblong to elliptical, obtuse, mucronate. Racemes 6- to 20-flowered. Calyx-teeth unequal, shorter than tube; corolla 12-15(-20) mm, white with purple veins. Legume 20-30 × 4-7 mm, yellow, glabrous. Seeds 4-5; hilum 1/3-1/2 of the circumference.{\i   W. Europe.} Be Br Da Ga Ge Hb He Hs Lu No.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. V. montenegrina} Rohlena,{\i   Feddes Repert.}{\b  3}: 146 (1907)(incl.{\i   V. orbelica} Stoj. & Stefanov). Glabrous or sparsely pubescent perennial 40-60 cm. Leaves without a tendril, often with a terminal leaflet; leaflets 8-17 pairs, 10-25 × 4-8 mm, oblong, obtuse or emarginate, minutely denticulate. Racemes 10- to 30-flowered. Calyx-teeth unequal, shorter than tube; corolla c. 14 mm, violet-blue or white with violet tinge. Legume c. 20 × 5-6 mm, glabrous. Seeds 4-5. •{\i   W. Jugoslavia, S.W. Bulgaria.} Bu Ju.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Possibly not specifically distinct from {\b V. abbreviata} Fischer ex Sprengel, {\i  Pugillus}{\b  1}: 50 (1813), from the Caucasus.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 3. V. sparsiflora} Ten.,{\i   Fl. Nap.}{\b  5}: 110 (1836). Sparsely pubescent perennial up to 100 cm. Leaves without a tendril; leaflets 6-14 pairs, 8-25 × 4-10 mm, oblong to elliptical, acute. Racemes 6- to 20-flowered. Calyx-teeth unequal, shorter than tube; corolla 15-25 mm, pale yellow. Legume 20-40 × 4-9 mm, pale yellow,
\par

\par
130}
\par