{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 entire. Racemes 4- to 15-flowered. Calyx-teeth unequal, shorter than tube; corolla 10-13 mm, purple or blue, wings and keel whitish. Legume 15-30 × 6-8 mm, oblong-rhombic, yellow, glabrous. Seeds 1-3; hilum 1/3 of the circumference. 2n = 12.{\i    S.C. & E. Europe, extending westwards to France and northwards to} 60°{\i   N. in Fennoscandia; absent from most islands}. Al Au Bu Cz Da *Fe Ga Ge Gr Hu It Ju No Po Rm Rs (N, B, C, W, K, E) Si Su Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 16. V. sylvatica} L., {\i  Sp. Pl.} 734 (1753). Usually glabrous perennial 60-200 cm. Leaflets 5-12 pairs, 6-20 × 3-10 mm, oblong to ovate-oblong; stipules dentate. Racemes 5- to 20-flowered. Calyx-teeth unequal, shorter than tube; corolla 12-20 mm, white with purple veins. Legume 25-30 × 5-10 mm, black, glabrous. Seeds 4-5; hilum 2/3 of the circumference. 2n = 14.{\i   N., C. & E. Europe, extending southwards to Italy and Crna Gora.} Al Au Br Co Cz Da Fe Ga Ge Hb He ?Hs Hu It Ju No Po Rm Rs (N, B, C, W, E) Su.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 17. V. multicaulis} Ledeb.,{\i   Icon. Pl. Fl. Ross.}{\b  1}: 12 (1829). Pubescent perennial 20-45 cm. Leaves usually with a simple tendril; leaflets 4-8 pairs, 15-22 × 1·5-2·5 mm, linear-oblong or elliptic-oblong; stipules entire. Racemes 10- to 20-flowered. Calyx-teeth unequal, the lower almost equalling tube; corolla 15-18 mm, violet. Legume 20-30 × 6-7 mm, brown, glabrous. Seeds c. 5.  {\i   Rocks and stony slopes. C. Ural.} Rs (C).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 18. V. onobrychioides} L., {\i  Sp. Pl.} 735 (1753). Glabrous or pubescent perennial 30-120 cm. Leaflets 4-11 pairs, 10-35 × 1-4 mm, linear or oblong-lanceolate; stipules entire or with few teeth. Racemes 4- to 12-flowered. Calyx-teeth unequal, the lower equalling the tube; corolla 17-24 mm, violet with pale keel. Legume 25-40 × 5-7 mm, reddish-brown, glabrous, stipitate. Seeds 5-10; hilum 1/4-1/3 of the circumference. {\i  S. Europe.} Al Bu Ga Gr He Hs It Ju Lu Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 19. V. altissima} Desf.,{\i   Fl. Atl., }{\b 2}: 163 (1799). Glabrous perennial 60-200 cm. Leaflets 5-9 pairs, 10-25 × 4-9 mm, oblong, sometimes denticulate; stipules dentate. Racemes 5- to 15-flowered. Calyx-teeth unequal, shorter than tube; corolla 15-19 mm, white with bluish veins on the standard. Legume 40-50 × 5-7 mm, brown, subglabrous. Seeds 6-10; hilum 1/10 of the circumference. {\i  W. Mediterranean region, westwards to S. France.} Co Ga It Sa Si.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 20. V. dumetorum} L.,{\i   Sp. Pl.} 734 (1753). Subglabrous perennial (30-)80-150(-200) cm. Leaflets 3-5 pairs, 12-40 × 6-20 mm, ovate; stipules dentate. Racemes 2- to 14-flowered. Calyx-teeth unequal, shorter than tube; corolla 12-20 mm, blue or purple. Legume 25-60 × 6-10 mm, brown, glabrous. Seeds 6-10; hilum c. ½ of the circumference.{\i   From S.C. Sweden and White Russia southwards to C. Italy and Greece, and westwards to E. France.} Au Bu Cz Da Ga Ge Gr He Hu It Ju Po Rm Rs (B, C, W, E) Su.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 21. V. villosa} Roth,{\i   Tent. Fl. Germ.}{\b  2}({\b 2}): 182 (1793). Annual 30-200 cm. Leaflets 4-12 pairs, linear to elliptical; stipules entire. Calyx strongly gibbous at the base; calyx-teeth unequal; corolla 10-20 mm, violet, purple or blue, sometimes with white or yellow wings; limb of the standard c. ½ as long as claw. Legume 20-40 × (4-)6 mm brown, stipitate. Seeds 2-8; hilum 1/12-1/5 of the circumference.{\i   Europe, southwards from N. France and White Russia; widely cultivated for fodder and naturalized further north. }Al Au Bl Bu Co Cr Cz Ga Ge Gr He Hs Hu It Ju Lu Po Rm Rs (C, W, K, E) Sa Si Tu [Be Br Da Fe Ho No Rs (N, B) Su].
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Stems villous; lower calyx-teeth longer than tube .............. ({\b a}) subsp. {\b villosa}
\par
1 Stems glabrous or appressed-pubescent; lower calyx-teeth 
\par
  shorter than tube
\par
2 Legume pubescent
\par
3 Racemes 5- to 20-flowered ........................................ ({\b c}) subsp. {\b eriocarpa}
\par
3 Racemes 2- to 6- flowered ..................................... ({\b d}) subsp. {\b microphylla}
\par
2 Legume glabrous or glabrescent
\par
4 Racemes 10- to 30-flowered ............................................. ({\b b}) subsp. {\b varia}
\par
4 Racemes 2- to 10-flowered
\par
5 Wings usually yellow; legume glabrous ............. ({\b e}) subsp. {\b pseudocracca}
\par
5 Wings purple, violet or white; legume usually sparsely
\par
  pubescent when young ........................................... ({\b d}) subsp. {\b microphylla}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b villosa}: Villous. Leaflets (8-)10-35 × 2-8 mm. Racemes 10- to 30-flowered. Calyx-teeth plumose, the lower as long as or longer than tube; corolla 10-20 mm; wings variously coloured. Legume glabrous.{\i   Almost throughout the range of the species; widely naturalized}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b varia} (Host) Corb., {\i  Nouv. Fl. Normand.} 181 (1893) ({\i  V. dasycarpa }auct., ?an Ten., {\i  V. varia} Host): Glabrous or appressed-pubescent. Leaflets (8-)10-30 × 2-8 mm. Racemes 10- to 30-flowered. Calyx-teeth glabrous or appressed-pubescent, all shorter than tube; corolla 10-16(-18) mm; wings violet, purple, blue or white. Legume glabrous.{\i   Almost throughout the range of the species; widely naturalized}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b c}) Subsp. {\b eriocarpa} (Hausskn.) P. W. Ball,{\i   Feddes Repert.}{\b  79}: 45 (1968) ({\i  V. eriocarpa} (Hausskn.) Halácsy): Like subsp. ({\b b}) but leaflets 5-15(-20) × 1-5 mm; racemes 5- to 20-flowered; legume pubescent at least when young.{\i   Greece and Aegean region; Sicilia}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b d}) Subsp. {\b microphylla} (D'Urv.) P. W. Ball, {\i  Feddes Repert.}{\b  79}: 45 (1968) ({\i  V. microphylla} D'Urv.): Like subsp. ({\b b}) but leaflets 3-10 × 1-4 mm; racemes 2- to 6-flowered; legume glabrous or pubescent.{\i   S. Greece and Aegean region}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b e}) Subsp. {\b pseudocracca} (Bertol.) P. W. Ball,{\i   Feddes Repert.}{\b  79}: 45 (1968) ({\i  V. pseudocracca} Bertol.; incl. {\i  V. elegantissima} R. J. Shuttlew): Like subsp. ({\b b}) but leaflets 5-20 × 1-5 mm; racemes 3- to 10-flowered; wings usually yellow. 2n = 14.{\i   S.W. Europe}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 22. V. benghalensis} L.,{\i   Sp. Pl.} 736 (1753) ({\i  V. atropurpurea} Desf.). Villous annual or short-lived perennial 20-80 cm. Leaflets 5-9 pairs, 10-25 × 1·5-6 mm, linear, oblong or elliptical; stipules entire or dentate. Racemes 2- to 12-flowered. Calyx strongly gibbous at base; calyx-teeth unequal, the lower longer than tube; corolla 10-18 mm, reddish-purple, usually black at tip; limb of the standard about ½ as long as claw. Legume 25-40 × 8-11 mm, brown, pubescent, at least on the suture, shortly stipitate. Seeds 3-5; hilum 1/5 of the circumference. 2n = 14.{\i   Mediterranean region, Portugal, Açores.} Az Bl Co Ga Gr Hs It Lu Sa Si.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 23. V. glauca} C. Presl in J. & C. Presl,{\i   Del. Prag.} 37 (1822). Pubescent perennial 10-40 cm. Leaves with a simple tendril; leaflets 3-6 pairs, 5-12 × 1-3 mm, oblong to ovate; stipules entire. Racemes 4- to 8-flowered. Calyx-teeth equal, about equalling tube; corolla 8-10 mm, pale purple. Legume 15-25 × 5-9 mm, dark red-brown, pubescent, at least on the suture. Seeds c. 4; hilum 1/8-1/7 of the circumference.{\i   Sardegna, Sicilia.} Sa Si. ({\i  N.W. Africa}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 24. V. biennis} L., {\i  Sp. Pl.} 736 (1753) ({\i  V. picta} Fischer & C. A. Meyer). Glabrous or sparsely pubescent annual 30-150 cm. Leaflets 3-6(-8) pairs, 10-40 × 2-10 mm, oblong; stipules entire or dentate. Racemes 5- to 20-flowered. Calyx-teeth unequal, shorter than or equalling tube; corolla 10-15 mm, white with violet at the tip and violet veins. Legume 25-35 × 6-7 mm, brown, glabrous. Seeds 4-6; hilum 1/4-1/3 of the circumference. 2n = 14.{\i   From Hungary to W. Kazakhstan; local.} Hu Rm Rs (C, W, E).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 25. V. cretica} Boiss. & Heldr. in Boiss.,{\i   Diagn. Pl. Or. Nov.}{\b  2}({\b 9}): 118 (1849). Sparsely pubescent annual 10-30 cm. Leaflets 1-6 pairs, 4-10 × 1-4 mm, linear to elliptical; stipules entire.
\par

\par
132}
\par