{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 {\i  seeds and immature legume and as fodder; often occurring as a relict of cultivation and perhaps locally naturalized.}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  The origin of this species is not known. Some authorities consider it to be native to S.W. Asia and others to N. Africa, but no undoubtedly wild plants are known from these areas. An alternative theory is that it has been developed under cultivation from{\b  54}, which it closely resembles in many characters.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc {\b 50.                Lens}                Miller
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc By P.W. Ball.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Like {\i  Vicia }but calyx-teeth equal and at least twice as long as the tube; style pubescent on the upper side; legume strongly compressed; seeds flat, orbicular.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Stipules semi-hastate or dentate
\par
2 Legume glabrous; peduncle usually aristate ............................... {\b 1. nigricans}
\par
2 Legume pubescent; peduncle not aristate .................................... {\b 4. ervoides}
\par
1 Stipules oblong-lanceolate, entire
\par
3 Legume 12-16 × 6-12 mm; racemes about equalling leaves ....... {\b 2. culinaris} 
\par
3 Legume 7-11 × 4·5-6·5 mm; racemes slightly longer than
\par
  leaves ........................................................................................... {\b 3. orientalis}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. L. nigricans} (Bieb.) Godron,{\i   Fl. Lorr. }{\b 1}: 173 (1843) ({\i  Ervum nigricans} Bieb.,{\i   L. culinaris} subsp.{\i   nigricans} (Bieb.) Thell., {\i  Vicia nigricans }(Bieb.) Cosson & Germ.). Annual 10-30 cm, patent-pubescent. Leaves sometimes without tendril; leaflets 2-5 pairs, 5-10 × 1·5-2 mm, linear to oblong; stipules semi-hastate or dentate. Racemes 1- to 3-flowered, longer than leaves; peduncle with an articulation near the apex and aristate. Calyx-teeth 2-4 times as long as tube; corolla 4-7 mm, pale blue or lilac. Legume 9-12 × 4-6 mm, yellowish, glabrous. Seeds 1-3.{\i   S. Europe.} ?Al ?Bl Bu Co Cr Ga Gr Hs It Ju Lu Rs (K, E) Sa Si.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. L. culinaris} Medicus, {\i  Vorl. Churpf. Phys.-Ökon. Ges.}{\b  2}: 361 (1787)({\i  L. esculenta} Moench, {\i  Ervum lens} L., {\i  Vicia lens} (L.) Cosson & Germ.). Like {\b 1} but usually more robust; stems up to 40(-50) cm; leaflets 3-8 pairs, up to 20 × 8 mm, oblong or elliptical; stipules oblong-lanceolate, entire; racemes about equalling leaves; calyx-teeth up to 6 times as long as tube; legume 12-16 × 6-12 mm.{\i   Widely cultivated in C., S. & E. Europe for its edible seeds} ({\i  lentils}) {\i  and sometimes naturalized.} [Al Au Az Bu Co Cr Cz Ga Ge Gr He Hs Hu It Ju Lu Rm Rs (B, C, W, K, E) Sa Si.] ({\i  Origin not known}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 3. L. orientalis} (Boiss.) M. Popov,{\i   Bull. Univ. Asie Centr.}{\b  15} (Suppl.): 22 (1927). Like {\b 1} but stipules oblong-lanceolate, entire; peduncles not or shortly aristate; legume 7-11 × 4·5-6·5 mm. {\i  S.E. Greece; Krym.} Gr Rs (K). ({\i  S. W. Asia.})
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Only recently detected in Europe and perhaps more widespread.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 4. L. ervoides} (Brign.) Grande, {\i  Bull. Orto Bot. Napoli}{\b  5}: 58 (1918) ({\i  L. lenticula} (Schreber) Alef.,{\i   Ervum ervoides} (Brign.) Hayek). Annual up to 30 cm, appressed-pubescent. Leaves without tendril or uppermost with a short tendril; leaflets 2-4 pairs, 8-18 × 1-3(-4) mm, linear to elliptical; stipules semi-hastate or dentate. Racemes 1- to 2-flowered, longer than leaves; peduncle with an articulation near the apex, not aristate. Calyx-teeth 2-4 times as long as tube; corolla 4-6 mm, pale blue. Legume 9-11 × 4-5 mm, yellowish, pubescent. Seeds 1-3.{\i   S. Europe, but very local in the west.} Al Bl Bu Cr Gr It Hs Ju Rs (K) Sa Si.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc {\b 51.                    Lathyrus}               L.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc (Incl.{\i   Orobus} L.)
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc By P.W. Ball.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Annual or perennial herbs, often climbing by means of tendrils. Leaves usually paripinnate and terminated by a tendril, rarely reduced to a tendril or a grass-like phyllode; leaflets usually distinctly parallel-veined; stipules usually herbaceous. Flowers in axillary racemes, or solitary, axillary. Calyx actinomorphic to bilabiate; keel usually obtuse; stamens diadelphous; style pubescent on the upper side, rarely glabrous. Legume usually oblong, compressed, dehiscent. Seeds 2 or more.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  No clear distinction exists between this genus and{\i   Vicia}. The majority of the species can readily be separated from {\i  Vicia} by the often winged stem, the parallel-veined, and often fewer leaflets and the style-pubescence. On the other hand species {\b 1-10} can be separated only by style-pubescence, and it must be doubtful whether this character alone can justify the assignment of these species and, for example {\i  Vicia orobus} or {\i  V. oroboides}, to separate genera.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 In a number of species, particularly {\b 12-14} and {\b 39-45} the colour of the corolla changes markedly on drying, becoming pale purple or blue instead of a bright red or reddish-purple. Because of this some of the descriptions of corolla-colour may not be accurate.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Most species occur in dry grassland or scrub or as ruderals.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Literature: M. Bässler,{\i   Feddes Repert.}{\b  72}: 69-97 (1966). K. Brunsberg,{\i   Bot. Not. }{\b 118}: 377-402 (1965). Z. Czefranova,{\i   Nov. Syst. Pl. Vasc.} ({\i  Leningrad}){\b  1965}: 152-167 (1965).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Leaves without leaflets
\par
2 Rhachis forming a grass-like phyllode; stipules minute;
\par
  corolla crimson ............................................................................. {\b 53. nissolia}
\par
2 Rhachis forming a tendril; stipules 6-30(-50) mm, ovate,
\par
  hastate; corolla yellow ................................................................... {\b 54. aphaca}
\par
1 At least the upper leaves with 1 or more pairs of leaflets
\par
3 Stem winged, at least in the upper part
\par
4 Lower leaves without leaflets, the rhachis broadly winged and 
\par
  resembling a leaf
\par
5 Upper leaves with 1-2 pairs of leaflets; corolla yellow; dorsal 
\par
  suture of legume with 2 wings ....................................................... {\b 52. ochrus}
\par
5 Upper leaves with 2-4 pairs of leaflets; corolla purple with 
\par
  violet, lilac, white or pink wings; dorsal suture of legume not winged
\par
6 Wings violet or lilac; standard emarginate; dorsal suture of 
\par
  legume channelled ................................................................... {\b 50. clymenum}
\par
6 Wings white or pink; standard mucronate; dorsal suture of 
\par
  legume not channelled ............................................................. {\b 51. articulatus}
\par
4 All leaves with 1 or more pairs of leaflets
\par
7 At least some leaves with 2 or more pairs of leaflets; racemes 2- 
\par
  to many-flowered
\par
8 Leaves without a tendril; rhachis mucronate
\par
9 Corolla cream, sometimes with a pink or purple tinge; hilum 
\par
  c. 1/8 of the circumference of the seed .................................. {\b 15. pannonicus}
\par
9 Corolla red-purple or crimson; hilum c. ¼ of the circumference 
\par
  of the seed
\par
10 Calyx pubescent ....................................................................... {\b 18. alpestris}
\par
10 Calyx glabrous, sometimes with ciliate teeth ........................ {\b 19. montanus}
\par
8  Leaves with a tendril
\par
11 Rhachis at least 4 mm wide, broadly winged .................. {\b 34. heterophyllus}
\par
11 Rhachis not more than 3 mm wide
\par
12 Stipules usually at least 25 mm, about as large as leaflets ..... {\b 9. pisiformis}
\par
12 Stipules less than 25 mm, distinctly smaller than leaflets 
\par
13 Lowest tooth of the calyx about as long as tube ...................... {\b 23. palustris}
\par

\par
136}
\par