{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 numerous, rather small, slender, subequal, hairy, deflexed or falcate. Leaflets 5, hairy or grey-tomentose beneath and with pectinately arranged hairs on the veins; terminal leaflet 4-5 times as long as its petiolule, usually elliptical, acuminate, rounded at base. Inflorescence long, leafy to the apex, the axis hairy, sparsely glandular and with numerous falcate or deflexed prickles; bracts leaf-like; flowers 1-2 cm in diameter. Sepals appressed to young fruit, grey- or white-tomentose and with longer hairs, appendiculate, sometimes with a few acicles and stalked glands; petals obovate, small, white; stamens white, slightly shorter than or equalling the greenish styles; receptacle hairy; carpels glabrous or pubescent. 2n = 28.{\i  N.W. & N.C. Europe, extending to Hungary}. Au Be Br Cz Da Ge Hb Ho Hu Po.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Related species include:
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b  R. axillaris} Lej. in Lej. & Court., {\i Comp. Fl. Belg.}{\b  2}: 166 (1831) ({\i R. leyi} Focke, {\i R. scanicus} F. Aresch.). 2n = 28. Be Br Da Ge Su.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b  R. carpinetorum} Freyn,{\i  Verh. Zool.-Bot. Ges. Wien}{\b  31}: 373 (1882). Ju.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b  R. cimbricus} Focke, {\i Abh. Nat. Ver. Bremen}{\b  9}: 334 (1886). Cz Da Ge.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b  R. danicus} Focke, {\i op. cit.} 322 (1886). Br Da Ge.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b  R. fictus} Sudre,{\i  Bat. Eur. }70 (1907). Cz Ga Hu.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b  R. loretianus} Sudre,{\i  Rubi Eur.} 37 (1908). Ga Rm.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b  R. orthosepalus} Halácsy,{\i  Verh. Zool.-Bot. Ges. Wien }{\b 35}: 664 (1886). Au.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 26. R. questieri} P. J. Mueller & Lefevre,{\i  Pollichia }{\b 16-17}: 120 (1859). Stems robust, angled, with plane faces, glabrescent, armed with strong, brown, patent to falcate prickles and a few smaller gland-tipped pricklets; young shoots bronze-coloured. Leaflets 3-5 glabrescent on both surfaces; terminal leaflet elliptical to obovate, long-acuminate, rounded or subcordate at base, coarsely and unevenly serrate. Inflorescence elongate, narrow, leafy, the upper leaves grey-tomentose; pedicels shorter than the leaf-like bracts; axis grey-tomentose and with short hairs, a few glands and falcate prickles. Sepals somewhat deflexed at first, the apices sometimes rising as the fruit swells, long-pointed, tomentose, unarmed or with a few acicles; petals obovate, emarginate, pink; stamens white or pink-based, exceeding the yellowish or pinkish styles; carpels usually glabrous. 2n = 28. {\i W. & C. Europe.} Au Be Br Cz Ga Hb Hu It Lu Rm.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Related species include:
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b  R. castranus} Samp. ex Coutinho, {\i Fl. Port.} 298 (1913). Lu.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b R. maassii} Focke ex Bertram,{\i  Fl. Braunschw. }75 (1876). Br Cz Ge Ho Rm.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b  R. mercicus} Bagnall,{\i  Jour. Bot. }({\i London}) {\b 30}: 372 (1892). 2n = 28. Br Hs.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b  R. muenteri} Marsson,{\i  Fl. Neu- Vorpommern }144 (1869). Be Br Ga Ge Lu Su.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b  R. nemoralis} P. J. Mueller,{\i  Flora} ({\i Regensb}.){\b  41}: 139 (1858). Br Da Ge No.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b  R. scheutzii} Lindeb. ex F. Aresch.,{\i  Bot. Not.}{\b  1886}: 38 (1886). 2n = 28. Su.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 27. R. laciniatus} Willd.,{\i  Hort. Berol.}{\b  2} ({\b 7}): 82 (1806). Stems robust, sulcate, glabrescent, armed with numerous, equal, falcate prickles. Leaflets 5, long-stalked, divided into pairs of laciniate segments, glabrescent or hairy beneath. Inflorescence broad and leafy, with numerous short, falcate prickles. Sepals deflexed, often appendiculate, grey-tomentose; petals incised at the apex, white or pink. 2n = 28.{\i  Cultivated for ornament and widely naturalized in many areas.} [Be Br Cz Da Fe Ga Ge Ho Rm Su.]({\i Origin unknown}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 28. R. rhombifolius} Weihe ex Boenn., {\i Prodr. Fl. Monast. }151 (1824) ({\i R. argenteus} Weihe & Nees, non C. C. Gmelin). Stems angled and sulcate, deep red, slightly hairy, eglandular, with long, subulate or falcate prickles. Leaflets 5, large, subglabrous above, white-tomentose and pubescent beneath; terminal leaflet elliptical to ovate, gradually acuminate, c. 3 times as long as its petiolule, unevenly and finely serrate. Inflorescence large, pyramidal, with long-stalked, cymose branches, leafy; axis hairy, with subsessile, inconspicuous glands; prickles few to numerous, nearly straight; bracts not leaf-like, often glandular. Sepals deflexed after flowering, grey-green tomentose, unarmed or aciculate; petals suborbicular-ovate, entire, downy, pink; stamens white or pink, exceeding the pink styles; anthers pubescent; carpels glabrous or pubescent; receptacle hairy. 2n = 28.{\i  W. & C. Europe, extending to Bulgaria.} Au Be Br Bu Cz Da Ga Ge Hb He ?Ho ?Hs Hu Lu Po Rm.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Related species include:
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b  R. albiflorus} Boulay & Lucand ex Coste, {\i Fl. Fr.}{\b  2}: 37 (1901). Ga Hu.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b R. alterniflorus} P. J. Mueller & Lefevre,{\i  Pollichia}{\b  16-17}: 160 (1859). 2n = 
\par
28. Be Br Cz Ga Ge Hu.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b  R. centronotus} A. Kerner,{\i  Ber. Naturw. Ver. Innsbruck}{\b  2}: 411 (1871). Au.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b  R. cordifolius} Weihe & Nees, {\i Rubi Germ.} 21 (1822), non J. & C. Presl. Cz Hu Po.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b R. exornatus} E. I. Nyárády in Savul.,{\i  Fl. Rep. Pop. Române}{\b  4}: 908 (1956). Rm.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b  R. lasiothyrsus} Sudre,{\i  Bull. Assoc. Fr. Bot.}{\b  4}: 234 (1901). Be Br Cz Ga.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b R. majusculus }Sudre, {\i Bat. Eur.} 71 (1907). Br Ga Rm.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b  R. prolongatus} Boulay & Letendre ex Coste,{\i  Fl. Fr }{\b  2}: 41 (1901). Ga.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b R. sampaianus} Sudre in Samp.,{\i  Ann. Sci. Nat.} ({\i Porto}){\b  9}: 32 (1905). Ga Hs Lu.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b R. schenkei} Hruby, {\i Verh. Naturf. Ver. Brünn }{\b 74} (Beih.) 80 (1944) ({\i R. cordifolius} ×{\i  candicans }?). Cz.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b  R. silesiacus} Weihe in Wimmer & Grab., {\i Fl. Siles. }{\b 2}({\b 1}): 53 (1829). 2n = 28. Br Cz Ge He Hu Po. Placed nearer to{\b  43} by Focke and nearer to {\b 49} by Watson.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b  R. subincertus} Samp.,{\i  Ann. Sci. Nat.} ({\i Porto}{\b ) 9}: 31 (1905). Hs Lu.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b R. sueviacus} Sudre,{\i  Bull. Soc. Bot. Fr.}{\b  55}: 177 (1908). Au.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b  R. vallicola} P. J. Mueller,{\i  Pollichia}{\b  16-17}: 188 (1859). Au Be Br Cz Hb. Placed near to {\b 28} by Watson, but nearer to {\b 34} by Sudre and Legrain.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b  R. wimmeranus }Spribille,{\i  Zeitschr. Naturw. Abt. Deutsch. Ges. Wiss. }({\i Posen}){\b  9}: 117 (1902). Cz.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 29. R. pyramidalis} Kaltenb., {\i Fl. Aachen. Beck.}{\b  2}: 275 (1844). Stems low-arching or procumbent, angled, with plane faces, becoming reddish, glabrous or slightly hairy and sometimes with a few stalked glands and acicles; prickles numerous, subequal, patent and straight or slightly falcate. Leaflets 5, yellow-green, glabrescent above, hairy and tomentose beneath, with shining, yellow hairs on the veins; terminal leaflet orbicular to elliptical, acuminate, usually subcordate at the base, coarsely and unevenly biserrate. Inflorescence dense, pyramidal during flowering, but the upper branches lengthening during fruiting, leafy at the base, hirsute and slightly glandular, with narrow-based, nearly straight prickles. Sepals deflexed at first but sometimes rising after anthesis, glandular, aciculate, slightly tomentose; petals obovate or ovate-elliptical, pale pink; stamens white, exceeding the green styles; carpels glabrous; receptacle hairy. 2n = 28. {\i N.W. & C. Europe.} Au Be Br Cz Da Ga Ge H b He Ho Hs Hu Po Su.
\par

\par
13}
\par