{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 15(-20)-flowered. Calyx-teeth unequal; corolla 10-15(-20) mm, reddish-purple. Legume 40-50 × 4-5 mm, dark brown, glabrous. Seeds 10-20, smooth; hilum 1/8-1/6 of the circumference. 2n = 14.{\i   E.C. Europe and U.S.S.R.} Cz Hu Po Rs (N, B, C, W, E).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 10. L. humilis} (Ser.) Sprengel,{\i   Syst. Veg. }{\b 3}: 263 (1826). Glabrous or sparsely pubescent perennial; stem 20-50 cm, not winged. Leaflets 3-5 pairs, 15-40 × 7-20 mm, lanceolate-elliptical to orbicular-elliptical, pinnately veined; stipules 6-18 × 2-10 mm, linear-lanceolate to orbicular-ovate, semi-sagittate. Racemes (1-)2- to 4-flowered. Calyx-teeth unequal; corolla 16-20 mm, purple. Legume 30-50 × 4-5·5 mm, dark brown, glabrous. Seeds 4-5, smooth, black.{\i   C. Ural.} Rs (C). ({\i  N. & C. Asia.})
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 11. L. incurvus} (Roth) Willd., {\i  Sp. Pl.}{\b  3}: 1091 (1802). Sparsely pubescent perennial; stem 40-80 cm, narrowly winged. Leaflets (3-)4-5 pairs, 15-50 × 6-17 mm, oblong-lanceolate or oblong-elliptical, feebly parallel-veined; stipules 5-25 × 1·5-3 mm, linear-lanceolate. Racemes 5- to 12-flowered. Calyx-teeth slightly unequal; corolla 13-15 mm, bluish-purple. Legume 30-35 × 5-5·5 mm, brown, glabrous. Seeds 6-11, smooth; hilum ¼ of the circumference. 2n = 14.{\i   S.E. Russia, S. & E. Ukraine, W. Kazakhstan.} Rs (C, W, K, E) [Su].
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 12. L. filiformis} (Lam.) Gay,{\i   Ann. Sci. Nat.} ser. 4 (Bot.),{\b  8}: 315 (1857) ({\i  L. canescens }(L. fil.) Gren. & Godron). Glabrous or sparsely pubescent perennial; stem 15-50 cm, winged; roots slender. Leaves without tendril; leaflets 2-4 pairs, 30-60 × 2-6 mm, linear-lanceolate, acuminate; stipules 9-12 × 0·5-1·5 mm, linear. Racemes 4- to 10-flowered. Calyx-teeth unequal; corolla 14-22 mm, bright reddish-purple; keel more or less winged at apex; style dilated at apex. Legume 45-70 × 4-6 mm, brown, glabrous. Seeds c. 10, smooth; hilum 1/8 of the circumference.{\i   Mountain rocks; calcicole. E. Spain, S. France, N. Italy.} Ga Hs It.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 13. L. bauhinii} Genty, {\i  Bull. Soc. Dauph. Ech. Pl.} ser. 2, {\b 3}: 90 (1892) ({\i  L. filiformis} (Lam.) Gay var. {\i  ensifolius }(Lapeyr.) Hayek). Like {\b 12} but corolla 20-27 mm; keel acute, not winged at apex; style not dilated at apex; hilum 1/4-1/3 of the circumference of seed. •{\i   Pyrenees; Jura; Alps; N.W. part of Balkan peninsula.} Al Ga Ge He Hs Ju.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 14. L. digitatus} (Bieb.) Fiori in Fiori & Paol.,{\i   Fl. Anal. Ital. }{\b 2}: 105 (1900) (incl. {\i  L. sessilifolius} (Sibth. & Sm.) Ten.,{\i   L. tempskyanus} (Freyn & Sint.) K. Malý). Glabrous perennial; stem 10-40 cm, not winged; roots fusiform, fleshy. Leaves usually almost digitate, without tendril; leaflets 1-2 pairs, 15-80 × 2-8 mm, linear; stipules 6-8 × 0·5-1 mm, lanceolate, semi-sagittate. Racemes 4 to 10-flowered. Calyx-teeth slightly unequal; corolla 15-30 mm, bright reddish-purple. Legume 40-70 × 5-9 mm, brown, glabrous. Seeds 5-7, smooth; hilum 1/5 of the circumference. 2n = 14. {\i   S.E. Europe, S. Italy.} Al Bu Gr It Ju Rs (K) Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 15. L. pannonicus} (Jacq.) Garcke,{\i   Fl. Nord-Mittel-Deutschl}. ed. 6, 112 (1863) ({\i  L. albus} (L. fil.) Kittel). Glabrous or sparsely pubescent perennial; stem 15-50 cm, not or very narrowly winged; roots tuberous, fleshy. Leaves without tendril; leaflets 1-4 pairs, 15-75 × 2-5(-8) mm, linear to oblong-lanceolate or oblong-elliptical; stipules 10-20 × 1-2·5 mm, linear-lanceolate, semi-sagittate. Racemes 3- to 9-flowered. Calyx glabrous or ciliate on the margin, the teeth unequal; corolla 12-20 mm, pale cream with reddish or purplish tinge; style filiform. Legume 30-65 × 3-8 mm, pale brown, glabrous. Seeds 12-20, smooth; hilum 1/8 of the circumference. 2n = 14.{\i   From C. Spain, S. Italy and S.E. Russia northwards to N.W. France and to} 54°{\i   N. in C. Russia.} Al Au Bu Cz Ga Ge Hs Hu It Ju Po Rm Rs (C,W,K,E).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  A variable species that has been variously divided into varieties and subspecies or even separate species. There is no general agreement as to the number of taxa that can be recognized. The fullest account is given by Sirjaev,{\i   Bull. Assoc. Russe Sci. Prague }({\i  Sci. Nat. Math.}) {\b 5}: 239-261 (1937), who recognized 6 varieties in Europe. Bässler, {\i  Feddes Repert. }{\b 72}: 89 (1966), gives a list of 6 subspecies from Europe, without any explanation, which differs somewhat from Sirjaev's treatment, a modification of which is given here.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Lowest calyx-tooth about as long as or longer than tube,
\par
  stem usually very narrowly winged near the apex .................... (e)subsp.{\b  varius}
\par
1 Lowest calyx-tooth shorter than tube (sometimes only 
\par
  slightly shorter); stem not winged
 2 Leaflets 15-30 × 4-7 mm,  oblong-lanceolate or
\par
  oblong-elliptical ............................................................ ({\b d}) subsp. {\b hispanicus}
\par
2 Leaflets 35-75 × 2-6(-7) mm, linear or linear-lanceolate or 
\par
  linear-elliptical 
\par
3 Peduncles shorter than or about as long as the subtending leaf;
\par
  calyx-teeth usually glabrous, the lowest 1/2-4/5 as long
\par
  as the tube .......................................................................... ({\b b}) subsp. {\b collinus}
\par
3 Peduncles usually exceeding the subtending leaf, calyx-teeth 
\par
  usually ciliate, the lowest usually not more than 1/2 as long
\par
  as the tube 
\par
4 Tubers 2-5 cm, oblong-ovoid ...................................... ({\b a}) subsp. {\b pannonicus}
\par
4 Tubers mostly 10 cm or more, slender or fusiform
\par
  .................................................................................. ({\b c}) subsp. {\b asphodeloides}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b pannonicus}: Stems up to 50 cm, not winged; tubers 2-5 cm, oblong-ovoid. Leaflets 35-60 × 2-4 mm, linear or linear-lanceolate. Peduncles 6-9 cm, usually exceeding the subtending leaf. Calyx-teeth ciliate, the lowest c. ½ as long as tube.{\i   Damp pastures. E.C. Europe and N.W. part of Balkan peninsula}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b collinus} (Ortmann) Soó, {\i  Scripta Bot. Mus. Transs.}{\b  1}: 46 (1942) ({\i  L. lacteus} (Bieb.) Wissjul., {\i  L. pannonicus} var.{\i   versicolor} auct. pro parte): Stems up to 50 cm, not winged; tubers usually more than 10 cm, slender or fusiform. Leaflets 35-70 × 2-6(-7) mm, linear, linear-lanceolate or linear-elliptical. Peduncles 3-7(-8) cm, usually shorter than the subtending leaf. Calyx teeth usually glabrous, the lowest 1/2-4/5 as long as tube.{\i   Dry grassland and scrub. E.C. & E. Europe, N. part of Balkan peninsula.}
\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b c}) Subsp. {\b asphodeloides} (Gouan) Bässler,{\i   Feddes Repert. }{\b 72}: 89 (1966): Like subsp. ({\b b}) but peduncles 5-9 cm, usually exceeding the subtending leaf; calyx-teeth usually ciliate, the lowest c. ½ as long as tube.{\i   Dry grassland and scrub. From W. France to the Alps and S. Italy}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b d}) Subsp. {\b hispanicus} (Lacaita) Bässler,{\i   loc. cit.} (1966): Stems 15-30 cm, not winged; tubers usually more than 10 cm, slender or fusiform. Leaflets 15-30 × 4-7 mm, oblong-lanceolate or oblong-elliptical. Peduncles 4-8 cm, usually exceeding the subtending leaf. Calyx-teeth glabrous or sparsely ciliate, the lowest c. ½ as long as tube. {\i  Dry grassland and scrub.  C. & E. Spain}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Intermediates between subspp. ({\b c}) and ({\b d}) occur in the Pyrenees and in N.E. Spain. This subspecies has also been recorded from Krym but all the specimens seen from there are referable to subsp. ({\b b}).
\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b e}) Subsp. {\b varius} (C. Koch) P. W. Ball,{\i   Feddes Repert.}{\b  79}: 47 (1968) ({\i  L. pannonicus }var.{\i   versicolor} auct. pro parte): Stems up to 50 cm, narrowly winged, at least near the apex; tubers 3 cm or more, oblong-ovoid to fusiform. Leaflets 35-75 × 3-7 mm, linear-lanceolate or linear-elliptical. Peduncles 5-11 cm, as long as to much longer than the subtending leaf. Calyx-teeth usually ciliate, the lowest as long as or longer than tube.{\i   Dry grassland and scrub.  N. Italy, N.W. Jugoslavia.}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Very variable in the size of the tubers and the length of the peduncle. Plants with short tubers and short peduncles are possibly intermediate between subspp. ({\b a}) and ({\b e}).
\par

\par
139}
\par