{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 54 Roots fusiform, fleshy; leaflets 1-2 pairs; calyx-teeth only 
\par
   slightly unequal; legume 5-9 mm wide ..................................... {\b 14. digitatus}
\par
54 Roots slender; leaflets 2-4 pairs; calyx-teeth usually very 
\par
   unequal; legume 4-6 mm wide
\par
55 Leaflets 5-11 mm wide, usually less than 10 times as long as 
\par
   wide, obtuse or subacute, mucronate ......................................... {\b 18. alpestris}
\par
55 Leaflets 2-6 mm wide, always at least 10 times as long as 
\par
   wide, acuminate
\par
56 Keel more or less winged at apex; style dilated at apex ........ {\b 12. filiformis}
\par
56 Keel acute, not winged at apex; style ±filiform, not dilated at 
\par
   apex ............................................................................................ {\b 13. bauhinii}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. L. vernus} (L.) Bernh., {\i  Syst. Verz. Erfurt} 247 (1800). Glabrous or sparsely pubescent perennial; stem 20-40(-60) cm, not winged. Leaves without tendril; leaflets (1-)2-4 pairs, 30-70(-100) × (1-)10-30 mm, ovate or lanceolate, rarely linear, acuminate, feebly parallel-veined; stipules 10-25 × 2-8 mm, ovate-lanceolate, rarely linear, semi-sagittate. Racemes 3- to 10-flowered. Calyx-teeth unequal; corolla 13-20 mm, reddish-purple, becoming blue. Legume 40-60 × 5-8 mm, brown, glabrous. Seeds 8-14, smooth; hilum ¼ of the circumference. 2n = 14.{\i   Most of Europe except the islands and parts of the south and west.} Al Au Bu Cz Da Fe Ga Ge Gr He Hs Hu It Ju No Po Rm Rs (N, B, C, W,K, E) Su [Be Ho].
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. L. venetus} (Miller) Wohlf. in Koch,{\i   Syn. Deutsch. Fl}. ed. 3, 714 (1892) ({\i  L. variegatus} (Ten.) Gren. & Godron). Like {\b 1} but leaflets ovate-orbicular, acute; stipules ovate-orbicular; racemes 6- to 30-flowered; corolla 10-15 mm; legume covered with brown glands. 2n = 14. {\i   S.E. & E.C. Europe, extending westwards to Corse.} Al Au Bu Co Cz Gr He Hu It Ju Rm Rs (C, W, E) Si.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 3. L. niger} (L.) Bernh., {\i  Syst. Verz. Erfurt} 248 (1800). Glabrous or sparsely pubescent perennial; stem 15-90 cm, not winged. Leaves without tendril; leaflets 3-6(-11) pairs, lanceolate to elliptical, obtuse, mucronate, more or less pinnately veined; stipules 4-10 × 1-2 mm, linear, semi-sagittate. Racemes 2- to 10-flowered. Calyx-teeth unequal; corolla 10-15 mm, purple becoming blue. Legume 35-60 × 4-6 mm, black, glabrous. Seeds 6-10, smooth; hilum ¼ of the circumference.{\i   Europe except for most of the northeast, the extreme south and many islands.} Al Au *Be *Br Bu ?Co Cz Da Fe Ga Ge Gr He *Ho Hs Hu It Ju Lu No Po Rm Rs (B, C, W, K, E) ?Si Su Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b niger}: Stem 30-90 cm; roots usually not tuberous; leaflets 10-40 × 5-16 mm, lanceolate to elliptical. 2n = 14. {\i  Throughout the range of the species}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b jordanii} (Ten.) Arcangeli,{\i   Comp. Fl. Ital.} 198 (1882): Stem 15-25 cm; roots fusiform-tuberous; leaflets 8-25 × 3-7 mm, oblong-lanceolate. • {\i  S. Italy}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 4. L. japonicus} Willd., {\i  Sp. Pl. }{\b 3}: 1092 (1802). Somewhat glaucous, glabrous or pubescent perennial; stem up to 90 cm, not winged. Leaves sometimes without tendril; leaflets 2-5 pairs, (10-)20-40 × (5-)10-20 mm, elliptical, pinnately veined; stipules 10-25 × 10-20 mm, triangular-hastate.Racemes 2- to 12 flowered. Calyx-teeth more or less unequal; corolla 14-22(-25) mm, purple becoming blue. Legume 30-50 × 6-10 mm, brown, glabrescent. Seeds 4-11, smooth; hilum ¼ of the circumference.{\i   Maritime sands and shingle; rarely on shores of large lakes. Coasts of W. & N. Europe; inland in N. W. Russia and N. Norway}. Br Da Fe †Ga Ge Hb ?Hs Is No Po Rs (N, B, C) Su.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b japonicus}: Racemes 2- to 7-flowered; calyx pubescent; corolla 18-22(-25) mm. 2n = 14.{\i   Arctic Europe}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  The European plant may be distinct from typical{\i   L. japonicus} and may represent another subspecies; cf. E. G. Pobedimova, {\i  Not. Syst.} ({\i  Leningrad}) 19: 20-39 (1959).
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b maritimus} (L.) P. W. Ball,{\i   Feddes Repert. }{\b 79}: 45 (1968) ({\i  L. maritimus} Bigelow, {\i  Pisum maritimum }L.): Racemes 5- to 12-flowered; calyx usually glabrous; corolla 14-18(-20) mm. 2n = 14. {\i  W. Europe; Baltic region; subarctic Russia}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b 5-8}). {\b L. laevigatus} group. Perennial; stem 20-60 cm not winged. Leaves without tendril; leaflets 2-6 pairs, 30-100 × 5-50 mm, pinnately veined; stipules 5-30 × 2-12 mm, lanceolate to ovate. Racemes 2- to 20-flowered. Calyx-teeth unequal; corolla yellow or orange-yellow. Legume 50-75 × 5-8 mm, brown. Seeds 6-12, smooth; hilum 1/5-1/3 of the circumference.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Legume densely glandular when young; leaflets with brownish
\par
  glands beneath; corolla brown- or orange-yellow ............................ {\b 8. aureus} 
\par
1 Legume eglandular; leaflets eglandular; corolla yellow
\par
2 Corolla 25-30 mm ......................................................................... {\b 7. gmelinii}
\par
2 Corolla 15-25 mm
\par
3 Calyx-teeth less than 1/3 as long as tube ................................... {\b 5. laevigatus}
\par
3 Calyx-teeth more than 1/3 as long as tube
\par
4 Sparsely pubescent; leaflets 5-30 mm wide .............................. {\b 5. laevigatus}
\par
4 Glabrous; leaflets 20-50 mm wide ..................................... {\b 6. transsilvanicus}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 5. L. laevigatus} (Waldst. & Kit.) Gren.,{\i   Mém. Soc. Émul. Doubs} ser. 3, {\b 10}: 193 (1865). Glabrous or sparsely pubescent. Leaflets 2-6 pairs, 5-40 mm wide, oblong or elliptical to ovate. Corolla 15-25 mm, yellow. Legume glabrous. •{\i    C. Europe, extending to N. Spain, N. part of Balkan peninsula and W. part of U.S.S.R}. Au Cz Ga Ge He Hs Hu It Ju Po Rm Rs (B, C, W).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b laevigatus}: Usually glabrous; leaflets 20-40 mm wide, elliptical to ovate; lower calyx-teeth less than 1/3 as long as tube. 2n = 14. {\i   E.C. & E.Europe}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b occidentalis} (Fischer & C. A. Meyer) Breistr.,{\i   Bull. Soc. Bot. Fr.}{\b  87}: 53 (1940): Sparsely pubescent; leaflets 5-30 mm wide, oblong, elliptical or ovate-elliptical; lower calyx-teeth 1/3 as long to as long as the tube, the lateral teeth triangular. 2n = 14.{\i   C. & S.W. Alps, Pyrenees, N. Spain}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  The populations in C. Europe are often intermediate between the two subspecies.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 6. L. transsilvanicus} (Sprengel) Fritsch, {\i  Sitz-ber. Akad. Wiss. Wien} ({\i  Math.-Nat.}) {\b 104}: 517 (1895). Glabrous. Leaflets 2-4 pairs, 20-50 mm wide, elliptical to ovate. Lower calyx-teeth as long as or slightly shorter than tube, the lateral oblong- or triangular-ovate; corolla 20-25 mm, yellow. Legume glabrous. 2n = 14. •{\i    Carpathians, N. Romania}. Cz Hu Rm Rs (W).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 7. L. gmelinii} Fritsch,{\i   op. cit.} 516 (1895) ({\i  L. luteus} (L.) Peterm., non Moench). Glabrous or sparsely pubescent. Leaflets 2-4 pairs, 20-50 mm wide, elliptical to ovate. Lower calyx-teeth ¼-½ as long as tube; corolla 25-30 mm, yellow. Legume glabrous.{\i   C. & S. Ural.} Rs (C). ({\i  Mountains of C. Asia}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 8. L. aureus} (Steven) Brândza,{\i   Prodr. Fl. Române} 546 (1883). Sparsely pubescent; leaflets 3-6 pairs, 25-50 mm wide, elliptical to ovate, with brownish glands beneath. Lower calyx-teeth about as long as tube, triangular or ovate-triangular; corolla 17-22 mm, brownish- or orange-yellow. Legume densely glandular when young.{\i   Black Sea region, from Bulgaria to Krym.} Bu ?Gr Rm Rs (K)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 9. L. pisiformis} L.,{\i   Sp. Pl.} 734 (1753). Glabrous perennial; stem 50-100 cm, winged. Leaflets 3-5 pairs, 25-60 × (7-)10-30 mm, ovate or elliptical, pinnately or feebly parallel-veined. Stipules 20-50 × 10-20 mm, ovate or elliptical. Racemes 8- to
\par

\par
138}
\par