{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 darker. Legume 25-35 × 4-6 mm, not contracted between the seeds, dark brown, usually glabrous. Seeds 4·5-5 mm. {\i  S. Europe}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   The chromosome number 2n = 10 has been reported by a number of authors for this subspecies. According to Mettin & Hanelt,{\i   loc. cit.} (1964), these plants should be referred to subsp. ({\b c}). They record 2n = 14 for a non-European collection of subsp. {\i  amphicarpa}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b c}) Subsp. {\b cordata} (Wulfen ex Hoppe) Ascherson & Graebner,{\i   op. cit.} 968 (1909) ({\i  V. cordata }Wulfen ex Hoppe): Leaflets oblong or obovate-cuneate, truncate to emarginate. Calyx-teeth longer than tube; corolla 18-22 mm; standard reddish-purple, the wings dark red. Legume 30-50 × 4·5-6 mm, not contracted between the seeds, dark brown or almost black, usually glabrous. Seeds 3-4·5 mm. 2n = 10. {\i  S. Europe.}
\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b d}) Subsp. {\b incisa} (Bieb.) Arcangeli,{\i   Comp. Fl. Ital.} 201 (1882) ({\i  V. incisa} Bieb.): Most leaflets toothed or incised, obovate in outline, truncate or emarginate. Calyx-teeth about as long as tube; corolla c. 20 mm; standard pale blue to violet, the wings usually darker. Legume c. 40 × 5-6 mm, not contracted between the seeds, glabrous. Seeds c. 4 mm.{\i   Krym, Bulgaria, N.E. Greece, ?Italy.} 
\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b e}) Subsp. {\b sativa}: Leaflets oblong-cuneate to obcordate, truncate or emarginate. Calyx-teeth as long as or longer than tube; corolla 18-30 mm; standard pink to dark reddish-purple, the wings darker. Legume 35-70 × 6-11 mm, contracted between the seeds, brown or yellow-brown, usually hairy. Seeds 3·5-6·5 mm. 2n = 12. {\i   Almost throughout the range of the species, but introduced in the northern half.}
\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b f}) Subsp. {\b macrocarpa} (Moris) Arcangeli,{\i   Comp. Fl. Ital.} 201 (1882): Like subsp. ({\b e}) but legume 8-10(-12) mm wide, reticulate-veined, not contracted between the seeds, dark brown to black, more or less glabrous; seeds 5·5-8 mm.{\i   Mediterranean region, S. Bulgaria}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 47. V. lathyroides} L.,{\i   Sp. Pl.} 736 (1753) (incl.{\i   V. olbiensis} Reuter). Pubescent annual up to 20 cm. Leaflets 2-4 pairs, 4-14(-20) × 0·5-4 mm, obovate-elliptical to linear, very shortly mucronate; tendrils simple; stipules entire, not spotted. Flowers solitary. Calyx-teeth equal, about as long as tube; corolla 5-8 mm, purple. Legume 15-30 × 3-4 mm, black, glabrous, with a short curved beak, not breaking the calyx when mature. Seeds 6-12, cubic, tuberculate. 2n = 12. {\i  Most of Europe northwards to S.W. Finland }({\i  Ahvenanmaa}). All except Az Bl Fa Is Rs (N, E) Sb.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 48. V. cuspidata} Boiss.,{\i   Diagn. Pl. Or. Nov. }{\b 1}({\b 2}): 104 (1843). Like {\b 47} but leaflets 2-6 pairs, those of the upper leaves acuminate and with a long mucro; corolla 10-14 mm;legume 30-40 × 4-5 mm, with a long straight beak.{\i   N.E. Greece, Turkey-in-Europe.} Gr Tu. ({\i  E. Mediterranean region.})
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 49. V. peregrina} L., {\i  Sp. Pl. }737 (1753) (incl.{\i   V. megalosperma} Bieb.). Sparsely pubescent annual up to 100 cm. Leaflets 3-7 pairs, 8-30 × 0·5-2(-3) mm, linear or oblong, mucronate and emarginate with acute lobes, so that the apex appears to be 3-lobed; stipules entire. Flowers solitary or 2 together. Calyx-teeth unequal, the lowest equalling tube; corolla 10-16 mm, purple. Legume 30-40 × 8-12 mm, brown, pubescent. Seeds 4-6; hilum 1/12-1/10 of the circumference. {\i  S. Europe.} Al Bl Bu Cr Ga Gr Hs It Ju Lu Rm Rs (K, E) Sa Si Tu [He Hu].
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 50. V. melanops} Sibth. & Sm.,{\i   Fl. Graec. Prodr.}{\b  2}: 72 (1813) ({\i  V. pichleri} Huter). Pubescent annual 15-80 cm. Leaflets 5-10 pairs, 5-20 × 2-8 mm, oblong or ovate, obtuse or emarginate; stipules entire. Flowers 1-4 together. Calyx-teeth unequal, the lower equalling tube; corolla 15-22 mm, greenish-yellow, wings black-tipped, keel purple. Legume 20-50(-80) × 6-12 mm, brown, glabrous, margin tuberculate, pubescent. Seeds 4-7; hilum 1/5-1/4 of the circumference.{\i   Balkan peninsula, Italy, Sicilia, S. France.} Al Bu Ga Gr It Ju Si Tu [Cz].
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 51. V. lutea} L.,{\i   Sp. Pl.} 736 (1753). Subglabrous to villous annual up to 60 cm. Leaflets 3-10 pairs, 10-25 × 1-5 mm, linear or oblong; stipules entire or dentate. Flowers 1-3 together. Calyx teeth unequal, the lower longer than tube; corolla (15-)20-35 mm, pale yellow often purple-tinged. Legume 20-40 × 8-14 mm, yellowish-brown to black, pubescent, the hairs tuberculate at base, rarely glabrous. Seeds 3-9; hilum 1/3-1/2 of the circumference.{\i   S. & W. Europe, extending northwards to England, Switzerland, Hungary and Moldavia; a frequent casual elsewhere and locally naturalized.} Al *Az Bl *Br Bu Cr Ga Gr He Hs Hu It Ju Lu Rm Rs (W) Sa Si Tu [ ?Au Cz Ge].
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b lutea}: Subglabrous to densely pubescent; leaflets of upper leaves subobtuse, mucronate; legume with white hairs with small tubercle at base; seeds 4-10. 2n = 14.{\i   Throughout the range of the species.}
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b vestita} (Boiss.) Rouy,{\i   Fl. Fr.}{\b  5}: 219 (1899) ({\i  V. vestita} Boiss.): Villous; leaflets of upper leaves acuminate; legume with red-brown to red hairs with a large tubercle at base; seeds 3-4.{\i   S.W. Europe}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 52. V. hybrida} L.,{\i   Sp. Pl.} 737 (1753). Subglabrous or pubescent annual 20-60 cm. Leaflets 3-8 pairs, 6-15 × 1·5-7 mm, oblong or obovate-elliptical, emarginate to obtuse, mucronate; stipules entire. Flowers solitary. Calyx-teeth unequal, the lower longer than tube; corolla 18-30 mm, pale yellow or purplish, standard pubescent on back. Legume 25-40 × 8-10 mm, brown, pubescent. Seeds 5-6; hilum 1/10-1/8 of the circumference.{\i   S. Europe.} Al Bl Bu Co Cr Ga Gr Hs It Ju Rm Rs (K) Sa Si Tu [He].
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Sect. FABA (Miller) S. F. Gray. Leaflets 1-3 pairs; flowers solitary, axillary or in few-flowered, sessile or shortly pedunculate racemes; corolla large (more than 10 mm); style pubescent on the lower side beneath the stigma.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 53. V. bithynica} (L.) L., {\i  Syst. Nat.} ed. 10,{\b  2}: 1166 (1759). Glabrous or pubescent annual 20-60 cm. Leaflets 2-3 pairs, 20-50 × 2-20 mm, oblong-lanceolate to ovate; stipules dentate. Flowers 1-3 together. Calyx-teeth unequal, longer than tube; corolla 10-20 mm; standard purple, wings and keel white. Legume 25-50 × 7-10 mm, brown or yellow, pubescent. Seeds 4-7; hilum 1/7-1/6 of the circumference. 2n = 14.{\i   S. & W. Europe northwards to England.} Al Az Bl Br Bu Cr Ga Gr Hs It Ju Lu Rs (K) Sa Si Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 54. V. narbonensis} L., {\i  Sp. Pl.} 737 (1753) (incl. {\i  V. serratifolia} Jacq.). Pubescent, erect annual 20-60 cm. Lower leaves without tendril; leaflets 1-3 pairs, 20-50 × 10-40 mm, ovate or elliptical, obtuse or emarginate, entire or serrate; stipules c. 10 mm, entire or dentate. Flowers 1-6 together. Calyx-teeth unequal, the lower longer than tube; corolla 10-30 mm, dark purple. Legume 30-70 × 10-15 mm, black or brown, glabrous with tuberculate-dentate pubescent margin. Seeds 4-8, 4-6 mm; hilum 1/8 of the circumference. {\i  S. Europe extending northwards to Hungary.} Al Bu Co Ga Gr Hs Hu It Ju Lu Rm Rs (K) Sa Si Tu [Au Cz Ge].
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 55. V. faba} L., {\i  Sp. Pl. }737 (1753). Like {\b 54} but more robust; leaves without tendril; leaflets 40-80(-100) × 10-20(-40) mm; corolla usually white with black wings; legume 80-200 × 10-20 mm, densely pubescent but becoming sparsely pubescent when mature; seeds 20-30 mm, ovoid-oblong, compressed.{\i   Cultivated throughout Europe since prehistoric times for the edible}
\par

\par
135}
\par