{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 6-13(-16) mm, orange-red. Legume 30-70 × 4-7 mm, brown, glabrous, with prominent longitudinal veins. Seeds 8-15, smooth or slightly rugose; hilum 1/13-1/11 of the circumference. 2n = 14.{\i   S. Europe, extending northwards to N.W. France and S. Hungary; Denmark and S. Sweden.} Al Bl Bu Co Cr Da Ga Gr He Hu Hs It Ju Lu Rm Rs (K) Sa Si Su Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 40. L. angulatus} L., {\i  Sp. Pl.} 731 (1753). Like {\b 39} but stipules 7-14 × 1·5-2 mm; peduncles 20-70 mm, articulated near the apex and rarely 2-flowered; corolla purple or pale blue; legume 25-50 × 3-4 mm, with rather indistinct reticulate venation; seeds rugose to finely tuberculate; hilum 1/18-1/14 of the circumference.{\i   Sandy soils. Mediterranean region and S.W. Europe, extending to N.W. France.} Co Cr Ga Gr Hs It Ju Lu Sa.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 41. L. inconspicuus} L., {\i  Sp. Pl.} 730 (1753). Glabrous annual; stem 10-30 cm, not winged. Leaves without or with a usually simple tendril; leaflets 1 pair, 25-40 × 1-4 mm, linear-lanceolate; stipules 7-10 × 0·5-2 mm, linear or lanceolate, semi-sagittate. Flowers solitary; peduncles 2-5 mm, articulated near the base or middle. Calyx-teeth equal, as long as tube; corolla 4-9 mm, pale purple. Legume 30-60 × 2-5 mm, pale brown, densely pubescent when young, glabrescent. Seeds 5-14, smooth; hilum 1/25-1/20 of the circumference.{\i   Mediterranean region}. Al ?Bl Bu Ga Gr Hs It Ju Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 42. L. setifolius} L.,{\i   Sp. Pl.} 731 (1753). Glabrous annual; stem 10-60 cm, narrowly winged. Leaflets 20-90 × 0·5-3(-4) mm, linear; stipules 2-15 × 0·2-2 mm, linear, semi-sagittate. Flowers solitary; peduncles 10-40 mm, articulated near apex. Calyx-teeth slightly unequal, as long as or slightly longer than tube; corolla 8-11(-18) mm, orange-red. Legume 15-30 × 7-11 mm, pale brown, glabrescent, but persistently pubescent on suture. Seeds 2-3, finely papillose; hilum 1/9-1/8 of the circumference.{\i   S. Europe.} Al Bl Bu Co Cr Ga Gr Hs It Ju Lu Rm Rs (K) Si.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 43. L. cicera} L., {\i  Sp. Pl.} 730 (1753) (? incl.{\i   L. aegaeus} Davidov). Glabrous annual; stem 20-100 cm, winged. Leaflets 1(-2) pairs, 10-90(-110) × 1-6(-15) mm, linear to lanceolate; stipules 10-20 × 2-5 mm, lanceolate, semi-sagittate. Flowers solitary; peduncles 10-30 mm, articulated near the middle or apex. Calyx-teeth equal, 2-3 times as long as tube; corolla (5-)10-14(-20) mm, reddish-purple. Legume 20-40 × 5-10 mm, brown, glabrous, with 2 keels on dorsal suture. Seeds 2-6, smooth; hilum 1/13 of the circumference. 2n = 14.{\i   Grassland and cultivated ground. S. Europe; often cultivated elsewhere for fodder and sometimes persisting}. Al Bl Bu Co Cr Ga Gr He Hs It Ju Lu Rm Rs (K,E) Sa Si Tu [Au].
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b  L. stenophyllus} Boiss. & Heldr. in Boiss.,{\i   Diagn. Pl. Or. Nov.}{\b  2}({\b 9}): 126 (1849), from Anatolia, has been once recorded from Kriti, but its presence there requires confirmation. It is like {\b 43} but has calyx-teeth as long as the tube and the legume with 3 keels on the dorsal suture.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 44. L. sativus} L.,{\i   Sp. Pl.} 730 (1753). Like {\b 43} but leaflets 25-150 × 3-7(-9) mm; peduncles 30-60 mm; corolla 12-24 mm, white, pink or blue; legume 10-18 mm wide, with 2 wings on dorsal suture; hilum 1/16-1/15 of the circumference of seed. 2n = 14.{\i   Cultivated for fodder in C., S. & E. Europe and widely naturalized.} [Al Au Az Be Bu Cr Ga Gr He Hs Hu Ju Lu Rm Rs (C, W, K, E) Tu.] ({\i  Origin not known.})
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 45. L. amphicarpos} L. {\i  Sp. Pl.} 729 (1753) ({\i  L. quadrimarginatus} Bory & Chaub.). Glabrous annual; stem 5-25 cm, narrowly winged. Leaves without or with a simple tendril; leaflets 1 pair, 5-30 × 1-4 mm, linear to ovate-oblong; stipules 5-10 × 2-4 mm, lanceolate, semi-sagittate. Flowers solitary; peduncles 20-40 mm, articulated near apex. Calyx-teeth equal, c. 1½ times as long as tube; corolla 10-12 mm, red. Legume 20-25 × 9-11 mm, brown, glabrous, with 2 wings on both dorsal and ventral sutures. Seeds 2-4, smooth; hilum 1/15-1/13 of the circumference. {\i  S. Greece; Sicilia; Islas Baleares; S.W. part of Iberian peninsula}. Bl ?Cr Gr Hs Lu Si.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 46. L. annuus} L.,{\i   Demonstr. Pl.} 20 (1753). Glabrous annual; stem 40-150 cm, winged. Leaflets 1 pair, 50-150 × (1-)4-18 mm, linear or linear-lanceolate; stipules 10-25 × 0·3-0·8 mm, linear, semi-sagittate. Racemes 1- to 3-flowered. Calyx-teeth equal, as long as or slightly longer than tube; corolla 12-18 mm, yellow or orange-yellow. Legume 30-80 × 7-12 mm, pale brown, glandular when young, glabrescent. Seeds 7-8, tuberculate or papillose; hilum 1/10-1/9 of the circumference.{\i   Cultivated ground. Mediterranean region, Portugal; sometimes cultivated for fodder. }Al Bl Bu Co Cr Ga Gr Hs It Ju Lu Sa Si Tu [Az].
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 47. L. hierosolymitanus} Boiss.,{\i   Diagn. Pl. Or. Nov.}{\b  2}({\b 9}): 127 (1849). Like {\b 46} but corolla 7-12 mm, pinkish-yellow; legume 5-7 mm wide; seeds rugulose.{\i   Kriti, Kikladhes, N.E. Greece.} Cr Gr. ({\i  S. W. Asia.})
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 48. L. gorgoni} Parl., {\i  Gior. Sci. Sic.}{\b  62}: 3 (1838). Glabrous annual; stem 20-60 cm, winged. Leaflets 1 pair, 30-60 × 3-9 mm, linear to linear-elliptical; stipules 25-45 × 3-5 mm, lanceolate, semi-sagittate. Flowers solitary; peduncles 30-45 mm, articulated near apex. Calyx-teeth equal, 2-3 times as long as tube; corolla 18-25 mm, reddish-yellow. Legume 25-50 × 7-10 mm, brown, glabrous, with 3 keels on dorsal suture. Seeds 5-8, smooth; hilum 1/11-1/9 of the circumference. {\i  Sardegna; Sicilia; Turkey-in- Europe}. Sa Si Tu. ({\i  S.W. Asia}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 49. L. hirsutus} L., {\i  Sp. Pl.} 732 (1753). Sparsely pubescent annual; stem 20-120 cm, winged. Leaflets 1 pair, 15-80 × 3-20 mm, linear or oblong; stipules 10-18 × 1-2 mm, linear, semi-sagittate. Racemes 1- to 3(-4)-flowered. Calyx-teeth equal, as long as or slightly longer than tube; corolla 7-15(-20) mm, red with pale blue wings. Legume 20-50 × 5-10 mm, brown, pubescent, tuberculate. Seeds 5-10, tuberculate; hilum 1/6-1/5 of the circumference. 2n = 14.{\i   C. & S. Europe.} Al Au Be Bu Co Cz Ga Ge Gr He Hs Hu It Ju Lu Po Rm Rs (K, E) Sa Si Tu [Br].
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 50. L. clymenum} L., {\i  Sp. Pl.} 732 (1753) (incl.{\i   L. tuntasii} Heldr. ex Halácsy). Glabrous annual; stem 30-100 cm, winged. Leaves with broad leaf-like petiole and rhachis, the lower linear-lanceolate, without leaflets, the upper with 2-4(-5) pairs of leaflets; leaflets 20-60(-80) × (3-)6-11(-20) mm, linear to elliptical or lanceolate; stipules 9-18 × 2-6 mm, linear to ovate, semihastate. Racemes 1- to 5-flowered. Calyx-teeth equal, shorter than tube; corolla 15-20 mm, crimson with violet or lilac wings, very rarely pale yellow; style aristate. Legume 30-70 × 5-12 mm, brown, glabrous, channelled on the dorsal suture, not torulose. Seeds 5-7, smooth; hilum 1/7-1/6 of the circumference.{\i   Mediterranean region.} Al Bl Co Cr Ga Gr Hs It Ju Lu Si Tu [Az].
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 51. L. articulatus} L.,{\i   Sp. Pl.} 731 (1753). Like {\b 50} but leaflets 0·5-5(-11) mm wide; corolla with white or pink wings; style obtuse; legume 5-8 mm wide, not channelled on the dorsal suture, somewhat torulose.{\i   Mediterranean region, Portugal.} Bl Co Cr Ga Gr Hs It Ju Lu Sa Si.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 52. L. ochrus} (L.) DC. in Lam. & DC.,{\i   Fl. Fr}. ed. 3, {\b 4}: 578 (1805). Like {\b 50} but the lower leaves ovate-oblong; upper leaves with 1-2 pairs of leaflets; leaflets 15-35 × 6-20 mm, ovate; stipules 6-12 mm; racemes 1- to 2-flowered; calyx-teeth slightly unequal, as long as tube; corolla pale yellow; legume 40-60 ×
\par

\par
142}
\par