{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 8 Racemes c. 1 cm; legume 3-3·5 mm, globose with a short beak
\par
  .................................................................................................. {\b 9. neapolitana} 
\par
7 Racemes with at least 10 flowers
\par
9 Ovary and young legume glabrous; legume with transverse veins
\par
10 Biennial; legume with indistinct transverse veins ................... {\b 5. officinalis}
\par
10 Annual; legume with very prominent transverse veins ............. {\b 11. elegans}
\par
9  Ovary and young legume pubescent; legume reticulate veined
\par
11 Biennial or perennial; legume flattened .................................... {\b 2. altissima}
\par
11 Annual; legume globose ....................................................... {\b 9. neapolitana}
\par
2  Stipules of the middle leaves toothed
\par
12 Legume reticulate-veined
\par
13 Corolla 3-3·5 mm; legume faintly veined, compressed ............... {\b 1. dentata}
\par
13 Corolla 6-9 mm; legume foveolate-rugose, globose ...................... {\b 8. italica} 
\par
12 Legume concentric-striate
\par
14 Racemes much shorter than subtending leaf;
\par
   legume acute .........................................................................{\b 15. messanensis}
\par
14 Racemes in fruit at least as long as subtending leaf;
\par
   legume rounded at apex
\par
15 Standard as long as or longer than keel; legume blackish-brown
\par
   ........................................................................................................ {\b 12. infesta}
\par
15 Standard shorter than keel; legume yellowish-brown
\par
16 Corolla 3-4 mm; legume broadly sessile; leaflets oblong-cuneate 
\par
   ....................................................................................................... {\b 13. sulcata}
\par
16 Corolla 4-8 mm; legume stipitate; leaflets obovate cuneate ... {\b 14. segetalis}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. M. dentata} (Waldst. & Kit.) Pers.,{\i   Syn. Pl.}{\b  2}: 348 (1807).Erect or ascending, branched biennial 20-150 cm. Leaflets oblong-elliptical or lanceolate-ovate, serrate. Stipules subulate, dentate at base. Racemes many-flowered. Corolla 3-3·5 mm, bright yellow; wings shorter than standard, longer than keel. Legume 4·5-5·5 mm, obovoid, slightly reticulate-veined, glabrous, blackish-brown when ripe. 2n = 16.{\i   Salt steppes, saline meadows and river-banks. E. & C. Europe, extending northwards to S. Sweden.} Au Cz Da Ge Hu Ju Po Rm Rs (C, W, E) Su.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. M. altissima} Thuill.,{\i   Fl. Paris} ed. 2, 378 (1799). Erect, branched biennial or short-lived perennial 60-150 cm. Leaflets oblong-ovate or cuneate, obtuse, serrate. Stipules subulate-setaceous, entire. Racemes 2-5 cm, many-flowered, elongating in fruit. Corolla 5-7 mm, yellow; wings, standard and keel equal. Legume 5-6 mm, obovoid, acute, reticulate-veined, pubescent, black when ripe, usually 2-seeded; style long and persistent. 2n = 16.{\i   Damp or saline habitats, and as a ruderal. Throughout a large part of Europe, but rare in the east and absent as a native from the islands.} Al Au Be Cz Da Ga Ge Gr He Ho Hs Hu It Ju No Po Rm Rs (C, W, E) Su [*Br Hb].
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 3. M. alba} Medicus, {\i  Vorl. Churpf. Phys.-Ökon. Ges.}{\b  2}: 382 (1787). Erect, branched annual or biennial 30-150 cm. Leaflets narrowly oblong-obovate to suborbicular, serrate. Stipules setaceous, entire. Racemes lax and slender, many-flowered. Corolla 4-5 mm, white; wings and keel nearly equal, shorter than standard. Legume 3-5 mm, obovoid, mucronate, reticulate-veined, glabrous, greyish-brown when ripe. 2n = 16. {\i  Open habitats, often as a weed or ruderal. Almost throughout Europe, except for most of the islands, but doubtfully native, especially in the north.} Al Au Bu Cz *Da *Fe Ga Ge Gr He *Ho Hs Hu It Ju Lu *No Po Rm Rs (*N, *B, C, W, K, E) *Su Tu [Be Br].
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 4. M. wolgica} Poiret in Lam.,{\i   Encycl. Méth. Bot., Suppl.}{\b  3}: 648 (1814). Erect, branched biennial 40-120 cm. Lower leaflets rhombic-ovate, serrate, the upper oblong-lanceolate to linear, usually entire. Stipules linear, setaceous, entire. Racemes 5-10 cm, lax and slender, many-flowered, elongating in fruit; pedicels 2-4 mm. Corolla 3-3·5 mm, white; wings and standard longer than keel. Legume 4-5 mm, obovoid, acute, distinctly reticulate-veined, glabrous, brownish-yellow when ripe, usually 1-seeded.{\i   Usually on saline soils. S.E. Russia, S. & E. Ukraine, W. Kazakhstan; casual in N. Europe.} Rs (W, E).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b M. arenaria} Grec., {\i  Consp. Fl. Roman., Supl.} 198 (1909), from sand dunes in Romania (S. of Constanta) and Ukraine (Danube delta), with racemes grouped 3-5 together, corolla 5-6 mm and legume 6-7 mm with 2 or more seeds, may be separable from{\b  4}, but further information is needed.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 5. M. officinalis} (L.) Pallas, {\i  Reise}{\b  3}: 537 (1776) ({\i  M. arvensis} Wallr.). Decumbent or erect, branched biennial 40-250 cm. Leaflets of lower leaves obovate to ovate, the upper ovate-lanceolate, all serrate. Racemes lax and slender, many-flowered. Corolla 4-7 mm, yellow; wings and standard equal, longer than keel. Legume 3-5 mm, transversely rugose, mucronate, glabrous, brown when ripe, usually 1-seeded; style often deciduous. 2n = 16.{\i   Cultivated ground, often on clay or saline soils. Most of Europe except the extreme south, but only as an alien in much of the north.} Al Au *Be Bl Bu Cz Ga Ge Gr He *Ho Hs Hu It Ju Po Rm Rs (*N, *B, C, W, K, E) Sa Tu [Br Da Fe Hb No Su].
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 6. M. polonica} (L.) Pallas,{\i   Reise }{\b 3}: 537 (1776). Erect or ascending, branched biennial 35-150 cm. Lower leaflets obovate, acute, dentate, the upper spathulate, subentire. Racemes 4-6 cm, lax, 4- to 9-flowered, pedicels 4-5 mm. Corolla 5·5-6·5 mm, bright yellow; wings and standard a little longer than keel. Legume 7-8 mm, lanceolate or oblong-rhomboid, acute, reticulate-veined, yellow or pale brown when ripe. {\i  Sandy soils. S. Ukraine, S.E. Russia, W. Kazakhstan.} Rs (W, E). ({\i  W.C. Asia}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 7. M. taurica} (Bieb.) Ser. in DC., {\i  Prodr. }{\b 2}: 188 (1825). Erect, branched biennial 30-80 cm. Lower leaflets rhombic-obovate or suborbicular-cuneate, the upper oblong, obtuse or truncate, all serrate. Stipules linear-subulate, entire. Racemes 5-9 cm, lax, 40- to 60-flowered, elongating in fruit. Corolla c. 6 mm, white; wings, standard and keel subequal; ovary and young legume pubescent. Legume 4-5 mm, obovoid, transversely striate, with prominent veins, pale brown when ripe, usually 1-seeded.{\i   Dry hillsides and cultivated ground. Krym.} ?Rm Rs (K). ({\i  N. Anatolia.})
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 8. M. italica} (L.) Lam., {\i  Fl. Fr.}{\b  2}: 594 (1778). Erect, branched annual 20-60 cm. Lower leaflets orbicular-obovate, the upper narrower, all obtuse or truncate, serrate above middle. Stipules incise-dentate. Racemes 1·5-3 cm, lax, many-flowered, elongating in fruit. Corolla 6-9 mm, yellow; standard longer than wings and keel. Legume 5-6 mm, globose, obtuse with an apiculus, strongly reticulate-veined, yellowish or greyish-brown when ripe.{\i   Dry, open habitats. Mediterranean region.} Al Bl Co Cr Ga Gr Hs It Ju Sa Si [Lu].
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 9. M. neapolitana} Ten.,{\i   Fl. Nap. }{\b 1},{\i   Prodr}.: 62 (1811). Erect, branched annual 15-50 cm; stem pubescent above. Lower leaflets obovate-orbicular, the upper oblong-linear, all obtuse, serrate. Stipules lanceolate, entire. Racemes c. 1 cm, lax, 8- to 20-flowered, elongating in fruit. Corolla 4-6 mm, bright yellow; standard, wings and keel equal; ovary pubescent. Legume 3-3·5 mm, globose, reticulate-veined, narrowing to a conical beak 0·5-1 mm, becoming glabrous, light brown when ripe. 2n = 16.{\i   Dry, open habitats. S. Europe.} Al Bl Bu Co Cr Ga Gr Hs It Ju Lu Rs (K) Sa Si Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 10. M. indica} (L.) All.,{\i   Fl. Pedem. }{\b 1}: 308 (1785) ({\i  M. parviflora} Desf.). Erect or ascending annual 15-50 cm. Leaflets lanceolate-oblong, serrate. Stipules subentire. Racemes dense, (10-)many-
\par

\par
149}
\par