{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 5-15 mm, elliptical to oblong, feebly parallel-veined; stipules 5-20 × 1-4 mm, linear to lanceolate, semi-sagittate. Racemes 2- to 7- flowered. Calyx-teeth slightly unequal; corolla 12-20 mm, bright red-purple. Legume 20-40 × 4-7 mm, brown, glabrous. Seeds 3-6, smooth or slightly tuberculate; hilum 1/10-1/5 of the circumference. 2n = 14.{\i   Most of Europe except the north and extreme south.} Al Au Be Bu Cz Ga Ge Gr He Ho Hs Hu It Ju Po Rm Rs (B, C, W, K, E) [Br Da Su].
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 28. L. roseus} Steven,{\i   Mém. Soc. Nat. Moscou}{\b  4}: 92 (1813). Glabrous perennial; stem 40-150 cm, not winged. Leaves without tendril; leaflets 1 pair, 25-50 × 15-35 mm, ovate-elliptical to obovate-orbicular, pinnately veined; stipules 4-15 mm, linear-triangular. Racemes 1- to 5-flowered. Calyx-teeth unequal; corolla 12-20 mm, pink. Legume 30-55 × 5-9 mm, pale brown, glabrous. Seeds up to 10, smooth; hilum 1/5 of the circumference.{\i   Krym.} Rs (K). ({\i  Anatolia and Caucasus}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 29. L. grandiflorus} Sibth. & Sm.,{\i   Fl. Graec. Prodr.}{\b  2}: 67 (1813). Pubescent perennial; stem 30-150 cm, not winged. Leaflets 1(-3) pairs, 25-50 × 10-35 mm, ovate, feebly parallel-veined; stipules 2-10 × 0·5-1·5 mm, linear, sometimes sagittate. Racemes 1- to 4-flowered. Calyx-teeth equal, shorter than tube; corolla 25-30 mm, the standard violet, wings purple, keel pink. Legume 60-90 × 6-7 mm, brown, glabrous. Seeds 15-20, smooth; hilum 1/6 of the circumference. {\i  Shady places in the mountains. S. half of the Balkan peninsula; S. Italy, Sicilia}. Al Bu Cr Gr It Ju Si.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 30. L. rotundifolius} Willd.,{\i   Sp. Pl. }{\b 3}: 1088 (1802) (incl. {\i  L. litvinovii} Iljin). Glabrous perennial; stem 40-80 cm, winged. Leaflets 1 pair, 25-60 × 20-40(-45) mm, elliptical to suborbicular or ovate-orbicular, usually not more than twice as long as wide, feebly parallel-veined, the margin plane; stipules 10-25 × 3-6 mm, oblong or lanceolate, hastate. Racemes 3- to 8-flowered. Calyx-teeth unequal, the lowest at least twice as long as upper 2; corolla 15-22 mm, purple-pink. Legume 40-70 × 4-10 mm, brown, glabrous. Seeds 8-10, reticulate-rugose; hilum 1/5 of the circumference. 2n = 14.{\i   E. Russia; Krym. }Rs (C, K). ({\i  W. Asia.})
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 31. L. undulatus} Boiss., {\i  Diagn. Pl. Or. Nov.}{\b  3}({\b 2}): 41 (1856) ({\i  L. rotundifolius} auct., non Willd.). Like {\b 30} but leaflets 30-70 × 16-35 mm, elliptical to ovate, up to 4 times as long as wide, the margin undulate-crispate; racemes 5- to 10-flowered; lowest calyx-tooth c. 1½ times as long as upper 2; legume 60-80 × 7-11 mm. {\i  Turkey-in-Europe} ({\i  eastern half}). Tu. ({\i  Anatolia.})
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 32. L. sylvestris} L.,{\i   Sp. Pl.} 733 (1753). Glabrous or pubescent perennial; stem 60-200 cm, winged. Leaflets 1 pair, (20-)50-150 × 5-20(-40) mm, linear to lanceolate; stipules 10-30 × 2-5 mm, linear to lanceolate, semi-sagittate, less than ½ as wide as stem. Racemes 3- to 12-flowered. Calyx-teeth unequal; corolla 13-20 mm, purple-pink. Legume 40-70 × 5-13 mm, brown, glabrous. Seeds 10-15, reticulate-rugose; hilum 1/3-1/2 of the circumference. 2n = 14. {\i  Most of Europe except the extreme north and extreme south.} Al Au Be Br Bu Co Cz Da Fe Ga Ge Gr He Ho Hs Hu It Ju Lu No Po Rm Rs (N, B, C, W, E) Sa Su.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 33. L. latifolius} L.,{\i   Sp. Pl.} 733 (1753) ({\i  L. megalanthus} Steudel; incl.{\i   L. membranaceus} C. Presl). Glabrous or pubescent perennial; stem 60-300 cm, winged. Leaflets 1 pair, (30-)40-150 × 3-50 mm, linear to ovate- or elliptic-orbicular; stipules (20-)30-60 × 2-11 mm, lanceolate to ovate, semi-hastate, more than ½ as wide as stem. Racemes 5- to 15-flowered. Calyx-teeth unequal; corolla (15-)20-30 mm, purple-pink. Legume 50-110 × 6-10 mm, brown, glabrous. Seeds 10-15 reticulate-rugose; hilum 1/5-1/3 of the circumference. 2n = 14.{\i   C. & S. Europe, extending to N. France; cultivated for ornament and sometimes naturalized.} Al Au Bl Bu Co Cz Ga Gr He Hs Hu It Ju Lu Po Rm Rs (W, K) Sa Si [Be Br Ge]
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Very variable in leaflet-shape, and sometimes divided, on this basis, into two species or subspecies, but there is little correlation between leaflet-shape and other characters.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   {\b 34. L. heterophyllus} L., {\i  Sp. Pl.} 733 (1753). Like {\b 33} but leaflets usually 2-3 pairs on upper leaves, and corolla 12-22 mm. 2n = 14. {\i   S.W. & C. Europe, extending to C. Sweden.} Au Cz Ga Ge He Hs It Lu Po Sa Su.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   The status of this species is very uncertain. It is possibly only a variant of {\b 33}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 35. L. tremolsianus} Pau,{\i   Not. Bot. Fl. Esp.}{\b  4}: 29 (1891) ({\i  L. elegans} Porta & Rigo, non Vogler,{\i   L. latifolius} var.{\i   angustifolius} sensu Willk. pro parte). Glabrous annual; stem up to 100 cm, winged. Leaflets 1 pair, 30-100 × 1-4 mm, linear-lanceolate; stipules 10-30 × 2-4 mm, linear-lanceolate, semi-sagittate. Racemes 1- to 3-flowered. Calyx-teeth subequal, at least the lower longer than tube; corolla 20-30 mm, pink with blue wings. Legume c. 70 × 6 mm, glabrous. •{\i   S.E. Spain.} Hs.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 36. L. tingitanus} L., {\i  Sp. Pl. }732 (1753). Glabrous annual; stem 60-120 cm, winged. Leaflets 1 pair, 20-80 × 4-18 mm, linear-lanceolate to ovate; stipules 12-25 × 3-12 mm, lanceolate to ovate, semi-sagittate or -hastate. Racemes 1- to 3-flowered. Calyx-teeth subequal, shorter than tube; corolla 20-30 mm, bright purple. Legume 60-100 × 8-10 mm, brown, glabrous. Seeds 6-8, smooth; hilum 1/6 of the circumference. {\i  S. & E. part of Iberian peninsula; Sardegna; Açores.} Az Hs Lu Sa.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 37. L. odoratus} L.,{\i   Sp. Pl}. 732 (1753). More or less pubescent annual; stem 50-200 cm, winged. Leaflets 1 pair, 20-60 × 7-30 mm, ovate-oblong or elliptical, sometimes feebly parallel veined; stipules 15-25 × 3-4 mm, lanceolate, semi-sagittate. Racemes 1- to 3-flowered. Calyx-teeth subequal, longer than tube; corolla 20-35 mm, purple. Legume 50-70 × 10-12 mm, brown, pubescent. Seeds c. 8, smooth; hilum ¼ of the circumference. 2n = 14.  •{\i   S. Italy and Sicilia; widely cultivated for ornament and perhaps naturalized in some parts of C. & S. Europe.} It Si [Au Ga Lu].
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   In cultivation the corolla may be white, pink, purple, violet or blue or some combination of these; some of these colour variants may occasionally occur as casuals.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 38. L. saxatilis} (Vent.) Vis.,{\i   Fl. Dalm.}{\b  3}: 330 (1852) ({\i  L. ciliatus} Guss., {\i  Vicia saxatilis} (Vent.) Tropea). Pubescent annual; stem 10-30 cm, not winged. Leaves without tendril; leaflets 1-3 pairs, those of the lower leaves 3-8 × 1·5-3 mm, obcordate, with 3 teeth at apex, those of the upper leaves 7-20 × 0·5-2 mm, linear; stipules 2-3 × 0·5 mm, linear, semi-hastate, the lobe often irregularly toothed. Flowers solitary; peduncles 2-10 mm, articulated near the middle or apex. Calyx-teeth subequal, slightly shorter than tube; corolla 6-9 mm, pale blue or yellowish. Legume 15-30 × 5-7 mm, brown, glabrous. Seeds 3-8, smooth; hilum 1/12 of the circumference.{\i   Mediterranean region; Krym.} Bl Co Cr Ga Gr Hs It Ju Rs (K).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 39. L. sphaericus} Retz., {\i  Obs. Bot.}{\b  3}: 39 (1783). Glabrous or pubescent annual; stem 10-50 cm, not winged. Leaflets 1 pair, 20-60(-100) × 1-7 mm, linear to linear-lanceolate; stipules 6-15 × 0·5-1 mm, linear, semi-sagittate. Flowers solitary; peduncles 5-20 mm, aristate, articulated near the middle or apex. Calyx-teeth equal, as long as or slightly longer than tube; corolla
\par

\par
141}
\par