{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 40. O. euphrasiifolia} Desf.,{\i   Fl. Atl. }{\b 2}: 141 (1798). Erect annual; stems 7-20 cm, hairy and glandular. Leaves 1-foliolate; leaflets 10-25 mm, lower ovate, upper linear. Flowers shortly pedicellate, borne singly at each node in congested racemes which elongate after anthesis. Corolla 12-15 mm, yellow, exceeding the calyx. Legume c. 8 mm. Seeds c. 12, 0·5-1 mm, reddish-brown, tuberculate.{\i   Maritime sands. S.E. Spain} ({\i  Cabo de Gata}). Hs. ({\i  N.W. Africa.})
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 41. O. hirta} Poiret in Lam.,{\i   Encycl. Méth. Bot., Suppl.}{\b  1}: 741 (1811) ({\i  O. baetica} auct., non Clemente, {\i  O. ellipticifolia} Willk.). Procumbent annual 10-30 cm; stems sometimes simple and ascending, tomentose and with scattered glandular hairs. Leaves 3-foliolate, lower sometimes 1-foliolate; leaflets 6-10 mm, ovate to ovate-orbicular. Flowers borne singly at each node in a dense raceme which becomes lax after anthesis; pedicels up to 2 mm. Corolla 8-12 mm, purple. Legume 5 mm. Seeds 2-3, c. 2 mm, smooth. {\i  Grassy scrub. S.W. Spain; W.C. Portugal.} Hs Lu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 42. O. cossoniana} Boiss. & Reuter,{\i   Pugillus} 33 (1852). Procumbent or ascending annual 10-35 cm, often somewhat woody at the base; stems glandular-hairy. Leaves 3-foliolate; leaflets 7-15 mm, obovate or elliptical; lowest bracts 3-foliolate, upper without leaflets. Flowers shortly pedicellate, borne singly at each node, in a fairly dense raceme. Corolla 13-15 mm, pink, exceeding the calyx. Legume 5-7 mm, ovate. Seeds c. 4, 2·5-3 mm, smooth.{\i   Maritime sands. S.W. Spain; one station in S.W. Portugal.} Hs Lu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 43. O. diffusa} Ten., {\i  Fl. Nap. }{\b 1},{\i   Prodr.}: 41 (1811). Procumbent or ascending annual 10-40 cm; stems glandular-hairy, viscid. Leaves 3-foliolate, but the basal sometimes pinnate; leaflets 10-20 mm, oblanceolate to suborbicular, denticulate, with usually 10-16 more or less appressed teeth; lowest bracts 3-foliolate, upper without leaflets. Flowers very shortly pedicellate, borne singly at each node in a dense terminal raceme, elongating considerably after anthesis. Corolla 9-11 mm, pink, equalling or exceeding the calyx. Legume 5-8 mm. Seeds 1-3, c. 2 mm, reddish-brown, tuberculate.{\i   Coasts of the Mediterranean region and of Portugal and N.W. Spain.} Co Cr Gr Hs It Lu Sa Si.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 44. O. serrata} Forskål,{\i   Fl. Aegypt. }130 (1775). Diffuse, procumbent annual 5-30 cm; viscid. Leaves 3-foliolate; leaflets 6-10 mm, oblong or oblong-linear, dentate, with 4-6 patent or somewhat recurved teeth; lowest bracts 3-foliolate, the upper without leaflets. Flowers shortly pedicellate, borne singly at each node in a dense terminal raceme which elongates after anthesis. Corolla c. 8 mm, white or pale pink, equalling or slightly exceeding the calyx. Legume 6-7 mm. Seeds 2-5, c. 1 mm, brown, minutely tuberculate.{\i   Karpathos.} Cr. ({\i  S.W. Asia, N. Africa}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 45. O. tournefortii} Cosson,{\i   Not. Pl. Crit. }34 (1849). Branched, ascending annual 10-40 cm; stems densely hairy below, glandular-hairy above. Leaves 3-foliolate; leaflets 5-10 mm, obovate, emarginate, somewhat fleshy, with prominent veins; lower bracts 3-foliolate, upper without leaflets. Flowers shortly pedicellate, borne singly at each node in a dense raceme which elongates after anthesis. Corolla 6-8 mm, white to pale yellow, variously veined with purple, equalling or slightly shorter than the calyx. Legume 7-8 mm, ovoid-oblong. Seeds 4-6, c. 1·5 mm, brown, minutely tuberculate.{\i   S.W. Spain. }Hs. ({\i  Morocco.})
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 46. O. subspicata} Lag.,{\i   Period. Soc. Med. Cádiz}{\b  4}: 1 (1824) ({\i  O. picardii }Boiss.). Erect or ascending annual 5-30 cm; stems variably glandular-hairy. Leaves 3-foliolate, the lower with long petioles up to 3 cm; leaflets 6-18 mm, linear-oblanceolate to ovate, serrate; bracts mostly without leaflets. Flowers shortly pedicellate, borne singly at each node, in a short dense raceme which elongates after anthesis. Corolla 8-14 mm, pink, exceeding the calyx. Legume c. 7 mm, ovoid-oblong. Seeds 4-6, c. 1 mm, brown, tuberculate.{\i   Maritime sands. W. Spain, Portugal}. Hs Lu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 47. O. mitissima} L., {\i  Sp. Pl.} 717 (1753). Erect or procumbent annual; stems 15-60 cm, somewhat tomentose or nearly glabrous. Leaves 3-foliolate; leaflets 10-20 mm, obovate or elliptical, sometimes caducous, lower bracts 3-foliolate, upper without leaflets, concave and membranous. Flowers shortly pedicellate, borne singly at each node, in a dense terminal raceme. Calyx-tube glabrous, with very prominent white veins, margins of teeth glandular-ciliate. Corolla 10-12 mm, pink, exceeding the calyx. Legume 5-6 mm, ovate. Seeds 2-3, 1·5-2 mm, dark brown, spinulose. {\i  Mediterranean region, Portugal}. Bl Co Cr Ga Gr Hs It Ju Lu Sa Si Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 48. O. alopecuroides} L., {\i  Sp. Pl.} 717 (1753). Robust annual 10-65 cm, variable in habit; stems nearly glabrous below, densely hairy and glandular above. Leaves 1-foliolate; leaflets 20-50 cm, elliptical or elliptic-orbicular, glabrous. Flowers subsessile, borne singly at each node, in dense terminal racemes, elongating slightly after anthesis. Corolla 13-16 mm, pink, exceeding the calyx. Legume 8-10 mm. Seeds 2-3, 2-3 mm, orange-brown, smooth and shining.{\i   Cultivated ground and waste places. W. Mediterranean region; casual elsewhere in S. Europe.} *Co Hs It Si.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 49. O. baetica} Clemente,{\i   Ens. Vid} 291 (1807) ({\i  O. salzmanniana} Boiss. & Reuter). Like {\b 48} but less robust; upper leaves and lower bracts 3-foliolate; corolla about equalling the calyx.{\i   Sandy places. S.W. Spain, S. Portugal.} Hs Lu. ({\i  N.W. Africa}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc {\b 54.                  Melilotus}                  Miller
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc By A. Hansen.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Annual, biennial or short-lived perennial herbs. Leaves 3-foliolate; leaflets usually toothed. Flowers in axillary racemes. Calyx-teeth subequal; corolla yellow or white, rarely tinged with blue or violet, deciduous, free from the staminal tube; stamens diadelphous, the filaments not dilated. Legume globose to obovoid, rarely lanceolate-rhomboid, straight, indehiscent or very tardily dehiscent. Seeds 1-2, rarely more.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Several species are cultivated locally as fodder, and occur frequently as casuals outside the geographical limits given below.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Many species smell strongly of coumarin, especially when dry.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Literature: O.E. Schulz, {\i  Bot. Jahrb.}{\b  29}: 660-735 (1901).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Corolla white, tinged with blue or violet (Turkey) ............... {\b 16. physocarpa}
\par
1 Corolla white or yellow, without a blue or violet tinge
\par
2 Stipules of the middle leaves entire or minutely denticulate
\par
3 Corolla white
\par
4 Ovary and young legume pubescent; legume with conspicuous 
\par
  transverse veins ................................................................................ {\b 7. taurica}
\par
4 Ovary and young legume glabrous; legume reticulate-veined
\par
5 Pedicels 1-1·5 mm ............................................................................... {\b 3. alba}
\par
5 Pedicels 2-4 mm ............................................................................ {\b 4. wolgica}
\par
3 Corolla yellow
\par
6 Corolla 2-3 mm; legume 1·5-3 mm ............................................... {\b 10. indica}
\par
6 Corolla 3-9 mm; legume 3-8 mm
\par
7 Racemes with not more than 10 flowers
\par
8 Racemes 4-6 cm; legume 7-8 mm, lanceolate-rhomboid ............ {\b 6. polonica}
\par

\par
148}
\par