{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 suborbicular to broadly elliptical or obovate, obtuse or emarginate, densely glandular-hairy. Flowers subsessile, borne singly at each node, in short, dense, terminal racemes without conspicuous leaf-like bracts. Corolla c. 10 mm, yellow, equalling or exceeding the calyx. Legume c. 6 mm. Seeds 1-2, c. 3 mm, brown, minutely tuberculate.{\i   S.E. Spain.} Hs.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 31. O. hispida} Desf.,{\i   Fl. Atl.}{\b  2}: 146 (1798). Shrub 30-150 cm; stems hispid. Leaves 3-foliolate; leaflets 5-15 mm, elliptical or ovate, obtuse; lower bracts 3-foliolate, the upper without leaflets. Flowers shortly pedicellate, borne singly at each node, in lax racemes. Corolla 13-20 mm, pink. Legume 6-7 mm. Seeds c. 2, c. 1·5 mm, black, tuberculate.{\i   Sicilia.} Si.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 32. O. spinosa} L., {\i  Sp. Pl.} 716 (1753). Dwarf shrub 10-80 cm; stems variously hairy and sparsely glandular, usually erect or ascending, usually spiny. Leaves mostly 3-foliolate; leaflets very varied in shape. Bracts usually 1-foliolate. Flowers borne singly, rarely in pairs, at each node, in lax racemes. Calyx glandular-pubescent, and shortly hirsute at the mouth. Corolla 6-20 mm, pink or purple, usually much exceeding the calyx. Legume 6-10 mm. Seeds 1 or few, c. 2 mm, brown or blackish, tuberculate, rarely smooth. 2n = 30.{\i   W., C. & S. Europe, extending to S. Norway and N.W. Ukraine.} All except Az Fa Fe Hb Is Rs (N,B,E) Sb.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 One pair of chromosomes possesses a long constriction so that it frequently appears to be two pairs; this probably accounts for the records of 2n = 32 for this species and for records of 2n = 32 and 64 for {\b 33}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Plant with weak spines; legume shorter than calyx; corolla
\par
  15-20 mm ......................................................................... ({\b d}) subsp. {\b austriaca}
\par
1 Plant with robust spines; legume equalling or exceeding calyx
\par
2 Corolla 10-20 mm; legume 2- to 4-seeded ........................ ({\b a}) subsp. {\b spinosa}
\par
2 Corolla 6-10 mm, little longer than calyx; legume 1-seeded
\par
3 Seeds tuberculate; leaflets 6-10 mm ............................ ({\b b}) subsp. {\b antiquorum}
\par
3 Seeds smooth; leaflets 10-20 mm ................................. ({\b c}) subsp. {\b leiosperma}
\par

\par
 
\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b spinosa} ({\i  O. campestris} Koch & Ziz): Stems erect, usually spiny and with two opposite rows of hairs when young. Leaflets ovate-oblong, acute, more than 3 times as long as wide. Flowers borne singly at each node; corolla 10-20 mm.{\i   In the northern part of the range of the species, southwards to S. Italy and N.E. Portugal.}
\par

\pard\f0\fs28    ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b antiquorum} (L.) Arcangeli,{\i   Comp. Fl. Ital. }157 (1882) ({\i  O. antiquorum} L.; incl. {\i  O. decipiens} Aznav., {\i  O. diacantha} Sieber ex Reichenb.): Stems erect, irregularly hairy, usually, and often exceedingly, spiny. Leaflets 6-10 mm, sometimes less. Corolla 6-10 mm. Seeds tuberculate.{\i   S. Europe}. 
\par

\pard\f0\fs28    ({\b c}) Subsp. {\b leiosperma} (Boiss.) Sirj., {\i  Beih. Bot. Centr. }{\b 49}({\b 2}): 590 (1932) ({\i  O. leiosperma} Boiss.): Like subsp. ({\b b}) but leaflets larger and seeds smooth.{\i   S. & E. parts of Balkan peninsula, Aegean region; Krym.} 
\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b d}) Subsp. {\b austriaca} (G. Beck) Gams in Hegi,{\i   Ill. Fl. Mitteleur.}{\b  4}({\b 3}): 1224 (1923): Stems simple, irregularly hairy, unarmed or slightly spiny; somewhat foetid. Leaflets up to 20 mm. Flowers borne singly at each node, in long lax racemes. Corolla 15-20 mm. Seeds tuberculate. {\i  C. Europe}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 33. O. repens} L., {\i  Sp. Pl.} 717 (1753) ({\i  O. spinosa} subsp.{\i   procurrens }(Wallr.) Briq.). Shrubby perennial 40-70 cm; stems procumbent or ascending, often rooting, unarmed or with usually soft spines, variably hairy with long, eglandular and short, glandular hairs, not in two distinct rows. Leaves 1- to 3-foliolate; leaflets usually ovate, obtuse or emarginate, less than 3 times as long as wide. Flowers borne singly, rarely in pairs, at each node, in lax leafy racemes. Calyx densely hirsute; corolla (7-)15-20 mm, pink or purple, usually much exceeding the calyx. Legume 5-7 mm. Seeds 1-2, c. 2·5 mm, brown or blackish, tuberculate. 2n = 30, 60.{\i   W. & C. Europe, extending to} c. 66°{\i   N. in E. Sweden, to Estonia, and to the N. half of the Balkan peninsula.} Au Be Br Bu Cz Da Ga Ge Hb He Ho Hs It Ju Lu No Po Rm Rs (B, W, K) Su Tu [Fe].
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 34. O. arvensis} L.,{\i   Syst. Nat.} ed. 10,{\b  2}: 1159 (1759) ({\i  O. hircina} Jacq.,{\i   O. intermedia} auct.). Shrubby perennial 50-100 cm; stems erect, variably hairy. Leaves mostly 3-foliolate; leaflets 10-25 mm, elliptical to ovate. Flowers pedicellate, borne in pairs at each node, in dense terminal racemes; bracts 1- to 3-foliolate. Corolla 10-20 mm, pink. Legume 6-9 mm, about equalling the calyx. Seeds 1-3, c. 2·5 mm, dark brown, tuberculate. 2n = 30. {\i  Europe from} c. 65°{\i   N. in Norway, E. Germany and Albania eastwards, but absent from N. Russia.} Al Au Bu Cz Da Fe Ge Gr Hu It Ju No Po Rm Rs (B, C, W, K, E) Su.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 A variable species, possibly divisible into a number of subspecies. One of the more distinct is{\b  O. spinosiformis} Simkovics,{\i   Österr. Bot. Zeitschr. }{\b 27}: 158 (1877) ({\i  O. semihircina} Simkovics), from E.C. Europe, with 2 rows of hairs on the upper part of the stem and the corolla 10-15 mm.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 35. O. masquillierii} Bertol.,{\i   Hort. Bot. Bon.}{\b  2}: 11 (1839). Dwarf shrub up to 40 cm; stems ascending or decumbent, with unilateral long hairs but few glandular hairs. Leaves 3-foliolate; leaflets 10-18 mm, oblong, ovate or elliptical, acute or obtuse, the terminal long-petiolate. Flowers pedicellate, borne singly at each node, in usually dense racemes; bracts without leaflets. Corolla 11-15 mm, pink, exceeding the calyx. Legume 3-6 mm, shorter than the calyx. Seeds c. 2, c. 2 mm, dark brown, tuberculate. 2n = 30.{\i   Dry clay soils. N. & C. Italy.} It.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 36. O. filicaulis} Salzm. ex Boiss., {\i  Voy. Bot. Midi Esp.}{\b  2}: 153 (1839). Procumbent or ascending annual 10-50 cm; stems variably hairy and glandular. Leaves 3-foliolate; leaflets 4-10 mm, obovate, obtuse; lowest bracts 3-foliolate, upper 1-foliolate. Flowers shortly pedicellate, borne singly at each node, forming a short, dense terminal raceme. Corolla c. 12 mm, pink, equalling or slightly exceeding the calyx. Legume 5 mm. Seeds c. 3, 1-1·5 mm, brown, minutely tuberculate.{\i   S.W. Spain.} Hs.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 37. O. alba} Poiret, {\i  Voy. Barb.}{\b  2}: 210 (1789). Erect annual 15-45 cm; stems branching from the base, strict, nearly glabrous. Leaves 1-foliolate; leaflets 10-45 mm, usually lanceolate or oblong. Flowers borne singly at each node, in lax terminal racemes; pedicels 1-2 mm. Corolla 12-16 mm, pink or whitish, exceeding the calyx. Legume 5 mm. Seeds c. 4, c. 1·5 mm, tuberculate.{\i   Pastures and cultivated fields. Italy and Sardegna. }It Sa.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 38. O. oligophylla} Ten.,{\i   Fl. Nap. }{\b 1},{\i   Prodr}.: 70 (1811). Like {\b 37} but stems procumbent or ascending, villous and with scattered glandular hairs; pedicels c. 5 mm, up to 15 mm after anthesis; corolla 10-13 mm; seeds minutely tuberculate. •{\i   C. & S. Italy, Sicilia.} It Si.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 39. O. variegata} L., {\i  Sp. Pl.} 717 (1753). Procumbent or ascending annual 10-30 cm; stems glandular-tomentose and villous. Leaves 1-foliolate; leaflets 5-10 mm, obovate. Flowers borne singly at each node in a lax, terminal, often branched raceme; pedicels up to 4 mm. Corolla 12-14 mm, yellow, much exceeding the calyx. Legume c. 8 mm. Seeds 10-14, c. 1·5 mm, reddish brown, smooth. {\i  Maritime sands. Mediterranean region, S. Portugal.} Al Co Cr Gr Hs It Lu Sa Si.
\par

\par
147}
\par