{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b viscosa}: Leaves 1- to 3-foliolate. Primary branches of inflorescence longer than leaves; arista 6-15 mm. Corolla exceeding the calyx, yellow. Legume exceeding calyx. Seeds numerous. {\i  C. & W. Mediterranean region; S. & N.E. Portugal. }
\par

\pard\f0\fs28    ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b brachycarpa} (DC.) Batt. in Batt. & Trabut,{\i   Fl. Algér.} ({\i  Dicot.}) 212 (1889): Leaves 1- to 5-foliolate. Primary branches of the inflorescence 14-18 mm; arista 2-6 mm. Corolla 9-11 mm, slightly exceeding the calyx, yellow, rarely with pink veins. Legume c. 8 mm, about equalling the calyx.{\i   Spain and Portugal}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28    ({\b c}) Subsp. {\b breviflora} (DC.) Nyman,{\i   Consp. }161 (1878) ({\i  O. breviflora} DC.): Middle cauline leaves 3-foliolate, rarely all leaves 1-foliolate; apex of leaflets often emarginate. Primary branches of the inflorescence equalling or shorter than leaves; arista 6-15 mm. Corolla shorter than calyx. Legume 12-18 mm. Seeds numerous.{\i   Almost throughout the range of the species.}
\par

\pard\f0\fs28    ({\b d}) Subsp. {\b sieberi} (Besser ex DC.) Sirj., {\i  Beih. Bot. Centr.}{\b  49 }({\b 2}): 526 (1932) ({\i  O. sieberi }Besser ex DC.): Leaves 1- to 3-foliolate. Primary branches of the inflorescence shorter than leaves, often nearly muticous; flowers aggregated at apices of branches. Corolla exceeding calyx, standard often pink. Legume rather longer than calyx. Seeds 4-6. •{\i   From Sardegna to Kriti. }

\pard\f0\fs28    ({\b e}) Subsp. {\b subcordata} (Cav.) Sirj.,{\i   op. cit.} 527 (1932): Stems 15-25 cm, glabrous below. Leaves all 1-foliolate; leaflets subcordate. Primary branches of the inflorescence up to twice as long as leaves; arista 6-15 mm. Corolla yellow. Legume 2-3 times as long as calyx.{\i   S. Spain}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28    ({\b f}) Subsp. {\b foetida} (Schousboe ex DC.) Sirj., {\i  op. cit.} 527 (1932): Stems up to 70 cm, rather slender, glabrous below, variably hairy above. Middle leaves 3-foliolate, leaflets acute. Primary branches of the inflorescence 3-4 times as long as leaves. Corolla pinkish-purple, exceeding calyx. Legume about equalling calyx. Seeds 3-4.{\i   S. Spain.}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 19. O. crotalarioides} Cosson, {\i  Not. Pl. Crit.} 155 (1852). Like {\b 18} but with leaves all 1-foliolate; leaflets up to 28 mm, elliptical, obovate or ovate-oblong; primary branches of the inflorescence c. 20 mm; corolla yellow, shorter than the calyx; legume 20-25 × 8-9 mm, much inflated; seeds up to 2 mm. {\i  S. Spain.} Hs.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Sect. ONONIS (Sect.{\i   Bugrana} Griseb.). Flowers in racemes or very condensed panicles with the primary branches not more than 1·5 mm; legume usually erect or patent, ovate or rhombic; seeds few.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 20. O. cintrana} Brot., {\i  Phyt. Lusit.} ed. 3, {\b 1}: 138 (1816). Erect annual 10-35 cm; stems densely hairy and glandular. Leaves 1-foliolate, the middle cauline 3-foliolate. Flowers in dense terminal panicles, the primary branches 1- to 2-flowered; pedicels 5-15 mm. Corolla 12-14 mm, yellow with red veins. Legume c. 5 mm. Seeds c. 4, c. 1 mm, brown, acutely tuberculate.{\i   Dry places. C. & S. Portugal, S.W. Spain.} Hs Lu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 21. O. speciosa} Lag.,{\i   Gen. Sp. Nov.} 22 (1816). Erect or ascending dwarf shrub up to 1 m; stems with very short, dense glandular hairs; inflorescence with long hairs, some glandular. Leaves 3-foliolate; leaflets 15-23 mm, elliptical to suborbicular, subcoriaceous, glabrous, viscid with sessile glands. Flowers in dense, oblong panicles, the primary branches 1- to 3-flowered; pedicels 2-6 mm; bracts subscarious, caducous. Corolla 15-20 mm, golden-yellow. Legume c. 6 mm. Seeds 3 mm, black, smooth.{\i   S. Spain.} Hs.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 22. O. aragonensis} Asso,{\i   Syn. Stirp. Arag.} 96 (1779). Dwarf shrub 15-30 cm; stems often much contorted, densely hairy above, sometimes with scattered short glandular hairs intermixed. Leaves 3-foliolate; leaflets 4-10 mm, elliptical or suborbicular, obtuse, or emarginate, coriaceous. Flowers in long, lax, terminal panicles, the primary branches 1- to 2-flowered; pedicels 2-4 mm. Corolla 12-18 mm, yellow. Legume 7-8 mm. Seeds 1-2, 3-4 mm, dark greenish-brown, smooth.{\i   Pyrenees, E. & S. Spain.} Ga Hs.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 23. O. reuteri} Boiss. in Boiss. & Reuter,{\i   Pugillus} 30 (1852). Like {\b 22} but leaflets 2-4 mm and corolla not more than 10 mm. {\i  S.W. Spain.} Hs.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 24. O. pinnata} Brot., {\i  Fl. Lusit.}{\b  2}: 99 (1804) ({\i  O. rosifolia }DC.). Dwarf shrub 45-80 cm; stems numerous, strict, villous, sparsely glandular. Leaves pinnate; leaflets 5-9, 10-15 mm, ovate, rounded or emarginate at apex, base cuneate. Flowers borne singly at each node in dense racemes, which elongate later; pedicels 4 mm. Corolla 15-23 mm, pink. Legume 6-7 mm. Seeds 3, c. 1·5 mm, brown, smooth.{\i   Scrub. S. half of Iberian peninsula.} Hs Lu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 25. O. leucotricha} Cosson, {\i  Not. Pl. Crit. }34 (1849). Dwarf shrub 15-40 cm, villous and with numerous, short glandular hairs. Leaves pinnate; leaflets 5-7, 10-30 mm, ovate or elliptical, caducous, but the petioles long-persistent. Flowers subsessile, borne singly at each node, in dense, terminal racemes, which elongate after anthesis. Corolla 10-14 mm, pinkish-purple. Legume 6-8 mm. Seeds 4-6, 1·5-2 mm, brown, smooth.{\i   S.W. Spain }({\i  near Cádiz}). Hs.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 26. O. pusilla} L., {\i  Syst. Nat.} ed. 10,{\b  2}: 1159 (1759) ({\i  O. columnae} All.). Perennial up to 25 cm, somewhat woody at the base; stems variably hairy. Leaves 3-foliolate, long-petiolate; leaflets 5-13 mm, elliptical to suborbicular, sometimes emarginate. Flowers sessile in lax spikes, with leaf-like bracts (longer than the flowers) to the apex. Corolla 5-12 mm, yellow, about equalling the calyx. Legume 6-8 mm. Seeds c. 6, c. 2 mm, yellow-brown, minutely tuberculate.{\i   S. Europe, extending northwards to N. France and Czechoslovakia.} Al Au Bu Co Cz Ga Gr He Hs Hu It Ju Lu Rm Rs (K) Sa Si Tu [Be].
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 27. O. saxicola} Boiss. & Reuter,{\i   Pugillus} 32 (1852). Like {\b 26} but up to 20 cm, procumbent and slender; corolla c. 12 mm, exceeding the calyx.{\i   S.W. Spain }({\i  Serrania de Ronda}). Hs.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   {\b 28. O. minutissima} L.,{\i   Sp. Pl.} 717 (1753). Dwarf shrub 5-30 cm. Stems often procumbent and rooting, nearly glabrous. Leaves 3-foliolate; leaflets 3-6 mm, sessile, oblong-oblanceolate to obovate, caducous. Flowers pedicellate, borne singly at each node, in dense terminal racemes. Calyx-tube whitish, with long, subulate teeth; corolla 8-10 mm, yellow, not exceeding the calyx. Legume 6-7 mm. Seeds 3-6, 1·5-2 mm, brown, smooth. 2n = 30. {\i  W. Mediterranean region, extending eastwards to Jugoslavia.} Bl Co Ga Hs It Ju Sa Si.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 29. O. striata} Gouan,{\i   Obs. Bot.} 47 (1773). Somewhat woody, rhizomatous up to 20 cm; flowering stems ascending, somewhat tomentose. Leaves 3-foliolate; leaflets 3-6 mm, oblanceolate to orbicular-obovate, often emarginate, the veins very prominent when dry. Flowers borne singly at each node, in few-flowered terminal racemes; pedicels short. Corolla (5-)10-13 mm, yellow, exceeding the calyx. Legume 6-7 mm. Seeds 1-3, c. 2 mm, dark greenish-brown, smooth.{\i   Mountains; calcicole. • S.W. Europe}. Ga Hs It.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 30. O. cephalotes} Boiss.,{\i   Elenchus} 33 (1838) ({\i  O. montana} Cosson). Perennial with woody rhizome 8-20 cm; stems densely glandular-hairy and villous. Leaves 3-foliolate; leaflets 3-7 mm,
\par

\par
146}
\par