{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}
\pard\f0\fs28    ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b ramosissima} (Desf.) Batt. in Batt. & Trabut,{\i   Fl. Algér.} ({\i  Dicot}.) 213 (1889) ({\i  O. ramosissima} Desf.): Stems erect, often much-branched with glandular hairs 0·2-0·5 mm and sometimes with longer eglandular hairs. Lower leaves 1- to 3-foliolate; leaflets (5-)8-15(-25) mm. Calyx-teeth 1·5-2·5 times as long as tube; corolla (10-)12-15 mm. Legume 10-15 mm. Seeds dark brown, minutely tuberculate. {\i  W. Mediterranean region & Portugal, usually near the coast}. 
\par
\pard\f0\fs28    ({\b c}) Subsp. {\b hispanica} (L. fil.) Coutinho,{\i   Fl. Port. }331 (1913) ({\i  O. virgata} G. Kunze, {\i  O. hispanica} L. fil.): Like subsp. ({\b b}) but stems often procumbent and with very dense glandular hairs; leaflets 2-5(-8) mm; corolla 6-12 mm; legume 10-12 mm; seeds greyish-brown, smooth. {\i  Coasts of Spain and Portugal; Islas Baleares}.
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28     {\b 7. O. crispa} L., {\i  Sp. Pl.} ed. 2, 1010 (1763). Erect, dwarf shrub 15-50 cm; stem densely glandular-hairy, leafy. Lower leaves often 5-foliolate, upper 3-foliolate; leaflets 7-9 mm, orbicular, the margins undulate. Inflorescence dense, the primary branches 1- or 2-flowered, muticous or shortly aristate. Corolla 15-20 mm, yellow, the standard often with red veins. Legume 15-20 mm. Seeds 12, c. 2 mm, minutely tuberculate.{\i   S.E. Spain, Islas Baleares.} Bl Hs ?Lu.
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28     {\b 8. O. ornithopodioides} L.,{\i   Sp. Pl}. 718 (1753). Erect annual up to 30 cm; stems glandular-hairy. Leaves 3-foliolate; leaflets 10-15 mm, obovate to oblanceolate, the terminal long-petiolate. Primary branches of the inflorescence 1- or 2-flowered, aristate, as long as the leaflets. Corolla 6-8 mm, yellow, shorter than the calyx. Legume 12-20 mm, subfalcate, torulose. Seeds 6-10, c. 1·5 mm, acutely tuberculate.{\i   Mediterranean region.} Al Bl Co Gr Hs It Ju Sa Si.
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28     {\b 9. O. biflora} Desf.,{\i   Fl. Atl.}{\b  2}: 143 (1798) ({\i  O. geminiflora} Lag.). Erect annual 10-50 cm; stems sparsely glandular-hairy. Leaves 3-foliolate; leaflets 15-20 mm, elliptical, fleshy. Primary branches of the inflorescence 15-40 mm, 1- to 2-flowered, aristate. Corolla 12-16 mm, yellow, sometimes with pink veins; standard glabrous. Legume c. 20 mm. Seeds 12-14, c. 3 mm, acutely tuberculate.{\i   Mediterranean region, Portugal.} Gr Hs It Lu Sa Si.
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 10. O. maweana} Ball,{\i   Jour. Bot.} ({\i  London}) {\b 11}: 304 (1873). Erect annual 8-35 cm; stems glandular hairy. Lower leaves 1- to 5-foliolate; leaflets variable, obovate to linear. Primary branches of the inflorescence less than 5 mm, 2-flowered, muticous; pedicels up to 5 mm. Corolla 9-13 mm; standard pink to purple, glandular-hairy; wings and keel yellow. Legume 6-12 mm. Seeds 12, c. 1 mm, minutely tuberculate.{\i   Sandy soils. S.W. Portugal.} Lu. ({\i  N.W. Morocco}.)
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 11. O. sicula} Guss., {\i  Cat. Pl. Boccad.} 78 (1821). Slender, erect annual 10-35 cm; stems villous and glandular-hairy. Leaves 3-foliolate, the upper 1-foliolate; leaflets 10-15 mm, oblong, finely dentate. Primary branches of the inflorescence 10-20 mm, aristate, 1-flowered. Corolla 5-9 mm, yellow, usually shorter than the calyx. Legume 10-17 mm. Seeds many, c. 1 mm, tuberculate.{\i   W. Mediterranean region.} Hs It ?Sa Si.
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 12. O. reclinata} L.,{\i   Sp. Pl}. ed. 2, 1011 (1763). Procumbent annual 2-15 cm; stems villous and glandular-hairy. Leaves 3-foliolate; leaflets 5-8 mm, oblanceolate to obovate-orbicular. Primary branches of the inflorescence up to 10 mm, muticous, 1-flowered. Corolla 5-10 mm, pink or purple, about equalling the calyx. Legume 8-14 mm. Seeds up to 20, 0·5-1 mm, acutely tuberculate.{\i   Dry grassy places. S. & W. Europe, northwards to S. England.} Al Bl Br Bu Co Cr Ga Gr Hs It Ju Lu Sa Si Tu.
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 13. O. dentata} Solander ex Lowe,{\i   Trans. Camb. Philos. Soc.}{\b  4}: 34 (1831). Like {\b 12} but the 4 upper calyx-teeth dilated at the apex and 3-toothed or lobed; seeds up to 1·75 mm. {\i   Sicilia S. Spain, S. Portugal.} Hs Lu Si.
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28 Possibly not specifically distinct from {\b 12.}
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 14. O. pendula} Desf.,{\i   Fl. Atl.}{\b  2}: 147 (1798). Erect annual 20-40 cm; stems variably glandular-hairy. Leaves 3-foliolate upper 1-foliolate; leaflets 10-18 mm, obovate to suborbicular apex rounded. Primary branches of the inflorescence 5-7 mm muticous, 1-flowered. Corolla 12-18 mm, pink. Legume 10-12 mm. Seeds 8-12, c. 1 mm, acutely tuberculate. {\i  S. Spain, Sicilia.} Hs Si.
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 15. O. laxiflora} Desf.,{\i   op. cit.} 146 (1798). Ascending annual 8-30 cm; stems branched, pubescent and glandular-hairy. Leaves 3-foliolate; leaflets 10-15 mm, ovate. Primary branches of the inflorescence up to 20 mm, muticous, 1-flowered. Corolla 8-10 mm, pink or whitish, scarcely exceeding the calyx. Legume 16-22 mm, not deflexed. Seeds many, c. 1 mm, acutely tuberculate.{\i   S. Spain; one station in E.C. Portugal.} Hs Lu.
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 16. O. verae} Sirj.,{\i   Beih. Bot. Centr.}{\b  49}({\b 2}): 517 (1932). Ascending or procumbent annual 6-12 cm; stems hairy and glandular. Leaves all 1-foliolate, glandular and sparsely hairy; leaflets of cauline leaves orbicular, those of the uppermost leaves linear. Primary branches of the inflorescence 6-8 mm, muticous, 1-flowered. Corolla 10-12 mm, pink. Legume 6-8 mm. Seeds 8, c. 1 mm, acutely tuberculate.{\i    Kriti.} Cr.
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 17. O. pubescens} L.,{\i   Mantissa Alt.} 267 (1771). Erect annual 15-35 cm; stems viscid and villous. Upper and lower leaves 1-foliolate, middle 3-foliolate; leaflets 10-25 mm, elliptical. Inflorescence dense, the primary branches 5-10 mm, muticous, 1-flowered. Corolla c. 15 mm, yellow. Legume 8-10 mm, acuminate. Seeds 2-3, c. 3 mm, dark brown, smooth.{\i   Mediterranean region; frequent in the east and west but very rare in the centre.} ? Bl Cr Ga Gr Hs ?It Lu ?Si Tu.
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 18. O. viscosa} L.,{\i   Sp. Pl.} 718 (1753). Erect annual 10-80 cm stems densely and softly hairy and glandular. Leaves all 1-foliolate or the middle cauline leaves 3(-5)-foliolate; leaflets 10-20 mm, variable, usually elliptical to obovate, obtuse. Primary branches of the inflorescence 10-20 mm, aristate, 1-flowered. Corolla up to 12 mm, yellow, the standard frequently with red veins. Legume up to 20 mm, not or only slightly inflated. Seeds many, 1-1·5 mm, yellow-brown, acutely tuberculate. 2n = 32.{\i   Mediterranean region, Portugal.} Al Bl Cr Ga Gr Hs It Ju Lu Sa Si Tu.
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28 Very variable especially in the western part of its range, where several subspecies and numerous varieties have been recognized.
\par
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Legume 12-20 mm, exceeding the calyx
\par 2 Primary branches of the inflorescence muticous or with arista
\par  less than 3 mm ..................................................................... ({\b d}) subsp. {\b sieberi}
\par 2 Primary branches of the inflorescence with arista 6-15 mm
\par 3 Corolla not exceeding calyx
\par 3 Corolla exceeding calyx ............................................... ({\b c}) subsp.{\b  breviflora}
\par 4 Arista with simple hairs .................................................... ({\b a}) subsp. {\b viscosa}
\par 4 Arista without simple hairs
\par 1 Legume 6-10 mm, about equalling calyx ................... ({\b e}) subsp. {\b subcordata}
\par 5 Primary branches of the inflorescence not exceeding the leaves,
\par  muticous or with short arista .............................................. ({\b d}) subsp. {\b sieberi}
\par 5 Primary branches of the inflorescence exceeding leaves
\par 6 Leaves mostly 1-foliolate; corolla yellow, rarely with pink 
\par  veins ........................................................................... ({\b b}) subsp. {\b brachycarpa}
\par 6 Middle cauline leaves 3-foliate; corolla pinkish-purple ..... ({\b f}) subsp. {\b foetida}
\par
\par 145}
\par