{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 30 Inflorescence with conspicuous leaf-like bracts; stipules 
\par
   more than 6 mm ............................................................................ {\b 26. pusilla}
\par
28 Corolla exceeding the calyx
\par
31 Racemes 2- to 4-flowered or flowers solitary; leaves not 
\par
   glandular-hairy .............................................................................. {\b 29. striata}
\par
31 Racemes many-flowered; leaves glandular-hairy
\par
32 Racemes with numerous leaf-like bracts equalling or 
\par
   exceeding the flowers ................................................................ {\b 27. saxicola}
\par
32 Racemes with scarious bracts (except sometimes at the base)  
\par
   shorter than the flowers .......................................................... {\b 30. cephalotes}
\par
27 Corolla pink or purple; standard hairy
\par
33 Unarmed shrub; stems hispid; leaves with subsessile glands 
\par
   beneath ......................................................................................... {\b 31. hispida}
\par
33 More or less herbaceous, sometimes spiny; stem variably hairy; 
\par
   leaves without subsessile glands beneath
\par
34 Inflorescence dense; middle and upper bracts without leaflets
\par
   .............................................................................................. {\b 35. masquillieri}
\par
34 Inflorescence lax; bracts 1-foliolate
\par
35 Stems usually procumbent, usually rooting; leaflets obtuse or 
\par
   emarginate .................................................................................... {\b 33. repens}
\par
35 Stems usually erect or ascending, not rooting; leaflets obtuse or acute
\par
36 Plant usually spiny; flowers usually borne singly at each node of 
\par
   the raceme .................................................................................... {\b 32. spinosa}
\par
36 Plant unarmed; flowers usually in pairs at each node of the raceme
\par
   ..................................................................................................... {\b 34. arvensis}
\par
21 Annual
\par
37 Calyx campanulate
\par
38 Standard hairy
\par
39 Corolla pink
\par
40 Seeds smooth ........................................................................ {\b 42. cossoniana}
\par
40 Seeds tuberculate
\par
41 Leaves 3-foliolate; flowers in short, dense, terminal racemes . {\b 36. filicaulis}
\par
41 Leaves 1-foliolate; flowers in long lax racemes
\par
42 Stems erect, glabrous; inflorescence not elongating after anthesis . {\b 37. alba}
\par
42 Stems procumbent or ascending, villous; inflorescence 
\par
    elongating after anthesis ....................................................... {\b 38. oligophylla}
\par
39 Corolla yellow
\par
43 Stems procumbent or ascending; seeds smooth ...................... {\b 39. variegata}
\par
43 Stems erect; seeds tuberculate ......................................... {\b 40. euphrasiifolia} 
\par
38 Standard glabrous
\par
44 Lowest bracts 1-foliolate or without leaflets; corolla pink ... {\b 46. subspicata}
\par
44 Lowest bracts 3-foliolate; corolla variously coloured
\par
45 Seeds smooth ................................................................................. {\b 41. hirta}
\par
45 Seeds tuberculate
\par
46 Calyx equalling or slightly exceeding corolla; calyx-teeth  
\par
   about as long as tube ............................................................. {\b 45. tournefortii}
\par
46 Calyx shorter than corolla; calyx-teeth distinctly longer than tube
\par
47 Middle cauline leaves with leaflets 10-20 mm, denticulate, with 
\par
   usually 10-16 teeth; legume with 1-3 seeds ................................. {\b 43. diffusa}
\par
47 Middle cauline leaves with leaflets 6-10 mm, dentate, with 4-6 
\par
   teeth; legume with 2-5 seeds ........................................................ {\b 44. serrata}
\par
37 Calyx tubular
\par
48 Leaves and lower bracts 1-foliolate ................................ {\b 48. alopecuroides}
\par
48 Upper leaves and lower bracts 3-foliolate
\par
49 Corolla 10-12 mm, exceeding the calyx ................................ {\b 47. mitissima}
\par
49 Corolla more than 12 mm, about equalling the calyx ................ {\b 49. baetica}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Sect. NATRIX Griseb. Flowers in panicles, the primary branches 1- to 3-flowered; fruiting pedicels usually more or less deflexed. Legume oblong.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. O. rotundifolia} L., {\i  Sp. Pl.} 719 (1753). Erect, branched dwarf shrub 35-50 cm; stems villous and glandular. Leaves 3-foliolate; leaflets c. 25 mm, elliptical to orbicular, obtuse, coarsely toothed, sparingly glandular; terminal leaflet with long petiolule. Primary branches of the inflorescence c. 30 mm, up to 60 mm in fruit, muticous; pedicels 3-6 mm. Corolla 16-20 mm, pink or whitish. Legume 20-30 mm. Seeds 10-20, c. 3 mm, minutely tuberculate. {\i   Usually calcicole. •  From S.E. Spain to E. Austria & C. Italy, mainly in the mountains.} Au Ga He Hs It.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. O. tridentata} L., {\i  Sp. Pl.} 718 (1753). Erect or procumbent dwarf shrub 15-40 cm; stem tomentose. Leaves mostly 3-foliolate; leaflets 12-14(-40) mm, linear to obovate, somewhat fleshy, entire to coarsely toothed. Primary branches of the inflorescence up to 10 mm, usually aristate; arista 4-5 mm; bracts c. 5 mm. Corolla 10-17 mm, pink. Legume 13-20 mm, compressed. Seeds 2-3, c. 2·75 mm, brown and mealy. 2n = 30.{\i   Gypsaceous soils. E., C. & S. Spain.} Hs.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 3. O. fruticosa} L., {\i  Sp. Pl.} 718 (1753). Erect dwarf shrub 25-100 cm; young stems shortly pubescent. Leaves mostly 3-foliolate, subsessile; leaflets 7-25 mm, oblong-lanceolate, subcoriaceous, glabrous. Primary branches of the inflorescence 10-30 mm, in the axils of scarious bracts; pedicels 2-5 mm. Corolla 10-20 mm, pink. Legume 18-22 mm. Seeds c. 4, 2·5 mm, minutely tuberculate.{\i   Dry rocky places, mainly on mountains. C. & E. Spain and C. Pyrenees; S.E. France.} Ga Hs.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 4. O. cristata} Miller,{\i   Gard. Dict.} ed. 8, no. 9 (1768) ({\i  O. cenisia} L.). Procumbent, rhizomatous perennial 5-35 cm; stems shortly hairy and glandular. Leaves 3-foliolate; leaflets 5-10 mm, oblong or oblanceolate, subcoriaceous. Primary branches of the inflorescence 10-30 mm, shortly or minutely aristate. Corolla 10-14 mm, pink. Legume 9-12 mm. Seeds c. 5, 2·5 mm, tuberculate.{\i   S.W. Alps; C. Appennini; E. Pyrenees and mountains of E. Spain.} Ga Hs It.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 5. O. adenotricha} Boiss.,{\i   Diagn. Pl. Or. Nov. }{\b 1}({\b 2}): 14 (1843). Rhizomatous perennial 5-30 cm; stems several, glandular-hairy, arising from a woody base. Lower leaves pinnate, becoming 1- to 3-foliolate towards the apex of the stem; leaflets 6-7 mm, ovate, emarginate. Primary branches of the inflorescence c. 7 mm, muticous or aristate. Corolla 7-9 mm, yellow. Legume 10-12 mm. Seeds 2-4, c. 2 mm, tuberculate.{\i   Dry stony places; calcicole. Mountains of S. Bulgaria.} Bu. ({\i  Anatolia, Lebanon.})
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 6. O. natrix} L., {\i  Sp. Pl}. 717 (1753). Erect, much-branched dwarf shrub; stems 20-60 cm, densely glandular-hairy. Leaves 3-foliolate, the lower rarely pinnate; leaflets variable, ovate to linear. Flowers in lax leafy panicles, the primary branches 1-flowered. Corolla 6-20 mm, yellow, frequently with red or violet veins. Legume 10-25 mm. Seeds 4-10, c. 2 mm, smooth or minutely tuberculate. {\i   S. & W. Europe, northwards to N. France, but very rare in the Balkan peninsula.} Bl Co Cr Ga Ge He Hs It Ju Lu Sa Si.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Leaflets 2-5(-8) mm; corolla 6-12 mm; seeds greyish-brown,
\par
   smooth ............................................................................ ({\b c}) subsp. {\b hispanica}
\par
1 Leaflets (5-)8 mm or more; corolla (10-)12-20 mm;  
\par
  seeds dark brown, minutely tuberculate
\par
2 Stem with dense, long (0·5-2 mm) glandular and eglandular 
\par
  hairs; calyx teeth 2·5-4 times as long as tube ................... ({\b a}) subsp. {\b natrix} 
\par
2 Stem with short (0·2-0·5 mm) glandular hairs, sometimes with 
\par
  some longer hairs; lower leaves 1- to 3-foliolate;
\par
  calyx-teeth 1·5-2·5 times as long as the tube ......... ({\b b}) subsp. {\b ramosissima}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b natrix}: Stems erect, with dense, long (0·5-2 mm) eglandular and glandular hairs and some short glandular hairs. Lower leaves 3-foliolate, sometimes pinnate; leaflets 12-20(-30) mm. Calyx-teeth 2·5-4 times as long as tube; corolla 12-20 mm, usually with red or violet veins. Legume 12-25 mm. Seeds dark brown, minutely tuberculate.{\i   Almost throughout the range of the species, from S.E. Spain eastwards. Very variable, especially in the western part of its range}.
\par

\par
144}
\par