{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 10-12 mm, with 2 wings on the dorsal suture. 2n = 14.{\i   S. Europe.} Al Bl Co Cr Ga Gr Hs It Ju Lu Sa Si Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 53. L. nissolia} L.,{\i   Sp. Pl. }729 (1753). Glabrous or sparsely pubescent annual; stem 10-90 cm, not winged. Petiole and rhachis up to 130 mm, forming a linear, grass-like phyllode, without leaflets or tendril; stipules 0·5-2 mm, filiform. Racemes 1- to 2-flowered. Calyx-teeth equal, much shorter than tube; corolla (6-)8-18 mm, crimson. Legume 30-60 × 2-4 mm, pale brown, glabrous or pubescent. Seeds 12-20, hilum 1/9-1/8 of the circumference. 2n = 14.{\i   Grassy places. W., C. & S. Europe.} Al Au Be Br Bu Co Cz Ga Ge Gr He Ho Hs Hu It Ju Lu Po Rm Rs (W, K, E) Sa Si Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 54. L. aphaca} L.,{\i   Sp. Pl.} 729 (1753). Glabrous annual; stem up to 100 cm, angled. Seedling leaves with 1 pair of small leaflets; mature leaves without leaflets but with a tendril; stipules 6-50 × 5-40 mm, ovate, hastate. Flowers usually solitary; peduncles 20-50 mm. Calyx-teeth equal, 2-3 times as long as tube; corolla 6-18 mm, yellow. Legume 20-35 × 3-8 mm, brown, glabrous. Seeds 6-8; hilum 1/10 of the circumference. 2n = 14. {\i   W., C. & S. Europe, but only as an alien in much of the northern part  of its range}. Al *Au *Az Bl Bu Co Cr Ga Gr Hs *Hu It Ju Lu *Rm Rs (W, K, E) Sa Si Tu [Be Br Ge He Ho].
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc {\b 52.                    Pisum}                  L.
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc By P.W. Ball.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Like{\i   Lathyrus} but stems terete; calyx-teeth large and more or less leaf-like; wings adnate to keel; style dilated at apex, longitudinally grooved with recurved margins.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. P. sativum} L., {\i  Sp. Pl.} 727 (1753). Glabrous annual up to 200 cm. Leaflets 1-3 pairs, 2-7 × 1-4 cm, suborbicular to elliptical or oblong; stipules up to 10 × 6 cm, ovate to elliptical, semicordate at base. Racemes 1- to 3-flowered. Corolla 15-35 mm, white to purple. Legume 30-120 × 10-25 mm, yellow or brownish, reticulate-veined. Seeds up to 10. {\i   S. Europe; cultivated almost throughout Europe since prehistoric times for the edible seed and for fodder, and often occurring as an escape from cultivation. }Al Bu Co Ga Gr Hs Ju It Lu Rm Rs (W, K) Sa Si Tu [Au Rs (C)].
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b sativum} (incl.{\i   P. arvense} L.): Racemes shorter than or only slightly exceeding the leaves; corolla white to purple; seeds globose or somewhat angular, smooth or rugose.{\i   Widely cultivated and sometimes naturalized, particularly in S. Europe}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b elatius} (Bieb.) Ascherson & Graebner,{\i   Syn. Mitteleur. Fl.}{\b  6}({\b 2}): 1064 (1910) ({\i  P. elatius} Bieb.): Racemes exceeding the leaves; corolla lilac or purple; seeds globose, granular.{\i   S. Europe}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc {\b 53.                  Ononis}                  L.
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc By R.B. Ivimey-Cook.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Annual or perennial herbs or dwarf shrubs, usually glandular-hairy. Leaves 3-foliolate, sometimes simple or imparipinnate, leaflets usually toothed; stipules adnate to the petiole. Flowers in panicles, spikes, or racemes. Calyx campanulate or tubular; corolla yellow, pink or purple, sometimes nearly white; keel more or less beaked; stamens monadelphous. Legume oblong or ovate, dehiscent. Seeds 1-many.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Literature: G. Sirjaev,{\i   Beih. Bot. Centr. }{\b 49}({\b 2}): 381-665 (1932).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Flowers in panicles, sometimes condensed and with the primary 
\par
  branches 1-flowered, the pedicels then distinctly articulated more 
\par
  than 1·5 mm from the base; legume linear or oblong, usually deflexed
\par
2 Perennial; stems woody, at least at the base
\par
3 Corolla pink or purple, occasionally whitish
\par
4 Terminal leaflet with a long petiolule .................................... {\b 1. rotundifolia}
\par
4 Terminal leaflet subsessile
\par
5 Stems and peduncles densely white tomentose; leaflets with few 
\par
  rather blunt teeth .......................................................................... {\b 2. tridentata}
\par
5 Stem and peduncles sparsely to moderately hairy with straight hairs; 
\par
  leaflets serrate or serrulate with usually numerous teeth 
\par
6 Stems 25-100 cm, erect, usually many-flowered;  
\par
   all or most bracts without leaflets ............................................... {\b 3. fruticose}
\par
6 Stems 5-35 cm, procumbent, 1- to 6-flowered; all bracts with  
\par
  1 or 3 leaflets .................................................................................. {\b 4. cristata}
\par
3 Corolla yellow, sometimes with violet or red veins
\par
7 Filament of the adaxial stamen connate with the rest only in the 
\par
  lower ½ (Bulgaria) ................................................................... {\b 5. adenotricha}
\par
7 Filament of the adaxial stamen connate with the rest in the lower 
\par
  2/3-3/4
\par
8 Margin of leaflets not undulate; inflorescence lax ........................... {\b 6. natrix}
\par
8 Margin of leaflets undulate; inflorescence dense ............................ {\b 7. crispa}  
\par
2 Annual; stem herbaceous
\par
9 Legume torulose ............................................................. {\b 8. ornithopodioides}
\par
9 Legume not torulose
\par
10 Primary branches of the inflorescence 2-flowered
\par
11 Standard yellow, sometimes with pink veins, glabrous ............... {\b 9. biflora}
\par
11 Standard pink or purple, glandular-hairy ................................ {\b 10. maweana}
\par
10 Primary branches of the inflorescence 1-flowered
\par
12 Wings with tooth on inner margin
\par
13 Calyx-teeth 5-veined; seeds smooth ..................................... {\b 17. pubescens}
\par
13 Calyx-teeth 3-veined; seeds tuberculate
\par
14 Legume not or slightly inflated ................................................. {\b 18. viscosa}
\par
14 Legume much inflated ..................................................... {\b 19. crotalarioides} 
\par
12 Wings without tooth on inner margin
\par
15 Peduncles shortly aristate; corolla yellow .................................... {\b 11. sicula}
\par
15 Peduncles muticous; corolla pink or purple
\par
16 Leaves all 1-foliolate .................................................................... {\b 16. verae}
\par
16 At least the lower leaves 3-foliolate
\par
17 Calyx-teeth with glandular hairs only ..................................... {\b 15. laxiflora}
\par
17 Calyx-teeth with at least some of the hairs eglandular 
\par
18 Corolla more than 10 mm, exceeding the calyx;
\par
   leaflets 10-15 mm ....................................................................... {\b 14. pendula}
\par
18 Corolla less than 8 mm, equalling or shorter than the calyx;
\par
    leaflets 5-8 mm 
\par
19 Calyx-teeth entire .................................................................... {\b 12. reclinata} 
\par
19 Calyx-teeth dilated at apex and 3-toothed ................................. {\b 13. dentata}
\par
1  Flowers in spikes or racemes, sometimes with several flowers
\par
   at each node; pedicels not articulated or with an articulation 
\par
   not more than 1·5 mm from the base; legume ovate or rhombic 
\par
20 Legume deflexed; pedicels 5-15 mm ....................................... {\b 20. cintrana} 
\par
20 Legume erect or patent; pedicels less than 5 mm or absent 
\par
21 Perennial
\par
22 Pedicels articulated at base; calyx-teeth 1½-2½ times as long as tube
\par
23 Leaflets 15-23 mm; flowers in dense spike-like inflorescences 
\par
   .................................................................................................... {\b 21. speciosa}
\par
23 Leaflets not more than 10 mm; flowers in lax inflorescences 
\par
24 Leaflets 4-10 mm; corolla 12-18 mm ................................. {\b 22. aragonensis} 
\par
24 Leaflets 2-4  mm; corolla not more than 10 mm ........................ {\b 23. reuteri} 
\par
22 Pedicels not articulated; calyx-teeth 2½-4 times as long as tube 
\par
25 Lower leaves pinnate; corolla pink 
\par
26 Corolla 10-14 mm, equalling the calyx;  
\par
   calyx-teeth 5-veined .............................................................. {\b 25. leucotricha} 
\par
26 Corolla 15-23 mm, exceeding the calyx; calyx-teeth 7-veined . {\b 24. pinnata} 
\par
25 Leaves 1- to 3-foliolate; corolla pink, purple or yellow 
\par
27 Corolla yellow; standard glabrous 
\par
28 Corolla shorter than or equalling the calyx 
\par
29 Calyx-teeth glabrous or with short glandular hairs ........... {\b 28. minutissima} 
\par
29 Calyx-teeth with long eglandular and glandular hairs 
\par
30 Inflorescence without conspicuous leaf-like bracts; 
\par
   stipules less than 6 mm ........................................................... {\b 30. cephalotes}
\par

\par
143}
\par