{\rtf1\ansi \deff4\deflang1033{\fonttbl{\f4\froman\fcharset0\fprq2 Times New Roman;}}{\colortbl;\red0\green0\blue0;\red0\green0\blue255;\red0\green255\blue255;\red0\green255\blue0;\red255\green0\blue255;\red255\green0\blue0;\red255\green255\blue0;\red255\green255\blue255;\red0\green0\blue128;\red0\green128\blue128;\red0\green128\blue0;\red128\green0\blue128;\red128\green0\blue0;\red128\green128\blue0;\red128\green128\blue128;\red192\green192\blue192;}{\stylesheet{\widctlpar \f4\fs20\lang2057 \snext0 Normal;}{\*\cs10 \additive Default Paragraph Font;}}{\info{\author dddd}{\operator dddd}{\creatim\yr1998\mo11\dy11\hr17\min22}{\revtim\yr1998\mo11\dy11\hr17\min24}{\version2}{\edmins2}{\nofpages4}{\nofwords925}{\nofchars5274}{\*\company  }{\vern57431}}\widowctrl\ftnbj\aenddoc\hyphcaps0 \fet0\sectd \linex0 {\*\pnseclvl1\pnucrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl2\pnucltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl3\pndec\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl4\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl5\pndec\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl6\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl7\pnlcrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl8\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl9\pnlcrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}
\pard\plain \ \f4\fs20\lang2057 {\fs28  Related species include:
\par 
\par }{\b\fs28  R. dumnoniensis}{\fs28  Bab.,}{\i\fs28  Jour. Bot.}{\fs28  (}{\i\fs28 London}{\fs28 ) }{\b\fs28 28}{\fs28 : 338 (1890). 2n = 28. Be Br Ga Hb Hs.
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 30. R. macrophyllus}{\fs28  Weihe & Nees,}{\i\fs28  Rubi Germ.}{\fs28  35 (1824). Stems more or less distinctly angled and furrowed above, slightly glaucescent, hairy, sometimes with occasional glands; prickles short, subulate. Leaflets 5, large, usually green and rather pubescent beneath, but occasionally slightly greyish-tomentose, the veins not hairy; terminal leaflet very large, ovate-cordate, long-acuminate, twice as long as its petiolule, unevenly and finely dentate. Inflorescence rather short, subracemose, leafy at the base, the branches deeply divided; axis hairy, with a few stalked glands and weak prickles. Sepals deflexed after flowering, green-tomentose and unarmed; petals usually pale pink; stamens white, exceeding the green styles; receptacle very hairy; carpels glabrous. 2n = 28.}{\i\fs28  N.W. & C. Europe, extending to Bulgaria.}{\fs28  Au Be Br Bu Cz Da Ga Ge Hb He Ho Hu Ju Po Rm.
\par 
\par  Related species include:
\par 
\par }{\b\fs28  R. longebracteatus}{\fs28  E. I. Ny\'e1r\'e1dy in Savul.,}{\i\fs28  Fl. Rep. Pop. Rom\'e2ne }{\b\fs28 4}{\fs28 : 903 (1956). Rm.
\par  }{\b\fs28 R. montanus}{\fs28  Libert ex Lej.,}{\i\fs28  Fl. Spa }{\b\fs28 2}{\fs28 : 311 (1813). Be Cz Ge Ho Hu.         
\par }{\b\fs28  R. neopyramidalis }{\fs28 E. I. Ny\'e1r\'e1dy in Savul.,}{\i\fs28  Fl. Rep. Pop. Rom\'e2ne}{\b\fs28  4}{\fs28 : 902 (1956). Rm. 
\par }{\b\fs28  R. orbifolius}{\fs28  Boulay & Letendre ex Lefevre,}{\i\fs28  Bull. Soc. Bot. Fr.}{\b\fs28  24}{\fs28 : 224 (1877) in syn. Ga Hu.  
\par  }{\b\fs28 R. piletostachys }{\fs28 Gren. & Godron, }{\i\fs28 Fl. Fr. }{\b\fs28 1}{\fs28 : 548 (1849). Au Ga Ju. 
\par  }{\b\fs28 R. quadicus}{\fs28  (Sabr.) G. Beck,}{\i\fs28  Fl. Nieder-\'d6sterr.}{\b\fs28  2}{\fs28 (}{\b\fs28 1}{\fs28 ): 726 (1892). Au.     
\par }{\b\fs28  R. schlechtendalii}{\fs28  Weihe ex Link,}{\i\fs28  Enum. Hort. Berol. Alt.}{\b\fs28  2}{\fs28 : 62 (1822). 2n = 28. Au Br Cz Ga Ge Hb.
\par }{\b\fs28  R. slatinensis}{\fs28  E. I. Ny\'e1r\'e1dy in Savul.,}{\i\fs28  Fl. Rep. Pop. Rom\'e2ne}{\b\fs28  4}{\fs28 : 904 (1956). Rm.
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 31. R. silvaticus}{\fs28  Weihe & Nees,}{\i\fs28  Rubi Germ. }{\fs28 30 (1824). Stems rather weak, arching-procumbent, angled above, hairy, eglandular or with a few glands; prickles numerous and rather weak, subulate or subconical. Leaflets 5, green, hairy beneath; terminal leaflet elliptical, 4-5 times as long as its petiolule, acuminate, rounded at base, rather coarsely serrate or biserrate. Inflorescence pyramidal, dense, often leafy, the axis hairy, with numerous fine, deflexed prickles. Sepals deflexed, often appendiculate, pubescent, sometimes glandular and with acicles; petals obovate, white or pink; stamens white, much exceeding the green styles; anthers, carpels and receptacle hairy. 2n = 28. }{\i\fs28 C. Europe, extending to Ireland and Denmark.}{\fs28  Au Be Br Cz Da Ga Ge Hb He Ho ?Hs Hu Po Rm.
\par 
\par  Related species include:
\par 
\par }{\b\fs28  R. bicolorispinosus }{\fs28 E. I. Ny\'e1r\'e1dy in Savul., }{\i\fs28 Fl. Rep. Pop. Rom\'e2ne}{\b\fs28  4}{\fs28 : 905 (1956). Rm.
\par }{\b\fs28  R. nemorensis}{\fs28  P. J. Mueller & Lefevre, }{\i\fs28 Pollichia }{\b\fs28 16-17}{\fs28 : 198 (1859). Be Br Cz Ga He Hu Po Rm.
\par }{\b\fs28  R. splendidiflorus}{\fs28  Sudre,}{\i\fs28  Bull. Soc. Etud. Sci. Angers }{\b\fs28 31}{\fs28 : 69 (1902). Cz Ga Rm.
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 32. R. egregius}{\fs28  Focke, }{\i\fs28 Abh. Nat. Ver. Bremen}{\b\fs28  2}{\fs28 : 463 (1871). Stems rather weak, arcuate, procumbent or climbing, glabrescent, not pruinose, with few or no stalked glands or acicles; prickles short, subulate, yellow to orange. Leaves mostly ternate, often rather small, tomentose-pubescent beneath; terminal leaflet suborbicular-obovate, acuminate, cordate at base, finely or coarsely serrate. Inflorescence a dense, long, tapering panicle, with very long, many-flowered lower branches, hairy, slightly glandular and with rather weak prickles; flowers rather large. Sepals patent, becoming deflexed; petals obovate, white; stamens exceeding the green styles; carpels and receptacle glabrous or glabrescent. Fruit of 15-20 rather large drupelets. 2n = 28.}{\i\fs28  N.W. & C. Europe}{\fs28 . Au Be Br Da Ga Ge Hb He Ho.
\par 
\par  Varies greatly in leaf-form and -toothing.
\par 
\par  Related species include:
\par 
\par }{\b\fs28  R. ceticus}{\fs28  Hal\'e1csy,}{\i\fs28  Verh. Zool.-Bot. Ges. Wien}{\b\fs28  41}{\fs28 : 244 (1891). Au.
\par }{\b\fs28  R. lespinassei}{\fs28  Clavaud,}{\i\fs28  Act. Soc. Linn. Bordeaux}{\b\fs28  37}{\fs28 : iii (1883) (}{\i\fs28 R. coutinhoi }{\fs28 Samp.). Ga Hs Lu.
\par }{\b\fs28  R. lindleyanus }{\fs28 Lees,}{\i\fs28  Phytologist}{\fs28  (}{\i\fs28 Newman}{\fs28 )}{\b\fs28  3}{\fs28 : 361 (1848). 2n = 28. Be Br Ga Ge Hb Ho.
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 33. R. villicaulis}{\fs28  Koehler ex Weihe & Nees,}{\i\fs28  Rubi Germ.}{\fs28  30 (1824). Stems robust, arching or procumbent, angled, with dense, long, patent hairs and an occasional pricklet; prickles hairy, straight, mostly deflexed. Leaflets 5, pubescent or grey-tomentose beneath; terminal leaflet orbicular-ovate to rather narrowly elliptical, acuminate, cordate at base, unevenly or coarsely serrate; petioles with strong, falcate prickles. Inflorescence large, broad, with numerous strong, straight, deflexed prickles, occasionally with a few glands and pricklets; the lower axillary branches rather numerous, long and oblique; upper branches cymose; terminal flowers subsessile. Sepals usually long-pointed, aciculate, somewhat deflexed; petals rather broad, pink or white; stamens and styles pink or white; carpels glabrous or pubescent; receptacle hairy. 2n = 28.}{\i\fs28  N.W. & C. Europe}{\fs28 . Au Br Cz ?Ga Ge Hb He Ho ?Ju Po Rs (W).
\par 
\par  Related species include:
\par 
\par }{\b\fs28  R. atrocaulis}{\fs28  P. J. Mueller,}{\i\fs28  Pollichia }{\b\fs28 16-17}{\fs28 : 163 (1859). Br Ga Ge.
\par }{\b\fs28  R. eduardii}{\fs28  Borb\'e1s,}{\i\fs28  \'d6sterr. Bot. Zeitschr.}{\b\fs28  40}{\fs28 : 247 (1890) (}{\i\fs28 R. villicaulis}{\fs28  var}{\i\fs28  formanekianus}{\fs28  Borb\'e1s). Ju.
\par }{\b\fs28  R. gelertii}{\fs28  Frid.,}{\i\fs28  Bot. Tidsskr.}{\b\fs28  15}{\fs28 : 237 (1886). Br Da Ge.
\par }{\b\fs28  R. insularis}{\fs28  F. Aresch.,}{\i\fs28  Bot. Not.}{\b\fs28  1881}{\fs28 : 158 (1881). Da Su. 
\par }{\b\fs28  R. kelleri}{\fs28  Hal\'e1csy,}{\i\fs28  \'d6sterr. Bot. Zeitschr.}{\b\fs28  40}{\fs28 : 431 (1890). Au.
\par }{\b\fs28  R. langei}{\fs28  G. Jensen ex Frid. & Gelert, }{\i\fs28 Bot. Tidsskr.}{\b\fs28  16}{\fs28 : 67 (1887) (}{\i\fs28 R.atrocaulis }{\fs28 auct. dan., non P. J. Mueller). Br Da Ge.
\par }{\b\fs28  R. magurensis}{\fs28  E. I. Ny\'e1r\'e1dy in Savul.,}{\i\fs28  Fl. Rep. Pop. Rom\'e2ne}{\b\fs28  4}{\fs28 : 908 (1956). Rm.
\par  }{\b\fs28 R. ocnensis}{\fs28  E. I. Ny\'e1r\'e1dy in Savul.,}{\i\fs28  op. cit. }{\fs28 907 (1956). Rm. 
\par }{\b\fs28  R. seciurensis }{\fs28 E. I. Ny\'e1r\'e1dy in Savul., }{\i\fs28 op. cit.}{\fs28  906 (1956). Rm. 
\par }{\b\fs28  R. septentrionalis }{\fs28 W. C. R. Watson,}{\i\fs28  Jour. Ecol. }{\b\fs28 33}{\fs28 : 338 (1946) (}{\i\fs28 R. confinis }{\fs28 Lindeb., non P. J. Mueller). Br No Su.
\par }{\b\fs28  R. subvillicaulis}{\fs28  E. I. Ny\'e1r\'e1dy in Savul.,}{\i\fs28  Fl. Rep. Pop. Rom\'e2ne}{\b\fs28  4}{\fs28 : 906 (1956). Rm.
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 34. R. polyanthemus}{\fs28  Lindeb.,}{\i\fs28  Herb. Rub. Scand.}{\b\fs28  1}{\fs28 : n. 16 (1882). Stems angled, moderately pubescent; prickles fairly strong, yellow or red. Leaflets 3-7, becoming convex, dull above, grey-tomentose or pubescent beneath; terminal leaflet suborbicular to broadly or narrowly obovate, cuspidate, almost simply serrate or serrate-dentate, rounded at base. Inflorescence long, slightly narrowed above, many-flowered; axis tomentose or pubescent, sometimes glandular and with few or numerous, strong, deflexed pricklets below. Sepals deflexed, grey-tomentose and pubescent, glandular and aculeolate; petals broad, obovate, pink; stamens pink or white, much exceeding the green- or red
\par 
\par 14}
\par }