{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 16. L. pallescens} (Bieb.) C. Koch, {\i  Linnaea}{\b  15}: 723 (1841). Like {\b 15} but pubescent; roots slender, not fleshy; leaflets 1-3 pairs; stipules often semi-hastate; calyx pubescent; corolla 17-22 mm; style dilated at apex; hilum ¼ of the circumference of the seed. {\i  S.E. Europe, extending to Hungary and to} c. 53°{\i   N. in E. Russia}. Bu Hu Ju Rm Rs (C, W, K, E).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 17. L. pancicii} (Juris.) Adamovic,{\i   Prosv. Glasn. }{\b 22}: 1246 (1901). Villous perennial; stem 30-70 cm, not winged. Leaves without tendril; leaflets 3-5 pairs, 40-75 × 5-8 mm, linear or linear-lanceolate; stipules 7-9 mm, linear, semi-sagittate. Racemes 4- to 10-flowered. Calyx-teeth slightly unequal; corolla 15-19 mm, pale yellow; style dilated at apex. Legume 50-65 × 6-7 mm, pale brown, villous. Seeds c. 10, smooth; hilum 1/3 of the circumference. •{\i   S.E. Jugoslavia, S.W. Bulgaria.} Bu Ju.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 18. L. alpestris} (Waldst. & Kit.) Kit. ex Celak., {\i  Österr. Bot. Zeitschr.}{\b  38}: 86 (1888) (incl.{\i   L. friedrichsthallii} (Griseb.) K. Malý). Glabrous or pubescent perennial; stem 15-60 cm, sometimes narrowly winged at apex. Leaves without tendril; leaflets 2-3 pairs, 20-50 × 5-11 mm, linear to lanceolate-oblong or elliptical; stipules 12-20 × 2-4 mm, lanceolate, semi-sagittate. Racemes 3- to 6-flowered. Calyx-teeth unequal; corolla 12-16 mm, red-purple. Legume 30-40 × 5-6 mm, brown, glabrous. Seeds 10-14; hilum ¼ of the circumference.{\i   Mountain woods. Balkan peninsula from} c. 40° {\i  to }42° 30'{\i  N.} Al Bu Gr Ju.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 19. L. montanus} Bernh.,{\i   Syst. Verz. Erfurt} 247 (1800) ({\i  L. macrorrhizus} Wimmer). Glabrous or subglabrous perennial; stem 15-50 cm, winged. Leaves without tendril; leaflets (1-)2-4 pairs, 10-50(-100) × 1-12(-16) mm, linear to elliptical; stipules 5-25 × 2-8 mm, linear or lanceolate, semi-sagittate. Racemes 2- to 6-flowered. Calyx-teeth unequal; corolla 10-16 mm, crimson, becoming bluish. Legume 25-45 × 4-5 mm, red-brown, glabrous. Seeds 4-10, smooth; hilum 1/5-1/4 of the circumference. 2n = 14.{\i   S., W. & C. Europe, extending to the Baltic region and White Russia.} Al Au Be Br Co Cz Da Fe Ga Ge Hb He Ho Hs Hu It Ju Lu No Po Rs (B,C) Su.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b 20-22. L. pratensis} group. Glabrous or pubescent perennial; stem not winged. Leaflets usually 1 pair; stipules sagittate. Racemes 2- to 12-flowered. Calyx-teeth unequal; corolla 10-20 mm, yellow. Legume 20-40 × 4-7 mm, black, glabrous or pubescent. Seeds 5-12, smooth; hilum 1/7-1/5 of the circumference.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Leaves mucronate or with a very short simple tendril ................. {\b 21. binatus}
\par
1 At least the upper leaves with a distinct tendril
\par
2 Lower calyx-teeth slightly shorter than tube ............................. {\b 20. pratensis}
\par
2 Lower calyx-teeth as long as or longer than tube
\par
3 Leaflets 2-9 mm wide, linear-lanceolate to lanceolate; 
\par
  stipules smaller than leaflets ...................................................... {\b 20. pratensis}
\par
3 Leaflets 8-15 mm wide, ovate; stipules as large as or larger
\par
  than leaflets ........................................................................... {\b 22. hallersteinii}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 20. L. pratensis} L.,{\i   Sp. Pl.} 733 (1753). Stem 30-120 cm. Leaves with a tendril; leaflets 10-30(-40) × 2-9 mm, linear-lanceolate to lanceolate or elliptical; stipules (5-)10-30 × 3-6(-12) mm, linear to lanceolate, rarely ovate, smaller than or about as long as the leaflets. Racemes (2-)5- to 12-flowered. Lower calyx-teeth shorter to longer than tube. Corolla 10-16(-18) mm. 2n = 7, 8, 9, 12, 14, 16, 21, 28, 42.{\i   Usually in grassland or scrub. Almost throughout Europe}. All except ?Az Bl Cr Sb.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Very variable and possibly containing a number of subspecies. There does not seem to be any correlation between morphology and chromosome number.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 21. L. binatus} Pancic, {\i  Fl. Princ. Serb. }256 (1874). Stem up to 30 cm. Leaves without or with a very short simple tendril; leaflets 8-20 × 2·5-5 mm, lanceolate; stipules 6-12 × 1-4 mm, linear-lanceolate to lanceolate, smaller than the leaflets. Racemes 1- to 4-flowered. Lower calyx-teeth as long as or slightly longer than tube; corolla 15-20 mm. 2n = 14. {\i   Screes. • C. Jugoslavia}. Ju.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Plants intermediate between {\b 20} and {\b 21} sometimes occur in C. Jugoslavia.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 22. L. hallersteinii} Baumg.,{\i   Enum. Stirp. Transs. }{\b 2}: 333 (1816). Stem 30-120 cm. Leaves with a tendril; leaflets 25-40 × 8-15 mm, ovate; stipules 20-40 × 6-12 mm, ovate, equalling or larger than leaflets. Racemes 2- to 6-flowered. Lower calyx-teeth longer than tube; corolla 14-20 mm. 2n = 14.{\i   Woods or scrub. •  Romania and C. part of Balkan peninsula.} Gr Ju Rm.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Plants from the central part of the Balkan peninsula are sometimes intermediate between {\b 20} and {\b 22}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 23. L. palustris} L., {\i  Sp. Pl}. 733 (1753) ({\i  L. pilosus} Cham.). Sparsely pubescent perennial 20-120 cm. Leaflets 2-5 pairs, 25-80 × 3-12(-16) mm, linear to oblong or lanceolate; stipules 10-20 × 3-8 mm, lanceolate or ovate, semi-sagittate. Racemes 2- to 8-flowered. Calyx-teeth unequal; corolla 12-20 mm. Legume 25-60 × (5-)7-9 mm, brown, glabrous. Seeds 3-12(-20), smooth; hilum ¼ of the circumference.{\i   Wet places. Most of Europe, but very rare in the Mediterranean region}. Al Au Be Br Bu Co Cz Da Fe Ga Ge Hb He Ho Hs Hu Is It Ju Lu No Po Rm Rs (N, B, C, W, E) Su Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b palustris}: Stem narrowly winged; corolla purplish-blue; seeds mottled. 2n = 42.{\i   Throughout the range of the species except the Iberian peninsula}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b nudicaulis} (Willk.) P. W. Ball,{\i   Feddes Repert.}{\b  79}: 47 (1968): Stem not winged; corolla bright red-purple; seeds black, not mottled. •{\i   N. & W. parts of Iberian peninsula}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 24. L. laxiflorus} (Desf.) O. Kuntze, {\i  Acta Horti Petrop. }{\b 10}: 185 (1887) ({\i  L. inermis} Rochel ex Friv.). Pubescent or subglabrous perennial; stem 20-50 cm, not winged. Leaves without tendril; leaflets 1 pair, 20-40 × 10-20 mm, lanceolate to suborbicular; stipules 10-30 × 8-15 mm, lanceolate to ovate-orbicular, sagittate or semi-sagittate. Racemes 2- to 6-flowered. Calyx-teeth subequal, pubescent, 2-3 times as long as tube; corolla 15-20 mm, blue-violet. Legume 30-40 × 3-5 mm, pubescent. Seeds c. 6; hilum 1/10-1/6 of the circumference. 2n = 14.{\i   Mountain woods. S.E. Europe, S. Italy}. Al Bu Cr Gr It Ju Rs (K) Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 25. L. neurolobus} Boiss. & Heldr. in Boiss.,{\i   Diagn. Pl. Or. Nov. }{\b 2}({\b 9}): 125 (1849). Glabrous perennial; stem 15-50 cm, winged. Lower leaves without tendril, upper with simple tendril; leaflets 1 pair, 5-12 × 1-4 mm, oblong to ovate-oblong; stipules 2-3 mm, linear. Racemes 1- to 2-flowered. Calyx-teeth equal; corolla 6-10 mm, blue. Legume 20-30 × 3-4 mm, brown, glabrous, with very prominent longitudinal veins. Seeds 3-6, smooth; hilum 1/6 of the circumference. 2n = 14. {\i  Woodland streams. • W. Kriti.} Cr.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 26. L. cirrhosus} Ser. in DC., {\i  Prodr.}{\b  2}: 374 (1825). Glabrous perennial; stem 90-120 cm, winged. Leaflets 2-3 pairs, 15-40 × 5-12 mm, elliptical or oblong-lanceolate; stipules 6-20 × 1-5 mm, linear or lanceolate, semi-sagittate. Racemes 4- to 10-flowered. Calyx-teeth unequal; corolla 12-17 mm, pink. Legume 40-70 × 7-11 mm, pale brown, glabrous, the dorsal suture with 3 keels. Seeds 10-15, tuberculate; hilum 1/6 of the circumference. •{\i   Pyrenees; Cevennes.} Ga Hs.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 27. L. tuberosus} L., {\i  Sp. Pl.} 732 (1753). Glabrous or subglabrous perennial; stem 30-120 cm, not winged. Leaflets 1 pair, 15-45 ×
\par

\par
140}
\par