{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 49 Calyx-tube longer than wide, cylindrical; corolla 10-12 mm  {\b 15. bivonae}
\par
23 Calyx-tube slightly to conspicuously inflated or gibbous in fruit
\par
50 Perennial
\par
51 Calyx-tube in fruit glabrous, ± regular, only the 10 longitudinal 
\par
   veins conspicuous ........................................................................... {\b 13. thalii}
\par
51 Calyx-tube in fruit pubescent and strongly gibbous above, with 
\par
   numerous longitudinal and transverse veins forming a reticulum
\par
52 Bracts 0·5-1 mm, free ............................................................. {\b 28. physodes}
\par
52 Bracts 3-4 mm, ± united below into an irregular involucre . {\b 29. fragiferum}
\par
50 Annual
\par
53 Fruiting calyx pubescent, tomentose or lanate (sometimes finally 
\par
   glabrescent), adaxially gibbous; bracts inconspicuous and
\par
   ± concealed; heads lateral
\par
54 Fruiting heads ± pedunculate; calyx pyriform, pubescent to 
\par
   tomentose, finally glabrescent, its 2 upper teeth evident,
\par
   divergent .............................................................................. {\b 30. resupinatum}
\par
54 Fruiting heads subsessile; calyx ± globose, lanate, its 2 upper 
\par
   teeth ± concealed ................................................................. {\b 31. tomentosum}
\par
53 Fruiting calyx glabrous, inflated ± equally on all sides;
\par
   bracts prominent, glumaceous, striate; heads pseudoterminal
\par
55 Leaflets broadly obovate-cuneate; corolla slightly exceeding the 
\par
   calyx; bracts shorter than the fruiting calyx-tube .................. {\b 25. spumosum}
\par
55 Leaflets (at least the upper) oblong, elliptical or lanceolate, 
\par
   rarely obovate-elliptical or suborbicular-cuneate; corolla much 
\par
   exceeding the calyx; bracts about as long as the fruiting calyx-tube
\par
56 Calyx-tube usually much inflated in fruit with 24-35 prominent 
\par
   longitudinal and ± prominent transverse veins ................... {\b 26. vesiculosum}
\par
56 Calyx-tube scarcely inflated in fruit without or with c. 24 weak 
\par
   longitudinal veins and without transverse veins ....................... {\b 27. mutabile}
\par
22 Flowers ebracteate but heads sometimes involucrate; throat 
\par
   of the calyx usually ± dosed by a ring of hairs or an annular
\par
   or bilabiate callosity at maturity; legume 1(-2)-seeded,
\par
   almost always included in the calyx-tube
\par
57 Fertile flowers 2-12; inner flowers consisting only of sterile 
\par
   calyces developing either at or after anthesis
\par
58 Sterile flowers developing after anthesis from a central nodule; 
\par
   fruiting heads appressed to the ground or subterranean .....{\b 97. subterraneum}
\par
58 Sterile flowers developing simultaneously with the fertile ones; 
\par
   fruiting heads aerial
\par
59 Fertile flowers 10-15, in 2 rows; mature heads 20-25 mm in
\par
   diameter ................................................................................... {\b 98. globosum}
\par
59 Fertile flowers 4-6, in 1 row; mature heads 8-15 mm in diameter
\par
   ............................................................................................... {\b 99. pauciflorum}
\par
57 Fertile flowers usually numerous; sterile flowers absent
\par
60 All or at least some calyces evidently 20-veined, or the 
\par
   20 veins completely obscured by dense sericeous hairs
\par
61 Perennial
\par
62 Apex of stipules pubescent, subulate or narrowly linear, 
\par
   scarious ....................................................................................... {\b 79. alpestre}
\par
62 Apex of stipules glabrous or glabrescent, lanceolate or narrowly 
\par
   triangular, herbaceous
\par
63 Stipules entire, adnate by less than ½ their length to the 
\par
   petiole; leaflets obscurely denticulate ........................................ {\b 74. medium}
\par
63 Stipules often serrate above, adnate by more than their length to 
\par
   the petiole; leaflets spinose-denticulate ........................................ {\b 80. rubens}
\par
61 Annual
\par
64 Stems less than 4 cm; heads crowded
\par
65 Leaflets deeply emarginate; corolla not exceeding the calyx
\par
   ................................................................................................ {\b 70. congestum}
\par
65 Leaflets obtuse; corolla about twice as long as the calyx ......... {\b 71. barbeyi}
\par
64 Stems 5-40 cm; heads solitary
\par
66 Calyx-tube glabrous or glabrescent; fruiting heads shortly 
\par
   pedunculate, not involucrate .................................................. {\b 69. lappaceum}
\par
66 Calyx-tube hairy; heads sessile, with an involucre formed by the 
\par
   upper stipules
\par
67 Free part of the stipules (except of the uppermost leaves) long, 
\par
   linear-lanceolate, straight; corolla exceeding the calyx ................ {\b 72. hirtum}
\par
67 Free part of the stipules (except of the uppermost leaves) short, 
\par
   ovate-lanceolate, often recurved; corolla not exceeding the calyx     
\par
   ...................................................................................................... {\b 73. cherleri} 
\par
60 Calyx 10-veined, or some calyces with up to 14 veins
\par
68 Perennial
\par
69 Stems 1-5 cm; leaflets 2-8 mm ................................................... {\b 68. ottonis}
\par
69 Stems 5-100 cm; leaflets 10-60 mm
\par
70 Lowest calyx-tooth about 2-3 times as long as the other 4, linear
\par
71 Corolla 20-25 mm; peduncles 40-80 mm .......................... {\b 86. pannonicum}
\par
71 Corolla 15-20 mm; peduncles not more than 25 mm ........ {\b 85. ochroleucon}
\par
70 Calyx-teeth subequal or the lowest not more than 1½ times as long
\par
   as the other four, setaceous, filiform or linear
\par
72 Upper internodes with patent hairs 
\par
73 Calyx-tube glabrous
\par
74 Corolla reddish-purple; upper stipules lanceolate ................... {\b 74. medium}
\par
74 Corolla cream; upper stipules ovate-lanceolate ...................... {\b 78. pignantii}
\par
73 Calyx-tube hairy
\par
75 Stipules of the middle cauline leaves abruptly contracted into
\par
   a setaceous arista; heads sessile, involucrate ............................. {\b 63. pratense}
\par
75 Stipules of the middle cauline leaves with a triangular-lanceolate, 
\par
   acuminate apex; heads often shortly pedunculate ...................... {\b 66. noricum}
\par
72 Upper internodes with appressed hairs, or glabrous
\par
76 Stems 5-8 cm; stipules with an oblong, obtuse apex ............ {\b 67. wettsteinii}
\par
76 Stems usually more than 10 cm; stipules acute
\par
77 Stipules of the middle cauline leaves abruptly contracted
\par
   into a setaceous arista ................................................................. {\b 63. pratense}
\par
77 Stipules of the middle cauline leaves with a linear, lanceolate
\par
   or ovate, ± herbaceous apex
\par
78 Petioles united along their length to the lower part of the stipules
\par
79 Leaflets linear-oblong; calyx-tube densely pubescent ............. {\b 76. patulum}
\par
79 Leaflets obovate-cuneate; calyx-tube glabrous .................. {\b 77. velebiticum}
\par
78 Petioles united along only part of their length to the stipules
\par
80 Calyx-tube glabrous or glabrescent .......................................... {\b 74. medium}
\par
80 Calyx-tube persistently hairy 
\par
81 Calyx-teeth filiform, all of them longer than the tube;
\par
   corolla pink ..................................................................... {\b 75. heldreichianum} 
\par
81 Calyx-teeth lanceolate-subulate, ± herbaceous, the upper 4 
\par
   teeth equalling or shorter than the calyx-tube; corolla 
\par
   yellowish-white, rarely pink 
\par
82 Leaflets not emarginate; lowest calyx-tooth usually 
\par
   distinctly longer than the tube ............................................. {\b 85. ochroleucon} 
\par
82 Leaflets deeply emarginate; lowest calyx-tooth scarcely 
\par
   longer than the tube ................................................................. {\b 87. canescens} 
\par
68 Annual
\par
83 Heads sessile, axillary or terminal, involucrate
\par
84 Heads few-flowered, scarcely exceeding the subtending stipules; 
\par
   lowest calyx-tooth shorter than the tube ..................................... {\b 51. saxatile}
\par
84 Heads many-flowered, much exceeding the subtending
\par

\par
159}
\par