{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 glabrous, with transverse veins. Seeds c. 2·5 mm, linear, tuberculate.{\i   S. Aegean region} ({\i  Gavdhos, ?Kriti}). Cr. ({\i  E. Mediterranean region}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 11. T. spicata} Sibth. & Sm.,{\i   Fl. Graec. Prodr.}{\b  2}: 108 (1813). Stems 10-40 cm, ascending, glabrous. Leaflets 6-14 × 3-6 mm, obovate to elliptical, denticulate, glabrous above, subglabrous beneath. Racemes capitate, many-flowered; peduncles 2-4 cm; pedicels c. 2 mm. Calyx   c. 4 mm, the teeth unequal, the longest about as long as tube; corolla 6-7 mm, yellow. Legume 5-8 × 3 mm, erect or patent, ovate, compressed, with long, patent hairs when young, glabrescent, with reticulate veins and with a long, curved beak. Seeds 1, c. 2·5 mm, ovoid, finely tuberculate.{\i   S.E. Europe.} Bu Gr Rs (K) Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 12. T. striata} L. fil., {\i  Suppl.} 340 (1781) ({\i  T. tenuis} Fischer ex Bieb.). Stems up to 30 cm, usually erect, puberulent. Leaflets 5-10 × 4-7 mm, elliptical to obovate, denticulate, glabrous or puberulent on the veins beneath. Racemes subumbellate, usually 4- to 5-flowered; peduncles 1-4 cm; pedicels c. 1 mm. Calyx 3-4 mm, the teeth slightly longer than tube; corolla 4-5 mm, yellow. Legume 15-20 × 1·3-2 mm, erect or patent, linear, curved, glabrous, with transverse anastomosing veins. Seeds 1·5-2 mm, oblong, tuberculate-rugose.{\i   S.E. Europe.} Bu Gr Ju Rs (K, E).
\par
 
\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 13. T. arcuata} C.A. Meyer, {\i  Verz. Pfl. Cauc.} 136 (1831) (?{\i  T. cancellata} Pers.). Like {\b 12} but leaflets more or less triangular; racemes 4- to 8-flowered, sessile; legume c. 15 mm and more strongly curved. {\i  S.E. Russia, W. Kazakhstan.} Rs (E). ({\i  S.W. & C. Asia.})
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 14. T. fischerana} Ser. in DC.,{\i   Prodr}{\b . 2}: 183 (1825). Stems 5-30 cm, usually densely pubescent. Leaflets 3-7 × 3-6 mm, usually obovate, denticulate, puberulent. Racemes subumbellate, 4- to 10-flowered; peduncles 0·5-2 cm; pedicels c. 1 mm. Calyx 3-5 mm, the teeth about as long as tube; corolla 5-7 mm, yellow. Legume 10-25 × 1-1·5 mm, erect or patent, linear, curved, pubescent, with transverse anastomosing veins. Seeds c. 2 mm, oblong, tuberculate-rugose.{\i   Krym.} Rs (K, ?E). ({\i  S.W. Asia}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 15. T. polyceratia} L., {\i  Sp. Pl. }777 (1753). Stems 20-45 cm, somewhat hairy. Leaflets 5-13 × 5-10 mm, ovate, obovate or suborbicular, entire to pinnatifid, usually sparsely hairy. Racemes subumbellate, 1- to 6(-8)-flowered, subsessile, rarely with peduncle up to 3·5 cm; pedicels c. 0·5 mm. Calyx 3-4 mm, the teeth shorter than tube; corolla 4-6(-9) mm, yellow. Legume (10-)20-50 × 1·5-2 mm, erect or patent, straight or slightly curved, pubescent, with reticulate veins. Seeds 1·5-2 mm, oblong, yellow, tuberculate.{\i   Spain and N. Portugal, just extending to S. France.} Ga Hs Lu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 16. T. orthoceras} Kar. & Kir., {\i  Bull. Soc. Nat. Moscou}{\b  14}: 399 (1841). Like {\b 15} but stems usually glabrous; calyx-teeth as long as tube; corolla 4-5 mm; legume 1-1·5 mm wide, with oblique anastomosing veins.{\i   S.E. Russia, W. Kazakhstan.} Rs (E). ({\i  S.W. & C. Asia.})
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 17. T. monspeliaca} L., {\i  Sp. Pl.} 777 (1753). Stems up to 35 cm, densely appressed-pubescent. Leaflets 4-10 × 3-7 mm, obovate-cuneate, entire to incise-serrate. Racemes subumbellate, 4- to 14-flowered, subsessile; pedicels up to 1 mm. Calyx c. 3 mm, the teeth slightly longer than tube; corolla c. 4 mm, yellow. Legume 7-17 × 1-1·5 mm, pendent, linear, slightly curved upwards, usually pubescent, with thick oblique veins. Seeds c. 1·5 mm, brown, finely tuberculate.{\i   C. & S. Europe, extending to Belgium and W. France.} Al Au Be Bl Bu Cr Co Cz Ga Gr He Hs Hu It Ju Lu Rm Rs (W, K) Sa Si Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Subgen.{\b  Trifoliastrum} (Moench) G. Beck. Calyx campanulate. Legume inflated.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 18. T. caerulea} (L.) Ser. in DC.,{\i   Prodr.}{\b  2}: 181 (1825). Stems 20-60(-100) cm, erect, sparsely hairy, hollow. Leaflets 20-50 × 5-20 mm, ovate to oblong, emarginate, denticulate. Racemes globose, dense, many-flowered; peduncles 2-5 cm; pedicels c. 1 mm. Calyx c. 3 mm, the teeth about equalling tube; corolla c. 6 mm, blue or white. Legume 4-5 × 3 mm, erect or patent, rhomboid-obovate, abruptly contracted to a beak c. 2 mm. Seeds c. 2 mm, ovoid, brown, finely tuberculate.{\i   Cultivated for fodder throughout much of Europe, and widely naturalized or casual as a weed or ruderal. Apparently nowhere indigenous; probably derived from}{\b  19}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 19. T. procumbens} (Besser) Reichenb.,{\i   Pl. Crit.}{\b  4}: 35 (1826) ({\i  T. besserana} Ser., {\i  T. caerulea} subsp.{\i   procumbens} (Besser) Thell.). Like {\b 18} but stems solid; leaflets 12-28 × 3-8 mm, linear-lanceolate; racemes subglobose, becoming oblong, lax; legume ovoid, gradually attenuate into a beak.{\i   E.C. & S.E. Europe.} Au Bu ?Cz Gr Hu Ju Rm Rs ( ?C, W, K, E) Tu [Ga].
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Subgen.{\b  Foenum-graecum }Sirj. Calyx tubular. Legume not inflated.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 20. T. coerulescens} (Bieb.) Halácsy,{\i   Consp. Fl. Graec. }{\b 1}: 351 (1900). Stems up to 40 cm, densely hairy. Leaflets 8-20 × 7-12 mm, ovate-triangular or obovate, denticulate, villous. Racemes ovate, (3-)10- to 15-flowered; peduncles 1-2(-5) cm (rarely shorter); pedicels c. 0·5 mm. Calyx 5-8 mm, villous, the teeth as long as tube; corolla 11-13(-16) mm, blue. Legume (excluding beak) 10-15 × 2·5-3 mm, erect or patent, lanceolate, compressed, more or less straight, villous, with oblique anastomosing veins; beak 3·5-5 mm. Seeds c. 2·5 mm, ovate, finely tuberculate.{\i   Aegean region; Krym. }Gr Rs (K).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 21. T. gladiata} Steven ex Bieb., {\i  Fl. Taur.-Cauc.}{\b  2}: 222 (1808). Stems 5-25 cm, densely pubescent. Leaflets 5-12 × 3-6 mm, obovate or oblanceolate, emarginate, denticulate, usually sparsely pubescent. Flowers usually solitary; pedicels c. 0·5 mm. Calyx c. 6 mm, the teeth 1/3-1/2 as long as tube, pubescent with subpatent hairs; corolla 8-10 mm, pale yellow, sometimes tinged with purple. Legume (excluding beak) 15-40 × 3-7 mm, erect or patent, linear-oblong, compressed, more or less straight, pubescent, with longitudinal anastomosing veins; beak 10-20 mm. Seeds c. 3·5 mm, ovoid, tuberculate.{\i   S. Europe.} Bu Cr Ga Gr Hs Hu It Ju Rm Rs (K) Sa Si Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 22. T. cariensis} Boiss., {\i  Diagn. Pl. Or. Nov.}{\b  1}({\b 2}): 21 (1843). Like {\b 21} but stems up to 35 cm; leaflets 6-10 mm wide, broadly obovate-cuneate, glabrous above, sparsely pubescent beneath; calyx c. 11 mm; corolla c. 18 mm; legume curved; beak 30-40 mm; seeds finely tuberculate.{\i   S.E. Greece.} Gr. ({\i  S. & W. Anatolia, Cyprus}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 23. T. foenum-graecum} L., {\i  Sp. Pl}. 777 (1753). Stems 10-50 cm, sparsely pubescent. Leaflets 20-50 × 10-15 mm, obovate to oblong-oblanceolate, denticulate. Flowers solitary or paired, subsessile. Calyx 6-8 mm, the teeth about as long as tube; Corolla 12-18 mm, yellowish-white tinged with violet at the base. Legume (excluding beak) 60-110 × 4-6 mm, erect or patent, linear, somewhat curved, glabrous or glabrescent, with longitudinal veins; beak (10-)20-30 mm. Seeds c. 5 × 3 mm, quadrangular, somewhat compressed, yellow or pale brown, finely tuberculate. 2n = 16.{\i   Cultivated for fodder, mainly in C. & S. Europe, and widely naturalized.} [Al Au Be Bu Cr Cz Ga Ge Gr He Hs Hu It Ju Lu Rm Rs Si Tu.] ( ?{\i  S.W. Asia}.)
\par

\par
152}
\par