{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 33 Nearly glabrous perennial; calyx-teeth glabrous ....................... {\b 24. pironae}
\par
33 Densely pubescent annuals; calyx-teeth pubescent
\par
34 Legume discoid to cylindrical; transverse veins scarcely 
\par
   anastomosing ............................................................................... {\b 23. rigidula}
\par
34 Legume globose to ellipsoid; transverse veins anastomosing
\par
    freely near the submarginal vein ............................................... {\b 26. aculeata} 
\par
32 Legume glabrous or with sparse hairs
\par
35 Marginal and submarginal veins of legume confluent at maturity and 
\par
   forming a single acute or convex keel
\par
36 Transverse veins of legume nearly straight; spines not sulcate at 
\par
   base ............................................................................................ {\b 25. littoralis}
\par
36 Transverse veins of legume strongly curved; spines sulcate at base
\par
   ...................................................................................................... {\b 27. globosa}
\par
35 Marginal and submarginal veins of legume separated by a distinct 
\par
   groove at maturity and so forming 3 keels
\par
37 Racemes usually with more than 3 flowers; legume glabrous,
\par
   usually without spines; spines, if present, usually short, 
\par
   conical, straight or uncinate ......................................................... {\b 20. tornata}
\par
37 Racemes usually with 1-3 flowers; legume nearly always sparsely 
\par
   villous, always spiny; spines usually long, curved .................. {\b 22. truncatula}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Subgen.{\b  Medicago.} Legume without a submarginal vein parallel with and close to the marginal vein; margin of legume usually thin.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. M. lupulina} L.,{\i   Sp. Pl.} 779 (1753). More or less pubescent annual or short-lived perennial 5-60 cm. Leaflets orbicular, obovate, or rhombic- or oblong-cuneate, rounded to emarginate, usually apiculate; stipules lanceolate to ovate, serrate or entire. Racemes 10- to 50-flowered. Corolla 2-3 mm. Legume 1·5-3 mm, reniform, black when ripe; transverse veins strongly curved, slightly anastomosing and forming an elongated network. Seed 1, black. 2n = 16.{\i   Throughout Europe, except the extreme north; sometimes cultivated for forage.} All except Sb; probably introduced in Fa Is.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. M. secundiflora} Durieu in Duchartre,{\i   Rev. Bot.}{\b  1}: 365 (1845). Like {\b 1} but whitish-pubescent annual 2-20 cm; stipules lanceolate, entire or with 2 teeth at base; racemes 3- to 10-flowered secund; legume 3·5-4 mm; transverse veins freely anastomosing forming a more or less isodiametric network. {\i  S. France} ({\i  Aude}),{\i   N.E. Spain, Islas Baleares; doubtfully native in Italy}. Bl Ga Hs *It.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 3. M. hybrida} (Pourret) Trautv., {\i  Bull. Sci. Acad. Imp. Sci. Pétersb.}{\b  8}: 271 (1841) ({\i  M. pourretii} Noulet). Glabrous perennial 10-40 cm. Leaflets broadly obovate to suborbicular, crenulate-serrate; stipules ½-ovate, sagittate, dentate, acute. Racemes 2- to 5-flowered. Legume oblong-falcate, acuminate, dehiscent; transverse veins forming a strong, more or less isodiametric network. Seeds 2-3. {\i  Woods and mountain slopes; calcicole. • Corbieres and Pyrenees.} Ga.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 4. M. cretacea} Bieb.,{\i   Fl. Taur.-Cauc.}{\b  2}: 223 (1808) ({\i  Trigonella cretacea} (Bieb.) Grossh.). Like {\b 3} but stipules entire; legume 1-seeded, indehiscent, with prominent transverse veins which are almost parallel and scarcely anastomose.{\i   Krym. }Rs (K). ({\i  W. Transcaucasus}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 5. M. sativa} L., {\i  Sp. Pl.} 778 (1753). More or less pubescent perennial up to 80 cm. Leaflets obovate to almost linear, long-cuneate, dentate at apex; stipules lanceolate to linear-subulate entire or dentate at base. Racemes 5- to 40-flowered. Pedicels short, stout, erect in fruit. Corolla (5-)6-11 mm. Legume nearly straight, falcate or in a spiral of 1-3 turns with a hole through the centre, glabrous, pubescent or glandular, not spiny; transverse veins anastomosing and forming a transversely or radially elongated network.{\i   Throughout most of Europe, except the north and some islands; often naturalized.} All except Az Fa Is Sb. Introduced in Fe.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Very variable, particularly in S. and S.E. Europe, where a number of distinct species have been recognized. In view of the overall variation and the known frequency of hybridization between{\i   M. sativa} and {\i  M. falcata,} two of the most distinct taxa, it seems best to treat them all as subspecies. Hybrids between subspecies with bluish and yellow corollas often have green or almost black corollas. The best-known of these is subsp.{\i   falcata }× subsp. {\i  sativa} ({\i  M}. ×{\i   varia} Martyn). What appear to be hybrids between subsp. glomerata and subspp. ({\b a})-({\b c}) have been called {\i  M. polychroa} Grossh.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Corolla blue to purple
\par
2 Corolla 7-11 mm ............................................................. ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b sativa}
\par
2 Corolla 5-6(-7) mm
\par
3 Legume falcate ........................................................... ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b ambigua}
\par
3 Legume in a spiral of 2-3 turns ................................... ({\b c}) Subsp. {\b caerulea}
\par
1 Corolla yellow
\par
4 Legume nearly straight or falcate .................................. ({\b d}) Subsp. {\b falcata}
\par
4 Legume in a spiral of 1½-3 turns ............................. ({\b e}) Subsp. {\b glomerata}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b sativa}: Corolla 7-11 mm, blue to violet; legume 4-6 mm in diameter, in a spiral of 1½-3½ turns. 2n = 32. {\i  Cultivated as forage and naturalized throughout the range of the species. Origin uncertain}. 
\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b ambigua} (Trautv.) Tutin,{\i   Feddes Repert.}{\b  79}: 53 (1968) ({\i  M. falcata} var.{\i   ambigua} Trautv., {\i  M. trautvetteri} Sumnev.): Corolla 5-6(-7) mm, violet-blue; legume falcate.{\i   S.E. Russia} ({\i  Orenburg}). Rs (E). 
\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b c}) Subsp. {\b caerulea} (Less. ex Ledeb.) Schmalh., {\i  Fl. Sred. Juz. Ross.}{\b  1}: 226 (1895) ({\i  M. caerulea} Less. ex Ledeb.): Corolla 5-6 mm, violet, rarely whitish; legume 2-3(-5) mm in diameter, in a spiral of 2-3 turns. 2n = 16.{\i   S.E. Russia, W. Kazakhstan and Krym.} Rs (K, E).
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b d}) Subsp. {\b falcata} (L.) Arcangeli,{\i   Comp. Fl. Ital.} 160 (1882) ({\i  M. borealis} Grossh., {\i  M. falcata} L.,{\i   M. romanica} Prodan): Corolla 5-8 mm, yellow; legume almost straight to falcate. 2n = 16, 32. {\i  Throughout the range of the species, except for a few islands.} 
\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b e}) Subsp. {\b glomerata} (Balbis) Tutin,{\i   Feddes Repert.}{\b  79}: 53 (1968) ({\i  M. glomerata }Balbis, {\i  M. glutinosa} Bieb., {\i  M. polychroa} Grossh. pro parte): Corolla 6-10 mm, yellow; legume 3-5 mm in diameter, in a spiral of 1½-3 turns.{\i   S. Europe.}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 6. M. prostrata} Jacq., {\i  Hort. Vindob.}{\b  1}: 39 (1770). Slender nearly or quite glabrous perennial 10-40 cm. Leaflets oblong or linear-cuneate, dentate at apex; stipules ovate-lanceolate, the lower deeply dentate. Racemes usually 1- to 6-flowered. Corolla c. 4 mm. Pedicels 2-2½ times as long as calyx, slender, recurved in fruit. Legume 3-4 mm in diameter, in a rather lax spiral of 2-3 turns, pendent, glabrous or glandular, not spiny; transverse veins slender, anastomosing freely, but not forming an intermediate vein parallel to the marginal vein. 2n = 32.{\i   Dry grassland. •  From E. Austria and Italy to the Black Sea}. Al Au Cz Hu It Ju Rm.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 7. M. rupestris} Bieb., {\i  Fl. Taur.-Cauc.}{\b  2}: 225 (1808). Appressed-pubescent perennial c. 20 cm, with a woody stock. Leaflets narrowly linear, dentate at apex; stipules subulate, almost entire. Racemes 2- to 8-flowered. Corolla 5-7 mm. Pedicels about as long as calyx, slender, recurved in fruit. Legume 3-4 mm in diameter, in a spiral of about 1 turn, pubescent, not spiny;
\par

\par
154}
\par