{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 based styles; carpels and receptacle hairy. 2n = 28.{\i  N.W. Europe, extending to S. Sweden and Germany}. Br Da Ge Hb Ho Su.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 35. R. rhamnifolius} Weihe & Nees,{\i  Rubi Germ.} 22 (1822). Stems robust, angled, sulcate, often reddish, nearly glabrous, eglandular, armed with strong, equal, rather large-based, patent and straight or falcate prickles. Leaflets 5, coriaceous, glabrous above, pubescent beneath, those of the upper leaves white-tomentose beneath, unevenly and very finely serrate; terminal leaflet orbicular, 2-3 times as long as petiolule, shortly acuminate, rounded or subcordate at the base, with many hooked prickles. Inflorescence pyramidal, leafy at the base; axis hairy, with numerous strongly deflexed or falcate prickles. Sepals deflexed after flowering, aciculate, hairy or white-tomentose; petals orbicular and often rather large, white or pale pink; stamens white, exceeding the green styles; carpels and receptacle glabrescent; pollen imperfect. {\i C. Europe, extending to Belgium.} Be Ga Ge He Hu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Related species include:
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b  R. beirensis} (Samp.) Samp.,{\i  Bol. Soc. Brot.} ser. 2, {\b 10}: 111 (1935). Lu.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b R. cardiophyllus} P. J. Mueller & Lefèvre,{\i  Pollichia }{\b 16-17}: 86 (1859). 2n = 28. Br Da Ga Ge Hb Ho. 
\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b  R. obtusangulus} Gremli,{\i  Excurs.-Fl. Schweiz} ed. 4, 144 (1881). He Lu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 36. R. hochstetterorum} Seub.,{\i  Fl. Azor.} 48 (1844). Leaves of fertile branches with 3-5 large leaflets, pubescent above; terminal leaflet obovate, unevenly biserrate. Inflorescence large, long, the branches irregular, densely tomentose, eglandular; bracts lanceolate. Sepals deflexed, white-tomentose. Petals at least 3 cm, white, suborbicular; margins crenulate. • Açores. Az.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  A very imperfectly understood species, probably known only from the type. Most records are referable to {\b 38}. Perhaps diploid.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 37. R. lindebergii} P. J. Mueller,{\i  Pollichia}{\b  16-17}: 292 (1859). Stems high-arching, then procumbent, branched, rather sulcate, sparsely hairy, glaucescent; prickles red-based, strong, patent or falcate. Leaflets 5, rather small, greyish above, softly pubescent to grey-tomentose beneath; terminal leaflet narrowly elliptic-obovate, shortly cuspidate-acuminate, rounded at base, finely serrate; petiole long, bearing many large, hooked prickles. Inflorescence long, narrow, leafy above; middle branches divided near base, 2-3 arising together from the same axis; prickles numerous, strong, falcate. Sepals deflexed, ovate, white-tomentose; petals narrowly obovate, white or pinkish; stamens longer than the styles; carpels glabrous. 2n = 28.{\i  N.W. Europe.} Br Da No Su.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Related species include:
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b R. mercieri} Genev.,{\i  Mem. Soc. Acad.} ({\i Angers}){\b  24}: 271 (1868). Br Ga He. Placed nearest to this species by Sudre, but nearer to {\b 49} by Watson.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Subsect.{\i  Discolores} P. J. Mueller. Stems arching, rooting apically in the autumn; prickles usually subequal and confined to the angles; stalked glands absent or few. All leaves grey-white tomentose beneath. Sepals grey-white tomentose, deflexed. Usually late-flowering.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 38. R. ulmifolius} Schott,{\i  Isis }{\b 1818}: 821 (1818) ({\i R. rusticanus} Merc., {\i R. discolor} sensu Syme, non Weihe & Nees,{\i  R. amoenus} Portenschl., non Koehler). Stems robust, arching or procumbent, angled, often sulcate, pruinose, glabrous to tomentose with semi-appressed hairs; prickles robust, broad-based, patent to falcate, hairy. Leaves pedate, often very small; leaflets 3-5, dark green and glabrous above, white-tomentose beneath, convex, variously toothed, coriaceous; terminal leaflet ovate or suborbicular to obovate. Inflorescence often long and narrow, sometimes pyramidal, leafy at the base, with patent branches and long pedicels; all axes with robust, broad-based, patent to falcate, hairy prickles. Sepals deflexed after flowering, sometimes slightly aciculate, white-tomentose; petals crumpled, orbicular or ovate, sometimes jagged at the apex, pink or occasionally white; stamens white or pink, equalling or just exceeding the green, pink or white styles; anthers glabrous; pollen completely fertile; carpels hairy, often tomentose. 2n = 14.{\i  S., W. & C. Europe}. Al Au Az Be Bl Br Co Cr Cz Ga Ge Hb He Ho Hs It Ju Lu Sa Si Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  The only diploid, sexual species in Subgen.{\i  Rubus }whose chromosome number has been verified from material of wild origin; it is very polymorphic in shape of leaves, branching of inflorescence, clothing of the axis, size of flowers and colour of petals, and up to 20 subspecies as well as 92 varieties have been described.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Related species include:
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b  R. heteromorphus }Ripart ex Genev., {\i Mem. Soc. Acad.} ({\i Angers}) {\b 24}: 255 (1868) ({\i R. dalmatinus} Tratt. ex Focke). Al Ju.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b  R. portuensis} Samp., {\i Ann. Sci. Nat.} ({\i Porto}) {\b 8}: 10 (1904). Hs Lu.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b  R. sanguineus} Friv.,{\i  Flora} ({\i Regensb.}) {\b 18}: 334 (1835) ({\i R. sanctus} auct. plur., non Schreber,{\i  R. anatolicus }Focke,{\i  R. discolor} Boiss., non Weihe & Nees). Bu Rs (K).
\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b  R. thessalus }Halácsy, {\i Consp. Fl. Graec. }{\b 1}: 503 (1900) ({\i R. anatolicus} var.{\i  cinereus} Hausskn.). Al Gr.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 39. R. godronii} Lecoq & Lamotte,{\i  Cat. Pl. Centr. Fr. }151 (1847) ({\i R. praecox} subsp.{\i  godronii }(Lecoq & Lamotte) Hayek). Stems terete at base, slightly or strongly angled above, glaucescent, with somewhat unequal, straight or curved prickles with a subconical base. Leaflets 5, glabrous or hairy above, white-tomentose and hairy beneath; terminal leaflet ovate, elliptical or obovate, twice as long as its petiolule, rounded or slightly cordate at base, finely and almost simply dentate; stipules with sparse glands. Inflorescence densely or sparsely hairy, with falcate prickles; bracts with sparse, subsessile glands. Sepals deflexed after flowering, tomentose and pubescent, with no or few acicles; petals oblong, pale pink or sometimes white; stamens white, greatly exceeding the green styles; pollen sterile; carpels and receptacle hairy.{\i  W. & C. Europe.} Be Br Cz Ga Ge Hb He Ho Lu Po.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Related species include:
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b  R. caldasianus} Samp.,{\i  Ann. Sci. Nat. }({\i Porto}){\b  8}: 8 (1904). Lu. 
\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b  R. winteri }P. J. Mueller ex Focke,{\i  Syn. Rub. Germ.} 196 (1877). 2n = 28. Au Br Ga Ge Hb He Ho Ju.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 40. R. bifrons} Vest ex Tratt., {\i Rosac. Monogr.}{\b  3}: 28 (1823). Almost evergreen; stems much-branched, stout, red-brown, obtusely angled, with plane faces, not pruinose, usually glabrescent, occasionally with a few minute glands and acicles; prickles long, robust, subulate. Leaflets 3-5, dark green, glabrous or glabrescent above, white-tomentose beneath; terminal leaflet usually orbicular or shortly obovate, shortly acuminate or cuspidate, twice as long as its petiolule, truncate or subcordate at base; basal leaflets shortly petiolulate; stipules with sessile glands. Inflorescence elongate, the axis tomentose towards the base, variably hairy above and sometimes with some shortly stalked
\par

\par
15}
\par