{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 flowered. Corolla 2-3 mm, pale yellow; wings and keel equal, shorter than standard. Legume 1·5-3 mm, subglobose, strongly reticulate- veined, glabrous, whitish-grey when young.{\i   Mediterranean region and  S.W. Europe; naturalized in C. & N.W. Europe.} Al *Az Bl Co Cr Ga Gr Hs It Ju Lu Sa Si Tu [Au Be Br Cz Ge He Ho].
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 11. M. elegans} Salzm. ex Ser. in DC.,{\i   Prodr.}{\b  2}: 188 (1825). Erect annual 20-150 cm; stem pubescent above. Lower leaflets obovate-orbicular, the upper oblong, all obtuse or truncate, serrate. Lower stipules triangular-lanceolate, the upper linear-setaceous, entire. Racemes 1·5-2 cm, lax, 15- to 30-flowered. Corolla 4-5 mm, yellow; standard and wings equal, shorter than keel; ovary glabrous. Legume 3·5-4 mm, obovoid, compressed, with transverse or sigmoid veins, brownish-yellow when ripe. Grassland, usually near the sea.{\i   W. & C. Mediterranean region, Portugal.} Al Bl Co Ga ?Gr Hs It Ju Lu Sa Si.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 12. M. infesta} Guss.,{\i   Fl. Sic. Prodr.}{\b  2}: 486 (1828). Erect or ascending, branched annual 30-50 cm. Lower leaflets triangular or cuneate-obovate, the upper oblong-cuneate. Stipules semi-ovate or sagittate, dentate. Racemes 2-3 cm, lax, 15- to 50-flowered, elongating in fruit. Corolla 6-7·5 mm, yellow, standard and keel subequal, shorter than wings; ovary glabrous. Legume 4-5 mm, subglobose or obovoid, concentric-striate, blackish-brown when ripe.{\i   W. Mediterranean region. }Bl Co It Si.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 13. M. sulcata} Desf.,{\i   Fl. Atl.}{\b  2}: 193 (1799). Erect, branched or simple annual 10-40 cm. Leaflets oblong-cuneate, obtuse, serrate. Stipules dentate. Racemes 1-1·5 cm, 8- to 25-flowered, elongating in fruit and then as long as or longer than the leaves. Corolla 3-4 mm, yellow. Legume 3-4 mm, globose, concentric-striate, pale yellow or yellowish-brown when ripe.{\i   Cultivated ground and other open habitats. Mediterranean region, S. Portugal.} Al Bl Co Cr Ga Gr Hs It Ju Lu Sa Si Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 14. M. segetalis} (Brot.) Ser. in DC., {\i  Prodr.}{\b  2}: 187 (1825). Erect annual 40-60 cm. Leaflets obovate-cuneate, obtuse, serrate. Lowest stipules entire, the upper dentate. Racemes c. 3 cm, dense, 30- to 50-flowered, c. 3 times as long as their subtending leaf. Corolla 4-8 mm, yellow. Legume 2·5-5·5 mm, oblong-globose, concentric-striate, yellow when ripe.{\i   Damp places. Mediterranean region,} Portugal. Bl Co Cr Ga Gr Hs It Ju Lu Sa Si.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  This species is composed of two taxa which may merit specific rank. Typical{\i   M. segetalis,} from the W. Mediterranean region and C. & S. Portugal, has the legume 4·5-5·5 mm with 12-15 concentric striations. The second taxon, from the Mediterranean region and Portugal, has the legume 2·5-3 mm with up to 8 concentric striations. The correct name for the latter is uncertain.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 15. M. messanensis} (L.) All.,{\i   Fl. Pedem.}{\b  1}: 309 (1785) ({\i  M. sicula} (Turra) B. D. Jackson). Erect or ascending, branched annual 20-40 cm. Leaflets obovate-orbicular or lanceolate-cuneate, serrate. Lower stipules triangular-lanceolate, denticulate, the upper lanceolate, entire but denticulate at base. Racemes 0·7-1 cm, 3- to 10-flowered, shorter than their subtending leaves. Corolla 4-5 mm, yellow; standard and keel subequal, longer than wings. Legume 5-8 mm, oblique-ovoid, acute, concentric-striate, yellowish-brown when ripe.{\i   Cultivated ground and damp places, especially near the coast. Mediterranean region, Portugal}. Bl Co Ga Hs It Ju Lu Sa Si Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 16. M. physocarpa} Stefanov,{\i   Bull. Soc. Bot. Bulg. }{\b 3}: 79 (1929). Erect annual 10-15 cm, diffusely branched from base; branches crispate-pubescent. Leaflets cuneate-obovate, denticulate, slightly fleshy. Stipules lanceolate, entire. Racemes short, few-flowered, longer than subtending leaf. Corolla c. 5 mm, white, tinged with blue or violet. Legume 4-4·5 mm, ovoid-globose, abruptly mucronate, pendent, with few obscure longitudinal veins, sparsely crispate-pubescent.{\i   Dry, rocky places. • Turkey-in-Europe} ({\i  Kumbag, near Tekirdag}). Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 This species is apparently known only from the original collection, the location of which is uncertain. It is very similar to and may not be distinct from {\b M. bicolor} Boiss. & Balansa in Boiss., {\i  Diagn. Pl. Or. Nov.}{\b  3}({\b 6}): 46 (1859), from W. Anatolia.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc {\b 55.                 Trigonella}                    L.
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc By R.B. Ivimey-Cook. 
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Annual. Leaves pinnately 3-foliolate; leaflets usually toothed. Flowers solitary or in sessile or pedunculate axillary heads or short racemes. Calyx-teeth equal or unequal; corolla yellow, blue or purplish, free from the staminal tube, deciduous; stamens diadelphous or monadelphous; filaments not dilated. Legume usually linear or oblong, straight or curved, indehiscent or dehiscing along one suture. Seeds 1-many.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Literature: G. Sirjaev,{\i   Publ. Fac. Sci. Univ. Masaryk}{\b  102}: 1-57 (1928); {\b 110}: 1-37 (1929); {\b 128}: 1-31 (1930); {\b 136}: 1-33 (1931); {\b 148}: 1-43 (1932); {\b 170}: 1-37 (1933). I. T. Vassilczenko, {\i  Acta Inst.Bot. Acad. Sci. URSS}{\b  10}: 124-269 (1953).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Calyx 5-12 mm, tubular
\par
2 Legume 1-2 mm wide, not beaked; seeds smooth; 
\par
  pedicels c. 2 mm ....................................................................... {\b 7. grandiflora}
\par
2 Legume 2·5-7 mm wide, beaked; seeds tuberculate;
\par
  pedicels not more than 0·5 mm
\par
3 Flowers (3-)10-15 in pedunculate heads;
\par
  beak of legume 3·5-5 mm .................................................... {\b 20. coerulescens}
\par
3 Flowers solitary or paired and not pedunculate; 
\par
  beak of legume 10-40 mm
\par
4 Leaflets 20-50 × 10-15 mm; legume (excluding beak) 60-110 mm;
\par
  seeds quadrangular ........................................................ {\b 23. foenum-graecum}
\par
4 Leaflets 5-12 × 3-8 mm; legume (excluding beak) 15-40 mm; 
\par
  seeds ovoid
\par
5 Corolla 8-10 mm; legume straight; beak 10-20 mm ................... {\b 21. gladiata}
\par
5 Corolla c. 18 mm; legume curved; beak 30-40 mm .................. {\b 22. cariensis} 
\par
1 Calyx 2-5 mm, usually campanulate
\par
6 Legume flat, membranous, with a broad membranous wing on the suture
\par
7 Calyx c. 3 mm; corolla 7-10 mm; legume 12-20 × 10-15 mm ....... {\b 1. graeca}
\par
7 Calyx c. 2 mm; corolla c. 5 mm; legume 11-14 × 8-10 mm .......... {\b 2. cretica}
\par
6 Legume not membranous and not winged
\par
8 Corolla blue, rarely white; legume 4-5 mm
\par
9 Racemes globose, scarcely elongating after anthesis; 
\par
  legume abruptly contracted into a beak ...................................... {\b 18. caerulea}
\par
9 Racemes subglobose, elongating after anthesis; 
\par
  legume gradually attenuate into a beak ................................ {\b 19. procumbens}
\par
8 Corolla yellow, sometimes tinged with purple; legume 5 mm or more
\par
10 Racemes sessile or subsessile with peduncles less than 0·5 cm
\par
11 Legume glabrous
\par
12 Legume erect or patent ............................................................... {\b 13. arcuata}
\par
12 Legume pendent
\par
13 Stems sparsely hairy; calyx-teeth shorter than tube .................. {\b 10. spinosa}
\par
13 Stems densely appressed-pubescent;
\par
   calyx-teeth longer than tube ................................................. {\b 17. monspeliaca}
\par
11 Legume pubescent at least when young
\par
14 Legume 7-17 mm, pendent ................................................ {\b 17. monspeliaca}
\par
14 Legume (10-)20-50 mm, erect or patent
\par
15 Legume 1·5-2 mm wide, with reticulate veins ..................... {\b 15. polyceratia}
\par

\par
150}
\par