{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 15 Legume 1-1·5 mm wide, with oblique anastomosing veins .. {\b 16. orthoceras}
\par
10 Racemes pedunculate
\par
16 Legume glabrous
\par
17 Calyx-teeth equal
\par
18 Legume pendent; calyx-teeth ½ as long as tube ....................... {\b 3. maritima}
\par
18 Legume erect or patent; calyx-teeth slightly longer than tube .... {\b 12. striata}
\par
17 Calyx-teeth unequal
\par
19 Legume 5-8 mm, ovate .............................................................. {\b 11. spicata}
\par
19 Legume 10-16 mm, linear or oblong
\par
20 Peduncles c. 1·5 cm, about as long as leaves .......................... {\b 6. rechingeri}
\par
20 Peduncles 2-6 cm, at least twice as long as leaves
\par
21 Wings shorter than keel; legume acuminate ......................... {\b 4. corniculata}
\par
21 Wings as long as keel; legume subacute ................................... {\b 5. balansae} 
\par
16 Legume hairy
\par
22 Legume pendent; seeds smooth
\par
23 Stems glabrous; legume with thick, oblique veins .................... {\b 3. maritima}
\par
23 Stems villous; legume with indistinct, reticulate veins .......... {\b 8. sprunerana}
\par
22 Legume erect or patent; seeds tuberculate or tuberculate-rugose, 
\par
   rarely smooth
\par
24 Legume 5-8 mm; flowers in ± elongated racemes
\par
25 Legume contracted between the seeds, pubescent; seeds smooth
\par
   ..................................................................................................... {\b 9. smyrnaea}
\par
25 Legume not contracted between the seeds, glabres cent; seeds finely 
\par
   tuberculate .................................................................................... {\b 11. spicata}
\par
24 Legume 10 mm or more; flowers in subumbellate racemes
\par
26 Calyx-teeth shorter than tube; legume 1·5-2 mm wide ........ {\b 15. polyceratia}
\par
26 Calyx-teeth about as long as tube; legume 1-1·5 mm wide
\par
27 Corolla 5-7 mm; legume with transverse veins .................... {\b 14. fischerana}
\par
27 Corolla 4-5 mm legume with oblique veins ......................... {\b 16. orthoceras}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Subgen. Trigonella. Calyx usually campanulate. Legume not inflated.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. T. graeca} (Boiss. & Spruner) Boiss.,{\i   Fl. Or.}{\b  2}: 91 (1872). Stems 10-30 cm, usually ascending glabrous. Leaflets 10-15 × 7-12 mm, obovate to suborbicular truncate, somewhat fleshy. Racemes subcapitate, many-flowered; peduncles 4-6 cm; pedicels 3-4 mm. Calyx c. 3 mm, the teeth ½ as long as tube; corolla 7-10 mm, yellow. Legume 12-20 × 10-15 mm, ovate-orbicular, flat, membranous, with transverse anastomosing veins, and with a membranous wing on the upper suture. Seeds 2-3, c. 4 mm, ovoid, brown, tuberculate.{\i   Stony places. • S. & W. Greece.} Gr.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. T. cretica} (L.) Boiss.,{\i   loc. cit.} (1872) ({\i  Pocockia cretica} (L.) Ser.). Like {\b 1} but calyx c. 2 mm; corolla c. 5 mm; legume 11-14 × 8-10 mm with 1(-2) seeds.{\i   Calcareous screes. Kriti.} ?Cr. ({\i  W. Anatolia.}) 

\pard\f0\fs28  The records from Europe are probably all erroneous.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 3. T. maritima} Delile ex Poiret in Lam.,{\i   Encycl. Méth. Bot., Suppl. }{\b 5}: 361 (1817). Stems 5-40 cm, procumbent, glabrous. Leaflets 5-10 × 5-8 mm, ovate, truncate or emarginate, denticulate, glabrous or sparsely hairy beneath. Racemes subumbellate, (3-)5- to 10-flowered; peduncles 1-2 cm; pedicels 1-1·5 mm. Calyx 2-2·5 mm, the teeth ½ as long as tube; corolla 6-7 mm, yellow. Legume 10-16 × 2-3 mm, pendent, linear, somewhat curved and deflexed, subglabrous or sparsely hairy, with thick, oblique veins. Seeds c. 1 mm, ovoid, brown, smooth.{\i   Dry places. C. Mediterranean region.} It Sa Si. ({\i  N. Africa, S.W. Asia.})
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 4. T. corniculata} (L.) L.,{\i   Syst. Nat.} ed. 10, {\b 2}: 1180 (1759). Stems 10-55 cm, procumbent to erect, glabrous or subglabrous. Leaflets 10-40 × 7-35 mm, linear-lanceolate to obovate, obtuse, sometimes emarginate. Racemes ovate-oblong, 8- to 15-flowered; peduncles up to 6 cm; pedicels c. 3 mm. Calyx 3-4 mm, the teeth unequal, as long as or shorter than tube; corolla 6-7 mm, yellow; wings shorter than keel. Legume 10-16 × (1·5-)2-3 mm, pendent, linear, acuminate, compressed, somewhat curved, glabrous, with thin transverse veins. Seeds 1-1·5 mm, oblong, tuberculate. 2n = 16.{\i   Mediterranean region.} Al Bu ?Cr Ga Gr Hs It Ju Si.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 5. T. balansae} Boiss. & Reuter in Boiss., {\i  Diagn. Pl. Or. Nov.}{\b  3}({\b 5}): 79 (1856). Like {\b 4} but racemes globose at anthesis; wings equalling the keel; legume 2-4 mm wide, subacute.{\i   S. Greece and Aegean region.} Cr Gr.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Perhaps only a subspecies of{\b  4}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 6. T. rechingeri} Sirj.,{\i   Österr. Bot. Zeitschr.}{\b  85}: 58 (1936). Stems 5-20 cm, sparsely pubescent or subglabrous. Leaflets 7-10 × 7-9 mm, obovate, denticulate, glabrous or subglabrous. Racemes capitate, 6- to 10-flowered; peduncles c. 1·5 cm; pedicels 1·5-2 mm. Calyx 3-4 mm, the teeth unequal, the longest about equalling tube; corolla c. 7 mm, yellow. Legume 10-14 × 3-4 mm, pendent, oblong, glabrous, with transverse veins. Seeds 1·5-2 mm, ovoid, yellow, finely tuberculate.{\i   Coastal rocks; calcicole. • S. Aegean region.} Cr Gr.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 7. T. grandiflora} Bunge,{\i   Arb. Naturf.-Ver. Riga}{\b  1}: 218 (1847). Stems 5-25(-35) cm, glabrous or subglabrous. Leaflets 8-15 × 5-10 mm, obovate-cuneate, truncate, dentate, sparsely pubescent on the veins beneath. Racemes subumbellate, (1-)2 to 3(-5)-flowered; peduncles c. 1 cm; pedicels c. 2 mm. Calyx 5-7 mm, the teeth 1/3-1/2 as long as tube; corolla 13-16 mm, yellow. Legume 20-75 × 1-2 mm, erect or patent, linear, curved, glabrous, with oblique veins, the apex hooked. Seeds c. 3 mm, cylindrical, yellow with a few red spots.{\i   Dry slopes and cultivated ground. S.E. Russia.} Rs (E). ({\i  C. Asia, Iran}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 8. T. sprunerana} Boiss.,{\i   Diagn. Pl. Or. Nov. }{\b 1}({\b 2}): 17 (1843). Stems up to 15 cm, villous. Leaflets 6-13 × 3-9 mm, obovate, villous. Racemes subcapitate, 5- to 10-flowered; peduncles 0·5-1·5 cm; pedicels c. 2 mm. Calyx 3-3·5 mm, the teeth slightly unequal, the longest as long as or slightly longer than tube; corolla 5-7 mm, yellow. Legume 15-20 × c. 2 mm, pendent, linear-oblong, curved, villous, with indistinct, reticulate veins. Seeds c. 2 mm, ovoid, smooth.{\i   Aegean region.} Gr Tu. ({\i  S.W. Asia}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 9. T. smyrnaea} Boiss.,{\i   op. cit. }19 (1843). Stems 10-15 cm, subglabrous. Leaflets 6-7 × 3-4 mm, obovate, emarginate, puberulent beneath. Racemes ovate, 5- to 7-flowered; peduncles 1·5-3·5 cm; pedicels c. 1 mm. Calyx c. 4 mm, the teeth unequal, the longest about as long as tube; corolla c. 8 mm, yellow. Legume 6-7 × 2 mm, erect or patent, shortly cylindrical, curved, pubescent, contracted between the seeds, with indistinct, longitudinal veins. Seeds c. 2 mm, ovoid, smooth.{\i   Krym.} Rs (K). ({\i  Anatolia}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 10. T. spinosa} L., {\i  Sp. Pl. }777 (1753). Stems 15-30 cm, procumbent or ascending, sparsely hairy. Leaflets 5-8(-12) × 4-5(-8) mm, obovate, denticulate or subentire, glabrous above, sparsely hairy beneath. Racemes subumbellate, (1-)4- to 6-flowered, sessile or subsessile; pedicels c. 0·5 mm. Calyx c. 2·5 mm, the teeth shorter than tube; corolla c. 4 mm, yellow. Legume (15-)20-35 × 1-2 mm, pendent, linear, compressed, curved,
\par

\par
151}
\par