{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28   {\b 32. M. praecox} DC.,{\i   Cat. Pl. Horti Monsp.} 123 (1813). Somewhat pubescent annual up to 30 cm. Leaflets obcordate, cuneate, dentate near the apex; stipules lanceolate to ovate-lanceolate, incise-dentate to pectinate. Racemes 1- to 2-flowered. Corolla 2-3 mm. Legume 3-4 mm in diameter, in a lax spiral of 4-5 turns, subglobose to cylindrical, sparsely puberulent, spiny, transverse veins strongly curved, anastomosing near the submarginal vein and forming a tangentially elongated network; submarginal vein separated from the marginal vein by a narrow groove not visible when the legume is viewed from the edge; marginal vein broad and rounded; spines up to as long as the diameter of the legume, usually somewhat curved and uncinate, deeply sulcate.{\i   Mediterranean region extending to Krym. }Bl Bu Co Ga Gr Hs It Rs (K) Sa.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 33. M. laciniata} (L.) Miller, Gard. Dict. ed. 8, no. 5 (1768). Somewhat puberulent annual up to 40 cm. Leaflets obcordate, cuneate, often incise-dentate or almost pinnatifid; stipules ovate to ovate-lanceolate in outline, dentate to pectinate. Racemes 1- to 2-flowered. Corolla c. 5 mm. Legume 2·5-5 mm in diameter, in a lax spiral of 3-7 turns, globose to ellipsoid, glabrous or sometimes pubescent, spiny; transverse veins sigmoid, sparingly branched; submarginal vein broad, separated from the flat or convex marginal vein by a narrow groove; spines up to as long as the diameter of the legume, nearly straight but uncinate, deeply sulcate at base.{\i   Naturalized locally in the Mediterranean region, extending to the Ukraine}. [Co Ga Hs It Rs (W).] ({\i  N. Africa, Asia Minor}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b laciniata}: Stipules divided more than halfway to the middle; legume 4-5 mm in diameter, with 10-16 transverse veins per turn of the spiral. {\i  Throughout the range of the species}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b schimperana} P. Fourn.,{\i   Quatre Fl. Fr.} 545 (1936): Stipules divided less than halfway to the middle; legume 2·5-4 mm in diameter, with 7-10(-12) transverse veins per turn of the spiral.{\i   France, perhaps elsewhere}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 34. M. coronata} (L.) Bartal.,{\i   Cat. Piante Siena} 61 (1776) Pubescent annual 10-30 cm. Leaflets obovate, cuneate, dentate near the apex. Racemes 3- to 8-flowered. Corolla 2·5-3 mm. Legume 2-4 mm in diameter, in a lax spiral of 2 turns, shortly cylindrical, usually pubescent, spiny; transverse veins strongly curved, scarcely anastomosing; submarginal vein separated from the marginal by a wide groove; marginal vein expanded into a flat border from which arise 2 rows of spines, one upward- and one downward-pointing, parallel to the legume; spines short, straight, deeply sulcate. 2n = 16.{\i   Mediterranean region extending to Bulgaria.} Al Bu Co Cr Ga Gr Hs It Ju [Lu].
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 35. M. disciformis} DC.,{\i   Cat. Pl. Horti Monsp.} 124 (1813). Softly pubescent annual 10-30 cm. Leaflets obovate, cuneate, dentate near the apex; stipules lanceolate, dentate near the base. Racemes 1- to 4-flowered. Corolla 4-5 mm. Legume c. 6 mm in diameter, in a lax spiral of 5 turns, discoid, glabrous, spiny; transverse veins apparently absent; upper turn of the spiral much smaller than the others and without spines; spines slender, somewhat curved, about half as long as the diameter of the legume.{\i   Mediterranean region extending to Bulgaria.} Bu Cr Ga Gr Hs It.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 36. M. tenoreana} Ser. in DC., {\i  Prodr.}{\b  2}: 180 (1825). Like {\b 35} but legume c. 5 mm in diameter, in a lax spiral of 4-5 turns, shortly cylindrical, flat at both ends; transverse veins anastomosing to form a network, with a wide veinless border; turns of the spiral all subequal and spiny; spines in 2 rows, one upward- and one downward-pointing parallel to the legume, nearly straight. {\i  W. Mediterranean region, local.} Ga Hs It Sa Si.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 37. M. minima} (L.) Bartal.,{\i   Cat. Piante Siena} 61 (1776). Villous annual up to 40 cm. Leaflets obovate or obcordate, dentate near the apex; stipules lanceolate to ovate-lanceolate, sometimes shallowly dentate near the base. Racemes 1- to 6(-8)-flowered. Corolla 4-4·5 mm. Legume 3-5 mm in diameter, in a lax spiral of 3-5 turns, subglobose, sparsely villous and somewhat glandular, nearly always spiny; transverse veins slender, curved, not anastomosing; submarginal vein wide, separated from the narrow, flat or convex marginal vein by a wide groove; spines very short to longer than the diameter of the legume, patent, usually uncinate, deeply sulcate at base. 2n = 16.{\i   Most of Europe, except the north and some islands.} Al Au Be Bl Br Bu Co Cr Cz Da Ga Ge Gr He Ho Hs Hu It Ju Lu Po Rm Rs (W, K, E) Sa Si Su ?Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc {\b  57.                Trifolium}                     L.
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc By D.E. Coombe.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Annual, biennial or perennial herbs, rarely somewhat woody. Leaves 3-foliolate, very rarely digitate with 5(-8) leaflets; leaflets usually toothed. Flowers in heads or short spikes, very rarely solitary. Calyx-teeth equal or unequal; petals persistent or deciduous, adnate to each other and to the staminal tube; stamens diadelphous; all or 5 of the filaments dilated at the apex. Legume included in the calyx or shortly exserted, rarely much exceeding the calyx, indehiscent or dehiscent by a ventral suture or by an indurated lid. Seeds 1-4(-10).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Literature: E. G. Bobrov,{\i   Fl. Syst. Pl. Vasc. }{\b 6}: 164 344 (1947). C. Vicioso, {\i  Anal. Inst. Bot. Cavanilles}{\b  10}: 347-398 (1952), {\b 11}: 289-383 (1953). R. Hendrych, {\i  Preslia }{\b 28}: 403-412 (1956). M. Hossain,{\i   Notes Roy. Bot. Gard. Edinb.}{\b  23}: 387-481 (1961).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 A large genus extensively cultivated for fodder. The most important species are{\b  10}, {\b 14}, {\b 29}, {\b 30}, {\b 62},{\b  63}, {\b 88} and {\b 97}, but others may be used locally.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Some leaves with 5 or more leaflets .......................................... {\b 2. lupinaster} 
\par
1 All adult leaves 3-foliolate 
\par
2 Calyx with 5(-6) veins; leaves often pinnately 3-foliolate; corolla 
\par
  always persistent and scarious in fruit
\par
3 Calyx-teeth subequal or the 2 upper longer than the rest; corolla 
\par
  before anthesis white or cream; flowers ± umbel late, subtended by 
\par
  membranous bracts; legume 2- to 4-seeded
\par
4 Calyx-teeth subequal, subulate, separated by broad obtuse sinuses
\par
  ................................................................................................... {\b 14. hybridum}
\par
4 Calyx-teeth unequal, the 2 upper longer than the rest, narrowly 
\par
  lanceolate, separated by narrow acute sinuses ............................... {\b 10. repens}
\par
3 Calyx-teeth unequal, the 2 upper shorter than the rest; corolla 
\par
  before anthesis yellow, orange, lilac or violet; flowers ± spicate; 
\par
  bracts represented by a few short, red, evanescent glandular hairs; 
\par
  legume 1(-2)-seeded
\par
5 Corolla violet or reddish-violet before anthesis
\par
6 Fruiting heads ovoid, lax, with peduncles exceeding the leaves; 
\par
  corolla 8-10 mm ...................................................................... {\b 34. speciosum}
\par
6 Fruiting heads subglobose, dense, with peduncles equalling or 
\par
  shorter than the leaves; corolla 4-6 mm .................................... {\b 36. lagrangei} 
\par
5 Corolla yellow, rarely orange or lilac before anthesis 
\par
7 Uppermost leaves subopposite; heads solitary, paired or few, 
\par
  pseudoterminal 
\par
8 Perennial; corolla 7-9 mm, bright chestnut-brown 
\par
  after anthesis ................................................................................. {\b 32. badium} 
\par
8 Annual or biennial; corolla c. 6 mm, very dark brown
\par
  after anthesis ............................................................................ {\b 33. spadiceum} 
\par
7 All leaves alternate; heads usually numerous, lateral, axillary
\par

\par
157}
\par