{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28\li200  9 All leaflets of the upper leaves subsessile, their petiolules subequal
\par
10 Fruiting pedicels 2-4 times as long as the upper limb of the
\par
   calyx-tube ................................................................................ {\b 45. sebastiani}
\par
10 Fruiting pedicels not more than 1½ times as long as the upper 
\par
   limb of the calyx-tube, usually much shorter
\par
11 Fruiting pedicels 1-1½ times as long as the upper limb 
\par
   of the calyx-tube; corolla 2-3(4-) mm .................................. {\b 47. micranthum}
\par
11 Fruiting pedicels distinctly shorter than the upper limb of the 
\par
   calyx-tube; corolla 5-8 mm
\par
12 Stipules of the upper leaves lanceolate-ovate, not dilated at the 
\par
   base .............................................................................................. {\b 42. aureum}
\par
12 Stipules of the upper leaves semicordate-ovate, often auriculate
\par
13 Leaflets oblong-ovate or rhombic, widest near the middle
\par
   .............................................................................................. {\b 43. velenovskyi}
\par
13 Leaflets obovate-cuneate or narrowly ellipticobovate,
\par
   widest near the apex
\par
14 Stems 20-50 cm; leaflets up to 18 mm, narrowly elliptic-obovate; 
\par
   corolla 5-7 mm .............................................................................. {\b 41. patens}
\par
14 Stems 5-20 cm; leaflets 8-10 mm, obovate-cuneate; corolla 7-8 mm
\par
   ...................................................................................................... {\b 37. brutium}
\par
9  Terminal leaflet of the upper leaves distinctly petiolulate, its 
\par
   petiolule longer than that of the lateral leaflets
\par
15 Corolla 3-3·5 mm, scarcely sulcate ........................................... {\b 46. dubium}
\par
15 Corolla 4-10 mm (if less, then markedly sulcate)
\par
16 Corolla (3-)4-5(-6) mm; legume 3-6 times as long as the style
\par
   .................................................................................................. {\b 44. campestre}
\par
16 Corolla (5-)6-10 mm; legume scarcely exceeding the style
\par
17 Peduncles shorter than or equalling the leaves; pedicels 1-2 mm, 
\par
   longer than the upper limb of the calyx-tube ............................. {\b 35. boissieri}
\par
17 Peduncles exceeding the leaves; at least the lower pedicels not 
\par
   longer than the upper limb of the calyx-tube
\par
18 Lower pedicels about as long as the upper limb of the calyx-tube, 
\par
   upper pedicels somewhat longer .............................................. {\b 40. dolopium}
\par
18 All pedicels much shorter than the upper limb of the calyx-tube
\par
19 Corolla 5-7 mm; stems 20-50 cm ................................................ {\b 41. patens}
\par
19 Corolla 7-9 mm; stems 5-20 cm
\par
20 Corolla 8-9 mm; orange before anthesis ........................... {\b 39. aurantiacum}
\par
20 Corolla 7-8 mm, yellow before anthesis 
\par
21 Stipules oblong-lanceolate, not semicordate-auriculate .. {\b 38. mesogitanum} 
\par
21 Stipules semicordate-ovate, often auriculate ............................ {\b 37. brutium}
\par
2  Calyx with more than 5(-6) veins, usually 10, 20 or more;
\par
   leaves digitately 3-foliolate; petals deciduous or marcescent,
\par
   sometimes scarious
\par
22 Flowers subtended by small, sometimes connate, bracts; throat of 
\par
   calyx not closed by a ring of hairs or by an annular or bilabiate 
\par
   callosity; legume usually 2- to 8- seeded, included or exserted
\par
23 Calyx-tube not inflated in fruit
\par
24 Heads 1- to 6-flowered
\par
25 Corolla 6-8 mm; legume greatly exserted .................... {\b 1. ornithopodioides}
\par
25 Corolla 12-25 mm; legume not or slightly exserted
\par
26 Peduncles less than 15 mm, usually concealed by the stipules; 
\par
   bracts free; calyx-tube cylindrical ........................................... {\b 24. uniflorum}
\par
26 Peduncles 15-150 mm, evident; bracts connate, forming 
\par
   1 or 2 minute involucres; calyx-tube campanulate
\par
27 Peduncles 50-150 mm; corolla 18-25 mm ................................. {\b 3. alpinum}
\par
27 Peduncles 15-25 mm; corolla 12-14 mm ...................................... {\b 4. pilczii} 
\par
24 Heads 7- to many-flowered
\par
28 All heads sessile
\par
29 Internodes 10-80 mm; heads ± remote; corolla longer than
\par
    the calyx .............................................................................. {\b 22. glomeratum}
\par
29 Internodes usually less than 5 mm; heads congested or confluent; 
\par
   corolla shorter than the calyx ................................................ {\b 23. suffocatum} 
\par
28 At least some heads with peduncles 5 mm or more
\par
30 Stipules denticulate or fimbriate
\par
31 Veins of the leaflets and stipules ending in glandular teeth; 
\par
   standard slightly exceeding the calyx .......................................... {\b 5. strictum}
\par
31 Veins of the leaflets and stipules not ending in glan dular teeth; 
\par
   standard about twice as long as the calyx .............................. {\b 6. nervulosum}
\par
30 Stipules not denticulate or fimbriate
\par
32 Stems creeping and rooting at the nodes
\par
33 Upper calyx-teeth narrowly lanceolate; leaflets with translucent 
\par
   lateral veins and usually light or dark markings ........................... {\b 10. repens}
\par
33 Upper calyx-teeth ovate-lanceolate or triangular leaflets with 
\par
   opaque lateral veins and usually unmarked .......................... {\b 11. occidentale}
\par
32 Stems not creeping or rooting at the nodes
\par
34 Corolla 18-25 mm; bracts connate, forming 1 or 2 minute 
\par
   involucres ..................................................................................... {\b 3. alpinum}
\par
34 Corolla 5-16 mm; bracts not connate
\par
35 Fruiting pedicels as long as or longer than the calyx-tube
\par
36 Perennial
\par
37 Calyx-teeth subulate, separated by broad obtuse sinuses ...... {\b 14. hybridum} 
\par
37 Calyx-teeth lanceolate or narrowly triangular, with narrow
\par
   acute sinuses
\par
38 Pedicels 4-5 × 0·5 mm, strongly thickened in fruit;
\par
   standard straight .......................................................................... {\b 15. bivonae}
\par
38 Pedicels 1-4 × 0·1-0·2 mm, scarcely thickened in fruit;
\par
   standard ± recurved
\par
39 Flowers not or scarcely deflexed after anthesis; calyx-tube about 
\par
   as wide as long ................................................................................ {\b 13. thalii}
\par
39 Flowers strongly deflexed after anthesis; calyx-tube longer than wide
\par
40 Standard ovate-lanceolate ........................................................... {\b 10. repens}
\par
40 Standard broadly ovate or elliptical ...................................... {\b 12. pallescens}
\par
36 Annual
\par
41 All calyx-teeth 2-4 times as long as the tube
\par
42 Heads 20-25 mm wide; corolla 8-11 mm; seeds 2 mm ... {\b 18. michelianum}
\par
42 Heads 10-15 mm wide; corolla 6-8 mm; seeds 1 mm ......... {\b 19. angulatum}
\par
41 Upper 2 calyx-teeth equalling or only slightly exceeding the tube
\par
43 Heads 10-20 mm wide; corolla 6-9 mm ............................... {\b 17. nigrescens}
\par
43 Heads 8-12 mm wide; corolla 4-5 mm .................................... {\b 21. cernuum}
\par
35 Fruiting pedicels shorter than the calyx-tube
\par
44 Annual
\par
45 Heads 8-11 mm wide, globose; corolla 4-5 mm ...................... {\b 20. retusum}
\par
45 Heads 15-25 mm wide, hemispherical or cylindrical;
\par
    corolla 9-12 mm .............................................................. {\b 16. isthmocarpum}
\par
44 Perennial
\par
46 Calyx sparsely pubescent, at least at the base of the teeth
\par
47 Heads globose or ovate; corolla 7-9 mm ................................ {\b 7. montanum}
\par
47 Heads oblong; corolla 10-15 mm ........................................... {\b 8. ambiguum}
\par
46 Calyx glabrous
\par
48 Peduncles 10-30 mm; corolla 5-8 mm; calyx-teeth ovate-
\par
   triangular (Greece) ....................................................................... {\b 9. parnassi}
\par
48 Peduncles (10-)50-150 mm; corolla 7-12 mm; calyx-teeth 
\par
   lanceolate to subulate
\par
49 Calyx-tube as wide as long, somewhat inflated in fruit;  
\par
   corolla 6-10 mm .............................................................................. {\b 13. thalii}
\par

\par
158}
\par