{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28\qc {\b 56.                 Medicago}                    L.
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc By †T.G. Tutin.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Annual or perennial herbs or small shrubs. Leaves 3-foliolate, stipulate. Flowers in axillary pedunculate racemes. Calyx campanulate, with 5 nearly equal teeth; corolla caducous; stamens diadelphous; filaments filiform. Legume longer than the calyx, nearly always indehiscent, usually spirally coiled, sometimes falcate, reniform or almost straight, often spiny. Seeds 1-several.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  All the annual species grow in more or less open habitats, such as sea-shores, roadsides, cultivated fields or grassy places.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Literature: R. Nègre, {\i  Trav. Inst. Sci. Chérif.} ser. bot.,{\b  5}: 1-119 (1956);{\i   Bull. Soc. Hist. Nat. Afr. Nord} {\b 50}: 267-314 (1959). S. J. van Ooststroom & Th. Reichgelt, {\i  Acta Bot. Neerl.}{\b  7}: 90-123 (1958). I. Urban, {\i  Verh. Bot. Ver. Brandenb.}{\b  15}: 1-85 (1873). C. C. Heyn, {\i  Scripta Acad. Hierosol.}{\b  12} (1963).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Margin of legume with one longitudinal vein, with which the 
\par
  transverse veins join, sometimes running into spines, without
\par
  a strong submarginal vein close to the marginal one 
\par
2 Legume ± falcate or reniform
\par
3 Legume up to 3 mm, reniform; seed solitary
\par
4 Racemes 10- to 50-flowered; transverse veins of legume slightly 
\par
  anastomosing, forming an elongated network .............................. {\b 1. lupulina}
\par
4 Racemes 3- to 10-flowered; transverse veins of legume freely 
\par
  anastomosing, forming a ± isodiametric network .................. {\b 2. secundiflora}
\par
3 Legume more than 3 mm, ± falcate; seeds usually several
\par
5 Pedicels erect in fruit ....................................................................... {\b 5. sativa}
\par
5 Pedicels deflexed in fruit
\par
6 Stipules dentate; legume with transverse veins anastomosing freely
\par
  ........................................................................................................ {\b 3. hybrida}
\par
6 Stipules entire; legume with transverse veins scarcely
\par
   anastomosing ................................................................................ {\b 4. cretacea}
\par
2 Legume spirally coiled
\par
7 Perennials with a stout, woody stock
\par
8 Shrub 100-400 cm ....................................................................... {\b 11. arborea}
\par
8 Herbs less than 100 cm
\par
9 Pedicels erect in fruit
\par
10 Legume with long, slender spines ......................................... {\b 13. carstiensis}
\par
10 Legume not spiny
\par
11 Leaflets obovate to almost linear, long-cuneate at base; corolla 
\par
   (5-)6-11 mm ..................................................................................... {\b 5. sativa}
\par
11 Leaflets broadly obovate, shortly cuneate at base; 
\par
   corolla 3-6 mm ...................................................................... {\b 10. suffruticosa}
\par
9  Pedicels recurved or deflexed in fruit 
\par
12 Transverse veins of legume thick, anastomosing to form a 
\par
   conspicuous intermediate vein parallel to the marginal
\par
13 Leaflets narrowly linear; legume convex at apex ...................... {\b 8. saxatilis}
\par
13 Leaflets obovate-cuneate to oblong-cuneate; 
\par
   legume flat at apex .................................................................... {\b 9. cancellata}
\par
12 Transverse veins of legume thin, sometimes indistinct, not forming 
\par
   an intermediate vein parallel to the marginal
\par
14 Pedicels 2-2½ times as long as calyx in fruit; transverse veins of 
\par
   legume anastomosing freely, strongly curved ............................. {\b 6. prostrata}
\par
14 Pedicels about as long as calyx in fruit; transverse veins of 
\par
   legume scarcely anastomosing, nearly straight ........................... {\b 7. rupestris}
\par
7  Annuals
\par
15 Margin of legume with distinct (usually long) spines
\par
16 Legume pubescent and glandular ............................................... {\b 15. ciliaris}
\par
16 Legume glabrous (except sometimes for the spines) and
\par
    eglandular ................................................................................ {\b 14. intertexta}
\par
15 Margin of legume without spines, occasionally with small rounded 
\par
   projections
\par
17 Legume strongly pelviform .................................................... {\b 16. scutellata}
\par
17 Legume flat or convex at the ends
\par
18 Transverse veins of legume anastomosing abundantly ........... {\b 19. soleirolii}
\par
18 Transverse veins of legume scarcely anastomosing
\par
19 Transverse veins of legume not becoming thickened towards 
\par
  the thin  margin ........................................................................ {\b 12. orbicularis}
\par
19 Transverse veins of legume becoming thickened towards the thick 
\par
   marginal vein ................................................................................ {\b 18. rugosa}
\par
1  Legume with a strong submarginal vein, or with a wide veinless 
\par
   border 
\par
20 White-tomentose perennial; legume with a distinct hole through 
\par
   the centre ...................................................................................... {\b 21. marina}
\par
20 Annuals or nearly glabrous perennials; legume without a hole 
\par
   through the centre
\par
21 Submarginal vein of legume connected to the marginal vein by 
\par
   cross-veins which form a regular subquadrate network ........ {\b 17. blancheana}
\par
21 Legume without cross-veins connecting the submarginal and marginal 
\par
   veins
\par
22 Legume in a lax spiral, the young legume projecting from the calyx 
\par
   as soon as the petals have fallen
\par
23 Legume without apparent transverse veins or with a veinless border 
\par
   1/4-1/3 as wide as the radius of the spiral
\par
24 Legume discoid with no apparent transverse veins; upper turn of 
\par
   spiral without spines, much smaller than the other spiny ones
\par
   ................................................................................................ {\b 35. disciformis}
\par
24 Legume shortly cylindrical, with a wide veinless border; upper 
\par
   turn of spiral spiny, about the same size as the others ............. {\b 36. tenoreana}
\par
23 Legume with prominent transverse veins and no wide veinless border
\par
25 Margin of legume wide, flat, with 2 rows of spines, one upward- 
\par
   and one downward-pointing, parallel to the legume ................. {\b 34. coronata}
\par
25 Margin of legume keeled or rounded; spines usually patent
\par
26 Leaflets nearly always with a dark spot; marginal vein of legume 
\par
   sulcate and margin therefore with 3 conspicuous grooves .......... {\b 30. arabica}
\par
26 Leaflets never with a dark spot; marginal vein of legume not 
\par
   sulcate
\par
27 Groove between the submarginal and marginal veins of the legume 
\par
   very wide, visible when the legume is viewed from the edge
\par
28 Legume discoid to shortly cylindrical, usually glabrous or nearly 
\par
   so; transverse veins curved but not sigmoid, anastomosing freely    
\par
   ............................................................................................... {\b 31. polymorpha}
\par
28 Legume subglobose, sparsely villous and often glandular;
\par
    transverse veins sigmoid, not anastomosing .............................. {\b 37. minima}
\par
27 Groove between the submarginal and marginal veins narrow, not 
\par
   visible when the legume is viewed from the edge
\par
29 Leaflets usually incise-dentate or almost pinnatifid; transverse 
\par
   veins of legume sigmoid, sparingly branched, not anastomosing 
\par
   .................................................................................................... {\b 33. laciniata}
\par
29 Leaflets dentate near the apex; transverse veins of legume strongly 
\par
   curved but not sigmoid, anastomosing freely near the submarginal
\par
   vein ............................................................................................. {\b 32. praecox}
\par
22 Legume in a very close spiral, the young legume concealed within 
\par
   the calyx when the petals fall 
\par
30 Legume with a veinless border 1/4-1/3 as wide as the radius of the 
\par
   spiral
\par
31 Legume usually in a left-handed spiral; margin with 1 keel; 
\par
   spines usually short, obtuse ....................................................... {\b 28. turbinata}
\par
31 Legume always in a right-handed spiral; margin with 3 keels; 
\par
   spines usually long, acute .............................................................. {\b 29. murex}
\par
30 Legume without a wide veinless border
\par
32 Legume densely glandular-pubescent
\par

\par
153}
\par