{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 which the spines, if present, arise; spines conical, usually short, but up to ½ as long as the diameter of the legume, patent, straight or uncinate.{\i   W. Mediterranean region extending to Portugal.} Co Hs It Lu Sa Si.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 21. M. marina} L., {\i  Sp. Pl.} 779 (1753). Procumbent, white-tomentose, densely leafy perennial 20-50 cm. Leaflets obovate, cuneate at base, denticulate at apex; stipules ovate, acuminate, entire or toothed. Racemes almost capitate, 5- to 12-flowered. Corolla 6-8 mm. Legume 5-7 mm, in a spiral of 2-3 turns with a small hole through the middle, cylindrical, densely white-tomentose; submarginal and marginal veins thick, with two rows of short, conical spines.{\i   Maritime sands. Shores of the Mediterranean Black Sea and Atlantic to} c. 48°{\i   N}. Al Bl Bu Co Cr Ga Gr Hs It Ju Lu Rm Rs (K) Sa Si ?Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 22. M. truncatula} Gaertner, {\i  Fruct. Sem. Pl.}{\b  2}: 350 (1791) ({\i  M. tribuloides} Desr.). Sparsely villous annual up to 50 cm. Leaflets obovate or obcordate, cuneate, denticulate near the apex; stipules ovate-lanceolate to narrowly lanceolate, incise-dentate to laciniate in the lower half. Racemes 1- to 3(-5)flowered. Corolla 5-6 mm. Legume 5-8 mm in diameter, in a spiral of 3-6 turns, cylindrical, nearly always sparsely villous, spiny; transverse veins scarcely anastomosing, joining a very thick submarginal vein separated from the slender but distinct marginal vein by the groove; spines up to more than half as long as the diameter of the legume, curved or uncinate, each arising partly from the marginal and partly from the submarginal vein.{\i   Mediterranean region extending to Portugal and W. France.} Bl Co Cr Ga Gr Hs It Ju Lu Sa Si ?Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 23. M. rigidula} (L.) All.,{\i   Fl. Pedem.}{\b  1}: 316 (1785) ({\i  M. gerardii} Waldst. & Kit. ex Willd.,{\i   M. agrestis }Ten. ex DC.). Like {\b 22} but corolla 6-7 mm; legume in a spiral of 4-7 turns, discoid to cylindrical, nearly always densely glandular-pubescent, rarely glabrescent, nearly always spiny; transverse veins strongly curved, scarcely anastomosing; submarginal veins at first separated from the marginal vein by a shallow groove, becoming confluent with it and forming a convex margin when fully ripe; spines usually about half as long as the diameter of the legume, somewhat curved, uncinate. 2n = 14, 16.{\i   S. Europe.} Al Bl Bu Co Cr Ga Gr Hs It Ju Lu Rm Rs (W, E) Sa Si ?Tu [Cz Hu].
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 24. M. pironae} Vis.,{\i   Linnaea}{\b  28}: 365 (1857). Nearly glabrous perennial 20-40 cm. Leaflets obovate to obcordate, cuneate denticulate near apex; stipules ovate, entire or incise-dentate. Racemes 2- to 6-flowered. Corolla 7-8 mm. Legume 5-7 mm in diameter, in a spiral of 3-4 turns, shortly cylindrical, glandular-pubescent, spiny; transverse veins anastomosing and forming an irregular network; marginal and submarginal veins forming a convex margin; spines short, flattened and sulcate at base. 2n = 16.{\i   Rocky places. N.E. Italy}. It.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 25. M. littoralis} Rohde ex Loisel.,{\i   Not. Pl. Fr.} 118 (1810). Sparsely villous annual up to 40(-110) cm. Leaflets obovate or obcordate, cuneate, dentate towards the apex; stipules lanceolate, incise-dentate. Racemes 1- to 6-flowered. Corolla 5-6 mm. Legume 4-6 mm in diameter, in a spiral of 3-6 turns, discoid to cylindrical, glabrous, spiny or not; transverse veins nearly straight, scarcely anastomosing except near the submarginal vein; submarginal vein at first separated from the marginal vein by a shallow groove, becoming confluent with it and forming a keeled margin when fully ripe; spines varying from short and conical to half as long as the diameter of the legume, arising from the submarginal vein. {\i  Mediterranean region extending to Portugal and W. France.} Al Bl Bu Co Cr Ga Gr Hs It Ju Lu Sa Si.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 26. M. aculeata} Gaertner,{\i   Fruct. Sem. Pl.}{\b  2}: 349 (1791) ({\i  M. turbinata }Willd., non (L.) All.). Like {\b 25} but stipules ovate-lanceolate; legume 7-10 mm in diameter, in a spiral of 5-7 turns, globose to ellipsoid, with dense, short, sometimes glandular hairs, sometimes glabrescent, spiny or not; transverse veins somewhat curved; spines usually conical, straight or curved.{\i   Mediterranean region, extending to Portugal and Bulgaria.} Al ?Bl Bu Co Cr Ga Gr Hs It Ju Lu Sa Si.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 27. M. globosa} C. Presl in J. & C. Presl,{\i   Del. Prag. }45 (1822). Like {\b 25} but transverse veins strongly curved, joining the submarginal vein at a very acute angle; spines sulcate at base.{\i   Aegean region and perhaps Sicilia.} Bu Cr Gr ?Si.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 28. M. turbinata} (L.) All.,{\i   Fl. Pedem.}{\b  1}: 315 (1785) ({\i  M. tuberculata }(Retz.) Willd.). Sparsely villous annual up to 50 cm. Leaflets obovate, cuneate, dentate near the apex; stipules lanceolate to ovate-lanceolate, dentate to incise-dentate. Racemes 1- to 8-flowered. Corolla 5-6 mm. Legume 5-7 mm in diameter, in a spiral of 5-6 turns, cylindrical or somewhat conical, glabrous, spiny; transverse veins slender, curved, not or very rarely anastomosing, ending at a veinless border 1/4-1/3 as wide as the radius of the spiral; marginal vein forming a keel; spines usually short, broad, obtuse, rarely acute and up to 1/2 as long as the diameter of the legume.{\i   Mediterranean region, extending to Portugal and Bulgaria}. Bl Bu Co Cr Ga Gr Hs It Ju Lu Sa Si.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 29. M. murex} Willd., {\i  Sp. Pl. }{\b 3}: 1410 (1802) ({\i  M. sphaerocarpos} Bertol.). Like {\b 28} but leaflets obcordate or obtriangular; corolla 4-5 mm; legume 5-9 mm in diameter, in a spiral of 5-9 turns sometimes not spiny; submarginal and marginal veins distinct forming 3 keels; spines usually longer and less conical.{\i   Mediterranean region extending to Portugal.} Bl Co Cr Ga Gr Hs It Ju Lu Sa Si ?Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 30. M. arabica} (L.) Hudson,{\i   Fl. Angl.} 288 (1762) ({\i  M. maculata} Sibth.). Sparsely pubescent to glabrous annual up to 50 cm. Leaflets usually obcordate, cuneate, dentate near the apex usually with a dark spot. Racemes 1- to 4(-6)-flowered. Corolla 5-7 mm. Legume (4-)5-6 mm in diameter, in a lax spiral of 4-7 turns, subglobose to shortly ellipsoid, somewhat flattened at both ends, glabrous, usually spiny; transverse veins curved, anastomosing and forming a tangentially elongated network near the margin; margin with 3 grooves, the lateral deeper and wider than the central; spines usually ½-¾ as long as the diameter of the legume, deeply sulcate.{\i   S. Europe extending north-westwards to Britain and the Netherlands and eastwards to Krym; a frequent casual further north}. Al Be Bl Br Bu Co Ga Ge Gr Ho Hs Hu It Ju Lu Rm Rs (K) Sa Si ?Tu [Cz Hb He Su].
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   {\b 31. M. polymorpha} L., {\i  Sp. Pl.} 779 (1753) ({\i  M. denticulata} Willd., {\i  M. hispida} Gaertner,{\i   M. lappacea} Desr., {\i  M. nigra} (L.) Krocker {\i  M. polycarpa} Willd.). Glabrous or pubescent annual up to 40 cm. Leaflets obovate to obcordate, cuneate, dentate near the apex; stipules lanceolate to ovate-lanceolate, laciniate. Racemes 1- to 5(-8)-flowered. Corolla 3-4·5 mm. Legume 4-8(-10) mm in diameter, in a lax spiral of 1½-6 turns, usually glabrous and spiny; transverse veins strong, anastomosing freely, at least near the submarginal vein; submarginal vein conspicuous, separated from the marginal vein by a deep groove, the margin consequently with 3 keels separated by 2 grooves; spines absent or up to more than the diameter of the legume in length, each arising from both the submarginal and marginal veins and therefore deeply sulcate. 2n = 14.{\i   S. Europe, extending northwards to Britain and eastwards to Krym; a frequent casual further north.} Al Au Az Bl Br Bu Co Cr Ga Ge Gr Hs It Ju Lu Rm Rs (K) Sa Si ?Tu [Be Cz He Ho Hu].
\par

\par
156}
\par