{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}
\pard\f0\fs28 transverse veins scarcely anastomosing, nearly straight.{\i   Rocky places. Krym.} Rs (K).
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 8. M. saxatilis} Bieb.,{\i   Fl. Taur.-Cauc.}{\b  2}: 225 (1808) ({\i  M. rhodopea} Velen.). Like {\b 7} but legume in a spiral of 3-4 turns, convex at apex, transverse veins thick, conspicuous, anastomosing to form a prominent intermediate vein parallel to the margin; margin with a few, small straight spines.{\i   Rocky places. Bulgaria and Krym.} Bu Rs (K).
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 9. M. cancellata} Bieb.,{\i   Fl. Taur.-Cauc.}{\b  2}: 226 (1808). Like {\b 7} but leaflets obovate-cuneate; legume in a spiral of 2-3 turns, flat at apex, pendent, not spiny; transverse veins forming a regular network and a prominent intermediate vein parallel to the margin.{\i   Steppe. S.E. Russia.} Rs 
\par(E).
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 10. M. suffruticosa} Ramond ex DC. in Lam. & DC.,{\i   Fl. Fr}. ed. 3, {\b 4}: 541 (1805). Perennial 5-35 cm. Leaflets obovate or obcordate, cuneate at base, denticulate; stipules semi-ovate-lanceolate, dentate. Racemes 3- to 8-flowered. Corolla 3-6 mm. Legume 4-6 mm in diameter, in a spiral of 2-4 turns, not spiny, with a small hole in the middle.{\i   Rocky places. S. France and E. Spain.} Ga Hs.
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b suffruticosa}: More or less densely pubescent; stipules acuminate; peduncle equalling or slightly longer than the subtending leaf; corolla c. 6 mm; legume with a thin margin. •{\i   Corbières, Pyrenees.} 
\par
\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b leiocarpa} (Bentham) P. Fourn.,{\i   Quatre Fl. Fr.} 544 (1936): Glabrous or nearly so; stipules not acuminate; peduncle longer than the subtending leaf; corolla c. 3 mm; legume with a thickened margin. •{\i   Languedoc, E. Pyrenees to Valencia}.
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 11. M. arborea} L., {\i  Sp. Pl.} 778 (1753). Sericeous shrub 100-400 cm. Leaflets obovate, cuneate at base, entire or denticulate at apex; stipules lanceolate, entire. Racemes very short, almost capitate, 4- to 8-flowered. Corolla 12-15 mm. Legume 12-15 mm in diameter, in a spiral of 1-11/2 turns, not spiny, reticulately veined, with a hole through the centre.{\i   Rocky places. S. Mediterranean region.} Al Bl Cr Gr Hs It Sa Si [Ga Lu].
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 12. M. orbicularis} (L.) Bartal.,{\i   Cat. Piante Siena} 60 (1776). Glabrous or sparsely hairy, procumbent annual 20-90 cm. Leaflets obovate-cuneate, dentate at the apex or in the upper 2/3; stipules laciniate. Racemes 1- to 5-flowered. Corolla 2-5 mm. Legume 10-17(-20) mm in diameter, in a spiral of 4-6 turns, lenticular, convex on both faces, glabrous or somewhat glandular-pubescent, not spiny; transverse veins with a few, usually weak anastomosing branches. 2n = 16.{\i   S. Europe.} Al Bl Bu Co Cr Ga Gr Hs It Ju Lu Rm Rs (K) Sa Si [Hu].
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 13. M. carstiensis} Jacq.,{\i   Collect. Bot. }{\b 1}: 86 (1787). Nearly or quite glabrous perennial up to 60 cm. Leaflets obovate or elliptical, denticulate; stipules ovate-lanceolate or lanceolate, laciniate or dentate. Racemes (1-)5- to 12(-20)-flowered. Corolla 6-8 mm. Legume 6-8 mm in diameter, in a spiral of 5-8 turns, shortly cylindrical, flat at both ends, glabrous; transverse veins few, strong, scarcely anastomosing; margin thickened, with nearly straight, rather slender spines, half as long to as long as the diameter of the legume.{\i   Bushy places. • From N.E. Italy and S.E. Austria to Bulgaria. }Al Au Bu It Ju.
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 14. M. intertexta} (L.) Miller,{\i   Gard. Dict.} ed. 8, no. 4 (1768). Nearly glabrous procumbent or ascending annual up to 50 cm. Leaflets obovate, cuneate, denticulate, sometimes with a dark spot; stipules ovate to ovate-lanceolate, incise-dentate. Racemes 1- to 7(-10)-flowered. Corolla 6-9 mm. Legume 12-15 mm in diameter, in a spiral of (3-)6-10 turns, ovoid, cylindrical or rarely discoid, convex at both ends, glabrous except often for the spines; transverse veins strong, anastomosing and forming a tangentially elongated network; spines usually 3-4 mm, curved and appressed to the legume.{\i   Mediterranean region and Portugal.} Gr Hs It Lu Sa Si [Ga].
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28   {\b  M. granadensis} Willd., {\i  Enum. Pl. Hort. Berol.} 803 (1809), from S. Spain (near Málaga), appears to be a variant of {\b 14} with discoid fruits.
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 15. M. ciliaris} (L.) All., {\i  Fl. Pedem. }{\b 1}: 315 (1785). Like {\b 14} but legume villous, with glandular hairs; spines usually shorter, less appressed, straight except for the more or less curved apices.{\i   Mediterranean region extending to Portugal.} Bl Co Ga Gr Hs It Lu Sa Si.
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 16. M. scutellata} (L.) Miller, {\i  Gard. Dict.} ed. 8, no. 2 (1768). More or less densely glandular-pubescent annual 20-60 cm. Leaflets obovate to elliptical, cuneate, dentate in the upper part; stipules ovate-lanceolate to lanceolate, incise-dentate. Racemes 1- to 3-flowered. Corolla 6-7 mm. Legume 9-18 mm in diameter, in a spiral of 4-8 pelviform, imbricate turns, glandular-pubescent, not spiny; transverse veins numerous, conspicuous, freely anastomosing and joining the strong marginal vein.{\i   S. Europe.} Bl Co Cr Ga Gr Hs It Ju Lu Rs (W, K) Sa Si [Au].
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28 Subgen.{\b  Cymatium} (Pospichal) Gams. Legume with a submarginal vein parallel with and close to the marginal vein; margin of legume usually thick.
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28     {\b 17. M. blancheana} Boiss.,{\i   Diagn. Pl. Or. Nov.}{\b  3}({\b 5}): 75 (1856). Pubescent annual up to 60 cm. Leaflets obovate or elliptical, cuneate, dentate to deeply incise-dentate at base. Racemes 1- to 3-flowered. Corolla 7-9 mm. Legume 8-12 mm in diameter, in a spiral of 4-6 turns, lenticular to globose, glabrous to more or less pubescent, not spiny; transverse veins strong, with abundant, weaker anastomosing branches forming a strong subquadrate network joining the submarginal and marginal veins.{\i   Naturalized in Italy and C. & S. Portugal, a casual elsewhere in Europe.} [It Lu.] ({\i  Asia Minor}.)
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 18. M. rugosa} Desr. in Lam.,{\i   Encycl. Méth. Bot.}{\b  3}: 632 (1792) ({\i  M. elegans} Jacq. ex Willd.). Glandular-pubescent annual 10-50 cm. Leaflets obovate, cuneate, dentate in the upper part; stipules lanceolate, incise-dentate. Racemes 1- to 5-flowered. Corolla 2-4 mm. Legume 6-10 mm in diameter, in a spiral of 2-3 turns, discoid, glabrescent, not spiny; transverse veins scarcely anastomosing, becoming strongly thickened towards the strong marginal vein.{\i   C. & E. Mediterranean region, local.} Cr Gr It Sa Si [?Co Ga ?Hs Lu].
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 19. M. soleirolii} Duby,{\i   Bot. Gall.}{\b  1}: 124 (1828). Like {\b 18} but stipules laciniate; corolla 8-9 mm; legume 5-7 mm in diameter; transverse veins with abundant anastomosing branches, not becoming thicker towards the marginal vein.{\i   Krym; probably introduced in Italy, S. France and Corse.} *Co *Ga *It Rs (K).
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 20. M. tornata} (L.) Miller, {\i  Gard. Dict.} ed. 8, no. 3 (1768). More or less patent-pubescent annual up to 60 cm. Leaflets obovate, cuneate, dentate near the apex; stipules lanceolate, dentate to laciniate near the base. Racemes 1- to 10-flowered. Corolla 5-7 mm. Legume 5-8 mm in diameter, in a spiral of 11/4-8 turns, lenticular to cylindrical, flat at both ends, glabrous, spiny or not; transverse veins scarcely anastomosing except near the marginal vein, where they form a submarginal vein from
\par
\par 155}
\par