{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 Boiss.), both from Kriti, may merit subspecific rank. The former has obovate leaflets; hairy stems, petioles, stipules and bracts; smaller heads and calyx entirely densely villous-lanate; the latter has the calyx completely glabrous or with a few scattered hairs.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 29. T. fragiferum} L.,{\i   Sp. Pl.} 772 (1753). Usually more or less hairy perennial; stems (2-)10-30(-40) cm, several, procumbent, often rooting at the nodes, rarely caespitose with stems short and not rooting. Leaflets (3-)8-20 mm; ovate, elliptical or obcordate Stipules lanceolate-subulate, membranous. Heads 10-14 mm wide, hemispherical in flower, 10-22(-35) mm, globose, ellipsoid or irregularly cylindrical in fruit; peduncles up to 200 mm, often hairy, exceeding the leaves. Bracts 3-4 mm, whorled, the lowest ones united below, forming a deeply dissected, irregular involucre. Upper lip of calyx-tube greatly inflated in fruit; corolla 6-7 mm, pale pink. Legume included, 1- to 2-seeded.{\i   Almost throughout Europe northwards to} 60° 30' {\i  N.} All except Az Fa Is Rs (N) Sb.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b fragiferum}: Heads 10-22 mm in fruit, globose. Calyx 4-4·5 mm in flower, with teeth longer than the tube, 8-10 mm in fruit, concealing all or most of the persistent corolla. 2n = 16.{\i   Probably throughout the range of the species, but possibly absent from much of S. Europe.} 
\par

\pard\f0\fs28    ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b bonannii} (C. Presl) Sojak,{\i   Nov. Bot. Horti Bot. Univ. Carol. Prag.}{\b  1963}: 50 (1963) ({\i  T. neglectum} C. A. Meyer): Heads (10-)15-25(-35) mm in fruit, subglobose to irregularly cylindrical; calyx 3·5-4 mm in flower, the teeth not longer than the tube, 4-6 mm in fruit, the corolla exserted by 2-2·5 mm.{\i   Mainly in the south but extending northwards to Poland and S. England}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Much of the variation in habit, size and indumentum is phenotypic. Plants from dry places in the Mediterranean region approach {\b 28} in habit but are readily distinguished by their characteristic involucral bracts.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 30. T. resupinatum} L.,{\i   Sp. Pl.} 771 (1753). Glabrous annual; stems 10-30(-60) cm, procumbent, ascending or erect. Leaflets 7-20 mm, obovate-cuneate. Bracts minute, united at the base. Flowers resupinate, scented or scentless. Heads in fruit 8-20(-25) mm, globose, stellate; peduncles shorter than to twice as long as the leaves. Calyx 5-10 mm in fruit, pyriform, sparsely pubescent to tomentose, glabrescent, crowned by the two divergent upper calyx-teeth; corolla 2-8 mm, pink, rarely reddish-purple.{\i   Grassy places or disturbed, usually damp ground; sometimes cultivated. Doubtfully native in S. Europe; frequently introduced in W. & C. Europe.} *Az *Al *Be *Bl Bu *Co *Cr *Ga *Gr *Hs *It *Ju *Lu *Rm *Rs (K) *Sa *Si *Tu [Au Be Br Cz Ge He Ho Hu].
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Very variable in habit and the size of its parts. Var.{\i   majus} Boiss. ({\i  T. suaveolens }Willd.), with tall, fistulose stems; peduncles twice as long as the leaves; flowers strongly scented; fruiting heads 20 mm or more and corolla 7-8 mm is anciently cultivated for fodder. It is naturalized in Portugal and probably also in the Mediterranean region.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 31. T. tomentosum} L.,{\i   Sp. Pl.} 771 (1753). Like {\b 30} but caespitose; stems not more than 15 cm, usually procumbent; fruiting heads 7-11(-14) mm, subsessile; upper lip of calyx almost spherical in fruit, lanate, its two teeth short and usually concealed.{\i   Dry places. Mediterranean region, Portugal, Açores.} Al Az Bl Co Cr Ga Gr Hs It Ju Lu Sa Si Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Sect. CHRONOSEMIUM Ser. Leaves often pinnately 3-foliolate. Bracts represented by a few, short, red glandular hairs. Calyx 5-veined, upper teeth shorter than the lower. Corolla eventually darkening, persistent and scarious. Legume stalked, slightly exceeding calyx, 1(-2)-seeded.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 32. T. badium} Schreber in Sturm, {\i  Deutschl. Fl.} Abt. 1, Band 4, Heft 16 (1804). Perennial with a massive tap-root. Stems 10-25 cm, many, ascending, appressed-hairy or glabrescent. Uppermost leaves more or less opposite; leaflets 10-20 mm, sessile or with short petiolules, elliptical, rhombic or deltate. Stipules 10-15 mm, ovate-lanceolate. Heads up to 25 mm in fruit; pedicels about as long as the calyx-tube. Corolla 7-9 mm, golden-yellow, becoming bright chestnut-brown after anthesis; standard cochleate, sulcate. Legume less than twice as long as the style.{\i   Usually calcicole. • Mountains of C. & S. Europe.} Al Au Bu Cz Ga Ge He Hs It Ju Po Rm.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 33. T. spadiceum} L.,{\i   Fl. Suec.} ed. 2, 261 (1755). Annual or biennial; stems 20-40 cm, slender, erect, little-branched, glabrescent. Uppermost leaves more or less opposite; leaflets up to 20 mm, all sessile, those of the upper leaves oblong; petioles exceeding the oblong-lanceolate stipules. Heads up to 20 mm in fruit, dense, cylindrical, pseudoterminal, often in pairs; peduncles erect; pedicels much shorter than the calyx-tube. Corolla c. 6 mm, golden-yellow, becoming very dark brown after anthesis; standard sulcate. Legume about 4 times as long as the style. {\i  Grassy places; calcifuge. N., C. & E. Europe, extending westwards to N. Spain}. Au Bu Cz Fe Ga Ge He Hs It Ju No Po Rm Rs (N, B, C, W) Su.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 34. T. speciosum} Willd.,{\i   Sp. Pl.} 3: 1382 (1802) (incl.{\i   T. violaceum} Davidov). Annual; stems 10-30 cm, with appressed or patent hairs, erect. Leaflets 10-18(-24) mm, oblong-elliptical, glabrous or hairy, the terminal petiolulate. Stipules semi-ovate or oblong. Heads up to 30 mm in fruit, ovoid, lax; peduncles 2-3 times as long as the leaves; pedicels c. 1 mm, about as long as the upper limb of the calyx-tube. Upper calyx-teeth equalling or shorter than the upper limb of the calyx-tube; lower calyx-teeth 2-3 times longer than the upper. Corolla 8-10 mm, violet.{\i   Mediterranean region from Sicilia eastwards.} Al Bu Cr Gr It Ju Si Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 35. T. boissieri} Guss. ex Boiss.,{\i   Fl. Or.}{\b  2}: 152 (1872). Like {\b 34} but hairs patent; peduncles shorter than or equalling the leaves; pedicels 1-2 mm, longer than the upper limb of the calyx-tube; corolla pale yellow; standard narrower, more or less folded longitudinally over the legume.{\i   Greece and Aegean region.} Cr Gr.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 36. T. lagrangei} Boiss.,{\i   Fl. Or.}{\b  2}: 154 (1872). Annual; stems erect or ascending, appressed-hairy. Leaflets 7-14 mm, obovate or ovate, the terminal petiolulate. Heads 8-15 mm, subglobose, dense; peduncles equalling or shorter than the leaves; pedicels about ½ as long as the calyx-tube. Upper calyx-teeth shorter than the tube, the lower ones subulate, twice as long as the tube; corolla 4-6 mm, violet-red; standard 3 times as long as the calyx.{\i   Rocky places. Aegean region.} Cr Gr.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 37. T. brutium} Ten., {\i  Viagg. Calabr.} 126 (1827). Annual; stems 5-20 cm, hairy, ascending. Leaflets 8-10 mm, obovate-cuneate, truncate or emarginate, the terminal leaflet of the upper leaves with a short petiolule (up to 1·5 mm) or subsessile. Stipules semicordate-ovate, often auriculate. Heads 15-20 mm in fruit, subglobose to ovoid; peduncles 30-50 mm, 2-4 times as long as the leaves; pedicels up to 0·5 mm, shorter than the upper limb of the calyx-tube. Upper calyx-teeth shorter than the upper limb of the calyx-tube; lower calyx-teeth more or less equalling the lower limb of the calyx-tube. Corolla 7-8 mm, yellow before anthesis, limb of standard broadly obovate, sulcate. Legume scarcely longer than the style. •{\i   S. Italy.} It.
\par

\par
165}
\par