{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 glands and a few acicles; prickles patent, mostly straight, subulate and strong. Sepals tomentose, pubescent, sometimes gland-dotted, aculeolate or unarmed; petals large, suborbicular, pale pink to red; stamens white or pale pink, exceeding the green or reddish styles; receptacle glabrescent; carpels sparsely pubescent. {\i W. & C. Europe}. Au Be Br Cz Ga Ge He Ho Hs Hu It Ju Lu Po Rm Rs (W).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Related species include:
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b R. banaticus }E. I. Nyárády in Savul., {\i Fl. Rep. Pop. Române}{\b  4}: 890 (1956). Rm.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b R. cuspidifer }P. J. Mueller & Lefevre,{\i  Pollichia }{\b 16-17}: 89 (1859). 2n = 28. Be Br Ga He Lu Rm. 
\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b  R. gillotii} Boulay ex Coste,{\i  Fl. Fr.}{\b  2}: 39 (1901). Ga.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b R. hedycarpus} Focke,{\i  Syn. Rub. Germ.} 190 (1877) ({\i R. praecox} Bertol.). Bu Cz Ga.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b R. istricus }Pospichal,{\i  Fl. Österr. Küstenl.}{\b  2}: 273 (1898). Ju.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b  R. margaritae} Gáyer,{\i  Magyar Bot. Lapok}{\b  20}: 13 (1921). Rm.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b R. trifoliatus} Pospichal,{\i  Fl. Österr. Küstenl.}{\b  2}: 270 (1898). Ju. . 
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 41. R. discolor} Weihe & Nees,{\i  Rubi Germ.} 30 (1824) ({\i R. procerus }P. J. Mueller, {\i R. armeniacus} Focke, {\i R. karstianus} Borbás, {\i R. macrostemon }Focke, {\i R. praecox} subsp. {\i macrostemon} (Focke) Hayek). Stems tall, robust, light brown to purple, arching, angled, sparsely hairy at first, glabrescent, glaucescent; prickles sparse, strong, broad-based, straight or falcate. Leaflets 5, large, glabrescent above, white-tomentose or pubescent beneath; terminal leaflet ovate or suborbicular, shortly acuminate, twice as long as its petiolule, truncate at base; basal leaflets shortly petiolulate; stipules with sparse sessile glands. Inflorescence large, pyramidal-truncate, lax, floriferous, leafy, the axis villous, with numerous falcate or geniculate prickles; flowers c. 3 cm in diameter. Sepals deflexed after flowering, tomentose, hairy, unarmed; petals ovate to orbicular, pale pink or white; stamens white or pale pink, much exceeding the green styles; anthers pubescent; pollen sterile; carpels slightly pubescent, receptacle pubescent. Fruit very large.{\i  S., W. & C. Europe}. Au Be Bu Cz Ga Ge He Ho Hu It Ju Lu Rm Tu [Br Da].
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   A vigorous variant (the so-called Himalayan blackberry) is often cultivated in gardens and more or less naturalized.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Related species include:
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b  R. geniculatus} Kaltenb., {\i Fl. Aachen. Beck. }{\b 2}: 267 (1844). Be Br Cz Ga Ge He Ho Rm.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b  R. hebetatus} Sudre, {\i Bull. Soc. Etud. Sci. Angers}{\b  31}: 83 (1902). Au Ga Hs.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 42. R. chloocladus} W. C. R. Watson,{\i  Watsonia }{\b 3}: 288 (1956) ({\i R. pubescens }Weihe ex Boenn., non Rafin.). Stems arching, somewhat sulcate, sparsely and minutely tomentose and with longer hairs, becoming purple, sometimes pruinose; prickles robust, deflexed or strongly curved. Leaflets 5, slightly hairy above, pubescent and grey-white tomentose beneath; terminal leaflet ovate to elliptical, 2-3 times as long as its petiolule; basal leaflets shortly petiolulate; stipules filiform, with subsessile glands. Inflorescence elongated and narrow, almost leafless, tomentose; prickles long-based and falcate. Sepals deflexed after flowering, white-tomentose, hairy, unarmed; petals ovate or obovate, white or pink; stamens white, exceeding the green styles; receptacle and carpels hairy. {\i W. & C. Europe.} Au Be Br Cz Ga Ge He Ho Hs Hu Ju Lu Po Rm.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Related species include:
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b  R. evagatus }Sudre, {\i Bull. Assoc. Pyr. }{\b 12}: 10 (1902). Au Ga. 
\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b  R. vestii} Focke, {\i Syn. Rub. Germ. }155 (1877). Au Hu It Rm.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 43. R. candicans} Weihe ex Reichenb.,{\i  Fl. Germ. Excurs.} 601 (1832) ({\i R. thyrsoideus} Wimmer pro parte,{\i  R. coarctatus} P. J. Mueller). Stems high-arching, not very woody, sulcate, not pruinose, glabrous or with a few hairs; prickles rather few but very long-based, some falcate. Leaves digitate; leaflets 5, glabrous above, white-tomentose and hairy beneath; terminal leaflet variable in shape, unevenly dentate; lower leaflets subsessile; stipules linear. Inflorescence broad and long, dense, leafy, often with few prickles above, with elongated, ascending peduncles. Sepals deflexed after flowering, tomentose, hairy; petals rather small, obovate to oblong, white to deep pink; stamens rather few, slightly exceeding the green styles; carpels glabrous to hairy; receptacle hairy; pollen and fruit sometimes largely sterile. 2n = 21.{\i  S., W. & C. Europe}. Au Be Bl Bu Cz Ga Ge Gr Hb He Ho Hs Hu It Ju Lu Po Rm Rs (K) Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Various subspecies have been described, varying in hairiness of the stem, shape of leaves, vigour of flowering and the strength of the inflorescence-prickles.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Related species include:
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b  R. aciodontus} P. J. Mueller & Lefevre, {\i Pollichia}{\b  16-17}: 83 (1859). Ga Hu Rm.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b R. arduennensis} Libert ex Lej., {\i Fl. Spa }{\b 2}: 317 (1813). Be Da Ga Ge Hu Rm.  
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b R. cirlioarae} E. I. Nyárády in Savul.,{\i  Fl. Rep. Pop. Române}{\b  4}: 898 (1956). Rm.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b  R. constrictus} P. J. Mueller & Lefevre, {\i Pollichia}{\b  16-17}: 79 (1859). Cz Hu Ju Rm.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b R. drautensis} E. I. Nyárády in Savul., {\i Fl. Rep. Pop. Române}{\b  4}: 893 (1956). Rm.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b R. fragrans} Focke,{\i  Syn. Rub. Germ. }172 (1877), non Salisb. Bu Ge ?Ju. 
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b R. linkianus} Ser. in DC.,{\i  Prodr.}{\b  2}: 560 (1825). [Ga Ju.] Included in{\i  R. pubescens} by Focke, but placed by Sudre along with{\i  R. arduennensis} in a special series of the{\i  Discolores}, linking it with Ser. {\i Tomentosi} of the{\i  Appendiculati. R. linkianus} is unknown in the wild state.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b  R. moestus} Holuby,{\i  Österr. Bot. Zeitschr.}{\b  23}: 375 (1873). Cz Hu Rm.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b  R. persicinus} A. Kerner,{\i  Ber. Naturw. Ver. Innsbruck }{\b 2}: 137 (1871). Cz Ju. 
\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b  R. petnicensis} E. I. Nyárády in Savul.,{\i  Fl. Rep. Pop. Române}{\b  4}: 897 (1956).Rm.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b R. phyllostachys} P. J. Mueller,{\i  Flora} ({\i Regensb}.){\b  41}: 133 (1858). Au Be Cz Ga Ge He Hs Hu Ju Lu Po Rm.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b  R. saxosus} E. I. Nyárády in Savul., {\i Fl. Rep. Pop. Române}{\b  4}: 893 (1956). Rm. 
\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b  R. severinensis} E. I. Nyárády in Savul., {\i op. cit.} 892 (1956). Rm.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b R. subvillosus} Sudre,{\i  Bull. Assoc. Fr. Bot.}{\b  5}: 127 (1902). Co Ga Ge Hu Rm Si.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b  R. teregovensis} E. I. Nyárády in Savul.,{\i  Fl. Rep. Pop. Române}{\b  4}: 897 (1956). Rm.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b  R. thyrsanthus} Focke,{\i  Syn. Rub. Germ.} 168 (1877) ({\i R. villicaulis} auct. roman., non Koehler ex Weihe & Nees). Al Au Br Bu Cz Ga Ge Hb He Hu Ju No Po Rm Su.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b  R. tumidus} Gremli, {\i Excurs.-Fl. Schweiz} ed. 2, 161 (1874). Ga He Rm.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Subsect.{\i  Appendiculati} Genev. Stems arching, rooting at the apex; prickles nearly always unequal and scattered over the stem-faces; stems and inflorescence usually with stalked glands. Inflorescence often compound.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Series{\i  Tomentosi} Wirtgen. Stems with sparse glands; leaves grey- or white-tomentose beneath; inflorescence usually eglandular, tomentose; petals yellowish-white.
\par

\par
16}
\par