{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 Other mountain plants of S. Europe have small, relatively few-flowered heads.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 64. T. pallidum} Waldst. & Kit., {\i  Pl. Rar. Hung. }{\b 1}: 35 (1800-1). Annual or biennial; stems 15-40(-60) cm, usually much-branched, hairy. Leaflets 15-25 mm, obovate-cuneate to elliptical. Stipules abruptly contracted into a filiform arista. Heads 15-25 mm, globose to ovoid, involucrate, sessile. Calyx-tube 10-veined; veins evident; teeth setaceous, triangular and 5-veined at the base, 1½ times as long as the tube. Corolla c. 12 mm, whitish or pale pink, rarely bright orange-pink, 1½-3 times as long as the calyx.{\i   Dry grassy places, rocks and screes. S. Europe, westwards to Corse and extending northwards to Hungary}. Al Bu Co Cr Gr Hu It Ju Rm Si Tu [Cz].
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 65. T. diffusum} Ehrh.,{\i   Beitr. Naturk.}{\b  7}: 165 (1792). Like {\b 64} but leaflets narrower; apex of stipules linear, herbaceous; heads denser; calyx-teeth subulate-filiform, 3-veined at the base, twice as long as the tube; corolla reddish-purple, not or scarcely exceeding the calyx.{\i   Damp or shady, grassy places. S., S.E. & E.C. Europe.} Al Bl Bu Co Cz Ga Gr Hs Hu It Ju Lu Rm Rs (W, K, E) Sa Si.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Sometimes confused with {\b 72} but readily distinguished by the 10-veined calyx-tube.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 66. T. noricum} Wulfen, {\i  Arch. Bot. }({\i  Roemer}){\b  3}: 387 (1805) (incl. {\i  T. praetutianum} Guss. ex Ser.). Caespitose perennial; stems 8-20 cm, simple, with dense, patent hairs. Cauline leaves 2 or 3; leaflets 15-25 mm, oblong, elliptical or obovate; stipules whitish, gradually narrowed into a long, acute apex. Heads 25-40 mm wide, globose, often nodding. Calyx-tube campanulate-cylindrical with dense, patent hairs; all teeth subequal, equalling or a little longer than the tube; corolla c. 15 mm, cream; standard about 1½ times as long as the calyx. Legume dehiscing ventrally.{\i   Alpine pastures, screes and stony slopes; calcicole; from about }1600{\i   to }2600 {\i  m. •  Appennini, E. Alps, mountains of W. part of Balkan peninsula.} Al Au Gr Ju It.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 67. T. wettsteinii} Dörfler & Hayek,{\i   Österr. Bot. Zeitschr. }{\b 70}: 16 (1921). Like {\b 66} but stems 5-8 cm, appressed hairy; leaflets 5-10 mm, obovate; stipules with obtuse apex; calyx glabrous at the base; corolla pink.{\i   Mountain rocks. • N.E. Albania.} Al ?.Ju.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 68. T. ottonis} Spruner ex Boiss.,{\i   Diagn. Pl. Or. Nov.}{\b  1}({\b 2}): 28 (1843). Like {\b 66} but densely caespitose; stems 1-5 cm; leaflets 2-8 mm, ovate; calyx-teeth usually shorter than the tube; heads 15-20 mm; corolla 12-15 mm, deep purple; standard 1 ½-2 times as long as the calyx.{\i   Rocky places on mountains. • S. Greece.} Gr.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 69. T. lappaceum} L.,{\i   Sp. Pl.} 768 (1753). Annual, bright green, with numerous usually branched glabrescent, erect or ascending stems 5-40 cm. Leaflets 5-20 mm, obovate-cuneate, obtuse, hairy. Stipules oblong, conspicuously veined; apex long, lanceolate or subulate, herbaceous, hairy. Heads 12-20 mm wide, globose, rarely ovoid; peduncles up to 35 mm in fruit. Calyx-tube with 20 conspicuous veins, glabrous or glabrescent, rarely hairy; teeth 3·5-6 mm, longer than the tube, prominently 5-veined and triangular below, filiform and hairy above. Corolla 7-8 mm, pink, equalling the calyx at anthesis, much shorter than the calyx in fruit. Legume ovate, with a thickened apex.{\i   S. Europe.} Al Az Bl Bu Co Ga Gr Hs It Ju Lu Rs (K) Sa Si Tu [Cz].
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Varies considerably in habit and size. The only taxon possibly deserving more than varietal rank is subsp.{\b  adrianopolitanum}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Velen.,{\i   Fl. Bulg., Suppl.} 80 (1898), from S. Bulgaria, with upper stipules broadly ovate and shortly acuminate, and heads elliptical, with rather long peduncles.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 70. T. congestum} Guss.,{\i   Cat. Pl. Boccad.} 81 (1821). Annual; stems 1-3 cm, numerous, stout, woody, procumbent, glabrous. Leaflets 5-9 mm, narrowly cuneate, deeply emarginate, obscurely denticulate, densely appressed-pubescent above and beneath; petioles up to 30 mm; stipules membranous, broadly ovate, abruptly contracted into a short point. Heads 8-10 mm, pseudoterminal and axillary, sessile, involucrate, more or less congested. Flowers mostly erect. Calyx-tube 20-veined, densely but shortly pubescent; teeth nearly twice as long as the tube, subulate from a narrowly triangular base, glabrous and 5-veined below, with sparse patent hairs above the middle. Corolla 6-7 mm, white, not longer than the calyx.{\i   Fields and roadsides on clay soils. Sicilia, S. Italy, Malta.} It Si.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 71. T. barbeyi} Gibelli & Belli,{\i   Atti Accad. Sci. Torino}{\b  22}: 610 (1887). Like {\b 70} but stems densely pubescent; leaflets oblong-obovate, cuneate, obtuse; stipules linear; calyx-teeth shorter than the tube, densely hairy, broadly triangular at the base, subulate above; corolla pink, about twice as long as the calyx.{\i   Grassy places. Karpathos.} Cr. ({\i  Rodhos}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 72. T. hirtum} All., {\i  Auct. Fl. Pedem.} 20 (1789). Annual; stems up to 35 cm, often with patent branches; hairs patent. Leaflets 8-20 mm, obovate-cuneate, denticulate above, rarely emarginate. Stipules lanceolate, abruptly contracted into a long setaceous apex with spreading hairs. Heads 15-20(-25) mm wide, persistent in fruit, densely hairy, globose, solitary, sessile, with an involucre formed of dilated stipules and one or sometimes two 3-foliolate leaves. Calyx 20-veined, the veins obscured by dense hairs; teeth twice as long as the tube. Corolla 12-15 mm, purple, longer than the calyx.{\i   Dry places. S. Europe.} Al Bu Co Cr Ga Hs It Ju Lu ?Rm Rs (K) Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 73. T. cherleri} L.,{\i   Demonstr. Pl.} 21 (1753). Like {\b 72} but stems 5-15(-30) cm, rarely branching above; leaflets obcordatecuneate, almost entire; stipules with a short, ovate-lanceolate, herbaceous and often recurved apex; heads hemispherical, readily abscissing below the involucre in fruit; calyx-teeth more or less equalling the tube; corolla pinkish-white, equalling or shorter than the calyx.{\i   Dry places, mainly lowland. S. Europe.} Al Bl Bu Co Cr Ga Gr Hs It Ju Lu Sa Si Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 74. T. medium} L.,{\i   Amoen. Acad.}{\b  4}: 105 (1759). Rhizomatous. Stems (10-)30-45(-65) cm, ascending, more or less flexuous, often branched, sparsely appressed-hairy or glabrescent, rarely with spreading hairs above. Leaflets 20-60 × (5-)9-20(-35) mm, ovate, obovate or elliptical, almost entire, petioles usually exceeding the stipules. Stipules lanceolate, herbaceous and ciliate above, usually adnate by less than half their length to the petioles. Heads 25-35 mm, globose or ovoid, usually solitary, ultimately shortly pedunculate. Calyx-tube glabrous or glabrescent, rarely with sparse spreading hairs above, 10(-20)-veined; teeth filiform. Corolla 12-20 mm, light purple-red. Legume dehiscing longitudinally. 2n = c. 70, 78-80, 84.{\i   In open woodland, scrub and poor pastures. Throughout Europe except the extreme north and south.} All except Az Bl Cr Fa Is Sa Sb Si.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Rather variable in C. & S. Europe; intermediates occur between the subspecies which do not accommodate some plants from S. Europe.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Calyx-tube 13- to 20-veined ......................................... ({\b c}) subsp. {\b sarosiense}
\par
1 Calyx-tube 10(-14)-veined
\par
2 Stems with spreading hairs above ............................... ({\b d}) subsp. {\b balcanicum}
\par

\par
169}
\par