{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 their apex abruptly setaceous. Heads 10-15 mm, ovoid or oblong, sessile, axillary and pseudoterminal, usually not paired. Calyx-tube 2·5-3 mm, ovoid, hairy, somewhat inflated and readily abscissing at maturity; calyx-teeth subulate, subequal, straight, erect or somewhat patent. Corolla 4-5 mm, pink; standard free, usually equalling or exceeding the upper calyx-teeth. 2n = 14.{\i   Dry places. S.W. & C. Europe, extending northwards to S. Sweden.} All except Cr Fa Fe Is No Rs (N, B, C, W, E) Sb.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Variable in size, habit and the relative lengths of calyx-tube, calyx-teeth and petals. Robust plants from S. Europe, with stems up to 50 cm, heads cylindrical and corolla not exceeding the upper calyx-teeth, have been described as{\b  T. tenuiflorum} Ten.,{\i   Fl. Nap. }{\b 1},{\i   Prodr.}: 44 (1811) ({\i  T. incanum} C. Presl). This taxon may merit subspecific rank.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 49. T. arvense} L.,{\i   Sp. Pl. }769 (1753). Annual or biennial; stems 4-40 cm, erect or diffusely branched, whitish- or reddish-pubescent, rarely glabrescent. Upper leaves sessile, their leaflets 5-20 mm, linear-oblong. Lower stipules lanceolate-subulate, the upper subulate from an ovate base. Heads up to 20 mm, numerous, ovoid or oblong, pedunculate, with numerous, densely sericeous flowers. Calyx 3·5-7(-9) mm, the tube globose in fruit, often covered with dense hairs, rarely glabrescent; teeth 1-3(-5) times as long as the tube, reddish, subequal, setaceous, with long hairs. Corolla c. 4 mm, whitish or pink, much shorter than the calyx. 2n = 14.{\i   Dry places; somewhat calcifuge. Most of Europe except the extreme north.} All except Fa Is Sb.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Very variable in habit, indumentum, pigmentation, size and shape of the leaflets and length of the calyx-teeth. Several taxa are recorded over most of Europe. Plants with smaller and less hairy calyx (3·5-4·5 mm) are often called {\b T. gracile} Thuill.,{\i   Fl. Paris} ed. 2, 383 (1799); they seem most frequent in W. Europe but occur sporadically elsewhere. {\b T. longisetum} Boiss. & Balansa in Boiss.,{\i   Diagn. Pl. Or. Nov.}{\b  3}({\b 6}): 47 (1859), with calyx-teeth 4-5 times as long as the tube may deserve recognition as a subspecies of the Mediterranean region.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28     {\b 50. T. affine} C. Presl, {\i  Symb. Bot.}{\b  1}: 54 (1832) ({\i  T. preslianum} Boiss.). Like {\b 49} but standard about as long as the calyx and wings hairy outside.{\i   Turkey-in-Europe, S. Bulgaria.} Bu Tu. ({\i  Anatolia.})
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 51. T. saxatile} All.,{\i   Mélang. Philos. Math. Soc. Roy. Turin }({\i  Misc. Taur}.) {\b 5}: 77 (1774). Annual, greyish-pubescent; stems 5-15 cm, often numerous, procumbent or ascending. Leaflets 3-6 mm, narrowly obovate-cuneate, emarginate; stipules ovate or lanceolate, acute, the upper ones dilated, reddish with darker veins. Heads 6-10 mm wide, depressed-globose, few-flowered, sessile and sheathed at the base by the stipules. Calyx readily abscissing at maturity, its tube ovoid, densely hairy; teeth straight or incurved, unequal, all shorter than the tube. Corolla 3-4 mm, whitish or pinkish, not exceeding the calyx.{\i   Dry gravel and moraines. • Alps.} Au Ga He It.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 52. T. bocconei} Savi,{\i   Atti Accad. Ital.} ({\i  Firenze}) {\b 1}: 191 (1808). Annual; stems (2-)5-25(-30) cm, densely pubescent, erect or ascending, sparingly branched. Leaflets of upper leaves 7-23 mm, narrowly cuneate-oblong, glabrescent, denticulate, veins nearly straight. Stipules lanceolate, abruptly contracted above, the upper ones not dilated. Heads 9-15 mm, dense, cylindrical or conical, the terminal ones often paired but unequal. Calyx-tube cylindrical, pubescent; teeth subulate, erect or connivent, unequal, the lowest one equalling the tube. Corolla 4-5 mm, pinkish, equalling the calyx, persistent in fruit.{\i   Dry places. S. & W. Europe, northwards to S.W. England. }Bl Br Bu Co Cr Ga Gr Hs It Ju Lu Sa Si Tu [Ge Hs].
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 53. T. tenuifolium} Ten.,{\i   Fl. Nap.}{\b  1}, {\i  Prodr}.: 44 (1811). Like {\b 52} but stems more branched and spreading; upper leaflets linear or oblong; calyx-teeth not connivent in fruit; corolla twice as long as the calyx, pink or cream. •{\i   S. Italy, Balkan peninsula, Aegean region.} Al Bu Cr Gr It Ju Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 54. T. trichopterum} Pancic,{\i   Verh. Zool.-Bot. Ges. Wien}{\b  6}: 480 (1856). Like {\b 52} but leaflets 5-10 mm, obcordate-cuneate, deeply emarginate, usually persistently hairy on the lower surface; calyx with long dense, white or ultimately brown, plumose hairs, the teeth erect; corolla 5-6 mm, about 1½ times as long as the calyx.{\i   Dry stony slopes. • Balkan peninsula.} Al Bu Gr Ju.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 55. T. phleoides} Pourret ex Willd.,{\i   Sp. Pl.}{\b  3}: 1377 (1802). Annual; stems 10-35 cm, erect, sparsely appressed-hairy. Upper leaves subsessile; leaflets 10-25 mm, linear or oblanceolate, denticulate. Stipules oblong, with a subulate apex. Heads up to 25 mm, dense, oblong, ovoid or conical, solitary or paired; peduncles 50-60 mm. Calyx-tube ovoid, with 10 distinct veins and a ring of hairs at the throat; teeth 1·5-2 mm, subequal, as long as or a little shorter than the tube, triangular-lanceolate, dilated at the base, ultimately divergent. Corolla 4-5 mm, a little shorter than the calyx.{\i   Dry, stony grassland, mainly in the mountains. S. Europe.} Al Bu Co Gr It Hs Lu Sa Si [Ga Ge].
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 56. T. gemellum} Pourret ex Willd.,{\i   Sp. Pl. }{\b 3}: 1376 (1802). Like {\b 55} but leaflets 7-15 mm, elliptic-obovate; heads sessile or very shortly pedunculate; throat of the calyx with an annular, hairy callosity; calyx-teeth 3-4 mm, lanceolate-setaceous, scarcely dilated at the base, longer than the tube.{\i   Dry, sandy and stony places. Spain and Portugal.} Hs Lu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 57. T. ligusticum} Balbis ex Loisel.,{\i   Fl. Gall.} 731 (1807). Annual; stems 10-40(-60) cm, dark green, with sparse patent hairs, ascending or diffuse. Leaves all petiolate; leaflets 10-20 × 5-13 mm, broadly obovate. Stipules ovate or oblong with setaceous apex. Heads 6-15 mm, ovoid or oblong, often paired, then one axillary and long-pedunculate, the other terminal but laterally displaced and shortly pedunculate. Calyx 4-6 mm; mouth of the calyx-tube closed with a callosity; calyx-teeth ciliate, setaceous, ultimately divergent, subequal, 1-2 times as long as the tube. Corolla 3-4 mm, much shorter than the calyx.{\i   Dry places; calcifuge. S.W. Europe.} Az Bl ?Bu Co Ga Hs It Lu Sa Si ?Tu [Ge].
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 58. T. scabrum} L.,{\i   Sp. Pl.} 770 (1753). Annual; stems 5-25 cm, rigid, flexuous, numerous, procumbent or ascending. Leaflets 5-10 mm, obovate-cuneate, coriaceous, denticulate; lateral veins recurved and prominent at the margins. Stipules ovate or oblong with setaceous apex, entire. Heads 5-12 mm, numerous, mostly axillary, sessile, globose or ovoid, attenuate and scarcely clasped at the base by the stipules. Calyx persistent in fruit; teeth rigid, spinose, slightly recurved in fruit, the lowest one longer than the tube. Corolla 4-5 mm, whitish, rarely pink, usually shorter than the calyx.2n = 10.{\i   Dry places. S. & W. Europe, northwards to Scotland.} Al Az Be Bl Br Bu Co Cr Ga Ge Gr Hb He Ho Hs It Ju Lu Rm Rs (K) Sa Si Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Plants from the Mediterranean region with cylindrical heads, more recurved calyx-teeth and pink corolla, slightly exceeding the calyx, have been described as{\b  T. lucanicum} Gasparr. ex Guss., {\i  Fl. Sic. Prodr.}{\b  2}: 494 (1828) and {\b T. scabrum} subsp. {\b turcicum }Velen., {\i  Sitz.-Ber. Böhm. Ges. Wiss.} ({\i  Math.-Nat. Kl}.) {\b 1893}({\b 37}): 23 (1894); they may merit subspecific rank. Plants from Istria and Greece identified with {\b T. compactum} Post, {\i  Fl. Syr. Pal. Sin}. 239 (1896), perhaps should be included in {\b 58}.
\par

\par
167}
\par