{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28\li200   stipules; lowest calyx-tooth as long as or longer than the tube
\par
85 All leaves alternate
\par
86 Lateral veins of the leaflets ± straight
\par
87 Corolla not or scarcely exceeding the lowest calyx-tooth
\par
88 Calyx-teeth subequal, all longer than the tube, divergent
\par
   in fruit ...................................................................................... {\b 56. gemellum}
\par
88 Calyx-teeth unequal, only the lowest equalling or slightly 
\par
   exceeding the tube, connivent or somewhat divergent in fruit
\par
89 Fruiting calyx readily abscissing, with ± inflated tube and 
\par
   erecto-patent teeth ...................................................................... {\b 48. striatum}
\par
89 Fruiting calyx not readily abscissing, tube not inflated, teeth 
\par
   straight or connivent ................................................................. {\b 52. bocconei}
\par
87 Corolla exceeding the lowest calyx-tooth
\par
90 Corolla twice as long as the calyx; upper leaflets linear .... {\b 53. tenuifolium}
\par
90 Corolla 1½ times as long as the calyx; upper leaflets narrowly 
\par
   oblong to obcordate-cuneate, deeply emarginate ............... {\b 54. trichopterum}
\par
86 Lateral veins of the leaflets recurved, often ± thickened 
\par
   towards the margins
\par
91 Corolla 4-5 mm, equalling or slightly exceeding the calyx;
\par
   axillary heads numerous ............................................................ {\b 58. scabrum}
\par
91 Corolla 8-10 mm, twice as long as the calyx; 
\par
   axillary heads few ................................................................. {\b 59. dalmaticum}
\par
85 At least the two uppermost leaves opposite .......................... {\b 96. clypeatum}
\par
92 Calyx-teeth triangular-lanceolate (-acuminate) or subulate from
\par
   an expanded triangular base, spreading or recurved in fruit
\par
93 Corolla much shorter than the calyx; calyx-teeth subequal,
\par
   up to 4 times as long as the tube .............................................. {\b 61. dasyurum}
\par
93 Corolla nearly equalling or exceeding the calyx;
\par
   calyx-teeth unequal or subequal, not more than twice as 
\par
   long as the tube and usually less
\par
94 Throat of the calyx closed with a ring of hairs
\par
95 Calyx-teeth triangular-lanceolate, dilated at the base,
\par
   as long as or shorter than the tube ............................................ {\b 55. phleoides}
\par
95 Calyx-teeth lanceolate-setaceous, scarcely dilated at the base, 
\par
   longer than the tube ................................................................. {\b 56. gemellum}
\par
94 Throat of the calyx dosed by a bilabiate callosity,
\par
   leaving only a narrow vertical slit
\par
96 Calyx-tube campanulate, glabrous or sparsely hairy above;
\par
   leaflets 10-20 mm ................................................................. {\b 93. squamosum}
\par
96 Calyx-tube ovoid, densely hairy; leaflets 20-40(-70) mm .. {\b 94. squarrosum}
\par
92 Calyx-teeth subulate, setaceous or filiform, ± straight and erect 
\par
   in fruit
\par
97 Corolla whitish or pink, much exceeding the calyx; calyx-teeth 
\par
   1-1½ times as long as the tube .................................................. {\b 64. pallidum}
\par
97 Corolla reddish-purple, not or scarcely exceeding the calyx; 
\par
   calyx-teeth twice as long as the tube ........................................ {\b 65. diffusum} 
\par
83 Heads pedunculate, terminal or axillary
\par
98 Upper leaves alternate
\par
99 Leaflets of upper leaves lanceolate, linear or linear-oblong
\par
100 Heads 10-25 mm, usually numerous; calyx-throat not closed by a 
\par
    bilabiate callosity
\par
101 Calyx-teeth triangular-lanceolate, dilated at the base, 
\par
    sparsely ciliate or glabrescent ................................................. {\b 55. phleoides}
\par
101 Calyx-teeth setaceous, usually densely pubescent or villous
\par
102 Corolla much shorter than the calyx ....................................... {\b 49. arvense}
\par
102 Corolla equalling or longer than the calyx ................................. {\b 50. affine}
\par
100 Heads 20-110 mm,.one or few, usually terminal; calyx-throat at 
\par
    maturity narrowed to a vertical slit by a bilabiate callosity
\par
103 Corolla 10-12 mm, not or scarcely exceeding the calyx {\b 81. angustifolium}
\par
103 Corolla 13-25 mm, much exceeding the calyx
\par
104 Corolla 16-25 mm; stem robust, little branched ................ {\b 82. purpureum}
\par
104 Corolla 13-15 mm; stems weak and diffusely branched ...... {\b 83. desvauxii}
\par
99  Leaflets of upper leaves obovate-cuneate or obcordate
\par
105 Heads capitate, ± globose in fruit; stipules denticulate .........{\b 60. stellatum}
\par
105 Heads spicate, oblong, cylindrical or conical in fruit;
\par
    stipules entire or obscurely dentate
\par
106 Corolla much shorter than the calyx; calyx-tube obconical or 
\par
    campanulate; stipules lanceolate, entire ................................ {\b 57. ligusticum}
\par
106 Corolla equalling or exceeding the calyx; calyx-tube
\par
    ovoid or globose; stipules ovate, at least at the apex, 
\par
    entire or obscurely dentate or angled
\par
107 Calyx-teeth unequal, the 4 upper ones shorter than the tube,
\par
    all with long patent hairs ..................................................... {\b 84. smyrnaeum}
\par
107 Calyx-teeth subequal, all as long as or longer than the tube,
\par
    with erecto-patent hairs ........................................................ {\b 62. incarnatum} 
\par
98  At least the two uppermost leaves opposite
\par
108 Corolla 20-25 mm; calyx-teeth broadly ovate-triangular,
\par
    with many veins.
\par
108 Corolla less than 20 mm; calyx-teeth linear subulate to ovate- 
\par
    lanceolate, with 1-3 veins
\par
109 Corolla much shorter than the calyx; calyx-teeth subequal,
\par
    up to 4 times as long as the tube ............................................. {\b 61. dasyurum}
\par
109 Corolla equalling or exceeding the calyx; calyx-teeth unequal or 
\par
    subequal, the lowest one not more than twice as long as the tube
\par
110 Leaflets up to 60 × 4·5 mm, linear-oblong, acute .................... {\b 91. latinum}
\par
110 Leaflets 8-40(-70) × 4-15 mm, relatively shorter and broader, obtuse
\par
111 Legume exserted slightly from the mouth of the calyx-tube
\par
112 Calyx-teeth spinescent in fruit, the lowest one 3-veined,
\par
    at least at the base ............................................................. {\b 88. alexandrinum}
\par
112 Calyx-teeth scarcely spinescent in fruit, the lowest
\par
    one 1-veined .............................................................................. {\b 89. apertum}
\par
111 Legume not exserted, concealed by the closed bilabiate callosity 
\par
    at the mouth of the calyx-tube
\par
113 Calyx-teeth subequal
\par
114 Calyx-teeth ovate-lanceolate, each with 3-5 veins; 
\par
    heads 20-35 mm, ovate, shortly pedunculate ......................... {\b 95. obscurum}
\par
114 Calyx-teeth lanceolate, each with 3 veins; heads 10-15 mm,
\par
    globose; peduncles 30-120 mm ........................................... {\b 92. leucanthum}
\par
113 Calyx-teeth unequal
\par
115 Calyx-teeth 1-veined, or 3-veined only at the base ............ {\b 90. echinatum}
\par
115 Calyx-teeth distinctly 3-veined to the middle or above
\par
116 Calyx-tube campanulate, glabrous or sparsely hairy above;
\par
    leaflets 10-20 mm ................................................................ {\b 93. squamosum}
\par
116 Calyx-tube ovoid, densely hairy; leaflets 20-40(-70) mm {\b 94. squarrosum}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Subgen. {\b Falcatula} (Brot.) D. E. Coombe. Flowers bracteate. Calyx-throat open, without a ring of hairs or a callosity. Legume oblong, slightly curved, exceeding the calyx, dehiscent. Seeds 5-9.
\par

\par
160}
\par