{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 38. T. mesogitanum} Boiss., {\i  Diagn. Pl. Or. Nov. }{\b 1}({\b 2}): 34 (1843). Like {\b 37} but terminal leaflet of the upper leaves with a longer petiolule (more than 1·5 mm); stipules oblong-lanceolate; limb of standard oblong.{\i   Stony meadows. Turkey-in-Europe} ({\i  near Kesan}). Tu. ({\i  W. Anatolia.})
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 39. T. aurantiacum} Boiss. & Spruner in Boiss.,{\i   Diagn. Pl. Or. Nov. }{\b 1}({\b 2}): 33 (1843). Like {\b 37} but terminal leaflet of the upper leaves with a longer petiolule (more than 1·5 mm); stipules oblong-lanceolate, the upper sometimes cordate-auriculate; heads 20-25 mm in fruit, ovoid; corolla 8-9 mm, orange before anthesis; limb of standard obovate-oblong. •{\i   Greece and Kriti}. Cr Gr.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 40. T. dolopium} Heldr. & Hausskn. ex Gibelli & Belli, {\i  Malpighia}{\b  3}: 228 (1889). Annual; stems erect, appressed-hairy. Leaflets 6-14 mm; the lower oblong-ovate, cuneate; the upper oblong to oblong-lanceolate, acute. Heads 8-10 mm, ovoid or globose, lax; peduncles 20-40 mm, 2-3 times as long as the leaves; pedicels of the upper flowers longer than the calyx-tube. Upper calyx-teeth shorter than the upper limb of the calyx-tube; lower calyx-teeth 1-2 times as long as the lower limb of the calyx-tube. Corolla c. 8 mm, golden-yellow; limb of standard obovate-oblong. Legume scarcely longer than the style. •{\i   N. Greece.} Gr.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Intermediate between {\b 39} and {\b 41}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 41. T. patens} Schreber in Sturm,{\i   Deutschl. Fl.} Abt. 1, Band 4, Heft 16 (1804). Annual, sparsely hairy; stems 20-50 cm, flexuous, erect or ascending. Leaflets up to 18 mm, narrowly elliptic-obovate, the terminal subsessile or with a petiolule up to 2 mm. Stipules ovate, dilated and rounded at the base. Heads 10-15 mm in fruit; peduncles 20-50 mm, slender, usually much longer than the leaves. Flowers almost sessile. Upper calyx-teeth shorter than the upper limb of the calyx-tube; lower calyx-teeth equal to or longer than the lower limb of the calyx-tube. Corolla 5-7 mm, yellow; limb of standard oblong-ovate, sulcate.{\i   Moist grassland. C. & S. Europe.} Al Au Bu Co Cr Cz Ga Gr He Hs Hu It Ju Po Rm Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 42. T. aureum} Pollich,{\i   Hist. Pl. Palat.}{\b  2}: 344 (1777) ({\i  T. agrarium }L., nom. ambig., {\i  T. strepens} Crantz, nom. illeg.). Robust biennial; stems 15-30(-40) cm, many, erect and branched, usually appressed-hairy. Leaflets up to 15 mm, oblong-ovate or rhombic, widest near the middle, the terminal one nearly sessile. Stipules lanceolate-ovate, not dilated below. Peduncles up to 50 mm, stout, equalling or exceeding the leaves. Heads up to 16 mm, dense, many-flowered. Flowers nearly sessile. Upper calyx-teeth shorter than the upper limb of the calyx-tube; lower calyx-teeth 1-2 times as long as the lower limb of the calyx-tube. Corolla 6-7 mm, golden-yellow; limb of standard obovate, sulcate. 2n = 16. {\i  Thickets, margins of woods and clearings. Much of Europe, but absent from most of the extreme North, most of the west and the Mediterranean region.} Al Au Be Bu Cz Da Fe Ga Ge Gr He Ho Hs Hu It Ju No Po Rm Rs (N, B, C, W, K, E) Su [Br].
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 43. T. velenovskyi} Vandas, {\i  Sitz.-Ber. Böhm. Ges. Wiss.} ({\i  Math.-Nat. Kl.}) {\b 1888}: 441 (1889). Like {\b 42} but stipules dilated and rounded below; heads laxer and fewer flowered ({\b 30-40}); peduncles longer; pedicels ½ as long as the calyx-tube; lower calyx-teeth about 3 times as long as the lower limb of the calyx-tube; corolla not becoming darker after anthesis. •{\i   N. part of the Balkan peninsula}. Al Bu Ju.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 44. T. campestre} Schreber in Sturm,{\i   Deutschl. Fl.} Abt. 1, Band 4, Heft 16 (1804) (T. procumbens L., nom. ambig.). Annual; stems up to 30(-50) cm, hairy, erect or ascending. Leaflets 8-10 mm, obovate, the terminal one petiolulate. Stipules semiovate, dilated and rounded at the base. Heads up to 15 mm, dense, 20- to 30-flowered; pedicels ½ as long as the calyx-tube. Upper calyx-teeth as long as or shorter than the upper limb of the calyx-tube; lower calyx-teeth 1-2 times as long as the lower limb of calyx-tube. Corolla (3-)4-5(-6) mm, yellow; limb of standard broadly cochleate, sulcate. Legume 3-6 times as long as the style. 2n = 14.{\i   Dry, grassy places. Throughout Europe except the extreme north and east.} All except Is Rs (N) Sb; introduced in Fa Fe.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Variable in habit and size. {\b T. pumilum} Hossain,{\i   Notes Roy. Bot. Gard. Edinb.}{\b  23}: 479 (1961), from the Aegean region (Amorgos), described as being similar to {\b 46}, appears to be a small variant of {\b 44}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28     {\b 45. T. sebastianii} Savi,{\i   Diar. Med. Flajani }2 (1815). Annual; 5-30 cm, sparsely hairy, erect or ascending. Leaflets up to 18 mm, obovate-lanceolate or oblong, with 15-25 pairs of lateral veins; petiolules subequal, very short. Heads 8-10 mm, 8- to 20-flowered; pedicels deflexed, 2-4 times as long as the calyx-tube. Upper calyx-teeth 2-3 times as long as upper limb of calyx-tube; lower calyx-teeth 3-4 times as long as the lower limb of the calyx-tube. Corolla 4 mm, yellow, becoming reddish-brown after anthesis; limb of standard broadly obovate or orbicular, sulcate.{\i   C. & S. Italy, Sicilia; Balkan peninsula, very local.} Bu Gr It Ju Si Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 46. T. dubium} Sibth.,{\i   Fl. Oxon.} 231 (1794) ({\i  T. minus} Sm., {\i  T. filiforme} auct.). Annual; stems up to 25(-50) cm, usually hairy, procumbent or ascending. Leaflets up to 11 mm, obcordate or obovate with 4-9 pairs of lateral veins; terminal leaflet petiolulate. Stipules 4-5 mm, equalling or exceeding the petioles of the upper leaves, broadly ovate. Heads 8-9 mm, 3- to 15(-25)flowered; peduncles not capillary; pedicels stout, shorter than the calyx-tube. Calyx-teeth unequal, the lower about as long as the lower limb of the calyx-tube. Corolla 3-3·5 mm, yellow, becoming yellowish-brown after anthesis; standard narrowly oblong, nearly smooth. 2n = 28, 32.{\i   Dry grassy places. Most of Europe except the extreme north.} All except Bl Cr Fa Is Rs (B, K) Sa Sb Tu [Fe Rs (N)].
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 47. T. micranthum} Viv.,{\i   Fl. Lib.} 45 (1824) ({\i  T. filiforme} L., nom. ambig.) Annual; stems 2-10(-20) cm, glabrescent, procumbent or ascending. Leaflets up to 5(-8) mm, obcordate or obovate with 4-9 pairs of lateral veins; terminal leaflet subsessile. Stipules oblong or ovate. Heads c. 4 mm, 1- to 6-flowered; peduncles capillary; pedicels capillary, as long as or longer than the upper limb of the calyx-tube. Calyx-teeth unequal, the lower longer than the lower limb of the calyx-tube. Corolla 2-3(-4) mm, yellow, becoming yellowish-brown after anthesis; standard oblong, nearly smooth. 2n = 16.{\i   Grassy places. W. & S. Europe, extending northwards to Hungary}. Al Az Be Bl Br Bu Co Cr Da Ga Ge Gr Hb Ho Hs Hu It Ju Lu No Rm Sa Si.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Subgen. {\b Trifolium}. Flowers ebracteate. Calyx-throat usually more or less closed with a ring of hairs or an annular or 2-lobed callosity. Legume nearly always included in the calyx-tube, 1- to 2-seeded.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Sect. TRIFOLIUM. Heads usually spicate, rarely capitate. Flowers usually sessile, all fertile.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 48. T. striatum} L., {\i  Sp. Pl.} 770 (1753). Annual, softly hairy; stems 4-30(-50) cm, spreading or ascending. Leaflets 6-16 mm, obovate-cuneate; lateral veins almost straight; stipules ovate,
\par

\par
166}
\par