{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b 9. T. parnassi} Boiss. & Spruner in Boiss., {\i  Diagn. Pl. Or. Nov.}{\b  1} ({\b 2}): 30 (1843). Suffruticose perennial, glabrous, caespitose, stems 1-3 cm. Leaflets 3-6 mm, obovate or obcordate. Stipules ovate, acuminate. Heads up to 12-flowered, not paired; peduncles 10-30 mm, equalling or longer than the leaves. Bracts longer than the pedicels. Calyx glabrous; teeth ovate-triangular, imbricate, ½ as long as the tube. Corolla 5-8 mm, pink. •{\i   Mountains of Greece.} Gr.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 10. T. repens} L., {\i  Sp. Pl.} 767 (1753). Glabrous or glabrescent perennial, usually with extensively creeping stems rooting at the nodes. Leaflets usually bright green with either light or dark marks along the veins, or both; lateral veins translucent in the living plant. Stipules large, membranous, sheathing, contracted into a subulate apex. Heads usually globose. Flowers scented; calyx-teeth narrowly lanceolate, the 2 upper longer than the rest, separated by narrow acute sinuses; corolla 8-13 mm, becoming light brown and strongly deflexed after anthesis; standard ovate-lanceolate. Legume linear, compressed, constricted between the 3-4 seeds.{\i   Grassy places, mainly on well-drained soils. Throughout Europe to }c. 71° {\i  N.} All except Sb.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Extensively cultivated for fodder and many cultivars have been selected and are grown for this purpose. These often persist or become more or less naturalized.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  There is, in addition, a considerable amount of variation in wild plants. A comprehensive treatment of this variation is not yet possible, but the following are among the more distinct subspecies that may be recognized.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Heads 25-30 mm wide; corolla yellow; standard 3-4 times
\par
  as long as the calyx ..................................................... ({\b d}) subsp. {\b ochranthum} 
\par
1 Heads not more than 25 mm wide; corolla white or pink;
\par
  standard not more than 3 times as long as the calyx
\par
2 Peduncles 10-20 mm, scarcely exceeding the leaves ({\b e}) subsp. {\b orphanideum}
\par
2 Peduncles usually exceeding the leaves
\par
3 Calyx with only 6 distinct veins .................................... ({\b c}) subsp. {\b orbelicum}
\par
3 Calyx 10-veined
\par
4 Petioles densely hairy ................................................... ({\b f}) subsp. {\b prostratum}
\par
4 Petioles glabrous
\par
5 Leaflets 10 mm or more; heads 15-25 mm wide ................ ({\b a}) subsp. {\b repens}
\par
5 Leaflets less than 10 mm; heads less than 20 mm wide ({\b b}) subsp. {\b nevadense}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b repens}: Stems rooting at the nodes. Leaflets 10-25(40) mm, obovate or elliptical; petioles 20-200 mm. Heads usually 40- to 80-flowered; peduncles 50-300 mm. Upper calyx-teeth longer than the rest; corolla 7-10 mm, white or pale pink, rarely deep red; standard 2-2½ times as long as the calyx. 2n = 32.{\i   Almost throughout the range of the species.}

\pard\f0\fs28  Plants from the high mountains of Europe are usually more dwarf with short creeping stems, smaller leaves, peduncles 10-30(-60) mm and heads with fewer flowers.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b nevadense} (Boiss.) D.E. Coombe,{\i   Feddes Repert.}{\b  79}: 54 (1968): Stems rooting at the nodes. Leaflets minute, cuneate obcordate; petioles relatively long; peduncles exceeding the leaves. Upper calyx-teeth a little longer than the others; corolla white; standard 3 times as long as the calyx. •{\i   S. Spain }({\i  Sierra Nevada}).
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  The identity of similar white-flowered plants from the Alps is uncertain.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b c}) Subsp. {\b orbelicum} (Velen.) Pawl., {\i  Zapiski Fl. Tatr}{\b  4}: 9 (1949): Stems often short, but sometimes elongate and rooting at the nodes. Leaflets 6-8 mm, obovate-cuneate. Heads dense; peduncles up to 120 mm. Calyx-tube 6- to 8-veined with only 6 veins distinct; upper calyx-teeth 1½ times as long as the tube; corolla 8-10 mm, cream; standard 2-2½ times as long as the calyx. •{\i   Carpathians and mountains of Balkan peninsula}.
\par
 ({\b d}) Subsp. {\b ochranthum} E.I. Nyárády,{\i   Bul. Grad. Bot. Cluj }{\b 20}: 45 (1940): Stems long, rooting. Leaflets up to 13 mm, broadly obovate or nearly orbicular, weakly denticulate; petioles 30-60 mm. Heads 25-30 mm wide. Corolla 10-12 mm, light yellow or greenish-yellow; standard 3-4 times as long as the calyx. •{\i   Bosna; Romania}.
\par
 ({\b e}) Subsp. {\b orphanideum} (Boiss.) D.E. Coombe,{\i   Feddes Repert.}{\b  79}: 54 (1968): Stems 1-5 cm, procumbent and rooting or subcaespitose and non-rooting. Leaflets 5-7 mm, broadly obcordate or obovate; petioles 10-20 mm. Heads 8- to 12-flowered; peduncles 10-20 mm. Corolla pale pink; standard 2-2½ times as long as the calyx. ½{\i   Greece, Kriti}.
\par
 ({\b f}) Subsp. {\b prostratum} Nyman,{\i   Consp. }178 (1878) ({\i  T. biasolettii }Steudel & Hochst.): Stems usually rooting at the nodes. Leaflets 5-10(-15) mm, broadly obcordate; petioles densely hairy. Heads 14-18 mm wide. Corolla c. 9 mm, pale pink. •{\i   C. part of the Mediterranean region from S. France and Corse to Albania}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 11. T. occidentale} D. E. Coombe,{\i   Watsonia}{\b  5}: 70 (1961). Like {\b 10} but leaflets 6-10 mm, thicker, almost orbicular, obtuse or emarginate, glaucous, without light or dark markings; lateral veins not translucent in the living plant; petioles with sparse but persistent hairs; stipules vinous-red; heads 20-24 mm wide, 20(-40)-flowered; flowers scentless; upper calyx-teeth ovate-lanceolate or triangular, often with 1-2 teeth on the upper margin; corolla 8-9 mm. 2n = 16.{\i   Sand-dunes and dry grassy places near the sea. Coasts of S.W. England and N.W. France.} Br Ga ?Hs.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 12. T. pallescens} Schreber in Sturm,{\i   Deutschl. Fl.} Abt. 1, Band 4, Heft 15 (1804) (incl.{\i   T. glareosum} (Ser.) Schleicher ex Boiss., non Dumort., {\i  T. arvernense} Lamotte). Glabrous, caespitose perennial; tap-root often massive; stems 5-10(-20) cm, numerous, procumbent or ascending, with 1-3 non-rooting nodes. Leaflets 6-20 mm, elliptical or obovate, bright-green. Stipules ovate-lanceolate, membranous, with acute apex. Heads 15-25 mm wide, pseudoterminal, at first globose; peduncles 20-90 mm, stout; pedicels 1·5-4 mm, longer than the bracts and the calyx-tube. Flowers sweetly scented, deflexed after anthesis. Corolla 6-10 mm, yellowish-white to pink, becoming dark brown; standard broadly ovate or elliptical, 2-3 times as long as the calyx. 2n = 16. {\i  Damp screes and pastures above} 1800{\i   m; calcifuge. • Mountains of C.& S. Europe.} Al Au Bu Ga Gr He Hs It Ju Rm.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 13. T. thalii} Vill.,{\i   Prosp. Pl. Dauph.} 43 (1779). Like {\b 12} but stems shorter; leaflets obovate, dull green; peduncles (10-)50-120 mm; pedicels 1-1·5 mm, shorter than or rarely equalling the calyx-tube; flowers not or scarcely deflexed after anthesis; calyx-tube in fruit about as wide as long, somewhat inflated, strongly ribbed, with somewhat patent teeth; standard twice as long as calyx.{\i   Meadows and pastures; calcicole. • Alps, Appennini, Pyrenees and mountains of N. Spain.} Au Ga Ge He Hs It.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Often confused with {\b 12} or with mountain plants of {\b 10} but especially distinctive in fruit.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 14. T. hybridum} L., {\i  Sp. Pl.} 766 (1753) ({\i  T. fistulosum} Gilib.). Perennial, glabrous or glabrescent; stems (5-)20-40(-90) cm, erect or ascending, and lax, or rarely densely caespitose and procumbent, not rooting at the nodes. Leaflets 10-20(-30) × 10-15 (-20) mm, obovate or obcordate; petioles up to 10 cm; stipules partly herbaceous, ovate to ovate-lanceolate, gradually contracted into a subulate apex. Heads globose, pseudoterminal and
\par

\par
162}
\par