{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 59. T. dalmaticum} Vis., {\i  Flora }({\i  Regensb}.) {\b 12} (Ergänz. 1): 21 (1829). Like {\b 58} but stems ascending, scarcely flexuous; leaflets 8-15 mm; heads globose becoming oblong, involucrate, mostly terminal and solitary, rarely paired; all calyx-teeth longer than the tube, strongly recurved in fruit; corolla 8-10 mm, pink, twice as long as the calyx.{\i   Dry, rocky and grassy places. • Balkan peninsula.} Al Bu Gr Ju Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Sometimes confused with {\b 58} but appears to be quite distinct.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b T. filicaule} Boiss. & Heldr. in Boiss.,{\i   Diagn. Pl. Or. Nov.}{\b  2}({\b 9}): 24 (1849), recorded from S. Greece (Lakonia), probably belongs with {\i  T. dalmaticum;} it differs principally in the corolla being less than twice as long as the calyx.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 60. T. stellatum} L., {\i  Sp. Pl}. 769 (1753). Annual; stems (2-)8-20 (-35) cm, erect, simple or branching from the base, with dense patent hairs. Leaflets 8-12 mm, obcordate, denticulate towards the apex; stipules ovate, obtuse, acutely denticulate, the margin and veins bright green. Heads 15-25 mm, globose or ovoid; peduncles (5-)30-100 mm, with appressed or patent hairs. Calyx-teeth twice as long as the tube, patent in fruit, 3-veined, triangular-lanceolate with a subulate-acuminate apex. Corolla 8-12 mm, pink, rarely purple or yellow, equalling the calyx, rarely much longer. 2n = 14.{\i   Fields, roadsides and stony slopes. Mediterranean region, Portugal.} Al Bl Co Cr Ga Gr Hs It Ju Lu Sa Si Tu [Br].
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 61. T. dasyurum} C. Presl,{\i   Symb. Bot.}{\b  1}: 53 (1832) ({\i  T. formosum} D'Urv., non Savi). Like {\b 60} but usually more robust, branching above, with the 2 uppermost leaves subopposite; leaflets 20-25 mm, oblong-elliptical or lanceolate, acute, entire; stipules lanceolate-acuminate, entire; heads 20-35 mm, often paired; calyx-teeth up to {\b 4} times as long as the tube; corolla c. 16 mm, shorter than the calyx.{\i   Greece and Aegean region.} Cr Gr.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Variable in stature and length of peduncle.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 62. T. incarnatum} L.,{\i   Sp. Pl.} 769 (1753). Annual; stems (10-)20-50 cm, simple or branching only from the base, erect or ascending; hairs usually patent below and appressed above. Leaflets 8-25 mm, obovate-cuneate to suborbicular, denticulate towards the apex. Stipules ovate, blunt, often herbaceous, sometimes pigmented, angled or obscurely dentate. Heads 10-40 mm, solitary, oblong-ovoid to cylindrical; peduncles long. Calyx-teeth as long as or longer than the tube, linear, acute, patent in fruit. Corolla 10-12 mm, equalling or exceeding the calyx, blood-red, pink, cream or white.{\i   S. & W. Europe; cultivated also in a large part of Europe and widespread as an escape except in the extreme north.} Al Au Be Br Bu Co Cr Cz Da Fe Ga Ge Gr He Hs Ho Hu It Ju Lu No Po Rm Rs (W, K, E) Sa Si Su Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b incarnatum}: Stems robust, erect, often unbranched, not very hairy. Heads dense. Corolla blood-red, rarely pure white, equalling or slightly exceeding the calyx.{\i   Cultivated and widely naturalized}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b molinerii} (Balbis ex Hornem.) Syme in Sowerby, Engl. Bot. ed. 3, {\b 3}: 45 (1864): Stems usually several, ascending, less robust, densely hairy. Heads less dense. Corolla usually yellowish-white, rarely pink, much exceeding the calyx.{\i   Certainly native on cliff-tops exposed to sea-spray; also inland in parts of the Mediterranean region. S. & W. Europe, northwards to S. W. England}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 The subspecies are very distinct in N.W. Europe but are connected by intermediates in the south. In some regions the status of the plants is uncertain.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   {\b 63. T. pratense} L.,{\i   Sp. Pl.} 768 (1753) (incl. {\i  T. borysthenicum} Gruner). Perennial, caespitose, more or less hairy; stems 5-100 cm. Leaflets obovate, or oblong-lanceolate to nearly orbicular, hairy below, often glabrescent above. Stipules triangular above, abruptly contracted into a setaceous, usually ciliate point; upper stipules very wide. Heads 20-40 mm, globose or ovoid, solitary or paired, usually sessile and involucrate. Calyx-tube 10-veined, usually appressed-hairy; teeth triangular with filiform apex, straight, ciliate, separated by broad sinuses, the lowest one about twice as long as the tube. Corolla 12-15 mm usually reddish-purple or pink, rarely cream or white, (1-)2 times as long as the lowest calyx-tooth. Legume ovate, with a thickened apex. 2n = 14.{\i   Meadows and pastures on fertile and moist but well-drained soils from sea-level to} 3150{\i   m; extensively cultivated as a forage crop. Throughout Europe except for parts of the extreme north and parts of the extreme south; introduced in Iceland and the Faroes.} All except Bl Cr Sb.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Extremely variable both in the wild and cultivated state in habit, stature, indumentum, size and shape of leaflets and size and colour of flowers. The non-rhizomatous perennial habit, the stipules and the calyx afford the best means of identification. Many ecologically specialized wild populations (for example, of high mountains and coastal habitats) are locally distinct, but it is impossible at present to bring the numerous local taxa into a comprehensive scheme for the whole of Europe. The following indicates some of the variation within the species.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Var.{\i   pratense}. Long-lived perennial. Stems usually 20-40 cm, solid, procumbent or ascending, appressed-hairy, or some rarely with patent hairs above. Heads often solitary. In natural or semi-natural habitats throughout the range of the species. Includes the so-called var. {\i  parviflorum} Bab. with heads shortly pedunculate, flowers often pedicellate, sometimes bracteate, and corolla not exceeding the calyx, a widely-occurring monstrosity often confused with unrelated species.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Var.{\i   sativum} Sturm ({\i  T. sativum} (Sturm) Crome). Short-lived perennial. Stems 40-70(-100) cm, hollow, more or less erect, glabrescent or glabrous. Leaflets up to 50 mm or more. Heads large, often paired; corolla usually pink. Includes most of the important cultivars. {\b T. baeticum} Boiss., {\i  Voy. Bot. Midi Esp. }{\b 2}: 726 (1845), from S.W. Spain and Sicilia, is similar but has yellow flowers.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Var. {\i  americanum} C. O. Harz. Stems with stiff, patent hairs. Leaflets never emarginate, the upper ones lanceolate. Calyx with patent, villous hairs. Corolla deep red. Native in parts of S.E. Europe; introduced into cultivation in C. Europe by way of N. America in 1883, but declining in cultivation since 1910. Often identified with {\i  T. expansum }Waldst. & Kit.,{\i   Pl. Rar. Hung. }{\b 3}: 237 (1807).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Var. {\i  maritimum} Zabel (var. {\i  villosum} Wahlberg). Stems slender, ascending; hairs dense, patent below, often appressed above. Leaflets and heads relatively small. Corolla pink, white or cream. Maritime pastures and dune-slacks, mainly on the S. coast of the Baltic.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Var. {\i  frigidum} Gaudin. Stems 5-30 cm, stout, procumbent or ascending, densely hairy, at least above. Stipules often hairy over the whole outer surface. Heads large, 30 mm or more wide. Corolla dirty white, often yellowish or pinkish, 1½ times as long as the calyx. 2n = 14. Alps; often treated as a subspecies. Somewhat similar plants from the mountains of E. Portugal, the Pyrenees, Carpathians and the mountains of the Balkan peninsula differ in minor characters, especially flower colour; they are closer to var.{\i   pratense} in size of heads and indumentum.
\par

\par
168}
\par