{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 Calyx exceeding the petals. Calyx-teeth very unequal, finally recurved, the upper longer than the tube; corolla 4-5 mm, white or pink; standard ovate, not emarginate. Legume 2-seeded.{\i   Dry, grassy places. C. & S.E. Europe, extending locally westwards to N.W. Spain and E. Portugal.} Au Bu Cz Ga *Ge Hs Hu Ju Lu Rm Rs (W, K, E) Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 21. T. cernuum} Brot.,{\i   Phyt. Lusit.} ed. 3, {\b 1}: 150 (1816). Like {\b 20} but leaflets truncate or emarginate; pedicels 2 mm, about as long as the calyx-tube and longer than the bracts, strongly deflexed in fruit; calyx shorter than the corolla with teeth subequal, scarcely as long as the tube; petals pink; standard deeply emarginate.{\i   Dry, grassy places. S.W. Europe.} Az Co Ga Hs Lu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 22. T. glomeratum} L., {\i  Sp. Pl.} 770 (1753). Glabrous annual; stems (2-)10-20(-35) cm, numerous, procumbent or ascending. Internodes 10-80 mm. Leaflets 5-10(-20) mm, obovate, mucronate; petioles 10-20(-70) mm; stipules ovate, acuminate. Heads 8-12 mm wide, globose, dense, sessile or subsessile, mostly remote. Flowers sessile. Calyx-tube glabrous with 10(-12) distinct veins, a little longer than the teeth; teeth subequal, triangular-ovate, auriculate, acuminate, deflexed; corolla 4-5 mm, pink, a little longer than the calyx. Legume (1-)2-seeded.{\i   Dry places. S. & W. Europe, northwards to }c. 52° 30' {\i  N in England.} Al Az Bl Br Bu Co Cr Ga Gr Hb Hs It Ju Lu Sa Si Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 23. T. suffocatum} L., {\i  Mantissa Alt. }276 (1771). Glabrescent, caespitose annual; stems 1-3(-5) cm, procumbent. Internodes rarely reaching 5 mm. Leaflets 3-8 mm, obovate-cuneate, emarginate; petioles 10-60 mm; stipules ovate, acuminate. Heads 5-6 mm, sessile, numerous, usually confluent, rarely somewhat separated, then ovate. Calyx sparsely pubescent at first, glabrescent; teeth all as long as the tube, lanceolate or subulate, recurved; corolla 3-4 mm, white; standard a little shorter than the calyx. Legume 2-seeded.{\i   Dry places. S. & W. Europe, northwards to} c. 53° 30' {\i  N in England}. Al Az Bl Br Co Cr Ga Gr Hs It Ju Lu Rm Sa Si Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Sect. CRYPTOSCIADIUM Celak. Perennial. Heads axillary, 1- to 3(-5)-flowered; peduncles usually very short and covered by the imbricate stipules. Pedicels evident, curved in fruit. Calyx cylindrical, 10-veined. Legume 3- to 10-seeded.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 24. T. uniflorum} L., {\i  Sp. Pl.} 771 (1753). Taproot woody; stems 1-3(-6) cm, caespitose, procumbent. Internodes very short. Leaflets 4-10 mm, orbicular, obovate or rhombic, acute or obtuse, apiculate, strongly veined with cusped teeth, often appressed-pubescent beneath. Petioles 10-30(-70) mm, glabrous or appressed-pubescent. Stipules broadly triangular, long-acuminate, membranous, imbricate. Pedicels 1-7 mm, usually shorter than the calyx-tube, curved or deflexed and sometimes much thickened in fruit. Calyx-tube 6-7 mm, glabrous or pubescent; teeth subequal, narrowly lanceolate, straight, usually much shorter than the tube; corolla (12-)15-20(-27) mm, white, cream, purple or parti-coloured; standard strongly recurved. Legume linear, acute, pubescent above.{\i   Dry pastures and stony places. E. Mediterranean region, extending to Sicilia.} Cr Gr It Si Tu [*Ga].
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Very variable in indumentum, in size and shape of the leaflets, length of peduncles, length, thickness and curvature of the fruiting pedicels, length of calyx-teeth (which may equal the tube), and length and colour of the corolla.{\b  T. savianum} Guss.,{\i   Fl. Sic. Prodr.}{\b  2}: 488 (1828), from Sicilia and Calabria, has strongly recurved and thickened fruiting pedicels and is more pubescent than plants from other areas. It may merit subspecific rank.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Sect. MISTYLLUS (C. Presl) Godron. Glabrous annuals. Heads pseudoterminal with prominent, glumaceous, striate, free bracts. Calyx 20- to 35-veined, inflated more or less equally on all sides in fruit; teeth setaceous, recurved. Legume included, 1- to 4-seeded.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 25. T. spumosum} L.,{\i   Sp. Pl.} 771 (1753). Stems 10-30(-50) cm, procumbent or ascending. Leaflets 10-20(-30) mm, broadly obovate-cuneate, thin, not strongly veined, denticulate. Heads globose to ovate; peduncles 10-40(-100) mm. Bracts conspicuous, shorter than the mature calyx-tube. Calyx-tube much inflated, pyriform, with transverse as well as longitudinal striations; corolla pink, slightly exceeding the calyx. Legume 3- to 4-seeded.{\i   Dry, grassy places and disturbed ground. Mediterranean region, Portugal}. Bl Co Cr Ga Gr Hs It Lu Sa Si Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 26. T. vesiculosum} Savi,{\i   Fl. Pis.}{\b  2}: 165 (1798). Stems (5-)15-50(-70) cm, rigid. Leaflets (5-)15-30(-60) mm, almost coriaceous, those of the lower leaves obovate, of the upper usually oblong, elliptical or lanceolate, rarely obovate-elliptical or suborbicular-cuneate, long-apiculate, spinulose-denticulate; stipules with long setaceous apices. Heads 20-60 × 20-35 mm, globose, ovoid or oblong; peduncles 10-50 mm; bracts about as long as the calyx-tube. Calyx-tube turbinate and contracted at the mouth, or broadly cylindrical to ovoid, with 24-35 prominent longitudinal veins connected by numerous more or less evident transverse veins; teeth as long as or a little shorter than the tube. Corolla white, becoming pink; standard 1½-2 times as long as the calyx. Legume 2- to 3-seeded. {\i  Dry, grassy places. S. Europe from Corse eastwards, extending northwards to Hungary.} Al Bu Co Cr Gr Hu It Ju Rm Rs (W, K, E) Tu [Ga].
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Very variable in habit, size of the parts, shape of the calyx-tube and degree of development of the transverse veins of the calyx-tube. Some plants from the Balkan peninsula, Calabria and Sicilia, with cylindrical or ovoid calyx-tube with indistinct transverse veins have been separated as{\b  T. multistriatum} Koch,{\i   Syn. Fl. Germ.} ed. 2, 190 (1843) ({\i  T. setiferum} Boiss., {\i  T. rumelicum} (Griseb.) Halácsy), but they do not appear to be specifically distinct.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 27. T. mutabile} Portenschl., {\i  Enum. Pl. Dalmat.} 16 (1824) ({\i  T. leiocalcyinum} Boiss. & Spruner). Like {\b 26} but more robust; calyx-tube broadly cylindrical or ovoid, the longitudinal veins slender, faint, not prominent and the transverse veins absent. {\i  Dry grassy places. • S. Italy, Sicilia; Greece, Albania, islands of W. Jugoslavia.} Al Gr It Ju Si.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Sect. VESICASTRUM Ser. Bracts free or united into a small involucre. Flowers subsessile. Calyx inflated in fruit, upper lip externally densely hairy (rarely glabrous), scarious and reticulately veined, its two teeth often setaceous.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 28. T. physodes} Steven ex Bieb.,{\i   Fl. Taur.-Cauc. }{\b 2}: 217 (1808). Glabrous perennial; stems 5-25 cm, procumbent or ascending, not rooting at the nodes. Leaflets 10-20(-25) mm, ovate or elliptical to obovate-orbicular; stipules lanceolate, aristate. Heads 15-20 mm wide, globose or ovoid; peduncles 10-80 mm. Bracts 0·5-1 mm, free, shorter than or equalling the pedicels. Upper lip of the calyx hairy, its teeth lanceolate, porrect; lower calyx-teeth subulate, straight, somewhat longer than the tube; corolla 8-14 mm, pink.{\i   Balkan peninsula, S. Italy, Sicilia; Portugal.} Al Cr Gr It Ju Lu Si Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b  T. rechingeri} Rothm., {\i  Bot. Jahrb.}{\b  73}: 438 (1944) ({\i  T. physodes} var. {\i  sericocalyx} Gibelli & Belli) and {\b T. sclerorrhizum} Boiss.,{\i   Diagn. Pl. Or. Nov.}{\b  2}({\b 9}): 28 (1849) ({\i  T. physodes} var.{\i   psilocalyx}
\par

\par
164}
\par