{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 axillary; peduncles longer than the leaves; pedicels slender, the upper ones 4-5 mm, up to twice as long as the calyx-tube, deflexed after anthesis. Calyx-tube 1-1·5 mm, with 5 veins distinct, the other 5 often obscure; calyx-teeth 2-3 mm, longer than the tube, the two upper slightly longer than the others, subulate, separated by broad obtuse sinuses; corolla (5-)7-10 mm, purple or white at first, pink later, becoming brown. Legume 2- to 4-seeded.{\i   Meadows and pastures. Most of Europe; widely cultivated as a forage plant and native distribution uncertain.} *Au Bu Cr *Cz Ga Gr *He Hs *Hu It Ju *Rm Rs (*W, K, *E) Tu [Be Br Da Fe Ge Hb Ho No Po Rs (N, B, C) Su].
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Stems 5-10(-15) cm, densely caespitose, procumbent or ascending; 
\par
  heads 12-15 mm wide; corolla purple ........................... ({\b c}) subsp. {\b anatolicum} 
\par
1 Stems more than 15 cm; heads more than 15 mm wide;
\par
  corolla white and pink 
\par
2 Stems sparingly branched, erect, fistulose; heads c. 25 mm wide 
\par
  .......................................................................................... ({\b a}) subsp. {\b hybridum} 
\par
2 Stems much-branched, procumbent or ascending, scarcely fistulose; 
\par
  heads 16-19 mm wide ......................................................... ({\b b}) subsp. {\b elegans}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b hybridum}: 2n = 16.{\i   Native distribution uncertain; widely cultivated in C., N. & E. Europe and frequently naturalized}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b elegans} (Savi) Ascherson & Graebner,{\i   Syn. Mitteleur. Fl.}{\b  6}({\b 2}): 496 (1907): {\i  Scattered in the southern part of the range of the species, rarer in the north.}
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Probably the wild progenitor of subsp. ({\b a}). 
\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b c}) Subsp. {\b anatolicum} (Boiss.) Hossain,{\i   Notes Roy. Bot. Gard. Edinb.}{\b  23}: 466 (1961):{\i   Mountains of Bulgaria and Greece}. ({\i  Anatolia}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 15. T. bivonae} Guss.,{\i   Fl. Sic. Prodr.}{\b  2}: 512 (1828). Perennial; stems 10-20 cm, erect or ascending, numerous, simple, from a stout stock. Leaflets up to 20 × 10 mm, broadly obovate, elliptical or ovate, obtuse, with numerous curved lateral veins, prominent near the margin. Peduncles 80-150 mm; pedicels 4-5 × 0·5 mm, thick, often longer than the calyx-tube. Flowers strongly deflexed and imbricate after anthesis. Calyx glabrous; teeth lanceolate, acuminate, straight, the two upper slightly longer than the others and about as long as the cylindrical tube; corolla 10-12 mm, pink; standard straight. Legume usually 1-seeded.{\i   Mountain grassland. • Sicilia.} Si.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Very similar before anthesis to {\b 28}, but readily distinguished by the floral characters after anthesis.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 16. T. isthmocarpum} Brot.,{\i   Phyt. Lusit.} ed. 3, {\b 1}: 148 (1816). Glabrous annual; stems 5-60 cm, branching from the base, procumbent or ascending, often fistulose. Leaflets 10-25 mm, obovate, broadly elliptical or obtriangular; petioles up to 10 cm. Stipules membranous, abruptly contracted into a subulate apex. Heads 15-25 mm wide, hemispherical, or cylindrical, dense; peduncles 20-100 mm, longer than the leaves. Flowering pedicels not longer than the calyx-tube, weakly deflexed in fruit. Calyx-teeth subequal, triangular-acute to lanceolate-subulate, shorter than or as long as the calyx-tube, straight or recurved; corolla 9-12 mm, pink; standard 1½-2 times as long as the calyx. Legume oblong, constricted between the two seeds.{\i   Moist grassland on sandy soil. W. Mediterranean region and Portugal.} Co Hs It Lu Si [Ga *Tu].
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b isthmocarpum}: Heads hemispherical. Calyx-teeth narrowly triangular, acute, straight or recurved in fruit. Corolla pink; standard twice as long as the calyx.{\i   Spain and Portugal}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b jaminianum} (Boiss.) Murb.,{\i   Lunds Univ. Arsskr.}{\b  33}({\b 12}): 67 (1897): Heads cylindrical. Calyx-teeth linear-subulate, patent or recurved in fruit. Corolla white or pale pink; standard 1½ times as long as the calyx.{\i   Italy, Sicilia, Corse}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Intermediates between subspp. ({\b a}) and ({\b b}) occur in S.W. Spain.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 17. T. nigrescens} Viv.,{\i   Fl. Ital. Fragm.} 12 (1808). Glabrous or glabrescent annual; stems 5-40 cm, often numerous, procumbent, erect or ascending. Leaflets 8-15(-25) mm, obovate or obcordate. Stipules triangular-lanceolate, acuminate. Heads 10-20 mm wide, globose, lax; peduncles longer than the leaves; pedicels equalling or longer than the calyx-tube, deflexed in fruit. Calyx-teeth lanceolate or linear, without wide sinuses between, the upper teeth usually slightly longer than the others and equalling or exceeding the tube. Corolla 6-9 mm, white, cream or pink, becoming brown. Legume 1- to 5-seeded. 2n = 16. {\i  Grassland and waste places. S. Europe.} Al Az Bl Bu Co Cr Ga Gr Hs It Ju Lu Sa Si Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b nigrescens}: Ovules (3-)4(-6); legume shallowly constricted between the seeds.{\i   Almost throughout the range of the species}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b petrisavii} (G. C. Clementi) Holmboe,{\i   Stud. Veg. Cyprus} 106 (1914): Ovules 2; legume deeply constricted between the seeds.{\i   Damp grassland. Balkan peninsula and Sicilia}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Robust plants with 1-seeded legumes from damp places in the E. part of the Balkan peninsula have been named{\b  T. meneghinianum} G. C. Clementi,{\i   Sert. Or.} 31 (1855).{\b  T. macropodum} Guss.,{\i   Fl. Sic. Syn.}{\b  2}: 388 (1844), from Sicilia, with short, densely caespitose stems, sulcate peduncles, subequal calyx-teeth and 2-seeded legumes, may be another subspecies. Both require further study.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 18. T. michelianum} Savi,{\i   Fl. Pis.}{\b  2}: 159 (1798). Annual; stems erect, up to 65 cm, 2-6 mm thick, fistulose, striate, branching, often constricted at the nodes. Leaflets 10-30 mm, oblong or obovate, dentate; petioles up to 70 mm. Stipules ovate, acuminate. Heads 20-25 mm wide, globose, many-flowered, lax; peduncles equalling or exceeding the leaves; pedicels 3-6 mm, 5-10 times as long as the calyx-tube. Flowers deflexed after anthesis. Calyx c. 5 mm; teeth subequal, linear-subulate, 3-4 times as long as the tube; corolla 8-11 mm, pink. Legume obovate or orbicular, stipitate, 2-seeded, thinly pubescent; seed 2 mm. {\i  In wet meadows and by standing water, S. Europe, extending northwards to N. France.} Bu Co ?Cr Ga Gr Hs It Ju Lu Rm Sa Si.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Less robust plants with solid stems, shorter pedicels, and calyx-teeth only twice as long as the tube are recorded from the Balkan peninsula as {\b T. balansae} Boiss.,{\i   Diagn. Pl. Or. Nov. }{\b 3}({\b 5}): 81 (1856); they may represent a distinct subspecies.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 19. T. angulatum} Waldst. & Kit., {\i  Pl. Rar. Hung.}{\b  1}: 26 (1800). Like {\b 18} but with heads 10-15 mm wide; peduncles as long as or shorter than the leaves; calyx 3-3·5 mm; teeth about twice as long as the tube; corolla 6-8 mm, reddish; legume oblong, glabrous, 3- to 5-seeded; seed 1 mm.{\i   Damp saline places. E.C. Europe, extending southwards to Macedonia; S.E. Russia} ({\i  near Temrjuk}). Cz Hu Ju Rm Rs (E) [Ga].
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 20. T. retusum} L.,{\i   Demonstr. Pl.} 21 (1753) ({\i  T. parviflorum} Ehrh.). Glabrous or glabrescent annual; stems 10-20(-40) cm, numerous, branching, procumbent or ascending. Leaflets 8-18 mm, the lower obovate-lanceolate, the upper oblong, mucronate, denticulate; veins curved, prominent; petioles 10-70 mm. Stipules triangular, acuminate, membranous. Heads 8-11 mm wide, globose, dense, the upper nearly sessile, the lower with peduncles up to 30 mm. Pedicels c. 1 mm or less, much shorter than the bracts and calyx-tube, not or slightly deflexed in fruit.
\par

\par
163}
\par