{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. T. ornithopodioides} L., {\i  Sp. Pl.} 766 (1753) ({\i  Trigonella ornithopodioides} (L.) DC.) Stems 5-10(-20) cm, procumbent, glabrous. Leaflets 4-10(-14) mm, obovate or obcordate, cuneate, truncate, mucronate and serrate, shortly petiolulate. Petioles 20-40(-50) mm, longer than the leaves, stipules and heads. Stipules 7-10 mm, lanceolate, acuminate. Heads (1-)2- to 4(-5)-flowered. Peduncles up to 8 mm. Corolla 6-8 mm, white or pink. Calyx-teeth subequal, longer than the tube. Standard narrowly oblong. Legume 6-8 mm, exserted. 2n = 16. {\i  Open habitats, moist or wet in winter. W. Europe northwards to Ireland and the Netherlands, and extending eastwards to Italy; S.E. part of C. Europe.} ?Az Bl Br Co Ga Ge Hb Ho Hs Hu It ?Ju Lu Rm Sa.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Plants growing in winter in shallow water have floating leaves with petioles up to 10 cm.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Subgen.{\b  Lotoidea} Pers. Flowers subtended by free or united bracts (or short glandular hairs). Calyx-throat open, without a ring of hairs or a callosity. Legume included in the calyx or exserted. Seeds (1-)2-4(-10).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Sect. LUPINASTER (Fabr.) Ser. Perennial. Flowers often in 2 superposed whorls each subtended by a minute involucre of connate bracts. Calyx ± regular. Corolla persistent and becoming scarious. Legume shortly stalked.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. T. lupinaster} L., {\i  Sp. Pl.} 766 (1753). Stems 15-50 cm, erect or ascending, glabrous or glabrescent. Upper leaves with 5(-8) lanceolate or linear leaflets, their petioles up to 10 mm, shorter than and largely united to the stipules. Heads lax, 10- to 20-flowered, peduncles 10-30 mm. Corolla 15-20 mm, red or white. Legume 1- to 9-seeded.{\i   E. Europe.} Cz Po Rm Rs (N, C, W, E).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  The variability in habit, leaflet-shape, corolla-colour and chromosome number require further study. Plants from European Russia regarded as identical with{\i   T. lupinaster} (originally described from Siberia) are said to be rhizomatous, with dark-green, lanceolate leaflets 30-50 × 5-20 mm, red (or white) corolla and light green seeds; 2n = 32 (2n = 40 in some Asiatic plants from S. Sayan).{\b  T. ciswolgense} Sprygin ex Iljin & Truchaleva,{\i   Dokl. Akad. Nauk SSSR }{\b 132}: 219 (1960) ({\i  T. lupinaster} var.{\i   albiflorum} Ser.), is said to be non-rhizomatous, taller, more erect, leaves light green, corolla white, seeds violet; it has 2n = 16 and occurs mainly in the S. and W. parts of the range of the species. Plants with linear leaflets, 8-10 times as long as broad, corolla red or white and 2n = 32, occurring in the W. and S.W. parts of the range of the species have been described as {\b T. litwinowii }Iljin in Iljin & Truchaleva, {\i  loc. cit.} (1960) ({\i  T. lupinaster} subsp. {\i  angustifolium} (Litv.) Bobrov).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 3. T. alpinum} L., {\i  Sp. Pl.} 767 (1753). Glabrous, densely caespitose perennial with massive tap-root; stems very short, hidden by dead leaf-bases. Leaves 3-foliolate; leaflets 10-40(-70) mm, lanceolate or linear. Petioles 20-50(-120) mm. Stipules up to 40(-90) mm, concealing the stems, largely adnate to the petioles. Heads 3- to 12-flowered. Peduncles 50-150 mm. Corolla 18-25 mm, pink, purple or rarely cream, strongly scented. Legume 1- to 2-seeded. 2n = 16.{\i   Meadows and pastures, mainly between }1700{\i   and} 2500 {\i  m; calcifuge. Alps, N. & C. Appennini, mountains of S. France and N. Spain.} Au Ga He Hs It.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Some plants from west of the Rhône have short, obtuse, elliptical leaflets with strongly curved veins; they need further study.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 4. T. pilczii} Adamovic,{\i   Denkschr. Akad. Wiss. Math.-Nat. Kl. }({\i  Wien}) {\b 74}: 130 (1904). Like {\b 3} but smaller, less robust; leaflets 8-12 mm, oblong to obovate; petioles up to 20 mm; stipules up to 7 mm; heads 2- to 8-flowered; peduncles 15-25 mm; corolla 12-14 mm, purplish. •{\i   S. Jugoslavia and Albania.} Al Ju.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Sect. PARAMESUS (C. Presl) Godron. Annual. Inflorescence of 1-4 closely superposed whorls, each subtended by a minute involucre of ± connate bracts. Legume (1-)2-seeded, with a swollen and indurated wall, indehiscent, exceeding the calyx-tube.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 5. T. strictum} L.,{\i   Cent. Pl. }{\b 1}: 24 (1755) ({\i  T. laevigatum} Poiret). Erect or ascending, 3-15(-25) cm. Leaflets 8-20 mm, linear to oblong-elliptical, the upper often lanceolate; veins ending in stalked glands. Stipules conspicuous, ovate or rhombic, glandular-denticulate. Heads 7-10 mm, axillary or pseudoterminal; peduncles 1-2 times as long as the leaves. Involucral bracts exceeding the pedicels. Corolla 5-6 mm, pink, the standard slightly exceeding the calyx. Legume nearly orbicular, dorsally gibbous, 2-seeded.{\i   Grassland; calcifuge. W. & S. Europe, northwards to Britain.} Br Bu Co Cz Ga Gr Hs Hu It Lu Rm Sa Si Tu [Ge].
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 6. T. nervulosum} Boiss. & Heldr. in Boiss.,{\i   Diagn. Pl. Or. Nov. }{\b 2}({\b 9}): 25 (1849). Procumbent or ascending, 4-15 cm. Leaflets narrowly oblanceolate; marginal glands absent or obscure. Stipules ovate, laciniate-dentate; glands absent or obscure. Heads 10-15 mm, solitary, pseudo-terminal; peduncles more than twice as long as the leaves. Involucral bracts equalling the pedicels, or obscure. Corolla 6-7 mm, pink; standard 2 or more times as long as the calyx. Legume oblong, dorsally gibbous.{\i   N. Albania; N.E. Greece.} Al Gr.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Sect. LOTOIDEA. Annual or perennial. Flowers umbellate, rarely spicate, numerous, pedicellate, subtended by lanceolate membranous bracts. Calyx-teeth unequal. Legume (1-)2- to 4(-5)-seeded.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 7. T. montanum} L., {\i  Sp. Pl.} 770 (1753). Perennial; stock woody, with several erect, almost unbranched, more or less lanate stems 15-60 cm. Leaflets of basal leaves 30-70 mm, ovate, lanceolate or elliptical. Leaflets of cauline leaves 15-40(-60) mm, elliptical or oblong. Leaves glabrous above, sericeous or glabrescent beneath. Heads 15-30 mm, often in pairs, dense and many-flowered, globose or ovoid; peduncles 10-70 mm, densely hairy, ± erect. Calyx more or less hairy; teeth subulate. Corolla 7-9 mm, white or yellowish, rarely pink, yellowish-brown after anthesis; standard recurved. Legume usually 1-seeded. 2n = 16.{\i   Dry grassy places. Europe, but absent from much of the west, the Mediterranean region and the north.} Au Be Bu Cz Fe Ga Ge He Hs Hu It Ju No Po Rm Rs (N, B, C, W, K, E) Su.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Var.{\i   gayanum} Godron, from S.W. France and Spain, may merit subspecific rank. It has the leaflets of the basal leaves broadly elliptical or sub-orbicular; heads solitary; peduncles 100-150 mm, sparsely hairy; pedicels 2 mm, as long as the calyx-tube and exceeding the bracts, deflexed in fruit; and the calyx-tube glabrescent, with oblique mouth.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b T. balbisianum }Ser. in DC.,{\i   Prodr.}{\b  2}: 201 (1825), from mountains of S. France and N.W. Italy, may also merit subspecific rank. It has the corolla c. 10 mm, the calyx-teeth subequal, longer than the tube, and 2n = 16.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 8. T. ambiguum} Bieb.,{\i   Fl. Taur.-Cauc.}{\b  2}: 208 (1808). Robust perennial; stems 8-60 cm, procumbent or ascending, sparsely hairy or glabrescent. Leaflets 10-50(-70) mm, ovate-lanceolate or ovate-elliptical, glabrous or glabrescent. Heads 25-40 mm, hemispherical becoming oblong-ovate, usually solitary; peduncles 50-100(-200) mm. Bracts much longer than the pedicels. Calyx-tube  glabrous or slightly hairy above. Corolla 10-15 mm, white, becoming reddish. Legume 1- to 2-seeded.{\i   S. part of U.S.S.R.} ?Rm Rs (W, K, E).
\par

\par
161}
\par