{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b 84. T. smyrnaeum} Boiss., {\i  Diagn. Pl. Or. Nov.}{\b  1}({\b 2}): 25 (1843) ({\i  T. lagopus} Pourret ex Willd., non Gouan, {\i  T. sylvaticum} Gerard sec. C. Vicioso, {\i  T. hervieri} Freyn). Annual, softly grey-hairy; stems 5-20 cm, often stout, often spreading, with divaricate branches; hairs patent. Leaflets 5-10 mm, obovate-cuneate, often emarginate; stipules broadly ovate, sometimes denticulate above. Heads ovoid or cylindrical, dense, often more or less paired. Fruiting calyx with a subglobose tube; calyx-teeth subulate, ciliate, unequal, the lowest a little longer than the tube. Corolla 7-8 mm, pale pink, equalling or exceeding the calyx.{\i   Dry places; usually calcifuge. S. Europe.} Bu Co Cr Ga Gr Hs It Ju Lu Tu [Ge].
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 85. T. ochroleucon} Hudson,{\i   Fl. Angl.} 283 (1762) (incl.{\i   T. caucasicum} Tausch, {\i  T. pallidulum} Jordan). Shortly rhizomatous or caespitose perennial; stems 20-50 cm, ascending; upper internodes long. Leaflets 15-30(-50) × 5-8 mm, oblong-elliptical or lanceolate. Stipules with a linear-lanceolate, herbaceous apex. Heads 20-40 mm, globose or oblong, shortly pedunculate or subsessile. The 4 upper calyx-teeth equalling or shorter than the tube, the lowest usually longer and deflexed in fruit, with one distinct central vein, rarely with two lateral veins. Corolla 15-20 mm, exceeding the calyx, at first yellowish-white, rarely pink, ultimately falling. Legume thickened at the apex.{\i   Mainly in shady or somewhat damp habitats. W., C. & S. Europe.} Al Au Be Br Bu Co Cz Ga Ge Gr He Hs Hu It Ju Lu Po Rm Rs (W) Sa Si Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Variable in indumentum, petal-colour and length of the calyx-teeth, especially the lowest. Plants from S. Europe (var.{\i   roseum} (C. Presl) Guss.) often have pink petals and the lowest calyx-tooth 2-3 times as long as the tube, sometimes with two indistinct lateral veins; some plants from Ukraine and S. Russia have yellowish-white petals and 2 distinct lateral veins on the lowest calyx-tooth, the latter twice as long as the tube ({\i  T. caucasicum} Tausch).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 86. T. pannonicum} Jacq.,{\i   Obs. Bot.}{\b  2}: 21 (1767). Shortly rhizomatous, hairy perennial; stems 20-50(-100) cm, erect. Upper leaflets 30-60 × 8-18 mm, oblong-lanceolate or elliptical; stipules with a long, linear, herbaceous apex. Heads up to 50(-80) mm, ovoid or cylindrical; peduncles up to 80 mm. Calyx-teeth linear-subulate, the lowest twice as long as the others. Corolla 20-25 mm, yellowish-white.{\i   Meadows, meadow-steppes and open scrub. • E.C. & S.E. Europe extending westwards to the S.W. Alps, occasionally cultivated elsewhere.} Al Bu Cz Ga Gr Hu It Ju Po Rm Rs (W) ?Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 87. T. canescens} Willd., {\i  Sp. Pl.}{\b  3}: 1369 (1802). Caespitose perennial; stems 10-30 cm, ascending, simple, clothed with appressed, white hairs. Stipules 20-30 mm, lanceolate, membranous below, herbaceous above. Leaflets of lower leaves 15-30 mm, thin, broadly oblong, deeply emarginate. Heads terminal, solitary, ovoid, lax. Calyx appressed-hairy; teeth 1-veined, the lowest only a little longer than the others and scarcely longer than the tube. Corolla c. 20 mm, creamy-white; standard twice as long as the calyx, emarginate.{\i   Mountain grassland. Krym.} Rs (K).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 88. T. alexandrinum} L.,{\i   Cent. Pl.}{\b  1}: 25 (1755). Annual; stems 40-70 cm, erect, branching, sparsely appressed-hairy. Leaflets 15-25 × 5-10 mm, oblong or lanceolate; free part of the stipules subulate, marginal hairs of the upper ones dilated at the base. Heads 15-20(-25) mm, ovoid or oblong-conical; peduncles up to 30 mm. Calyx hairy; tube obconical; teeth unequal, triangular-subulate, spinescent, the lowest 3-veined, at least at the base, about as long as the tube, others shorter, 1-veined. Corolla 8-10 mm, cream, about twice as long as the calyx. Apex of the mature legume slightly exserted, not concealed by the ring of hairs in the calyx-throat, which is devoid of a bilabiate callosity.{\i   Widely cultivated in the warmer parts of Europe and locally naturalized}. [Au Bu He Hs Hu Lu.]
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Long cultivated in N.E. Africa, possibly native in the E. Mediterranean region. Plants from S.E. Europe appear to belong to{\i   T. constantinopolitanum} ({\i  vide }{\b 90}) which is sometimes identified with {\i  T. alexandrinum} var.{\i   phleoides} (Boiss.) Boiss.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 89. T. apertum} Bobrov in Komarov,{\i   Fl. URSS}{\b  11}: 391 (1941). Like {\b 88} but calyx narrower and less hairy; veins less prominent; teeth 1-veined, narrower, less spinescent, subpatent in fruit; corolla larger.{\i   S.E. Russia.} Rs (E). ({\i  N.W. Caucasus, N.E. Anatolia}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 90. T. echinatum} Bieb.,{\i   Fl. Taur.-Cauc.}{\b  2}: 216 (1808) ({\i  T. supinum} Savi). Annual; stems 10-60 cm, procumbent or ascending, sparsely to densely hairy or glabrous. Leaflets 8-25 × 4-12 mm, obovate or oblanceolate; stipules short. Heads 8-15 mm in flower, ovoid or globose; peduncles 20-50(-80) mm. Fruiting calyx with tube 1·5-2 mm, campanulate or obconical, sparsely hairy or glabrous, the furrows between the 10 veins not reaching the widened mouth of the tube; teeth linear-subulate, 1-veined or 3-veined only at the base, stiff and spinose, the lowest much longer than the others and twice as long as the tube. Corolla 8-12 mm, pink or cream, at least twice as long as the calyx. Legume included.{\i   Grassy, often damp places. Balkan peninsula extending to Italy and S. Romania.} Al Bu Gr It Ju Rm Si Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Very variable in habit, height, indumentum and length of the calyx-teeth.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b T. constantinopolitanum} Ser. in DC.,{\i   Prodr. }{\b 2}: 193 (1825), is a plant of doubtful identity and affinity, variously treated as identical with or as a variety of{\b  88}, or as a subspecies of {\b 90}. Plants from Bulgaria, N. Greece and Turkey-in-Europe so treated are said to have stems with patent hairs, obovate leaflets, calyx-tube somewhat constricted at the apex, the lowest calyx-tooth scarcely longer than the tube, and corolla pale yellow. The legume is included in the calyx-tube as in {\b 90} and not exserted as in {\b 88}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 91. T. latinum} Sebastiani,{\i   Rom. Pl.}{\b  1}: 7 (1813). Like {\b 90} but peduncles 60-80 mm; leaflets up to 60 × 4·5 mm, linear-lanceolate, acute; calyx-tube pubescent.{\i   S.E. part of the Balkan peninsula; C. Italy.} Bu Gr It Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Often regarded as a hybrid between {\b 90} and {\b 92}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 92. T. leucanthum} Bieb.,{\i   Fl. Taur.-Cauc. }{\b 2}: 214 (1808). Annual; stems (5-)15-30 cm, with dense patent hairs. Leaflets 10-20 mm, cuneate-oblong. Heads 10-15 mm, nearly globose, often paired; peduncles 30-120 mm, appressed hairy. Fruiting calyx urceolate, densely pubescent, the veins reaching the base of the subequal, lanceolate,3-veined, patent teeth. Corolla 6-8 mm, white or pink, a little longer than the calyx. Legume included.{\i   Dry, stony places. S. Europe.} Al Bu Co Cr Gr Hs It Ju Lu Rs (K) Sa Si Tu [Ga].
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 93. T. squamosum} L., {\i  Amoen. Acad.}{\b  4}: 105 (1759) ({\i  T. maritimum} Hudson). Annual; stems 10-40 cm, procumbent or erect, hairy or glabrescent. Upper leaflets 10-20 × 6-8 mm, narrowly obovate-cuneate or oblong, often apiculate. Stipules linear, the free herbaceous part longer than the rest. Fruiting heads 10-20 mm, ovoid; peduncles up to 20 mm. Fruiting calyx tough, with a campanulate tube, glabrous or thinly hairy above, the 10 veins
\par

\par
171}
\par