{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28     {\b 9. A. polycephala} Desf., {\i  Fl. Atl.}{\b  2}: 150 (1798) ({\i  A. podocephala} Boiss.). Tall, more or less erect perennial up to 60 cm, woody below. Leaves evenly distributed along the stem, imparipinnate; leaflets 13-15 (often fewer in the uppermost leaves), narrowly elliptical, subequal, villous to hirsute above and beneath, without dilated sheathing leaf-bases. Heads arranged in a raceme, the lower pedunculate, the upper subsessile, dense. Calyx 6-9 mm, tubular-campanulate, hirsute, with long, plumose, awn-like teeth, the lowermost more or less equalling the tube. Corolla yellow; standard obovate-orbicular.{\i   S. Spain.} Hs.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 10. A. tejedensis} Boiss.,{\i   Biblioth. Univ. Genève} ser. 2, {\b 13}: 408 (1838). Like {\b 9} but more or less procumbent, forming dense tufts; indumentum very dense, brownish; capitula not in a racemose inflorescence but aggregated together; calyx 8·5-10 mm, all teeth about as long as the tube, the lowermost slightly longer; corolla yellow to orange, sometimes flushed brownish-violet.{\i   S. Spain.} Hs.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 11. A. rupestris} Cosson, {\i  Not. Pl. Crit.} 155 (1852). Like {\b 9} but leaflets 10-15, oblong-lanceolate; heads 2 or 3, not in a raceme; calyx 10-12 mm, the teeth shorter than the tube; standard ovate.{\i   Crevices of limestone rocks. S.E. Spain} ({\i  Sierra de Segura, S. de Cazorla and neighbouring mountains}). Hs.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 12. A. ramburii} Boiss., {\i  Elenchus} 35 (1838). Perennial up to 55 cm, woody below. Stems erect to ascending. Leaves mostly in the lower ½ of the stem, imparipinnate; leaflets 7-11, subequal, narrowly elliptical to oblong, sparsely sericeous above and beneath. Heads small, subtended by digitate bracts borne just beneath the flowers. Calyx 4-6·5 mm, more or less tubular, hirsute; teeth triangular, slightly less than ½ as long as the tube. Corolla yellow, becoming reddish later.{\i   S. & E. Spain}. Hs.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 13. A. onobrychoides} Cav.,{\i   Icon. Descr.}{\b  2}: 40 (1793). Perennial up to 50 cm, very woody below. Stems erect to ascending. Leaves mostly in the lower half of the stem, imparipinnate; leaflets 5-11, equal, very narrowly elliptical or very narrowly obovate to linear, glaucous, very sparsely pubescent above, more densely so beneath. Heads small, ebracteate. Calyx 2-3 mm, tubular-campanulate, sericeous, the teeth triangular, less than half as long as the tube. Corolla yellow. •{\i   S. & E. Spain.} Hs.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 14. A. gerardi} L.,{\i   Mantissa} 100 (1767) ({\i  Dorycnopsis gerardii} (L.) Boiss.). Perennial up to 60 cm, woody below. Stems ascending, diffuse, branched. Leaves remote, evenly distributed along the stem, imparipinnate; leaflets 5-11, equal, linear, oblanceolate or very narrowly elliptical, glabrous above, sparsely pubescent beneath. Heads small, ebracteate. Calyx 1·5-2·5 mm, tubular campanulate, very sparsely hairy, the teeth triangular, up to half as long as the tube. Corolla pink.{\i   S.W. Europe eastwards to Capraia.} Co Ga Hs It Lu Sa.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 15. A. vulneraria} L.,{\i   Sp. Pl.} 719 (1753). Annual, biennial or perennial. Lowermost leaves reduced to a terminal leaflet, or imparipinnate with a much larger terminal leaflet; upper leaves imparipinnate, equifoliolate or not. Heads many-flowered, subtended by 2 palmatisect bracts borne close beneath the flowers. Calyx inflated at anthesis, constricted at the apex, with 5 unequal teeth and the mouth oblique. Corolla yellow, red, purple, orange, whitish or parti-coloured. Legume 1(-2)-seeded.{\i   Throughout Europe.} All except Az Sb.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  A very polymorphic species divisible into about 30 infraspecific taxa (many of them frequently recognized as species),between which intermediates occur, often over a large area. 24 of these taxa occur in Europe, and they are recognized as subspecies below. They fall into 2 fairly distinct groups (({\b a})-({\b r}) and ({\b s})-({\b x}) below). The occurrence of intermediates often makes identification difficult and many specimens can be identified only by comparison with herbarium specimens.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  The term bract refers only to the large outer bracts of each inflorescence. Leaves on the vegetative stems or rosettes are referred to as the lowest leaves.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Calyx 2-4(-5) mm wide, the lateral teeth small, appressed to 
\par
  the upper teeth (often only visible when fresh); bract-lobes 
\par
  narrowly deltate, acute; upper cauline leaves equifoliolate
\par
2 Indumentum of stems composed entirely of patent hairs
\par
3 Calyx 7-10 mm; plant delicate; stems 6-15 cm ...... ({\b k}) subsp. {\b vulnerarioides}
\par
3 Calyx (10-)11-13 mm; plant robust; stems 20-25 cm
\par
4 Leaves confined to the lower part of the stem, fleshy,
\par
  glabrous above ................................................................. ({\b r}) subsp. {\b corbierei}
\par
4 Leaves evenly distributed along the stem, thin, sparsely
\par
  hairy above ................................................................ ({\b q}) subsp. {\b hispidissima}
\par
2 Indumentum of stems with at least some appressed hairs 
\par
5 Indumentum of calyx evenly appressed, shining
\par
6 Calyx 14-17 mm; leaves ± evenly distributed along the stem
\par
  .............................................................................................. ({\b p}) subsp. {\b maura}
\par
6 Calyx 10-13·5(-14) mm; leaves confined to the lower
\par
  part of the stem
\par
7 Lower cauline leaves inequifoliolate, with 1-3 leaflets;
\par
  calyx (11-)12-13·5(-14) mm ...................................... ({\b n}) subsp. {\b praepropera}
\par
7 Lower cauline leaves subequifoliolate, with 7-11 leaflets;
\par
  calyx 10-12 mm .......................................................... ({\b o}) subsp. {\b weldeniana}
\par
5 Indumentum of calyx patent or semipatent, never shining
\par
8 Bracts divided for more than ½ of their total length,
\par
  usually as long as or longer than the calyces
\par
9 Leaves evenly distributed along the stem
\par
10 Calyx red at apex, weakly semipatent-hairy; stems thin, not 
\par
   woody at the base; lower cauline leaves subequifoliolate
\par
   ....................................................................................... ({\b a}) subsp. {\b vulneraria}
\par
10 Calyx concolorous, strongly patent-hairy; stems usually
\par
   woody at the base; lower cauline leaves markedly inequifoliolate
\par
11 Hairs on the lower part of the stem patent; stems 
\par
   ascending to erect ........................................................ ({\b c}) subsp. {\b polyphylla}
\par
11 All cauline hairs appressed; stems decumbent ............. ({\b b}) subsp. {\b maritima}
\par
9  Leaves confined to the lower part of the stem
\par
12 Calyx 7-9 mm; plants small, delicate, with stems 10-15(-20) cm
\par
13 Lower cauline leaves subequifoliolate with 5-9(-11)
\par
   leaflets .................................................................... ({\b k}) subsp. {\b vulnerarioides}
\par
13 Lower cauline leaves inequifoliolate with 1-5 leaflets . ({\b f}) subsp. {\b pulchella}
\par
12 Calyx 10-13 mm; plants tall, robust, with stems 20-40 cm
\par
14 Calyx 10-11 mm; lower cauline leaves inequifoliolate
\par
15 Bracts exceeding the flowers; calyx concolorous ......... ({\b d}) subsp. {\b bulgarica}
\par
15 Bracts shorter than the flowers; calyx red at apex ...........({\b e}) subsp. {\b boissieri}
\par
14 Calyx 11-17 mm; lower cauline leaves equifoliolate 
\par
16 Calyx 11-13 mm; red at apex ........................................ ({\b 1}) subsp. {\b forondae}
\par
16 Calyx 14-17 mm, concolorous ..................................... ({\b m}) subsp. {\b pindicola}
\par
8  Bracts divided to ½ or less, usually shorter than the calyces
\par
17 Leaflets of rosette and lower cauline leaves broadly
\par
   elliptical to orbicular, very densely silvery-sericeous 
\par
   above, obscuring the green colour of the leaf .......... ({\b h}) subsp. {\b argyrophylla}
\par
17 Leaflets of rosette and lower cauline leaves narrower,
\par
   glabrous above, or if hairy, then the hairs grey but
\par
   not obscuring the green colour of the leaf
\par

\par
179}
\par