{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 44. R. canescens} DC., {\i Cat. Pl. Hort. Monsp.} 139 (1813) ({\i R. tomentosus }Borkh. pro parte). Stems arching, procumbent or nearly erect, usually glabrous, occasionally sparsely tomentose or pubescent, the hairs stellate, or occurring singly or in tufts, with a few glands and acicles; prickles weak, unequal, the largest curved. Leaves small, pedate; leaflets 3-5, usually greyish tomentose above, grey-white-tomentose beneath; terminal leaflet rhombic, 4 times as long as its petiolule, subacuminate, entire or subcordate at base, very coarsely incise-serrate. Inflorescence rather long, nearly leafless, the axis tomentose, usually eglandular; peduncles ascending, slender, with small, yellowish, subulate prickles; bracts lanceolate, the lower trifid. Sepals deflexed after flowering, grey-white, sometimes aciculate; petals small, obovate-oblong, yellowish-white; stamens white, more or less equalling the green styles; pollen completely fertile; carpels glabrous.{\i  S. & C. Europe, extending to Belgium }. Al Au Be Bu Co Cr Cz Ga Ge He Hs Hu It Ju Lu Po Rm Rs (W, K) Si Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Very polymorphic. A sexual species, probably diploid.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Related species include:
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b  R. aipetriensis} Juz., {\i Not. Syst.} ({\i Leningrad}){\b  13}: 104 (1950). Rs (K)        
\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b  R. almensis} Juz., {\i op. cit. 93} (1950). Rs (K). 
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b R. collinus} DC., {\i Cat. Pl. Hort. Monsp.} 139 (1813) ( ?{\i R. canescens} ×{\i  ulmifolius}). Ga Hs.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b R. crimaeus} Juz.,{\i  Not. Syst.} ({\i Leningrad}) {\b 13}: 99 (1950). Rs (K). 
\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b  R. divergens} P.J.Mueller, {\i Flora }({\i Regensb.}) {\b 41}: 182 (1858) (?{\i R. caesius} ×{\i  canescens}). Au Cz Ga Ge He Ju. 
\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b  R. eurythyrsiger} Juz.,{\i  Not. Syst.} ({\i Leningrad}){\b  13}: 101 (1950). Rs (K). 
\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b  R. hrubyi} Rohlena,{\i  Me'm. Soc. Sci. Bohême} ({\i Sci.}) {\b 1936 }({\b 22}): 16 (1937). Ju.  
\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b  R. lloydianus} Genev.,{\i  Mem. Soc. Acad.} ({\i Angers}){\b  10}: 26 (1861). Au Bu Cz Ga Hs It Hu Ju Rs (K). 
\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b  R. marschallianus} Juz., Not. Syst. ({\i Leningrad}) {\b 13}: 104 (1950). Rs (K). 
\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b  R. moestifrons }Juz.,{\i  op. cit.} 97 (1950). Rs (K). 
\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b  R. nanitauricus} Juz., {\i op. cit.} 91 (1950). Rs (K). 
\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b  R. oenoxylon} Juz., {\i op. cit.} 96 (1950). Rs (K). 
\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b  R. paratauricus }Juz.,{\i  op. cit.} 90 (1950). Rs (K).  
\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b  R. schultzii} Ripart ex P. J. Mueller, {\i Pollichia}{\b  16-17}: 289 (1859) (?{\i R. canescens} ×{\i  vestitus}). Ga Ju. 
\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b  R. sericophyllus} P. J. Mueller & Wirtgen ex Focke,{\i  Syn. Rub. Germ.} 240 (1877). Ge He ?Ju. 
\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b  R. stenophyllidium} Juz., {\i Not. Syst.} ({\i Leningrad}) {\b 13}: 92  (1950). Rs (K) 
\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b  R. stevenii} Juz., {\i op. cit.} 102 (1950). Rs (K).
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b R. subtauricus} Juz., {\i op. cit.} 98 (1950). Rs (K). 
\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b  R. tauricus} Schlecht. ex Juz., {\i op. cit}. 88 (1950). Rs (K). 
\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b  R. tomentellus} Ripart ex Genev.,{\i  Me'm. Soc. Acad.} ({\i Angers}) {\b 24}: 301 (1868)   (?{\i R. canescens} ×{\i  ulmifolius}). Ga Ju.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b  R. trachypus} Boulay & Gillot, {\i Ann. Soc. Bot. Lyon}{\b  8}: 20 (1881) (?{\i R. canescens} ×{\i  ulmifolius}). Ga Ju. 
\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b  R. troitzkyi }Juz.,{\i  Not. Syst.} ({\i Leningrad}) {\b 13}: 105 (1950). Rs (K). 
\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b  R. undabundus} Juz.,{\i  op. cit.} 94 (1950). Rs (K). 
\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b  R. utshansuensis} Juz.,{\i  op. cit.} 94 (1950). Rs (K). 
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Series{\i  Vestiti} Focke. Stem-prickles only slightly unequal, mainly on the angles of the stems; glands rather sparse; stems and leaves often rather hairy.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 45. R. vestitus} Weihe & Nees in Bluff & Fingerh.,{\i  Comp. Fl. Germ.}{\b  1}: 684 (1825). Stems angled, hirsute and tomentose, not pruinose, red-brown, with few glands and pricklets; prickles deep purple, subulate. Leaflets (3-)5, dull green, slightly hairy above, white-tomentose beneath, with stout, pectinately arranged hairs on the veins; terminal leaflet orbicular or obovate, twice as long as its petiolule, shortly acuminate, subcordate, unevenly serrate-dentate, undulate. Inflorescence long; axis hairy, with some glands and pricklets; prickles long, slender, patent or deflexed; bracts mainly trifid; flowers 2·5-3 cm in diameter. Sepals deflexed after flowering, slightly glandular and aculeolate, tomentose; petals 5-6, suborbicular, villous, deep to pale pink; stamens numerous, exceeding the green or pink styles; anthers usually pubescent; filaments deep pink to white; receptacle hairy; carpels glabrous or slightly hairy.{\i  W. & C. Europe, extending to Sweden.} Au Be Br Cz Da Ga Ge Hb He Ho Hu It Lu Po Rm Su.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Related species include:
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b R. bakonyensis} Gáyer,{\i  Feddes Repert.}{\b  22}: 190 (1925). Hu. 
\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b  R. conspicuus} P. J. Mueller,{\i  Flora} ({\i Regensb}.){\b  42}: 71 (1859). Br Ga Ge He Hu 
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b R. holochloroides} Sudre & Sabr. in Sudre, {\i Rubi Eur.} 195 (1912). Au.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b  R. holochloropsis} Sudre,{\i  op. cit.} 219 (1913). Au.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b  R. holochloros} (Sabr.) Fritsch,{\i  Exkursionsfl. Österr.} ed. 3, 209 (1922) Au 

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b  R. leucanthemus }P. J. Mueller, {\i Pollichia}{\b  16-17}: 122 (1859). Au Cz Ge He Ho
\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b  R. leucotrichus} Sudre,{\i  Bat. Eur.} 55 (1906). Au Ga.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b R. lipovensis} E. I. Nyárády in Savul.,{\i  Fl. Rep. Pop. Române}{\b  4}: 912 (1956).  Rm.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b  R. pilifer} Sudre,{\i  Bull. Soc. Bot. Fr. }{\b 46}: 90 (1899). Cz Ga Ge Hu Rm.      
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b R. podophyllos} P. J. Mueller,{\i  Bonplandia }{\b 9}: 281 (1861). 2n = 28. Au Br ?Cz Ga Ge He Hu. Placed near to{\b  45} by Watson, but near to {\b 47} by Sudre.         
\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b  R. saxigenus} Sudre, {\i Bull. Soc. Etud. Sci. Angers}{\b  35}: 26 (1906). Au Ga.    
\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b  R. vaccarum} E. I. Nyárády in Savul.,{\i  Fl. Rep. Pop. Române}{\b  4}: 911 (1956). Rm.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 46. R. boraeanus} Genev., {\i Mem. Soc. Acad.} ({\i Angers}) {\b 8}: 87 (1860). Stems purple, with sparse, tufted hairs, unequal, scattered, stout pricklets, and a few acicles and short glandular hairs; prickles stout-based, straight or slightly falcate. Leaves pedate; leaflets 5, thick, grey-white tomentose beneath; terminal leaflet obovate or suborbicular-ovate, acuminate or cuspidate, cordate, coarsely toothed. Inflorescence broad, more or less cylindrical with a few weak, deflexed or falcate prickles; branches long erecto-patent; peduncles and pedicels often unarmed; flowers 1·5-2·5 cm in diameter. Sepals patent to erect; petals broadly obovate, usually pink, sometimes white; stamens pink or pink based, equalling the pink-based styles; anthers, carpels and receptacle pubescent. 2n = 28.{\i  W. Europe, from Ireland to Switzerland.} Br Ga Hb He.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Related species include:
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b  R. augustus }Hormuzaki, {\i Mem. Sect. Sti.} ({\i Acad. Româna}) ser. 3, {\b 2}: 287 (1925). Au.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b  R. breyninus} G. Beck, {\i Fl. Nieder-Österr.}{\b  2}({\b 1}): 729 (1892). Au. 
\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b  R. caflishii} Focke,{\i  Syn. Rub. Germ.} 278 (1877). Au Cz Ga Ge He Hu Ju.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b  R. calvarii} Hormuzaki,{\i  Österr. Bot. Zeitschr.}{\b  68}: 225 (1919). Au. 
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b R. crucimontis} Hayek, {\i Verh. Zool.-Bot. Ges. Wien}{\b  66}: 452 (1916). Au.  
\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b  R. epipsilos} Focke,{\i  Syn. Rub. Germ. }258 (1877). Au Ge.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b  R. fimbrifolius} P. J. Mueller & Wirtgen ex Focke,{\i  op. cit.} 256 (1877). Au Ga Ge.
\par

\par
17}
\par