{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 2 Stems appressed-hairy or glabrescent above
\par
3 Upper 4 calyx-teeth not longer than the tube ................... ({\b a}) subsp. {\b medium}
\par
3 Upper 4 calyx-teeth longer than the tube ...................... ({\b b}) subsp. {\b banaticum}
\par
                                  
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b medium}: Stems (10-)30-45 cm, appressed-hairy or glabrescent above; leaflets 20-50 × 9-20 mm; calyx-tube glabrous or glabrescent, 10-veined; upper 4 calyx-teeth not longer than the tube.{\i   Throughout the range of the species, possibly excepting Greece.}
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b banaticum} (Heuffel) Hendrych,{\i   Preslia}{\b  28}: 405 (1956): Stems up to 50 cm, appressed-hairy or glabrescent above; leaflets 25-45 × 15-30 mm; calyx-tube glabrous or glabrescent, 10(-14)-veined; upper 4 calyx-teeth longer than the tube. •{\i   Czechoslovakia, Hungary, Romania}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b c}) Subsp. {\b sarosiense} (Hazsl.) Simonkai, {\i  Enum. Fl. Transs.} 180 (1887): Stems 20-65 cm, appressed-hairy or glabrescent above; leaflets up to 20-60 × 15-35 mm; calyx-tube glabrous or shortly hairy, 13- to 20-veined; upper 4 calyx-teeth up to twice as long as the tube. •{\i   Foothills of the Carpathians}. 
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b d}) Subsp. {\b balcanicum} Velen.,{\i   Fl. Bulg.} 135 (1891): Stems 10-30 cm, with spreading hairs above; leaflets 25-30 × 12-13 mm; calyx-tube glabrous or with a few sparse spreading hairs above; upper 4 calyx-teeth longer than the tube. •{\i   Balkan peninsula}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 75. T. heldreichianum} Hausskn.,{\i   Mitt. Thür. Bot. Ver.} nov. ser.,{\b  5}: 72 (1893). Like {\b 74} but stems 15-30 cm, slender, shortly branched throughout; leaflets 12-20 × 8-10 mm, coriaceous and with prominent veins beneath, finely denticulate; stipules membranous, appressed-hairy; heads c. 20 mm; calyx-tube appressed-pubescent, 10-veined; calyx-teeth glabrous and with a transparent membranous margin below, the 4 upper c. 1½ times, the lowest about twice as long as the tube; corolla pink. {\i   In woods. • Crna Gora, Bulgaria, N. Greece}. Bu Gr Ju.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 76. T. patulum} Tausch,{\i   Syll. Pl. Nov. Ratisbon.} ({\i  Königl. Baier. Bot. Ges}.) {\b 2}: 245 (1828). Like {\b 74} but slender and delicate; stems 20-60 cm, appressed-hairy, much-branched; leaflets 15-50 × 4-5 mm, linear-oblong; petioles short, united along their length with the lanceolate, subulate stipules; heads up to 40 mm, ovoid or oblong, lax; calyx-tube densely pubescent; teeth longer than the tube, eventually curved and patent.{\i   Stony woodlands and scrub. • S. Italy, W. part of Balkan peninsula.} Al Ju It Gr.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 77. T. velebiticum} Degen, {\i  Magyar Bot. Lapok}{\b  10}: 113 (1911). Like {\b 74} but leaflets 10-15 × 5 mm, obovate-cuneate; petioles usually entirely adnate to the stipules; free apex of the stipules ovate-lanceolate; heads globose; calyx-tube glabrous; upper 4 calyx-teeth subulate, glabrous below, sparsely hairy or glabrous above, ½ as long as the tube.{\i   Rocky places. • N.W. Jugoslavia.} Ju.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 78. T. pignantii} Fauché & Chaub. in Bory,{\i   Expéd. Sci. Morée }{\b 3}({\b 2}): 219 (1832). Rhizomatous; stems 15-45 cm, ascending, with patent hairs and axillary, leafy short shoots. Leaflets 10-30 × 10-15 mm, broadly obovate or elliptical, obtuse or emarginate. Upper stipules ovate-lanceolate, herbaceous, the greater part free from the petiole. Heads 20-30 mm, globose; flowers shortly pedicellate. Calyx-tube glabrous; teeth filiform, with long patent hairs, subequal, equalling or longer than the tube, ultimately patent or recurved; corolla 15-18 mm, yellowish-white.{\i   Woods and thickets, mainly in the mountains. • Balkan peninsula.} Al Bu Gr Ju.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 79. T. alpestre} L., {\i  Sp. Pl.} ed. 2, 1082 (1763). Rhizomatous; stems (5-)15-40 cm, erect or ascending, usually simple and hairy. Leaflets 20-50(-60) × 5-13 mm, lanceolate or narrowly elliptical, hairy or glabrous above; veins very numerous, curved. Stipules adnate by more than ½ their length to the petioles, often ciliate and pubescent, the free part linear or subulate, usually scarious. Heads 15-25 mm, paired or solitary, globose or ovoid, subsessile or with peduncles up to 1 cm. Calyx-teeth subulate or filiform, straight, hairy, the lowest one much longer than the others. Corolla c. 15 mm, purple, rarely pink or white. Legume ovoid, dehiscing longitudinally.{\i   Dry open woods, scrub and pastures. C., E. & S. Europe, northwards to Denmark and Estonia.} Al Au Be Bu Cz Da Ga Ge Gr He ?Hs Hu It Ju Po Rm Rs (B, C, W, K, E).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Very variable. The widespread plant has appressed hairs on the stem and a 20-veined calyx; plants from Italy and the Balkan peninsula frequently have dense, patent hairs; var.{\i   durmitoreum} Rohlena from Crna Gora, has a usually 10-veined calyx, slender stems and smaller flowers.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 80. T. rubens} L., {\i  Sp. Pl.} 768 (1753). Rhizomatous, usually glabrous. Stems (20-)30-60 cm, erect, usually simple and glabrous. Leaflets up to 70 × 10 mm, oblong-lanceolate, rarely elliptical, spinulose-denticulate; veins very numerous, curved. Stipules ovate or lanceolate, adnate by more than ½ their length to the petioles, usually glabrous, the upper ones often forming an obconical sheath, the free part herbaceous, often serrate. Heads up to 80 × 25 mm, cylindrical, solitary or paired; peduncles up to 4 cm. Calyx-tube 20-veined, glabrous, rarely hairy; teeth straight, subulate, hairy. Corolla c. 15 mm, purple, rarely white. Legume ovoid, dehiscing longitudinally.{\i   Dry open woodland and scrub. • C. Europe, extending locally to N. Spain, C. Italy, Crna Gora and Ukraine region.} Al Au Cz Ga Ge He Hs Hu It Ju Po Rm Rs (W, C).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b  81. T. angustifolium} L.,{\i   Sp. Pl.} 769 (1753). Annual; stems 10-50 cm, appressed-hairy, few, one often taller and stiffly erect, the others shorter and ascending, branching at the base. Leaflets (10-)20-80 × (1-)2-4 mm, linear-lanceolate, acute; stipules lanceolate-subulate. Heads (15-)20-80 mm, solitary, ovoid or conical-cylindrical; peduncles (10-)20-40(-60) mm. Calyx-teeth subequal, linear or subulate, finally patent, ciliate, the apex glabrous or with a few short hairs. Corolla 10-12 mm, pink, shorter than or equalling the calyx-teeth. {\i  Dry places; calcifuge. S. Europe}. Al Az Bl Bu Co Cr Cz Ga Gr It Ju Lu Rm Rs (K) Sa Si Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  The plant known under the illegitimate name {\b T. intermedium} Guss., {\i  Cat. Pl. Boccad.} 82 (1821), non Lapeyr., from the Mediterranean region and Bulgaria, is like {\b 81} but has stems 10-20 cm; leaflets 10-20 mm, narrowly elliptical or lanceolate; calyx-teeth subequal, more or less evenly ciliate from the base to the apex. It may merit subspecific rank.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 82. T. purpureum} Loisel., {\i  Fl. Gall.} 484 (1807). Robust annual; stems up to 60 cm, often branching above; hairs somewhat patent. Leaflets 20-50 × 2·5-5 mm, linear to elliptic-oblong. Heads 20-110 mm; flowers opening gradually from below upwards. Calyx-teeth very unequal, the lowest one twice as long as the others; corolla 16-25 mm, bright reddish-purple, much exceeding the calyx-teeth.{\i   Dry, often disturbed ground. S. France, Sicilia, Balkan peninsula; doubtfully elsewhere in the Mediterranean region}. Al Bu ?Co Ga Gr Ju Rm Si Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 83. T. desvauxii} Boiss. & Blanché in Boiss.,{\i   Diagn. Pl. Or. Nov.}{\b  3}({\b 2}): 12 (1856). Like {\b 82} but stems weak and diffusely branched; heads smaller; corolla 13-15 mm.{\i   Bulgaria, Thrace.} Bu Gr. ({\i  E. Mediterranean region.})
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Often treated as a variety of {\b 82} but very distinct in cultivation.
\par

\par
170}
\par