{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 3 Legume with wings less than 2 mm wide, often only keeled;
\par
  calyx-teeth 2-3 times as long as tube; style with a 
\par
  unilateral membranous wing at the tip 
\par
4 Legume 4-winged or -keeled; seeds 3-5 mm in diameter ........ {\b 4. conjugatus}
\par
4 Legume with 2 wings on the upper side but neither 
\par
  winged nor keeled beneath; seeds 2-2·5 mm in diameter ............ {\b 5. requienii}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. T. maritimus} (L.) Roth, {\i  Tent. Fl. Germ.}{\b  1}: 323 (1788) ({\i  Lotus siliquosus} L.). Glabrous or pubescent perennial 10-40 cm. Leaflets up to 30 × 15 mm, oblanceolate to obovate; stipules ovate, acute or subobtuse. Peduncles much longer than leaves. Flowers solitary. Calyx-teeth shorter than tube; corolla 25-30 mm, pale yellow; style with a unilateral membranous wing at the tip. Legume 30-60 × 3-5 mm, glabrous or subglabrous; wings c. 1 mm wide. 2n = 14.{\i   C. & S. Europe, extending northwards to S. Sweden and eastwards to E. Ukraine, but absent from most of the Mediterranean region.} Au Bu Co Cz Da Ga Ge He Hs Hu It Ju Po Rm Rs (W, K) Sa Su [Br].
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. T. biflorus} (Desr.) Ser. in DC.,{\i   Prodr.}{\b  2}: 215 (1825) ({\i  Lotus biflorus} Desr.). Like {\b 1} but annual; stipules ovate-orbicular, obtuse; flowers 1-4 on each peduncle; corolla 17-25 mm, deep bright orange; legume 20-40 × 4-6 mm, pubescent.{\i   S. Italy, Sicilia; N.W. Greece.} Gr It Si.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 3. T. purpureus} Moench, {\i  Méth. }164 (1794) ({\i  Lotus tetragonolobus} L.). Pubescent annual 10-40 cm. Leaflets up to 40 × 25 mm, obovate or obovate-rhombic; stipules ovate, more or less acute. Peduncles shorter than or equalling leaves. Flowers solitary or paired. Calyx-teeth 1-2 times as long as tube; corolla 15-22 mm, crimson; style not winged at the tip. Legume 30-90 × 6-8 mm, glabrous; wings 2-4 mm wide. {\i  S. Europe, extending northwards to} c. 47° {\i  N. in Ukraine.} Bl Cr *Ga Gr Hs It Rs (W, K) Sa Si [Cz Lu].
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b  T. wiedemannii} Boiss.,{\i   Fl. Or. }{\b 2}: 176 (1872) ({\i  Lotus wiedemannii }(Boiss.) Nyman) is an imperfectly known species from the Aegean region (Paros). It is like {\b 3} but with leaflets c. 4 mm, emarginate (not acute to obtuse); stipules very shortly stalked (not sessile); corolla c. 10 mm; and calyx-teeth obtuse (not acute), shorter than the tube.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 4. T. conjugatus} (L.) Link, {\i  Enum. Hort. Berol. Alt.}{\b  2}: 264 (1822). Pubescent annual 10-30 cm. Leaflets up to 25 × 15 mm, obovate or obovate-rhombic, acute or mucronate; stipules ovate, acute. Peduncles shorter than or equalling leaves. Flowers solitary or paired; calyx-teeth 2-3 times as long as tube; corolla 14-20 mm, bright red; style with a unilateral membranous wing at the tip. Legume 20-40 × 3-6 mm, glabrous, with 4 wings or keels up to 2 mm wide. Seeds 3-5 mm in diameter.{\i   Sicilia.} Si.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 5. T. requienii} (Mauri ex Sanguinetti) Sanguinetti,{\i   Fl. Rom. Prodr. Alt.} 581 (1864) ({\i  T. conjugatus} auct., non (L.) Link, {\i  Lotus requienii} Mauri ex Sanguinetti). Like {\b 4} but corolla 13-15 mm; legume 25-65 × 3·5-4·5 mm with 2 wings on the upper side and neither winged nor keeled beneath; seeds 2-2·5 mm in diameter.{\i   Mediterranean region, S. Portugal.} Bl ?Co Gr Hs It Lu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc {\b 61.              Hymenocarpus}                     Savi
\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc ({\i  Circinnus} Medicus)
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc By P.W. Ball.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Annual. Leaves simple to imparipinnate; stipules minute, membranous. Flowers in heads. Calyx campanulate, with 5 equal teeth; corolla yellow; keel beaked; stamens diadelphous. Legume indehiscent, spirally twisted and flattened so that it is suborbicular in outline; outer margin membranous-winged.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. H. circinnatus} (L.) Savi,{\i   Fl. Pis.}{\b  2}: 205 (1798). Stems up to 30 cm, densely patent-pubescent. Lower leaves simple, obovate-oblong, upper with 2-3 pairs of leaflets, the terminal much larger than the lateral. Calyx-teeth filiform, much longer than tube; corolla 5-7 mm. Legume 10-15 mm in diameter, the outer margin often toothed. {\i  S. Europe, westwards to S.E. France.} Al Bu Co Cr Ga Gr It Ju Sa Si Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc {\b 62.                 Securigera}                          DC.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc ({\i  Bonaveria}  Scop.)
\par
 
\pard\f0\fs24\qc By P.W. Ball.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Annual. Leaves imparipinnate; stipules small. Flowers in axillary heads. Calyx campanulate, bilabiate; corolla yellow; keel beaked; stamens monadelphous. Legume linear, compressed, with thickened margins and a long beak, tardily dehiscent.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. S. securidaca} (L.) Degen & Dörfler,{\i   Denkschr. Akad. Wiss. Math.-Nat. Kl.} ({\i  Wien}) {\b 64}: 718 (1897) ({\i  Bonaveria securidaca} (L.) Reichenb.). Stems 10-50 cm, glabrous. Leaflets 4-7 pairs, oblong-obovate, truncate or emarginate, mucronate. Heads 4- to 8-flowered. Corolla 8-12 mm. Legume 5-10 cm (including beak), the beak 1·5-3 cm, recurved at tip. 2n = 12.{\i   S. Europe westwards to S.E. France.} Al Bu Co Cr Ga Gr It Ju Rs (K) Si Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc {\b 63.                   Anthyllis}                 L.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc (Incl.{\i   Physanthyllis} Boiss.,{\i   Cornicina} Boiss. (DC.) and {\i  Dorycnopsis} Boiss.)
\par
 
\pard\f0\fs24\qc By J. Cullen.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Shrubs or herbs. Leaves usually imparipinnate, rarely simple or 3-foliolate. Stipules small, caducous. Flowers usually in dense heads, rarely in fascicles or borne singly in the bract-axils. Calyx tubular, campanulate or constricted near the apex, with equal or unequal teeth; corolla variously coloured; stamens monadelphous, or the upper stamen free for up to ½ its length. Legume sessile or stipitate, frequently indehiscent or tardily dehiscent, usually completely included within the persistent calyx. Seeds 1-many.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Measurements of the calyx given in the keys and descriptions are at anthesis and include the teeth unless these are specifically excluded.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Shrubs or undershrubs with woody branches
\par
2 Flowers in terminal heads; bracts subtending the heads palmatisect
\par
3 Leaflets 3-5, the terminal leaflets much larger than the lateral  {\b 6. henoniana}
\par
3 Leaflets very numerous, all ± the same size
\par
4 Leaflets narrowly elliptical; calyx 4-6 mm ............................. {\b 4. barba-jovis}
\par
4 Leaflets very narrowly elliptical to linear; calyx 6·5-9 mm ........... {\b 5. aegaea}
\par
2 Flowers in axillary fascicles or solitary; bracts simple
\par
5 Plant spiny; branches tortuous ................................................ {\b 3. hermanniae}
\par
5 Plant not spiny; branches straight or flexuous
\par
6 At least the upper leaves 3-foliolate; calyx 4·5-7 mm ............... {\b 1. cytisoides}
\par
6 All leaves simple; calyx 3-4·5 mm ............................................. {\b 2. terniflora}
\par
1 Herbs, sometimes slightly woody at the base, but never
\par
  with woody branches
\par
7 Calyx inflated at anthesis, gibbous, constricted at the apex
\par
8 Calyx unequally 5-toothed, the mouth oblique; legume 1-seeded,
\par
  or if 2-seeded then not constricted between the seeds ............. {\b 15. vulneraria}
\par

\par
177}
\par