{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 and furrows disappearing below the dilated mouth; teeth lanceolate-acuminate, spreading, herbaceous, the lowest distinctly 3-veined and equalling the tube, the other four 1- or 3-veined, about ½ as long as the tube. Corolla 5-7 mm, pale pink, exceeding the calyx. Legume included.{\i   Damp, grassy places especially near the sea. Mediterranean region and W. Europe, northwards to England.} Al Az Bl Br Co Cr Ga Gr Hs It Ju Lu Sa Si Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Moderately variable in habit, size of the parts and indumentum.{\b  T. xatardii} DC. in Lam. & DC.,{\i   Fl. Fr.} ed. 3,{\b  5}: 558 (1815), from S.W. France, has the calyx-tube sparsely hairy to near the base and the lowest calyx-tooth sometimes barely longer than the others, but is probably not clearly distinct from {\b 93. T. cinctum} DC.,{\i   Cat. Pl. Horti Monsp. }152 (1813), from the coasts of Jugoslavia and Albania, has heads subtended by a 6- or 7-fid bracteiform involucre; it may merit subspecific rank.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 94. T. squarrosum} L.,{\i   Sp. Pl.} 768 (1753) ({\i  T. panormitanum} C. Presl). Robust annual; stems 20-80 cm, erect or ascending, appressed-hairy or glabrous. Leaflets 20-40(-70) × 8-15 mm, oblong. Stipules 20-50 mm, with a herbaceous, linear, 3-veined, free apex; marginal hairs dilated at the base. Heads 15-30 mm, ovoid; peduncles (0-)10-60 mm. Calyx-tube ovoid, contracted at the mouth, densely hairy; teeth triangular-lanceolate, herbaceous, 3-veined, the lowest wider, twice as long as the others, deflexed in fruit; marginal hairs dilated at the base so that the calyx-teeth appear finely denticulate. Corolla 9-12 mm, pale pink or white, equalling or slightly exceeding the lowest calyx-tooth. Legume included.{\i   Grassy places. S. Europe.} Al Co Ga Gr Hs It Ju Lu Rs (W) Sa Si Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 95. T. obscurum} Savi,{\i   Obs. Trif. }31 (1810). Annual; stems 20-60 cm, little-branched, often flexuous, glabrous below, appressed-hairy above. Leaflets 15-20 × 7-12 mm, obovate to oblong-lanceolate. Free part of the stipules lanceolate or linear, herbaceous. Heads 20-35 mm, shortly pedunculate, globose, oblong-ovoid or conical-cylindrical and rather lax in fruit. Fruiting calyx with an ovoid, glabrescent or hairy tube, usually somewhat constricted above; teeth almost equal, about as long as the tube, ovate-lanceolate, all with 3 or 5 veins, sometimes with anastomoses, herbaceous, patent. Corolla 4-5 mm, whitish or pale pink, not exceeding the calyx. Legume included.{\i   Moist, sandy fields. C. & S. Italy; S. Spain.} Hs It. ({\i  N.W. Africa.})
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b obscurum}: Upper leaflets obovate, 2-2½ times as long as wide; free apex of stipules 6-10 mm, lanceolate. Heads not more than 20 mm, globose or ovoid; peduncles longer than the upper stipules. •{\i   C. & S. Italy}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b aequidentatum} (Pérez Lara) C. Vicioso,{\i   Anal. Inst. Bot. Cavanilles }{\b 11} ({\b 2}): 344 (1953) ({\i  T. isodon} Murb.): Upper leaflets oblong-lanceolate, often apiculate, 3-3½ times as long as wide; free apex of stipules 12-20 mm, linear. Heads up to 35 mm, conical-cylindrical or ovoid; peduncles scarcely exceeding the upper stipules.{\i   S. Spain}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 96. T. clypeatum} L.,{\i   Sp Pl.} 769 (1753). Annual; stems 8-35 cm; hairs deflexed. Leaflets 10-20 mm, broadly obovate-cuneate, often apiculate. Stipules ovate, acute. Heads solitary; peduncles 10-60 mm, hairs often appressed. Calyx-teeth patent, ovate-triangular, foliaceous, with numerous prominent veins. Corolla 20-25 mm, pale pink.{\i   Karpathos.} Cr. ({\i  Mediterranean region.})
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Sect. TRICHOCEPHALUM Koch. Heads capitate; flowers sessile, ebracteate, the outer fertile, the inner consisting only of sterile
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 97. T. subterraneum} L., {\i  Sp. Pl.} 767 (1753). Annual; stems up to 20(-30) cm, numerous, procumbent. Leaflets broadly obcordate; petioles usually long; stipules semi-ovate. Fruiting-heads globose, appressed to or buried in the soil by the long, deflexed peduncle. Fertile flowers 2-5(-7); corolla 8-14 mm, whitish. Sterile flowers numerous, developing after anthesis, becoming strongly deflexed over the fruiting calyces. Legume 1-seeded, ovoid, somewhat exserted. 2n = 16.{\i   Dry grassy places, often on sandy soils. S. & W. Europe, northwards to England, the Netherlands and S.E. Hungary. }Al Az Be Bl Br Bu Co Cr Ga Gr Hb Ho Hs Hu It Ju Lu Rm Rs (W, K) Sa Si Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Very variable in the size of its vegetative parts.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 98. T. globosum} L., {\i  Sp. Pl.} 767 (1753) ({\i  T. radiosum }Wahlenb., {\i  T. nidificum} Griseb.). Annual with patent hairs on stems and petioles. Leaflets obovate-cuneate or obcordate; stipules ovate. Peduncles longer than the subtending leaves. Fertile flowers 10-15, in two rows. Sterile calyces densely hairy, developing simultaneously with the fertile ones. Fruiting heads 20-25 mm, globose, becoming detached at maturity.{\i   Dry grassy places. S.E. part of Balkan peninsula.} Bu Gr Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   European plants are often identified with {\b T. radiosum} Wahlenb. in Jakob Berggren,{\i   Res. Eur. Österländ.}{\b  2} App.: 43 (1827), and treated as specifically distinct from {\i  T. globosum} L.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 99. T. pauciflorum} D'Urv.,{\i   Mem. Soc. Linn. Paris }{\b 1}: 350 (1822) ({\i  T. olivieranum} Ser., {\i  T. globosum} auct., non L.). Like {\b 98} but stems and peduncles with more or less appressed hairs; peduncles more or less equalling the subtending leaves; heads c. 15 mm, with 4-6, uniseriate, fertile flowers; sterile calyces with more slender lobes.{\i   Dry places. Aegean region.} Gr Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc {\b 58.                    Dorycnium}                    Miller 
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc By P.W. Ball.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Perennial herbs or small shrubs. Leaves 5-foliolate, the lowest pair simulating stipules; stipules minute, free. Flowers in axillary heads. Calyx campanulate, with 5 equal or unequal teeth; corolla white or pink, with an obtuse, dark red or black keel; stamens diadelphous. Legume oblong to ovoid-globose, dehiscent. Seeds 1-many.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Literature: M. Rikli,{\i   Bot. Jahrb.}{\b  31}: 314-404 (1901).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Corolla 10-20 mm ....................................................................... {\b 1. hirsutum}
\par
1 Corolla 3-7 mm
\par
2 At least the lower and middle cauline leaves with a
\par
  rhachis at least 5 mm long ............................................................... {\b 2. rectum}
\par
2 Leaves without or with a very short rhachis
\par
3 Calyx-teeth equal; legume 5-7 mm, cylindrical .......................... {\b 3. graecum}
\par
3 Calyx-teeth ± unequal, the lowest distinctly longer
\par
  than the upper 2; legume 3-5 mm, ovoid-globose ..................... {\b 4. pentaphyll}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. D. hirsutum} (L.) Ser. in DC.,{\i   Prodr. }{\b 2}: 208 (1825) ({\i  Bonjeanea hirsuta }(L.) Reichenb.). Perennial herb or small shrub 20-50 cm, usually villous. Leaves without or with a very short rhachis; leaflets 7-25 × 3-8 mm, oblong-obovate. Heads 4- to 10-flowered. Calyx-teeth unequal; corolla 10-20 mm, standard and wings white or pink. Legume 6-12 mm, oblong-ovoid, the valves not contorted at maturity. 2n = 14.{\i   Mediterranean region and S. Portugal. }Al Bl Co Cr Ga Gr Hs It Ju Lu Sa Si Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. D. rectum} (L.) Ser. in DC., {\i  loc. cit.} (1825) ({\i  Bonjeanea recta} (L.) Reichenb.). Perennial herb or small shrub 30-150 cm, appressed-pubescent. Leaves with rhachis 5-10 mm; lowest pair of leaflets 7-25 × 6-18 mm, ovate to subreniform, upper 3 15-35 × 8-20 mm, obovate or obovate-oblong. Heads 20- to 40-flowered. Calyx-teeth equal; corolla 5-6 mm, standard and
\par

\par
172}
\par