{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 distribution of this and some related species is very confused, owing to their widespread use as a forage crop.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  The main variants which occur in Europe are as follows: (i) sparsely to densely pubescent; calyx-teeth shorter than tube ({\i  N. part of the range of the species, locally in the south}); (ii) glabrous or sparsely pubescent; leaflets small, fleshy; calyx-teeth about ½ as long as tube ({\i  coasts of W. & N. Europe}); (iii) villous or densely pubescent; calyx-teeth slightly longer than tube ({\i  C. & S. Europe}).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Dwarf plants resembling {\b 8} in many characters also occur in the mountains.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 8. L. alpinus} (DC.) Schleicher ex Ramond,{\i   Mém. Mus. Hist. Nat. }({\i  Paris}) {\b 13}: 275 (1825). Like {\b 7} but stems usually not more than 10 cm; leaflets 2-6 × 1·5-4 mm; heads 1- to 3(-5)-flowered; corolla 12-18 mm. 2n = 12.{\i   Pyrenees, Alps, ?Balkan peninsula.} ?Al Au ?Bu Ga Ge He Hs It Ju.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 9. L. uliginosus} Schkuhr,{\i   Handb.}{\b  2}: 412 (1796) ({\i  L. pedunculatus} auct., non Cav.,{\i   L. corniculatus} subsp.{\i   major} auct. pro parte). Stems 30-100 cm, erect or ascending, subglabrous to villous, hollow. Leaflets 8-25 × 3-15 mm, obovate, obtuse, often mucronate, glaucous beneath. Heads 5- to 12(-15)-flowered; pedicels 1-2 mm. Calyx-teeth about as long as tube, the upper pair separated by an acute sinus in bud; corolla 10-18 mm. Legume 15-35 × 2-2·5 mm. 2n = 12.{\i   Marshes and wet grassland. W., C. & S. Europe, extending northrwards to} 60° {\i  N. in Fennoscandia and eastwards to c. }25°{\i   E. in Ukraine; often occurring as a casual elsewhere in Europe.} Al Au Az Be Br Bu Co Cr Cz Da Ga Ge Gr Hb He Ho Hs It Ju Lu Po Rm Rs (B, W) Sa Su [Fa Fe Hu No].
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 10. L. pedunculatus} Cav., {\i  Icon. Descr.}{\b  2}: 52 (1793). Like {\b 9} but leaflets rhombic, acute; heads 3- to 8(-10)-flowered; calyx-teeth longer than tube, the upper 2 separated by an obtuse sinus in bud. Stems 40-120 cm, pubescent; leaflets 15-35 × 5-12 mm; legume 15-40 × 2-3 mm. {\i  W. & C. Spain, E.C. Portugal.} Hs Lu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b  L. granadensis} Zertova,{\i   Folia Geobot. Phytotax.} ({\i  Praha}){\b  1}: 79 (1966), from S. Spain (Sierra Nevada), is probably a subspecies of {\b 10}. It has broadly obovate to orbicular, obtuse or subacute, rather densely hairy, bright green leaflets.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 11. L. preslii} Ten., {\i  Fl. Nap. }{\b 5}: 160 (1836). Stems 15-80 cm, procumbent, subglabrous or pubescent. Leaflets 6-15 × 3-8 mm, obovate. Heads 1- to 6-flowered; pedicels c. 1·5 mm. Calyx-teeth linear, with triangular base, at least 1½ times as long as tube, the upper pair separated by an acute sinus in bud; corolla 10-15 mm. Legume 20-30 × c. 2 mm.{\i   Wet places. Mediterranean region; local.} Al Bl Ga Gr Hs ?It Ju Si.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 12. L. palustris} Willd.,{\i   Sp. Pl. }{\b 3}: 1394 (1802). Stems 50-100 cm, procumbent or ascending, pubescent or villous. Leaflets 6-20 × 4-8 mm, obovate or oblanceolate. Heads 2- to 4-flowered; pedicels c. 1 mm. Calyx-teeth about twice as long as tube, linear-triangular, curved; corolla 6-10 mm, yellow or whitish, only slightly exceeding calyx. Legume 12-30 × c. 2 mm.{\i   Wet places. S. Albania, Greece and Aegean region.} Al Cr Gr.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 13. L. aegaeus} (Griseb.) Boiss.,{\i   Fl. Or. }{\b 2}: 167 (1872). Villous perennial 20-60 cm. Leaflets 10-20 × 5-10 mm, obovate. Heads 1- to 5-flowered. Calyx-teeth slightly longer than tube, corolla 18-25 mm, bright, pale yellow; standard much longer than keel. Legume 30-50 × 3-4 mm, slightly torulose.{\i   C. & E. parts of Balkan peninsula.} Bu Gr Ju.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 14. L. parviflorus} Desf.,{\i   Fl. Atl.}{\b  2}: 206 (1799). Villous annual up to 40 cm. Leaflets 7-15 × 2·5-7 mm, obovate to oblong-lanceolate. Heads 3- to 7-flowered; peduncles longer than leaves; becoming recurved in fruit. Calyx-teeth 3-4 times as long as tube; corolla 5-10 mm, yellow; keel with a right-angle on the lower edge and a long beak. Legume 4-6 × c. 1·5 mm, not or only slightly longer than calyx; valves not contorting on dehiscence. 2n = 12.{\i   S. Europe}. Az Bl Co Cr Ga Gr Hs It Ju Lu Sa Si.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 15. L. subbiflorus} Lag., {\i  Varied. Ci. Lit. Artes} ({\i  Madrid}) {\b 2}({\b 4}): 213 (1805) ({\i  L. hispidus} Desf. ex DC. 1815, non 1805). Annual up to 50(-100) cm. Leaflets 5-20 × 1-8 mm, oblong, lanceolate or obovate-oblong. Heads (1-)2- to 4-flowered; peduncles longer than leaves. Calyx-teeth longer than tube, corolla 5-10 mm, yellow; keel obtusely angled on the lower edge, with a long beak. Legume (4-)6-16 × 1·5-2 mm, straight, up to 3 times as long as calyx; valves contorting on dehiscence. {\i  W. Europe, northwards to} c. 52°{\i   N. in Britain, and extending eastwards to Sicilia.} Az Bl Br Co Ga Hb Hs It Lu Sa Si.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b subbiflorus}: Stems villous or almost  hirsute at least at the apex; calyx-teeth 1½-3 times as long as tube. 2n = 24.{\i   Almost throughout the range of the species.}
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b castellanus} (Boiss. & Reuter) P. W. Ball,{\i   Feddes Repert.}{\b  79}: 41 (1968) ({\i  L. castellanus} Boiss. & Reuter): Stems glabrous or pubescent; calyx-teeth c. 1½ times as long as tube. • {\i  W. & C. Spain, C. & S. Portugal}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 16. L. angustissimus} L., {\i  Sp. Pl.} 774 (1753) (incl.{\i   L. praetermissus} Kuprian.,{\i   L. thessalus} Hayek). Like {\b 15} but keel with a right-angle on the lower edge and a short beak; legume (10-)15-30 × 1-1·5 mm, usually at least 4 times as long as calyx. Heads 1- to 3-flowered; peduncles shorter or longer than leaves; corolla 5-12 mm, sometimes with purple veins. 2n = 12.{\i   S. Europe, extending northwards to S. England and N. Ukraine.} Al Az Bl Br Bu Co Cr Ga Gr Hs Hu It Ju Lu Rm Rs (C, W K, E) Sa Si Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Sect. KROKERIA (Moench) Willk. Like Sect. {\i  Lotus }but the legume very inflated and sulcate on the back.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 17. L. edulis} L.,{\i   Sp. Pl.} 774 (1753). Sparsely pubescent annual 10-50 cm. Leaflets 5-16 × 3·5-10 mm, obovate to obovate-oblong. Heads 1- to 2-flowered; peduncles longer than leaves. Calyx-teeth subequal, longer than tube; corolla 10-16 mm, yellow. Legume 20-40 × 4-8 mm, curved. 2n = 14. {\i   Mediterranean region, S. Portugal.} Al Bl Co Cr Ga Gr Hs It Ju Lu Sa Si Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Sect. ERYTHROLOTUS Brand. Calyx actinomorphic; corolla white, pink or purple; style not toothed.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 18. L. conimbricensis} Brot., {\i  Phyt. Lusit.} 59 (1800) ({\i  L. coimbrensis} Brot. ex Willd.). Sparsely pubescent or glabrous annual 5-30 cm. Leaflets 4-10 × 2-5 mm, obovate or rhombic. Peduncles shorter than leaves, 1-flowered. Calyx-teeth longer than tube; corolla 5-8 mm, white or pale pink, with violet keel. Legume 20-60 × 1-2 mm, curved upwards. 2n = 12.{\i   Mediterranean region, S. Portugal.} Co Cr Ga Gr Hs It Lu Sa Si.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 19. L. aduncus} (Griseb.) Nyman,{\i   Syll.} 298 (1855). Villous perennial 10-15 cm. Leaflets 5-14 × 2-6 mm, obovate or oblong-obovate. Heads 2- to 5-flowered; peduncles as long as or longer than leaves. Calyx-teeth 1½-2 times as long as tube; corolla 15-20 mm, purple. Legume not known.{\i   Limestone rocks above }1000{\i   m. • Aegean region }({\i  Thasos}). Gr.
\par

\par
175}
\par