{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 wings white or pink. Legume 10-20 mm, linear-oblong, the valves contorted at maturity. {\i  Mediterranean region, C. & S. Portugal}. Al Bl Co Cr Ga Gr Hs It Lu Sa Si Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 3. D. graecum} (L.) Ser. in DC.,{\i   loc. cit.} (1825). Perennial herb or small shrub 20-80 cm, appressed-pubescent. Leaves without or with a very short rhachis; leaflets 10-25 × 3-10 mm, obovate-oblong. Heads 10- to 25-flowered. Calyx-teeth equal; corolla 6-7 mm, standard and wings white. Legume 5-7 mm, oblong or oblong-ovoid, the valves not contorted at maturity.{\i   E. part of Balkan peninsula; Krym.} Bu Gr Rs (K) Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 4. D. pentaphyllum} Scop.,{\i   Fl. Carn}. ed. 2, {\b 2}: 87 (1772). Perennial herb or small shrub 10-80 cm. Leaves without rhachis; leaflets linear to obovate-oblong. Calyx-teeth unequal; corolla 3-6(-7) mm, standard and wings white. Legume 3-5 mm, ovoid-globose. {\i  C. & S. Europe}. Al Au Bl Bu Co Cz Ga Ge Gr He Hs Hu Ju It Lu Po Rm Rs (K) Sa Si Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  The following subspecies are treated by many authors as species, but subspp. ({\b a}), ({\b b}) and ({\b c}) are often difficult to separate on purely morphological grounds. Subsp. ({\b d}) is generally well defined and few intermediates occur except in S.E. France.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Heads 12- to 25-flowered; pedicels as long as or 
\par
  longer than calyx-tube
\par
2 Calyx-teeth about as long as tube ....................................... ({\b c}) subsp. {\b gracile}
\par
2 Calyx-teeth much shorter than tube ............................. ({\b d}) subsp. {\b herbaceum}
\par
1 Heads 5- to 15-flowered; pedicels shorter than or as 
\par
  long as calyx-tube
\par
3 Leaflets of the upper leaves 6-12 × 2-3 mm; standard apiculate 
\par
  .................................................................................... ({\b a}) subsp. {\b pentaphyllum}
\par
3 Leaflets of the upper leaves (8-)10-20 × 2-4 mm;
\par
  standard not or only slightly apiculate ........................ ({\b b}) subsp. {\b germanicum}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b pentaphyllum} ({\i  D. suffruticosum} Vill.): Stems 10-50 cm, appressed-pubescent. Leaflets of upper leaves 6-12 × 2-3 mm, linear-oblanceolate. Heads 5- to 15-flowered; pedicels usually shorter than calyx-tube. Calyx-teeth shorter than tube; corolla 4-6(-7) mm, standard apiculate.{\i   S.W. Europe, extending to S. Italy}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Plants from N. Portugal and N. Spain are like subsp. ({\b a}) but have the leaflets 12-18 × 2-3(-4) mm and the heads with up to 25 flowers. They may represent another subspecies.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b germanicum} (Gremli) Gams in Hegi,{\i   Ill. Fl. Mitteleur.}{\b  4}({\b 3}): 1380 (1923) ({\i  D. germanicum} (Gremli) Rikli): Like subsp. ({\b a}) but leaflets of upper leaves (8-)10-20 × 2-4 mm, oblong-obovate; standard not or only slightly apiculate. •{\i   C. Europe and Balkan peninsula}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b c}) Subsp. {\b gracile} (Jordan) Rouy, {\i  Fl. Fr.}{\b  5}: 137 (1899) ({\i  D. jordanii} Loret & Barr.): Like subsp. ({\b a}) but stems 30-80 cm; leaflets of upper leaves 10-20 × 2-4 mm; heads 12- to 20-flowered; pedicels usually longer than calyx-tube; calyx-teeth about equalling tube; corolla 3-5 mm. {\i  Mediterranean coasts of France and Spain}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b d}) Subsp. {\b herbaceum} (Vill.) Rouy, {\i  op. cit.} 135 (1899) ({\i  D. herbaceum} Vill Stems 20-65 cm, usually patent-pubescent. Leaflets of upper leaves 5-20 × 2-6 mm, oblong-obovate. Heads 12- to 25-flowered; pedicels usually as long as calyx. Calyx-teeth not more than ½ as long as tube; corolla 3-5 mm; standard not apiculate.{\i   C. & S.E. Europe, extending to S. Italy and Sicilia.}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc {\b 59.                    Lotus}                    L.
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc By P.W. Ball (and A. Chrtková- Zertová on {\i L. corniculatus} group.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Annual or perennial herbs, often woody at base. Leaves imparipinnate; leaflets 5, the lowest pair resembling stipules, rarely one of the lowest pair absent; stipules minute. Flowers solitary or in heads. Calyx campanulate or tubular-campanulate, actinomorphic or bilabiate; keel beaked; stamens diadelphous. Legume cylindrical, sometimes compressed, dehiscent. Seeds numerous.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Literature: A. Brand,{\i   Bot. Jahrb.}{\b  25}: 166-232 (1898). In addition a large number of papers have been published in recent years dealing with the genetics and cytotaxonomy of{\i   Lotus}. The following are some of the most recent, and references to earlier papers may be found in them: W. F. Grant,{\i   Canad. Jour. Genet. Cytol.}{\b  7}: 457-471 (1965). K. Larsen & A. Zertova,{\i   Bot. Tidsskr.}{\b  59}: 177-194 (1963). N. Miniaev,{\i   Not. Syst.} ({\i  Leningrad}) {\b 18}: 119-141 (1957). J. Ujhelyi,{\i   Ann. Hist.-Nat. Mus. Hung. }{\b 52}: 185-200 (1960).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Leaves with 4 leaflets, the upper 3 broadly obcordate,
\par
  mucronate .............................................................................. {\b 30. tetraphyllus}
\par
1 Leaves with 5 leaflets, the upper 3 never obcordate
\par
2 Calyx ± bilabiate, the lateral teeth usually shorter than
\par
  the rest, the upper teeth usually curved upwards
\par
3 Leaves with rhachis less than ½ as long as the lowest
\par
  pair of leaflets
\par
4 Perennial; corolla 8 mm or more, usually about twice as
\par
  long as calyx .................................................................... {\b 20-23. creticus} group
\par
4 Annual; corolla 5-8(-9) mm, not more than 1½ times
\par
  as long as calyx ........................................................................ {\b 25. halophilus}
\par
3 Leaves with rhachis more than ½ as long as the lowest
\par
  pair of leaflets
\par
5 Peduncles not more than 1½(-2) times as long as the
\par
  subtending leaves in fruit
\par
6 Bracts shorter than calyx; corolla purple or purple and
\par
  yellow .......................................................................................... {\b 28. azoricus}
\par
6 Bracts usually longer than the calyx; corolla yellow
\par
7 Peduncles mostly longer than the subtending leaves in
\par
  fruit; lowest pair of leaflets triangular or rhombic-
\par
  orbicular ......................................................................... {\b 26. ornithopodioides}
\par
7 Peduncles shorter than the subtending leaves in fruit;
\par
  lowest pair of leaflets ovate or elliptic-ovate .......................... {\b 27. peregrinus}
\par
5 Peduncles at least twice as long as the subtending 
\par
  leaves in fruit
\par
8 Annual; standard apiculate ....................................................... {\b 29. arenarius}
\par
8 Perennial, woody at base; standard not apiculate 
\par
9 Calyx campanulate; lateral calyx-teeth not more than
\par
  0·5 mm wide at middle, filiform or linear-triangular
\par
  with a triangular base ................................................ {\b 1-12. corniculatus} group
\par
9 Calyx tubular-campanulate; lateral calyx-teeth at 
\par
  least 0·5 mm wide at middle, oblong or triangular-
\par
  oblong .............................................................................{\b  20-23. creticus} group
\par
2 Calyx not bilabiate, the teeth all ± equal, but 
\par
  sometimes curved
\par
10 Calyx-teeth all shorter than tube
\par
11 Perennial with woody stock; corolla bright yellow,
\par
   orange or red ............................................................. {\b 1-12. corniculatus} group
\par
11 Annual; corolla white or pale yellow. ........................................ {\b 24. strictus}
\par
10 Calyx-teeth longer than tube
\par
12 Corolla purple (Thasos) ............................................................ {\b 19. aduncus}
\par
12 Corolla white, yellow, orange or reddish
\par
13 Corolla 18-25 mm; standard exceeding keel by at least 2 mm . {\b 13. aegaeus}
\par
13 Corolla not more than 18 mm; standard not or only 
\par
   slightly exceeding keel 
\par
14 Calyx-teeth at least 3 times as long as tube ......................... {\b 14. parviflorus}
\par
14 Calyx-teeth less than 3 times as long as tube 
\par
15 Legume 4-8 mm in diameter, sulcate on back ............................. {\b 17. edulis}
\par
15 Legume 1-3 mm in diameter, not sulcate on back
\par
16 Perennial, woody at base; legume usually 2-3 mm in 
\par
   diameter .................................................................... {\b 1-12. corniculatus} group
\par
16 Annual; legume 1-2 mm in diameter
\par
17 Legume not more than 3 times as long as calyx; 
\par
   seeds 8-12; keel obtusely angled on the lower edge ............. {\b 15. subbiflorus}
\par
17 Legume at least 3 times as long as calyx; seeds more
\par
   than 12; keel with a right-angle on the lower edge
\par

\par
173}
\par