{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 18 Legume straight or slightly curved at apex; peduncles
\par
   1- to 3-flowered, shorter or longer than leaves;
\par
   corolla yellow .................................................................... {\b 16. angustissimus}
\par
18 Legume strongly curved; peduncles 1-flowered, shorter
\par
   than leaves; corolla white or pink ................................... {\b 18. conimbricensis}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Sect. LOTUS. Calyx usually actinomorphic; corolla usually yellow; style not toothed. Legume not inflated.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1-12. L. corniculatus} group. Perennial herbs usually with woody stock. Calyx-teeth usually more or less equal, but sometimes curved; corolla 8-18 mm, yellow, sometimes orange or red and yellow. Legume cylindrical, straight. Seeds many.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  A widespread, variable group containing diploid and tetraploid species. It is sometimes treated as a single species with a number of subspecies and varieties. Recent work has shown that there are a number of relatively local diploid taxa throughout C. & S. Europe and Asia (in addition to {\b 1} and {\b 9}), together with more widespread tetraploids. The data available at the present are insufficient to produce a comprehensive account of the group, and it is likely that some of the species recognized here are heterogeneous, while others may not be distinct species.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Leaflets of upper leaves linear or linear-lanceolate,
\par
  at least(3-)4 times as long as wide
\par
2 Calyx-teeth usually shorter than tube; corolla often
\par
  becoming greenish on drying ............................................................ {\b 1. tenuis}
\par
2 Calyx-teeth c. 1½ times as long as tube; corolla
\par
  becoming reddish on drying .......................................................... {\b 2. krylovii}
\par
1 Leaflets lanceolate to obovate, usually not more than
\par
  3 times as long as wide
\par
3 Calyx-teeth at least 1½ times as long as tube
\par
4 Corolla 10-15 mm, about twice as long as calyx ........................... {\b 11. preslii}
\par
4 Corolla 6-10 mm, not more than 1½ times as long as  calyx ..... {\b 12. palustris}
\par
3 Calyx-teeth not more than 1½ times as long as tube
\par
5 Stem hollow
\par
6 Leaflets obovate; upper 2 calyx-teeth separated by an
\par
  acute sinus in bud ....................................................................... {\b 9. uliginosus}
\par
6 Leaflets rhombic; upper 2 calyx-teeth separated by an
\par
  obtuse sinus in bud .............................................................. {\b 10. pedunculatus}
\par
5 Stem solid, sometimes with a narrow hollow at base
\par
7 Calyx-teeth shorter than or almost equalling tube
\par
8 Flowering stems usually more than 10 cm; heads mostly
\par
  3- to 6-flowered; leaflets 5-15 mm .......................................... {\b 7. corniculatus}
\par
8 Dwarf plants with stout stock and procumbent or 
\par
  ascending flowering stems 2-10 cm; heads 1- to 3(-5)-
\par
  flowered; leaflets 2-6 mm ............................................................... {\b 8. alpinus}
\par
7 At least the lower calyx-teeth equalling or longer than tube
\par
9 Corolla not more than 10(-11) mm
\par
10 Calyx-teeth all ± straight; calyx and leaves glabrous 
\par
   or subglabrous ............................................................................ {\b 5. stenodon}
\par
10 Upper and lateral calyx-teeth strongly curved; calyx
\par
   and leaves pubescent with silvery appressed hairs or
\par
   with patent hairs ......................................................................... {\b 6. glareosus}
\par
9 Corolla 10-18 mm
\par
11 Stems procumbent or ascending
\par
12 Calyx ± zygomorphic, the upper and lateral teeth curved ........... {\b 4. delortii}
\par
12 Calyx actinomorphic, the teeth all straight .......................... {\b 7. corniculatus}
\par
11 Stems ± erect
\par
13 Leaflets elliptic-lanceolate .......................................................... {\b 3. borbasii}
\par
13 Leaflets elliptic-oblanceolate or obovate .................................. {\b 5. stenodon}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. L. tenuis} Waldst. & Kit. ex Willd.,{\i   Enum. Pl. Hort. Berol.} 797 (1809) ({\i  L. tenuifolius} (L.) Reichenb., non Burm. fil.). Stems 20-90 cm, glabrous or sparsely pubescent. Leaflets 5-15 × 1-4 mm, linear or linear-lanceolate. Heads 1- to 4(-6)-flowered. Calyx-teeth equal, usually shorter than tube; corolla 6-12 mm, yellow; wings obovate-oblong. Legume 15-30 × 2-2·5 mm. 2n = 12.{\i   Most of Europe except the north-east and extreme north.} Al Au Be Bl Br Bu Co Cr Cz Da Ga Ge Gr He Ho Hs Hu It Ju Lu Po Rm Rs (W, K, E) Sa Si Su Tu [Fe No].
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. L. krylovii} Schischkin & Serg.,{\i   Animadv. Syst. Herb. Univ. Tomsk.}{\b  1932} ({\b 7-8}): 5 (1932) ({\i  L. frondosus} (Freyn) Kuprian.). Stems 10-35 cm, glabrous or sparsely pubescent. Leaflets 7-13 × 1-4(-6) mm, linear-lanceolate to oblong-obovate. Heads 1- to 2(-4)-flowered. Calyx-teeth equal, longer than tube; corolla 7-10 mm, yellow, with standard red on back and red veined. Legume 20-35 × 2-3 mm.{\i   Saline steppes. S.E. Russia, W. Kazakhstan.} Rs (E). ({\i  C. & S.W. Asia.})
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 3. L. borbasii} Ujhelyi, {\i  Ann. Hist.-Nat. Mus. Hung.}{\b  52}: 187 (1960) ({\i  L. corniculatus} subsp.{\i   major} auct. pro parte). Stems 15-30(-50) cm, more or less erect, glabrous or villous. Leaflets 5-18(-20) × 1·5-8 mm, elliptic-lanceolate. Heads 2- to 6-flowered. Calyx-teeth slightly unequal, longer than tube, linear-triangular; corolla 13-18 mm; wings rhombic-ovate. Legume 10-30 × 2 mm. 2n = 12. •{\i   E.C. Europe, extending southwards to Hercegovina.} Au Cz Hu Ju.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 4. L. delortii} Timb.-Lagr. ex F. W. Schultz, {\i  Arch. Fl. Fr. Allem.} 201 (1852) (incl.{\i   L. pilosus} Jordan). Stems 10-20 cm, procumbent, villous. Leaflets 4-9 × 1·5-3 mm, usually obovate-oblong. Heads 2- to 4-flowered. Calyx-teeth slightly unequal, longer than tube, linear-triangular, the upper and lateral teeth often curved; corolla 12-15 mm; wings obovate. Legume 20-35 × 2·5-3 mm. •{\i    N. Italy, S. France E. Spain.} Ga Hs It.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 5. L. stenodon} (Boiss. & Heldr.) Heldr.,{\i   Sched. Herb. Graec. Norm.} no. 1419 (1897) ({\i  L. orphanidis} Ujhelyi; incl.{\i   L. preslii} var.{\i   rostellatus} (Heldr.) Hayek). Stems up to 20 cm, procumbent or erect, glabrous or sparsely hairy. Leaflets 3-12 × 1·5-7 mm, elliptic-oblanceolate to obovate. Heads 2- to 5-flowered; peduncle 1-6 cm; pedicels 0·5-2 mm. Calyx-teeth unequal, longer than tube; corolla 8-17 mm. Legume 10-30 × 1·2-2 mm. •{\i   W. part of Balkan peninsula.} Al Gr Ju.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 6. L. glareosus} Boiss. & Reuter,{\i   Pugillus} 36 (1852). Stems up to 20 cm, procumbent or ascending, sparsely to densely villous, or with dense, silvery, appressed hairs. Leaflets 2-10 × 1·5-5 mm, obovate or elliptic-obovate. Heads 1- to 6-flowered, calyx-teeth ± unequal, longer than tube, linear-triangular or linear with triangular base, the lateral and upper teeth curved; pedicels 0·5-1·5 mm. Calyx-teeth unequal, as long as or longer than tube; corolla 8-10 mm, usually reddish. Legume 15-25 × 2-2·5 mm. •{\i   Mountains of S. Spain, C. Portugal.} Hs Lu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Variable and possibly containing two species. One relatively dwarf with dense, silvery, appressed hairs and small leaflets, peduncles and pedicels, the other larger, with patent hairs and larger leaflets, peduncles and pedicels.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 7. L. corniculatus} L.,{\i   Sp. Pl.} 775 (1753) (incl.{\i   L. ambiguus} Besser ex Sprengel,{\i   L. caucasicus} Kuprian.). Stems 5-35 cm, procumbent or ascending, glabrous to villous. Leaflets 4-18 × 1-10 mm, lanceolate or oblanceolate to suborbicular. Heads (1-)2- to 7-flowered; pedicels 1-2·5 mm. Calyx-teeth equal, shorter or slightly longer than the tube, triangular to filiform with triangular base; corolla 10-16 mm, usually yellow. Legume 15-30 × 2-2·5 mm. 2n = 24.{\i   Almost throughout Europe.} All except Sb; introduced in Is.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  As defined here this species is very variable. It may eventually be possible to recognize a number of subspecies, but the native
\par

\par
174}
\par