{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 8 Calyx ± equally 5-toothed, the mouth straight;
\par
  legume 2-seeded, constricted between the seeds .................... {\b 16. tetraphylla}
\par
7 Calyx not inflated at anthesis (rarely slightly inflated 
\par
  in fruit), neither gibbous nor constricted at the apex
\par
9 Annual
\par
10 Legume straight; heads 4- to 8-flowered .................................. {\b 17. lotoides}
\par
10 Legume curved; heads more than 8-flowered
\par
11 Legume not winged, falcate, beaked, the beak exserted
\par
   from the calyx; calyx 7-8 mm ..................................................... {\b 19. hamosa}
\par
11 Legume winged, circinate or annular, not beaked,
\par
   completely included within the calyx; calyx 5-7 mm .............. {\b 18. cornicina}
\par
9  Perennial, woody at the base
\par
12 Calyx 1·5-6 mm; middle cauline leaves with 5-11 leaflets
\par
13 Calyx 4-6 mm, the teeth linear, plumose ................................ {\b 12. ramburii}
\par
13 Calyx 1·5-3 mm, the teeth broadly triangular, not plumose
\par
14 Leaves glaucous, mostly near the base of the stem;
\par
   corolla yellow ................................................................... {\b 13. onobrychoides}
\par
14 Leaves green, evenly distributed along the stem;
\par
   corolla pink ................................................................................... {\b 14. gerardi}
\par
12 Calyx (4-)6·5-12 mm; middle cauline leaves with 13-41 leaflets
\par
15 Leaves confined to lower 1/3 of the stem; petiole 
\par
   dilated, sheathing and striate
\par
16 Corolla red to purple; calyx-teeth plumose, ± as long
\par
   as the tube .................................................................................... {\b 7. montana}
\par
16 Corolla yellow; calyx-teeth not plumose, much shorter
\par
   than the tube ...................................................................................... {\b 8. aurea}
\par
15 Leaves evenly distributed along the stem; petiole not
\par
   dilated, sheathing or striate
\par
17 Stems procumbent or decumbent; leaves densely tomentose .{\b 10. tejedensis}
\par
17 Stems erect or ascending; leaves villous to hirsute
\par
18 Calyx 6-9 mm, with teeth as long as the tube; standard
\par
   obovate-orbicular ................................................................... {\b 9. polycephala}
\par
18 Calyx 10-12 mm, with teeth shorter than the tube;
\par
   standard ovate ............................................................................ {\b 11. rupestris}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. A. cytisoides} L.,{\i   Sp. Pl.} 720 (1753). Shrub up to 60 cm; branches woody, erect, straight to flexuous, whitish- or greyish-tomentose-puberulent. Lower leaves simple; upper leaves 3-foliolate; the terminal leaflet narrowly elliptical, much larger than the laterals. Flowers solitary or in fascicles of 2-3 in the axils of simple, elliptical to ovate bracts, forming a spiciform inflorescence. Calyx 4·5-7 mm, villous to hirsute, with 5 equal teeth, the teeth shorter than the tube. Corolla yellow. Seed 1. {\i  S. & E. Spain, Islas Baleares, S. France.} Bl Ga Hs.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. A. terniflora} (Lag.) Pau,{\i   Bull. Acad. Int. Géogr. Bot.} ({\i  Le Mans}) {\b 16} (Mem.): 75 (1906) ({\i  A. genistae} Dufour ex DC.). Like {\b 1} but less robust; indumentum finely sericeous; leaves all simple, oblong to narrowly elliptical; calyx 3-4·5 mm.{\i   S. & S.E. Spain.} Hs.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 3. A. hermanniae} L., {\i  Sp. Pl.} 720 (1753). Shrub up to 50 cm, with tortuous, woody branches, the ends of the branches becoming spiny. Leaves simple or 3-foliolate; leaflets oblong-spathulate or oblong-obovate, sericeous above, strongly so beneath. Flowers solitary or in axillary fascicles of up to 3 flowers, forming an interrupted raceme. Calyx 3-5 mm, tubular, the teeth triangular, much shorter than the sparsely sericeous tube. Corolla yellow. Seed 1.{\i   Mediterranean region.} Al Bl Co Cr Gr It Ju Sa Si Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 4. A. barba-jovis} L.,{\i   Sp. Pl.} 720 (1753). Shrub up to 90 cm, with woody branches. Leaves imparipinnate with (9-)13-19 subequal, narrowly elliptical to narrowly obovate leaflets, sparsely green-sericeous above, densely silver-sericeous beneath. Flowers in terminal heads, subtended by digitate bracts close beneath the flowers. Heads usually more than 10-flowered. Calyx 4-6 mm, tubular-campanulate, the teeth long-triangular, shorter than the whitish-hairy tube. Corolla yellow. Seed 1. •{\i   Mediterranean region from E. Spain to N. Jugoslavia. Often cultivated.} ?Al Co Cr Ga Gr Hs It Ju Sa Si.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 5. A. aegaea} Turrill, {\i  Kew Bull.}{\b  1939}: 189 (1939). Like {\b 4}, but leaflets very narrowly elliptical to linear, often revolute; heads with fewer (5-9) flowers; calyx 6·5-9 mm. •{\i   Kriti and Kikladhes }({\i  Pholegandros, Amorgos}). Cr Gr.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 6. A. henoniana} Cosson ex Batt. in Batt. & Trabut,{\i   Fl. Algér.} ({\i  Dicot.}) 250 (1889) ({\i  A. sericea} Lag., non Willd.). Shrub up to 60 cm, with woody branches. Leaves with 3-5 leaflets, sericeous above and beneath; terminal leaflet larger than the laterals; rhachis winged and somewhat sheathing. Heads terminal, 5- to 8-flowered, subtended by digitate bracts just beneath the flowers. Calyx 5-6·5 mm, tubular-campanulate, hirsute, the teeth triangular-subulate, c. ½ as long as the tube. Corolla yellow. Seed 1. {\i  S. & E. Spain}. Hs.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 7. A. montana} L.,{\i   Sp. Pl}. 719 (1753). Perennial with woody stems, often forming large clumps. Leaves mostly near the base of the flowering stems, rarely up to the middle or above, imparipinnate; leaflets 17-41, narrowly elliptical to narrowly obovate-oblong, subequal, pubescent on both surfaces; leaf-bases dilated sheathing, striate. Flowering stems erect, sericeous to hirsute. Flowers in dense heads, subtended by palmatisect bracts borne just beneath the flowers. Calyx tubular, with subulate, plumose teeth about equalling the tube. Corolla red to purple, the standard much exceeding the other petals. 2n = 12.{\i   Alps and mountains of S. Europe.} Al Au Bu Ga Gr He Hs It Ju Rm.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Polymorphic; three rather indistinct subspecies may be recognised.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Calyx-tube and calyx-teeth both c. 2 mm; terminal leaflets 
\par
  rounded, differing somewhat in shape from the laterals
\par
  ....................................................................  .................. ({\b c}) subsp. {\b hispanica}
\par
1 Calyx-tube and calyx-teeth both 3 mm or more; terminal leaflets 
\par
  similar in shape to the laterals, rarely larger or smaller
\par
2 Calyx-tube and calyx-teeth both 3-4 mm; corolla pink;
\par
  bracts usually exceeding the flowers .............................. ({\b b}) subsp. {\b jacquinii}
\par
2 Calyx-tube and calyx-teeth both 4-5 mm; corolla purple;
\par
  bracts usually not exceeding the flowers ......................... ({\b a}) subsp. {\b montana}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b montana}: {\i  Alps from France to Austria; Appennini}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b jacquinii} (A. Kerner) Hayek,{\i   Prodr. Fl. Penins. Balcan.}{\b  1}: 885 (1926) ({\i  A. jacquinii} A.Kerner): {\i  E. Alps and mountains of the Balkan peninsula}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Intermediates between this and subsp. ({\b a}) occur in Austria and N. Jugoslavia.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b c}) Subsp. {\b hispanica} (Degen & Hervier) Cullen,{\i   Watsonia}{\b  6}: 389 (1968) ({\i  A. montana }var.{\i   hispanica} Degen & Hervier):{\i   S. Spain}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Variants similar to subsp. ({\b c}) occur in the Pyrenees. Their status is very doubtful and the whole complex is in need of revision.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 8. A. aurea} Welden in Host,{\i   Fl. Austr.}{\b  2}: 319 (1831). Slightly woody perennial. Leaves mostly near the base, or in the lower 1/3 of the stem, rarely a small leaf near the head, imparipinnate; leaflets 13-19, subequal, narrowly ovate to elliptical, sericeous above and beneath; leaf-bases dilated, sheathing, striate. Heads dense. Calyx 6·5-8 mm, tubular, ridged, sericeous-hirsute, with triangular-subulate teeth much shorter than the tube. Corolla yellow. •{\i   Balkan peninsula.} Al Bu Gr Ju.
\par

\par
178}
\par