{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 Sect. LOTEA (Medicus) Willk. Calyx bilabiate; corolla yellow; style not toothed.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b 20-23. L. creticus} group. Perennials up to 50 cm, glabrous to densely sericeous. Leaflets obovate to oblong-oblanceolate. Heads (1-)2- to 6-flowered. Upper 2 calyx-teeth curved upwards, lateral 2 shorter than the lower. Legume 20-50 × 1·5-2 mm.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Lateral calyx-teeth acute, only slightly shorter than
\par
  the upper keel with a long straight beak
\par
2 Leaflets densely sericeous; keel with a purple beak ................... {\b 22. creticus}
\par
2 Leaflets subglabrous to pubescent; keel with a yellow
\par
  or brownish-yellow beak ............................................................. {\b 23. collinus}
\par
1 Lateral calyx-teeth obtuse, much shorter than the upper;
\par
  keel with a short, curved beak
\par
3 Legume straight or slightly curved .......................................... {\b 20. cytisoides}
\par
3 Legume curved in a semi-circle or circle .......................... {\b 21. drepanocarpus}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 20. L. cytisoides} L., {\i  Sp. Pl.} 776 (1753) ({\i  L. creticus }auct., non L.). Leaflets 4-14 × 2-8 mm. Calyx 6-7·5 mm, the lateral teeth obtuse, much shorter than the upper. Corolla 8-14 mm, standard emarginate; wings slightly longer than keel; keel with a short, curved, purple beak (about as long as the rest of the keel). Legume straight or slightly curved. 2n = 14.{\i   Mediterranean region}. Bl Co Cr Ga Gr Hs It Ju Sa Si.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 21. L. drepanocarpus} Durieu in Duchartre, {\i  Rev. Bot.}{\b  2}: 438 (1847). Like {\b 20} but legume curved in a semi-circle or circle. {\i  Naturalized in S. France and Jugoslavia}. [Ga Ju.] ({\i  N. Africa.})
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 22. L. creticus} L., {\i  Sp. Pl.} 775 (1753) ({\i  L. commutatus} Guss.). Leaflets 7-18 × 4-9 mm, densely sericeous. Calyx 7·5-9 mm, the lateral teeth acute, almost as long as the upper. Corolla 12-18 mm; standard entire; wings much longer than keel; keel with a long, straight, purple beak (up to twice as long as the rest of the keel). Legume straight or slightly curved. 2n = 28. {\i  Maritime. Mediterranean region, Portugal.} Gr Hs Ju Lu Si.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 23. L. collinus} (Boiss.) Heldr., {\i  Sched. Herb. Graec. Norm.} no. 1320 (1897) ({\i  L. creticus} subsp. {\i  collinus} (Boiss.) Briq.). Like {\b 22} but leaflets subglabrous to pubescent; keel with a yellow or brownish-yellow beak.{\i   Dry places inland. Greece and S. Spain, local.} Gr Hs. ({\i  N. Africa, S.W. Asia}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b  L. longisiliquosus} R. de Roemer,{\i   Linnaea }{\b 25}: 22 (1852), from S. Spain, is probably identical with {\b 23}, although it was originally placed in the {\i  L. corniculatus} group. Records of{\i   L. longisiliquosus} from Islas Baleares, however, probably refer to {\b 7}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 24. L. strictus} Fischer & C. A. Meyer, {\i  Ind. Sem. Horti Petrop.}{\b  1}: 32 (1835). Glabrous or subglabrous annual up to 100 cm. Leaves shortly petiolate; leaflets 6-15 × 4-8 mm, oblong-obovate. Heads 2- to 10-flowered; peduncles longer than leaves. Calyx-teeth subequal, the upper teeth curved upwards; corolla 15-20 mm, white or pale yellow. Legume 25-30 × 3-4 mm, straight or curved at apex.{\i   E. Bulgaria, N.E. Greece.} Bu Gr. ({\i  S.W. Asia}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 25. L. halophilus} Boiss. & Spruner in Boiss.,{\i   Diagn. Pl. Or. Nov. }{\b 1}({\b 2}): 37 (1843) ({\i  L. villosus }Forskål, non Burm. fil., {\i  L. pusillus }Viv., non Medicus). Pubescent annual 10-30 cm. Leaves sessile or shortly petiolate; leaflets 3-7 × 1·5-3 mm, oblong-obovate. Heads 1- to 9-flowered; peduncles longer than leaves. Lateral calyx-teeth slightly shorter than upper; corolla 5-8(-9) mm. Legume 20-30 × 1·5-2 mm, slightly torulose; curved at apex.{\i   Maritime sands. E. Mediterranean region, extending to Sicilia.} Cr Gr It Si.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 26. L. ornithopodioides} L.,{\i   Sp. Pl.} 775 (1753). Pubescent annual 10-50 cm. Leaves petiolate; leaflets 8-30 × 4-16 mm, the upper 3 obovate to rhombic, the lower 2 ovate-rhombic, cordate or cuneate at base. Heads 2- to 5-flowered; peduncles equalling or slightly longer than leaves. Lateral calyx-teeth very short, obtuse; corolla 7-10 mm. Legume 20-50 × 2-3 mm, torulose, curved. 2n = 14.{\i   S. Europe}. Al Bl Co Cr Ga Gr Hs It Ju Lu Rs (W, K) Sa Si Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 27. L. peregrinus} L., {\i  Sp. Pl.} 774 (1753). Like {\b 26} but leaflets 5-15 × 3-8 mm, the lower 2 ovate, always cuneate; peduncles shorter than or equalling leaves; corolla 6-9 mm; legume not or only slightly torulose, straight.{\i   Greece and Aegean region; Linosa.} Cr Gr Si.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Sect. PEDROSIA (Lowe) Brand. Calyx more or less bilabiate; corolla yellow or purple; style toothed.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 28. L. azoricus} P. W. Ball, {\i  Feddes Repert.}{\b  79}: 40 (1968) ({\i  L. macranthus} auct. azor., non Lowe). Diffuse annual or perennial 20-40 cm, with dense, appressed, silvery indumentum. Upper 3 leaflets 5-10 × 2-6 mm, obovate, basal 2·5-8 × 2·5-6 mm, suborbicular or ovate-orbicular. Peduncles 1-flowered, shorter than leaves, with a trifoliolate bract inserted near the middle or towards the apex. Calyx-teeth slightly unequal, the upper 2 longer than the lower 3 and curved upwards, all longer than tube, Corolla 20-25 mm, purple or yellow and purple; standard shorter than the long-beaked keel. Legume 40-55 × 3-4 mm, straight. •{\i   Açores} ({\i  Santa Maria and Sao Miguel}). Az.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 29. L. arenarius} Brot.,{\i   Fl. Lusit.}{\b  2}: 120 (1804). Pubescent or subglabrous annual up to 50 cm. Leaves shortly petiolate; leaflets 5-15 × 2·5-8 mm, obovate. Heads 2- to 6-flowered; peduncles longer than leaves. Calyx-teeth more or less unequal, the lateral 2 usually shorter than the others. Corolla 10-15 mm, yellow with red or purple striations. Legume 25-50 × 2-2·5 mm, straight. {\i  S. Spain, S. & C. Portugal.} Hs Lu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Sect. QUADRIFOLIUM Brand. Leaflets 4; calyx-teeth slightly unequal; corolla yellow, with red or purple striations; style not toothed.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 30. L. tetraphyllus} L.,{\i   Syst. Veg.} ed. 13, 575 (1774). Sparsely pubescent perennial up to 15(-30) cm. Upper 3 leaflets 3-8 × 2-5 mm, obcordate, mucronate, lowest leaflet oblong or oblong-obcordate. Peduncles 1-flowered, longer than leaves. Upper 2 calyx-teeth curved upwards, lateral 2 slightly shorter than the others; corolla 7-10 mm. Legume 20-25 × c. 2 mm, straight. •{\i   Islas Baleares.} Bl.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc {\b 60.                  Tetragonolobus}                 Scop.
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc By P.W. Ball. 
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Like {\i  Lotus} but leaves 3-foliolate; stipules herbaceous; flowers solitary or paired; calyx-teeth equal; legume almost square in transverse section, with the angles winged or keeled.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Peduncles at least twice as long as the leaves;
\par
  calyx-teeth shorter than tube; corolla yellow or orange
\par
2 Flowers solitary; corolla 25-30 mm; legume 30-60 × 3-5 mm, 
\par
  glabrous or subglabrous .............................................................. {\b 1. maritimus}
\par
2 Flowers 1-4 on each peduncle; corolla 17-25 mm; legume
\par
  20-40 × 4-6 mm, pubescent ........................................................... {\b 2. biflorus}
\par
1 Peduncles shorter than or equalling leaves; calyx-teeth
\par
  longer than tube; corolla pink, red or purple
\par
3 Legume with 4 wings at least 2 mm wide; calyx-teeth not
\par
  more than twice as long as tube; style not membranous-
\par
  winged at the tip ......................................................................... {\b 3. purpureus}
\par

\par
176}
\par