{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 3 Standard glabrous; legume with 1 row of teeth on the
\par
  margin or unarmed; stipules usually connate
\par
6 Standard at least 1·2 times as long as the keel
\par
7 Calyx-teeth 2-3 times as long as tube
\par
8 Calyx densely hirsute; legume with long hairs (0·5 mm or more)   
\par
  ..................................................................................................... {\b 6. ebenoides}
\par
8 Calyx sparsely pubescent; legume with short hairs 
\par
   (less than 0·5 mm)............................................................................ {\b 7. supina}
\par
7 Calyx-teeth 1-2 times as long as tube
\par
9 Calyx glabrous except for the pubescent margin; margin
\par
  of the legume unarmed or with teeth not more than 3 mm ............. {\b 8. gracilis}
\par
9 Calyx pubescent; margin of the legume with some teeth 
\par
  at least 3 mm ................................................................................ {\b 9. pindicola}
\par
6 Standard shorter than to slightly longer than keel
\par
10 Standard at least 5 mm shorter than keel .............................. {\b 10. stenorhiza}
\par
10 Standard not more than 2 mm shorter than keel
\par
11 Wings 7-8 mm, distinctly exceeding calyx
\par
12 Margin of the legume unarmed or tuberculate; stems
\par
   usually very short, rarely up to 40 cm .......................................... {\b 4. saxatilis}
\par
12 Margin of the legume with 6-7 teeth; stems 30-60 cm ................ {\b 5. petraea}
\par
11 Wings not more than 6(-7) mm, shorter than calyx
\par
13 Legume densely pubescent or villous, the hairs at least 0·5 mm
\par
14 Standard emarginate; margin of the legume with teeth 3-6 mm
\par
   .............................................................................................. {\b 14. peduncularis}
\par
14 Standard entire or truncate; margin of the legume with 
\par
   teeth not more than 3 mm
\par
15 Leaflets 12-16 pairs; corolla purple; margin of 
\par
   legume with 8-10 teeth .......................................................... {\b 13. sphaciotica}
\par
15 Leaflets 6-12 pairs; corolla white or pink; margin of
\par
   legume with 3-6 teeth
\par
16 Stems pubescent, the hairs less than 1 mm; legume 4-7 mm ......... {\b 11. alba}
\par
16 Stems villous, the hairs 1 mm or more; legume 8-10 mm ......... {\b 12. degenii}
\par
13 Legume with hairs less than 0·5 mm
\par
17 Calyx longer than keel ................................................................ {\b 16. reuteri}
\par
17 Calyx shorter than keel
\par
18 Standard 1-2 mm shorter than keel .......................................... {\b 17. montana}
\par
18 Standard less than 1 mm shorter than to slightly longer than keel 
\par
19 Corolla (9-)10-14 mm
\par
20 Corolla usually white with pink veins; margin of the
\par
   legume with teeth at least 3 mm (Spain) ............................. {\b 14. peduncularis}
\par
20 Corolla pink or purple; margin of the legume with 
\par
   teeth not more than 3(-4) mm
\par
21 Leaflets densely silvery pubescent beneath ............................. {\b 15. argentea}
\par
21 Leaflets green or greyish beneath
\par
22 Legume (6-)7-12 mm, the teeth on the margin usually
\par
   2-4 mm ....................................................................................... {\b 17. montana}
\par
22 Legume 4-8 mm, the teeth on the margin not more than 2 mm
\par
23 Calyx-teeth with long ± patent hairs ....................................... {\b 21. viciifolia}
\par
23 Calyx-teeth with appressed or ± erecto-patent hairs
\par
24 Plant with non-flowering rosettes of leaves at the base; 
\par
   margin of the legume with teeth not more than 1 mm ............... {\b 15. argentea}
\par
24 Plant without non-flowering rosettes of leaves;
\par
   margin of the legume with teeth 0·5-2 mm ................................. {\b 18. arenaria}
\par
19 Corolla 5-10 mm
\par
25 Margin of the legume with teeth 2-4 mm ................................. {\b 18. arenaria}
\par
25 Margin of the legume with teeth not more than 2 mm
\par
26 Leaflets ± densely grey-pubescent, at least beneath;
\par
   calyx-teeth with ± patent hairs ................................................ {\b 19. oxyodonta}
\par
26 Leaflets green or grey-green, glabrous to pubescent; calyx-teeth 
\par
   with appressed or erecto-patent hairs, or glabrous
\par
27 Legume ± toothed ..................................................................... {\b 18. arenaria}
\par
27 Legume unarmed, rarely slightly tuberculate ............................ {\b 20. inermis}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Sect. HYMENOBRYCHIS DC. Usually perennial; racemes many-flowered; standard pubescent on back; ovary usually curved; margin of the legume with 2 rows of teeth, rarely unarmed.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 A large section, centred in Asia and N. Africa, with a few marginal European representatives.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. O. hypargyrea} Boiss.,{\i  Diagn. Pl. Or. Nov.}{\b  1}({\b 2}): 91 (1843). Villous perennial up to 100 cm or more. Leaflets 4-7 pairs, 25-50 × 6-20 mm, ovate-oblong or oblong, acute, glabrous above, densely grey-tomentose beneath; stipules not connate, but adnate to petiole. Calyx villous, the teeth slightly longer than tube; corolla 15-20 mm, pale yellow with pink veins. Legume 14-18 mm, villous; sides unarmed or tuberculate; margin entire or shortly denticulate.{\i  Macedonia.} Gr Ju. ({\i C. & W. Anatolia}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. O. pallasii} (Willd.) Bieb.,{\i  Cent. Pl. }{\b 1}: t. 35 (1810). Like {\b 1} but leaflets 5-8 pairs, 15-30(-40) × 10-15 mm, ovate or ovate-oblong; calyx-teeth 1·5-2 times as long as tube; legume with toothed sides; margin denticulate, the teeth up to 0·5 mm. •{\i  Krym.} Rs (K).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 3. O. radiata} (Desf.) Bieb., {\i Cent. Pl.}{\b  2}: t. 55 (1832). Villous perennial 40-60 cm. Leaflets 5-9 pairs, 10-20(-30) × (6-)8-12 mm, elliptical or ovate-oblong, obtuse or subacute, glabrous above, sparsely pubescent beneath; stipules free or connate. Calyx villous, the teeth 2-3 times as long as tube; corolla 15-20 mm, pale yellow with red veins. Legume 11-16(-17) mm, glabrous or pubescent; sides toothed; margin denticulate, the teeth 0·5-1·5 mm.{\i  S.E. Russia.} Rs (E). ({\i Caucasus}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Sect. ONOBRYCHIS. Perennial; stipules usually connate; racemes many-flowered; standard glabrous; ovary straight; margin of the legume with 1 row of teeth, rarely unarmed.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 4. O. saxatilis} (L.) Lam. {\i Fl. Fr.}{\b  2}: 653 (1778). Caespitose, subacaulescent perennial, rarely with stems up to 40 cm, pubescent with appressed hairs. Leaflets 6-15 pairs, 7-25 × 1-3(-4) mm, linear, glabrous above. Calyx sparsely pubescent, the teeth 1·5-2 times as long as tube; corolla 9-14 mm, pale yellow with pink veins; wings c. 8 mm, longer than calyx. Legume 5-8 mm, unarmed, but the margin sometimes tuberculate.{\i  W. Mediterranean region.} Ga Hs It.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 5. O. petraea} (Bieb. ex Willd.) Fischer,{\i  Cat. Jard. Gorenki} ed. 2, 73 (1812). Like {\b 4} but with stems 30-60 cm, leaflets 8-25 × 2·5-5·5 mm, elliptical or elliptic-oblong; calyx-teeth 1·5-2·5 times as long as tube; corolla pale purple; margin of the legume with 6-7 teeth c. 0·5 mm.{\i  Krym.} Rs (K). ({\i Caucasus}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 6. O. ebenoides} Boiss. & Spruner in Boiss.,{\i  Diagn. Pl. Or. Nov.}{\b  1}({\b 2}): 97 (1843). Greyish pubescent perennial up to 45 cm, with appressed hairs. Leaflets 4-7 pairs, 4-15(-20) × 1·5-2·5(-5) mm, linear-elliptical or elliptical. Calyx densely hirsute, the teeth 2-3 times as long as tube; corolla 7-10 mm, pink with darker veins, rarely white; standard distinctly longer than keel. Legume 5-7 mm, densely tomentose; sides toothed; margin with 4-5 teeth.  ?•{\i  C. & S. Greece.} Gr.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 7. O. supina} (Chaix) DC. in Lam. & DC., {\i Fl. Fr}. ed. 3,{\b  4}: 612 (1805). Sparsely pubescent perennial up to 40(-60)
\par

\par
188}
\par