{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 Like subsp. ({\b 1}), but calyx longer and concolorous and the whole plant usually very sparsely hairy. •{\i  N. W. Greece.} Gr.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b n}) Subsp. {\b praepropera.} (A. Kerner) Bornm.,{\i  Bot. Jahrb. }{\b 59}: 483 (1925) ({\i A. praepropera} (A. Kerner) G. Beck, {\i A. spruneri} (Boiss.) G. Beck, {\i A. dillenii} auct. mult., non Schultes ex G. Don fil., nec sensu Rothm.): Stems 10-35 cm, ascending to erect, hirsute below. Lowest leaves usually with only 1 leaflet; uppermost leaves equifoliolate with 7-13 leaflets. Calyx purple at apex; corolla red to purplish.{\i  Mediterranean region, but absent from Spain and much of Italy.} Al Bl Co Cr Ga Gr It Ju Sa Tu.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Occasional robust variants approach subsp. ({\b p}).
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b o}) Subsp. {\b weldeniana.} (Reichenb.) Cullen,{\i  Watsonia }{\b 6}: 389 (1968) ({\i A. weldeniana} Reichenb.): Like subsp. ({\b n}) but lowest leaves with 5-9 broadly elliptical leaflets.{\i  Italy, N. & W. Jugoslavia.} It Ju.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Intermediates to subsp. ({\b n}) are common in the coastal part of Jugoslavia. For intermediates to subsp. ({\b s}) see that subspecies. Intermediates to subsp. ({\b c}) ({\i A. tricolor} Vuk.) occur inland in N. Jugoslavia.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b p}) Subsp. {\b maura} (G. Beck) Lindb., {\i Acta Soc. Sci. Fenn.} nov. ser., B, {\b 1}({\b 2}): 77 (1932) ({\i A. maura} G. Beck): Stems 30-60 cm, hirsute below; lowest leaves with 1-3 leaflets, the terminal leaflet often very large (5-10 cm); uppermost leaves equifoliolate with 9-13 leaflets. Calyx red at apex; corolla usually red.{\i  W. & S. Portugal, S. & E. Spain, S. Italy, Sicilia.} Hs It Lu Si. ({\i N. Africa.})
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Variants from Spain (except the extreme south) differ from the typical plant in being less robust, and with the leaves not so evenly distributed along the stem; they appear to be intermediate to either subsp. ({\b n}) or subsp. ({\b i}), and have been given a variety of names, the most common being {\i A. gandogeri} Sagorski and {\i A. font-queri} Rothm. Very fleshy-leaved plants ({\i A. pachyphylla} Rothm.) occur in coastal regions of C. Portugal. They are apparently an ecological modification.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b q}) Subsp. {\b hispidissima} (Sagorski) Cullen,{\i  Watsonia}{\b  6}: 389 (1968) ({\i A. hispidissima }Sagorski): Stems 20-25 cm, ascending, hirsute over their whole length; lowermost leaves with 1-3 leaflets; uppermost leaves equifoliolate with 9-11 leaflets. Calyx concolorous; corolla yellow when dry.{\i  Macedonia. }Gr Ju. ({\i Anatolia.})
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b r}) Subsp. {\b corbierei} (Salmon & Travis) Cullen, {\i Watsonia.}{\b  6}: 295 (1967) ({\i A. maritima} var. {\i corbierei }Salmon & Travis): Like subsp. ({\b q}) but the leaves fleshy; indumentum of the whole plant less dense. •{\i  W. Britain} ({\i Anglesey, Cornwall});{\i  Channel Islands} ({\i Sark}). Br Ga.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Probably occurs also on the N. & W. coasts of France.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b s}) Subsp. {\b carpatica} (Pant.) Nyman, {\i Consp., Suppl.}{\b  2}({\b 1}): 87 (1889) ({\i A. vulgaris} A. Kerner pro parte,{\i  A. carpatica} Pant.): Stems 10-30 cm, ascending, sparsely sericeous; all leaves inequifoliolate with 1-7(-9) leaflets. Calyx sparsely sericeous, usually concolorous; corolla pale yellow, rarely deep yellow or reddish. •{\i  N.W. & C. Europe. Cultivated for fodder elsewhere and often more or less naturalized}. Be Br Cz Da Ga Ge Hb He It Ju Po.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Intermediates occur with almost every other subspecies with which it comes into geographical contact. Intermediates to subsp. ({\b t}), with which it is largely sympatric, occur throughout the Alps; the two subspecies appear to be ecologically partially isolated, subsp. ({\b t}) occurring at high altitudes. Intermediates to subsp. ({\b c}) ({\i A. affinis} Brittinger ex A. Kerner) are widespread in the lowlands of Europe where they have been cultivated as fodder plants, this perhaps explaining their rather surprising occurrence in S. Belgium. Intermediates to subsp. ({\b a}) ({\i A. pseudovulneraria} Sagorski) are common in N.W. Europe. Intermediates to subsp. ({\b o}) (var. {\i versicolor} Sagorski) occur in N. Italy and Slovenija.
\par
 ({\b t}) Subsp. {\b alpestris} Ascherson & Graebner,{\i  Syn. Mitteleur. Fl.}{\b  6}({\b 2}): 626 (1908) ({\i A. alpestris} Hegetschw., non Reichenb.): Like subsp. ({\b s}) but calyx longer, hirsute with greyish-black hairs. 2n = 12. •{\i  Cordillera Cantabrica; Alps; Carpathians; mountains of the Balkan peninsula.} Au Bu Cz Ga Ge Gr He Hs Hu It Ju Po Rm.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Replaced in the Pyrenees by subsp. ({\b u}). A small, lowered variant ({\i A. valesiaca} G. Beck) occurs in Switzerland (Valais).
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b u}) Subsp. {\b pyrenaica} (G. Beck) Cullen, {\i Feddes Repert.}{\b  79}: 52 (1968) ({\i A. coccinea} f.{\i  pyrenaica} G. Beck): Plant sparsely hairy, stem 10-25 cm. Leaves all inequifoliolate with 1-7 leaflets. Calyx red at apex; corolla pink to red. •{\i  Cordillera Cantabrica; Pyrenees.} Ga Hs.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b v}) Subsp. {\b iberica} (W. Becker) Jalas, {\i Bull. Jard. Bot. Bruxelles}{\b  27}: 409 (1957) ({\i A. asturiae} W. Becker): Stems 20-40 cm, mostly decumbent, sericeous, usually very branched; leaves inequifoliolate with 3-9 leaflets. Calyx red at apex; corolla red. •{\i  W. coast of Europe.} Be Ga Hs Lu.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b w}) Subsp. {\b lapponica} (Hyl.) Jalas, {\i Ann. Bot. Soc. Zool.-Bot. Fenn. Vanamo}{\b  24}({\b 1}): 38 (1950) ({\i A. kuzenevae} Juz.): Stems 15-40 cm, ascending to erect, sericeous. Leaves all inequifoliolate with 1-9 leaflets. Calyx concolorous or red at apex; corolla yellow. 2n = 12. •{\i  Fennoscandia, N. Britain, Chibiny mountains of the Kol'skij Poluostrov.} Br Fe No Rs (N) Su.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Specimens from S. Finland ({\i A. vulneraria }subsp.{\i  fennica }Jalas) have laxer, fewer-flowered heads and narrower leaflets, and show differences in ecology.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b x}) Subsp. {\b borealis} (Rouy) Jalas,{\i  op. cit.} 40 (1950): Very like subsp. ({\b w}) but indumentum denser, stems up to 15 cm. •{\i  Iceland}. Is.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 16. A. tetraphylla} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 719 (1753) ({\i Physanthyllis tetraphylla} (L.) Boiss.). Procumbent annual. Stems villous to hirsute. Leaves imparipinnate, with (1-)5 leaflets, the large, more or less obovate terminal leaflet much exceeding the small, lateral leaflets, hairy on both surfaces, much less above. Flowers in axillary fascicles of 1-7. Calyx 12-15 × 4·5-6 mm, inflated at anthesis, later up to 12 mm wide, gibbous, especially so in fruit, densely sericeous, frequently reddish near the apex, the teeth subequal, the mouth of the calyx straight. Corolla yellow, the keel often red at apex. Legume usually 2-seeded, constricted between the seeds.{\i  Mediterranean region, S. Portugal.} Al Bl Co Cr Ga Gr Hs It Ju Lu Sa Si.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 17. A. lotoides} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 720 (1753) ({\i Cornicina lotoides} (L.) Boiss.). Erect annual. Stems villous to hirsute. Lowermost leaves often reduced to the terminal leaflet, the upper irregularly imparipinnate with (3-)5-7 subequal, narrowly lanceolate to oblanceolate leaflets, hairy above and beneath, strongly so on the margin. Heads 4- to 8-flowered, subtended by digitate bracts borne just beneath the flowers. Calyx 9-11 mm, tubular, with 5 unequal triangular teeth and an oblique mouth, long pubescent. Corolla yellow to orange. Legume straight, 6- to 10-seeded, erect, the infructescence forming a compact long narrow head. {\i Spain and Portugal.} Hs Lu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 18. A. cornicina} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 719 (1753) ({\i Cornicina loeflingii} Boiss.). Annual. Stems ascending to erect, villous to hirsute. Lowermost leaves reduced to the terminal leaflet, the upper with up to 9 subequal, very narrowly elliptical leaflets, sericeous above and beneath. Heads 9- or more-flowered, subtended by digitate bracts. Calyx 5-7 mm, not inflated or gibbous at anthesis but inflated in fruit, with 5 unequal teeth and an oblique mouth. Corolla yellow-orange. Legume winged, curved into an almost complete circle, completely included within the calyx. Seeds 3 or more.{\i  C. & S. Spain, Portugal. }Hs Lu.
\par

\par
181}
\par