{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b R. graniticola} Halácsy ex Topitz,{\i  Österr. Bot. Zeitschr.}{\b  42}: 202 (1892). Au Cz.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b  R. greinensis} Halácsy ex Topitz,{\i  loc. cit. }(1892). Au.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b  R. grossbaueri} G. Beck,{\i  Fl. Nieder-Österr.}{\b  2}({\b 1}{\i} ): 731 (1892). Au.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b R. macrostachys} P. J. Mueller,{\i  Flora} ({\i Regensb.}){\b  41}: 150 (1858). Au Br Bu Cz Ga Ge He Hu Rm.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b R. pseudotenellus} Gilli,{\i  Verh. Zool.-Bot. Ges. Wien}{\b  80}: 68 (1931)({\i R. tenellus} Hayek, non P. J. Mueller & Lefevre). Au.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b R. schlikkumii }Wirtgen, {\i Flora} ({\i Regensb}.){\b  42}: 235 (1859) ({\i R. ocyriacus} Halácsy). Au Ge He Hu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 47. R. adscitus} Genev.,{\i  Mem. Soc. Acad. }({\i Angers}){\b  8}: 88 (1860) ({\i R. hypoleucus} P. J. Mueller & Lefevre, non Vest). Stems angled, sulcate or the faces flat, densely pubescent with long and short hairs, acicles, and sunken glands; prickles subequal, all rather short, straight, yellowish; prickles on petiole straight or slightly falcate. Leaflets 3-5, softly hairy above, white-tomentose beneath; terminal leaflet oblong-obovate, shortly acuminate, rounded or subcordate at base, coarsely and unevenly serrate. Inflorescence pyramidal, with long, patent branches, many-flowered, leafy at the base; axis densely hairy, with many sunken glands and weak, deflexed prickles. Sepals deflexed after flowering, long-pointed, pubescent and tomentose, with a few glands; petals elliptic-ovate, pink; stamens white, or pink-based, equalling or exceeding the green styles; receptacle hirsute; carpels usually glabrous.{\i  N.W. & C. Europe}. Au Be Br Cz Ga Hb Hu Rm.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Related species include:
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b  R. dasyclados} A. Kerner,{\i  Ber. Naturw. Ver. Innsbruck}{\b  2}: 155 (1871). Au Ge.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b  R. doftanensis} E. I. Nyárády in Savul.,{\i  Fl. Rep. Pop. Române}{\b  4}: 913 (1956). Rm.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b  R. leucostachys} Schleicher ex Sm.,{\i  Engl. Fl.}{\b  2}: 403 (1824). 2n = 28. Br Da Ga.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b R. macrothyrsus} Lange,{\i  Icon. Pl. Fl. Dan.}{\b  48}: 6 (1871). 2n = 28. Br Da Ge. 
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b R. tenuispinosus} E. I. Nyárády in Savul.,{\i  Fl. Rep. Pop. Române}{\b  4}: 911 (1956). Rm.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 48. R. mucronulatus} Boreau,{\i  Fl. Centre Fr.} ed. 3, {\b 2}: 196 (1857) ({\i R. mucronatus} Bloxam, non Ser.,{\i  R. mucronifer} Sudre pro parte). Stems robust, subterete, striate, hairy at first and becoming deep purple, with a few slender prickles. Leaflets 3-5, imbricate, pubescent or greenish-tomentose beneath; terminal leaflet broad, orbicular or obovate, mucronate to long-cuspidate, subcordate to rounded at base, serrate to serrate-dentate. Inflorescence leafy, few-flowered, with long peduncles and pedicels; axis striate, tomentose, with prickles, unequal glands and acicles; flowers c. 3 cm in diameter. Sepals patent, pubescent, green, with a white margin; petals obovate, pink, rarely white; stamens pink, much longer than the pink styles; anthers and carpels hairy.{\i  N.W. & C. Europe.} Au Be Br Cz Da Hb He Ho Ge Po.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Related species include:
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b  R. fritschii}  Sabr. in Hayek,{\i  Sched. Fl. Styr. Exsicc.}{\b  7-8}: 15 (1906). Au.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b  R. henriquesii}  Samp.,{\i  Ann. Sci. Nat.} ({\i Porto}) {\b 9}: 63 (1905) ({\i R. peratticus} Samp.,{\i  R. menkei} subsp.{\i  henriquesii} (Samp.) Sudre). Ga Hs Lu.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b  R. mucronatoides} A. Ley,{\i  Jour. Bot.} ({\i London}) {\b 45}: 446 (1907). Au Br.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 49. R. gremlii} Focke, Syn. Rub. Germ. 266 (1877) ({\i R. colemannii} subsp.{\i  gremlii} (Focke) Sudre). Stems procumbent or climbing, more or less hairy, with straight, yellow prickles. Leaves pedate; leaflets 3-5, glabrescent on both surfaces; terminal leaflet long-stalked, ovate or ovate-oblong, narrowed to a long point, rounded or cordate at base, unevenly serrate. Inflorescence rather long and narrow, often leafy; axis and pedicels densely pubescent with patent hairs and with small acicular prickles; glands various. Sepals deflexed, tomentose; petals narrowly obovate-cuneate, pubescent, pinkish or white; stamens often much exceeding the styles. {\i C. Europe; Britain.} Au Br Cz Ge He Hu Ju Rm.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Sudre breaks up the complex species{\b  R. colemannii} Bloxam in Kirby, {\i Fl. Leicest.} ed. 2, 38 (1850) into several subspecies. Other species, listed below, link this complex with species in Ser.{\i  Radulae}:
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b  R. balatonicus} Borbás,{\i  Result. Wiss. Erforsch. Balaton}{\b  2}({\b 2}): 146 (1907). Hu.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b  R. beckii} Halácsy,{\i  Verh. Zool.-Bot. Ges. Wien}{\b  35}: 663 (1886). Au Cz.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b  R. chloroclados} Sabr.,{\i  Österr. Bot. Zeitschr}{\b . 41}: 413 (1891). Cz Rm.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b  R. clusii} Borbás ex Sabr.,{\i  Erdesz. Lapok }{\b 1885}: 104 (1885). Au Cz Ju Rm. Sudre and Nyárády make this species synonymous with{\b  49}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b R. condensatus} P. J. Mueller,{\i  Flora} ({\i Regensb}.){\b  41}: 167 (1858). Au Br Ga Ge He Hu.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b  R. diminutus} Gáyer in Jáv.,{\i  Magyar Fl.} 495 (1924). Hu.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b R. eriostachys }P. J. Mueller & Lefevre, {\i Pollichia }{\b 16-17}: 225 (1859). Au Be Br Ga Hu.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b R. ferox} Vest ex Tratt.,{\i  Rosac. Monogr.}{\b  3}: 40(1823) ({\i R. apum} Fritsch,{\i  R. lasiaxon }Borbás ex Waisb.). Au Ge Hu.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b  R. grandiflorus} E. I. Nyárády in Savul.,{\i  Fl. Rep. Pop. Române}{\b  4}: 916 (1956). Rm.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b  R. gratiosus} P.J.Mueller & Lefevre,{\i  Pollichia}{\b  16-17}: 153 (1859). Be Cz Ga Hu.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b  R. gremblichii} Halácsy, {\i Österr. Bot. Zeitschr.}{\b  40}: 433 (1890). Au.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b  R. halacsyi} Borbás ex Halácsy,{\i  Verh. Zool.-Bot. Ges. Wien }{\b 35}: 666(1886). Au Cz Hu.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b  R. hebecaulis }Sudre,{\i  Bull. Assoc. Fr. Bot.}{\b  3}: 101 (1900) ({\i R. hebeticaulis} auct.). Au Br Cz Ga Ge He Ho Hu Po Rm.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b  R. helveticus} Gremli,{\i  Beitr. Fl. Schweiz}{\b  36} (1870). Au Br Ge He.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b  R. indotatus} Gremli,{\i  Österr. Bot. Zeitschr.}{\b  21}:128 (1871). Au He.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b R. inopacatus} P. J. Mueller & Lefevre,{\i  Pollichia}{\b  16-17}: 117 (1859). Au Br Cz Ga Hu.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b R. joannis} G. Beck,{\i  Fl. Nieder-Österr.}{\b  2}({\b 1}):736(1892). Au.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b  R. laetecoloratus} E. I. Nyárády in Savul., {\i Fl. Rep. Pop. Române}{\b  4}: 914 (1956). Rm.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b  R. morifolius} P. J. Mueller,{\i  Flora }({\i Regensb}.){\b  41}: 164 (1858). Au Cz Ge Hu.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b  R. mulleri} Lefevre,{\i  Pollichia}{\b  16-17}:180(1859). Au Be Br Ga He Ho Hu Rm.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b  R. podophylloides} Sudre, {\i Bull. Soc. Etud. Sci. Angers}{\b  31}: 105 (1902). Au Cz Ga He Hu.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b R. porphyrantherus} Hormuzaki, {\i Mem. Sect. Sti.} ({\i Acad. Române}) ser. 3,{\b  2}: 290(1925). Au.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b  R. rariglandulosus} E. I. Nyárády in Savul.,{\i  Fl. Rep. Pop. Române}{\b  4}: 916 (1956). Rm.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b  R. salisburgensis }Focke,{\i  Syn. Rub. Germ.} 280 (1877). Au Br Cz Ga Ge He Hu.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b  R. schmidelyanus} Sudre,{\i  Bull. Soc. Bot. Fr.}{\b  51}: 21 (1904). 2n = 35. Au Br Cz Ga Ge He Hu Po.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b  R. serratulifolius }Sudre, {\i Compt. Rend. Congr. Soc. Sav.} ({\i Sci}.){\b  1908}: 206 (1909). Au Be Br Ga Ge.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b R. subcoriaceus} E. I. Nyárády in Savul.,{\i  Fl. Rep. Pop. Române}{\b  4}: 916 (1956). Rm.
\par

\par
18}
\par