{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 19. A. hamosa} Desf.,{\i  Fl. Atl.}{\b  2}: 151 (1798) ({\i Cornicina hamosa} (Desf.) Boiss.). Like {\b 18} but upper leaves often with up to 11 leaflets; calyx 7-8 mm, more or less tubular, curved; legume deflexed and upcurved, many-seeded, beaked, the beak exserted from the calyx.{\i  S. Spain, Portugal.} Hs Lu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 64.                     Ornithopus}                 L.
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc By P.W. Ball.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Annual. Leaves imparipinnate; stipules small, free, linear. Flowers in axillary heads. Calyx tubular or campanulate, with 5 equal teeth; keel obtuse; stamens diadelphous. Legume lomentose, terete or compressed, usually constricted between the segments, strongly reticulate.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 All species occur in dry, often acid, sandy places, or as ruderals.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Heads ebracteate or with minute scarious bracts .......................... {\b 4. pinnatus}
\par
1 Heads subtended by a pinnate leafy bract
\par
2 Corolla yellow; legume not or only slightly contracted
\par
  between the segments ............................................................... {\b 1. compressus}
\par
2 Corolla pink or white; legume strongly contracted 
\par
  between the segments
\par
3 Corolla 6 mm or more; bracts shorter than the flowers,
\par
  usually about equalling the calyx ..................................................... {\b 2. sativus}
\par
3 Corolla not more than 5 mm; bracts much longer than
\par
  the flowers ................................................................................. {\b 3. perpusillus}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. O. compressus} L.,{\i  Sp. Pl.} 744 (1753). Pubescent, stems 10-50 cm. Leaflets 7-18 pairs, oblong, elliptical or oblong-lanceolate. Heads 3- to 5-flowered; bracts with 7-9 leaflets. Calyx-teeth at least ½ as long as the tube; corolla 5-8 mm, yellow. Legume 20-50 mm, curved, more or less compressed, not or only slightly contracted between the segments; segments 5-8, oblong; beak 7 mm or more, curved. {\i S. Europe.} Al Az Bl Bu Co Cr Ga Gr Hs It Ju Lu Sa Si Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. O. sativus} Brot.,{\i  Fl. Lusit.}{\b  2}: 160 (1804). Pubescent, stems 20-70 cm. Leaflets 9-18 pairs, lanceolate or elliptical to ovate. Heads 2- to 5-flowered; bracts with 5-9 leaflets, shorter than the flowers. Calyx-teeth slightly shorter than to about equalling tube; corolla 6-9 mm, white or pink. Legume 12-40 × 2-2·5 mm, compressed, contracted between the segments; segments 3-7, elliptic-oblong.{\i  S.W. Europe; cultivated as a fodder plant in most of Europe and locally naturalized.} Az Ga Hs Lu [Ge Po Rs (C, W)].
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b sativus} ({\i O. roseus} Dufour): Legume 12-25 mm, straight; beak usually not more than 5 mm, straight, sometimes hooked at the tip.{\i  Native in S.W. France, N. half of Iberian peninsula and Açores, cultivated elsewhere.}
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b isthmocarpus} (Cosson) Dostál,{\i  Kvetena CSR }788 (1948): Legume 20-40 mm, curved, usually with a long, narrow, cylindrical constriction between the segments; beak 10 mm or more, curved.{\i  S.W. part of Iberian peninsula}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 The two subspecies are apparently linked by intermediates (var.{\i  macrorrhynchus} Willk.) in C. Portugal and W.C. Spain.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 3. O. perpusillus} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 743 (1753). Pubescent, stems up to 30 cm. Leaflets 7-13 pairs, elliptical or oblong. Heads 3- to 8-flowered; bracts with 5-9 leaflets, longer than the flowers. Calyx-teeth not more than ½ as long as tube; corolla 3-5 mm, white or pink. Legume 10-18(-25) × 1·5-2 mm, straight, compressed, contracted between the segments; segments 4-9, elliptic-oblong, beak not more than 3 mm, straight, often hooked at the tip. 2n = 14. {\i W. & W.C. Europe, extending eastwards to Italy, Poland and S. Sweden; rarely naturalized further east.} Az Be Br Co Da Ga Ge Hb He Ho Hs It Lu Po Rm Sa Su [Au Cz Rs (B, C, W)].
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Hybrids between {\b 2} and {\b 3} occur frequently.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 4. O. pinnatus} (Miller) Druce,{\i  Jour. Bot. }({\i London}) {\b 45}: 420 (1907) ({\i O. ebracteatus} Brot.). Glabrous or sparsely pubescent, 10-50 cm. Leaflets 3-7 pairs, linear to oblanceolate. Heads 1 to 5-flowered, ebracteate or with minute scarious bracts. Calyx-teeth not more than ½ as long as tube; corolla 6-8 mm, yellow. Legume 20-35 mm, curved, terete, not contracted between the segments; segments (6-)8-12, cylindrical; beak not more than 5 mm. 2n = 14.{\i  W. Mediterranean region and W. Europe, northwards to S.W. England} ({\i Isles of Scilly}). Az Bl Br Co Ga Gr Hs It Lu Sa Si.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 65.                  Coronilla}                L.
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc By P.W. Ball.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Annual or perennial herbs or dwarf shrubs. Leaves imparipinnate, rarely simple or 3-foliolate; stipules various, free or connate. Flowers in axillary heads. Calyx campanulate, more or less bilabiate; keel acute; stamens diadelphous. Legume lomentaceous, terete or longitudinally ridged or angled, not constricted between the segments.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Literature: A. Uhrová,{\i  Beih. Bot. Centr. }{\b 53B}: 1-174 (1935).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Lower leaves simple or 3-foliolate, the terminal leaflet
\par
  much larger than the lateral
\par
2 Upper leaves simple or 3-foliolate ........................................ {\b 12. scorpioides}
\par
2 Upper leaves imparipinnate ........................................................ {\b 13. repanda}
\par
1 Lower leaves imparipinnate, the leaflets more or less equal
\par
3 Claw of the standard 2-3 times as long as the calyx ...................... {\b 1. emerus}
\par
3 Claw of the standard equalling or slightly longer than the calyx
\par
4 Corolla yellow
\par
5 Leaflets with a narrow scarious margin
\par
6 Herb 30-70 cm; heads 12- to 20-flowered; pedicels 4-6 mm ....... {\b 6. coronata}
\par
6 Small shrubs not more than 50 cm; heads usually not 
\par
  more than 10-flowered; pedicels 2-4 mm
\par
7 Leaflets shortly petiolulate; stipules 3-8(-10) mm,
\par
  herbaceous with membranous tip, deciduous ............................... {\b 3. vaginalis}
\par
7 Leaflets sessile; stipules c. 1 mm; membranous, persistent ........... {\b 4. minima}
\par
5 Leaflets without a scarious margin
\par
8 Annual; legume strongly curved .................................................. {\b 11. rostrata}
\par
8 Small shrubs; legume ± straight
\par
9 Stem not junciform; leaves persistent; leaflets 
\par
  elliptical to obovate-orbicular, not fleshy ..................................... {\b 2. valentina}
\par
9 Stem junciform with long internodes; leaves caducous;
\par
  leaflets linear or oblong, fleshy ........................................................ {\b 5. juncea}
\par
4 Corolla white, pink or purple
\par
10 Annual; heads 3- to 6(-9)-flowered
\par
11 Corolla 4-7 mm; legume ± straight, with a curved beak ............. {\b 10. cretica}
\par
11 Corolla 7-11 mm; legume strongly curved, with a
\par
   straight beak ................................................................................. {\b 11. rostrata}
\par
10 Perennial; heads (5-)10- to 40 flowered
\par
12 Heads up to 40 flowered; segments of the legume
\par
   9-10 mm (Kriti) ..............................................................................{\b 9. globosa}
\par
12 Heads not more than 20-flowered; segments of the legume 4-6 mm
\par
3  Leaflets of the lower leaves (5-)7-12 pairs, not more
\par
   than 12 mm wide ............................................................................... {\b 7. varia}
\par
13 Leaflets 3-5(-6) pairs, 10-20 mm wide ........................................ {\b 8. elegans}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. C. emerus} L., Sp. Pl. 742 (1753). Small shrub up to 100(-200) cm. Leaflets 2-4 pairs, 10-20 mm, obovate, mucronate, glaucous; stipules 1-2 mm, free, membranous. Corolla 14-20 mm, pale yellow; claw of the standard 2-3 times as long as the
\par

\par
182}
\par