{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 cm. Leaflets 5-12(-20) pairs, 6-15(-25) × 1·5-3(-4) mm, oblong or elliptical. Calyx usually sparsely pubescent, the teeth 2-3(-4) times as long as tube; corolla 7-10 mm, pink, or white with pink veins, the standard distinctly longer than keel. Legume 4-5 mm, villous; sides toothed; margin with 3-4 teeth up to 2 mm. 2n = 14.{\i  S.W. Europe from E. Spain to N.W. Italy; Calabria.} Ga Hs It.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 8. O. gracilis} Besser, {\i Enum. Pl. Volhyn. }74 (1822) (incl. {\i O. longeaculeata }Pacz.). Glabrous or sparsely pubescent perennial 25-75 cm. Leaflets 3-8 pairs, 12-25 × 1-3(-5) mm, usually linear. Calyx glabrous except for the pubescent margin, the teeth 1-2 times as long as tube, ciliate on the margin; corolla 5-7 mm, pink, the standard distinctly longer than keel. Legume 2·5-5(-7) mm, pubescent with short appressed hairs; sides toothed; margin unarmed or with 4-6 teeth up to 3 mm.{\i  S.E. Europe, from Macedonia to Krym.} Bu Gr Ju Rm Rs (W, K) Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 9. O. pindicola} Hausskn.,{\i  Mitt. Thür. Bot. Ver.} nov. ser., {\b 5}: 87 (1893). Like {\b 8} but leaflets 7-11(-16) × 2-5(-6) mm, oblong or elliptical; calyx-tube and teeth usually shortly pubescent; corolla 6-9 mm; legume 4-7 mm, with teeth up to 3·5(-5) mm. Greece and S. Jugoslavia. ?Bu Gr Ju.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 10. O. stenorhiza} DC., Prodr. 2: 346 (1825). Densely grey pubescent perennial up to 40 cm. Leaflets of the lower leaves 5-13 pairs, 5-12 × 2-3·5 mm, elliptical or oblong-elliptical; of the upper leaves 3-8 pairs, 10-13 × 1-2 mm, linear or oblong. Calyx appressed-pubescent, the teeth 1½-2 times as long as tube; corolla 10-13 mm, pink with darker veins, the standard not more than ½ as long as keel. Legume 4-5 mm, pubescent; sides toothed; margin with 5-7 teeth up to 4 mm. •{\i  S.E. Spain.} Hs.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 11. O. alba} (Waldst. & Kit.) Desv.,{\i  Jour. Bot. Appl. }{\b 3}: 83 (1814). Pubescent perennial up to 60 cm. Leaflets of the lower leaves 6-10 pairs, 5-35 × 1·5-4(-6) mm, linear to elliptical. Calyx pubescent with patent hairs or villous, rarely with the tube glabrous, the teeth at least twice as long as tube; corolla 8-14 mm, white or pink often with pink veins, the standard about as long as keel. Legume 4-7 mm, villous, the hairs at least 0·5 mm; sides toothed; margin with 2-6 teeth. {\i Balkan peninsula, S. Romania; C. & S. Italy.} Al Bu Gr It Ju Rm.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Corolla 8-10 mm; calyx-teeth 3-4 times as long as tube ({\b d}) subsp. {\b calcarea}
\par
1 Corolla 10-14 mm; calyx-teeth 2-3 times as long as tube
\par
2 Corolla 12-14 mm; calyx-tube villous ............................ ({\b c}) subsp. {\b echinata}
\par
2 Corolla 10-12 mm; calyx-tube usually sparsely pubescent
\par
3 Leaflets of lower leaves 8-35 mm; corolla usually white;
\par
  calyx with white hairs .............................................................. ({\b a}) subsp. {\b alba}
\par
3 Leaflets of lower leaves 5-12 mm; corolla usually pinkish;
\par
  calyx with brownish hairs ................................................. ({\b b}) subsp. {\b laconica}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b alba}: Leaflets of lower leaves 8-35 × 1·5-4 mm; calyx-tube subglabrous to pubescent with white hairs, the teeth 2-3 times as long as the tube; corolla 10-12 mm, white sometimes with pinkish veins; legume 5-7 mm, the margin with (3-)4-6 teeth up to 2(-3) mm. •{\i  S. Romania, N. & C. part of Balkan peninsula, C. & S. Italy}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b laconica} (Orph. ex Boiss.) Hayek,{\i  Prodr. Fl. Penins. Balcan.}{\b  1}: 928 (1926): Leaflets of the lower leaves 5-12 × 1·5-2·5 mm; calyx-tube pubescent with brownish hairs, the teeth 2-3 times as long as the tube; corolla 10-12 mm, pink, or white and pink; legume 4-6 mm, the margin with 3-4 teeth up to 1·5 mm.•{\i  S. & W. parts of Balkan peninsula; S. Italy}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b c}) Subsp. {\b echinata} (G. Don fil.) P. W. Ball, {\i Feddes Repert.}{\b  79}: 42 (1968) ({\i O. echinata }G. Don fil.): Leaflets of lower leaves 8-25 × 3-6 mm; calyx-tube villous, the teeth 2-3 times as long as tube; corolla 12-14 mm, pink; legume 5-6 mm, the margin with 3-5 teeth up to 3 mm. {\i S. Italy}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b d}) Subsp. {\b calcarea} (Vandas) P. W. Ball,{\i  Feddes Repert. }{\b 79}: 41 (1968)({\i O. calcarea }Vandas): Leaflets of lower leaves 4-15 × 1-4 mm; calyx-tube more or less pubescent, the teeth 3-4 times as long as tube; corolla 8-10 mm, white; legume c. 5 mm, the margin with 2-4(-5) teeth up to 2 mm.{\i  C. part of Balkan peninsula.}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b  O. bertiscea} Sirj. & Rech. fil.,{\i  Feddes Repert. }{\b 38}: 325 (1935), from W. Jugoslavia (near Gusinje, Crna Gora), is possibly another subspecies of {\b 11}. It has the leaflets of the lower leaves 6-11 × 1·5-2·5 mm; the calyx-tube sparsely hairy, with teeth twice as long as the tube; the corolla 8-9(-10) mm, purple with darker veins, and the legume 5-6·5 mm, the margin with 3-4 teeth up to 0·75 mm.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 12. O. degenii} Dörfler,{\i  Denkschr. Akad. Wiss. Math.-Nat. Kl.} ({\i Wien}) {\b 64}: 718 (1897). Villous perennial 30-50 cm, the hairs at least 1 mm. Leaflets of the lower leaves 9-12 pairs, 12-20 × 2-4·5 mm, elliptical or oblong-elliptical, very densely hairy with appressed hairs; stipules free or united up to the middle. Calyx villous, the teeth 3-4 times as long as tube; corolla 10-14 mm, white, the standard about as long as keel. Legume 8-10 mm, villous with the hairs at least 0·5 mm; sides with long teeth; margin with 3-4 teeth up to c. 3 mm. •{\i  C. Macedonia }({\i Alsar, S.E. of Prilep}). Ju.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 13. O. sphaciotica} W. Greuter,{\i  Candollea}{\b  20}: 213 (1965). Densely silvery-sericeous perennial up to 60 cm. Leaflets of the lower leaves 12-16 pairs, up to 30 × 5 mm, oblong-elliptical or broadly linear. Calyx villous, the teeth 3 times as long as tube; corolla 11-12 mm, purple, the standard as long as or slightly shorter than keel. Legume c. 10 mm, sericeous-pubescent, with the hairs at least 0·5 mm; sides toothed; margin with 8-10 teeth, 1-3 mm. {\i Limestone cliffs, }1300-1750 {\i m. • W. Kriti.} Cr.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 14. O. peduncularis} (Cav.) DC., {\i Prodr.}{\b  2}: 346 (1825). Pubescent perennial 10-60 cm. Leaflets of the lower leaves 4-14 pairs, 4-20 × 1-6 mm, linear to elliptical, glabrous above, pubescent beneath. Calyx glabrous or pubescent, the teeth twice as long as tube; corolla 10-15 mm, white to purplish, often with purple veins. Legume 5-15 mm; sides toothed; margin with 4-10 teeth 3-6 mm.{\i  C. & S. Spain, S. Portugal}. Hs Lu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b peduncularis} ({\i O. eriophora} Desv.): Leaflets 7-14 pairs; standard usually shorter than keel; legume 8-15 mm, densely pubescent with long hairs (at least 1·5 mm), rarely glabrous.{\i  Almost throughout the range of the species}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b matritensis} (Boiss. & Reuter) Maire,{\i  Bull. Soc. Hist. Nat. Afr. Nord }{\b 19}: 84 (1928) ({\i O. longeaculeata} (Boiss.) Pau,{\i  O. matritensis} Boiss. & Reuter): Leaflets 3-8 pairs; standard equalling the keel; legume 5-8 mm, pubescent with short hairs (less than 0·5 mm). •{\i  E.C. & S.E. Spain}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 15. O. argentea} Boiss., {\i Voy. Bot. Midi Esp.}{\b  2}: 188 (1839). Pubescent perennial 10-35 cm. Leaflets 5-8 pairs, 4-10 × 2-3 mm, elliptical to linear-oblong. Calyx pubescent, the teeth 2-3 times as long as tube; corolla 10-14 mm, pink, often with darker veins. Legume 4·5-8 mm, pubescent; sides toothed; margin with 4-7 teeth up to 1(-4) mm.{\i  S. & E. Spain, Pyrenees.} Ga Hs.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b argentea}: Leaflets densely silver-pubescent beneath; racemes comose before anthesis; calyx-teeth with dense patent hairs; standard slightly shorter than keel.{\i  S. Spain}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b hispanica} (Sirj.) P. W. Ball,{\i  Feddes Repert.}{\b  79}: 42 (1968) ({\i O. hispanica} Sirj.): Leaflets pubescent but not silvery beneath; racemes not comose; calyx-teeth with erecto-patent
\par

\par
189}
\par