{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28  (a) Subsp.{\b  repanda}: Leaflets 8-15 mm, oblanceolate, truncate or obtuse; corolla (6·5-)8-9 mm; legume 50-70 × 1·4-2 mm.{\i  Sandy soil; usually maritime. Throughout the range of the species, except S.E. Spain}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b dura} (Cav.) Coutinho,{\i  Fl. Port.} 356 (1913) ({\i Ornithopus durus} Cav.): Leaflets 4-10(-15) mm, obcordate, emarginate; corolla 5-6·5 mm; legume 30-40 × c. 1 mm. {\i Inland. C. & S. Portugal, S. Spain}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 66.                     Hippocrepis}             L.
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc By P.W. Ball.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Annual or perennial herbs. Leaves imparipinnate; stipules small, linear or lanceolate, free. Flowers in axillary heads, rarely solitary. Calyx tubular-campanulate with 5 subequal teeth; corolla yellow; keel acute; stamens diadelphous. Legume lomentaceous, laterally compressed; segments lunate to horseshoe-shaped, or flat and rectangular with a semicircular to orbicular sinus, which has a curved protuberance at its base enclosing the seed.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Literature: F. Bellot,{\i  Anal. Inst. Bot. Cavanilles}{\b  7}: 197-334 (1947). A. Hrabetová-Uhrová,{\i  Acta Acad. Sci. Nat. Mor.-Sil.}{\b  21}({\b 4}) (1949); {\b 22}: 99-158, 219-250, 331-356 (1950).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 A taxonomically difficult genus in which there is considerable difference of opinion as to the status and affinities of many of the taxa, particularly in species {\b 1-4}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 All species occur in dry, usually sunny, situations.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Width of the legume refers to the width at the articulation.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Peduncles not more than 5 mm, usually 1-flowered ............ {\b 10. unisiliquosa}
\par
1 Peduncles more than 5 mm, with 2 or more flowers
\par
2 Annual, slender and herbaceous at the base
\par
3 Peduncles longer than the leaves in fruit; corolla 12-15 mm ... {\b 9. salzmannii}
\par
3 Peduncles shorter than or equalling the leaves; corolla 3-8 mm
\par
4 Corolla 3-5 mm; legume with long papillae on the seed
\par
  protuberance ...................................................................................... {\b 7. ciliata}
\par
4 Corolla 5-8 mm; legume glabrous or with very small papillae
\par
  ............................................................................................... {\b 8. multisiliquosa}
\par
2 Perennial, more or less woody and much branched at the
\par
  base,or caespitose
\par
5 Seed-protuberance, or sometimes the whole legume,
\par
  covered  with white papillae at least 0·5 mm long ....................... {\b 4. squamata}
\par
5 Legume glabrous or with much shorter papillae
\par
6 Legume with red or brown papillae ............................................... {\b 3. comosa}
\par
6 Legume glabrous, or with white papillae
\par
7 Legume without broad, flattened regions between the 
\par
  seed-protuberances; segments lunate ................................................ {\b 1. glauca}
\par
7 Legume with broad, flattened regions between the seed
\par
  protuberances; segments with a semicircular to orbicular sinus
\par
8 Legume more or less densely papillose, particularly on
\par
  the seed-protuberance ....................................................................... {\b 2. scabra}
\par
8 Legume glabrous, rarely very sparsely papillose
\par
9 Leaflets 3-6 pairs, the largest c. 5 mm wide, obovate;
\par
  claw of the standard about as long as the calyx ........................... {\b 5. valentina}
\par
9 Leaflets 5-10 pairs, the largest usually not more than
\par
  2 mm wide, linear or oblong; claw of the standard twice
\par
  as long as the calyx ....................................................................... {\b 6. balearica}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28     {\b 1. H. glauca} Ten., {\i Fl. Nap. }{\b 1},{\i  Prodr.}: 43 (1811) ({\i H. comosa} subsp. {\i glauca} (Ten.) Rouy). Perennial up to 40 cm, woody at base. Leaflets 4-7 pairs, 2-10 × 0·5-3 mm, linear to obovate,densely white pubescent beneath. Heads 4- to 8-flowered; peduncles 2-3 or more times as long as the leaves. Corolla 6-12 mm; claw of the standard about as long as the calyx. Legume (20-)30-40 × 1-2(-3) mm, without broad, flattened regions between the seed-protuberances; segments lunate, with white papillae. {\i Mediterranean region.} Al Ga Gr Hs It Ju Si.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Not always clearly separable from {\b 2} and {\b 3}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. H. scabra} DC.,{\i  Prodr. }{\b 2}: 312 (1825). Perennial up to 40 cm, woody at base. Leaflets (2-)3-8 pairs, 3-12 × 0·5-5 mm, oblong to obovate, usually pubescent beneath. Heads 2- to 8-flowered; peduncles 2-5 times as long as the leaves. Corolla 6-12 mm; claw of the standard up to twice as long as the calyx. Legume 12-25 × (2-)3-6 mm, with broad flat regions between the seed protuberances; segments with horseshoe-shaped to orbicular sinuses, with white papillae. {\i Spain.} Hs.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  This species, as defined here, is composed of three taxa, which are more or less separable geographically:{\i  H. scabra }DC.,{\i  sensu stricto}, from S. Spain, with corolla 8-12 mm and the legume with orbicular sinuses;{\b  H. commutata} Pau,{\i  Bol. Soc. Aragon. Ci. Nat. }{\b 2}: 274 (1903), from C. & N. Spain, with corolla 6-8 mm and the legume with orbicular sinuses;{\b  H. bourgaei} (Nyman) Hervier, {\i Bull. Acad. Int. Geogr. Bot.} ({\i Le Mans}) {\b 17}: 37 (1907), from S.E. Spain, with corolla 5-8 mm and the legume with semicircular sinuses. The characters by which these taxa are separated are not very satisfactory, and there is considerable variation within a single population. Intermediates between {\b 1} and {\b 2} occur in N.E. Spain, while {\i H. bourgaei} has sometimes been included in {\b 1} and sometimes in {\b 3}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 3. H. comosa} L.,{\i  Sp. Pl. }744 (1753). Perennial up to 40(-60) cm, woody at base. Leaflets 3-8 pairs, (2-)5-15 × (1-)2-4 mm, obovate to linear, subglabrous to densely pubescent beneath. Heads (2-)5- to 12-flowered; peduncles up to 4 times as long as the leaves. Corolla 6-10(-14) mm; claw of the standard usually distinctly longer than the calyx. Legume 15-30 × 2-3 mm; segments horseshoe-shaped or with semicircular sinuses, with red-brown papillae. 2n = 28.{\i  W., C. & S. Europe, northwards to N. England and N.C. Germany}. Al Au Be Br Bu Cz Ga Ge Gr He Ho Hs Hu It Ju Rm Rs (W) Sa.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  An extremely variable species which can be distinguished from all the other perennial species of{\i  Hippocrepis} by the red-brown papillae on the legume. Plants in S.E. Europe, otherwise closely resembling this species, sometimes have white papillae, and it is not clear whether these are variants of {\b 3} or of {\b 1} or {\b 2}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 4. H. squamata} (Cav.) Cosson, {\i Not. Pl. Crit.} 105 (1851). Caespitose perennial 10-40 cm, woody at base. Leaflets 3-7 pairs, 2·5-8 × 1·5-5 mm, lanceolate to suborbicular, usually very densely pubescent, sericeous or silvery. Heads 2- to 8-flowered; peduncles 2-4 times as long as the leaves. Corolla 6-12 mm; claw of the standard about as long as the calyx. Legume 10-25 × 2·5-4 mm; segments lunate or with a semicircular sinus; at least the seed-protuberance covered with white papillae 0·5 mm or more long. •{\i  C., S. & E. Spain.} Hs.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b squamata}: Leaflets up to 7 pairs, lanceolate to obovate; legume with papillae covering the seed-protuberance and sometimes the sinuses.{\i  C., E. & S.E. Spain.}
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b eriocarpa} (Boiss.) Nyman,{\i  Consp.} 187 (1878): Leaflets up to 5 pairs, suborbicular; legume completely covered by long papillae.{\i  S. Spain}.
\par

\par
184}
\par