{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 3 Corolla 8-11 mm, 1½-2 times as long as the calyx ............ {\b 3. spinosissimum}
\par
3 Corolla 14-20 mm, 2½-5 times as long as the calyx .............. {\b 4. glomeratum}
\par
1 Perennial
\par
4 Acaulescent, with all the leaves in a basal rosette
\par
5 Calyx about as long as the corolla; legume unarmed .............. {\b 15. candidum}
\par
5 Calyx shorter than the corolla; legume with short
\par
  spines or setae
\par
6 Corolla yellow; calyx about as long as the wings .............. {\b 16. grandiflorum}
\par
6 Corolla purple-violet; calyx exceeding the wings ............... {\b 17. biebersteinii}
\par
4 Caulescent; plants with leafy and usually branched stems
\par
7 Leaflets glabrous or sparsely hairy beneath; legume
\par
  glabrous or sparsely pubescent, unarmed
\par
8 Leaflets emarginate; bracts 1-1·5 mm; corolla cream or
\par
  white, sometimes with bluish veins .................................... {\b 7. boutignyanum}
\par
8 Leaflets obtuse or acute; corolla reddish-violet
\par
9 Bracts 6-15 mm, longer than the pedicel; segments of
\par
  legume with a wide membranous margin .............................. {\b 5. hedysaroides}
\par
9 Bracts 1·5-3 mm, shorter than the pedicel; segments of
\par
  legume with a very narrow membranous margin .......................... {\b 6. alpinum}
\par
7 Leaflets pubescent or sericeous beneath; legume 
\par
  pubescent or with spines or setae
\par
10 Legume unarmed
\par
11 Leaflets lanceolate or linear; corolla pale pink or lilac . {\b 9. razoumowianum}
\par
11 Leaflets oblong, elliptical or obovate; corolla 
\par
   purple or violet
\par
12 Calyx-teeth shorter than tube ................................................ {\b 10. cretaceum}
\par
12 Calyx-teeth as long as or longer than tube .............................. {\b 12. tauricum}
\par
10 Legume with spines or setae
\par
13 Calyx-teeth about as long as tube; legume glabrous ............. {\b 1. coronarium}
\par
13 Calyx-teeth longer than tube; legume pubescent
\par
14 Corolla yellow ............................................................................ {\b 14. varium}
\par
14 Corolla purple to violet
\par
15 Corolla 15-24 mm ...................................................................... {\b 8. gmelinii}
\par
15 Corolla 9-14 mm
\par
16 Leaflets elliptical to obovate; calyx 3-3·5 mm ................ {\b 18. macedonicum}
\par
16 Leaflets linear to oblong-elliptical; calyx 4-9 mm
\par
17 Spines on legume more than 1 mm ..................................... {\b 11. ucrainicum}
\par
17 Spines on legume not more than 1 mm ...................................... {\b 13. humile}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Sect. HEDYSARUM. Caulescent. Stipules free. Segments of the legume spinulose.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. H. coronarium} L.,{\i  Sp. Pl.} 750 (1753). Perennial 30-100 cm, sparsely appressed-pubescent. Leaflets 3-5 pairs, 15-35 × 12-18 mm, elliptical to obovate-orbicular, glabrous or subglabrous above, pubescent beneath. Racemes 10- to 35-flowered, dense. Calyx sparsely to densely pubescent, the teeth about as long as the tube; corolla 12-15 mm, bright reddish-purple. Legume with 2-4 spinulose, but otherwise glabrous segments. 2n = 16.{\i  C. & W. part of Mediterranean region; cultivated for fodder and naturalized elsewhere in S. Europe.} Hs It Sa Si [Bl Ga Gr Ju Lu].
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. H. flexuosum} L.,{\i  Sp. Pl.} 750 (1753). Annual 20-60 cm, glabrous or sparsely pubescent. Leaflets 1-3(-5) pairs, 15-45 × 9-40 mm, pubescent, oblong or obovate, the terminal larger than the lateral. Racemes 15- to 40-flowered. Calyx sparsely pubescent, the teeth longer than the tube; corolla 8-12 mm, purple or pink. Legume with 2-8 setose and spinulose segments.{\i  Sandy places near the sea. S.W. Spain, S.W. Portugal.} Hs Lu [Rs (K)]. ({\i N. Africa}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 3. H. spinosissimum} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 750 (1753). Annual 15-35 cm, appressed-pubescent. Leaflets (2-)4-8 pairs, 5-12 × 2-5 mm,elliptical or oblong, subglabrous or pubescent. Racemes 2- to 10-flowered. Calyx 4-6 mm, sparsely pubescent, the teeth as long as or longer than the tube; corolla 8-11 mm, white to pale pinkish purple, 1½-2 times as long as calyx. Legume with 2-4 spinulose and pubescent segments.{\i  Mediterranean region.} Bl Co Cr Ga Gr Hs ?It Sa Si.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 4. H. glomeratum} F. G. Dietrich, {\i Vollst. Lexic.}{\b  4}: 534 (1804) ({\i H. capitatum} Desf., non Burm. fil., {\i H. spinosissimum} sensu Coste pro parte). Like {\b 3} but leaflets sometimes obovate; corolla 14-20 mm, pinkish-purple, 2½-5 times as long as the calyx.{\i  Mediterranean region, Portugal.} Co Ga Gr Hs It Ju Lu Sa Si.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Sect. GAMOTION Basiner (Sect. Obscura B. Fedtsch.) Caulescent. Stipules usually united. Segments of the legume unarmed, reticulate-veined.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 5. H. hedysaroides} (L.) Schinz & Thell., {\i Viert. Naturf. Ges. Zürich}{\b  58}: 70 (1913) ({\i H. obscurum }L.). Perennial 10-40 cm, glabrous or sparsely pubescent. Leaflets 3-10 pairs, 10-25 × 5-12 mm, obtuse. Racemes 3-8 cm, 15- to 35(-48)-flowered. Bracts 6-15 mm. Calyx-teeth shorter or longer than the tube; corolla 13-25 mm, reddish-violet, rarely white. Legume with 2-5 segments, with a membranous margin. •{\i  Mountains of S.C. Europe; Arctic Russia, N. & C. Ural.} Au Cz Ga Ge He ?Hs It Ju Po Rm Rs (N, C, W).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Leaflets 6-10 pairs; longest calyx-teeth 3-4·5 mm ........ ({\b b}) subsp. {\b exaltatum}
\par
1 Leaflets usually 4-6 pairs; longest calyx-teeth 1·5-3 mm
\par
2 Leaflets ovate or elliptical ........................................ ({\b a}) subsp. {\b hedysaroides}
\par
2 Leaflets oblong-elliptical ................................................. ({\b b}) subsp. {\b arcticum}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b hedysaroides}: Stems 10-15 cm. Leaflets 4-6 pairs, ovate or elliptical. Calyx-teeth triangular, the longest 1·5-3 mm. 2n = 14.{\i  Almost throughout the range of the species}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  This subspecies contains two variants, one with calyx-teeth longer than the tube occurring in the Alps, the other with calyx-teeth shorter than the tube occurring in the mountains of E.C. Europe and the Alps.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b exaltatum} (A. Kerner) Zertová,{\i  Feddes Repert.}{\b  79}: 47 (1968) ({\i H. exaltatum} A. Kerner): Stems 30-40 cm. Leaflets 6-10 pairs. Calyx-teeth lanceolate or subulate, the longest 3-4·5 mm.{\i  S. Alps}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b c}) Subsp. {\b arcticum} (B. Fedtsch.) P. W. Ball, {\i Feddes Repert.}{\b  79}: 47 (1968) ({\i H. arcticum} B. Fedtsch.): Stems 20-30 cm. Leaflets 4-6 pairs, oblong-elliptical. Calyx-teeth shorter than the tube, the longest c. 1·5 mm.{\i  Arctic Russia, N. & C. Ural}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 6. H. alpinum} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 750 (1753). Perennial 30-100 cm, glabrous or sparsely pubescent. Leaflets 6-14 pairs, 10-30 × 4-10 mm, oblong or lanceolate, obtuse or acute. Racemes 6-15 cm, 20- to 30(-60)-flowered. Bracts 1·5-3 mm. Calyx-teeth shorter than the tube; corolla 12-15 mm, reddish-violet. Legume with 2-6 sparsely pubescent segments, with a very narrow membranous margin.{\i  N. & E. Russia}. Rs (N, C, E). ({\i N. Asia}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 7. H. boutignyanum} Alleiz., {\i Bull. Soc. Bot. Fr.}{\b  75}: 38 (1928). Glabrous perennial 50-60 cm. Leaflets 4-8 pairs, 10-30 × 6-18 mm, elliptical or obovate, emarginate; petioles glandular. Racemes 5-20 cm. Bracts 1-1·5 mm. Calyx-teeth shorter than the tube; corolla 12-16(-20) mm, cream or white, sometimes with bluish veins. Legume with 2-5 segments, glabrous except for hairy margin. •{\i  S.W. Alps}. Ga.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Sect. MULTICAULIA (Boiss.) B. Fedtsch. Caulescent. Stipules united. Segments of the legume unarmed or spinose, rugose.
\par

\par
186}
\par