{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 18 Leaves confined to the lower part of the stem; stems
\par
   stiff, ascending to erect, robust ............................................ ({\b i}) subsp. {\b reuteri}
\par
18 Leaves mostly at the base of the thin, flexuous stems;
\par
   plants decumbent, delicate
\par
19 Calyx 5-7(-8) mm; lower cauline leaves obviously inequi-
\par
   foliolate; rosette-leaves usually reduced to the 
\par
   terminal leaflet ................................................................ ({\b g}) subsp. {\b arundana}
\par
19 Calyx 8-10 mm; lower cauline leaves subequifoliolate;
\par
   rosette-leaves usually with 3-5 leaflets ............................... ({\b j}) subsp. {\b atlantis}
\par
1  Calyx (4·5-)5-7 mm wide, the lateral teeth obvious,
\par
   not appressed to the upper; bract-lobes parallel-sided,
\par
   obtuse; upper cauline leaves inequifoliolate 
\par
20 Calyx appressed-sericeous
\par
21 Plants much-branched, with branches from most axils;
\par
   calyx-indumentum dense; stem- and leaf-indumentum 
\par
   canescent ............................................................................ ({\b v}) subsp. {\b iberica}
\par
21 Plants without axillary branches; calyx-indumentum sparse; 
\par
   stem- and leaf-indumentum inconspicuous, not canescent
\par
22 Calyx red at apex; corolla red to pink; plant decumbent
\par
   ......................................................................................... ({\b u}) subsp. {\b pyrenaica}
\par
22 Calyx concolorous, white; corolla yellow; plant 
\par
   ascending to erect ............................................................ ({\b s}) subsp. {\b carpatica}
\par
20 Calyx ± patent-villous to -hirsute
\par
23 Calyx (12-)13-15(-18) mm, with smoke-grey indumentum
\par
    .......................................................................................... ({\b t}) subsp. {\b alpestris}
\par
23 Calyx 9-12 mm, with white indumentum
\par
24 Stems 10-15 cm; sinus between upper calyx-teeth wide,
\par
   obvious ............................................................................. ({\b x}) subsp. {\b borealis}
\par
24 Stems 15-40 cm; sinus between upper calyx-teeth narrow,
\par
   obscure ......................................................................... ({\b w}) subsp. {\b lapponica}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b vulneraria} ({\i  A. linnaei} Juz.): Stems 5-55 cm, decumbent to ascending, sometimes branched, sericeous. Lowest leaves inequifoliolate with 5-7 leaflets; uppermost leaves equifoliolate with 9-15 leaflets. Calyx usually with a red apex; corolla mostly yellow. •{\i   N. Europe from Ireland to Finland and Latvia.} Be Br Da Fe Ga Ge Hb Ho No Rs (B) Su.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Red-flowered variants are often recognized as var.{\i   coccinea} L. Plants from the coasts of Britain and France to Denmark are intermediate with subsp. ({\b v}) and have been recognized as var.{\i   langei} Jalas. For intermediates with subsp. ({\b s}) see that subspecies. Plants intermediate between subsp. ({\b a}) and subsp. ({\b c}) have been described as {\i  A. colorata} Juz.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b maritima} (Schweigger) Corb.,{\i   Nouv. Fl. Norm.} 148 (1894) ({\i  A. maritima} Schweigger): Stems 20-60 cm, usually decumbent, white-sericeous, branched. Lowest leaves inequifoliolate with 1-3 leaflets; uppermost leaves equifoliolate with 7-11 leaflets. Calyx concolorous; corolla yellow. •{\i   S. part of the Baltic region, near the coast.} Da Ge Po Rs (B) Su.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b c}) Subsp. {\b polyphylla} (DC.) Nyman,{\i   Consp. }164 (1878) ({\i  A. arenaria} (Rupr.) Juz., {\i  A. polyphylla }(DC.) Kit. ex G. Don fil.,{\i   A. schiwereckii} (DC.) Blocki): Stems 30-90 cm, stout, ± erect, branched, usually hirsute below, rarely glabrous. Leaves numerous; lowest inequifoliolate with 3-7 leaflets, uppermost equifoliolate with 11-15 leaflets. Calyx concolorous; corolla yellow, rarely reddish. 2n = 12.{\i   C. & E. Europe, extending to C. Jugoslavia; rarely introduced elsewhere}. Au Cz Da Hu It Ju Po Rm Rs (N, B, C, W, K, E) [Be Ge].
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  For intermediates to subsp. ({\b s}) and subsp. ({\b o}) see those subspecies; intermediates to subsp. ({\b d}) occur in the Balkan peninsula.{\i   A. schiwereckii} (DC.) Blocki is a rather rare, subglabrous variant. The subspecies has been cultivated as a fodder plant in various areas of Europe.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b d}) Subsp. {\b bulgarica} (Sagorski) Cullen,{\i   Watsonia}{\b  6}: 389 (1968): Stems 25-35 cm, ascending, branched, hirsute below. Lowest leaves inequifoliolate with 1-3 leaflets; uppermost leaves equifoliolate with 9-11 leaflets. Calyx concolorous, usually much exceeded by the bract-lobes; corolla pale yellow to almost whitish. •{\i   Balkan peninsula.} Al Bu Gr Ju.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b e}) Subsp. {\b boissieri} (Sagorski) Bornm.,{\i   Feddes Repert. }{\b 50}: 135 (1941) ({\i  A. boissieri }Sagorski,{\i   A. taurica} Juz.): Like subsp. ({\b d}) but with shorter bract-lobes and calyx red at apex; corolla sometimes reddish.{\i   Krym.} Rs (K).
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b f}) Subsp. {\b pulchella} (Vis.) Bornm., {\i  Bot. Jahrb.}{\b  59}: 483 (1925) ({\i  A. albana }Wettst.,{\i   A. scardica} Wettst., {\i  A. biebersteiniana} (Taliev) Popl. ex Juz.): Stems 6-20 cm, decumbent, usually sericeous, more or less unbranched. Lowest leaves inequifoliolate with 1-3 leaflets; uppermost leaves equifoliolate with 7-11 leaflets. Calyx red at apex; corolla yellow or reddish. {\i  Balkan peninsula, Krym}. Al Bu Gr Ju Rs (K).
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Intermediates to subspp. ({\b t}) and ({\b d}) occur in N. Greece.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b g}) Subsp. {\b arundana} (Boiss. & Reuter) Vasc.,{\i   Anais Inst. Vinho Porto}{\b  1}: 73 (1941) ({\i  A. arundana} Boiss. & Reuter): Stems 5-20 cm, sericeous, thin and flexuous. Lowest leaves equifoliolate with 1-3 leaflets; uppermost leaves equifoliolate with 9-11 leaflets. Calyx very small, purple at apex; corolla purplish red. •{\i   S. Spain.} Hs.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  This subspecies grows at higher altitudes than subsp. ({\b h}). Intermediates between them occur in the middle regions of the mountains of S. Spain.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b h}) Subsp. {\b argyrophylla} (Rothm.) Cullen, {\i  Watsonia.}{\b  6}: 389 (1968) ({\i  A. argyrophylla} Rothm.,{\i   A. webbiana} auct. mult., non Hooker): Stems 10-20 cm, ascending, hirsute near the base. Lowest leaves inequifoliolate with 1-3 leaflets; uppermost equifoliolate with 7-11 leaflets, most of the terminal leaflets broadly elliptical to orbicular with dense silvery indumentum. Calyx purple at apex; corolla red to purple. •{\i   S. Spain.} Hs.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b  A. webbiana} Hooker, {\i  Bot. Mag.}{\b  60}: t. 3284 (1833), the name most frequently applied to this taxon, was described from Madeira.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b i}) Subsp. {\b reuteri} Cullen, {\i  Watsonia}{\b  6}: 389 (1968) ({\i  A. hispida }Boiss. & Reuter, non {\i  A. vulneraria} var.{\i   hispida }Boiss.): Stems 15-30 cm, hirsute-villous below. Lowest leaves inequifoliolate with 1-3 leaflets. Calyx purple at apex; corolla red.•{\i   S. & E. Spain, at low altitudes.} Hs.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Some specimens resemble subsp. ({\b n}), which is absent from mainland Spain.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b j}) Subsp. {\b atlantis} Emberger & Maire, {\i  Bull. Soc. Hist. Nat. Afr. Nord }{\b 24}: 209 (1933) ({\b A. nivalis} (Willk.) G. Beck): Stems 8-20 cm, decumbent, hirsute below. Lowest leaves subequifoliolate with 5-9 leaflets; uppermost equifoliolate with 7-13 leaflets. Calyx purple at apex; corolla purplish.{\i   High mountains of S. & E. Spain.} Hs.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b k}) Subsp. {\b vulnerarioides} (All.) Arcangeli, {\i  Comp. Fl. Ital.} ed. 2, 502 (1894) ({\i  A. vulnerarioides} (All.) Bonjean ex Reichenb., {\i  A. bonjeanii} G. Beck): Stems 6-15 cm, ascending, completely hirsute, or hirsute only below. Lowest leaves inequifoliolate with 1-5 leaflets; uppermost equifoliolate with 9-13 leaflets. Calyx red at apex; corolla yellow. •{\i   Pyrenees, S.W. Alps, C. Appennini.} Ga Hs It.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Specimens from C. Appennini (Monte Majella) approach subsp. ({\b f}). {\i  A. bonjeanii} G. Beck is the name applied to variants with stems appressed-hairy in the upper part.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b l}) Subsp. {\b forondae} (Sennen) Cullen, {\i  Watsonia}{\b  6}: 389 (1968) ({\i  A. forondae} Sennen): Stems 20-40 cm, ascending to erect, hirsute below. Lowest leaves equifoliolate with 9-13 leaflets, most of the leaflets broadly elliptical or almost orbicular. Calyx red at apex; corolla usually yellow. •{\i   Mountains of N.E. Spain, Pyrenees, S.W. Alps.} Ga Hs It.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  More or less sympatric with subsp. ({\b k}) but at much lower altitudes. Intermediates between this and subsp. ({\b u}) ({\i  A. sampaiana} Rothm.), are found in N.E. Portugal and N.W. Spain. ({\b m}) Subsp. {\b pindicola} Cullen,{\i   Watsonia }{\b 6}: 389 (1968).
\par

\par
180}
\par