{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b 8. H. gmelinii} Ledeb.,{\i  Mém. Acad. Sci. Pétersb.}{\b  5}: 551 (1815). Pubescent perennial 20-70 cm. Leaflets (3-) 4-11 pairs, 7-30 × 3-14 mm, oblong or elliptical, pubescent. Racemes 15- to 45 flowered. Calyx appressed-pubescent or subglabrous, the teeth longer than the tube; corolla 15-24 mm, purple. Legume with 3-6 pubescent, spinose, rugose segments.{\i  S.E. Russia, W. Kazakhstan}. Rs (E). ({\i N.C. Asia.})
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 9. H. razoumowianum} Helm & Fischer ex DC.,{\i  Prodr.}{\b  2}: 342 (1825). Perennial up to 50 cm, appressed-pubescent. Leaflets 4-8 pairs, 10-30 × 1·5-4·5 mm, linear or lanceolate, glabrous or sparsely pubescent above, pubescent beneath. Racemes 8- to 20-flowered. Calyx appressed-pubescent, the teeth as long as or longer than the tube; corolla 15-20 mm, pale pink or lilac. Legume with 2-7 pubescent, spinose segments, sulcate on the margin.{\i  S.E. Russia.} Rs (E). ({\i N. Kazakhstan.})
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 10. H. cretaceum} Fischer ex DC., {\i loc. cit.} (1825). Sparsely pubescent perennial 20-50 cm. Leaflets 5-12 pairs, 5-12 × 1·5-3 mm, oblong or elliptical, subglabrous above, appressed-pubescent beneath. Racemes 12- to 20-flowered. Calyx 3-4 mm, sparsely appressed-pubescent, the teeth shorter than the tube; corolla 11-17 mm, deep violet. Legume with 2-4 pubescent, reticulate-veined segments. •{\i  S.E. Russia.} Rs (E).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 11. H. ucrainicum} B. Kaschm., {\i Bull. Jard. Bot. Pétersb.}{\b  5}: 59 (1905). Pubescent perennial 7-20(-35) cm. Leaflets 5-10 pairs. 8-14(-20) × 1·5-3 mm, oblong-elliptical, subglabrous above, densely white-pubescent beneath. Racemes 8- to 25-flowered. Calyx 4-5·5 mm, pubescent, the teeth 2-3 times as long as the tube; corolla 10-12 mm, purple. Legume with 2-4 sparsely pubescent, spinose segments. E. Ukraine. Rs (E).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 12. H. tauricum} Pallas ex Willd.,{\i  Sp. Pl.}{\b  3}: 1208 (1802). Sparsely pubescent perennial 15-20 cm. Leaflets 6-8 pairs, 7-12 × 2-3·5 mm, oblong or elliptical to obovate, pubescent. Racemes 8- to 15-flowered. Calyx sparsely pubescent, the teeth as long as or longer than the tube; corolla 11-18 mm, purple. Legume with 2-5 pubescent segments, sulcate on the margin.{\i  N.E. Bulgaria; Krym}. Bu Rs (K).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Two distinct variants occur: one with corolla 11-14(-15) mm, from Bulgaria and Krym, the other with corolla 14-18 mm, from Krym.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 13. H. humile} L.,{\i  Syst. Nat.} ed. 10,{\b  2}: 1171 (1759). Pubescent perennial 20-50 cm. Leaflets 6-16 pairs, 4-10 × 1-3 mm, linear or oblong, glabrous above, pubescent beneath. Racemes 15- to 25-flowered. Calyx 4-9 mm, with long white hairs, the teeth longer than the tube; corolla 9-14 mm, purple-violet. Legume with (1-)2-3 pubescent, shortly spinose segments, sometimes with spines only on the margin.{\i  W. Mediterranean.} Ga Hs.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 14. H. varium} Willd.,{\i  Sp. Pl.}{\b  3}: 1206 (1802). Pubescent perennial 30-60 cm. Leaflets 7-8 pairs, 5-12 mm, oblong or elliptical, pubescent. Racemes 15- to 30-flowered. Calyx 5-8 mm, pubescent, the teeth about 1½ times as long as the tube; corolla 14-22 mm, yellow, the keel sometimes purple at apex. Legume with 2-4 pubescent segments.{\i  Turkey-in-Europe} ({\i S.W. of Gelibolu}); ?{\i Macedonia}. Tu. ({\i N. & C. Anatolia.})
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b  H. formosum} Fischer & C. A. Meyer ex Basiner,{\i  Mém. Sav. Étr. Pétersb.}{\b  6}: 69 (1846), from W. Asia, with ovate leaflets and yellow corolla, has been recorded from Bulgaria. The specimen on which this record is based has purple flowers, and cannot be determined with certainty.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Sect. SUBACAULIA (Boiss.) B. Fedtsch. Acaulescent. Stipules united. Segments of the legume unarmed or spinulose.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 15. H. candidum} Bieb.,{\i  Fl. Taur.-Cauc.}{\b  2}: 176 (1808). Perennial with peduncles 20-40 cm, patent-pubescent. Leaflets 2-6 pairs, 10-35 × 8-25 mm, oblong or elliptical, silver-white-pubescent above, sericeous beneath. Racemes 15- to 50-flowered. Calyx about as long as corolla, the teeth much longer than the tube; corolla 15-22 mm, yellow, pink or purple; standard as long as or slightly shorter than keel. Legume with 2-4 unarmed, tomentose segments.{\i  Krym.} Rs (K). ({\i W. Caucasus.})
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 16. H. grandiflorum} Pallas, {\i Reise}{\b  2}: 743 (1773). Like {\b 15} but sometimes subglabrous; leaflets 2-5 pairs, 15-40 × 8-30 mm, elliptical or ovate; calyx distinctly shorter than corolla; corolla 18-25 mm, yellow; standard exceeding keel; segments spinulose.{\i  S.E. Europe, from Bulgaria to} c. 55°{\i  N. in E. Russia}. Bu Rm Rs (W, E)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 17. H. biebersteinii} Zertová,{\i  Feddes Repert. }{\b 79}: 47 (1968)({\i H. argenteum} Bieb., non L.). Like {\b 15} but peduncles with appressed hairs; leaflets 3-7 pairs, oblong or oblong-ovate, sericeous; corolla purple-violet; standard exceeding keel; segments shortly spinulose. {\i S.E. Russia.} Rs (E).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Sect. CRINIFERA (Boiss.) B. Fedtsch. Caulescent. Stipules united. Segments of the legume setose.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 18. H. macedonicum} Bornm.,{\i  Mitt. Thür. Bot. Ver}. nov. ser., {\b 36}: 43 (1925). Perennial 20-50 cm, appressed-pubescent. Leaflets 8-12(-14) pairs, 3-5(-8) × 2-3(-5) mm, elliptical or obovate, glabrous above, white pubescent beneath. Racemes 15- to 30-flowered. Calyx 3-3·5 mm, the teeth slightly longer than the tube; corolla 10-14 mm, purple-violet. Legume with 2-3 segments. 2n = 16. •{\i  S. Jugoslavia.} Ju.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 71.                       Onobrychis}                 Miller
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc By P.W. Ball.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Annual or perennial herbs. Leaves imparipinnate; stipules free or connate. Flowers in axillary racemes. Calyx campanulate, with 5 equal teeth; corolla white, pink or purple, rarely yellow; stamens diadelphous. Legume indehiscent, more or less orbicular and compressed, with a distinct, usually toothed, margin and foveolate to reticulate-veined sides which often have teeth on the veins or ridges. Seeds 1-3.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Literature: H. Handel-Mazzetti, {\i Österr. Bot. Zeitschr.}{\b  59}: 369-378, 424-430, 479-488 (1909); {\b 60}: 5-12, 64-71 (1910). G. Sirjaev,{\i  Publ. Fac. Sci. Univ. Masaryk}{\b  56}: 1-195 (1925); {\b 76}: 1-165 (1926);242: 1-14 (1937);{\i  Bull. Soc. Bot. Bulg.}{\b  4}: 7-24 (1931).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Annual; racemes not more than 8-flowered
\par
2 Corolla 7-8 mm; legume with linear-triangular to subulate 
\par
  teeth on the margin .................................................................. {\b 22. caput-galli}
\par
2 Corolla 10-14 mm; legume with broadly triangular 
\par
  teeth on the margin ............................................................... {\b 23. aequidentata}
\par
1 Perennial; racemes usually at least 10-flowered
\par
3 Standard pubescent on the back; legume with 2 rows of
\par
  teeth on the margin, rarely unarmed; stipules usually free
\par
4 Leaflets sparsely pubescent and green beneath; margin 
\par
  of the legume with teeth 0·5-1·5 mm ............................................... {\b 3. radiata}
\par
4 Leaflets densely grey-tomentose beneath; margin of the
\par
  legume with teeth not more than 0·5 mm, or unarmed
\par
5 Sides of the legume unarmed or tuberculate; margin
\par
  unarmed or with minute teeth ................................................... {\b 1. hypargyrea}
\par
5 Sides of the legume toothed; margin with teeth up to 0·5 mm ...... {\b 2. pallasii}
\par

\par
187}
\par