{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 calyx. Legume 50-110 mm; segments 3-12, 8-10 mm.{\i  C. & S.E. Europe, extending locally to S. Norway, the Pyrenees and E. Spain.} Al Au Bu Co Cr Cz Ga Ge Gr He Hs Hu It Ju No Rm Rs (K) Si Su Tu [Da].
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b emerus}: Peduncles about equalling the leaves; heads 1- to 5-flowered; segments of the legume obtusely angled. 2n = 14. •{\i  Throughout the range of the species except the south-east}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b emeroides} (Boiss. & Spruner) Hayek,{\i  Prodr. Fl. Penins. Balcan.}{\b  1}: 917 (1926) ({\i C. emeroides }Boiss. & Spruner): Peduncles longer than the leaves; heads up to 8-flowered; segments of the legume subterete.{\i  S.E. Europe, E. & S. Italy}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Plants from Italy and N. Jugoslavia are often intermediate between the two subspecies.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. C. valentina} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 742 (1753). Small shrub up to 100 cm. Leaflets 2-6 pairs, up to 20 mm, obovate, emarginate; stipules free, deciduous. Heads 4- to 12-flowered. Corolla 7-12 mm, yellow. Legume 10-50 mm; segments 1-10, 5-7 mm, fusiform, subcompressed, with two obtuse angles.{\i  Scrub and cliffs. Mediterranean region, S. Portugal.} Al Bl Co Cr Ga Gr Hs It Ju Lu Sa Si [Br].
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b valentina}: Leaflets 3-6 pairs; stipules 5-10 mm, herbaceous. Legume with 3-7 segments.{\i  C. part of Mediterranean region} ({\i S.E. France to Albania}).
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b glauca} (L.) Batt. in Batt. & Trabut,{\i  Fl. Algér.} ({\i Dicot.}) 285 (1889) ({\i C. glauca} L.): Leaflets 2-3 pairs; stipules 2-6 mm, ovate or lanceolate, membranous. Legume with 1-4(-10) segments.{\i  Almost throughout the range of the species.}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Subsp.{\b  pentaphylla} (Desf.) Batt., {\i loc. cit.} (1889) ({\i C. pentaphylla} Desf.) occurs in S. Spain. It is intermediate between subspp. ({\b a}) and ({\b b}) with 2-3 pairs of leaflets; stipules 5-10 mm, herbaceous, and the legume with 1-3 segments. Similar intermediate plants occur in S. France and in Italy.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 3. C. vaginalis} Lam.,{\i  Encycl. Méth. Bot.}{\b  2}: 121 (1786). Small shrub up to 50 cm. Leaflets 2-6 pairs, 4-10 mm, oblong-ovate or obovate to suborbicular, shortly petiolate, margin scarious; stipules 3-8(-10) mm, connate, herbaceous, with membranous tip, deciduous. Heads 4- to 10-flowered; pedicels 2-4 mm. Corolla 6-10 mm, yellow. Legume 15-35 mm; segments 3-8, 4·5-5 mm, ovoid, obtusely 6-angled, 4 of the angles winged. 2n = 12. {\i Dry grassland, scrub and open woods; calcicole. • Mountain regions of C. Europe, Italy, Jugoslavia and Albania. }Al Au Cz Ga Ge He Hu It Ju ?Rm.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 4. C. minima} L., {\i Cent. Pl.}{\b  2}: 28 (1756). Small shrub up to 30(-45) cm. Leaflets 2-6 pairs, 2-15 mm, elliptical or obovate to suborbicular, sessile, margin scarious, stipules c. 1 mm, connate, membranous, persistent. Heads up to 10(-15)-flowered; pedicels 2-4 mm. Corolla 5-8(-12) mm, yellow. Legume 10-35 mm; segments 1-7, 4·5-5·5 mm, oblong, 4-angled. 2n = 24. {\i Dry, open habitats. S.W. Europe extending to N.W. France, S.W. Switzerland and E. Italy.} Ga He Hs It Lu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 5. C. juncea} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 742 (1753). Small junciform shrub 20-100 cm, with long internodes. Leaves caducous; leaflets (1-)2-3 pairs, 5-25 mm, linear or oblong, fleshy; stipules 1-3(-5) mm, free, membranous. Heads 5- to 12- flowered. Corolla 6-12 mm,yellow. Legume 10-50 mm; segments 2-11, 4-5 mm, oblong, obtusely 4-angled.{\i  Dry open habitats. W. Mediterranean region, extending to W. Jugoslavia and S. Portugal}. Bl Ga Hs It Ju Lu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 6. C. coronata} L.,{\i  Syst. Nat.} ed. 10, {\b 2}: 1168 (1759). Perennial herb 30-70 cm. Leaflets 3-6(-7) pairs, 15-30(-40) mm, elliptical or obovate, petiolate, margin narrowly scarious; stipules 3-5 mm, connate, membranous, deciduous. Heads 12- to 20-flowered; pedicels 4-6 mm. Corolla 7-11 mm, yellow. Legume 15-30 mm; segments 1-5(-9), 6-7·5 mm, ovoid-oblong, obtusely 4-angled. 2n = 10.{\i  Dry woods, scrub and grassland; calcicole. C. Europe and W. part of Balkan peninsula, extending to C. France, N. Italy and Krym.} Al Au Cz Ga Ge Gr He Hu It Ju ?Rm Rs (W, K).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Recorded from E. Spain, probably in error for robust plants of{\b  4}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 7. C. varia} L.,{\i  Sp. Pl}. 743 (1753). Perennial herb 20-120 cm. Leaflets (5-)7-12 pairs, 6-20 × 3-12 mm, oblong or elliptical, margin narrowly scarious; stipules 1-6 mm, free, membranous. Heads (5-)10- to 20-flowered. Corolla (8-)10-15 mm, white, pink or purple. Legume 20-60(-80) mm; segments 3-8(-12), 4-6 mm, oblong, 4-angled. 2n = 24.{\i  C. & S. Europe, extending to C. Russia, but native limits not clear; often cultivated for fodder and naturalized in W. & N. Europe.} Al Au Bu Cr Cz Ga Ge Gr He *Ho Hu Hs It Ju Po Rm Rs (*B, C, W, K, E) Tu [Be Br Da No Rs (N) Su].
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 8. C. elegans} Pancic,{\i  Fl. Princ. Serb.} 262 (1874) ({\i C. latifolia} (Hazsl.) Jáv.). Like Like {\b 7} but leaflets 3-5(-6) pairs, (15-)20-50 × (7-)10-20 mm, pruinose beneath; heads 6- to 18-flowered; corolla 8-10 mm; legume 50-80 mm; segments 5-10. 2n = 12. {\i Woods and scrub. • From Albania and Czechoslovakia eastwards to Ukraine.} Al Au Cz Gr Hu Ju Rm Rs (W).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 9. C. globosa} Lam., {\i Encycl. Méth. Bot. }{\b 2}: 122 (1786). Like {\b 7} but leaflets 15-30 × 5-13 mm; heads 15- to 40-flowered; corolla 9-11 mm, usually white; legume 30-70 mm; segments 2-5, 9-10 mm.{\i  Cliffs. Kriti.} Cr.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 10. C. cretica} L.,{\i  Sp. Pl.} 743 (1753). Annual up to 90 cm. Leaflets 3-8 pairs, 5-20 mm, obovate-oblong, obtuse or truncate; stipules 1-3 mm, free, linear, membranous. Heads 3- to 6(-9)flowered. Corolla 4-7 mm, white or pink. Legume 30-80 mm, straight, with curved beak; segments 5-9, 6-7 mm, linear-oblong, 4-angled.{\i  Grassy places and as a ruderal. S.E. Europe, extending to S. & E. Italy.} Al Bu Cr Gr It Ju Rs (W, K) Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 11. C. rostrata} Boiss. & Spruner in Boiss.,{\i  Diagn. Pl. Or. Nov. }{\b 1}({\b 2}): 100 (1843) ({\i C. parviflora} Willd., non Moench). Like {\b 10} but leaflets emarginate; stipules ovate; corolla 7-11 mm, pink, white or pale yellow; legume strongly curved, with straight beak; segments obtusely 2-angled. {\i S. Albania, Greece and Aegean region; Krym.} Al Cr Gr Rs (K) Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 12. C. scorpioides} (L.) Koch,{\i  Syn. Fl. Germ. }188 (1835). Annual up to 40 cm. Leaves simple or 3-foliolate; terminal leaflet up to 40 mm, elliptical or suborbicular, much larger than the reniform-orbicular lateral leaflets; stipules 1-2 mm, connate, membranous. Heads 2- to 5-flowered. Corolla 4-8 mm, yellow. Legume 20-60 mm, curved; segments 2-11, oblong, more or less straight, obtusely 4- to 6-angled. 2n = 12.{\i  Dry open habitats, often as a weed or ruderal. S. Europe; often casual elsewhere.} Al Bl Bu Co Cr Ga Gr Hs It Ju Lu Rm Rs (K) Sa Si Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 13. C. repanda} (Poiret) Guss.,{\i  Fl. Sic. Syn.}{\b  2}: 302 (1844). Like {\b 12} but upper leaves imparipinnate; leaflets 2-4 pairs, subequal, 4-15 mm, oblanceolate to obovate, truncate or emarginate; segments of the legume distinctly curved.{\i  S. half of Iberian peninsula; Islas Baleares; Italy and Sicilia.} Bl Hs It Lu Si.
\par

\par
183}
\par