{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 5. H. valentina} Boiss., {\i Elenchus }38 (1838). Perennial 20-50 cm, woody at base. Leaflets 3-6 pairs, 9-12 × 3-6 mm, obovate or obovate-elliptical, obtuse, mucronate. Heads 2- to 10- flowered; peduncles up to 1½ times as long as the leaves. Corolla 9-12 mm; claw of the standard about as long as the calyx. Legume 10-30 × 3-5 mm with broad flat regions between the seed-protuberances; segments with semicircular sinus, glabrous.{\i  Calcareous rocks. • S.E. Spain} ({\i Alicante prov.}). Hs.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 6. H. balearica} Jacq.,{\i  Misc. Austr. Bot.}{\b  2}: 305 (1781). Like {\b 5} but leaflets 5-10 pairs, 4-12 × 1-2(-5) mm, linear or oblong, acute; peduncles up to 3 times as long as the leaves; corolla 10-15 mm; claw of the standard about twice as long as the calyx; legume 15-45 mm; segments sometimes with orbicular sinus.{\i  Calcareous rocks. • Islas Baleares.} Bl.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 7. H. ciliata} Willd.,{\i  Ges. Naturf. Freunde Berlin Mag.}{\b  2}: 173 (1808). Slender annual up to 30 cm. Leaflets 3-6(-7) pairs, 5-15 × 0·5-3 mm, linear or oblong. Heads 2- to 6-flowered; peduncle about equalling the leaves. Corolla 3-5 mm. Legume 15-25 × 2·5-4 mm, curved so that the sinuses open on the concave edge; segments with orbicular sinuses and with long papillae on the seed-protuberance. {\i S. Europe}. Al Bl Bu Co Cr Ga Gr Hs It Ju Lu Rs (K) Sa Si Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 8. H. multisiliquosa} L.,{\i  Sp. Pl.} 744 (1753). Slender annual 10-60 cm. Leaflets 3-8 pairs, 5-15 × 2-5 mm, obovate-oblong. Heads 2- to 6-flowered; peduncle about equalling leaves. Corolla 5-8 mm. Legume 20-40(-60) × 3-5 mm, curved so that the sinuses open on the convex edge; segments with orbicular sinuses, glabrous or very sparsely papillose. 2n = 14.{\i  W. Mediterranean region and S. Portugal; Greece.} Bl Co Gr Hs Lu Sa Si.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 9. H. salzmanii} Boiss. & Reuter in Boiss.,{\i  Diagn. Pl. Or. Nov. }{\b 1}({\b 2}): 101 (1843). Like {\b 8} but the peduncle distinctly longer than the leaves in fruit; corolla 12-15 mm; legume 25-50 × 4-7 mm.{\i  Maritime sands and dry, stony ground. S.W. Spain} ({\i near Cadiz}). Hs. ({\i N.W. Morocco.})
\par

\par
 
\pard\f0\fs28   {\b 10. H. unisiliquosa} L.,{\i  Sp. Pl.} 744 (1753) (incl. {\i H. biflora} auct. eur., non Sprengel). Slender annual up to 40 cm. Leaflets 3-7 pairs, 2-12 × 1-5 mm, linear to obovate. Flowers usually solitary, axillary, rarely 2 or 3 together and shortly pedunculate. Corolla 4-7 mm. Legume 15-40 × 4-5 mm; segments with an orbicular sinus, glabrous or sparsely papillose. {\i S. Europe}. Al Bl Bu Co Cr Ga Gr Hs It Ju Lu Rs (K) Sa Si Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 67.                    Hammatolobium}              Fenzl
\par
 
\pard\f0\fs24\qc By P.W. Ball.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Perennial herbs. Leaves imparipinnate or 3-foliolate, sometimes almost digitate; stipules small, free, linear. Flowers solitary or in axillary heads, subtended by a simple or 3-foliolate bract. Calyx tubular-campanulate, with 5 subequal teeth; keel acute; stamens monadelphous. Legume lomentaceous; segments terete, finely reticulate-veined.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. H. lotoides} Fenzl,{\i  Pugillus} 3 (1842). Much branched and woody at base with procumbent villous stems 10-15 cm. Leaflets 5-15 × 4-10 mm, obovate. Heads 1- to 5-flowered. Corolla 10-14 mm, yellow or purple. Legume 10-25 mm, oblong, pubescent, beaked; segments 2-8, ovoid-oblong.{\i  Mountain cliffs. S. Greece}. Gr.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 68.                       Scorpiurus}                   L.
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc By P.W. Ball.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Annual. Leaves simple, with 3-5 parallel veins; stipules free, linear. Flowers solitary or in axillary heads. Calyx campanulate, with 5 equal teeth; corolla yellow or purplish; keel acute; stamens diadelphous. Legume lomentaceous or indehiscent, curved or variously contorted, longitudinally ridged, usually with spines or tubercles on the outer ridges.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Literature: C. C. Heyn & V. Raviv,{\i  Bull. Torrey Bot. Club}{\b  93}: 259-267 (1966).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 Fruit smooth or with tubercles or spines on the outer ridges;  
\par
   flowers usually 2-5 in a head ..................................................... {\b 1. muricatus}
\par
Fruit with capitate tubercles on the outer ridges;
\par
   flowers solitary, rarely 2 together on a peduncle .................. {\b 2. vermiculatus}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. S. muricatus} L.,{\i  Sp. Pl}. 745 (1753) (incl.{\i  S. subvillosus} L., {\i S. sulcatus} L.). Stems up to 80 cm, glabrous or pubescent with appressed or patent hairs. Heads (1-)2- to 5-flowered. Corolla 5-10(-12) mm. Legume with the ridges smooth or the outer 4-8 tuberculate or spinose. Seeds lunate, attenuate at the ends. 2n = 28.{\i  S. Europe; a rare casual elsewhere.} Al Bl Bu Co Cr Ga Gr Hs It Ju Lu Rs (K) Sa Si Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Often divided into 3 taxa, of varying rank, on the type of indumentum, the length of the peduncle in relation to the leaves, the length of the calyx-teeth in relation to the tube and the degree of spininess and the contortion of the legume. The correlation between these characters is inconstant, and there does not seem to be any satisfactory geographical separation.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. S. vermiculatus} L.,{\i  Sp. Pl.} 744 (1753). Stems up to 70 cm, hirsute. Flowers solitary or rarely 2 together on a peduncle. Corolla 10-20 mm. Legume with stout capitate tubercles on the outer ridges. Seeds elliptical or oblong.{\i  S.W. Europe. }*Co *Ga ?Gr Hs It Lu Sa.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 69.                   Eversmannia}                  Bunge
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc By P.W. Ball.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Spiny shrubs, the spines formed from axillary branches. Leaves imparipinnate; stipules connate. Flowers in axillary racemes. Calyx tubular-campanulate, the teeth more or less unequal; corolla pink; stamens monadelphous or diadelphous. Legume lomentaceous, disarticulating tardily, oblong, compressed, not constricted between the segments.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. E. subspinosa} (Fischer ex DC.) B. Fedtsch.,{\i  Acta Horti Petrop.}{\b  24}: 173 (1905). Grey-pubescent shrub 12-60 cm, with tortuous branches. Leaflets 3-7 pairs, 5-10 × 3-4 mm, elliptical or obovate, obtuse. Corolla 12-17 mm. Legume 30-50 × 4-5 mm, glabrous, flexuous, with the dorsal edge persisting after the disarticulation of the legume.{\i  S.E. Russia} ({\i by the lower Volga}). Rs (E). ({\i Kazakhstan}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 70.                    Hedysarum}                 L. 
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc By A. Chrtková-Zertová.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Annual or perennial herbs. Leaves imparipinnate; stipules free or connate. Flowers in axillary racemes. Calyx campanulate, with 5 subequal teeth; corolla pink, purple or violet, rarely white or yellow; stamens diadelphous. Legume lomentaceous, more or less compressed, with up to 8 segments. Seeds 1 in each segment.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Annual
\par
2 Leaflets 1-3(-5) pairs, the terminal leaflet 15-45 × 9-40 mm ... {\b 2. flexuosum}
\par
2 Leaflets (2-)4-8 pairs, the terminal leaflet 5-15 × 2-5 mm
\par

\par
185}
\par