{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 hairs on the margin, glabrous or subglabrous on the surfaces; standard equalling or slightly exceeding keel. •{\i  From S.E. Spain to the Pyrenees}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b O. pyrenaica} (Sennen) Sennen ex Sirj.,{\i  Publ. Fac. Sci. Univ. Masaryk }{\b 56}: 135 (1925), from the Pyrenees, is a rare taxon of somewhat uncertain affinities related to {\b 15 b} and {\b 17}. It is a dwarf (up to 12 cm) sparsely pubescent perennial, with leaflets 2-4 × 1·5-2·5 mm; calyx-teeth about as long as tube, with a few short hairs on the margin; corolla 8-10 mm; legume with 4-6 teeth up to 1·5 mm on the margin.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 16. O. reuteri} Leresche in Leresche & Levier,{\i  Deux Excurs. Bot.} 73 (1880). Pubescent perennial up to 30 cm, with appressed hairs. Leaflets 7-11 pairs, 3-7 × 1·5-2·5 mm, linear to obovate. Calyx pubescent, exceeding the keel, the teeth 1·5-2·5 times as long as tube; corolla 7-9 mm, Legume 6-7 mm, pubescent; sides toothed; margin with 6-7 teeth up to 2 mm. •{\i  N. Spain.} Hs.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 17. O. montana} DC. in Lam. & DC.,{\i  Fl. Fr.} ed. 3,{\b  4}: 611 (1805). Subglabrous or sparsely pubescent perennial up to 50 cm. Leaflets 5-8 pairs, elliptical or ovate to oblong. Calyx sparsely pubescent, the hairs appressed or erecto-patent; corolla (8-)10-14 mm, pink, usually with purple veins. Legume pubescent; sides toothed or unarmed; margin with 4-8 teeth.{\i  Mountains of C. Europe, Italy and the Balkan peninsula; doubtfully in the Pyrenees.} Al Au Bu Cz Ga Ge Gr He It Ju Po Rm.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Standard equalling or slightly shorter than keel;
\par
  legume (6-)7-12 mm, the margin with teeth up to 4 mm . ({\b c}) subsp. {\b cadmea}
\par
1 Standard c. 2 mm shorter than keel; legume 6-8 mm,
\par
  the margin with teeth not more than 2 mm
\par
2 Leaflets (5-)10-20 mm; calyx-teeth not more than 3 
\par
  times as long as tube ........................................................ ({\b a}) subsp. {\b montana}
\par
2 Leaflets 4-7(-10) mm; calyx-teeth 3-4 times as long as tube
\par
  ........................................................................................... ({\b b}) subsp. {\b scardica}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b montana}: Leaflets (5-)10-20 × (2-)3-5 mm, usually glabrous above, pubescent beneath; racemes 3-7 cm before anthesis; calyx-teeth 1·5-3 times as long as tube; standard c. 2 mm shorter than keel; legume 6-8 mm, the teeth on the margin 0·5-2 mm. 2n = 28. •{\i  Alps, N. & C. Apennini, Carpathians, W. Jugoslavia}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b scardica} (Griseb.) P. W. Ball,{\i  Feddes Repert. }{\b 79}: 42 (1968) ({\i O. sativa} var. {\i scardica} Griseb.): Leaflets 4-7(-10) × 2-4 mm, glabrous above, sparsely pubescent beneath; racemes 1-3 cm before anthesis; calyx-teeth 3-4 times as long as tube; standard c. 2 mm shorter than keel; legume 6-7 mm, the teeth on the margin c. 0·5 mm.{\i  Balkan peninsula}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b c}) Subsp. {\b cadmea} (Boiss.) P. W. Ball,{\i  Feddes Repert.}{\b  79}: 42 (1968) ({\i O. cadmea} Boiss.): Leaflets 3-11 × 2-6 mm, pubescent; racemes 2-3 cm before anthesis; calyx-teeth 1·5-3 times as long as tube; standard equalling or slightly shorter than keel; legume (6-)7-12 mm, the teeth on the margin up to 4 mm.{\i  C. & S. Greece}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 18. O. arenaria} (Kit.) DC.,{\i  Prodr.}{\b  2}: 345 (1825). Subglabrous or pubescent perennial 10-80 cm. Leaflets usually 3-12 pairs, linear-oblong to elliptical. Calyx glabrous or pubescent, the teeth with appressed or erecto-patent hairs on the margin; corolla pink with purple veins. Legume 4-6(-7) mm, pubescent; sides toothed; margin with 3-8 teeth, rarely unarmed.{\i  C., E. & S.E. Europe, extending to C. France and C. Italy}. Al Au Bu Cz Ga Ge Gr He Hu It Ju Po Rm Rs (B, C, W, E) Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Margin of the legume with teeth 2-4 mm long;
\par
  leaflets usually 3-7 pairs
\par
2 Calyx-teeth 2·5-4 times as long as tube;
\par
  racemes not more than 7 cm in flower ........................ ({\b f}) subsp. {\b lasiostachya}
\par
2 Calyx-teeth about twice as long as tube; racemes up to
\par
  12 cm in flower ...................................................................... ({\b g}) subsp. {\b cana} 
\par
1 Margin of the legume with teeth 0·5-2 mm long; leaflets 5-12 pairs
\par
3 Standard c. 1 mm shorter than keel ................................... ({\b c}) subsp. {\b sibirica}
\par
3 Standard ± equalling keel
\par
4 Calyx-teeth 1·5-2·5 times as long as tube
\par
5 Corolla 8-10 mm; standard pink on the back .................. ({\b a}) subsp. {\b arenaria}
\par
5 Corolla (9-)10-12 mm; standard very pale pink on the back
\par
  .......................................................................................... ({\b b}) subsp. {\b taurerica}
\par
4 Calyx-teeth (2-)2·5-4 times as long as tube
\par
6 Calyx 5-7(-8) mm; corolla 7·5-9 mm ............................... ({\b d}) subsp. {\b miniata}  
\par
6 Calyx usually 7-10 mm; corolla 9-12·5 mm ............... ({\b e}) subsp. {\b tommasinii}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b arenaria} ({\i O. sativa} auct. gall. pro max. parte, non Lam. {\i O. borysthenica} (Sirj.) Klokov, {\i O. tanaitica} Sprengel): Leaflets 5-12 pairs, 10-30 × 1·5-4(-8) mm; calyx 4-7 mm, the teeth 1·5-2·5 times as long as tube, sparsely pubescent; corolla 8-10 mm; legume 4-6 mm, the margin with 4-6 teeth (0·5-2 mm). 2n = 14, 28.{\i  C. & E. Europe, extending westwards to C. France and southwards to C. Italy}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b taurerica} Hand.-Mazz.,{\i  Feddes Repert.} ({\i Beih}.) {\b 100}: 53 (1937): Like subsp. ({\b a}) but corolla (9-)10-12 mm; standard very pale pink on the back. •{\i  S.E. Alps}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b c}) Subsp. {\b sibirica} (Turcz. ex Besser) P. W. Ball,{\i  Feddes Repert.}{\b  79}: 42 (1968) ({\i O. sibirica} Turcz. ex Besser): Like subsp. ({\b a}) but leaflets 15-30 × 4-6 mm, and standard c. 1 mm shorter than keel (not equalling).{\i  E. Russia.} ({\i N. Asia}.)
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b d}) Subsp. {\b miniata} (Steven) P. W. Ball,{\i  Feddes Repert.}{\b  79}: 42 (1968) ({\i O. miniata} Steven): Like subsp. ({\b a}) but leaflets 6-15 × 2·5-3(-5) mm; 2·5-4 times as long as tube with numerous erecto-patent hairs on the margin; corolla 7-9(-11) mm.{\i  Krym.} ({\i Caucasus}.)
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b e}) Subsp. {\b tommasinii} (Jordan) Ascherson & Graebner, {\i Syn. Mitteleur. Fl.}{\b  6}({\b 2}): 882 (1909) ({\i O. tommasinii} Jordan, {\i O. ocellata} G. Beck): Leaflets 7-14 pairs, (5-)10-25 × 2-5 mm; calyx (5-)7-10 mm, the teeth (2-)2·5-3·5 times as long as tube, ciliate on the margin; corolla 9-12·5 mm; legume 4-7 mm, the margin with 3-7 teeth (0·5-2 mm), or rarely unarmed. 2n = 14. •{\i  W. Jugoslavia, N. Albania, Italy}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b f}) Subsp. {\b lasiostachya} (Boiss.) Hayek,{\i  Prodr. Fl. Penins. Balcan.}{\b  1}: 928 (1926): Leaflets 4-7 pairs, 5-20 × 2-3 mm; racemes not more than 7 cm in flower; calyx 5-8 mm, the teeth 2·5-4 times as long as tube, with long erecto-patent hairs on the margin; corolla 5-9 mm; legume 4-5 mm, the margin with 3-5 teeth (2-4 mm).{\i  Balkan peninsula, except the north-west}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b g}) Subsp. {\b cana} (Boiss.) Hayek, {\i op. cit.} 929 (1926): Like subsp. ({\b f}) but leaflets 5-10(-13) × 1·5-3·5 mm; racemes up to 12 cm in flower; calyx 5-7 mm, the teeth about twice as long as tube; margin of the legume with 2-4 teeth.{\i  Turkey-in-Europe}. ({\i W. & C. Anatolia}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Two taxa of uncertain status closely related to {\b 18}, {\b 19}, {\b 20} and {\b 21}, occur in S.E. Russia, just north of the Terek river. These are {\b O. novopokrovskii} Vassilcz.,{\i  Bull. Jard. Bot. URSS}{\b  29}: 624 (1930), with linear leaflets, calyx-teeth 3-4 times as long as tube, subglabrous except for patent hairs on the margin, corolla 8-10 mm and legume 5-6 mm with 5-6 teeth, 1-2 mm, on the margin, and {\b O. cyri} Grossh.,{\i  Sci. Pap. Appl. Sect. Tiflis Bot. Gard.}{\b  6}: 123 (1929), with calyx-teeth subglabrous except for patent hairs on the margin, corolla (6-)8-12(-13) mm and legume 5-6 mm with 4-5 teeth on the margin.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 19. O. oxyodonta} Boiss., {\i Diagn. Pl. Or. Nov. }{\b 1}({\b 2}): 98 (1843). Like {\b 18} subsp. ({\b a}) but more or less grey-pubescent; leaflets 4-8 
\par

\par
190}
\par