{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28     {\b 7. O. corymbosa} DC., {\i Prodr. }{\b 1}: 696 (1824) ({\i O. martiana }Zucc.). Pubescent, acaulescent perennial with subterranean bulb 15-30 mm, which soon develops into a mass of sessile bulbils 3-6 mm. Petioles 5-15(-30) cm, flexuous; leaflets 20-45 × 20-55 mm, obcordate or orbicular, with a narrow indentation at the apex, punctate beneath, especially near the margin. Inflorescence a corymbose cyme; flowers infundibuliform; petals 15-20 mm, purplish-pink. Sterile in Europe. {\i Naturalized as a weed and on disturbed ground in parts of W. Europe.} [Az Br Ga He Hs Lu.] ({\i South America; widely naturalized in subtropical countries}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b   O. debilis} Kunth in Humb.,{\i  Bonpl. & Kunth, Nov. Gen. Sp.}{\b  5}: 236 (1822), doubtfully distinct from {\b 7}, from which it apparently differs only in its smaller (2-3 mm) bulbils and brick-red petals, is occasionally naturalized in England, and perhaps elsewhere.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 8. O. latifolia} Kunth in Humb.,{\i  Bonpl. & Kunth, Nov. Gen. Sp.}{\b  5}: 237 (1822). Like {\b 7} but almost glabrous; bulbils emitted from the base of the bulb, usually on horizontal stolons 1-2(-30) cm, less often on short, erect stalks; leaflets up to 60 × 100 mm, obdeltate, rather shallowly emarginate, not punctate; inflorescence umbellate; petals pale to deep pink.{\i  Naturalized in cultivated fields and waste places in parts of W. Europe.} [Az Br Ga Hb Hs Lu.] ({\i Tropical South America}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 9. O. tetraphylla} Cav., {\i Icon. Descr.}{\b  3}: 19 (1795). Like {\b 7} but bulb up to 4 cm; bulbils on stolons up to 10 cm; leaves 4-foliolate; leaflets up to 35 × 40 mm, obdeltate, shallowly emarginate, sometimes with a purple zone; inflorescence umbellate; petals bright red.{\i  Naturalized in cultivated ground in a few regions.} [Au Ga Ju.] ({\i Mexico.})
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   {\b  O. deppei} Loddiges ex Sweet, {\i Brit. Flower Gard.} ser. 2, {\b 1}: t. 96 (1831), from Mexico, differing from {\b 9} by its sessile bulbils and truncate (scarcely emarginate), leaflets, is cultivated and occasionally becomes established.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   {\b O. lasiandra} Zucc. in Otto & A. Dietr.,{\i  Allgem. Gartenz.}{\b  2}: 245 (1834), of doubtful origin, is a similar plant, but with 7-8 narrowly oblanceolate leaflets. It is cultivated and rarely naturalized.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 10. O. pes-caprae} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 434 (1753) ({\i O. cernua} Thunb.). Sparsely pubescent, caespitose perennial, with a deeply-buried bulb, which emits an annual, ascending, subterranean stem bearing bulbils and a rosette of leaves at soil level. Petioles up to 20 cm; leaflets 8-20 × 12-30 mm, obcordate, deeply emarginate. Flowers infundibuliform (sometimes{\i  flore pleno}), in umbellate cymes; petals 20-25 mm, yellow. Capsule short, rarely formed.{\i  Cultivated ground and other open habitats. Extensively naturalized in the Mediterranean region and W. Europe.} [Bl Br Co Cr Ga Gr Hs It Lu Sa Si.] ({\i South Africa}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 11. O. purpurea} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 433 (1753). Pubescent or villous, caespitose perennial, with a bulb which emits an ascending subterranean stem bearing a rosette of leaves at soil level. Petioles 3-10 cm; leaflets 8-23 × 9-30 mm, rhombic, obtuse, punctate and often purple beneath. Flowers solitary, infundibuliform; peduncles 1-10 cm; sepals lanceolate; petals 25-35 mm, purplish-pink, white at base. Capsule c. 5 mm.{\i  Open habitats. Naturalized from gardens in S.W. Europe}. [Az Co Hs Lu Si.] ({\i South Africa.})
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 12. O. incarnata} L., {\i Sp Pl.} 433 (1753). Glabrous, erect perennial, with a subterranean bulb. Stem up to 20 cm, bearing sessile, axillary bulbils. Leaves subopposite, mostly crowded; petioles 2-6 cm; leaflets 5-18 × 8-20 mm, delicate, obcordate, deeply emarginate. Flowers infundibuliform, solitary; peduncles 3-7 cm; sepals with 2 apical tubercles; petals 12-20 mm, pale lilac with darker veins. Sterile. {\i Walls and roadsides. Naturalized from gardens in S.W. England and the Channel Islands.} [Br Ga.] ({\i South Africa}.)
\par

\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b  83.              GERANIACEAE.}
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc Edit. D.A. Webb.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Herbs, or rarely small shrubs with soft stems. Leaves stipulate, usually lobed or divided, and sometimes more or less compound. Flowers in cymes, umbels or spikes, 5-merous, actinomorphic or somewhat zygomorphic. Sepals 5, free; petals 5, free; stamens obdiplostemonous in two whorls of 5, some of them sometimes reduced to staminodes. Ovary superior, of 5 united carpels, separating in fruit into 5 1-seeded mericarps; styles united in flower, sometimes separating in fruit.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Literature: R. Knuth in Engler, {\i Pflanzenreich }{\b 53} ({\b IV, 129}): 1-640 (1912).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Several species and hybrids of{\i  Pelargonium} from S. Africa are widely cultivated for ornament or ({\i P. radula} and hybrids) for essential oils. They are reported as occasional escapes, or as persisting among native vegetation in abandoned fields, and are sometimes planted in roadside hedges, but none appears to be truly naturalized. The plants likely to be encountered include{\b  P. peltatum} (L.) L'Hér. in Aiton, {\i Hort. Kew. }{\b 2}: 427 (1789), with fleshy, peltate, 5-lobed leaves and procumbent stems;{\b  P. radula }(Cav.) L'Hér. in Aiton, {\i op. cit.} 423 (1789) and its hybrids, with fragrant, deeply pinnatisect leaves and with a dark patch on the upper 2 petals; and {\b P}. × {\b hybridum} (L.) L'Hér. in Aiton,{\i  op. cit.} 424 (1789) ({\i P. inquinans} ×{\i  zonale}), with bright scarlet flowers and leaves usually marked with a dark ring.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Flowers in spikes; stigmas united, capitate ........... {\b 3. Biebersteinia}
\par
1 Flowers in cymes or umbels; stigmas free, linear
\par
2 Leaves palmately (rarely ternately) divided or lobed;
\par
  beak of mericarp straight or curved in a simple arc,
\par
  sometimes absent ........................................... {\b 1. Geranium}
\par
2 Leaves pinnately divided or lobed; beak of mericarp
\par
  spirally twisted at maturity ................................ {\b 2. Erodium}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 1.               Geranium}                 L.
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc By D.A. Webb & I.K. Ferguson.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Herbs. Leaves more or less orbicular in outline, palmately (rarely ternately) lobed or divided, many or all of them basal; cauline leaves, if present, usually opposite near base of stem, but often alternate in inflorescence. Inflorescence cymose; ultimate peduncles usually 2-flowered. Flowers actinomorphic. Stamens all fertile, or rarely 3-5 reduced to staminodes. Stigmas 5, filiform. Mericarps usually dehiscent, separating from the base upwards, usually retaining outer part of style in the form of a long beak, of which the apex remains for a while attached to the central axis formed by the still coherent inner parts of all 5 styles.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  In all European species, except where the contrary is implied
\par

\par
193}
\par