{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 pairs, grey-pubescent, sometimes subglabrous above; racemes not more than 3(-4) cm in flower; calyx-teeth densely pubescent with more or less patent hairs; corolla 7-9 mm.{\i  Balkan peninsula.} Al Gr Ju.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Possibly another subspecies of {\b 18}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 20. O. inermis} Steven, {\i Bull. Soc. Nat. Moscou}{\b  29}({\b 2}): 165 (1856). Subglabrous perennial 30-70 cm. Leaflets 6-8 pairs, 8-24 × 3-5 mm, linear to elliptical. Calyx c. 4 mm, sparsely pubescent, the teeth 1·5-3·5 times as long as tube, with erectopatent hairs on the margin; corolla 7-9 mm, pink with purple veins. Legume 4-6 mm, pubescent; sides unarmed or with a few tubercles; margin unarmed or rarely with 2-3 tubercles. {\i Krym and S.E. Russia.} Rs (K, E).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 21. O. viciifolia} Scop., {\i Fl. Carn}. ed. 2, {\b 2}: 76 (1772) ({\i O. sativa} Lam.). Subglabrous to pubescent perennial 10-80 cm. Leaflets 6-14 pairs, 10-35 × 4-7 mm, ovate to oblong, rarely linear. Racemes up to 9 cm in flower. Calyx 5-8 mm, pubescent, the teeth 2-3 times as long as tube; corolla (8-)10-14 mm, pink with purple veins. Legume 5-8 mm, pubescent; sides toothed; margin usually with 6-8 teeth up to 1 mm. 2n = 28.{\i  Possibly native in C. Europe; widely cultivated for fodder and naturalized}. *Al *Au *Cz *Hu *Ju *Rm [Be Br Da Ga He Ju It Lu Po Rs (C, W) Su].
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Sect. LOPHOBRYCHIS Hand.-Mazz. Like Sect.{\i  Onobrychis} but annual and racemes 2- to 8-flowered.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 22. O. caput-galli} (L.) Lam.,{\i  Fl. Fr. }{\b 2}: 651 (1778). Glabrous or sparsely pubescent annual up to 90 cm. Leaflets 4-7 pairs, 4-20 × 2-6 mm, obovate to linear. Peduncles about as long as leaves in flower. Calyx-teeth 2-4 times as long as tube; corolla 7-8 mm, reddish-purple. Legume 6-10 mm; sides with long teeth; margin with 4-9 linear-triangular to subulate teeth 3-5 mm. 2n = 14.{\i  Mediterranean region extending to C. Bulgaria.} Al Bu Cr Ga Gr Hs It Ju Si Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 23. O. aequidentata} (Sibth. & Sm.) D'Urv.,{\i  Mém. Soc. Linn. Paris }{\b 1}: 346 (1822). Pubescent annual up to 40 cm. Leaflets 5-8 pairs, 4-25 × 2-5 mm, elliptical to linear. Peduncles much longer than leaves in flower. Calyx-teeth 4-5 times as long as tube; corolla 10-14 mm, reddish-purple. Legume 6-12 mm; sides toothed; margin with 4-7 broadly triangular teeth 2-5 mm.{\i  Mediterranean region (rare in the west), S. & W. parts of the Balkan peninsula. }Al Bu Cr Ga Gr Hs It Ju Si Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b O. crista-galli} (L.) Lam., {\i Fl. Fr.}{\b  2}: 652 (1778), from N. Africa and S.W. Asia, with peduncles equalling or shorter than leaves; calyx-teeth 4-5 times as long as tube; corolla 7-8 mm; and legume 8-14 mm with 3-5 broadly triangular toothed teeth 4-6 mm, has been recorded, probably in error for {\b 23}, from Greece and Kriti. It has also been recorded as a casual from S. France.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 72.                  Ebenus}                      L.
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc By P.W. Ball.
\par 

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Perennial herbs or small shrubs. Leaves 3-foliolate or imparipinnate; stipules connate, scarious, divided at the apex. Flowers in axillary heads or racemes, subtended by scarious bracts. Calyx tubular-campanulate, with 5 equal teeth; corolla pink or purple; keel obtuse, obliquely truncate; stamens usually monadelphous. Legume included in the calyx, indehiscent, compressed. Seeds 1-2.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 Small shrub; stipules bifid at apex; flowers in dense racemes ........ {\b 1. cretica}
\par
Herb, woody at base; stipules 3- to 4-fid at apex; flowers in heads
\par
  ..................................................................................................... {\b 2. sibthorpii}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. E. cretica} L.,{\i  Sp. Pl.} 764 (1753). Small shrub up to 50 cm. Leaves 3-foliolate or imparipinnate with 2 pairs of leaflets on a short rhachis so that the leaves are almost digitate; leaflets 15-30 mm, elliptic-oblong, sericeous; stipules bifid at apex. Flowers in dense racemes, the bracts not forming an involucre at the base; peduncles scarcely exceeding the leaves. Corolla 10-15 mm, bright pink; standard and keel subequal. •{\i  Cliffs and rocks. Kriti.} Cr.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. E. sibthorpii} DC., {\i Prodr.}{\b  2}: 351 (1825). Herb, woody at the base, with flowering stems 15-30 cm. Leaves with 2-4 pairs of leaflets; rhachis elongated; leaflets 8-20 mm, elliptic-oblong to obovate; stipules 3- to 4-fid at apex. Flowers in heads, with scarious bracts forming an involucre at the base; peduncles at least as long as the leaves. Corolla 10-15 mm, reddish-purple; standard shorter than keel.{\i  Cliffs and rocks. S.E. Greece.} Gr.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 73.                 Alhagi}                     Gagnebin
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc By P.W. Ball.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Spiny shrubs, the spines formed from short, axillary branches which bear scale leaves and the flowers. Leaves simple; stipules minute, free. Flowers solitary or paired. Calyx campanulate, with 5 equal teeth; corolla pink, red or purple; keel curved upwards at the apex, obtuse; stamens diadelphous. Legume linear, indehiscent, strongly contracted between the 1-5 seeds.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 Leaves glabrous; calyx-teeth not more than 0·5 mm, very
\par
    shortly triangular, much wider than long .............................. {\b 1. pseudalhagi} 
\par
Leaves densely pubescent; calyx-teeth 0·5 mm or more, 
\par
    triangular-ovate, about as long as wide ................................... {\b 2. graecorum}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. A. pseudalhagi} (Bieb.) Desv.,{\i  Jour. Bot. Appl.}{\b  1}: 120 (1813).Much-branched shrub up to 60 cm, glabrous. Leaves 10-20 mm, oblong, lanceolate or ovate. Flowers 3-8 on each spine; calyx-teeth not more than 0·5 mm, very shortly triangular wider than long, the sinus between the teeth obtusely angled; corolla 7-10 mm, red or pink. Legume 8-30 mm, blackish-brown.{\i  Steppes. S.E. Russia, W. Kazakhstan.} Rs (E).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. A. graecorum} Boiss.,{\i  Diagn. Pl. Or. Nov.}{\b  2}({\b 9}): 114 (1849). Like {\b 1} but stems and leaves appressed-pubescent; calyx-teeth at least 0·5 mm, triangular-ovate, about as long as wide, the sinus between the teeth acutely angled; corolla purple.{\i  Maritime sands. S.E. Greece, Kikladhes. }Gr.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 74.                    Arachis}                    L.
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc By P.W. Ball.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Annual. Leaves usually paripinnate with 2 pairs of leaflets; stipules linear, adnate to the petiole. Flowers sessile, in axillary racemes and with a long, tubular hypanthium. Calyx bilabiate the upper lip (3-)4-toothed, the lower lip entire. Corolla yellow adnate to the base of the stamen-tube; stamens monadelphous, the 2 adaxial stamens sterile. Legume cylindrical, torulose, indehiscent, underground. Seeds 1-3.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  After fertilization the base of the ovary elongates rapidly and buries the ovary in the ground. Subsequent development of the legume takes place underground.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Literature: B. W. Smith,{\i  Amer. Jour. Bot.}{\b  37}: 802-815 (1950).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. A. hypogaea} L. {\i Sp. Pl. }741 (1753). Stems up to 50 cm, much-branched, pubescent. Leaflets 25-60 × 15-30 mm, elliptical to obovate. Corolla 15-20 mm. Legume 20-40 × 10-15 mm, glabrous, reticulate.{\i  Cultivated for the edible seed} ({\i ground-nut}){\i  in S. Europe.} ({\i Tropical and subtropical South America}.)
\par

\par
191}
\par