{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 glabrous, with about 4 strong, transverse ridges near the apex, and covered elsewhere by a close reticulum of lower but conspicuous ridges. 2n = 32.{\i  S. & W. Europe, northwards to} 52°{\i  N. in Britain}. Al Az Bl Br Bu Co Cr Ga Gr Hb He Hs It Ju Lu ?Rm Rs (K) Sa Si Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  In parts of Europe this species is difficult to distinguish satisfactorily from {\b 37}, and is often treated as a subspecies.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 39. G. cataractarum} Cosson,{\i  Not. Pl. Crit. }99 (1851). Perennial with woody stock, sparsely hirsute to villous. Stems up to 40 cm, pseudodichotomous. Leaves 4-7 cm wide, suborbicular in outline, divided to the base into 5 obovate-cuneate, irregularly pinnatifid lobes; petiole 5-25 cm. Sepals 6-7 mm, erect, elliptic-oblong, mucronate or shortly aristate. Petals c. 15 mm, bright pinkish-purple; limb about twice as long as claw. Stamens 8-10 mm; pollen yellow. Mericarps glabrous, separating without stylar beak, and without suspensory fibres, reticulate-rugose. {\i Damp or shady limestone rocks. S.E. Spain} ({\i Sierra de Segura and adjacent ranges}). Hs.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 2.                   Erodium}                 L'Hér.
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc By D.A. Webb & A.O. Chater.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Annual to perennial herbs usually with hermaphrodite flowers, rarely dioecious. Leaves mostly opposite, usually longer than wide, pinnatifid to pinnate, or rarely undivided, usually with appressed hairs. Inflorescence an umbel (rarely reduced to a single flower), subtended by 2 or more usually scarious bracts. Flowers actinomorphic or slightly zygomorphic. Stamens 5, antesepalous, with a nectary at the base of the filament, alternating with 5 scale-like staminodes. Mericarps indehiscent, separating from the base upwards, retaining during dispersal the outer part of the style as a long beak, which in most species becomes twisted into a spiral at maturity, the pitch of the spiral varying with the humidity. Stigmas 5, filiform.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  In some species the principal leaflets of the leaf alternate irregularly with very much smaller lobes or leaflets. The latter are referred to as{\i  intercalary lobes} or{\i  leaflets}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  The sepals of most species are accrescent. The measurements below refer to the fruiting condition, and include the terminal mucro or arista.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  At the top of the mericarp, near the base of the style, are two flattened areas or depressions, referred to below as{\b  pits}, which in some species are divided into two or more sections by one or more ridges. As the ridges lie near the lower margin of the pit, the impression created is of a pit with one or more{\b  furrows} below it, and this terminology is used in the descriptions.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Literature: R. Knuth in Engler, {\i Pflanzenreich}{\b  53} ({\b IV. 129}): 221-290 (1912). F. Vierhapper, {\i Verh. Zool.-Bot. Ges. Wien }{\b 69}: 112-155 (1919).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Leaves undivided, pinnatifid or pinnatisect, sometimes
\par
  compound at the base, but if so with only 1(-2) pairs
\par
  of distinct leaflets
\par
2 Beak of fruit not more than 17 mm
\par
3 Leaves at least 3 cm wide
\par
4 Apical pits of mericarp with a furrow at the base ................... {\b 6. malacoides}
\par
4 Apical pits of mericarp without a furrow at the base ............... {\b 7. alnifolium}
\par
3 Leaves less than 3 cm wide
\par
5 Annual; apical pits of mericarp with a furrow at the base
\par
6 Petals twice as long as sepals; flowers in umbels of 2-5.... {\b 9. sanguis-christi}
\par
6 Petals rarely exceeding sepals, often absent;
\par
  flowers solitary, rarely in pairs ................................................. {\b 8. maritimum}
\par
5 Perennial; apical pits of mericarp without a furrow
\par
  at the base
\par
7 Leaves grey-green, villous or densely pubescent;
\par
  pedicels with numerous patent hairs .......................................... {\b 10. corsicum}
\par
7 Leaves green, sparsely hairy; pedicels with usually 
\par
  few appressed hairs ................................................................... {\b 11. reichardii}
\par
2 Beak of fruit more than 17 mm
\par
8 Plant acaulescent (S. Spain) ......................................................... {\b 3. boissieri}
\par
8 Plant normally caulescent
\par
9 Perennial
\par
10 Beak of fruit not more than 40 mm
\par
11 Sepals 5-7 mm; mericarps less than 5 mm .................................... {\b 4. chium}
\par
11 Sepals 10-12 mm; mericarps c. 8 mm ................................. {\b 12. ruthenicum}
\par
10 Beak of fruit more than 40 mm
\par
12 Roots tuberous; beak of mericarp with long, yellowish
\par
   hairs on inner face (Kriti) ............................................................. {\b 34. hirtum}
\par
12 Roots not tuberous; beak of mericarp with inner face
\par
   glabrous, but usually with hairs on basal part of 
\par
   outer face
\par
13 Leaves divided to midrib, at least near the base;
\par
   lobes oblong, pinnatifid or incise-dentate
\par
14 Sepals c. 12 mm, with arista 2-3 mm .................................. {\b 12. ruthenicum}
\par
14 Sepals c. 8 mm, with arista 1 mm ............................................ {\b 21. alpinum}
\par
13 Leaves divided for not more than 2/3 of the distance
\par
   to midrib; lobes ovate to orbicular, usually crenate
\par
15 Bracts suborbicular, glabrous; mericarps c. 5 mm,
\par
   with beak 40-60 mm ..................................................................... {\b 1. gussonii}
\par
15 Bracts triangular-lanceolate, hairy; mericarps c. 9 mm,
\par
   with beak 65-100 mm .................................................................. {\b 2. guttatum}
\par
9  Annual or biennial
\par
16 Bracts at base of umbel 2, suborbicular to reniform .............. {\b 5. laciniatum}
\par
16 Bracts at base of umbel at least 3, ovate to lanceolate
\par
17 Beak of fruit less than 45 mm
\par
18 Apical pits of mericarp with a furrow at the base ................. {\b 6. malacoides}
\par
18 Apical pits of mericarp without a furrow at the base
\par
19 Beak of fruit more than 25 mm; leaves lobed ............................... {\b 4. chium}
\par
19 Beak of fruit less than 25 mm; leaves not lobed ..................... {\b 7. alnifolium}
\par
17 Beak of fruit more than 45 mm
\par
20 Apical pits of mericarp with two conspicuous furrows at the base
\par
   ........................................................................................................ {\b 14. botrys}
\par
20 Apical pits of mericarp without furrows, or with a 
\par
   single shallow one 
\par
21 Mericarps 6-7 mm; sepals 7-10 mm .................................. {\b 13. hoefftianum} 
\par
21 Mericarps 9-14 mm; sepals 12-20 mm
\par
22 Leaf with intercalary lobes or leaflets; apical pits
\par
   of mericarp glandular-hairy ...................................................... {\b 16. ciconium}
\par
22 Lobes of leaf diminishing regularly from base to apex;
\par
   apical pits of mericarp smooth or foveolate, not hairy .............. {\b 15. gruinum}
\par
1  Leaves pinnate for most of their length (sometimes 
\par
   pinnatisect towards the apex)
\par
23 Intercalary leaflets, much smaller than the principal
\par
   ones, present
\par
24 Annual or biennial .................................................................. {\b 16. ciconium}
\par
24 Perennial, with stout, woody rhizome
\par
25 Petals yellow ..................................................................... {\b 18. chrysanthum}
\par
25 Petals pink, purple or white
\par
26 Plant acaulescent (France and Spain)
\par
27 Leaves densely white-sericeous above, green and ±
\par
   glabrous beneath ......................................................................... {\b 22. rupestre}
\par
27 Leaves without a conspicuous difference in indumentum
\par
   between the two surfaces
\par
28 Leaves glabrous to sparsely strigulose, with linear segments; 
\par
   petals 15-20 mm ............................................................................ {\b 24. rodiei}
\par
28 Leaves usually densely hairy, with ovate-oblong to
\par
   lanceolate segments; petals not more than 13 mm ................... {\b 23. petraeum}
\par
26 Plant caulescent (S.E. Europe and Italy)
\par

\par
199}
\par