{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 their satisfactory diagnosis, on a continental scale, as separate species, is not possible on the information available.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Petals white with red veins; pedicels without glandular hairs
\par
  ........................................................................................ ({\b b}) subsp. {\b rivulare}
\par
1 Petals blue, purple or lilac, rarely white, not red-veined
\par
2 Leaves divided for less than 90 % of the radius; lobes 
\par
  dentate or shortly pinnatifid; petals usually reddish-purple
\par
  ................................................................................... ({\b a}) subsp. {\b sylvaticum}
\par
2 Leaves divided for more than 90 % of the radius; lobes deeply 
\par
  pinnatifid or pinnatisect; petals blue, violet or lilac
\par
3 Petals 13-18 mm, bright violet-blue; pedicels without
\par
  glandular hairs ........................................................ ({\b c}) subsp. {\b caeruleatum}
\par
3 Petals 6-15 mm, pale blue to lilac; pedicels with or
\par
  without glandular hairs .................................... ({\b d}) subsp. {\b pseudosibiricum}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b sylvaticum}: Leaves less deeply divided than in other subspecies. Pedicels and mericarps often with patent, glandular hairs. Petals c. 15 mm, usually reddish-purple, but sometimes white, pink, lilac or blue. 2n = 28.{\i  Throughout the range of the species}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b rivulare} (Vill.) Rouy,{\i  Fl. Fr.}{\b  4}: 81 (1897) ({\i G. rivulare} Vill.): Stem seldom more than 30 cm. Pedicels and mericarps with appressed, eglandular hairs only. Petals 11-15 mm, white with red veins. 2n = 28. •{\i  Alps, mainly in the West; calcifuge}. Ga He It.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b c}) Subsp. {\b caeruleatum} (Schur) D. A. Webb & I. K. Ferguson,{\i  Feddes Repert.}{\b  74}: 25 (1967) ({\i G. caeruleatum} Schur): Like subsp. ({\b b}) but petals 13-18 mm, bright violet-blue.•{\i  S. Carpathians and mountains of Balkan peninsula.} Al Bu Ju Rm.
\par
 ({\b d}) Subsp. {\b pseudosibiricum} (J. Mayer) D. A. Webb & I. K. Ferguson,{\i  Feddes Repert.}{\b  74}: 26 (1967) ({\i G. pseudosibiricum} J. Mayer): Pedicels with or without glandular hairs. Petals 6-15 mm, pale blue to lilac.{\i  C. & S. Ural and adjacent parts of E. Russia.} Rs (C, E). ({\i N. Asia}.)
\par

\par
 
\pard\f0\fs28 In subsp.{\i  sylvaticum,} and perhaps in others, some plants are often found with only female flowers, which are considerably smaller than the normal ones.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 9. G. endressii} Gay,{\i  Ann. Sci. Nat. }{\b 26}: 228 (1832). Perennial, with long, slender, creeping rhizome. Stems 30-80 cm, erect, hirsute. Leaves 5-8 cm wide, divided for 80 % of the radius into 5 ovate-rhombic, nearly contiguous, irregularly incise-dentate lobes. Inflorescence diffuse, with rather few flowers on long peduncles; pedicels densely hirsute with patent, eglandular hairs, and also bearing numerous subsessile glands. Sepals 9-10 mm; petals c. 16 mm, obovate, entire or very slightly emarginate, pink, without darker veins. Mericarps pubescent, without ridges. {\i Wet places.• S.W. France} ({\i W. half of Basses-Pyrenees}),{\i  just extending into Spain; cultivated for ornament in W. Europe and locally naturalized}. Ga Hs [Be Br].
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 10. G. versicolor} L.,{\i  Cent. Pl.}{\b  1}: 21 (1755) ({\i G. striatum} L.). Like {\b 9} but leaf-lobes sometimes more widely separated; pedicels with the long, eglandular hairs much sparser and sometimes absent; petals deeply emarginate, white or pale lilac with violet veins.{\i  Mountain woods. • S. part of Balkan peninsula, C. & S. Italy, Sicilia; naturalized from gardens in N. W. Europe}. Al Gr Ju It Si [Br Ga Hb].
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  {\i G. endressii} × {\i versicolor} is cultivated in gardens, and is naturalized in Britain and Ireland, in the absence of the parent species. It has emarginate, pale pink petals with darker veins.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 11. G. nodosum} L.,{\i  Sp. Pl.} 681 (1753). Perennial, with creeping, fairly slender rhizome. Stems 20-50 cm, erect, subglabrous or with short, deflexed hairs. Leaves 6-10 cm wide, divided for 65-80 % of the radius into 3-5 ovate-elliptical, toothed lobes; teeth obtuse, shortly mucronate. Inflorescence diffuse, few flowered; pedicels densely pubescent with mainly deflexed hairs. Sepals 8-9 mm, appressed-pubescent; petals 12-17 mm, oblanceolate-cuneate, deeply emarginate, bright pink or violet with darker veins. Mericarps hairy, with a transverse ridge, sometimes rather faint, below the style.{\i  Mountain woods. • From C. France to the Pyrenees, C. Italy and C. Jugoslavia; occasionally naturalized from gardens elsewhere}. Co Ga He Hs It Ju [Be Br Ge Ho].
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 12. G. albiflorum} Ledeb., {\i Icon. Pl. Fl. Ross.}{\b  1}: 6 (1829). Perennial, with rather short, vertical rhizome. Stems 40-60 cm, erect, glabrous at least below. Leaves 10-18 cm wide, hairy above, subglabrous beneath, divided for 75-80 % of the radius into 5-7 rhombic, pinnatifid or dentate lobes; segments acute. Flowers numerous, in a fairly compact, corymbose inflorescence; pedicels with long, glandular hairs. Sepals 5-7 mm, reddish, sparsely hairy; petals 9-15 mm, obovate, emarginate, suberect, white or pale lilac. Mericarps hairy. {\i Woods and stream-sides. N.E. Russia} ({\i N. & C. Ural, and lower Pecora basin}). Rs (N). ({\i N. & C. Asia.})
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 13. G. peloponesiacum} Boiss.,{\i  Diagn. Pl. Or. Nov.}{\b  3}({\b 1}): 110 (1853). Perennial. Stems erect, branched from near the base, with eglandular hairs below and glandular above. Leaves 8-12 cm wide, divided for 65 % of the radius into 3-5 ovate-rhombic, irregularly pinnatifid lobes; segments obtuse. Inflorescence corymbose; pedicels densely pubescent with short, eglandular and longer, glandular hairs. Sepals c. 10 mm, glandular-hairy; petals c. 15 mm, obovate, emarginate, bluish-violet. Mericarps hirsute.{\i  Shady places. • Albania; S. Greece.} Al Gr.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 14. G. ibericum} Cav., {\i Monad. Class. Diss. Dec.} 209 (1787). Perennial, with stout, oblique rhizome. Stems erect, branched only in upper half, with patent, eglandular hairs. Leaves 7-11 cm wide, divided for 75-80 % of the radius into 5-7 rhombic, pinnatifid lobes; segments acute. Inflorescence few-flowered, compact; pedicels with subsessile glands and very long, whitish eglandular hairs. Sepals 12-15 mm; petals c. 25 mm, deep purple emarginate, sometimes with a tooth in the apical notch. Mericarps hirsute.{\i  Naturalized from gardens in N.W. France.} [Ga.] ({\i Caucasus}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 15. G. phaeum} L.,{\i  Sp. Pl.} 681 (1753). Perennial, with short, stout, oblique rhizome. Stems 40-70 cm, erect, with short glandular and long, patent eglandular hairs. Leaves 6-15 cm wide, divided for c. 70 % of the radius into (5-)7 broadly oblong, weakly pinnatifid lobes. Inflorescence axillary or leaf-opposed, and also terminal, rather lax, many-flowered; pedicels remaining erect after flowering. Sepals 8-9 mm, with arista c. 1 mm, densely glandular-puberulent and also with long eglandular hairs. Petals 8-10 × 6-10 mm, obovate-orbicular, entire, erose or apiculate, patent, blackish- or brownish-purple or (var.{\i  lividum }(L'Hér.) DC.) dull lilac. Mericarps hirsute, with 2-4, strong transverse ridges below the style. 2n = 28.{\i  Damp or shady places. C. Europe, extending to the Pyrenees, C. Italy, Bulgaria and the W. borders of U.S.S.R. Frequent also as an escape from gardens both within this range and further north.} Al Au Bu Cz Ga Ge He Hs Hu It Ju Po Rm Rs (C, W) [Be Br Da Hb Ho Su].
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 16. G. reflexum} L.,{\i  Mantissa Alt.} 257 (1771). Like {\b 15} but arista of sepals often obsolete; petals 7-9 × 2·5-4 mm, oblong, sharply deflexed in flower, dull lilac or purple; pedicels deflexed during the maturation of the fruit.{\i  Mountain woods and meadows. • S. part of Balkan peninsula; C. Italy.} Al Bu Gr It Ju [Ge].
\par

\par
196}
\par