{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs36\qc GERANIALES
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 82.        OXALIDACEAE}
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc Edit  D.H. Valentine.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Herbs, rarely small shrubs. Leaves usually compound. Flowers 5-merous, hermaphrodite, actinomorphic. Ovary superior, 5-locular; placentation axile. Fruit a capsule. Seeds with endosperm.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 1.                     Oxalis}                   L.
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc By D.P. Young.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Perennial herbs, sometimes bulbous. Leaves palmately 3(-8) foliolate, with or without stipules; leaflets usually indented at the apex, otherwise entire, showing sleep-movements. Inflorescence axillary, cymose, sometimes a cymose umbel or a single flower. Flowers often heterostylous. Sepals 5, free; petals 5, free or weakly united. Stamens 10, obdiplostemonous. Ovules numerous. Styles 5, free. Fruit a loculicidal capsule. Seeds projectile, with an elastic integument.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Several bulbous species, originally introduced by gardeners, have become established to the extent of being serious weeds; these species often develop tuberous roots. They multiply vegetatively by fragmentation into bulbils, but are virtually seed-sterile. The resultant propagation of various clones has obscured the taxonomy of the genus, which is in need of revision.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Literature: A. Chevalier,{\i  Rev. Bot. Appl.}{\b  20}: 651-694 (1940). R. Knuth in Engler,{\i  Pflanzenreich} ({\i IV, 130}): 1-481 (1930). D. P. Young,{\i  Watsonia}{\b  4}: 51-69 (1958).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Petals yellow
\par
2 Aerial stem absent; bulbils present at base of plant ............... {\b 10. pes-caprae}
\par
2 Aerial stem present; bulbils absent
\par
3 Stem rooting at nodes; leaves alternate; stipules auriculate
\par
4 Leaflets 5-18 × 8-23 mm; capsule 10-25 mm .......................... {\b 1. corniculata}
\par
4 Leaflets 3-5 × 3-6 mm; capsule 5-7 mm ........................................... {\b 2. exilis}
\par
3 Stem not rooting at nodes; leaves mostly subopposite;
\par
  stipules not auriculate
\par
5 Inflorescence umbellate; fruiting pedicels deflexed;
\par
  stipules oblong; stem with non-septate hairs .................................... {\b 3. stricta}
\par
5 Inflorescence not umbellate; fruiting pedicels not
\par
  deflexed;stipules absent; stem with septate hairs ......................... {\b 4. europaea}
\par
1 Petals white, red, violet or purple
\par
6 Stem rhizomatous; bulb absent (although rhizome may be swollen)
\par
7 Rhizome 1-2 cm thick at apex; inflorescence corymbose ........... {\b 5. articulata}
\par
7 Rhizome less than 1 cm thick; flowers solitary ......................... {\b 6. acetosella}
\par
6 Stem erect or absent; bulb present
\par
8 Aerial stem erect, leafy; petals pale lilac .................................. {\b 12. incarnata}
\par
8 Aerial stem absent; petals pink, red or violet
\par
9 Leaflets not emarginate; petals 25-35 mm ................................ {\b 11. purpurea}
\par
9 Leaflets emarginate; petals 15-20 mm
\par
10 Leaves 4-foliolate ................................................................... {\b 9. tetraphylla}
\par
10 Leaves 3-foliolate
\par
11 Leaflets widest at or below middle, pubescent, and
\par
   punctate beneath near the margin ............................................ {\b 7. corymbosa}
\par
11 Leaflets widest near apex, subglabrous, not punctate ................. {\b 8. latifolia}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. O. corniculata} L.,{\i  Sp. Pl. }435 (1753) ({\i O. repens} Thunb.). Creeping, pubescent perennial, but flowering soon after germination. Stems up to 50 cm, procumbent, rooting at the nodes. Leaves alternate; petioles 2-8 cm, with small auriculate stipules; leaflets 5-18 × 8-23 mm, obcordate, deeply emarginate. Inflorescence umbellate, of 1-7 flowers; fruiting pedicels deflexed. Sepals lanceolate; petals 4-7 mm, yellow. Capsule 10-25 mm, cylindrical, hoary. Seeds transversely ridged, brown. 2n = 24. {\i Dry open habitats, especially cultivated ground. S. Europe, extending locally northwards to N. France, Hungary and C. Ukraine; often naturalized or casual further north.} Al Az Bl Bu Co Cr Ga Gr He Hs Hu It Ju Lu Rs (W, K) Sa Si Tu [Au Be Br Cz Fe Ge Hb Ho No Po Rm Su].
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Var. {\i repens} (Thunb.) Zucc., with leaflets 5-9 × 6-12 mm, inflorescence 1- to 2-flowered, and capsule 10-15 mm, from S. Africa, is frequently found as a garden escape, as are also purple-suffused cultivars.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. O. exilis} A. Cunn.,{\i  Ann. Nat. Hist.}{\b  3}: 316 (1839). Like {\b 1} but very dwarf with creeping, filiform stems; leaflets 3-5 × 3-6 mm; inflorescence 1-flowered; capsule 5-7 mm. {\i Naturalized from gardens in Britain and Channel Islands.} [Br Ga.] ({\i Australasia}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 3. O. stricta} L.,{\i  Sp. Pl.} 435 (1753) ({\i O. dillenii} Jacq., {\i O. navieri} Jordan). Like {\b 1} but caespitose, short-lived; stems up to 20 cm, ascending, with non-septate hairs, not rooting at the nodes; leaves subopposite or in groups; stipules oblong, inconspicuous; ridges on seed often with white markings. 2n = c. 24.{\i  Locally naturalized in S., W. & C. Europe as a weed of cultivated ground.} [Al Au Br Cz Da Ga Ge It Ju Sa.] ({\i E. & C. North America}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 4. O. europaea} Jordan in F. W. Schultz,{\i  Arch. Fl. Fr. Allem.}{\b  1}: 309 (1854) ({\i O. stricta} auct. plur., non L.). Like {\b 1} but stems up to 40 cm, erect, not rooting, emitting filiform, underground stolons; leaves subopposite or subverticillate; stipules absent; stems and petioles with crisped, septate hairs; inflorescence cymose, with pedicels not deflexed in fruit; capsule 8-12 mm, not hoary. 2n = 24.{\i  Naturalized as a weed of cultivated ground in most of Europe except the extreme north and south.} [Al Au Be Br Bu Co Cz Da Fe Ga Ge Hb He Ho Hs Hu It Ju No Po Rm Rs (B, C, W, K) Su.] ({\i North America and E. Asia}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b    O. valdiviensis} Barn. in C. Gay, {\i Hist. Chil. Bot.}{\b  1}: 446 (1846), from Chile, a glabrous, caespitose plant with dichasia of purple-veined, yellow flowers and ovoid capsule, is cultivated for ornament and occasionally becomes naturalized.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 5. O. articulata} Savigny in Lam., {\i Encycl. Méth. Bot. }{\b 4}: 686 (1798). Pubescent, caespitose perennial up to 35 cm. Rhizome with swollen oblong segments up to 2 cm in diameter, bearing the scarious remains of leaf-bases. Leaves in terminal rosettes. Petioles 5-30 cm; leaflets 12-40 × 15-50 mm, obcordate, deeply emarginate, covered with orange or brown tubercles. Inflorescence a corymbose cyme; sepals lanceolate, with 2 apical tubercles; petals 12-20 mm, pink. Capsule 10 mm, cylindrical-ovoid.{\i  Cultivated in gardens and naturalized in waste places in parts of W. Europe.} [Az Br Ga Hb Hs Lu.] ({\i E. temperate South America}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Somewhat variable in size and morphology.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 6. O. acetosella} L.,{\i  Sp. Pl.} 433 (1753). Sparsely pubescent, creeping perennial. Rhizome above ground, slender, bearing the fleshy, tooth-like remains of leaf-bases; leaves scattered. Petioles 5-10 cm; leaflets 10-27 × 15-30 mm, obcordate, emarginate. Flowers solitary, campanulate; peduncles 5-10 cm; sepals oblong-lanceolate; petals 8-15 mm, white with lilac veins to pale purple or violet. Late flowers apetalous, cleistogamous. Capsule 3-4 mm, angular-ovoid; seeds light brown, longitudinally ridged. 2n = 22.{\i  Woods and shady places. Most of Europe but rarer in the South.} All except Az Bl Cr Rs (K, E) Sa Si Sb.
\par

\par
192}
\par