{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 17. G. aristatum} Freyn & Sint., {\i Bull. Herb. Boiss.}{\b  5}: 587 (1897). Like {\b 15} but with deflexed hairs on lower part of stem; pedicels glandular-hirsute, deflexed during the maturation of the fruit; sepals with arista 4-6 mm, and with very long (2-3 mm) eglandular hairs; petals 13 × 17 mm, oblong-elliptical, apiculate, somewhat deflexed, pale lilac with darker veins; mericarps sericeous towards the base, subglabrous above, with ridges as in {\b 15}. •{\i  Mountains of S. Albania, S. Jugoslavia }({\i Makedonija}){\i  and N.W. Greece.} Al Gr Ju.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    ({\b 18-21}) {\b G. tuberosum }group. Perennials with short, thick, often tuber-like rhizome. Stem single, 20-60 cm, erect, pubescent, with 0-2 pairs of cauline leaves in addition to the pair of large, leaf-like bracts at the base of the inflorescence, which consists of 2 main branches and sometimes a smaller terminal branch between them, each branch terminating in a corymbose cyme. Basal leaves divided for at least 95 % of the radius into 5-9 lobes, which are variously toothed, lobed or pinnatisect. Cauline leaves (if present) and bracts also deeply lobed, but the lobes narrower and less deeply segmented. Petals broadly obovate, deeply emarginate, purplish-pink. Mericarps hairy, without ridges.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  The four species included in this group appear to differ constantly in well-correlated characters, despite a considerable similarity in general appearance.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Hairs on pedicels glandular ................................................ {\b 19. macrostylum}
\par
1 Hairs on pedicels eglandular
\par
2 Petals 17-22 mm .................................................................. {\b 21. malviflorum}
\par
2 Petals 8-15 mm
\par
3 Cauline leaves other than bracts absent; lobes of basal
\par
  leaves with 3-6 segments on each side .................................... {\b 18. tuberosum}
\par
3 At least 1 cauline leaf present; lobes of basal leaves
\par
  with 0-1(-2) segments on each side ...................................... {\b 20. linearilobum}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 18. G. tuberosum} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 680 (1753). Rhizome a small, globose tuber. Basal leaves 6-8 cm wide; lobes pinnatisect, with 3-6 linear-oblong segments on each side. Cauline leaves absent. Lobes of lower bracts toothed or pinnatifid. Hairs on pedicels eglandular. Sepals 4-7 mm; petals 8-13 mm. Styles 18-20 mm in fruit, stout and hairy right up to the stigmas. {\i Usually in cultivated ground. S. Europe, from S.E. France to the Aegean region and Krym.} Al Bu Cr ?Co *Ga Gr It Ju Rs (K) Sa Si Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 19. G. macrostylum} Boiss.,{\i  Diagn. Pl. Or. Nov.}{\b  1}({\b 1}): 58 (1843). Rhizome tuberous, but somewhat irregular and lobed. Basal leaves as in {\b 18}. A pair of cauline leaves present; lobes of these and of the lower bracts deeply pinnatifid or pinnatisect. Hairs on pedicels glandular. Sepals 8-11 mm; petals 12-17 mm. Styles 16-18 mm in fruit, the apical 2 mm glabrous and more slender than the rest.{\i  Greece and Albania.} Al Gr.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 20. G. linearilobum} DC. in Lam. & DC.,{\i  Fl. Fr.} ed. 3,{\b  5}: 629 (1815). Rhizome a small, globose tuber. Basal leaves 4-7 cm wide; lobes with usually only 1 linear segment diverging on each side. 1-2 pairs of cauline leaves present; lobes of these and of bracts mostly entire. Hairs on pedicels eglandular. Sepals 5-9 mm; petals 9-15 mm. Styles c. 22 mm in fruit, the apical 2 mm glabrous and more slender than the rest.{\i  Dry places. S.E. Ukraine and S. Russia.} Rs (W, K, E).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 21. G. malviflorum} Boiss. & Reuter, {\i Pugillus} 27 (1852). Rhizome ovoid or oblong, sometimes contorted, scarcely tuber-like. Basal leaves c. 7 cm wide, with usually only 5 deeply pinnatisect lobes, each with 3-4 linear-oblong segments on each side. A pair of cauline leaves present, or sometimes a single leaf. Hairs on pedicels eglandular. Sepals 8-10 mm; petals 17-22 mm. Styles 25 mm in fruit, glabrous below the stigmas but not markedly narrowed.{\i  Rocky hillsides. S. Spain} ({\i Grazalema to Sierra Nevada and northwards to Jaen}). Hs.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 22. G. asphodeloides} Burm. fil.,{\i  Spec. Bot. Geran.} 28 (1759) (incl.{\i  G. tauricum} Rupr.). Perennial, with fleshy, fusiform roots arising from a very short rhizome. Stems 30-75 cm, erect, with deflexed, sometimes glandular hairs. Leaves 4-6 cm wide, divided for 80-85 % of the radius into 5-7 obovate-cuneate, apically 3-fid lobes; segments entire to incise-dentate. Inflorescence diffuse, few-flowered; pedicels slender, glandular-pubescent. Sepals 10 mm, with arista 0·5-1·25 mm; petals c. 15 mm, entire or slightly emarginate, pinkish-lilac with darker veins. Mericarps pubescent, without ridges.{\i  S. Europe, from Sicilia eastwards}. Al Bu Gr It Rm Rs (K) Si Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 23. G. palustre} L.,{\i  Cent. Pl.}{\b  2}: 25 (1756). Perennial, with thin, fibrous roots, arising from a short rhizome. Stems 20-60 cm, erect or spreading, with patent or somewhat deflexed hairs. Leaves 5-10 cm wide, divided for 80-85 % of the radius into 5-7 obovate-cuneate, incise-dentate lobes. Inflorescence diffuse, few-flowered; fruiting pedicels deflexed, 2-4 times as long as the sepals, densely pubescent. Sepals 10-13 mm, with arista usually c. 2 mm, glabrous except for short, appressed hairs on the veins; petals 12-18 mm, entire or very slightly emarginate, purple or lilac, hairy on inner surface at extreme base. Mericarps hairy, without ridges. 2n = 28.{\i  Throughout a large part of Europe, but absent from the islands, the Mediterranean region and much of the north.} Au Be Bu Cz Da Fe Ga Ge He ?Hs Hu It Ju Po Rm Rs (N, B, C, W, E) Su.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 24. G. collinum} Stephan ex Willd., {\i Sp. Pl.}{\b  3}: 705 (1800). Like {\b 23} but leaf-segments usually more acute; hairs on stem and petioles appressed; sepals densely appressed-pubescent all over and with slightly shorter arista; petals lilac-pink, hairy only on margins at base, not on inner surface.{\i  Wet places. S. part of U.S.S.R.; Romania.} Rm Rs (C, W, K, E).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b  G. acutilobum} Coincy, Jour. Bot. (Paris) 12: 56 (1898), known from two places in N. & E. Spain, does not appear to be separable from {\b 24}; it requires further investigation.
\par

\par
 
\pard\f0\fs28   {\b 25. G. divaricatum} Ehrh., {\i Beitr. Naturk.}{\b  7}: 164 (1792). Annual; stems 30-60 cm, erect or ascending, divaricately branched, with long eglandular and short glandular hairs. Leaves 4-9 cm wide, divided for 75-85 % of the radius into 3-5 shortly pinnatifid lobes with obtuse segments; often asymmetrical with the central lobe not the largest. Peduncles shorter than the subtending leaves; fruiting pedicels deflexed, much longer than the calyx. Sepals shortly mucronate; petals 5-7 mm, equalling the sepals, emarginate, pink. Filaments pubescent at the base. Mericarps pubescent, transversely ridged, separating without a stylar beak.{\i  C. & S. Europe; S. & W. parts of U.S.S.R.} Al Bu Cz Ga Ge Gr He Hs Hu It Ju Po Rm Rs (B, C, W, K, E) [Au].
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 26. G. bohemicum} L., {\i Cent. Pl.}{\b  2}: 25 (1756). Annual or biennial; stems 20-60 cm, erect, hirsute. Leaves 2-6 cm wide, divided for 75 % of the radius into 5-7 obovate or rhombic, irregularly pinnatifid lobes; segments ovate-oblong, subacute. Peduncles longer than the subtending leaves; fruiting pedicels erect, about equalling the calyx. Sepals 9-12 mm, aristate; petals 8-9 mm, emarginate, bright violet-blue with darker veins. Filaments ciliate at the base. Mericarps hairy, without ridges; seeds yellowish-grey, with dark brown patches, almost smooth. Cotyledons with deep lateral notches. 2n = 28.{\i  E. & C. Europe, extending to S. Norway, E. France, N. Italy and Albania.} Al Bu Cz Fe Ga Ge Gr He Hu It Ju No Po Rm Rs (N, B, C, W, K, E) Su.
\par

\par
197}
\par