{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 27. G. lanuginosum} Lam., Encycl. Méth. Bot. 2: 655 (1788). Like {\b 26}, but leaf-lobes more obtuse; petals 7·5 mm, with a white base; seeds uniformly brown, distinctly foveolate; cotyledons without lateral notches. 2n = 48.{\i  Mediterranean region; Sweden.} Al Bu Co Ga Gr Hs It Sa Si *Su.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 28. G. sibiricum} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 683 (1753). Perennial, with short, inconspicuous rhizome. Stems 30-60 cm, procumbent or ascending, with long, deflexed hairs. Leaves 4-7 cm wide, divided for 85 % of the radius into 5-7 lanceolate, deeply pinnatifid lobes; segments ovate-lanceolate, acute. Inflorescence diffuse; peduncles sometimes 1-flowered; pedicels with numerous patent or deflexed hairs. Sepals 6-7 mm, aristate; petals c. 6 mm, more or less emarginate, lilac with darker veins. Mericarps with patent hairs, without ridges.{\i  From S. Ural across C. Russia and Ukraine to E. Romania; widely naturalized in C. Europe and still spreading westwards}. Rm Rs (B, C, W, E) [Au Cz Ga Ge He Hu Po].
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 29. G. pyrenaicum} Burm. fil.,{\i  Spec. Bot. Geran.}{\b  27} (1759). Perennial, with short, inconspicuous rhizome. Stems 25-70 cm, erect, with short glandular and long, patent eglandular hairs. Leaves 2-5 cm wide, divided for 65 % of the radius into 5-7 contiguous, cuneate, truncate lobes, each with straight, entire sides and a broad, crenate apex. Fruiting pedicels deflexed, densely pubescent. Sepals 4-5 mm, shortly mucronate; petals 7-10 mm, deeply emarginate, purple to lilac. Mericarps with appressed hairs, without ridges. 2n = 26. {\i S. & W. Europe; widely naturalized elsewhere.} Al Br Bu Co Ga Gr Hb He Hs Hu It Ju Lu Rm Si Tu [*Au Be Cz Da Fe *Ge Ho Hu No Po Rs (C, W, K, E) Su].
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 30. G. rotundifolium} L.,{\i  Sp. Pl. }683 (1753). Annual; stems 10-40 cm, erect or ascending, with long and short hairs, both glandular and eglandular mixed. Basal leaves 3-7·5 cm wide, divided for 25-40 % of the radius into 5-7 contiguous, cuneate lobes, which are deeply crenate or divided apically into short, obtuse segments; upper leaves more deeply divided, with more acute segments. Peduncles usually shorter than subtending leaves. Sepals 5-6 mm, mucronate; petals 5-7 mm, entire or very slightly emarginate, pink. Mericarps hairy, without ridges. 2n = 26.{\i  Most of Europe except the north.} Al Au Az Be Bl Br Bu Co Cr Cz Ga Ge Gr Hb He Hs Hu It Ju Lu Rm Rs (B, C, W, K, E) Sa Si Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 31. G. molle} L.,{\i  Sp. Pl.} 682 (1753). Densely pubescent, usually greyish-green annual, perhaps rarely perennial; stems 10-40 cm, decumbent or ascending, branched from the base, with long, soft white hairs and shorter, often glandular hairs. Basal leaves 1·5-4 cm wide, divided for 70 % of the radius into 5-7 obovate-cuneate, shortly 3-fid lobes; uppermost leaves alternate, sessile. Lowest leaves of inflorescence considerably exceeding subtended peduncle, and with petiole considerably longer than lamina. Sepals 4-5 mm, shortly mucronate; petals 3-7 mm, deeply emarginate, pinkish-purple. Filaments glabrous. Mericarps glabrous, usually with transverse ridges. 2n = 26.{\i  Europe, except the extreme north. }All except Is Rs (N) Sb, but only as a naturalized alien in Fa.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 32. G. brutium} Gasparr., {\i Rendic. Accad. Sci.} ({\i Napoli}) {\b 1}: 49 (1842) ({\i G. villosum} Ten., non Miller). Like {\b 31} but probably more often perennial; green, and usually rather sparsely pubescent; stems up to 70 cm, usually erect; lowest leaves of inflorescence shorter than or scarcely exceeding subtended peduncle, and with petiole usually shorter than lamina; petals 6-11 mm, bright reddish-purple.{\i  Balkan peninsula; S. Italy and Sicilia.} Al Bu Gr It Ju Si Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 31} and {\b 32} are very distinct when well-grown, but in dwarfed plants the distinctive characters are often obscured. {\b 32} is often confused with {\b 29}, but is easily distinguished by the glabrous, rugose mericarps, as well as by the brighter and redder petals.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 33. G. pusillum} L., {\i Syst. Nat.} ed. 10, {\b 2}: 1144 (1759). Like {\b 31} but with only short hairs on stem; sepals c. 4 mm; petals 2-4 mm, pale lilac; 3-5 of the stamens reduced to staminodes; and mericarps hairy, without transverse ridges. 2n = 36, 26.{\i  Most of Europe except the extreme north}. All except Az Bl Fa Is Sb Si; probably not native in Hb.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 34. G. columbinum} L.,{\i  Sp. Pl.} 682 (1753) (incl. {\i G. schrenkianum }Trautv. ex Krylov). Annual; stems 10-60 cm, ascending or erect, usually with short, deflexed hairs. Leaves 2-5 cm wide, divided almost to the base into 5-7 contiguous, rhombic, deeply pinnatifid lobes; segments linear-oblong. Uppermost leaves opposite, distinctly petiolate. Peduncles longer than the subtending leaves; pedicels with short, deflexed eglandular hairs. Sepals 9-13 mm, with appressed eglandular hairs, mainly on the veins; arista at least 2 mm. Petals 7-10 mm, purplish-pink. Mericarps glabrous or sparsely hairy, without ridges. 2n = 18.{\i  Europe, except the extreme north.} All except Az Fa Is Rs (N) Sb.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 35. G. dissectum} L.,{\i  Cent. Pl.}{\b  1}: 21 (1755). Like {\b 34} but basal leaves sometimes larger; peduncles shorter than the subtending leaves; pedicels and sepals densely pubescent, with some of the hairs glandular; sepals 5-6 mm, with shorter arista; petals c. 5 mm; mericarps hairy. 2n = 22.{\i  Most of Europe except the extreme north, but doubtfully native in much of Fennoscandia and U.S.S.R}. All except Fa Is Sb Rs (N).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 36. G. lucidum} L.,{\i  Sp. Pl}. 682 (1753). Annual, shining green, often tinged with red, usually sparsely hairy. Stems 10-40 cm, erect or ascending. Leaves 2-6 cm wide, divided for 60-70 % of the radius into 5 obovate-cuneate lobes, which are crenate or shortly 3-fid at the apex, with broad, obtuse, mucronate segments. Sepals 5-7 mm, aristate, erect and connivent during flowering, strongly keeled and with transverse ridges. Petals 8-10 mm, with a well-marked claw longer than the obovate, entire, pink limb. Mericarps usually separating without a stylar beak, laterally compressed, with 5 strong, longitudinal ridges at apex, irregularly reticulate-rugose below, pubescent on upper and inner sides. 2n = 20.{\i  Most of Europe except the northeast.} Al Au Be Bl Br Bu Co Cr Cz Da Fe Ga Ge Gr Hb He Hs Hu It Ju Lu No Rm Rs (B, W, K) Sa Si Su Tu [Po ?Rs (E)]
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 37. G. robertianum} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 681 (1753). Annual or biennial, often turning red, more or less hairy. Stems 10-50 cm, procumbent to ascending. Leaves 3-8 cm wide, very deeply divided, so as to appear compound, with 3(-5) principal divisions, which are 2-pinnatisect with oblong, mucronate or apiculate segments. Pedicels with long, patent glandular and deflexed eglandular hairs. Sepals 7-9 mm, erect, lanceolate, aristate, hirsute. Petals 9-13(-15) mm; limb 6-9 mm, obovate-cuneate, entire, bright pink, abruptly contracted to a narrow claw. Pollen orange. Mericarps separating without stylar beak, but remaining attached to the axis by a strand of delicate fibres; with 1 or 2 strong, transverse ridges at the apex and a few low, irregular ridges forming an open reticulum elsewhere; ridges usually hairy. 2n = 32, 64.{\i  Europe except the extreme north.} All except ?Bl Fa Is Sb.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 38. G. purpureum} Vill. in L., {\i Syst. Pl. Eur.}{\b  1}, {\i Fl. Delph.}: 72 (1785). Like {\b 37} but sepals ovate, mucronate or shortly aristate; petals 5-9 mm, purplish-pink, with limb 3-5 mm, elliptic-oblong, longer than broad, and contracted less abruptly to a relatively broader claw; pollen yellow; mericarps usually
\par

\par
198}
\par