{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28   {\b 1. G. macrorrhizum} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 680 (1753). Perennial, with stout, horizontal rhizome. Stem (6-)20-50 cm, erect, with 0-1 pairs of cauline leaves as well as the bracts. Leaves 4-10 cm wide, fragrant, divided for 75-80 % of the radius into 5-7 obovate, pinnatifid lobes; segments 3-4 on each side, obtuse but conspicuously mucronate. Inflorescence with 2-3 peduncles subtended by 2 bracts, which are subsessile and 3- to 5-lobed but otherwise like the basal leaves; lateral peduncles each with 4-9 nodding flowers in a dense corymb or umbel. Sepals erect, reddish; petals c. 15 mm, with claw at least half as long as the obovate, entire, patent or deflexed, dull purplish-red limb. Stamens 18-22 mm; filaments curved. Style up to 40 mm, of which the terminal half is not thickened and drops off before the fruit ripens. Mericarps glabrous, without ridges. 2n = 46.{\i  Shady places, usually among mountains; calcicole. • Balkan peninsula, S. & E. Carpathians, S. Alps, Appennini; cultivated elsewhere for ornament and often naturalized.} Al Au Bu Ga Gr It Ju Rm *Rs (W) [Be Br Ge Rs (K)].
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Dwarf mountain plants from Greece are often nearly glabrous and with very small, scarious bracts; they approach closely to{\b  2} but differ in the shape of the leaf-lobes.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. G. dalmaticum} (G. Beck) Rech. fil.,{\i  Magyar Bot. Lapok }{\b 33}: 28 (1934) ({\i G. macrorrhizum} subsp.{\i  microrhizon} Freyn). Like {\b 1} but smaller and more delicate; glabrous except for pedicels and sepals; lamina 2·5-4 cm wide, divided nearly to the base into 5 cuneate lobes with straight, entire sides and 3 triangular teeth at the apex; cauline leaves always absent; bracts always very small and scarious; petals c. 13 mm; stamens 14-18 mm. {\i Rocky places. • S. W. Jugoslavia and N. Albania} . Al Ju.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 3. G. cinereum} Cav.,{\i  Monad. Class. Diss. Dec.} 204 (1787). Perennial, with very stout, vertical rhizome. Leaves all basal, 2-3 cm wide, pubescent on both sides, sometimes greyish-sericeous beneath, divided for 80 % of the radius (but often apparently less from overlapping of the lobes) into 5-7 obovate-cuneate or obdeltate, usually almost contiguous lobes, each with 3 obtuse or mucronate segments or teeth at apex. Peduncles 5-10 cm, 2-flowered; bracts usually small, scarious. Sepals aristate; petals c. 15 mm, obovate, emarginate, with very short claw. Mericarps sericeous, with 1-3 ridges below the style.{\i  Rocky or grassy places in mountains. S. & W. part of Balkan peninsula; C. & S. Italy; Pyrenees}. Al Ga Gr Hs It Ju.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Two rather ill-defined subspecies may be recognized:
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b cinereum}: Leaf-segments c. 2 mm; sepals pubescent but with long hairs very few or only on margin; petals pale lilac with darker veins. •{\i  Pyrenees}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b subcaulescens} (L'Hér. ex DC.) Hayek, {\i Prodr. Fl. Penins. Balcan.}{\b  1}: 572 (1925) ({\i G. subcaulescens} L'Hér.): Leaf-segments up to 5 mm; usually at least some of the sepals with plentiful long, white hairs; petals usually deep reddish-purple, but sometimes pale.{\i  S. & W. part of Balkan peninsula; C. & S. Italy}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Plants which resemble {\b 3} in many features but differ in others have been described from calcareous mountains in several regions of Spain. They occur in disjunct populations, and it is difficult to give them satisfactory taxonomic treatment; they should probably be regarded as variants or subspecies of {\b 3. G. subargenteum} Lange in Willk. & Lange,{\i  Prodr. Fl. Hisp.}{\b  3}: 525 (1878), from the Cordillera Cantábrica, has the leaves very densely appressed-pubescent (grey-green above, silvery beneath); sepals without long hairs; and petals deep purplish-pink. {\b G. dolomiticum} Rothm., {\i Bol. Soc. Esp. Hist. Nat.}{\b  34}: 151 (1934), from N.W. Spain (S. of Ponferrada), is robust, with petioles up to 15 cm; leaves pale green beneath; stem sometimes branched and with cauline leaves near the base; sepals acute to acuminate, with long marginal hairs; and petals apparently fairly deep purple.{\b  G. cazorlense} Heywood, {\i Bull. Brit. Mus.} ({\i Bot}.){\b  1}: 112 (1954), from S.E. Spain (Sierra de Cazorla), is small and densely caespitose, with closely contiguous leaf-lobes bearing short, rounded segments; sepals small, acute or shortly mucronate; and petals 12 mm, white with violet veins.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 4. G. humbertii} Beauverd,{\i  Bull. Soc. Bot. Genève} ser. 2,{\b  31}: 447 (1940). Like {\b 3}, but stem said to be branched, and perhaps with some cauline leaves near the base; petals c. 10 mm, with well-developed claw c. 5 mm long, white with pink veins. Fruit unknown.{\i  Mountain rocks.• N. Greece} ({\i Kaimakchalan}). Gr.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Only once collected and rather inadequately described, this plant needs further investigation. It may be a variety of {\b 3}, but the clawed petals appear to be very distinctive.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 5. G. argenteum} L., {\i Cent. Pl.}{\b  2}: 25 (1756). Like {\b 3} but leaves densely silvery-sericeous on both sides, divided for 95 % of the radius; lobes deeply divided, each with usually 3 linear-oblong segments; petals pale pink. {\i Calcareous rocks and screes. • Mountains of N. & C. Italy, extending to S.E. France and N.W. Jugoslavia.} Ga It Ju.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 6. G. sanguineum} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 683 (1753). Perennial, with stout, horizontal rhizome. Stems diffuse, branched, erect to decumbent, with long, white, patent hairs and sessile glands. Leaves mostly cauline, 3-5(-8) cm wide, divided for 85 % of the radius into 5-7 pinnatisect lobes, each with 1-3 linear-oblong, acute segments on each side. Peduncles (with pedicel) 7-15 cm, 1-flowered (very rarely 2-flowered), with 2 small bracts at a node near the middle, representing the junction with the pedicel. Sepals 8-13 mm; petals 15-20 mm, obovate, emarginate, bright reddish-purple (rarely pink). Mericarps somewhat hairy, without ridges. 2n = 84 (52-56).{\i  Rocky or sandy ground or on well-drained soils. Most of Europe southwards from} c. 60°{\i  N.} All except Az Bl Cr Fa Ho Is Rs (N) Sa Sb.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 7. G. pratense} L.,{\i  Sp. Pl.} 681 (1753). Perennial, with stout, oblique rhizome. Stems 30-80 cm, erect, with deflexed hairs below and patent, glandular hairs above. Leaves c. 10 cm wide, divided almost to the base into 5-7 ovate, deeply pinnatifid lobes; segments oblong, acute. Inflorescence compact, with suberect branches; pedicels deflexed after flowering, becoming erect again when fruit is ripe. Sepals 11-15 mm; petals 15-20 mm, obovate, entire, bright violet-blue. Mericarps hirsute, without ridges. 2n = 28.{\i  Throughout a large part of Europe, but rare in the Mediterranean region and much of the north; frequently cultivated for ornament and widely naturalized}. Au Be Br Bu Cz Fe Ga Ge Gr Hb He Ho Hs Hu It Ju No Po Rm Rs (N, B, C, W, E) Su [Da].
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 8. G. sylvaticum} L.,{\i  Sp. Pl}. 681 (1753). Perennial, with stout, oblique rhizome. Stems 20-60 cm, erect, with variable indumentum. Leaves 5-12 cm wide, divided for 80-95 % of the radius into 5-7 ovate, dentate to pinnatisect lobes. Inflorescence more or less compact, with suberect branches; pedicels remaining erect after flowering. Sepals 6-12 mm; petals 6-18 mm, obovate, entire, variable in colour. Mericarps hirsute, without ridges.{\i  Most of Europe, but only on mountains in the south, and absent from many islands.} Al Au Be Br Bu Cz Da Fa Fe Ga Ge Gr Hb He Hs Hu Is It Ju No Po Rm Rs (N, B, C, W, E) Su [Ho].
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 The taxa recognized below as subspecies are often very distinct in particular regions, but in view of the great variability of ({\b a})
\par

\par
195}
\par