{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b R. taeniarum} Lindeb., {\i Nov. Fl. Scand.} 5 (1858) ({\i R. infestus} auct., non Weihe ex Boenn.). Be Br Cz Da Ge ?Ho Su.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b  R. teretiusculus} Kaltenb.{\i  Fl. Aachen Beck.}{\b  2}: 282 (1844). Au Br Ge ?Ho Hu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Series{\i  Radulae} Focke. Stems rough and tuberculate; prickles scattered and very unequal, quite distinct from the smaller pricklets. Inflorescence-axis with glandular and eglandular hairs, the glandular hairs mostly not longer than the eglandular.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 50. R. radula} Weihe ex Boenn.,{\i  Prodr. Fl. Monast. }152 (1824). Stems arching, robust, angled, glabrous to pubescent, glandular; prickles unequal, the smaller ones numerous, acicular. Leaves digitate; leaflets 5, rather large, deep green and nearly glabrous above, white-tomentose beneath; terminal leaflet 2-3 times as long as its petiolule, ovate or ovate-rhombic, gradually acuminate, rounded or slightly cordate at base, unevenly and finely serrate-dentate. Inflorescence pyramidal, often leafy to the apex, the axis hairy, with numerous unequal glands, acicles and prickles; the largest prickles long, robust, subulate, often nearly patent; flowers rather small. Sepals deflexed after flowering, not appendiculate, white-tomentose and hirsute, glandular and aculeolate; petals oblong-obovate, white or pinkish; stamens white, rarely pinkish, exceeding the green or pink-based styles; receptacle hairy; carpels glabrous. 2n = 28.{\i  W. & C. Europe, extending to S. Norway.} Au Be Br Cz Da Ga Ge Hb He Ho Hu Lu No Po Rm Su.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Related species include:
\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b  R. gizellae} Borbás,{\i  Österr. Bot. Zeitschr.}{\b  41}: 147 (1891). ?Cz Hu Ju.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b  R. uncinatus} P. J. Mueller,{\i  Flora} ({\i Regensb.}) {\b 41}: 154 (1858). Au Ga Ge Hu.
\par
 
\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 51. R. genevieri} Boreau, {\i Fl. Centre Fr.} ed. 3, 2: 193 (1857). Stems slender, bluntly angled, with flat, striate faces, densely puberulent, with long, slender, strong prickles. Leaves rather small, pedate; leaflets (3-)5, glabrescent above, silky-tomentose beneath; terminal leaflet obovate-cuspidate, partly biserrate and partly dentate. Inflorescence very long and narrow, leafy, with flexuous, tomentose axis; pedicels long, prickly. Sepals appendiculate; petals obovate or spathulate, emarginate, tapering below, pale pink; stamens white or pink-based, much exceeding the reddish styles; receptacle and carpels pubescent.{\i  W. & C. Europe.} Br ?Cz Ga Ge Hb He Ho Hu Lu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Related species include:
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b  R. brigantinus} Samp.,{\i  Ann. Sci. Nat.} ({\i Porto}) {\b 8}: 120 (1904). Lu.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b  R. echinatus} Lindley, {\i Syn. Brit. Fl.} 94 (1829) ({\i R. discerptus} P. J. Mueller). 2n = 28. Br Cz Ga Hb He Lu.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b R. maranensis} Samp. ex Coutinho, {\i Fl. Port}. 301 (1913). Lu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 52. R. apiculatus} Weihe & Nees in Bluff & Fingerh., {\i Comp. Fl. Germ.}{\b  1}: 680 (1825). Stems robust, angled, striate, faces plane or slightly sulcate, glaucescent, slightly hairy, with scattered short glands and numerous acicles and pricklets, some gland-tipped; prickles unequal, slender, the largest patent or falcate, the more numerous smaller ones papilliform. Leaves large, pedate; leaflets (3-)5, glabrescent above, tomentose and rough beneath with short, patent hairs; terminal leaflet elliptic-obovate, shortly acuminate, often subcuneate and rounded at base. Inflorescence long, leafy, narrowed to the apex, with rather short branches; axis tomentose, with numerous glands and acicles and few, fine, sharply deflexed or patent yellowish prickles. Sepals somewhat deflexed or patent after flowering, tomentose, glandular and with a few acicles; petals 5-6, ovate, pink; stamens white or pink, about equalling the cream-coloured styles; carpels glabrous or slightly hairy. 2n = 28.{\i  W. & C. Europe }. Au Be Br Cz Ga Ge Hb He Ho Hu Lu Rm.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Related species include:
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b  R. albicomus} Gremli,{\i  Beitr. Fl. Schweiz} 30 (1870). Au Cz Ga He Hu.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b  R. carinthiacus} Halácsy, {\i Verh. Zool.-Bot. Ges. Wien}{\b  41}: 254 (1891). Au.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b  R. dasycarpus} (Sabr.) Fritsch, {\i Exkursionsfl. Österr.} ed. 3, 209 (1922). Au.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b  R. lumnitzeri} (Sabr.) Fritsch,{\i  op. cit.} 214 (1922). Au.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b  R. lusitanicus} R. P. Murray,{\i  Bol. Soc. Brot.}{\b  5}: 189 (1887). Hs Lu.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b R. micans }Gren. & Godron,{\i  Fl. Fr.}{\b  1}: 546 (1849). Au Br Cz Ga Ge He Hu ?Po.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b  R. perdurus} Holuby & Borbás ex Sabr.,{\i  Österr. Bot. Zeitschr. }{\b 42}: 21 (1892). Cz.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b R. roetensis }Waisb.,{\i  Österr. Bot. Zeitschr.}{\b  47}: 6 (1897). Au Cz Hu.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b  R. subcanus} P. J. Mueller ex Genev., {\i Mem. Soc. Acad.} ({\i Angers}) {\b 28}: 45 (1872). Au Cz Ga Ge Hu.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b  R. supinus} Sabr.,{\i  Österr. Bot. Zeitschr.}{\b  55}: 357 (1905). Au.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b  R. transmontanus} Samp. ex Coutinho,{\i  Fl. Port.} 302 (1913), non Focke. Lu.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b  R. verticalis} Hormuzaki,{\i  Mem. Sect. ,Sti.} ({\i Acad. Româna}) ser. 3,{\b  2}: 292 (1925). Au.
\par
 
\par

\pard\f0\fs28   {\b 53. R. fuscus} Weihe & Nees in Bluff & Fingerh.,{\i  Comp. Fl. Germ.} {\b 1}: 681 (1825). Stems robust, obtusely angled, reddish, densely hairy, slightly glandular; prickles unequal, the largest very long, straight or curved, the smallest acicular. Leaflets 5, deep green, slightly hairy above, softly hairy beneath; terminal leaflet twice as long as its petiolule, ovate, acuminate, cordate at the base, margins coarsely and partly biserrate. Inflorescence long and narrow or pyramidal, leafy, with hairy, glandular axis; prickles numerous, patent or falcate; bracts long, linear-lanceolate; peduncles nearly patent; pedicels long, tomentose. Sepals varying in posture, green-tomentose, glandular, aculeolate; petals large, not contiguous, ovate or obovate, white or pale pink; stamens white, exceeding the greenish styles; receptacle hairy; carpels usually glabrous.{\i  W. & C. Europe, extending to S. Sweden.} Au Be Br Cz Da Ga Ge Hb He Ho Hu Rm Su.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Related species include:
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b  R. granulatus} P. J. Mueller & Lefevre,{\i  Pollichia }{\b 16-17}: 154 (1859). 2n = 28. Au Be Br Cz Ga Ge He Ho Hu Rm.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b  R. krasanii} Sabr. in Hayek,{\i  Fl. Steierm.}{\b  1}: 771 (1909). Au.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b  R. timbal-lagravei} P. J. Mueller ex Rouy & Camus, {\i Fl. Fr.}{\b  6}: 97 (1900). Ga He Hs.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   {\b 54. R. foliosus} Weihe & Nees in Bluff & Fingerh., {\i Comp. Fl. Germ. }{\b 1}: 682 (1825). Stems arching, then procumbent, angled, with plane faces, slightly hairy, glaucescent, with crowded, deep purple glands, acicles and pricklets; pricklets unequal, the largest very long, falcate. Leaflets 3-5, thick and tough, deep green, slightly hairy and shining above, green, tomentose beneath; terminal leaflet ovate to elliptical, acuminate, subcordate or rounded at base. Inflorescence large, many-flowered, variable; sometimes pyramidal, sometimes narrow, leafy, the branches either simple, branched near the base, or several arising from one axil; axis tomentose, with numerous dark purple glands and few, slender prickles; bracts leaf-like. Sepals varying in posture, appendiculate,
\par

\par
19}
\par