{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 in the description, the basal leaves (to which the descriptions refer) have long petioles; the cauline leaves, if present, have progressively shorter petioles and lamina often with fewer lobes; all leaves bear rather short, appressed hairs on both surfaces; and the sepals are hairy, obtuse to subacute, and mucronate or aristate.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  In the description below {\i lobe} is used to indicate a primary division of the leaf,{\i  segment} a division of a lobe. Measurements of sepals refer to the fruiting condition, and include the arista.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Annual or biennial
\par
2 Petals with conspicuous claw; sepals erect during flowering
\par
3 Sepals keeled; leaves not deeply divided ................................... {\b 36. lucidum}
\par
3 Sepals not keeled; leaves very deeply divided, so as 
\par
  to appear compound
\par
4 Petals 9-13 mm; pollen orange; mericarps with rather few ridges
\par
  ................................................................................................ {\b 37. robertianum}
\par
4 Petals 5-9 mm; pollen yellow; mericarps with numerous ridges
\par
  .................................................................................................. {\b 38. purpureum}
\par
2 Petals without distinct claw; sepals ± patent during flowering
\par
5 Petals entire ....................................................................... {\b 30. rotundifolium}
\par
5 Petals 2-lobed, emarginate or crenulate at apex
\par
6 Mericarps (excluding style) glabrous
\par
7 Uppermost leaves opposite; arista of sepal at least 2 mm ... {\b 33. columbinum}
\par
7 Uppermost leaves alternate; sepals with short mucro (c. 0·5 mm)
\par
8 Plant greyish-green, densely pubescent; lowest leaf of
\par
  inflorescence considerably exceeding the subtended 
\par
  peduncle, and with petiole considerably longer than 
\par
  lamina .............................................................................................. {\b 31. molle}
\par
8 Plant green, sparsely or moderately hairy; lowest leaf
\par
  of inflorescence shorter than or slightly exceeding the
\par
  subtended peduncle, and with petiole scarcely longer
\par
  than lamina ................................................................................... {\b 32. brutium}
\par
6 Mericarps (excluding style) hairy
\par
9 Mericarps transversely ridged, separating without a stylar 
\par
  beak ....................................................................................... {\b 25. divaricatum}
\par
9 Mericarps without transverse ridges, and with long stylar 
\par
  beak
\par
10 Sepals shortly mucronate; 3-5 stamens lacking anthers .......... {\b 33. pusillum}
\par
10 Most of the sepals with long arista; all 10 stamens
\par
   with anthers
\par
11 Leaves divided for c. 95 % of the radius, with ± linear segments
\par
12 Peduncles shorter than subtending leaf .................................. {\b 35. dissectum}
\par
12 Peduncles longer than subtending leaf .............................. {\b 34. columbinum}
\par
11 Leaves divided for c. 75 % of the radius, with ovate-oblong  
\par
   segments
\par
13 Seeds yellowish-grey, with irregular, dark brown patches, 
\par
   almost smooth; cotyledons with deep lateral notches ........... {\b 26. bohemicum}
\par
13 Seeds uniformly brown, distinctly foveolate;
\par
   cotyledons without lateral notches ...................................... {\b 27. lanuginosum}
\par
1  Perennial, often with conspicuous rhizome, tuber or woody stock
\par
14 Petals with a distinct claw at least 1/3 as long as the limb
\par
15 Stamens 8-10 mm, only slightly exceeding the sepals
\par
16 Leaves all ± basal; petioles c. 5 mm ........................................ {\b 4. humbertii}
\par
16 Several cauline leaves present; petioles of basal 
\par
   leaves 100-200 mm ............................................................. {\b 39. cataractarum}
\par
15 Stamens 14-22 mm, more than twice as long as the sepals
\par
17 Lamina of basal leaves 4-10 cm wide, divided for 
\par
   75-80 % of the radius; lobes lanceolate, irregularly
\par
   pinnatifid or incise-dentate ................................................. {\b 1. macrorrhizum}
\par
17 Lamina of basal leaves 2·5-4 cm wide, divided for 
\par
   90 % of the radius; lobes cuneate, entire except for
\par
   shortly 3-toothed apex ............................................................ {\b 2. dalmaticum}
\par
14 Petals with very short claw or none
\par
18 Petals entire, apiculate, erose or very slightly emarginate
\par
19 Petals spreading horizontally or deflexed; mericarps
\par
   with 2-4 conspicuous ridges below the base of the style
\par
20 Arista of sepal 4-6 mm ............................................................ {\b 17. aristatum}
\par
20 Arista of sepal c. 1 mm
\par
21 Petals 6-10 mm wide, patent or slightly deflexed ..................... {\b 15. phaeum}
\par
21 Petals 2·5-4 mm wide, sharply deflexed ................................. {\b 16. reflexum}
\par
19 Petals curving upwards, giving a ± cup-shaped flower;
\par
   mericarps smooth, or with a single, indistinct ridge
\par
22 Inflorescence compact, somewhat corymbose, with usually
\par
   more than 10 flowers
\par
23 Pedicels deflexed during maturation of the fruit;
\par
   sepals 11-15 mm ........................................................................... {\b 7. pratense}
\par
23 Pedicels erect during maturation of the fruit; sepals
\par
   6-12 mm ................................................................................... {\b 8. sylvaticum}
\par
22 Infloresence diffuse, not corymbose, with usually less
\par
   than 10 flowers
\par
24 Petals c. 6 mm ........................................................................ {\b 28. sibiricum}
\par
24 Petals at least 12 mm
\par
25 Rhizome long, slender, horizontal ............................................. {\b 9. endressii}
\par
25 Rhizome short
\par
26 Roots fleshy, fusiform, arising in a cluster from a very 
\par
   short rhizome; arista of sepals not more than 1·25 mm .....{\b 22. asphodeloides}
\par
26 Roots fibrous, not clustered; arista of sepals usually
\par
   more than 1·5 mm
\par
27 Sepals hairy only on the veins ................................................... {\b 23. palustre}
\par
27 Sepals hairy both on and between the veins ............................ {\b 24. collinum}
\par
18 Petals 2- or 3-lobed, or distinctly emarginate
\par
28 Stock small and inconspicuous; petals not more than 10(-12) mm 
\par
29 Mericarps smooth, hairy
\par
30 Leaf-lobes cuneate, truncate; hairs on mericarp appressed  {\b 29. pyrenaicum}
\par
30 Leaf-lobes lanceolate, acute; hairs on mericarp patent ........... {\b 28. sibiricum}
\par
29 Mericarps rugose, glabrous
\par
31 Plant greyish-green, densely pubescent; lowest leaf of 
\par
   inflorescence considerably exceeding the subtended peduncle, 
\par
   and with petiole considerably longer than lamina .......................... {\b 31. molle}
\par
31 Plant green, sparsely or moderately hairy; lowest leaf of 
\par
   inflorescence shorter than or only slightly exceeding the 
\par
   subtended peduncle and with petiole scarcely longer than 
\par
   lamina ......................................................................................... {\b 32. brutium}
\par
28 Plant with conspicuous tuber, rhizome or woody stock;
\par
   petals usually more than 10 mm
\par
32 Peduncles 1-flowered ........................................................... {\b 6. sanguineum}
\par
32 Peduncles 2-flowered
\par
33 Pedicels with long glandular hairs
\par
34 Leaves divided to the base ....................................... {\b 18-21. tuberosum} group
\par
34 Leaves divided for 65-80 % of the radius
\par
35 Leaf-segments acute; sepals 5-7 mm; petals usually white ...{\b 12. albiflorum}
\par
35 Leaf-segments obtuse; sepals c. 10 mm; petals bluish- 
\par
   violet .............................................................................. {\b 13. peloponesiacum}
\par
33 Pedicels eglandular, or with subsessile glands 
\par
   (sometimes also with much longer eglandular hairs)
\par
36 Leaves not more than 4 cm wide, usually all basal
\par
37 Leaves silvery-sericeous on both sides, with linear-
\par
   oblong segments ....................................................................... {\b 5. argenteum}
\par
37 Leaves green, at least above, with broadly oblong to
\par
   suborbicular segments ................................................................ {\b 3. cinereum}
\par
36 Larger leaves at least 5 cm wide, some of them cauline
\par
38 Pedicels with subsessile glands
\par
39 Petals c. 16 mm, pale lilac with darker veins ........................ {\b 10. versicolor}
\par
39 Petals c. 25 mm, deep purple ................................................... {\b 14. ibericum}
\par
38 Pedicels eglandular
\par
40 Rhizome long, slender; leaves divided for c. 70 % of the radius
\par
   ................................................................................................... {\b 11. nodosum}
\par
40 Rhizome short, often tuberous; leaves divided to the base
\par
   .................................................................................... {\b 18-21. tuberosum} group
\par

\par
194}
\par