{\rtf1\ansi \deff4\deflang1033{\fonttbl{\f4\froman\fcharset0\fprq2 Times New Roman;}{\f31\fnil\fcharset2\fprq2 Math3Mono;}}{\colortbl;\red0\green0\blue0;\red0\green0\blue255;\red0\green255\blue255;\red0\green255\blue0;\red255\green0\blue255;\red255\green0\blue0;\red255\green255\blue0;\red255\green255\blue255;\red0\green0\blue128;\red0\green128\blue128;\red0\green128\blue0;\red128\green0\blue128;\red128\green0\blue0;\red128\green128\blue0;\red128\green128\blue128;\red192\green192\blue192;}{\stylesheet{\widctlpar \f4\fs20\lang2057 \snext0 Normal;}{\*\cs10 \additive Default Paragraph Font;}}{\info{\author dddd}{\operator dddd}{\creatim\yr1998\mo11\dy11\hr17\min6}{\revtim\yr1998\mo11\dy11\hr17\min7}{\version2}{\edmins1}{\nofpages4}{\nofwords1105}{\nofchars6303}{\*\company  }{\vern57431}}\widowctrl\ftnbj\aenddoc\hyphcaps0 \fet0\sectd \linex0 {\*\pnseclvl1\pnucrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl2\pnucltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl3\pndec\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl4\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl5\pndec\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl6\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl7\pnlcrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl8\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl9\pnlcrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}
\pard\plain \ \f4\fs20\lang2057 {\b\fs28 110}{\fs28 : 43-48,241-244 (1963). Each of the 3 subspecies here proposed has a fairly distinctive facies, but intermediates are common, whose cytological status is often unknown. Plants intermediate between subsp. (}{\b\fs28 a}{\fs28 ) and (}{\b\fs28 b}{\fs28 ) are especially common in N.W. Europe, and have been named }{\b\fs28 E. cicutarium }{\fs28 subsp. }{\b\fs28 dunense}{\fs28  Andreas, }{\i\fs28 Nederl. Kruidk. Arch. }{\b\fs28 54}{\fs28 : 198 (1947) (}{\i\fs28 E. glutinosum}{\fs28  subsp.}{\i\fs28  dunense}{\fs28  (Andreas) Rothm.). They have mostly 2n = 40; but one variant has been found with 2n = 60, which has been interpreted as an amphidiploid hybrid between subspp. (}{\b\fs28 a}{\fs28 ) and (}{\b\fs28 b}{\fs28 ) and named }{\b\fs28 E. danicum}{\fs28  K. Larsen,}{\i\fs28  Biol. Meddel. Kong. Danske Vid. Selsk.}{\b\fs28  23}{\fs28 (}{\b\fs28 6}{\fs28 ): 14 (1958).
\par 
\par }
\pard \li200\ {\fs28 1 Mericarp without or with a very faint furrow below apical pit 
\par   ....................................................................................... (}{\b\fs28 b}{\fs28 ) subsp. }{\b\fs28 bipinnatum}{\fs28  
\par 1 Mericarp with a distinct furrow below apical pit
\par 2 Hairs on mericarp arising from blackish tubercles; beak 40-70 mm
\par   ................................................................................... (}{\b\fs28 c}{\fs28 ) subsp. }{\b\fs28 jacquinianum}{\fs28 
\par 2 Mericarp without blackish tubercles; beak 10-40 mm . (}{\b\fs28 a}{\fs28 ) subsp. }{\b\fs28 cicutarium}{\fs28 
\par 
\par }
\pard \ {\fs28  (}{\b\fs28 a}{\fs28 ) Subsp. }{\b\fs28 cicutarium}{\fs28  (incl. }{\i\fs28 E. salzmannii}{\fs28  Delile, }{\i\fs28 E. primulaceum}{\fs28  (Lange) Welw. ex Lange): Often robust, with stems up to 100 cm; sparsely or densely hairy, eglandular or somewhat glandular. Leaflets pinnatifid or somewhat pinnatisect. Bracts several, ovate. Petals usually purplish-pink, the upper 2 larger and often with a blackish basal patch. Mericarps 5-7 mm, without blackish tubercles; apical pits large, with a furrow at the base. Beak 10-40 mm. 2n = 20, 36, 40, 48, 54.}{\i\fs28  Throughout the range of the species.}{\fs28 
\par  (}{\b\fs28 b}{\fs28 ) Subsp. }{\b\fs28 bipinnatum}{\fs28  Tourlet,}{\i\fs28  Cat. Pl. Indre Loire }{\fs28 103 (1908) (}{\i\fs28 E. bipinnatum}{\fs28  Willd.,}{\i\fs28  E. staphylinum}{\fs28  Bertol., }{\i\fs28 E. sabulicola }{\fs28 (Lange) Lange): Usually less robust than subspp. (}{\b\fs28 a}{\fs28 ) and (}{\b\fs28 c}{\fs28 ); often densely glandular-hairy. Leaflets deeply pinnatisect or almost pinnate. Bracts several, ovate. Umbels with 3-7 flowers. Petals usually lilac or white, equal, without black patch. Mericarps 4-5 mm, without black tubercles; apical pits small, without a furrow at the base, or with a very faint one. Beak 10-40 mm. 2n = 20, 40.}{\i\fs28  Usually on maritime sands. W. Europe, northwards to the Netherlands, and eastwards to Sardegna}{\fs28 .
\par  (}{\b\fs28 c}{\fs28 ) Subsp. }{\b\fs28 jacquinianum}{\fs28  (Fischer, C. A. Meyer & Av\'e9-Lall.) Briq. in Engler,}{\i\fs28  Pflanzenreich}{\b\fs28  53}{\fs28 (}{\b\fs28 IV.129}{\fs28 ): 281 (1912) (}{\i\fs28 E. aethiopicum}{\fs28  auct., non}{\i\fs28  Geranium aethiopicum}{\fs28  Lam.): Usually robust; often densely glandular-hairy. Leaflets deeply pinnatisect or almost pinnate. Bracts 2-3, suborbicular. Petals usually equal and without black patch. Mericarps 5-7 mm, with hairs arising from blackish tubercles; apical pits large, with a conspicuous furrow at the base. Beak 40-70 mm. 2n = 20.}{\i\fs28  Sandy places. S. Spain, S. Portugal, Sardegna, Elba.}{\fs28  (}{\i\fs28 N. Africa.}{\fs28 )
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 26. E. moschatum}{\fs28  (L.) L'H\'e9r. in Aiton,}{\i\fs28  Hort. Kew.}{\b\fs28  2}{\fs28 : 414 (1789). Annual or biennial, smelling of musk. Stems 10-50 cm, hispid with usually deflexed hairs, dense above, sparse below. Leaves up to 20 cm, oblong-lanceolate, pinnate almost throughout their length, without intercalary leaflets; leaflets ovate, dentate, serrate or somewhat pinnatifid, the lower ones remote. Umbels with 5-12 flowers; bracts several, broadly ovate, subacute, subglabrous, pale brown. Sepals 6-9 mm; petals c. 15 mm, violet or purple. Mericarps 5-6 mm, with patent, brown or white hairs; apical pits very wide, glandular, with a wide, deep furrow at the base. Beak 20-45 mm. 2n = 20.}{\i\fs28  Cultivated ground and waste places. S. & W. Europe; frequently naturalized or casual elsewhere}{\fs28 . Al Az Bl *Br Co Cr Ga Gr Ho Hs It Ju Lu Sa Si Tu [Au Be Cz Ge *Hb He Hu].
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 27-30. E. acaule}{\fs28  group. Acaulescent perennials. Leaves up to 15 cm, oblong to ovate-lanceolate, pinnate, without intercalary leaflets; leaflets ovate-elliptical to ovate-lanceolate, pinnatifid or pinnatisect. Umbels with 3-10 flowers; bracts several, ovate-lanceolate, subglabrous. Mucro of sepals small or absent. Mericarps 6-7 mm, with ascending, white hairs. Beak 25-50 mm.
\par 
\par }
\pard \li200\ {\fs28 1 Petiole almost as long as lamina ................................................ }{\b\fs28 30. rupicola}{\fs28  
\par 1 Petiole not more than half as long as lamina
\par 2 Petals without a dark patch; hairs on sepals appressed, eglandular
\par   ......................................................................................................... }{\b\fs28 27. acaule}{\fs28 
\par 2 Upper two petals with a black basal patch; hairs on sepals \'b1 patent,
\par   glandular
\par 3 Bracts and stipules brown; hairs on leaves mostly eglandular; 
\par   apical pits of mericarp eglandular .......................................... }{\b\fs28 28. canifolium}{\fs28 
\par 3 Bracts and stipules whitish; hairs on leaves mostly glandular; 
\par   apical pits of mericarp densely glandular .......................................... }{\b\fs28 29. paui}{\fs28 
\par 
\par }
\pard \ {\fs28    }{\b\fs28 27. E. acaule}{\fs28  (L.) Becherer & Thell., }{\i\fs28 Feddes Repert.}{\b\fs28  25}{\fs28 : 215 (1928) (}{\i\fs28 E. romanum}{\fs28  (Burm. fil.) L'H\'e9r.). Ultimate segments of leaves elliptic-lanceolate; petiole very short, sparsely eglandular-pubescent. Peduncles eglandular below; bracts brown. Sepals 5-8 mm, with appressed, eglandular hairs. Petals 7-12 mm, lilac, equal, without black patch. Apical pits of mericarp eglandular, with a fairly distinct furrow at the base. 2n = 40.}{\i\fs28  Dry places. Mediterranean region, S. Portugal.}{\fs28  Co Cr Ga Gr Hs It Lu Sa Si Tu.
\par 
\par  Sometimes regarded as a subspecies of }{\b\fs28 25}{\fs28 , but the combination of acaulescent with perennial and usually robust habit is distinctive. Acaulescent variants of }{\b\fs28 25}{\fs28  are small and annual.
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 28. E. carvifolium}{\fs28  Boiss. & Reuter, }{\i\fs28 Diagn. Pl. Nov. Hisp.}{\fs28  9 (1842). Hairs on leaves mostly eglandular; ultimate segments linear-lanceolate; petiole short. Peduncles eglandular below; bracts brown. Sepals 5-8 mm, usually with patent, glandular hairs, sometimes also with appressed, eglandular hairs. Petals 7-12 mm, purple, the upper 2 larger and with a blackish, basal patch. Apical pits of mericarp eglandular, without a furrow at the base or with a very faint one. 2n = 20, 40.}{\i\fs28  Pinewoods and mountain pastures. \bullet  N.C. & W.C. Spain.}{\fs28  Hs.
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 29. E. paui}{\fs28  Sennen, }{\i\fs28 Bol. Soc. Ib\'e9r. Ci. Nat. }{\b\fs28 26}{\fs28 : 83 (1927). Leaves 1\'b75-3 cm, somewhat greyish on both surfaces from a dense covering of mostly glandular hairs; ultimate segments lanceolate or linear-lanceolate; petiole densely hairy, short. Bracts and stipules whitish. Sepals c. 10 mm, densely hairy, glandular or eglandular. Petals c. 12 mm, violet, the upper 2 larger and with a blackish basal patch. Apical pits of mericarp densely glandular, without a furrow at the base. Beak 25-30 mm. \bullet }{\i\fs28  N.C. Spain}{\fs28  (}{\i\fs28 Pico de Urbion}{\fs28 ). Hs.
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 30. E. rupicola}{\fs28  Boiss.,}{\i\fs28  Voy. Bot. Midi Esp.}{\b\fs28  2}{\fs28 : 724 (1845). Leaves with mostly patent hairs; leaflets pinnatifid; ultimate segments oblong-lanceolate; petiole densely glandular-hairy, about as long as lamina. Bracts and stipules brownish. Sepals with long, patent, eglandular, and shorter, glandular hairs. Petals as in }{\b\fs28 29}{\fs28 . Apical pits of mericarp eglandular, without a furrow at the base. 2n = 20.}{\i\fs28  Rock-crevices. }{\i\fs28 {\field{\*\fldinst SYMBOL 234 \\f "Math3Mono" \\s 14}{\fldrslt\f31\fs28}}}{\i\fs28  S. Spain}{\fs28  (}{\i\fs28 Sierra Nevada}{\fs28 ). Hs.
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 31. E. astragaloides}{\fs28  Boiss. & Reuter,}{\i\fs28  Pugillus}{\fs28  130 (1852). Acaulescent perennial. Leaves up to 4 cm, whitish-tomentose on both surfaces, oblong-lanceolate, pinnate, without intercalary leaflets; leaflets ovate, often entire, but some of those of the older leaves usually dentate or pinnatifid. Stipules reddish-brown. Umbels with 2-8 flowers; bracts lanceolate, whitish-tomentose. Sepals 8-10 mm, densely glandular-villous; mucro small or absent. Petals 10-12 mm, purplish. Mericarps 6-8 mm, with ascending, white hairs; apical pits with conspicuous glandular hairs, without a furrow at the base. Beak 25-45 mm.}{\i\fs28  Sandy soil. \bullet  S. Spain}{\fs28  (}{\i\fs28 Sierra Nevada}{\fs28 ). Hs.
\par 
\par 203}
\par }