{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 green, tomentose, glandular; petals 5-7, fimbriate, white or pink; stamens white, slightly exceeding the pink-based styles; receptacle and carpels pubescent.{\i  C. & N.W. Europe}. Au Be Br ?Cz Da Ga Ge Hb He Ho Hu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Related species include:
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b  R. barbatus }(Sabr.) Fritsch,{\i  Exkursionsfl. Österr.} ed. 3, 215 (1922). Au.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b  R. brachystemon }Heimerl,{\i  Österr. Bot. Zeitschr.}{\b  32}: 109 (1882). Au Cz.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b  R. corymbosus} P. J. Mueller,{\i  Flora} ({\i Regensb}.) {\b 41}: 151 (1858), non Weihe & Nees. Au Be Br Cz Ga Ge He.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b  R. flexuosus} P. J. Mueller & Lefevre,{\i  Pollichia }{\b 16-17}: 240 (1859). Au Be Br Cz Ga Ge He Ho Hu. According to Watson synonymous with {\b 54}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b  R. insericatus} P. J. Mueller ex Wirtgen, {\i Flora} ({\i Regensb.}){\b  42}: 233 (1859). 2n = 28. Be Br Cz Ga Ge He Ho.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b  R. microbelus} Sudre, {\i Bull. Soc. Bot. Fr. }{\b 52}: 341 (1905). Au Be Ge.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b  R. petri} Fritsch,{\i  Österr. Bot. Zeitschr.}{\b  60}: 310 (1910). Au.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b  R. saltuum} Focke in Gremli,{\i  Beitr. Fl. Schweiz} 30 (1870). Au He.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b  R. truncifolius} P. J. Mueller & Lefevre, {\i Pollichia}{\b  16-17}: 139 (1859). Au Be Br Ga Ge.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 55. R. infestus} Weihe ex Boenn., {\i Prodr. Fl. Monast.} 153 (1824). Stems erect at first, then arching, becoming brownish-red, angled, with plane or sulcate faces, glabrous or sparsely hairy, not pruinose, with a few glands and acicles and often many unequal prickles, the largest prickles strong, curved and sometimes touching or coalescing at base. Leaflets 5, dark green and glabrescent above, pubescent to grey-green tomentose beneath; terminal leaflet ovate to broadly ovate, acuminate, subcordate, coarsely serrate. Inflorescence short, few-flowered, often leafy to the apex; axis sparsely hairy, with crowded, strong, unequal, straight or hooked prickles; pedicels long, tomentose. Sepals patent or appressed to the young fruit, green, hairy, glandular and aculeolate, with white margins; petals 5-7, orbicular or ovate, white or pale pink; stamens white at first, becoming red, and concealing the yellowish or green styles; receptacle pubescent; carpels glabrous. 2n = 28. {\i From Ireland and N. France to Poland.} Be Br Cz Da Ga Ge Hb Po.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Related species include:
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b R. babingtonii} Bell Salter, {\i Ann. Nat. Hist. }{\b 15}: 307 (1845). Br Da Ga.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b  R. cunctator} Focke, {\i Syn. Rub. Germ.} 281 (1877). Au Lu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 56. R. thyrsiflorus} Weihe & Nees in Bluff & Fingerh.,{\i  Comp. Fl. Germ. }{\b 1}: 684 (1825). Stems procumbent, robust, terete, or angled with plane or slightly concave faces, glaucescent, glabrous or sparsely hairy, with a few glands and numerous, unequal, very short, deflexed and falcate prickles. Leaflets 3-5, large, imbricate, glabrescent above, shortly hairy beneath; terminal leaflet 4 times as long as its petiolule, suborbicular, acuminate, subcordate, serrate-dentate. Inflorescence long, dense-flowered and tapering, with several simple leaves and usually many, erecto-patent, 1- to 3-flowered branches in the upper part, the 2-3 lower branches with flowers in panicles; axis tomentose and hirsute, with acicles and sunken glands; prickles short. Sepals often 6, rising after anthesis, with linear apices, tomentose and glandular; petals often 6, white, elliptical, emarginate; stamens white, about equalling or slightly exceeding the green or reddish styles; receptacle pubescent; carpels usually glabrous. 2n = 28.{\i  N.W. & C. Europe.} Au Be Br Cz Ga Ge He Hu Ju Rm.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Related species include:
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b  R. begoniifolius} Holuby, {\i Österr. Bot. Zeitschr.}{\b  25}: 315 (1875). Al Cz.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b  R. chloranthus} (Sabr.) Fritsch,{\i  Exkursionsfl. Österr.} ed. 3, 213 (1922). Au Hu.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b  R. prionatus} Sudre,{\i  Compt. Rend. Congr. Soc. Sav}. ({\i Sci.}) {\b 1908}: 214 (1909). Au Ga Ge.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b R. stylosus} Sabr. in Hayek,{\i  Fl. Steierm. }{\b 1}: 801 (1909) pro var. Au Ge.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 57. R. pallidus} Weihe & Nees in Bluff & Fingerh.,{\i  Comp. Fl. Germ. }{\b 1}: 682 (1825). Stems arching, then procumbent, becoming purple, terete near base, angled above, with plane faces, densely hairy and with blackish glands; prickles very short, unequal, broad-based and mostly deflexed. Leaves pedate; leaflets 3-5, pale green and hairy above, green and glabrescent beneath; terminal leaflet ovate-elliptical, sometimes long-acuminate, cordate, serrate. Inflorescence broadly pyramidal-truncate, leafy below and sometimes to the apex, the middle branches long, patent; axis hairy, finely glandular, with few, weak, deflexed, pale prickles. Sepals narrow, deflexed after flowering but rising in fruit, purplish-greenish-grey tomentose, glandular and aculeolate; petals ovate or elliptical, white or sometimes pinkish; stamens white, variable in length; receptacle pubescent; carpels glabrous. 2n = 28. {\i N.W. & C. Europe}. Au Be Br Cz Da Ga Ge He Ho Hu Po.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Very variable; several subspecies and varieties have been described. 
\par
 
\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Related species include:
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b  R. bloxamii} Lees in Steele,{\i  Handb. Field Bot. }55 (1847). 2n = 28. Be Br Da Ga Ge Hu. According to Watson, R. multifidus Boulay & Malbr. is synonymous with this species, but Sudre makes {\i R. multifidus} a subspecies of {\b 59}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b  R. hirsutus} Wirtgen, {\i Prodr. Fl. Preuss. Rheinl.} 61 (1842), non Thunb. Au Be Br Cz Ge He.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b  R. macrocalyx} Halácsy,{\i  Österr. Bot. Zeitschr.}{\b  40}: 433 (1890). Au.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b  R. microstachys} Boulay,{\i  Ronces Vosg.} 92 (1868). Au Ga Ge.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 58. R. obscurus} Kaltenb.,{\i  Fl. Aachen. Beck.}{\b  2}: 281 (1844). Stems robust, with blunt angles, densely pubescent with long hairs, glandular, purple, glaucescent; prickles unequal, long, patent or falcate, bright red. Leaves pedate, more or less grey-white tomentose beneath; leaflets 3-5, glabrous above, becoming convex; terminal leaflet elliptic-obovate, acuminate, subcuneate and nearly entire at base; petioles short, with straight prickles. Inflorescence large and compound, pyramidal, the lower branches long and many-flowered; axis densely pubescent, with numerous sunken glands; prickles short, fine, straight, yellowish. Sepals erecto-patent in fruit, green, tomentose, glandular, aculeolate, appendiculate; petals narrow, deep pink; stamens white or pink, slightly exceeding the pink styles; receptacle and carpels pubescent. 2n = 28.{\i  N.W. & C. Europe.} Au Be Br Cz Ga Ge He Ho Hu Po.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Related species include:
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b R. castaneifolius} Sabr., {\i Mitt. Naturw. Ver. Steierm.}{\b  52}: 289 (1916). Au.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b  R. cruentatus}  P. J. Mueller ex Focke,{\i  Syn. Rub. Germ.} 312 (1877). Au Be Br Da Ga Ge.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b  R. entomodontos} P. J. Mueller ex Focke,{\i  loc. cit}. (1877). Br Cz Ga.
\par

\par
20}
\par