{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 {\i Pyrenees}. Al Au Br Bu Cz Ga Ge Gr He Hs Hu It Ju Po Rm Rs (N, C, W, E).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Upper cauline leaves 3-veined; inner sepals twice as long as wide
\par
  ..................................................................................... ({\b e}) subsp. {\b extraaxillare}
\par
1 Upper cauline leaves 1-veined, inner sepals less than twice as
\par
  long as wide
\par
2 Inner sepals very obtuse, longer than the outer (lowlands) 
\par
3 Stems erect from an ascending base; pollen grains with furrows
\par
  ........................................................................................... ({\b a}) subsp. {\b perenne}
\par
3 Stems usually decumbent or ascending; pollen grains with pores 
\par
  ......................................................................................... ({\b b}) subsp. {\b anglicum}
\par
2 Inner sepals acute or obtuse, equalling the outer (mountains) 
\par
4 Pollen grains with furrows ............................................... ({\b c}) subsp. {\b alpinum}
\par
4 Pollen grains with pores ............................................... ({\b d}) subsp. {\b montanum}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b perenne}: Stems (20-)30-60 cm, erect from an ascending base. Middle cauline leaves 1-2·5 mm wide, 1-veined or obscurely 3-veined. Inner sepals 4·5-5·5 mm, very obtuse, exceeding the outer sepals by 0·5-1 mm. Capsules 5-7 mm. Pollen grains with furrows. 2n = 18.{\i  C. & E. Europe}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b anglicum} (Miller) Ockendon, {\i Feddes Repert.}{\b  74}: 20 (1967) ({\i L. anglicum} Miller): Like subsp. ({\b a}) but stems decumbent or ascending, occasionally suberect; pollen grains with pores. 2n = 36.{\i  Britain}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b c}) Subsp. {\b alpinum} (Jacq.) Ockendon,{\i  Feddes Repert.}{\b  74}: 20 (1967) ({\i L. alpinum} Jacq.; incl.{\i  L. boreale} Juz.): Stems 5-30 cm decumbent or ascending. Middle cauline leaves 1-3 mm wide. Inner sepals 4·5-6 mm, equalling the outer sepals. Pollen grains with furrows. 2n = 18.{\i  Pyrenees, Alps, Appennini, Rodopi; N. Ural.}
\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Plants from the Pyrenees are particularly variable. Some have the wide leaves and long inner sepals characteristic of subsp. ({\b e}), while others have suberect or flexuous pedicels.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b d}) Subsp. {\b montanum} (DC.) Ockendon,{\i  Feddes Repert.}{\b  74}: 20 (1967) ({\i L. montanum }Schleicher ex DC.): Stems 20-40 cm ascending or erect. Middle cauline leaves 1-3 mm wide. Inner sepals 5·6-6·5 mm, acute, equalling the outer sepals. Pollen grains with pores. 2n = 36. •{\i  Jura and N. Alps}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b e}) Subsp. {\b extraaxillare} (Kit.) Nyman, {\i Consp., Suppl.}{\b  2}({\b 1}): 71 (1889) ({\i L. extraaxillare} Kit.): Like subsp. ({\b d}) but upper cauline leaves 2-4 mm wide, 3-veined; pollen grains with furrows. 2n = 18. •{\i  Carpathians; mountains of Balkan peninsula}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 19. L. austriacum} L., {\i Sp. Pl}. 278 (1753). Stems (6-)10-60 cm, erect or ascending. Middle cauline leaves 1- or obscurely 3-veined. Inflorescence many-flowered. Inner sepals acute or obtuse. Pedicels deflexed or flexuous. Capsules 3·5-7·5 mm. Heterostylous.{\i  C. & S. Europe.} Al Au Bu Cz Ga Ge Gr He Hs Hu It Ju Po Rm Rs (C, W, K, E) Si Tu [Da].
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Capsules 5-7·5 mm ..................................................... ({\b b}) subsp. {\b collinum}
\par
1 Capsules 3·5-5 mm
\par
2 Leaves less than 1 mm wide; pedicels flexuous ............. ({\b c}) subsp. {\b euxinum}
\par
2 Leaves more than 1 mm wide; pedicels deflexed ........ ({\b a}) subsp. {\b austriacum}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b austriacum}: Stems (20-)30-60 cm. Middle cauline leaves 1-3 mm wide. Inner sepals 3·5-5·5 mm, obtuse. Pedicels deflexed. Capsule 3·5-5 mm. 2n = 18.{\i  Throughout most of the range of the species but absent from the south-west.}
\par
 ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b collinum} Nyman,{\i  Consp.} 125 (1878) ({\i L. collinum} Guss., nom. provis.): Stems 6-30(-40) cm. Middle cauline leaves 1-3 mm wide. Inner sepals 4·5-5·5 mm, acute or obtuse. Pedicels deflexed. Capsules 5-7·5 mm. 2n = 18.{\i  Mediterranean region C. France}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  A heterogenous subspecies comprising a few very disjunct populations.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b c}) Subsp. {\b euxinum} (Juz.) Ockendon,{\i  Feddes Repert.}{\b  74}: 21 (1967) ({\i L. euxinum} Juz.; incl. {\i L. marschallianum} Juz.): Stems 12-36 cm, densely leafy. Leaves 0·1-1 mm wide, revolute. Inner sepals 3-4 mm, very obtuse. Pedicels flexuous or squarrose. Capsules 4-5·5 mm.{\i  Krym}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 20. L. punctatum} C. Presl in J. & C. Presl,{\i  Del. Prag.} 58 (1822) (incl. {\i L. pycnophyllum} Boiss. & Heldr.). Stems up to 15 cm, very crowded, very densely leafy throughout. Leaves 3-5(-7) mm, narrowly ovate, 1-veined. Flowers solitary or in terminal groups of 2 or 3. Inner sepals 5-6 mm, obtuse. Pedicels erect or somewhat flexuous. Capsules 5·5-7 mm. Heterostylous.{\i  Mountains of Sicilia and Greece.} Gr  Si.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 21. L. leonii} F. W. Schultz,{\i  Flora} ({\i Regensb}.){\b  21}: 644 (1838). Stems 7-30(-40) cm, erect when young, later decumbent. Middle cauline leaves 1-veined. Inflorescence 1- to 6(-12)-flowered. Inner sepals 3·5-6 mm, acute or obtuse. Pedicels deflexed, flexuous or suberect. Capsules 5-7(-8) mm. Homostylous. 2n = 18. •{\i  France, W. Germany}. Ga Ge.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 22. L. decumbens} Desf.,{\i  Fl. Atl.}{\b  1}: 278 (1798). Glabrous annual; stems up to 40 cm, decumbent, ascending or suberect. Leaves 1-3(-5) mm wide, linear or linear-lanceolate, acute 1- to 3(-5)-veined, usually with scabrid margins. Sepals 7-9 mm ovate, long-acuminate, with wide, scarious margins below and narrow, ciliate margins above. Petals 2-2½ times as long as sepals, pink or red. Stigmas linear. Capsule 4·5-6·5 mm, sub-globose; beak 0·5-1 mm, acuminate. Homostylous.{\i  S. Italy Sardegna, Sicilia}. It Sa Si.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 23. L. bienne} Miller, {\i Gard. Dict.} ed. 8, no. 8 (1768) ({\i L. angustifolium} Hudson). Biennial or perennial (rarely annual); stems 6-60 cm, usually branched, slender, ascending or erect. Leaves 0·5-1·5 mm wide, linear or linear-lanceolate, acuminate, 1- to 3-veined. Sepals 4-5·5 mm, subequal, ovate-acuminate, with a conspicuous midvein; margin of inner sepals scarious and ciliate, margin of outer sepals entire. Petals 2-3 times as long as sepals, blue. Stigmas linear. Capsule 4-6 mm, subglobose; beak c. 1 mm, acuminate. Homostylous. 2n = 30.{\i  W. & S. Europe, northwards to} 54°{\i  N. in Britain.} Al Bl Br Bu Co Cr Ga Gr Hb Hs It Ju Lu Rs (K) Sa Si Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 24. L. usitatissimum} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 277 (1753) (incl.{\i  L. crepitans} (Boenn.) Dumort., {\i L. humile} Miller). Like {\b 23} but more robust; always annual; stem usually single; leaves 1·5-3 mm wide, 3-veined; sepals 6-9 mm; capsule 6-9 mm; beak c. 1 mm.{\i  Not known wild. Of uncertain origin, perhaps derived from}{\b  23}.{\i  Formerly cultivated throughout most of Europe for the fibre} ({\i flax}){\i  and oil from the seed} ({\i linseed} );{\i  now much less commonly grown, especially in the west, but still recorded as a casual throughout Europe}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Sect. DASYLINUM (Planchon) Juz. Leaves alternate, pubescent without basal glands. Sepals glandular-ciliate. Petals free, blue or pink. Stigmas linear. Heterostylous.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 25. L. viscosum} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} ed. 2, 398 (1762). Pubescent perennial; stems up to 60 cm, erect or ascending below. Leaves 3-8(-11) mm wide, lanceolate or ovate-lanceolate, 3- to 5-veined with glandular margins (margins of middle and lower leaves occasionally eglandular). Sepals 6-9 mm, lanceolate. Petals 2½-3 times as long as sepals, pink (blue when dry). Capsule 3·5-4·5 mm, subglobose; beak c. 0·5 mm, shortly acuminate. •{\i  S. & S.C. Europe, from N. Spain to S. Germany and N. Jugoslavia; rather local and mainly in the mountains.} Au Ga Ge Hs It Ju.
\par

\par
209}
\par