{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28  Described from Anatolia. The European plant is distinguished by its narrower leaf-segments as subsp. {\b elatum} (Form.) P. H. Davis & J. Roberts, {\i Notes Roy. Bot. Gard. Edinb.}{\b  22}: 18 (1955).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 20. E. beketowii} Schmalh., {\i Fl. Sred. Juz. Ross. }{\b 1}: 198 (1895). Perennial; stems 15-30 cm. Leaves c. 10 cm, bipinnate, with narrowly linear segments, greyish with numerous appressed, glandular hairs; intercalary leaflets present. Umbel with 5-15 flowers. Sepals c. 9 mm; petals c. 8 mm, lilac. Mericarps c. 7 mm; beak 30-40 mm.{\i  Rocky and gravelly places. • S.E. Ukraine} ({\i Kal'mius and Kal'cik valleys, near Zdanov}). Rs (W).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Apparently distinct, but needing further investigation.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 21. E. alpinum} L'Hér.,{\i  Geraniologia} t. 3 (1792). Perennial; stems up to 20 cm, shortly and sparsely hairy. Leaves up to 7 cm, more or less appressed-hairy but not silvery, oblong-lanceolate, pinnate, with pinnatifid, rarely pinnatisect leaflets; ultimate segments oblong-lanceolate, acute; intercalary leaflets present. Umbels with 2-9 flowers; bracts 3 or more, ovate-lanceolate, acute, subglabrous, brown. Sepals 8-10 mm, glandular hairy; petals 10-14 mm, violet. Mericarps c. 10 mm, with ascending, white hairs; apical pits small, shallow, glandular-hairy, without a furrow at the base. Beak 40-60 mm. 2n = 18. •{\i  Mountains of C. Italy}. It.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 22. E. rupestre} (Pourret ex Cav.) Guittonneau,{\i  Bull. Soc. Bot. Fr.}{\b  110}: 244 (1963) ({\i E. supracanum} L'Hér.). Acaulescent perennial. Leaves 1-3 cm, whitish-silvery on upper surface with dense, straight, short, appressed hairs, green and subglabrous beneath, pinnate, with intercalary leaflets; leaflets pinnatisect, with oblong-lanceolate, usually entire segments. Umbels with 1-3 flowers; bracts lanceolate, appressed-hairy. Sepals 5-7 mm; petals c. 10 mm, pale pink with darker veins. Mericarps c. 5 mm with ascending, white hairs; apical pits with conspicuous, sessile glands, without a furrow at the base. Beak 12-15 mm. 2n = 20.{\i  Dry, calcareous rocks.• N.E. Spain.} Hs.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 23. E. petraeum} (Gouan) Willd., {\i Sp. Pl.}{\b  3}: 626 (1800). Acaulescent perennial. Leaves 1-7 cm, ovate-oblong, subglabrous to densely hairy, sometimes canescent or somewhat silvery, without a conspicuous difference in indumentum between the surfaces, pinnate, with intercalary leaflets; leaflets pinnatisect, with oblong to linear-lanceolate, usually pinnatifid segments. Umbels with 1-5 flowers; bracts triangular-ovate to linear-lanceolate, appressed-hairy. Sepals 6-10 mm; petals 8-13 mm, equal or unequal, violet, pink or white, the 2 upper sometimes with a black basal patch. Mericarps 5-6 mm, with ascending, white hairs; apical pits without a furrow at the base. Beak 18-33 mm. 2n = 20.{\i  Rocky places, mainly in the mountains. Spain and S.W. France.} Ga Hs.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Very variable, especially in stature, size of leaves, nature and density of indumentum, width of bracts, size and colour of petals and length of beak of fruit. There is, however, much reticulation of these characters; on the information at present available it seems best to recognize 5 subspecies in Europe, with probably a sixth in Morocco.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Apical pits of mericarp eglandular, or with very few, usually minute
\par
  and sessile glands
\par
2 Leaves subglabrous and odourless; petals white with red veins
\par
  ....................................................................................... ({\b b}) subsp. {\b lucidum} 
\par
2 Leaves ± hairy, fetid; petals bright pink .................... ({\b a}) subsp. {\b petraeum} 
\par
1 Apical pits of mericarp with conspicuous stalked glands
\par
3 Petals equal, without a dark patch at the base ........ ({\b e}) subsp. {\b valentinum}
\par
3 Upper 2 petals larger than lower 3, and with a dark patch at the base
\par
4 Petals violet to purple; hairs on leaves often glandular
\par
  ................................................................................ ({\b c}) subsp. {\b glandulosum}
\par
4 Petals white to pale pink or lilac, with red or purple veins;
\par
  hairs on leaves usually eglandular ................................ ({\b d}) subsp. {\b crispum}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b petraeum}: Leaves somewhat hairy, fetid; petals usually larger than in other subspecies, bright pink, equal, without a dark patch at the base; apical pits of mericarps more or less glandular; beak 18-24 mm.{\i  Calcicole. • S. France} ({\i C. Pyrenees to Aude}).
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b lucidum} (Lapeyr.) D. A. Webb & Chater,{\i  Feddes Repert.}{\b  74}: 17 (1967) ({\i E. lucidum} Lapeyr.): Like subsp. ({\b a}) but leaves almost glabrous, not fetid, with ultimate segments usually broader; petals smaller, white, veined with pink.{\i  Usually calcifuge. • E. & C. Pyrenees}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b c}) Subsp. {\b glandulosum} (Cav.) Bonnier, {\i Fl. Compl. Fr.}{\b  2}: 88 (1913) ({\i E. macradenum} L'Hér.): Leaves usually rather densely glandular-pubescent, fetid; petals violet to purple, the upper 2 with a dark patch at the base; apical pits of mericarp with conspicuous stalked glands; beak 25-32 mm. •{\i  Pyrenees and N. Spain}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b d}) Subsp. {\b crispum} (Lapeyr.) Rouy,{\i  Fl. Fr.}{\b  4}: 101 (1897) ({\i E. cheilanthifolium} Boiss.): Leaves usually more or less densely white-pubescent, with rather short segments, often with revolute margins; petals white, pale pink or lilac, with red or purple veins, the upper 2 with a dark patch at the base; apical pits of mericarp with conspicuous stalked glands; beak 20-35 mm.{\i  Calcicole. E. Pyrenees and Corbières; E. & S. Spain}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b e}) Subsp. {\b valentinum} (Lange) D. A. Webb & Chater, {\i Feddes Repert.}{\b  74}: 17 (1967) ({\i E. petraeum} var.{\i  valentinum} Lange): Like subsp. ({\b d}) but upper petals without a dark patch at the base.{\i  Calcicole. • S.E. Spain} ({\i S. Valencia to N.E. Granada}).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 24. E. rodiei} (Br.-Bl.) Poirion,{\i  Feddes Repert.}{\b  74}: 14 (1967) ({\i E. petraeum} subsp.{\i  rodiei }Br.-Bl.). Acaulescent perennial. Leaves 3-5 cm, ovate, long-petiolate, subglabrous, pinnate, with intercalary leaflets; leaflets deeply pinnatisect; ultimate segments linear, entire. Peduncles 8-20 cm. Umbels with 2-8(-10) flowers; bracts long-acuminate. Sepals 9-11 mm; petals 15-20 mm, bright pink. Mericarps 7-8 mm, with ascending, pale brown hairs; apical pits eglandular, without a furrow at the base. Beak 30-35 mm.{\i  Fissures in dolomite rock. • S.E. France} ({\i N.W. of Grasse}). Ga.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Some variants of {\b 23}({\b a}) from shaded situations resemble {\b 24}, but their petals are always smaller and their leaves hairier.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 25. E. cicutarium} (L.) L'Hér. in Aiton,{\i  Hort. Kew. }{\b 2}: 414 (1789). Usually caulescent and annual, often somewhat fetid; stem up to 60(-100) cm. Leaves up to 15 cm, pinnate, without intercalary leaflets, with variable indumentum; leaflets pinnatifid to pinnate, but always divided for more than half-way to midrib. Umbels with up to 12 flowers; bracts brownish. Sepals 5-7 mm; petals 4-11 mm, purplish-pink, lilac or white. Mericarps 4-7 mm, with ascending hairs; apical pits eglandular. Beak 10-70 mm.{\i  Cultivated or disturbed ground, sandy places and dry grassland. Throughout Europe, but probably introduced in much of the centre, north and east.} All except Fa Is Sb.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  A very variable and difficult complex. Within the compass of the species as here delimited over 30 binomials have been proposed for European plants (omitting those of A. Jordan)but the delimitation of these supposed species has been attempted if at all, with reference only to immediately adjacent populations. The only recent attempt to survey the field more widely is that of Litardière in Briquet,{\i  Prodr. Fl. Corse}{\b  2}({\b 2}): 28-35 (1936), and we follow here his taxonomic scheme, subject to nomenclatural revisions suggested by Guittonneau,{\i  Bull. Soc. Bot. Fr}.
\par

\par
202}
\par