{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28   {\b  L. goulimyi} Rech. fil., {\i Anzeig. Akad. Wiss. }( {\b Wien}) {\b 93}: 96 (1956), from Greece (Evvoia), has stems up to 30 cm, and inflorescence with up to 10 flowers. Similar plants have been called{\i  L. elegans} var.{\i  elatius} Halácsy, and are not clearly distinguishable from few-flowered variants of{\b  5}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b  L. dolomiticum} Borbás, {\i Term.-Tud. Kozl.}{\b  29}: 208 (1897), restricted to dolomitic rocks in Hungary (near Pilisszentiván), differs principally in its shorter sepals (6-7 mm) and petals (10-16 mm).It has 2n = 28.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 10. L. leucanthum} Boiss. & Spruner in Boiss., {\i Diagn. Pl. Or. Nov.}{\b  1}({\b 1}): 55 (1843) (incl. {\i L. gyaricum }Vierh.). Like {\b 9} but leaves more or less densely covered with very short, stiff hairs, and petals white. Heterostylous. • {\i S.E. Greece; Aegean region} ({\i Yioura}). Gr.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  The original description mentions the remarkable indumentum, but most gatherings from Imittos (and some elsewhere) contain a proportion of subglabrous plants. It is possible that such plants are the result of hybridization with other species of this section (particularly{\b  9}), but there is insufficient evidence to support this view, and later authors have amended the description to include both glabrous and hairy variants.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 11. L. pallasianum} Schultes in Roemer & Schultes,{\i  Syst. Veg.}{\b  6}: 758 (1820) (incl. {\i L. borzeanum} E. I. Nyárády,{\i  L. czerniaevii} Klokov). Caespitose, with branched, woody stock and flowering stems up to 30 cm. Basal leaves linear to linear-spathulate, subacute; cauline linear. Stems, at least in lower part, and leaves more or less densely grey-pubescent. Inflorescence usually with 2-4 flowers. Sepals (4-)6-9 mm, lanceolate, acuminate, subglabrous, with hyaline, glandular-denticulate margin. Petals 15-20 mm, pale yellow. Capsule 4-6 mm. Heterostylous. 2n = 28.{\i  S. & E. Ukraine, S.E. Romania.} Rm Rs (?C, W, K, E).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 12. L. nodiflorum} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 280 (1753) (incl.{\i  L. luteolum} Bieb.). Glabrous annual; stems up to 40 cm, solitary or few, somewhat branched, winged. Lower leaves spathulate, upper linear, 1(-3)-veined, all with small brown glands at base and with rough, finely serrulate margin. Inflorescence very lax, the branches pseudoracemose, with subsessile terminal and axillary flowers. Sepals 8-13 mm, linear-subulate, acuminate. Petals c. 20 mm, yellow, with long claw. Capsule 5-6 mm. Homostylous.{\i  Mediterranean region, eastwards from S.E. France; Balkan peninsula; Krym.} Al Bu Cr Ga Gr It Ju Rs (K) Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Sect. LINUM. Leaves alternate, glabrous, without basal glands. Sepals eglandular. Petals free, blue, purple or pink. Stigmas capitate, clavate or linear. Homostylous or heterostylous.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 13. L. narbonense} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 278 (1753). Glabrous perennial; stems up to 50 cm, erect or ascending. Leaves 1-5(-10) mm wide, linear or lanceolate, long-acuminate, 1- to 3(-5)-veined. Sepals 10-14 mm, lanceolate, long-acuminate, with minutely serrulate-ciliate, scarious margins. Petals 2½-3 times as long as sepals, bright blue; stigmas linear. Capsule 7-9 mm, subglobose, with a narrow beak 2-2·5 mm. Heterostylous. 2n = 30. {\i W. & C. Mediterranean region, N. Spain, N.E. Portugal.} Bl Co Ga Hs It Ju Lu Si [He].
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 14. L. nervosum} Waldst. & Kit., {\i Pl. Rar. Hung.}{\b  2}: 109 (1802-3) (incl.{\i  L. jailicola} Juz.). Glabrous or puberulent perennial; stems up to 60 cm, erect. Leaves 3-6(-10) mm wide, lanceolate-acuminate, 3- to 5-veined, with scabrid margins. Sepals 7-11 mm, ovate-lanceolate, narrowly acuminate, with a setaceous apex and narrow, scarious, ciliate margins. Petals 2-2½ times as long as sepals, blue. Stigmas clavate. Capsule 6-10 mm, subglobose. Heterostylous. 2n = 18.{\i  S.E. Europe, extending northwards to} 53°{\i  N. in S.C. Russia}. Bu Ju Rm Rs (C, W, K).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 15. L. aroanium} Boiss. & Orph. in Boiss.,{\i  Diagn. Pl. Or. Nov. }{\b 3}({\b 1}): 96 (1853). Glabrous perennial; stems up to 40 cm, rather thin and flexuous, decumbent or ascending. Leaves 1-3(-4) mm wide, lanceolate-acuminate, 1-veined, with scabrid margins. Sepals 5-7 mm, lanceolate, narrowly acuminate, with narrow, scarious, ciliate margins. Petals 2½-3 times as long as sepals, blue. Stigmas clavate. Capsule 5-7 mm, subglobose. Heterostylous.{\i  Mountains of S. & C. Greece.} Gr.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 16. L. hologynum} Reichenb.,{\i  Fl. Germ. Excurs.} 833 (1832). Glabrous perennial; stems up to 40 cm, ascending or erect. Leaves 0·5-1·5 mm wide, linear or filiform, 1-veined, with smooth or sometimes scabrid margins. Sepals 5-8 mm, lanceolate, long-acuminate, with scarious, not ciliate, margins; lower part of mid-vein of sepals very prominent and more or less keel-like. Petals 2½ times as long as sepals, blue, violet, or pinkish-purple, Styles united almost to the apex; stigmas linear. Capsule 4-6 mm, subglobose. Homostylous. •{\i  Balkan peninsula, just extending into S.W. Romania.} Al Bu Gr Ju Rm.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Distinguished from all other European species of{\i  Linum} by its united styles.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 17. L. virgultorum} Boiss. & Heldr. ex Planchon,{\i  London Jour. Bot.} ({\i Hooker}){\b  7}: 172 (1848). Glabrous annual; stems 5-20 cm, erect or ascending below. Leaves up to 2 mm wide, linear-lanceolate, 1-veined, with scabrid margins. Sepals 6-8 mm, lanceolate-acuminate, with scabrid margins. Petals 2-2½ times as long as sepals, blue. Stigmas capitate. Capsule 4·5-5 mm, subglobose. Heterostylous.{\i  S. Greece} ({\i Athinai}). Gr. ({\i Anatolia.})
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    ({\b 18-21}).{\b  L. perenne} group. Glabrous perennials, sometimes caespitose and woody at the base; stems up to 60 cm, erect, ascending or decumbent. Leaves 1-3(-4) mm wide, linear or linear-lanceolate, entire, 1- to 3-veined. Sepals 3·5-6 mm, unequal, the outer narrower than the inner and with an acute or acuminate apex, the inner with a rounded or mucronate apex and entire, scarious margins. Petals 3-4 times as long as sepals, blue. Stigmas capitate. Capsule 3·5-7(-8) mm, subglobose, beak very short or absent. Usually heterostylous.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  A difficult group in need of further study. There is considerable variation in habit, width of leaves, number of flowers in the inflorescence, shape and size of petals, sepals and capsules, and posture of fruiting pedicels. At least some of this variation can be environmentally induced. The variation of most characters is almost continuous and intermediates between taxa can be found most of these taxa have therefore been treated here as subspecies, since the incomplete morphological separation is often accompanied by geographical isolation.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Homostylous, with anthers and stigmas at about the same height . {\b 21. leonii}
\par
1 Heterostylous, with anthers and stigmas at different heights
\par
2 Leaves very crowded, 6 mm or less ....................................... {\b 20. punctatum}
\par
2 Leaves moderately crowded, the longest at least 10 mm
\par
3 Pedicels deflexed or flexuous ................................................ {\b 19. austriacum}
\par
3 Pedicels erect, ± straight ............................................................. {\b 18. perenne}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 18. L. perenne} L.,{\i  Sp. Pl.} 277 (1753). Stems 10-60 cm, decumbent, ascending or erect. Middle cauline leaves 1- to 3-veined. Inflorescence usually many-flowered. Inner sepals acute or obtuse. Pedicels erect. Capsules 5-8 mm. Heterostylous. {\i C. & E. Europe, extending locally westwards to Britain and the}
\par

\par
208}
\par