{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 32. E. daucoides} Boiss.,{\i  Elenchus }28 (1838). Acaulescent perennial. Leaves up to 8 cm, eglandular-villous to glandular-pubescent, lanceolate or linear-lanceolate, pinnate, without intercalary leaflets; leaflets ovate to ovate-lanceolate, pinnatifid or dentate. Stipules whitish or pale brown. Peduncles 4-13 cm; umbels with 1-7 flowers; bracts lanceolate to ovate, white, somewhat hairy. Sepals 8-12 mm. Petals c. 10 mm, pale lilac or purplish, the upper 2 with a dark basal patch. Mericarps 7·5-9 mm, with ascending, white hairs; apical pits shallow, with conspicuous glandular hairs, without a furrow at the base. Beak 24-45 mm. 2n = 40, 60, 80.{\i  Calcareous mountain rocks. Spain.} Hs.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Plants from S.E. Spain (Sierra de Cazorla), with eglandular leaves, broad and distinct leaflets, peduncles 14-18 cm, and up to 9 flowers in the umbel, but otherwise identical with {\b 32}, have been distinguished as {\b E. cazorlanum} Heywood, {\i Bull. Brit. Mus.} ({\i Bot.}) {\b 1}: 116 (1954).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 33. E. manescavi} Cosson, {\i Ann. Sci. Nat.} ser. 3 ({\i Bot.}), {\b 7}: 205 (1847). Acaulescent perennial. Leaves up to 30 cm, lanceolate, pinnate, without intercalary leaflets; leaflets ovate, deeply pinnatifid, with acutely dentate segments. Peduncles up to 50 cm; umbels with 5-20 flowers; bracts suborbicular, herbaceous, united to form a cupule. Sepals 12-14 mm; petals 15-20 mm, purple. Mericarps 10-12 mm, with patent, brown or white hairs; apical pits eglandular, without or with a very slight furrow at the base. Beak 40-70 mm. 2n = 40.{\i  Meadows and pastures. • W. & C. Pyrenees, westwards from} c. 0° 20' {\i W.} Ga ?Hs.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 34. E. hirtum} (Forskål) Willd., {\i Sp. Pl. }{\b 3}: 632 (1800). Perennial; roots with globose tubers up to 1·5 cm. Stems 10-30 cm, ascending to erect, with patent, white hairs. Leaves up to 6 cm, deeply pinnatisect; lobes incise-dentate or pinnatifid; petiole at least as long as lamina in basal leaves, very short in upper cauline leaves. Umbels with 3-5 flowers; bracts broadly ovate, pale, scarious, hairy; pedicels 10-20 mm, stiffly deflexed in fruit. Sepals 6-7 mm, with short mucro; petals c. 8 mm, pale pink. Mericarps c. 5 mm; apical pits small, with a conspicuous furrow at the base. Beak (50)80-100 mm, not spirally twisted, with numerous long, brown or yellow hairs on the inner side.{\i  Sandy hillsides. S.E. Kriti} ({\i near Ierapetra});{\i  probably introduced}. [*Cr.] ({\i N. Africa, E. Mediterranean region}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  The only representative in Europe of the section{\i  Plumosa} Boiss., distinguished by the persistently straight beak to the mericarps, furnished with long, yellowish hairs on its inner side.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc   {\b 3.                Biebersteinia}               Stephan
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc By D.A. Webb.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Perennial herbs with pinnate leaves. Flowers actinomorphic, in a terminal spike. Stamens all fertile; filaments connate at the base. Style arising from the inner side of the carpel, near the base; stigmas united, capitate. Mericarps without beak.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. B. orphanidis} Boiss., {\i Diagn. Pl. Or. Nov.}{\b  3}({\b 1}): 113 (1853). Plant glandular-pubescent throughout. Stock stout, woody. Stem 35-50 cm, erect, stout. Leaves up to 35 cm, mostly basal but some cauline, alternate; all oblanceolate in outline, shortly petiolate, pinnate; leaflets deeply and irregularly pinnatisect, with toothed or lobed segments. Stipules large, scarious, brown. Spike 5-10 cm, compact. Sepals accrescent, unequal, the larger (outer) 15-20 mm in fruit, ovate-deltate, imbricate, connivent round the fruit. Petals shorter than sepals, pink, with long claw and obovate, fimbriate limb. Mericarps 6 × 4 mm, rugose, dark brown.{\i  Once collected in S. Greece} ({\i Killini Oros}); {\i perhaps extinct in Europe}. †Gr. ({\i E. Anatolia}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 84.             TROPAEOLACEAE}
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc Edit. N.A. Burges.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Flowers solitary, axillary, hypogynous, zygomorphic, hermaphrodite. Sepals 5, the dorsal produced into a spur; petals 5, clawed; stamens 8, free, unequal; ovary 3-locular, each loculus with 1 pendent ovule; placentation axile; style 1, apical; stigmas 3, linear. Fruit of 3 indehiscent, 1-seeded carpels, which separate from the central axis when mature.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc   {\b 1.                    Tropaeolum}                L.
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc By D.M. Moore.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Somewhat succulent herbs, procumbent or climbing by coiling petioles; leaves alternate; stipules usually absent.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. T. majus} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 345, [1231] (1753). Glabrous annual or perennial. Leaves 4-15 cm, peltate, orbicular, subentire to somewhat angular or sinuate. Flowers 3-6 cm in diameter, orange or red to yellow, or parti-coloured; spur 2-4 cm, straight, cylindrical; limb of petal orbicular, more or less equalling claw; 3 lower petals ciliate at base.{\i  Widely cultivated in gardens; frequently escaping and locally naturalized}. [Au Bl Ga Hs.] ({\i Peru to Colombia}.)
\par

\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 85.                ZYGOPHYLLACEAE}
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc Edit. †T.G. Tutin.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Herbs or shrubs. Leaves stipulate, usually pinnate. Flowers hermaphrodite, usually actinomorphic, (4-)5-merous. Disc present. Stamens usually twice as many as petals. Ovary superior, usually angled or winged. Fruit dry or fleshy.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Spiny shrub ................................................................................... {\b 5. Nitraria}
\par
1 Herbs, sometimes woody at base
\par
2 At least the basal leaves alternate; sepals persistent
\par
3 Perennial; not succulent; flowers with long pedicels ................. {\b 1. Peganum}
\par
3 Annual; succulent; flowers subsessile ...................................... {\b 6. Tetradidis}
\par
2 Leaves all opposite; sepals deciduous
\par
4 Stipules spinose ............................................................................ {\b 2. Fagonia}
\par
4 Stipules not spinose
\par
5 Flowers yellow; fruit spiny on the back ...................................... {\b 4. Tribulus}
\par
5 Flowers white; fruit not spiny ............................................. {\b 3. Zygophyllum}
\par

\par
204}
\par