{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 8. E. maritimum} (L.) L'Hér. in Aiton,{\i  Hort. Kew.}{\b  2}: 416 (1789). Annual or biennial; stems up to 20 cm, hairy. Leaves 0·5-2·5 cm, mostly basal, broadly ovate, obtusely dentate or pinnatifid. Flowers solitary, rarely in pairs; bracts ovate, brown; pedicels with appressed, often glandular hairs. Sepals 3-4·5 mm; petals 3 mm or less, pink or white, very often absent. Mericarps 3 mm, with short, brownish hairs and a few longer hairs near the apex; apical pits deep, usually eglandular, with a pronounced furrow at the base, delimited by a high, narrow ridge. Beak c. 10 mm. 2n = 20.{\i  Dry places, usually near the sea. N.W. Europe, from N.W. France to S.W. Scotland; W.C. Mediterranean region; one station in N.W. Spain}. Br Co Ga Hb Hs It Sa Si.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Outside Europe known only from Tenerife and a small island off Tunisia.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 9. E. sanguis-christi} Sennen,{\i  Ann. Soc. Linn. Lyon} nov. ser., {\b 72}: 12 (1926). Annual, at first acaulescent, but sometimes with procumbent, leafy flowering stems later. Leaves 1-1·5 cm, oblong-lanceolate, pinnatifid to pinnatisect with obtuse, suborbicular lobes, usually with one pair of free leaflets at the base, greyish with appressed hairs on both surfaces and with sessile, vesicular glands beneath. Flowers in umbels of 2-5; bracts 2, suborbicular, whitish; pedicels glandular-pubescent. Sepals 3·5-4 mm, with scarious border, scarcely mucronate; petals 6 mm, deep red. Mericarps 4 mm, with yellowish hairs of equal length; apical pits eglandular, with a rather narrow furrow at the base. Beak 12-15 mm. 2n = 20.{\i  Dry limestone rocks near the sea. • E. Spain}. Hs.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 10. E. corsicum} Léman in Lam. & DC.,{\i  Fl. Fr.} ed. 3,{\b  4}: 842 (1805). Perennial; stems up to 25 cm, hairy. Leaves 10-25 mm, suborbicular to oblong-ovate, crenate-dentate, the upper sometimes pinnatifid, grey-green, villous or densely pubescent. Flowers solitary or in umbels of 2-3; bracts 2, ovate, hairy, pale brown; pedicels with patent, eglandular hairs. Sepals 3-7 mm, without mucro; petals 5-10 mm, white or pink. Mericarps 3·5 mm, with numerous, long, white hairs; apical pits deep, glandular, without a furrow at the base. Beak 10-15 mm. 2n = 20(?18).{\i  Rocks near the sea. • Corse, Sardegna.} Co Sa.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 11. E. reichardii} (Murray) DC.,{\i  Prodr. }{\b 1}: 649 (1824) ({\i E. chamaedryoides} L'Hér.). Like {\b 10} but acaulescent; leaves 5-15 mm, green, sparsely hairy; flowers always solitary; bracts glabrous; hairs of pedicels appressed; petals white with purple veins; mericarps with appressed hairs and shallower apical pits. 2n = 20.{\i  Damp rocks. • Islas Baleares.} Bl ?Co.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 12. E. ruthenicum} Bieb., {\i Cent. Pl.}{\b  1}: t. 48 (1810) ({\i E. serotinum} Steven). Perennial; stems 15-50 cm, usually with patent hairs. Leaves up to 8 cm, triangular-ovate, with one pair of free pinnae at the base, the upper part pinnatifid; lobes dentate or pinnatifid. Umbels with 3-13 flowers; bracts several, linear-lanceolate, hairy, brown. Sepals 10-12 mm; petals c. 12 mm, violet. Mericarps c. 8 mm, densely hairy; apical pits glandular, without a furrow at the base. Beak 30-70 mm.{\i  Dry open habitats. Ukraine and Moldavia; once reported from Dobrogea.} Rm Rs (W, ?E).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 13. E. hoefftianum} C. A. Meyer,{\i  Mem. Acad. Sci. Pétersb}. ser. 6 ({\i Sci. Nat}.), {\b 7} (Bot.): 3 (1855) (incl. {\i E. neilreichii} Janka). Like {\b 12} but annual or biennial; leaves not more than 6 cm, occasionally without free pinnae at base; umbels with 1-8 flowers; sepals 7-10 mm; petals c. 8 mm; mericarps 6-7 mm, with apical pits more or less eglandular; beak 50-75 mm.{\i  S.E. & E.C. Europe.} Bu Cz Gr Hu Ju Rm Rs (W, ?K, E) Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 14. E. botrys} (Cav.) Bertol.,{\i  Amoen.} 35 (1819). Caulescent annual; stems (5-)10-40 cm, with long, patent or deflexed hairs. Leaves up to 5 cm, usually appressed-setose, oblong or ovate, at least the upper deeply pinnatifid or pinnatisect; lobes pinnatifid or dentate. Umbels with 1-4 flowers; bracts ovate-lanceolate, acute, subglabrous, brown. Sepals 10-13 mm; petals c. 15 mm violet. Mericarps 8-11 mm, with ascending, whitish hairs apical pits deep, eglandular, with two furrows at the base, the upper larger. Beak 50-110 mm. 2n = 40.{\i  Dry places. S. Europe; sometimes naturalized or casual further north.} Bl Bu Co Cr Ga Gr Hs It Ju Lu Sa Si Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 15. E. gruinum} (L.) L'Hér. in Aiton, {\i Hort. Kew. }{\b 2}: 415 (1789). Caulescent annual or biennial; stems 15-50 cm, with patent or deflexed hairs. Leaves up to 10 cm, ovate or ovate-lanceolate, deeply pinnatifid or pinnatisect, sometimes with a pair of free leaflets at the base; lobes and leaflets irregularly dentate or serrate. Umbels with 2-6 flowers; bracts lanceolate, acute, glabrous, whitish. Sepals 15-20 mm, usually with few eglandular hairs; petals 20-25 mm, violet. Mericarps c. 14 mm, with numerous ascending, whitish hairs; apical pits deep, foveolate, with a wide furrow at the base. Beak 60-110 mm.{\i  Dry grassland and maritime sands. Aegean region; Sicilia.} Cr Gr ?Hs Si [Ga].
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 16. E. ciconium} (L.) L'Hér. in Aiton,{\i  Hort. Kew.}{\b  2}: 415 (1789). Annual or biennial; stems 10-70 cm, with short, usually deflexed and glandular hairs. Leaves up to 9 cm, pinnate at least near the base; leaflets pinnatisect, the ultimate segments dentate or pinnatifid; intercalary lobes present. Umbels with 3-10 flowers; bracts ovate-lanceolate, densely hairy. Sepals 12-15 mm, glandular-hairy; petals c. 8 mm, bluish or lilac, with darker veins. Mericarps 9-11 mm, with numerous whitish hairs; apical pits deep, densely glandular, without a furrow at the base. Beak 60-100 mm. 2n = 18.{\i  Dry, sandy or disturbed ground. S. Europe, extending northwards to} 48° {\i N. in E.C. Europe.} Al Bl Bu Co Cr Cz Ga Gr Hs Hu It Ju Rm Rs (W, K) Sa Si Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 17. E. guicciardii} Heldr. ex Boiss.,{\i  Diagn. Pl. Or. Nov. }{\b 3}({\b 6}). 40 (1859). Dioecious perennial; stems up to 20 cm, with short, dense, white, appressed hairs. Leaves up to 5 cm, bipinnate, or pinnate with pinnatisect leaflets, silvery-sericeous on both surfaces; ultimate segments linear-lanceolate or -oblanceolate; intercalary leaflets present. Umbels with 2-7 flowers; bracts several, ovate-lanceolate, acute, brown, with eglandular hairs. Sepals 8-12 mm, with appressed, eglandular hairs and arista 2-3 mm; petals 8-10 mm, pink. Mericarps c. 9 mm, with very dense, ascending, white hairs; apical pits glandular-hairy, without a furrow at the base. Beak 45-65 mm. •{\i  High mountains of S. Albania and C. & N.W. Greece.} Al Gr.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 18. E. chrysanthum} L'Hér. ex DC.,{\i  Prodr. }{\b 1}: 645 (1824). Like {\b 17} but usually smaller, with leaves seldom more than 3 cm; bracts often obtuse, with glandular hairs; sepals with glandular hairs and mucro less than 2 mm; petals bright yellow; mericarps 6-7 mm.{\i  Open stony ground; calcicole. • Mountains of C. & S. Greece.} Gr.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 19. E. absinthoides} Willd., {\i Sp. Pl.}{\b  3}: 627 (1800). Dioecious perennial; stems up to 20 cm, glandular-pubescent at least above. Leaves up to 5 cm, bipinnate, or pinnate with pinnatisect leaflets, green, with relatively sparse, appressed hairs, some of them glandular; ultimate segments linear to linear-lanceolate; intercalary leaflets present. Umbels with 2-8 flowers. Sepals 10-13 mm, with patent, glandular hairs; petals c. 10 mm, violet. Mericarps as in {\b 17}. {\i Rocks and stony ground. Mountains of Macedonia.} Bu Gr Ju.
\par

\par
201}
\par