{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 29 Leaves silvery-sericeous on both surfaces ......................... {\b 17. guicciardii}
\par
29 Leaves ± hairy, but not silvery
\par
30 Leaflets pinnatifid or somewhat pinnatisect, with
\par
   oblong-lanceolate segments; flowers hermaphrodite ................. {\b 21. alpinum}
\par
30 Leaflets pinnate or deeply pinnatisect, with linear segments; dioecious
\par
31 Leaves not more than 5 cm, green, with usually rather few
\par
   glandular hairs; beak of fruit usually more than 40 mm ..... {\b 19. absinthoides}
\par
31 Leaves up to 10 cm, greyish, with numerous eglandular hairs; 
\par
   beak of fruit not more than 40 mm .......................................... {\b 20. beketowii}
\par
23 Intercalary leaflets absent
\par
32 Plant caulescent
\par
33 Most of the leaflets divided less than half-way to the midrib; 
\par
   apical pits of mericarp glandular ........................................... {\b 26. moschatum}
\par
33 Most of the leaflets divided more than half-way to the midrib; 
\par
   apical pits of mericarp eglandular .......................................... {\b 25. cicutarium}
\par
32 Plant acaulescent
\par
34 Bracts herbaceous, united to form a cupule .......................... {\b 33. manescavi}
\par
34 Bracts scarious, free or united only at base
\par
35 Annual or biennial .................................................................{\b 25. cicutarium}
\par
35 Perennial
\par
36 Many of the leaflets, at least of the later leaves of
\par
   the season's growth, entire .................................................. {\b 31. astragaloides}
\par
36 Leaflets of well-grown plants all pinnatifid or pinnatisect
\par
37 Mericarps 7·5-9 mm .............................................................. {\b 32. daucoides}
\par
37 Mericarps 5-7 mm .......................................................... {\b 27-30. acaule} group
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. E. gussonii} Ten.,{\i  Fl. Nap.}{\b  1},{\i  Prodr}.: 39 (1811). Perennial; stems 15-30 cm, with long, white hairs. Leaves up to 4 cm, broadly ovate, cordate, usually 3-lobed, crenate or obtusely dentate. Stipules large, dark brown. Umbels with 4-10 flowers; bracts suborbicular, glabrous, brown. Sepals 5-7 mm; petals c. 12 mm, purplish. Mericarps c. 6 mm, with short, appressed, white hairs; apical pits shallow, with a few glands, with or without a very shallow furrow at the base. Beak 40-60 mm. 2n = 20. {\i Grassland. • S. Italy.} It. 
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. E. guttatum} (Desf.) Willd.,{\i  Sp. Pl.} {\b 3}: 636 (1800). Perennial; stems 3-30 cm, with short, deflexed hairs. Leaves 1-2·5 cm, triangular to ovate, cordate or truncate at base, the lower undivided, the upper rather deeply 3-lobed. Umbels with 2-3 flowers; bracts triangular-lanceolate, acute, hairy. Sepals 11-13 mm; petals c. 10 mm, deep violet with a black basal spot. Mericarps c. 9 mm, with brownish, ascending hairs; apical pits with a few small glands and with a shallow furrow at the base. Beak 65-100 mm.{\i  Sandy or rocky places. S. Spain} ({\i Málaga prov}.). Hs. ({\i N. Africa}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 3. E. boissieri} Cosson,{\i  Bull. Soc. Bot. Fr. }{\b 20}: 244 (1873) ({\i E. asplenioides} auct. hisp., vix (Desf.) Willd.). Acaulescent perennial. Leaves 2-5 cm, ovate, variously lobed or pinnatifid in apical half, pinnatisect towards base and usually with a pair of distinct leaflets at base, covered with short, white, appressed hairs. Umbels with 1-5 flowers; bracts ovate, brown or greenish; pedicels densely glandular-hairy. Sepals c. 9 mm, with arista c. 1·5 mm; petals 12-15 mm, lilac with purple veins. Mericarps 7-9 mm, with somewhat appressed, white hairs; apical pits shallow, usually eglandular, without a furrow at the base. Beak 50-75 mm. 2n = 20. {\i Calcareous screes. • S. Spain} ({\i Sierra Nevada}). Hs.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 4. E. chium} (L.) Willd., {\i Phytogr.}{\b  1}: 10 (1794). Stems 5-50 cm, with deflexed hairs at least near the base. Leaves ovate, very variably dissected. Umbels with 2-8 flowers; bracts 3 or more, ovate, acute, brown. Sepals 5-7 mm; petals 5-9 mm, purplish. Mericarps 3·5-4·5 mm, with short, appressed, whitish hairs; apical pits small but rather deep, covered with minute glands, without a furrow at the base. Beak 30-40 mm. 2n = 20.{\i  Dry, mainly open habitats. Mediterranean region, Portugal.} Bl Co Cr Ga Gr Hs It Lu Sa Si Tu
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Very variable; the following subspecies may be recognized, but correlation of characters is rather poor. and intermediates are fairly common, especially in Corse.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b chium}: Robust annual or biennial. Leaves divided for 1/2-2/3 of distance to midrib, with obtusely dentate lobes. Pedicels often eglandular. Staminodes ciliate.{\i  Throughout the range of the species}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b littoreum} (Léman) Ball, {\i Jour. Linn. Soc. London} ({\i Bot.}) {\b 16}: 387 (1878) ({\i E. littoreum} Léman): Slender perennial. Leaves pinnatisect, with strongly dentate or pinnatifid lobes. Pedicels usually glandular. Staminodes glabrous. {\i S.E. Spain, Islas Baleares, Corse, S. France}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 5. E. laciniatum} (Cav.) Willd.,{\i  Sp. Pl.}{\b  3}: 633 (1800). Annual or biennial; stems 7-50 cm, with deflexed hairs at least near the base. Leaves 2-7 cm, oblong to broadly ovate, very variously dissected: undivided and irregularly serrate, or with 3 pinnatifid lobes, or almost bipinnatisect with linear-lanceolate segments. Umbels with 4-9 flowers; bracts 2, suborbicular to reniform, glabrous, brown; hairs on pedicels and sepals eglandular. Sepals c. 7 mm, distinctly mucronate; petals 7-10 mm, purplish. Mericarps 4·5-6·5 mm, with short, whitish hairs; apical pits shallow, eglandular, without a furrow at the base. Beak 35-90 mm. 2n = 20. {\i Maritime sands and other dry places. Mediterranean region, S. Portugal.} Al Co Cr Gr Hs It Lu Sa Si Tu [Ga].
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Plants from S.W. Spain (near Cádiz) show some approach to {\b 6} in the structure of their fruit, and may perhaps be hybrids.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Some plants from C. & E. Spain and the Aegean region differ in some or all of the following characters: bracts 3 or more, acute, white; calyx and pedicels glandular-pubescent; sepals scarcely mucronate; beak 30-40 mm. In S.W. Asia there are plants in which these characters are fairly well correlated, and they have been distinguished as subsp.{\b  pulverulentum} (Cav.) B. L. Burtt & P. Lewis,{\i  Kew Bull.} 1954: 405 (1954) ({\i E. cavanillesii }Willk.). In Europe, however, the correlation is poor, and no such distinction seems practicable.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 6. E. malacoides} (L.) L'Hér. in Aiton, {\i Hort. Kew.}{\b  2}: 415 (1789) (incl.{\i  E. subtrilobum} Jordan,{\i  E. aragonense} Loscos). Annual or biennial; stems (3-)10-60 cm, with deflexed hairs, often glandular. Leaves 2-10 × 1-5 cm, ovate to oblong, cordate, dentate, sometimes pinnatifid or 3-lobed. Umbels with 3-7 flowers; bracts several, ovate-orbicular, often hairy, whitish; hairs on pedicels and sepals usually glandular. Sepals 5-7 mm; petals 5-9 mm, purplish. Mericarps 5 mm, with white or brownish hairs; apical pits deep, usually glandular, with a wide, deep furrow at the base. Beak 18-35 mm. 2n = 40.{\i  Dry, open habitats. S. Europe, extending northwards in W. France to} 49°{\b  N.} Al Az Bl Co Cr Ga Gr Hs It Ju Lu Rs (K) Sa Si Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 7. E. alnifolium} Guss.,{\i  Fl. Sic. Prodr.}{\b  2}: 307 (1828). Annual; stems up to 50 cm, hispid with deflexed hairs. Leaves 5-10 cm, the lower cordate-suborbicular, undivided or slightly lobed, crenate, the upper ovate, dentate or serrate. Umbels with 4-7 flowers; bracts ovate, subacute, glabrous or ciliate, brown or whitish; pedicels and sepals glandular-hairy. Sepals 6-7 mm; petals c. 6 mm, pale pink. Mericarps c. 4 mm, with brownish hairs, apical pits deep, eglandular, without a furrow at the base. Beak 10-20 mm. 2n = 20. {\i Dry grassland. C. & S. Italy, Sicilia, Sardegna.} It Sa Si.
\par

\par
200}
\par