{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 1.                 Peganum}               L.
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc By †T.G. Tutin.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Herbs. Sepals 4-5, persistent; petals 4-5, neither cucullate nor clawed. Disc annular; stamens 12-15. Ovary globose. Fruit a capsule; seeds with endosperm.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28     {\b 1. P. harmala} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 444 (1753). Glabrous perennial 30-60 cm. Stems terete below, angled above, much-branched. Leaves alternate, deeply and irregularly pinnatisect, somewhat fleshy; lobes linear-lanceolate, acute; stipules small, linear, acuminate. Flowers 10-20 mm, solitary, pedicellate. Sepals linear, sometimes toothed near the base, persistent; petals greenish-white. Fruit 7-10 mm, stipitate, globose. 2n = 24.{\i  Steppes and dry waste places. Mediterranean region and S.E. Europe.} Bu ?Cr Gr Hs It Ju Rm Rs (W, K, E) Sa Tu [Ga Hu].
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 2.                    Fagonia}            L.
\par
 
\pard\f0\fs24\qc By †T.G. Tutin.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Herbs, often with spinose stipules. Sepals 5, deciduous; petals 5, clawed, caducous. Disc inconspicuous; stamens 10. Ovary 5-angled. Fruit a capsule; seeds with endosperm.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. F. cretica} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 386 (1753). Almost glabrous, procumbent perennial 10-40 cm. Stems branched, angled and striate. Leaves opposite, 3-foliolate, petiolate; leaflets 5-15 mm, lanceolate or linear-lanceolate, asymmetrical, rather coriaceous; stipules shorter than petioles, spinose. Flowers c. 10 mm, solitary, axillary. Sepals acuminate; petals purplish. Fruit 8-10 mm (including the persistent style), the 5 loculi very sharply angled and ciliate on the angles.{\i  Dry, stony places. S. part of Mediterranean region.} Bl Cr Gr Hs Si.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 3.                 Zygophyllum}          L.           
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc By †T.G. Tutin.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Herbs, sometimes woody at base. Leaves opposite. Sepals 4-5, deciduous; petals 4-5, clawed. Disc fleshy, angled; stamens 8-10. Ovary and style 4- to 5-angled. Fruit a capsule; seeds with endosperm.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Leaves with 4-5 pairs of leaflets .......................................... {\b 1. macropterum}
\par
1 Leaves with 1 pair of leaflets
\par
2 Plant arachnoid-tomentose .............................................................. {\b 4. album}
\par
2 Plant glabrous
\par
3 Leaflets obovate-orbicular to elliptical ........................................... {\b 2. fabago}
\par
3 Leaflets linear-oblong ................................................................ {\b 3. ovigerum}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. Z. macropterum} C. A. Meyer in Ledeb.,{\i  Fl. Altaica }{\b 2}: 102 (1830). Scabrid-pubescent perennial with a woody stock. Stems c. 10 cm, procumbent; rhizome fleshy. Leaves pinnate; leaflets 6-8 mm, 4-5 pairs, elliptical; rhachis rather wide, ending in a mucro; stipules membranous. Flowers solitary in the dichotomies of the stem. Sepals obovate-oblong; petals spathulate, orange. Fruit 15-25 mm, very broadly winged on the angles. {\i Saline places. S. Ural.} Rs (C, E). ({\i  W. & C. Asia.})
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. Z. fabago} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 385 (1753). Glabrous perennial. Stems 60-100 cm, erect. Leaves with 1 pair of obovate-orbicular to elliptical, asymmetrical, rather fleshy leaflets; rhachis forming a short projection between the leaflets; stipules herbaceous. Flowers solitary, axillary. Sepals oblong-ovate; petals oblong-ovate, obtuse or weakly emarginate, cream in upper half, orange below. Fruit 20-35 mm, oblong-cylindrical, at least 3 times as long as wide.{\i  Dry places. S.E. Europe, from }c. 28° {\i E. eastwards; naturalized locally in the W. Mediterranean region.} Rm Rs (W, K, E) [Ga Hs Sa].
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 3. Z. ovigerum} Fischer & C. A. Meyer ex Bunge,{\i  Arb. Naturf.Ver. Riga}{\b  1}: 200 (1847). Like {\b 2} but leaflets linear-oblong; fruit 10-15 mm, about as long as wide.{\i  Dry, saline soils. S.E. Russia, W. Kazakhstan.} Rs (E). ({\i W.C. Asia.})
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 4. Z. album} L. fil., {\i Dec. Prim. Pl. Rar. Hort. Upsal.} 11 (1762). Greyish, arachnoid-tomentose small shrub. Stems c. 40 cm, spreading, the smaller ones herbaceous and rather succulent. Leaves with 1 pair of elliptical or obovate, fleshy leaflets and a fleshy, oblong petiole; stipules scarious. Flowers solitary, axillary. Sepals elliptical; petals obovate, white, clawed. Fruit 5-10 × 4-7 mm, sharply 5-angled. {\i Sea-shores. Kasos and islets around Kriti; N.E. Spain.} Cr Hs. ({\i W. Asia, N. Africa}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 4.                    Tribulus}            L.
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc By †T.G. Tutin.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Herbs. Sepals 5, deciduous; petals 5, fugacious. Disc annular, 10-lobed; stamens 10. Ovary 5-lobed. Fruit splitting into 5 indehiscent portions; seeds without endosperm.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. T. terrestris} L., {\i Sp. Pl. }387 (1753). Pubescent, procumbent annual 10-60 cm. Stems simple or freely branched. Leaves opposite, often unequal, paripinnate; pinnae 5-8 pairs, elliptical or oblong-lanceolate. Flowers 4-5 mm; petals yellow. Fruit of 5 stellately arranged, hard, rugose carpels which are keeled and tuberculate on the back, and with 2 or more stout spines on the sides. {\i Dry open habitats, often as a weed. S. Europe, extending locally northwards to N. W. France, S.E. Czechoslovakia and E.C. Russia.} Al Au Bl Bu Co Cr Cz Ga Gr Hs Hu It Ju Lu Rm Rs (C, W, K, E) Sa Si Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Varies from green and rather sparsely appressed-pubescent to almost silvery-tomentose.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Two subspecies, based on the degree of hairiness and development of spines on the fruit, are sometimes recognized. These do not appear to have any discrete patterns of geographical distribution and are therefore best regarded as varieties.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 5.                   Nitraria }                L.
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc By †T.G. Tutin.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Much-branched, spiny shrub. Calyx 5-fid, fleshy, persistent; petals 5, cucullate, not clawed. Disc inconspicuous; stamens 15. Ovary oblong-pyramidal. Fruit fleshy; seeds without endosperm.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. N. schoberi} L., {\i Syst. Nat.} ed. 10, {\b 2}: 1044 (1759). Glabrous. Stems 50-200 cm. Leaves alternate or fasciculate, simple, oblanceolate, obtuse, fleshy, sessile; stipules membranous, caducous. Flowers c. 4 mm, shortly pedicellate, in dichasia. Calyx-lobes triangular; petals greenish-white. Fruit 10-12 mm, ovoid-conical.{\i  Saline soils. S.E. Europe, from S.E. Romania to W. Kazakhstan; local.} Rm Rs (K, E). ({\i W. & C. Asia.})
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 6.                   Tetradiclis}                Steven ex Bieb.  
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc By †T.G. Tutin.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Herb. Sepals 4, persistent; petals 4, very shortly clawed. Disc annular, inconspicuous; stamens 4. Ovary 4-angled, depressed in the middle. Fruit a capsule; seeds with little endosperm.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. T. tenella} (Ehrenb.) Litv., {\i Trav. Mus. Bot. Acad. Pétersb. }{\b 3}: 122 (1907) ({\i T. salsa} C. A. Meyer). Glabrous annual up to 10 cm. Leaves succulent, pinnatisect or laciniate, the lowest opposite, the others alternate. Flowers 0·5-1 mm, subsessile in the axils of the leaf-like bracts, forming a scorpioid, spicate inflorescence. Fruit c. 3 mm in diameter.{\i  Saline places. S. Ukraine; S.E. Russia} ({\i Volga delta}). Rs (W, K, E). ({\i C. & S. W. Asia.})
\par

\par
205}
\par