{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 86.             LINACEAE}
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc Edit. S.M. Walters.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Herbs or small shrubs. Leaves exstipulate, simple, entire. Inflorescence cymose. Flowers 4- or 5-merous, actinomorphic. Sepals free; petals usually free (sometimes joined at base); fertile stamens in one whorl, sometimes with a whorl of staminodes. Ovary superior, usually 8- or 10-celled. Styles usually free. Fruit a loculicidal capsule; seeds usually 1 in each loculus.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 Flowers 5-merous; seeds flat .............................................................{\b  1. Linum}
\par
Flowers 4-merous; seeds ovoid ........................................................{\b  2. Radiola}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 1.                      Linum}                   L.
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc By D.J. Ockendon & S.M. Walters.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Herbs or small shrubs. Leaves sessile, usually narrow, 1-veined or parallel-veined. Flowers 5-merous. Sepals entire. Petals clawed, longer than the sepals. Stamens 5, alternating with 5 tooth-like staminodes; filaments united at base. Capsule dehiscing with 10 valves, often with a short beak. Seeds flat.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Measurements of the capsule exclude the beak. Pedicel characters refer to the mature fruiting stage. The inflorescence is basically cymose, but in many species (Sect.{\i  Dasylinum, Linastrum} and {\i Linum}) well-developed inflorescences have branches which are pseudoracemose (cincinni). The difference between an irregular dichasium and an inflorescence composed of cincinni seems to be at least in part a question of individual development, and is not therefore of great taxonomic importance.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Unless otherwise stated, the species occur in rather open habitats on rocks or well-drained, calcareous or sandy soils.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Leaves all opposite; petals less than 7 mm, white 
\par
  (Sect.Cathartolinum) .............................................................. {\b 36. catharticum}
\par
1 At least upper cauline leaves alternate; petals usually coloured, 
\par
  if white then more than 7 mm
\par
2 At least upper leaves with a pair of glands at the base;
\par
  stem with narrow wings decurrent from leaf-bases (Sect. Syllinum)
\par
3 Annual; leaf-margins rough, finely serrulate ........................ {\b 12. nodiflorum}
\par
3 Perennial; leaf-margins smooth, entire
\par
4 Leaves hairy
\par
5 Petals white ........................................................................... {\b 10. leucanthum}
\par
5 Petals yellow ........................................................................ {\b 11. pallasianum}
\par
4 Leaves glabrous 
\par
6 Shrub up to 1 m, with thick, persistent leaves often
\par
  in dense clusters at the ends of woody branches ........................ {\b 1. arboreum}
\par
6 Plants with variably developed woody stock, sometimes with basal
\par
  leaf-rosettes; flowering stems not more than 60 cm, annual  
\par
7 Inflorescence subcapitate .......................................................... {\b 2. capitatum}
\par
7 Inflorescence ± laxly cymose, or flowers solitary ....... ({\b 3-9}).{\b  flavum }group
\par
2 Leaves without glands at the base; stem terete or striate
\par
8 Plant pubescent, with hairs more than 1 mm; uppermost leaves
\par
  usually with glandular margins (Sect. Dasylinum)
\par
 9 Annual, usually less than 20 cm ............................................. {\b 28. pubescens}
\par
9 Perennial, usually more than 20 cm
\par
10 Plant woody at base; flowering stems slender; short non-flowering 
\par
   shoots present at time of flowering ...................................... {\b 27. spathulatum}
\par
10 Plant not woody at base; flowering stems stout; non-flowering
\par
   shoots absent at time of flowering
\par
11 Middle cauline leaves usually glandular-ciliate; petals
\par
   pink (blue when dry) ................................................................ {\b 25. viscosum}
\par
11 Middle cauline leaves not glandular-ciliate; petals blue ......... {\b 26. hirsutum}
\par
8 Plant glabrous or with hairs less than 1 mm; uppermost
\par
  leaves eglandular
\par
12 Capsule less than 3·5 mm; petals yellow, pink or white  (Sect. Linastrum)
\par
13 Petals pink or white; capsule more than 2·7 mm
\par
14 Homostylous; petals 2-2½ times as long as sepals .............. {\b 32. teruifolium}
\par
14 Heterostylous; petals 3-4 times as long as sepals ............ {\b 33. suffruticosum}
\par
13 Petals yellow- capsule less than 2·7 mm
\par
15 Perennial; lower leaves opposite; sepals scarcely 
\par
   exceeding capsule .................................................................. {\b 29. maritimum}
\par
15 Annual; lower leaves alternate; sepals much exceeding capsule
\par
16 Leaf-margins smooth, entire
\par
17 Petals 4-6 mm; stems less than 30 cm .................................... {\b 30. trigynum}
\par
17 Petals 8-18 mm; stems more than 30 cm ...................................... {\b 31. tenue}
\par
16 Leaf-margins rough, finely serrulate (but sometimes revolute)
\par
18 Leaves narrowly lanceolate, more than 1 mm wide ................. {\b 34. strictum}
\par
18 Leaves linear or setaceous, often with revolute margins, 
\par
   less than 1 mm wide ................................................................. {\b 35. setaceum}
\par
12 Capsule more than 3·5 mm; petals blue (rarely red or white)..(Sect. Linum)
\par
19 Leaf-margins scabrid
\par
20 Homostylous; petals red or pink .......................................... {\b 22. decumbens}
\par
20 Heterostylous; petals blue
\par
21 Annual; stigmas capitate .................................................... {\b 17. virgultorum}
\par
21 Perennial; stigmas clavate
\par
22 Leaves with 3-5 veins; petals 20-24 mm ............................... {\b 14. nervosum}
\par
22 Leaves with 1 vein; petals 12-18 mm .................................... {\b 15. aroanium}
\par
19 Leaf-margins smooth
\par
23 Bracts with scarious margins; sepals 10-14 mm; 
\par
   petals 25-40 mm .................................................................... {\b 13. narbonense}
\par
23 Bracts without scarious margins; sepals 3·5-9 mm; petals 10-25 mm
\par
24 Styles united almost to the apex .......................................... {\b 16. hologynum}
\par
24 Styles free almost to the base
\par
25 Stigmas capitate; usually heterostylous ................. ({\b 18-21}). {\b perenne} group
\par
25 Stigmas linear or clavate; homostylous
\par
26 Sepals long-acuminate; petals red or pink .......................... {\b 22. decumbens}
\par
26 Sepals shortly acuminate; petals blue
\par
27 Usually biennial or perennial; stems several; capsule 4-6 mm .. {\b 23. bienne}
\par
27 Annual; stem usually solitary; capsule 6-9 mm .............. {\b 24. usitatissimum}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   SECT. SYLLINUM Griseb. Stem with narrow wings decurrent from leaf-bases. Leaves alternate, with a pair of glands at base. Sepals sometimes glandular-ciliate. Petals slightly joined at base of claw, usually yellow. Stigmas usually linear or oblong-linear. Homostylous or heterostylous.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. L. arboreum} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 279 (1753). Glabrous shrub up to 1 m. Leaves (5-)10-20 × 3-10 mm, spathulate, thick, persistent, 1-veined, with cartilaginous margins, often crowded in more or less dense rosettes. Inflorescence usually few-flowered, rather compact. Sepals 5-8 mm, lanceolate, acuminate, not ciliate. Petals 12-18 mm, yellow. Capsule (5-)6-8 × 5-6 mm, beaked, about equalling sepals.{\i  Limestone rocks. S. Aegean region.} Cr Gr. ({\i S.W. Anatolia and Rodhos.})
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b  L. caespitosum} Sibth. & Sm., {\i Fl. Graec. Prodr.}{\b  1}: 216 (1806), is smaller in all its parts, particularly the sepals (4·5 mm), but
\par

\par
206}
\par