{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 otherwise does not differ from {\b 1}. It occurs in Kriti, mainly on conglomerate rocks. {\b L. doerfleri} Rech. fil., {\i Österr. Bot. Zeitschr}. {\b 84}: 147 (1935), also described from Kriti, differs from {\b 1} in its minutely serrulate (not entire) sepals and somewhat smaller capsule. The status of both these variants is doubtful.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. L. capitatum} Kit. ex Schultes,{\i  Östreichs Fl.} ed. 2, {\b 1}: 528 (1814). Stock woody, with well-developed rhizomes often terminating in leaf-rosettes. Flowering stems 10-40 cm, robust, green, angular. Rosette-leaves oblong-spathulate, obtuse; cauline linear-lanceolate, acute. Inflorescence a subcapitate cyme, 5- to 10(-15)-flowered. Sepals 5-6 mm, oblong-lanceolate, acuminate. Petals 15-20 mm, yellow, with obovate, obtuse limb. Capsule c. 5 mm; beak c. 1 mm. Heterostylous.{\i  Rocky slopes on mountains. Balkan peninsula; C. & S. Italy}. Al Bu Gr It Ju.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b 3-9}).{\b  L. flavum} group. Glabrous perennials with a variably developed woody stock and erect or ascending flowering stems 5-60 cm. Sepals lanceolate, usually glandular-ciliate. Petals 10-35 mm, yellow. Capsule globose; beak 1-2·5 mm. Heterostylous.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 A difficult group, occurring in S.,C. and E. Europe, from Spain and S. Germany eastwards. Although the extreme taxa differ strikingly in habit, much of the variation is not clearly discontinuous, and it is not clear how much variation is genetically based.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Petals (22-)25-35 mm, gradually narrowed into claw;
\par
  beak of capsule c. 2 mm ...................................................... {\b 8. campanulatum}
\par
1 Petals 10-25(-30) mm, usually ± abruptly narrowed into claw;
\par
  beak of capsule usually c. 1 mm
\par
2 Inflorescence with 1-9 flowers; flowering stems not more 
\par
   than 20 cm ..................................................................................... {\b 9. elegans}
\par
2 Inflorescence with more than 10 flowers; flowering stems up to 60 cm
\par
3 Inflorescence with (20-)25-40 flowers; stock erect or
\par
  ascending, little-branched
\par
4 Sepals (5-)6-8 mm, scarcely exceeding capsule ............................ {\b 3. flavum}
\par
4 Sepals 8-10 mm, up to twice as long as capsule ....................... {\b 4. thracicum}
\par
3 Inflorescence usually with 10-20 flowers; stock much branched,
\par
  often with ± slender rhizomes
\par
5 Sepals 4-6·5 mm, shortly acuminate, usually not exceeding
\par
   capsule ...................................................................................... {\b 7. ucranicum}
\par
5 Sepals 5-9 mm, narrowly acuminate, clearly exceeding capsule
\par
6 Leaves of non-flowering stems obtuse; petals 20-25 (-30) mm .. {\b 6. uninerve}
\par
6 Leaves of non-flowering stems acute or subacute;
\par
  petals usually less than 20 mm .................................................... {\b 5. tauricum}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 3. L. flavum} L.,{\i  Sp. Pl.} 279 (1753). Robust, with erect flowering stems up to 60 cm from a compact stock, and few or no non-flowering rosettes. Leaves 20-35 × 3-12 mm, 3(-5)-veined, the lower spathulate, the upper lanceolate. Inflorescence branched, usually with 25-40 flowers. Sepals (5-)6-8 mm, lanceolate, acuminate. Petals c. 20 mm, with obovate limb and relatively short claw. Capsule 5-6 mm, beak c. 1 mm. {\i C. & S.E. Europe, extending to N.E. Italy and northwards to} c. 55°{\i  N. in C. Russia}. Al Au Bu Cz Ge Hu It Ju Po Rm Rs (C, W, K, E).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b  L. basarabicum} (Savul. & Rayss) Klokov ex Juz. in Komarov,{\i  Fl. URSS}{\b  14}: 133 (1949), from Moldavia and W. Ukraine, is said to differ mainly in its oblong-elliptical, 5-veined lower leaves and inflorescence with 2-20(-25) flowers. It could be placed here or with {\b 5}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 4. L. thracicum} Degen, {\i Österr. Bot. Zeitschr. }{\b 43}: 55 (1893). Like {\b 3} but stems usually 20-40 cm, more numerous, slender, ascending, and sepals 8-10 mm, narrowly acuminate, 1½-2 times as long as capsule. •{\i  Balkan peninsula}. Bu Gr Ju Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b L. rhodopeum} Velen.,{\i  Sitz.-Ber. Böhm. Ges. Wiss. }({\i Math.-Nat. Kl.}){\b  1895} ({\b 37}): 3 (1896), from S. Bulgaria and Samothraki, seems to differ only in its few stems and petals 16-18 mm. {\b L. turcicum} Podp., {\i Verh. Zool.-Bot. Ges. Wien}{\b  52}: 637 (1902), from Greece (Olimbos), is a robust plant with ovate, 5-veined leaves, narrowly-acuminate calyx and beak of capsule c. 2·5 mm. The status of these two variants is doubtful.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 5. L. tauricum} Willd.,{\i  Enum. Pl. Hort. Berol.} 339 (1809) ({\i L. serbicum} Podp.; incl.{\i  L. bulgaricum }Podp.,{\i  L. pseudelegans} Podp.,{\i  L. orientale} sensu Hayek). Stock much-branched, often woody, with numerous non-flowering rosettes and flowering stems up to 40 cm. Lower leaves narrowly spathulate, more or less acute, usually 3-veined; upper cauline leaves often lanceolate, 1(-3)-veined. Inflorescence usually 10- to 20-flowered. Sepals 6-8 mm, narrowly acuminate, much exceeding capsule. Beak of capsule c. 1 mm.{\i  S.E. Europe}. Al Bu Gr Ju Rm Rs (W, K) Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  The plant from Krym described by Willdenow is said by Russian authors to differ from other material from the U.S.S.R. in its lanceolate cauline leaves and persistent basal leaves. The more widespread plant in W. Ukraine, Moldavia and S.E. Romania (and also in Krym) has been distinguished as{\b  L. linearifolium} (Lindem.) Jáv.,{\i  Magyar Bot. Lapok}{\b  9}: 156 (1910), with linear-spathulate basal and linear or linear-lanceolate cauline leaves, the former often withered at time of flowering.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b  L. euboeum} Bornm., {\i Bot. Jahrb.}{\b  59}: 443 (1925), described from S.E. Greece (Evvoia), has 5-veined leaves and short, triangular-lanceolate sepals.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 6. L. uninerve} (Rochel) Jáv.,{\i  Magyar Bot. Lapok}{\b  9}: 156 (1910). Like {\b 5} but with dense central stock and thin, creeping, woody rhizomes, spathulate basal leaves c. 10 mm wide, and petals 20-25(-30) mm. •{\i  C. & S. Romania}. Rm.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 7. L. ucranicum} Czern., {\i Consp. Pl. Charc.} 12 (1859) (incl. L. uralense Juz.). Like {\b 5} but sepals not more than 6·5 mm, shortly acuminate and not exceeding capsule.{\i  From E. Ukraine across S.C. Russia to S. Ural.} Rs (C, W, E).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 8. L. campanulatum} L., {\i Sp. Pl}. 280 (1753). Stock woody, usually somewhat branched, and often with slender rhizomes and non-flowering rosettes. Flowering stems up to 25 cm, slender, erect or ascending. Lower leaves spathulate, the upper cauline usually oblanceolate, all, or at least the cauline, 1-veined. Inflorescence usually 3- to 5-flowered, subcorymbose. Sepals narrowly acuminate, enlarging in fruit and much exceeding capsule. Petals (22-)25-35 mm, with long claw, giving the appearance of a tubular corolla. Stigmas oblong-linear. Beak of capsule c. 2 mm. •{\i  W. Mediterranean region, from E. Spain to C. Italy.} Ga Hs It.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 9. L. elegans} Spruner ex Boiss.,{\i  Diagn. Pl. Or. Nov.}{\b  3}({\b 1}): 99 (1853). Dwarf plant with woody, branched stock and compact basal leaf-rosettes. Flowering stems usually less than 15 cm. Lower leaves obovate to spathulate, 3-veined, thick and with conspicuous hyaline margin. Inflorescence with (1-)3-7 flowers. Sepals 7-8(-10) mm, narrowly lanceolate, acuminate. Petals 15-20 mm, obovate, with relatively short claw. Capsule much shorter than sepals.{\i  Rocky places on mountains. • Balkan peninsula.} Al ?Bu Gr Ju.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Perhaps conspecific with{\b  L. boissieri} Ascherson & Sint. ex Boiss.,{\i  Fl. Or., Suppl.} 137 (1888), from N.W. Anatolia.
\par

\par
207}
\par