{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 32 Capsule not cristate
\par
33 Shrubs with slender stems
\par
34 Rays of the umbel and dead twigs persistent
\par
35 Rays of the umbel spinescent; cauline leaves and ray-leaves 
\par
   similar ............................................................................ {\b 47. acanthothamnos}
\par
35 Rays of the umbel not spinescent; ray-leaves
\par
   much wider than the cauline ........................................................ {\b 45. spinosa}
\par
34 Rays of the umbel and dead twigs not persistent
\par
36 Leaves mucronate; ray-leaves rhombic- or orbicular-ovate,
\par
    mucronate ............................................................................. {\b 44. squamigera}
\par
36 Leaves not mucronate; raylet-leaves ovate or obovate, not mucronate
\par
37 Capsule with long, slender tubercles .................................... {\b 46. glabriflora}
\par
37 Capsule with low, broad tubercles ............................................ {\b 43. bivonae}
\par
33 Herbs, sometimes woody at base
\par
38 Tubercles on capsule ± hemispherical
\par
39 Umbel with more than 5 rays ................................................... {\b 18. palustris}
\par
39 Umbel with 1-5 rays
\par
40 Stems scaly at base
\par
41 Raylet-leaves ovate-lanceolate or elliptical; cyathium long- 
\par
   pedunculate; capsule with small, hemispherical tubercles ...... {\b 36. carniolica}
\par
41 Raylet-leaves broadly rhombic; cyathium ± sessile;
\par
   capsule with large, irregular tubercles ......................................... {\b 37. duvalii}
\par
40 Stems not scaly at base
\par
42 Plant nearly or quite glabrous 
\par
43 Leaves acuminate
\par
44 Axillary rays not overtopping the umbel; raylet leaves 10-17 mm; 
\par
   raylet-leaves capsule deeply sulcate .................................... {\b 19. velenovskyi}
\par
44 Axillary rays overtopping the umbel; raylet-leaves 4-10 mm;
\par
   capsule scarcely sulcate .......................................................... {\b 20. soongarica}
\par
43 Leaves obtuse, rarely acute
\par
45 At least the lower leaves widest above the middle
\par
46 Ray-leaves much shorter than the rays; rays long, patent ...... {\b 42. clementei}
\par
46 Ray-leaves about as long as the rays, at least at 
\par
   flowering time; rays short, crowded ........................................ {\b 38. brittingeri}
\par
45 All leaves widest at or below the middle
\par
47 Middle cauline leaves linear-lanceolate, acute; capsule 5-7 mm
\par
   ............................................................................................ {\b 39. ruscinonensis}
\par
47 Middle cauline leaves broadly ovate to ovate-lanceolate,
\par
   obtuse or subobtuse; capsule 3·5-4 mm
\par
48 Leaves 10-30 mm; ray-leaves broadly ovate to suborbicular
\par
     ............................................................................................. {\b 40. welwitschii}
\par
48 Leaves 50-80 mm; ray-leaves narrowly rhombic .......... {\b 41. monchiquensis}
\par
42 Plant distinctly pubescent 
\par
49 Capsule sparsely tuberculate ................................................. {\b 30. oblongata} 
\par
49 Capsule densely tuberculate .................................................. {\b 38. brittingeri} 
\par
38 Some of the tubercles on capsule at least twice as long as wide,
\par
   often filiform 
\par
50 Stems scaly at base
\par
51 Rhizome swollen and jointed; stems c. 2 mm in diameter;
\par
   raylet-leaves triangular
\par
52 Stems terete .................................................................................. {\b 34. dulcis}
\par
52 Stems finely ribbed in upper part ............................................. {\b 35. angulata}
\par
51 Rhizome cylindrical; stems c. 5 mm in diameter; 
\par
   raylet-leaves ovate ........................................................................ {\b 12. villosa}
\par
50 Stems not scaly at base
\par
53 Leaves distinctly serrate or serrulate
\par
54 Stems stout; ray-leaves orbicular .................. ({\b 25-29}). {\b epithymoides} group
\par
54 Stems very slender; ray-leaves ovate to obovate
\par
55 Leaves linear-oblong; ray-leaves obovate cuneate ................. {\b 33. uliginosa}
\par
55 Leaves obovate to obovate-oblong; rayleaves ovate
\par
56 Upper leaves acute or subacute; all leaves about equal in size
\par
   .................................................................................................. {\b 38. brittingeri}
\par
56 Upper leaves rounded at apex; lower leaves much smaller 
\par
   than upper ............................................................................ {\b 32. polygalifolia}
\par
53 Leaves entire or almost entire 
\par
57 Plant glabrous
\par
58 Ray-leaves obovate or suborbicular ............. ({\b 25-29}).{\b  epithymoides} group
\par
58 Ray-leaves ovate
\par
59 Stems 70-150 cm, stout, erect; axillary rays numerous ...... {\b 21. ceratocarpa}
\par
59 Stems 5-30 cm, slender, decumbent; axillary rays absent .{\b 32. polygalifolia}
\par
57 Plant pubescent
\par
60 Leaves glabrous above; tubercles on capsule usually 
\par
   mixed long and short, the long not tapering ............................... {\b 22. hyberna}
\par
60 Leaves ± hairy above; tubercles on capsule all long,
\par
   tapering, purple-tipped
\par
61 Upper leaves acute; raylet-leaves reniform-deltate ............... {\b 24. squamosa}
\par
61 All leaves obtuse; raylet-leaves elliptical to ovate
\par
   ......................................................................... ({\b 25-29}).{\b  epithymoides} group
\par
10 Glands horned or with a truncate or emarginate outer margin
\par
62 Horns of glands short, often dilated and minutely lobed at apex; 
\par
   bracts between the male flowers absent
\par
63 Leaves obovate to suborbicular ........................................... {\b 57. myrsinitess}
\par
63 Leaves lanceolate
\par
64 Leaves lanceolate; seeds smooth ................................................. {\b 58. rigida}
\par
64 Leaves linear-lanceolate; seeds rugose-vermiculate ................... {\b 59. broteri}
\par
62 Horns of glands usually slender, or outer margin of
\par
  glands truncate or emarginate; bracts between the male
\par
  and female flowers present, hirsute or plumose (except 86).
\par
65. Annual; seeds not smooth
\par
66 Seeds tuberculate or rugulose
\par
67 Lower leaves narrowly linear, very numerous and usually
\par
   closely imbricate ........................................................................ {\b 61. aleppica}
\par
67 Lower leaves not narrowly linear and closely imbricate
\par
68 Seeds vermiculate-rugulose
\par
69 Seeds oblong, black, sometimes with white ridges ........... {\b 62. medicaginea}
\par
69 Seeds ovoid, brown or grey
\par
70 Leaves linear to linear-oblanceolate ........................................... {\b 64. exigua}
\par
70 Leaves obovate ........................................................................... {\b 67. peplus}
\par
68 Seeds tuberculate
\par
71 Capsule 2·5 × 2·8 mm ................................................... {\b 63. dracunculoides}
\par
71 Capsule 1·6-2 × 1·6 mm ............................................................. {\b 64. exigua}
\par
66 Seeds pitted or sulcate or both
\par
72 Seeds sulcate, sometimes also pitted
\par
73 Seeds sulcate and pitted; capsule with 2 ridges on each valve ... {\b 67. peplus}
\par
73 Seeds sulcate, not pitted; capsule not ridged
\par
74 Seeds transversely sulcate .......................................................... {\b 65. falcata}
\par
74 Seeds longitudinally sulcate ...................................................... {\b 66. sulcata}
\par
72 Seeds pitted, but not sulcate
\par
75 Raylet-leaves linear .............................................................. {\b 68. ledebourii}
\par
75 Raylet-leaves rhombic-trullate to transversely ovate
\par
76 Raylet-leaves obliquely rhombic-trullate ............................. {\b 69. taurinensis}
\par
76 Raylet-leaves rhombic-deltate to transversely ovate ............... {\b 70. segetalis}
\par
65 Perennial; seeds smooth or not
\par
77 Seeds pitted, rugulose or tuberculate
\par
78 Procumbent or ascending; umbel not developed or with not  
\par
   more than 3 rays
\par
79 Capsule not winged ................................................................... {\b 90. maresii}
\par
79 Capsule winged ................................................................. {\b 91. herniariifolia}
\par
78 Erect; umbel usually with more than 3 rays
\par
80 Seeds tuberculate ..................................................................... {\b 93. pithyusa}
\par

\par
214}
\par