{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 2-8 mm; raylet-leaves 4-10 × 2-8 mm; rays 20-35 mm, with 3 cyathia; capsule 4-5 × 4-5 mm, scarcely sulcate, with sparse, hemispherical tubercles.{\i  E.C. Russia} ({\i Kujbysevskaja Obl.}). Rs (E). ({\i Temperate Asia.})
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 21. E. ceratocarpa} Ten.,{\i  Fl. Nap.}{\b  1}, {\i Prodr. }28 (1811). Glabrous perennial 70-150 cm. Stems with numerous axillary rays. Leaves lanceolate, acute, margin weakly undulate, entire. Ray-leaves ovate-lanceolate; raylet-leaves ovate, narrowed at base. Rays 5-6, first 3- to 5-chotomous, then 2- to 3-chotomous. Capsule 4-5 mm, glabrous, with long flattened-conical tubercles, sulcate. Seeds c. 3 mm, dark grey.{\i  Dry places. • S. Italy, Sicilia.} It Si.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 22. E. hyberna} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 462 (1753). Perennial with a stout rhizome. Stems 30-60 cm, usually with axillary rays. Leaves oblong to oblanceolate-oblong, obtuse or emarginate, entire, glabrous above, sparsely villous beneath, turning pinkish-red. Ray-leaves like the cauline leaves. Rays (4-)5(-6). Capsule 5-6 mm, usually with short and long, slender tubercles. Seeds 3·4-3·8 mm. 2n = 36.{\i  Damp or shady places, mainly on mountains in the south. • W. & S. Europe, eastwards to N. Italy and northwards to Ireland.} Br Co Ga Hb Hs It Lu Sa.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Capsule distinctly pedicellate .......................................... ({\b a}) subsp. {\b hyberna}
\par
1 Capsule nearly sessile
\par
2 Glands with thickened, rugose margins; ripe seed smooth
\par
  .......................................................................................... ({\b b}) subsp. {\b insularis}
\par
2 Glands with thin, flat margins; ripe seed rugulose ............. ({\b c}) subsp. {\b canuti}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b hyberna}: Axillary rays usually 0-5; glands after flowering with thin, flat margins; capsule distinctly pedicellate; seeds nearly smooth, pale brownish-grey.{\i  Throughout most of the range of the species}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b insularis} (Boiss.) Briq.,{\i  Prodr. Fl. Corse}{\b  2}({\b 2}): 77 (1935) ({\i E. insularis} Boiss.): Axillary rays usually numerous; glands after flowering with thickened, rugose margins; capsule nearly sessile; seeds nearly smooth, pale brownish-grey.{\i  Corse, Sardegna, N. W. Italy}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b c}) Subsp. {\b canuti} (Parl.) Tutin,{\i  Feddes Repert. }{\b 79}: 55 (1968) ({\i E. canuti }Parl.): Axillary rays 0-1; glands after flowering with thin, flat margins; capsule subsessile; seeds rugulose, reddish.{\i  Maritime Alps.}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b  E. gibelliana} Peola, {\i Malpighia}{\b  6}: 249 (1892), is like subsp. ({\b c}) but with undulate glands. It occurs on serpentine in N.W. Italy and probably represents an ecotype of subsp. ({\b c}).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 23. E. gregersenii} K. Malýex G. Beck,{\i  Glasn. Muz. Bosni Herceg. }{\b 32}: 90 (1920). A softly pubescent perennial. Stems with non-flowering axillary branches. Leaves oblong, obtuse or emarginate, entire, glabrous above, pilose beneath. Raylet leaves broadly elliptical. Rays 4-5. Glands brown. Capsule glabrous, with 2 crests formed of elongated, confluent tubercles on the back of each valve.{\i  Woods and meadows on serpentine. • C. Jugoslavia.} Ju.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 24. E. squamosa} Willd., {\i Sp. Pl. }{\b 2}: 918 (1800). Pubescent perennial 45-60 cm. Rhizome nodose-thickened. Stems usually pubescent, with axillary rays. Leaves oblong to oblong-elliptical, entire or nearly so, appressed-pubescent, particularly beneath, very shortly petiolate, the lower obtuse, the upper acute. Ray leaves rhombic-elliptical; raylet-leaves reniform-deltate, obtuse, glabrous. Rays 5-8, usually dichotomous, slender. Capsule 5 mm, covered with cylindrical-filiform tubercles and often pubescent. Seeds 3 mm, smooth.{\i  Woods. S.E. Russia} ({\i Rostovskaja Obl}.). Rs (E). ({\i Caucasian region.})
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    ({\b 25-29}).{\b  E. epithymoides} group. Perennial, with a stout stock. Axillary rays few or none. Leaves lanceolate to elliptical or obovate, obtuse. Rays 4-5. Capsule with long, slender, often purple-tipped tubercles.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   A group of closely related taxa centred in the Balkan peninsula; some may be best regarded as subspecies, but further investigma tion is required.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Leaves serrate .................................................................... {\b 29. montenegrina}
\par
1 Leaves entire or serrulate near apex
\par
2 Plant glabrous ........................................................................ {\b 27. gasparrinii}
\par
2 Plant pubescent
\par
3 Leaves 3-4 times as long as wide; capsule c. 6 mm ................. {\b 26. lingulata}
\par
3 Leaves 2-3 times as long as wide; capsule 3-5 mm
\par
4 Leaves usually 30-50 mm; raylet-leaves elliptical;
\par
   capsule 3-4 mm .................................................................. {\b 25. epithymoides}
\par
4 Leaves usually 10-20 mm; raylet-leaves broadly ovate;
\par
  capsule 4-5 mm ........................................................................... {\b 28. fragifera}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 25. E. epithymoides} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} ed. 2, 656 (1762) ({\i E. polychroma} A. Kerner). Softly and rather densely pubescent. Stems 20-40 cm, robust, not woody below. Leaves usually 30-50 × 11-26 mm, 2-3 times as long as wide, obovate-oblong or elliptic-oblong, rounded at the base, entire or obscurely serrulate. Ray-leaves like the cauline but yellow, sometimes purple-tinged in flower; raylet-leaves elliptical. Rays about as long as ray-leaves; lobes of the cyathium as long as the cup; glands small. Capsule 3-4 mm. Seeds 2·5-2·9 mm, brown or yellowish-grey, with a brown, raised reticulum. 2n = 16. {\i Somewhat calcicole. C. & S.E. Europe, from S.E. Germany to C. Ukraine and S. Bulgaria.} Al Au Bu Cz Ge Gr Hu It Ju Po Rm Rs (W).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b   E. jacquinii} Fenzl ex Boiss. in DC.,{\i  Prodr.}{\b  15}({\b 2}): 136 (1862), of unknown origin, but perhaps from N. Jugoslavia, is like {\b 25} but has rugose seeds. It may be a hybrid or an abnormality.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 26. E. lingulata} Heuffel,{\i  Verh. Zool.-Bot. Ges. Wien}{\b  8}: 192 (1858). Like {\b 25} but cauline leaves 3-4 times as long as wide; rays much longer than ray-leaves; capsule c. 6 mm.{\i  Shady places, mainly in the mountains. • Albania, C. & S. Jugoslavia, S. Romania, N. Greece.} Al Gr Ju Rm.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 27. E. gasparrinii} Boiss. in DC., {\i Prodr. }{\b 15}({\b 2}): 125 (1862). Like {\b 25} but glabrous; stems woody below; leaves ovate-oblong or elliptical; ray-leaves obovate or suborbicular; capsule c. 4 mm; seeds minutely punctate or smooth.{\i  Damp places in the mountains. • C. Italy, Sicilia}. It Si.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 28. E. fragifera} Jan, {\i Cat. Pl. Phaen.} 76 (1818). Softly pubescent. Stems 10-30 cm, woody below. Leaves usually 10-20 mm, lanceolate to obovate, rounded at the base, entire. Ray-leaves ovate; raylet-leaves broadly ovate. Rays about as long as rayleaves. Capsule 4-5 mm, densely covered with filiform papillae, which become dark red on drying. Seeds 3·4-3·9 mm, brownish or bluish-grey, with a paler, raised reticulum.{\i  Rocky places. • W. Jugoslavia and Albania, just extending to N.E. Italy.} Al It Ju.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 29. E. montenegrina} (Bald.) K. Malýex Rohlena,{\i  Sitz.-Ber. Böhm. Ges. Wiss.} ({\i Math.-Nat. Kl.}) {\b 1912}({\b 1}): 110 (1913). Like {\b 28} but leaves elliptical or elliptic-lanceolate, serrate, narrowed at the base; ray-leaves suborbicular, but attenuate and subpetiolate at the base; seeds 2·5 mm, punctate-scabrid.{\i  Mountain rocks. • S. Jugoslavia.}  Ju.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 30. E. oblongata} Griseb., {\i Spicil. Fl. Rumel.}{\b  1}: 136 (1843). Stout, caespitose, densely pubescent perennial up to 80 cm. Stems robust, often with axillary rays below the terminal umbel.
\par

\par
218}
\par