{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 2n = 16.{\i  Europe, northwards to} 69°{\i  N. in Fennoscandia; mainly on mountains in the south}. All except Az Bl Cr Sa Sb Si.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  In Fennoscandia, the Alps and the Carpathians more or less perennial variants occur, which may have a slightly woody stock and much-branched stems. It does not seem possible to distinguish such plants sufficiently clearly from the widespread annual plant for them to merit subspecific rank.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 2.                   Radiola}                Hill
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc By S.M. Walters.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Like{\i  Linum} but flowers 4-merous; sepals toothed at apex; petals more or less equalling sepals; capsule dehiscing with 8 valves; seeds ovoid.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. R. linoides} Roth, {\i Tent. Fl. Germ.}{\b  1}: 71 (1788). Glabrous annual, rarely more than 10 cm; stems filiform, usually with free dichotomous branching. Leaves up to 3 mm, opposite, more or less elliptical, 1-veined. Flowers numerous, in dichasia; pedicels short; sepals c. 1 mm, (2-)3(-4)-toothed at apex; petals c. 1 mm, obtuse or emarginate, white. Capsule c. 1 mm, globose. 2n = 18. .{\i  Seasonally damp, bare, sandy or peaty ground; calcifuge. Most of Europe except the north-east and extreme north, but rare and local in much of the centre & south-east.} Al Be Bl Br Bu Co Cz Da Ga Ge Gr Hb †He Ho Hs Hu It Ju Lu No Po Rm Rs (B, C, W,E) Sa Si Su Tu.
\par

\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 87.            EUPHORBIACEAE}
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc Edit. †T.G. Tutin.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Dioecious or monoecious herbs or shrubs, often with latex. Leaves usually alternate, simple; usually stipulate. Flowers usually actinomorphic, often apetalous and sometimes without sepals. Male flowers with one to many stamens with free or connate filaments. Female flowers with a usually 3-locular superior ovary and 3 styles; disc usually present, annular, pulvinate or cyathiform; ovules 1-2 in each loculus. Fruit a capsule, often dehiscing explosively; seeds often carunculate.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Inflorescence usually umbellate; flowers without perianth,
\par
   in small groups surrounded by an involucre; latex present ...... {\b 7. Euphorbia}
\par
1 Inflorescence not umbellate; perianth present; flowers not
\par
  surrounded by an involucre; latex absent
\par
2 Plant with stellate hairs ........................................................ {\b 3. Chrozophora}
\par
2 Plant glabrous or with simple hairs
\par
3 Shrubs
\par
4 Spiny; leaves up to 1·5 cm, entire ........................................... {\b 2. Securinega}
\par
4 Unarmed; leaves up to 60 cm, palmately lobed ........................... {\b 6. Ricinus}
\par
3 Herbs, sometimes woody at base
\par
5 Leaves palmately lobed ................................................................ {\b 6. Ricinus}
\par
5 Leaves entire, serrate or crenate
\par
6 Leaves opposite ...................................................................... {\b 4. Mercurialis}
\par
6 Leaves alternate
\par
7 Perennial; leaves entire ........................................................... {\b 1. Andrachne}
\par
7 Annual, leaves crenate .............................................................. {\b 5. Acalypha}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 1.                  Andrachne}                  L.
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc By †T.G. Tutin.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Monoecious. Small shrubs. Flowers solitary or in small fascicles in the leaf-axils. Sepals 5-6, free or shortly connate; petals 5-6, very small in male flowers. Male flowers with 5-6 stamens, free or connate round the rudimentary ovary; glands between the petals and stamens free or connate. Female flowers with 3-locular ovary and 3 free or shortly connate styles.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. A. telephioides} L., {\i Sp. Pl. }1014 (1753). Stems up to 30 cm, green, simple or little-branched, arising from a brown, much branched stock. Leaves up to 10 mm, obovate to elliptical, acute or subacute, entire, glaucous, closely and evenly spaced; petioles 0·5-2 mm; stipules silvery, often red at base. Petals yellowish. Styles deeply 2-fid. Capsule 2-3 mm, subglobose, glabrous; seeds triquetrous, with a convex, punctulate back. {\i Dry places. Mediterranean region; Krym.} Bu Cr Gr Hs It Ju Rs (K) Si [Ga].
\par

\par


\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 2.                   Securinega}            Commerson
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc By †T.G. Tutin.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Dioecious. Shrubs or small trees, often spiny. Leaves distichous. Flowers axillary, solitary or fasciculate. Calyx 5- to 6-partite; petals absent. Male flowers with 5-6 stamens; glands alternating with the calyx-lobes, outside the stamens. Female flowers with 3, free or shortly connate styles.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. S. tinctoria} (L.) Rothm., {\i Feddes Repert.}{\b  49}: 276 (1940) ({\i S. buxifolia }auct., non (Poiret) Müller Arg.). Spiny shrub up to 150 cm. Leaves 8-15 × 2-4 mm, oblong-obovate, obtuse or emarginate, mucronulate, distichous on the long shoots; petiole c. 1 mm; stipules very small, subulate. Styles 2-fid. Capsule c. 3 mm, bluntly trigonous, with 3 shallow grooves.{\i  Sandy river-banks. • C. & S.W. Spain; E. Portugal.} Hs Lu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 3.                Chrozophora}                  A. Juss.
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc By †T.G. Tutin.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Monoecious. Annual herbs, covered with stellate hairs. Male flowers in terminal spike-like racemes or in axillary fascicles; calyx 5-fid; petals 5; stamens 5-10, monadelphous; rudimentary ovary absent. Female flowers solitary at the base of the male; calyx 10-partite; petals absent or very 
\par
small; ovary 3-locular; styles 3, 2-fid.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Literature: D. Prain, {\i Kew Bull. }{\b 1918}: 103 (1918).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 Plant green or grey-green; leaves cuneate at base; stamens 9-11
\par
  ....................................................................................................... {\b 1. tinctoria}
\par
Plant whitish; leaves truncate to subcordate at base; stamens 4-5(-7)
\par
 ........................................................................................................  {\b 2. obliqua}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. C. tinctoria} (L.) A. Juss.,{\i  Euphorb. Tent.} 84 (1824). Plant green or grey-green, rather thinly stellate-tomentose. Stems up to 50 cm, more or less branched. Leaves ovate to rhombic, entire or sinuate-dentate, subobtuse, cuneate at base; petiole as long as to twice as long as lamina. Male flowers with 9-11 stamens. Capsule mucronate, covered with peltate hairs; seeds c. 4 mm, rough. {\i Dry places near the coast. S. Europe.} Al Bl Bu Co Cr Ga Gr Hs It Ju Lu Rs (K) Sa Si Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. C. obliqua} (Vahl) A. Juss. ex Sprengel,{\i  Syst. Veg.}{\b  3}: 850 (1826) ({\i C. verbascifolia} (Willd.) A. Juss. ex Sprengel). Like {\b 1} but plant whitish, very densely stellate-tomentose; leaves truncate to subcordate at base; male flowers with 4-5(-7) stamens; capsule sparsely and shortly muricate. {\i Dry places. Mediterranean region. }Cr Gr Hs It ?Rs (K).
\par

\par
211}
\par