{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 Leaves narrowly obovate, obtuse, serrulate. Ray-leaves ovate, narrowed, or rounded at base. Rays 5, about equalling or somewhat exceeding the ray-leaves. Glands often only 2-3. Capsule 3·8-4·3 mm, sparsely covered with short tubercles, glabrous. Seeds 2-5 mm, brown.{\i  Shady places. S. part of Balkan peninsula and Aegean region.} Al Bu Cr Gr Ju Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 31. E. apios} L.,{\i  Sp. Pl.} 457 (1753). Decumbent to erect, pubescent perennial with a subterranean, napiform tuber 2-7 cm. Stems 5-20 cm, slender, scaly at base, with 0-1(-3) axillary rays. Leaves linear-lanceolate to oblong or obovate cuneate, obtuse to subacute, serrulate. Ray-leaves like the cauline; raylet-leaves suborbicular, cuneate. Umbel with 3-5 rays. Capsule c. 3 mm, with short, conical tubercles. Seeds c. 2 mm, smooth, dull, dark brown. 2n = 12.{\i  Dry, rocky or bushy places. S.E. part of Balkan peninsula; Aegean region; S.E. Italy}. Bu Cr Gr It.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b  E. dimorphocaulon} P. H. Davis, {\i Phyton }({\i Austria}) {\b 1}: 196 (1949), from Kriti, is probably a seasonal form of {\b 32}, flowering in autumn instead of spring, at the time when non-flowering shoots are present.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 32. E. polygalifolia} Boiss. & Reuter in Boiss.,{\i  Cent. Euphorb. }34 (1860). Glabrous or rarely pubescent perennial with a woody stock and numerous slender, decumbent or ascending stems 5-30 cm. Lower leaves obovate, much smaller than the upper; upper obovate-oblong; all obtuse, entire or serrulate. Ray-leaves ovate; raylet-leaves rhombic-ovate or reniform, mucronulate. Rays (3-)4-6. Capsule c. 3·5 mm, depressed-globose, with numerous stout, cylindrical tubercles. Seeds smooth, grey, shiny.{\i  Dry grassland and thickets. • N. & E. Spain.} Hs.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b  E. mariolensis} Rouy,{\i  Bull. Soc. Bot. Fr.}{\b  29}: 127 (1882), may be subspecifically distinct, but requires further investigation. It is pubescent, has narrower leaves and larger, less densely tuberculate capsules. It is recorded from calcareous hillsides in N.E. Spain and S. France.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 33. E. uliginosa} Welw. ex Boiss. in DC., {\i Prodr. }{\b 15}({\b 2}): 127 (1862). Glabrous or somewhat pubescent perennial 20-60 cm, with a stout, woody stock. Stems very slender, woody at base. Leaves 5-20 × 1-3 mm, linear-oblong, serrulate, obtuse, coriaceous. Ray-leaves linear-lanceolate to obovate-cuneate, shorter than umbel-rays; raylet-leaves broadly obtriangular. Rays 2-5. Capsule 2·5-3 mm, densely covered with short, clavate tubercles. Seeds 2 mm, smooth, dark brown.{\i  Temporary pools and wet heaths. • W. Portugal, N.W. Spain.} Lu Hs.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 34. E. dulcis} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 457 (1753). More or less pubescent perennial 20-50 cm. Rhizome long, thicker than the stems, fleshy, swollen and jointed. Stems slender, scaly at base, terete, with (0-)4-8 axillary rays. Leaves 25-70 mm, elliptical to oblong. Ray-leaves shorter than rays, like the cauline but wider; raylet-leaves triangular-subcordate, serrulate. Rays (3-)5(-8), slender. Glands dark purple after flowering. Capsule 3-4 mm, deeply sulcate, glabrous or pubescent, irregularly and sometimes sparsely covered with cylindrical and hemispherical tubercles. Seeds 2·3-2·6 mm, smooth, dark brown. 2n = 12, 24.{\i  Damp or shady places. • W. & C. Europe, extending locally southwards to C. Italy and Macedonia.} Au Be Bu Co Cz Ga Ge He Ho Hs Hu It Ju Lu Po Rm Rs (W) [Br Da].
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b  E. deseglisei }Boreau ex Boiss. in DC., {\i Prodr. }{\b 15}({\b 2}): 128 (1862), resembles{\b  34} in its leaves, but is said to differ from it in having the rays shorter than the ray-leaves. It occurs sporadically in France and may be an abnormality or a hybrid, but requires further investigation.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 35. E. angulata} Jacq.,{\i  Collect. Bot}{\b . 2}: 309 (1789). Like {\b 34} but glabrous; stems finely ribbed in the upper part, the ribs with sharp angles; leaves 10-25 mm; glands yellowish-red after flowering; capsule 2·5 mm. •{\i  S. & E.C. Europe.} Au Cz Ga Hs Hu It Ju Lu Po Rm Rs (W).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 36. E. carniolica} Jacq.,{\i  Fl. Austr.}{\b  5}: 34 (1778). Glabrous or slightly pubescent perennial 20-55 cm, with a stout, woody stock and long, creeping rhizome. Stems in small tufts, scaly at base, usually with axillary rays below the terminal umbel. Leaves (20-)40-70 mm, obovate-oblong, cuneate, obtuse or cuspidate, entire. Ray-leaves like the cauline; raylet-leaves ovate-lanceolate, narrowed at base, entire. Rays 3-5. Cyathium long-pedunculate. Glands brownish-yellow. Capsule 5 mm; valves keeled, covered with hemispherical tubercles. Seeds 3·2-3·7 mm, smooth, brown.{\i  Mountain woods and bushy slopes. • E. Alps, N. part of Balkan peninsula, E. Carpathians.} Au He It Ju Rm Rs (W).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 37. E. duvalii} Lecoq & Lamotte, {\i Cat. Pl. Centr. Fr.} 327 (1847). Glabrous perennial 20-40 cm, with a stout woody stock. Stems tufted, scaly at base, often with axillary rays below the terminal umbel. Leaves obovate to lanceolate, obtuse, subcordate at base, usually serrulate. Ray-leaves broadly elliptical to almost reniform, shorter than rays; raylet-leaves rhombic to suborbicular. Rays (3-)5. Cyathium more or less sessile. Capsule c. 4 mm, covered with large, irregular tubercles. Seeds c. 3 mm, smooth, brown.{\i  Rocky pastures and thickets. • S. France.} Ga.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 38. E. brittingeri} Opiz ex Samp.,{\i  Lista Esp. Herb. Port., Ap.}{\b  2}: 5 (1914) ({\i E. verrucosa} L. 1759, non L. 1753). More or less pubescent perennial 20-45 cm, with a woody stock and numerous slender, herbaceous stems without scales at the base, and usually with several axillary non-flowering shoots. Leaves 20-35 mm, oblong-elliptical to obovate, serrulate. Ray-leaves ovate to broadly elliptical; raylet-leaves yellowish at flowering time, green or purplish later. Rays (4-)5. Capsule 3-4 mm, weakly sulcate, with crowded tubercles. Seeds 2-2·5 mm, dark brown with paler, raised markings when quite ripe. {\i Woods and grassy places. • W. & C. Europe, N. & C. Italy, N. part of Balkan peninsula.} Al Au Be Cz Ga Ge Gr He Hs Hu It Ju Rm.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b   E. flavicoma} DC., {\i Cat. Pl. Horti Monsp.} 110 (1813), from Spain, S. France and N. Italy, is probably not specifically distinct from {\b 38}. It is a smaller plant with rather coriaceous leaves and 1-5 rays, which are usually shorter than the ray-leaves; the seeds are said to be rather larger than in {\b 38}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   {\b 39. E. ruscinonensis} Boiss., {\i Cent. Euphorb. }33 (1860). Nearly glabrous perennial 10-20 cm. Stems woody below, without scales at base, with non-flowering branches and axillary rays. Leaves serrulate, the lower elliptical, obtuse, sparsely hairy beneath, the middle linear-lanceolate, acute, glabrous; upper cauline and ray-leaves ovate or subcordate, obtuse. Rays 5, short. Capsule 5-7 mm, scarcely sulcate, covered with small, hemispherical-conical tubercles.{\i  Calcareous slopes. • S. France }({\i Corbiéres}). Ga.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 40. E. welwitschii} Boiss. & Reuter,{\i  Pugillus }108 (1852). Nearly or quite glabrous perennial with a napiform tuber. Stems 30-60 cm, stout, woody at base, often with axillary rays. Leaves 10-30 × 10-15 mm, broadly ovate to ovate-lanceolate, obtuse or subobtuse, serrulate or almost entire. Ray-leaves broadly ovate to suborbicular, obtuse or subobtuse, shorter than rays; raylet-leaves orbicular-cordate. Rays 5(-6). Capsule 3·5-4 mm, covered with hemispherical tubercles, sometimes
\par

\par
219}
\par