{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 80 Seeds rugulose or pitted
\par
81 Seeds rugulose; axillary rays aggregated to form a
\par
   whorl below the umbel ......................................................... {\b 77. biumbellata}
\par
81 Seeds pitted; axillary rays not aggregated into a whorl below
\par
   the umbel
\par
82 At least some leaves serrate; teeth slender ................................. {\b 10. serrata}
\par
82 Leaves entire, or serrulate towards the apex
\par
83 Capsule at least 4 mm wide; raylet-leaves lanceolate to ovate
\par
84 Ray-leaves little shorter than cauline leaves;
\par
   cyathial lobes very densely ciliate ............................................... {\b 78. boetica}
\par
84 Ray-leaves distinctly shorter than cauline leaves;
\par
   cyathial lobes sparsely ciliate ............................................. {\b 79. bupleuroides}
\par
83 Capsule not more than 3·5 mm wide; raylet-leaves reniform, 
\par
   deltate, rhombic, transversely ovate or suborbicular
\par
85 Glands truncate ..................................................................... {\b 80. nicaeensis}
\par
85 Glands with (1-)2 horns
\par
86 Glands with short horns; seeds irregularly or shallowly pitted
\par
87 Seeds evenly and shallowly pitted ........................................ {\b 74. petrophila}
\par
87 Seeds irregularly pitted ....................................................... {\b 75. transtagana}
\par
86 Glands with long horns; seeds evenly and fairly deeply pitted 
\par
88 Leaves linear-lanceolate, acute ..................................................... {\b 71. pinea}
\par
88 Leaves obovate to oblanceolate, usually obtuse and mucronate 
\par
89 Seeds less than 2 mm .......................................................... {\b 72. portlandica}
\par
89 Seeds more than 2 mm .............................................................. {\b 73. deflexa}
\par
77 Seeds smooth
\par
90 Raylet-leaves usually connate in pairs at base; capsule glabrous or
\par
   pubescent; stems usually flowering in the second year
\par
91 Capsule densely villous ........................................................ {\b 105. characias}
\par
91 Capsule glabrous
\par
92 Axillary rays arranged in 2-5 whorls below the umbel ...... {\b 104. heldreichii}
\par
92 Axillary rays not in whorls ............................................ {\b 103. amygdaloides}
\par
90 Raylet-leaves not connate; capsule glabrous; stems usually
\par
   flowering in the first year
\par
93 Capsule 4-6 mm wide
\par
94 Up to 15 cm, with horizontal rhizome (Greece) .................. {\b 82. orphanidis}
\par
94 Up to 70 cm, with vertical stock (widespread)
\par
95 At least some leaves sharply serrate ........................................... {\b 10. serrata}
\par
95 All leaves entire or minutely serrulate
\par
96 Glands with long horns; caruncle prominent, boat-shaped;
\par
   leaves imbricate and succulent ................................................ {\b 102. terracina}
\par
96 Glands emarginate, with short horns; caruncle minute, conical;
\par
   leaves imbricate, ± succulent
\par
97 Leaves obovate-oblong to ovate; rays 3-6 ................................ {\b 94. paralias}
\par
97 Leaves linear-oblong to linear-oblanceolate; rays 8-12 .... {\b 79. bupleuroides}
\par
93 Capsule not more than 4·5 mm wide
\par
98 Leaves palmately veined, somewhat coriaceous, often glaucus
\par
99 Leaves obviously irregularly and sharply serrulate near
\par
   the apex ...................................................................................... {\b 93. pithyusa}
\par
99 Leaves nearly or quite entire
\par
100 Umbel with (5-)7-20(-30) rays
\par
101 Umbel with not more than 8 rays
\par
102 Leaves (10-)40-75 mm ........................................................ {\b 80. nicaeensis}
\par
102 Leaves not more than 20 mm ....................................................... {\b 89. gayi}
\par
101 Umbel with up to 30 rays
\par
103 Leaves usually acute; seeds 1·5-2 mm ............................... {\b 92. seguierana}
\par
103 Leaves usually obtuse; seeds 2-2·5 mm .............................. {\b 80. nicaeensis}
\par
100 Umbel with (1-)2-5(-9) rays
\par
104 Leaves 17-27 mm wide, prominently 9- to 11-veined ...... {\b 81. bessarabica}
\par
104 Leaves not more than 17 mm wide, with fewer than 9 weak veins
\par
105 Ray-leaves longer than the cauline leaves ........................... {\b 88. variabilis}
\par
105 Ray-leaves not longer than the cauline leaves
\par
106 Plant with basal rosette of leaves
\par
107 Rosette-leaves oblanceolate, usually obtuse; axillary
\par
       rays 0-4(-7) ............................................................................... {\b 84. triflora}
\par
107 Rosette-leaves linear-oblanceolate, usually emarginate; axillary 
\par
        rays 0(-1) ............................................................................... {\b 85. saxatilis}
\par
106 Plant not forming rosettes
\par
108 Glands 2-horned
\par
109 Horns shorter than the gland
\par
110 All leaves less than 6 mm wide .......................................... {\b 76. matritensis}
\par
110 Some leaves more than 6 mm wide ...................................... {\b 83. barrelieri}
\par
109 Horns at least as long as the gland
\par
111 Leaves entire ............................................................................. {\b 84. triflora}
\par
111 Leaves finely serrulate .......................................................... {\b 83. barrelieri}
\par
108 Glands truncate or crescentic
\par
112 Leaves usually more than 10 mm wide ............................... {\b 80. nicaeensis}
\par
112 Leaves less than 10 mm wide
\par
113 Cyathial cup glabrous within ............................................... {\b 86. valliniana}
\par
113 Cyathial cup pubescent within
\par
114 Capsule 3-3·5 mm .................................................................... {\b 87. minuta}
\par
114 Capsule 2·5 mm ............................................................................ {\b 89. gayi}
\par
98 Leaves pinnately veined, usually membranous and not glaucus
\par
115 Leaves cordate at base
\par
116 Stems up to 25 cm; leaves not more than 30 mm .............. {\b 95. nevadensis}
\par
116 Stems up to 90 cm; leaves up to 80 mm ................................... {\b 96. agraria}
\par
115 Leaves rarely cordate at base
\par
117 Plant puberulent or pubescent
\par
118 Leaves lanceolate to ovate-lanceolate; umbel with up 
\par
       to 16 rays .............................................................................. {\b 98. salicifolia}
\par
118 Leaves linear to linear-lanceolate; umbel with up to 6 rays ........ {\b 99. esula}
\par
117 Plant glabrous
\par
119 Leaves usually emarginate or 3-cuspidate
\par
120 Leaves linear ................................................................................ {\b 99. esula}
\par
120 Leaves oblanceolate to elliptic-obovate
\par
121 Not rhizomatous; leaf-margins flat ............................................. {\b 99. esula}
\par
121 Rhizomatous; leaf-margins undulate ................................... {\b 100. undulata}
\par
119 Leaves not emarginate or 3-cuspidate
\par
122 Upper surface of leaves shiny .................................................... {\b 97. lucida}
\par
122 Upper surface of leaves dull
\par
123 Leaves linear, crowded, especially on the lateral shoots . {\b 101. cyparissias}
\par
123 Leaves lanceolate to broadly ovate, not crowded ........................ {\b 99. esula}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Subgen.{\b  Chamaesyce} Rafin. Usually procumbent annuals. Leaves stipulate, opposite, distichous, usually asymmetrical at base, petiolate. Cyathia axillary or clustered, not in umbels. Glands often with petaloid appendages. Seeds without a caruncle.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. E. nutans} Lag.,{\i  Gen. Sp. Nov.} 17 (1816) ({\i E. preslii} Guss.). Procumbent to ascending annual up to 60 cm. Stems pubescent above when young, otherwise nearly glabrous. Leaves 10-30(-36) × 5-10(-14) mm, elliptic-oblong, obtuse, subacute or acute, asymmetrical at base, serrate, occasionally sparsely pubescent above, glabrous beneath; petiole 1-2 mm. Stipules 0·5 mm, triangular, connate or free. Glands transversely ovate, yellow, with small, pale pink appendages. Capsule 1·8-2 × 2 mm, rather
\par

\par
215}
\par