{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 59. R. menkei} Weihe & Nees in Bluff & Fingerh., {\i Comp. Fl. Germ.}{\b  1}: 679 (1825). Stems procumbent, angled, with dense, patent hairs and unequal, yellowish, broad-based, deflexed prickles. Leaflets 3-5, slightly hairy above, hairy beneath, those of the upper leaves grey or grey-white tomentose; terminal leaflet elliptic-obovate, 2-3 times as long as its petiolule, cuspidate, rounded at base, unevenly serrate. Inflorescence more or less cylindrical, dense and subcorymbose at apex; axis hirsute, with numerous short glands and unequal acicles; prickles numerous strong, unequal, falcate. Sepals becoming appressed to fruit, green, tomentose, glandular and aculeolate; petals ovate-elliptical, white; stamens white, greatly exceeding the green or pink styles; receptacle hairy; carpels glabrous. {\i W. & C. Europe}. Au Be Br Cz Ga Ge He ?Ho Hu Ju Lu Po.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Related species include:
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b  R. bregutiensis} A. Kerner ex Focke, {\i Abh. Nat. Ver. Bremen }{\b 13}: 152 (1894). Au Ga He Hu Ju.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b  R. suavifolius} Gremli, {\i Beitr. Fl. Schweiz }35 (1870). Au Ga Ge He Hu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Series{\i  Rudes} Sudre. Stems rough and tuberculate; prickles scattered, very unequal, quite distinct from the smaller pricklets. Inflorescence-axis tomentose to glabrous, always with some glandular hairs.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 60. R. rudis} Weihe & Nees in Bluff & Fingerh., {\i Comp. Fl. Germ.}{\b  1}: 687 (1825). Small bush with deep purple, sulcate, glabrous not pruinose, very rough stems bearing numerous short glands and unequal, deflexed or falcate prickles. Leaves pedate; leaflets 3-5, shining and glabrous or glabrescent above, slightly tomentose and hairy beneath; terminal leaflet ovate to elliptical, acuminate, subcuneate at base, serrate-dentate, with coarse, angular, patent teeth. Inflorescence short, subcorymbose, with patent, cymose branches; axis tomentose (with short, unequal, purple glands longer than the tomentum on the pedicels) or glabrous; pedicels long; bracts lanceolate, the lower ones trifid; flowers 1·5-2 cm in diameter. Sepals appressed to fruit or imperfectly deflexed, triangular-attenuate, tomentose, glandular, slightly aculeolate; petals ovate-oblong, glabrescent, pink; stamens white, exceeding the green styles; receptacle and carpels glabrescent.{\i  N.W. & C. Europe.} Au Be Br Bu Cz Ga Ge He Ho Hu Ju Po Rs (W).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Related species include:
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b  R. amplus} Fritsch ex Halácsy,{\i  Verh. Zool.-Bot. Ges. Wien }{\b 41}: 262 (1891). Au Ge Hu.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b  R. ctenodon }(Sabr.) Fritsch,{\i  Exkursionsfl. Österr.} ed. 3, 214 (1922). Au Ge.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 61. R. melanoxylon} P. J. Mueller & Wirtgen ex Genev.,{\i  Mem. Soc. Acad.} ({\i Angers}){\b  24}: 133 (1868). Stems purplish-black, angled, glabrescent, not pruinose, with sparse glands and unequal, strong, curved or straight prickles. Leaflets usually 5, glabrescent above, pubescent or slightly tomentose beneath; terminal leaflet ovate, shortly acuminate, subcordate, coarsely and unevenly serrate-dentate. Inflorescence flexuous, lax, rather leafy; axis glabrous or glabrescent, with numerous unequal, purple glands, and strong patent, deflexed or rather falcate prickles; peduncles patent or ascending, long, few-flowered. Sepals patent after anthesis, green, tomentose, glandular and aculeolate; petals ovate, bright pink; stamens white, exceeding the green styles; carpels hairy.{\i  N.W. & C. Europe.} Au Be Br Cz Ga Ge He Hu Po Rm.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Related species include:
\par

\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b  R. albicomiformis} (Sabr.) Fritsch,{\i  Exkursionsfl. Österr}. ed. 3, 209 (1922). Au.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b  R. amphistrophos} (Focke) Fritsch,{\i  op. cit.} 212 (1922). Au.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b R. fagetanus} E. I. Nyárády in Savul.,{\i  Fl. Rep. Pop. Române}{\b  4}: 919 (1956). Rm.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b  R. omalus} Sudre, {\i Bull. Soc. Bot. Fr. }{\b 52}: 324 (1905). Cz Ga Ge He Hu Rm.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b R. rhodopsis }Sabr. ex Fritsch,{\i  Exkursionsfl. Österr.} ed. 3, 207 (1922). Au Ge.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b R. rubristamineus} E. I. Nyárády in Savul.,{\i  Fl. Rep. Pop. Române}{\b  4}: 918 (1956). Rm.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b R. schummelii} Weihe in Wimmer & Grab., {\i Fl. Siles. }{\b 2}({\b 1}): 47 (1829). Cz Ga Ge.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b  R. thelybatos} Focke, {\i Syn. Rub. Germ. }279 (1877). Au Ga Ge Hu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 62. R. vallisparsus} Sudre, {\i Bull. Soc. Étud. Sci. Angers }{\b 35}: 42 (1906). Luxuriant; stems long, terete to obtusely angled, becoming white-pruinose, glabrescent, scabrid, slightly glandular, with unequal, rather short, deflexed or falcate prickles. Leaflets 3(-4), rather large, bright green and glabrescent above, green and glabrescent or slightly tomentose beneath; terminal leaflet ovate to elliptical, twice as long as its petiolule, acuminate, subcordate, variably serrate. Inflorescence pyramidal, truncate, leafy, the axis tomentose and sparsely pubescent, glaucescent below, with short, purple or deep red glands, and strong to medium patent or curved prickles. Sepals patent to erecto-patent in fruit, green, tomentose, acuminate, aculeolate, with short glands; petals ovate-elliptical, emarginate, not contiguous, pink; stamens white, becoming reddish, not much exceeding styles; styles yellowish, becoming red; receptacle glabrescent; carpels pubescent. 2n = 28.{\i  N.W. & C. Europe}. Au Be Br Ga Ge He Hu Rm.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Related species include:
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b  R. alnicola} Sudre, {\i Bull. Acad. Int. Géogr. Bot.} ({\i Le Mans}) {\b 12}: 62 (1903). Ga. Treated by Sudre as a subspecies of{\i  R. vallisparsus,} but according to Gustafsson perhaps a diploid species; it occurs in the Pyrenees.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b R. glaucellus} Sudre,{\i  Bull. Assoc. Fr. Bot. }{\b 1}: 91 (1898). Cz Ga Ge He Hu Po.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b  R. persanimontis} E. I. Nyárády in Savul.,{\i  Fl. Rep. Pop. Române}{\b  4}: 920 (1956). Rm.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Series{\i  Histrices} Focke. Prickles very unequally distributed over the stem and showing a gradual transition into pricklets of varying lengths, acicles and stalked glands.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b  R. lasquiensis} Spribille, {\i Verh. Bot. Ver. Brandenb.}{\b  41}: 214 (1900), is a member of Ser. {\i Histrices}; it occurs in Poland, and its affinities are not known further.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 63. R. fuscater} Weihe & Nees in Bluff. & Fingerh.,{\i  Comp. Fl. Germ.}{\b  1}: 681 (1825). Stems obtusely angled, deep purple-black, glaucous, densely hairy, with numerous unequal glands, pricklets and subulate prickles. Leaflets 3-5, deep green and glabrescent above, yellowish-green and pubescent beneath; terminal leaflet ovate or suborbicular,about twice as long as its petiolule, acute, cordate, unevenly and rather shallowly serrate-dentate. Inflorescence short, leafy at base; pedicels long; axis densely hairy, with many unequal purplish glands rarely longer than the diameter of the axis; prickles numerous, strong, straight or falcate; bracts lanceolate; flowers usually more than 2 cm in diameter. Sepals patent or almost appressed to fruit, shortly pointed, green, tomentose, white-margined, glandular and aculeolate; petals broad, ovate,
\par

\par
21}
\par