{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28     {\b 26. L. hirsutum} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 277 (1753). Pubescent perennial; stems up to 45 cm, robust, erect, many-flowered. Leaves 10-45 mm, up to 10 mm wide, ovate or oblong, acute or obtuse, 3- to 5-veined, eglandular, except the uppermost. Sepals 8-12 mm, ovate-lanceolate. Petals about 2½ times as long as sepals, blue. Capsule 3·5-5 mm, subglobose; beak c. 0·5 mm, shortly acuminate. 2n = 16.{\i  E.C. & E. Europe, northwards to Czechoslovakia and S.C. Russia.} Al Au Bu Cz Gr Hu Ju Po Rm Rs (C, W, K) Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b hirsutum} (incl.{\i  L. lanuginosum} Juz.): Stems pubescent above; middle cauline leaves oblong, usually with 5 veins.{\i  Throughout the range of the species}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b glabrescens} (Rochel) Soó,{\i  Magyar Biol. Int. Munkái}{\b  6}: 132 (1933) ({\i L. pannonicum} A. Kerner): Stem almost glabrous above; middle cauline leaves linear-oblong, usually with 3 veins.{\i  Czechoslovakia, Hungary, Jugoslavia}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 27. L. spathulatum} (Halácsy & Bald.) Halácsy,{\i  Consp. Fl. Graec. }{\b 1}: 258 (1900) ({\i L. hirsutum }subsp.{\i  spathulatum} (Halácsy & Bald.) Hayek). Like {\b 26} but woody at the base; stems up to 25 cm, slender, decumbent, few-flowered.{\i  Mountains of N. Greece and S. Albania}. Al Gr.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 28. L. pubescens} Banks & Solander in A. Russell, {\i Nat. Hist. Aleppo} ed. 2,{\b  2}: 268 (1794). Pubescent annual with 1-2 stems on each plant; stems 7-20(-35) cm, slender, erect, few-flowered. Leaves up to 20 × 5 mm, lanceolate. Sepals 8-10 mm, narrowly lanceolate. Petals twice as long as sepals, pink. Capsule 3·5-4·5 mm, subglobose.{\i  Albania, Greece, Kriti.} Al Cr Gr.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Sect. LINASTRUM (Planchon) Bentham. Leaves mostly alternate, glabrous, without basal glands. Sepals glandular-ciliate. Petals free, yellow, pink or white. Stigmas linear or capitate, rarely clavate. Homostylous or heterostylous.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 29. L. maritimum} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 280 (1753) (incl. {\i L. mulleri} Moris). Glabrous or sometimes hairy perennial; stems up to 80 cm, erect or ascending. Leaves 2-4(-5) mm wide, lanceolate or narrowly elliptical; lower leaves opposite, 3-veined; middle and upper leaves alternate, 1-veined. Sepals 3 mm, ovate, acute, inconspicuously ciliate. Petals 8-15 mm, yellow. Stigmas clavate. Capsule 2-3 mm, wider than long, subglobose; beak minute or absent. Heterostylous. 2n = 20.{\i  Damp, usually saline soils. Mediterranean region and Portugal; E. Austria}. Au Bl Co Ga Gr Hs It Ju Lu Sa.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 30. L. trigynum} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 279 (1753) ({\i L. gallicum }L.). Glabrous annual; stems 10-30 cm, erect or ascending. Leaves 1-2(-3) mm wide, linear-lanceolate to narrowly elliptical, with smooth margins. Sepals 3-4 mm, shortly acuminate with glandular-ciliate margins and setaceous apex. Petals 4-6 mm, yellow. Stigmas linear. Capsule c. 2 mm, subglobose; beak c. 0·3 mm. Homostylous.{\i  S. Europe, extending northwards to C. France and E. Czechoslovakia.} Al Bl Bu Co Cr Cz Ga Gr Hs Hu It Ju Lu Rm Rs (W) Sa Si Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 31. L. tenue} Desf., {\i Fl. Atl.}{\b  1}: 280 (1798). Like {\b 30} but more robust; stems up to 70 cm; leaves 1-4(-5) mm wide, minutely serrulate; sepals 3-5 mm; petals 8-18 mm. Heterostylous.{\i  S. Spain, S. & C. Portugal.} Hs Lu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 32. L. tenuifolium} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 278 (1753). Glabrous (or sometimes hairy) perennial with few short non-flowering shoots; stems (10-)20-45 cm, erect, ascending or decumbent, slightly branched below. Leaves 0·5-1(-2) mm wide, linear, 1-veined; leaf-margins rough, minutely serrulate, flat or slightly inrolled. Sepals 5-8 mm, lanceolate-acuminate, 1-veined, with glandular ciliate, minutely serrulate margins. Petals 2-2½ times as long as sepals, pink or almost white. Styles patent; stigmas capitate. Capsule 2·7-3·5(-4) mm, subglobose; beak c. 0·7 mm, acuminate. Homostylous. 2n = 16, 18.{\i  C. & S. Europe, extending northwards to Belgium and C. Ukraine.} Al Au Be Bu Co Cz Ga Ge Gr He Hs Hu It Ju Po Rm Rs (W, K, E) Sa Si Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 33. L. suffruticosum} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 279 (1753). Like {\b 32} but sometimes woody at base, with many short non-flowering shoots; stems 5-40(-50) cm, procumbent with ascending lateral shoots, much branched below; leaves 0·2-1 mm wide, linear or setaceous with rough, minutely serrulate, strongly inrolled margins; sepals 4-6 mm, ovate-acuminate, 3-veined; petals white with a violet or pink claw, 3-4 times as long as sepals; styles erect; heterostylous. 2n = 72.{\i  S.W. Europe, from C. Spain to N.W. Italy and extending northwards to N.C. France.} Ga Hs It.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b suffruticosum}: Woody at base; sometimes densely puberulent-scabrid; stems 20-50 cm; leaves linear, rough; petals 20-30 mm.{\i  Spain}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b salsoloides} (Lam.) Rouy,{\i  Fl. Fr.}{\b  4}: 71 (1897) ({\i L. salsoloides} Lam.): Scarcely woody at base; stems 5-25 cm; leaves filiform, minutely serrulate; petals 10-20 mm.{\i  Throughout the range of the species}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Dwarf plants with very densely leafy stems and small imbricate leaves have been called{\b  L. ortegae} Planchon,{\i  London Jour. Bot.} ({\i Hooker}){\b  7}: 184 (1848), and may deserve subspecific or specific rank.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 34. L. strictum} L.,{\i  Sp. Pl.} 279 (1753). Annual; stems 10-45 cm, erect, inconspicuously hairy below. Leaves 1·5-3(-5) mm wide; margins minutely serrulate, very rough, often inrolled. Sepals 4-6 mm, ovate-lanceolate, long-acuminate, minutely serrulate and glandular-ciliate. Petals 6-12 mm, yellow. Stigmas capitate. Capsule 2-2·5 mm, subglobose; beak c. 0·3 mm. Homostylous. 2n = 18.{\i  S. Europe.} Al Bl Bu Co Cr Ga Gr Hs It Ju Lu Rs (K) Sa Si Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b strictum}: Stems robust, seldom branched below; inflorescence a dense, spike-like cyme or a corymb; flowers sessile, or subsessile with thick pedicels rarely longer than the calyx.{\i  Throughout the range of the species}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b corymbulosum} (Reichenb.) Rouy,{\i  Fl. Fr.}{\b  4}: 60 (1897) ({\i L. corymbulosum} Reichenb.,{\i  L. liburnicum} Scop.): Stems slender, often branched below; inflorescence lax, spreading; pedicels slender, equalling or longer than the calyx.{\i  Throughout the range of the species}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  The form of the inflorescence is very variable in both subspecies.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 35. L. setaceum} Brot., {\i Phyt. Lusit.} 43 (1800). Like {\b 34} but leaves 0·5 mm wide, setaceous with inrolled margins, densely crowded in middle of stem; inflorescence lax, much-branched. 2n = 18. {\i S. Spain, C. & S. Portugal.} Hs Lu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Sect. CATHARTOLINUM (Reichenb.) Griseb. Leaves opposite, without basal glands. Petals small, free, white. Stigmas capitate. Homostylous.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 36. L. catharticum} L.,{\i  Sp. Pl.} 281 (1753). Usually annual, very slender, glabrous, rarely more than 15 cm. Leaves 1-veined, lower obovate-lanceolate, upper lanceolate. Inflorescence a lax dichasium; flowers nodding in bud, on long slender pedicels. Sepals 2-3 mm, lanceolate, glandular-ciliate. Petals obovate, entire or shallowly emarginate, about twice as long as sepals, white, with a yellow claw. Capsule globose; seeds compressed.
\par

\par
210}
\par