{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 deeply sulcate, smooth, glabrous. Seeds 1·1 mm, ovoid-quadrangular, irregularly transversely rugulose, blackish.{\i  Disturbed ground. Locally naturalized in S. & S.C. Europe, and casual elsewhere}. [Au Az Bu Ga He Hs Hu It ?Ju Lu Rm Si.] ({\i North America}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. E. peplis} L.,{\i  Sp. Pl.} 455 (1753). Procumbent, somewhat fleshy, glabrous annual, usually with 4 branches from the base; branches up to 40 cm. Leaves (4-)5-11(-16) × 2·5-5(-10) mm, falcate-oblong, obtuse or emarginate, entire or almost so; base obliquely truncate; petiole 2-3 mm. Stipules 1·5 mm, subulate. Glands semicircular, reddish-brown, with small, paler appendages. Capsule (3-)3·5-4(-4·5) × 4-5 mm, rather deeply sulcate, nearly smooth, purplish. Seeds 3 mm, ovoid-pyriform, smooth, pale grey, occasionally brown-mottled.{\i  Sandy sea-shores, rarely inland. Coasts of S. & W. Europe, northwards to S.W. England.} Al Az Bl Br Bu Co Cr Ga Gr †Hb Hs It Ju Lu Rm Rs (W, K, E) Sa Si Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 3. E. polygonifolia} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 455 (1753). Procumbent, somewhat fleshy, glabrous annual; branches up to 18 cm. Leaves (4-)9-12·5 × (1-)2-3 mm, linear to linear-oblong, obtuse, minutely apiculate, somewhat asymmetrical at the base, entire; petiole 1·5 mm. Stipules 1 mm, triangular. Glands suborbicular, concave. Capsule 3 × 3 mm, shallowly sulcate, nearly smooth. Seeds 2 mm, ovoid-pyriform-quadrangular, smooth, pinkish-grey.{\i  Sea-shores. Naturalized in S. France and N. Spain.} [Ga Hs.] ({\i E. North America}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 4. E. humifusa} Willd.,{\i  Enum. Pl. Hort. Berol., Suppl}. 27 (1813). Procumbent, glabrous, more or less glaucous annual, with 4 branches from the base; branches up to 13 cm. Leaves (2-)5-8(-9·5) × (1-)2-4(-5) mm, ovate, obtuse, asymmetrical at base, serrulate, especially in the upper half; petiole 0·5-1 mm. Stipules c. 1 mm, subulate-filiform. Glands transversely ovate to suborbicular, concave, stipitate. Capsule 1·5 × 1·5-2 mm, transversely rugulose, nearly smooth. Seeds 1·2 mm, ovoid, smooth, mottled grey-brown.{\i  Stony or disturbed ground. S. Ukraine and S.E. Russia; naturalized elsewhere in parts of S. & C. Europe as a weed and ruderal.} Rs (W, K, E) [Au Co ?Cz Ga Ge He Hu It ?Ju Po Rm Sa Si.] (W. & C. Asia.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b  E. serpens} Kunth in Humb., Bonpl. & Kunth,{\i  Nov. Gen. Sp.}{\b  2}: 52 (1817), has smaller, entire leaves, stipules often connate, and smaller, more or less quadrangular seeds. It is native of America, and occurs frequently as a casual in S. France and Spain, where it is perhaps locally naturalized.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 5. E. chamaesyce} L.,{\i  Sp. Pl.} 455 (1753). Procumbent, glabrous or villous annual with branches up to 30 cm. Leaves (1-)3-7(-11) × (1-)2·5-4·5(-6) mm, asymmetrically ovate-suborbicular to oblong, obtuse or emarginate, oblique at the base, nearly entire or obscurely serrulate; petiole c. 1 mm. Stipules up to 1 mm, triangular. Glands suborbicular, with small, whitish appendages. Capsule 2 × 2 mm, rather deeply sulcate, smooth, glabrous to densely patent-pubescent. Seeds 1·2 mm, ovoid-quadrangular, irregularly tuberculate-rugulose, greyish.{\i  Open habitats. S. Europe, extending northwards to E.C. Russia.} Al Bl Bu Co Cr Ga Gr Hs It Ju Lu Rm Rs(C, W, K, E) Sa Si Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b chamaesyce}: Glabrous or pubescent. Leaves less than 10 mm, suborbicular-ovate, usually emarginate, often entire. Appendages not more than twice as wide as the glands usually entire.{\i  Throughout the range of the species}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b massiliensis} (DC.) Thell. in Ascherson & Graebner,{\i  Syn. Mitteleur. Fl.}{\b  7}: 457 (1917): Villous. Leaves usually up to 10 mm, ovate-oblong to oblong, obtuse, serrulate. Appendages more than twice as wide as the glands, often 3-lobed.{\i  S.E. Europe and C. Mediterranean region.} Bu Cr Gr It Ju Rm Rs (W, K) Sa Si.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 6. E. maculata} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 455 (1753). Procumbent annual, with branches up to 20 cm. Stems pubescent. Leaves (2-)4-7(-13) × (0·5-)1-2(-4) mm, ovate-oblong to oblong, slightly curved, obtuse or subacute, obliquely truncate at the base, serrulate near the apex, sparingly pubescent above, more densely so beneath, usually with a purple blotch on the midrib; petiole 0·5-1 mm. Stipules c. 1 mm, triangular-subulate. Glands transversely ovate, with small, purplish appendages. Capsule 1-1·3 × 1·2-1·5 mm, shallowly sulcate, smooth, sparsely covered with closely appressed hairs. Seeds 0·8 mm, ovoid-quadrangular, with 3-4 transverse furrows on each face, brownish.{\i  Naturalized as a weed and ruderal. S. & S.C. Europe.} [Au Az Bu Ga ?Ge He Hs Hu It Ju Lu Rm Sa Si.] ({\i North America}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 7. E. prostrata} Aiton,{\i  Hort. Kew. }{\b 2}: 139 (1789). Procumbent annual, with branches up to 20 cm. Stems usually glabrous below, pubescent above. Leaves (2-)8-10(-15) × (1-)4-6(-8) mm, ovate, obtuse, asymmetrical at the base, serrulate to subentire, sparsely pubescent to glabrescent on both surfaces; petiole c. 1 mm. Stipules c. 1 mm, triangular, the upper free, the lower often connate. Glands transversely ovate, with small appendages. Capsule 1·5 × 1·5 mm, shallowly sulcate, sharply keeled, smooth, glabrous except for the ciliate keels. Seeds 1 mm, ovoid-quadrangular, deeply transversely furrowed, greyish.{\i  Naturalized as a weed and ruderal. Mediterranean region and Portugal.} [Gr Hs It Lu Si.] ({\i North America}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Subgen.{\b  Esula }Pers. Usually erect herbs or sometimes shrubs. Leaves exstipulate, usually alternate, symmetrical at base, sessile or subsessile. Cyathia almost always in umbels. Glands without petaloid appendages. Seeds usually with a caruncle.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Sect. PACHYCLADAE (Boiss.) Tutin. Shrubs with stout branches. Leaves alternate, entire, present only on the current year's growth. Glands suborbicular, entire or irregularly lobed. Capsule with indurated pericarp. Seeds smooth.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 8. E. stygiana} H. C. Watson, {\i London Jour. Bot.} ({\i Hooker}) {\b 3}: 605 (1844). Branches erect. Leaves c. 150 × 40 mm, oblong, mucronate, glaucous and sparsely pubescent beneath, dark green above. Ray-leaves oblong, villous. Rays c. 4, repeatedly branched. Glands suborbicular. Capsule c. 6 mm, shallowly sulcate, rounded, verrucose.{\i  Rocky, bushy places, particularly in small volcanic craters; }500-800{\i  m. • Açores. }Az.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 9. E. dendroides} L.,{\i  Sp. Pl.} 462 (1753). Stems up to 200 cm, apparently dichotomously branched. Leaves 25-65 × 3-8 mm, oblong-lanceolate, obtuse, mucronulate. Ray-leaves like the cauline but rather shorter and wider; raylet-leaves broadly rhombic, yellowish. Rays 5-8, dichotomous. Glands suborbicular, irregularly lobed. Capsule 5-6 mm, the valves laterally compressed, smooth or nearly so. Seeds 3 mm, laterally compressed, grey. 2n = 18.{\i  Rocky places near the sea. Mediterranean region. }Al Bl Co Cr Ga Gr Hs It Ju Sa Si
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Sect. CARUNCULARES (Boiss.) Tutin. Herbs. Leaves sharply serrate. Glands transversely ovate, truncate or obscurely crescentic. Capsule with indurated pericarp. Seeds smooth or minutely punctate.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 10. E. serrata} L.,{\i  Sp. Pl.} 459 (1753). Glabrous, glaucous perennial 20-50 cm. Stock slender, woody. Leaves linear-oblong
\par

\par
216}
\par