{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 Male flowers with membranous perianth; stamens numerous; filaments repeatedly branched. Female flowers with caducous, membranous perianth; ovary 3-locular. Seeds 3, carunculate.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. R. communis} L.,{\i  Sp. Pl.} 1007 (1753). Annual herb or shrub up to 4 m. Leaves up to 60 cm, peltate, palmately 5- to 9-fid; lobes lanceolate to ovate-lanceolate, acuminate, irregularly dentate. Panicle erect. Fruit 10-20 mm, with long conical projections or smooth. Seed 9-17 mm, smooth, shiny, reddish-brown to blackish, marked in various shades of white, grey or brown; caruncle large.{\i  Cultivated for the oil obtained from the seeds and for ornament. Naturalized in S. & S.C. Europe.} [Al Az Bl Bu Co Cr Ga Gr Hs It Ju Lu Rm Sa Si.] ({\i Tropics.})
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 7.                    Euphorbia}                          L.
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc By A.R. Smith & †T.G. Tutin.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Monoecious. Herbs or small shrubs, with latex. Flowers in small groups surrounded by a more or less deeply lobed involucre with 4-5 (rarely more) glands at the top and usually pubescent within, the whole forming a {\i cyathium}. 'Inflorescence' of cyathia usually umbellate, often with axillary rays below the umbel. Perianth absent. Male flowers of a single stamen jointed to the pedicel. Female flowers solitary, pedicellate, surrounded by several male flowers; ovary 3-locular, with 3, usually free, styles; ovules solitary in each loculus. Seeds usually carunculate.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  In the following account the inflorescence is referred to as an umbel, though it is not strictly one. The leaves subtending the primary branches (rays) of the umbel are called ray-leaves and those subtending the ultimate branches raylet-leaves. The bracts, when present, subtend the individual male flowers in the cyathium.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  In addition to the species described below several others are reported as casual aliens in S. Europe, and some of them may be in process of naturalization. These include{\b  E. indica} Lam., {\i Encycl. Méth. Bot. }{\b 2}: 423 (1788),{\b  E. missurica} Rafin., {\i Atl. Journ.}{\b  1}: 146 (1832), {\b E. engelmannii} Boiss.,{\i  Cent. Euphorb. }15 (1860) and{\b  E. rhytisperma} (Klotzsch & Garcke) Engelm. ex Boiss. in DC.,{\i  Prodr.}{\b  15}({\b 2}): 43 (1862).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b  E. marginata} Pursh,{\i  Fl. Amer. Sept.}{\b  2}: 607 (1814), from North America, is cultivated for ornament and frequently escapes in S.E. Europe. It is an annual with the ray- and raylet-leaves with wide, petal-like, white margins and the glands with conspicuous white appendages.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Literature: E.Boissier in DC., {\i Prodr. }{\b 15}({\b 2}): 7-187 (1862).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Stipules present; leaves usually asymmetrical at the base, opposite, 
\par
  but not decussate
\par
2 Ripe seeds smooth
\par
3 Leaves linear-oblong ........................................................... {\b 3. polygonifolia}
\par
3 Leaves ovate or falcate-oblong
\par
4 Seeds 3 mm ...................................................................................... {\b 2. peplis}
\par
4 Seeds less than 1·5 mm ............................................................... {\b 4. humifusa}
\par
2 Ripe seeds rugulose 
\par
5 Capsule hairy 
\par
6 Capsule hairy on the keels only ................................................... {\b 7. prostrata} 
\par
6 Capsule hairy all over 
\par
7 Hairs on capsule closely appressed ............................................. {\b 6. maculata}
\par
7 Hairs on capsule patent .......................................................... {\b 5. chamaesyce} 
\par
5 Capsule glabrous 
\par
8 Leaves 10-30(-36) mm, serrate ....................................................... {\b 1. nutans} 
\par
8 Leaves (1-)3-7(-11) mm, entire or obscurely serrulate .......... {\b 5. chamaesyce}
\par
1 Stipules absent; leaves symmetrical at the base, usually alternate
\par
9 Leaves opposite and decussate; capsule spongy ......................... {\b 60. lathyris} 
\par
9 Leaves alternate, rarely opposite but then not decussate; 
\par
  capsule indurate
\par
10 Glands suborbicular or ovate, sometimes irregularly lobed but
\par
   neither horned nor with the outer margin truncate or emarginate
\par
11 Shrubs with stout branches; glands suborbicular, entire or irregularly
\par
   lobed
\par
12 Leaves 25-65 mm, glabrous; capsule smooth or nearly so .... {\b 9. dendroides}
\par
12 Leaves c. 150 mm, sparsely hairy beneath; capsule verrucose . {\b 8. stygiana}
\par
11 Herbs, or slender, wiry dwarf shrubs; glands ovate, entire
\par
13 Annual or biennial; stems usually solitary
\par
14 Capsule winged .................................................................... {\b 54. pterococca}
\par
14 Capsule not winged
\par
15 Capsule tuberculate
\par
16 Tubercles in 2 rows on each valve of the capsule;
\par
    seeds verruculose .................................................................... {\b 53. cuneifolia} 
\par
16 Tubercles not in 2 rows on each valve of the capsule; seeds smooth
\par
17 Tubercles ending in a long bristle; capsule usually indehiscent
\par
   ................................................................................................ {\b 17. akenocarpa}
\par
17 Tubercles not ending in a bristle; capsule dehiscent
\par
18 Lowest raylet-leaves like the ray-leaves; capsule not more
\par
   than 2·5 mm; seeds reddish ....................................................... {\b 51. serrulata}
\par
18 Lowest raylet-leaves markedly different from the ray-leaves; 
\par
   capsule 2-3 mm; seeds olive-brown .................................... {\b 50. platyphyllos}
\par
15 Capsule not tuberculate
\par
19 Seeds reticulate-rugose or transversely sulcate
\par
20 Leaves entire; seeds with 3 transverse depressions on each face 
\par
   ........................................................................................ {\b 56. phymatosperma}
\par
20 Leaves serrate in the upper half; seeds reticulate-rugose ... {\b 55. helioscopia}
\par
19 Seeds smooth
\par
21 Capsule glabrous, even when young
\par
22 Capsule indehiscent, scarcely sulcate ................................. {\b 17. akenocarpa}
\par
22 Capsule dehiscent, usually distinctly sulcate
\par
23 Leaves entire or weakly sinuate; umbel with 3 rays;
\par
   capsule 5-7 mm ......................................................................... {\b 14. lagascae}
\par
23 Leaves sharply serrate; umbel with 4-5 rays; capsule c. 3 mm .. {\b 15. arguta}
\par
21 Capsule hairy, at least when young
\par
24 Leaves rounded and mucronulate at apex; capsule 3-4 mm,
\par
   persistently sericeous or with scattered bristles .................... {\b 17. akenocarpa}
\par
24 Leaves, except the lowest, acute; capsule c. 2·5 mm,
\par
   pubescent when young, becoming glabrous ...................... {\b 16. microsphaera}
\par
13 Perennial herbs or small shrubs; stems usually numerous
\par
25 Capsule smooth or nearly so
\par
26 Stems slender, not scaly below ........................................... {\b 13. corallioides}
\par
26 Stems stout, scaly below
\par
27 Rhizome without tubers; raylet-leaves longer than wide;
\par
   seeds not more than 3·2 mm ......................................................... {\b 12. villosa}
\par
27 Rhizome with large tubers; raylet-leaves wider than long;
\par
   seeds c. 4 mm .......................................................................... {\b 11. isatidifolia}
\par
25 Capsule tuberculate or cristate 
\par
28 Seeds minutely tuberculate ................................................... {\b 52. pubescens}
\par
28 Seeds quite smooth, rarely shallowly vermiculate-rugose
\par
29 Procumbent or ascending; inflorescence usually reduced
\par
   to a single cyathium, rarely with 2-3 short rays
\par
30 Stems not scaly at base; glands 8 ........................................... {\b 49. capitulata}
\par
30 Stems scaly at base; glands 4 ........................................... {\b 48. chamaebuxus}
\par
29 Erect; inflorescence always of several cyathia
\par
31 Plant with a large, subterranean, napiform tuber;
\par
   stems usually less than 20 cm ......................................................... {\b 31. apios}
\par
31 Plant without a large, subterranean tuber; stems more than 20 cm
\par
32 Capsule with 2 crests on the back of each carpel ................ {\b 23. gregersenii}
\par

\par
213}
\par