{\rtf1\ansi \deff4\deflang1033{\fonttbl{\f4\froman\fcharset0\fprq2 Times New Roman;}}{\colortbl;\red0\green0\blue0;\red0\green0\blue255;\red0\green255\blue255;\red0\green255\blue0;\red255\green0\blue255;\red255\green0\blue0;\red255\green255\blue0;\red255\green255\blue255;\red0\green0\blue128;\red0\green128\blue128;\red0\green128\blue0;\red128\green0\blue128;\red128\green0\blue0;\red128\green128\blue0;\red128\green128\blue128;\red192\green192\blue192;}{\stylesheet{\widctlpar \f4\fs20\lang2057 \snext0 Normal;}{\*\cs10 \additive Default Paragraph Font;}}{\info{\author dddd}{\operator dddd}{\creatim\yr1998\mo11\dy5\hr13\min2}{\revtim\yr1998\mo11\dy5\hr13\min2}{\version2}{\edmins0}{\nofpages4}{\nofwords1007}{\nofchars5742}{\*\company  }{\vern57431}}\widowctrl\ftnbj\aenddoc\hyphcaps0 \fet0\sectd \linex0 {\*\pnseclvl1\pnucrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl2\pnucltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl3\pndec\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl4\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl5\pndec\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl6\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl7\pnlcrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl8\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl9\pnlcrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}
\pard\plain \ \f4\fs20\lang2057 {\fs28 to ovate-lanceolate, acute or obtuse, with fine, patent teeth; the upper broadly ovate at base. Ray-leaves lanceolate-acuminate to suborbicular; raylet-leaves ovate to suborbicular, yellow. Rays 3-5, once to several times dichotomous. Capsule 5-6 mm. Seeds c. 3 mm, smooth or shallowly punctate, grey.}{\i\fs28  S.W. Europe, extending northwards to}{\fs28  46\'b0 }{\i\fs28 N. in W. France and eastwards to}{\b\fs28  }{\i\fs28 Pantellaria.}{\fs28  Bl Ga Hs It Lu Sa Si.
\par 
\par  Sect. HELIOSCOPIA Dumort. Herbs or shrubs. Glands transversely ovate, not truncate, emarginate or with horns. Bracts present between the male flowers. Capsule with indurated pericarp.
\par 
\par  (A) Perennial; capsule smooth or more or less tuberculate or rugulose; seeds smooth, rarely weakly reticulate.
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 11. E. isatidifolia}{\fs28  Lam.,}{\i\fs28  Encycl. M\'e9th. Bot.}{\b\fs28  2}{\fs28 : 430 (1788). Robust glabrous perennial 30-45 cm, with a stout rhizome bearing pendent, pyriform tubers the size of a hen's egg; latex yellow. Stems scaly below, very stout, sometimes with axillary rays. Leaves oblong, obtuse, entire, crowded. Ray-leaves cordate at base; raylet-leaves deltate-cordate, wider than long. Rays 5, dichotomous. Capsule 7-8 mm, rugulose. Seeds c. 4 mm, pale brown, weakly reticulate.}{\i\fs28  Dry, calcareous pasture and scrub. \bullet  E. Spain}{\fs28 . Hs.
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 12. E. villosa}{\fs28  Waldst. & Kit. ex Willd.,}{\i\fs28  Sp. Pl.}{\b\fs28  2}{\fs28 : 909 (1800) (}{\i\fs28 E. pilosa}{\fs28  auct. eur., non L.; incl.}{\i\fs28  E. austriaca}{\fs28  A. Kerner, }{\i\fs28 E. carpatica }{\fs28 Woloszczak, }{\i\fs28 E. semivillosa}{\fs28  Prokh.,}{\i\fs28  E. tauricola}{\fs28  Prokh.). Stout, glabrous or pubescent, rhizomatous perennial 30-120 cm. Stems numerous, often with non-flowering branches as well as axillary umbels, scaly below. Leaves oblong, oblong-lanceolate to oblong-ovate or elliptical, 2-6 times as long as wide, obtuse to acute, often mucronate, entire, or serrulate near apex. Ray-leaves ovate, obtuse, mucronate; raylet-leaves smaller and relatively wider, yellowish. Rays (4)5 or more, trichotomous and then dichotomous. Capsule 3-6 mm, smooth, minutely tuberculate or with tubercles longer than broad (}{\i\fs28 E. carpatica}{\fs28 ), glabrous to densely villous. Seeds 2\'b75-3\'b72 mm, smooth, brown.}{\i\fs28  Damp meadows, open woods and river-banks. S.E., S. & E.C. Europe, extending northwards to C. Russia and N.W. France.}{\fs28  Al Au \'86Br Bu Cz Ga Ge Gr Hs Hu It Ju Po Rm Rs (C, W, K, E).
\par 
\par   Variable in leaf-shape, indumentum and development of tubercles on the capsule. Several variants occupying limited areas have been described as species, e.g.}{\b\fs28  E. austriaca}{\fs28  A. Kerner,}{\i\fs28  Sched. Fl. Exsicc. Austro-Hung.}{\b\fs28  3}{\fs28 : 62 (1884) and }{\b\fs28 E. carpatica }{\fs28 Woloszczak, }{\i\fs28 Spraw. Kom. Fizyogr. Krakow.}{\b\fs28  27}{\fs28 : 153 (1892), but intermediates between them occur. It may be possible to recognize subspecies, but a thorough investigation of the whole complex is needed.}{\i\fs28  E. pilosa}{\fs28  L. is an Asiatic species.
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 13. E. corallioides}{\fs28  L., }{\i\fs28 Sp. Pl.}{\fs28  460 (1753). Caespitose, villous perennial 40-60 cm. Stems few, rather slender, with few axillary rays below the terminal umbel, not scaly below. Leaves oblong to oblanceolate. Ray-leaves like the cauline but wider; raylet leaves green or red-tinged. Capsule 3-4 mm, usually densely pubescent, finely granulate. Seeds c. 2\'b75 mm, reddish-brown.}{\i\fs28  Woods. \bullet  C. & S. Italy, Sicilia.}{\fs28  It Si [Br].
\par 
\par (B) Annual; capsule smooth or nearly so; seeds smooth.
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 14. E. lagascae}{\fs28  Sprengel, }{\i\fs28 Neue Entdeck. }{\b\fs28 2}{\fs28 : 115 (1820). Glabrous annual 30-45 cm. Lower leaves ovate, upper oblong-lanceolate, obtuse, entire or weakly sinuate. Ray-leaves ovate-lanceolate or triangular-ovate, subcordate at base, obtuse and mucronate; raylet-leaves ovate-rhombic. Rays 3. Capsule 5-7 mm, ovoid, acutely keeled, not sulcate, weakly reticulate veined. Seeds 3\'b76-4\'b72 mm, grey or brownish with darker spots.}{\i\fs28  Cultivated ground. \bullet  C. & S. Spain; Sardegna.}{\fs28   Hs Sa ?Si.
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 15. E. arguta}{\fs28  Banks & Solander in A. Russell, }{\i\fs28 Nat. Hist. Aleppo }{\fs28 ed. 2, }{\b\fs28 2}{\fs28 : 253 (1794). Softly pubescent annual 10-40 cm. Stem with axillary rays below the terminal umbel. Leaves oblanceolate or narrowly obovate, sharply and deeply serrate, acute. Ray-leaves like the cauline but rather wider; raylet-leaves rhombic to triangular, serrate. Rays 4-5, stout. Capsule c. 3 mm, finely punctate or reticulate, shallowly sulcate. Seeds grey.}{\i\fs28  Cultivated ground. S. Greece}{\fs28  (}{\i\fs28 Peloponnisos}{\fs28 ). Gr. (}{\i\fs28 E. Mediterranean region.}{\fs28 )
\par 
\par (C) Annual; capsule often setose; seeds smooth.
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 16. E. microsphaera}{\fs28  Boiss.,}{\i\fs28  Diagn. Pl. Or. Nov.}{\b\fs28  1}{\fs28 (}{\b\fs28 7}{\fs28 ): 87 (1846). Rather stout, subglabrous annual 15-30 cm. Leaves oblong, serrulate towards the apex, the lowest obtuse, the rest acute. Ray-leaves ovate, obtuse; raylet-leaves orbicular-triangular obtuse. Rays 5. Capsule c. 2\'b75 mm, subglobose, pubescent when young, becoming glabrous, smooth, not sulcate, tardily dehiscent; seeds ovoid, laterally compressed, dark brown.}{\i\fs28  Arable land. Turkey-in-Europe}{\fs28  (}{\i\fs28 Marmaraereglisi}{\fs28 ). *Tu. (}{\i\fs28 S.W. Asia.}{\fs28 )
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 17. E. akenocarpa}{\fs28  Guss.,}{\i\fs28  Cat. Pl. Boccad.}{\fs28  75 (1821) (incl.}{\i\fs28  E. cybirensis}{\fs28  Boiss., }{\i\fs28 E. zahnii}{\fs28  Heldr. ex Hal\'e1csy). Glabrous or pubescent annual 15-45 cm. Leaves elliptical to obovate-cuneate, serrulate near the acute or rounded, mucronulate apex. Ray-leaves elliptic-ovate. Rays 2-5, stout, usually much longer than the ray-leaves in fruit. Capsule 3-4 mm, subsessile, woody, usually indehiscent, persistent, scarcely sulcate, usually with tubercles ending in a long bristle, sometimes glabrous or sericeous. Seeds 2\'b76 mm, blackish.}{\i\fs28  Disturbed ground. Mediterranean region.}{\fs28  Cr Gr Hs It Si Ju.
\par 
\par (D) Perennial; capsule with elongated or hemispherical tubercles; seeds smooth or nearly so.
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 18. E. palustris}{\fs28  L.,}{\i\fs28  Sp. Pl.}{\fs28  462 (1753). A very robust, caespitose, glabrous, glaucous perennial with creeping rhizome. Stems 50-150 cm, with numerous non-flowering branches and some axillary rays below the terminal umbel. Leaves 20-60(-80) \'d7 3-15 mm, lanceolate or oblong-lanceolate, turning purplish-red in autumn. Ray-leaves ovate, somewhat shorter than rays; raylet-leaves orbicular-ovate, yellowish. Rays more than 5. Capsule 4\'b75-6 mm, covered with many short tubercles. Seeds 3\'b72-3\'b77 mm, brown. 2n = 20. }{\i\fs28 Damp places, especially by rivers, in swampy woods or near the sea. Most of Europe from S. Finland, S. Norway and N. France southwards, but rare in the Mediterranean region.}{\fs28  Al Au Bu Co Cz Fe Ga Ge Gr He Ho Hs Hu It Ju No Po Rm Rs (B, C, W, K, E) Su [Be].
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 19. E. velenovskyi}{\fs28  Bornm.,}{\i\fs28  Bot. Jahrb.}{\b\fs28  66}{\fs28 : 117 (1933) (}{\i\fs28 E. soongarica}{\fs28  sensu Hayek, non Boiss.). Robust, glabrous perennial c. 60 cm, with axillary rays which do not overtop the terminal umbel. Leaves 15-30(-90) \'d7 4-6(-18) mm, linear-lanceolate; acuminate; margin cartilaginous, sharply serrate in upper half. Ray-leaves 15-40 \'d7 10-18 mm, ovate, scarcely serrate, yellowish in flower; raylet-leaves 10-17 \'d7 10-15 mm, rhombic-ovate. Rays 5-10, 50-80 mm, with 4 cyathia. Capsule 4\'b72-4\'b74 \'d7 5 mm, deeply sulcate, with few, small tubercles. Seeds dark brown. \bullet }{\i\fs28  Bulgaria, Makedonija, N.E. Greece.}{\fs28  Bu Gr Ju.
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 20. E. soongarica}{\fs28  Boiss.,}{\i\fs28  Cent. Euphorb.}{\fs28  32 (1860). Like }{\b\fs28 19}{\fs28  but axillary rays overtopping the terminal umbel; leaves 20-110 \'d7 5-22 mm, usually wider than in }{\b\fs28 19}{\fs28 ; ray-leaves 10-30 x
\par 
\par 217}
\par }