{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 4.                  Mercurialis}                    L.
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc By †T.G. Tutin.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Usually dioecious. Herbs with watery sap. Leaves opposite; stipules small. Male flowers usually in clusters on long axillary spikes; calyx-lobes 3; stamens 8-15. Female flowers solitary or few, axillary, subsessile or pedunculate; calyx-lobes 3; styles 2. Fruit with 2 cells, each with 1 seed.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Rhizomatous; aerial stem simple
\par
2 Lower leaves usually scale-like; petiole (3-)5-10(-18) mm ......... {\b 6. perennis}
\par
2 Lower leaves like the upper, but smaller; petiole 1-2 mm ................ {\b 7. ovata}
\par
1 Not rhizomatous; stems branched
\par
3 Densely tomentose .................................................................... {\b 5. tomentosa}
\par
3 Glabrous or sparsely hairy 
\par
4 Annual, without a thick woody stock .............................................. {\b 1. annua} 
\par
4 Perennial, with a thick woody stock
\par
5 Sparsely hairy; leaves incise-dentate ...................................... {\b 4. reverchonii} 
\par
5 Glabrous; leaves crenate-dentate or shallowly sinuate-dentate
\par
6 Leaves crenate-dentate; fruit 3-4 × 5-6 mm; seed smooth ........... {\b 2. elliptica}
\par
6 Leaves shallowly sinuate-dentate; fruit c. 2 × 3 mm; 
\par
  seed rugulose .................................................................................. {\b 3. corsica}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. M. annua} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 1035 (1753). Glabrous or sparsely hairy annual 10-50 cm. Stem branched, often from the base. Leaves 1·5-5 cm, ovate to elliptic-lanceolate, crenate-serrate; petiole 2-15 mm. Rarely monoecious. Female flowers axillary, few, subsessile; calyx-lobes triangular-ovate, acute. Fruit 2-3 × (2-)3-4 mm, hispid, rarely nearly glabrous; seed c. 2 mm, ovoid, rugulose. 2n = 16, 48, 64, 80, 96, 112.{\i  Cultivated ground and waste places. Most of Europe, but introduced in much of the north and west.} Al Au *Az Be Bl *Br Bu Co Cr Cz *Da Ga Ge Gr He Ho Hs Hu It Ju Lu Po Rm Rs (C, W, K) Sa Si Tu [Fe Hb No Su].
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  B. Durand, {\i Ann. Sci. Nat}. ser. 12 (Bot.),{\b  4}: 579-736 (1963), has shown that diploid plants are nearly always dioecious, are widespread, and very variable. Most are completely interfertile, but some saxicolous populations from S.E. France form sterile hybrids with other diploid populations, though some introgression seems to occur. These local diploid populations have been described as{\b  M. huetii} Hanry, {\i Billotia }{\b 1}: 21 (1864), and are characterized by small size, long, patent branches, and fruit up to 2 mm wide, ciliate, but not hispid on the surface.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  The polyploids are characterized by being usually monoecious. Plants with 2n = 48 occur in the coastal regions of Portugal and S. and E. Spain, and also in isolated populations on the eastern coast of Corse, and probably correspond to {\b M. ambigua} L. fil., {\i Dec. Prim. Pl. Rar. Hort. Upsal.} 15 (1762). The remaining polyploids (2n = 64, 80, 96, 112) are restricted, as far as is known, to Corse and Sardegna.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 In the absence of clear-cut morphological characters it does not seem possible to give specific rank to any of the taxa in the complex, though they appear to be distinguishable on the average characters of population-samples.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. M. elliptica} Lam., {\i Encycl. Méth. Bot.}{\b  4}: 119 (1797). Glabrous perennial up to 60 cm. Stems branched; stock stout and woody. Leaves (1-)2-4 cm, elliptical or ovate, obtuse or subacute, crenate-dentate; petiole 2-8 mm. Female flowers axillary, 1 or few; petioles up to 3 mm; calyx-lobes orbicular-ovate, obtuse. Fruit 3-4 × 5-6 mm, glabrous; seed c. 2 mm, globose or ovoid,smooth or nearly so.{\i  Sandy waste places. C. & S. Portugal, S. Spain.} Hs Lu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 3. M. corsica} Cosson,{\i  Not. Pl. Crit.} 63 (1850). Like {\b 2} but leaves remotely and shallowly sinuate-dentate; fruit c. 2 × 3 mm, often hispidulous; seeds c. 1·5 mm, ovoid, rugulose. Rocky places and disturbed ground. •{\i  Corse and Sardegna. }Co Sa.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 4. M. reverchonii} Rouy, {\i Naturaliste} ({\i Paris}){\b  9}: 199 (1887). Like {\b 2} but sparsely pubescent; leaves 1·5-6 cm, the lower suborbicular, the others ovate, all incise-dentate, subobtuse, truncate to subcordate at base; petioles 5-10 mm; female flowers 3-5, in a usually branched, shortly pedunculate axillary inflorescence; fruit hispid; seeds reticulate-veined.{\i  S.W. Spain.} Hs. ({\i Morocco.})
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 5. M. tomentosa} L., {\i Sp. Pl. }1035 (1753). Densely tomentose perennial up to 60 cm. Stems freely branched. Leaves 1-5 cm, oblong-lanceolate to oblong-obovate, acute or obtuse and mucronate, entire or weakly serrate; petiole 1-3 mm. Female flowers 1 or few, axillary, subsessile; calyx-lobes ovate-lanceolate, acute. Fruit 4 × 6 mm, densely tomentose; seed c. 3 mm, ovoid, rugulose.{\i  Rocky slopes. • S.W. Europe.} Bl Ga Hs Lu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Sterile hybrids between {\b 2} and {\b 5} occur with the parents.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 6. M. perennis} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 1035 (1753). More or less pubescent rhizomatous perennial up to 40 cm, becoming blackish when dried. Stems simple. Leaves 2-8 cm but usually scale-like in the lower part of the stem, elliptic-lanceolate to elliptic-ovate, crenate-serrate, crowded in the upper part of the stem; petiole (3-)5-10(-18) mm. Female flowers 1-3, in axillary inflorescences up to 7 cm in fruit. Fruit c. 4 × 7 mm, pubescent; seed 3-3·5 mm, globose, rugulose. 2n = 42, 64 (female), 66 (male) c. 80, 84.{\i  Shady places, usually in }Quercus- {\i or} Fagus-{\i woods. Most of Europe, northwards to} 66° {\i N. in Norway}. Al Au Be Br Bu Co Cz Da Fe Ga Ge Gr *Hb He Ho Hs Hu It Ju Lu No Po Rm Rs (B, C, W, K, E) Si Su.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 7. M. ovata} Sternb. & Hoppe, {\i Denkschr. Bayer. Bot. Ges. Regensb.}{\b  1}: 170 (1815). Like {\b 6} but plant yellowish-green when dried: stems with foliage leaves throughout, not crowded towards the top, ovate to suborbicular; petiole usually 1-2 mm. 2n = 32.{\i  C. & S.E. Europe}. Al Au Bu Cz Ge Gr He Hu It Po Rm Rs (W, K, E) Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 A sterile hybrid, {\b M}. × {\b paxii} Graebner in Ascherson & Graebner,{\i  Syn. Mitteleur. Fl.}{\b  7}: 408 (1916) ({\b 6} × {\b 7}), occurs locally.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 5.                     Acalypha}                     L.
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc By †T.G. Tutin.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Monoecious. Annual herbs. Flowers in small axillary spikes. Male flowers with 4-partite perianth; stamens 8-16; filaments united at base. Female flowers with 3- to 5-partite perianth; ovary 3-locular; styles 3. Seeds 3, carunculate.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. A. virginica} L.,{\i  Sp. Pl.} 1003 (1753). Pubescent annual 10-50 cm. Leaves 2-10 cm, lanceolate to ovate, crenate; petiole 1/3-1/2 as long as lamina. Inflorescence with male flowers above and female at base; bract of female flowers with 7-9 lanceolate lobes. Fruit pubescent; seed ellipsoid, smooth; caruncle small.{\i  Naturalized locally in Italy, S. Switzerland and S. Austria.} [Au He It.] ({\i North America}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 6.                      Ricinus}                         L.
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc By †T.G. Tutin.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Monoecious shrubs or large herbs. Leaves alternate, deeply palmately lobed. Flowers paniculate, male above, female below.
\par

\par
212}
\par