{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 rank; the distinctions between them are of a minor nature and do not seem to be clear-cut, but 2 subspp. can be recognized.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b nicaeensis}: Rays (3-)9-18: capsule 3·5-4·5 mm.{\i  S. Europe}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b glareosa} (Pallas ex Bieb.) A.R. Sm.,{\i  Feddes Repert.}{\b  79}: 55 (1968) ({\i E. glareosa} Pallas ex Bieb.): Rays (3-)7-8; capsule 3 mm. {\i E. & E.C. Europe}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 81. E. bessarabica} Klokov in Fomin, {\i Fl. RSS Ucr. }{\b 7}: 629 (1955). Like {\b 80} but with broadly ovate, 9- to 11-veined cauline and ray-leaves 17-27 mm wide; umbel with 3-4 rays. {\i S.W. Ukraine, ?Moldavia.} Rs (W).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 82. E. orphanidis} Boiss., {\i Diagn. Pl. Or. Nov. }{\b 3}({\b 4}): 89 (1859). Glabrous, glaucous, prostrate to ascending perennial with an extensive, branched, fleshy, articulated rhizome and stems up to 15 cm, with 0-3 axillary rays. Leaves 6-18 × 2-7 mm, usually obovate, entire, petiolate. Ray-leaves oblong-oblanceolate to ovate-oblong. Raylet-leaves rhombic-deltate to reniform, obtuse, occasionally emarginate. Rays 3-5, up to 4 times dichotomous. Glands with 2 rather long, occasionally bifid horns. Capsule 4·5-5 mm, deeply sulcate, smooth. Seeds 3 mm, broadly ovoid, dark grey.{\i  Rocks and screes above} 1500{\i  m. Greece} ({\i Parnassos}). Gr.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 83. E. barrelieri} Savi,{\i  Bot. Etrusc. }{\b 1}: 143 (1808) ({\i E. baselicis} Ten.). Glabrous or minutely papillose, somewhat glaucous perennial up to 40 cm, with 0-2(-4) axillary rays. Leaves 4-20 × 2-11(-16) mm, linear-oblanceolate to ovate-deltate, entire or serrulate in the upper half. Ray-leaves ovate to reniform. Raylet-leaves ovate-rhombic to transversely ovate, mucronate or aristate, often purple-tinged. Rays (1-)3-5(-12), once or twice dichotomous. Glands with 2 short or long, occasionally bifid horns. Capsule 3-4 × 2·5-3 mm, not or weakly sulcate, smooth. Seeds 1·7-2 mm, ovoid, smooth, pale grey. {\i Shady and rocky places. Balkan peninsula, Italy, S. France.} Bu Ga Gr It Ju Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Plants from Italy differ from those from the Balkan peninsula in having entire leaves and usually more rays.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 84. E. triflora} Schott, Nyman & Kotschy,{\i  Analect. Bot.} 63 (1854). Glabrous, somewhat glaucous perennial up to 15 cm, with a far-creeping rhizome and no axillary rays. Leaves 5-15 × 2-8 mm, entire, oblong to ovate-deltate. Ray-leaves like the upper cauline leaves; raylet-leaves rhombic or transversely ovate. Rays (3-)5, once or twice dichotomous. Glands with 2, 3-fid horns. Capsule 3 × 3 mm, shallowly sulcate, smooth. Seeds 2 mm, ovoid, smooth, pale grey.{\i  Alpine meadows and open pine-woods.  •W. Jugoslavia} ({\i Velebit}). Ju.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b  E. kerneri} Huter in A. Kerner,{\i  Sched. Fl. Exsicc. Austro-Hung.}{\b  2}: 48 (1882), from the S.E. Alps, is like {\b 84} and may be conspecific. It is up to 35 cm and has 0-4(-7) axillary rays. The leaves are rather larger and the longest are clustered in a rosette.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 85. E. saxatilis} Jacq., {\i Fl. Austr.}{\b  4}: 23 (1776). Glabrous, somewhat glaucous, ascending perennial up to 20 cm, with a far-creeping branched rhizome and 0(-1) axillary rays. Leaves 2-25 × 2-7 mm, entire, the longest ones clustered in a rosette; rosette-leaves linear-oblanceolate; cauline leaves oblong to suborbicular-rhombic. Ray-leaves ovate or suborbicular, obtuse, often emarginate, cordate. Raylet-leaves rhombic, transversely ovate or reniform. Rays (4-)5, never more than once dichotomous. Glands with 2 horns. Capsule 3-4 × 3 mm, shallowly sulcate, smooth. Seeds 2·3 mm, ovoid, smooth, whitish. 2n = 18.{\i  Rocky places, mainly in the mountains; calcicole. • N.W. Jugoslavia, E. Austria.} Au ?Cz Ju.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 86. E. valliniana} Belli, {\i Ann. Bot.} ({\i Roma}) {\b 1}: 9 (1903). Glabrous, glaucous perennial up to 16 cm, with a far-creeping rhizome, and with 0-4 axillary rays. Leaves 3-19 × 2-9 mm, suborbicular to ovate-lanceolate or oblanceolate, entire. Ray-leaves like the upper cauline. Raylet-leaves reniform, deltate or rhombic. Rays 5-7, up to 3 times dichotomous. Glands shallowly emarginate, pitted. Cyathial cup completely glabrous within; bracts between the male flowers absent. Capsule 3-3·5 × 3·5-4 mm, shallowly sulcate, slightly granulate on the keels. Seeds 2·5-2·8 mm, ovoid, smooth, somewhat shiny, dark brown.{\i  Dry, open, stony, calcareous slopes. • S.W. Alps.} Ga It.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 87. E. minuta} Loscos & Pardo, {\i Ser. Pl. Arag.} 96 (1863) ({\i E. pauciflora} Dufour, non Hill). Glabrous, somewhat glaucous perennial with a branched rhizome; stem up to 13 cm, simple or branched from the base, with 0(-2) axillary rays. Leaves 2-12(-18) × 1-4·5(-9) mm, usually oblanceolate to elliptical, nearly or quite entire, slightly coriaceous. Ray- and raylet-leaves suborbicular to rhombic-deltate. Rays (2-)3-5, once or twice dichotomous. Glands emarginate or truncate. Capsule 3-3·5 × 3 mm, shallowly sulcate, nearly smooth. Seeds 2·1-2·3 mm, ovoid, irregularly and shallowly rugulose or almost smooth, whitish.{\i  Dry, stony ground. • N. & E. Spain.} Hs.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 88. E. variabilis} Cesati,{\i  Bibliot. Ital.}{\b  91}: 348 (1838). Glabrous, somewhat glaucous, rhizomatous perennial 35(-60) cm, with (0-)1-4(-7) axillary rays. Leaves 4-35 × 1-6(-15) mm, ellipticovate to lanceolate, entire. Ray-leaves like the cauline but longer. Raylet-leaves deltate. Rays (3-)4-5, once dichotomous. Glands with 2 horns. Capsule 2·5-3 × c. 3·5 mm, shallowly sulcate, smooth or finely granulate on the keels. Seeds 2·5 mm, ovoid, smooth, grey. {\i Scrub on calcareous slopes. • N. Italy, just extending into S.E. France.} Ga It.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 89. E. gayi} Salis,{\i  Flora} ({\i Regensb}.) {\b 17}({\b 2}): Beibl. 6 (1834). Glabrous, somewhat glaucous, rather weak perennial up to 17(-26) cm, with a far-creeping, slender rhizome; stems simple or branched from the base, and with 0-1 (-6) axillary rays. Leaves (1·5-)4-12(-20) × 1·5-6·5 mm, obovate to oblanceolate-oblong, usually obtuse, entire. Ray-leaves like the upper cauline. Raylet-leaves linear-lanceolate to elliptic-ovate or rarely deltate. Rays 2-3(-8), often unbranched. Glands emarginate, pitted. Capsule 2·5 × 2·5 mm, deeply sulcate, smooth or finely granulate on the keels. Seeds 2 mm, ovoid, smooth, greyish. {\i Rocky and bushy places. • Corse; C. Spain.} Co Hs.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Spanish plants have been distinguished as{\b  E. sennenii} Pau,{\i  Bol. Soc. Aragon. Ci. Nat.}{\b  6}: 29 (1907). They have wider raylet-leaves and more numerous axillary rays and umbel-rays, but are otherwise indistinguishable from plants from Corse.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 90. E. maresii} Knoche,{\i  Fl. Balear.}{\b  2}: 161 (1922). Glabrous, much-branched perennial with slender, procumbent-ascending stems up to 40 cm, with no axillary rays and with a far-creeping, much-branched rhizome. Leaves 1·5-12 × 1-4 mm, obovate to linear-oblanceolate, entire, often becoming purplish; petiole up to 1 mm. Ray-leaves like the upper cauline. Raylet-leaves orbicular to elliptic-lanceolate. Umbel not developed, or with 2-3 rays. Rays up to twice dichotomous, occasionally proliferating. Glands truncate or with 2 horns, rugulose. Capsule 2·5 × 2·5 mm, shallowly sulcate, granulate-rugose on the keels. Seeds 1·5 mm, ovoid-cylindrical, shallowly pitted, whitish, grey in the pits.{\i  Shady crevices in limestone rocks. • Islas Baleares}. Bl.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 91. E. herniariifolia} Willd.,{\i  Sp. Pl.}{\b  2}: 902 (1800). Glabrous or tomentose, somewhat glaucous perennial with numerous pro-
\par

\par
224}
\par