{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 with up to 5 segments. Inflorescence cymose, bracteate. Sepals and petals 5. Petals concave, yellow, entire. Stamens 10; filaments free, more or less expanded below and pubescent on the inner surface. Capsule 5-lobed, dehiscent. Styles connate.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Ovules 4 in each loculus of the ovary 
\par
2 Leaves from the middle of the stem usually 3-sect, the upper and
\par
  lower entire; each capsule-segment crowned with a large, ± 
\par
  denticulate appendage ............................................................... {\b 4. coronatum}
\par
2 Leaves from the middle of the stem usually entire; each capsule-
\par
  segment crowned with a blunt, tuberculiform appendage (at times dis- 
\par
  sected into shortly cylindrical tubercles) or with no obvious appendage
\par
3 Leaves not reaching the inflorescence, a length of stem below the
\par
  inflorescence naked
\par
4 Lower bracts small, not leaf-like ............................................... {\b 1. linifolium}
\par
4 Lower bracts large and leaf-like ............................................. {\b 5. balcanicum}
\par
3 Leaves reaching the inflorescence, the upper often subverticillate
\par
5 Sepals suborbicular to obtusely deltate, distinctly erose
\par
  denticulate .................................................................................. {\b 3. thesioides}
\par
5 Sepals linear-lanceolate to lanceolate, acute
\par
6 Leaves linear-lanceolate; plant glabrous throughout
\par
  (except the filaments) .............................................................. {\b 5. balcanicum}
\par
6 Leaves lanceolate to oblong-lanceolate; plant crispate-
\par
  pubescent, to sublanate at least in the inflorescence ................ {\b 2. suaveolens}
\par
1 Ovules 2 in each loculus
\par
7 Loculi of the ovary, even when very young, quite rounded at the apex,
\par
  with no conspicuous corniculate or tuberculiform appendage .. {\b 8. buxbaumii}
\par
7 Loculi of the ovary each with a prominent corniculate or
\par
  tuberculiform appendage at the apex, at least when young
\par
8 Most leaves 3-sect to the base .................................................. {\b 6. patavinum}
\par
8 All leaves simple .................................................................. {\b 7. boissieranum}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. H. linifolium} (L.) G. Don fil., {\i Gen. Syst.}{\b  1}: 780 (1831) ({\i H. hispanicum} Spach). Stems 15-40 cm, woody below, glabrous or crispate-pubescent. Leaves 10-35 × 0·75-7 mm, sessile, lanceolate-ovate to linear, glabrous or crispate-pubescent, becoming smaller upwards and usually ceasing some distance below the inflorescence. Inflorescence more or less compact, flat-topped. Sepals suborbicular to deltate-lanceolate, glabrous to white-lanate. Capsule glabrous to densely pubescent, especially around the apical appendages, which are blunt and tuberculiform, often dissected into numerous shortly cylindrical tubercles.{\i  Dry, sunny slopes. C., E. & S. Spain.} Hs [Ga].
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. H. suaveolens} (DC.) G. Don fil.,{\i  loc. cit.} (1831) ({\i H. ciliatum} Griseb.). Stems 15-30(-50) cm, crispate-pubescent, sometimes more or less lanate in the inflorescence. Leaves sessile, entire, rarely 3-sect, lanceolate to oblong, acute, shortly hairy especially along the margins, the middle 7-30 × 2-11 mm, not becoming appreciably smaller upwards, reaching the inflorescence, the uppermost often forming an involucre-like whorl. Inflorescence compact. Sepals lanceolate, acute, glabrous to sparsely lanate. Capsule tuberculate, usually glabrous, sometimes pubescent on the inner surface at the top; tubercles prominent and increasingly so above. Apical tubercle of young ovary-segments erect, conical.{\i  S.E. Europe, from Macedonia to E. Ukraine.} Bu Ju Rm Rs (W, E) Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Very like {\b 1}, but with a characteristic facies. In view of the small specific distinctions obtaining in the genus as a whole, it seems best to maintain the two as distinct.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 3. H. thesioides} (Fischer ex DC.) G. Don fil., {\i loc. cit.} (1831) ({\i H. tauricum} Spach, {\i H. suaveolens }sensu Vved., non (DC.) G. Don fil.). Stems 10-35 cm, subglabrous or more or less crispate-pubescent, sometimes more or less lanate in the inflorescence. Leaves sessile, entire, oblanceolate to oblong-ovate, subacute, glabrous or thinly hairy on the margins and lower surface, the middle 11-30 × 3-13 mm, not becoming appreciably smaller upwards, sometimes forming an involucre-like whorl. Inflorescence compact. Sepals suborbicular to obtusely deltate, distinctly erose-denticulate, glabrous or ciliate. Capsule glabrous, tuberculate-glandular. Apical tubercle of young ovary-segments flattened, smooth, large.{\i  Bulgaria; Krym; Don valley.} Bu Rs (K, E).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Distinguished from {\b 2} chiefly in the shape of the sepals and the broad, flat, apical tubercles of the young ovary-segments.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 4. H. coronatum} Griseb.,{\i  Spicil. Fl. Rumel.}{\b  1}: 129 (1843). Stems 12-35 cm, shortly crispate-pubescent, white-lanate in the inflorescence. Leaves variable; middle leaves or central leaflets 8-25 × 1-4 mm. Inflorescence compact. Sepals linear-lanceolate. Capsule pubescent on the inner surface towards the top, tuberculate-glandular, each segment crowned with a large, somewhat laterally compressed, more or less denticulate appendage. •{\i  Balkan peninsula, from N. Albania to C. Greece.} Al Gr Ju.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 5. H. balcanicum} Vandas,{\i  Magyar Bot. Lapok}{\b  4}: 264 (1905). Stems 15-25 cm, plant quite glabrous except for filaments. Leaves 10-15 × 2·5-3·5 mm, lanceolate to oblanceolate, acute, attenuate below, not becoming appreciably smaller upwards, reaching the inflorescence or almost so, passing into the large, leaf-like lower bracts. Inflorescence compact. Sepals narrowly deltate to deltate-ovate. Capsule smooth to almost pitted below, the glands flat or slightly immersed, each segment crowned with a smooth, feebly delimited, obtuse apical tubercle. {\i  • N.E. Greece, S.W. Bulgaria.} Bu Gr.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 6. H. patavinum} (L.) G. Don fil., {\i Gen. Syst.}{\b  1}: 780 (1831) ({\i Ruta patavina} L.). Stems 10-30 cm, finely crispate-pubescent. Leaves crowded; basal leaves simple, lanceolate-oblong to oblanceolate; middle leaves 3-sect to the base, the middle segment 15-33 × 1·5-5 mm, somewhat longer and wider than lateral ones, pale beneath; uppermost leaves linear, simple or 3-sect. Inflorescence dense. Sepals deltate-lanceolate to linear-lanceolate. Capsule with scattered, sharply conical-tuberculate glands, with a small, conical, tuberculiform appendage on the outer surface near the top of each segment. •{\i  W. part of Balkan peninsula, just extending to N.E. Italy and S.W. Romania}. Al Gr It Ju Rm.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 7. H. boissieranum} Vis. & Pancic, {\i Mem. Ist. Veneto}{\b  15}: 14 (1870) ({\i H. albanicum }(Bald.) Bornm.). Stems 6-25 cm, crispate-pubescent, more or less lanate in the inflorescence. Leaves 10-40 × 1·5-3 mm, lanceolate to oblanceolate, long-attenuate below, sparingly hairy or glabrous. Inflorescence more or less compact. Sepals linear-lanceolate. Capsule pubescent on the inner surface near the top, with scattered more or less prominently tuberculate glands below, each segment with a conical apical appendage which is sometimes dissected into smaller tubercles. •{\i  Jugoslavia and Albania.} Al Ju.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Very like {\b 4} but distinguished by the much smaller apical appendages of the capsule-segments, the invariably simple leaves which are more or less glabrous when mature, and by having 2 ovules in each loculus.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 8. H. buxbaumii} (Poiret) G. Don fil.,{\i  Gen. Syst.}{\b  1}: 780 (1831). Stems 15-50 cm, single or rather few, sparsely to densely crispate-pubescent. Leaves 25-50 × 2·5-13 mm, oblanceolate, or linear-lanceolate, entire, or 3-sect almost or quite to the base, with the middle segment larger than the lateral ones, more or less long-attenuate and subpetiolate below, crispate-pubescent.
\par

\par
228}
\par