{\rtf1\ansi \deff4\deflang1033{\fonttbl{\f4\froman\fcharset0\fprq2 Times New Roman;}}{\colortbl;\red0\green0\blue0;\red0\green0\blue255;\red0\green255\blue255;\red0\green255\blue0;\red255\green0\blue255;\red255\green0\blue0;\red255\green255\blue0;\red255\green255\blue255;\red0\green0\blue128;\red0\green128\blue128;\red0\green128\blue0;\red128\green0\blue128;\red128\green0\blue0;\red128\green128\blue0;\red128\green128\blue128;\red192\green192\blue192;}{\stylesheet{\widctlpar \f4\fs20\lang2057 \snext0 Normal;}{\*\cs10 \additive Default Paragraph Font;}}{\info{\author dddd}{\operator dddd}{\creatim\yr1998\mo11\dy11\hr17\min10}{\revtim\yr1998\mo11\dy11\hr17\min10}{\version2}{\edmins0}{\nofpages4}{\nofwords1048}{\nofchars5977}{\*\company  }{\vern57431}}\widowctrl\ftnbj\aenddoc\hyphcaps0 \fet0\sectd \linex0 {\*\pnseclvl1\pnucrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl2\pnucltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl3\pndec\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl4\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl5\pndec\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl6\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl7\pnlcrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl8\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl9\pnlcrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}
\pard\plain \ \f4\fs20\lang2057 {\fs28 Inflorescence wide and lax, often wider than high; branching often beginning about half-way up the stem. Sepals deltate-ovate, glabrous or ciliate. Capsule glabrous, densely furnished with pale-margined glands, the apex of each segment rounded even in the very young ovary.}{\i\fs28  Turkey-in-Europe; Kriti.}{\fs28  Cr Tu [Ga]. (}{\i\fs28 S.W. Asia}{\fs28 .)
\par 
\par }
\pard \qc\ {\fs28  }{\b\fs28 3.                    Dictamnus}{\fs28                    L.
\par }{\fs24 By C.C. Townsend.
\par 
\par }
\pard \ {\fs28 Perennial herbs with alternate, pellucid-punctate, imparipinnate leaves. Flowers large and showy, in terminal, bracteate racemes. Sepals 5. Petals 5, narrow, the lowest declinate. Stamens 10; filaments declinate and upwardly curving. Styles connate. Capsule hard, deeply 5-lobed.
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 1. D. albus}{\fs28  L.,}{\i\fs28  Sp. Pl.}{\fs28  383 (1753). Bushy, densely leafy perennial 40-80 cm, more or less woody below; stems and branches glandular-punctate, thinly hairy. Leaflets 3-6 pairs, lanceolate to ovate, pubescent at least on the principal veins beneath; inflorescence-axis, pedicels, bracts and sepals densely furnished with short, patent hairs and dark, stipitate glands. Sepals lanceolate. Petals 2-2\'b75 cm, elliptic-lanceolate, white to pink or bluish, with purple dots or streaks. Filaments about as long as the petals, glandular above.}{\i\fs28  S. & S.C. Europe, extending northwards to}{\fs28  c. 54\'b0 }{\i\fs28 N. in E. Russia}{\fs28 . Al Au Bu Cz Ge Gr He Hs Hu It Ju Po Rm Rs (W, K, E).
\par 
\par  The following variants are frequently maintained as separate species: }{\b\fs28 D. caucasicus}{\fs28  Fischer ex Grossh., }{\i\fs28 Fl. Kavk.}{\b\fs28  3}{\fs28 : 20 (1932), from S. Russia;}{\b\fs28  D. gymnostylis}{\fs28  Steven, }{\i\fs28 Bull. Soc. Nat. Moscou}{\b\fs28  29}{\fs28 (}{\b\fs28 2}{\fs28 ): 333 (1856), from Ukraine and S. Russia; and}{\b\fs28  D. hispanicus}{\fs28  Webb ex Willk.,}{\i\fs28  Suppl. Prodr. Fl. Hisp.}{\fs28  263 (1893), from E. & S.E. Spain. These are chiefly founded on indumentum of the vegetative parts, ovary and style, leaf-characters (size, shape and number of leaflets, development of wing of petiole), habit, and development of the ovary-appendages. All these characters, however, show much variation and cannot be convincingly correlated with distribution. Several are also found to be of little taxonomic value in closely allied genera. Accordingly,}{\i\fs28  D. albus}{\fs28  is treated here as a single polymorphic species.
\par 
\par }
\pard \qc\ {\fs28 Subfam.    }{\b\fs28  Aurantioideae}{\fs28 
\par }
\pard \ {\fs28 
\par Fruit a berry with a thick, coriaceous rind or a harder shell, and a juicy pulp. Seeds without endosperm.
\par 
\par }
\pard \qc\ {\fs28  }{\b\fs28 4.                      Citrus}{\fs28                        L.
\par }{\fs24 By C.C. Townsend.
\par 
\par }
\pard \ {\fs28 Small trees. Young twigs with single spines in the leaf-axils, but older branches often unarmed. Leaves alternate, simple, coriaceous, thin; lateral veins few. Petioles often more or less winged or margined and articulated with the lamina. Flowers white, solitary and axillary or in short axillary racemes. Sepals 4-5; petals (4-)5(8). Stamens 4-10 times as many as the petals. Ovary usually 10- to 14-locular; ovules in 2 rows. Seeds surrounded by stipitate, fusiform pulp-vesicles.
\par 
\par  Literature: W. T. Swingle, }{\i\fs28 The Botany of Citrus and its wild relatives}{\fs28 , in H. J. Webber & L. D. Batchelor,}{\i\fs28  The}{\fs28  Citrus}{\i\fs28  Industry}{\b\fs28  1}{\fs28 : 129-474. Berkeley and Los Angeles. 1943. T. Tanaka,}{\i\fs28  The species problem in}{\fs28  Citrus (}{\i\fs28 Revisio Aurantiacearum}{\fs28  IX). Tokyo. 1954.
\par 
\par  A genus of considerable taxonomic difficulty. The present account is based on the work of the above two authorities. The species described are those most commonly cultivated for their fruit and essential oils in the Mediterranean region. In addition,}{\b\fs28  C. bergamia}{\fs28  Risso & Poiteau,}{\i\fs28  Hist. Nat. Orang.}{\fs28  111 (1818), is cultivated in Calabria for the essential oil yielded by its rind. It is a small tree with winged petioles and oblong-ovate leaves, and has a pale yellow, pyriform fruit 7\'b75-10 cm in diameter. All the cultivated species are probably derived from plants which are native in tropical and subtropical parts of S.E. Asia.
\par 
\par }
\pard \li200\ {\fs28 1 Petiole terete or carinate-margined but not winged;
\par   fruit 15-25 cm in diameter .............................................................. }{\b\fs28 1. medica}{\fs28 
\par 1 Petiole distinctly winged; fruit not more than 15 cm in diameter
\par 2 Stamens generally more than 4 times as many as the petals; 
\par   flowers of two sorts, hermaphrodite and functionally male;
\par   ripe fruit light yellow, with a mammilliform process at apex
\par 3 Fruit acid; flowers tinged or streaked with purple ........................... }{\b\fs28 2. limon}{\fs28 
\par 3 Fruit insipidly sweet; flowers pure white ...................................... }{\b\fs28 3. limetta}{\fs28 
\par 2 Stamens about 4 times as many as the petals; flowers usually all herma-
\par   phrodite; fruit yellow or orange without a mamilliform process at apex
\par 4 Leaves narrowly elliptical; fruit rarely more than 6\'b75 cm, depressed;
\par   rind very easily detached from the segments ............................... }{\b\fs28 4. deliciosa}{\fs28 
\par 4 Leaves broadly elliptical; fruit 7-15 cm, spherical or broadly ovoid, 
\par   not or only slightly flattened above and below; rind adhering
\par   to the segments
\par 5 Fruit 10-25 cm in diameter; rind yellow; petiole usually broadly winged
\par 6 Twigs and underside of midrib glabrous ...................................... }{\b\fs28 5. paradisi}{\fs28 
\par 6 Twigs and underside of midrib sparsely hairy ............................... }{\b\fs28 6. grandis}{\fs28 
\par 5 Fruit usually 7-9 cm; rind orange or orange-yellow; petiole rather
\par   narrowly winged, obovate to oblanceolate, usually at least twice 
\par   as long as wide
\par 7 Fruit with a rough rind and bitter sour pulp; petioles
\par   obovate in outline ....................................................................... }{\b\fs28 7. aurantium}{\fs28 
\par 7 Fruit with a sweet taste and nearly smooth rind;
\par   petioles oblanceolate in outline ..................................................... }{\b\fs28 8. sinensis}{\fs28 
\par 
\par }
\pard \ {\fs28    }{\b\fs28 1. C. medica}{\fs28  L., }{\i\fs28 Sp. Pl.}{\fs28  782 (1753) (Citron). Small tree. Twigs angular when young, soon terete, glabrous, with short, stout axillary spines. Leaves glabrous, elliptic-ovate to ovate-lanceolate, crenate to serrate; veins prominent on both surfaces. Petiole terete or narrowly margined. Flowers in short, few-flowered racemes, hermaphrodite or functionally male; petals often pink or purplish on the outer surface. Stamens very numerous, coherent in groups of four or more. Fruit 15-25 cm 10- to 13-locular; rind very thick, often rough and warty, yellow when ripe; pulp pale green or yellow, acid or sweetish.
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 2. C. limon}{\fs28  (L.) Burm. fil.,}{\i\fs28  Fl. Ind.}{\fs28  173 (1768) (Lemon). Small tree. Twigs angled when young, soon rounded, glabrous, with stout axillary spines. Leaves broadly elliptical, acute, serrate or crenate. Petiole with narrow wing or merely margined, distinctly articulated with the lamina. Flowers solitary or in short, few-flowered racemes, hermaphrodite or functionally male; petals purplish-suffused on the outer surface. Stamens 25-40, coherent in groups. Fruit 6\'b75-12\'b75 cm, 8- to 10-locular, yellow when ripe, oblong or ovoid, with a broad, low, mamilliform process at apex; rind somewhat rough to almost smooth; pulp acid.
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 3. C. limetta}{\fs28  Risso,}{\i\fs28  Ann. Mus. Hist. Nat.}{\fs28  (}{\i\fs28 Paris}{\fs28 ) }{\b\fs28 20}{\fs28 : 195 (1813) (Sweet Lime). Like }{\b\fs28 2}{\fs28  but flowers pure white; fruit shorter, sweet.
\par 
\par  According to Tanaka, a mutant of }{\b\fs28 2}{\fs28 .
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 4. C. deliciosa}{\fs28  Ten.,}{\i\fs28  Ind. Sem. Horti Neap. }{\fs28 9 (1840) (Tangerine).Small, spreading tree. Twigs spiny, slender. Leaves narrowly elliptical. Flowers solitary or in small axillary clusters. Fruit 5-7\'b75 cm in diameter, depressed-globose; rind thin, easily separated from the pulp, bright orange when ripe; pulp sweet.
\par 
\par 229}
\par }