{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 mm, deeply sulcate, finely granulate on the keels. Seeds 1·5-1·75 mm, oblong-quadrangular, irregularly and closely white vermiculate-rugulose on a blackish ground.{\i  Pastures. S. Portugal, S. Spain, Islas Baleares.} Bl Hs Lu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 63. E. dracunculoides} Lam., {\i Encycl. Méth. Bot. }{\b 2}: 428 (1788). Glabrous annual up to 10 cm, often much-branched from the base, and with 0-6 axillary rays. Leaves 4-15 × 1-4·5 mm, obovate to linear-spathulate, often 2- to 6-toothed at the apex. Ray- and raylet-leaves smaller than the cauline leaves, variable in shape. Rays (2-)3, up to 4 times dichtomous. Capsule 2·5 × 2·8 mm, shallowly sulcate, smooth. Seeds 1·5 mm, ovoid, grey with white conical tubercles.{\i  Stony ground. S.E. Spain }({\i Cabo de Gata, Prov. Almeria}). Hs.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 This species is represented in Europe only by subsp.{\b  inconspicua} (Ball) Maire,{\i  Bull. Soc. Hist. Nat. Afr. Nord}{\b  20}: 202 (1929) ({\i E. glebulosa} var. {\i almeriensis} Lange). The typical subspecies occurs throughout most of the drier tropics and subtropics of the Old World.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 64. E. exigua} L.,{\i  Sp. Pl.} 456 (1753). Glabrous annual up to 35 cm, often much-branched from the base, with 0-3 (rarely more) axillary rays. Leaves 3-25 × 1-2 mm, linear to oblong cuneate, entire. Ray-leaves like the upper cauline. Raylet-leaves obliquely triangular-ovate-lanceolate, rarely 1- to 2-toothed on one side near the base. Rays 3-5, up to 7 times dichotomous. Glands with 2 horns, rarely the horns much reduced. Capsule 1·6-2 × 1·6 mm, shallowly sulcate, smooth but granulate on the keels. Seeds 1-2 mm, ovoid-quadrangular, vermiculate-rugose, grey. 2n = 24.{\i  Cultivated ground. Most of Europe northwards to} c. 65°{\i  N., but absent from much of the east}. All except Fa Fe Is Rs (N, K, E) Sb.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 (B) Seeds transversely sulcate.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 65. E. falcata} L.,{\i  Sp. Pl.} 456 (1753) (incl.{\i  E. acuminata} Lam.). Glabrous annual up to 40 cm, simple or with 2-3(-9) branches from the base, with (0-)8(-16) axillary rays. Leaves 5-30 × 3-5 mm, obovate-spathulate to linear-oblong, cuneate, mucronate, entire. Ray-leaves like the cauline. Raylet-leaves up to 21 × 10 mm, asymmetrically suborbicular or elliptic-ovate, acuminate to aristate, subentire. Rays 4-5, up to 5 times dichotomous. Glands broad, with 2 horns. Capsule 1·5-2 × 1-2·5 mm, shallowly sulcate, smooth. Seeds 1·2 mm, flattened-ovoid-quadrangular, pale grey or brown. 2n = 16, 36.{\i  Disturbed ground and as a weed and ruderal. Europe from N.C. France and C. Russia southwards.} Al Au Bl Bu Co Cr Cz Ga Ge Gr He Hs Hu It Ju Lu Po Rm Rs (C, W, K, E) Sa Si Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 (C) Seeds longitudinally sulcate.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 66. E. sulcata} De Lens ex Loisel.,{\i  Fl. Gall}. ed. 2, {\b 1}: 339 (1828). Glabrous annual up to 10 cm, often becoming much branched from the base, with 0-1 axillary rays. Leaves 4-7 × 1-1·5 mm, linear to linear-oblanceolate, entire. Ray-leaves slightly larger than the upper cauline. Raylet-leaves like the rayleaves but somewhat wider. Rays (2-)3-4(-5), often many times dichotomous. Glands with 2 horns. Capsule 1·7 × 1·7 mm, deeply sulcate, smooth. Seeds 1·25-1·5 mm, ovoid-hexagonal, with a longitudinal furrow on each face, pale grey, often darker in the furrows.{\i  Dry, open ground. S.W. Europe.} Bl Ga Hs It.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 (D) Seeds pitted, or sulcate and pitted.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 67. E. peplus} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 456 (1753). Glabrous annual up to 40 cm, with 2 or more branches from the base and with 0-3 axillary rays. Leaves 5-25 × 3-15 mm, with petioles up to 8 mm, ovate, suborbicular or obovate, entire. Ray-leaves like the cauline, but with shorter petioles. Raylet-leaves smaller, slightly obliquely ovate. Rays 3, up to 5 times dichotomous. Glands with 2 filiform horns. Capsule 2 × 2 mm, shallowly sulcate, smooth; each valve with two dorsal ridges. Seeds 1·1-1·4 mm, ovoid-hexagonal, sulcate ventrally and pitted dorsally, pale grey, darker in the depressions. 2n = 16. {\i Weed of cultivated ground. Most of Europe northwards to} c. 65°{\i  N.} All except Fa Is Rs (N, ?K) Sb.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b E. peploides} Gouan,{\i  Fl. Monsp.} 174 (1765), appears to be merely a dwarf variant of{\b  67}, with a poorly developed umbel and smaller seeds with fewer pits. It occurs in dry places in the Mediterranean region and Portugal.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b E. calabrica} Huter, Porta & Rigo, {\i Österr. Bot. Zeitschr. }{\b 57}: 436 (1907), from Calabria, is like{\b  67} but the capsule is without ridges and the seeds are vermiculate-rugose. It is doubtfully distinct from {\b 67} and is in need of further investigation.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 68. E. ledebourii} Boiss.,{\i  Cent. Euphorb. }35 (1860). Glabrous annual up to 20 cm, simple or branched from the base, with 0-2 axillary rays. Leaves 10-20 × 0·5-2 mm, subopposite or opposite, linear, entire. Ray- and raylet-leaves like the upper cauline but somewhat larger. Rays (2-)5, often much-branched. Glands with 2 horns. Capsule c. 2·7 × 2·7 mm, shallowly sulcate, finely granulate on the keels. Seeds 2 mm, ovoid-cylindrical, pitted, the pits circular on the dorsal faces and elongate and irregularly confluent on the ventral faces, pale grey, often darker in the depressions.{\i  Cliffs and stony ground. Krym} ({\i near Sudak}). Rs (K). ({\i Caucasian region}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 69. E. taurinensis} All.,{\i  Fl. Pedem.}{\b  1}: 287 (1785) (incl.{\i  E. graeca} Boiss. & Spruner). Glabrous annual up to 15 cm, simple or with 2 branches from the base, with up to 6 axillary rays. Leaves 20-30 × 3·5-5 mm, shortly petiolate, linear-oblanceolate, entire. Ray-leaves like the upper cauline. Raylet-leaves somewhat obliquely rhombic-trullate, acute, subentire. Rays (3-)4(-5), often much-branched. Glands yellow, with 2 pink horns. Capsule 3 × 3·5 mm, shallowly sulcate, finely granulate on the keel. Seeds 1·8-2 mm, ovoid, rather deeply pitted, greyish-white, dark grey in the pits.{\i  Disturbed ground. S. Europe; a frequent casual elsewhere}. Al Bl Bu Cr Ga Gr Hs It Ju Rs (K) Tu [Au Hu].
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Sect. PARALIAS Dumort. Annual or perennial; leaves alternate, palmately veined; capsule with indurated mesocarp; seeds ornamented or smooth.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 (A) Seeds distinctly pitted.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 70. E. segetalis} L., {\i Sp. Pl}. 458 (1753) ({\i E. tetraceras} Lange). Glabrous annual up to 35 cm, rarely perennating, simple or branched from the base, with (0-)4-5 axillary rays. Leaves 10-30(-60) × 1-3 mm, linear to linear-lanceolate, entire. Ray-leaves elliptic-oblong. Raylet-leaves deltate-rhombic, obtuse; base cuneate to subcordate. Rays 5(-6), up to 5 times dichotomous. Glands emarginate or with 2, rarely 4, horns. Capsule 2·5-3 × 3-3·5 mm, deeply sulcate, granulate-rugulose on the keels. Seeds 1·5-2 mm, ovoid, pale grey. 2n = 16.{\i  Open, sandy ground, often near the sea. S. W. Europe and Mediterranean region, eastwards to N. W. Jugoslavia; locally naturalized in C. Europe as a weed.} Bl Co ?Cr Ga Hs It Ju Lu [Cz Ge He Hu Rm]
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 71. E. pinea} L., {\i Syst. Nat.} ed. 12, 333 (1767) ({\i E. segetalis} subsp.{\i  pinea} (L.) Hayek,{\i  E. segetalis }var. {\i pinea} (L.) Willk.). Like {\b 70} but always perennial, with usually densely leafy stems up to 50 cm, often much-branched from the base and usually
\par

\par
222}
\par