{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 ovate or obovate, entire. Ray-leaves shorter and often wider than cauline. Raylet-leaves rhombic, deltate or reniform. Rays (4-)5-17, once or twice dichotomous. Glands emarginate or with 2 horns. Capsule 2·5-3 × 3·5 mm, deeply sulcate, granulate on the keels. Seeds 2 mm, ovoid, grey or brownish.{\i  Throughout a large part of continental Europe, but only as an alien in the north.} Al Au Be Bu Cz Ga Ge Gr Ho Hs Hu It Ju Lu Po Rm Rs (*B, C, W, K, E) Tu [Br Da Fe He No Rs (N) Su].
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b esula} (incl. {\i E. borodinii} Sambuk, {\i E. filicina }Portenschl.,{\i  E. imperfoliata} Vis.,{\i  E. pancicii }G. Beck, {\i E. pseudagraria} Smirnov): Axillary rays 8-20; leaves oblanceolate to broadly ovate or obovate, obtuse or slightly emarginate; umbel usually with 8-17 rays. 2n = 60, 64. {\i Throughout most of the range the species.}
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b tommasiniana} (Bertol.) Nyman,{\i  Consp.} 652 (1881) ({\i E. virgata} Waldst. & Kit., non Desf.; incl.{\i  E. subcordata} Ledeb.,{\i  E. tenuifolia} Lam.,{\i  E. uralensis} Fischer ex Link). Axillary rays usually 2-12; leaves linear to lanceolate, sometimes widened and rounded at base, acute or subacute; umbel usually with 5-9 rays. 2n = 20.{\i  S., E. & E.C. Europe; the hybrid with subsp. esula often naturalized elsewhere}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b  E. leptocaula} Boiss. in DC., {\i Prodr,}{\b  15}({\b 2}): 159 (1862) ({\i E. astrachanica} C. A. Meyer ex Prokh.,{\i  E. borszczowii} Prokh.), from E. Romania and U.S.S.R., is like subsp.{\i  tommasiniana} but usually smaller. It is often puberulent and usually has narrowly linear leaves up to 85 mm but less than 4 mm wide.{\b  E. sareptana} A. Becker ex Boiss. in DC.,{\i  Prodr. }{\b 15}({\b 2}): 159 (1862) ({\i E. tanaitica} Pacz.), from S.E. Russia, is similar but has leaves up to 11 mm wide, oblanceolate to obovate or elliptic-obovate and strongly emarginate. They may merit subspecific rank.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 100. E. undulata} Bieb.,{\i  Fl. Taur.-Cauc.}{\b  1}: 371 (1808). Glabrous, glaucous ascending perennial up to 15 cm, simple or branched from the base, with 1-6 axillary rays and with a slender, extensive rhizome. Leaves 10-20 × 3-12 mm, oblanceolate to elliptic-obovate; margins usually undulate. Ray-leaves like the cauline. Raylet-leaves ovate-trullate. Rays 2-5, once dichotomous. Capsule 3·5-4 mm, deeply sulcate, smooth. Seeds 2 mm, ovoid.{\i  Steppes and semi-deserts. S.E. Russia, W. Kazakhstan.} Rs (C, E).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 101. E. cyparissias} L.,{\i  Sp. Pl.} 461 (1753). Glabrous perennial up to 50 cm, rhizomatous, usually unbranched at the base but with up to 16 axillary non-flowering branches and 0-7 axillary rays. Leaves 5-40 × 0·5-3 mm, linear, entire. Ray-leaves linear to oblong. Raylet-leaves reniform, rhombic or suborbicular. Rays (5-)9-18(-22), once or twice dichotomous. Glands with 2 horns. Capsule 3 × 3·5 mm, deeply sulcate, granulate on the keels. Seeds 1·75 mm, ovoid, somewhat shiny, grey. 2n = 20, 40. •{\i  Most of Europe except the extreme north and the extreme south, but only as an alien in most of the north.} Al Au Be ?Bl Bu Cz Ga Ge Gr He Ho Hs Hu It Ju Po Rm Rs (C, W, E) Tu [Br Da Fe No Rs (N, *B, K) Su].
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 102. E. terracina} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} ed. 2, 654 (1762). Glabrous perennial; stem up to 70 cm, simple or branched from the base and with 0-5 axillary rays. Leaves 15-40(-55) × 4-7(-11) mm, linear-lanceolate to elliptic-oblong, rarely (var. angustifolia Lange) 1·5-2 mm wide, linear, minutely serrulate. Ray-leaves resembling the upper cauline. Raylet-leaves deltate-rhombic, sometimes slightly asymmetrical, occasionally coarsely serrulate. Rays 4-5, up to 5 times dichotomous. Glands with 2 long, slender horns. Capsule 3-5 × 4-5 mm, deeply sulcate, smooth. Seeds 2-2·5 mm, ovoid, pale grey.{\i  Dry sandy ground, often near the sea. Mediterranean region, extending to N.W. Spain and Portugal}. Al Bl Co Cr Ga Gr Hs It Ju Lu Sa Si.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 (B) Raylet-leaves connate; axillary non-flowering shoots absent.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 103. E. amygdaloides} L.,{\i  Sp. Pl.} 463 (1753). Pubescent, caespitose perennial; stem up to 90 cm, with up to 30 axillary rays. Leaves (10-)25-70(-130) × (5-)10-20(-30) mm, oblanceolate to obovate or spathulate, entire. Ray-leaves broadly ovate. Raylet-leaves partially or wholly connate, rarely more or less free (var.{\i  ligulata }(Chaub.) Bory). Rays (3-)5-11, up to 4 times dichotomous. Glands with 2 horns. Capsule 3-4 × 2·5-4 mm, deeply sulcate, punctate. Seeds 2-2·5 mm, ovoid, blackish. 2n = 18.{\i  Woods. C., S. & N.W. Europe, extending eastwards to C. Ukraine.} Al Au Be Br Bu Co Cz Ga Ge Gr *Hb He Ho Hs Hu It Ju Lu Po Rm Rs (W, K) Sa Si Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b amygdaloides}: Stems flowering in the second year. Leaves of the first year's growth larger than those of the second and crowded at the top of the stem. Horns of the glands usually convergent.{\i  Throughout the range of the species, except Corse and Sardegna.}
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b semiperfoliata} (Viv.) A.R. Sm.,{\i  Feddes Repert. }{\b 79}: 65 (1968) ({\i E. semiperfoliata} Viv.): Stems usually flowering in the first year. Leaves more or less uniform in size and evenly spaced. Horns of the glands usually parallel. •{\i  Corse and Sardegna}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 104. E. heldreichii} Orph. ex Boiss.,{\i  Diagn. Pl. Or. Nov. }{\b 3}({\b 4}): 90 (1859) ({\i E. semiverticillata} Halácsy). Pubescent to glabrescent perennial with biennial stem up to 100 cm, with numerous axillary rays arranged in 2-5 whorls of (3-)5-9 rays. Leaves (15-)40-80(-110) × (3-)10-20(-30) mm, oblong, oblanceolate or obovate, entire; those of the first year's growth usually larger than those of the second. Ray-leaves obovate to ovate. Raylet-leaves suborbicular-deltate to semicircular, not or partially connate at the base. Rays 5-8, up to three times dichotomous. Glands with 2 long horns. Capsule 3-3·5 × 3·5 mm, deeply sulcate, smooth. Seeds 2·2 mm, more or less ovoid, pale grey.{\i  Dry mountain slopes. • Greece and S. Albania.} Al Gr.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 105. E. characias} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 463 (1753) ({\i E. melapetala} Gasparr.). Densely tomentose, rarely glabrescent, glaucous, caespitose perennial, sometimes with biennial stems up to 180 cm, with 13-30(-40) axillary rays. Leaves (14-)30-130 × 4-10(-17) mm, linear to oblanceolate or occasionally obovate, entire; those of the first year's growth usually larger than those of the second. Ray-leaves like the upper cauline. Raylet-leaves suborbicular-deltate, usually connate in pairs at the base. Rays 10-20, usually twice, but up to 4 times dichotomous. Glands variable. Capsule 4-7 × 5-6 mm, deeply sulcate, smooth, densely villous. Seeds 2·5-3·8 mm, ovoid, silver-grey.{\i  Dry, fairly open ground. Mediterranean region, Portugal.} Al Bl Co Cr Ga Gr Hs It Ju Lu Sa Si.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b characias}: Stems usually up to 80 cm; glands dark reddish-brown, rarely yellow, with short horns or emarginate. 2n = 20.{\i  W. Mediterranean region, Portugal}.
\par
 ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b wulfenii} (Hoppe ex Koch) A.R. Sm., {\i Feddes Repert.}{\b  79}: 55 (1968) ({\i E. wulfenii} Hoppe ex Koch,{\i  E. veneta} sensu Hayek): Stems up to 180 cm; glands yellowish, with long horns.{\i  E. Mediterranean region}.
\par

\par
226}
\par