{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 with more axillary rays.{\i  Sandy seashores. W. & C. Mediterranean region, S.W. Europe.} Al Az Bl Co Ga Hs It Ju Lu Sa Si.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 72. E. portlandica} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 458 (1753) ({\i E. segetalis} var.{\i  littoralis }Lange). Glabrous perennial up to 40 cm, usually much-branched from the base; pattern and number of axillary branches very variable. Leaves 5-25 × 2-6 mm, obovate to narrowly oblanceolate, usually obtuse, entire, rarely denticulate near the apex. Ray-leaves usually like the upper cauline, rarely ovate-suborbicular. Raylet-leaves deltate-rhombic, obtuse, mucronate. Rays (3-)4-5(-6), up to 4 times dichotomous. Glands yellowish, with 2 horns. Capsule 2·8-3 × 3-3·2 mm, deeply sulcate, granulate on the keels. Seeds 1·5-1·8 mm, ovoid, pale grey, darker in the pits.{\i  Maritime sands. W. Europe, from Gibraltar to S.W. Scotland.} Br Ga Hb Hs Lu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 73. E. deflexa} Sibth. & Sm., {\i Fl. Graec. Prodr.}{\b  1}: 328 (1809). Glabrous, glaucous, ascending, caespitose perennial up to 35 cm, branched at the base, with 0-4(-7) axillary rays. Leaves 3-15 × 2-6 mm, orbicular to obovate or oblong, entire, shortly petiolate. Ray-leaves ovate-deltate or rhombic. Raylet-leaves rhombic, transversely ovate or more or less reniform. Rays (3-)5(-9), up to 3 times dichotomous. Glands with 2 long horns. Capsule 3 × 3 mm, deeply sulcate, granulate on the keels. Seeds 2·5 mm, ovoid or ovoid-cylindrical, pale grey, darker in the pits.{\i  Mountain rocks and screes. • Aegean region and C. Greece.} Cr Gr.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 74. E. petrophila} C. A. Meyer,{\i  Mem. Acad. Sci. Pétersb.} ser. 6 (Sci. Nat.), {\b 7} (Bot.): 9 (1855). Glabrous or minutely papillose, caespitose perennial up to 25 cm, branched at the base, with 0-2(-3) axillary rays. Leaves 10-16 × 3-5 mm, oblong to suborbicular-ovate, more or less entire. Ray-leaves suborbicular to rhombic-trullate. Raylet-leaves suborbicular to deltate or reniform. Rays (2-)4-5, up to 3 times dichotomous. Glands with 2 horns, or emarginate to transversely oblong with 1 or 2 small horns. Capsule 2·5-3 × 2·5-3 mm, shallowly sulcate, nearly smooth. Seeds 2 mm, evenly and shallowly pitted, ovoid, with a dorsal ridge.{\i  Rocks and stony slopes; calcicole. Krym & E. Ukraine.} ?Rm Rs (K, E).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 75. E. transtagana} Boiss.,{\i  Diagn. Pl. Or. Nov.}{\b  3}({\b 4}): 88 (1859). Glabrous or minutely papillose, glaucous perennial 4-15(-22) cm, with a long, slender rhizome and 0-5 axillary rays. Leaves 4-12 × 1-5 mm, the lowest small, oblong, the upper larger, linear-lanceolate, serrulate near apex. Ray-leaves broadly ovate to rhombic. Raylet-leaves rhombic-deltate or reniform, obtuse, mucronate, entire or slightly serrulate. Rays (2-)3-5, twice dichotomous. Glands suborbicular, pitted, with 2 short horns. Capsule 3·5 × 3·5 mm, shallowly sulcate, smooth. Seeds 2·3 mm, irregularly pitted, ovoid-pyriform, whitish to light brown, grey in the pits. Quercus-{\i scrub. • C. & S. Portugal}. Lu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 (B) Seeds smooth, rugulose, tuberculate or indistinctly pitted.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 76. E. matritensis} Boiss., {\i Cent. Euphorb. }35 (1860). Glabrous or minutely papillose, slightly glaucous perennial up to 40 cm, simple or branched at the base from a stout, woody stock, with 0-5(-10) axillary rays. Leaves 8-25(-35) × 2-6 mm, linear-oblanceolate to elliptic, entire. Ray-leaves somewhat wider than the upper cauline. Raylet-leaves suborbicular to rhombic. Rays 5, up to 3 times dichotomous. Glands with 2 short horns. Capsule 3·5-4 × 3·5 mm, shallowly sulcate, finely granulate on the keels. Seeds 2·5 mm, ovoid, indistinctly pitted, pale grey.{\i  Dry, open habitats. • C. & S. Spain, E. Portugal.} Hs Lu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 77. E. biumbellata} Poiret, {\i Voy. Barb. }{\b 2}: 174 (1789). Glabrous perennial up to 65 cm, occasionally branched from the base, with (6-)8-20(-27) axillary rays usually clustered together to form a whorl below the umbel, and with 0-10(-19) more widely spaced axillary rays. Leaves 20-55 × 2-12 mm, linear to linear-lanceolate, entire. Ray-leaves lanceolate to ovate-deltate. Raylet-leaves reniform to deltate-rhombic. Rays 8-21, up to 4 times dichotomous. Glands with somewhat clavate horns. Capsule 3-3·8 × 3·5-4 mm, shallowly sulcate, granulate on the keels. Seeds 2·3 mm, ovoid-cylindrical, irregularly and shallowly rugulose, pale grey, darker in the depressions.{\i  Rocky or sandy ground near the coast. W. Mediterranean region; local.} Bl Co Ga Hs It Si.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b  E. megalatlantica} subsp.{\b  briquetii} (Emberger & Maire) Losa & Vindt,{\i  Trav. Inst. Sci. Cherif.} ser. bot., {\b 19}: 456 (1960), occurs between Lorca and Puerto de Lumbreras in S.E. Spain. It is like {\b 77} but has not more than 10 axillary rays or 5 umbel-rays and a more prominently tuberculate capsule; it may be more closely related to{\i  E. biumbellata }than to{\i  E. megalatlantica.}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 78. E. boetica} Boiss., {\i Cent. Euphorb.} 36 (1860). Glabrous, somewhat glaucous, caespitose perennial up to 40 cm, with a far-creeping rhizome; stems simple or branched at the base, with 0-6 axillary rays. Leaves 10-30 × 1-5 mm, linear to linear-lanceolate, entire, obsoletely 3(-5)-veined. Ray-leaves linear-lanceolate. Raylet-leaves lanceolate to ovate. Rays 4-6, up to 3 times dichotomous, occasionally proliferating. Glands variable in shape. Cyathial lobes usually very densely ciliate. Capsule (3·5-)5 × 4(-5) mm, shallowly sulcate, weakly punctate on the keels. Seeds 2·5 mm, ovoid, shallowly pitted, grey. {\i Scrub on dry, sandy, acid soil, usually near the sea. • S.W. Spain, S. Portugal}. Hs Lu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 79. E. bupleuroides} Desf.,{\i  Fl. Atl.}{\b  1}: 387 (1798). Glabrous, somewhat glaucous perennial up to 60 cm, with 0-7 axillary rays. Leaves 20-40 × 3-8 mm, linear-oblong to linear-oblanceolate, entire, coriaceous. Ray-leaves shorter than the cauline, often acute. Raylet-leaves elliptic-lanceolate to ovate-oblong, not much shorter than the ray-leaves, obtuse. Rays 8-12, once or twice dichotomous. Glands with 2 short horns. Cyathial lobes sparsely ciliate. Capsule 4·3 × 4·3 mm, shallowly sulcate, nearly smooth. Seeds 2·9 mm, ovoid, smooth or with numerous shallow depressions, greyish.{\i  Calcareous grassland,} c. 1300 {\i m. S.E. Spain} ({\i La Sagra}). Hs. ({\i N.W. Africa}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Represented in Europe only by subsp. {\b luteola} (Cosson & Durieu ex Boiss.) Maire,{\i  Bull. Soc. Hist. Afr. Nord}{\b  30}: 363 (1939) ({\i E. luteola} Cosson & Durieu ex Boiss.). The typical subspecies occurs in Algeria.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 80. E. nicaeensis} All.,{\i  Fl. Pedem. }{\b 1}: 285 (1785) ({\i E. goldei} Prokh., {\i E. pannonica} Host,{\i  E. stepposa} Zoz ex Prokh.,{\i  E. volgensis} Krysht.). Glabrous or minutely papillose, glaucous, often reddish-suffused perennial up to 80 cm, with 0-10(-20) axillary rays. Leaves 10-75 × 3-18 mm, lanceolate to oblong or occasionally ovate, nearly entire, obtuse, coriaceous, 3(-7)veined. Ray-leaves elliptic-ovate to suborbicular. Raylet-leaves transversely ovate or reniform, often yellowish. Rays (3-)5-18, once or twice dichotomous. Glands truncate to emarginate, or sometimes with 2 short horns. Capsule 3-4·5 × 3-4 mm, shallowly sulcate, rugulose, sometimes pubescent. Seeds 2-2·5 mm, ovoid, nearly smooth, rarely indistinctly pitted, pale grey. {\i Dry, open ground. S., E. & E.C. Europe, northwards to} c. 53°{\i  N. in E. Russia.} Al Au Bu Cz Ga Gr Hs Hu It Ju Lu Rm Rs (C, W, K, E) Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Variable in size and shape of leaves, number of rays and degree of indentation of the glands. A number of more or less local populations can be recognized and have often been given specific
\par

\par
223}
\par