{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 cumbent to ascending stems up to 20 cm, forming dense mats, much-branched but with no axillary rays. Leaves 0·4-10 × 0·4-5 cm, orbicular to obovate-elliptical, subacute or obtuse, entire; petiole up to 1·5 mm. Ray- and raylet-leaves very like the cauline. Rays 2-3, not or once dichotomous, occasionally proliferating. Glands with 2 horns. Capsule 3 × 3·5 mm, shallowly sulcate, smooth, with 2 wings on each keel, glabrous or tomentose. Seeds 2 mm, cylindrical, irregularly and shallowly pitted, pale grey. {\i Mountain rocks; calcicole. Albania, Greece and Kriti.} Al Cr Gr.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 92. E. seguierana} Necker,{\i  Acta Akad. Theod.-Pal.}{\b  2}: 493 (1770) ({\i E. gerardiana} Jacq.). Glabrous, glaucous, somewhat caespitose perennial up to 60 cm, branched or not from the base and with up to 30 axillary rays. Leaves 10-35 × 2-8 mm, linear to elliptic-oblong, entire, somewhat coriaceous. Ray-leaves ovate-lanceolate to ovate. Raylet-leaves rhombic-deltate to reniform. Rays 5-30, up to 4 times (usually twice) dichotomous. Glands transversely ovate, truncate. Capsule 2-3 × 2-3 mm, shallowly sulcate, weakly granulate on the keels, elsewhere smooth. Seeds 1·5-2 mm, ovoid-fusiform, smooth, pale grey.{\i  Dry places. Most of Europe except the north and extreme south.} Al Au Be Bu Co Cz Ga Ge Gr He Ho Hs Hu It Ju Rm Rs (C, W, K, E) Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b seguierana}: Axillary rays fewer than 10. Leaves usually erect. Umbel usually with fewer than 15 rays. Capsule 2·5-3 × 2·5-3 mm. {\i Throughout the range of the species, but rare in the Balkan peninsula}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b niciciana} (Borbás ex Novák) Rech. fil.,{\i  Ann. Naturh. Mus.} ({\i Wien}) {\b 56}: 212 (1948) ({\i E. niciciana} Borbás ex Novák): Axillary rays up to 30. Leaves often patent. Umbel with (15-)20-30 rays. Capsule 2-2·5 × 2-2·5 mm.{\i  Balkan peninsula.} Al Bu Gr Ju Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 93. E. pithyusa} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 458 (1753). Minutely papillose, glaucous, often suffruticose perennial up to 55 cm, much-branched at the base and with 0-20(-30) axillary rays, occasionally forming a whorl. Leaves 5-28(-45) × 1-12 mm, deflexed and closely imbricate at the base of the stem, linear-lanceolate to ovate-lanceolate. Ray-leaves ovate, obtuse, mucronate, entire or irregularly serrulate. Raylet-leaves transversely ovate to suborbicular. Rays 5-8, up to 4 times dichotomous, occasionally proliferating. Glands variable in shape. Capsule 2·3-3·2 × 2·5-3·5 mm, shallowly sulcate, granulate on the keels. Seeds 1·5-1·7(-2) mm, ovoid, rugulose, tuberculate or almost smooth, dark grey and whitish. 2n = 36.{\i  W. Mediterranean region.} Bl Co Ga It Sa Si.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b pithyusa}: Non-flowering branches up to 40; axillary rays not more than 20, never whorled. Leaves 5-28 mm. Glands without horns. Capsule 2·3-2·5 × 2·5-2·7 mm; seeds up to 1·7 mm. {\i Sandy and rocky shores. Throughout the range of the species, except Sicilia}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b cupanii} (Guss. ex Bertol.) A.R. Sm.,{\i  Feddes Repert.}{\b  79}: 66 (1968) ({\i E. cupanii} Guss. ex Bertol.): Non-flowering branches absent; axillary rays up to 30, sometimes whorled. Leaves up to 45 mm. Glands with 2, multifid horns. Capsule 3-3·2 × 3-3·5 mm; seeds 2 mm.{\i  Bushy and rocky places inland. Islands of W. Mediterranean region}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 94. E. paralias} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 458 (1753). Glabrous, glaucous, somewhat fleshy, caespitose perennial up to 70 cm, branched from the base, and with 0-9 axillary rays. Leaves 3-30 × 2-15 mm, lowest ones obovate-oblong, middle ones elliptic-oblong and upper ones ovate; all entire, adaxially concave, imbricate. Ray-leaves like the upper cauline. Raylet-leaves suborbicular-rhombic to reniform, strongly adaxially concave. Rays 3-6, up to 3 times dichotomous. Glands emarginate. Capsule 3-5 × 4·5-6 mm, deeply sulcate, granulate on the keels. Seeds 2·5-3·5 mm, broadly ovoid, smooth, pale grey. 2n = 16.{\i  Sandy sea-shores. Coasts of W. & S. Europe, from Ireland and the Netherlands to Romania.} Al Be Bl Br Bu Co Cr Ga Gr Hb Ho Hs It Ju Lu Rm Sa Si Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Sect. ESULA. Perennials; cauline leaves alternate, pinnately veined; glands truncate or with 2 horns; capsules with indurated pericarp; seeds smooth.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 (A) Raylet-leaves not connate; axillary non-flowering branches usually present.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 95. E. nevadensis} Boiss. & Reuter,{\i  Pugillus} 110 (1852). Glabrous, somewhat glaucous perennial up to 25 cm, simple or branched from the base and with up to 4 axillary non-flowering shoots and 3-12 axillary rays. Leaves 5-20(-30) × 2-15 mm, lanceolate to broadly ovate, rounded or cordate at the base, almost entire. Ray-leaves like the cauline but shorter. Raylet-leaves reniform, deltate-rhombic or suborbicular. Rays 5-9, not or once dichotomous. Glands with 2 horns. Capsule (2-)3 × 3·5-4 mm, deeply sulcate, granulate on the keels. Seeds 2·5 mm, ovoid, grey, shiny. •{\i  Mountains of S. & E. Spain.} Hs.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 96. E. agraria} Bieb.,{\i  Fl. Taur.-Cauc. }{\b 1}: 375 (1808). Glabrous perennial up to 90 cm, unbranched at the base and with 0-3 axillary non-flowering branches and (2-)6-24 axillary rays. Leaves (15-)25-45(-80) × 7-27 mm, triangular-ovate to oblong or (var.{\i  subhastata} (Vis. & Pancic) Griseb.) lingulate-panduriform or (var.{\i  euboea} (Halácsy) Hayek) linear-lanceolate, broadly cordate-auriculate at the base, amplexicaul, more or less entire. Ray-leaves like the cauline. Raylet-leaves triangular-subreniform. Rays (6-)8-14, up to three times dichotomous. Glands emarginate or with 2 short horns. Capsule 2·5-3 × 3-3·5 mm, deeply sulcate, granulate-rugulose on the keels. Seeds 2 mm, ovoid, grey.{\i  S.E. Europe.} Al Bu Gr Ju Rm Rs (W, K) Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 97. E. lucida} Waldst. & Kit.,{\i  Pl. Rar. Hung.}{\b  1}: 54 (1801). Robust, glabrous, perennial up to 140 cm, usually unbranched at the base but with (2-)4-6(-10) axillary non-flowering branches and 6-20 axillary rays. Leaves (25-)50-110(-130) × (7-)15-23(-35) mm, lanceolate to ovate-lanceolate, entire, somewhat shiny. Ray-leaves ovate to ovate-oblong. Raylet-leaves suborbicular-deltate. Rays 7-11, twice dichotomous. Glands with 2 horns. Capsule 3·5-4 × 4 mm, deeply sulcate, smooth. Seeds up to 3 mm, oblong-ovoid, pale grey. 2n = 36.{\i  Marshes and riverbanks. C. & S.E. Europe, extending to White Russia and C. Ukraine.} Au Bu Cz Ge Gr Hu Ju Po Rm Rs (C, W) Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 98. E. salicifolia} Host, {\i Syn. Pl. Austr.} 267 (1797). More or less glandular-pubescent perennial up to 80 cm, unbranched at the base, with 0-3 axillary non-flowering branches and 6-18 axillary rays. Leaves 25-100 × 7-35 mm, lanceolate to ovate-lanceolate, entire. Ray-leaves ovate. Raylet-leaves orbicular-deltate to reniform. Rays 9-16, up to 3 times dichotomous. Glands with 2 horns. Capsule 3 × 3·5 mm, deeply sulcate, granulate. Seeds 2 mm, ovoid, shiny, brownish. 2n = 36.{\i  Lowland meadows. • C. & S.E. Europe.} Al Au Bu Cz Ge Gr Hu Ju Rm Rs (W) ?Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 99. E. esula} L.,{\i  Sp. Pl.} 461 (1753) (incl.{\i  E. gmelinii }Steudel, {\i E. subtilis} Prokh.,{\i  E. zhiguliensis} Prokh.). Glabrous or pubescent perennial up to 120 cm. Stems usually unbranched at the base but with up to 11 axillary non-flowering branches and 0-20(-30) axillary rays. Leaves 15-85 × 0·5-15(-22) mm, linear to broadly
\par

\par
225}
\par