{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28   {\b 53. E. cuneifolia} Guss., {\i Pl. Rar. }190 (1826). Glabrous annual 5-25 cm. Stem slender, simple or sparingly branched. Leaves broadly obovate, long-cuneate, denticulate near the rounded apex. Ray-leaves like the cauline; raylet-leaves suborbicular. Rays 5, trichotomous then dichotomous. Capsule 1·5 mm, scarcely sulcate. Seeds 1-1·3 mm.{\i  Damp grassy places. C. Mediterranean region}. Co It Sa Si
\par

\par
  (H) Annual; capsule winged; seeds alveolate-reticulate.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 54. E. pterococca} Brot.,{\i  Fl. Lusit.}{\b  2}: 312 (1804). Glabrous annual 10-30 cm, often with axillary rays below the terminal umbel. Leaves obovate or spathulate, obtuse, serrulate, the lower shortly petiolate. Ray-leaves like the cauline; rayletleaves rhombic-ovate. Rays 5 (rarely more), trichotomous then dichotomous. slender. Capsule c. 1·5 mm, smooth, with 2 undulate wings on each valve. Seeds c. 1·3 mm, dark brown.{\i  Grassy places. C. Portugal to S.E. Greece, mainly in the islands.} Bl Co Gr Hs It Lu Sa Si.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   (I) Annual; capsule smooth, unwinged; seeds reticulate-rugose or transversely sulcate.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 55. E. helioscopia} L.,{\i  Sp. Pl.} 459 (1753). Erect, glabrescent annual, usually with a single stem 10-50 cm. Leaves obovate-spathulate, obtuse, serrate in the upper half. Ray- and raylet-leaves like the cauline but smaller. Rays 5, trichotomous then dichotomous. Capsule 2·5-3·5 mm. Seeds 2 mm, reticulate-rugose. 2n = 42.{\i  Disturbed ground. Almost throughout Europe, but only as a casual in the extreme north}. All except Az Fa Is Sb.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b   E. helioscopioides} Loscos & Pardo,{\i  Ser. Pl. Arag.} 93 (1863) and{\b  E. dominii} Rohlena,{\i  Sitz.-Ber. Böhm. Ges. Wiss.} ({\i Math. Nat. Kl.}) {\b 1904}({\b 38}): 83 (1905) seem to be identical and are probably dwarf variants of {\b 55}. They have several decumbent stems 3-10 cm; crowded, imbricate leaves; rays 2-3, short, and seeds c. 1 mm.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 56. E. phymatosperma} Boiss. & Gaill. in Boiss., {\i Diagn. Pl. Or. Nov.}{\b  3}({\b 4}): 83 (1859). Glabrous, glaucous annual 8-12 cm. Leaves c. 6 mm, obovate, obtuse, entire. Ray-leaves elliptical; raylet-leaves ovate-rhombic, mucronulate. Rays 3(-5). Capsule 3-4 mm. Seeds 2-2·5 mm, with 3 transverse depressions on each face. {\i S. Italy, N. Greece.} Gr It. ({\i N. Africa, S.W. Asia.})
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Represented in Europe and N. Africa by subsp. {\b cernua} (Cosson & Durieu) Vindt,{\i  Trav. Inst. Sci. Chérif.} ser. bot., {\b 2}: 82 (1953).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Sect. MYRSINITEAE (Boiss.) Tutin. Herbs. Glands crescentic, with short horns usually dilated and minutely lobed at apex. Bracts between male flowers absent.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 57. E. myrsinitess} L.,{\i  Sp. Pl.} 461 (1753). Glabrous, glaucous perennial up to 40 cm. Stems decumbent or ascending, numerous, stout, simple, densely leafy, with 0-3 axillary rays. Leaves obovate to suborbicular, cuspidate or mucronate, rather thick and fleshy. Ray-leaves obovate-spathulate to orbicular, mucronate. Raylet-leaves suborbicular to broadly cordate, mucronate. Rays (1-)5-12, once or twice dichotomous, variable in length. Glands with dilated, often weakly lobed horns. Capsule (4-)5-7 mm, glabrous, smooth or minutely tuberculate. Seeds (2-)3-4 mm, vermiculate-rugose or rarely smooth, greyish-brown.{\i  Rocky places. S. Europe, from Islas Baleares to Krym.} Al Bl Bu Co Cr Gr It Ju Rm Rs (K) Si Tu [Cz].
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Variable in size, length of rays, and degree of rugosity of seed. Populations on some of the Mediterranean islands are nearly homogeneous for these features and have been described as species:{\b  E. fontqueriana} W. Greuter,{\i  Candollea }{\b 20}: 170 (1965), in Islas Baleares,{\b  E. corsica} Req., {\i Ann. Sci. Nat. }{\b 5}: 384 (1825), in Corse, and{\b  E. rechingeri }W. Greuter,{\i  Candollea}{\b  20}: 172 (1965), in Kriti. They may merit subspecific rank, but further investigation of the species throughout its range is desirable.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 58. E. rigida} Bieb., {\i Fl. Taur.-Cauc.}{\b  1}: 375 (1808) ({\i E. biglandulosa} Desf.). Glabrous, intensely glaucous perennial with a thick woody stock. Stems 30-50 cm, stout, erect or ascending, densely leafy. Leaves lanceolate, acuminate, thick and fleshy, the lower patent, the upper almost imbricate. Ray-leaves obovate; raylet-leaves suborbicular, often mucronate. Rays 6-12, short, once or twice dichotomous. Glands with capitate, minutely lobed horns. Capsule 5-8 mm, strongly trigonous, sparsely papillose when dry. Seeds smooth, whitish when ripe. 2n = 20. {\i Dry, rocky places. S. Europe; local.} Al ?Cr Gr It Lu Rs (K) Si Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 59. E. broteri} Daveau,{\i  Bol. Soc. Brot.}{\b  3}: 33 (1885). Like {\b 58} but less glaucous; leaves linear-lanceolate, acute to subobtuse; capsule minutely hyaline-punctate and whitish-granulate; seeds shallowly and irregularly rugose-vermiculate.{\i  On acid, sandy soils. • E. Portugal, Spain}. Hs Lu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Sect. LATHYRIS Dumort. Biennial; cauline leaves decussate; capsule with spongy pericarp.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 60. E. lathyris} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 457 (1753). Glabrous, glaucous biennial up to 150 cm, with numerous axillary shoots. Leaves 30-150 × 5-25 mm, linear to oblong-lanceolate, entire. Ray-leaves ovate-lanceolate. Raylet-leaves triangular-ovate, acute, paler green than the cauline and ray-leaves. Rays 2-4, up to 8 times dichotomous. Glands with two clavate horns. Capsule 9-13 × 13-17 mm, shallowly sulcate, more or less smooth. Seeds 5 mm, barrel-shaped, rugulose, brown or grey. {\i A ruderal and weed of cultivated ground. S., W. & C. Europe, but probably native only in E. & C. Mediterranean region.} Co *Ga Gr It *Ju Sa [Au Az Be Bl Br Bu Cz Ge He Ho Hs Lu Rm].
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Sect. CYMATOSPERMUM (Prokh.) Prokh. Annuals; cauline leaves opposite or alternate; capsule with indurated mesocarp; seeds ornamented.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  (A) Seeds tuberculate or rugulose.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 61. E. aleppica} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 458 (1753). Glabrous or minutely papillose, somewhat glaucous annual up to 40 cm, sometimes with up to 30 basal branches, and 1-9(-12) axillary rays. Leaves 10-25(-50) × 0·2-3(-5) mm, very dense and closely imbricate, linear-subulate to linear-oblanceolate, entire. Ray-leaves like the upper cauline. Raylet-leaves ovate-rhombic to trullate or falcate, entire or irregularly toothed. Rays 2-4(-6) up to 5 times dichotomous. Glands with 2 horns, the horns paler than the glands. Capsule 2 mm, shallowly sulcate, more or less smooth. Seeds 1·5 mm, ovoid-tetragonous, grey with white tubercles.{\i  Cultivated or stony ground. E. & C. Mediterranean region; Krym.} Bu ?Co ?Cr *Ga Gr It Ju Rs (K) Si Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 62. E. medicaginea} Boiss., {\i Elenchus} 82 (1838). Glabrous annual up to 40 cm, with (0-)2-8 axillary rays. Leaves 20-35 × 6-12 mm, obovate-cuneate to elliptic-oblong, subobtuse or emarginate, minutely serrulate. Ray-leaves like the upper cauline. Raylet-leaves up to 13 × 19 mm, rhombic-deltate, upper ones often yellowish. Rays (3-)5, up to 5 times dichotomous. Glands with 2 horns, often longer than the glands. Capsule 2·5 × 2·5-3
\par

\par
221}
\par