{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs36\qc RUTALES
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b  88.                RUTACEAE}
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc Edit. †T.G. Tutin.
\par
\pa

\pard\f0\fs28 Herbs, shrubs or trees. Leaves alternate or opposite, simple or compound, dotted with translucent glands, exstipulate, sometimes reduced to spines. Flowers usually hermaphrodite and actinomorphic. Sepals 4-5, free or connate below. Petals 4-5. Disc present. Stamens as many or twice as many as the petals, rarely more, free or rarely monadelphous. Ovary superior, usually syncarpous and often 4- to 5-locular, but carpels occasionally united at the base only or rarely free. Styles as many as the carpels, free or connate.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Trees or large shrubs; fruit either fleshy or a samara
\par
2 Leaves simple .................................................................................. {\b 4. Citrus}
\par
2 Leaves compound
\par
3 Leaflets 5-13; fruit a black, fleshy drupe ........................... {\b 5. Phellodendron}
\par
3 Leaflets 3(-5); fruit a flat, broadly winged samara .......................... {\b 6. Ptelea}
\par
1 Herbs or dwarf shrubs; fruit a capsule
\par
4 Leaves imparipinnate; leaflets 2·5-7·5 cm, distinctly serrulate;
\par
  flowers zygomorphic, never yellow .......................................... {\b 3. Dictamnus}
\par
4 Leaves simple, 3(-5)-sect or 2- to 3-pinnatisect; lobes less than 2·5 cm,
\par
  entire or obscurely crenate-serrate; flowers actinomorphic, yellow
\par
5 Leaves 2- to 3-pinnatisect; petals 4, except in the central flower, 
\par
  dentate or fimbriate, rarely entire; filaments glabrous below ............. {\b 1. Ruta}
\par
5 Leaves simple or 3-sect, very rarely 5-sect; petals 5, entire;
\par
  filaments hairy below on inner surface ............................... {\b 2. Haplophyllum}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  Subfam.    {\b  Rutoideae}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Fruit a capsule, usually 4- to 5-valved. Seeds with endosperm.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 1.                   Ruta}                  L.
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc By C.C. Townsend.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Perennial herbs, more or less woody below. Leaves alternate, 2- to 3-pinnatisect, ultimate segments linear to obovate. Inflorescence cymose, bracteate, Sepals and petals 4, or frequently 5 in the central flower. Petals cucullate, yellow, dentate or ciliate or more rarely entire. Stamens twice as many as the petals; filaments glabrous, attenuate. Capsule 4- to 5-lobed, dehiscent. Styles connate.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 All species grow in dry, usually rocky situations.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Leaf-segments linear; pedicels shorter than the capsule; 
\par
  petals not denticulate or ciliate ..................................................... {\b 1. montana}
\par
1 Leaf-segments oblanceolate to oblong-obovate; pedicels as long
\par
  as or longer than the capsule; petals denticulate or ciliate
\par
2 Petals fringed with long cilia
\par
3 Bracts not or scarcely wider than the branches which they subtend; 
\par
  plant glandular-puberulent above ............................................ {\b 2. angustifolia}
\par
3 Lower bracts much wider than the branches which they subtend;
\par
  plant glabrous throughout ........................................................ {\b 3. chalepensis}
\par
2 Petals denticulate, without long cilia
\par
4 Sepals lanceolate, acute; pedicels slightly longer that the capsule
\par
  .................................................................................................... {\b 4. graveolens}
\par
4 Sepals deltate-ovate, obtuse; pedicels at least twice as long 
\par
  as the capsule .................................................................................. {\b 5. corsica}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. R. montana} (L.) L.,{\i  Amoen. Acad.}{\b  3}: 52 (1756). Stem 15-70 cm, glabrous below the inflorescence. Lower leaves petiolate, the upper sessile; ultimate segments up to 1 mm wide, rather thick, linear, those of the upper leaves up to 12 mm. Inflorescence dense, the ultimate branches often subracemose; pedicels shorter than capsule; inflorescence-branches, pedicels, bracts and sepals more or less densely glandular. Sepals lanceolate, acuminate. Petals oblong, undulate but scarcely denticulate. Capsule glabrous; segments obtuse and rounded at apex.{\i  S.W. Europe; very locally also in C. & E. Mediterranean region}. Bl Ga Gr Hs It Lu Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. R. angustifolia} Pers.,{\i  Syn. Pl.}{\b  1}: 464 (1805). Stem 25-75 cm, glabrous below the inflorescence. Lower leaves shortly petiolate; ultimate segments 1·25-3·5 mm wide, obovate-lanceolate to narrowly oblong. Inflorescence rather lax; pedicels as long as or longer than the capsule; bracts lanceolate, not or scarcely wider than the subtended branch; inflorescence branches, pedicels, bracts and sepals glandular-puberulent. Sepals deltate-ovate, subacute. Petals oblong, fringed with cilia frequently as long as the width of the petal. Capsule glabrous; segments acuminate.{\i  W. Mediterranean region, extending to N.W. Jugoslavia.} Bl Co Ga Hs It Ju Lu Sa Si.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 3. R. chalepensis} L.,{\i  Mantissa} 69 (1767) ({\i R. bracteosa} DC.). Stem 20-60 cm, glabrous. Lower leaves more or less long-petiolate; ultimate segments 1·5-6 mm wide, narrowly oblong-lanceolate or obovate. Inflorescence lax; pedicels as long as or longer than the capsule; branches and pedicels glabrous, rarely a very few minute glands above; bracts wider than the subtended branch, the lower several times so, cordate-ovate. Sepals glabrous, deltate-ovate. Petals oblong, fringed with cilia not as long as the width of the petal. Capsule glabrous; segments acuminate.{\i  S. Europe.} Al Az Bl Co Cr Ga Gr Hs It Ju Lu Sa Si.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b  R. fumariifolia} Boiss. & Heldr. in Boiss.,{\i  Diagn. Pl. Or. Nov.}{\b  2}({\b 8}): 125 (1849), from Kriti, appears to be only a depauperate form or small variety of {\b 3}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 4. R. graveolens} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 383 (1753). Glabrous throughout; stem 14-45 cm. Lower leaves more or less long-petiolate, the uppermost subsessile; ultimate segments 2-9 mm wide, lanceolate to narrowly oblong or obovate. Inflorescence rather lax; pedicels as long as or longer than the capsule; bracts lanceolate, leaf-like. Sepals lanceolate, acute. Petals oblong-ovate, denticulate, undulate. Capsule glabrous; segments somewhat narrowed above to an obtuse apex. {\i Balkan peninsula and Krym; perhaps elsewhere in Mediterranean region; widely naturalized from gardens in S. & S.C. Europe}. Al *Bl Bu Ga *Hs Ju Rs (K) Tu [Au Co Cz Ga Ge Gr He Hu It Rm].
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 5. R. corsica} DC.,{\i  Prodr.}{\b  1}: 710 (1824). Glabrous throughout; stem 18-45 cm, much-branched from the base upwards. Lower leaves with petioles up to 8 cm, the uppermost subsessile; ultimate segments 1·5-7 mm wide, obovate to cuneate-orbicular. Inflorescence lax, virgate; pedicels ascending, the lower up to 7 times as long as the capsule, the upper twice as long. Sepals deltate-ovate, obtuse. Petals broadly ovate, pale yellow, denticulate, undulate. Capsule-segments acuminate. •{\i  Mountains of Corse and Sardegna.} Co Sa.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 2.                 Haplophyllum}                A. Juss.
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc By C.C. Townsend.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Perennial herbs, sometimes woody below. Leaves alternate, entire, lanceolate to elliptical or linear, rarely broadly ovate, or 3-sect with lanceolate or linear segments, rarely some leaves
\par

\par
227}
\par