{\rtf1\ansi \deff4\deflang1033{\fonttbl{\f4\froman\fcharset0\fprq2 Times New Roman;}}{\colortbl;\red0\green0\blue0;\red0\green0\blue255;\red0\green255\blue255;\red0\green255\blue0;\red255\green0\blue255;\red255\green0\blue0;\red255\green255\blue0;\red255\green255\blue255;\red0\green0\blue128;\red0\green128\blue128;\red0\green128\blue0;\red128\green0\blue128;\red128\green0\blue0;\red128\green128\blue0;\red128\green128\blue128;\red192\green192\blue192;}{\stylesheet{\widctlpar \f4\fs20\lang2057 \snext0 Normal;}{\*\cs10 \additive Default Paragraph Font;}}{\info{\author dddd}{\operator dddd}{\creatim\yr1998\mo11\dy11\hr17\min9}{\revtim\yr1998\mo11\dy11\hr17\min10}{\version2}{\edmins1}{\nofpages4}{\nofwords1016}{\nofchars5795}{\*\company  }{\vern57431}}\widowctrl\ftnbj\aenddoc\hyphcaps0 \fet0\sectd \linex0 {\*\pnseclvl1\pnucrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl2\pnucltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl3\pndec\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl4\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl5\pndec\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl6\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl7\pnlcrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl8\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl9\pnlcrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}
\pard\plain \ \f4\fs20\lang2057 {\fs28 sparsely hairy. Seeds 2\'b78-3 mm, ovoid, smooth, dark brown.}{\i\fs28  Grassy slopes and margins of fields. C. & S. Portugal}{\fs28 . ?Hs Lu.(}{\i\fs28 Morocco}{\fs28 .)
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 41. E. monchiquensis}{\fs28  Franco & P. Silva,}{\i\fs28  Feddes Repert.}{\b\fs28  79}{\fs28 : 56 (1968) (}{\i\fs28 E. rupicola}{\fs28  var.}{\i\fs28  major}{\fs28  Boiss.). Like }{\b\fs28 40}{\fs28  but up to 100 cm; leaves 50-80 \'d7 12-20 mm, lanceolate, entire, glabrous or very sparsely villous; ray-leaves narrowly rhombic; capsule rather sparsely tuberculate; seeds ellipsoid. \bullet }{\i\fs28  S.W. Portugal.}{\fs28  Lu.
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 42. E. clementei}{\fs28  Boiss.,}{\i\fs28  Elenchus}{\fs28  82 (1838). More or less glabrous perennial 30-70 cm, with a napiform tuber. Stems terete, ascending, woody at base, sometimes with numerous slender axillary rays, usually bearing a single cyathium. Leaves obovate-oblong, obtuse, narrowed to a very short petiole, serrulate. Ray-leaves broadly ovate or rhombic, much shorter than rays; raylet-leaves suborbicular, entire. Rays 5. Capsule 4-5 mm, with a few hemispherical tubercles. Seeds 2\'b75-3\'b75 mm, smooth, reddish-brown.}{\i\fs28  Scrub and calcareous rocky places. S. Portugal, S. Spain.}{\fs28  Hs Lu. (}{\i\fs28 N.W. Africa}{\fs28 .)
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 43. E. bivonae}{\fs28  Steudel,}{\i\fs28  Nomencl. Bot.}{\fs28  ed. 2,}{\b\fs28  1}{\fs28 : 610 (1840). Glabrous shrub up to 150 cm. Stems leafless below, densely leafy above, not persistent and spiny when dead. Leaves linear-lanceolate, to ovate-lanceolate, acute or acuminate, rarely obtuse, entire. Ray-leaves ovate, as long as or longer than rays; raylet-leaves broadly obovate. Rays 5, short, dichotomous. Capsule 3\'b75-4\'b78 mm, glabrous, sulcate, with low, broad tubercles.Seeds 3 mm, smooth, dark brown, shiny.}{\i\fs28  Calcareous rocks near the sea. Sicilia}{\fs28  (}{\i\fs28  W. coast}{\fs28  ), }{\i\fs28 Malta. }{\fs28 Si. (}{\i\fs28 N. Africa.}{\fs28 )
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 44. E. squamigera}{\fs28  Loisel., }{\i\fs28 Fl. Gall.}{\fs28  729 (1807) (}{\i\fs28 E. rupicola}{\fs28  Boiss.). Shrub 60-120 cm. Stems branched, bare below, densely leafy above. Leaves 25-50 mm, linear-lanceolate to narrowly elliptical, mucronate, glabrous or pubescent beneath, entire or obscurely serrulate. Ray-leaves elliptic-ovate; raylet-leaves rhombic- or orbicular-ovate, obtuse, mucronate, yellowish at flowering time. Rays 5. Capsule 4-5 mm, sulcate, covered with short, cylindrical tubercles. Seeds 2\'b78-3 mm, smooth, brown.}{\i\fs28  Calcareous rocks. S. & E. Spain.}{\fs28  Hs. (}{\i\fs28 N. Africa}{\fs28 .)
\par 
\par }{\b\fs28  E. carthaginensis}{\fs28  Porta & Rigo ex Willk.,}{\i\fs28  Ill. Fl. Hisp.}{\b\fs28  2}{\fs28 :154 (1892), from S.E. Spain, is doubtfully distinct from }{\b\fs28 44}{\fs28 . It is said to be pruinose and to have a capsule c. 3 mm, with broad, scale-like tubercles and slightly smaller seeds.
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 45. E. spinosa}{\fs28  L., }{\i\fs28 Sp.Pl.}{\fs28  457 (1753). Glabrous,freely branched shrub 10-30 cm. Dead branches and umbel-rays more or less persistent but not pungent. Leaves 5-15(-20) mm, lanceolate or linear-lanceolate, entire. Ray-leaves obovate, about as long as rays, yellowish. Rays 1-5, very short, each usually with 1-cyathium. Capsule 3-4 mm, weakly sulcate, usually with long (rarely short) tubercles. Seeds 2-3 mm, smooth, brown. 2n = 14.}{\i\fs28  Dry, rocky places. \bullet  Mediterranean region, from France to Albania.}{\fs28  Al Co Ga It Ju Sa Si.
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 46. E. glabriflora}{\fs28  Vis.,}{\i\fs28  Mem. Ist. Veneto}{\b\fs28  12}{\fs28 : 477 (1864). Small, glabrous shrub with a thick, woody stock. Stems 10-20 cm, woody below, with slender, annual flowering branches. Leaves linear-lanceolate to elliptic-oblong, acute or obtuse, glaucous, punctate. Ray-leaves rather wider than the cauline, equalling or exceeding rays; raylet-leaves ovate or obovate, yellow. Rays (1-)3-5. Capsule c. 4 mm, with long, slender tubercles. Seeds smooth.}{\i\fs28  Stony slopes on mountains. \bullet  Balkan peninsula}{\fs28 . Al Gr Ju.
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 47. E. acanthothamnos}{\fs28  Heldr. & Sart. ex Boiss.,}{\i\fs28  Diagn. Pl. Or. Nov.}{\b\fs28  3}{\fs28 (}{\b\fs28 4}{\fs28 ): 86 (1859). Glabrous, intricately branched shrub 10-30 cm, with the branches usually terminating in paired spines formed from the indurated, forked rays of the umbels. Leaves elliptical to elliptic-obovate, obtuse or acute, entire. Ray-leaves like the cauline; raylet-leaves cuneate-obovate, yellow. Rays 3(-4). Capsule 3-4 mm, sulcate, with short, conical tubercles.Seeds 2 mm, smooth, brown.}{\i\fs28  Rocky places; lowland. Greece and Aegean region.}{\fs28  Cr Gr ?Ju.
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 48. E. chamaebuxus}{\fs28  Bernard ex Gren. & Godron, }{\i\fs28 Fl. Fr.Prosp.}{\fs28  8 (1846). Glabrous perennial 5-15 cm, with a slender rhizome. Stems scaly at base. Leaves obovate to elliptical, obtuse or acute, mucronulate, entire. Ray-leaves like the cauline, nearly equalling the rays. Rays 2-3, or the umbel often reduced to a single cyathium. Glands 4, reddish. Capsule c. 5 mm, covered with obtuse, flattened, flap-like tubercles. Seeds 1\'b78-2 mm smooth, brown.}{\i\fs28  Mountain rocks and screes. \bullet  W. Pyrenees, Cordillera Cantabrica, Sierra Nevada.}{\fs28  Ga Hs.
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 49. E. capitulata}{\fs28  Reichenb.,}{\i\fs28  Fl. Germ. Excurs.}{\fs28  873 (1832). Glabrous perennial 1-10 cm, with numerous stems from a slender rhizome. Leaves less than 10 mm, obovate, obtuse, entire, usually imbricate. Ray-leaves like the cauline but shorter. Cyathium solitary. Glands 8, purple, Capsule sulcate, with hemispherical or cylindrical, inflated tubercles. Seeds smooth.}{\i\fs28  Mountain rocks and screes. \bullet  Balkan peninsula.}{\fs28  Al Gr Ju.
\par 
\par (E) Annual; capsule tuberculate; seeds smooth.
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 50. E. platyphyllos}{\fs28  L.,}{\i\fs28  Sp.Pl.}{\fs28  460 (1753). Glabrous or pubescent annual 15-80(-110) cm. Stems with numerous axillary rays. Leaves obovate- to oblong-lanceolate, serrulate, acute,deeply cordate at base. Ray-leaves elliptic-oblong; raylet-leaves deltate, the lowest markedly different from the ray-leaves and similar to those subtending the cyathia. Rays usually 5. Capsule 2-3 mm, covered with hemispherical tubercles, shallowly sulcate. Seeds 1\'b78-2\'b72 mm, olive-brown.}{\i\fs28  S., W. & C. Europe.}{\fs28  Al Au Be Bl *Br Bu Co Cr Cz Ga Ge Gr He *Ho Hs Hu It Ju Po Rm Rs (W, K) Si Tu.
\par 
\par }{\b\fs28  E. gaditana}{\fs28  Cosson,}{\i\fs28  Not. Pl. Crit.}{\fs28  46 (1849), was collected once only in cultivated ground in S.W. Spain (Sanlucar de Barrameda, N. of Cadiz). It is probably an abnormal form of }{\b\fs28 50}{\fs28  with the leaves narrowed at the base (or the lower shortly petiolate) and with smaller seeds (c. 1 mm).
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 51. E. serrulata}{\fs28  Thuill.,}{\i\fs28  Fl. Paris}{\fs28  ed. 2, 237 (1799) (}{\i\fs28 E. stricta}{\fs28  L., nom. illegit.). Like }{\b\fs28 50}{\fs28  but usually more slender and smaller,always glabrous; umbel with (2-)4-5 rays; raylet-leaves becoming narrower downwards and passing gradually into the ray-leaves;capsule 2\'b75 mm or less, deeply sulcate, covered with cylindrical tubercles which are longer than wide; seeds 1\'b72-1\'b75 mm, red-brown.}{\i\fs28  S., C. & W. Europe.}{\fs28  Al Au Be Br Bu Co Cz Ga Ge Gr He Ho Hs Hu It Ju Po Rm Rs (W, K) Tu.
\par 
\par (F) Perennial; capsule tuberculate; seeds minutely tuberculate.
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 52. E. pubescens}{\fs28  Vahl,}{\i\fs28  Symb. Bot. }{\b\fs28 2}{\fs28 : 55 (1791). Densely pubescent to subglabrous perennial up to 100 cm. Stem stout, sometimes with axillary rays. Leaves oblong-lanceolate to linear, acute to subobtuse, cordate at base, denticulate or nearly entire. Ray-leaves elliptical to obovate; raylet-leaves rhombic-ovate, subcordate at base. Rays 5-6. Capsule (2-)3-4 mm, deeply sulcate, villous or subglabrous, with oblong tubercles.Seeds (1\'b75-)2-2\'b75 mm, dark brown, with paler, small, irregular tubercles. 2n = 14.}{\i\fs28  Damp meadows and river-banks. S. Europe}{\fs28 . Al Bl Co Cr Ga Gr Hs It Ju Lu Sa Si Tu.
\par 
\par (G) Annual; capsule with 2 rows of tubercles on each valve; seeds verruculose.
\par 
\par 220}
\par }