{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 fimbriate, deep pink or purple; stamens deep pink, rather short, remaining erect and coloured after petal-fall; styles greenish or deep pink; receptacle and carpels hairy. 2n = 28.{\i  N.W. & C. Europe.} Au Be Br Cz Ga Ge He Ho Hu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Related species include:
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b  R. adornatus} P. J. Mueller ex Wirtgen, {\i Flora} ({\i Regensb}.){\b  42}: 234 (1859). 2n = 28. Au Be Br Cz Ga Ge He Ho.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b  R. hartmanii} Gand. ex Sudre,{\i  Bull. Acad. Int. Géogr. Bot. }({\i Le Mans}) {\b 15}: 229 (1905) ({\i R. horridus }Hartman, non C. F. Schultz). 2n = 35. Br Su.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b  R. oigocladus} P. J. Mueller & Lefevre, {\i Pollichia}{\b  16-17}: 134 (1859). Br Ga Ge He.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 64. R. pilocarpus} Gremli,{\i  Beitr. Fl. Schweiz} 42 (1870) ({\i R. obtruncatus} subsp.{\i  pilocarpus} (Gremli) Sudre). Stems becoming blackish-purple; some prickles large, hairy, strong, confluent, straight or curved, others smaller, stout and sometimes gland-tipped. Leaflets 3-5, imbricate, tough, tomentose beneath; terminal leaflet orbicular or broadly ovate-acuminate, coarsely biserrate. Inflorescence large, many-flowered with 1-2, long, compound, patent branches below and corymbose at apex; axis stout, tomentose, with prickles like those of the stem; flowers usually less than 2 cm in diameter. Sepals aculeolate; petals suborbicular, emarginate, fimbriate, pink or white; stamens white, about equalling the reddish or greenish styles; anthers sometimes pubescent; carpels densely pubescent.{\i  N.W. & C. Europe. }Au Br Cz Ga Ge He Hu Ju.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Related species include:
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b  R. glottocalyx} G. Beck, {\i Fl. Nieder-Österr.}{\b  2}({\b 1}): 739 (1892). Au.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b  R. obtruncatus }P. J. Mueller,{\i  Flora} ({\i Regensb}.) 41: 152 (1858). Au Be ?Cz Ga Ge He Hu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 65. R. lejeunei} Weihe & Nees in Bluff & Fingerh., {\i Comp. Fl. Germ. }{\b 1}: 683 (1825). Stems robust, long, climbing, obtusely angled, not pruinose, sparsely hairy, with very short glands, and with tubercle-based acicles and pricklets; prickles unequal, long-based, tapering, straight or curved. Leaflets 3-5, large, glabrescent above, pubescent or glabrescent beneath; terminal leaflet rather long, obovate, acuminate, subcuneate at base, unevenly serrate or almost biserrate. Inflorescence pyramidal, with numerous paniculate lower branches and a subracemose apex; axis tomentose, with unequal red glands (some longer than the diameter of the rhachis), unequal acicles and rather short, subulate pricklets; flowers usually more than 2 cm in diameter. Sepals more or less deflexed after anthesis, tomentose, glandular, aculeolate, greenish, with a narrow, white margin; petals broadly elliptical, glabrous, bright pink; stamens red, pink or white, slightly exceeding the greenish, pink-based styles; receptacle pubescent; carpels glabrous or subglabrous. 2n = 35. {\i W. & C. Europe.} ?Au Be Br Ga Ge He Hs Hu It Lu Po.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Related species include:
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b  R. festivus} P. J. Mueller & Wirtgen ex Focke,{\i  Syn. Rub. Germ. }314 (1877). Be Br Ge He.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 66. R. rosaceus} Weihe & Nees in Bluff & Fingerh.,{\i  Comp. Fl. Germ.}{\b  1}: 685 (1825). Stems deep purple, obtusely angled, sulcate, glabrous or hairy, with numerous short glands and acicles; prickles unequal, short, patent, straight, some very small. Leaflets 3-5, deep green, glabrous or glabrescent above, pubescent beneath; terminal leaflet large, ovate or suborbicular, 3-4 times as long as its petiolule, acuminate, cordate, margins incise-serrate. Inflorescence pyramidal, many-flowered, often pendent, racemose at the apex; axis hairy, with numerous long, purple glands, some longer than the diameter of the axis, and unequal, short, straight or falcate prickles; pedicels and middle and lower branches all more or less patent; pedicels short; flowers usually less than 2 cm in diameter. Sepals becoming appressed to fruit, tomentose, green, glandular, appendiculate; petals 5-7(-11), suborbicular-ovate or obovate, pink; stamens usually pink, exceeding the mostly red styles; receptacle slightly hairy; carpels glabrous or pubescent. 2n = 28.{\i  N.W. & C. Europe}. Au Be Br Cz Ga Ge He Ho Hu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 67. R. histrix} Weihe & Nees in Bluff & Fingerh., {\i Comp. Fl. Germ.}{\b  1}: 687 (1825). Stems angled, reddish, glaucescent, glabrous or glabrescent, with numerous glands, acicles and prickles; prickles very long, unequal, broad-based, straight or falcate. Leaflets 3-5, large, subimbricate, bright green, sparsely hairy above, pale green, tomentose beneath; terminal leaflet suborbicular-ovate to elliptical, emarginate, long-acuminate, coarsely and sharply serrate. Inflorescence pyramidal, lax, leafy; axis with glands longer than its diameter, and numerous long, very unequal purplish-brown, slender, often falcate prickles; upper bracts long, linear-lanceolate; flowers usually more than 2 cm in diameter. Sepals patent to erect after anthesis, long-acuminate, green, tomentose, glandular and aculeolate; petals 5-7, ovate, emarginate, glabrous or glabrescent, bright pink; stamens pink, exceeding the red or yellow-based styles; receptacle glabrescent; carpels glabrous. 2n = 28.{\i  N.W. & C. Europe}. Au Be Br ?Cz Ga Ge ?Ho Hu Po Rm.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Related species include:
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b  R. abietinus} Sudre, {\i Bull. Assoc. Fr. Bot. }{\b 2}: 3 (1899). Au Br Ga Ge.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b  R. pseudodoftanensis} E. I. Nyárády in Savul., {\i Fl. Rep. Pop. Române}{\b  4}: 921 (1956). Rm.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b  R. rufescens} P.J.Mueller & Lefevre,{\i  Pollichia}{\b  16-17}: 152 (1859). 2n = 28. Be Br Ga Ge.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 68. R. koehleri} Weihe & Nees in Bluff & Fingerh.,{\i  Comp. Fl. Germ.}{\b  1}: 681 (1825). Stems angled, glaucescent, hairy or glabrescent, with numerous glands, acicles (some gland-tipped) and pricklets; prickles very unequal and numerous, yellowish, some very long, patent and straight or slightly falcate. Leaflets 5, tough, glabrescent above, pubescent beneath; terminal leaflet elliptic-obovate, acuminate, subcordate to entire at base, coarsely and very unevenly dentate to finely serrate-dentate. Inflorescence rather long and narrow, more or less cylindrical, with or without some simple leaves; axis more or less hairy, with prickles like those of the stem, and some of the glands longer than the diameter of the axis; upper branches 1- to 3-flowered, patent, the lower more erect; flowers usually more than 2 cm in diameter. Sepals somewhat deflexed to patent after flowering, sometimes appressed to fruit in the terminal flowers, green, tomentose, glandular and aculeolate, appendiculate; petals ovate-elliptical attenuate below, white or pale pink; stamens white, shorter than or much exceeding the greenish styles; receptacle and carpels glabrous, or {\i the carpels slightly pubescent. 2n = 28. W. & C. Europe}. Au Be Br Cz Ga Ge Hb He Ho Hu It Ju Lu Po Rm.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Very variable.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Related species include:
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b  R. apricus }Wimmer, {\i Fl. Schles.} ed. 3, 626 (1857). 2n = 28. Au Be Br Cz Ga Ge Hu Po Rs (W).
\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b  R. bavaricus} (Focke) Sudre,{\i  Bull. Acad. Int. Géogr. Bot.} ({\i Le Mans}) {\b 15}: 229 (1905). Au Cz Ge He Hu.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b  R. caroli} G. Beck,{\i  Fl. Nieder-Österr.}{\b  2}({\b 1}): 738 (1892). Au.
\par

\par
22}
\par