{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b  R. dasyphyllus} (Rogers) Rogers,{\i  Jour. Bot.} ({\i London}) {\b 38}: 496 (1900). 2n = 28. Br Da Ga Hb.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b R. doranus} Sudre, {\i Bull. Soc. Bot. Fr.}{\b  51}: 23 (1904). Ga Hu.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b R. gerezianus} Samp. ex Coutinho, {\i Fl. Port.} 301 (1913). Lu.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b  R. hamatulus} (Sabr.) Hayek, {\i Fl. Steierm.}{\b  1}: 805 (1909). Au.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b  R. hebecarpos} P. J. Mueller,{\i  Bonplandia}{\b  9}: 282 (1861) ({\i R. hebeticarpos} P.J. Mueller). Br Cz He Ho Hu Lu Po Rm.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b  R. impolitus} Sudre,{\i  Fl. Toulous.} 75 (1907). Au Cz Ga Ge.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b R. perneggensis} (Hayek) Fritsch,{\i  Exkursionsfl. Österr.} ed. 3, 218 (1922).Au.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b  R. proximus} Sudre, {\i Rubi Eur.} 186 (1912). Au.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b  R. pygmaeopsis} Focke, {\i Syn. Rub. Germ.} 364 (1877). Au Be Br Cz Ge.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b  R. pygmaeus} Weihe & Nees in Bluff & Fingerh.,{\i  Comp. Fl. Germ.}{\b  1}: 687 (1825). Au Cz Ge.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b  R. spinulatus} Boulay,{\i  Ronces Vosg.} 101 (1868). Au Br Cz Ga He.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b  R. spissifolius} Sudre, {\i Bull. Acad. Int. Géogr. Bot}. ({\i Le Mans}) {\b 12}: 69 (1903). Ga Ge Hu.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b  R. subpygmaeopsis} Spribille,{\i  Verh. Bot. Ver. Brandenb.}{\b  49}: 195 (1908). Au Ge Hu.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b R. vagabundus} Samp., {\i Ann. Sci. Nat.} ({\i Porto}){\b  9}: 69 (1905). Lu.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b R. vastus} (Sabr.) Hayek, {\i Fl. Steierm.}{\b  1}: 796 (1909). Au.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b R. vestitifolius} Fritsch ex Halácsy,{\i  Verh. Zool.-Bot. Ges. Wien }{\b 41}: 252 (1891). Au.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 69. R. incanescens} Bertol.,{\i  Fl. Ital.}{\b  5}: 223 (1844). Stems robust, obtusely angled, pruinose, with numerous, rather long, often glandular, hairs and acicles, otherwise glabrous; prickles straight or slightly curved, rather unequal, the largest very broad-based. Leaves pedate; leaflets 3-5, large, glabrous above, sparsely grey-white tomentose beneath; terminal leaflet obovate-acuminate, unevenly dentate. Inflorescence large, leafy at the base, with long, lax branches; axis densely tomentose, with numerous glandular hairs and acicles; prickles subulate; peduncles long. Sepals short, partially appressed to developing fruit; petals oblong, white or sometimes red; stamens exceeding the styles; carpels glabrous.{\i  S.W. Europe.} Ga Hs It Lu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 The affinities of this species are uncertain, and it has some characteristics of the Ser. {\i Glandulosi}. It . pollen quality and size suggest it is diploid.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Series{\i  Glandulosi }P. J. Mueller. Stems weak, terete, often procumbent, pruinose; prickles weak, or broad-based and curved. Inflorescence-axis usually with weak prickles; sepals usually appressed to the young fruit; petals often small; stamens usually equalling or exceeding styles.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28{\b  R. merinoi} Pau ex Merino,{\i  Bol. Soc. Aragon. Ci. Nat. }{\b 3}: 188 (1904) is a species in Ser.{\i  Glandulosi }occurring in N.W. Spain; its affinities are not known.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 70. R. scaber} Weihe & Nees in Bluff & Fingerh.,{\i  Comp. Fl. Germ. }{\b 1}: 683 (1825). Stems weak, terete or obtusely angled, glaucescent, more or less hairy, with short glands and weak prickles; prickles at base of stem large, weak and straight, those on upper part of the stem often falcate, with a stout base. Leaves pedate; leaflets 3-5, small, plicate, rugose, slightly hairy above and beneath; terminal leaflet ovate-elliptical or obovate, acuminate, cordate to rounded at base, finely or deeply and rather evenly serrate. Inflorescence pyramidal, dense at the apex, sometimes large and pendent, with patent branches; axis flexuous, with weak, yellowish, falcate prickles, shortly hairy, with pale glands shorter than the diameter of the axis, but longer than the tomentum and sometimes mixed with much longer glands; flowers 1-2 cm in diameter. Sepals soon appressed to young fruit, or deflexed, triangular-lanceolate, acuminate, tomentose, finely glandular and aculeolate, green, with white margin ; petals small, ovate or ovate-lanceolate, glabrous on the margin, erect, white or flesh-pink; stamens white, equalling or exceeding the greenish or reddish styles; receptacle hairy; carpels glabrous. 2n = 28. {\i N.W. & C. Europe, extending to Bulgaria.} Au Be Br Bu Cz Ga Ge Hb He Hu Po Rm.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Related species include:
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b  R. curtiglandulosus} Sudre,{\i  Bull. Acad. Int. Géogr. Bot.} ({\i Le Mans}) {\b 12}: 87 (1903). Au Be Br Cz Ga Ge He Hu.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b  R. fragariiflorus} P. J. Mueller,{\i  Flora} ({\i Regensb}.) {\b 41}: 173 (1858). Au Cz Ga Ge Hu.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b  R. miostilus} Boulay,{\i  Ronces Vosg.} 105 (1868) ({\i R. myostylus} auct.). Au Ga Ge Hs Lu.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b  R. tereticaulis} P. J. Mueller,{\i  Flora} ({\i Regensb.}) {\b 41}: 173 (1858). Au Be Br Bu Cz Ga He Hu Rm.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 71. R. schleicheri} Weihe ex Tratt.,{\i  Rosac. Monogr.}{\b  3}: 22 (1823). Stems trailing, usually terete, red, glaucescent, villous, with numerous yellowish-brown, unequal glands, acicles and prickles. Leaflets 3-5, rather small, hairy above and beneath, the midrib glandular beneath; terminal leaflet ovate or elliptical, long-acuminate, narrowed to a broad, truncate, often subcordate base; margins unevenly and deeply biserrate. Inflorescence nodding, racemose above, the middle branches crowded; bracts long, linear; axis usually tomentose and with long patent hairs, densely and unequally glandular, the glands mostly longer than the diameter of the axis; prickles yellowish, hooked, numerous on the pedicels; flowers 1-1·5 cm in diameter. Sepals patent to erecto-patent, rarely deflexed, tomentose, glandular, aculeolate, green; petals narrow, oblong-spathulate, sometimes emarginate, glabrous, more or less patent, white or pinkish; stamens white, usually exceeding the greenish styles; receptacle and carpels usually hairy. Fruit small, of c. 10 drupelets. 2n = 28.{\i  N.W. & C. Europe, extending to Bulgaria}. Au Be Br Bu Cz Ga Ge He ?Ho Hu Ju Po Rm.
\par

\par
 
\pard\f0\fs28 Very variable in shape of leaves, clothing of axis of inflorescence, length of stamens and posture of sepals.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Related species include:
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b  R. amplifrons} Sudre, {\i Bull. Acad. Int. Géogr. Bot.} ({\i Le Mans}){\b  21}: 51 (1911). Au Cz Ga Ge Hu.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b  R. antonii} Sabr., {\i Verh. Zool.-Bot. Ges. Wien}{\b  58}: 83 (1908) ( ? non {\i  R. koehleri} var.{\i  antonii} Borbás). Au Cz Ge.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b  R. caeruleicaulis} Sudre, {\i Bull. Soc. Etud. Sci. Angers }{\b 35}: 47 (1906). Au Ga Ge Hu.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b R. conterminus} Sudre,{\i  Bull. Assoc. Fr. Bot.}{\b  4}: 6 (1901). Au Cz Ga Ge Hu.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b  R. eumorphus} Kupcsok & Sabr.,{\i  Magyar Bot. Lapok}{\b  9}: 225 (1910). Au.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b R. fissurarum} Sudre,{\i  Bull. Acad. Int. Géogr. Bot.} ({\i Le Mans}) {\b 12}: 75 (1903). Au Be Cz Ga Ge Hu.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b R. furvus} Sudre,{\i  Bull. Assoc. Fr. Bot. }{\b 4}: 3 (1901). Au Cz Ga Ge He Hu Po.

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b  R. humifusus} Weihe & Nees in Bluff & Fingerh., {\i Comp. Fl. Germ.}{\b  1} : 685 (1825). Au Br Cz Ga Ge He Ho Hu Po Rs (W).
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b R. inaequabilus} Sudre,{\i  Bull. Acad. Int. Géogr. Bot.} ({\i Le Mans}){\b  12}: 78 (1903). Au Cz Ga Ge Hu.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b R. laceratus }P.J. Mueller, {\i Pollichia }{\b 16-17}: 229 (1859). Au Cz Ga Ge Hu.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b  R. longicuspis} P. J. Mueller ex Genev.,{\i  Mem. Soc. Acad.}({\i Angers}){\b  24}: 120 (1868). Au Cz Ga Ge Hu
\par

\par
23}
\par