{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28  less than 1 mm, linear; wings 3-3·5 mm, oblanceolate, obtuse, whitish, with 1 main vein and obscure branches. Corolla c. 2·5 mm, purple; upper petals narrowly oblong, shorter than keel; keel with a small crest. Filaments united for 4/5 of their length, ciliate at the base. Capsule 2·5-3 × 1·5-2 mm, obcordate, wider than wings. •{\i  W. Mediterranean region, from N. Italy to E. Spain.} Ga Hs It.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 7. P. sibirica} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 702 (1753). Erect or ascending perennial 10-20 cm; stems numerous, sparsely crispate-pubescent. Leaves ovate to lanceolate, acute, somewhat hairy. Racemes pseudoterminal, lax, with 5-10 flowers. Outer sepals subequal; wings 6-7 × 2-3 mm, curving upwards so as to expose the keel, obliquely ovate-lanceolate, finely ciliate, greenish. Corolla about as long as wings, lilac or blue; upper petals narrowly spathulate; keel exserted; crest conspicuous, with very fine lobes. Filaments mostly free in the upper 1/5 of their length, ciliate at the base. Style bent at right angles. Capsule c. 5 mm, suborbicular.{\i  Dry, calcareous slopes. S. & C. Russia, Ukraine, C. & E. Romania.} Rm Rs (C, W, E).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 8. P. subuniflora} Boiss. & Heldr. in Boiss., {\i Diagn. Pl. Or. Nov.}{\b  3}({\b 1}): 59 (1853). Small, decumbent perennial 5-8 cm. Leaves numerous, closely imbricate, obovate, obtuse. Racemes pseudolateral, with 1 or 2 blue flowers. Wings oblong-obovate, exceeding the corolla. Upper petals spathulate, exceeding the keel; crest of keel small, 5- to 7-lobed. Filaments united except for a small apical portion. Style short, erect; lower lobe of stigma acute, about as long as style.{\i  Mountain rocks. • S. Greece} ({\i Aroania Oros}). Gr.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 9. P. supina} Schreber,{\i  Icon. Descr. Pl. }19 (1766). Procumbent to suberect perennial with woody stock; stems 8-30 cm, numerous, puberulent. Lower leaves obovate to orbicular, obtuse or mucronate. Flowers blue. Wings slightly oblique, suborbicular to lanceolate, slightly exceeding corolla. Filaments united throughout their length. Style more than twice as long as ovary, slightly curved near apex; lower lobe of stigma small. Capsule obovate to suborbicular, emarginate.{\i  Stony slopes and mountain rocks. S.E. Europe.} Al Bu Gr Ju Rm Rs (K) Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Wings acute; upper outer sepal scarcely inflated .............. ({\b b}) subsp. {\b hospita}
\par
1 Wings obtuse or mucronate; upper outer sepal distinctly inflated
\par
2 Wings less than half as wide as capsule; gynophore 
\par
  less than 0·3 mm in fruit .................................................. ({\b c}) subsp. {\b rhodopea}
\par
2 Wings almost as wide as capsule; gynophore 0·5-1 mm in fruit
\par
  ............................................................................................... ({\b a}) subsp. {\b supina}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b supina} (incl.{\i  P. andrachnoides} Willd.): Stems procumbent to ascending. Upper leaves orbicular, ovate or elliptical. Racemes often subterminal, with 1-12 flowers. Wings suborbicular to ovate-elliptical.{\i  C. part of Balkan peninsula; Krym}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b hospita} (Heuffel) McNeill, {\i Feddes Repert. }{\b 79}: 30 (1968): Stems ascending. Upper leaves lanceolate. Racemes with 1-3 flowers. Wings oblanceolate to lanceolate, slightly longer than capsule and almost as wide. Capsule 7-8 mm. •{\i  N. part of Balkan peninsula, S.W. Romania}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b c}) Subsp. {\b rhodopea} (Velen.) McNeill,{\i  Feddes Repert.}{\b  79}: 31 (1968) ({\i P. hohenackeriana }subsp.{\i  rhodopea} (Velen.) Hayek): Stems ascending to suberect. Upper leaves narrowly elliptical to oblanceolate. Racemes distinctly pseudolateral, with 6-9 flowers. Wings oblong to oblanceolate. •{\i  S. Bulgaria, N.E. Greece}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 10. P. monspeliaca} L., {\i Sp. Pl}. 702 (1753). Erect annual. Leaves 10-25 mm, lanceolate to linear-lanceolate, acute. Racemes terminal. Outer sepals c. 3 mm, linear-lanceolate, subequal; wings 6-8 mm, narrowly elliptical, acute, greenish-white, with 3 main veins and numerous lateral branches, not anastomosing. Corolla c. 4 mm, whitish; crest of keel large. Filaments united for most of their length, ciliate above. Lower lobe of stigma large. Capsule sessile, obcordate. 2n = c. 38.{\i  Mediterranean region, Portugal, Bulgaria.} Al Bl Bu Co Cr Ga Gr Hs It Ju Lu Sa Si Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 11. P. major} Jacq.,{\i  Fl. Austr.}{\b  5}: 6 (1778) (incl. {\i P. moldavica} Kotov). Stems 15-60 cm, suberect or ascending from a woody stock, sparsely puberulent. Leaves glabrous or sparsely puberulent, the basal narrowly obovate to oblanceolate, the others lanceolate to linear. Racemes with (10-)30-60 flowers; bracts 3-6 mm, caducous. Flowers reddish-purple to violet-blue, rarely milky white. Wings 9-13 mm (10-15 mm in fruit), ovate-orbicular to ovate. Corolla-tube 9-14 mm, bent upwards. Gynophore 3-4 mm in fruit. Capsule 5-6 × 4·5-5 mm, oblong, narrowly winged. Strophiole with lateral lobes shorter than central. 2n = 32.{\i  Meadows. S.E. Europe, extending westwards to Italy and S. Czechoslovakia.} Al Au Bu Cz Gr Hu It Ju Rm Rs (W, K) Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Variable, especially in size and colour of flowers and shape of wings.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 12. P. anatolica} Boiss. & Heldr. in Boiss.,{\i  Diagn. Pl. Or. Nov.}{\b  3}({\b 1}): 57 (1853). Like {\b 11} but stems densely caespitose, not more than 40 cm; flowers usually lilac-pink; wings 7-10 mm (up to 12 mm in fruit); gynophore less than 3 mm in fruit; strophiole more or less equally 3-lobed. {\i S.E. part of Balkan peninsula}. Bu Gr Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 13. P. boissieri} Cosson,{\i  Not. Pl. Crit. }100 (1851). Like {\b 11} but stems not more than 40 cm, less densely leafy; basal leaves broader; racemes lax, with 5-20 flowers more than 1 cm apart; bracts 1·5-2 mm; flowers purple to pink, rarely white; corolla-tube straight; capsule broadly winged.{\i  Mountains of S. Spain}. Hs.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 14. P. venulosa} Sibth. & Sm.,{\i  Fl. Graec. Prodr. }{\b 2}: 52 (1813). Stems 5-30 cm, ascending from a woody stock, pubescent. Leaves entire, puberulent, the basal spathulate to obovate, the others elliptical to linear-lanceolate. Bracts caducous, equalling or slightly exceeding pedicels. Wings 7·5-9·5 × 2·5-3·5 mm, lanceolate to narrowly elliptical, obtuse, white or lilac with green veins, glabrous. Corolla bluish; tube longer than wings; upper petals greatly exceeding keel. Style 3-4 times as long as stigma. Capsule sessile, shorter and wider than wings. {\i Rocky hillsides. S. Greece and Aegean region.} ?Bu Cr Gr.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 15. P. preslii} Sprengel,{\i  Syst. Veg. }{\b 5}: 531 (1828). Like {\b 14} but less hairy, larger and more erect; bracts slightly shorter, persisting throughout anthesis; flowers pink or white; wings larger, acute; corolla with tube scarcely as long as wings; style 2-3 times as long as stigma; capsule subsessile, scarcely as wide as wings. • {\i Sicilia.} ?It Si.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 16. P. sardoa} Chodat,{\i  Bull. Soc. Bot. Genève} ser. 2, {\b 5}: 109 (1913). Like {\b 14} but glabrous, or slightly pubescent above; stems not more than 15 cm; leaves all linear-lanceolate; bracts slightly shorter; wings 7 × 3 mm, oblong-elliptical, acute, whitish; corolla-tube slightly shorter than wings; style less than twice as long as stigma. •{\i  Sardegna.} Sa.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 17. P. lusitanica} Welw. ex Chodat,{\i  Mém. Soc. Phys. Hist. Nat. Genève}{\b  31}({\b 2}), No. 2: 441 (1893). Stems 20-40 cm, erect, sparsely puberulent. Leaves more or less glabrous, the basal oblanceolate to lanceolate, the others linear. Racemes lax;
\par

\par
233}
\par