{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 than the sepals. Drupe shortly hispid, brownish-purple.{\i  Rocky places and scrub at low altitudes. S. Europe.} Al Az Bu Cr Ga Gr Hs It Ju Lu Rs (K) Si Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. R. typhina} L.,{\i  Cent. Pl.}{\b  2}: 14 (1756) ({\i R. hirta} (L.) Sudworth). Like {\b 1} but deciduous, up to 10 mm; leaflets 5-12 cm, oblong-lanceolate; rhachis not winged; inflorescence 10-20 cm; drupe crimson.{\i  Cultivated for ornament, and locally naturalized in S. Europe}. [Bu Cz Ga He Ju It Rm.] ({\i E. North America}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 3. R. pentaphylla} (Jacq.) Desf.,{\i  Fl. Atl. }{\b 1}: 267 (1798). Thorny tree up to 7 m. Bark of twigs grey, glabrous or nearly so. Leaves digitate; leaflets 3-5, up to 2 cm, oblanceolate to obtriangular, entire to shallowly lobed, most often 3-dentate at apex; petioles winged in upper half. Inflorescence axillary, slender, little branched, almost raceme-like, shorter than the leaves. Sepals ovate; petals ovate, pale yellow. Drupe with 3 tubercles at apex, red. {\i Dry calcareous places. Sicilia}. Si. ({\i N. Africa.})
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 4. R. tripartita} (Ucria) Grande, {\i Bull. Orto Bot. Napoli}{\b  5}: 62 (1918). Like {\b 3} but bark of twigs brown; all leaves with 3 leaflets; leaflets entire or with 2-3 teeth on each side; inflorescence obviously paniculate; petals greenish.{\i  Dry places. Sicilia.} Si. ({\i N. Africa, S.W. Asia}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 2.                      Cotinus}                     Miller
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc By †T.G. Tutin.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Like{\i  Rhus} but leaves simple and entire; buds with several imbricate scales; pedicels in fruit long, slender, with long, patent hairs; styles lateral.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. C. coggygria} Scop.,{\i  Fl. Carn.} ed. 2, {\b 1}: 220 (1772) ({\i Rhus cotinus} L.). Rounded, glabrous shrub up to 5 m. Leaves 3-8 cm, ovate or obovate, glaucous; petioles not winged. Inflorescence 15-20 cm, terminal, with long, slender branches. Pedicels numerous, many without fruits, all plumose. Drupe 3-4 mm, reniform.{\i  Dry rocky slopes. S. Europe, from S.E. France eastwards, and extending northwards to S.E. Czechoslovakia and C. Ukraine}. Al Au Bu Cr Cz Ga Gr He Hu It Ju Rm Rs (W, K, E) Tu [Ge Hs].
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 3.                 Pistacia}                    L.            
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc By †T.G. Tutin.
\par


\pard\f0\fs28 Dioecious trees or shrubs with resinous bark. Buds with several scales. Leaves pinnate, occasionally some reduced to 1 leaflet. Flowers in lateral panicles. Petals absent. Stamens 3-5. Placentation basal.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Petioles glabrous
\par
2 Leaves imparipinnate; panicles with long branches ................ {\b 1. terebinthus}
\par
2 Leaves paripinnate; panicle spike-like ......................................... {\b 4. lentiscus}
\par
1 Petioles pubescent or puberulent
\par
3 Leaves coriaceous; drupe c. 5 mm ............................................... {\b 2. atlantica}
\par
3 Leaves thin; drupe c. 25 mm ............................................................... {\b 3. vera}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. P. terebinthus} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 1025 (1753). Small deciduous tree or shrub up to 5 m. Leaves imparipinnate; leaflets usually 2-8·5-1 × 3·5 cm, 3-9, ovate to obovate or oblong, mucronate, coriaceous; rhachis not winged; petioles glabrous. Inflorescence with long branches. Flowers brownish. Drupe 5-7 × 4-6 mm obovoid, compressed, apiculate, at first reddish, becoming brown.{\i  Dry, open woods and rocky, usually calcareous slopes. Mediterranean region, Portugal.} Al Bl Bu Co Cr Ga Gr Hs It Ju Lu Sa Si Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. P. atlantica} Desf.,{\i  Fl. Atl.}{\b  2}: 364 (1799) ({\i P. mutica} Fischer & C. A. Meyer). Like {\b 1} but leaflets lanceolate, obtuse, not mucronate; petioles puberulent; rhachis narrowly winged.{\i  N.E. Greece; Turkey-in-Europe; Krym.} Gr Rs (K) Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 3. P. vera} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 1025 (1753). Like {\b 1} but leaflets 1-3, thin, puberulent when young; petioles pubescent; rhachis scarcely winged; drupe c. 25 mm. {\i Cultivated for its edible seeds in S. Europe and perhaps locally naturalized.} [?Ga ?Gr ?Hs ?Si.] ({\i Temperate Asia.})
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 4. P. lentiscus} L.,{\i  Sp. Pl.} 1026 (1753). Small evergreen tree or shrub 1-8 m. Leaves paripinnate; leaflets 1-5 × 0·5-1·5 cm, (4-)8-12, lanceolate to obovate-lanceolate, mucronate, coriaceous; rhachis broadly winged; petioles glabrous. Inflorescence compact, spike-like. Flowers yellowish or purplish. Drupe c. 4 mm, globose, apiculate, red becoming black.{\i  Dry open woods and scrub. Mediterranean region, extending to Portugal.} Al Bl Co Cr Ga Gr Hs It Ju Lu Sa Si.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b  P}. ×{\b  raportae} Burnat,{\i  Fl. Alp. Marit. }{\b 2}: 54 (1896) ({\i P. lentiscus} ×{\i  terebinthus}) occurs locally in France, Italy, Sardegna and, perhaps, Portugal.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 4.                        Schinus}                      L.
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc By †T.G. Tutin.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Polygamous or dioecious trees or shrubs. Buds with several scales. Leaves pinnate. Flowers in lateral and terminal panicles. Sepals 5. Petals 5. Stamens 10. Placentation apical.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 Rhachis unwinged; drupe 6-7 mm, pink .............................................. {\b 1. molle}
\par
Rhachis winged in upper part; drupe 4-5 mm, bright red ...... {\b 2. terebinthifolia}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. S. molle} L.,{\i  Sp. Pl.} 388 (1753). Evergreen tree or shrub usually up to 8 m. Branches slender, pendent. Leaflets 2·5-6 × 3-8 mm, 7-13 pairs linear-lanceolate, often serrate, pubescent when young; rhachis unwinged. Inflorescence much-branched, lax. Flowers white. Drupe 6-7 mm, globose, pink. {\i Planted for ornament in S. Europe and more or less naturalized}. [Gr Hs It Lu Sa Si.] ({\i Mountains of C. & S. America, from Mexico to N. Chile and N. Argentina.})
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. S. terebinthifolia} Raddi, {\i Mem. Mat. Fis. Soc. Ital. Sci. }{\b 18} (Fis.): 399 (1820). Like {\b 1} but branches not pendent; leaflets 10-20 mm wide, 2-7 pairs; rhachis winged in upper part; inflorescence dense; drupe 4-5 mm, bright red.{\i  Planted for ornament in S.W. Europe and locally naturalized}. [Hs Lu.] ({\i S.W. Brazil, Paraguay}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 95.           ACERACEAE}
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc Edit. S.M. Walters.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Trees or shrubs with opposite, exstipulate leaves. Flowers actinomorphic, sometimes perigynous, in racemes, panicles or corymbs. Sepals 5, free; petals 5, free, rarely absent; stamens usually 8, inserted on the usually well-developed disc. Ovary superior, of 2 carpels, each with 2 ovules; styles 2. Fruit of 2 winged, single-seeded mericarps (samarae).
\par

\par
237}
\par