{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 31. P. amara} L., {\i Syst. Nat.} ed. 10,{\b  2}: 1154 (1759). Stems 5-20 cm, numerous, arising from the centre of a basal rosette. Leaves glabrous, bitter, the basal 15-35 × 6-10 mm, elliptical to obovate, the upper lanceolate to oblong, widest near the middle, acute. Racemes with 8-25 blue, violet, pink or white flowers. wings 4·5-8 mm in fruit, elliptical. Corolla 3·5-6·5 mm, distinctly articulated between tube and keel and between keel and crest. Capsule 3·5-5·5 mm; seeds 2·3-2·8 mm. •{\i  Mountains of E.C. Europe and N. Jugoslavia.} Au ?Bu Cz Ge Hu Ju Po Rm Rs (W).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b amara}: wings 6-8 mm in fruit. Corolla 4·5-6·5 mm; crest of keel with 15-30 lobes; capsule much shorter than wings and only slightly wider. 2n = 28. E. Alps, W. Carpathians, Hungary, Jugoslavia.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b brachyptera} (Chodat) Hayek,{\i  Sched. Fl Stir. Exsicc.}{\b  9-10}: 21 (1906) ({\i P. subamara} Fritsch): wings 4·5-6·5 mm in fruit. Corolla 3·5-5·5 mm; crest of keel with 10-20 lobes; capsule slightly shorter and much wider than wings. 2n = 28. {\i Carpathians and S. Poland; a few localities in S.E. Alps}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 32. P. amarella} Crantz, {\i Stirp. Austr.} ed. 2, {\b 2}: 438 (1769) ({\i P. amara} subsp. {\i amarella} (Crantz) Chodat,{\i  P. austriaca} Crantz). Like {\b 31} but cauline leaves obtuse, widest near apex; wings 2-5 mm in fruit, oblong to obovate; corolla 2-4 mm, scarcely articulated; crest of keel with 5-15 lobes; capsule 3-4 mm, usually much wider than wings; seeds 1·5-2·3 mm. 2n = 34. •{\i   Much of Europe, but absent from most of the south}. Au Be Br ?Bu Cz Da Fe Ga Ge He Hu It Ju No Po Rm Rs (N, B, C, W) Su.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 33. P. alpina} (Poiret) Steudel,{\i  Nomencl. Bot.} 642 (1821). Stems decumbent, bearing leaf-rosettes from which arise lateral flowering stems 1-5 cm. Leaves not bitter; those of rosettes obovate to oblong, the others much smaller, oblong to linear-oblong. Bracts caducous. Flowers bright blue. wings 4-4·5 mm, with sparingly branched veins, not anastomosing. Capsule nearly as long as wings and about twice as wide. Lateral lobes of strophiole c. 1/3 as long as seed. 2n = c. 34.{\i  Alpine pastures; usually calcicole. • Pyrenees; Alps, eastwards to} c. 11° 30'{\i  E.} Ga It He Hs.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs36\qc SAPINDALES
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 93.               CORIARIACEAE}
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc Edit. D.A. Webb.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Shrubs with opposite or whorled, simple, exstipulate leaves. Flowers hermaphrodite or unisexual, 5-merous, in axillary or terminal racemes. Stamens 10. Carpels superior, free, 1-seeded, in a single whorl.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 1.                    Coriaria}                      L.
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc By D.A. Webb.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Stems angular. Sepals free. Petals free, green and shorter than the sepals in flower, enlarging, darkening and becoming succulent in fruit. Styles free, filiform, stigmatic all over. Fruit a collection of achenes, enclosed by the corolla until ripe.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. C. myrtifolia} L.,{\i  Sp. Pl.} 1037 (1753). Glabrous; stems 1-3 m, arcuate, with 4-angled, suberect branches. Leaves 3-6 cm, ovate-lanceolate, acute or cuspidate, sessile, opposite, or rarely in whorls of 3-4. Racemes 2-5 cm in flower, longer in fruit, axillary or terminating short, lateral branches. Sepals ovate, acute, persistent. Petals dark reddish-brown in fruit, strongly keeled on inner side, eventually separating to reveal the fruit. Flowers male, female and hermaphrodite, with fairly conspicuous rudiments of stamens in female and carpels in male flowers. Fertile stamens exserted, pendent; sterile stamens included, erect. Fertile styles long-exserted. Achenes 4 mm, ridged, shining black.{\i  Dry woods, hedges and rocky places. S.W. Europe, from S. Spain to N.W. Italy.} Bl Ga ?Gr Hs It [Lu].
\par

\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 94.             ANACARDIACEAE}
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc Edit. †T.G. Tutin.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Trees or shrubs. Leaves alternate, usually pinnate or digitate. Calyx usually 5-partite; petals 5, rarely absent, free or more or less connate; ovary superior, 1-locular, with one ovule; placentation basal or apical. Fruit a drupe.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Leaves simple ................................................................................ {\b 2. Cotinus}
\par
1 Leaves pinnate or digitate
\par
2 Leaves digitate ................................................................................... {\b 1. Rhus}
\par
2 Leaves pinnate
\par
3 Mature leaves and young twigs hairy ................................................ {\b 1. Rhus}
\par
3 Mature leaves and young twigs glabrous, except sometimes the petioles
\par
4 Leaves up to 15 cm; petals 0 ......................................................... {\b 3. Pistacia}
\par
4 Leaves 25 cm or more; petals 5 .................................................... {\b 4. Schinus}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 1.                    Rhus}                    L.
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc By †T.G. Tutin.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Polygamous or dioecious shrubs or small trees, often with resinous bark. Buds naked. Leaves digitate or pinnate. Flowers small, in axillary or terminal panicles. Petals 5. Stamens 5. Placentation basal. Fruit with short, non-plumose pedicels; styles terminal.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Leaves pinnate
\par
2 Rhachis of leaves winged, at least between the distal leaflets ....... {\b 1. coriaria}
\par
2 Rhachis of leaves completely unwinged ........................................ {\b 2. typhina}
\par
1 Leaves digitate
\par
3 Bark of twigs grey; at least some leaves with 5 leaflets; 
\par
  leaflets entire or 3-dentate at apex ........................................... {\b 3. pentaphylla}
\par
3 Bark of twigs brown; leaves with 3 leaflets; leaflets
\par
  entire or with 2-3 teeth on each side ............................................. {\b 4. tripartita}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. R. coriaria} L.,{\i  Sp. Pl.} 265 (1753). Almost evergreen shrub or small tree up to 3 m. Young twigs and petioles densely hispid. Leaves imparipinnate; leaflets 1-5 cm, 7-21, ovate to oblong, coarsely crenate-serrate, sometimes with 1-2 small lobes at base; rhachis hispid, winged, at least between the distal leaflets. Inflorescence c. 10 cm, the branches more or less concealed by the flowers. Sepals ovate, greenish; petals oblong, white, longer
\par

\par
236}
\par