{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}
\pard\f0\fs28 bracts half as long as pedicels; pedicels crispate-puberulent. Flowers blue. Wings 8·5-9 × 3·5-4 mm, oblong-elliptical to subspathulate, with a long claw, ciliate. Corolla-tube narrow, 2/3 as long as wings. Style twice as long as stigma. •{\i  N.W. Spain, N. Portugal.} Hs Lu.
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 18. P. baetica} Willk. in Willk. & Lange, {\i Prodr. Fl. Hisp.}{\b  3}: 559 (1878). Stems filiform, spreading or climbing. Leaves glabrous, lanceolate to linear-lanceolate. Racemes lax, with 5-20 flowers; bracts lanceolate, shorter than pedicels in flower. Flowers blue. Wings c. 9 mm in flower (c. 12 mm in fruit), broadly ovate, with a short, slender claw and with green, strongly anastomosing veins. Corolla scarcely longer than wings; tube curved. Gynophore c. 1*5 mm in fruit. Style about 11/2 times as long as stigma. Capsule broadly ovate, winged. {\i Shady places. W. Spain.} Hs.
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 19. P. doerfleri} Hayek, {\i Denkschr. Akad. Wiss. Math.-Nat. Kl.} ({\i Wien}) {\b 94}: 159 (1918). Stems c. 40 cm, numerous, erect, unbranched. Leaves glabrous, linear-lanceolate, acute. Racemes ovoid-oblong, dense, even in fruit; bracts slightly exceeding pedicels. Flowers pink. Wings 7-9 mm (11 mm in fruit), broadly obovate, with anastomosing veins. Corolla-tube c. 6 mm, about equalling the upper petals. Gynophore very short. Capsule shorter and narrower than wings. Lobes of strophiole not more than 1/4  as long as seed.{\i  Mountain grassland. • N.E. Albania.} Al ?Ju.
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 20. P. flavescens} DC.,{\i  Cat. Pl. Horti Monsp.} 134 (1813). Stems 15-40 cm, ascending to erect. Lower leaves obovate, the others lanceolate to linear-lanceolate. Racemes with 12-25 flowers; bracts 2·5-3·5 mm, exceeding pedicels in flower. Wings 7·5-9 mm, lanceolate to elliptical, acute to shortly acuminate, yellow in flower, greenish-yellow in fruit, with anastomosing veins. Corolla yellow; tube c. 3·5 mm; upper petals much longer than keel and about half as long as wings. Gynophore less than 1 mm in fruit. Capsule 6-7 × 4·5-5 mm, oblong-obovate, shorter and slightly wider than wings. Seeds oblong-ovoid; lateral lobes of strophiole at least half as long as seed. •{\i  Italy.} ?Co It.
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28 Plants from sandy grassland near the coast of E.C. Italy, with obtuse wings and shorter lobes to the strophiole, have been distinguished as{\b  P. pisaurensis }Caldesi,{\i  Nuovo Gior. Bot. Ital.}{\b  11}: 189 (1879).
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 21. P. nicaeensis} Risso ex Koch in Röhling,{\i  Deutschl. Fl.} ed. 3,{\b  5}: 68 (1839). Stems (10-)15-40 cm, usually ascending from a decumbent, woody base. Lower leaves spathulate to linear-lanceolate, the others lanceolate to linear. Racemes 3-15 cm, with 8-40 flowers, usually very lax; bracts exceeding pedicels and slightly exceeding flower-buds, caducous. Flowers pink, less often blue or white. Wings (5-)8-11 mm, 3- to 5-veined. Corolla-tube about half as long as wings, shorter than upper petals. Gynophore up to 1·5 mm in fruit. Capsule shorter than wings. Lateral lobes of strophiole about half as long as seed.{\i  Dry, grassy or stony places. S. & S.C. Europe, extending to S.E. Russia.} Al Au Bu Co Ga Ge Gr He Hs Hu It Ju ?Rm Rs (C, W, E)
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Outer sepals at least half as long as wings
\par 2 Outer sepals scarcely longer than corolla-tube; 
\par    flowers usually blue ....................................................... ({\b g}) subsp. {\b carniolica}
\par 2 Outer sepals almost as long as keel (excluding crest);
\par  flowers usually pink ..................................................... ({\b h}) subsp. {\b rorojulensis}
\par 1 Outer sepals less than half as long as wings
\par 3 Upper petals scarcely longer than wings ...................... ({\b e}) subsp. {\b caesalpinii}
\par 3 Upper petals longer than wings, usually clearly exserted
\par 4 Wings 6-8 mm, lanceolate ............................................ ({\b f}) subsp. {\b gariodiana}
\par 4 Wings (7-)8-11 mm, usually elliptical to suborbicular
\par 5 Stem and leaves ± tomentose ....................................... ({\b c}) subsp. {\b tomentella}
\par 5 Stem and leaves glabrous to pubescent
\par 6 Basal leaves obovate to spathulate, persistent to anthesis 
\par  ......................................................................................... ({\b a}) subsp. {\b nicaeensis}
\par 6 Leaves all linear-lanceolate to lanceolate (the basal
\par  sometimes deciduous before anthesis)
\par 7 Seeds oblong; lateral lobes of strophiole straight ......({\b b}) subsp. {\b mediterranea}
\par 7 Seeds ovoid to pyriform; lateral lobes of strophiole crescentic 
\par  .............................................................................................. ({\b d}) subsp. {\b corsica}
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b nicaeensis}: Leaves pubescent, the basal obovate to spathulate, the others linear-lanceolate to linear. Flowers usually blue. Outer sepals 3-4 mm; wings 7-8 mm. Upper petals exceeding wings. Capsule broadly obovate. •{\i  S.E. France, N.W. Italy}.
\par
\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b mediterranea} Chodat,{\i  Bull. Soc. Bot. Genève}{\b  5}: 179 (1889): Glabrous or minutely puberulent. Leaves all linear to linear-lanceolate. Flowers usually pink. Outer sepals 3-4 mm; wings 7·5-10 mm. Upper petals exceeding wings. Capsule oblong-obovate to obcordate. Seeds oblong; lateral lobes of strophiole straight.{\i  S.E. Europe, extending westwards to N. Italy, and northeastwards to S. Russia}.
\par
\pard\f0\fs28  The most widespread and variable of the subspecies, which should, perhaps, be divided. The plants from Ukraine and S. Russia included here are somewhat isolated geographically. They have been distinguished as {\b P. cretacea} Kotov,{\i  Zur. Inst. Bot. URSR}{\b  21-22}: 238 (1939), and may, perhaps, be referable to{\b  P. hybrida }DC.,{\i  Prodr. }{\b 1}: 325 (1824).
\par
\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b c}) Subsp. {\b tomentella} (Boiss.) Chodat,{\i  Bull. Soc. Bot. Genève}{\b  5}: 179 (1889) (subsp.{\i  graeca} Chodat): Like subsp ({\b b}) but stems and leaves densely hairy, often tomentose. Wings lanceolate, acute. •{\i  Greece and Aegean region}.
\par
\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b d}) Subsp. {\b corsica} (Boreau) Graebner in Ascherson & Graebner, {\i Syn. Mitteleur. Fl.}{\b  7}: 337 (1916): Leaves glabrous, the lower linear-lanceolate, the upper narrowly linear. Wings c. 10 × 6 mm, soon becoming colourless and membranous after flowering. Capsule c. 7 × 4·5 mm, obcordate. Seeds ovoid to pyriform; lateral lobes of strophiole crescentic. 2n = 34. •{\i  Corse, N. Italy}.
\par
\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b e}) Subsp. {\b caesalpinii} (Bubani) McNeill,{\i  Feddes Repert.}{\b  79}: 32 (1968) ({\i P. pedemontana} sensu Chodat, non Perr. & B. Verlot,{\i  P. rosea }sensu Willk. pro parte, non Desf., {\i P. vulgaris} subsp.{\i  pedemontana} auct. hisp.): Leaves glabrescent, the lower obovate to oblanceolate, the upper linear to linear-lanceolate, usually shortly apiculate. Flowers usually pink. Outer sepals c. 3 mm; wings 6·5-8 mm. Upper petals about as long as wings. Capsule obcordate. •{\i  N.E. Spain, S. France}.
\par
\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b f}) Subsp. {\b gariodiana} (Jordan & Fourr.) Chodat, {\i Bull. Soc. Bot. Genève }{\b 5}: 180 (1889): Leaves linear to linear-lanceolate, rather thick. Wings 6-8·5 mm, lanceolate. Upper petals exceeding the wings. Capsule narrowly obovate, cuneate, subsessile. •{\i  S.E. France, N.W. Italy}.
\par
\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b g}) Subsp. {\b carniolica} (A. Kerner) Graebner in Ascherson & Graebner, {\i Syn. Mitteleur. Fl.}{\b  7}: 339 (1916) ({\i P. carniolica }A. Kerner): Lower leaves oblanceolate to obovate, the upper linear to linear-lanceolate. Flowers usually blue. Outer sepals 4-5 mm, scarcely exceeding corolla-tube; wings 6-8 × 3·5-5 mm. Upper petals considerably exceeding wings. Gynophore in fruit 1-1·5 mm. Capsule obcordate, enclosed by wings. •{\i  E.C. Europe and W. part of Balkan peninsula}.
\par
\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b h}) Subsp. {\b forojulensis} (A. Kerner) Graebner,{\i  op. cit.} 338 (1916): Like subsp. ({\b g}) but flowers usually pink; outer sepals 4·5-5 mm, clearly exceeding corolla-tube; wings 7-9 mm; upper petals scarcely exceeding wings; capsule subsessile. •{\i  S. Alps}.
\par
\par 234}
\par