{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 15 Gynophore much shorter than ovary in flower and less than
      1 mm in fruit
\par
18 Wings less than 7 mm ................................................................. {\b 16. sardoa}
\par
18 Wings 7·5-11 mm
\par
19 Leaves entire; wings obtuse .................................................... {\b 14. venulosa}
\par
19 Leaves slightly serrulate; wings acute ......................................... {\b 15. preslii}
\par
13 Corolla-tube less than 2/3 as long as wings; keel not exserted
\par
20 Corolla and wings yellow in flower
\par
21 Wings 7·5-9 mm ................................................................... {\b 20. flavescens}
\par
21 Wings 4-7 mm .......................................................................... {\b 23. comosa}
\par
20 Corolla and wings purple, blue, pink or white (rarely wings green)
\par
   in flower
\par
22 Leaf-rosettes present, with leaves much longer than cauline leaves
\par
23 Stems with a decumbent, usually leafless portion below 
\par
   the leaf-rosette ............................................................................ {\b 30. calcarea}
\par
23 Leaf-rosettes basal
\par
24 Leaves not bitter; flowering stems arising laterally from rosette
\par
   ........................................................................................................ {\b 33. alpina}
\par
24 Leaves bitter; flowering stems arising from centre of rosette
\par
25 Wings 4·5-8 mm in fruit, elliptical .............................................. {\b 31. amara}
\par
25 Wings 2-4·5(-5) mm in fruit, oblong to obovate ..................... {\b 32. amarella}
\par
22 Leaf-rosettes absent; basal leaves not longer than 
\par
   most of the cauline leaves
\par
26 Wings 7·5-11 mm in flower and more than 8 mm in fruit
\par
27 Racemes ± ovoid, dense, not elongating in fruit ..................... {\b 19. doerfleri}
\par
27 Racemes conical or cylindrical, lax, elongating in fruit
\par
28 Stems filiform; corolla-tube curved; flowers blue ..................... {\b 18. baetica}
\par
28 Stems stout; corolla-tube straight; flowers usually
\par
   pink, sometimes blue or white
\par
29 Upper petals scarcely longer than keel ................................... {\b 22. apiculata}
\par
29 Upper petals much longer than keel ..................................... {\b 21. nicaeensis}
\par
26 Wings 3-7 mm in flower and not more than 8 mm in fruit
\par
30 Lower leaves ± opposite
\par
31 Cauline leaves increasing in size upwards ............................. {\b 29. edmundii}
\par
31 Cauline leaves ± equal ....................................................... {\b 26. serpyllifolia}
\par
30 All leaves alternate
\par
32 Racemes grouped in a corymbose panicle ........................... {\b 28. crista-galli}
\par
32 Racemes solitary
\par
33 Upper cauline leaves crowded, larger than those below;
\par
   peduncle 5 mm or less ................................................................ {\b 25. alpestris}
\par
33 Upper cauline leaves not crowded, not larger than 
\par
   those below; peduncle usually more than 10 mm
\par
34 Crest of keel 4- to 6-lobed; wings greenish in flower ........... {\b 27. carueliana}
\par
34 Crest of keel 8- to 40-lobed; wings pink, blue, purple or white
\par
35 Bracts not exceeding pedicels at anthesis ................................. {\b 24. vulgaris}
\par
35 Bracts exceeding pedicels at anthesis
\par
36 Wings (6-)8-11 mm, with 3-5 veins; bracts scarcely 
\par
   projecting beyond apex of developing raceme ....................... {\b 21. nicaeensis}
\par
36 Wings 4-6(-8) mm, with 1-3 veins; bracts projecting beyond
\par
   apex of developing raceme ......................................................... {\b 23. comosa}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Subgen. Brachytropis (DC.) Chodat. Flowers in axillary racemes. wings persistent, petaloid; keel without a crest, enclosed by upper petals; filaments united almost to the apex; anthers opening by two large pores on the inner surface. Seeds with little endosperm.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28     {\b 1. P. microphylla} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} ed. 2, 989 (1763) ({\i Brachytropis microphylla }(L.) Willk.).Dwarf shrub 10-30 cm, with the habit of an{\i  Ephedra} and erect or ascending, glabrous, sulcate stems. Leaves 5-15 × 1-2 mm, linear to linear-lanceolate, acute, deciduous, the lower usually falling before anthesis. Racemes with 3-8 flowers. Wings 8-10 mm, broadly ovate to suborbicular. Corolla 7-10 mm, blue; upper petals asymmetrical, wider than long; keel c. 2·5 mm.{\i  Dry, rocky places. • W. Spain, N. & C. Portugal}. Hs Lu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Subgen.{\b  Chamaebuxus} (DC.) Duchartre. Flowers axillary. Wings deciduous, petaloid; keel with a small crest: filaments united only at base; anthers opening by a valve on the inner surface. Seeds with much endosperm.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. P. chamaebuxus} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 704 (1753). Decumbent dwarf shrub 5-15 cm. Leaves 15-30 × (3-)5-10 mm, coriaceous, ovate to linear-lanceolate. Flowers solitary or in pairs in leaf-axils. Outer sepals unequal, the upper larger; wings patent, white to yellow, sometimes pinkish-purple. Corolla 10-14 mm; upper petals shorter than keel; keel with very small, 2- to 6-lobed crest; tube and upper petals similar in colour to wings; keel bright yellow, becoming purple or brownish-red. Capsule 6-8 mm, sessile, surrounded by a wing less than 1 mm wide. 2n = 38, c. 46.{\i  Woods, pastures and rocky slopes, mainly in the mountains. • Alps and W.C. Europe, northwards to} c. 51°{\i  N. in Germany, and extending southwards to S. Italy and W. Jugoslavia}. Au Cz Ga Ge He ?Hu It Ju Rm.
\par

\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 3. P. vayredae} Costa, {\i Introd. Fl. Cataluña} ed. 2, Supl. 10 (1877) ({\i Chamaebuxus vayredae} (Costa) Willk.). Like {\b 2} but leaves linear-lanceolate to linear; wings, corolla-tube and upper petals pinkish-purple; keel with a small, fimbriate crest with 5-9 narrow lobes; capsule 9-13 mm, with wing 2-2·5 mm wide. •{\i  E. Pyrenees.} Hs.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Subgen.{\b  Polygala}. Flowers in terminal or pseudolateral racemes. Wings persistent, often petaloid; keel with a prominent, fimbriate crest; filaments united for at least half their length; anthers opening by a large, subapical pore. Seeds with much endosperm.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 4. P. myrtifolia} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 703 (1753). Erect shrub 100-250 cm. Leaves 2·5-5 cm, oblong to obovate, obtuse. Racemes short, few-flowered, pseudolateral; bracts persistent. Wings 15-20 mm, violet-purple. Corolla 13-18 mm, lilac, shading to deep violet at apex of keel; upper petals short, 2-lobed, the upper lobe reflexed. Capsule elliptical-orbicular, emarginate, narrowly winged.{\i  Cultivated for ornament and locally naturalized in the W. Mediterranean region.} [Co Ga Si.] ({\i South Africa}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 5. P. rupestris} Pourret,{\i  Mém. Acad. Toulouse}{\b  3}: 325 (1788). Stems puberulent, arising from a woody stock. Leaves slightly coriaceous, linear to oblong, apiculate; margins revolute. Racemes with 1-3(-8) flowers, pseudolateral. Upper outer sepal c. 4 mm; lower pair c. 3 mm; wings 6-8 mm, obovate, greenish, with membranous margin and with 3 indistinct veins appearing as a single midrib. Corolla c. 5·5 mm, white, tipped with purple; upper petals c. 3·5 mm, narrowly oblong, slightly exceeding the keel; keel with a large crest. Filaments free for the upper 1/2-2/3 of their length, the united part ciliate throughout. Capsule suborbicular, narrowly winged.{\i  W. Mediterranean region.} Bl Ga Hs.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 6. P. exilis} DC.,{\i  Cat. Pl. Horti Monsp. }133 (1813). Low, branching annual 5-20 cm with terminal and pseudolateral racemes. Leaves 10-25 mm, narrowly oblong to linear, obtuse. Upper outer sepal 1·5-1·75 mm, narrowly obovate; lower pair
\par

\par
232}
\par