{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 22. P. apiculata} Porta,{\i  Nuovo Gior. Bot. Ital. }{\b 11}: 238 (1879). Stock woody, branched; stems 20-40 cm, erect. Lower leaves elliptical, obtuse; upper leaves lanceolate to linear, acute to acuminate. Racemes conical, rather lax; bracts longer than pedicels. wings 8-9 × 4-5 mm; veins scarcely anastomosing. Corolla about as long as wings; upper petals scarcely longer than keel. Capsule oblong, emarginate, subsessile. Central lobe of strophiole short, appressed; lateral lobes flattened, erect, forming a crest about half as long as the seed. •{\i  S. Italy}. It.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 23. P. comosa} Schkuhr,{\i  Handb.}{\b  2}: 324 (1796). Stems 7-20(-40) cm, erect or ascending. Lower leaves narrowly spathulate to obovate, obtuse, usually falling before anthesis; upper leaves linear to linear-lanceolate, acute. Racemes with 15-50 flowers, conical to cylindrical, dense; bracts 2-5 mm, linear, acuminate, exceeding the flower-buds, often persisting throughout anthesis. Flowers usually lilac-pink. wings 4-6(-8) mm. Corolla about as long as wings. Capsule obcordate-cuneate, shorter than wings and about as wide, narrowly winged. Strophiole hairy; lateral lobes about 1/3 as long as seed. 2n = 28-32, 34.{\i  Mainly in C. & E. Europe, but extending to S. Sweden, Belgium, N. Spain and N. Italy.} Al Au Be Bu Cz Fe Ga Ge Gr He Ho Hs Hu It Ju Po Rm Rs (N, B, C, W, K) Su Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Rather variable, and not always clearly distinguishable from {\b 21} and {\b 24}; its eastern and southern limits are, therefore, somewhat uncertain.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 24. P. vulgaris} L.,{\i  Sp. Pl.} 702 (1753) (incl. {\i P. oxyptera} Reichenb.). Stock woody, branched. Stems 7-35 cm, ascending to erect, glabrous or sparsely hairy. Leaves alternate, not bitter, the lower obovate to elliptical, the upper longer, linear-lanceolate. Racemes with 10-40 flowers, rather dense, conical at first, elongating in fruit; bracts membranous except for the midrib, scarcely exceeding pedicels in flower and shorter than flower-buds, caducous. Flowers blue, pink or white. wings (3-)4-7(-8) mm, with 3 anastomosing veins. Corolla-tube usually longer than upper petals. Style usually 1-1½ times as long as stigma. Capsule about as long as wings. Seeds oblong-ellipsoid; lobes of strophiole about 1/3 as long as seed. 2n = 28, 32, 48, c. 56, 68, c. 70. {\i Most of Europe westwards from N.W. Russia and C. Ukraine.} All except ?Bl Cr Is Rs (K, E) Sb ?Si.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Extremely variable; of the more widespread variants{\b  P. oxyptera} Reichenb., {\i Pl. Crit. }{\b 1}: 25 (1823), seems to have the strongest claim for recognition at specific rank; it is distinguished by the lanceolate to lanceolate-elliptical, acute wings, never wider than the capsule. It appears, however, that although in some regions (e.g. Poland) it is constant and readily distinguishable, in others (e.g. Britain) it is not.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   {\i  P. carniolica} var. {\i stojanovii} (Stefanov) Stoj. & Stefanov, from S.W. Bulgaria, appears to be indistinguishable from {\b 24} except for the presence of axillary racemes below the terminal one.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 25. P. alpestris} Reichenb., {\i Pl. Crit. }{\b 1}: 25 (1823). Stems 7-15 cm, few, decumbent or ascending. Leaves increasing in size upwards, the upper broadly lanceolate. Racemes 1·5-3·5 cm, with 5-20 flowers, dense; bracts shorter than pedicels at anthesis, caducous. Flowers blue or white. wings 4-6·5 mm, ovate to narrowly obovate, 1- to 3-veined. Corolla about as long as wings, distinctly articulated between tube and keel, and between keel and crest. Capsule wider than wings. Seeds ellipsoid; dorsal lobe of strophiole appressed. Mountain pastures and meadows. •{\i  S. & S.C. Europe, from the Alps to the Pyrenees and Greece.} Al Au Ga Ge Gr He Hs It Ju.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b alpestris}: wings 4-4·5(-5) mm, narrower than capsule; veins scarcely anastomosing. Capsule sessile. Lateral lobes of strophiole c. 1/3 as long as seed. 2n = 34.{\i  Pyrenees, Jura, Alps, Appennini}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b croatica} (Chodat) Hayek,{\i  Prodr. Fl. Penins. Balcan. }{\b 1}: 597 (1925) ({\i P. calcarea} subsp.{\i  croatica} (Chodat) Graebner): wings 5-6·5 mm, wider than capsule; veins usually distinctly anastomosing. Capsule on short gynophore. Lateral lobes of strophiole 1/5 as long as seed.{\i  W. part of Balkan peninsula, S. Italy}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b 26. P. serpyllifolia} J. A. C. Hose,{\i  Ann. Bot.} ({\i Usteri}) {\b 21}: 39 (1797) ({\i P. serpyllacea} Weihe). Stems 6-25 cm, slender, decumbent to ascending, not woody at base. Leaves 3-15 mm, the lower elliptical to obovate, opposite or subopposite, the upper lanceolate to linear-lanceolate, alternate or opposite. Racemes 1-3(-4) cm, with 3-10 flowers, terminal or pseudolateral; bracts shorter than pedicels at anthesis. Flowers usually blue. Outer sepals 1·5-2·5 mm; wings 4·5-5·5 mm, oblanceolate to elliptical; veins anastomosing. Upper petals usually longer than wings; crest of keel 10- to 25-lobed. Capsule shorter and wider than wings. Seeds ovoid; lateral lobes of strophiole c. 1/3 as long as seed. 2n = 32, 34, c. 68.{\i  Calcifuge. W. & C. Europe, eastwards to E. Germany and N.W. Jugoslavia}. Au ?Az Be Br Co Cz Da Fa Ga Ge Hb He Ho Hs It Ju Lu No.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b 27. P. carueliana} (A. W. Benn.) Burnat ex Caruel in Parl.,{\i  Fl. Ital.}{\b  9}: 117 (1890). Like {\b 26} but leaves alternate, remote, linear to subspathulate, obtuse; racemes all terminal; outer sepals 2·5-3·5 mm; wings 6 mm, greenish, sometimes with a purple tinge, slightly falcate, with veins scarcely anastomosing; corolla brownish-purple; crest of keel inconspicuous, 4- to 6-lobed. •{\i  N.W. Italy} ({\i Alpi Apuane}). It.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 28. P. cristagalli} Chodat, {\i Bull. Soc. Bot. Genève} ser. 2, {\b 5}: 110 (1913). Stems 15-20 cm, flexuous. Leaves glabrescent, acute, the lower broadly lanceolate, the upper linear-lanceolate. Racemes 1-2 cm, terminal on main axis and on upper axillary branches, forming a corymbose panicle. Outer sepals 3 mm, subulate; wings 5 × 1·5 mm, lanceolate, apiculate; veins not anastomosing. Crest of keel with long, narrow lobes. Capsule ¾ as long as wings. Seeds oblong-ellipsoid; lobes of strophiole flattened, erect, forming an apical crest. •{\i  S. Greece.} Gr.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 29. P. edmundii} Chodat,{\i  Bull. Herb. Boiss. }{\b 4}: 911 (1896). Stems c. 5 cm, numerous, slender, woody at the base. Leaves glabrous, increasing in size upwards, the lower 2-4 mm, spathulate, obtuse, opposite, the upper up to 10 mm, elliptical, obtuse, alternate, forming a small rosette below the raceme. Racemes terminal, sessile, very short, corymbose. wings c. 5 mm, ovate, shortly clawed; veins anastomosing. Corolla-tube short; upper petals oblong, obtuse. •{\i  N.W. Spain} ({\i Picos de Europa}). Hs.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 30. P. calcarea} F. W. Schultz,{\i  Flora} ({\i Regensb}.){\b  20}: 752 (1837). Stems 10-20 cm, with decumbent, usually leafless stolons terminating in leaf-rosettes, from which arise a number of almost erect flowering stems; non-flowering shoots also present, arising from the stock or from the rosette. Leaves glabrous or sparsely hairy, not bitter. Rosette-leaves spathulate to obovate; leaves of flowering stems smaller, linear-lanceolate, obtuse. Racemes with 6-20 flowers; bracts linear-lanceolate. Flowers usually blue or white. Wings c. 5 mm, obovate to oblong-elliptical; veins anastomosing. Corolla exceeding wings. Capsule 4-6 mm. Seeds ovoid-oblong; lateral lobes of strophiole about ½ as long as seed. 2n = 34.{\i  Calcicole. • W. Europe, northwards to S. England.} Be Br Ga Ge He Hs.
\par

\par
235}
\par