{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. A. altissima} (Miller) Swingle, {\i Jour. Washington Acad. Sci.}{\b  6}: 490 (1916). Up to 20 m, freely suckering. Bark smooth, grey. Leaves 45-60 cm, glabrous or nearly so; leaflets 7-12 cm, 13-25, lanceolate-ovate, long-acuminate, ciliate, with 2-4 teeth near the base, each with a large gland beneath. Panicles 10-20 cm. Flowers 7-8 mm in diameter, greenish. Samaras 3-4 cm, reddish when young.{\i  Planted for ornament, shade and soil-conservation; extensively naturalized in C., S. & W. Europe.} [Al Au Az Be Br Bu Co Cz Ga Ge Gr He Hs Hu It Ju Lu Rm Rs (W, K) Sa Si.] ({\i China.})
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 91.               MELIACEAE}
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc Edit. N.A. Burges.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Trees or shrubs. Leaves pinnate, alternate. Flowers actinomorphic, usually hermaphrodite, usually 5-merous. Petals free or connate at base. Stamens twice as many as petals, monadelphous. Ovary superior, with 2-8 loculi; placentation axile; style 1. Fruit a capsule, drupe or berry.
\par
    
\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 1.                    Melia}                    L.
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc By †T.G. Tutin.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Deciduous trees or shrubs. Flowers in large, axillary panicles. Sepals 5-6; petals 5-6, free. Ovary with 5-8 loculi; ovules 2 in each loculus. Fruit a drupe.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. M. azedarach} L.,{\i  Sp. Pl.} 384 (1753). Up to 15 m. Bark furrowed. Leaves up to 90 cm, 2-pinnate; leaflets 2·5-5 cm, ovate-lanceolate to elliptical, acute, serrate or lobed. Panicles 10-20 cm. Flowers lilac, fragrant; petals c. 18 mm. Fruit 6-18 mm, subglobose, yellow.{\i  Widely planted in S. Europe for ornament and shade and locally naturalized}. [Cr Ga Ju.] ({\i S. & E. Asia}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b  92.                POLYGALACEAE}
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc Edit. D.H. Valentine & D.A. Webb.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Leaves simple, exstipulate. Flowers hermaphrodite, zygomorphic, in spikes or racemes. Sepals 5, free; petals 3-5, more or less united; stamens 8, with filaments partly united. Ovary 2-locular, with 1 seed in each loculus.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 1.                 Polygala}                   L.
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc By J. McNeill.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Small, perennial herbs, rarely annuals or small shrubs. Leaves usually alternate, entire or subentire. Flowers usually in terminal racemes, rarely in axillary racemes or solitary in leaf-axils. Sepals unequal, the 2 inner ({\i wings}) much larger than the 3 outer. Petals 3, united proximally into a corolla-tube, free distally, the lower ({\i keel}) of different form from the 2 upper, and usually bearing a fimbriate crest. Filaments partly or wholly united into a tube, which is partly adnate to the corolla-tube. Gynophore often present, usually elongating in fruit. Stigma 2-lobed, only the posterior lobe receptive. Capsule compressed, usually with a marginal wing. Seeds hairy, with a usually 3-lobed strophiole.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Descriptions and measurements of the petals refer to the free portion and exclude the corolla-tube. Terminal racemes are sometimes displaced by the growth of an axillary branch immediately below them; they are then termed {\i pseudolateral}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Literature: R. Chodat,{\i  Arch. Sci. Phys. Nat.} ({\i Genève}) ser. 3, {\b 18}: 281-299 (1887);{\i  Bull. Soc. Bot. Genève }{\b 5}: 123-185 (1889);{\i  Mém. Soc. Phys. Hist. Nat. Genève} Suppl. Centen. No. 7 (1891);{\b  31}({\b 2}), No. 2 (1893). P. Graebner in Ascherson & Graebner,{\i  Syn. Mitteleur. Fl.}{\b  7}: 309-387 (1915-16). B. Pawlowski,{\i  Fragm. Fl. Geobot.}{\b  3}: 35-68 (1958).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Leaves coriaceous; wings patent, not enclosing corolla, deciduous
\par
2 Crest of keel inconspicuous, with 2-6 short lobes; 
\par
  capsule 6-8 mm ..................................................................... {\b 2. chamaebuxus}
\par
2 Crest of keel conspicuous, with 5-9 long, narrow lobes; 
\par
  capsule 9-13 mm .......................................................................... {\b 3. vayredae}
\par
1 Leaves scarcely coriaceous; wings enclosing at least a
\par
  part of the corolla, persistent in fruit
\par
3 Shrub 100-250 cm; wings 15-20 mm ........................................ {\b 4. myrtifolia}
\par
3 Herb or shrub less than 60 cm; wings 3-15 mm
\par
4 Keel without crest; lower cauline leaves often caducous ....... {\b 1. microphylla}
\par
4 Keel with usually prominent, fimbriate crest;
\par
  leaves usually persistent at least to anthesis
\par
5 Annual; corolla much shorter than wings
\par
6 Wings 3-3·5 mm; corolla purple ....................................................... {\b 6. exilis}
\par
6 Wings 6-8 mm; corolla whitish ........................................... {\b 10. monspeliaca}
\par
5 Perennial; corolla longer than wings, or only slightly shorter
\par
7 At least some racemes subterminal or pseudolateral
\par
8 Lower leaves ± opposite ...................................................... {\b 26. serpyllifolia}
\par
8 All leaves alternate
\par
9 Wings 4-4·5 mm ............................................................................ {\b 33. alpina}
\par
9 Wings 5-8 mm
\par
10 Wings conspicuously asymmetrical, curving upwards;
\par
   outer sepals subequal, not inflated ................................................ {\b 7. sibirica}
\par
10 Wings ± symmetrical; upper outer sepal inflated and longer than
\par
   lower pair
\par
11 Wings uniformly membranous, with 3-5 branched veins ............ {\b 9. supina}
\par
11 Wings herbaceous, with a membranous margin, and with 1 vein
\par
12 Leaves linear to oblong, apiculate ............................................. {\b 5. rupestris}
\par
12 Leaves obovate, obtuse ......................................................... {\b 8. subuniflora}
\par
7 Racemes all terminal
\par
13 Corolla-tube at least 2/3 as long as wings; keel clearly exserted
\par
14 Wings ciliate ........................................................................... {\b 17. lusitanica}
\par
14 Wings glabrous
\par
15 Gynophore longer than ovary in flower and more than 2 mm in fruit
\par
16 Gynophore less than 3 mm in fruit; wings 7-10 mm in flower {\b 12. anatolica}
\par
16 Gynophore more than 3 mm in fruit; wings 9-13 mm in flower
\par
17 Racemes with (10-)30-60 flowers; bracts 3-6 mm ....................... {\b 11. major}
\par
17 Racemes with 5-20 flowers; bracts 1·5-2 mm ......................... {\b 13. boissieri}
\par

\par
231}
\par