{\rtf1\ansi \deff4\deflang1033{\fonttbl{\f4\froman\fcharset0\fprq2 Times New Roman;}}{\colortbl;\red0\green0\blue0;\red0\green0\blue255;\red0\green255\blue255;\red0\green255\blue0;\red255\green0\blue255;\red255\green0\blue0;\red255\green255\blue0;\red255\green255\blue255;\red0\green0\blue128;\red0\green128\blue128;\red0\green128\blue0;\red128\green0\blue128;\red128\green0\blue0;\red128\green128\blue0;\red128\green128\blue128;\red192\green192\blue192;}{\stylesheet{\widctlpar \f4\fs20\lang2057 \snext0 Normal;}{\*\cs10 \additive Default Paragraph Font;}}{\info{\author dddd}{\operator dddd}{\creatim\yr1998\mo11\dy11\hr18\min53}{\revtim\yr1998\mo11\dy11\hr18\min54}{\version2}{\edmins1}{\nofpages4}{\nofwords1052}{\nofchars6000}{\*\company  }{\vern57431}}\widowctrl\ftnbj\aenddoc\hyphcaps0 \fet0\sectd \linex0 {\*\pnseclvl1\pnucrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl2\pnucltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl3\pndec\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl4\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl5\pndec\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl6\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl7\pnlcrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl8\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl9\pnlcrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}
\pard\plain \qc\ \f4\fs20\lang2057 {\fs28  }{\b\fs28 1.                Acer}{\fs28                    L.
\par }{\fs24 By S. M. Walters
\par 
\par }
\pard \ {\fs28 Trees or shrubs, usually deciduous. Leaves long-petiolate, usually palmately lobed. Flowers greenish or yellowish, often unisexual, sometimes apetalous. Samarae winged on outer side only.
\par 
\par   Literature: F. Pax in Engler, }{\i\fs28 Pflanzenreich}{\b\fs28  8}{\fs28  (}{\b\fs28 IV. 163}{\fs28 ): 6-80 (1902). A. I. Pojarkova,}{\i\fs28  Acta Inst. Bot. Acad. Sci. URSS}{\b\fs28  1}{\fs28 : 225-374 (1933).
\par 
\par   Two North American species,}{\b\fs28  A. saccharophorum}{\fs28  C. Koch, }{\i\fs28 Hort. Dendrol. }{\fs28 80 (1853) (}{\i\fs28 A. saccharum}{\fs28  auct.), and }{\b\fs28 A. saccharinum}{\fs28  L.,}{\i\fs28  Sp. Pl. }{\fs28 1055 (1753) (}{\i\fs28 A. dasycarpum}{\fs28  Ehrh.) are planted locally for timber in C. Europe.}{\i\fs28  A. saccharophorum}{\fs28  has leaves rather like those of }{\b\fs28 1}{\fs28 , but paler beneath and without latex. }{\i\fs28 A. saccharinum}{\fs28  has leaves more deeply lobed and silvery-white beneath, also without latex.
\par 
\par }
\pard \li200\ {\fs28 1 Leaves pinnately 3- to 7-foliolate .............................................. }{\b\fs28 15. negundo}{\fs28 
\par 1 Leaves simple, sometimes deeply palmately lobed
\par 2 Leaves less than 8 cm, \'b1 coriaceous
\par 3 wings of fruit horizontal; leaves ciliate ..................................... }{\b\fs28 3. campestre}{\fs28 
\par 3 wings of fruit subparallel or diverging at an acute angle;
\par   leaves not ciliate
\par 4 Leaves glabrous and green beneath, evergreen .................. }{\b\fs28 14. sempervirens}{\fs28 
\par 4 Leaves pubescent or subglaucous beneath, deciduous
\par 5 Leaves 3-lobed; lobes usually entire ............................ }{\b\fs28 13. monspessulanum}{\fs28 
\par 5 Leaves (3-)5-lobed; lobes dentate ................................ (}{\b\fs28 8-12}{\fs28 )}{\b\fs28 .opalus}{\fs28  group
\par 2 Leaves up to 15 cm, not coriaceous
\par 6 Leaves undivided (rarely slightly 3-lobed) ................................ }{\b\fs28 4. tataricum}{\fs28 
\par 6 Leaves distinctly 3- to 7-lobed
\par 7 Middle lobe of leaf separated nearly to base ........................... }{\b\fs28 6. heldreichii}{\fs28 
\par 7 Leaf lobed to not more than 2/3 of distance to base
\par 8 Inflorescence paniculate; petioles without latex
\par 9 Inflorescence erect, broadly pyramidal; leaves irregularly dentate 
\par   .................................................................................................... }{\b\fs28 7. trautvetteri}{\fs28 
\par 9 Inflorescence pendent, narrow; leaves serrate .................. }{\b\fs28 5. pseudoplatanus}{\fs28 
\par 8 Inflorescence corymbose; petioles with or without latex
\par 10 Petioles without latex; wings of fruit diverging at an acute angle 
\par    ....................................................................................... (}{\b\fs28 8-12}{\fs28 ). }{\b\fs28 opalus}{\fs28  group
\par 10 Petioles with latex; wings of fruit diverging at an obtuse angle,
\par    sometimes nearly horizontal
\par 11 Leaves usually less than 7 cm, ciliate ...................................... }{\b\fs28 3. campestre}{\fs28 
\par 11 Leaves (5-)7-15 cm, not ciliate
\par 12 Leaf-lobes almost entire ................................................................ }{\b\fs28 2. lobelii}{\fs28 
\par 12 Leaf-lobes sinuate-dentate ..................................................... }{\b\fs28 1. platanoides}{\fs28 
\par 
\par }
\pard \ {\fs28   Sect. PLATANOIDEA Pax. Usually monoecious; leaves (3-)5 to 7-lobed; latex present; inflorescence corymbose; stamens inserted on middle of disc.
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 1. A. platanoides}{\fs28  L.,}{\i\fs28  Sp. Pl.}{\fs28  1055 (1753). Spreading tree up to 30 m. Leaves (5-)10-15 cm, 5- to 7-lobed; lobes acuminate, with few large, acuminate teeth. Flowers in erect, glabrous corymbs appearing before the leaves. Fruit with widely divergent to sub-horizontal wings. 2n = 26.}{\i\fs28  Most of Europe except the extreme north, the extreme west and the islands; only on mountains in the south. Planted for ornament and occasionally naturalized.}{\fs28  Al Au Be Bu Cz Fe Ga Ge Gr He Hs Hu It Ju No Po Rm Rs (N, B, C, W, E) Su Tu [Br Ho].
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 2. A. lobelii}{\fs28  Ten., }{\i\fs28 Cat. Pl. Horti Neap., App.}{\fs28  ed. 2, 69 (1819). Like }{\b\fs28 1}{\fs28  but with a narrow, columnar habit; leaf-lobes almost entire; calyx hairy.}{\i\fs28  Mountain woods. \bullet  C. & S. Italy.}{\fs28  It.
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 3. A. campestre}{\fs28  L., }{\i\fs28 Sp. Pl.}{\fs28  1055 (1753). Shrub or small tree up to 20(-25) m. Leaves 4-7 cm, obtusely 3- to 5-lobed, ciliate, often thick in texture, sometimes subcoriaceous. Flowers few,greenish, in erect, pubescent corymbs, opening with the leaves.Fruit usually pubescent, sometimes glabrous (var. leiocarpum (Opiz) Wallr.), with horizontal wings.}{\i\fs28  Most of Europe from N.England, S. Sweden and C. Russia southwards, but rare in the Mediterranean region; planted for hedges or ornament and occasionally naturalized.}{\fs28  Al Au Be Br Bu Co Cz Da Ga Ge Gr He,Ho Hs Hu It Ju Po Rm Rs (C, W, K) Sa Si Su Tu [Hb].
\par 
\par  Variable, especially in S.E. Europe, where some of the variation may result from hybridization with }{\b\fs28 13}{\fs28  and }{\b\fs28 14}{\fs28 . Such plants, with 3 triangular, acute, entire leaf-lobes, have been recorded from Jugoslavia, Hungary and Romania, as subsp.}{\i\fs28  marsicum}{\fs28  (Guss.) Hayek,}{\i\fs28  Prodr. Fl. Penins. Balcan. }{\b\fs28 1}{\fs28 : 606 (1925).
\par 
\par   Sect. ACER. Usually monoecious; leaves 3- to 5(-7)-lobed,more rarely undivided; no latex; inflorescence paniculate or corymbose; stamens inserted on inner margin of disc.
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 4. A. tataricum}{\fs28  L.,}{\i\fs28  Sp. Pl. }{\fs28 1054 (1753). Shrub or small tree up to 10 m. Leaves 6-10 cm, oblong, acute, cordate at base, usually undivided, more rarely shallowly 3-lobed; margin irregularly incise-biserrate. Flowers greenish-white, in suberect panicles. Fruit glabrescent, with straight, subparallel wings.}{\i\fs28  S.E. Europe, extending westwards to }{\fs28 16\'b0}{\i\fs28  E. in Czechoslovakia and northwards to}{\fs28  c. 55\'b0}{\i\fs28  in C. Russia}{\fs28 . Al Au Bu Cz Gr Hu Ju Rm Rs (C, W, E).
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 5. A. pseudoplatanus}{\fs28  L.,}{\i\fs28  Sp. Pl.}{\fs28  1054 (1753). Spreading tree up to 30 m. Leaves (7-)10-15 cm, 5-lobed to about \'bd way; lobes acute, coarsely serrate. Flowers numerous, greenish, in narrow, pendent panicles, usually appearing with the leaves. Fruit glabrous, with acute wings usually diverging at about a right angle. 2n = 52.}{\i\fs28  C. & S. Europe, mainly in and around the mountains, from Belgium and N. Poland to C. Portugal, Sicilia and C. Greece. Widely planted elsewhere for shelter and ornament and frequently naturalized}{\fs28 . Al Au Be Bu Co Cz Ga Ge Gr He Ho Hs Hu It Ju Lu Po Rm Rs (W, C) Si Tu [Br Da Hb Su].
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 6. A. heldreichii}{\fs28  Orph. ex Boiss., }{\i\fs28 Diagn. Pl. Or. Nov.}{\b\fs28  3}{\fs28 (}{\b\fs28 5}{\fs28 ): 71 (1856). Tree up to 25 m. Leaves 5-14 cm, deeply 5-lobed with middle lobe free nearly to base; lobes acute, with 2 or 3 large teeth on each side. Flowers rather few, subglabrous, yellowish, in suberect panicles, opening with leaves. Fruit glabrous, with arcuate wings usually diverging at an obtuse angle. \bullet }{\i\fs28  Mountains of Balkan peninsula.}{\fs28  Al Bu Gr Ju.
\par 
\par  (}{\b\fs28 a}{\fs28 ) Subsp. }{\b\fs28 heldreichii}{\fs28 : Leaves 5-8 cm, glaucous beneath; samarae 2-3 cm.}{\i\fs28  Throughout most of the range of the species.}{\fs28 
\par  (}{\b\fs28 b}{\fs28 ) Subsp. }{\b\fs28 visianii}{\fs28  K. Mal\'fd, }{\i\fs28 Magyar Bot. Lapok}{\b\fs28  7}{\fs28 : 219 (1908) (}{\i\fs28 A. macropterum}{\fs28  Vis.): Leaves up to 14 cm, scarcely glaucous beneath; samarae 4-5 cm. }{\i\fs28 C. & S. Jugoslavia, W. Bulgaria}{\fs28 .
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 7. A. trautvetteri}{\fs28  Medv., }{\i\fs28 Izv. Kavk. Obsc.Ljub. Est.}{\b\fs28  2}{\fs28 : 8 (1880). Tree up to 15 m. Leaves 10-15 cm, deeply 5-lobed; lobes acute, with 3-4 large teeth on each side Flowers rather few, subglabrous, pale green, in erect, pyramidal panicles, appearing after the leaves. Fruit glabrescent with subparallel wings.}{\i\fs28  Near Istanbul}{\fs28  (}{\i\fs28 forest of Belgrad}{\fs28 ). Tu. (}{\i\fs28 N. Anatolia, W. Caucasus}{\fs28 .)
\par 
\par  Sect. GONIOCARPA Pojark. Usually monoecious; leaves 3- to 5-lobed (more rarely undivided), subcoriaceous, sometimes evergreen; no latex; inflorescence corymbose; stamens inserted on inner margin of disc.
\par 
\par    (}{\b\fs28 8-12}{\fs28 ).}{\b\fs28  A. opalus}{\fs28  group. Small tree or shrub up to 15 m. Leaves very variable in size, shape and texture, usually 5-lobed. Flowers rather few, yellowish, in subsessile corymbs with slender
\par 
\par 238}
\par }