{\rtf1\ansi \deff4\deflang1033{\fonttbl{\f4\froman\fcharset0\fprq2 Times New Roman;}}{\colortbl;\red0\green0\blue0;\red0\green0\blue255;\red0\green255\blue255;\red0\green255\blue0;\red255\green0\blue255;\red255\green0\blue0;\red255\green255\blue0;\red255\green255\blue255;\red0\green0\blue128;\red0\green128\blue128;\red0\green128\blue0;\red128\green0\blue128;\red128\green0\blue0;\red128\green128\blue0;\red128\green128\blue128;\red192\green192\blue192;}{\stylesheet{\widctlpar \f4\fs20\lang2057 \snext0 Normal;}{\*\cs10 \additive Default Paragraph Font;}}{\info{\author dddd}{\operator dddd}{\creatim\yr1998\mo11\dy11\hr17\min10}{\revtim\yr1998\mo11\dy11\hr17\min11}{\version2}{\edmins1}{\nofpages3}{\nofwords757}{\nofchars4315}{\*\company  }{\vern57431}}\widowctrl\ftnbj\aenddoc\hyphcaps0 \fet0\sectd \linex0 {\*\pnseclvl1\pnucrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl2\pnucltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl3\pndec\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl4\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl5\pndec\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl6\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl7\pnlcrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl8\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl9\pnlcrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}
\pard\plain \ \f4\fs20\lang2057 {\fs28     }{\b\fs28 5. C. paradisi}{\fs28  Macfadyen in Hooker,}{\i\fs28  Bot. Misc. }{\b\fs28 1}{\fs28 : 304 (1830) (Grapefruit). Spiny tree with rounded crown. Twigs angular, glabrous. Leaves 10-15 cm, broadly elliptical, rounded or sometimes cordate at the base, subacute at the apex; midrib glabrous. Petiole very broadly winged, frequently up to 15 mm wide near the top, obcordate in outline and tapering below. Flowers in axillary clusters or terminal racemes. Stamens 20-25. Fruit 10-15 cm in diameter, depressed-globose or subpyriform; rind thick, pale yellow when ripe; pulp with coarse vesicles.
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 6. C. grandis}{\fs28  (L.) Osbeck, }{\i\fs28 Dagb. Ostind. Resa}{\fs28  98 (1757) (Shaddock, Pomelo). Like }{\b\fs28 5}{\fs28  but a large tree with few spines; twigs and midrib pubescent; petiole less broadly winged; fruit up to 25 cm in diameter; pulp with slender vesicles.
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 7. C. aurantium}{\fs28  L., }{\i\fs28 Sp. Pl.}{\fs28  782 (1753) (Seville Orange). Tree with a rounded crown. Twigs angular when young, soon terete, with slender axillary spines. Leaves 7\'b75-10 cm, broadly elliptical, subacute at the apex, Cuneate or rounded below. Petioles rather broadly winged above, tapering to a wingless base. Flowers solitary or few in the axils, very fragrant. Fruit c. 7\'b75 cm in diameter, subglobose, slightly flattened at both ends, 10- to 12-locular; rind thick, rough, orange when ripe; pulp acid; core hollow when ripe.
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 8. C. sinensis}{\fs28  (L.) Osbeck,}{\i\fs28  Dagb. Ostind. Resa}{\fs28  41 (1757) (Orange). Tree with rounded crown. Twigs angular when young, soon terete, with few slender, rather flexible axillary spines Leaves acute, rounded below. Petioles narrowly winged. Flowers in short, lax racemes or solitary, fragrant. Fruit depressed-globose to shortly ovoid, 10- to 13-locular; rind thin to rather thick, nearly smooth, orange to orange-yellow when ripe; pulp sweet; core remaining solid when ripe.
\par 
\par }
\pard \qc\ {\fs28 Subfam.  }{\b\fs28  Toddalioideae}{\fs28 
\par }
\pard \ {\fs28 
\par Fruit a drupe or a samara. Seeds with or without endosperm.
\par 
\par }
\pard \qc\ {\fs28  }{\b\fs28 5.            Phellodendron}{\fs28                    Rupr.
\par }{\fs24 By C.C. Townsend.
\par 
\par }
\pard \ {\fs28 Dioecious. Deciduous trees. Leaves opposite, imparipinnate. Flowers small, in terminal panicles or corymbs, green. Sepals 5-8. Male flowers with 5-6 stamens, longer than the petals; ovary rudimentary. Female flowers with connate styles; stigma 5-lobed; stamens reduced to 5-6 small staminodes. Fruit a black, subglobose drupe.
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 1. P. amurense}{\fs28  Rupr.,}{\i\fs28  Bull. Phys.-Matlz. Acad. P\'e9tersb. }{\b\fs28 15}{\fs28 : 353 (1857). Tree up to 15 m, with deeply fissured, light grey, corky bark; branches forming a wide canopy. Leaflets 5-10 \'d7 1\'b76-4\'b75 cm, 5-13, narrowly ovate to ovate-lanceolate, long-acuminate, shortly attenuate or rounded at base, shallowly crenulate, dark green and shining above, paler and almost glabrous beneath. Flowers in terminal panicles; sepals c. 1 mm, acute; petals 4-6 mm, oblong, cucullate, densely pubescent within. Fruit c. 8 mm in diameter.}{\i\fs28  Cultivated for ornament and occasionally for timber in S.E. Europe.}{\fs28  [Bu Rm.] (}{\i\fs28 N.E. Asia.}{\fs28 )
\par 
\par }
\pard \qc\ {\fs28   }{\b\fs28 6.                    Ptelea}{\fs28                  L.
\par }{\fs24 By C.C. Townsend. 
\par 
\par }
\pard \ {\fs28 Deciduous polygamous shrubs or small trees. Leaves alternate, 3(-5)-foliolate. Flowers small, greenish-white, in terminal corymbs. Sepals and petals 4-5. Stamens 4-5; filaments villous below; female flowers with 4-5 small staminodes. Styles connate,short. Fruit a compressed, broadly winged samara. 
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 1. P. trifoliata}{\fs28  L.,}{\i\fs28  Sp. Pl.}{\fs28  118 (1753). Shrub or small tree up to 8 m, with rounded crown. Leaflets 6-12 \'d7 2-3\'b75 cm, 3(-5), ovate to elliptic-oblong, narrowed at each end or shortly acuminate at the apex, entire or obscurely crenulate, dark green and shining above, paler beneath. Sepals 1 mm, free, acute. Petals 4 mm, densely hairy within, oblong. Samara 1\'b75-2\'b75 cm, suborbicular, emarginate, straw-coloured, reticulate-veined.}{\i\fs28  Cultivated in gardens and locally naturalized}{\fs28 . [Ga Ge Hu Rm. (}{\i\fs28 North America}{\fs28 .)
\par 
\par }
\pard \qc\ {\fs28  }{\b\fs28 89.               CNEORACEAE}{\fs28 
\par }{\fs24 Edit.  †T.G. Tutin.
\par 
\par }
\pard \ {\fs28 Flowers 3- to 4-merous, hermaphrodite, actinomorphic, in small axillary cymes. Sepals and petals 3-4. Receptacle elongated and forming a gynophore in fruit. Ovary superior with 3-4 loculi, each with 2 pendent ovules. Fruit of usually 3 drupe-like cocci, attached to the central gynophore. Seed with curved embryo and fleshy endosperm.
\par 
\par 
\par }
\pard \qc\ {\fs28  }{\b\fs28 1.                       Cneorum}{\fs28                          L.
\par }{\fs24 By  †T.G. Tutin.
\par 
\par }
\pard \ {\fs28 Small shrubs. Leaves entire, coriaceous. Flowers yellow.
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 1. C. tricoccon}{\fs28  L.,}{\i\fs28  Sp. Pl. }{\fs28 34 (1753). Nearly glabrous, evergreen shrub 30-100 cm. Leaves 10-30 \'d7 3-7 mm, oblong, obtuse, mucronate, narrowed at base but sessile. Calyx-lobes c. 1 mm, ovate, persistent. Petals c. 5 mm. Fruit of usually 3 cocci c. 5 mm.}{\i\fs28  Rocky slopes, usually calcareous. \bullet  W. Mediterranean region.}{\fs28  Bl Ga Hs It Sa.
\par 
\par }
\pard \qc\ {\fs28  }{\b\fs28 90.                SIMAROUBACEAE}{\fs28 
\par }{\fs24 Edit.  †T.G. Tutin.
\par 
\par }
\pard \ {\fs28 Trees or shrubs with bitter bark. Leaves pinnate, alternate. Flowers actinomorphic, 5-merous. Petals free. Disc 10-lobed. Stamens 10 in male flowers, 2-3 in hermaphrodite flowers; filaments free. Ovary superior; carpels 5-6, more or less connate, unilocular, each with 1 ovule attached to the inner angle; styles 2-5, connate. Fruit drupe-like, a berry or a group of samaras.
\par 
\par }
\pard \qc\ {\fs28   }{\b\fs28 1.                     Ailanthus}{\fs28                   Desf.
\par }{\fs24 By  †T.G. Tutin.
\par 
\par }
\pard \ {\fs28 Deciduous trees. Flowers polygamous, in large terminal panicles. Fruit a group of samaras.
\par 
\par 230}
\par }