{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 pedicels, opening before the leaves. Fruit glabrous, with straight wings diverging at an acute angle.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Leaf-lobes parallel-sided, with deep sinuses often reaching 
\par
  half-way to the base
\par
2 Lower surface of mature leaf pubescent ................................. {\b 10. granatense}
\par
2 Lower surface of mature leaf glabrous or subglabrous (except for veins)
\par
3 Leaves glaucous, those on flowering shoots with deep sinuses
\par
  often reaching more than half-way to the base ............................ {\b 12. stevenii}
\par
3 Leaves usually green above, with sinuses rarely reaching 
\par
  more than half-way to the base ................................................ {\b 11. hyrcanum}
\par
1 Leaf-lobes ± triangular-ovate, with shallow sinuses never reaching
\par
  half-way to the base
\par
4 Leaf-lobes acute, lower surface often glabrescent (except for veins) 
\par
  ........................................................................................................... {\b 8. opalus}
\par
4 Leaf-lobes obtuse, lower surface usually rather densely
\par
  pubescent or tomentose .............................................................. {\b 9. obtusatum}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 8. A. opalus} Miller, {\i Gard. Dict.} ed. 8, no. 8 (1768) ({\i A. opulifolium} Chaix). Leaves up to 10 cm, but usually less than 8 cm, with 5 wide, short, acute or subacute lobes. Lower surface of leaf often glabrescent except for veins and vein-axils. Peduncles glabrous. •{\i  S.W. Europe, extending locally northwards to} c. 50° 30'{\i  in W. Germany}. Co Ga Ge He Hs It.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 9. A. obtusatum} Waldst. & Kit. ex Willd.,{\i  Sp. Pl.}{\b  4}({\b 2}): 984 (1806) (incl.{\i  A. aetnense }Tineo ex Strobl). Leaves up to 12 cm, with (3) 5 short, wide, obtuse lobes. Lower surface of leaf more or less densely and persistently hairy, often tomentose. Peduncles hairy. {\i Balkan peninsula, C. & S. Italy, Sicilia, Corse.} Al Co Gr It Ju Si.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 10. A. granatense} Boiss.,{\i  Elenchus} 25 (1838). Leaves up to 7 cm, with 3 long, parallel-sided main lobes and 2 subsidiary basal ones. Lower surface of leaf, young petioles and young branches usually more or less densely hairy (glabrous in var.{\i  nevadense }(Boiss. ex Pax.) Font-Quer & Rothm.).{\i  S. Spain; Mallorca.} Bl Hs. ({\i N. Africa.})
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 11. A. hyrcanum} Fischer & C. A. Meyer,{\i  Ind. Sem. Horti Petrop.}{\b  4}: 31(1837) (incl.{\i  A. intermedium} Pancic). Leaves up to 10 cm, with 5 long, narrow, parallel-sided lobes. Lower surface of leaf glabrous or slightly hairy.{\i  Balkan peninsula.} Al Bu Gr Ju.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   {\b A. reginae-amaliae} Orph. ex Boiss., {\i Diagn. Pl. Or. Nov.}{\b  3}({\b 1}): 109 (1853), described from the mountains of C. Greece, has 3(-5)-lobed, glabrous leaves only 2-4 cm. It is closely related to {\b 11} and perhaps best treated as a variety.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 12. A. stevenii} Pojark., {\i Acta Inst. Bot. Akad. Sci. URSS}{\b  1}: 150 (1933). Like {\b 11} but with somewhat glaucous leaves, and narrower and longer leaf-lobes (most leaves on flowering shoots with deep sinuses reaching more than half-way to base). •{\i  Krym.} Rs (K).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 13. A. monspessulanum} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 1056 (1753). Shrub or small tree up to 12 m. Leaves 3-8 cm, 3-lobed, coriaceous, shiny above, somewhat glaucous beneath, long-petiolate. Flowers greenish yellow, in corymbs, erect at first, somewhat pendent later; pedicels long, slender. Fruit glabrescent, with subparallel wings.{\i  S. Europe, extending locally northwards to} c. 50°{\i  N. in W. Germany.} Al Bu Co Ga Ge Gr Hs It Ju Lu Rm Sa Si ?Tu [Au].
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   {\b A. martinii} Jordan,{\i  Pug. Pl. Nov. }52 (1852), described from France (near Lyon), differs from {\b 13} in its larger leaves more cordate at the base, with 3-5 dentate lobes. Other taxa with leaves somewhat intermediate in shape and texture between {\b 13} and{\b  8} have been described from S. France, Italy and Spain. The status of these taxa is uncertain.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 14. A. sempervirens} L., {\i Mantissa} 128 (1767) ({\i A. orientale} auct. non L., {\i A. creticum} auct. non L.). Evergreen shrub up to 5(-12) m. Leaves 2-5 cm, 3-lobed to undivided, coriaceous, green beneath, shortly petiolate. Flowers few, greenish-yellow, in erect, glabrous corymbs. Fruit with wings subparallel or diverging at an acute angle. {\i Greece and Aegean region.} Cr Gr.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    Sect. NEGUNDO (Boehmer) Pax. Dioecious; leaves pinnate; no latex; floral disc absent.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 15. A. negundo} L.,{\i  Sp. Pl.} 1056 (1753). Tree up to 20 m. Leaves 5-10 cm, imparipinnate, with 3 or 5 (7) ovate-acuminate leaflets. Flowers apetalous, greenish, opening before the leaves; male inflorescence a corymb, female a lax, pendent raceme. Fruit glabrous, with arcuate wings diverging at an acute angle.{\i  Widely planted for ornament and occasionally naturalized.} [Au Bu Cz Ga Ge He Hs Hu Rs (C, W).] ({\i E. North America}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 96.                 SAPINDACEAE}
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc Edit. D.A. Webb.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Trees, shrubs, woody climbers or rarely (as in the only European representative) herbs, with alternate, usually compound leaves. Flowers hermaphrodite, hypogynous, usually small. Sepals and petals 3-5, free; stamens 8, deflexed. Ovary superior, 3-locular, with one seed in each loculus.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b Koelreuteria paniculata} Laxm., {\i Novi Comment. Acad. Sci. Petrop. }{\b 16}: 561 (1772), a graceful tree with pinnate leaves, yellow flowers and an inflated capsule, native to E. Asia, is widely planted in S. Europe in parks and by roadsides, and is perhaps locally naturalized in E. Romania and W. Ukraine.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 1.                Cardiospermum}               L.
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc By D.A. Webb.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Herbs, sometimes woody at the base. Leaves stipulate, ternately divided. Sepals and petals 4. Fruit an inflated, membranous capsule.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Literature: L. Radlkofer in Engler,{\i  Pflanzenreich }{\b 98a}({\b IV. 165}): 370-413 (1931).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. C. halicacabum} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 366 (1753). Annual, somewhat woody at the base, sparsely hairy throughout, climbing by means of branched, axillary tendrils. Stem up to 2 m but often much less, strongly ridged. Leaves more or less deltate in outline, ternate; leaflets deeply ternatisect, with a large, rhombic-lanceolate, irregularly incise-dentate terminal lobe and 2 small lateral lobes. Flowers in small, long-pedunculate, axillary cymes, often with tendrils intermixed with the flowers. Sepals 1·5 mm, ovate-orbicular. Petals 4 mm, white. Capsule up to 3 × 3 cm, trigonous or subglobose, papery; seeds 5 mm in diameter, black with a conspicuous, white, heart-shaped hilum. {\i Cultivated as a curiosity in S. Europe and locally naturalized.} [Gr Hs Ju.] ( {\i Widespread in the warmer regions of both hemispheres}.)
\par

\par
239}
\par