{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 1.                  Euonymus}                L.
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc By †T.G. Tutin.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Unarmed shrubs or small trees. Leaves usually opposite. Flowers 4- to 5-merous. Capsule 4- to 5-locular, dehiscent; seeds partly or completely covered by a bright orange, fleshy aril.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Stems creeping and rooting, with ascending branches;
\par
  leaves linear to linear-oblong; cymes all 1-flowered ........................ {\b 4. nanus}
\par
1 Stems never creeping and rooting; leaves lanceolate
\par
  to broadly obovate; cymes (1-)2- to 12-flowered
\par
2 Evergreen .................................................................................... {\b 5. japonicus}
\par
2 Deciduous
\par
3 Twigs subterete, covered with dark brown tubercles ............... {\b 3. verrucosus}
\par
3 Twigs ± quadrangular, without tubercles
\par
4 Leaves 3-8(-10) cm; buds 2-4 mm, ovoid, acute; 
\par
  flowers usually 4-merous ........................................................... {\b 1. europaeus}
\par
4 Leaves (5-)8-16 cm; buds 7-12 mm, fusiform, acuminate;
\par
  flowers usually 5-merous ............................................................. {\b 2. latifolius}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. E. europaeus} L.,{\i  Sp. Pl.} 197 (1753) ({\i E. vulgaris} Miller). Much-branched, glabrous, deciduous shrub or small tree 2-6 m. Twigs green, quadrangular, without brown tubercles. Buds 2-4 mm, ovoid, acute. Leaves up to 10 × 3·5 cm, opposite, ovate-lanceolate to elliptical, acute or acuminate, crenate-serrulate. Cymes 3- to 8-flowered. Flowers usually 4-merous. Capsule 10-15 mm wide, angled, pink; seeds covered by the aril. 2n = 64.{\i  Most of Europe, except the extreme north and much of the Mediterranean region}. All except Az Bl Cr Fa Fe Is Rs (N) Sb.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. E. latifolius} (L.) Miller, {\i Gard. Dict.} ed. 8, no. 2 (1768) ({\i Kalonymus latifolia} (L.) Prokh.). Like {\b 1} but twigs less distinctly quadrangular; buds 7-12 mm, fusiform, acuminate; leaves up to 16 × 7 cm, oblong-elliptical to obovate, acuminate, serrulate; cymes 4- to 12-flowered; flowers usually 5-merous; capsule 15-20 mm wide, narrowly winged on the angles.{\i  S.C. & S.E. Europe, extending to C. Italy and S. France.} Al Au Bu ?Cz Ga Ge Gr He It Ju Rm Rs (K) Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 3. E. verrucosus} Scop.,{\i  Fl. Carn.} ed. 2, {\b 1}: 166 (1772). Much branched, nearly glabrous shrub 1-3 m. Twigs slender, green, subterete, covered with dark brown tubercles. Leaves up to 6 × 3·5 cm, opposite, elliptic-oblong to ovate, acute or acuminate, crenate-serrulate, often puberulent on the veins beneath. Cymes 1- to 3-flowered. Flowers 4-merous. Capsule c. 10 mm wide, with rounded angles; seeds black, partly covered by the aril.{\i  E.C. & E. Europe northwards to} c. 57°{\i  N., extending to N. Italy and Albania.} Al Au Bu Cz Gr Hu It Ju Po Rm Rs (N, B, C, W, K, E) Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 4. E. nanus} Bieb., {\i Fl. Taur.-Cauc.}{\b  3}: 160 (1819). Procumbent or ascending, glabrous, more or less evergreen shrub 0·2-2 m. Twigs quadrangular. Leaves up to 3·5 × 0·7 cm, alternate or sometimes opposite or verticillate, linear to linear-oblong, obtuse or subacute, entire or remotely denticulate. Cymes 1-flowered. Flowers 4-merous. Capsule c. 10 mm wide, sharply angled; seeds brown, partly covered by the aril.{\i  N.E. Romania, Moldavia, W. & C. Ukraine}. Rm Rs (W).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  A species of very disjunct distribution, being recorded outside Europe only from Mongolia, Tibet and the north flank of the Caucasus.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 5. E. japonicus} L. fil.,{\i  Suppl.} 154 (1781). Erect, glabrous, evergreen shrub or small tree up to 6 m. Twigs weakly angled, grey. Leaves up to 7 × 3·5 cm, opposite, elliptical to obovate, acute or obtuse, crenate-serrate. Flowers 4-merous. Capsule c. 8 mm wide, with rounded angles; seeds covered by the aril.{\i  Commonly planted for ornament and locally naturalized in S. Europe.} [Bu Ga Hs It Ju.] ({\i Japan}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 2.                      Maytenus}                 Molina
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc By †T.G. Tutin.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Usually spiny shrubs. Leaves alternate. Calyx-lobes, petals and stamens (4-)5. Capsule (1-)2(-3)-locular, dehiscent; seeds with a fleshy aril round the base.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. M. senegalensis} (Lam.) Exell,{\i  Bol. Soc. Brot.} ser. 2,{\b  26}: 223 (1952) ({\i Catha europaea} (Boiss.) Boiss.). Intricately branched, very spiny, evergreen shrub 1-2 m. Leaves 1-3 × 0·3-0·6 cm, ovate-oblong to obovate-rhombic, entire, long-cuneate at base, somewhat glaucous. Calyx-lobes, petals and stamens 5. Capsule 5-7 mm wide, globose, 2-locular or 1-locular through abortion; seeds reddish-brown, shiny.{\i  Rocky places. S. Spain }({\i between Malaga and Almeria}). Hs. ({\i Tropical Asia and Africa, extending to N.W. Africa}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 101.             STAPHYLEACEAE} 
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc Edit. N.A. Burges.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Trees or shrubs. Leaves pinnate, stipulate. Flowers hermaphrodite, actinomorphic. Sepals and petals 5, free; stamens 5, free; ovary superior, 2- to 3-locular, with numerous ovules in each loculus; styles 2-3; stigma capitate. Fruit a few-seeded capsule.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 1.                   Staphylea}                  L. 
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc By P.W. Ball.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Leaves opposite; lateral leaflets sessile; stipules deciduous. Flowers in terminal panicles. Fruit inflated, dehiscent, 2- to 3-lobed. Seeds without aril.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. S. pinnata} L.,{\i  Sp. Pl.} 270 (1753). Shrub up to 5 m. Leaflets 5-7, 5-10 cm, ovate-oblong, acuminate, serrulate, glabrous. Panicles 5-12 cm, oblong, pendent. Sepals ovate, whitish, about as long as petals; petals 6-10 mm, oblong, whitish. Fruit 2·5-4 cm, subglobose. Seeds c. 1 cm, yellowish-brown.{\i  C. Europe, extending to S. Italy, Bulgaria and W. Ukraine.} Au Bu Cz Ga Ge He Hu It Ju Po Rm Rs (W) [Br].
\par

\par
242}
\par