{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 aristate teeth, dark, shining green and glabrous above, light green beneath, with tufts of yellowish hairs in the vein-axils. Flowers 3-7, usually 5. Style pubescent. Fruit c. 10 mm; pericarp woody, pubescent, strongly ribbed. Quercus-{\i woods; rare. Krym.} Rs (K).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 3. T. platyphyllos} Scop.,{\i  Fl. Carn.} ed. 2, {\b 1}: 373 (1772) ({\i T. officinarum} Crantz pro parte). Up to 40 m; branches spreading. Leaves 6-9(-12) cm, soft, broadly ovate, abruptly acuminate, symmetrically or obliquely cordate at the base, regularly serrate with acute but not aristate teeth, pubescent or almost glabrous. Cymes pendent; flowers 2-5, usually 3. Fruit 8-10 mm, subglobose to pyriform; pericarp woody, tomentose, strongly 5-ribbed. {\i C. & S. Europe, extending eastwards to W. Ukraine and locally northwards to N. France and S.W. Sweden. Often planted in parks and gardens}. Al Au Be Bu Co Cz Da Ga Gr He Ho Hs Hu It Ju Po Rm Rs (W) ?Si Su ?Tu [*Br].
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Very variable, particularly in the amount of pubescence on leaves and young shoots. Three fairly distinct subspecies may be recognized.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Leaves pubescent on both surfaces; young twigs pubescent
\par
  .......................................................................................... ({\b b}) subsp. {\b cordifolia}
\par
1 Leaves glabrous, at least above
\par
2 Leaves distinctly pubescent on midrib beneath, sometimes also on
\par
  secondary veins; young twigs glabrous or pubescent  ({\b a}) subsp. {\b platyphyllos}
\par
2 Leaves glabrous beneath, or very slightly pubescent on midrib;
\par
  young twigs glabrous ................................................. ({\b c}) subsp. {\b pseudorubra}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b platyphyllos} ({\i T. officinarum} subsp.{\i  platyphyllos} (Scop.) Hayek):{\i  Mainly in the C. & S. parts of the range of the species}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b cordifolia} (Besser) C. K. Schneider,{\i  Ill. Handb. Laubholzk.}{\b  2}: 376 (1909) ({\i T. cordifolia} Besser; incl. subsp.{\i  eugrandifolia} C. K. Schneider,{\i  T. officinarum} subsp. {\i grandifolia} (Ehrh. ex Hoffm.) Hayek):{\i  In the N., E. & C. parts of the range of the species}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b c}) Subsp. {\b pseudorubra} C. K. Schneider, {\i op. cit.} 378 (1909) ({\i T. officinarum} subsp.{\i  flava} (Wolny) Hayek):{\i  Mainly in the S. part of the range of the species}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 4. T. rubra} DC., {\i Cat. Pl. Horti Monsp.} 150 (1813) ({\i T. officinarum} subsp.{\i  rubra} (Weston) Hayek & subsp. {\i corinthiaca} (V. Engler) Hayek). Like {\b 3} but leaves firmer, glabrous or subglabrous, more obliquely cordate or truncate, and with markedly acuminate-aristate teeth. Fruit variable in shape.{\i  S.E. & E.C. Europe; distribution uncertain, because of confusion with} {\b 3}({\b c}). ?.Al Bu Gr Hu ?Ju ?Rm Rs (K).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b rubra}: Young twigs pubescent. Leaves sparingly pubescent on the veins beneath. {\i Throughout the range of the species, except Krym}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b caucasica} (Rupr.) V. Engler,{\i  Monogr. Gatt.} Tilia 107 (1909) ({\i T. caucasica} Rupr.): Young twigs glabrous; leaves glabrous except sometimes for small tufts of hairs in the vein-axils. {\i Krym.} ({\i Caucasus}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 5. T. cordata} Miller, {\i Gard. Dict.} ed. 8, no. 1 (1768) ({\i T. parvifolia} Ehrh. ex Hoffm.). Up to 30 m, with large, spreading crown. Young twigs glabrous or subglabrous. Leaves 3-9 cm, suborbicular, abruptly acuminate, acutely and finely serrate, cordate at the base, glabrous except for some tufts of reddish-brown hairs in the vein-axils beneath; tertiary veins not prominent. Cymes obliquely erect, with 4-15 flowers; bracts petiolate. Fruit c. 6 mm, globose; pericarp membranous, smooth or slightly ribbed.{\i  Throughout Europe except the extreme north, the extreme south and some islands.} Al Au Be Br Bu Co Cz Da Fe Ga Ge ?Gr He Ho Hs Hu It Ju No Po Rm Rs (N, B, C, W, K, E) Su Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b   6. T}. ×{\b  vulgaris} Hayne, {\i Darst. Beschr. Arzn. Gewachse}{\b  3}: t. 47 (1813) ({\i T. europaea} L. pro parte, {\i T. intermedia} DC.) ({\i T. cordata }×{\i  platyphyllos}). Young twigs usually glabrous. Leaves 6-10 cm, broadly ovate, shortly acuminate, obliquely cordate or nearly truncate at the base, dull green above, paler beneath, glabrous except for whitish hairs in the vein-axils beneath; tertiary veins prominent. Cymes pendent, with 5-10 flowers. Fruit c. 8 mm, subglobose or broadly ovoid, rounded at the ends; pericarp woody, slightly ribbed.{\i  Occasional as a natural hybrid in most regions of Europe where the parent species grow together; also planted in parks and gardens, especially in N. W. Europe, and sometimes naturalized.} Au Cz Ga Ge Gr He Hs Hu It Po Rm Rs (W) Si Su [Br].
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b T}. × {\b euchlora} C. Koch, {\i Wochenschr. Gärtn. Pflanzenk.}{\b  9}: 284 (1866) (probably {\i T. cordata} × {\i dasystyla}) is often planted for ornament, especially in C. Europe. It differs from {\b 6} in the leaves, which are dark, shining green above, and with reddish-brown hairs in the vein-axils beneath, the fewer (3-7) flowers, and the fruit tapered at the ends.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 106.              MALVACEAE}
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc Edit. D.A. Webb
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Herbs, shrubs or small trees with simple (but sometimes deeply palmatisect), alternate, stipulate leaves. Flowers regular, hermaphrodite. Bracteoles usually present immediately below the calyx, forming an epicalyx. Sepals 5, united at the base; petals 5, free or united slightly at the base. Stamens numerous, the filaments united for most of their length to form a tube which surrounds the ovary and styles. Ovary superior, of 4 or more (usually numerous) carpels; styles usually free. Fruit a schizocarp or a loculicidal capsule.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Epicalyx absent
\par
2 Annual, with suborbicular leaves; fruit hairy, each carpel with 
\par
  several seeds ................................................................................. {\b 9. Abutilon}
\par
2 Woody perennial, with oblong-lanceolate leaves; fruit glabrous,
\par
  each carpel 1-seeded ............................................................................ {\b 3. Sida}
\par
1 Epicalyx present
\par
3 Carpels 3-5; fruit a capsule
\par
4 Epicalyx-segments broadly ovate to deltate .......................... {\b 11. Gossypium}
\par
4 Epicalyx-segments linear
\par
5 Fruit depressed, 5-angled, with 1 seed in each loculus ....... {\b 14. Kosteletzkya}
\par
5 Fruit at least as long as wide, rounded, with several several in
\par
  each loculus
\par
6 Fruit not more than twice as long as wide; 
\par
  calyx persistent in fruit ............................................................... {\b 12. Hibiscus}
\par
6 Fruit more than twice as long as wide; calyx deciduous ... {\b 13. Abelmoschus}
\par
3 Carpels at least 6; fruit a schizocarp
\par
7 Epicalyx-segments 5 or more
\par
8 Mericarps in several superimposed planes, 
\par
  forming a ± globose head .............................................................{\b 2. Kitaibela}
\par
8 Mericarps in a single whorl, forming a circular disc
\par
9 Staminal tube terete; flowers not more than 30 mm in
\par

\par
248}
\par