{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 clavate, glabrous. 2n = 18, 20.{\i  Naturalized on river-banks and in waste places in a large part of Europe.} [Au Be Br Cz Da Fe Ga Ge Hb He Ho Hu It Ju No Po Rm Rs (B, C, W) Su.] ({\i Himalaya.})
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 5. I. balfourii} Hooker fil.,{\i  Bot. Mag.}{\b  124}: t. 7878 (1903). Glabrous annual 40-80 cm; stems simple or branched. Leaves 2-13 × 1·5-7 cm, ovate-lanceolate; base cuneate, shortly decurrent on petiole; apex long-acuminate; margin serrate, glandular near base; teeth 20-40 on each side, mucronate. Flowers 3-8 in axillary racemes, 2·5-4 cm, pinkish-purple; sepal-sac 8-9 × 6-8 mm, longer than wide, gradually contracted to spur; spur 12-18 mm, straight or slightly curved. Capsule 2-4 cm, linear to subclavate, glabrous.{\i  Locally naturalized on disturbed ground and at wood-margins. C. & S. Europe.} [Ga He Hu It.] ({\i Himalaya}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 6. I. balsamina} L.,{\i  Sp. Pl.} 938 (1753). Pubescent or glabrous annual 10-60 cm; stems simple. Leaves 5-12 × 1-2·5 cm, alternate elliptical to lanceolate-ovate; base cuneate, decurrent on petiole, apex acute to acuminate; margin serrate; teeth 15-20 on each side. Flowers 1(-3) in leaf-axils, 1-2·5 cm, pinkish to purplish or white; pedicels 1-2 cm; sepal-sac 3-5 × 8-12 mm, wider than long, abruptly contracted to spur; spur 4-10 mm, curved, often absent. Capsule 0·8-1·3 cm, ellipsoid, pubescent. {\i Widely cultivated in gardens, and occasionally naturalized.} [Au Cz Ga Nu.] ({\i S. & E. Asia.})
\par

\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 99.               AQUIFOLIACEAE}
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc Edit. D.A. Webb.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Trees or shrubs with simple, alternate leaves. Stipules inconspicuous. Flowers actinomorphic, usually unisexual, in axillary cymes. Sepals united; petals free or slightly united at base; stamens equal in number to the petals. Ovary superior, syncarpous; fruit a drupe with several pyrenes.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Literature: T. Loesener,{\i  Nova Acta Acad. Leop.-Carol. }{\b 78}: 1-598 (1901), {\b 89}:1-313 (1908).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 1.                   Ilex}                    L.
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc By D.A. Webb.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Evergreen shrubs or small trees; dioecious, but with conspicuous vestiges of gynoecium in male and of stamens in female flowers. Flowers 4-merous. Ovary 4-locular; stigma 4-lobed, sessile; drupe containing (2-)4 pyrenes with stony endocarp.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 All leaves entire, or with 1-3 very small and forwardly 
\par
  directed teeth .................................................................................... {\b 3. perado}
\par
1 Many of the leaves boldly spinose-dentate or serrate, with  
\par
  at least 4 ± patent, spinose teeth
\par
2 Petiole with a wide, shallow groove; leaves yellowish or greenish 
\par
   when dried, usually strongly undulate ..................................... {\b 1. aquifolium}
\par
2 Petiole with a narrow, deep groove; leaves blackish when dried, 
\par
   only slightly undulate ................................................................... {\b 2. colchica}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. I. aquifolium} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 125 (1753) (incl. {\i I. balearica} Desf.). Shrub or small tree 2-10 m (up to 24 m in cultivation), glabrous except for puberulent young shoots and inflorescences; bark pale grey. Leaves 5-12 cm, ovate, spinose-acuminate or -cuspidate 1·5-3 times as long as wide, dark green and very glossy above paler and duller beneath, mostly with strongly spinose, undulate margin, but sometimes (commonly on upper branches of old trees, and rarely over most of the plant) flat and entire; petiole short, with a wide, shallow groove. Flowers 8 mm in diameter, in crowded cymes. Vestigial ovary in male flowers small; vestigial stamens in female flowers with full-sized filaments but small anthers; functionally hermaphrodite flowers have been recorded. Fruit 8-10 mm, globose, bright red, usually longer than its pedicel. 2n = 40. •{\i  S. & W. Europe, extending north-eastwards to N. Germany and Austria}. Al Au Be Bl Br Bu Co Da Ga Ge Gr Hb He Ho Hs It Ju Lu No *Rm Sa Si †Su.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    Widely cultivated for ornament in all but the coldest parts of Europe; numerous cultivars and hybrids are found in gardens, some of them approaching {\b 2} or {\b 3} in leaf-shape. Wild plants with a large proportion of their leaves entire seem to predominate in S. & E. Spain and the Islas Baleares; they have been mistaken for {\b 3}, or distinguished as{\b  I. balearica} Desf.,{\i  Hist. Arb.}{\b  2}: 362 (1809). They all, however, possess some leaves with at least a few strong, patent, marginal spines, and in all other characters agree with {\b 1}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. I. colchica} Pojark.,{\i  Ref. Nauc.-Issled. Rabot. Akad. Nauk SSSR}({\i Biol}.){\b 1945}: 9 (1947). Like {\b 1} but always a shrub 1-3 m; leaves oblong, c. 2·5 times as long as wide, all spinose-serrate and only slightly undulate, turning black on drying; petiole with a narrower and deeper groove.{\i  Turkey-in-Europe.} Tu. ({\i Caucasus, N. Anatolia}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 3. I. perado} Aiton,{\i  Hort. Kew.}{\b  1}: 169 (1789). Like {\b 1} but leaves 2·5-6 cm, elliptic-oblong to suborbicular, 1·1-1·8 times as long as wide, shortly mucronate or emarginate, entire or with 1-3 fine marginal spines directed strongly towards the apex; petiole somewhat winged; young shoots glabrous; corolla pinkish; fruit 7-9 mm, usually shorter than its pedicel.{\i  Açores.} Az. ({\i Madeira, Canarias}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    The above description applies to subsp. azorica Tutin, {\i Jour. Bot. }({\i London}) {\b 71}: 100 (1933). Other subspecies have longer leaves, often with spinose-undulate margins, and larger fruits.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs36\qc CELASTRALES
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 100.                CELASTRACEAE}
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc Edit. †T.G. Tutin.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Trees, shrubs or climbers. Leaves simple; stipules small or absent. Inflorescence usually cymose. Flowers actinomorphic, usually hermaphrodite. Calyx 4- to 5-lobed; petals 4-5, rarely absent, usually small and greenish; stamens 4-5, opposite the calyx-lobes; disk usually present; ovary superior, 1- to 5-locular; ovules 1-2(-many) in each loculus.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 Unarmed; ovary and capsule 4- to 5-locular ............................... {\b 1. Euonymus}
\par
Densely spiny; ovary and capsule 2-locular ................................. {\b 2. Maytenus}
\par

\par
241}
\par