{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 3.                Rhamnus}               L.
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc By †T.G. Tutin.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Germination epigeal. winter buds with scales. Stipules subulate, caducous. Flowers 4-merous or sometimes 5-merous, usually unisexual but monoecious. Styles 3-4; stigmas small. Fruit a drupe with 2-4 pyrenes.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Literature: S. Rivas Martinez,{\i  Anal. R. Acad. Farm.} ({\i Madrid}){\b  28}: 363-397 (1962). W. Vent,{\i  Feddes Repert.}{\b  65}: 3-132 (1962) (Sect.{\i  Rhamnastrum}).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Leaves evergreen
\par
2 Spines present; flowers usually 4-merous, in cymose 
\par
  fascicles or rarely solitary ............................................................ {\b 3. lycioides}
\par
2 Spines 0; flowers 5-merous, in racemes, or rarely solitary
\par
3 Leaves entire or remotely denticulate ......................................... {\b 1. alaternus}
\par
3 Leaves strongly and closely spinose-denticulate ......... {\b 2. ludovici-salvatoris}
\par
1 Leaves deciduous
\par
4 Leaves all alternate; spines 0
\par
5 Leaves tomentose on both surfaces .................................... {\b 13. sibthorpianus}
\par
5 Leaves glabrous or somewhat hairy but not tomentose on both surfaces
\par
6 Usually erect, 100-400 cm; leaves with (5-)7-20 pairs of 
\par
  lateral veins ................................................................................... {\b 11. alpinus}
\par
6 Procumbent, 5-20 cm; leaves with 4-9(-13) pairs of  
\par
  lateral veins .................................................................................. {\b 12. pumilus}
\par
4 Lower leaves mostly opposite or subopposite;  
\par
  lateral twigs usually spinescent
\par
7 Lamina of leaves on short shoots 1-2½ times as long as petiole;
\par
  petiole 2-3 times as long as stipules
\par
8 Lamina of leaves on short shoots 2-2½ times as long as petiole,
\par
  ovate to elliptical ....................................................................... {\b 8. catharticus}
\par
8 Lamina of leaves on short shoots about as long as petiole,
\par
  usually orbicular ....................................................................... {\b 9. orbiculatus}
\par
7 Lamina of leaves on short shoots 3-6 times as long as petiole;
\par
  petiole not or scarcely longer than stipules
\par
9 Leaves mostly less than 1 cm; lateral veins inconspicuous
\par
10 Leaves oblong or ovate .......................................................... {\b 7. prunifolius}
\par
10 Leaves obovate ......................................................................... {\b 3. lycioides}
\par
9 Leaves 1-6 cm; lateral veins conspicuous
\par
11 Mature leaves pubescent beneath
\par
12 Leaves 3½-4½ times as long as wide, glabrous above
\par
   .............................................................................................. {\b 10. persicifolius}
\par
12 Leaves rarely more than 3 times as long as wide,
\par
   pubescent above ........................................................................ {\b 5. rhodopeus}
\par
11 Mature leaves glabrous or with hairs on veins and petiole only
\par
13 Leaves ± orbicular ................................................................ {\b 6. intermedius}
\par
13 Leaves lanceolate, ovate or obovate
\par
14 Leaves crenate-serrate ................................................................ {\b 4. saxatilis}
\par
14 Leaves entire ............................................................................. {\b 3. lycioides}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Sect. ALATERNUS (Miller) DC. Not spiny. Leaves alternate, evergreen. Flowers 4- to 5-merous, in racemose inflorescences, rarely solitary.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. R. alaternus} L.,{\i  Sp. Pl. }193 (1753). Nearly glabrous shrub up to 5 m, very variable in habit. Leaves (1-)2-6 cm, lanceolate to ovate, acute to obtuse, often mucronate, entire or remotely denticulate, coriaceous; petiole 1-8 mm. Inflorescence dense, more or less pubescent; bracteoles ciliolate, usually caducous. Calyx-lobes lanceolate, acute, yellow; petals absent. Drupe 4-6 mm, not fleshy, obovoid, reddish becoming black; pyrenes 3.{\i  Mediterranean region, extending to Portugal.} Al Bl Co Ga Gr Hs It Ju Lu Sa Si [Rs (K)].
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   {\b R. myrtifolius} Willk., {\i Linnaea}{\b  25}: 18 (1852), from Spain, was distinguished on account of its procumbent habit, small, oblong-lanceolate leaves, solitary flowers and smaller drupe. There appears, however, to be intergradation between this and typical{\i  R. alaternus}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. R. ludovici-salvatoris} Chodat, {\i Bull. Soc. Bot. Genève} ser. 2,{\b 1}: 242 (1909) ({\i R. balearicus} (DC.) Willk., non Link). Nearly glabrous shrub up to 2 m. Leaves 1-2·5 cm, elliptical to suborbicular, strongly and closely spinose-denticulate. Inflorescence dense; bracteoles glandular-denticulate, usually persistent. Calyx-lobes ovate-lanceolate, yellow; petals absent. Drupe obovoid-globose. •{\i  Islas Baleares; E. Spain }({\i near Valencia}). Bl Hs.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  The bracteoles are said to be persistent in {\b 2} and caducous in {\b 1}, but this is by no means always true.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    Sect. RHAMNUS. Spiny. Leaves often opposite and fascicled, usually deciduous. Flowers 4-merous, in cymose fascicles, rarely solitary.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 3. R. lycioides} L.,{\i  Sp. Pl.} ed. 2, 279 (1762). Much-branched, glabrous or puberulent shrub up to 1 m. Leaves 0·5-2 cm, usually coriaceous, evergreen or deciduous, obovate to linear, obtuse or emarginate, sometimes mucronate, entire, rarely crenulate; petiole 2-3 mm; stipules caducous. Calyx-lobes lanceolate, acute, yellowish; petals absent or very small. Drupe 4-6 mm, obovoid, compressed laterally, yellowish or black when ripe; pyrenes 2.{\i  Mediterranean region, extending to Portugal.} Bl Cr Ga Gr Hs Lu Sa Si.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Leaves linear to linear-spathulate; lateral veins
\par
  invisible on upper surface; drupe black when ripe
\par
2 Leaves and young twigs nearly or quite glabrous .......... ({\b a}) subsp. {\b lycioides}
\par
2 Leaves and young twigs densely puberulent ................. ({\b b}) subsp. {\b velutinus}
\par
1 Leaves usually obovate, rarely linear-obovate; lateral veins
\par
  distinctly visible on upper surface; drupe usually yellowish
\par
2 Leaves evergreen; veins conspicuous ............................. ({\b c}) subsp. {\b oleoides}
\par
2 Leaves deciduous; veins inconspicuous ........................... ({\b d}) subsp. {\b graecus}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b lycioides}: Young twigs and leaves nearly or quite glabrous; leaves narrowly linear, rarely linear-spathulate; midrib slender; lateral veins invisible on upper surface; flowers usually hermaphrodite; drupe black when ripe.{\i  Spain and Islas Baleares}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b velutinus} (Boiss.) Tutin, {\i Feddes Repert.}{\b  79}: 56 (1968): Like subsp. ({\b a}) but young twigs and leaves densely puberulent; midrib very wide, occupying most or all of the space between the recurved margins of the leaf.{\i  S.E. Spain}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b c}) Subsp. {\b oleoides} (L.) Jahandiez & Maire, {\i Cat. Pl. Maroc}{\b  2}: 476 (1932) ({\i R. oleoides} L.): Leaves 1-4 × 0·3-1 cm, usually obovate, coriaceous; lateral veins distinctly visible on upper surface; flowers unisexual; drupe yellowish or sometimes blackish when ripe. {\i Almost throughout the range of the species}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b d}) Subsp. {\b graecus} (Boiss. & Reuter) Tutin,{\i  Feddes Repert. }{\b 74}: 26 (1967) ({\i R. graecus} Boiss. & Reuter): Like subsp. ({\b c}) but leaves 0·6-1·8 × 0·4-0·8 cm, deciduous, not coriaceous.{\i  S. Greece and Aegean region}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 4. R. saxatilis} Jacq.,{\i  Enum. Stirp. Vindob.}{\b  39}, 212 (1762). Much-branched, procumbent to erect shrub up to 2 m. Leaves 1-5 cm, lanceolate, ovate or obovate, acute, crenate-serrate, glabrous above when mature, deciduous; lateral veins conspicuous; petiole not or little longer than stipules. Drupe 5-8 mm, black when ripe.{\i  Calcicole. • S. & S.C. Europe.} Al Au Bu Cz Ga Ge Gr He Hs Hu It Ju Rm Si.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b saxatilis} (incl.{\i  R. infectorius} L.): Procumbent; young twigs glabrous; leaves 1-3 cm, thin, glabrous beneath when mature. {\i Almost throughout the range of the species}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28    ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b tinctorius} (Waldst. & Kit.) Nyman, {\i Consp.} 146
\par

\par
244}
\par