{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 free, patent or deflexed, persistent for at least a short time after anthesis. Disc adnate to base of ovary and not visible as a distinct structure. Berry bluish-black, usually pruinose.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Most of the leaves simple and 3-lobed .................................... {\b 3. tricuspidata}
\par
1 Leaves all digitate, mostly 5-foliolate
\par
2 Tendrils with (3-)5-8(-12) branches, ending in adhesive discs
\par
  ................................................................................................. {\b 1. quinquefolia}
\par
2 Tendrils with 3-5 branches, often swollen at the apex,
\par
  but without adhesive discs ............................................................... {\b 2. inserta}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. P. quinquefolia} (L.) Planchon in A. & C. DC., {\i Monogr. Phan.}{\b  5}: 448 (1887). Stems up to 30 m, climbing and trailing. Leaves digitate; leaflets (3-)5(-7), 5-10 cm, obovate-elliptical, coarsely and obtusely serrate, dull and somewhat glaucous beneath. Tendrils mostly with 5-8 branches, each of which develops, on touching a solid support, a terminal, adhesive disc. Flowers in terminal and leaf-opposed, more or less thyrsoid panicles with several lateral branches. Petals c. 3 mm, deflexed, green. Fruit c. 6 mm, globose, with 2-3 seeds.{\i  Formerly widely cultivated for ornament; now largely replaced in some countries by} {\b 2}{\i  and} {\b 3},{\i  but naturalized locally in C. Europe and Britain.} [Au Br Ge He Ho.] ({\i E. part of U.S.A.})
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. P. inserta} (A. Kerner) Fritsch,{\i  Exkursionsfl. Österr.} ed. 3, 321, 789 (1922) ({\i P. inserens} Hayek,{\i  P. vitacea} (Knerr) A. S. Hitchc.,{\i  P. quinquefolia} auct. eur. med., non (L.) Planchon). Like {\b 1} but leaflets more acutely serrate and shining green beneath; tendrils longer, with 3-5 branches, clinging by coiling or by swelling of the apex inside a crevice, but without adhesive disc; inflorescences all leaf-opposed, smaller, and with conspicuously dichotomous branching. {\i Widely cultivated for ornament and frequently naturalized.} [Au Cz Da Ga Ge Ho Hu It Ju Po Rm.] ({\i S. Canada, N. & W. parts of U.S.A}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Hybrids between {\b 1} and {\b 2} have been reported, and it is possible that some of the naturalized plants are hybrids.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 3. P. tricuspidata} (Siebold & Zucc.) Planchon in A. & C. DC.,{\i  Monogr. Phan.}{\b  5}: 452 (1887). Stems up to 20 m, climbing. Leaves on old plants mostly suborbicular-deltate in outline, with 3 acuminate lobes, but on young shoots some 3-foliolate and some simple, unlobed leaves may occur. Tendrils short, much-branched, clinging by preformed adhesive discs. Inflorescences as in {\b 1}, but mostly on short shoots. Fruit with 1-2 seeds. {\i Widely cultivated for ornament on walls; naturalized in Jugoslavia and perhaps elsewhere}. [Ju.] ({\i China and Japan}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs36\qc MALVALES
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 105.              TILIACEAE}
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc Edit. D.A.Webb.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Leaves simple, alternate; stipules usually caducous. Flowers hermaphrodite, actinomorphic, 5-merous. Sepals and petals free. Stamens numerous, sometimes united at the base into fascicles. Ovary superior, of 5 carpels; fruit a capsule or nut.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b  Corchorus olitorius}  L.,{\i  Sp. Pl. }529 (1753), extensively cultivated in warmer countries for its fibres and as a vegetable, is occasionally cultivated in the Aegean region and has been reported as locally naturalized or casual. It is an erect, glabrous annual with ovate, serrate leaves, small, yellow, leaf-opposed flowers and a narrow, many-seeded capsule.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 1.                    Tilia}                    L.
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc By K. Browicz.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Deciduous trees with large, obtuse buds. Leaves distichous petiolate, cordate or truncate at the base, serrate or denticulate. Stipules caducous. Flowers fragrant, yellowish or whitish, in cymes; peduncle adnate in its basal half to a large, membranous bract. Stamens up to 80, free or in 5 antepetalous fascicles; epipetalous staminodes sometimes present. Ovary 5-locular; stigma 5-lobed. Fruit a unilocular nut with 1-3 seeds.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 All European species are interfertile, and natural hybrids are common, especially in S.E. & E.C. Europe. They have often been described as species, varieties or forms, and many of them are extensively planted in parks and gardens. The existence of these hybrids makes difficult the accurate delimitation of the geographical range of some of the species.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Literature: V. Engler,{\i  Monographie der Gattung} Tilia. Breslau. 1909. J. Wagner,{\i  Mitt. Deutsch. Dendrol. Ges.}{\b  44}: 316-345(1932); 45: 5-60 (1933). J. Wagner,{\i  Mitt. Kgl. Ungar. Gartenb.-Lehranst.}{\b  7-10} (1940-44).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Leaves white-tomentose beneath with stellate hairs;
\par
   staminodes present .................................................................... {\b 1. tomentosa}
\par
1 Leaves glabrous beneath, or pubescent with simple hairs;
\par
  staminodes absent
\par
2 Fruit strongly ribbed
\par
3 Style pubescent ........................................................................... {\b 2. dasystyla}
\par
3 Style glabrous
\par
4 Leaves serrate, but without aristate teeth .............................. {\b 3. platyphyllos}
\par
4 Leaves with acuminate-aristate teeth ................................................ {\b 4. rubra}
\par
2 Fruit smooth or slightly ribbed
\par
5 Cymes obliquely erect; tertiary veins of leaves not prominent ..... {\b 5. cordata}
\par
5 Cymes pendent; tertiary veins of leaves prominent .................. {\b 6.} × {\b vulgaris}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. T. tomentosa} Moench.,{\i  Verz. Ausl. Bäume Weissenst.} 136 (1785)  ({\i T. argentea} DC.). Up to 30 m, broadly pyramidal. Young twigs tomentose. Leaves 8-10 cm, suborbicular-cordate, serrate, biserrate or slightly lobed, dark green and glabrescent above, white-tomentose with stellate hairs beneath; petiole usually less than half as long as lamina. Bract lanceolate to oblong, subsessile. Flowers dull white, in pendent cymes of 6-10. Staminodes present. Fruit 6-8 mm, usually ovoid, minutely verrucose.{\i  Balkan peninsula, extending northwards to N. Hungary and W. Ukraine; often planted elsewhere for ornament.} Al Bu Gr Hu Ju Rm Rs (W) Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Variable, especially in habit (ascending or somewhat pendent branches) and in length of petiole. An extreme variant, perhaps best treated as a cultivar, with conspicuously pendent branches, long and slender petioles, spathulate bracts and a depressed-globose fruit (nearly always sterile), is frequently planted for ornament, usually under the name of{\b  T. petiolaris} auct., ? an DC.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. T. dasystyla} Steven, {\i Bull. Soc. Nat. Moscou }{\b 4}: 260 (1832). Up to 20 m. Twigs pubescent at first, later glabrous. Leaves 7-11 × 5-8 cm, firm, orbicular-ovate, subcordate, serrate with
\par

\par
247}
\par