{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 97.            HIPPOCASTANACEAE}
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc Edit. N.A. Burges.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Trees or large shrubs. Leaves opposite, digitate, exstipulate. Flowers male and hermaphrodite, somewhat zygomorphic. Sepals 5, connate; petals 5, free; stamens 5-9, free, hypogynous; ovary superior, 3-locular, with 2 ovules in each loculus; style and stigma 1. Fruit a large, 1- to 2-seeded, loculicidal capsule, opening by 3 valves.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Represented in Europe by one species. The family is otherwise confined to America and S. & E. Asia.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 1.                    Aesculus}                     L.
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc By P.W. Ball.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Deciduous. Flowers in large, terminal, erect panicles. Calyx tubular or campanulate, 5-toothed.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. A. hippocastanum} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 344 (1753). Tree up to 25 m. Buds up to 3·5 cm, resinous, viscid. Leaflets 5-7, 8-25 cm, obovate, cuneate, usually acuminate, irregularly crenate-serrate glabrous above, tomentose or glabrescent beneath. Panicle 15-30 cm, cylindrical. Petals c. 1 cm, white with yellow to pink spot at base. Fruit c. 6 cm in diameter, spiny. Seeds 2-4 cm, brown, with a large white hilum.{\i  Mountain woods. •  C. part of the Balkan peninsula; one station in E. Bulgaria. Extensively planted for ornament and as a shade tree in most of Europe except the extreme north, and locally for timber; locally naturalized in thickets and hedges in W. & C. Europe. }Al Bu Gr Ju [Au Br Cz Ga Ge Hb He].
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   {\b A. carnea} Hayne in Guimpel, Otto & Hayne,{\i  Abbild. Fremd. Holzart. }25 (1825) ({\i A. rubicunda} Loisel.), is also often planted. It is like {\b 1} but is usually smaller in all its parts, with the buds not viscid, the petals pink or red and the fruit almost smooth. It is an allopolyploid of garden origin derived from {\i A. hippocastanum} and{\i  A. pavia} L., a native of E. North America.
\par

\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 98.           BALSAMINACEAE}
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc Edit. S.M. Walters.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Herbs. Leaves simple, exstipulate. Flowers solitary or in racemes, hermaphrodite, strongly zygomorphic. Sepals usually 3, free. Petals 5, the 4 lower connate in 2 lateral pairs. Stamens 5, alternate with petals; anthers connate. Ovary superior, 5-celled; ovules anatropous, axile, numerous, uniseriate in each cell; stigma sessile, 5-toothed. Fruit a loculicidal capsule; valves 5, dehiscing elastically and coiling. Seeds without endosperm.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 1.                  Impatiens}                L.
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc By D.M. Moore.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Sepals 3, the lowest large, petaloid, saccate, usually spurred, the lateral ones small, ovate, usually green. Upper petal largest, each lateral pair connate except for 2 apical lobes.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Leaves opposite or verticillate ................................................ {\b 4. glandulifera}
\par
1 Leaves alternate
\par
2 Flowers yellow or orange
\par
3 Flowers, including spur, not more than 1·8 cm; sepal-sac wider than
\par
  long; upper leaves usually largest, usually with 20 or more teeth
\par
  on each side .................................................................................. {\b 3. parviflora}
\par
3 Flowers, including spur, usually 2 cm or more; sepal-sac longer than
\par
  wide; upper leaves smaller than lower, usually with 16 or fewer
\par
  teeth on each side
\par
4 Flowers yellow; sepal-sac gradually contracted to spur;
\par
  spur usually curved through less than 90° ............................... {\b 1. noli-tangere}
\par
4 Flowers orange; sepal-sac abruptly contracted to spur;
\par
  spur bent through 180° .................................................................. {\b 2. capensis}
\par
2 Flowers purplish-pink to reddish, occasionally white
\par
5 Partial inflorescences exceeding the subtending leaf,
\par
  capsule 2-4 cm, glabrous .............................................................. {\b 5. balfourii}
\par
5 Partial inflorescences shorter than the subtending leaf;
\par
  capsule not more than 1·3 cm, pubescent ................................... {\b 6. balsamina}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. I. noli-tangere} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 938 (1753). Glabrous annual 20-180 cm; stems simple or branched. Leaves 1·5-10 × 1·5 cm, alternate, ovate-elliptical to ovate-lanceolate or oblong; base cuneate to subcordate; apex obtuse to acute, mucronate; margin serrate to crenate, often glandular near base; teeth 7-16(-20) on each side, usually mucronate. Flowers (2-)3-6 in axillary racemes, the early ones often cleistogamous, the others (1·5-)2-3·5 cm, yellow with small brownish spots; sepal-sac (8-)10-20 × 7-13 mm, longer than wide, gradually contracted to spur; spur 6-12 mm, curved, rarely bent through 90° or more. Capsule c. 1·5 cm, linear, glabrous. 2n = 20, 40. {\i Damp, shady places. Most of Europe, but absent from the extreme north and parts of the south}. Au Be Br Bu Cz Da Fe Ga Ge Gr He Ho Hs Hu It Ju No Po Rm Rs (N, B, C, W, E) Su.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. I. capensis} Meerb.,{\i  Afbeeld. Zelds. Gewass.} t. 10 (1775) ({\i I. biflora }Walter). Like {\b 1} but leaves with 5-12(-14) teeth on each side, often undulate; flowers orange with large reddish-brown blotches; sepal-sac abruptly contracted to spur; spur 5-9 mm, bent through 180° to lie parallel with sac. {\i Naturalized by rivers and canals in Britain and France.} [Br Ga.] ({\i North America}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 3. I. parviflora} DC.,{\i  Prodr.}{\b  1}: 687 (1824). Glabrous annual 10-100 cm; stems simple or sometimes branched. Leaves 4-20 × 2-9 cm, alternate, elliptical to ovate-elliptical, the uppermost usually the largest; base cuneate, decurrent on petiole; apex acuminate; margin serrate or crenate-serrate, often glandular near base; teeth (13-)20-35 on each side, mucronate. Flowers 3-10 in axillary racemes, the early ones often cleistogamous, the others 0·6-1·8 cm, pale yellow; sepal-sac 3-5 × 4-6 mm, wider than long, gradually contracted to spur; spur 1-7 mm, straight or slightly curved. Capsule 1-2·5 cm, clavate or linear, glabrous. 2n = 24, 26.{\i  Naturalized in woods, on river-banks and on disturbed ground in a large part of Europe.} [Au Be Br Cz Da Fe Ga Ge He Hu It ?No Po Rm Rs (C, W) Su.] ({\i C. Asia}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 4. I. glandulifera} Royle,{\i  Ill. Bot. Himal. Mount.} 151 (1835) ({\i I. roylei} Walpers). Glabrous annual 100-200 cm; stems stout, simple or sometimes branched. Leaves 5-18 × 2·5-7 cm, opposite or in whorls of 3, lanceolate to elliptical; base cuneate, shortly decurrent on petiole; apex acuminate; margin serrate, glandular near base; teeth (18-)25-50 on each side, mucronate. Flowers (3-)5-12 in axillary racemes, 2·5-4 cm, purplish-pink, rarely white; sepal-sac 12-20 × 9-17 mm, longer than wide, abruptly contracted to spur; spur 2-5(-7) mm, straight. Capsule 1·5-3 cm,
\par

\par
240}
\par