{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 102.               BUXACEAE}
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc Edit. D.A. Webb.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Leaves simple, exstipulate. Flowers small and inconspicuous, actinomorphic, unisexual, in axillary, bracteolate clusters. Corolla absent. Ovary superior, 3-locular, with 1-2 pendent ovules in each loculus.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 1.                     Buxus}                   L.
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc By D.A. Webb.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Evergreen shrubs or small trees with entire, coriaceous, opposite leaves. Monoecious, each axillary cluster containing a terminal female flower with some male flowers below it. Male flowers with 4 sepals, 4 stamens and vestigial ovary. Female flowers without clearly defined perianth but subtended by spirally arranged bracteoles; styles stout, persistent; stigmas 2-lobed. Fruit a loculicidal capsule, with 2 seeds in each loculus. Seeds with caruncle.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 Leaves 15-30 mm; inflorescence c. 5 mm in diameter;  
\par
  styles less than half as long as capsule .................................. {\b 1. sempervirens}
\par
Leaves 25-40 mm; inflorescence c. 10 mm in diameter; 
\par
  styles nearly as long as capsule .................................................... {\b 2. balearica}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. B. sempervirens} L.,{\i  Sp. Pl.} 983 (1753). Shrub or small tree 2-5(-8) m, mainly glabrous but with persistent, whitish pubescence on proximal part of leaf and usually on the 4-angled young shoots. Leaves 15-30 × 7-15 mm, dark, glossy green above, paler beneath, ovate, oblong or elliptical, usually emarginate, shortly petiolate; margin somewhat revolute. Inflorescence c. 5 mm in diameter, with ovate, acute bracteoles; male flowers sessile. Anthers 1-2 mm. Capsule c. 7 mm, broadly oblong; styles c. 2·5 mm in fruit, patent, straight. Seeds 5-6 mm, black, glossy.{\i  Usually on dry, base-rich soils. S.W. & W.C. Europe; gregarious and locally abundant, but absent from wide areas.} Al Au Be Br Co Ga Ge Gr He Hs It Ju Lu Sa *Tu [Az Rm].
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Several cultivars are known in gardens, the commonest being a dwarf one used for edging of flower-beds.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. B. balearica} Lam.,{\i  Encycl. Méth. Bot.}{\b  1}: 511 (1785). Like {\b 1} but glabrous or soon glabrescent; shoots stouter and more stiffly erect; leaves 25-40 × 9-18 mm, less glossy and paler green above; inflorescence c. 10 mm in diameter, with suborbicular obtuse bracteoles; male flowers pedicellate; anthers c. 2·5 mm styles of mature capsule 5-7 mm, arcuate. •{\i  Sardegna, Islas Baleares; a few localities on the coast of S. & E. Spain.} Bl Hs Sa.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   {\b B. longifolia} Boiss.,{\i  Diagn. Pl. Or. Nov.}{\b  2}({\b 12}): 107 (1853), known only from the S.E. corner of Asiatic Turkey, is extremely similar, and should, perhaps, be considered conspecific.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs36\qc RHAMNALES
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 103.               RHAMNACEAE}
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc Edit. †T.G. Tutin.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Trees or shrubs. Leaves simple, usually stipulate. Inflorescence cymose. Flowers perigynous. Calyx 4- to 5-lobed, lobes valvate in bud. Petals 4-5, often small and sometimes absent, inserted at mouth of the hypanthium and often hooded over the stamens. Stamens 4-5, alternating with the calyx-lobes; anthers versatile. Ovary superior, 2- to 4-locular; ovules solitary. Fruit often fleshy.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Stipules spinescent, persistent
\par
2 Young twigs puberulent; fruit dry, winged .................................. {\b 1. Paliurus}
\par
2 Young twigs glabrous; fruit fleshy, unwinged ............................ {\b 2. Ziziphus}
\par
1 Stipules soft, often caducous
\par
3 Winter buds with scales; flowers usually 4-merous, 
\par
  often unisexual ............................................................................ {\b 3. Rhamnus}
\par
3 Winter buds naked; flowers usually 5-merous, hermaphrodite
\par
  ....................................................................................................... {\b 4. Frangula}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 1.                  Paliurus}                   Miller
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc By †T.G. Tutin.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Stipules spinescent. Flowers 5-merous, hermaphrodite. Styles 2-3. Fruit dry, hemispherical, with a wide membranous wing round the top.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. P. spina-christi} Miller, {\i Gard. Dict.} ed. 8 (1768) ({\i P. australis} Gaertner). Nearly glabrous, much-branched shrub up to c. 3 m. Twigs flexuous, puberulent when young. Leaves 2-4 cm, alternate and distichous, ovate, crenate-serrate, shortly petiolate. Flowers in small, axillary, shortly pedunculate cymes. Fruit 18-30 mm in diameter; wing undulate.{\i  Dry slopes; also often used for hedges. Mediterranean region} ({\i except the islands}),{\i  Balkan peninsula and Black Sea coast.} Al Bu Ga Gr Hs It Ju Rm Rs (K) Tu [Co Hu].
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   {\b P. microcarpus} Wilmott, {\i Jour. Bot. }({\i London}) {\b 56}: 145 (1917), is a variant from N. Greece (Makedhonia) with the fruit 9-10 mm in diameter and very narrowly winged.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 2.                      Ziziphus}                 Miller
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc By †T.G. Tutin.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Stipules spinescent. Flowers 5-merous, hermaphrodite. Styles 2-3. Fruit a fleshy drupe.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 Twigs green; leaves denticulate; drupe ovoid-oblong ........................ {\b 1. jujuba}
\par
Twigs grey; leaves very shallowly crenate; drupe sub-globose ........... {\b 2. lotus}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. Z. jujuba} Miller, {\i Gard. Dict.} ed. 8, no. 1 (1768). Shrub or small tree up to 8 m. Twigs flexuous, glabrous when young, green. Leaves 2-5·5 cm, alternate, oblong, obtuse, glandular-denticulate, shortly petiolate. Flowers few, in a small, axillary cyme which is longer than its peduncle. Drupe 1·5-3 cm, ovoid-oblong, dark reddish or almost black, edible. {\i Cultivated in S. Europe for its edible fruits and frequently naturalized in the Mediterranean region and on the Black Sea coast. }[Al Bu Cr Ga Gr Hs It Ju Rm Si Tu.] ({\i Temperate Asia}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. Z. lotus} (L.) Lam., {\i Encycl. Méth. Bot. }{\b 3}: 317 (1789). Like {\b 1} but always a shrub; twigs grey; leaves very shallowly glandular-crenate; cyme shorter than its peduncle; drupe subglobose, deep yellow.{\i  Dry places. Spain; Sicilia; Greece.} Gr Hs Si. ({\i N. Africa and Arabia.})
\par

\par
243}
\par