{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 (1878) ({\i R. tinctorius} Waldst. & Kit.): Usually erect; young twigs pubescent; leaves 2-5 cm, thick, pubescent on the veins beneath when mature.{\i  E.C. & S.E. Europe}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 5. R. rhodopeus} Velen.,{\i  Fl. Bulg.} 119 (1891). Like {\b 4} but twigs puberulent; leaves densely pubescent, the lateral veins soon branching into a reticulum. •{\i  S.E. part of Balkan peninsula}. Bu Gr Ju Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 6. R. intermedius} Steudel & Hochst., {\i Flora} ({\i Regensb.}) {\b 10}: 74 (1827). Like {\b 4} but leaves 1-1·5 cm, broadly ovate to orbicular, cuspidate. •{\i  W. Jugoslavia and Albania.} Al Ju.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Perhaps {\b 4 }× {\b 9}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 7. R. prunifolius} Sibth. & Sm., {\i Fl. Graec. Prodr.}{\b  1}: 157 (1806). Small, procumbent, very spiny shrub. Leaves 0·5-1·2 cm, oblong or ovate, crenate, glabrous, deciduous; lateral veins inconspicuous; petiole not or little longer than stipules. Drupe black when ripe.{\i  Rocky places. Greece and Kriti}. Cr Gr.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 8. R. catharticus} L.,{\i  Sp. Pl.} 193 (1753). Shrub or small tree 4-6 m. Leaves 3-7 cm, ovate to elliptical, obtuse or cuspidate, glabrous or somewhat pubescent, deciduous; lateral veins 2-4 pairs, conspicuous; petiole much longer than stipules; lamina of leaves on short shoots 2-2½ times as long as petiole. Drupe 6-8 mm, black when ripe. 2n = 24.{\i  Usually calcicole. Most of Europe, northwards to 61° 45' N. in Sweden; absent from the extreme south}. Al Au Be Br Bu Cz Da Fe Ga Ge ?Gr Hb He Ho Hs Hu It Ju Lu No Po Rm Rs (N, B, C, W, K, E) Si Su.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 9. R. orbiculatus} Bornm.,{\i  Österr. Bot. Zeitschr.}{\b  37}: 225 (1887). Like {\b 8} but small shrub; leaves 1-3 cm, orbicular or rarely ovate or elliptical; lamina of leaves on short shoots almost as long as petiole; drupe dehiscent when ripe.{\i  S.W. Jugoslavia, Albania.} Al Ju.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 10. R. persicifolius} Moris,{\i  Stirp. Sard.}{\b  2}: 2 (1827). Like {\b 8} but leaves elliptic-lanceolate, crenate-serrate, pubescent beneath; petiole 1/4-1/5 as long as lamina; drupe reddish when ripe. •{\i  Sardegna.} Sa.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Sect. RHAMNASTRUM Rouy. Unarmed. Leaves all alternate, deciduous. Flowers 4-merous, in cymose fascicles, rarely solitary. ({\i Oreoherzogia} W. Vent.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 11. R. alpinus} L., {\i Sp. Pl. }193 (1753). Usually erect shrub up to 4 m. Leaves (1·5-)4-10(-15) cm, broadly elliptical, obtuse or cuspidate; lateral veins (5-)7-20 pairs, prominent beneath; petiole up to 20 mm; stipules caducous. Drupe 4-6 mm, black.{\i  Usually calcicole. Mountains of S. & S.C. Europe.} Al Au Bu Co Ga Gr He Hs It Ju Sa.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1.Twigs pubescent; bud-scales pubescent ............................ ({\b a}) subsp. {\b alpinus}
\par
1 Twigs glabrous; bud-scales glabrous or ciliate
\par
2 Erect; leaves green on both surfaces; lateral veins straight
\par
  ............................................................................................... ({\b b}) subsp. {\b fallax}
\par
2 Procumbent; leaves glaucous above, grey beneath; lateral veins curved
\par
  .................................................................................. ({\b c}) subsp. {\b glaucophyllus}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b alpinus}: Erect. Twigs pubescent; bud-scales pubescent. Leaves green on both surfaces; lateral veins (5-)7-12 pairs.{\i  S.W. Europe; C. Alps; Italy}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b fallax} (Boiss.) Maire & Petitmengin,{\i  Mat. Étude Fl. Geogr. Bot. Or.}{\b  4}: 60 (1908) ({\i R. fallax} Boiss.): Erect. Twigs glabrous; bud-scales ciliate but otherwise glabrous. Leaves green on both surfaces; lateral veins 10-20 pairs.{\i  E. Alps; Balkan peninsula.}
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b c}) Subsp. {\b glaucophyllus} (Sommier) Tutin,{\i  Feddes Repert. }{\b 74}: 26 (1967) ({\i R. glaucophyllus} Sommier): Procumbent. Twigs glabrous; bud-scales rarely ciliate. Leaves glaucous above, grey beneath; lateral veins 6-8 pairs. •{\i  N.W. Italy} ({\i Alpi Apuane}).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 12. R. pumilus} Turra, {\i Gior. Ital. Sci. Nat. Agric. Arti Commerc.}{\b  1}: 120 (1764). Usually dioecious. Usually procumbent, up to 20 cm high. Leaves 1·5-6(-7·5) cm, usually obovate or elliptical, acute, acuminate or sometimes obtuse; lateral veins 4-9(-13) pairs, somewhat arcuate, prominent beneath; petiole up to 10(-15) mm; stipules caducous. Flowers rarely hermaphrodite. Drupe 6-8 mm, black.{\i  Mountain rocks. • Alps, and mountains of S. Europe from Spain to Albania. }Al Au Ga Ge He Hs It Ju Sa.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 13. R. sibthorpianus} Roemer & Schultes,{\i  Syst. Veg. }{\b 5}: 286 (1819) (incl.{\i  R. guicciardii} (Boiss.) Heldr. & Sart. ex Halácsy). Dioecious or polygamous. Erect shrub. Leaves 1-9 cm, ovate to suborbicular, acuminate to obtuse, entire or serrulate, tomentose; lateral veins 6-12 pairs, prominent beneath; petiole up to 10 mm, usually shorter than the caducous stipules. Drupe c. 4 mm, subglobose.{\i  Mountain rocks. • S. Greece.} Gr.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 4.                  Frangula}                    Miller
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc By †T.G. Tutin.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Like{\i  Rhamnus} but germination hypogeal; winter buds naked; flowers usually 5-merous and hermaphrodite; style 1.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Shrub up to 80 cm; flowers in umbellate cymes with a  
\par
  distinct peduncle ........................................................................... {\b 3. rupestris} 
\par
1 Tall shrub or small tree; flowers solitary, or fascicled in sessile cymes
\par
2 Leaves 2-7 cm, glabrous or sparsely pubescent beneath when
\par
   mature; calyx glabrous ...................................................................... {\b 1. alnus}
\par
2 Leaves 10-18 cm, persistently pubescent beneath; 
\par
  calyx pubescent ............................................................................... {\b 2. azorica}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. F. alnus} Miller, {\i Gard. Dict.} ed. 8, no. 1 (1768) ({\i Rhamnus frangula} L.). Shrub or small tree usually 4-5 m. Leaves 2-7 cm, obovate, cuspidate, entire, pubescent beneath when young, later nearly or quite glabrous, petiolate; lateral veins 7-9 pairs. Flowers axillary, solitary or fascicled; pedicels and calyx glabrous. Drupe 6-10 mm in diameter, glabrous, red becoming black. 2n = 20, 26.{\i  Most of Europe, except the extreme north and much of the Mediterranean region.} Al Au Be Br Bu Cz Da Fe Ga Ge Gr Hb He Ho Hs Hu It Ju Lu No Po Rm Rs (N, B, C,W, K, E) Su Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. F. azorica} Tutin in Palhinha,{\i  Cat. Pl. Vasc. Açores} 72 (1966) ({\i Rhamnus latifolius} L'Hér., non{\i  Frangula latifolia} Miller). Like {\b 1} but up to 10 m; leaves 10-18 cm, persistently pubescent beneath; lateral veins 10-13 pairs; pedicels and calyx pubescent; drupe 10-13 mm in diameter, puberulent.{\i  In} Laurus-Myrica {\i woods. Açores.} Az. ({\i Madeira.})
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 3. F. rupestris} (Scop.) Schur,{\i  Enum. Pl. Transs. }142 (1866) ({\i Rhamnus rupestris} Scop.). Ascending or procumbent shrub up to 80 cm. Leaves 2-5 cm, elliptical to suborbicular, obtuse or acute, denticulate or sometimes entire, pubescent on the veins beneath, petiolate; lateral veins 5-8 pairs. Flowers in small, axillary, pedunculate, umbellate cymes; pedicels pubescent. Drupe c. 6 mm in diameter, glabrous, red becoming black.{\i  Rocky places, usually on mountains. • W. part of Balkan peninsula, extending to N.E. Italy.} Al Gr It Ju.
\par

\par
245}
\par