{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 diameter, at least some of them on conspicuous pedicels or 
\par
  peduncles ........................................................................................ {\b 7. Althaea}
\par
9 Staminal tube 5-angled; flowers at least 30 mm in diameter
\par
  subsessile in a spike-like inflorescence ............................................. {\b 8. Alcea}
\par
7 Epicalyx-segments 2-3
\par
10 Epicalyx-segments united at the base, at least in bud ............... {\b 6. Lavatera}
\par
10 Epicalyx-segments free, even in bud
\par
11 Mericarps forming a ± globose head; epicalyx-segments wider
\par
    than sepals .................................................................................... {\b 1. Malope}
\par
11 Mericarps in a single whorl, forming a circular disc;
\par
   epicalyx-segments narrower than sepals
\par
12 Stigmas terminal, capitate; mericarps 2-seeded ....................... {\b 10. Modiola}
\par
12 Stigmas lateral, filiform; mericarps 1-seeded
\par
13 Mericarps inflated; petals rounded at apex ............................... {\b 4. Malvella}
\par
13 Mericarps not inflated; petals emarginate or 2-lobed ................... {\b 5. Malva}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 1.                   Malope}                   L.
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc By D.A. Webb.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Herbs. Flowers long-pedicellate, solitary in the leaf-axils. Epicalyx-segments 3, free, ovate to orbicular, cordate, wider than the sepals. Petals not emarginate. Stigmas lateral, filiform. Mericarps numerous, 1-seeded, indehiscent, glabrous, rugulose irregularly arranged in a globose head.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b  M. multiflora} Cav., {\i Monad. Class. Diss. Dec.} 85 (1786), from S. Spain, has never been seen since its original discovery, and may belong to some other genus. It was said to have 3-4 small, white flowers in each leaf-axil.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Leaves all longer than wide; petals 20-40 mm ........................... {\b 1. malacoides}
\par
Many of the leaves at least as wide as long; petals 35-60 mm ........... {\b 2. trifida}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. M. malacoides} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 692 (1753) (incl.{\i  M. stipulacea} Cav.). Perennial, or perhaps sometimes annual, hispid at least above. Stems 20-50 cm, several, ascending, usually simple. Lower leaves 20-50 × 12-35 mm, oblong-lanceolate to ovate crenate; the upper similar or 3-lobed. Epicalyx-segments 8-12 × 6-8 mm in flower, strongly accrescent, cordate-orbicular, acuminate, wider and shorter than the lanceolate, acuminate sepals. Petals 20-40 mm, deep pink or purple.{\i  Mediterranean region.} Al Co Cr Ga Gr Hs It Sa Si Tu [Rs (W)].
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. M. trifida} Cav., {\i Monad. Class. Diss. Dec}. 85 (1786). Annual, glabrous except for marginal cilia on stipules, bracts and sepals. Stem up to 150 cm, single, erect, stout. Leaves up to 8 × 10 cm, but often much less, long-petiolate, crenate or obtusely dentate, the lower suborbicular, the upper with 3-5 broad, triangular lobes. Epicalyx-segments orbicular-cordate, 12-15 mm in flower, increasing to 30 mm in fruit. Sepals broadly lanceolate to ovate. Petals 35-60 × 20-40 mm, deep purplish-red.{\i  S.W. Spain and S.C. Portugal} ({\i very local}); {\i cultivated for ornament, and casual, or perhaps naturalized, elsewhere}. Hs *Lu [Cz Ga Rs]. (N.W. Africa.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 2.                     Kitaibela}                 Willd.
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc By D.A. Webb.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Perennial herbs. Flowers in axillary cymes. Epicalyx-segments 6-9, slightly connate at the base. Stigmas lateral, filiform. Fruit a schizocarp; mericarps numerous, 1-seeded, eventually dehiscent, arranged in about 5 superposed whorls so as to form a depressed globose head.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. K. vitifolia} Willd., {\i Ges. Naturf. Freunde Berlin Neue Schr.}{\b  2}: 107 (1799). Stems up to 3 m, robust, sparingly branched; stems, petioles and inflorescence hispid with white hairs. Leaves long-petiolate; lamina up to 18 cm, rhombic to suborbicular cordate, with 5-7 triangular, dentate lobes, glabrescent. Cymes with 1-4 flowers. Epicalyx-segments ovate, acuminate, slightly longer and wider than the sepals. Petals 25 × 20 mm, obdeltate-cuneate, entire or slightly retuse, white. Mericarps dark brown, hairy.{\i  Damp thickets and grassland. • Jugoslavia, from S.E. Hrvatska and Vojvodina to N. Makedonija.} Ju [Hu Rm].
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 3.                   Sida}                     L.
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc By D.A. Webb.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Herbs or small shrubs. Epicalyx absent. Stigmas terminal, capitate. Fruit a schizocarp, mericarps fairly numerous, indehiscent, in a single whorl, each with a single, pendent ovule; pericarp not inflated.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. S. rhombifolia} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 684 (1753). Low shrub, puberulent, especially on lower surface of leaves. Stems 30-80 cm, slender, stiff, straight. Leaves 3-6 × 1-3 cm, rhombic-ovate to narrowly oblong, crenate-serrate at least in apical half; petiole short. Flowers axillary, solitary; pedicels 2-4 cm. Sepals rhombic, apiculate; petals 10-12 mm, obovate-cuneate, dull yellow. Mericarps 7-12, pale brown, reticulate, with 1 or 2 prominent stylar beaks.{\i  Cultivated as a medicinal plant, and naturalized on roadside and waste ground in the Açores and Portugal}. [*Az Lu.] ({\i Africa, America, S. & E. Asia}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 4.                  Malvella}           Jaub. & Spach
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc By D.A. Webb.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Perennial herbs. Flowers solitary in leaf-axils. Epicalyx-segments 3, free. Petals not emarginate. Stigmas lateral, filiform. Fruit a schizocarp; mericarps 9-12, in a single whorl, 1-seeded, with pendent ovule and inflated, membranous pericarp.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. M. sherardiana} (L.) Jaub. & Spach, {\i Ill. Pl. Or.}{\b  5}: 47 (1855). Villous with white, simple, and yellowish, stellate hairs. Stems 20-45 cm, procumbent, woody at the base. Leaves 13-35 × 20-35 mm, orbicular to reniform, crenate, shortly petiolate. Epicalyx-segments linear, much smaller than the ovate-triangular sepals. Petals c. 10 mm, deep pink. Mericarps pale brown, hairy, finely reticulate.{\i  Cultivated fields and waste places. C. Spain; N. & C. Greece and S. Bulgaria; Krym.} Bu Gr Hs Rs (K).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 5.                 Malva}                      L.
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc By D.H. Dalby.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Herbs. Epicalyx-segments 2-3, free. Petals emarginate or 2-lobed, purple, pink or white. Stigmas lateral, filiform. Fruit a schizocarp; mericarps numerous, 1-seeded, indehiscent, dark brown or black, arranged in a single whorl around the short, conical or flattened apex of the receptacle.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Many species are variable in indumentum and leaf-shape. In most species the basal leaves are subentire. Sepal-characters refer to the fully open flower, unless the contrary is stated; the measurements exclude the basal part of the sepal which is fused to others.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Three hybrids have been reported among European species: {\b 5} × {\b 6}; {\b 8} × {\b 12}; {\b 11} × {\b 12}. It is possible that the apparent variability of some species is due, at least in part, to hybridization.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 All European species except{\b  6} are found principally in dry, open habitats; they are also nitrophilous, and usually occur, therefore, as ruderals or weeds of cultivated ground. It is almost impossible, for this reason, to determine accurately the geographical limits as natives of many of the species.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Sepals linear to narrowly triangular, more than 3 times
  as long as wide
\par
2 Staminal tube glabrous .................................................................... {\b 4. cretica}
\par
2 Staminal tube pubescent ............................................................ {\b 3. stipulacea}
\par

\par
249}
\par