{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b  R. metschii} Focke, {\i Syn. Rub. Germ.} 359 (1877). Au Ju.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b R. mucronipetalus} P. J. Mueller,{\i  Bonplandia }{\b 9}: 298 (1861). Au Be Cz Ga Ge Hu.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b R. opiparus} E. I. Nyárády in Savul., {\i Fl. Rep. Pop. Române}{\b  4}: 922 (1956).Rm.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b  R. richteri} Halácsy,{\i  Österr. Bot. Zeitschr.}{\b  40}: 434 (1890). Au.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b  R. rosellus} Sudre,{\i  Bull. Acad. Int. Géogr. Bot.} ({\i Le Mans}) {\b 12}: 72 (1903).Au Cz Ga Ge.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 72. R. glandulosus} Bellardi,{\i  Mém. Acad. Sci.} ({\i Turin}) {\b 5}: 230 (1793) ({\i R. bellardii} Weihe & Nees). Stems robust, terete, reddish-brown, pruinose, glabrescent, with crowded, rather long glands and acicles; the numerous, unequal prickles weak and deflexed or occasionally falcate. Leaflets mostly 3, sparsely hairy on both surfaces; terminal leaflet elliptical or elliptic-obovate, shortly acuminate, more or less entire at base, usually finely and evenly serrate. Inflorescence broad, rather short, subcorymbose at apex, with 1-3 simple leaves, glandular on both surfaces; pedicels long; axis densely pubescent, densely glandular-aciculate, with many glands longer than the diameter of the axis; prickles often purple-black; flowers up to 2·5 cm in diameter. Sepals appressed to the developing fruit, triangular-ovate-attenuate, tomentose, green, glandular, aculeolate; petals oblanceolate, fimbriate at apex, white; stamens white, but drying pink, scarcely equalling the green- or red-based styles; receptacle pubescent; carpels glabrous. 2n = 28. {\i W. & C. Europe, extending to S. Sweden, Lithuania and Bulgaria.} Au Be Br Bu Cz Da Ga Ge He Ho Hs Hu It Ju Po Rm Rs (B) Su.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 73. R. serpens} Weihe ex Lej. & Court.,{\i  Comp. Fl. Belg. }{\b 2}: 172 (1831). Stems and leaves yellowish-green; stems procumbent, robust, terete, glaucescent, usually very hairy; glands and acicles pale yellow, the glands numerous, the acicles few; prickles setaceous, with a conical base. Leaflets 3-5, hairy on both surfaces; terminal leaflet ovate, acuminate, subcordate, minutely serrulate. Inflorescence short, leafy, arched; axis hairy, with numerous glands and weak prickles. Sepals appressed to the developing fruit, acuminate, tomentose, green, glandular, usually unarmed; petals small, oblong, white; stamens white, exceeding the greenish styles; carpels usually glabrous. 2n = 28.{\i  W. & C. Europe, extending to Bulgaria.} Al Au Be Bu Cz Da Ga Ge He ?Ho Hs Hu Ju Po Rm Rs (W).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Related species include:
\par

\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b   R. aculeolatus} P. J. Mueller, {\i Pollichia}{\b  16-17}: 228 (1859). Au Be Ga He Hu.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b   R. acutifolius} P. J. Mueller,{\i  op. cit. }211 (1859). Au Ge.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b   R. analogus} P. J. Mueller & Lefevre, {\i op. cit.} 232 (1859). Au Br Cz Ga Ge.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b   R. angustifrons} Sudre,{\i  Rubi Eur.} 217 (1913). 2n = 28. Au Be Br Cz Ga Ge Hu.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b  R. angustisetus} Sudre, {\i Bull. Acad. Int. Géogr. Bot.} ({\i Le Mans}){\b  15}: 231 (1905). Au Cz Ga Ge.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b  R. asclepiadeus} Borbás, {\i Magyar Bot. Lapok}{\b  2}: 337 (1903). Au.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b  R. bayeri} Focke,{\i  Österr. Bot. Zeitschr. }{\b 18}: 99 (1868). Au Bu Cz Ju.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b  R. biserratus} P. J. Mueller in Boulay,{\i  Ronces Vosg. }115 (1868). Au Be Ga Ge Hu.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28   {\b R. caliculatus} Kaltenb.,{\i  Fl. Aachen. Beck.}{\b  2}: 283 (1844) ({\i R. viridis} Kaltenb., non Presl ex Ortmann). Au Be Br Cz Ga Ge Hu.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b  R. chlorostachys} P. J. Mueller,{\i  Bonplandia}{\b  9}: 303 (1861). Au Cz Ga Hu.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b  R. corylinus} P. J. Mueller, {\i Flora} ({\i Regensb}.) {\b 41}: 169 (1858). Au Cz Ga Ge.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b  R. decurtatus }P. J. Mueller, {\i Pollichia}{\b  16-17}: 210 (1859). Au Ga Ge.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b  R. divexiramus} P. J. Mueller ex Genev.,{\i  Monogr. Rubus} ed. 2, 88 (1880). Au Cz Ga.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b  R. durotrigum} R. P. Murray,{\i  Jour. Bot. }({\i London}){\b  30}: 15 (1892). Au Br Ge He Hu.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b  R. hispidissimus} Sudre, {\i Bull. Soc. Etud. Sci. Angers}{\b  35}: 50 (1906). Au Cz Ga Ge Hu.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b  R. horridulus} P. J. Mueller in Boulay, {\i Ronces Vosg. }112 (1868). Au Cz Ga Ge Hu.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b  R. incultus }Wirtgen ex Focke,{\i  Syn. Rub. Germ.} 369 (1877). Au Be Br Cz Ga Ge He Hu.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b  R. lamprophyllus} Gremli,{\i  Österr. Bot. Zeitschr.}{\b  21}: 94 (1871) ({\i R. bayeri} subsp. {\i lamprophyllus} (Gremli) Focke). Au Bu Cz He Hu Ju.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b  R. leptadenes} Sudre,{\i  Bull. Acad. Int. Géogr. Bot.} ({\i Le Mans}){\b  15}: 232 (1905). Au Be Br Cz Ga Ge He Hu.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28   {\b R. leptobelus }Sudre,{\i  Bat. Eur. }31 (1904). Au 13e Cz Ga Ge Hu It.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b  R. longisepalus} P. J. Mueller,{\i  Bonplandia}{\b  9}: 297 (1861). Au Ga Ge ?Po.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b  R. lusaticus} Rostock ex R. Wagner, {\i Ber. Deutsch. Bot. Ges.}{\b  5}: cliv (1887). Au Br Cz Ga Ge He Hu. 
\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b  R. napophiloides} Sudre,{\i  Bat. Eur. }32 (1904). Au Be Cz Ga Ge He Hu.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b  R. niveoserpens} E. I. Nyárády in Savul.,{\i  Fl. Rep. Pop. Române}{\b  4}: 925 (1956). Rm.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b   R. obrosus} P. J. Mueller,{\i  Pollichia}{\b  16-17}: 234 (1859). Au Be Ge Hu.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b  R. ochrosetus} Borbás,{\i  Abauj-Torna Varmegye Fl.} 445 (1896). Al Gr Ju.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b  R. oreades} P. J. Mueller & Wirtgen ex Genev., {\i Mem. Soc. Acad.} ({\i Angers}) {\b 24}: 89 (1868). Au Be Cz Ga Ge He Lu.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b   R. pachychlamydeus} Sabr., {\i Mitt. Naturw. Ver. Steierm.}{\b  52}: 277 (1916). Au
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b  R. parvulipetalus} Sudre, {\i Bull. Soc. Étud. Sci. Angers}{\b  35}: 49 (1906). Au Cz Ga Ge Hu.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b  R. persericans} Sabr. ex Sudre,{\i  Rubi Eur.} 219 (1913). Au.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b  R. preissmannii} Halácsy, {\i Verh. Zool.-Bot. Ges. Wien}{\b  41}: 273 (1891). Au.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b  R. renifrons} Sabr., {\i Österr. Bot. Zeitschr.}{\b  42}: 55 (1892). Au Cz.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b  R. rivularis} Wirtgen & P. J. Mueller,{\i  Flora} ({\i Regensb.}){\b  42}: 237 (1859). Au Bu Cz Ho Hu Ju Rm Rs (W).
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b  R. subaculeatus }Borbás ex Fritsch,{\i  Exkursionsfl. Österr.} ed. 3, 217 (1922) ({\i R. rivularis }var.{\i  spinosulus} Sudre). Au Rm.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b   R. subcaucasicus} Sabr. ex Sudre, {\i Rubi Eur. }211 (1913). Au.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b   R. vepallidus} Sudre,{\i  Bull. Soc. Bot. Belg.}{\b  47}: 224 (1910). Au Be Cz Ga Ge He Hu.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b   R. vindobonensis }Sabr., {\i Deutsche Bot. Monatsschr.}{\b  7}: 131 (1889). Au.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 74. R. hirtus} Waldst. & Kit.,{\i  Pl. Rar. Hung.}{\b  2}: 150 (1803-4). Stems robust, terete, more or less pruinose; glands and acicles brown or purple, the glands numerous, unequal, the acicles few; prickles unequal, long, subulate, fragile. Leaflets 3-5, hairy above, softly hairy beneath; terminal leaflet suborbicular-ovate, acuminate, cordate, unevenly serrate or sometimes finely mucronate-dentate. Inflorescence long, pyramidal, broad, lax, leafy, often pendent, with the lower and middle branches patent; axis hairy, with numerous purple glands mostly longer than the diameter of the axis, and a few rather acicular prickles; peduncles short, many-flowered; flowers 2-2·5 cm in diameter. Sepals appressed to the developing fruit, ovate, green, tomentose, densely glandular and aculeolate; petals obovate, glabrous, white; stamens white, slightly exceeding the greenish, rarely pinkish, styles; receptacle slender, cylindrical, hairy; carpels hairy. Fruit of rather small drupelets. 2n = 28.{\i  W., C. & S.E.}
\par

\par
24}
\par