{\rtf1\ansi \deff4\deflang1033{\fonttbl{\f4\froman\fcharset0\fprq2 Times New Roman;}}{\colortbl;\red0\green0\blue0;\red0\green0\blue255;\red0\green255\blue255;\red0\green255\blue0;\red255\green0\blue255;\red255\green0\blue0;\red255\green255\blue0;\red255\green255\blue255;\red0\green0\blue128;\red0\green128\blue128;\red0\green128\blue0;\red128\green0\blue128;\red128\green0\blue0;\red128\green128\blue0;\red128\green128\blue128;\red192\green192\blue192;}{\stylesheet{\widctlpar \f4\fs20\lang2057 \snext0 Normal;}{\*\cs10 \additive Default Paragraph Font;}}{\info{\author dddd}{\operator dddd}{\creatim\yr1999\mo1\dy22\hr15\min39}{\revtim\yr1999\mo1\dy22\hr15\min39}{\version2}{\edmins0}{\nofpages4}{\nofwords1030}{\nofchars5873}{\*\company  }{\vern57431}}\widowctrl\ftnbj\aenddoc\hyphcaps0 \fet0\sectd \linex0 {\*\pnseclvl1\pnucrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl2\pnucltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl3\pndec\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl4\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl5\pndec\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl6\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl7\pnlcrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl8\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl9\pnlcrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}
\pard\plain \qc\ \f4\fs20\lang2057 {\fs28  }{\b\fs28 104.                  VITACEAE}{\fs28 
\par }{\fs24 Edit. D.A. Webb.
\par 
\par }
\pard \ {\fs28 Shrubs, usually diffuse and climbing by means of leaf-opposed tendrils. Leaves alternate, stipulate, usually palmately lobed or divided. Flowers small, actinomorphic, in terminal or leaf opposed cymes or panicles. Sepals 5, united; petals 5, free or united distally; stamens 5, antepetalous. Ovary superior,2-locular; style and stigma 1; fruit a berry with 2-4 seeds.
\par 
\par  Literature: K. Sussenguth in Engler & Prantl, }{\i\fs28 Die naturlichen Pflanzenfamilien,}{\fs28  ed. 2, }{\b\fs28 20d}{\fs28 : 174-371. Leipzig & Berlin. 1953.
\par 
\par }
\pard \li200\ {\fs28 Leaves simple; bark usually peeling off in shreds; disc distinct from  
\par    ovary; petals united distally, falling at anthesis ................................. }{\b\fs28 1. Vitis}{\fs28 
\par Leaves simple or digitate; bark not peeling off in shreds; discs merged in
\par    base of ovary; petals free, patent, persisting for at least a short
\par    time after anthesis .............................................................. }{\b\fs28 2. Parthenocissus}{\fs28 
\par 
\par }
\pard \qc\ {\fs28  }{\b\fs28 1.                 Vitis}{\fs28                    L.
\par }{\fs24 By D.A. Webb.
\par 
\par }
\pard \ {\fs28 Bark usually peeling from old stems in long shreds. Leaves simple, usually palmately lobed. Petals cohering at the apex, falling at anthesis without separating. A 5-lobed, glandular disc present at base of ovary.
\par 
\par  Literature: Hegi,}{\i\fs28  Illustrierte Flora von Mittel-Europa}{\b\fs28  5}{\fs28 : 359-425. M\'fcnchen. 1925. L. H. Bailey, }{\i\fs28 Gentes Herb.}{\b\fs28  3}{\fs28 : 151-244 (1934). W. Scherz & J. Zimmermann in Engler & Prantl,}{\i\fs28  Die naturlichen Pflanzenfamilien,}{\fs28  ed. 2, }{\b\fs28 20d}{\fs28 : 334-371. Leipzig & Berlin. 1953.
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 1. V. vinifera}{\fs28  L. }{\i\fs28 Sp. Pl.}{\fs28  202 (1753). Stems up to 35 m, climbing over trees, but in cultivation usually reduced by annual pruning to 1-3 m. Leaves 5-15 cm, orbicular in outline, cordate, usually palmately 5- to 7 lobed, irregularly toothed, glabrescent above, often with persistent tomentum beneath. Tendrils branched, normally occurring opposite 2 leaves out of every 3. Flowers numerous, in rather dense panicles, which replace the tendrils in the upper part of the stem. Calyx very shortly 5-lobed. Petals c. 5 mm, pale green. Seeds 2-3.}{\i\fs28  S. & S.C. Europe, extending northwards in large-scale cultivation to}{\fs28  c. 52\'b0}{\i\fs28  N in S.W. Poland.}{\fs28  Al Au Bu Co Cz Ga Ge Gr He Hu It Ju Rm Rs (W, K) Sa Si Tu [Az Be Bl Cr Hs Lu Po Rs (E)].
\par 
\par  (}{\b\fs28 a}{\fs28 ) Subsp. }{\b\fs28 sylvestris}{\fs28  (C. C. Gmelin) Hegi,}{\i\fs28  Ill. Fl. Mitteleur.}{\b\fs28  5}{\fs28 : 364 (1925) (}{\i\fs28 V. sylvestris}{\fs28  C. C. Gmelin): Dioecious, with dimorphic foliage, the leaves of male plants being more deeply lobed. Fruit c. 6 mm, ellipsoid, bluish-black, acid; seeds usually 3, subglobose, with short, truncate beak.}{\i\fs28  River-banks and damp woods. S.E. & S.C. Europe, extending locally to Corse and W. Germany}{\fs28 .
\par  (}{\b\fs28 b}{\fs28 ) Subsp. }{\b\fs28 vinifera}{\fs28  (subsp. }{\i\fs28 sativa}{\fs28  Hegi): Flowers hermaphrodite. Fruit 6-22 mm, ellipsoid to globose, green, yellow, red or purplish-black, sweet; seeds 0-2, pyriform, with a rather long beak. 2n = 38. }{\i\fs28 Cultivated for wine-making and for the edible fruit in S. Europe and much of C. Europe, and widely naturalized.}{\fs28 
\par 
\par The cultivated vine, here treated as a subspecies, is, like most plants long established in cultivation, impossible to accommodate satisfactorily in any orthodox taxonomic scheme. The vines of Europe are certainly derived, at least in part, by selection from subsp.}{\i\fs28  sylvestris}{\fs28 , which is native in a large part of C. & S.E. Europe, though the practice of cultivation (and therefore the cultivated clones) probably originated in S.W. Asia. Confusion of the native subspecies with naturalized plants of subsp. }{\i\fs28 vinifera}{\fs28  has made difficult the precise determination of the original geographical limits, and some wild vines are probably recent hybrids between the two subspecies. Some authors, moreover, have suggested that other species of }{\i\fs28 Vitis}{\fs28  from the E. Mediterranean region, now extinct in the wild state, have contributed to the cultivated vine, but the evidence for this theory is slender. The situation has been further complicated in the past century by the introduction to Europe of many species of }{\i\fs28 Vitis}{\fs28  from North America. These are more or less resistant to the attacks of }{\i\fs28 Viteus vitifolii}{\fs28  ('phylloxera'), a parasitic aphid which did immense damage to European vines from 1867 onwards. American vines are now used almost exclusively as stocks; the scions grafted on these are either cultivars of }{\i\fs28 V. vinifera}{\fs28  subsp.}{\i\fs28  vinifera}{\fs28 , or hybrids between it and American species, or of purely American species or hybrids. These American vines are locally naturalized, especially around neglected or abandoned vineyards. The species planted on a large scale in Europe include }{\b\fs28 V. aestivalis}{\fs28  Michx,}{\i\fs28  Fl. Bor. Amer.}{\b\fs28  2}{\fs28 : 230 (1803), }{\b\fs28 V. berlandieri}{\fs28  Planchon,}{\i\fs28  Compt. Rend. Acad.}{\fs28  (}{\i\fs28 Paris}{\fs28 )}{\b\fs28  91}{\fs28 : 425 (1880), }{\b\fs28 V. cordifolia}{\fs28  Lam., }{\i\fs28 Tabl. Encycl. M\'e9th. Bot.}{\b\fs28  2}{\fs28 : 134 (1797), }{\b\fs28 V. labrusca}{\fs28  L.,}{\i\fs28  Sp. Pl.}{\fs28  203 (1753), }{\b\fs28 V. rotundifolia}{\fs28  Michx,}{\i\fs28  Fl. Bor. Amer.}{\b\fs28  2}{\fs28 : 231 (1803) (}{\i\fs28 V. vulpina }{\fs28 auct., non L.,}{\i\fs28  Muscadinia rotundifolia}{\fs28  (Michx) Small),}{\b\fs28  V. rupestris}{\fs28  Scheele,}{\i\fs28  Linnaea }{\b\fs28 21}{\fs28 : 159 (1848) and }{\b\fs28 V. vulpina}{\fs28  L.,}{\i\fs28  Sp. Pl.}{\fs28  203 (1753) (}{\i\fs28 V. riparia}{\fs28  Michx). The following key may help in their identification, but it does not attempt to deal with hybrids.
\par  
\par }
\pard \li200\ {\fs28 1 Bark not shredding from old stems; cavity in young stems 
\par    continuous across nodes; tendrils simple ...................................... rotundifolia
\par 1 Bark shredding from old stems; cavity in young stems interrupted
\par   by a diaphragm at each node; tendrils branched
\par 2 A tendril or inflorescence present at every node; leaves covered
\par   beneath with a continuous, red-brown tomentum ................................ labrusca
\par 2 Some nodes (usually 1 in 3) without tendril or inflorescence; leaves 
\par   glabrous to floccose beneath, but without continuous tomentum
\par 3 Leaves floccose with ferruginous hairs on veins beneath ................. aestivalis
\par 3 Leaves without ferruginous hairs beneath
\par 4 Leaves cordate, with conspicuous and fairly deep basal sinus
\par 5 Young shoots angled, floccose; leaves mostly as wide as long ...... berlandieri
\par 5 Young shoots terete, not floccose; leaves mostly longer 
\par   than wide ........................................................................................... cordifolia
\par 4 Leaves truncate at base, or subcordate with wide, shallow sinus
\par 6 Stems long, diffuse; tendrils well-developed ....................................... vulpina
\par 6 Compact bush; tendrils few or none .................................................. rupestris
\par 
\par }
\pard \ {\fs28 In addition to fruiting vines, several species of  }{\i\fs28 Vitis}{\fs28  from E. Asia are cultivated in gardens for their ornamental foliage; of these }{\b\fs28 V. coignetiae  }{\fs28 Pulliat ex Planchon, }{\i\fs28 Vigne Am\'e9r. Viticult. Eur.}{\b\fs28  7}{\fs28 : 186 (1883), and }{\b\fs28 V. thunbergii}{\fs28  Siebold & Zucc.,}{\i\fs28  Abh. Akad. Wiss}{\fs28 . (}{\i\fs28 M\'fcnchen}{\fs28 )}{\b\fs28  4}{\fs28 (}{\b\fs28 2}{\fs28 ): 198 (1846), are reported as locally naturalized. Both have a reddish-brown tomentum on the leaves, at least when young, as in}{\i\fs28  V. labrusca}{\fs28 , but have every third node without a tendril. V. coignetiae has terete young shoots and leaves scarcely lobed; }{\i\fs28 V. thunbergii}{\fs28  has angled young shoots and leaves deeply lobed.
\par 
\par }
\pard \qc\ {\fs28  }{\b\fs28 2.                   Parthenocissus}{\fs28                      Planchon
\par }{\fs24 By D.A. Webb.
\par 
\par }
\pard \ {\fs28 Bark not peeling in long shreds from old stems. Leaves digitate or simple. A tendril or inflorescence present at every node. Petals
\par 
\par 246}
\par }