{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 Europe. Al Au Be Br Bu Cz Ga Ge Gr Hb He Hs Hu Ju Po Rm Rs (W, K) Tu. Many variants have been described varying in hairiness of stem, shape and indumentum of leaves, armature of inflorescence and length of stamens.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Related species include:
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b  R. amoenus} Koehler ex Weihe in Wimmer & Grab.,{\i  Fl. Siles. }{\b 2}({\b 1}): 54 (1829) ({\i R. purpuratus} Sudre). Au Be Br Cz Ga He Rm.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b  R. anisacanthoides} Sudre,{\i  Bull. Soc. Bot. Fr. }{\b 52}: 328 (1905). Au Ga Ge Hu.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b  R. anoplocladus} Sudre,{\i  op. cit. }337 (1905). Au Cz Ga Ge He Hu.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b  R. brumalis} Sudre,{\i  Bull. Assoc. Fr. Bot.}{\b  4}: 5 (1901). Au Cz Ga Ge He.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b  R. capparidopsis }Hormuzaki,{\i  Mem. Sect. Sti.} ({\i Acad. Romana}) ser. 3,{\b  2}: 299 (1925). Au.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b  R. carneus} Sabr.,{\i  Mitt. Naturw. Ver. Steierm.}{\b  52}: 270 (1916). Au Ge.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b  R. celtidifolius} Focke ex Gremli,{\i  Beitr. Fl. Schweiz} 33 (1870). Au He.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b  R. coriifrons} (Sabr.) Hayek,{\i  Fl. Steierm.}{\b  1}: 822 (1909). Au.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b  R. crassus} Holuby,{\i  Österr. Bot. Zeitschr.}{\b  23}: 381 (1873). Au Cz Hu Po.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b  R. declivis} Sudre, {\i Compt. Rend. Congr. Soc. Sav.} ({\i Sci.}) {\b 1908}: 233(1909). Au Cz Ga Ge Hu.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b  R. elegantissimus} Hayek, {\i Verh. Zool.-Bot. Ges. Wien}{\b  66}: 459 (1916). Au.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b  R. erythrostachys }(Sabr.) Sabr. ex Halácsy, {\i Verh. Zool.-Bot. Ges. Wien}{\b  41}: 278 (1891). Au Bu Ju.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b  R. garrulimontis} Hormuzaki,{\i  Österr. Bot. Zeitschr.}{\b  68}: 227 (1919). Au.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b  R. guentheri} Weihe & Nees in Bluff & Fingerh., {\i Comp. Fl. Germ.}{\b  1}: 679 (1825). Au Br Bu Cz Ga Ge He Hu Ju Po.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b  R. hercynicus} G. Braun ex Focke, {\i Syn. Rub. Germ.} 370 (1877). Au Cz Ga Ge He Hu ?Ju ?Po.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b  R. hirtimimus} Juz.,{\i  Not. Syst.} ({\i Leningrad}){\b  13}: 108 (1950). Rs (K).
\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b  R. interruptus }Sudre, {\i Bull. Assoc. Fr. Bot.}{\b  2}: 7 (1899). Au Cz Ga Ge He Hs Hu Po.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b  R. kaltenbachii }Metsch, {\i Linnaea}{\b  28}: 170 (1856). Au Be Cz Ga He Ho Hu ?Po ?Rs (W).
\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b  R. latifrons} (Progel) Hayek,{\i  Fl. Steierm.}{\b  1}: 812 (1909). Ju.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b  R. minutidentatus }Sudre, {\i Bull. Soc. Bot. Fr.}{\b  52}: 323 (1905). Au Cz Ga Ge He Hs Hu Po.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b  R. minutiflorus }P. J. Mueller,{\i  Pollichia}{\b  16-17}: 235 (1859). Au Cz Ha Hs Hu Ju ?Po.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b  R. nigricatus} P. J. Mueller & Lefevre, {\i op. cit.} 204 (1859). Au Be Cz Ga Ge Hb He Hu ?Rs (W).
\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b  R. offensus} P. J. Mueller,{\i  Bonplandia}{\b  9}: 286 (1861). Au Be Cz Ga Ge He Hu.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b  R. pierratii} Boulay,{\i  Ronces Vosg.} 108 (1868). Au Ga Ge He Hu.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b  R. plusiacanthus} Borbás ex Sudre,{\i  Rubi Eur}. 200 (1912). Au Cz Hu Ju.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b  R. posoniensis} Sabr.,{\i  Verh. Zool.-Bot. Ges. Wien}{\b  36}: 90 (1886). Cz Hu.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b  R. praealpinus} Hayek, {\i Fl. Steierm.}{\b  1}: 822 (1909). Au.

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b  R. praedatus} Schmidely,{\i  Bull. Herb. Boiss.} ser. 2,{\b  3}: 79 (1903). Au Cz Ga Ge.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b  R. romanicus} E. I. Nyárády in Savul.,{\i  Fl. Rep. Pop. Române}{\b  4}: 929 (1956). Rm.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b  R. rubiginosus} P.J. Mueller,{\i  Pollichia}{\b  16-17} : 207 (1859). Au ?Cz Hu ?Po.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b  R. rubrisetoides} Hormuzaki,{\i  Mem. Sect. Sti.} ({\i Acad. Romana}) ser. 3, {\b 2}: 305 (1925). Au.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b  R. ruderalis} Kupcsok, {\i Magyar Bot. Lapok}{\b  9}: 236 (1910). Au Cz.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b  R. scenoreinus} Juz.,{\i  Not. Syst.} ({\i Leningrad}) {\b 13}: 106 (1950). Rs (K).
\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b  R. tenuidentatus} Sudre,{\i  Bull. Soc. Bot. Fr. }{\b 52}: 344 (1905). Au Be Cz Ga Ge He Hs Hu Po.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b  R. topitzii} Halácsy ex Topitz,{\i  Österr. Bot. Zeitschr.}{\b  42}: 203 (1892). Au.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b  R. trachyadenes }Sudre,{\i  Compt. Rend. Congr. Soc. Sav.} ({\i Sci.}) {\b 1908}: 233 (1909). Au Cz Ga Ge Hu.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b  R. wittingii }Halácsy, {\i Verh. Zool.-Bot. Ges. Wien }{\b 41}: 271 (1891). Au.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Subsect.{\i  Caesii} Focke. Stems usually terete. Leaves ternate or with 5 leaflets, the basal leaflets subsessile; stipules lanceolate. Inflorescence short and broad, or narrow with few-flowered branches; flowers often long-stalked. Petals often large, orbicular. Drupelets often large, partly abortive, usually pruinose.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 75. R. caesius} L.,{\i  Sp. Pl.} 493 (1753). Stems flagelliform, branched, terete, glabrous, pruinose, rarely with a few short glands; prickles few or many, weak, short, straight or falcate. Leaves ternate, slightly hairy above, more or less pubescent beneath; terminal leaflet ovate, sometimes more or less 3-lobed, shortly acuminate, subcordate, rather coarsely biserrate; lateral leaflets often bilobed; petiole sulcate; stipules ovate-lanceolate. Inflorescence short, consisting of a terminal and a few axillary 2- to 5-flowered corymbs; pedicels long, with short hairs, fine glands and sparse prickles; flowers 2-2·5 cm in diameter. Sepals appressed to the developing fruit, ovate-lanceolate, shortly acuminate, grey-green tomentose, with white margin and short glands; petals large, ovate, elliptical or suborbicular, white; stamens green, equalling the greenish styles. Drupelets 2-20, large, black, pruinose, loosely coherent. 2n = 28.{\i  Somewhat calcicole. Most of Europe.} All except Az Co Cr Fa Is S a Sb Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Several varieties have been described, some with pink flowers.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Hybrids between{\i  R. caesius} and plants belonging to other subsections of{\i  Rubus} are termed{\b  Rubi Corylifolii.} Many well-defined taxa have been described but they tend to have very restricted distributions and are not listed here; in Belgium for example, 38{\i  Corylifolii} have been described, in Britain 20, in Switzerland 50 and in Romania 28.{\i  Corylifolii} are recognised by having at least some of the following characters; stems terete; stipules more or less lanceolate; leaves large; leaflets imbricate, the basal subsessile; inflorescence short and broad, or narrow and with few-flowered branches; flowers long-stalked; petals large, orbicular; drupelets large, partly abortive, rather pruinose. Some set good fruit consisting of large but few drupelets, whilst others tend to be somewhat infertile. In Great Britain and Scandinavia the chromosome numbers of many of the{\i  Rubi Corylifolii} are higher than in the plants of other subsections (counts of 35 or 42 are relatively common), and this may well be true of the {\i Corylifolii} in other countries. Many are characteristic of ground which has been disturbed; they are particularly common at the edge of cultivated fields, in hedges, along ditch-banks, forest roads etc. The names{\i  R. corylifolius} Sm. and {\i R. dumetorum }Weihe are no longer in use except as referring to rather broad aggregates.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc {\b 10.                 Rosa}              L.
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc  By I. Klastersky
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Shrubs, usually deciduous. Stems usually with prickles. Leaves pinnate; stipules usually adnate to petiole. Flowers terminal, solitary or in corymbs, (4-)5-merous. Hypanthium urceolate, becoming coloured and fleshy in fruit; epicalyx absent; stamens
\par

\par
25}
\par