{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 more or less petaloid, usually yellow or brown; sepals similar in colour and texture. Style short, lateral. Fruit dry, indehiscent, usually enclosed in the persistent hypanthium.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 All European species grow in dry places.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Literature: G.Brecher,{\i  Ind. Horti Bot. Univ. Budapest.}{\b  5}: 57-116 (1941).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Flowers glabrous
\par
2 Young shoots glabrous ................................................................... {\b 15. dioica}
\par
2 Young shoots hairy
\par
3 Leaves with involute margins concealing the tomentose upper
\par
  surface ....................................................................................... {\b 10. broterana}
\par
3 Leaves flat; upper surface glabrous or hirsute
\par
4 Leaves sparsely hirsute above when young, with long,
\par
  straight hairs ..................................................................................... {\b 12. ruizii}
\par
4 Leaves glabrous above, or bearing short, crispate hairs
\par
5 Leaves c. 5 mm wide, elliptical; hypanthium 2·5 mm ............. {\b 13. subrepens}
\par
5 Leaves 1·5-3·5 mm wide, oblong; hypanthium 4-5 mm ............ {\b 14. tinctoria}
\par
1 Flowers hairy (sometimes only sparsely) 
\par
6 Annual; flowers greenish or white ............................................ {\b 17. passerina}
\par
6 Perennial; flowers yellow or reddish-brown
\par
7 Leafy stems annual, arising from a short, woody stock
\par
8 Leaves 15-30 × 4-8 mm ........................................................... {\b 1. sanamunda}
\par
8 Leaves 6-14 × 1-4 mm .............................................................. {\b 2. pubescens}
\par
7 Leafy stems woody, persistent
\par
9 Mature leaves glabrous
\par
10 Flowers in clusters of 2-5; fruit glabrous ................................ {\b 4. tartonraira}
\par
10 Flowers solitary or in pairs; fruit pubescent
\par
11 Leaves less than 1 mm wide ................................................... {\b 8. coridifolia}
\par
11 Most of the leaves at least 1 mm wide
\par
12 Young shoots glabrous ................................................................ {\b 15. dioica}
\par
12 Young shoots pubescent .......................................................... {\b 11. calycina}
\par
9 Mature leaves hairy, at least on one surface
\par
13 Leaves imbricate, appressed, white-tomentose on adaxial surface,
\par
   more or less glabrous on abaxial surface ....................................... {\b 3. hirsuta}
\par
13 Leaves about equally hairy on both surfaces
\par
14 Leaves and young shoots hirsute, with long, straight,
\par
   patent hairs .................................................................................... {\b 16. villosa}
\par
14 Leaves and young shoots sericeous or tomentose, with
\par
   appressed or intricate hairs 
\par
15 Sepals triangular, acute
\par
16 Most of the leaves borne on short lateral shoots ............................ {\b 5. nitida}
\par
16 Most of the leaves on long shoots ; short lateral shoots 
\par
   few or absent ............................................................................. {\b 4. tartonraira}
\par
15 Sepals broadly elliptical, obtuse
\par
17 Stems procumbent; leaves less than 1·5 mm wide;
\par
   flowers solitary ....................................................................... {\b 9. procumbens}
\par
17 Stems decumbent to erect; leaves more than 1·5 mm wide;
\par
   flowers usually in clusters
\par
18 Leaves sericeous, usually more than 10 mm long .................. {\b 4. tartonraira}
\par
18 Leaves villous to tomentose, not more than 10 mm long
\par
19 Flowers subtended by ovate bracts; hypanthium c. 4 mm ....... {\b 6. myrtifolia}
\par
19 Flower-clusters without bracts; hypanthium 6·5-8 mm ......... {\b 7. lanuginosa}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. T. sanamunda} All.,{\i  Fl. Pedem.}{\b  1}: 132 (1785) ({\i Passerina thymelaea} (L.) DC.). Stems 10-30 cm, annual, glabrous, erect, simple, arising from a short, woody stock. Leaves 15-30 × 4-8 mm, elliptical-oblong, acute, glabrous. Flowers unisexual and hermaphrodite, in ebracteate clusters of 2-5. Hypanthium 6-7 mm, tubular, sparsely hairy; sepals 2-2·5 mm, triangular, acute. Fruit glabrous. •{\i  C. & E. Spain; S. France. }Ga Hs.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. T. pubescens} (L.) Meissner in DC.,{\i  Prodr.}{\b  14}: 558 (1857) (incl. {\i T. thesioides} (Lam.) Endl., {\i T. elliptica} (Boiss.) Endl.). Like {\b 1} but smaller in all its parts and sometimes hairy; leaves 6-14 × 1-4 mm, linear to broadly elliptical; flowers in clusters of 2-3; hypanthium c. 5 mm. •{\i  E. & C. Spain; E. Pyrenees.} ?Ga Hs.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Plants from C. Spain and the region of Valencia are usually less hairy and with smaller and narrower leaves than those from either S.E. Spain or N. Aragon, and have been distinguished as {\b T. thesioides} (Lam.) Endl., {\i Gen. Pl., Suppl.}{\b  4}: 66 (1847), but intermediates are numerous and the correlation of these characters with geographical distribution is imperfect.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 3. T. hirsuta} (L.) Endl.,{\i  Gen. Pl., Suppl.}{\b  4}: 65 (1847) ({\i Passerina hirsuta} L.). Dwarf shrub 40-100 cm, with erect, spreading or decumbent, branched stems densely clothed with imbricate leaves; young shoots white-tomentose. Leaves 3-8 × 1·5-4 mm, ovate to lanceolate, obtuse to acuminate, erect, somewhat fleshy or coriaceous; adaxial surface white-tomentose, abaxial shining, glabrous or sparsely hairy. Flowers unisexual and hermaphrodite, in ebracteate clusters of 2-5. Hypanthium 3-4 mm, densely tomentose; sepals 1 mm, broadly ovate, glabrous above. Fruit glabrous, exposed shortly before maturity.{\i  Mediterranean region, S.E. Portugal.} Bl Co Cr Ga Gr Hs It Ju Lu Sa Si ?Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 4. T. tartonraira} (L.) All.,{\i  Fl. Pedem.}{\b  1}: 133 (1785) ({\i Passerina tartonraira} (L.) Schrader). Dwarf shrub 20-50 cm, with erect or decumbent stems; young shoots usually sericeous. Leaves 10-18 × 2-7 mm, obovate to narrowly oblong, obtuse to subacute, usually sericeous. Flowers unisexual and hermaphrodite, in clusters of 2-5, subtended by numerous small, ovate bracts. Hypanthium 5-6 mm, sericeous or pubescent; sepals 2 mm, broadly triangular, subacute. Fruit glabrous. {\i Mediterranean region.} Co Cr Ga Gr Hs It Sa Si Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Leaves ± glabrous ............................................................ subsp. ({\b c}) {\b thomasii}
\par
1 Leaves sericeous
\par
2 Leaves 2-4 times as long as wide ................................. subsp. ({\b a}) {\b tartonraira}
\par
2 Leaves 4-10 times as long as wide .................................. subsp. ({\b b}) {\b argentea}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b tartonraira}: Leaves 2·5-7 mm wide, 2-4 times as long as wide, sparsely to densely sericeous.{\i  Throughout the range of the species, except Kriti}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b argentea} (Sibth. & Sm.) Holmboe, {\i Stud. Veg. Cyprus }133 (1914) ({\i T. argentea} Sibth. & Sm.): Leaves 1·5-3 mm wide, 4-10 times as long as wide, densely silver-sericeous. •{\i  Kriti; ?Greece}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Plants from C. & S. Greece and from S. Spain are often intermediate between subsp. ({\b a}) and ({\b b}).
\par
 ({\b c}) Subsp. {\b thomasii} (Duby) Briq., {\i Prodr. Fl. Corse}{\b  3}({\b 1}): 5 (1938): Leaves and young shoots glabrous, or with a few scattered hairs; leaves 3-4 mm wide, 3-4 times as long as wide. 2n = 18. • {\i Corse }({\i near Ponte Leccia}).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 5. T. nitida} (Vahl) Endl., {\i Gen. Pl., Suppl. }{\b 4}: 65 (1847). Like {\b 4} but stems 10-30 cm, slender, erect, with numerous short, lateral branches on which most of the leaves are borne; leaves 6-9 × 1-2 mm; flower-clusters without bracts.{\i  Mountain rocks; calcicole. S. & E. Spain}. Hs.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 6. T. myrtifolia} (Poiret) D. A. Webb,{\i  Feddes Repert.}{\b  74}: 28 (1967) ({\i T. velutina} (Pourret ex Camb.) Meissner,{\i  Daphne myrtifolia} Poiret). Dwarf shrub with erect, freely branched stems. Leaves 6-10 × 2·5-4 mm, obovate to elliptic-oblong, densely villous-tomentose. Flowers unisexual and hermaphrodite, solitary or in clusters, subtended by ovate bracts. Hypanthium 4 mm, densely tomentose; sepals 1-1·5 mm, broadly ovate, obtuse.{\i  Maritime sands and calcareous rocks. • Islas Baleares.} Bl.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Records from N.W. Africa are probably erroneous.
\par

\par
259}
\par