{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 united in lower half; petals 7-13 mm, yellow. Mericarps c. 13, exceeding the calyx, black, hirsute, with a slender, erecto-patent beak. Seeds finely tuberculate. {\i Cultivated ground and waste places. S.E. Europe and Mediterranean region, extending to C. Russia and S. Czechoslovakia, but probably introduced in the western and northern parts of its range}. *Al Bu *Co Cr Gr Hu *It Ju Rm Rs (*C, W, K, E) [Cz Ga Hs Lu].
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 10.                    Modiola}                     Moench
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc By D.A. Webb.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Herbs. Flowers solitary in the leaf-axils. Epicalyx-segments 3, free. Petals not emarginate. Stigmas terminal, capitate. Fruit a schizocarp; mericarps numerous, in a single whorl, 2-seeded, dehiscent in situ, at least in upper half.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. M. caroliniana} (L.) G. Don fil.,{\i  Gen. Syst.}{\b  1}: 466 (1831). More or less setose annual, or sometimes perennial. Stems up to 50 cm, procumbent and rooting at the base, usually ascending towards the apex. Leaves 5-8 cm, deltate to suborbicular-reniform in outline, varying from incise-dentate to deeply palmatisect with 3-7 pinnatifid lobes. Epicalyx-segments lanceolate; sepals broadly triangular-ovate; petals 3-5 mm, slightly exceeding sepals, orange-scarlet. Mericarps c. 20, black; lateral faces rugose in lower half; dorsal face densely setose and bearing 2 stout spines. {\i Naturalized in damp, grassy places in N. Spain and N.W. Portugal.} [Hs Lu.] ({\i Tropical America and warm temperate North America; widely naturalized elsewhere.})
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 11.                     Gossypium}                       L.
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc By D.M. Moore.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Shrubs or woody annuals, irregularly dotted with black oilglands. Flowers solitary in the leaf-axils. Epicalyx-segments 3, free, broadly ovate to deltate, cordate. Calyx cupuliform, with 5 short teeth or lobes. Styles united; stigmas terminal, capitate, more or less united. Fruit a 3- to 5-locular, loculicidal capsule; seeds numerous, hairy.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   The cultivated cottons (which include all the European plants) differ from the wild species in having flattened, twisted ('lint') hairs on the seeds. This character seems to have developed under the influence of human selection. The same influence is responsible for the stabilization of the annual habit, which is found only in cultivated plants, and which has enabled the cultivation of cotton to be carried on in regions with a cold winter climate.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   No chromosome counts have been made on European plants, but{\i  G. herbaceum,} like all Old World species, is known to be diploid, with 2n = 26, while {\i G. hirsutum} is one of the New World tetraploids, with 2n = 52. Diploids also occur in the New World.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Literature: J. B. Hutchinson, R. A. Silow & S. G. Stephens,{\i  The Evolution of} Gossypium. London, etc. 1947. G. Watt,{\i  The Wild and Cultivated Cotton Plants of the World.} London. 1907.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 Teeth of epicalyx-segments usually less than 3 times as long
\par
  as wide; filaments 1-2 mm, ± equal .......................................... {\b 1. herbaceum}
\par
Teeth of epicalyx-segments usually more than 3 times as long 
\par
   as wide; filaments 4-6 mm, the upper longer than the lower ...... {\b 2. hirsutum}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. G. herbaceum} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 693 (1753). Woody annual 1-1·5 m, glabrous or sparsely hairy. Leaves c. 11 × 14 cm, cordate, with 3-7 lobes; lobes c. 5 × 5 cm, ovate-orbicular, usually slightly constricted at the base. Epicalyx-segments 2-2·5 cm, broadly deltate-ovate to semicircular, usually at least as wide as long; margin with 6-8 triangular, acute to shortly acuminate teeth, usually less than 3 times as long as wide. Petals yellow, with purple claw. Filaments 1-2 mm, more or less equal. Capsule 2-3·5 cm, subglobose, shortly beaked. {\i Widely cultivated in S. Europe, especially the E. Mediterranean region, and locally naturalized on disturbed ground.} [Al Cr Gr Hs It ?Ju Rm Si.] ({\i Probably originated in W. Pakistan; cultivated now from India and C. Asia to C. Africa.})
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b  G. arboreum}  L., Sp. Pl. 693 (1753) ({\i G. nanking} Meyen), which differs principally in its more conical capsule and epicalyx segments with only 3-4 teeth, is cultivated locally in Kriti.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. G. hirsutum} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} ed. 2, 975 (1763) ({\i G. mexicanum} Tod.). Like {\b 1} but sometimes hairier; leaf-lobes broadly triangular to lanceolate, seldom constricted at the base and sometimes overlapping; epicalyx-segments c. 4·5 cm, triangular-ovate, with marginal, long-acuminate teeth usually more than 3 times as long as wide; petals entirely yellow; filaments 4-6 mm, the upper longer than the lower; capsule 4-6 cm, ovoid.{\i  Cultivated in S. Europe, and perhaps locally naturalized}. [?Al Cr Gr It Rm.] ({\i Probably originated in Peru; cultivated in tropical America and southern U.S.A}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b  G. barbadense }L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 693 (1753) ({\i G. vitifolium} Lam.), like {\b 2} but with longer staminal column and petals spotted with purple, is reported as cultivated in Kriti.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 12.                    Hibiscus}                          L.
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc By D.A. Webb.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Herbs or shrubs. Flowers solitary in leaf-axils. Epicalyx-segments 6-13, linear, free, or united only at the base. Calyx persistent in fruit. Petals not emarginate. Styles free above; stigmas large, capitate, with long papillae. Fruit a 5-locular, loculicidal, subglobose, ovoid or shortly conical capsule; seeds reniform, numerous.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Shrub; seeds hairy ........................................................................ {\b 1. syriacus}
\par
1 Herb; seeds glabrous
\par
2 Perennial; leaves softly tomentose beneath ................................. {\b 2. palustris}
\par
2 Annual; leaves glabrous or hispid beneath
\par
3 Plant not spiny; sepals united for most of their length,
\par
  membranous in fruit ....................................................................... {\b 3. trionum}
\par
3 Plant ± spiny; sepals united only at base, somewhat
\par
  woody in fruit ........................................................................... {\b 4. cannabinus}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. H. syriacus} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 695 (1753). Erect, freely-branched shrub 2-3 m. Leaves 4-7 cm, rhombic, dentate-crenate in apical half and usually 3-lobed, sparsely stellate-pubescent beneath; petiole short. Pedicels 1-2 cm. Epicalyx-segments 7-9; sepals united in basal half; petals c. 5 cm, lilac or white, with a dark purple patch at the base. Capsule c. 25 × 13 mm, densely stellate-pubescent with yellow hairs. Seeds with long, white hairs on the margin.{\i  Planted for ornament and for hedges in S. Europe and locally naturalized}. [Ga Gr It Ju Sa Si] ({\i S. & E. Asia}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. H. palustris} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 693 (1753) ({\i H. roseus }Thore ex Loisel.). Perennial herb; stems 80-120 cm, simple, erect. Leaves 10-15 × 4-9 cm, suborbicular to ovate-lanceolate, acuminate, irregularly dentate to crenate, sometimes shortly 3-lobed, whitish-tomentose beneath with soft, stellate hairs; petiole 2-6 cm. Pedicels 5-7 cm. Epicalyx-segments c. 11; sepals united in basal half; petals c. 7 cm, pink (rarely white with red base). Capsule 15-25 mm, subglobose, enclosed in calyx. Seeds glabrous. {\i Marshes and river-banks. N. & C. Italy; S.W. France; Portugal.} Ga It *Lu. ({\i E. North America}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    The European plant (which is found also in Algeria, but doubtfully native) is sometimes separated as{\b  H. roseus} Thore ex Loisel.,{\i  Fl. Gall.} 434 (1807), but its differences from American specimens appear to be slight and inconstant.
\par

\par
255}
\par