{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 with 3-7 semicircular to oblong, crenate lobes. Epicalyx-segments oblong-lanceolate to elliptical; sepals stellate-pubescent beneath; petals 12-30 mm, pink to purple, with darker veins, bearded. Mericarps glabrous or pubescent, strongly reticulate; dorsal face flat; angles sharp, but not winged. 2n = 42.{\i  Almost throughout Europe except the extreme north.} All except Fa Is Sb, but only as an alien in much of the north.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Very variable in habit, indumentum, leaf-shape, corolla and length of pedicels. The variants that have been recognized represent local races, and the correlation of characters which they exhibit is not maintained on a continental scale.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 9. M. nicaeensis} All.,{\i  Fl. Pedem. }{\b 2}: 40 (1785) ({\i M. montana }auct., vix Forskål). Like {\b 8} but annual or biennial; leaves semicircular in outline, scarcely cordate; sepals usually glabrous beneath; petals 10-12 mm, pale lilac without darker veins, glabrous or nearly so.{\i  S. Europe; occasionally as a casual elsewhere.} Az Bl Co Cr Ga Gr Hs It Ju Lu Rs (K) Sa Si Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 10. M. parviflora} L.,{\i  Demonstr. Pl. }18 (1753). Glabrous or pubescent annual; stem 20-50 cm, erect, with ascending branches. Leaves long-petiolate, suborbicular-cordate, mostly with 5-7 deltate, crenate lobes. Flowers in groups of 2-4; fruiting pedicels mostly less than 10 mm. Epicalyx-segments linear to lanceolate; sepals orbicular-deltate, with short cilia or none, strongly accrescent, patent and scarious in fruit; petals 4-5 mm, slightly exceeding the sepals, pale lilac-blue, glabrous; staminal tube subglabrous. Mericarps glabrous or pubescent; dorsal face strongly reticulate; angles slightly winged. {\i Mediterranean region and S.W. Europe; a frequent casual elsewhere and occasionally naturalized.} Al Az Bl Co Cr Ga Gr Hs It Ju Lu Sa Si [Br].
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 11. M. pusilla} Sm. in Sowerby,{\i  Engl. Bot.}{\b  4}: t. 241 (1795) ({\i M. rotundifolia} L.). Like {\b 10} but stem usually decumbent; flowers in clusters of up to 10; fruiting pedicels often more than 10 mm; sepals conspicuously long-ciliate, scarcely accrescent; petals pale pink, glabrous; angles of mericarps sharp but not winged. {\i N., E. & C. Europe, extending to Belgium and N. Italy}. Au Az Be Bu Cz Da Ge Gr Ho Hu It Ju No Po Rm Rs (N, B, C, W, K, E) Su Tu [Br Fe Ga].
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 12. M. neglecta} Wallr.,{\i  Syll. Pl. Nov. Ratisbon.} ({\i Königl. Baier. Bot. Ges.}) {\b 1}: 140 (1824) ({\i M. rotundifolia} auct. plur., non L.). Annual, usually densely stellate-pubescent; stems 16-60 cm, ascending or decumbent. Leaves reniform to orbicular-cordate, with 5-7 crenate-dentate lobes. Flowers in clusters of 3-6; fruiting pedicels mostly more than 10 mm. Epicalyx-segments linear to ovate-oblong, shorter than the sepals; sepals triangular-ovate, ciliate; petals 9-13 mm, at least twice as long as the sepals, pale lilac to whitish, bearded; staminal tube pubescent. Mericarps pubescent, scarcely ridged; dorsal face rounded. 2n = 42.{\i  Most of Europe, except the extreme north and extreme south.} All except Az Bl Cr Fa Is Si Sb; only as an alien in Fe.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 13. M. verticillata} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 689 (1753) (incl. {\i M. crispa }(L.) L., {\i M. meluca} Graebner ex Medv.,{\i  M. mohileviensis} Downar). Like {\b 12} but calyx usually strongly accrescent; petals c. 7 mm, not more than twice as long as sepals, sometimes glabrous; staminal tube subglabrous; fruiting pedicels less than 10 mm; mericarps often weakly ridged on dorsal face. {\i Cultivated as a salad plant; widely naturalized in S. & C. Europe, and casual or locally naturalized further north}. [Au Br Cz Ga Ge Gr Ho It Ju Po Rm Rs (N, B, C, W, E).] ({\i E. Asia}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc   {\b 6.                     Lavatera}                    L.
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc By R. Fernandes.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Herbs or soft-wooded shrubs, usually stellate-pubescent. Flowers solitary or in clusters in the leaf-axils. Epicalyx-segments 3, more or less united at the base, at least in bud. Petals emarginate. stigmas lateral, filiform. Fruit a schizocarp; mericarps numerous, 1-seeded, usually indehiscent, arranged in a single whorl.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 The separation of this genus from {\i Malva} on the basis of its epicalyx-segments united at the base is very unsatisfactory, as in at least two species, traditionally assigned to{\i  Lavatera} by their general facies, the epicalyx-segments in the fully expanded flower are virtually free. No better taxonomic treatment has, however, been so far proposed.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  The compound hairs in this genus are described as stellate when they have numerous branches radiating in all directions, and as fasciculate when the branches, which are usually fewer and longer, are only slightly divergent.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Flowers in clusters
\par
2 Indumentum including simple, glandular hairs; stipules broad,
\par
  sometimes amplexicaul .................................................................. {\b 11. triloba}
\par
2 Indumentum without simple, glandular hairs; stipules narrow
\par
3 Epicalyx-segments longer than sepals, at least in fruit;
\par
  stems woody in lower part .............................................................. {\b 3. arborea}
\par
3 Epicalyx-segments shorter than sepals; stems herbaceous
\par
4 Sepals strongly accrescent; mericarps ridged, with 
\par
  flat dorsal face and sharp, ± denticulate angles ....................... {\b 2. mauritanica}
\par
4 Sepals only slightly accrescent; mericarps smooth or slightly 
\par
  ridged; dorsal face and angles rounded ............................................ {\b 1. cretica}
\par
1 Flowers solitary (rarely in pairs) in leaf-axils
\par
5 Annual; stems not densely tomentose
\par
6 Central axis of fruit expanded above to a disc which covers and
\par
  conceals the ripe mericarps; stem hispid with simple or few-rayed,
\par
  deflexed hairs ............................................................................ {\b 10. trimestris}
\par
6 Central axis of fruit not expanded above mericarps;
\par
  stem sparsely and minutely stellate-pubescent ............................. {\b 9. punctata}
\par
5 Perennial; stems densely tomentose, at least when young
\par
7 Leaves ovate-lanceolate or -oblong, about twice as long as 
\par
   wide, not lobed ...................................................................... {\b 5. oblongifolia}
\par
7 Lower leaves nearly as long as wide; upper leaves usually lobed
\par
8 All leaves suborbicular, scarcely lobed; mericarps
\par
  with concave dorsal face and very sharp angles .......................... {\b 4. maritima}
\par
8 At least the middle leaves distinctly 3- to 5-lobed, mericarps 
\par
  with rounded dorsal face and angles
\par
9 Herb; pedicels usually more than 1 cm at anthesis and more than
\par
  1·3 cm in fruit ........................................................................... {\b 8. thuringiaca}
\par
9 Shrub; pedicels not more than 1 cm at anthesis and 1·3 cm in fruit
\par
10 Epicalyx invaginated at insertion of pedicel, its segments
\par
   shorter than the sepals; mericarps glabrous ........................... {\b 7. bryoniifolia}
\par
10 Epicalyx not invaginated at insertion of pedicel, its segments ±
\par
   equalling the sepals; mericarps hispid or tomentose ........................ {\b 6. olbia} 
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. L. cretica} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 691 (1753). Annual or biennial, stellate-pubescent to slightly hispid. Leaves up to 20 cm, suborbicular-cordate, with 5-7 short lobes. Flowers in clusters of 2-8; pedicels unequal, shorter than the subtending petiole. Epicalyx-segments c. 6 mm, free nearly to the base, ovate; sepals c. 8 mm, triangular-ovate, acuminate; petals 10-20 mm, lilac. Mericarps 7-9(-11), smooth or slightly ridged; angles rounded. {\i Waste places. Mediterranean region and W. Europe, northwards to S.W. England.} Al Az Bl Br Co Cr Ga Gr Hs It Ju Lu Sa Si Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Like{\b  Malva sylvestris} in general appearance, and sometimes confused with it.{\i  L. cretica} is best distinguished by the broader
\par

\par
251}
\par