{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 {\i in damp or saline habitats. W. Mediterranean region, S. Portugal.} Bl Hs It Lu Sa Si
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Stem, petioles and inflorescence softly tomentose with slender
\par
  fasciculate hairs ............................................................ ({\b c}) subsp. {\b agrigentina}
\par
1 Stem, petioles and inflorescences more or less hispid and with
\par
  rigid stellate hairs
\par
2 Epicalyx-segments united in their lower third, at least along two of
\par
  the lines of junction; leaves flat or slightly undulate .......... ({\b a}) subsp. {\b triloba}
\par
2 Epicalyx-segments mostly free or very nearly so at anthesis;
\par
  leaves strongly undulate ............................................... ({\b b}) subsp. {\b pallescens}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b triloba} ({\i L. rotundata} Láz.-Ibiza & Tubilla): stems, petioles and pedicels floccose-tomentose to hispid; rigid stellate hairs present at least on pedicels and epicalyx. Leaves up to 8 cm, crenate, flat or slightly undulate. Epicalyx-segments usually united in their lower third; petals purple, sometimes suffused with yellow, or pure yellow.{\i  C., S. & E. Spain, S. Portugal, Sardegna}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b pallescens} (Moris) Nyman,{\i  Consp.} 128 (1878) ({\i L. minoricensis} Camb.): Indumentum as in ({\b a}). Leaves smaller, crispate-undulate. Epicalyx-segments usually free or very nearly so; petals purple or pale pink, only slightly exceeding the sepals. •{\i  Islas Baleares }({\i Menorca});{\i  Sardegna} ({\i island of San Pietro}).
\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b c}) Subsp. {\b agrigentina} (Tineo) R. Fernandes,{\i  Feddes Repert.}{\b  74}: 20 (1967) ({\i L. agrigentina} Tineo): Softly tomentose all over, with numerous long, slender fasciculate hairs and without rigid stellate hairs. Petals pure yellow. •{\i  Calabria, Sicilia.}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 7.                    Althaea}                     L.
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc By D.A. Webb.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Herbs. Flowers rather small, usually distinctly pedunculate or pedicellate, in racemes or panicles. Epicalyx-segments 6-9, united at the base. Petals obovate, entire or emarginate. Staminal tube terete, hairy. stigmas lateral, filiform. Mericarps indehiscent, arranged in a single whorl, unilocular, 1-seeded.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Literature: E. G. Baker,{\i  Jour. Bot.} ({\i London}){\b  28}: 140-141 (1890).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Annual; indumentum of simple and stellate hairs; anthers yellow
\par
2 Stipules entire; petals scarcely exceeding sepals ............................ {\b 1. hirsuta}
\par
2 Stipules deeply divided into narrow lobes; petals twice as  
\par
  long as sepals .............................................................................. {\b 2. longiflora}
\par
1 Perennial; indumentum of stellate hairs only; anthers purplish-red
\par
3 Sepals erect in fruit; mericarps glabrous ................................... {\b 3. cannabina}
\par
3 Sepals curved over the fruit; mericarps stellate-pubescent
\par
4 Leaves entire or lobed to about halfway to base; peduncle of 
\par
  axillary inflorescences shorter than the subtending leaf ............ {\b 4. officinalis}
\par
4 Leaves lobed nearly or quite to base; peduncle of axillary  
\par
  inflorescences at least as long as the subtending leaf ................ {\b 5. armeniaca}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. A. hirsuta} L.,{\i  Sp. Pl.} 687 (1753). Annual up to 60 cm, with numerous stiff, simple and some stellate hairs. Leaves suborbicular, cordate, crenate or dentate towards base of stem, becoming progressively more deeply lobed upwards; upper cauline leaves palmately 3- to 5-lobed; lobes linear, dentate or serrate. Stipules entire. Flowers solitary; pedicels longer than the subtending leaves. Epicalyx-segments lanceolate, acuminate, nearly as long as the calyx. Sepals lanceolate or ovate, long acuminate, erect in fruit. Petals c. 15 mm, scarcely exceeding the sepals, pinkish-lilac. Anthers yellow. Mericarps glabrous,transversely rugose, with a fine longitudinal rib on the dorsal face.{\i  Dry places, often as a weed of cultivated ground; somewhat calcicole. S. & S.E. Europe, extending to S.E. Czechoslovakia}. Al Bl Bu Co Cr Cz Ga *Ge Gr *He Hs Hu It Ju Lu Rm Rs (W, K, E) Sa Si Tu [Be].
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. A. longiflora} Boiss. & Reuter, {\i Diagn. Pl. Nov. Hisp.} 9 (1842). Like {\b 1} but stipules deeply divided into narrow lobes; petals c. 25 mm, twice as long as sepals; mericarps keeled on the dorsal face.{\i  E., C. & S. Spain and S.E. Portugal.} Hs Lu [Ga].
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 3. A. cannabina} L.,{\i  Sp. Pl.} 686 (1753) (incl. {\i A. kotschyi} Boiss.). Pubescent perennial up to 180 cm; all hairs stellate. Leaves palmately lobed, often to the base, with 3-5 lanceolate or linear, irregularly dentate and sometimes lobed segments. Flowers solitary or in clusters, on long, often branched, axillary peduncles, and often also forming a terminal panicle. Epicalyx-segments linear-lanceolate to ovate-acuminate. Sepals ovate, acuminate, erect in fruit. Petals 15-30 mm, pink. Anthers purplish-red. Mericarps glabrous, transversely rugose on the dorsal face; angles rounded.{\i  S. & E.C. Europe.} Al Bu Cz Ga Gr Hs Hu It Ju Lu Rm Rs (W, K) Sa Si Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b  A. narbonensis} Pourret ex Cav.,{\i  Monad. Class. Diss. Dec. }94 (1786), described from S. France, does not appear to merit more than varietal rank. The taxon to which this name is applied by Iljin in Komarov, {\i Fl. U.R.S.S. }{\b 15}: 142 (1949) does not seem to be the same, and may represent a subspecies found in S.E. Europe.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 4. A. officinalis} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 686 (1753) (incl. {\i A. kragujevacensis} Pancic, {\i A. taurinensis }DC.). Densely grey-pubescent perennial up to 200 cm; all hairs stellate. Leaves triangular-ovate, acute, crenate-serrate, undivided or palmately lobed, often somewhat plicate. Flowers solitary or clustered in axillary and terminal inflorescences; peduncle of axillary inflorescences shorter than the subtending leaf. Epicalyx-segments linear-lanceolate. Sepals ovate, acute, curved over the fruit. Petals 15-20 mm, very pale lilac-pink, rarely deeper pink. Anthers purplish-red. Mericarps more or less densely covered with stellate hairs, smooth. 2n = 42.{\i  Damp places. Most of Europe, from England, Denmark and C. Russia southwards}. Al Au Be Br Bu Co Cz Da Ga Ge Gr *Hb Ho Hs Hu It Ju Lu Po Rm Rs (C, W, K, E) Sa Si Tu [He].
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 5. A. armeniaca} Ten.,{\i  Ind. Sem. Horti Neap.} 1 (1837). Like {\b 4} but sparsely pubescent; lower leaves palmatipartite, upper 3-partite; peduncle of axillary inflorescences at least as long as the subtending leaf; mericarps rugose and slightly sulcate on the dorsal face.{\i  River-banks. S.E. Russia; rarely casual elsewhere}. Rs (E). ({\i C. & S.W. Asia.})
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b   A. broussonetiifolia} Iljin in Komarov, {\i Fl. URSS }{\b 15}: 678 (1949), from S.E. Russia (banks of the lower Volga) and W.C. Asia, is doubtfully distinct from{\b  5}. The sinuses between the lobes of the leaves are dilated above the base and the leaf-base is often broadly cuneate, instead of being truncate or subcordate.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 8.                   Alcea}                    L.
\par
 
\pard\f0\fs24\qc By D.A. Webb.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Tall perennials with erect stems. Flowers large, subsessile in terminal, spike-like racemes. Epicalyx-segments 6(-7), united at the base, smaller than the sepals or about equalling them. Petals emarginate. Staminal tube 5-angled, glabrous. Stigmas lateral, filiform. Carpels 18-40. Fruit a schizocarp; mericarps indehiscent, arranged in a single whorl, hairy at least in centre of dorsal face, each divided by an internal septum into an upper, empty cell and a lower one with a single seed.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   The genus is centred in S.W. & C. Asia, and is very difficult taxonomically on account of reticulation of characters and
\par

\par
253}
\par