{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Sepals ovate or triangular, not more than 3 times as long as wide
\par
3 Epicalyx-segments ovate or ovate-deltate, not more than 3 times 
\par
  as long as wide
\par
4 Ripe mericarps smooth or faintly ribbed; lower flowers solitary in
\par
  leaf-axils ............................................................................................. {\b 5. alcea}
\par
4 Ripe mericarps distinctly reticulate; lower flowers 2 or more in
\par
  each leaf-axil
\par
5 Petals 12-30 mm, 3-4 times as long as sepals; lower surface of 
\par
  sepals with numerous small, stellate hairs ................................... {\b 8. sylvestris}
\par
5 Petals 10-12 mm, not more than 2·5 times as long as sepals; 
\par
  lower surface of sepals with few stellate hairs or none .............. {\b 9. nicaeensis}
\par
3 Epicalyx-segments linear to narrowly ovate, at least 3 times as
\par
  long as wide
\par
6 Lower flowers solitary in leaf-axils, or all flowers in a terminal cluster
\par
7 Petals about equalling sepals ....................................................... {\b 2. aegyptia}
\par
7 Petals at least twice as long as sepals
\par
8 Middle cauline leaves lobed for at most 1/10 of the radius;
\par
  staminal tube glabrous ................................................................. {\b 1. hispanica}
\par
8 Middle cauline leaves lobed for at least 1/5 of the radius;
\par
  staminal tube hairy
\par
9 Epicalyx-segments 2, linear; mericarps with flat dorsal face and
\par
  sharp angles ................................................................................ {\b 3. stipulacea}
\par
9 Epicalyx-segments 3, narrowly oblong; mericarps with rounded
\par
  dorsal face and angles
\par
10 Pedicels with stellate hairs; mericarps ± glabrous ........... {\b 7. tournefortiana}
\par
10 Pedicels without stellate hairs, mericarps with numerous
\par
   white hairs .................................................................................. {\b 6. moschata}
\par
6 Lower flowers in groups in each leaf-axil
\par
11 Dorsal face of ripe mericarps smooth, or only faintly ridged
\par
12 Petals at least twice as long as sepals; calyx not accrescent .......{\b 12. neglecta}
\par
12 Petals less than twice as long as sepals; calyx
\par
   strongly accrescent ................................................................. {\b 13. verticillata}
\par
11 Dorsal face of ripe mericarps distinctly reticulate
\par
13 Petals at least 12 mm, usually bright purple or pink ................ {\b 8. sylvestris}
\par
13 Petals less than 12 mm, pale pink or lilac
\par
14 Calyx strongly accrescent; fruiting pedicels usually less than 
\par
   10 mm; angles of mericarps winged ......................................... {\b 10. paniflora}
\par
14 Calyx only slightly accrescent; fruiting pedicels usually more
\par
   than 10 mm; angles of mericarps not winged
\par
15 Staminal tube ± glabrous; epicalyx-segments about 6 times 
\par
   as long as wide .............................................................................. {\b 11. pusilla}
\par
15 Staminal tube with numerous hairs; epicalyx-segments not more
\par
   than 3 times as long as wide ...................................................... {\b 9. nicaeensis}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Sect. BISMALVA (Medicus) Dumort. Flowers solitary in leaf-axils, or in a congested, terminal raceme.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. M. hispanica} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 689 (1753). Erect annual up to 70 cm, stellate-pubescent and also villous with long, patent hairs. Leaves 2-3 cm wide, semicircular, crenate-serrate or slightly lobed. Flowers mostly axillary. Epicalyx-segments 2, linear to triangular-lanceolate; sepals 6-9 mm, rhombic-ovate; petals c. 20 mm, pale pink; staminal tube glabrous. Mericarps glabrous, without ridges; dorsal face rounded.{\i  Spain and Portugal.} Hs Lu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. M. aegyptia} L.,{\i  Sp. Pl.} 690 (1753). Erect to decumbent annual; stems up to 25 cm, strigose with branched hairs. Leaves suborbicular in outline, deeply dissected into narrow segments. Flowers mostly in terminal clusters. Epicalyx-segments 2(-3), linear; sepals 7-11 mm, broadly triangular-ovate, somewhat acuminate; petals about equalling sepals, lilac, glabrous; staminal tube pubescent. Mericarps usually glabrous; lateral faces conspicuously ridged; dorsal face flat, transversely ridged. {\i Spain; Aegean region.} Cr Gr Hs. ({\i N. Africa, S.W. Asia}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 3. M. stipulacea} Cav., {\i Monad. Class. Diss. Dec.} 62 (1786) ({\i M. trifida} Cav.). Like {\b 2} but sepals at least twice as long as wide; petals twice as long as sepals, bearded; mericarps densely pubescent, with lateral faces less strongly ridged. •{\i  S., E. & C.Spain.} Hs.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 4. M. cretica} Cav., {\i op. cit.} 67 (1786). Erect annual up to 40 cm, more or less hispid with long, patent hairs. Lower leaves sub-orbicular, crenate or slightly lobed; upper leaves usually deeply divided into 3(-5) oblong, dentate lobes. Flowers axillary, on long pedicels. Epicalyx-segments 3, linear to narrowly triangular; sepals 7-10 mm, similar in shape; staminal tube glabrous. Mericarps glabrous; dorsal face flat, with numerous small, transverse ridges; angles slightly winged.{\i  Mediterranean region. }Co Cr Gr Hs It Sa Si [Ga].
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b cretica}: Pedicels usually with small, stellate, as well as simple hairs; petals 1-1·5 times as long as sepals, bluish-lilac to pink. {\i Throughout the range of the species except Spain}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b althaeoides} (Cav.) Dalby, {\i Feddes Repert.}{\b  74}: 26 (1967) ({\i M. althaeoides} Cav.): Pedicels with simple hairs only;petals twice as long as sepals, pale pink. S. & E. Spain. Plants intermediate between the two subspecies are found in S. Italy and Malta.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 5. M. alcea} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 689 (1753). Erect perennial 30-125 cm; stems sparsely hirsute below, stellate-pubescent above. Upper leaves usually palmatisect, with (3-)5 obtusely dentate or pinnatifid lobes; lower leaves cordate-orbicular, less deeply lobed. Pedicels with stellate hairs only. Epicalyx-segments 3, ovate-deltate, densely pubescent; petals 20-35 mm, bright pink; staminal tube with long hairs. Mericarps glabrous or pubescent; dorsal face and angles rounded, smooth or with faint ridges. 2n = 84. •{\i  Most of Europe, northwards to S. Sweden, but rare in the Mediterranean region.} Au Be Bu Co Cz Da Ga Ge He Ho Hs Hu It Ju Po Rm Rs (B, C, W, E) Sa Su [Fe No].
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Very variable in leaf-shape, indumentum, and shape and size of petals. Numerous variants have been described as species, but the correlation between the variable characters does not seem to be good enough to permit of taxonomic recognition.{\b  M. excisa} Reichenb. in Reichenb. & Reichenb. fil., {\i Icon. Fl. Germ.}{\b  5}: 18 (1841), represents the most extreme variant. It has deeply bifid petals and deeply divided upper leaves with narrow, almost simple lobes.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 6. M. moschata} L.,{\i  Sp. Pl}. 690 (1753). Like {\b 5} but leaves with 5-7 acutely 2-pinnatifid lobes; hairs on pedicels all simple; epicalyx-segments linear to narrowly ovate, glabrous or sparsely hirsute; mericarps with long, white hairs. 2n = 42.{\i  Most of Europe from England and Poland southwards; naturalized from gardens further north.} Al Au Be Br Bu Co Cz Ga Ge Gr *Hb He Ho Hs It Ju Po Rm Rs (C, W, E) Si [Da Fe Hu No Rs (B) Su].
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 7. M. tournefortiana} L.,{\i  Cent. Pl. }{\b 1}: 21 (1755). Like {\b 5}  but less robust; leaves often deeply dissected into narrow, linear segments; epicalyx-segments linear to narrowly ovate, glabrous or sparsely hirsute; petals 15-25 mm, pale pink; mericarps with dorsal face rounded or flat. •{\i  S. W. Europe.} Ga Hs Lu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Sect. MALVA. Flowers 2 or more in each leaf-axil.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 8. M. sylvestris} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 689 (1753) (incl. {\i M. ambigua} Guss., {\i M. erecta} C. Presl, {\i M. mauritiana} L.). Biennial or perennial, with simple and stellate hairs. Stems up to 150 cm, erect to decumbent, woody at the base. Leaves very variable in size, reniform to suborbicular-cordate, more or less palmatifid,
\par

\par
250}
\par