{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 epicalyx-segments, mericarps with rounded angles, and absence of patent, simple hairs on the peduncles.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. L. mauritanica} Durieu in Duchartre,{\i  Rev. Bot. }{\b 2}: 436 (1847). Erect, stellate-tomentose annual. Leaves suborbicular cordate, shortly 5- to 7-lobed. Flowers in clusters; pedicels shorter than the subtending petiole. Epicalyx-segments ovate to oblong, free nearly to the base, shorter than the sepals; sepals broadly triangular-ovate, strongly accrescent, completely covering the ripe fruit; petals 8-15 mm, purple. Dorsal face of mericarps flat, reticulate; lateral faces strongly ridged; angles sharp, denticulate. {\i Maritime rocks. C. & S. Portugal; ?E. Spain.} ?Hs Lu. ({\i N.W. Africa.})
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 The European plants belong to subsp.{\b  davaei} (Coutinho) Coutinho,{\i  Fl. Port.} 402 (1913). Subsp.{\i  mauritanica} has rather larger mericarps, epicalyx-segments virtually free and sepals less accrescent.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 3. L. arborea} L.,{\i  Sp. Pl.} 690 (1753). Biennial up to 3 m, woody at the base; younger parts stellate-tomentose. Leaves up to 20 cm, orbicular, shortly 5- to 7-lobed. Flowers in clusters of 2-7; pedicels 1-2·5 cm, shorter than the subtending petiole. Epicalyx-segments 8-10 mm, suborbicular to ovate-oblong, obtuse, longer than the sepals, strongly accrescent, patent in fruit; sepals c. 4 mm, triangular, acute, connivent in fruit; petals 15-20 mm, lilac, with purple veins and base. Mericarps 6-8, glabrous or tomentose; dorsal and lateral faces ridged; angles sharp.{\i  Rocky places, especially near the sea; also in hedges and waste places, but there usually as an escape from gardens. Mediterranean region and coasts of W. Europe, northwards to} 55°{\i  N. in Ireland.} Al Bl Br Co Cr Ga Gr Hb Hs It Ju Lu Sa Si [Az].
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 4. L. maritima} Gouan,{\i  Obs. Bot.} 46 (1773) ({\i L. africana }Cav.). Shrub 30-120 cm; older branches bare, grey, glabrous, rugose; younger parts densely whitish-tomentose with minute stellate hairs. Leaves up to 7 × 8 cm but usually smaller, suborbicular, usually slightly 5-lobed; petiole 6-30 mm. Flowers solitary or in pairs; pedicels longer than the subtending petiole. Epicalyx-segments 3-8 mm, shorter than the sepals, elliptic-lanceolate to ovate, nearly free; sepals triangular-ovate, acuminate, accrescent, connivent in fruit; petals 1·5-3 cm, pale pink with purple base. Mericarps 9-13, strongly ridged; dorsal face concave; angles very sharp, denticulate.{\i  Dry, rocky places. W. Mediterranean region.} Bl Co Ga Hs It Sa.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 5. L. oblongifolia} Boiss.,{\i  Biblioth. Univ. Genève} ser. 2, {\b 13}: 407 (1838). Perennial 60-150 cm, woody at the base, covered with a dense, floccose tomentum of yellowish stellate hairs. Leaves up to 7·5 × 4 cm, ovate-lanceolate to oblong, cordate, crenate-dentate; petiole up to 15 mm. Flowers solitary in the leaf-axils; pedicels up to 15 mm. Epicalyx-segments 6-8 mm, deltate, obtuse, about half as long as the sepals; sepals lanceolate, acute, erect; petals 1·5-2·5 cm, pink with purplish base. Mericarps smooth, usually glabrous; dorsal face and angles rounded.{\i  Rocky and bushy places; calcicole. • S. Spain. }Hs.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 6. L. olbia} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 690 (1753). Shrub 60-200 cm; stems hispid; young parts of plant stellate-tomentose. Leaves up to 15 × 13 cm, the lower 3- to 5-lobed, the upper oblong-ovate to lanceolate, often slightly 3-lobed. Flowers solitary in leaf-axils; pedicels 2-7 mm. Epicalyx-segments 7-13 mm, ovate, shortly acuminate; sepals 10-14 mm, ovate, acuminate; petals 1·5-3 cm, purple. Mericarps c. 18, tomentose or hispid, not ridged; dorsal face and angles rounded. {\i W. Mediterranean region, C. & S. Portugal.} Bl Co Ga Hs It Lu Sa Si.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 7. L. bryoniifolia} Miller, {\i Gard. Dict.} ed. 8, no. 11 (1768) ({\i L. unguiculata} Desf., {\i L. sphaciotica} Gand.). Like {\b 6} but with floral leaves hastately 3-lobed, the basal lobes nearly as wide as the central; flowers more distant; epicalyx invaginated at insertion of pedicel, with segments shorter than the sepals and very abruptly acuminate; mericarps glabrous. {\i Greece and Aegean region; Sicilia.} Cr Gr Si.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 8. L. thuringiaca} L.,{\i  Sp. Pl. }691 (1753). Tomentose perennial; stems 60-200 cm, erect, herbaceous. Leaves up to 9 cm, orbicular-cordate, (3-)5-lobed. Flowers solitary in the leaf-axils. Epicalyx invaginated at insertion of pedicel; segments united to about half-way, broadly ovate, shortly acuminate, shorter than the sepals. Sepals c. 12 mm, triangular, acuminate, accrescent; petals (1·5-)2-4·5 cm, purplish-pink. Mericarps c. 20; dorsal face smooth but keeled; lateral faces smooth or slightly ridged; angles rounded.{\i  C. & S.E. Europe, extending to C. Italy and N.C. Russia; rarely naturalized or casual elsewhere}. Al Au Bu Cz Ge Gr Hu It Ju Po Rm Rs (B, C, W, K, E) Tu [Fe Ga Rs (N) Su].
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b thuringiaca}: Upper leaves with obtuse or subacute lobes. Inflorescence lax. Pedicels up to 8 cm in fruit. Petals up to 4·5 cm. {\i Throughout the range of the species except Greece and much of Italy}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b ambigua} (DC.) Nyman,{\i  Consp.} 128 (1878) ({\i L. ambigua} DC.): Upper leaves with acute to cuspidate lobes. Inflorescence rather dense. Pedicels not more than 3·5 cm in fruit. Petals not more than 3·5 cm.{\i  S. & W. parts of Balkan peninsula; Italy}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 9. L. punctata} All.,{\i  Auct. Fl. Pedem.} 26 (1789). Annual; stem 20-90 cm, erect, branched, usually flushed with purple-red and sparsely dotted with minute, white stellate hairs. Lower leaves up to 4·5-5 cm, reniform or semicircular, shortly 5-lobed; upper leaves hastate, with a long central lobe and shorter, patent lateral lobes. Flowers solitary in the leaf-axils; pedicels up to 15 cm in fruit. Epicalyx-segments 6-8 mm, broadly ovate, sometimes slightly 3-lobed, acuminate; sepals 8-9 mm, triangular, acuminate, accrescent, connivent in fruit; petals 1·5-3 cm, lilac-pink. Mericarps 14-17, glabrous, ridged; angles blunt.{\i  Mediterranean region.} Al Bl Co Cr Ga Gr ?Hs It Si Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 10. L. trimestris} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 692 (1753). Annual; stems up to 120 cm, erect or ascending, more or less strigose with simple or few-rayed, deflexed hairs. Leaves 3-6 × 2·5-7 cm, suborbicular-cordate, the upper somewhat 3- to 7-lobed. Flowers solitary in the leaf-axils; pedicel usually exceeding the subtending petiole. Epicalyx-segments shorter than the sepals, accrescent, united for most of their length, the free part broadly ovate, cuspidate; sepals 9-14 mm, oblong-lanceolate, acute, connivent in fruit; petals 2-4·5 cm, bright pink. Mericarps c. 12, glabrous, ridged, covered by a disc-like expansion of the central axis; dorsal face and angles rounded.{\i  Mediterranean region, Portugal; cultivated elsewhere in gardens and locally naturalized.} Bl Co Ga Gr Hs It ?Ju Lu Sa Si [Rs (B, C, W, K)].
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 11. L. triloba} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 691 (1753). Musk-scented perennial, woody at the base, with simple, glandular, as well as fasciculate or stellate hairs. Leaves cordate-orbicular, slightly 3-lobed; petiole up to 9 cm; stipules up to 2·5 × 1·5 cm, sometimes amplexicaul. Flowers in clusters of 3-7, pedicels shorter than subtending petiole. Epicalyx-segments 8-15 mm, lanceolate to broadly ovate; sepals ovate, acuminate, accrescent, somewhat connivent in fruit; petals 1·5-3 cm. Mericarps 12-16, glabrous or glandular-ciliate, smooth; dorsal face and angles rounded. {\i Often}
\par

\par
252}
\par