{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 (probably) hybridization. Until a complete revision has been undertaken this treatment of European plants must be regarded as provisional.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Literature: M. Zohary,{\i  Bull. Res. Counc. Israel}{\b  11D}: 210-229 (1963);{\i  Israel Jour. Bot. }{\b 12}: 1-26 (1963).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Petals entirely yellow ...................................................................... {\b 6. rugosa}
\par
1 Petals white, pink, purple or violet in apical part (sometimes
\par
   yellow at the base)
\par
2 Upper leaves palmatisect almost to the base .......................... {\b 5. lavateriflora}
\par
2 Upper leaves not divided for more than ¾ of the radius
\par
3 Stem sparsely setose or ± glabrous at maturity
\par
4 Furrow on dorsal face of mericarp rather shallow,
\par
  largely obscured by hairs; angles not winged ................................... {\b 1. setosa}
\par
4 Furrow on dorsal face of mericarp deep; angles 
\par
  produced into membranous wings ...................................................... {\b 2. rosea}
\par
3 Stem with persistent, dense tomentum of stellate hairs
\par
5 Epicalyx not more than half as long as calyx ........................... {\b 4. heldreichii}
\par
5 Epicalyx at least ¾ as long as calyx ................................................ {\b 3. pallida}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. A. setosa} (Boiss.) Alef., {\i Österr. Bot. Zeitschr.}{\b  12}: 255 (1862) ({\i Althaea pontica} (Janka) Baker fil., {\i Althaea rosea} auct. balcan. pro parte, non (L.) Cav.). Stem sometimes purple-spotted, setose with rather distant groups of deflexed hairs, tomentose-pubescent only on youngest parts. Leaves cordate-orbicular to deltate, the upper usually divided for 1/2-2/3 of the radius into 3-5 oblong or deltate, obtuse, crenate lobes. Epicalyx-segments triangular, acute; sepals similar but rather larger, without prominent veins. Petals 35-50 × 40-55 mm, almost contiguous, violet, usually with yellow base. Mericarps 6 mm; dorsal face densely hairy, with a shallow furrow; angles rugose, not winged; lateral faces appressed-setose.{\i  Turkey-in-Europe; Kriti; cultivated elsewhere for ornament and occasionally naturalized.} Cr Tu [It Ju]. ({\i S.W. Asia, Egypt.})
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. A. rosea} L.,{\i  Sp. Pl.} 687 (1753) ({\i Althaea rosea} (L.) Cav.). Stem glabrescent or sparsely setose with deflexed hairs, tomentose-pubescent only on youngest parts. Leaves cordate-orbicular to rhombic, weakly 3- to 5-lobed, slightly scabrid-setulose. Epicalyx-segments deltate to triangular-lanceolate, 1/2-2/3 as long as the subacute, triangular sepals. Petals 30-50 mm, contiguous, usually pink but sometimes white or violet. Mericarps 7 mm; dorsal face with deep, narrow furrow; angles rugose, produced into parallel wings; lateral faces appressed-setose. {\i Of unknown origin; cultivated in gardens throughout Europe and widely naturalized.} [Au Br Bu Cz Ga Ge He Hs Hu It Ju Lu Rm Rs.]
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Not known anywhere as an indigenous plant; probably a hybrid of {\b 1} with {\b 3} or with an Asiatic species. The customary ascription of China as the country of origin is certainly false. Cultivated plants show variation in many characters, especially of calyx and epicalyx, but the combination of winged mericarps, wide petals, and absence of tomentum from the mature stem is distinctive. Some garden plants have yellow or yellowish flowers and more deeply divided leaves, but in other respects resemble 2; they have been given the name of{\b  A. ficifolia} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 687 (1753) ({\i Althaea ficifolia} (L.) Cav.), which does not seem to refer to any wild plant. They are probably hybrids with {\b 6} or a related species.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 3. A. pallida} (Willd.) Waldst. & Kit., {\i Pl. Rar. Hung. }{\b 1}: 46 (1801) ({\i Althaea pallida }Willd.). Stem pubescent-tomentose throughout, and usually also hispid with longer hairs. Leaves cordate-orbicular to rhombic-deltate, crenate, undivided, or divided for c. 1/3 of the radius into 3-5 obtuse lobes, greyish-tomentose, especially beneath. Epicalyx-segments triangular, acute, equalling or slightly shorter than the sepals. Petals 30-45 × 25-35 mm, not contiguous. Mericarps 4·5-6 mm; dorsal face with deep, fairly broad furrow; angles rugose, produced into slightly divergent wings.{\i  S.E. & E.C. Europe, northwards to S. Czechoslovakia.} Al Au Bu Cr Cz Gr Hu Ju Rm Rs (W, K) Tu [It].
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b pallida}: Not very densely tomentose; petals pale pink, usually yellow at the base, deeply emarginate; mericarps 4·5-5 mm, blackish, with lateral faces glabrous.{\i  Throughout the range of the species except  Kriti and parts of Greece}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b cretica} (Weinm.) D. A. Webb,{\i  Feddes Repert.}{\b  74}: 27 (1967) ({\i Althaea cretica} Weinm., {\i Althaea rosea} auct. plur., non (L.) Cav.): Densely tomentose; petals bright pink or purple, scarcely yellow at the base, not very deeply emarginate; mericarps 5·5-6 mm, pale brown, with lateral faces appressed-setose.{\i  S. & W. parts of Balkan peninsula; Kriti}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  In the S. part of the Balkan peninsula, plants are found with combinations of the differential characters which makes it difficult to assign them to either subspecies.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b A. apterocarpa} (Fenzl) Boiss.,{\i  Fl. Or. }{\b 1}: 830 (1867), which is very like {\b 3}({\b b}) but with unwinged mericarps, is doubtfully recorded from S. Greece; no European material with ripe fruit appears to be available.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 4. A. heldreichii} (Boiss.) Boiss.,{\i  Fl. Or. }{\b 1}: 832 (1867) ({\i Althaea heldreichii} Boiss.). Like {\b 3}(a) but less robust; flowers rather smaller; epicalyx scarcely half as long as calyx; sepals with conspicuous, raised veins on the back. •{\i  Bulgaria and Macedonia; S. Ukraine.} Bu Gr Ju Rs (W, ?K).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 5. A. lavateriflora} (DC.) Boiss.,{\i  op. cit.} 828 (1867) ({\i Althaea pontica} sensu Hayek pro parte, non (Janka) Baker fil.). Stem tomentose or glabrescent, usually setose with long, deflexed hairs. Lower leaves palmatifid, the upper palmatisect, all tomentose with yellowish, stellate hairs, and with prominent veins beneath. Epicalyx-segments narrowly triangular, acute, 2/3-4/5 as long as the sepals. Petals c. 35 × 35 mm, violet with yellow base. Mericarps with a rather shallow furrow on dorsal face; angles shortly winged.{\i  Turkey-in-Europe} ({\i Bosphorus region}). Tu. ({\i S.W. Asia}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 6. A. rugosa} Alef., {\i Österr. Bot. Zeitschr.}{\b  12}: 254 (1862) (incl. {\i A. taurica} Iljin, {\i A. novopokrovskyi} Iljin). Stem with persistent tomentum and also villous with longer white hairs. Leaves 5-lobed, the upper more deeply (up to 2/3 of the radius), with oblong, obtuse, irregularly crenate lobes, densely tomentose on both surfaces when young, later variably glabrescent; veins very prominent beneath. Epicalyx-segments deltate, as broad as the sepals but only half as long. Petals 35 × 55 mm, pale or clear yellow. Mericarps 5-6 mm, pale brown; dorsal face usually deeply furrowed; angles produced into divergent wings; lateral faces appressed-setose.{\i  Ukraine and S. Russia.} Rs (W, K, E).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 9.                   Abutilon}                      Miller
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc By D.A. Webb.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Herbs, shrubs or small trees. Epicalyx absent. Stigmas terminal, capitate. Fruit a schizocarp; mericarps arranged in a single whorl, each with several seeds, usually dehiscent{\i  in situ} and not separating readily from the central axis.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. A. theophrasti} Medicus, {\i Kunstl. Geschl. Malv.-Fam.} 28 (1787) ({\i A. avicennae} Gaertner). Erect annual 50-100 cm, the younger parts tomentose, the older pubescent with simple and stellate hairs. Leaves up to 15 cm, long-petiolate, cordate-orbicular, acuminate, slightly crenate. Flowers in small cymes in axils of upper leaves; peduncles shorter than petioles. Sepals
\par

\par
254}
\par