{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 8. D. blagayana} Freyer, {\i Flora} ({\i Regensb}.) {\b 21}: 176 (1838). Evergreen dwarf shrub up to 30 cm, with long, decumbent sparingly branched stems, leafless except at the apex. Leaves 3-6 cm, obovate, obtuse, sessile, glabrous, coriaceous. Flowers creamy-white, fragrant, sessile, in terminal heads of 10-15, subtended by pale, sericeous bracts c. 10 mm long. Hypanthium 15-20 mm, narrow, with a few silky hairs. Sepals 6 mm, obtuse, patent. Drupe whitish. 2n = 18. •{\i  Balkan peninsula, extending northwards to Slovenija and the S. Carpathians.} Al Bu Gr Ju Rm.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 9. D. sericea} Vahl,{\i  Symb. Bot. }{\b 1}: 28 (1790) (incl.{\i  D. collina} Sm., {\i D. vahlii} Keissler). Evergreen shrub up to 70 cm, with erect or decumbent branches; young shoots hairy. Leaves 20-50 × 6-12 mm, oblong-obovate, covered with appressed hairs beneath, glabrous above except for a few hairs on the midrib. Flowers pink, very fragrant, in terminal heads of 5-15, subtended by short, ovate, sericeous bracts about half as long as the hypanthium; some axillary flower-clusters sometimes present as well. Hypanthium 6-8 mm, covered with whitish hairs; sepals 4-6 mm, obtuse. Drupe reddish-brown. {\i E. & C. Mediterranean region, westwards to }c. 10° 30'{\i  E. in Italy}. Cr Gr It Si.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 10. D. cneorum} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 357 (1753) (incl.{\i  D. julia }Kos.-Pol.). Evergreen dwarf shrub with usually decumbent or ascending, long, slender, straight, smooth branches; young shoots pubescent, greyish. Leaves 10-18(-25) × (2-)3-5(-6) mm, usually 3-4 times as long as wide, oblong or linear-oblanceolate, obtuse, sometimes mucronate, sessile, glabrous, not clustered at the ends of the branches. Flowers fragrant, pink, subsessile, in heads of 6-10(-20), subtended by bracts similar to the leaves but smaller. Hypanthium 6-10 mm, usually covered with whitish hairs; sepals 4-6 mm, obtuse. Drupe brownish-yellow, included in the hypanthium till ripe. 2n = 18. {\i Dry or stony places; usually calcicole. • C. Europe, extending to N.W. Spain, C. Italy, Bulgaria and C. Ukraine. }Al Au Bu Cz Ga Ge He Hs Hu It Ju Po Rm Rs (C, W).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Plants have been recorded from Bulgaria (Pirin Planina) with young shoots and hypanthium glabrous, as in {\b 11}, but with short, wide leaves as in{\b  10}. There is no information available about their fruits.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Plants from W. Hungary, S.E. Austria and N. Jugoslavia, with revolute leaf-margins and a rather erect habit, have been described as forma{\b  arbusculoides} Tuzson,{\i  Bot. Közl.}{\b  10}: 151 (1911). This occurs only on acid soils and may, perhaps, deserve recognition as a subspecies.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 11. D. striata} Tratt., {\i Arch. Gewächsk. }{\b 1}: 120 (1814). Like {\b 10} in habit but entirely glabrous, and with somewhat stouter, more freely branched stems; leaves somewhat crowded at the ends of the branches, longer and narrower (usually 5-6 times as long as wide) and less coriaceous; heads with 8-12 flowers; hypanthium 6-12 mm, often longitudinally striped; drupe reddish, exposed before maturity.{\i  Dry and stony places, usually above }1500 {\i m; somewhat calcicole. • Alps.} Au Ga Ge He It Ju.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 12. D. arbuscula} Celak.,{\i  Sitz.-Ber. Böhm. Ges. Wiss.} ({\i Math.Nat. Kl.}) {\b 1880}({\b 1}): 215 (1890). Like {\b 10} but with shorter branches and young shoots bright coral-red; leaves fleshy, linear or linear-oblong, deeply sulcate above and with revolute margins, crowded at the ends of the branches; flowers fewer but larger (hypanthium 12-20 mm, sepals 6-8 mm); and bracts scarious, much shorter than the flowers.{\i  Calcareous rocks, }900-1300{\i  m. • E. Czechoslovakia} ({\i Muran region, E. of Banska Bystrica}). Cz.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 The young shoots, leaves, bracts and flowers may be hairy or glabrous.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 13. D. petraea} Leybold,{\i  Flora} ({\i Regensb}.) {\b 36}: 81 (1853). Evergreen dwarf shrub with numerous short, stout, tortuous, procumbent, branched stems, forming an intricate mat. Young shoots greenish-brown, sparsely pubescent; older stems covered with raised leaf-scars. Leaves 8-12 × 2-3 mm, linear-oblanceolate, obtuse, glabrous, strongly keeled beneath so as to be triangular in section, clustered at the ends of the branches. Flowers fragrant, bright pink, in heads of 3-5 (rarely more), subtended by scarious bracts much shorter than the flowers. Hypanthium 9-15 mm, villous; sepals 3-5 mm, broadly ovate, obtuse. Drupe sparsely pubescent.{\i  Crevices of calcareous rocks, }700-2000{\i  m. • N. Italy }({\i in a small region centred on Lago di Idro, N.E. of Brescia}). It.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 14. D. rodriguezii} Texidor,{\i  Apunt. Fl. Esp.} 64 (1869). Evergreen dwarf shrub up to 50 cm, with numerous short, lateral branches; young shoots pubescent. Leaves 10-20 × 2-6 mm, oblong-oblanceolate, obtuse, obscurely denticulate and sinuate, ciliate, with revolute margins, sessile, not clustered at the ends of the branches. Flowers fragrant, purple tinged with yellow, sessile, in heads of 2-5, subtended by bracts similar to the leaves but smaller. Hypanthium 5-8 mm, covered with whitish hairs; sepals 3-5 mm, obtuse. Drupe greenish-brown, included in hypanthium till ripe.{\i  Littoral scrub. • Menorca.} Bl.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 15. D. jasminea} Sibth. & Sm., {\i Fl. Graec. Prodr. }{\b 1}: 260 (1809). Evergreen dwarf shrub up to 30 cm. Stems decumbent or ascending, short, tortuous, freely branched, covered with raised leaf-scars; young shoots glabrous. Leaves 8-11 × 1·5-3 mm, oblong-obovate, mucronate, shortly petiolate, glabrous. Flowers purple (rarely yellow or white) outside, white or pale yellow on upper surface of sepals, in terminal clusters of 2(-3), subtended by very small, hairy, deciduous bracts. Hypanthium 10-12 mm, very slender, glabrous or sparsely pubescent; sepals triangular, acute; ovary glabrous.{\i  Rocky places. • S.E. Greece, from Navplion to Giona and Evvoia.} Gr.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 16. D. malyana} Blecic,{\i  Bull. Mus. Hist. Nat. Pays Serbe} ser. B, {\b 5-6}: 23 (1953). Like {\b 15} but leaves 15-18 × 6 mm, obovate-spathulate, obtuse, not mucronate, sometimes sparsely hairy beneath; flowers white; ovary more or less sericeous. Drupe greenish, coriaceous.{\i  Limestone rocks. • N.W. Crna Gora} ({\i gorge of the Piva}). Ju.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 17. D. gnidioides} Jaub. & Spach,{\i  Ill. Pl. Or.}{\b  4}: 4 (1850). Erect shrub; branches long, strict, stout; young shoots pubescent with brown hairs. Leaves 25-40 × 4-7 mm, oblong-lanceolate, cuspidate-acuminate, pungent, erect, sessile, coriaceous, glaucous, with a few appressed hairs when young, glabrous later. Flowers pink, subsessile, in terminal, ebracteate heads of 5-8 and also in clusters of 2-3 in the upper leaf-axils. Hypanthium broad, covered with silky hairs. Sepals oblong, obtuse, 1/2-2/3 as long as the hypanthium. Drupe with coriaceous, scarcely fleshy exocarp, enclosed in the hypanthium till ripe.{\i  Aegean region }({\i Skiathos, Evvoia, Astipalaia}). Gr. ({\i E. Aegean and S. Anatolia}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 All European records of this species require confirmation.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 2.                   Thymelaea}                      Miller
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc By D.A. Webb & I.K. Ferguson.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Evergreen dwarf shrubs, or rarely perennial or annual herbs.Usually dioecious, but often with some hermaphrodite flowers on male and female plants. Leaves small, sessile. Flowers usually yellow, sometimes tinged with green or purple, solitary or in small clusters in the leaf-axils. Hypanthium urceolate or tubular,
\par

\par
258}
\par