{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 3. H. trionum} L.,{\i  Sp. Pl.} 697 (1753). Somewhat strigose-hispid annual; stem 10-50 cm erect to decumbent, branched. Leaves 4-7 cm, divided (except the lowest) more or less to the base into 3(-5) oblong-lanceolate, usually deeply pinnatifid lobes. Epicalyx-segments 10-13 bearing long, simple hairs. Sepals united for most of their length, with conspicuous, dark purple veins, strongly accrescent, membranous and vesicular in fruit. Petals c. 2 cm, pale yellow with a deep violet patch at the base. Capsule villous, enclosed in calyx.{\i  Cultivated ground and waste places. S.E. & E.C. Europe; naturalized elsewhere in the Mediterranean region and casual further north. }Al Bu Cr *Cz Gr Hu *It Ju Rm Rs (W, K, E) [Au Ga Ge Hs Lu Po *Si].
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 4. H. cannabinus} L.,{\i  Syst. Nat}. ed. 10,{\b  2}: 1149 (1759). Annual, with erect, simple stems up to 2 m, glabrous except for calyx and capsule; stem, petioles and sepals usually armed with small prickles. Leaves very variable, the lower usually suborbicular, dentate, scarcely lobed, the upper divided almost to the base into 3-7 linear-oblong lobes. Epicalyx-segments 6-12 sepals united only at the base, triangular, long-acuminate, villous, the free portion accrescent and becoming hard and spiny in fruit. Petals cream or pale yellow, sometimes purple at the base. Capsule subglobose, apiculate, pubescent.{\i  Cultivated for its fibres in parts of S.E. & E.C. Europe. }[Cr Hu Rs (W, E).] ({\i Tropical Africa and Asia.})
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 13.                   Abelmoschus}                   Medicus
\par
\pard\f0\fs24\qc By D.A. Webb.
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28  Like{\i  Hibiscus} but calyx tubular almost to the apex, splitting along one side at anthesis and falling before the fruit is ripe; capsule much longer than wide.
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. A. esculentus} (L.) Moench, Meth. 617 (1794) ({\i Hibiscus esculentus }L.). Annual, more or less hispid with simple and forked hairs; stems up to 200 cm, erect. Leaves long-petiolate, cordate to orbicular in outline, with 5-7 dentate lobes. Epicalyx-segments 8-10. Petals 2·5-5 cm, bright yellow, with a dark purple patch at the base. Stigmas deep red. Capsule 6-25 cm, linear-oblong, acuminate, somewhat ridged above, strigose.{\i  Cultivated for its edible young fruits in S.E. Europe.} [Al Bu Gr Rm Rs (W, K, E).] ({\i Tropical Africa}.)
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 14.                   Kosteletzkya }                      C. Presl
\par
\pard\f0\fs24\qc By D.A. Webb.
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28 Herbs. Epicalyx-segments numerous, linear. Petals not emarginate. Stigmas terminal, capitate. Carpels 5; fruit a depressed, 5-angled, loculicidal capsule, with one seed in each loculus.
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. K. pentacarpos} (L.) Ledeb.,{\i  Fl. Ross. }{\b 1}: 437 (1842). Erect perennial up to 2 m, pubescent with brownish, stellate hairs. Leaves long-petiolate, triangular-ovate, crenate, usually with 3(-5) broadly triangular lobes, but sometimes undivided. Flowers solitary or in small cymes in the leaf-axils. Epicalyx-segments 6-11 much shorter and narrower than the sepals. Petals 20-25 mm, obovate, entire, lilac-pink. Capsule c. 5 × 12 mm, black, strigose, dehiscing along the prominent angles. Seeds 4 mm, reniform, striate.{\i  Riversides and marshes. S. Europe, from E. Spain to S.E. Russia; very local.} Bl Hs It Rs (E).
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs36\qc THYMELAEALES
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 107.          THYMELAEACEAE}
\par
\pard\f0\fs24\qc Edit. D.A. Webb. 
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28 Small shrubs, rarely herbs, with simple, entire, usually alternate, exstipulate leaves. Flowers hermaphrodite or unisexual, regular, 4-merous, usually in small heads or clusters, rarely in racemes or panicles. Sepals often petaloid, arising from the rim of a tubular, campanulate or urceolate hypanthium ('calyx-tube' or 'receptacle' of many authors), usually similar in colour and texture to the sepals. Petals absent in European genera. Stamens 8, inserted in 2 whorls on the wall of the hypanthium; filaments short. Ovary superior, at the base of the hypanthium but free from it, with a single pendent ovule; style terminal or somewhat lateral. Fruit a nut or drupe.
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Hypanthium articulated near the middle, the lower half persistent
\par  in fruit, the upper half, with the sepals, deciduous ...................... {\b 3. Diarthron} 
\par 1 Hypanthium not articulated, wholly persistent or wholly
\par  deciduous
\par 2 Exocarp succulent, rarely coriaceous; fruit exposed when mature;
\par  leaves rarely less than 12 mm; flower usually fragrant ..................{\b  1. Daphne}
\par 2 Exocarp thin and dry; mature fruit usually enclosed in
\par  the persistent hypanthium; leaves rarely more than 12 mm;
\par  flowers scarcely fragrant ........................................................... {\b 2. Thymelaea}
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 1.                  Daphne}                     L.
\par
\pard\f0\fs24\qc By D.A. Webb & I.K. Ferguson.
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28 Dwarf to medium-sized shrubs, usually with tough, flexible branches; leaves often clustered at the ends of the branches. Flowers hermaphrodite, usually fragrant, in terminal heads or axillary spikes or clusters, rarely in terminal panicles. Hypanthium tubular or narrowly campanulate; sepals and hypanthium petaloid; style terminal. Fruit a drupe, exposed at maturity; exocarp succulent, rarely coriaceous.
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28  Literature: K. Keissler,{\i  Bot. Jahrb. }{\b 25}: 29-124 (1898).
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 All flowers terminal, solitary or in ± sessile heads or clusters
\par 2 Leaves deciduous, not coriaceous
\par 3 Branches decumbent or ascending; leaves hairy at least when young
\par  ............................................................................................................ {\b 6. alpina}
\par 3 Branches ± erect; leaves glabrous .................................................... {\b 3. sophia}
\par 2 Leaves evergreen, ± coriaceous
\par 4 Flowers solitary or in terminal pairs
\par 5 Leaves 8-11 × 1·5-3 mm, mucronate; flowers usually purple ... {\b 15. jasminea}
\par 5 Leaves 15-18 × 6 mm, not mucronate; flowers white ................ {\b 16. malyana}
\par 4 Flowers in terminal heads of 3 or more
\par 6 Sepals narrowly triangular, acuminate; inflorescence ebracteate
\par  ........................................................................................................ {\b 7. oleoides}
\par 6 Sepals ovate or broadly triangular, obtuse or acute;
\par  flowers subtended by scarious or leaf-like bracts
\par
\par 256}
\par