{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 7 Flowers creamy-white ............................................................... {\b 8. blagayana}
\par
7 Flowers pink or purplish
\par
8 Leaves 6-12 mm wide .................................................................... {\b 9. sericea}
\par
8 Leaves 2-6 mm wide
\par
9 Flowers purple, tinged with yellow; leaves ciliate and
\par
  obscurely denticulate (Islas Baleares) ..................................... {\b 14. rodriguezii}
\par
9 Flowers pink; leaves, entire, not ciliate
\par
10 Young shoots bright coral-red; leaf-margins strongly revolute
\par
   (Czechoslovakia) ...................................................................... {\b 12. arbuscula}
\par
10 Young shoots green to brown; leaf-margins seldom revolute
\par
11 Leaves strongly keeled beneath, ± trigonous; branches short,
\par
   tortuous ......................................................................................... {\b 13. petraea}
\par
11 Leaves not keeled; branches fairly long, ± straight
\par
12 Hypanthium usually hairy; leaves usually 3-4 times as
\par
   long as wide; fruit brownish-yellow .......................................... {\b 10. cneorum}
\par
12 Hypanthium glabrous; leaves usually 5-6 times as long
\par
   as wide; fruit reddish ...................................................................... {\b 11. striata}
\par
1  Flowers wholly or partly in axillary clusters or racemes,
\par
   or in terminal panicles
\par
13 Flowers greenish-yellow, glabrous
\par
14 Flowers in racemes, arising from the axils of the leaves of the 
\par
   previous year; hypanthium 2-3 times as long as sepals ................ {\b 4. laureola}
\par
14 Flowers in pairs, arising from the axils of reduced leaves of the
\par
   current year; hypanthium only slightly longer than petals ............ {\b 5. pontica}
\par
13 Flowers white, cream or pink, often hairy
\par
15 Mature leaves hairy beneath ......................................................... {\b 9. sericea}
\par
15 Mature leaves glabrous beneath
\par
16 Leaves deciduous, 8-25 mm wide ........................................... {\b 1. mezereum}
\par
16 Leaves evergreen, coriaceous, 3-10 mm wide
\par
17 Flowers in terminal panicles ...................................................... {\b 2. gnidium}
\par
17 Flowers in small, terminal heads, with axillary dusters
\par
    below them ............................................................................. {\b 17. gnidioides}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. D. mezereum} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 356 (1753). Deciduous shrub 25-200 cm, of bushy habit, with erect or ascending, greyish-brown branches; young shoots hirsute. Leaves 30-80 × 8-25 mm, oblong-lanceolate, glabrous or ciliate, thin, narrowed to a short petiole. Flowers pinkish-purple, very fragrant, appearing before  or with the leaves, borne in clusters of 2-4 in the axils of the  fallen leaves of the previous year, forming intercalary spikes. Hypanthium 5-8 mm, villous; sepals villous beneath, glabrous  above, slightly shorter than the hypanthium. Drupe bright red,  exposed before maturity. 2n = 18.{\i  Somewhat calcicole. Most of  Europe except the extreme west, south and north.} Al Au Be Br  Bu Cz Fe Ga Ge Gr He Ho Hs Hu It Ju No Po Rm Rs (N, B, C, W, E) ?Si Su [Da].
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Both the typical variety and var.{\i  alba }Aiton, with white flowers  and yellow drupes and usually a more strict habit, are often  cultivated for ornament and are occasionally naturalized by  bird-dispersal.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. D. gnidium} L.,{\i  Sp. Pl.} 357 (1753). Erect, evergreen shrub up  to 200 cm; branches slender, straight, brown, uniformly leafy for  some distance below the apex; young shoots appressed-puberulent. Leaves 20-50 × 3-10 mm, glabrous, subcoriaceous, linear  to obovate-oblong, acute, glandular beneath. Flowers creamy-white, in small, terminal panicles. Hypanthium 2·5-4 mm, villous, slightly longer than the sepals. Drupe ovoid, red.{\i  S. Europe, mainly in the west, extending northwards to }47°{\i  N. in  W. France.} Al Bl Co Ga Gr Hs It ?Ju Lu Sa Si.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 3. D. sophia} Kalenicz.,{\i  Bull. Soc. Nat. Moscou }{\b 22}({\b 1}): 311  (1849). Erect, deciduous shrub up to 150 cm; branches long,  slender, strict. Leaves c. 45 × 15 mm, oblong-obovate, sessile,  glabrous, glaucous beneath, not clustered at the ends of the  branches. Flowers white, fragrant, in terminal, ebracteate heads.  Hypanthium c. 10 mm, narrow, appressed-puberulent; sepals c. 7 × 3 mm, broadly triangular, acute. Drupe bright red. {\i Woods and thickets; calcicole. • S.C. Russia and N.E. Ukraine.} Rs (C, W, E). 
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 4. D. laureola} L., {\i Sp. Pl. }357 (1753). Evergreen shrub with suberect branches; young shoots greenish, glabrous. Leaves 30-120 × 10-35 mm, at least 3 times as long as wide, obovate-oblanceolate, subacute, coriaceous, glabrous, shining. Flowers yellowish-green, glabrous, borne in short, congested, bracteate, axillary racemes on the previous year's growth. Sepals ovate, acute, about 1/3 as long as the hypanthium. Drupe ovoid, black.{\i  S., S.C. & W. Europe, northwards to England and Hungary.} Al Au Az Be Br Bu Co Ga Ge Gr He Hu Hs It Ju Rm Sa Si ?Tu [Da Rs (K)].   
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b laureola}: 50-100 cm or more, erect, with most of the leaves clustered at the ends of the branches. Hypanthium 5-9 mm. 2n = 18. {\i Throughout the range of the species. } 
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b philippi} (Gren.) Rouy, {\i Consp. Fl. Fr.} 225 (1927): 20-40 cm, with spreading, more or less decumbent branches, leafy for some distance below the apex. Hypanthium 3-5 mm. •{\i  Pyrenees.} Ga Hs. 
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 5. D. pontica} L.,{\i  Sp. Pl.} 357 (1753). Like {\b 4}({\b a}) but of more spreading habit; leaves obovate, 2-2½ times as long as wide; flowers in pairs on a common peduncle, arising from the axils of reduced, bract-like leaves at the base of the current year's growth; hypanthium 8-10 mm, slender; sepals pale yellow, almost as long as the hypanthium. {\i S.E. Bulgaria and Turkey-in-Europe}. Bu Tu. ({\i N. Anatolia and Georgia.}) 
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 6. D. alpina} L.,{\i  Sp. Pl.} 356 (1753). Deciduous dwarf shrub with decumbent, often tortuous branches; young shoots hairy. Leaves 20-40 × 6-10 mm, obovate-cuneate to narrowly oblong, densely sericeous-villous on both surfaces, at least when young. Flowers white, fragrant, appearing after the leaves, subsessile, in terminal, ebracteate heads of 4-10. Hypanthium 4-6 mm. hairy; sepals 2·5-4 mm. Drupe red, pubescent, included in hypanthium till ripe.{\i  Calcicole. Mountains of S. & C. Europe, from E.C. France to the Pyrenees, N. Appennini and Crna Gora.} Au Ga He ?Hs It Ju. 
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 7. D. oleoides} Schreber,{\i  Icon. Descr. Pl.} 13 (1766). Evergreen dwarf shrub up to 50 cm (rarely more), with numerous, usually more or less straight branches; young shoots hairy. Leaves 10-45 × 3-12 mm, obovate, oblanceolate, oblong or elliptical, obtuse or acute, coriaceous, usually more or less villous when young, often glabrescent later, at least on upper surface. Flowers white or cream (rarely with hypanthium and lower surface of sepals deep pink), fragrant, subsessile, in terminal, ebracteate heads of 3-6. Hypanthium 6-8 mm, hairy; sepals 5-7 mm, narrowly triangular, acuminate. Drupe red, pubescent, included in hypanthium till ripe. {\i Usually calcicole. Mountains of S. Europe.} Al Bu Co Cr Gr Hs It Ju Sa Si.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Plants from E. Greece (Evvoia) with large, acute, elliptical leaves have been distinguished as{\b  D. euboica} Rech. fil.,{\i  Österr. Bot. Zeitschr. }{\b 104}: 176 (1957). They differ strikingly from most specimens of {\i D. oleoides} from the Balkan peninsula, but can be exactly matched by specimens from E. Spain, where they intergrade with typical plants. 
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b  D. kosaninii} (Stoj.) Stoj., {\i Spis. Balg. Akad. Nauk}{\b  37}: 137 (1928), from the mountains of S.W. Bulgaria, requires further investigation. It differs from {\b 7} in taller habit, shining, reddish bark, smaller leaves and deep pink flowers with shorter sepals, but plants can be found intermediate in all such characters between the extreme form and{\i  D. oleoides}. It is possibly the hybrid {\b 7} × {\b 10}. 
\par

\par
257}
\par