{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 56 Stems diffuse or decumbent; leaves 2-15 mm ........................... {\b 28. cuisinii}
\par
55 Sepals often unequal, subentire or irregularly ciliate
\par
   or fimbriate (Sect. {\i Oligostema})
\par
57 Sepals fimbriate or denticulate ................................................... {\b 47. aucheri}
\par
57 Sepals entire or ciliate
\par
58 Sepals unequal, with few or no superficial black glands;
\par
   petals 4-6(-8) mm .................................................................. {\b 50. humifusum}
\par
58 Sepals ± equal, with numerous superficial black glands;
\par
   petals (5-)7-15 mm
\par
59 Leaves on flowering stems linear to linear lanceolate;
\par
   sepals glandular-ciliate ......................................................... {\b 48. linarifolium}
\par
59 Leaves on flowering stems ovate to lanceolate or oblong;
\par
   marginal glands of sepals usually sessile .................................... {\b 49. australe}
\par
51 Capsule with some vesicles or oblique vittae, or almost smooth;
\par
   seeds usually longitudinally ribbed (Sect.{\i  Drosocarpium})
\par
60 Leaves with dense, conspicuous, reticulate venation
\par
61 Capsule with black vesicles ........................................................ {\b 38. richeri}
\par
61 Capsule without black vesicles
\par
62 Capsule with interrupted vittae; leaves with numerous
\par
   superficial glands .................................................................. {\b 36. umbellatum}
\par
62 Capsule with orange vesicles; leaves with few or no
\par
   superficial glands.................................................................... {\b 37. bithynicum}
\par
60 Leaves with lax or indistinct reticulate venation
\par
63 Black glands on petals absent, or confined to margin and apex
\par
64 Glands on capsule prominent
\par
65 Capsule narrowly pyramidal; sepals patent or deflexed in fruit
\par
   ................................................................................................. {\b 35. montbretii}
\par
65 Capsule ovoid; sepals erect in fruit
\par
66 Capsule with dorsal vittae and lateral vesicles; leaves
\par
   with numerous translucent glands ........................................ {\b 34. perfoliatum}
\par
66 Capsule with vesicles only; leaves usually without
\par
   translucent glands ........................................................................ {\b 40. rochelii}
\par
64 Glands on capsule not prominent
\par
67 Sepals eglandular-fimbriate ................................................... {\b 41. barbatum}
\par
67 Sepals entire or glandular-denticulate to -fimbriate
\par
68 Leaves 5-14 mm, smooth; seeds longitudinally grooved .. {\b 43. trichocaulon}
\par
68 Leaves 2-6 mm, papillose or undulate; seeds reticulate-pitted ...{\b 44. kelleri}
\par
63 Black glands dispersed over whole surface of petals
\par
69 Capsule with prominent vesicles .............................................. {\b 39. spruneri}
\par
69 Capsule smooth, or with slightly prominent glands
\par
70 Sepals eglandular-fimbriate .................................................... {\b 41. barbatum}
\par
70 Sepals entire or glandular-denticulate to -fimbriate
\par
71 Petals 13-20 mm; sepals glandular-ciliate to -fimbriate ...... {\b 42. rumelucum}
\par
71 Petals 6-12 mm; sepals entire to glandular-denticulate
\par
72 Leaves 5-14 mm, smooth; seeds longitudinally grooved .. {\b 43. trichocaulon}
\par
72 Leaves 2-6 mm, papillose or undulate; seeds reticulate-pitted ....{\b 44. kelleri}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Sect. EREMANTHE (Spach) Endl. Glabrous shrubs, without black glands. Stems 4-lined. Leaves opposite. Flowers terminal, solitary or rarely 2-3. Sepals entire. Petals and stamens deciduous. Stamen-fascicles and styles 5. Fruit dry. Seeds reticulate, not or slightly carinate.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. H. calycinum} L., {\i Mantissa} 106 (1767). Stems 20-60 cm, erect from creeping rhizomes, usually unbranched. Leaves 4·5-8·5 cm, oblong to elliptical or narrowly ovate, subsessile. Sepals 1-2 cm, markedly unequal, elliptical to suborbicular, persistent. Petals 2·5-4 cm, markedly asymmetrical, sometimes shallowly lobed. Anthers reddish. Capsule c. 20 mm, ovoid, deflexed.{\i  Shady places. Turkey and S.E. Bulgaria; cultivated elsewhere and locally naturalized.} Bu Tu [Br Ga Hb He It Lu Rs (W, K)]. (N. Anatolia.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Sect. ANDROSAEMUM (Duh.) Godron. Glabrous shrubs, without black glands. Stems 2-lined or 4-angled. Leaves opposite. Flowers in few-flowered, terminal cymes. Sepals entire. Petals and stamens deciduous. Stamen-fascicles 5. Styles 3(-4). Fruit more or less fleshy at first, tardily dehiscent. Seeds reticulate, winged.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. H. foliosum} Aiton,{\i  Hort. Kew. }{\b 3}: 104 (1789). Stems 50-100 cm or longer, erect or spreading, 4-angled. Leaves 3·5-6 cm, narrowly ovate to lanceolate, sessile. Sepals 5-6 mm, markedly unequal, ovate to linear-lanceolate, persistent until fruit ripens. Petals (10-)12-18 mm, narrowly elliptical. Stamens equalling or slightly exceeding petals. Styles 1·5-2·5 times as long as ovary. Fruit 8-13 mm, broadly ovoid to subglobose, thin-walled, soon becoming dry.{\i  Damp, shady places in mountains. • Açores.} Az.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 3. H. hircinum} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 784 (1753) ({\i Androsaemum hircinum} (L.) Spach). Stems 30-100(-150) cm, erect, 2-lined or 4-angled. Leaves 2-6·5(-7·5) cm, narrowly lanceolate to broadly ovate, sessile or subsessile, often with goat-like smell when crushed. Sepals (2-)3-6(-7) mm, somewhat unequal, lanceolate to ovate-lanceolate, deciduous. Petals 11-18 mm, oblanceolate to narrowly obovate. Stamens exceeding petals. Styles 3-5 times as long as ovary. Fruit 8-13 mm, ellipsoid to subcylindrical, subcoriaceous.{\i  Damp places, often beside rivers. Mediterranean region; naturalized from gardens in W. Europe}. Bl Co Cr Gr It Sa Si [Br Ga Hb He Hs Lu].
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 4. H. inodorum} Miller,{\i  Gard. Dict.} ed. 8, no. 6 (1768) ({\i H. elatum} Aiton). Intermediate between {\b 3} and {\b 5}. Stems 100-200 cm, erect, 2-lined. Leaves 3·5-9 cm, broadly ovate to oblong-lanceolate, sessile, without goat-like smell when crushed. Sepals 5-8 mm, markedly unequal, narrowly to broadly ovate, persistent at least till fruit ripens. Petals 7-15 mm, obovate. Stamens exceeding petals. Styles 2-2·5 times as long as ovary. Fruit 8-13 mm, ellipsoid to subcylindrical, thin-walled, reddish and succulent at first.{\i  Naturalized from gardens in Britain and France, but perhaps also native in S. France.} [Br *Ga ?It.] ({\i Madeira}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   The plants from natural habitats in France may be hybrids between {\b 3} and {\b 5}, but similar and apparently native plants occur in Madeira in the absence of either of these species.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 5. H. androsaemum} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 784 (1753) ({\i Androsaemum officinale} All.). Stems 30-70 cm, spreading, 2-lined. Leaves (2·5-)4-15(-30) cm, broadly ovate to ovate-oblong, sessile, sometimes amplexicaul, without goat-like smell when crushed. Sepals 8-12(-15) mm, markedly unequal, oblong-ovate to broadly ovate, deflexed and enlarging in fruit, persistent. Petals 6-10(-12) mm, obovate. Stamens shorter than petals, or equalling or slightly exceeding them. Styles shorter than ovary. Fruit 7-10(-12) mm, broadly cylindric-ellipsoid to globose, persistently fleshy, reddish, becoming black, deciduous.{\i  Damp or shady places. W. Europe, and locally in S. Europe eastwards to Turkey}. Be Br Bu Co Ga Hb He Hs It Ju Lu Sa ?Si Tu [Au].
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Sect. PSOROPHYTUM (Spach) Endl. Glabrous shrubs, without black glands. Stem and leaves covered with prominent, resinous vesicles. Leaves opposite. Flowers terminal, solitary. Sepals entire. Petals and stamens deciduous. Stamen-fascicles 5. Styles (4-)5. Fruit a capsule. Seeds reticulate, neither winged nor carinate.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 6. H. balearicum} L.,{\i  Sp. Pl. }783 (1753). Stems 15-120 cm, with ascending branches, 4-angled when young. Leaves (6-)8-10 mm,
\par

\par
263}
\par