{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}
\pard\f0\fs28 ous superficial black dots. Petals with black dots over the whole surface. Capsule without dorsal vittae, but with several round, orange vesicles.{\i  Woods and thickets. Around Istanbul.} Tu. ({\i N. Anatolia, Georgia}.)
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 38. H. richeri} Vill., {\i Prosp. Pl. Dauph.} 44 (1779). Stems 10-50 cm, erect, from a creeping and rooting base. Leaves 10-55 mm, ovate to triangular-ovate or elliptical, sessile, sometimes amplexicaul, entire, with conspicuous reticulate venation, without translucent glands or superficial black glands. Sepals acute or acuminate, subentire or variously ciliate or fimbriate, with numerous superficial black streaks and dots. Petals with numerous black dots over the whole surface. Capsule without dorsal vittae, but with numerous round or elongated, black, and sometimes also orange vesicles.{\i  Meadows and woods. • Mountains of S. & S.C. Europe.} Al Bu Ga Gr He Hs It Ju Rm Rs (W, ?K).
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Sepals acute, denticulate to ciliate; petals (10-)15-25 mm;
\par  leaves usually obtuse, amplexicaul ...................................... ({\b b}) subsp. {\b burseri}
\par 1 Sepals acuminate, subentire to fimbriate; petals 10-17 mm;
\par  leaves rarely amplexicaul
\par 2 Sepals fimbriate; leaves usually subacute ........................... ({\b a}) subsp. {\b richeri}
\par 2 Sepals ciliate to subentire; leaves usually obtuse ......... ({\b c}) subsp. {\b grisebachii}
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b richeri}: 2n = 14.{\i  S.W. & C. Alps, Jura, Appennini.}
\par
\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b burseri} (DC.) Nyman, {\i Consp. }132 (1878) ({\i H. burseri} (DC.) Spach):{\i  Pyrenees, Cordillera Cantábrica}.
\par
\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b c}) Subsp. {\b grisebachii} (Boiss.) Nyman, {\i loc. cit.} (1878) ({\i H. alpigenum }Kit., {\i H. alpinum} Waldst. & Kit., non Vill., {\i H. balcanicum} Velen., {\i H. grisebachii} Boiss.,{\i  H. transsilvanicum} Celak., {\i H. richeri} subsp. {\i alpigenum} (Kit.) E. Schmid): {\i S.E. Alps, Balkan peninsula; E. & S. Carpathians}.
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28  Subsp. {\i grisebachii} is variable, especially in habit, form and texture of leaves and form of sepals, but none of the local populations of distinct facies is worthy of taxonomic recognition if the variation of the subspecies throughout its range is considered.
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 39. H. spruneri} Boiss., {\i Diagn. Pl. Or. Nov. }{\b 2}({\b 8}): 112 (1849) ({\i H. perfoliatum }sensu Hayek pro parte, non L.). Stems 30-60 cm, erect, sometimes rooting at the base. Leaves 20-40(-60) mm, triangular-lanceolate or narrowly oblong, sessile, the uppermost sometimes with glandular auricles or with margin black-glandular-ciliate or denticulate. Sepals acute, black-glandular-ciliate and with numerous superficial black dots. Petals with black dots scattered over the whole surface. Capsule without dorsal vittae, but with numerous round, orange vesicles.{\i  Meadows and shady places. • W. part of Balkan peninsula, Istra, S.E. Italy.} Al Gr It Ju.
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 40. H. rochelii} Griseb. & Schenk, {\i Arch. Naturgesch.} ({\i Berlin}) {\b 18}: 299 (1852) ({\i H. boissieri} Petrovic, {\i H. pseudotenellum }Vandas). Stems 15-35(-50) cm, erect or decumbent. Leaves (20-)25-50 mm, triangular-lanceolate to linear, usually amplexicaul. Sepals acute to obtuse, black-glandular-ciliate or -fimbriate, usually with superficial black glands. Petals sometimes with a few superficial black dots. Capsule without dorsal vittae, but with numerous round or elongated, orange vesicles.{\i  Rocky pastures. • S.W. & C. Bulgaria, N.E. Jugoslavia, S.W. Romania.} Bu Ju Rm.
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 41. H. barbatum} Jacq.,{\i  Fl. Austr. }{\b 3}: 33 (1775). Stems 10-45 cm, erect or decumbent. Leaves 6-40 mm, lanceolate to linear-lanceolate or elliptic-oblong, sessile or shortly petiolate, entire. Sepals acute, eglandular-fimbriate, with numerous superficial black dots or streaks. Petals usually with superficial black dots, scattered over the whole surface or near the apex only. Capsule without or with interrupted dorsal vittae, with round or elongated, orange vesicles or almost smooth.{\i  Meadows and stony places. • Balkan peninsula, extending to Austria and S. Italy.} Al Au Bu Gr Hu It Ju.
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 42. H. rumeliacum} Boiss., {\i Diagn. Pl. Or. Nov.}{\b  2}({\b 8}): 113 (1849). Stems 5-40 cm, erect or decumbent, branching but rarely rooting at the base. Leaves 6-35 mm, ovate-lanceolate or oblong to linear, sessile or shortly petiolate, the uppermost ones sometimes black-glandular-ciliate. Sepals acute, black-glandular-fimbriate or -ciliate and with numerous superficial black dots or streaks. Petals with black dots scattered over the whole surface. Capsule without dorsal vittae, with faint, round or elongated vesicles or almost smooth.{\i  Calcareous, stony places. • Balkan peninsula; one station in S. Romania}. Al Bu Gr Ju Rm.
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28  Plants from the south-western part of the range are shorter and more decumbent, and with broader leaves and sepals; they have been distinguished as{\b  H. apollinis} Boiss. & Heldr. in Boiss.,{\i  Diagn. Pl. Or. Nov.}{\b  3}({\b 1}): 105 (1853), but show continuous intergradation with typical plants.
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 43. H. trichocaulon} Boiss. & Heldr. in Boiss.,{\i  Diagn. Pl. Or. Nov.}{\b  2}({\b 8}): 110 (1849). Stems 5-25(-45) cm, procumbent or ascending, slender, sometimes rooting at the base. Leaves 5-11(-14) mm, ovate-oblong to linear, sessile or shortly petiolate, entire. Sepals obtuse, black-glandular-denticulate to entire; sepals and petals sometimes with black dots or streaks scattered over the whole surface. Capsule sometimes with a few dorsal vittae, and with faint, round elongated vesicles or almost smooth. •{\i  W. & C. Kriti.} Cr.
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 44. H. kelleri} Bald.,{\i  Malpighia}{\b  9}: 67 (1895). Stems 1-5(-10) cm, procumbent, branching and rooting. Leaves 2-4(-6) mm, oblong or elliptical, petiolate, entire, slightly papillose or almost smooth. Sepals obtuse to subacute, black-glandular denticulate to subentire, with or without superficial black dots. Petals with a few superficial black dots. Capsule with dorsal vittae and round or elongated, orange vesicles.{\i  W. Kriti.} Cr.
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28 Perhaps not specifically distinct from {\b 43}.
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28  Sect. ORIGANIFOLIUM Stefanov. Perennial herbs. Black glands present on stem, leaves, sepals, petals and anthers. Stem 2-lined. Leaves with intramarginal and often superficial black glands. Flowers in pyramidal to cylindrical panicles. Petals and stamens persistent. Stamen-fascicles 3. Styles 3. Capsule with dorsal vittae and lateral vesicles. Seeds rugulose, or with short, transverse ridges superimposed on faint, longitudinal ribs.
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 45. H. aviculariifolium} Jaub. & Spach,{\i  Ill. Pl. Or. }{\b 1}: 59 (1842). Stems 15-35(-45) cm, erect or decumbent at the base, usually finely papillose. Leaves 9-23 mm, oblong or oblanceolate, densely papillose-puberulent. Sepals obtuse, black-glandular-ciliate and with superficial black dots. Petals with black dots scattered over the whole surface.{\i  Stony places. Turkey-in-Europe} ({\i  W. of Istanbul}). Tu. ({\i Anatolia}.)
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28  The European plants belong to subsp. {\b byzantinum} (Aznav.) N.K.B. Robson,{\i  Feddes Repert.}{\b  74}: 23 (1967) ({\i H. byzantinum} Aznav.). Other subspecies have glabrous stems and often glabrous leaves.
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28  Sect. THASIA Boiss. Glabrous perennial herbs. Black glands present on stem, leaves, sepals, petals and anthers. Stem 2-lined. Leaves with only intramarginal black glands. Flowers in corymbose cymes. Petals and stamens persistent. Stamen-fascicles 5. Styles 5. Capsule with longitudinal vittae. Seeds reticulate-pitted.
\par
\par 267}
\par