{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 ovate to narrowly oblong, undulate, coriaceous. Bracteoles appressed to calyx. Flowers 1·5-4 cm in diameter. Sepals suborbicular, patent in fruit. Capsule ovoid-pyramidal.{\i  Dry woods and rocky places. • Islas Baleares. }Bl [It].
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Sect. TRIADENIA (Spach) R. Keller. Dwarf, glabrous, microphyllous shrubs, without black glands. Leaves opposite. Flowers terminating long or short shoots, heterostylous. Sepals entire. Petals with entire, ligulate, nectariferous appendage. Stamen fascicles 3, with filaments united for more than ½ their length, alternating with 3 fleshy fasciclodes. Fruit dry. Seeds slightly carinate, with fleshy caruncle.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 7. H. aciferum} (W. Greuter) N.K.B. Robson,{\i  Feddes Repert. }{\b 74}: 23 (1967) ({\i Elodes acifera} W. Greuter). Low, procumbent shrub. Leaves 5-12 mm, narrowly linear-spathulate, coriaceous, somewhat glaucous, not imbricate. Flowers (1-)3, pedicellate. Sepals suberect, elliptical. Petals c. 9 mm, deciduous. Stamens persistent. Ovary with 2 ovules in each loculus. {\i Calcareous rocks near the sea. • S.W. Kriti.} Cr.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 8. H. aegypticum} L.,{\i  Sp. Pl.} 784 (1753) ({\i Triadenia maritima} (Sieber) Boiss.). Low, spreading shrub. Leaves 3-10 mm, elliptical to narrowly oblong, coriaceous, glaucous, often crowded and imbricate. Flowers solitary, sessile or subsessile. Sepals erect, oblong. Petals 8-14 mm, persistent. Stamens persistent. Ovary with numerous ovules in each loculus.{\i  Cliffs and rocks near the sea. Islands of C. & E. Mediterranean from Sardegna to Kriti.} Cr Gr Sa Si. ({\i N. Africa}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Sect. CORIDIUM Spach. Shrubs or perennial herbs, glabrous or with papillose leaves. Black glands confined to sepals, or rarely absent. Leaves whorled, usually linear; margins revolute. Flowers in cymes, rarely solitary. Sepals usually with glandular margin. Stamen-fascicles 3. Styles 3. Capsule with longitudinal vittae or oblique vesicles. Seeds papillose or rugulose.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 9. H. empetrifolium} Willd., {\i Sp. Pl. }{\b 3}: 1452 (1802). Shrub. Stems up to 50 cm, erect and caespitose with strict branching, or procumbent, straggling and rooting. Leaves 2-12 mm, in whorls of 3, glabrous. Flowers in elongated panicles or simple cymes, or solitary. Sepals with sessile, marginal black glands. Petals and stamens deciduous. Capsule with oblique vesicles.{\i  Rocky places. Greece and Aegean region; one station in N. Albania.} Al Cr Gr.
\par

\par
 
\pard\f0\fs28   {\b 10. H. amblycalyx} Coust. & Gand.,{\i  Bull. Soc. Bot. Fr.}{\b  63}: 14 (1916). Like {\b 9} but with leaves in whorls of 4 and sepals with eglandular margin.{\i  Rocky places. E. Kriti.} Cr.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 11. H. coris} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 787 (1753). Low shrub, or perennial herb with woody base. Stems 10-45 cm, erect or ascending from creeping and rooting base. Leaves 4-18 mm, in whorls of 4 (rarely 3), glabrous. Flowers in elongated or pyramidal panicles, rarely solitary. Sepals glandular-denticulate, or with sessile, marginal black glands. Petals and stamens persistent. Capsule with longitudinal and oblique, swollen vittae.{\i  Sunny, calcareous rocks. • N. & C. Italy, Switzerland, S.E. France.} Ga He It.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 12. H. ericoides} L., {\i Sp. Pl. }785 (1753). Dwarf shrub. Stems 2-12(-25) cm, erect, with strict branching and short internodes. Leaves 1·5-3·5 mm, in whorls of 4, densely papillose. Flowers in corymbs or panicles. Sepals shortly glandular-ciliate or entire. Petals and stamens persistent. Capsule with narrow, longitudinal vittae.{\i  Sunny, calcareous rocks. E. & S.E. Spain.} Hs.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Sect. HAPLOPHYLLOIDES Stefanov. Glabrous dwarf shrubs. Black glands confined to leaf-apex and sepal- and petal-margins. Stem 4-angled. Leaves opposite, subcoriaceous. Flowers few, in cymes. Petals and stamens persistent. Stamen-fascicles and styles 3. Capsule with longitudinal vittae. Seeds papillose.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 13. H. haplophylloides} Halácsy & Bald.,{\i  Verh. Zool.-Bot. Ges. Wien }{\b 42}: 576 (1893). Stems up to 25 cm, straggling, branching and rooting at the base. Leaves 12-28 mm, oblong-linear to elliptic-linear, with apical black gland. Cymes 3- to 5-flowered. Sepals black-glandular-ciliate or -denticulate. Petals with small, sessile, marginal black glands.{\i  Mountain woods and rocks. • S. Albania.} Al.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Sect. TAENIOCARPIUM Jaub. & Spach. Perennial herbs, sometimes woody at the base. Black glands confined to sepal- and petal-margins and sometimes leaf-apex. Stems terete or 2-lined, or very rarely 4-angled. Flowers in cymes or panicles. Petals and stamens persistent. Petals not clawed; pellucid glands elongated (rarely absent). Stamen-fascicles and styles 3. Capsule with longitudinal vittae. Seeds rugulose to papillose.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 14. H. hirsutum} L.,{\i  Sp. Pl.} 786 (1753). Stems 35-110 cm, erect from creeping and rooting base, pubescent. Leaves (20-)25-55(-60) mm, oblong to elliptical or lanceolate, without apical gland, strigose-pubescent. Inflorescence cylindrical. Sepals black-glandular-denticulate or -ciliate. Petals sometimes red-veined. Anthers yellow. 2n = 18. {\i Woods, riverbanks and roadsides. Most of Europe except the north-east and the extreme south.} Al Au Be Br Bu Cz Da Fe Ga Ge Gr Hb He Ho Hs Hu It Ju No Po Rm Rs (B, C, W, K, E) Su.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b  H. confertum} Choisy,{\i  Prodr. Monogr. Hypér.} 55 (1821), from S.W. Asia, has once been recorded from Turkey-in-Europe. It is like {\b 14}, but with much smaller leaves and fimbriate sepals.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 15. H. linarioides} Bosse, {\i Allgem. Gartenz.}{\b  3}: 99 (1835) ({\i H. alpestre} Steven, {\i H. repens} auct., non L.). Stems (5-)8-17(-30) cm, erect from creeping and rooting base, glabrous. Leaves on main stem (5-)8-14 mm, linear to narrowly elliptical, without apical gland, glabrous, usually with deflexed margin; leaves on axillary shoots smaller and crowded. Inflorescence subspicate, or with lowest branches somewhat elongated. Sepals with or without marginal black glands. Petals often red-tinged or red-veined. Anthers yellow. {\i Mountain rocks and grassland. C. part of Balkan peninsula; Krym.} Bu Gr Ju Rs (K).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 16. H. pulchrum} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 786 (1753). Stems (3-)10-90 cm, erect or ascending, glabrous. Leaves on main stem 6-20 mm, broadly ovate to oblong, cordate-amplexicaul, without apical gland, glabrous, with scarcely deflexed margin; leaves on axillary shoots smaller, oblong, petiolate. Inflorescence narrowly pyramidal or narrowly cylindrical. Sepals with marginal black glands sessile or shortly stalked. Petals red-tinged. Anthers orange to reddish-pink. 2n = 18.{\i  Woods and heaths, usually on acid soil. • N. W. Europe, extending locally to S. W. Poland, Switzerland and C. Portugal, and possibly to N. W. Jugoslavia and S.E. Italy}. ?Au Be Br Cz Da Fa Ga Ge Hb He Ho Hs It ?Ju Lu No Po Su.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Dwarf, few-flowered plants (f.{\i  procumbens} Rostrup) occur in exposed places in extreme N.W. Europe. This variant is said to breed true, but a complete series of intermediates links it with the typical plant.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 17. H. nummularium} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 787 (1753). Stems 8-30 cm, erect to diffuse, creeping and rooting at the base, glabrous.
\par

\par
264}
\par