{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 and carpels numerous; styles protruding through the orifice of a disc, sometimes forming a short column; ovules 1. Fruit a pseudocarp of numerous achenes enclosed in the hypanthium.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Most species occur in scrub, woodland and hedges.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 The description of leaves always refers to the best-developed leaves on the flowering stems.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 The armature may include prickles, acicles (slender, needle like structures), setae, stipitate glands and eglandular hairs.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 The innumerable cultivars of {\i Rosa} to be found in European gardens (the great majority {\i flore pleno}) are mostly complex hybrids, of which the most important ancestors are{\b  4},{\b  6} and {\b 14}, described below, and also {\i R. chinensis} Jacq., {\i R. odorata} var. {\i gigantea} (Collett ex Crepin) Rehder & E. H. Wilson,{\i  R. multiflora }Thunb., {\i R. wichuraiana} Crepin, all from E. Asia (though {\i R. chinensis} is not known in the wild state). Some modern garden roses, such as the 'hybrid polyanthas', include all seven of these species in their ancestry. For the origin of garden roses see C. C. Hurst,{\i  Jour. Roy. Hort. Soc. }{\b 66}: 73-82, 242-50, 282-9 (1941), and A. P. Wylie, {\i Jour. Roy. Hort. Soc. }{\b 79}: 555-71 (1954);{\b  80}: 8-24, 77-87 (1955).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 In addition to these hybrids, and to the species described below, many species, mostly from E. Asia, are cultivated in gardens, and some are perhaps becoming naturalized locally. Two hybrids are cultivated on a field scale in Bulgaria and S. France for essential oil from their petals: these are{\b  R}. ×{\b  bifera} (Poiret) Pers., {\i Syn. Pl.}{\b  2}: 48 (1806) ({\i R. damascena} auct., non Miller), which is probably a hybrid between {\b 4} and {\b 14} and {\b R.} × {\b alba} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 492 (1753), whose parentage is uncertain; it is perhaps a complex hybrid between {\b 2}, {\b 14} and a white-flowered member of Sect. {\i Caninae}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Literature: F. Crepin, {\i Bull. Soc. Bot. Belg.}{\b  8-21} (1869-82). H. Christ, {\i Rosén der Schweiz.} Basel. 1873. A. Déséglise, {\i Bull. Soc. Bot. Belg.}{\b  15}: 176-405, 491-602 (1876). V. Borbás, {\i Primitiae Monographiae Rosarum Imperii Hungarici.} Budapest. 1880. J. Schwertschläger, {\i Die Rosén des südlichen and mittleren Frankenjura.} München. 1910. E. Willmott, {\i The genus} Rosa. London. 1910-14. G. Täckholm, {\i Acta Horti Berg.}{\b  7}: 97-381 (1922). G. A. Boulenger, {\i Bull. Jard. Bot. Bruxelles}{\b  10} (1924); 12 (1932). A. H. Wolley-Dod,{\i  Jour. Bot.} ({\i London}){\b  68}-{\b  69} (Suppl.): 1-111 (1930-1). R. Keller,{\i  Synopsis Rosarum spontanearum Europae mediae.} Zürich. 1931. C. vicioso,{\i  Estudios sobre el Genero} 'Rosa'{\i  en España.} Ed. 2. Madrid. 1964.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Styles connate in a column
\par
2 Stylar column shorter than the inner stamens; styles some
\par
  times becoming free in fruit .......................................................... {\b 15. stylosa}
\par
2 Stylar column at least as long as the inner stamens; styles not
\par
  becoming free in fruit
\par
3 Inflorescence with 10-20 flowers
\par
4 Stylar column glabrous .............................................................. {\b 3. phoenicia}
\par
4 Stylar column hairy .................................................................... {\b 4. moschata}
\par
3 Flowers solitary or inflorescence with 2-7 flowers
\par
5 Leaves coriaceous, evergreen; stylar column usually hairy ..{\b 1. sempervirens}
\par
5 Leaves herbaceous, deciduous; stylar column glabrous
\par
6 Erect shrub; stems arching; prickles very stout with very
\par
  broad bases .................................................................................... {\b 15. stylosa}
\par
6 Trailing shrub; stems weak; prickles ± slender ............................ {\b 2. arvensis}
\par
1 Styles free
\par
7 Sepals ± entire
\par
8 Leaflets glabrous
\par
9 Leaflets simply serrate
\par
10 Stems with long prickles mixed with many short prickles
\par
   and acicles ................................................................................ {\b 5. pimpinella}
\par
10 Stems without acicles
\par
11 Pedicels glandular-hispid ...................................................... {\b 13. virginiana}
\par
11 Pedicels glabrous .......................................................................... {\b 9. glauca}
\par
9  Leaflets biserrate or compound serrate
\par
12 Petals yellow; fruit c. 10 mm globose .......................................... {\b 6. foetida}
\par
12 Petals deep purplish-pink; fruit 15-25 mm, ovoid to 
\par
   elongate-pyriform, rarely globose ........................................... {\b 12. pendulina} 
\par
8  Leaflets pubescent, at least beneath
\par
13 Petals yellow ................................................................................ {\b 6. foetida} 
\par
13 Petals white, pink or purplish-pink
\par
14 Young stems, prickles and lower surface of the leaflets 
\par
   densely tomentose; leaves thick, rugose ....................................... {\b 10. rugosa} 
\par
14 Young stems and prickles glabrous, the lower surface of the 
\par
   leaflets ± sparsely hairy; leaves not rugose 
\par
15 Pedicels glandular-hispid 
\par
16 Leaflets biserrate or compound-serrate ................................. {\b 12. pendulina}
\par
16 Leaflets simply serrate 
\par
17 Flowering stems usually densely covered with slender prickles 
\par
   or acicles; sepals erect and persistent after anthesis .................. {\b 7. acicularis}
\par
17 Flowering stems usually without acicles; sepals patent and 
\par
   deciduous after anthesis .......................................................... {\b 13. virginiana} 
\par
15 Pedicels glabrous 
\par
18 Flowering stems usually densely covered with slender prickles 
\par
   or acicles; fruit ovoid, with a distinct neck below the disc ........ {\b 7. acicularis} 
\par
18 Flowering stems without acicles; fruit usually globose 
\par
19 Stems usually with a pair of curved prickles at the nodes ........... {\b 8. majalis}
\par
19 Stems without paired prickles at nodes ...................................... {\b 11. blanda}
\par
7  Outer 3 sepals distinctly pinnatifid or lobed
\par
20 Leaflets coriaceous; petals (25-)30-45 mm ................................ {\b 14. gallica}
\par
20 Leaflets not coriaceous; petals 8-25(-30) mm 
\par
21 Leaflets glabrous or subglabrous, eglandular or very sparsely 
\par
   glandular 
\par
22 Leaflets bluish-green or purplish; young stems pruinose 
\par
23 Hypanthium and pedicels densely stipitate-glandular ............. {\b 17. montana}
\par
23 Hypanthium glabrous; pedicels rarely sparsely stipitate-glandular
\par
24 Sepals 2-3 mm wide; prickles sparse, rather slender, curved or 
\par
   straight, without stout bases ............................................................ {\b 9. glauca} 
\par
24 Sepals 3-5 mm wide; prickles stout, curved or hooked, usually 
\par
   with stout bases ......................................................... ({\b 18-31}). {\b canina} group 
\par
22 Leaflets green; young stems not pruinose 
\par
25 Pedicels glabrous ..................................................... ({\b 18-31}).{\b  canina} group 
\par
25 Pedicels stipitate-glandular 
\par
26 Sepals erect and persistent after anthesis ................................. {\b 17. montana}
\par
26 Sepals deflexed and deciduous after anthesis
\par
27 Leaflets not coriaceous; prickles usually hooked or curved
\par
   ................................................................................... ({\b 18-31}). {\b canina} group
\par
27 Leaflets subcoriaceous; prickles usually straight or slightly 
\par
   curved ....................................................................................... {\b 16. jundzillii}
\par
21 Leaflets distinctly hairy or glandular or both
\par
28 Leaflets coriaceous; petals(25-)30-45 mm ............................... {\b 14. gallica}
\par
28 Leaflets not coriaceous; petals 8-25(-30) mm 
\par
29 Leaflets ± densely viscid-glandular beneath 
\par
30 Leaflets glabrous or somewhat pubescent beneath, smelling of 
\par
   apples .................................................................. ({\b 39-47}).{\b  rubiginosa} group 
\par
30 Leaflets tomentose beneath, with a resinous smell
\par
   .............................................................................. ({\b 32-38}).{\b  tomentosa} group 
\par
29 Leaflets eglandular beneath or with glands confined to main veins
\par
31 Prickles straight or slightly curved; leaflets always hairy and 
\par
   usually very tomentose, with a resinous smell .... ({\b 32-38}).{\b  tomentosa }group 
\par
31 Prickles usually curved or hooked; leaflets glabrous or 
\par
   pubescent, very rarely tomentose and if tomentose then prickles 
\par
   distinctly curved or hooked and hypanthium glabrous; leaflets 
\par
   usually not scented .................................................... ({\b 18-31}).{\b  canina} group
\par

\par
26}
\par