{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 108.             ELAEAGNACEAE}
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc Edit. †T.G. Tutin.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Trees or shrubs with peltate or stellate, scale-like hairs. Leaves entire. Flowers perigynous, apetalous. Hypanthium 2- or 4-lobed; lobes valvate; stamens as many as sepals and alternating with them, or twice as many; ovary superior, unilocular; ovule solitary, basal. Fruit drupe-like, the dry fruit being surrounded by the fleshy hypanthium.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 Dioecious; calyx 2-lobed ............................................................ {\b 1. Hippophae}
\par
Polygamous; calyx 4-lobed ..........................................................{\b  2. Elaeagnus}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 1.                 Hippophae}                       L.
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc By †T.G. Tutin.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Deciduous. Dioecious. Flowers borne on the previous year's growth. Lower male flowers sessile; hypanthium shorter than the 2 lobes; stamens 4. All female flowers pedicellate; hypanthium longer than lobes.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. H. rhamnoides} L.,{\i  Sp. Pl. }1023 (1753). Much-branched, spiny shrub or small tree up to 11 m, suckering freely. Twigs covered with silvery scales. Leaves 1-6 × 0·3-1 cm, linear-lanceolate, covered with silvery or ferruginous scales. Flowers c. 3 mm, appearing before the leaves. Fruit 6-8 mm, subglobose or ovoid, orange. 2n = 24.{\i  On stable dunes and sea-cliffs, and on river-gravel and alluvium in mountain regions. Native throughout a considerable part of Europe, from} c. 68°{\i  N. in Norway to N. Spain, C. Italy and Bulgaria, and from N.W. France to Finland and Moldavia, but local and absent from wide areas. Often planted for ornament, or to stabilize sand or gravel, and naturalized in many places. }Au Be Br Bu Cz Da Fe Ga Ge He Ho Hs Hu It Ju No Po Rm Rs (B, W) Su [Hb Rs (N, C, E)].
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 2.                  Elaeagnus}                        L.
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc By †T.G. Tutin. 
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Flowers shortly pedicellate, all hermaphrodite, or hermaphrodite and male on the same plant, borne on the current year's growth. Hypanthium campanulate or tubular, 4-lobed. Stamens 4.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. E. angustifolia} L.,{\i  Sp. Pl.} 121 (1753). More or less spiny shrub or small tree up to 7 m. Twigs covered with silvery scales. Leaves 4-8 × 1-2·5 cm, oblong- or linear-lanceolate, green above, covered with silvery scales beneath. Flowers 8-10 mm, appearing with the leaves. Fruit 10-20 mm, ellipsoid, succulent, yellow, covered with silvery scales.{\i  Planted for ornament and widely naturalized in S. Europe, northwards to Czechoslovakia and C. Russia.} [Al Au Bu Cr Cz Ga Gr Hs Hu It Rm Rs (B, C, W, K, E).] ({\i Temperate Asia}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b E. commutata} Bernh., ex. Rydb.,{\i  Fl. Rocky Mount.} 582 (1918) ({\i E. argentea} Pursh, non Moench) from North America, is often confused with {\b 1}, but differs from it in having brown twigs and dry, mealy fruits. It is cultivated and perhaps locally naturalized.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs36\qc GUTTIFERALES
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 109.         GUTTIFERAE} ({\b CLUSIACEAE})
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc Edit. D.A. Webb.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Shrubs or herbs, with translucent glands containing essential oils and sometimes red or black glands containing hypericin. Leaves simple, opposite, or rarely in whorls of 3-4. Flowers actinomorphic. Sepals imbricate in bud. Petals free, contorted in bud. Stamens in fascicles or apparently indefinite. Ovary superior. Placentation axile or parietal. Seeds without endosperm.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 1.                Hypericum}                     L.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  (Incl.{\i  Elodes }Adanson and {\i Triadenia} Spach)
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc By N.K.B. Robson.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Flowers hermaphrodite. Sepals (4-)5. Petals (4-)5, yellow, sometimes tinged with red. Stamens in 3 or 5 fascicles of (1-)3 to c. 125, sometimes alternating with sterile fascicles ({\i fasciclodes}), or in 5 irregular groups; fascicles, if 5, antepetalous; if 3, one antepetalous and two (larger) antesepalous. Ovary (2-)3- to 5-locular or partly or completely 1-locular; ovules numerous. Styles (2-)3-5, free, slender. Fruit a septicidal capsule, rarely fleshy and more or less indehiscent.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Glands are designated{\i  marginal} if they protrude sufficiently to interrupt the line of the margin of a leaf, sepal or petal,{\i  intramarginal} if they abut on the margin but do not interrupt its line, superficial if they are quite clear of the margin.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  In many species the ovary and capsule have glandular streaks or patches on the wall. These are referred to as{\i  vittae} if flat or slightly swollen, and as {\i vesicles} if conspicuously swollen. vittae on or near the midrib of a carpel are described as dorsal.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Many European species are cultivated in gardens, as also are several species and hybrids of large-flowered shrubs from Asia belonging to the section{\i  Norysca} (Spach) Endl.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Literature: B. Stefanov, {\i God. Sof. Univ.} ({\i Agron.-Les. Fak.}) {\b 10}: 19-58 (1932); {\b 11}: 139-186 (1933); {\b 12}: 69-100 (1934).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Plant without red or black glands on leaves, sepals, petals or anthers
\par
2 Leaves in whorls of 3-4
\par
3 Petals and stamens deciduous; leaves smooth ...................... {\b 10. amblycalyx}
\par
3 Petals and stamens persistent; leaves papillose ......................... {\b 12. ericoides}
\par
2 Leaves opposite
\par
4 Broad-leaved shrub; petals and stamens deciduous
\par
5 stems and leaves covered with glandular vesicles ................... {\b 6. balearicum}
\par
5 stems and leaves smooth
\par
6 Styles 5; anthers reddish (Sect.{\i  Eremanthe}) ......................... {\b 1. calycinum}
\par
6 Styles 3(-4): anthers yellow (Sect. {\i Androsaemum})
\par
7 Petals shorter than sepals; ripe fruit black and succulent .... {\b 5. androsaemum}
\par
7 Petals longer than sepals; ripe fruit red or green, scarcely succulent
\par
8 Sepals shrivelling and falling before fruit ripens;
\par
  foliage often goat-scented ............................................................ {\b 3. hircinum}
\par
8 Sepals persistent at least until fruit ripens;
\par
  foliage not goat-scented
\par
9 Sepals acute or cuspidate; fruit subglobose ................................ {\b 2. foliosum}
\par
9 Sepals obtuse or subacute; fruit ellipsoid or narrowly ovoid ..... {\b 4. inodorum}
\par
4 Herb or microphyllous shrub; stamens and usually petals persistent
\par
10 Microphyllous shrub; stamens in 3 fascicles (Sect.{\i  Triadenia})
\par

\par
261}
\par