{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 shortly petiolate; inflorescence with fewer (1-7) flowers.{\i  Stony places in shade. • N. Aegean region }({\i Pangaion to Athos and Samothraki}). Gr.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 27. H. atomarium} Boiss.,{\i  Diagn. Pl. Or. Nov. }{\b 2}({\b 8}): 114 (1849). Stems 15-75 cm, erect or ascending, not rooting, shortly pubescent. Leaves 15-45(-55) mm, ovate to oblong or elliptical, sessile, shortly pubescent. Inflorescence cylindrical, rarely corymbose, relatively lax, glabrous. Bracts sometimes with long glandular cilia at the base but not auriculate. Sepals black-glandular-denticulate, with superficial black dots. Petals (8-)9-12 mm, sometimes with a few superficial black glands.{\i  Damp, shady places. S. Greece} ({\i Peloponnisos}). Gr. ({\i E. Aegean region, W. Anatolia}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 28. H. cuisinii} W. Barbey,{\i  Bull. Soc. Vaud. Sci. Nat. }{\b 21}: 220 (1886). Stems 4-15(-28) cm, diffuse or decumbent, rooting at the base, shortly pubescent or glabrous. Leaves 2-15 mm, elliptical to oblong or obovate, usually petiolate, shortly pubescent to glabrous. Inflorescence subcorymbose, lax, glabrous. Bracts not auriculate. Sepals black-glandular-denticulate and with superficial black dots or streaks. Petals 5-7(-8) mm, with superficial black glands. {\i Fissures of calcareous rocks. Karpathos, Kasos. }Cr.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 29. H. tomentosum} L.,{\i  Sp. Pl.} 786 (1753). Stems 10-90 cm, decumbent, rooting at the base, tomentose. Leaves 5-22 mm, oblong to ovate, hirsute to tomentose or crispate-pubescent. Inflorescence corymbose to cylindrical, becoming elongate-monochasial, tomentose or crispate-pubescent. Bracts not auriculate. Sepals 3-6 mm, ovate or elliptical to broadly lanceolate, acute to acuminate or rarely aristate, hirsute or tomentose, shortly glandular-ciliate and usually with an apical gland. Petals 6-11 mm, with marginal black glands.{\i  Damp places. S.W. Europe.} Bl ?Co Ga Hs It Lu Sa.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 30. H. pubescens} Boiss.,{\i  Elenchus }26 (1838). Like {\b 29} but with sepals 5-10 mm, lanceolate, aristate, entire, with sessile, marginal black glands and without apical gland; petals 9-15 mm. {\i S. Portugal, S. Spain; Sicilia, Malta.} Hs Lu ?Sa Si.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Plants intermediate between {\b 29} and {\b 30} are found in S. & E. Spain. Their status is uncertain.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 31. H. caprifolium} Boiss., {\i Elenchus }26 (1838). Stems 20-100 cm, erect or ascending from a creeping, rooting and branching base, crispate-pubescent. Leaves (15-)20-50 mm, ovate to oblong, completely perfoliate, crispate-pubescent. Inflorescence corymbose to broadly pyramidal, usually dense, glabrous. Bracts sometimes auriculate. Sepals lanceolate, aristate, black-glandular-ciliate and with superficial black glands. Petals with marginal black glands.{\i  Damp, shady places. S.E. Spain.} Hs.
\par

\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Sect. ELODES (Adanson) Koch. Perennial herbs, tomentose to crispate-pubescent, rarely glabrous. Red glands present on sepals and bracts. Flowers in pseudaxillary cymes. Petals and stamens persistent. Petals with 3-fid, ligulate, nectariferous .appendage. Stamen-fascicles 3, with filaments united for more than ½ their length, alternating with 3 scale-like fasciclodes. Styles 3. Ovary with 3 parietal placentae. Capsule with longitudinal vittae. Seeds longitudinally ribbed, with transverse striation.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 32. H. elodes} L.,{\i  Amoen. Acad.}{\b  4}: 105 (1759) ({\i H. helodes} auct., {\i H. palustre} Salisb., {\i Elodes palustris} Spach). Stem terete, erect from a creeping and rooting base, often with swollen internodes. Leaves 5-30 mm, orbicular to broadly ovate or broadly elliptical. Sepals erect, shortly red-glandular-ciliate. Corolla pseudo-tubular; petals eglandular. 2n = 32.{\i  Damp mud or shallow water. • W. Europe, northwards to} 57° 30' {\i in Scotland, and extending locally eastwards to E. Germany and C. Italy.} ?Au Az Be Br Ga Ge Hb Ho Hs It Lu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Sect. DROSOCARPIUM Spach. Perennial herbs, usually glabrous and somewhat glaucous. Black glands present on leaves, sepals, petals, anthers, and sometimes ovary. Leaves usually with intramarginal and often superficial black glands. Flowers in subcorymbose or broadly pyramidal panicles, rarely solitary. Petals and stamens persistent. Stamen-fascicles 3(-5). Styles 3(-5). Capsule with interrupted lateral vittae or vesicles, sometimes with dorsal vittae. Seeds usually as in Sect.{\i  Elodes}. 
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 33. H. vesiculosum} Griseb., {\i Spicil. Fl. Rumel.}{\b  1}: 226 (1843). Stems 30-70 cm, erect. Leaves 12-25 mm, ovate, amplexicaul, the lower with margin and auricles orange-glandular-denticulate, all without intramarginal but occasionally with superficial black glands. Sepals obtuse, shortly glandular- or eglandular-ciliate or-denticulate, and with superficial black streaks. Petals with black glandular streaks over the whole surface. Capsule with numerous elongated, orange vesicles.{\i  Mountain woods. • Greece.} Gr.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 34. H. perfoliatum} L.,{\i  Syst. Nat. }ed. 12,{\b  2}: 510 (1767) ({\i H. ciliatum} Lam.). Stems (15-)25-75 cm, erect or decumbent at the base. Leaves 13-60 mm, ovate to triangular-lanceolate or linear-lanceolate, usually amplexicaul. Sepals obtuse or subacute, densely and irregularly black-glandular-denticulate or -ciliate and with numerous superficial black streaks and dots. Petals sometimes with superficial black dots or streaks towards the apex. Capsule with dorsal vittae and lateral orange vesicles. {\i Damp meadows or shady places among rocks. Mediterranean region, C. & S. Portugal.} Bl ?Bu Co Cr Ga Gr Hs It Ju Lu Sa Si?Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Many records of this species from S.E. Europe are errors for {\b 35} or {\b 39}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 35. H. montbretii} Spach, {\i Hist. Vég.} ({\i Phan}.){\b  5}: 395 (1836) ({\i H. cassium} Boiss.). Stems 15-60 cm, erect. Leaves 15-50 mm, ovate to oblong, usually amplexicaul, often black-glandular-ciliate. Sepals acute or acuminate, rather sparsely black-glandular-ciliate and with few or no superficial black dots. Petals sometimes with subapical, superficial black dots. Capsule without dorsal vittae, but with numerous round, orange vesicles.{\i  Damp or shady, stony places. S.E. part of Balkan peninsula. }Bu Gr Ju Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b  H. setiferum} Stefanov, {\i Bull. Soc. Bot. Bulg. }{\b 3}: 83 (1929), reported from two localities in Bulgaria, differs only in having short, stiff, white hairs on the lower surface of the leaves, and some of the vesicles on the capsule somewhat elongated.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 36. H. umbellatum} A. Kerner,{\i  Österr. Bot. Zeitschr.}{\b  13}: 141 (1863). Stems 25-50 cm, erect. Leaves 15-40 mm, ovate to ovate-triangular, sessile, entire, with conspicuous reticulate venation and numerous superficial translucent or black glands. Sepals acute, black-glandular-ciliate and with numerous superficial black dots and streaks. Petals with black streaks or dots over the whole surface. Capsule with a few dorsal vittae and interrupted lateral vittae.{\i  Mountain woods. • N. Jugoslavia,C. Romania, Bulgaria; local.} Bu Ju Rm.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 37. H. bithynicum} Boiss.,{\i  Diagn. Pl. Or. Nov. }{\b 2}({\b 8}): 112 (1849) ({\i H. confusum }Vandas). Stems 15-55 cm, erect or decumbent and rooting at the base. Leaves 18-53 mm, ovate, amplexicaul, entire, with conspicuous reticulate venation, sometimes with superficial black glands, usually without translucent glands. Sepals acute, black-glandular-fimbriate and with numer-
\par

\par
266}
\par