{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28     {\b 7. T. lanuginosa} (Lam.) Ceballos & C. Vicioso,{\i  Estud. Veg. Fl. Forest. Málaga} 235 (1935) ({\i T. canescens} (Schousboe) Endl.,{\i  Daphne lanuginosa} Lam.). Dwarf shrub 60-80 cm, with erect, freely branched stems; young shoots villous. Leaves 3·5-5 × 1·5-2·5 mm, elliptical, grey-villous. Flowers unisexual and hermaphrodite, in ebracteate clusters of 3-9 on short lateral shoots. Hypanthium 6·5-8 mm, villous; sepals 1·5-2 mm, ovate, obtuse.{\i  Maritime sands and calcareous rocks. S. Spain}. Hs.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 8. T. coridifolia} (Lam.) Endl.,{\i  Gen. Pl., Suppl.}{\b  4}: 66 (1847). Dwarf shrub with spreading, freely branched stems 15-35 cm; young shoots subglabrous to pubescent. Leaves 4-7 × 0·5-0·75 mm, linear, patent, crowded, ciliate when young, glabrous later. Dioecious; flowers solitary or in pairs, forming short, terminal spikes, each subtended by 2 small bracts. Hypanthium c. 4 mm, covered with short, grey hairs, tubular in male flowers, urceolate in female. Sepals 1·5 mm, ovate, obtuse. Fruit pubescent.{\i  Heaths. • N.W. Spain, eastwards to} c. 3° 30' {\i W.} Hs.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 9. T. procumbens} A. & R. Fernandes,{\i  Bol. Soc. Brot}. ser. 2, {\b 26}: 266 (1952). Like {\b 8} but stems up to 70 cm, procumbent; leaves and young shoots densely covered with silky hairs; leaves 4-10 × 0·5-1·25 mm, linear-lanceolate; flowers solitary, the male with hypanthium 6-7 mm. •{\i  E. Portugal} ({\i Sabugal}) {\i and W. Spain} ({\i Sierra de Gata}). Hs Lu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 10. T. broterana} Coutinho, {\i Bol. Soc. Brot.}{\b  24}: 145 (1909). Like {\b 8} but stems 15-40 cm, erect; young shoots hairy; leaves with villous-tomentose adaxial surface, but with this surface concealed by strongly involute margins, so that only the glabrous abaxial surface is seen; hypanthium glabrous; sepals triangular.{\i  Mountain heaths. • N. & C. Portugal.} Lu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 11. T. calycina} (Lapeyr.) Meissner in DC.,{\i  Prodr. }{\b 14}: 555 (1857) ({\i Passerina calycina} (Lapeyr.) DC.). Dwarf shrub 20-50 cm. with erect or decumbent, branched stems; young shoots pubescent. Leaves 8-15 × 1-3 mm, linear to oblong, glabrous; margins revolute in apical half. Flowers unisexual and hermaphrodite, solitary, subtended by two small, ovate, obtuse, glabrous or ciliate bracts. Hypanthium c. 6 mm, tubular or urceolate, sparsely pubescent; sepals 2 mm, broadly ovate. Fruit pubescent. •{\i  C. & W. Pyrenees and mountains of N. Spain.} Ga Hs.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 12. T. ruizii} Loscos ex Casav., {\i Anal. Soc. Esp. Hist. Nat.}{\b  9}: 301 (1880). Like {\b 11} but leaves smaller and sparsely villous on adaxial surface when young; hypanthium c. 5 mm, glabrous.{\i  Calcicole. • Mountains of N. Spain.} Hs.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 13. T. subrepens} Lange, {\i Overs. Kong. Danske Vid. Selsk. Forh.}{\b  1893}: 193 (1893). Like {\b 11} but stems procumbent, rooting; leaves c. 11 × 5 mm, elliptical, acute, flat; hypanthium 2·5 mm, glabrous; sepals 1·5 mm. •{\i  E. Spain} ({\i mountain-ranges between Cuenca and Albarracin}). Hs.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 14. T. tinctoria} (Pourret) Endl.,{\i  Gen. Pl., Suppl.}{\b  4}: 66 (1847) ({\i Passerina tinctoria} Pourret). Dwarf shrub 20-50 cm, with erect or decumbent, often tortuous, branched stems covered with raised leaf-scars; young shoots crispate-pubescent. Leaves 5-12 × 1·5-3·5 mm, oblong, glabrous or crispate-pubescent on both surfaces. Flowers unisexual and hermaphrodite, solitary, subtended by 2 ovate, obtuse, tomentose bracts, 1·5-3 mm long. Hypanthium 4-5 mm, glabrous; sepals 1-2 mm, broadly ovate. Fruit glabrous.{\i  Rocky woods and scrub; calcicole. • N.E. Spain; Pyrenees; two outlying stations in S. France} ({\i Gard}). Ga Hs.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Dwarf plants from the Pyrenees, with small, narrow leaves and sparse indumentum, have been distinguished as{\b  T. nivalis} (Ramond) Meissner in DC.,{\i  Prodr.}{\b  14}: 555 (1857). They are easily confused with {\b 15} but differ in their pubescent young shoots. They may deserve subspecific status.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 15. T. dioica} (Gouan) All.,{\i  Auct. Fl. Pedem.} 9 (1789). Dwarf shrub 20-50 cm, with erect or decumbent, often tortuous, branched stems covered with raised leaf-scars; young shoots glabrous. Leaves 3-12 × 0·75-2·5 mm, linear to cuneate-oblanceolate, glabrous. Flowers unisexual and hermaphrodite, solitary or in pairs, subtended by 2-6 linear bracts, c. 1·5 mm long. Hypanthium 4-7 mm, tubular, usually glabrous; sepals 1·5-2 mm, triangular. Fruit pubescent. •{\i  Mountains of S.W. Europe, from N.W. Italy to the W. Pyrenees and S.E. Spain}. Ga Hs It.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  In S.E. Spain (Sierra de Cazorla and adjacent ranges) this species is represented by cushion-like plants with very short, tortuous, much-branched stems, leaves not more than 3·5 × 1·25 mm and often less, and flowers with short, rather obtuse sepals and sometimes a few hairs on the hypanthium. They have been distinguished as {\b T. granatensis} Pau ex Lacaita,{\i  Cavanillesia }{\b 3}: 40 (1930). Plants from exposed stations in the Pyrenees, however, provide a transition in all these characters to the typical plants of the S.W. Alps.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 16. T. villosa} (L.) Endl.,{\i  Gen. Pl., Suppl.}{\b  4}: 66 (1847). Dwarf shrub 20-40 cm, with erect or decumbent, branched stems; young shoots, flowers and margins and abaxial surface of leaves hirsute with straight, patent, rather stout hairs up to 2 mm long. Leaves 10-13 × 2-4 mm, oblong to narrowly elliptical; adaxial surface glabrous or sparsely hirsute. Dioecious; flowers solitary, without bracts. Hypanthium 7-9 mm, tubular; sepals 3 mm, narrowly oblong.{\i  S. W. Spain, S. Portugal.} Hs Lu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 17. T. passerina} (L.) Cosson & Germ.,{\i  Fl. Env. Paris} ed. 2, 586 (1861) ({\i Lygia passerina} (L.) Fasano,{\i  Passerina annua} Wikstr.). Annual; stems 20-50 cm, erect, glabrous or rarely pubescent. Leaves 8-14 × 1-2 mm, linear-lanceolate, acute, glabrous. Flowers hermaphrodite, greenish, solitary or in clusters of 2-3, arising from a tuft of silky hairs and subtended by 2 lanceolate bracts 2-3 mm long. Hypanthium 2-3 mm, pubescent; sepals 1 mm, ovate, obtuse. Fruit pubescent.{\i  S., W., C. & S.E. Europe, northwards to} 53°{\i  N. in Poland and eastwards to} 40°{\i  E. in S. Russia.} Al Au Be Bu Co Cz Ga Ge Gr He Hs Hu It Ju Lu Po Rm Rs (C, W, K, E) Sa Si.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Plants from Sicilia, Sardegna and Corse (and also from S.W. Asia), described originally as{\b  Stellera pubescens} Guss.,{\i  Fl. Sic. Prodr.}{\b  1}: 466 (1827), appear to differ in their pubescent leaves, whitish flowers in a denser spike, and later time of flowering. Their status is obscure, and they appear to have no valid name, whether as species or variety, under {\i Thymelaea}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 3.                    Diarthron }                  Turcz.
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc By D.A. Webb & I.K. Ferguson.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Flowers hermaphrodite, in ebracteate, terminal racemes. Hypanthium articulated near the middle, the lower half persistent in fruit, the upper, with the sepals, petaloid, deciduous. Style terminal. Fruit enclosed in the persistent base of the hypanthium; pericarp membranous.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. D. vesiculosum} (Fischer & C. A. Meyer) C. A. Meyer,{\i  Bull. Phys.-Math. Acad. Pétersb. }{\b 1}: 359 (1843). A slender annual, glabrous except for a few hairs on the young leaves and flowers. Stem 20-50 cm, erect, dichotomously branched. Leaves 8-15 × 2-5 mm, alternate, linear-oblong to lanceolate, subacute, shortly petiolate. Flowers greenish-yellow, on very short, clavate pedicels. Hypanthium 2-4 mm, distinctly ribbed in lower half; sepals ¼ as long, linear, obtuse. Fruit 2 × 1 mm, black, shining.{\i  Dry places. W. Kazakhstan: ?S.E. Russia.} Rs (E).
\par

\par
260}
\par