{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 ones mostly in the form of long streaks. 2n = 32.{\i  Lowlands of N.W. Europe from W. Germany and the Netherlands westwards, and in the Alps at lower altitudes than subsp.} ({\b a}).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 54. H. perforatum} L.,{\i  Sp. Pl.} 785 (1753) ({\i H. noeanum} Boiss.). Stems 10-100 cm, erect from a decumbent, rooting base, 2-lined. Leaves (5-)8-30(-35) mm, ovate to linear, sessile or subsessile, with obscurely reticulate venation and with numerous large translucent dots. Sepals lanceolate or oblong to linear, acute to acuminate or shortly aristate, usually entire, without or with a few superficial black dots. Petals with a few marginal black dots, sometimes also with superficial black dots or streaks. Capsule with dorsal vittae and lateral, oblique vittae or vesicles. 2n = 32 (?.48). {\i Throughout Europe except the extreme north.} All except Fa Is Sb.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Very variable. Most northern plants have relatively wide leaves; but towards the south of Europe plants with narrow leaves (var. {\i angustifolium} DC.) or small leaves (var.{\i  microphyllum} DC.) are predominant. Although these southern plants have been found to differ genetically from the wide-leaved ones, there appears to be no morphological discontinuity between them.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Reproduction in{\i  H. perforatum} has been shown to be 97 % apomictic (pseudogamous), resulting in the formation of unreduced embryo-sacs with 32 chromosomes. The pollen, however, undergoes normal meiosis. Hybrids with diploid species (2n = 16) are, therefore, pentaploid if{\i  H. perforatum} is the female parent and triploid if it is the male parent. Triploid hybrids are more or less intermediate between the parents, but pentaploids are usually almost indistinguishable from {\i H. perforatum.} Two hybrids of this type have been described: {\b 51} × {\b 54} ({\i H}. × {\i medium} Peterm.) which is rather rare, owing to the different habitat-preferences of the parents, and {\b 53}({\b a}) × {\b 54} ({\i H}. × {\i desetangsii} nm. {\i carinthiacum} (A. Fröhlich) N.K.B. Robson ({\i H. carinthiacum} A. Fröhlich)), which is fairly common in E. Europe.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b 53} ({\b b}) × {\b 54} ({\i H}. × {\i desetangsii} Lamotte nm.{\i  desetangsii}) is, however, tetraploid. It is common and apparently fertile. The primary hybrid is intermediate, with stems usually with 2 strong and 2 weak lines; leaves with laxly reticulate venation and a few pale glandular dots; sepals narrowly oblong or ovate-lanceolate, with the apex apiculate and erose-denticulate. Back-crossing has, however, produced a complete series of intermediates between the parents.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 55. H. triquetrifolium} Turra,{\i  Farset. Nov. Gen.} 12 (1765) ({\i H. crispum} L.). Stems 13-55 cm, erect or decumbent, 2-lined, with divaricate branches. Leaves 3-15(-20) mm, lanceolate-triangular or rarely ovate-triangular to linear-oblong, amplexicaul, usually without reticulate venation, sometimes with medium to small translucent dots; margin undulate. Sepals oblong to ovate-oblong, obtuse or apiculate, entire or denticulate, without black dots. Petals without black dots or rarely with one intramarginal dot. Capsule with longitudinal vittae or vesicles.{\i  Dry, stony or sandy places. E. part of Mediterranean region, extending westwards to Sicilia; naturalized further west.} Al Cr Gr It Si Tu [Bl Hs].
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 56. H. elegans} Stephan ex Willd.,{\i  Sp. Pl. }{\b 3}: 1469 (1802). Stems 15-55 cm, 2-lined, erect or decumbent and rooting at the base. Leaves 10-30 mm, lanceolate or ovate-lanceolate to oblong or linear-oblong, sessile, with obscurely reticulate venation, and with several large translucent dots; margin plane. Sepals lanceolate to narrowly oblong, acute to acuminate, black-glandulardenticulate or with sessile marginal glands, occasionally with one superficial black dot. Petals with only marginal black dots. Capsule with longitudinal vittae. {\i Dry places; somewhat calcicole. C. & E. Europe, from Turkey to C. Ural and westwards to W. Germany.} Au Bu Cz Ge Hu Ju Rm Rs (C, W, K, E) Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Sect. BRATHYS (Mutis ex L. fil.) Choisy. Glabrous, perennial or annual herbs. Black glands absent. Stem 4-lined. Flowers in pyramidal to corymbose cymes. Petals and stamens persistent. Stamens reduced to 5, or in 5 indefinite fascicles or groups. Styles (2-)3-5. Capsule with longitudinal vittae. Seeds longitudinally ribbed and with transverse striations.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  The above description applies to subsect.{\i  Spachium} R. Keller, which alone is represented in Europe.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Five North American species of this subsection have been found in Europe since 1834. All grow in damp places, and some have been recorded in areas previously well known to botanists. Their seeds are small, as in other species of{\i  Hypericum}, and it appears probable that they have been introduced relatively recently from North America by wading birds or among agricultural seeds or fodder. See H. Heine, {\i Bauhinia}{\b  2}: 71-78 (1962).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 57. H. gymnanthum} Engelm. & A. Gray,{\i  Boston Jour. Nat. Hist. }{\b 5}: 212 (1845). Perennial. Stems (20-)25-45(-60) cm, usually branched only in the inflorescence. Leaves 10-25(-30) mm, ovate- to lanceolate-triangular, cordate to rounded at the base, 5- to 7-veined. Sepals 3·5-5 mm. Capsule 3-5 mm, narrowly ovoid.{\i  Drained peat-bog. Poland} ({\i near Poznan}). *Po.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 First observed in 1884.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 58. H. mutilum} L.,{\i  Sp. Pl.} 787 (1753). Perennial or annual. Stems 10-40 cm, usually branched above the middle. Leaves 7-20(-30) mm, ovate to oblong or lanceolate, rounded to broadly cuneate at the base, 3- to 5-veined. Sepals 1·5-3 mm. Capsule 2·5-4 mm, ellipsoid.{\i  Marshes. Germany, Poland, Italy and France. }*Ga *Ge *It *Po.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 First observed in Italy in 1834 ( ? extinct), in Germany in 1874, in France in 1881, and in Poland in 1885.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 59. H. majus} (A. Gray) Britton,{\i  Mem. Torrey Bot. Club }{\b 5}: 225 (1894). Perennial or annual. Stems 10-35 cm, unbranched or branched above. Leaves 15-40 mm, lanceolate or oblong, rounded to broadly cuneate at the base, (3-)5- to 7-veined. Sepals (4-)5-7 mm. Capsule 5·5-7·5 mm, narrowly ovoid.{\i  Margins of ponds and streams. S. & E. Germany; E. France} ({\i Haute-Saône}). *Ga *Ge.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 First observed in Germany in 1945 and in France before 1955.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 60. H. canadense} L.,{\i  Sp. Pl.} 785 (1753). Annual or sometimes perennial. Stems 7-25(-40) cm, unbranched or branched above. Leaves 6-20(-30) mm, linear to oblanceolate, narrowly cuneate at the base, 1- to 3(-5)-veined. Sepals 2-4·5(-5) mm. Capsule 4-6 mm, ovoid to cylindrical. 2n = 16.{\i  Wet heaths. Netherlands} ({\i Overijsel}); {\i Ireland} ({\i Mayo}). *Hb *Ho.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 First observed in the Netherlands in 1909, and in Ireland in 1954. Records for Germany are errors for {\b 59}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 61. H. gentianoides} (L.) Britton, E. E. Sterns & Poggenb.,{\i  Prelim. Cat.} 9 (1888). Annual. Stems 5-20(-40) cm, usually with numerous ascending branches. Leaves 1-3 mm, subulate or scale-like. 1-veined. Sepals 2-2·5 mm. Capsule 5-7 mm, narrowly conical.{\i  Damp, sandy ground. S.W. France} ({\i Gironde}). *Ga.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 First observed in 1931.
\par

\par
269}
\par