{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 11 Leaves linear-spathulate; inflorescence usually 3-flowered ..... {\b 7. aciferum}
\par
11 Leaves elliptical to narrowly oblong; flowers solitary .......... {\b 8. aegypticum}
\par
10 Herb; stamens 5, or in 5 irregular groups (Sect.{\i  Brathys})
\par
12 Leaves linear-subulate, closely appressed; branches
\par
   numerous, fastigiate ............................................................ {\b 61. gentianoides}
\par
12 Leaves flat, ± patent; branches few or none, not fastigiate 
\par
13 Leaves suborbicular to ovate-triangular or broadly oblong
\par
14 Stem simple or nearly so; middle and upper leaves 
\par
   ovate-triangular, ± acute ..................................................... {\b 57. gymnanthum}
\par
14 Stem usually branched; middle and upper leaves oblong or ovate
\par
   to suborbicular, obtuse ............................................................... {\b 58. mutilum}
\par
13 Leaves linear to lanceolate, oblanceolate or narrowly oblong
\par
15 At least the upper leaves lanceolate, with (3-)5-7 veins 
\par
   at the base; sepals 4-7 mm ............................................................. {\b 59. majus}
\par
15 All leaves linear to linear-lanceolate or oblanceolate,
\par
   with 1-3(-5) veins at the base; sepals 2-5 mm ........................ {\b 60. canadense}
\par
1 Red or black glands present, at least on leaves, sepals or anthers
\par
16 Leaves in whorls of 3-4
\par
17 Petals and stamens deciduous; leaves in whorls of 3 ....... {\b 9. empetrifolium}
\par
17 Petals and stamens persistent; leaves usually in whorls of 4
\par
18 Leaves smooth; sepals with sessile marginal glands ..................... {\b 11. coris}
\par
18 Leaves papillose; sepals eglandular or glandular-ciliate ........ {\b 12. ericoides}
\par
16 Leaves opposite
\par
19 Leaves without intramarginal black glands (apical black glands
\par
   or intramarginal translucent glands sometimes present)
\par
20 Sepals entire, without marginal or intramarginal glands
\par
21 Sepals broadly imbricate; seeds reticulate-pitted
\par
22 Glabrous .............................................................................. {\b 21. olympicum}
\par
22 Pubescent .............................................................................. {\b 22. cerastoides}
\par
21 Sepals not or only slightly imbricate; seeds papillose
\par
23 Leaves 2-6 mm, ovate or ovate-elliptical, glaucous;
\par
   flowers solitary ........................................................................ {\b 19. taygeteum}
\par
23 Leaves (5-)8-30 mm, linear to narrowly elliptical, not glaucus; 
\par
   inflorescence many-flowered
\par
24 Stems 30-70 cm, scarcely rooting at the base; petals
\par
   not red-tinged .................................................................... {\b 20. hyssopifolium}
\par
24 Stems 5-20(-35) cm, rooting at the base; petals usually 
\par
   red-tinged ................................................................................ {\b 15. linarioides}
\par
20 Sepals ciliate, denticulate or fimbriate, with marginal or
\par
   intramarginal glands
\par
25 Dwarf shrub, with stems conspicuously 4-angled ........ {\b 13. haplophylloides}
\par
25 Herb, with stems not or scarcely 4-angled
\par
26 Lower leaves glandular-denticulate; capsule with 
\par
   orange vesicles ..................................................................... {\b 33. vesiculosum}
\par
26 Leaves entire; capsule with vittae, but without vesicles
\par
27 Glands on sepals red; filaments united for 2/3 of their length .... {\b 32. elodes}
\par
27 Glands on sepals black; filaments free almost to the base
\par
28 Leaves pubescent .................................................................... {\b 14. hirsutum}
\par
28 Leaves glabrous
\par
29 Inflorescence subcorymbose; petioles articulated at base;
\par
   stems diffuse
\par
30 Leaves glaucous only beneath; petals 10-16 mm ........... {\b 17. nummularium}
\par
30 Leaves glaucous on both sides; petals 6-9 mm .......................... {\b 18. fragile}
\par
29 Inflorescence cylindrical or narrowly pyramidal; petioles,
\par
   if present, not articulated; stems erect or ascending
\par
31 Anthers pink or orange; leaves ovate-cordate to oblong ........ {\b 16. pulchrum}
\par
31 Anthers yellow; leaves usually linear to linear-lanceolate
\par
32 Stems 30-70 cm, scarcely rooting at the base; petals
\par
   not red-tinged .................................................................... {\b 20. hyssopifolium}
\par
32 Stems 5-17(-32) cm, rooting at the base; petals usually
\par
   red-tinged ................................................................................ {\b 15. linarioides}
\par
19 At least some of the leaves with intramarginal black glands
\par
   (sometimes very few in{\b  29} and {\b 30})
\par
33 Sepals without marginal or intramarginal black glands
\par
34 Sepals broadly imbricate; flowerless axillary shoots usually absent
\par
35 Flowers less than 2 cm in diameter; vittae on capsule
\par
   conspicuous ........................................................................... {\b 50. humifusum}
\par
35 Flowers at least 2 cm in diameter; vittae on capsule faint or absent
\par
36 Glabrous .............................................................................. {\b 21. olympicum}
\par
36 Pubescent ............................................................................. {\b 22. cerastoides}
\par
34 Sepals not, or only slightly imbricate; flowerless axillary 
\par
   shoots present (Sect.{\i  Hypericum})
\par
37 Stems with 2 raised lines
\par
38 Leaves neither undulate nor amplexicaul; branches of
\par
   inflorescence ascending ......................................................... {\b 54. perforatum}
\par
38 Leaves undulate, amplexicaul; branches of 
\par
   inflorescence patent ......................................................... {\b 55. triquetrifolium}
\par
37 Stems with 4 raised lines or wings
\par
39 Sepals obtuse; stems not winged ......................................... {\b 53. maculatum}
\par
39 Sepals acute; stems winged
\par
40 Petals not more than 7·5 mm, pure yellow or rarely red-veined;
\par
   leaves usually flat ................................................................. {\b 51. tetrapterum}
\par
40 Petals at least 7·5 mm, usually tinged with red;
\par
   leaves undulate ....................................................................... {\b 52. undulatum}
\par
33 Sepals with marginal or intramarginal black glands
\par
41 Leaves hairy or papillose on both sides
\par
42 Capsule with vesicles as well as vittae; stems glabrous or
\par
   finely papillose
\par
43 Stems 1-5(-10) cm, procumbent, glabrous .................................. {\b 44. kelleri}
\par
43 Stems 15-45 cm, erect or decumbent, usually minutely
\par
   papillose ......................................................................... {\b 45. aviculariifolium}
\par
42 Capsule without vesicles; stem hairy
\par
44 Leaves connate at base ........................................................ {\b 31. caprifolium}
\par
44 Leaves free
\par
45 Bracts auriculate; sepals with long teeth or cilia
\par
46 Plant puberulent to velutinous; stems ± erect, not rooting at 
\par
   the nodes ................................................................................. {\b 24. annulatum}
\par
46 Plant hirsute; stems decumbent or procumbent, rooting at the nodes
\par
47 Leaves 12-45 mm, sessile ..................................................... {\b 25. delphicum}
\par
47 Leaves 8-15 mm, shortly petiolate ............................................ {\b 26. athoum}
\par
45 Bracts not auriculate; sepals subentire or with short teeth or cilia
\par
48 Sepals glabrous, with superficial black glands
\par
49 Petals at least 8 mm; leaves at least 15 mm, sessile ............. {\b 27. atomarium}
\par
49 Petals not more than 8 mm; leaves not more than 15 mm,
\par
   usually petiolate ........................................................................... {\b 28. cuisinii}
\par
48 Sepals hairy, without superficial black glands
\par
50 Sepals 5-10 mm, aristate, entire; petals 9-15 mm ................ {\b 30. pubescens}
\par
50 Sepals 3-6 mm, rarely aristate, shortly glandular ciliate;
\par
   petals 6-11 mm .................................................................... {\b 29. tomentosum}
\par
41 Leaves smooth and glabrous, at least above
\par
51 Capsule with longitudinal vittae only; seeds reticulate pitted
\par
52 Styles 5 ...................................................................................... {\b 46. thasium}
\par
52 Styles (2-)3(-4)
\par
53 Flowerless axillary shoots present; stems with black glands
\par
54 Sepals entire, with intramarginal black glands;
\par
   leaves undulate ....................................................................... {\b 52. undulatum}
\par
54 Sepals glandular-denticulate or with sessile marginal glands;
\par
   leaves flat ..................................................................................... {\b 56. elegans}
\par
53 Flowerless axillary shoots absent; stems usually without black glands
\par
55 Sepals equal, regularly dentate or ciliate
\par
56 Stems erect; leaves 20-70 mm .............................................. {\b 23. montanum}
\par

\par
262}
\par