{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 Leaves 5-18 mm, broadly ovate to orbicular, green above, glaucous beneath, glabrous, with conspicuous, intramarginal pale glands and 2 apical black glands. Inflorescence 1- to 8-flowered, subcorymbose. Sepals black-glandular-denticulate. Petals sometimes red-veined. Anthers yellow.{\i  Rock-crevices and stony slopes; calcicole. • Pyrenees and N. Spain; S.W. Alps.} Ga Hs ?It.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 18. H. fragile} Heldr. & Sart. ex Boiss., {\i Diagn. Pl. Or. Nov.}{\b  3}({\b 1}): 108 (1853). Stems 4-11(-16) cm, slender, suberect or straggling, articulated at the nodes, much branched at the base but not rooting, glaucous. Leaves 2-7 mm, ovate or oblong-orbicular, with conspicuous, intramarginal pale glands, usually without apical black glands, glaucous on both sides. Inflorescence 1- to 8-flowered, subcorymbose. Sepals black-glandular-ciliate. Petals red-tinged. Anthers yellow.{\i  Crevices in calcareous rocks. • E. Greece.} Gr.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Records from Karpathos and Kasos are probably errors for {\b 28}. Plants cultivated as {\i H. fragile} are usually referable to {\b 21}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 19. H. taygeteum} Quézel & Contandr., {\i Taxon }{\b 16}: 240 (1967). Like {\b 18} but stems often procumbent; leaves ovate to elliptical, with superficial as well as intramarginal pale glands; flowers all solitary; sepals entire.{\i  Crevices in calcareous rocks. • S. Greece }({\i Taiyetos}). Gr.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Sect. DROSANTHE (Spach) Endl. Like Sect. {\i Taeniocarpium} but petals more or less clawed, and with scarcely elongated pellucid glands.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 20. H. hyssopifolium} Chaix in Vill., {\i Hist. Pl. Dauph.}{\b  1}: 329 (1786). Stems 30-70 cm, erect, glabrous. Leaves on main stem 12-28 mm, linear to narrowly elliptical, without apical gland, glabrous, usually with deflexed margin; leaves on axillary shoots smaller, crowded. Inflorescence narrowly cylindrical to subspicate, or rarely narrowly pyramidal. Petals not red-tinged. Anthers yellow.{\i  Mountain regions of S. Europe.} Bu Ga Gr Hs It Ju Rs (K).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b hyssopifolium}: Leaves obtuse, not apiculate. Sepals subequal, usually continuously glandular-denticulate. Petals 7-9(-10) mm. Capsule (5-)6-8·5 mm.{\i  Throughout the range of the species, except Greece}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Plants from Krym, which have been named {\b H. chrysothyrsum }Woronow in Kusn., N. Busch & Fomin,{\i  Fl. Cauc. Crit.}{\b  3}({\b 9}): 30 (1906), are very similar to {\b 20}({\b a}), but may be better placed in {\b H. lydium} Boiss., {\i Diagn. Pl. Or. Nov.}{\b  1}({\b 1}): 57 (1842).
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b elongatum} (Ledeb.) Woronow in Kusn., N. Busch & Fomin,{\i  Fl. Cauc. Crit.}{\b  3}({\b 9}): 32 (1906) ({\i H. elongatum} Ledeb., {\i H. hyssopifolium} subsp. {\i tymphresteum} (Boiss. & Spruner) Hayek): Leaves usually apiculate. Sepals unequal, with margin partly or completely eglandular. Petals 12-15 mm. Capsule 8-13 mm. {\i C. Greece} ({\i Timfristos});{\i  Krym}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Plants from S. Spain ({\i H. callithyrsum} Cosson) tend to be intermediate between the two subspecies in respect of their sepals.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Sect. OLYMPIA (Spach) Endl. Glabrous, perennial herbs, often woody at the base. Black glands present on anthers, and sometimes elsewhere. Stems 2-lined. Leaves usually with intramarginal black glands. Flowers large, solitary or in few-flowered cymes. Petals and stamens persistent. Stamen-fascicles and styles 3. Capsule smooth or with faint, longitudinal vittae. Seeds reticulate-pitted.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 21. H. olympicum} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 784 (1753) ({\i H. dimoniei} Velen., {\i H. polyphyllum }sensu Hayek, non Boiss. & Balansa). Stems (8-)10-50(-75) cm, erect to decumbent. Leaves 5-28(-36) mm, narrowly oblong to narrowly elliptical or lanceolate, glaucous. Flowers 20-60 mm in diameter. Sepals unequal, often foliaceous, imbricate, entire, sometimes with superficial black glands. Petals eglandular or with apical black gland, or rarely with a few marginal black glands. {\i Dry, stony places. Balkan peninsula, mainly in the south and east}. Bu Gr Ju Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Sect. CAMPYLOPUS (Spach) Endl. Perennial herbs, sometimes woody at the base, with pubescent stems, leaves and sepals. Stems 2-lined. Leaves with a few intramarginal or superficial black glands, or with none. Flowers solitary or in small corymbose cymes. Petals and stamens persistent. Stamen-fascicles 3-5, sometimes united at the base. Styles 3(-5). Capsule with faint, longitudinal vittae. Seeds reticulate-pitted.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 22. H. cerastoides} (Spach) N.K.B. Robson,{\i  Feddes Repert.}{\b  74}: 22 (1967) ({\i H. rhodoppeum} Friv., {\i Campylopus cerastoides} Spach). Stems 7-27 cm, decumbent or ascending, rooting at the base. Leaves 8-30 mm, oblong to elliptical or ovate. Flowers 20-43 mm in diameter. Sepals unequal, foliaceous, broadly imbricate, entire. Petals with intramarginal or sessile, marginal black glands.{\i  Stony places; calcifuge. S.E. part of Balkan peninsula.} Bu Gr Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Sect. ADENOSEPALUM Spach. Perennial herbs, usually pubescent. Black glands present on leaves, sepals, anthers and sometimes petals, usually marginal or intramarginal. Stems usually terete. Leaves with intramarginal and occasionally a few superficial black glands. Flowers in pyramidal to cylindrical or corymbose cymes, rarely solitary. Petals and stamens persistent. Stamen-fascicles and styles 3. Ovary 3-locular. Capsule with longitudinal vittae. Seeds reticulate-pitted or with subscalariform striations.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 23. H. montanum} L.,{\i  Fl. Suec.} ed. 2, 266 (1755). Stems 20-80 cm, erect, glabrous. Leaves (20-)25-70 mm, ovate to lanceolate or oblong-elliptical, sessile, glabrous above, usually scabrid beneath. Inflorescence corymbose to shortly cylindrical, usually dense, glabrous. Bracts with glandular-ciliate auricles. Sepals black-glandular-ciliate. Petals without black glands. 2n = 16. {\i Woods and thickets; somewhat calcicole. W. & C. Europe, extending to S.W. Finland, C. Ukraine, C. Jugoslavia and C. Italy.} ?Al Au Be Br Co Cz Da Fe Ga Ge ?Gr He Ho Hs Hu It Ju Lu No Po Rm Rs (B, C, W) Sa Su.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 24. H. annulatum} Moris,{\i  Stirp. Sard.}{\b  1}: 9 (1827) ({\i H. atomarium} subsp. {\i degenii} (Bornm.) Hayek). Stems 20-65 cm, erect, shortly whitish-pubescent. Leaves 15-55 mm, ovate, sessile, shortly pubescent on both sides. Inflorescence pyramidal to shortly cylindrical or corymbose, rather lax, glabrous. Bracts with densely glandular-ciliate auricles. Sepals black-glandular-ciliate. Petals sometimes with 1-2 superficial black glands.{\i  Scrub and stony places on mountains. Balkan peninsula, from C. Jugoslavia to N. Greece; one locality in Sardegna.} Al Bu Gr Ju Sa.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 25. H. delphicum} Boiss. & Heldr. in Boiss.,{\i  Diagn. Pl. Or. Nov.}{\b  3}({\b 1}): 106 (1853). Stems 11-35(-45) cm, ascending, branching and rooting at the base, strigose-pubescent. Leaves 12-35 mm, ovate to oblong-ovate, sessile, strigose-pubescent. Inflorescence corymbose to shortly cylindrical, glabrous. Bracts with densely glandular auricles. Sepals black-glandular-ciliate. Petals with marginal black glands towards apex. Woodland and stony places. •{\i  Aegean region} ({\i Evvoia, Andros}). Gr.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 26. H. athoum} Boiss. & Orph. in Boiss.,{\i  Fl. Or. }{\b 1}: 794 (1867).Like {\b 25} but smaller in all its parts, with indumentum softer and less dense; stems more slender and diffuse; leaves 8-15 mm,
\par

\par
265}
\par