{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 46. H. thasium} Griseb., {\i Spicil. Fl. Rumel.}{\b  1}: 227 (1843). Stems 15-40 cm, erect or decumbent and rooting at the base. Leaves 15-30 mm, lanceolate or narrowly oblong to linear. Sepals broadly imbricate, black-glandular-fimbriate and with intramarginal black dots. Petals sometimes with a few superficial black dots.{\i  Sandy and rocky places. • S.E. part of Balkan peninsula. }Bu Gr Tu.
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28  Sect. OLIGOSTEMA (Boiss.) Stefanov. Glabrous perennial (rarely annual) herbs. Black glands present on leaves, sepals and petals, and sometimes on stem and anthers. Stems terete or 2-lined. Leaves with intramarginal and sometimes a few superficial black glands. Flowers in corymbose or pyramidal cymes or panicles, or rarely solitary. Petals and stamens persistent. Stamen-fascicles 3. Styles (2-)3. Capsule with longitudinal vittae. Seeds reticulate-pitted.
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 47. H. aucheri} Jaub. & Spach, {\i Ill. Pl. Or.}{\b  1}: 61 (1842) ({\i H. apterum} Velen., {\i H. jankae} Nyman). Stems 7-30 cm, suberect or decumbent. Leaves 4-20(-25) mm, oblong to lanceolate or linear, ascending or subappressed, with translucent dots. Sepals lanceolate, equal or unequal, black-glandular-denticulate to -fimbriate and sometimes with a few intramarginal black dots. Petals 2-2·5 times as long as the sepals, without superficial black glands. Capsule scarcely as long as the sepals.{\i  Stony places. S.E. part of Balkan peninsula.} Bu Gr Tu.
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 48. H. linarifolium} Vahl, {\i Symb. Bot.}{\b  1}: 65 (1790). Stems 5-65(-75) cm, erect or decumbent, sometimes branching and rooting at the base. Leaves 5-35 mm, narrowly oblong to narrowly lanceolate or linear, patent to subappressed, usually without translucent dots. Sepals lanceolate to ovate, subequal, black-glandular-ciliate and with numerous superficial black dots and streaks. Petals 2-4 times as long as the sepals, rarely with superficial black streaks. Capsule about twice as long as the sepals. 2n = 16. {\i Dry sunny places; calcifuge. W. Europe, northwards to} 53°{\i  N. in Britain and eastwards to} c. 4°{\i  E. in S. France}. Br Ga Hs Lu.
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 49. H. australe} Ten.,{\i  Fl. Neap. Prodr. App. Quinta} 25 (1826). Stems 8-40 cm, erect to decumbent or ascending, often branching and rooting at the base. Leaves 7-25 mm, ascending or subappressed, without translucent dots, the upper oblong to lanceolate, the lower obovate to oblanceolate. Sepals lanceolate to narrowly oblong, subequal, subentire to shortly black-glandular-ciliate and with numerous superficial black dots and streaks. Petals 1·5-2·5 times as long as the sepals, rarely with a few superficial black glands. Capsule 1·5-2 times as long as the sepals.{\i  W. Mediterranean region.} Bl Co Ga ?Hs It Sa Si.
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 50. H. humifusum} L.,{\i  Sp. Pl.} 785 (1753). Stems 3-30(-40) cm, decumbent or procumbent, branching and rooting at the base. Leaves 3-15(-20) mm, patent or ascending, usually with translucent dots, the upper oblong to lanceolate, the lower obovate to oblanceolate. Sepals ovate to lanceolate, unequal, entire or with sessile marginal glands or black-glandular-ciliate or -denticulate, usually with a few superficial black dots. Petals equalling or up to twice as long as the sepals, very rarely with superficial black dots. Capsule equalling or slightly exceeding the sepals. 2n = 16.{\i  Open habitats; usually calcifuge. W. & C. Europe, extending to S. Sweden, White Russia, S. Romania, N. Albania & C. Italy}. Al Au Az Be Br Co Cz Da Ga Ge Hb He Ho Hs Hu It Ju Lu Po Rm Rs (?B, C, W, ?K) Sa Su.
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28 {\b  48}, {\b 49} and{\b  50} form a group of closely related plants, each with a well-defined geographical area. Where the ranges overlap the species usually remain distinct, but intermediates between {\b 49} and {\b 50} have been recorded from N. Italy, and between {\b 48} and {\b 50} from S.W. England and the Channel Islands.
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28  Sect. HYPERICUM. Glabrous, perennial herbs, usually with axillary shoots developed. Black glands present on stems, leaves, anthers and sometimes sepals and petals. Stems 2- to 4-lined or 4-winged. Leaves with intramarginal and sometimes a few superficial black glands. Flowers in subcorymbose or pyramidal cymes. Petals and stamens persistent. Stamen-fascicles 3(-4). Styles 3(-4). Capsule with longitudinal vittae, or with dorsal vittae and lateral, oblique vesicles. Seeds reticulate-pitted.
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 51. H. tetrapterum} Fries,{\i  Nov. Fl. Suec.} 94 (1823) ({\i H. quadrangulum} L., nom. ambig.,{\i  H. acutum} Moench; incl.{\i  H. corsicum} Steudel). Stems (6-)10-100 cm, erect from a decumbent, rooting base or rarely wholly procumbent, narrowly 4-winged. Leaves (4-)10-35(-40) mm, orbicular, ovate, broadly oblong or broadly elliptical, sessile, with small translucent dots; margin usually plane. Sepals lanceolate or narrowly oblong, acute or acuminate, entire, sometimes with 1-2 superficial black dots. Petals 5-7(-7·5) mm, rarely with 1-2(-4) marginal black dots, not red-tinged (but red-veined in var. {\i corsicum} (Steudel) Boiss.). 2n = 16.{\i  Damp places. W., S. & C. Europe, extending to S. Sweden and E. Ukraine.} All except Az Bl Fa Fe Is Lu No Rs (N) Sb.
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 52. H. undulatum} Schousboe ex Willd., {\i Enum. Pl. Hort. Berol.} 810 (1809). Stems 15-100 cm, erect from a decumbent and rooting base, narrowly 4-winged. Leaves 7-40 mm, narrowly ovate to elliptical or narrowly oblong, sessile, with medium or small translucent dots; margin usually markedly undulate. Sepals lanceolate, acute or acuminate, entire, with 3-14 superficial black dots. Petals (7·5-)8-10 mm, without or with a few marginal or superficial black dots, usually red-tinged.{\i  Damp places. S.W. Europe, northwards to Wales.} Az Br Ga Hs Lu.
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28  In Spain and N. Portugal plants are found with characters or combinations of characters intermediate between {\b 51} and {\b 52}. As it is uncertain whether or not such plants are of hybrid origin, it seems best to include them at present in {\i H. undulatum} as var. {\i boeticum} (Boiss.) Lange ({\i H. boeticum} Boiss.).
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 53. H. maculatum} Crantz,{\i  Stirp. Austr. }{\b 2}: 64 (1763) ({\i H. quadrangulum} auct., non L.). Stems 15-100 cm, erect from a decumbent and rooting base, 4-lined. Leaves (10-)15-40(-50) mm, ovate or ovate-lanceolate to oblong or elliptical, sessile, with densely reticulate venation, without translucent dots or with a few large ones in the upper leaves. Sepals broadly ovate to oblong, with apex rounded or erose-denticulate, without or with a few superficial black dots. Petals usually with numerous superficial black dots or streaks and sometimes with a few marginal black dots. Capsule with longitudinal vittae.{\i  Most of Europe, but rare in the Mediterranean region.} Al Au Be Br Bu Cz Da Fa Fe Ga Ge Gr Hb He Ho Hs Hu It Ju No Po Rm Rs (N, B, C, W, E) Su.
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b maculatum}: Inflorescence-branches making an angle of c. 30° with the stem. Sepals entire, usually wide. Petals with superficial black glands only, mostly in the form of dots or short streaks, or rarely without black glands. 2n = 16.{\i  E., N. & C. Europe, westwards locally to Scotland and the Pyrenees}.
\par
\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b obtusiusculum} (Tourlet) Hayek, {\i Sched. Fl. Stir. Exsicc.}{\b  23-24}: 27 (1912): Inflorescence-branches making an angle of c. 50° with the stem. Sepals erose-denticulate, wide to narrow. Petals with a few marginal black glands, and superficial
\par
\par 268}
\par