{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 52. V. nebrodensis} C. Presl in J. & C. Presl, {\i Del. Prag.} 26 (1822). Dwarf, subglabrous perennial. Leaves 1-1·5 cm, crowded, narrowly ovate, obtuse, cuneate; lamina about equalling petiole. Stipules 0·5-1 cm, 3-partite, with a spathulate terminal and 2 filiform lateral segments. Peduncles 3-6 cm. Flowers 2-2·5 cm, dark violet; spur 10-12 mm, slender, straight or slightly curved. 2n = 20.{\i  Limestone rocks,} c. 1800{\i  m. •  N. Sicilia} ({\i Le Madonie}). Si.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 53. V. corsica} Nyman, {\i Syll.} 228 (1854) ({\i V. bertolonii} Salis, non Pio). Glabrescent perennial 10-20 cm, with slender stems. Lower leaves small, more or less rhombic, subcrenate; upper 2-3 cm, oblong to linear, subcrenate to entire. Stipules short, linear, foliaceous, with 1-4 laciniae at the base. Peduncles 4-8 cm. Flowers up to 3·5 cm, violet, rarely yellow, narrowly rectangular in face view; petals not contiguous. Spur 10-15 mm, 2-3 times as long as sepals and slightly curved.{\i  Mountain pastures. Corse, Sardegna, Elba.} Co It Sa.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b corsica}: Upper leaves narrowly oblong to broadly linear; stipules similar but usually with 1 short, filiform, basal segment. Spur stout. 2n = 52, c. 120. {\i Corse, Sardegna}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b ilvensis} (W. Becker) Merxm.,{\i  Feddes Repert.}{\b  79}: 57 (1968): Upper leaves narrowly linear; stipules similar but usually with 2-4 short, filiform, basal segments. Spur relatively slender. 2n = 52.{\i  Elba}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 54. V. munbyana} Boiss. & Reuter,{\i  Pugillus }15 (1852). Glabrous, slightly fleshy perennial 10-20 cm. Leaves c. 1·5 cm, crowded at the base, forming a cushion, subcordate, obtuse, markedly crenate, the upper somewhat elongated; petiole winged, longer than lamina. Stipules 1·5-2·5 cm, 3- to 5-partite, pinnatifid; terminal segment the largest, lanceolate; lateral segments linear. Flowers 3-5 cm, dark violet or yellow; calycine appendages 4-5 mm; spur c. 15 mm. 2n = 52. {\i Vertical limestone rocks. N.W. Sicilia.} Si. ({\i N. Africa}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  The plants described here have been known previously as {\i V. nebrodensis} var. {\i lutea} Guss. and var.{\i  grandiflora} Guss.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 55. V. pseudogracilis} Strobl, {\i Österr. Bot. Zeitschr.}{\b  27}: 227 (1877). Hairy or subglabrous perennial 5-15 cm, with ascending stems. Leaves 1-2 cm, the lower orbicular to ovate, truncate at base, obtuse, the upper lanceolate; petiole 1-3 times as long as lamina. Stipules 1-2 cm, irregularly and deeply divided into 3-7 linear to spathulate segments, the terminal the largest. Flowers 2-3 cm, yellow or bluish-violet; spur 8-10 cm.{\i  Open habitats; calcicole. • S.C. Italy.} It.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b pseudogracilis}: Always subglabrous. Lower leaves not cordate. Segments of stipules linear. Flowers yellow or bluish-violet. Sepals less than 10 mm. Spur stout. 2n = 34.{\i  Near Napoli and Salerno}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28 ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b cassinensis} (Strobl) Merxm. & A. Schmidt, {\i Feddes Repert.}{\b  74}: 30 (1967): Hairy or subglabrous. Lower leaves cordate. Segments of stipules linear to spathulate. Flowers yellow. Sepals 10 mm. Spur slender. 2n = 34.{\i  Prov. Frosinone} ({\i Monte Cassino}).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 56. V. eugeniae} Parl., {\i Nuovo Gior. Bot. Ital. }{\b 7}: 68 (1875). Rather compact perennial usually less than 3 cm. Lower leaves subrosulate, orbicular to ovate, usually markedly crenate; lamina equalling or shorter than petiole. Stipules pinnately divided, with 1-2 linear or oblong segments at each side, usually at the base, and a terminal crenate segment which is usually bigger than the lateral. Flowers 2-4 cm; petals wide, like those of {\b 48}, yellow or violet. Spur 2-6 mm, 2-3 times longer than the calycine appendages. •{\i  Appennini.} It.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b eugeniae}: Dwarf (1-2 cm). All leaves orbicular to ovate. Peduncles 4-10 cm. Spur 2-4 mm, stout, twice as long as calycine appendages. 2n = 34.{\i  Calcicole; usually above} 1000{\i  m}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b levieri} (Parl.) A. Schmidt,{\i  Ber. Deutsch. Bot. Ges.}{\b  77}: 96 (1965): Taller than subsp. ({\b a}). Upper leaves broadly lanceolate. Peduncles usually more than 10 cm. Spur up to 6 mm. 2n = 34.{\i  Usually below} 1000 {\i m}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 57. V. oreades} Bieb.,{\i  Fl. Taur.-Cauc. }{\b 3}: 167 (1819). Glabrous perennial, with slender, creeping rhizome and ascending stems 4-8 cm. Lower leaves orbicular to ovate, the upper ovate to oblong, remotely crenate, long-petiolate. Stipules 1-2 cm, the lower broadly ovate, the upper oblong, toothed or pinnatifid. Flowers 2-4·5 cm, yellow or violet. Sepals rather large, with conspicuous appendages. Petals, especially the 2 upper, very wide, almost orbicular, twice as long as sepals. Spur 4-8 mm, equalling or somewhat exceeding calycine appendages, stout (2 mm in diameter).{\i  Alpine meadows and rocks at }1500{\i  m. Krym}. Rs (K). ({\i Caucasian region}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 58. V. eximia} Form.,{\i  Verh. Naturf. Ver. Brünn }{\b 38}: 221 (1900). Subglabrous, caespitose perennial up to 10 cm. Leaves ovate or oblong-ovate, remotely crenate, lamina equalling petiole. Stipules pinnatipartite, with 1-3 outer and 1-2 inner linear segments, the terminal segment oblong-lanceolate. Flowers 2-2·5 cm, yellow or deep violet. Spur 4-5 mm, stout, curved, about twice as long as calycine appendages.{\i  Alpine meadows. • W. Macedonia}. Gr Ju.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 59. V. doerfleri} Degen, {\i Denkschr. Akad. Wiss. Math.-Nat. Kl. }({\i Wien}) {\b 64}: 710 (1897). Caespitose perennial 5-12 cm, densely and shortly hairy. Leaves 1-2 cm, slightly crenate; the lower ovate or suborbicular, the upper oblong; petiole equalling or exceeding lamina. Stipules 3- to 5-partite, lateral segments linear, central like the leaf, hairy. Flowers c. 2 cm, deep violet. Spur c. 7 mm, deflexed, violet, much exceeding the rather large calycine appendages.{\i  Sandy screes,} 1750-2500{\i  m. S. Jugoslavia }({\i Kaimakcalan}). Ju.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 60. V. allchariensis} G. Beck,{\i  Jahres-Kat. Wien. Bot. Tauschver. }{\b 1894}: 6 (1894). Caespitose perennial 8-25 cm, with a cluster of rather stout stems, woody at the base. Stems and leaves grey, with a short, rather dense pubescence. Lower leaves elliptic-oblong, with a cuneate base, remotely crenate-serrate; the upper linear, entire. Stipules 2- to 5-partite; segments linear. Peduncles 6-12 cm. Flowers 2-2·5 cm. Upper petals c. 1·5 cm, very wide. Spur c. 5 mm, obtuse, curved upwards, about twice as long as calycine appendages.{\i  Rocky hillsides. • Macedonia and E. Albania}. Al Gr Ju.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b allchariensis}: 10-25 cm. Lower leaves 4-5 cm, oblong. Flowers violet or yellow.{\i  C. Macedonia, northwards to Jakupica}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b gostivarensis} W. Becker & Bornm.,{\i  Feddes Repert.}{\b  17}: 75 (1921): 8-12 cm. Lower leaves 2-3 cm, broadly ovate. Flowers smaller than in ({\b a}), yellow.{\i  N.W. Macedonia and E. Albania}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b V. raunsiensis} W. Becker & Kosanin,{\i  Bull. Inst. Jard. Bot. Univ. Beograd}{\b  1}: 33 (1928), from serpentine at c. 1600 m in N. Albania (c. 10 km. W. of Kukës), is like {\b 60} but completely glabrous.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 61. V. frondosa} (Velen.) Hayek,{\i  Prodr. Fl. Penins. Balcan. }{\b 1}: 511 (1925). Compact perennial 1-3 cm Leaves orbicular, crenate. Stipules pinnately divided; lateral segments 1 on one side, 2-3 on the other; terminal segment subfoliaceous. Flowers medium-sized, yellow and violet. Sepals large, leaf-like, dentate, obtuse. Spur scarcely twice as long as calycine appendages.{\i  Alpine pastures. • S. Makedonija} ({\i S.E. of Prilep}). Ju.
\par

\par
278}
\par