{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 glabrous except for a few scattered hairs; lamina 1/3-1/2 as long as petiole. Stipules 5-8 mm, ovate-lanceolate, remotely fimbriate. Peduncles slightly exceeding leaves. Flowers c. 1·5 cm, pale violet. Sepals acute. Spur 5-7 mm, obtuse, stout.{\i  Coniferous woods and damp places. Fennoscandia; N. & C. Russia southwards to} c. 54° {\i N.} Fe No Rs (N, C) Su.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 31. V. pinnata} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 934 (1753). Leaves 3-6 cm, in a basal rosette, about as wide as long, deeply palmatifid, almost glabrous; petiole 4-10 cm. Stipules 1 cm, lanceolate, whitish. Flowers 1-2 cm, pale violet, fragrant. Sepals obtuse or subacute. Spur blunt, twice as long as calycine appendages.{\i  Rocks, screes and grassland, mostly between }1000{\i  and} 2000 {\i m; calcicole. Alps.} Au Ga He It Ju.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Subsect.{\i  Borealiamericanae} W. Becker. Perennial; acaulescent; with short, thick, fleshy rhizome and without stolons. Stipules free. Capsule and seed as in Subsect.{\i  Rostratae}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 32. V. obliqua} Hill, {\i Hort. Kew. }316 (1768) ({\i V. cucullata} Aiton). Glabrous or very sparsely pubescent. Lamina ovate-cordate with an open sinus, acute, crenate, about 1/3 as long as petiole. Peduncles equalling or exceeding leaves. Flowers c. 2 cm, blue-violet, not fragrant. Sepals acute; calycine appendages 2-6 mm. Style capitate. Cleistogamous fruit 1-1·5 cm, ovoid-cylindrical, only slightly exceeding sepals.{\i  Naturalized from gardens in Switzerland and Italy}. [He It.] ({\i North America}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Sect. DISCHIDIUM Ging. Perennial herbs. Stipules not leaf-like. Cleistogamous flowers produced. Style with 2-lobed stigma.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 33. V. biflora} L.,{\i  Sp. Pl.} 936 (1753). Rhizome slender, creeping. Plant with basal rosette of leaves and ascending, leafy flowering stems up to 20 cm. Leaves reniform, cordate, crenate, with scattered hairs; lamina 3-4 cm; petiole 4-12 cm. Stipules 3-4 mm, ovate to lanceolate, usually ciliate. Flowers 1·5 cm, yellow, not fragrant, the 4 posterior petals of the flower directed upwards as in Sect. {\i Melanium.} Sepals acute. Spur 2-3 mm. Capsule erect at maturity, glabrous. 2n = 12.{\i  Damp or shady places, mainly in the mountains. Fennoscandia; N. & C. Ural; mountain regions of Europe from C. France and the Carpathians to S. Spain, C. Italy and Bulgaria.} Au Bu Co Cz Fe Ga Ge He Hs Hu It Ju No Po Rm Rs (N, C, W) Su.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Sect. MELANIUM Ging. Herbaceous. Stipules usually large, leaf-like, often divided. Lateral petals directed upwards. Open flowers blue or yellow; cleistogamous flowers not produced. Style geniculate at the base, capitate, with wide stigmatic aperture. Capsule erect at maturity, glabrous.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 34. V. crassiuscula} Bory, {\i Ann. Gén. Sci. Phys.} ({\i Bruxelles}) {\b 3}: 16 (1820) ({\i V. nevadensis} Boiss.). Caespitose perennial up to 15 cm. Leaves c. 1·5 cm, ovate-orbicular, entire, glabrous or very shortly pubescent; petiole slightly longer than lamina. Stipules entire, like the leaves but smaller. Peduncles 2-4 cm. Flowers 1-1·5 cm, bright violet, pink or whitish, the lower petal golden-yellow at the base. Spur very short, obtuse, only slightly exceeding calycine appendages.{\i  Open habitats above} 2500{\i  m. S. Spain} ({\i Sierra Nevada}). Hs.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 35. V. diversifolia} (DC.) W. Becker, {\i Bull. Herb. Boiss}. ser. 2,{\b  3}: 892 (1903). Caespitose perennial 3-8(-15) cm, covered with rather short, stiff hairs. Leaves 1-2 cm, forming a rosette, entire; the lower suborbicular or broadly ovate, the upper ovate-oblong. Stipules oblong, with 3 laciniae. Peduncles 2-4 cm. Flowers up to 2 cm, violet, fragrant. Spur c. 5 mm, subulate, curved, greatly exceeding calycine appendages.{\i  Alpine meadows and rocks. • E. and C. Pyrenees.} Ga Hs.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 36. V. cenisia} L.,{\i  Sp. Pl.} ed. 2, 1325 (1763). Glabrous or pubescent, caespitose perennial. Stems 3-5 cm, numerous, procumbent. Leaves c. 1 cm, entire, the lower ovate, the upper oblong; lamina shorter than petiole. Stipules like the leaves but smaller, entire or with 1-2 small laciniae at the base. Peduncles 2-4 cm. Flowers 2-2·5 cm, bright violet. Spur 5-8 mm, about as long as the sepals, slender. 2n = 20.{\i  Calcareous screes. • S.W. Alps, and locally in C. Alps eastwards to} 9° 20'{\i  E}. Ga He It.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 37. V. comollia} Massara,{\i  Prodr. Fl. Valtell.} 203 (1834). Caespitose perennial up to 10 cm. Underground stems filiform. Leaves entire, ovate to oblong, glabrous or sparingly pubescent; lamina about ½ as long as petiole. Stipules like the leaves, but smaller, entire, or sometimes with a lacinia on the outer side. Flowers 1·5-2·5 cm. Sepals pubescent. Petals bright violet on inner side, with an orange or deep yellow spot, pale yellow on outer side; lower petal very broad. Spur short, slender, obtuse, curved, twice as long as calycine appendages.{\i  Non-calcareous screes. • S. Alps} ({\i Alpi Orobie}). It.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 38. V. valderia} All., {\i Fl. Pedem.}{\b  2}: 98 (1785). More or less pubescent, caespitose perennial 5-10(-20) cm. Leaves 1·5-2(-3) cm, entire; the lower suborbicular, ovate or oblong, the upper oblong or lanceolate. Stipules like the leaves but rather smaller, and with 2-7 laciniae at the base. Peduncles 4-7 cm. Flowers c. 2 cm, bright violet; lower petal oblong-obcordate. Spur 7-10 mm, slender, slightly curved, greatly exceeding calycine appendages. 2n = 20. {\i Open habitats; calcifuge. • Maritime Alps.} Ga It.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 39. V. magellensis} Porta & Rigo ex Strobl,{\i  Österr. Bot. Zeitschr.}{\b  27}: 229 (1877) (incl. {\i V. albanica }Halácsy). Glabrous or pubescent, caespitose perennial 4-10(-15) cm. Leaves 0·5-1·5 cm, ovate-orbicular, ovate or oblong, entire; lamina equalling petiole. Stipules like the leaves, sometimes smaller, sometimes with 1-2 laciniae. Flowers c. 2 cm, violet, pink or with upper petals dark reddish-violet. Spur 8-10 mm, straight or slightly curved, much longer than calycine appendages. 2n = 22.{\i  Alpine pastures and calcareous screes. • C. Appennini; Albania, N. Greece.} Al Gr It.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 40. V. brachyphylla} W. Becker,{\i  Feddes Repert. }{\b 20}: 73 (1924). Glabrous, caespitose perennial, with procumbent stems 5-10 cm. Leaves up to 1 cm, linear- or oblong-spathulate, entire; petiole short. Stipules like leaves but shorter, entire, or rarely with 1 or 2 laciniae. Flowers large, c. 2 cm wide, yellow. Spur 6-8 mm, slender, yellow or violet.{\i  Subalpine habitats. • S. Jugoslavia and N. Greece. }Gr Ju.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b  V. dukadjinica} W. Becker & Kosanin,{\i  Feddes Repert.}{\b  23}: 145 (1926), from N. and C. Albania, on serpentine (? and calcareous) soils at 1400 2000 m, is like {\b 40}, but has leaves 1·5-3 cm, and spur 10-12 mm. Other plants resembling {\b 40}, but with sparse, short hairs, leaves 2 cm and flowers yellow or violet, have been collected from N.W. Greece (Smolikas). Further investigation of all these, based on more material, is needed.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 41. V. perinensis} W. Becker,{\i  Feddes Repert.}{\b  17}: 74 (1921). Glabrous, caespitose perennial 6-8 cm. Leaves 1·5-2·5 cm, entire; lamina oblong, obtuse, rather thick; petiole twice as long as lamina. Stipules like the leaves, with a long petiole. Flowers c. 2 cm, yellow, or sometimes violet. Sepals wide, almost parallel
\par

\par
276}
\par