{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 92 Leaves not fleshy; flowers 2-3 cm; spur 8-12 mm
\par
93 Stipules 0·5-1 cm, 3-partite; flowers dark violet ................. {\b 52. nebrodensis}
\par
93 Stipules 1-2 cm, 3- to 7-partite; flowers yellow or bluish-violet 
\par
   ............................................................................................ {\b 55. pseudogracilis} 
\par
73 Spur 7 mm or less
\par
94 At least the upper leaves linear or linear-lanceolate
\par
95 Lower leaves orbicular
\par
96 Without leafy stolons; flowers 2-2·5 cm ................................... {\b 72. dubyana}
\par
96 With leafy stolons; flowers 2·5-3·5 cm .................................... {\b 73. declinata} 
\par
95 Lower leaves not orbicular
\par
97 Caespitose; plant usually pubescent, rarely glabrous ......... {\b 60. allchariensis}
\par
97 Not caespitose; plant glabrous
\par
98 Flowers 1·5-2 cm; spur 6 mm ................................................. {\b 71. rhodopeia} 
\par
98 Flowers 2·5-4 cm; spur 3-4 mm
\par
99 Lower leaves linear-lanceolate ................................................ {\b 70. beckiana}
\par
99 Lower leaves ovate .................................................................. {\b 73. declinata}
\par
94 Leaves not linear or linear-lanceolate
\par
100 Stipules not divided, denticulate ............................................. {\b 62. arsenica}
\par
100 Stipules ± deeply divided, or dentate
\par
101 Plant not more than 3 cm
\par
102 Sepals dentate ........................................................................ {\b 61. frondosa}
\par
102 Sepals entire or serrate .......................................................... {\b 56. eugeniae}
\par
101 Plant more than 3 cm
\par
103 Stipules pinnately divided; terminal segment large, usually crenate
\par
104 Sepals ovate-lanceolate or triangular ....................................... {\b 79. aetolica}
\par
104 Sepals lanceolate or linear
\par
105 Flowers 1-1·5 cm, yellow; spur slightly longer than 
\par
    calycine appendages .................................................................. {\b 77. langeana}
\par
105 Flowers 1·5-4 cm, violet or yellow; spur up to 3 times as long as
\par
    calycine appendages
\par
106 Petals as wide as long ............................................................. {\b 56. eugeniae}
\par
106 Petals longer than wide ............................................................. {\b 78. tricolor}
\par
103 Stipules ± divided but terminal segment not large or crenate
\par
107 Stipules divided to mid-vein or almost to base, the undivided part not
\par
    wider than the length of the segments
\par
108 Stems hairy
\par
109 Upper leaves narrowly lanceolate ........................................... {\b 72. dubyana}
\par
109 Upper leaves ovate or oblong
\par
110 Spur 6-7 mm, much longer than calycine appendages ............. {\b 68. gracilis}
\par
110 Spur c. 4 mm, not much longer than calycine appendages ....... {\b 76. hispida}
\par
108 Stems glabrous or subglabrous
\par
111 Sepals ovate-lanceolate or triangular ....................................... {\b 79. aetolica}
\par
111 Sepals lanceolate or linear
\par
112 Plant with leafy stolons .......................................................... {\b 73. declinata}
\par
112 Plant without leafy stolons
\par
113 Caespitose ................................................................................. {\b 58. eximia}
\par
113 Not caespitose
\par
114 Stipules 6- to 9-partite; spur curved ....................................... {\b 72. dubyana}
\par
114 Stipules 3- to 5-partite; spur straight ............................................ {\b 74. lutea}
\par
107 Stipules not very deeply divided, the undivided part wider than the
\par
    length of the segments
\par
115 Flowers 3-4 cm; petals almost orbicular
\par
116 Spur stout, not much longer than calycine appendages ........... {\b 57. oreades}
\par
116 Spur slender, twice as long as calycine appendages ............... {\b 69. speciosa}
\par
115 Flowers usually less than 3 cm; petals ± ovate
\par
117 Spur 3 times as long as calycine appendages ...................... {\b 66. elegantula}
\par
117 Spur not more than twice as long as calycine appendages
\par
118 Plant hairy; spur twice as long as calycine appendages ..... {\b 64. orphianidis}
\par
118 Plant glabrous or slightly hairy; spur equalling or scarcely 
\par
    exceeding calycine appendages ..................................................... {\b 65. dacica}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Sect. VIOLA (Sect. {\i Nomimium} Ging.). Herbaceous. Stipules not leafy. Open flowers blue, violet or white; cleistogamous flowers produced. Style beaked at apex.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Subsect.{\i  Viola.} Perennial; acaulescent, sometimes stoloniferous. Capsules globose, not explosive, on decumbent peduncles. Seeds with conspicuous elaiosome.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. V. odorata} L.,{\i  Sp. Pl.} 934 (1753). Perennial 5-15 cm, with leaf-rosette and long, procumbent, rooting stolons. Leaves orbicular-reniform, deeply cordate, widest at about the middle; petiole long. Stipules ovate, glabrous or sparsely ciliate, shortly glandular-fimbriate. Bracts at or above middle of peduncle. Flowers c. 1·5 cm, dark violet or white, fragrant. Sepals ovate, obtuse. Spur c. 6 mm, exceeding calycine appendages. Stigmatic beak vertical, its length equalling diameter of style. Capsule pubescent. 2n = 20.{\i  Europe, except the extreme north and parts of the Mediterranean region.} All except Bl Fa Fe Is Rs (N) Sb ?Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Widely cultivated in gardens and often naturalized. Its northern limit as a native plant is therefore uncertain; it is certainly native only in S., S.C. and parts of W. Europe.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b  V. ignobilis} Rupr., {\i Mém. Acad. Sci. Pétersb.} ser. 7,{\b  15}({\b 2}): 148 (1869), from the Caucasus and Iran, which is like {\b 1} but has ciliate sepals and a more or less horizontal stigmatic beak, has been recorded from 3 localities in Romania, but further confirmation of identity is needed.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. V. suavis} Bieb.,{\i  Fl. Taur.-Cauc. }{\b 3}: 164 (1819) ({\i V. pontica} W. Becker, {\i V. sepincola} Jordan). Perennial with short rhizome and leaf-rosette, producing short, stout stolons. Spring leaves 3-8 cm; summer leaves up to 20 cm, glabrous or hairy; lamina ovate-oblong to broadly ovate, broadest below the middle, cordate; petioles eventually very long. Stipules lanceolate, long fimbriate; fimbriae ciliate. Bracts below middle of peduncle. Flowers 1·5-2 cm, violet with white throat, fragrant. Spur exceeding calycine appendages. Capsule large, glabrous or pubescent. 2n = 40.{\i  S., C. & E. Europe, northwards to }52°{\i  N. in C. Russia, and extending to north-west France.} Al Au Bu Co ?Cr Cz Ga ?Gr He Hs Hu It Ju Po Rm Rs (C, W, K, E) [Ge].
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  A critical and widely distributed species. It was divided by Becker ({\i loc. cit.}) into a series of geographical subspecies, but his treatment is not satisfactory and further investigation is needed.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b V. catalonica} W. Becker, {\i Cavanillesia }{\b 2}: 43 (1929), from N.E. Spain, {\b V. jagellonica} Zapal., {\i Bull. Int. Acad. Sci. Cracovie} ser. B, {\b 1914}: 455 (1914), from Poland, and {\b V. adriatica} Freyn, {\i Flora} ({\i Regensb.}) {\b 67}: 679 (1884), from N.W. Jugoslavia, are somewhat intermediate between {\b 2} and {\b 3}. They may be of hybrid origin, and require further investigation.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 3. V. alba} Besser,{\i  Prim. Fl. Galic. }{\b 1}: 171 (1809). Perennial 5-15 cm, with short rhizome and leaf-rosette, usually producing long, slender, ascending non-rooting stolons which usually flower in their first year. Leaves persisting during winter, ovate to triangular-ovate, cordate, dark green, hairy or glabrous. Spring leaves c. 5 cm, summer leaves 10-15 cm; lamina much shorter than petiole. Stipules linear-lanceolate, long-fimbriate; fimbriae ciliate. Peduncles 4-6 cm; bracts at or above middle. Flowers 1·5-2 cm, fragrant, white or violet; lateral petals
\par

\par
272}
\par