{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 bearded. Seeds oblong-ovate.{\i  C. & S. Europe; Öland.} Al Au Bu Co Cr Cz Ga Ge Gr He Hs Hu It Ju ?Lu Po Rm Rs (W, K) Su Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Stolons sometimes absent; leaves sparsely hairy to glabrous, 
\par
  with margins usually convex; flowers violet; capsule 
\par
  sparsely hairy to glabrous ............................................. ({\b c}) subsp. {\b dehnhardtii}
\par
1 Stolons always present; leaves usually hairy, with straight or 
\par
  somewhat concave margins; flowers usually white; capsule hairy
\par
2 Leaves and capsule light green; spur yellow-green ................. ({\b a}) subsp. {\b alba}
\par
2 Leaves and capsule dark green; spur violet .................. ({\b b}) subsp. {\b scotophylla}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b alba}: 2n = 20.{\i  North and West of the Alps, from S. France to Poland}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b scotophylla} (Jordan) Nyman, {\i Consp.} 78 (1878): 2n = 20.{\i  S.E. Europe, extending to N. Italy, Austria and Switzerland}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b c}) Subsp. {\b dehnhardtii} (Ten.) W. Becker,{\i  Ber. Bayer. Bot. Ges.}{\b  8}({\b 2}):257(1902): 2n = 20. {\i Mediterranean region.}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b V. alba} subsp.{\b  thessala} (Boiss. & Spruner) Hayek,{\i  Prodr. Fl. Penins. Balcan.}{\b  1}: 502 (1925), from Greece, is probably best included in {\b 3}({\b b}).
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b V. cadevallii} Pau, {\i Mem. Acad. Ci. Artes Barcelona} ser. 3,{\b  2}: 62 (1896), from Spain, and{\b  V. pentelica} Vierh., {\i Verh. Zool.-Bot. Ges. Wien}{\b  64}: 266 (1914), from S.E. Greece, are probably best regarded as variants of {\b 3}({\b c}).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 4. V. cretica} Boiss. & Heldr. in Boiss., {\i Diagn. Pl. Or. Nov.}{\b  2}({\b 8}): 51 (1849). Like {\b 3} but stolons very long; leaves hispid; lateral petals beardless; capsule hairy; seeds orbicular to ovate. 2n = 20. •{\i  Mountains of Kriti.} Cr.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 5. V. jaubertiana} Marès & Vigineix, {\i Cat. Pl. Baléar.} 37 (1880). Like {\b 3} but completely glabrous; stolons stout; leaves coriaceous, shining, less deeply cordate; stipules broad, triangular, with glandular fimbriae; flowers larger than in {\b 3}, bright violet; capsule glabrous; seeds 3 mm. 2n = 20.{\i  Damp ravines. • Mallorca.} Bl.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 6. V. hirta} L.,{\i  Sp. Pl.} 934 (1753). More or less hairy perennial 5-15 cm, with short rhizome and leaf-rosette. Spring leaves cordate, longer than wide, summer leaves oblong-ovate, deeply cordate; petioles more or less glabrous. Stipules broadly triangular to lanceolate, shortly glandular-fimbriate, glabrous or ciliate at apex. Bracts below the middle of peduncle. Flowers c. 1·5 cm, violet, not fragrant. Sepals oblong, obtuse. Spur dark violet, exceeding calycine appendages. Capsule pubescent. 2n = 20.{\i  Most of Europe. }Al Au Be Br Bu ?Co Cr Cz Da Ga Ge Gr Hb He Ho Hs Hu It Ju No Po Rm Rs (N, B, C, W, E) Si Su [Fe].
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 7. V. collina} Besser, {\i Cat. Pl. Horto Cremen.} 151 (1816). Like {\b 6} but leaves with deeper sinus; stipules linear to oblong-lanceolate, longer-fimbriate and more hairy; bracts above middle of peduncle; flowers pale blue, fragrant; spur whitish and shorter. 2n = 20.{\i  Usually calcicole. Scattered over a large part of Europe, but absent from the Balkan peninsula, the islands and much of the north.} Au Be ?Co Cz Fe Ga Ge He Hs Hu It Ju No Po Rm Rs (N, B, C W E) Su.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 8. V. ambigua} Waldst. & Kit.,{\i  Pl. Rar. Hung.}{\b  2}: 208 (1804). Perennial with leaf-rosette; rhizome stout, more than 2 mm thick. Leaves oblong-ovate with truncate base, usually sparsely hairy, later glabrescent. Stipules 1-1·5 cm, dark green, broadly lanceolate, shortly glandular-fimbriate, ciliate. Peduncles scarcely exceeding the leaves; bracts at or below middle. Flowers 1-1·5 cm, fragrant. Sepals c. 3·5 mm, oblong. Petals dark violet. Spur 2-4 mm, curved, stout. Capsule pubescent. 2n = 40.{\i  Calcifuge. From E.C. Russia westwards to Macedonia and E. Austria}. Au Bu Cz ?Ge Hu Ju Rm Rs (C, W, K, E).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 9. V. thomasiana} Song. & Perr. in Billot,{\i  Annot. }183 (1860). Like {\b 8} but rhizome slender, less than 2 mm thick; leaves shallowly cordate; stipules 0·5-1 cm, linear-lanceolate, densely ciliate; sepals c. 2·5 mm; petals lilac or almost white; spur slender. 2n = 20.{\i  Usually above} 1000{\i  m; calcifuge. • C. & S. Alps.} Au Ga He It.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 10. V. pyrenaica} Ramond ex DC. in Lam. & DC., {\i Fl. Fr}. ed. 3, {\b 4}: 803 (1805). Perennial 8-10 cm, with short, erect rhizome and leaf-rosette. Spring leaves broadly ovate, cordate, glabrescent; summer leaves subacuminate, shining. Stipules lanceolate, shortly glandular-fimbriate, ciliate. Peduncles 3-5 cm; bracts at or above middle. Flowers c. 1·5 cm, pale violet with white throat, fragrant. Sepals broadly ovate, obtuse. Spur pale violet. Capsule glabrous. 2n = 20. {\i Subalpine habitats. Pyrenees, Alps and Jura; one station in C. Appennini; mountains of Balkan peninsula.} Al Au Bu Ga Gr He Hs It Ju.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b V. prenja }G. Beck, {\i Ann. Naturh. Mus.} ({\i Wien}){\b  2}: 81 (1887), described from alpine rocks in W. Jugoslavia (Prenj Planina), is like {\b 10} but has flowers c. 1 cm. It is probably best regarded as a variety of {\b 10}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 11. V. chelmea} Boiss. & Heldr. in Boiss., {\i Diagn. Pl. Or. Nov.}{\b  3}({\b 1}): 54 (1853). Perennial 4-8 cm, with short, erect rhizome and leaf-rosette. Lamina of spring leaves 0·5-1·5 cm, much shorter than petiole, triangular, truncate or cuneate at base, rather hairy; summer leaves larger, similar in shape, glabrous. Stipules broadly lanceolate, glandular-fimbriate. Flowers 1 cm, not fragrant. Sepals obtuse or subacute. Petals pale violet, not darkly veined. Spur rather stout, shorter than sepals. Capsule glabrous.{\i  Calcareous rocks, }500-2200{\i  m. • W. Jugoslavia and Greece.} Gr Ju.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b chelmea}: Stipules fimbriate, glabrous. Bracts of the peduncle narrow, glabrous or sparsely ciliate. 2n = 20. {\i Mountains of Greece}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b vratnikensis} Gáyer & Degen, {\i Magyar Bot. Lapok}{\b  13}: 309 (1914): Stipules long-fimbriate; fimbriae equalling the breadth of the stipule, ciliate. Bracts of the peduncle wide at the base, ciliate.{\i  W. Jugoslavia}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b V. vilaensis} Hayek,{\i  Denkschr. Akad. Wiss. Math.-Nat. Kl.} ({\i Wien}) {\b 94}: 154 (1918), from screes in Crna Gora (near Rikavac, on the Albanian frontier), is a variant of {\b 11} with stipules slightly hairy at the apex, and pale lilac or white petals with dark veins.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Species of Sect. {\i Viola,} subsect.{\i  Viola }({\b 1-11}) frequently hybridize with one another, but very rarely with species of other subsections. Of the 30 or more hybrids described the following 5 are probably the most frequent; all but the fifth are stoloniferous: {\i V. alba} ×{\i  odorata, V. collina} × {\i odorata, V. hirta }×{\i  odorata} ( {\i V.} × {\i permixta} Jordan), {\i V. alba} ×{\i  hirta, V. collina} × {\i hirta}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Subsect.{\i  Rostratae} Kupffer. Perennial; caulescent; lacking stolons or long creeping rhizomes. Capsules trigonous, explosive, on erect peduncles. Seeds with inconspicuous elaiosome.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 12. V. mirabilis} L.,{\i  Sp. Pl.} 936 (1753). Spring leaves in a basal rosette. Stems with a line of hairs, developing in summer to c. 20 cm. Mature leaves 4-8 cm, as wide as long, orbicular, cordate, acute. Stipules 1-2 cm, broadly lanceolate, entire, eventually brown. Open flowers 2 cm, arising from the rosette,
\par

\par
273}
\par