{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 Sect. SYNSTYLAE DC. Trailing, climbing or creeping shrubs. Rhizome short. Prickles curved, all similar. Outer sepals usually pinnatifid, deflexed and deciduous after anthesis. Disc wide, with a narrow orifice. Carpels sessile. Styles connate in a column, at least as long as the inner stamens, not becoming free in fruit.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. R. sempervirens} L.,{\i  Sp. Pl.} 492 (1753). Evergreen, with long, creeping stems. Prickles sparse, curved, markedly decurrent at base. Leaflets (3-)5-7, 30-60 × 10-20 mm, coriaceous, ovate-lanceolate, acuminate, serrate, glabrous, shining; stipules narrow. Inflorescence (1-)3- to 7-flowered, corymbose. Pedicels glandular-hispid, 2-4 times as long as the fruit. Sepals ovate, long-acuminate, usually entire, glandular with stalked glands on the margins and back, deflexed and deciduous after anthesis. Petals 10-20(-30) mm, white. Stylar column hairy or glabrous. Fruit c. 10 mm, globose or broadly ovoid, red.{\i  Mediterranean region and S.W. Europe, northwards to }47° 30' {\i in W. France.} Al Bl Co Cr Ga Gr Hs It Ju Lu Sa Si Tu [Br].
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. R. arvensis} Hudson,{\i  Fl. Angl.} 192 (1762). Deciduous, with long, weak, trailing stems. Prickles sparse, hooked, the upper sometimes slender and almost straight. Leaflets 5-7, 15-40 × 10-20 mm, herbaceous, ovate to broadly elliptical, dull above, sparsely appressed-pubescent to subglabrous. Inflorescence 1- to 3(-5)-flowered. Pedicels stipitate-glandular, 2-3 times as long as fruit. Sepals eglandular on the back, deflexed after anthesis, the outer with long, narrow lobes. Petals 15-25 mm, white. Stylar column glabrous. Fruit 10-16 mm, globose to ovoid, red. {\i S., W. & C. Europe.} Al Au Be Bl Br Bu ?Co Cz Ga Ge Gr Hb He Ho Hs Hu It Ju ?Po Rm Rs (W) Si Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 3. R. phoenicia} Boiss., {\i Diagn. Pl. Or. Nov.}{\b  2}({\b 10}): 4 (1849). Like {\b 2} but stems climbing; prickles stout, hooked; leaflets 15-50 × 10-30 mm, usually densely hairy on both surfaces; inflorescence 10 to 20-flowered, corymbose; outer sepals with short and wide lobes; fruit c. 10 mm.{\i  N.E. Greece} ({\i Thraki}). Gr. ({\i S.W. Asia.})
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 4. R. moschata} J. Herrmann,{\i  Diss. Rosa }15 (1762). Vigorous evergreen climber up to 12 m. Prickles sparse, stout, curved. Leaflets 5-7, 25-55 × 20-30 mm, ovate to elliptical, usually acute, serrate, usually pubescent, greyish-green beneath. Inflorescence many-flowered. Pedicels slightly pubescent and glandular. Sepals lanceolate, with a setiform apical appendage, more or less grey-pubescent, the outer with 2-4 lobes. Petals 10-15 mm, creamy-white. Stylar column hairy. Fruit 8-10 mm, ovoid.{\i  Cultivated for ornament, mainly in S. & W. Europe; naturalized in the Mediterranean region.} [Cr Ga Gr Hs Si.] ({\i Himalaya, Iran.})
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Sect. PIMPINELLIFOLIAE DC. Deciduous shrubs. Rhizome long. Stems usually with straight prickles and acicles. Flowers solitary, bracteate. Sepals entire, erect and persistent after anthesis. Disc narrow, with a wide orifice. Carpels shortly stipitate. Styles free.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 5. R. pimpinellifolia} L.,{\i  Syst. Nat}. ed. 10, {\b 2}: 1062 (1759) ({\i R. spinosissima} L. pro parte, {\i R. myriacantha} DC.). Stems up to 1 m, erect, forming dense patches. Prickles abundant and long on the main stems, sparser and shorter on the flowering stems and mixed with acicles. Leaflets 5-11, 5-15(-20) × 4-9 mm, glabrous, suborbicular to broadly elliptical, usually simply serrate and eglandular. Flowers solitary. Pedicels longer than the fruit, eglandular or with stalked glands. Sepals narrowly lanceolate, acuminate, eglandular. Petals 10-20(-25) mm, white, rarely pink. Styles short, usually in a compact head, lanate. Fruit c. 6 mm, globose or depressed-globose, black. 2n = 28.{\i  Europe except the north-east, most of Fennoscandia, the extreme south-west and many of the islands.} Al Au Be Br Bu Cz Da Ga Ge Gr Hb He Ho Hu Is It Ju No Po Rm Rs (C, W, K, E) †Su.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Many hybrids between{\b  5} and members of Sect. {\i Caninae} have been described. The influence of{\b  5} is usually recognizable in the presence of acicles and in the habit and leaflet-shape.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b    6. R. foetida} J. Herrmann,{\i  Diss. Rosa }18 (1762). Stems up to 4 m. Prickles curved, more or less compressed and strongly decurrent at the base. Leaflets 5-7, 15-40 × 12-25 mm, ovate-elliptical, usually sparsely hairy and dark green above, sparsely glandular and slightly paler beneath, biserrate; teeth glandular. Flowers 1-3. Pedicels usually glabrous, sometimes hispid. Sepals attenuate at apex, glandular-hispid. Petals 20-30 mm, yellow. Styles long, lanate. Fruit c. 10 mm, globose, red. {\i Cultivated for ornament; locally naturalized in S. & C. Europe}. [Au Cz Ga Ge Gr Hs It Rm Tu.] ({\i S.W. Asia}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Sect. CASSIORHODON Dumort. (Sect.{\i  Cinnamomeae} Crépin). Erect, deciduous shrubs. Rhizome long. Prickles at the nodes slender, straight, the others stout, hooked, or absent; acicles often present. Flowers in bracteate corymbs. Sepals usually entire, erect and persistent after anthesis. Disc narrow, with a wide orifice. Carpels lining the sides as well as the base of the hypanthium. Styles free.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 7. R. acicularis} Lindley, {\i Ros. Monogr.} 44 (1820). Stems up to 1 m, with numerous slender acicles and long straight prickles. Leaflets (3-)5-7, 15-55 × 15-28 mm, broadly elliptical to oblong, acute, usually rather coarsely serrate, usually glabrous above, pubescent beneath. Flowers solitary, scented. Bracts about equalling the pedicels, usually narrow. Pedicels usually glabrous, rarely glandular-hispid. Petals 18-24 mm, purplish-pink. Styles lanate. Fruit ovoid, with a distinct neck below the disc. {\i N.E. Europe, extending locally southwards to} c. 52°{\i  N. in C. & E. Russia.} Fe Rs (N, C) Su [Au].
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 8. R. majalis} J. Herrmann,{\i  Diss. Rosa} 8 (1762) ({\i R. cinnamomea} sensu L. (1759), non L. (1753), {\i R. spinosissima} L., nom. ambig.). Stems up to 2 m, forming large patches; bark reddish-brown. Prickles slender, straight or slightly curved, in pairs at the nodes; flowering stems sometimes unarmed. Leaflets 5-7, 15-45 × 15-27 mm, elliptical to obovate, cuneate at base, serrate, pubescent, bluish-green above, pale bluish beneath. Flowers solitary. Bracts about equalling or a little longer than the pedicels, large. Pedicels glabrous. Petals 18-25(-30) mm, purplish-pink. Styles lanate. Fruit depressed-globose, rarely ovoid, glabrous, red. 2n = 14.{\i  N. & C. Europe; U.S.S.R. except the south-west.} Au Cz Fe Ga Ge He It Ju No Po Rs (N, B, C, W, E) Su [Be Bu Da Ho].
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 9. R. glauca} Pourret,{\i  Mem. Acad. Toulouse }{\b 3}: 326 (1788) ({\i R. ferruginea }auct., non Vill., {\i R. rubrifolia} Vill.). Stems up to 3 m, erect bluish-green, pruinose when young, becoming brown. Prickles scattered, curved or straight, rather slender, without stout bases. Leaflets 5-9, 20-45 × 15-25 mm, elliptical to ovate, serrate, glabrous, bluish-green or purplish. Flowers 1-5. Pedicels glabrous, very rarely with stalked glands. Sepals 2-3 mm wide, sometimes almost entire but usually with a few linear lobes, glabrous. Petals 18-22 mm, narrow, deep pink. Disc flat. Styles white-lanate. Fruit c. 15 mm, globose, usually glabrous, brownish-red.{\i  Mountains of C. Europe, extending southwards to the Pyrenees, C. Italy and N. Albania.} Al Au Bu Co Cz Ga Ge He Hs Hu It Ju Po Rm [Fe Su].
\par

\par
27}
\par