{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs36\qc VIOLALES
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 110.             VIOLACEAE}
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc Edit. D.H. Valentine.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Small shrubs or herbs. Leaves alternate, stipulate, usually undivided. Flowers hermaphrodite, solitary. Sepals 5, persistent. Petals 5, free. Stamens 5, introrse, connivent round the ovary. Ovary superior, unilocular, with 3 placentas and numerous ovules. Fruit a 3-valved capsule. Seeds endospermic.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 1.                 Viola}                    L.
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc By D.H. Valentine, H. Merxmüller & A. Schmidt.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Leaves petiolate. Sepals prolonged into short appendages below the point of their insertion. Corolla zygomorphic, the lower petal spurred. Connectives of stamens with an apical appendage; the 2 lower stamens spurred. Style thickened above; stigma of various shapes (beaked, bilobed, capitate). Seeds with an elaiosome.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Various species and hybrids of the genus are commonly cultivated, especially the sweet violet, {\b 1}, and the garden pansy, {\i V.} × {\i wittrockiana} Gams (= {\i V. hortensis} auct.). The origin of the latter is not known with certainty, but it is thought to have arisen from hybrids between {\b 74}, {\b 78} and {\i V. altaica} Ker-Gawler. Amongst other European species in cultivation are {\b 48}, {\b 63}, {\b 73}, {\b 74} and their hybrids.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Description of flowers in the text refer to open (chasmogamous) flowers. Cleistogamous flowers are produced by species {\b 1-33} and by {\b 88-89}. Flower lengths are measured from apex of spur to apex of lower petal, or from apex of upper to apex of lower petal, whichever is the longer. The term{\i  rosulate} is used for plants with a loose, basal rosette of 3-5 petiolate leaves from the axils of which arise flowering branches, and the term {\i arosulate} for plants in which this basal rosette is lacking.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Literature: W. Becker, {\i Violae Europaeae.} Dresden. 1910. (Originally 
\par
published in {\i Beih. Bot. Centr. }{\b 26}({\b 2}): 1 44 (1909); 289-390 (1910).)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Aerial stems woody, at least below
\par
2 Spur less than 10 mm
\par
3 Flowers 2-2·5 cm, purple-violet ........................................... {\b 60. allchariensis}
\par
3 Flowers 1-1·5 cm, whitish, pale violet or yellow
\par
4 Leaves ovate to linear-lanceolate; petals whitish or pale
\par
  violet ....................................................................................... {\b 88. arborescens}
\par
4 Leaves obovate; petals yellow ............................................ {\b 89. scorpiuroides}
\par
2 Spur more than 10 mm
\par
5 Spur c. 12 mm ............................................................................ {\b 91. kosaninii}
\par
5 Spur more than 16 mm
\par
6 Spur 16-18 mm; lower petal entire ...................................... {\b 90. delphinantha}
\par
6 Spur 20-30 mm; lower petal emarginate ................................. {\b 92. cazorlensis}
\par
1 Aerial stems herbaceous or absent
\par
7 Lateral petals directed downwards; style usually neither
\par
  capitate nor bilobed
\par
8 Style capitate; rhizome thick and fleshy ...................................... {\b 32. obliqua}
\par
8 Style not capitate; rhizome not thick or fleshy
\par
9 Caulescent, with leafy, aerial flowering stems
\par
10 Plant lacking basal leaf-rosette; leaves usually longer than wide
\par
11 Leaves oblong-ovate or ovate, cordate or subcordate
\par
12 Stipules equalling or exceeding petiole ..................................... {\b 25. jordanii}
\par
12 Stipules usually not more than half as long as petiole ................. {\b 20. canina}
\par
11 Leaves ovate-lanceolate or lanceolate, usually not cordate
\par
13 Spur much exceeding calycine appendages .................................. {\b 21. lactea}
\par
13 Spur only slightly exceeding calycine appendages
\par
14 Plant glabrous .............................................................................. {\b 23. pumila}
\par
14 Plant, or at least leaves, shortly pubescent
\par
15 Stems up to 50 cm; stipules equalling or exceeding petiole ........ {\b 24. elatior}
\par
15 Stems up to 25 cm; stipules not exceeding petiole, often only
\par
   half as long ............................................................................. {\b 22. persicifolia}
\par
10 Plant with basal leaf-rosette; leaves usually about as long as wide
\par
16 Stipules entire; open flowers arising from the base of the rosette
\par
17 Stems glabrous .................................................................... {\b 13. willkommii}
\par
17 Stems with a line of hairs ......................................................... {\b 12. mirabilis}
\par
16 Stipules usually dentate or fimbriate; open flowers cauline
\par
18 Calycine appendages 2-3 mm, conspicuous
\par
19 Flowers pale-blue or whitish; stigma hairy ............................... {\b 19. sieheana}
\par
19 Flowers deep violet; stigma glabrous or papillose ................... {\b 18. riviniana}
\par
18 Calycine appendages not more than 1 mm, inconspicuous
\par
20 Stipules narrowly lanceolate, long-fimbriate ............... {\b 15. reichenbachiana}
\par
20 Stipules broadly lanceolate to ovate, shortly fimbriate
\par
21 Stems up to 25 cm; spur 4-6 mm .............................................. {\b 16. tanaitica}
\par
21 Stems not more than 10 cm; spur 1·5-4 mm
\par
22 Leaves delicate; petiole glabrous or with scattered hairs .......... {\b 17. mauritii}
\par
22 Leaves firm; petiole usually pubescent .................................... {\b 14. rupestris}
\par
9 Acaulescent, lacking leafy, aerial stems, but sometimes with stolons
\par
23 Stipules semi-adnate to petiole
\par
24 Leaves deeply palmatifid ............................................................ {\b 31. pinnata}
\par
24 Leaves simple, not palmatifid
\par
25 Leaves cordate with shallow sinus; 
\par
   plant with creeping rhizome ...................................................... {\b 26. uliginosa}
\par
25 Leaves cordate with deep sinus; plant without creeping rhizome
\par
26 Sepals obtuse .................................................................................... {\b 29. jooi}
\par
26 Sepals acute ............................................................................... {\b 30. selkirkii}
\par
23 Stipules free
\par
27 Sepals acute
\par
28 Leaves acute ............................................................................. {\b 12. mirabilis}
\par
28 Leaves obtuse ...................................................................... {\b 13. willkommii}
\par
27 Sepals obtuse
\par
29 Capsule trigonous, explosive; fruiting peduncles erect
\par
30 Leaves in pairs; bracts in upper third of peduncle .................... {\b 28. epipsila}
\par
30 Leaves 3 or 4 together; bracts at middle of peduncle ............... {\b 27. palustris}
\par
29 Capsule spherical, not explosive; fruiting peduncles procumbent
\par
31 Stolons present
\par
32 Whole plant glabrous
\par
33 Stipules broad, triangular; stolons stout ................................. {\b 5. jaubertiana}
\par
33 Stipules narrow 
\par
34 Stipules lanceolate; stolons short, stout .......................................... {\b 2. suavis}
\par
34 Stipules linear-lanceolate; stolons long, slender ................................ {\b 3. alba}
\par
32 Plant with hairs on stem, leaves or fruit
\par

\par
270}
\par