{\rtf1\ansi \deff4\deflang1033{\fonttbl{\f4\froman\fcharset0\fprq2 Times New Roman;}}{\colortbl;\red0\green0\blue0;\red0\green0\blue255;\red0\green255\blue255;\red0\green255\blue0;\red255\green0\blue255;\red255\green0\blue0;\red255\green255\blue0;\red255\green255\blue255;\red0\green0\blue128;\red0\green128\blue128;\red0\green128\blue0;\red128\green0\blue128;\red128\green0\blue0;\red128\green128\blue0;\red128\green128\blue128;\red192\green192\blue192;}{\stylesheet{\widctlpar \f4\fs20\lang2057 \snext0 Normal;}{\*\cs10 \additive Default Paragraph Font;}}{\info{\author dddd}{\operator dddd}{\creatim\yr1998\mo11\dy11\hr17\min13}{\revtim\yr1998\mo11\dy11\hr17\min14}{\version2}{\edmins1}{\nofpages5}{\nofwords1163}{\nofchars6632}{\*\company  }{\vern57431}}\widowctrl\ftnbj\aenddoc\hyphcaps0 \fet0\sectd \linex0 {\*\pnseclvl1\pnucrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl2\pnucltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl3\pndec\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl4\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl5\pndec\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl6\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl7\pnlcrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl8\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl9\pnlcrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}
\pard\plain \li200\ \f4\fs20\lang2057 {\fs28 35 Stolons short, stout ......................................................................... }{\b\fs28 2. suavis}{\fs28  
\par 35 Stolons long, slender
\par 36 Leaves orbicular, obtuse; stipules broadly ovate ......................... }{\b\fs28 1. odorata}{\fs28 
\par 36 Leaves ovate, acute; stipules linear-lanceolate
\par 37 Leaves sparsely hairy; lateral petals bearded .................................... }{\b\fs28 3. alba}{\fs28 
\par 37 Leaves hispid; lateral petals beardless ........................................... }{\b\fs28 4. cretica}{\fs28 
\par 31 Stolons absent
\par 38 Leaves cordate with deep sinus
\par 39 Stipules shortly fimbriate; flowers not fragrant ............................... }{\b\fs28 6. hirta}{\fs28 
\par 39 Stipules long-fimbriate; flowers fragrant
\par 40 Leaves light green; spur whitish ................................................... }{\b\fs28 7. collina}{\fs28 
\par 40 Leaves dark green; spur violet .......................................................... }{\b\fs28 3. alba}{\fs28 
\par 38 Leaves cordate with shallow sinus, or truncate
\par 41 Leaves truncate or subcordate
\par 42 Flowers pale violet; capsule glabrous ....................................... }{\b\fs28 11. chelmea}{\fs28 
\par 42 Flowers dark violet; capsule pubescent ...................................... }{\b\fs28 8. ambigua}{\fs28 
\par 41 Leaves cordate with shallow sinus
\par 43 Leaves oblong-ovate; sepals and capsule pubescent ............. }{\b\fs28 9. thomasiana}{\fs28 
\par 43 Leaves broadly ovate; sepals and capsule glabrous ............... }{\b\fs28 10. pyrenaica}{\fs28 
\par 7 Lateral petals directed upwards; style capitate or bilobed at apex
\par 44 Leaves reniform; style bilobed at apex ........................................ }{\b\fs28 33. biflora}{\fs28 
\par 44 Leaves not reniform; style capitate at apex
\par 45 Stems entirely subterranean
\par 46 Leaves \'b1 entire; stipules ovate-orbicular ........................... }{\b\fs28 5. grisebachiana}{\fs28 
\par 46 Leaves crenate; stipules oblong or lanceolate .............................. }{\b\fs28 46. alpina}{\fs28 
\par 45 Aerial stems present, though sometimes very short
\par 47 All leaves entire
\par 48 Annual
\par 49 Plant densely hairy ..................................................................... }{\b\fs28 83. parvula}{\fs28 
\par 49 Plant glabrous or sparsely hairy
\par 50 Flowers less than 1 cm, lilac-blue                                                }{\b\fs28 84. heldreichiana}{\fs28 
\par 50 Flowers 1 cm, yellow ............................................................... }{\b\fs28 85. mercurii}{\fs28 
\par 48 Perennial
\par 51 Spur 5-10 mm; flowers 2 cm or more
\par 52 Leaves linear to oblong-spathulate; flowers yellow
\par    (rarely violet) ...................................................................... }{\b\fs28 40. brachyphylla}{\fs28 
\par 52 At least the lower leaves broader; flowers pink or violet
\par 53 Stipules with 2-7 basal laciniae ................................................ }{\b\fs28 38. valderia}{\fs28 
\par 53 Stipules entire or rarely with 1-2 laciniae
\par 54 Spur 5-8 mm; petioles long and slender ..................................... }{\b\fs28 36. cenisia}{\fs28 
\par 54 Spur 8-10 mm; petioles short and stout .............................. }{\b\fs28 39. magellensis}{\fs28 
\par 51 Spur less than 5 mm
\par 55 Plant with a short, dense tomentum
\par 56 Upper leaves narrower than lower; stipules with 3 laciniae  }{\b\fs28 35. diversifolia}{\fs28 
\par 56 Upper leaves not narrower than lower; stipules entire
\par    or with 1 lacinia
\par 57 Spur not more than twice as long as calycine appendages .... }{\b\fs28 42. stojanowii}{\fs28 
\par 57 Spur 2-3 times as long as calycine appendages ........................ }{\b\fs28 43. fragrans}{\fs28 
\par 55 Plant glabrous or sparsely pubescent
\par 58 Spur scarcely exceeding calycine appendages
\par 59 Leaves oblong; flowers usually yellow .................................. }{\b\fs28 41. perinensis}{\fs28 
\par 59 Leaves ovate to orbicular; flowers violet to whitish
\par 60 Petiole slightly longer than lamina ..................................... }{\b\fs28 34. crassiuscula}{\fs28 
\par 60 Petiole at least twice as long as lamina ............................ }{\b\fs28 45. grisebachiana}{\fs28 
\par 58 Spur at least twice as long as calycine appendages
\par 61 Flowers up to 2\'b75 cm; spur slender .......................................... }{\b\fs28 37. comollia}{\fs28 
\par 61 Flowers c. 1 cm; spur stout
\par 62 Leaves ovate to orbicular, subcordate .......................... }{\b\fs28 47. nummulariifolia}{\fs28 
\par 62 Leaves oblong-linear to oblong-ovate, not subcordate
\par 63 Leaves c. 1\'b75 cm, gradually narrowed to petiole ...................... }{\b\fs28 43. fragrans}{\fs28 
\par 63 Leaves up to 2\'b75 cm, abruptly contracted into petiole ................ }{\b\fs28 44. poetica}{\fs28 
\par 47 At least the lower leaves crenate or serrulate
\par 64 Annual or biennial;flowers usually not more than 1\'b75 cm
\par 65 Corolla equalling or shorter than calyx
\par 66 Flowers 1-1\'b75 cm
\par 67 Bracts of peduncle concealed by the calycine appendages ........ }{\b\fs28 87. occulta}{\fs28 
\par 67 Bracts of peduncle not concealed ............................................. }{\b\fs28 80. arvensis}{\fs28 
\par 66 Flowers less than 1 cm
\par 68 Plant glabrous or sparsely hairy ....................................... }{\b\fs28 84. heldreichiana}{\fs28 
\par 68 Plant densely hairy
\par 69 Hairs short; leaves crenately lobed ...................................... }{\b\fs28 81. kitaibeliana}{\fs28 
\par 69 Hairs long; leaves almost entire ................................................. }{\b\fs28 83. parvula}{\fs28 
\par 65 Corolla distinctly exceeding calyx
\par 70 Plant hispid ............................................................................... }{\b\fs28 82. hymettia}{\fs28 
\par 70 Plant not hispid (sometimes pubescent below)
\par 71 Leaves almost entire; stipules usually 3-partite ........................ }{\b\fs28 85. mercurii}{\fs28 
\par 71 Leaves crenate; stipules divided into more than 3 segments
\par 72 Flowers 1-3\'b75 cm; spur 3-6\'b75 mm .............................................. }{\b\fs28 78. tricolor}{\fs28 
\par 72 Flowers c. 1 cm; spur 2-3 mm .................................................. }{\b\fs28 86. demetria}{\fs28 
\par 64 Perennial; flowers usually 1\'b75 cm or more
\par 73 Spur 7\'b75 mm or more
\par 74 Stipules ovate-triangular ............................................................ }{\b\fs28 63. cornuta}{\fs28 
\par 74 Stipules not ovate-triangular
\par 75 Caespitose ................................................................................. }{\b\fs28 59. doerfleri}{\fs28 
\par 75 Not caespitose
\par 76 Stipules deeply divided into at least 6 segments
\par 77 Plant hairy 
\par 78 Flowers 3-4 cm ....................................................................... }{\b\fs28 50. splendida}{\fs28 
\par 78 Flowers 2-3 cm
\par 79 Stipules 7- to 17-partite; spur 5-8 mm .................................. }{\b\fs28 66. elegantula}{\fs28 
\par 79 Stipules 3- to 8-partite; spur 8-10 mm ............................ }{\b\fs28 55. pseudogracilis}{\fs28 
\par 80 Flowers yellow
\par 80 Flowers violet
\par 81 Plant puberulent ........................................................................... }{\b\fs28 67. athois}{\fs28 
\par 81 Plant with patent hairs ............................................................... }{\b\fs28 75. bubanii}{\fs28 
\par 77 Plant glabrous or subglabrous
\par 82 Spur not more than 8 mm ...................................................... }{\b\fs28 66. elegantula}{\fs28 
\par 82 Spur 8-15 mm
\par 83 Lower stipules entire or dentate ............................................... }{\b\fs28 48. calcarata}{\fs28 
\par 83 Lower stipules 3- to 7-partite .......................................... }{\b\fs28 55. pseudogracilis}{\fs28 
\par 76 Stipules entire or dentate, or divided into not more than 5 segments 
\par 84 Stipules entire or dentate ........................................................... }{\b\fs28 48. calcarata}{\fs28  
\par 84 Stipules, at least the upper, pinnately divided, with 3-5 segments
\par 85 Plant with slender, creeping rhizomes ....................................... }{\b\fs28 57. oreades}{\fs28 
\par 85 Plant without slender, creeping rhizomes
\par 86 Plant hairy
\par 87 Upper leaves linear to lanceolate
\par 88 Upper leaves and segments of stipules narrow linear ............ }{\b\fs28 49. bertolonii}{\fs28 
\par 88 Upper leaves and segments of stipules linear-lanceolate
\par    to lanceolate ............................................................................ }{\b\fs28 51. aethnensis}{\fs28 
\par 87 Upper leaves lanceolate to ovate
\par 89 Flowers yellow ................................................................ }{\b\fs28 55. pseudogracilis}{\fs28 
\par 89 Flowers violet ............................................................................... }{\b\fs28 67. athois}{\fs28 
\par 86 Plant glabrous or subglabrous
\par 90 Upper leaves linear to lanceolate, differing greatly from the lower
\par 91 Flowers \'b1 square in face view; petals usually contiguous ..... }{\b\fs28 49. bertolonii}{\fs28 
\par 91 Flowers narrowly rectangular in face view; petals not
\par    contiguous .................................................................................... }{\b\fs28 53. corsica}{\fs28 
\par 90 Upper leaves lanceolate to ovate, usually not differing
\par    greatly from the lower
\par 92 Leaves slightly fleshy; flowers 3-5 cm; spur c. 15 mm ........ }{\b\fs28 54. munbyana}{\fs28 
\par 
\par 271}
\par }