{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 sided, obtuse. Spur very short and rather stout, scarcely exceeding calycine appendages.{\i  Calcareous rocks. • Mountains of S. Bulgaria and N. Greece.} Bu Gr.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 42. V. stojanowii} W. Becker, {\i Feddes Repert.}{\b  19}: 332 (1924). Hispid, caespitose perennial 8-10 cm. Leaves 2 cm × 2-3 mm, narrowly oblong-spathulate, obtuse, entire, long-petiolate. Stipules c. 1·5 cm, like the leaves, with a single lacinia on the outer side at the base. Flowers 1-1·25 cm, yellow, or the upper petals tinged with violet. Spur 3-5 mm, rather stout, curved upwards, scarcely twice as long as calycine appendages.{\i  Subalpine meadows. • S. Bulgaria & N.E. Greece.} Bu Gr.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 43. V. fragrans} Sieber,{\i  Reise Kreta}{\b  2}: 320 (1823). Subglabrous to hispid, caespitose perennial 5-10(-15) cm. Leaves c. 1·5 cm, oblong to oblong-linear, obtuse, entire, gradually narrowed to a rather long petiole. Stipules like the leaves but shorter. Flowers usually c. 1 cm but rather variable in size, 1-2 per stem, yellow or pale violet. Spur c. 3 mm, stout, 2-3 times as long as calycine appendages.{\i  Mountain rocks. • Greece, Kriti.} Cr Gr.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 44. V. poetica} Boiss. & Spruner in Boiss.,{\i  Diagn. Pl. Or. Nov. }{\b 1}({\b 6}): 21 (1845). Like {\b 43} but glabrous; leaves up to 2·5cm, oblong-ovate, abruptly contracted into petiole; petiole 3 times as long as lamina; flowers 1-4 per stem, violet or blue.{\i  Rock crevices at} c. 2000{\i  m. Mountains of S.C. Greece} ({\i Fokis, Fthiotis}). Gr.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 45. V. grisebachiana} Vis., {\i Mem. Ist. Veneto}{\b  10}: 436 (1861). Acaulescent perennial 3-8 cm. Leaves 1·5-3 cm, ovate-orbicular, obtuse, entire or slightly crenate, subglabrous, abruptly contracted into a relatively long petiole. Stipules like the leaves but smaller. Flowers c. 2 cm, basal, violet. Sepals broad, obtuse. Spur 3-4 mm, obtuse, exceeding calycine appendages. 2n = 22.{\i  Alpine meadows. • C. part of Balkan peninsula.} Al Ju Bu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 46. V. alpina} Jacq.,{\i  Enum. Stirp. Vindob.} 159 (1762). Acaulescent perennial 4-10 cm, with a stout stock. Leaves 1·5-3·5 cm, in a basal rosette, ovate-orbicular, crenate, truncate or subcordate at base, obtuse, glabrous, long-petiolate. Stipules 5 mm, oblong or lanceolate, semi-adnate to petiole. Peduncles 2-5 cm. Flowers (1·5-)2-3 cm, violet. Spur 3-4 mm, obtuse, only slightly longer than calycine appendages. 2n = 22.{\i  Alpine meadows and screes; calcicole. •  N.E. Alps; Carpathians}. Au Cz Po Rm.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 47. V. nummulariifolia} Vill.,{\i  Prosp. Pl. Dauph.} 26 (1779). Glabrous, delicate perennial 3-5 cm, with numerous, short, procumbent stems. Leaves 1-2 cm, ovate to orbicular, subcordate, entire; petiole equalling or rather longer than lamina. Stipules c. 5 mm, oblong-lanceolate, acute, the lower entire, the upper remotely dentate. Flowers 1 cm, bright blue. Spur obtuse, about twice as long as the rather short calycine appendages.{\i  Alpine meadows and rocks; calcifuge. • Maritime Alps, Corse.} Co Ga It.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 48. V. calcarata} L.,{\i  Sp. Pl.} 935 (1753). Low-growing perennial; stems up to 5 cm. Leaves 1-4 cm, rosulate, orbicular, ovate to lanceolate, crenate, glabrous or slightly hairy on the margins; petiole equalling or exceeding lamina. Stipules 0·5-1·5 cm, oblong, entire or dentate or the upper sometimes pinnatifid. Peduncles 3-9 cm, 1-4 per stem. Flowers 2-4 cm long and up to 3 cm wide, violet or yellow. Petals very wide, the lateral and upper often wider than the lower. Spur 8-15 mm, about equalling the petals, straight or slightly curved upwards.{\i  Meadows, pastures and screes, mostly above} 1500{\i  m. • Alps and S. Jura; W. part of Balkan peninsula.} Al Au Ga Ge ?Gr He It Ju.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b calcarata}: stems up to 5 cm; leaves medium-sized; stipules subentire or dentate; stems 1- to 2-flowered; flowers usually violet. 2n = 40.{\i  Alps, S. Jura.}
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b zoysii} (Wulfen) Merxm., {\i Feddes Repert. }{\b 74}: 30 (1967) ({\i V. zoysii} Wulfen): stems very short; leaves broadly ovate to orbicular; stipules entire or dentate with 1-2 short laciniae; peduncles rather short; stems 1-flowered; flowers usually yellow. 2n = 40.{\i  Calcareous soils. W. part of Balkan peninsula; S.E. Alps} ({\i Karawanken}).
\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b c}) Subsp. {\b villarsiana} (Roemer & Schultes) Merxm.,{\i  Feddes Repert.}{\b  74}: 30 (1967): stems somewhat elongated; heterophyllous, upper leaves narrower than lower; upper stipules pinnatifid; stems 1- to 4-flowered; flowers yellow, blue or white. 2n = 40.{\i  S.W. Alps}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Subsp. ({\b c}) is intermediate between {\b 48}({\b a}) and {\b 49}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   {\b 49. V. bertolonii} Pio,{\i  De Viola} 34 (1813) ({\i V. heterophylla} Bertol., non Poiret). Glabrous, rarely puberulent or hairy perennial with stems up to 30 cm. Leaves variable in shape and size, but the lower always different in shape from the upper; the lower usually orbicular or ovate, obtuse, crenate, more or less long-petiolate, with stipules much shorter than the petiole and not or only slightly divided; the upper usually narrow, linear, entire, with pinnately or palmately divided stipules which have 3-5 narrow segments, of which the terminal is the longest. Flowers large, violet or yellow, more or less square in face view; the petals usually contiguous, the lower petal the widest. Spur long, about equalling the petals, acute, straight or slightly curved.{\i  Maritime Alps, N. Appennini; S. Italy, N.E. Sicilia.} Ga It Si.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b bertolonii}: Basal leaves usually small, lanceolate to rhombic. Stipules often pinnate. Flowers 2-3 cm in diameter. 2n = 40.{\i  Maritime Alps and N. Appennini}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Intermediates occur between this and {\b 48}({\b c}).
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b messanensis} (W. Becker) A. Schmidt, {\i Flora} ({\i Regensb}.) {\b 154}: 159 (1964): Basal leaves larger than in ({\b a}), ovate. Stipules palmate. Flowers usually 3-4 cm in diameter. 2n = 40.{\i  S. Italy and N.E. Sicilia}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b  V. heterophylla} Bertol. subsp.{\b  graeca} (W. Becker) W. Becker,{\i  Beih. Bot. Centr.}{\b  26}({\b 2}): 326 (1910), from S.E. Italy (Monte Gargano), Albania and Greece, with very narrow upper leaves, very long, pinnate stipules with long, filiform segments, flowers narrowly rectangular in face-view and 2n = 20, is doubtfully related to {\b 49}, and needs further investigation.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 50. V. splendida} W. Becker,{\i  Bull. Herb. Boiss.} ser. 2, {\b 2}: 750 (1902). Hairy perennial with ascending stems, 10 cm when young, later up to 50 cm. Lower leaves c. 1½ cm, cordate or subcordate, obtuse; upper 2-3 × 1 cm and more acute, all obtusely crenate and with a long, winged petiole. Stipules half as long as leaves, subpinnate, with 6-10 lanceolate laciniae, the terminal larger and entire. Peduncles 1-3, much longer than the leaves. Flowers 3-4 cm; petals yellow or violet, with rounded apex; spur equalling lower petal, straight, subulate. 2n = 40.{\i  Calcicole. • S. Italy} ({\i mountains near Salerno}). It.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 51. V. aethnensis} Parl., {\i Fl. Ital.}{\b  9}: 185 (1890). Pubescent perennial c. 10 cm, with ascending stems. Leaves 1-1·5 cm, not markedly crenate; the lower orbicular to ovate, the upper lanceolate to linear-lanceolate. Stipules 3-partite, not deeply divided, segments oblong, obtuse, rather broad. Flowers 1·5-2 cm, violet; spur 8-10 mm, usually curved. 2n = 40.{\i  Volcanic soils,} 1500-2500{\i  m. Sicilia} ({\i Etna}). Si.
\par

\par
277}
\par