{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 21. V. lactea} Sm. in Sowerby,{\i  Engl. Bot.}{\b  7}: t. 445 (1798). Arosulate. Stems 10-15(-20) cm, ascending. Lamina 1-3(-4) cm, about equalling petiole, lanceolate to ovate-lanceolate, often purplish-tinged, rounded to cuneate at base. Stipules 1-1·5 cm, lanceolate, coarsely dentate, all except the uppermost much shorter than petiole. Flowers 1·5-2 cm, bluish-white. Petals about 3 times as long as wide. Spur 3-4 mm, exceeding calycine appendages. 2n = 58.{\i  Dry heaths. • W. Europe, northwards to} 53° 30'{\i  in Ireland}. Br Ga Hb Hs Lu.
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 22. V. persicifolia} Schreber,{\i  Spicil. Fl. Lips.} 163 (1771) ({\i V. stagnina} Kit.). Arosulate. Subglabrous. Stems up to 25 cm, erect; soboliferous. Lamina 2-4 cm, equalling or longer than petiole, triangular-lanceolate, truncate or subcordate at base. Stipules c. 1 cm, subentire to fimbriate, shorter than petiole. Flowers 1-1·5 cm, appearing circular in face view, white with violet veins. Petals obovate to orbicular, scarcely longer than wide. Spur 2-3 mm, greenish, as wide as long, only slightly exceeding calycine appendages. 2n = 20.{\i  Marshes and fens. Most of Europe except the Mediterranean region, the south-east and the extreme north.} Au Be Br Cz Da Fe Ga Ge Hb He Ho Hs Hu It Ju No Po Rm Rs (N, B, C, W, E) Su.
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 23. V. pumila} Chaix in Vill., {\i Hist. Pl. Dauph.}{\b  1}: 339 (1786). Arosulate. Glabrous. Stems 5-15(-20) cm, ascending to erect. Lamina 2-3 × 1 cm, usually longer than the petiole, lanceolate, subacute, usually distinctly cuneate or occasionally rounded at base. Stipules large, entire or coarsely dentate, the upper 1-2 cm and longer than the petiole. Flowers c. 1·5 cm, pale blue. Spur 2-3 mm, only slightly exceeding calycine appendages. 2n = 40.{\i  Grassland. Mainly in C. & E. Europe, northwards to} c. 56° {\i  in Russia, but extending to N. Italy, W. France and the Baltic islands.} Au Bu Cz Ga Ge He Hu It Ju Po Rm Rs (C, W, K, E) Su.
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28  {\b V. accrescens} Klokov in Klokov & Wissjul.,{\i  Fl. RSS Ucr.}{\b  7}: 632 (1955), from Ukraine and S. Russia, is like {\b 23} but has larger stems and leaves, papillose stems and petioles, and usually white flowers.
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 24. V. elatior} Fries, {\i Nov. Fl. Suec. }ed. 2, 277 (1828). Like {\b 23} but up to 50 cm, erect, and larger in all parts. Plants shortly hairy except for sepals and ovary. Lamina 3-9 × 1-2 cm, lanceolate, subcordate, equalling or exceeding petiole. Stipules 2-5 cm, conspicuous, entire or coarsely dentate at base, equalling or exceeding petiole. Flowers 2-2·5 cm, pale blue. Spur 2-4 mm, only slightly exceeding calycine appendages. 2n = 40.{\i  Damp grassland and scrub. Mainly in C. & E. Europe, northwards to} c. 57°{\i  in Eurasia, but extending to N. Italy, C. France and the Baltic islands.} Au Bu Cz Ga Ge Gr He Hu It Ju Po Rm Rs (C, W, K, E) Su [Be].
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 25. V. jordanii} Hanry,{\i  Prodr. Hist. Nat. Var} 169 (1853). Stems up to 40 cm, erect. Leaves cordate, dimorphic; the lower about as long as wide, the upper triangular-lanceolate, 2-3 times as long as wide. Stipules up to 4 cm, conspicuous, the lower dentate, the upper almost entire, equalling or exceeding petiole. Flowers c. 2·5 cm, pale blue or white; spur c. 5 mm, curved upwards. 2n = 40.{\i  Marshes and fens. S.E. & E.C. Europe; S.E. France.} Bu Ga Hu Ju Rm Rs (W, K).
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28  Species of Sect. {\i Viola} subsect. {\i Rostratae} ({\b 12-25}) frequently hybridize with one another, but very rarely with species of other subsections. Of the 25 or more hybrids described, the following, which are all highly infertile, are probably the most frequent:- {\i V. mirabilis} ×{\i  riviniana, V. riviniana} ×{\i  rupestris, V. reichenbachiana} × {\i riviniana, V. canina} × {\i riviniana, V. canina} ×{\i  persicifolia, V. canina} ×{\i  pumila, V. canina} ×{\i  rupestris}.
\par 
\pard\f0\fs28  Subsect. {\i Repentes} (Kupffer) W. Becker. Acaulescent, with long, creeping rhizome. Stipules broad, semi-adnate to petiole. Capsule and seed as in Subsect. {\i Rostratae}.
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 26. V. uliginosa} Besser,{\i  Prim. Fl. Galic. }{\b 1}: 169 (1809). Rhizome slender; shoots short, erect, bearing rosettes of leaves. Leaves 4 × 2 cm, cordate, acute; petiole 2-10 cm. Stipules ovate-lanceolate, entire. Flowers 2-3 cm, arising from the base of the rosette, violet. Sepals 5-6 mm, ovate-lanceolate. Spur 3-4 mm, stout, violet. Fruiting peduncles up to 15 cm, erect. 2n = 20.{\i  Moorland and marshes. C. & W. parts of U.S.S.R. and S. & E. Fennoscandia, extending very locally westwards to E. Germany and N.W. Jugoslavia}. Da Fe Ge Ju Po ?Rm Rs (N, B, C, W) Su.
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28  Greatly reduced by draining and cultivation, especially in the western part of its range; mainly now in White Russia, W. Ukraine and W.C. Russia. Hybrids with {\b 18} have been described from Russia and Sweden.
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28  Subsect.{\i  Plagiostigma} (Godron) Kupffer. Perennial, acaulescent, with slender, creeping rhizome. Stipules free. Capsule and seed as in Subsect.{\i  Rostratae}.
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 27. V. palustris} L.,{\i  Sp. Pl.} 934 (1753). Leaves 3 or 4 in a rosette, 2-6 cm, wider than long, reniform, glabrous; petiole 2-6 cm, slender. Stipules 5-7 mm, ovate-lanceolate, entire or denticulate, free. Peduncles 4-15 cm; bracts at or below the middle. Flowers 1-1·5 cm, pale lilac, not fragrant. Sepals ovate, obtuse. Spur blunt, pale lilac. Capsule glabrous. {\i Bogs and marshes. Most of Europe, but rare in the south and east.} Au Az Be Br Bu Co Cz Da Fa Fe Ga Ge Hb He Ho Hs †Hu Is It Ju Lu No Po Rm Rs (N, B, C, W) Su.
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b palustris}: Leaves obtuse; petioles glabrous. Bracts below the middle of peduncle. 2n = 48.{\i  Throughout the range of the species, except Portugal and Açores}.
\par
\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b juressi} (Link ex K. Wein) Coutinho,{\i  Not. Fl. Port.}{\b  5}: 12 (1921): Summer leaves subacute; petioles usually with patent hairs. Bracts at about middle of peduncle. {\i W. Europe, northwards to Ireland}.
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 28. V. epipsila} Ledeb., {\i Ind. Sem. Horti Dorpat.} 5 (1820). Like {\b 27} but larger in all its parts; leaves always in pairs, cordate-orbicular to reniform, slightly longer than wide, with scattered hairs beneath; bracts in upper third of peduncle; flowers 1·5-2 cm. 2n = 24.{\i  Marshes. N. & E.C. Europe}. Cz Da Fe Ge Is No Po Rm Rs (N, B, C, E) Su.
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28  Subsect.{\i  Adnatae} W. Becker. Perennial; acaulescent; without creeping rhizomes or stolons. Stipules semi-adnate to petiole. Capsule and seed as in Subsect.{\i  Rostratae}.
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 29. V. jooi} Janka,{\i  Österr. Bot. Wochenbl.}{\b  7}: 198 (1857). Leaves 10-30 cm, in basal rosette, ovate-triangular, cordate with open sinus, dentate or serrate, glabrous; lamina of mature leaves 1/3-1/2 as long as petiole. Stipules linear-lanceolate. Flowers 1-2·5 cm, reddish- or violet-purple, fragrant. Sepals obtuse. Spur 4-6 mm, curved, obtuse, rather slender. Capsule glabrous. 2n = 24.{\i  Calcareous rocks in mountain regions. • C. Romania.} Rm.
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28  Sometimes regarded as a subspecies of {\b V. macroceras} Bunge in Ledeb.,{\i  Fl. Altaica }{\b 1}: 256 (1829). The other subspecies occur in the Caucasus and the Altai.
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 30. V. selkirkii} Pursh ex Goldie,{\i  Edinb. Philos. Jour.}{\b  6}: 324 (1822). Rhizome slender. Leaves 4-15 cm, in a basal rosette broadly ovate, cordate with a deep sinus, crenate, subacute,
\par
\par 275}
\par