{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 fragrant; aerial stems bearing cleistogamous flowers only, on very short peduncles. Sepals acute, with conspicuous appendages. Petals pale violet. Spur 6-8 mm, whitish. Style glabrous. 2n = 20. {\i Mainly in woodland, on base-rich soil. Widespread in Europe, but absent from the islands and much of the south and west.} Au Be Bu Cz Da Fe Ga Ge He Hs Hu It Ju No Po Rm Rs (N, B, C, W, K, E) Su.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b   V. pseudomirabilis} Coste,{\i  Bull. Soc. Bot. Fr.}{\b  40}: cxv (1893), from woodland on calcareous soil in S. France (Causse du Larzac, near Millau), is in some ways intermediate between {\b 12} and {\b 18}. The stems, 10-30 cm, are glabrous, the leaves shortly acuminate, the stipules ovate-lanceolate and fimbriate, the flowers large and not fragrant. The open flowers are cauline as in {\b 18}, not basal as in {\b 12}; and the fact that they are fertile and produce capsules (on long peduncles) indicates that the plants are not direct hybrids between {\b 12} and {\b 18}. W. Becker, {\i Feddes Repert. }{\b 18}:141 (1922),records {\i V.pseudomirabilis} from Bulgaria. Further investigation is needed.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 13. V. willkommii} R. de Roemer, {\i Linnaea }{\b 25}: 10 (1852). Like {\b 12} but stems glabrous; leaves smaller, ovate-cordate, obtuse; flowers blue, scarcely fragrant; sepals shorter and broader; spur much broader and saccate.{\i  Calcicole. • N.E. Spain. }Hs.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 14. V. rupestris} F. W. Schmidt,{\i  Abh. Böhm. Ges. Wiss.} ser. 2, {\b 1}: 60 (1791) ({\i V. arenaria} DC.). Rosulate, with a short, central shoot, a basal rosette of leaves and axillary flowering stems. Plant, including petiole and capsule, finely pubescent (rarely glabrous). Stems up to 10 cm. Leaves 1-3 cm, cordate-reniform, obtuse. Stipules c. 8 mm, ovate-lanceolate, entire or dentate. Flowers 1-1·5 cm, reddish-violet, pale blue or white. Calycine appendages inconspicuous. Lower petal usually emarginate. Spur c. 3 mm, pale violet. Head of style papillose.{\i  Open habitats on light, base-rich soils. Widespread in Europe, but absent from most of the islands, and much of the south and west.} Au Be Br Bu Cz Fe Ga Ge He Ho Hs Hu It Ju No Po Rm Rs (N, B, C, W, E) Su.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b rupestris}: Plant dark green. Petals rather wide, the lower emarginate. Spur of stamen stout. 2n = 20.{\i  Throughout the range of the species except N. W. Fennoscandia}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b relicta} Jalas,{\i  Ann. Bot. Soc. Zool.-Bot. Fenn. Vanamo}{\b  24}({\b 1}): 70 (1950): Plant bright green. Petals narrow, the lower apiculate, scarcely emarginate. Spur of stamen slender. 2n = 20.{\i  Calcareous screes. N.W. Fennoscandia}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 15. V. reichenbachiana} Jordan ex Boreau,{\i  Fl. Centre Fr.} ed. 3, {\b 2}: 78 (1857) ({\i V. sylvestris} Lam. pro parte). Rosulate, with a short central shoot, a basal rosette of leaves and axillary flowering stems. Stems up to 15 cm. Leaves 2-4 cm, about as wide as long, cordate, subacute. Stipules of cauline leaves 1 cm or more, narrowly lanceolate, fimbriate; fimbriae often equalling width of stipule. Flowers 1·2-1·8 cm. Sepals acute; calycine appendages very short, inconspicuous in fruit. Petals narrow, violet, often darker at the base. Spur 3-6 mm, slender, straight, deep violet. Head of style hairy. 2n = 20.{\i  Woods and shady places. S., W. & C. Europe, extending northwards to} 60° {\i N. in Sweden and eastwards to Estonia and C. Ukraine}. Al Au Be Br Bu Co Cz Da Ga Ge Gr Hb He Ho Hs Hu It Ju Lu Po Rm Rs (B, C, W, K) Sa Si Su Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 16. V. tanaitica} Grosset, {\i Feddes Repert. }{\b 26}: 80 (1929). Like {\b 15} in habit but up to 25 cm; stipules of cauline leaves broadly lanceolate or ovate-lanceolate, dentate or shortly fimbriate, with fimbriae less than half the width of the stipule; flowers 10-15 mm, pale violet; calycine appendages short; spur 4-6 mm.{\i  Deciduous woodland and scrub. • S.C. Russia} ({\i Kurskaja to Kujbysevskaja Obl}.). Rs (C, ?W, E).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 17. V. mauritii} Tepl.,{\i  Bull. Soc. Oural. Sci. Nat.}{\b  7}: 37 (1883). Like {\b 15} in habit. Stems up to 10 cm. Leaves delicate, glabrous or with scattered hairs, deeply cordate, the lower mostly rounded at the apex, the upper ovate, obtuse. Stipules of cauline leaves not more than 1 cm, ovate or ovate-lanceolate, serrate, shortly fimbriate or almost entire. Flowers 1-1·3 cm. Sepals short, acute; appendages inconspicuous. Petals pale violet. Spur 1·5-4 mm, slender, straight or slightly curved.{\i  Coniferous woods. E. Russia} ({\i C. Ural and around Perm'}). Rs (N, C). ({\i N. Asia.})
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 18. V. riviniana} Reichenb., {\i Pl. Crit. }{\b 1}: 81 (1823). Like {\b 15} in habit, but very variable in size. Leaves from very small to c. 4 cm, cordate, subacute. Stipules of cauline leaves more than 1 cm, lanceolate, fimbriate; fimbriae shorter than in {\b 15}. Flowers 1·4-2·5 cm; calycine appendages usually 2-3 mm, more or less conspicuous, the lower accrescent in fruit. Petals rather wide, bluish-violet. Spur 3-5 mm, stout, whitish or light purple, often curved upwards. Stigma glabrous or papillose. 2n = 35, 40, 45, 46, 47.{\i  Woodland or grassland. Europe except the south-east.} All except Az Bl Cr Rs (W, K, E) Sb ?Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Plants from exposed habitats in W. Europe, with leaves up to 2 cm, flowering branches up to 10 cm and somewhat smaller flowers and fruit than plants from more sheltered habitats, have been distinguished as subsp.{\b  minor} (Murb. ex E. S. Gregory) Valentine,{\i  New Phytol.}{\b  40}: 208 (1941). As, however, so many intermediate plants and habitats exist, it is probably better to relegate subsp. minor to the rank of variety.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 19. V. sieheana} W. Becker,{\i  Bull. Herb. Boiss}. ser. 2,{\b  2}: 751 (1902) ({\i V. neglecta} sensu Bieb., non F. W. Schmidt). Like {\b 18} but stipules larger, c. 4 mm wide, and less fimbriate, or only dentate; flowers larger; petals very wide, pale blue or whitish, the lower deeply cupped; spur very stout, whitish; stigma with a tuft of hairs.{\i  Woodland, or in shade among rocks. S.E. Europe}. Bu Gr Rm Rs (K) Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 20. V. canina} L.,{\i  Sp. Pl.} 935 (1753). Arosulate (without a basal rosette of leaves). Stems 10-40 cm, decumbent, ascending or erect. Leaves ovate to lanceolate, usually cordate or subcordate, usually obtuse or subacute. Stipules dentate or subentire, shorter than petiole. Flowers 1·5-2·5 cm, blue or white. Spur white or greenish-yellow, equalling or up to three times as long as the rather conspicuous calycine appendages.{\i  Most of Europe, but rarer in the south.} All except Az Bl Cr Gr Si.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Very variable. The{\b  3} subspecies described below are sometimes given specific rank.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Procumbent or ascending; leaves less than twice as long as wide,
\par
  cordate; median stipules less than 1/3 as long as petiole;
\par
  flowers blue .......................................................................... ({\b a}) subsp. {\b canina}
\par
1 Erect; upper leaves twice as long as wide, subcordate; median
\par
  stipules up to ½ as long as petiole; flowers blue or white
\par
2 Plant up to 40 cm; petals broadly obovate; spur 1½-2
\par
  times as long as calycine appendages, straight ................ ({\b b}) subsp. {\b montana}
\par
2 Plant up to 20 cm; petals narrowly elliptical; spur 
\par
  2-3 times as long as calycine appendages, curved ........... ({\b c}) subsp. {\b schultzii}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b canina}: 2n = 40. {\i Throughout the range of the species.}
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b montana} (L.) Hartman,{\i  Bot. Not.}{\b  1841}: 82 (1841) ({\i V. montana }L.): 2n = 40. {\i Throughout most of the range of the species}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b c}) Subsp. {\b schultzii} (Billot) Kirschleger,{\i  Fl. Alsace }{\b 1}: 81 (1852): 2n = 40. {\i Fens and marshes. C. Europe, extending to N. Italy and S. Romania}.
\par

\par
274}
\par