{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 62. V. arsenica} G. Beck,{\i  Jahres-Kat. Wien. Bot. Tauschver.}{\b  1894}: 6 (1894). Glabrous perennial, with ascending stems up to 25 cm. Leaves c. 4 cm, broadly ovate or orbicular, truncate or subcordate, crenate, long-petiolate. Stipules c. 1 cm, not divided, lanceolate, acuminate, denticulate, shorter than petiole. Peduncles c. 10 cm. Flowers 2 × 2 cm, yellow. Spur rather thick, curved upwards, twice as long as calycine appendages.{\i  Grassy places, on arsenical soil. • S. Makedonija }({\i Alsar, 40 km S.W. of Prilep}). Ju.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 63. V. cornuta} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} ed. 2, 1325 (1763). Perennial with slender rhizome. Stems 20-30 cm, ascending. Leaves 2-3(-5) cm, ovate, acute, crenate, hairy beneath. Stipules 0·5-1·5 cm, equalling or exceeding petiole, ovate-triangular, palmately incised. Flowers 2-3(-4) cm, violet or lilac, fragrant. Spur 10-15 mm, slightly curved, greatly exceeding calycine appendages. 2n = 22.{\i  Mountain rocks and pastures. • Pyrenees; naturalized from gardens in several regions.} Ga Hs [Au Br Cz He It Ju Rm].
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b  V. montcaunica} Pau,{\i  Anal. Soc. Esp. Hist. Nat.}{\b  23} (Act.): 129 (1895), from N. & C. Spain, has deeply palmatifid stipules and flowers half the size of {\b 63}, with a shorter spur. Further investigation is needed.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 64. V. orphanidis} Boiss.,{\i  Fl. Or.}{\b  1}: 464 (1867). Softly hairy perennial. Stems 20-70 cm, numerous, ascending. Leaves 2-4 cm, ovate or orbicular, sometimes subcordate, crenate or serrate, hairy mainly along the veins and at the margins; lamina equalling or exceeding petiole. Stipules 1-2 cm, obliquely ovate. Flowers 2-3 cm, violet or blue. Spur 4-5 mm, slender, curved, twice as long as calycine appendages.{\i  Mountain grassland and woodland margins. • Mountains of Balkan peninsula from Crna Gora to C. Greece and eastwards to S.W. Bulgaria. }Al Bu Gr Ju.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b orphanidis}: Stems up to 50 cm. Stipules deeply dentate or subpinnately divided; terminal segment larger than the rest. Flowers 2 cm. Petals blue, with a yellow spot on the lower petal.{\i  Throughout the range of the species}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b nicolai} (Pant.) Valentine,{\i  Feddes Repert. }{\b 74}: 30 (1967) ({\i V. nicolai} Pant.): Stems up to 70 cm. Stipules obliquely ovate to ovate-lanceolate, the lower lobed, the upper deeply serrate. Flowers 2-3 cm, violet.{\i  Mountains of N. & E. Crna Gora.}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 65. V. dacica} Borbás,{\i  Magyar Nov. Lapok}{\b  13}: 79 (1890) ({\i V. prolixa} (Adamovic) Pancic). Perennial 15-35 cm; stems subglabrous or slightly hairy. Leaves 2-4 cm, ovate or elliptical, crenate, glabrous, or margins sometimes ciliate; lamina equalling or exceeding petiole. Stipules c. ½ as long as leaves, obliquely ovate-lanceolate, pinnately divided to 1/2 or 1/3 of their width, or coarsely incise-serrate. Flowers 2-3 cm, usually rather large. Petals violet or yellowish. Spur very short, equalling or scarcely exceeding calycine appendages.{\i  Grassland and forest-margins in mountain districts. • From Albania and Bulgaria northwards to S.E. Poland.} Al Bu ?Cz Ju Po Rm Rs (W).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b  V. polyodonta} W. Becker, {\i Beih. Bot. Centr.}{\b  26}({\b 2}): 332 (1910), from Jugoslavia (E. Bosnia), which differs slightly from{\b  65} in size, indumentum and stipule-shape, is probably best regarded as a variety.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 66. V. elegantula} Schott, {\i Österr. Bot. Wochenbl.}{\b  7}: 167 (1857). Glabrous or shortly pubescent perennial 10-30 cm. Leaves 1-2(-3) cm, the lower orbicular, the upper ovate-lanceolate or lanceolate. Stipules ½-¾ as long as leaves, ovate, pinnately divided, the undivided part wider than the length of the segments, with 4-10 segments on the outer and 2-4 on the inner side. Flowers 2-2·5 cm; petals not very wide, violet or yellow or parti-coloured, rarely white or pink. Spur 5-8 mm, straight or slightly curved, slender, 3 times as long as calycine appendages. {\i Subalpine and alpine meadows. • W. Jugoslavia and Albania.} Al Ju.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 67. V. athois} W. Becker, {\i Bull. Herb. Boiss.} ser. 2, {\b 2}: 854 (1902). Puberulent perennial 10-15 cm. Leaves 1·5-3 cm, the lower orbicular, the upper ovate or oblong, crenulate. Stipules 5- to 7-partite, pinnately divided almost to the base; lateral segments often very short, linear or oblong; terminal segment leaf-like, crenulate. Flowers c. 2 cm, violet. Spur c. 8 mm, curved. 2n = 20.{\i  Mountain rocks. • N.E. Greece} ({\i Athos}). Gr.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 68. V. gracilis} Sibth. & Sm.,{\i  Fl. Graec. Prodr.}{\b  1}: 146 (1806). Puberulent perennial up to 30 cm. Leaves (1-)2-3 cm, orbicular-ovate or oblong, obscurely crenate. Stipules 4- to 8-partite, pinnately divided to the base; segments linear or oblong, the central segment larger, leaf-like, crenate. Flowers 2-3 cm, violet or yellow. Spur 6-7 mm, straight or slightly curved, 2-3 times as long as calycine appendages. 2n = 20.{\i  Rocks and alpine meadows. • Mountains of Balkan peninsula, from Crna Gora to N.E. Greece.} Al Bu Ju Gr.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Taxa which are probably related to {\b 67} and {\b 68} are {\b V. heterophylla} Bertol. subsp. {\b euboea} (Halácsy) W. Becker, {\i Beih. Bot. Centr.}{\b  26}({\b 2}): 326 (1910), from E. Greece, and {\b V. cephalonica} Bornm.,{\i  Mitt. Thür. Bot. Ver.} nov. ser.,{\b  37}: 50 (1927), from W. Greece (Kefallinia). It is possible that {\b V. orbelica} Pancic,{\i  Magyar Bot. Lapok}{\b  32}: 9 (1933), from S. Bulgaria, should also be placed here; it has been thought to be related to {\b 78}({\b c}), but an unconfirmed chromosome count of 2n = 20 suggests relationship with {\b 68}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 69. V. speciosa} Pant., {\i Österr. Bot. Zeitschr.}{\b  23}: 79 (1873). Glabrescent or shortly hairy caespitose perennial, with many short stems up to 10 cm. Leaves 1·5-2·5 cm, crenate, the lower ovate, the upper ovate-lanceolate. Stipules ½-¾ as long as leaves, obliquely ovate, deeply pinnatifid; segments linear, entire, about equalling the width of the undivided part. Flowers c. 3 × 3 cm, deep violet; petals almost orbicular. Spur 5-6 mm, straight, twice as long as calycine appendages, slender (1 mm in diameter). {\i Meadows, pastures and screes. • Mountains of Crna Gora and N. Albania}. Al Ju.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 70. V. beckiana} Fiala, {\i Glasn. Muz. Bosni Herceg.}{\b  7}: 423 (1895). Glabrous perennial. Stems 12-20 cm, ascending from procumbent base, thickly clothed with leaves. Leaves 2·5-4·5 cm × 2-5 mm, linear-lanceolate, remotely serrulate. Stipules about half as long as the leaves; the lower linear, subentire, the upper digitately or pinnately divided, with linear segments. Peduncles 5-8 cm. Flowers 2·5-4 × 2-3 cm, yellow or deep violet. Sepals oblong-lanceolate, obtuse or shortly acuminate. Spur 3-4 mm, curved at the end, slightly longer than calycine appendages.{\i  Serpentine and calcareous rocks, }1000-1800{\i  m. • S. Jugoslavia, Albania.} Al Ju.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   {\b V. pascua} W. Becker, {\i Bull. Inst. Jard. Bot. Univ. Beograd}{\b  1}: 34 (1928), from Macedonia, is like {\b 70} but with pubescent stems not more than 12 cm, wider leaves, and spur c. 6 mm.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 71. V. rhodopeia} W.Becker,{\i  Beih. Bot. Centr.}{\b  26}({\b 2}): 334 (1910). Like {\b 70} but flowers 1·5-2 cm; sepals lanceolate, long, acuminate; petals yellow; spur 6 mm, straight, slender, pale violet.{\i  Damp mountain pastures. • S. Bulgaria }({\i W. Rodopi}). Bu.
\par

\par
279}
\par