{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b formosum} (Curtis) Heywood, {\i Feddes Repert. }{\b 79}: 59 (1968) ({\i Cistus formosus}, Curtis): Corolla 4-6 cm in diameter; petals spotted well above the claw.{\i  S. Portugal} ({\i Algarve}).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 4. H. atriplicifolium} (Lam.) Spach, {\i Ann. Sci. Nat.} ser. 2 (Bot.), {\b 6}: 366 (1836). Erect, up to 150 cm. Leaves of non-flowering shoots 20-50 × 10-30 mm, rhombic-elliptical to ovate-lanceolate, obtuse, with 3 prominent veins, shortly petiolate; leaves of flowering shoots 10-40 × 10-20 mm, oblong-cordate, pinnate-veined, sessile; all with a dense covering of peltate scales and stellate hairs. Flowering branches elongate, rigid, leafless, densely tomentose and with patent, purplish, viscid hairs; flowers in lax cymes. Sepals 3; petals yellow, spotted at the base.{\i  C. & S. Spain.} Hs.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 5. H. halimifolium} (L.) Willk. in Willk. & Lange,{\i  Prodr. Fl. Hisp.}{\b  3}: 717 (1878) ({\i Helianthemum halimifolium} (L.) Pers.). Much branched, erect, up to 100 cm. Leaves 10-40 × 5-20 mm, elliptical or spathulate-lanceolate, white-tomentose on both surfaces when young, greenish or greyish above when mature with silvery, peltate scales and stellate hairs. Flowers in numerous paniculate cymes. Sepals 5, with a dense covering of peltate scales; petals yellow, spotted or unspotted. 2n = 18. • {\i  S.W. Europe, extending to S.E. Italy; mainly near the coast.} Bl Co Hs It Lu Sa ?Si.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b halimifolium}: stems 30-100 cm; flowers in lax panicles; sepals without stellate hairs; petals cuneate.{\i  Almost throughout the range of the species}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b multiflorum} (Salzm. ex Dunal) Maire in Jahandiez & Maire, {\i Cat. Pl. Maroc}{\b  2}: 494 (1932) ({\i H. multiflorum} (Salzm. ex Dunal) Willk.): stems 30-40 cm; flowers in dense panicles; sepals with numerous stellate hairs; petals obcordate. {\i Portugal, S.W. Spain}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 6. H. umbellatum} (L.) Spach,{\i  Ann. Sci. Nat.} ser. 2 (Bot.), {\b 6}: 366 (1836) ({\i Helianthemum umbellatum} (L.) Miller). Diffuse, 15-25 cm; branches short and tortuous, ascending, with dense, whitish indumentum. Leaves 5-12 × 1·5-2 mm, crowded at the end of branches, linear or linear-lanceolate, with revolute margins, dark green, sparsely pubescent or subglabrous above, densely tomentose beneath. Flowers white, in terminal 3- to 6-flowered, umbellate cymes, sometimes with a secondary and a tertiary 1- to 2-flowered cyme. Pedicels equal, not filiform. Sepals villous. 2n = 18. •{\i  S.W. & C. France, N. Spain, N. Portugal.} Ga Gr Hs Lu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 7. H. viscosum} (Willk.) P. Silva,{\i  Agron. Lusit. }{\b 24}: 165 (1964) ({\i H. umbellatum} var.{\i  viscosum} Willk.). Like {\b 6} but 25-60 cm; branches more or less straight, suberect; leaves 10-20 mm, distributed along the branches; flowers in 3-5 whorls, each of (-4)5-6(-9) flowers; pedicels more or less unequal; sepals hirsute-villous.{\i  C., S. & E. Spain, E. Portugal.} Hs Lu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 8. H. verticillatum} (Brot.) Sennen, Monde Pl. 192: 39 (1931). Like {\b 6} but 25-60 cm; branches short and straight, erecto-patent, sparsely stellate-hairy; leaves distributed along the branches, the margins revolute or not; flowers in 3-5 whorls, each of (3-)4-5(-7) flowers; pedicels filiform; sepals pubescent-villous. S.W. Portugal. Lu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 9. H. commutatum} Pau,{\i  Bol. Soc. Aragon. Ci. Nat.}{\b  3}: 263 (1904) ({\i H. libanotis} Lange pro parte, {\i Helianthemum libanotis} Willd. pro parte.). Low-growing, much-branched, up to 50 cm, with annular leaf scars on branches. Leaves 10-35 × 1·5-3 mm, linear, with revolute margins, shining green and glabrous above, white-tomentose beneath, resembling those of {\i Rosmarinus.} Flowers solitary or in 2(-5)-flowered, terminal cymes. Sepals glabrous. Petals pale yellow.{\i  Mainly coastal sands. S. Spain, W. & S. Portugal.} Hs Lu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 3.                    Tuberaria}                    (Dunal) Spach
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc By M.C.F. Proctor.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Annual or perennial, with a basal leaf-rosette; flowering stems erect. Leaves with 3 veins. Flowers yellow, in terminal cymes. Sepals 5, the 2 outer usually smaller than the 3 inner. Stigma more or less sessile. Capsule 3-valved.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Perennial, with woody stock and persistent basal rosette
\par
  flowering stems with small, bract-like leaves only
\par
2 Leaves gradually narrowed at the base; petals unspotted .............. {\b 1. lignosa}
\par
2 Leaves abruptly narrowed into a distinct petiole;
\par
  petals with a dark spot at the base
\par
3 Veins of leaf distinctly anastomosing; bracts lanceolate,
\par
  acute ...................................................................................... {\b 2. globularifolia}
\par
3 Veins of leaf not anastomosing; bracts broadly ovate,
\par
  obtuse ................................................................................................. {\b 3. major}
\par
1 Annual, with basal rosette often dead at anthesis;
\par
  flowering stems leafy
\par
4 Flowers subsessile in dense, ± scorpioid cymes ....................... {\b 10. echioides}
\par
4 Flowers distinctly pedicellate
\par
5 Pedicels longer than sepals during anthesis
\par
6 Outer sepals much smaller than the inner, not accrescent
\par
7 Leaves obovate to lanceolate or oblong (the uppermost linear),
\par
  villous, flat (or the uppermost with the margins ± revolute) ........... {\b 4. guttata}
\par
7 Leaves lanceolate or linear, at least the upper
\par
  glabrescent, the margins distinctly revolute .......................... {\b 5. bupleurifolia}
\par
6 Outer sepals ± equalling the inner, all accrescent in fruit
\par
8 Stipules 1/3 as long as leaves; plant with appressed hairs ........ {\b 8. acuminata}
\par
8 Stipules 1/2-2/3 as long as leaves; plant with patent hairs .... {\b 9. macrosepala}
\par
5 Pedicels ± equalling sepals during anthesis
\par
9 Capsule villous ....................................................................... {\b 6. villosissima}
\par
9 Capsule glabrous
\par
10 Pedicels white-puberulent .......................................................... {\b 7. praecox}
\par
10 Pedicels glabrous .......................................................................... {\b 4. guttata}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Sect. TUBERARIA. Perennial; all leaves exstipulate; ovary shortly stipitate.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. T. lignosa} (Sweet) Samp., {\i Bol. Soc. Brot.} ser. 2,{\b  1}: 128 (1922) ({\i T. vulgaris} Willk., {\i T. melastomatifolia} Grosser,{\i  Helianthemum tuberaria} (L.) Miller). Perennial up to 40 cm, with branched, woody stock bearing leaf-rosettes resembling those of{\i  Plantago} spp. Leaves 20-55 × 8-25 mm, obovate-lanceolate to elliptical, gradually narrowed at the base into an indistinct petiole, subglabrous (rarely hairy) above, tomentose or sericeous-pubescent beneath. Flowering stems 20-30 cm, unbranched. Bracts lanceolate, acute. Flowers c. 30 mm in diameter, 3-7, in bracteate cymes. Sepals 10-15 × 4-7 mm, lanceolate-acuminate. Petals unspotted. 2n = 14.{\i  Scrub and woodland. Iberian peninsula and W. Mediterranean region, extending to S.E. Italy.} Bl Co Ga Hs It Lu Sa Si.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. T. globularifolia} (Lam.) Willk., {\i Icon. Descr. Pl. Nov.}{\b  2}: 71 (1859). Perennial up to 40 cm, with branched, woody stock. Leaves 25-50 mm, more or less spathulate, abruptly narrowed at the base into a petiole about equalling the lamina, glabrous or hairy above, hairy on veins and margins beneath, the veins distinctly anastomosing. Flowering stems 15-30 cm, unbranched. Bracts lanceolate-ovate. Flowers 30-50 mm in diameter; petals dark-spotted at the base.{\i  Scrub or heath on sandy soil. • N.W. Portugal and N.W. Spain.} Hs Lu.
\par

\par
285}
\par