{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 Leaves ovate to linear-lanceolate, acute. Stipules linear-lanceolate, lyrate-pinnatifid, 1/3 as long as leaves. Peduncles with minute bracts. Flowers 1-1·5 cm, whitish or pale violet. Spur c. 4 mm, curved, obtuse. Capsule erect at maturity, glabrous. 2n = c. 140.{\i  Rocky places and thickets, calcicole. W. Mediterranean region, S.W. Portugal.} Bl Ga Hs Lu Sa.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 89. V. scorpiuroides} Cosson,{\i  Bull. Soc. Bot. Fr. }{\b 19}: 80 (1872) ({\i V. methodiana} Coust. & Gand.). Like {\b 88} but leaves broadly obovate; stipules linear; flowers yellow.{\i  Rocky places. S. Aegean region} ({\i Kithira to Kriti}.) Cr Gr. ({\i N. Africa.})
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Sect. DELPHINIOPSIS W. Becker. Perennial, suffruticose. Open flowers pink, red or violet with very long spur; cleistogamous flowers not produced. Style neither capitate nor beaked.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 90. V. delphinantha} Boiss., {\i Diagn. Pl. Or. Nov. }{\b 1}({\b 1}): 7 (1843). Stems 5-10 cm, numerous, crowded, erect. Leaves 0·75-1·5 cm, linear to lanceolate, acute, entire, sessile. Stipules slightly shorter than leaves, the lower bifid, the upper entire. Flowers pinkish or reddish-purple, on long peduncles. Sepals acute. Petals narrow, the lower entire. Spur 16-18 mm, equalling or exceeding petals. Capsule glabrous. 2n = 20.{\i  Calcareous rocks. • Mountains of N. Greece, just extending into Bulgaria; one station in S. Greece}. Bu Gr.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 91. V. kosaninii} (Degen) Hayek,{\i  Denkschr. Akad. Wiss. Math.-Nat. Kl.} ({\i Wien}) {\b 94}: 155 (1918). Like {\b 90} but flowers lilac-pink; lower petal emarginate; spur 12 mm.{\i  Alpine meadows. • N. Albania, N. Makedonija. }Al Ju.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 92. V. cazorlensis} Gand.,{\i  Bull. Assoc. Fr. Bot.}{\b  5}: 226 (1902). Like {\b 90} but flowers intense pinkish-purple; lower petal emarginate; spur 20-30 mm.{\i  Calcareous rocks,} 1000-2100{\i  m. • S.E. Spain} ({\i  prov. Jaén}). Hs.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 111.             PASSIFLORACEAE}
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc Edit. †T.G. Tutin.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Herbaceous or woody climbers with axillary tendrils. Leaves alternate, usually stipulate. Flowers perigynous, usually hermaphrodite, actinomorphic. Hypanthium cup-shaped. Sepals usually 5, free or connate at base, often petaloid. Petals 5, usually free. Corona inserted on the rim of the hypanthium, composed of 1-2 rows of long filaments, 1 row of short filaments and a membrane partially closing the hypanthium. Stamens usually 5, alternating with the petals. Ovary superior, often on a long gynophore, unilocular, with 3(-5) parietal placentae; ovules numerous; stigmas 3-5. Fruit a berry or loculicidal capsule.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 1.                   Passiflora}            L.
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc By P.W. Ball.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Flowers hermaphrodite. Stamens connate and adnate to the gynophore. Stigmas 3. Fruit a berry.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. P. caerulea} L.,{\i  Sp. Pl.} 959 (1753). Glabrous and somewhat glaucous climber up to 10 m; stems terete or obscurely angled. Leaves 10-15 cm, digitately 5(-7)-lobed, the lobes oblong-lanceolate or -ovate; petiole with 2-4 glands. Flowers 7-10 cm in diameter, solitary, axillary on articulated peduncles. Sepals white or pale pink on the inside, with a short horn on the back. Petals white or pale pink. Corona dull purple at the base, white in the middle, purplish-blue at the apex. Stigmas dull purple. Fruit c. 5 cm, ovoid or subglobose, orange-yellow.{\i  Naturalized in Açores; frequently cultivated for ornament, particularly in S. Europe.} [Az.] ({\i C. & W. South America.})
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Some other species are cultivated in S. Europe for ornament and for the edible fruit.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 112.                CISTACEAE}
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc Edit. V.H. Heywood.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Shrubs or herbs. Leaves simple, usually opposite, mostly with stellate indumentum. Flowers hermaphrodite, actinomorphic, hypogynous, solitary or in cymes. Sepals 5 or 3. Petals 5, rarely 0, usually caducous. Stamens many. Ovary 1-locular or incompletely septate with 3 or 5 (rarely 10) parietal placentae; ovules usually orthotropous, rarely anatropous. Style simple or absent. Fruit a loculicidal capsule. Seeds with a more or less curved embryo; endosperm present.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Literature: W. Grosser in Engler, {\i Pflanzenreich }{\b 14} ({\b IV. 193}) (1903).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Capsule with 5, 6 or 10 valves; flowers white to purplish-red ........ {\b 1. Cistus}
\par
1 Capsule with 3 valves; flowers white, pink or yellow
\par
2 Style short, straight or 0; sepals 3 or 5; shrubs ......................... {\b 2. Halimium}
\par
2 Style long, or if short or 0 then herbs; sepals 5
\par
3 Annual or perennial, with a basal leaf-rosette (which may
\par
  be withered at anthesis); stigma sessile or subsessile ................. {\b 3. Tuberaria}
\par
3 Dwarf shrubs or annuals, without a basal leaf-rosette; style present
\par
4 Leaves all opposite and decussate, oblong to linear;
\par
 stamens all fertile; ovules orthotropous ............................... {\b 4. Helianthemum}
\par
4 Upper leaves usually alternate, ± linear; outer stamens
\par
  sterile; ovules anatropous .............................................................. {\b 5. Fumana}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 1.                   Cistus}                     L.
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc By E.F. Warburg.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Shrubs. Flowers 2 cm or more in diameter, white to purplish-red. Ovary usually 5-, rarely up to 10-locular; placentation axile; ovules orthotropous, the funicle filiform.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Hybrids occur involving species {\b 1}, {\b 2}, {\b 5}, {\b 7-13}, some being frequent. Hybrids between species {\b 6}, {\b 8}, {\b 9}, and species of Halimium also occur.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  All species are plants of dry scrub or open woodland.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Literature: P. Dansereau,{\i  Boissiera }{\b 4}: 1-90 (1939). M. Martin Bolaños & E. Guinea,{\i  Jarales y Jaras} ({\i Cistografía Hispanica}). Madrid. 1949.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Sepals 5
\par
2 Style filiform, as long as the stamens
\par
3 Petals white; flowers in unilateral cymes ........................................ {\b 6. varius}
\par
3 Petals purplish-pink or -red; flowers not in unilateral cymes
\par
4 Leaves sessile, with 3 ± parallel veins
\par

\par
282}
\par