{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b d}) Subsp. {\b subalpina} Gaudin,{\i  Fl. Helv. }{\b 2}: 210 (1828) (incl. {\i V. elisabethae} Klokov, {\i V. monticola} Jordan, {\i V. bielziana} Schur, {\i V. saxatilis} F. W. Schmidt): Perennial or biennial. Stems 20-30(-40) cm, ascending or erect. Leaves and stipules very variable in size and shape, but wider than in ({\b c}). Flowers 2-3·5 cm, yellow, or the upper petals violet. Lateral and lower petals distinctly veined. Spur 5-6 mm, about twice as long as calycine appendages. 2n = 26.{\i  Subalpine meadows and screes, up to }2700 {\i m. Mountains of S. & C. Europe, from N. Spain to the Carpathians and Krym}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b e}) Subsp. {\b matutina} (Klokov) Valentine,{\i  Feddes Repert.}{\b  74}: 31 (1967) ({\i V. matutina} Klokov): Annual or biennial. Stems 10-80 cm. Leaves up to 8 × 3 cm, crenate, with 4-10 teeth on each side. Stipules pinnatipartite; terminal segment up to 4 cm. Flowers 1·5-2·5 cm, yellowish-white to yellow. Spur 4-5 mm.{\i  Wood-margins, thickets and open habitats. • S. & E. Ukraine, N. Moldavia and adjoining parts of S. Russia.}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b  V. thasia} W. Becker,{\i  Bull. Herb. Boiss}. ser. 2, {\b 2}: 855 (1902) may be related to {\b 78}({\b c}).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b  V. calaminaria} (DC.) Lej., {\i Rev. Fl. Spa} 49 (1824), from soils rich in zinc in Holland, Belgium and Germany, has been placed under both {\b 74 }and {\b 78}. Its chromosome number is 2n = 52, and it is probably best regarded as a variety of {\b 78}({\b d}).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 79. V. aetolica} Boiss. & Heldr. in Boiss.,{\i  Diagn. Pl. Or. Nov.}{\b  3}({\b 6}): 24 (1859). Perennial. Stems 15-40 cm. Leaves c. 2 cm, ovate to lanceolate, coarsely crenate. Stipules 1-1·5 cm, ciliate, pinnatifid; terminal segment ovate to ovate-lanceolate, subcrenate or entire. Sepals 2-3 mm wide at base, ovate-lanceolate or triangular, often denticulate, ciliate. Flowers 1·5-2 cm, yellow, the upper petals rarely violet. Spur 5-6 mm, straight, slender, c. 1½ times as long as calycine appendages. 2n = 16.{\i  Montane and subalpine meadows. S. & W. parts of Balkan peninsula.} Al Gr Ju.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 80. V. arvensis} Murray,{\i  Prodr. Stirp. Götting.} 73 (1770). Annual up to 40 cm, branched, more or less erect, with an indumentum of short, deflexed hairs. Leaves 2-5 cm, oblong-spathulate, acute or obtuse, crenate. Stipules ½-¾ as long as leaves, coarsely pinnatifid; terminal segment lanceolate, leaf-like. Bracts in upper third of peduncle. Flowers 1-1·5 cm; lower petal cream to yellow; others cream to bluish-violet. Sepals lanceolate, equalling or exceeding corolla. Spur equalling calycine appendages. 2n = 34. {\i Open and cultivated ground. Almost throughout Europe}. All except Az Bl Cr Fa Is Sb.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  The species is very variable, and intermediates between it and{\b  78}, probably of hybrid origin, have frequently been described, e.g.{\i  V. contempta} Jordan.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 81. V. kitaibeliana} Schultes in Roemer & Schultes, {\i Syst. Veg. }{\b 5}: 383 (1819). Annual 2-10(-20) cm, with dense indumentum of short, crisped or deflexed hairs. Leaves 1-3 cm, the lowermost orbicular, the others oblong-spathulate, crenately lobed. Stipules 0·5-1 cm, pinnatipartite with an oblong-spathulate, crenately lobed, shortly stalked terminal segment and smaller lateral segments. Bracts just below the flower. Flowers 0·4-0·8 cm. Sepals lanceolate, exceeding the corolla. Petals cream-white to yellow with a yellow centre. Spur slightly longer than calycine appendages. 2n = 16, 48.{\i  Dry, open habitats. S. & C. Europe, extending to W.C. France and E. Ukraine.} Al Au Br Bu Co Cr Cz Ga Gr He Hs Hu It Ju Lu ?Po Rm Rs (W, K, E) Si Tu [Ge].
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 82. V. hymettia} Boiss. & Heldr. in Boiss.,{\i  Diagn. Pl. Or. Nov.}{\b  3}({\b 1}): 57 (1853). Shortly hispid annual 3-10(-20) cm. Leaves 1·5-2 cm, the lower ovate-orbicular, the upper oblong-spathulate, crenate. Stipules pinnately divided almost to the base; terminal segment stalked and leaf-like, larger than the rest. Peduncles 4-5 cm. Flowers 1-1·5 cm. Petals yellow, the upper often becoming violet, or all violet, about twice as long as sepals. Spur 3-4 mm, stout, slightly longer than calycine appendages. 2n = 16.{\i  Pastures. Mediterranean region, Portugal; S.W. Romania.} Al Ga Gr It Lu Rm Si Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b  V. lavrenkoana} Klokov,{\i  Ind. Sem. Hort. Bot. Charkov.} 8 (1927) and {\i V. cretacea} Klokov in Schischkin & Bobrov,{\i  Fl. URSS}{\b  15}: 686 (1949), described from the Ukraine, resemble {\b 82}; their status is uncertain.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 83. V. parvula} Tineo,{\i  Pl. Rar. Sic. Pug.} 5 (1817). Annual, 2-3(-10) cm, villous with long hairs. Leaves 0·5-1·2 cm, the lowermost oblong-orbicular, almost entire, the others oblong-spathulate. Stipules deeply lobed. Bracts on upper third of peduncles. Sepals ovate-lanceolate; appendages exceeding the spur. Flowers c. 0·5 cm, creamy white; corolla scarcely exceeding calyx. 2n = 10. {\i Rocks and screes, }1500-2500{\i  m. Mountains of S. Europe, northwards to S. Jugoslavia, Corse and C. Spain.} Co Gr Hs It Ju Si.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 84. V. heldreichiana} Boiss., {\i Diagn. Pl. Or. Nov.}{\b  2}({\b 8}): 53 (1849). Like {\b 83} but glabrous or sparsely hairy; basal leaves 1-3 cm; stipules like leaves but much shorter, with only 1-2 small teeth at base; flowers lilac-blue; lower petal 0·4-0·6 cm.{\i  Rocks and screes, }1500-2300{\i  m. Kriti.} Cr.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 85. V. mercurii} Orph. ex Halácsy, {\i Denkschr. Akad. Wiss. Math.-Nat. Kl.} ({\i Wien}){\b  61}: 497 (1894). Sparsely hairy or glabrous annual 2-6(-10) cm. Leaves 0·5-1·5 cm, the lower ovate-orbicular, the upper oblong, almost entire. Stipules usually 3-partite, the terminal segment stalked and leaf-like. Flowers c. 1 cm. Petals yellow, about twice as long as sepals. Spur violet, stout, about equalling the calycine appendages.{\i  S. Greece }({\i Killini Oros}). Gr.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 86. V. demetria} Prolongo ex Boiss.,{\i  Voy. Bot. Midi Esp. }{\b 2}: 73 (1839). Annual, glabrous or with short hairs. Stems 5-15 cm, slender. Lower leaves 1-4 cm, orbicular, subcordate, long-petiolate; the upper 0·5-1·5 cm, broadly ovate to oblong; margins with 2-3 coarse crenations; petiole short. Stipules often nearly as long as leaves, pinnatifid, with short lateral segments at the base, and a large, leaf-like terminal segment. Flowers c. 1 cm. Petals bright yellow, about twice as long as the sepals; upper petals sometimes violet. Spur 2-3 mm, violet, stout, slightly longer than the calycine appendages.{\i  Shady rocks and screes; calcicole. S. W. Spain and W.C. Portugal.} Hs Lu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 87. V. occulta} Lehm.,{\i  Ind. Sem. Horti Bot. Hamburg}. (1829). Annual. Stems 3-15 cm, erect. Leaves 2-3 cm, narrowly oblong-spathulate, remotely crenate-serrate or almost entire, glabrous to pubescent; the lower petiolate, the upper sessile. Upper stipules deeply and pinnately divided, with the terminal segment the largest, entire. Bracts of peduncle concealed by the calycine appendages. Sepals c. 1 cm, broadly lanceolate, as long as or longer than the corolla; appendages large, exceeding the spur. Flowers 1-1·5 cm, white to cream. Petals sometimes with bluish margins.{\i  Ruderal. Krym}. [Rs (K).] ({\i C. & S.W. Asia}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Sect. XYLINOSIUM W. Becker. Perennial, suffruticose. Open flowers violet or yellow; cleistogamous flowers produced. Style neither capitate nor beaked.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 88. V. arborescens} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 935 (1753). Stems 10-20 cm, woody and corky at the base, ascending, greyish, pubescent.
\par

\par
281}
\par