{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 72. V. dubyana} Burnat ex Gremli,{\i  Neue Beitr. Fl. Schweiz}{\b  5}: 15 (1890). Glabrous or shortly hairy perennial, without leafy stolons. Stems 10-30 cm; upper internodes short. Lower leaves 2-4 cm, orbicular, the upper narrowly lanceolate or linear. Stipules digitately divided to the base; segments linear, 4-6 on the outer and 2-3 on the inner side, the terminal scarcely wider. Flowers 2-2·5 cm, violet; lower petal with a yellow spot. Spur 5-6 mm, curved downwards, slender, much longer than calycine appendages. 2n = 20.{\i  Dry pastures and rocky places; calcicole. • Italian Alps, between} 7° 30' {\i and }11° {\i E}. It.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 73. V. declinata} Waldst. & Kit.,{\i  Pl. Rar. Hung. }{\b 3}: 248 (1807). Glabrous perennial 15-40 cm, with leafy stolons. Leaves 2-3 cm, the lower orbicular or ovate, the upper oblong or linear-lanceolate; petiole short. Stipules ½-¾ as long as leaves, pinnately divided into linear segments, with 3-4 on the outer and 2-3 on the inner side, the terminal scarcely longer. Flowers 2·5-3·5 cm, deep violet. Spur 3-4 mm, curved, slender, scarcely exceeding calycine appendages.{\i  Pastures and meadows,} 800-2000{\i  m. • E. & S. Carpathians.} ?Bu Cz Rm Rs (W).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 74. V. lutea} Hudson, {\i Fl. Angl. }331 (1762). Perennial, with a slender, branching rhizome and without leafy stolons. Stems 10-20(-40) cm, usually simple, glabrous. Leaves ovate, oblong or lanceolate, glabrous or pubescent. Stipules palmately or pinnately divided into 3-5 segments, sometimes pubescent on the margins and the veins. Peduncles usually c. 6 cm. Flowers 1·5-3 cm, yellow, violet or parti-coloured; lower petal with a dense network of veins. Spur 3-6 mm, short, slender, twice as long as calycine appendages, or sometimes scarcely longer. {\i W. & C. Europe, southwards to the Pyrenees.} Au Be Br Cz Ga Ge Hb He Ho Hs Po.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 A very variable species. Typical populations from the east and west of its range can be described as follows:
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b lutea}: Usually c. 10 cm. Stems less than 1 mm in diameter. Leaves and stipules distinctly pubescent. Lower leaves 1-2 cm, ovate; upper 2-4 cm, ovate-lanceolate to lanceolate. Segments of stipules 1-1·5 mm wide. Flowers 1·5-2·5(-3) cm; lower petal 1-1·5 cm wide. 2n = 48.{\i  W. Europe, Switzerland.}
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b sudetica} (Willd.) W. Becker,{\i  Beih. Bot. Centr.}{\b  18}({\b 2}): 388 (1905) ({\i V. sudetica }Willd.): Usually c. 15 cm. Stems more than 1 mm in diameter. Leaves and stipules glabrous or puberulent. Lower leaves c. 1·5 cm, ovate to orbicular, median and upper 2-4 cm, narrowly lanceolate. Segments of stipules 1·5-3 mm wide. Flowers 2-3 cm; lower petal up to 2 cm wide.{\i  Mountains of C. Europe, from} c. 14°{\i  E. eastwards.}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 75. V. bubanii} Timb.-Lagr.,{\i  Congr. Sci. Fr}. 19{\i  Sess.} ({\i Toulouse}) {\b 1}: 280 (1852). Perennial, stems 10-25 cm. Leaves and stipules usually with patent hairs. Leaves crenate, the lower orbicular, the upper oblong. Stipules less than 1 cm, deeply palmatifid; segments linear-oblong, 3-5 on the outer and 2-3 on the inner side, terminal slightly wider. Flowers 2-3 cm, violet. Spur c. 10 mm, straight or slightly curved. 2n = c. 128. •{\i  Pyrenees and mountains of N. Spain.} Ga Hs.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b  V. trinitatis} Losa,{\i  Contrib. Estud. Fl. Veg. Prov. Zamora} 80 (1949), and{\b  V. palentina} Losa, Collect. Bot. ({\i Barcelona}){\b  2}: 295 (1950), both from N.W. Spain, have rather large flowers with a long spur, though glabrous or with few hairs. They may be varieties of {\b 75}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 76. V. hispida} Lam.,{\i  Fl. Fr. }{\b 2}: 679 (1778) ({\i V. rothomagensis} auct.). Perennial, the whole plant with patent hairs. Stems up to 25 cm. Leaves 1·5-3 cm, crenate, the lower suborbicular, subcordate, the upper ovate or oblong, subcordate or truncate. Stipules palmatifid; segments linear or oblong, entire, terminal slightly larger than lateral. Flowers c. 2 cm, violet, or yellowish. Spur c. 4 mm, not much longer than calycine appendages.{\i  Calcareous cliffs. • N.W. France} ({\i near Rouen}). Ga.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b V. cryana} Gillot,{\i  Bull. Soc. Bot. Fr.}{\b  25}: 255 (1878), from chalk slopes in N.C. France (S.E. of Tonnerre), is now extinct. It was like {\b 76} but rather smaller and glabrous.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 77. V. langeana} Valentine,{\i  Feddes Repert.}{\b  79}: 57 (1968). ( {\i V. caespitosa} Lange, non D. Don). Sparsely papillose-hairy perennial, forming a mat up to 30 cm across, from which vertical stems up to 20 cm arise. Lower leaves more or less rosulate, obovate; the upper oblong or narrowly spathulate, all slightly crenate or subentire. Stipules pinnatifid, with linear segments, the terminal slightly the largest. Flowers 1-1·5 cm. Petals yellow, twice as long as calyx. Spur slightly longer than calycine appendages.{\i  Sandy, acid soil. • Mountains of C. Spain & C. Portugal. }Hs Lu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 78. V. tricolor} L.,{\i  Sp. Pl. }935 (1753). Glabrous to shortly pubescent annual, biennial or perennial; rhizome absent or short. Stems ascending or erect, usually branched. Lower leaves cordate to ovate, obtuse, crenate; the upper ovate to lanceolate, more or less cuneate at base, crenate. Stipules deeply and pinnately lobed, the terminal segment larger than the others, usually lanceolate, entire or crenate, usually leaf-like. Flowers 1-2·5(-3·5) cm, violet, yellow or particoloured. Corolla distinctly exceeding calyx. Spur 3-6·5 mm, variable in length, up to twice as long as the calycine appendages.{\i  Most of Europe, but rare in the south and only on mountains.} All except Az Bl Cr Lu Sa Sb Si.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 The following grouping of subspecies is provisional, and further investigation is needed.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Usually annual
\par
2 Stems not more than 40 cm; flowers usually blue-violet ..({\b a}) subsp. {\b tricolor}
\par
2 Stems up to 80 cm; flowers usually yellow .................... ({\b e}) subsp. {\b matutina}
\par
1 Usually perennial
\par
3 Lateral petals without veins ....................................... ({\b c}) subsp. {\b macedonica}
\par
3 Lateral petals with distinct veins
\par
4 Low-growing, maritime .................................................... ({\b b}) subsp. {\b curtisii}
\par
4 Ascending or erect, montane ......................................... ({\b d}) subsp. {\b subalpina}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b tricolor} (incl.{\i  V. luteola} Jordan, {\i V. nemausensis} Jordan): Annual, rarely perennial. Stems (5-)15-25(-40) cm, usually more or less erect. Median and upper leaves very variable in size (1·5 cm) and shape (ovate to lanceolate). Flowers blue-violet, rarely entirely yellow. Spur 3-5 mm, slightly exceeding calycine appendages. 2n = 26.{\i  Cultivated ground, grassland. Throughout the range of the species}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b curtisii} (E. Forster) Syme in Sowerby,{\i  Engl. Bot.} ed. 3,{\b  2}: 26 (1865) (incl. {\i V. litoralis} Sprengel): Perennial, rarely annual. Stock vertical, not or scarcely creeping. Stems 3-15 cm. Leaves and stipules narrow, ovate-lanceolate to lanceolate, and fleshy. Flowers variable in colour. Lateral and lower petals distinctly veined. Spur often twice as long as calycine appendages. 2n = 26.{\i  Dunes and dry grassland, usually near the sea. W. Europe and the Baltic region}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b c}) Subsp. {\b macedonica} (Boiss. & Heldr.) A. Schmidt, {\i Feddes Repert.}{\b  74}: 30 (1967) ({\i V. saxatilis} F. W. Schmidt subsp.{\i  macedonica} (Boiss. & Heldr.) Hayek): Usually perennial, but sometimes annual or biennial. Stems c. 20 cm, usually erect. Leaves and stipules often narrow, lanceolate. Upper petals bright violet, remainder yellowish; lateral petals without veins, lower petal with few or no veins. 2n = 26.{\i  Meadows, up to more than }2000{\i  m. Balkan peninsula}.
\par

\par
280}
\par