{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 16 Petals white; sepals in fruit less than 10 mm ............................ {\b 12. pilosum}
\par
16 Petals pink; sepals in fruit more than 10 mm .......................... {\b 13. virgatum}
\par
2 Lower leaves exstipulate (the upper leaves sometimes stipulate);
\par
  style shorter than stamens, strongly sigmoid at base
\par
17 Flowers solitary or few on long pedicels at ends of leafy
\par
    shoots ...................................................................................... {\b 31. lunulatum}
\par
17 Flowers in leafless cymes
\par
18 Leaves (at least of non-flowering shoots) densely
\par
   stellate-tomentose beneath
\par
19 Leaves all exstipulate, or upper leaves of flowering
\par
   shoots with only small stipules
\par
20 Leaves cuneate at base ................................................................ {\b 23. canum}
\par
20 Leaves rounded or cordate at base
\par
21 Leaves ovate-orbicular to cordate-orbicular ......................... {\b 26. pannosum}
\par
21 Leaves ovate to lanceolate, acute
\par
22 Inflorescence simple or branched from base;
\par
   leaves all exstipulate .............................................................. {\b 25. marifolium}
\par
22 Inflorescence usually paniculate; upper leaves of
\par
   flowering shoots with small stipules ......................................... {\b 27. cinereum}
\par
19 Upper leaves of flowering shoots with conspicuous,
\par
   leaf like stipules
\par
23 Leaves ± revolute ................................................................ {\b 30. viscidulum}
\par
23 Leaves flat
\par
24 Leaves rounded or cordate at base .......................................... {\b 27. cinereum}
\par
24 Leaves cuneate at base ......................................................... {\b 28. hymettium}
\par
18 Leaves green on both surfaces
\par
25 Upper leaves of flowering shoots with conspicuous stipules
\par
   ............................................................................................. {\b 29. rossmaessleri}
\par
25 All leaves exstipulate
\par
26 Leaves elliptical to linear-lanceolate ................................... {\b 22. oelandicum}
\par
26 Leaves ovate to cordate-orbicular ................................... {\b 24. origanifolium}
\par
1 Annuals
\par
27 Sepals scarious .................................................................. {\b 21. aegyptiacum}
\par
27 Sepals herbaceous
\par
28 Plant viscid; sepals obtuse; pedicels deflexed after anthesis
\par
   ............................................................................................... {\b 20. sanguineum}
\par
28 Not viscid; sepals acuminate; pedicels erect after anthesis
\par
29 Flowers subsessile; inflorescence dense
\par
30 Bracts shorter than sepals; seeds smooth or foveolate ............ {\b 16. villosum}
\par
30 Bracts longer than sepals; seeds covered with crystalline
\par
   papillae ...................................................................................... {\b 17. papillare}
\par
29 Pedicels 2-12 mm; inflorescence lax
\par
31 Pedicels erect, shorter than the sepals ................................... {\b 18. ledifolium}
\par
31 Pedicels patent, arcuate-erect at apex, exceeding the sepals
\par
   ............................................................................................... {\b 19. salicifolium}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Subgen.{\i  Helianthemum}. Leaves all stipulate; style straight or slightly sigmoid.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Sect. ARGYROLEPIS Spach. Shrubs or dwarf shrubs. Inflorescence compound; capsule ellipsoid-trigonous.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. H. lavandulifolium} Miller,{\i  Gard. Dict.} ed. 8, no. 13 (1768) ({\i H. racemosum} Pers.). Small shrub 10-50 cm, densely grey-tomentose. Leaves 10-50 × 3-8 mm, lanceolate to linear-lanceolate, acute, with revolute margins, greyish-green and appressed-tomentose above, white-tomentose beneath. Stipules sometimes caducous. Flowers many, in dense cymes divided from the base into 3-5 branches. Petals 5-10 mm, yellow. Capsule shorter than calyx. 2n = 20.{\i  Calcicole. Mediterranean region.} Cr Ga Gr Hs It Ju Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. H. squamatum} (L.) Pers., {\i Syn. Pl. }{\b 2}: 78 (1806). Small densely caespitose shrub 10-30 cm, densely covered with sessile, silvery peltate scales. Leaves 10-30 × 3-10 mm, lanceolate to oblanceolate- or linear-spathulate, fleshy, with flat margins. Stipules about as long as the petiole, subulate to linear-lanceolate, caducous. Inflorescence usually branched from base into usually 3 long-pedunculate, dense, more or less capitate cymes. Petals only slightly longer than the sepals, yellow with a dark spot at the base. 2n = 10.{\i  Gypsum soils. E., C. & S. Spain.} Hs.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 3. H. caput-felis} Boiss., {\i Elenchus} 16 (1838). Compact, caespitose dwarf shrub 10-30 cm; branches erect, very leafy, densely tomentose. Leaves 6-15 × 2-10 mm, broadly elliptical to lanceolate, thick, densely tomentose on both surfaces, with revolute margins. Cymes compact, few-flowered. Sepals densely villous, giving the appearance in bud of a cat's head. Petals 9-12 mm, yellow, longer than the sepals.{\i  Coastal limestone cliffs and dry places inland. S.E. Spain} ({\i Alicante prov}.),{\i  Balear} Bl Hs. ({\i N. Africa}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Sect. HELIANTHEMUM. Dwarf shrubs; inflorescence unbranched; capsule ovoid or globose.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 4. H. piliferum} Boiss.,{\i  Elenchus} 17 (1838). Stems 10-20 cm, erect or procumbent, glabrous, leafy below, leafless above. Upper leaves 10-20 × 1-2 mm, the lower smaller, linear-lanceolate, stiff, with strongly revolute margins, glabrous, bright green, often with a white bristle at the apex, very shortly petiolate. Stipules like the leaves, but half as long. Cymes unilateral, few- to many-flowered. Sepals subglabrous. Flowers 25 mm in diameter; petals yellow. Capsule 7 mm, much shorter than the sepals in fruit.{\i  S. Spain}. Hs.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 5. H. viscarium} Boiss. & Reuter, {\i Pugillus} 14 (1852). Compact, 15-30 cm, more or less glandular-viscid. Leaves 10-20 × 2-4 mm, linear-lanceolate to linear-elliptical, green on both surfaces or glaucous beneath, with more or less revolute margins. Stipules linear, longer than the petioles. Cymes 4- to 12-flowered, with conspicuous bracts resembling the stipules. Sepals exceeding the capsule, becoming inflated in fruit, with strongly marked ribs.{\i  S.E. Spain} ({\i Murcia prov}.). Hs. ({\i N. Africa}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 6. H. asperum} Lag. ex Dunal in DC.,{\i  Prodr. }{\b 1}: 283 (1824). Laxly branched, with erect stems up to 35 cm. Leaves 10-22 × 3-7 mm, ovate-oblong to oblong-linear, roughly hairy with stellate hairs and greenish above, usually grey-tomentose beneath, with more or less revolute margins. Cymes 6- to 9-flowered. Sepals inflated in fruit, prominently ribbed, the ribs with conspicuous, long bristles; intercostal spaces glabrous and shining. Flowers c. 20 mm in diameter; petals white. Capsule included in the sepals. {\i Dry and rocky places on calcareous soil. E., C. & S. Spain.} Hs.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 7. H. hirtum} (L.) Miller,{\i  Gard. Dict.} ed. 8, no. 14 (1768). Up to 30 cm, caespitose, with erect branches, rarely procumbent. Leaves 3-20 × 1-6 mm, the lower ones smaller, ovate-orbicular, the upper elliptical to linear-lanceolate, all somewhat fleshy, dark green to grey above, canescent and stellate-tomentose beneath. Cymes 5- to 17-flowered. Sepals prominently ribbed, the ribs and margins with conspicuous, long bristles; intercostal spaces stellate-hairy. Flowers 15 mm in diameter; petals white or yellow. Capsule included in the sepals.{\i  Scrub, woods, dry places, usually on calcareous substrate. S.W. Europe.} Co Ga Hs Lu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 8. H. croceum} (Desf.) Pers., {\i Syn. Pl.}{\b  2}: 79 (1806) ({\i H. glaucum} Pers.). 5-30 cm, densely or laxly caespitose; branches erect or procumbent. Leaves 5-20 × 2-7 mm, suborbicular to linear-lanceolate, fleshy, usually stellate-tomentose on both surfaces,
\par

\par
287}
\par