{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 3. T. major} (Willk.) P. Silva & Rozeira,{\i  Agron. Lusit.}{\b  24}: 168 (1964) ({\i T. globularifolia} var.{\i  major} Willk.) Like {\b 2} but leaves thicker, with the veins not anastomosing; bracts broadly ovate, obtuse.{\i  Coastal scrub. • S. Portugal}. Lu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Sect. SCORPIOIDES Willk. Annual; uppermost leaves usually stipulate; ovary sessile.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 4. T. guttata} (L.) Fourr.,{\i  Ann. Soc. Linn. Lyon} nov. ser., {\b 16}: 340 (1868) ({\i T. variabilis} Willk.; incl. {\i T. inconspicua} (Thib.) Willk.,{\i  Helianthemum guttatum} (L.) Miller). Villous annual up to 30 cm, with basal rosette often persisting to anthesis. Basal and lower cauline leaves broadly to narrowly elliptical or obovate, exstipulate; upper cauline leaves linear-oblong or linear-lanceolate, more or less revolute, stipulate or not; all leaves with stellate hairs on both surfaces or only simple hairs above. Flowers 10-20 mm in diameter, long-pedicellate, in terminal raceme-like cymes. Outer sepals much smaller than the inner; petals usually dark-spotted at the base. 2n = 36. {\i S. & W. Europe, northwards to} 54° {\i N. and extending eastwards to} 14°{\i   E. in E. Germany.} Al Bl Br Bu Co Cr Ga Ge Gr Hb Ho Hs It Ju Lu Sa Si Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Very variable in hairiness, shape and size of leaves, size of petals and in the persistence of the basal rosette. In some variants the petals may be inconspicuous or absent.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b T. brevipes} (Boiss. & Reuter) Willk.,{\i  Icon. Descr. Pl. Nov. }{\b 2}: 79 (1859), with very shortly pedicellate flowers, probably represents a variant of this species. It is known only from S. Spain (San Roque).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Species {\b 5-9} are frequently regarded as subspecies or varieties of {\i T. guttata}, but they appear to be distinct species and do not fit into a subspecific pattern of distribution.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 5. T. bupleurifolia} (Lam.) Willk., {\i Icon. Descr. Pl. Nov. }{\b 2}: 77 (1859). Like {\b 4} but leaves narrow, the uppermost strongly revolute, bright green, glabrous or sparsely pubescent; inflorescence slender, few-flowered; flowers 10-13 mm in diameter.{\i  Coastal sands. S. Portugal, S.W. Spain.} Hs Lu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 6. T. villosissima} (Pomel) Grosser in Engler,{\i  Pflanzenreich}{\b  14}({\b IV, 193}): 59 (1903). Slender, sericeous-tomentose annual. Basal leaves caducous; cauline leaves 25-50 × 8-12 mm, ovate-lanceolate; upper cauline leaves smaller, alternate, with stipules half as long as the leaves; all leaves dark green, villous. Cymes branched at base, distinctly scorpioid when young, dense. Petals unspotted. Capsule villous. {\i Sicilia} ({\i Scoglitti, W. of Ragusa}). Si. ({\i Algeria.})
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 7. T. praecox} Grosser, {\i loc. cit.} (1903). Small, unbranched, slender, grey-villous annual. Lower cauline leaves 25-35 × 8-12 mm; stipules 1/3 as long as upper cauline leaves. Petals scarcely exceeding the sepals, unspotted. Capsule glabrous.{\i  Coastal regions of C. Mediterranean region.} Co It Ju Sa Si.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 8. T. acuminata} (Viv.) Grosser,{\i  loc. cit.} (1903). Robust, erect annual up to 40 cm, grey-pubescent with appressed hairs. Basal and lower cauline leaves 40-60 × 3-5 mm, linear-lanceolate; stipules 1/3 as long as the upper cauline leaves. Inflorescence dense. Pedicels thick and usually erect in fruit. Outer sepals smaller than the inner at anthesis, all accrescent and subequal in fruit; petals unspotted.{\i  N.W. Italy.} It.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 9. T. macrosepala} (Cosson) Willk.,{\i  Icon. Descr. Pl. Nov.}{\b  2}: 80 (1859). Like {\b 8} but often up to 80 cm, with patent hairs; basal leaves 50-80 × 12-30 mm, elliptic-lanceolate, the upper with stipules 1/2 to 2/3 as long as the leaves; inflorescence compact, becoming lax in fruit; pedicels arcuate in fruit; outer sepals equalling or exceeding the inner, rarely shorter.{\i  Open places, often on mountains. S.W. Spain, E.C. Portugal.} Hs Lu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 10. T. echioides} (Lam.) Willk.,{\i  op. cit.} 81 (1859). Robust, erect annual up to 30 cm, variably branched, white-pubescent with patent hairs. Basal leaves caducous and the whole plant often leafless in fruit. Leaves 35-60 × 8-12 mm, oblong-lanceolate. Flowers inconspicuous, subsessile in dense, scorpioid, many-flowered cymes. Outer sepals exceeding the inner, all accrescent in fruit; petals spotted at the base, caducous. {\i Sandy ground and waste places. S.W. Spain.} Hs. ({\i N.W. Africa.})
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 4.                    Helianthemum}                 Miller
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc By M.C.F. Proctor & V.H. Heywood.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Dwarf shrubs or annual herbs. Leaves opposite, decussate, usually stipulate. Flowers in raceme-like cymes, often secund. Sepals 5, the 3 inner ovate, the 2 outer smaller, usually linear or oblong. Petals usually yellow, less often white or pink; stamens numerous, all fertile. Style short and straight or filiform and more or less sigmoid. Capsule ovoid, 3-valved; ovules orthotropous.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Literature: E. Guinea,{\i  Cistáceas Españolas} ({\i Bol. Inst. For. Inv. Exper. Madrid} No. 71) 63-160. Madrid. 1954.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Dwarf shrubs
\par
2 All leaves stipulate (stipules occasionally caducous);
\par
  style slender, filiform, slightly sigmoid at base
\par
3 Leaves and sepals densely covered with peltate scales ........... {\b 2. squamatum}
\par
3 Leaves and sepals without peltate scales
\par
4 Inflorescence corymbose .................................................. {\b 1. lavandulifolium}
\par
4 Inflorescence ± simple
\par
5 Outer sepals broadly ovate, reflexed so as to give the
\par
  villous flower buds the appearance of a cat's head .................... {\b 3. caput-felis}
\par
5 Outer sepals linear to linear-lanceolate, the flower
\par
  buds not resembling a cat's head
\par
6 Flowers sessile
\par
7 Branches slender; sepals 3-4 mm in fruit ............................ {\b 14. sessiliflorum}
\par
7 Branches robust; sepals 5-8 mm in fruit ................................. {\b 15. stipulatum}
\par
6 Flowers pedicellate
\par
8 Plant glandular-hairy in all its parts ........................................... {\b 5. viscarium}
\par
8 Plant not glandular-hairy
\par
9 Sepals with long, stiff, patent bristles, usually
\par
  equalling or exceeding the intercostal spaces
\par
10 Intercostal spaces of sepals glabrous and shining ...................... {\b 6. asperum}
\par
10 Intercostal spaces of sepals stellate-tomentose ............................. {\b 7. hirtum}
\par
9 Sepals without long, stiff bristles
\par
11 Stipules ± leaf-like, longer than the petioles; stellate hairs
\par
   (when present) on upper surface of leaf forming a thick felt
\par
12 Upper surface of leaves densely stellate-tomentose .................. {\b 8. croceum}
\par
12 Upper surface of leaves glabrous to pubescent ................ {\b 9. nummularium}
\par
13 Leaves with strongly revolute margins; capsule much
\par
   shorter than sepals ...................................................................... {\b 4. piliferum}
\par
13 Leaves nearly or quite flat; capsule about
\par
   equalling sepals ................................................................... {\b 9. nummularium}
\par
11 Stipules linear, not leaf-like; stellate hairs (when resent) on
\par
   upper surface of leaf closely appressed scarcely forming a felt
\par
14 Petals yellow ..................................................................... {\b 10. leptophyllum}
\par
14 Petals white or pink
\par
15 Sepals pubescent .................................................................. {\b 11. apenninum}
\par
15 Sepals glabrous or stellate-tomentose on or between the ribs
\par

\par
286}
\par