{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 10. R. rugosa} Thunb.,{\i  Fl. Jap}. 213 (1784). Stems up to 2·5 m, densely tomentose when young. Prickles hairy, at least at the base, straight, mixed with dense acicles. Leaflets 5-9, 20-50 × 18-25(-40) mm, ovate to elliptical, usually green and shiny above, thick, rugose. Flowers 1-3. Bracts large, enclosing the pedicels. Pedicels usually densely tomentose. Petals (25-)30-45(-50) mm, purplish-red, rarely white. Fruit depressed-globose, with a well-developed neck below the disc, glabrous, scarlet. 2n = 14.{\i  Cultivated for ornament and for hedges; naturalized in parts of N., W. & C. Europe}. [Au Br Da Fe Ga Ge Hb Ho Hu No Po Rm Su.] ({\i E. Asia.})
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 11. R. blanda} Aiton,{\i  Hort. Kew.}{\b  2}: 202 (1789). Erect shrub up to 2 m. Stems unarmed, or with scattered acicles when young; bark brown. Leaflets 5-7(-9), 20-60 × 15-40 mm, elliptical to obovate-oblong, usually acute, coarsely serrate, dull and glabrous above, paler and usually pubescent beneath. Flowers 1-5. Bracts large, enclosing the pedicels. Pedicels glabrous. Petals 15-25 mm, pink. Fruit subglobose or ellipsoid, glabrous, red.{\i  Cultivated for ornament; naturalized in C. Europe}. [Au Ge.] ({\i E. & C. North America.})
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 12. R. pendulina} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 492 (1753) ({\i R. alpina} L.). Stems up to 2 m; bark green, yellowish-green or occasionally purplish. Prickles usually absent. Leaflets 7-11, 20-60 × 10-30 mm, oblong-ovate to -obovate, biserrate, glabrous or pubescent above, usually sparsely pubescent and sometimes glandular at least on the veins beneath, with glandular teeth. Flowers solitary. Bracts about as long as and enclosing the pedicels, soon deciduous. Pedicels glandular-hispid, recurved in fruit. Petals 15-25 mm, deep purplish-pink. Styles densely hairy. Fruit 15-25 mm, pendent, ovoid to elongate-pyriform, rarely globose, often glandular-hispid, red.{\i  Mountains of C. & S. Europe.} Al Au Be Bu Cz Ga Ge Gr He Hs Hu It Ju Po Rm Rs (W).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Sect. CAROLINAE Crépin. Erect, deciduous shrubs. Stems slender, with straight, paired prickles and often acicles. Flowers few, in corymbs. Sepals patent and soon deciduous after anthesis. Pedicels and hypanthium glandular-hispid, rarely smooth. Carpels confined to the bottom of the hypanthium.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 13. R. virginiana} J. Herrmann,{\i  Diss. Rosa }19 (1762). Stems up to 2 m, with few or no suckers; bark bluish-green, becoming reddish-brown. Prickles hooked, curved or absent. Leaflets 5-9, 20-60 × 12-25 mm, elliptical to elliptic-obovate, often cuneate at base, acute, serrate, dull green above, glabrous or sparsely hairy beneath; teeth eglandular. Flowers 2-8. Bracts much shorter than the pedicels. Pedicels glandular-hispid. Sepals patent and deciduous after anthesis, glandular-hispid on the back. Petals 15-25(-30) mm, pink or white. Styles lanate. Fruit 10-15 mm, ovoid-globose to globose, glandular-hispid.{\i  Cultivated for ornament and locally naturalized.} [Au Br Ga.] ({\i E. North America}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Sect. ROSA (Sect.{\i  Gallicanae} DC.). Erect, usually low shrubs. Rhizome long. Stems usually with hooked prickles mixed with acicles. Outer sepals usually pinnatifid, deflexed and deciduous after anthesis. Disc wide, with a narrow orifice. Carpels sessile. Styles free.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 14. R. gallica} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 492 (1753). Deciduous shrub 0·4-0·8 m, forming large patches. Stems with prickles and glandular setae. Leaflets 3-7, 20-60 × 18-30 mm, coriaceous, suborbicular or ovate to narrowly elliptical, rounded at the apex, usually compound-serrate, dull bluish-green and glabrous above, paler, pubescent and glandular beneath. Flowers solitary, rarely 2-4,6-9 cm in diameter, strongly scented. Pedicels glandular-setose. Sepals glandular on the back. Petals (25-)30-45 mm, deep pink. Styles densely hairy, rarely glabrous. Fruit globose to fusiform, densely glandular-setose, bright red. {\i S. & C. Europe, extending to Belgium and C. France. }Al Au Be Bu Cz Ga Ge Gr He Hu It Ju Po Rm Rs (C, W, K) Tu [Co Hs Lu Sa Si].
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Sect. CANINAE DC. Deciduous shrubs, with erect or arching stems. Rhizome short. Prickles usually numerous, hooked or straight; acicles usually absent. Flowers in bracteate corymbs. Outer sepals usually pinnatifid, deflexed, erect or patent, persistent or caducous after anthesis. Disc flat or conical, variable in size, narrow. Carpels long-stipitate. Styles free.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 This section has long been recognized as critical, and very large numbers of taxa have been described. So far as is known, they are all polyploid, with 2n = 28, 35 or 42, and their reproduction is unusual. In the pentaploids, for example, 7 bivalents and 21 univalents are formed at meiosis. In the pollen the univalents are lost, so that most functional pollen-grains carry only 7 chromosomes; in the ovules, on the other hand, all the univalents go to one pole at the first meiotic division and the egg has 28 chromosomes. Thus, in sexual reproduction, most of the chromosomes of the offspring come from the seed-parent and have not paired at meiosis. Inheritance thus tends to be predominantly maternal, and this in turn means there is a tendency for the biotypes in Sect.{\i  Caninae} to be relatively constant, though hybridization can produce new biotypes, some of which may survive and become stabilized. The situation is analogous to facultative apomixis, though{\i  Rosa} is not apomictic.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 In the account of Sect. {\i Caninae} which follows, an attempt has been made to cover the whole range of variation but to describe only a limited number of fairly well-defined species. It is recognized that many intermediates may occur. Because of the taxonomic difficulties, the geographical distribution of many of the species is imperfectly known, and can only be given in general terms.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 15. R. stylosa} Desv., {\i Jour. Bot. Rédigé }{\b 2}: 317 (1809). Stems up to 3 m. Prickles hooked, some with very stout bases. Leaflets 5-7, 25-50 × 15-25 mm, elliptical to elliptic-oblong, usually acuminate, serrate, usually pubescent beneath at least on the veins, rarely pubescent above, eglandular. Flowers solitary to many. Pedicels long, usually glandular-hispid. Sepals deflexed and deciduous after anthesis. Petals 15-30 mm, usually white, sometimes pink. Disc conical. Styles connate in a column which is shorter than the inner stamens, sometimes becoming free in fruit. Fruit 10-15 mm, ovoid, rarely globose, glabrous, red.{\i  From Ireland and W. Germany to S. Spain and Bulgaria}; local. Au Br Bu Ga Ge Hb He Hs Hu It Rm.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 16. R. jundzillii} Besser,{\i  Cat. Horto Cremen.} 117 (1816) ({\i R. marginata} auct., non Wallr.). Stems up to 2 m, erect. Prickles slender, straight or slightly curved. Leaflets 5-7, 25-40 × 15-25 mm, subcoriaceous, elliptical to ovate, acute, biserrate, glabrous or rarely very sparsely pubescent, sparsely glandular on the margins and veins beneath; teeth glandular; rhachis sparsely glandular. Flowers solitary, slightly scented. Pedicels c. 25 mm, usually twice as long as the fruit, stipitate-glandular. Sepals glandular on the back, deflexed and deciduous after anthesis. Petals 15-25(-30) mm, pale to deep pink. Disc flat, wide. Styles ± densely pubescent. Fruit c. 12 mm, globose to ovoid, sparsely stipitate-glandular or glabrous, red.{\i  C. & E. Europe, extending westwards to C. France and N.W. Italy}. Al Au Bu Cz Ga Ge ?Gr He Hu It Ju Po Rm Rs (C, W, K) ?Tu.
\par

\par
28}
\par