{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 at least between the ribs. Petals c. 10 mm, pink. Capsule shorter than the sepals in fruit. ?Spain. ?Hs. ({\i N. Africa.})
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Doubtfully recorded from Spain, where it has been confused with {\b 11} and {\b 12}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Sect. ERIOCARPUM Dunal. Dwarf shrubs; inflorescence usually unbranched; capsule globose or trigonous; style long, filiform.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 14. H. sessiliflorum} (Desf.) Pers., {\i Syn. Pl.}{\b  2}: 78 (1806) Caespitose, much-branched dwarf shrub 30-60 cm; branches and shoots white, stellate-pubescent. Leaves varying according to the season; in rainy periods 15-20 mm, lanceolate, green, with flat margins, caducous; in dry periods 5-12 mm, linear, whitish, strongly revolute, persistent. Cymes 6- to 15-flowered, dense; flowers minute, chasmogamous or cleistogamous. Sepals 1-2 mm, green, with stellate hairs between the ribs and long white hairs on the ribs, white-villous at base. Petals yellow, longer or shorter than the sepals.{\i  Dry hillsides near the sea. S. Italy, Sicilia.} It Si.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Often regarded as a subspecies or variety of{\b  H. lippii }(L.) Pers.,{\i  loc. cit. }(1806), from N. Africa and Asia Minor.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 15. H. stipulatum} (Forskål) C. Chr.,{\i  Dansk Bot. Ark.}{\b  4}({\b 3}): 20 (1922) ({\i H. ellipticum} (Desf.) Pers.). Dwarf shrub, usually erect. Leaves 8-15 × 2·5-7·5 mm, linear- to ovate-lanceolate, with slightly or strongly revolute margins according to the season, sparsely stellate-tomentose above, densely so beneath. Cymes 3- to 7-flowered, lax. Sepals 3-4 mm, stellate-hairy between and on the ribs, ciliate; petals as long as the sepals, yellow.{\i  Maritime sands. Greece} ({\i N. W. Peloponisos}). Gr. ({\i S.W. Asia, Egypt}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Sect. BRACHYPETALUM Dunal. Annuals; inflorescence mostly unbranched; capsule trigonous; style short, straight.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 16. H. villosum} Thib. in Pers.,{\i  Syn. Pl.}{\b  2}: 78 (1806). Slender, erect annual 8-20 cm. Leaves 5-30 × 3-8 mm, lanceolate to obovate-lanceolate, grey-green with stellate hairs on both surfaces; stipules linear, 1/3-1/2 as long as the leaves. Cymes dense, unilateral, more or less scorpioid when young, later spike-like; pedicels short. Sepals 5-8 mm, villous; petals inconspicuous, shorter than the sepals, narrow, yellow. Seeds smooth.{\i  Dry or rocky places. S. Spain, S. Portugal.} Hs Lu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 17. H. papillare} Boiss., {\i Voy. Bot. Midi Esp. }{\b 2}: 63 (1839). Somewhat robust annual up to 13 cm; stems erect or ascending, covered with patent hairs. Leaves 10-25 × 5-8 mm, lanceolate to obovate-lanceolate, with patent hairs on both surfaces and with stellate hairs beneath; stipules linear-lanceolate 1/3-1/2 as long as the leaves. Cymes dense, contracted, 2-5 cm when young, later spike-like; pedicels short. Sepals c. 5 mm, accrescent; petals yellow, linear-lanceolate. Seeds covered with shining, crystalline papillae.{\i  Scrub and open habitats on clay or dry soils. S. Spain.} Hs.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 18. H. ledifolium} (L.) Miller,{\i  Gard. Dict.} ed. 8, no. 20 (1768) ({\i H. niloticum }(L.) Pers., non Moench; incl.{\i  H. lasiocarpum} Desf. ex Willk.). Villous-tomentose annual 10-60 cm, variable in habit and size of parts. Leaves 10-50 × 3-12 mm, elliptical to lanceolate or obovate, greenish above, greyish beneath, rarely greyish on both surfaces; stipules linear to lanceolate, about as long as the leaves. Cymes 3- to 13-flowered, scorpioid; pedicels erect, thickened. Sepals 6-10 mm, accrescent; petals shorter than the sepals, yellow, cuneate. Seeds foveolate, smooth or papillose. 2n = 20.{\i  Dry places. S. Europe.} Bu Cr Ga Gr Hs It Ju Lu Sa Si.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 19. H. salicifolium} (L.) Miller,{\i  Gard. Dict.} ed. 8, no. 21 (1768) ({\i H. intermedium} (Pers.) Thib. ex Dunal). Annual up to 30 cm, variable in habit, usually much-branched. Leaves 5-30 × 3-10 mm, ovate-lanceolate to elliptic-oblong; stipules linear- to ovate-lanceolate. Flowers in simple or branched, 5- to 20-flowered cymes; pedicels long, slender, patent, usually upturned at the apex. Sepals 5-12 mm; petals longer or shorter than the sepals, or absent. 2n = 20.{\i  Dry places. S. Europe.} Al Bl Bu Co Cr Ga Gr He Hs It Ju Lu Rm Rs (K) Sa Si Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 20. H. sanguineum} (Lag.) Lag. ex Dunal in DC.,{\i  Prodr. }{\b 1}: 273 (1824) ({\i H. retrofractum} Pers.). Much-branched, glandular-hairy annual 2-10 cm; stems often purple-tinged. Lower leaves 10-20 × 8-10 mm, elliptical, obtuse, caducous; upper leaves oblong-lanceolate, persistent; stipules 1/3 as long as the leaves. Cymes lax, 3- to 6-flowered; pedicels stout, curved before anthesis, strongly deflexed in fruit. Sepals 7-8 mm; petals yellow, shorter than the sepals. Capsule glabrous.{\i  Portugal, Spain, Italy, Kriti}. Cr Hs It Lu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 21. H. aegyptiacum} (L.) Miller, {\i Gard. Dict}. ed. 8, no. 23 (1768). Erect, little-branched annual up to 30 cm; stems and branches villous. Leaves 10-30 × 1·5-3 mm, linear-lanceolate or oblong, often with revolute margins, dark green above, grey-tomentose beneath; stipules linear, 1/3-1/4 as long as the leaves. Cymes lax, 3- to 9-flowered; pedicels long, filiform, deflexed in fruit. Sepals 6-10 mm; petals yellow, shorter than the sepals. Capsule appressed-pubescent.{\i  Dry, sandy places. Mediterranean region, S. Bulgaria}. Bu Co Cr Gr Hs It Sa Si.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Subgen.{\b  Plectolobum} Willk. Dwarf shrubs; at least the lower leaves exstipulate; style distinctly sigmoid at the base.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Sect. PLECTOLOBUM (Sect. {\i Chamaecistus} Willk.). Flowers in simple or branched, bracteate cymes.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 22. H. oelandicum} (L.) DC. in Lam. & DC., {\i Fl. Fr.} ed. 3, {\b 4}: 817 (1805) ({\i H. montanum} sensu Willk.). Laxly or densely caespitose dwarf shrub up to 20 cm. Leaves elliptical to linear-lanceolate, acute or obtuse, green on both surfaces, glabrous or with simple or fasciculate but not stellate hairs. Flowers few or many, in simple or branched cymes; petals yellow.{\i  Scattered over much of Europe, but absent from most of the north and most of the islands.} Al Au Cz Ga Ge Gr He Hs It Ju Lu Po Rm Rs (N, C, W, K, E) Su.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Polymorphic, and divisible into at least five fairly clearly delimited subspecies:
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Lax; cymes 6- to 20-flowered, often produced on lateral
\par
  branches of the current year's growth; petals 3-6 mm . ......({\b d}) subsp. {\b italicum}
\par
1 Caespitose; cymes 2- to 10-flowered, usually produced from
\par
  the apex of the previous year's growth; petals 5-10 mm
\par
2 Procumbent and intricately branched; leaves glabrous
\par
  or subglabrous; sepals subglabrous .............................. ({\b a}) subsp. {\b oelandicum}
\par
2 Compact; leaves pubescent; sepals long-pubescent
\par
3 Hairs on sepals ± patent .................................................... ({\b e}) subsp. {\b orientale}
\par
3 Hairs on sepals mainly ± appressed
\par
4 Leaves oblong-elliptical to oblong-linear, obtuse;
\par
  petals 7-10 mm ................................................................... ({\b b}) subsp. {\b alpestre}
\par
4 Leaves lanceolate, usually acute; petals 5-9 mm ......... ({\b c}) subsp. {\b rupifragum}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b oelandicum}: 2n = 22.{\i  Öland.}
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b alpestre} (Jacq.) Breistr., {\i Bull. Soc. Sci. Dauph. }{\b 61}: 623 (1947) ({\i H. alpestre} (Jacq.) DC.,{\i  H. italicum} subsp.{\i  alpestre} (Jacq.) Beger): 2n = 22. {\i Mountains of C. & S. Europe}.
\par

\par
289}
\par