{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 5 Leaves not undulate; pedicels 5-20 mm ...................................... {\b 1. albidus}
\par
5 Leaves undulate; pedicels 1-5 mm ................................................ {\b 2. crispus}
\par
4 Leaves petiolate, pinnately veined
\par
6 Leaves usually 20-50 mm, variable in shape, the veins
\par
  impressed above; sepals ovate-lanceolate, long acuminate ........... {\b 3. incanus}
\par
6 Leaves 5-20 mm, elliptical, the veins not or scarcely
\par
  impressed above; sepals ovate, acute ................................... {\b 4. heterophyllus}
\par
2 Stigma sessile or subsessile
\par
7 Petals pink; leaves grey-tomentose, at least beneath .............. {\b 5. parviflorus}
\par
7 Petals white; leaves green
\par
8 Leaves sessile or subsessile
\par
9 Leaves subsessile, elliptical, narrowed to a cuneate base .......... {\b 9. albanicus}
\par
9 Leaves sessile, not or scarcely narrowed at base
\par
10 Leaves linear-lanceolate or linear; outer sepals broadly
\par
   cuneate at base .................................................................... {\b 7. monspeliensis}
\par
10 Leaves oblong; outer sepals cordate at base ........................ {\b 8. psilosepalus}
\par
8 Leaves distinctly petiolate
\par
11 Leaves 10-40 mm, rugose and scabrid above, rounded or
\par
    cuneate at base ....................................................................... {\b 10. salvifolius}
\par
11 Leaves 40-100 mm, smooth above, cordate at base ........... {\b 11. populifolius}
\par
1 Sepals 3
\par
12 Leaves at least 6 mm wide; linear-lanceolate to ovate or spathulate;
\par
   flowers at least 5 cm in diameter
\par
13 Inflorescence usually 4- to 8-flowered; ovary 5-locular ....... {\b 12. laurifolius}
\par
13 Flowers solitary; ovary 6- to 10-locular
\par
14 Leaves linear-lanceolate; ovary 10-locular ............................. {\b 13. ladanifer}
\par
14 Leaves oblanceolate to spathulate; ovary 6-locular ................. {\b 4. palhinhae}
\par
12 Leaves not more than 4 mm wide, linear; flowers not more than
\par
   3 cm in diameter
\par
15 Peduncles, pedicels and calyx clothed with long, white hairs ...... {\b 15. clusii}
\par
15 Peduncles, pedicels and calyx subglabrous ............................. {\b 16. libanotis}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. C. albidus} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 524 (1753). Compact bush up to 100 cm, erect. Leaves (15-)20-50(-75) × 5-20(-30) mm, oblong to elliptical, flat, 3-veined, densely greyish-white-tomentose, sessile. Cymes 1- to 7-flowered, ± symmetrical. Pedicels 5-20 mm. Sepals 5, tomentose. Flowers 4-6 cm in diameter, purplish-pink. Styles filiform. 2n = 18. {\i  S.W. Europe, extending to }c. 11° {\i E. in N. Italy}. Bl Co Ga Hs It Lu Sa.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. C. crispus} L.,{\i  Sp. Pl.} 524 (1753). Rounded bush up to 50 cm. Leaves 10-40 × 4-15 mm, oblong to elliptical, undulate, 3-veined, greyish-green, villous-tomentose, with mixed stellate and long, simple hairs, sessile. Cymes few-flowered, dense. Pedicels 1-5 mm. Sepals 5, densely villous. Flowers 3-4 cm in diameter, purplish-red. Style filiform. 2n = 18.{\i  W. Mediterranean region, C. & S. Portugal.} ?Co Ga Hs It Lu Si.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 3. C. incanus} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 524 (1753) ({\i C. villosus} auct., vix L.; incl.{\i  C. polymorphus} Willk.). Stems up to 100 cm, erect or spreading. Leaves (10-)20-50(-70) × 8-30 mm, ovate, obovate or elliptical, often undulate, pinnately veined, green or greyish, pubescent or tomentose with stellate hairs, with the veins impressed above and prominent beneath. Petioles 3-15 mm. Cymes 1- to 7-flowered, more or less symmetrical. Sepals 5, ovate-lanceolate, long-acuminate, with stellate hairs and long, simple hairs. Flowers 4-6 cm in diameter, purplish-pink.{\i  S. Europe, but rare in the west.} Al Bl Bu Co Cr Gr It Ju Rs (K) Sa Si Tu [Br].
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Leaves 15-25 × 8-15 mm, distinctly undulate-crispate .... ({\b c}) subsp. {\b creticus}
\par
1 Leaves 25-50 × 15-30 mm, flat
\par
2 Sepals with a few long hairs not hiding the dense stellate hairs;
\par
  stems and pedicels stellate-hairy ...................................... ({\b b}) subsp. {\b corsicus}
\par
2 Sepals with many long hairs hiding the stellate hairs;
\par
  stems and pedicels densely white-villous .......................... ({\b a}) subsp. {\b incanus}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b incanus} ({\i C. tauricus} C. Presl, {\i C. polymorphus} subsp. {\i villosus} var. {\i vulgaris }Willk.): {\i S. Europe, from Corse & W. Italy eastwards to Krym}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b corsicus} (Loisel.) Heywood,{\i  Feddes Repert. }{\b 79}: 60 (1968) ({\i C. villosus} subsp. {\i corsicus} (Loisel.) Rouy & Fouc.): {\i W. Mediterranean islands, Italy, Jugoslavia}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b c}) Subsp. {\b creticus} (L.) Heywood,{\i  Feddes Repert. }{\b 79}: 60 (1968) ({\i C. creticus} L.): {\i Greece and Aegean region}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 4. C. heterophyllus} Desf.,{\i  Fl. Atl. }{\b 1}: 411 (1798). Stems up to 100 cm, erect, much-branched. Leaves 5-20 mm, elliptical, pinnately veined, dark green and stellate-pubescent above, with the veins scarcely impressed, paler and tomentose beneath, with prominent veins. Petioles 1-2 mm. Cymes 1- to 5-flowered. Pedicels 15-45 mm. Sepals 5, conspicuously pubescent, with stellate hairs and few long, simple hairs. Flowers 5-6 cm in diameter, purplish-pink. Style filiform.{\i  S.E. Spain} ({\i near Cartagena}). Hs. ({\i N.W. Africa}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 5. C. parviflorus} Lam., {\i Encycl. Méth. Bot.}{\b  2}: 14 (1786). Stems up to 100 cm, somewhat spreading. Leaves 10-30 mm, ovate, 3-veined in the basal half, grey-tomentose, petiolate. Cymes 1- to 6-flowered, more or less symmetrical. Pedicels 5-10 mm. Sepals 5. Flowers 2-3 cm in diameter, pink. Style absent.{\i  Aegean region; S.E. Italy; Lampedusa.} Cr Gr It Si ?Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 6. C. varius} Pourret,{\i  Mém. Acad. Toulouse}{\b  3}: 312 (1788) ({\i C. pouzolzii} Delile). Stems up to 50 cm, somewhat spreading. Leaves oblong, 3-veined, grey-tomentose, sessile. Cymes 2- to 8-flowered, unilateral. Sepals 5. Flowers c. 2 cm in diameter, white. Style filiform. {\i S. France} ({\i Gard, Aveyron, Ardèche}). Ga. ({\i N.W. Africa}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Sometimes considered to be a hybrid between {\b 2} and {\b 7}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 7. C. monspeliensis} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 524 (1753). Compact bush up to 100 cm, erect, viscid. Leaves 15-50 × 4-8 mm, linear-lanceolate or linear, 3-veined, green and sparsely pubescent above, densely stellate-tomentose beneath, sessile. Cymes 2- to 8-flowered, unilateral. Sepals 5, the outer ovate, broadly cuneate at base. Flowers 2-3 cm in diameter, white. Style very short. 2n = 18.{\i  S. Europe}. Al Bl Co Cr Ga Gr Hs It Ju Lu Sa Si.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 8. C. psilosepalus} Sweet, {\i Cistin.} t. 33 (1826) ({\i C. hirsutus} Lam. (1786), non Lam. (1778)). Stems up to 100 cm, somewhat spreading. Leaves 20-60 × 5-20 mm, ovate-oblong to linear-oblong, green, 3-veined at least in the basal half, more or less hairy, with long, simple and stellate hairs on both surfaces, sessile. Cymes 1- to 5-flowered, more or less symmetrical. Sepals 5, the outer ovate, cordate at base, hirsute and long-ciliate. Flowers 4-6 cm in diameter, white. Style very short. •{\i   Portugal, W. Spain; N.W. France} ({\i doubtfully native}). *Ga Hs Lu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 9. C. albanicus} E. F. Warburg ex Heywood,{\i  Feddes Repert.}{\b  79}: 60 (1968) ({\i C.} ×{\i  florentinus} nm. {\i adriaticus} Markgraf). Stems c. 25 cm. Leaves elliptical, narrowed to a cuneate base, green, hairy with long, simple and stellate hairs above, subsessile. Cymes up to 4-flowered, unilateral. Sepals 5, the outer rounded or cordate at base, with stiff, long, white hairs and short hairs. Flowers 3-4 cm in diameter, white. Style very short.{\i  • C. Albania.} Al.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Originally described by Markgraf as a hybrid between {\b 7} and {\b 10}, but not growing with either.
\par

\par
283}
\par