{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 10. C. salvifolius} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 524 (1753). Stems up to 100 cm, spreading or procumbent. Leaves 10-40 × 6-20 mm, ovate or elliptical, rounded or broadly cuneate at base, green, scabrid and rugose above, with stellate hairs on both surfaces, petiolate. Flowers mostly solitary but sometimes up to 4 in a cyme, petiolate. Pedicels 10-100 mm. Sepals 5, the two outer cordate at base. Flowers 3-5 cm in diameter, white. Style very short. 2n = 18.{\i  S. Europe, extending northwards to} c. 47°{\i  in W. France.} Al Bl Bu Co Cr Ga Gr He Hs It Ju Lu Sa Si Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 11. C. populifolius} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 523 (1753). Stems up to 150 cm, somewhat spreading. Leaves 40-100 × 30-65 mm, ovate, cordate at base, glabrous, green and smooth above, petiolate. Cymes 2- to 6-flowered, pedunculate. Sepals 5, the two outer cordate at base. Flowers 4-6 cm in diameter, white. Style very short. 2n = 18.{\i  Spain and Portugal, extending eastwards to} c. 3° {\i E in S. France}. Ga Hs Lu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b populifolius}: Leaves usually at least 1½ times as long as wide, not or scarcely undulate. Sepals with few white hairs. •{\i  France, N. Spain, Portugal}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b major} (Pourret ex Dunal) Heywood,{\i  Feddes Repert.}{\b  79}: 61 (1968) ({\i C. populifolius} var.{\i  major} Pourret ex Dunal,{\i  C. populifolius} var.{\i  lasiocalyx} Willk.): Leaves usually less than 1½ times as long as wide, undulate. Sepals densely clothed with long white hairs.{\i  C. & S. Spain, Portugal}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 12. C. laurifolius} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 523 (1753). Stems up to 150 cm, erect. Leaves 30-80(-90) × 10-30 mm, ovate to ovate-lanceolate, 3-veined, dark green and glabrous on upper surface, densely white-tomentose beneath, petiolate. Inflorescence a terminal (1-)4- to 8-flowered, long-pedunculate, umbel-like cyme, often with 1 or 2 opposite pairs of flowers below. Sepals 3. Flowers 5-6 cm in diameter, white. Style very short. 2n = 18. {\i  S.W. Europe, extending to W.C. Italy}.  Co Ga Hs It Lu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 13. C. ladanifer} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 523 (1753). Stems up to 250 cm, erect, very viscid. Leaves 40-80(-120) × 6-25 mm, linear-lanceolate, 3-veined for 1/3 their length, green and glabrous above, densely white-tomentose beneath, subsessile. Sepals 3. Flowers 7-10 cm in diameter, solitary, white, with or without a crimson spot at the base of each petal. Style very short. Ovary 10-locular.{\i  S.W. Europe. }Ga Hs Lu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 14. C. palhinhae} Ingram, {\i Gard. Chron.} ser. 3, {\b 114}: 34 (1943). Like {\b 13} but stems only up to 50 cm; leaves 20-60 mm, oblanceolate to spathulate; flowers white, unspotted; ovary 6-locular. •{\i  S.W. Portugal} ({\i W. coast of Algarve}). Lu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 15. C. clusii} Dunal in DC.,{\i  Prodr.}{\b  1}: 266 (1824) ({\i C. libanotis} auct. mult., non L.). Stems up to 100 cm, erect, much-branched. Leaves 10-25 × 1-2 mm, linear, dark green above, white-tomentose beneath, with revolute margins, subsessile. Inflorescence up to 12-flowered with a terminal, umbel-like cyme and often with opposite pairs of flowers or 3-flowered cymes below. Peduncles, pedicels and calyx clothed with long, white hairs. Sepals 3, 5-8 mm. Flowers 2-3 cm in diameter, white. Style short. {\i W. & C. Mediterranean region, from S. Spain to S.E. Italy.} Bl Hs It Si.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 16. C. libanotis} L.,{\i  Syst. Nat.} ed. 10,{\b  2}: 1077 (1759) ({\i C. bourgaeanus} Cosson). Like {\b 15} but leaves (15-)20-35(-40) × 1·5-3 mm; peduncles, pedicels and calyx subglabrous, viscid; sepals 8-10 mm.{\i  S.W. Portugal, S.W. Spain.} Hs Lu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 2.                    Halimium}                     (Dunal) Spach
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc By M.C.F. Proctor & V.H. Heywood.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Small shrubs. Leaves opposite, decussate, exstipulate. Sepals 3 or 5, the 2 outer much smaller than the 3 inner. Flowers yellow or white. Style short and straight or absent. Capsule 3-valved; ovules orthotropous.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Literature: E. Guinea,{\i  Cistáceas Españolas} ({\i Bol. Inst. For. Inv. Exper. Madrid,} No. 71) 11-38. Madrid. 1954.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 All European species are found in woods or scrub, or on heaths or sandy ground in fairly dry conditions, and usually on siliceous soils.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Leaves ovate to lanceolate, mostly more than 4 mm wide, flat or
\par
  with the margins only slightly revolute
\par
2 Leaves of flowering shoots subglabrous, sessile; those of sterile
\par
  shoots smaller, petiolate, tomentose; inflorescence lax,
\par
  long-pedunculate ....................................................................... {\b 1. ocymoides}
\par
2 Leaves all alike
\par
3 Sepals 5, covered with peltate scales .................................... {\b 5. halimifolium}
\par
3 Sepals 3, villous or hirsute
\par
4 Flowering branches and pedicels densely tomentose and
\par
  with patent, purplish, viscid hairs ........................................ {\b 4. atriplicifolium}
\par
4 Flowering branches and pedicels sericeous to villous,
\par
  without purplish hairs
\par
5 Inflorescence villous, with short hairs; sepals without
\par
  purple bristles; petals unspotted ................................................. {\b 2. alyssoides}
\par
5 Inflorescence sericeous, with long hairs; sepals often with long,
\par
  purple bristles; petals sometimes with a brown spot at the base
\par
  ................................................................................................... {\b 3. lasianthum}
\par
1 Leaves linear, less than 4 mm wide, the margins revolute
\par
6 Flowers yellow; sepals glabrous .......................................... {\b 9. commutatum}
\par
6 Flowers white; sepals villous
\par
7 Stems 15-25 cm; branches tortuous; leaves crowded at
\par
  the ends of branches .................................................................... 6.umbellatum
\par
7 Stems 25-60 cm; branches straight; leaves distributed
\par
  along the branches
\par
8 Branches with dense, whitish indumentum; pedicels unequal;
\par
  sepals hirsute-villous ................................................................... {\b 7. viscosum}
\par
8 Branches sparsely stellate-hairy; pedicels equal;
\par
  sepals pubescent-villous ......................................................... {\b 8. verticillatum}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. H. ocymoides} (Lam.) Willk. in Willk. & Lange,{\i  Prodr. Fl. Hisp.}{\b  3}: 715 (1878) ({\i Helianthemum ocymoides} (Lam.) Pers.). Erect, rarely procumbent, up to 100 cm. Leaves of non-flowering shoots 3-15 × 2-5 mm, obovate, grey-tomentose, with 1-3 veins, shortly petiolate, often plicate; leaves of flowering shoots 12-30 × 3·5-7·5 mm, obovate to lanceolate, green, with 3 veins, sessile. Flowers on long pedicels, in lax, terminal panicles. Sepals 3; petals yellow, usually with a dark spot at the base. 2n = 18.{\i  Iberian peninsula, chiefly in the centre and west.} Hs Lu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. H. alyssoides} (Lam.) C. Koch,{\i  Hort. Dendrol. }32 (1853) ({\i H. occidentale} Willk., {\i Helianthemum alyssoides} (Lam.) Vent.). Compact, erect or decumbent, 10-100 cm, grey-tomentose. Leaves 5-40 × 3-15 mm, oblong to ovate- or obovate-lanceolate, obtuse, dark green above, white-tomentose beneath, or white-stellate-tomentose on both surfaces; shortly petiolate or sessile. Flowers in short, terminal, shortly villous cymes. Sepals 3, shortly villous; petals yellow, unspotted. •{\i  W. & C. France, N.W. Spain, N. & C. Portugal}. Ga Hs Lu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 3. H. lasianthum} (Lam.) Spach,{\i  Ann. Sci. Nat.} ser. 2 (Bot.), {\b 6}: 366 (1836) ({\i H. eriocephalum} Willk.,{\i  H. occidentale} Willk. pro parte). Like {\b 2} but leaves somewhat obtuse to acute; pedicels and sepals long-sericeous; sepals often with long purple bristles; {\i S. Portugal, S. Spain.} Hs Lu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b lasianthum}: Corolla 2-3 cm in diameter; petals spotted at the base or unspotted.{\i  S. Portugal, S. Spain.}
\par

\par
284}
\par