{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 rarely with stellate, fasciculate and simple hairs above, with flat, or slightly to strongly revolute margins; stipules longer than the petioles. Cymes 3- to 15-flowered. Sepals stellate-tomentose between the ribs, sometimes minutely so, conspicuously stellate tomentose or hirsute on the ribs. Flowers up to 20 mm in diameter; petals orange-yellow, bright yellow or white. Capsule about equalling the sepals in fruit. 2n = 20. {\i Scrub, woods and mountain slopes. W. Mediterranean region, Portugal.} Ga Hs It Lu Sa Si.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Extremely variable in habit, indumentum, leaf-dimensions and -shape and flower-colour.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   {\b 9. H. nummularium} (L.) Miller, {\i Gard. Dict}. ed. 8, no. 12 (1768) ({\i H. chamaecistus} Miller, {\i H. vulgare} Gaertner). 5-50 cm; branches procumbent or ascending. Leaves 5-50 × 2-15 mm, oblong or lanceolate to ovate or orbicular, subglabrous to pubescent above, white-tomentose, rarely greenish, beneath, with flat or slightly revolute margins. Stipules lanceolate to linear-lanceolate, longer than the petioles. Cymes 1- to 12-flowered, unilateral. Petals 6-18 mm, golden-yellow, rarely cream, pale yellow, white, orange or pink. Capsule about equalling the sepals. 2n = 20.{\i  Grassy and rocky places, usually on basic soils. Most of Europe except the extreme north}. All except Az Fa Is No Rs (N) Sb.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   A complex species variously divided by different authors. A modification of the treatment in Hegi,{\i  Ill. Fl. Mitteleur.}{\b  5}({\b 1}): 565-571 (1925) is followed here.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Leaves green on both surfaces
\par
2 Leaves glabrous, or the margins and midrib ciliate
\par
3 Petals yellow .................................................................... ({\b e}) subsp. {\b glabrum}
\par
3 Petals pink ................................................................ ({\b f}) subsp. {\b semiglabrum}
\par
2 Leaves with long hairs on surface and margins
\par
4 Sepals tomentose or pubescent between the ribs; inner
\par
  sepals 5-8 mm; petals 8-12 mm ..................................... ({\b d}) subsp. {\b obscurum}
\par
4 Sepals glabrous between the ribs; inner sepals 7-10 mm;
\par
  petals 10-18 mm ....................................................... ({\b h}) subsp. {\b grandiflorum}
\par
1 Leaves grey- or white-tomentose, at least beneath
\par
5 Petals c. 10 mm, pink
\par
6 Leaves white-tomentose beneath ................................ ({\b c}) subsp. {\b pyrenaicum}
\par
6 Leaves greyish-pubescent beneath .............................. ({\b g}) subsp. {\b berterianum}
\par
5 Petals yellow, orange, red-spotted at the base or rarely white
\par
7 Leaves 2-5(-7) mm wide; petals 6-10(-12) mm ...... ({\b a}) subsp. {\b nummularium}
\par
7 Leaves 5-15 mm wide; petals (8-)10-15 mm ............. ({\b b}) subsp. {\b tomentosum}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b nummularium} ({\i H. nummularium} subsp. {\i vulgare} (Gaertner) Hayek; incl.{\i  H. arcticum} (Guss.) Juz.): 2n = 20. {\i Widespread in Europe}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b tomentosum} (Scop.) Schinz. & Thell. in Schinz & R. Keller,{\i  Fl. Schweiz} ed. 3, {\b 2}: 249 (1914) ({\i H. tomentosum} (Scop.) S. F. Gray):{\i  Mountains of S. Europe}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b c}) Subsp. {\b pyrenaicum} (Janchen) Schinz & Thell. in Hegi,{\i  Ill. Fl. Mitteleur.}{\b  5}({\b 1}): 570 (1925) ({\i H. pyrenaicum} Janchen,{\i  H. vulgare} var.{\i  roseum} Willk.): {\i Pyrenees and neighbouring mountains}.
\par
{\i  Widely cultivated in gardens for ornament.}
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b d}) Subsp. {\b obscurum} (Celak.) J. Holub, {\i Acta Horti Bot. Prag.}{\b  1963}: 53 (1964) ({\i H. hirsutum} (Thuill.) Mérat, {\i H. nummularium} subsp.{\i  ovatum} (Viv.) Schinz & Thell.,{\i  H. ovatum} subsp.{\i  hirsutum} Hayek,{\i  H. vulgare }var. {\i genuinum }Willk. pro parte): 2n = 20.{\i  C. Europe and parts of E. & S. Europe, extending northwards to Sweden}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b e}) Subsp. {\b glabrum} (Koch) Wilczek, {\i Annu. Cons. Jard. Bot. Genève}{\b  21}: 453 (1922) ({\i H. nitidum} G. C. Clementi): {\i Mountains of C.,S. & S.W.Europe}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b f}) Subsp. {\b semiglabrum} (Badaro) M.C.F. Proctor,{\i  Feddes Repert. }{\b 79}: 59 (1968) ({\i H. semiglabrum} Badaro): {\i Maritime Alps, N. Appennini}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b g}) Subsp. {\b berterianum} (Bertol.) Breistr.,{\i  Bull. Soc. Sci. Dauph.}{\b  61}: 623 (1947) ({\i H. berterianum} Bertol.):{\i  Maritime Alps, Appennini}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b h}) Subsp. {\b grandiflorum} (Scop.) Schinz & Thell. in Schinz & R. Keller, {\i Fl. Schweiz} ed. 3, {\b 2}: 249 (1914) ({\i H. grandiflorum} (Scop.) Lam.,{\i  H. ovatum} subsp.{\i  grandiflorum} (Scop.) Hayek): 2n = 20.{\i  Mountains of C., S. & S. W. Europe}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b H. morisianum} Bertol.,{\i  Fl. Ital. }{\b 5}: 374 (1844), from Sardegna, with pink petals, may deserve recognition as a further subspecies.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 10. H. leptophyllum} Dunal in DC.,{\i  Prodr.}{\b  1}: 279 (1824). Erect, much-branched, slender, 10-20(-30) cm. Leaves 5-10(-20) × 2-5 mm, rather distant and evenly spaced, linear-oblong to elliptic-lanceolate, grey and stellate-tomentose above and greenish beneath, or subglabrous and green on both surfaces. Stipules linear, about as long as the petiole. Cymes (1-)3- to 8-flowered. Flowers c. 20 mm in diameter; petals yellow. Capsule shorter than the sepals in fruit.{\i  Dry hillsides. S. Spain, S. Italy. }Hs It.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Plants from Italy with linear leaves and more pubescent sepals have been recognized as{\b  H. jonium} Lacaita, {\i Nuovo Gior. Bot. Ital}. nov. ser., {\b 17}: 609 (1910).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 11. H. apenninum} (L.) Miller,{\i  Gard. Dict}. ed. 8, no. 4 (1768) ({\i H. polifolium} Miller, {\i H. pulverulentum} auct.). Lax, somewhat spreading, up to 50 cm, much-branched from the base. Leaves 8-30 × 2-8 mm, linear to linear-oblong, green to grey- or white-tomentose above, densely stellate-hairy to grey- or white-tomentose beneath, with slightly to strongly revolute margins; stipules linear-lanceolate, slightly longer than the lower petioles. Cymes 3- to 10-flowered. Sepals 7-10 mm, pubescent over the whole outer surface. Petals white, with a yellow claw. Capsule about equalling the sepals in fruit. 2n = 20.{\i  S. & W. Europe, northwards to S. England and extending to W. Germany.} Al Be Bl Br Cr Ga Ge Gr He Hs It Lu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    Plants with pink petals occur in the Islas Baleares and N.W. Italy.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 12. H. pilosum} (L.) Pers.,{\i  Syn. Pl.}{\b  2}: 79 (1806). Caespitose or lax, much-branched, up to 30 cm; branches usually white-tomentose. Leaves 10-20 × 1-4 mm, the upper cauline longer than the lower, linear to linear-oblong, greenish-pubescent above, grey-tomentose beneath, or more or less tomentose on both surfaces, with margins strongly or only slightly revolute. Cymes 4- to 10(-15)-flowered. Sepals 5-6 mm, glabrous or stellate-tomentose on the ribs. Petals c. 10 mm, white with a yellow claw. Capsule shorter than the sepals in fruit.{\i  Scrub and forest clearings, on dry, calcareous or clay soils. W. Mediterranean region, Portugal.} Ga Hs Lu It.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b   H. almeriense} Pau, {\i Mem. Mus. Ci. Nat. Barcelona} ({\i Bot}.) {\b 1}({\b 3}): 11 (1925), from S.E. Spain (Almería prov.), resembles some variants of {\b 12} but is usually entirely glabrous and has leaves 5-12 mm, ovate-orbicular to linear-oblong, obtuse. It may deserve recognition as a separate species.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 13. H. virgatum} (Desf.) Pers.,{\i  Syn. Pl.}{\b  2}: 79 (1806). Up to 30 cm; branches slender, white-tomentose. Leaves 10-30 × 2-8 mm, the middle and upper longer than the lower, linear-lanceolate, green above, stellate-tomentose beneath, with revolute margins. Cymes 5- to 10-flowered. Sepals 8-10 mm, stellate-tomentose
\par

\par
288}
\par