{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 6. F. thymifolia} (L.) Spach ex Webb,{\i  Iter Hisp.} 69 (1838) ({\i F. viscida} Spach, {\i F. glutinosa }(L.) Boiss., {\i Helianthemum viride }Ten.). Up to 20 cm; stems erect or ascending. Leaves 5-11 × 0·5-1 mm, opposite at least below, linear, linear-lanceolate or narrowly elliptical, obtuse or mucronate, glabrous, pubescent or glandular-pubescent, with strongly revolute margins, stipulate, with small, leafy, axillary shoots. Inflorescence 3- to 9-flowered; pedicels much longer than the subtending bracts. Capsule (4-)6-seeded. 2n = 32. {\i Mediterranean region; Portugal}. Al Bl Co Cr Ga Gr Hs It Ju Lu Sa Si Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Variable in indumentum, more or less glabrous variants having been described as distinct species.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 7. F. paradoxa} Heywood in Guinea, {\i Cistác. Esp. }174 (1954). Laxly or densely caespitose, 3-10(-20) cm. Leaves (3-)4-7(-10) × 0·75-1·25 mm, alternate, linear, trigonous or subtrigonous, mucronate or obtuse, ciliate, exstipulate. Inflorescence 1- to 2(-3)-flowered, the flower terminal when solitary; pedicels much longer than the subtending bracts, arcuate-patent after flowering. Capsule usually 6-seeded; capsule valves widely patent; seeds retained long after dehiscence. {\i Calcicole. • S.E. Spain} ({\i Sierra de Cazorla, S. de Segura}). Hs.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  A variable and puzzling species showing similarities to {\b 2}, {\b 3} and {\b 4}, possibly the result of former hybridization. Characterized among other features by the fact that from {\b 12} ovules only 6 seeds usually develop which (unlike other species) occupy the space left by the abortive ovules and fill the loculi.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 8. F. laevipes} (L.) Spach,{\i  Ann. Sci. Nat.} ser. 2 (Bot.),{\b  6}: 359 (1836). Much-branched, laxly caespitose, up to 30 cm; stems slender, ascending. Leaves (3-)4-8 × 0·3-0·4 mm, alternate, linear-setaceous, subterete, bright green or glaucous, glabrous or with scattered glandular hairs, stipulate, with small, axillary, leafy shoots. Inflorescence 3- to 8-flowered, terminal; pedicels much longer than the subtending bracts, patent. Capsule usually 6-seeded; capsule-valves widely patent. 2n = 32. {\i Calcicole. Mediterranean region; Portugal.} Bl Cr Ga Gr Hs It Ju Lu Sa Si
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 9. F. aciphylla} Boiss.,{\i  Fl. Or.}{\b  1}: 449 (1867). Up to 30 cm; stems erect, flexuous. Leaves 5-12(-15) × 0·5-1·5 mm, linear-acicular, alternate, glabrous or sparsely pubescent when young, the margins occasionally setose-ciliate, exstipulate. Inflorescence 3- to 5-flowered; pedicels longer than the small subtending bracts, glabrous. Capsule 3-seeded, completely enclosed in the calyx.{\i  Once recorded from C. Greece} ({\i Thessalia}). ?Gr. ({\i Anatolia}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 113.             TAMARICACEAE}
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc Edit D.A. Webb.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Shrubs or small trees. Leaves simple, alternate, exstipulate, usually ericoid. Flowers solitary or in spike-like racemes, hermaphrodite, actinomorphic. Sepals 4-5, free or slightly united at the base; petals 4-5, free; stamens 4 to numerous, free or partly united. Ovary superior, of 3-5 carpels; placentation parietal. Fruit a septicidal capsule; seeds numerous, with numerous long, unicellular hairs.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Flowers solitary; styles 5, filiform ........................................... {\b 1. Reaumuria}
\par
1 Flowers in racemes; styles 3, short, or stigma sessile on
\par
  style-like beak of ovary
\par
2 Stamens free, or apparently united at the base by a horizontal,
\par
   fleshy disc; styles 3-4 ................................................................... {\b 2. Tamarix}
\par
2 Stamens united in a short tube by the expanded, vertical filament-
\par
  bases; stigma sessile on style-like beak of ovary ........................ {\b 3. Myricaria}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 1.                 Reaumuria}              Hasselq. ex L.
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc By D.A. Webb.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Flowers solitary, terminal, 5-merous. Petals with 2 scale-like appendages on inner side at base. Stamens numerous, united at base to form 5 antepetalous bundles. Styles 5, filiform. Seeds covered with hairs except for a slender, glabrous beak.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. R. vermiculata} L.,{\i  Syst. Nat.} ed. 10,{\b  2}: 1081 (1759) ({\i R. mucronata} Jaub. & Spach). Glabrous shrub c. 30 cm, with erect branches. Leaves up to 12 mm, semi-cylindrical, mucronate, glaucous, crowded near the base of the branch, widely spaced above, often subtending leafy, axillary short shoots. Flowers subtended by numerous imbricate bracts, which conceal the calyx. Petals c. 7 mm, white; appendages fimbriate. Stamens in 5 bundles of c. 15. Capsule globose.{\i  Banks near the sea, on gypsaceous clay. S. coast of Sicilia} ({\i Porto Empedocle}). *Si. ({\i N. Africa}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 2.                   Tamarix}                      L.
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc By B. Baum.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Leaves small, scale-like, amplexicaul or sheathing, with immersed, salt-secreting glands. Flowers small, white or pink, in spike-like racemes, which may be borne on the growth of the current year, or of previous years, or both. Sepals and petals 4-5. Stamens 4-15, of which 4-5 are antesepalous and 0-10 antepetalous; anthers extrorse. In the species without antepetalous stamens there is a more or less fleshy, nectar-secreting, 4- to 5-lobed disc between stamens and ovary. Styles 3-4, short. Seeds with a sessile tuft of hairs.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  The racemes may be vernal (produced early in the season, from the woody stems) or aestival (produced later on the growth of the current year). Recent work has shown that this distinction has not the taxonomic value which was formerly attributed to it, as the behaviour of many species varies according to the climate. The information given below refers to the behaviour of plants in their native European habitats. Measurements of racemes refer to the flowering condition.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    Literature: A. von Bunge,{\i  Tentamen Generis Tamaricum Species accuratius definiendi.} Dorpat. 1852. F. Niedenzu,{\i  De Genere Tamarice. Braunsberg.} 1895. G. Arendt, {\i Beitrage zur Kenntnis der Gattung} Tamarix. Berlin. 1926. B. Baum, {\i Monographic Revision of the Genus }Tamarix. Jerusalem. 1966.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Sepals and petals 4
\par
2 Bracts shorter than or ± equalling the pedicels
\par
3 Racemes 10-12 mm wide; sepals 2-2·5 mm .............................. {\b 6. hampeana}
\par
3 Racemes 6-8 mm wide; sepals 1-1·5 mm
\par
4 Bracts obtuse; racemes mostly vernal ............................................... {\b 12. laxa}
\par
4 Bracts acute; racemes mostly aestival .......................................... {\b 13. gracilis}
\par
5 Racemes 7-10 mm wide; bracts exceeding the calyx
\par
6 Sepals c. 3·5 mm ........................................................................ {\b 7. dalmatica}
\par
6 Sepals not more than 2·5 mm
\par
7 Inner sepals denticulate; base of filaments confluent with
\par
  lobes of disc ................................................................................. {\b 10. boveana}
\par
7 Sepals all ± entire; filaments inserted in slight notches
\par
  on lobes of disc .............................................................................. {\b 11. meyeri}
\par
5 Racemes 3-6(-7) mm wide; bracts not exceeding the calyx
\par
8 Bark black; bracts herbaceous in proximal half; petals
\par
  more than 2 mm ........................................................................... {\b 4. tetrandra}
\par

\par
292}
\par