{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 7.                  Echinocystis}             Torrey & A. Gray
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc By †T.G. Tutin.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Monoecious, nearly glabrous annual. Stems climbing; tendrils branched. Male flowers in axillary, racemose panicles, the female solitary; both greenish-white; calyx and corolla deeply 5- to 6-fid. Stamens 5; filaments connate. Female flowers without staminodes. Ovary with 2 placentae and 2 ovules on each placenta.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. E. lobata} (Michx) Torrey & A. Gray,{\i  Fl. N. Amer.}{\b  1}: 542 (1840). Stems 5-8 m. Leaves c. 5 cm, 3- to 7-lobed to about the middle, cordate, remotely serrulate; lobes acuminate. Calyx-lobes narrowly triangular, acuminate; corolla-lobes c. 5 mm, triangular, acute. Fruit 3-5 cm, ovoid, covered with long slender prickles, splitting irregularly at the apex when mature.{\i  Naturalized in C. and S.E. Europe.} [Au Cz Ge Hu Ju Rm Rs (W).] ({\i E. North America.})
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 8.                  Sicyos}                     L.
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc By †T.G. Tutin.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Monoecious annual with climbing stems; tendrils branched. Male flowers in axillary racemes, the female in long-pedunculate heads; both whitish; calyx and corolla deeply 5-fid. Stamens 5; filaments connate; anthers more or less coherent. Female flowers without staminodes. Ovary unilocular, with a solitary ovule.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. S. angulatus} L.,{\i  Sp. Pl.} 1013 (1753). Stems 5-8 m, more or less viscid-pubescent. Leaves c. 7 cm, about as wide as long, deeply cordate, denticulate, 5-angled or -lobed. Calyx-lobes narrowly triangular; corolla-lobes c. 5 mm, triangular, subacute. Fruit c. 1·5 cm, compressed-ovoid, coriaceous, lanate and covered with long setae.{\i  Naturalized in damp places in S.C. & S.E. Europe.} [Au Cz Hu It Ju Rm Rs (C, W) Si.] ({\i E. North America}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs36\qc CACTALES
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 118.               CACTACEAE}
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc Edit. N.A. Burges.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Perennial, succulent plants; stems columnar, cylindrical or flattened, often jointed (the individual segments being referred to as joints). Leaves absent or small, subulate, caducous. Branches, spines, flowers and sometimes barbed bristles (glochids) developed from more or less circular, cushion-like structures (areoles) situated in leaf-axils when leaves are present. Flowers hermaphrodite, solitary, sessile. Perianth with tube; sepals numerous and intergrading with petals, all imbricate in several rows. Stamens numerous; filaments inserted on perianth-throat. Style 1; stigmas 2 to many. Ovary inferior, 1-celled; placentae 3 or more, parietal; ovules numerous. Fruit a berry, often spiny or glochidiate, usually many-seeded.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Literature: N. L. Britton & J. N. Rose,{\i  The Cactaceae. Washington. }1919-23. C. Backeberg,{\i  Die Cactaceae.} Jena. 1958-62.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 Stems jointed; areoles with numerous glochids;
\par
  leaves small,subulate, caducous .................................................... {\b 1. Opuntia}
\par
Stems not jointed; areoles without glochids;
\par
  leaves absent .................................................................................... {\b 2. Cereus}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 1.                  Opuntia}                    Miller
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc By D.M. Moore.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Somewhat woody; stems with short, cylindrical or flattened, often tuberculate joints. Leaves small, subulate, caducous. Areoles bearing many glochids and usually longer, stouter spines. Ovary spiny or spineless. Seeds hard, pale, more or less discoid or angular.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Joints readily detachable .................................................................... {\b 1. tuna}
\par
1 Joints not readily detachable, persistent
\par
2 Plants less than 1 m, shrub-like, procumbent or ascending
\par
3 Areoles brown-lanate; spines brownish-white; fruit with
\par
  flat umbilicus ................................................................................. {\b 2. vulgaris}
\par
3 Areoles not lanate; spines yellow; fruit with depressed
\par
  umbilicus ........................................................................................... {\b 4. stricta}
\par
2 Plants more than 1 m, usually tree-like often with trunk
\par
4 Spines absent or rarely 1-2, less than 1 cm; glochids
\par
  yellow; fruit with depressed umbilicus .................................... {\b 1. ficus-indica}
\par
4 Spines 1-4, more than 1 cm; glochids brownish; fruit
\par
  with flat umbilicus
\par
5 Joints bright, shining green; areoles lanate; spines
\par
  1-2, yellow to dark reddish; fruit reddish-purple .................... {\b 3. monacantha}
\par
5 Joints dull green, slightly glaucous; areoles not lanate;
\par
  spines 1-4, white; fruit yellowish-red ............................................ {\b 6. maxima}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. O. tuna} (L.) Miller,{\i  Gard. Dict}. ed. 8, no. 3 (1768). Shrub up to 1 m; joints 8-10(-16) cm, obovate to oblong, readily detachable. Leaves 4-5 mm; areoles large, brown; spines in groups of (2-)3-5(-6), up to 5 cm, slightly spreading, light yellow; glochids yellow. Flowers c. 5 cm in diameter, yellow usually tinged with red; filaments short, greenish below; style and stigma-lobes cream or yellowish. Fruit c. 3 cm, obovoid, red; seeds 3-4 mm wide.{\i  Locally naturalized in S. Europe.} [Ga It Lu.] ({\i West Indies.})
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. O. vulgaris} Miller,{\i  Gard. Dict}. ed. 8, no. 1 (1768) ({\i O. humifusa} Rafin.). Procumbent and spreading, or sometimes ascending shrub up to 0·5 m; joints 3-13(-17) cm, orbicular to oblong, thick, dark green. Leaves 4-8 mm, subulate, patent; areoles distant; spines 0-1(-2), up to 5 cm, brownish or whitish glochids numerous, yellow to dark brown. Flowers 5-9 cm in diameter, bright yellow, sometimes reddish in centre; filaments yellow; stigma-lobes white. Fruit 2·5-5 cm, obovoid to oblong, red, succulent, edible; seeds 4-5 mm wide.{\i  Naturalized on rocks and walls in S. & S.C. Europe.} [Au ?Co Cr Ga Gr He Ho It Ju.] ({\i E. North America, from Alabama to Ontario}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 3. O. monacantha} Haw., {\i Suppl. Pl. Succ. }81 (1819) ({\i O. vulgaris} auct., non Miller). Somewhat tree-like, 2-4(-6) m, often with cylindrical, spiny or smooth trunk 15 cm in diameter, usually much-branched at apex; joints 10-30 cm, ovate to oblong, narrowed at base, bright shining green. Leaves 2-3 mm, subulate; areoles shortly lanate; spines 1-2(-10 on trunk), 1-4 cm, erect, yellowish to dark reddish. Flowers golden-yellow; filaments greenish; style white; stigma-lobes white. Fruit 5-7·5 cm, obovoid, reddish-purple, long-persisting, sometimes proliferous. {\i Naturalized on the coast of S.E. France and possibly elsewhere.} [?Co Ga ?He ?Hs ?It ?Lu.] ({\i E. South America}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 4. O. stricta} (Haw.) Haw., {\i Syn. Pl. Succ.} 191 (1812). Low, spreading bush up to 0·8 m; joints 8-15(-30) cm, obovate to oblong, rather thick, green or bluish-green. Leaves 3-4 mm,
\par

\par
299}
\par