{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28  Plants from Corse with irregular whitish markings on the leaves have been found to have 2n = 40. It is not clear whether this chromosome number is constantly associated with distinctive morphological characters but, if so, an additional subspecies may have to be recognized.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 4.                    Citrullus}                  Schrader
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc By †T.G. Tutin.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Monoecious. Stems procumbent or climbing; tendrils simple or branched. Flowers solitary, yellow; calyx and corolla deeply 5-fid. Stamens 3; filaments and anthers free; connective not prolonged beyond the loculi. Female flowers with 3 small staminodes. Disc absent. Ovary with 3 placentae and numerous ovules.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 Annual; ovary densely lanate ............................................................ {\b 1. lanatus}
\par
Perennial; ovary sparsely hispid ................................................. {\b 2. colocynthis}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. C. lanatus} (Thunb.) Mansfeld,{\i  Kulturpfl.} ({\i Beih}.){\b  2}: 421 (1959) ({\i C. vulgaris} Schrader,{\i  Colocynthis citrullus} (L.) O. Kuntze). Annual. Stems c. 10 mm in diameter, densely villous. Leaves 8-20 × 5-15 cm, ovate in outline, pinnatisect, with lobed segments. Calyx-lobes narrowly lanceolate; corolla-lobes c. 15 mm, ovate-oblong, obtuse. Ovary densely lanate. Fruit c. 25 cm in diameter, subglobose or ellipsoid, smooth, greenish; pulp red, succulent. {\i Widely cultivated in S. Europe for its edible fruits} ({\i water-melon}). ({\i S. Africa.})
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   {\b 2. C. colocynthis} (L.) Schrader, {\i Linnaea}{\b  12}: 414 (1838) ({\i Colocynthis vulgaris} Schrader). Perennial. Stems c. 2 mm in diameter, hispid. Leaves 5-12 × 3-8 cm, 1- to 2-pinnatisect with 3-5 sinuate-lobed segments. Calyx-lobes subulate; corollalobes c. 5 mm, ovate, acute. Ovary sparsely hispid. Fruit c. 4 cm, globose, smooth, yellow; pericarp dry.{\i  S. part of the Mediterranean region; cultivated elsewhere for its purgative fruits and often naturalized.} Gr Hs Si [Hu It Rm]. ({\i Arid regions of N. Africa and Asia}.)
\par

\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 5.                     Cucumis}                  L.
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc By †T.G. Tutin.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Monoecious. Annual or perennial, usually procumbent herbs; tendrils unbranched. Flowers deep yellow, the male usually in clusters, the female solitary; calyx and corolla deeply 5-fid. Stamens 3, free; connective of the anther prolonged beyond the loculi. Female flowers with 3 staminodes. Disc present. Ovary with 3-5 placentae; ovules numerous.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   {\b Lagenaria siceraria} (Molina) Standley, {\i Publ. Field Mus.} ({\i Chicago}) ser. bot., {\b 3}: 435 (1930) ({\i L. vulgaris} Ser.), with white flowers and a rotate corolla, is widely cultivated in S. Europe.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Fruit ± cylindrical ........................................................................... {\b 3. sativus}
\par
1 Fruit globose or ovoid
\par
2 Flowers 20-30 mm; fruit smooth ...................................................... {\b 1. melo}
\par
2 Flowers 4-5 mm; fruit aculeate ............................................. {\b 2. myriocarpus}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. C. melo} L.,{\i  Sp. Pl.} 1011 (1753) ({\i C. dudaim} L., {\i Melo dudaim} (L.) Sageret,{\i  Melo sativus }auct.). Annual. Stems up to 1 m, c. 10 mm in diameter, hispid. Leaves 8-15 × 8-15 cm, suborbicular or reniform, cordate, 5-angled or shallowly 3- to 7-lobed, denticulate, villous, angles or lobes rounded. Calyx-lobes subulate; corolla 20-30 mm; lobes acute. Fruit very variable in size, usually globose or ovoid, pubescent, often becoming glabrous.{\i  Widely cultivated in S. Europe for its edible fruit} ({\i melon}). ({\i Tropical Africa and Asia.})
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. C. myriocarpus} Naudin, {\i Ann. Sci. Nat.} ser. 4 (Bot.), {\b 11}: 22 (1859). Annual. Stems up to 2 m, rather slender, shortly hispid or scabrid. Leaves 4-8 cm, deeply (3-)5(-7)-lobed, deep green, nearly glabrous, somewhat scabrid above, very shortly hirsute and later scabrid beneath. Calyx-lobes subulate; corolla 4-5 mm; lobes acute. Fruit 2-2·5 cm, globose, sparsely and softly aculeate.{\i  Naturalized locally in Spain, C. Portugal and E. Russia; a rather frequent casual in S. Europe.} [Hs Lu Rs (E).] ({\i S. Africa.})
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   {\b 3. C. sativus} L.,{\i  Sp. Pl.} 1012 (1753). Annual. Stems stout, hispid. Leaves 7-18 × 7-18 cm, suborbicular in outline, palmately 3- to 5-lobed, dentate, villous and scabrid; lobes acute or acuminate. Calyx-lobes subulate; corolla 20-30 mm; lobes acute. Fruit cylindrical, terete or angled, glabrous, often tuberculate and aculeate.{\i  Widely cultivated for its edible fruit} ({\i cucumber}) {\i in the southern half of Europe.} ({\i India}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 6.               Cucurbita}                       L.
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc By †T.G. Tutin.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Monoecious. Stems procumbent or climbing; tendrils branched (except in some cultivars). Flowers solitary, yellow. Calyx 5-fid; corolla campanulate, lobed to about the middle. Stamens 3; filaments free; anthers coherent. Female flowers with small staminodes. Ovary with 3-5 placentae; ovules numerous.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  In addition to the species described below{\b  C. ficifolia} Bouche, {\i Verh. Ver. Beförd. Gartenb. Preuss.}{\b  12}: 205 (1837) ({\i C. melanosperma} Gasparr.), a perennial species with fruits 20-30 cm long and with black seeds, and {\b C. mixta} Pangalo,{\i  Bull. Appl. Bot. Pl.-Breed.} ({\i Leningrad}) {\b 23}: 264 (1930), which is like {\b 2} but has the fruiting peduncle hard, inflated and corky, are cultivated for culinary purposes in parts of S.E. Europe.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Fruiting peduncle terete, soft, corky, not expanded at
\par
  attachment to fruit; flowers slightly scented .................................. {\b 3. maxima}
\par
1 Fruiting peduncle angled, hard, not corky, ± expanded
\par
  at attachment to fruit; flowers not scented
\par
2 Plant rather softly hairy; calyx-lobes ligulate but
\par
  often expanded above; leaves shallowly lobed ........................... {\b 2. moschata}
\par
2 Plant harshly hispid-setose; calyx-lobes linear-lanceolate,
\par
  not expanded above; leaves often deeply lobed ................................. {\b 1. pepo}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. C. pepo} L.,{\i  Sp. Pl.} 1010 (1753). Stems up to c. 10 mm in diameter, hispid. Leaves 15-30 cm, broadly ovate in outline, cordate, variously lobed, hispid-setose; lobes acute. Peduncles of male and female flowers 5-angled, slightly expanded below the female flowers. Calyx-lobes linear-lanceolate; corolla 7-10 cm in diameter, deep yellow; lobes ovate, acute or acuminate. Fruit 15-40 cm in diameter, globose to cylindrical, green or yellow, smooth or tuberculate; seeds white.{\i  Widely cultivated as a vegetable} ({\i vegetable marrow}){\i  and for ornament in the southern half of Europe.} ({\i N. Central America.})
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. C. moschata} Duchesne ex Poiret, {\i Dict. Sci. Nat. }{\b 11}: 234 (1818). Like {\b 1} but leaves shallowly lobed or almost entire, softly hairy; peduncles of male flowers terete, of female flowers strongly expanded at top; calyx-lobes usually expanded and leaf-like at apex; fruit asymmetrical, curved, brown or reddish-yellow, with a musky odour.{\i  Cultivated as a vegetable in S. Europe.} ({\i Central America.})
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 3. C. maxima} Duchesne in Lam., {\i Encycl. Méth. Bot.}{\b  2}: 151 (1786). Like {\b 1} but leaves orbicular, not lobed, softly hairy; peduncles terete, not expanded below the female flowers; fruit variously shaped, often glaucous and very large (up to 100 kg.). {\i Cultivated as a vegetable} ({\i pumpkin}){\i  in S. Europe}. ({\i Central America.})
\par

\par
298}
\par