{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b c}) Subsp. {\b rupifragum} (A. Kerner) Breistr.,{\i  loc. cit.} (1947) ({\i H. italicum} subsp.{\i  rupifragum }(A. Kerner) Beger,{\i  H. rupifragum} A. Kerner):{\i  E. & E.C. Europe}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b d}) Subsp. {\b italicum} (L.) Font Quer & Rothm.,{\i  Cavanillesia}{\b  6}: 153 (1934) ({\i H. italicum} (L.) Pers.): 2n = 20. {\i Mediterranean region}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b e}) Subsp. {\b orientale} (Grosser) M.C.F. Proctor, {\i Feddes Repert. }{\b 79}: 58 (1968) ({\i H. orientale} (Grosser) Juz. & Pozd.):{\i  Krym}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 23. H. canum} (L.) Baumg., {\i Enum. Stirp. Transs. }{\b 2}: 85 (1816). Stems 4-20(-30) cm, procumbent or ascending. Leaves elliptical, ovate-lanceolate, lanceolate or linear, grey-tomentose beneath, green to grey-tomentose above, with or without stellate hairs. Cymes lax or dense, with 1-5 flowers. Petals 4-8 mm, yellow. C. & S. Europe; Britain and Ireland; Öland. Al Au Br Bu Cz Ga Ge Gr Hb He Hs Hu It Ju Po Rm Rs (W, K) Sa Si Su Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Very variable, and divisible with difficulty into a number of subspecies:
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Shoots arcuate-ascending; inflorescences usually produced on
\par
  lateral branches of the current year's growth
\par
2 Inflorescence 5- to 15-flowered, eglandular .................... ({\b f}) subsp. {\b pourretii}
\par
2 Inflorescence 3- to 6-flowered, with purplish-black glandular
\par
  hairs ............................................................................. ({\b b}) subsp. {\b nebrodense}
\par
1 Shoots forming a more or less procumbent mat; inflorescences
\par
  usually produced from apex of previous year's growth
\par
3 Robust, very pubescent; sepals densely villous; petals
\par
  6-8 mm (Krym) ................................................................. ({\b g}) subsp. {\b stevenii}
\par
3 Less robust; sepals with more or less appressed
\par
  pubescence; petals less than 6 mm
\par
4 Leaves lanceolate to linear, sparsely strigose above; inflorescences
\par
  usually produced on lateral branches of the current year's growth
\par
  (Öland) ........................................................................... ({\b c}) subsp. {\b canescens}
\par
4 Leaves ovate-lanceolate to lanceolate; indumentum various;
\par
  inflorescence from apex of previous year's growth
\par
5 Leaves glabrous or subglabrous above; flowers 1-3(-4)
\par
  (England) ......................................................................... ({\b d}) subsp. {\b lengatum}
\par
5 Leaves ± pubescent or strigose above; flowers usually more than 3
\par
6 Leaves relatively broad, rather persistent on the lower parts of
\par
  the vegetative shoots .................................................. ({\b e}) subsp. {\b piloselloides}
\par
6 Leaves relatively narrow, mostly clustered into rosettes
\par
  at the apex of the vegetative shoots ..................................... ({\b a}) subsp. {\b canum}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b canum}: 2n = 22.{\i  Almost throughout the range of the species}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b nebrodense} (Heldr. ex Guss.) Arcangeli,{\i  Comp. Fl. Ital.} 72 (1882) ({\i H. allionii }Tineo): •{\i  Sicilia}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b c}) Subsp. {\b canescens} (Hartman) M.C.F. Proctor,{\i  Feddes Repert.}{\b  79}: 58 (1968): • Öland.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b d}) Subsp. {\b levigatum} M.C.F. Proctor, {\i Watsonia}{\b  4}: 38 (1957): • {\i N. England} ({\i near Middleton-in-Teesdale}).
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b e}) Subsp. {\b piloselloides} (Lapeyr.) M.C.F. Proctor,{\i  Feddes Repert.}{\b  79}: 58 (1968) ({\i Cistus piloselloides} Lapeyr.): •{\i Pyrenees, N. Spain; related forms in W. Ireland}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b f}) Subsp. {\b pourretii} (Timb.-Lagr.) M.C.F. Proctor,{\i  Feddes Repert.}{\b  79}: 59 (1968) ({\i H. pourretii} Timb.-Lagr.):  •{\i S. France, Italy}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b g}) Subsp. {\b stevenii} (Rupr. ex Juz. & Pozd.) M.C.F. Proctor,{\i  Feddes Repert. }{\b 79}: 59 (1968) ({\i H. stevenii} Rupr. ex Juz. & Pozd.): •{\i Krym.}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 24. H. origanifolium} (Lam.) Pers.,{\i  Syn. Pl.}{\b  2}: 76 (1806). Stems 5-30 cm, procumbent or ascending. Leaves broadly ovate to ovate-lanceolate or orbicular-cordate, variable in size and texture, flat or with revolute margins, subglabrous to densely pubescent, with sparse to dense stellate hairs beneath; stipules minute and caducous or absent. Cymes 4- to 12-flowered, simple or branched. Petals 3-6 mm, yellow.{\i  Sandy and rocky places. S. Portugal, Spain, Islas Baleares.} Bl Hs Lu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Leaves densely hairy above, stellate-hairy beneath;
\par
  flowers 5-13 mm in diameter, in simple cymes ................... ({\b d}) subsp. {\b molle}
\par
1 Leaves sparsely hairy above, with a few long simple and a few
\par
  stellate hairs beneath; flowers 5-8 mm in diameter, in panicles
\par
2 Stellate hairs on both surfaces of leaf .................................. ({\b c}) subsp. {\b serrae}
\par
2 Stellate hairs absent or on lower surface of leaf only
\par
3 Inflorescence branched; upper leaves stipulate ....... ({\b a}) subsp. {\b origanifolium}
\par
3 Inflorescence simple; all leaves exstipulate .................. ({\b b}) subsp. {\b glabratum}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b origanifolium}:{\i  S. Portugal; ?E. Spain.} ({\i N. Africa}.)
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b glabratum} (Willk.) Guinea & Heywood in Guinea, Cistác. Esp. 133 (1954) ({\i H. origanifolium} var. {\i glabratum} Willk.): {\i E. Spain}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b c}) Subsp. {\b serrae} (Camb.) Guinea & Heywood, {\i op. cit.} 134 (1954) ({\i H. serrae} Camb.): {\i Islas Baleares.}
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b d}) Subsp. {\b molle} (Cav.) Font Quer & Rothm.,{\i  Cavanillesia}{\b  6}: 162 (1934) ({\i N. origanifolium }var.{\i  majus} Willk.): {\i S. & N.E. Spain}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 25. H. marifolium} (L.) Miller, {\i Gard. Dict.} ed. 8, no. 24 (1768) ({\i H. myrtifolium} Samp.). Laxly caespitose, much-branched; stems 5-30 cm, usually procumbent, rarely erect, grey-tomentose. Leaves 5-25 mm, ovate-lanceolate to broadly ovate, acute, green and glabrous to greyish-tomentose above, grey- or white-tomentose beneath; stipules minute and caducous, or absent. Cymes 4- to 7-flowered, simple or branched. Flowers 10-15 mm in diameter; petals yellow. •{\i  S. Portugal, S. & E. Spain, S. France.} Ga Hs Lu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Very variable in leaf-dimensions and indumentum.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 26. H. pannosum} Boiss., {\i Elenchus }15 (1838). Densely caespitose, dwarf shrub, 3-12 cm. Leaves 6-10(-20) × 2-7(-14) mm, ovate-orbicular or cordate-orbicular, covered with a thick, soft, whitish felt on both surfaces or greenish above; stipules minute and caducous, or absent. Cymes few- or many-flowered, simple or branched. Petals yellow. {\i Limestone rocks and screes. • S. Spain}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b pannosum} (subsp.{\i  boissieri} Font Quer & Rothm.): Inflorescence glandular-hairy; leaves thick and fleshy, with a dense, white covering of simple appressed hairs above.{\i  Sierra Nevada}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b frigidulum} (Cuatrec.) Font Quer & Rothm.,{\i  Cavanillesia}{\b  6}: 164 (1934): Inflorescence eglandular; leaves thin, greenish above.{\i  Sierra de Mágina }({\i prov. Jaén}).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 27. H. cinereum} (Cav.) Pers.,{\i  Syn. Pl.}{\b  2}: 76 (1806) (incl.{\i  H. rubellum} C. Presl, non Moench,{\i  H. paniculatum} Dunal). Usually laxly caespitose with erect branches, but very variable. Leaves ovate to lanceolate, rounded or cordate at base, green and glabrous to grey-tomentose above, grey-tomentose beneath. Stipules small or large, persistent or caducous. Inflorescence usually paniculate, rarely a simple cyme. Petals yellow. 2n = 20, 22.{\i  Mediterranean} region. Gr Hs It Si.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Very variable in habit, indumentum, leaf-shape and other features. No satisfactory division into infraspecific taxa is possible.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 28. H. hymettium} Boiss. & Heldr. in Boiss., {\i Diagn. Pl. Or. Nov.}{\b  3}({\b 1}): 52 (1853). Up to 10 cm; branches procumbent or decumbent. Leaves 7-15 × 3-6 mm, oblong-lanceolate to elliptical, white-tomentose on both surfaces or greenish and glabrous above, flat. Stipules of upper leaves 2-3 mm; cymes 7- to 9-flowered,
\par

\par
290}
\par