{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\par\f0\fs36\qc CUCURBITALES
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 117.          CUCURBITACEAE}
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc Edit. †T.G. Tutin.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Herbs, often climbing by means of tendrils. Flowers unisexual. Calyx deeply 5(-6)-lobed; corolla deeply 5(-6)-lobed. Stamens 5, sometimes 3 (owing to 4 being connate in pairs); filaments sometimes all connate; anthers with 1 theca, free or coherent. Ovary inferior, unilocular but often more or less divided by the 2-5 placentae; style usually 1, with 3, usually divided stigmas. Ovules 1 to many. Fruit usually fleshy and indehiscent.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 The bicollateral vascular bundles are a well-known and apparently constant feature of the family.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Literature: A. Cogniaux in Engler,{\i  Pflanzenreich}{\b  88}({\b IV. 275}){\b I}. (1916); A. Cogniaux & H. Harms in Engler, {\i op. cit. }{\b II} (1924).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Tendrils absent; fruit explosive ................................................. {\b 2. Echallium}
\par
1 Tendrils present; fruit not explosive
\par
2 Tendrils simple
\par
3 Stamens 5; calyx-tube with a horizontal scale near the base ..{\b 1. Thladiantha}
\par
3 Stamens 3; calyx-tube without a horizontal scale near the base
\par
4 Flowers greenish-white; male flowers in racemes;
\par
  fruit 6-10 mm ................................................................................. {\b 3. Bryonia}
\par
4 Flowers deep yellow; male flowers in axillary clusters,
\par
  or solitary; fruit at least 20 mm
\par
5 Connective of the anther prolonged beyond the loculi;
\par
  disc present ................................................................................... {\b 5. Cucumis}
\par
5 Connective of the anther not prolonged beyond the loculi;
\par
  disc absent .................................................................................... {\b 4. Citrullus}
\par
2 Tendrils branched
\par
6 Flowers whitish; stamens 5; filaments connate; fruit hispid
\par
7 Leaves lobed to about the middle; lobes acuminate;
\par
  female flowers axillary, shortly pedicellate ........................... {\b 7. Echinocystis}
\par
7 Leaves angled or shallowly lobed; lobes acute; female
\par
  flowers in dense, long-pedunculate heads ....................................... {\b 8. Sicyos}
\par
6 Flowers deep yellow; stamens 3; filaments free; fruit not hispid
\par
8 Corolla lobed almost to base ....................................................... {\b 4. Citrullus}
\par
8 Corolla lobed to about half way ................................................ {\b 6. Cucurbita}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 1.             Thladiantha}                Bunge
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc By †T.G. Tutin.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Dioecious perennial. Tendrils simple. Flowers yellow. Calyx campanulate, 5-fid, with one horizontal scale across the lower part of the tube; corolla deeply 5-fid. Male flowers with 5 free stamens. Female flowers with 5 linear staminodes. Seeds numerous.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. T. dubia} Bunge, {\i Enum. Pl. Chin. Bor. }29 (1833). Softly hairy. Stems up to 1·5 m. Leaves 5-10 cm, broadly ovate, acute or acuminate, denticulate. Flowers solitary, or the male in short racemes; calyx-lobes linear-lanceolate; corolla-lobes 25 × 9-12 mm, ovate, subacute, villous beneath, papillose-glandular above. Fruit 4-5 × 2·5 cm, ovoid-oblong, with 10 shallow, longitudinal grooves.{\i  Locally naturalized in C. & S.E. Europe.} [Au Cz Hu Rm Rs.] ({\i N. China}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 2.                   Echallium}                A. Richard
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc By †T.G. Tutin.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Monoecious. Perennial hispid herb with a tuberous root. Stems procumbent, without tendrils. Calyx shortly campanulate,5-fid; corolla almost rotate, 5-fid. Male flowers in axillary racemes; stamens 3. Female flowers solitary, axillary; staminodes 5, 4 connate in pairs. Seeds numerous.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. E. elaterium} (L.) A. Richard in Bory,{\i  Dict. Class. Hist. Nat.}{\b  6}: 19 (1824). Stems 15-60 cm. Leaves long-petiolate; lamina 4-10 cm, cordate to triangular, entire, denticulate or rarely shallowly lobed, undulate, rather fleshy. Corolla of male flowers 18-20 mm, yellowish. Fruit 4-5 × 2·5 cm, green, ovoid, very hispid, dehiscing explosively at the base.{\i  Sandy or stony ground near the sea and often as a ruderal. S. Europe.} Al Bl Bu Co Cr Ga Gr Hs It Ju Lu Rm Rs (W, K, E) Sa Si Tu [Az Br Cz Hu].
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 3.                  Bryonia}                     L.
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc By †T.G. Tutin.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Monoecious or dioecious. Perennial hispid-papillose herbs with tuberous roots. Stems climbing by means of unbranched tendrils. Flowers greenish-white, in axillary, racemose panicles or subumbellate fascicles; calyx shortly campanulate, 5-dentate; corolla almost rotate, deeply 5-fid. Stamens 3. Female flowers with 3-5, often almost obsolete staminodes. Seeds few.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 Often monoecious; stigma glabrous; berry black .................................. {\b 1. alba}
\par
Always dioecious; stigma papillose-hairy; berry red ........................ {\b 2. cretica}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. B. alba} L.,{\i  Sp. Pl.} 1012 (1753). Dioecious in S.E. Europe, elsewhere monoecious. Stems up to 4 m, branched. Leaves 5-10 cm, ovate, cordate, 5-angled or palmately 5-lobed; lobes ovate or triangular, acute or acuminate, sharply dentate, the central much longer than the lateral. Calyx of female flowers usually as long as the corolla. Stigma glabrous. Fruit 7-8 mm in diameter, black. {\i S., C. & E. Europe; formerly cultivated as a medicinal plant and often naturalized further north and west.} Al Au Bu Ge Gr He Hu It Ju Po Rm Rs (C, W, K, E) Tu [Be Cz Da Fe Ga No Rs (B) Su].
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. B. cretica} L., {\i Sp.Pl.} 1013(1753). Like {\b 1} but always dioecious; leaf-lobes entire or with few, large, subobtuse teeth, the central usually not markedly longer than the lateral; calyx of female flowers usually about half as long as the corolla; stigma papillose hairy; fruit 6-10 mm in diameter, red.{\i  S., S.C. & W. Europe, northwards to Britain; formerly cultivated as a medicinal plant and often naturalized.} Al Au Be Br Co Cr Cz Ga Ge Gr He Ho Hs Hu It Ju Lu *Po Sa Si [Da Ge Hb No Su].
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Male inflorescence eglandular or nearly so; immature
\par
  fruit white-spotted ................................................................ ({\b a}) subsp. {\b cretica}
\par
1 Male inflorescence glandular; immature fruit uniformly green
\par
2 Male inflorescence with few or no long hairs ..................... ({\b b}) subsp. {\b dioica}
\par
2 Male inflorescence with abundant long hairs ....................... ({\b c}) subsp. {\b acuta}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b cretica}: Leaves and young fruit with irregular whitish markings. Male inflorescence eglandular or very nearly so.{\i  Aegean region}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b dioica} (Jacq.) Tutin,{\i  Feddes Repert.}{\b  79}: 61 (1968) ({\i B. dioica} Jacq., {\i B. sicula} (Jan) Guss.): Leaves and young fruit uniformly green. Male inflorescence glandular, with few or no long hairs. 2n = 20. {\i Almost throughout the range of the species}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b c}) Subsp. {\b acuta} (Desf.) Tutin,{\i  Feddes Repert.}{\b  79}: 61 (1968) ({\i B. acuta }Desf.): Leaves and young fruit uniformly green. Male inflorescence glandular and with abundant long hairs.{\i  ?Sardegna, Lampedusa. }({\i Tunisia, Libya.})
\par

\par
297}
\par