{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 8 Bark brown to purple; bracts entirely scarious; petals
\par
  less than 2 mm ............................................................................ {\b 5. parviflora}
\par
1 Sepals and petals 5
\par
9 Base of filaments confluent with lobes of disc
\par
10 Racemes 8-12 mm wide
\par
11 Bracts exceeding pedicels; petals narrowly obovate,
\par
   with distinct claw ....................................................................... {\b 7. dalmatica}
\par
11 Bracts shorter than pedicels; petals ± elliptical,
\par
   without distinct claw ................................................................. {\b 6. hampeana}
\par
10 Racemes 3-8 mm wide
\par
12 Petals 2-3 mm, at least some of them persistent ......................... {\b 1. africana}
\par
12 Petals 1·25-2 mm, caducous
\par
13 Bracts equalling or exceeding the calyx; petals not
\par
   more than 1·5 mm .................................................................... {\b 2. canariensis}
\par
13 Bracts not extending beyond middle of calyx, petals
\par
   1·5-2 mm
\par
14 Glabrous; sepals entire .................................................................. {\b 3. gallica}
\par
14 Hairy or papillose; sepals finely and closely
\par
   denticulate .................................................................................... {\b 14. hispida}
\par
9 Filaments alternating With lobes of disc, inserted in
\par
  or below the sinus
\par
15 Petals persistent; racemes 3-5 mm wide
\par
16 Petals obovate, not keeled ................................................... {\b 8. ramosissima}
\par
16 Petals ovate to suborbicular, keeled ...................................... {\b 9. smyrnensis}
\par
15 Petals caducous; racemes 6-7 mm wide
\par
17 Pedicel much shorter than calyx; sepals 2-2·5 mm ................... {\b 4. tetrandra}
\par
17 Pedicel longer than calyx; sepals 1 mm ..................................... {\b 13. gracilis}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. T. africana} Poiret, {\i Voy. Barb. }{\b 2}: 139 (1789) ({\i T. hispanica} Boiss.). Tree with black or dark purple bark, glabrous except for papillose bracts and inflorescence-axis. Leaves 1·5-4 mm, acute. Racemes 30-60 × 5-8 mm, usually vernal, but often aestival in Spain and Portugal. Bracts triangular, obtuse to acuminate, usually exceeding the calyx. Flowers subsessile, white or pale pink, 5-merous, without antepetalous stamens. Sepals 1·5 mm, trullate-ovate, acute. Petals 2-3 mm, trullate-ovate, at least some of them persistent. Filaments expanded at the base and confluent with the lobes of the disc.{\i  Coastal marshes and river-banks. S.W. Europe, extending eastwards to S. Italy.} Bl Co Ga Hs It Lu Sa Si [Br].
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. T. canariensis} Willd.,{\i  Abh. Phys. Kl. Königl. Preuss. Akad. Wiss. }{\b 1812-13}: 79 (1816) ({\i T. gallica} auct. pro parte). More or less papillose shrub or bushy tree with reddish-brown bark. Leaves 1-3 mm. Racemes 15-45 × 3-5 mm, dense, with papillose axis, usually aestival (but sometimes vernal in Spain), forming panicles. Bracts linear to triangular, acuminate, entire, equalling or somewhat exceeding the calyx. Pedicel equalling calyx. Flowers pink, 5-merous, without antepetalous stamens. Sepals 0·5-0·75 mm, finely and deeply denticulate. Petals 1·25-1·5 mm, obovate, caducous. Filaments as in 1 but disc much smaller.{\i  W. Mediterranean region, Portugal.} Bl Ga Hs Lu Sa Si
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 3. T. gallica} L.,{\i  Sp. Pl.} 270 (1753) ({\i T. anglica} Webb). Like {\b 2} but entirely glabrous; bark dark brown to dark purple; racemes rather lax; bracts more or less erose-denticulate, not exceeding the calyx; sepals 0·75-1·25 mm, entire; petals 1·5-2 mm, elliptical to elliptic-obovate; disc less fleshy.{\i  S.W. Europe, extending to N.W. France; planted elsewhere for shelter and ornament and sometimes naturalized.} *Az Bl Co Ga Hs It Si [Br].
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 4. T. tetrandra} Pallas ex Bieb.,{\i  Fl. Taur.-Cauc. }{\b 1}: 247 (1808). Glabrous or slightly papillose shrub or small tree with black bark. Leaves 3-5 mm, acute, with scarious margin. Racemes 30-60 × 6-7 mm, usually vernal. Bracts oblong, obtuse, herbaceous except for the scarious apex. Flowers white, 4-(5-)merous, with 0-4 antepetalous stamens. Pedicel much shorter than calyx. Sepals 2-2·5 mm, entire, the outer keeled and acute, the inner obtuse and shorter. Petals 2·5(-3) mm, ovate to ovate-elliptical. Filaments of antesepalous stamens inserted in shallow sinuses between the lobes of the conspicuous, fleshy disc.{\i  Damp places, mainly in the mountains. E. part of Balkan peninsula; Krym.} Bu Gr Ju Rs (K) Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 5. T. parviflora} DC.,{\i  Prodr. }{\b 3}: 97 (1828) ({\i T. cretica} Bunge). Like {\b 4} but bark brown to purple; racemes narrower (3-5 mm) and usually shorter; bracts almost entirely scarious; flowers smaller, with petals not more than 2 mm; sepals denticulate; filaments of antesepalous stamens confluent with the lobes of the smaller and less fleshy disc.{\i  Hedges and river-banks. Balkan peninsula and Aegean region; widely cultivated for ornament in C. & S. Europe, and perhaps becoming naturalized}. Al Cr Gr Ju Tu [Co Hs It].
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 6. T. hampeana} Boiss. & Heldr. in Boiss.,{\i  Diagn. Pl. Or. Nov.}{\b  2}({\b 10}): 8 (1849) ({\i T. haussknechtii} Niedenzu). Glabrous tree with brown or reddish bark. Leaves 1·75-4 mm. Racemes 20-60 (-130) × 10-12 mm, usually vernal, solitary or aggregated to form a lax panicle. Bracts shorter than or slightly exceeding pedicels. Flowers 4- to 5-merous, with 0-3 antepetalous stamens; sometimes a petal or sepal is 2-fid and can be mistaken for 2. Sepals 2-2·5 mm, the outer keeled, acute, subentire, the inner trullate-ovate, acuminate but with obtuse apex, slightly denticulate. Petals 2·5™4 mm, ovate-elliptical. Filaments of antesepalous stamens confluent with the lobes of the disc.{\i  River-banks and maritime sands. Greece and Aegean region.} Gr Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 7. T. dalmatica} Baum, {\i Monogr. Rev. Tamarix} 180 (1966) ({\i T. africana} auct. balcan., non Poiret). Glabrous tree with blackish bark. Leaves 2·5-4 mm. Racemes 20-60 × 8-10 mm, usually vernal. Bracts broadly triangular, obtuse to acuminate, usually exceeding the calyx. Flowers subsessile, white, 4-(5-)merous. Sepals 3·5 mm, keeled, the outer ovate, acute, the inner trullate, obtuse. Petals 2·5-5 mm, narrowly obovate, with distinct claw. Stamens as in {\b 6}. {\i Coastal marshes and river-banks. E. Mediterranean region.} Al Cr Gr It Ju *Si.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 8. T. ramosissima} Ledeb.,{\i  Fl. Altaica }{\b 1}: 424 (1829) ({\i T. eversmannii} C. Presl ex Bunge, {\i T. pallasii} auct., non Desv.). Glabrous shrub or small tree with reddish-brown bark. Leaves 1·5-3·5 mm, acute. Racemes 15-70 × 3-4 mm, without naked base, usually aestival, in dense panicles. Bracts narrowly triangular, acute, denticulate, exceeding the pedicels. Pedicel shorter than calyx. Flowers pink, 5-merous, without antepetalous stamens. Outer sepals 0·5-1 mm, narrowly trullate, acute, denticulate, the inner wider and more obtuse. Petals 1-1·75 mm, obovate to broadly elliptical. Filaments inserted below the sinuses which separate the emarginate lobes of the disc.{\i  Damp places, especially on saline or alkaline soils. S. part of U.S.S.R.} Rs (W, K, E).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   {\b  T. chinensis} Lour., {\i Fl. Cochinch. }{\b 1}: 182 (1790), from China, is widely cultivated for ornament (often under the name of{\i  T. gallica}) and perhaps locally naturalized. It is very like {\b 8}, but has smaller, entire sepals, ovate petals and shorter bracts.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 9. T. smyrnensis} Bunge,{\i  Tent. Tamaric. }53 (1852) ({\i T. hohenackeri} Bunge, {\i T. pallasii} auct., non Desv.). Like {\b 8} but racemes somewhat thicker and naked at the base; sepals 1 mm; petals 2 mm, ovate-orbicular, strongly keeled, especially towards the base; lobes of disc scarcely emarginate. {\i Coastal marshes and by mountain streams. S.E. Europe, from the Aegean region to S. Ukraine.} ?Al Bu Cr Gr Rm Rs (K, E) Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 10. T. boveana} Bunge,{\i  Mém. Sav. Étr. Pétersb.}{\b  7}: 291 (1851). Bushy tree with reddish-brown bark; young twigs usually somewhat papillose. Leaves 1·25-4 mm, acuminate. Racemes 50-150 × 8-9
\par

\par
293}
\par