{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 2 Stems erect or ascending, often caespitose
\par
4 Flowers in long, terminal, secund spikes; leaves
\par
  completely covered with a white, calcareous crust .................... {\b 4. thymifolia}
\par
4 Flowers mostly clustered in dense terminal cymes;
\par
  leaves mostly not completely covered by a white crust
\par
5 Calyx 4-6 mm, with hairs c. 0·5 mm ............................................ {\b 2. boissieri}
\par
5 Calyx 2-3 mm, with hairs c. 0·1 mm ........................................ {\b 3. corymbosa}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. F. pulverulenta} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 332 (1753). Annual; stems up to 30 cm, procumbent, often mat-forming, rarely erect, sparsely or densely puberulent. Leaves 1-5(-8) × 0·5-4 mm, obovate to oblong-spathulate, usually plane, glabrous or sparsely puberulent above, densely puberulent beneath, without a white crust. Flowers crowded, secund, in short terminal and axillary spikes. Calyx 2·5-4 mm, puberulent or subglabrous. Petals 3·5-5 mm, oblong to obovate, pale or deep violet.{\i  Maritime sands and shingle, and saline areas inland. S. & S.E. Europe.} Al Az Bl Bu Co Cr Ga Gr Hs It Ju Lu Rm Rs (W, K, E) Sa Si.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. F. boissieri} Reuter ex Boiss., {\i Voy. Bot. Midi Esp.}{\b  2}: 721 (1845). Perennial; stems up to 30 cm, erect or ascending, branched, woody at base, with long, patent, sparse hairs, or minutely and sparsely puberulent, or subglabrous. Leaves (2·5-)4-7 mm, glabrous above, crystalline-papillose beneath, without a white crust; margins revolute. Flowers in dense terminal cymes. Calyx 4-6 mm, with conspicuous swollen hairs c. 0·5 mm on lower half. Petals 5-7 mm, purplish.{\i  Saline places near the sea. S. Portugal, S.W. Spain.} Hs Lu. ({\i N. Africa}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 3. F. corymbosa} Desf.,{\i  Fl. Atl.}{\b  1}: 315 (1798) ({\i F. webbii} Boiss. & Reuter). Perennial; stems up to 30 cm, erect or ascending, much-branched, woody at base, puberulent. Leaves 2-6 mm, sparsely or densely puberulent on both surfaces, with a white crust or powder which usually does not completely cover the surface; margins revolute. Flowers in dense terminal cymes. Calyx 2-3 mm, sparsely or densely puberulent more or less throughout, with hairs c. 0·1 mm. Petals 4-6 mm, pale purplish.{\i  Saline places. S. Spain.} Hs. ({\i N. Africa}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 4. F. thymifolia} Desf., {\i op. cit.} 316 (1798) ({\i F. reuteri} Boiss.). Perennial; stems up to 30 cm, erect or ascending, much-branched, woody at base, densely puberulent. Leaves 2-3·5 mm, completely covered by a white crust; margins revolute. Flowers solitary or in small clusters, secund, arranged in long, terminal spikes. Calyx 2·5-4 mm, sparsely or densely puberulent more or less throughout, with hairs c. 0·1 mm. Petals c. 7 mm, purplish.{\i  Saline places. C., E. & S. Spain.} Hs.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 5. F. laevis} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 331 (1753) ({\i F. intermedia} auct., non DC.). Perennial; stems up to 40 cm, procumbent, much-branched, mat-forming, sparsely or densely puberulent with hairs up to 0·1(-0 2) mm. Leaves 2-5 mm, glabrous or subglabrous above, puberulent beneath, sometimes covered by a white crust; margins revolute. Flowers solitary or in small clusters, throughout the upper parts of the main stems and branches, not confined to terminal corymbiform clusters. Calyx 3-4(-5) mm, subglabrous, or puberulent, with hairs up to 0·2 mm in the lower part. Petals 4-6 mm, purplish or whitish.{\i  Maritime sands and shingle. W. Europe, northwards to S. England, and extending eastwards to S.E. Italy.} Az Bl Br Co Ga Hs It Lu Sa Si.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 6. F. hirsuta} L.,{\i  loc. cit.} (1753) ({\i F. intermedia} DC.,{\i  F. hispida} DC.). Perennial; stems up to 40 cm, procumbent, much-branched, mat-forming, densely puberulent or pubescent at least near apex, with hairs 0·1-1 mm. Leaves 2-8 mm, glabrous to puberulent above, puberulent beneath, without a white crust but sometimes with a powdery covering; margins revolute, or rarely some leaves plane. Flowers confined to conspicuous, dense corymbiform clusters terminal on the main stems and branches. Calyx 3·5-5 mm, sparsely puberulent to densely pubescent with hairs up to 0·5 mm. Petals 4-6 mm, pale purplish or white.{\i  Maritime sands and shingle, and saline areas inland. S.E. Europe and Mediterranean region, westwards to} c. 3°{\i  E.} Al Bl Co Cr Ga Gr It Rm Rs (W, K, E) Sa Si Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 115.             ELATINACEAE}
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc Edit S.M. Walters.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Aquatic or marsh herbs. Leaves simple, opposite or whorled, stipulate. Flowers hermaphrodite, regular, hypogynous, 2- to 5-merous, solitary or in cymes. Sepals free or connate at base, as many as petals. Petals free, imbricate. Stamens as many or twice as many as petals. Ovary superior, 2- to 5-locular; styles free; ovules numerous; placentation axile. Fruit a septicidal capsule.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 Sepals 5, with membranous margin, acute; leaves serrate ................. {\b 1. Bergia}
\par
Sepals 3 or 4, membranous throughout, obtuse; leaves entire .......... {\b 2. Elatine}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 1.                    Bergia}                        L.
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc By C.D.K. Cook.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Herbs with serrate leaves. Sepals 5, acute, with wide median vein and membranous margins, free. Petals 5.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. B. capensis} L.,{\i  Mantissa Alt.} 241 (1771). Glabrous annual or short-lived perennial. Stems succulent, pink, erect or procumbent and rooting at nodes. Leaves lanceolate to oblanceolate, serrate. Flowers in dense axillary cymes.{\i  Naturalized as a weed in rice-fields in E. Spain.} [Hs.] ({\i Tropical and subtropical Africa and Asia.})
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 2.                  Elatine}                       L.
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc By C.D.K. Cook.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Herbs of wet places. Leaves entire. Sepals 3 or 4, membranous, obtuse, connate at base. Petals 3 or 4, membranous, patent in terrestrial plants, closely investing ovary or occasionally absent in aquatic plants. Capsule more or less globose. Seeds straight or curved.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Literature: G. Moesz,{\i  Magyar Bot. Lapok }{\b 7}: 1-34 (1908). H. Glück in A. Pascher,{\i  Die Susswasser-Flora Mitteleuropas}{\b  15}: 299-313. 1936. H. L. Mason,{\i  Madroño}{\b  13}: 239-240 (1956).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Many authors have regarded the presence or absence of the pedicel as an unreliable character but cultivation experiments (Mason{\i  loc. cit.}) suggest that this character is constant within each species.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  All species grow in shallow, usually still water, on wet mud or sand, or in seasonally flooded places.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Leaves in whorls of 3-18 ......................................................... {\b 1. alsinastrum}
\par
1 Leaves opposite
\par
2 Flowers 4-merous
\par
3 Sepals about 3 times as long as petals at anthesis ..................... {\b 4. hungarica}
\par
3 Sepals not or little longer than petals at anthesis
\par

\par
295}
\par