{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 4 Sepals shorter than mature capsule .......................................... {\b 2. hydropiper}
\par
4 Sepals longer than mature capsule ........................................... {\b 3. macropoda}
\par
2 Flowers 3-merous
\par
5 Stamens 3
\par
6 Flowers sessile; capsule remaining in leaf-axil at maturity .......... {\b 5. triandra}
\par
6 Flowers shortly pedicellate; capsule turning away from
\par
  leaf-axil at maturity ...................................................................... {\b 6. ambigua}
\par
5 Stamens 6
\par
7 Flowers sessile, in axillary cymes of 2-5 ................................... {\b 8. brochonii}
\par
7 Flowers pedicellate, solitary in leaf-axils ................................... {\b 7. hexandra}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. E. alsinastrum} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 368 (1753). Annual or perennial 2-80 cm. Leaves whorled, heterophyllous; in aquatic state linear, up to 18 in a whorl; in terrestrial state lanceolate to ovate, as few as 3 in a whorl. Flowers sessile. Sepals 4, ovate, acute; petals 4, ovate, longer than sepals; stamens 8; carpels 4. Capsule depressed above. Seeds almost straight.{\i  Most of Europe from N. France, S.W. Finland and N. Russia southwards.} Au Bu Co Cr Cz Fe Ga Gr He Hs Hu It Ju Lu Po Rm Rs (N, C, W, E) Sa Si
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. E. hydropiper} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 367 (1753) ({\i E. oederi} Moesz; incl.{\i  E. orthosperma} Düben). Annual 2-16 cm. Leaves opposite. Flowers sessile or subsessile. Sepals 4, ovate, widest at base, shorter than mature capsule; petals 4, ovate, pale red, as long as or longer than sepals; stamens 8; carpels 4. Capsule depressed above, 4-sided. Seeds almost straight or asymmetrically horseshoe-shaped, with long arm 3 times as long as short arm; reticulations on testa rectangular. 2n = c. 40.{\i  N. & C. Europe, extending locally southwards to C. Spain, N. Italy, Bulgaria and S.E. Russia}. Au Be Br Bu Cz Da Fe Ga Ge Hb He Ho Hs Hu It No Po Rm Rs (N, B, C, W, E) Su.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 3. E. macropoda} Guss.,{\i  Fl. Sic. Prodr. }{\b 1}: 475 (1827) ({\i E. campylosperma} Seub.). Annual 2-16 cm. Leaves opposite. Flowers with distinct pedicel up to 23 mm. Sepals 4, much longer than mature capsule; petals 4, ovate, pale red, shorter than sepals; stamens 8; carpels 4. Capsule globose or depressed. Seeds almost straight or asymmetrically horseshoe-shaped, with long arm 2-2·5 times as long as short arm; reticulations on testa usually hexagonal at base of seed.{\i  S.W. Europe and W. Mediterranean region.} Bl Co Ga Hs Lu Sa Si
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 4. E. hungarica} Moesz, {\i Magyar Bot. Lapok}{\b  7}: 24 (1908). Annual. Leaves opposite. Flowers with distinct pedicel up to 3 mm. Sepals 4, obovate, about 3 times as long as petals at anthesis; petals 4; stamens 8; carpels 4. Capsule depressed, 4-sided. Seeds symmetrically horseshoe-shaped; reticulations on testa hexagonal at base of seed. {\i  S.E. & E.C. Europe, from S.E. Czechoslovakia to the lower Volga.} Cz Hu Rm Rs (W, K, E) [Lu].
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 5. E. triandra} Schkuhr,{\i  Handb.}{\b  1}: 345 (1791) (incl. {\i E. callitrichoides} (W. Nyl.) Kaufm.). Annual 1-18 cm. Leaves opposite. Flowers sessile. Sepals (2-)3(-4), obtuse, widest at base; petals 3, white or red, longer than sepals, sometimes absent in submerged plants; stamens 3, opposite sepals; carpels 3. Capsule remaining in leaf-axils at maturity. Seeds slightly curved. 2n = c. 40.{\i  C., N. & E. Europe, extending to C. France and N. Italy.} Au Az Be Bu Cz Fe Ga Ge Ho Hu It Ju No Po Rm Rs (N, B, C, E) Su.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 6. E. ambigua} Wight in Hooker, {\i Bot. Misc.}{\b  2}: 103 (1830). Like {\b 5} but flowers shortly pedicellate; capsules turning to one side away from leaf-axil at maturity. {\i E. Carpathian region.} [Cz Rm Rs (W).] ({\i S. & E. Asia.})
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    Apparently a recent introduction to Europe.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 7. E. hexandra} (Lapierre) DC., {\i Icon. Pl. Gall. Rar.} 14 (1808). Annual or short-lived perennial 2-20 cm. Leaves opposite. Flowers solitary in leaf-axils; pedicels 0·5-10 mm. Sepals 3, obtuse, widest at base; petals 3, longer than sepals; stamens 6; carpels 3. Capsule almost globose, but slightly depressed above. Seeds straight or weakly curved. 2n = 72.{\i  W. & C. Europe, extending to S. Sweden and N. Italy. }Au Be Br Cz Da Ga Ge Hb He Ho Hs Hu It Ju Lu No Po Rm Su.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 8. E. brochonii} Clavaud, {\i Act. Soc. Linn. Bordeaux}{\b  37}: lxiii (1883). Like {\b 7} but flowers sessile, 2-5 in axillary cymes. {\i S.W. France} ({\i Bayonne and S.W. of Bordeaux}). Ga. ({\i N. Africa.})
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 116.              DATISCACEAE}
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc Edit. †T.G. Tutin.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Usually dioecious herbs or trees. Leaves alternate, exstipulate. Flowers actinomorphic. Male flowers with 4-9 calyx-lobes; petals usually absent; stamens 4-25. Female and hermaphrodite flowers with 3-8 calyx-lobes; petals usually absent; ovary unilocular, inferior; placentation parietal; ovules numerous, anatropous. Fruit a membranous or coriaceous capsule, dehiscing between the styles.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 1.                  Datisca}                  L.
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc By †T.G. Tutin.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Herbs with 3-sect or imparipinnate leaves. Petals absent. Stamens with long anthers and short filaments. Styles 3, bifid.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. D. cannabina} L.,{\i  Sp. Pl.} 1037 (1753). Robust, glabrous perennial c. 1 m, resembling{\i  Cannabis sativa} in general appearance. Leaves imparipinnate; leaflets lanceolate, acuminate, coarsely serrate. Flowers small, interspersed with entire bracts in long racemes subtended by the upper leaves.{\i  Banks of streams. Kriti.} Cr. ({\i S.W. Asia, Himalaya.})
\par

\par
296}
\par