{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 somewhat condensed. Sepals 4 mm. Petals 3-4 mm, yellow. {\i Stony hillsides. • S. Greece, Kriti}. Cr Gr.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 29. H. rossmaessleri} Willk.,{\i  Linnaea}{\b  30}: 87 (1859). Caespitose dwarf shrub 5-15 cm, often pulvinate, with rigid, projecting shoots. Leaves 5-10 × 3-5 mm, ovate-lanceolate, green, pubescent or glabrous on both surfaces; upper leaves stipulate. Cymes simple or branched, few-flowered, somewhat lax. Petals yellow. •{\i  S. & S.E. Spain.} Hs.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200    30. H.viscidulum Boiss.,{\i  Elenchus} 15 (1838). Densely caespitose, 7-15 cm. Leaves 5-15 × 5-10 mm, lanceolate to triangular-ovate or ovate-orbicular, long-petiolate, pubescent above, white-tomentose beneath, the margins revolute; upper leaves stipulate. Inflorescence simple or branched. Petals yellow. •{\i  S. Spain.} Hs.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Plant eglandular ...................................................... ({\b b}) subsp. {\b guadiccianum}
\par
1 Plant glandular
\par
2 Leaves variable, the mid-cauline ovate-triangular, wide at the base;
\par
  petiole at least as long as the lamina ............................. ({\b a}) subsp. {\b viscidulum}
\par
2 Leaves all similar, ovate-elliptical to elliptic-lanceolate,
\par
  the base as narrow as the apex; petiole shorter than the lamina,
\par
  or rarely as long ............................................................ ({\b c}) subsp. {\b viscarioides}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b viscidulum} ({\i H. viscidulum} subsp.{\i  texedense} Font Quer & Rothm.): {\i Sierra Nevada, Sierra Tejeda}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b guadiccianum} Font Quer & Rothm., {\i Cavanillesia}{\b  6}: 170 (1934): {\i Guadix.}
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b c}) Subsp. {\b viscarioides} (Debeaux & Reverchon) Guinea & Heywood in Guinea, Cistác. Esp. 160 (1954) ({\i H. viscarioides} Debeaux & Reverchon):{\i  Sierra de Cazorla, Sierra del Cuarto}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Sect. MACULARIA Dunal. Flowers long-pedicellate, subsolitary on leafy branches.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 31. H. lunulatum} (All.) DC. in Lam. & DC.,{\i  Fl. Fr. ed. 3,}{\b  4}: 816 (1805). Caespitose dwarf shrub 5-20 cm; branches tortuous, often becoming naked and subspinose. Leaves 10 mm, elliptic-lanceolate, green, slightly pubescent. Flowers few, at the apex of leafy branches. Petals yellow, with an orange spot at the base.•{\i  Alpi Marittime}. It
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 5.                 Fumana}                (Dunal) Spach
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc By V.H. Heywood
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Dwarf shrubs. Leaves narrow, ovate-lanceolate to linear, acicular, alternate (rarely opposite), stipulate or exstipulate. The two outer sepals small, the three inner large, scarious, prominently veined. Petals yellow. Outer stamens sterile, moniliform. Style filiform, more or less geniculate at base. Capsule 3-veined, the valves usually patent after dehiscence.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  All European species grow on dry, rocky, stony or sandy ground, often in low scrub.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Literature: E. Guinea,{\i  Cistáceas Españolas} ({\i Bol. Inst. For. Inv. Exper. Madrid} No. 71)161-181. Madrid. 1954.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Leaves ± equally spaced on the stems, not or scarcely reduced above
\par
2 Leaves ovate- to oblong-lanceolate, stipulate ................................ {\b 1. arabica}
\par
2 Leaves linear, exstipulate
\par
3 Procumbent; fruiting pedicels as long as or shorter than
\par
  adjacent leaves, recurved from the base ................................. {\b 2. procumbens}
\par
3 Erect or straggling-ascending; fruiting pedicels much
\par
  longer than adjacent leaves, patent, with deflexed apex .............. {\b 3. ericoides}
\par
1 Leaves unequally spaced on the stem, ± abruptly reduced
\par
  above to form small bracts in the inflorescence
\par
4 Capsule with 3 seeds (Greece) .................................................... {\b 9. aciphylla}
\par
4 Capsule with 6-12 seeds
\par
5 Leaves opposite, stipulate ......................................................... {\b 6. thymifolia}
\par
5 Leaves alternate, usually exstipulate
\par
6 Leaves linear-setaceous, ± terete, stipulate .................................. {\b 8. laevipes}
\par
6 Leaves linear to linear-lanceolate, trigonous or subtrigonous,
\par
  exstipulate
\par
7 Pedicels and calyx eglandular ..................................................... {\b 7. paradoxa}
\par
7 Pedicels and usually calyx glandular
\par
8 Leaves glandular-hairy; capsule with (-6)8-12 seeds .................... {\b 4. scoparia}
\par
8 Leaves glabrous; capsule with not more than 6 seeds .............. {\b 5. bonapartei}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. F. arabica} (L.) Spach, {\i Ann. Sci. Nat.} ser. 2 (Bot.),{\b  6}: 355 (1836) (incl. {\i F. viscidula} (Steven) Juz.). Much-branched, laxly caespitose, up to 25 cm. Leaves 5-12 × 0·8-5 mm, alternate,ovate- to oblong-lanceolate, acute, flat, glandular-pubescent to glabrescent (greyish when young in var.{\i  incanescens} Hausskn.); stipules short. Flowers 1-7, forming a distinct, lax, inflorescence. Capsules (6-)8- to 12-seeded; seeds reticulate-foveolate.{\i  S. Europe, from Sardegna to Krym.} Al ?Bu Cr Gr It Ju Rs (K) Sa Si.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b  F. pinatzii} Rech. fil., {\i Anzeig. Akad. Wiss.} ({\i Wien}) {\b 93}: 97 (1956), described from Evvoia, Greece, differs only by its 6-seeded capsules; plants of{\i  F. arabica} from the Kikladhes sometimes have only 6 seeds.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. F. procumbens} (Dunal) Gren. & Godron, {\i Fl. Fr.}{\b  1}: 173(1847) ({\i Cistus fumana} L., {\i Helianthemum procumbens} Dunal, {\i Fumana nudifolia} Janchen, {\i F. vulgaris} Spach). Procumbent,with usually spreading branches up to 40 cm. Leaves (4-)10-18 × 0·5-2 mm, alternate, linear, subtrigonous, mucronate, ciliate, ex-stipulate. Flowers 3-4, solitary in the axils of leaves, not forming an inflorescence; pedicels about as long as the adjacent leaves, recurved from the base. Capsule 8- to 12-seeded; seeds retained for a long time after dehiscence. {\i W.C. & S. Europe, northwards to N. France; Öland and Gotland.} Al Au Be Bl Bu Cr Cz Ga Ge Gr He Hs It Ju Lu Rm Rs (W, K) Sa Si Su Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 3. F. ericoides} (Cav.) Gand. in Magnier,{\i  Fl. Select. Exsicc.} no. 201 (1883) ({\i F. spachii }Gren. & Godron). Erect or straggling-ascending, much-branched, up to 20 cm. Leaves (3-)8-12(-15) × 0·5-2 mm, variable in size according to position on plant, alternate, linear, obtuse, glabrous or glandular-puberulent, exstipulate; leaves more or less equally spaced, scarcely reduced in size in inflorescence. Flowers 2-5, axillary or subterminal, scattered among the leaves, not forming a distinct inflorescence; pedicels much longer than the adjacent leaves, patent in fruit and deflexed at the apex. Capsule 8- to 12-seeded, late-dehiscent; seeds not long retained.{\i  Calcicole. Mediterranean region; Portugal.} Bl ?Co ?Cr Ga Gr He Hs It Ju Lu Sa Si.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 4. F. scoparia} Pomel,{\i  Mat. Fl. Atl.} 10 (1860) ({\i F. ericoides} auct. pro parte, non (Cav.) Gand.). Like {\b 3} but ascending; leaves crowded below, widely spaced above, abruptly reduced in size in inflorescence; inflorescence terminal, distinct, densely glandular-hairy with long hairs; capsule (6-)8- to 12-seeded; seeds retained for some time after dehiscence.{\i  Mediterranean region}. Al ?Cr Gr Hs It.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 5. F. bonapartei} Maire & Petitmengin,{\i  Mat. Étude Fl. Géogr. Bot. Or.}{\b  4}: 37 (1908). Procumbent, with spreading stems up to 15 cm. Leaves (3-)4 10(-12) × 0·5-1·5 mm, alternate, linear,subtrigonous, glabrous, exstipulate. Inflorescence up to 7-flowered; pedicels much longer than the subtending bracts, glandular-pubescent, patent in fruit and deflexed at the apex. Capsule 6-seeded.{\i  Balkan peninsula, mainly in the west.} Al Gr Ju.
\par

\par

\par
291}
\par