{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 17. R. montana} Chaix in Vill., {\i Hist. Pl. Dauph.}{\b  1}: 346 (1786). Stems up to 3 m, erect. Prickles curved or nearly straight, abruptly dilated at base. Leaflets 7-9, 20-35 × 12-25 mm, broadly obovate, biserrate, glabrous, bluish-green, glandular beneath on the midrib and rarely also on the lateral veins; petiole and rhachis glandular. Flowers solitary or 2-3. Pedicels very densely stipitate-glandular. Sepals glandular on the back, erect and persistent after anthesis. Petals 14-22 mm, pale pink, becoming whitish. Disc as wide as or very little wider than the orifice. Styles lanate. Fruit 15-25 mm, ovoid to elongate-pyriform, stipitate-glandular, rarely glabrous. {\i S. Europe and parts of S.C. Europe. }Au Ga Gr He Hs It ?Ju Si.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    ({\b 18-31}).{\b  R. canina} group. Stems up to 5 m, erect.Prickles usually curved or hooked, stout, usually all similar. Leaflets ovate, obovate, elliptical or suborbicular, glabrous or pubescent, eglandular or with a few glands on the main veins beneath, more rarely with numerous glands, the glands not strongly scented. Pedicels glabrous or stipitate-glandular. Flowers solitary or 2-5. Sepals 3-5 mm wide, usually deflexed after anthesis but sometimes erect or patent. Petals white or pink. Disc flat. Styles short or long, glabrous, villous or lanate. Fruit globose, ovoid or ellipsoid, glabrous or stipitate-glandular.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Sepals usually deflexed and deciduous in fruit; styles
\par
  usually glabrous or villous, rarely lanate
\par
2 Leaflets glabrous
\par
3 Pedicels glabrous
\par
4 Leaves eglandular
\par
5 Disc narrow, the orifice more than 1 mm in diameter ............ {\b 24. subcanina}
\par
5 Disc wide, the orifice not more than 1 mm in diameter ............... {\b 18. canina}
\par
4 Leaves glandular, at least on the rhachis, petioles and veins
\par
6 Leaflets with glandular teeth ...................................................... {\b 21. nitidula}
\par
6 Leaflets with eglandular teeth ................................................. {\b 19. squarrosa}
\par
3 Pedicels stipitate-glandular
\par
7 Disc narrow, the orifice more than 1 mm in diameter ............ {\b 24. subcanina}
\par
7 Disc wide, the orifice not more than 1 mm in diameter
\par
8 Leaflets serrate, with short and rather wide teeth ............. {\b 20. andegavensis}
\par
8 Leaflets biserrate or compound-serrate, with long,
\par
  acuminate teeth
\par
9 Styles glabrous; leaves usually eglandular or rarely
\par
  sparsely glandular on petiole and rhachis .................................. {\b 22. pouzinii}
\par
9 Styles villous; leaves glandular on veins, petiole and rhachis  ...{\b 21. nitidula}
\par
 2 Leaflets hairy
\par
10 Pedicels glabrous
\par
11 Disc narrow, the orifice more than 1 mm in diameter ......... {\b 26. subcollina}
\par
11 Disc wide, the orifice not more than 1 mm in diameter
\par
12 Leaves usually glandular beneath ....................................... {\b 28. obtusifolia}
\par
12 Leaves usually eglandular beneath ................................... {\b 29. corymbifera}
\par
10 Pedicels ± stipitate-glandular
\par
13 Leaves usually densely glandular beneath; styles
\par
   usually long ................................................................................ {\b 31. abietina}
\par
13 Leaves with glands confined to rhachis and petiole;
\par
   styles usually short .................................................................. {\b 30. deseglisei}
\par
1  Sepals usually erect or patent in fruit, persistent; styles lanate 
\par
14 Acicles present ......................................................................... {\b 27. rhaetica}
\par
14 Acicles absent
\par
15 Stems usually reddish; leaflets glabrous or rarely
\par
   with a few scattered glands beneath ....................................... {\b 23. vosagiaca}
\par
15 Stems usually green; leaflets hairy and usually glandular
\par
16 Sepals erect or patent in fruit; leaflets densely
\par
   appressed hairy beneath ................................................................ {\b 25. caesia}
\par
16 Sepals deflexed or patent in fruit; leaflets usually 
\par
   sparsely hairy beneath ............................................................ {\b 26. subcollina}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 18. R. canina} L.,{\i  Sp. Pl.} 491 (1753). Stems green; internodes long. Prickles stout, curved or hooked; flowering stems rarely unarmed. Leaflets 5-7, 15-40 × 12-20 mm, ovate, obovate or elliptical, serrate or compound-serrate, glabrous and eglandular, dark to glaucous green, shining or dull above; petiole and rhachis often with acicles. Pedicels 10-20 mm, as long as or longer than the fruit, glabrous. Sepals deflexed and caducous after anthesis. Petals 15-25(-30) mm, pink to white. Disc wide, with the orifice less than 1 mm in diameter. Styles usually not long-exserted, densely villous to glabrous. Fruit 10-20 mm, globose, ovoid or ellipsoid, glabrous, red. 2n = 35.{\i  Europe northwards to }c. 62°{\i  N}. All except Az Fa Is Sb Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 19. R. squarrosa} (Rau) Boreau,{\i  Fl. Centre Fr.} ed. 3,{\b  2}: 222 (1857). Like {\b 18} but leaflets compound-serrate, glandular on the mid-veins and sometimes over the entire lower surface; stipules, petiole and rhachis densely glandular; styles long-exserted, villous. Mainly in C. Europe; distribution not fully known. Au Be Br Bu Cz Ga Ge Gr He Hu Po Rm.
\par

\par
 
\pard\f0\fs28   {\b 20. R. andegavensis} Bast.,{\i  Essai Fl. Maine Loire} 189 (1809). Like {\b 18} but leaflets serrate; petiole and rhachis glandular and with acicles; pedicels stipitate-glandular; style usually long-exserted; fruit often stipitate-glandular.{\i  W., S. & C. Europe.} Al Au Be Br Bu Cz Ga Ge Gr He Hs Hu It Ju Po Rm Rs (W) ?Sa Si.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 21. R. nitidula} Besser,{\i  Cat. Pl. Jard. Krzemien. Suppl.}{\b  4}: 20 (1815)({\i R. blondaeana} Ripart ex Deseglise). Like {\b 18} but leaflets with glandular teeth, glandular on the mid-veins and sometimes on the lateral veins; petioles and rhachis always glandular; pedicels sometimes stipitate-glandular; styles usually long-exserted, pubescent or lanate; fruit sometimes glandular-hispid. {\i From Britain and N. Portugal eastwards to S. Sweden, the Carpathians and Greece.} Au Be Br Bu Cz Ga Ge Gr He Hs Hu It Ju Lu Po Rm Rs (W).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 22. R. pouzinii} Tratt.,{\i  Rosac. Monogr.}{\b  2}: 112 (1823). Like {\b 18} but leaflets 15-25 × 10-18 mm, suborbicular to elliptical, with glandular teeth, sparsely glandular on rhachis and petiole; pedicels densely stipitate-glandular; styles long-exserted, glabrous; fruit occasionally glandular-hispid. {\i Mediterranean region, Portugal}. Bl Co Cr Ga Gr Hs It Lu Sa Si.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 23. R. vosagiaca} Desportes, {\i Ros. Gall.} 88 (1828) ({\i R. afzeliana} subsp.{\i  vosagiaca} (Desportes) R. Keller & Gams,{\i  R. glauca} subsp. {\i reuteri} (Godet) Hayek). Stems up to 2 m, pruinose when young; internodes long. Prickles crowded, rather short, curved or hooked. Leaflets 5-7, 20-40 × 15-25 mm, elliptical or ovate to obovate, serrate to compound-serrate, margins overlapping, glabrous, usually bluish-green and pruinose, or rarely green and not pruinose, rarely with scattered glands beneath. Pedicels 2-20 mm, rarely longer than fruit, glabrous. Sepals erect and persistent after anthesis. Petals 15-25 mm, bright pink. Disc narrow, with the orifice more than 1 mm in diameter. Styles lanate. Fruit 10-20 mm, globose, rarely ovoid, glabrous, deep red.{\i  Most of Europe, northwards to Iceland and Fennoscandia, but rare in the south-west.} Al Au Bu Cz Da Fe Ga Ge Gr He Ho Hs Hu It Ju Lu No Po Rm Rs (N, B, C, W) Si Su.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 24. R. subcanina} (Christ) Dalla Torre & Sarnth.,{\i  Fl. Tirol}{\b  6}({\b 2}): 515 (1909) ({\i R. glauca }subsp.{\i  subcanina} (Christ) Hayek). Like {\b 23} but pedicels (10-)20-30 mm, often longer than the fruit,
\par

\par
29}
\par