{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 mm, usually vernal. Bracts linear, acute, strongly papillose, much exceeding the flowers. Pedicel shorter than calyx. Flowers 4-merous, without antepetalous stamens. Sepals 1·5-2 mm, the outer broadly ovate-trullate, acute, entire, the inner obtuse, more or less denticulate and somewhat shorter. Petals 3-4 mm, narrowly obovate, with distinct claw, caducous. Filaments confluent with the lobes of the disc.{\i  S.E. Spain} ({\i very local}). Hs. ({\i N.W. Africa}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 11. T. meyeri} Boiss., {\i Diagn. Pl. Or. Nov.}{\b  2}({\b 10}): 9 (1849). Glabrous shrub or small tree with reddish-brown or greyish-brown bark. Leaves 1-4 mm, linear. Racemes 40-100 × 7 mm, usually vernal. Bracts oblong, papillose at least on inner side, equalling or exceeding the flowers. Pedicel shorter than calyx. Flowers 4-merous, rarely with 1 antepetalous stamen. Sepals 2-2·5 mm, subentire, the outer acute and keeled, the inner obtuse and narrower. Petals 3-3·5 mm, elliptical to obovate. Filaments of antesepalous stamens inserted in a slight notch on the lobes of the disc.{\i  Saline soils. S.E. Russia} ( {\i Volga delta and by Kuma River}). Rs (E). ({\i Caucasus, S.W. Asia.})
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 12. T. laxa} Willd., {\i Abh. Phys. Kl. Königl. Preuss. Akad. Wiss.}{\b  1812-13}: 82(1816)({\i T. pallasii} Desv.).Glabrous shrub or small tree with greyish-brown bark. Leaves 1-4 mm, acute, entire. Racemes 10-70 × 6-8 mm, usually vernal but often also some aestival. Bracts spathulate, obtuse, scarious, shorter than the pedicels (except sometimes the uppermost). Pedicel longer than calyx. Flowers 4-merous, without antepetalous stamens. Sepals 1-1·5 mm, trullate-ovate, the outer acute, keeled, subentire, the inner obtuse, erose-denticulate. Petals 2-3 mm, broadly elliptical to ovate, caducous. Filaments inserted in shallow sinuses between the more or less emarginate lobes of the disc.{\i  River-banks and lake-shores. S.E. Russia, W. Kazakhstan}. Rs (E). ({\i W. & C. Asia.})
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 13. T. gracilis} Willd., {\i op. cit.} 81 (1816). Glabrous, bushy tree with brown or blackish bark. Leaves 1-4 mm, much longer than wide. Racemes 20-60 × 6-7 mm, usually aestival, solitary or in lax panicles. Bracts spathulate to narrowly trullate, acute, usually shorter than pedicels. Pedicel longer than calyx. Flowers 4- to 5-merous, the 4-merous sometimes with 1 antepetalous stamen. Sepals 1 mm, ovate, obtuse, subentire to irregularly denticulate. Petals 1·25-2·5 mm, elliptical to obovate, caducous. Filaments of antesepalous stamens inserted in shallow sinuses between the more or less emarginate lobes of the disc.{\i  Sand-dunes, river-banks and salt-marshes. From S.E. Ukraine to W. Kazakhstan.} Rs (W, E). ({\i W. & C. Asia.})
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    European plants are referable to var.{\i  angustifolia} (Ledeb.) Baum ({\i T. angustifolia} Ledeb.).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 14. T. hispida} Willd.,{\i  op. cit.} 77 (1816). Shrub or small tree with reddish-brown bark, usually densely hispid-pubescent, but sometimes glabrous except for papillose inflorescence-axis. Leaves 1-2·5 mm, acute, cordate-auriculate at base. Racemes 15-70(-150) × 3-5 mm, usually aestival, aggregated in dense panicles. Bracts narrowly triangular, acuminate, longer than pedicels. Pedicel shorter than calyx. Flowers 5-merous, without antepetalous stamens. Sepals 1 mm, trullate-ovate, strongly denticulate, especially in distal half, the outer more or less keeled. Petals 2 mm, obovate to elliptical, caducous. Filaments confluent with the lobes of the disc. {\i Saline sands. W. Kazakhstan.} Rs (E). ({\i Dry regions of Asia.})
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 3.                     Myricaria}                   Desv.
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc By D.A. Webb.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Like{\i  Tamarix} but flowers 5-merous, without disc; stamens united in a short tube round the ovary by the expanded filament-bases; anthers introrse; stigma sessile on the beak of the acuminate ovary; tuft of hairs on seed stipitate.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. M. germanica} (L.) Desv., {\i Ann. Sci. Nat.}{\b  4}: 349 (1825). Glabrous shrub 60-250 cm, with erect branches. Leaves 2-5 mm, linear-lanceolate, obtuse, sessile, somewhat glaucous, closely imbricate on young shoots. Racemes (2-)4-12(-25) × 1 cm, sometimes branched at the base, usually terminal on the main branches, but sometimes terminating short lateral twigs, or sessile on the woody shoots of the previous year. Bracts 5-7(-10) mm, broadly ovate to narrowly oblong, obtuse, acute or long-acuminate, with broad, scarious margin below. Sepals c. 4 mm, lanceolate; petals 5-6 mm, pink; stamens 10. Capsule 8-11 mm, narrowly pyramidal. 2n = 24.{\i  River-gravels and other open habitats. Mainly in C. Europe and Fennoscandia, but extending to the Pyrenees and E. Spain, C. Italy and S. Ukraine, with an outlying station on the Lower Volga. }?Al Au Cz Fe Ga Ge He Hs Hu It Ju No Po Rm Rs (W, K, E) Su.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Var.{\i  bracteosa} Franchet ({\i M. alopecuroides} Schrenk), which has long-acuminate bracts with patent apex, occurs sporadically throughout the range of the species.{\b  M. squamosa} Desv.,{\i  Ann. Sci. Nat. }{\b 4}: 350 (1825), appears simply to designate plants with late-developing, sessile, lateral racemes, which usually have narrow, obtuse bracts and persistent bud-scales at the base.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 114.           FRANKENIACEAE}
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc Edit. D.H. Valentine.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Herbs or dwarf shrubs. Leaves opposite, entire, often ericoid; stipules absent. Flowers usually hermaphrodite. Sepals 4-6, connate for more than half their length. Petals 4-6, clawed, with a scale-like appendage on the claw. Stamens usually 6, in 2 whorls. Ovary superior, fertile only in the lower half, 1-locular; placentation parietal; ovules numerous. Capsule loculicidal. Seeds endospermous.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 1.                  Frankenia}                   L.
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc By A.O. Chater.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Annual or perennial. Flowers sessile, solitary or in leafy cymes or spikes. Petals and sepals usually 5; calyx tubular, persistent; petals imbricate. Outer whorl of stamens shorter than the inner. Ovary sessile, of 3(-4) carpels; ripe capsule enclosed in calyx.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Literature: R. Negre,{\i  Trav. Inst. Sci. Cherif.} ser. bot.,{\b  12} (1957).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Annual; leaves obovate or oblong-spathulate, usually plane
\par
  ................................................................................................. {\b 1. pulverulenta}
\par
1 Perennial, woody at base; leaves with revolute margins, appearing
\par
  linear or linear-lanceolate 2 stems procumbent, mat-forming
\par
3 Flowers scattered throughout the upper parts of the stems and
\par
  branches, not confined to terminal corymbiform clusters ................. {\b 5. laevis}
\par
3 Flowers confined to dense corymbiform clusters which
\par
  are terminal on the main stems or branches .................................... {\b 6. hirsuta}
\par

\par
294}
\par