{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs36\qc  ROSALES {\fs28 (continued)}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc {\b 80.         ROSACEAE}
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc Edited by D.H. Valentine & A.O. Chater
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Trees, shrubs or herbs. Leaves usually alternate and stipulate. Flowers regular, usually hermaphrodite, perigynous or epigynous. Hypanthium flat, concave or tubular. Sepals usually 5, sometimes with epicalyx. Petals usually 5, free, sometimes absent. Stamens usually 2, 3 or 4 times as many as the sepals, sometimes 1-5 or indefinite. Carpels 1 to numerous, free or connate, sometimes adnate to the hypanthium. Ovules usually 2, sometimes 1 or more, anatropous. Styles free, rarely united. Fruit of one or more achenes, drupes or follicles, or a pome, the hypanthium sometimes becoming coloured and fleshy. Endosperm usually absent.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  It is convenient, in this family, to use the term 'hypanthium' to denote that part of the flower which bears the sepals, petals and stamens on its outer or upper margins, and on which the carpels are borne. The hypanthium is often, at least in part, receptacular in nature, but it is sometimes fused, to a variable extent, with the walls of the carpels, the exact line of demarcation being difficult to determine.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  The family is notable for the large number of genera which are cultivated either for ornament or for food. Apomixis, either facultative or obligate, is a feature of the reproduction of several genera of the two largest European subfamilies, the Rosoideae and Maloideae; and in some of these, notably {\i Rubus}, {\i Alchemilla} and {\i Sorbus}, the number of taxa described at the level of species is very large. This situation has been met by describing and keying a number of species which represent the whole range of variation. The remaining species (at least those described in Standard Floras or important monographs) are then listed after the species which they most closely resemble, together with a note of the territories in which they occur.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Trees, shrubs or dwarf shrubs
\par
2 Petals c. 8; procumbent dwarf shrub ................................................. {\b 16. Dryas}
\par
2 Petals 0, 4 or 5
\par
3 Leaves pinnate or digitate
\par
4 Flowers in dense capitula; petals 0
\par
5 Stamens 2; fruit dry ......................................................................... {\b 15. Acaena}
\par
5 Stamens numerous; fruit fleshy ........................................... {\b 14. Sarcopoterium}
\par
4 Flowers not in dense capitula; petals 4 or 5
\par
6 Carpels and fruit exposed on the hypanthium
\par
7 Prickly; fruit a head of drupelets ........................................................ {\b 9. Rubus}
\par
7 Unarmed; fruit a head of achenes or follicles
\par
8 Carpels 5, developing into follicles ...................................................{\b 1. Sorbina}
\par
8 Carpels more than 5, developing into achenes ............................ {\b 19. Potentilla}
\par
6 Carpels enclosed in the hypanthium
\par
9 Usually spiny shrubs; carpels numerous, free .................................... {\b 10. Rosa}
\par
9 Unarmed trees; carpels 2-5, adnate to the hypanthium ................... {\b 28. Sorbus}
\par
3 Leaves simple
\par
10 Leaves opposite; sepals and petals 4 ....................................... {\b 7. Rhodotypos}
\par
10 Leaves alternate; sepals and petals 5
\par
11 Carpels not adnate to the hypanthium; fruit not a pome
\par
12 Flowers yellow ................................................................................. {\b 8. Kerria}
\par
12 Flowers white, pink, red or purple
\par
13 Leaves lobed
\par
14 Fruit of 1 or more drupelets .............................................................. {\b 9. Rubus}
\par
14 Fruit of several follicles
\par
15 Stipules absent; carpels free ............................................................ {\b 3. Spiraea}
\par
15 Stipules caducous; carpels connate at base
\par
13 Leaves not lobed
\par
16 Carpel 1; fruit a drupe .................................................................... {\b 35. Prunus}
\par
16 Carpels more than 1; fruit of several follicles
\par
17 Carpels free ..................................................................................... {\b 3. Spiraea}
\par
17 Carpels connate at base ................................................................. {\b 4. Sibiraea}
\par
11 Carpels enclosed in and adnate to the hypanthium; fruit a pome
\par
18 Flowers solitary
\par
19 Flowers less than 1 cm in diameter; fruit red or black .......... {\b 31. Cotoneaster}
\par
19 Flowers more than 1 cm in diameter; fruit brown, green or yellow
\par
20 Sepals shorter than petals, dentate .............................................. {\b 25. Cydonia}
\par
20 Sepals longer than petals, entire ................................................ {\b 33. Mespilus}
\par
18 Flowers in 2- to many-flowered inflorescences
\par
21 Walls of carpels becoming stony in fruit
\par
22 Leaves entire ......................................................................... {\b 31. Cotoneaster}
\par
22 Leaves crenate-dentate or serrate or lobed
\par
23 Evergreen; stipules caducous ................................................. {\b 32. Pyracantha}
\par
23 Deciduous; stipules persistent .................................................. {\b 34. Crataegus}
\par
21 Walls of carpels becoming cartilaginous in fruit
\par
24 Flowers in compound corymbs or panicles
\par
25 Evergreen; flowers in panicles ................................................ {\b 29. Eriobotrya}
\par
25 Deciduous; flowers in compound corymbs ................................... {\b 28. Sorbus}
\par
24 Flowers in umbels, racemes or few-flowered clusters
\par
26 Petals linear to oblong-ovate, not clawed ............................ {\b 30. Amelanchier}
\par
26 Petals obovate or orbicular, clawed
\par
27 Styles free; flesh of fruit with stone-cells ........................................ {\b 26. Pyrus}
\par
27 Styles connate at base; flesh of fruit with few or no stone-cells. .... {\b 27. Malus}
\par
1 Herbs
\par
28 Petals 0
\par
29 Leaves simple or digitately divided
\par
30 Annual stamens 1(-2) .................................................................. {\b 24. Aphanes}
\par
30 Perennial; stamens 4-10
\par
31 Carpels 5-12 ............................................................................... {\b 20. Sibbaldia}
\par
31 Carpel 1
\par
29 Leaves pinnate
\par
32 Stamens 2; hypanthium with 4 spines ...........................................{\b 15. Acaena}
\par
32 Stamens 4 or numerous; hypanthium without spines ........... {\b 13. Sanguisorba}
\par
28 Petals 4 or more
\par
33 Petals c. 8 ........................................................................................ {\b 16. Dryas}
\par
33 Petals 4, 5 or 6
\par
34 Sepals 4-6; epicalyx absent
\par
35 Flowers yellow; fruit with hooked bristles ............................. {\b 11. Agrimonia}
\par
35 Flowers white, cream, purple or red; fruit without bristles
\par
36 Stipules absent; carpels 3 .............................................................. {\b 5. Aruncus}
\par
36 Stipules present; carpels 6 or more
\par
37 Leaves pinnate, with small leaflets between the larger ones;
\par
   fruit a head of achenes ............................................................... {\b 6. Filipendula} 
\par
37 Leaves undivided, digitate, or pinnate with equal leaflets;
\par
   fruit a head of drupelets ..................................................................... {\b 9. Rubus} 
\par
34 Sepals 4-5; epicalyx-segments 4-5 
\par
38 Carpels and achenes enclosed in the hypanthium .................... {\b 12. Aremonia}
\par
38 Carpels and achenes exposed
\par
39 Leaves pinnate or lyrate
\par
40 Styles long, persistent ..................................................................... {\b 17. Geum}
\par
40 Styles short, deciduous ............................................................. {\b 19. Potentilla}
\par
39 Leaves ternate, digitate or digitately lobed
\par
41 Receptacle swollen, and fleshy or spongy in fruit
\par

\par
3}
\par