{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. C. lutetiana} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 9 (1753). 15-60 cm. Leaves truncate or slightly cordate at base, sparsely denticulate and strigulose. Bracteoles usually absent. Hypanthial tube 1-1·2 mm, about as long as ovary. Petals 2-4 × 2-2·5 mm. Filaments 2·5-5·5 mm. Disc 0·2-0·4 mm high. Fruit 3-4 × 2-2·5 mm, bilocular, with hooked bristles 0·7-1·1 mm. 2n = 22.{\i  Most of Europe except the north-east.} All except Az Bl Cr Fa Fe Is Rs (N) Sb.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. C.} ×{\b  intermedia} Ehrh.,{\i  Beitr. Naturk.}{\b  4}: 42 (1789). 10-45 cm. Leaves shallowly cordate at base, dentate, subglabrous. Bracteoles present. Hypanthial tube 0·5-1·2 mm, shorter than ovary. Petals 1·8-4 × 2-2·3 mm. Filaments 2-4 mm. Disc obscure, rarely up to 0·2 mm high. Fruit up to 2 × 1·2 mm, falling in immature state, bilocular but 1 loculus more or less abortive, with hooked bristles 0·5-0·6 mm. 2n = 22.{\i  N.W. & C. Europe, extending locally to N. Spain, N. Italy, Crna Gora, C. Russia and S. Sweden}. Au Be Br Cz Da Ga Ge Hb He Ho Hs Hu It Ju No Po Rm Rs (B, C, W) Su.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Completely sterile; the hybrid between {\b 1} and {\b 3}, usually growing with one or both parents.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 3. C. alpina} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 9 (1753). 5-30 cm. Leaves cordate, dentate, glabrous. Bracteoles present. Hypanthial tube 0·1-0·2 mm, about as wide as long, much shorter than ovary. Petals 0·6-1·4 × 0·4-0·9 mm. Filaments 1-1·5 mm. Disc obscure. Fruit 2 × 1 mm, unilocular, with often straight bristles 0·1-0·5 mm. 2n = 22. N.{\i  Europe, extending southwards in the mountains to the Pyrenees, N. Appennini and Crna Gora.} Al Au Be Br ?Co Cz Da Fe Ga Ge He Ho Hs It Ju No Po Rm Rs (N, B, C, W) Su.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 3.                    Oenothera}                    L.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  ({\i Onagra} Miller)
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc By P.H. Raven.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Annual, biennial or perennial herbs. Leaves alternate. Flowers actinomorphic, rather large, in a leafy spike; hypanthial tube conspicuous. Sepals 4, deflexed in flower; petals 4, yellow or rarely pink; stamens 8, in 2 whorls; stigma deeply 4-lobed; ovary 4-locular. Fruit an elongate, loculicidal capsule; seeds small, numerous, without a chalazal plume of hairs.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Plants of American origin cultivated for ornament in Europe and widely naturalized, usually on disturbed ground. Several other species, not described here, have been recorded as casuals.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Literature: O. Renner,{\i  Ber. Deutsch. Bot. Ges. }{\b 60}: 448-466 (1942);{\b  63}: 129-138 (1950); {\i Planta }{\b 47}: 219-254 (1956). K. Rostanski, {\i Fragm. Fl. Geobot. }{\b 11}: 499-523 (1965).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Petals pink to reddish-violet; flowers opening near sunrise ........... {\b 13. rosea}
\par
1.Petals yellow, often becoming reddish or purplish;
\par
  flowers opening near sunset
\par
2 Cauline leaves oblong-ovate or broadly oblanceolate, ±
\par
  truncate at base; plant densely hispid ....................................... {\b 10. longiflora}
\par
2 Cauline leaves lanceolate or elliptical, cuneate at base;
\par
  plant not densely hispid
\par
3 Hypanthial tube 70-100 mm ......................................................... {\b 11. affinis}
\par
3 Hypanthial tube 15-50 mm
\par
4 Capsule conspicuously enlarged distally; seeds pendent,
\par
  not sharply angled .......................................................................... {\b 12. stricta}
\par
4 Capsule not enlarged distally; seeds horizontal, sharply angled
\par
5 Sepal-apices divergent in bud; inflorescence ± nodding
\par
  at anthesis ...................................................................... {\b 7-9. parviflora} group
\par
5 Sepal-apices appressed to one another in bud; inflorescence
\par
  erect ..................................................................................... {\b 1-6. biennis} group
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Subgen. {\b Oenothera.} Annual or biennial. Cauline leaves up to 20 × 5 cm, lanceolate. Flowers nocturnal; petals yellow, often becoming purplish-red. Capsule elongate, cylindrical; seeds horizontal, sharply angled.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Because of the presence of balanced combinations of lethal genes and of self-pollination in many species of this group, progenies from individual plants breed true; this has led to the establishment of many distinctive variants in Europe and a number of them have been given specific names. Any new combination of chromosomes produces, in effect a new 'species'. Each is then characterized by a particular complex of chromosomes transmitted only through the pollen and another transmitted only through the egg. Some of the chromosome-complexes are found in more than one of these true-breeding strains, which are thus not comparable with the species recognized in any other group of flowering plants. Only the more widespread species are described here and those which seem to have originated in Europe are treated as native, although their parents were introduced deliberately or accidentally from temperate North America. It is often nearly impossible to determine dried specimens and a number of the distributions are manifestly incomplete.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1-6. O. biennis} group. Stem up to 300 cm, hairy. Inflorescence erect. Sepal-apices terminal, slender, appressed to one another in bud. Hypanthial tube 18-50 mm. Petals 12-60 mm. Style 3-60 mm. Capsule 10-40 mm, tapering above. Seeds 1·2-2 × 0·7-1 mm.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    According to the standards of Munz,{\i  N. Amer. Fl}. ed. 2,{\b  5}: 132-135 (1965), species {\b 1} and probably{\b  2} would be referred to {\i O. biennis} subsp.{\i  biennis} (subsp. {\i caeciarum }Munz) and species {\b 3} would be referred to {\i O. biennis} subsp. {\i centralis} Munz.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Plant greyish-pubescent; ovary and young fruit densely
\par
   strigose ......................................................................................... {\b 4. strigosa}
\par
1 Plant green or bluish-green; ovary and young fruit
\par
  glandular or strigulose
\par
2 Stem and ovaries without red spots
\par
3 Veins of mature leaves reddish; petals 24-30 mm ......................... {\b 1. biennis}
\par
3 Veins of mature leaves not reddish; petals more than 30 mm . {\b 6. suaveolens}
\par
2 Stem and ovaries with red spots
\par
4 Calyx red-striped or entirely red, at least on later flowers .. {\b 5. erythrosepala}
\par
4 Calyx green
\par
5 Stem up to 200 cm, not easily detached at the base;
\par
  inflorescence-axis reddish; bracts lanceolate, weakly toothed .. {\b 2. rubricaulis}
\par
5 Stem up to 300 cm, easily detached at the base; inflorescence-
\par
  axis green; bracts ovate, strongly toothed .............................. {\b 3. chicagoensis}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. O. biennis} L.,{\i  Sp. Pl.} 346 (1753) ({\i Onagra biennis }(L.) Scop.). Stem 10-150 cm, without red spots. Calyx green. Hypanthial tube 18-44 mm. Petals 24-30 mm. Style 3-17 mm. 2n = 14 (ring of 6 and ring of 8 chromosomes at meiosis).{\i  Waste ground and open habitats. Europe except the extreme north and parts of the south.} All except Bl Cr Fa Fe Is Rs (N) Sa Sb.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b 2} contains the same pollen-transmitted chromosome-complex but differs in the complex transmitted through the egg.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. O. rubricaulis} Klebahn, {\i Jahrb. Hamb. Wiss. Anst. }{\b 31} (Beih. 3): 23 (1914). Stem up to 200 cm, well-branched, with red spots. Inflorescence-axis reddish; bracts lanceolate, weakly toothed. Calyx green. Petals 22-23 mm. 2n = 14 (ring of 14 chromosomes at meiosis).•{\i  C. Europe, extending to France and Russia.} ?Br Ga Ge Hu Po Rs (C).
\par

\par
306}
\par