{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b communis}: Up to 5 m; leaves 2-5 cm, not crowded; berry broadly ellipsoid.{\i  Throughout the range of the species}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b tarentina} (L.) Arcangeli,{\i  Comp. Fl. Ital}. 258 (1882): Not more than 2 m; leaves less than 2 cm, crowded; berry subglobose.{\i  E. Spain to W. Jugoslavia; Kriti; mainly near the coast.} Co Cr Ga Hs It Ju Sa [Lu].
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 2.                Eucalyptus}                    L'Hér.
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc By N.A. Burges.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Trees with persistent or deciduous, smooth or fibrous bark. Leaves dimorphic; juvenile leaves opposite, sessile or shortly petiolate, often glaucous, frequently produced on mature trees in response to wounding; mature leaves alternate, petiolate, pendent, tough, rigid, with a prominent intramarginal vein. Flowers in umbels or solitary, closed in bud by the connate perianth-segments forming a hemispherical or conical operculum which falls off when the flower opens. Fruit a capsule, opening by valves which are described as{\i  exserted} when they project beyond the rim of the capsule and{\i  enclosed }when they remain below the rim.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 A large genus centred in Australia. Specific identification is based largely on characteristics of the bark, and on operculum and capsule-shape, although subdivision of the genus is based principally on anther-morphology. The large number of species examined in Australia all have 2n = 22.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 The species described below have been planted in Europe (mainly in S.W. Europe and Italy) on a fairly large scale for timber, for shelter, for soil-stabilization, or as an antimalarial measure. Other species occasionally planted include{\b  E. amygdalinus} Labill., {\i Nov. Holl. Pl.}{\b  2}: 14 (1806) ({\i E. salicifolius} auct.),{\b  E. cladocalyx} F. Mueller,{\i  Linnaea}{\b  25}: 388 (1853),{\b  E. gunnii} Hooker fil.,{\i  London Jour. Bot.} ({\i Hooker}){\b  3}: 499 (1844), and{\b  E. salignus} Sm.,{\i  Trans. Linn. Soc. London}{\b  3}: 285 (1797).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Literature: W. F. Blakely,{\i  A Key to the Eucalypts,} ed. 2. Canberra. 1955. A. R. Penfold & J. L. Willis,{\i  The Eucalypts.} London and New York. 1961.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Flowers solitary; fruit more than 10 mm ..................................... {\b 9. globulus}
\par
1 Flowers in umbels; fruit not more than 10 mm
\par
2 Fruit sessile or subsessile
\par
3 Umbels 3-flowered; peduncles terete ...................................... {\b 11. viminalis}
\par
3 Umbels (3-)5- to 10-flowered; peduncles compressed
\par
4 Leaves more than 18 cm; bark smooth; fruit glaucous .............. {\b 10. maidenii}
\par
4 Leaves less than 18 cm; bark fibrous; fruit not glaucous
\par
5 Peduncles 7-10 mm; fruit 7-9 × 7-9 mm, cylindrical ............... {\b 1. botryoides}
\par
5 Peduncles 25-35 mm; fruit 13-20 × 11-15 mm,
   campanulate .................................................................... {\b 5. gomphocephalus}
\par
2 Fruit distinctly pedicellate
\par
6 Peduncles compressed, angular or strap-shaped
\par
7 Fruit 5-8 mm, ovoid to hemispherical; valves strongly
\par
  exserted .......................................................................................... {\b 3. resinifer}
\par
7 Fruit 12-15 mm, cylindrical to urceolate; valves
\par
  enclosed or very slightly exserted ................................................. {\b 2. robustus}
\par
6 Peduncles terete or nearly so
\par
8 Bark smooth, white
\par
9 Peduncles 10-15 mm; fruit 7-8 × 5-6 mm, hemispherical .. {\b 7. camaldulensis}
\par
9 Peduncles 5-12 mm; fruit 6-9 × 8-10 mm, broadly turbinate .. {\b 6. tereticornis}
\par
8 Bark rough, black or reddish
\par
10 Leaves with inconspicuous veins ............................................. {\b 4}. ×{\b  trabutii}
\par
10 Leaves with prominent veins ........................................................... {\b 8. rudis}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. E. botryoides} Sm., {\i Trans. Linn. Soc. London}{\b  3}: 286 (1797). Tree up to 20 m. Bark subfibrous, persistent. Juvenile leaves 5-8 × 3-4 cm; ovate to broadly lanceolate; mature leaves broadly lanceolate-acuminate. Umbels 6- to 10-flowered; peduncles 7-10 × 4-5 mm, compressed. Operculum hemispherical, obtuse or apiculate. Fruit 7-9 × 7-9 mm, cylindrical, sessile; valves enclosed or slightly exserted. 2n = 22. [It Lu Sa Si.] ({\i S.E. Australia.})
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. E. robustus} Sm., {\i Bot. New Holl.} 39 (1795). Tree up to 12 m. Bark rough, subfibrous, persistent. Juvenile leaves up to 11 × 7 cm, broadly lanceolate to elliptic-lanceolate; mature leaves 10-18 × 4-8 cm, broadly lanceolate, long-acuminate. Umbels 5-to 10-flowered; peduncles 20-33 mm, compressed to strap-shaped. Operculum rostrate. Fruit 12-15 × 10-12 mm, cylindrical, pedicellate; valves deeply enclosed.{\i  Planted in swampy ground, often in subsaline areas}. [Ga It Lu Sa.] ({\i E. Australia}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 3. E. resinifer} Sm. in White,{\i  Jour. Voy. New S. Wales} 231 (1790). Tree up to 40 m. Bark reddish, rough, fibrous, persistent. Juvenile leaves 4-6 × 1·5-2 cm, narrowly lanceolate; mature leaves 10-16 × 2-3 cm, lanceolate, with inconspicuous veins. Umbels 5- to 10-flowered; peduncles 15-20 mm, compressed to angular. Operculum acutely conical to rostrate. Fruit 5-8 × 5-8 mm, ovoid to hemispherical, pedicellate; valves strongly exserted. [Ga Hs It Sa Lu.] ({\i E. Australia}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 4. E}. ×{\b  trabutii} Vilmorin, ex Trabut, {\i Bull. Stat. Rech. Forest. Nord Afr.}{\b  1}: 141 (1917). Like {\b 3} but juvenile leaves ovate-lanceolate; peduncles terete; operculum shorter; fruit 6 × 9 mm, more tapering towards the base. 2n = 22. [Ga It Si.]
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 A hybrid of Algerian origin, probably {\b 1} × {\b 7}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 5. E. gomphocephalus} DC.,{\i  Prodr. }{\b 3}: 220 (1828). Tree up to 40 m. Bark light grey, closely fibrous, persistent. Juvenile leaves 5-7 × 4-5 mm, broadly lanceolate. Mature leaves up to 17 × 2 cm, narrowly lanceolate, thick. Umbels 3- to 7-flowered; peduncles 25-35 × 10-15 mm, strap-shaped. Operculum hemispherical to conical. Fruit 13-20 × 11-15 mm, campanulate, smooth or with a single rib, sessile; valves shortly exserted. [Hs It Si.] ({\i Western Australia.})
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 6. E. tereticornis} Sm.,{\i  Bot. New Holl.} 41 (1795) ({\i E. umbellatus} (Gaertner) Domin, non Dum.-Courset). Tree up to 50 m. Bark smooth, irregularly blotched. Juvenile leaves 6-16 × 5-6 cm, elliptical to broadly lanceolate; mature leaves 10-21 × 1·2-2·5 cm, narrowly lanceolate. Umbels 5- to 12-flowered; peduncles 5-12 mm, almost terete. Operculum long, conical. Fruit 6-9 × 8-10 mm, broadly turbinate, pedicellate; valves strongly exserted. [It Lu.] ({\i E. Australia and Papua}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 7. E. camaldulensis} Dehnh., {\i Cat. Pl. Hort. Camald.} ed. 2, 20 (1832) ({\i E. rostratus} Schlecht., non Cav.). Spreading tree up to 15 m. Bark smooth, dull, white, deciduous. Juvenile leaves 6-9 × 2·5-4 cm, narrowly to broadly lanceolate, slightly glaucous; mature leaves 12-22 × 0·8-1·5 cm, lanceolate, acuminate, thin. Umbels 5- to 10-flowered; peduncles 10-15 mm, terete. Operculum conical to rostrate. Fruit 7-8 × 5-6 mm, hemispherical with a broad raised rim; valves exserted, incurved. 2n = 22. [Al Co Ga Gr Hs It Lu Sa Si.] ({\i Australia}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 8. E. rudis} Endl. in Endl. et al.,{\i  Enum. Pl. Hügel} 49 (1837). Tree up to 15 m with short trunk and spreading branches. Bark black, rough and persistent on trunk, smooth on branches. Juvenile leaves 10 × 7·5 cm, slightly glaucous, ovate to orbicular; mature leaves 10-15 × 1-2 cm, narrowly to broadly lanceolate, with prominent veins. Umbels 4- to 10-flowered; peduncles
\par

\par
304}
\par