{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 3.                Rotala}                     L.
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc By D.A. Webb.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Glabrous annuals with opposite, sessile leaves. Flowers minute, 4-merous, solitary in the leaf-axils, each subtended by 2 linear, whitish bracteoles. Hypanthium broadly campanulate, without visible veins; epicalyx absent; petals minute or absent. Capsule septicidal; walls with very fine horizontal striae (visible only with a microscope).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  A mainly tropical genus, known in Europe only as a weed of rice-fields.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 Leaves c. 10 mm, mostly longer than the internodes,
\par
 oblanceolate, with thickened, hyaline margin .................................... {\b 1. indica}
\par
Leaves 2-5 mm, much shorter than the internodes except near
\par
 apex of stem, subcordate-ovate, without hyaline margin ............. {\b 2. filiformis}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. R. indica} (Willd.) Koehne, {\i Bot. Jahrb. }{\b 1}: 172 (1880). Stems 10-25 cm, erect from a creeping base, rather stout; branches few and short. Leaves mostly c. 10 × 3·5 mm, oblanceolate, obtuse, with a narrow, hyaline, cartilaginous margin. Flowers c. 2·5 mm, pinkish. Sepals 1-1·5 mm, triangular, acuminate; petals 0·5 mm, persistent; stamens 4. Style 1·5 mm; capsule 2·5 mm, globose, 4-valved.{\i  Rice-fields. N. Italy, C. Portugal}. [It Lu.] ({\i S. & E. Asia.})
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 The European plant is var.{\i  uliginosa} (Miq.) Koehne, apparently introduced from Japan. Var.{\i  indica} has a narrower hypanthium and is more freely branched.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. R. filiformis} (Bellardi) Hiern in Oliver,{\i  Fl. Trop. Afr.}{\b  2}: 468 (1871). Like {\b 1} but stems up to 35 cm and more delicate; leaves 2-5 mm, ovate-subcordate (the lowest sometimes linear-oblong), without hyaline margin, much shorter than internodes except near apex of stem; flowers 1·5-2 mm; sepals deltate, not acuminate; petals absent; stamens 2; style 0·5 mm; capsule ellipsoid.{\i  Rice-fields. N. Italy.} [It.] ({\i C. & S. Africa}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 120.              TRAPACEAE}
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc Edit. †T.G. Tutin.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Flowers solitary, perigynous. Sepals, petals and stamens 4. Ovary semi-inferior, 2-locular; ovules 1 in each loculus, pendent. Fruit 1-locular, coriaceous or woody; seed solitary, with unequal cotyledons; endosperm absent. Radicle on germination penetrating the top of the fruit.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 1.                   Trapa}                    L.
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc By †T.G. Tutin.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Aquatic herbs rooted in the mud. Submerged leaves sessile, linear, entire, the lowest opposite, the others alternate; floating leaves petiolate, alternate, with broad, dentate lamina. Stipules small, caducous. Green, pinnately-branched adventitious roots arise in pairs or whorls from the lower nodes.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. T. natans} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 120 (1753). Annual, with unbranched stems 0·5-2 m. Submerged leaves caducous; floating leaves 1-4·5 cm long and wide, usually rhombic, dentate, glabrous above, pubescent, at least on the veins, beneath; base broadly cuneate or almost truncate, entire; petiole up to 17 cm, pubescent, often with a fusiform swelling. Flowers in the axils of the floating leaves; pedicels pubescent. Sepals narrowly triangular, keeled, accrescent and indurated in fruit, forming 2, 3 or 4 horns. Petals c. 8 mm, white, caducous.Nut 2-3·5 × 2-5·5 cm. 2n = c. 48.{\i  In nutrient-rich but not strongly calcareous water. S. & C. Europe, extending northwards to C. France and to} c. 57°{\i  N. in C. Russia. Sometimes cultivated elsewhere, and formerly widespread in continental N. Europe, particularly during the Sub-boreal period}. Al Au Bl Bu Cz Ga Ge Gr He Hs Hu It Ju Po Rm Rs(B,C,W K, E) †Su.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  There is great variation in the size of the fruit and in the number and degree of development of the horns. Several of these variants have been described as species or subspecies, and populations in one lake or river-system may show considerable uniformity; there is, however, overlap in characters between populations. In addition some of the variation appears to be due to edaphic factors, such as abnormally high calcium or low potassium and nitrogen concentrations. It therefore seems unjustified to give taxonomic recognition to these populations.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 121.                 MYRTACEAE}
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc Edit. S.M. Walters.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Evergreen trees or shrubs. Leaves simple, usually opposite, exstipulate, with aromatic oil-glands. Flowers hermaphrodite, actinomorphic. Calyx and corolla 4- or 5-merous. Stamens numerous. Ovary inferior, syncarpous, with axile placentation; fruit a berry or capsule.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 Shrubs; leaves opposite; fruit a berry ............................................... {\b 1. Myrtus}
\par
Trees; leaves on adult shoots alternate; fruit a woody capsule ....{\b 2. Eucalyptus}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 1.                   Myrtus}                        L.
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc By M.S. Campbell.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Shrubs with simple, opposite leaves. Flowers solitary in leaf-axils. Fruit a berry crowned by the persistent calyx-teeth.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. M. communis} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 471 (1753). Erect, much-branched shrub, up to 5 m. Twigs glandular-hairy when young. Leaves up to 5 cm, ovate-lanceolate, acute, entire, coriaceous, punctate, very aromatic when crushed. Flowers up to 3 cm in diameter, sweet-scented. Pedicels long, slender, with 2 small, caducous bracteoles. Petals suborbicular, white. Berry 7-10 × 6-8 mm, broadly ellipsoid to subglobose, usually blue-black when ripe.{\i  Scrub; usually calcifuge. Mediterranean region and S. W. Europe.} Al Az Bl Co Cr Ga Gr Hs It Ju Lu Sa Si.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Widely cultivated since ancient times; the native range is therefore very uncertain.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 In addition to the two subspecies given below, other variation has been described, but seems to show no geographical correlation.
\par

\par
303}
\par