{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 rarely stipitate-glandular; sepals patent or deflexed.{\i  Probably widespread in Europe, but rarer in the west.} Au Br Bu Cz Da Ga Ge He Hu It Ju No Po Rm Rs (B, C, W).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 25. R. caesia} Sm. in Sowerby,{\i  Engl. Bot.}{\b  33}: t. 2367 (1812) ({\i R. coriifolia }Fries,{\i  R. afzeliana} subsp.{\i  coriifolia} (Fries) R. Keller & Gams). Like {\b 23} but internodes short; leaflets pubescent to glabrous above, usually densely appressed-pubescent to almost tomentose beneath, rarely sparsely glandular; pedicels occasionally stipitate-glandular, sometimes pubescent when young; sepals patent or erect; fruits up to 25 mm, the central one often pyriform. 2n = 35.{\i  Most of Europe eastwards to Estonia and C. Ukraine.} Au Be Br Bu Cz Da Fe Ga Ge Gr He Ho Hs Hu It Ju No Po Rm Rs (B, C, W) Si Su.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 26. R. subcollina} (Christ) Dalla Torre & Sarnth.,{\i  Fl. Tirol}{\b  6}({\b 2}): 516 (1909) ({\i R. coriifolia} subsp.{\i  subcollina} (Christ) Hayek). Like {\b 23} but leaves not bluish-green or pruinose, sometimes sparsely hairy above, hairy beneath at least on the veins and sometimes glandular on veins and rhachis; sepals patent or deflexed after anthesis and usually deciduous. Probably widespread in Europe except the extreme north. Au Be ?Br Bu Cz Da Ga Ge He Hs Hu ?It Ju No Po Rm Rs (W, E) Su.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 27. R. rhaetica} Gremli,{\i  Excurs.-Fl Schweiz} ed. 4, 164 (1881) ({\i R. afzeliana} subsp.{\i  rhaetica} (Gremli) R. Keller & Gams). Like {\b 23} but stout, hooked prickles and slender, straight acicles both present; leaflets not bluish-green or pruinose, somewhat glandular and more or less hairy on both surfaces; pedicels 5-10 mm, glabrous or stipitate-glandular. • Alps. Au He It.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 28. R. obtusifolia} Desv., {\i Jour. Bot. Rédigé}{\b  2}: 317 (1809) ({\i R. tomentella} Léman,{\i  R. klukii} Besser). Stems up to 2 m, green; prickles scattered, short, stout, compressed, strongly hooked. Leaflets 5-7, 15-35 × 14-25 mm, broadly ovate, simply to compound-serrate, softly appressed-pubescent on both surfaces, sometimes pubescent only on the veins beneath, usually glandular on the veins beneath; teeth glandular, short and wide; petiole and rhachis densely pubescent, more or less glandular, covered with minute acicles. Pedicels 5-15 mm, glabrous. Sepals eglandular, deflexed and caducous after anthesis. Petals 12-18(-24) mm, white or pale pink. Disc wide, with the orifice less than 1 mm wide. Styles long-exserted, villous or rarely glabrous. Fruit 10-20 mm, ovoid or globose, glabrous, red.{\i  C., S. & N.W. Europe.} Al Au Be Br Bu Co Cz Da Ge Gr Hb He Hu It Ju Po Rm Rs (W, C) Sa Si Su.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28     {\b 29. R. corymbifera} Borkh., {\i Vers. Forstbot. Beschr. Holzart.} 319 (1790) ({\i R. dumetorum} Thuill.). Like {\b 28} but leaflets broadly elliptical to suborbicular, rarely narrower, simply serrate, sometimes glabrous above, usually eglandular. 2n = 35.{\i  Probably widespread throughout Europe but rarer in the north & north-west}. Al Au Be Bl Br Bu Co Cr Cz Fe Ga Ge Gr He Ho Hs Hu It Ju Lu No Po Rm Rs (?B, C, W, K, E) Sa Si Su Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 30. R. deseglisei} Boreau, {\i Fl. Centre Fr.} ed. 3, {\b 2}: 224 (1857). Like {\b 28} but petiole and rhachis usually glandular; pedicels and sometimes the base of the hypanthium rather sparsely stipitate-glandular; styles usually short.{\i  Mainly C. Europe; distribution not fully known}. Au Br Bu Cz Fe Ga Ge He Hu It Ju ?No Po Rs (?B, ?C, ?W) ?Su.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 31. R. abietina} Gren. ex Christ, {\i Ros. Schweiz} 132 (1873) ({\i R. obtusifolia }subsp. {\i abietina} (Gren. ex Christ) F. Hermann). Like {\b 28} but prickles more abundant, curved; leaflets compound-serrate, densely glandular; pedicels stipitate-glandular; sepals glandular on the back; fruit 10-25 mm, glabrous or densely stipitate-glandular. •{\i  Alps. }Au Ga Ge He It Ju.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    ({\b 32-38}). {\b R. tomentosa} group. Stems up to 3 m, erect. Prickles usually straight or slightly curved. Leaflets orbicular, ovate, oblong-ovate or elliptical, compound-serrate, very rarely simply serrate, usually densely tomentose, frequently glandular beneath, with a resinous smell. Pedicels usually glandular-hispid. Flowers solitary or 2-5. Sepals usually pinnatifid, usually erect after anthesis but sometimes patent or deflexed. Petals usually pink. Styles lanate or villous, very rarely glabrous. Fruit globose, ovoid or pyriform, glandular-hispid.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Sepals ± patent or deflexed after flowering
\par
2 Leaflets soft, densely tomentose or pubescent; sepals deciduous; 
\par
  styles usually villous or glabrous ............................................. {\b 32. tomentosa}
\par
2 Leaflets rough, usually sparsely tomentose or pubescent; sepals 
\par
  persistent; styles densely villous to lanate ............................ {\b 33. scabriuscula}
\par
1 Sepals erect and persistent after flowering
\par
3 Pedicels grey-puberulent and sometimes stipitate-glandular
\par
4 Young stems pruinose, glabrous, or ± pubescent; leaflets and 
\par
  pedicels eglandular .................................................................. {\b 37. heckeliana}
\par
4 Young stems not pruinose, densely pubescent; leaflets glandular, 
\par
  at least on the veins beneath ...................................................... {\b 38. orientalis}
\par
3 Pedicels stipitate-glandular but not grey-puberulent
\par
5 Prickles somewhat curved; base of sepals not swollen; sepals 
\par
  soon deciduous in fruit ............................................................... {\b 34. sherardii}
\par
5 Prickles straight; base of sepals swollen; sepals persistent in fruit
\par
6 Leaflets 30-50(-60) × 16-30 mm; young stems not pruinose ....... {\b 35. villosa} 
\par
6 Leaflets 12-35 × 8-18 mm; young stems usually pruinose ........... {\b 36. mollis}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 32. R. tomentosa} Sm., {\i Fl. Brit. }{\b 2}: 539 (1800). Compact shrub. Stems up to 2 m. Internodes long; young stems and leaves pale green; prickles curved, or nearly straight on the flowering stems, somewhat slender. Leaflets 5-7, 20-40 × 12-20 mm, ovate, ovate-lanceolate or elliptical, rarely obovate, serrate or biserrate, usually densely pubescent or tomentose on both surfaces, glandular beneath and more or less sparsely glandular above, with a resinous smell. Pedicels c. 20 mm, longer than the fruit, glandular-hispid. Sepals densely glandular on the back, deflexed to patent, deciduous after anthesis. Petals 15-25 mm, pink or white. Disc 4-6 times the diameter of the orifice. Styles glabrous or villous. Fruit ovoid, globose or pyriform, stipitate-glandular, rarely glabrous, red.{\i  Most of Europe except the extreme north.} Al Au Be Br Bu Co Cz Da Ga Ge Hb He Ho Hs Hu It Ju Lu No Po Rm Rs (B, C, W, K, ?E) Su.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 33. R. scabriuscula} Sm. in Sowerby,{\i  Engl. Bot.}{\b  27}: t. 1896 (1808). Like {\b 32} but more diffuse, with stems up to 3 m; leaflets sparsely tomentose or pubescent and often densely hairy only on the veins, rather rough to the touch, compound-serrate, teeth glandular; sepals persistent after anthesis; styles densely villous or lanate.{\i  Probably widespread in most of Europe, except the northern and eastern margins}. Au Be ?Bl Br Bu Cz Da Ga Ge He Hs Hu It Ju No Po Rm Rs (W, C, ?E)  Su.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 34. R. sherardii} Davies, Welsh Botanol. 1: 49 (1813) (R. omissa Deseglise). Like {\b 32} but more compact; stems pruinose; internodes long; leaflets biserrate, with glandular teeth; pedicels 10-15(-20) mm, as long as the fruit; sepals erect and persistent after anthesis; petals pink; styles lanate, rarely villous. 2n = 28. N., W. & C. Europe, eastwards to S.W. Finland and extending southwards to Bulgaria. ?Be Br Bu Cz Da Fe Ga Ge Hb He Hs Ju Po Su.
\par

\par
30}
\par