{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 8 Leaves orbicular to oblong-lanceolate, mostly 1-3 times
\par
  as long as wide; epicalyx-segments and sepals  usually
\par
  shorter than hypanthial tube
\par
9 Tube of hypanthium hemispherical to pelviform in fruit,
\par
  shorter than the capsule; plant glabrous; stems
\par
  extensively creeping and rooting .................................................. {\b 12. portula}
\par
9 Tube of hypanthium broadly campanulate in fruit, at
\par
  least as long as the capsule; plant often scabrid, at
\par
  least in younger parts; stems ±erect, scarcely rooting ...... {\b 11. borysthenicum}
\par
7 Tube of hypanthium cylindrical or narrowly campanulate
\par
  in fruit, distinctly longer than wide; capsule usually
\par
  ellipsoid or cylindrical
\par
10 Leaves oblong-lanceolate to broadly obovate, all
\par
   widest above the middle and most of them less than
\par
   2·5 times as long as wide ................................................. {\b 11. borysthenicum}
\par
10 Leaves linear to oblong, rarely somewhat oblanceolate,
\par
   usually parallel-sided or widest near the middle, most
\par
   of them more than 2·5 times as long as wide
\par
11 Style c. 0·25 mm; hypanthium in fruit less than twice
\par
   as long as wide ........................................................................ {\b 10. thesioides}
\par
11 Style 1·5-2 mm; hypanthium in fruit 3-6 times as long
\par
   as wide
\par
12 Epicalyx-segments less than 0·5 mm, triangular, about
\par
   equalling the sepals, involute in fruit .................................. {\b 9. tribracteatum}
\par
12 Epicalyx-segments at least 1 mm, subulate, longer than
\par
   the sepals, erect or patent in fruit
\par
13 Flowers (5-)6-merous; stamens (2-)4-6(-12); leaves
\par
   mostly more than 2 mm wide ................................................. {\b 7. hyssopifolia}
\par
13 Flowers 4(-5)-merous; stamens 2-3; leaves mostly less
\par
   than 2 mm wide ......................................................................... {\b 8. thymifolia}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. L. salicaria} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 446 (1753) (incl.{\i  L. intermedium} Colla). Erect perennial 50-150 cm, subglabrous to densely grey-pubescent. Stem with 4 or more raised lines, sparingly branched. Leaves mostly opposite or in whorls of 3 (but the upper ones sometimes alternate), ovate to lanceolate-oblong, acute, sessile, truncate and semi-amplexicaul at base. Flowers trimorphic, in whorl-like cymes in the axils of small bracts, forming long, terminal spikes. Hypanthium 4·5 × 1·5-2 mm, broadly tubular; epicalyx-segments 2·5-3 mm, subulate, longer and narrower than the deltate sepals. Petals c. 10 mm, reddish-purple. Stamens 12, some or all exserted. Capsule 3-4 mm, ovoid. 2n = 60.{\i  Fens, riversides and other damp places. Almost throughout Europe except the extreme north.} All except Az Bl Cr Fa Is Sb.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. L. virgatum} L.,{\i  Sp. Pl}. 447 (1753). Like {\b 1} but less robust and entirely glabrous; leaves linear-oblong to lanceolate, tapered to a narrow, cuneate base; epicalyx-segments 1 mm, triangular, about as long as the sepals; petals c. 7 mm.{\i  Marshes and other wet places. S.E., E. & E.C. Europe, westwards to N.W. Italy and C. Austria, and northwards to} c. 57° {\i N. in E. Russia; sometimes cultivated for ornament and locally naturalized.} Al Au Bu Cz Gr Hu It Ju Po Rm Rs (C, W, K, E) [Ga Ge].
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 3. L. junceum} Banks & Solander in A. Russell, {\i Nat. Hist. Aleppo} ed. 2,{\b  2}: 253 (1794)({\i L. graefferi} Ten., {\i L. acutangulum} auct., non Lag.,{\i  L. flexuosum} auct., non Lag.). Glabrous, usually perennial; stems usually branched from the base with decumbent, divaricate, straggling branches 20-70 cm. Leaves 8-22 × 2-11 mm, broadly elliptic-oblong to linear-oblong, mostly alternate. Flowers trimorphic, solitary in the leaf-axils, suberect. Hypanthium 5-6 mm, shorter than the subtending leaf, cylindrical-obconical, tapered gradually to the base, spotted with red near the base. Sepals broadly deltate, scarious; epicalyx-segments c. 1 mm, triangular-subulate, equalling or somewhat exceeding the sepals. Petals 5-6 mm, purple, sometimes white or cream at the base. Stamens 12, some or all exserted. Capsule much shorter than the hypanthium.{\i  Wet places. S.W. Europe and Mediterranean region}. Al Az Bl Co Cr Ga Gr Hs It Lu Sa Si Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 4. L. acutangulum} Lag., {\i Gen. Sp. Nov.} 16 (1816) ({\i L. maculatum} Boiss. & Reuter). Like {\b 3} but annual, slender, with erect or straggling stems not more than 30 cm; leaves up to 15 × 4 mm, but usually much less; hypanthium sometimes longer than the subtending leaf, green or uniformly tinged with red, but without red spots, bearing, especially in fruit, 6 narrow, hyaline, keel-like ridges decurrent from the base of the epicalyx-segments, which are about twice as long as the sepals; petals with a sharply delimited white zone at the base.{\i  Wet places. C. & S. Spain; S. France.} Ga Hs ?It ?Si.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   {\b 5. L. castellanum} González-Albo ex Borja,{\i  Anal. Inst. Bot. Cavanilles}{\b  23}: 160 (1968). Like {\b 3} but annual, slender, and smaller in all its parts; hypanthium 4-5 mm, without red spots and without prominent ridges; epicalyx-segments c. 0·5 mm, ovate-deltate, inserted below the top of the hypanthium and scarcely reaching to the sinuses between the sepals. •{\i  S.C. Spain} ({\i Prov. Albacete and Ciudad Real}). Hs.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 6. L. flexuosum} Lag.,{\i  Gen. Sp. Nov.} 16 (1816). Annual, with procumbent, flexuous, reddish branches 3-10 cm. Leaves 5-12 × 1-2·5 mm, oblanceolate-elliptical to linear, alternate, patent, yellowish-green. Flowers trimorphic, patent. Hypanthium c. 5·5 × 2 mm in fruit, cylindrical, obtuse at both ends, purple red. Sepals 1 mm, deltate, white; epicalyx-segments shorter than the sepals, obtuse, patent. Petals c. 4·5 mm, pinkish-purple distally, creamy-white at the base. Stamens 12, some or all exserted. Capsule almost as long as the hypanthium.{\i  Seasonally wet places. • C. Spain. }Hs.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Seldom collected, but very distinct. Most records under this name are referable to {\b 3}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 7. L. hyssopifolia} L., {\i Sp. Pl}. 447 (1753). Annual, with erect or ascending branches, more or less glabrous. Leaves up to 25 × 8 mm, but usually much less, alternate, usually suberect, linear to oblong. Flowers numerous, erect and appressed, (5-)6-merous, homostylous. Hypanthium 4-6 mm, obconical in flower, cylindrical in fruit. Epicalyx-segments 1-1·5 mm, subulate, about twice as long as the deltate sepals. Petals 2-3 mm, pink. Stamens usually 4-6, included. Capsule about as long as the hypanthium; style 1·5-2 mm.{\i  Disturbed or seasonally flooded ground. Europe except the north, where, however, it occurs locally as a weed or casual.} Al Au Az Be Bl Br Bu Co Cr Cz Ga Ge Gr He Hs Hu It Ju Lu Po Rm Rs (C, W, K, E) Sa Si Tu [No Su].
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 8. L. thymifolia} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 447 (1753). Like {\b 7} but usually somewhat scabrid; stems 5-12 cm, erect to procumbent; leaves 5-9 × 1-2 mm; hypanthium 3-4(-5) mm; sepals very short, almost obsolete; flowers 4(-5)-merous; petals 1-2 mm; stamens usually 2.{\i  Wet places. S.W. Europe, W. & C. Mediterranean region; S. part of U.S.S.R.} Bl Ga ?Gr Hs It Ju Lu Rs (W, K, E) Sa.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Although this species usually differs from {\b 7} by a large number of characters, the correlation between the characters is in some regions poor, and puzzling intermediate plants exist.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 9. L. tribracteatum} Salzm. ex Sprengel,{\i  Syst. Veg.}{\b  4}({\b 2}): 190 (1827) ({\i L. bibracteatum} Salzm. ex Guss.). Erect to decumbent, glabrous or scabrid annual; stem 5-30 cm, with 4 raised lines, usually with numerous divaricate branches. Leaves 3-12(-18) × 1-3(-5) mm, linear to oblong-oblanceolate, alternate, those on the main stem often much larger than those on the branches. Flowers 4- to 6-merous, solitary in the leaf-axils, numerous, subsessile; bracteoles usually as long as the hypanthium, but sometimes minute. Hypanthium 5-6 × 1 mm, narrowly cylindrical,
\par

\par
301}
\par