{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 tapered to the base. Epicalyx-segments and sepals 0·5 mm or less, subequal, inconspicuous and usually involute in fruit. Petals 2-3 mm, oblong, purple; stamens 4-6. Capsule cylindrical, equalling or slightly exceeding the hypanthium; style c. 2 mm.{\i  Seasonally wet places. S. Europe, extending northwards to W. France, Hungary and the lower Volga.} Al Bu Ga Gr Hs Hu It Lu Rm Rs (W, K, E) Sa Si Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 10. L. thesioides} Bieb., {\i Fl. Taur.-Cauc.}{\b  1}: 367 (1808) ({\i L. geminiflorum} Bertol.). Erect, glabrous, rather glaucous annual; stem 20-40 cm, simple or with a few ascending branches. Leaves 10-20 × 1-2 mm, linear to linear-oblong, acute, alternate. Flowers 4- to 6-merous, in axillary clusters of 1-4. Hypanthium 1·75-2·5 mm, narrowly campanulate in fruit, about twice as long as wide. Epicalyx-segments c. 0·5 mm, ovate-lanceolate, green, longer than the deltate, scarious sepals. Petals minute or absent; stamens 4-6, included. Capsule slightly exceeding the hypanthium; style c. 0·25 mm.{\i  Lake-margins and other wet places. S. France; Hungary; S.E. Russia; once recorded from N. Italy}. *Ga Hu ?It Rs (E).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   A very rare and imperfectly known species. The plants from France have most of the flowers in groups of 2-3; those from Russia have them solitary in the upper part of the plant. Our knowledge is, however, insufficient to justify a division into subspecies.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b    L. linifolium} Kar. & Kir., {\i Bull. Soc. Nat. Moscou }{\b 14}: 421 (1841), from C. Asia, has been recorded from one locality in Hungary. It seems very doubtful, however, that it is specifically distinct from {\i L. thesioides}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 11. L. borysthenicum} (Schrank) Litv. in Majevski,{\i  Fl. Sred. Ross.} ed. 5, 209 (1917) ({\i Peplis erecta} Req. ex Moris, {\i P. boraei }(Guépin) Jordan,{\i  Middendorfia borysthenica }(Schrank) Trautv.). Annual, usually more or less scabrid-hispid, at least above; stem 3-10(-18) cm, usually erect, but sometimes creeping and rooting for a short distance at the base. Leaves 5-20 × 2-8(-13) mm, alternate or opposite, oblong-oblanceolate to broadly obovate, sessile. Flowers (5-)6-merous, solitary (rarely in pairs) in the leaf-axils, sessile; bracteoles c. 1·5 mm, filiform. Hypanthium 2-3 mm in flower (up to 4 mm in fruit), narrowly to very broadly campanulate, 0·8-1·7 times as long as wide, often vinous red. Epicalyx-segments subulate, equalling or exceeding the deltate sepals. Petals minute, fugacious, purplish, often absent; stamens (5-)6, included. Capsule globular to shortly cylindrical or ovoid-conical, shorter than the hypanthium. 2n = 30.{\i  Seasonally wet places. S. Europe, extending northwards locally to N.W. France and S.C. Russia, but very rare in the Balkan peninsula.} Co Cr Ga Gr Hs It Lu Rs (C, W, E) Sa Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Very variable, especially in arrangement of leaves, degree of scabridity, and shape of hypanthium.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 12. L. portula} (L.) D. A. Webb,{\i  Feddes Repert.}{\b  74}: 13 (1967) ({\i Peplis portula }L.). Glabrous annual; stems up to 25 cm, extensively creeping and rooting at the nodes. Leaves 5-15 mm, obovate-spathulate, tapered to a distinct petiole, opposite, rather fleshy. Flowers 6-merous, solitary in the leaf-axils. Hypanthium c. 1·5 mm, pelviform to hemispherical, wider than long; epicalyx-segments subulate, equalling or rarely twice as long as the triangular-acuminate sepals. Petals 1 mm, purple, sometimes absent; stamens 6. Capsule subglobose, nearly twice as long as the hypanthium. 2n = 10.{\i  Wet places and in shallow water; calcifuge. Europe, except the extreme north}. All except Fa Is Rs (K) Sb.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 13. L. volgense} D. A. Webb,{\i  Feddes Repert. }{\b 74}: 13 (1967) ({\i Peplis alternifolia} Bieb.). Glabrous annual; stem 3-10 cm, erect, branched from the base. Leaves 6-0 × 1-1·5 mm, linear-oblanceolate to linear, shortly petiolate, alternate. Flowers usually 5-merous, solitary in the leaf-axils. Hypanthium 0·75 mm, pelviform, considerably wider than long; epicalyx-segments linear-subulate, longer than the hypanthium and about equalling the triangular-acuminate, red-tipped sepals. Petals absent; stamens 2. Capsule subglobose.{\i  Wet places. U.S.S.R., northwards to} c. 58°{\i  N.} ?Bu Rs (C, W, E).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 2.                  Ammannia}                    L.
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc By D.A. Webb.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Annuals with opposite, sessile leaves. Flowers 4-merous, in axillary, dichasial cymes, sometimes reduced to congested clusters. Hypanthium broadly campanulate to subglobose, distinctly veined; epicalyx present or absent; petals small, sometimes absent. Stamens 4, rarely more. Capsule irregularly circum-scissile, or dehiscing only by decay.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Style 2-3 mm
\par
2 Flowers in ± lax, distinctly pedunculate cymes ......................... {\b 1. auriculata}
\par
2 Flowers in congested, subsessile clusters .................................... {\b 2. coccinea}
\par
1 Style less than 0·5 mm
\par
3 Hypanthium and sepals glabrous; epicalyx absent ..................... {\b 3. baccifera}
\par
3 Hypanthium and sepals pubescent; epicalyx present,
\par
  its segments exceeding the sepals ............................................. {\b 4. verticillata}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. A. auriculata} Willd.,{\i  Hort. Berol.}{\b  1}: t. 7 (1803). Glabrous; stem up to 1 m, erect, subtetragonal, simple or with ascending branches. Leaves up to 90 × 8 mm, usually longer than the internodes, linear-oblong, acute to acuminate, cordate-auriculate at the base. Cymes 3- to 15-flowered, with peduncles and at least some of the pedicels clearly visible. Hypanthium 2-3 mm, campanulate; sepals reduced to very short teeth; epicalyx-segments even smaller or absent. Petals 2·5 mm, fugacious; stamens 4, rarely more. Style 2-3 mm; capsule globose, slightly exceeding hypanthium.{\i  Naturalized in rice-fields. N.W. Italy} ({\i around Novara and Vercelli}). [It.] ({\i Widespread in tropical and warm-temperate regions.})
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   The European plant is referable to var. {\i arenaria} (Kunth) Koehne, and is probably of American origin.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. A. coccinea} Rottb.,{\i  Pl. Horti Univ. Rar. Progr.} 7 (1773). Like {\b 1} but cymes very congested, without clearly visible peduncle or pedicels; hypanthium subglobose, up to 5 mm in fruit and slightly exceeding the capsule; epicalyx-segments nearly equalling sepals.{\i  Naturalized in rice-fields. Spain and Portugal.} [Hs Lu.] ({\i America, from U.S.A. to Brazil.})
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 3. A. baccifera} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 120 (1753) (incl.{\i  A. aegyptiaca} Willd., {\i A. viridis} Willd. ex Hornem.). Glabrous; stem 10-30(-60) cm, erect, simple or branched. Leaves 10-30(-70) × 4-10(-15) mm, linear-oblong to broadly oblanceolate, subacute, with cuneate to subcordate base. Flowers subsessile in crowded, axillary clusters. Hypanthium 1·5-2 mm; sepals deltate, about 2/3 as long as hypanthium; epicalyx and petals absent; stamens 4. Stigma subsessile; capsule slightly exceeding hypanthium. {\i Rice-fields and other wet places. S.E. Russia.} Rs (E). ({\i From Africa to Australia and E. Asia.})
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 4. A. verticillata} (Ard.) Lam., {\i Encycl. Méth. Bot. }{\b 1}: 131 (1783). Like {\b 3} but sepals smaller; hypanthium and sepals pubescent; epicalyx-segments conspicuous, longer than the sepals; reddish petals sometimes present; capsule concealed in hypanthium.{\i  Rice-fields, marshes and shallow water. S.E. Russia and S.E. Ukraine; naturalized in S. & E.C. Europe.} Rs (E) [?Bu Hu It Ju Rm]. ({\i S.W. Asia}.)
\par

\par
302}
\par