{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 3. O. chicagoensis} Renner ex Cleland & Blakeslee,{\i  Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. U.S.}{\b  16}: 189 (1930). Stem up to 300 cm, well-branched, with red spots. Inflorescence-axis green; bracts ovate, strongly toothed. Calyx green. Petals (12-)20-25 mm. 2n = 14 (ring of 12 chromosomes and 1 bivalent at meiosis). {\i C. Europe.} [Ga Ge It Po.] ({\i Temperate North America.})
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 4. O. strigosa} (Rydb.) Mackenzie & Bush, {\i Man. Fl. Jackson Co. Missouri} 139 (1902) ({\i O. hungarica }Borbás). Plant greyish-pubescent; stem without red spots. Inflorescence lax. Calyx reddish. Petals c. 20 mm. Ovary and young fruit densely strigose. 2n = 14 (ring of 14 chromosomes at meiosis).{\i  C. Europe.} [Au Cz Ga Ge Hu Po.] ({\i Temperate North America.})
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b  O. renneri} H. Scholz, {\i Wiss. Zeitschr. Pädag. Hochsch. Potsdam }{\b 2}: 206 (1953), from Poland and Germany (near Brandenburg), is like {\b 4} but has a dense inflorescence and green buds. It has 2n = 14 (ring of 14 chromosomes at meiosis). Here also may belong plants, having the same chromosomal configuration, which are abundantly naturalized in S. Switzerland (Ticino); they were recently incorrectly reported as {\i O. elata }Kunth, a species from Mexico and Central America.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 5. O. erythrosepala} Borbás, {\i Magyar Bot. Lapok}{\b  2}: 245 (1903) ({\i O. lamarckiana} auct., non Ser.). Stem 30-150 cm, erect, hairy, with red spots. Leaves broadly lanceolate, with crinkled margins. Calyx red-striped or entirely red, at least on later flowers. Hypanthial tube 30-50 mm. Petals 40-60 mm. Style 20-60 mm; stigma held above anthers. 2n = 14 (ring of 12 chromosomes and 1 bivalent at meiosis).{\i  Locally common in W. & C. Europe.} Au Be Br Cz ?Da Ga Ge Ho Hu It Lu Po Rm [He].
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Widely cultivated; probably of spontaneous garden origin in Europe from plants introduced from North America, and now naturalized in both continents, where it is generally accepted as a distinct species.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b O. coronifera} Renner,{\i  Planta}{\b  47}: 239 (1956), from Germany (near Berlin) and W. Czechoslovakia, is like {\b 5} but has plane, narrowly lanceolate leaves and the stigma surrounded by the anthers. It has 2n = 14 (ring of 12 chromosomes and 1 bivalent at meiosis).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 6. O. suaveolens} Pers., {\i Syn. Pl. }{\b 1}: 408 (1805). Like {\b 5} but leaves not crinkled; stem without red spots; stigma surrounded by anthers. 2n = 14 (ring of 12 chromosomes and 1 bivalent at meiosis).{\i  Probably of European origin and sparingly naturalized in scattered localities}. • Az Cz Ga Ge Hu It Po.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  The application of the name is somewhat uncertain. {\b O. grandiflora} L'Hér. in Aiton,{\i  Hort. Kew}.{\b 2}: 2 (1789), differs in its subglabrous sepals and capsules (pubescent and glandular in {\b 6}). It is probably usually cultivated but may occasionally become naturalized.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   {\b 7-9. O. parviflora} group. Stem 10-200 cm, erect or decumbent, hairy. Inflorescence more as less nodding at anthesis. Sepal-apices subterminal, divergent in bud. Hypanthial tube 15-30 mm. Petals 12-20 mm. Style 4·5-25 mm. Capsule 20-40 mm. Seeds 1·7-2·2 × 1-1·5 mm.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  The name{\i  O. muricata} L. ({\i Onagra muricata} (L.) Moench) refers to this group, but its exact application is uncertain. The distributions of the individual taxa are not at all well-known but the group as a whole occurs in the following territories: Au Be Br Bu Cz Da Ga Ge He Ho Hs Hu It Ju No Po Rm Rs (C).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Leaves white-hairy; young capsule red-striped ....................... {\b 9. ammophila}
\par
1 Leaves subglabrous; capsule not red-striped
\par
2 Root thick; inflorescence stout, leafy; sepal-apices short ......... {\b 7. parviflora}
\par
2 Root slender; inflorescence slender, lax; sepal-apices long ........ {\b 8. silesiaca}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 7. O. parviflora} L.,{\i  Syst. Nat.} ed. 10, {\b 2}: 998 (1759). Root thick. Stem slightly nodding, with indistinct red spots at the end of flowering period. Leaves subglabrous. Inflorescence stout, rather dense and leafy. Sepal-apices short, forming U-shaped pairs. Petals c. 11 mm. Capsule green. 2n = 14.{\i  Disturbed ground and other open habitats. W. & C. Europe}. [Cz Ga Ge Ho Hu It No Po.] ({\i Temperate North America}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b  O. issleri} Renner ex Rostanski,{\i  Fragm. Fl. Geobot.}{\b  11}: 514 (1965), differs in its strongly nodding stem which lacks red spots, but which may be red-striped, its sepal-apices forming V-shaped pairs and its longer petals (12-20 mm). It has 2n = 14 (ring of 14 chromosomes at meiosis), and is known from E. France (Alsace), where it is the commonest representative of the group, and Poland (near Wroclaw).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 8. O. silesiaca} Renner, {\i Ber. Deutsch. Bot. Ges.}{\b  60}: 455 (1942). Like {\b 7} but root slender; stem without red spots; inflorescence slender and lax; sepal-apices longer; petals 16-20 mm, cordate. 2n = 14 (ring of 14 chromosomes at meiosis).{\i  Disturbed ground and other open habitats. • C. Europe}. Au Cz Ge Po.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b  O. atrovirens }Shull & Bartlett, {\i Amer. Jour. Bot. }{\b 1}: 239 (1914), which is introduced from E. temperate North America and occurs in E. France (Alsace), is like {\b 8} but has linear, sepal-like petals c. 12 × 2-3 mm. It has 2n = 14 (ring of 14 chromosomes at meiosis).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 9. O. ammophila} Focke,{\i  Abh. Nat. Ver. Bremen }{\b 18}: 182 (1905). Stem up to 100 cm, decumbent, often procumbent, without red spots. Leaves white-hairy; cauline leaves dentate, bluish-green. Sepal-apices long, curved. Petals not more than 16 mm. Capsule red-striped when young. 2n = 14 (ring of 12 chromosomes and 1 bivalent at meiosis).{\i  Open, sandy habitats, especially on sea-shores. Mainly in N. & W. Europe.} ?Br Cz Da Ga Ge Ho.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b  O. syrticola}  Bartlett in E. L. Greene,{\i  Cybele Columb.}{\b  1}: 38 (1914), from E. North America, occurs sporadically in W. & C. Europe. It differs from {\b 9} in its erect stems and strongly nodding inflorescence, reddish leaf-margins, short and straight sepal-apices and in its shorter petals (not more than 13 mm). It has 2n = 14 (ring of 14 chromosomes at meiosis).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b  O. rubricuspis}  Renner ex Rostanski, {\i Fragm. Fl. Geobot.}{\b  11}: 512 (1965), from Germany (Hessen) and Belgium (Limbourg), is like {\b 9} but has erect stems up to 200 cm and entire, dark green, cauline leaves. It has 2n = 14 (ring of 14 chromosomes at meiosis).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Subgen.{\b  Raimannia }(Rose) Munz. Usually annual or biennial. Flowers nocturnal; petals yellow, becoming reddish. Capsule elongate, cylindrical; seeds pendent, not sharply angled.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 10. O. longiflora} L.,{\i  Mantissa Alt.} 227 (1771). 10-100 cm, erect, densely hispid. Basal leaves 10-15 × 1·5-2·5 cm, oblanceolate; cauline leaves 2-5 × 0·7-1·6 cm, oblong-ovate or broadly oblanceolate, denticulate; uppermost leaves 1-1·5 cm, ovate. Hypanthial tube 30-80 mm. Petals 20-40 mm. Anthers 8-10 mm; filaments 15-20 mm. Capsule 2-3 × 0·2-0·3 cm, slightly enlarged upwards. Seeds c. 1·5 mm, narrowly obovoid, smooth.{\i  Locally naturalized in S. Europe.} [Az Ga Hs.] ({\i Temperate South America}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 11. O. affinis} Camb. in St-Hil., {\i Fl. Bras. Mer.}{\b  2}: 269 (1830). 30-100 cm, erect, densely greyish-pubescent. Basal leaves
\par

\par
307}
\par