{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}
\pard\f0\fs28 absent at flowering; cauline leaves 5-9 × 0·8-1·2 cm, linear-lanceolate, remotely denticulate, undulate; uppermost leaves 3-4 × 0·4-0·5 cm, otherwise similar. Hypanthial tube 70-100 mm. Petals 32-40 mm. Stamens, capsules and seeds as in {\b 10}. 2n = 14.{\i  Coastal areas on sandy soil. Naturalized in C. & S. Portugal.} [Lu.] ({\i Temperate South America}.)
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28 Perhaps this species should be included in{\i  O. mollissima} L., as suggested by Tandon & Hecht,{\i  Cytologia }{\b 21}: 252 (1956).
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 12. O. stricta} Ledeb. ex Link,{\i  Enum. Hort. Berol. Alt.}{\b  1}: 377 (1821). 20-100 cm, erect, villous. Basal leaves 5-10 × 0·5-1·8 cm, oblanceolate or linear; cauline leaves 2-5(-9) × 0·5-3 cm, narrowly lanceolate, denticulate, undulate. Hypanthial tube 15-30 mm. Petals 20-45 mm. Anthers 7-8 mm; filaments 10-20 mm. Capsule 2-2·5 × c. 0·3 cm, conspicuously enlarged in upper half. Seeds c. 1·5 mm, narrowly obovoid, smooth. 2n = 14.{\i  Locally naturalized in several districts, mainly in W. & C. Europe.} [Az Co Ga Ge He Hs It Lu Rs (C).] ({\i Temperate South America}.)
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28   {\b  O. laciniata} Hill,{\i  Hort. Kew. }172(4) (1768) ({\i O. sinuata} L.), with sinuate-pinnatifid leaves and petals 5-18 mm, has been recorded for several countries, but does not seem to be effectively naturalized.
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28   Subgen. {\b Hartmannia} (Spach) Munz. Petals pink to red-violet. Capsule clavate, attenuate at the base, ribbed or winged. Seeds numerous, rounded.
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28   {\b 13. O. rosea} L'Hér. ex Aiton,{\i  Hort. Kew.}{\b  2}: 3 (1789). Perennial, sometimes flowering in the first year; stems up to 100 cm from a somewhat woody stock, more or less strigulose. Basal leaves 2-5 cm, subentire to coarsely pinnatifid, with petioles 1-2 cm; cauline leaves 1·5-3 cm, subentire or subpinnatifid below. Hypanthial tube 4-8 mm. Petals 4-10 × 3-4 mm. Capsule 8-10 × 3-4 mm, somewhat winged; pedicel 5-20 mm, hollow, ribbed. Seeds c. 0·6 mm, oblong-obovoid.{\i  Naturalized in S. Europe; casual elsewhere.} [Az Bl Ga Hs It Lu Si.] ({\i Warmer regions of North and South America}.)
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 4.                     Ludwigia}                  L
\par
\pard\f0\fs28\qc  ({\i Isnardia} L.,{\i  Jussiaea} L.)
\par
\pard\f0\fs24\qc By P.H. Raven.
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28 Perennial herbs of wet places. Leaves opposite or alternate. Flowers actinomorphic, axillary; hypanthial tube absent. Sepals 4 or 5, somewhat persistent in fruit; petals 0 or 5, yellow, showy; stamens 4, or 10 in 2 whorls; stigma entire; ovary 4- or 5-locular. Fruit an irregularly dehiscent capsule; seeds numerous, small, free or embedded in coherent woody blocks of endocarp.
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28 Literature: P. H. Raven,{\i  Reinwardtia }{\b 6}: 327-427 (1963).
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Leaves opposite; petals absent; stamens 4 ................................... {\b 3. palustris}
\par 1 Leaves alternate; petals present; stamens 10
\par 2 Flowering stems coarsely and densely hairy ........................ {\b 1. uruguayensis}
\par 2 Flowering stems finely hairy to subglabrous ............................. {\b 2. peploides}
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. L. uruguayensis} (Camb.) Hara,{\i  Jour. Jap. Bot.}{\b  28}: 294 (1953) ({\i Jussiaea repens} sensu Coste, non L.). Stems up to 1·5 m, floating and subglabrous in vegetative state, erect and densely hairy in flowering state. Leaves 3-13 × 0·3-2·5 cm, lanceolate, alternate. Sepals 5, 6-20 mm, hairy. Petals 12-30 mm, bright yellow. Stamens 10; filaments 2-4 mm. Capsule 13-25 × 3-4 mm, hairy. Fruiting pedicel (0·5-)2·5-6 cm. Seeds 1·5 × 1·5 mm, firmly enclosed in hard endocarp. 2n = 80.{\i  Abundantly naturalized in rivers and ditches in parts of S. France and N.E. Spain.} [Ga Hs.] ({\i North and South America}.)
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28   {\b 2. L. peploides} (Kunth) P. H. Raven,{\i  Reinwardtia}{\b  6}: 393 (1963). Like {\b 1} but leaves 1-6 × 0·4-3 cm, oblong; flowering stems, calyx and capsule finely hairy to subglabrous; fruiting pedicel 1-4 cm. 2n = 16.{\i  Naturalized in rivers in S.W. France.} [Ga.] ({\i North and South America}.)
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 3. L. palustris} (L.) Elliott,{\i  Sketch Bot. South Carol. Georgia}{\b  1}: 211 (1817) ({\i Isnardia palustris} L.). Stems 3-50 cm, glabrous, creeping. Leaves 7-45 mm, narrowly obovate, opposite. Sepals 4, 1·4-2 × 0·8-1·8 mm. Petals absent. Stamens 4; filaments 0·5-0·6 mm. Capsule 2-5 × 2-3 mm, glabrous, with green bands on the angles. Seeds 0·6-0·9 × 0·3 mm, free from endocarp. 2n = 16.{\i  Wet places. W., C. & S. Europe; rather local.} Al Au Be Br Bu Co Cz Ga Ge Gr He Ho Hs Hu It Ju Lu Po Rm Rs (W) Sa Tu.
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 5.                     Epilobium}                     L.
\par
\pard\f0\fs28\qc  ({\i Chamaenerion }Séguier)
\par
\pard\f0\fs24\qc By P.H. Raven.
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28 Perennial herbs, often flowering in the first year, overwintering by turions or rosettes, which persist about the base of the previous year's stem, or by stolons. Leaves alternate, opposite, or verticillate. Flowers actinomorphic or weakly zygomorphic, small to medium-sized, in a leafy raceme or spike, or axillary; hypanthial tube short or absent. Sepals 4, erect; petals 4, white, pink or purple; stamens 8, in 2 whorls; stigma clavate or capitate and entire, or deeply 4-lobed; ovary 4-locular. Fruit a long and slender, loculicidal capsule; seeds numerous, small, with a chalazal plume of hairs (coma).
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28   Literature: C. Haussknecht,{\i  Monographie der Gattung} Epilobium. Jena. 1884.
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Leaves alternate; flowers showy, ± zygomorphic, the style
\par  deflexed, at least before the anthers have dehisced
\par 2 Leaves lanceolate or elliptical; seeds smooth
\par 3 Inflorescence many-flowered; style 10-20 mm, becoming
\par  erect after the anthers have dehisced .................................... {\b 1. angustifolium}
\par 3 Inflorescence few-flowered; style 4-7·5 mm, deflexed
\par  throughout anthesis ..................................................................... {\b 2. latifolium}
\par 2 Leaves linear or linear-lanceolate; seeds finely papillose
\par 4 Leaves strigulose, at least along veins and on margins; style
\par  7-15 mm, becoming erect after anthers have dehisced ................ {\b 3. dodonaei}
\par 4 Leaves glabrous; style 3·5-5 mm, deflexed throughout anthesis
\par  ...................................................................................................... {\b 4. fleischeri}
\par 1 Leaves opposite or verticillate, at least below; flowers actino-
\par  morphic, the style very rarely deflexed
\par 5 Stigma distinctly 4-lobed
\par 6 Stems patent-pubescent; leaves sessile or subsessile
\par 7 Leaves semi-amplexicaul; petals usually more than 10 mm ....... {\b 5. hirsutum}
\par 7 Leaves not amplexicaul; petals less than 10 mm ................... {\b 6. parviflorum}
\par 6 Stems appressed-pubescent or subglabrous; leaves mostly petiolate
\par 8 Leaves narrowly cuneate at base; petiole 3-10 mm;
\par  petals white, later pink .......................................................... {\b 10. lanceolatum}
\par 8 Leaves rounded at base; petiole usually less than 3 mm;
\par  petals pink to purplish
\par 9 Overwintering by long, fleshy, hypogeal stolons up to
\par  10 cm; seeds 1·7-2 mm, attenuate, with a prominent beak ............. {\b 7. duriaei}
\par 9 Overwintering by turions or short, hypogeal stolons;
\par  seeds c. 1 mm, without a beak
\par 10 Leaves 3·5-8 × 1-4 cm; buds acute; petals 6-10 mm ............. {\b 8. montanum}
\par 10 Leaves 1·5 × 0·5-1·5 cm; buds obtuse; petals 3-6 mm ............. {\b 9. collinum}
\par 5 Stigma clavate or capitate, not lobed
\par 11 Stolons epigeal, filiform; leaves entire; seeds 1·5-2 mm,
\par   with a pellucid appendage ........................................................... {\b 15. palustre}
\par
\par
308}
\par
