{\rtf1\ansi \deff4\deflang1033{\fonttbl{\f4\froman\fcharset0\fprq2 Times New Roman;}}{\colortbl;\red0\green0\blue0;\red0\green0\blue255;\red0\green255\blue255;\red0\green255\blue0;\red255\green0\blue255;\red255\green0\blue0;\red255\green255\blue0;\red255\green255\blue255;\red0\green0\blue128;\red0\green128\blue128;\red0\green128\blue0;\red128\green0\blue128;\red128\green0\blue0;\red128\green128\blue0;\red128\green128\blue128;\red192\green192\blue192;}{\stylesheet{\widctlpar \f4\fs20\lang2057 \snext0 Normal;}{\*\cs10 \additive Default Paragraph Font;}}{\info{\author dddd}{\operator dddd}{\creatim\yr1998\mo10\dy28\hr15\min3}{\revtim\yr1998\mo10\dy28\hr15\min5}{\version2}{\edmins2}{\nofpages4}{\nofwords1050}{\nofchars5990}{\*\company  }{\vern57431}}\widowctrl\ftnbj\aenddoc\hyphcaps0 \fet0\sectd \linex0 {\*\pnseclvl1\pnucrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl2\pnucltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl3\pndec\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl4\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl5\pndec\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl6\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl7\pnlcrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl8\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl9\pnlcrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}
\pard\plain \li200\ \f4\fs20\lang2057 {\fs28 11 Stolons hypogeal or epigeal and leafy, or absent; leaves often
\par    toothed; seeds usually less than 1\'b75 mm, with or without appendage
\par 12 Leaves usually verticillate; seeds 1\'b78-2 mm, with a
\par    pellucid appendage ...................................................................... }{\b\fs28 11. alpestre}{\fs28 
\par 12 Leaves usually opposite; seeds 0\'b77-1\'b77 mm, with or with
\par    out appendage
\par 13 Plant creeping and rooting at the nodes .............................. }{\b\fs28 27. nerterioides}{\fs28 
\par 13 Plant not creeping and rooting at the nodes
\par 14 Inflorescence, including ovary, \'b1 conspicuously pubescent
\par    or strigulose
\par 15 Inflorescence glandular
\par 16 Seeds not striate-papillose, obovoid and rounded at ends ......... }{\b\fs28 14. roseum}{\fs28 
\par 16 Seeds striate-papillose, acuminate with a pellucid appendage
\par 17 Overwintering by turions; petals 5-6\'b75 mm, purplish-pink .................................................................................... }{\b\fs28 25. glandulosum}{\fs28 
\par 17 Overwintering by leafy rosettes; petals 2\'b75-6 mm,
\par    purplish-pink or white ......................................................... }{\b\fs28 26. adenocaulon}{\fs28 
\par 15 Inflorescence entirely eglandular or with a few glandular
\par    hairs on the calyx only
\par 18 Seeds with a pellucid appendage at apex (northern or montane plants)
\par 19 Stigma capitate, held above the anthers at anthesis;
\par    petals 5\'b75-7 mm ...................................................................... }{\b\fs28 19. atlanticum}{\fs28 
\par 19 Stigma clavate, surrounded by the anthers at anthesis; petals 3-6 mm
\par 20 Stolons epigeal, leafy; leaves ovate or elliptical;
\par    petals pale violet ............................................................................ }{\b\fs28 17. nutans}{\fs28 
\par 20 Stolons absent; leaves linear to narrowly elliptical;
\par    petals white, rarely pale pink .................................................. }{\b\fs28 16. davuricum}{\fs28 
\par 18 Seeds without a pellucid appendage at apex
\par 21 Stigma capitate; leaves with bulbils or short vegetative
\par    shoots in the axils; stems glandular .................................... }{\b\fs28 24. gemmascens}{\fs28 
\par 21 Stigma clavate; leaves without bulbils or short vegetative
\par    shoots in the axils; stems eglandular
\par 22 Stolons epigeal, leafy; calyx with a few erect,
\par    glandular hairs ......................................................................... }{\b\fs28 13. obscurum}{\fs28 
\par 22 Stolons absent; calyx eglandular ......................................... }{\b\fs28 12. tetragonum}{\fs28 
\par 14 Inflorescence, including ovary, subglabrous (small
\par    northern or montane plants)
\par 23 Stolons epigeal, leafy, sometimes inconspicuous
\par 24 Stolons short; petals white; inflorescence not or scarcely
\par    nodding before anthesis ......................................................... }{\b\fs28 22. lactiflorum}{\fs28 
\par 24 Stolons long; petals purplish-pink, more rarely white;
\par    inflorescence nodding before anthesis
\par 25 Leaves shortly petiolate; stem with weakly elevated
\par    lines decurrent from margins of petioles ..................... }{\b\fs28 20. anagallidifolium}{\fs28 
\par 25 Leaves sessile; stem with fine, not elevated lines
\par    decurrent from margins of petioles ......................................... }{\b\fs28 18. tundrarum}{\fs28 
\par 23 Stolons hypogeal or absent
\par 26 Strigulose lines decurrent from margins of petioles not
\par    elevated; petals white, rarely pink .......................................... }{\b\fs28 16. davuricum}{\fs28 
\par 26 Strigulose or smooth lines decurrent from margins of
\par    petioles elevated; petals violet or purplish to white
\par 27 Petals 2\'b75-4 mm, white; seeds c. 1\'b72 mm ............................. }{\b\fs28 22. lactiflorum}{\fs28 
\par 27 Petals 4-11 mm, violet or purplish; seeds c. 1 mm
\par 28 Petals 4-6 mm, violet; seeds finely papillose .................... }{\b\fs28 21. hornemannii}{\fs28 
\par 28 Petals 7-11 mm, bright purplish-pink; seeds smooth ......... }{\b\fs28 23. alsinifolium}{\fs28 
\par 
\par }
\pard \ {\fs28   Sect. CHIAMAENERION Tausch. Roots thick, woody, spreading. Leaves alternate. Flowers more or less zygomorphic, showy; petals entire or shallowly emarginate, violet or purplish. stigma 4-lobed. Pollen grains shed singly.
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 1. E. angustifolium}{\fs28  L.,}{\i\fs28  Sp. Pl.}{\fs28  347 (1753) (}{\i\fs28 Chamaenerion angustifolium}{\fs28  (L.) Scop.,}{\i\fs28  E. spicatum}{\fs28  Lam.). Stems up to 250 cm, erect. Leaves 2\'b75-20 \'d7 0\'b74-3\'b75 cm, lanceolate, with well-developed submarginal vein. Inflorescence a long raceme; flower-buds sharply deflexed. Style 10-20 mm, deflexed, becoming erect after anthers have dehisced and become deflexed. Seeds 1-1\'b73 mm, smooth. 2n = 36. }{\i\fs28 Almost throughout Europe, but rare in the south.}{\fs28  All except Az Bl Cr Lu Sa Sb Si.
\par 
\par   }{\b\fs28 2. E. latifolium}{\fs28  (L.)L.,}{\i\fs28  loc. cit.}{\fs28  (1753) (}{\i\fs28 Chamaenerion latifolium}{\fs28  (L.) Th. Fries & Lange). Stems 4-55 cm, decumbent. Leaves 1-7\'b75 \'d7 0\'b75-2\'b75 cm, elliptical, veins obscure. 1-to 7(-12)-flowered, leafy; flower-buds nodding just before anthesis. Style 4-7\'b75 mm, deflexed. Seeds 1\'b75-2\'b71 mm, smooth. 2n = 72.}{\i\fs28  Iceland, N.E. Russia}{\fs28 . Is Rs (N). (}{\i\fs28 N. Asia, North America.}{\fs28 )
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 3. E. dodonaei}{\fs28  Vill.,}{\i\fs28  Prosp. Pl. Dauph.}{\fs28  45 (1779) (}{\i\fs28 Chamaenerion angustissimum}{\fs28  (Weber) D. Sosn.,}{\i\fs28  C. dodonaei}{\fs28  (Vill.) Schur, }{\i\fs28 C. palustre}{\fs28  auct. mult., non (L.) Scop., }{\i\fs28 E. rosmarinifolium}{\fs28  Haenke). Stems 20-110 cm, erect. Leaves 2-2\'b75 \'d7 0\'b71-0\'b735 cm linear, strigulose, veins obscure. Inflorescence lax; flower-buds slightly nodding just before anthesis. Style 7-15 mm, at first deflexed but later erect after anthers have dehisced. Seeds 1\'b75-2 mm, papillose. 2n = 36.}{\i\fs28  C. & S. Europe, from C. France to W. Ukraine.}{\fs28  Al Au Bu Cz Ga Ge Gr He Hu It Ju Po Rm Rs (W) Si.
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 4. E. fleischeri}{\fs28  Hochst.,}{\i\fs28  Flora }{\fs28 (}{\i\fs28 Regensb}{\fs28 .)}{\b\fs28  9}{\fs28 : 85 (1 826) (}{\i\fs28 Chamaenerion rosmarinifolium}{\fs28  sensu Coste pro parte, non (Haenke) Moench). Stems 8-45 cm, decumbent, often many. Leaves 1\'b75-4 \'d7 0\'b71-0\'b76 cm, narrowly lanceolate, glabrous, veins obscure. Inflorescence subcorymbose; flower-buds slightly nodding just before anthesis. Style 3\'b75-5 mm, deflexed. Seeds 1\'b72-1\'b77 mm, papillose. 2n = 36. \bullet  }{\i\fs28 Alps; usually at higher altitudes than}{\fs28  }{\b\fs28 3}{\fs28 . Au Ga Ge He It.
\par 
\par 
\par  Sect. EPILOBIUM (Sect.}{\i\fs28  Lysimachion}{\fs28  Tausch). Roots rather slender. Leaves opposite or verticillate, at least below. Flowers actinomorphic or nearly so; petals emarginate, white, pink or purplish. Stigma 4-lobed (spp.}{\b\fs28  5-10}{\fs28 ), or entire. Pollen grains shed in tetrads.
\par 
\par   Although self-pollination is normal in most European species of this section, occasional hybrids occur between many of the species, and may best be recognized by their intermediate morphology and (usually) by their high degree of sterility. Most of the species occur on moist or disturbed ground.
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 5. E. hirsutum}{\fs28  L.,}{\i\fs28  Sp. Pl. }{\fs28 347 (1753). Stolons hypogeal, fleshy; stems up to 200 cm, robust, usually villous or tomentose. Leaves 2-12 \'d7 0\'b75-3\'b75 cm, oblong to lanceolate, sessile, semi-amplexicaul, sharply serrulate. Petals (6-)10-16 mm, bright purplish-pink. Seeds 1-1\'b75 mm, obovoid. 2n = 36.}{\i\fs28  Europe except the extreme north.}{\fs28  All except Az Fa Is Sb; only as a casual in Fe No Rs (N).
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 6. E. parviflorum}{\fs28  Schreber,}{\i\fs28  Spicil. Fl. Lips.}{\fs28  146, 155 (1771). Overwintering by rosettes; stems up to 75 cm, robust, usually villous. Leaves 2\'b75-10 \'d7 0\'b77-3 cm, oblong- to linear-lanceolate, subsessile, weakly serrulate. Petals 4-9 mm, purplish-pink.Seeds c. 1 mm, obovoid. 2n = 36.}{\i\fs28  Europe except the extreme north.}{\fs28  All except Fa Is Rs (N) Sb.
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 7. E. duriaei}{\fs28  Gay ex Godron in Gren & Godron.}{\i\fs28  Fl. Fr. }{\b\fs28 1}{\fs28 :581 (1849). Stolons hypogeal, long, fleshy; stems 10-40 cm, strigulose. Leaves 1\'b75-3\'b75 \'d7 1-2 cm, ovate-acuminate, subsessile, repand with prominent teeth. Petals 6\'b75-10 mm, pink. Seeds
\par 
\par 309}
\par }