{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}
\pard\f0\fs28 10-15 mm, terete, slender. Operculum broadly conical. Fruit 5-9 × 10-12 mm, hemispherical or with a tapering base, pedicellate; valves strongly exserted, incurved. [It Sa Si.] ({\i Western Australia.})
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 9. E. globulus} Labill.,{\i  Rel. Voy. Rech. La Pérouse }{\b 1}: 153 (1800). Tree up to 40 m. Bark smooth, deciduous. Juvenile leaves 7-16 × 4-9 cm, ovate to broadly lanceolate, cordate, very glaucous; mature leaves 10-30 × 3-4 cm, lanceolate to falcate-lanceolate, acuminate, glossy green. Flowers solitary. Operculum hemispherical, umbonate. Fruit 10-15 × 15-30 mm, depressed-globose, somewhat tapering towards the base, with 4 main ribs, sessile; valves often covered by disc. [Az Bl Ga Hb Hs It Lu Sa Si.] ({\i Tasmania}.)
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 10. E. maidenii} F. Mueller,{\i  Proc. Linn. Soc. New S. Wales }ser. 2,{\b  4}: 1020 (1890). Tree up to 40 m. Bark smooth, white, deciduous. Juvenile leaves 4-16 × 4-12 cm, ovate, cordate, amplexicaul,glaucous; mature leaves c. 20 × 2·5 cm, glossy green. Umbels 3- to 7(-10)-flowered; peduncles 10-15 mm, compressed. Operculum hemispherical to broadly conical. Fruit 8-10 × 10-12 mm, turbinate, 1- to 2-ribbed, glaucous, subsessile; valves strongly exserted, partly adnate to disc. [Hs It Lu Sa Si.] ({\i S.E. Australia}.)
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 11. E. viminalis} Labill.,{\i  Nov. Holl. Pl.}{\b  2}: 12 (1806). Tree up to 50 m. Bark smooth, white, deciduous, often hanging from the branches in long ribbons. Juvenile leaves 5-10 × 1·5-3 cm, ovate pale green, sessile, more or less amplexicaul; mature leaves 11-18 × 1·5-2 cm, lanceolate, acuminate, pale green. Umbels 3-flowered; peduncles 3-6 mm, terete. Operculum hemispherical to conical. Fruit 5-6 × 7-8 mm, spherical or slightly tapered at the base, sessile or shortly pedicellate; valves exserted, patent. [Ga Hs It Lu Si.] ({\i S. & E. Australia, Tasmania}.)
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 122.              PUNICACEAE}
\par
\pard\f0\fs24\qc Edit. †T.G. Tutin.
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28 Leaves not gland-dotted. Flowers perigynous. Sepals 5-7, valvate, persistent. Petals 5-7, imbricate and crumpled in bud. Ovary inferior, multi-locular; loculi superposed, the lower ones with axile, the upper ones with parietal placentation; styles simple; ovules numerous. Fruit berry-like, with a coriaceous exocarp and numerous seeds each surrounded by pulp.
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 1.                  Punica}                   L.
\par
\pard\f0\fs24\qc By †T.G. Tutin.
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28 Shrub or tree, sometimes spiny; twigs 4-angled. Leaves opposite, deciduous; stipules absent. Flowers hermaphrodite, terminal.
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. P. granatum} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 472 (1753). Spiny shrub or small unarmed tree. Leaves oblong-lanceolate to obovate, glabrous entire. Flowers 30-40 mm in diameter. Hypanthium coriaceous reddish. Petals red, rarely white. Fruit 5-8 cm in diameter reddish-brown; pulp surrounding seeds translucent, purple yellowish or white, acid or sweet.{\i  Cultivated for its fruit in most of S. Europe, and widely naturalized in the Mediterranean region and Portugal}. [Al Bl Bu Co Cr Ga Gr He Hs It Ju Lu Rm ?Sa ?Si Tu.] ({\i S.W. Asia}.)
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 123.        ONAGRACEAE} ({\b OENOTHERACEAE})
\par
\pard\f0\fs24\qc Edit. D.M. Moore.
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28 Herbs or shrubs. Flowers hermaphrodite, actinomorphic or weakly zygomorphic. Hypanthial tube ('calyx-tube') often present. Sepals 2, 4 or 5; petals 0, 2, 4 or 5. Stamens 2 or 4 in 1 whorl, or 8 or 10 in 2 whorls; pollen connected in masses by fine threads. Style 1; ovary inferior, 1-, 2-, 4- or 5-locular. Fruit a capsule, a berry or dry and indehiscent; seeds without endosperm.
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Sepals and petals 2; fruit indehiscent, 1- or 2-seeded ................... {\b 2. Circaea}
\par 1 Sepals 4 or 5; petals 4, 5 or 0 ; fruit a many-seeded
\par  capsule or a berry
\par 2 Shrubs; fruit a berry ...................................................................... {\b 1. Fuchsia}
\par 2 Herbs; fruit a capsule
\par 3 Sepals 4 or 5, somewhat persistent in fruit; petals 0 or 5;
\par  stamens 4 or 10 ........................................................................... {\b 4. Ludwigia}
\par 3 Sepals and petals 4, caducous; stamens 8
\par 4 Seeds with a chalazal tuft of hairs; corolla purplish-pink
\par  to white, never yellow ............................................................... {\b 5. Epilobium}
\par 4 Seeds without a tuft of hairs; corolla yellow, rarely
\par  pink or purplish .......................................................................... {\b 3. Oenothera}
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 1.                    Fuchsia}                     L.
\par
\pard\f0\fs24\qc By P.H. Raven.
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28 Shrubs. Leaves usually opposite or in whorls of 3, sometimes alternate near ends of branches. Flowers actinomorphic, large, axillary, pendent; hypanthial tube long. Sepals 4; petals 4; stamens 8 in 2 whorls; stigma entire; ovary 4-locular. Fruit a berry; seeds numerous, small.
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28 Literature: P. A. Munz, {\i Proc. California Acad. Sci.} ser. 4, {\b 25}: 1-138 (1943).
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. F. magellanica} Lam., {\i Encycl. Méth. Bot. }{\b 2}: 565 (1788). Up to 3 m. Leaves 1·5-5·5 cm, elliptic-ovate, acuminate. Flowers solitary; pedicels 2-5·5 cm. Hypanthial tube 5-10 mm, red. Sepals 12-20 mm, ovate-lanceolate, red. Petals 6-20 mm obovate, violet, rarely white. Berry 1-2 cm, black. 2n = 44. {\i Planted for hedges in the Açores, Ireland and W. Britain and locally naturalized}. [Az Br Hb.] ({\i Temperate South America}.)
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 2.                    Circaea}                       L.
\par
\pard\f0\fs24\qc By P.H. Raven.
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28 Stoloniferous perennial herbs. Leaves opposite, ovate, acuminate. Flowers actinomorphic, small, in a terminal, bracteate raceme; hypanthial tube short. Sepals 2; petals 2, white or pinkish, stamens 2; stigma entire or shallowly notched; ovary 1- or 2-locular, with one ovule in each cell. Fruit clavate, indehiscent, densely covered with bristles; seeds 1 or 2.
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Inflorescence not elongating until petals have dropped,
\par  the open flowers clustered at apex; fruit unilocular ......................... {\b 3. alpina}
\par 1 Inflorescence elongating before petals have dropped,
\par  the open flowers well-spaced; fruit ± bilocular
\par 2 Disc 0·2-0·4 mm high; plants fertile ............................................ {\b 1. lutetiana}
\par 2 Disc obscure or rarely up to 0·2 mm high; plants sterile ........{\b  2.} ×{\b  intermedia}
\par
\par
305}
\par
