{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 Subgen.{\b  Cornus}. Inflorescence an axillary umbel with yellowish-green bracts. Fruit more or less cylindrical or ellipsoid.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 4. C. mas} L., {\i Sp. Pl. }117 (1753). Shrub or small tree up to 8 m, with greenish-yellow twigs. Leaves 4-10 cm, ovate or elliptical, acute or acuminate, dull green beneath; veins 3-5 pairs. Bracts 6-10 × 3-6 mm, deciduous; pedicel about equalling bracts. Petals 2-2·5 mm, yellow. Fruit 12-15 mm, red.{\i  C. & S.E. Europe, extending to C. Italy and C. France; cultivated for ornament and for the edible fruit.} Al Au Be Bu Cz Ga Ge Gr He Hu It Ju Rm Rs (W, K) Tu [Br].
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Subgen. {\b Arctocrania} (Endl.) Reichenb. Inflorescence a terminal umbel with large, whitish bracts. Fruit globose.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 5. C. suecica} L.,{\i  Sp. Pl.} 118 (1753) ({\i Chamaepericlymenum suecicum} (L.) Ascherson & Graebner). Rhizomatous herb with erect, annual flowering stems up to 25 cm. Leaves 1-4 cm, sessile, suborbicular or ovate to elliptical, subacute. Bracts 8-16 × 5-10 mm; pedicels much shorter than bracts. Petals 1-1·5 mm, dark purple. Fruit c. 5 mm, red. 2n = 22.{\i  Calcifuge. N. Europe, extending southwards to} c. 53°{\i  N. in the Netherlands.} Br Da Fa Fe Ge Ho Is No Po Rs (N, B, C) Su.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 128.              ARALIACEAE}
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc Edit. D.A. Webb.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Shrubs or woody climbers; leaves alternate. Flowers actinomorphic, small. Calyx small or rudimentary; petals 5, free; stamens 5; ovary inferior. Fruit a berry.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 1.                     Hedera}                   L.
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc By D.A. Webb.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Stems woody, climbing or creeping, with numerous adventitious roots. Leaves simple, exstipulate, evergreen. Indumentum of stellate or peltate hairs. Flowers hermaphrodite, in globose umbels, which may be solitary or grouped in a racemose panicle. Sepals very small, deltate. Ovary 5-celled, surmounted by a conspicuous, domed disc, terminating in a single, short style. Berry globose, with 2-5 rugose, whitish seeds.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  There is little agreement among authors on the taxonomic treatment of this genus, the number of European species recognized varying in different accounts from 1 to 6.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Literature: F. Tobler,{\i  Die Gattung} Hedera. Jena. 1912. L. Lammermayr,{\i  Pflanzenareale }{\b 2}({\b 7}): Karte 65-68 (1930). G. H. M. Lawrence & A. E. Schulze, {\i Gentes Herb.}{\b  6}: 107-173 (1942).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 Leaves on non-flowering shoots usually less than 15 cm,
\par
  distinctly lobed; hairs on young shoots and inflorescence
\par
  0·15-0·4 mm in diameter, mostly with 6-16 rays ............................... {\b 1. helix}
\par
Leaves on non-flowering shoots often 15-25 cm, scarcely
\par
  lobed; hairs on young shoots and inflorescence
\par
  0·5-0·75 mm in diameter, with 15-25 rays ................................... {\b 2. colchica}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. H. helix} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 202 (1753). Stem up to 30 m, creeping or climbing. Young shoots and inflorescence densely covered with stellate to peltate hairs 0·15-0·4 mm in diameter, with (4-)6-16(-22) rays. Leaves shining, dark green, dimorphic; those of the flowering shoots (often absent in shady or cold situations) 6-10 × 2-12 cm, narrowly elliptical to suborbicular-cordate, entire; those of the non-flowering shoots up to 15 × 15 cm but usually much less, palmately 3- or 5-lobed. Petals 3-5 mm, yellowish-green, patent, later deflexed. Berry with 2-3 seeds. {\i Climbing on trees, rocks and walls, or covering the ground in woods. W., C. & S. Europe, northwards to} 60° 30'{\i  in Norway, and extending eastwards to Latvia and Ukraine}. All except Fa Fe Is Sb Rs (N, E).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Widely cultivated in gardens, where a large number of cultivars differing mainly in size, shape and colour of leaves, are known. Cuttings taken from flowering shoots form erect shrubs with leaves of one type only; these are often cultivated. The wild populations are also very variable, but beyond the recognition of three subspecies it is difficult to give satisfactory taxonomic expression to this variation.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Ripe fruit yellow ............................................................ ({\b b}) subsp. {\b poetarum}
\par
1 Ripe fruit black
\par
2 Hairs stellate, mostly with 6-10 squarrose rays,
\par
  united only at the extreme base .............................................. ({\b a}) subsp. {\b helix}
\par
2 Hairs stellate-peltate, mostly with 13-16 horizontal
\par
  rays, united for about ¼ of their length ...................... ({\b c}) subsp. {\b canariensis}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b helix} (incl.{\i  H. taurica }sensu Pojark., vix Carrière): Leaves dark green, often with paler veins, mostly longer than wide, those of the non-flowering shoots usually conspicuously 5-lobed, those of the flowering shoots elliptical, rhombic or ovate, often undulate. Hairs greyish-white, less often yellowish, stellate, with (4-)6-10(-12) squarrose rays which are united only at the extreme base. Ripe fruit black, 8-10 mm in diameter. 2n = 48.{\i  Throughout the range of the species, but rarer in the extreme south-west and south-east}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b poetarum} Nyman,{\i  Consp.} 319 (1879): Like ({\b a}) but leaves rather lighter green, and those of the non-flowering shoots less deeply lobed; ripe fruit yellow, up to 12 mm in diameter.{\i  Greece and Turkey; naturalized in France and Italy.} ({\i N. Africa, S.W. Asia}.)
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b c}) Subsp. {\b canariensis} (Willd.) Coutinho,{\i  Fl. Port.} 428 (1913): Leaves mostly wider than long, those of the non-flowering shoots reniform, rather obscurely 3-lobed, those of the flowering shoots suborbicular-cordate. Hairs usually yellowish-brown, stellate-peltate, with 12-16(-22) rays all in one plane, united at the base for about ¼ of their length. Fruit as in ({\b a}). {\i Açores, Portugal.} ({\i N.W. Africa, Atlantic Islands}.)
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Usually distinct in Europe, but apparently intergrading with ({\b a}) and ({\b b}) in N. Africa.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   {\b  H. hibernica} hort., with very large, deeply cordate leaves on the non-flowering shoots, is somewhat intermediate between ({\b a}) and ({\b c}). It seems to have originated as a wild plant in S.W. Ireland, but has not been re-discovered. Garden material has 2n = 96.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. H. colchica} (C. Koch) C. Koch, {\i Wochenschr. Gartn. Pflanzenk.}{\b  2}: 74 (1859). Like {\b 1} but leaves very large (up to 25 cm), those of the non-flowering shoots ovate-deltate, only very slightly lobed; hairs yellowish-brown, peltate, with 15-25 horizontal rays united for 1/3-1/2 of their length. Fruit black.{\i  Cultivated in gardens, especially in S. & W. Europe, and locally naturalized}. [Ga Rs (K).] ({\i Caucasus, N. Anatolia}.)
\par

\par
314}
\par