{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 35. R. villosa} L.,{\i  Sp. Pl.} 491 (1753) ({\i R. pomifera} J. Herrmann). Compact shrub up to 1·5 m. Stems with short internodes, not pruinose. Prickles slender, long, straight, somewhat inflated at the base, scarcely decurrent. Leaflets 5-7, 30-50(-60) × 16-30 mm, oblong-ovate to broadly elliptical, biserrate, pubescent to tomentose on both surfaces, often densely glandular beneath, conspicuously bluish-green, with a resinous smell; teeth glandular. Pedicels 5-10(-15) mm, about as long as the fruit, stipitate- or setose-glandular. Sepals erect and persistent after anthesis. Petals 20-25 mm, pink. Disc narrow. Styles lanate. Fruit 10-20 mm, globose to pyriform, densely stipitate-glandular, dull red.{\i  C. & S. Europe, extending northwards to the Netherlands}. Al Au Bu Ga Ge Gr He Ho Hu It Ju Po Rm Rs (C, W) [Cz Da No Rs (B) Su].
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 36. R. mollis} Sm. in Sowerby, {\i Engl. Bot.}{\b  35}: t. 2459 (1812) ({\i R. villosa }auct., non L.). Like {\b 35} but young stems usually pruinose; leaflets 12-35 × 8-18 mm, greyish-green; pedicels, sepals and sometimes fruit with sparse, slender, stipitate glands; fruit 10-15 mm, globose or broadly ovoid. 2n = 28.{\i  Mainly in N. & W. Europe, but extending locally to S.C. Russia.} Al Be Br Da Fa Fe Ga Ge Hb He Hs Ju Lu No Po Rs (B, C, W) Su.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 37. R. heckeliana} Tratt.,{\i  Rosac. Monogr.}{\b  2}: 85 (1823) ({\i R. orphanides} Boiss. & Reuter). Stems up to 1 m, somewhat pruinose when young, more or less pubescent. Prickles sparse, curved or straight. Leaflets 5-7, 15-30 × 8-22 mm, orbicular to ovate, simply serrate or biserrate, densely pubescent above, grey-tomentose beneath, usually eglandular. Flowers solitary. Pedicels c. 5 mm, usually grey-puberulent, eglandular. Sepals more or less glandular-hispid on the back, erect and usually persistent after anthesis. Petals 12-15 mm, pink. Disc narrow. Styles lanate. Fruit 10-12 mm, globose to ovoid, glabrous or stipitate-glandular, red.{\i  Mountains of E. Mediterranean region and Sicilia.} Al Cr Gr It Si.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 38. R. orientalis} Dupont ex Ser. in DC.,{\i  Prodr. }{\b 2}: 607 (1825). Like {\b 37} but usually not more than 0·5 m; young stems densely pubescent; prickles straight; leaflets usually somewhat glandular on the veins beneath; pedicels c. 10 mm, stipitate-glandular and tomentose; sepals more densely glandular-hispid on the back; fruit densely stipitate-glandular.{\i  S. Jugoslavia, N. Albania, Greece. }Al Gr Ju.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    ({\b 39-47}).{\b  R. rubiginosa} group. Erect shrubs up to 3·5 m. Prickles usually hooked or curved, sometimes mixed with acicles and glandular setae. Leaflets suborbicular, ovate, obovate or elliptical, rounded or cuneate at base, biserrate to compound serrate, glabrous or somewhat pubescent, never tomentose, more or less densely glandular-viscid beneath, smelling of apples; teeth glandular. Pedicels glabrous or glandular-hispid. Flowers solitary or 2-3. Sepals pinnatifid, erect or deflexed after anthesis. Petals small, white or pink. Styles short or long, glabrous, villous or lanate. Fruit globose, ovoid or ellipsoid, glabrous or glandular-hispid.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Pedicels and hypanthium glabrous
\par
2 Styles lanate or densely villous
\par
3 Sepals deflexed and usually deciduous after anthesis;
\par
  prickles usually mixed with acicles and glandular setae
\par
4 Leaflets 10-30 × 10-20 mm, cuneate at base; prickles 
\par
  curved or straight, mixed with setae ................................ {\b 43. caryophyllacea}
\par
4 Leaflets 8-12 × 6-10 mm, rounded at base; prickles 
\par
  curved or falcate, rarely mixed with setae .................................. {\b 47. serafinii}
\par
3 Sepals erect and persistent after anthesis; stems 
\par
  without acicles and glandular setae
\par
5 Prickles stout, curved or falcate; pedicels as long as
\par
  or longer than fruit; stems up to 3·5 m ........................................ {\b 40. elliptica}
\par
5 Prickles slender, nearly straight; pedicels c. ½ as 
\par
  long as fruit; stems not more than 0·5 m ......................................... {\b 44. sicula}
\par
2 Styles glabrous or very sparsely villous
\par
6 Leaflets 8-12 × 6-10 mm, rounded at base ................................. {\b 47. serafinii}
\par
6 Leaflets 10-30 × 12-25 mm, cuneate at base .............................. {\b 41. agrestis}
\par
1 Pedicels and hypanthium stipitate-glandular or 
\par
  glandular pubescent
\par
7 Styles glabrous or subglabrous
\par
8 Leaflets cuneate at base .............................................................. {\b 41. agrestis}
\par
8 Leaflets rounded at base
\par
9 Prickles mixed with numerous setae and stipitate glands;
\par
  stems not more than 0·5 m ............................................................ {\b 46. turcica}
\par
9 Prickles not mixed with setae and stipitate glands;
\par
  stems up to 3·5 m ..................................................................... {\b 42. micrantha}
\par
7 Styles villous or lanate
\par
10 Prickles slender, usually not mixed with glandular
\par
   setae and acicles ............................................................................. {\b 44. sicula}
\par
10 Prickles usually stout, mixed with glandular setae and acicles
\par
11 Leaflets usually pubescent and glandular on the upper surface; 
\par
   styles lanate
\par
12 Leaflets 7-15 × 5-15 mm, stems not more than 0·5 m ............ {\b 45. glutinosa}
\par
12 Leaflets 10-25 × 8-15 mm; stems up to 3 m ........................ {\b 39. rubiginosa}
\par
11 Leaflets usually glabrous or subglabrous on the upper
\par
   surface, styles villous
\par
13 Pedicels usually less than 5 mm; sepals deflexed and
\par
   deciduous after anthesis ................................................................ {\b 46. turcica}
\par
13 Pedicels 10-15 mm; sepals erect and persistent after
\par
   anthesis ................................................................................... {\b 39. rubiginosa}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 39. R. rubiginosa} L.,{\i  Mantissa Alt.} 564 (1771) ({\i R. eglanteria} L., nom. ambig.). Up to 3 m. Prickles stout, curved or falcate, usually mixed with acicles and glandular setae especially on the flowering stems. Leaflets 5-7, 10-25 × 8-15 mm, suborbicular to broadly ovate to obovate, rounded at base, compound-serrate glabrous or pubescent above, usually pubescent and more or less densely glandular beneath. Pedicels 10-15 mm, densely stipitate or setose-glandular. Sepals glandular on the back, erect and persistent after anthesis. Petals 8-15 mm, deep pink. Disc narrow, with a wide orifice. Styles short, villous or lanate. Fruit 1-1·5 cm, subglobose, ovoid or ellipsoid, glabrous or glandular-hispid, bright red. 2n = 35. {\i Most of Europe northwards to} 61°{\i  N.} Al Au Be Bl Br Bu Cz Da Ga Ge Gr Hb He Ho Hu It Ju No Po Rm Rs (B, C, W, K) Su Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 40. R. elliptica} Tausch,{\i  Flora} ({\i Regensb}.){\b  2}: 465 (1819) ({\i R. graveolens} Gren. & Godron). Like {\b 39} but stems without acicles or glandular setae; leaflets elliptical, cuneate at base, pubescent on both surfaces; pedicels glabrous; sepals eglandular on the back; fruit glabrous. W. & C. Europe, extending south-eastwards to Albania and W. Ukraine. Al Au Be Br Bu Cz Ga Ge Gr ?Hb He Hs Hu It Ju Po Rm Rs (W).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 41. R. agrestis} Savi,{\i  Fl. Pis. }{\b 1}: 475 (1798) ({\i R. sepium} Thuill., non Lam.). Up to 2 m. Internodes long; prickles curved, sometimes few or absent on the flowering shoots. Leaflets 5-7, 10-30(-50) × 12-25 mm, elliptical to oblong-obovate, acute, cuneate at base, biserrate to compound-serrate, glabrous or pubescent, always glandular, dull green; teeth glandular. Pedicels 10-20 mm, glabrous or sometimes sparsely stipitate-glandular. Sepals eglandular, glabrous, deflexed and deciduous after anthesis. Petals 10-20 mm, white. Disc wide, with a narrow orifice. Styles rather long, glabrous or slightly villous. Fruit 10-15 mm, subglobose, ovoid or ellipsoid, glabrous, red.{\i  Most of Europe, rare in the north and east.} All except Az Cr Fa Fe Is No Rs (N, B, C, E) Sb.
\par

\par
31}
\par