{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 purplish. Seeds c. 1·5 mm, fusiform, smooth, with a pellucid appendage. 2n = 36. {\i N. Europe, extending southwards in the mountains to Corse and Jugoslavia.} Al Au Br Bu Co Cz Fa Fe Ga Ge Gr He Hs Is It Ju Lu No Po Rm Rs (N, C, W) Sb Su.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 21. E. hornemannii} Reichenb., {\i Pl. Crit. }{\b 2}: 73 (1824). Stolons hypogeal, short; stems 6-25 cm, with slightly elevated pubescent lines. Leaves 2-4 × 1-1·5 cm, ovate-elliptical, weakly serrulate; petiole 2-8 mm. Inflorescence glabrescent. Petals 4-6 mm, pale violet. Seeds c. 1 mm, fusiform, finely papillose, with a pellucid appendage. 2n = 36.{\i  Wet places. Arctic and subarctic Europe}. Fe Is No Rs (N) Su.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b  E. uralense} Rupr. in E. Hofmann,{\i  Nördl. Ural}{\b  2} ({\i Fl. Bor.Ural.}): 33 (1856) described from N. Ural, is doubtfully distinct. It is said to be more glaucous, with leafy stolons and seeds c. 1·2 mm.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 22. E. lactiflorum} Hausskn., {\i Österr. Bot. Zeitschr.}{\b  29}: 89 (1879). Like {\b 21} but with short, inconspicuous, leafy, epigeal stolons; leaves very weakly serrulate; petals 2·5-4 mm, white; seeds c. 1·2 mm, finely pitted. 2n = 36.{\i  Arctic and subarctic Europe.} Fa Fe Is No Rs (N) Su.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 23. E. alsinifolium} Vill.,{\i  Prosp. Pl. Dauph.} 45 (1779). Like {\b 21} but stolons long, spreading; leaves shortly petiolate, serrulate; petals 7-11 mm, bright purplish-pink; seeds smooth. 2n = 36. •{\i   In the mountains of the greater part of Europe, and at low altitudes in the Arctic.} Au Br Bu Cz Fa Fe Ga Ge Gr Hb He Hs Is It Ju No Po Rm Rs (N, W) Su.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 24. E. gemmascens} C. A. Meyer, {\i Verz. Pfl. Cauc. }173 (1831). overwintering by turions; stems 12-50 cm, densely glandular-pubescent, with elevated lines. Leaves 2-4 × 0·8-1·5 cm, weakly serrulate, with bulbils or short vegetative shoots in axils; petioles 2-4 mm. Inflorescence canescent. Petals 6-10·5 mm, purplish-pink; stigma capitate. Seeds c. 1 mm, attenuate, papillose.{\i  Mountains of the Balkan peninsula.} Al ?Bu Gr Ju.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Plants referred to this species from France and Italy seem close to {\b 14} but further work is needed to clarify their affinities.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 25. E. glandulosum} Lehm., {\i Pugillus}{\b  2}: 14 (1830). Overwintering by turions; stems 40-80 cm, with elevated strigulose lines. Leaves 3-8 × 1-3 cm, subsessile, rounded at base, weakly serrulate. Inflorescence glandular-pubescent. Petals 5-6·5 mm, purplish-pink. Seeds c. 1 mm, attenuate, with a pellucid appendage. 2n = 36.{\i  Naturalized in N. Europe.} [Fe No ?Po Rs (N, B) Su.] ({\i N. North America}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 26. E. adenocaulon} Hausskn.,{\i  Österr. Bot. Zeitschr.}{\b  29}: 119 (1879). Overwintering by leafy rosettes; stems 10-140 cm, with elevated strigulose lines. Leaves 3-10 × 1-3 cm, shortly petiolate, serrulate. Inflorescence with glandular, greyish pubescence. Petals 2·5-6 mm, purplish-pink or white. Seeds c. 1 mm, attenuate, with a pellucid appendage. 2n = 36.{\i  Naturalized as a weed and ruderal in a large part of Europe, mainly in the north-west.} [Be Br Cz Da Fe Ga Ge Ho No Po Rs (N, B, C, W) Su.] ({\i North America}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  In Scandinavia white-flowered plants have been referred incorrectly to {\i E. rubescens} Rydb., which is a synonym of{\i  E. saximontanum} Hausskn. Very similar plants, with longer petioles (3-)4-6 mm, from Denmark, Sweden and Finland, may be referable to{\i  E. ciliatum} Rafin. ({\i E. americanum} Hausskn.), another North American species.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 27. E. nerterioides} A. Cunn., {\i Ann. Nat. Hist. }{\b 3}: 32 (1839). Stems procumbent, matted, rooting at the nodes. Leaves 3·5-10 × 3-6 mm, mostly opposite, broadly ovate, weakly toothed, shortly petiolate. Pedicels 2·5-7·5 cm, erect. Petals 2·5-4 mm, white. Seeds c. 0·7 mm, papillose. 2n = 36.{\i  Cultivated in rock-gardens and now widely naturalized in damp, stony places in Britain and Ireland.} [Br Hb.] ({\i New Zealand}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b E. inornatum} Melville, {\i Kew Bull}. {\b 14}: 298 (1960), with smooth seeds and more nearly elliptical leaves, is well naturalized in a number of parks and gardens in the Netherlands and Denmark and has been reported as a casual in Ireland.{\b  E. pedunculare} A. Cunn.,{\i  Ann. Nat. Hist.}{\b  3}: 31 (1839) ({\i E. linnaeoides} Hooker fil.), readily distinguishable by its acutely dentate leaves, is well established in two localities in W. Ireland. Both are natives of New Zealand with the same habit as {\b 27} and like it are cultivated as rock-garden plants.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 124.                 HALORAGACEAE}
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc Edit. S.M. Walters.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Herbs with exstipulate leaves. Flowers hermaphrodite or unisexual. Sepals 0, 2 or 4, small. Petals 0, 2 or 4, often caducous. Stamens 2, 4 or 8, epipetalous; anthers basifixed, 2-locular. Ovary inferior, 1- to 4-locular, with 1 pendent, anatropous ovule in each loculus; styles 1-4, usually short; stigmas feathery or coarsely papillose. Fruit a drupe, or a schizocarp separating into 1-seeded nutlets.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Literature: A. K. Schindler in Engler,{\i  Pflanzenreich}{\b  23} ({\b IV. 225}): 77-127 (1905).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 Terrestrial plants; leaves alternate, ovate to orbicular,
\par
 palmately lobed; ovary 1-locular ................................................... {\b 1. Gunnera}
\par
Submerged aquatic plants; leaves whorled, usually pinnate
\par
 with capillary segments; ovary 4-locular .............................. {\b 2. Myriophyllum}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 1.                  Gunnera}                    L.
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc By D.C.K. Cook.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Stoloniferous or rhizomatous herbs. Leaves alternate, with erect petiole and ovate to orbicular, palmately-lobed lamina. Sepals 2. Petals 0 or 2. Stamens 2. Ovary 1-locular; styles 2. Fruit a drupe.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   {\b 1. G. tinctoria} (Molina) Mirbel,{\i  Hist. Nat. Pl.} ed. 2, {\b 10}: 140 (1805) ({\i G. chilensis} Lam.). Gigantic herb with stout, horizontal rhizome. Petiole 20-150 cm, with conical spines; lamina up to 2 m, cordate-suborbicular, palmately 5- to 9-lobed; margin irregularly incise-serrate. Inflorescence a very dense-flowered and much-branched panicle up to 50 × 20 cm; flowers sessile, mostly hermaphrodite. Sepals minute. Petals 2, cucullate.{\i  Cultivated for ornament, and locally naturalized in W. Europe.} [Az Br Ga Hb.] ({\i W. South America}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 2.                Myriophyllum}                  L.
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc By D.C.K. Cook.
\par 

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Glabrous, rhizomatous, aquatic perennial herbs. Leaves (in European species) in whorls of 3-6, usually pinnatisect with capillary segments. Inflorescence an emergent spike; flowers mostly unisexual, male above, female below. Sepals 0 or 4, inconspicuous. Petals 0 or 4, caducous in male, inconspicuous or
\par

\par
311}
\par