{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}
\pard\f0\fs28\li200 28 Leaves 1-pinnate or 1-pinnatisect; segments of lower
\par   leaves ovate ............................................................................. {\b 93. Malabaila}
\par 28 Leaves 2- to 3-pinnatisect; lobes of lower leaves
\par   linear-lanceolate to setaceous
\par 29 Bracts 3-5; fruit 5-6·5 mm ....................................................... {\b 82. Palimbia}
\par 29 Bracts 0; fruit 3 mm ................................................................. {\b 84. Johrenia}
\par 27 Petals white or pinkish
\par 30 Bracts pinnatisect ..................................................................... {\b 110. Artedia}
\par 30 Bracts simple or 0
\par 31 Leaves 1-pinnate or simple .................................................. {\b 94. Tordylium}
\par 31 Leaves 2- to 3-ternate ................................................................... {\b 95. Laser}
\par 26 Margin of fruit with a wing which is thin, at least at its outer edge
\par 32 Petals yellow
\par 33 Bracteoles connate, at least at base ...................................... {\b 81. Levisticum}
\par 33 Bracteoles free or 0
\par 34 Leaves ternate ................................................................... {\b 90. Peucedanum}
\par 34 Leaves pinnate
\par 35 Leaves 1-pinnate (very rarely some 2-pinnate)
\par 36 Plant ± hispid, not pruinose; stock without fibres .................. {\b 91. Pastinaca}
\par 36 Plant nearly glabrous, pruinose; stock with abundant fibres .... {\b 99. Thapsia}
\par 35 Leaves at least 2-pinnate
\par 37 Slender annual ........................................................................ {\b 41. Anethum}
\par 37 Stout perennial
\par 38 Bracts numerous
\par 39 Dorsal ridges of fruit with wings as wide as the lateral ........... {\b 52. Cachrys}
\par 39 Dorsal ridges of fruit not or very narrowly winged
\par 40 Leaf-lobes ovate-cuneate to ovate-oblong ......................... {\b 90. Peucedanum}
\par 40 Leaf-lobes linear to linear-lanceolate ...................................... {\b 87. Ferulago}
\par 38 Bracts 0(-3)
\par 41 Lateral wings of fruit at least as wide as rest of mericarp,
\par   usually shiny
\par 42 Stock without fibres; dorsal ridges of fruit not prominent,
\par   never winged ............................................................................. {\b 80. Angelica}
\par 42 Stock with fibres; dorsal ridges of fruit prominent, often winged
\par 43 Fruit flat; secondary ridges not winged ..................................... {\b 99. Thapsia}
\par 43 Fruit convex on back; secondary dorsal-ridges ± winged  {\b 96. Elaeoselinum}
\par 41 Lateral wings of fruit narrow, not shiny
\par 44 Fruit pubescent on commissural face ................................ {\b 88. Eriosynaphe}
\par 44 Fruit glabrous on commissural face
\par 45 Bracteoles 0, rarely 1-2 and caducous; fruit flat ......................... {\b 86. Ferula}
\par 45 Bracteoles (2-)several, persistent; fruit convex on back ... {\b 90. Peucedanum}
\par 32 Petals white, pink or greenish
\par 46 Dorsal ridges of fruit winged
\par 47 Bracts 5 or more, persistent
\par 48 Young fruit densely pubescent all over ................................. {\b 97. Guillonea}
\par 48 Young fruit glabrous, or hispid on the primary ridges only
\par 49 Stem usually triquetrous; lower leaves simple or
\par   1-pinnate ................................................................................ {\b 53. Heptaptera}
\par 49 Stem terete; lower leaves 2- to 5-pinnate or ternate
\par 50 Ridges of fruit all equally and narrowly winged
\par 51 Leaves pubescent on margin and veins beneath .......... {\b 49. Pleurospermum}
\par 51 Leaves glabrous, though sometimes scabrid, on margins
\par   and veins beneath
\par 52 Basal and lower cauline leaves c.100 cm; lateral
\par   umbels usually opposite or whorled ............................ {\b 16. Molopospermum}
\par 52 Basal and lower cauline leaves 10-30 cm; lateral umbels
\par   absent or alternate
\par 53 Lateral umbels, if present, not overtopping the
\par   terminal umbel ...................................................................... {\b 77. Ligusticum}
\par 53 Lateral umbels overtopping the terminal umbel ......... {\b 50. Aulacospermum}
\par 50 At least the lateral ridges of fruit with wide wings
\par 54 Dorsal wings of fruit at least 1/2 as wide as lateral .............. {\b 98. Laserpitium}
\par 54 Dorsal wings of fruit not more than 1/4 as wide as lateral
\par 55 Plant somewhat hispid; bracts often 2- to 3-fid ......................... {\b 100. Rouya}
\par 55 Plant quite glabrous; bracts always entire ....................... {\b 96. Elaeoselinum}
\par 47 Bracts 0, rarely up to 7 and caducous
\par 56 Wings of fruit all equal and narrow
\par 57 Primary divisions of leaves erecto-patent ........................... {\b 77. Ligusticum}
\par 57 Primary divisions of leaves patent or deflexed ................ {\b 78. Cenolophium}
\par 56 Wings of fruit wide, the lateral conspicuously wider than the dorsal
\par 58 Leaf-lobes broadly ovate to suborbicular ........................... {\b 98. Laserpitium}
\par 58 Leaflobes linear to oblong-lanceolate
\par 59 Rays and top of peduncle glabrous ................................. {\b 79. Conioselinum}
\par 59 Rays or top of peduncle pubescent
\par 60 Leaf-lobes c. 10 mm ................................................................ {\b 76. Selicum}
\par 60 Leaf-lobes c. 30 mm or more .................................................. {\b 80. Angelica}
\par 46 Dorsal ridges of fruit unwinged
\par 61 Fruit not obviously compressed
\par 62 Annual; bracteoles deflexed in flower ..................................... {\b 35. Aethusa}
\par 62 Perennial or biennial; bracteoles not reflexed in flower
\par 63 Petals yellowish ......................................................................... {\b 43. Silaum}
\par 63 Petals white .................................................................................. {\b 32. Seseli}
\par 61 Fruit strongly compressed
\par 64 Fruit dark brown; wings and strong dorsal ridges
\par   sharply denticulate ....................................................... {\b 101. Melanoselinum}
\par 64 Fruit light brown or greenish; wings and dorsal ridges
\par   not denticulate
\par 65 Fruit narrowly winged, often hairy; vittae conspicuous ...... {\b 92. Heracleum}
\par 65 Fruit broadly winged, glabrous; vittae inconspicuous
\par 66 Leaves 1-pinnate or 3-foliolate ......................................... {\b 90. Peucedanum}
\par 66 Leaves at least 2-pinnate or ternate
\par 67 Leaf-lobes less than 30 mm .............................................. {\b 90. Peucedanum}
\par 67 Most leaf-lobes 30 mm or more
\par 68 Leaf-lobes linear to lanceolate .......................................... {\b 90. Peucedanum}
\par 68 Leaf-lobes ovate to suborbicular
\par 69 Bracts 3-6, persistent ......................................................... {\b 90. Peucedanum}
\par 69 Bracts 0(-3), caducous if present
\par 70 Rays puberulent on inner side ................................................. {\b 80. Angelica}
\par 70 Rays glabrous .................................................................... {\b 90. Peucedanum}
\par 25 Fruit unwinged; ridges without thickened or wing-like edge
\par
\par 316}
\par