{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 absent in female flowers. Stamens 4 or 8. Ovary 4-locular; stigmas 4, sessile or subsessile. Fruit separating longitudinally into 4 1-seeded nutlets.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Upper bracts pinnatisect, with capillary segments
\par
2 Emergent leaves sparsely glandular; hermaphrodite flowers
\par
  usually present; fruit smooth ................................................... {\b 1. verticillatum}
\par
2 Emergent leaves densely glandular; hermaphrodite flowers
\par
  absent; fruit finely tuberculate ................................................... {\b 4. brasiliense}
\par
1 Upper bracts simple, entire or serrate
\par
3 Stamens 4; bracts longer than flowers ................................ {\b 5. heterophyllum}
\par
3 Stamens 8; bracts shorter than flowers
\par
4 Flowering spike usually more than 4 cm; all flowers whorled .... {\b 2. spicatum}
\par
4 Flowering spike not more than 3 cm; upper flowers
\par
  solitary or opposite ................................................................. {\b 3. alterniflorum}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. M. verticillatum} L.,{\i  Sp. Pl.} 992 (1753). Stems up to 300 cm; perennation by clavate turions. Leaves 25-45 mm, (4-)5(-6) in a whorl, often longer than internodes; segments 24-35. Spike 7-25 cm. Flowers usually in whorls of 5; bracts pinnatisect, 1-15 times as long as the flowers. A few hermaphrodite flowers usually present between male and female flowers. Petals 2·5 mm in male flowers, absent in female. Stamens 8. Fruit c. 3 mm, subglobose, smooth. 2n = 28.{\i  Almost throughout Europe.} All except Az Co Cr Fa Sb.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   In the terrestrial state this species may be as small as 3 cm, with leaves 1 cm and with as few as 4 leaf-segments.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. M. spicatum} L.,{\i  Sp. Pl.} 992 (1753). Like {\b 1} but turions absent; leaves (3-)4(-5) in a whorl, about equalling internodes; leaf-segments 13-38; flowers in whorls of 4; bracts (except the lowest) entire and shorter than the flowers; female flowers with 4 small petals; fruit finely tuberculate.{\i  Almost throughout Europe.} All except Az Fa Sb.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 3. M. alterniflorum} DC. in Lam. & DC.,{\i  Fl. Fr.} ed 3, 5: 529 (1815). Stems up to 120 cm; turions absent. Leaves 1-2·5 cm, (3-)4 in a whorl, about equalling the internodes; segments 6-18. Spike up to 3 cm, with apex drooping in bud. Male flowers solitary or in opposite pairs, usually with rudiments of carpels. Female flowers whorled at base, in groups of 2-4 or solitary above. Bracts leaf-like, longer than the flowers at the base of the inflorescence, entire and shorter than the flowers in upper part. Hermaphrodite flowers rare. Petals 2·5 mm, yellow with red streaks. Stamens 8. Fruit 1·5-2 × c. 1·5 mm, subcylindrical, finely tuberculate. 2n = 14.{\i  Mainly in W., N. & C. Europe, but extending south-eastwards to Sicilia & W. Ukraine. }Az Be Br Co Cz Da Fa Fe Ga Ge Hb He Ho Hs Is It Lu No Po Rs (N, C, W) Sa Si Su.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 4. M. brasiliense} Camb. in St-Hil.,{\i  Fl. Bras. Mer.}{\b  2}: 252 (1830). Stems up to 200 cm, often woody at base. Leaves 4-6 in a whorl, usually longer than internodes; emergent leaves light blue-green, covered by minute, transparent, hemispherical glands; segments 8-30. Flowers unisexual, solitary, axillary; bracts pinnatisect, resembling foliage leaves. Petals 5 mm in male flowers, absent in female. Stamens 8. Fruit 1·8 × 1·2 mm, ovoid, finely tuberculate. {\i Cultivated for ornament and locally naturalized in S.W. France; frequently casual elsewhere in Europe.} [Ga.] ({\i Tropical and subtropical South America}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Male flowers have not been reported from plants grown in Europe or North America.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 5. M. heterophyllum} Michx,{\i  Fl. Bor. Amer. }{\b 2}: 191 (1803). Stems up to 100 cm. Leaves 4-6 in a whorl, either pinnatisect, with 5-12 capillary segments, or lanceolate to linear and serrate. Spike 3-35 cm, with solitary flowers borne in the axils of lance olate bracts. Flowers hermaphrodite, or occasionally female at base of inflorescence, male above. Petals 1·5-3 mm. Stamens 4. Fruit 1-1·5 mm, subglobose, each nutlet beaked and with 2 ridges on the outer face, finely tuberculate.{\i  Naturalized in S.E. Austria.} [Au Br.] ({\i E. North America.})
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    The pinnatisect leaves develop when the plant grows in low temperatures (15°C or less), and entire leaves develop when the plant grows at higher temperatures; intermediate leaves are few.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 125.            THELIGONACEAE}
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc Edit. †T.G. Tutin.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Flowers unisexual, in axillary 1- to 3-flowered clusters. Perianth present. Male flowers with 7-20 stamens. Female flowers with an inferior, unilocular ovary. Fruit a nut-like drupe. Ovule solitary, basal.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 1.                 Theligonum}                   L.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  ({\i Cynocrambe} Gagnebin)
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc By †T.G. Tutin.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Annual, glabrous and somewhat succulent herbs. Flowers green. Perianth of male flowers globose, splitting into 2-5 lobes at anthesis. Female flowers with a tubular, minutely toothed perianth.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. T. cynocrambe} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 993 (1753) ({\i Cynocrambe prostrata} Gaertner). Foetid. Monoecious. Stems 5-30 cm, ascending, swollen at nodes. Leaves ovate, entire, petiolate, the lower opposite, the upper alternate; stipules membranous, sheathing. Male flowers with a 2-partite perianth and usually 7-12 stamens; anthers long, narrowly linear. Fruit c. 2 mm, ovoid, adnate to the base of the perianth. 2n = 20.{\i  Damp or shady rocks and walls. S. Europe.} Al Bl Bu Co Cr Ga Gr Hs It Ju Lu Rs (K) Sa Si Tu.
\par

\par
312}
\par