{\rtf1\ansi \deff4\deflang1033{\fonttbl{\f4\froman\fcharset0\fprq2 Times New Roman;}}{\colortbl;\red0\green0\blue0;\red0\green0\blue255;\red0\green255\blue255;\red0\green255\blue0;\red255\green0\blue255;\red255\green0\blue0;\red255\green255\blue0;\red255\green255\blue255;\red0\green0\blue128;\red0\green128\blue128;\red0\green128\blue0;\red128\green0\blue128;\red128\green0\blue0;\red128\green128\blue0;\red128\green128\blue128;\red192\green192\blue192;}{\stylesheet{\widctlpar \f4\fs20\lang2057 \snext0 Normal;}{\*\cs10 \additive Default Paragraph Font;}}{\info{\author dddd}{\operator dddd}{\creatim\yr1998\mo11\dy11\hr17\min14}{\revtim\yr1998\mo11\dy11\hr17\min14}{\version2}{\edmins0}{\nofpages3}{\nofwords766}{\nofchars4367}{\*\company  }{\vern57431}}\widowctrl\ftnbj\aenddoc\hyphcaps0 \fet0\sectd \linex0 {\*\pnseclvl1\pnucrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl2\pnucltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl3\pndec\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl4\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl5\pndec\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl6\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl7\pnlcrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl8\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl9\pnlcrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}
\pard\plain \qc\ \f4\fs20\lang2057 {\fs28  }{\b\fs28 126.           HIPPURIDACEAE}{\fs28 
\par }{\fs24 Edit. S.M. Walters.
\par 
\par }
\pard \ {\fs28 Glabrous, aquatic herbs. Leaves simple, exstipulate, whorled. Perianth reduced to a rim around the top of the ovary. Stamen 1, anterior, median. Ovary inferior, 1-locular; ovule solitary, pendent, anatropous; integument single; micropyle closed. Style 1, simple, elongate, with stigmatic papillae throughout its length. Fruit a small nut.
\par 
\par }
\pard \qc\ {\fs28   }{\b\fs28 1.                   Hippuris}{\fs28                        L.
\par }{\fs24 By C.D.K. Cook.
\par 
\par }
\pard \ {\fs28 Flowers male, female, hermaphrodite or sterile, borne in leaf-axils, the upper sessile, the lower usually shortly pedicellate.
\par 
\par  Literature: M. E. McCully & H. M. Dale,}{\i\fs28  Canad. Jour. Bot. }{\b\fs28 39}{\fs28 : 611-625, 1099-1116 (1961).
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 1. H. vulgaris}{\fs28  L., }{\i\fs28 Sp. Pl.}{\fs28  4 (1753). Aquatic perennial with creeping rhizome from which arise erect leafy shoots (4-)30-60(-150) cm. Leaves (0\'b75-)5-8(-10) cm, obovate to linear-lanceolate, (2-)6-12(-18) in a whorl. Nut 2-3 mm, ovoid, smooth. 2n = 32.}{\i\fs28  Almost throughout Europe, but rare in the south-west and extreme south.}{\fs28  All except Az Bl ?Co Gr Sa Si Tu.
\par 
\par  A very plastic species. The submerged parts usually have long, linear-lanceolate, flaccid, light green leaves, while the emergent parts have short, linear, rigid, dark green leaves.
\par 
\par }{\b\fs28  H. tetraphylla}{\fs28  L. fil., }{\i\fs28 Suppl. }{\fs28 81 (1781), is often recognized as a distinct species with leaves very short, obovate and 4 in a whorl. These characters are to some extent under environmental control, and can be induced by conditions of high salinity or low temperature. The status of such variants is therefore doubtful.
\par 
\par }
\pard \qc\ {\fs36 UMBELLIFLORAE
\par 
\par }{\fs28  }{\b\fs28 127.             CORNACEAE}{\fs28 
\par }{\fs24 Edit. S.M. Walters.
\par 
\par }
\pard \ {\fs28 Trees or shrubs, rarely herbs. Leaves simple, exstipulate. Flowers usually hermaphrodite and 4-merous. Sepals small or almost absent; stamens usually 4, alternating with the petals. Ovary inferior, (1-)2(-4)-locular; ovules pendent, anatropous, solitary in each loculus. Fruit a drupe, rarely a berry.
\par 
\par  Literature: W. Wangerin in Engler,}{\i\fs28  Pflanzenreich}{\fs28   }{\b\fs28 41}{\fs28 (}{\b\fs28 IV. 229}{\fs28 ): 1-110 (1910).
\par 
\par }{\b\fs28  Aucuba japonica }{\fs28 Thunb., }{\i\fs28 Nova Gen. Pl. }{\b\fs28 3}{\fs28 : 62 (1783), from E. Asia, a dioecious, evergreen shrub, with dark purple flowers and red berries, is often planted for ornament and may be locally naturalized.
\par 
\par }
\pard \qc\ {\b\fs28 1.                   Cornus}{\fs28                    L.
\par }
\pard \ {\fs28 (Incl. }{\i\fs28 Chamaepericlymenum}{\fs28  Hill, }{\i\fs28 Swida}{\fs28  Opiz, }{\i\fs28 Thelycrania}{\fs28  (Dumort.) Fourr.)
\par }
\pard \qc\ {\fs24 By P.W. Ball.
\par 
\par }
\pard \ {\fs28  Deciduous trees, shrubs or rhizomatous herbs. Leaves usually opposite, entire. Petals valvate. Ovary 2-locular. Fruit a drupe with a single, 2-locular pyrene.
\par 
\par  Literature: A. I. Pojarkova,}{\i\fs28  Not. Syst.}{\fs28  (}{\i\fs28 Leningrad}{\fs28 ) }{\b\fs28 12}{\fs28 : 164 180 (1950).
\par 
\par }
\pard \li200\ {\fs28 1 Herb with annual flowering stems; inflorescence an umbel
\par   with large, white bracts exceeding the flowers ............................... }{\b\fs28 5. suecica}{\fs28 
\par 1 Shrubs or small trees; inflorescence ebracteate, or with
\par   yellowish-green bracts which do not exceed the flowers
\par 2 Inflorescence an axillary umbel with yellowish-green bracts,
\par   appearing before the leaves; petals yellow; fruit red ............................ }{\b\fs28 4. mas}{\fs28 
\par 2 Inflorescence a terminal, ebracteate corymb, appearing after
\par   the leaves; petals dull white or pale yellowish-white; fruit
\par   white or purplish-black
\par 3 Petals 4-7 mm; fruit purplish-black; largest leaves
\par   with 3-5 pairs of veins ................................................................ }{\b\fs28 1. sanguinea}{\fs28 
\par 3 Petals 3-4 mm; fruit white; largest leaves with 5-7 pairs of veins
\par 4 Pyrene ellipsoid, cuneate at base; plant without or
\par   with few stolons ................................................................................... }{\b\fs28 2. alba}{\fs28 
\par 4 Pyrene suborbicular, rounded at base; plant stoloniferous ............. }{\b\fs28 3. sericea}{\fs28 
\par 
\par }
\pard \ {\fs28  Subgen.}{\b\fs28  Kraniopsis}{\fs28  Rafin. Inflorescence a terminal, ebracteate, cymose corymb. Fruit more or less globose.
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 1. C. sanguinea}{\fs28  L.,}{\i\fs28  Sp. Pl}{\fs28 . 117 (1753) (}{\i\fs28 Thelycrania sanguinea}{\fs28  (L.) Fourr.). Shrub up to 4 m, with dark red twigs. Leaves (3-)4-10 cm, broadly elliptical or ovate, acuminate, pale green and pubescent; veins 3-5 pairs. Inflorescence 4-5 cm in diameter. Petals 4-7 mm, dull white. Fruit 5-8 mm, purplish-black. 2n = 22.}{\i\fs28  Most of Europe except the north-east and extreme north.}{\fs28  All except Az Bl Cr Fa Is Rs (N) Sb; naturalized in Fe.
\par 
\par  (}{\b\fs28 a}{\fs28 ) Subsp. }{\b\fs28 sanguinea}{\fs28 : Leaves with simple, crispate hairs beneath.}{\i\fs28  Almost throughout the range of the species}{\fs28 .
\par  (}{\b\fs28 b}{\fs28 ) Subsp. }{\b\fs28 australis}{\fs28  (C. A. Meyer) J\'e1v. in So\'f3 & J\'e1v.,}{\i\fs28  Magyar N\'f6v. K\'e9z.}{\b\fs28  1}{\fs28 : 398 (1951) (}{\i\fs28 C. australis}{\fs28  C. A. Meyer, }{\i\fs28 Thelycrania australis}{\fs28  (C. A. Meyer) Sanadze): Leaves with medifixed hairs beneath. }{\i\fs28 S.E. Europe, extending northwards to E. Czechoslovakia}{\fs28 .
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 2. C. alba}{\fs28  L., }{\i\fs28 Mantissa}{\fs28  40 (1767) (}{\i\fs28 Thelycrania alba}{\fs28  (L. Pojark.). Shrub up to 3 m, with dark red twigs; usually not stoloniferous. Leaves 4-8 cm, broadly ovate to elliptical, acute, glaucous beneath; veins 5-7 pairs. Inflorescence 3-5 cm in diameter. Petals 3-4 mm, yellowish-white. Fruit c. 8 mm, white; pyrene ellipsoid, cuneate at base.}{\i\fs28  N. Russia, southwards to }{\fs28 56\'b0}{\i\fs28  N; cultivated elsewhere for ornament and locally naturalized.}{\fs28  Rs (N, C) [Br No Su]. (}{\i\fs28 N. Asia}{\fs28 .)
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 3. C. sericea}{\fs28  L.,}{\i\fs28  Mantissa Alt.}{\fs28  199 (1771) (}{\i\fs28 C. stolonifera}{\fs28  Michx, }{\i\fs28 Thelycrania stolonifera}{\fs28  (Michx) Pojark.). Like }{\b\fs28 2}{\fs28  but with numerous stolons; leaves up to 14 cm, acuminate; pyrene subglobose, rounded at base.}{\i\fs28  Cultivated for ornament and locally naturalized}{\fs28 . [Au Br Fe He.] (}{\i\fs28 North America}{\fs28 .)
\par 
\par 313}
\par }