{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 71 Flowers yellow
\par
72 Fruit at least 3 times as long as wide
\par
73 Lobes of lower leaves broadly ovate ................................ {\b 42. Kundmannia}
\par
73 Leaf-lobes linear to linear-oblong
\par
74 Most cauline leaves with lamina; fruit with wide, rounded
\par
   ridges; plant without a ± globose subterranean stock .... {\b 12. Chaerophyllum}
\par
74 Most cauline leaves without lamina; fruit with slender,
\par
   scarcely prominent ridges; plant with a ± globose,
\par
   subterranean stock ...................................................................... {\b 24. Muretia}
\par
72 Fruit less than 3 times as long as wide
\par
75 Bracts and bracteoles 0 or few
\par
76 Leaf-lobes filiform
\par
77 Perennial or biennial; rays stout, usually c. 20, very unequal;
\par
   fruit scarcely compressed ..................................................... {\b 40. Foeniculum}
\par
77 Annual; rays slender, usually c. 40, subequal; fruit
\par
   strongly compressed ................................................................... {\b 61. Ridolfia}
\par
76 Leaf-lobes ovate to suborbicular in outline
\par
78 Stems stout, petioles of cauline leaves strongly inflated ...... {\b 20. Smyrnium}
\par
78 Stems slender; petioles of cauline leaves not inflated .......... {\b 25. Pimpinella}
\par
75 Bracts or bracteoles numerous
\par
79 Leaf-lobes lanceolate to ovate
\par
80 Leaves pinnate, oblong-lanceolate in outline ......................... {\b 83. Bonannia}
\par
80 Leaves ternate, triangular in outline
\par
81 Stem freely branched; fruit c. 3 mm ................................. {\b 60. Petroselinum}
\par
81 Stem usually simple; fruit 6-7 mm .......................................... {\b 39. Xatardia}
\par
79 Leaf-lobes filiform to linear-obovate
\par
82 Fruit almost or quite smooth; ridges very wide, corky,
\par
   ± confluent ................................................................................. {\b 52. Cachrys}
\par
82 Fruit with distinct ridges
\par
83 Bracts 0(-2) .................................................................................. {\b 32. Seseli}
\par
83 Bracts numerous
\par
84 Leaf-lobes fleshy, narrowly obovate .................................... {\b 29. Crithmum}
\par
84 Leaf-lobes not fleshy, filiform or linear
\par
85 Fruit 7-25 mm .......................................................................... {\b 52. Cachrys}
\par
85 Fruit 3-5 mm ................................................................................ {\b 32. Seseli}
\par
71 Flowers white, pink, greenish- or yellowish-white
\par
86 Fruit at least 3 times as long as wide
\par
87 Fruit without ridges, except in the usually well-developed
\par
   beak ........................................................................................ {\b 13. Anthriscus}
\par
87 Fruit with ridges; beak very short or 0
\par
88 Bracts 4-15; leaf-margin cartilaginous ..................................... {\b 70. Falcaria}
\par
88 Bracts 0(-5); leaf-margin not cartilaginous
\par
89 Fruit and ovary pubescent
\par
90 Rays 1-3; nodes swollen ..................................................... {\b 11. Myrrhoides}
\par
90 Rays 5 or more; nodes not swollen ...................................... {\b 37. Athamanta}
\par
89 Fruit and ovary glabrous; rays 4-24
\par
91 Fruit with very prominent, sharp ridges ................................... {\b 15. Myrrhis}
\par
91 Fruit with low, rounded ridges
\par
92 Bracteoles numerous; fruit at least 5 times as long
\par
   as wide ............................................................................ {\b 12. Chaerophyllum}
\par
92 Bracteoles 0 or few; fruit 3-3½ times as long as wide ............... {\b 71. Carum}
\par
86 Fruit less than 3 times as long as wide
\par
93 Fruit glabrous, not prickly, though sometimes rugose,
\par
   muricate or densely papillose
\par
94 Fruit rugose, muricate or densely papillose
\par
95 Fruit rugose or muricate
\par
96 Fruit distinctly longer than wide
\par
97 Annual; rays 2-5 ............................................................ {\b 85. Capnophyllum}
\par
97 Perennial; rays 6-10 ................................................................. {\b 51. Lecokia}
\par
96 Fruit not or scarcely longer than wide
\par
98 Stock without fibres; fruit without visible ridges ....................... {\b 18. Bifora}
\par
98 Stock with fibres; fruit with prominent,convolute ridges ..... {\b 57. Trinia}
\par
95 Fruit densely papillose
\par
99 Bracteoles 0; fruit not or scarcely longer than wide .... {\b 73. Brachyapium}
\par
99 Bracteoles present; fruit distinctly longer than wide ........ {\b 32. Seseli}
\par
94 Fruit smooth, except for the longitudinal ridges
\par
100 Fruit globose; mericarps not separating at maturity ..... {\b 17. Coriandrum}
\par
100 Fruit usually ovoid; mericarps readily separating at maturity
\par
101 Lowest leaves 1-pinnate or simple
\par
102 stems creeping and often rooting at nodes
\par
103 Leaf-segments linear .............................................................. {\b 69. Thorella}
\par
103 Leaf-segments ovate
\par
104 Bracts 0, or few and entire ........................................................ {\b 59. Apium}
\par
104 Bracts numerous, large, pinnatisect .......................................... {\b 28. Berula}
\par
102 Stems ± erect, not rooting at nodes
\par
105 Upper leaves with filiform to narrowly oblong, ±
\par
    parallel-sided lobes, or without lamina
\par
106 Upper leaves palmately divided into filiform lobes ........... {\b 25. Pimpinella}
\par
106 Upper leaves pinnately divided into linear to oblong
\par
    lobes, or without lamina
\par
107 At least some bracts 3-fid or pinnatisect ................................... {\b 66. Ammi}
\par
107 Bracts entire or 0
\par
108 Bracteoles 0, rarely 1-3 and caducous
\par
109 Upper petioles strongly inflated; rays subequal ................. {\b 25. Pimpinella}
\par
109 Upper petioles scarcely inflated; rays very unequal ................ {\b 71. Carum}
\par
108 Bracteoles several, persistent
\par
110 Bracteoles not more than ¼ as long as longest pedicels ............ {\b 62. Sison}
\par
110 Bracteoles more than ½ as long as longest pedicels
\par
111 Stems stout, not branched at base; rays 0·5-1·5 mm in diameter;
\par
    fruit usually longer than pedicel ............................................. {\b 33. Oenanthe}
\par
111 Stems slender, branched at base; rays not more than
\par
    0·25 mm in diameter; fruit usually shorter than pedicel .......... {\b 67. Ptychotis}
\par
105 Upper leaves with lanceolate to ovate or obovate lobes
\par
    with distinctly curved sides
\par
112 Bracts 0, rarely 1-3 and caducous
\par
113 Stem branched .................................................................... {\b 25. Pimpinella}
\par
113 Stem simple .......................................................................... {\b 74. Endressia}
\par
112 Bracts numerous, persistent
\par
114 Stylopodium conical ................................................................. {\b 28. Berula}
\par
114 Stylopodium nearly flat
\par
115 Lower leaves with 3-5 segments .......................................... {\b 48. Hladnikia}
\par
115 Lower leaves with at least 9 segments
\par
116 Leaf-segments serrate ................................................................. {\b 27. Sium}
\par
116 Leaf-segments lobed .................................................................. {\b 32. Seseli}
\par

\par
317}
\par