{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 155 Fruit ± hairy with smooth, not glochidiate hairs
\par
156 Lower leaves simple or 1-pinnate
\par
157 Bracts 0, or few and small .................................................. {\b 25. Pimpinella}
\par
157 Bracts several, at least 20 mm
\par
158 Lower leaves simple or shallowly lobed ............................ {\b 54. Magydaris}
\par
158 Lower leaves pinnate ................................................................. {\b 32. Seseli}
\par
156 Lower leaves at least 2-pinnate
\par
159 Bracteoles 0(-2)
\par
160 Slender annual up to 15 cm ........................................... {\b 73. Brachyapium}
\par
160 Perennial (10-)30-100 cm .................................................. {\b 25. Pimpinella}
\par
159 Bracteoles 3 or more, sometimes connate
\par
161 Bracts as long as or longer than rays
\par
162 Slender annual; rays 1-5 ...................................................... {\b 58. Cuminum}
\par
162 Stout perennial or biennial; rays(10-)20-60 ............................... {\b 32. Seseli}
\par
161 Bracts much shorter than rays
\par
163 Bracteoles connate, at least at base ........................................... {\b 32. Seseli}
\par
163 Bracteoles free
\par
164 Fruit distinctly narrowed below the stylopodium .............. {\b 37. Athamanta}
\par
164 Fruit ± truncate at apex ............................................................. {\b 32. Seseli}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc   Subfam.     {\b  Hydrocotyloideae}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Leaves usually stipulate. Endocarp woody; vittae absent, at least in the ripe fruit.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc   {\b 1.                Hydrocotyle}                   L.
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc By J.F.M. Cannon.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Perennial. Stipules present. Inflorescence a simple umbel, or flowers in whorls. Fruit ovoid-ellipsoid to suborbicular, strongly compressed laterally; fruit-wall with a woody inner layer. Carpophore absent. Ridges prominent to obsolete; vittae conspicuous to obsolete.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 All species occur in marshy ground or in shallow water.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Leaves with a deep basal sinus
\par
2 Petioles 2-3 mm thick, very soft and ± fleshy .................... {\b 1. ranunculoides}
\par
2 Petioles less than 1 mm thick
\par
3 Leaves glabrous or rarely with scattered hairs; umbel
\par
  3- to 10-flowered; lateral ridges of fruit prominent ............ {\b 4. sibthorpioides}
\par
3 Leaves usually hispid to pubescent; umbel 10- to 20-flowered;
\par
  lateral ridges of fruit conspicuous but not prominent ................. {\b 5. moschata}
\par
1 Leaves peltate
\par
4 Inflorescence of whorled branches which bear whorls of flowers;
\par
  fruit distinctly pedicellate ........................................................ {\b 2. bonariensis}
\par
4 Inflorescence simple (rarely branched); flowers in whorls;
\par
  fruit nearly sessile ......................................................................... {\b 3. vulgaris}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. H. ranunculoides} L. fil.,{\i  Suppl.} 177 (1781) ({\i H. natans} Cyr.). Stems floating or creeping, rooting profusely at the nodes. Petioles up to 35 cm; leaves reniform to suborbicular with a deep basal sinus, crenate to lobed. Peduncles much shorter than the leaves. Inflorescence a simple umbel of 5-10 flowers. Fruit 2 × 3 mm, pedicellate, suborbicular; ridges not prominent.{\i  Perhaps native in Italy, Sardegna and Sicilia.} *It *Sa *Si [Hs]. North America
\pard\f0\fs28 .)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. H. bonariensis} Commerson ex Lam.,{\i  Encycl. Méth. Bot.}{\b  3}: 153 (1789). Stems creeping, not rooting as profusely at the nodes as {\b 1}. Petioles up to 35 cm; leaves peltate, orbicular-ovate, crenate. Inflorescence of whorled branches which bear whorls of flowers, equalling or exceeding the leaves. Fruit 1·5 × 3·5 mm, cordate at the base, pedicellate, with prominent, almost winged ridges. {\i Brackish dune-slacks. Naturalized in France, Italy, Spain and Portugal.} [Ga Hs It Lu.] ({\i Temperate South America.})
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 3. H. vulgaris} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 234 (1753). Stems creeping and rooting at the nodes. Petioles up to 25 cm, sometimes with long patent hairs; leaves suborbicular, crenate, with 6-10 veins. Inflorescence ½ as long as subtending petiole; flowers in whorls. Fruit 2 mm wide, very shortly pedicellate, cordate at the base, with evident ridges. 2n = 96.{\i  Shallow fresh water and damp places. W., C. & S. Europe, extending to} c. 60°{\i  N. in Norway and Sweden and to White Russia.} Al Au Az Be Br Co Cz Da Ga Ge Gr Hb He Ho Hs Hu It Ju Lu No Po Rs (B,C) Si Su.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  There is some evidence that the closely related {\b H. verticillata} Thunb.,{\i  Diss. Hydrocot.} 2, 5 (1798), which is widespread from Australia, through tropical Africa to America, may occur in S. Europe. It may be distinguished by the leaves with 8-13 veins, glabrous petioles about equalling the inflorescence and fruit with cuneate base.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 4. H. sibthorpioides} Lam.,{\i  Encycl. Méth. Bot.}{\b  3}: 153 (1789). Delicate, slender, creeping herb. Leaves glabrous; basal sinus deep. Umbel 3- to 8(-10)-flowered; pedicels very short or absent. Fruit with prominent lateral ridges.{\i  Naturalized near Milano and probably elsewhere}. [It.] ( {\i Widespread in the tropics}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 5. H. moschata} G. Forster,{\i  Fl. Ins. Austral. Prodr.} 22 (1786). Slender creeping herb. Leaves usually more or less densely hispid; basal sinus deep. Umbel 10- to 20-flowered; pedicels very short or absent. Fruit with conspicuous lateral ridges.{\i  Naturalized in S.W. Ireland }({\i Valentia Island}). [Hb.] ({\i New Zealand}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc   {\b 2.                  Bowlesia}                   Ruiz & Pavón
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc By †T.G. Tutin.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Leaves simple, lobed; stipules present, scarious. Sepals conspicuous, tridentate. Petals white, entire, subobtuse. Fruit ovoid, stellate-pubescent; ridges obsolete; vittae absent.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. B. incana} Ruiz & Pavón,{\i  Fl. Peruv. }{\b 3}: 28 (1802). Stellate-pubescent annual. Stems 10-50 cm, slender, procumbent, branched. Leaves 5-30 mm, reniform to cordate in outline, 5- to 7-lobed. Umbels simple, with 1-6 flowers. Bracteoles small. Fruit 1-1·5 mm, subsessile.{\i  Naturalized in S. France} ({\i Herault}). [Ga.] ({\i Semi-arid parts of temperate South America and southern North America}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc   {\b 3.                   Naufraga}                  Constance & Cannon
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc By †T.G. Tutin.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Leaves 3 -foliolate or pinnate, stipulate. Sepals absent. Petals white, ovate, flat or slightly incurved. Carpophore absent. Fruit truncate-globose, didymous. Ridges filiform, inconspicuous; vittae solitary, the commissural absent.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. N. balearica} Constance & Cannon, {\i Feddes Repert.}{\b  74}: 3 (1967). Glabrous perennial 2·5-4 cm. Basal leaves 5-10 mm, crowded; segments 3-5(-7), 1·5-5 × 1-3 mm, ovate, entire or the terminal one with 1-2 lobes; petioles with a sheathing, auricled, scarious base. Cauline leaves usually 3-foliolate, in a single whorl; stipules large, whitish, scarious. Umbels simple, 2-4 in a whorl. Bracts and bracteoles absent. Fruit c. 0·8 mm, the truncate apex with a conspicuously scarious-margined disk; stylopodium absent; carpels free from one another, except near the apex, so that they hang down on either side of the pedicel and are attached to it only at the top.{\i  Damp, shady crevices of calcareous sea cliffs. • Mallorca} ({\i near Pollensa}). Bl.
\par

\par
319}
\par