{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 129.               UMBELLIFERAE}
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc Edit. †T.G. Tutin.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Herbs, rarely shrubs. Leaves alternate; lamina usually large and much-divided; petiole often inflated and sheathing at base. Stipules absent, except in Subfam.{\i  Hydrocotyloideae}. Inflorescence usually a compound umbel. Flowers epigynous, small, hermaphrodite or unisexual, the plant rarely dioecious. Sepals usually small or absent; petals 5, usually more or less 3-lobed, the middle lobe inflexed; outer petals sometimes much larger than inner ({\i radiate}); stamens 5; carpels (1-)2, usually attached to a central axis ({\i carpophore}), from which the mericarps separate at maturity; styles (1-)2, often with a thickened base ({\i stylopodium}); ovule 1 in each loculus, pendent. Fruit dry; pericarp membranous or exocarp variously indurated; endocarp rarely woody (Subfam.{\i  Hydrocotyloideae}). Mericarps usually joined by a narrow or wide commissure; each mericarp more or less compressed laterally or dorsally, with 5 longitudinal veins, usually with ridges over them, separated by {\i valleculae} or sometimes with 4 secondary ridges alternating with the primary; resin canals ({\i vittae}) usually present between the primary ridges and on the commissural face.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  In the following account the primary divisions of the leaves are referred to as {\i segments} and the ultimate divisions, cut nearly or quite to the midrib, as{\i  lobes}. The lobes may themselves sometimes be deeply lobed. The leaves are never truly pinnate, but are described as pinnate, for brevity, when the lamina is divided to the midrib. Descriptions of umbels refer to the terminal, or other well-developed umbel: lateral umbels are often smaller, with fewer rays, and may be entirely male.{\i  Bracts} are the structures which subtend the primary branches ({\i rays}) of a compound umbel, and {\i bracteoles} are those which subtend the partial umbel, or the whole of a simple umbel. When the stylopodium is described, the description refers to the stylopodium of a hermaphrodite flower. Descriptions of the ridges of the fruit refer to the primary ridges, unless otherwise specified.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Ripe fruit is essential for the certain identification of some genera, though with a little experience the characters of the ripe fruit can often be deduced from a careful examination of unripe fruit or even the ovary. Some genera which have the ripe fruit strongly compressed and winged (e.g.{\i  Peucedanum}) do not show these characters when young.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  It has recently been shown (M.T. Cerceau-Larrival,{\i  Mém. Mus. Nat. Hist. Nat.} ({\i Paris}) ser. B,{\b  14}: 1-164 (1962)) that the seedlings and pollen provide valuable generic characters. As information is available so far for little more than half the European genera it has not been practicable to utilize it in the following account.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Literature: H. Wolff in Engler, {\i Pflanzenreich}{\b  43} ({\b IV. 228}) (1910);{\b  61} ({\b IV. 228}) (1913); {\b 90} ({\b IV. 228}) (1927).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Stellate hairs present, at least on under surface of
\par
  leaves or on fruit; fruit without prickles
\par
2 Leaves simple, lobed; stipules present; petals white .................. {\b 2. Bowlesia}
\par
2 Leaves pinnate; stipules absent; petals yellow
\par
3 Leaf-lobes ovate; fruit strongly compressed ........................... {\b 89. Opopanax}
\par
3 Leaf-lobes linear-filiform; fruit not compressed .......... {\b 36. Portenschlagiella}
\par
1 Plant glabrous or with simple hairs, or fruit with prickles
\par
4 Male flowers clustered round a female or hermaphrodite
\par
  flower, their pedicels ± connate or adnate to the ovary;
\par
  flowers not in capitula
\par
5 Leaves 3- to 5-lobed .................................................................... {\b 9. Petagnia}
\par
5 Leaves 2- to 3-pinnate ......................................................... {\b 10. Echinophora}
\par
4 Male flowers not clustered round a female or hermaphrodite
\par
  flower, their pedicels free; flowers sometimes in capitula
\par
6 Umbels with slender, flexuous peduncles, arranged in a leaf-less
\par
  panicle; pedicels about as long as the rays, filiform ................. {\b 65. Lereschia}
\par
6 Umbels not arranged in a leafless panicle; pedicels
\par
  shorter than rays, or flowers in capitula or whorls
\par
7 All leaves simple, entire or denticulate
\par
8 Leaves septate, ± fistular; stems prostrate, rooting at the nodes
\par
  ................................................................................................... {\b 34. Lilaeopsis}
\par
8 Leaves not septate and fistular; stem erect or 0
\par
9 Flowers in compound umbels; petals yellow ........................ {\b 56. Bupleurum}
\par
9 Flowers in sessile or shortly pedunculate capitula;
\par
  petals whitish ..................................................................... {\b 55. Hohenackeria}
\par
7 Leaves deeply and repeatedly divided, or sometimes
\par
  crenate or dentate
\par
10 Flowers sessile or subsessile in capitula
\par
11 Leaves spinose-dentate or pinnatifid, with spinescent lobes ... {\b 7. Eryngium}
\par
11 Leaves not spinescent
\par
12 Stems branched; bracteoles small, inconspicuous ..................... {\b 4. Sanicula}
\par
12 Stems simple; bracteoles large, leaf-like ................................. {\b 5. Hacquetia}
\par
10 Flowers distinctly pedicellate, in umbels or rarely whorls
\par
13 All leaves ± orbicular in outline, crenate or palmately lobed
\par
14 Leaves entire, crenate, or serrate, not deeply lobed
\par
15 All leaves long-petiolate; flowers in simple umbels or
\par
   whorls .................................................................................... {\b 1. Hydrocotyle}
\par
15 Cauline leaves sessile or subsessile; flowers in compound umbels
\par
16 Flowers yellow ..................................................................... {\b 20. Smyrnium}
\par
16 Flowers white or pink .......................................................... {\b 92. Heracleum}
\par
14 Leaves deeply lobed; lobes with dentate margins
\par
17 Umbels simple; bracteoles conspicuous ................................... {\b 6. Astrantia}
\par
17 Umbels compound; bracteoles small
\par
18 Partial umbels with numerous flowers; fruit strongly
\par
   compressed ............................................................................. {\b 92. Heracleum}
\par
18 Partial umbels with 1-6 flowers; fruit not or scarcely
\par
   compressed ......................................................................... {\b 64. Cryptotaenia}
\par
13 Most or all leaves pinnately or ternately divided,
\par
   usually distinctly longer than wide, rarely the upper
\par
   cauline or outer basal entire
\par
19 Cauline leaves in a single whorl; stipules scarious,
\par
   conspicuous ................................................................................ {\b 3. Naufraga}
\par
19 Cauline leaves not in a single whorl; stipules 0
\par
20 Sepals finely pinnatisect; partial umbels with 1 flower;
\par
   ovary unilocular .......................................................................... {\b 8. Lagoecia}
\par
20 Sepals entire or 0; partial umbels with more than
\par
   1 flower; ovary bilocular
\par
21 Flowering stem with a flexuous, subterranean part;
\par
   basal leaves with partly subterranean petioles
\par
22 Stylopodium abruptly contracted into the styles ....................... {\b 21. Bunium}
\par
22 Stylopodium gradually narrowed into the styles
\par
23 Fruit linear-oblong; ridges prominent ......................................... {\b 23. Huetia}
\par
23 Fruit oblong-ovoid; ridges indistinct ................................ {\b 22. Conopodium}
\par
21 Flowering stem without flexuous, subterranean part;
\par
   leaves arising at or above the ground
\par
24 Beak of fruit at least as long as seed-bearing part .................... {\b 14. Scandix}
\par
24 Beak of fruit 0, or much shorter than seed-bearing part
\par
25 Lateral ridges of fruit with a distinct, but sometimes narrow,
\par
   ± membranous wing, or thickened and rounded at the outer edge;
\par
   dorsal ridges winged or not
\par
26 Margin of fruit conspicuously thickened, at least at its outer edge
\par
27 Petals yellow
\par

\par
315}
\par