{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 101 Lowest leaves at least 2-pinnate or 2-ternate
\par
117 Finely divided submerged leaves present at flowering time
\par
118 Rays 1-3 ................................................................................... {\b 59. Apium}
\par
118 Rays 5 or more ..................................................................... {\b 33. Oenanthe}
\par
117 No finely divided submerged leaves present at flowering time
\par
119 Larger bracts at least ½ as long as rays,often divided
\par
120 Bracteoles usually 3; rays 1-5 ............................................. {\b 58. Cuminum}
\par
120 Bracteoles numerous; rays (4-)10-150
\par
121 Sepals conspicuous
\par
122 Rays 4-10; fruit 4-6 mm ....................................................... {\b 31. Dethawia}
\par
122 Rays (10-)20-60; fruit 2·5-4·5 mm ............................................. {\b 32. Seseli}
\par
121 Sepals 0 or very small
\par
123 Fruit 5-10 mm ............................................................. {\b 49. Pleurospermum}
\par
123 Fruit not more than 2·5 mm
\par
124 Most leaf-lobes 10 mm or more ................................................ {\b 66. Ammi}
\par
124 Most leaf-lobes 2-3 mm ..................................................... {\b 72. Stefanoffia}
\par
119 Bracts much less than ½ as long as rays,sometimes 0
\par
125 Bracteoles strongly dimorphic, some spathulate and
\par
    often inflated, some subulate ................................................ {\b 68. Ammoides}
\par
125 Bracteoles all similar in shape
\par
126 Dioecious ................................................................................... {\b 57. Trinia}
\par
126 Most flowers hermaphrodite, or plant monoecious
\par
127 Cauline leaves 0 or very small
\par
128 Stems junciform, glaucous; rays 2-3 ............................. {\b 30. Sclerochorton}
\par
128 Stems not junciform and glaucous; rays more than 3
\par
129 Bracts 0-2
\par
130 Stock with abundant fibres ........................................................ {\b 32. Seseli}
\par
130 Stock without fibres ............................................................. {\b 19. Scaligera}
\par
129 Bracts several
\par
131 Basal leaves ternate .................................................... {\b 46. Physospermum}
\par
131 Basal leaves pinnate ................................................................. {\b 71. Carum}
\par
127 Cauline leaves well-developed
\par
132 Roots usually tuberous; most pedicels shorter than
\par
    fruit and often becoming thickened ........................................ {\b 33. Oenanthe}
\par
132 Roots not tuberous; most pedicels longer than fruit
\par
    and not becoming thickened
\par
133 Bracts 0(-3)
\par
134 Basal leaves with ovate lobes
\par
135 Lateral umbels opposite or whorled; bracteoles numerous
\par
    ......................................................................................... {\b 44. Trochiscanthes}
\par
135 Lateral umbels alternate; bracteoles 0(-2)
\par
136 Rhizome far-creeping; lower leaves 2-ternate; umbels
\par
    long-pedunculate ................................................................ {\b 26. Aegopodium}
\par
136 Rhizome 0; lower leaves 2-pinnate; most umbels
\par
    sessile or subsessile ..................................................................... {\b 59. Apium}
\par
134 Basal leaves with linear to linear-lanceolate lobes
\par
137 Leaf-lobes 5-10 mm wide,incise-serrate ................................... {\b 63. Cicuta}
\par
137 Leaf-lobes 1-2 mm wide, entire or pinnatisect
\par
138 Fruit compressed laterally ........................................................ {\b 71. Carum}
\par
138 Fruit subterete ............................................................................ {\b 32. Seseli}
\par
133 Bracts several
\par
139 Leaf-lobes filiform
\par
140 Leaves linear-oblong in outline ................................................ {\b 71. Carum}
\par
140 Leaves ovate to triangular in outline ......................................... {\b 45. Meum}
\par
139 Leaf-lobes linear-lanceolate to ovate
\par
141 Ridges of fruit strongly undulate; stem purple-spotted .......... {\b 47. Conium}
\par
141 Ridges of fruit smooth; stem not purple-spotted
\par
142 Stem distinctly grooved or angled
\par
143 Leaf-lobes oblong or ovate,± dentate ........................................ {\b 32. Seseli}
\par
143 Leaf-lobes linear-lanceolate, entire or deeply pinnatisect .... {\b 75. Cnidium}
\par
142 Stem terete, smooth or faintly striate above
\par
144 Leaf-lobes linear-lanceolate ....................................................... {\b 32. Seseli}
\par
144 Leaf-lobes ovate
\par
145 Branches numerous, mostly opposite or whorled .................... {\b 71. Carum}
\par
145 Branches few or 0, alternate ...................................................... {\b 38. Grafia}
\par
93 Fruit pubescent, hispid, or with prickles
\par
146 Outer mericarp of each fruit with straight prickles; inner
\par
    mericarp tuberculate or with short, conical projections ............. {\b 102. Torilis}
\par
146 Both mericarps similar
\par
147 Fruit with broad,or tubercle-based prickles arranged
\par
    in 1-3 rows on the ridges
\par
148 At least some bracts 3-fid or pinnatisect ............................... {\b 108. Daucus}
\par
148 Bracts simple or 0
\par
149 Rays and upper part of peduncle densely white-pubescent {\b 109. Pseudorlaya}
\par
149 Rays and upper part of peduncle not densely white-pubescent
\par
150 Bracts 2-5, conspicuous
\par
151 Bracts at least ½ as long as the smooth rays ........................... {\b 107. Orlaya}
\par
151 Bracts not more than ¼ as long as the setose rays .............. {\b 106. Turgenia}
\par
150 Bracts 0(-3), small and inconspicuous if present
\par
152 Rays more than 6 ........................................................... {\b 103. Astrodaucus}
\par
152 Rays 2-5
\par
153 Outer petals much longer than inner ................................... {\b 105. Caucalis}
\par
153 Outer petals not or little longer than inner ................... {\b 104. Turgeniopsis}
\par
147 Fruit without broad- or tubercle-based prickles
\par
    arranged in 1-3 rows on the ridges
\par
154 Most umbels shortly pedunculate and leaf-opposed;
\par
    fruit with a distinct, glabrous beak ....................................... {\b 13. Anthriscus}
\par
154 Umbels long-pedunculate, not leaf-opposed; fruit
\par
    without a distinct, glabrous beak
\par
155 Fruit densely covered with stiff, rough,minutely
\par
    glochidiate bristles ..................................................................... {\b 102. Torilis}
\par

\par
318}
\par