{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 1·7-2 mm, attenuate with a prominent beak.{\i  Calcifuge. • Mountains of W. Europe from N.W. Spain} ({\i Asturias}){\i  to the Vosges.} Ga He Hs.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 8. E. montanum} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 348 (1753) ({\i E. hypericifolium} Tausch). Turions produced in autumn; stems 10-80 cm, strigulose. Leaves 3·5-8 × 1-4 cm, ovate to narrowly ovate, shortly petiolate, repand or with prominent teeth, rarely entire. Buds acute. Petals 6-10 mm, purplish-pink. Seeds c. 1 mm, obovoid. 2n = 36.{\i  Almost throughout Europe}. All except Az Bl Cr Is Sb Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 9. E. collinum} C. C. Gmelin,{\i  Fl. Bad.}{\b  4}: 265 (1826). Stolons hypogeal, short, or turions produced; stems 10-40 cm, strigulose. Leaves 1-5 × 0·5-1·5 cm, ovate or narrowly ovate, shortly petiolate, sharply repand-serrulate. Buds obtuse. Petals 3-6 mm, pale purplish-pink. Seeds c. 1 mm, obovoid. 2n = 36. •{\i  Most of continental Europe}. Al Au Be Bu Co Cz Fe Ga Ge Gr He Hs Hu Is It Ju No Po Rm Rs (N, B, C, W, E) Sa Su.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 10. E. lanceolatum} Sebastiani & Mauri, Fl. Rom. 138 (1818). Overwintering by rosettes; stems 10-60 cm, strigulose. Leaves 3-12 × 1-3·5 cm, oblong, obtuse, narrowly cuneate at base, serrulate; petiole 3-10 mm. Petals 5-8·5 mm, white, becoming purplish-pink. Seeds c. 1 mm, obovoid. 2n = 36.{\i  W., C. & S. Europe.} Al Au Be Br Bu Co Cz Ga Ge Gr He Ho Hs Hu It Ju Lu Rm Rs (K) Sa Si Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 11. E. alpestre} (Jacq.) Krocker, {\i Fl. Siles.}{\b  1}: 605 (1787) ({\i E. trigonum} Schrank). Overwintering by turions; stems 20-70 cm, robust, with elevated hirsute lines. Leaves 2·5-8 × 1-2·5 cm, usually verticillate, broadly lanceolate-acuminate, sharply toothed. Petals 5·5-12·5 mm, pinkish-violet. n = 36.{\i  Mountains of C. & S. Europe, from the Pyrenees to the Carpathians and Bulgaria.} Al Au Bu Cz Ga Ge He Hs It Ju Po Rm Rs (W).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 12. E. tetragonum} L.,{\i  Sp. Pl.} 348 (1753). Overwintering by rosettes; stems 15-110 cm, with elevated strigulose lines. Leaves 2-8 × 0·5-2 cm, oblong or oblong-lanceolate, serrulate. Inflorescence greyish-pubescent. Petals purplish-pink. Capsule 5-8 cm. Seeds 1-1·5 mm, obovoid.{\i  Europe except the extreme north.} All except Az Fa Hb Is Rs (N) Sb; only as casual in No.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Petals 7-11·5 mm; stigma usually elevated above the
\par
  anthers at anthesis ......................................................... ({\b c}) subsp. {\b tournefortii}
\par
1 Petals 2·5-7 mm; stigma surrounded by anthers at anthesis
\par
2 Leaves oblong, ± decurrent .......................................... ({\b a}) subsp. {\b tetragonum}
\par
2 Leaves mostly oblong-lanceolate, shortly petiolate,
\par
  not decurrent ......................................................................... ({\b b}) subsp. {\b lamyi}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b tetragonum} ({\i E. adnatum} Griseb.): 2n = 36. {\i Throughout the range of the species.}
\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Normally self-pollinated.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b lamyi} (F. W. Schultz) Nyman,{\i  Consp.} 247 (1879) ({\i E. lamyi} F. W. Schultz): 2n = 36. {\i Throughout a large part of the range of the species, but only in S.W. part of U.S.S.R. and of doubtful status in Finland}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Normally self-pollinated.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b c}) Subsp. {\b tournefortii} (Michalet) Léveillé, {\i Monde Pl.}{\b  6}: 22 (1896):{\i  Mediterranean region, apparently local}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Normally cross-pollinated; intergrades with the other subspecies.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 13. E. obscurum} Schreber, {\i Spicil. Fl. Lips. }147, 155 (1771). Stolons epigeal, leafy; stems 20-90 cm, with elevated strigulose lines. Leaves 1·5-8 × 0·5-1·5 cm, narrowly ovate or lanceolate, serrulate. Inflorescence greyish-pubescent, with a few glandular hairs on calyx. Petals 4-7 mm, purplish-pink. Capsule 4-6 cm. Seeds c. 1 mm, obovoid. 2n = 36.{\i  Wet places. Europe except the extreme north and much of the U.S.S.R.} All except Bl Cr Fa Is Rs (K, E) Sb Si Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 14. E. roseum} Schreber,{\i  Spicil. Fl. Lips.} 147, 155 (1771). Overwintering by turions; stems 15-80 cm, with elevated strigulose lines. Leaves 3-10 × 1-3·5 cm, lanceolate or elliptical, narrowly cuneate at base, serrulate. Inflorescence canescent and densely glandular-pubescent. Petals 3·5-7 mm, white, becoming pinkish-streaked. Capsule 4-6 cm. Seeds c. 1 mm, obovoid.{\i  Most of Europe except the extreme north.} All except Az Bl Co Cr Fa Is Rs (N) Sa Sb Si.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b roseum}: Petioles 4-15 mm. 2n = 36.{\i  Throughout the range of the species}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b subsessile} (Boiss.) P. H. Raven,{\i  Notes Roy. Bot. Gard. Edinb.}{\b  2A}: 194 (1962) ({\i E. nervosum} Boiss. & Buhse): Petioles 1-3 mm. {\i S.E. Europe}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 15. E. palustre} L.,{\i  Sp. Pl.} 348 (1753). Stolons epigeal, filiform; stems 5-70 cm, strigulose above. Leaves 1·5-6 × 0·3-1·5 cm, lanceolate, acuminate, sessile, entire. Inflorescence strigose, rarely glandular-pubescent. Petals 3-7 mm, pale pink or white. Seeds 1·5-2 mm, fusiform, with a conspicuous pellucid appendage. 2n = 36. {\i Wet places. Throughout Europe except for parts of the Mediterranean region.} All except Az Bl ?Co Cr Sa Sb Si Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 16. E. davuricum} Fischer ex Hornem.,{\i  Hort. Hafn., Suppl.} 44 (1819). Overwintering by rosettes; stems 5-30 cm, glandular-pubescent and strigulose above, with slightly elevated lines. Leaves 0·6-5 × 0·1-0·4 cm, linear to elliptical, sessile, entire, remote. Inflorescence subglabrous, rarely greyish-pubescent, nodding until capsules are ripe. Petals 3-5 mm, white, rarely pink. Seeds 1·2-1·7 mm, fusiform, finely papillose, with a conspicuous pellucid appendage.{\i  Fennoscandia and N. Russia, southwards to }60°{\i  N. in Norway.} Fe No Rs (N) Su.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b davuricum}: Plant not caespitose; leaves linear. 2n = 36. {\i Throughout the range of the species.}
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b arcticum} (Sam.) P. H. Raven, {\i Feddes Repert. }{\b 79}: 61 (1968) ({\i E. arcticum} Sam.): Plant more or less caespitose; leaves rounded; seeds perhaps more finely papillose than in subsp. ({\b a}).{\i  Arctic Russia} ({\i Vajgac}).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 17. E. nutans} F. W. Schmidt, {\i Fl. Boëm. }{\b 4}: 82 (1794). Stolons epigeal, leafy; stems 5-30 cm, strigulose above, with elevated lines. Leaves 1·3 × 0·2-0·8 cm, ovate or elliptical, subentire, rarely as long as internodes. Inflorescence strigulose, nodding before anthesis. Petals 3-6 mm, pale violet; stigma clavate, surrounded by anthers at anthesis. Seeds c. 1·5 mm, fusiform, very finely papillose, with a pellucid appendage. •{\i  Mountains of C. & S. Europe, from the Pyrenees to the Carpathians and Bulgaria}. Au Bu Cz Ga Ge He Hs It Po Rm Rs (W).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 18. E. tundrarum} Sam., {\i Bot. Not.}{\b  1922}: 264 (1922). Like {\b 17} but stolons less leafy; stems 4-8 cm, with fine, not elevated, decurrent lines; leaves often longer than internodes; inflorescence with a few fine, appressed hairs. Seeds unknown.{\i  Arctic Russia} ({\i Vajgac and adjacent mainland}). Rs (N). ({\i Arctic Asia.})
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 19. E. atlanticum} Litard. & Maire,{\i  Mém. Soc. Sci. Nat. Maroc}{\b  26}: 15 (1930) ({\i E. samuelssonii} P. H. Raven). Like {\b 17} but petals 5·5-7 mm, bright pinkish-purple; stigma capitate, held well above anthers at anthesis. {\i S. Spain} ({\i Sierra Nevada}). Hs. ({\i N.W. Africa}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 20. E. anagallidifolium} Lam., {\i Encycl. Méth. Bot. }{\b 2}: 376 (1786) ({\i E. alpinum} auct. mult., non L.). Stolons epigeal, leafy; stems 2-10 cm, with weakly elevated strigulose lines. Leaves 1-2·5 × 0·5-0·7 cm, ovate or elliptical, shortly petiolate, subentire. Inflorescence glabrescent, nodding. Petals 3-4·5 mm, pale
\par

\par
310}
\par