{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 lanceolate, aristate. Fruit becoming strongly swollen, with numerous small, not overlapping scales. {\i Dry places. S. Italy and Sicilia}. It Si. ({\i N. Africa}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 15. E. ternatum} Poiret in Lam.,{\i  Encycl. Méth. Bot., Suppl.}{\b  4}: 295 (1816). Perennial; stems 30-40 cm, erect. Basal leaves persistent, slightly coriaceous; lamina 3-sect; segments 10-30 × 0·5-1 cm, linear, undivided, with soft, ascending marginal spines; petiole narrowly winged. Inflorescence with 3-6 pedunculate hemispherical capitula 1·5-2 cm. Bracts 2-3 cm, 5-9, linear-acuminate, usually with a pair of spinescent teeth near base; bracteoles 3-cuspidate. Sepals 2-3 mm, ovate, shortly aristate.{\i  Dry places. Kriti.} Cr.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 16. E. serbicum} Pancic,{\i  Verh. Zool.-Bot. Ges. Wien}{\b  6}: 520 (1856). Perennial; stems 40 75 cm. Basal leaves persistent slightly coriaceous; lamina palmatisect; segments 10-25 × 0·2-4 cm, 5-7, linear, undivided, with soft ascending marginal spines; petiole winged, sometimes broadly sheathing, often with linear, spinescent-dentate to -pinnatisect appendages in upper part. Inflorescence with usually numerous pedunculate, hemispherical capitula 1-1·5 cm. Bracts 1-4 cm, 5-7, linear-acuminate, often expanded at base, with 1-2 pairs of spinescent teeth; bracteoles 3-cuspidate. Sepals 2-3 mm, ovate-lanceolate, shortly aristate. {\i Dry places. • Srbija.} Ju.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 17. E. palmatum} Pancic & Vis.,{\i  Mem. Ist. Veneto }{\b 15}: 20 (1870). Perennial; stems 30-75 cm. Basal leaves persistent, slightly coriaceous; lamina 5-9 × 5-11 cm, reniform-orbicular, palmatisect with 5-7 oblanceolate, mostly 3-fid, serrate lobes; petiole unwinged. Inflorescence strict, green, with up to 10 pedunculate, hemispherical capitula 1-1·5 cm. Bracts 2-4 cm, 5-7, linear-oblanceolate, with 1-5 pairs of spinescent teeth; bracteoles 3-cuspidate. Sepals c. 3 mm, ovate-lanceolate, aristate. Fruit densely scaly. {\i Dry places and woods. • C. part of Balkan peninsula.} Al Bu Gr Ju.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Plants from S. Jugoslavia and N.W. Greece have been called {\b E. wiegandii} Adamovic,{\i  Österr. Bot. Zeitschr. }{\b 55}: 178 (1905) ({\i E. tricuspidatum} auct. balcan., non L.). They differ from {\b 17} only in having less divided, usually 3-fid basal leaves with undivided or weakly 3-fid lobes, and do not merit specific separation.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 18. E. glaciale} Boiss.,{\i  Biblioth. Univ. Genève} ser. 2,{\b  13}: 409 (1838). Perennial; stems 5-20 cm, erect. Basal leaves persistent, coriaceous; lamina 3-5 × 3-6 cm, deeply 3-fid or 3-sect, the lobes with large, lanceolate-acuminate, pungent teeth and the base decurrent as a spiny wing on the petiole; unwinged part of petiole half as long as or as long as lamina. Inflorescence bluish with 3(-5) pedunculate, globose capitula 1-1·5 cm. Bracts 3-5 cm, 7-8, narrowly linear-lanceolate, pungent, with 1-2(-3) pairs of spines; bracteoles 3-cuspidate. Sepals c. 1·5 mm, ovate, shortly aristate. Fruit without scales. {\i Stony places above} 2500 {\i m. S. Spain} ({\i Sierra Nevada}). Hs. ({\i N. W. Africa}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 19. E. dilatatum} Lam.,{\i  Encycl. Méth. Bot. }{\b 4}: 755 (1798). Perennial; stems 5-40 cm, erect. Basal leaves 2-10 cm, persistent slightly coriaceous, obovate, 3-sect above, pinnatisect below, the segments ovate to linear-lanceolate, pinnatisect to coarsely toothed with softly spinescent teeth; petiole not distinct, winged more or less to the base. Inflorescence bluish, with up to 12 pedunculate, globose capitula 0·5-1·5 cm, the lateral often subsessile. Bracts 1-3 cm, 5-10, lanceolate to linear-lanceolate with 3-6 pairs of spinescent teeth, not pungent; bracteoles entire, or rarely a few 3-cuspidate. Sepals c. 2·5 mm, ovate, aristate.{\i  Dry places. Spain and Portugal.} Hs Lu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 20. E. spinalba} Vill., {\i Prosp. Pl. Dauph.} 26 (1779). Perennial; stems 20-35 cm, very stout. Basal leaves coriaceous; lamina 5-8 × 5-10 cm, suborbicular, cordate at base, palmatifid or palmatisect with (3-)4-5 irregularly pinnatifid segments with large, spinescent teeth throughout; petiole about twice as long as lamina, unwinged. Inflorescence usually bluish, with up to 10 pedunculate, ovoid-cylindrical capitula 4-6 × 2-3 cm. Bracts 6-9 cm, 15-30, linear-lanceolate, often 3-fid, with numerous spinescent teeth, pungent; bracteoles mostly 3-cuspidate. Sepals c. 3·5 mm, linear-lanceolate, aristate. Fruit densely scaly. {\i Dry, stony places on mountains. • S.W. Alps.} Ga It.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 21. E. bourgatii} Gouan,{\i  Obs. Bot.} 7 (1773). Perennial; stems 15-45 cm, erect. Basal leaves slightly coriaceous, persistent; lamina 3-7 cm, suborbicular, 3-sect with pinnatifid or 2-pinnatifid, spinescent-dentate segments; petiole 2-4 times as long as lamina, unwinged. Inflorescence usually bluish, with up to 7 pedunculate, ovoid-globose capitula 1·5-2·5 cm. Bracts 2-5 cm, 10-15, linear-lanceolate, entire or with 1-2(-3) pairs of spinescent teeth; bracteoles entire or 3-cuspidate. Sepals c. 3 mm, lanceolate to ovate, aristate. Fruit sparsely scaly. 2n = 16.{\i  Dry, stony places on mountains. Spain, Pyrenees.} Ga Hs.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 22. E. amorginum} Rech. fil.,{\i  Magyar Bot. Lapok }{\b 33}: 9 (1934). Perennial; stems 50-100 cm, erect. Basal leaves slightly coriaceous; lamina c. 12 cm, 3-sect, the lobes ovate or ovate-lanceolate, pinnatisect with pinnatifid or irregularly serrate lobes; petiole as long as lamina, unwinged. Inflorescence with c. 15 pedunculate, ovoid-globose capitula c. 1-5 cm. Bracts up to 1 cm, c. 8, linear-oblanceolate, merging into the entire bracteoles. Sepals c. 2 mm, ovate, obtuse, aristate. Fruit densely scaly.{\i  Limestone cliffs near the sea. • S. Kikladhes.} Gr.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 23. E. amethystinum} L., {\i Sp. Pl. }233 (1753) (incl. {\i E. glomeratum} Lam.). Perennial; stems 20-40 cm, erect. Basal leaves usually persistent, coriaceous; lamina 10-15 cm, obovate, palmatisect above and pinnatisect below, the segments 2- or 3-pinnatisect with linear-lanceolate, spinescent-serrate segments; petiole broadly winged. Inflorescence usually bluish, cylindrical to corymbiform with usually numerous pedunculate, globose or ovoid capitula 1-2 cm. Bracts 2-5 cm, 5-9 linear-lanceolate, with 1-4 pairs of spines; bracteoles entire or 3-cuspidate. Sepals 1·5-2·5 mm, ovate-lanceolate, shortly aristate, Fruit sparsely scaly.{\i  Dry places. Balkan peninsula and Aegean region; Italy and Sicilia.} Al ?Bu Cr Gr It Ju Si.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 24. E. campestre} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 233 (1753). Perennial; stems 20-70 cm, erect. Basal leaves usually persistent, coriaceous; lamina 5-20 cm, broadly ovate, 3-sect; the central lobe pinnatisect, with opposite, pinnatisect lobes; the lateral lobes pinnatisect with alternate, often pinnatisect lobes; lobes spinose-serrate; petiole equalling lamina, unwinged. Inflorescence usually corymbiform, pale greenish, with numerous pedunculate, ovoid capitula (0·5-)1-1·5(-2·5) cm. Bracts (1-)1·5-4·5 cm, 5-7, linear-lanceolate, entire or with 1(-2) pairs of spines; bracteoles entire. Sepals c. 2·5 mm, ovate-lanceolate, aristate. Fruit densely scaly, the scales overlapping. 2n = 14, 28.{\i  Dry places. C. & S. Europe, extending to S. England}. Al Au Be Bl *Br Bu Co Cr Cz Ga Ge Gr He Ho Hs Hu It Ju Lu Po Rm Rs (C, W, K, E) Sa Si Tu [Da].
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 25. E. corniculatum} Lam., {\i Encycl. Méth. Bot.}{\b  4}: 758 (1798). Probably biennial; stems 15-60 cm, erect, often branched near base. Basal leaves usually decaying early, soft; lamina 2-5 cm, ovate-oblong, remotely toothed; petiole usually many times as long as lamina, swollen and conspicuously segmented. Inflorescence spreading, bluish, with up to 40 pedunculate, ovoid to
\par

\par
323}
\par