{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 5 Leaf-lobes coarsely serrate, obliquely cuneate at base;
\par
  lobes of upper leaves acuminate ............................................. {\b 1. aromaticum}
\par
2 Leaflobes deeply divided
\par
6 Bracteoles membranous, very conspicuous in fruit;
\par
  flowers yellow
\par
7 Bracts 0-1, small, subulate; fruit c. 10 mm ............................... {\b 4. coloratum}
\par
7 Bracts prominent, membranous, sometimes divided and
\par
  leaf-like; fruit c. 20 mm ................................................................ {\b 5. creticum}
\par
6 Bracteoles herbaceous, with a narrow membranous margin,
\par
  relatively inconspicuous in fruit; flowers white or pinkish
\par
8 Perennial; fruit 8-12 mm ............................................................. {\b 11. aureum}
\par
8 Biennial; fruit 4-7 mm
\par
9 Plant with an elongate tap-root; stem setose;
\par
  bracteoles hairy ...................................................................... {\b 12. temulentum}
\par
9 Plant with a short, tuberous root; stem glabrous above;
\par
  bracteoles glabrous ................................................................... {\b 10. bulbosum}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. C. aromaticum} L.,{\i  Sp. Pl.} 259 (1753). Robust perennial up to 200 cm, with a long creeping rhizome. Leaves usually 2-ternate or rarely pinnate; lobes 40-100 mm, lanceolate to ovate, acutely and coarsely serrate, obliquely cuneate at base, glabrous to white-puberulent beneath, those of upper leaves usually acuminate.Petals white. Fruit 8-15 mm, narrowly ovoid-oblong; stylopodium depressed-conical, wider than apex of fruit; styles flexuous; pedicels scarcely thickened in fruit.{\i  C. & E. Europe, Balkan peninsula, N. Italy.} Al Au Cz Ge Gr Hu It Ju Po Rm Rs (N, B, C, W).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b  C. euboeum} Halácsy,{\i  Magyar Bot. Lapok }{\b 11}: 152 (1912), from E. Greece ({\i C. Evvoia}) is an obscure species which appears to have been collected once only. It is probably related to {\b 1}, but is c. 30 cm and smaller throughout, and has ternately pinnatisect leaves with wide, undivided segments.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. C. byzantinum} Boiss.,{\i  Ann. Sci. Nat.} ser. 3 (Bot.),{\b  2}: 65(1844). Like {\b 1} but the upper leaf-lobes obliquely cordate at base,with regularly serrate margin and broadly acute apex.{\i  S.E. part of Balkan peninsula.} Bu Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 3. C. heldreichii} Orph. ex Boiss.,{\i  Diagn. Pl. Or. Nov.}{\b  3}({\b 2}):104 (1856). Like {\b 1} but lower leaves densely pubescent beneath,the lobes crenate-serrate, broadly acute; fruit 17-25 mm, linear-oblong; stylopodium elongate, passing imperceptibly into the rigid styles; pedicels becoming about as thick as the fruit. •{\i  Mountains of C. & S. Greece.} Gr.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 4. C. coloratum} L., {\i Mantissa} 57 (1767). Annual. Stem up to 100 cm, with long, patent hairs. Leaves 3-pinnate; lobes 0·5-1·5 mm wide, linear. Bracts absent or rarely one, small, subulate; bracteoles lanceolate or ovate-lanceolate, membranous, very conspicuous in fruit. Petals yellow. Fruit 8-12 mm. •{\i  Albania & W. Jugoslavia.} Al Ju.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 5. C. creticum} Boiss. & Heldr. in Boiss.,{\i  Diagn. Pl. Or. Nov.}{\b  2}({\b 10}): 51 (1849). Like {\b 4} but stem more or less glabrous; leaf-lobes up to 2 mm wide, linear-lanceolate; bracts present, sometimes divided and leaf-like; bracteoles sometimes divided at apex; fruit 17-25 mm. •{\i  Kriti} ({\i Levka Ori, near Omalos}). Cr.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 6. C. azoricum} Trelease, {\i Ann. Rep. Missouri Bot. Gard.}{\b  8}: 116(1897). Robust herb c. 60 cm; stem somewhat purplish. Leaves (1-)2-pinnate; lobes irregularly and jaggedly serrate; petiole, rhachis and lamina with an often dense covering of patent hairs. Bracts 0-3, probably deciduous; bracteoles large and conspicuous. Petals white. Ripe fruit unknown, but probably 15 mm; stylopodium nearly 1 mm, conical; styles patent. •{\i  Açores.} Az.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    ({\b 7-9}).{\b  C. hirsutum} group. Robust perennials with stems up to 120 cm. Leaves 2- to 3-pinnate. Stems and leaves densely hairy to subglabrous. Bracteoles often unequal. Petals white or sometimes pinkish. Fruit 4-20 mm, narrowly ovoid-oblong, tapering gradually upwards. Styles nearly erect.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28   A difficult group which requires further investigation. The species here recognized are sometimes treated as subspecies, but as{\b  7} and {\b 9}, at least, occur sympatrically in the Alps without intermediates, specific status seems more appropriate.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Carpophore divided to 1/3 of its length or less, somewhat
\par
  swollen above the base; lowest segments nearly as large
\par
  as the rest of the leaf .................................................................... {\b 7. hirsutum}
\par
1 Carpophore divided nearly to the base, not noticeably swollen;
\par
  lowest segments much smaller than the rest of the leaf
\par
2 Lateral umbels mostly opposite or verticillate; stem
\par
  and leaves with a short, soft, silky pubescence .............................. {\b 8. elegans}
\par
2 Lateral umbels alternate; stem and leaves subglabrous
\par
  or with relatively stiff hairs ............................................................ {\b 9. villarsii}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 7. C. hirsutum} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 258 (1753) ({\i C. cicutaria} Vill.).Segments of leaves relatively broad and little-divided, tending to overlap one another. Fruit up to 12 mm. 2n = 22.{\i  C. & S. Europe, mainly in mountain regions.} Al Au Bu Cz Ga Ge Gr He Hs Hu It Ju Po Rm Rs (W) [Be Da].
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b  C. magellense} Ten.,{\i  Fl. Nap.}{\b  3},{\i  Prodr. Suppl.}{\b  4}: 15 (1824), from N. Italy, may deserve specific or subspecific status. It has large, little-divided leaves, and fruits which are 13-20 mm.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b 8. C. elegans} Gaudin,{\i  Fl. Helv.}{\b  2}: 364 (1828). Segments of leaves relatively narrow, not overlapping, long-acuminate. Fruit 8-12 mm. 2n = 22.{\i  Alps.} Au He It.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 9. C. villarsii} Koch, {\i Syn. Fl. Germ.} 317 (1835). Segments of leaves narrow and not overlapping, acute. Fruit 8-20 mm. 2n = 22. {\i C. Europe.} Al Au Ga Ge He It Ju.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 10. C. bulbosum} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 258 (1753) ({\i C. laevigatum} Vis.). Biennial or monocarpic perennial with a short tuberous root. Stem up to 200 cm, glabrous above, hairy below and often tinged or spotted with purple-brown. Leaves 2- to 3-pinnate; lobes 0·5-2·0 mm wide. Bracts 0-1; bracteoles lanceolate to obovate, glabrous. Petals white. Fruit 5-7 mm; styles about as long as the flattened upper surface of the stylopodium.{\i  E. & C. Europe, extending to N. Italy.} Au Bu Cz Fe Ga Ge He *Ho It Ju Po Rm Rs (N, C, W, K, E) Su [Be].
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b bulbosum}: Usually 100-200 cm. Leaves finely divided. Bracteoles usually lanceolate; styles patent.{\i  C. & S.E. Europe.}
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b prescottii} (DC.) Nyman,{\i  Consp.} 300 (1879) ({\i C. prescottii} DC.): Usually c. 50 cm. Leaves less finely divided. Bracteoles usually obovate or ovate-lanceolate; styles at first nearly erect, diverging somewhat later.{\i  Sweden, Finland and USSR.}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 11. C. aureum} L.,{\i  Sp. Pl.} ed. 2,  370 (1762) ({\i C. maculatum} Willd. ex DC.). Robust perennial up to 150 cm. Stem glabrous or with more or less patent hairs, frequently purple-spotted. Leaves 3-pinnate, yellowish-green, hairy; margins sometimes ciliate; apical lobes long and narrow, serrate. Rays 12-18. Bracts 0-1; bracteoles hairy. Petals white. Fruit 8-12 mm, rather abruptly contracted near the apex; styles much longer than the flattened upper surface of the stylopodium.{\i  C. & S. Europe.} Al Au Bu Cz Ga Ge Gr He Hs Hu It Ju Po Rm Rs (K) Tu [Br].
\par

\par
325}
\par