{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Basal leaves 150-250 cm, ensiform, simple;
\par
  bracts c. 2 mm ................................................................... {\b 26. pandanifolium}
\par
1 Basal leaves less than 150 cm; bracts more than 3 mm
\par
2 Bracteoles 4-cuspidate ...................................................................... {\b 1. tenue}
\par
2 Bracteoles entire or 3-cuspidate
\par
3 Most bracts more than 6 cm ...................................................... {\b 20. spinalba}
\par
3 Bracts not more than 6 cm
\par
4 Bracts more than 25 ..................................................................... {\b 9. alpinum}
\par
4 Bracts fewer than 25
\par
5 Capitula 4-10 cm ............................................................................ {\b 5. duriaei}
\par
5 Capitula less than 4 cm
\par
6 Basal leaves 3- to 7-sect, persistent, with linear
\par
  segments 10-30 × 0·2-4 cm
\par
7 Basal leaves 3-sect; inflorescence with 3-6 capitula ................. {\b 15. ternatum}
\par
7 Basal leaves 5- to 7-sect; inflorescence with more than
\par
  6 capitula .................................................................................... {\b 16. serbicum}
\par
6 Basal leaves not as above, or decaying early
\par
8 Outer bracteoles almost as large as bracts
\par
9 Stems 50-100 cm; basal leaves divided ................................ {\b 22. amorginum}
\par
9 Stems less than 40 cm; basal leaves undivided
\par
10 Bracts and bracteoles usually more than 12; roots
\par
   c. 2 mm  thick; basal leaves 1 cm or more wide ......................... {\b 2. barrelieri}
\par
10 Bracts and bracteoles usually fewer than 12; roots less
\par
   than 2 mm thick; basal leaves usually less than 1 cm wide
\par
11 Bracts rigid, pungent; sepals c. 2 mm ....................................... {\b 3. galioides}
\par
11 Bracts soft, with setiform apex; sepals 1-1·5 mm ................... {\b 4. viviparum}
\par
8 Outer bracteoles much smaller than bracts
\par
12 Bracts entire
\par
13 Bracts more than 8 .................................................................. {\b 21. bourgatii}
\par
13 Bracts fewer than 8
\par
14 Inflorescence of fewer than 10 capitula; bracteoles
\par
   3-cuspidate ........................................................................ {\b 13. tricuspidatum}
\par
14 Inflorescence of more than 10 capitula; bracteoles entire
\par
15 Basal leaves undivided, with swollen, segmented petiole;
\par
   axis of capitulum projecting in a bract-like appendage ...... {\b 25. corniculatum}
\par
15 Basal leaves divided; petiole not swollen and segmented;
\par
   axis of capitulum not projecting
\par
16 Bracts 3-4, thickened and folded at base .............................. {\b 14. triquetrum}
\par
16 Bracts 5-7, ± flat at base ........................................................ {\b 24. campestre}
\par
12 Bracts with 1 or more pairs of spines or teeth
\par
17 Bracts ovate to ovate-lanceolate; sepals 4-5 mm ................... {\b 8. maritimum}
\par
17 Bracts lanceolate to linear; sepals less than 4 mm
\par
18 Capitula sessile; stem procumbent, branched from the base .. {\b 6. ilicifolium}
\par
18 Capitula pedunculate; stem erect, usually not branched from the base
\par
19 Bracts with more than 6 pairs of teeth or spines
\par
20 Lamina of leaf decurrent on petiole ....................................... {\b 7. aquifolium}
\par
20 Lamina of leaf not decurrent on petiole .......................... {\b 13. tricuspidatum}
\par
19 Bracts with 6 or fewer pairs of teeth or spines
\par
21 Basal leaves undivided (though often deeply dentate)
\par
22 Inflorescence strict, with not more than 8 capitula .......... {\b 13. tricuspidatum}
\par
22 Inflorescence spreading, with more than 10 capitula
\par
23 Sepals mucronate ..................................................................... {\b 12. creticum}
\par
23 Sepals aristate
\par
24 Capitula more than half as long as bracts .................................. {\b 10. planum}
\par
24 Capitula not more than half as long as bracts ................... {\b 11. dichotomum}
\par
21 Basal leaves divided
\par
25 Lamina of basal leaves decurrent on petiole
\par
26 Basal leaves with 2- or 3-pinnatisect segments .............. {\b 23. amethystinum}
\par
26 Basal leaves with dentate to pinnatisect segments
\par
27 Leaves and bracts very coriaceous, strongly pungent;
\par
   bracts 3-5 cm, with 1-2(-3) pairs of spines ................................. {\b 18. glaciale}
\par
27 Leaves and bracts slightly coriaceous, scarcely pungent;
\par
   bracts 1-3 cm, with 3-6 pairs of spines .................................... {\b 19. dilatatum}
\par
25 Lamina of basal leaves not decurrent on petiole
\par
28 Bracts 10-15 ............................................................................. {\b 21. bourgatii}
\par
28 Bracts fewer than 10
\par
29 Bracteoles entire
\par
30 Basal leaves with dentate to 3-fid segments ..................... {\b 11. dichotomum}
\par
30 Basal leaves with 2-pinnatisect segments ............................. {\b 24. campestre}
\par
29 Bracteoles 3-cuspidate
\par
31 Inflorescence spreading, usually with 30-100 capitula ........... {\b 12. creticum}
\par
31 Inflorescence strict, with 10 or fewer capitula
\par
32 Bracts linear-lanceolate, 2·5-4 mm wide in middle;
\par
   basal leaves palmatisect ........................................................... {\b 17. palmatum}
\par
32 Bracts narrowly linear-lanceolate, 1-2 mm wide in
\par
   middle; basal leaves 3-fid .................................................. {\b 13. tricuspidatum}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. E. tenue} Lam.,{\i  Encycl. Méth. Bot.}{\b  4}: 755 (1798). Annual; stems 2-40 cm, erect. Basal leaves 1-3 cm, obovate, deeply serrate to 3- to 5-fid; lamina decurrent on short petiole. Inflorescence subcorymbose, with usually numerous, pedunculate, globose to ovoid capitula 0·5-1 cm. Bracts 1-2·5 cm, 7-9, narrowly linear-lanceolate, with 6-12 pairs of spines; bracteoles 4-cuspidate. Sepals 1-1·5 mm, ovate, with short awn. Fruit densely covered with scales.{\i  Dry, sandy places on acid soils. Iberian peninsula, except the north-east}. Hs Lu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. E. barrelieri} Boiss.,{\i  Ann. Sci. Nat.} ser. 3 (Bot.),{\b  1}: 125 (1844). Annual or biennial with blackish roots c. 2 mm thick; stems 5-30 cm, usually erect. Basal leaves 7-10 × 1-1·5 cm, persistent, linear-oblanceolate or linear-oblong, repand-crenate to crenate-serrate; lamina decurrent on petiole. Inflorescence subcorymbose, with up to 30 usually sessile, depressed-hemispherical capitula 0·5-0·8 cm. Bracts and bracteoles 12-25, not clearly differentiated from each other, the outer 1-2 cm, linear-lanceolate, entire or with 1(-2) pairs of spines. Sepals c. 2·5 mm, ovate, aristate. Fruit densely covered with scales.{\i  Places liable to winter flooding. C. & S. Italy, Corse, Sardegna, Sicilia.} Co It Sa Si.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 3. E. galioides} Lam., {\i Encycl. Méth. Bot. }{\b 4}: 757 (1798). Annual with brownish roots less than 2 mm thick; stems 3-15(-30) cm, procumbent or erect. Basal leaves 3-4 × 0·7-1 cm, decaying early, lanceolate to linear-lanceolate, deeply incise-serrate; lamina decurrent on petiole. Inflorescence spreading, with usually up to 25, sessile, depressed-hemispherical capitula 0·5-1 cm. Bracts and bracteoles 8-12, not clearly differentiated from each other, the outer 0·5-1 cm, lanceolate-acuminate, with 1-2 pairs of spines. Sepals c. 2 mm, ovate, aristate. Fruit sparsely or densely scaly.{\i  Dry, open places. W. half of Iberian peninsula.} Hs Lu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   A little-known and poorly collected species.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 4. E. viviparum} Gay, {\i Ann. Sci. Nat.} ser. 3 (Bot.), {\b 9}: 171 (1848). Biennial; stems 1-8 cm, procumbent. Basal leaves 1-3(-5) × 0·3-0·5 cm, persistent, linear-oblanceolate, closely or remotely serrate; lamina decurrent on petiole; inner rosette-leaves much
\par

\par
321}
\par