{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 42. R. micrantha} Borrer ex Sm. in Sowerby,{\i  Engl. Bot. }{\b 35}: t. 2490 (1812). Like {\b 41} but up to 3·5 m; leaflets usually rounded at base; pedicels stipitate-glandular; sepals glandular; fruit glabrous or glandular-hispid.{\i  W., S. & C. Europe, extending to N. Ukraine.} Al Au Be Bl Br Bu Co Cz Ga Ge Gr Hb He Ho Hs Hu It Ju Lu Po Rm Rs (C, W, K) Si Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 43. R. caryophyllacea} Besser,{\i  Cat. Pl. Jard. Krzemien. Suppl.}{\b  4}: 18 (1815). Up to 1 m. Prickles stout, broad, curved, often paired, nearly straight, mixed with setae on the flowering shoots. Leaflets 5-7, 10-30 × 10-20 mm, ovate to elliptical, compound-serrate, usually densely glandular on both surfaces, glabrous to pubescent. Pedicels glabrous. Sepals glandular or eglandular, deflexed after anthesis and tardily deciduous. Petals 12-20 mm, pale pink. Styles lanate. Fruit c. 10 mm, subglobose to ellipsoid, glabrous, bright red.{\i  E.C. Europe, Balkan peninsula, Ukraine.} Au Bu Cz Gr Hu It Ju Po Rm Rs (C,W).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 44. R. sicula} Tratt.,{\i  Rosac. Monogr.}{\b  2}: 86 (1823) ({\i R. thuretii} (Burnat & Gremli) Burnat & Gremli). Up to 0·5 m. Prickles usually sparse, slender, more or less curved, sometimes mixed with acicles and glandular setae. Leaflets 5-7, 7-15 × 5-15 mm, broadly ovate to suborbicular, compound-serrate, usually glabrous and sparsely glandular above, densely glandular and glabrous or sparsely pubescent beneath. Pedicels 3-5 mm, often stipitate-glandular, sometimes sparsely pubescent. Sepals glandular on the back, patent or erect after anthesis. Petals 10-15 mm, pink. Styles villous to lanate. Fruit c. 10 mm, globose, usually sparsely stipitate-glandular, red.{\i  Mediterranean region.} Al Ga Gr Hs It ?Ju Si.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 45. R. glutinosa} Sibth. & Sm., {\i Fl. Graec. Prodr. }{\b 1}: 348 (1809). Like {\b 44} but prickles mixed with numerous stalked glands and setae; leaflets more densely glandular and usually densely pubescent to tomentose on the upper surface.{\i  E. & C. Mediterranean region, Balkan peninsula}. Al Bu Cr Gr It Ju Si.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 46. R. turcica} Rouy, {\i Ill. Pl. Eur. Rar. }{\b 6}: 45 (1896) ({\i R. ferox }Bieb., non Lawrance,{\i  R. horrida} Fischer ex Crépin, non Sprengel). Like {\b 44} but prickles abundant, stout, curved, mixed with numerous setae and stalked glands; sepals deflexed and deciduous after anthesis; styles glabrous or somewhat villous.{\i  S.E. Europe.} Bu Gr Rm Rs (W, K) Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 47. R. serafinii} Viv.,{\i  Fl. Lib.} 67 (1824). Like {\b 44} but prickles hooked or falcate, rarely mixed with setae; leaflets 8-12 × 6-10 mm, shining and glabrous above; pedicels glabrous; sepals glandular or eglandular, deflexed and deciduous after anthesis; fruit glabrous.{\i  C. Mediterranean region; Bulgaria and S. Jugoslavia.} Bu Co It ?Rm Sa Si.
\par

\par
 
\pard\f0\fs28\qc {\b 11.               Agrimonia}        L.
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc By V. Skalicky.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Perennial, rhizomatous herbs. Stem erect, with glandular hairs. Leaves irregularly pinnate. Flowers 5-merous, in terminal, spike-like racemes; pedicels short, with 2 bracteoles. Hypanthium deeply concave, becoming hard in fruit; epicalyx absent; stamens 5-20; carpels 2; style terminal; ovules 1. Fruit of 1 to 2 achenes enclosed in the hypanthium, which is obconical, turbinate or cylindrical, and has hooked bristles at the upper end.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Literature: V. Skalicky,{\i  Acta Horti Bot. Prag. }{\b 1962}: 87-108 (1962).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Petals pale yellow; mature hypanthium (including bristles) 4-5 mm
\par
  ........................................................................................................... {\b 1. pilosa}
\par
1 Petals golden yellow; mature hypanthium (including bristles) 6-12 mm
\par
2 Pedicels 4-10 mm; bracts often ovate and entire ............................ {\b 4. repens}
\par
2 Pedicels 1-4 mm; lower bracts trilobed
\par
3 Stem with both short and long eglandular hairs;
\par
  mature hypanthium grooved for at least ¾ of its length ............. {\b 2. eupatoria}
\par
3 Stem with long eglandular hairs only; mature hypanthium
\par
  grooved for half its length .............................................................. {\b 3. procera}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. A. pilosa} Ledeb.,{\i  Ind. Sem. Horti Dorpat., Suppl.} 1 (1823) ({\i A. dahurica} Willd. ex Ser.). Stem 50-150 cm, with long eglandular hairs. Leaves green on both surfaces, with glandular but very few eglandular hairs beneath; leaflets with 3-8 pairs of teeth, cuneate and entire at base. Raceme lax. Petals 2·5-4 mm, pale yellow, entire. Mature hypanthium (including bristles) 4-5 × 3-3·5 mm, deeply grooved throughout its length, more or less glabrous except for the bristles; inner bristles connivent and interwoven. {\i U.S.S.R. from} c. 49°{\i  to} c. 62°{\i  N., extending westwards to S. Finland, N.E. Poland and C. Romania.} Fe Po Rm Rs (N, B, C, W)[Cz].
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. A. eupatoria} L.,{\i  Sp. Pl.} 448 (1753). Stem 15-150 cm, with both long patent, and short flexuous, eglandular hairs. Basal leaves often in a rosette and basal internodes short. Leaves with 3-6 pairs of main leaflets and 2-3 smaller pairs in between; leaflets serrate or crenulate almost to the base, dark green above, whitish- or greyish-tomentose beneath, with glandular hairs; stomata (21-)23-25(-27) µm. Pedicels at maturity 1-3 mm; lower bracts trilobed. Petals (3-)4-5(-6) mm, golden yellow, obovate, usually not emarginate. Mature hypanthium obconical to turbinate, deeply and narrowly grooved for at least ¾ of its length, and with many eglandular, appressed hairs; the inner bristles erect, the outer ascending, patent or deflexed. {\i Almost throughout Europe except the extreme north.} All except Cr Fa Is Sb.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b eupatoria}: Plants with rosette 15-40 cm, those without rosette up to 150 cm; not villous, except occasionally the tallest plants. Leaflets broadly obovate and coarsely crenulate to elliptical and serrate; glandular hairs concealed by the tomentum. Hypanthium (including bristles) 7-10 × 5-7 mm, grooved throughout its length; disc scarcely projecting; lowest bristles ascending or patent. 2n = 28. {\i Throughout the range of the species, except Açores}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b grandis} (Andrz. ex Ascherson & Graebner) Bornm.,{\i  Feddes Repert.} ({\i Beih}.) {\b 89}: 244 (1940): Plants up to 150 cm, robust, villous, usually without rosette. Leaflets elliptical, coarsely serrate; glandular hairs concealed by the tomentum. Hypanthium (including bristles) 11 × 9 mm, grooved throughout its length; disc projecting by c. 0·4 mm; lowest bristles patent or slightly deflexed.{\i  S., E. & E.C. Europe.}
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b c}) Subsp. {\b asiatica} (Juz.) Skalicky, {\i Feddes Repert.}{\b  79}: 35 (1968) ({\i A. asiatica} Juz.). Without rosette. Leaflets elliptical, coarsely and acutely dentate; glandular hairs not concealed by the tomentum. Hypanthium (including bristles) 7-8 × 7-8 mm, grooved for ¾ of its length; disc projecting by c. 0·5 mm; lowest bristles always distinctly deflexed.{\i  S.E. Russia.} ({\i C. & S.W. Asia}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 3. A. procera} Wallr.,{\i  Erst. Beitr. Fl. Hercyn. }203 (1840) ({\i A. odorata }auct., non Miller). Stem 50-120 cm, with long eglandular hairs; without basal rosette. Leaves green on both surfaces; stomata (27-)30(-33) µm.; leaflets elliptical, coarsely and acutely serrate almost to the base. Pedicels at maturity (1·5-)2·5(-4) mm; lower bracts trilobed. Petals golden yellow, oblong to obovate, often emarginate. Mature hypanthium (including bristles) c. 11 × 11 mm, turbinate, with broad, shallow grooves for c. ½ its length, and with well-developed disc; lowest bristles distinctly deflexed.
\par

\par
32}
\par