{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 21.                       Bunium}                     L.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  ({\i Bulbocastanum} Miller)
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc By P.W. Ball.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Stock a more or less globose tuber. Subterranean part of stem flexuous. Leaves 2- to 3-pinnate with narrow lobes. Sepals small or absent. Petals white, obcordate; apex inflexed. Fruit oblong-obovoid or oblong, laterally compressed. Ridges thick and prominent or slender; vittae 1-3. Stylopodium abruptly contracted into the style. Cotyledon solitary through abortion.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Fruiting pedicels not more than 0·3 mm in diameter, much
\par
  thinner than the fruit
\par
2 Bracts 5-10; pedicels minutely toothed on the inner edge  {\b 1. bulbocastanum}
\par
2 Bracts 1-5(-6); pedicels not toothed ............................................. {\b 2. alpinum}
\par
1 Fruiting pedicels at least 0·5 mm in diameter, almost
\par
  as thick as the fruit
\par
3 Rays 3-6; primary ridges of fruit slender ..................................... {\b 2. alpinum}
\par
3 Rays 6-15; primary ridges of fruit thick
\par
4 Bracts 0-2; sepals 0 or minute; styles about as long as
\par
  stylopodium .............................................................................. {\b 3. ferulaceum}
\par
4 Bracts 6-8; sepals up to 0·4 mm; styles longer than the
\par
  stylopodium ........................................................................... {\b 4. pachypodum}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. B. bulbocastanum} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 243 (1753). Usually erect perennial (5-)30-100 cm. Basal leaves with linear-lanceolate lobes. Rays (5-)10-20, slender; pedicels minutely toothed on inner edge. Bracts 5-10, lanceolate, acuminate; bracteoles like the bracts. Sepals absent or minute. Fruit 3-5 mm, oblong-ellipsoid; primary ridges slender; vittae solitary.{\i  From S. England and Islas Baleares eastwards to C. Germany and N.W. Jugoslavia. }Be Bl Br Co Ga Ge He Ho It Ju Sa Si [*Au Cz Da].
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. B. alpinum} Waldst. & Kit.,{\i  Pl. Rar. Hung. }{\b 2}: 199 (1804). Procumbent or erect perennial up to 50(-75) cm. Basal leaves with linear to elliptical or lanceolate lobes. Rays 3-10(-16), slender or stout; pedicels slender or stout, not toothed on inner edge. Bracts 1-5(-6), linear or lanceolate; bracteoles like the bracts. Sepals absent or minute. Fruit 2-4(-5·5) mm; primary ridges slender; vittae 2-3.{\i  Mountains of S. Europe. }Al Co Ga Hs It Ju Sa Si
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   A very variable species, the variation being correlated with altitude and habitat as well as distribution. The following division into subspecies is somewhat tentative.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Rays 5-10(-16)
\par
2 Leaf-lobes not more than 5(-7) mm .............................. ({\b c}) subsp. {\b montanum}
\par
2 Leaf-lobes 5-10(-20) mm ................................................... ({\b d}) subsp. {\b macuca}
\par
1 Rays 3-5(-6)
\par
3 Fruit 3·5-5·5 mm; leaf-lobes very obtuse ......................... ({\b e}) subsp. {\b petraeum}
\par
3 Fruit 2·5-3·5 mm; leaf-lobes acute or subobtuse
\par
4 Fruit oblong or oblong-ellipsoid, widest at the middle ...... ({\b a}) subsp. {\b alpinum}
\par
4 Fruit oblong-obovoid, widest above the middle ......... ({\b b}) subsp. {\b corydalinum}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b alpinum}: stems usually procumbent; leaf-lobes usually 3-5 mm, linear to lanceolate, acute or subobtuse. Rays 3-5(-6), 10-25 mm, slender or somewhat thickened in fruit. Fruit 2·5-3·5 mm, oblong or oblong-ellipsoid. •{\i  Mountains of N.W. part of Balkan peninsula}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b corydalinum} (DC.) Nyman,{\i  Consp. }304 (1879) ({\i B. corydalinum} DC.,{\i  B. alpinum} sensu Lange, non Waldst. & Kit.): Like subsp. ({\b a}) but rays 5-10(-20) mm; fruit oblong-obovoid. •{\i  High mountains of S. Spain; Corse, Sardegna.}
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b c}) Subsp. {\b montanum} (Koch) P.W. Ball,{\i  Feddes Repert.}{\b  79}: 62 (1968) ({\i B. montanum} Koch): Stems usually erect; leaf-lobes 3-5(-7) mm, linear to lanceolate, acute. Rays 5-10(-16), 20-40 mm, slender. Fruit 2·5-3·5 mm, oblong. •{\i   W. part of Balkan peninsula;} ? {\i Italy}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b d}) Subsp. {\b macuca} (Boiss.) P.W. Ball,{\i  Feddes Repert.}{\b  79}: 62 (1968) ({\i B. macuca} Boiss.): Like subsp. ({\b c}) but leaf-lobes 510(-20) mm. {\i S. Spain; Sicilia}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b e}) Subsp. {\b petraeum} (Ten.) Rouy & Camus,{\i  Fl. Fr.}{\b  7}: 350 (1901): Stems procumbent; leaf-lobes 4-8 mm, linear-elliptical, very obtuse. Rays 3-5(-6), 4-6 mm, stout. Fruit 3·5-5·5 mm, ellipsoid or oblong-ellipsoid. •{\i  C. Appennini}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 3. B. ferulaceum} Sibth. & Sm.,{\i  Fl. Graec. Prodr.}{\b  1}: 186 (1806). Erect or ascending perennial 20-60 cm. Basal leaves with linear, acute lobes. Rays 6-15; pedicels almost as thick as the fruit. Bracts 0-2, lanceolate; bracteoles 3-6, lanceolate. Sepals absent or minute. Fruit 4-6 mm, oblong or obovoid-oblong; primary ridges thick and very prominent; vittae solitary; styles about as long as stylopodium.{\i  Balkan peninsula and Aegean region; Krym.} Bu Cr Gr Ju Rs (K) Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 4. B. pachypodum} P.W. Ball,{\i  Feddes Repert.}{\b  79}: 63 (1968) ({\i Bulbocastanum incrassatum} Lange pro parte). Like {\b 3} but lobes of leaves subobtuse; bracts 6-8; sepals up to 0·4 mm, distinct; styles longer than the stylopodium.{\i  S.W. Europe.} Bl *Ga Hs Lu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 22.                     Conopodium }                 Koch
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc By P.W. Ball.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Stock a more or less globose tuber. Subterranean part of stem flexuous. Leaves 2- to 3-pinnate. Sepals absent. Petals white, rarely pink, often with a wide, brown vein on the back, obcordate; apex inflexed. Fruit oblong-ovoid, laterally compressed. Ridges filiform, indistinct; vittae 2-3. Stylopodium more or less attenuate into styles. Cotyledons 2.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  A taxonomically difficult genus requiring a thorough revision in the Iberian peninsula. The value and reliability of the characters used to separate the species is not clear, although many difficulties could be resolved by field studies and cultivation.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Styles deflexed and appressed to the stylopodium in fruit
\par
2 Bracts usually solitary; bracteoles 2 or more ..................... {\b 6. thalictrifolium}
\par
2 Bracts 0; bracteoles 0-1 ............................................................. {\b 7. bunioides}
\par
1 Styles erect or patent, or rarely somewhat deflexed,
\par
  but not appressed to the stylopodium
\par
3 Lower part of stem leafless ............................................................. {\b 1. majus}
\par
3 Lower part of stem leafy, with ± persistent leaf-bases
\par
4 Middle and upper cauline leaves with sheath not more
\par
  than 7 mm and less than ¼ as long as lamina ............................. {\b 4. ramosum}
\par
4 Middle and upper cauline leaves with sheath usually
\par
  more than 7 mm and always at least ¼ as long as lamina
\par
5 Lower cauline leaves with ovate or suborbicular,
\par
  pinnatifid to dentate lobes ........................................................ {\b 2. pyrenaeum}
\par
5 Lower cauline leaves with linear, lanceolate or oblong lobes
\par
6 Cauline leaves with linear or lanceolate lobes;
\par
  bracteoles 0-1 ............................................................................... {\b 3. bourgaei}
\par
6 Cauline leaves with long, linear-setaceous to linear
\par
  lobes; bracteoles usually 5 or more ....................................... {\b 5. capillifolium}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. C. majus} (Gouan) Loret in Loret & Barrandon,{\i  Fl. Montpell.} ed. 2, 214 (1886) ({\i C. denudatum} Koch). Stems 15-50(-90) cm, erect, leafless at the base. Basal leaves with elliptical to ovate, acutely lobed lobes; cauline leaves with linear to filiform lobes; sheaths of middle and upper leaves 1-8 mm, not more than ¼ as long as lamina. Umbels with 6-12 rays; bracts 0-2; bracteoles 2 or more. Fruit 3-4 mm; stylopodium about as long as wide;
\par

\par
329}
\par