{\rtf1\ansi \deff4\deflang1033{\fonttbl{\f4\froman\fcharset0\fprq2 Times New Roman;}}{\colortbl;\red0\green0\blue0;\red0\green0\blue255;\red0\green255\blue255;\red0\green255\blue0;\red255\green0\blue255;\red255\green0\blue0;\red255\green255\blue0;\red255\green255\blue255;\red0\green0\blue128;\red0\green128\blue128;\red0\green128\blue0;\red128\green0\blue128;\red128\green0\blue0;\red128\green128\blue0;\red128\green128\blue128;\red192\green192\blue192;}{\stylesheet{\widctlpar \f4\fs20\lang2057 \snext0 Normal;}{\*\cs10 \additive Default Paragraph Font;}}{\info{\author dddd}{\operator dddd}{\creatim\yr1998\mo11\dy11\hr17\min15}{\revtim\yr1998\mo11\dy11\hr17\min15}{\version2}{\edmins0}{\nofpages4}{\nofwords979}{\nofchars5582}{\*\company  }{\vern57431}}\widowctrl\ftnbj\aenddoc\hyphcaps0 \fet0\sectd \linex0 {\*\pnseclvl1\pnucrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl2\pnucltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl3\pndec\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl4\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl5\pndec\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl6\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl7\pnlcrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl8\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl9\pnlcrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}
\pard\plain \ \f4\fs20\lang2057 {\fs28 subglobose capitula 0\'b75-1 cm; axis of capitulum projecting in a bract-like appendage. Bracts 1\'b75-2\'b75(-5) cm, 3-7, linear-lanceolate, entire; bracteoles entire. Sepals 1-1\'b75 mm, ovate, shortly aristate. Fruit densely scaly.}{\i\fs28  Places liable to winter flooding. Portugal and S.W. Spain; Sardegna.}{\fs28  Hs Lu Sa.
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 26. E. pandanifolium}{\fs28  Cham. & Schlecht.,}{\i\fs28  Linnaea}{\b\fs28  1}{\fs28 : 336 (1826). Perennial; stems 150-400 cm, erect. Basal leaves 150-250 cm, ensiform, simple, with slender marginal spines. Inflorescence paniculate, of numerous greenish-white, ovoid-globose capitula 6-10 \'d7 4-8 mm; bracts c. 2 mm, 6-8, ovate-lanceolate, acute, entire; bracteoles entire, sometimes ciliolate. Sepals c. 1 mm, broadly ovate.}{\i\fs28  Banks of ditches. Naturalized in the Mondego plain, C. Portugal.}{\fs28  [Lu.] (}{\i\fs28 Subtropical South America}{\fs28 .)
\par 
\par }
\pard \qc\ {\fs28  }{\b\fs28 8.                  Lagoecia}{\fs28                         L.
\par }{\fs24 By  †T.G. Tutin.
\par 
\par }
\pard \ {\fs28 Annual. Leaves simply pinnate. Umbels compound. Partial umbels 1-flowered. Bracts and bracteoles leaf-like, pinnatisect. Sepals like the bracteoles, conspicuous. Style 1. Fruit covered with short, brittle, clavate hairs.
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 1. L. cuminoides}{\fs28  L., }{\i\fs28 Sp. Pl.}{\fs28  203 (1753). Annual 10-30 cm. Basal leaves with ovate, dentate segments; upper cauline with segments deeply divided into short, lanceolate, aristate lobes. Umbels 0\'b75-1\'b75 cm in diameter, dense, globose; rays numerous. Bracts like the leaves; bracteoles 4, 2-pinnatisect, with setaceous lobes. Sepals pinnatisect, the lobes setaceous and sometimes 2- to 3-fid. Fruit c. 2 mm. }{\i\fs28 Mediterranean region, extending to S.E. Portugal and Bulgaria.}{\fs28  Bu Cr Gr Hs It Lu.
\par 
\par }
\pard \qc\ {\fs28  }{\b\fs28 9.                     Petagnia}{\fs28                      Guss.
\par }{\fs24 By  †T.G. Tutin.
\par 
\par }
\pard \ {\fs28 Basal leaves usually peltate, deeply lobed; cauline palmately divided. Inflorescence repeatedly branched. Sepals conspicuous. Petals whitish, oblong-cuneate; apex short, inflexed. Ovary 1-locular; ovule 1. Fruit subglobose, hard and nut-like. Ridges prominent above, obsolete below; vittae absent.
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 1. P. saniculifolia}{\fs28  Guss.,}{\i\fs28  Fl. Sic. Prodr.}{\b\fs28  1}{\fs28 : 311 (1827). Perennial. Stock stout; stems up to 50 cm. Basal leaves long-petiolate, the lamina 4-6 cm, 5-lobed, the lobes dentate; cauline leaves subsessile, deeply 3- to 5-lobed. Inflorescence cymose, the ultimate branches with a central, sessile female or hermaphrodite flower and 2-4 male flowers, whose pedicels are more or less adnate to the ovary of the central flower. Bracts and bracteoles small. Fruit c. 2\'b75 mm, glabrous. 2n = 42.}{\i\fs28  Beside woodland streams. N. Sicilia.}{\fs28  Si.
\par 
\par }
\pard \qc\ {\fs28  Subfam.          }{\b\fs28  Apioideae}{\fs28 
\par 
\par }
\pard \ {\fs28 Leaves always exstipulate. Endocarp soft; vittae usually present in the ripe fruit. Style terminal on the stylopodium. Fruit never scaly.
\par 
\par }
\pard \qc\ {\fs28  }{\b\fs28 10.                        Echinophora}{\fs28                    L.
\par }{\fs24 By  †T.G. Tutin.
\par 
\par }
\pard \ {\fs28 Leaves 2- to 3-pinnate. Sepals pungent, persistent, often unequal in the outer flowers. Petals white or yellow, oblanceolate, emarginate, the outer often larger; apex inflexed. Fruit ovoid-oblong; styles long, persistent, woody. Ridges low, indistinct; vittae solitary.
\par 
\par }
\pard \li200\ {\fs28 Leaf-lobes keeled beneath, sulcate above, spine-tipped;
\par  petals white, very rarely pink .......................................................... }{\b\fs28 1. spinosa}{\fs28 
\par Leaf-lobes flat, not spine-tipped; petals yellow ............................ }{\b\fs28 2. tenuifolia}{\fs28 
\par 
\par 
\par }
\pard \ {\fs28    }{\b\fs28 1. E. spinosa}{\fs28  L.,}{\i\fs28  Sp. Pl.}{\fs28  239 (1753). More or less pubescent perennial up to 50 cm. Leaves 2-pinnate, rigid; lobes thick, keeled beneath, sulcate above, spine-tipped. Rays 4-8, pubescent. Bracts and bracteoles 5-10, oblong-lanceolate to linear, spinose. Each partial umbel with a central hermaphrodite flower and a number of male flowers whose more or less connate pedicels form an involucre round the fruit. Petals white, or very rarely pink, pubescent on the back, the outer larger than the inner. }{\i\fs28  Maritime sands. Mediterranean region.}{\fs28  Al Bl Co Ga Gr Hs It Ju Sa Si
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 2. E. tenuifolia}{\fs28  L., }{\i\fs28 Sp. Pl.}{\fs28  239 (1753). Greyish-pubescent perennial 20-50 cm. Leaves 2- to 3-pinnate, lanceolate in outline; lobes somewhat fleshy, flat, dentate, not spine-tipped. Rays 2-5, pubescent. Bracts 2-5, lanceolate or linear-lanceolate; bracteoles 5, ovate, deflexed, spinescent in fruit. Partial umbels as in }{\b\fs28 1}{\fs28 . Petals yellow, ciliate, the outer scarcely larger than the inner.}{\i\fs28  Dry places. S. Europe, from Sicilia eastwards.}{\fs28  Bu Cr Gr It Rm Rs (K) Si Tu.
\par 
\par  (}{\b\fs28 a}{\fs28 ) Subsp. }{\b\fs28 tenuifolia}{\fs28 : Stem sulcate; lobes of cauline leaves lanceolate.}{\i\fs28  S.Italy and Sicilia.}{\fs28 
\par  (}{\b\fs28 b}{\fs28 ) Subsp. }{\b\fs28 sibthorpiana}{\fs28  (Guss.) Tutin}{\i\fs28  Feddes Repert.}{\b\fs28  74}{\fs28 : 31 (1967) (}{\i\fs28 E. sibthorpiana}{\fs28  Guss.): stem striate; lobes of cauline leaves ovate. }{\i\fs28 From Greece and Kriti to Krym}{\fs28 .
\par 
\par }
\pard \qc\ {\fs28  }{\b\fs28 11.                    Myrrhoides}{\fs28                Heister ex Fabr.
\par (}{\i\fs28 Physocaulis}{\fs28  (DC.) Tausch)
\par }{\fs24 By J.F.M. Cannon.
\par 
\par }
\pard \ {\fs28 Leaves 2-pinnate. Sepals absent. Petals white, obovate; apex short, inflexed. Fruit subcylindrical, scarcely beaked; stigmas sessile. Primary ridges 5, obtuse; vittae solitary; endosperm deeply furrowed.
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 1. M. nodosa}{\fs28  (L.) Cannon,}{\i\fs28  Feddes Repert.}{\b\fs28  79}{\fs28 : 65 (1968) (}{\i\fs28 Physocaulis nodosus}{\fs28  (L.) Koch,}{\i\fs28  Chaerophyllum nodosum}{\fs28  (L.) Crantz). Annual up to 100 cm. Stem often purplish, hispid, conspicuously swollen below the nodes at maturity. Leaves densely strigose; lobes ovate, irregularly dentate. Bracts absent; bracteoles 5-7. Rays (1-)2-3. Style obsolete; stigmas sessile on the stylopodium. Fruit 4-10 mm, gradually narrowed towards the top, covered with curved, upward-pointing, white bristles, many of which arise from tubercles. 2n = 22.}{\i\fs28  S. Europe, extending northwards to Hungary.}{\fs28  Al Bu Co Ga Gr Hs Hu It Ju Lu Rm Rs (K) Sa Si Tu.
\par 
\par }
\pard \qc\ {\fs28  }{\b\fs28 12.                      Chaerophyllum}{\fs28                      L.
\par }{\fs24 By J.F.M. Cannon.
\par 
\par }
\pard \ {\fs28 Leaves 1- to 3-pinnate or ternate. Sepals obsolete. Petals white, pinkish or yellow, emarginate; apex inflexed. Fruit narrowly oblong to very narrowly ovoid, more or less gradually narrowed towards the scarcely beaked apex, slightly compressed laterally. Ridges wide and rounded; vittae solitary.
\par 
\par }
\pard \li200\ {\fs28 1 Petals distinctly ciliate; styles nearly erect, forming
\par   a very acute angle ....................................................... (}{\b\fs28 7-9}{\fs28 ). }{\b\fs28 hirsutum}{\fs28  group
\par 1 Petals not ciliate; styles nearly always divergent
\par 2 Leaf-lobes almost undivided
\par 3 Leaf-lobes greyish beneath, with a dense, white tomentum
\par   over most of the lower surface
\par 4 Leaf-lobes with deep, rather irregular serrations;
\par   petiole with a \'b1 dense covering of patent hairs ........................... }{\b\fs28 6. azoricum}{\fs28 
\par 4 Leaf-lobes rather irregularly crenate-serrate; petiole
\par   with short, crispate hairs ........................................................... }{\b\fs28 3. heldreichii}{\fs28 
\par 3 Leaf-lobes greenish beneath, glabrous or with hairs \'b1
\par   confined to the veins
\par 5 Leaf-lobes finely and regularly serrate, obliquely subcordate
\par   at base; lobes of upper leaves acute ......................................... }{\b\fs28 2. byzantinum}{\fs28 
\par 
\par 324}
\par }