{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 12. C. temulentum} L., {\i Sp. Pl. }258 (1753). Erect biennial up to 100 cm. Stem clothed with setose, more or less appressed hairs, purple-spotted to almost entirely purple. Leaves 2- to 3- pinnate; apical lobes with relatively obtuse points, dark green, with appressed hairs on both surfaces. Rays 6-12. Bracts absent; bracteoles hairy. Petals white. Fruit 4-7 mm, gradually narrowed to the apex; styles about as long as the flattened upper surface of the stylopodium. 2n = 14, 22.{\i  Most of Europe, but absent from or casual in much of the north and rare in the Mediterranean region.} All except Az Bl Cr Fa Fe Is No Sa Sb.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  The fruit is always glabrous in W. & N. Europe. In S. & S.E. Europe forma {\i eriocarpum }Guss., with pubescent fruit, occurs locally.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 13.                   Anthriscus}                     Pers.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  ({\i Cerefolium} Fabr.)
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc By J.F.M. Cannon.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Leaves 2- to 3-pinnate. Sepals minute or absent. Petals white, emarginate; apex inflexed. Fruit narrowly oblong, rarely ovoid, with a usually well-developed beak; commissure constricted. Ridges confined to the beak; vittae solitary.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Robust perennial or biennial; fruit with a short, poorly
\par
  developed beak ........................................................... ({\b 1-4}).{\b  sylvestris} group
\par
1 Annual; fruit with a prominent, well-developed beak
\par
2 Fruit very narrow; beak up to 4 mm, 1/3-1/2 as long as
\par
  the rest of the fruit .................................................................... {\b 5. cerefolium}
\par
2 Fruit ovoid to oblong-ovoid; beak up to 2 mm, about ½
\par
  as long as the rest of the fruit
\par
3 Fruit usually with stiff, spine-like bristles (rarely
\par
  glabrous); petals minute, inconspicuous ....................................... {\b 6. caucalis}
\par
3 Fruit glabrous; petals ± conspicuous ......................................... {\b 7. tenerrima}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    ({\b 1-4}). {\b A. sylvestris} group. Robust biennials or perennials up to 150 cm, often perennating by buds in the axils of the basal leaves. Leaves 3-pinnate with pinnatifid lobes. Rays 4-15, glabrous. Bracts 0; bracteoles several, lanceolate-ovate. Pedicels elongating but not becoming noticeably thickened in fruit. Fruit up to 10 mm, narrowly ovoid-oblong, smooth or with bristly tubercles, very shortly beaked.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   A group of closely related taxa that have sometimes (e.g. by Thellung in Hegi,{\i  Ill. Fl. Mitteleur}.) been treated as subspecies. Evidence of sympatric occurrence without obvious hybridization suggests that specific status is more appropriate.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Fruit black or dark brown when ripe, smooth and shiny,
\par
  very rarely with a few small tubercles
\par
2 Lowest primary leaf-divisions much smaller than the rest
\par
  of the leaf ..................................................................................... {\b 1. sylvestris}
\par
2 Lowest primary leaf-divisions nearly as large as the rest
\par
  of the leaf ........................................................................................... {\b 2. nitida}
\par
1 Fruit greenish to brownish when ripe, rather dull, unusually
\par
  with ± prominent tubercles, which often end in a curved bristle
\par
3 Leaf-lobes not distinctly cuneate ............................................... {\b 3. nemorosa}
\par
3 Leaf-lobes distinctly cuneate .................................................. {\b 4. fumarioides}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. A. sylvestris} (L.) Hoffm., {\i Gen. Umb.} 40 (1814) ({\i A. torquata} Coste, {\i Chaerophyllum sylvestre} L.,{\i  Cerefolium sylvestre} (L.) Besser). Leaves relatively dull. Partial umbels with 4-8 fruits. Fruit 7-10 mm, with thick, short hairs around the base (sometimes difficult to detect in very ripe material). 2n = 16.{\i  Almost throughout Europe but rare in the Mediterranean region.} Al Au Be Br Bu Cz Da Fe Ga Ge Gr He Hb Hs Ho Hu It Ju Lu No Po Rm Rs (N, B, C,W, K, E) Su.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. A. nitida} (Wahlenb.) Garcke,{\i  Fl. Nord-Mittel-Deutschl.} ed. 7, 180 (1865) ({\i A. sylvestris} subsp.{\i  alpestris }(Wimmer & Grab.)Gremli). Leaves dark green and rather glossy. Partial umbels usually with 3-6 fruits. Fruit 5-7 mm, without a ring of hairs around the base.{\i  C. & E. Europe.} Au Bu Cz Ga Ge He Hu It Ju Po Rm Rs (B, W).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 3. A. nemorosa} (Bieb.) Sprengel, {\i Pl. Umb. Prodr.} 27 (1813) ({\i A. aemula} (Woronow) Schischkin). Leaves glabrous above, hairy on the veins beneath; lobes not distinctly cuneate at base. Fruit 8-10 mm, greenish to blackish-green when ripe, usually tuberculate and hispidulous.{\i  Italy, Balkan peninsula, U.S.S.R.} Al Bu Cr Gr It Ju Rm Rs (N, C, K) Si.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 4. A. fumarioides} (Waldst. & Kit.) Sprengel,{\i  Pl. Umb. Prodr.} 27 (1813) (?{\i  A. vandasii} Velen.). Like {\b 3} but leaf-lobes cuneate at base; fruit 6-8 mm, yellowish-brown when ripe. •{\i  Italy and W. part of Balkan peninsula}. Al ?Au Ju It Gr.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 5. A. cerefolium} (L.) Hoffm.,{\i  Gen. Umb.} 41 (1814) ({\i A. longirostris} Bertol.,{\i  Cerefolium cerefolium} (L.) Schinz & Thell.). wiry annual up to 70 cm. Leaves 3-pinnate with pinnatifid lobes. Rays 2-6, more or less pubescent. Bracteoles linear. Fruit 7-10 mm, almost linear, with a prominent, slender beak up to 4 mm. Styles much longer than the stylopodium, nearly erect.{\i  Probably native in E.C. & S.E. Europe; widespread as an alien elsewhere; var.} cerefolium{\i  cultivated as a herb and often naturalized.} Al Au Bu Cz Gr Hu Ju Po Rm Rs (C, W, E) [Be Br Da Ga Ge He Ho Hs It Rs (B)].
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   The fruit may be glabrous (var.{\i  cerefolium}, which includes the cultivated plant) or may have numerous hooked hairs (var.{\i  longirostris} (Bertol.) Cannon).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 6. A. caucalis} Bieb., {\i Fl. Taur.-Cauc. }{\b 1}: 230 (1808) ({\i A. scandicina }Mansfeld,{\i  A. vulgaris }Pers., non Bernh.,{\i  Chaerophyllum anthriscus} (L.) Crantz, {\i Cerefolium anthriscus} (L.) G. Beck). wiry annual up to 80(-100) cm, often purplish towards the base. Leaves 2- to 3-pinnate; lobes 1-10 mm, dentate or pinnatisect. Rays 2-6, glabrous. Bracteoles linear-lanceolate to ovate, aristate. Pedicels elongating and becoming thicker than the rays in fruit. Petals minute. Fruit 3 mm, ovoid; beak up to 2 mm, glabrous. 2n = 14.{\i  Dry places. W.,S. & C. Europe, extending to S. Sweden and S. Ukraine.} Al Au Bl Br Bu Co Cz Da Ga Gr Hb He Ho Hs Hu It Ju Lu Po Rm Rs (W, K) Su Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   The fruit is usually covered with hooked spines (var.{\i  caucalis}) but is glabrous in var.{\i  neglecta} (Boiss. & Reuter) P. Silva & Franco.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 7. A. tenerrima} Boiss. & Spruner, {\i Ann. Sci. Nat}. ser. 3 (Bot.), {\b 2}: 60 (1844) ({\i A. tenella }Hayek). Slender, flexuous annual up to 40 cm, but usually less. Leaves 3-pinnate; lobes of the lower leaves ovate, those of the upper leaves sometimes linear. Rays 2-4. Bracteoles lanceolate-ovate. Pedicels elongating and becoming very strongly thickened in fruit. Petals conspicuous. Fruit 5 mm; beak up to 2 mm, glabrous. {\i Shady places on mountains. • C. & S. Greece.} Gr.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 14.                      Scandix}                           L.
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc By J.F.M. Cannon.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Leaves (1-)2- to 3-pinnate, with narrow lobes. Umbels with few rays, sometimes reduced to one ray only. Sepals absent. Petals white, oblong, often very unequal in the outer flowers; apex incurved or inflexed. Fruit subcylindrical, slightly compressed laterally; beak up to four times as long as the seed-bearing part. Ridges prominent, slender; vittae very slender.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   All species occur in open habitats, often as weeds.
\par

\par
326}
\par