{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Bracteoles obviously pinnate, with narrow, linear,
\par
  patent lobes ..................................................................................... {\b 1. stellata}
\par
1 Bracteoles entire or with 2 or more coarse, irregular
\par
  teeth or forward-pointing lobes
\par
2 Beak somewhat compressed laterally, not very clearly
\par
  differentiated from the seed-bearing part of the fruit;
\par
  carpophore usually 2-fid at the top ............................................... {\b 2. australis}
\par
2 Beak strongly compressed dorsally and obviously distinct
\par
  from the seed-bearing part of the fruit; carpophore
\par
  entire ................................................................................... {\b 3. pecten-veneris}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. S. stellata} Banks & Solander in A. Russell,{\i  Nat. Hist. Aleppo} ed. 2,{\b  2}: 249 (1794) ({\i S. pinnatifida} Vent.). Up to 30 cm, slender. Leaves 1- to 3-pinnate, with narrowly linear lobes. Rays 1-3. Bracts absent or 1, like the leaves; bracteoles obviously pinnate, without a distinct membranous margin. Outer petals scarcely radiate. Beak of fruit 1·5-3 times as long as the seed-bearing part, strongly compressed dorsally.{\i  S. Spain; S. Jugoslavia and N.E. Greece; Krym.} Gr Hs Ju Rs (K).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. S. australis} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 257 (1753). Leaves 1- to 3-pinnate, with narrowly linear lobes. Rays 1-3. Bracts absent; bracteoles ovate to narrowly oblong-ovate, often with membranous margin, hairy or glabrous. Outer petals sometimes strongly radiate. Fruit 15-40 mm; beak of fruit usually at least twice as long as seed-bearing part, somewhat compressed laterally.{\i  S. Europe}. Al Bu Cr Ga Gr Hs It Ju Lu Rm Rs (K) Sa Si Tu [Ga].
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   A very complex range of variation has stimulated the description of numerous subspecies. The following are well-marked:
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Beak not longer than the seed-bearing part of fruit  ({\b b}) subsp. {\b brevirostris}
\par
1 Beak distinctly longer than the seed-bearing part of fruit
\par
2 Styles about as long as stylopodium ......................... ({\b a}) subsp. {\b microcarpa}
\par
2 Styles distinctly longer than stylopodium
\par
3 Marginal petals much longer than the others and conspicuously
\par
  radiate ......................................................................... ({\b c}) subsp. {\b grandiflora}
\par
3 Marginal petals only slightly longer than others and
\par
  not conspicuously radiate ................................................ ({\b d}) subsp. {\b australis}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b microcarpa} (Lange) Thell. in Hegi,{\i  Ill. Fl. Mitteleur. }{\b 5}({\b 2}): 1034 (1926) ({\i S. microcarpa }Lange): Slender. Bracteoles ovate-lanceolate, usually 2- to 3-fid, about as long as the rays. Styles about equalling the stylopodium, often reddish. Beak longer than the seed-bearing part of fruit.{\i  Portugal & Spain}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b brevirostris} (Boiss. & Reuter) Thell. in Hegi,{\i  loc. cit.} (1926) ({\i S. brevirostris} Boiss. & Reuter): Bracteoles small and inconspicuous, with long hairs. Styles scarcely longer than the stylopodium. Beak not longer than the seed-bearing part of fruit.{\i  Spain}.
\par
 ({\b c}) Subsp. {\b grandiflora} (L.) Thell. in Hegi,{\i  op. cit. }1035 (1926) ({\i S. grandiflora} L.): Often relatively robust. Bracteoles broadly elliptical and usually fringed with long hairs. Marginal radiate petals very conspicuous. Styles 4-6 times as long as the stylopodium. Beak longer than the seed-bearing part of fruit.{\i  Balkan peninsula and Aegean region; Italy; naturalized in France}.
\par
 ({\b d}) Subsp. {\b australis} (incl. subsp.{\i  balcanica }Vierh., subsp. {\i gallica }Vierh., subsp.{\i  curvirostris} (Murb.) Vierh., {\i S. falcata }Loudon): Bracteoles very variable in shape and pubescence. Marginal petals only slightly longer than the rest and not conspicuously radiate. Styles at least twice as long as stylopodium. Beak much longer than the seed-bearing part of fruit.{\i  Mediterranean region; Romania; Krym}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 3. S. pecten-veneris} L.,{\i  Sp. Pl.} 256 (1753). Up to 50 cm. Leaves 2- to 3-pinnate, with linear lobes. Rays 1-3. Bracts absent or rarely few; bracteoles sometimes with membranous margins, simple or irregularly divided, with jagged teeth, often with patent hairs. Outer petals often somewhat enlarged and radiate. Fruit 15-80 mm, usually large and robust; beak usually longer than seed-bearing part of fruit, more or less strongly flattened dorsally.{\i  W., C. & S. Europe, extending as a casual northwards to} 66° {\i N. in Fennoscandia.} Al Au Be Bl Br Bu Co Cr Cz Da Ga Ge Hb He Ho Hs Hu It Ju Lu Po Rm Rs (K) Si Su Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 This species, like {\b 2}, shows a complex range of variation.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Beak less than twice as long as the seed-bearing part
\par
  of fruit; styles less than 0·5 mm; fruit c. 15 mm ........... ({\b a}) subsp. {\b brachycarpa}
\par
1 Beak at least twice as long as the seed-bearing part of fruit;
\par
  styles 0·4-2·5 mm; fruit 20-80 mm
\par
2 Beak strongly flattened, 3-4 times as long as the seed-bearing
\par
  part of fruit; styles 1-2·5 mm, 2-4(-6) times as long as the
\par
  stylopodium; bracteoles conspicuous, longer than the pedicels
\par
  and persistent ............................................................ ({\b b}) subsp. {\b pecten-veneris}
\par
2 Beak less strongly flattened, 2-3 times as long as the seed-
\par
  bearing part of fruit; styles 0·4-0·75 mm, less than twice as
\par
  long as the stylopodium; bracteoles small, oblong-lanceolate,
\par
  as long as the pedicels and soon withering ............... ({\b c}) subsp. {\b macrorhyncha}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b brachycarpa} (Guss.) Thell. in Hegi,{\i  Ill. Fl. Mitteleur. }{\b 5}({\b 2}): 1038 (1926) ({\i S. brachycarpa} Guss.):{\i  Greece, Italy & Sicilia. Naturalized in France & Germany}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b pecten-veneris} : 2n = 26. {\i Throughout the range of the species}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b c}) Subsp. {\b macrorhyncha} (C.A. Meyer) Rouy & Camus,{\i  Fl. Fr.}{\b  7}: 299 (1901) ({\i S. macrorhyncha }C.A. Meyer, {\i S. hispanica} Boiss.): {\i S. Europe}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b S. iberica }Bieb., {\i Fl. Taur.-Cauc.}{\b  1}: 425 (1808) from S.W. Asia, has been recorded from near Istanbul, but probably only as a casual. It is like {\b 3} but with (5-)6-9 rays in the terminal umbel, outer petals strongly radiate, and beak of fruit less strongly flattened.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 15.                     Myrrhis}                  Miller
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc By J.F.M. Cannon.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Leaves 2- to 3-pinnate. Sepals minute. Petals white, cuneate-obovate; apex short, inflexed. Fruit linear-oblong, beaked. Ridges very prominent; vittae obsolete at maturity.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. M. odorata} (L.) Scop.,{\i  Fl. Carn. }ed. 2, {\b 1}: 207 (1772). Puberulent, strongly aromatic perennial up to 200 cm. Leaf-lobes oblong-lanceolate, deeply dentate; sheaths conspicuous. Rays 4-20. Bracts usually absent; bracteoles several. Some partial umbels bearing male flowers only, the peduncles of these shorter and more slender than those of the hermaphrodite umbels. Fruit 15-25 mm, scabrid with bristly hairs especially near the top, dark shiny brown when mature.{\i  Alps, Pyrenees, Appennini, mountains of W. part of Balkan peninsula; cultivated for flavouring and for fodder, and widely naturalized elsewhere.} Al Au Ga *Ge He Hs It Ju [Be Br Cz Da Fe Hb Ho Is No Po Rs (N, B, W) su].
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 16.             Molopospermum}                Koch
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc By J.F.M. Cannon.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Leaves 2- to 4-pinnate. Sepals present. Petals white, lanceolate; apex more or less inflexed. Fruit ovoid, compressed laterally. Ridges prominent, the dorsal narrowly winged.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. M. peloponnesiacum} (L.) Koch,{\i  Nova Acta Acad. Leop.Carol.}{\b  12}({\b 1}): 108 (1824) ({\i M. cicutarium} DC.). Robust, glabrous perennial up to 200 cm. Basal and lower cauline leaves c. 100 cm; lobes lanceolate, deeply incise-dentate. Lateral umbels often verticillate. Rays 12-21. Bracts and bracteoles 6-9, lanceolate,
\par

\par
327}
\par