{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28\qc   Subfam. {\b  Saniculoideae}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Leaves always exstipulate. Endocarp soft; vittae usually present in the ripe fruit. Style surrounded by the annular or pelviform stylopodium. Fruit usually scaly.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc   {\b 4.                Sanicula}                       L.
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc By †T.G. Tutin.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Stock short. Leaves palmately 3- to 7-partite. Inflorescence of a number of umbels in a cyme, often forming a false compound umbel. Bracts small. Sepals conspicuous. Fruit covered with hooked bristles. Vittae conspicuous or not.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Leaves crenate-serrate, the teeth ending in a short
\par
  seta; bracts linear, entire or nearly so; fruit 4-5 mm .................... {\b 1. europaea}
\par
1 Leaves sharply toothed, the teeth ending in a long seta;
\par
  bracts lanceolate, toothed like the leaves; fruit 3 mm ..................... {\b 2. azorica}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. S. europaea} L.,{\i  Sp. Pl.} 235 (1753). Perennial 20-60 cm, with a stout stock. Basal leaves long-petiolate; segments obovate-cuneate, crenate-serrate and sometimes lobed, the teeth ending in a short seta (c. 0·5 mm). False umbels usually with 3 rays. Bracts linear, entire or sometimes with a few teeth; bracteoles entire. Petals pink or white. Fruit 4-5 mm. 2n = 16.{\i  Throughout Europe, except the northern and eastern margins; only on mountains in the south.} All except Az Bl Cr Fa Is Rs (N, E) Sb.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. S. azorica} Guthnick ex Seub.,{\i  Fl. Azor.} 41 (1844). Like {\b 1} but usually larger; leaves sharply toothed, the teeth ending in a long seta (c. 3 mm); false umbels usually with more than 3 rays; bracts lanceolate, toothed like the leaves; fruit 3 mm. •{\i  Açores.} Az.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc   {\b 5.                     Hacquetia}                         DC.
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc By †T.G. Tutin.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Stock shortly creeping. Leaves digitately 3-partite. Inflorescence a simple umbel. Bracts large, leaf-like. Sepals conspicuous. Fruit glabrous, ovoid, slightly compressed laterally; ridges rather stout, prominent; vittae conspicuous, solitary under the ridges.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. H. epipactis} (Scop.) DC.,{\i  Prodr.}{\b  4}: 85 (1830). Glabrous perennial 10-25 cm, with a creeping rhizome. Basal leaves long-petiolate; segments 2-4 cm, sessile, ovate, cuneate, lobed and toothed in the upper half. Umbels scapose. Bracteoles 1-2 cm, 5-6, like the leaf-segments, longer than the flowers. Petals yellow. Fruit c. 4 mm. 2n = 16.{\i  In woods. • E. Alps, mountains of W. Hrvatska, N. Carpathians, S. Poland; local.} Au Cz It Ju Po.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 6.                      Astrantia}                            L.
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc By †T.G. Tutin.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Leaves palmately lobed or palmatipartite. Inflorescence a simple umbel. Bracteoles large, coloured. Sepals conspicuous. Petals whitish, lanceolate; apex long, inflexed. Fruit with inflated ridges, covered with vesicular scales. Carpophore absent.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Bracteoles coriaceous, with prominent cross-veins;
\par
  calyx-teeth long-acuminate ............................................................... {\b 1. major}
\par
1 Bracteoles membranous, with inconspicuous cross-veins;
\par
  calyx-teeth subobtuse or mucronate
\par
2 At least some basal leaves more than 5-partite
\par
3 Leaf-segments deeply serrate; fruit ellipsoid ................................... {\b 2. minor}
\par
3 Leaf-segments obscurely serrate or denticulate; fruit
\par
  subcylindrical ............................................................................. {\b 3. pauciflora}
\par
2 All basal leaves 5-partite
\par
4 Middle segment of leaf free nearly or quite to base;
\par
  bracteoles exceeding the umbel .................................................... {\b 4. bavarica}
\par
4 Middle segment of leaf united to the lateral ones in the lower
\par
  part; bracteoles shorter than or equalling the umbel .................. {\b 5. carniolica}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. A. major} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 235 (1753). Robust perennial up to 100 cm. Stems usually unbranched, except at the top. Basal leaves long-petiolate, 3- to 5(-7)-partite; segments lanceolate to obovate from a cuneate base, serrate or dentate and often somewhat lobed; middle segment free for at least 2/3 its length. Bracteoles equalling or exceeding the umbel, lanceolate or oblanceolate, acuminate, more or less connate and whitish below, usually pink or purplish towards the apex. Calyx-teeth narrowly lanceolate, long-acuminate. Fruit 6-8 mm, nearly cylindrical.{\i  C. Europe, extending to N. Spain, C. Italy, Bulgaria and White Russia.} Al Au Bu Cz Ga Ge He Hs Hu It Ju Po Rm Rs (C, W) [Br Da Fe].
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b major}: Bracteoles equalling the umbel. 2n = 28. {\i Throughout the range of the species, except some of the higher mountains.}
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b carinthiaca} Arcangeli, {\i Comp. Fl. Ital.} 265 (1882): Bracteoles twice as long as the umbel, at least in the terminal umbel. {\i Higher mountains from the S. Alps to N.W. Spain}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. A. minor} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 235 (1753). Slender perennial 20-40 cm. Stems often branched about half-way up. Basal leaves usually 7-partite; segments lanceolate to obovate from a cuneate base deeply and sharply serrate, mostly free nearly or quite to base. Bracteoles equalling or exceeding the umbel, lanceolate, acute or acuminate, free to base. Calyx-teeth ovate-oblong, mucronulate. Fruit c. 3 mm, ellipsoid. 2n = 16. •{\i  Pyrenees, S.W. Alps, N. Appennini.} Ga He Hs It.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 3. A. pauciflora} Bertol. in Desv.,{\i  Jour. Bot. Appl.}{\b  2}: 76 (1813). Like {\b 2} but basal leaves 5- to 7-partite with usually linear-lanceolate, obscurely serrate or denticulate segments; fruit c. 4 mm, subcylindrical.{\i  Calcicole. • Italy} ({\i C. & S. Appennini, Alpi Apuane}). It.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 4. A. bavarica} F.W. Schultz,{\i  Flora }({\i Regensb}.) {\b 41}: 161 (1858). Slender perennial up to 60 cm. Stems usually unbranched except at top. Basal leaves long-petiolate, 5-partite; segments lanceolate from a cuneate base, irregularly dentate and often somewhat lobed; middle segment free nearly to base. Bracteoles exceeding the umbel, narrowly lanceolate, acute or acuminate, free to base. Calyx-teeth ovate-oblong, acute. Fruit c. 4 mm, oblong or ovoid. 2n = 14. •{\i  E. Alps.} Au Ge It Ju.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 5. A. carniolica} Jacq.,{\i  Fl. Austr. }{\b 5}: 31 (1778). Like {\b 4} but leaf-segments ovate, the middle one united to the lateral ones in the lower part; bracteoles usually shorter than umbel; fruit c.3 mm. 2n = 14. •{\i  S.E. Alps.} Au It Ju.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 7                  Eryngium}                     L.
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc By A.O. Chater.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Glabrous herbs. Leaves entire to 3-pinnatisect, at least the upper softly to pungently spiny. Inflorescence usually branched; flowers sessile in hemispherical to cylindrical capitula, at the base of which are 3 or more softly to pungently spinescent bracts; entire, 3- or 4-cuspidate bracteoles present at least near the edges of the capitula. Sepals rigid; petals less than 4 mm erect, emarginate, shorter than sepals. Fruit ovoid to subglobose nearly always sparsely or densely covered with scales; mericarps plano-convex, slightly ridged; vittae usually slender; carpophore absent.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Descriptions of basal leaves refer to those present at the time of flowering, or to the last ones produced before flowering. Descriptions of capitula, bracts, bracteoles and floral parts refer to the largest, central capitulum of an inflorescence.
\par

\par
320}
\par