{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 smaller. Inflorescence spreading, with up to 50 sessile, depressed-hemispherical, 5- to 8-flowered capitula up to 0·5 cm. Bracts and bracteoles 10-12, not clearly differentiated from each other, the outer 0·5-0·8 cm, lanceolate or linear-lanceolate, with 1-2(-3) pairs of spines. Sepals 1-1·5 mm, ovate, aristate. Fruit sparsely scaly.{\i  Places liable to winter flooding. • N. Portugal, N.W. Spain, N.W. France.} Ga Hs Lu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 5. E. duriaei} Gay ex Boiss., {\i Voy. Bot. Midi Esp.}{\b  2}: 237 (1839) ({\i E. duriaeanum} Gay). Monocarpic, living 3-4 years; stems 30-150 cm, erect. Basal leaves 10-45 × 2·5-7 cm, persistent, coriaceous, linear-oblanceolate to linear-spathulate, with large, patent, spinescent teeth; lamina decurrent on petiole. Inflorescence bluish, with up to 10 pedunculate, cylindrical capitula 4-10 × 1·5-2 cm. Bracts 1·5-5 cm, 7-12, linear-lanceolate, with 1(-3) pairs of teeth; bracteoles 3-cuspidate or entire. Sepals c. 5 mm, lanceolate, aristate. Fruit densely scaly.{\i  Dry, rocky} Quercus-{\i woodland. • Mountains of N. half of Iberian peninsula}. Hs Lu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 6. E. ilicifolium} Lam.,{\i  Encycl. Méth. Bot.}{\b  4}: 757 (1798). Annual; stems 2-15 cm, procumbent. Basal leaves 2-6 × 1-3 cm, persistent, coriaceous. obovate, with wide, patent, spinescent teeth; lamina shortly decurrent on petiole. Inflorescence spreading, bluish, with usually numerous, ovoid or globose, sessile capitula 1-1·5 cm. Bracts 1·5-3 cm, 5-7, oblanceolate to elliptical, with 2(-3) pairs of triangular, spinescent teeth; bracteoles tricuspidate, the inner dilated at the base and often entire. Sepals 1-2 mm, ovate, aristate. Fruit densely scaly on the angles only.{\i  Dry places. S. Spain.} Hs. ({\i N. Africa.})
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 7. E. aquifolium} Cav., {\i Anal. Ci. Nat. }{\b 3}: 32 (1801) (incl. {\i E. huteri }Porta & Rigo). Perennial; stems 10-50 cm, erect. Basal leaves 5-10 × 1·5-3 cm, persistent, slightly coriaceous, oblanceolate-spathulate or obovate, coarsely, often doubly dentate, with patent, spinescent teeth; lamina decurrent on petiole. Inflorescence bluish, subcorymbose, with up to 12 pedunculate, subglobose capitula 1-2 cm. Bracts 2·5-5 cm, 5-7, lanceolate, with more than 6 pairs of teeth or spines; at least some bracteoles 3-cuspidate. Sepals c. 3 mm, lanceolate, aristate. Fruit densely scaly.{\i  Dry places. S. Spain.} Hs. ({\i N.W. Africa}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 8. E. maritimum} L.,{\i  Sp. Pl.} 233 (1753). Perennial, perhaps sometimes monocarpic; stems 15-60 cm, erect, branched above. Lamina of basal leaves 4-10 × 5-15 cm, suborbicular, truncate or cordate at base, 3-(to 5-)lobed, coriaceous, with coarse, patent, spinescent teeth; petiole equalling lamina, unwinged, entire. Inflorescence spreading, bluish, with usually numerous, pedunculate, subglobose capitula 1·5-3 cm. Bracts 2·5-4 cm, 4-7, ovate or ovate-lanceolate, with 1-3 pairs of broad, spinescent teeth; bracteoles 3-cuspidate. Sepals 4-5 mm, ovate-lanceolate, aristate. fruit densely scaly. 2n = 16.{\i  Maritime sands. Coasts of Europe northwards to} 60°{\i  N.} Al Be Bl Br Bu Co Cr Da Ga Ge Gr Hb Ho Hs It Ju Lu No Po Rm Rs (B, W, K, E) Sa Si Su Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 9. E. alpinum} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 233 (1753). Perennial; stems 30-70 cm, erect. Basal leaves persistent, soft; lamina 8-15 × 5-13 cm, ovate- or triangular-cordate, irregularly toothed; petiole 2-4 times as long as lamina, unwinged, entire. Inflorescence bluish, with 1-3 pedunculate, ovoid-cylindrical capitula 2-4 × 1·5-2 cm. Bracts 3-6 cm, more than 25, many of them pinnatifid, with numerous pectinately arranged, long, soft spines; bracteoles 3-cuspidate or entire. Sepals c. 3·5 mm, ovate-lanceolate, aristate. Fruit densely scaly.{\i  Meadows and grassy places; usually calcicole. • Jura, Alps and mountains of W. & C. Jugoslavia; once recorded from the W. Carpathians.} Au ?Cz Ga He It Ju.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 10. E. planum} L.,{\i  Sp. Pl.} 233 (1753). Perennial; stems 25-100 cm, erect. Basal leaves persistent, slightly coriaceous; lamina 5-10 × 3-6 cm, oblong to ovate-oblong, cordate at base serrate; petiole about as long as lamina, unwinged. Inflorescence usually bluish, subcorymbose, with usually numerous pedunculate, ovoid-globose capitula 1-2 × 1-1·5 cm. Bracts 1·5-2·5 cm, 6-8, sometimes slightly shorter than the capitulum, linear-lanceolate, with 1-4 pairs of spinescent teeth; bracteoles 3-cuspidate or entire. Sepals c. 2 mm, ovate-lanceolate, aristate. Fruit densely scaly, the scales overlapping. 2n = 16.{\i  Dry places. C. & S.E. Europe.} Au Cz Ge Hu Ju Po Rm Rs (C, W, K, E) Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 11. E. dichotomum} Desf.,{\i  Fl. Atl.}{\b  1}: 226 (1798). Perennial; stems 20-100 cm, erect. Basal leaves slightly coriaceous, decaying early; lamina 3·5-6 × 0·7-3 cm, oblong, cordate or truncate at base, simply or doubly serrate (the younger sometimes 3-lobed); petioles equalling or up to twice as long as lamina. Inflorescence usually bluish, with usually numerous pedunculate, subglobose capitula 1-1·5 cm. Bracts 2-4 cm, 4-6(-7), linear-lanceolate, with 1-2 pairs of spinescent teeth; bracteoles entire or rarely 3-cuspidate. Sepals 2-3 mm, ovate-lanceolate, aristate. Fruit densely scaly, the scales overlapping.{\i  Dry places. W. Mediterranean region} ({\i local}); {\i S.E. Russia.} Hs It Si Rs (E).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  The plants from Russia differ from the Mediterranean ones in having the younger basal leaves often 3-lobed and more persistent, and in the larger, bluer inflorescence. They have been called {\b E. caeruleum} Bieb.,{\i  Beschr. Länd. Terek. Casp.} 155 (1800) ({\i E. biebersteinianum} Nevski), but do not appear to be specifically distinct.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 12. E. creticum} Lam.,{\i  Encycl. Méth. Bot.}{\b  4}: 754 (1798). Perennial, or sometimes biennial or annual; stems (12-)25-100 cm, erect, much-branched above. Basal leaves slightly coriaceous, decaying early; lamina 5-15 × 3-15 cm, very variable, oblong-ovate to suborbicular, cordate or truncate at base, undivided and crenate-dentate to 3-sect with 2-pinnatifid segments; petiole 1-2 times as long as lamina, unwinged. Inflorescence bluish, very diffuse, with usually numerous pedunculate, globose capitula 0·5-1 cm. Bracts 1-3 cm, 5-7, linear-lanceolate, pungent, with 1-2 pairs of spines; bracteoles linear-lanceolate, 3-cuspidate. Sepals c. 1·5 mm, ovate, mucronate. Fruit sparsely scaly, the scales not overlapping.{\i  Dry places. Balkan peninsula and Aegean region, extending northwards to Slovenija. }Al Bu Cr Gr Ju Tu [It].
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 13. E. tricuspidatum} L.,{\i  Demonstr. Pl.} 8 (1753). Perennial; stems 15-75 cm, erect. Basal leaves persistent, soft; lamina c. 3 × 2-3 cm, oblong-ovate to suborbicular, cordate, crenate-dentate to serrate, undivided or 3-fid for c. ½ its length; petiole 1-2 times as long as lamina, unwinged. Inflorescence strict, greenish, with 2-8 pedunculate, hemispherical capitula c. 1 cm. Bracts 1·5-5 cm, 5-7, narrowly linear-lanceolate, with (3-)5-8 pairs of spinescent teeth, rarely entire; bracteoles linear-lanceolate, 3-cuspidate. Sepals c. 2 mm, ovate, mucronate. Fruit densely scaly, the scales overlapping. {\i Dry places. S. W. Spain; Sardegna; Sicilia.} Hs Sa Si. ({\i N. Africa.})
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 14. E. triquetrum} Vahl,{\i  Symb. Bot.}{\b  2}: 46 (1791). Perennial; stems 15-40 cm, erect. Basal leaves decaying early, slightly coriaceous; lamina c. 4 × 3 cm, broadly ovate, 3-fid or 3-sect with palmatifid to 2-pinnatifid spinescent-dentate lobes; petiole 1-2 times as long as lamina, unwinged. Inflorescence usually corymbose, bluish, with numerous pedunculate, hemispherical, few-flowered capitula c. 5 mm. Bracts 1·5-3 cm, 3-4, linear-lanceolate, entire, pungent, folded and thickened at the base; bracteoles linear-lanceolate, entire. Sepals 2·5-3 mm, ovate
\par

\par
322}
\par