{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}
\pard\f0\fs28 acuminate, unequal, sometimes leaf-like, margin broadly membranous. Sepals obtuse, deciduous. Styles longer than the stylopodium. Fruit 12 mm. •{\i  S. Alps; Pyrenees.} Ga Ge He Hs It Ju.
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 17.                     Coriandrum}                         L.
\par
\pard\f0\fs24\qc By †T.G. Tutin.
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28 Lowest leaves lobed, others 1- to 3-pinnate. Sepals conspicuous, unequal. Petals white, the outer larger and deeply 2-lobed; apex inflexed. Fruit ovoid or globose, hard; mericarps not separating at maturity. Ridges low; vittae solitary, inconspicuous in fruit.
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. C. sativum} L.,{\i  Sp. Pl.} 256 (1753). Glabrous annual 15-50 cm, foetid when fresh. Segments of lower leaves ovate-cuneate, irregularly toothed; lobes of upper leaves linear. Rays 3-5(-10). Bracts 0 or 1; bracteoles usually 3, linear. Fruit 2-6 × 2-5·5 mm. 2n = 22.{\i  Cultivated for its aromatic fruits and widely naturalized in S. Europe, more rarely or casual further north.} [Au Az Cr Cz Ga Ge Gr He Hs Hu It Ju Lu Po Rm Rs (B, C, W, K, E) Si.] ({\i N. Africa, W. Asia}.)
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 18.                     Bifora}                      Hoffm.
\par
\pard\f0\fs24\qc By †T.G. Tutin.
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28 Leaves 1- to 2-pinnate; lobes linear or filiform. Sepals small or absent. Petals white, obcordate; apex inflexed. Fruit didymous; mericarps almost spherical, attached by the small commissure but separating when ripe. Ridges scarcely visible.
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28\li200 Lobes of upper leaves linear, flat; rays 1-3(-5); petals
\par   of all flowers nearly equal; style c. 0·2 mm .............................. {\b 1. testiculata}
\parLobes of upper leaves filiform; rays 3-8; outer petals of
\par marginal flowers much larger than others; style 1-1·5 mm ............. {\b 2. radians}
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. B. testiculata} (L.) Roth,{\i  Enum. }{\b 1}({\b 1}): 888 (1827). Glabrous annual 20-40 cm. Stem usually freely branched. Leaves 1- to 2-pinnate, oblong in outline; lobes of upper leaves linear, flat, entire or lobed. Rays up to 10 mm, 1-3(-5). Bracts 0 or 1; bracteoles 2-3, subulate. Petals of all flowers nearly equal. Fruit 2·5-3·5 × 4·5-7 mm, rugose, shortly beaked; style not more than 0·2 mm, scarcely as long as stylopodium.{\i  S. Europe. }Al Bl Co Cr Ga Gr Hs It Ju Lu Sa Si Tu.
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. B. radians} Bieb.,{\i  Fl. Taur.-Cauc.}{\b  3}: 233 (1819). Like {\b 1} but lobes of upper leaves filiform; rays up to 25 mm, 3-8; outer petals of marginal flowers much larger than others; fruit rugulose, unbeaked; style 1-1·5 mm, at least twice as long as stylopodium. {\i S. & S.C. Europe, extending to Ukraine, but absent from most of the Iberian peninsula; naturalized elsewhere in C. Europe.} Al Bl Bu *Cz Ga Ge Hs *Hu It Ju Rm Rs (W, K) Si Tu [Au Ge He Po].
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 19.                         Scaligeria}                   DC.
\par
\pard\f0\fs24\qc By †T.G. Tutin.
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28  Leaves 2- to 3-pinnate. Sepals absent. Petals white, obcordate, shortly clawed; apex inflexed. Fruit broadly ovoid from a cordate base, compressed laterally, shortly beaked. Ridges slender; vittae 2-3.
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. S. cretica} (Miller) Boiss.,{\i  Diagn Pl. Or. Nov.}{\b  2}({\b 10}): 52 (1849). Glabrous biennial 40-50 cm, with a tuberous root. Segments of basal leaves rhombic-ovate, dentate or 3-fid, of cauline leaves pinnatisect, with linear, entire lobes. Rays 6-15(-20), slender. Bracts absent; bracteoles few, linear-lanceolate. Fruit 1·5-2 mm.{\i  Aegean region and S. & W. parts of Balkan peninsula. }Al Cr Gr Ju.
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28  Subsp.{\b  halophila }Rech. fil.,{\i  Denkschr. Akad. Wiss. Math.-Nat. Kl.} ({\i Wien}) {\b 105}({\b 2}): 102 (1943), was described from a single collection from the spray-zone of an islet off Kriti. It has fleshy leaves and larger fruits (2·5 mm) than the typical plant. Until it has been studied further its status remains doubtful.
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 20.                         Smyrnium}                     L.
\par
\pard\f0\fs24\qc By †T.G. Tutin.
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28 Lower leaves usually 2- to 3-ternate, upper usually simple. Sepals absent. Petals yellow, lanceolate to obcordate; apex inflexed. Fruit ovoid or subglobose, didymous. Ridges slender, the marginal usually inconspicuous; vittae numerous, scattered.
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Upper cauline leaves not amplexicaul; lamina divided ............. {\b 1. olusatrum}
\par 1 Upper cauline leaves amplexicaul; lamina undivided
\par 2 Upper leaves and branches opposite; rays 15-20
\par 3 Lobes of basal leaves cordate-ovate; lower cauline
\par  leaves cordate-ovate, dentate or shallowly lobed ...................... {\b 2. orphanidis}
\par 3 Lobes of basal leaves oblong-cuneate; lower cauline
\par  leaves 3-partite ........................................................................... {\b 3. apiifolium}
\par 2 Upper leaves and branches alternate; rays 5-12
\par 4 Stems narrowly winged on the angles; upper leaves
\par  crenate serrate, sometimes minutely so ................................... {\b 4. perfoliatum}
\par 4 Stems not winged on the angles; upper leaves entire,
\par  rarely shallowly denticulate ................................................. {\b 5. rotundifolium}
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. S. olusatrum} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 262 (1753). Glabrous biennial 50-150 cm. Stem stout, solid, becoming hollow when old; upper branches often opposite. Leaves dark green and shiny; basal c. 30 cm, triangular in outline, ternate; segments 1- to 2-pinnate; lobes 10-60 mm, rhombic-ovate, crenate-dentate and sometimes lobed; cauline leaves smaller and less divided, with short, inflated petioles. Rays (3-)7-15(-18). Bracts and bracteoles few, small, sometimes 0. Fruit 7-8 mm, black. 2n = 22. {\i  S. Europe, extending northwards to N.W. France; extensively naturalized in Britain and Ireland.} Al Az Bl Co Cr Ga Gr Hs It Ju Lu Sa Si Tu [Br Hb Ho].
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. S. orphanidis} Boiss.,{\i  Fl. Or.}{\b  2}: 925 (1872). Glabrous biennial up to 130 cm. Stem stout, terete, hollow; upper branches opposite. Basal leaves c. 30 cm, 3-ternate; lobes 20-40 mm, cordate-ovate, dentate or shallowly lobed; lower cauline leaves ovate, subcordate, coarsely lobed and obtusely dentate, with short, inflated petioles; upper cauline leaves opposite, ovate-cordate, amplexicaul, crenate-dentate. Rays 15-20. Bracts and bracteoles absent. Fruit 3 mm.{\i  Greece and Aegean region.} Gr Tu.
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 3. S. apiifolium} Willd.,{\i  Sp. Pl.}{\b  1}: 1468 (1798). Like {\b 2} but lobes of basal leaves smaller, oblong-cuneate, deeply and acutely dentate; lower cauline leaves 3-partite; upper oblong-cordate, sharply dentate.{\i  Aegean region.} Cr Gr.
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 4. S. perfoliatum} L., {\i Sp. Pl. }262 (1753). Nearly glabrous biennial 50-150 cm. Stem angled and narrowly winged on the angles, solid, pubescent at the nodes; upper branches alternate. Basal leaves 1- to 2-ternate; lobes ovate, dentate or somewhat lobed; upper leaves ovate-cordate, amplexicaul, crenate-serrate, rarely subentire. Rays 5-12. Bracts and bracteoles absent. Styles longer than stylopodium. Fruit 3-3·5 × 5-5·5 mm, brownish-black.{\i  S. Europe, northwards to E. Czechoslovakia.} Al Bu Cr Cz Ga Gr Hs Hu It Ju Lu Rm Rs (K) Sa Si Tu [Au Br Da Ge].
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 5. S. rotundifolium} Miller, {\i Gard. Dict.} ed. 8, no. 2 (1768). Like {\b 4} but stem ridged, not winged; upper leaves entire, rarely shallowly denticulate; styles shorter than stylopodium; fruit 2-2·5 × 3-3·5 mm.{\i  Mediterranean region, from Corse and Sardegna eastwards.} Bu Co Cr Gr It Ju Sa Si.
\par
\par
\par 328}
\par