{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 c. 4 mm, obovoid, puberulent.{\i  Dry, rocky grassland above} 1000 {\i m. Calcicole. • S. Krym.} Rs (K).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 7. S. vayredanum} Font Quer,{\i  Revista Olot.}{\b  1}({\b 11}): 3 (1926). Glabrous or puberulent perennial 30-60 cm. Leaves 3- to 4-pinnate, glabrous; lobes 5-18 × 1-2 mm, linear-oblong. Rays 5-18, up to 20 mm, puberulent all round. Bracts 6-8; bracteoles free. Petals white, puberulent. Fruit 2·5-5 × 1-2 mm, oblong, puberulent. {\i Limestone cliffs and screes. • S. Spain.} Hs.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 8. S. intricatum} Boiss.,{\i  Elenchus} 48 (1838). Glabrous, caespitose perennial 20-30 cm. Leaves 2-pinnate; lobes 5-8 × 1-2 mm, linear to elliptical, acute. Rays 2-4, up to 20 mm, glabrous. Bracts 2-3, less than 1 mm; bracteoles less than 1 mm, free. Petals white. Fruit not known.{\i  Limestone cliffs. • S. Spain} ({\i Sierra de Gador}). Hs.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 9. S. granatense} Willk.,{\i  Bot. Zeit.}{\b  5}: 431 (1847). Densely puberulent, caespitose perennial 9-25 cm. Leaves 2-pinnate; lobes 2-5 × 0·5-1 mm, oblong-obovate, obtuse, sometimes mucronate. Umbels dense, subglobose; rays 5-6, not more than 5 mm, densely puberulent all round. Bracts 0-1; bracteoles connate, often up to the middle, the free apex triangular or subulate. Petals white or pink, pubescent on back. Fruit ovoid, densely puberulent.{\i  Limestone cliffs. • S. Spain.} Hs.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   {\b 10. S. peixoteanum} Samp.,{\i  Ann. Sci. Nat.} ({\i Porto}) {\b 10}: 36 (1906). Like {\b 9} but stems 20-75 cm, glabrous except for the puberulent base; leaf-lobes 5-20 × c. 0·5 mm, narrowly linear; umbels less dense; rays 3-6, not more than 6 mm, densely puberulent on the inner side, sparsely puberulent to subglabrous on the outer side.{\i  Usually on serpentine. • N.E. Portugal.} Lu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 11. S. nanum} Dufour in Bory, {\i Voy. Souterrain }363 (1821). Glabrous, caespitose perennial up to 10(-15) cm. Leaves 2-pinnate; lobes 4·5-8 × 0·7-1·5 mm, elliptic-oblong or -obovate, obtuse, mucronate. Umbels subglobose; rays 5-8, not more than 6 mm, puberulent on the inner side. Bracts usually 0; bracteoles free. Petals white or pink, glabrous. Fruit 3-4 × 1·5-2·5 mm, oblong, densely pubescent-scabrid. •{\i  Pyrenees.} Ga Hs.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 12. S. montanum} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 260 (1753) ({\i S. glaucum} L.). Glabrous perennial 10-70 cm. Leaves 2- to 3-pinnate; lobes 3- 50 × 0·5-2 mm, linear to obovate; petiole canaliculate. Rays 3-25, up to 20 mm, puberulent on inner side, rarely all round. Bracts 0(-3); bracteoles free or connate at base. Petals white or pale pink, glabrous. Fruit 2·5-4·5 × 1·5-2·5 mm, oblong-ovoid, glabrescent or puberulent.{\i  S. Europe, from C. Spain to W. part of Balkan peninsula, and extending northwards to} c. 49° {\i N. in France.} Al Ga †Ge He Hs It Ju.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Rays 10-20; leaf-lobes 1-2 mm wide ....................... ({\b c}) subsp. {\b polyphyllum}
\par
1 Rays 3-12(-14); leaf-lobes 0·5-1 mm wide
\par
2 Fruit with thin, acutely angled ridges narrower than
\par
  valleculae ...................................................................... ({\b a}) subsp. {\b montanum}
\par
2 Fruit with wide, rounded ridges wider than valleculae
\par
  ..................................................................................... ({\b b}) subsp. {\b tommasinii}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b montanum}: Leaf-lobes 5-50 × 0·5-1 mm, linear or linear-lanceolate. Rays 5-12(-14). Fruit puberulent or glabrescent; ridges thin, acutely angled, narrower than valleculae.{\i  C. Spain, S. & E. France, Italy; one station in Switzerland.}
\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b tommasinii} (Reichenb. fil.) Arcangeli, {\i Comp. Fl. Ital.} 282 (1882) ({\i S. tommasinii} Reichenb. fil.): Like subsp. ({\b a}) but rays 3-9; fruit glabrescent; ridges wide, rounded, wider than valleculae. •{\i  W. part of Balkan peninsula, E., C.& S. Italy}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b c}) Subsp. {\b polyphyllum} (Ten.) P.W. Ball,{\i  Feddes Repert.}{\b  79}: 64 (1968): Leaf-lobes 3-14 × 1-2 mm, linear to obovate. Rays 10-20, sometimes puberulent all round. Fruit glabrescent; ridges thin, acutely angled. •{\i  S. Italy}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 13. S. cantabricum} Lange,{\i  Ind. Sem. Horto Haun. }27 (1855). Glabrous perennial 25-70 cm. Leaves 2-ternate; lobes 25-100 × 1·5-3 mm, linear to elliptic-lanceolate, entire. Rays 5-10, up to 30 mm, glabrous. Bracts 0-1; bracteoles free. Petals very pale yellow or purplish, glabrous. Fruit 2·5-3·5 × 1·5-2 mm, ovoid, glabrous. •{\i  N. Spain} ({\i E. part of Cordillera Cantabrica}). Hs.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 14. S. bocconi} Guss., {\i Cat. Pl. Boccad.} 80 (1821). Glabrous perennial 20-50 cm. Leaves 1- to 3-ternate; lobes 10-30 × (2-)5-15 mm, lanceolate or linear, usually 2- to 3-fid at apex, coriaceous. Rays 4-18, subglabrous to puberulent. Bracts 0; bracteoles free. Petals white, glabrous. Fruit 4-6 × c. 2·5 mm, oblong, glabrescent.{\i  Rocks and cliffs. Islands of W. Mediterranean region.} Co Sa Si.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 15. S. elatum} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} ed. 2, 375 (1762). Glabrous biennial or perennial 15-120 cm. Leaves 2- to 4-pinnate; lobes 10-30 × 0·5-2 mm, linear or linear-lanceolate; petiole terete. Rays 2-20, up to 30 mm, glabrous. Bracts 0(-1); bracteoles free. Sepals c. 0·5 mm. Petals white, glabrous or sparsely puberulent. Fruit 2-3·5 × 1·5-2 mm, ovoid or ellipsoid. •{\i  S. & C. Europe, from C. Spain to S.E. Romania and northwards to Czechoslovakia}. Al Au Cz Ga Hs Hu It Ju Po Rm.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Rays usually 2-7
\par
2 Fruit usually puberulent; sepals inserted at apex of fruit ... ({\b a}) subsp. {\b elatum}
\par
2 Fruit glabrous; sepals inserted c. 0·5 mm below apex of fruit
\par
  ............................................................................................ ({\b b}) subsp. {\b gouanii}
\par
1 Rays usually (5-)8-20
\par
3 Fruit glabrous or sparsely puberulent ................................ ({\b c}) subsp. {\b osseum}
\par
3 Fruit densely papillose-puberulent .............................. ({\b d}) subsp. {\b austriacum}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b elatum}: Rays 3-6. Fruit puberulent, sometimes glabrescent; sepals inserted at apex of fruit. vittae usually 3.{\i  From C. Spain to S. France and Italy}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b gouanii} (Koch) P.W. Ball,{\i  Feddes Repert.}{\b  79}: 64 (1968) ({\i S. gouanii} Koch; incl. {\i S. bosnense} K. Malý, {\i S. hercegovinium} K. Malý): Rays (2-)4-7(-15). Fruit glabrous; sepals inserted c. 0·5 mm below apex of fruit. vittae (2-)3(-5).{\i  N. Italy, N. W., part of Balkan peninsula}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b c}) Subsp. {\b osseum} (Crantz) P.W. Ball,{\i  Feddes Repert. }{\b 79}: 64 (1968) ({\i S. osseum} Crantz, {\i S. devenyense} Simonkai): Rays (5-)8-15. Fruit glabrous or sparsely puberulent; sepals inserted at apex of fruit. Vittae usually 1. 2n = 18. {\i E.C.Europe.}
\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b d}) Subsp. {\b austriacum} (G. Beck) P.W. Ball, {\i Feddes Repert.}{\b  79}: 64 (1968) ({\i S. austriacum} (G. Beck) Wohlf.): Rays 9-20. Fruit densely papillose-puberulent; sepals inserted at apex of fruit. Vittae 2-3(-4).{\i  From N. Italy and N. Jugoslavia  northwards to S. Czechoslovakia.}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 16. S. annuum} L.,{\i  Sp. Pl.} 260 (1753). Puberulent or glabrous biennial or perennial up to 60(-100) cm. Leaves 2- to 3-pinnate; lobes up to 10(-15) × 0·5-2 mm, linear or linear-lanceolate. Rays (8-)12-40, up to 40 mm, puberulent on inner side. Bracteoles free. Petals white or pink, minutely papillose on back. Fruit 1·5-3 × 1-1·5 mm, ovoid, glabrous. 2n = 16.{\i  From N. France and C. Russia southwards to N. Spain and Bulgaria.} Au Bu Cz Ga Ge He Hs Hu It Po Rm Rs (B, C, W, E).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b annuum}: Leaves ovate in outline; lobes up to 10(-15) × 0·5-2 mm; rays up to 40; bracts 0-1; bracteoles about equalling partial umbel; petals with at least some papillae acute.{\i  Throughout the range of the species}.
\par

\par
336}
\par