{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28     {\b 16. P. saxifraga} L.,{\i  Sp. Pl.} 263 (1753) (incl.{\i  P. alpestris} (Sprengel) Schultes, {\i P. dissecta} Retz.,{\i  P. laconica} Halácsy). Somewhat pubescent (rarely completely glabrous) perennial up to 60 cm. Stock at flowering time usually without sterile rosettes. Stem usually terete, almost or quite solid, branched, almost leafless above. Lower leaves usually with 3-7 pairs of segments which vary from simple, ovate, to 2-pinnatisect, with linear lobes. Rays 6-25. Bracts absent, rarely 1-4; bracteoles absent, rarely 5-8. Petals white, rarely pinkish or purplish. Fruit 2-2·5 mm, broadly ovoid; ridges not prominent. 2n = 40.{\i  Most of Europe, except the extreme south and most of the islands.} Al Au Be Br Bu Cz Da Fa Ga Ge Gr Hb He Ho Hs Hu It Ju No Po Rm Rs (N, B, C, W, K, E) Sa Su Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Very variable in size, pubescence, leaf-dissection and flower colour. This variation has received diverse taxonomic treatments two species, each with several subspecies, being recognized by some authors, while others do not even recognize subspecies. Rather distinct, ecologically specialized, local variants also occur and some resemble {\b 13} so closely that they can be identified with certainty only if ripe fruit is present.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Evidence about the status of the various taxa is at present conflicting and inadequate, and further investigation on a continental scale is necessary before a more detailed account of this polymorphic species can be given.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 26.                     Aegopodium }                 L.
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc By †T.G. Tutin.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Leaves 1- to 2-ternate, with wide segments. Sepals small. Petals white or sometimes pink, obcordate; apex inflexed. Fruit ovoid, laterally compressed, constricted at the commissure. Ridges slender; vittae absent in ripe fruit.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. A. podagraria} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 265 (1753). Perennial. Rhizome long, slender; stems up to 100 cm. Basal leaves deltate in outline; segments 4-8 cm, lanceolate to ovate, serrate, sometimes 3-lobed; petiole longer than lamina, trigonous. Cauline leaves smaller, with a short, inflated petiole; upper usually entire. Rays 10-20. Bracts and bracteoles usually absent. Fruit 3-4 mm. 2n = 22, c. 44.{\i  In hedges and open woods; common also as a weed of cultivation. Throughout most of Europe, but rare in the south.} Al Au Be Bu ?Co Cz Da Fe Ga Ge ?Gr He Ho Hu It Ju No Po Rm Rs (N, B, C, W, K, E) Su [Br Fa Hb Is].
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 27.                         Sium }                           L.
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc By †T.G. Tutin.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Submerged leaves 2- to 3-pinnate, with linear lobes; aerial leaves usually pinnate, with broad lobes. Sepals present, sometimes very small. Petals white, obcordate; apex inflexed. Fruit ovoid or ovoid-oblong, slightly compressed laterally. Ridges slender or broad, the lateral marginal on the mericarps; vittae 1-3, superficial; stylopodium nearly flat.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 Stem strongly furrowed; sepals conspicuous, lanceolate .............. {\b 1. latifolium}
\par
Stem striate; sepals very small ......................................................... {\b 2. sisarum}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. S. latifolium} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 251 (1753). Glabrous perennial up to 150 cm. Stem strongly sulcate, hollow. Submerged leaves (present only in spring) 2- to 3-pinnate, with linear lobes; aerial leaves simply pinnate; lobes up to 10 × 3 cm, 4-9(-16) pairs, ovate-lanceolate, unequal at base, serrate. Rays usually 20-30. Bracts usually 2-6, often large and leaf-like; bracteoles lanceolate. Sepals c. 1 mm. Fruit 3-4 mm, ellipsoid but somewhat compressed; ridges thick. 2n = 20.{\i  In shallow water. Europe, except for much of the Mediterranean region and parts of the west.} Al Au Be Br Bu Cz Da Fe Ga Ge Hb He Ho Hs Hu It Ju Po Rm Rs (N, B, C, W, E) Su [No].
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. S. sisarum} L.,{\i  Sp. Pl.} 251 (1753) (incl.{\i  S. sisaroideum }DC.). Like {\b 1} but usually smaller; stem striate; submerged leaves absent; leaf-lobes usually lanceolate; sepals very small; fruit 2-3·5 mm, with slender ridges.{\i  Damp places. From E. Hungary and Bulgaria to C. & S.E. Russia; sometimes cultivated for the edible roots and occasionally naturalized in C. Europe and N. Italy.} Bu Hu Rm Rs (C, W, K, E) [Au Ge It].
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 The cultivated plant, with tuberous roots, is var.{\i  sisarum} and is of unknown origin. The wild plant is var.{\i  lancifolium} (Bieb.) Thell. ({\i S. lancifolium} Bieb., non Schrank, {\i S. sisaroideum} DC.).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 28.                        Berula}                        Koch
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc By †T.G. Tutin.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Like{\i  Sium} but fruit sub-didymous; lateral ridges not marginal on the mericarps; vittae deeply embedded; stylopodium conical.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. B. erecta} (Hudson) Coville, {\i Contr. U.S. Nat. Herb.}{\b  4}: 115 (1893) ({\i Sium angustifolium} L., {\i S. erectum} Hudson). Stoloniferous, glabrous perennial 30-100 cm. Submerged leaves 3- to 4-pinnate with linear lobes; lower aerial leaves with (5-)7-14(-19) pairs of sessile, oblong-lanceolate to ovate, biserrate segments 2-6 cm upper cauline leaves small, usually very irregularly serrate. Umbels leaf-opposed; rays 10-20. Bracts and bracteoles numerous, often leaf-like and 3-fid or pinnatisect. Fruit 1·5-2 mm, usually wider than long. 2n = 20.{\i  In shallow water. Almost throughout Europe except the extreme north.} All except Az Cr Fa Fe Is Rs (N) Sb Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 29.                        Crithmum }                      L.
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc By †T.G. Tutin.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Leaves 1- to 2-pinnate, with subterete, fleshy segments. Sepals minute. Petals yellowish-green, obcordate; apex inflexed. Fruit ovoid-oblong, not compressed; pericarp spongy. Ridges thick and prominent; vittae several.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. C. maritimum} L.,{\i  Sp. Pl. }246 (1753). Glabrous perennial 15-50 cm, woody below. Leaves deltate in outline; lobes 1-5 cm, linear-oblanceolate, subacute. Rays 8-36, rather stout. Bracts and bracteoles triangular-lanceolate to linear-lanceolate, ultimately deflexed. Fruit 5-6 mm, yellowish or purplish.{\i  Maritime rocks, rarely on sand or shingle. Atlantic coast of Europe, northwards to Scotland; Mediterranean and Black sea coasts.} Al Az Bl Br Bu Co Cr Ga Gr Ho Hs It Ju Lu ?Rm Rs (K) Sa Si Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 30.                      Sclerochorton }                 Boiss.
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc By †T.G. Tutin.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Lower leaves 2- to 3-pinnate, uppermost entire; lobes short, remote, linear. Sepals small. Petals white, obovate, emarginate; apex inflexed. Fruit ovoid-oblong, not compressed. Ridges prominent; vittae 6-7.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   {\b 1. S. junceum} (Sibth. & Sm.) Boiss.,{\i  Fl. Or.}{\b  2}: 969 (1872). Glaucous perennial with numerous solid, rigid, striate stems 15-45 cm. Umbels with 2-3 long rays. Bracts and bracteoles 2-3, short, linear. Fruit c. 6 mm. {\i Rocks on high mountains. S. Greece.} Gr.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 31.                         Dethawia }                    Endl.
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc By †T.G. Tutin.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Leaves 3-pinnate, with linear, crowded lobes. Sepals conspicuous. Petals white, elliptical; apex not or weakly inflexed. Fruit ovoid-oblong, not compressed. Ridges prominent, obtuse; vittae solitary.
\par

\par
333}
\par