{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28  linear, subobtuse, much shorter than the rays; bracteoles like the bracts. Fruit 3·5-4 mm.{\i  Steppes and cultivated ground. S. part of U.S.S.R., northwards to} c. 50°{\i  N. in the west and} c. 53°{\i  N. in the east.} Rs (?C, W, E).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 25.                    Pimpinella }                      L.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  (Incl.{\i  Reutera} Boiss., {\i Pancicia} Vis.)
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc By †T.G. Tutin
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Basal leaves usually entire or trisect, sometimes 1- to 3-pinnate; middle cauline usually 2-pinnate, with narrow lobes. Sepals usually minute. Petals white or yellow, rarely pink or purplish, not or slightly emarginate; apex inflexed. Fruit ovoid-oblong to subglobose, laterally compressed, constricted at the commissure. Ridges filiform, sometimes concealed by hairs, setae or tubercles; vittae (2-)3(-4).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Petals yellow
\par
2 Lower leaves distinctly 2- to 3-pinnate
\par
3 Plant almost glabrous; fruit 2-2·5 mm, glabrous .................... {\b 4. procumbens}
\par
3 Plant greyish-pubescent; fruit 1·5 mm, ± velutinous .................... {\b 1. rigidula}
\par
2 Lower leaves 1-pinnate; segments occasionally pinnatisect
\par
4 Leaf-segments 25-60 mm; fruit 3·5-4 mm, ovoid-oblong ................. {\b 2. lutea}
\par
4 Leaf-segments 8-30 mm; fruit 3 mm, subglobose ......................... {\b 3. gracilis}
\par
1 Petals white, pink or purplish
\par
5 Ovary and fruit quite glabrous
\par
6 Upper leaves palmately divided to base; lobes numerous, long,
\par
  setaceous ....................................................................................... {\b 12. serbica}
\par
6 Upper leaves pinnately divided; lobes few
\par
7 Rays 2-7
\par
8 Plant ± hairy; fruit c. 4 mm ...................................................... {\b 11. anisoides}
\par
8 Plant glabrous; fruit 5-7 mm .................................................... {\b 15. bicknellii}
\par
7 Rays (5-)10-25
\par
9 Fruit 5-6 mm; ridges narrowly winged ........................................ {\b 14. siifolia}
\par
9 Fruit 2-3·5 mm; ridges unwinged
\par
10 Stem usually sharply angled, hollow; ridges of fruit prominent,
\par
   whitish ............................................................................................ {\b 13. major}
\par
10 Stem usually terete, nearly or quite solid; ridges of fruit
\par
   inconspicuous ............................................................................ {\b 16. saxifraga}
\par
5 Ovary and fruit ± hairy
\par
11 Annual or biennial; stock slender, without fibres or scale-like
\par
   leaf-bases
\par
12 Rays usually more than 15; fruit with long, patent hairs ......... {\b 7. peregrina}
\par
12 Rays 2-15; fruit with short, appressed hairs
\par
13 Fruit 3-5 mm ................................................................................ {\b 5. anisum}
\par
13 Fruit 1·5 mm ................................................................................. {\b 6. cretica}
\par
11 Perennial; stock stout, with abundant scale-like leaf-bases
\par
14 Lower leaves 1-pinnate
\par
15 Plant densely white-tomentose; fruit c. 3 mm, oblong .......... {\b 9. pretenderis}
\par
15 Plant glabrous to greyish-pubescent; fruit c. 2 mm, ovoid ......... {\b 8. tragium}
\par
14 Lower leaves 2- to 3-pinnate
\par
16 Petals glabrous on the back .................................................... {\b 11. anisoides}
\par
16 Petals hairy on the back
\par
17 Leaf-lobes broadly ovate, crenate in upper half ......................... {\b 10. villosa}
\par
17 Leaf-lobes oblong, incise-serrate or lobed.................................. {\b 8. tragium}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. P. rigidula} (Boiss. & Orph.) H. Wolff in Engler,{\i  Pflanzen-reich }{\b 90} ({\b IV. 228}): 227 (1927)  ({\i Reutera rigidula} Boiss. & Orph.). Greyish-pubescent perennial up to 100 cm. Stem terete, pubescent below, glabrous above, freely branched. Lower leaves c. 30 cm, 3-pinnate, triangular in outline; lobes cuneate-ovate, divided into linear-oblong, obtuse lobes; cauline leaves small or reduced to sheathing petioles. Umbels very numerous; peduncles short. Rays 4-8 slender. Bracts and bracteoles absent or few. Petals yellow. Fruit c. 1·5 mm, ovoid, narrowed at apex, more or less velutinous. {\i Cultivated fields. • S. Greece.} Gr.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. P. lutea} Desf., {\i Fl. Atl.}{\b  1}: 265 (1798). Somewhat pubescent perennial 80-140 cm. Stem  terete, with numerous long branches above. Lower leaves c. 20 cm, pinnate; segments 25-60  mm, 7-11, cordate-ovate to suborbicular, crenate-dentate, sometimes shallowly lobed; upper cauline leaves reduced to petioles. Umbels few; peduncles short. Rays 3-5, filiform. Bracts absent or 1; bracteoles absent. Petals yellow. Fruit 3·5-4 mm, ovoid-oblong, glabrous.{\i  Sunny volcanic rocks. Corse and Pantellaria.} Co Si. (Algeria, Tunisia.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 3. P. gracilis} (Boiss.) H. Wolff in Engler,{\i  Pflanzenreich}{\b  90} ({\b IV. 228}): 228 (1927) ({\i Reutera  gracilis} Boiss.; incl. {\i R. puberula} Loscos & Pardo). Almost glabrous or puberulent biennial or perennial up to 150 cm. Stock with brown, scale-like leaf-bases. Stem slender, terete, freely  branched above. Lower leaves 5-18 cm, pinnate, oblong-lanceolate in outline; segments 8-30 mm, (3-)5-9, ovate, dentate and sometimes pinnatisect; upper cauline leaves reduced to the  sheathing petiole. Rays 2-5, very slender. Bracts and bracteoles absent. Pedicels filiform.  Petals yellow. Fruit c. 3 mm, subglobose, didymous, glabrous or scabrid-puberulent.•{\i   Mountains of E. & S. Spain.} Hs.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 4. P. procumbens} (Boiss.) H. Wolff, {\i op. cit}. 229 (1927) ({\i Reutera procumbens} Boiss.).  Almost glabrous biennial with slender,terete, decumbent stems 10-30 Stock with scale-like leaf-bases. Lower leaves 5-10 cm, 2- to 3-pinnate, ovate in outline;lobes 2-6 mm, lanceolate,  acute, shortly hairy on margins; cauline very small, the lamina pinnatifid or 3-fid. Rays 3-6, filiform. Bracts and bracteoles absent; pedicels filiform. Petals yellow. Fruit 2-2·5 mm, ovoid-globose.{\i  Rock-crevices in mountains. • S. Spain }({\i Sierra Nevada}). Hs.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 5. P. anisum} L.,{\i  Sp. Pl.} 264 (1753) ({\i Anisum vulgare} Gaertner).Finely pubescent, strongly  aromatic annual 10-50 cm. Stem terete, striate, branched above. Lowest leaves reniform, incise-dentate or shallowly lobed; next leaves pinnate with 3-5, ovate or obovate, dentate  segments; upper cauline leaves 2- to 3-pinnate,with linear-lanceolate lobes and narrow, sheathing petioles. Rays 7-15, sparsely puberulent. Bracts absent or 1; bracteoles usually few,  filiform. Petals white. Fruit 3-5 mm, ovoid to oblong, shortly appressed-setose.{\i  Widely  cultivated for its aromatic fruits and often naturalized; native distribution unknown, but  certainly of Asiatic origin.} [Au Bu Cr Cz Ga Ge Gr Hs Hu It Ju Lu No Po Rm Rs (C, W, E).]
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 6. P. cretica} Poiret in Lam.,{\i  Encycl. Méth. Bot., Suppl.}{\b  1}: 684 (1811). Puberulent or  subglabrous annual 10-30 cm. Lowest leaves suborbicular, simple, cordate at base, crenate-dentate or shallowly lobed; next 3-foliolate, upper 1- to 2-pinnate, with few,linear, entire lobes. Rays (2-)5-10, filiform. Bracts and bracteoles absent. Fruit 1·5 mm, ovoid, densely setulose, grey-green.{\i  Dry places. S. Aegean region.} Cr Gr.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 7. P. peregrina} L.,{\i  Sp. Pl. }264 (1753) ({\i P. taurica} (Ledeb.) Steudel). Finely pubescent  biennial 50-100 cm. Lowest leaves simple, cordate, serrate; next leaves pinnate, the segments  5-9, suborbicular, more or less cordate at base, crenate; upper cauline 2-pinnate, with linear, often recurved lobes. Rays 8-50, filiform, setulose. Bracts and bracteoles absent. Fruit c. 2  mm, ovoid, with patent hairs.{\i  Dry places. S. Europe, eastwards from E. Spain.} Al Bu Co Cr  Ga Gr Hs It Ju Rm Rs (K) Sa Si Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 8. P. tragium} Vill.,{\i  Prosp. Pl. Dauph.} 24 (1779) (incl.{\i  P. tominophylla} (Woronow) Stankov).  Somewhat pubescent to glabrous
\par

\par
331}
\par