{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b carvifolium} (Vill.) P. Fourn., {\i Quatre Fl. Fr.} 679 (1937) ({\i S. carvifolium} Vill.): Leaves oblong in outline; lobes up to 6 × 0·5 mm; rays 12-18; bracts 2-6; bracteoles shorter than partial umbel; petals with all papillae obtuse. •{\i  S.W. Alps}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 17. S. campestre} Besser, {\i Enum. Pl. Volhyn. }44 (1822). Glabrous perennial 50-100(-200) cm. Leaves 3- to 4-pinnate; lobes 5-2·5 × 0·5-1·5 mm, linear or linear-lanceolate. Rays 7-15, up to 40 mm, puberulent on inner side. Bracts 0(-2); bracteoles free. Petals white or yellowish-white, puberulent on back. Fruit 3-3·5 × 1-2 mm, ovoid, puberulent.{\i  S.E. Europe, extending northwards to S.C. Russia}. Bu Rm Rs (C, W, K, E).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 18. S. arenarium} Bieb., {\i Fl. Taur.-Cauc.}{\b  3}: 242 (1819). Like {\b 17} but leaf-lobes 10-45 × 0·5-1 mm, linear; fruit 3·5-5 × 2-2·5 mm, usually glabrous.{\i  S. part of U.S.S.R.} Rs (C, W, K, E).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 19. S. tortuosum} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 260 (1753) (incl. {\i S. pauciradiatum} Schischkin). Glabrous biennial 10-75 cm. Leaves 3- to 4-pinnate; lobes 5-15 × 0·5-2 mm, linear-lanceolate to oblong-obovate. Rays 4-11, up to 25 mm, puberulent on inner side. Bracts 0(-3); bracteoles free, with a wide membranous margin. Petals yellowish-white, puberulent on back. Fruit 2-4 × (1·5-)2-2·5 mm, ovoid or ellipsoid, puberulent. {\i S. Europe.} Al Bu Co Ga Gr Hs It Ju Lu Rm Rs (K) Sa Si.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Variable in habit and the shape of the leaf-lobes.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 20. S. pallasii} Besser, {\i Cat. Pl. Horto Crem.} 130 (1816) (incl.{\i  S. varium }Trev.). Glabrous biennial or perennial 30-120 cm. Leaves 2- to 4-pinnate; lobes 5-25(-45) × 0·5-1(-2) mm, linear to almost filiform; petiole canaliculate on upper side. Rays 7-25(-30), up to 60 mm, glabrous. Bracts 0 (-2); bracteoles free. Petals white, glabrous. Fruit 2·5-3·5(-4·5) × 1·5-2·5 mm, ellipsoid or oblong, glabrous or slightly tuberculate-verrucose. 2n = 16, 20.{\i  From N. Italy and Czechoslovakia eastwards to C. Ukraine.} Au Bu Cz Gr Hu It Ju Rm Rs (W, K).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 21. S. glabratum} Willd. ex Schultes in Roemer & Schultes,{\i  Syst. Veg.}{\b  6}: 406 (1820). Glabrous perennial 25-40 cm; stock with persistent long petioles. Leaves 2-pinnate; lobes 15-60(-80) × 0·7-2 mm, linear-filiform, rigid. Rays 6-10, up to 20 mm, glabrous. Bracts 0(-1); bracteoles free. Petals white, glabrous. Fruit 2·5-4 mm, ovoid-oblong, tuberculate-verrucose.{\i  S.E. Russia, W. Kazakhstan.} Rs (C, E). ({\i W. & C. Asia}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 22. S. strictum} Ledeb.,{\i  Fl. Altaica }{\b 1}: 338 (1829). Glabrous perennial 10-70 cm. Leaves 3-pinnate; lobes 10-50 × 0·5-1(-2) mm, narrowly linear. Rays 15-35, up to 30 mm, scabrid on the inner side. Bracts 0(-1); bracteoles free. Petals white, glabrous. Fruit 3-4 × 1-1·5 mm, oblong, glabrous.{\i  S.E. Russia.} Rs (C, E). ({\i W. Asia}).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   {\b 23. S. rigidum} Waldst. & Kit.,{\i  Pl. Rar. Hung. }{\b 2}: 156 (1803-4) (incl.{\i  S. serbicum} Degen,{\i  S. gummiferum }var.{\i  resiniferum }Velen.). Perennial up to 100 cm, puberulent, at least at the apex. Leaves 2- to 3(-4)-pinnate; lobes (10-)20-100 × 0·5-5(-7) mm, linear, long-acuminate, rigid. Rays 5-30, up to 45 mm, puberulent all round. Bracts 0(-3); bracteoles connate at base. Petals white or purplish-pink, puberulent or tomentose. •{\i  S.E. Europe.} Al Bu Gr Ju Rm Rs (W).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b rigidum}: Rays 10-30, up to 45 mm; fruit 4-5 mm.{\i  Cliffs. N. part of Balkan peninsula, W. & C. Romania}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b peucedanifolium} (Besser) Nyman,{\i  Consp. }295 (1879) ({\i S. peucedanifolium} Besser, non Mérat): Rays 5-9, up to 25 mm; fruit 2·5-3·5 mm.{\i  From E. Bulgaria to W. Ukraine}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 24. S. rhodopeum} Velen.,{\i  Sitz.-Ber. Bohm. Ges. Wiss.} ({\i Math.Nat. Kl.}) {\b 1890}({\b 1}): 45 (1890). Like {\b 23} (a) but stem glabrous; rays puberulent on inner side; petals glabrous; fruit 4-6 mm, puberulent. •{\i  Bulgaria}. Bu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 25. S. malyi} A. Kerner, {\i Österr. Bot. Zeitschr.}{\b  31}: 37 (1881). Biennial 6-15 cm, puberulent above. Leaves 2- to 3-pinnate; lobes 4-15 × 1 mm, linear, obtuse. Rays 6-12, up to 12 mm, pubescent all round. Bracts 0-1; bracteoles connate at base. Petals pink. Fruit 2·5-3 × 1·2-1·5.mm, ovoid, sparsely puberulent.{\i  Cliffs. • Mountains of W. Jugoslavia.} Ju.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 26. S. hippomarathrum} Jacq.,{\i  Enum. Stirp. Vindob.} 52, 224 (1762). Glabrous perennial 15-60(-90) cm. Leaves 2- to 3-pinnate; lobes 4-10 × 0·4-0·7 mm, linear. Rays 5-12(-20), up to 15 mm, pubescent on inner side. Bracts 0; bracteoles connate. Petals white or pale pink, glabrous. Fruit 3·5-6 × 2-3 mm, oblong-ovoid.{\i  E.C. Europe, W. Ukraine; S. Ural.} Au Cz Ge Hu Ju Rm Rs (?B, C, W).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b hippomarathrum}: Bracteoles connate almost to the apex. Fruit puberulent. 2n = 20. •{\i  E.C. Europe, W. Ukraine}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b hebecarpum} (DC.) Drude in Engler & Prantl,{\i  Natürl. Pflanzenfam. }{\b 3}({\b 8}): 202 (1898) ({\i S. ledebourii} G. Don fil.): Bracteoles connate to about the middle. Fruit densely pubescent. {\i S. Ural}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 27. S. dichotomum} Pallas ex Bieb., {\i Fl. Taur.-Cauc.}{\b  1}: 235 (1808). Minutely papillose-velutinous perennial 40-100 cm. Leaves 2-pinnate; lobes 10-20 × 0·5-1 mm, narrowly linear. Rays 5-9(-16), up to 20 mm, puberulent all round. Bracts 0; bracteoles connate up to the middle. Petals white. Fruit 2·5-3 × 1·5 mm, ovoid, minutely puberulent.{\i  Krym.} Rs (K). ({\i Caucasus}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 28. S. tomentosum} Vis.,{\i  Stirp. Dalm.} 6 (1826). Glabrous perennial 50-100 cm. Leaves 3- to 4-pinnate; lobes 70-120 × c. 1 mm, linear-setaceous, rigid. Rays 7-10, up to 7 mm, tomentose. Bracts absent; bracteoles connate almost to the apex. Petals white. Fruit c. 6 mm, tomentose.{\i  Limestone cliffs. • N.W. Jugoslavia.} Ju.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 29. S. globiferum} Vis.,{\i  Flora} ({\i Regensb.}) {\b 13}: 50 (1830). Like {\b 28} but leaf-lobes 20-80 × 0·4-1 mm; rays 20-30, 5-20 mm; bracteoles connate up to the middle; fruit 4·5-7 × 2-3·5 mm.{\i  Cliffs. • W. Jugoslavia}. Ju.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Possibly not specifically distinct from {\b 28}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 30. S. leucospermum} Waldst. & Kit.,{\i  Pl. Rar. Hung.} {\b 1}: 92 (1802). Glabrous perennial 50-100-cm. Leaves 4- to 5-pinnate; lobes 20-60 × c. 0·5 mm, linear-setaceous. Rays 6-12, up to 15 mm, puberulent all round. Bracts 0-1; bracteoles connate at base, puberulent. Petals white. Fruit 3-4 × 2-2·5 mm, ovoid-globose, sparsely puberulent. 2n = 22.{\i  Cliffs and screes. • W. Hungary.} Hu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   {\b 31. S. degenii} Urum., {\i Magyar Bot. Lapok}{\b  12}: 217 (1913). Glabrous perennial up to 100 cm. Leaves 3-pinnate; lobes 30-40 × 0·5 mm, filiform. Rays 12-20, up to 30 mm, puberulent on inner side. Bracts absent; bracteoles connate at base, puberulent. Petals white. Fruit c. 4 × 2 mm, oblong, puberulent.{\i  Dry limestone cliffs. • N. Bulgaria.} Bu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Described as having the fruit 10 × 2 mm, but this appears to be erroneous.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 32. S. parnassicum} Boiss. & Heldr. in Boiss., {\i Diagn. Pl. Or. Nov.}{\b  3}({\b 6}): 80 (1859). Glabrous perennial up to 40 cm. Leaves 2
\par

\par
337}
\par