{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 37 Longest rays not more than 20(-25) mm;
\par
   fruit 2·5-4 × 1·5-2 mm ............................................................ {\b 12. montanum}
\par
37 Longest rays 30-50 mm; fruit 4-6 × 2-2·5 mm ................... {\b 24. rhodopeum}
\par
27 Rays not more than 10(-12)
\par
38 Rays puberulent all round
\par
39 Lobes of basal leaves up to 60 × 0·5 mm, setaceous ..... {\b 30. leucospermum}
\par
39 Lobes of basal leaves not more than 15 mm, up to
\par
   2 mm wide, linear, elliptical or obovate
\par
40 Bracteoles free ...................................................................... {\b 12. montanum}
\par
40 Bracteoles connate at base
\par
41 Leaf-lobes long-acuminate ....................................................... {\b 23. rigidum}
\par
41 Leaf-lobes obtuse, sometimes minutely apiculate
\par
42 Stem densely pubescent; bracteoles triangular to
\par
   subulate, densely puberulent .................................................... {\b 9. granatense}
\par
42 Stem glabrous, at least in the lower half; bracteoles
\par
   ovate-lanceolate, sparsely puberulent ............................................ {\b 25. malyi}
\par
38 Rays puberulent only on inner side
\par
43 Caespitose, the flowering stems not more than 10(-15) cm;
\par
   umbels dense, subglobose; rays not more than 6 mm .................. {\b 11. nanum}
\par
43 Not caespitose, the flowering stems more than 10 cm;
\par
   umbels lax; rays usually more than 10 mm
\par
44 Petals glabrous
\par
45 Lobes of lower leaves linear or linear-lanceolate ................ {\b 12. montanum}
\par
45 Lobes of lower leaves setaceous ......................................... {\b 33. bulgaricum}
\par
44 Petals puberulent on the back
\par
46 Bracteoles with wide membranous margin, equalling
\par
   or wider than the herbaceous central part ............................... {\b 19. tortuosum}
\par
46 Bracteoles with narrow membranous margin
\par
47 Fruit 3-3·5 × 1-2 mm, puberulent .......................................... {\b 17. campestre}
\par
47 Fruit 3·5-5 × 2-2·5 mm, usually glabrous .............................. {\b 18. arenarium}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Subgen.{\b  Libanotis} (Hill) Drude. Sepals 0·5-1 mm, deciduous; bracts usually numerous.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. S. libanotis} (L.) Koch,{\i  Nova Acta Acad. Leop.-Carol.}{\b  12}({\b 1}): 111 (1824) ({\i Libanotis montana} Crantz). Glabrous or pubescent biennial or perennial (usually monocarpic) up to 120 cm; stems ridged. Lower leaves 1- to 3-pinnate. Rays (10-)20-60, up to 50 mm. Bracts usually 5-15 mm, 8 or more, linear, rarely replaced by 1-3 simple, lobed or toothed leaves; bracteoles 10-15, free. Sepals linear to ovate-lanceolate; petals white or pink, pubescent on the back. Fruit 2·5-4 × 1·5-2·5 mm, ovoid or ellipsoid, subterete, glabrous or pubescent; ridges obtuse. Styles deflexed, less than ½ as long as the fruit. 2n = 22.{\i  Most of Europe except the extreme north, west and south.} Au Be Br Bu Cz Da Fe Ga Ge He Hs Hu It Ju No Po Rm Rs (N, B, C, W, E) Su.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Very variable in leaf-dissection and shape of the lobes, and in indumentum. Leaf-dissection and shape of the lobes shows an east-west cline, the plants with the most dissected leaves and narrowest lobes occurring in the west. Plants with glabrous fruits occur mainly in the southern half of the range of the species, sometimes forming discrete populations, sometimes with otherwise almost identical plants with pubescent fruits. Populations with distinctive combinations of these characters have been described as separate species or as subspecies, but it is generally not possible to distinguish any of these taxa from the remainder by a single character. The following, however, seem sufficiently distinct to merit recognition as subspecies.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b libanotis} (incl. {\i S. athamanthoides} Reichenb.,{\i  Libanotis daucifolia} (Scop.) Reichenb.): Lower leaves 2- to 3-pinnate; lobes linear, oblong or lanceolate, often falcate, acute. •{\i  W., C. and parts of S. Europe, extending northwards to S. Sweden}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b intermedium} (Rupr.) P.W. Ball, {\i Feddes Repert.}{\b  79}: 64 (1968) ({\i Libanotis intermedia} Rupr.,{\i  S. libanotis} subsp. {\i sibiricum} Thell. pro parte): Lower leaves 1- to 2-pinnate; lobes ovate, coarsely toothed or pinnatifid, obtuse or subobtuse. {\i E. & E.C. Europe}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. S. sibiricum} (L.) Garcke,{\i  Fl. Nord-Mittel Deutschl. }139 (1849) ({\i Libanotis sibirica} (L.) C.A. Meyer). Like {\b 1} but stems terete, glabrous; lower leaves 1-pinnate; lobes ovate, toothed or pinnatisect; petals violet in bud; fruit usually glabrous; styles about ½ as long as fruit.{\i  S. Ural.} Rs (C).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 3. S. condensatum} (L.) Reichenb. fil. in Reichenb. & Reichenb. fil.,{\i  Icon. Fl. Germ.}{\b  21}: 37 (1867) ({\i Libanotis condensata} (L.) Crantz). Like {\b 1} but fruit dorsally compressed, with a narrow (0·5-1 mm) wing on the margin; styles erect or patent, about as long as fruit.{\i  N. Russia.} Rs (N). ({\i N. Asia}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Subgen. {\b Seseli.} Sepals less than 0·5 mm, or absent; bracts absent or few, rarely numerous.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 4. S. peucedanoides} (Bieb.) Kos.-Pol.,{\i  Bull. Soc. Nat. Moscou} nov. ser., {\b 29}: 184 (1916) ({\i Gasparrinia peucedanoides} (Bieb.) Bertol.,{\i  Silaus virescens} (Sprengel) Boiss.; incl. {\i Seseli elegans} Schischkin). Glabrous perennial 40-100 cm. Leaves 2- to 3-pinnate; lobes 3-10 × 0·5-1 mm, linear. Rays (5-)10-20, up to 60 mm, glabrous. Bracts 5-12; bracteoles free. Petals yellow, glabrous. Fruit 3-5 × 2·5 mm, ovoid or ellipsoid, glabrous. 2n = 22.{\i  S. & E.C. Europe, from S. France to W. Ukraine and Bulgaria; one station in S.E. Russia}. Al Bu Cz Ga Gr Hu It Ju Rm Rs (W, E).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Variable and possibly containing a number of subspecies.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   {\b 5. S. gummiferum} Pallas ex Sm.,{\i  Exot. Bot.}{\b  2}: 121 (1807). Glabrous to densely pubescent perennial up to 150 cm. Leaves 2- to 3-pinnate; lobes (6-)8-30 × 1·5-5(-7) mm, variable in shape. Rays 20-40(-60), up to 50 mm, pubescent all round. Bracts 8-16, rarely 0; bracteoles connate at base. Petals white. Fruit 3-4 × c. 1·5 mm, oblong, puberulent.{\i  Limestone cliffs below} 1000 m.{\i  S. Aegean region; Krym}. Cr Gr Rs (K).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Basal leaves glabrous ............................................. ({\b b}) subsp. {\b crithmifolium}
\par
1 Basal leaves puberulent or velutinous
\par
2 Lobes of basal leaves 1-5 mm wide, linear or oblong;
\par
  rays 20-35 ................................................................. ({\b a}) subsp. {\b gummiferum}
\par
2 Lobes of basal leaves 4-7 mm wide, elliptical or obovate;
\par
  rays 30-60 ........................................................................ ({\b c}) subsp. {\b aegaeum}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b gummiferum}: Glabrous or puberulent. Basal leaves densely puberulent; lobes 8-30 × 1·5-5 mm, linear or oblong. Rays 20-35. •{\i  Krym}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b crithmifolium} (DC.) P.H. Davis,{\i  Notes Roy. Bot. Gard. Edinb.}{\b  21}: 120 (1953) ({\i S. crithmifolium }(DC.) Boiss.): Puberulent. Basal leaves glabrous; lobes (6-)10-30 × 2-5 mm, oblong. Rays 20-45. •{\i  Amorgos, Karpathos and neighbouring islands.}
\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b c}) Subsp. {\b aegaeum} P. H. Davis,{\i  loc. cit. }(1953) ({\i S. crithmifolium} auct., pro parte): Velutinous. Basal leaves velutinous; lobes 10-25 × 4-7 mm, elliptical or obovate. Rays 30-60. •{\i  E. Kriti, Folegandros, Sikinos}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   {\b 6. S. lehmannii} Degen, {\i Österr. Bot. Zeitschr.}{\b  48}: 121 (1898).Glabrous or subglabrous perennial 10-75 cm. Leaves 2-pinnate; lobes 20-70 × 1-2(-3) mm, narrowly linear, acute. Rays 25-35, up to 60 mm, glabrous or sparsely puberulent on inner side. Bracts 10-16; bracteoles connate at base. Petals white. Fruit
\par

\par
335}
\par