{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 to 3-pinnate; lobes 20-35 × 0·5 mm, linear-setaceous. Rays 15-25, up to 30 mm, puberulent on inner side. Bracts few; bracteoles connate at base, glabrous except for ciliate margin. Petals white. Ovary puberulent. Fruit not known.{\i  Cliffs,} 1000-2000{\i  m.  C. Greece} ({\i Parnassos}). Gr.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 33. S. bulgaricum} P.W. Ball,{\i  Feddes Repert.}{\b  79}: 64 (1968) ({\i S. filifolium} Janka, non Thunb.). Glabrous perennial 15-40 cm. Leaves 2-pinnate; lobes of basal leaves 10-15 × 0·5-1 mm, of cauline up to 30 mm, linear-setaceous. Rays 6-11, up to 10 mm, puberulent on inner side. Bracts absent; bracteoles connate at base. Petals white. Fruit densely puberulent.{\i  Cliffs. • C. Bulgaria}. Bu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 34. S. gracile} Waldst. & Kit., {\i Pl. Rar. Hung.}{\b  2}: t. 117 (1802). Glabrous perennial 30-90 cm. Leaves 3-pinnate; lobes 20-100 × c. 0·5 mm), setaceous. Rays 5-16, up to 70 mm, glabrous. Bracts 0(-2); bracteoles free. Petals yellow, glabrous. Fruit 2-3 × 1·5-2 mm, ellipsoid or ovoid, glabrous.{\i  Dry stony slopes; calcicole. • N. Jugoslavia, S. & C. Romania.} Ju Rm.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 33.                    Oenanthe}                     L.
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc By D.C.K. Cook.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Leaves pinnate or pinnatisect. Sepals acute, persistent. Petals white or pale pink, notched, the outer radiating; apex long, inflexed. Fruit ovoid, cylindrical, obconical or globose; commissure wide. Lateral ridges grooved or thickened, sometimes obscure; vittae solitary.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Fruit globose .............................................................................. {\b 1. globulosa}
\par
1 Fruit not globose
\par
2 Some umbels leaf-opposed; peduncles shorter than rays
\par
3 Roots with obovoid tubers ................................................................. {\b 2. lisae}
\par
3 Roots entirely fibrous
\par
4 Fruit more than 5 mm .............................................................. {\b 12. fluviatilis}
\par
4 Fruit less than 4·5 mm ............................................................... {\b 13. aquatica}
\par
2 Umbels terminal; peduncles longer than rays
\par
5 Partial umbels globose in fruit; fruits sessile ............................... {\b 3. fistulosa}
\par
5 Partial umbels not globose in fruit; some fruits
\par
  pedicellate (though pedicels sometimes short and thick)
\par
6 Rays and pedicels not thickened in fruit
\par
7 Lobes of basal leaves ovate or suborbicular ................................ {\b 11. crocata}
\par
7 Lobes of basal leaves spathulate or linear
\par
8 Root-tubers ovoid, clustered at base of stem ..................... {\b 8. peucedanifolia}
\par
8 Root-tubers not ovoid, not clustered at base of stem
\par
9 Basal leaves 3-pinnate; styles not more than ¼ as
\par
  long as fruit ................................................................................. {\b 10. banatica}
\par
9 Basal leaves 2-pinnate; styles at least ½ as long as fruit ........... {\b 9. lachenalii}
\par
6 Rays and pedicels thickened in fruit
\par
10 Lobes of basal leaves cuneate or ovate; stem solid;
\par
   root-tubers ovoid, distant from the stem ............................ {\b 4. pimpinelloides}
\par
10 Lobes of basal leaves linear or linear-lanceolate; stem
\par
   hollow; root-tubers cylindrical or ovoid, near the stem
\par
11 Upper cauline leaves 2-pinnate; lobes setaceous ..................... {\b 5. millefolia}
\par
11 Upper cauline leaves pinnate; lobes linear or linear-lanceolate
\par
12 Root-tubers obovoid; fruit cylindrical or obconical .................. {\b 7. silaifolia}
\par
12 Root-tubers cylindrical or fusiform; fruit elliptical ................. {\b 6. tenuifolia}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. O. globulosa} L., {\i Sp. Pl. }255 (1753). Much-branched perennial rarely more than 50 cm. Roots with ovoid tubers, distant from stem. Stem hollow, grooved. Basal leaves 2-pinnate; lobes ovate to linear. Cauline leaves 1- to 2-pinnate; lobes linear to linear-lanceolate. Umbels terminal or leaf-opposed. Peduncle longer or shorter than rays. Rays 3-16, thickened in fruit. Partial umbels male, or male and hermaphrodite; male flowers pedicellate. Fruit c. 5 mm, globose. Styles 2/3 as long as fruit.{\i  Marshes, usually near the sea. W. Mediterranean region, eastwards to S. Italy; C. & S. Portugal.} Bl Co Ga Hs It Lu Sa Si
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b globulosa}: Umbels mainly terminal; peduncle usually longer than rays; rays 5-6, of which 2-3 bear fruit and thicken. 2n = 22. {\i Throughout the range of the species, except perhaps Sicilia}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b kunzei} (Willk.) Nyman,{\i  Consp. }299 (1879): Umbels mainly leaf-opposed; peduncle often shorter than rays; rays 5-16, of which 3-8 bear fruit and thicken.{\i  E. Portugal; S. Spain; Sicilia}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. O. lisae} Moris,{\i  Mem. Accad. Sci. Torino }{\b 38} ({\i Sci. Fis. Mat.}): 27 (1835). Much-branched perennial up to 40 cm. Roots with obovoid tubers, narrow at point of attachment to stem. Stem hollow, striate. Basal leaves 1- to 2-pinnate; lobes ovate to linear. Cauline leaves pinnate; lobes linear to linear-lanceolate. Umbels terminal and leaf-opposed; lower umbels sessile. Peduncle absent or shorter than rays, except for terminal umbel. Rays 2-7, not thickened in fruit. Pedicels present only at periphery of partial umbels, not thickened in fruit. Fruit 3-3·5 mm. elliptical. Styles less than 1/10 as long as fruit.{\i  Marshes. • Sardegna.} Sa.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 3. O. fistulosa} L.,{\i  Sp. Pl.} 254 (1753). Erect, slender, stoloniferous perennial up to 80 cm. Roots with fusiform to ovoid tubers. Stem striate, hollow, thin-walled, often constricted at nodes. Basal leaves 1- to 2-pinnate; lobes ovate, lobed. Cauline leaves pinnate; lobes linear-lanceolate to subulate, entire. Submerged or winter leaves 2-pinnate; segments filiform. Umbels terminal. Peduncle longer than rays. Rays 2-4, thickened in fruit. Pedicels present only at periphery of partial umbels, not thickened in fruit. Fruit 3-4 mm, cylindrical or obconical. Styles as long as fruit. 2n = 22.{\i  Wet places and in shallow water. W., C. & S. Europe, extending to S. Sweden and White Russia.} Al Au Be Br Bu Co Cz Da Ga Ge Gr Hb He Ho Hs Hu It Ju Lu Po Rm Rs (C,W) Sa Si Su.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 4. O. pimpinelloides} L.,{\i  Sp. Pl.} 255 (1753) (incl. {\i O. angulosa }Griseb., {\i O. incrassans} Bory & Chaub., {\i O. thracica} Griseb.). Erect perennial up to 100 cm. Roots with ovoid tubers, distant from stem. Stem solid, grooved. Basal leaves 2-pinnate; lobes cuneate to ovate, lobed. Cauline leaves 1- to 2-pinnate- lobes linear to linear-lanceolate, entire. Umbels terminal. Peduncle longer than rays. Rays 6-15, thickened in fruit. Pedicels thickened in fruit. Fruit c. 3 mm, cylindrical. Styles more than 2/3 as long as fruit.{\i  W. & S. Europe.} Al Be ?Bl Br Bu Co Cr Ga Gr Hb Ho Hs It Ju Lu Rs (K) Sa Si Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 5. O. millefolia} Janka,{\i  Österr. Bot. Zeitschr.}{\b  22}: 177 (1872). Erect perennial up to 70 cm. Roots with obovoid tubers, narrowed at point of attachment to stem. Stem hollow, grooved. Basal and cauline leaves 2-pinnate; lobes setaceous. Umbels terminal. Peduncle longer than rays. Rays 5-15, slightly thickened in fruit. Pedicels occasionally absent in centre of partial umbel, thickened in fruit. Fruit 2·5-3·5 mm, cylindrical. Styles about as long as fruit.{\i  Dry grassland and thickets. • Bulgaria.} Bu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 6. O. tenuifolia} Boiss. & Orph. in Boiss.,{\i  Diagn. Pl. Or. Nov.}{\b  3}({\b 6}): 79 (1859). Erect, slender perennial up to 60 cm. Roots with cylindrical tubers clustered at base of stem. Stem hollow,
\par

\par
338}
\par