{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 perennial (5-)10-50(-100) cm. Stock with abundant scale-like remains of petioles. Stem striate, solid. Lower leaves pinnate and sometimes further divided, oblong in outline; segments obovate or lanceolate, often obliquely subcordate at base, serrate, crenate, dentate or sometimes lobed, very rarely with an additional pair of segments at the base of the primary ones; cauline leaves few, small. Rays 5-15, glabrous or pubescent. Bracts and bracteoles absent or few. Petals pubescent on back. Fruit c. 2 mm, ovoid, shortly tomentose.{\i  S. & E. Europe, northwards to }c. 54°{\i  N. in E. Russia.} Al Bl Bu Cr Ga Gr Hs It Ju Rm Rs (C, W, K, E) Si Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Very variable in height, dissection of leaves, and hairiness. A number of subspecies have been described and specific rank has been given to some of them. Further investigation is needed, but the following seem to be fairly well-marked subspecies:
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Leaves 2- to 3-pinnate .................................................. ({\b e}) subsp. {\b titanophila}
\par
1 Leaves 1-pinnate
\par
2 Plant 5-10 cm; stock very stout, with the persistent leaf-bases
\par
  not or scarcely sheathing it; leaf-lobes up to c. 5 mm, ovate,
\par
  deeply toothed .................................................................. ({\b d}) subsp. {\b depressa}
\par
2 Plant (10-)30-100 cm; stock slender to stout, with or without
\par
  persistent, sheathing leaf-bases; leaf-lobes 5-15 mm,
\par
  shallowly to deeply toothed
\par
3 Plant 10-30 cm; stock with long, slender branches;
\par
  stem slender; cauline leaves few or 0; leaf-lobes
\par
  suborbicular, not deeply toothed ...................................... ({\b a}) subsp. {\b tragium}
\par
3 Plant 30-100 cm ; stock with short, stout branches ;leaf-
\par
  lobes ovate or deeply lobed
\par
4 Plant slender; leaf-lobes 5-10 mm, incise-serrate ......... ({\b b}) subsp. {\b lithophila}
\par
4 Plant stout; leaf-lobes 10-15 mm, not deeply serrate .... ({\b c}) subsp. {\b polyclada}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b tragium}:{\i  S.E. France:} ? {\i Sicilia.}
\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b lithophila} (Schischkin) Tutin,{\i  Feddes Repert.}{\b  79}: 62 (1968) ({\i P. lithophila} Schischkin; {\i P. tragium} var. {\i typica }Halácsy):{\i  S. Europe, from Spain to Krym.}
\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b c}) Subsp. {\b polyclada} (Boiss. & Heldr.): Tutin,{\i  Feddes Repert.}{\b  79}: 62 (1968) ({\i P. polyclada} Boiss. & Heldr.): {\i Balkan peninsula.}
\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b d}) Subsp. {\b depressa} (DC.) Tutin,{\i  Feddes Repert. }{\b 79}: 62 (1968) ({\i P. depressa} DC.): {\i Greece and Kriti}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b e}) Subsp. {\b titanophila} (Woronow) Tutin,{\i  Feddes Repert.}{\b  79}: 62 (1968) ({\i P. titanophila} Woronow):{\i  S.E. European U.S.S.R., but absent from Krym}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 9. P. pretenderis} (Heldr.) Orph. ex Halácsy, {\i Consp. Fl. Graec.}{\b  1}: 683 (1901). Like {\b 8} but densely white-tomentose; leaf-lobes obovate to narrowly flabellate, toothed only towards the apex; fruit c. 3 mm, oblong.{\i  Kikladhes.} Gr.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 10. P. villosa} Schousboe,{\i  Kong. Danske Vid. Selsk. Skr.} ser. 3,{\b  1}: 139 (1800). Puberulent, somewhat glaucous perennial 30-100 cm. Stem terete, solid, branched from the base. Lower leaves up to 30 cm, 2- to 3-pinnate, ovate-oblong or oblong in outline; segments usually 7-11, all or the lower pair only with an additional pair of segments at the base of the primary ones; lobes 5-30 mm, broadly ovate, crenate in upper half, usually serrulate below, often 3-fid, conspicuously reticulately veined; cauline usually reduced to ovate, sheathing petioles. Rays 3-6, puberulent. Bracts and bracteoles absent or few. Petals villous on back. Fruit c. 2 mm, ovoid, densely villous (including the commissural face).{\i  Iberian peninsula, Açores.} Az Hs Lu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 11. P. anisoides} Briganti,{\i  Nova Pimp. Spec. Diss.} 11 (1802). Somewhat puberulent to almost tomentose perennial 40-100 cm. Stem terete, finely striate. Lower leaves 2-pinnate, ovate-lanceolate in outline, at least the lower pair of segments usually with an additional pair at base; lobes 5-10 mm, ovate or obovate, cuneate, dentate or lobed; cauline leaves usually reduced to narrow, sheath-like petioles. Rays 2-6, glabrous. Bracts and bracteoles absent. Petals glabrous on back. Fruit c. 4 mm, ovoid or ovoid-oblong, glabrous or appressed-pubescent. •{\i  C. & S. Italy, Sicilia.} It Si.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 12. P. serbica} (Vis.) Bentham & Hooker fil. ex Drude in Engler & Prantl,{\i  Natürl. Pflanzenfam. }{\b 3}({\b 8}): 195 (1898) ({\i Pancicia serbica} Vis.). Glabrous perennial c. 50 cm. Stem terete, striate, branched above. Lower leaves cordate, serrate, long-petiolate; the next leaves deeply lobed; the upper palmately divided to the base into numerous setaceous lobes. Rays 10-15. Bracts 5-8, linear, scabrid, sometimes caducous; bracteoles 5. Fruit 3-4 mm, ovoid; ridges very narrowly winged.{\i  Mountain meadows. • C. & W.Jugoslavia; N.& E.Albania.} Al Ju.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 13. P. major} (L.) Hudson,{\i  Fl. Angl. }110 (1762) ({\i P. magna} L.). Glabrous or rarely puberulent perennial up to 100 cm. Stock at flowering time with non-flowering rosettes. Stem deeply sulcate (very rarely terete), hollow, branched above. Lower leaves 1(-3)-pinnate with 3-9 segments; segments up to 100 mm, ovate or oblong, dentate, rarely pinnatisect; cauline leaves smaller, with inflated, sheath-like petioles with membranous margins. Rays 10-25, slender. Bracts absent; bracteoles usually absent, rarely few, caducous. Petals white to deep pink. Fruit 2·5-3·5 mm, ovoid-oblong; ridges prominent, whitish. 2n = 20. {\i Most of Europe except the extreme north and south and S. & E. Russia.} Au Be Br Bu Cz Da Ga Ge Hb He Ho Hs Hu It Ju No Po Rm Rs (N, B, C, W) Su [Fe].
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    Very variable in height, degree of dissection of the leaves and colour of flowers. A number of subspecies have been described but the correlation between the characters differentiating these does not appear to be very good. Perhaps the most distinct of the taxa is var.{\b  rubra }(Hoppe) Fiori & Béguinot in Fiori & Paol.,{\i  Fl. Anal. Ital.}{\b  2}: 163 (1900), which occurs on the higher mountains of C. Europe. It has short stems and very deep pink flowers, but plants with the same flower colour and up to 100 cm high are found in the W. Carpathians and S.C. France ; these seem to intergrade  with normal{\i  P. major.} Plants with greatly dissected leaves are common in the eastern part of the range of the species, but occur sporadically elsewhere.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 14. P. siifolia} Leresche, {\i Jour. Bot.} ({\i London}) {\b 17}: 198 (1879). Glabrous perennial up to 60 cm. Stock long. Stem slender, terete, striate, little-branched. Lower leaves 10-30 cm, triangular-lanceolate in outline; segments 3-9, more or less deeply lobed and sharply serrate, somewhat glaucous beneath; petioles inflated, sheathing; upper cauline leaves with long, linear-lanceolate lobes, at least the terminal one entire. Rays 5-12. Bracts 0(-2); bracteoles 1-3(-6), narrowly linear. Petals pink. Fruit 5-6 mm, oblong-ovoid; ridges prominent, very narrowly winged.{\i  Mountain pastures.• W. Pyrenees; N. Spain} ({\i Picos de Europa}). Ga Hs.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 15. P. bicknellii} Briq., {\i Bull. Herb. Boiss. }{\b 6}: 85 (1898). Perennial up to 50 cm. Stock stout, without fibres. Leaves 2-ternate and ultimately pinnatisect; lobes ovate, incise-dentate. Rays 5-7. Bracts absent; bracteoles usually 5, lanceolate. Pedicels c. 0-75 mm in diameter in fruit. Petals white. Fruit 5-7 mm, ovoid; ridges low and rounded.{\i  Rocky slopes. • Mallorca.} Bl.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   This species has been placed in a monotypic genus,{\i  Spiroceratium}  H. Wolff, mainly on account of the deeply furrowed endosperm. In the other respects it seems to agree well with{\i  Pimpinella}.
\par

\par
332}
\par