{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 grooved. Basal leaves 1- to 2-pinnate; lobes linear. Cauline leaves pinnate or simple, linear-lanceolate; lobes linear to linear-lanceolate. Umbels terminal. Peduncle longer than rays. Rays 5-7, slightly thickened in fruit. Pedicels thickened in fruit. Fruit 3·5-4 mm, elliptical. Styles at least as long as fruit.{\i  Marshes. • C. part of Balkan peninsula,from S. Albania and S.E. Bulgaria to C. Greece.} Al Bu Gr.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 7. O. silaifolia} Bieb.,{\i  Fl. Taur.-Cauc.}{\b  3}: 232 (1819) ({\i O. media} Griseb.). Erect, sparsely branched perennial up to 100 cm. Roots with obovoid tubers, gradually narrowed to point of attachment to stem. Stem hollow, grooved. Basal leaves 2- to 4-pinnate; lobes linear to linear-lanceolate. Cauline leaves 1- to 2-pinnate; lobes linear-lanceolate. Umbels terminal. Peduncle longer than rays. Rays 4-10, markedly thickened in fruit. Pedicels thickened in fruit, sometimes very short and occasionally absent in centre of partial umbels. Fruit 2·5-4 mm, cylindrical or obconical. Styles almost as long as fruit.{\i  Wet places. 2n = 22. C., W. & S. Europe.} Al Au Be Br Bu Co Cz Ga Ge Gr Hu It Ju Rm Rs (W, K) Sa Si Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 8. O. peucedanifolia} Pollich,{\i  Hist. Pl. Palat.}{\b  1}: 289 (1776) (incl. {\i O. stenoloba} Schur). Like {\b 7} but root-tubers ovoid, not narrowed to point of attachment to stem; rays and pedicels not thickened in fruit; fruit ovoid; styles rarely more than 1/2 as long as fruit. {\i Wet grassland. • W. & W.C. Europe, from the Netherlands to S. Italy; Romania and Balkan peninsula.} Be Bu ?Cz Ga Ge He Ho Hs It Ju Lu Rm.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Plants from Romania and the Balkan peninsula are usually treated as a separate species,{\b  O. stenoloba} Schur, {\i Enum. Pl. Transs.} 255 (1866), but do not seem to be distinguishable from {\b 8}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 9. O. lachenalii} C.C. Gmelin,{\i  Fl. Bad. }{\b 1}: 678 (1805) (incl.{\i  O. jordanii} Ten., {\i O. marginata} Vis.). Erect perennial up to 100 cm. Roots with cylindrical or fusiform tubers. Stem solid, or with a small central cavity when older. Basal leaves 2-pinnate; lobes spathulate to linear. Cauline leaves 1- to 2-pinnate; lobes linear to linear-lanceolate. Umbels terminal. Peduncle longer than rays. Rays 5-15, not thickened in fruit. Pedicels not thickened in fruit. Fruit 2-3 mm, ovoid. Styles 1/2-2/3 as long as fruit. 2n = 22.{\i  Wet grassland. W. Europe, extending eastwards to N.W. Poland and N.W. Jugoslavia.} Be Br ?Bu Co Da Ga Ge ?Gr Hb He Ho Hs It Ju Lu Po Sa Si Su.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   {\b O. foucaudii} Tesseron,{\i  Compt. Rend. Soc. Bot. Rochel.}{\b  6}: 14 (1884), is a variant of{\b  9} that is up to 175 cm, with a hollow stem and slightly larger and wider leaves; it is confined to W. France.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 10. O. banatica} Heuffel,{\i  Flora }({\i Regensb}.) {\b 37}: 291 (1854). Erect, slender perennial up to 100 cm. Roots with cylindrical tubers. Stem hollow, deeply grooved. Basal leaves 1- to 3-pinnate; lobes linear to linear-lanceolate. Umbels terminal. Peduncle longer than rays. Rays 9-16, not thickened in fruit. Pedicels not thickened in fruit. Fruit 3-4 mm, elliptical. Styles ¼ as long as fruit or less.{\i  • E.C. Europe and Balkan peninsula.} Bu Cz Gr Hu Ju Rm Rs (W).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 11. O. crocata} L.,{\i  Sp. Pl.} 254 (1753). Branched, stout perennial up to 150 cm. Roots with obovoid or ellipsoid tubers narrowed at point of attachment to stem. Stem hollow, striate and grooved. Basal leaves 3- to 4-pinnate; lobes ovate to suborbicular, cuneate at base, lobed, crenate. Cauline leaves 2- to 3-pinnate; lobes ovate to linear. Umbels terminal. Peduncle longer than rays. Rays 10-40, not thickened in fruit. Pedicels not thickened in fruit.Fruit 4-6 mm, cylindrical. Styles ½ as long as fruit. 2n = 22. {\i Wet places. W. Europe and W. Mediterranean region.} Be Br Co Ga Hb Hs It Lu Sa Si.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b  O. prolifera} L., {\i Sp. Pl}. 254 (1753), is a teratological variant of {\b 11} with fasciated and proliferating rays. It is confined to the Mediterranean region and S.W. Asia; in Europe it is recorded from Sicilia and Kriti.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   {\b 12. O. fluviatilis} (Bab.) Coleman, {\i Ann. Nat. Hist.}{\b  13}: 188 (1844). Submerged, ascending or erect perennial. Roots entirely fibrous. Stem striate, hollow. Basal leaves 2- to 3-pinnate; lobes ovate or suborbicular, cuneate at base, shallowly lobed. Cauline leaves 1- to 2-pinnate; lobes ovate, cuneate at base, shallowly lobed. Submerged or winter leaves 2-pinnate; lobes cuneate, cut at the ends into narrow lobes; lobes linear to filiform. Umbels leaf-opposed. Peduncle usually shorter than rays. Rays 6-15, not thickened in fruit. Pedicels not thickened in fruit. Fruit 5-6·5 mm, elliptical. Styles 1/5 as long as fruit or less. 2n = 22.{\i  In still or slowly flowing water. • W. Europe.} Be Br Da Ga Ge Hb.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   {\b O. conioides} Lange,{\i  Haandb. Danske Fl.} ed. 2, 199 (1859), is an erect, robust, terrestrial state of {\b 12}, apparently confined to areas liable to flooding in the valley of the lower Elbe and two localities in Belgium.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 13. O. aquatica} (L.) Poiret in Lam.,{\i  Encycl. Méth. Bot. }{\b 4}: 530 (1798) ({\i O. phellandrium }Lam.). Much-branched, stout winter annual or biennial up to 150 cm. Roots entirely fibrous. Stem hollow, striate and grooved, often very short. Aerial leaves 3-pinnate; segments deeply lobed; lobes ovate, acute. Submerged or winter leaves 3- to 4-pinnate; lobes linear to filiform. Umbels terminal or leaf-opposed. Peduncle usually shorter than rays. Rays 5-15, not thickened in fruit. Pedicels not thickened in fruit. Fruit 3·5-4·5 mm, oblong-ovoid or elliptical, often curved. Styles less than ¼ as long as fruit. 2n = 22.{\i  In still or slowly-flowing water. Most of Europe except the extreme north.} All except Az Bl Cr Is Sb.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 34.                Lilaeopsis}               E.L. Greene
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc By †T.G. Tutin.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Leaves simple. Sepals small. Petals white, ovate; apex involute. Fruit ovoid, slightly compressed laterally. Ridges thick, somewhat corky; vittae solitary.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. L. attenuata} (Hooker & Arnott) Fernald, {\i Rhodora }{\b 26}: 94 (1924). Glabrous, with slender, procumbent stems rooting at the nodes. Leaves 1·5-15 cm, erect, fistular, septate. Umbels simple, with 8-15 flowers; peduncles 1-5 cm, slender. Bracteoles few, small, or often absent. Fruit 2-2·25 × 2 mm; ridges acute, the lateral somewhat larger than the dorsal.{\i  Marshes and shallow water. Naturalized in Portugal.} [Lu.] ({\i S.E. North America, E. temperate South America.})
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 35.                 Aethusa }                        L.
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc By †T.G. Tutin.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Leaves 2(-3)-pinnate. Sepals absent. Petals white, obcordate, the outer larger; apex inflexed. Fruit ovoid, somewhat compressed dorsally. Ridges thick, the lateral narrowly winged; vittae solitary.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. A. cynapium} L.,{\i  Sp. Pl.} 256 (1753). Annual or sometimes biennial 5-200 cm. Leaves deltate in outline; lobes lanceolate or ovate, pinnatifid. Rays (4-)10-20. Bracts usually absent; bracteoles usually 3-4, deflexed, subulate, on the outer side of the partial umbels. Fruit 3-4 mm.{\i  A weed of cultivated land. rarely in woods. Most of Europe, but rare in the Mediterranean region}. Au Be Br Bu Co Cz Da Fe Ga Ge Hb He Ho Hs Hu It Ju No Po Rm Rs (N, B, C, W, K, E) Su.
\par

\par
339}
\par