{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 styles erect or erecto-patent. •{\i  W. Europe, extending eastwards to Italy.} Br Co Ga Hb Hs It Lu No ?Si [Fa].
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. C. pyrenaeum} (Loisel.) Miégeville,{\i  Bull. Soc. Bot. Fr.}{\b  21}: xxxii (1874). Like {\b 1} but stems 40-70 cm, leafy to the base; cauline leaves with broadly ovate to suborbicular, obtusely lobed lobes, sheaths usually more than 10 mm, at least ¼ as long as the lamina; umbels with up to 16 rays. • {\i W. Pyrenees and mountains of N. Spain; C. Portugal.} Ga Hs Lu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Perhaps only a subspecies of {\b 1}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 3. C. bourgaei} Cosson,{\i  Not. Pl. Crit. }110 (1851) (incl. {\i Heterotaenia arvensis} Cosson). Stems up to 70 cm, procumbent or erect, leafy to the base. Basal leaves with linear or oblong, acute lobes; cauline leaves with linear or lanceolate lobes; sheaths of middle and upper leaves 7 mm or more, at least ¼ as long as lamina, usually densely pubescent. Umbels with 3-14 rays; bracts 0; bracteoles 0-1. Fruit 2·5-4 mm; stylopodium wider than long; styles erect or patent, rarely somewhat deflexed. •{\i  Spain and Portugal.} Hs Lu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 4. C. ramosum} Costa,{\i  Ind. Sem. Horti Barcin. }{\b 1860} (1860). Like {\b 3} but sheaths of middle and upper cauline leaves 2-7 mm, less than ¼ as long as lamina, usually glabrous or ciliate. •{\i  C.& E. Spain; C. Portugal.} Hs Lu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 5. C. capillifolium} (Guss.) Boiss.,{\i  Voy. Bot. Midi Esp.}{\b  2}: 736 (1845) (incl.{\i  C. elatum} Willk., {\i C. marianum} Lange, {\i C. subcarneum} (Boiss. & Reuter) Boiss.). Stems 20-80 cm, erect, leafy to the base. Basal leaves with ovate or elliptical, acutely lobed lobes; cauline leaves with very long, linear-setaceous lobes; sheaths of middle and upper leaves 7 mm or more, at least ¼ as long as lamina. Umbels with 6-20(-25) rays; bracts 0-2; bracteoles 5 or more. Fruit 3-5 mm; stylopodium usually wider than long; styles erect or erecto-patent. {\i S. Europe.} ?Gr Hs Lu It Si.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b  C. brachycarpum} Boiss. ex Lange, {\i Vid. Meddel. Dansk Naturh. Foren. Kjøbenhaven}{\b  1865}: 44 (1866), from N.W. Spain, is doubtfully distinct from {\b 5}. It is said to differ in the cauline leaves with linear-lanceolate lobes; the bracts with a narrow (not a wide) membranous margin; the petals with a wide, brown vein on the back.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 6. C. thalictrifolium} (Boiss.) Calestani, {\i Webbia }{\b 1}: 279 (1905) ({\i Heterotaenia thalictrifolia} (Boiss.) Boiss.). Stems 30-60 cm, erect, leafy to the base. Basal leaves with ovate to suborbicular, obtusely lobed lobes; cauline leaves with linear-lanceolate lobes. Umbels with 5-8 rays; bracts usually 1; bracteoles 2 or more. Fruit 3-3·5 mm; stylopodium wider than long; styles deflexed and appressed to the stylopodium in fruit. •{\i  S. Spain.} Hs.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 7. C. bunioides} (Boiss.) Calestani,{\i  loc. cit.} (1905) ({\i Butinia bunioides} Boiss.). Stems up to 20 cm, procumbent, leafy to the base. Basal and cauline leaves with lanceolate or elliptical, obtuse, sometimes 3-lobed lobes. Umbels with 3-5 rays; bracts and bracteoles 0. Fruit 2·5-3 mm; stylopodium wider than long; styles deflexed and appressed to the stylopodium in fruit. •{\i  C. & S. Spain} ({\i Sierra Nevada, Sierra de Gredos}). Hs.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 23.                   Huetia }                          Boiss.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28 ({\i Biasolettia }Koch, non C. Presl; {\i Freyera} Reichenb., non {\i Freyeria} Scop.)
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc By P.W. Ball.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Like{\i  Bunium} but fruit linear-oblong; vittae absent at maturity; stylopodium attenuate into the style.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Ridges of fruit minutely toothed; bracteoles pubescent ................. {\b 3. pumila}
\par
1 Ridges of fruit not toothed; bracteoles glabrous, rarely ciliate
\par
2 Bracteoles glabrous ................................................................. {\b 1. cynapioides}
\par
2 Bracteoles ciliate ............................................................................. {\b 2. cretica}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. H. cynapioides} (Guss.) P.W. Ball, {\i Feddes Repert.}{\b  79}: 16 (1968) ({\i Freyera cynapioides} (Guss.) Griseb.). Procumbent or erect perennial up to 40(-75) cm. Lobes of basal leaves linear or linear-lanceolate, acute, rarely elliptical, obtuse. Rays 3-15. Bracts 0(-3); bracteoles linear or lanceolate, glabrous. Fruit 3-6 mm; ridges not toothed.{\i  Balkan peninsula; C. & S. Italy}. Al Bu Gr It Ju.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   A rather variable species in Greece. The three following ill-defined subspecies may be recognized.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Leaf-lobes 1·5-4 mm wide, obtuse; rays 3-7 ................ ({\b c}) subsp. {\b divaricata}
\par
1 Leaf-lobes 0·5-1·5 mm wide, acute
\par
2 Pedicels usually with short teeth at apex; rays 6-15 ... ({\b a}) subsp. {\b cynapioides}
\par
2 Pedicels without teeth at apex; rays 3-8 ...................... ({\b b}) subsp. {\b macrocarpa}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b cynapioides} (incl.{\i  Freyera congesta} Boiss. & Heldr.,{\i  F. bornmuelleri} (H. Wolff) Hayek,{\i  Conopodium graecum} Freyn & sint.): Leaf-lobes 0·5-1·5 mm wide, linear or linear-lanceolate, acute; rays 6-15; pedicels usually with short teeth at the apex.{\i  Throughout the range of the species, except for much of C. & S. Greece}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b macrocarpa} (Boiss. & Spruner) P.W. Ball,{\i  Feddes Repert.}{\b  79}: 16 (1968) ({\i Butinia macrocarpa} Boiss. & Spruner, {\i Freyera macrocarpa} (Boiss. & Spruner) Boiss.; incl.{\i  F. parnassica }Boiss. & Heldr.): Leaf-lobes 0·5-1·5 mm wide, linear or linear-lanceolate, acute; rays 3-8; pedicels without short teeth at the apex.{\i  C. & S. Greece, extending locally to S Albania.}
\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b c}) Subsp. {\b divaricata} (Boiss. & Orph.) P.W. Ball, {\i Feddes Repert.}{\b  79}: 16 (1968) ({\i Freyera divaricata} Boiss. & Orph.): Leaf-lobes 1·5-4 mm wide, elliptical or linear-elliptical, obtuse; rays 3-6(-7); pedicels without teeth at the apex.{\i  S. & E. Greece}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. H. cretica} (Boiss. & Heldr.) P.W. Ball,{\i  Feddes Repert.}{\b  79}: 16 (1968) ({\i Butinia cretica} Boiss. & Heldr., {\i Freyera cretica }(Boiss. & Heldr.) Boiss. & Heldr.). Procumbent perennial up to 5 cm. Basal leaves with broadly elliptical to oblong, subobtuse lobes. Rays 2-5. Bracts absent; bracteoles oblong or lanceolate, ciliate. Fruit c. 4·5 mm; ridges not toothed. •{\i  Kriti.} Cr.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Possibly only a subspecies of {\b 1}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   {\b 3. H. pumila} (Sibth. & Sm.) Boiss. & Reuter in Boiss.,{\i  Diagn. Pl. Or. Nov.}{\b  3}({\b 2}): 103 (1856) ({\i Freyera pumila} (Sibth. & Sm.) Boiss.). Procumbent perennial up to 10 cm. Basal leaves with linear-elliptical, subobtuse lobes. Rays 3-6. Bracts absent; bracteoles lanceolate, pubescent. Fruit 4·5-5 mm; ridges minutely toothed. •{\i  S.C. Greece }({\i Parnassos}). Gr.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Records from other localities in Greece are erroneous.
\par

\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 24.                        Muretia}                    Boiss.
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc By †T.G. Tutin.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Leaves 2-pinnate; lobes linear. Sepals absent. Petals yellow, ovate-lanceolate or lanceolate, emarginate; apex inflexed. Fruit subcylindrical, slightly compressed laterally, not constricted at the commissure. Ridges filiform, scarcely prominent; vittae 2-3.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   {\b 1. M. lutea} (Hoffm.) Boiss., {\i Fl. Or.}{\b  2}: 858 (1872). Perennial with a tuberous, more or less globose stock. Basal leaves long-petiolate; cauline with remote segments which are cut into few lobes 10-15 mm long. Rays 7-12, slender, very unequal. Bracts
\par

\par
330}
\par