{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 2n = 56. {\i W., C. & S. Europe, extending to S.W. Finland and E. Ukraine.} Au Be Br Bu Cz Da Fe Ga Ge Hb He Ho Hs Hu It Ju Lu No Po Rm Rs (B, C, W) Si Su.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 4. A. repens} L., {\i Syst. Nat.} ed. 10,{\b  2}: 1046 (1759) ({\i A. odorata} Miller). Stem 50-100 cm, villous, with long and short eglandular hairs; without basal rosette. Leaves large, coriaceous, dark green above, greyish-green beneath; leaflets overlapping. Stipules large. Pedicels at maturity (4-)5(-10) mm; bracts often ovate and entire. Petals 5-7 mm, golden yellow, oblong, rounded at apex. Hypanthium (including bristles), 10-12 × 12-14 mm, cylindrical, with deep and narrow grooves for ¾ of its length; disc stout, projecting by c. 1·5 mm; lowest bristles distinctly deflexed.{\i  Formerly cultivated in gardens and now naturalized in various parts of Europe}. [Au Be Cz Ge ?It Rm Tu.] ({\i Anatolia}.)
\par

\par
 
\pard\f0\fs28\qc {\b 12.               Aremonia}            Nestler
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc By V. Skalický.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Like {\i Agrimonia} but inflorescence a few-flowered cyme, each flower with an 8- to 12-lobed involucre; epicalyx present; stamens 5-10; hypanthium without bristles.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. A. agrimonoides} (L.) DC., {\i Prodr. }{\b 2}: 588 (1825) ({\i Agrimonia agrimonoides} L.). Stem 5-35 cm, with basal leaf-rosette. Cauline leaves alternate, often 3-foliolate; leaflets obovate, crenate-dentate. Both open and cleistogamous flowers produced. Involucre up to 11 mm, concealing hypanthium at maturity. Epicalyx-segments c. 0·7 mm. Calyx-segments at maturity 2·5 mm on open flowers, minute and connivent on cleistogamous flowers.{\i  Mountain woods. S. & C. Europe from Sicilia and S.W. Germany eastwards, and northwards to} c. 49°{\i  N. in Czechoslovakia}. Al Au Bu Cz Ge Gr Hu It Ju Rm Si Tu [Br He].
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b agrimonoides}: Stem c. 15 cm, slender. Leaves usually with 2-3 pairs of main leaflets, the 3 terminal leaflets much larger than the rest. Petals 4-5 mm. Fruit frequently formed from cleistogamous flowers. Hypanthium (with elaiosome) 5-6 mm in fruit, almost globose, brownish, abruptly narrowed to whitish densely hairy elaiosome.{\i  Throughout the range of the species, but rare in Greece}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b pouzarii} Skalický, {\i Feddes Repert.}{\b  79}: 36 (1968): Stem c. 25 cm, robust. Leaves usually with 3-4 pairs of main leaflets, the 5 or 7 terminal leaflets somewhat larger than the rest. Petals 6-8 mm. Fruits formed mainly from open flowers. Hypanthium (with elaiosome) 7-8 mm in fruit, broadly ellipsoid covered with grey hairs, not narrowed to elaiosome.{\i  Greece.}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Plants intermediate between ({\b a}) and ({\b b}) occur in S. Jugoslavia and S. Bulgaria.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc {\b 13.             Sanguisorba}             L.
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc By M.C.F. Proctor & G. Nordborg.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Perennial herbs. Leaves pinnate. Flowers hermaphrodite or polygamous, in dense, terminal capitula or spikes, with 2(-3) bracteoles below each flower. Hypanthium deeply concave; sepals 4; epicalyx and petals absent; stamens 4 or numerous, rarely 2 carpels 1-2(-3); style terminal. Fruit of 1(-2) achenes enclosed in the 4-angled hypanthium, which becomes dry and hard.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Literature: G. Nordborg, {\i Op. Bot. }({\i Lund}){\b  11}({\b 2}): 1-103 (1966) and {\b 16}: 1-166 (1967).
\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 All flowers hermaphrodite
\par
2 Sepals dull crimson ................................................................... {\b 1. officinalis}
\par
2 Sepals green
\par
3 Fruiting hypanthium with narrow wings; stamens 4 .................... {\b 2. albanica}
\par
3 Fruiting hypanthium with broad wings; stamens 4-15 ........... {\b 3. dodecandra}
\par
1 Upper flowers of capitulum female
\par
4 Plant viscid, with glandular hairs .................................................. {\b 4. hybrida}
\par
4 Plant not viscid, without glandular hairs
\par
5 Rhizome clothed with the sheaths of old leaves .................... {\b 5. ancistroides}
\par
5 Rhizome not clothed with the sheaths of old leaves
\par
6 Faces of the hypanthium reticulate, sculptured or
\par
  irregularly ridged .............................................................................. {\b 6. minor}
\par
6 Faces of the hypanthium with longitudinal ridges ......................... {\b 7. cretica}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Subgen.{\b  Sanguisorba.} Flowers hermaphrodite. Stamens (2-)4(-15). Stigmatic papillae short. Carpel 1.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. S. officinalis} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 116 (1753) ({\i S. polygama} F. Nyl.). Glabrous. Stems 20-100 cm, erect, branched. Basal and lower cauline leaves with 3-7 pairs of leaflets; leaflets up to c. 5 cm, stalked, ovate or oblong-ovate, more or less cordate at base, glaucous beneath. Capitula 1-3 cm, subglobose or ellipsoid, erect. Sepals dull crimson. Stamens 4, equalling or slightly longer than the calyx; anthers dark crimson. Style 1, simple. Fruiting hypanthium with 4 narrow wings, smooth between the wings. 2n = 28, 56.{\i  Damp, base-rich habitats. Most of Europe except most of the Mediterranean region and parts of the north.} Al Au Be Br Bu Cz *Da Ga Ge Gr Hb He Ho Hs Hu Is It Ju No Po Rm Rs (N, B, C, W, K, E) Su [Fe].
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. S. albanica} Andrasovszky & Jáv., {\i Bot. Közl.}{\b  19}: 23 (1921). Like {\b 1} but leaves coriaceous, shining; capitula 2-8 cm, cylindrical, often interrupted at the base; sepals green; stamens longer than calyx; anthers yellow.{\i  Scrub on serpentine,} 450-600{\i  m. • N.E. Albania; ?Jugoslavia,} c. 25 km{\i  S. of Pec}. Al ?Ju.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 3. S. dodecandra} Moretti,{\i  Bibliot. Ital.}{\b  70}: 436 (1833). Stems 40-100 cm, erect. Leaves elliptical, with 4-10 pairs of leaflets; leaflets stalked, linear-lanceolate to ovate, sharply serrate, light green beneath. Capitula 4-7 cm, cylindrical, long-stalked, greenish-yellow to whitish. Sepals green. Stamens 4-15, much longer than the calyx. Fruiting hypanthium with broad wings. 2n = 56.{\i  Subalpine meadows and banks of streams. • N. Italy} ({\i Prov. Sondrio}). It [Po].
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Subgen.{\b  Poterium} (L.) A. Braun & Bouché. Upper flowers of capitulum female, the middle and lower hermaphrodite. Stamens numerous. Stigmatic papillae long. Carpels 2.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 4. S. hybrida} (L.) Nordborg, {\i Op. Bot.} ({\i Lund}) {\b 11}({\b 2}): 67 (1966) ({\i S. agrimonoides} Cesati). Erect, coarsely hairy, glandular-pubescent, viscid, with branched flowering stems up to 80 cm. Basal leaves with 3-5 pairs of oblong or elliptical leaflets, the terminal and subterminal leaflets the largest. Capitula rarely more than 1·5 cm, ovoid, compact, in a lax panicle with flexuous branches. Hypanthium 2·5-3 mm, more or less fusiform, glabrous, with longitudinal ridges, not winged. 2n = 56.{\i  River-banks and wood-margins. W. half of Iberian peninsula.} Hs Lu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 5. S. ancistroides} (Desf.) Cesati, {\i Icon. Stirp. }{\b 2}: sub {\i Sang. dodecandra} (1841). Cushion-like, 10-20 cm; rhizome woody, above ground, clothed with the sheaths of old leaves. Leaves with 3-10 pairs of leaflets; leaflets 5-10 mm, mostly of equal size. Flowering stems usually leafless. Capitula c. 1 cm. Hypanthium c. 4 mm, fusiform, almost smooth or with faces slightly reticulate, sometimes with irregular longitudinal ridges, not winged. 2n = 28.{\i  Limestone cliffs. S. half of Iberian peninsula.} Hs Lu.
\par

\par
33}
\par