{\rtf1\ansi \deff4\deflang1033{\fonttbl{\f4\froman\fcharset0\fprq2 Times New Roman;}}{\colortbl;\red0\green0\blue0;\red0\green0\blue255;\red0\green255\blue255;\red0\green255\blue0;\red255\green0\blue255;\red255\green0\blue0;\red255\green255\blue0;\red255\green255\blue255;\red0\green0\blue128;\red0\green128\blue128;\red0\green128\blue0;\red128\green0\blue128;\red128\green0\blue0;\red128\green128\blue0;\red128\green128\blue128;\red192\green192\blue192;}{\stylesheet{\widctlpar \f4\fs20\lang2057 \snext0 Normal;}{\*\cs10 \additive Default Paragraph Font;}}{\info{\author dddd}{\operator dddd}{\creatim\yr1998\mo11\dy11\hr17\min16}{\revtim\yr1998\mo11\dy11\hr17\min17}{\version2}{\edmins1}{\nofpages5}{\nofwords1104}{\nofchars6294}{\*\company  }{\vern57431}}\widowctrl\ftnbj\aenddoc\hyphcaps0 \fet0\sectd \linex0 {\*\pnseclvl1\pnucrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl2\pnucltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl3\pndec\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl4\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl5\pndec\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl6\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl7\pnlcrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl8\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl9\pnlcrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}
\pard\plain \ \f4\fs20\lang2057 {\fs28    }{\b\fs28 1. D. tenuifolia}{\fs28  (Ramond ex DC.) Godron in Gren. & Godron,}{\i\fs28  Fl. Fr. }{\b\fs28 1}{\fs28 : 706 (1849). Perennial with flexuous, rather slender stems 10-40 cm. Leaves mostly basal, deltate in outline; lobes mucronate. Rays 4-10, nearly equal. Bracts 1-3, very unequal; bracteoles numerous, linear-lanceolate. Pedicels puberulent. Fruit 4-6 mm. 2n = 22.}{\i\fs28  Mountain rocks and screes. \bullet  Pyrenees, Cordillera Cant\'e1brica.}{\fs28  Ga Hs.
\par 
\par }
\pard \qc\ {\fs28  }{\b\fs28 32.                           Seseli }{\fs28                         L.
\par (Incl.}{\i\fs28  Libanotis}{\fs28  Hill)
\par }{\fs24 By P.W. Ball.
\par 
\par }
\pard \ {\fs28 Biennial or perennial herbs; stock usually with fibres. Leaves several times pinnately or ternately divided. Bracts 0-16. Sepals absent or small. Petals white, rarely pink or yellow. Fruit oblong to ellipsoid or ovoid, not strongly compressed. Ridges prominent; vittae usually 1-3.
\par 
\par   A taxonomically difficult genus containing a number of rare or very local species. The following are known from very few localities or collections; further investigation is needed to confirm their status, and in a few cases to confirm that they are correctly placed in Seseli: }{\b\fs28 7}{\fs28 , }{\b\fs28 8}{\fs28 , }{\b\fs28 9}{\fs28 , }{\b\fs28 10}{\fs28 , }{\b\fs28 28}{\fs28 , }{\b\fs28 31}{\fs28 , }{\b\fs28 32}{\fs28 , and }{\b\fs28 33}{\fs28 .
\par 
\par }{\b\fs28   S. vandasii}{\fs28  Hayek,}{\i\fs28  Feddes Repert. }{\b\fs28 21}{\fs28 : 256 (1925), from S. Jugoslavia (near Prilep), is another little-known species of uncertain position. It is a glabrous perennial with the lower leaves 3-sect, the lobes 20-100 \'d7 1 mm, filiform, the rays 3-5, glabrous, the bracteoles free, puberulent, and the petals pink.
\par 
\par }
\pard \li200\ {\fs28 1 Rays glabrous and not papillose
\par 2 Bracteoles less than 1 mm, much shorter than pedicels ...........  }{\b\fs28 8. intricatum}{\fs28 
\par 2 Bracteoles more than 1 mm, at least 1/3 as long as pedicels
\par 3 Bracts 5 or more, rarely replaced by 1-3 simple leaves
\par 4 Petals yellow; rays not more than 20 ................................. }{\b\fs28 4. peucedanoides}{\fs28 
\par 4 Petals white or pink; rays usually more than 20
\par 5 Leaf-lobes 20-70 \'d7 1-2(-3) mm, narrowly linear; bracteoles
\par   connate at base ............................................................................ }{\b\fs28 6. lehmannii}{\fs28 
\par 5 Leaf-lobes either less than 20 mm long or more than 3 mm
\par   wide; bracteoles free
\par 6 Stem ridged; petals white or pink in bud ..................................... }{\b\fs28 1. libanotis}{\fs28 
\par 6 Stem terete; petals violet in bud ................................................. }{\b\fs28 2. sibiricum}{\fs28 
\par 3 Bracts 0(-3)
\par 7 Fruit 4-6 mm; lobes of lower leaves (2-)5-15 mm wide ............ }{\b\fs28 14. bocconii}{\fs28 
\par 7 Fruit 2-4(-5) mm; lobes of lower leaves not more than 3 mm wide
\par 8 Stock stout, branched, with persistent long petioles;
\par   fruit tuberculate-verrucose ....................................................... }{\b\fs28 21. glabratum}{\fs28 
\par 8 Stock usually simple, without or with at most some fibrous
\par   remains of the leaf-bases; fruit glabrous, pubescent or papillose
\par 9 Petals yellow; leaf-lobes 20-100 \'d7 c. 0\'b75 mm, setaceous ............ }{\b\fs28 34. gracile}{\fs28 
\par 9 Petals white, pink or purplish, rarely yellowish-white; leaf-
\par   lobes less than 20 mm long or more than 0\'b75 mm wide, not setaceous
\par 10 Basal leaves 2-ternate, the lobes 25-100 \'d7 1\'b75-3 mm,
\par    linear to elliptic-lanceolate .................................................. }{\b\fs28 13. cantabricum}{\fs28 
\par 10 Basal leaves 2- to 4-pinnatisect, the lobes
\par    5-30(-40) \'d7 0\'b75-2 mm, \'b1 narrowly linear
\par 11 Petiole of basal leaves not canaliculate; calyx-teeth
\par    0\'b72-0\'b75 mm in fruit ........................................................................ }{\b\fs28 15. elatum}{\fs28 
\par 11 Petiole of basal leaves canaliculate; calyx-teeth
\par    minute or 0 ................................................................................... }{\b\fs28 20. pallasii}{\fs28 
\par 1 Rays pubescent or papillose
\par 12 Bracteoles connate for at least 1/3 of their length,
\par    forming a conical sheath around each partial umbel
\par 13 Lobes of basal leaves 20-120 mm, setaceous or linear-setaceous
\par 14 Rays 7-10 ........................................................................... }{\b\fs28 28. tomentosum}{\fs28 
\par 14 Rays 20-30 ........................................................................... }{\b\fs28 29. globiferum}{\fs28 
\par 13 Lobes of basal leaves not more than 20 mm, linear-
\par    setaceous to narrowly obovate
\par 15 Lower leaves glabrous
\par 16 Stems puberulent at base; rays 3-6, not more than 6 mm,
\par    usually distinctly puberulent all round ............................... }{\b\fs28 10. peixoteanum}{\fs28 
\par 16 Stems glabrous at base; rays 5-12(-20), at least some
\par    more than 6 mm, puberulent on the inner side ............. }{\b\fs28 26. hippomarathrum}{\fs28 
\par 15 Lower leaves densely puberulent
\par 17 Lobes of basal leaves 2-5 mm, narrowly obovate;
\par    rays not more than 5 mm ......................................................... }{\b\fs28 9. granatense}{\fs28 
\par 17 Lobes of basal leaves 10-20 mm, linear; rays 12-20 mm . }{\b\fs28 27. dichotomum}{\fs28 
\par 12 Bracteoles free, or connate only in the lower third,
\par    forming a disc at the base of each partial umbel
\par 18 Lower leaves 1-pinnate; lobes ovate, toothed or pinnatifid
\par 19 Stem ridged; petals white or pink in bud ................................... }{\b\fs28 1. libanotis}{\fs28 
\par 19 Stem terete; petals violet in bud ............................................... }{\b\fs28 2. sibiricum}{\fs28 
\par 18 Lower leaves 2- to 4-pinnate; lobes various
\par 20 Bracts (4-)5 or more, rarely replaced by 1-3 simple leaves
\par 21 Bracteoles connate at base
\par 22 Lobes of basal leaves (6-)8-30 \'d7 1\'b75-5(-7) mm, linear to
\par    obovate or elliptical; rays densely puberulent all round ....... }{\b\fs28 5. gummiferum}{\fs28 
\par 22 Lobes of basal leaves 20-70 \'d7 1-3 mm, narrowly linear;
\par    rays sparsely puberulent on inner side ....................................... }{\b\fs28 6. lehmannii}{\fs28 
\par 21 Bracteoles free
\par 23 Sepals 0\'b75-1 mm, deciduous; rays usually 20-60
\par 24 Styles not more than \'bd as long as fruit ..................................... }{\b\fs28 1. libanotis}{\fs28 
\par 24 Styles about as long as fruit ............................................... }{\b\fs28 3. condensatum}{\fs28 
\par 23 Sepals less than 0\'b75 mm or absent; rays fewer than 20
\par 25 Rays pubescent on the inner side; fruit glabrous ...................... }{\b\fs28 16. annuum}{\fs28 
\par 25 Rays puberulent all round; fruit puberulent ......................... }{\b\fs28 7. vayredanum}{\fs28 
\par 20 Bracts 0(-3)
\par 26 Lower leaves 1- to 3-ternate; lobes up to 15 mm wide,
\par    2- to 3-fid; fruit 4-6 mm ............................................................. }{\b\fs28 14. bocconi}{\fs28 
\par 26 Lower leaves 2- to 4-pinnatisect; lobes usually less
\par    than 5 mm wide; fruit usually less than 4 mm
\par 27 Rays usually more than (10-)12
\par 28 Rays puberulent all round
\par 29 Leaf-lobes long-acuminate, somewhat pungent; petals
\par    puberulent; calyx-teeth obscure ................................................. }{\b\fs28 23. rigidum}{\fs28 
\par 29 Leaf-lobes acute or subobtuse, not pungent; petals
\par    glabrous or sparsely puberulent
\par 30 Calyx-teeth c. 0\'b75 mm; petiole not canaliculate ................. }{\b\fs28 5. gummiferum}{\fs28 
\par 30 Calyx-teeth obscure; petiole canaliculate ............................. }{\b\fs28 12. montanum}{\fs28 
\par 28 Rays puberulent only on inner side
\par 31 Fruit 1\'b75-2\'b75(-3) mm ................................................................. }{\b\fs28 16. annuum}{\fs28 
\par 31 Fruit 3 mm or more
\par 32 Petals pubescent on back
\par 33 Fruit 3-3\'b75 \'d7 1-2 mm, puberulent .......................................... }{\b\fs28 17. campestre}{\fs28 
\par 33 Fruit 3\'b75-5 \'d7 2-2\'b75 mm, usually glabrous .............................. }{\b\fs28 18. arenarium}{\fs28 
\par 32 Petals glabrous
\par 34 Ovary and fruit glabrous .......................................................... }{\b\fs28 22. strictum}{\fs28 
\par 34 Ovary and young fruit puberulent; mature fruit sometimes glabrescent
\par 35 Lobes of lower leaves 20-40 \'d7 c. 0\'b75 mm, linear-
\par    setaceous or filiform; longest rays c. 30 mm
\par 36 Bracts 0; bracteoles puberulent ................................................. }{\b\fs28 31. degenii}{\fs28 
\par 36 Bracts few; bracteoles glabrous except for the
\par    ciliate margin ...................................................................... }{\b\fs28 32. parnassicum}{\fs28 
\par 35 Lobes of lower leaves usually less than 20 mm long or more
\par    than 0\'b75 mm wide, linear or linear-lanceolate, rarely obovate
\par 
\par 334}
\par }