{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. M. panacifolia} (Vahl) Lange in Willk. & Lange,{\i  Prodr. Fl. Hisp. }{\b 3}: 62 (1874). Like {\b 1} but leaves hispid only on the veins beneath; rays 10-30, bracts 20-30 mm, linear-lanceolate; bracteoles 10-20 mm.{\i  Portugal, C. & S. Spain, Islas Baleares.} Bl Hs Lu.
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 55.                Hohenackeria}          Fischer & C.A. Meyer
\par
\pard\f0\fs24\qc By †T.G. Tutin.
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28 Leaves simple; margins cartilaginous, minutely denticulate. Inflorescence of sessile capitula. Bracteoles absent. Sepals conspicuous. Petals whitish. Fruit ovoid, glabrous or hispidulous; ridges wide, rounded, corky; vittae inconspicuous. Carpophore absent.
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28\li200 Stems very short, concealed by leaves; fruit glabrous ..................... {\b 1. exscapa}
\parStems up to 5 cm, not completely concealed; fruit hispidulous .... {\b 2. polyodon}
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. H. exscapa} (Steven) Kos.-Pol., {\i Trudy Bot. Sada Jur'ev. }{\b 15}({\b 2-3}): 120 (1914); Small, glabrous annual with very short stems. Leaves up to 10 cm, far exceeding the inflorescence, simple, broadly sheathing at base, with a linear-lanceolate lamina; margin thickened, denticulate. Flowers sessile, in a dense, sessile or subsessile capitulum. Bracteoles absent. Calyx-teeth 3-5, spinescent in fruit. Fruit c. 4 mm, glabrous, nearly smooth at top, with wide corky ridges in the lower 3/4; mericarps not separating. {\i S. Spain} ({\i Sierra de Baza, Sierra de Gador}). Hs. ({\i N. Africa, Caucasus.})
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. H. polyodon} Cosson & Durieu, {\i Bull. Soc. Bot. Fr.}{\b  2}: 183 (1855). Like {\b 1} but stems sometimes up to 5 cm; calyx-teeth 5, bifid nearly to base; fruit 3 mm, ridged to top, covered with short, stiff, patent hairs.{\i  C. Spain.} Hs. ({\i N. Africa.})
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 56.                        Bupleurum}                   L.
\par
\pard\f0\fs24\qc By †T.G. Tutin.
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28 Leaves simple. Sepals usually absent. Petals yellow, not emarginate; apex inflexed. Fruit usually ovoid or oblong. Ridges usually conspicuous; vittae 1-5.
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Leaves perfoliate; bracts absent
\par 2 Rays usually 5-10; bracteoles oblanceolate to ovate;
\par  fruit smooth .......................................................................... {\b 1. rotundifolium}
\par 2 Rays usually 2-3; bracteoles suborbicular; fruit
\par conspicuously tuberculate ......................................................... {\b 2. lancifolium}
\par 1 Leaves not perfoliate; bracts present, though sometimes deciduous
\par 3 Perennials with a stout stock and non-flowering stems,
\par  or sometimes shrubs
\par 4 Marginal veins of leaves strongly thickened and at least
\par  as prominent as the others ........................................................... {\b 31. rigidum}
\par 4 Veins of leaves slender and all similar, or the midrib the thickest
\par 5 Stems woody, at least at base
\par 6 Leaves with a well-marked midrib and conspicuous,
\par  reticulate lateral veins
\par 7 Leaves crowded near the top of the woody branches, from
\par  the apex of which herbaceous flowering stems arise ................. {\b 37. foliosum}
\par 7 Leaves ± evenly spaced along the stems
\par 8 Primary lateral veins reaching leaf-margin; bracts
\par  deciduous ................................................................................ {\b 39. fruticosum}
\par 8 Primary lateral veins not reaching leaf-margin; bracts
\par  persistent .............................................................................. {\b 38. gibraltarium}
\par 6 Leaves with several well-marked, ± parallel veins;
\par  lateral veins few and inconspicuous
\par 9 Bracts 3(-5)-veined
\par 10 Leaves not densely crowded, the upper conspicuously longer
\par   than lower; bracts and bracteoles linear, not fleshy .............. {\b 36. acutifolium}
\par 10 Leaves densely crowded, the upper not longer than the
\par   lower; bracts and bracteoles oblong-lanceolate, ± fleshy
\par 11 Leaves 3-6 cm, widest above the middle; pedicels c. 1 mm
\par   ............................................................................................ {\b 34. dianthifolium}
\par 11 Leaves 7-18 cm, widest below the middle; pedicels 2-4 mm .. {\b 35. barceloi}
\par 9  Bracts 1-veined, or apparently veinless
\par 12 Flowering stems and rays becoming hard and spinose,
\par   persisting for 2-3 years ............................................................. {\b 32. spinosum}
\par 12 Flowering stems and rays not becoming hard and spinose,
\par   not persistent ......................................................................... {\b 33. fruticescens}
\par 5  Stems herbaceous
\par 13 Leaves with a prominent midrib and numerous,
\par   anastomosing lateral veins
\par 14 Cauline leaves 1(-2); bracteoles connate for at least
\par   1/4 of their length .......................................................................... {\b 4. stellatum}
\par 14 Cauline leaves 3-5; bracteoles free or very shortly connate
\par 15 Stem hollow; lower leaves usually ovate; rays 5-12 ............ {\b 3. longifolium}
\par 15 Stem solid; lower leaves linear to lanceolate; rays 3-6 .......... {\b 5. angulosum}
\par 13 Leaves ± parallel-veined; lateral veins few and inconspicuous
\par 16 Basal leaves linear- to oblong-lanceolate, or wider
\par 17 Bracteoles linear to lanceolate
\par 18 Stock with few or no remains of leaves; bracts 2-5 ................ {\b 29. falcatum}
\par 18 Stock covered with persistent remains of leaves bracts (3-)5-7.. {\b 30. elatum}
\par 17 Bracteoles ovate to suborbicular
\par 19 Basal leaves usually 3- to 5-veined; rays usually 5-7 ..... {\b 26. ranunculoides}
\par 19 Basal leaves 7- to 11-veined; rays usually 11-13 ................ {\b 28. multinerve}
\par 16 Basal leaves linear
\par 20 Stock with few or no persistent remains of leaves;
\par   leaves often falcate .................................................................... {\b 29. falcatum}
\par 20 Stock with numerous persistent remains of leaves;
\par   leaves not falcate
\par 21 Cauline leaves not wider than the basal; rays 4-5
\par   filiform (S.E. Spain) .................................................................. {\b 27. bourgaei}
\par 21 Cauline leaves usually wider than the basal; rays
\par   usually 5-15, stout (not S.E. Spain)
\par 22 Stock covered with dark brown remains of leaves;
\par   fruit 2·5-3 mm ................................................................... {\b 26. ranunculoides}
\par 22 Stock covered with light brown leaf-bases; fruit 5-6 mm ...... {\b 25. petraeum}
\par 3 Annuals with slender root and no non-flowering stems
\par 23 Bracteoles broadly lanceolate to ovate, often overlapping and
\par   ± enclosing the flowers,incurved, aristate or mucronate
\par 24 Umbels all with 1 ray .............................................................. {\b 14. capillare}
\par 24 Most or all umbels with more than 1 ray
\par 25 Bracteoles with numerous, conspicuous, ascending and
\par   then abruptly recurved cross-veins .......................................... {\b 15. fontanesii}
\par 25 Bracteoles without cross-veins or with inconspicuous,
\par   ascending, not recurved ones
\par 26 Bracts more than 1/2 as long as the longest ray
\par 27 Bracteoles greenish-brown, with numerous slender cross-veins;
\par   margin narrowly scarious .......................................................... {\b 11. baldense}
\par 27 Bracteoles yellowish-green, without cross-veins; margin
\par   broadly scarious
\par 28 Bracteoles completely translucent, except for the veins ............. {\b 6. flavum}
\par 28 Bracteoles translucent outside the lateral veins,
\par   ± opaque inside them ........................................................... {\b 10. glumaceum}
\par 26 Bracts less than 1/2 as long as the longest ray
\par 29 Bracteoles without cross-veins ..................................................... {\b 7. gracile}
\par
\par 345}
\par