{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b turbith}: Leaves glabrous; lobes 15-35 × 0·3-0·5 mm, filiform; rays (15-)20-35; bracts 0-1(-5); bracteoles abruptly narrowed at apex; each half of stylopodium twice as long as wide; styles erect.{\i  N.E. Italy, N.W. Jugoslavia}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b haynaldii} (Borbás & Uechtr.) Tutin,{\i  Feddes Repert.}{\b  79}: 19 (1968) ({\i A. haynaldii} Borbás & Uechtr.): Leaves glabrous or pubescent; lobes 8-20 × 0·3-0·6 mm, narrowly linear; rays 15-25; bracts 5-8; bracteoles gradually or rarely abruptly narrowed at apex; each half of stylopodium about as long as wide; styles patent or erecto-patent.{\i  W. Jugoslavia, Albania.}
\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b c}) Subsp. {\b hungarica} (Borbás) Tutin, {\i Feddes Repert.}{\b  79}: 19 (1968) ({\i A. hungarica} Borbás): Leaves glabrous or rarely pubescent; lobes c. 25 × 0·8 mm, narrowly linear or filiform; rays 30-50; bracts 5-8; bracteoles gradually or abruptly narrowed at apex; each half of stylopodium 1½-2 times as long as wide; styles patent or erecto-patent.{\i  S. Carpathians}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 4. A. cretensis} L.,{\i  Sp. Pl. }245 (1753). Erect, pubescent perennial up to 60 cm. Leaves 3- to 5-pinnate; lobes 3-7 mm, linear or linear-oblong. Rays 5-15(-36), pubescent, with flexuous or crispate hairs at least as long as the diameter of the ray. Bracts 0-5, sometimes pinnatisect; bracteoles several, gradually narrowed at apex. Each half of stylopodium about as long as wide; styles erecto-patent. Fruit 6-8 mm, oblong-ovoid, densely puberulent. 2n = 22.{\i  Rocky places, mainly in the mountains. • From S.E. Spain and E. France to C. Jugoslavia.} Al Au Ga Ge He Hs It Ju.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Plants which are usually taller and have more numerous rays (15-36) than the typical plant occur in S. Spain, Italy, S.E. Austria, Jugoslavia and Albania. They have been called{\b  A. hispanica} Degen & Hervier,{\i  Bull. Acad. Int. Geogr. Bot.} ({\i Le Mans}) {\b 17}: 41 (1907) and{\b  A. vestina }A. Kerner,{\i  Sched. Fl. Exsicc. Austro-Hung.}{\b  4}: 37 (1886). They seem to be intermediate between {\b 3}({\b b}) and {\b 4}, differing from the former mainly in having longer hairs on the rays.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 5. A. densa} Boiss. & Orph. in Boiss., {\i Diagn. Pl. Or. Nov.}{\b  3}({\b 5}): 98 (1856). Densely pubescent perennial 20-40 cm. Stems freely branched from near the base. Leaves mostly basal, crowded, 4-to 5-pinnate; lobes 5-10 mm, oblong. Umbels forming a dense panicle, the lateral not overtopping the terminal one. Rays 20-35. Bracts 3-7, sometimes pinnatisect; bracteoles several, gradually narrowed at apex. Each half of stylopodium about as long as wide; styles erecto-patent. Mature fruit unknown. •{\i  S. Albania, C. Greece}. Al Gr
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 6. A. cortiana} Ferrarini,{\i  Webbia}{\b  20}: 334 (1965). Like {\b 5} but stem 3-10 cm; lateral umbels overtopping the terminal one; rays 15-20; fruit c. 7 mm. {\i Calcareous rocks. • N. Italy} ({\i Alpi Apuane}). It.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b  A. aurea} (Vis.) Neilr. in J. Maly, {\i Enum. Pl. Austr., Nachtr.} 198 (1848), appears to have been collected once only. The type and the fragment figured by Reichenbach fil. ({\i Icon. Fl. Germ.}{\b  21}: t. 1935 (1864)) are both missing. It is said to be an annual with yellow flowers and was found in W. Jugoslavia on the east side of the Dinara Planina. It may have been wrongly placed in {\i Athamanta} but requires further investigation.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 38.                           Grafia }                Reichenb.
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc By †T.G. Tutin.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Leaves 3- to 4-pinnate or -ternate. Petals white, obcordate; apex wide and long, inflexed. Fruit ovate-oblong, compressed laterally. Ridges prominent, almost winged; vittae 3-4.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. G. golaka} (Hacq.) Reichenb.,{\i  Handb.} 219 (1837) ({\i Hladnikia golaka} (Hacq.) Reichenb. fil.). Glabrous, glaucous perennial 50-100 cm. Leaf-lobes up to 3·5 cm, nearly rhombic, pinnately lobed or dentate. Rays 12-22. Bracts numerous, ovate-oblong, acute or sometimes bifid at apex; bracteoles usually 3, on the outer side of the partial umbel. Fruit 8-13 mm.{\i  Calcicole. • S.E. Alps, C. Appennini, W. Jugoslavia.} It Ju.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 39.                        Xatardia }                    Meissner
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc By †T.G. Tutin.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Leaves 2- to 3-pinnate, with narrow lobes. Sepals absent. Petals greenish-yellow, lanceolate, narrowed to the involute apex. Fruit ovoid, slightly compressed dorsally. Ridges stout and prominent; vittae solitary, slender.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. X. scabra} (Lapeyr.) Meissner,{\i  Pl. Vasc. Gen. }{\b 2}: 105 (1838). Glabrous perennial with a long, stout root. Stem 10-25 cm, usually simple, stout, solid. Leaves deltate in outline; lobes mucronate. Rays up to 14 cm, very unequal, scabrid, erect in fruit. Bracts 0-2, bracteoles 4-12, both linear-subulate, caducous. Fruit 6-7 mm.{\i  Alpine, calcareous and schistose screes.    • E. Pyrenees,} Ga Hs.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 40.                       Foeniculum }                    Miller
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc By †T.G. Tutin.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Leaves 3- to 4-pinnate, with long filiform lobes. Sepals absent. Petals yellow, oblong, scarcely narrowed to the involute apex. Fruit ovoid-oblong, scarcely compressed. Ridges stout, prominent, the lateral somewhat wider than the others; vittae solitary.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. F. vulgare} Miller, {\i Gard. Dict}. ed. 8, no. 1 (1768) ({\i F. officinale} All.). Glabrous, glaucous perennial or biennial up to 250 cm. Stem striate, shiny, developing a small hollow when old. Leaves more or less triangular in outline; lobes usually 5-50 mm, filiform, acuminate, cartilaginous at apex, usually widely spaced and not all lying in one plane; petioles of upper leaves usually 3-6 cm. Rays 4-30. Bracts and bracteoles usually 0. Fruit 4-10·5 mm, ovoid-oblong; lateral ridges scarcely more prominent than dorsal.{\i  Usually maritime. Most of Europe, except the north, but probably native only in the south and south-west.} Al Az Bl *Br Bu Co Cr Ga Gr *Hb Hs It Ju Lu Sa Si Tu [Au Be Cz Ge He Ho Hu Po Rm Rs (C, W, E, K)].
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b piperitum} (Ucria) Coutinho, {\i Fl. Port.} 450 (1913) ({\i F. piperitum} (Ucria) Sweet): Perennial; leaf-lobes seldom more than 10 mm, rigid and rather fleshy; terminal umbel often overtopped by lateral ones; rays usually 4-10; fruit sharp-tasting. {\i Dry, rocky places. Mediterranean region}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b vulgare}: Often biennial; leaf-lobes usually more than 10 mm, flaccid; terminal umbel not overtopped by lateral ones; rays usually 12-25; fruit sweet-tasting.{\i  Widely cultivated for flavouring and commonly naturalized}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   A variety of subsp. ({\b b}) (var.{\i  azoricum }(Miller) Thell.) with a large tuberous stock is cultivated as a vegetable in some Mediterranean countries.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 41.                       Anethum}                       L.
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc By †T.G. Tutin.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Leaves 3- to 4-pinnate, with long, filiform lobes. Sepals absent. Petals yellow, oblong; apex incurved. Fruit elliptical, strongly compressed dorsally. Dorsal ridges slender, prominent; lateral winged; vittae solitary.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. A. graveolens} L. {\i Sp. Pl.} 263 (1753). Glaucescent, strongly smelling annual 20-50 cm. Leaves 3- to 4-pinnate with filiform,
\par

\par
341}
\par