{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 6. S. minor} Scop., {\i Fl. Carn.} ed. 2, {\b 1}: 110 (1772) ({\i S. gaillardotii }(Boiss.) Hayek, {\i S. garganica} (Ten.) Bertol.). 10-90 cm, glabrous or hairy, with well-developed basal leaf-rosette; rhizome not clothed with the sheaths of old leaves. Flowering stems erect, leafy, rarely leafless. Leaves with 3-12 pairs of orbicular to elliptical leaflets; leaflets 0·5-2 cm, more or less stalked, crenate to incise-serrate, mostly of equal size. Capitula 1-3 cm, globose to ovoid. Hypanthium 3-8 mm, usually angled, ridged or winged and with faces reticulate or sculptured in various ways.{\i  Dry grassland and rocky ground. S., W. & C. Europe, extending to S. Sweden and C. Russia; an occasional casual in the north-east}. All except Az Fa Is Rs (N, E) Sb, but only as a casual alien in Fe No Rs (B).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Extremely variable in size, habit and ornamentation of the hypanthium. Differences in the hypanthium are often clearly marked, but they are not always satisfactorily correlated with other characters. So far as is known, there are no sterility barriers between the subspecies which are here described.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Hypanthium not or scarcely angled, strongly verrucose ({\b d}) subsp. {\b magnolii}
\par
1 Hypanthium ± 4-angled, not verrucose
\par
2 Hypanthium distinctly hairy ........................................ ({\b b}) subsp. {\b lasiocarpa}
\par
2 Hypanthium glabrous or with very short hairs
\par
3 Hypanthium subglobose, the faces pitted and faintly reticulate
\par
  ........................................................................................ ({\b c}) subsp. {\b lateriflora}
\par
3 Hypanthium ± elongated, the faces reticulate or ridged
\par
4 Angles of hypanthium ridged, the faces reticulate .............. ({\b a}) subsp. {\b minor}
\par
4 Angles of hypanthium winged, the faces covered with
\par
  irregular ridges
\par
5 Hypanthium up to 1½ times as long as wide ................. ({\b e}) subsp. {\b muricata}
\par
5 Hypanthium at least twice as long as wide ...................... ({\b f}) subsp. {\b rupicola}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b minor} ({\i Poterium sanguisorba} L., {\i S. dictyocarpa} (Spach) Franchet): 2n = 28. {\i Throughout most of the range of the species}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b lasiocarpa} (Boiss. & Hausskn.) Nordborg,{\i  Op. Bot.} ({\i Lund}) {\b 11}({\b 2}): 66 (1966) ({\i S. villosa }(Sibth. & Sm.) Dörfler): 2n = 56.{\i  Dry and rocky places. Turkey-in-Europe} ({\i near Istanbul}). ({\i Anatolia, Syria}).
\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b c}) Subsp. {\b lateriflora} (Cosson) M. C. F. Proctor,{\i  Feddes Repert. }{\b 79}: 35 (1968):{\i  Stony grassland. S. Spain}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b d}) Subsp. {\b magnolii} (Spach) Briq.,{\i  Prodr. Fl. Corse}{\b  2}({\b 1}): 209 (1913) ({\i Poterium magnolii} Spach, {\i S. verrucosa} (Ehrenb.) A. Braun: 2n = 28.{\i  Mediterranean region}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b e}) Subsp. {\b muricata} Briq.,{\i  op. cit.} 210 (1913) ({\i Poterium polygamum }Waldst. & Kit.,{\i  S. muricata} (Spach) Gremli,{\i  S. rhodopaea} (Velen.) Hayek): 2n = 28, 56.{\i  S. Europe; naturalized in C. and parts of N. Europe}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b f}) Subsp. {\b rupicola} (Boiss. & Reuter) Nordborg, {\i Op. Bot.} ({\i Lund}) {\b 11}({\b 2}): 66 (1966): 2n = 28, 56. {\i C. & S. Spain, Portugal, Sardegna, Sicilia}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 7. S. cretica} Hayek,{\i  Österr. Bot. Zeitschr. }{\b 64}: 358 (1914). Like {\b 6} but leaves with c. 6 pairs of larger leaflets 2·5-3 cm; capitula globose; hypanthium broadly winged, with longitudinal ridges on the faces. 2n = 28.{\i  Limestone cliffs. W. Kriti}. Cr.
\par

\par
 
\pard\f0\fs28\qc {\b 14.       Sarcopoterium}      Spach
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc By M.C.F. Proctor.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Like{\i  Sanguisorba} but spiny shrubs; flowers unisexual; stamens numerous; carpels 2; fruit of 2 achenes enclosed in the hypanthium, which becomes red and fleshy.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. S. spinosum} (L.) Spach, {\i Ann. Sci. Nat.} ser. 3 (Bot.), {\b 5}: 43 (1846) ({\i Poterium spinosum} L.). Much-branched shrub up to 60 cm. Shoots densely tomentose; lateral branches forming leafless spines. Leaves with 9-15 small, ovate, hairy leaflets. Capitula up to 3 cm, globose or oblong; the upper flowers female, the lower male. Calyx-teeth stellate-patent, caducous; stamens 10-30; hypanthium tubular-urceolate. 2n = 28.{\i  Dry places. Mediterranean region, from Sardegna eastwards.} Al Cr Gr It Ju Sa Si Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc {\b 15.                 Acaena}             Mutis ex L.
\par
 
\pard\f0\fs24\qc By D.H. Valentine.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Perennial herbs or dwarf shrubs. Leaves usually pinnate. Flowers hermaphrodite, in terminal capitula. Hypanthium deeply concave, contracted at the mouth; sepals 3-4; epicalyx and petals absent; stamens 1-10; carpels 2. Fruit of 1-2 achenes enclosed in the dry hypanthium which bears 4 to numerous spines.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. A. anserinifolia} (J. R. & G. Forster) Druce,{\i  Rep. Bot. Exch. Club Brit. Is.}{\b  4}: 484 (1917). Creeping, branched dwarf shrub with short, ascending, leafy, hairy stems up to 15 cm. Leaves 2-4 cm, pinnate with 3-5 pairs of leaflets; leaflets 4-12 mm, oblong, sessile, deeply crenate-serrate. Peduncles 4-7 cm in flower, up to 10 cm in fruit, bearing solitary capitula. Capitula 5-10 mm, globose, greenish, reaching 20 mm in fruit; each hypanthium with 4 long spines 5-6 mm, barbed at the apex and reddish-brown; stamens 2.{\i  Naturalized from gardens in Britain and Ireland.} [Br Hb.] ({\i S.E. Australia, New Zealand}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc {\b 16.               Dryas}             L.
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc By T.T. Elkington.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Procumbent, branched dwarf shrubs. Leaves simple. Flowers hermaphrodite or polygamous, solitary. Hypanthium convex; sepals 7-10, epicalyx absent; petals (7-)8(-16); stamens and carpels numerous. Fruit a head of achenes with long, persistent, terminal, hairy styles.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. D. octopetala} L.,{\i  Sp. Pl. }501 (1753). Stems up to 0·5 m. Leaves 5-40 × 2·5-20 mm, oblong to ovate, cordate or truncate at base, rugose, crenate, stipulate, petiolate; lower surface covered with a dense tomentum of white, simple hairs; veins usually with some large, brownish, branched hairs. Pedicels, calyx and hypanthium pubescent and usually with purple glands. Petals 7-17 mm, white, oblong. Styles 2-3 cm in fruit. 2n = 18, 36.{\i  On neutral and basic soils. Mountains of Europe, southwards to N. Spain, C. Italy and S. Bulgaria; also at low altitudes in the north.} Al Au Br Bu Cz Fe Ga Ge Hb He Hs Is It Ju No Po Rm Rs (N, C, W) Sb Su.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Plants which lack branched hairs on the leaves and which are found in a number of populations, have been described as{\b  D. babingtoniana} A. E. Porsild,{\i  Bull. Nat. Mus. Can.}{\b  160}: 140 (1959).{\b  D. punctata} Juz.,{\i  Bull. Jard.Bot. URSS}{\b  28}: 320 (1929), which has large glands on the upper surface of the leaves, has been described from Arctic Russia. Neither of these taxa is worthy of more than varietal rank.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc {\b 17.               Geum}             L.
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc By W. Gajewski.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Perennial herbs. Leaves pinnate or lyrate. Flowers solitary or in cymose, bracteate inflorescences, usually 5-merous. Hypanthium saucer-shaped, sometimes with a central, clavate carpophore; epicalyx present; petals more or less clawed, white, cream, yellow or red; stamens and carpels numerous; styles terminal. Fruit a head of achenes with long, persistent hairy styles, or with only the basal part of the style (rostrum) persistent.
\par

\par
34}
\par