{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}
\pard\f0\fs28 usually without cross-veins. Bracteoles semitranslucent, ovate- or oblong-lanceolate, acuminate; apex usually recurved, shortly aristate; margin minutely serrulate; veins prominent, cross-veins absent. Petals 0·7-0·9 × 0·5-0·6 mm, irregularly and remotely dentate. Fruit 1·6-2 mm; ridges filiform.{\i  Dry rocky places,especially near the sea. E. Mediterranean region.} Bu Gr Tu.
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 7. B. gracile} D'Urv., {\i Mém. Soc. Linn. Paris }{\b 1}: 286 (1822). Like {\b 6} but bracts never more than 1/2 as long as longest rays; bracteoles quite entire; petals 0·5-0·6 × 0·4-0·6 mm, not dentate; fruit 1·3-1·8 mm. 2n = 14.{\i  S.E. Greece and Aegean region}. Cr Gr.
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 8. B. aira} Snogerup,{\i  Bot. Not. }{\b 115}: 366 (1962). Very slender,erect, much-branched annual up to 50 cm. Lower leaves long-petiolate, linear-lanceolate; upper sessile, linear. Rays 3-6, long,filiform. Bracts 1/5-1/2 as long as longest ray, 3-4, lanceolate,acuminate, 3-veined. Partial umbels normally with 1-3 flowers.Fruit 1·2-1·8 mm; ridges inconspicuous. 2n = 14.{\i  Kikladhes} ({\i Naxos}). Gr.
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 9. B. apiculatum} Friv.,{\i  Flora }({\i Regensb}.) {\b 18}: 335 (1835). Slender,erect annual 30-60 cm. Lower leaves more or less distinctly petiolate, the others sessile, all narrowly linear-lanceolate or linear,3- to 5-veined. Rays 6-8(-15). Bracts 1/3-1/2 as long as rays, linear-lanceolate, aristate, herbaceous, narrowly scarious-margined, minutely serrulate. Bracteoles broadly lanceolate or elliptic- or obovate-lanceolate , whitish, completely semitranslucent; awn at least 1/2 as long as wide part; margin narrowly scarious, minutely serrulate; veins connected by few (rarely numerous) short cross-veins. Fruit 2·75-3 mm; ridges obscure.{\i  Dry, rocky places. E. part of the Balkan peninsula, extending to S.E. Romania}.Bu Gr Rm.
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 10. B. glumaceum} Sibth. & Sm.,{\i  Fl. Graec. Prodr. }{\b 1}: 177 (1806)({\i B. semidiaphanum} Boiss.). Like {\b 9} but rays 3-8(-12); bracts up to as long as the longest ray, with a wide, white, serrulate margin; bracteoles elliptical, completely translucent outside the lateral veins, thicker inside them; awn usually less than 1/2 as long as broad part. 2n = 16.{\i  Dry places. Albania, Greece and S.E .Jugoslavia.} Al Gr Ju.
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 11. B. baldense} Turra, {\i Gior. Ital. Sci. Nat. Agric. Arti Commerc.}{\b 1}: 120 (1764). Usually much-branched annual up to 75 cm. Lower leaves more or less distinctly petiolate, the others sessile, all linear-lanceolate or narrowly oblong-spathulate, 3- to 5-veined. Rays (2-)3-8(-10). Bracts more than 1/2 as long as the longest rays, lanceolate, long-acuminate or aristate, yellowish- or glaucous-green; margin narrowly scarious; veins 3-5, prominent. Bracteoles lanceolate to ovate, slightly concave, aristate, yellowish; margin narrowly scarious, minutely serrulate; veins 3-5, the inner 3 prominent, sometimes with a weaker submarginal vein on each side, connected by numerous slender cross-veins.Fruit c. 2 mm; ridges filiform.{\i  Dry open habitats; calcicole. S. & W. Europe from Romania to Spain and England.} Al Bl Br Co Ga ?Gr Hs It Ju Rm Sa Si.
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b baldense} ({\i B. aristatum} sensu Coste, non Bartl.):Glaucous, usually 5-15 cm and with primary branches only; rays (2-)3-4(-6); bracts glaucous, broadly lanceolate; bracteoles acuminate or shortly aristate. {\i W. Europe, extending to Sicilia}.
\par
\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b gussonei} (Arcangeli) Tutin,{\i  Feddes Repert.}{\b  74}: 31(1967) ({\i B. aristatum} subsp. {\i gussonei} Arcangeli, {\i B. veronense }Turra): Bright green, usually 30-75 cm and with primary and secondary branches; rays 5-8(-10); bracts yellowish, linear-lanceolate to lanceolate; bracteoles usually long-aristate.{\i  Balkan peninsula, Italy}.
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 12. B. flavicans} Boiss. & Heldr. in Boiss., {\i Diagn. Pl. Or. Nov.}{\b  3}({\b 6}): 74 (1859). Like {\b 11} but bracts not more than 1/2 as long as the longest rays, yellowish; veins prominent, connected by conspicuous cross-veins; bracteoles broadly ovate, strongly concave, yellowish; awn c. 1/2 as long as wide part; veins 5, the marginal much weaker than the others, connected by numerous, conspicuous cross-veins.{\i  C. & S. W. part of Balkan peninsula.} Al Gr Ju.
\par
\pard\f0\fs28  Perhaps not specifically distinct from {\b 11}.
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 13. B. karglii} Vis.,{\i  Fl. Dalm.}{\b  3}: 35 (1852). Slender annual or rarely biennial up to 50 cm. Lower leaves lanceolate, with a petiole about as long as lamina; upper linear-lanceolate to linear, acute, 5- to 7-veined. Rays 2-5. Bracts 1/4 to 1/2 as long as rays, oblong-lanceolate to elliptical, shortly cuspidate, greenish-yellow, translucent; margin narrowly scarious, minutely serrulate; veins 3-5, the marginal, if present, c. 1/2 as long as the bract; bracteoles ovate, subobtuse, mucronate, usually larger than the bracts, more or less enclosing the partial umbel, except at anthesis; veins always 5, connected by cross-veins, the marginal disappearing towards the apex. Fruit 1·75-2 mm; ridges slender.{\i  Mountain rocks. • W. part of Balkan peninsula. }Al Ju.
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 14. B. capillare} Boiss. & Heldr. in Boiss.,{\i  Diagn. Pl. Or. Nov.}{\b  3}({\b 2}): 82 (1856). Like {\b 13} but up to 75 cm; bracts longer than the ray, narrowly lanceolate, straw-coloured; margin broadly scarious, entire; veins wide, yellow or brownish-yellow; ray 1.{\i  Mountains. • S. Greece }({\i Delphi-Levadhia region}). Gr.
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 15. B. fontanesii} Guss. ex Caruel in Parl., {\i Fl. Ital.}{\b  8}: 417 (1889). Divaricately branched annual up to 50 cm. Leaves linear, often somewhat falcate, acuminate; lower more or less petiolate, veins 3-5. Terminal umbels with short, stout peduncles, usually overtopped by lateral ones. Rays 5-7, suberect in fruit. Bracts 1/2 as long as to about as long as the longer rays, lanceolate, acuminate, whitish and semitranslucent in fruit; veins 3-9, stout, connected by numerous cross-veins which are ascending and then usually abruptly recurved; bracteoles like the bracts but smaller, exceeding the flowers, very shortly connate at base. Fruit 1·5-1·7 mm, oblong-ellipsoid; ridges very slender.{\i  Dry open habitats. Mediterranean region from Sardegna eastwards.} Al Bu Gr It Ju Sa Si Tu [Au Ga].
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28   Subsect.{\i  Juncea} Briq. Annual. Leaves narrow, 3- to 11(-19) veined; veins more or less parallel; bracteoles herbaceous, flat, acute, 3-veined. Fruit not papillose.
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 16. B. praealtum} L.,{\i  Fl. Monsp.} 12 (1756) ({\i B. junceum} L.). Erect annual up to 150 cm. Leaves linear, acuminate, often subfalcate, abruptly narrowed to a short, sheathing base; veins up to 19, the midrib much thicker than the others and forming a keel beneath. Rays 2-3(-5). Bracts usually much shorter than rays, linear-lanceolate, very rarely wider, long-acuminate; bracteoles like the bracts but smaller, a little longer than the flowers, but exceeded by the fruits. Fruit 4-6 mm; ridges prominent. •{\i  S. & S.C. Europe.} Al Au Bu Cz Ga Gr Hs Hu It Ju Rm Sa Si Tu [Be].
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 17. B. commutatum} Boiss. & Balansa in Boiss.,{\i  Diagn. Pl. Or. Nov. }{\b 3}({\b 6}): 75 (1859). Erect annual up to 100 cm. Leaves linear to linear-lanceolate, subamplexicaul, the lower 9- to 11-veined at base, the upper 3- to 5-veined. Rays 4-7. Bracts 1/4 to 1/2 as long as the longest rays, 3-6, linear-lanceolate, long-acuminate, conspicuously 3- to 5-veined; bracteoles linear-lanceolate or lanceolate, 3-veined. Fruit 1·25-2·5 mm, ovoid-truncate or sub-
\par
\par 347}
\par