{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 5-10, free or somewhat connate, very variable in shape; veins 5 conspicuous, with some lateral veins. Fruit 5-6 mm, dark brown shiny; ridges winged. 2n = 14. {\i Calcicole. • S. & E. Alps}. Au Ga It Ju.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 26. B. ranunculoides} L.,{\i  Sp. Pl.} 237 (1753). Perennial up to 60 cm; stock rather slender, with more or less numerous dark brown remains of dead leaves. Basal leaves linear, linear-lanceolate or spathulate, more or less narrowed into a petiole; veins usually 3-5; cauline leaves wider, the upper usually ovate, acuminate, semi-amplexicaul; veins usually numerous. Rays (3-)5-7(-15), rather stout. Bracts 1-5, like the upper-most leaf; bracteoles 5-(7-9), yellowish, very variable in shape and size; veins usually 3-7, conspicuous, with some lateral veins. Fruit 2·5-3 mm; ridges filiform, prominent or narrowly winged.{\i  Mountains of C. & S. Europe, from the Carpathians to N. Spain, C. Italy and S.W. Jugoslavia.} Au Cz Ga Ge He Hs It Ju Po Rm.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b ranunculoides}: Leaves all flat, the lower narrowly lanceolate or oblong-spathulate, distinctly petiolate, the upper ovate, acuminate. 2n = 42.{\i  Throughout the range of the species}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b gramineum} (Vill.) Hayek,{\i  Prodr. Fl. Penins. Balcan.}{\b  1}: 971 (1927): Lower leaves more or less involute, linear, somewhat narrowed towards the base but scarcely petiolate, the upper linear-lanceolate. 2n = 14.{\i  Pyrenees, S. Alps, Appennini, Jugoslavia}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 27. B. bourgaei} Boiss. & Reuter in Boiss.,{\i  Diagn. Pl. Or. Nov. }{\b 3}({\b 2}): 84 (1856). Perennial up to 60 cm; stock woody, long, procumbent, covered with remains of dead leaves. Basal leaves crowded, narrowly linear, sessile, amplexicaul, dead at fruiting time; cauline similar in shape, few, remote; veins 5-7. Rays 4-5, filiform. Bracts 1-3, linear to linear-lanceolate, 5-veined; bracteoles equalling the flowers, lanceolate, shortly cuspidate or mucronate, 5-veined.{\i  S.E. Spain} ({\i Sierra de Alcaraz}). Hs.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Ripe fruit is apparently unknown. Doubtfully distinct from {\b 26}({\b b}).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 28. B. multinerve} DC., {\i Mém. Soc. Phys. Hist. Nat. Genève}{\b  4}: 500 (1828). Perennial c. 50 cm; stock rather stout, more or less densely covered with remains of dead leaves. Basal leaves linear-lanceolate, more or less distinctly petiolate; veins 7-11; upper cauline leaves linear-lanceolate to ovate from a cordate amplexicaul base, often long-acuminate; veins 11-45. Rays (5-)11-13(-20). Bracts 2-7, ovate, acute or acuminate; veins up to 21; bracteoles usually exceeding the flowers, ovate to suborbicular, apiculate, yellowish; veins 5-9(-13). Fruit 3·5-4 mm, dark brown; ridges narrowly winged.{\i  C. & S. Ural, and some outlying stations in C. Russia.} Rs (C, ?W). ({\i N. Asia.})
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 29. B. falcatum} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 237 (1753) (incl. {\i B. exaltatum }Bieb., {\i B. olympicum} Boiss.,{\i  B. parnassicum} Halácsy, {\i B. rossicum} Woronow,{\i  B. sibthorpianum} Sm., {\i B. woronovii} Manden.). Very variable perennial or rarely annual up to 100 cm; stock almost or quite devoid of remains of dead leaves. Basal leaves obovate elliptical, oblong or linear, distinctly petiolate or sessile; veins 5-7; cauline leaves sessile, semi-amplexicaul, lanceolate to linear often falcate. Rays 3-15, filiform. Bracts 2-5, lanceolate to subulate, very unequal; veins 3-5; bracteoles 5, linear-lanceolate, acuminate; veins 3(-5). Fruit 3-6 mm; ridges filiform or more or less winged.{\i  S., C. & E. Europe, extending north-westwards to S. England.} Al Au Be Br Bu Co Cz Ga Ge Gr He Hs Hu It Ju Po Rm Rs(C,W,K,E).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  A very variable species which requires investigation before infraspecific taxa can be satisfactorily delimited. The two following are sufficiently distinct morphologically to merit recognition as subspecies at this stage, though more or less intermediate plants (e.g.{\i  B. parnassicum} Halácsy) occur in some parts of their range.
\par

\par
  ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b falcatum}: Leaves elliptical to oblong, distinctly petiolate; fruit c. 3 mm; ridges usually unwinged. 2n = 16.{\i  Throughout the range of the species}.
\par
  ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b cernuum} (Ten.) Arcangeli,{\i  Comp. Fl. Ital.} ed. 2, 590 (1894): Leaves linear, sessile; fruit c. 5 mm; ridges more or less winged.{\i  Pyrenees, S. Alps, Appennini, S. Carpathians, mountains of Balkan peninsula, S. Russia}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Subsp.{\b  dilatatum }Schur,{\i  Enum. Pl. Transs.} 253 (1866), is a tall plant, with usually obovate basal leaves and distinctly but shortly petiolate cauline leaves. It is known from Romania, Hungary and Czechoslovakia and has 2n = 32. It is not, however, clear whether there is a constant correlation between morphological characters and chromosome number.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 30. B. elatum} Guss., {\i Fl. Sic. Prodr. }{\b 1}: 316 (1827). Perennial up to 150 cm; stock stout, woody, covered with remains of dead leaves. Basal leaves oblong-lanceolate to broadly lanceolate, somewhat narrowed to the amplexicaul base; veins 7-9; cauline leaves similar to the basal. Rays 6-14, slender, strict. Bracts (3-)5-7, lanceolate, acuminate; veins 5-7; bracteoles 5-6, much exceeding the flowers, linear-lanceolate, long-acuminate; veins 5(-7). Fruit c. 5 mm, oblong; ridges slender.{\i  Shady calcareous rocks. N. Sicilia} ({\i Madonie}). Si.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Subsect.{\i  Marginata} (Godron) H. Wolff. Perennial. Leaves linear to broadly obovate, all petiolate; veins 3-11, parallel, usually with a conspicuous reticulum of small veins between them, the marginal strongly thickened.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 31. B. rigidum} L.,{\i  Sp. Pl.} 238 (1753). Perennial up to 150 cm; stems woody at base, with numerous patent or erecto-patent branches. Leaves coriaceous, very variable in shape; petiole amplexicaul at base. Rays 2-5, slender. Bracts 2-4 mm, 2-5, subulate, appressed to rays; bracteoles like the bracts, shorter than the pedicels in fruit; veins obscure. Fruit c. 4 mm, ellipsoid; ridges filiform, prominent.{\i  Dry rocky places. Iberian peninsula, S. France, N. Italy. }Ga Hs It Lu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b rigidum}: Basal leaves oblong to broadly obovate; veins 5-11, with conspicuous small veins between them.{\i  Throughout the range of the species}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b paniculatum} (Brot.) H. Wolff in Engler,{\i  Pflanzenreich}{\b  43} ({\b IV. 228}): 154 (1910): Basal leaves linear or linear-spathulate; veins 3(-5), with few, inconspicuous small veins between them.{\i  Spain and Portugal}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Subsect.{\i  Rigida} (Drude) H. Wolff. Stems woody, at least at base. Leaves evergreen; veins more or less parallel, with inconspicuous small veins between them.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 32. B. spinosum} Gouan,{\i  Obs. Bot.} 8 (1773). Intricately branched, glaucous perennial up to 30 cm; lower part of stems stout, woody, devoid of remains of dead leaves; upper parts of stems dying after fruiting, becoming hard and spinose and persisting for 2-3 years. Basal leaves linear-subulate, scarcely narrowed at base; veins 3-5, conspicuous beneath; cauline similar but smaller, few, remote. Rays 2-7, becoming rigid and spinose after the fruit has been shed. Bracts 2 mm, usually 5, subulate, 1-veined; bracteoles similar to the bracts, but sometimes lanceolate. Fruit 3-4·5 mm, ovoid-oblong; ridges filiform, prominent.{\i  S. & E. Spain.} Hs.
\par

\par
349}
\par