{\rtf1\ansi \deff4\deflang1033{\fonttbl{\f4\froman\fcharset0\fprq2 Times New Roman;}}{\colortbl;\red0\green0\blue0;\red0\green0\blue255;\red0\green255\blue255;\red0\green255\blue0;\red255\green0\blue255;\red255\green0\blue0;\red255\green255\blue0;\red255\green255\blue255;\red0\green0\blue128;\red0\green128\blue128;\red0\green128\blue0;\red128\green0\blue128;\red128\green0\blue0;\red128\green128\blue0;\red128\green128\blue128;\red192\green192\blue192;}{\stylesheet{\widctlpar \f4\fs20\lang2057 \snext0 Normal;}{\*\cs10 \additive Default Paragraph Font;}}{\info{\author dddd}{\operator dddd}{\creatim\yr1998\mo11\dy11\hr17\min18}{\revtim\yr1998\mo11\dy11\hr17\min18}{\version2}{\edmins0}{\nofpages4}{\nofwords978}{\nofchars5579}{\*\company  }{\vern57431}}\widowctrl\ftnbj\aenddoc\hyphcaps0 \fet0\sectd \linex0 {\*\pnseclvl1\pnucrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl2\pnucltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl3\pndec\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl4\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl5\pndec\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl6\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl7\pnlcrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl8\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl9\pnlcrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}
\pard\plain \ \f4\fs20\lang2057 {\fs28 with broad, rounded ridges, forming 3 prominent angles on each mericarp; vittae large.
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 1. H. pastinacifolia}{\fs28  Reichenb.,}{\i\fs28  Pl. Crit.}{\b\fs28  9}{\fs28 : 9 (1831). Glabrous biennial or perennial 15-40 cm. Basal leaves 5-16 cm; segments up to 2\'b75 \'d7 1\'b75 cm, 3 or 5, ovate, dentate to pinnatifid; petiole with a long sheath-like base; cauline leaves few, small. Rays 9-20, scabrid on their inner angles. Bracts numerous, entire or 3-fid; bracteoles entire; both appressed at first, deflexed later. Fruit 4-5 mm, oblong. 2n = 22.}{\i\fs28  Calcareous rocks, }{\fs28 1100-1500}{\i\fs28  m. \bullet  W. Slovenija}{\fs28  (}{\i\fs28 mountains north of Ajdovscina}{\fs28 ). Ju.
\par 
\par }
\pard \qc\ {\fs28  }{\b\fs28 49.                   Pleurospermum}{\fs28                    Hoffm.
\par }{\fs24 By  †T.G. Tutin.
\par 
\par }
\pard \ {\fs28 Leaves 2- to 3-pinnate. Sepals small. Petals white, suborbicular, shortly clawed, papillose within. Fruit ovoid-oblong, slightly compressed laterally; mesocarp spongy, often breaking down and leaving an air-space between exocarp and endocarp as the fruit ripens. Ridges prominent, often with narrow, undulate wings; vittae solitary.
\par 
\par }
\pard \li200\ {\fs28 Leaf-lobes sparsely hairy on margins and on veins beneath,
\par   abruptly contracted to the acute apex; bracts entire or
\par   shallowly lobed ......................................................................... }{\b\fs28 1. austriacum}{\fs28 
\par Leaf-lobes densely hairy on margins and on veins beneath,
\par   gradually narrowed to the acute apex; bracts usually
\par   deeply pinnatisect .......................................................................... }{\b\fs28 2. uralense}{\fs28 
\par 
\par }
\pard \ {\fs28    }{\b\fs28 1. P. austriacum}{\fs28  (L.) Hoffm.,}{\i\fs28  Gen. Umb.}{\fs28  x (1814). Monocarpic perennial or biennial 50-200 cm. Stock with fibres. Stem very stout, hollow, ridged; branches alternate. Lower leaves ternately 2- to 3-pinnate, triangular-ovate in outline; lobes 4-10 cm, ovate, cuneate, pinnatifid, coarsely crenate-dentate, with a wide, obtuse, cartilaginous apex, sparsely hairy on margins and veins beneath. Rays 12-20(-40), weakly angled. Bracts numerous, eventually deflexed, entire or shallowly lobed; bracteoles numerous, lanceolate, entire, with membranous margins. Fruit 9-10 mm; ridges usually unwinged. 2n = 22. \bullet }{\i\fs28  C. & E. Europe, extending to the S.W. Alps and with an isolated area in Sweden.}{\fs28  Au Bu Cz Ga Ge He Hu It Ju Po Rm Rs (B, C, W) Su.
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 2. P. uralense}{\fs28  Hoffm., }{\i\fs28 Gen. Umb.}{\fs28  ix (1814). Like }{\b\fs28 1}{\fs28  but leaf-lobes ovate-lanceolate, densely hairy on margins and veins beneath; rays (15-)20-40, strongly angled; bracts usually deeply pinnatisect; fruit 5-6 mm; ridges narrowly winged.}{\i\fs28  E. Russia}{\fs28 . Rs (N, C, E). (}{\i\fs28 N.E. Asia}{\fs28 .)
\par 
\par }
\pard \qc\ {\fs28  }{\b\fs28 50.                       Aulacospermum}{\fs28                    Ledeb.
\par }{\fs24 By  †T.G. Tutin.
\par 
\par }
\pard \ {\fs28 Like}{\i\fs28  Pleurospermum}{\fs28  but sepals absent; mesocarp of fruit not spongy and not breaking down as the fruit ripens.
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 1. A. isetense}{\fs28  (Sprengel) Schischkin,}{\i\fs28  Fl. URSS}{\b\fs28  16}{\fs28 : 242 (1950). Glabrous perennial 50-100 cm. Stock surrounded by brown leaf-bases. Stems c. 1 cm in diameter, grooved; branches erectopatent, exceeding the terminal umbel. Basal and lower cauline leaves 8-10 \'d7 4 cm, 3-pinnate, ovate-oblong in outline; lobes 2-6 \'d7 0\'b73 mm, linear, acute, entire, dentate or 3-fid. Rays 20-30. Bracts 8-10, linear-lanceolate, dentate or pinnatifid; bracteoles entire or rarely dentate. Fruit 5-7 mm, subglobose; lateral ridges with a narrow, erose, crenate-dentate wing.}{\i\fs28  E. Russia, westwards to}{\fs28  49\'b0 }{\i\fs28 E}{\fs28 . Rs (C, E).
\par 
\par }
\pard \qc\ {\fs28  }{\b\fs28 51.                            Lecokia }{\fs28                          DC.
\par }{\fs24 By  †T.G. Tutin.
\par 
\par }
\pard \ {\fs28 Leaves 1- to 2-pinnate. Sepals small. Petals white, obovate; apex involute. Fruit ovoid-oblong, somewhat compressed laterally, constricted at the commissure, shortly beaked. Ridges thick, corky, muricate; vittae numerous.
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 1. L. cretica}{\fs28  (Lam.) DC.,}{\i\fs28  Coll. M\'e9m.}{\b\fs28  5}{\fs28 : 75 (1829). Glabrous perennial 60-100 cm. Lower leaves broadly triangular in outline; lobes oblong, irregularly toothed or lobed. Rays 6-10. Bracts 0 or 1; bracteoles few, subulate. Fruit 10-12 mm.}{\i\fs28  Limestone pastures. Kriti.}{\fs28  Cr. (}{\i\fs28 S.W. Asia}{\fs28 .)
\par 
\par }
\pard \qc\ {\fs28  }{\b\fs28 52.                        Cachrys}{\fs28                         L.
\par (Incl. }{\i\fs28 Hippomarathrum}{\fs28  Link, }{\i\fs28 Prangos}{\fs28  Lindley)
\par }{\fs24 by  †T.G. Tutin.
\par 
\par }
\pard \ {\fs28 Leaves 2- to 4-pinnate, with linear lobes. Sepals conspicuous to obsolete. Petals yellow, ovate; apex involute. Fruit subdidymous. Ridges thick, undulately winged and papillose, or wide and smooth; vittae numerous.
\par 
\par }
\pard \li200\ {\fs28 1 Sepals absent; ridges of fruit very wide, almost confluent, smooth
\par 2 Plant pubescent ....................................................................... }{\b\fs28 8. odontalgica}{\fs28 
\par 2 Plant glabrous
\par 3 Leaf-lobes 5-30 mm; fruit almost terete ......................................... }{\b\fs28 6. trifida}{\fs28 
\par 3 Leaf-lobes 25-60 mm; fruit weakly grooved .................................. }{\b\fs28 7. alpina}{\fs28 
\par 1 Sepals present; ridges of fruit prominent, wedge-shaped,
\par   often papillose or dentate
\par 4 Bracts of central umbel (1-)2-pinnatisect ......................................... }{\b\fs28 1. sicula}{\fs28 
\par 4 Bracts of central umbel entire or 2- to 3-fid
\par 5 Margins of leaf-lobes scabrid or puberulent ............................... }{\b\fs28 5. ferulacea}{\fs28 
\par 5 Margins of leaf-lobes glabrous, though sometimes
\par   remotely denticulate
\par 6 Ridges of fruit smooth or with short, flattened,
\par   often appressed papillae ................................................................ }{\b\fs28 2. libanotis}{\fs28 
\par 6 Ridges of fruit dentate-cristate
\par 7 Leaflobes 35-80 mm, filiform ...................................................... }{\b\fs28 3. pungens}{\fs28 
\par 7 Leaf-lobes not more than 15(-30) mm, flat, 3-fid .......................... }{\b\fs28 4. cristata}{\fs28 
\par 
\par }
\pard \ {\fs28    }{\b\fs28 1. C. sicula}{\fs28  L., }{\i\fs28 Sp. Pl.}{\fs28  ed. 2, 355 (1762) (}{\i\fs28 Hippomarathrum pterochlaenum}{\fs28  Boiss.). Erect, slightly scabrid, glaucescent perennial 30-150 cm. Stem solid, striate; branches opposite or whorled. Leaves 2- to 3-pinnate, broadly rhombic- or triangular-ovate in outline; lobes 15-50 \'d7 1-1\'b75 mm, linear, often flaccid, mucronate, scabrid on the margin. Rays 20-30. Bracts of central umbel (1-)2-pinnatifid; bracteoles subulate, entire. Fruit 10-15 mm; ridges prominent, wide and rounded, more or less dentate-cristate. }{\i\fs28 S. part of W. Mediterranean region, extending to C. & S. Portugal.}{\fs28  Hs It Lu Sa Si
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 2. C. libanotis}{\fs28  L., }{\i\fs28 Sp. Pl.}{\fs28  246 (1753) (}{\i\fs28 Hippomarathrum bocconii}{\fs28  Boiss.). Like }{\b\fs28 1}{\fs28  but usually smaller and stouter; leaves less divided; lobes 5-10 \'d7 1\'b75-2\'b75 mm, rigid, often dentate; rays 8-15; bracts simple or sometimes 2- to 3-fid; fruit not more than 10 mm; ridges smooth or with short, flattened, often appressed papillae.}{\i\fs28  S. part of W. Mediterranean region extending to S. Portugal.}{\fs28  Hs It Lu Sa Si
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 3. C. pungens}{\fs28  Jan ex Guss.,}{\i\fs28  Fl. Sic. Prodr. }{\b\fs28 1}{\fs28 : add. 7 (1827). Like }{\b\fs28 1}{\fs28  but leaf-lobes 35-80 mm, filiform; bracts entire or 2- to 3-fid.}{\i\fs28  S. Italy, Sicilia.}{\fs28  It Si.
\par 
\par   }{\b\fs28 4. C. cristata}{\fs28  DC., }{\i\fs28 Prodr. }{\b\fs28 4}{\fs28 : 238 (1830) (}{\i\fs28 Hippomarathrum cristatum}{\fs28  (DC.) Boiss.). Erect, glabrous perennial. Stem angled; branches opposite or whorled. Leaves 2- to 4-pinnate, ovate in outline; lobes c. 15 \'d7 1 mm, rigid, narrowly linear, flat, 3-fid at
\par 
\par 343}
\par }