{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 mucronate lobes. Rays 15-30, unequal. Bracts and bracteoles absent. Fruit 5-6 mm, dark brown with a pale wing.{\i  Widely cultivated as a herb and often more or less naturalized, particularly in the Mediterranean region.} [Au Be Bl Bu Cr Cz Ga Gr He Ho Hs Hu It Ju Lu Rm Rs (B, C, W, K, E) Si.] ({\i India and S.W. Asia;} ?{\i N. Africa}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 42.                     Kundmannia}                      Scop.
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc By †T.G. Tutin.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Leaves 1- to 2-pinnate; segments ovate. Sepals small, somewhat accrescent. Petals yellow, broadly ovate; apex involute. Fruit nearly cylindrical. Ridges slender but prominent; vittae numerous, irregularly arranged.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. K. sicula} (L.) DC.,{\i  Prodr.}{\b  4}: 143 (1830) ({\i Brignolia pastinacifolia} Bertol.). Glabrous perennial 30-70 cm. Lower leaves usually 2-pinnate with a pair of supplementary segments at the base of each pair of primary segments; lobes ovate, crenate-serrate, the lowest sometimes lobed; upper cauline leaves 1-pinnate, the segments incise-serrate or lacerate. Umbels with 5-30 subequal rays. Bracts and bracteoles numerous, linear. Fruit 6-10 mm.{\i  Mediterranean region, extending to S. Portugal}. Bl Co Cr Gr Hs It Lu Sa Si [Ga].
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 43.                       Silaum}                       Miller
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc By †T.G. Tutin.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Leaves 1- to 4-pinnate. Sepals absent. Petals yellowish, ovate; apex short, involute. Fruit ovoid-oblong to nearly cylindrical, scarcely compressed. Ridges slender, prominent, the lateral narrowly winged; vittae numerous, slender, inconspicuous.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   {\b 1. S. silaus} (L.) Schinz & Thell.,{\i  Viert. Naturf. Ges. Zürich}{\b  60}: 359 (1915) ({\i Silaus pratensis} Besser, incl.{\i  S. besseri} DC., {\i Silaum alpestre} (L.) Thell.,{\i  S. flavescens} (Bernh.) Hayek). Glabrous perennial 3-100 cm. Stem solid, striate. Basal leaves 2- to 4-pinnate, triangular in outline; segments long-stalked; lobes 5-20 mm, lanceolate to linear, finely serrulate, with prominent midrib, acuminate or obtuse and mucronate; apex often reddish; upper cauline leaves 1-pinnate or reduced to an inflated petiole. Rays 5-15, sharply angled. Bracts 0-3; bracteoles several, linear-lanceolate, broadly scarious. Fruit 4-5 mm, ovoid-oblong to subcylindrical.{\i  W., C. & E. Europe.} Al Au Be Br Cz Ga Ge He Ho Hs Hu It Ju Po Rm Rs (B, C, W, K, E) Su.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Very variable in the shape of the leaf-lobes and the size and shape of the fruit, particularly in the eastern part of its range.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Variants with linear leaf-lobes and subcylindrical fruits c. 5 mm have been called {\i S. alpestre} (L.) Thell. in Hegi,{\i  Ill. Fl. Mitteleur.}{\b  5}({\b 2}): 1295 (1926).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 44.                 Trochiscanthes}                    Koch
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc By †T.G. Tutin.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Leaves 3- to 4-ternate, with large, ovate segments. Sepals conspicuous. Petals greenish-white, clawed; apex inflexed, obtuse. Fruit ovoid, slightly compressed laterally. Ridges slender, prominent; vittae 4.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. T. nodiflora} (Vill.) Koch,{\i  Nova Acta Acad. Leop.-Carol. }{\b 12}({\b 1}): 104(1824). Glabrous perennial 100-200 cm. Stem with numerous opposite or whorled patent branches. Leaves with irregularly serrate and sometimes shallowly lobed segments 5-11 × 2-4·5 cm. Umbels small, very numerous, terminating the branches; rays 4-8. Bracts 0-1; bracteoles 3-5, subulate. Fruit c. 6 mm.{\i  Mountain woods. • S.E. France, S.W. Switzerland, N. Italy. }Ga He It.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 45.                            Meum}                        Miller
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc By †T.G. Tutin.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Leaves 3- to 4-pinnate, with crowded, filiform lobes. Sepals absent. Petals white or purplish, ovate; apex more or less inflexed. Fruit ovoid-oblong, scarcely compressed. Ridges very prominent, stout; vittae 3-5.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. M. athamanticum} Jacq.,{\i  Fl. Austr.}{\b  4}: 2 (1776) (incl. {\i M. nevadense }Boiss.). Glabrous, strongly aromatic perennial 760 cm. Stock surrounded by coarse, fibrous remains of petioles. Leaves mostly basal; lobes 2-5 mm. Rays 3-15. Bracts 0-2, setaceous; bracteoles few, setaceous, often small. Fruit 4-10 mm. •{\i  Mountains of W. & C. Europe, extending locally to Calabria and C. Bulgaria}. Al Au Be Br Bu Cz Ga Ge He Hs It Ju Po ?Rs (W) [No].
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 46.                        Physospermum}                   Cusson
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc By †T.G. Tutin.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Leaves 2- to 3-ternate. Sepals small. Petals white, obovate, emarginate; apex inflexed. Fruit ovoid, didymous, with a cordate base. Ridges filiform; vittae solitary.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 Leaf-lobes 10-30 mm, pinnatifid; fruit 3-4 mm ....................... {\b 1. cornubiense}
\par
Leaf-lobes 50-110 mm, serrate, usually unlobed; fruit 5-9 mm
\par
  ................................................................................................. {\b 2. verticillatum}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. P. cornubiense} (L.) DC.,{\i  Prodr.}{\b  4}: 246 (1830) ({\i P. aquilegifolium} Koch,{\i  Danaa nudicaulis} (Bieb.) Grossh.,{\i  D. cornubiensis} (L.) Burnat). Nearly glabrous perennial 30-120 cm. Stem striate, solid. Basal leaves long-petiolate, 2-ternate; lobes 10-30 mm, pinnatifid, cuneate at base, puberulent on margins and veins; cauline leaves small or reduced to petioles. Rays 6-20, glabrous. Bracts and bracteoles lanceolate, acute. Fruit 3-4 mm.{\i  S. Europe, extending northwards to S. England, Hungary and S.C. Russia.} Al Br Bu Co Ga Gr Hs Hu It Ju Lu Rm Rs (C,W,K).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. P. verticillatum} (Waldst. & Kit.) Vis.,{\i  Fl. Dalm.}{\b  3}: 358 (1852) ({\i Danaa verticillata} (Waldst. & Kit.) Janchen). Like {\b 1} but more robust; stems up to c. 160 cm, sulcate; branches usually whorled; leaves more or less setulose on margins and veins; lobes 50-110 mm on lower leaves, serrate, usually unlobed; fruit 5-9 mm. {\i N. Jugoslavia, Italy, Sicilia.} It Ju Si.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 47.                       Conium}                       L.
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc By †T.G. Tutin.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Leaves 2- to 4-pinnate; lobes serrate or pinnatifid. Sepals absent. Petals white, obcordate; apex inflexed. Fruit subglobose, laterally compressed. Ridges prominent, often undulate-crispate; vittae absent.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. C. maculatum} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 243 (1753). Nearly glabrous winter annual or biennial 50-250 cm. Stem pruinose, usually with reddish-brown spots below, hollow. Lower leaves up to 50 × 40 cm, triangular in outline, 2- to 4-pinnate, soft, entirely glabrous; lobes 10-20 mm, oblong-lanceolate to deltate, pinnatifid, coarsely serrate or crenate-serrate. Rays (6-)10-20, often puberulent. Bracts (0-)5-6, narrowly triangular to ovate-lanceolate, deflexed; margin scarious; bracteoles 3-6, on the outside of the partial umbel, widened at base and often connate. Fruit 2·5-3·5 mm. {\i Almost throughout Europe, except the extreme north.} All except Fa Is Sb.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 48.                    Hladnikia }              Reichenb.
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc By †T.G. Tutin.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Leaves ternate or pinnate, with ovate segments. Sepals conspicuous. Petals whitish. Fruit less than 3 times as long as wide,
\par

\par
342}
\par