{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 29 Bracteoles with slender cross-veins
\par
30 Bracteoles subobtuse, mucronate ................................................ {\b 13. karglii}
\par
30 Bracteoles acute or acuminate, usually aristate
\par
31 Bracteoles c. twice as long as wide ......................................... {\b 12. flavicans}
\par
31 Bracteoles c. 3 times as long as wide
\par
32 Bracteoles translucent outside the lateral veins,
\par
   ± opaque inside them; awn usually less than ½ as
\par
   long as the wide part of bracteole ......................................... {\b 10. glumaceum}
\par
32 Bracteole completely translucent, except for the veins;
\par
   awn at least ½ as long as the wide part of bracteole ................ {\b 9. apiculatum}
\par
23 Bracteoles narrowly lanceolate or narrowly elliptical to
\par
   subulate, not overlapping, ± flat, rarely aristate
\par
33 At least the lower leaves with the midrib forming a
\par
   prominent keel beneath
\par
34 Middle cauline leaves 5- to 9-veined; petals smooth
\par
   on back .................................................................................... {\b 16. praealtum}
\par
34 Middle cauline leaves 3-veined; petals papillose on back .{\b 22. asperuloides}
\par
33 Midrib of leaves not forming a prominent keel beneath
\par
35 Most umbels with 2-3 rays
\par
36 Fruit conspicuously papillose ........................................... {\b 23. tenuissimum}
\par
36 Fruit not papillose
\par
37 Most lateral umbels subsessile .......................................... {\b 22. asperuloides}
\par
37 All umbels distinctly pedunculate
\par
38 Bracteoles exceeding the flowers, linear ........................... {\b 20. trichopodum}
\par
38 Bracteoles about equalling the flowers, lanceolate or
\par
   elliptical ................................................................................. {\b 18. brachiatum}
\par
35 Most umbels with at least 4 rays
\par
39 Partial umbels rarely with more than 3 flowers ................................. {\b 8. aira}
\par
39 Partial umbels with 4 or more flowers
\par
40 Veins of bracteoles very prominent; fruit almost
\par
   unribbed, but with small, white papillae ...................... {\b 24. semicompositum}
\par
40 Veins of bracteoles obscure, at least near apex; fruit
\par
   distinctly ribbed, without white papillae
\par
41 Branches numerous, short, erecto-patent or appressed ................ {\b 21. affine}
\par
41 Branches few, long, rarely appressed
\par
42 Bracteoles lanceolate, distinctly 3-veined throughout ..... {\b 17. commutatum}
\par
42 Bracteoles subulate to linear-lanceolate, 1-veined,
\par
  or 3-veined in the lower half only ................................................. {\b 19. gerardi}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Sect. BUPLEURUM (Sect. Perfoliata Godron). Annual. Lower leaves sessile or shortly petiolate; upper perfoliate; veins numerous, slender, radiating, anastomosing near the margin and connected by fine cross-veins elsewhere. Bracts absent; bracteoles 4-7, lanceolate to ovate, longer than the partial umbel.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. B. rotundifolium} L.,{\i  Sp. Pl. }236 (1753). Erect, glaucous, often purple-tinged annual 15-75 cm. Leaves elliptic-ovate to suborbicular, obtuse, often mucronate. Rays (3-)5-10, often somewhat thickened at base and apex. Bracteoles 5-6, oblanceolate to ovate or obovate, acuminate, shortly connate at base, yellowish-green and patent in flower, becoming whitish and connivent in fruit; veins conspicuous. Fruit 3-3·25 mm, elliptic-oblong, blackish-brown, smooth; ridges filiform. {\i Arable land and other dry, open habitats. C. & S. Europe and U.S.S.R. southwards from} c. 52°{\i  N, but absent from many of the islands.} Al Au Be Bu Co Cz Ga Ge Gr He Hs Hu It Ju Po Rm Rs ( ?B, C, W, K, E) Sa Tu [Br Ho].
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. B. lancifolium} Hornem., {\i Hort. Hafn.} 267 (1813) ({\i B. protractum} Hoffmanns. & Link). Like {\b 1} but leaves usually ovate- or oblong-lanceolate; rays 2-3(-5); bracteoles suborbicular, mucronate; fruit 3-5 mm, ovoid-globose, conspicuously tuberculate.{\i  Arable land and other dry, open habitats. S. Europe.} Al Bl Co Cr Ga Gr Hs It Ju Lu Sa Si Tu [Au Be Br]
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Sect. DIAPHYLLUM (Hoffm.) Dumort. Perennial. Lower leaves usually long-petiolate; upper cordate-amplexicaul; veins subparallel below, divergent above, anastomozing and becoming inconspicuous near the margin. Bracts and bracteoles leaf-like; bracteoles longer than the partial umbel.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 3. B. longifolium} L.,{\i  Sp. Pl.} 237 (1753). Stout, erect, yellow or purple-tinged perennial 30-150 cm. Lower leaves elliptic-spathulate, subobtuse, mucronate; petiole longer than or equalling lamina, broadly winged, sheathing at base; cauline leaves ovate- to suborbicular-cordate. Rays 5-12. Bracts 2-4, ovate to suborbicular, obtuse or shortly acuminate; bracteoles 5-8, like the bracts but smaller, usually shortly connate, but sometimes up to half-way; veins conspicuous. Fruit 4-5·5 mm, elliptic-oblong, dark brown or black; ridges very prominent.{\i  C. Europe, extending to C. France, N. Bulgaria and E. Russia.} Al Au Bu Cz Ga Ge He Hu Ju Po Rm Rs (N, C, W, K, E).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b longifolium}: Plant rarely yellowish-green; bracts and bracteoles green, sometimes purplish, very rarely yellowish, scarcely translucent. {\i From C. France to the Carpathians and N. Bulgaria, mainly in mountain regions}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b aureum} (Hoffm.) Soó,{\i  Acta Bot. Acad. Sci. Hung. }{\b 12}: 116 (1966) ({\i B. aureum} (Hoffm.) Fischer ex Sprengel): Plant usually yellowish-green; bracts and bracteoles yellowish-green, more or less translucent.{\i  C. & E. Russia from} c. 51°{\i  to }59°{\i  N}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Sect. RETICULATA Godron. Perennial. Lower leaves shortly petiolate; upper dilated at base and more or less amplexicaul; midrib conspicuous; lateral veins slender, divergent, anastomosing, ultimately joining up with a continuous, distinct marginal vein. Bracts leaf-like; bracteoles broadly ovate, connate or free.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 4. B. stellatum} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 236 (1753). Stout, erect perennial 15-40 cm; stock densely covered with remains of dead leaves. Basal leaves numerous, linear to lanceolate; petiole much shorter than lamina, broadly winged; cauline leaves 1(-2), narrowed from an ovate, semi-amplexicaul base. Rays 3-6. Bracts 2-3(-4), like the upper leaves but shorter and relatively wider; bracteoles 8-12, obovate, acute or mucronate, often yellowish, connate for at least ¼ their length; veins conspicuous. Fruit c. 5 mm, ovoid-elliptical, dark brown; ridges winged. 2n = 16.{\i  Rocky places. Alps, Corse.} Au Co Ga He It.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 5. B. angulosum} L.,{\i  Sp. Pl.} 236 (1753). Like {\b 4} but cauline leaves 3-5, cordate-amplexicaul at base; bracteoles 4-6, broadly ovate to suborbicular, free or very shortly connate at base; fruit 6-7 mm, oblong.{\i  Rocky places; calcicole. • Pyrenees and mountains of N.E. Spain.} Ga Hs.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Sect. ISOPHYLLUM (Hoffm.) Dumort. Annual or perennial. Lower leaves sessile, linear, rarely wider and petiolate; veins 3-many, more or less parallel, the lateral usually few, short, inconspicuous; marginal vein more or less distinct.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Subsect.{\i  Aristata} (Godron) Briq. Annual. Leaves narrow; veins few, more or less parallel; bracteoles ovate or elliptical, awned or mucronate, 3- to 9-veined.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 6. B. flavum} Forskål,{\i  Fl. Aegypt.} xxiii, 205 (1775). Slender, erect, divaricately branched annual 20-75 cm. Lower leaves distinctly petiolate, the others sessile, linear-lanceolate or linear, 3- to 5-veined. Rays 3-6(-20). Bracts more than 2/3 as long as longest rays, lanceolate, long-acuminate or aristate, yellowish-green, semi-translucent, broadly scarious-margined; veins 3,
\par

\par
346}
\par