{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 globose; ridges filiform.{\i  Balkan peninsula, extending northwards to Hungary and N.E. Romania; Krym}. Al Bu ?Gr Hu Ju Rm Rs (K)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Rays nearly equal; lateral veins of bracteoles inconspicuous;
\par
  fruit up to 1·5 mm .................................................... ({\b c}) subsp. {\b aequiradiatum}
\par
1 Rays very unequal; lateral veins of bracteoles conspicuous; fruit 2-2·5 mm
\par
2 Green, up to 100 cm; rays of terminal umbels 5-7 ... ({\b a}) subsp. {\b commutatum}
\par
2 Glaucous, up to 50 cm; rays of terminal umbels 4-5 ({\b b}) subsp. {\b glaucocarpum}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b commutatum}: Branches patent; rays 5-7, very unequal; bracteoles exceeding the flowers, about equalling the fruit, not hardened in fruit; fruit c. 2 mm.{\i  Balkan peninsula; Krym}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b glaucocarpum} (Borbás) Hayek, {\i Prodr. Fl. Penins. Balcan. }{\b 1}: 975 (1927): Branches patent; rays 4-5, very unequal; bracteoles about twice as long as flowers, little longer than fruit, hardened in fruit; fruit 2-2·5 mm.{\i  From Bulgaria to Romania and Hungary.}
\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b c}) Subsp. {\b aequiradiatum} (H. Wolff) Hayek,{\i  loc. cit.} (1927): Branches strict; rays 5-8, nearly equal; bracteoles scarcely exceeding flowers, shorter than fruit; fruit 1·25-1·5 mm.{\i  Bulgaria; perhaps elsewhere in the Balkan peninsula}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 18. B. brachiatum} C. Koch ex Boiss.,{\i  Fl. Or.}{\b  2}: 844 (1872). Erect annual 80-100 cm. Leaves linear, sessile, the lower with 5-7 veins. Rays 2-3(-5). Bracts 1/3 to 1/2 as long as the longest rays, 2-5, linear-lanceolate, long-acuminate, conspicuously 3-veined; bracteoles about equalling the flowers, 5, lanceolate or elliptical, cuspidate; margin rather broadly scarious, minutely serrulate; lateral veins inconspicuous. Fruit 1·5-2·5 mm, ovoid-oblong, truncate; ridges filiform. {\i S. & S.E. Krym.} Rs (K). ({\i Caucasus, E. Anatolia.})
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 19. B. gerardi} All.,{\i  Mélang. Philos. Math. Soc. Roy. Turin} ({\i Misc. Taur}.) {\b 5}: 81 (1774) ({\i B. affine} sensu Coste, non Sadler, {\i B. australe} Jordan). Slender, erect annual up to 75 cm. Leaves linear or linear-lanceolate, often subfalcate, acuminate, semiamplexicaul at base; veins 5-7. Rays 2-7. Bracts 1/3 to 1/2 as long as the longer rays, 3-5, linear-lanceolate, acuminate, 3-veined; bracteoles usually distinctly exceeding flowers and fruit, subulate or linear-lanceolate, long-acuminate; veins 1, sometimes with 2 lateral ones in the lower half. Fruit 2-3 mm, ovoid-oblong; ridges filiform.{\i  S. & W. Europe, northwards to N.W. France.} Bu Co Ga Gr Hs It Lu Rs (K) Si
\par
[Ge].
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 20. B. trichopodum} Boiss. & Spruner, {\i Ann. Sci. Nat.} ser. 3 (Bot.),{\b  1}: 145 (1884). Slender, erect annual up to 50 cm. Lower leaves long-petiolate, narrowly oblanceolate to spathulate, obtuse or shortly acuminate; upper sessile, linear or oblong from a subcordate, amplexicaul base, acuminate. Rays 2-4(-6), long, slender. Bracts 1/6 to 1/2 as long as rays, 1-3(-5), linear to ovate-lanceolate, acuminate; veins (1-)3-5; bracteoles exceeding the flowers, about equalling the fruit, linear, acuminate; veins inconspicuous. Fruit 2-3 mm, oblong; ridges slender, prominent.{\i  Dry, open habitats. S. & E. Greece and Aegean region.} Cr Gr.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 21. B. affine} Sadler, {\i Fl. Com. Pest.}{\b  1}: 204 (1825). Somewhat glaucous, erect annual up to 75 cm, with numerous short, erectopatent or appressed branches. Leaves linear, somewhat dilated and semi-amplexicaul at base, long-acuminate; veins 3-8, strict, rather stout. Bracts 1/3 to 1/2 as long as longest rays, 2-5, linear-lanceolate from a rather wide base, long-acuminate, 3-veined; bracteoles somewhat exceeding flowers and fruit, like the bracts, but smaller; lateral veins obscure. Fruit 2-2·5 mm, ellipsoid oblong; ridges slender, prominent.{\i  Dry, open habitats. S.C. & E.C. Europe, extending to Bulgaria and S.E. Ukraine.} Au Bu Cz Hu Ju Rm Rs (W, K) ?Si.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 22. B. asperuloides} Heldr. ex Boiss., {\i Diagn. Pl. Or. Nov}{\b . 3}({\b 6}): 76 (1859) (incl.{\i  B. pauciradiatum} Fenzl). Somewhat glaucous, flexuous annual up to 80 cm, much-branched with very stout, appressed secondary branches. Leaves linear, acuminate to subobtuse, the lower petiolate, the upper semi-amplexicaul, 3-veined; margin rather narrowly scarious and serrulate. Rays (1-)2-3; most lateral umbels subsessile. Bracts 1/3-1/2 as long as the longest ray, subulate, acute, 3-veined; bracteoles exceeding the flowers, shorter than the fruit, like the bracts, but smaller. Fruit c. 2·25 mm, oblong-ellipsoid; ridges inconspicuous.{\i  Dry, open habitats. S.E. Europe.} Bu Gr Ju Rm Rs (K).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Subsect. {\i Trachycarpa} (Lange) Briq. Annual. Leaves narrow, 3- to 7-veined; veins more or less parallel; bracteoles herbaceous, flat, acute, 3-veined. Fruit papillose.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 23. B. tenuissimum} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 238 (1753). Usually much branched, somewhat glaucous annual up to 75 cm. Leaves linear or linear-lanceolate, the lowest shortly petiolate, the others sessile, subobtuse or more or less acuminate; veins 5-7, conspicuous beneath. Rays 1-3. Bracts much shorter than the longer rays, subulate, acuminate, 3-veined; bracteoles acute or subobtuse, usually serrulate on the margin and veins. Fruit 1·5-2·25 mm, subglobose, papillose; ridges slender, prominent, crenulate. 2n = 16. {\i Usually in more or less saline habitats. S., W. & C. Europe, extending to S.E. Sweden }({\i Gotland}) {\i and S.E. Russia.} Al Au Be Br Bu Co Cz Da Ga Ge Gr Ho Hs Hu It Ju Lu Po Rm Rs (W, K, E) Sa Si Su Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b tenuissimum}: Secondary branches short; rays unequal; bracteoles about twice as long as the flowers, subfalcate to linear-lanceolate; vittae obscure.{\i  Throughout the range of the species, except the south part of the Balkan peninsula and S.E. Russia}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b gracile} (Bieb.) H. Wolff in Engler,{\i  Pflanzenreich }{\b 43}{\b (IV. 228}): 104 (1910) ({\i B. gracile} (Bieb.) DC., non D'Urv.,{\i  B. marschallianum} C.A.Meyer): Secondary branches long; rays nearly equal; bracteoles about equalling the flowers, lanceolate or obovate-lanceolate; vittae conspicuous.{\i  S. part of the Balkan peninsula and S.E. part of U.S.S.R}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 24. B. semicompositum} L.,{\i  Demonstr. Pl.} 7 (1753) ({\i B. glaucum} Robill. & Cast. ex DC.). Much-branched, spreading, glaucous annual up to 30 cm. Lower leaves spathulate to linear, petiolate, obtuse to acute; upper linear, sessile, semi-amplexicaul, acuminate; veins 3-5. Rays 3-6, filiform. Bracts ¼ to ½ as long as the longest rays, linear, 3-veined; bracteoles exceeding the flowers, linear-lanceolate or rarely narrowly elliptical, aristate; veins 3, very prominent. Fruit 1·5-2 mm, subglobose or ovoid-oblong, covered with small whitish papillae; ridges slender, inconspicuous.{\i  Dry places, especially on sandy soils. S. Europe.} Bl Co Cr Ga Gr Hs It Ju Lu ?Rs (E) Sa Si
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Subsect. {\i Nervosa} (Godron) Briq. Usually perennial. Lower leaves often elliptical, usually petiolate, upper sessile and amplexicaul.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 25. B. petraeum} L.,{\i  Sp. Pl.} 236 (1753). Perennial up to 50 cm; stock stout, covered with light brown leaf-bases. Basal leaves numerous, linear; cauline absent or few, linear to ovate-lanceolate, semi-amplexicaul, acuminate. Rays usually 5-15, rather stout. Bracts 3-6, linear or lanceolate; veins up to 9(-13); bracteoles
\par

\par
348}
\par