{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 apex, divaricate. Rays (4-)10-12. Bracts and bracteoles short linear. Fruit 7-10 mm; ridges dentate-cristate, almost winged.{\i  S. Italy, S. part of Balkan peninsula, Aegean region.} Bu Cr Gr It Ju.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Plants from N. Greece (Thessaloniki) have leaf-lobes up to 30 mm, but only 0·5 mm wide, which are erecto-patent, not divaricate. In other respects they resemble {\b 4}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Plants from the Kikladhes with 4-6 rays in the umbels have been called{\b  Hippomarathrum pauciradiatum} (Heldr. & Halácsy) Heldr. & Halácsy in Halácsy,{\i  Consp. Fl. Graec. }{\b 1}: 660 (1901). They do not appear to differ from {\b 4} in any other way.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 5. C. ferulacea} (L.) Calestani,{\i  Webbia}{\b  1}: 154 (1905) ({\i Prangos ferulacea }(L.) Lindley). Robust, nearly glabrous perennial up to 180 cm. Stock with numerous coarse fibres. Stem striate, solid. Leaves up to 80 cm, 3- to 5-pinnate; lobes 10-45 mm, linear or filiform, puberulent or minutely scabrid on the margins. Rays 6-18, stout. Bracts and bracteoles several, linear-lanceolate, acuminate. Fruit 10-25 mm; mericarps with 5 equal wings or prominent ridges.{\i  Balkan peninsula, extending to S.W. Romania, C. Italy and Sicilia.} Al Bu Gr It Ju Rm Si.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Variable in length of leaf-lobes and in size, shape and development of wings of the fruit. {\i Prangos carinata }Griseb. ex Degen,{\i  Term.-Tud. Kozl.}{\b  28}: 44 (1896), described from Romania, has suborbicular, strongly ridged but unwinged fruits. Plants with similar fruits occur in S. Italy, where they appear to intergrade with the more widely distributed variant with oblong, winged fruits.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 6. C. trifida} Miller,{\i  Gard. Dict}. ed. 8, no. 1 (1768) ({\i C. laevigata} Lam.). Glabrous perennial 60-120 cm. Stem striate, terete, solid; upper branches opposite or verticillate. Lower leaves 30-40 × 30-40 cm, 4- to 7-pinnate, triangular in outline; lobes 5-30 mm, linear, mucronate; petioles of upper cauline leaves narrow. Rays 10-20, glabrous. Bracts few or none, linear; bracteoles several. Fruit 12-15 mm, elliptical, almost terete. •{\i  W. Mediterranean region, Portugal.} Ga Hs It Lu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 7. C. alpina} Bieb.,{\i  Fl. Taur.-Cauc.}{\b  1}: 217 (1808). Like {\b 6} but lower leaves 40-50 × 50-60 cm; lobes 25-60 mm, filiform, usually arcuate; bracts and bracteoles very short; fruit weakly sulcate. •{\i  S.E. Europe, from Macedonia to S.E. Russia; local. }Bu Ju Rm Rs (K, E).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 8. C. odontalgica} Pallas,{\i  Reise}{\b  3}: 720 (1776). Greyish-puberulent perennial 20-90 cm. Stem terete and striate, or weakly ridged, solid. Lower leaves 10-25 × 8-20 cm, 3- to 4-pinnate, triangular in outline; lobes 3-4 mm, linear, obtuse; petioles of upper cauline leaves inflated. Rays 4-7, glabrous. Bracts and bracteoles 1-3 mm, 5-7, linear-lanceolate, ciliate. Fruit 10-12 mm, subcylindrical.{\i  S. Ukraine, S.E. Russia, W. Kazakhstan}. Rs (W, K, E).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 53.                       Heptaptera}                  Margot & Reuter
\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  ({\i Colladonia} DC., non Sprengel)
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc By †T.G. Tutin.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Like{\i  Cachrys} but leaf-lobes ovate-lanceolate; fruit oblong or ovate, slightly compressed dorsally.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Stem terete; mericarps with lateral wings only ...................... {\b 4. macedonica}
\par
1 Stem triquetrous; mericarps with dorsal and lateral wings
\par
2 Middle cauline leaves with pinnatifid segments .................... {\b 3. angustifolia}
\par
2 Middle cauline leaves with entire or slightly lobed segments
\par
3 Leaf-segments decurrent on the rhachis; bracts and
\par
  bracteoles lanceolate or ovate ...................................................... {\b 1. triquetra}
\par
3 Leaf-segments not decurrent on the rhachis; bracts and
\par
  bracteoles linear-lanceolate ................................................ {\b 2. colladonioides}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. H. triquetra} (Vent.) Tutin,{\i  Feddes Repert.}{\b  74}: 34 (1967) ({\i Colladonia triquetra }(Vent.) DC.). Glabrous perennial with a stout, solid, triquetrous stem up to 150 cm. Stock covered with scale-like remains of leaves. Basal leaves simple, the others pinnatifid; segments 7-12 cm, ovate, crenate, sometimes slightly lobed, decurrent on the rhachis. Terminal umbel with 7-14 rays, often overtopped by lateral umbels. Bracts and bracteoles numerous, lanceolate or ovate, membranous. Fruit 10-12 mm, ovate; mericarps with 5 equal wings.{\i  In scrub on hills. • S.E. Bulgaria and Turkey-in-Europe.} Bu Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. H. colladonioides} Margot & Reuter, {\i Mém. Soc. Phys. Hist. Nat. Genève }{\b 8}: 302 (1839) ({\i Colladonia colladonioides} (Margot & Reuter) Halácsy). Like {\b 1} but usually up to 60 cm; stems more or less scabrid on the angles; leaf-segments oblique at base, not decurrent, the lateral 1-5 cm, the terminal larger; bracts and bracteoles linear-lanceolate, with scarious margins; fruit 12-18 mm; outer mericarps with 4 wings, inner with 3.{\i  Sunny hillsides. S. & W. Greece.} Gr.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 3. H. angustifolia} (Bertol.) Tutin, {\i Feddes Repert.}{\b  74}: 33 (1967) ({\i Colladonia angustifolia }Bertol.). Like {\b 1} but segments of middle cauline leaves pinnatifid, not decurrent, the lobes oblong-lanceolate, serrate; bracts and bracteoles linear; fruit 13-15 mm, oblong; lateral wings of mericarps nearly twice as wide as dorsal.{\i  Bushy places. • S. Italy.} It.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 4. H. macedonica} (Bornm.) Tutin, {\i Feddes Repert.}{\b  74}: 34 (1967) ({\i Colladonia anatolica} sensu Hayek, non (Boiss.) Boiss., {\i C. macedonica} Bornm.). Scabrid perennial with a terete stem up to 100 cm. Basal leaves pinnatifid, with 3-4 pairs of segments; lower segments repeatedly 2- to 3-sect or 3-partite. Rays 9-12. Bracts numerous, linear-lanceolate; bracteoles oblong, without scarious margins. Fruit c. 20 mm; mericarps with lateral ridges winged and dorsal ridges obtuse, unwinged.{\i  In scrub on hills. • Makedonija }({\i near Negotino}). Ju.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 54.                      Magydaris}                       Koch ex DC.
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc By †T.G. Tutin.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Leaves simple or pinnate; segments wide. Sepals small. Petals white, obcordate, villous beneath; apex inflexed. Fruit ovoid, hairy, slightly compressed dorsally. Ridges wide and rounded; vittae numerous.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 Leaves grey-tomentose beneath; rays 40-50 ............................... {\b 1. pastinacea}
\par
Leaves hispid only on the veins beneath; rays 10-20 ................. {\b 2. panacifolia}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. M. pastinacea} (Lam.) Paol. in Fiori & Paol., {\i Fl. Anal. Ital.}{\b  2}: 205 (1900). Pubescent perennial 100-250 cm, smelling of coumarin. Stem glabrous or shortly hispid, solid, rigid, branched above. Basal leaves simple or shallowly 3- to 5-lobed, ovate-oblong, crenate; cauline pinnate, with 3-5 ovate, crenate-denticulate, obtuse segments; uppermost often reduced to an inflated petiole; all grey-tomentose beneath. Rays 40-50, pubescent. Bracts 50-60 mm, several, deflexed, lanceolate, acuminate or sometimes laciniate or dentate at apex; margins scarious; bracteoles 20-30 mm, linear-lanceolate. Fruit c. 5 mm, greyish-brown, densely villous; pericarp spongy.{\i  S. Italy, Sicilia, Sardegna.} It Sa Si
\par

\par
344}
\par