{\rtf1\ansi \deff4\deflang1033{\fonttbl{\f4\froman\fcharset0\fprq2 Times New Roman;}}{\colortbl;\red0\green0\blue0;\red0\green0\blue255;\red0\green255\blue255;\red0\green255\blue0;\red255\green0\blue255;\red255\green0\blue0;\red255\green255\blue0;\red255\green255\blue255;\red0\green0\blue128;\red0\green128\blue128;\red0\green128\blue0;\red128\green0\blue128;\red128\green0\blue0;\red128\green128\blue0;\red128\green128\blue128;\red192\green192\blue192;}{\stylesheet{\widctlpar \f4\fs20\lang2057 \snext0 Normal;}{\*\cs10 \additive Default Paragraph Font;}}{\info{\author dddd}{\operator dddd}{\creatim\yr1998\mo11\dy5\hr13\min2}{\revtim\yr1999\mo1\dy22\hr15\min42}{\version2}{\edmins0}{\nofpages4}{\nofwords1005}{\nofchars5732}{\*\company  }{\vern57431}}\widowctrl\ftnbj\aenddoc\hyphcaps0 \fet0\sectd \linex0 {\*\pnseclvl1\pnucrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl2\pnucltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl3\pndec\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl4\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl5\pndec\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl6\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl7\pnlcrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl8\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl9\pnlcrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}
\pard\plain \ \f4\fs20\lang2057 {\fs28   A polymorphic species in which the following subspecies can be recognized, though they show considerable phenotypic variation.
\par 
\par }
\pard \li200\ {\fs28 1 Stem more than 100 cm; leaf-lobes oblong to linear (}{\b\fs28 c}{\fs28 ) subsp. }{\b\fs28 cynapioides}{\fs28 
\par 1 Stem less than 100 cm; leaf-lobes ovate
\par 2 Bracteoles usually several times as long as the partial umbels;
\par   outer pedicels about twice as long as their fruit ........... (}{\b\fs28 a}{\fs28 ) subsp. }{\b\fs28 cynapium}{\fs28 
\par 2 Bracteoles not longer than the partial umbels; outer
\par   pedicels usually shorter than their fruits .......................... (}{\b\fs28 b}{\fs28 ) subsp. }{\b\fs28 agrestis}{\fs28 
\par 
\par }
\pard \ {\fs28   (}{\b\fs28 a}{\fs28 ) Subsp. }{\b\fs28 cynapium}{\fs28 : Annual. Stem 30-80 cm, sulcate, green. Leaf-lobes ovate. Bracteoles usually several times as long as the partial umbels. Outer pedicels about twice as long as their fruits. 2n = 20.}{\i\fs28  Waste places and arable land. Throughout the range of the species}{\fs28 .
\par   (}{\b\fs28 b}{\fs28 ) Subsp. }{\b\fs28 agrestis}{\fs28  (Wallr.) Dost\'e1l,}{\i\fs28  Kvetena CSR}{\fs28  1048 (1949) (}{\i\fs28 A. cynapium}{\fs28  var.}{\i\fs28  agrestis}{\fs28  Wallr.): Annual. Stem 5-20 cm, angled, green. Leaf-lobes ovate. Bracteoles shorter than to as long as the partial umbels. Outer pedicels usually shorter than their fruits. 2n = 20.}{\i\fs28  Arable land. Throughout the range of the species}{\fs28 .
\par   (}{\b\fs28 c}{\fs28 ) Subsp. }{\b\fs28 cynapioides}{\fs28  (Bieb) Nyman,}{\i\fs28  Consp.}{\fs28  297 (1879): Biennial. Stem 100-200 cm, terete, finely striate, pruinose. Leaf lobes oblong to linear. Bracteoles about twice as long as their fruits. 2n = 20.}{\i\fs28  Woodlands. C. Europe, extending to S. Sweden}{\fs28 .
\par 
\par }
\pard \qc\ {\fs28  }{\b\fs28 36.                   Portenschlagiella}{\fs28                   Tutin
\par (}{\i\fs28 Portenschlagia}{\fs28  Vis., non Tratt.)
\par }{\fs24 By  †T.G. Tutin.
\par 
\par }
\pard \ {\fs28 Leaves 4- to 5-pinnate. Sepals small. Petals yellow. oblong-spathulate, emarginate, ciliate beneath; apex involute. Fruit ovoid-cylindrical, not compressed, hispid and with stellate hairs. Primary ridges stout, prominent; secondary filiform; vittae 3.
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 1. P. ramosissima}{\fs28  (Portenschl.) Tutin,}{\i\fs28  Feddes Repert. }{\b\fs28 74}{\fs28 : 32 (1967) (}{\i\fs28 Portenschlagia ramosissima}{\fs28  (Portenschl.) Vis.). Stout, somewhat pubescent perennial. Stock subglobose, with abundant coriaceous remains of dead leaves. Leaves with linear-filiform, acuminate lobes. Umbels subglobose, often in a whorl at the top of the main stem; rays 30-50, puberulent. Bracts and bracteoles numerous.}{\i\fs28  Rocky places. \bullet  S. Italy. W. Jugoslavia and N.W. Albania.}{\fs28  Al It Ju.
\par 
\par }
\pard \qc\ {\fs28  }{\b\fs28 37.                    Athamanta }{\fs28                            L.
\par }{\fs24 By  †T.G. Tutin.
\par 
\par }
\pard \ {\fs28 Leaves 2- to 5-pinnate, with narrow lobes. Sepals small. Petals white or perhaps rarely yellow, emarginate or 2-lobed, sometimes pubescent beneath or ciliate; apex inflexed, long. Fruit oblong-ovoid to ovoid, scarcely compressed, pubescent, narrowed to a short beak. Ridges low; vittae 1-2.
\par 
\par }
\pard \li200\ {\fs28 1 Leaf-lobes ovate to rhombic
\par 2 Each half of stylopodium about twice as long as wide;
\par   fruit with conspicuous, pubescent ridges, almost or
\par   quite glabrous between them ................................................... }{\b\fs28 1. macedonica}{\fs28 
\par 2 Each half of stylopodium wider than long; fruit with
\par   inconspicuous ridges, densely pubescent all over ............................ }{\b\fs28 2. sicula}{\fs28 
\par 1 Leaf-lobes linear or linear-oblong
\par 3 Hairs on rays straight, shorter than the diameter on the ray ........... }{\b\fs28 3. turbith}{\fs28 
\par 3 Hairs on rays flexuous, at least as long as the diameter of the ray
\par 4 Stems simple or with few branches; rays 5-15(-36) .................... }{\b\fs28 4. cretensis}{\fs28 
\par 4 Stems freely branched, the umbels forming a dense panicle; rays 15-35
\par 5 Stem 20 40 cm; lateral umbels not overtopping the terminal one;
\par   rays 20-35 ......................................................................................... }{\b\fs28 5. densa}{\fs28 
\par 5 Stem 3-10 cm; lateral umbels overtopping the terminal one;
\par   rays 15-20 ...................................................................................... }{\b\fs28 6. cortiana}{\fs28 
\par 
\par }
\pard \ {\fs28   }{\b\fs28 1. A. macedonica}{\fs28  (L.) Sprengel in Roemer & Schultes,}{\i\fs28  Syst. Veg.}{\b\fs28  6}{\fs28 : 491 (1820) (incl.}{\i\fs28  A. chiliosciadia}{\fs28  Boiss. & Heldr.). Erect perennial up to 200 cm, with numerous short branches in the inflorescence. Lower leaves 2- to 3-pinnate; lobes ovate, dentate; upper leaves simple or pinnatisect. Peduncles and umbels puberulent. Rays 5-18. Bracts 5-8, sometimes pinnatisect; bracteoles linear-lanceolate, acuminate. Each half of the stylopodium about twice as long as wide; styles patent or erecto-patent. Fruit 3-5 mm, ovoid, puberulent on the prominent ridges, nearly or quite glabrous between them. \bullet }{\i\fs28  S. part of Balkan peninsula; S. Italy.}{\fs28  Al Gr It Ju.
\par 
\par }
\pard \li200\ {\fs28 1 Leaf-lobes 20-50 mm; umbel with arachnoid pubescence
\par   ..................................................................................... (}{\b\fs28 c}{\fs28 ) subsp. }{\b\fs28 arachnoidea}{\fs28 
\par 1 Leaf-lobes 2-20 mm; umbels shortly pubescent
\par 2 Leaf-lobes (5-)10-20 mm, puberulent ....................... (}{\b\fs28 a}{\fs28 ) subsp. }{\b\fs28 macedonica}{\fs28 
\par 2 Leaf-lobes 2-5 mm. nearly or quite glabrous .................. (}{\b\fs28 b}{\fs28 ) subsp. }{\b\fs28 albanica}{\fs28 
\par 
\par }
\pard \ {\fs28  (}{\b\fs28 a}{\fs28 ) Subsp. }{\b\fs28 macedonica}{\fs28 : Up to 200 cm; lobes of lower leaves (5-)10-20 mm, puberulent; umbels shortly pubescent; fruit 3-4 mm.}{\i\fs28  Throughout most of the range of the species}{\fs28 .
\par  (}{\b\fs28 b}{\fs28 ) Subsp. }{\b\fs28 albanica}{\fs28  (Alston & Sandwith) Tutin,}{\i\fs28  Feddes Repert.}{\b\fs28  79}{\fs28 : 18 (1968) (}{\i\fs28 A. albanica}{\fs28  Alston & Sandwith): Up to 50 cm; lobes of lower leaves 2-5 mm, somewhat fleshy, nearly or quite glabrous; fruit 4-5 mm.}{\b\fs28  S. Albania}{\fs28  (}{\i\fs28 near Gjinokast\'ebr}{\fs28 ).
\par  (}{\b\fs28 c}{\fs28 ) Subsp. }{\b\fs28 arachnoidea}{\fs28  (Boiss. & Orph.) Tutin,}{\i\fs28  Feddes Repert. }{\b\fs28 79}{\fs28 : 18 (1968) (}{\i\fs28 A. arachnoidea}{\fs28  Boiss. & Orph.): Leaf-lobes 20-50 mm, puberulent; umbels with arachnoid hairs.}{\i\fs28  S. Greece}{\fs28  (}{\i\fs28 Ta\'efyetos}{\fs28 ).
\par   What appears to be a dwarf variant of }{\b\fs28 1}{\fs28  from N.W. Greece has been described as }{\b\fs28 Seseli farinosum}{\fs28  Qu\'e9zel & Contandr., }{\i\fs28 Taxon}{\b\fs28  16}{\fs28 : 240 (1967). It has 2n = 22.
\par 
\par   }{\b\fs28 A. macrosperma}{\fs28  H. Wolff,}{\i\fs28  Feddes Repert.}{\b\fs28  18}{\fs28 : 133 (1922) appears to have been collected once only, in S. Greece (near Athinai). It is like }{\b\fs28 1}{\fs28  and may be an abnormal specimen of it. It has 4-6 rays, obtuse bracteoles and fruit c. 8 mm.
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 2. A. sicula}{\fs28  L.,}{\i\fs28  Sp. Pl.}{\fs28  244 (1753). Pubescent perennial up to 100 cm. Leaves 3- to 4-pinnate; lobes 2-5 mm, ovate to rhombic, lobed or dentate. Rays 10-20. Bracts few, linear-lanceolate or rarely pinnatisect; bracteoles linear-lanceolate, acuminate. Each half of the stylopodium wider than long; styles patent. Fruit 6-7 mm, ovoid-oblong, densely pubescent all over; ridges inconspicuous.}{\i\fs28  C. & S. Italy, Sicilia.}{\fs28  It Si.
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 3. A. turbith}{\fs28  (L.) Brot.,}{\i\fs28  Fl. Lusit. }{\b\fs28 1}{\fs28 : 435 (1804) (}{\i\fs28 A. mathioli}{\fs28  Wulfen). Perennial up to 50 cm. Leaves 2- to 4-pinnate, glabrous or sparsely pubescent; lobes up to 35 mm, linear or filiform. Rays (15-)20-35(-50), pubescent, with straight hairs shorter than the diameter of the ray. Bracts 0-8; bracteoles several, lanceolate. Fruit 5-6 mm, ovoid, densely pubescent all over. \bullet }{\i\fs28  N. W. part of Balkan peninsula, extending to N.E. Italy; S. Carpathians.}{\fs28  Al It Ju Rm.
\par 
\par }
\pard \li200\ {\fs28 1 Styles erect ........................................................................ (}{\b\fs28 a}{\fs28 ) subsp. }{\b\fs28 turbith}{\fs28 
\par 1 Styles patent or erecto-patent
\par 2 Rays 15-25 .................................................................... (}{\b\fs28 b}{\fs28 ) subsp. }{\b\fs28 haynaldii}{\fs28 
\par 2 Rays 30-50 .................................................................... (}{\b\fs28 c}{\fs28 ) subsp. }{\b\fs28 hungarica}{\fs28 
\par 
\par 340}
\par }