{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 linear-lanceolate, ciliolate. Petals yellowish-white. Fruit 3·5-4 mm. Mountain pastures. Mountains of W. Europe, ,from the Vosges to N.W. Spain. Ga Hs.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 77.                   Ligusticum}                    L.
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc By †T.G. Tutin.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Perennial. Leaves 2- to 5-pinnate or 2-ternate. Sepals small. Petals usually white, obcordate; apex inflexed. Fruit not compressed. Ridges very prominent, narrowly winged; vittae numerous.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Leaves 2-ternate; lobes 20-50 mm, ovate-cuneate ....................... {\b 7. scoticum}
\par
1 Leaves 2- to 5-pinnate; lobes not more than 15 mm,
\par
  linear to narrowly ovate-oblong
\par
2 Bracts 5-10, at least half as long as rays, persistent
\par
3 Stem simple, usually leafless; stock without fibres;
\par
  bracts simple, erecto-patent ................................................... {\b 1. mutellinoides}
\par
3 Stem usually branched, leafy; stock with abundant
\par
  fibres; bracts usually pinnatisect, deflexed ............................... {\b 6. ferulaceum}
\par
2 Bracts 0 or few, rarely up to 7 and then caducous
\par
4 Stock without coarse fibres; leaf-lobes narrowly linear ............ {\b 4. albanicum}
\par
4 Stock with abundant coarse fibres; leaf-lobes not narrowly linear
\par
5 Rays 20-50; branches opposite or whorled above ........................ {\b 5. lucidum}
\par
5 Rays not more than 15; branches alternate
\par
6 Leaves triangular in outline; fruit with smooth ridges ................ {\b 2. mutellina}
\par
6 Leaves oblong in outline; fruit with denticulate ridges ............... {\b 3. corsicum}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. L. mutellinoides} (Crantz) Vill., {\i Prosp. Pl. Dauph. }25 (1779) ({\i L. simplex} (L.) All.,{\i  Gaya simplex} (L.) Gaudin; incl.{\i  Pachypleurum alpinum} Ledeb.). Almost glabrous. Stock stout, with few or no fibres. Stem up to 30 cm, simple, nearly solid, leafless or rarely with 1 leaf. Leaves 3-10 cm, ovate in outline, 2- to 3-pinnate; lobes 2-5 mm, narrowly ovate-oblong to linear-lanceolate, acute. Rays 8-20. Bracts and bracteoles numerous, linear-lanceolate, often 2- to 3-fid. Petals white or pink. Fruit 3-5 mm, ellipsoid; ridges smooth, sometimes with short, stiff hairs between them. 2n = 22.{\i  Alps; Sudety; Carpathians; N. Ural and Arctic Russia.} Au Cz Ga Ge He It Ju Po Rm Rs (N, C).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   The Russian populations are sometimes given specific status as{\b  L. alpinum} (Ledeb.) F. Kurtz, {\i Bot. Jahrb.}{\b  19}: 464 (1894), non Sprengel. Plants having the fruit characters of {\i L. alpinum} occur sporadically in the Alps; the only reliable distinguishing character of the Russian plants appears to be the somewhat less dissected leaves.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. L. mutellina} (L.) Crantz,{\i  Stirp. Austr.}{\b  3}: 81 (1767) {\i (Meum mutellina} (L.) Gaertner). Almost glabrous. Stock with abundant coarse fibres. Stem 10-50 cm, hollow, usually with 1-2 branches subtended by small leaves. Leaves 5-10 cm, triangular in outline, 2- to 3-pinnate; lobes 3-5(-15) mm, linear-lanceolate, mucronate. Rays 7-10(-15). Bracts 0-2, small; bracteoles 3 to several, lanceolate, about as long as pedicels. Petals usually red or purple. Fruit 4-6 mm, ovoid-oblong, glabrous; ridges smooth. 2n = 22. •{\i  Mountains of C. & S. Europe, from S.C. France to the Carpathians and S. Bulgaria.} Al Au Bu Cz Ga Ge He It Ju Po Rm Rs (W).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Two subspecies, based on the division of the leaves, are sometimes recognized, but do not seem to merit this status. 'Subsp. {\i adonidifolium }(Gay) Beauverd' has long, little-divided leaf-lobes and occurs in the French Alps and Romania; it seems often to be sympatric with the widespread typical subspecies.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 3. L. corsicum} Gay, {\i Ann. Sci. Nat. }{\b 26}: 222 (1832). Like {\b 2} but often taller; leaves oblong in outline; fruit with denticulate ridges.{\i  Stony places in the mountains. • Corse. }Co.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 4. L. albanicum} Jáv.,{\i  Bot. Közl. }{\b 19}: 24 (1921). Like {\b 2} but stock without fibres; leaf-lobes narrowly linear, at most 0·5 mm wide; bracts up to 7, caducous; bracteoles often longer than partial umbels. •{\i  N. Albania.} Al.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 5. L. lucidum} Miller,{\i  Gard. Dict.} ed. 8, no. 4 (1768) ({\i L. pyrenaeum} Gouan, {\i L. seguieri} Vill.). Almost glabrous. Stock with abundant coarse fibres. Stem up to 150 cm, branched, solid, with several cauline leaves; branches opposite or whorled above. Leaves c. 30 cm, triangular in outline, 3- to 5-pinnate; lobes (2-)4-15 mm. Rays (11-)20-50. Bracts usually absent; bracteoles 5-8, about ½ as long as the partial umbel. Fruit (4-)5-6(-8) mm, ellipsoid or oblong-ovoid; ridges narrowly winged. •{\i  Mountains of S. Europe.} Al Bl Ga He Hs It Ju.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b lucidum}: Leaf-lobes 4-15 mm, lanceolate, oblanceolate or linear, usually acuminate. Rays 20-50. Fruit usually 5-6 mm. {\i Throughout the range of the species, except Islas Baleares}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b huteri} (Porta & Rigo) O. Bolós, {\i Publ. Inst. Biol. Apl.} ({\i Barcelona}) {\b 27}: 54 (1958) ({\i L. huteri} Porta & Rigo): Leaf-lobes 2-5 mm, oblanceolate to almost obovate, obtuse, mucronate. Rays 11-16. Fruit 4-4·5 mm.{\i  Islas Baleares} ({\i Mallorca}).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 6. L. ferulaceum} All.,{\i  Mélang. Philos. Math. Soc. Roy. Turin} ({\i Misc. Taur}.){\b  5}: 80 (1774). Nearly glabrous. Stock with abundant coarse fibres. Stem up to 60 cm, solid, usually branched from the base. Leaves 10-30 cm, 3- to 4-pinnate; lobes up to 5 mm, linear-lanceolate to linear, acuminate. Rays 15-25. Bracts numerous, leaf-like, usually pinnatisect; bracteoles as long as the partial umbel. Fruit 3-7 mm, ovoid.{\i  Screes and alpine pastures. • French Jura, S.W. Alps.} Ga It.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 7. L. scoticum} L., {\i Sp. Pl. }250 (1753). Glabrous. Stock without fibres. Stem up to 90 cm, somewhat branched, leafy, hollow. Leaves 10-20 cm, triangular in outline, 2-ternate; lobes 20-50 mm, ovate-cuneate, dentate or shallowly lobed in upper half. Rays 8-20. Bracts and bracteoles 1-7, linear. Fruit 5-8 mm, oblong-ovoid.{\i  Rocky sea-shores. Coasts of N. Europe, from W. Ireland to N.W. Russia; two stations on the Baltic }({\i E. Sweden}). Br Da Fa Hb Is No Rs (N) Su.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 78.                     Cenolophium}                   Koch ex DC.
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc By †T.G. Tutin.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Leaves 3- to 5-pinnate. Sepals absent. Petals white, broadly ovate, emarginate; apex inflexed. Fruit oblong-ellipsoid, somewhat compressed dorsally. Ridges very prominent, narrowly winged; vittae solitary.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. C. denudatum} (Hornem.) Tutin,{\i  Feddes Repert.}{\b  74}: 31 (1967) ({\i Athamanta denudata }Hornem.,{\i  C. fischeri} (Sprengel) Koch ex DC.). Glabrous perennial 60-150 cm. Stock with fibrous remains of petioles. Stem solid, terete, striate, often purplish. Leaves triangular in outline, 3- to 5-pinnate; primary divisions patent or deflexed; lobes 10-30 mm, oblong-lanceolate, mucronate or acute, often somewhat falcate, scabrid on midrib and margin. Rays 15-20, weakly angled, somewhat papillose. Bracts absent; bracteoles several, subulate. Fruit 3·5-6 mm, 8-angled.{\i  U.S.S.R., except the south.} Rs (N, B, C, W, E).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 79.                        Conioselinum}                  Hoffm.
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc By †T.G. Tutin.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Leaves 2- to 3-pinnate. Sepals absent. Petals white, broadly ovate, emarginate; apex inflexed. Fruit elliptical, strongly compressed dorsally. Ridges winged, the lateral strongly, the dorsal narrowly; vittae 1-4.
\par

\par
356}
\par