{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}
\pard\f0\fs28 margins serrate to rather coarsely dentate. Umbels on short, stout peduncles, with numerous robust, puberulent rays. Bracts 6-8, linear; bracteoles numerous, like the bracts, equalling or shorter than the pedicels. Petals white with green striations. Fruit 10 × 7 mm, broadly oblong; dorsal ridges prominent, acute; wings as wide as the mericarps, rather thick and corky, projecting beyond the stylopodium when mature. Fruit rather glossy, slightly tinged with brown.{\i  Maritime rocks. • N.W. Spain }({\i near La Coruña}); {\i W. Portugal} ({\i Ilha Berlenga}). Hs Lu.
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 81.                   Levisticum}                       Hill
\par
\pard\f0\fs24\qc By †T.G. Tutin.
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28 Leaves 2- to 3-pinnate. Sepals absent. Petals greenish-yellow, elliptical, obtuse; apex short, inflexed. Fruit ovoid-oblong, somewhat compressed dorsally. Marginal ridges with rather thick, but distinct, wings; dorsal low, obtuse, or rarely narrowly winged; vittae solitary.
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. L. officinale} Koch,{\i  Nova Acta Acad. Leop.-Carol.}{\b  12}({\b 1}): 101 (1824). Stout perennial 100-250 cm, with strong smell; lower branches alternate, upper opposite or whorled; stock with numerous scale-like remains of petioles. Lower leaves up to 70 × 65 cm, triangular-rhombic in outline; lobes long-cuneate, irregularly and deeply dentate and lobed in upper part. Rays 12-20, rather stout, furrowed. Bracts numerous, lanceolate-subulate, deflexed; bracteoles several, connate, at least at base. Fruit 5-7 mm, yellow or brown.{\i  Most of Europe, except the extreme north and south and the islands, particularly in mountainous regions and near habitations; doubtfully native; often cultivated as a herb.} [Al Au Be *Bu Cz Da Fe *Ga Ge He Ho *Hs Hu *It *Ju No Po Rm Rs (N, B, C, W, K, E) Su.] (Iran.)
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 82.                        Palimbia}                          Besser
\par
\pard\f0\fs24\qc By †T.G. Tutin.
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28 Leaves 3-pinnate; lobes linear or setaceous. Sepals absent. Petals yellowish-white, oblong; apex obtuse, inflexed. Fruit ellipsoid-oblong, slightly compressed dorsally. Dorsal ridges not prominent; the lateral thick, prominent but not winged; vittae 3.
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. P. rediviva} (Pallas) Thell. in Hegi,{\i  Ill. Fl. Mitteleur.}{\b  5}({\b 2}): 1364 (1926). Perennial. Stem 40-90 cm; stock with fibrous remains of petioles. Lower leaves in a rosette; primary divisions opposite or verticillate; lobes 2-5 × 0·3-0·5 mm, linear or setaceous, mucronate, rigid; cauline leaves reduced to scale-like, amplexicaul petioles. Umbels numerous, forming a panicle; rays 3-20(-30), almost equal. Bracts and bracteoles 3-5, linear-lanceolate. Fruit 5-6·5 mm.{\i  S. part of U.S.S.R., just extending to E. Romania.} Rm Rs (C, W, K, E).
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 83.                          Bonannia}                       Guss.
\par
\pard\f0\fs24\qc By †T.G. Tutin.
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28 Like{\i  Palimbia} but leaf-lobes oblong-lanceolate; petals yellow; fruit more strongly compressed dorsally; lateral ridges like the dorsal; vittae 3-4.
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. B. graeca} (L.) Halácsy,{\i  Consp. Fl. Graec. }{\b 1}: 641 (1901). Perennial 30-70 cm. Leaves nearly all basal, 2-pinnate; lobes acute, irregularly dentate or lobed, puberulent beneath; cauline leaves usually reduced to sheathing petioles. Rays 6-20. Bracts and bracteoles variable in number, short, linear. Fruit c. 6 mm, ovoid, pruinose. •{\i  Calabria and Sicilia, extending very locally to S. Greece and the Aegean region.} ?Cr Gr It Si.
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 84.                           Johrenia}                      DC.
\par
\pard\f0\fs24\qc By †T.G. Tutin.
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28 Leaves 1- to 2-pinnate. Sepals absent or small. Petals yellow, oblong; apex involute, obtuse. Fruit oblong-ovoid, compressed dorsally. Ridges not winged, the lateral much thicker than the dorsal; vittae solitary in the ridges.
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. J. distans} (Griseb.) Halácsy, {\i Consp. Fl. Graec. }{\b 1}: 634 (1901). Perennial up to 100 cm, branched from base. Lower leaves c. 10 × 5 cm, 2-pinnate; lobes 1-2 mm wide, linear-lanceolate, pinnatifid; upper leaves reduced to inflated petioles. Rays 3-5. Bracts absent; bracteoles few, setaceous. Fruit 3 mm. •{\i  Greece.} Gr.
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28  {\b  J. thessala} Bornm.,{\i  Feddes Repert.}{\b  28}: 37 (1930), was described from C. Greece (Thessalia), but the fruit is unknown, so it is not certain that it belongs to this genus. It has lower leaves c. 35 × 40 cm, with lobes c. 5 mm wide and entire, and otherwise resembles {\b 1} in general appearance.
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28  {\b  J. selinoides} Boiss. & Balansa in Boiss.,{\i  Diagn. Pl. Or. Nov.}{\b  3}({\b 5}): 99 (1856), known otherwise only from S. Anatolia, was recorded by Velenovsky from Bulgaria, but the record appears to be erroneous.
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 85.                      Capnophyllum}                Gaertner
\par
\pard\f0\fs24\qc By †T.G. Tutin.
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28 Leaves 3-pinnate, resembling those of a {\i Fumaria.} Sepals absent or small. Petals white; apex involute. Fruit ovoid, somewhat compressed dorsally. Ridges very prominent, the lateral thicker than the dorsal and sometimes narrowly winged, all transversely rugose-scabrid; vittae solitary, in the ridges and sometimes between them.
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. C. peregrinum} (L.) Lange in Willk. & Lange,{\i  Prodr. Fl. Hisp.}{\b  3}: 33 (1874). Glabrous annual 10-50 cm. Stem solid, sulcate. Leaf-segments broadly triangular with entire or lobed, lanceolate to linear lobes. Rays 2-5. Bracts absent or few; bracteoles 4-6, shortly triangular. Fruit 4-6 mm.{\i  W. Mediterranean region, southwards from }c. 41°{\i  N., extending to S. Portugal and S.E. Italy.} ?Gr Hs It Lu Sa Si [Ga].
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 86.                       Ferula}                         L.
\par
\pard\f0\fs24\qc By J.F.M. Cannon.
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28 Perennial. Leaves 3- to 4-pinnate or -ternate, with usually linear lobes. Bracts absent; bracteoles absent or few. Sepals absent or minute. Petals yellow. Fruit elliptical or oblong-elliptical, strongly compressed dorsally, with thin lateral wings closely appressed to one another, and filiform or slightly carinate dorsal ridges. vittae usually numerous.
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28   Literature: E. Korovin,{\i  Generis} Ferula ({\i Tourn.}) {\i L. Monographia illustrata.} Taschkent. 1947.
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Sheaths of uppermost leaves very large, situated close beneath and
\par  enveloping the developing umbels; rays of terminal umbel (15-)20-40
\par 2 Leaf-lobes up to 50 mm, without distinctly revolute margins .. {\b 1. communis}
\par 2 Leaf-lobes not more than 10 mm, with distinctly revolute margins
\par  ........................................................................................................ {\b 2. tingitana}
\par 1 Sheaths of uppermost leaves not very large and conspicuous;
\par  rays of terminal umbel not more than 15
\par 3 Leaf-lobes up to 90 mm .................................................................. {\b 7. tatarica}
\par 3 Leaf-lobes not more than 30 mm
\par 4 Leaf-lobes 10-30 mm .................................................................. {\b 3. sadlerana}
\par 4 Leaf-lobes less than 10 mm
\par 5 Umbels with 9-15 rays, not proliferating
\par
\par 358}
\par