{\rtf1\ansi \deff4\deflang1033{\fonttbl{\f4\froman\fcharset0\fprq2 Times New Roman;}}{\colortbl;\red0\green0\blue0;\red0\green0\blue255;\red0\green255\blue255;\red0\green255\blue0;\red255\green0\blue255;\red255\green0\blue0;\red255\green255\blue0;\red255\green255\blue255;\red0\green0\blue128;\red0\green128\blue128;\red0\green128\blue0;\red128\green0\blue128;\red128\green0\blue0;\red128\green128\blue0;\red128\green128\blue128;\red192\green192\blue192;}{\stylesheet{\widctlpar \f4\fs20\lang2057 \snext0 Normal;}{\*\cs10 \additive Default Paragraph Font;}}{\info{\author dddd}{\operator dddd}{\creatim\yr1998\mo10\dy28\hr15\min2}{\revtim\yr1998\mo11\dy11\hr17\min2}{\version2}{\edmins1}{\nofpages4}{\nofwords1048}{\nofchars5974}{\*\company  }{\vern57431}}\widowctrl\ftnbj\aenddoc\hyphcaps0 \fet0\sectd \linex0 {\*\pnseclvl1\pnucrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl2\pnucltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl3\pndec\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl4\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl5\pndec\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl6\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl7\pnlcrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl8\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl9\pnlcrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}
\pard\plain \ \f4\fs20\lang2057 {\fs24  }{\fs28 Several hybrids are recorded. The most frequent and widespread is}{\b\fs28  G.}{\fs28  \'d7}{\b\fs28  intermedium}{\fs28  Ehrh.,}{\i\fs28  Beitr. Naturk. }{\b\fs28 6}{\fs28 : 143 (1791) (}{\b\fs28 5}{\fs28  \'d7}{\b\fs28  9}{\fs28 ), which is fertile; segregates approaching one or other of the parents, as well as intermediates, are often found. }{\b\fs28 G.}{\fs28  \'d7}{\b\fs28  sudeticum}{\fs28  Tausch,}{\i\fs28  Hort. Canal.}{\b\fs28  1}{\fs28 (}{\b\fs28 1}{\fs28 ): t.[9] (1823) (}{\i\fs28 G. inclinatum}{\fs28  Schleicher ex Gaudin & Monnard) (}{\b\fs28 2}{\fs28  \'d7}{\b\fs28  5}{\fs28 ) occurs in scattered localities, with the parents, in the Alps and the Carpathians and in Jugoslavia.
\par 
\par  Literature: F. Bolle, }{\i\fs28 Feddes Repert. }{\fs28 (}{\i\fs28 Beih.}{\fs28 ) }{\b\fs28 72}{\fs28 : 1-119 (1933). W. Gajewski, }{\i\fs28 Monogr. Bot. }{\fs28 (}{\i\fs28 Warszawa}{\fs28 ) }{\b\fs28 4}{\fs28 : 1-416 (1957).
\par 
\par }
\pard \li200\ {\fs28 1 Style persistent in its entirety
\par 2 Distal part of style covered with stiff, deflexed bristles;
\par   proximal part glabrous .......................................................... }{\b\fs28 4. heterocarpum}{\fs28 
\par 2 Whole of style covered with long, ascending, soft hairs
\par 3 Plant with stolons; leaves pinnate .................................................. }{\b\fs28 1. reptans}{\fs28 
\par 3 Plant without stolons; leaves lyrate
\par 4 Flowers erect, golden yellow; inflorescence 1- to 3-flowered . }{\b\fs28 2. montanum}{\fs28 
\par 4 Flowers nodding, pale yellow or whitish; inflorescence
\par   3- to 7-flowered ....................................................................... }{\b\fs28 3. bulgaricum}{\fs28 
\par 1 Distal part of style deciduous; proximal part (rostrum)
\par   persistent, hooked
\par 5 Receptacle on a distinct carpophore 5-10 mm
\par 6 Petals clawed, cream to pink ............................................................ }{\b\fs28 5. rivale}{\fs28 
\par 6 Petals not or scarcely clawed, yellow ...................................... }{\b\fs28 6. sylvaticum}{\fs28 
\par 5 Receptacle \'b1 sessile
\par 7 Petals red .................................................................................. }{\b\fs28 7. coccineum}{\fs28 
\par 7 Petals yellow
\par 8 Petals usually not more than 8 mm
\par 9 Stipules not more than 1 cm ..................................................... }{\b\fs28 13. hispidum}{\fs28 
\par 9 Stipules more than 1 cm
\par 10 Achenes c. 250, forming an ovoid head ......................... }{\b\fs28 12. macrophyllum}{\fs28 
\par 10 Achenes c. 70, forming a globose head ..................................... }{\b\fs28 9. urbanum}{\fs28 
\par 8 Petals usually more than 8 mm
\par 11 Achenes 6-8 mm ................................................................... }{\b\fs28 8. pyrenaicum}{\fs28 
\par 11 Achenes less than 6 mm
\par 12 Plant with a dense, soft pubescence ............................................. }{\b\fs28 11. molle}{\fs28 
\par 12 Plant not densely hairy, or hairs stiff .................................... }{\b\fs28 10. aleppicum}{\fs28 
\par 
\par }
\pard \ {\fs28  Subgen.}{\b\fs28  Oreogeum }{\fs28 (Ser.) F. Bolle. Style long, persistent in its entirety, with long, soft, ascending hairs throughout its length.
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 1. G. reptans}{\fs28  L., }{\i\fs28 Sp. Pl}{\fs28 . 501 (1753) (}{\i\fs28 Sieversia reptans}{\fs28  (L.) Sprengel). Rhizome thick, ending in a leaf-rosette which produces several long stolons. Rosette-leaves pinnate, the segments deeply incised. Flowering stems 3-15 cm, usually 1-flowered, with few, small leaves. Flowers 25-40 mm in diameter, bright yellow. Achenes numerous; styles 20-25 mm. 2n = 42.}{\i\fs28  Usually above 2000 m. \bullet  Alps; Carpathians; mountains of N. Albania, Crna Gora and S.W. Bulgaria.}{\fs28  Al Au Bu Cz Ga Ge He It Ju Po Rm.
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 2. G. montanum}{\fs28  L., }{\i\fs28 Sp. Pl.}{\fs28  501 (1753) (}{\i\fs28 Sieversia montana}{\fs28  (L.) Sprengel). Rhizome thick, creeping; stolons lacking. Basal leaves lyrate; terminal leaflet c. 6 cm. Flowering stem 3-10(-30) cm, 1- to 3-flowered, with small leaves. Flowers 25-40 mm in diameter, golden yellow. Achenes numerous; styles 20 mm. 2n = 28. \bullet }{\i\fs28  Mountains of C. & S. Europe.}{\fs28  Al Au Bu Co Cz Ga Ge Gr He Hs It Ju Po Rm Rs (W).
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 G. micropetalum}{\fs28  Gasparr.,}{\i\fs28  Not. Piante Lucan.}{\fs28  11 (1833), from the S. Appennini, may possibly be a small-flowered variant of}{\b\fs28  2}{\fs28 , but the fruits are not known and further investigation is desirable.
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 3. G. bulgaricum}{\fs28  Pancic,}{\i\fs28  Elem. Fl. Bulg.}{\fs28  26 (1883). Rhizome thick; stem 30-50 cm, erect, with small leaves. Basal leaves large, lyrate; terminal leaflet 10-15 cm, cordate-reniform. Inflorescence 3- to 7-flowered; flowers c. 25 mm in diameter, nodding, campanulate. Calyx light green; petals triangular, emarginate, whitish to pale yellow. Achenes numerous; styles 10-15 mm. 2n = 56. \bullet }{\i\fs28  Mountains of S. Jugoslavia, Albania and S.W. Bulgaria.}{\fs28  Al Bu Ju.
\par 
\par Subgen.}{\b\fs28  Orthostylus }{\fs28 (C. A. Meyer) F. Bolle. Style long, persistent in its entirety, the distal part with stiff, deflexed bristles.
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 4. G. heterocarpum}{\fs28  Boiss.,}{\i\fs28  Biblioth. Univ. Gen\'e8ve}{\fs28  ser. 2,}{\b\fs28  13}{\fs28 : 408 (1838) (}{\i\fs28 G. umbrosum }{\fs28 Boiss., non Dumort.). Plant softly hairy; stem 30-50 cm, branched. Basal leaves lyrate; terminal leaflet c. 6 cm, cordate, more or less lobed. Inflorescence 5- to 10-flowered; flowers c. 10 mm in diameter, campanulate. Petals elliptical or obovate, pale yellow; carpophore long. Achenes c. 15 mm, 5-15 in number, patent, the lowermost often deflexed; basal part of style glabrous; distal part long, straight.}{\i\fs28  Mountains of E. & S. Spain; isolated stations in S.E. France, C. Italy and Albania.}{\fs28  Al Ga Hs It.
\par 
\par Subgen.}{\b\fs28  Geum}{\fs28 . Style geniculate with hooked rostrum; distal part deciduous.
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 5. G. rivale}{\fs28  L. }{\i\fs28 Sp. Pl.}{\fs28  501 (1753). Rhizome short, thick; stem 20-30 cm, branched. Basal leaves pinnate, with 3-6 pairs of unequal leaflets; terminal leaflet 2-5 cm, suborbicular, incised or lobed; cauline leaves 3-partite; stipules c. 5 mm. Inflorescence 2- to 5-flowered; flowers nodding, campanulate. Calyx dark brownish-purple; petals 8-15 mm, erect, long-clawed, emarginate, cream to pink; carpophore 5-10 mm. Achenes 100-150, hairy, with long rostrum. 2n = 42.}{\i\fs28  Most of Europe except the Mediterranean region.}{\fs28  Al Au Be Br Bu Cz Da Fa Fe Ga Ge Gr Hb He Ho Hs Is It Ju No Po Rm (N, B, C, W, E) Su.
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 6. G. sylvaticum}{\fs28  Pourret,}{\i\fs28  M\'e9m. Acad. Toulouse}{\b\fs28  3}{\fs28 : 319 (1788). Whole plant hairy; rhizome usually short and thick; stem 15-40 cm, with small, simple cauline leaves. Basal leaves lyrate, with 1-2 pairs of lateral leaflets; terminal leaflet 3-5 cm, ovate, lobed; stipules small. Inflorescence 1- to 3-flowered; flowers c. 20 mm in diameter, erect. Petals patent, suborbicular, yellow. Carpophore 5 mm. Achenes 6-8 mm, 15-30 in number. 2n = 42.}{\i\fs28  S.W. Europe, extending eastwards to Calabria.}{\fs28  Ga Hs Lu It.
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 7. G. coccineum}{\fs28  Sibth. & Sm.,}{\i\fs28  Fl. Graec. Prodr.}{\b\fs28  1}{\fs28 : 354 (1809). Stem erect, branched, with small, lobed leaves. Basal leaves lyrate, with 2-3 pairs of lateral leaflets; terminal leaflet c. 8 cm, reniform. Inflorescence 2- to 4-flowered; flowers large, erect, long-stalked. Sepals deflexed after flowering; petals 10-18 mm, rounded, patent, red; carpophore absent. Achenes small, numerous, with bristly hairs; rostrum with a few long hairs at the base. 2n = 42.}{\i\fs28  Mountains of Balkan peninsula.}{\fs28  Al Bu Gr Ju.
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 G. rhodopeum}{\fs28  Stoj. & Stefanov, }{\i\fs28 \'d6sterr. Bot. Zeitschr.}{\b\fs28  72}{\fs28 : 86 (1923), described from S. Bulgaria (Rodopi Planina), is like }{\b\fs28 7}{\fs28  but has 3-6 pairs of lateral pinnae, yellow petals 10-14 mm, shortly hairy achenes and hairy rostrum. Cultivation experiments indicate that it is a hybrid between}{\b\fs28  7}{\fs28  and some other, undetermined species of }{\i\fs28 Geum}{\fs28 . Further investigation is needed.
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 8. G. pyrenaicum}{\fs28  Miller, }{\i\fs28 Gard. Dict.}{\fs28  ed. 8, no. 3 (1768). Rhizome short, thick; stem erect. Basal leaves lyrate, with 4-6 pairs of unequal leaflets; terminal leaflet c. 10 cm, rounded cordate, lobed; cauline leaves very small. Inflorescence (1-)3(-5)flowered; flowers large, erect. Petals 10-14 mm, rounded, patent, bright yellow; carpophore absent. Achenes 6-8 mm, numerous with long rostrum. \bullet }{\i\fs28  Pyrenees.}{\fs28  Ga Hs.
\par 
\par 35}
\par }