{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 rous to hispid with short stiff hairs. Leaves 2-pinnate, with linear lobes. Bracteoles absent. Umbels of male plants with up to 10 rays; umbels of female plants with up to 9 markedly unequal rays. Fruit ovoid, deeply sulcate, scabrid to sparsely hispid.{\i  S.E. Russia; S. & E. Ukraine}. Rs (W, K, E).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 4. T. ramosissima} (Fischer ex Trev.) Koch, {\i Nova Acta Acad. Leop.-Carol. }{\b 12}({\b 1}): 127 (1824) ({\i T. ucrainica} Schischkin, {\i T. kitaibelii} sensu Hayek, non Bieb.). Erect, glabrous herb up to 80 cm. Leaves 2-pinnate, with narrow, linear lobes up to 30 mm. Bracteoles usually 5, conspicuous. Male plants relatively sparsely branched, the branches making a wide angle with the stem. Female plants densely branched. Umbels of male plants with 5-10 rays; umbels of female plants with 4-8(-10) rays. Fruit 2-2·5 mm, oblong-ovoid, much shorter than its pedicel, glabrous; ridges rounded, with shallow grooves between them. 2n = 20.{\i  S.E. & E.C. Europe, westwards to C. Czechoslovakia}. Au Bu Cz Hu Ju Rm Rs (C, W, E).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   It appears possible that this species may include two subspecies. One, occurring in E.C. Europe ({\i T. kitaibelii} auct., non Bieb.), has smaller fruit (c. 2 mm) and relatively robust rays, while the other, from Russia, has rather larger fruit (c. 2·5 mm) and finer rays.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 5. T. kitaibelii} Bieb.,{\i  Fl. Taur.-Cauc.}{\b  3}: 246 (1819). Glabrous herb up to 40 cm, often branched from near the base, and without a distinct main stem. Leaves 2(-3)-pinnate with linear lobes up to 10 mm; margins with short bristly hairs. Umbels of male plants with 5-7 rays; umbels of female plants with 4-9 rays. Bracteoles 3-5. Pedicels becoming thickened in fruit. Fruit 3-4 mm, ovoid, glabrous, with prominent acute ridges. •{\i  Krym.} Rs (K).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 6. T. muricata} Godet,{\i  Fl. Jura}{\b  1}: 271 (1852). Like {\b 5} but fruit 4-5 mm, scabrid with small spines.{\i  S.E. Russia.} Rs (C, E).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 7. T. dalechampii} (Ten.) Janchen,{\i  Österr. Bot. Zeitschr.}{\b  58}: 298 (1908). Branched from the base. Branches up to 15 cm, bearing patent umbels. Leaves 2-pinnate; lobes c. 10 mm, linear. Umbels of male plants with 5-8 rays; umbels of female plants with 5-7 very unequal rays. Fruit 3 mm, ovoid; primary ridges prominent, smooth; secondary ridges rounded, well developed.{\i  Mountain pastures. • Italy and Balkan peninsula.} Al Gr It Ju.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b T. frigida} (Boiss. & Heldr.) Drude in Engler & Prantl,{\i  Natürl. Pflanzenfam.}{\b  3}({\b 8}): 183 (1898), from Greece, is probably conspecific with {\b 7.} It has a smaller number of rays in the umbels (male 4-6, female 4-5).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 8. T. guicciardii} (Boiss. & Heldr.) Drude in Engler & Prantl,{\i  Natürl. Pflanzenfam.}{\b  3}({\b 8}): 183 (1898). Much-branched herb up to 15 cm, distinctly obpyramidal in overall shape. Stems tinged with purple. Leaves 2- to 3-pinnate; lobes up to 10 mm, linear. Umbels of male plants with up to 10 rays; umbels of female plants with 4-6 rays. Fruit 2-3 mm, ovoid, reddish-brown; primary ridges sinuous, verrucose; secondary ridges moderately developed, rugose.{\i  • C. & S. Greece.} Gr.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 9. T. crithmifolia} (Willd.) H. Wolff in Engler,{\i  Pflanzenreich}{\b  43} ({\b IV. 228}): 190 (1910) ({\i Rumia crithmifolia} (Willd.) Kos.-Pol.,{\i  R. taurica }Hoffm.). Erect herb up to 50 cm. Stem branched. Leaves 2-pinnate; lobes up to 30 mm, narrowly linear. Umbels of male plants with 7-10 rays; umbels of female plants with 2-4 subequal rays. Mature fruit c. 5 mm, whitish or reddish. Primary ridges with greatly developed sinuous lobes, which give the fruit an appearance resembling that of a human brain. •{\i  Krym.} Rs (K).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 58.                  Cuminum}                    L.
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc By †T.G. Tutin.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Leaves 2-ternate. Sepals subulate, conspicuous. Petals white or pink, emarginate; apex long, inflexed. Fruit ovoid-oblong, dorsally compressed. Ridges filiform, the secondary more conspicuous; vittae solitary.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   {\b 1. C. cyminum} L.,{\i  Sp. Pl.} 254 (1753). Slender annual 10-50 cm. Leaves with filiform lobes 2-5 cm long. Rays 1-5, rather stout. Bracts 2-4, filiform or 3-fid, usually longer than the rays; bracteoles usually 3, very unequal. Flowers 3-5 in each partial umbel; pedicels stout. Fruit 4-5 mm, ovoid-oblong, setulose or glabrous.{\i  Cultivated in the Mediterranean region for its aromatic fruits and more or less naturalized locally.} [Ga Hs Si.] ({\i N. Africa, S.W. Asia}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 59.                     Apium}                       L.
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc By †T.G. Tutin.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Leaves pinnate, or the upper ternate. Sepals minute or absent. Petals whitish, not emarginate; apex sometimes inflexed. Fruit ovoid, or elliptic-oblong, laterally compressed. Ridges usually stout; vittae solitary.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Bracteoles absent ..................................................................... {\b 1. graveolens}
\par
1 Bracteoles 5-7
\par
2 Leaves all with lanceolate to suborbicular, serrate or shallowly
\par
  lobed segments; bracteoles with white, membranous margins
\par
3 Stem procumbent, rooting at lower nodes, then ascending or
\par
  erect; peduncle usually shorter than rays; bracts 0-2 ................ {\b 2. nodiflorum}
\par
3 Stem procumbent and rooting at every node; peduncle
\par
  usually longer than rays; bracts 3-7 .................................................. {\b 3. repens}
\par
2 Lower leaves with segments divided into filiform
\par
  lobes; bracteoles entirely herbaceous
\par
4 Rays 2(-4); pedicels not thickened in fruit; styles
\par
  much shorter than stylopodium in fruit ..................................... {\b 4. inundatum}
\par
4 Rays 3-5, pedicels thickened at base in fruit; styles
\par
  somewhat longer than stylopodium in fruit ................................. {\b 5. crassipes}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. A. graveolens} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 264 (1753). Stout biennial up to 100 cm, with a strong, characteristic smell. Stem sulcate, solid. Leaves 1- to 2-pinnate; segments 5-50 mm, deltate, rhombic or lanceolate, lobed and serrate or almost crenate. Umbels mostly shortly pedunculate or sessile, often leaf-opposed. Rays 4-12. Bracts and bracteoles absent. Fruit 1·5-2 mm, broadly ovoid.{\i  Damp places, usually near the sea. Coasts of Europe northwards to} c. 56°{\i  N}. Al Au Az Be Bl Br Bu Co Cr Da Ga Ge Gr Hb Ho Hs It Ju Lu Po Rm Rs (W, K, E) Sa Si [Cz Fe He Hu No Su].
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Several varieties are widely cultivated for the edible petioles (celery), leaves or roots, and are locally naturalized.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. A. nodiflorum} (L.) Lag., {\i Amen. Nat. }{\b 1}: 101 (1821) ({\i Helosciadium nodiflorum} (L.) Koch). Procumbent or ascending perennial up to 100 cm. Stems hollow, rooting at the lower nodes. Leaves 1-pinnate, segments 10-60 mm, 7-13, lanceolate to ovate, serrate and often somewhat lobed. Peduncle usually shorter than rays, often almost absent; umbels leaf-opposed. Rays 3-12. Bracts usually absent, rarely 1 or 2; bracteoles 5-7, ovate or lanceolate, with a white, membranous margin. Fruit 1·5-2 mm, longer than wide, ovoid. 2n = 22. {\i Wet places. Much of Europe, particularly in the west; distribution uncertain owing to confusion with}{\b  3}. Al Az Be Bl Br Bu Co ?Cr Ga Ge ?Gr Hb He Ho Hs It ?Ju Lu ?Rm Sa Si ?Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 3. A. repens} (Jacq.) Lag., {\i loc. cit. }(1821) ({\i Helosciadium repens} (Jacq.) Koch). Like {\b 2} but stem creeping throughout its length and rooting at every node; leaf-segments 5-14 mm, 5-11, ovate to sub
\par

\par
351}
\par