{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 69.                  Thorella}                    Briq.
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc By †T.G. Tutin.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 First leaves usually reduced to the subulate petiole and rhachis; others pinnate, with short, spathulate, sometimes pinnatisect segments. Sepals small. Petals whitish, suborbicular, weakly emarginate; apex inflexed. Fruit ovoid, compressed laterally. Ridges prominent, stout; vittae solitary.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. T. verticillatinundata} (Thore) Briq., {\i Annu. Cons. Jard. Bot. Genève }{\b 17}: 275 (1914) ({\i Ptychotis thorei} Godron & Gren.). Perennial with slender rhizome; stems up to 20 cm, slender. Leaves mostly basal, the first fistular, septate, the others with 7-20 pairs of segments. Rays 3-6, usually unequal. Bracts 3-5, entire or 2- to 3-fid, much shorter than the rays; bracteoles like the bracts. Fruit c. 2 mm.{\i  Seasonally flooded places. • S.W. & W.C. France; W. Portugal.} Ga Lu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 70.                          Falcaria}                     Fabr.
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc By †T.G. Tutin.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Leaves usually 1- to 2-ternate; margins cartilaginous and serrate. Sepals conspicuous. Petals whitish, broadly obovate, emarginate; apex inflexed. Fruit at least three times as long as wide, oblong, compressed laterally, constricted at the commissure. Ridges low, wider than the grooves; vittae solitary.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. F. vulgaris} Bernh., {\i Syst. Verz. Erfurt} 176 (1800) ({\i F. rivini} Host,{\i  F. sioides} Ascherson). Glaucous annual, biennial or perennial up to 90 cm. Stems terete, solid, freely branched and often forming a low, tangled mass. Leaves 1- to 2-ternate; segments up to 30 cm, linear-lanceolate or linear, acuminate, somewhat falcate, strongly, sharply and regularly serrate. Rays 12-18. Bracts and bracteoles 4-15, subulate. Fruit 3-4 mm, oblong. 2n = 22.{\i  Europe from N. France and C. Russia southwards, but absent from the islands.} Au Bu Ga Gr He Hs Hu It Ju Po Rm Rs (*B, C, W, K, E) ?Tu [Be Br Da Ho Su].
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 71.                            Carum}                        L.
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc By †T.G. Tutin.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Leaves 2- to 4-pinnate. Sepals very small or absent. Petals whitish, rarely pink or yellowish, obovate, emarginate; apex inflexed. Fruit obovoid-oblong, laterally compressed. ridges filiform, prominent or almost winged; vittae solitary and wide, or 2-3 and narrow.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Leaf-segments diminishing markedly in size from about
\par
  the middle of the leaf downwards .......................................... {\b 3. verticillatum}
\par
1 Lowest pair of leaf-segments the largest or, rarely, the
\par
  lower 1-3 pairs smaller than the rest
\par
2 Lowest leaf-segments at least twice as long as wide
\par
3 Rays erecto-patent after flowering; bracteoles few or 0,
\par
  c. ¼ as long as the longer pedicels ..................................................... {\b 1. carvi}
\par
3 Outer rays almost horizontal after flowering; bracteoles
\par
  4-8, c. ½ as long as the pedicels .............................................. {\b 2. multiflorum}
\par
2 Lowest leaf-segments about as long as wide
\par
4 Stems erect; styles longer than stylopodium ............................. {\b 4. rigidulum}
\par
4 Stems decumbent; styles not longer than stylopodium ............ {\b 5. heldreichii}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. C. carvi} L.,{\i  Sp. Pl.} 263 (1753) (incl.{\i  C. velenovskyi} Rohlena). Divaricately branched, glabrous perennial up to 150 cm. Stems striate, leafy. Leaves 2- to 3-pinnate; lobes 3-25 mm, linear-lanceolate or linear. Rays 5-16, very unequal, erecto-patent in fruit. Bracts usually absent, rarely up to 8, and then sometimes 2-to 3-partite; bracteoles absent or few, up to ¼ as long as longest pedicels. Petals whitish or pink. Fruit 3-6 mm, ovoid, strong smelling when crushed; ridges low, rounded. 2n = 20. {\i Most of Europe, except the Mediterranean region; widely cultivated for its aromatic fruits} ({\i caraway}),{\i  which are used for flavouring, and frequently naturalized. }Al Au Be Bu Cz Da Fe Ga Ge He Ho Hs Hu It Ju No Po Rm Rs (N, B, C, W, K, E) Su [*Br Fa Hb Is Sb.]
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. C. multiflorum} (Sibth. & Sm.) Boiss.,{\i  Fl. Or.}{\b  2}: 882 (1872). Biennial or perennial up to 70 cm. Basal leaves up to c. 10 cm, triangular in outline, 2- to 3-pinnate; lobes up to 10 mm, ovate to obovate in outline, dentate or pinnatisect with ovate or lanceolate, entire lobes. Rays 5-28, the outer almost horizontal in fruit. Bracts and bracteoles 4-8, oblong to ovate-lanceolate. Petals white. Fruit 2-3 mm, oblong-ellipsoid; ridges very narrowly winged.{\i  S. part of Balkan peninsula; one station in S.E. Italy. }Al Bu Cr Gr It Ju.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b multiflorum}: stems stout, with numerous stout branches; lobes of cauline leaves similar to those of basal leaves; rays usually 15-25.{\i  W. & S. Greece, S. Albania}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b strictum} (Griseb.) Tutin,{\i  Feddes Repert.}{\b  74}: 31 (1967) ({\i Bunium strictum} Griseb., {\i C. lumpeanum} Dörfler & Hayek): Stems slender, with few, slender branches; lobes of cauline leaves narrower than those of basal leaves; rays 5-12.{\i  • From N.E. Greece and S.W. Bulgaria to C. & N. Albania and S.E. Italy}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 3. C. verticillatum} (L.) Koch,{\i  Nova Acta Acad. Leop.-Carol.}{\b  12}({\b 1}): 122 (1824). Erect, glabrous perennial up to 120 cm. Root of fusiform fibres thickened downwards. Stem striate, little branched, with few small leaves. Basal leaves 10-25 cm, narrowly oblong in outline, with usually more than 20 pairs of deeply palmatisect segments which are longest in the upper half; lobes up to 10 mm, filiform, appearing as if whorled. Rays up to 12. Bracts up to 10, linear-acuminate; bracteoles numerous, linear-lanceolate, deflexed. Petals white. Fruit 2·5-4 mm, ellipsoid; ridges prominent. {\i Marshes and damp meadows. • W. Europe, northwards to Scotland and the Netherlands.} Be Br ?Co Ga †Ge Hb Ho Hs Lu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 4. C. rigidulum} (Viv.) Koch ex DC.,{\i  Prodr.}{\b  4}: 115 (1830) (incl.{\i  C. graecum} Boiss. & Heldr.,{\i  C. adamovicii} Halácsy). Glabrous perennial up to 60 cm. Stems erect, simple or with few long branches, striate, with few small leaves. Basal leaves 10-20 cm, oblong or oblong-lanceolate in outline; segments up to 15 pairs, the largest at or near the base of the lamina; lobes 2-10 × 0·5-2 mm, linear-lanceolate to setaceous. Rays 3-11, erecto-patent. Bracts 0-6, linear; bracteoles 3-8, linear-lanceolate, acuminate, broadly scarious. Petals white or yellowish-white. Styles longer than stylopodium. Fruit 3-4 mm, ellipsoid, ridges prominent.{\i  Mountain rocks. • Balkan peninsula; C. Italy} ({\i Alpi Apuane}). Al Bu Gr It Ju.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 5. C. heldreichii} Boiss., {\i Diagn. Pl. Or. Nov.}{\b  3}({\b 2}): 78 (1856) ({\i C. flexuosum} (Ten.) Nyman, non Fries; incl.{\i  C. rupestre} Boiss. & Heldr.). Perennial, up to 40 cm. Stems several, decumbent, then ascending, flexuous. Basal leaves 3-10 cm, oblong-lanceolate in outline; segments up to 8 pairs, the largest at or near the base of the lamina; lobes 2-10 × c. 0·5 mm, elliptic-lanceolate, acuminate; bracteoles 3-5, linear to setaceous, acuminate, with narrow scarious margin. Petals white or yellowish-white. Styles not longer than stylopodium. Fruit 3·5-4·5 mm, ellipsoid; ridges prominent.{\i  Mountain rocks. • Greece, Albania and Italy}. Al Gr It.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 72.                    Stefanoffia}                    H. Wolff.
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc By †T.G. Tutin.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Roots napiform. Leaves 2- to 3-pinnate, with narrow lobes. Sepals absent. Petals whitish, obcordate; apex inflexed, broad, reaching nearly to the base of the petal. Fruit subglobose, slightly compressed laterally. Ridges filiform; vittae solitary.
\par

\par
354}
\par