{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 orbicular; peduncle usually 2-3 times as long as rays; rays 3-6; bracts 3-7; fruit usually c. 1 mm, wider than long. 2n = 22. {\i Wet places. Mainly in C. and E. Europe; distribution uncertain owing to confusion with}{\b  2}. Au Be ?Bu ?Cr Cz Da Ga Ge ?Gr He Ho Hs Hu It ?Ju Lu Po ?Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 4. A. inundatum}(L.) Reichenb. fil. in Reichenb. & Reichenb. fil., {\i Icon. Fl. Germ.}{\b  21}: 9 (1863) ({\i Helosciadium inundatum} (L.) Koch). Perennial up to 75 cm, usually partly or completely submerged. Leaves pinnate, the lower (whether submerged or not) divided into filiform or linear lobes, the upper with ovate, often 3-lobed segments c. 5 mm. Peduncle about as long as rays; umbels leaf opposed. Rays 2(-4); pedicels not thickened in fruit. Bracts absent; bracteoles 3-6, herbaceous, lanceolate. Styles much shorter than stylopodium in fruit. Fruit 2-3·5 mm, elliptic-oblong. 2n = 22. •{\i  W. Europe, extending eastwards to Sicilia, Poland and S.E. Sweden.} Be Br Da Ga Ge Hb Ho Hs It Lu Po Si Su.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b  A}. × {\b moorei} (Syme) Druce,{\i  Rep. Bot. Exch. Club Brit. Is.}{\b  3}: 20 (1912) ({\i A. inundatum }× {\i nodiflorum}), occurs locally with the parents and is sterile.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 5. A. crassipes} (Koch ex Reichenb.) Reichenb. fil. in Reichenb. & Reichenb. fil.,{\i  loc. cit.} (1863) ({\i Helosciadium crassipes} Koch ex Reichenb.). Like {\b 4} but rays 3-5; pedicels strongly thickened at base in fruit; bracteoles 5-8; styles distinctly longer than stylopodium in fruit. •{\i  Corse, Sardegna, Sicilia, S. Italy. }Co It Sa Si
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b A. leptophyllum} (Pers.) F. Mueller ex Bentham,{\i  Fl. Austral.}{\b  3}: 372 (1867) ({\i A. tenuifolium} Thell.), from America, with finely divided leaf-segments, umbels with usually 2 rays and no bracts or bracteoles, is recorded as introduced in a number of places; it seems often to be impermanent, but persists in Portugal. It may be incorrectly placed in{\i  Apium}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 60.                   Petroselinum}                   Hill
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc By †T.G. Tutin.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Leaves 1- to 3-pinnate. Sepals minute. Petals white or yellowish, emarginate; apex inflexed. Fruit ovoid. Ridges filiform, conspicuous; vittae solitary.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 Leaves 3-pinnate; flowers yellowish ............................................... {\b 1. crispum}
\par
Leaves simply pinnate; flowers white ............................................. {\b 2. segetum}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. P. crispum} (Miller) A.W. Hill, {\i Hand-list Herb. Pl. Kew} ed. 3, 122 (1925) ({\i P. hortense} auct., {\i P. sativum} Hoffm.). Erect, glabrous biennial up to 75 cm. Stem terete, solid; branches ascending. Lower leaves triangular in outline, 3-pinnate; lobes 10-20 mm, cuneate, lobed, often crispate in cultivars. Umbels flat-topped. Rays 8-20. Bracts 1-3, entire or 3-fid; bracteoles 5-8, linear-oblong to ovate-cuspidate. Petals yellowish. Fruit 2·5-3 mm, broadly ovoid. 2n = 22. {\i Cultivated as a herb and naturalized in much of Europe; origin uncertain, but perhaps S.E. Europe or W. Asia.} [All except Al Fa Fe Ho Is Rs (N) Sb Tu.]
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. P. segetum} (L.) Koch,{\i  Nova Acta Acad. Leop.-Carol.}{\b  12}({\b 1}): 128 (1824). Slender, more or less glaucous biennial or annual up to 100 cm. Stem terete, solid; branches divaricate. Leaves linear-oblong in outline, simply pinnate; segments 3-10 mm, ovate, serrate or sometimes lobed; margins thickened; teeth cartilaginous, incurved. Rays 2-5, very unequal. Bracts and bracteoles 2-5, subulate. Petals white. Fruit 2-4 mm, ovoid. •{\i  W. Europe, from the Netherlands and England to Portugal, and extending eastwards to C. Italy.} Be Br ?Co Ga Ho Hs It Lu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 61.                         Ridolfia}                    Moris
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc By †T.G. Tutin.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Leaves 4-pinnate, with filiform lobes. Sepals absent. Petals yellow, ovate; apex inflexed, truncate. Fruit ovoid-cylindrical, compressed laterally. Ridges slender, scarcely prominent; vittae solitary, slender.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. R. segetum} Moris, {\i Enum. Sem. Hort. Taur}. 43 (1841). Glabrous annual with stems 40-100 cm. Leaves with long, divaricate lobes, the upper often reduced to the inflated petiole. Umbels with 10-60 slender, nearly equal rays. Bracts and bracteoles absent. Fruit 1·5-2·5 mm.{\i  Cultivated land and waste places. Mediterranean region, extending to Portugal.} Bl Co Ga Gr Hs It Ju Lu Sa Si Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 62.                           Sison}                             L.
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc By †T.G. Tutin.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Leaves pinnate. Flowers hermaphrodite. Sepals absent. Petals white, emarginate; apex inflexed. Fruit subglobose. Ridges filiform; vittae solitary, conspicuous, widest below the middle, much shorter than the fruit.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. S. amomum} L., {\i Sp. Pl. }252 (1753). Biennial up to 100 cm, with a nauseous smell when crushed. Leaves 10-20 cm; the lower petiolate, simply pinnate, with 7-9 pairs of pinnae; pinnae 2-7 cm, usually sessile, oblong-ovate, serrate and often lobed; upper cauline leaves usually ternate, with spathulate or linear, dentate or lobed segments. Rays 3-6, slender, unequal. Bracts and bracteoles 2-4, linear, rarely absent. Pedicels very unequal. Fruit 1·5-3 mm.{\i  S. & W. Europe, northwards to} 53° 30' {\i N. in England.} Bl Br Bu Co Ga Gr He Hs It Ju Rm Sa Si Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 63.                         Cicuta}                       L.
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc By †T.G. Tutin.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Leaves 2- to 3-pinnate. Sepals conspicuous. Petals white or pink, emarginate; apex inflexed. Fruit subglobose, slightly compressed laterally. Ridges wide; vittae solitary, conspicuous.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. C. virosa} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 255 (1753). Stout perennial up to 120 cm. Stock ovoid or shortly cylindrical, septate. Leaves up to 30 cm, deltate in outline; lobes 5-10 cm, linear-lanceolate or linear, acutely and deeply serrate, asymmetrical at base; petiole stout. Rays 1-5 cm, 10-20, subequal. Bracts absent; bracteoles 6-8, linear-oblong, about as long as the pedicels in fruit. Flowers 30-50 in each partial umbel. Pedicels slender, divaricate or deflexed in fruit. Fruit 1·75-2 × 1·5-1·75 mm. 2n = 22.{\i  In shallow water or on damp mud. Most of Europe from} 45°{\i  N. northwards; very rare further south and absent from most of the islands.} Au Be Br Bu Cz Da Fe Ga Ge Gr Hb He Ho *Hs Hu It Ju No Po Rm Rs (N, B, C, W, E) Su.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Extremely poisonous.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 64.                      Cryptotaenia}                      DC.
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc By †T.G. Tutin.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Leaves ternate. Sepals absent. Petals white, somewhat emarginate; apex inflexed. Fruit subcylindrical. Ridges slender; vittae solitary, inconspicuous in fruit.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. C. canadensis} (L.) DC., {\i Prodr.}{\b  4}: 119 (1830). Perennial up to 100 cm. Lower leaves long-petiolate with segments 5-10 cm, ovate, biserrate; upper leaves subsessile. Rays 3-10, unequal. Bracts absent; bracteoles absent or small. Flowers 1-6 in each partial umbel. Pedicels slender, strict, very unequal. Fruit 4-6 mm, often curved.{\i  Naturalized in Austria} ({\i Steiermark}). [Au]. ({\i E. North America, Japan.})
\par

\par
352}
\par
