{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 65.                       Lereschia }                    Boiss.
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc By †T.G. Tutin.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Like{\i  Cryptotaenia} but fruit more strongly compressed laterally; styles free to base; vittae 2-3.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. L. thomasii} (Ten.) Boiss.,{\i  Ann. Sci. Nat}. ser. 3 (Bot.),{\b  1}: 128 (1844). glabrous, rhizomatous perennial 40-60 cm. Leaves mostly basal, ternate; segments rhombic, entire or serrulate in basal half and coarsely dentate to lobed in upper half; teeth and lobes serrulate, aristate; lower leaves long-petiolate. Umbels irregular, arranged in a leafless panicle. Flowers hermaphrodite and male; pedicels slender. Bracts and bracteoles few, small. Base of styles swollen in flower. Fruit c. 4 mm, subclavate, often curved. 2n = 12. {\i Damp places. S. Italy} ({\i Calabria}). It.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Very similar to{\i  Petagnia} in general appearance and perhaps more closely related to it than{\i  Cryptotaenia.}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 66.                       Ammi}                          L.
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc By †T.G. Tutin.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Leaves 1- to 3-pinnate or -ternate. Sepals very small or absent. Petals white or yellowish, obcordate, the outer larger; apex inflexed. Fruit ovoid or ovoid-oblong, slightly compressed laterally, constricted at the commissure. Primary ridges filiform, prominent; vittae solitary.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Rays patent or erecto-patent in flower, becoming erect,
\par
  thickened and indurate in fruit ....................................................... {\b 1. visnaga}
\par
1 Rays patent and slender in flower and fruit
\par
2 Plant not more than 10 cm; basal leaves simple .............................. {\b 3. majus}
\par
2 Plant c. 100 cm; basal leaves 2- to 3-pinnate
\par
3 Lobes of lower leaves narrowly linear or filiform ...................... {\b 2. crinitum}
\par
3 Lobes of lower leaves never narrowly linear or filiform
\par
4 Bracts always linear, entire ...................................................... {\b 5. trifoliatum}
\par
4 At least some bracts pinnatisect or 3-fid
\par
5 Lobes of middle and upper cauline leaves lanceolate or linear ....... {\b 3. majus}
\par
5 Lobes of middle and upper cauline leaves obovate or
\par
  broadly oblanceolate ......................................................................... {\b 4. huntii}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. A. visnaga} (L.) Lam.,{\i  Fl. Fr.}{\b  3}: 462 (1778). Robust annual or biennial up to 100 cm. Lower leaves pinnate; others 2- to 3-pinnate; all with narrowly linear or filiform lobes. Rays up to c. 150, slender and patent in flower, becoming erect, thickened and indurate in fruit. Bracts 1- to 2-pinnatisect, equalling or exceeding the rays; bracteoles subulate. Pedicels erect, stout and rigid in fruit. Fruit 2-2·5 mm.{\i  Mediterranean region and Portugal; a frequent weed farther north.} Al *Az Bl Co *Ga Gr Hs It Lu Sa Si Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. A. crinitum} Guss.,{\i  Pl. Rar.} 128 (1826). Like {\b 1} but leaves very much divided; rays remaining patent and slender in fruit; bracts like the upper leaves. •{\i  S. Italy and Sicilia.} It Si.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   An imperfectly known species, perhaps not distinct from {\b 1}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 3. A. majus} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 243 (1753). Annual 30-100 cm, very variable in habit and leaf-dissection. Leaves 2- to 3-pinnate lower usually with elliptical or obovate, obtuse, serrate lobes middle with lanceolate, acuminate, serrate to dentate lobes; upper with linear, dentate lobes. Rays 15-60, slender and erectopatent in flower and fruit. Bracts 3-fid or pinnatisect, with filiform lobes, sometimes entire; bracteoles lanceolate, acuminate to linear-lanceolate. Pedicels slender. Fruit 1·5-2 mm.{\i  S. Europe; a frequent weed farther north.} Al *Az Bl Co Cr Ga Gr Hs It Ju Lu Sa Si Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b  A. topalii} Beauverd, {\i Candollea}{\b  7}: 264 (1937) is an extreme dwarf variant of {\b 3} from Evvoia. It is up to 10 cm and has simple basal leaves. Plants intermediate between this and normal {\i A. majus} occur in rocky places on other Mediterranean islands.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 4. A. huntii} H.C. Watson,{\i  London Jour. Bot.} ({\i Hooker}){\b  6}: 382 (1847) (incl.{\i  A. seubertianum }(H. C. Watson) Trelease). Annual or biennial up to 100 cm. Leaves 2- to 3-pinnate or the upper ternate; lobes elliptical to oblong, deeply toothed, with narrow, aristate teeth. Rays 7-20, the longer up to 3 cm. Bracts pinnatisect or 3-fid, with linear lobes; bracteoles linear-lanceolate. Pedicels up to 12 mm, slender. Fruit 1·5-1·75 mm, narrowly ovoid. •{\i  Açores.} Az.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 5. A. trifoliatum} (H.C. Watson) Trelease,{\i  Ann. Rep. Missouri Bot. Gard.}{\b  8}: 116 (1897). Like {\b 4} but larger rays 3-5 cm; bracts linear, never pinnatisect, often very unequal; pedicels usually c. 5 mm; fruit 1·5-1·75 mm. •{\i  Açores.} Az.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b  4} and{\b  5} have been seldom collected and are not well known. They may, together with {\i A. seubertianum}, merely represent local populations of one species.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 67.                          Ptychotis}                  Koch
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc By †T.G. Tutin.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Lower leaves 1-pinnate; segments pinnatisect. Sepals conspicuous. Petals whitish, with a suborbicular lobe projecting on either side of the inflexed, oblong apex. Fruit oblong, constricted at the commissure. Ridges prominent and almost winged; vittae solitary.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. P. saxifraga} (L.) Loret & Barrandon,{\i  Fl. Montpell.} 283 (1876) ({\i P. heterophylla} Koch). Glabrous biennial 30-70 cm. Rosette-leaves simply pinnate, with 3-5(-7) dentate, serrate or somewhat lobed lobes; lower cauline leaves similar but with 5-9 lobes; the others small, 1- to 2-pinnatisect, with linear lobes; petioles of upper leaves expanded and sheathing. Umbels 2-5 cm in diameter; peduncles slender; rays 6-12, slender, unequal. Bracts 2-3, caducous; bracteoles 3-6, setaceous. Pedicels unequal. Fruit 2-3 mm.{\i  Dry places. W. Mediterranean region, extending locally to N.E. France and N.E. Italy.} Co Ga He Hs It Sa.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 68.                        Ammoides}                 Adanson
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc By †T.G. Tutin.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Lower leaves 2-pinnate, with linear segments. Sepals absent. Petals whitish, with a suborbicular lobe projecting on either side of the inflexed, oblong apex. Fruit broadly ovoid, laterally compressed, not constricted at the commissure. Ridges filiform prominent; vittae solitary.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. A. pusilla} (Brot.) Breistr.,{\i  Bull. Soc. Sci. Dauph.}{\b  61}: 628 (1947) ({\i Ptychotis ammoides} Koch). Slender, glabrous annual 10-50 cm. Leaves glaucescent, the lower 2-pinnate, oblong in outline, with 7-11 pairs of very short lobes, the middle with 3-5 pairs of segments, the upper usually with 2-3 long, filiform segments. Rays 5-11, slender, unequal. Bracts absent, or few and caducous; bracteoles 4-6, some linear-lanceolate, others spathulate and inflated distally, with an acuminate apex. Pedicels unequal. Fruit c. 1 mm.{\i  Mediterranean region, extending to Portugal.} Al Co Gr Hs It Ju Lu Sa Si.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b   Ptychotis morisiana} Béguinot, {\i Arch. Bot.} ({\i Forli}){\b  3}: 284 (1927), described from Sardegna (Tavolara), is said to be like {\b 1} but with shorter, linear-lanceolate leaf-lobes, a single bract and 3 linear, aristate bracteoles. It is perhaps a subspecies of{\i  A. pusilla,} but it requires further investigation, especially as ripe fruit is unknown.
\par

\par
353}
\par