{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. S. daucoides} (Boiss.) H. Wolff,{\i  Notizbl. Bot. Gart. Berlin}{\b  9}: 282 (1925). Perennial c. 50 cm. Leaves with linear, obtuse, rather rigid lobes 2-3 mm long. Umbels with 10-20 subequal, divaricate rays. Bracts numerous, 2-3 times bifid, 1/3-1/2 as long as rays; bracteoles 6-8, narrowly linear, about equalling the pedicels. Fruit c. 1·5 mm.{\i  Dry grassland. N. Greece} ({\i }),{\i  Kikhlades and S.E. Bulgaria.} Bu Gr.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 73.                     Brachyapium}                  (Baillon) Maire
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc By †T.G. Tutin.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Leaves 2- to 3-pinnate. Sepals absent. Petals white, suborbicular; apex inflexed. Fruit broadly cordate-ovoid, subdidymous, distinctly compressed laterally. Ridges prominent, filiform. vittae solitary.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. B. dichotomum} (L.) Maire,{\i  Bull. Soc. Hist. Nat. Afr. Nord}{\b  23}: 186 (1932) ({\i Pimpinella dichotoma} L., {\i Tragiopsis dichotoma} (L.) Pomel). Slender annual up to 15 cm. Lower leaves 2- to 3-pinnate; lobes 3-10 mm, linear-lanceolate or linear, acute; petioles of upper cauline leaves with wide membranous margins.Rays 4-8, filiform, minutely scabrid. Bracts and bracteoles absent. Fruit c. 1 mm, broadly cordate or reniform, densely papillose or shortly hispid.{\i  C. & S.E. Spain.} Hs. ({\i N. Africa.})
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 74.                         Endressia}                       Gay
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc By †T.G. Tutin.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Leaf-segments digitately lobed. Sepals subulate, as long as stylopodium. Petals ovate-lanceolate, involute. Fruit ovoid; ridges prominent.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Literature: P. Rey,{\i  Doc. Cartes Vég., Sér. Pyrénées} {\b 3}({\b 3}): 1-30 (1945).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 Stem glabrous, except for a ring of hairs at base of umbel;
\par
     rays glabrous ............................................................................ {\b 1. pyrenaica}
\par
Stem pubescent below; rays puberulent on inner side .................. {\b 2. castellana}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. E. pyrenaica} (Gay ex DC.) Gay,{\i  Ann. Sci. Nat. }{\b 26}: 224 (1832). Almost glabrous perennial 5-40 cm. Stock stout, short. Stem terete, strongly striate, hollow, usually simple. Leaves mostly basal; segments 5-9, deeply palmately lobed, the lobes all very narrow, pinnatifid. Umbels small, dense, subglobose in fruit; rays 9-25, glabrous. Bracts usually absent, rarely 1-4,caducous; bracteoles 1-5, subulate. Sepals accrescent. Fruit 2-4 mm, ovoid.{\i  Subalpine grassland. • E. Pyrenees.} Ga Hs.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. E. castellana} Coincy,{\i  Jour. Bot.} ({\i Paris}) {\b 12}: 3 (1898). Like {\b 1} but stock slender, long; stem pubescent at base and near apex; leaf-segments 7-11, less deeply and more broadly lobed, some-times broadly ovate and merely dentate; petioles and veins more or less pubescent; rays puberulent on inner side; sepals not accrescent.{\i  Subalpine grassland.• N. Spain} ({\i Burgos to Pamplona}). Hs.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 75.                         Cnidium}                    Cusson
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc By †T.G. Tutin.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Leaves 2- to 4-pinnate. Sepals small. Petals white, obcordate; apex wide, inflexed. Fruit ovoid or subglobose, slightly compressed laterally. Ridges wide and prominent, the lateral a little more prominent than the others; vittae solitary.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 Petioles of cauline leaves sheathing the stem throughout their length;
\par
   leaf-segments sessile or subsessile; fruit c. 2 mm ........................ {\b 1. dubium}
\par
Petioles of cauline leaves sheathing the stem at their base only;
\par
   leaf-segments long-stalked; fruit c. 4 mm ............................... {\b 2. silaifolium}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. C. dubium} (Schkuhr) Thell. in Hegi, {\i Ill. Fl. Mitteleur.}{\b  5}({\b 2}) 1305 (1926). Nearly glabrous biennial or perennial 30-100 cm. Stem terete below, furrowed above, hollow. Leaves oblong in outline, 2- to 3-pinnate, the segments sessile or subsessile; lobes 5-20 × 1-2 mm, narrowly oblong, with serrulate, somewhat recurved margins, prominent midrib and whitish, acute apex; cauline leaves with often purplish petioles, sheathing the stem throughout their length. Rays 20-30, narrowly winged and puberulent on the angles. Bracts usually few or absent, subulate; bracteoles numerous, subulate, scabrid. Fruit 2-3 mm, subglobose. 2n = 20.{\i  C. Europe, extending to S. Sweden and E. Denmark; U.S.S.R.} Au Cz Da Ge Hu Po Rm Rs (N, B, C, W, E)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. C. silaifolium} (Jacq.) Simonkai,{\i  Enum. Fl. Transs.} 259 (1887) ({\i C. apioides} (Lam.) Sprengel). Glabrous perennial 60-120 cm. Stem striate, solid. Leaves triangular in outline, 2- to 4-pinnate, the segments long-stalked; lobes 4-10 × 0·5-2 mm, linear-lanceolate to obovate or oblanceolate, with scabrid margins; apex acute or obtuse, mucronate or rounded; petioles of cauline leaves stout, sheathing at base only. Rays 20-45, scabrid on the angles. Bracts usually few or absent, subulate; bracteoles numerous, subulate, almost smooth. Fruit 3·5-4 mm, ovoid.{\i  S. Europe, from S.E. France to Romania and Kriti.} Al Bu Cr Ga Gr He It Ju Rm Si [Cz].
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b silaifolium}: Leaves rather soft, 2- to 4-pinnate; lobes 3-5 times as long as wide, linear-lanceolate to narrowly obovate, acute or narrowed into a mucro.{\i  Throughout the range of the species}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b orientale} (Boiss.) Tutin,{\i  Feddes Repert.}{\b  74}: 31 (1967) ({\i C. orientale} Boiss.): Leaves rather rigid, 2- to 3-pinnate; lobes twice as long as wide, obovate or oblanceolate, rounded abruptly mucronate.{\i  Greece, N.W. Bulgaria, Romania.} ({\i S.W. Asia}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   {\b C. monnieri} (L.) Cusson,{\i  Mém. Soc. Roy. Méd.} ({\i Paris}) 1782: 280 (1782), an annual from E. Asia, with leaves resembling those of Aethusa cynapium and with ciliate bracteoles, was cultivated in botanic gardens in the 18th century and was formerly naturalized in some of the warmer parts of Europe, but has not been seen for many years.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 76.                        Selinum}                        L.
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc By †T.G. Tutin.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Leaves 2- to 3-pinnatisect. Sepals absent; Petals white, obcordate; apex inflexed. Fruit ovoid-oblong, compressed dorsally. Ridges winged, the marginal distinctly wider than the others; vittae solitary.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 Stem strongly angled, with narrowly winged angles;
\par
 cauline leaves several .................................................................. {\b 1. carvifolia}
\par
Stem striate, unwinged; cauline leaves 0-2 ................................. {\b 2. pyrenaeum}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. S. carvifolia} (L.) L.,{\i  Sp. Pl.} ed. 2, 350 (1762). Nearly glabrous perennial 30-100 cm. Stem solid, branched, leafy, strongly angled, the angles narrowly winged. Leaves 2- to 3-pinnate; lobes 3-10 mm, almost linear to ovate, sometimes lobed, finely serrulate, mucronate or aristate. Rays 5-33, puberulent on the angles. Bracts absent, or 1-2, caducous; bracteoles several, linear-lanceolate. Petals white. Fruit 3-4 mm. 2n = 22.{\i  Most of Europe except for much of the Mediterranean region.} Au Be Br Bu Cz Da Fe Ga Ge He Ho Hs Hu It Ju Lu No Po Rm Rs (N, B, C W, E) Su.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. S. pyrenaeum} (L.) Gouan,{\i  Obs. Bot.} 11 (1773) ({\i Angelica pyrenaea }(L.) Sprengel). Glabrous perennial 20-50 cm. Stem simple or slightly branched, striate; cauline leaves 0-2. Basal leaves 2- to 3-pinnatisect; lobes linear-lanceolate to linear, cuspidate. Rays 3-9, stout, very unequal. Bracts absent; bracteoles
\par

\par
355}
\par