{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}
\pard\f0\fs28\li200 6 Stem up to 40 cm; sheaths of leaves narrow; fruit 6 mm ................... {\b 5. nuda}
\par 6 Stem 80-150 cm; sheaths of leaves broad; fruit 10 mm ............. {\b 6. orientalis}
\par 5 Umbels with 1-7 rays, proliferating
\par 7 Fruit 8-12 mm; robust plant up to 150 cm ................................... {\b 4. heuffelii}
\par 7 Fruit 4-5(-9) mm; slender plant 30-60 cm ..................................... {\b 8. caspica}
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. F. communis} L., {\i Sp. Pl. }246 (1753). Stem up to 200 cm or more, very robust. Leaves with conspicuous sheathing bases; lamina finely divided, with linear lobes up to 50 × 0·5-3 mm; margins not distinctly revolute. Upper leaves of the inflorescence progressively reduced to conspicuous sheathing bases only. Terminal umbel more or less sessile, surrounded by smaller lateral umbels on long peduncles, which may themselves have secondary lateral umbels. Bracts 0; bracteoles few, linear-lanceolate, deciduous. Terminal umbels with 20-40 rays. Fruit c. 15 mm.{\i  Mediterranean region}. Al Bl Co Cr Ga Gr Hs It Ju Sa Si Tu.
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b communis}: Leaf-lobes not more than 1 mm wide, green on both surfaces. {\i Throughout the range of the species}.
\par
\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b glauca} (L.) Rouy & Camus,{\i  Fl. Fr.}{\b  7}: 398 (1901) ({\i F. glauca} L.): Leaf-lobes up to 3 mm wide, bright green above and distinctly glaucous beneath.{\i  Almost throughout the range of the species}.
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. F. tingitana} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 247 (1753). Like {\b 1} but leaf-lobes not more than 10 mm, with the margins distinctly revolute, the ultimate lobes partly united to one another.{\i  S. & S.E. Spain; Portugal.} Hs Lu. ({\i North Africa}.)
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 3. F. sadlerana} Ledeb., {\i Fl. Ross.}{\b  2}: 300 (1844). Stem up to 150(-200) cm, robust. Leaves finely divided, with conspicuous sheathing bases; lobes up to 30 × 3 mm, linear, somewhat scabrid on the margins and veins beneath. Umbels with up to 12 rays; partial umbels with 7-13 flowers. Bracts and bracteoles 0-1. Fruit 7-10 mm. 2n = 22. {\i Dry, rocky places. N. & C. Hungary, S.E. Czechoslovakia, W.C. Romania.} Cz Hu Rm.
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 4. F. heuffelii} Griseb. ex Heuffel,{\i  Flora} ({\i Regensb}.){\b  36}: 623 (1853). Stem up to 150 cm, robust. Leaves with smaller sheathing bases than in 3. Lamina finely divided; lobes 2-7(-9) × 1-1·5 mm, oblong-linear, at first somewhat pubescent, becoming glabrous. Umbels with 4-7 rays, proliferating; partial umbels with 10-15 flowers. Bracts and bracteoles 0. Fruit 8-12 mm.{\i  Dry, rocky slopes; calcicole. • W. Bulgaria, N.E. Jugoslavia, S.W. Romania}. Bu Ju Rm.
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 5. F. nuda} Sprengel, {\i Sp. Umb.} 81 (1818). Stem up to 40 cm, relatively slender. Leaves glabrous, glaucous, 3- to 4-pinnate; lobes up to 3 mm, remote and deeply cut. Leaf-bases sheathing but narrow. Umbels with 10-15 rays; partial umbels with c. 15 flowers. Bracts and bracteoles 0. Fruit c. 6 mm.{\i  Saline clays. S.E. Russia} ({\i Lower Volga}). Rs (E). ({\i W.C. Asia}.)
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 6. F. orientalis} L.,{\i  Sp. Pl.} 247 (1753). Stem 80-150 cm. Leaves 4-pinnate; lobes c. 5 mm, narrowly linear. Leaf-bases well developed and sheathing. Umbels with c. 10 rays; partial umbels with 10-15 flowers. Fruit c. 10 mm.{\i  Dry grassland. S. Ukraine; one station in S.E. Bulgaria.} Bu Rs (W, K).
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 7. F. tatarica} Fischer ex Sprengel,{\i  Pugillus}{\b  1}: 27 (1813). Stem slender, less than 40 cm. Leaves 3-pinnate or -ternate; lobes up to 90 × 3 mm, narrowly linear. Umbels with 4-7 rays; partial umbels with c. 10 flowers. Bracts and bracteoles 0, or the latter represented by a few minute scales. Fruit 8-9 mm.{\i  Saline soils. E. Ukraine, S.E. Russia.} Rs (C, W, E).
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 8. F. caspica} Bieb.,{\i  Fl. Taur.-Cauc. }{\b 1}: 220 (1808). Stem 360 cm. Leaves 3- to 4-pinnate, with short, closely crowded lobes. Umbels with (1-)3-6(-8) rays, proliferating; partial umbels with 8-10 flowers. Fruit 4-5(-9) mm.{\i  Dry, saline soils. S. & E. Ukraine, S.E. Russia.} Rs (C, W, K, E).
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 87.                           Ferulago}                      Koch
\par
\pard\f0\fs24\qc By J.F.M. Cannon.
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28 Leaves 2- to 3(-4)-pinnate with filiform to linear-lanceolate lobes. Bracts and bracteoles well-developed and usually conspicuous. Sepals minute. Petals yellow. Fruit strongly compressed dorsally, with more or less well-developed lateral wings and filiform to distinctly winged dorsal ridges; vittae numerous.
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Nodes very conspicuously swollen ................................................ {\b 1. nodosa}
\par 1 Nodes not conspicuously swollen
\par 2 Leaves elliptical to almost linear in outline, widest near the middle
\par 3 Leaf-lobes linear; fruit with acute, filiform dorsal ridges ........... {\b 8. sylvatica}
\par 3 Leaf-lobes setaceous; fruit with conspicuously winged    dorsal ridges .................................................................................. {\b 9. sartorii}
\par 2 Leaves triangular in outline, widest at the base
\par 4 Leaf-lobes elongate, linear ........................................................ {\b 2. thyrsiflora}
\par 4 Leaf-lobes setaceous or short and linear
\par 5 Leaf-lobes finely setaceous; fruit ovate-lanceolate .............. {\b 3. asparagifolia}
\par 5 Leaf-lobes short, linear; fruit narrowly elliptic-oblong to
\par  narrowly obovate ..................................................... ({\b 4-7}).{\b  campestris} group
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. F. nodosa} (L.) Boiss., {\i Diagn. Pl. Or. Nov.}{\b  2}({\b 10}): 37 (1849). Erect, glabrous perennial c. 60 cm. Stems very conspicuously swollen at the nodes. Leaves triangular in outline; lobes shortly linear. Bracts and bracteoles ovate-lanceolate. Fruit 8-10 mm, with narrow, somewhat undulate lateral wings and narrow dorsal wings. •{\i  Aegean region and S. part of Balkan peninsula, extending westward to Sicilia. }Al Cr Gr Si.
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. F. thyrsiflora} (Sibth. & Sm.) Koch, {\i Nova Acta Acad. Leop.Carol. }{\b 12}({\b 1}): 98 (1824). Robust, glabrous perennial. Leaves triangular in outline; lobes elongate, linear. Umbels closely aggregated into a complex, thyrsoid panicle. Bracts and bracteoles linear-lanceolate. Fruit c. 8 mm, narrowly elliptical, with narrow lateral wings and obtuse, filiform dorsal ridges.{\i  Mountain rocks. • Kriti.} Cr.
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 3. F. asparagifolia} Boiss., {\i Ann. Sci. Nat.} ser. 3 (Bot.), {\b 1}: 321 (1844). Erect, glabrous perennial up to 250 cm. Leaves triangular-ovate in outline; lobes setaceous. Bracts and bracteoles lanceolate to linear, often caducous when fully mature. Fruit 9-12 × 5 mm, broadly ovate-lanceolate with narrow lateral wings and filiform dorsal ridges.{\i  Damp, shady places. Karpathos.} Cr. ({\i S. & W. Anatolia}).
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28    ({\b 4-7}).{\b  F. campestris} group. Perennial. Stem up to 200 cm. Leaves up to 60 cm, triangular-ovate in outline; lobes linear or filiform. Bracts and bracteoles usually lanceolate, conspicuous. Fruit 10-12 mm, elliptic-oblong to narrowly obovate; lateral wings very well developed; dorsal ridges slender, obtuse.
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28   A complex of closely related species, all but one of which are confined in Europe to the Iberian peninsula.
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Stem angled, strongly sulcate; plant dark green
\par 2 Leaf-lobes short; dorsal ridges of fruit narrowly winged .................. {\b 5. lutea}
\par 2 Leaf-lobes usually elongate; dorsal ridges of fruit
\par  filiform, unwinged ..................................................................... {\b 4. campestris}
\par
\par 359}
\par