{\rtf1\ansi \deff4\deflang1033{\fonttbl{\f4\froman\fcharset0\fprq2 Times New Roman;}}{\colortbl;\red0\green0\blue0;\red0\green0\blue255;\red0\green255\blue255;\red0\green255\blue0;\red255\green0\blue255;\red255\green0\blue0;\red255\green255\blue0;\red255\green255\blue255;\red0\green0\blue128;\red0\green128\blue128;\red0\green128\blue0;\red128\green0\blue128;\red128\green0\blue0;\red128\green128\blue0;\red128\green128\blue128;\red192\green192\blue192;}{\stylesheet{\widctlpar \f4\fs20\lang2057 \snext0 Normal;}{\*\cs10 \additive Default Paragraph Font;}}{\info{\author dddd}{\operator dddd}{\creatim\yr1998\mo11\dy5\hr13\min3}{\revtim\yr1998\mo11\dy5\hr13\min4}{\version2}{\edmins1}{\nofpages4}{\nofwords1050}{\nofchars5986}{\*\company  }{\vern57431}}\widowctrl\ftnbj\aenddoc\hyphcaps0 \fet0\sectd \linex0 {\*\pnseclvl1\pnucrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl2\pnucltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl3\pndec\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl4\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl5\pndec\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl6\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl7\pnlcrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl8\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl9\pnlcrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}
\pard\plain \ \f4\fs20\lang2057 {\fs28  }{\b\fs28 1. C. tataricum}{\fs28  Hoffm.,}{\i\fs28  Gen. Umb.}{\fs28  ed. 2, 185 (1816) (}{\i\fs28 C. vaginatum}{\fs28  Thell.; incl. }{\i\fs28 C. boreale}{\fs28  Schischkin). Glabrous perennial 50-150 cm. Lower leaves long-petiolate, triangular-rhombic in outline, 2- to 3-pinnate; lobes of lower leaves 3-5(-20) mm, oblong-lanceolate to linear, often pinnatifid; upper leaves with greatly inflated petioles, lamina small. Rays (7-)15-30. Bracts few or absent; bracteoles numerous, narrowly subulate, finely papillose-serrulate. Fruit 5 mm.}{\i\fs28  E. & E.C. Europe, southwards to the S. Carpathians and westwards to arctic Norway and C. Austria.}{\fs28  Au Cz Fe No Po Rm Rs (N, B, C, W, E).
\par 
\par }
\pard \qc\ {\fs28  }{\b\fs28 80.                    Angelica}{\fs28                        L.
\par (Incl. }{\i\fs28 Archangelica}{\fs28  N. M. Wolf, }{\i\fs28 Ostericum}{\fs28  Hoffm.)
\par }{\fs24 By J.F.M. Cannon.
\par 
\par }
\pard \ {\fs28 Leaves 2- to 3-pinnate or -ternate; lobes broad. Calyx-teeth usually inconspicuous, but sometimes well developed. Petals white, pinkish, greenish or rarely yellowish, lanceolate; apex more or less incurved. Fruit ovate or oblong, strongly compressed dorsally. Lateral ridges forming wide wings which are not closely appressed at the margins, and are frequently more or less undulate; dorsal ridges usually well developed; vittae variable in number.
\par 
\par }
\pard \li200\ {\fs28 1 Calyx-teeth broadly ovate, whitish and well-developed .............. }{\b\fs28 1. palustris}{\fs28 
\par 1 Calyx-teeth minute or 0
\par 2 Petals yellowish ................................................................................ }{\b\fs28 6. laevis}{\fs28 
\par 2 Petals white, greenish or pinkish
\par 3 Leaf-lobes (especially the terminal ones) usually
\par   strongly decurrent on the rhachis
\par 4 Fruit with thick, corky wings ................................................. }{\b\fs28 3. archangelica}{\fs28 
\par 4 Fruit with \'b1 membranous wings
\par 5 Wings of fruit distinctly wider than the mericarps ..................... }{\b\fs28 2. sylvestris}{\fs28 
\par 5 Wings of fruit not wider than the mericarps }{\b\fs28 5. razulii}{\fs28 
\par 3 Leaf-lobes not or only slightly decurrent on the rhachis
\par 6 Fruit with thick, corky wings; fleshy maritime plant .............. }{\b\fs28 8. pachycarpa}{\fs28 
\par 6 Fruit with \'b1 thin, membranous wings
\par 7 Wings of fruit distinctly wider than the mericarps ..................... }{\b\fs28 2. sylvestris}{\fs28 
\par 7 Wings of fruit usually narrower than or about as wide
\par   as the mericarps
\par 8 Rays puberulent ....................................................................... }{\b\fs28 4. heterocarpa}{\fs28 
\par 8 Rays glabrous ...................................................................... }{\b\fs28 7. angelicastrum}{\fs28 
\par 
\par }
\pard \ {\fs28    }{\b\fs28 1. A. palustris}{\fs28  (Besser) Hoffm., }{\i\fs28 Gen. Umb.}{\fs28  174 (1814) (}{\i\fs28 Ostericum palustre}{\fs28  (Besser) Besser). Biennial to perennial up to 120 cm. Leaves 2- to 3-pinnate; sheathing bases well-developed; lobes coarsely serrate; base frequently oblique. Umbels terminal and lateral, with numerous rays. Bracts 0-3, caducous; bracteoles numerous, linear-lanceolate, with a whitish margin. Sepals well developed, broadly ovate, whitish. Petals white. Fruit 5-6 mm, ovate-elliptical, with prominent dorsal ridges. }{\i\fs28 Wet places. E. & C. Europe, northwards to Estonia, westwards to C. Germany, and extending southwards to Crna Gora.}{\fs28  ?Au ?Bu Cz Ge Hu Ju Rm Rs (B, C, W, E).
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 2. A. sylvestris}{\fs28  L.,}{\i\fs28  Sp. Pl.}{\fs28  251 (1753) (}{\i\fs28 A. illyrica}{\fs28  K. Mal\'fd,}{\i\fs28  A. elata}{\fs28  Velen.,}{\i\fs28  A. brachyradia}{\fs28  Freyn). Erect, often robust perennial up to 200 cm or more. Stems usually tinged with purple. Leaves 2- to 3-pinnate, up to 60 cm; lobes obliquely oblong-ovate, acutely serrate, the terminal usually simple. Petioles strongly sheathing at the base. Upper leaves reduced to inflated sheaths, which more or less enclose the developing umbels. Rays numerous, puberulent. Bracts 0 or few, caducous; bracteoles setaceous. Sepals minute. Petals white to pinkish. Fruit 4-5 mm, ovate; dorsal ridges obtuse; wings wider than the mericarps, rather membranous and somewhat undulate. 2n = 22.}{\i\fs28  Damp or shady places. Almost throughout Europe.}{\fs28  All except Az Bl Cr Rs (K) ?Sa Sb.
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 3. A. archangelica}{\fs28  L., }{\i\fs28 Sp. Pl.}{\fs28  250 (1753) (}{\i\fs28 Archangelica officinalis}{\fs28  Hoffm.). Like }{\b\fs28 2}{\fs28  but stems less often tinged with purple; leaf-lobes more irregular in outline and more jaggedly cut, often distinctly decurrent on the rhachis; terminal lobe usually 3-lobed; petals greenish-white to cream; fruit with rather thick, corky wings. }{\i\fs28 Damp places. N. & E. Europe, westwards to the Netherlands and Iceland and southwards to C. Ukraine; often cultivated elsewhere for its aromatic petioles, used in confectionery and for a liqueur; frequently naturalized.}{\fs28  Cz Da Fa Fe Ge Ho Is No Rs (N,B,C,W,E)Su [Au Be Br Bu Ga He Hu It Ju Rm].
\par 
\par   (}{\b\fs28 a}{\fs28 ) Subsp. }{\b\fs28 archangelica}{\fs28  (incl. }{\i\fs28 Archangelica decurrens}{\fs28  Ledeb.): Petals greenish to cream. Bracteoles about as long as pedicels. Fruit 6-8 \'d7 4-5 mm, nearly oblong; dorsal ribs prominent and acute. Odour pleasant and aromatic. 2n = 22.}{\i\fs28  Almost throughout the range of the species; includes the cultivated plant.}{\fs28 
\par   (}{\b\fs28 b}{\fs28 ) Subsp. }{\b\fs28 litoralis}{\fs28  (Fries) Thell. in Hegi,}{\i\fs28  Ill. Fl. Mitteleur.}{\b\fs28  5}{\fs28 (}{\b\fs28 2}{\fs28 ): 1342 (1926): Petals greenish-white. Bracteoles about half as long as pedicels. Fruit 5-6 \'d7 3\'b75-4\'b75 mm, more elliptical than in (}{\b\fs28 a}{\fs28 ); dorsal ribs not prominent, obtuse. Odour pungent. 2n = 22.}{\i\fs28  N. Europe, usually on sea-shores}{\fs28 .
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 4. A. heterocarpa}{\fs28  Lloyd, }{\i\fs28 Bull. Soc. Bot. Fr.}{\b\fs28  6}{\fs28 : 709 (1859). Almost glabrous, robust perennial up to 200 cm. Leaves 2-pinnate; lobes up to 10 \'d7 3 cm, ovate-lanceolate, sometimes oblique at the base and slightly decurrent; margins more or less regularly serrate and slightly cartilaginous. Rays numerous, puberulent. Bracts 0 or few, linear; bracteoles several, about as long as the pedicels. Partial umbels with numerous flowers; pedicels up to 10 mm. Petals white; apex distinctly incurved. Fruit 4-6 \'d7 2-3 mm, oblong. wings usually narrower than the mericarp, but apparently rather variable and sometimes wider.}{\i\fs28  Muddy banks of tidal rivers. \bullet  S.W. France.}{\fs28  Ga.
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 5. A. razulii}{\fs28  Gouan,}{\i\fs28  Obs. Bot.}{\fs28  13 (1773). Like }{\b\fs28 4}{\fs28  but leaf-lobes narrowly lanceolate, the upper strongly decurrent on the rhachis; petals white to pinkish-white; apex strongly inflexed; fruit c. 8 mm, ovate-oblong; wings about as wide as the mericarp.}{\i\fs28  Meadows and pastures. \bullet  Pyrenees, N.W. Spain.}{\fs28  Ga Hs.
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 6. A. laevis}{\fs28  Gay ex Av\'e9-Lall.,}{\i\fs28  Ind. Sem. Horti Petrop.}{\b\fs28  9}{\fs28 : 58 (1843). Robust, erect perennial. Leaves 2- to 3-pinnate, glabrous above but with short hairs on the veins beneath; lobes narrowly ovate-lanceolate; margin serrate; teeth mucronate. Rays c. 10 cm, numerous, very slightly puberulent. Bracts 0; bracteoles several, linear-subulate, unequal and shorter than the pedicels. Petals yellowish, with an inflexed apex. Fruit 7 \'d7 4\'b75 mm, oblong; dorsal ridges prominent and acute; wings well developed, about as wide as the mericarps.}{\i\fs28  Banks of streams. \bullet  N.W. Spain; Portugal.}{\fs28  Hs Lu.
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 7. A. angelicastrum}{\fs28  (Hoffmanns. & Link) Coutinho,}{\i\fs28  Fl. Port.}{\fs28  455 (1913). Robust, erect perennial. Leaves 2(-3)-pinnate; lobes narrowly lanceolate, biserrate, somewhat oblique at the base and sometimes slightly decurrent on the rhachis, with numerous short, rather stiff hairs on the veins beneath. Rays rather unequal, glabrous. Bracts 0(-1?); bracteoles linear, numerous. Fruit with prominent, acute dorsal ridges; wings about as wide as the mericarp. \bullet }{\i\fs28  C. Portugal}{\fs28  (}{\i\fs28 Serra de Estrela}{\fs28 ). Lu.
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 8. A. pachycarpa}{\fs28  Lange, }{\i\fs28 Descr. Icon. Ill.}{\fs28  7 (1864). Robust, fleshy perennial up to 100 cm. Leaves 2- to 3-pinnate. Lateral lobes broadly elliptical; terminal lobes lanceolate, often 3-lobed;
\par 
\par 357}
\par }