{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 33. B. fruticescens} L., {\i Cent. Pl.}{\b  1}: 9 (1755). Much-branched, glaucescent, small shrub up to 100 cm. Stem flexuous, the upper part becoming hard and spinose after fruiting. Leaves 2-7 cm, subacute, widest above the middle. Umbels forming a panicle. Rays 2-5(-10), not spinescent; bracts 1-3 mm, recurved at apex, apparently veinless; bracteoles narrowly triangular, recurved at apex; pedicels 1-2 mm. Fruit 3-4 mm, ovoid.{\i  E. & C. Spain.} Hs [Ga].

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 34. B. dianthifolium} Guss.,{\i  Fl. Sic. Prodr., Suppl.} 71 (1832). Small shrub with leaves crowded at the apex of the branches and with herbaceous, almost leafless flowering stems up to 40 cm. Leaves 3-6 cm, linear-lanceolate, often somewhat falcate, widest above the middle, cucullate at apex; veins 3-5, without visible small veins between them. Umbels forming a raceme. Rays 3-8, rather stout. Bracts 2-4 mm, 5, oblong-lanceolate, rather fleshy, 3-veined; bracteoles similar but smaller; pedicels c. 1 mm. Fruit 4-5 mm, oblong; ridges slender, prominent.{\i  Calcareous rocks. • N. side of island of Marettimo, near Sicilia. }Si.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 35. B. barceloi} Cosson ex Willk.,{\i  Linnaea}{\b  40}: 83 (1876). Like {\b 34} but leaves 7-18 cm, widest below the middle, acute; rays 5-8(-12); bracts 3-6 mm; pedicels 2-4 mm. •{\i  Islas Baleares.} Bl.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 36. B. acutifolium} Boiss.,{\i  Elenchus} 47 (1838). Perennial up to 100 cm, woody at the base. Leaves linear or linear-lanceolate; lower up to 8 cm, with 7-13 veins, without visible cross-veins; upper up to 18 cm. Rays 3-10, slender. Bracts 4-5 mm, 5, linear, acute, 3- to 5-veined; bracteoles subulate, 3-veined. Fruit c. 3 mm. •{\i  S. Portugal} ({\i near Odemira}), {\i S. Spain} ({\i Sierra de Estepona}). Hs Lu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Sect. CORIACEA Godron. Shrubs. Leaves evergreen, pinnately veined, with a well-marked midrib.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 37. B. foliosum} Salzm. ex DC.,{\i  Prodr.}{\b  4}: 133 (1830). Small shrub up to 100 cm. Lower leaves linear-lanceolate, shortly petiolate, upper subcordate-ovate, acuminate, sessile. Rays 2-3. Bracts much shorter than rays, 2-3, ovate; bracteoles 5-6, shortly connate at base, similar to the bracts. Fruit c. 3 mm.{\i  S.W. Spain} ({\i near Algeciras and Gibraltar}). Hs. ({\i Morocco}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 38. B. gibraltarium} Lam.,{\i  Encycl. Méth. Bot.}{\b  1}: 520 (1785) ({\i B. verticale} Ortega). Small shrub up to 200 cm. Leaves lanceolate, very shortly petiolate, held more or less vertically; primary lateral veins not reaching the margin. Rays 10-30, rather stout. Bracts 5-7, deflexed, persistent, lanceolate to ovate, with up to 12 subparallel veins; bracteoles much shorter than the pedicels, 5, ovate or suborbicular, 5- to 7-veined. Fruit 7-8 mm; ridges wide, narrowly winged.{\i  C. & S. Spain.} Hs.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 39. B. fruticosum} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 238 (1753). Shrub up to 250 cm. Leaves elliptic-oblong to obovate, subsessile, usually erecto-patent; primary lateral veins reaching the margin. Rays 5-25, stout. Bracts 5-6, deflexed, deciduous, elliptical, ovate or obovate, with 5-7 veins and conspicuous cross-veins; bracteoles shorter than the pedicels, 5-6, deciduous, broadly obovate, 4- to 5(-7)-veined. Fruit 7-8 mm; ridges slender, narrowly winged.{\i  S. Europe.} Co Ga Gr Hs It Lu Sa Si [Br Rs (K)].
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 57.                   Trinia}                    Hoffm.
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc By J.F.M. Cannon.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Dioecious (rarely monoecious) biennials or perennials, sometimes monocarpic. Leaves usually 2-pinnate, with linear lobes, but sometimes further divided. Bracts and bracteoles present or absent. Sepals absent or minute. Petals white or yellowish; apex incurved. Fruit ovoid, somewhat compressed laterally; ridges often prominent and rounded; vittae present.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   In some species the secondary ridges are conspicuously developed, in others the primary ridges form greatly contorted lobes covering the whole surface of the fruit.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Secondary ridges not developed on the fruit
\par
2 Bracteoles 3-6
\par
3 Fruit scabrid with small spines .................................................... {\b 6. muricata}
\par
3 Fruit glabrous
\par
4 Plant not more than 10 cm .............................................................. {\b 1. glauca}
\par
4 Plant more than 15 cm
\par
5 Only some flowers in each umbel of female plant setting
\par
  fruit; fruit c. 3 mm, with well-developed, acute ridges ............... {\b 5. kitaibelii}
\par
5 Almost all flowers of female plant setting fruit; fruit
\par
  c. 2 mm, with rounded ridges with shallow grooves between
\par
  them ........................................................................................ {\b 4. ramosissima}
\par
2 Bracteoles absent
\par
6 Fruit scabrid-pubescent .................................................................. {\b 3. hispida}
\par
6 Fruit glabrous
\par
7 Lobes of leaves 20-70 × 0·5 mm, very narrowly linear;
\par
  plants often rather erect and fastigiate ...................................... {\b 2. multicaulis}
\par
7 Lobes of leaves 5-30 × c. 1 mm, narrowly linear; plants
\par
  often rather diffuse and spreading ................................................... {\b 1. glauca}
\par
1 Secondary ridges developed, or fruit covered with  sinuous lobes
\par
8 Fruit covered with sinuous lobes, resembling the
\par
  convolutions of the brain ........................................................ {\b 9. crithmifolia}
\par
8 Fruit with obvious ridges
\par
9 Primary ridges prominent and smooth; secondary ridges
\par
  rounded ................................................................................... {\b 7. dalechampii}
\par
9 Primary ridges undulate-verrucose; secondary ridges
\par
  rugose ........................................................................................ {\b 8. guicciardii}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. T. glauca} (L.) Dumort.,{\i  Fl. Belg.} 78 (1827) ({\i T. stankovii} Schischkin,{\i  T. vulgaris} DC.). Glabrous, glaucous perennial up to 50 cm. Stock with abundant fibres. Stem angled, flexuous, repeatedly branched, the lower branches often nearly as long as the main stem. Lower leaves 2- to 3-pinnate, with 3-5 segments; lobes 5-30 mm, usually longer in the female than in the male plants. Bracts and bracteoles absent or few. Fruit 2-3 mm.{\i  W., C. & S. Europe, northwards to S. England.} Al Au Br Bu ?Co Cz Ga Ge Gr He Hs Hu It Ju Rm Rs (K) Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b glauca}: Leaf-lobes often rather long, obscurely veined; bracts and bracteoles absent; pedicels up to five times as long as the ripe fruit.{\i  Throughout the range of the species.}
\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b carniolica} (A. Kerner ex Janchen) H. Wolff in Engler,{\i  Pflanzenreich}{\b  43} ({\b IV. 228}): 182 (1910): Leaf-lobes short, with prominent midrib; bracts and bracteoles usually present; pedicels as long as or slightly longer than the ripe fruit. {\i Appennini, mountains of W. Jugoslavia, Albania and C. Romania}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   It seems likely that{\b  T. dufourii} DC.,{\i  Prodr.}{\b  4}: 104 (1830), recorded from E. Spain, is only a minor variant of {\b 1}. The only differential character appears to be that in {\i T. dufourii} the upper cauline leaves are without a lamina.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. T. multicaulis} (Poiret) Schischkin,{\i  Fl. URSS}{\b  16}: 352 (1950) ({\i T. henningii} Hoffm.). Erect, glabrous herb, profusely branched especially in the upper part. Stock with abundant fibres. Leaves 1- to 2-pinnate; lobes 20-70 mm, very narrowly linear. Bracteoles absent. Umbels of male plants arranged in verticillate racemes; rays 5-10. Umbels of female plants with 4-8 unequal rays. Fruit 3-4 mm, oblong-ovoid, glabrous; ridges thick and prominent. •{\i  E. Europe, from E. Romania to E.C. Russia}. Rm Rs (C, W, E).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 3. T. hispida} Hoffm., {\i Gen. Umb.} 94 (1814) ({\i T. hoffmannii }Bieb.). Erect herb up to 35 cm, often much-branched. Stem glab-
\par

\par
350}
\par