{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 2 Leaves glabrous .......................................................................... {\b 1. minimum}
\par
2 Leaves pubescent, at least beneath
\par
3 Leaves pinnatisect, not suborbicular in outline,
\par
  with 2-3 pairs of segments ........................................................ {\b 2. austriacum}
\par
3 Leaves simple or ternatisect, ± suborbicular in outline
\par
4 Leaves 3-lobed or ternatisect; stem often glandular pubescent
\par
  .................................................................................................... {\b 3. orphanidis}
\par
4 Leaves palmately 5- to 7-lobed or almost entire;
\par
  stem not glandular-pubescent ................................................... {\b 4. carpaticum}
\par
1 Stems at least 4 mm in diameter, usually more than 50 cm high;
\par
  at least the larger umbels more than 10 cm in diameter, with 12-150 rays
\par
5 Leaves pinnately divided into small segments not more
\par
  than 3 cm; rhachis and petiolules slender ........................... {\b 6. ligusticifolium}
\par
5 Leaves simple, or divided into segments more than 3 cm;
\par
  rhachis and petiolules stout
\par
6 Vittae not or only slightly expanded at their lower
\par
  end, not more than 0·4 mm wide ...........................................{\b  5. sphondylium}
\par
6 Vittae conspicuously expanded at their lower end, up to 1 mm wide
\par
7 Leaves simple, densely white-tomentose beneath ........................ {\b 7. stevenii}
\par
7 Leaves ternatisect or pinnatisect, not white-tomentose beneath
\par
8 Plant 60-80 cm; umbels 10-12 cm in diameter; rays 15-20 ...... {\b 8. pubescens}
\par
8 Plant (170-)200-500 cm; larger umbels 20-50 cm in diameter;
\par
  rays more than 50 ............................................................ {\b 9. mantegazzianum}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. H. minimum} Lam.,{\i  Fl. Fr.}{\b  3}: 413 (1778). Rhizomatous perennial. Stem up to 30 cm, 1-2 mm in diameter, glabrous, or sometimes puberulent, above. Leaves resembling those of{\i  Corydalis bulbosa}, glabrous, 2-pinnatisect or 2-ternatisect; segments stipitate, divided into obovate or oblanceolate lobes up to 10 × 3 mm. Umbels up to 6(-9) cm in diameter; rays 3-6, glabrous or puberulent; bracts and bracteoles usually 0. Petals white or pinkish. Fruit 8-10 × 6-8·5 mm, broadly elliptical to suborbicular; vittae absent or very slender and inconspicuous.{\i  Calcareous screes. • Mountains of S.E. France.} Ga.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. H. austriacum} L., {\i Sp. Pl}. 249 (1753). Rhizomatous perennial. Stem up to 40(-65) cm, 3 mm in diameter, glabrous below, usually pubescent above. Leaves resembling those of {\i Pastinaca sativa}, pinnate with 2-3 pairs of segments; petiole, rhachis and both surfaces of segments rather sparsely pubescent, rarely glabrous; segments sessile (rarely the lowermost shortly stipitate), ovate, sometimes lobed near the base, serrate or crenate. Umbels up to 9 cm in diameter; rays (5-)6-13(-15), pubescent or puberulent; bracts and bracteoles usually present, linear or triangular. Fruit 7-11 × 6-9 mm, usually broadly obovate; vittae slender. 2n = 22.{\i  • E. Alps; one station in C. Switzerland.} Au Ge He It Ju.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b austriacum}: Rays (5-)7-13(-15). Petals white, the outer (3-)5-8(-8·5) mm, with each lobe 0·9-2(-2·3) mm wide.{\i  N.E. Alps, C. Switzerland}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b siifolium} (Scop.) Nyman,{\i  Consp.} 290 (1879): Rays (5-)6-10(-12). Petals pink or red, the outer ones (5-)6-10(-12) mm with each lobe (1·3-)1·8-3·5(-4) mm wide. {\i S.E. Alps}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 3. H. orphanidis} Boiss., {\i Fl. Or.}{\b  2}: 1041 (1872). Stem up to 50 cm, up to 3 mm in diameter, pubescent and sometimes glandular. Leaves simple and 3-lobed, or ternatisect, rather coarsely crenate. Umbels c. 5 cm in diameter, with 6-9 rays. Outer petals of each umbel c. 4 mm, somewhat larger than the inner. Fruit c. 10 × 9 mm, broadly obovate to suborbicular; vittae slender.{\i  • Macedonia.} ?Gr Ju.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 4. H. carpaticum} Porc.,{\i  Fl. Naseud.} 144 (1881). Rhizomatous perennial. Stem 20-30(-50) cm, up to 3 mm in diameter, with patent hairs. Leaves suborbicular in outline, undivided to deeply palmately 5- to 7-lobed, cordate, crenate to serrate. Umbels 5-7 cm in diameter, with 5-15(-17) rays. Outer petals of each umbel c. 4 mm. Fruit 6-7 × 5 mm, broadly obovate to suborbicular; vittae rather slender. •{\i  E. Carpathians. }Rm Rs (w).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 5. H. sphondylium} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 249 (1753). Biennial or shortlived perennial. Stem up to 250(-350) cm, 4-20 mm in diameter, glabrous to strongly hispid. Leaves varying from simple and shallowly palmately lobed to pinnate with 5(-9) crenate to serrate segments, sparsely pubescent (at least on the veins) to densely hispid or softly white-tomentose beneath, subglabrous to more or less sparsely hispid above. Umbels up to 20 cm in diameter, with 15-45 rays; bracts few or 0; bracteoles usually present. Ovary glabrous to pubescent or hispid; fruit (5-)7-10(-12) × (4-)6-8(-10) mm, elliptical or obovate to suborbicular, glabrous; vittae rather slender, up to 0·4 mm wide. 2n = 22.{\i  Throughout Europe except the extreme north and much of the Mediterranean region.} All except Az Bl Co Cr Fa Is Sa Sb.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  An extremely variable species, many variants of which have been given specific rank. The main geographical variants are recognized below as subspecies, but there appears to be considerable intergradation between them. Investigation of taxonomy and distribution is hampered by inadequacy of available herbarium material, and good annotated specimens are required. Some variants having short setae on the ovary may also merit subspecific rank, but further investigation is required.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Variants with leaf-lobes very long and narrow occur in several subspecies and are probably best regarded as formae (see Gawlowska,{\i  Fragm. Fl. Geobot.}{\b  7}: 3-39 (1961)).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Petals white or rarely pinkish, outer radiate
\par
2 Leaves ternate or pinnate, at least the terminal segment
\par
  with a distinct petiolule
\par
3 Larger cauline leaves usually ternate .......................... ({\b d}) subsp. {\b montanum}
\par
3 Larger cauline leaves nearly always with 5(-9) segments
\par
4 Upper branches usually not whorled; leaves usually ±
\par
  coarsely hispid or pubescent beneath ....................... ({\b e}) subsp. {\b sphondylium}
\par
4 Upper branches whorled; leaves softly villous beneath,
\par
  with long, soft hairs particularly on the veins ........... ({\b f}) subsp. {\b verticillatum}
\par
2 Leaves not divided into separate segments, though often
\par
  deeply lobed and appearing ± digitate
\par
5 Lower leaves lobed to 1/3 or less, the lobes usually
\par
  rounded; commissural vittae very slender or 0 ................ ({\b a}) subsp. {\b alpinum}
\par
5 Lower leaves lobed to ½ or more, the lobes usually
\par
  acute or acuminate; commissural vittae conspicuous
\par
6 Plant usually less than 130 cm; leaves usually less than
\par
  30 cm, with 5-7 usually acute lobes, which are simple or
\par
  with few small secondary lobes ................................. ({\b b}) subsp. {\b pyrenaicum}
\par
6 Plant more than 130 cm, robust; leaves up to 50 cm with 7-9 ±
\par
  long, acute lobes, which are usually again conspicuously
\par
  acutely lobed ......................................................... ({\b c}) subsp. {\b transsilvanicum}
\par
1 Petals ± greenish or yellowish, outer not or scarcely radiate
\par
7 Leaves not divided into segments, though often deeply lobed
\par
  and appearing digitate ......................................................... ({\b g}) subsp. {\b orsinii}
\par
7 Leaves ternate or pinnate, at least the terminal segment
\par
  with a distinct petiolule
\par
8 Larger cauline leaves usually with 5(-9) segments, each
\par
  divided into usually acute lobes ...................................... ({\b i}) subsp. {\b sibiricum}
\par
8 Larger cauline leaves usually ternate, each segment
\par
  divided into usually rounded or acuminate lobes ............ ({\b h}) subsp. {\b ternatum}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b alpinum} (L.) Bonnier & Layens,{\i  Fl. Fr.} 128 (1894) ({\i H. alpinum} L.,{\i  H. sphondylium} subsp.{\i  juranum} (Genty) Thell.): Stem sparsely setose to subglabrous below. Leaves simple, the lower suborbicular with 3-5 shallow, broadly rounded lobes,
\par

\par
365}
\par