{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b  96.                 Elaeoselinum}            Koch ex DC.
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc By †T.G. Tutin.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Leaves 3- to 5-pinnate. Sepals usually small. Petals yellowish or white, oblong, slightly emarginate to shallowly bifid; apex inflexed. Fruit orbicular, ovoid or oblong, somewhat compressed dorsally, with 4 wide lateral wings and unwinged or narrowly winged dorsal ridges; vittae solitary in the grooves and in the ridges.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Petals white ........................................................................... {\b 4. gummiferum}
\par
1 Petals yellow
\par
2 Lateral wings of mericarps extending much beyond the
\par
  top of the fruit .............................................................................. {\b 3. foetidum}
\par
2 Lateral wings of mericarps not or scarcely extending
\par
  beyond the top of the fruit
\par
3 Bracts and bracteoles, if present, few, linear-lanceolate
\par
  or setaceous ................................................................................ {\b 1. asclepium}
\par
3 Bracts and bracteoles numerous, lanceolate ........................... {\b 2. tenuifolium}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. E. asclepium} (L.) Bertol.,{\i  Fl. Ital.}{\b  3}: 383 (1838). almost glabrous perennial up to 130 cm. Stock with numerous coarse fibres. Stem solid, striate, rather slender, branched above. Basal leaves up to 40 cm, 3- to 5-pinnate; divisions often whorled; lobes 2-3 mm, filiform; petiole and rhachis somewhat pubescent; cauline leaves reduced to inflated petioles. Rays 8-25. Petals yellow. Fruit 8-15 mm, orbicular or ovate-oblong; mericarps with wide, whitish, shiny lateral wings.{\i  Mediterranean region.} Al Bl Gr Hs It Sa Si.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b asclepium}: Basal leaves horizontal; bracts and bracteoles absent or few, setaceous; dorsal ridges of fruit unwinged.{\i  From W. Italy and Sicilia to S.E. Greece}.
\par
  ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b meoides} (Desf.) Fiori,{\i  Nuov. Fl. Anal. Ital.}{\b  2}: 84 (1925) ({\i E. meoides} (Desf.) Koch ex DC.,{\i  E. millefolium }Boiss.): Basal leaves erect; bracts and bracteoles few, linear-lanceolate; dorsal ridges of fruit distinctly but narrowly winged.{\i  From Spain to S. Italy}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Plants from Spain and Islas Baleares are more or less intermediate between the two subspecies, but are generally assigned to subsp. ({\b b}).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. E. tenuifolium} (Lag.) Lange in Willk. & Lange,{\i  Prodr. Fl. Hisp.}{\b  3}: 26 (1874). Like {\b 1}({\b a}) but leaf-lobes lanceolate, rigid; rays 10-27; bracts and bracteoles numerous, lanceolate; fruit 8-10 mm; dorsal ridges of mericarps usually broadly winged.{\i  S. half of Iberian peninsula}. Hs Lu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 3. E. foetidum} (L.) Boiss., {\i Elenchus} 51 (1838). Erect perennial like {\b 1} in general appearance. Leaves 3-pinnate; lobes c. 10 mm, ovate in outline, usually 3-fid. Rays 10-20. Bracts 0-1; bracteoles numerous, setaceous. Petals yellow. Fruit 10-12 mm, ovoid-oblong; mericarps with wide lateral wings which extend beyond the top of the fruit, and narrow dorsal wings.{\i  S. Portugal, S.W. Spain.} Hs Lu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 4. E. gummiferum} (Desf.) Tutin, {\i Feddes Repert.}{\b  74}: 33 (1967). ({\i Margotia gummifera} (Desf.) Lange). Nearly glabrous perennial up to 120 cm. Leaves with inflated petioles and shortly hispid rhachis; basal leaves 3- to 4-pinnate, triangular in outline; lobes ovate in outline, toothed or pinnately lobed; cauline leaves with very small or no lamina. Rays 8-20. Bracts and bracteoles 6-9, linear-lanceolate. Petals white. Fruit 10-12 mm, ovoid-oblong; mericarps with wide lateral and narrow dorsal wings.{\i  C., S. & W. Spain, Portugal.} Hs Lu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 97.                        Guillonea}                       Cosson
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc By †T.G. Tutin.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Like{\i  Laserpitium} but young fruit densely tomentose; dorsal ridges prominent, widened at the top by the development of the pericarp.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. G. scabra} (Cav.) Cosson, {\i Not. Pl. Crit. }110 (1851). Pubescent perennial 30-120 mm. Stock with abundant fibres. Stem terete, striate, swollen at the nodes, branched above. Leaves mostly basal, 3-pinnate, triangular in outline, glaucescent and scabrid; lobes 5-20 mm, oblong-lanceolate or cuneate, lobed or dentate. Rays 5-15. Bracts numerous, linear-subulate, ciliate, eventually deflexed; bracteoles villous, about equalling the villous-tomentose pedicels. Petals white, villous beneath. Fruit c. 10 mm, densely tomentose between the wings when mature; wings glabrous, wider than the mericarp. •{\i  S. & E. Spain.} Hs.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 98.                          Laserpitium}                      L.
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc By †T.G. Tutin.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Leaves several times pinnate or ternate. Sepals conspicuous, ovate to subulate. Petals white, pinkish, pale yellow or greenish-yellow, obcordate; apex inflexed. Fruit ellipsoid or oblong, broadly ovoid or rectangular, terete or slightly compressed dorsally. Primary ridges inconspicuous, secondary winged,the lateral wings usually larger than the dorsal.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Leaf-lobes divided into numerous narrow lobes
\par
2 Rays 15 or more .............................................................................. {\b 9. halleri}
\par
2 Rays 7-9 ............................................................................. {\b 11. pseudomeum}
\par
1 Leaf-lobes entire, dentate or with few broad lobes
\par
3 Bracts not ciliate, often 0
\par
4 Leaf-lobes entire
\par
5 Rays 2-15 .......................................................................... {\b 6.  peucedanoides}
\par
5 Rays 20-50 .......................................................................................... {\b 1. siler}
\par
4 Leaf-lobes crenate to dentate
\par
6 Bracts of primary umbel numerous, persistent .......................... {\b 2. latifolium}
\par
6 Bracts of primary umbel 0-5, caducous
\par
7 Leaf-lobes suborbicular, shallowly crenate-dentate;
\par
  fruit very narrowly winged ..................................................... {\b 3. longiradium}
\par
7 Leaf-lobes ovate or broadly ovate, strongly dentate or
\par
  crenate-dentate; lateral wings of fruit 1-2 mm wide
\par
8 wings of fruit equal ........................................................................ {\b 4. nestleri}
\par
8 Lateral wings of fruit much wider than dorsal ................................ {\b 5. krapfii}
\par
3 Bracts ciliate, always numerous
\par
9 Stock without fibres; petals with scattered hairs beneath
\par
10 Upper petioles narrow; rays rough on the inner side .......... {\b 12. prutenicum}
\par
10 Upper petioles somewhat inflated; rays hispid ....................... {\b 13. hispidum}
\par
9 Stock with fibres; petals glabrous beneath
\par
11 Upper petioles strongly inflated; stem hollow; leaf-lobes
\par
   with a ± regular isodiametric network of veins ..................... {\b 7. archangelica}
\par
11 Upper petioles narrow, appressed; stem solid; leaf-lobes
\par
   with an obscure or irregular and elongated network of veins
\par
12 Membranous margin of bracteoles narrower than herbaceous
\par
   middle part; sepals triangular-ovate .......................................... {\b 10. gallicum}
\par
12 Membranous margin of bracteoles as wide as herbaceous
\par
   middle part; sepals lanceolate-subulate ........................................ {\b 8. nitidum}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. L. siler} L.,{\i  Sp. Pl. }249 (1753) ({\i Siler montanum} Crantz). Almost glabrous perennial 30-100(-180) cm. Stock with abundant fibres. Stem terete, striate, simple or branched above. Lower leaves up to 100 cm, 2- to 4-pinnate, triangular in outline; lobes 15-70 × 3-25 mm, linear-lanceolate to oblong-obovate, somewhat glaucous and coriaceous; margin narrowly cartilaginous, smooth or slightly sinuate; midrib prominent, whitish; main lateral veins evenly spaced; network of fine veins elongated
\par

\par
368}
\par