{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Stem subterete, weakly sulcate; plant light green
\par
3 Leaf-lobes filiform; bracts setaceous, erect ................................ {\b 6. capillaris}
\par
3 Leaf-lobes linear; bracts ovate-lanceolate, becoming deflexed {\b 7. granatensis}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 4. F. campestris} (Besser) Grec., {\i Consp. Fl. Roman.} 252 (1898) ({\i F. galbanifera} Koch,{\i  F. nodiflora} sensu Thell.,{\i  Ferula ferulago} L.). Plant dark green; stem strongly angled and sulcate; leaf-lobes  usually elongate. Dorsal ridges of fruit filiform, unwinged.{\i  S.E. Europe, extending westwards to S. France and northwards to} c. 51°{\i  N. in W. Russia.} Al Bu Ga It Ju Rm Rs (C, W, K, E) Si.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 5. F. lutea} (Poiret) Grande,{\i  Bull. Orto Bot. Napoli }{\b 4}: 366 (1914) ({\i Ferula sulcata }Desf.). Like {\b 4} but leaf-lobes short; dorsal ridges of fruit narrowly winged.{\i  N. Spain, N. Portugal.} Hs Lu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 6. F. capillaris} (Link ex Sprengel) Coutinho,{\i  Fl. Port. }452 (1913). Plant light green; stem subterete, weakly sulcate; leaf-lobes  filiform. Bracts setaceous, erect. •{\i  S. Portugal} ({\i near Tavira}). Lu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 7. F. granatensis} Boiss., {\i Elenchus} 48 (1838) ({\i Ferula granatensis} (Boiss.) Nyman). Like {\b 6} but leaf-lobes linear; bracts ovate-lanceolate, becoming deflexed. •{\i  Spain, N. Portugal.} Hs Lu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Plants with shorter and wider leaf-lobes have been distinguished as{\i  F. nodiflora} var.{\i  brachyloba} (Boiss. & Reuter) Thell. ({\i Ferula brachyloba} (Boiss. & Reuter) Nyman, {\i Ferulago brachyloba} Boiss. & Reuter.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 8. F. sylvatica} (Besser) Reichenb.,{\i  Pl. Crit. }{\b 4}: 53 (1826) ({\i F. confusa} Velen.,{\i  F. monticola} Boiss. & Heldr.). Glabrous perennial. Stem up to 125 cm. Leaves up to 50 cm, narrowly elliptical to nearly linear in outline, widest at the middle; lobes linear. Bracts and bracteoles conspicuous, ovate-lanceolate to lanceolate. Fruit 6-10 mm, elliptical; lateral wings well-developed; dorsal ridges acute, filiform.{\i  S.E. Europe, extending to Hungary and Italy.} Al Bu Gr Hu It Ju Rm Rs (W) Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Small plants with leaves more or less linear in outline have been wrongly identified as{\i  F. meoides} (L.) Boiss. ({\i Lophosciadium meoides }(L.) Calestani), a synonym of{\i  Ferula communis} L. They appear to represent one extreme of variation in {\b 8} and to be indistinguishable from it in other respects.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 9. F. sartorii} Boiss.,{\i  Fl. Or.}{\b  2}: 999 (1872). Erect, glabrous perennial c. 50 cm. Leaves narrowly elliptical in outline; lobes up to 30 mm, finely setaceous. Bracts and bracteoles ovate-lanceolate to lanceolate. Fruit c. 10 mm, elliptical; lateral wings conspicuous and slightly undulate at maturity; dorsal ridges with distinct narrow wings. •{\i  S.E. Greece, Kiklades.} Gr.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 88.                       Eriosynaphe}                       DC.
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc By J.F.M. Cannon.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Like{\i  Ferula} but mericarps shortly and rather coarsely pubescent on commissural face; vittae solitary between the ridges, none on the commissural face.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. E. longifolia} (Fischer ex Sprengel) DC.,{\i  Coll. Mém.}{\b  5}: 51 (1829). Glabrous perennial 50-70 cm. Leaves somewhat glaucous, 3-pinnate; lobes 30-80 × 1-4 mm, narrowly linear. Umbels terminal and lateral, arranged in complex, paniculate inflorescences. Bracts and bracteoles absent. Petals yellow; pedicels up to 25 mm, slender, unequal. Fruit 7-10 mm, elliptical. Dorsal ridges of fruit filiform; lateral wings moderately developed, rather thickened and corky.{\i  Dry, usually calcareous slopes. S.E. Russia, S.E. Ukraine. }Rs (W, E).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 89.                          Opopanax}                     Koch
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc By †T.G. Tutin.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Leaves pinnate, with stellate hairs beneath, segments entire or sometimes deeply lobed. Sepals absent. Petals yellow, ovate-oblong, involute. Fruit obovate to orbicular, strongly compressed dorsally. Lateral ridges united to form a border surrounding the fruit before dehiscence; dorsal ridges slender, low; vittae 2-3.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 Fruit 6-7 mm, with a narrow, thickened border ........................... {\b 1. chironium}
\par
Fruit 7-9 mm, with a wide, thin border ........................................... {\b 2. hispidus}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. O. chironium} (L.) Koch, {\i Nova Acta Acad. Leop.-Carol. }{\b 12}({\b 1}): 96 (1824). Robust perennial with a stout, solid stem up to 200 cm. Branches verticillate or subopposite, often very close below the terminal umbel. Lower leaves 2-pinnate, with stellate hairs beneath; lobes 4-12 cm, obliquely cordate to cuneate at base, crenate-serrate; rhachis sparsely hispid, upper leaves simple, or reduced to inflated petioles. Rays 9-25. Bracts and bracteoles few, setaceous. Fruit 6-7 mm, elliptical; border narrow, thickened, whitish. 2n = 22.{\i  W. & C. Mediterranean region, N. & C. parts of Balkan peninsula, just extending to S.E. Romania.} Al Bu Ga Gr Hs It Ju Rm Sa Si
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Plants from the Balkan peninsula tend to have larger leaflets with a more cuneate, decurrent base than those from the western part of the range of the species. Extreme variants have been called{\b  O. bulgaricus} Velen., ({\i Österr. Bot. Zeitschr.}{\b  52}: 51 (1902).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. O. hispidus} (Friv.) Griseb.,{\i  Spicil. Fl. Rumel.}{\b  1}: 378 (1843) ({\i O. orientalis} Boiss.). Like {\b 1} but up to 300 cm; lobes usually 2-4 cm, ovate-lanceolate, hispid (like the rhachis); rays 6-13; fruit 7-9 mm, broadly elliptical; border wide, thin.{\i  S. part of the Balkan peninsula and Aegean region; S. Italy and Sicilia.} Al Bu Cr Gr It Ju Si.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 90.                     Peucedanum}                        L.
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc By T.G.Tutin.
\par  

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Leaves several times pinnate or ternate. Sepals absent or conspicuous. Petals white, yellow or rarely pink or purplish, broadly ovate; apex long, inflexed. Fruit strongly compressed dorsally. Lateral ridges winged; wings closely appressed to one another, dorsal ridges usually prominent; vittae 1-3.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Cauline leaves absent .................................................................. {\b 29. alpinum}
\par
1 Cauline leaves present, the upper sometimes reduced to
\par
  sheath-like petioles
\par
2 Lobes of at least the lower leaves linear or narrowly lanceolate,
\par
  never serrate and usually unlobed; leaves never simply pinnate
\par
3 Stock without fibres; bracts 4-7, persistent ........................... {\b 23. lancifolium}
\par
3 Stock with fibres; bracts absent or few, usually caducous
\par
4 Leaves with at least 5 primary divisions
\par
5 Lobes of lower leaves narrowly linear; fruit 3-5 mm ........ {\b 10. oligophyllum}
\par
5 Lobes of lower leaves linear-lanceolate; fruit 6-7·5 mm ............. {\b 13. schottii}
\par
4 Leaves with 3 primary divisions
\par
6 Petals white or pink
\par
7 Lower leaves 3- to 4-ternate; rays 10-20: bracts usually
\par
  2-6, caducous ............................................................................... {\b 7. gallicum}
\par
7 Lower leaves 1- to 2-ternate; rays 5-10; bracts 0(-1) .............. {\b 8. aragonense}
\par
6 Petals yellow
\par
8 Fruit 1/4-1/3 as long as pedicel
\par
9 Leaf-lobes linear, flat, or with slightly recurved margins .......... {\b 1. officinale}
\par
9 Leaf-lobes filiform, canaliculate ............................................ {\b 6. paniculatum}
\par
8 Fruit about as long as pedicel
\par
10 Distinct intermediate veins present in the leaf-lobes;
\par
   leaves 2- to 3-ternate
\par

\par
360}
\par