{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}
\pard\f0\fs28 subglabrous or with sparse setae on veins; rays 12-26. Petals white, outer radiate. Commissural vittae short and very slender or absent. {\i Open woodland. • Jura}.
\par
\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b pyrenaicum} (Lam.) Bonnier & Layens,{\i  loc. cit. }(1894) ({\i H. pyrenaicum} Lam.,{\i  H. pollinianum} Bertol., {\i H. sphondylium} subsp.{\i  montanum} auct. pro parte, non (Schleicher ex Gaudin) Briq.): stem pubescent or setose below. Leaves simple, with 5-7 usually acute or acuminate primary lobes, softly pubescent, hispid or densely white-tomentose beneath. Rays 12-45. Petals white, outer radiate. Commissural vittae conspicuous. •{\i  Pyrenees, Alps, N. Appennini, mountains of the Balkan peninsula}.
\par
\pard\f0\fs28   Plants with the leaves densely white-tomentose beneath may be referred to var.{\i  pyrenaicum}, while those with leaves pubescent or setose beneath may be referred to var.{\i  pollinianum} (Bertol.) Thell. Both varieties probably occur throughout the range of the subspecies.
\par
\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b c}) Subsp. {\b transsilvanicum} (Schur) Brummitt, {\i Feddes Repert.}{\b  79}: 65 (1968) ({\i H. transsilvanicum} Schur, {\i H. palmatum} Baumg.): Like subsp. ({\b b}) but more robust, up to 250 cm; leaves up to 50 cm, with 7-9 lobes, more conspicuously acute and more divided into secondary lobes. {\i • E. & S. Carpathians}.
\par
\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b d}) Subsp. {\b montanum} (Schleicher ex Gaudin) Briq. in Schinz & R. Keller,{\i  Fl. Schweiz} ed. 2, {\b 1}: 372 (1905) ({\i H. dissectum} Ledeb., {\i H. setosum} Lapeyr., {\i H. montanum }Schleicher ex Gaudin, {\i H. sphondylium} subsp.{\i  granatense} (Boiss.) Briq.): Larger cauline leaves almost always ternate, sometimes white-tomentose beneath. Rays 12-25(-30). Petals white, outer radiate.{\i  In mountain areas, but probably usually at lower altitudes than} ({\b b}).{\i  C. Europe, extending locally southward to Sicilia and S. Spain; E. Russia}.
\par
\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b e}) Subsp. {\b sphondylium} (subsp.{\i  australe} (Hartman) Ahlfvengren): Larger cauline leaves pinnate, with usually 5(-9) segments, each segment often pinnately lobed; lobes acute, pubescent to densely hispid beneath. Rays 12-25. Petals white, rarely pink, outer radiate.{\i  Usually lowland. • Mainly in N.W. Europe, but extending to Scandinavia, E.C. Europe and the Mediterranean region}.
\par
\pard\f0\fs28   Plants from the W. Carpathians having short setae on the ovary may be referred to var. {\i chaetocarpoides} Gawlowska (subsp.{\i  trachycarpum }(Soják) J. Holub).
\par
\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b f}) Subsp. {\b verticillatum} (Pancic) Brummitt,{\i  Feddes Repert.}{\b  79}: 65 (1968) ({\i H. verticillatum} Pancic): Like subsp. ({\b e}) but leaves softly pubescent, especially on the veins, and the upper branches more or less whorled. •{\i  Balkan peninsula}.
\par
\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b g}) Subsp. {\b orsinii} (Guss.) H. Neumayer, {\i Verh. Zool.-Bot. Ges. Wien }{\b 72}: 169 (1923) ({\i H. orsinii} Guss.): Leaves simple, with 5-7 acute or acuminate lobes, pubescent to hispid beneath. Rays 12-45. Petals greenish, the outer ones not or only slightly radiate. •{\i  Mountains of the Balkan peninsula; C. & S. Appennini}.
\par
\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b h}) Subsp. {\b ternatum} (Velen.) Brummitt,{\i  Feddes Repert.}{\b  79}: 65 (1968) ({\i H. ternatum} Velen.): Larger cauline leaves usually ternate, the segments usually more or less broadly rounded or acuminate, pubescent or hispid beneath. Rays 12-25. Petals greenish, the outer ones not or only slightly radiate.{\i  Balkan peninsula; N.C. Appennini}.
\par
\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b i}) Subsp. {\b sibiricum} (L.) Simonkai,{\i  Enum. Fl. Transs.} 266 (1887) ({\i H. sibiricum} L.,{\i  H. lecokii} Gren. & Godron): Larger cauline leaves usually pinnate, with 5(-7) segments, each segment often pinnately lobed, the lobes acute, pubescent or hispid beneath. Rays 12-25. Petals greenish, the outer ones not or only slightly radiate. 2n = 22.{\i  Mainly in N.E. & E.C. Europe, but also in C. & S.W. France and perhaps in the Appennini}.
\par
\pard\f0\fs28   Plants of this subspecies with short setae on the ovary may be referred to var.{\i  chaetocarpum} H. Neumayer & Thell.
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28   {\b 6. H. ligusticifolium} Bieb.,{\i  Fl. Taur.-Cauc.}{\b  1}: 224 (1808). Stem 40-80 cm, 4-10 mm in diameter, softly and sparsely pubescent. Leaves pinnate to 2-pinnate; segments up to 3 cm, shallowly or deeply divided into more or less cuneate lobes, glabrous to sparsely and softly pubescent; rhachis slender and subglabrous. Rays 12-25. Petals white, outer radiate. Fruit 9-10 × 6-8 mm, broadly elliptical; vittae slender, linear, usually at least 3/4 the length of the fruit.{\i  Stony places in mountains. • S. Krym.} Rs (K).
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 7. H. stevenii} Manden.,{\i  Kavk. Vidy Heracleum }61 (1950) ({\i H. laciniatum} auct., ? Hornem., {\i H. villosum} auct., ? Fischer ex Sprengel). Biennial or perennial up to 100 cm. Leaves simple, 5- to 7-lobed, the lobes obtuse or rounded, serrate, subglabrous above or roughly hairy on veins only, densely white-tomentose beneath. Larger umbels up to 30 cm in diameter; rays up to 70. Petals white, outer radiate. Fruit 10-13 × 7-9 mm, broadly ovate to obovate, with short upwardly-directed hairs; vittae swollen at their lower ends.{\i  Stony slopes. Krym.} Rs (K). ({\i Caucasus}.)
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 8. H. pubescens} (Hoffm.) Bieb., {\i Fl. Taur.-Cauc. }{\b 3}: 225 (1819) ({\i H. speciosum} auct., ? Weinm.). Stem 60-80 cm. Leaves ternate to pinnate, the segments pinnately lobed, subglabrous above, shortly pubescent beneath. Umbels 10-12 cm. in diameter; rays 15-20. Petals white, radiate. Fruit 13-14 × 8-10 mm, pubescent or sometimes setose towards the margins; vittae swollen at their lower ends.{\i  Damp, shady places. • S. Krym. Perhaps naturalized in C. & W. Europe}. Rs (K) [?Au ?Cz ?Ga].
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 9. H. mantegazzianum} Sommier & Levier, {\i Nuovo Gior. Bot. Ital.} nov. ser.,{\b  2}: 79 (1895). Biennial, monocarpic, or perennial. Stem 200-500 cm, up to 10 cm in diameter, usually with conspicuous purple blotches. Leaves up to 300 cm, ternate, or ternately or pinnately divided in varying degree, with lateral segments up to 130 cm, pinnately lobed, acute, shortly pubescent beneath. Umbels up to 50 cm in diameter, with 50-150 rays. Petals up to 12 mm, white or rarely pinkish, outer radiate. Fruit (7-)9-11 × 6-8(-10) mm, glabrous to villous; vittae strongly swollen, 0·5-1 mm wide or more.{\i  Widely naturalized in Europe.} [Au Br Cz Da Fe Ga Ge Hb He Ho Hu It No Rs (C) Su.] (S.W. Asia.)
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28   The taxonomy and nomenclature of the naturalized plants from S.W. Asia require further investigation. They are very variable in duration, height, shape, dissection and pubescence of the leaves, shape and size of fruit, etc., and probably represent more than one species. Perennial plants with leaves pinnately divided into 5 segments may perhaps be referable to{\b  H. lehmannianum} Bunge, {\i Del. Sem. Horti Dorpat.}{\b  1849}: 2 (1850), from C. Asia.{\b  H. persicum} Desf. ex Fischer in Fischer, C. A. Meyer & Avé-Lall.,{\i  Ind. Sem. Horti Petrop. }{\b 7}: 50 (1841) (? {\i H. amplissimum} Wenderoth) is probably distinct and occasionally naturalized; it is like {\b 9} but rarely more than 200 cm high, and usually has 2 pairs of lateral leaf-segments.{\i  H. laciniatum} auct. scand., non Hornem., naturalized in Norway to 70° N and possibly also in Finland, has the leaves pinnately divided into 5(-7) segments and smaller (7-11 mm) fruit than typical {\i H. mantegazzianum}; it may be identical with {\i H. persicum}.
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28   For other cultivated species, which may occasionally escape, see Thellung in Hegi,{\i  Ill. Fl. Mitteleur.}{\b  5}({\b 2}): 1421-1427 (1926).
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 93.                      Malabaila}                  Hoffm.
\par
\pard\f0\fs24\qc By †T.G. Tutin.
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28 Leaves pinnate. Sepals absent or small. Petals yellow, ovate or obcordate. Fruit orbicular-obcordate. wing strongly thickened at the margin, with a conspicuous vitta bordering the fruit at the base of the wing.
\par
\par 366}
\par