{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 11 Leaves (2-)3-ternate; intermediate veins conspicuous particularly
\par
   in the middle of the leaf-lobe; rays very unequal, the longest
\par
   3-4 cm .................................................................................... {\b 5. rochelianum}
\par
11 Leaves 2-ternate; intermediate veins usually conspicuous at the
\par
   base of leaf-lobe; rays nearly equal, not more than 2·5 cm ...... {\b 9. coriaceum}
\par
10 No distinct intermediate veins in leaf-lobes; leaves
\par
   3- to 6-ternate
\par
12 Leaf-lobes 0·5(-1) mm wide, filiform; fruit 7-9 mm ............ {\b 2. longifolium}
\par
12 Leaf-lobes 1-3 mm wide, linear; fruit 4-7·5 mm
\par
13 Leaves 4- to 6-ternate; lobes 10-45 mm; fruit 4-5(-6) mm ....... {\b 3. tauricum}
\par
13 Leaves 3- to 4-ternate; lobes 20-90 mm; fruit 6-7·5 mm ...... {\b 4. ruthenicum}
\par
2 Lobes of at least the lower leaves ovate or oblong in
\par
  outline, dentate or lobed, or leaves simply pinnate
\par
14 Leaf-lobes ovate, dentate, sometimes with 1-3 broad, dentate lobes
\par
15 Bracts several, persistent; stock usually with fibres
\par
16 Leaves 2-ternate; stock stout, with slender, far-creeping
\par
   rhizome; bracts erecto-patent ........................................... {\b 17. aegopodioides}
\par
16 Leaves 1- to 3-pinnate; stock without slender, far-creeping
\par
   rhizome; bracts deflexed
\par
17 Leaves 2- to 3-pinnate ................................................................ {\b 25. cenaria}
\par
17 Leaves 1-pinnate .................................................................... {\b 18. latifolium}
\par
15 Bracts 0-2, caducous; stock without fibres
\par
18 Stem solid; leaves simply pinnate and often 3-foliolate ..... {\b 28. hispanicum}
\par
18 Stem hollow; at least some leaves 2-ternate or 2- to 3-pinnate
\par
19 Stem 30-100 cm, simple or with alternate branches; petioles of
\par
   upper cauline leaves strongly inflated; fruit 4-5 mm ............. {\b 26. ostruthium}
\par
19 Stem 120-360 cm; upper branches opposite or whorled;
\par
   petioles of cauline leaves rather narrow; fruit 7-9 mm .......... {\b 27. verticillare}
\par
14 Leaf-lobes ovate to oblong in outline, but ± pinnatifid;
\par
   ultimate lobes entire or nearly so
\par
20 Bracts 0, or few and caducous; upper leaves usually
\par
   simply pinnate, with entire segments
\par
21 Rays scabrid-puberulent on inner side .................................. {\b 12. carvifolia}
\par
21 Rays smooth and glabrous on inner side
\par
22 Stem distinctly sulcate, at least above  {\b 13. schottii}
\par
22 Stem terete and finely striate throughout
\par
23 Stem c.30 cm; petals white ..................................................... {\b 11. achaicum}
\par
23 Stem up to 200 cm; petals yellow or yellowish
\par
24 Lower leaves oblong in outline, 2-pinnate ........................... {\b 14. vittijugum}
\par
24 Lower leaves triangular in outline, 3- to 4-pinnate ............... {\b 16. arenarium}
\par
20 Bracts several, persistent
\par
25 Bracts deflexed
\par
26 Stock with fibres; stalks of primary and secondary
\par
   divisions of leaves patent or deflexed ................................. {\b 22. oreoselinum}
\par
26 Stock without fibres; stalks of primary and secondary
\par
   divisions of leaves erecto-patent
\par
27 Stem hollow; wing of ripe fruit less than 1 mm wide ............... {\b 24. palustre}
\par
27 Stem solid; wing of ripe fruit at least 1·5 mm wide ............. {\b 21. austriacum}
\par
25 Bracts patent or appressed to rays
\par
28 Rays 5-6, stout ................................................................... {\b 15. obtusifolium}
\par
28 Rays (6-)10-25, slender
\par
29 Rays glabrous; sepals at anthesis narrow; petals dull yellow;
\par
   styles c. 1 mm ........................................................................... {\b 19. alsaticum}
\par
29 Rays puberulent; sepals at,anthesis almost ovate;
\par
   petals white; styles at least 1·5 mm ............................................ {\b 20. venetum}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. P. officinale} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 245 (1753). Glabrous perennial 60-200 cm. Stock often c. 5 cm in diameter, with abundant fibres.Stems terete or weakly angled, solid, branched above. Lower leaves 30-60 cm, 2- to 6-ternate; lobes 40-150 × (0·5)1-3 mm, linear, narrowed at both ends, flat or with margins slightly recurved, with prominent midrib and weaker marginal veins. Rays 10-40. Umbels nodding in bud, later erect. Bracts 0-3, usually caducous; bracteoles several, setaceous. Petals yellow. Fruit 5-10 mm, narrowly elliptical to oblong-obovate, 1/4-1/3 as long as pedicels; wing c. 1/3 as wide as mericarp. 2n = 66.{\i  Usually in grassland. • C. & S. Europe, extending north-westwards to S.E. England.} Al Au Br Bu Cz Ga Ge ?Gr Hs Hu It Ju Lu Rm.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b officinale}: Leaf-lobes not more than 100 mm; styles about as long as stylopodium; fruit elliptical or oblong-obovate.{\i  Throughout the range of the species}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b stenocarpum} (Boiss. & Reuter) Font Quer,{\i  Fl. Cardo} 114 (1950) ({\i P. stenocarpum} Boiss. & Reuter): Leaf-lobes up to 150 mm; styles shorter than stylopodium; fruit narrowly elliptical or narrowly obovate. {\i C. & E. Spain.}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. P. longifolium} Waldst. & Kit.,{\i  Pl. Rar. Hung. }{\b 3}: 279 (1812). Like {\b 1} but leaf-lobes rarely more than 1 mm wide, keeled; ripe fruit about as long as pedicels.{\i  Dry rocky places. • From Bosna and C. Romania to S. Albania and S. Bulgaria}. Al Bu Ju Rm.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   {\b 3. P. tauricum} Bieb., {\i Fl. Taur.-Cauc.}{\b  1}: 215 (1808). Glabrous perennial 40-100 cm. Stock c. 1 cm in diameter, with abundant fibres. Stem terete, striate, solid. Lower leaves c. 30 cm, (4-)5-6(-7)-ternate; lobes 10-45 × 1-2 mm, linear, acute or mucronate, with 3 prominent veins. Rays 7-28. Bracts 1-3, subulate; bracteoles several, filiform. Petals pale yellow. Fruit 4-5(-6) mm, broadly elliptical, about as long as pedicels; wing c. 1/3 as wide as mericarp.{\i  Dry hillsides and pinewoods. • C. & E. Romania; Krym.} Rm Rs (K).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 4. P. ruthenicum} Bieb.,{\i  Fl. Taur.-Cauc.}{\b  1}: 215 (1808). Like {\b 3} but leaves 3(-4)-ternate; lobes 20-90 mm; fruit 6-7·5 mm.{\i  Dry places. S.E. Europe, from N.E. Bulgaria to the middle Volga.} Bu Rm Rs (C, W, E).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 5. P. rochelianum} Heuffel, {\i Österr. Bot. Zeitschr.}{\b  8}: 27 (1858). Like {\b 3} but lower leaves (2-)3-ternate; lobes 30-70 × 1·5-2·5 mm, with 3 prominent veins and 2 less conspicuous ones between them. •{\i  C. & S.W. Romania, C. Jugoslavia.} ?Hu Ju Rm.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 6. P. paniculatum} Loisel., {\i Fl. Gall.} 722 (1807). Glabrous perennial c. 100 cm. Stock stout, with fibres. Stem terete, striate, solid. Lower leaves 3- to 5-ternate; lobes filiform, canaliculate. Umbels numerous; peduncles divaricate. Rays 10-20. Bracts 1-2, caducous, bracteoles several, subulate. Petals pale yellow. Fruit c. 10 mm, oblong-elliptical, shorter than pedicels; wing narrow.{\i  Open woodland and scrub. • Corse and Sardegna.} Co Sa.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 7. P. gallicum} Latourr.,{\i  Chlor. Lugd.} 7 (1785). Glabrous perennial 60-100 cm. Stock with abundant fibres. Stem terete, striate, solid. Lower leaves 3- to 4-ternate, the secondary divisions with usually 5 or more lobes; lobes widest below the middle; midrib and marginal veins with a network of much-branched, curved veins between them. Rays (7-)10-20, strongly papillose on inner side, rarely smooth. Bracts usually 2-6, caducous; bracteoles 4-8. Petals white or pink, densely but minutely papillose. Fruit 4-6 mm, elliptical, about as long as the pedicel; wing narrow, rather thin and translucent; dorsal ridges prominent. •{\i  W. & C. France, N.W. Spain, N. Portugal.} Ga Hs Lu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 8. P. aragonense} Rouy & Camus,{\i  Fl. Fr.}{\b  7}: 390 (1901). Like {\b 7} but stock with few fibres; stem slender; lower leaves 1- to 2-ternate; rays 5-10, minutely papillose; bracts absent, rarely 1. •{\i  N. Spain} ({\i Oviedo to Teruel}). Hs.
\par

\par
361}
\par