{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 parallel to the main lateral veins. Petioles of lower leaves somewhat laterally compressed, of upper cauline strongly inflated. Rays 20-50, papillose on the inner side. Bracts and bracteoles numerous, lanceolate, glabrous, not deflexed. Petals white. Fruit 6-12 mm, oblong; wings 0·5-1 mm wide. •{\i  Mountains of S. & S.C. Europe.} Al Au Bu ?Cz Ga Ge Gr He Hs It Ju.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Leaf-lobes decurrent on rhachis to the next lobe ................. ({\b c}) subsp. {\b zernyi}
\par
1 Leaf-lobes not or shortly decurrent
\par
2 Leaf-lobes 5-12 mm wide, acute, shortly stalked ................... ({\b a}) subsp. {\b siler}
\par
2 Leaf-lobes 10-25 mm wide, obtuse, narrowed at base ({\b b}) subsp. {\b garganicum}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b siler}: Lower leaves 4-pinnate; lobes 5-12 mm wide, lanceolate, acute, shortly stalked, the 3 terminal free at base.{\i  Throughout the range of the species except the south-east}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b garganicum} (Ten.) Arcangeli,{\i  Comp. Fl. Ital.} 302 (1882): Lower leaves 4-pinnate; lobes 10-25 mm wide, elliptical or oblong, obtuse, mucronate, narrowed at base, the 3 terminal often confluent and shortly decurrent.{\i  S. part of Balkan peninsula; S. Italy}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b c}) Subsp. {\b zernyi} (Hayek) Tutin,{\i  Feddes Repert.}{\b  74}: 31 (1967) ({\i L. zernyi} Hayek): Lower leaves 2- to 3-pinnate; lobes linear-oblong, decurrent on the rhachis to the next lobe.{\i  N.E. Albania, just extending to Jugoslavia.}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. L. latifolium} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 248 (1753). Nearly glabrous, somewhat pruinose perennial (30-)60-150(-250) cm. Stock with abundant fibres. Stem terete, striate, solid, branched above. Leaves 2-pinnate, triangular in outline; lobes 20-100 mm, ovate, cordate, usually unequal at base, often sparsely hairy beneath; margin narrowly cartilaginous, dentate and serrulate or shortly ciliate; midrib prominent; network of fine veins conspicuous and more or less isodiametric. Petioles of lower leaves somewhat laterally compressed and often sparsely hispid; of upper cauline strongly inflated. Rays (20-)25-40(-50), rough on the inner surface. Bracts numerous, narrow and membranous-margined, sometimes nearly leaf-like, glabrous; bracteoles few, subulate. Petals white. Fruit 5-10 mm, ovoid; wings 2-2·5 mm wide, all equal, usually undulate; primary ridges (between the wings) appressed-hispid. 2n = 22.{\i  Much of Europe, but absent from the margins and most islands; extends from C. Spain to} 61° {\i N. in Sweden and to C. Ukraine and Bulgaria.} Au Bu Co Cz Da Fe Ga Ge He Hs Hu It Ju No Po Rm Rs (B, C, W) Su ?Tu [Be].
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 3. L. longiradium} Boiss., {\i Voy. Bot. Midi Esp.}{\b  2}: 734 (1845). Like {\b 2} but leaf-lobes 18-30 mm, usually suborbicular, shallowly crenate-dentate; rays up to 13; bracts absent; bracteoles numerous; fruit narrowly winged. •{\i  S. Spain }({\i Sierra Nevada}). Hs.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 4. L. nestleri} Soyer-Willemet,{\i  Obs. Pl. Fr.} 87 (1828). Like {\b 2} but leaves 2- to 3-pinnate; lobes dentate or serrate, cuneate or rounded at base; rays 18-30; bracts 1-3, caducous; bracteoles 1-5; fruit oblong; wings 1-2 mm wide, not undulate.{\i  Calcicole. • Mountains of S. France and Iberian peninsula.} Ga Hs Lu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 5. L. krapfii} Crantz,{\i  Class. Umb.} 67 (1767). Glabrous or somewhat pubescent perennial 60-120 cm. Stock with abundant fibres. Stem terete, striate, slender, branched above. Lower leaves c. 30 cm, 2- to 3-ternate, triangular in outline; lobes 20-80 mm, ovate or suborbicular, acute or obtuse, rounded to cordate at base, often hairy beneath; margin somewhat thickened, dentate or crenate-dentate; midrib prominent; network of fine veins conspicuous and more or less isodiametric. Petioles of upper cauline leaves strongly inflated. Rays (5-)7-15(-24), very unequal. Bracts 0-5, glabrous, caducous; bracteoles several. Petals usually greenish-yellow or pinkish. Fruit 5-11 mm, ellipsoid; lateral wings much wider than dorsal. •{\i  Mountains of E.C. Europe and N. part of Balkan peninsula; S. & E. Alps.} Al Au Bu He It Ju Po Rm Rs (W).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b krapfii} ({\i L. marginatum} Waldst. & Kit.; incl.{\i  L. alpinum} Waldst. & Kit.): Stem usually slightly pruinose; upper cauline leaves similar to lower, their lobes ovate, usually dentate; rays nearly always rough or shortly hispid on inner side; primary ridges of fruit with short setae.{\i  N. part of Balkan peninsula, extending to N.E. Italy; Carpathians}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b gaudinii} (Moretti) Thell.,{\i  Monde Pl.} 153: 2 (1925) ({\i L. gaudinii} Moretti): Stem usually strongly pruinose; upper cauline leaves markedly different from lower, their lobes oblong, usually entire; rays glabrous and smooth on inner side; primary ridges of fruit glabrous.{\i  N. Italy, N.W. Jugoslavia, W. Austria E. Switzerland}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 6. L. peucedanoides} L.,{\i  Cent. Pl.}{\b  2}: 13 (1756). Slender, glabrous perennial 30-60(-100) cm. Stock with abundant fibres. Stem terete, striate, usually branched. Lower leaves 2- to 3-ternate triangular in outline; lobes 15-100 × 2-12 mm, linear to ovate-oblong, narrowed at both ends; margin somewhat incurved entire, lower surface with 3-5 prominent veins arising near the base of lobe, and so nearly parallel; network of fine veins elongated parallel to the midrib. Petioles of upper cauline leaves narrow. Rays 2-15, smooth. Bracts 5-8, linear, glabrous; bracteoles subulate. Petals white. Fruit 4·5-7 mm, broadly ellipsoid-lateral wings 1-1·5 mm wide, somewhat wider than dorsal. 2n = 22. •{\i  S.E. Alps; mountains of N.W. Jugoslavia.} Au It Ju.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 7. L. archangelica} Wulfen in Jacq.,{\i  Collect. Bot. }{\b 1}: 214 (1787). Pubescent perennial 80-150 cm. Stock with abundant fibres. Stem stout, angled, often reddish-spotted, densely hairy at the nodes and with numerous scattered, long, soft hairs. Lower leaves 3- to 4-ternate, triangular in outline; lobes 20-60 × 10-50 mm, ovate, rounded at base, acute, dentate and sometimes lobed; network of fine veins more or less isodiametric. Petioles of upper cauline leaves very strongly inflated. Rays 14-40, pubescent, rough on the inner side. Bracts numerous, conspicuous, often 3-fid; bracteoles numerous, linear-lanceolate, hairy, soon deflexed. Petals white, or pinkish beneath. Fruit 8-10 mm, ellipsoid; lateral wings 1·5-3 mm wide, wider than dorsal. •{\i  Mountains of E.C. Europe and N. part of Balkan peninsula.} Bu Cz Ju Po Rm.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 8. L. nitidum} Zanted.,{\i  Comment. Ateneo Brescia }{\b 1815}: 89 (1818). Somewhat hispid perennial 30-70 cm. Stock with abundant fibres. Stem terete, striate, solid. Lower leaves 3-pinnate, ovate to triangular in outline; lobes 15-30 × 10-15(-25) mm, ovate, cordate to broadly cuneate at base, glabrous above, hispid beneath, dentate, often lobed, ciliate; network of veins somewhat elongated and irregular. Petioles of upper cauline leaves rather narrow, with wide membranous margin. Rays (10-)15-25(-35), sparsely hispid to glabrous, rough on the inner side. Bracts numerous, lanceolate, often 2- to 3-fid at apex, ciliate; bracteoles numerous, nearly as long as pedicels, largely membranous. Petals white. Fruit 5-6 mm, broadly ovoid; lateral wings c. 1·5 mm wide, dorsal narrower. 2n = 22.{\i  N. Italy} ({\i Trentino to Como}). It.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 9. L. halleri} Crantz,{\i  Class. Umb.} 67 (1767) ({\i L. panax} Gouan). More or less pubescent perennial 15-60 cm. Stock with abundant fibres. Stem terete, striate, simple or little-branched. Lower leaves 4- to 5-pinnate, triangular in outline; lobes 4-7 mm, ovate to linear-lanceolate in outline, usually again divided into 5-7 linear or filiform lobes; midrib prominent, lateral veins obscure. Petioles of upper cauline leaves narrow. Rays 15-30(-45), rough on the inner side. Bracts numerous, conspicuous, linear-lanceolate,
\par

\par
369}
\par