{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Bracts 6-8, persistent ............................................................... {\b 3. involucrata}
\par
1 Bracts 0, rarely few and deciduous
\par
2 Rays 3-9; styles persistent ................................................................. {\b 1. aurea}
\par
2 Rays (12-)20-30; styles deciduous ........................................... {\b 2. graveolens}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. M. aurea} (Sibth. & Sm.) Boiss.,{\i  Fl. Or.}{\b  2}: 1053 (1872). Pubescent and somewhat viscid biennial 30-50 cm. Stem hollow, striate. Leaves pinnate; segments 3-4 pairs, ovate in lower leaves, linear-lanceolate in upper leaves, deeply serrate or sometimes lobed. Rays 3-9. Bracts 0; bracteoles few, linear-lanceolate, deciduous. Fruit 8-10 mm, suborbicular; styles persistent. 2n = 22.{\i  Balkan peninsula.} Al Bu Gr Ju.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. M. graveolens} (Sprengel) Hoffm., {\i Gen. Umb.} 126 (1814) (incl.{\i  M. vaginans }(Velen.) Velen.). Shortly pubescent biennial up to 100 cm. Leaves pinnate; segments often 5-7 cm, dentate, sometimes lobed. Rays (12-)20-30. Bracts and bracteoles O or few, deciduous. Fruit 6-7 mm, suborbicular; styles deciduous.{\i  Dry places. S.E. Europe, southwards to N.E. Greece and extending to} c. 51°{\i  N. in E. Russia.} Bu Gr Rm Rs (C, W, K, E).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 3. M. involucrata} Boiss. & Spruner,{\i  Ann. Sci. Nat.} ser. 3 (Bot.), {\b 1}: 337 (1844). Pubescent biennial 40-50 cm. Leaves pinnate, greyish; segments 3-6 pairs, ovate, deeply dentate, sometimes 3-lobed or -partite. Rays 8-20. Bracts and bracteoles 6-8, persistent, lanceolate, deflexed. Fruit (7-)9-14 mm, glabrous; inner part of wing usually translucent.{\i  S. half of Balkan peninsula; Kikhlades.} Al Gr Ju.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b   M. psaridiana }Heldr., {\i Österr. Bot. Zeitschr.}{\b  39}: 243 (1889), described from S. Greece (Taiyetos), is said to have the fruit 9 mm, with the inner part of the wing scarcely translucent. In all other respects it appears to be indistinguishable from {\b 3}, and is probably best regarded as a variant of it.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 94.                           Tordylium}                        L.
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc By †T.G. Tutin.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Leaves simple, pinnatisect or pinnate. Sepals prominent, often unequal. Petals whitish or purplish, cuneate or clawed, outer larger and often 2-lobed; apex inflexed. Fruit orbicular or ovate-elliptical, strongly compressed dorsally; margin strongly thickened, usually corrugated or lobed; dorsal ridges inconspicuous; vittae usually solitary.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Rays 20-40 .............................................................................. {\b 5. byzantinum}
\par
1 Rays not more than 15
\par
2 Fruit setose; thickened margin smooth ...................................... {\b 1. maximum}
\par
2 Fruit with soft hairs; thickened margin corrugated
\par
3 Stem stout, sparsely hairy; outer flowers with 1 large,
\par
  ± equally 2-lobed petal; fruit 5-8 mm ............................................ {\b 4. apulum}
\par
3 Stem slender, tomentose; outer flowers with 2 large,
\par
  unequally 2-lobed petals; fruit 2-5 mm
\par
4 Stems 20-50 cm, softly hairy; fruit 2-3 mm, with
\par
  vesicular hairs ............................................................................. {\b 2. officinale}
\par
4 Stems up to c. 15 cm, setose; fruit 3·5-5 mm, with
\par
  soft flexuous hairs .................................................................... {\b 3. pestalozzae}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. T. maximum} L.,{\i  Sp. Pl.} 240 (1753). Stout, shortly hispid biennial or annual 30-130 cm. Stem with deflexed bristles, ridged, hollow, usually much-branched. Leaves pinnate; basal with ovate or suborbicular, crenate segments which are cordate at base; cauline with ovate-lanceolate to linear-lanceolate, dentate segments which are cuneate at base, sometimes reduced to the terminal segment. Rays 5-15. Bracts and bracteoles numerous, subulate. Outer flowers with 2-3 petals larger than the others (2-3 mm) and unequally 2-lobed. Fruit 5-8 mm, setose; wing with a thin inner part; thickened margin smooth, not corrugated.{\i  S. & S.C. Europe, though doubtfully native in the northern part of its range.} Al Au *Br Bu Co Cz Ga Gr Hs Hu It Ju Lu Rm Rs (W, K) Sa Si Tu [Be Ge He].
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. T. officinale} L.,{\i  Sp. Pl.} 239 (1753). Slender, pubescent annual 20-50 cm. Stem with short, rather soft, more or less vesicular, deflexed or patent hairs, ridged, hollow, simple or branched from the base. Lower leaves pinnate with ovate to suborbicular deeply cordate segments, sometimes reduced to the terminal segment; upper leaves simple to pinnatisect, lanceolate or oblong, dentate or crenate-dentate. Rays 8-14. Bracts and bracteoles about as long as the rays, numerous, subulate, stiffly ciliate. Outer flowers with 2 petals much larger than the others (5-8 mm), each very unequally 2-lobed. Fruit 2-3 mm, with soft, vesicular hairs; wing without a thin inner part; thickened margin corrugated.{\i  Italy, Balkan peninsula and Aegean region.} Al Cr Gr It Ju Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 3. T. pestalozzae} Boiss.,{\i  Diagn. Pl. Or. Nov. }{\b 2}({\b 10}): 45 (1849). Like {\b 2} but stems up to 15 cm, slender, setose; leaves mostly basal; fruit 3·5-5 mm, with soft, flexuous, not vesicular hairs.{\i  Kikladhes and Karpathos.} Cr Gr. ({\i S. & W. Anatolia}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 4. T. apulum} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 239 (1753). Stout, softly and rather sparsely pubescent annual 20-50 cm. Stem densely hairy at base, with sparse long hairs above, ridged, solid, branched. Leaves pinnate; lower with ovate, deeply crenate segments; uppermost with linear, entire segments. Rays 3-8. Bracts and bracteoles much shorter than the rays, several, subulate, stiffly ciliate. Outer flowers with one petal larger than the others (4-6 mm), more or less equally 2-lobed and appearing like 2 large petals. Fruit 5-8 mm, with soft, vesicular hairs; wing with a thin inner part; thickened margin corrugated, minutely papillose.{\i  Mediterranean region.} Al Bl Co Cr Ga Gr Hs It Ju Sa Si Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 5. T. byzantinum} (Aznav.) Hayek,{\i  Prodr. Fl. Penins. Balcan.}{\b  1}: 1045 (1927). Annual 30-90 cm. Stem with short stiff bristles and soft hairs below, ridged, branched. Leaves sometimes entire, ovate or cordate, crenate, sometimes pinnate, with 3-5 ovate, crenate-dentate segments. Rays 20-40. Bracts and bracteoles numerous, setaceous. Outer flowers with 2 petals much larger than the others, each very unequally 2-lobed. Fruit c. 3 mm, with soft vesicular hairs; wing without a thin inner part; thickened margin smooth, not corrugated.{\i  Kriti; Turkey-in-Europe} ({\i near Istanbul}). Cr Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b  Ainsworthia trachycarpa} Boiss., {\i Diagn. Pl. Or. Nov. }{\b 2}({\b 10}): 43 (1849), has been reported from Makedonija, but probably in error.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 95.                       Laser}                     Borkh.
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc By †T.G. Tutin.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Leaves 2- to 3-ternate. Sepals conspicuous. Petals white, obovate, long-clawed; apex inflexed. Fruit ovoid or oblong. Primary and secondary ridges very prominent, thickened; vittae solitary under the secondary ridges.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. L. trilobum} (L.) Borkh.,{\i  Botaniker} ({\i Halle}) 246 (1795) ({\i Siler trilobum} (L.) Crantz). Glabrous perennial up to 120 cm; stock with fibrous remains of petioles. Leaf-lobes c. 5 cm, ovate or cordate, crenate-dentate and often lobed. Umbels up to 25 cm in diameter; rays 11-20. Bracts few or none; bracteoles few, caducous, lanceolate, long-acuminate. Fruit 5-10 mm.{\i  C. & E. Europe.} Al Au Bu Cz Ga Ge ?Gr Hu It Ju Rm Rs (B, C, W, K, E).
\par

\par
367}
\par