{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}
\pard\f0\fs28 lamina. Terminal umbel large; lateral umbels smaller, whorled, with male flowers only; rays 10-30, sparsely puberulent at top. Bracts 0-1; bracteoles few, filiform. Sepals triangular. Petals greenish-yellow. Fruit 7-9 mm; wing 2-2·5 mm wide; dorsal ridges prominent. •{\i  E. & E.C. Alps, extending to Hungary, N. Jugoslavia and C. Italy.} Au He Hu It Ju.
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 28. P. hispanicum} (Boiss.) Endl. in Walpers,{\i  Repert. Bot. Syst.}{\b  2}: 411 (1843). Glabrous perennial 60-100 cm. Stock stout, without fibres. Stem terete, striate, solid, simple or little-branched. Lower leaves simply pinnate, often 3-foliolate; segments 30-100 × 20-50 mm, broadly ovate, dentate, the terminal one sometimes lobed; upper cauline leaves with inflated petioles and often no lamina. Rays 15-40, scabrid-puberulent on the inner side. Bracts 0-2; bracteoles several, setaceous. Petals white. Fruit 3·5-5 mm, elliptical; wing c. 1 mm wide; dorsal ridges narrow, prominent.{\i  Damp places. S. & E. Spain.} Hs.
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 29. P. alpinum} (Sieber ex Schultes) B.L. Burtt & P. H. Davis,{\i  Kew Bull. }{\b 1949}: 227 (1949) ({\i P. creticum} Sprengel). Glabrous perennial up to 15 cm. Stem simple or with one branch. Leaves 2-4 cm, all basal, 3-foliolate or more or less deeply 3-lobed; segments suborbicular-cuneate, dentate, the lateral sessile, the terminal stalked. Rays 3-5, smooth and glabrous, unequal. Bracts and bracteoles 0. Petals greenish-white. Fruit 6-7 mm. {\i Mountains. • Kriti.} Cr.
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 91.                      Pastinaca}                         L.
\par
\pard\f0\fs24\qc By †T.G. Tutin.
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28 Leaves simple or pinnate; segments sometimes deeply lobed. Sepals absent. Petals yellow, ovate, incurved. Fruit elliptical, strongly compressed dorsally; lateral ridges winged, the vascular bundles near the outer edge of the wing; vittae 1, rarely 2.
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Bracts and bracteoles several .......................................................... {\b 4. hirsuta}
\par 1 Bracts and bracteoles 0, rarely 1-2, caducous
\par 2 Basal leaves simple .......................................................................... {\b 3. lucida}
\par 2 Basal leaves pinnate
\par 3 Petioles of lower leaves slender, not spongy; secondary veins
\par  of lamina inconspicuous; vittae on the commissural face
\par  stopping short of the ends of the fruit ............................................... {\b 1. sativa}
\par 3 Petioles of lower leaves up to 1 cm in diameter, spongy;
\par  secondary veins of lamina very conspicuous; vittae on
\par  the commissural face reaching the ends of the fruit ...................... {\b 2. latifolia}
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. P. sativa} L.,{\i  Sp. Pl.} 262 (1753). More or less pubescent biennial up to 100 cm. Stem hollow or solid, angled or terete. Basal leaves usually simply pinnate, rarely (subsp.{\i  sativa} var.,{\i  fleischmannii} (Hladnik) Burnat) 2-pinnatisect; secondary veins inconspicuous; segments (2-)5-11, acute or obtuse, crenate-dentate, the teeth with a cartilaginous mucro; petioles slender, not spongy. Rays 5-20, more or less angled. Bracts and bracteoles 0-2, caducous. Fruit 5-7 mm, broadly elliptical; wing 0·25-0·5 mm wide; vittae on the commissural face not reaching the ends of the fruit. {\i Most of Europe except the Arctic, but only as an escape from cultivation in parts of the north.} Al Au Be Br Bu Co Cz Ga Ge Gr He Ho Hs Hu It Ju Po Rm Rs (*B, C, W, K, E) Sa ?Si Tu [Da Fe Hb Lu No Rs (N) Su].
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Stem, petiole, upper surface of leaves and rays with sparse,
\par  short, straight hairs; leaf-segments often narrow and acute
\par  or acuminate, often cuneate at base and ± pinnatisect in lower
\par  part; stem usually strongly angled ........................................ ({\b a}) subsp. {\b sativa}
\par 1 Stem, petiole, upper surface of leaves and rays ± grey-hairy;
\par  hairs on stem usually long and flexuous; leaf-segments usually
\par  broad, obtuse, subcordate at base, crenate-dentate or shallowly
\par  lobed in lower part; stem angled or terete
\par 2 Stem angled .................................................................... ({\b b}) subsp. {\b sylvestris}
\par 2 Stem terete
\par 3 Terminal umbel not or little larger than the others; rays usually
\par  5-7, nearly equal; longest about twice as long as partial umbel
\par  ................................................................................................ ({\b c}) subsp. {\b urens}
\par 3 Terminal umbel much larger than lateral; rays usually 10-12;
\par  longest 3-4 times as long as partial umbel ..................... ({\b d}) subsp. {\b divaricata}
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b sativa} (incl.{\i  P. fleischmannii} Hladnik): Terminal umbel usually with 9-20 very unequal rays; hairs on stem short, straight. 2n = 22.{\i  Widely cultivated for its edible root and often naturalized; almost throughout the range of the species.}
\par
\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b sylvestris} (Miller) Rouy & Camus, {\i Fl. Fr.}{\b  7}: 372 (1901) ({\i P. sylvestris} Miller): Terminal umbel usually with 9-20 very unequal rays; hairs on stem soft and flexuous.{\i  C. & W. Europe}.
\par
\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b c}) Subsp. {\b urens} (Req. ex Godron) Celak.,{\i  Prodr. Fl. Bohm.} 574 (1875) ({\i P. teretiuscula} Boiss.,{\i  P. urens} Req. ex Godron,{\i  P. umbrosa} Steven ex DC.): Hairs usually short and stem often glabrescent.{\i  S., C. & E. Europe}.
\par
\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b d}) Subsp. {\b divaricata} (Desf.) Rouy & Camus, {\i Fl. Fr.}{\b  7}: 374 (1901) ({\i P. divaricata} Desf.): Plant more or less grey-hairy. •{\i  Corse and Sardegna}.
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28   {\b 2. P. latifolia} (Duby) DC.,{\i  Prodr.}{\b  4}: 189 (1830). Like {\b 1} but commonly up to 200 cm; petioles of lower leaves up to 1 cm in diameter, spongy; lamina with a conspicuous network of secondary veins; segments 3-7; vittae on commissural face running the entire length of the fruit.{\i  River-banks and rocky places. • Corse.} Co.
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28   {\b 3. P. lucida} L.,{\i  Mantissa} 58 (1767). Like {\b 1} but leaves shining above, finely serrate; basal simple, cordate; lower cauline larger, pinnate, with 3-7 entire or shallowly lobed segments, the terminal one 3-lobed and cordate; upper cauline entire, subrhombic. •{\i  Islas Baleares.} Bl.
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28   {\b 4. P. hirsuta} Pancic,{\i  Fl. Princ. Serb.} 359 (1874). Perennial with little-branched, angled stem. Leaves pinnate, shortly hispid; segments ovate, lobed and coarsely serrate. Rays 10-16. Bracts and bracteoles several, linear. Fruit 5 mm, elliptical.{\i  Mountain meadows. • E. Jugoslavia, S. & W. Bulgaria.} Bu Ju.
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 92.                          Heracleum}                      L.
\par
\pard\f0\fs24\qc By R.K. Brummitt.
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28 Leaves simple, rarely subentire, usually apparently digitately lobed, or ternatisect, pinnate or 2-pinnate. Calyx-teeth small. Petals white, greenish-yellow or pink. Fruit elliptical or obovate to suborbicular, strongly compressed dorsally, glabrous to villous. Marginal ridges forming a broad wing; dorsal ridges slender; vittae solitary in the furrows, slender or conspicuously swollen at their lower ends, shorter than the fruit.
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28  {\b  Zosima absinthiifolia} (Vent.) Link, {\i Enum. Hort. Berol. Alt. }{\b 1}: 274 (1821), has been recorded from the Lower Volga, but the basis of the record is unknown and it is unlikely that a mountain species such as this would occur there. It is like {\i Heracleum} but has conspicuous sepals and the fruit has a wide, hyaline wing around which the lateral ridges form a thickened rim.
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Stems less than 4 mm in diameter, not more than 50(-65) cm high;
\par  umbels not more than 7(-9) cm in diameter, with 3-15(-17) rays
\par
\par 364}
\par