{\rtf1\ansi \deff4\deflang1033{\fonttbl{\f4\froman\fcharset0\fprq2 Times New Roman;}}{\colortbl;\red0\green0\blue0;\red0\green0\blue255;\red0\green255\blue255;\red0\green255\blue0;\red255\green0\blue255;\red255\green0\blue0;\red255\green255\blue0;\red255\green255\blue255;\red0\green0\blue128;\red0\green128\blue128;\red0\green128\blue0;\red128\green0\blue128;\red128\green0\blue0;\red128\green128\blue0;\red128\green128\blue128;\red192\green192\blue192;}{\stylesheet{\widctlpar \f4\fs20\lang2057 \snext0 Normal;}{\*\cs10 \additive Default Paragraph Font;}}{\info{\author dddd}{\operator dddd}{\creatim\yr1998\mo11\dy5\hr13\min4}{\revtim\yr1998\mo11\dy5\hr13\min4}{\version2}{\edmins0}{\nofpages4}{\nofwords1120}{\nofchars6388}{\*\company  }{\vern57431}}\widowctrl\ftnbj\aenddoc\hyphcaps0 \fet0\sectd \linex0 {\*\pnseclvl1\pnucrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl2\pnucltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl3\pndec\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl4\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl5\pndec\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl6\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl7\pnlcrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl8\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl9\pnlcrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}
\pard\plain \ \f4\fs20\lang2057 {\fs28    }{\b\fs28 19. P. alsaticum}{\fs28  L., }{\i\fs28 Sp. Pl.}{\fs28  ed. 2, 354 (1762) (}{\i\fs28 Johrenia pichleri}{\fs28  Boiss.; incl.}{\i\fs28  P. lubimenkoanum}{\fs28  Kotov). Glabrous, purplish perennial 30-180 cm. Stock stout, branched, with fibres. Stem terete, striate below, somewhat angled above, hollow; branches numerous, short, often whorled. Lower leaves 2- to 4-pinnate, triangular in outline; lobes 10-30 mm, ovate-cuneate in outline and usually lobed, scaberulous on margins and on veins beneath; apex with a small cartilaginous point; petiole and rhachis strongly sulcate on upper surface; upper cauline leaves very small, with broad, auriculate petioles. Rays 6-25, usually 1-2 cm, smooth or slightly rough. Bracts and bracteoles 4-8, persistent, lanceolate to linear-lanceolate, acuminate, not deflexed; margins membranous. Sepals narrow. Petals dull yellow, with few, obtuse, microscopic papillae. Fruit 3-4\'b75 mm, oblong-elliptical; wing c. 0\'b75 mm wide, rather thin and translucent; dorsal ridges wide. 2n = 22. \bullet }{\i\fs28  C. & S.E. Europe, extending to W. France and C. Russia}{\fs28 . Al Au Bu Cz Ga Ge Hu Ju Po Rm Rs (C, W, K, E).
\par 
\par }{\b\fs28    20. P. venetum}{\fs28  (Sprengel) Koch,}{\i\fs28  Syn. Fl. Germ. }{\fs28 305 (1835). Like }{\b\fs28 19}{\fs28  but rays denticulate and puberulent along the whole of the inner side; sepals broad, ovate; petals white, with many acute, microscopic papillae; fruit 5\'b75-6 mm; wing of fruit 0\'b77-1 mm wide. \bullet }{\i\fs28  E. Pyrenees; S. Alps, Appennini.}{\fs28  Ga He Hs It Ju.
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 21. P. austriacum}{\fs28  (Jacq.) Koch, }{\i\fs28 Nova Acta Acad. Leop.-Carol.}{\b\fs28  12}{\fs28 (}{\b\fs28 1}{\fs28 ): 94 (1824). Glabrous or (var.}{\i\fs28  velutinum}{\fs28  Levier) puberulent perennial 30-120 cm. Stock without fibres. Stem sulcate, solid, branched above. Lower leaves 3- to 4-pinnate; lobes ovate in outline, at least some stalked, deeply pinnately divided into oblong or (var.}{\i\fs28  rablense}{\fs28  (Wulfen) Koch) linear to linear-lanceolate lobes with cartilaginous apex; upper cauline leaves less divided, with oblong, auricled petioles. Rays 15-40, papillose on the inner side. Bracts and bracteoles numerous, linear-lanceolate to subulate, ciliate, deflexed. Sepals ovate-lanceolate, acute. Petals white, with very sparse, obtuse papillae. Fruit 6-9 mm, elliptical to nearly oblong; wing 1\'b75-2\'b75 mm wide, thin; dorsal ridges narrow but prominent. \bullet }{\i\fs28  Balkan peninsula and S.C. Europe, extending to E. France}{\fs28 . Al Au Bu Ga Gr He It Ju Rm.
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 22. P. oreoselinum}{\fs28  (L.) Moench,}{\i\fs28  Meth.}{\fs28  82 (1794). Nearly glabrous, often reddish perennial 30-100 cm. Stock with fibres. Stem terete, striate, solid, glabrous or puberulent. Lower leaves up to 40 cm, 2- to 3-pinnate, triangular in outline, somewhat coriaceous; primary and secondary divisions at right angles to the axis or deflexed, the stalks often flexuous; lobes usually 10-30 mm, ovate in outline, pinnately lobed, their stalks narrowly winged; ultimate lobes obovate-cuneate or rhombic, dentate, apiculate; margins thickened, scabrid; upper cauline leaves less divided, their petioles somewhat inflated. Rays 15-30, puberulent on the inner side. Bracts and bracteoles usually numerous, linear-lanceolate, deflexed. Sepals ovate, subobtuse. Petals white or pinkish, papillose. Fruit 5-8 mm, broadly obovate; wing c. 0\'b775 mm wide, rather thick; dorsal ridges slender, scarcely prominent. 2n = 22.}{\i\fs28  Much of Europe, but absent from the islands, the extreme south, and most of the north.}{\fs28  Au Cz \'86Da Ga Ge He Hs Hu It Ju Lu Po Rm Rs (B, C, W, E) Su.
\par 
\par }{\b\fs28   P. bourgaei}{\fs28  Lange in Willk. & Lange,}{\i\fs28  Prodr. Fl. Hisp.}{\b\fs28  3}{\fs28 : 42 (1874), from C. Spain and C. Portugal, is probably a variant of }{\b\fs28 22}{\fs28 , but ripe fruit appears to be still unknown. It is larger in all its parts, and has broad leaf-lobes which are oblique and unequally lobed.
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 23. P. lancifolium}{\fs28  Lange, }{\i\fs28 Vid. Meddel. Dansk Naturh. Foren. Kj\'f8benhavn}{\b\fs28  1865}{\fs28 : 39 (1866). Glabrous perennial 80-120 cm. Stock without fibres. Stem terete, striate, hollow. Lower leaves 2- to 3-pinnate, triangular in outline; lobes (10-)40-60(-100) mm, linear, entire; upper cauline leaves pinnate or simple. Rays 5-12, very unequal, puberulent on the inner side. Bracts and bracteoles 4-7, linear, deflexed. Sepals very short, obtuse. Petals white or pale yellowish-white, sometimes suffused with pink. Fruit 5-6 mm, elliptical; wing 0\'b75-1 mm wide, rather thick; dorsal ridges thick, prominent.}{\i\fs28  Wet meadows and marshes. \bullet  N.W. France, N.W. Spain, W. Portugal.}{\fs28  Ga Hs Lu.
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 24. P. palustre}{\fs28  (L.) Moench, }{\i\fs28 Meth.}{\fs28  82 (1794). Almost glabrous biennial up to 160 cm. Stock without fibres. Stem sulcate, hollow. often purplish. Lower leaves 2- to 4-pinnate, triangular in outline; petiole strongly canaliculate above, often puberulent beneath; lobes 5-20 mm, ovate in outline, pinnately lobed; ultimate lobes linear or oblong, entire or 2- to 3-fid, with an obtuse cartilaginous apex. Rays 20-40, puberulent on the inner side. Bracts and bracteoles 4 or more, very unequal, lanceolate, sometimes 2- to 3-fid, deflexed. Sepals ovate, obtuse. Petals white, papillose-puberulent above. Fruit 4-5 mm, elliptical; wing 0\'b75-0\'b775 mm wide, thick; dorsal ridges wide and prominent; commissural vittae concealed by pericarp.}{\i\fs28  Wet places. Europe, except the south-west, the extreme south and most of the islands.}{\fs28  Au Be Br Bu Cz Da Fe Ga Ge He Ho Hu It Ju No Po Rm Rs (N, B, C, W, E) Su.
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 25. P. cervaria}{\fs28  (L.) Lapeyr.,}{\i\fs28  Hist. Abr. Pyr.}{\fs28  149 (1813). Nearly glabrous perennial 30-150 cm. Stock with fibres. Stem terete, striate, shallowly sulcate above, with few small cauline leaves. Lower leaves up to 50 cm, (1-)2- to 3-pinnate, triangular in outline; lobes up to 50 mm, ovate to ovate-oblong, obtuse or shortly acuminate, cuneate to cordate and often unequal at base, the lower often more or less deeply 1- to 4-lobed; margins dentate, the teeth and apex with sharp, awn-like points; network of veins conspicuous on both surfaces. Rays 15-30, puberulent on the inner side. Bracts numerous, unequal, the larger often pinnatisect, deflexed; bracteoles numerous, subulate, deflexed. Sepals ovate, acute. Petals white, papillose above. Fruit 4-9 mm, elliptical to suborbicular; wing 0\'b75-1 mm wide, rather thick; dorsal ridges scarcely prominent.}{\i\fs28  C. Europe, extending to N. Spain, C. Italy, Albania, E. Ukraine and Lithuania.}{\fs28  Al Au Be Bu Cz Ga Ge He Hs Hu It Ju Po Rm Rs (B, C, W).
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 26. P. ostruthium}{\fs28  (L.) Koch,}{\i\fs28  Nova Acta Acad. Leop.-Carol.}{\b\fs28  12}{\fs28 (}{\b\fs28 1}{\fs28 ): 95 (1824). Almost glabrous perennial 30-100 cm. Rhizome stout, branched. Stem terete, striate, hollow, simple or branched above. Lower leaves up to 30 \'d7 34 cm, usually 2-ternate, triangular in outline; lobes usually 50-100 \'d7 40-70 mm, ovate to lanceolate, acuminate, irregularly dentate; middle lobe sometimes again 3-lobed, lateral ones sometimes 2-lobed; margins and often the veins on the lower surface ciliolate; petioles of cauline leaves strongly inflated. Peduncle puberulent. Rays usually 30-60, puberulent on the inner side. Bracts 0(-1); bracteoles few, setaceous. Petals white or pinkish. Fruit 4-5 mm, suborbicular wing nearly as wide as mericarp.}{\i\fs28  Mountain meadows, woods, stream-banks and rocky places. \bullet  Mountains of C. & S. Europe,from the Sudety to S. Spain and C. Italy; often naturalized elsewhere from cultivation.}{\fs28  Au Co Cz Ga Ge He Hs It Ju Po ?Rm ?Rs (K) [Be Br Da No Rs (C) Su].
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 27. P. verticillare}{\fs28  (L.) Koch ex DC.,}{\i\fs28  Prodr. }{\b\fs28 4}{\fs28 : 181 (1830) (}{\i\fs28 P. altissimum}{\fs28  (Miller) Thell., non Desf., }{\i\fs28 Tommasinia altissima}{\fs28  (Miller) Thell.). Monocarpic, usually living 4-5 years. Stock without fibres. Stem 120-360 cm, up to 5 cm in diameter, terete, striate, hollow; lower branches alternate, upper opposite or whorled. Lower leaves 30-80 cm, ternately 2- to 3-pinnate, triangular in outline; lobes 25-80 \'d7 20-60 mm, ovate or ovate-oblong, irregularly serrate-dentate or 3-lobed; teeth with short cartilaginous points; petioles of lower leaves puberulent; petioles of upper cauline leaves rather narrow, sheath-like, with small
\par 
\par 363}
\par }