{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b G. gasparrinii} Pignatti, {\i Arch. Bot}. ({\i Forli}) {\b 34}: 12 (1958), from the C. Appennini, is like {\b 8} but has smaller flowers. It has only been collected once, and the fruits are unknown; further investigation is desirable.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 9. G. urbanum} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 501 (1753). Plant hairy. Rhizome short, thick; stem 20-60 cm, erect, branched. Basal leaves pinnate, with 1-5 pairs of unequal leaflets; terminal leaflets 2-10 cm, suborbicular and deeply lobed; cauline leaves 3- to 5-partite or 3-lobed, large; stipules 1-3 cm. Inflorescence (1-)2- to 5-flowered; flowers 10-15 mm in diameter, erect, long-stalked. Petals 4-7 mm, obovate or oblong, patent, rather pale yellow; carpophore absent. Achenes 3-6 mm, c. 70, hairy, forming a globose head; rostrum glabrous. 2n = 42. {\i Most of Europe except the extreme north.} All except Az Bl Cr Fa Is Sb.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 10. G. aleppicum} Jacq.,{\i  Icon. Pl. Rar.}{\b  1}: 10 (1786). Plant hairy. Rhizome short, thick; stem 80-120 cm, erect, much-branched. Basal leaves pinnate, with 4-6 pairs of unequal leaflets; terminal leaflet c. 12 cm, deeply lobed, crenate and acutely dentate, cuneate at base; cauline leaves 3-to 5-partite, large; stipules 2-3 cm, deeply cut. Inflorescence (1-)3- to 6-flowered; flowers c. 20 mm in diameter, erect, in large cymes. Petals 8-10 mm, rounded, patent, yellow; carpophore absent. Achenes 2·5-5 mm, 200-250, hairy, forming an obovoid head; rostrum hairy at the base, otherwise glabrous. 2n = 42.{\i  E. & E.C. Europe.} ?Al Cz Hu Po Rm Rs (N, B, C, W, K) [Fe].
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 11. G. molle} Vis. & Pancic,{\i  Mem. Ist. Veneto}{\b  10}: 429 (1861). Plant with a dense, soft pubescence; stem 30-40 cm, erect. Basal leaves pinnate, with 2-3 pairs of small leaflets; terminal leaflet 5-6 cm, orbicular, subcordate, crenate; cauline leaves 3-partite. Stipules 1-2 cm, deeply cut. Inflorescence 3- to 5-flowered; flowers erect. Petals 10-12 mm, elliptical, patent, pale yellow; carpophore absent. Achenes less than 6 mm, numerous, with short, glandular rostrum. 2n = 42. •{\i  Balkan peninsula; C. & S. Italy.} Al Bu Gr It Ju ?Sa.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 12. G. macrophyllum} Willd.,{\i  Enum. Pl. Hort. Berol.} 557 (1809). Stem c. 100 cm, erect, hairy. Basal leaves lyrate, very long stalked; lateral leaflets rather small and distant, the terminal large, 3- to 5-lobed, cordate-reniform; cauline leaves 3- to 8-partite, with lanceolate, incised stipules. Inflorescence 4- to 9-flowered; flowers c. 16 mm in diameter, yellow; carpophore absent. Achenes c. 250 pubescent, forming an ovoid head with glandular rostrum.{\i  Cultivated in gardens; occasionally naturalized.} [Br Cz Ge No Rs (C).] ({\i E. Asia, North America.})
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 13. G. hispidum} Fries, {\i Fl. Halland.} 90 (1818). Plant hirsute and glandular; stem 30-40 cm, erect. Basal leaves pinnate, lanceolate in outline, with 3-5 pairs of leaflets; terminal leaflet c. 6 cm, elongated, deeply 3-lobed or incised; cauline leaves similar but smaller and with smaller terminal lobes; stipules not more than 1 cm. Inflorescence 3- to 5-flowered; flowers small, erect, long-stalked. Petals 5-8 mm, oblong or obovate, patent, pale yellow; carpophore absent. Achenes numerous, forming a globose head; rostrum rather short, glabrous. 2n = 42. • {\i  S.E. Sweden; N.E. Spain. }Hs Su.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc {\b 18.              Waldsteinia}             Willd.
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc By W. Gajewski.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Like{\i  Geum} but leaves ternate or lobed; epicalyx small or absent; carpels 3-15; styles deciduous in fruit.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 Basal leaves lobed; plant without stolons ......................................... {\b 1. geoides}
\par
Basal leaves ternate; plant with stolons ............................................. {\b 2. ternata}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. W. geoides} Willd.,{\i  Ges. Naturf. Freunde Berlin Neue Schr.}{\b  2}: 106 (1799). Rhizome erect or shortly creeping. Leaves broadly cordate-reniform, with 5-7 lobes, coarsely serrate. Stems 15-25 cm, 3- to 7-flowered, with leaf-like bracts. Flowers 10-15 mm; petals auricled at the base. 2n = 14. •{\i  E.C. Europe, extending to S. Bulgaria and W. Ukraine.} Bu Cz Hu Ju Rm Rs (W) [Ge].
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. W. ternata} (Stephan) Fritsch,{\i  Österr. Bot. Zeitschr. }{\b 39}: 449 (1889) ({\i W. trifolia} Rochel). Rhizome creeping, branched, with rooting stolons. Leaves ternate; leaflets sessile, cuneate at the base, shallowly lobed, serrate. Stem 10-15 cm, 3- to 7-flowered, with small bracts. Flowers c. 15 mm; petals not auricled at the base.{\i  Carpathians, from} c. 20°{\i  E. eastwards; a few stations in S.E. Austria and N.W. Jugoslavia.} Au Cz Ju Rm [Fe].
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Known also from E. Asia (Japan to E. Siberia); the European plants appear to be identical although the two populations are separated by more than 5000 km. Further investigation is desirable.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc {\b 19.             Potentilla}     L.
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc By P.W. Ball, B. Pawlowski & S.M. Walters.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Perennial, rarely annual or biennial herbs, or small shrubs. Leaves digitate, pinnate or ternate. Flowers solitary or in cymes, (4-)5(-6)-merous. Hypanthium more or less flat, with a central, hemispherical, dry or spongy receptacle; epicalyx present; stamens 10-30; carpels (4-)10-80; style nearly basal, lateral or terminal. Fruit a head of achenes; styles usually not persistent.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Descriptions of leaves and leaflets refer only to the basal and lower cauline leaves.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Many species are cultivated in gardens for ornament. In addition to those native in Europe, the following species from the Himalayas are cultivated and are very locally naturalized:{\b  P. atrosanguinea} Loddiges ex D. Don, {\i Prodr. Fl. Nepal.} 232 (1825), densely pubescent, with digitate leaves, 5 leaflets and red or purple petals longer than sepals;{\b  P. nepalensis} Hooker,{\i  Exot. Fl.} t. 88 (1824), sparsely hairy, with ternate leaves and orange-scarlet to red or purple petals longer than the sepals;{\b  P. argyrophylla} Wallich ex Lehm., {\i Pugillus}{\b  3}: 36 (1831), with ternate, silvery-sericeous leaves and yellow petals 10-15 mm.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Interspecific hybridization and apomixis are of common occurrence in Subgen.{\i  Potentilla} ({\b 4-54}). Some species or groups of species are known to be complexes composed both of amphimictic, usually diploid, plants and apomictic polyploid plants. The experimental evidence at present available is somewhat fragmentary. {\b 18-20}, {\b 22}, {\b 43} and {\b 49} are known to be wholly or partially apomictic and morphological evidence suggests that {\b 21}, {\b 38-39} and {\b 50} (and possibly others) are of hybrid origin and are therefore likely to be apomictic. Intermediates, presumably of hybrid origin, between any two of {\b 15-51} may occur and be locally common. Some of these appear to reproduce apomictically, and now occur well outside the range of one of the putative parents, e.g.{\i  P. subarenaria} Borbás ex Zimmeter (probably {\b 49} × {\b 51}) in Fennoscandia.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Because of hybridization, and apomixis it is often difficult to classify the material in clear-cut species. As a result of this, occasional individuals may not key out satisfactorily and may have characters which do not fully agree with the descriptions.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Literature: T. Wolf,{\i  Biblioth. Bot.} ({\i Stuttgart}){\b  71}: 1-715 (1908). B.Pawlowski,{\i  Fragm. Fl. Geobot.}{\b  11}: 53-91 (1965) (Subgen.{\i  Fragariastrum}). R. Czapik,{\i  Acta Biol. Cracov.} ({\i Bot}.) {\b 5}: 43-61
\par

\par
36}
\par