{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28   {\b 9. P. coriaceum} Reichenb., {\i Fl. Germ. Excurs.} 866 (1832). Like {\b 7} but leaves 2-ternate; midrib and marginal veins of leaf-lobes with ascending simple branches, which unite to form secondary longitudinal veins which are usually conspicuous near the base of the lobe; bracts usually 0-3; rays 4-11, almost smooth; petals pale yellow to white, weakly papillose; wing of fruit thick, not or scarcely translucent; dorsal ridges low.{\i  Grassland. • W. Jugoslavia, just extending into N.E. Italy}. It Ju.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 10. P. oligophyllum} (Griseb.) Vandas,{\i  Magyar Bot. Lapok}{\b  4}: 110 (1905). Nearly glabrous perennial up to 60 cm. Stem somewhat angled, slender. Lower leaves 1- to 2-pinnate; lobes few, narrowly linear, acute; upper cauline leaves 3-fid or entire. Rays 6-10, glabrous or puberulent. Bracts absent; bracteoles 3-5, filiform. Petals white or pink. Fruit 3-5 mm.{\i  Mountain grassland. • Albania, Jugoslavia, W. Bulgaria.} Al Bu Ju.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b oligophyllum}: stem up to 60 cm, usually branched below the middle. Umbels 2-4; rays 1-5 cm, very unequal, glabrous. Peduncle glabrous. Petals white.{\i  Albania and S. Jugoslavia.}
\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b aequiradium} (Velen.) Tutin,{\i  Feddes Repert.}{\b  79}: 62 (1968) ({\i P. aequiradium} Velen.): stem up to 40 cm, simple or with one branch in the upper part. Umbel 1(-2); rays 0·5-2 cm, subequal, puberulent on the upper surface. Peduncle puberulent. Petals pink.{\i  N. Jugoslavia and W. Bulgaria}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 11. P. achaicum} Halácsy,{\i  Consp. Fl. Graec., Suppl. }42 (1908). Glabrous perennial c. 30 cm. Stem terete, striate, with few leaves. Lower leaves pinnate, oblong in outline; segments 10-13 mm, sessile, ovate in outline, distant, pinnately lobed; lobes 1- to 3-dentate; upper leaves small, with lanceolate, undivided segments. Rays 8-13, smooth. Bracts absent; bracteoles 1-3. Petals white. Fruit ovate; wing c. ½ as wide as mericarp; dorsal ridges somewhat prominent. •{\i  S. Greece} ({\i by the Vouraikos, Akhaia}). Gr.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 12. P. carvifolia} Vill.,{\i  Prosp. Pl. Dauph.} 25 (1779) ({\i P. chabraei} (Jacq.) Reichenb.; incl.{\i  P. podolicum} (Besser) Eichw.). Almost glabrous perennial 30-100 cm. Stock with fibres. Stem sulcate, at least above, solid, branched. Basal leaves 30-40 cm, oblong in outline, shining on both surfaces, 1-pinnate, the segments pinnatisect; lobes 15-30 mm, usually 2- to 3-fid; ultimate divisions linear-oblong, their margins rough; venation reticulate; upper cauline leaves pinnate; segments linear-lanceolate, often falcate, acuminate, entire; petioles oblong-lanceolate. Rays 6-18, very unequal, papillose-puberulent on the inner side. Bracts absent; bracteoles 1 to few, subulate. Petals yellowish or greenish-white. Styles c. 0·5 mm, scarcely as long as stylopodium. Fruit 4-5 mm, broadly elliptical; wing 1/6-1/4 the width of the mericarp, translucent; dorsal ridges filiform, rather prominent.{\i  S. & C. Europe, extending north-westwards to the Netherlands and eastwards to S Russia.} Au Be Bu Cz Ga Ge He Ho Hs Hu It Ju Rm Rs (C, W, E) Si.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 13. P. schottii} Besser ex DC.,{\i  Prodr.}{\b  4}: 178 (1830). Like {\b 12} but leaves dull, somewhat glaucous; rays glabrous and smooth; bracts and bracteoles sometimes several, caducous; petals white or pinkish in bud; styles often up to 2 mm and 2-3 times as long as stylopodium; fruit 6-7·5 mm. 2n = 22.{\i  Rocky slopes; calcicole. • From S.E. France to C. Jugoslavia; one station in W. Ukraine.} Al Ga It Ju Rs (W).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Perhaps not specifically distinct from {\b 12}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 14. P. vittijugum} Boiss.,{\i  Fl. Or.}{\b  2}: 1018 (1872). Usually glabrous perennial or biennial up to 140 cm. Stem terete, striate, solid. Lower leaves 2-pinnate, oblong in outline; lobes 7-10(-15) mm, ovate in outline, pinnately divided, mucronate, with reticulate venation; upper cauline leaves pinnate with long, linear, entire or slightly divided segments. Rays 10-20, very unequal, glabrous. Bracts absent; bracteoles 2-3, linear. Petals yellow. Fruit 5-6 mm, oblong; wing c. 1/5 width of mericarp; dorsal ridges filiform. •{\i  Balkan peninsula.} Al Bu Gr Ju.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b  P. minutifolium} (Janka) Velen., {\i Fl. Bulg., Suppl.} 122 (1898) is probably conspecific with {\b 14}. It has puberulent stems, nearly equal rays, 6-7 bracteoles and broadly winged fruit.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 15. P. obtusifolium} Sibth. & Sm.,{\i  Fl. Graec. Prodr. }{\b 1}: 189 (1806). Glabrous perennial c. 40 cm. Stock with fibres. Stem terete, solid, branched from base. Lower leaves 2-pinnate, narrowly triangular in outline; lobes up to 20 mm, ovate-oblong in outline, deeply dentate or pinnately lobed; cauline leaves similar but smaller. Rays 5-6, stout. Bracts and bracteoles several, short, linear-lanceolate, deflexed. Petals yellowish. Fruit c. 12 mm, ovate or obovate; wing more than half as wide as mericarp, rather thick; dorsal ridges filiform.{\i  Maritime sands. E. Greece, Turkey.} Gr Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 16. P. arenarium} Waldst. & Kit.,{\i  Pl. Rar. Hung.}{\b  1}: 18 (1800) (incl.{\i  P. borysthenicum} Klokov). Glabrous perennial 90-150 (-200) cm. Stock with fibres. Stem terete, striate, solid, branched above. Lower leaves up to 45 cm, 3- to 4-pinnate; lobes 4-14 (-20) mm, ovate in outline, divided into linear or narrowly oblanceolate, mucronate to shortly acuminate, entire or 2- to 3-fid lobes; upper cauline leaves reduced to the inflated petiole. Rays 2-14, usually very unequal. Bracts 0-2, lanceolate; bracteoles several, linear-lanceolate. Petals yellowish. Fruit 6-9 mm, elliptical; wing c. ¼ the width of the mericarp; dorsal ridges conspicuous. {\i Dry, usually sandy ground. From S. Czechoslovakia to Albania and S.E. Russia.} Al Bu Cz Hu Ju Rm Rs (W, E).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b arenarium}: Leaf-lobes narrowly oblanceolate; rays 5-14; pedicel 1-2 times as long as fruit.{\i  Throughout the range of the species, except for Albania and S. & W. Jugoslavia}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b neumayeri} (Vis.) Stoj. & Stefanov,{\i  Fl. Balg.} ed. 3, 857 (1948) ({\i P. neumayeri} (Vis.) Reichenb. fil.): Leaf-lobes linear; rays 2-6; pedicel c. 4 times as long as fruit. •{\i  S. & W. Jugoslavia, Albania, S. Bulgaria}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 17. P. aegopodioides} (Boiss.) Vandas, {\i Sitz.-Ber. Bohm. Ges. Wiss.} ({\i Math.-Nat. Kl}.) {\b 1888}: 449 (1889). Glabrous perennial up to 100 cm. Stock stout; rhizome long, creeping. Stem somewhat angled, hollow, little-branched. Lower leaves 2-ternate; lobes 50-70 × 20-40 mm, ovate or oblong, dentate, truncate or cuneate at base; upper cauline leaves with inflated petioles and 3-5 small segments. Rays 10-25. Bracts (0-)3-6, linear-subulate; bracteoles numerous, as long as pedicels. Petals white or pink. Fruit 5-7 mm, suborbicular; wing 1·5-2 mm wide, somewhat translucent; dorsal ridges filiform.{\i  Beside mountain streams. • Balkan peninsula}. Al Bu Gr Ju.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 18. P. latifolium} (Bieb.) DC.,{\i  Prodr.}{\b  4}: 181 (1830) (incl.{\i  P. macrophyllum} Schischkin). Almost glabrous perennial 40-100 cm. Stock with fibres. Stem terete, striate, somewhat angled above, solid, branched. Leaves simply pinnate; segments 30-60 mm, few, elliptical or ovate, serrate, somewhat fleshy; upper cauline leaves very small, 3-foliolate, with inflated petioles. Rays 10-21, glabrous or puberulent on the inner side. Bracts 4-6, lanceolate or linear-lanceolate, deflexed; bracteoles 5-7, linear. Petals white. Fruit 5-7 mm, elliptical; wing c. 0·5 mm wide; dorsal ridges filiform, inconspicuous. {\i Damp places. From N. Italy to S.E. Russia.} ?Al It Ju Rm Rs (C, W, E).
\par

\par
362}
\par