{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 (1962). A. Müntzing,{\i  Hereditas}{\b  44}: 280-329 (1958),{\i  Bot. Not.}{\b 111}: 300 (1963).209-227(1958). G.L. Smith, {\i New Phytol.}{\b  62}: 264 The last 4 papers deal with apomixis in the genus.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Leaves pinnate
\par
2 Petals white or purple
\par
3 Petals purple, shorter than sepals ................................................. {\b 3. palustris}
\par
3 Petals white, longer than sepals ................................................... {\b 5. rupestris}
\par
2 Petals yellow
\par
4 Flowers solitary in the axils of leaves or large bracts
\par
5 Stoloniferous; petals longer than sepals ....................................... {\b 4. anserina}
\par
5 Not stoloniferous; petals shorter than sepals ................................ {\b 23. supina}
\par
4 Flowers mostly in cymes; bracts small or 0
\par
6 Shrub; achenes pubescent ............................................................ {\b 1. fruticosa}
\par
6 Herbs sometimes woody at base; achenes glabrous
\par
7 Leaflets entire or 2- to 3-fid at apex ............................................... {\b 2. bifurca}
\par
7 Leaflets toothed or pinnatifid, at least some with more
\par
  than 3 teeth or lobes
\par
8 Leaflets toothed or pinnatifid about ½-way to the midrib
\par
9 Petals 4-5 mm; calyx accrescent; sepals c. 10 mm in fruit ..... {\b 24. norvegica}
\par
9 Petals 5 mm or more; calyx not accrescent; sepals less
\par
  than 10 mm in fruit
\par
10 Terminal leaflet of lower leaves 20-40 mm wide, larger
\par
   than the lateral; sepals obtuse ............................ {\b 6. geoides}
\par
10 Terminal leaflet of lower leaves less than 20 mm wide,
\par
   about the same size as the laterals; sepals acute
\par
11 Stem and inflorescence tomentose or sericeous, usually eglandular
\par
12 Leaflets 3-5; petals 5-8 mm .................................................... {\b 8. rubricaulis}
\par
12 Leaflets (5-)7-19; petals 8-10 mm .................................... {\b 11. pensylvanica}
\par
11 Stem and inflorescence with short, glandular and
\par
   eglandular hairs and a few setae 
\par
13 Leaflets 20-40 mm; petals scarcely longer than sepals .......... {\b 12. longifolia}
\par
13 Leaflets 4-25 mm; petals 1½-2 times as long as sepals
\par
14 Lower leaves with 7-12 pairs of leaflets; epicalyx
\par
   segments distinctly longer than sepals ............................. {\b 13. pimpinelloides}
\par
14 Lower leaves with 5-8 pairs of leaflets; epicalyx-
\par
   segments as long as or slightly longer than sepals ....................... {\b 14. visianii}
\par
8  Leaflets pinnatisect, divided almost to the midrib into
\par
   linear or oblong lobes
\par
15 Leaflets 3-5; flowers 1-3(-6) on each stem
\par
16 Petals 3-6 mm, only slightly longer than sepals; stems usually 
\par
   sericeous-villous ......................................................................... {\b 7. pulchella}
\par
16 Petals 5-8 mm, distinctly longer than sepals;
\par
   stems patent-pubescent ............................................................. {\b 8. rubricaulis}
\par
15 Leaflets 5 or more; flowers usually more than 5 on each stem
\par
17 Sepals as long as or slightly longer than epicalyx
\par
   segments; stems and leaves tomentose ....................................... {\b 9. multifida}
\par
17 Sepals about twice as long as epicalyx-segments;
\par
   stems and leaves densely patent-hirsute ......................... {\b 10. eversmanniana} 
\par
1  Leaves ternate or digitate
\par
18 Petals white, cream or pink
\par
19 Style hairy, at least in the lower half, persistent in fruit. .........{\b 75. saxifraga}
\par
19 Style glabrous, or hairy at the extreme base, deciduous
\par
20 Petals with a long claw
\par
21 Leaflets crenate-dentate at least in the apical 2/3,
\par
   tomentose and without straight hairs ......................................... {\b 66. speciosa}
\par
21 Leaflets toothed only at apex, tomentose but with 
\par
   many straight hairs
\par
22 Achenes pubescent .................................................................. {\b 67. apennina}
\par
22 Achenes glabrous
\par
23 Petals purple; leaflets 4-8 mm ................................................... {\b 68. kionaea}
\par
23 Petals white; leaflets 8-20 mm .................................................. {\b 69. deorum}
\par
20 Petals without or with a short claw
\par
24 Leaves ternate, rarely digitate
\par
25 Petals 10-15 mm; stems silvery-grey sericeous ........................... {\b 59. nitida}
\par
25 Petals less than 10 mm; stems not sericeous
\par
26 Stems 5- to many-flowered, exceeding the leaves; carpels 
\par
   sparsely hairy on the dorsal side, otherwise glabrous  ......{\b 65. grammopetala}
\par
26 Stems 1- to 4-flowered, usually shorter than leaves;
\par
   carpels pubescent on the ventral side, otherwise glabrous
\par
27 Leaflets crenate-dentate only towards the apex;
\par
   petals 6-9 mm ............................................................................ {\b 71. montana}
\par
27 Leaflets serrate almost to the base; petals not more than 7 mm
\par
28 Usually stoloniferous; filaments filiform, glabrous ................... {\b 72. sterilis}
\par
28 Not stoloniferous; filaments broad and flat,
\par
   densely ciliate at least up to the middle
\par
29 Petals shorter than or as long as sepals; stems and
\par
   pedicels eglandular .................................................................. {\b 73. micrantha}
\par
29 Petals longer than sepals; stems and pedicels with 
\par
   some pluricellular glandular hairs ........................................... {\b 74. carniolica}
\par
24 Leaves digitate with 5 or more leaflets
\par
30 Flowers stellate, the sepals and petals patent;
\par
   petals usually longer than sepals
\par
31 Stems and inflorescence silvery-sericeous
\par
32 Leaves silvery-sericeous above; stems not more than
\par
   5 cm, 1- or 2-flowered .................................................................... {\b 59. nitida}
\par
32 Leaves glabrous above; stems 10-30 cm, usually 
\par
   many-flowered .................................................................. {\b 60. alchimilloides}
\par
31 Stems and inflorescence not sericeous
\par
33 Leaflets silvery-sericeous beneath, glabrous or 
\par
   subglabrous and green above; achenes with a few long hairs
\par
   at the point of attachment, otherwise glabrous ................................. {\b 70. alba}
\par
33 Leaflets green or somewhat sericeous, but the two surfaces
\par
   always ± similar; achenes villous
\par
34 Free part of stipules of the basal leaves ovate or ovate-
\par
   lanceolate .............................................................................. {\b 58. crassinervia}
\par
34 Free part of stipules of the basal leaves linear or
\par
   linear-lanceolate
\par
35 Petals 6-8 mm wide, much longer than sepals; filaments 
\par
   filiform, glabrous ....................................................................... {\b 57. clusiana}
\par
35 Petals not more than 5 mm wide, slightly longer than
\par
   sepals; filaments thickened and pubescent at base
\par
36 Stems 5-30 cm, pubescent or villous; epicalyx segments as
\par
   long as or slightly longer than sepals ..................................... {\b 55. caulescens}
\par
36 Stems 2-10 cm, densely villous; epicalyxsegments 
\par
   distinctly shorter than sepals ................................................... {\b 56. petrophila}
\par
30 Flowers subcampanulate, the sepals and petals erecto- 
\par
   patent; petals shorter than or about equalling sepals
\par
37 Achenes sparsely hairy on the dorsal side, otherwise 
\par
   glabrous; petals about equalling sepals ............................ {\b 65. grammopetala}
\par
37 Achenes villous; petals shorter than sepals
\par
38 Leaflets grey- or silvery-tomentose or sericeous beneath
\par
39 Stems and petioles with a very short, grey tomentum 
\par
   and with a few long, appressed or erecto-patent hairs ................ {\b 61. valderia}
\par
39 Stems and petioles with dense, long, patent hairs .............. {\b 62. haynaldiana}
\par
38 Leaflets pubescent and glandular beneath, green,
\par
   sometimes sericeous when young
\par
40 Leaflets crenate-serrate in the apical ½; epicalyx
\par
   segments about as long as sepals ............................................... {\b 63. doerfleri}
\par
40 Leaflets with a few teeth in the apical 1/3; epicalyx
\par
   segments longer than sepals ......................................................... {\b 64. nivalis}
\par

\par
37}
\par