{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 divided into numerous linear, mucronate, rigid, sparsely pubescent lobes; basal leaves numerous, suberect; cauline leaves few. Umbels convex, with 10-20 subequal rays. Bracts 4-6, entire or pinnatifid, shorter than the rays; bracteoles setaceous, deflexed. Petals white, the outer ones scarcely radiate. Fruit 4-6 mm; primary ridges densely velutinous; secondary ridges with numerous setaceous, aculeate spines about as long as the width of the mericarp.{\i  Dry hillsides. C. & S. Spain, C. Portugal.} Hs Lu. ({\i N. Africa.})
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 10. D. crinitus} Desf.,{\i  op. cit.} 242 (1798). Like {\b 9} but stems sparsely retrorse-scabrid; basal leaves pubescent; male umbels more or less flat, with up to 30 unequal rays; bracts 6-10; bracteoles linear-lanceolate; petals sometimes purplish beneath; primary ridges with biseriate, sericeous bristles; secondary ridges with spines 1½-2 times as long as the width of the mericarp.{\i  Dry hillsides and disturbed ground. C. & S. Spain, Portugal.} Hs Lu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 109.                       Pseudorlaya}                   (Murb.)Murb.
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc By V.H. Heywood.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Leaves 2- to 3-pinnate. Bracts several, linear. Sepals conspicuous. Petals white or purplish, scarcely radiating; apex inflexed. Fruit ellipsoid; primary ridges filiform, ciliate; secondary ridges with 2-3 rows of glochidiate spines.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 Fruit 7-10 × 5-6 mm; all secondary ridges with smooth spines
\par
   2·5-3·5 mm, those of the lateral ridges widened at the base ........... {\b 1. pumila}
\par
Fruit 5-6 × 2·5-3·5 mm; all secondary ridges with scabrid spines
\par
   0·5-1·5 mm, not widened at the base ......................................... {\b 2. minuscula}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. P. pumila} (L.) Grande, {\i Nuovo Gior. Bot. Ital.} nov. ser.,{\b  32}: 86 (1925) ({\i Daucus pumilus} (L.) Hoffmanns. & Link, {\i Orlaya maritima} (L.) Koch,{\i  Pseudorlaya maritima} (L.) Murb.; incl.{\i  P. bubania} (Philippe) Murb.). Densely hairy annual up to 20 cm, branched from the base. Leaves 2- to 3-pinnate, the segments divided into ovate lobes. Rays 2-5, unequal. Bracts 2-5, linear, acuminate, green, sometimes 3-fid; bracteoles linear-lanceolate. Petals white or purplish, the outer only slightly larger than the others. Fruit 7-10 × 5-6 mm, ellipsoid; lateral secondary ridges with 8 prominent, smooth spines, widened at the base, the other secondary ridges with c. 18 narrow spines 2·5-3·5 mm. 2n = 16.{\i  Maritime sands; more rarely inland. Mediterranean region, C. & S. Portugal.} Al Bl Co Cr Ga Gr Hs It Lu Sa Si
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   A well-marked variant with short spines on the fruits (var.{\i  breviaculeata} (Boiss.) Heywood) is found in various parts of the range of the species; a similar variant with smaller fruits occurs in S. France and has been confused with the following species.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. P. minuscula} (Pau ex Font Quer) Laínz, {\i Bol. Inst. Estud. Astur.} ({\i Supl. Ci}.) ser. C,{\b  5}: 39 (1962) ({\i P. pycnacantha} H. Lindb.). Like {\b 1} but petals usually white; fruits 5-6 × 2·5-3·5 mm; spines on all secondary ridges 25-40, similar, 0·5-1·5 mm, scabrid, not widened at the base.{\i  Maritime sands. N. & C. Portugal, Sardegna; probably also in Spain and S. France.} ?Ga ?Hs Lu Sa.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Very like {\b 1} in its vegetative characters and often confused with it, but distinct in its fruits. The distribution is not yet fully known.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 110.                       Artedia}                        L.
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc By †T.G. Tutin.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Leaves 3-pinnate. Sepals absent. Petals white, the inner ovate, obtuse; the outer very large, obovate, with lobed margin. Fruit ovate, strongly compressed dorsally. Dorsal ridges inconspicuous, lateral secondary ridges forming a thickened border which is deeply divided into ovate-spathulate lobes.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. A. squamata} L.,{\i  Sp. Pl.} 242 (1753). Slender, glabrous annual 30-50 cm. Leaf-lobes setaceous. Umbels with numerous rays and in the middle a tuft of violet bristles. Bracts and bracteoles leaflike, with setaceous lobes. {\i Turkey-in-Europe }({\i Gelibolu}). Tu. ({\i S.W. Asia.})
\par

\par
375}
\par