{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 101.                     Melanoselinum}                      Hoffm.
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc By †T.G. Tutin.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Like{\i  Thapsia} but monocarpic; petals whitish or purplish; fruit pubescent, almost black; lateral wings strongly denticulate.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. M. decipiens} (Schrader & Wendl.) Hoffm.,{\i  Gen. Umb. }177 (1814). Biennial or monocarpic perennial. Stem 120-280 cm, woody and leafless in lower part, smooth, terete. Leaves c. 40 × 30 cm, 2- to 3-pinnate, rhachis and midribs pubescent; lobes 20-120 mm, lanceolate or ovate, acute, sharply serrate or dentate; petioles strongly inflated. Inflorescence 60-90 cm, much-branched, leafy, somewhat pubescent. Rays 30-50, pubescent. Bracts 20-30 mm, 10-12, lanceolate or ovate, irregularly cut, pubescent; bracteoles about as long as pedicels, numerous, lanceolate, pubescent. Fruit 12-14 mm, oblong, pubescent, almost black; lateral wings c. 1·5 mm wide, dark brown, strongly denticulate.{\i  Açores.} Az. ({\i Madeira, Canarias.})
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 102.                           Torilis}                      Adanson
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc By J.F.M. Cannon.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Annual, rarely biennial. Leaves 1- to 3-pinnate, the segments jaggedly toothed. Sepals small, rarely conspicuous, persistent. Petals white or pinkish; apex inflexed. Fruit linear to ovoid, narrowed at the commissure. Ridges slender, ciliate, the grooves between the ridges usually filled with spines or tubercles.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Umbels mostly lateral, leaf-opposed; peduncles up to 5 cm
\par
2 Plant usually procumbent; rays very short, concealed by
\par
  flowers or fruit ................................................................................. {\b 1. nodosa}
\par
2 Plant erect; rays evident ........................................................... {\b 6. leptophylla}
\par
1 Umbels mostly terminal on peduncles usually more than 5 cm
\par
3 Bracts 4-12
\par
4 Outer petals only slightly longer than inner; ripe fruit
\par
  3-4 mm; style 2-3 times as long as the stylopodium .................... {\b 3. japonica}
\par
4 Outer petals distinctly longer than inner; ripe fruit c. 2 mm;
\par
  style 5-6 times as long as the stylopodium ................................... {\b 4. ucranica}
\par
3 Bracts 0-1
\par
5 Leaves very finely divided; lobes less than 1 mm wide ................. {\b 5. tenella}
\par
5 Leaves coarsely divided; lobes at least 2 mm wide ...................... {\b 2. arvensis}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. T. nodosa} (L.) Gaertner,{\i  Fruct. Sem. Pl.}{\b  1}: 82 (1788). Annual up to 50 cm, usually procumbent. Leaves 1- to 2-pinnate, with deeply pinnatifid segments. Umbels sessile to shortly pedunculate, leaf-opposed; rays very short, generally concealed by the flowers or fruit, giving the umbels a capitate appearance. Bracts absent; bracteoles exceeding the subsessile flowers. Petals pinkish-white. Fruit 2-3 mm; outer mericarp with straight, patent spines, the inner with tubercles. 2n = 22.{\i  S. & W. Europe; naturalized in C.Europe.} Al Be Bl Br Bu Co Cr Ga Gr Hb Ho Hs It Ju Lu Rm Rs (K) Sa Si Tu [Au Cz Ge He].
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. T. arvensis} (Hudson) Link,{\i  Enum. Hort. Berol. Alt.}{\b  1}: 265 (1821). Usually erect annual up to 100 cm. Leaves very variable, from 2-pinnate to 3-foliolate; lobes at least 2 mm wide, coarsely toothed, remotely serrate or subentire. Rays 2-12. Bracts 0-1; bracteoles numerous. Fruit 3-6 mm; both mericarps spiny, or the outer spiny and the inner tuberculate; rarely the whole fruit covered with tubercles. 2n = 12.{\i  W., S. & C. Europe.} Al Au Az Be Bl*Br Bu Co Cr Cz Ga Ge Gr He Ho Hs Hu It Ju Lu Po Rm Rs (W, K, E) Sa Si Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   A difficult complex, here divided into subspecies, all of which have been accorded specific recognition by various authors. It is urgently in need of revision using modern methods.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Rays 4-12
\par
2 Styles 3-6 times as long as the stylopodium; outer petals
\par
  distinctly radiate ............................................................... ({\b a}) subsp. {\b neglecta}
\par
2 Styles 2-3 times as long as the stylopodium; outer petals
\par
  only slightly radiate .......................................................... ({\b b}) subsp. {\b arvensis}
\par
1 Rays 2-3(-4)
\par
3 Rays 2(-4), rather robust, widely diverging, usually forming
\par
  an angle of c. 90°; upper leaves similar to lower but reduced;
\par
  fruit 5-6 mm ..................................................................... ({\b c}) subsp. {\b elongata}
\par
3 Rays (2-)3(-4), slender, usually forming an angle of 45°-60°;
\par
  upper leaves usually with linear, remotely serrate to entire
\par
  segments; fruit 4-5 mm ................................................... ({\b d}) subsp. {\b purpurea}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b neglecta} (Schultes) Thell. in Hegi,{\i  Ill. Fl. Mitteleur. }{\b 5}({\b 2}): 1055 (1926) ({\i T. radiata} Moench): stem erect, much branched. Rays 4-12. Outer petals up to 2 mm or more, distinctly radiate. Styles 3-6 times as long as the stylopodium.{\i  C. & S. Europe}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b arvensis} (subsp.{\i  divaricata} Thell.,{\i  T. helvetica} C.C. Gmelin): stem either ascending and often little-branched, the branches forming a narrow angle with the stem, or low and much-branched, the branches making a wide angle with the stem. Rays 4-12. Outer petals not more than 1·5 mm, very slightly radiate. Styles 2-3 times as long as the stylopodium.{\i  Throughout the range of the species}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b c}) Subsp. {\b elongata} (Hoffmanns. & Link) Cannon,{\i  Feddes Repert.}{\b  79}: 62 (1968) ({\i Caucalis elongata} Hoffmanns. & Link): stem erect, little-branched; upper leaves like the lower but smaller. Rays usually 2. Petals often tinged with violet or purple, the outer not radiate. Styles scarcely longer than the stylopodium.{\i  Mediterranean region}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b d}) Subsp. {\b purpurea} (Ten.) Hayek,{\i  Prodr. Fl. Penins. Balcan. }{\b 1}: 1057 (1927) ({\i T. heterophylla} Guss., {\i T. torgesiana} (Hausskn.) Hayek,{\i  T. arvensis} subsp.{\i  heterophylla} (Guss.) Thell.: stem erect, with few branches. Basal leaves (often absent at maturity) pinnate, with deeply divided segments; uppermost leaves 3-foliolate, with linear-lanceolate to linear segments, the central segment very long; margin remotely serrate to subentire. More rarely upper and lower leaves similar, but upper smaller and less divided. Rays usually 3.{\i  S. Europe.}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 3. T. japonica} (Houtt.) DC.,{\i  Prodr.}{\b  4}: 219 (1830) ({\i T. anthriscus} (L.) C.C. Gmelin, non Gaertner). Erect annual or rarely biennial up to 125 cm. Leaves 1- to 3-pinnate; apex of lobes ovate to narrowly ovate. Rays 5-12. Bracts 4-6(-12); bracteoles well-developed. Outer petals slightly longer than the inner. Fruit 3-4 mm, with recurved spines. Styles patent, 2-3 times as long as the stylopodium. 2n = 16.{\i  Europe, except the extreme north and much of the Mediterranean region.} All except Az Cr Fa Is Rs (N) Sa Sb Si.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 4. T. ucranica} Sprengel in Roemer & Schultes,{\i  Syst. Veg.}{\b  6}: 485 (1820) ({\i T. microcarpa} Besser). Like {\b 3} but leaf-lobes linear to linear-lanceolate; rays 10-15; outer petals distinctly longer than the inner, radiate; fruit c. 2 mm; styles 5-6 times as long as the stylopodium. {\i S.E. Europe, extending locally to Hungary and S.E. Poland.} Bu Gr Hu Ju Po Rm Rs (C, W, E) Tu [Ge].
\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Perhaps overlooked in some areas, but some records may be erroneous.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 5. T. tenella} (Delile) Reichenb. fil. in Reichenb. & Reichenb. fil.,{\i  Icon. Fl. Germ.}{\b  21}: 84 (1867) ({\i Caucalis tenella} Delile). Erect annual, with a simple or branched stem up to 60 cm. Leaves 2-pinnate; lobes less than 1 mm wide, narrowly linear. Rays 5-9(-11). Bracts 0-1; bracteoles linear-lanceolate. Sepals conspicuous. Fruit linear in outline. Stigmas sessile on the conical stylopodium.{\i  Rocky hillsides. S.E. Greece.} Gr. ({\i S.W. Asia, Egypt}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 6. T. leptophylla} (L.) Reichenb. fil. in Reichenb. & Reichenb. fil.,{\i  Icon. Fl. Germ.}{\b  21}: sub t. 169 (1866) ({\i T. xanthotricha} (Steven) Schischkin, {\i Caucalis leptophylla} L.). Erect annual up to 40 cm,
\par

\par
371}
\par