{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 membranous-margined, ciliate, often 3-fid at apex; bracteoles almost entirely membranous. Petals white or pinkish. Fruit 6-9 mm, ellipsoid; lateral wings c. 1·5 mm, dorsal often narrower. •{\i  Alps} ({\i local});{\i  Corse.} Au Co Ga He It.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b halleri}: Pubescent; hairs on leaves and petioles often in small groups; leaf-lobes usually ovate in outline; bracts ciliate; bracteoles lanceolate; sepals usually ciliate.{\i  Alps}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b cynapiifolium} (Viv. ex DC.) P. Fourn.,{\i  Quatre Fl. Fr.} 694 (1937) ({\i L. cynapiifolium} (Viv. ex DC.) Salis): Almost glabrous; leaf-lobes usually linear-lanceolate in outline; bracts sparsely ciliate; bracteoles setaceous or subulate; sepals glabrous. 2n = 22.{\i  Corse}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 10. L. gallicum} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 248 (1753). Robust, glabrous or slightly hairy perennial up to 160 cm. Stock with abundant fibres. Stem terete, striate, branched. Lower leaves c. 50 cm, 3- to 5-pinnate, triangular in outline; lobes 10-20 mm, linear-lanceolate or oblanceolate, entire or 3-fid; midrib slender, lateral veins obscure. Petioles of upper cauline leaves narrow. Rays 20-50, rough on the inner side. Bracts and bracteoles numerous, linear-lanceolate, ciliate. Petals white or pink. Fruit c. 6 mm, oblong; lateral wings c. 2 mm wide, the dorsal narrower. {\i Calcicole. • Mountains of S. Europe from Spain to Italy.} Bl Ga Hs It Sa.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   {\b  L. paradoxum} A. Bolós & Font Quer,{\i  Collect. Bot.} ({\i Barcelona}){\b  1}: 297 (1947), from the Pyrenees, is a variant of{\b  10} with hairs at the junctions of the branches of the leaves and with considerable development of the pericarp over the primary ridges, rather as in {\i Guillonea}. Intermediates between this extreme form and the typical plant occur in N.E. Spain.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 11. L. pseudomeum} Orph., Heldr. & Sart. ex Boiss.,{\i  Diagn. Pl. Or. Nov.}{\b  3}({\b 2}): 95 (1856). Glabrous perennial 10-25 cm. Stem terete, striate, simple or with 1-2 branches. Lower leaves 2- to 3-pinnate, oblong-lanceolate in outline; lobes orbicular in outline, again divided into numerous, crowded, linear-setaceous lobes; cauline leaves few. Petioles rather narrow. Rays 7-9, rough on the inner side. Bracts and bracteoles numerous, lanceolate, broadly membranous, almost glabrous. Petals white. Fruit c. 8 mm, oblong; lateral wings c. 2 mm, the dorsal narrower. •{\i  Mountains of C. & S. Greece.} Gr.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 12. L. prutenicum} L.,{\i  Sp. Pl.} 248 (1753). More or less pubescent biennial 30-100 cm, occasionally of longer duration but always monocarpic. Stock without fibres. Stem slender, angled, glabrous or rarely somewhat hispid, branched above. Lower leaves 2- to 3-pinnate, triangular in outline; lobes 10-25 × 2-9 mm, lanceolate or elliptical, sessile or shortly stipitate, usually dentate or lobed, glabrous above, more or less hispid beneath, ciliate; veins obscure. Petioles of upper cauline leaves narrow. Rays (6-)12-20(-30), rough on the inner side. Bracts and bracteoles numerous, conspicuous, linear-lanceolate, broadly membranous, ciliate, soon deflexed. Petals white, or with a yellowish tinge. Fruit 3·5-4·5 mm, broadly ellipsoid; primary ridges hispid; lateral wings c. 1 mm wide, the dorsal narrower. •{\i  C., E. and parts of S. Europe, from N. Germany & C. Russia to N. Portugal, N. Italy and Bulgaria.} Au Bu Cz Ga Ge He Hs Hu It Ju Lu Po Rm Rs (B, C, W, E).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b prutenicum}: Stem stout, more or less pubescent; leaf-lobes lanceolate; rays usually more than 12. {\i Throughout the range of the species, except S.W. France and N.W. Spain}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b dufourianum} (Rouy & Camus )Tutin,{\i  Feddes Repert. }{\b 74}; 31 (1967) ({\i L. prutenicum }forme{\i  dufourianum} Rouy & Camus): Stem slender, glabrous; leaf-lobes linear-lanceolate; rays 6-12. {\i S.W. France, N.W. Spain}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 13. L. hispidum} Bieb.,{\i  Fl. Taur.-Cauc. }{\b 1}: 221 (1808). Like {\b 12} but perennial; stem hispid throughout; rays 30-40, hispid; petals yellow; fruit 6 mm, ellipsoid-oblong.{\i  S. & E. Ukraine}. Rs (K, E).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 99.                       Thapsia}                  L.
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc By †T.G. Tutin.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Leaves (1-)2- to 3-pinnate. Sepals small. Petals yellow, cuneate or long-clawed; apex inflexed. Fruit oblong to ovate, compressed dorsally. Primary ridges slender, inconspicuous; dorsal secondary ridges like the primary or sometimes narrowly winged, the marginal ones broadly winged.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Leaves pinnate; lobes 50-120 mm ................................................ {\b 2. maxima}
\par
1 Leaves (1-)2- to 4-pinnate; lobes 5-25(-50) mm
\par
2 Ultimate lobes of leaves regularly dentate ...................................... {\b 1. villosa}
\par
2 Ultimate lobes of leaves entire or with 1-2 teeth ....................... {\b 3. garganica}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. T. villosa} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 261 (1753). Somewhat pubescent, pruinose perennial 30-200 cm. Stock with abundant fibres. Stem terete, striate, solid. Lower leaves 20-35 × 10-30 cm, 3- to 4-pinnate, more or less villous to hispidulous on rhachis and lamina; lobes 5-15 mm, rarely (var.{\i  platyphyllos} P. Silva & Franco) up to 30 mm, ovate-oblong to oblong in outline, dentate or shallowly lobed; teeth with a spinous mucro; petioles of upper cauline leaves inflated, without lamina. Rays 9-24. Bracts and bracteoles few or none. Fruit 8-15 mm, elliptical; lateral wings 2-3 mm wide, deeply emarginate at base and apex; dorsal ridges not or very narrowly winged.{\i  Portugal to S. France.} Ga Hs Lu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. T. maxima} Miller,{\i  Gard. Dict.} ed. 8, no. 2 (1768). Like {\b 1} but nearly glabrous; lower leaves up to 50 cm, pinnate, ovate in outline; lobes 50-120 mm, ovate-oblong in outline, dentate or shallowly lobed, often decurrent; fruit 7-10 mm. •{\i  C. & S. Spain, E. & S. Portugal.} Hs Lu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 3. T. garganica} L.,{\i  Mantissa} 57 (1767) ({\i T. decussata} Lag.). Glabrous or sparsely hispid, pruinose perennial 30-250 cm. Stock with abundant stiff fibres. Stem terete, striate, solid. Lower leaves 10-40 × 5-20 cm, (1-)2- to 3-pinnate, narrowly triangular in outline, glaucous beneath; lobes 10-50 mm, linear-oblong, often again lobed; ultimate lobes entire or with 1-2 teeth, acute or obtuse. Rays 5-20, glabrous. Bracts and bracteoles absent. Fruit 12-25 mm, oblong or elliptical; lateral wings 3-6 mm wide, deeply emarginate at base and apex; dorsal ridges not winged.{\i  S. part of Mediterranean region, extending to Portugal.} Bl Cr Gr Hs It Lu Sa Si
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 100.                           Rouya}                         Coincy
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc By †T.G. Tutin.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Like{\i  Thapsia} but bracts and bracteoles numerous; sepals conspicuous, accrescent, exceeding the stylopodium; petals white; fruit strongly compressed; dorsal ridges distinctly winged.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. R. polygama} (Desf.) Coincy,{\i  Naturaliste} ({\i Paris}) {\b 23}: 213 (1901) ({\i Thapsia polygama} Desf.). Almost glabrous perennial 10-30 cm. Stock rather slender, flexuous, with whitish, scale-like leaf-bases in upper part. Stem striate, sparsely hairy, solid. Lower leaves 2-8 cm, 2-pinnate, ovate in outline; lobes 5-10 mm, ovate to oblong-lanceolate, sometimes dentate or 3-fid, acute. Rays 10-20. Bracts several, usually 2- to 3-fid, ciliate; bracteoles several, linear-lanceolate. Fruit c. 8 mm, oblong-elliptical; lateral wings 1-1·5 mm wide, undulate; dorsal ridges narrowly winged.{\i  Maritime sands. Corse and Sardegna.} Co Sa. ({\i N. Africa}.)
\par

\par
370}
\par