{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 forming conspicuous wings. Other plants from Greece show similar features and they may prove to form a subspecies of {\b 1}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. O. grandiflora} (L.) Hoffm., {\b Gen. Umb.} 58 (1814) ({\i Caucalis grandiflora} L.). Like {\b 1} but rays 5-12; outer petals up to 8 times as long as the others; fruit c. 8 mm, ovoid-lanceolate with the spines on the secondary ridges shorter than the width of the fruit, scarcely compressed and not confluent. 2n = 20. {\i Dry places. S., C. & W. Europe, northwards to Belgium.} Al Au Be Bu Cr Cz Ga Ge Gr He Hs Hu It Ju Rm Rs (K) Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 3. O. daucorlaya} Murb.,{\i  Lunds Univ. Årsskr.}{\b  27}({\b 5}): 119 (1892). Annual. Stems up to 80 cm, branched from the middle or the base, glabrous. Leaves 3- to 4-pinnatisect, the ultimate segments linear-lanceolate; upper cauline leaves 2- to 3-pinnate. Umbels long-pedunculate, with 6-10 rays. Bracts lanceolate, half as long as the rays; bracteoles obovate, with a wide, membranous, ciliate margin. Petals white, the outer 8 times as long as the others. Fruit 9-11 mm, ellipsoid; spines on secondary ridges in a single row or partly 2-seriate, strongly compressed and confluent at the base.{\i  Rocky places, scrub, hedgerows. Balkan peninsula, Slovenija; one station in C. Italy.} Al ?Bu Gr It Ju.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 108.                   Daucus}                          L.
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc By V.H. Heywood.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Leaves 2- to 3-pinnate. Bracts several, usually pinnatisect. Sepals small or obsolete. Petals white, yellowish or purplish, the outer often radiate; apex inflexed. Fruit ellipsoid to ovoid, cylindrical or somewhat compressed dorsally; primary ridges filiform, ciliate; secondary ridges with a single row of spines.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Umbels subsessile, leaf-opposed; styles very short ...................... {\b 1. durieua}
\par
1 Umbels pedunculate; styles medium or long
\par
2 Lower leaves pinnately divided into sessile, rigid,
\par
  multifid, apparently verticillate segments
\par
3 Umbels convex; rays subequal; primary ridges of
\par
  mericarps densely velutinous; spines on secondary
\par
  ridges about as long as the width of the mericarp ........................ {\b 9. setifolius}
\par
3 Umbels ±flat; rays unequal; primary ridges of mericarps
\par
  with bristles; spines on secondary ridges 1½-2 times
\par
  as long as the width of the mericarp ............................................. {\b 10. crinitus}
\par
2 Lower leaves 2- to 3-pinnate, with petiolulate lobes
\par
  which do not appear to be verticillate
\par
4 Spines on secondary ridges of mericarp not confluent
\par
  at the base, not longer than the width of the mericarp ...................... {\b 8. carota}
\par
4 Spines on secondary ridges of mericarp dilated, confluent
\par
  at the base or winged, (1-)2-3 times as long as the width
\par
  of the mericarp
\par
5 Rays 3-4; the petals less than 1 mm ...................................... {\b 7. involucratus}
\par
5 Rays 6 to numerous; at least the outer radiate petals
\par
  more than 1 mm
\par
6 Bracts deflexed in flower
\par
7 Rays markedly unequal; spines on fruits silvery-white,
\par
  widely confluent at the base; petals remaining white ................ {\b 2. muricatus}
\par
7 Rays slightly unequal; spines on fruits yellowish,
\par
  slightly dilated but not confluent at the base; petals
\par
  becoming yellowish after anthesis ................................................... {\b 5. aureus}
\par
6 Bracts not deflexed in flower
\par
8 Bracts usually longer than the rays; spines on secondary
\par
  ridges of mericarp dilated but not markedly confluent
\par
  at the base ...................................................................................... {\b 6. guttatus}
\par
8 Bracts as long as or shorter than the rays; spines on
\par
  secondary ridges of mericarp markedly confluent and
\par
  winged at the base
\par
9 Annual; rays 8-14; fruit 4-6 mm ..................................................... {\b 3. broteri}
\par
9 Biennial; rays 12-40; fruits 2-3 mm .......................................... {\b 4. halophilus}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Sect. DURIEUA Batt. Umbels subsessile, leaf-opposed. Styles short, erect.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. D. durieua} Lange in Willk. & Lange,{\i  Prodr. Fl. Hisp. }{\b 3}: 23 (1874). Annual; stems 15-30 cm, erect or ascending, flexuous, branched from the base, retrorse-scabrid. Leaves 2- to 3-pinnate; lobes lanceolate, entire or 2- to 3-fid, shortly hispid. Rays 3-5, markedly unequal. Bracts several, unequal, resembling the cauline leaves; bracteoles 3-5, linear-lanceolate, entire or pinnatifid. Petals very small, yellowish-white. Fruit 5-6 mm, oblong-elliptical; primary ridges of mericarps with several rows of whitish spines; secondary ridges with golden-yellow spines.{\i  Dry hillsides and disturbed ground. Spain and E. Portugal.} Hs Lu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Sect. DAUCUS. Leaf-lobes petiolulate; umbels pedunculate. Styles medium to long, erecto-patent.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. D. muricatus} (L.) L.,{\i  Sp. Pl.} ed. 2, 349 (1762). Annual; stems up to 60 cm, branched above, hispid. Leaves 3-pinnate; lobes linear-lanceolate, mucronate, sparsely hairy. Rays numerous, markedly unequal, contracted in fruit. Bracts pinnatisect, the segments linear-setaceous, later deflexed; bracteoles linear-setaceous, entire or 3-fid. Petals white, the outer strongly radiate. Fruit 5-10 mm; spines on secondary ridges silvery-white, 1-2 times as long as the width of the mericarp, strongly dilated and confluent at the base.{\i  Dry, open habitats, especially near the sea. W. & C. Mediterranean region, Portugal.} ?Co Hs It Lu Sa Si.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 3. D. broteri} Ten.,{\i  Fl. Nap.}{\b  4},{\i  Syll. App.}{\b  3}: 4 (1830). Annual stems 15-50 cm, erect or ascending, much-branched from the base, retrorse-scabrid or sometimes hispid near the base. Leaves 2-pinnate; lobes linear-oblong, entire or pinnatifid. Rays 8-14, short. Bracts shorter than or as long as the rays, not deflexed, pinnatifid; bracteoles linear-lanceolate to setaceous, entire or 3-sect. Petals 1-2·5 mm, white or pink, the outer radiate. Fruit 4-6 mm; spines on secondary ridges about as long as the width of the mericarp, strongly dilated and confluent at the base.{\i  Cultivated fields and sea-shores. Italy, Balkan peninsula, Kriti.} Al Bu Cr Gr It Ju.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 4. D. halophilus} Brot.,{\i  Phyt. Lusit.} ed. 3,{\b  2}: 198 (1827). Biennial; stems 15-40 cm, robust, erect or ascending, little-branched, retrorse-scabrid. Leaves 2-pinnate, the lobes fleshy, ovate, usually entire. Rays 12-40, long. Bracts shorter than the rays, not deflexed, with 5-7 lanceolate lobes; bracteoles cuneate, 3-lobed at apex, the margins wide, scarious and long-ciliate. Petals 1-2 mm white (sometimes pink in the centre of the umbel), the outer radiate. Fruit 2-3 mm; spines on secondary ridges shorter than or as long as the width of the mericarp, yellowish, confluent at the base and forming a crest.{\i  Rocky sea-shores. C. & S. Portugal.} Lu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 5. D. aureus} Desf., {\i Fl. Atl.}{\b  1}: 242 (1798). Annual or biennial; stems 15-60 cm, branched, scabrid, with sparse, patent hairs or subglabrous. Leaves 3-pinnate, the lobes lanceolate to linear-lanceolate, acute. Rays numerous, slightly unequal. Bracts shorter than rays, deflexed, pinnatisect, the lobes setaceous; bracteoles usually 3-sect, rarely entire, linear. Petals white, becoming yellowish after anthesis, the outer radiate. Fruit 4-6 mm; spines on secondary ridges slightly dilated at base but not usually confluent.{\i  Cultivated fields. E. & S. Spain, Italy, Sicilia.} Hs It Si [Ga].
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 6. D. guttatus} Sibth. & Sm.,{\i  Fl. Graec. Prodr.}{\b  1}: 184 (1806) ({\i D. setulosus} Guss. ex DC., {\i D. bicolor} Sibth. & Sm.). Annual; stems 20-60 cm, usually several, branched, erect or ascending,
\par

\par
373}
\par