{\rtf1\ansi \deff4\deflang1033{\fonttbl{\f4\froman\fcharset0\fprq2 Times New Roman;}}{\colortbl;\red0\green0\blue0;\red0\green0\blue255;\red0\green255\blue255;\red0\green255\blue0;\red255\green0\blue255;\red255\green0\blue0;\red255\green255\blue0;\red255\green255\blue255;\red0\green0\blue128;\red0\green128\blue128;\red0\green128\blue0;\red128\green0\blue128;\red128\green0\blue0;\red128\green128\blue0;\red128\green128\blue128;\red192\green192\blue192;}{\stylesheet{\widctlpar \f4\fs20\lang2057 \snext0 Normal;}{\*\cs10 \additive Default Paragraph Font;}}{\info{\author dddd}{\operator dddd}{\creatim\yr1998\mo11\dy11\hr17\min19}{\revtim\yr1998\mo11\dy11\hr17\min20}{\version2}{\edmins1}{\nofpages4}{\nofwords1053}{\nofchars6005}{\*\company  }{\vern57431}}\widowctrl\ftnbj\aenddoc\hyphcaps0 \fet0\sectd \linex0 {\*\pnseclvl1\pnucrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl2\pnucltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl3\pndec\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl4\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl5\pndec\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl6\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl7\pnlcrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl8\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl9\pnlcrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}
\pard\plain \ \f4\fs20\lang2057 {\fs28 retrorse-scabrid or sometimes hispid near the base. Lower leaves 2-pinnate, the segments divided into short, linear, acute lobes; upper leaves with linear segments. Rays 8-25. Bracts usually longer than umbels, not deflexed, pinnatifid; bracteoles linear-setaceous. Petals 0\'b76-2\'b75 mm, white, those of the central flower of the umbel and those of the central umbel usually dark purple. Fruit 2-4 mm; spines of the secondary ridges 1-2 times as long as the width of the mericarp.}{\i\fs28  Dry hillsides, especially near the sea. C. & S. Italy, Balkan peninsula, Aegean region, Romania.}{\fs28  Al Bu Cr Gr It Ju Rm Tu.
\par 
\par   (}{\b\fs28 a}{\fs28 ) Subsp. }{\b\fs28 guttatus}{\fs28 : Fruit 2-3 mm; spines 7-8 on each secondary ridge, twice as long as the width of the mericarp.}{\i\fs28  C. & S. Italy, Greece, Aegean region}{\fs28 .
\par   (}{\b\fs28 b}{\fs28 ) Subsp. }{\b\fs28 zahariadii}{\fs28  Heywood, }{\i\fs28 Feddes Repert.}{\b\fs28  79}{\fs28 : 66 (1968): Fruit 3-4 mm; spines 9-14 on each secondary ridge, about as long as or slightly longer than the width of the mericarp. \bullet }{\i\fs28  Romania, Bulgaria, Jugoslavia}{\fs28 .
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 7. D. involucratus}{\fs28  Sibth. & Sm.,}{\i\fs28  Fl. Graec. Prodr.}{\b\fs28  1}{\fs28 : 184 (1806). Annual; stems up to 20 cm, usually several, ascending, branched from the base, sparsely hispid or subglabrous. Leaves 1- to 2-pinnate, the segments divided into oblong-lanceolate lobes. Rays 3-4, short. Bracts usually longer than the rays, not deflexed, pinnatisect; bracteoles entire. Petals less than 1 mm, white or purplish. Fruit 2-5 mm; spines of the secondary ridges 3 times as long as the width of the mericarp.}{\i\fs28  Dry, stony places. S. & E. Greece, Aegean region.}{\fs28  Cr Gr.
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 8. D. carota}{\fs28  L.,}{\i\fs28  Sp. Pl. }{\fs28 242 (1753) (incl. }{\i\fs28 D. gingidium}{\fs28  L.). Annual or biennial, variable in habit and branching; stems 10-100(-150) cm, glabrous to hispid. Leaves 2- to 3-pinnate, rarely less divided, the segments linear to lanceolate, glabrous to pubescent, thin or fleshy; upper cauline leaves often bract-like. Umbels concave, flat or convex, with a variable number of rays. Bracts as long as the rays or shorter, 1- to 2-pinnatisect; bracteoles of outer partial umbels 3-sect, those of the inner simple. Petals white to purplish, often with one or several flowers of the central umbel dark purple. Fruit 2-4 mm; spines on the secondary ridges not longer than the width of the mericarps.}{\i\fs28  Most of Europe}{\fs28 . }{\i\fs28 All except Fa Is Sb, but only as an alien in Fe Rs (N).}{\fs28 
\par 
\par   Extremely polymorphic and variously divided into a number of subspecies, of which the following appear to deserve recognition. Hybridization between these subspecies is frequent and identification is often difficult. Several authors prefer to recognize subspp. (}{\b\fs28 f}{\fs28 ) to (}{\b\fs28 l}{\fs28 ) as a separate species (}{\i\fs28 D. gingidium}{\fs28  L.).
\par 
\par }
\pard \li200\ {\fs28 1 Umbels strongly contracted in fruit
\par 2 Stem procumbent or ascending ........................................ (}{\b\fs28 j}{\fs28 ) subsp. }{\b\fs28 gadecaei}{\fs28 
\par 2 Stem erect
\par 3 Terminal umbel 3-5 cm across; plant usually glabrous or
\par   very sparsely retrorse-scabrid ........................................ (}{\b\fs28 b}{\fs28 ) subsp. }{\b\fs28 maritimus}{\fs28 
\par 3 Terminal umbels 5-15 cm or more across; plant usually hispid
\par 4 Tap-root swollen, fleshy, orange or whitish ...................... (}{\b\fs28 e}{\fs28 ) subsp. }{\b\fs28 sativus}{\fs28 
\par 4 Tap-root slender, white
\par 5 Terminal umbels (10-)12-20(-30) cm across; spines on
\par   the secondary ridges usually stellulate ............................ (}{\b\fs28 d}{\fs28 ) subsp. }{\b\fs28 maximus}{\fs28 
\par 5 Terminal umbels 5-10 cm across; spines on the secondary
\par   ridges simple or 2-pointed, rarely stellulate
\par 6 Segments of lower leaves ovate-lanceolate to lanceolate,
\par   dentate or pinnatifid with lanceolate lobes; spines
\par   simple or 2-pointed ............................................................... (}{\b\fs28 c}{\fs28 ) subsp. }{\b\fs28 major}{\fs28 
\par 6 Segments of lower leaves ovate or cuneate-lanceolate,
\par   deeply pinnatifid or pinnatisect with linear or linear
\par   lanceolate lobes; spines mainly simple ............................... (}{\b\fs28 a}{\fs28 ) subsp. }{\b\fs28 carota}{\fs28 
\par 1 Umbels convex or only slightly contracted in fruit
\par 7 Pinnae forming a right angle with the rhachis ......... (}{\b\fs28 g}{\fs28 ) subsp. }{\b\fs28 commutatus}{\fs28 
\par 7 Pinnae forming an acute angle with the rhachis
\par 8 Leaves not fleshy; stem usually more than 30 cm, erect
\par 9 Stem and leaf-rhachis sparsely pubescent .................. (}{\b\fs28 h}{\fs28 ) subsp. }{\b\fs28 hispanicus}{\fs28 
\par 9 Stem and leaf-rhachis densely hispid .............................. (}{\b\fs28 i}{\fs28 ) subsp. }{\b\fs28 hispidus}{\fs28 
\par 8 Leaves \'b1 fleshy, usually shiny; stem usually less than
\par   30 cm, often procumbent or ascending
\par 10 Stem glabrous or sparsely hairy
\par 11 Spines on secondary ridges straight ........................ (}{\b\fs28 k}{\fs28 ) subsp. }{\b\fs28 drepanensis}{\fs28 
\par 11 Spines on secondary ridges curving upwards ............. (}{\b\fs28 f}{\fs28 ) subsp. }{\b\fs28 gummifer}{\fs28 
\par 10 Stem densely hairy
\par 12 Leaf-segments usually 3(-5)-fid, the lobes ovate
\par    lanceolate ................................................................... (}{\b\fs28 k}{\fs28 ) subsp. }{\b\fs28 drepanensis}{\fs28 
\par 12 Leaf-segments incise-dentate, pinnatifid or pinnatisect
\par 13 Leaves not shiny, densely pubescent; stems c. 10 cm,
\par    little-branched ................................................................. (}{\b\fs28 l}{\fs28 ) subsp. }{\b\fs28 rupestris}{\fs28 
\par 13 Leaves shiny, sparsely pubescent; main stems 10-30(-80) cm,
\par    much-branched, with erecto-patent branches ............... (}{\b\fs28 f}{\fs28 ) subsp. }{\b\fs28 gummifer}{\fs28 
\par 
\par }
\pard \ {\fs28   (}{\b\fs28 a}{\fs28 ) Subsp. }{\b\fs28 carota}{\fs28 : 2n = 18. }{\i\fs28 Throughout most of the range of the species}{\fs28 .
\par   (}{\b\fs28 b}{\fs28 ) Subsp. }{\b\fs28 maritimus}{\fs28  (Lam.) Batt. in Batt. & Trabut,}{\i\fs28  Fl. Alger.}{\fs28  (}{\i\fs28 Dicot.}{\fs28 ) 382 (1889) (}{\i\fs28 D. maritimus }{\fs28 Lam.): }{\i\fs28 Mediterranean region and Portugal, mainly near the coast}{\fs28 .
\par   (}{\b\fs28 c}{\fs28 ) Subsp. }{\b\fs28 major}{\fs28  (Vis.) Arcangeli, }{\i\fs28 Comp. Fl. Ital. }{\fs28 299 (1882):}{\i\fs28  S. Europe}{\fs28 .
\par   (}{\b\fs28 d}{\fs28 ) Subsp. }{\b\fs28 maximus}{\fs28  (Desf.) Ball,}{\i\fs28  Jour. Linn. Soc. London}{\fs28  (}{\i\fs28 Bot.}{\fs28 ) }{\b\fs28 16}{\fs28 : 476 (1878) (}{\i\fs28 D. maximus}{\fs28  Desf., }{\i\fs28 D. mauritanicus}{\fs28  L.): }{\i\fs28 Mediterranean region.}{\fs28 
\par   (}{\b\fs28 e}{\fs28 ) Subsp. }{\b\fs28 sativus}{\fs28  (Hoffm.) Arcangeli,}{\i\fs28  Comp. Fl. Ital.}{\fs28  299 (1882) (}{\i\fs28 D. sativus}{\fs28  (Hoffm.) Roehl.):}{\i\fs28  Cultivated throughout most of Europe for its edible root}{\fs28  (}{\i\fs28 carrot}{\fs28 ).
\par   (}{\b\fs28 f}{\fs28 ) Subsp. }{\b\fs28 gummifer}{\fs28  Hooker fil.,}{\i\fs28  Stud. Fl. Brit. Is.}{\fs28  ed. 3, 185 (1884) (}{\i\fs28 D. gummifer}{\fs28  Lam., non All.,}{\i\fs28  D. gingidium}{\fs28  subsp.}{\i\fs28  fontanesii} {\fs28  Onno pro parte): \bullet }{\i\fs28  Atlantic coasts of Britain, France and N. Spain}{\fs28 .
\par   (}{\b\fs28 g}{\fs28 ) Subsp. }{\b\fs28 commutatus}{\fs28  (Paol.) Thell.,}{\i\fs28  Feddes Repert.}{\b\fs28  22}{\fs28 : 312 (1926) (}{\i\fs28 D. gingidium}{\fs28  subsp.}{\i\fs28  mauritanicus}{\fs28  Onno):}{\i\fs28  Mediterranean coasts.}{\fs28 
\par   (}{\b\fs28 h}{\fs28 ) Subsp. }{\b\fs28 hispanicus}{\fs28  (Gouan) Thell.,}{\i\fs28  loc. cit.}{\fs28  (1926) (}{\i\fs28 D. gummifer }{\fs28 All., }{\i\fs28 D. gingidium }{\fs28 subsp.}{\i\fs28  gummifer}{\fs28  (All.) Onno, }{\i\fs28 D. gingidium}{\fs28  subsp.}{\i\fs28  fontanesii}{\fs28 Onno pro parte.):}{\i\fs28  Mediterranean coasts}{\fs28 .
\par   Intermediates with subsp. (}{\b\fs28 g}{\fs28 ) are frequent.
\par   (}{\b\fs28 i}{\fs28 ) Subsp. }{\b\fs28 hispidus}{\fs28  (Arcangeli) Heywood,}{\i\fs28  Feddes Repert. }{\b\fs28 79}{\fs28 : 68 (1968) (}{\i\fs28 D. gummifer }{\fs28 subsp.}{\i\fs28  hispidus }{\fs28 Arcangeli, }{\i\fs28 D. carota}{\fs28  subsp.}{\i\fs28  fontanesii}{\fs28  Thell.):}{\i\fs28  Coastal sands of S. Portugal and C. Mediterranean region; perhaps elsewhere}{\fs28 .
\par   (}{\b\fs28 j}{\fs28 ) Subsp. }{\b\fs28 gadecaei}{\fs28  (Rouy & Camus) Heywood,}{\i\fs28  Feddes Repert.}{\b\fs28  79}{\fs28 : 68 (1968)(}{\i\fs28 D. communis}{\fs28  proles }{\i\fs28 gadecaei}{\fs28  Rouy & Camus):}{\i\fs28  Coast of N.W. France}{\fs28 .
\par   (}{\b\fs28 k}{\fs28 ) Subsp. }{\b\fs28 drepanensis}{\fs28  (Arcangeli) Heywood,}{\i\fs28  Feddes Repert. 79}{\fs28 : 68 (1968): (}{\i\fs28 D. gingidium}{\fs28  subsp.}{\i\fs28  drepanensis}{\fs28  Arcangeli,}{\i\fs28  D. bocconei}{\fs28  Guss., }{\i\fs28 D. polygamus}{\fs28  Gouan pro parte):}{\i\fs28  Mediterranean region}{\fs28 .
\par   (}{\b\fs28 l}{\fs28 ) Subsp. }{\b\fs28 rupestris}{\fs28  (Guss.) Heywood, }{\i\fs28 Feddes Repert.}{\b\fs28  79}{\fs28 : 68 (1968) (}{\i\fs28 D. rupestris}{\fs28  Guss.,}{\i\fs28  D. gingidium}{\fs28  subsp.}{\i\fs28  rupestris}{\fs28  (Guss.) Onno):}{\i\fs28  Islands of the C. Mediterranean region}{\fs28  (}{\i\fs28 Malta, Lampedusa, Lampesina}{\fs28 ).
\par 
\par   Sect. MEOIDES Lange. Leaf-segments sessile, subverticillate; umbels pedunculate. Styles medium or long, erecto-patent.
\par 
\par   }{\b\fs28 9. D. setifolius}{\fs28  Desf.,}{\i\fs28  Fl. Atl. }{\b\fs28 1}{\fs28 : 244 (1798). Perennial; stems (3-)10-60 cm, erect, branched above, glabrous. Leaves linear to lanceolate in outline, pinnate, the segments pseudo-verticillate,
\par 
\par 374}
\par }