{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 sometimes branched. Leaves 2-pinnate; lobes linear. Umbels mostly lateral, leaf-opposed; peduncles 2-3(-5) cm. Rays 2-3. Fruit linear-oblong; spines yellowish to straw-coloured. Stigmas sessile on the conical stylopodium.{\i  S. Europe; a frequent casual farther north and perhaps locally naturalized}. Al Bl Bu Co Cr Ga Gr Hs It Ju Lu Rs (K) Tu [Au Cz He Ho Rs (C, W)].
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 103.                      Astrodaucus}                     Drude
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc By V.H. Heywood.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Leaves several times pinnate. Calyx-teeth short. Petals white or yellowish, the outer ones radiating, unequally 2-lobed; apex inflexed. Fruit prismatic, laterally compressed or subcylindrical; primary ridges 5, filiform, ciliate or with stellate hairs; secondary ridges with triangular or pyramidal spines in 1 or 2 rows, confluent at the base into a wing.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 Bracteoles 5; petals 4 mm ............................................................. {\b 1. orientalis}
\par
Bracteoles 8-11; petals 2·5 mm ...................................................... {\b 2. littoralis}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. A. orientalis} (L.) Drude in Engler & Prantl,{\i  Natürl. Pflanzenfam.}{\b  3}({\b 8}): 157, 271 (1898). Stem up to 100 cm, erect, branched above. Leaves triangular-ovate in outline, 3- to 4-pinnate, sparsely hairy; lobes minute, oblong, obtuse. Rays 8-15. Bracts 0(-3); bracteoles 5, oblong-lanceolate, ciliate. Petals 4 mm. Fruit 5-6 mm; spines on secondary ridges triangular, 2-seriate, longer than the width of the mericarp.{\i  S. Ukraine.} Rs (W, K) [Cz Rs (C)]. ({\i S.W. Asia.})
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. A. littoralis} (Bieb.) Drude, {\i loc. cit.} (1898). Stem up to 65 cm, erect, branched. Leaves broadly triangular in outline, 4- to 5-pinnate, sparsely hairy; lobes linear or oblong-linear. Rays 8-20(-25). Bracts 0(-3); bracteoles 8-11, lanceolate to oblong-ovate, ciliate. Petals 2·5 mm. Fruit 6-7 mm; spines on secondary ridges pyramidal, 1-seriate, glochidiate at the apex.{\i  Maritime sands. S.E. Europe, from Bulgaria to S.E. Russia.} Bu Rm Rs (W, K, E).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 104.                     Turgeniopsis}                    Boiss.
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc By J.F.M. Cannon.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Annual. Leaves 3- to 4-pinnate. Sepals small. Petals white, obovate, unequally 2-lobed; apex inflexed. Fruit ellipsoid, obtuse, somewhat compressed laterally. Primary ridges rather indistinct, bearing short bristles. Secondary ridges well-developed and broadly obtuse in section, bearing 2-3 rows of hooked spines, which arise from warty bases.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   A monotypic genus distinguished from {\i Caucalis} by the endosperm, which is not inrolled at the commissural face, and from{\i  Torilis} by the strongly developed secondary ridges.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. T. foeniculacea} (Fenzl) Boiss., {\i Ann. Sci. Nat.} ser. 3 (Bot.), {\b 2}: 53 (1844). Stem up to 50 cm, terete, finely striate. Leaves with very fine capillary segments c. 0·5 mm wide. Bracts 0-1, linear-subulate; bracteoles 0-3, like the bracts. Rays 2-3. Partial umbels with 2-3 hermaphrodite flowers and a small number of male flowers in the centre. Fruit 8-10 × 4-5 mm. Stylopodium shortly conical; styles short, stiff.{\i  Dry, stony slopes. S. Bulgaria }({\i C. Rodopi}). Bu. ({\i S.W. Asia}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 105.                          Caucalis}                        L.
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc By V.H. Heywood.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Leaves 2- to 3-pinnate. Sepals small or obsolete. Petals white or pink, the outer radiating; apex inflexed. Fruit ellipsoid to ovoid, compressed laterally; 3 of the primary ridges with uniseriate cilia; secondary ridges thickened, with aculeate spines.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. C. platycarpos} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 241 (1753) ({\i C. daucoides} L. (1767),non L. (1753), {\i C. lappula} Grande). Annual; stems up to 40 cm, erect, branched, slightly setose or pubescent. Leaf-segments pinnately divided into oblong or lanceolate lobes, almost glabrous. Rays 2-5. Bracts absent, rarely 1-2; bracteoles linear-lanceolate. Petals c. 2 mm, white or pink. Fruit 6-13 × 5 mm; secondary ridges of mericarps with 1 row of aculeate spines as long as the width of the mericarp. 2n = 20.{\i  Most of Europe except the north. }Al Au Bu Co Cz Ga Ge Gr He Hs Hu It Ju Lu Po Rm Rs (C, W, K, E) Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b   C. bischoffii} Kos.-Pol.,{\i  Bull. Soc. Nat. Moscou} nov. ser., {\b 29}: 153 (1916) ({\i C. muricata} Bischoff, non Crantz) is the name applied to a distinctive variant which occurs mainly in the eastern part of the range of {\b 1} and apparently replaces it in Krym. In this the spines on the secondary ridges of the mericarps are 1 mm (much shorter than the width of the mericarps) and widened at the base. It is variously treated as a species or as a subspecies or variety of {\b 1} and its status is not clear.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 106.                        Turgenia}                       Hoffm.
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc By V.H. Heywood.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Like {\i Caucalis} but the two primary marginal ridges each with a single row of spines or tubercles, and the remaining primary and secondary ridges similar to each other, with spines in 2-3 rows.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   {\b 1. T. latifolia} (L.) Hoffm.,{\i  Gen. Umb.} 59 (1814) ({\i Caucalis latifolia} L.). Annual up to 60 cm. Leaves pinnate, the segments lanceolate to oblong, serrate or pinnatifid, pubescent to hispid beneath, the margins often ciliate. Umbels long-pedunculate; rays 2-5. Bracts (2-)3-5; bracteoles 5-7, ovate-lanceolate to oblong, with wide scarious margins. Petals c. 5 mm, white, pink or purplish, the marginal 1 or 2 larger, radiating. Fruit 6-10 × 7 mm. {\i Cultivated and disturbed ground. S. & S.C. Europe; sometimes naturalized or casual farther north.} Al Au Be Bu Cr Cz Ga Ge Gr He Hs Hu It Ju Lu Rm Rs (W, K, E) Si Tu [Br Rs (C)].
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc  {\b 107.                        Orlaya}                           Hoffm.
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc By V.H. Heywood.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Leaves 2-pinnate. Sepals small or obsolete. Petals white or pink, the outer larger and radiate. Fruit ovoid, compressed dorsally; primary ridges slender, setulose; secondary ridges with 1 or 2 rows of spines.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Rays of umbel 2-14 ......................................................................... {\b 1. kochii}
\par
1 Rays of umbel 5-12
\par
2 Spines on secondary dorsal ridges uniseriate or partly
\par
  2-seriate, strongly compressed and confluent at the base;
\par
  upper cauline leaves 2- to 3-pinnatisect .................................... {\b 3. daucorlaya}
\par
2 Spines on secondary dorsal ridges 2- to 3-seriate, scarcely
\par
  compressed and not confluent at the base; upper cauline
\par
  leaves entire or pinnatisect ....................................................... {\b 2. grandiflora}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. O. kochii} Heywood,{\i  Agron. Lusit.}{\b  22}: 13 (1961) ({\i O. platycarpos} Koch pro parte, {\i Caucalis platycarpos} auct., non L. (1753)). Annual. Stems up to 40 cm, simple or branched, slightly hairy at the base. Leaves 2- to 3-pinnate, the ultimate segments oblong. Umbels long-pedunculate, with 2-4 rays. Bracts 2-3, lanceolate, usually as long as the rays; bracteoles 2-3, ovate-lanceolate to obovate, with a membranous, glabrous or ciliate margin. Petals white, the outer 2-3 times as long as the others. Fruit 10-15 mm, ellipsoid; secondary ridges with 2-3 rows of spines which are confluent at the base and as long as the width of the fruit. 2n = 16.{\i  Dry places. S. Europe.} Al Bu Co Cr Ga Gr Hs It Ju Lu Rs (K) Sa Si Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b    O. topaliana} Beauverd, {\i Candollea}{\b  7}: 262 (1937) described from Greece (Thessalia), has deflexed bracteoles, densely hispid-papillose primary ridges and the spines on the secondary ridges
\par

\par
372}
\par