{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 18 Petals yellow
\par
41 Leaflets with at least some stellate or branched hairs beneath
\par
42 Leaflets 5-7, with relatively sparse stellate hairs beneath;
\par
   stellate hairs with usually 5-10 rays ............................................. {\b 50. pusilla}
\par
42 Leaflets 3-5, with a dense tomentum of stellate hairs
\par
   beneath; stellate hairs with usually 15-30 rays ............................ {\b 51. cinerea}
\par
41 Stellate or branched hairs absent
\par
43 Sepals and petals 4, at least in some flowers
\par
44 Sepals and petals almost always 4; carpels 4-8(-20);
\par
   most leaves with 3 leaflets (but with stipules 
\par
   resembling leaflets) ........................................................................ {\b 52. erecta}
\par
44 Sepals and petals 4-5; carpels 20-50; some leaves
\par
   with 4-5 leaflets ............................................................................ {\b 53. anglica}
\par
43 Sepals and petals 5
\par
45 Flowering stems procumbent, rooting at the nodes;
\par
   flowers solitary in the axils of leaves ........................................... {\b 54. reptans}
\par
45 Flowering stems usually not rooting at the nodes;
\par
   flowers usually in terminal cymes
\par
46 Leaflets densely tomentose, villous or sericeous 
\par
   beneath, the indumentum completely covering the 
\par
   surface of the leaflet
\par
47 Epicalyx-segments up to 2 times as long as sepals,
\par
   about as wide as sepals at the base ........................................ {\b 26. astracanica}
\par
47 Epicalyx-segments not or only slightly longer than
\par
   sepals, narrower than sepals at the base
\par
48 Leaflets sericeous or villous beneath, the hairs all ± straight
\par
49 Petals (4-)5-7 mm; epicalyx-segments oblong or oblong-
\par
   lanceolate, obtuse or subacute ............................................... {\b 39. nevadensis}
\par
49 Petals 12-14 mm; epicalyx-segments linear-lanceolate 
\par
   or linear-triangular, long-acuminate ..................................... {\b 27. detommasii}
\par
48 Leaflets tomentose, with most of the hairs crispate
\par
50 Leaflets entire in the basal ¼
\par
51 Style slightly clavate, but often somewhat distorted .................. {\b 22. collina}
\par
51 Style conical, tapering towards apex
\par
52 All hairs crispate ...................................................... {\b 18-20}. {\b argentea} group
\par
52 Some hairs crispate, some long and simple ............................. {\b 21. inclinata}
\par
50 Leaflets toothed or lobed almost to the base
\par
53 Leaflets at least 3 times as long as wide .................................. {\b 21. inclinata}
\par
53 Leaflets less than 3 times as long as wide 
\par
54 All hairs on petiole crispate; leaflets 3 .......................................... {\b 15. nivea}
\par
54 At least some hairs on petiole long and straight;
\par
   leaflets 3-5 
\par
55 Leaflets with tufts of silky hairs at apex ................................. {\b 8. rubricaulis}
\par
55 Leaflets without tufts of silky hairs at apex 
\par
56 Hairs on petiole all long and straight ................................. {\b 16. chamissonis}
\par
56 Hairs on petiole both crispate and long and straight ............. {\b 17. hookerana}
\par
46 Leaflets green or grey-green beneath, the indumentum
\par
   not completely covering the surface
\par
57 Basal leaves ternate (rarely a few with 4-5 leaflets)
\par
58 Petals 10 mm or more
\par
59 Anthers less than 1 mm; leaflets with 2-4 pairs of teeth .............. {\b 44. aurea}
\par
59 Anthers 1-1·5 mm; leaflets with 4-11 pairs of teeth
\par
60 Basal leaves pubescent between the main veins beneath .... {\b 31. grandiflora}
\par
60 Basal leaves pubescent only on the main veins beneath . {\b 32. montenegrina}
\par
58 Petals less than 10 mm
\par
61 Annual or short-lived perennial without or with few 
\par
   non-flowering rosettes;epicalyx-segments longer than
\par
   sepals in fruit ............................................................................ {\b 24. norvegica}
\par
61 Perennial with numerous non-flowering rosettes;
\par
   epicalyx-segments as long as or shorter than sepals in fruit
\par
62 Petals less than 6 mm
\par
63 Leaflets eglandular, glabrous or sparsely hairy beneath,
\par
   glabrous above ......................................................................... {\b 40. brauniana}
\par
63 Leaflets usually glandular, densely hairy beneath,
\par
   sparsely to densely hairy above
\par
64 Petals 3-5 mm, as long as or only slightly longer than
\par
   sepals; leaflets of basal leaves with elliptical or 
\par
   oblanceolate, very obtuse teeth ..................................................... {\b 41. frigida}
\par
64 Petals c. 5 mm, c. 1½ times as long as sepals,
\par
   leaflets of basal leaves with triangular-oblong,
\par
   acute or subobtuse teeth .......................................................... {\b 42. hyparctica}
\par
62 Petals 6 mm or more
\par
65 Petals cream or pale yellow, about as long as sepals;
\par
   sepals linear-lanceolate or lanceolate ............................... {\b 65. grammopetala}
\par
65 Petals yellow, exceeding sepals; sepals ovate or 
\par
   triangular-ovate
\par
66 Terminal tooth of leaflet always smaller than the 
\par
   adjacent lateral; leaflets with appressed, sericeous
\par
   hairs on the margin and main veins beneath ................................... {\b 44. aurea}
\par
66 Terminal tooth of leaflet subequal to the adjacent
\par
   lateral; leaflets without sericeous hairs
\par
67 Leaflets with triangular-oblong, acute to subobtuse teeth; 
\par
   petals not spotted; stems and leaflets usually glandular .........{\b 42. hyparctica}
\par
67 Leaflets with oblong or elliptical, very obtuse teeth;
\par
   petals often with an orange spot at the base; stems and
\par
   leaflets usually eglandular ........................................................... {\b 43. crantzii}
\par
57 Basal leaves mostly digitate with 5 or more leaflets
\par
68 Flowering stems terminal; rosettes of leaves absent or few, lateral
\par
69 Petals 4-5 mm; sepals and epicalyx-segments accrescent,
\par
   15-20 mm in fruit ...................................................................... {\b 5. intermedia}
\par
69 Petals 5-14 mm; sepals and epicalyx-segments not
\par
   markedly accrescent
\par
70 Calyx and leaflets, at least on lower surface, with
\par
   crispate hairs .............................................................................. {\b 21. inclinata}
\par
70 Calyx and leaflets without crispate hairs
\par
71 Epicalyx-segments up to 2 times as long as the sepals,
\par
   about as wide as sepals at the base ......................................... {\b 26. astracanica}
\par
71 Epicalyx-segments shorter than to slightly longer 
\par
   than sepals, narrower than sepals at the base
\par
72 Leaflets with 3-7 teeth at apex; stems with long,
\par
   simple hairs, without or with very few short hairs ........................... {\b 29. hirta}
\par
72 Leaflets coarsely toothed or pinnatifid to the base;
\par
   stems with short glandular or eglandular hairs as well
\par
   as with long, simple hairs
\par
73 Leaflets villous or sericeous beneath with many,
\par
   crowded, short eglandular hairs ............................................ {\b 27. detommasii}
\par
73 Leaflets with sparse, short eglandular hairs or with
\par
   short glandular hairs beneath ........................................................... {\b 28. recta}
\par
68 Flowering stems lateral; stock with a terminal rosette of
\par
   leaves, the plant often with numerous rosettes of leaves
\par
74 Stipules of cauline leaves adnate to the whole length
\par
   of the petiole .............................................................................. {\b 36. stipularis}
\par
74 Stipules of cauline leaves free or adnate only to the
\par
   base of the petiole
\par
75 Lower surface of leaflets with crispate hairs, usually 
\par
   ± tomentose ................................................................................... {\b 22. collina}
\par
75 Lower surface of leaflets with ± straight or slightly 
\par
   curved hairs, or glabrous
\par
76 Stipules of basal leaves linear to linear-triangular ...... {\b 49. tabernaemontani}
\par
76 Stipules of basal leaves lanceolate to ovate
\par
77 Plant with sessile yellow glands; style papillose at base ........ {\b 46. humifusa}
\par
77 Plant eglandular or with glandular hairs; style not 
\par
   papillose at base
\par

\par
38}
\par