{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 78 At least some basal leaves with 6 or more leaflets
\par
79 Epicalyx-segments narrowly linear ............................................. {\b 47. patula}
\par
79 Epicalyx-segments oblong or linear-lanceolate to 
\par
   broadly elliptical or lanceolate 
\par
80 Style conical-filiform
\par
81 Leaflets glabrous above; petals c. 6 mm .................................. {\b 37. longipes}
\par
81 Leaflets hairy above; petals usually more than 6 mm 
\par
   ................................................................................. ({\b 38-39}). {\b chrysantha} group
\par
80 Style conical at base, slightly clavate at apex
\par
82 Hairs on stems and leaves with a minute tubercle at base .. {\b 45. heptaphylla}
\par
82 Hairs on stems and leaves without a minute tubercle at base .. {\b 48. australis}
\par
78 Basal leaves with not more than 5 leaflets
\par
83 Terminal leaflet with a distinct petiolule ................................. {\b 33. umbrosa}
\par
83 Terminal leaflet sessile or subsessile
\par
84 Petals 10-15 mm
\par
85 Terminal tooth of leaflet always smaller than the 
\par
   adjacent lateral; style slightly clavate ............................................. {\b 44. aurea}
\par
85 Terminal tooth of leaflet subequal to the adjacent lateral;  
\par
   style filiform-cylindrical
\par
86 Cauline stipules acute or acuminate; epicalyx-segments acute
\par
   .............................................................................................. {\b 34. delphinensis}
\par
86 Cauline stipules obtuse or subacute; epicalyx-segments 
\par
   subobtuse .................................................................................. {\b 35. pyrenaica}
\par
84 Petals 4-10 mm
\par
87 Hairs on stems and leaves with a minute tubercle at base;
\par
   hairs mostly patent
\par
88 Petals (6-)7-10 mm; style conical-filiform ........ ({\b 38-39}).{\b  chrysantha} group
\par
88 Petals 5-7 mm; style slightly clavate .................................. {\b 45. heptaphylla}
\par
87 Hairs on stems and leaves without a minute tubercle at base;  
\par
   hairs patent or appressed
\par
89 Terminal tooth of leaflet always smaller than adjacent lateral
\par
90 Stems and leaflets variously hairy but never sericeous;
\par
   style conical-filiform ........................................... ({\b 38-39}).{\b  chrysantha }group
\par
90 Upper part of stems and inflorescence appressed-sericeous;
\par
   leaflets with appressed sericeous hairs on the margin 
\par
   and main veins beneath; style slightly clavate ............................... {\b 44. aurea}
\par
89 Terminal tooth of leaflet subequal to the adjacent lateral
\par
91 Style slightly clavate; leaflets usually with patent
\par
   hairs on the margin ....................................................................... {\b 43. crantzii}
\par
91 Style conical-filiform; leaflets usually with 
\par
   appressed or semipatent hairs on the margin
\par
92 Petals 4-7 mm; leaflets sericeous or sericeous-villous
\par
   beneath (S. Spain) ................................................................... {\b 30. nevadensis}
\par
92 Petals (6-)7-10 mm; leaflets usually not sericeous beneath
\par
93 Hairs on stem appressed or subappressed, never glandular ....{\b 35. pyrenaica}
\par
93 Hairs on stem mostly patent or erectopatent, often 
\par
   glandular .............................................................. ({\b 38-39}). {\b chrysantha} group
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Subgen. {\b Trichothalamus} (Lehm.) Reichenb. ({\i Dasiphora} Rafin.). Shrubs. Leaves pinnate. Petals yellow or white. Receptacle hairy, dry. Style sub-basal, clavate. Achenes densely pubescent.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. P. fruticosa} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 495 (1753) ({\i Dasiphora fruticosa} (L.) Rydb.). Much-branched, deciduous, more or less pubescent shrub up to 1 m. Leaves pinnate; leaflets (3-)5(-7), 10-25 × 2-7 mm, oblong-lanceolate or elliptical, entire. Flowers unisexual or hermaphrodite, solitary or few in terminal cymes. Sepals triangular-ovate; epicalyx-segments oblanceolate-linear, about as long as sepals. Petals 8-12 mm, yellow, longer than sepals. 2n = 14, 28.{\i  Britain and Ireland; Baltic region; Ural; Pyrenees; Maritime Alps; Rodopi; widely cultivated for ornament and locally naturalized, especially in Russia.} Br Bu Ga Hb Hs It Rs (N, B, C) Su [No].
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   In N. Europe and Ural the plants are tetraploid with the flowers usually unisexual, although the sterile carpels in male flowers and the sterile stamens in female flowers are conspicuous. In the Pyrenees the plants are diploid with hermaphrodite flowers.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b  P. glabrata} Willd., {\i Ges. Naturf. Freunde Berlin Mag.}{\b  7}: 285 (1816) ({\i P. davurica }Nestler), from E. Asia, is cultivated for ornament in much of Europe, and is recorded as an escape from cultivation in France. It is very like {\b 1} but has white petals.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Subgen.{\b  Schistophyllidium} Juz. Perennial, woody at base. Leaves pinnate. Petals yellow. Receptacle hairy, dry. Style sub-basal, fusiform. Achenes pubescent near the point of attachment when young, becoming glabrous at maturity.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. P. bifurca} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 497 (1753) ({\i P. orientalis} Juz.). Rhizomatous perennial. Flowering stems up to 30 cm, subglabrous to almost sericeous. Leaves pinnate; leaflets 5-15, 8-20 × 3-8 mm, oblong-ovate, entire or 2- to 3-fid at apex. Flowers in a lax cyme. Sepals oblong-ovate; epicalyx-segments linear-lanceolate, slightly shorter than sepals. Petals 4-8 mm, yellow, longer than sepals.{\i  Steppes and dry sandy places. S.E. Europe, from E. Romania eastwards, extending locally northwards to c.} 53°{\i  N in S.C. Russia.} Rm Rs (C, W, E) [Su].
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Subgen. {\b Comarum} (L.) Syme ({\i Comarum} L.)Herbs. Leaves pinnate Petals purple. Receptacles hairy, spongy. Style lateral, filiform. Achenes glabrous.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 3. P. palustris} (L.) Scop.,{\i  Fl Carn}. ed. 2, {\b 1}: 359 (1772){\i  Comarum palustre} L.). Plant With long, creeping, woody rhizome. Flowering stems up to 45 cm, with scattered hairs. Leaves pinnate; leaflets (3-)5 or 7, 30-60 × 10-20 mm, oblong, coarsely serrate, subglabrous beneath. Flowers in a lax terminal cyme. Sepals 10-15 mm, ovate, acuminate, purplish, accrescent; epicalyx-segments linear, much smaller than sepals. Petals about half as long as sepals, deep purple, persistent. 2n = 28, 35, 42, 62-64.{\i  Marshes, bogs and acid fens. Europe from C. Spain, N. Italy and S. Bulgaria northwards.} Au Be Br Bu Cz Da Fa Fe Ga Ge Hb He Ho Hs Hu Is It Ju No Po Rm Rs (N, B, C, W, K, E) Su.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Subgen.{\b  Potentilla.} Herbs. Leaves pinnate or digitate. Petals yellow, rarely white, red or purple. Receptacle glabrous or pubescent. Style usually subterminal. Achenes glabrous.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 4. P. anserina} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 495 (1753). Perennial; stock short, thick, with terminal rosette of leaves. Stems up to 80 cm, procumbent, stoloniferous. Leaves pinnate; leaflets 7-25, 10-40 × 5-15 mm, oblong to ovate, serrate or crenate-serrate. Flowers solitary, axillary. Sepals ovate or broadly elliptical; epicalyx-segments triangular-lanceolate. Petals 7-10 mm, yellow, about twice as long as sepals. Style lateral, filiform.{\i  Most of Europe except the extreme north-east and much of the south.} Au Be Br Bu Cz Da Fa (N. B. C. Fe Ga Ge Hb He Ho Hs Hu Is It Ju Lu No Po Rm Rs , W, K, E) ?Si Su.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 For an account of the variation of this species see A. Rousi,{\i  Ann. Bot. Fenn.}{\b  2}: 47-112 (1965).
\par

\par
39}
\par