{\rtf1\ansi \deff4\deflang1033{\fonttbl{\f4\froman\fcharset0\fprq2 Times New Roman;}}{\colortbl;\red0\green0\blue0;\red0\green0\blue255;\red0\green255\blue255;\red0\green255\blue0;\red255\green0\blue255;\red255\green0\blue0;\red255\green255\blue0;\red255\green255\blue255;\red0\green0\blue128;\red0\green128\blue128;\red0\green128\blue0;\red128\green0\blue128;\red128\green0\blue0;\red128\green128\blue0;\red128\green128\blue128;\red192\green192\blue192;}{\stylesheet{\widctlpar \f4\fs20\lang2057 \snext0 Normal;}{\*\cs10 \additive Default Paragraph Font;}}{\info{\author dddd}{\operator dddd}{\creatim\yr1998\mo11\dy11\hr17}{\revtim\yr1998\mo11\dy11\hr17}{\version2}{\edmins1}{\nofpages4}{\nofwords1031}{\nofchars5880}{\*\company  }{\vern57431}}\widowctrl\ftnbj\aenddoc\hyphcaps0 \fet0\sectd \linex0 {\*\pnseclvl1\pnucrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl2\pnucltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl3\pndec\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl4\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl5\pndec\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl6\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl7\pnlcrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl8\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl9\pnlcrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}
\pard\plain \li200\ \f4\fs20\lang2057 {\fs28 42 Petals purple .............................................................................. }{\b\fs28 19. Potentilla}{\fs28 
\par 42 Petals yellow or white 
\par 43 Epicalyx-segments 3-toothed at apex; petals yellow .............. }{\b\fs28 22. Duchesnea}{\fs28 
\par 43 Epicalyx-segments not toothed at apex; petals white .................. }{\b\fs28 21. Fragaria}{\fs28 
\par 41 Receptacle not swollen in fruit 
\par 44 Petals 1-2 mm; stamens 5(-10) .................................................. }{\b\fs28 20. Sibbaldia}{\fs28 
\par 44 Petals more than 2 mm; stamens 10 or more 
\par 45 Carpels more than 6 ................................................................... }{\b\fs28 19. Potentilla}{\fs28 
\par 45 Carpels 2-6 
\par 46 Flowers 4-merous ...................................................................... }{\b\fs28 19. Potentilla}{\fs28 
\par 46 Flowers 5-merous .................................................................. }{\b\fs28 18. Waldsteinia}{\fs28 
\par 
\par }
\pard \ {\fs28  Subfam.}{\b\fs28  Spiraeoideae}{\fs28 
\par 
\par Stipules sometimes absent. Flowers 5-merous. Hypanthium flat, concave  or campanulate, without carpophore; epicalyx absent; stamens 15 to  numerous; carpels 1-5, whorled, free or connate at base, not sunk in  hypanthium. Fruit of 1-5 follicles; seeds 2 or more. Basic chromosome  number 8 or 9.
\par 
\par }
\pard \qc\ {\b\fs28 1.              Sorbaria}{\fs28           (Ser.) A. Braun
\par }{\fs24 By P.W. Ball
\par 
\par }
\pard \ {\fs28 Deciduous shrubs. Leaves pinnate, the leaflets serrate; stipules  present. Inflorescence a terminal panicle. Petals ovate to orbicular,  white; stamens 20-50; carpels 5, connate at base. Follicles dehiscent  along the ventral suture. Seeds several.
\par 
\par }
\pard \li200\ {\fs28 Leaflets with less than 25 pairs of veins; stamens about twice
\par  as long as petals; pedicels erect in fruit ........................................... }{\b\fs28 1. sorbifolia}{\fs28 
\par Leaflets with more than 30 pairs of veins; stamens as long as petals;
\par  pedicels  recurved in fruit................................................................ }{\b\fs28 2. tomentosa}{\fs28 
\par 
\par }
\pard \ {\fs28    }{\b\fs28 1. S. sorbifolia}{\fs28  (L.) A. Braun in Ascherson,}{\i\fs28  Fl. Brandenb.}{\b\fs28  1}{\fs28 : 177 (1864). Erect, up to 2 m, suckering. Leaflets 5-10 pairs, 4-10 \'d7 1\'b75-3  cm, lanceolate to ovate-lanceolate, glabrous or puberulent beneath. Panicles 10-25 cm, with erect branches. Flowers 6-8 mm in diameter; stamens about twice as long as petals. Pedicels erect in fruit.}{\i\fs28  Cultivated for ornament in much of Europe and often locally naturalized.}{\fs28  [Da Fe Ga It No Su.] (}{\i\fs28 N.Asia}{\fs28 .)
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 2. S. tomentosa}{\fs28  (Lindley) Rehder,}{\i\fs28  Jour. Arnold Arb.}{\b\fs28  19}{\fs28 : 74 (1938). Up to 6 m. Leaflets 7-10 pairs, 5-10 \'d7 1-2 cm, lanceolate to linear-lanceolate, long-acuminate, pubescent on the veins beneath when young. Panicles 20-30 cm, with patent branches. Flowers c. 6 mm in  diameter; stamens as long as petals. Pedicels recurved in fruit. }{\i\fs28 Cultivated for ornament in S. & W. Europe; naturalized in France.}{\fs28  [Ga.] (}{\i\fs28 Himalaya}{\fs28 .)
\par 
\par }
\pard \qc\ {\b\fs28 2.             Physocarpus}{\fs28            (Camb.) Maxim.   
\par }{\fs24 By P.W. Ball
\par 
\par }
\pard \ {\fs28 Deciduous shrubs. Leaves simple, usually lobed and serrate; stipules caducous. Inflorescence a terminal corymb. Petals suborbicular, white or pale pink, scarcely exceeding the sepals; stamens 20-40; carpels  1-5, connate at base. Follicles dehiscent along both sutures. Seeds  2-5.
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 1. P. opulifolius}{\fs28  (L.) Maxim., }{\i\fs28 Acta Horti Petrop.}{\b\fs28  6}{\fs28 (}{\b\fs28 1}{\fs28 ): 220 (1879). Up to 3 m, glabrous or sparsely pubescent. Leaves 2-10 cm, ovate-orbicular, usually 3- to 5-lobed, the lobes crenate-dentate or crenate-serrate. Flowers c. 10 mm in diameter; carpels (3-)4-5. Follicles glabrous.}{\i\fs28  Cultivated for ornament in much of Europe and sometimes naturalized.}{\fs28  [Au Br Cz Ga Ho Ju No.] (}{\i\fs28 E. North America.}{\fs28 )
\par 
\par }
\pard \qc\ {\b\fs28 3.                Spiraea}{\fs28          L.
\par }{\fs24 By J. Dost\'e1l
\par 
\par }
\pard \ {\fs28 Deciduous shrubs. Leaves simple, rarely lobed, entire or serrate, usually shortly petiolate, exstipulate. Inflorescence paniculate, corymbose or umbellate. Petals white or pink; stamens 15 to numerous; carpels 5, free. Follicles dehiscent along the ventral suture. Seeds several.
\par 
\par In addition to the naturalized species described below, many species and hybrids are cultivated for ornament in gardens.
\par 
\par Literature: H. Zabel,}{\i\fs28  Die strauchigen Spiraen unserer Garten.}{\fs28  Berlin.  1893. V.V. Shulgina,}{\i\fs28  Derev'ja i Kustarniki SSSR }{\b\fs28 3}{\fs28 : 269-332 (1954). G. Krussmann,}{\i\fs28  Handbuch der Laubholzkunde}{\b\fs28  2}{\fs28 : 489-499. Berlin. 1962.
\par 
\par }
\pard \li200\ {\fs28 1 Inflorescence a panicle or compound corymb, terminating a long shoot
\par 2 Inflorescence a panicle, longer than wide
\par 3 Sepals erect in fruit; nectar-ring distinct
\par 4 Panicles cylindrical; flowers usually pink .................................. }{\b\fs28 1. salicifolia}{\fs28 
\par 4 Panicles conical; flowers usually white ............................................... }{\b\fs28 2. alba}{\fs28 
\par 3 Sepals deflexed in fruit; nectar-ring absent 
\par 5 Follicles glabrous ........................................................................ }{\b\fs28 3. douglasii}{\fs28 
\par 5 Follicles pubescent .....................................................................}{\b\fs28 4. tomentosa}{\fs28 
\par 2 Inflorescence a compound corymb, at least as wide as long  
\par 6 Stamens equalling or shorter than petals ................................. }{\b\fs28 5. decumbens}{\fs28 
\par 6 Stamens at least 1\'b75 times as long as petals  
\par 7 Leaves acute; petals pink .............................................................. }{\b\fs28 6. japonica}{\fs28 
\par 7 Leaves obtuse; petals white or yellowish-white ....................... }{\b\fs28 7. corymbosa}{\fs28 
\par 1 Inflorescence a simple umbel or corymb, terminating a short shoot 
\par 8 Inflorescence sessile or the lower very shortly pedunculate
\par   ............................................................................................... }{\b\fs28 13. hypericifolia}{\fs28 
\par 8 Inflorescence pedunculate
\par 9 Leaves with 3 longitudinal veins
\par 10 Veins conspicuous; petals shorter than stamens ......................... }{\b\fs28 11. crenata}{\fs28 
\par 10 Veins inconspicuous; petals longer than stamens ............... }{\b\fs28 12.}{\fs28  \'d7 }{\b\fs28 vanhouttei}{\fs28 
\par 9 Leaves pinnately veined
\par 11 Branches angular; petals c. 6 mm ................................... }{\b\fs28 8. chamaedryfolia}{\fs28 
\par 11 Branches terete; petals 2-3 mm
\par 12 Leaves of non-flowering shoots serrate towards apex,
\par    glabrous at maturity ......................................................................... }{\b\fs28 9. media}{\fs28 
\par 12 Leaves of non-flowering shoots entire, tomentose beneath ........... }{\b\fs28 10. cana}{\fs28 
\par 
\par }
\pard \ {\fs28   Subgen.}{\b\fs28  Spiraea}{\fs28 . Inflorescence a terminal panicle or compound corymb, terminating a long shoot.
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 1. S. salicifolia}{\fs28  L.,}{\i\fs28  Sp. Pl.}{\fs28  489 (1753). 1-2 m; branches erect, puberulent when young. Leaves 4-8 \'d7 1-2 cm, elliptic-oblong, cuneate at base, acute or subobtuse, sharply and often doubly serrate, glabrous; petiole very short. Inflorescence 4-12 cm, paniculate; panicle cylindrical, dense, its lower branches usually ascending and not longer than the bracts; rhachis and pedicels pubescent. Flowers c. 8 mm in diameter; sepals triangular-ovate, puberulent, erect; petals pink, rarely white. Stamens about twice as long as petals; nectar secreted by a ring of tissue inside the stamens. Follicles erect, glabrous.}{\i\fs28  C. &  E.C. Europe; rather local; widely cultivated and often naturalized elsewhere.}{\fs28  Au Bu Cz Hu Po Rm Rs (B,C, W) [Br ?Da Fe Ga Ge He Ho It Ju  No Su].
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 2. S. alba}{\fs28  Duroi, }{\i\fs28 Harbk. Baumz.}{\b\fs28  2}{\fs28 : 430 (1772). Like }{\b\fs28 1}{\fs28  but leaves wider; inflorescence conical, wider at the base and often longer, its lower branches usually spreading and longer than their bracts; flowers white or rarely pink.}{\i\fs28  Locally naturalized in C. & W. Europe.}{\fs28  [Au Cz Da Fe Hu Ga Ge.](}{\i\fs28 Eastern U.S.A.}{\fs28 )
\par 
\par 4}
\par }