{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b anserina}: Leaflets 15-25, silvery-sericeous, at least beneath; hairs straight. Epicalyx-segments often toothed or lobed. Achenes grooved on the back. 2n = 28, 35, 42.{\i  Almost throughout the range of the species.}
\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b egedii} (Wormsk.) Hiitonen, {\i Suomen Kasvio} 449 (1933) ({\i P. egedii} Wormsk.): Leaflets 7-15, glabrous or sparsely pubescent beneath; hairs, except on the veins, crispate. Epicalyx segments usually entire. Achenes not grooved. 2n = 28. {\i Sea-shores. Coasts of N. Europe, southwards to} c. 60° {\i N. in Sweden and Finland}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 5. P. rupestris} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 496 (1753) ({\i P. corsica} Sieber ex Lehm.). Perennial. Flowering stems up to 60 cm, puberulent to densely pubescent, and glandular, at least above. Leaves pinnate; leaflets 5-7, 10-40 × 5-35 mm, ovate to suborbicular, irregularly crenate-dentate or doubly crenate-dentate. Flowers one to many. Sepals triangular, subacute to shortly acuminate; epicalyx-segments lanceolate, shorter than sepals. Petals 8-14 mm, white, longer than sepals. Style sub-basal, fusiform. 2n = 14.{\i  W. & C. Europe and Balkan peninsula, extending to S. Sweden, N. Italy and White Russia.} Al Au Be Br Bu Co Cz Ga Ge Gr He Hs Hu It Ju Lu No Po Rm Rs (W) Sa Su.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   {\b 6. P. geoides} Bieb., {\i Fl. Taur.-Cauc. }{\b 1}: 404 (1808) (incl.{\i  P. jailae} Juz.). Perennial. Flowering stems 15-50 cm, softly hirsute. Leaves pinnate; leaflets 7-9, 25-50 × 20-40 mm, suborbicular, doubly incise-serrate. Sepals ovate or triangular, obtuse or subacute, often 3-lobed at apex; epicalyx-segments linear-lanceolate, obtuse, often 2- to 3-lobed at apex, much shorter than sepals. Petals 10-12 mm, pale yellow, longer than sepals. Style sub-basal, fusiform.{\i  N. Greece, Bulgaria; Krym.} Bu Gr ?.Ju Rs (K).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Much confused with and perhaps not distinct from {\b 5} in the Balkan peninsula. Plants described as{\i  P. rupestris} var. {\i beniczkyi }(Friv.) T. Wolf,{\i  P. rupestris} var.{\i  mollis} (Pancic) Ascherson & Graebner and {\i P. rupestris }var. {\i strigosa }T. Wolf are either referable to this species or are intermediate between {\b 5} and {\b 6}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 7. P. pulchella} R. Br. in Parry,{\i  Jour. Voy. N.W. Pass.} ({\i Suppl. App}.) 277 (1824). Perennial. Flowering stems 2-15(-25) cm, usually sericeous-villous. Leaves pinnate; leaflets 3-5, 5-20 × 4-12 mm, obovate-cuneate in outline, pinnatisect, with 3-7 linear-lanceolate or oblong lobes, silvery-grey on both surfaces, or grey-green above. Flowers 1-3(-6). Sepals ovate; epicalyx-segments oblong, shorter than sepals. Petals 3-6 mm, yellow, oblong-obovate, slightly longer than sepals. Style conical-filiform, papillose at base, shorter than achene. 2n = 28.{\i  Spitsbergen and Vajgac.} Rs (N) Sb. ({\i Arctic Asia and America.})
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 8. P. rubricaulis} Lehm., {\i Pugillus}{\b  2}: 11 (1830). Perennial. Flowering stems 3-20 cm, patent-pubescent, often reddish below. Leaves ternate or pinnate, the leaflets sometimes crowded; leaflets 3-5, 10-30 × 5-15 mm, obovate in outline, pinnatifid or pinnatisect with 3-7 oblong to ovate lobes, greyish-green above, white-tomentose beneath and sometimes sericeous. Flowers 1-3(-5). Sepals ovate-lanceolate; epicalyx-segments lanceolate or linear-oblong, as long as or slightly shorter than sepals. Petals 5-8 mm, yellow, broadly obovate, longer than sepals. Style conical-filiform, not or only slightly papillose. {\i Spitsbergen.} Sb. ({\i Arctic America.})
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 9. P. multifida} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 496 (1753) (incl. {\i P. lapponica }(F. Nyl.) Juz.). Perennial. Flowering stems 10-40 cm, sparsely to densely tomentose. Leaves pinnate, the leaflets sometimes very crowded and so almost digitate; leaflets 5-9, 5-40 × 3-20 mm, deeply pinnatisect, with up to 5 linear lobes, green above, grey-green beneath. Flowers usually numerous. Sepals ovate-lanceolate; epicalyx-segments oblong-linear, as long as or slightly shorter than sepals. Petals 5-7 mm, yellow, slightly longer than sepals. Style conical-filiform, much shorter than achene.{\i  Fennoscandia; Ural; Pyrenees; Alps.} Ga He ?Hs It Rs (N, C, ?E) Sb Su [Fe].
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 10. P. eversmanniana} Fischer ex Ledeb.,{\i  Fl. Ross. }{\b 2}: 42 (1843). Like {\b 9} but usually with dense, long, patent hairs; leaflets 11-19, the lobes often pinnatifid, grey-green or white above, white beneath; sepals twice as long as epicalyx-segments; petals about 1½ times as long as sepals; style about as long as achene. •{\i S. E. Russia.} Rs (?C, E).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 11. P. pensylvanica} L., {\i Mantissa} 76 (1767). Perennial. Flowering stems 15-80 cm, grey-pubescent. Leaves pinnate; leaflets (5-)7-19, 20-70 × 8-20 mm, oblong or lanceolate, coarsely toothed or pinnatifid, green or grey. Flowers numerous. Sepals oblong-lanceolate; epicalyx-segments linear-lanceolate, as long as sepals. Petals 8-12 mm, yellow, as long as or longer than sepals. Style conical-filiform. {\i C. & S. Spain; S.W. Alps; S. Ural; N.W. Russia.} Ga Hs It Rs (N, C, ?E).
\par

\par
 
\pard\f0\fs28  This species extends to Asia and N. America and is very variable, especially in indumentum, leaflet-dissection and petal-size. The European populations can to some extent be distinguished from each other, but it is possible to match all of these with individuals from various parts of Asia and North America. It is therefore impossible to reach any satisfactory conclusion as to the status of the European populations without undertaking a complete revision of the whole complex. The taxa generally recognized in Europe are{\b  P. pennsylvanica} L.{\i  sensu stricto} ({\i P. strigosa} Pallas ex Ledeb., {\i P. sibirica} T. Wolf), from S.W. Alps, N.W. Russia and S. Ural, with the leaflets coarsely toothed, green and pubescent beneath and the petals about equalling the sepals;{\b  P. conferta} Bunge in Ledeb., {\i Fl. Altaica}{\b  2}: 240 (1830) ({\i P. sibirica} var.{\b  pectinata} T. Wolf), from S. Ural, with the leaflets pinnatifid and grey-tomentose, beneath and the petals about equalling the sepals;{\b  P. hispanica} Zimmeter, {\i Gatt. Potent.} 7 (1884), from C. & S. Spain, with the leaflets usually grey-tomentose beneath and the petals at least 1½ times as long as the sepals.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 12. P. longifolia} Willd.,{\i  Ges. Naturf. Freunde Berlin Mag.}{\b  7}: 287 (1816) ({\i P. viscosa} Donn ex Lehm.). Perennial. Flowering stems 20-50 cm, densely hirsute and glandular. Leaves pinnate; leaflets 7-13, 20-40 × 7-12 mm, oblong-lanceolate, with 11-15 teeth, green. Flowers numerous, subcapitate, the pedicels less than 10 mm. Sepals ovate; epicalyx-segments oblong, about as long as sepals. Petals c. 8 mm, slightly longer than sepals. Style conical-filiform, papillose at base, about as long as achene.{\i  C. Ural}. Rs (C).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 13. P. pimpinelloides} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 497 (1753). Perennial. Flowering stems 15-40 cm, hirsute, glandular. Leaves pinnate; leaflets 15-25, 10-15 × 7-15 mm, orbicular-ovate to ovate, with 7-11 teeth, green. Flowers numerous, in a somewhat condensed terminal cyme. Sepals ovate-lanceolate; epicalyx-segments oblong-lanceolate, longer than sepals. Petals 7-8 mm, pale yellow, much longer than sepals. Style conical-filiform.{\i  S.C. Russia} ({\i E. of Orel}). Rs (C). ({\i Caucasus}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 14. P. visianii} Pancic, {\i Mem. Ist. Veneto }{\b 12}: 480 (1865). Perennial. Flowering stems up to 40 cm, pubescent with long patent hairs, glandular. Leaves pinnate; leaflets 11-17, 4-25 × 3·5-16 mm, cuneate-obovate, with 2-7 teeth. Flowers usually numerous in a lax terminal cyme; pedicels usually 10 mm or more. Sepals triangular-lanceolate; epicalyx-segments oblong to ovate-oblong, as long as or longer than sepals. Petals 8-10 mm, yellow,
\par

\par
40}
\par