{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 much longer than sepals. Style conical-filiform, shorter than achene.Cliffs and dry grassland, usually on serpentine. •{\i  N.W. part of Balkan peninsula.} Al Ju.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 15. P. nivea} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 499 (1753). Perennial up to 20 cm. Flowering stems subglabrous to white-tomentose. Leaves ternate; leaflets 7-25 × 6-15 mm, ovate or obovate, crenate-serrate with 7-13 teeth, densely white tomentose beneath, very sparsely pubescent above; petiole tomentose with only crispate hairs. Flowers up to 12 in a terminal cyme. Sepals lanceolate or ovate; epicalyx segments linear or linear-lanceolate, as long as or shorter than sepals. Petals 6-9 mm, yellow, slightly longer than sepals. Style conical-filiform. 2n = 56.{\i  Spitsbergen; N. & W. Fennoscandia; Ural; Alps and N. Appennini.} Au Ga Fe He It No Rs (N, C) Sb Su.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Plants described as subsp.{\b  subquinata} (Lange) Hultén, {\i Bot. Not. }{\b 1945}: 135 (1945) are apomictic, probably derived from hybridization between {\b 15} and {\b 16}. They are intermediate between these two species.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 16. P. chamissonis} Hultén, {\i Bot. Not. }{\b 1945}: 140 (1945) (?{\i  P. kuznetzowii} (Govoruchin) Juz. pro parte). Like {\b 15} but flowering stems 15-30 cm; leaves sometimes digitate; leaflets pinnatifid with 5-9 oblong, obtuse or subacute lobes; petiole with only long, straight hairs; flowers often more than 12; petals 6-9 mm. 2n = 77.{\i  Arctic Europe.} Fe No Rs (N) Sb Su.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 17. P. hookerana} Lehm., {\i Ind. Sem. Hort. Bot. Hamburg. Add.} 10 (1849) ({\i P.kuznetzowii} (Govoruchin) Juz. pro parte). Like {\b 15} but flowering stems up to 40 cm; leaves sometimes digitate; petiole with both crispate and long, straight hairs; flowers often more than 12.{\i  Ural.} Rs (N, ?C).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    ({\b 18-20}). {\b P. argentea} group. Procumbent to erect perennial. Flowering stems terminal, densely tomentose. Leaves digitate; leaflets usually 5,(7-)10-30 × (4-)5-15 mm, cuneate-obovate, incise-dentate to pinnatifid, densely tomentose beneath, sparsely pubescent to densely white-tomentose above. Flowers numerous. Sepals ovate; epicalyx-segments linear, as long as sepals. Petals 4-7 mm, yellow, about as long as or longer than sepals. Style conical-filiform.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  The distribution of the species recognized in this group is not known with any accuracy. The group as a whole occurs in the following territories: Al Au Be Br Bu Co Cz Da Fe Ga Ge Gr He Ho Hs Hu It Ju No Po Rm Rs (N, B, C, W, K, E) Si Su Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  The group consists of a polyploid complex, the members of which may be either amphi- or apomictic; some diploids and most polyploids are obligate apomicts. G. Marklund, {\i Mem. Soc. Fauna Fl. Fenn.}{\b  9}: 2-13 (1934),recognized 3 species and A. & G. Müntzing, {\i Bot. Not.}{\b  1941}: 237-278(1941), and A. Muntzing,{\i  Bot. Not. }{\b 111}: 209-227 (1958), have shown that one of Marklund's species is usually diploid and another usually hexaploid, though the correlation is not perfect. Tetraploid plants, intermediate between diploid and hexaploid parents, sometimes occur. The chromosome number of the 3rd species is not known.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Leaflets of the basal leaves mostly with 9-11 acute teeth or lobes;
\par
  petals 5-7 mm .............................................................................. {\b 19. neglecta}
\par
1 Leaflets of the basal leaves with 2-7 obtuse or 
\par
  subobtuse teeth or lobes;petals 4-5 mm
\par
2 Leaflets green above; pedicels and calyx relatively
\par
  sparsely tomentose ...................................................................... {\b 18. argentea}
\par
2 Leaflets grey-green to white above; pedicels and 
\par
  calyx densely white-tomentose ..................................................... {\b 20. calabra}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 18. P. argentea} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 497 (1753). Flowering stems up to 30 cm, usually procumbent or ascending. Leaflets green above, with usually not more than 7 subobtuse teeth; middle cauline stipules entire or with 1 lobe. Pedicels and calyx relatively sparsely tomentose, grey-green. Petals 4-5 mm, not overlapping. Carpels pale yellow. 2n = 14.{\i  N. Europe, Alps; probably in the mountains elsewhere in C. & S. Europe}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Usually apomictic.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 19. P. neglecta} Baumg.,{\i  Enum. Stirp. Transs.}{\b  2}: 63 (1816) ({\i P. impolita} auct., non Wahlenb.). Flowering stems up to 50 cm, usually erect. Leaflets grey-green above, usually with 9-11 acute teeth; middle cauline stipules with 1 or 2 lobes. Pedicels and calyx densely white-tomentose. Petals 5-7 mm, almost overlapping. Carpels dark yellow or orange-yellow. 2n = 42.{\i  Most of Europe but absent from many islands.}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Usually apomictic. A few plants with 2n = 35 have been recorded. They are morphologically indistinguishable from {\b 19}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 20. P. calabra} Ten., {\i Fl. Nap. 1, Prodr.:} 68 (1811). Flowering stems up to 20 cm, usually procumbent. Leaflets grey-green to white above, flabellate or 2- to 3-lobed, the lobes obtuse; middle cauline stipules usually entire. Pedicels and calyx densely white tomentose. Petals c. 5 mm.{\i  Mountains of C. & S. Italy and Sicilia; W. part of Balkan peninsula}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 The plants from the Balkan peninsula are somewhat intermediate between {\b 20} and {\b 18} or {\b 19}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 21. P. inclinata} Vill.,{\i  Hist. Pl. Dauph. }{\b 3}: 567 (1788) ({\i P. canescens} Besser). Erect or ascending perennial. Flowering stems 15-50 cm, terminal, tomentose and with patent, long, simple hairs. Leaves digitate; leaflets 5-7, 15-40 × 5-15 mm, oblong-obovate, incise-dentate or -serrate, or pinnatifid with up to 12 pairs of teeth, tomentose beneath and with long simple hairs on the veins. Flowers numerous. Sepals ovate; epicalyx-segments linear, as long as sepals. Petals 5-7 mm, yellow, slightly longer than sepals. Style conical-filiform. 2n = 42.{\i  S. & C. Europe, extending north eastwards to C. Ukraine.} Al Au Bu Cz Ga Ge Gr He Hs Hu It Ju Po Rm Rs (W, K, E) Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Very variable in the density of the indumentum and in the division of the leaflets. It is intermediate between the{\i  P. argentea} group and {\b 28} and may represent another apomictic hybrid complex.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   {\b P. pindicola} (Nyman) Hausskn.,{\i  Mitt. Thür. Bot. Ver.} nov. ser., {\b 5}: 95 (1893) ({\i P. virescens} (Boiss.) Halácsy), from S.E. Europe, is like {\b 21} but has epicalyx-segments linear-lanceolate, slightly longer than sepals, and petals sometimes up to 12 mm. It appears to be intermediate between the{\i  P. argentea group} and {\b 26} or {\b 27}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 22. P. collina} Wibel,{\i  Prim. Fl. Werthem.} 267 (1799). Procumbent to erect perennial. Flowering stems up to 30(-40) cm, terminal or lateral, glabrous to white-tomentose. Leaves digitate; leaflets 5-7, oblong-obovate or oblanceolate, variously toothed or incised, sparsely pubescent to white-tomentose or sericeous beneath. Flowers few to numerous. Sepals ovate; epicalyx segments linear or linear-lanceolate, usually as long as or shorter than sepals. Petals 4-7 mm, yellow, as long as or longer than sepals. Style conical at base, slightly clavate at apex, but often somewhat distorted. 2n = 42.{\i  C. Europe, extending to N. Italy, C. France,S. Sweden and the S. & W. parts of the U.S.S.R.} Au ?Be Bu Cz Da Ga Ge He Hu It ?Ju Po Rm Rs (B, C, W, K, E) Su
\par

\par
41}
\par