{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}
\pard\f0\fs28 As defined here this species is composed of a wide range of plants which are intermediate between the {\i P. argentea }group and {\b 40-51}. Some are known to be apomictic and are probably of hybrid origin. It is sometimes very difficult to decide whether an individual should be referred to{\i  P.collina} or to one of the putative parent species.
\par
\par{\b  22} contains at least {\b 12} taxa that have been described as species and are often recognized as such in Europe.
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28 Those most closely resembling the{\i  P. argentea} group are:
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28  {\b P. johanniniana} Goiran,{\i  Spec. Morph. Veg.} 45 (1875). It.
\par
\pard\f0\fs28  {\b P. sordida} Fries ex Aspegren,{\i  Förs. Blek. Fl.} 38 (1823). Bu Cz Ga Ge.
\par
\pard\f0\fs28  {\b P. collina}{\i  sensu stricto} ({\i P. wibeliana} T. Wolf). Au Cz Ga Ge Hu Rm Rs(C).
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28 Those most closely resembling {\b 40}-{\b  51} are:
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28 {\b  P. alpicola} De la Soie ex Fauconnet,{\i  Bull. Trav. Soc. Murith.}{\b  5}:18 (1876). He It.
\par
\pard\f0\fs28 {\b  P. opizii} Domin, {\i Sitz.-Ber. Böhm. Ges. Wiss.} ({\i Math.-Nat. Kl}.) {\b 1903} ({\b 25}):21 (1904). Cz.
\par
\pard\f0\fs28  {\b P. rhenana} P. J. Mueller ex Zimmeter, {\i Gatt. Potent.} 12 (1884). Ge.
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28 The following are more or less intermediate:
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28 {\b  P. argenteiformis} Kauffm., {\i Mosk. Fl.} 159 (1866). Rs (E).
\par
\pard\f0\fs28 {\b  P. leucopolitana} P. J. Mueller in Billot,{\i  Annot.} 278 (1862). Au Cz Da Ga Ge Hu Po Rm Rs (C, W).
\par
\pard\f0\fs28  {\b P. praecox} F. W. Schultz,{\i  Pollichia}{\b  16-17}: 5 (1859). Ge He.
\par
\pard\f0\fs28 {\b  P. silesiaca} Uechtr.,{\i  Jahresb. Schles. Ges. Vaterl. Cult.}{\b  44}: 82 (1867).?Ge Po.
\par
\pard\f0\fs28  {\b P. thyrsiflora} Zimmeter in A. Kerner, {\i Sched. Fl. Exsicc. Austro-Hung.}{\b  2}: 21 (1882). Cz Ge Hu It Po Rm Rs (C, W).
\par
\pard\f0\fs28  {\b P. wiemanniana} Günther & Schummel, {\i Sched. Cent. Siles. Exsicc.} 5 (1813).Au Cz Da Ga Ge He Hu It Ju Rs (B, C, W, E) Su.
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 23. P. supina} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 497 (1753). Annual or short-lived perennial.Flowering stems 10-40 cm, glabrous or setose at base, sparsely tomentose and with sessile glands above. Leaves pinnate; leaflets 5-11, 8-20 × 5-15 mm, oblong or obovate, incise-dentate. Flowers numerous. Sepals triangular-ovate; epicalyx segments lanceolate to ovate, obtuse, longer than sepals. Petals 2·5-3 mm, yellow, shorter than sepals. Style conical-filiform. 2n = 28.{\i  C., S. & E. Europe extending westwards to C. France and the Netherlands.} Au Be Bu Cz Ga Ge Gr He Ho Hu It Ju Po Rm Rs (C, W, E) Tu.
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 24. P. norvegica} L., {\i Sp. Pl. }499 (1753). Annual or short-lived perennial. Flowering stems 10-70 cm, terminal, hirsute, sometimes with a few glands. Leaves ternate, rarely a few pinnate with 5 leaflets; leaflets 10-70 × 7-40 mm, obovate, elliptical or oblong, coarsely serrate or serrate-dentate or almost pinnatifid, green. Flowers numerous. Sepals c.5 mm in flower, c. 10 mm in fruit, ovate, acute; epicalyx-segments oblong, subobtuse, longer than sepals in fruit. Petals 4-5 mm, yellow, shorter than or as long as sepals. Style conical-filiform. {\i N., C. & E.Europe; a frequent casual elsewhere and sometimes naturalized.} Au Cz Da Fe Ge It No Po Rm Rs (N, B, C, W, E) Su [Be Br Ga He Ho Ju].
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28  This species appears to be spreading westwards; some authors believe it to be native only in E. & E.C. Europe.
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 25. P. intermedia} L.,{\i  Mantissa} 76 (1767) ({\i P. heidenreichii} Zimmeter). Biennial or perennial. Flowering stems 20-50 cm, terminal, glabrous or setose at base, tomentose above. Leaves digitate; leaflets (3-)5, 10-40 × 5-18 mm, obovate or obovate-oblong, serrate-dentate to incise-serrate, green or sometimes grey-pubescent beneath. Flowers numerous. Sepals c. 5 mm in flower, 15-20 mm in fruit, ovate, acute; epicalyx-segments oblong-ovate, subobtuse, about as long as sepals. Petals 4-5 mm, yellow, as long as or slightly longer than sepals. Style conical filiform.{\i  N. & C. Russia; a common casual elsewhere, tending to become naturalized}. Rs (N, *B, C, *W) [Au Be Br Cz Da Fe Ga Ge He Ho It No Po Su].
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 26. P. astracanica} Jacq.,{\i  Misc. Austr. Bot.}{\b  2}: 349 (1781) ({\i P. taurica} sensu T. Wolf). Perennial. Flowering stems up to 30 cm, terminal, hirsute and often densely glandular. Leaves digitate; leaflets usually 5, 10-50 × 7-20 mm, oblong-oblanceolate to obovate, variously toothed. Flowers usually numerous, usually very crowded. Sepals triangular-ovate; epicalyx-segments triangular-lanceolate or -ovate, long-acuminate,usually 11/2-2 times as long as sepals, always as wide as sepals at the base. Petals 12-15 mm, yellow, distinctly longer than calyx. Style conical cylindrical. {\i S.E. Europe.} Bu Gr Ju Rm Rs (W, K, E).
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28  Variable in the density and type of indumentum and in the shape and length of the calyx and epicalyx-segments. The following are often recognized as separate species:{\b  P. astracanica }{\i sensu stricto} ({\i P. taurica }var. {\i genuina }T. Wolf), from S.E. Europe, with densely glandular stems, leaflets green or grey-green beneath and sepals and epicalyx-segments broadly triangular-ovate, subobtuse; {\b P. callieri} (T. Wolf) Juz. in Komarov,{\i  Fl. URSS}{\b  10}: 164 (1941), from Krym, like{\i  P. astracanica} but with triangular-lanceolate, acute sepals and epicalyx-segments; {\b P. emilii-popii} E. I. Nyárády,{\i  Bul. Grad. Bot. Cluj }{\b 8}: 87 (1928), from coasts of Romania and Bulgaria, with the stems eglandular, leaflets densely white sericeous-villous beneath and sepals and epicalyx-segments triangular lanceolate, acute; {\b P. taurica} Willd.,{\i  Ges. Naturf. Freunde Berlin Mag. }{\b 7}: 291 (1816), from Krym, with the stems eglandular or sparsely glandular, leaflets green or grey-green beneath and sepals and epicalyx-segments acute.
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 27. P. detommasii} Ten.,{\i  Fl. Nap.}{\b  1}, {\i Prodr.:} 61 (1811). Perennial. Flowering stems up to 30(-45) cm, terminal, hirsute and densely pubescent, eglandular. Leaves digitate; leaflets 5-7, 20-50 × 8-25 mm, obovate to obovate-oblong, crenate-serrate, sericeous villous at least beneath. Flowers usually numerous; cymes crowded. Sepals triangular-ovate, acuminate; epicalyx-segments linear-lanceolate, long-acuminate, about as long as sepals. Petals 12-14 mm, yellow, as long as or longer than sepals. Style conical cylindrical, shorter than achene. •{\i  Balkan peninsula, C. & S. Italy, Sicilia.} Al Bu Gr It Ju Si ?Tu.
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 28. P. recta} L.,{\i  Sp. Pl.} 497 (1753) (incl. {\i P. adriatica} Murb.,{\i  P. hirta} auct. balcan., non L., {\i P. laciniosa} Kit. ex Nestler,{\i  P. semilaciniosa} Borbás, {\i P. transcaspia} T. Wolf, {\i ?P. velenovskyi} Hayek). Perennial. Flowering stems 10-70 cm, terminal, densely pubescent, with long, patent or erecto-patent hairs and short, usually glandular hairs. Leaves digitate; leaflets 5-7, 15-100 × 5-35 mm, oblong to obovate, serrate to pinnatisect, green or grey. Flowers numerous; cymes lax. Sepals triangular-ovate; epicalyx segments linear or linear-lanceolate, as long as or slightly longer than sepals. Petals 12-14 mm, yellow, as long as or longer than sepals. Style conical-cylindrical. 2n = 42.{\i  C., E. & S. Europe}. Al Au Bu Co Cz Ga Ge Gr He Hs Hu It Ju Po Rm Rs (C, W, K, E) Sa Si Tu [Be Br Fe Ho No Su].
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28  A very variable species. It is not yet possible to make any satisfactory subdivision for the whole of Europe. In the western part of its range the achenes are narrowly but distinctly winged while
\par
\par 42}
\par