{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 in the eastern part they are not winged. The most distinct taxa are{\b  P. recta }L. {\i sensu stricto,} from C., E. and parts of S. Europe, with serrate or incise-serrate, green or grey-green leaflets;{\b  P. laciniosa} Kit. ex Nestler, {\i Monogr. Potent.} 45 (1816), from E.C. Europe, with pinnatifid or pinnatisect, green or grey-green leaflets;{\b  P. pedata} Nestler, {\i op. cit.} 44 (1816), from S.E. Europe, with pinnatifid or pinnatisect, grey leaflets.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b  P. reuteri} Boiss.,{\i  Diagn. Pl. Or. Nov. }{\b 3}({\b 2}): 51 (1856), from S. Spain, is probably of hybrid origin from {\b 28} and {\b 30}. It is like {\b 28} but the basal leaves have not more than 7(-9) teeth or lobes and the achenes are without a narrow membranous margin.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 29. P. hirta} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 497 (1753). Like {\b 28} but stems and leaves with only long, patent, eglandular hairs; leaflets linear- to oblong-oblanceolate, rarely obovate, with 3-7 obtuse teeth or lobes at apex; petals longer than sepals. •{\i  W. Mediterranean region.} Co Ga Hs It.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 30. P. nevadensis} Boiss., {\i Elenchus }40 (1838). Perennial. Flowering stems up to 30 cm, lateral, villous. Leaves digitate; leaflets 5, (4-)7-20 × (3-)5-15 mm, obovate or oblanceolate, crenate-serrate, sericeous-villous beneath. Flowers up to 4. Sepals ovate or ovate-lanceolate; epicalyx-segments oblong or oblong-lanceolate, slightly shorter than sepals. Petals (4-)5-7 mm, yellow, longer than sepals. Style conical-filiform.{\i  Dry rocks and screes. S. Spain }({\i Sierra Nevada}). Hs.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 31. P. grandiflora} L.,{\i  Sp. Pl.} 499 (1753). Perennial. Flowering stems 10-40 cm, lateral, densely hirsute with patent or subappressed hairs. Leaves ternate; leaflets 15-40 × 10-30 mm, obovate to almost suborbicular, coarsely dentate or crenate-serrate, sparsely to densely grey-tomentose beneath; terminal leaflet sessile or petiolulate. Flowers numerous. Sepals ovate, acute; epicalyx-segments oblong-lanceolate, acute, shorter than sepals. Petals 10-15 mm, yellow, about twice as long as sepals. Style conical-filiform. •{\i  Alps; C. & E. Pyrenees}. Au Ga He Hs It.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 32. P. montenegrina} Pant.,{\i  Österr. Bot. Zeitschr.}{\b  23}: 5 (1873). Perennial. Flowering stems 30-80 cm, lateral, densely hirsute with subappressed hairs. Leaves ternate, very rarely a few digitate; leaflets 35-80 × 20-40 mm, broadly obovate to obovate-oblong, coarsely serrate or serrate-crenate, green, pubescent on the main veins beneath; terminal leaflet with distinct petiolule. Flowers numerous. Sepals triangular-lanceolate to ovate, acute; epicalyx segments oblong, obtuse, or subacute, shorter than or as long as sepals. Petals 10-12 mm, yellow, about twice as long as sepals. Style conical-filiform. •{\i  N. part of Balkan peninsula}. Al Bu Ju.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 33. P. umbrosa} Steven ex Bieb.,{\i  Fl. Taur.-Cauc. }{\b 3}: 357 (1819). Like {\b 32} but leaves digitate with 5 leaflets; sepals ovate, subobtuse; epicalyx-segments oblong-ovate. •{\i  Krym}. Rs (K)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 34. P. delphinensis} Gren. & Godron,{\i  Fl. Fr. }{\b 1}: 530 (1849). Perennial. Flowering stems 30-50 cm, lateral, hirsute with subappressed hairs. Leaves digitate; leaflets 5, 25-60 × 15-30 mm, obovate, coarsely toothed, green; terminal leaflet sessile or subsessile. Flowers numerous. Sepals triangular-ovate, acute; epicalyx-segments lanceolate, acute, almost as long as sepals. Petals 10-12 mm, yellow, twice as long as sepals. Style conical-filiform. •{\i  S.W. Alps} ({\i Alpes Cottiennes, Massif du Pelrouse}). Ga.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 35. P. pyrenaica} Ramond ex DC. in Lam. & DC.,{\i  Fl. Fr.} ed. 3,{\b  4}: 459 (1805). Perennial. Flowering stems 10-40(-70) cm, lateral, sparsely to densely hirsute with appressed or subappressed hairs. Leaves digitate; leaflets 5, 12-60 × 7-30 mm, oblong or obovate-oblong, crenate-dentate, green; terminal leaflet sessile or subsessile. Flowers 5 or more. Sepals triangular-ovate, subacute; epicalyx-segments elliptic-linear, subobtuse, shorter than or as long as sepals. Petals (7-)10-15 mm, 1½-2 times as long as sepals. Style conical-filiform. •{\i  Pyrenees, N. & C. Spain.} Ga Hs.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    Plants from Spain often have more coarsely and deeply toothed leaflets and sometimes the petals are less than 10 mm. They may be of hybrid origin from {\b 28} or {\b 29} and {\b 35}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 36. P. stipularis} L.,{\i  Sp. Pl.} 498 (1753). Perennial. Flowering stems 10-25(-35) cm, glabrous, or sometimes with pedicels, calyx and margin of leaflets sparsely hairy. Leaves digitate; leaflets 7-9, 6-20(-30) × 2-6 mm, oblong-obovate with 3-7 teeth at apex. Stipules 10-30 mm, adnate to the petiole throughout its length. Flowers up to 12. Sepals oblong-ovate; epicalyx-segments narrowly linear, slightly shorter than sepals. Petals 6-8 mm, yellow, 1½ times as long as sepals. Style conical at base, slightly clavate at apex.{\i  N.E. Russia.} Rs (N). ({\i N. Siberia.})
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 37. P. longipes} Ledeb.,{\i  Fl. Ross.}{\b  2}: 50 (1843). Perennial. Flowering stems 15-50 cm, sparsely hairy. Leaves digitate; leaflets 7, 25-50 × 10-20 mm, oblong or oblong-obovate, coarsely toothed or almost pinnatifid, glabrous above, sparsely hairy beneath. Flowers usually numerous. Sepals ovate-lanceolate; epicalyx-segments linear-lanceolate, about as long as sepals. Petals c. 6 mm, yellow, longer than sepals. Style conical-filiform.{\i  S.E Russia}. Rs (C, E).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    ({\b 38-39}). {\b P. chrysantha} group. Perennial. Flowering stems 10-50(-70) cm, usually lateral, procumbent to erect, usually densely patent-pubescent or hirsute, and with short glandular and eglandular hairs. Leaves digitate; leaflets 5-9, 12-100 × 5-50 mm, oblong-lanceolate to obovate, crenate-serrate to coarsely serrate. Flowers in lax terminal cymes. Sepals ovate or oblong-ovate, acute; epicalyx-segments linear- or oblong-lanceolate, acute or subobtuse, about as long as sepals. Petals (6-)7-10 mm, yellow. Style more or less conical-filiform.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    This group is morphologically intermediate between {\b 28} and {\b 43} and allied species and is probably of hybrid origin. There does not appear to be any definite evidence as to the breeding system in this group, but it is likely that it is, at least in part, apomictic.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    Two species are briefly described below; both are frequently subdivided at infraspecific level.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 38. P. chrysantha} Trev.,{\i  Ind. Sem. Horto Wratisl.} 5 (1818). Leaflets usually 5. Petals 1½-2 times as long as sepals.{\i  Balkan peninsula, Romania, Ural}. Bu Ju Rm Rs (C).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 39. P. thuringiaca} Bernh. ex Link,{\i  Enum. Hort. Berol. Alt. }{\b 2}: 64 (1822) ({\i P. goldbachii} Rupr., {\i P. nestlerana }Tratt.,{\i  P. heptaphylla} sensu Coste, non L.). Leaflets 5-9. Petals 1-1½ times as long as sepals.{\i  C. Europe, S.W. Alps, N. & C. Italy.} Cz Ga Ge He ?Hs It Rm [Fe No Rs (B) Su].
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    The records from N.E. Spain are probably referable to {\b 35}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 40. P. brauniana} Hoppe in Sturm,{\i  Deutschl. Fl.} Abt. 1, Band 5, Heft 17 (1804) ({\i P. dubia} (Crantz) Zimmeter, non Moench, {\i P. minima} Haller fil.). Dwarf perennial. Flowering stems up to 5 cm, lateral, ascending, sparsely hairy and eglandular. Leaves ternate; leaflets 5-10(-15) × 3-7(-10) mm, oblong-obovate to obovate, shallowly dentate, glabrous above, sparsely hairy beneath. Stipules of basal leaves broadly ovate, obtuse. Flowers 1-3(-5).
\par

\par
43}
\par