{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}
\pard\f0\fs28 Epicalyx-segments broadly elliptical, very obtuse, distinctly shorter than sepals. Petals 3-5 mm, yellow, as long as or up to 11/2 times as long as sepals. Style usually somewhat swollen at the base. 2n = 14. •{\i  Mountain grassland and rocks, usually above} 2000{\i  m; calcicole. Alps, Jura} ({\i Reculet}), {\i Pyrenees.} Au Ga Ge He Hs It Ju.
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 41. P. frigida} Vill.,{\i  Hist. Pl. Dauph.}{\b  3}: 563 (1788). Like {\b 40} but flowering stems up to 10 cm; indumentum much thicker, with sessile glandular and long, ± patent, eglandular hairs; leaflets hairy above, more deeply incise-dentate; petals slightly shorter to slightly longer than sepals. 2n = 28.{\i  Mountain grassland and rocks, usually above} 2500{\i  m; calcifuge. • Pyrenees, Alps}. Au Ga He Hs It.
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 42. P. hyparctica} Malte, {\i Rhodora }{\b 36}: 177 (1934) ({\i P. emarginata} Pursh, non Desf.). Flowering stems up to 10 cm, lateral, ascending, sparsely hairy and sparsely to densely glandular. Leaves ternate; leaflets 5-15 mm, broadly obovate, with triangular-oblong, acute or subobtuse teeth, sparsely hairy above, sparsely to densely hairy and often glandular beneath. Stipules of basal leaves ovate. Flowers 1-3. Epicalyx-segments elliptical or oblong-elliptical, obtuse, a little shorter than the ovate sepals. Petals (4*5-)6-8 mm, yellow, about 11/2 times as long as sepals.Style conical at base, slightly clavate at apex. 2n = 42.{\i  Arctic Europe.} Rs (N) Sb Su. ({\i Arctic America and W. Asia}.)
\par
\par 
\pard\f0\fs28   {\b 43. P. crantzii} (Crantz) G. Beck ex Fritsch,{\i  Excursionsfl. Österr.} 295(1897) ({\i P., verna} L. nom. ambig.,{\i  P. alpestris} Haller fil., {\i P. salisburgensis} Haenke). Perennial with thick, woody stock; branches few, short, not or hardly rooting; lateral flowering stems up to 20 (-30) cm slender, ascending. Leaves digitate; leaflets (3-)5, 8-20( 40) × 6-15(-20) mm, oblanceolate to obovate-cuneate or almost suborbicular,usually with broad, obtuse teeth, the terminal tooth subequal to the adjacent lateral, glabrous or sparsely hairy above, sparsely to densely hairy (mainly on the veins) beneath, the margin with patent hairs. Stipules of basal leaves ovate-lanceolate, subacute, often persistent in the withered state. Flowers 1-12. Epicalyx-segments oblong or elliptical,shorter than or almost as long as the triangular-ovate sepals. Petals 6-10 mm, yellow, often with an orange-coloured spot at base, longer than sepals. Style conical at base, slightly clavate at apex. 2n = 28, 42, 48, 64.{\i  Open, rocky ground; usually calcicole. N. Europe; mountains of C. & S. Europe.} Al Au Br Bu Cz Fa Fe Ga Ge He Hs Is It Ju Lu No Po Rm Rs (N,B,C,W) Sb Su.
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28  Very variable. Tetraploid plants from S. Poland (Tatra) are known to be sexual, but other plants in Scandinavia and Britain prove to be hexaploids or higher polyploids and apomictic. Plants from N. England and Sweden with characters intermediate between{\b  43} and {\b 49} are high polyploids and almost certainly the product of occasional hybridization.
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28  {\b  P. serpentini} Borbás ex Zimmeter, {\i Gatt. Potent.} 22 (1884), described from serpentine rocks in Austria (Burgenland), is a densely glandular-hairy variant; similar (but not identical) variants are known from serpentine in the Vosges and in Czechoslovakia and all probably merit varietal status only.
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 44. P. aurea} L., {\i Cent. Pl.}{\b  2}: 18 (1756). Like {\b 43} but more mat forming; upper part of stem and inflorescence covered with appressed silky hairs, never glandular; leaflets with appressed silky hairs on the margin and on the veins beneath, the terminal tooth always smaller than the adjacent lateral; epicalyx-segments linear-lanceolate; petals 6-11 mm.{\i  Grassland and rocky places, usually between} 1400{\i  m and} 2600{\i  m; calcifuge. Mountains of S.and C. Europe, from N. Spain to the Carpathians and the Balkan peninsula.} Al Au Bu Cz Ga Ge Gr He Hs It Ju Po Rm Rs (W).
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b aurea}: Leaflets 5, with acute teeth. 2n = 14.{\i  • Throughout the range of the species except the S. & E. parts of the Balkan peninsula}. 
\par
\pard\f0\fs28 Amphimictic and not very variable.
\par
\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b chrysocraspeda} (Lehm.) Nyman, {\i Consp.} 225 (1878) ({\i P. ternata} C. Koch): Leaflets always 3, often with obtuse teeth.{\i  Balkan peninsula, S. & E. Carpathians}.
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 45. P. heptaphylla} L.,{\i  Cent. Pl. }{\b 1}: 13 (1755) ({\i P. opaca} L., {\i P. rubens} (Crantz) Zimmeter, non Vill.). Perennial, with slender stock; branches short, ascending; lateral flowering stems up to 40 cm, slender, with soft patent hairs borne on minute tubercles, and shorter, thick pubescence, often with reddish multicellular glandular hairs. Leaves digitate; leaflets 5-7, 8-25 × 4-11 mm, ovate-lanceolate, dentate or crenate-dentate; stipules of basal leaves ovate-lanceolate, acute. Flowers 1-10. Sepals ovate lanceolate; epicalyx-segments linear-lanceolate, as long as or shorter than sepals. Petals 5-7 mm, yellow. Achenes smooth. Style conical at base, slightly clavate at apex, smooth. 2n = 14 28, 30, 35. {\i Dry, unshaded grassland; usually lowland and calcicole. • C. Europe, extending to C. Jugoslavia and N. Ukraine, and northwards to} 58°{\i  N. in S. Sweden.} Au ?Bu Cz Da Ga Ge He Hu It Ju Po Rm Rs (W) Su.
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 46. P. humifusa} Willd.,{\i  Ges. Naturf. Freunde Berlin Mag.}{\b  7}: 289 (1816)({\i P. opaciformis }T. Wolf). Like {\b 45} but with numerous more or less sessile, yellow, glandular hairs, and minutely papillose, conical-filiform style. {\i S. & E. parts of U.S.S.R.} Rs (C, W, K, E)
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28  The style resembles that of {\b 23-35}, but the otherwise close similarity to{\b  45} makes it reasonable to retain this species here.
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 47. P. patula} Waldst. & Kit.,{\i  Pl. Rar. Hung. }{\b 2}: 218 (1805) ({\i P. schurii} Fuss ex Zimmeter). Stock relatively slender; lateral flowering stems up to 25(-70) cm, with long, rather stiff sub-appressed hairs. Leaves digitate; leaflets (5-)7-9, 5-15(-60) × 2-3(-15) mm, linear-oblanceolate, dentate or with short linear lobes; stipules of basal leaves lanceolate, acute. Flowers 1-10. Sepals triangular-ovate; epicalyx-segments narrowly linear, more or less equalling sepals. Petals 6-7 mm, yellow. Achenes rugose, somewhat keeled; style conical at base, enlarged at apex. 2n = 42.{\i  Dry, open grassland in the lowlands. E.C. & E. Europe, northwards to C. Czechoslovakia and to} 54°{\i  N. in C. Russia.} Al Au Bu Cz Hu Ju Rm Rs (W, C,E).
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 48. P. australis} Krasan,{\i  Österr. Bot. Zeitschr.}{\b  17}: 302 (1867). Like {\b 47} but sometimes glandular; leaflets (5-)7, 7-20 × 3-6 mm, oblong-obovate to obovate; epicalyx-segments oblong to broadly elliptical; achenes smooth or only slightly rugose. 2n = 42. {\i  Dry grassland. E.C. Europe, N.E.Italy, W. Jugoslavia; S.C. France.} Al Cz Ga Gr It Ju.
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28  {\b P. rigoana }T. Wolf,{\i  Biblioth. Bot.} ({\i Stuttgart}) {\b 71}: 578 (1908), described from S. Italy (Monte Pollino), has the mat-forming and freely-rooting habit of {\b 49} to {\b 51}, but the hairiness and stipule shape of {\b 48}. The petals are said to be concave and deeply emarginate, with an auriculate base.Its relationships are quite uncertain.
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 49. P. tabernaemontani} Ascherson, {\i Verh. Bot. Ver. Brandenb. }{\b 32}: 156(1891) ({\i P. verna }auct., non L., {\i P. verna }subsp. {\i vulgaris} (Ser.) Gaudin). Mat-forming perennial, with numerous procumbent woody stems freely rooting at the nodes, and short, ascending, lateral flowering stems usually not more than 10 cm high;
\par
\par 44}
\par