{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 hairiness variable, but consisting of simple hairs only. Leaves digitate; leaflets 5-7, 8-40 × 4-15 mm, cuneate-oblanceolate to -obovate, dentate or cuneate-dentate; stipules of basal leaves linear. Flowers 1-12. Sepals ovate; epicalyx-segments lanceolate, obtuse, usually much shorter than the sepals. Petals 6-10 mm, yellow, longer than sepals. Achenes rugose; style conical at base, slightly clavate at apex. 2n = 42, 49, 50, 56, c.60, 63, 70, c. 84. {\i Dry grassland and rocky places, usually lowland. • N.,W. & C. Europe, extending to the Baltic region, White Russia and Bulgaria.} Au Be Bu Br Co Cz Da *Fe Ga Ge He Ho Hs Hu It No Po Rm Rs (*N,B, C) Su.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Extremely variable. This polyploid complex is, so far as is known, wholly apomictic, and almost certainly arose by hybridization from related sexual species ({\b 40-51}). Many taxa have been described, differing in habit, hairiness, leaflet-shape and -number, but no satisfactory taxonomic treatment is possible in the present state of knowledge.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  The records of this species and {\b 51} from Finland are almost all erroneous. They refer to{\b  P. subarenaria} Borbás ex Zimmeter,{\i  Gatt. Potent. }21 (1884),an apomictic species probably of recent hybrid origin from{\b  49} and {\b 51}, which also occurs in C. Europe.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 50. P. pusilla} Host, {\i Fl. Austr.}{\b  2}: 39 (1831) ({\i P. glandulifera} Krasan, {\i P. gaudinii} Gremli, {\i P. verna }subsp.{\i  puberula} (Krasan) Hegi). Like {\b 49} but whole plant rather sparingly covered with branched or stellate hairs interspersed with simple hairs, particularly on lower surface of leaflets; stellate hairs with 5-10 rays; petals 5-7 mm.{\i  Mainly in subalpine grassland, up to} 2000 {\i m. • C. Europe, extending to S.W. Alps. }Au Cz Ga Ge He Hu It Ju Po Rm.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Possibly of distant hybrid origin from {\b 49} × {\b 51}, but with a wide distribution. Very variable.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 51. P. cinerea} Chaix ex Vill.,{\i  Prosp. Pl. Dauph.} 46 (1779) (incl.{\i  P. arenaria} Borkh.,{\i  P. glaucescens }Willd.,{\i  P. incana} P. Gaertner, B. Meyer &Scherb.,{\i  P. tommasiniana }F. W. Schultz,{\i  P. velutina} Lehm.). Mat-forming,with freely rooting, procumbent woody stems, and flowering stems up to 10 cm, the stem and leaves with a dense, usually continuous tomentum of stellate hairs with 15-30 rays, mixed with long, simple hairs and sometimes with glandular hairs. Leaves ternate or digitate; leaflets 3-5, 5-20 × 3·5-9 mm, oblong-obovate to broadly obovate, dentate or crenate-dentate, grey-green above, grey beneath; stipules of basal leaves linear. Flowers 1-6. Sepals ovate or ovate-lanceolate; epicalyx-segments lanceolate or elliptical, usually shorter than sepals. Petals 4-7 mm, yellow, longer than sepals. Achenes rugose; style conical at base, slightly clavate at apex. 2n = 14, 28.{\i  Dry places, up to }1600{\i  m. C., E. & S. Europe from E. Spain eastwards; Baltic region}. Al Au Be Bu Cz Da Ga Ge Gr He Hs Hu It Ju Po Rm Rs (N, B, C, W, E) Su.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Plants from Poland are sexual with 2n = 28; this number has also been recorded from Hungary and Czechoslovakia. The chromosome numbers 2n = 35,42 and 56 have been found in plants from Switzerland and S. France, but it is possible that they were hybrids between{\b  49} and {\b 51}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 52. P. erecta} (L.) Rauschel, {\i Nomencl. Bot.} ed. 3, 152 (1797) ({\i P. tormentilla} Stokes). Perennial; stock stout, with a terminal rosette of leaves which are often dead at flowering time. Flowering stems (5-)10-30(-50) cm, procumbent to suberect, never rooting, appressed-pubescent. Leaves ternate or rarely digitate; leaflets 3,rarely 4 or 5, 5-30 × 2·5-10 mm, obovate-cuneate to oblong-lanceolate,dentate to incise-serrate at apex, glabrous or sparsely hairy above, sericeous-villous beneath. Flowers nearly all 4-merous, usually many in a terminal cyme. Sepals ovate-lanceolate; epicalyx-segments linear-oblong. Petals (3-)4-6 mm, usually a little longer than sepals. Stamens 14-20. Carpels 4-8(-20). Style conical at base, slightly clavate at apex. 2n = 28.{\i  Almost throughout Europe, but rare in the Mediterranean region.} All except Bl Cr Gr Sb Si Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 53. P. anglica} Laicharding,{\i  Veg. Eur.}{\b  1}: 475 (1790) ({\i P. procumbens} Sibth.). Like {\b 52} but stock not so stout and with a persistent rosette of leaves; flowering stems 15-80 cm, procumbent, finally rooting at nodes; lower leaves often with 5 leaflets; flowers 4- to 5-merous, solitary, axillary or the upper forming a few-flowered cyme; petals 5-8 mm, up to twice as long as sepals; stamens 15-20; carpels 20-50. 2n = 56. {\i W. & C. Europe, extending to S.W. Finland and the western borders of the U.S.S.R.} Az Be Br Co Cz Da Fe Ga Ge Hb Ho Hs It ?Ju Po Rm Rs (B,C,W) Su.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Hybrids between {\b 52}, {\b 53} and {\b 54} are widely distributed in N. Europe and possibly elsewhere. The hybrid {\b 52} × {\b 54} closely resembles {\b 53}, from which it is most readily distinguished by its high infertility.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 54. P. reptans} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 499 (1753). Perennial; stock relatively slender with a persistent rosette of leaves; flowering stems 30-100 cm, procumbent, rooting at the nodes, glabrous or pubescent. Leaves digitate; leaflets 5(-7), 5-70 × 3-25 mm, obovate or oblong-obovate, dentate or serrate-dentate. Flowers 5-merous, all solitary, axillary. Sepals and epicalyx-segments variable. Petals (7-)8-12 mm, up to twice as long as sepals. Stamens c. 20. Carpels 60-120. Style conical at base, enlarged at apex. 2n = 28.{\i  Europe except the extreme north.} All except Fa Is Sb.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Subgen. {\b Fragariastrum} (Heister ex Fabr.) Reichenb. Herbs. Leaves ternate or digitate. Petals white or pink, rarely pale yellow. Receptacle densely hairy. Style subterminal, conical filiform. Achenes usually pubescent.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Sect. FRAGARIASTRUM. Anthers oblong. Style deciduous, glabrous.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 55. P. caulescens} L.,{\i  Cent. Pl.}{\b  2}: 19 (1756). Perennial. Flowering stems usually 5-30 cm, pubescent with erecto-patent (rarely subpatent) or subappressed hairs. Leaves digitate; leaflets 5-7, 10-30 mm, oblong or oblong-obovate, with few connivent teeth at apex. Flowers numerous, in lax cymes. Sepals lanceolate or ovate-lanceolate; epicalyx-segments as long as or slightly longer, but much narrower than sepals. Petals 6-10 × 2·5-5 mm, white, slightly longer than sepals, often slightly mucronulate, not or indistinctly emarginate. Filaments thickened towards the base, pubescent at least in the lower half. Style pale yellow.{\i  Rock fissures; usually calcicole. Alps, and mountains of S. Europe from Spain to Jugoslavia.} Au Bl Ga Ge He Hs It Ju Si.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Very polymorphic, but none of the subordinate taxa seem to merit subspecific status.
\par

\par
 
\pard\f0\fs28   {\b 56. P. petrophila} Boiss., {\i Voy. Bot. Midi Esp.}{\b  2}: 728 (1845). Like {\b 55} but densely caespitose; whole plant densely silvery villous; flowering stems 2-10 cm; leaflets 7-15 mm, 3- to 5(-7)toothed at apex; cymes mostly dense; flowers mostly smaller; epicalyx-segments distinctly shorter than sepals; petals 5-7 × 3-5 mm.{\i  Mountains of S. Spain.} Hs.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 57. P. clusiana} Jacq.,{\i  Fl. Austr.}{\b  2}: 10 (1774). Perennial. Flowering stems 5-10 cm, pubescent with subappressed hairs. Leaves digitate; leaflets usually 5, 7-12 mm, obovate, truncate and 3- to 5-toothed at apex. Flowers usually 1-3. Sepals oblong-
\par

\par
45}
\par