{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 lanceolate; epicalyx-segments narrowly linear, slightly shorter than sepals. Petals 9-10 × 6-8 mm, white, broadly obovate, emarginate, much longer than sepals. Filaments filiform, glabrous. Style reddish. 2n = 42.{\i  E. Alps; mountains of W. Jugoslavia and Albania.} Al Au Ge It Ju.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 58. P. crassinervia} Viv.,{\i  Fl. Cors., App. }{\b 1}: 2 (1825). Perennial. Flowering stems up to 20(-40) cm, densely pubescent with erecto-patent, long and short hairs, and glandular hairs. Leaves digitate; leaflets 5, 10-30 mm, obovate, crenate or crenate-dentate in the upper half; veins prominent beneath; stipules of basal leaves ovate or ovate-lanceolate. Flowers 5 or more. Sepals ovate; epicalyx-segments lanceolate or ovate-lanceolate, about as long as sepals. Petals c. 8 mm, white, entire, longer than sepals. Filaments glabrous or sparsely hairy at base. 2n = 14.{\i  Mountain rocks; calcifuge.• Corse and Sardegna.} Co Sa.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 59. P. nitida} L.,{\i  Cent. Pl. }{\b 2}: 18 (1756). Densely caespitose and silvery-grey, sericeous perennial. Flowering stems up to 5 cm. Leaves usually ternate; leaflets 5-10 mm, obovate or oblanceolate, with (0-)3(-7) teeth at apex; stipules lanceolate or ovate lanceolate. Flowers 1-2. Sepals triangular-lanceolate; epicalyx segments linear, shorter than sepals. Petals 10-12 × 7-10 mm, pink or white, emarginate, longer than sepals. 2n = 42.{\i  Calcareous rocks and screes. • S.W. & S.E. Alps, N. Appennini.} Au Ga It Ju.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 60. P. alchimilloides} Lapeyr., {\i Mem. Acad. Toulouse}{\b  1}: 212 (1782). Perennial. Flowering stems 10-30 cm, sericeous. Leaves digitate; leaflets 5-7, 10-25 mm, oblong-elliptical with usually 3 small teeth at apex, glabrous above, silvery-sericeous beneath and on margin; stipules lanceolate or linear-lanceolate. Flowers usually numerous. Sepals ovate-lanceolate; epicalyx-segments linear-lanceolate, as long as sepals. Petals 8-10 mm, white, emarginate, longer than sepals.{\i  Mountain rocks and screes. • Pyrenees}. Ga Hs.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 61. P. valderia} L.,{\i  Syst. Nat}. ed. 10, {\b 2}: 1064 (1759). Perennial. Flowering stems up to 40 cm, grey-tomentose; tomentum of short hairs (0·2-0·5 mm) mixed with long erecto-patent hairs (1-2 mm) and with a few glandular hairs less than 0-1 mm. Leaves digitate; leaflets usually 7, 15-30 mm, narrowly obovate, dentate at least in the apical ½, green or grey above, grey tomentose or almost sericeous beneath. Flowers usually numerous. Sepals triangular-ovate; epicalyx-segments linear-lanceolate, as long as or shorter than sepals. Petals 6-7 mm, white, shorter than sepals. Filaments villous. 2n = 14.{\i  Rocks and stony mountain pastures. • Maritime Alps}. Ga It.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 62. P. haynaldiana} Janka,{\i  Österr. Bot. Zeitschr.}{\b  22}: 176 (1872). Like {\b 61} but flowering stems without short hairs, with patent hairs 1·5-3 mm, and with numerous glandular hairs 0·1-0·3 mm; leaflets green above, silvery-sericeous-tomentose beneath; epicalyx-segments usually distinctly longer than sepals; filaments glabrous or pubescent. 2n = 14.{\i  Mountain rocks. • Bulgaria and S. Carpathians.} Bu Rm.
\par

\par
 
\pard\f0\fs28   {\b 63. P. doerfleri} Wettst., {\i Biblioth. Bot. }({\i Stuttgart}) {\b 26}: 39 (1892) ({\i P. caulescens} var.{\i  doerfleri} (Wettst.) T. Wolf). Perennial. Flowering stems 5-25 cm, densely pubescent with long patent hairs 1·5-2(-2·5) mm and with glandular hairs up to 0·15(-0·2) mm. Leaves digitate; leaflets 5, 15-40 mm, obovate, crenate-serrate in the apical half, pubescent, green or grey-green. Flowers numerous. Sepals triangular-lanceolate; epicalyx-segments linear-lanceolate, about as long as sepals. Petals 5-7 mm, white, shorter than sepals. Filaments densely pubescent in lower half.{\i  Siliceous cliffs above }2000{\i  m. • S. Jugoslavia }({\i Sar Planina}). Ju.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 64. P. nivalis} Lapeyr.,{\i  Mém. Acad. Toulouse }{\b 1}: 210 (1782) Perennial. Flowering stems up to 30 cm, densely pubescent with long, patent hairs c. 1·5 mm and with short, glandular hairs. Leaves digitate; leaflets (5-)7(-9), 10-20 mm, obovate, with a few connivent teeth in the apical 1/3, pubescent, green or grey-green. Flowers numerous. Sepals triangular-lanceolate; epicalyx segments linear-lanceolate, longer than sepals. Petals 6-7·5 mm, white, shorter than sepals. Filaments glabrous. •{\i  Mountains of N. & E. Spain, Pyrenees, S.W. Alps. }Ga Hs.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 65. P. grammopetala} Moretti,{\i  Bot. Ital.} 4 (1826). Perennial. Flowering stems 10-30 cm, pubescent with long erecto-patent hairs (1-2 mm) and numerous glandular hairs (up to 0·8 mm). Leaves ternate or digitate; leaflets 3(-5), 15-25 mm, obovate, serrate-dentate in the apical half, pubescent, green. Flowers numerous. Sepals linear-lanceolate or lanceolate; epicalyx segments linear or linear-lanceolate, as long as or slightly shorter than sepals. Petals 6-7·5 mm, cream or very pale yellow, about equalling sepals.{\i  Mountain rocks; calcifuge. • C. Alps.} He It.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 66. P. speciosa} Willd.,{\i  Sp. Pl.}{\b  2}: 1110 (1800). Perennial. Flowering stems up to 30 cm, grey- or white-tomentose. Leaves ternate; leaflets 15-30 mm, broadly obovate to elliptic-obovate, crenate or crenate-dentate at least in the apical 2/3, white-tomentose beneath. Flowers numerous. Sepals broadly ovate; epicalyx segments linear, as long as or longer than sepals. Petals c. 10 mm, white, slightly longer than sepals. {\i W. & S. parts of Balkan peninsula; Kriti. }Al Cr Gr Ju.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 67. P. apennina} Ten.,{\i  Fl. Nap.}{\b  1}, Prodr.: 30 (1811). Perennial. Flowering stems up to 20 cm, white-tomentose. Leaves ternate; leaflets 7-15 × 3-6 mm, silvery-sericeous, rarely glabrous above. Flowers 1-5(-7). Sepals ovate; epicalyx-segments linear, as long as or slightly shorter than sepals. Petals 8-12 mm, longer than sepals. Achenes pubescent. •{\i  Balkan peninsula; C. Appennini.} Al Bu It Ju.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b apennina}: Leaflets oblong-obovate, subentire or with 2-3 teeth at apex. Petals white.{\i  C. Appennini, W. Jugoslavia, N. Albania}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b stoianovii} Urum. & Jáv.,{\i  Magyar Bot. Lapok}{\b  19}: 36 (1922): Leaflets broadly obovate, with 3-5 teeth at apex. Petals pale pink.{\i  S.W. Bulgaria}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 68. P. kionaea} Halácsy,{\i  Verh. Zool.-Bot. Ges. Wien}{\b  38}: 751 (1888) ({\i P. apennina }subsp.{\i  kionaea} (Halácsy) Maire & Petitmengin). Perennial. Flowering stems up to 10 cm, grey- or white tomentose. Leaves ternate; leaflets 4-8 × 3-6 mm, broadly obovate, with 3-9 teeth at apex, silvery-sericeous, sometimes grey-green above. Flowers 1-3. Sepals ovate; epicalyx-segments linear, about as long as sepals. Petals c. 8 mm, purple, longer than sepals. Achenes glabrous.{\i  Limestone cliffs and rocks above} 1800 {\i m. S.C. Greece} ({\i Giona}). Gr.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 69. P. deorum} Boiss. & Heldr. in Boiss.,{\i  Diagn. Pl. Or. Nov.}{\b  3}({\b 2}): 51 (1856). Perennial. Flowering stems up to 25 cm, grey- or white-tomentose. Leaves ternate; leaflets 8-20 × 4-9 mm, obovate to oblanceolate, with 3-9 teeth at apex, silvery-sericeous, sometimes grey-green above. Flowers 3-6, congested. Sepals ovate, purple on the inner surface; epicalyx-segments linear, about as long as sepals. Petals 10-12 mm, white, longer than sepals. Achenes glabrous.{\i  Limestone cliffs and stony ground above} 2000{\i  m. C. Greece} ({\i Olimbos}). Gr.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 70. P. alba} L.,{\i  Sp. Pl.} 498 (1753). Perennial. Flowering stems up to 15 cm, pubescent with appressed or erecto-patent hairs. Leaves digitate; leaflets 5, 20-40 mm, oblong- to obovate-
\par

\par
46}
\par