{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 lanceolate with a few teeth at apex, glabrous and green above, silvery-sericeous beneath. Flowers several. Sepals lanceolate; epicalyx-segments linear, shorter than sepals. Petals 7-10 mm, white,longer than sepals. Filaments glabrous. Achenes smooth. 2n = 28. •{\i  C. & E. Europe, extending southwards to N. Italy and Macedonia}. Au Bu Cz Ga Ge He Hu It Ju Po Rm Rs (C, W).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 71. P. montana} Brot., {\i Fl. Lusit.}{\b  2}: 390 (1804) ({\i P. splendens} Ramond ex DC.). Perennial; usually with long stolons. Flowering stems 5-20 cm, pubescent with patent hairs. Leaves ternate or rarely digitate; leaflets 10-30 mm, oblong-obovate to obovate, crenate-dentate towards the apex, pubescent and green above, grey-sericeous beneath. Flowers 1-4. Sepals ovate; epicalyx segments linear or lanceolate, as long as or slightly shorter than sepals. Petals 6-9 mm, white, longer than sepals. Achenes smooth. •{\i  N. part of Iberian peninsula, W. & C. France.} Ga Hs Lu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 72. P. sterilis} (L.) Garcke,{\i  Fl. Halle}{\b  2}: 200 (1856) ({\i P. fragariastrum} Pers., {\i Fragaria sterilis }L.). Perennial; usually with long stolons. Flowering stems 5-15 cm, pubescent with patent hairs, eglandular. Leaves ternate; leaflets 10-25 mm, broadly obovate, crenate-serrate, sparsely pubescent and green above, grey-sericeous beneath. Flowers 1-3. Sepals ovate-lanceolate, yellow green on inner side towards base; epicalyx-segments lanceolate, shorter than sepals. Petals c. 5 mm, white, slightly longer than sepals. Filaments filiform, glabrous. Achenes minutely rugulose. 2n = 28. •{\i  W., C. & S. Europe, eastwards to Poland and Macedonia and extending northwards to S. Sweden.} ?Al Au Be Br Cz Da Ga Ge Hb He Ho Hs It Ju Lu Po ?Sa ?Si Su.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 73. P. micrantha} Ramond ex DC. in Lam. & DC.,{\i  Fl. Fr.} ed. 3,{\b  4}: 468(1805). Perennial. Flowering stems 1-5(-15) cm, densely pubescent with patent or sub-deflexed hairs, eglandular. Leaves ternate; leaflets 10-50 mm, obovate, serrate or serrate-crenate, pubescent and green above,somewhat grey-sericeous beneath. Flowers 1-2(-3). Sepals and epicalyx-segments ovate-lanceolate, usually equal; sepals dark reddish on inner side towards base. Petals 3-5 mm, white, rarely pink, as long as or slightly shorter than sepals. Filaments densely ciliate, at least in lower half. Achenes minutely rugulose. 2n = 12, 14. {\i S. & C. Europe, northwards to} c. 50° 30'{\i  N. in W. Germany.} Al Au Bu Co Cz Ga Ge Gr He Hs Hu It Ju Rm Rs (K) Sa Si.
\par

\par
 
\pard\f0\fs28   {\b 74. P. carniolica} A. Kerner,{\i  Österr. Bot. Zeitschr.}{\b  20}: 44 (1870) ({\i P.micrantha }var. {\i carniolica} (A. Kerner) T. Wolf). Like {\b 73} but stems, pedicels and calyx with pluricellular glandular hairs as well as long, patent, simple hairs; flowers up to 4; sepals yellowish-green on inner side towards base; epicalyx-segments shorter than sepals; petals longer than sepals. •{\i  N.W. Jugoslavia}. Ju.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Sect. PLUMOSISTYLAE Pawl. Anthers globose. Style persistent in fruit, at least the lower half plumose.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 75. P. saxifraga} Ardoino ex De Not.,{\i  Ind. Sem. Horti Bot. Genuens.}{\b  1848}:25 (1848). Pulvinate perennial. Flowering stems up to 15(-20) cm, densely glandular and with appressed eglandular hairs. Leaves ternate or digitate; leaflets 3-5, 15-30 mm, linear to obovate-lanceolate, usually 3-toothed at apex, margin revolute, coriaceous, subglabrous and green above, silvery sericeous beneath. Flowers (3-)5-12(-20). Sepals ovate or ovate-lanceolate; epicalyx-segments linear, shorter than sepals. Petals 4·5-6 mm, white, longer than sepals. 2n = 14.{\i  Limestone rock fissures. • Maritime Alps. }Ga It.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc {\b  20.               Sibbaldia}               L.
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc By P.W. Ball.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Like{\i  Potentilla} but stamens usually 5 (rarely 4 or 10); carpels 5-12.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 Sepals c. 3 × 1-1·5 mm; petal-veins not or scarcely anastomosing
\par
    ................................................................................................. {\b 1. procumbens} 
\par
Sepals c. 5 × 2 mm; petal-veins distinctly anastomosing
\par
    ....................................................................................................... 2. parviflora
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. S. procumbens} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 284 (1753). Procumbent perennial herb with branched woody stock, each branch terminated by a rosette of leaves; flowering stems 1-5 cm, axillary, usually shorter than the leaves, pubescent. Leaves ternate; leaflets 5-20 mm, obovate-cuneate, 3-toothed or -lobed at the truncate apex, pubescent, green. Flowers few, in a dense cyme; sepals c. 3 × 1-1·5 mm; petals 1·5-2 mm, sometimes absent, yellow, oblanceolate, 3-veined, the veins not or scarcely anastomosing. Achenes 1-1·5 mm, more or less rugulose, shining. 2n = 14.{\i  N. Europe, and the mountains of C. & S. Europe.} Au Br Bu Co Cz Fa Fe Ga Ge He Hs Is Ju No Po Rs (N) Sb Su.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. S. parviflora} Willd., {\i Ges. Naturf. Freunde Berlin Neue Schr.}{\b  2}: 125(1799). Like {\b 1} but more densely pubescent and greyish; sepals c. 5 × 2 mm; petals obovate, the veins distinctly anastomosing.{\i  S. Jugoslavia }({\i Galicica Planina, S.W. of Ohrid}). Ju. ({\i Mountains of W. & C. Asia.})
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc {\b 21.            Fragaria}             L.
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc By †T.G. Tutin.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Like{\i  Potentilla} but receptacle becoming fleshy and brightly coloured in fruit; achenes on the surface or sunk in pits.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Sepals patent or deflexed after flowering
\par
2 Scape conspicuously longer than leaves; stolons 0 or few ......... {\b 2. moschata}
\par
2 Scape not or scarcely longer than leaves; stolons
\par
  usually numerous
\par
3 Pedicels appressed-pubescent; achenes projecting,
\par
  uniformly scattered over the receptacle ............................................. {\b 1. vesca}
\par
3 Pedicels patent-pubescent; achenes not projecting,
\par
  confined to the upper part of the receptacle ..................................... {\b 3. viridis}
\par
1 Sepals appressed after flowering
\par
4 Achenes sunk in deep pits ......................................................... {\b 4. virginiana}
\par
4 Achenes on the surface of the receptacle, projecting or not
\par
5 Fruit c. 1 cm, achenes projecting; leaves pubescent above ............. {\b 3. viridis}
\par
5 Fruit c. 3 cm, achenes not projecting; leaves ± glabrous above
\par
  ...................................................................................................{\b  5}. ×{\b  ananassa}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. F. vesca} L.,{\i  Sp. Pl.} 494 (1753). Perennial herb, with long, epigeal, rooting stolons. Leaves 3-foliolate in a basal rosette; leaflets 1-6 cm, ovate or obovate to rhombic, coarsely serrate, bright green and sparsely hairy on upper surface. Scape 5-30 cm, little longer than the leaves, erect in fruit. Pedicels appressed pubescent. Flowers c. 15 mm in diameter, white, usually hermaphrodite. Sepals patent or deflexed in fruit. Achenes uniformly scattered over and projecting from the usually red, glabrous receptacle. 2n = 14.{\i  Almost throughout Europe.} All except Bl Cr Fa Sb.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. F. moschata} Duchesne, {\i Hist. Nat. Frais.} 145 (1766) ({\i F. elatior} Ehrh.). Like {\b 1} but up to 40 cm; stolons few or absent; scape longer than the leaves; pedicels patent-pubescent; flowers c. 20 mm in diameter, usually unisexual; receptacle without achenes near its base.{\i  C. Europe, extending to N.W. France, C. Italy, Turkey and C. Russia; widely naturalized from gardens in N. Europe.} Al Au Be Bu Cz Ga Ge He Hs Hu It Ju Po Rm Rs (C, W)Tu [Br Da Fe Ho No Rs (N, B) Su].
\par

\par
47}
\par