{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 3. F. viridis} Duchesne, {\i op. cit. }135 (1766) ({\i F. collina }Ehrh.). Like {\b 1} but up to 20 cm, with short filiform stolons; leaflets appressed-pubescent, or glabrous on upper surface; flowers creamy-white, sometimes unisexual; sepals appressed or recurved after flowering; receptacle without achenes near its base.{\i  Most of Europe, except the islands and the extreme north.} Al Au Be Bu Cz Da Fe Ga Ge Gr He Hs Hu It Ju No Po Rm Rs (B, C, W, K, E) Su.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b viridis}: Leaflets pubescent on upper surface. Pedicels with erecto-patent or appressed hairs; sepals appressed after flowering. Achenes projecting from the receptacle. 2n = 14. {\i Throughout the range of the species except the south-east.}
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b campestris} (Steven) Pawl.,{\i  Feddes Repert.}{\b  79}: 35 (1968) ({\i F. campestris} Steven): Leaflets glabrous on upper surface. Pedicels with patent hairs; sepals recurved after flowering. Achenes in pits in the receptacle. {\i S.E. part of the range of the species}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 4. F. virginiana} Duchesne, {\i Hist. Nat. Frais. }204 (1766). Perennial herb; stolons numerous. Leaves 3-foliolate in a basal rosette, rather coriaceous, not or scarcely rugose, blue-green and nearly or quite glabrous above. Scapes up to 25 cm, decumbent in fruit. Flowers white, often unisexual, female much smaller than male. Sepals appressed after flowering. Receptacle c. 2 cm, glabrous, without achenes near its base; achenes deeply sunk in pits.{\i  Cultivated and naturalized locally in E.Europe; exact distribution unknown through confusion with}{\b  5}. ({\i E. North America.})
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 5. F.} × {\b ananassa} Duchesne, {\i op. cit.} 190 (1766) ({\i F. chiloensis} auct.). Like {\b 4} but flowers hermaphrodite; receptacle c. 3 cm, in most cultivars covered all over with achenes which are on the surface or very slightly sunk.{\i  Widely cultivated and naturalized throughout much of Europe}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  A hybrid between {\b 4} and {\i F. chiloensis} (L.) Duchesne from W. America. Both the parents and the hybrid are hexaploid with 2n = 56.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  All species mentioned here, as well as many of their hybrids, are, or have been, cultivated for their edible fruits (strawberries). The common cultivated strawberry of Europe belongs to{\b  5}, and the Alpine strawberry to {\b 1}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc {\b  22.             Duchesnea}            Sm.
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc By D.M. Valentine.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Like {\i Potentilla} but epicalyx-segments 3-toothed at apex; receptacle becoming fleshy and brightly coloured in fruit.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. D. indica} (Andrews) Focke in Engler & Prantl, {\i Natürl. Pflanzenfam. }{\b 3}({\b 3}): 33 (1888). Perennial herb, with epigeal, rooting stolons. Stems up to 50 cm. Leaves 3-foliolate, rather long petiolate; leaflets obovate, crenate, with a cuneate base. Stipules lanceolate. Flowers solitary, yellow, not or only slightly exceeding the leaves; sepals c. 10 mm; epicalyx-segments broadly ovate, exceeding the sepals; petals c. 8 mm. Receptacle spongy, bright red, tasteless.{\i  Naturalized in a few regions of W., C. & S. Europe.} [Au Az Ga He It.] ({\i Probably native in S. & E. Asia.})
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc {\b 23.                 Alchemilla}              L. 
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc By S.M. Walters; Ser. Elatae by B. Pawlowski.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Perennial herbs with woody rhizome. Leaves palmate or palmately lobed. Inflorescence compound, cymose. Flowers small, green or yellowish, more or less aggregated into distinct clusters (glomeruli). Hypanthium urceolate; sepals 4(-5); epicalyx present; petals absent; stamens 4(-5), inserted on outer margin of disc; carpel 1; style basal. Fruit a single achene, wholly or partially enclosed in the thin, dry hypanthium.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  It is known that many of the common European species of this genus reproduce apomictically; the pollen is largely or wholly abortive, and the seed develops precociously in the flower. Sexual reproduction is apparently confined to {\i A. pentaphyllea} and to a small group of species in Ser.{\i  Hoppeanae}. The high chromosome numbers suggest complex, hybrid origins from parent sexual species which are now extinct.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  More than 300 species have been described in Europe, mostly in Subsect.{\i  Heliodrosium} Rothm. Some of these are widespread and easily recognized, and others, though very local, present no taxonomic difficulty. Many taxa, however, particularly in S.E. Europe, are still very inadequately known. The following account attempts to key and describe all the wide-ranging species, and some of the more easily recognizable local endemics, and to list as 'related species' other local taxa.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  The key is designed for well-grown specimens with inflorescences and mature basal leaves. Late season's growth, or second growth after grazing or cutting, may differ considerably in leaf-shape and hairiness, and is often unidentifiable.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28 The term ' leaf', unless qualified, refers to mature, basal leaves the term 'sinus' refers to the space or angle between the sides of the two basal lobes. The depth of division of the leaf is expressed by a fraction (1/2, 2/3, etc.), which is the proportion of length of free lobe to the'radius' of the leaf (measured from top of petiole to top of middle lobe). Between the lobes there may be developed a more or less obvious, toothless, V-shaped (rarely U-shaped) incision, so that each lobe has sub-parallel sides proximally. This incision is described as 'long' when it exceeds twice the length of the adjacent tooth. The number of teeth is given for one side of the middle lobe, and excludes the apical tooth.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 In general, the large species are northern or montane hay meadow or roadside plants, which have probably been introduced by human agency to part of their present geographical range; the medium-sized species occur in either semi-natural mountain grassland or grazed pasture, whilst many dwarf species are mountain plants. The extreme dwarf species characteristic of snow patches on mountains, which Buser called 'sub-nival', belong to several different groups, and show striking parallelism in their relative hairlessness and in their deeply lobed leaves, usually with long incisions and large teeth (spp. {\b 6}, {\b 12}, {\b 33}, {\b 62}, {\b 93-95}, {\b 117}, {\b 118}).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Literature: R. Buser,{\i  Alchemilles Valaisannes}. Zürich. 1894 (also published in Jaccard, H., Catalogue de la Flore Valaisanne,{\i  Neue Denkschr. Schweiz. Ges. Naturw.}{\b  34}: 104 139 (1895). S. Juzepczuk in V. L.Komarov,{\i  Flora URSS }{\b 10}: 289-410. Mosqua & Leningrad. 1941. A. Maillefer, {\i Mém. Soc. Vaud. Sci. Nat. }{\b 8}: 101-136 (1944). B. Pawlowski,{\i  Flora Tatr }{\b 1}:442-503 Warsaw. 1956. W. Rothmaler,{\i  Feddes Repert.} ({\i Beih}.) {\b 100}: 59-93(1938) (Subsect.{\i  Calycanthum}). W. Rothmaler, {\i Feddes Repert.}{\b  66}: 194-234(1962) (C. Europe). G. Samuelsson,{\i  Acta Phytogeogr. Suec.}{\b  16} (1942) (Ser. {\i Pubescentes} and Ser. {\i Vulgares} in Fennoscandia).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Leaves palmately divided to more than ½
\par
2 Plant glabrous, or with very few hairs mainly on the
\par
  margins of the leaves
\par
3 Leaves almost compound, with (3-)5 segments; epicalyx
\par
  segments much smaller than sepals ........................................ {\b 1. pentaphyllea}
\par
3 Leaves lobed to 1/2-2/3; epicalyx-segments at least as
\par
  long as sepals ................................................................................... {\b 118. fissa}
\par
2 Plant hairy, at least on lower surface of leaf
\par
4 Leaf-segments 5-7, at least the middle segment completely free;  
\par
  pedicel shorter than hypanthium (Ser.{\i  Saxatiles})
\par

\par
48}
\par