{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 5 Teeth of leaf-segments 2-3 mm; leaves dull and only 
\par
  sparsely sericeous beneath ......................................................... {\b 6. subsericea}
\par
5 Teeth of leaf-segments usually c. 1 mm; leaves shiny
\par
  and densely sericeous beneath
\par
6 Leaf-segments always 5 ............................................................... {\b 2. saxatilis}
\par
6 Leaf-segments 6 or 7 on at least some leaves
\par
7 Inflorescence with crowded glomeruli, not much 
\par
  exceeding leaves ............................................................................... {\b 4. alpina}
\par
7 Inflorescence with more spaced glomeruli, much
\par
  exceeding leaves
\par
8 Leaf-segments ovate-lanceolate .................................................. {\b 3. transiens}
\par
8 Leaf-segments broadly obovate .................................................. {\b 5. basaltica}
\par
4 Leaf-segments (5-)7-9, usually joined at base;
\par
  pedicel at least as long as hypanthium
\par
9 Leaves lobed to more than 2/3
\par
10 Teeth of leaf-segments 2-3 mm; leaves dull and only
\par
   sparsely sericeous beneath ...................................................... {\b 12. grossidens}
\par
10 Teeth of leaf-segments usually c. 1 mm; leaves shiny
\par
   and densely sericeous beneath
\par
11 At least the middle leaf-segment completely free ...................... {\b 7. plicatula}
\par
11 All leaf-segments joined at base
\par
12 Leaves ± semicircular, with very wide sinus .............................. {\b 9. anisiaca}
\par
12 Leaves suborbicular, with narrow or closed sinus
\par
13 Leaf-segments elliptical, acute ..................................................... {\b 8. pallens}
\par
13 Leaf-segments linear or oblong-linear, obtuse, some
\par
   times subtruncate ...................................................................... {\b 10. hoppeana}
\par
9 Leaves lobed to 2/3 or less
\par
14 Plant with patent or deflexed hairs
\par
15 Hypanthium hairy .................................................................... {\b 33. helvetica}
\par
15 Hypanthium glabrous
\par
16 Dwarf; epicalyx-segments less than ½ as long as sepals ..... {\b 62. decumbens}
\par
16 Medium-sized; epicalyx-segments at least ½ as long
\par
   as sepals ..................................................................................... {\b 63. undulata}
\par
14 Plant with appressed or subappressed hairs (present at
\par
   least on distal half of veins on lower surface of leaf)
\par
17 Leaves glabrous beneath, except on veins ................................. {\b 117. incisa}
\par
17 Leaves hairy beneath
\par
18 Teeth on leaf-lobes indistinct, ± hidden by dense,
\par
   sericeous indumentum ............................................................. {\b 11. conjuncta}
\par
18 Teeth on leaf-lobes obvious, not hidden by indumentum
\par
19 Leaves glabrous or subglabrous above ................................. {\b 13. faeroensis}
\par
19 Leaves hairy above 
\par
20 Leaves rather sparsely hairy above and beneath .................... {\b 14. paicheana}
\par
20 Leaves densely hairy above and beneath ................................... {\b 72. buschii}
\par
1  Leaves palmately lobed to ½ or less
\par
21 Stems and petioles with erecto-patent, patent or deflexed hairs
\par
22 Hypanthium more or less densely hairy
\par
23 Epicalyx-segments at least as long as sepals;
\par
   hypanthium much shorter than mature achene
\par
24 Stems and petioles with erecto-patent hairs ......................... {\b 100. viridiflora}
\par
24 Stems and petioles with patent hairs
\par
25 Leaves glabrous or subglabrous above ................................... {\b 101. albanica}
\par
25 Leaves densely hairy above ................................................ {\b 102. phegophila}
\par
23 Epicalyx-segments usually shorter than sepals;
\par
   hypanthium as long as mature achene
\par
26 Stems and petioles with at least some deflexed hairs
\par
27 All pedicels hairy throughout their length
\par
28 Leaf-lobes subtruncate, with long incisions ....................... {\b 25. erythropoda}
\par
28 Leaf-lobes rounded or subtriangular, with short incisions ..... {\b 26. lithophila}
\par
27 At least some pedicels glabrous or with few hairs
\par
   towards base only
\par
29 Some epicalyx-segments ± equalling sepals (Krym) ......... {\b 38. hirsutissima}
\par
29 Epicalyx-segments shorter than sepals
\par
30 Dwarf mountain plants up to 15 cm; leaf-lobes with 4-5(-6) teeth
\par
31 Leaves lobed to c. ½; lobes with teeth 2 mm or more ............ {\b 33. helvetica}
\par
31 Leaves lobed to c. ¼; lobes with teeth c. 1 mm ....................... {\b 30. colorata}
\par
30 Medium-sized or rather large plants up to 50 cm;
\par
   leaf-lobes with (6-)7-9 teeth
\par
32 Hairs on hypanthium with a small tubercle at base ............ {\b 36. gibberulosa}
\par
32 Hairs on hypanthium without tubercle at base
\par
33 Leaves ± reniform lobes with distinct incisions .................... {\b 35. hebescens}
\par
33 Leaves orbicular or suborbicular; lobes with short,
\par
   indistinct incisions ........................................................................ {\b 37. bungei} 
\par
26 Stems and petioles with patent or erecto-patent hairs
\par
34 All pedicels ± densely hairy
\par
35 Leaf-lobes without incisions (or with very short, indistinct ones)
\par
36 Base of petioles reddish; leaf-lobes with 6-9 teeth .................. {\b 57. filicaulis}
\par
36 Base of petioles not reddish; leaf-lobes with 4-6 teeth ....... {\b 21. glaucescens}
\par
35 Leaf-lobes with distinct incisions
\par
37 Hairs on stems and petioles patent
\par
38 Leaf-lobes truncate ................................................................. {\b 23. flabellata}
\par
38 Leaf-lobes rounded
\par
39 Robust lowland plant up to 40 cm .......................................{\b 22. hirsuticaulis}
\par
39 Dwarf mountain plant not more than 15 cm .............................. {\b 24. cinerea}
\par
37 Hairs on stems and petioles erecto-patent or subappressed
\par
40 Leaves lobed to 1/4-1/3(-2/5); hairs on petioles 
\par
   never subappressed ................................................................... {\b 23. flabellata}
\par
40 Leaves lobed to more than 1/3; hairs on petioles
\par
   often subappressed
\par
41 Leaves glabrous above, or hairy above only on folds ................. {\b 34. vetteri}
\par
41 Leaves evenly hairy above ..................................................... {\b 27. bulgarica}
\par
34 At least some pedicels glabrous or subglabrous
\par
42 Stems and petioles With patent hairs only
\par
43 Dwarf plants up to 15 cm
\par
44 Base of petioles reddish .......................................................... {\b 57. filicaulis}
\par
44 Base of petioles not reddish
\par
45 Plant densely hairy ..................................................................... {\b 31. illyrica}
\par
45 Plant rather sparsely hairy ......................................................... {\b 58. minima}
\par
43 Medium-sized plants up to 50 cm
\par
46 Outer (spring) leaves glabrous above, inner (summer)
\par
   leaves hairy above; flowers 2·5-3 mm wide ........................ {\b 55. heterophylla}
\par
46 All leaves ± hairy above; flowers at least 3 mm wide
\par
47 Leaves lobed to 1/2; lobes with distinct incisions ............ {\b 42. schistophylla}
\par
47 Leaves lobed to 1/3 or less; lobes with short or no incisions
\par
48 Leaves ± orbicular, densely and evenly hairy above;
\par
   lobes with equal teeth .............................................................. {\b 41. monticola}
\par
48 Leaves ± reniform, often sparsely or unevenly hairy 
\par
   above; lobes with unequal teeth ................................................ {\b 57. filicaulis}
\par
42 Stems and petioles with erecto-patent hairs (sometimes
\par
   mixed with patent hairs)
\par
49 Leaves orbicular, with overlapping basal lobes
\par
50 Leaf-lobes with no incisions .................................................. {\b 39. propinqua}
\par
50 Leaf-lobes with rather long incisions ................................... {\b 40. conglobata}
\par
49 Leaves reniform or semicircular, with wide sinus
\par
51 Leaves rather densely hairy, reniform; leaf-lobes with
\par
   acute teeth .............................................................................. {\b 28. lapeyrousii}
\par
51 Leaves rather sparsely hairy, almost semicircular;
\par
   leaf-lobes with obtuse teeth .......................................................... {\b 29. plicata}
\par
22 Hypanthium glabrous or with sparse hairs
\par
52 Epicalyx-segments at least as long as sepals;
\par
   hypanthium much shorter than mature achene
\par

\par
49}
\par