{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 3. S. douglasii} Hooker,{\i  Fl. Bor.-Amer.}{\b  1}: 172 (1832). Up to 2·5 m, erect, compact. Leaves 3-10 cm, oblong, obtuse or acute, entire at the base, unequally serrate towards the apex; glabrous above, white-tomentose beneath. Inflorescence 10-20 cm, paniculate; panicle narrow or broad. Sepals white, tomentose, deflexed; petals deep pink; nectar-ring absent. Follicles glabrous, converging.{\i  Locally naturalized from gardens in C. & N.W. Europe.} [Au Br Cz Ho Hu Po.] ( {\i W. North America}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 4. S. tomentosa} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 489 (1753). Like {\b 3} but leaves ovate to ovate-oblong, acute, unequally and often doubly serrate, yellowish or greyish tomentose beneath; panicle narrow; follicles pubescent, usually diverging.{\i  Locally naturalized from gardens in N. & C. Europe}. [Cz Da Ge.] ({\i E. North America}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 5. S. decumbens} Koch in Röhling,{\i  Deutschl. Fl.} ed. 3, {\b 3}: 433 (1831). Stems c. 0·25 m, procumbent and ascending. Leaves up to 4 cm, oblong-obovate, cuneate and entire at the base, serrate or dentate towards the apex. Inflorescence corymbose; corymbs 3-5 cm wide, wider than long, many-flowered. Incompletely dioecious; flowers 5-7 mm in diameter; petals white, as long as or rarely shorter than stamens. Follicles glabrous.{\i  Calcareous rocks and screes. • S.E. Alps.} Au It Ju.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b decumbens}: Leaves acutely serrate, pale green and glabrous beneath. Pedicels and rhachis of inflorescence glabrous. 460-800{\i  m. Mainly in the eastern part of the range}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b tomentosa} (Poech) Dostál, {\i Feddes Repert.}{\b  79} : 34 (1968) ({\i S. decumbens }var. {\i tomentosa }Poech, S. hacquetii Fenzl & C.Koch): Leaves finely dentate, grey-tomentose beneath. Pedicels and rhachis of inflorescence tomentose. 600-1600{\i  m. In the western part of the range}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 6. S. japonica} L. fil.,{\i  Suppl.} 262 (1781). Up to 1·5 m., erect. Leaves up to 10 × 4 cm, ovate to oblong-lanceolate, cuneate at the base, acute, irregularly serrate, glaucous beneath and usually pubescent on the veins. Inflorescence corymbose; corymbs up to 12 cm wide; pedicels pubescent. Sepals deflexed; petals pink, shorter than stamens. Follicles glabrous.{\i  Locally naturalized from gardens in C. Europe.} [Au Cz Ge Hu It.] ({\i Japan}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 7. S. corymbosa} Rafin.,{\i  Précis Découv. Somiol.} 36 (1814). Up to 1 m; branches erect or ascending, terete. Leaves c. 5 × 3 cm, ovate, rounded and entire at the base, obtuse or rounded and sharply serrate at the apex, glabrous. Inflorescence corymbose; corymbs 3-10 cm wide, somewhat convex. Sepals not deflexed; petals white or yellowish-white; stamens 3 times as long as petals. Follicles glabrous. {\i Locally naturalized from gardens}. [Cz.] ({\i Eastern U.S.A.})
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Subgen.{\b  Nothospiraea }Zabel. Inflorescence a simple umbel or corymb, terminating a short shoot.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 8. S. chamaedryfolia} L.,{\i  Sp. Pl.} 489 (1753) ({\i S. ulmifolia }Scop.). Up to 2 m, densely branched; stems angular, brown, glabrous. Leaves up to 7 × 4 cm, ovate, ovate-lanceolate or rhombic-elliptical, acute, entire at the base, irregularly or doubly serrate towards the apex, glabrous. Inflorescence c. 4 cm, pedunculate, hemispherical, many-flowered; pedicels c. 10 mm. Sepals triangular-ovate, revolute; petals c. 6 mm, orbicular, shorter than stamens. Follicles glabrous, shining, with remains of style at apex.{\i  Low woodland and scrub. Carpathians, S.E. Alps, mountains of Balkan peninsula.} Au Bu Cz It Ju Rm Rs (W) [Ga Ge He].
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 9. S. media} Franz Schmidt,{\i  Östr. Allgem. Baumz.}{\b  1}: 53 (1792) ({\i S. oblongifolia }Waldst. & Kit., {\i S. chamaedryfolia} L. pro parte). Up to 1·5 m, erect; stems terete. Leaves up to 5 × 2 cm, broadly elliptical, rounded at apex, glabrous when mature, sparsely hairy or grey-tomentose beneath when young; those of the non-flowering shoots with 6-8 teeth near apex, those of the flowering shoots entire. Inflorescence up to 4 cm, pedunculate, almost spherical, many-flowered. Sepals c. 1 mm, half as long as hypanthium, revolute; petals c. 3 mm, orbicular, white or pale yellow, as long as stamens or shorter. Follicles glabrous or thinly hairy, with remains of style on dorsal side. 2n = 10.{\i  Scrub on rocks. N. part of Balkan peninsula and S.C. Europe, extending eastwards to W. Ukraine; also in N. & E. Russia.} Au Bu Cz Hu Ju Po Rm Rs (N, C, W, E).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b media}: Inflorescence glabrous. Petals white, entire.{\i  Throughout the range of the species}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b polonica} (Blocki) Pawl.,{\i  Feddes Repert.}{\b  79}: 34 (1968) ({\i S. polonica} Blocki): Inflorescence softly pubescent. Petals pale yellow, fimbriate. {\i Poland}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    The main area of distribution of this species is in E. Asia and Siberia, extending into the north and east parts of European Russia. It is separated by over 1300 km from the secondary area in C. Europe.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 10. S. cana} Waldst. & Kit., {\i Pl. Rar. Hung. }{\b 3}: 252 (1807). Up to 1 m; stems terete, hairy when young. Leaves up to 3·5 × 1·5 cm, elliptical to broadly lanceolate, tapering abruptly at both ends, entire, or rarely with 2-3 teeth at the apex, dark green above, pale green and tomentose beneath. Inflorescence up to 2 cm wide, pedunculate. Hypanthium hairy; sepals revolute; petals c. 2 mm, orbicular, white or grey-white, shorter than stamens. Follicles hairy, with remains of style at apex.{\i  Rocky places. • N. Jugoslavia; one station in N.E. Italy}. It Ju.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 11. S. crenata} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 489 (1753) ({\i S. crenifolia} C. A. Meyer). Up to 1 m; stems erect, finely hairy when young. Leaves up to 4 × 2 cm, lanceolate to obovate with a cuneate base, acute, entire or crenate-serrate towards the apex, with 3 very conspicuous veins running lengthwise from base to apex. Inflorescence c. 2 cm wide, pedunculate, the lowermost flowers usually in the axils of small leaves. Flowers c. 8 mm in diameter; hypanthium glabrous. Sepals erect in fruit; petals orbicular, white, shorter than stamens. Follicles subglabrous.{\i  S.E. Europe, extending northwards to E. Czechoslovakia and to} 55°{\i  N. in C. Russia.} Bu Cz Gr †Hu Ju Rm Rs (C, W, E) [Be He Hs].
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 12. S.} × {\b vanhouttei} (Briot) Zabel,{\i  Garten-Zeit.} ({\i Wittmack}){\b  3}:496 (1884) ({\i S. cantoniensis }×{\i  trilobata}). Up to  2 m; stems arcuate. Leaves 2-3·5 cm, rhombic or obovate, cuneate or rounded at the base, acute, incise-serrate and usually slightly 3- to 5-lobed. Inflorescence 2-5 cm wide, pedunculate. Pedicels 1 cm; petals white, twice as long as stamens.{\i  Locally naturalized from gardens in C. Europe}. [Cz Ge Hu Rm.] ({\i Garden origin}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 13. S. hypericifolia} L.,{\i  Sp. Pl.} 489 (1753) ({\i S. flabellata} Bertol. ex Guss.). Shrub, up to 1·5 m. Stems terete or slightly angular, hairy or glabrous; the flowering stems arcuate, the non-flowering erect. Leaves 1-2·5(-3) cm, with 3-5 longitudinal veins, narrowly elliptical or obovate, cuneate, entire or (on flowering twigs) with 3-5 crenations at the apex, nearly or quite glabrous. Inflorescence sessile or the lower very shortly pedunculate; flowers numerous. Receptacle and sepals glabrous; petals white, longer than or equalling stamens.{\i  S.W. & S.E. Europe}. Bu Ga Hs Lu Rs (C, W, E) [*Hu *It Rm].
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b hypericifolia}: Leaves narrowly elliptical, acute, entire. Sepals shorter than hypanthium; petals ovate, rather longer than stamens.{\i  Ukraine and S. Russia; one station in Bulgaria}.
\par

\par
5}
\par