{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 53 Stems and inner (summer) petioles with erecto-patent
\par
   hairs, outer (spring) petioles glabrous ...................................... {\b 106. aroanica}
\par
53 Stems and all petioles with patent or slightly
\par
   deflexed hairs
\par
54 Flowers 4·5-6·5(-7·2) mm wide; epicalyx-segments
\par
   mostly with 2-4 teeth ............................................................... {\b 96. achtarowii}
\par
54 Flowers 3-5 mm wide; epicalyx-segments entire or with 1(-2) teeth
\par
55 Leaves lobed to 2/5-1/2; lobes with distinct incisions  ........{\b 105. peristerica}
\par
55 Leaves lobed to usually not more than 1/3; lobes
\par
   without incisions
\par
56 Leaves glabrous or sparsely hairy above
\par
57 Leaves sparsely hairy beneath ............................................... {\b 99. catachnoa}
\par
57 Leaves densely hairy beneath
\par
58 Epicalyx-segments often with 1 tooth; leaves sparsely
\par
   hairy above ........................................................................ {\b 97. jumrukczalica}
\par
58 Epicalyx-segments entire; leaves glabrous above .................. {\b 103. indivisa}
\par
56 Leaves densely hairy above
\par
59 Upper cauline leaves glabrous above ............................... {\b 104. heterotricha}
\par
59 All cauline leaves hairy above
\par
60 Leaves lobed to 1/5-(1/4) ............................................................. {\b 98. mollis}
\par
60 Leaves lobed to (1/4)1/3-2/5 ........................................... {\b 107. zapalowiczii}
\par
52 Epicalyx-segments usually shorter than sepals;
\par
   hypanthium as long as mature achene
\par
61 Petioles of outer (spring) leaves glabrous, those of
\par
   inner (summer) leaves hairy   (Subser.{\i  Heteropodae})
\par
62 Hairs on petioles of summer leaves erecto-patent
\par
63 Leaf-lobes rounded; stems hairy up to the inflorescence ........... {\b 59. compta}
\par
63 Leaf-lobes truncate; stems glabrous at least in the upper half
\par
64 Robust, up to 50 cm; leaf-lobes with 6-12 teeth ....... {\b 60. rhododendrophila}
\par
64 Dwarf, up to 15 cm; leaf-lobes with 4-6 teeth .......................... {\b 61. polonica}
\par
62 Hairs on petioles of summer leaves patent or deflexed
\par
65 Leaves lobed to 2/5 or more
\par
66 Hairs on stems and petioles patent ............................................ {\b 66. tatricola}
\par
66 Hairs on stems and petioles deflexed
\par
67 Dwarf; epicalyx-segments less than ½ as long as sepals ..... {\b 62. decumbens}
\par
67 Medium-sized; epicalyx-segments at least ½ as long
\par
   as sepals ..................................................................................... {\b 63. undulata}
\par
65 Leaves lobed to less than 2/5
\par
68 Stems glabrous, or only the 2 lowest internodes hairy ........... {\b 65. tirolensis}
\par
68 Stems hairy for at least part of their length above 
\par
   the second internode
\par
69 Leaves reniform, with very wide sinus ............................... {\b 64. rubristipula}
\par
69 Leaves suborbicular or orbicular, with little or no sinus
\par
70 Cauline leaves lobed to not more than ¼; hypanthium
\par
   rounded at base ...................................................................... {\b 67. heteropoda}
\par
70 Cauline leaves lobed to at least 1/3; hypanthium acute
\par
   at base ............................................................................................. {\b 68. tenuis}
\par
61 All petioles hairy (except sometimes the very first
\par
   in the season)
\par
71 Very dwarf, rarely more than 5 cm
\par
72 Leaves sericeous; leaf-lobes with 4-5 rather obtuse teeth .......... {\b 32. exigua}
\par
72 Leaves not sericeous; leaf-lobes with 5-7 acute teeth .............. {\b 58. minima}
\par
71 Medium-sized or large, up to 70 cm
\par
73 Leaves glabrous or subglabrous above, ± densely hairy beneath
\par
74 Flowers at least 3·5 mm wide .................................................. {\b 56. curtiloba}
\par
74 Flowers not more than 3 mm wide ................................... {\b 54. xanthochlora}
\par
73 Leaves hairy above at least in folds, hairy or glabrous beneath
\par
75 Hairs on stems and petioles all patent or erectopatent
\par
76 Hairs erecto-patent; hypanthium attenuate at base ..................... {\b 53. gracilis}
\par
76 Hairs patent; hypanthium rounded at base
\par
77 All leaves densely and evenly hairy on both surfaces
\par
78 Leaves orbicular; leaf-lobes with equal teeth ........................ {\b 41. monticola}
\par
78 Leaves ± reniform; leaf-lobes with unequal teeth
\par
79 Inflorescence-branches ± densely hairy; flowers usually
\par
   at least 3 mm wide ......................................................................... {\b 43. crinita}
\par
79 Inflorescence-branches sparsely hairy; flowers 2-3 mm wide {\b 52. nemoralis}
\par
77 Some leaves sparsely or unevenly hairy above
\par
80 Leaf-lobes almost triangular; base of petioles not reddish; 
\par
   hypanthium glabrous ................................................................. {\b 51. acutiloba}
\par
80 Leaf-lobes rounded; base of petioles reddish;
\par
   hypanthium often somewhat hairy ............................................. {\b 57. filicaulis}
\par
75 At least some hairs on stems and petioles deflexed
\par
81 Leaves rather sparsely hairy above, often only on folds
\par
82 Leaves flat, with basal lobes usually not touching ............... {\b 50. heptagona}
\par
82 Leaves undulate, with basal lobes touching
\par
83 Leaf-lobes without incisions; flowers 3-4 mm wide ............ {\b 48. subcrenata}
\par
83 Leaf-lobes with short incisions; flowers 2·5-3 mm wide .{\b 49. cymatophylla}
\par
81 Leaves densely and evenly hairy above
\par
84 Leaves reniform, with wide sinus ............................................... {\b 43. crinita}
\par
84 Leaves orbicular or suborbicular, with little or no sinus
\par
85 Flowers 1·5-2·5 mm wide ...................................................... {\b 47. tytthantha}
\par
85 Flowers at least 3 mm wide
\par
86 Hypanthium attenuate at base; inflorescence often glabrous 
\par
   or nearly so ............................................................................... {\b 44. strigosula}
\par
86 Hypanthium rounded at base; at least main inflorescence
\par
   branches hairy
\par
87 Leaves orbicular, with basal lobes overlapping ................... {\b 45. subglobosa}
\par
87 Leaves suborbicular, with basal lobes not overlapping .......... {\b 46. sarmatica}
\par
21 Stems and petioles glabrous, or with appressed or
\par
   sub-appressed hairs
\par
88 Epicalyx-segments usually at least as long as sepals;
\par
   hypanthium much shorter than mature achene
\par
89 Whole plant glabrous (rarely a few hairs on summer petioles) .....{\b 118. fissa}
\par
89 At least the lowest internode and some of the petioles hairy 
\par
90 Plant ± densely subappressed-hairy throughout (Ural) ........... {\b 108. haraldii}
\par
90 At least pedicels and upper inflorescence-branches glabrous
\par
91 Leaf-lobes with long, almost U-shaped incisions ...................... {\b 117. incisa}
\par
91 Leaf-lobes with V-shaped incisions or without incisions
\par
92 Leaves lobed to 1/3-2/5(-1/2); teeth long, equal .................. {\b 116. pyrenaica}
\par
92 Leaves lobed to less than 1/3 (rarely to 1/3); teeth
\par
   medium or short, often unequal
\par
93 Flowers at least 4·5 mm wide; epicalyx-segments distinctly 
\par
   longer than sepals ............................................................... {\b 115. oculimarina}
\par
93 Flowers usually less than 4·5 mm wide; epicalyx segments 
\par
   usually about as long as sepals, sometimes slightly longer
\par
94 Leaves very shallowly lobed to not more than 1/5; robust, 
\par
   up to 60 cm ............................................................................. {\b 112. gorcensis}
\par
94 Leaves lobed to more than 1/5; usually medium-sized
\par
   or rather dwarf, not more than 30 cm
\par
95 Epicalyx-segments slightly shorter than sepals
\par
96 Leaf-lobes rounded ..................................................................... {\b 109. fallax}
\par
96 Leaf-lobes subtruncate ...................................................... {\b 110. sericoneura}
\par
95 Epicalyx-segments at least as long as sepals
\par
97 Rather robust; leaf-lobes with no incisions ......................... {\b 111. flexicaulis}
\par
97 Dwarf; leaf-lobes with incisions
\par

\par
50}
\par