{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 98 Flowers at least 4 mm wide; hairs on lowest 1-2(-3) internodes
\par
   ................................................................................................. {\b 113. cuspidens}
\par
98 Flowers 3-4 mm wide; hairs on lowest internode only .......... {\b 114. othmarii}
\par
88 Epicalyx-segments usually shorter than sepals;
\par
   hypanthium as long as mature achene
\par
99 Stems, up to and including at least the main inflorescence-
\par
    branches, with some appressed or subappressed hairs
\par
100 Whole plant, including pedicels, densely sericeous with
\par
    subappressed hairs ................................................................... {\b 27. bulgarica}
\par
100 Plant glabrous or subglabrous on at least the upper
\par
    surface of leaves or some pedicels or hypanthia
\par
101 All hypanthia ± densely hairy
\par
102 Leaves ± evenly hairy above
\par
103 Leaves orbicular ...................................................................... {\b 19. fulgens}
\par
103 Leaves reniform or semicircular
\par
104 Leaf-lobes with short incisions .......................................... {\b 28. lapeyrousii}
\par
104 Leaf-lobes with long incisions
\par
105 Hairs subappressed; leaf-lobes with obtuse teeth ..................... {\b 29. plicata}
\par
105 Hairs appressed; leaf-lobes with acute teeth .................... {\b 70. camptopoda}
\par
102 Leaves glabrous above or with hairs only along folds
\par
106 Leaf-lobes 7 ............................................................................... {\b 34. vetteri}
\par
106 Leaf-lobes 9-11
\par
107 Leaf-lobes ± truncate, with distinct incisions ................ {\b 16. infravalesiaca}
\par
107 Leaf-lobes not truncate, without incisions ..................... {\b 17. schmidelyana}
\par
101 At least some hypanthia glabrous or subglabrous
\par
108 Leaf-lobes without incisions
\par
109 Hypanthia attenuate at base ..................................................... {\b 53. gracilis}
\par
109 Hypanthia rounded at base
\par
110 Leaf-lobes with wide, obtuse, unequal teeth; leaves
\par
    often hairy above ................................................................ {\b 69. glomerulans}
\par
110 Leaf-lobes with narrow, acute, subequal teeth; leaves
\par
    glabrous above ................................................................... {\b 78. murbeckiana}
\par
108 Leaf-lobes with incisions
\par
111 Leaf-lobes 9-11; medium-sized, up to 30 cm ...................... {\b 71. crebridens}
\par
111 Leaf-lobes 5-7(-9); dwarf, not more than 15 cm
\par
112 Pedicels mostly glabrous .......................................................... {\b 72. buschii}
\par
112 Pedicels hairy ........................................................................... {\b 20. kerneri}
\par
99  Hairs on stems confined to lowest 2(-3) internodes
\par
113 Leaves hairy at least on folds above
\par
114 Petioles glabrous (rarely the latest summer petioles
\par
    with some hairs)
\par
115 Leaves orbicular; lobes with distinct incisions ................. {\b 84. glabricaulis}
\par
115 Leaves reniform; lobes without incisions .............................. {\b 85. versipila}
\par
114 Petioles hairy
\par
116 Hypanthium acute at base, attenuate into pedicel ................ {\b 74. wallischii}
\par
116 Hypanthium rounded at base, clearly demarcated from pedicel
\par
117 Leaves orbicular, with overlapping basal lobes ................ {\b 73. controversa}
\par
117 Leaves reniform to suborbicular, with distinct sinus
\par
118 Leaves lobed to c. 1/2 .......................................................... {\b 14. paicheana}
\par
118 Leaves lobed to 1/4-1/3 ....................................................... {\b 75. connivens}
\par
113 Leaves glabrous above
\par
119 Petioles glabrous (rarely the latest summer petioles with some hairs)
\par
120 Leaves lobed to not more than 1/5-1/4
\par
121 Outer leaves very shallowly lobed to c. 1/7 ......................... {\b 88. stanislaae}
\par
121 All leaves lobed to 1/5-1/4
\par
122 Leaf-lobes with distinct incisions ........................................... {\b 86. coriacea}
\par
122 Leaf-lobes without incisions
\par
123 Leaves orbicular, without sinus ......................................... {\b 87. inconcinna}
\par
123 Leaves reniform to suborbicular, with small or
\par
    medium-sized sinus ...................................................................... {\b 83. glabra}
\par
120 Leaves lobed to at least 1/4
\par
124 Leaf-lobes with distinct incisions
\par
125 Leaves orbicular ..................................................................... {\b 93. demissa}
\par
125 Leaves ± reniform
\par
126 Leaves lobed to 1/4-1/3 ....................................................... {\b 89. trunciloba}
\par
126 Leaves lobed to c. 2/5
\par
127 Leaf-lobes with equal teeth ...................................................... {\b 90. sinuata}
\par
127 Leaf-lobes with ± unequal teeth ....................................... {\b 94. pseudincisa}
\par
124 Leaf-lobes without incisions
\par
128 Medium-sized, with erect or ascending stems up to 40 cm . {\b 91. straminea}
\par
128 Dwarf, with procumbent stems up to 25 cm
\par
129 Leaves orbicular; lobes semicircular ................................... {\b 92. aequidens}
\par
129 Leaves reniform; lobes ovate .................................................. {\b 95. longana}
\par
119 Petioles hairy
\par
130 Epicalyx-segments less than 2/3 as long as sepals
\par
131 Leaves orbicular or suborbicular; leaf-lobes with
\par
    distinct incisions ...................................................................... {\b 15. splendens}
\par
131 Leaves reniform; leaf-lobes with small incisions ................ {\b 18. jaquetiana}
\par
130 Some epicalyx-segments at least 2/3 as long as sepals
\par
132 Leaf-lobes with distinct incisions
\par
133 Leaves thick, suborbicular, with narrow sinus; rather
\par
    robust ............................................................................................ {\b 76. baltica}
\par
133 Leaves thin, orbicular, without sinus; usually rather
\par
    slender ...................................................................................... {\b 77. wichurae}
\par
132 Leaf-lobes without incisions or with indistinct incisions
\par
134 Leaf-lobes with narrow, acute, subequal teeth
\par
135 Leaf-lobes with short incisions (often ± obscured by
\par
    overlapping margins of lobes) ................................................ {\b 75. connivens}
\par
135 Leaf-lobes without incisions
\par
136 Leaves lobed to 2/5-1/2 ........................................................ {\b 79. acutidens}
\par
136 Leaves lobed to 1/4-1/3 .................................................. {\b 78. murbeckiana}
\par
134 Leaf-lobes with wide, obtuse or subacute, usually unequal teeth
\par
137 Sepals longer than wide; stems often glabrous above
\par
    the second internode .................................................................... {\b 83. glabra}
\par
137 Sepals not or scarcely longer than wide;
\par
    stems usually hairy in the lower part
\par
138 Inflorescence narrow, usually much exceeding leaves ............. {\b 82. obtusa}
\par
138 Inflorescence with divaricate branches, not much
\par
    exceeding leaves
\par
139 Flowers 4-5 mm wide .......................................................... {\b 80. reniformis}
\par
139 Flowers 3-3·5 mm wide ............................................................ {\b 81. lineata}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Sect. PENTAPHYLLEAE Camus. Stoloniferous, rooting at the nodes.Leaves with almost separate segments, the middle segment obovate-cuneate. Fully sexual.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. A. pentaphyllea} L.,{\i  Sp. Pl.} 123 (1753). Dwarf, subglabrous. Flowering stems up to 15 cm long, procumbent or ascending. Leaves up to 3 × 3 cm; segments 3 or 5 (rarely 7), almost separate, obovate-cuneate, deeply incise-dentate in the distal half, often with a very few hairs mainly on the margins. Stipules lanceolate or ovate-lanceolate, conspicuous, especially on cauline leaves. Inflorescence few-flowered. Sepals c. 1·5 mm, 4 or 5, ovate, much larger than epicalyx-segments; anthers 4 or 5; pollen normal. Hypanthium c. 2 mm, glabrous. 2n = 64.{\i  North-facing slopes and snow-patches, usually above} 2000{\i  m; calcifuge. Alps, eastwards to} c. 11°{\i  E. in Italy.} Au Ga He It.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Sect. ALCHEMILLA ({\i Brevicaulon} Rothm.). Stock woody, not stoloniferous. Leaves variably lobed, sometimes with free segments but the middle segment not cuneate. Almost wholly apomictic.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Subsect. {\i Chirophyllum} Rothm. (Sect. {\i Alpinae} Buser). Dwarf or medium-sized, rarely more than 30 cm, more or less densely
\par

\par
51}
\par