{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}
\pard\f0\fs28  sericeous. Leaves palmate or deeply palmately divided (always to at least 1/2), with dense (rarely sparse), appressed hairs beneath. Epicalyx-segments less than half as long as sepals. Mature achene wholly enclosed in hypanthium.
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28   Series {\i Saxatiles} Buser. Dwarf, strongly rhizomatous. Leaves palmate with 5-7 leaflets, glabrous above, at least the middle leaflet practically free. Pedicels usually shorter than hypanthium. Sepals erect after flowering.
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. A. saxatilis} Buser,{\i  Not. Alchim.} 3 (1891). Stems erect, usually at least 3 times as long as the leaves. Leaflets 5, thick, dark green, broadly elliptical, with small and inconspicuous teeth on the rounded, distal margin. Inflorescence long, with distinct, separate glomeruli. {\i Siliceous rocks. • Mountains of S. & C. Europe from Spain to Jugoslavia.} Co Ga Ge He Hs It Ju.
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28   Related species include:
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28  {\b  A. obovalis} Buser in Dörfler,{\i  Herb. Norm.}{\b  47}: 198 (1906). {\i S.W. Alps} ({\i Col de Lautaret}). Ga.
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 3. A. transiens} (Buser) Buser in Dörfler, {\i Herb. Norm.}{\b  36}: 204 (1906). Like {\b 2} but leaflets sometimes 6-7, ovate-lanceolate, and with more distinct, acute, distal teeth. {\i Siliceous rocks. • Mountains of S. Europe, from Portugal to N. Italy}. Co Ga He Hs It Lu.
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28   Intermediate between {\b 2} and {\b 4}. Related species include:
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28  {\b  A. lucida }Buser in Dörfler, {\i Herb. Norm.}{\b  47}: 201(1906). {\i S.W. Alps} ({\i Col de Lautaret}). Ga.
\par
\pard\f0\fs28   {\b A. saxetana} Buser in Dörfler, {\i op. cit.} 199 (1906).{\i  W.C. Alps} ({\i Valais}). He.
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 4. A. alpina} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 123 (1753) ({\i A. alpina} subsp. {\i glomerata} (Tausch) Camus). Stems ascending, usually scarcely exceeding the leaves. Leaflets 5-7, green or yellow-green, lanceolate, with few but conspicuous teeth. Glomeruli dense. 2n = c. 120, c. 128, c. 140, c. 152.{\i  Mainly calcifuge in the southern part of its range. N., W. & W.C. Europe, southwards to S. Spain, Appennini and E. Alps; only on mountains except in the extreme north}. Au Br Co Fa Fe Ga Ge Hb He Hs Is It No Rs (N) Sb Su.
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28 Related species include:
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28   {\b A. argentidens} Buser in Dörfler, {\i Herb. Norm. }{\b 47}: 200 (1906). {\i W.C. Alps }( {\i Valais}). He.
\par
\pard\f0\fs28   {\b A. brachyclada }Buser in Dörfler,{\i  op. cit.} 199 (1906). {\i S.W. Alps} ({\i Isere}). Ga.
\par
\pard\f0\fs28   {\b A. viridicans} Rothm.,{\i  Bol. Soc. Esp. Hist. Nat. }{\b 34}: 150 (1934). {\i E. Pyrenees} ({\i Prov. Lerida}). Hs.
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28   Other regional variation certainly occurs, but has not been treated taxonomically. In N. Europe the variation is less, but still detectable.
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 5. A. basaltica} Buser, {\i Österr. Bot. Zeitschr. }{\b 44}: 476 (1894). Like {\b 4} but stems usually greatly exceeding leaves; leaflets broadly obovate, with truncate apex and rather long teeth. {\i Siliceous rocks. • Mountains of S.W. & W.C. Europe, from Spain to E. Switzerland.} Ga He Hs.
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28 Intermediate between{\b  4} and {\b 6}.
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 6. A. subsericea} Reuter, {\i Compt. Rend. Soc. Haller.}{\b  2}: 20 (1853-4). Stems not much exceeding leaves. Leaflets usually 5, lanceolate, grey-green and only sparsely sericeous beneath, with conspicuous, straight teeth up to 3 mm. Glomeruli less dense than{\b  4}. {\i Calcifuge; often in snow-patches. • Mountains of S. Europe, from N. Spain to W. Austria.} Au Ga He Hs It.
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28 Related species include:
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28  {\b  A. amphibola} Buser in Dörfler,{\i  Herb. Norm.}{\b  47}: 202 (1906). {\i W. Alps} ({\i Haute Savoie}). Ga. Exceptional in Ser. {\i Saxatiles} in growing on calcareous rock.
\par
\pard\f0\fs28   {\b A. jucunda }Buser ex Maillefer,{\i  Mém. Soc. Vaud. Sci. Nat.}{\b  8}: 116 (1944). {\i Alpes Maritimes.} Ga.
\par
\pard\f0\fs28   {\b A. vaccariana} Buser, {\i Bull. Soc. Bot. Ital.}{\b  1906}: 61(1906).{\i  W.C. Alps}({\i Valle d'Aosta}). It.
\par
\par 
\pard\f0\fs28  Maillefer suggests that these taxa may have arisen by hybridization between {\i A. pentaphyllea }and members of Ser. {\i Saxatiles} (though none of the latter are known to be sexual). See also {\b 12}.
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28   Series {\i Hoppeanae} Buser. Dwarf to medium-sized, with short rhizomes. Leaf-segments (5-)7-9, mostly slightly to distinctly connate. Pedicels usually at least as long as hypanthium. Sepals patent after flowering.
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28   All species in this series are calcicole, and occur on mountains on rocks or in pastures.
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 7. A. plicatula} Gand.,{\i  Rad Jug. Akad. Znan. Umj.}{\b  66}: 34 (1883) ({\i A. hoppeana} subsp.{\i  asterophylla} (Tausch) Gams). Leaves orbicular, densely sericeous beneath; segments 7(-9), lanceolate, with short, acute teeth, middle one usually completely free; segments in the young leaf usually distinctly folded along midrib. •{\i  Mountains of S. & S.C. Europe from the Alps and S. Carpathians to S. Spain and Albania.} Al Au Ga Ge He Hs It Ju Rm.
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28   Variable. The most widespread taxon is var.{\i  plicatula} ({\i A. visianii }Gand., {\i A. asterophylla} (Tausch) Buser,{\i  A. alpigena} Buser), with the leaves glabrous above; in the south of the area is found var.{\i  vestita }(Buser) Rothm. ({\i A. amphisericea} Buser), with the leaves more or less hairy above.
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28   Related species with leaves glabrous above include:
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28   {\b A. buseri} Maillefer,{\i  Mém. Soc. Vaud. Sci. Nat.}{\b  8}: 120 (1944). {\i S.W. & W.C. Alps} ({\i Isere; Vaud}). Ga He.
\par
\pard\f0\fs28   {\b A. chirophylla} Buser,{\i  Bull. Soc. Nat. Ain }{\b 13}: 24 (1903).{\i  Jura} ({\i Ain}). Ga.
\par
\pard\f0\fs28   {\b A. florulenta} Buser in Briq.,{\i  Prodr. Fl. Corse}{\b  2}({\b 1}): 205 (1913). {\i Jura} ({\i Ain}). Ga.
\par
\pard\f0\fs28   {\b A. font-queri} Rothm.,{\i  Bol. Soc. Esp. Hist. Nat.}{\b 34} : 151 (1934). {\i S. Spain} ({\i Sierra Nevada}). Hs.
\par
\pard\f0\fs28  {\b  A. nitida} Buser,{\i  Bull. Soc. Nat. Ain}{\b  13}: 33 (1903). {\i From S.C. France to N. Italy}. Ga He It.
\par
\pard\f0\fs28   {\b A. scintillans} Buser ex Jaquet, {\i Mém. Soc. Fribourg. Sci. Nat.} ({\i Bot.}){\b  2}: 62 (1907).{\i  Jura; W.C. Alps} ({\i Vaud}). Ga He.
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28   Related species with leaves hairy above include:
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28  {\b  A. coruscans} Buser in Dörfler,{\i  Herb. Norm.}{\b  47}: 205 (1906). {\i W.C. Alps }({\i Isere}). Ga.
\par
\pard\f0\fs28  {\b  A. murisserica }Maillefer, {\i Mem. Soc. Vaud. Sci. Nat.}{\b  8}: 123 (1944). {\i W.C. Alps} ({\i Vaud}). He.
\par
\pard\f0\fs28   {\b A. petraea} Buser ex Maillefer,{\i  loc. cit.} 122 (1944).{\i  Jura} ({\i Ain}). Ga.
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 8. A. pallens} Buser, {\i Not. Alchim.} 6 (1891). Leaves more or less orbicular, flat, not folded, glabrous above, only sparsely sericeous and pale blue-green beneath; segments 7(-9), elliptical, shortly but distinctly connate at the base, with the teeth shorter and
\par
\par 52}
\par