{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 wider than in {\b 7}. •{\i  Alps, eastwards to} c. 12° 30' {\i E.; mountains of E. & S.C. France.} Au Ga Ge He It.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Related species include:
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b A. atrovirens }Buser ex Jaquet, {\i Mem. Soc. Fribourg. Sci. Nat.} ({\i Bot.}){\b  2}: 4(1905). {\i W.C. Alps} ({\i Fribourg}). He.
\par
 
\pard\f0\fs28 {\b A. flavovirens} Buser,{\i  Bull. Soc. Nat. Ain }{\b 13}: 33 (1903). {\i S.W. Alps} ({\i Col de Lautaret}). Ga.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b A. longinodis} (Buser) Maillefer,{\i  Mém. Soc. Vaud. Sci. Nat.}{\b  8}: 122 (1944).{\i W.C. Alps }({\i Valais}). He.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 9. A. anisiaca} Wettst.,{\i  Biblioth. Bot.} ({\i Stuttgart}) {\b 26}: 41 (1892) ({\i A.hoppeana} subsp. {\i anisiaca }(Wettst.) Gams). Leaves more or less semicircular, with very wide sinus, usually hairy above, densely sericeous beneath; segments narrowly lanceolate, shortly connate at base. •{\i  N.E. Alps}. Au Ge.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 10. A. hoppeana} (Reichenb.) Dalla Torre in Hartinger, {\i Atlas Alpenfl.}({\i Text}) 94 (1882). Leaves orbicular, with more or less overlapping outer segments, glabrous above, sparsely appressed hairy and greenish beneath; segments distinctly connate at base, linear to oblong-linear, with very obtuse apex and small, short apical teeth. •{\i  N. Alps, Jura, S. W. Germany}. Au Ge He.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 11. A. conjuncta} Bab.,{\b  Ann. Nat. Hist.}{\b  10}: 25 (1842). Up to 40 cm. Leaves thick, orbicular, dull, blue-green and glabrous above, sericeous and shiny beneath; segments 7(-9), flat, elliptical, connate to 1/3(1/2), with the teeth very indistinct and almost hidden by sericeous marginal indumentum. •{\i  Jura and S.W. Alps; widely cultivated in gardens and naturalized in Britain}. Ga He [Br].
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 More robust than any other species in Subsect. {\i Chirophyllum}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Related species include:
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b A. leptoclada} Buser,{\i  Alchim. Valais.} 4 (1894).{\i  S.W. & W.C. Alps.} Ga He It.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 12. A. grossidens} Buser,{\i  Not. Alchim.} 6 (1891) ({\i A.hoppeana} subsp. {\i grossidens} (Buser) Gams). Leaves suborbicular, grey green and only sparsely sericeous beneath; segments 7, obovate, subtruncate, the middle segment almost free, with conspicuous straight teeth up to 3 mm. 2n = 64. •{\i  Alps, eastwards to} c. 10° {\i E. in Austria.} Au Ga Ge He It.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Related species include:
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  A. glacialis Buser, {\i Bull. Herb. Boiss}. ser. 2, {\b 5}: 514 (1905). {\i S.E. Alps}.He It.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  A. jugensis (Buser) Maillefer, {\i Mem. Soc. Vaud. Sci. Nat.}{\b  8}: 120 (1944). {\i S. W. & W.C. Alps }({\i Haute Savoie, Vaud}). Ga He.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  {\i A. grossidens} and {\i A. glacialis} have been shown to be sexual species, and the latter seems to hybridize freely with {\i A. pentaphyllea} on the Gemmijoch. The whole group may well have originated by hybridization between {\i A. pentaphyllea} and members of Ser.{\i  Hoppeanae.} See also {\b 6}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b A. catalaunica} Rothm., {\i Bol. Soc. Esp. Hist. Nat.}{\b  34}: 150 (1934),described from the Spanish Pyrenees, and {\b A. petiolulans} Buser,{\i  Bull. Soc.Nat. Ain }{\b 13}: 24 (1903), described from Switzerland, have the prominent teeth of {\b 12}, but the leaves have dense, sericeous hairs beneath.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Subsect. {\i Heliodrosium }Rothm. Very variable in habit and hairiness. Leaves rarely lobed to more than ½, and never with separate segments. Epicalyx-segments at least half as long as sepals, but not longer and always narrower. Mature achene wholly enclosed in hypanthium.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Series{\i  Splendentes} Buser. Like Subsect. {\i Chirophyllum} but leaves usually not lobed to more than ½, and epicalyx-segments at least half as long as sepals.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  A small group of species confined, except for{\b  13}, to the Alps, Jura and Pyrenees, and possessing characters intermediate between Subsect.{\i  Chirophyllum} and Subsect.{\i  Heliodrosium}. They are presumably the products of ancient hybridization between members of these subsections. All have a compact, woody rhizome, and relatively short and usually slender stems not more than 30 cm. They are mostly calcicole.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 13. A. faeroensis} (Lange) Buser, {\i Ber. Schweiz. Bot. Ges.}{\b  4}: 58 (1894). Dwarf but relatively robust, up to 15(-30) cm; sericeous throughout except for upper surface of leaves and some pedicels which are usually glabrous. Leaves reniform, with very wide sinus, lobed always to more than 1/2 and up to 2/3; lobes usually 7 with long incisions and rather large,acute teeth extending more than halfway down side of lobe. Inflorescence compact. Epicalyx segments not much more than 1/2 as long as sepals. 2n = c.220, c. 224.{\i  Faeroes, E. Iceland.} Fa Is.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 14. A. paicheana} (Buser) Rothm., {\i Feddes Repert.}{\b  66}: 226 (1962). Like {\b 13} but more sparsely hairy; stems more slender; leaves lobed to ½, sparsely appressed-hairy above, sparsely hairy and greenish beneath; epicalyx-segments distinctly longer, up to as long as sepals; inflorescence laxer. •{\i  W.C. Alps }({\i Valais}). He.
\par

\par
 
\pard\f0\fs28   {\b 15. A. splendens} Christ ex Favrat, {\i Bull. Soc. Vaud. Sci. Nat.}{\b  25}: 52 (1889). Stems up to 30 cm, slender, with few, small cauline leaves. Often glabrous except for sparse, appressed hairs on petioles, veins on lower surface of leaf and lowest internodes. Leaves orbicular or suborbicular,always glabrous above, lobed to 1/4-1/3; lobes 9-11, subquadrangular, more or less truncate, with distinct incisions and 7-9 small, acute teeth. 2n = c. 163. •{\i  C. Alps; Jura. }Ga He.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 16. A. infravalesiaca} (Buser) Rothm.,{\i  Feddes Repert.}{\b  66}: 226 (1962). Like {\b 15} but with denser, appressed hairs often extending to the pedicels and flowers; and leaves lobed up to ½. •{\i  W.C. Alps }({\i Valais}). He.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 17. A. schmidelyana} Buser, {\i Not. Alchim. }15 (1891). Stems up to 20 cm,more or less densely appressed-hairy up to and including the inflorescence-branches, with large cauline leaves. Leaves orbicular, lobed to 1/3-1/2; lobes 9-11, subtriangular, without incisions and with c. 6 large, acute teeth. Leaves glabrous above sparsely hairy beneath. •{\i  Jura; W. Alps} ({\i Savoie}). Ga He.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 18. A. jaquetiana} Buser, {\i Bull. Herb. Boiss}. ser. 2, {\b 2}: 619 (1902). Like {\b 17} but very sparsely appressed-hairy, the mature leaves and distal portions of stems subglabrous; leaves more or less reniform, with wide sinus and short incisions. •{\i  W.C. Alps} ({\i Fribourg}). He.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 19. A. fulgens} Buser, {\i Not. Alchim. }15 (1891). Stems up to 30 cm, or more, more or less densely sericeous throughout, but pedicels often subglabrous. Leaves orbicular, densely sericeous often silvery beneath and sparsely appressed-hairy above, lobed to c. ¼; lobes 9-11, rounded, with short incisions, and 7-9 equal acute teeth. 2n = c. 140.•{\i  Pyrennes.} Ga Hs.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   {\b  20. A. kerneri }Rothm., {\i Feddes Repert.}{\b  66}: 226 (1962). Stems up to 15 cm, densely sericeous throughout, including pedicels, but some flowers subglabrous. Leaves suborbicular with narrow
\par

\par
53}
\par