{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 sinus, glabrous above, sericeous beneath, lobed up to 2/5; lobes 5-7(-9), subtruncate, with distinct incisions and 4-6 subobtuse teeth. •{\i  N.E. Alps, very local.} Au Ge.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Series {\i Pubescentes} Buser. Dwarf or medium-sized, usually with dense, soft, more or less patent hairs often covering all parts of the plant. Leaves less than 6 cm wide, usually shallowly palmately lobed to less than ½; lobes with 4-5(-6) usually rather wide and obtuse teeth. Epicalyx-segments usually slightly shorter and narrower than sepals.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Characteristic of rather dry grassland or open, rocky habitats, in the lowlands in N. Europe and submontane in the south; not markedly synanthropic.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 21. A. glaucescens} Wallr.,{\i  Linnaea}{\b  14}: 134 (1840) ({\i A. hybrida} auct., non (L.) L.,{\i  A. minor} auct., {\i A. pubescens} auct., non Lam.). Rather small, up to 20 cm, usually compact, with neat, orbicular, densely hairy leaves, often sericeous; hairs patent or erecto-patent on all parts of the plant. Leaf-lobes (5-)7-9, rounded, with no incisions and 4-6 teeth. Stipules of cauline leaves dentate, not conspicuous; stipules, base of stem and petioles brownish, not reddish or purplish-red. Inflorescence with dense glomeruli. 2n = 103-110. •{\i   Mainly in C. & N.E. Europe, but extending locally to Ireland, C. France, N. Italy, Bulgaria and Krym}. Au Be Br Bu Co Cz Da Fe Ga Ge Hb He Ho Hu It Ju No Po Rm Rs (N, B, C, W, K) Su.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 22. A. hirsuticaulis} H. Lindb., {\i Meddel. Soc. Fauna Fl. Fenn.}{\b  30}: 143 (1904). Robust, medium-sized, up to 40 cm, the leaves with dense hairs but not sericeous, the stems with patent hairs throughout. Leaf-lobes 5-7(-9), rounded, with long incisions and 4-6 teeth. Stipules of cauline leaves deeply laciniate, rather conspicuous. Inflorescence with very dense glomeruli. •{\i  N.E. Europe}. Fe Rs (N, B, C, E).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 23. A. flabellata} Buser,{\i  Not. Alchim. }12 (1891). Dwarf, up to 15 cm, with densely sericeous leaves and short, slender stems with erecto-patent or patent hairs throughout. Leaves lobed to 1/4-1/3(-2/5); lobes 5-7, truncate, wider than long, with long incisions and 2-4(-6) teeth. Stipules, base of stems and petioles brownish. Inflorescence with dense glomeruli; pedicels more or less equalling hypanthium.{\i  Usually calcifuge. • Mountains of S. & C. Europe from the Pyrenees to the Carpathians and Krym.} Au Bu Cz Ga Ge He Hs It Ju Po Rm Rs (W,K).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 24. A. cinerea} Buser, {\i loc. cit.} (1891) ({\i A. lanuginosa} Rothm.). Like {\b 23} but leaf-lobes rounded, with short incisions; hairs dense and patent throughout; pedicels often longer than hypanthium. •{\i  Alps, N. Appennini, mountains of N. half of Balkan peninsula}. Al Au Bu Ga It Ju.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Somewhat intermediate between {\b 23} and {\b 30}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Related species include:
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b  A. pirinica} Pawl., {\i Bull. Int. Acad. Sci. Cracovie} ser. B (1), {\b 1951}: 350 (1953). {\i S.W. Bulgaria} ({\i Pirin}). Bu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 25. A. erythropoda} Juz. in Grossh., {\i Fl. Kavk.}{\b  4}: 323 (1934) (incl.{\i  A. erythropodoides} Pawl.,{\i  A. jailae} Juz.). Rather robust, medium-sized, up to 30 cm. Stems and petioles with a mixture of patent and deflexed hairs, the latter particularly obvious on petioles of summer leaves and on the lower internodes. Leaves with dense, soft hairs; lobes usually 5-7, subtruncate, with long incisions and 3-6 obtuse to subacute teeth. Flowers up to 4 mm wide, yellowish, in rather dense glomeruli.{\i  W. Carpathians; mountains of Balkan peninsula; Krym}. Bu Cz Ju Rs (K). ({\i Caucasus}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Described by Juzepczuk, from the Caucasus, as developing a reddish-violet colour on the stems and mature petioles. Some, but not all, of the plants in the Balkan peninsula show this character.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 26. A. lithophila} Juz.,{\i  Not. Syst.} ({\i Leningrad}){\b  8}: 12 (1938). Like {\b 25} but leaf-lobes rounded or subtriangular, with very short incisions and 5-6 acute teeth. •{\i  Krym.} Rs (K).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Related species include:
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b  A. exsanguis} Juz., {\i Not. Syst.} ({\i Leningrad}){\b  8}: 10 (1938) {\i Krym}. Rs (K)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 27. A. bulgarica} Rothm.,{\i  Feddes Repert. }{\b 46}: 125 (1939). Rather small, up to 20 cm, sericeous, with subappressed or erecto-patent hairs throughout. Leaves suborbicular, lobed up to 2/5; lobes 5-7(-9), truncate or subtruncate, with long incisions and 4-6 rather narrow, acute teeth. Inflorescence small, with few, rather dense glomeruli. •{\i  Mountains of Balkan peninsula}. Bu Gr Ju.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28     Related species include:
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b A. consobrina} Juz.,{\i  Not. Syst.} ({\i Leningrad}) {\b 16}: 143 (1954).{\i  S. Ural.} Rs (C).
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b A. exul }Juz.,{\i  Not. Syst.} ({\i Leningrad}) {\b 14}: 147 (1951).{\i  S. Ural.} Rs (C).
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b A. helenae} Juz.,{\i  Not. Syst.} ({\i Leningrad}){\b  16}: 142 (1954).{\i  S. Ural}. Rs (C).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   These 4 species are closely related to {\b A. sericata} Reichenb., {\i Pl. Crit.}{\b  1}: 6 (1823) sens. lat. (incl.{\i  A. rigida} Buser) from the Caucasus, which is commonly cultivated in gardens and has been recorded as an escape.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 28. A. lapeyrousii} Buser,{\i  Bull. Herb. Boiss.}{\b  1, App. 2}: 18 (1893) ({\i A. hybrida} (L.) L., nom. ambig.). Medium-sized, up to 25 cm, with erecto-patent or subappressed hairs throughout, except on pedicels which are usually glabrous; in general less densely hairy than{\b  21}. Stems rather slender and diffuse. Leaves reniform, lobed to c. 1/3; lobes 7-9, usually more or less triangular, with short incisions and 5-6 acute, somewhat connivent teeth. •{\i  Pyrenees and mountains of S.C. France.} Ga Hs.
\par

\par
 
\pard\f0\fs28   {\b 29. A. plicata} Buser,{\i  op. cit. }20 (1893). Like {\b 28} but less densely hairy, so that neither leaf-surface is sericeous and shiny at maturity; leaf-lobes with rather long incisions (often obscured by folding) and obtuse teeth; only the lowest pedicels in the glomeruli hairy. •{\i  N.E. & C. Europe.} Au Cz Fe Ga Ge He Hu No Po Rm Rs (N, B, C, W) Su.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Related species include:
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b  A. hungarica} Soó, {\i Acta Bot. Acad. Sci. Hung. }{\b 9}: 424 (1963).{\i  N. Hungary and S.E. Czechoslovakia. }Cz Hu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 30. A. colorata} Buser,{\i  Not. Alchim.} 10 (1891). Dwarf, up to 15 cm, more or less densely covered with soft hairs, some of which are slightly deflexed on the lower internodes and on mature petioles. Leaves reniform to suborbicular, somewhat undulate; lobes 7(-9), with short incisions. Stems quickly developing a reddish-purple colour. Pedicels glabrous, except for some lower flowers of glomeruli.{\i  Usually calcicole. • Mountains of S. & S.C. Europe from the Pyrenees to the Carpathians}. Al Au Cz Ga Ge He Hs It Ju Po Rm.
\par

\par
54}
\par