{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 Very similar in geographical range to {\b 23}, but usually rather clearly differentiated by soil preference.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Related species include:
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b A. exilis} Juz.,{\i  Acta Horti Petrop.}{\b  43}: 537 (1931) ({\i A. egens} Juz.). {\i C.Russia} ({\i Ul'janovskaja} Obl.). Rs (C).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 31. A. illyrica} Rothm.,{\i  Feddes Repert.}{\b  66}: 227 (1962). Like {\b 30} but hairs patent, not deflexed; leaves more deeply lobed, the lobes more nearly truncate. •{\i  Mountains of N.W. Jugoslavia.} Ju.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 32. A. exigua} Buser ex Paulin, {\i Jahresb. Staatsgymn. Laibach}{\b  1907}: 11(1907) ({\i A. pusilla} Buser, non Pomel). Like {\b 30} but very dwarf, up to 5(-10) cm; distal part of stems, including flowers, glabrous or subglabrous; hairs patent and sparser throughout.{\i  Mountain grassland, often in damp hollows. • Alps and mountains of Jugoslavia; E.Carpathians.} Au Ga Ge It Ju Rm.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 33. A. helvetica} Brügger,{\i  Jahresb. Naturf. Ges. Graubundens}{\b  23-24}: 64(1880) ({\i A. intermedia} Haller fil.). Dwarf, with relatively sparse patent hairs except on the upper surface of the leaves and the pedicels, which are subglabrous. Leaves lobed to 1/2-2/3; lobes 5-7, wide, with very long incisions and large distal teeth 2 mm or more. Inflorescence rather small. Flowers up to 4 mm wide.{\i  Snow-patches. • C. & E. Alps}. Au Ge He It.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b  A. intermedia} subsp. {\b sooi} Palitz, {\i Feddes Repert.}{\b  40}: 244 (1936),described from Romania (Transsilvania), seems to differ in having shallower leaf-lobes, and denser hairs on pedicels and upper leaf surface. It would probably be best treated as a separate species, but the information is insufficient.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 34. A. vetteri} Buser, {\i Bull. Herb. Boiss.}{\b  2, App. 4}: 7 (1894). Medium-sized, up to 25 cm, sericeous and almost shiny, with sub-appressed hairs throughout, but mature summer leaves either glabrous above, or with a few hairs along the folds. Stems slender. Leaves lobed to c. 2/5; lobes usually 7, rounded, with long incisions and narrow, acute teeth; cauline leaves small. •{\i  Mountains of S.W. Europe from Spain} ({\i Sierra de Gudar}){\i  to Maritime Alps.} Ga Hs It.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 This species is intermediate between. Ser. {\i Pubescentes} and Ser. {\i Splendentes}, and might be included in either. It also resembles {\b 27}, differing mainly in the leaves, which are subglabrous above.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Series {\i Vulgares }Buser. Very variable in habit and hairiness, but often robust and relatively glabrous. Leaves palmately lobed to less than ½ (very rarely more); leaf-lobes with often 6 or more, variably shaped (but often acute) teeth.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 A very heterogeneous collection of species which are usually grouped in subseries based on the degree of hairiness. This artificial grouping seems to be the only practicable one.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Subser.{\i  Hirsutae} H. Lindb. Stem, at least on lower internodes and petioles, with more or less dense, erecto-patent, patent or deflexed hairs. Leaves with some erecto-patent or patent hairs.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 35. A. hebescens} Juz.,{\i  Acta Horti Petrop.}{\b  43}: 537 (1931). Medium-sized plant up to 30 cm, with dense, deflexed hairs throughout except for pedicels, which are usually glabrous at least in their distal half.Leaves reniform, flat, shallowly lobed; lobes 9(-11), subtruncate, with distinct incisions and 6-8 rather small teeth.{\i  C. Russia.} Rs (C). ({\i C.Asia.})
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Related species include:
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b  A. aemula}  Juz.,{\i  Acta Inst. Bot. Acad. Sci. URSS }{\b 1}: 120 (1933). {\i Krym.} Rs(K).
\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b  A. pseudocalycina}  Juz., {\i Not. Syst.} ({\i Leningrad}){\b  17}: 243 (1955). {\i S. Ural}. Rs (C).
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b A. pycnantha}  Juz.,{\i  Not. Syst.} ({\i Leningrad}){\b  8}: 15 (1938).{\i  Krym}. Rs (K).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 36. A. gibberulosa} H. Lindb.,{\i  Acta Soc. Sci. Fenn. }{\b 37}({\b 10}): 4 (1909). Like {\b 35} but leaves orbicular and strongly undulate; lobes rounded, with short or no incisions and rather long teeth; basal lobes often overlapping; hairs, especially on pedicels and hypanthia, with a small tubercle at base.{\i  N.C. Russia.} Rs (N, C).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 37. A. bungei} Juz.,{\i  Animadv. Syst. Herb. Univ. Tomsk. }{\b 1932} ({\b 5-6}): 2(1932) (A. barbulata Juz.). Like {\b 35} but pedicels more often completely glabrous; leaves orbicular or reniform-orbicular; lobes 7-9, rounded,with short, indistinct incisions and 6-9 rather wide, acute teeth.{\i  C. & S. Ural.} Rs (C). ({\i W. Siberia.})
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Related species include:
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b A. argutiserrata} H. Lindb. ex Juz., Animadv. Syst. Herb. Univ. Tomsk.1932(5 6): 4 (1932). S. Ural. Rs (C). (W. Siberia.)
\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b  A. cheirochlora} Juz., {\i Not. Syst.} ({\i Leningrad}) {\b 14}: 153 (1951). E.C. Russia(Tatarskaja A.S.S.R.). Rs (C).
\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b  A. dasycrater}  Juz.,{\i  op. cit.} 151 (1951).{\i  E.C. Russia} ({\i Tatarskaja A.S.S.R.}). Rs (C).
\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b  A. glyphodonta}  Juz., {\i Not. Syst. }({\i Leningrad}) {\b 16}: 143 (1954).{\i  C. Russia} ({\i Ivanovskaja Obl.}). Rs (C).
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b A. macrescens}  Juz.,{\i  Not. Syst.} ({\i Leningrad}) {\b 14}: 148 (1951).{\i  E.C. Russia} ({\b Tatarskaja A.S.S.R.}). Rs (C).
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b A. oligantha}  Juz., {\i Not. Syst. }({\i Leningrad}) {\b 17}: 245 (1955). {\i S. Ural.} Rs(C).
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b A. trichocrater}  Juz., {\i Sched. Herb. Fl. URSS}{\b  14}({\b 82}): 55 (1957). {\i E.C.Russia }({\i Kirovskaja Obl.}). Rs (C).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 38. A. hirsutissima} Juz., {\i Not. Syst.} ({\i Leningrad}) {\b 8}: 16 (1938). Like {\b 35} but very densely hairy except for pedicels; leaves very shallowly lobed; epicalyx-segments often equalling sepals. {\i Krym.} Rs (K).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 The large epicalyx gives this plant a characteristic appearance; it might be included in Subsect.{\i  Calycanthum,} but the hypanthium is relatively too long.
\par
 
\par

\pard\f0\fs28   {\b 39. A. propinqua} H. Lindb. ex Juz.,{\i  Not. Syst. }({\i Leningrad}) {\b 4}: 184 (1923). Medium-sized, up to 35 cm, densely hairy throughout except for pedicels, which are usually completely glabrous. Hairs, particularly on petioles and upper part of inflorescence, usually erecto-patent. Leaves orbicular, shallowly lobed to c. ¼, with overlapping, basal lobes; lobes 7-9, more or less semicircular, with no incisions and 6-7 rather obtuse teeth. Flowers 3-4 mm wide; hypanthium distinctly hairy. •{\i   N. & C. Europe.} Cz Fe Ge No Po Rs (N, B, C) Su.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 40. A. conglobata} H. Lindb., {\i Acta Soc. Sci. Fenn.}{\b  37}({\b 10}): 36 (1909) ({\i A. juzepczukii }Alechin). Like {\b 39} but leaf-lobes with rather long incisions and 6-9 narrower, often acute teeth; hypanthium usually subglabrous in upper part. {\i N. part of U.S.S.R.} Rs (N, B, C).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Related species include:
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b  A. confertula}  Juz., {\i Not. Syst. }({\i Leningrad}) {\b 17}: 246 (1955).{\i  S. Ural}. Rs(C).
\par

\par
55}
\par