{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b  A. crassicaulis} Juz., {\i Not. Syst. }({\i Leningrad}) {\b 14}: 155 (1951). {\i C. Ural}. Rs (C).
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b A. gortschakowskii} Juz.,{\i  Not. Syst.} ({\i Leningrad}) {\b 17}: 249 (1955).{\i  N. Ural. }Rs (N).
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b A. languescens}  Juz.,{\i  Not. Syst.} ({\i Leningrad}){\b  8}: 18 (1938).{\i  Krym.} Rs (K).
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b A. sibirica}  Zamels,{\i  Animadv. Syst. Herb. Univ. Tomsk. }{\b 1931} ({\b 3}): 3 (1931).{\i  E. Russia.} Rs (C, ?E).
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b A. stevenii}  Buser,{\i  Monit. Jard. Bot. Tiflis }{\b 5}: 3 (1906).{\i  Krym.} Rs (K).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 41. A. monticola} Opiz in Berchtold & Opiz, {\i Okon.-Techn. Fl. Böhm.}{\b  2}({\b 1}): 13 (1838) ({\i A. pastoralis} Buser). Medium-sized, up to 50 cm, rather robust; petioles, leaves and stems, up to and including inflorescence-branches, with dense patent hairs, but pedicels glabrous, and hypanthium often glabrous or nearly so. Leaves orbicular, sinus closed or nearly so; lobes 9-11, more or less semicircular, with short incisions and 7-9 rather regular, acute teeth. Glomeruli dense. Flowers c. 3 mm wide. 2n = c. 101, 103-109.{\i  Most of Europe except the islands, but rare or local in the west, and only on mountains in the south.} Al Au Be Br Bu Cz Da Fe Ga Ge He Ho Hu It Ju No Po Rm Rs (N, B, C, W) Su.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Related species include:
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b  A. neostevenii} Juz.,{\i  Not. Syst.} ({\i Leningrad}){\b  8}: 19 (1938). {\i Krym.} Rs (K).
\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b  A. prasina} Juz., {\i Not. Syst.} ({\i Leningrad}) {\b 16}: 144 (1954). {\i C. Russia} ({\i Gor'kovskaja Obl.}). Rs (C).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 42. A. schistophylla} Juz., {\i Acta Inst. Bot. Acad. Sci. URSS }{\b 1}: 121 (1933). Like {\b 41} but leaves reniform, lobed up to ½ ; lobes 7-9, almost oblong, with very long incisions; hypanthium (and even some pedicels) usually rather densely hairy. •{\i  C. Russia, from Moscow region to Tatarskaja A.S.S.R}. Rs (C).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 43. A. crinita} Buser,{\i  Scrin. Fl. Select.} ({\i Magnier}) {\b 11}: 256 (1892). Like {\b 41} but leaves reniform, very shallowly lobed, with wide sinus; lobes with no incisions and rather unequal, wide teeth; hairs on petioles and stems often somewhat deflexed; inflorescence rather lax; hypanthium almost always glabrous.{\i  C. & S.E. Europe.} Bu Cz Ga Ge He Hu It Ju Po Rm.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Related species include:
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b  A. amicorum}  Pawl., {\i Fragm. Fl. Geobot. }{\b 1}({\b 1}): 61 (1954). {\i W. Carpathians}. Po.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b  A. ladislai} Paw., {\i op. cit.} 58 (1954). {\i W. Carpathians} ({\i Tatra}). Po.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 44. A. strigosula} Buser,{\i  Bull. Herb. Boiss. }{\b 1, App. 2}: 24 (1893). Medium-sized, up to 30 cm. Leaves orbicular, shallowly lobed; lobes c. 9, rounded, often overlapping at base, with short incisions usually more or less covered by folding, and 6-8 small, equal teeth. Leaves with patent hairs on both surfaces, rather rough; petioles and lower internodes with dense deflexed hairs. Inflorescence narrow, often almost glabrous. Flowers 3-4 mm wide, glabrous; hypanthium attenuate at base. •{\i  Mountains of S. and S.C. Europe from S.C. France to N. Jugoslavia.} Au Ga Ge He It Ju.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 45. A. subglobosa} C. G. Westerlund,{\i  Redog. Allm. Larov. Norr.-Soderkoping }{\b 1906-07}: 28 (1907). Like {\b 44} but often up to 50 cm; more robust; inflorescence more spreading, and more or less hairy up to and including the smaller branches; pedicels glabrous; hypanthium rounded at base. 2n = c. 102, 108. •{\i   N. & N.C. Europe from Arctic Sweden to N.C. Germany}. Cz Ge No Rs (B) Su [Rs (N)].
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 46. A. sarmatica} Juz.,{\i  Acta Inst. Bot. Acad. Sci. URSS}{\b  3}: 202 (1936). Like {\b 44} but leaves orbicular-reniform, often with narrow sinus; lobes usually 7-9; inflorescence more or less hairy up to and including the smaller branches; pedicels glabrous; hypanthium rounded at base. 2n = 105-106. •{\i   N.E. Europe, extending to W. Sweden.} Fe ?Po Rs (B, C) Su [Rs (N)].
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Scandinavian authors distinguish{\b  45} and {\b 46} from {\b 44}, principally on the degree of hairiness of the inflorescence, but plants occur in the Alps with sparse hairs on the inflorescence-branches and even on the hypanthium, and the distinction is not easy to maintain. Other species related to {\b 44-46} include:
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b A. breviloba}  H. Lindb., {\i Acta Soc. Sci. Fenn.}{\b  37}({\b 10}): 4 (1909). {\i C. Russia.} Rs (N, C).
\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b  A. cyrtopleura}  Juz. in Komarov,{\i  Fl. URSS}{\b  10}: 620 (1941). {\i S. Ural.} Rs (C).
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b A. kornasiana}  Pawl., {\i Fragm. Fl. Geobot.}{\b  1}({\b 1}): 64 (1954).{\i  W. Carpathians} ({\i Tatra}). Po.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b A. litwinowii}  Juz., {\i Acta Inst. Bot. Acad. Sci. URSS}{\b  1}: 122 (1933). {\i C. Russia and S. Ural.} Rs (C).
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b A. substrigosa}  Juz. in Majevski,{\i  Fl. Sred. Ross.} ed. 7, 446 (1940).{\i  C. & E. Russia.} Rs (C).
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b A. tubulosa}  Juz., {\i Not. Syst. }({\i Leningrad}) {\b 14}: 157 (1951).{\i  C. & S. Ural.} Rs (C).
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b A. walasii}  Pawl.,{\i  Bull. Int. Acad. Sci. Cracovie }ser. B(l), {\b 1951}: 345 (1953). {\i W. Carpathians }({\i Tatra}). Cz Po.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b 47. A. tytthantha} Juz.,{\i  Acta Inst. Bot. Acad. Sci. URSS}{\b  1}: 123 (1933) ({\i A. multiflora }Buser ex Rothm.). Medium-sized, up to 50 cm. Leaves suborbicular, rather shallowly lobed, with narrow sinus, densely hairy on both surfaces, often somewhat sericeous beneath; lobes c. 9, rounded to subtriangular, with no incisions and 6-8 small, acute, subequal teeth. Cauline leaves rather large. Petioles and lower internodes densely hairy with at least some slightly deflexed hairs. Upper branches of inflorescence, including pedicels and hypanthium, glabrous. Flowers 1·5-2·5 mm wide. •{\i  Krym; naturalized in Scotland.} Rs (K) [Br].
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Related species include:
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b  A. arcuatiloba}  Juz. in Komarov,{\i  Fl. URSS }{\b 10}: 621 (1941).{\i  Krym}. Rs (K).
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b A. imberbis}  Juz.,{\i  Not. Syst. }({\i Leningrad}){\b  8}: 21 (1938). {\i Krym.} Rs (K).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 48. A. subcrenata} Buser,{\i  Scrin. Fl. Select.} ({\i Magnier}) {\b 12}: 285 (1893). Medium-sized, up to 50 cm. Leaves suborbicular, usually very undulate, usually rather sparsely hairy (often only on folds) above, more densely and evenly hairy beneath; lobes 7-9, rather wide and deep, the basal ones often touching and turned upwards, without incisions and with wide, coarse and unequal teeth. Petioles and lower internodes hairy; some hairs slightly deflexed. Inflorescence rather narrow and few-flowered, usually glabrous. Flowers 3-4 mm wide; hypanthium and pedicels always glabrous. 2n = 96, 104-110.{\i  N. & C. Europe, extending southwards to the S.W. Alps and S.W. Bulgaria.} Au Br Bu Cz Da Fe Ga Ge He Is It Ju No Po Rm Rs (N, B, C, W) Su.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 49. A. cymatophylla} Juz.,{\i  Not. Syst. }({\i Leningrad}) {\b 3}: 41 (1922). Like {\b 48} but leaf-lobes with short incisions and narrower, more equal teeth; leaves only sparsely hairy beneath; hairs on petioles and lower internodes strongly deflexed; flowers  2·5-3 mm wide. 2n = 106-107.{\i  N.E. & N.C. Europe, extending to S. Poland and W. Sweden. }Cz Ge Po Rs (N, B, C) Su.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 50. A. heptagona} Juz.,{\i  op. cit.} 45 (1922). Like {\b 48} but leaves more or less flat; lobes triangular, with narrow, acute teeth;
\par

\par
56}
\par