{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 leaves often only sparsely hairy; hairs on petioles and lower internodes strongly deflexed; inflorescence of medium size. {\i Baltic region.} Rs (N, B, C) Su [Fe].
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Species related to {\b 40-50} include:
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b  A. calvipes} Juz., {\i Not. Syst.} ({\i Leningrad}) {\b 16}: 164 (1954).{\i  C. Russia} ({\i Gor'kovskaja Obl.}). Rs (C).
\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b  A. decalvans} Juz., {\i Acta Horti Petrop.}{\b  43}: 535 (1931).{\i  E.C.Russia.} Rs (C).
\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b  A. devestiens} Juz., {\i Not. Syst.} ({\i Leningrad}){\b  14}: 165 (1951).{\i  E.C.Russia.} Rs (C).
\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b  A. hirtipes} Buser, {\i Bull. Herb. Boiss.} ser. 2, {\b 1}: 473 (1901). {\i E. Alps }({\i Prov. Sondrio}). It.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b  A. homoeophylla} Juz., {\i Not. Syst.} ({\i Leningrad}){\b  14}: 159 (1951).{\i E.C. Russia} ({\i Tatarskaja A.S.S.R}.). Rs (C).
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b A. hyperborea} Juz., {\i op. cit.} 167 (1951). {\i C. Ural.} Rs (N, C).
\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b  A. obscura} Buser,{\i  Bull. Soc. Nat. Ain}{\b  13}: 30 (1903).{\i  W. & C.Alps, Jura.} Ga Ge He.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b  A. rhiphaea} Juz.,{\i  Not. Syst.} ({\i Leningrad}) {\b 14}: 169 (1951).{\i  S. Ural}.Rs (C).
\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b  A. semilunaris} Alechin,{\i  Not. Syst.} ({\i Leningrad}) {\b 3}: 132 (1922).{\i C. Russia and E. Baltic region}. Rs (N, B, C) [Fe].
\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b  A. stellaris} Juz.,{\i  Acta Inst. Bot. Acad. Sci. URSS}{\b  1}: 126 (1933). {\i N.C. Russia.} Rs (N, C).
\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b  A. stenantha} Juz., {\i Not. Syst.} ({\i Leningrad}) {\b 14}: 163 (1951). {\i S. Ural.} Rs (C).
\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b  A. submamillata} Juz., {\i Not. Syst.} ({\i Leningrad}) {\b 16}: 159 (1954). {\i C. Ural.} Rs (C).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 51. A. acutiloba} Opiz in Berchtold & Opiz,{\i  Okon.-Techn. Fl. Böhm. }{\b 2}({\b 1}): 15 (1838) ({\i A. acutangula} Buser). Large, up to 65 cm, robust. Leaves usually more or less reniform, very variably hairy above with patent hairs, usually with hairs restricted to folds and distal portion of lobes, and with dense patent hairs beneath; lobes 9-11(-13), almost triangular, with straight sides and narrow, subtruncate apex (lobes of the late summer leaves of well-grown plants often longer than wide); teeth acute, very un-equal, the largest in the middle. Petioles and lower half of stem with dense patent hairs; inflorescence glabrous. Flowers 3-4 mm wide; hypanthium rounded at base. 2n = c. 100, 105-109.{\i  N., E.& C. Europe, extending to the S.W. Alps and Macedonia.} Au Be Br Bu Cz Da Fe Ga Ge Gr He Hu It Ju No Po Rm Rs (N, B, C,W, E) Su.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 52. A. nemoralis} Alechin,{\i  Predv. Otcet Rabot. Nizegorod. Geobot. Eksped. }{\b 1927}: 80 (1928). Like {\b 51} but medium-sized, up to 50 cm; leaf-lobes short, ovate; leaves usually more or less hairy throughout on upper surface; flowers 2-3 mm.•{\i  C. Russia}. Rs (C).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Related species include:
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b  A. brevidens}  Juz.,{\i  Not. Syst.} ({\i Leningrad}){\b  8}: 22 (1938). {\i Krym}. Rs (K).
\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b  A. denticulata}  Juz. in Komarov,{\i  Fl. URSS}{\b  10}: 622 (1941) (incl.{\i  A. rubricaulis} Juz.). {\i C. Ural}. Rs (C).
\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b  A. lessingiana}  Juz., {\i Not. Syst.} ({\i Leningrad}) {\b 14}: 161 (1951). {\i S. Ural.} Rs (C).
\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b  A. longipes}  Juz.,{\i  Not. Syst. }({\i Leningrad}) {\b 16}: 154 (1954). {\i S. Ural}. Rs (C).
\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b  A. rigescens}  Juz.,{\i  Animadv. Syst. Herb. Univ. Tomsk.}{\b  1932}({\b 5-6}): 5 (1932). {\i C. & S. Ural}. Rs (C).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 53. A. gracilis} Opiz in Berchtold & Opiz, {\i Okon.-Techn. Fl.Böhm.}{\b  2}({\b 1}): 14 (1838) ({\i A. micans} Buser; incl.{\i  A. opizii} Hadac). Medium-sized, up to 50 cm, usually rather slender. Leaves more or less reniform, subsericeous; lobes 9(-11), rounded, with no incisions and narrow, subequal teeth. Both surfaces of leaves, petioles and lower half of stem with more or less dense, erectopatent or even almost subappressed, rather soft hairs. Inflorescence narrow, with diffuse glomeruli, its branches with sparse hairs or glabrous; pedicels glabrous. Hypanthium long, rather narrowly cuneate at base, glabrous. 2n = c. 93, 104-110.{\i  N.E. & C. Europe, extending to S.W. Norway, E. France, N. Italy and C. Greece.} Au Be Bu Cz Da Fe Ga Ge Gr He Hu It Ju No Po Rm Rs (N, B, C, W) Su.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Easily distinguished (in well-grown specimens) from {\b 41} and {\b 51}, with which it often grows, by the subappressed hairiness of the upper leaf-surface, the narrow inflorescence and the elongated hypanthium.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    Related species include:
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b  A. hians}  Juz. in Komarov,{\i  Fl. URSS}{\b  10}: 621 (1941). C. Ural. Rs (C).
\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b  A. lindbergiana}  Juz.,{\i  Not. Syst. }({\i Leningrad}) {\b 4}: 181 (1923) ({\i A. atrifolia }Zamels).{\i  C. & E. Russia.} Rs (?B, C).
\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b  A. malimontana}  Juz., {\i Not. Syst.} ({\i Leningrad}) {\b 16}: 153 (1954).{\i  S. Ural}. Rs (C).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 54. A. xanthochlora} Rothm., {\i Feddes Repert. }{\b 42}: 167 (1937) ({\i A. pratensis} auct., vix Opiz, {\i A. vulgaris} auct., {\i A. sylvestris} auct.). Medium-sized, up to 50 cm, usually robust, often yellowish-green. Leaves reniform to orbicular-reniform, glabrous above or rarely with sparse hairs in the folds; lobes 9-11, rounded, with rather wide, acute, subequal teeth. Lower surface of leaf, petioles, and stems up to the inflorescence-branches with dense, patent or (especially on petioles and lower internodes) erecto-patent hairs. Pedicels and hypanthium usually glabrous or nearly so. Flowers 2·5-3 mm wide, with hypanthium c. 2 mm. 2n = c. 105. •{\i  W. & C. Europe, extending to S. Sweden, Latvia and C. Greece.} Au Be Br Bu Cz Da Ga Ge Gr Hb He Ho Hs Hu It Ju No Po Rm Rs (B, W) Su [Fe].
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Easily distinguished from other widespread European species by its densely hairy stems and petioles, its leaves which are glabrous above, and its small flowers.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    Related species include:
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b  A. brevituba}  Juz., {\i Not. Syst.} ({\i Leningrad}) {\b 14}: 181 (1951). {\i N.E. Russia} ({\i R. Unja}). Rs (N).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 55. A. heterophylla} Rothm.,{\i  Feddes Repert.}{\b  46}: 128 (1939). Like {\b 54} but up to 25 cm; later-developed leaves more or less hairy above; hairs on internodes patent or slightly deflexed; hypanthium usually with patent hairs.{\i  Mountains of Balkan peninsula.} Al Bu Ju.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Related species include:
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b A. croatica }Gand.,{\i  Rad. Jug. Akad. Znam. Umj.}{\b  66}: 33 (1883). N. Jugoslavia. Ju.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b  A. ivonis} Pawl., {\i Acta Soc. Bot. Polon.} {\b 22}: 251 (1953).{\i  S.W. Bulgaria }({\i Pirin}). Bu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 56. A. curtiloba} Buser,{\i  Mém. Soc. Fribourg. Sci. Nat.} ({\i Bot.}) {\b 2}: 69 (1907). Like {\b 54} but leaves lobed to not more than 1/5; lobes with large teeth; flowers c. 3·5 mm wide. •{\i  W.C. Alps. }He.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Related species include:
\par

\par
 
\pard\f0\fs28 {\b   A. flavicoma}  Buser ex Schroeter,{\i  Ber. Schweiz. Bot. Ges.}{\b  14}: 120 (1904). {\i C. Alps.} He.
\par

\par
57}
\par