{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b  A. leiophylla}  Juz.,{\i  Acta Inst. Bot. Acad. Sci. URSS }{\b 1}: 127 (1933). {\i N. & C. Russia, extending to S. Ural.} Rs (C) [Fe]
\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b  .A. multidens} Buser,{\i  Bull. Herb. Boiss.}{\b  1, App. 2}: 27 (1893). {\i S.W. Alps} ({\i Haute Savoie}). Ga.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 57. A. filicaulis} Buser, {\i Bull. Herb. Boiss. }{\b 1, App. 2}: 22 (1893). Small to medium-sized, up to 40 cm. Leaves reniform, with wide sinus, variably clothed with patent hairs on both surfaces, but often only on veins beneath and folds above; lobes 7(-9), rounded with no incisions and subacute, somewhat connivent teeth. Lower part of stem, and all petioles except those of earliest basal leaves, with patent hairs. Base of petioles and stipules purplish-red. Flowers 3·5-4 mm wide; hypanthium usually with patent hairs. •{\i  N., N.W. & N.C. Europe and on the principal mountains of W. & C. Europe from the Pyrenees to the Sudeten mountains}. Au Be Br Cz Da Fa Fe Ga Ge Hb He Ho Hs Is No Po Rm Rs (N, B, C) Su.
\par
 
\par
({\b a}) Subsp. {\b filicaulis}: Upper part of stem, inflorescence-branches and pedicels glabrous. 2n = c. 96, 103-110, c. 150.{\i  Iceland, Fennoscandia and N. Russia; locally in the mountains of W. & C. Europe}.
\par
 ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b vestita} (Buser) M. E. Bradshaw, {\i Watsonia}{\b  5}: 305 (1963) ({\i A. vestita} (Buser) Raunk., {\i A. minor} auct.): Hairy throughout. 2n = c. 96, 104-110.{\i  Mainly in N.W. Europe, but extending to Arctic Norway, Finland, E. Austria and S. France}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Related species include:
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b  A. braun-blanquetii}  Pawl., {\i Bull. Inst. Acad. Sci. Cracovie} ser. B(1), {\b 1951}: 343 (1953). {\i W. Carpathians} ({\i Tatra}). Po.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b  A. exuens} Juz.,{\i  Not. Syst.} ({\i Leningrad}){\b  8}: 24 (1938). {\i Krym}. Rs (K).
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b A. fokinii} Juz.,{\i  Not. Syst.} ({\i Leningrad}) {\b 14}: 173 (1951).{\i  C. Russia }({\i Kirovskaja Obl}.). Rs (C).
\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b  A. macroclada} Juz., {\i Not. Syst. }({\i Leningrad}) {\b 16}: 161 (1954).{\i  S. Ural}. ?Rs (C). Doubtfully recorded for Europe.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b A. strictissima} Juz.,{\i  Not. Syst.} ({\i Leningrad}){\b  17}: 251 (1955).{\i  S. Ural}. Rs (C).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 58. A. minima} Walters, {\i Watsonia }{\b 1}: 10 (1949). Very dwarf, up to 5(-7) cm, sparsely hairy throughout, with subglabrous pedicels. Leaves reniform with wide sinus; lobes 5, with long incisions. Base of petioles and stipules brownish. Flowers c. 2 mm, in small glomeruli. 2n = 103-108.{\i  Calcareous pastures. • N. England}. Br.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Subser.{\i  Heteropodae} Buser. Petioles of spring leaves glabrous; those of summer leaves with erecto-patent, patent or deflexed hairs. Stem (at least in lower half) and leaves usually somewhat hairy.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Members of this subseries can only be recognized by the contrast between the glabrous spring petioles and the hairy summer petioles on the same plant. Well-grown material is therefore essential for determination, and apparently well-developed specimens of some robust species (e.g. {\b 65}) may not always show the characteristically hairy summer petioles, even though the plant is flowering. Conversely, it should be noted that some species in Subser. {\i Hirsutae} have glabrous or subglabrous petioles to the earliest-formed spring leaves (e.g. {\b 57}).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 The subseries is found in the main mountain ranges of Europe from the Pyrenees to the Carpathians and the west part of the Balkan peninsula, and also in Ural. Plants from the S. Carpathians have been referred to this subseries; they need further study, and have not been included here.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 59. A. compta} Buser,{\i  Bull. Herb. Boiss.} ser. 2, {\b 1}: 471 (1901). Medium-sized, up to 30 cm; stems erect, hairy up to the inflorescence, but the lowest internode glabrous. Leaves reniform, with sparse hairs on both surfaces, and appressed hairs on the veins beneath, lobed to 1/4-2/5; lobes 9, rounded, with short incisions and 5-7 equal teeth. Petioles of summer leaves with erecto-patent hairs. Inflorescence not or scarcely exceeding leaves. Flowers 3-4 mm wide. •{\i  E. & C. Alps.} Au He It.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Related species include:
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b  A. flaccida}  Buser, {\i Bull. Soc. Nat. Ain }{\b 13}: 28 (1903). {\i S.W. & C. Alps, Jura.} Ga He.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b A. kulczynskii}  Pawl., {\i Bull. Int. Acad. Sci.} Cracovie ser. B(l), {\b 1951}: 338 (1953). {\i W. Carpathians }({\i Tatra}). Po.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b A. kvarkushensis}  Juz., {\i Not. Syst. }({\i Leningrad}){\b  16}: 167 (1954).{\i  C. Ural.} Rs (C).
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b A. szaferi}  Pawl.,{\i  Bull. Int. Acad. Sci. Cracovie} ser. B(l),{\b  1951}: 341 (1953). {\i E. Carpathians} ({\i Stanislavskaja Obl}.). Rs (W).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 60. A. rhododendrophila} Buser, {\i Bull. Soc. Nat. Ain }{\b 13}: 24 (1903). Robust, up to 50 cm; stems erect, glabrous except for the lowest internodes. Leaves reniform, glabrous on both surfaces or with sparse hairs beneath, lobed to 1/4-1/3; lobes 9(-11), truncate, with short incisions and 6-12 unequal teeth. Petioles of summer leaves with erecto-patent hairs. Inflorescence large and divaricate, much exceeding the leaves, glabrous. Flowers c. 3 mm wide. •{\i  S.W. & C. Alps, Jura, S.C. France}. Ga He.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 61. A. polonica} Pawl.,{\i  Fragm. Fl. Geobot.}{\b  1}({\b 1}): 55 (1954). Dwarf up to 15 cm; stems ascending, hairy in the lower half or glabrous. Leaves reniform, glabrous or hairy in the folds and at the margin above, sericeous on the veins and on the basal lobes beneath, lobed to 1/4-1/3; lobes 7(-9), truncate, with distinct incisions and 5-6 subequal teeth. Petioles of summer leaves with erecto-patent hairs. Inflorescence somewhat exceeding leaves, glabrous, with erect branches. Flowers 3·5-4·5 mm wide.{\i  Calcicole. • W. Carpathians} ({\i Tatra}). Po.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 62. A. decumbens} Buser,{\i  Bull. Herb. Boiss. }{\b 2}: 44 (1894). Dwarf, with more or less procumbent stems up to 20 cm long, ascending only in inflorescence, subglabrous or hairy on lowest internode and at base of cauline stipules. Leaves reniform to suborbicular, hairy above only in the folds and beneath only on the veins, lobed to c. ½ ; lobes 7-9, rounded or quadrangular, usually with long incisions and with 4-7 long, narrow, acute teeth; cauline leaves with overlapping lobes. Petioles of summer leaves with somewhat deflexed hairs. Inflorescence usually greatly exceeding leaves, glabrous. Flowers 3-4 mm wide; epicalyx-segments less than ½ as long as and narrower than the wide sepals. {\i  Snow patches and damp hollows,} 1500-2600{\i  m. • Alps, Jura}. Au Ga Ge He It.
\par
 
\par

\pard\f0\fs28   {\b 63. A. undulata} Buser,{\i   Bull. Herb. Boiss. }{\b 1, App. 2}: 26 (1893). Medium-sized, rather robust, with procumbent stems up to 40 cm long, often ascending in inflorescence, glabrous except for sparse hairs on the second internode; leaves orbicular, sparsely hairy on both surfaces, lobed to c. 1/2; lobes 9, rounded, with long incisions and 7-9 large, acute teeth; cauline leaves with divergent lobes. Petioles of summer leaves with somewhat deflexed hairs. Inflorescence exceeding leaves, usually glabrous. Flowers 2·5-3 mm; epicalyx-segments 1/2-2/3 as long as sepals; hypanthium rather narrow. •{\i  Alps, Appennini.} Ga Ge He It.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 64. A. rubristipula} Buser in Dörfler,{\i  Herb. Norm. }{\b 36}: 217 (1898). Medium-sized, up to 30 cm; stems hairy up to at least the middle. Leaves sparsely hairy above, sericeous on the veins
\par

\par
58}
\par