{\rtf1\ansi \deff4\deflang1033{\fonttbl{\f4\froman\fcharset0\fprq2 Times New Roman;}{\f31\fnil\fcharset2\fprq2 Math3Mono;}}{\colortbl;\red0\green0\blue0;\red0\green0\blue255;\red0\green255\blue255;\red0\green255\blue0;\red255\green0\blue255;\red255\green0\blue0;\red255\green255\blue0;\red255\green255\blue255;\red0\green0\blue128;\red0\green128\blue128;\red0\green128\blue0;\red128\green0\blue128;\red128\green0\blue0;\red128\green128\blue0;\red128\green128\blue128;\red192\green192\blue192;}{\stylesheet{\widctlpar \f4\fs20\lang2057 \snext0 Normal;}{\*\cs10 \additive Default Paragraph Font;}}{\info{\author dddd}{\operator dddd}{\creatim\yr1998\mo11\dy5\hr14\min6}{\revtim\yr1999\mo1\dy13\hr15\min2}{\version2}{\edmins9}{\nofpages4}{\nofwords905}{\nofchars5162}{\*\company  }{\vern57431}}\widowctrl\ftnbj\aenddoc\hyphcaps0\formshade \fet0\sectd \linex0\endnhere {\*\pnseclvl1\pnucrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl2\pnucltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl3\pndec\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl4\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl5\pndec\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl6\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl7\pnlcrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl8\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl9\pnlcrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}
\pard\plain \widctlpar \f4\fs20\lang2057 {\fs28  beneath, lobed to 1/-1/3 lobes 9(-11), rounded-triangular, with small incisions and 5-7 long, acute teeth. Petioles of summer leaves with patent hairs. Inflorescence only slightly exceeding leaves, glabrous or subglabrous. Flowers 2.5-3 mm. }{\fs28 {\field{\*\fldinst SYMBOL 232 \\f "Math3Mono" \\s 14}{\fldrslt\f31\fs28}}}{\fs28  }{\i\fs28 C. Alps, Jura}{\fs28 . Ge He.
\par  
\par  Related species include:
\par  
\par  }{\b\fs28 A. amphipsila}{\fs28  Juz.,}{\i\fs28  Not.Syst}{\fs28 . }{\i\fs28 (Leningrad)}{\fs28  }{\b\fs28 17}{\fs28 : 252 (1955). }{\i\fs28 C. Ural}{\fs28 . Rs (C).
\par    
\par  }{\b\fs28 A. iremelica}{\fs28  Juz., }{\i\fs28 Not. Syst}{\fs28 . }{\i\fs28 (Leningrad)}{\fs28  }{\b\fs28 14}{\fs28 : 174 (1951). }{\i\fs28 S. Ural}{\fs28 . Rs (C).
\par  
\par  }{\b\fs28 65. A. tirolensis}{\fs28  Buser ex Dalla Torre & Sarnth.,}{\i\fs28  Fl. Tirol}{\fs28  }{\b\fs28 6}{\fs28 (2): 536 (1909). 
\par Robust, up to 50 cm; stems ascending, glabrous or only the 2 lowest internodes hairy. Leaves reniform, sparsely hairy or subglabrous above, hairy beneath only on the veins, lobed to 1/4-1/3; lobes 9(-11), rounded-triangular, overlapping, with short incisions and 8-12 unequal teeth. Petioles of summer leaves with patent hairs. Inflorescence exceeding leaves, glabrous. Flowers 3 mm. }{\fs28 {\field{\*\fldinst SYMBOL 232 \\f "Math3Mono" \\s 14}{\fldrslt\f31\fs28}}}{\fs28  }{\i\fs28 C. & E. Alps. extending to W. Jugoslavia}{\fs28 . Au Ge He Ju.
\par  
\par  Related species include:
\par  
\par  }{\b\fs28 A. semispoliata}{\fs28  Juz., }{\i\fs28 Not. Syst. (Leningrad)}{\fs28  }{\b\fs28 17}{\fs28 : 253 (1955). }{\i\fs28 N. Ural}{\fs28 . Rs (N).
\par  
\par  }{\b\fs28 66. A. tatricola}{\fs28  Pawl., }{\i\fs28 Bull. Int. Acad. Sci. Cracovie ser. B (}{\fs28 1}{\i\fs28 ),}{\fs28  }{\b\fs28 1951}{\fs28  :339 (1951) .
\par Dwarf with more or less procumbent stems up to 15 cm long, hairy up to the first or second branch, but the lowest 1 or 2 internodes glabrous. Leaves orbicular or orbicular- reniform, sparsely hairy on both surfaces, sometimes only on the veins, folds and margins, lobed to 2/5 or almost 1/2; lobes 7(-9), rounded, the middle 3 often larger than the rest, with more or less short incisions and 5-8 usually unequal teeth. Petioles of summer leaves with patent hairs. Inflorescence usually exceeding leaves, usually glabrous. Flowers 3-4.5 mm. Calcicole.}{\fs28 {\field{\*\fldinst SYMBOL 232 \\f "Math3Mono" \\s 14}{\fldrslt\f31\fs28}}}{\fs28  }{\i\fs28 W. Carpathians (Tatra).}{\fs28  Po.
\par 
\par  }{\b\fs28 67. A. heterodopa}{\fs28  Buser, }{\i\fs28 Ber. Schweiz. Bot. Ges}{\fs28 . }{\b\fs28 4}{\fs28 : 73 (1894).
\par  Dwarf to medium-sized, up to 30 cm; stems hairy up to at least the middle; leaves suborbicular, sparsely hairy or glabrescent on both surfaces, lobed to 1/6-1/3; lobes 7(-9), rounded-triangular, with wide teeth; cauline leaves lobed to not more than 1/4; lobes truncate. Inflorescence narrow, exceeding the leaves. Flowers c. 4 mm; hypanthium rounded at base. }{\fs28 {\field{\*\fldinst SYMBOL 232 \\f "Math3Mono" \\s 14}{\fldrslt\f31\fs28}}}{\fs28  }{\i\fs28 S.W. & C. Alps}{\fs28 , }{\i\fs28 Jura,}{\fs28  }{\i\fs28 Appennini.}{\fs28  Ga He It.
\par  
\par  }{\b\fs28 68. A. tenuis}{\fs28  Buser, op. cit. 76 (1894). Like 67 but smaller and more slender; cauline leaves lobed to at least 1/3; lobes ovate; flowers c. 3 mm; hypanthium acute at base. }{\fs28 {\field{\*\fldinst SYMBOL 232 \\f "Math3Mono" \\s 14}{\fldrslt\f31\fs28}}}{\fs28  }{\i\fs28 Pyrenees, Alps, Appennini}{\fs28 . Au Ga Ge He It.
\par  
\par  Related species include:
\par  
\par  }{\b\fs28 A. sectilis}{\fs28  Rothm., }{\i\fs28 Feddes Repert}{\fs28 . 66: 229 (1962). }{\i\fs28 E. Alps}{\fs28 . Au.
\par  
\par  Subser. }{\b\fs28 Subglabrae}{\fs28  H. Lindb. Stems, at least on lowest inter-nodes, and petioles with some appressed or subappressed hairs.
\par  
\par  }{\b\fs28 69. A. glomerulans}{\fs28  Buser, }{\i\fs28 Bull. Herb. Boiss}{\fs28 . }{\b\fs28 1}{\fs28 , App. }{\b\fs28 2}{\fs28 : 30 (1893). 
\par Medium-sized, up to 40 cm, often robust; stems not much exceeding leaves, with subappressed hairs up to the main inflorescence-branches. Leaves reniform to suborbicular, lobed to 1/3-1/4, often undulate when fresh; lobes usually 9, semicircular, often overlapping when dried, with no incisions and 7-9 wide teeth. Petioles and usually both leaf-surfaces with sparse to rather dense, subappressed hairs. Flowers in dense glomeruli; hypanthium and pedicels glabrous. 2n=101-109, c. 144. }{\i\fs28 Wet places, often in snow-patches}{\fs28 . }{\i\fs28 N.}{\fs28  }{\i\fs28 Europe, extending southwards in the mountains to the Pyrenees and C. Alps}{\fs28 . Br Da Fe Ga He ?Hs Is No Rs (N, B, C) Sb Su.
\par  
\par  The indumentum of sub-appressed hairs, which extends into the inflorescence, distinguishes this species from all other widespread N. European species of }{\i\fs28 Ser. Vulgares.
\par 
\par }{\fs28  Related species include:
\par  
\par   }{\b\fs28 A. borealis}{\fs28  Sam. ex Juz. in Pojark., }{\i\fs28 Fl. Murmansk}{\fs28 . }{\b\fs28 4}{\fs28 : 324(1959).
\par  2n= 130-152. }{\i\fs28 Arctic Fennoscandia}{\fs28 . Fe Rs (N) Su.
\par    }{\b\fs28 A. kolaensis}{\fs28  Juz. in Pojark., }{\i\fs28 loc. cit}{\fs28 . (1959). }{\i\fs28 Arctic Russia (Murmanskaja}{\fs28  }{\i\fs28 Obl}{\fs28 .}{\i\fs28 )}{\fs28 . Rs (N).
\par   }{\b\fs28 A. obtusiformis}{\fs28  Alechin in }{\i\fs28 Govoruchin, Fl. Urala}{\fs28  531 (1937). }{\i\fs28 N. Ural}{\fs28 . Rs (N).
\par   }{\b\fs28 A. transpolaris}{\fs28  Juz., }{\i\fs28 Not. Syst. (Leningrad)}{\fs28  }{\b\fs28 16}{\fs28 : 179 (1954). }{\i\fs28 Arctic}{\fs28  }{\i\fs28 Russia (Murmanskaja Obl.).}{\fs28  Rs (N).
\par        
\par  }{\b\fs28 70}{\fs28 . }{\b\fs28 A. camptopoda}{\fs28  Juz., }{\i\fs28 Not. Syst. (Leningrad)}{\fs28  }{\b\fs28 8}{\fs28 : 25 (1938).
\par  Medium-sized, up to 30 cm, with appressed hairs throughout, except on most pedicels; stems ascending, with few large cauline leaves. Leaves reniform, lobed to c. 1/3; lobes 9, semicircular, with long incisions and 6-9 rather acute teeth. Inflorescence lax, few-flowered. Flowers c. 3 mm wide; hypanthium with dense erecto-patent hairs. }{\fs28 {\field{\*\fldinst SYMBOL 232 \\f "Math3Mono" \\s 14}{\fldrslt\f31\fs28}}}{\fs28  }{\i\fs28 Krym.}{\fs28  Rs (K).
\par 
\par  }{\b\fs28 71. A. crebridens}{\fs28  Juz., }{\i\fs28 Op. cit}{\fs28 . }{\b\fs28 27}{\fs28  (1938). Like }{\b\fs28 70}{\fs28  but less densely hairy; leaves orbicular, lobed to c. 1/4; lobes 9-11; hypanthium and pedicels glabrous or subglabrous. }{\fs28 {\field{\*\fldinst SYMBOL 232 \\f "Math3Mono" \\s 14}{\fldrslt\f31\fs28}}}{\fs28  }{\i\fs28 Krym}{\fs28 . Rs (K).
\par     
\par  }{\b\fs28 72. A. buschii}{\fs28  Juz., }{\i\fs28 Acta Inst. Bot. Acad. Sci. URSS}{\fs28  }{\b\fs28 1}{\fs28 : 128  (1933). Dwarf, with appressed hairs throughout except for pedicels and hypanthium; stems up to 10 cm long, slender, ascending. Leaves lobed to c. 1/2; lobes 5, semicircular, with long incisions and 4-6 wide, obtuse teeth. Inflorescence narrow, lax, few-flowered. Flowers c. 4 mm wide; hypanthium and pedicels of lowest flowers sparsely hairy, the rest glabrous. }{\fs28 {\field{\*\fldinst SYMBOL 232 \\f "Math3Mono" \\s 14}{\fldrslt\f31\fs28}}}{\fs28  }{\i\fs28 Krym}{\fs28 . Rs (K).
\par  
\par  Species 70-72, distinguished by the almost complete indumentum of appressed hairs, seem to be related to Caucasian rather than to any other European species.
\par  
\par  }{\b\fs28 73. A. controversa}{\fs28  Buser, }{\i\fs28 Bull. Soc. Nat. Ain}{\fs28  }{\b\fs28 13}{\fs28 : 25 (1903). Medium-sized, up to 30 cm; stems much exceeding leaves, with appressed hairs in lower half. Leaves orbicular, with more or less evenly distributed appressed hairs on both surfaces, lobed to 1/3-2/5; lobes 9, overlapping, semicircular, with 6-8 equal teeth. Petioles with appressed hairs. Inflorescence glabrous. }{\fs28 {\field{\*\fldinst SYMBOL 232 \\f "Math3Mono" \\s 14}{\fldrslt\f31\fs28}}}{\fs28  }{\i\fs28 Jura; W. Alps}{\fs28 . He.
\par  
\par  Related species include:
\par  
\par  }{\b\fs28 A. cleistophylla}{\fs28  Rothm. & O. Schwarz, }{\i\fs28 Feddes Repert}{\fs28 . }{\b\fs28 42}{\fs28 : 395 (1937). }{\i\fs28 N.}{\fs28  }{\i\fs28 Alps (Allgauer Alpen).}{\fs28  Ge.
\par  }{\b\fs28 A. smythiensis}{\fs28  Pawl., }{\i\fs28 Fragm. Fl. Geobot}{\fs28 . }{\b\fs28 1}{\fs28 (1): 52 (1954). }{\i\fs28 W.}{\fs28  }{\i\fs28 Carpathians(Tatra).}{\fs28  Po.
\par  
\par  }{\b\fs28 74. A. wallischii}{\fs28  Pawl., }{\i\fs28 Bull. Int. Acad. Sci. Cracovie ser. B(}{\fs28 1}{\i\fs28 )}{\fs28  }{\b\fs28 1951}{\fs28 : 333 (1953). Dwarf, with slender, procumbent or ascending stems up to 12 cm long, with subappressed hairs in lower half. Leaves reniform, with appressed hairs on folds and near margins above, and with appressed hairs mainly on the veins beneath, lobed up to c. 1/3; lobes 7-9, broadly elliptical, somewhat overlapping, with long incisions, and 4 6 short, wide, obtuse teeth.
\par 
\par 59
\par }}