{\rtf1\ansi \deff4\deflang1033{\fonttbl{\f4\froman\fcharset0\fprq2 Times New Roman;}}{\colortbl;\red0\green0\blue0;\red0\green0\blue255;\red0\green255\blue255;\red0\green255\blue0;\red255\green0\blue255;\red255\green0\blue0;\red255\green255\blue0;\red255\green255\blue255;\red0\green0\blue128;\red0\green128\blue128;\red0\green128\blue0;\red128\green0\blue128;\red128\green0\blue0;\red128\green128\blue0;\red128\green128\blue128;\red192\green192\blue192;}{\stylesheet{\widctlpar \f4\fs20\lang2057 \snext0 Normal;}{\*\cs10 \additive Default Paragraph Font;}}{\info{\author dddd}{\operator dddd}{\creatim\yr1998\mo11\dy11\hr17\min21}{\revtim\yr1998\mo11\dy11\hr17\min21}{\version2}{\edmins0}{\nofpages4}{\nofwords955}{\nofchars5449}{\*\company  }{\vern57431}}\widowctrl\ftnbj\aenddoc\hyphcaps0 \fet0\sectd \linex0 {\*\pnseclvl1\pnucrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl2\pnucltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl3\pndec\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl4\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl5\pndec\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl6\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl7\pnlcrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl8\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl9\pnlcrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}
\pard\plain \ \f4\fs20\lang2057 {\fs28  (}{\b\fs28 b}{\fs28 ) Subsp. }{\b\fs28 obovata}{\fs28  (Waldst. & Kit. ex Willd.) Dost\'e1l,}{\i\fs28  Feddes Repert.}{\b\fs28  79}{\fs28 : 34 (1968). (}{\i\fs28 S. obovata}{\fs28  Waldst. & Kit. ex Willd.): Leaves narrowly obovate, obtuse, entire or with 3-5 crenations at apex. Sepals equalling hypanthium; petals c. 3 mm, obovate, equalling stamens. }{\i\fs28 S.W. Europe}{\fs28 .
\par 
\par }
\pard \qc\ {\b\fs28 4.              Sibiraea}{\fs28              Maxim.
\par }{\fs24 By P.W. Ball
\par 
\par }
\pard \ {\fs28  Like}{\i\fs28  Spiraea}{\fs28  but polygamo-dioecious, not hermaphrodite; inflorescence a terminal panicle; carpels connate at base; follicles dehiscent at the apex of the dorsal suture and along the ventral suture.
\par 
\par }{\b\fs28 1. S. altaiensis}{\fs28  (Laxm.) C. K. Schneider,}{\i\fs28  Ill. Handb. Laubholzk.}{\b\fs28  1}{\fs28 : 485 (1905) (}{\i\fs28 S. laevigata}{\fs28  (L.) Maxim.). Procumbent shrub up to 1 m. Leaves 30-80 \'d7 6-16 mm, oblong, cuneate at the base, obtuse, mucronate, entire, glabrous. Inflorescence c. 3 cm in flower, up to 7 cm in fruit. Sepals c. 1 mm, triangular; petals 2-2\'b75 mm, white; hypanthium tomentose. Fruit 3-4\'b75 mm.}{\i\fs28  Calcareous cliffs and rocks,}{\fs28  800-1600}{\i\fs28  m. W. Jugoslavia}{\fs28 . Ju. (}{\i\fs28 Mountains of C. Asia.}{\fs28 )
\par 
\par  Known in Europe from 3 localities north of Mostar and 3 in the central part of the Velebit. These are separated by over 5000 km from the nearest Asiatic localities in E. Kazakhstan and E. Siberia. The European plant has been described as var.}{\i\fs28  croatica}{\fs28  (Degen) G. Beck, but when the range of variation of the Asiatic populations is considered, it is not possible to separate the European ones.
\par 
\par Sometimes cultivated for ornament. The plant in cultivation is usually erect and somewhat taller, with larger leaves and inflorescence. It is said to be naturalized in France.
\par 
\par }
\pard \qc\ {\b\fs28 5.             Aruncus}{\fs28            L.
\par }{\fs24 By  †T.G.Tutin
\par 
\par }
\pard \ {\fs28 Polygamo-dioecious perennial herbs. Leaves compound, exstipulate. Inflorescence a panicle. Petals white or yellowish-white; stamens numerous; carpels 3, free. Follicles dehiscent along the ventral suture. Seeds several.
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 1. A. dioicus}{\fs28  (Walter) Fernald,}{\i\fs28  Rhodora}{\b\fs28  41}{\fs28 : 423 (1939). (incl.}{\i\fs28  A. sylvestris}{\fs28  Kostel.,}{\i\fs28  A. vulgaris}{\fs28  Rafin., }{\i\fs28 Spiraea aruncus }{\fs28 L.). Rhizome stout, much branched; stems up to 2 m, simple, erect. Leaves up to 1 m, 2-pinnate; leaflets ovate, acute, cuneate to subcordate at base, acutely biserrate. Inflorescence large, pyramidal. Flowers c. 5 mm in diameter, subsessile, usually unisexual. Petals oblong- to obovate-cuneate. Fruit c. 3 mm, pendent.}{\i\fs28  Damp or shady places in mountain districts. From Belgium and the Pyrenees to S. Poland, C. Ukraine and N. Albania.}{\fs28  Al Au Be Cz Ga Ge He Hs Hu It Ju Po Rm Rs (W).
\par 
\par }
\pard \qc\ {\fs28 Subfam.}{\b\fs28  Rosoideae}{\fs28 
\par }
\pard \ {\fs28 Stipules present, usually persistent. Flowers usually 4-, 5- or 6-merous. Hypanthium flat or concave, often with a central carpophore, sometimes campanulate or tubular; epicalyx sometimes present; stamens usually numerous, sometimes enclosed in or adnate to the hypanthium. Basic chromosome number 7, 8 or 9.
\par 
\par }
\pard \qc\ {\b\fs28 6.             Filipendula}{\fs28              Miller
\par }{\fs24 By P.W. Ball
\par 
\par }
\pard \ {\fs28 Perennial, rhizomatous herbs. Leaves pinnate, usually with small leaflets between the larger ones. Inflorescence a cymose panicle. Flowers usually 5- or 6-merous; hypanthium flat or slightly concave; petals pale cream, sometimes purplish beneath; stamens 20-40; carpels 6-12, in one whorl. Fruit a head of achenes.
\par 
\par }
\pard \li200\ {\fs28 Basal leaves with at least 8 pairs of large leaflets; leaflets not  
\par   more than 2 cm; petals 5-9 mm ..................................................... }{\b\fs28 1. vulgaris}{\fs28 
\par Basal leaves with not more than 5 pairs of large leaflets; leaflets  
\par   2 cm or more; petals 2-5 mm ......................................................... }{\b\fs28 2. ulmaria}{\fs28 
\par 
\par }
\pard \ {\fs28    }{\b\fs28 1. F. vulgaris}{\fs28  Moench, Meth. 663 (1794) (}{\i\fs28 F. hexapetala}{\fs28  Gilib., }{\i\fs28 Spiraea filipendula}{\fs28  L.). Subglabrous or sparsely pubescent; stems up to 80 cm, usually simple and with few leaves; roots bearing ovoid tubers. Basal leaves with 8-25 pairs of large leaflets; large leaflets 0\'b75-2 cm, oblong in outline, pinnatifid, the lobes often toothed. Inflorescence 3-10 cm, wider than long. Petals usually 6, 5-9 mm, purplish beneath; stamens about equalling petals. Achenes 3-4 mm, erect, pubescent. 2n = 14, 16.}{\i\fs28  Dry grassland. Most of Europe, northwards to c}{\fs28 . 64\'b0}{\i\fs28  N. in Norway}{\fs28 . Al Au Be Br Bu Cz Da Fe Ga Ge Gr Hb He Ho Hs Hu It Ju Lu No Po Rm Rs (N, B, C, W, K, E) Su Tu.
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 2. F. ulmaria}{\fs28  (L.) Maxim.,}{\i\fs28  Acta Horti Petrop.}{\b\fs28  6}{\fs28 (}{\b\fs28 1}{\fs28 ): 251 (1879) (}{\i\fs28 Spiraea ulmaria}{\fs28  L.). Pubescent to tomentose; stems 50-200 cm, simple or branched, leafy; roots not tuberous. Basal leaves with up to 5 pairs of large leaflets; large leaflets 2-8 cm, ovate-oblong to ovate-suborbicular, variously toothed or shallowly lobed. Inflorescence 5-25 cm, usually longer than wide. Petals 5(-6), 2-5 mm; stamens exceeding petals. Achenes c. 2 mm, spirally twisted. 2n = 14, 16, 24.}{\i\fs28  Throughout Europe except some of the islands and much of the Mediterranean region.}{\fs28  All except Az Bl Co Cr Rs (K) Sa Sb Si Tu.
\par 
\par Variable in the indumentum and toothing of the leaflets. The following subspecies appear to be reasonably distinct.
\par 
\par }
\pard \li200\ {\fs28 1 Leaflets green with sparse, long, straight hairs beneath
\par     ........................................................................................ (}{\b\fs28 c}{\fs28 ) Subsp. }{\b\fs28 denudata}{\fs28 
\par 1 Leaflets with crispate hairs and usually white-tomentose beneath
\par 2 Leaflets crenate-serrulate to shallowly biserrate; achenes glabrous
\par    ........................................................................................... (}{\b\fs28 a}{\fs28 ) Subsp. }{\b\fs28 ulmaria}{\fs28  
\par 2 Leaflets deeply biserrate or shallowly lobed with serrate lobes;
\par   achenes pubescent ........................................................... (}{\b\fs28 b}{\fs28 ) Subsp. }{\b\fs28 picbaueri}{\fs28 
\par 
\par }
\pard \ {\fs28  (}{\b\fs28 a}{\fs28 ) Subsp. }{\b\fs28 ulmaria}{\fs28 : Stem up to 200 cm, glabrous at least below. Leaflets ovate to ovate-suborbicular, plane, crenate-serrulate to shallowly biserrate, acute with a broadly triangular apex, sparsely to densely white-tomentose beneath. Inflorescence lax. Achenes glabrous.}{\i\fs28  Usually in damp or wet places. Throughout the range of the species}{\fs28 .
\par  (}{\b\fs28 b}{\fs28 ) Subsp. }{\b\fs28 picbaueri}{\fs28  (Podp.) Smejkal,}{\i\fs28  Preslia}{\b\fs28  38}{\fs28 : 253 (1966) (}{\i\fs28 F. stepposa}{\fs28  Juz.): Stem not more than 100 cm, tomentose. Leaflets ovate to ovate-oblong, the margin crispate, deeply biserrate or shallowly lobed with serrate lobes, acuminate or acute with a long, narrowly triangular apex, always densely white-tomentose beneath. Inflorescence dense. Achenes pubescent. }{\i\fs28 Relatively dry grassland, steppes and scrub.  From E. Austria and S. Czechoslovakia to Bulgaria; S.E. Russia}{\fs28 . 
\par  (}{\b\fs28 c}{\fs28 ) Subsp. }{\b\fs28 denudata}{\fs28  (J. & C. Presl) Hayek,}{\i\fs28  Fl. Steierm. }{\b\fs28 1}{\fs28 : 872 (1909) (}{\i\fs28 F. denudata}{\fs28  (J. & C. Presl) Fritsch): Stem up to 200 cm, glabrous or subglabrous. Leaflets ovate to ovate-oblong, plane, deeply biserrate or shallowly lobed with serrate lobes, acuminate or acute, with a long, narrowly triangular apex, green and sparsely
\par 
\par 6}
\par }