{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 Petioles usually with rather dense, subappressed hairs. Inflorescence lax, few-flowered, glabrous. Flowers c. 4 mm wide; hypanthium narrow, attenuate into pedicel.{\i  Wet granite rocks. • W. Carpathians }({\i Tatra}). Cz Po.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 75. A. connivens} Buser, {\i Bull. Herb. Boiss. }{\b 2}: 107 (1894) (incl.{\i  A. subconnivens} Pawl.). Medium-sized, up to 30 cm; stems with appressed hairs in lower half. Leaves reniform to suborbicular, usually somewhat sericeous above, with appressed hairs at least in folds and towards the margin, usually subglabrous beneath except for veins which have subappressed hairs, lobed to 1/4-1/3; lobes 7-9, ovate-triangular, with short incisions (often more or less obscured by overlapping margins of lobes) and 7-10 narrow, acute, equal, connivent teeth. Inflorescence glabrous, much exceeding leaves. Flowers 3-4 mm wide. •{\i  Principal mountain ranges of S. & C. Europe from the Pyrenees to the Carpathians and S. Bulgaria.} Au Bu Cz Ga Ge He Hs It Ju Po Rm ?Rs (W).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Related species include:
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b  A. czywczynensis}  Pawl., {\i Bull. Int. Acad. Sci. Cracovie} ser. B(l), {\b 1951}: 334 (1953).{\i  E. Carpathians }({\i Civcinskye Gory}). Rm Rs (W).
\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b  A. racemulosa}  Buser, {\i Bull. Herb. Boiss.}{\b  1, App. 2}: 31 (1893).{\i  S. W. Alps} ({\i Haute Savoie}). Ga.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 76. A. baltica} Sam. ex Juz. in Majevski,{\i  Fl. Sred. Ross.} ed. 7, 449 (1940) ({\i A. nebulosa} Sam.). Medium-sized, rather robust, up to 40 cm. Leaves suborbicular, glabrous above, subglabrous beneath except for veins which have subappressed hairs throughout, lobed to c. ¼ ; lobes 9-11, ovate-triangular to semicircular, with short but distinct incisions and 7-9 acute, equal, connivent teeth. Petioles and lower half of stems usually with rather dense, appressed or subappressed hairs. Inflorescence lax, glabrous; flowers c. 4 mm wide.{\i  N.E. Europe, extending to E. Poland.} Fe Po Rs (N, B, C) Su.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Related species include:
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b A. psiloneura} Juz., {\i Acta Inst. Bot. Acad. Sci. URSS}{\b  1}: 129 (1933).{\i  C. Ural.} Rs (C).
\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b  A. stichotricha} Juz., {\i Not. Syst.} ({\i Leningrad}){\b  14}: 176 (1951).{\i  C. Russia} ({\i Tatarskaja A.S.S.R}.). Rs (C).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 77. A. wichurae} (Buser) Stefansson, {\i Fl. Ísl.} 135 (1901). Like {\b 76} but rather small, up to 30 cm; stems slender, usually glabrous above the second or third internode; leaves orbicular; lobes with deeper incisions. 2n = 103-106. •{\i   N. Europe, southwards to N. England and the Sudeten mountains.} Br Fa Fe Is No Po Rs (N, ?B) Su.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Related species include:
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b  A. oxyodonta} (Buser) C. G. Westerlund,{\i  Redog. Allm. Lärov. Norr.-Söderköping }{\b 1906-7}: 12 (1907). {\i C. Scandinavia.} No Su.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 78. A. murbeckiana} Buser,{\i  Bot. Not. }{\b 1906}: 142 (1906). Like {\b 76} but stems often hairy up to the inflorescence-branches; leaves reniform, with wide sinus; lobes 9, with no incisions and rather wider teeth. 2n = 102-109.{\i  Iceland; Fennoscandia; Ural.} Fe Is No Rs (N, C) Su.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Related species include:
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b  A. turkulensis}  Pawl.,{\i  Bull. Int. Acad. Sci. Cracovie} ser. B(1), {\b 1951}: 335 (1953). {\i E. Carpathians }({\i Stanislavskaja Obl.}). Rs (W).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 79. A. acutidens} Buser,{\i  Bull. Herb. Boiss. }{\b 2}: 104 (1894). Like {\b 76} but usually smaller, up to 25 cm; stems hairy only on lowest two internodes; leaves lobed to 2/5(-1/2); lobes with no incisions and very narrow, acuminate teeth. •{\i  Alps.} Au Ga Ge He It.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Records of this species for the Carpathians are doubtful.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Related species include:
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b  A. acuminatidens} Buser,{\i  Bull. Herb. Boiss.} ser. 2, {\b 2}: 624 (1902). {\i C. Alps}. He.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 76-79} have sometimes been treated as a single variable species, {\i A. acutidens}, and there is unusual taxonomic difficulty in the group. Nevertheless the regional variation reflected in the present treatment seems very significant, and well-grown specimens can usually be assigned to one of the four widespread species here adopted.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 80. A. reniformis} Buser, {\i Alchim. Valais.} 23 (1894). Robust; stems up to 40 cm, ascending, usually not greatly exceeding leaves, with subappressed hairs on lower half. Leaves reniform, with wide sinus, thick, glabrous above, with subappressed hairs beneath only on veins, very shallowly lobed to c. 1/5; lobes 9, short, wide, obtuse, with no incisions and 7-9 rather wide, subequal teeth. Petioles with more or less dense, appressed hairs. Inflorescence diffuse, with divaricate branches. Flowers 4-5 mm wide; sepals up to 2 mm, not longer than wide, rounded. •{\i  Alps; Sudeten Mountains; W. Carpathians; mountains of Jugoslavia}. Au Cz Ga Ge It Ju Po.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Resembles species of Subser.{\i  Glabrae }in robust habit and texture of leaves. Plants from the W. Carpathians previously referred to this species have very recently been distinguished as{\b  A. obsoleta} Frohner, {\i Preslia}{\b  38}: 323 (1966). They have leaf-lobes with very unequal teeth and triangular, acute sepals longer than wide.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 81. A. lineata} Buser, {\i Alchim. Valais.} 27 (1894). Like {\b 80} but leaves usually hairy on basal lobes beneath; leaf-lobes with small, equal teeth; flowers 3-3·5 mm wide. •{\i  Pyrenees; Vosges; Alps; mountains of W. part of Balkan peninsula.} Al Au Ga Ge He Hs It Ju.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Rothmaler gives this species for the Carpathians without more precise indication.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 82. A. obtusa} Buser, {\i op. cit.} 22 (1894). Like {\b 80} but stems usually greatly exceeding leaves; leaves reniform to suborbicular with rather narrow sinus, lobed to (1/5-)1/4-1/3; inflorescence narrow, with rather dense glomeruli; flowers 3-4 mm wide. 2n = c. 103.{\i  N.E. Europe; mountains of C. & S. Europe extending southwards to the Maritime Alps.} Au Cz Fe Ga Ge He It Ju Po Rm Rs (N, B, C, W) Su.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Plants referable to {\b 82} or the related species occur in the Balkan peninsula, but their exact identification is uncertain.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Related species include:
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b A. effusa}  Buser,{\i  op. cit.} 24 (1894). {\i Cevennes; Jura; S. Alps; Appennini}. Ga He It.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b  A. impexa}  Buser,{\i  op. cit.} 26 (1894).{\i  Jura; W. & C. Alps; Appennini. }Au ?Ga Ge He It.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b 83. A. glabra} Neygenf.,{\i  Enchirid. Bot. Siles.} 67 (1821) ({\i A. alpestris} auct.). Large, robust, up to 60 cm; stems much exceeding leaves, usually glabrous except on lowest 1(-2) internodes, which are usually sericeous with appressed hairs. Leaves reniform to suborbicular, glabrous except for appressed hairs on distal half of main veins beneath, lobed to c. ¼; lobes 9-11, triangular-ovate with no incisions and 7-9 very unequal, rather wide teeth. Petioles with rather sparse, appressed hairs. Inflorescence rather
\par

\par
60}
\par