{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 narrow; flowers 3-4 mm wide; sepals triangular, acute, longer than wide. 2n = 96, c. 100, 102-110. N. & C. Europe, extending southwards in the mountains to the Pyrenees and N. Balkan peninsula. Au Be Br Bu Cz Da ?Fa Fe Ga Ge Hb He Ho Hs Hu Is It Ju No Po Rm Rs (N, B, C, W) Su.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Very variable, particularly in habit and leaf-shape, but a satisfactory taxonomic treatment is not yet possible.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Related species include:
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b  A. boleslai} Pawl., {\i Fragm. Fl. Geobot. }{\b 1}({\b 1}): 49 (1954). {\i W. Carpathians }({\i Tatra}). Cz Po.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b  A. cunctatrix} Juz., {\i Not. Syst.} ({\i Leningrad}) {\b 16}: 181 (1954).{\i  N. Ural.} Rs (N, C).
\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b  A. glabriformis} Juz.,{\i  Not. Syst.} ({\i Leningrad}){\b  14}: 178 (1951). {\i N. Ural.} Rs (N, C).
\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b  A. paeneglabra} Juz., {\i op. cit.} 179 (1951).{\i  C. Ural}. Rs (C).
\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b  A. ursina} Frohner,{\i  Bot. Jahrb}{\b . 83}: 389 (1965). {\i Mountains of E. Austria, W. Czechoslovakia and S. Germany}. Au Cz Ge.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Subser.{\i  Glabrae} Rothm. Petioles and stems entirely glabrous (occasionally with a few hairs, especially on late summer petioles).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  With the exception of{\b  84}, which Juzepczuk included in Subser. {\i Hirsutae}, this subseries is confined to the main mountain ranges of S. and C. Europe from Spain to the Balkan peninsula.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 84. A. glabricaulis} H.Lindb.,{\i  Acta Soc. Sci. Fenn.}{\b  37}({\b 10}): 3 (1909). Medium-sized, up to 35 cm; stems glabrous, usually only slightly exceeding leaves. Leaves suborbicular, with sparse patent hairs above, glabrous beneath except for sparse hairs distally on the main veins; lobes 7-9, short, broadly triangular, with short incisions and 5-8 short, wide teeth. Inflorescence narrow, completely glabrous, with rather few flowers 1·5-3 mm wide.{\i  N.E. Europe.} Rs (N, B, C) [Fe].
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b A. parcipila} Juz.,{\i  Not. Syst.} ({\i Leningrad}){\b  14}: 175 (1951), described from C. Ural (Osljanka), is said to differ from {\b 84} in the sparse, patent hairs on the summer petioles, and was therefore included in Subser.{\i  Heteropodae} by Juzepczuk. Some material determined by Juzepczuk as this species has entirely glabrous petioles, however, and cannot be distinguished from{\b  84}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 85. A. versipila} Buser,{\i  Bull. Herb. Boiss.}{\b  2}: 112 (1894). Like {\b 84} but stems greatly exceeding leaves; leaves reniform; lobes without incisions; leaves sericeous with subappressed hairs above ; flowers 3-4 mm wide. •{\i  Jura, Alps.} Au Ga Ge He.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Related species include:
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b  A. aggregata} Buser, {\i Alchim. Valais.} 17 (1894). {\i S. W. & C. Alps, Jura.} Ga He.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b A. versipiloides} Pawl., {\i Bull. Int. Acad. Sci. Cracovie} ser. B(l), {\b 1951}: 330 (1953). {\i W. Carpathians} ({\i Tatra}). Po.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 86. A. coriacea} Buser, {\i Not. Alchim. }19 (1891). Large, robust, glabrous, up to 50 cm, not turning reddish in late summer; stems usually greatly exceeding leaves. Leaves more or less orbicular, often very large (up to 15 × 17 cm), thick, lobed to c.1/5(1/4); lobes 9-11, semicircular, with short incisions and 6-8 very wide, obtuse, unequal teeth. Inflorescence narrow, rather few-flowered. Flowers c.4 mm wide; hypanthium c. 2 mm, truncate at base. •{\i  Mountains of S.W. and S.C. Europe, from Spain to W. Austria.} Au Ga &e He Hs ?It.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 87. A. inconcinna} Buser, {\i Bull. Herb. Boiss.}{\b  1, App. 2}: 34 (1893). Like {\b 86} but plant turning reddish-brown in late summer; leaf lobes without incisions; inflorescence spreading. •{\i  Mountains of S.W. and S.C. Europe from C. France to W. Austria.} Au Ga Ge He ?It.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Related species include:
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b  A. subtatrica} Pawl.,{\i  Bull. Int. Acad. Sci. Cracovie} ser. B(1), {\b 1951}: 320 (1953).{\i  W. Carpathians }({\i Tatra}). Po.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 88. A. stanislaae} Pawl.,{\i  Bull. Int. Acad. Sci. Cracovie} ser. B(1), {\b 1951}: 317 (1953). Like {\b 86} but up to 30 cm, turning dull reddish-brown in late summer; outer leaves suborbicular, very shallowly lobed to c. 1/7, inner leaves reniform, lobed to c. 1/5; lobes with acute teeth; hypanthium of flower up to 2·7 mm, narrowing gradually to pedicel. •{\i  W. Carpathians} ({\i Tatra}). Cz Po.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 89. A. trunciloba} Buser, {\i Alchim. Valais.} 15 (1894). Medium sized, glabrous, up to 35 cm, becoming dark reddish-brown in summer; stems slender, greatly exceeding leaves. Leaves reniform to suborbicular, thin, lobed to 1/4-1/3; lobes 9(-11), semicircular, subtruncate, with long incisions and 6-8 short, wide, acute teeth. Inflorescence spreading. Flowers 3-3·5 mm wide. •{\i  Jura, Alps, Appennini.} Au Ga ?Ge He It.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 90. A. sinuata} Buser, {\i Bull. Herb. Boiss.}{\b  2}: 102 (1894). Like {\b 89} but leaves lobed to 1/3(2/5); lobes narrow, with very acute teeth; inflorescence narrow; flowers c. 4 mm wide. •{\i  Alps, Appennini.} Au Ga He It.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 91. A. straminea} Buser,{\i  Alchim. Valais.} 13 (1894) (incl. {\i A. kotulae} Pawl.). Medium-sized, up to 40 cm, glabrous, rather slender, not or scarcely becoming reddish-brown in summer; stems greatly exceeding leaves. Leaves reniform, with wide sinus, thin, lobed to c. ¼; lobes 9-11, more or less triangular, with 7-9 narrow, acute, equal teeth. Inflorescence narrow. Flowers c. 3 mm wide. •{\i  Alps; W. Carpathians; mountains of N. part of Balkan peninsula}. Au Bu Cz Ga Ge He Hs It Ju Po.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Related species include:
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b  A. longiuscula} Buser, {\i Bull. Herb. Boiss.}{\b  2}: 101 (1894). {\i W.C. Alps} ({\i Valais}). He.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b  A. squarrosula} Buser,{\i  Mém. Soc. Fribourg. Sci. Nat.} ({\i Bot.}) {\b 1}: 126 (1902). {\i W. Alps.} He.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 92. A. aequidens} Pawl., Fragm. Fl. Geobot. 1(1): 46 (1954). Dwarf, glabrous, with procumbent stems up to 15 cm long. Leaves orbicular, lobed to 1/4-1/3; lobes 7-9, semicircular, with no incisions and (4-)5-8 subequal, obtuse or subacute teeth. Inflorescence narrow, many-flowered; flowers 3-4·5 mm wide. W. Carpathians (Tatra). Cz Po.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Related species (dwarf, with relatively short leaf-lobes) include:
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b  A. sokolowskii}  Pawl.,{\i  Bull. Int. Acad. Sci. Cracovie} ser. B(1), {\b 1951}: 328 (1953).{\i  W. Carpathians} ({\i Tatra}). Cz Po.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b  A. zmudae}  Pawl.,{\i  loc. cit.} (1953). {\i W. Carpathians} ({\i Tatra}). Po.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 93. A. demissa} Buser, {\i Bull. Herb. Boiss.}{\b  2}: 96 (1894). Dwarf, glabrous; stems procumbent or somewhat ascending, up to 25 cm long, not or scarcely exceeding leaves. Leaves suborbicular, lobed to c. 2/5; lobes 7-9, obovate, more or less truncate, with distinct incisions, and 4-6 narrow, acute, equal, somewhat divergent teeth. Inflorescence narrow. Flowers 3·5-4 mm wide.{\i  Wet places, often snow-patches. • Pyrenees; Alps; Appennini.} Au Ga He ?Hs It.
\par

\par
61}
\par