{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 94. A. pseudincisa} Pawl.,{\i  Bull. Int. Acad. Sci. Cracovie} ser. B(1), {\b 1951}: 326 (1953). Like {\b 93} but leaves reniform to suborbicular; lobes oblong-elliptical, with acute, unequal and more or less connivent teeth; inflorescence spreading; flowers up to 5 mm wide. {\i Wet places on mountains, above }1500{\i  m. • W. Carpathians} ({\i Tatra}). Cz Po.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Species related to {\b 93} and {\b 94} include:
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b A. fissimima} Buser, {\i Bull. Herb. Boiss.}{\b  2}: 99 (1894). {\i W.C. Alps }({\b Valais}).He.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b A. semisecta} Buser, {\i op. cit.} 94 (1894) ({\i A. vulgaris} subsp.{\i  semisecta} (Buser) Gams). {\i Alps, Jura.} Au Ga He.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 95. A. longana} Buser, {\i Bull. Herb. Boiss.} ser. 2, {\b 1}: 468 (1907) (incl.{\i  A. marcailhouorum }Buser). Like {\b 93} but leaves reniform; lobes ovate, with no incisions and short, rather wide, acute teeth.{\i  Wet places, often snow-patches. • Pyrenees; S. & E. Alps.} Au Ga He.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Related species (leaf-lobes long, without incisions) include:
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b A. frigens} Buser ex Jaquet,{\i  Mém. Soc. Fribourg. Sci. Nat.} ({\i Bot.}) {\b 1}: 129(1902) ({\i A. frigida} Buser, non Weddell). {\i W.C. Alps.} Ga He.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Subsect. {\i Calycanthum} Rothm. Very variable in habit and hairiness. Leaves rarely lobed to more than ½. Epicalyx-segments at least as long as sepals, and usually almost as wide; both epicalyx-segments and sepals patent after anthesis, giving the appearance of an 8-pointed star. Hypanthium distinctly shorter than mature achene, and usually shorter than sepals. Flowers usually yellowish.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 This subsection is confined to the mountains of S. & C. Europe and Ural.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Series{\i  Elatae} Rothm. At least the lower internodes and some petioles with erecto-patent, patent, or deflexed hairs.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 96. A. achtarowii} Pawl.,{\i  Bull. Int. Acad. Sci. Cracovie }ser. B (1), {\b 1951}: 301 (1953). Medium-sized, up to 45 cm; stems with patent hairs up to and including inflorescence-branches. Leaves suborbicular, with patent hairs, sparse above and dense beneath, lobed to 1/5-1/4; lobes 9-11, semicircular, with no incisions and 8-10 acute teeth. Petioles with patent hairs. Pedicels glabrous or with sparse hairs. Flowers 4·5-6·5(-7·2) mm wide; epicalyx-segments with (1-)2-4(-5) teeth, much longer than sepals; hypanthium glabrous or subglabrous. •{\i  Bulgaria} ({\i Stara Planina}). Bu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 97. A. jumrukczalica} Pawl.,{\i  op. cit.} 305 (1953). Like {\b 96} but up to 20 cm;leaves lobed to c. 1/3; lobes 7-9; flowers 3·5-4·5 mm wide; epicalyx-segments entire or with 1(-2) teeth, not or slightly longer than sepals. •{\i  Bulgaria }({\i Stara Planina}). Bu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 98. A. mollis} (Buser) Rothm.,{\i  Feddes Repert.}{\b  33}: 347 (1934). Large, up to 80 cm, robust, usually with dense, patent hairs throughout, except on pedicels. Leaves often very large (up to 13 × 15 cm), lobed to 1/8-1/4; lobes 9-11, semicircular, with 7-9 wide, ovate teeth. Pedicels glabrous or subglabrous. Flowers 3·5-5 mm wide; epicalyx-segments entire or with one tooth; hypanthium with patent hairs. {\i E. Carpathians.} Rm Rs (W).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Very widely cultivated in gardens in Europe.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 99. A. catachnoa} Rothm., {\i Feddes Repert}. ({\i Beih.}) {\b 100}: 66 (1938). Rather large, up to 50 cm; stems with dense, patent hairs up to inflorescence. Leaves orbicular, glabrous above, with sparse hairs or subglabrous beneath, lobed to 1/5-1/4; lobes 11-13, ovate-triangular, with no incisions and 8-12 ovate, obtuse and apiculate teeth. Petioles with dense patent hairs. Inflorescence compact, with dense glomeruli. Pedicels glabrous. Flowers 3·5-4 mm wide; epicalyx-segents entire, scarcely longer than sepals, hypanthium glabrous or with sparse hairs. •{\i  E. Albania; Bulgaria.} Al Bu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 100. A. viridiflora} Rothm.,{\i  op. cit.} 73 (1938). Rather large, up to 50 cm; stems with dense erecto-patent hairs below, and patent hairs above and on the inflorescence-branches. Leaves suborbicular, with dense patent hairs on both surfaces, lobed to c. ¼ lobes 9-11, ovate-triangular, with no incisions and 6-9 large subacute, unequal teeth. Petioles with dense, erecto-patent or subappressed hairs. Pedicels often glabrous. Glomeruli lax. Flowers 3·5-4 mm wide, greenish; hypanthium with dense, patent hairs. •{\i C. Greece }({\i Olimbos}). Gr.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 101. A. albanica} Rothm.,{\i  op. cit.} 76 (1938). Slender, up to 30 cm; stem,including the inflorescence-branches, with patent hairs. Leaves suborbicular, subglabrous or glabrous above and with rather sparse patent hairs beneath, lobed to 1/5-1/4; lobes 9, truncate, with no incisions and 4-7 connivent teeth. Petioles with patent hairs. Pedicels often glabrous. Glomeruli dense. Flowers 3-4 mm wide; hypanthium with patent hairs. •{\i  Albania.} Al.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 102. A. phegophila} Juz., {\i Not. Syst.} ({\i Leningrad}) {\b 16}: 182 (1954). Like {\b 101} but with rather dense patent hairs throughout, including pedicels. •{\i  Krym.} Rs (K).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 103. A. indivisa} (Buser) Rothm.,{\i  Feddes Repert.}{\b  33}: 346 (1934) ({\i A. acutiloba }Steven subsp.{\i  indivisa} (Buser) Hayek). Medium sized, up to 45 cm; stems with patent hairs up to and including main inflorescence-branches. Leaves suborbicular, glabrous above, with dense patent hairs beneath, lobed to 1/4-1/3; lobes 11, ovate-elliptical, with no incisions and 8-10 wide teeth. Petioles with dense patent hairs. Ultimate inflorescence-branches and pedicels glabrous. Flowers 3·5-4 mm; hypanthium glabrous or with sparse hairs at base. •{\i  Mountains of Balkan peninsula }Bu Gr Ju.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 104. A. heterotricha} Rothm.,{\i  Feddes Repert. }({\i Beih.}) {\b 100}: 75 (1938). Like {\b 103} but up to 60 cm; basal leaves reniform, lobed to 1/5-1/4, with dense, patent hairs on both surfaces; upper cauline leaves glabrous above; hypanthium hairy. •{\i  Mountains of N. Greece and S. Jugoslavia}. Gr Ju.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 105. A. peristerica} Pawl., {\i Bull. Int. Acad. Sci. Cracovie} ser. B(1),{\b 1951}: 307 (1953). Medium-sized, up to 40 cm; stems with dense patent hairs up to main inflorescence-branches. Leaves glabrous above or with sparse hairs on margins and at base; with dense patent hairs beneath, lobed to 2/5-1/2; lobes 9-11, ovate, with long incisions and 5-7 acute teeth. Pedicels glabrous. Flowers 3·5-4·5 mm wide; hypanthium with sparse hairs at base or glabrous. •{\i  S. Jugoslavia} ({\i Perister}). Ju.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 106. A. aroanica} (Buser) Rothm.,{\i  Feddes Repert.}{\b  33}: 345 (1934). Medium-sized, up to 50 cm; stems with erecto-patent hairs in lower half. Leaves glabrous above, with appressed hairs beneath; lobes c. 9, ovate, with no incisions and 8 or 9 broadly ovate teeth. Petioles of outer leaves glabrous, of inner (summer) leaves with erecto-patent hairs. Inflorescence-branches and pedicels glabrous. Flowers 4·5-6·5 mm wide; hypanthium with sparse patent hairs. •{\i  S. Greece} ({\i Killini}). Gr.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 107. A. zapalowiczii} Pawl.,{\i  Bull. Int. Acad. Sci. Cracovie} ser. B(l),{\b 1951}: 309 (1953). Medium-sized, up to 40 cm, with rather
\par

\par
62}
\par