{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 dense patent or slightly deflexed hairs, except for the ultimate inflorescence branches and pedicels which are glabrous. Leaves reniform to suborbicular, lobed to 1/3-2/5; lobes 9(-11), more or less semicircular, with no incisions and 7-11 large, wide, obtuse teeth. Inflorescence narrow. Flowers 3·5-5 mm wide; epicalyx-segments usually slightly shorter and always much narrower than sepals, and both slightly longer than hypanthium; hypanthium glabrous or with sparse patent hairs. •{\i  E. Carpathians.} Rm Rs (W).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Related species include:
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b  A. bandericensis} Pawl., {\i Acta Soc. Bot. Polon.}{\b  22}: 247 (1953). {\i S.W. Bulgaria }({\i Pirin}). Bu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   {\b 107} and {\b 108} are somewhat intermediate between Subsect.{\i  Calycanthum} and Subsect. {\i Heliodrosium} in flower structure.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Series {\i Calycinae} Buser. Hairs, if present on stems and petioles, subappressed or appressed.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 108. A. haraldii} Juz., {\i Acta Inst. Bot. Acad. Sci. URSS}{\b  1}: 130 (1933). Medium-sized, up to 30 cm, with appressed hairs throughout except on upper surface of some leaves, and pedicels and hypanthium of upper flowers, which are glabrous. Leaves reniform to suborbicular, lobed to about ¼; lobes 7-9, arcuate to semicircular, with short or no incisions, and 7-10 acute, somewhat connivent teeth. Inflorescence narrow, with lax glomeruli. Flowers 3-4 mm; epicalyx-segments slightly shorter and much narrower than sepals; hypanthium about as long as sepals. •{\i  S. Ural.} Rs (C).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Easily distinguished from all other European species of Subsect.{\i  Calycanthum} by the appressed hairs in the inflorescence.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 109. A. fallax} Buser, {\i Ber. Schweiz. Bot. Ges.}{\b  4}: 65 (1894). Medium-sized, with slender stems up to 30 cm. Leaves suborbicular, glabrous above, subglabrous or with sparse appressed hairs beneath but with dense appressed hairs, often sericeous, on the veins, lobed up to 1/3; lobes 7-9, broadly triangular, with no incisions and 6-10 short teeth. Petioles and lower half of stems with more or less dense, appressed hairs. Inflorescence glabrous. Flowers up to 4 mm wide; sepals slightly larger than epicalyx segments.{\i  Usually calcicole. • Pyrenees, S. Alps, Appennini, Balkan peninsula.} Au Ga Ge Gr He Hs It Ju.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 110. A. sericoneura} Buser,{\i  op. cit.} 68 (1894). Like {\b 109} but more robust; leaves more shallowly lobed; lobes 9-11, more truncate; flowers 4-5 mm wide. •{\i  C. &E. Alps; S. Carpathians}. Au He Rm.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Related species include:
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b  A. babiogorensis} Pawl.,{\i  Fragm. Fl. Geobot. }{\b 3}({\b 1}): 34 (1957). {\i W. Carpathians} ({\i Tatra}). Cz Po.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b  A. giewontica} Pawl.,{\i  op. cit.} 31 (1957). {\i W. Carpathians} ({\i Tatra}). Cz Po.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b  A. jasiewiczii} Pawl., {\i op. cit.} 41 (1957). {\i W. Carpathians} ({\i Tatra}). Cz Po.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b  A. pycnoloba} Juz.,{\i  Not. Syst.} ({\i Leningrad}) {\b 14}: 183 (1951).{\i  C. Ural.} Rs (C).
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b A. sericoneuroides} Pawl.,{\i  Fragm. Fl. Geobot.}{\b  3}({\b 1}): 37 (1957). {\i W. Carpathians} ({\i Tatra}). Cz Po.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 111. A. flexicaulis} Buser, {\i Bull. Herb. Boiss. }{\b 1, App. 2}: 32 (1893) ({\i A. glaberrima }subsp.{\i  flexicaulis} (Buser) Gams). Large, robust, stems up to 60 cm. Leaves suborbicular, glabrous above, with very sparse, subappressed hairs beneath and not sericeous on the veins, lobed to not more than ¼ ; lobes 9-11, wide, rounded, with no incisions and 6-10 small teeth. Petioles and main inflorescence-branches with appressed or subappressed hairs. Flowers c. 4 mm wide; sepals shorter than hypanthium. •{\i  Alps, Jura}. Ga Ge He.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 112. A. gorcensis} Pawl.,{\i  Bull. Int. Acad. Sci. Cracovie} ser. B(1), {\b 1951}: 311 (1953). Like {\b 111} but leaves reniform with very wide sinus, lobed to not more than 1/5; lobes often triangular; flowers 4-5 mm wide; sepals about as long as hypanthium. •{\i  W. Carpathians; C. Jugoslavia} ({\i Bosna}). Cz Ju Po.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Related species-include:
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b  A. damianicensis}  Pawl.,{\i  Acta Soc. Bot. Polon.}{\b  22}: 248 (1953). {\i S.W. Bulgaria} ({\i Pirin}). Bu.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b  A. vranicensis}  Pawl., {\i op. cit.} 250 (1953). {\i C. Jugoslavia} ({\i Bosna}). Ju.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 113. A. cuspidens} Buser, {\i Bull. Herb. Boiss.}{\b  2}: 106 (1894). Small, with slender, ascending stems up to 25 cm, with appressed hairs on lowest 1-2(-3) internodes. Leaves reniform to suborbicular glabrous above, with sometimes sparse subappressed hairs beneath, at least on basal lobes, and usually along whole length of veins, lobed up to 1/3; lobes 7-9, semicircular or somewhat truncate, with short but distinct incisions and 5-7 acute, connivent teeth. Inflorescence small, glabrous. Flowers 4-6 mm wide. •{\i  E. & C. Alps.} Au Ge He.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Related species include:
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b   A. asteroantha} Rothm., {\i Feddes Repert.} ({\i Beih.}) {\b 100}: 85 (1938). {\i Bulgaria }({\i Stara Planina}). Bu.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b   A. eugenii}  Pawl., {\i Bull. Int. Acad. Sci. Cracovie} ser. B(1), {\b 1951}: 315 (1953). {\i W. Carpathians} ({\i Tatra}). Cz Po.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 114. A. othmarii} Buser, {\i Bull. Herb. Boiss.} ser. 2,{\b  1}: 464 (1901). Like {\b 113} but dwarf; hairs restricted to lowest internode, petioles, and distal parts of veins on lower surface of leaf, flowers 3-4 mm wide. •{\i  C. Alps.} Au Ge He.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Related species include:
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b  A. gracillima}  Rothm.,{\i  Feddes Repert.} ({\i Beih}.) {\b 100}: 87 (1938) (?{\i A. riloensis} Ronniger).{\i  S.E. Alps} ({\i Slovenija});{\i  Bulgaria} ({\i Rila Planina}). Bu Ju.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b  A. pseudothmarii}  Pawl., {\i Fragm. Fl. Geobot.}{\b  1}({\b 1}): 44 (1954).{\i  W. Carpathians} ({\i Tatra}). Cz Po.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 115. A. oculimarina} Pawl.,{\i  Fragm. Fl. Geobot.}{\b  3}({\b 1}): 44 (1957). Medium-sized, with stems up to 50 cm long, procumbent below, usually with appressed hairs on only the 2 lowest internodes, sometimes glabrous. Leaves more or less reniform, glabrous above, usually with appressed hairs beneath only on the distal half of the veins, lobed to c. ¼ ; lobes 9(-11), semicircular, with short or no incisions and 6-8 rather large, subequal teeth. Petioles with appressed hairs or glabrous. Inflorescence spreading, with lax glomeruli. Flowers 4·5-6·5(-7·8) mm wide; sepals longer than hypanthium; epicalyx-segments distinctly longer than sepals, often with a single lateral tooth.{\i  Wet granite rocks. • W. Carpathians} ({\i Tatra}). Cz Po.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 116. A. pyrenaica} Dufour,{\i  Ann. Gén. Sci. Phys. }({\i Bruxelles}) {\b 8}: 228 (1821) ({\i A. firma} Buser pro parte,{\i  A. glaberrima} subsp.{\i  firma} (Buser) Gams pro parte). Medium-sized, usually blue-green; stems up to 25 cm, ascending, glabrous except for lowest internode (rarely also the second) and distal half of veins on lower surface of leaf, which have some appressed hairs. Leaves suborbicular, lobed to 1/3-2/5(-1/2); lobes 7-9, more or less semicircular,
\par

\par
63}
\par