{\rtf1\ansi \deff4\deflang1033{\fonttbl{\f4\froman\fcharset0\fprq2 Times New Roman;}}{\colortbl;\red0\green0\blue0;\red0\green0\blue255;\red0\green255\blue255;\red0\green255\blue0;\red255\green0\blue255;\red255\green0\blue0;\red255\green255\blue0;\red255\green255\blue255;\red0\green0\blue128;\red0\green128\blue128;\red0\green128\blue0;\red128\green0\blue128;\red128\green0\blue0;\red128\green128\blue0;\red128\green128\blue128;\red192\green192\blue192;}{\stylesheet{\widctlpar \f4\fs20\lang2057 \snext0 Normal;}{\*\cs10 \additive Default Paragraph Font;}}{\info{\author dddd}{\operator dddd}{\creatim\yr1998\mo11\dy11\hr17\min2}{\revtim\yr1998\mo11\dy11\hr17\min3}{\version2}{\edmins1}{\nofpages4}{\nofwords933}{\nofchars5319}{\*\company  }{\vern57431}}\widowctrl\ftnbj\aenddoc\hyphcaps0 \fet0\sectd \linex0 {\*\pnseclvl1\pnucrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl2\pnucltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl3\pndec\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl4\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl5\pndec\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl6\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl7\pnlcrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl8\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl9\pnlcrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}
\pard\plain \ \f4\fs20\lang2057 {\fs28 with short but distinct incisions and 5-8 long, acute, equal teeth. Inflorescence rather small. Flowers 3\'b75-4\'b75(-5\'b75) mm wide. \bullet }{\i\fs28  Pyrenees, Alps, Carpathians, mountains of N. part of Balkan peninsula}{\fs28 .Au Bu Cz Ga Ge He Hs It Ju Po Rm ?Rs (W).
\par 
\par Related species include:
\par 
\par }{\b\fs28 A. venosula}{\fs28  Buser, }{\i\fs28 Bull. Herb. Boiss.}{\fs28  ser. 2, }{\b\fs28 1}{\fs28 : 466 (1901).}{\i\fs28  E. Alps}{\fs28  (}{\i\fs28 Prov. Sondrio}{\fs28 ). ?He It.
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 117. A. incisa}{\fs28  Buser, }{\i\fs28 Scrin. Fl. Select.}{\fs28  (}{\i\fs28 Magnier}{\fs28 )}{\b\fs28  11}{\fs28 : 255 (1892). Dwarf, delicate; stems up to 15 cm, slender; like }{\b\fs28 116}{\fs28  in hairiness. Leaves reniform to suborbicular, lobed to 1/3-1/2; lobes 7-9, long, narrow, with very long, almost U-shaped incisions, and (4-)5-7 long, narrow, connivent teeth, the longest up to 3 mm. Inflorescence small, lax. Flowers 3-4 mm wide. \bullet }{\i\fs28  Jura, Vosges, Alps, Carpathians.}{\fs28  Au Cz Ga Ge He Po Rs (W).
\par 
\par Related species include:
\par 
\par  }{\b\fs28 A. vallesiaca }{\fs28 Rothm., }{\i\fs28 Feddes Repert. }{\b\fs28 42}{\fs28 : 168 (1937) (}{\i\fs28 A. gracilis}{\fs28  Buser,non Opiz).}{\i\fs28  W.C. Alps}{\fs28  (}{\i\fs28 Valais}{\fs28 ). He.
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 118. A. fissa}{\fs28  G\'fcnther & Schummel,}{\i\fs28  Sched. Cent. Siles. Exsicc.}{\b\fs28  9}{\fs28  no. 2(1819) (}{\i\fs28 A. glaberrima }{\fs28 auct.,}{\i\fs28  A. glabra}{\fs28  Poiret). Delicate, glabrous, with procumbent or ascending stems up to 25 cm long. Leaves more or less orbicular, thin, lobed to 1/2-2/3; lobes 5-7, long, subcuneate, with a wide, rounded or subtruncate apex, somewhat overlapping, with long, almost U-shaped incisions, and 4-6 very large teeth, the longest up to 4\'b75 mm. Inflorescence small. Flowers 3\'b75-5 mm wide.}{\i\fs28  In snow-patches and on wet rocks. \bullet   Pyrenees, Alps, Sudeten mountains.}{\fs28  Au Cz Ga Ge He Hs Po.
\par 
\par Records of this species for the Carpathians are all,}{\i\fs28  fide}{\fs28  Pawlowski and Rothmaler, referable to }{\b\fs28 116}{\fs28  or }{\b\fs28 117}{\fs28 .
\par 
\par }
\pard \qc\ {\b\fs28  24.                Aphanes}{\fs28               L.
\par }{\fs24 By S.M. Walters.
\par 
\par }
\pard \ {\fs28 Like }{\i\fs28 Alchemilla}{\fs28  but annual, with deeply dissected leaves and conspicuous, connate stipules; flowers in condensed, leaf-opposed cymes; stamen 1(rarely 2), inserted on inner margin of disc.
\par 
\par Measurements of length of the fruiting hypanthium include the persistent sepals.
\par 
\par Literature: W. Rothmaler,}{\i\fs28  Feddes Repert. }{\b\fs28 53}{\fs28 : 265-270 (1944).
\par 
\par }
\pard \li200\ {\fs28 1 Stems rather slender, ascending; all leaves petiolate;
\par   fruiting hypanthium less than 2\'b775 mm
\par 2 Fruiting hypanthium more than 2 mm; lobes of stipules triangular
\par   ........................................................................................................ }{\b\fs28 1. arvensis}{\fs28 
\par 2 Fruiting hypanthium less than 2 mm; lobes of stipules oblong
\par   ................................................................................................... }{\b\fs28 2. microcarpa}{\fs28 
\par 1 Stems rather robust, erect; at least the upper leaves sessile;  
\par   fruiting hypanthium at least 2\'b775 mm
\par 3 All leaves sessile; stipules densely imbricate ................... }{\b\fs28 3. cornucopioides}{\fs28 
\par 3 Lower leaves petiolate; stipules not or scarcely imbricate ........}{\b\fs28 4. floribunda}{\fs28 
\par   
\par 
\par }
\pard \ {\fs28    }{\b\fs28 1. A. arvensis}{\fs28  L., }{\i\fs28 Sp. Pl.}{\fs28  123 (1753) (}{\i\fs28 Alchemilla arvensis}{\fs28  (L.) Scop.). Rather slender, usually greyish-green, hairy. Stems up to 30 cm, ascending, usually much-branched from the base. Leaves deeply 3-fid, the segments divided at the apex into 3-5 oblong lobes; petiole short, adnate to the stipules. Lobes of stipules 5-7, triangular, about half as long as entire portion. Inflorescence more or less sessile; fruiting hypanthium 2\'b72-2\'b76 mm, usually slightly protruding beyond stipules; sepals somewhat spreading. 2n = 48.}{\i\fs28  Cultivated ground and other open habitats. S., W. & C.Europe, extending north-eastwards to S. Sweden, Latvia and N.E. Poland}{\fs28 . All except ?Al ?Az Fa Fe Is No Rs (N, ?C, ?W, E) Sb.
\par 
\par Facultatively apomictic.
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 2. A. microcarpa}{\fs28  (Boiss. & Reuter) Rothm., }{\i\fs28 Feddes Repert.}{\b\fs28  42}{\fs28 : 172 (1937)(}{\i\fs28 A. arvensis}{\fs28  auct. pro parte, non L.). Like }{\b\fs28 1}{\fs28  but usually more slender and of a purer green; lobes of stipules oblong, usually almost as long as the entire portion; fruiting hypanthium (1-)1\'b74-1\'b79 mm, often not protruding beyond stipules; sepals connivent. 2n = 16.}{\i\fs28  Open habitats on sandy, usually acid soils. Europe northwards to Scotland and S. Sweden, and eastwards to N.E. Poland, the Carpathians and the Adriatic; a few isolated stations in the Balkan peninsula.}{\fs28  Al Au Az Be Br Bu Co Cz Da Ga Ge Gr Hb He Ho Hs Hu It Ju Lu Po Rm Sa Si Su Tu.
\par 
\par A sexual species, closely related to }{\b\fs28 1}{\fs28 .
\par 
\par Plants from Corse have been distinguished as var. bonifaciensis Buser; they differ in their smaller flowers and fruiting hypanthia and in their diffuse, branched habit. An even smaller-flowered variant is }{\b\fs28 Alchemilla minutiflora}{\fs28  Aznav.,}{\i\fs28  Bull. Soc. Bot. Fr. }{\b\fs28 46}{\fs28 : 141 (1899), described from Turkey-in-Europe. At present, it seems best to include all such plants from S. Europe in }{\b\fs28 2}{\fs28 .
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 3. A. cornucopioides}{\fs28  Lag., }{\i\fs28 Gen. Sp. Nov.}{\fs28  7 (1816) (}{\i\fs28 Alchemilla cornucopioides}{\fs28  (Lag.) Roemer & Schultes). Rather robust, very hairy. Stems up to 15 cm, erect, densely leafy. Leaves sessile, more or less 3-fid, each segment 2- to 3-lobed. Stipules densely imbricate, with triangular lobes, clearly adnate to base of leaf and forming an amplexicaul cup. Fruiting hypanthium 2\'b775-3\'b75 mm; sepals erecto-patent.}{\i\fs28  Dry, acid soils. Iberian peninsula.}{\fs28  Hs Lu.
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 4. A. floribunda}{\fs28  (Murb.) Rothm., }{\i\fs28 Feddes Repert.}{\b\fs28  42}{\fs28 : 172 (1937). Like }{\b\fs28 3}{\fs28  but stems not so densely leafy; lower leaves with short petioles; stipules not or scarcely imbricate.}{\i\fs28  Dry, acid soils. Mediterranean region, from Islas Baleares eastwards.}{\fs28  Bl Co Gr It Ju Sa Si Tu.
\par 
\par }
\pard \qc\ {\fs28  Subfam.             }{\b\fs28  Maloideae}{\fs28 
\par }
\pard \ {\fs28 
\par Stipules present, usually caducous. Flowers 5-merous. Hypanthium tubular,not open at the apex and completely enclosing the 2-5 more or less connate carpels which are more or less adnate to the hypanthium; epicalyx absent; stamens numerous. Fruit a fleshy pome, developed from the carpels and hypanthium. Basic chromosome number 17.
\par 
\par }
\pard \qc\ {\b\fs28 25.              Cydonia}{\fs28             Miller
\par }{\fs24 By A. Terp\'f3.
\par 
\par }
\pard \ {\fs28 Deciduous shrubs or trees. Leaves entire. Stipules caducous. Flowers solitary. Sepals shorter than petals, dentate, persistent; stamens 15-25; carpels 5, walls cartilaginous in fruit; ovules numerous; styles 5, free. Fruit many-seeded.
\par 
\par   }{\b\fs28 Chaenomeles speciosa}{\fs28  (Sweet) Nakai,}{\i\fs28  Jap. Jour. Bot.}{\b\fs28  4}{\fs28 : 331 (1929)(}{\i\fs28 Cydonia japonica}{\fs28  auct., non (Thunb.) Pers.) and}{\i\fs28  C. japonica }{\fs28 (Thunb.)Spach,}{\i\fs28  Hist. Veg.}{\fs28  (}{\i\fs28 Phan.}{\fs28 ) }{\b\fs28 2}{\fs28 : 159 (1834), are widely cultivated for ornament, and may occur as escapes, though it is doubtful if they are naturalized.}{\i\fs28  Chaenomeles}{\fs28  is like}{\i\fs28  Cydonia}{\fs28  but has leaves serrate, sepals deciduous, stamens 40-60 and styles connate at the base.
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 1. C. oblonga}{\fs28  Miller,}{\i\fs28  Gard. Dict.}{\fs28  ed. 8, no. 1 (1768) (}{\i\fs28 C. vulgaris}{\fs28  Pers.). Shrub or tree 1\'b75-6 m. Shoots at first villous, later glab-
\par 
\par 64}
\par }