{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 rous. Leaves 5-10 × 3·5-7·5 cm, ovate, entire. Flowers 4-4·5 cm in diameter; pedicels short, tomentose. Petals pink. Fruit 2·5-3·5 cm (5-12 cm in cultivation), globose or pyriform, fragrant, yellow, tomentose. 2n = 34.{\i  Cultivated throughout a large part of Europe; naturalized in hedges and thickets in S. Europe and more locally in C. Europe}. [Al Au Bu Co Cz Ga Ge Gr He Hs Hu It Ju Lu Rm Rs (K) Sa Si Tu.] ({\i S.W. & C. Asia.})
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc {\b 26.                 Pyrus}           L.
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc By A. Terpó & J. do Amaral Franco.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Deciduous shrubs or trees, often spiny on lower branches or when young. Leaves simple, rarely lobed; stipules caducous. Flowers in corymbs. Petals clawed, white, rarely pinkish; stamens 15-30; anthers dehiscing centripetally, usually red; carpels 2-5, connate, walls cartilaginous in fruit; ovules 2; styles 2-5, free. Fruit pyriform, turbinate or globose; flesh containing stone-cells.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 The leaves described are the middle leaves of the short shoots.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b P. salicifolia} Pallas, {\i Reise }{\b 3}: 734 (1776), a Caucasian species, has been recorded from Krym and European Turkey, but apparently in error for {\b 11} and {\b 9} respectively.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Literature: An. A. Fedorov in Sokolov,{\i  Derev'ja i Kustarniki SSSR}{\b  3}:151-306 (1954). A. Terpó, {\i Ann. Acad. Horti-Viticult.} ({\i Budapest}) {\b 22}({\b 6, 2}):1-258 (1960). J. do Amaral Franco & M. L. da Rocha Afonso, {\i Rev. Fac. Ci.}({\i Lisboa}) ser. 2C,{\b  13}({\b 2}): 175-213 (1965).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Fruit with deciduous calyx
\par
2 Leaves aristate-dentate; inflorescence and unfolding leaves
\par
  glabrous ..................................................................................... {\b 2. magyarica}
\par
2 Leaves crenate-dentate, serrulate or entire; inflorescence 
\par
  and unfolding leaves pubescent or tomentose
\par
3 Leaves crenate-dentate or serrulate ............................................... {\b 1. cordata}
\par
3 Leaves entire .................................................................................. {\b 3. rossica}
\par
1 Fruit with persistent calyx
\par
4 Fruit (5-)6-16 cm, fleshy, sweet-tasting ................................. {\b 13. communis}
\par
4 Fruit not more than 5·5 cm, hard, usually not sweet-tasting 
\par
5 Leaves not more than 1½ times as long as wide
\par
6 Leaves cuspidate, entire ............................................................. {\b 5. caucasica}
\par
6 Leaves not cuspidate, crenulate or serrulate at least in part
\par
7 Petals 10-17 × 7-13 mm; leaves thin ............................................ {\b 4. pyraster}
\par
7 Petals 8-10 × 5-7 mm;leaves thick .......................................... {\b 6. bourgaeana}
\par
5 Leaves more than 1½ times as long as wide
\par
8 Leaves glabrous when unfolding ................................................... {\b 7. syriaca}
\par
8 Leaves hairy when unfolding
\par
9 Mature leaves glabrous or papillose beneath
\par
10 Leaves crenulate, rounded at the base .................................. {\b 6. bourgaeana}
\par
10 Leaves entire to slightly serrulate, cuneate at the base .. {\b 8. amygdaliformis}
\par
9 Mature leaves pubescent or tomentose beneath
\par
11 Styles densely villous, at least at base
\par
12 Styles villous to the middle; fruit 2-3 cm .......................... {\b 10. elaeagrifolia}
\par
12 Styles villous only at base; fruit 3-5 cm ..................................... {\b 11. nivalis}
\par
11 Styles ± glabrous
\par
13 Leaves usually less than 3·5 cm wide, entire ........................... {\b 9. salvifolia}
\par
13 Leaves usually more than 3·5 cm wide, serrulate-
\par
   crenulate towards apex .............................................................. {\b 12. austriaca}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. P. cordata} Desv., {\i Obs. Pl. Env. Angers }152 (1818). Shrub or small tree up to 8 m, with patent, usually spiny branches. Twigs purplish. Leaves 2·5-5·5 × 1·5-3·5 cm, ovate-lanceolate to ovate, crenate-dentate or serrulate, rounded to subcordate at base, acuminate to cuspidate at apex, pubescent when young; petiole 2-5 cm, slender. Corymbs and leaves densely tomentose when unfolding. Sepals 2-3 × 1-1·5 mm, triangular-subulate. Petals 6-8 × 5-7 mm, obovate-elliptical. Fruit 0·8-1·5 (-1·8) cm, globose or obovoid, shiny, red, densely covered with lenticels; pedicel 1·2-2·5(-3·5) cm, slender; calyx deciduous.{\i  Woods and hedges. • Western margin of Europe, from C. Portugal to S.W. England.} Br Ga Hs Lu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. P. magyarica} Terpó, {\i Ann. Acad. Horti-Viticult.} ({\i Budapest}) {\b 22}({\b 6,2}): 34(1960). Like {\b 1} but leaves aristate-dentate; inflorescence and leaves more or less glabrous; fruit 1·5-2 cm in diameter, not densely covered with lenticels.{\i  In} Quercus{\i  woodland. • Hungary}. Hu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 3. P. rossica} Danilov, {\i Not. Syst.} ({\i Leningrad}) {\b 15}: 126 (1953). Tree 15-20 m, with spiny branches; bark peeling in wide, thin sheets. Leaves 3-7 × 2-6 cm, broadly ovate, entire, tomentose when unfolding; petiole 1½ times as long as lamina. Fruit 2-2·5 cm in diameter, globose, somewhat compressed, densely covered with lenticels; calyx deciduous.{\i  In }Quercus{\i  woodland. • S.C. Russia }({\i Kurskaja and Voronezskaja Oblasti}). Rs (C).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 4. P. pyraster} Burgsd., {\i Anleit. Erzieh. Holzart.}{\b  2}: 193 (1787) ({\i P.communis} auct., non L.,{\i  P. communis} var.{\i  achras} Wallr.). Tree 8-20 m, with patent or ascending, usually spiny branches. Twigs grey to brown. Bud-scales 5-8. Leaves 2·5-7 × 2-5 cm, elliptical, ovate or orbicular, cuneate, rounded or cordate at base, acute or shortly acuminate, thin, crenulate-serrulate throughout or only at the apex, rarely entire, usually glabrous at maturity; petiole 2-7 cm, slender. Sepals 3-8 × 1-3·5 mm. Petals 10-17 × 7-13 mm, elliptical to orbicular. Fruit 1·3-3·5 × 1·8-3·5 cm, globose to turbinate, yellow, brown or black, the lenticels often conspicuous; pedicel 1-5·5 cm, slender; calyx persistent.{\i  Thickets and open woods. S., W. & C. Europe and S. half of U.S.S.R.} Al Au Be ?Br Bu Cz ?Da Ga Ge Gr He Hs Hu It Ju Lu Po Rm Rs (C, W, E) Si.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 This species, which comprises many of the variants of the wild and naturalized pears of Europe, has received a variety of taxonomic treatments. It has not yet been possible to subdivide it satisfactorily.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 5. P. caucasica} Fedorov in Grossh., {\i Fl. Kavk.} ed. 2, {\b 5}: 421 (1952). Tree 15-25 m, with pyramidal crown and spiny lower branches. Twigs grey, glabrous. Leaves 3-5·5 × 2·5-4 cm, usually orbicular-ovate and caudate-cuspidate, chartaceous, entire, ciliate and sparsely pubescent while young, soon glabrous; petiole 2-5·5 cm, slender. Corymbs glabrous except the tomentose sepals. Sepals 4-5 × 1-1·5 mm, linear. Petals 11-13 × 9-11 mm, elliptical. Fruit 1·5-3·5 × 2-4 cm, globose-turbinate, dull, brown; pedicel 1-4 cm, stoutish; calyx persistent.{\i  Thrace; Krym.} Gr Rs (K) ?Tu. ({\i Caucasus, N. Anatolia}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 6. P. bourgaeana} Decne,{\i  Jard. Fruit.}{\b  1}: t. 2 (1871) ({\i P. communis} var. {\i mariana} Willk., {\i P. communis} auct. iber., non L.). Tree up to 10 m, with open crown and spiny lower branches. Twigs grey, stoutish. Leaves 2-4 × 1·5-3·5 cm, ovate or ovate-cordate, rarely lanceolate, thick, crenulate; petiole 2-5 cm, slender. Corymbs and leaves tomentose when unfolding. Sepals 5-7 × 2-2·5 mm, oblong-lanceolate, mucronate. Petals 8-10 × 5-7 mm, obovate-cuneate. Fruit 1·7-2·5 cm in diameter, turbinate-globose, dull, yellow with brown spots to almost brown when mature; pedicel 1·5-4 cm, stout; calyx persistent.{\i  Usually near seasonal streams. Portugal, W. Spain}. Hs Lu. ({\i Morocco}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 7. P. syriaca} Boiss.,{\i  Diagn. Pl. Or. Nov.}{\b  2}({\b 10}): 1 (1849). Small, round-headed tree up to 10 m, with spiny branches. Twigs grey but reddish-brown when young, always glabrous. Leaves 3-9 × 1·5-3 cm, oblong-lanceolate, serrulate or crenulate, coriaceous,
\par

\par
65}
\par