{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 shining, glabrous; petiole 2-5 cm, slender. Corymbs glabrous except for the sepals. Sepals 5 × 2·5 mm, lanceolate, tomentose; petals 10-12 mm, orbicular-elliptical. Fruit 3-3·5 cm in diameter, globose to turbinate; pedicel 2·5-4 cm, stout; calyx persistent.{\i  Cultivated locally, and occasionally naturalized}. [Hu.] ({\i S.W. Asia}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 8. P. amygdaliformis} Vill., {\i Cat. Méth. Jard. Strasb.} 323 (1807) ({\i P. parviflora }Desf., {\i P. nivalis} sensu Lindley, non Jacq.). Shrub or small tree up to 6 m; branches sometimes spiny. Twigs grey, dull, tomentose while young. Leaves 2·5-8 × 1-3 cm, narrowly lanceolate to obovate, usually entire, rarely 3-lobed, with rounded or cuneate base, sparsely hairy when young, papillose beneath at maturity; petiole 2-5 cm. Sepals 5-6 × 1·5 mm, triangular, acuminate. Petals 7-8 × 5-6 mm, elliptical, usually emarginate at apex. Fruit 1·5-3 cm in diameter, usually globose, fulvous; pedicel stout, as long as or slightly longer than fruit; calyx persistent. {\i Dry, rocky places. Mediterranean region, Bulgaria.} Al Bu Co Cr Ga Gr Hs It Ju Sa Si Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b  P. mecsekensis} Terpó,{\i  Ann. Acad. Horti-Viticult.} ({\i Budapest}){\b  22}({\b 6, 2}): 133 (1960), from Hungary, a tree 10-15 m, with ovate-lanceolate, crenulate leaves, is intermediate between {\b 4} and {\b 8} and is possibly of hybrid origin.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b  P. pyrainus} Rafin., {\i Specch. Sci.}{\b  2}: 173 (1814), from Sicilia, is doubtfully distinct from {\b 8}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   {\b 9. P. salvifolia} DC., {\i Prodr.}{\b  2}: 634 (1825) ({\i P. communis} subsp.{\i  salvifolia} (DC.) Gams). Small or medium-sized tree; branches usually spiny. Leaves 4-7 × 2-3·5 cm, lanceolate or elliptical, entire, glabrescent above, grey-tomentose beneath; petiole 2-5 cm. Styles more or less glabrous. Fruit turbinate or pyriform; calyx persistent.{\i  Sunny slopes and dry, open woods. • From Belgium to Greece and Krym.} Au Be Ga Gr Hu Ju Po Rm Rs (K).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Often cultivated, and perhaps only naturalized over part of its range.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 10. P. elaeagrifolia} Pallas,{\i  Nova Acta Acad. Sci. Petrop. }{\b 7}: 355 (1793). Shrub or small tree with stout, erect spiny branches. Twigs grey-tomentose. Leaves 3·5-8 × 2-3·5 cm, lanceolate to obovate-lanceolate, entire, or crenulate at apex, with a dense, grey-white tomentum; petiole shorter than lamina. Corymbs many-flowered, whitish-tomentose, subsessile. Sepals c. 5 × 1·5 mm, linear-triangular. Petals c. 10 × 7 mm, elliptical. Styles densely villous in lower half. Fruit 2-3 cm in diameter, pyriform to globose; pedicel 2-3 cm, stout; calyx persistent.{\i  Dry places. S.E. Europe.} Al Bu Gr Rm Rs (K) Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   {\b 11. P. nivalis} Jacq., {\i Fl. Austr.}{\b  2}: 4 (1774) ({\i P. communis} subsp.{\i  nivalis} (Jacq.) Gams). Tree 8-20 m, with stout, ascending, usually spineless branches. Twigs stout, white-tomentose when young, later blackish. Leaves 5-9 × 3-4 cm; lamina obovate, cuneate at base and decurrent, entire or slightly crenulate at apex, covered sparsely above and densely beneath with a whitish-grey pubescense; petiole 1-2 cm, tomentose. Corymbs tomentose-lanate. Sepals 6-8 × 3-4 mm, triangular-acuminate. Petals 14-16 × 12-14 mm, obovate-elliptical. Styles villous only at base. Fruit 3-5 cm in diameter, globose, yellowish-green with purple dots, becoming sweet when over-ripe; pedicel as long as or longer than fruit; calyx persistent.{\i  Sunny slopes and dry, open woods. • S. & S.C. Europe.} Au Bu Cz Ga He Hu It Ju Rm.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Several varieties with narrower leaves and smaller fruits are known, and many are grown as rootstocks.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 12. P. austriaca} A. Kerner, {\i Sched. Fl. Exsicc. Austro-Hung.}{\b  7}: 15 (1896). Medium-sized or large tree, with black, spineless branches. Twigs stout, black, greyish-tomentose when young. Leaves 6-9 × 2·5-5 cm, lanceolate to obovate-lanceolate, serrulate-crenulate towards the acuminate apex, glabrescent above and with a yellow-grey tomentum beneath; petiole 1·5-6 cm. Corymbs tomentose. Sepals and petals similar to those of {\b 11} but slightly smaller. Styles more or less glabrous. Fruit 2·5-5·5 × 2-4·5 cm, turbinate or pyriform; calyx persistent. •{\i  C. Europe}. Au Cz He Hu ?Rm.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Often cultivated, and perhaps only naturalized over part of its range.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 13. P. communis} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 479, 1200 (1753). Tree up to 20 m; branches with or without spines, ascending on young and spreading on adult trees. Twigs stout, reddish-brown, soon becoming glabrous and shining. Leaves 5-8 × 3·5-5·5 cm, ovate and elliptical, more or less cuspidate at apex, crenulate-serrulate to subentire, usually glabrous at maturity; petiole equalling or shorter than lamina. Corymbs and leaves tomentose when unfolding. Sepals 6-8 × 3-4 mm, lanceolate-acuminate. Petals 12-14 × 10-12 mm, obovate. Fruit (5-)6-16 × 4-12 cm, oblong, pyriform, turbinate or subglobose, with a sweet taste; calyx persistent.{\i  Cultivated on a field scale in most of Europe except the north and the drier regions of the south}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    More than a thousand cultivars of the garden pear are known. It is of hybrid origin, and many species are considered to be among its parents, including {\b 4}, {\b 7}, {\b 9}, {\b 11} and{\b  12}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc {\b 27.             Malus}              Miller
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc By A. Terpó.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Deciduous, rarely spiny shrubs or trees. Leaves simple, sometimes lobed. Flowers in umbels. Petals clawed, white, pink or red; stamens 15-50; anthers dehiscing centrifugally, yellow; carpels 3-5, connate, walls cartilaginous in fruit; ovules 2 or more; styles 2-5, connate at base. Fruit more or less globose; flesh usually without stone-cells.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Many species are grown for ornament.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Literature: W. Henning,{\i  Züchter }{\b 17-18}: 289-349 (1947).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Leaves lobed
\par
2 Petiole 2-7 cm; sepals 7-10 mm, persistent .................................. {\b 1. trilobata}
\par
2 Petiole 0·5-2 cm; sepals 3-4 mm, deciduous .............................. {\b 2. florentina}
\par
1 Leaves not lobed
\par
3 Mature leaves glabrous on both surfaces ................................... {\b 3. sylvestris}
\par
3 Mature leaves tomentose, at least beneath
\par
4 Fruit more than 5 cm ................................................................. {\b 6. domestica}
\par
4 Fruit less than 5 cm
\par
5 Leaves elliptical; styles glabrous ............................................. {\b 4. dasyphylla}
\par
5 Leaves ovate or obovate; styles sometimes villous in lower half . {\b 5. praecox}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    Sect. ERIOLOBUS (DC.) C. K. Schneider. Leaves conduplicate in bud, deeply lobed. Fruit with stone-cells.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. M. trilobata} (Labill.) C. K. Schneider, {\i Feddes Repert.}{\b  3}: 179 (1906) ({\i Sorbus trilobata} (Labill.) Heynh.). Unarmed shrub up to 10 m; twigs densely pubescent at first, soon glabrous. Leaves 4-10 cm, often wider than long, serrulate, usually cordate a base, deeply 3-lobed, the main lobes usually 2- to 3-lobed, glabrous above, sparsely pubescent and becoming subglabrous beneath; petiole 2-7 cm. Flowers c. 3·5 cm in diameter, white Sepals 7-10 mm, tomentose, persistent. Fruit 2-3 cm, obovoid yellowish-green.{\i  Evergreen scrub. N.E. Greece.} Gr [*Bu.] ({\i Syria Lebanon, Israel.})
\par

\par
66}
\par