{\rtf1\ansi \deff4\deflang1033{\fonttbl{\f4\froman\fcharset0\fprq2 Times New Roman;}}{\colortbl;\red0\green0\blue0;\red0\green0\blue255;\red0\green255\blue255;\red0\green255\blue0;\red255\green0\blue255;\red255\green0\blue0;\red255\green255\blue0;\red255\green255\blue255;\red0\green0\blue128;\red0\green128\blue128;\red0\green128\blue0;\red128\green0\blue128;\red128\green0\blue0;\red128\green128\blue0;\red128\green128\blue128;\red192\green192\blue192;}{\stylesheet{\widctlpar \f4\fs20\lang2057 \snext0 Normal;}{\*\cs10 \additive Default Paragraph Font;}}{\info{\author dddd}{\operator dddd}{\creatim\yr1998\mo11\dy11\hr17\min3}{\revtim\yr1998\mo11\dy11\hr17\min4}{\version2}{\edmins1}{\nofpages4}{\nofwords1106}{\nofchars6308}{\*\company  }{\vern57431}}\widowctrl\ftnbj\aenddoc\hyphcaps0 \fet0\sectd \linex0 {\*\pnseclvl1\pnucrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl2\pnucltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl3\pndec\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl4\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl5\pndec\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl6\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl7\pnlcrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl8\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl9\pnlcrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}
\pard\plain \ \f4\fs20\lang2057 {\fs28    }{\b\fs28 2. M. florentina}{\fs28  (Zuccagni) C. K. Schneider,}{\i\fs28  Ill. Handb. Laubholzk.}{\b\fs28  1}{\fs28 :724 (1906) (' }{\i\fs28 Sorbus torminalis}{\fs28  \'d7}{\i\fs28  Malus pumila}{\fs28 ' sensu Hayek). Unarmed small tree up to 4 m. Leaves 3-6 cm, broadly ovate, dentate, truncate or cordate at base, irregularly incise-lobed with several lobes on each side, white-tomentose beneath; petiole 0\'b75-2 cm. Flowers 1\'b75-2 cm in diameter,white. Sepals 3-4 mm, deciduous. Fruit c. 1 cm, ellipsoid or obovoid, red. \bullet }{\i\fs28   Italy; S. Jugoslavia and N. Greece; very local.}{\fs28  Al Gr It Ju.
\par 
\par Sect. MALUS. Leaves involute in bud, simple. Fruit without stone-cells.
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 3. M. sylvestris}{\fs28  Miller,}{\i\fs28  Gard. Dict.}{\fs28  ed. 8, no. 1 (1768) (}{\i\fs28 M. communis}{\fs28  subsp.}{\i\fs28  sylvestris}{\fs28  (Miller) Gams,}{\i\fs28  M. acerba}{\fs28  M\'e9rat). More or less spiny tree or shrub 2-10 m. Leaves 3-11 \'d7 2\'b75-5\'b75 cm, ovate, elliptical or suborbicular, crenate or serrate, with rounded or cuneate base, shortly apiculate, glabrous when mature; petiole 1\'b75-3 cm. Flowers 3-4 cm in diameter, white or pink; sepals 3-7 mm, glabrous externally, tomentose internally; styles glabrous or sparsely villous at the base. Fruit 2\'b75-3 cm, subglabrous, yellowish-green.}{\i\fs28  Most of Europe, northwards to C. Fennoscandia, but rather local on mountains in the south; cultivated as a rootstock.}{\fs28  All except Az Bl Cr Fa Is Rs (N) Sa Sb.
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 4. M. dasyphylla}{\fs28  Borkh.,}{\i\fs28  Handb. Forstbot.}{\b\fs28  2}{\fs28 : 1269 (1803) (}{\i\fs28 M. communis }{\fs28 subsp.}{\i\fs28  pumila}{\fs28  auct., non (Miller) Gams, }{\i\fs28 M. pumila}{\fs28  var. }{\i\fs28 paradisiaca}{\fs28  auct.,non (L.) C. K. Schneider). Medium-sized, sparsely spiny tree; twigs tomentose, becoming glabrous. Leaves 3\'b75-11 \'d7 2\'b75-5 cm, elliptical, acuminate, crenate, tomentose beneath; petiole 1-5 cm. Styles glabrous.Fruit 4 cm, yellowish (occasionally red along one side), acid; pedicel(1-)2\'b75(-5) cm.}{\i\fs28  Damp, lowland woods. \bullet  Danube basin and N. part of Balkan peninsula.}{\fs28  Al Au Bu Gr Hu Ju Rm.
\par 
\par }{\b\fs28  M. pumila}{\fs28  Miller, }{\i\fs28 Gard. Dict.}{\fs28  ed. 8, no. 3 (1768) (}{\i\fs28 M. pumila}{\fs28  var. }{\i\fs28 paradisiaca }{\fs28 (L.) C. K. Schneider), a shrub up to 2 m, with abundant greenish, short-stalked, sweet fruits 3-5 cm in diameter, is widely cultivated as the paradise apple.
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 5. M. praecox}{\fs28  (Pallas) Borkh.,}{\i\fs28  Handb. Forstbot.}{\b\fs28  2}{\fs28 : 1271 (1803) (}{\i\fs28 M. pumila}{\fs28  var.}{\i\fs28  praecox}{\fs28  (Pallas) C. K. Schneider). Small tree or shrub, sometimes spiny; twigs glabrous. Leaves 2-10 \'d7 1-5 cm, ovate or obovate, abruptly acuminate, serrate, biserrate or crenate-serrate, tomentose beneath; petiole 0\'b75-5 cm. Flowers 4-5 cm in diameter; sepals tomentose both externally and internally; styles glabrous, or villous in lower half.Fruit 2-2\'b75 cm, equalling pedicel.}{\i\fs28  Deciduous woodland along rivers. \bullet  U.S.S.R. northwards to}{\fs28  c. 55\'b0}{\i\fs28  N. and eastwards to}{\fs28  c. 50\'b0}{\i\fs28  E}{\fs28 . Rs (C, W, E).
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 6. M. domestica}{\fs28  Borkh.,}{\i\fs28  Handb. Forstbot.}{\b\fs28  2}{\fs28 : 1272 (1803). Unarmed small to medium-sized tree; twigs tomentose. Leaves 4-13 \'d7 3-7 cm, ovate-elliptical, serrate, with rounded, rarely cordate base, slightly tomentose above and densely tomentose beneath. Fruit more than 5 cm, varying in colour, sweet or acid, much longer than pedicel.}{\i\fs28  Cultivated for its fruit almost throughout Europe. Often escaping and occasionally naturalized}{\fs28 .
\par 
\par The apple is of hybrid origin, and has probably been derived from }{\b\fs28 3}{\fs28 , }{\b\fs28 4}{\fs28 , }{\b\fs28 5}{\fs28  and some Asiatic species. More than a thousand cultivars are grown.
\par 
\par }
\pard \qc\ {\b\fs28  28.              Sorbus}{\fs28               L.
\par }{\fs24 By E.F. Warburg & Z.E. K\'e1rp\'e1ti.
\par 
\par }
\pard \ {\fs28 Deciduous trees or shrubs without spines. Leaves simple, lobed or pinnate. Flowers in compound corymbs. Petals white, rarely pink; stamens 15-25; carpels 2-5, partly free or connate, walls cartilaginous or membranous in fruit; ovules 2; styles free or connate at base.
\par 
\par  The five most widespread European species (}{\b\fs28 1}{\fs28 , }{\b\fs28 2}{\fs28 , }{\b\fs28 3}{\fs28 , }{\b\fs28 4}{\fs28  and }{\b\fs28 5}{\fs28 ) are amphimictic, but some at least of the local species are polyploid and apomictic. Species }{\b\fs28 1}{\fs28  does not hybridize with the others in nature, but}{\b\fs28  2}{\fs28 , }{\b\fs28 3}{\fs28 ,}{\b\fs28  4}{\fs28 , }{\b\fs28 5}{\fs28  and their products form a hybrid complex. Some of the hybrid products are amphi- and some apomictic. It is likely that many of the apomictic species have arisen by hybridization, and their probable origin is given in the text. It is not practicable to describe all these species, partly because their taxonomy has not been elucidated for the whole of Europe. Accordingly, a number of representative species has been described (}{\b\fs28 6}{\fs28  to }{\b\fs28 18}{\fs28 ), and after each of these have been listed the other species which seem to be most closely related to them. (This is analogous to the procedure in}{\i\fs28  Rubus}{\fs28 .)
\par 
\par  Important characters used in the identification of the species are the depth and character of toothing and lobing of leaves of short shoots, and the colour of the fruit and the distribution of its lenticels. The leaves referred to in the descriptions are always those of the short shoots, unless otherwise specified.
\par 
\par  A more detailed treatment is given in the monograph by T. Hedlund, }{\i\fs28 Kungl. Svenska Vet.-Akad. Handl.}{\fs28  nov. ser.,}{\b\fs28  35}{\fs28 (}{\b\fs28 1}{\fs28 ): 1-147 (1901). Accounts for particular countries include: E. F. Warburg in Clapham, Tutin and Warburg,}{\i\fs28  Flora of the British Isles}{\fs28  ed. 2, 423-437. Cambridge. 1962. Z.K\'e1rp\'e1ti, }{\i\fs28 Feddes Repert.}{\b\fs28  62}{\fs28 : 71-331 (1960) and}{\i\fs28  Bot. K\'f6zl. }{\b\fs28 52}{\fs28 : 135-140(1966). R. D\'fcll,}{\i\fs28  Ber. Bayer. Bot. Ges.}{\b\fs28  34}{\fs28 : 11-65 (1961). M. Kovanda, }{\i\fs28 Acta Dendrol. Cech.}{\b\fs28  3}{\fs28 : 23-70 (1961). There is an account of cytology and the breeding system in two papers by A. Liljefors,}{\i\fs28  Acta Horti Berg. }{\b\fs28 16}{\fs28 (}{\b\fs28 10}{\fs28 ):277-329 (1953) and }{\b\fs28 17}{\fs28 : 47-113 (1955).
\par 
\par }
\pard \li200\ {\fs28 1 Leaves pinnate, with the terminal leaflet about the same size as 
\par   the others
\par 2 Bark shredding; styles 5; ripe fruit 20 mm or more, greenish 
\par   or brownish ................................................................................. }{\b\fs28 1. domestica}{\fs28 
\par 2 Bark smooth; styles 3-4; ripe fruit less than 14 mm, scarlet ...... }{\b\fs28 2. aucuparia}{\fs28 
\par 1 Leaves simple, lobed, or pinnatifid, or, if pinnate,
\par   with the terminal leaflet much larger than the others
\par 3 Leaves green beneath at maturity, more or less concolorous
\par 4 Tree; leaves lobed; fruit brown .................................................. }{\b\fs28 3. torminalis}{\fs28 
\par 4 Shrub; leaves not lobed;fruit scarlet ................................ }{\b\fs28 4. chamaemespilus}{\fs28  
\par 3 Leaves white- or grey-tomentose beneath at maturity 
\par 5 Leaves not or only very shallowly lobed
\par 6 Leaves grey-tomentose beneath
\par 7 Leaves not lobed, coarsely toothed ............................................ }{\b\fs28 17. sudetica}{\fs28 
\par 7 Leaves very shallowly lobed, finely toothed ....................... }{\b\fs28 18. margittaiana}{\fs28 
\par 6 Leaves white-tomentose beneath
\par 8 Leaves usually widest at or below middle, rounded at base; 
\par   fruit usually longer than wide ............................................................... }{\b\fs28 5. aria}{\fs28 
\par 8 Leaves usually widest above middle, cuneate at base;
\par   fruit not longer than wide
\par 9 Leaves with teeth symmetrical and patent; fruit usually
\par   less than 12 mm, with few lenticels ................................................. }{\b\fs28 6. graeca}{\fs28 
\par 9 Leaves with teeth curved on outer edge; fruit usually
\par   more than 12 mm,with numerous lenticels ................................... }{\b\fs28 7. rupicola}{\fs28 
\par 5 Leaves distinctly lobed
\par 10 Leaves white-tomentose beneath, usually with less than
\par    7 pairs of lateral veins ............................................................... }{\b\fs28 8. umbellata}{\fs28 
\par 10 Leaves with whitish-, yellowish- or grey-green tomentum
\par    beneath,usually with more than 7 pairs of lateral veins
\par 11 Leaves with at least 1 pair of free leaflets
\par 12 Leaves with 2 pairs of free leaflets ............................................ }{\b\fs28 13. hybrida}{\fs28 
\par 12 Leaves with 4-5 pairs of free leaflets ..................................... }{\b\fs28 14. meinichii}{\fs28 
\par 11 Leaves (at least those of the short shoots) without free leaflets
\par 13 Leaves deeply lobed, lobes extending to 2/5 of the way to 
\par    the midrib ...................................................................................... }{\b\fs28 12. dacica}{\fs28 
\par 
\par 67}
\par }