{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 13 Leaves less deeply lobed
\par
14 Leaves usually less than 8 cm; fruit 6-8 mm ............................... {\b 9. minima}
\par
14 Leaves usually more than 8 cm; fruit more than 8 mm
\par
15 Leaf-lobes shallow, extending about 1/8 of way to midrib ...... {\b 16. latifolia}
\par
15 Leaf-lobes well-marked, extending 1/4-1/3 of way to midrib
\par
16 Leaves 1½-2 times as long as wide; fruit with few, small lenticels
\par
17 Leaves with whitish-grey tomentum beneath; fruit c. 10 mm, 
\par
   subglobose ............................................................................... {\b 10. mougeotii}
\par
17 Leaves with yellowish-grey tomentum beneath; fruit
\par
   12-15 mm, much longer than wide ........................................ {\b 15. intermedia}
\par
16 Leaves c. 1¼ times as long as wide; fruit with many,
\par
   large lenticels
\par
18 Fruit red .................................................................................. {\b 11. austriaca}
\par
18 Fruit yellowish-brown .............................................................. {\b 16. latifolia}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. S. domestica} L.,{\i  Sp. Pl.} 477 (1753). Tree up to 20 m, with patent branches; bark shredding. Leaves pinnate, with 6-8 pairs of leaflets; leaflets 3-4·5 cm, oblong, serrate, pubescent beneath when young, finally glabrous. Flowers 16-18 mm in diameter, white; sepals triangular, longer than wide; styles 5. Fruit 20 mm or more, obovoid or pyriform, greenish or brownish, with numerous stone-cells.{\i  S. Europe, extending northwards to C. Germany; planted for its fruit and for ornament in C. Europe and locally naturalized.} Al Bu Co Ga Ge Gr *He Hs Hu It Ju Rm Rs (K) Sa Si Tu [Au Cz].
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. S. aucuparia} L.,{\i  loc. cit.} (1753). Tree up to 15(-20) m, usually with erecto-patent branches; bark smooth. Leaves pinnate, with 5-7 pairs of leaflets; leaflets 2·5-6(-9) cm, oblong, serrate. Flowers 8-10 mm in diameter, white; sepals deltate, sometimes rounded; styles 3-4. Fruit 6-9(-14) mm, subglobose, depressed-globose, or ovoid, scarlet, with few or no stone-cells. 2n = 34. {\i Most of Europe}. All except Az Bl Cr Fa Sa Sb Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Leaflets up to 9 cm; fruit depressed-globose ............. ({\b e}) subsp. {\b fenenkiana}
\par
1 Leaflets 2·5-6 cm; fruit subglobose or ovoid
\par
2 Petiole not more than 2 cm .......................................... ({\b d}) subsp. {\b praemorsa}
\par
2 Petiole usually more than 2·5 cm
\par
3 Sepals glabrous ................................................................. ({\b c}) subsp. {\b sibirica}
\par
3 Sepals hairy
\par
4 Inflorescence-axis ± hairy; fruit subglobose .................. ({\b a}) subsp. {\b aucuparia}
\par
4 Inflorescence-axis glabrous; fruit longer than wide  .........({\b b}) subsp. {\b glabrata}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b aucuparia}: Buds, leaves beneath and inflorescence axis more or less hairy. Petiole usually more than 2·5 cm. Leaflets firm, subobtuse or abruptly narrowed to an acute apex. Sepals deltate, hairy. Fruit subglobose. {\i Throughout most of the range of the species but rarer in the south}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b glabrata} (Wimmer & Grab.) Cajander, {\i Suomen Kasvio} 360 (1906) ({\i S. glabrata }(Wimmer & Grab.) Hedl.): Less hairy than subsp. ({\b a}). Petiole usually more than 2·5 cm. Leaflets thin, gradually tapered to an acute apex, subglabrous or sparsely hairy on both surfaces. Inflorescence-axis glabrous or nearly so. Sepals rounded, hairy. Fruit longer than wide.{\i  N. Europe and mountains of C. Europe}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b c}) Subsp. {\b sibirica} (Hedl.) Krylov, {\i Fl. Zap. Sibir.}{\b  7}: 1464 (1933) ({\i S. sibirica} Hedl.): Glabrous or nearly so. Petiole usually more than 2·5 cm. Leaflets gradually tapered to an acute apex, glabrous, or hairy only on midrib beneath. Inflorescence-axis glabrous. Sepals deltate, glabrous.{\i  N.E. Russia}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b d}) Subsp. {\b praemorsa} (Guss.) Nyman,{\i  Consp. }241 (1878): Petiole not more than 2 cm. Leaflets 2½ times as long as wide, subobtuse, bluntly serrate,hairy beneath. Fruit ovoid.{\i  S. Italy, Sicilia, Corse}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b e}) Subsp. {\b fenenkiana} Georgiev & Stoj.,{\i  Bull. Soc. Bot. Bulg.}{\b  5}: 101(1932): Leaflets up to 9 × 1-1·8 cm, linear-lanceolate, thin, sparsely hairy on midrib beneath. Inflorescence many- (up to 200-)flowered. Fruit 10-12 × 12-14 mm, depressed-globose.{\i  Bulgaria}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 3. S. torminalis} (L.) Crantz, {\i Stirp. Austr.}{\b  2}: 45 (1763). Tree up to 25 m. Leaves 5-9 cm, ovate, with 3-4 pairs of triangular-ovate to lanceolate lobes, decreasing in size towards the apex, serrate, green on both surfaces, glabrous above, pubescent beneath at least when young, the pubescence rarely persistent. Flowers 10-15 mm in diameter, white; styles 2. Fruit 12-18 mm, obovoid, rarely subglobose, brown, with numerous lenticels. 2n = 34.{\i  S., W. & C. Europe, extending to E. Denmark}. Al Au Be Br Bu Cz Da Ga Ge Gr He Hs Hu It Ju Lu.Po Rm Rs (W, K) Sa Si Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 4. S. chamaemespilus} (L.) Crantz, {\i op. cit.} 40 (1763). Shrub up to 1·5 m. Leaves 3-6 cm, elliptical to obovate, serrate, green on both surfaces, glabrous above, glabrous or sparsely pubescent beneath. Corymbs small and dense. Petals c. 5 mm, erect, pink; styles 2. Fruit 10-13 mm, subglobose or ovoid, scarlet, with few lenticels. 2n = 34. •{\i  Mountains of C. & S. Europe, from the Vosges and the Carpathians to the Pyrenees, S. Italy and Bulgaria.} Al Au Bu Cz Ga Ge ?Gr He Hs It Ju Po Rm.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 5. S. aria} (L.) Crantz,{\i  op. cit.} 46 (1763). Tree up to 25 m with wide crown, or a shrub. Leaves 5-12 cm, ovate or elliptical, usually widest at or below the middle and usually rounded at base, irregularly biserrate or shallowly lobed, the teeth curved on the outer edge and pointing towards the apex, densely and evenly white-tomentose beneath; veins(9-)10-14(-15) pairs. Flowers 10-15 mm in diameter, white. Fruit 8-15 mm,usually longer than wide, scarlet, usually with numerous small lenticels.2n = 34.{\i  From Ireland and Spain eastwards to the Carpathians; southern limits uncertain because of confusion with allied species}. Al Au Be Bl Br Bu Co Cz Ga Ge Hb He Hs Hu It Ju Po Rm Rs (W) Sa Si.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b aria}: Leaves up to 12 cm, ovate or elliptical; veins distant; with greenish-white tomentum beneath. Amphimictic. {\i Throughout most of the range of the species}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b lanifera} (A. Kerner) Jáv.,{\i  Magyar Fl.} 481 (1924): Leaves up to 7 × 5 cm, elliptical, somewhat coriaceous; veins relatively close; with pure white tomentum beneath. •{\i  Mountains of W. Jugoslavia.}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Related species include:
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b S. leptophylla} E. F. Warburg, {\i Watsonia}{\b  4}: 44 (1957). Apomictic. 2n = 68. Br.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 6. S. graeca} (Spach) Kotschy in Unger & Kotschy,{\i  Ins. Cypern} 369 (1865)({\i S. cretica} Lindley, {\i S. meridionalis} (Guss.) Fritsch). Shrub or small tree. Leaves 5-9 × 4-7 cm, obovate or suborbicular, not lobed, widest above the middle, broadly cuneate at the base, somewhat coriaceous, with 9-11 pairs of veins, usually with a thick, greenish-white tomentum beneath, biserrate; teeth symmetrical and patent. Fruit usually less than 12 mm, subglobose, crimson, with few, large lenticels. 2n = 34.{\i  S.E. & E.C.Europe, extending to Sicilia, Czechoslovakia and Germany.} Al Au Bu Cr Cz Ge Gr Hu It  Ju  Rm Rs (K) Si.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Amphimictic diploids and apomictic plants have both been reported in this species.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Related species include:
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b S. baldaccii} (Degen & Fritsch ex C. K. Schneider) Zinserl. in Komarov, {\i Fl. URSS}{\b  9}: 398 (1939). Al Ju.
\par

\par
68}
\par