{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b  S. eminens} E. F. Warburg, {\i Watsonia }{\b 4}: 44 (1957). 2n = 68. Br.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b  S. hibernica} E. F. Warburg,{\i  op. cit.} 44 (1957). Hb. 

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b S. lancastriensis} E. F. Warburg, {\i op. cit. }45 (1957). Br.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b  S. norvegica} Hedl., Nyt Mag. Naturvid. (Christiania) 52: 254 (1914). Apomictic. No Su.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b  S. pannonica} Karpati, {\i Feddes Repert.}{\b  62}: 182 (1960). Au Cz Ge Hu ?Rm.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b  S. porrigens} Hedl.,{\i  Nyt Mag. Naturvid.} ({\i Christiania}) {\b 52}: 255 (1914). Gr.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b S. porrigentiformis} E. F. Warburg,{\i  Watsonia }{\b 4}: 45 (1957). Apomictic.2n = 51, 68. Br.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b  S. wilmottiana} E. F. Warburg,{\i  Watsonia}{\b  6}: 296 (1967). Br.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\i  S. eminens} and {\i S. pannonica} are intermediate between {\b 5} and{\b  6}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 7. S. rupicola} (Syme) Hedl., {\i Nyt Mag. Naturvid.} ({\i Christiania}){\b  52}: 256(1914) ({\i S. salicifolia} (Hartman) Hedl.). Shrub c. 2 m, rarely a small tree. Leaves (6-)8-14·5 cm, c. 1½-2 times as long as wide, obovate or oblanceolate, widest above the middle, usually cuneate and entire at the base, with 7-9 pairs of veins, not lobed, rather thickly white-tomentose beneath, coarsely and unequally serrate, the teeth somewhat curved on the outer margin and directed towards the leaf-apex. Petals c. 7 mm. Fruit 12-15 mm, subglobose, wider than long, carmine, with numerous scattered lenticels. 2n = 68. Apomictic.149{\i   Britain and Ireland; Norway, S. Sweden and Estonia} ({\i Saaremaa}). Br Hb No Rs (B) Su.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Related species include:
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b S. vexans} E. F. Warburg,{\i  Watsonia}{\b  4}: 46 (1957). Br.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 8. S. umbellata} (Desf.) Fritsch in A. Kerner, {\i Sched. Fl. Exsicc. Austro-Hung.}{\b  7}: 18 (1896). Shrub or small tree. Leaves (3-)47(-10) × 3-6·5 cm, usually broadly obovate or suborbicular, with 4-7 pairs of veins, distally with shallow lobes and coarsely toothed, lobes acute or obtuse, densely and thickly white tomentose beneath. Flowers c. 15 mm in diameter. Fruit globose, yellowish. {\i S.E. Europe}. Al Bu Gr Ju Rm Rs (K) ?Si.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Leaves deltate, longer than wide, acutely cuneate at base; 
\par
  lobes acuminate ............................................................... ({\b b}) subsp. {\b banatica}
\par
1 Leaves subrhombic, suborbicular or ovate-orbicular,
\par
  ± as long as wide, obtusely cuneate at base; lobes obtuse
\par
2 Lobes extending 1/3-1/2 of the way to midrib ........... ({\b c}) subsp. {\b flabellifolia}
\par
2 Lobes extending 1/4 of the way to midrib
\par
3 Leaves up to 6 cm in diameter ...................................... ({\b a}) subsp. {\b umbellata}
\par
3 Leaves up to 4 cm in diameter ....................................... ({\b d}) subsp. {\b koevessii}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b umbellata}: Leaves up to 6 cm in diameter, subrhombic-orbicular, with 5-6 pairs of veins; lobes obtuse, extending ¼ of the way to midrib. Balkan peninsula, Romania.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b banatica} (Jáv.) Kárpáti,{\i  Feddes Repert.}{\b  62}: 179 (1960): Leaves up to 10 × 6·5 cm, deltate, longer than wide, with 6-7 pairs of veins, acute, narrowly cuneate at base; lobes acuminate.{\i  S.W. Romania,?Jugoslavia}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b c}) Subsp. {\b flabellifolia} (Spach) Kárpáti,{\i  op. cit. }182 (1960): Leaves up to 6 cm in diameter, subrhombic-orbicular, with 5-6 pairs of veins; lobes obtuse, extending to 1/3-2/5(-1/2) of the way to midrib.{\i  S. Jugoslavia; Greece; Krym}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b d}) Subsp. {\b koevessii} (Pénzes) Kárpáti,{\i  Ann. Sect. Horti-Viticult. Univ.Sci. Agr}. ({\i Budapest}) {\b 12}: 146 (1948): Leaves 3-4 cm in diameter, suborbicular, with 4-5 pairs of veins; lobes obtuse, extending ¼ of the way to midrib. {\i Mountains of Balkan peninsula.}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Related species include:
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b S. danubialis }(Jáv.) Kárpáti, {\i Feddes Repert. }{\b 62}: 185 (1960). Au Cz Ge Hu?Ju Rm Rs (W).
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b S. taurica }Zinserl. in Komarov, {\i Fl. URSS} {\b 9} : 497 (1939). Rs (K).
\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b  S. taurica} Zinserl. in Komarov,{\i  loc. cit }(1939). Rs (K)
\par 

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 These 3 species are intermediate between {\b 6} and {\b 8}; the following is intermediate between {\b 5} and {\b 8}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b S. subdanubialis} (Soó) Kárpáti,{\i  Feddes Repert.}{\b  62}: 188 (1960). Cz Hu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 9. S. minima} (A. Ley) Hedl.,{\i  Kungl. Svenska Vet.-Akad. Handl.} nov. ser., {\b 35}({\b 1}): 61 (1901). Shrub up to c. 3 m. Twigs relatively slender. Leaves 6-8 cm, about twice as long as wide, with 8-9 pairs of veins, shallowly lobed, the deepest lobes extending 1/5-1/3(-1/2) of the way to the midrib, at maturity subglabrous above, evenly and thinly grey-tomentose beneath. Petals c. 4 mm. Fruit 6-8 mm subglobose, scarlet, with few, small lenticels.{\i  Limestone rocks. • Wales}. Br.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b  S. minima} is apomictic, as are probably many of the following related species. All have probably originated as a result of hybridization between {\b 2} and {\b 7}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b  S. arranensis} Hedl., {\i Kungl. Svenska Vet.-Akad. Handl.} nov. ser., {\b 35}({\b 1}): 60 (1901). Br.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b  S. lancifolia} Hedl.,{\i  Skr. Vid.-Selsk. Kristiania (Math.-Nat.)}{\b  1911}({\b 6}): 166 (1912). No.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b  S. leyana} Wilmott, {\i Proc. Linn. Soc. London }{\b 146}: 78 (1934). Br.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b  S. neglecta} Hedl. in Hyl., {\i Uppsala Univ. Arsskr.}{\b  1945}({\b 7}): 221 (1945). No.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b  S. subpinnata} Hedl.,{\i  Nyt Mag. Naturvid.} ({\b Christiania}){\b  49}: 198 (1911). No.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 10. S. mougeotii} Soyer-Willemet & Godron,{\i  Bull. Soc. Bot. Fr. }{\b 5}: 447 (1858). ({\i S. scandica} sensu Coste, non (L.) Hedl.). Shrub or tree up to 20 m. Leaves 7-10 × 3·5-5·5 cm, ovate or obovate obtuse, cuneate at the base, with 8-10 pairs of veins, shallowly lobed, the larger lobes extending about ¼ of the way to the midrib, not overlapping, at maturity subglabrous above and with whitish-grey tomentum beneath. Petals 5-6 mm. Fruit c. 10 mm in diameter, subglobose, slightly longer than wide, red,with small and sparse lenticels. •{\i  Alps }({\i mainly in the west});{\i  Pyrenees.}?Au Ga He Hs ?It.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 This species is apomictic so far as is known; it probably originated as a result of hybridization between {\b 2} and{\b  6}. It is related to {\b 11}, which replaces it in the mountains of E.C. & S.E. Europe.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 11. S. austriaca} (G. Beck) Hedl.,{\i  Kungl. Svenska Vet.-Akad. Handl.} nov.ser.,{\b  35}({\b 1}): 65 (1901) ({\i S. mougeotii} subsp.{\i  austriaca} (G.Beck) Hayek). Small tree. Leaves 8-13 × 7-8 cm, broadly ovate to ovate-elliptical, c. 1·3 times as long as wide, with 8-11 pairs of veins, shallowly lobed, the larger lobes extending c. 1/3 of the way to the midrib, usually somewhat overlapping, with whitish-grey tomentum beneath. Fruit up to 13 mm in diameter, subglobose, red, with rather large and numerous lenticels. •{\i  E. Alps, Carpathians, Balkan peninsula}. Au Bu Cz Hu Ju Rm Rs (W).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Leaves about as long as wide ....................................... ({\b d}) subsp. {\b serpentini}
\par
1 Leaves 1·3-1·5 times as long as wide
\par
2 Leaves not coriaceous ..................................................... ({\b a}) subsp. {\b austriaca}
\par
2 Leaves coriaceous
\par
3 Leaves up to 13 cm ............................................... ({\b b}) subsp. {\b hazslinszkyana}
\par
3 Leaves up to 8 cm ............................................................. ({\b c}) subsp. {\b croatica}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b austriaca}: Leaves up to 12 × 8 cm, ovate, obtusely cuneate at base, with 9-12 pairs of veins.{\i  Throughout most of the range of the species, but only in the mountains}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b hazslinszkyana} (Soó) Kárpáti, {\i Feddes Repert.}{\b  62}: 175 (1960): Leaves up to 13 × 10 cm, broadly ovate or ovate-elliptical, rounded or broadly cuneate at the base, with (8-)10-11 pairs of veins, coriaceous.{\i  Hill-regions of N. Hungary and S.E. Czechoslovakia}.
\par

\par
69}
\par