{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 hairy beneath with long straight hairs. Inflorescence lax. Achenes glabrous.{\i  Usually in damp or wet places. E.C. & E. Europe.}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc {\b 7.            Rhodotypos}       Siebold & Zucc.
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc By P.W. Ball
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Deciduous shrubs. Leaves simple, opposite. Flowers solitary, terminal, 4-merous; hypanthium flat; petals white; stamens numerous; carpels usually 4. Fruit a head of dry drupes.
\par

\par
   {\b 1. R. scandens} (Thunb.) Makino,{\i  Bot. Mag. Tokyo}{\b  27}: 126 (1913). Erect, up to 2 m or more. Leaves 4-8 cm, ovate or ovate-oblong, acuminate, biserrate, glabrous above, sericeous beneath when young. Flowers 3-5 cm in diameter; sepals dentate, persistent in fruit. Drupes 8-10 mm, black, shining.{\i  Cultivated for ornament and sometimes naturalized}. [?Ga Rs (W).] ({\i Japan and C. China.})
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc {\b 8.               Kerria}              DC.         
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc By P.W. Ball
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Deciduous shrubs. Leaves simple. Flowers solitary, terminal on lateral branches, 5-merous; hypanthium flat; petals yellow; stamens numerous; carpels 5-8. Fruit a head of achenes.
\par

\par
{\b 1. K. japonica} (L.) DC., {\i Trans. Linn. Soc. London}{\b  12}: 157 (1818). Erect,up to 2·5 m; branches green. Leaves 2-10 cm, ovate, acuminate, biserrate, glabrous above, pubescent beneath. Flowers 3-5 cm in diameter. Achenes brownish-black.{\i  Widely cultivated for ornament and sometimes naturalized.} [ ?Ga He ?Rm Rs (W).] ({\i C. & W. China}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Usually {\i flore pleno} in cultivation.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc {\b 9.                 Rubus}                   L.
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc By Y. Heslop-Harrison
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Perennial herbs or shrubs. Stems usually with prickles. Leaves usually pinnate, digitate or pedate, with 3-7 dentate leaflets. Flowers solitary or in racemose or paniculate inflorescences. Flowers usually 5-merous; hypanthium flat, with a large, usually convex receptacle; epicalyx absent; petals red, purple, pink or white; stamens numerous; carpels numerous; styles subterminal, usually deciduous; ovules 2. Fruit usually a coherent head of 1-seeded drupelets.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 The European species of{\i  Rubus}, native and naturalized, are placed in 5 subgenera. The first four contain 9 species, and present no taxonomic difficulties. In the remaining subgenus,{\i  Rubus}, some 2000 species have been described. Almost all are agamospecies, segregated from{\i  R. fruticosus} L. This name, which is based on a mixture of two species ({\b 12},{\i  R. plicatus} and {\b 38}, {\i R. ulmifolius}) belonging to different subsections, is now used only in an aggregate sense, and it covers the whole of the section {\i Rubus}, except for{\b  75} and the{\i  Corylifolii} (see note following {\b 75}). Many of the species are tetraploid (2n = 28) but diploids, triploids, pentaploids and hexaploids are also known. It is likely that many of the species have arisen during the Pleistocene era as a result of hybridization and apomixis. The apomicts are all polyploid and pseudogamous; apomixis is often facultative so that new apomictic biotypes can arise at the present time by hybridization, thus increasing the number of potential taxa.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 It is thus not profitable to treat fully and by conventional means the whole array of agamospecies, and no attempt at a detailed treatment is made here. The full spectrum of morphological variation has, however, been covered, and this has been done by recognizing 66 {\i circle}-species which are relatively wide spread and distinct. Round these the remaining species can be grouped. (This method was proposed by Gustafsson,{\i  op. cit}.). The description of a circle-species applies only to the circle-species and does not cover the related species which are listed after the appropriate circle-species. All species recognised in Basic and Standard Floras are listed. The key should enable all European species to be run down to their respective subsections and sometimes series, but below this level only those species selected as 'circle-species' are keyed out.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 The classificatory framework is based on that of Sudre ({\i op. cit.}).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 In the descriptions the stem- and leaf-characters are those of the middle part of the first-year or non-flowering stem of a well-grown plant in a normal environment.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 The armature may include large{\i  prickles}, smaller{\i  pricklets}, {\i acicles}, stalked{\i  glands} and eglandular{\i  hairs}. The acicles, which may be gland-tipped, are stouter and more rigid than the glands or hairs, but are always straight and never expanded at the base. Prickles which are straight but directed backwards along the stem are said to be {\i deflexed}; those which are curved as well as deflexed are said to be {\i falcate}. Sepals which are furnished with pricklets are aculeolate; sepals with the apex prolonged are appendiculate; descriptions of the indumentum of sepals refer to the outer surface.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Although the inflorescence is always determinate, it resembles a raceme, corymb or panicle in appearance and is called by these terms for convenience.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Endemic signs have not been used for the ' related species ' because of lack of information, but it is probable that the great majority of those listed are endemic to Europe.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Literature: W.O.Focke, {\i Biblioth. Bot.} ({\i Stuttgart}){\b  72}({\b 1-2}): 1-223 (1910-11); 83 (1914). Å. Gustafsson,{\i  Lunds Univ. Årsskr.} ser. 2, {\b 39}({\b 6}) (1943). H. Sudre, {\i Rubi Europae.} Paris. 1908-1913. W. C. R. Watson, {\i Handbook of the Rubi of Great Britain and Ireland.} Cambridge. 1958. K. E. Weihe & C. G. Nees von Esenbeck,{\i  Rubi Germanici}. Eberfeld. 1822-27.

\pard\f0\fs28  Some of the more recent Floras treat{\i  Rubus} very fully, e.g.: J. Legrain in W. Robyns,{\i  Flore Générale de Belgique}{\b  3}: 10-274 Bruxelles.1958-59. E. I. Nyárády in T. Savulescu,{\i  Flora Republicii Populare Române}{\b  4}: 276-580. Bucuresti. 1956. J. Dostál,{\i  Kvetena CSR} 572-630. Praha. 1950. Á. Kiss in R. Soó & S. Jávorka. {\i A Magyar Növényvilag Kézikönyve} 251-270. Budapest. 1951.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Stems herbaceous or nearly so; stipules free from petiole
\par
2 Leaves simple
\par
3 Dioecious; ripe fruit orange ................................................ {\b 1. chamaemorus}
\par
3 Flowers hermaphrodite; ripe fruit red ................................... {\b 2. humulifolius}
\par
2 Leaves ternate
\par
4 All stems flower-bearing, without prickles; petals pink ............... {\b 3. arcticus}
\par
4 Some stems vegetative, with prickles; petals white .................... {\b 4. saxatilis}
\par
1 Stems woody; stipules united with petiole
\par
5 Leaves simple; receptacle flat ...................................................... {\b 5. odoratus}
\par
5 Leaves compound; receptacle convex
\par
6 Ripe fruit red or orange, separating from receptacle; leaves ternate or
\par
  pinnate
\par
7 Leaves subglabrous beneath; flowers ± solitary; petals bright purple
\par
  .................................................................................................... {\b 6. spectabilis} 
\par
7 Leaves white-tomentose beneath; flowers in racemes; petals white or pink  
\par
8 Stems densely covered with reddish bristles; petals pink, 
\par
  curved inwards .....................................................................{\b 9. phoenicolasius} 
\par
8 Stems not densely covered with bristles; petals white, erect
\par

\par
7}
\par