{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b c}) Subsp. {\b croatica} Kárpáti, {\i op. cit.} 177 (1960): Leaves up to 8 × 6 cm, elliptical or ovate-elliptical, obtusely cuneate at base, with 8-9 pairs of veins, with dense whitish tomentum beneath, coriaceous. {\i W. Jugoslavia} ({\i Velebit}).
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b d}) Subsp. {\b serpentini} Kárpáti,{\i  op. cit. }177 (1960): Leaves 10 cm, orbicular or suborbicular, with 8-9(-10) pairs of veins, not coriaceous.{\i  E. Austria} ({\i Burgenland}).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Related species include:
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b  S. anglica} Hedl., {\i Nyt Mag. Naturvid.} ({\i Christiania}) {\b 52}: 258 (1914). 2n = 68. Br Hb.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b  S. subsimilis} Hedl.,{\i  op. cit. }257 (1914). No.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Related species which are intermediate between {\b 5}, {\b 6} and {\b 11} include:
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b  S. buekkensis} Soó, {\i Acta. Biol. Acad. Sci. Hung.}{\b  3}: 224 (1952). Cz Hu.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b S. carpatica} Borbás in C. K. Schneider,{\i  Ill. Handb. Laubholzk.}{\b  1}: 686 (1906). Au Cz Ju ?Rm.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b  S. hungarica }(Bornm.) Kárpáti,{\i  Feddes Repert.}{\b  62}: 199 (1960). Cz Ju ?Rm.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b  S. javorkae} (Soó) Kárpáti,{\i  op. cit.} 196 (1960). Cz Hu.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b  S. sooi} (Mathe) Kárpáti, {\i op. cit.} 199 (1960). Cz Hu.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b  S. velebitica} Kárpáti, {\i op. cit.} 190 (1960). Ju.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 12. S. dacica} Borbás, {\i Österr. Bot. Zeitschr. }{\b 37}: 404 (1887). Small tree. Leaves 10 × 7 cm, ovate, c. 1½ times as long as wide, with 8-9 pairs of veins, rather deeply lobed, the larger lobes extending 1/3-2/5 of the way to the midrib, rather coriaceous, with white or whitish-grey tomentum beneath. Fruit c. 10 mm. •{\i  W.C. Romania.} Rm.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Related species include:
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b  S. pseudothuringiaca} Düll, {\i Ber. Bayer. Bot. Ges.}{\b  34}: 55 (1961). Ge.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 This species and {\b 12} may have originated as a result of hybridization between {\b 2} and {\b 11}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 13. S. hybrida} L., {\i Sp. Pl}. ed. 2, 684 (1762) ({\i S. fennica} (Kalm) Fries). Medium-sized tree. Leaves 7·5-10·5 cm, ovate, obtuse, slightly cordate at base, with 8-10 pairs of veins, coarsely serrate, lobed, with 2 pairs of free sessile leaflets proximally, separated from one another by 5-10 mm, and a third pair usually cut to the midrib at least on one side, rather coriaceous, with a greyish tomentum beneath. Fruit 10-12 mm, globose, red,with small and sparse lenticels.{\i  S. & W. Fennoscandia, Bornholm.} Da Fe No Su.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Related species include:
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b S. borbasii} Jáv., {\i Bot. Közl.}{\b  14}: 99 (1915). Rm.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b  S. pseudofennica} E. F. Warburg, {\i Watsonia}{\b  4}: 43 (1957). Br.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 14. S. meinichii} (Lindeb.) Hedl., {\i Nyt Mag. Naturvid.} ({\i Christiania}){\b  52}: 259 (1914). Small tree. Leaves obtuse, coarsely serrate, somewhat coriaceous, lobed, with 4-5 pairs of free, sessile leaflets proximally, subglabrous above, with greyish tomentum beneath; upper leaflets shortly decurrent on petiole, terminal leaflet larger than the lateral, ovate-rhombic, decreasingly lobed towards apex. Fruit up to 12 mm, subglobose, not or only slightly longer than wide, red. •{\i  S. & W. Norway.} No.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Related species include:
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b  S. teodori} Liljefors, {\i Acta Horti Berg. }{\b 16}: 283 (1953). 2n = 51. Su.

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b 13}, {\b 14} and their related species are all apomictic, so far as is known. They probably originated by hybridization between {\b 2} and{\b  7} or between{\b  2} and {\b 4}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 15. S. intermedia} (Ehrh.) Pers., {\i Syn. Pl.}{\b  2}: 38 (1806) ({\i S. suecica }(L.)Krok & Almq., {\i S. scandica} (L.) Fries). Medium sized tree. Leaves elliptical, 1·5-1·9 times as long as wide, with 7-9 pairs of lateral veins; lobes extending 1/4-1/3(-1/2) of the way to the midrib, with yellowish-grey tomentum beneath. Leaves of vigorous long shoots often more deeply lobed. Fruit 12-15 × 8-10 mm, scarlet, with few and small lenticels. 2n = 68. •{\i  S. Fennoscandia and Baltic region.} Da Fe Ge No Po Rs (B) Su [Cz].
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Widely planted as an ornamental tree, this species is known to be apomictic; Liljefors considers that one of its parental species is {\b 3}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 16. S. latifolia} (Lam.) Pers.,{\i  loc. cit.} (1806). Medium-sized tree.Leaves broadly elliptical, 1-1¼ times as long as wide or somewhat longer,shortly acute, rounded or slightly cordate at base, with 7-9 pairs of veins, somewhat coriaceous, lobed (but never with free leaflets), glabrescent above, with grey-green tomentum beneath; lobes more or less triangular, the second pair usually the largest, acute or acuminate, rounded at the lower edge, biserrate or unequally serrate, the teeth terminating the main veins straight. Flowers c. 20 mm in diameter. Fruit 12-14 × 13-15·5 mm, subglobose, yellowish-brown, with rather many, large lenticels. •{\i  From E.C. Portugal to S.W. Germany.} Ga Ge Hs Lu [Su].
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b 16} and the very numerous related species are, so far as is known, all apomictic, and probably originated by hybridization between {\b 3} and one or other of the species {\b 5}, {\b 6}, {\b 7} or {\b 8}. The related species may be arranged in 2 series, as follows:
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\i  Series} ({\i a}). Leaves with greenish-grey tomentum beneath. Fruit ovoid or subglobose, brown, reddish-brown or orange. Resembling {\b 3}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b  S. borosiana} Kárpáti, {\i Ann. Sect. Horti- Viticult. Univ. Sci. Agr. }({\i Budapest}){\b  12}: 144 (1948). Hu.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b  S. decipiens} (Bechst.) Irmisch in Petzold & Kirchner, {\i Arbor. Muscav.} 301(1864). Ga Ge.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b  S. decipientiformis} Kárpáti, {\i Ann. Sect. Horti- Viticult. Univ. Sci. Agr. }({\b Budapest}) {\b 14}: 36 (1950). Hu.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b  S. degenii} Jáv., {\i Magyar Bot. Lapok}{\b  25}: 85 (1926). Hu.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b  S. devoniensis} E. F. Warburg, {\i Watsonia}{\b  4}: 46 (1957). Br Hb.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b  S. gayeriana} Kárpáti,{\i  Ann. Sect. Horti- Viticult. Univ. Sci. Agr.} ({\i Budapest}) {\b 14}: 35 (1950). Hu.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b  S. heilingensis} Düll, {\i Ber. Bayer. Bot. Ges. }{\b 34}: 47 (1961). Ge.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b  S. joannis} Kárpáti, {\i Bot. Közl.}{\b  52}: 140 (1966). Cz.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b S. klasterskyana} Kárpáti, {\i op. cit. }136 (1966). Cz.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b  S. multicrenata} Bornm. ex Düll, {\i Ber. Bayer. Bot. Ges.}{\b  34}: 49 (1961). Ge.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b  S. parumlobata} Irmisch ex Düll,{\i  op. cit.} 45 (1961). Ge.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b  S. pseudolatifolia} Boros, {\i Mitt. Kgl. Ungar. Garfenb.-Lehranst. }{\b 3}: 51(1937). Hu.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b  S. subcordata} Bornm. ex Düll, {\i Ber. Bayer. Bot. Ges. }{\b 34}: 47 (1961). Ge.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b  S. zertovae} Kárpáti, {\i Bot. Közl.}{\b  52}: 137 (1966). Cz.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\i  Series} ({\i b}). Leaves with whitish-grey tomentum beneath. Fruit subglobose,red or orange-red. Resembling{\b  5-8}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b  S. adamii} Kárpáti,{\i  Hung. Acta Biol.}{\b  1}: 112 (1949). Hu.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b  S. andreanszkyana} Kárpáti,{\i  Ann. Sect. Horti-Viticult. Univ. Sci. Agr}.({\i Budapest}){\b 14}: 35 (1950). Hu.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b S. badensis} Düll,{\i  Ber. Bayer. Bot. Ges.}{\b 34}: 51 (1961). Ge.
\par

\par
70}
\par