{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b S. bakonyensis} (Jáv.) Kárpáti,{\i  Hung. Acta Biol. }{\b 1}: 116 (1949).Hu.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b  S. balatonica} Kárpáti, {\i op. cit.} 121 (1949). Hu.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b   S. barthae} Kárpáti, {\i Ann. Sect. Horti-Viticult. Univ. Sci. Agr. }({\i Budapest}) {\b 14}: 37 (1950). Hu.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b  S. bohemica} Kovanda,{\i  Acta Univ. Carol.} ({\i Biol}.){\b  1}: 77 (1961). Cz.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b   S. bristoliensis} Wilmott,{\i  Proc. Linn. Soc. London}{\b  146}: 76 (1934).2n = 51. Br.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b  S. dominii} Kárpáti, {\i Bot. Közl.}{\b  52}: 140 (1966). Cz.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b  S. eugenii-kelleri} Kárpáti,{\i  Hung. Acta Biol.}{\b  1}: 113 (1949). Hu.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b  S. franconica} Bornm. ex Düll,{\i  Ber. Bayer. Bot. Ges.}{\b  34}: 49(1961). Ge.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28   {\b S. futakiana} Kárpáti,{\i  Bot. Közl.}{\b  52}: 137 (1966). Cz.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b   S. gerecseensis} Boros & Kárpáti, {\i Hung. Acta Biol.}{\b  1}: 107(1949). Hu.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b   S. karpatii} Boros, {\i Ann. Sect. Horti-Viticult. Univ. Sci. Agr.}({\i Budapest}){\b  13}: 153 (1949). Hu.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b  S. kmetiana} Kárpáti,{\i  Bot. Közl.} {\b 52}: 137 (1966). Cz.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b   S. latissima} Kárpáti,{\i  Ann. Sect. Horti-Viticult. Univ. Sci. Agr. }({\i Budapest}) {\b 14}: 36 (1950). Hu.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b   S. magocsyana} Kárpáti,{\i  Bot. Közl.}{\b  52}: 140 (1966). Cz.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b  S. paxiana} Jáv.,{\i  Magyar Bot. Lapok}{\b  25}: 89 (1926). Rm.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28   {\b S. pseudobakonyensis} Kárpáti,{\i  Hung. Acta Biol.}{\b  1}: 117 (1949) Hu.

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b  S. pseudosemiincisa} Boros, {\i Mitt. Kgl. Ungar. Gartenb.Lehranst.}{\b  3}: 53 (1937). Hu.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b   S. pseudovertesensis} Boros, {\i op. cit. }53 (1937). Hu.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b  S. redliana} Kárpáti,{\i  Hung. Acta Biol.}{\b  1}: 118 (1949). Hu.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b  S. semiincisa} Borbás, {\i Term.-Tud. Közl.}{\b  11}: 34 (1879). 2n = 34. Hu.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b  S. simonkaiana} Kárpáti,{\i  Ann. Sect. Horti-Viticult. Univ. Sci.Agr. }({\i Budapest}) {\b 14}: 38 (1950). Hu.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b   S. slovenica} Kovanda,{\i  Acta Univ. Carol.} ({\i Biol.}) {\b 1}: 73 (1961).?Au Cz.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b  S. subcuneata} Wilmott, {\i Proc. Linn. Soc. London }{\b 146}: 76 (1934).Br.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b  S. vertesensis} Boros, {\i Mitt. Kgl. Ungar. Gartenb.-Lehranst. }{\b 3}: 52 (1937). Hu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 17. S. sudetica} (Tausch) Fritsch in A. Kerner,{\i  Sched. Fl.Exsicc. Austro-Hung.}{\b  7}: 20 (1896). Shrub. Leaves elongate- or obovate-elliptical, acute, c. 1¾ times as long as wide, with 8-9 pairs of veins, coarsely serrate, the teeth straight and not pointing forward, not lobed, glabrous above, with a dense grey tomentum beneath. Petals c. 5 mm. Fruit red. •{\i  N.W. Czechoslovakia} ({\i Krkonose}). Cz.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 18. S. margittaiana} (Jáv.) Kárpáti,{\i  Feddes Repert.}{\b  62}: 304 (1960). Like {\b 17} but leaves obtuse, finely serrate, very slightly lobed, with a less dense tomentum beneath.{\i  E. Czecho-slovakia }({\i Fatra}). Cz.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b  17} and {\b 18} are probably apomictic species which have arisen by hybridization between {\b 4} and one or other of the species{\b  5}, {\b 6},{\b  7} or {\b 8}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc {\b 29.              Eriobotrya}           Lindley  
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc By P.W. Ball.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Evergreen shrubs or trees. Leaves simple. Inflorescence a terminal panicle. Sepals persistent in fruit; petals ovate or suborbicular, clawed, white; stamens 20; carpels 2-5, walls thin in fruit; ovules 2; styles connate only at base. Fruit with 1 or a few large seeds.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. E. japonica} (Thunb.) Lindley, {\i Trans. Linn. Soc. London}{\b  13}:102 (1821). Small tree up to 10 m. Leaves 12-25 cm, obovate to elliptic-oblong, dentate, reddish-brown-tomentose beneath. Inflorescence densely reddish-brown-tomentose. Flowers c. 1 cm in diameter. Fruit 3-6 cm, pyriform or ellipsoid, yellow. Seeds 1-1·5 cm.{\i  Cultivated in S. Europe for the edible fruit, and elsewhere for ornament. More or less naturalized in Açores, Portugal and Kriti.} [Az Cr Hs It Lu.] ({\i C. China}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc {\b 30.                 Amelanchier}         Medicus 
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc By J. do Amaral Franco.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Deciduous shrubs or small trees, without spines. Leaves simple, serrate. Stipules caducous. Flowers in terminal racemes, rarely solitary. Petals linear to oblong-obovate, not clawed, white, rarely pink; stamens 10-20; carpels 5, connate or partly free, with walls cartilaginous in fruit; ovules 2; styles 2-5, free or connate at base. Fruit small, 4- to 10-celled, bluish- or purplish-black, usually juicy and sweet.

\pard\f0\fs28   This genus includes ornamental species (chiefly from North America) which flower profusely and have yellow or red leaves in the autumn. Some of these, and a few hybrids, are occasionally grown in European gardens, and their nomenclature has been very confused.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Styles free; leaves coarsely serrate (3-5 teeth per cm) ..................  {\b 1. ovalis}
\par
1 Styles connate; leaves finely serrulate (6-12 teeth per cm)
\par
2 Young leaves whitish; racemes erect; petals 4-10 mm .................. {\b 2. spicata}
\par
2 Young leaves purplish; racemes nodding; petals 15-18 mm ....{\b 3. grandiflora}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. A. ovalis} Medicus,{\i  Gesch. Bot.} 79 (1793) ({\i A. vulgaris} Moench,{\i  A. rotundifolia} Dum.-Courset). Erect or spreading shrub up to 3 m; bark blackish; young twigs lanate. Leaves 2·5-5 cm, ovate to obovate, rounded or emarginate and mucronate at apex, rather coarsely serrate, lanate beneath when young. Racemes 3- to 8-flowered, erect, lanate. Sepals at first lanate, soon glabrous; petals 10-13 mm; styles 5, free. Fruit bluish-black; pedicels 5-10 mm. {\i Rocky places and open woods, mainly on limestone and in mountain areas. S. & C. Europe northwards to Luxembourg and S. Poland.} Al Au Be Bl Bu Co Cr Cz Ga Ge Gr He Hs Hu It Ju Lu Po Rm Rs (K) Sa Si Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   The plant from Kriti and S. Greece, usually a smaller shrub with more persistent tomentum on young twigs, leaves, pedicels and calyces, is regarded by some authors as a distinct variety, var.{\i  cretica} (Willd.) Fiori ({\i A. cretica} (Willd.) DC.) and may deserve higher status.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   {\b 2. A. spicata} (Lam.) C. Koch,{\i  Dendrologie}{\b  1}: 182 (1869). Like {\b 1} but up to 4 m; leaves finely serrulate, densely white-tomentose when young; petals 4-10 mm; styles connate at base; apex of ovary lanate. 2n = 68.{\i  Cultivated for ornament and sometimes naturalized in N. Europe.} [Fe Ga Ge No Rs (C) Su.]
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Formerly considered to be a garden hybrid between {\b 1} and {\i A. canadensis} (L.) Medicus, but now considered to be conspecific with {\i A. humilis} Wieg., from N.E. North America.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b  A. canadensis} (L.) Medicus, {\i Gesch. Bot.} 79 (1793) ({\i A. oblongifolia} (Torrey & A. Gray) M. J. Roemer), native of eastern U.S.A., is closely related to {\b 2}, but differs mainly in having the leaves usually oblong, and the apex of the ovary more or less glabrous. It is sometimes cultivated in gardens in N. and C. Europe, but its name has been frequently used for other species.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   {\b 3. A. grandiflora} Rehder, {\i Jour. Arnold Arb.}{\b  2}: 45 (1920) ({\i A. confusa} Hyl., {\i A. laevis} auct. eur., non Wieg.). Shrub or small tree up to 9 m; young twigs hairy. Leaves 3-7 cm, broadly elliptical, cordate, finely serrulate, purplish and floccose-tomentose when young but soon green and glabrous. Racemes many-flowered,
\par

\par
71}
\par