{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 nodding, slightly villous. Petals 15-18 mm; styles 5, connate at base. Fruit dark purple; pedicels 20-22 mm. {\i Of garden origin; now commonly cultivated for ornament, and sometimes naturalized in W. Europe}. [Be Br Ga Ge Ho.]
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   This taxon has been much confused in gardens both with{\i  A. arborea} (Michx fil.) Fernald ({\i A. canadensis} sensu W. Darlington, non (L.) Medicus) and {\i A. laevis} Wieg. The former, from eastern U.S.A., is a taller tree up to 20 m, with young leaves tomentose-lanate on both surfaces, racemes silky-tomentose, and fruit brown; the latter, from N.E. North America, has young twigs nearly glabrous, leaves always glabrous, and fruit smaller, on longer pedicels 30-50 mm.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc {\b 31.              Cotoneaster}            Medicus
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc By K. Browicz.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Shrubs, rarely small trees, without spines. Leaves entire. Stipules caducous. Flowers small, in cymes or corymbs, or solitary. Sepals persistent; petals white or pink; stamens c. 20; carpels 2-5, free on the ventral side, with walls stony in fruit; ovules 2; styles 2-5, free. Fruit red or black, with mealy flesh; pyrenes 2-5.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Some of the species are very similar to one another, and difficult to distinguish in the vegetative state. They are also variable, particularly in the indumentum and the shape of the leaf-apex. Interspecific hybrids are fairly common. Many species are cultivated as ornamental shrubs, and some are naturalized by bird dispersal, often in places remote from gardens.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Literature: G. Klotz, {\i Wiss. Zeitschr. Univ. Halle} ({\i Math.-Nat.}) {\b 6}({\b 6}): 
\par
945-982 (1957).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Petals patent, white (rarely pink)
\par
2 Evergreen shrub not more than 1 m ................................... {\b 11. microphyllus}
\par
2 Deciduous shrub usually more than 1 m
\par
3 Leaves pubescent beneath at first, soon glabrous;
\par
  inflorescence lax ...................................................................... {\b 8. granatensis}
\par
3 Leaves persistently tomentose beneath; inflorescence dense
\par
4 Hypanthium and sepals tomentose ....................................... {\b 9. nummularius}
\par
4 Hypanthium and sepals slightly pubescent ................................. {\b 10. tauricus}
\par
1 Petals erect, ± tinged with red or pink
\par
5 Fruit black .......................................................................................... {\b 7. niger}
\par
5 Fruit red or purplish
\par
6 Flowers solitary or in pairs; shrubs not more than 
\par
  0·7 m, usually procumbent
\par
7 Leaves not more than 1·2 cm, shining above ......................... {\b 1. horizontalis}
\par
7 Leaves more than 2 cm, dull above ....................................... {\b 4. cinnabarinus}
\par
6 Flowers in clusters of 2-5 or more; shrubs usually 
\par
  more than 1 m, erect
\par
8 Twigs strigose pubescent ............................................................. {\b 2. simonsii}
\par
8 Twigs appressed-villous or almost glabrous
\par
9 Calyx glabrous, or pubescent at margin ................................ {\b 3. integerrimus}
\par
9 Calyx densely pubescent or tomentose
\par
10 Leaves obtuse or rarely subacute, tomentose beneath ......... {\b 5. nebrodensis}
\par
10 Leaves acuminate or acute, usually glabrescent ................... {\b 6. acuminatus}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Sect. COTONEASTER. Petals erect, reddish, pinkish or white with red 
\par
markings.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. C. horizontalis} Decne,{\i  Fl. Serres Jard. Eur.}{\b  22}: 168 (1879). Deciduous or semi-evergreen shrub c. 0·5 m, with horizontally patent, much-branched stems. Leaves up to 1·2 cm, suborbicular or broadly elliptical, acute or mucronate at apex, dark green and shining above, glabrous or with a few hairs beneath. Petioles 1-2 mm, strigose-pubescent. Flowers 1-2, subsessile. Petals reddish or whitish. Fruit 5-6 mm, subglobose, bright red; pyrenes usually 3. {\i Frequently cultivated and rarely naturalized}. [Au Br.] ({\i W. China.})
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. C. simonsii} Baker in Saunders,{\i  Refug. Bot.}{\b  1}: t. 55 (1869). Erect shrub up to 4 m, deciduous to semi-evergreen. Twigs with strigose pubescence persisting for 2-3 years. Leaves 1-3 cm, orbicular-obovate, broadly cuneate at the base, acute or slightly acuminate, dark green above and pubescent while young, paler green beneath and sparsely strigose, chiefly on the veins; petioles 2-4 mm. Flowers 2-4 in short cymes. Petals white with red markings. Fruit 8 mm, shortly ellipsoid or obovoid, scarlet; pyrenes 3-4.{\i  Frequently cultivated, and occasionally naturalized in N.W. Europe.} [Br Ga Hb No.] ({\i E. India.})
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 3. C. integerrimus} Medicus, {\i Gesch. Bot. }85 (1793) ({\i C. vulgaris} Lindley). Erect, branched, deciduous shrub up to 2 m. Young twigs tomentose, soon glabrous. Leaves 2-5 × 0·5-3 cm, suborbicular to ovate, obtuse or, especially on the long shoots, acute, usually mucronate, rounded at the base, glabrous above, greyish tomentose beneath, petiolate. Flowers 2-3(-4) in short, glabrous cymes. Calyx glabrous, or pubescent at margin. Petals pink. Fruit 6-8 mm, subglobose, red; pyrenes (2-)3(-4).{\i  Dry, stony places, mainly in the mountains; somewhat calcicole. Much of Europe, but absent from most of the U.S.S.R., the extreme north, and much of the Mediterranean region.} Al Au Be Br Bu Cz Da Fe Ga Ge Gr He Hs Hu It Ju No Po Rm Rs (B, W, K) Su.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 4. C. cinnabarinus} Juz.,{\i  Not. Syst.} ({\i Leningrad}) {\b 13}: 32 (1950). Like {\b 3} but rarely more than 0·7 m, with decumbent branches; leaves broadly ovate or orbicular, with obtuse apex; flowers solitary or rarely in pairs; fruit reddish or ange. •{\i  N.W. Russia} ({\i Kol'skij Poluostrov.}) Rs (N).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   {\b C}. × {\b antoninae} Juz., {\i Not. Syst.} ({\i Leningrad}) {\b 13}: 33 (1950), from Kol'skij Poluostrov (N. Russia) and from Finland, is possibly a hybrid between {\b 4} and {\b 7}. Further investigation is needed.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   {\b C. uniflorus} Bunge in Ledeb., {\i Fl. Altaica}{\b  2}: 220 (1830), from C. Asia and W. China, has been recorded from Kol'skij Poluostrov and from Finland, but the records are all referable to{\b  4}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 5. C. nebrodensis} (Guss.) C. Koch,{\i  Hort. Dendrol.} 179 (1853) ({\i C. tomentosus} Lindley). Deciduous shrub up to 3 m. Young twigs tomentose. Leaves 3-6 cm, suborbicular, broadly ovate or elliptical, obtuse or rarely subacute, with white pubescence above at first, later glabrescent, and with whitish or greyish tomentum beneath; petiole 3-6 mm, tomentose. Axis of inflorescence, peduncles and calyx tomentose; flowers 3-12, in nodding cymes. Petals usually reddish on the outer side. Fruit 7-8 mm, subglobose, red, with a whitish tomentum; pyrenes 3-5.{\i  Dry, stony places, mainly in the mountains; somewhat calcicole. S. & S.C. Europe, northwards to the Vosges and S. Poland}. Al Au Bu Cz Ga Ge Gr He Hs Hu It Ju Po Rm Si [Da No Su].
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   {\b C}. ×{\b  intermedius} Coste, {\i Bull. Soc. Bot. Fr. }{\b 40}: cxxii (1893), a hybrid between {\b 3} and {\b 5}, occurs sporadically throughout the area of the parents and is sometimes treated as a species.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 6. C. acuminatus} Lindley, {\i Trans. Linn. Soc. London}{\b  13}: 101 (1821). Erect, deciduous shrub up to 4 m, often with pendent branches. Young twigs densely pubescent. Leaves 3-6 cm, twice as long as wide, elliptic-ovate to ovate-lanceolate, acuminate or acute, broadly cuneate at the base, more or less pubescent on both surfaces when young, glabrous above and subglabrous beneath at maturity. Flowers 2-5 in short, pubescent cymes. Calyx pubescent; petals pink or whitish. Fruit 9-10 mm wide, ellipsoid, bright red, slightly hairy near apex; pyrenes 2.{\i  Frequently cultivated and occasionally naturalized.} [Ga Ge.] ({\i Himalaya}.)
\par

\par
72}
\par