{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 7. C. niger} (Thunb.) Fries, {\i Summa Veg. Scand.} 175 (1846) ({\i C. orientalis} A. Kerner, {\i C. melanocarpus} Loddiges ex C. K. Schneider). Deciduous shrub up to 2-2·5 m. Young twigs more or less pubescent, the older glabrous, shining, reddish-brown. Leaves up to 5 cm, broadly ovate to ovate-oblong, obtuse or sometimes subacute and mucronulate, especially on the long shoots, dark green and sparsely pubescent above at first, whitish tomentose beneath; petiole 1-5 mm. Flowers 3-8(-15) in nodding, pubescent or almost glabrous cymes. Calyx glabrous or slightly pubescent; petals reddish or reddish-white. Fruit 6-9 mm, subglobose, black, pruinose; pyrenes 2.{\i  N., E. & E.C. Europe, southwards to Macedonia.} Bu Cz Da Hu Ju No Po Rm Rs (N, B, C. W, K, E) Su.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   {\b C. matrensis} Domokos,{\i  Mitt. Kgl. Ungar. Gartenb.-Lehranst.}{\b  7}: 50 (1941), from Hungary and Czechoslovakia, and {\b C. alaunicus} Golitsin, {\i Nov. Syst. Pl. Vasc.} ({\i Leningrad}) {\b 1964}: 145 (1964), from C. Russia, are probably hybrids of {\b 3} and {\b 7} or variants of {\b 7}. They need further study.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Sect. CHAENOPETALUM Koehne. Petals patent, white (rarely pink).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 8. C. granatensis} Boiss.,{\i  Elenchus} 41 (1838) ({\i C. multiflorus} var. {\i granatensis} (Boiss.) Wenzig). Deciduous shrub or sometimes small tree up to 4·5 m, with slender, arching branches. Twigs pubescent at first, soon glabrous. Leaves 2-5 cm, elliptical or orbicular, obtuse or mucronulate, rounded or broadly cuneate at base, glabrous above, with scattered hairs beneath. Inflorescence many-flowered, branched, lax, pubescent. Calyx somewhat hairy. Fruit 6-9 mm, pyriform, red; pyrenes 2. •{\i  S. Spain} ({\i Sierra Nevada}). Hs.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 9. C. nummularia} Fischer & C. A. Meyer,{\i  Ind. Sem. Horti Petrop.}{\b  2}: 34 (1835). Erect, deciduous shrub up to 1·5 m, but sometimes dwarfed by exposure; young twigs grey-tomentose. Leaves 1-2·5 × 0·9-2·2 cm, broadly elliptical, obovate, or suborbicular, obtuse, mucronate, sometimes emarginate, sparsely hairy above when young, whitish- or greyish-tomentose beneath; petiole 1·5-2·5 mm, tomentose. Inflorescence 3- to 7-flowered, dense. Hypanthium and calyx tomentose. Fruit c. 8 mm, subglobose, red, whitish-pubescent when young, becoming glabrous; pyrenes 2.{\i  Kriti.} Cr. ({\i C. & S.W. Asia, N. Africa}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   The plant from Kriti has pink petals, though over the rest of its range the species has white petals.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 10. C. tauricus} Pojark., {\i Not. Syst.} ({\i Leningrad}) {\b 8}: 138 (1938). Like {\b 9} but leaves oblong-elliptical or oblong-ovate; hypanthium and calyx slightly pubescent.{\i  Stony mountain slopes. Krym.} Rs (K).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 11. C. microphyllus} Wallich ex Lindley, {\i Bot. Reg. }{\b 13}: t. 1114 (1827). Evergreen shrub up to 1 m, with stiff, patent branches. Twigs strigose-pubescent. Leaves 0·5-0·8 cm, obovate to obovate-oblong, obtuse or emarginate, rarely subacute, cuneate at base, dark green, glabrous and shining above, glaucous and pubescent beneath; petiole 1-2 mm. Flowers solitary, or sometimes 2-3. Calyx pubescent. Fruit 6 mm, globose, scarlet; pyrenes 2.{\i  Cultivated, and naturalized in Britain and Ireland.} [Br Hb.] ({\i Himalaya and S.W. China}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc {\b 32.               Pyracantha}           M.J. Roemer  
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc By P.W. Ball.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Evergreen, usually spiny shrubs. Leaves simple. Stipules minute,caducous. Flowers in compound corymbs. Sepals persistent; petals suborbicular, white; stamens 20; anthers yellow; carpels 5, free on the ventral side, with walls stony in fruit; ovules 2. Fruit red, orange or yellow, with 5 pyrenes.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. P. coccinea} M. J. Roemer,{\i  Syn. Monogr.}{\b  3}: 219 (1847) ({\i Cotoneaster pyracantha} (L.) Spach). Up to 2 m (up to 6 m in cultivation). Leaves 2-4 cm, elliptical to obovate-elliptical, glabrous or sparsely pubescent beneath when young, crenate-dentate. Flowers 7-8 mm in diameter. Fruit 5-7 mm, bright red, rarely orange or yellow.{\i  S. Europe, westwards to N.E. Spain.} Al Bu Ga Gr Hs It Ju Rs (K) Tu [Br Lu].
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    This and several closely related species are widely cultivated for the ornamental flowers and fruit.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc {\b 33.               Mespilus}                 L.
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc By P.W. Ball.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Deciduous trees or shrubs, sometimes spiny. Leaves simple. Stipules deciduous. Flowers solitary. Sepals longer than petals, entire, persistent; stamens 30-40; anthers red; carpels 5, connate, with walls stony in fruit; ovules 2; styles 5, free. Fruit with foliaceous sepals.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. M. germanica} L.,{\i  Sp. Pl.} 478 (1753). Shrub or small tree up to 6 m. Leaves 5-12 cm, lanceolate or oblanceolate to obovate, pubescent, but sometimes glabrous above, entire or serrulate towards the apex. Flowers 3-4 cm in diameter. Sepals 10-16 mm, linear-triangular. Petals white. Fruit 2-3 cm, brown, pyriform to depressed-globose.{\i  S.E. Europe, extending to Sardegna and Sicilia; cultivated and naturalized in C. & W. Europe.} Bu Gr *It Rs (K) *Sa *Si [Au Be Br Cz Ga Ge He Ho Hs Ju Rm].
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    Cultivated for the fruit, which after incipient decay becomes soft and edible.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc {\b 34.              Crataegus}              L. 
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc By J. do Amaral Franco.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Deciduous, usually spiny shrubs or small trees. Leaves simple, lobed or pinnatifid, serrate. Stipules persistent. Flowers in corymbs. Petals obovate, white, rarely pink; stamens 5-25; carpels 1-5, free on the ventral side, walls stony in fruit; styles 1-5; ovules 2. Fruit red, yellow or black, usually with mealy flesh; pyrenes 1-5.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  In many species the leaves and stipules are much larger and more deeply cut on non-flowering shoots than on flowering shoots. The characters given in the keys and descriptions are to be interpreted as referring only to the leaves of the flowering shoots.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  In regions where the areas of two taxa overlap, hybrids are commonly found. Notes about some of these hybrids are given in the text.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Lateral veins of leaves ending only in the apices of the 
\par
  teeth or lobes
\par
2 Leaves obovate to oblong-obovate, simply and acutely
\par
  serrate above, entire at base; spines 70-100 mm ......................... {\b 2. crus-galli}
\par
2 Leaves ovate or elliptic-ovate, biserrate; spines 10-30 mm
\par
3 Sepals glandular-serrate; stamens 10 ............................................ {\b 1. intricata}
\par
3 Sepals entire; stamens 20
\par
4 Leaves lobed to less than ½ way to the midrib; petioles
\par
  8-15 mm ..................................................................................... {\b 3. sanguinea}
\par
4 Leaves lobed to more than ½ way to the midrib; petioles
\par
  15-35 mm ......................................................................................... {\b 4. altaica}
\par
1 Lateral veins of leaves ending both in the apices of 
\par
  the teeth or lobes and in the sinuses
\par
5 Young twigs, leaves, pedicels and hypanthia glabrous 
\par
  or with straight, patent hairs
\par
6 Leaf-lobes serrulate; stipules serrate
\par

\par
73}
\par