{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 7 Fruit light or bright red, crowned by erect or erecto-patent sepals
\par
8 Leaf-lobes strongly acuminate; fruit oblong-cylindrical .............. {\b 9. calycina}
\par
8 Leaf-lobes subobtuse; fruit subglobose ................................ {\b 10. microphylla}
\par
7 Fruit dark red to blackish, crowned by deflexed or patent sepals
\par
9 Style 1; fruit with 1 pyrene .......................................................... {\b 9. calycina}
\par
9 Styles 2-3; fruit with 2 pyrenes
\par
10 Corymb 5- to 10-flowered, glabrous; twigs glabrescent
\par
11 Leaves lobed to less than ½ way to midrib, the lobes obtuse;
\par
   fruit 8-12 mm, without protuberances at the base ...................... {\b 5. laevigata}
\par
11 Leaves lobed ½ way to the midrib, the lobes acute; fruit 
\par
   12-15 mm, usually with 5 protuberances at the base .............. {\b 6. macrocarpa}
\par
10 Corymb 12- to 20-flowered, villous; twigs villous
\par
12 Leaves with 3-5 obtuse or acute lobes; lobes serrulate in
\par
   upper half only; sepals triangular, acute ......................................... {\b 7. taurica}
\par
12 Leaves with 5-7 acuminate lobes; lobes serrulate 
\par
   almost to the base; sepals lanceolate,long-attenuate .................. {\b 8. ucrainica}
\par
6  Leaf-lobes entire or with a few acute teeth; stipules entire
\par
13 Leaf-lobes acute to subobtuse; ripe fruit 6-10 mm,
\par
   dark or bright red .................................................................... {\b 14. monogyna}
\par
13 Leaf-lobes acuminate; ripe fruit 10-14 mm, dark purple 
\par
   to blackish
\par
14 Leaf-lobes with only 1 or 2 teeth at apex; leaves 40-80 mm; 
\par
   main veins curving towards base of leaf ................................... {\b 13. ambigua}
\par
14 Leaf-lobes unevenly serrate in their apical half;
\par
   leaves 30-35 mm; main veins straight
\par
15 Corymb villous .......................................................................... {\b 11. pallasii}
\par
15 Corymb glabrous ............................................................ {\b 12. karadaghensis}
\par
5  Young twigs, leaves, pedicels and hypanthia tomentose,
\par
   lanate or sericeous (rarely twigs lanate and leaves glabrous)
\par
16 Petiole 10-30 mm; leaf-lobes serrate; flowers 10-15 mm
\par
   in diameter
\par
17 Ripe fruit red and pruinose, with 1 pyrene; twigs pruinose
\par
   ........................................................................................... {\b 15. sphaenophylla}
\par
17 Ripe fruit blackish, with 4-5 pyrenes; twigs not pruinose
\par
18 Leaves with 3-7 lobes; indumentum arachnoid-lanate;
\par
   corymb compound, many-flowered ........................................ {\b 16. pentagyna}
\par
18 Leaves with 7-11 lobes; indumentum tomentose;
\par
   corymb simple, few-flowered ......................................................... {\b 17. nigra}
\par
16 Petiole 2-10 mm; leaf-lobes entire or with 1-3 teeth at apex; 
\par
   flowers 15-20 mm in diameter
\par
19 Leaves not more than 30 mm; fruit 7-10 mm in diameter
\par
20 Indumentum lanate; styles 1-3 ............................................. {\b 19. heldreichii}
\par
20 Indumentum sericeous; styles 5 ........................................... {\b 22. pycnoloba}
\par
19 Leaves 30-50 mm; fruit 15-25 mm in diameter
\par
21 Twigs and leaves lanate but soon glabrescent;
\par
   leaf-lobes broad; fruit dark red ............................................ {\b 18. schraderana}
\par
21 Twigs and leaves persistently hairy; leaf-lobes narrow;
\par
   fruit orange-red to yellow
\par
22 Leaves with 3-7 acute, sparsely incise-dentate lobes;
\par
   styles 3-5 ................................................................................... {\b 20. laciniata}
\par
22 Leaves with 3(-5) subobtuse, entire lobes; styles 1-2 ............. {\b 21. azarolus}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. C. intricata} Lange, {\i Bot. Tidsskr. }{\b 19}: 264 (1895) ({\i C. coccinea }auct. plur.,non L.). Shrub up to 3 m; twigs glabrous, purplish-brown; spines up to 30 mm. Leaves 35-70 × 20-60 mm, elliptic-ovate, acute, bright green, glabrous above and nearly so beneath; lobes 7-11, short, acute, serrate; petiole 15-25 mm. Corymb slightly villous. Sepals glandular-serrate; stamens 10; anthers yellow. Fruit 10-12 mm, subglobose, reddish-brown; pyrenes 3-4.{\i  Cultivated for ornament in C. Europe and rarely naturalized.} [Rm.] ({\i E. North America}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b C. mollis} (Torrey & A. Gray) Scheele,{\i  Linnaea }{\b 21}: 569 (1848), with leaves densely pubescent beneath when young (but later usually only on the veins), and usually pyriform, scarlet fruit, from C. North America, and{\b  C. submollis }Sarg., {\i Bot. Gaz. }{\b 31}: 7 (1901), with leaves softly pubescent beneath when young (but later only puberulent on the veins), and larger, bright orange-red fruit, from E.North America, are both widely planted in gardens and for hedges in N.W. Europe; they have both passed for a long time under the name{\i  C. coccinea} L.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. C. crus-galli} L.,{\i  Sp. Pl.} 476 (1753). Like {\b 1} but a larger shrub or a small tree; twigs light or greyish-brown; spines 70-100 mm; leaves 20-80 × 5-20 mm, obovate to oblong-obovate, not lobed, acutely serrate above the entire base, glabrous; petiole 5-15 mm; sepals entire; fruit red; pyrenes 2. {\i Cultivated for ornament and locally naturalized}. [?Co Cz ?Ga.]({\i E. & C. North America.})
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 3. C. sanguinea} Pallas,{\i  Fl. Ross.}{\b  1}({\b 1}): 25 (1784). Shrub up to 4 m; twigs soon glabrous, purple; spines absent or small. Leaves 50-80 × 45-65 mm, ovate, acute, cuneate, slightly pubescent on both surfaces; lobes 5-9, short, acute, acutely serrate; petiole 8-15 mm. Corymb glabrous; flowers 10-15 mm in diameter. Sepals entire; stamens 20; anthers pink or purple; styles 2-5. Fruit 8-12 mm, globose, bright red (var.{\i  sanguinea}) or yellow (var.{\i  chlorocarpa} (C. Koch) C. K. Schneider); pyrenes 5. {\i C. & E. Russia, northwards to} c. 60° N;{\i  W. Razakhastan.} Rs (C, E) [Au ?Ga.]({\i Siberia}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 4. C. altaica} (Loudon) Lange, {\i Rev. Crat.} 42 (1897). Small tree; twigs glabrous, dark brown; spines 6-20 mm. Leaves 50-90 × 40-80 mm, ovate, acute, truncate to broadly cuneate, glabrous, lobed; lobes 5-9, extending more than ½ way to the midrib, acuminate, acutely and unevenly serrate; petioles 15-35 mm; stipules c. 20 × 15 mm, incise-serrate. Corymb glabrous; flowers 8-12 mm in diameter. Sepals entire, short; stamens 20; anthers whitish; styles 4-5. Fruit 8-10 mm, yellow; pyrenes 4-5.{\i  On the borders of S.E. Russia and Kazakhstan} ({\i near Ural'sk}). Rs (E). ({\i S.C.Asia.})
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 5. C. laevigata} (Poiret) DC.,{\i  Prodr.}{\b  2}: 630 (1825) ({\i C. oxyacanthoides} Thuill., {\i C. oxyacantha} auct.). Shrub; twigs glabrescent, brown; spines 6-15 mm. Leaves obovate, slightly coriaceous light green beneath; lobes 3-5, short, broad, obtuse, serrulate, petiole 6-18 mm; stipules 5-10 × 1-3 mm, acuminate, unequally incise-serrate. Corymb 5- to 10-flowered, glabrous; flowers 15-18 mm in diameter. Sepals entire; anthers red; styles 2-3. Fruit globose or ellipsoid, deep red; pyrenes 2. {\i Woods. • N W. Pyrenees,and N. Italy.} Au Be Br Cz Da Ga Ge He Ho Hs Hu It Po ?Rm ?Rs (B, W) Su [No].
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Nearly all the glabrous or slightly pubescent species in Europe have been called {\i C. oxyacantha} by regional authors, so that references in the  literature are very confused.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b laevigata}: Leaves 15-35 mm, sparsely pubescent or almost glabrous, without hairs in vein-axils beneath; sepals broadly triangular,about as long as wide; hypanthium glabrous; fruit 8-10 mm, globose.{\i  Commoner in the western part of the range, and in the lowlands}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b palmstruchii} (Lindman) Franco,{\i  Feddes Repert.}{\b  74}: 25 (1967)({\i C. palmstruchii} Lindman): Leaves 30-50 mm, more densely pubescent on the veins beneath and with tufts of hair in the vein-axils beneath; sepals nearly twice as long as wide; hypanthium villous; fruit 10-12 mm, ellipsoid.{\i  Commoner in the eastern part of the range, and in the mountains}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b  C.} ×{\b  media} Bechst., {\i Diana}{\b  1}: 88 (1797) ({\i C. monogyna} × {\i laevigata}) occurs in N.W. and C. Europe. Plants derived from{\i  C. monogyna} subsp. {\i nordica} and {\i C. laevigata} subsp.{\i  laevigata} have cuneate leaves, with 3-5 subacute, subentire lobes extending ¾ of
\par

\par
74}
\par