{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 the way to the midrib, almost straight main veins, flowers 10-14 mm in diameter, triangular-acyte sepals 1·5-2 × 2 mm, villous hypanthium and 1-2 styles. Plants derived from {\i C. monogyna} subsp. {\i monogyna} and {\i C. laevigata} subsp.{\i  laevigata} differ in having leaves with the lobes extending not more than ½ way to the midrib, serrulate in their apical half, flowers 12-16 mm in diameter, broadly triangular sepals and glabrous hypanthium.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b  C.} × {\b schumacheri} Raunk., {\i Bot. Tidsskr. }{\b 42}: 247 (1933) ({\i C. calycina} × {\b laevigata}) also occurs in N.W. and C. Europe. It has orbicular-ovate leaves, rounded-cuneate at base, 3-5 ovate, acuminate, serrulate lobes with almost straight main veins, triangular-subulate sepals longer than wide, glabrous hypanthium, oblong fruit 8-10 mm, crowned by erect, but later recurving sepals.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 6. C. macrocarpa} Hegetschw.,{\i  Fl. Schweiz} 464 (1840). Like {\b 5} but usually procumbent shrub; with leaves 30-50 × 20-40 mm, lobes extending ½ way to the midrib, ovate, acute; fruit 12-15 × 10-12 mm, ellipsoid, usually with 5 protuberances at the base, and crowned by sepals which are longer than wide. • {\i E. Alps; Czecozoslovakia.} Au Cz Ga Ge He It.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 7. C. taurica} Pojark. in Komarov{\i  Fl. URSS}{\b  9}: 501 (1939). Shrub; twigs villous; spines c. 10 mm. Leaves ovate-rhombic to obovate, dark green and sparsely villous above, lighter green and densely and softly hairy beneath; lobes 3-5, broad, obtuse or acute, serrulate to the middle or only near the apex, extending 2/3-3/4 of the way to the midrib; petiole 8-20 mm.Corymb 12- to 20-flowered, villous. Hypanthium and pedicels strongly white villous. Sepals triangular, acute; styles (1-)2(-3). Fruit 12-15 × 10-14 mm, subglobose, usually distinctly 5-angled below, deep red, becoming sparsely villous to subglabrous when ripe, crowned by deflexed sepals; pyrenes usually 2.{\i  Scrub in rocky places. E. Krym}. Rs (K).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 8. C. ucrainica} Pojark. in Komarov,{\i  Fl. URSS}{\b  9}: 502 (1939). Like {\b 7} but twigs and leaves less villous; spines 12-20 mm; leaf lobes 5-7, ovate-acuminate, serrulate almost to the base, extending 1/3-1/2 of the way to the midrib; hypanthium and pedicels less villous; sepals lanceolate, long-attenuate; fruit 10-14 × 9-12 mm, globose-ovoid, obtusely 5-angled.{\i  Margins of woods. • N., W. & C. Ukraine.} Rs (C, W).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 9. C. calycina} Peterm., {\i Deutschl. Fl. }176 (1849). Shrub or small tree; twigs glabrous, purplish- or cinnamon-brown; spines up to 13 mm, or absent. Leaves 30-60(-85) × 30-50(-65) mm, obovate-rhombic to broadly ovate, cuneate at base, thin, light green beneath, glabrescent; lobes 3-5(-9), broadly ovate, acute to acuminate, serrulate almost to the base, extending 1/2-2/3 of the way to the midrib; petiole 10-35 mm; stipules 10-15(-25) × 4-8 mm, falcate-incurved or oblong, subulate at apex, incise-serrate. Corymb glabrous; flowers 15-20 mm in diameter. Sepals 3-4 × 1-2 mm, triangular-subulate to long-acuminate, entire; style 1. Fruit 6-13 × 5-10 mm, oblong-cylindrical to subglobose, light to dark red; pyrene 1. •{\i  N.W. & C. Europe, extending to S. Russia and W. Bulgaria.} Au Be Bu Cz Da Fe Ga Ge Hu Ju No Po Rm Rs (B, C, W, E) Su.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b calycina}: Fruit oblong-cylindrical, light red, crowned by more or less erect sepals.{\i  N.W. & C. Europe, extending to E. Romania}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b curvisepala} (Lindman) Franco, {\i Feddes Repert.}{\b  79}: 39 (1968) ({\i C. curvisepala} Lindman): Fruit ellipsoid to subglobose, dark red, crowned by deflexed sepals. {\i Woods. E.C. Europe, extending to S. Russia and W.Bulgaria; S. Sweden and S. Finland}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b C}. × {\b kyrtostyla} Fingerh.,{\i  Linnaea}{\b  4}: 372 (1829) ({\i C. calycina} ×{\i  monogyna}, {\i C. heterodonta} Pojark.), found in the lowlands of N.W. Europe, is like {\b 9}({\b a}) but differs mainly in the cuneate leaves with oblong, acute lobes with only a few teeth at the apex, main veins curving downwards and fruits crowned by deflexed sepals.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b  C. plagiosepala} Pojark., {\i Nov. Syst. Pl. Vasc.} ({\i Leningrad}){\b  1965}: 135 (1965), from S.E. Poland, is very like {\b 9}({\b b}) but has long cuneate, usually 3-lobed leaves and patent or erecto-patent sepals 4·5-5·5 mm; its status is uncertain.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 10. C. microphylla} C. Koch, {\i Verh. Ver. Beförd. Gartenb. Preuss.} nov. ser., {\b 1}: 288 (1853). Slender shrub; twigs glabrescent, purplish-brown; spines 5-12 mm, slender. Leaves 15-30 × 10-25 mm, ovate, light green beneath, glabrescent; lobes 3-5, wide, subobtuse, serrulate; petiole 4-16 mm; stipules falcate-incurved, incise-serrate. Corymb glabrous or puberulent- flowers 8-13 mm in diameter. Sepals short, triangular-ovate; style 1. Fruit 9-12 mm, subglobose, bright red, crowned by erect or erecto-patent sepals; pyrene 1. {\i Krym.} Rs (K). ({\i Caucasus, N. Iran.})
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 11. C. pallasii} Griseb., {\i Spicil. Fl. Rumel. }{\b 1}: 89 (1843) ({\i C. beckerana} Pojark., {\i C. stevenii} Pojark.). Shrub; twigs glabrescent, reddish; spines 10-20 mm or absent. Leaves 30-35 × 30-35 mm, ovate, acute, light green beneath, glabrescent, main veins straight; lobes 5-7, acuminate, unevenly serrate in the apical half, extending ¾ of the way to the midrib; stipules entire, subulate. Corymb villous; flowers c. 15 mm in diameter.Styles (1-)2. Fruit 10-12 mm, ellipsoid-globose, first yellow, later red, blackish when ripe, crowned by deflexed sepals; pyrenes (1-)2.{\i  Mountain slopes. S.E. Russia; Krym.} Rs (K, E).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 12. C. karadaghensis} Pojark., {\i Not. Syst}. ({\i Leningrad}){\b  37}: 167 (1963). Like {\b 11} but leaf-lobes always 5; corymbs glabrous; styles and pyrenes 1(-2). •{\i  Krym.} Rs (K).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 13. C. ambigua} C. A. Meyer ex A. Becker, {\i Bull. Soc. Nat. Moscou}{\b  31} ({\b 1}): 12, 34 (1858) ({\i C. volgensis} Pojark.). Shrub or small tree up to 8 m; twigs glabrescent, dark brown; spines 8-15 mm or absent. Leaves 40-80 × 40-80 mm, ovate, broadly cuneate, thin, with hair-tufts in axils of veins beneath, main veins curving towards base of leaf; lobes 5-7(-9), oblong, acuminate, acutely serrate in the apical half, extending more than ¾ of the way to the midrib; stipules entire, subulate. Corymb and hypanthium villous, later glabrescent; flowers c. 15 mm in diameter. Sepals 2-3 mm; styles (1-)2. Fruit 11-14 mm, subglobose, dark red, crowned by patent sepals; pyrenes (1-)2.{\i  Wooded mountain slopes. S. Russia, E. Ukraine}. Rs (C, W, E).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 14. C. monogyna} Jacq.,{\i  Fl. Austr.}{\b  3}: 50 (1775) ({\i C. oxyacantha} L., nom. ambig.). Shrub or small tree up to 10 m; spines 7-20 mm. Leaves obovate to rhombic, cuneate, discolorous; lobes 3-7, oblong, acute or subobtuse, entire or sparsely toothed near the apex, extending ¾ of the way to the midrib, the sinuses usually open and deep; stipules entire, lanceolate-subulate. Flowers 8-15 mm in diameter. Style 1. Fruit 6-10 mm, dark or bright red, crowned by deflexed sepals which are usually slightly longer than wide; pyrene 1.{\i  Hedges and thickets. Almost throughout Europe except the northern and eastern margins.} All except Az Fa Is Rs (N, B, E)Sb.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 A variable species. The taxa here included in{\i  C. monogyna} have been variously treated by different authors.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Twigs and leaves densely pubescent ............................... ({\b f}) subsp. {\b azarella}
\par
1 Twigs and leaves glabrous or sparsely pubescent
\par
2 Leaves coriaceous, ± glaucous or glaucescent beneath
\par
3 Leaves 30-50 mm; petiole 15-30 mm; fruit brownish-red
\par
  ................................................................................. ({\b c}) subsp. {\b leiomonogyna}
\par

\par
75}
\par