{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 3 Leaves 10-30 mm; petiole 3-15 mm; fruit bright red,
\par
  slightly pruinose while young ........................................ ({\b d}) subsp. {\b brevispina}
\par
2 Leaves slightly coriaceous, greyish or light green beneath
\par
4 Leaves up to 20 mm; flowers 8-10 mm in diameter .......... ({\b e}) subsp. {\b aegeica}
\par
4 Leaves more than 20 mm; flowers 10-15 mm in diameter
\par
5 Leaves (3-)5- to 7-lobed, large; petiole 20-25 mm;
\par
  hypanthium villous ............................................................. ({\b a}) subsp. {\b nordica}
\par
5 Leaves deeply 3(-5)-lobed, small; petiole 5-15 mm;
\par
  hypanthium glabrous ...................................................... ({\b b}) subsp. {\b monogyna}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b nordica} Franco,{\i  Feddes Repert.}{\b  79}: 37 (1968):Leaves 30-50 × 18-40 mm, ovate-cuneate, (3-)5- to 7-lobed, slightly coriaceous, greyish beneath, glabrescent; petiole 20-25 mm; hypanthium villous; fruit 8-10 mm in diameter, deep red, subglobose. 2n = 34.{\i  Lowlands. • N. & C. Europe}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b monogyna}: Leaves 25-35 × 25-35 mm, obovate, deeply 3(-5)-lobed, slightly coriaceous, light green beneath, glabrescent; petiole 5-15 mm; hypanthium glabrous (rarely with a few scattered hairs); fruit 6-9 × 5-7 mm, dark red, globose-urceolate.{\i  Submontane. From France to S. Ukraine.}
\par  

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b C}. ×{\b  degenii} Zsak,{\i  Bot. Közl.}{\b  32}: 191 (1935) ({\i C. monogyna }× {\i nigra}), found in E.C. Europe, is like {\b 14}({\b b}) but has sparsely lanate twigs with few spines, leaves sparsely pubescent above and more or less lanate beneath, at least near the mid-vein, 5-9 unevenly serrate lobes, usually 2-3 styles and a subglobose, brownish fruit.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b c}) Subsp. {\b leiomonogyna} (Klokov) Franco, {\i Feddes Repert.}{\b  79}: 37 (1968) ({\i C. leiomonogyna} Klokov): Leaves 30-50 × 15-35 mm, obovate, 3- to 5-lobed, coriaceous, glaucescent beneath, glabrous or nearly so; petiole 15-30 mm; hypanthium glabrous; fruit 7-9 × 5-7 mm, shortly ellipsoid, brownish-red.{\i  Forest-steppe. • C. & S. Ukraine}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b d}) Subsp. {\b brevispina} (G. Kunze) Franco, {\i Collect. Bot.} ({\i Barcelona}) {\b 7}: 463 (1968) ({\i C. brevispina }G. Kunze): Leaves 10-30 × 10-30 mm, obovate, 3(-5)-lobed, coriaceous, glaucous beneath, glabrescent; petiole 3-15 mm; hypanthium glabrous (very rarely villous); fruit 7-10 mm, globose, bright red, but slightly pruinose while young.{\i  Hedges and thickets, usually near streams. Iberian peninsula and Islas Baleares.}
\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b e}) Subsp. {\b aegeica} (Pojark.) Franco, {\i op. cit. }{\b 79}: 37 (1968) ({\i C. aegeica} Pojark.): Leaves 10-20 × 7-15 mm, obovate-cuneate to almost flabellate, 3(-5)-lobed, chartaceous, light green beneath, glabrous; petiole 3-6 mm; flowers 8-10 mm in diameter; hypanthium glabrous; fruit 7-8 mm, subglobose. {\i E. Aegean region, from Karpathos to Thasos.}
\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b f}) Subsp. {\b azarella} (Griseb.) Franco,{\i  Collect. Bot.} ({\i Barcelona}){\b  7}: 471(1968) ({\i C. azarella} Griseb.): Twigs and young leaves densely pubescent, usually retaining some hairs; leaves 15-30 × 7-30 mm, flabellate, deeply 3- to 5(-7)-lobed, subcoriaceous, light green beneath; petiole 4-13 mm; hypanthium villous; fruit 7-10 mm, subglobose, brownish-red.{\i  Dry mountain thickets. • S.E. Europe, Sicilia, S. & E. Italy and S. & E. Spain}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b  C. }×{\b  polyacantha} Jan, {\i Elench. Hort. Parm.} 8 (1827) ({\i C. laciniata} ×{\i  monogyna,} ?{\i C. oxyacantha} auct. balcan.) recorded originally from Sicilia, and perhaps found also in the Balkan peninsula, is like {\b 14}({\b f}) but has blackish twigs; more slender spines; leaves 15-20 × 15-20 mm, retaining the hairs on the veins beneath; stipules 6-9 × 3-5 mm, semisagittate, serrate; corymb few-flowered; styles (1-)2; fruit 4-7 × 4-7 mm, deep red, globose-urceolate but flattened sideways, verruculose; pyrenes usually 2.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   {\b 15. C. sphaenophylla} Pojark. in Komarov,{\i  Fl. URSS}{\b  9}: 502 (1939). Unarmed shrub; twigs reddish-brown, villous, becoming glabrous and pruinose. Leaves 30-50 × 20-30 mm, coriaceous, villous but glabrescent, obovate-cuneate, the upper part with 3 lobes; lobes extending 1/3 to 1/2 way to the midrib, the middle lobe wide, incise-serrate, the laterals narrower, acute, serrate; petiole 10-25 mm; stipules falcate-lanceolate, entire. Hypanthium and pedicels densely tomentose; flowers 10-15 mm in diameter. Style 1. Fruit 10-14 × 9-12 mm, red but pruinose, crowned by patent sepals; pyrenes 1. {\i Scrub on hills. • Krym.} Rs (K).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b  C. dipyrena} Pojark.,{\i  op. cit.} 508 (1939), from Krym, is probably a hybrid between{\b  15} and {\b 16}. It differs from {\b 15} by the less pubescent, 5- to 7-lobed, ovate or rhombic leaves, less tomentose hypanthium and pedicels, and deep red or purplish-black fruit with usually 2 pyrenes.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 16. C. pentagyna} Waldst. & Kit. ex Willd., {\i Sp. Pl.}{\b  2}: 1006 (1800). Shrub or small tree; twigs sparsely arachnoid-lanate, later glabrescent, grey-brown; spines c. 10 mm. Leaves 20-60 × 20-40 mm, subrhombic-ovate to obovate, coriaceous, dark green and nearly glabrous above, lighter green and sparsely arachnoid-lanate beneath, finally nearly glabrous; lobes 3-7, irregularly serrate, wide, subobtuse, extending 2/3 of the way to the midrib, with acute sinuses; petiole 15-30 mm; stipules narrow, falcate long-acuminate, remotely dentate to entire. Corymb compound, many-flowered; hypanthium and pedicels tomentose; flowers 12-15 mm in diameter. Sepals 1 × 2 mm, broadly triangular, soon deciduous; styles 3-5; top of ovary tomentose. Fruit 10-15 mm, globose-ellipsoid, blackish-purple, dull; pyrenes 4-5.{\i  Margins of woods. E.C. Europe and N. part of Balkan peninsula, extending eastwards to S. Ukraine.} Al Bu Cz Hu Ju ?Rm Rs (W, K, E) ?Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b  C. klokovii} Ivaschin,{\i  Ukr. Bot. Zur.}{\b  21}({\b 6}): 61 (1964), from the E. Ukraine, a tree with the leaves less hairy beneath, flowers 10-12 mm in diameter, and usually 3 styles and pyrenes, is perhaps a subspecies of {\b 16}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 17. C. nigra} Waldst. & Kit.,{\i  Pl. Rar. Hung. }{\b 1}: 62 (1801). Like {\b 16} but leaves 40-80 × 25-55 mm, ovate or triangular, acute, thinner, tomentose on both surfaces; lobes 7-11, sharply and irregularly serrate, acute, extending ½ way to the midrib; petiole 10-20 mm; stipules wide, ovate-falcate; corymb simple, few-flowered; top of ovary glabrous; fruit black, lustrous.{\i  Woods. • E.C. Europe, extending to Albania and C. Jugoslavia.} Al Cz Hu Ju ?Rm.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 18. C. schraderana} Ledeb.,{\i  Fl. Ross.}{\b  2}: 91 (1843). Shrub; twigs thinly lanate, soon glabrescent, purplish; spines up to 10 mm, or absent. Leaves 30-50 × 30-50 mm, obovate to rhombic, coriaceous, sparsely lanate beneath but finally nearly glabrous; lobes 3-5, wide, subobtuse, extending 2/5-3/4 of the way to the midrib, with narrow sinuses, entire or with 1-3 coarse teeth near the apex; petiole 5-8 mm; stipules large, semicordate, serrate. Hypanthium and pedicels tomentose; flowers 15-18 mm in diameter. Sepals short, triangular; styles 2-4. Fruit 12-14 × 15-16 mm, depressed-globose, dark red, crowned by subpatent sepals; pyrenes 2-4.{\i  Mountains. N. Greece; Krym}. Gr Rs (K).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 19. C. heldreichii} Boiss.,{\i  Diagn. Pl. Or. Nov.}{\b  3}({\b 2}): 47 (1856) ({\i Mespilus heldreichii} (Boiss.) Ascherson & Graebner). Shrub; twigs lanate; spines small. Leaves 15-30 × 12-30 mm, broadly ovate, coriaceous, lanate on both surfaces; lobes 3-5, wide, acute, sparsely serrate in the apical half, extending 2/3 of the way to the midrib; petiole 3-10 mm; stipules semiorbicular-falcate, entire or with a few teeth near the base. Hypanthium and pedicels lanate; flowers 15-18 mm in diameter. Styles 1-3. Fruit c. 7 mm, globose, red, crowned by erect, later recurved, sepals; pyrenes 1-3.{\i  Mountains. • S. Albania, C. & S. Greece, Kriti.} Al Cr Gr.
\par

\par
76}
\par