{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 20. C. laciniata} Ucria, {\i Nuovo Racc. Opusc. Aut. Sic.}{\b  6}: 251 (1793) ({\i C. orientalis} Pallas ex Bieb.). Shrub or small tree up to 10 m; twigs lanate, blackish after the fall of the hairs; spines few. Leaves 30-50 × 25-40 mm, rhombic to obovate-oblong, cuneate, coriaceous, lanate on both surfaces; lobes 3-7, narrow, oblong, acute, extending 7/8 of the way to the midrib, incise-dentate with 1-3 teeth at apex; petiole 3-8 mm; stipules semilunate, serrate, caducous. Hypanthium and pedicels lanate; flowers 15-20 mm in diameter. Sepals long-acuminate; styles 3-5, rarely connate.Fruit 15-20 mm, globose or pyriform, brick-red to yellowish-orange, lanate-white young, crowned by deflexed sepals; pyrenes 3-5.{\i  Mountain thickets and rocky slopes. S.E. Europe; Sicilia; S.E. Spain.} Al Bu Cr Gr Hs Ju Rs(W, K) Si [Ga].
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b laciniata}: Leaves usually less than 30 mm wide; fruit globose, brick- to orange-red.{\i  Throughout the range of the species}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b pojarkovae} (Kossych) Franco,{\i  Feddes Repert. }{\b 79}: 37 (1968) ({\i C. pojarkovae} Kossych): Leaves usually more than 30 mm wide; fruit pyriform, yellowish-orange.{\i  Mountain slopes. • Krym}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 21. C. azarolus} L., {\i Sp. Pl}. 477 (1753). Like {\b 20} but twigs tomentose; leaves tomentose on both surfaces; lobes 3(-5), subobtuse, entire, the sinuses less deep; stipules falcate, coarsely serrate; hypanthium and pedicels densely tomentose; sepals shortly acuminate; styles 1-2(-3); fruit 20-25 mm in diameter, subglobose, orange-red or yellow; pyrenes 1-3. {\i Dry hillsides and mountains. Kriti; cultivated for its edible fruits in S. Europe and locally naturalized.} Cr [Ga Hs It ?Ju Si].
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 The wild plant from Kriti is var.{\i  aronia} L.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b C.} ×{\b  ruscinonensis} Gren. & Blanc,{\i  Billotia }{\b 1}: 71 (1866) ({\i C. azarolus} ×{\i  monogyna}), is found occasionally with the parents in the W. Mediterranean region. It is like {\b 21} but has thinner, subglabrous or glabrous leaves glossy green above; petioles up to 12 mm; corymb laxer, glabrescent; flowers 13-16 mm in diameter; sepals more acute; fruit 10-15 mm in diameter, less tomentose while young.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 22. C. pycnoloba} Boiss. & Heldr. in Boiss.,{\i  Diagn. Pl. Or. Nov.}{\b  3}({\b 2}): 46 (1856). Shrub; twigs silvery-sericeous; spines strong but short. Leaves 15-25 × 15-25 mm, obovate-cuneate, densely silvery-sericeous on both surfaces; lobes 5-7, narrow, acute, entire, extending 2/3 of the way to the midrib, with narrow sinuses; petiole 2-4 mm; stipules obovate, acute,entire, caducous. Hypanthium and pedicels densely silvery-sericeous; flowers c. 15 mm in diameter. Sepals triangular-lanceolate, acute,erecto-patent; styles 5. Fruit 8-10 mm, globose, brick-red, sericeous while young, crowned by deflexed sepals; pyrenes 3-5.{\i  Mountain woods at }1000-1800 {\i m.  S. Greece }({\i Peloponnisos}). Gr.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Subfam.  {\b   Prunoideae}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Stipules present, often small and caducous. Flowers 5-merous. Hypanthium concave or tubular, with a single free carpel at the base; epicalyx absent; stamens numerous. Fruit a 1-seeded drupe. Basic chromosome number 8.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc {\b 35.               Prunus}            L.
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc By D.A. Webb.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Shrubs or trees. Leaves simple, usually crenate or serrate, petiolate. Stipules free, narrow, more or less scarious, often deciduous. Flowers 5-merous, solitary or in clusters, umbels, corymbs or racemes. Petals pink or white.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 The delimitation of the genus and its subgenera here adopted is that of Rehder. Many authors elevate the subgenera or sections to the rank of genus.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Literature: A. Rehder,{\i  Bibliography of Cultivated Trees and Shrubs}, 
\par
318-350. Jamaica Plain. 1949.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Ovary and fruit hairy
\par
2 Leaves broadly ovate to suborbicular, convolute in bud .......... {\b 5. armeniaca}
\par
2 Leaves at least twice as long as wide, longitudinally
\par
  folded in bud
\par
3 Small shrub without spines; hypanthium about twice as
\par
  long as wide ..................................................................................... {\b 4. tenella}
\par
3 Tree or spiny shrub; hypanthium about as long as wide
\par
4 Leaves 6-9 mm wide; fruit 20-25 mm ............................................ {\b 3. webbii}
\par
4 Leaves 12-40 mm wide; fruit at least 35 mm
\par
5 Petals white or pale pink when expanded; mesocarp 
\par
  coriaceous; endocarp compressed,pitted .......................................... {\b 2. dulcis}
\par
5 Petals usually deep pink throughout anthesis; mesocarp
\par
  succulent; endocarp ± globose, deeply sulcate ............................... {\b 1. persica}
\par
1 Ovary and fruit glabrous
\par
6 Flowers in racemes or corymbs
\par
7 Flowers in short corymbs of 3-10 .............................................. {\b 16. mahaleb}
\par
7 Flowers in elongated racemes of 12-100
\par
8 Leaves evergreen, coriaceous; fruit ovoid-conical, ± acuminate
\par
9 Racemes usually considerably exceeding the subtending leaf; 
\par
  petioles and young twigs dark red ............................................ {\b 20. lusitanica}
\par
9 Racemes equalling or slightly exceeding the subtending
\par
  leaf; petioles and young twigs pale green ............................ {\b 21. laurocerasus}
\par
8 Leaves deciduous, thin and soft; fruit ± globose
\par
10 Petals 6-9 mm .............................................................................. {\b 17. padus}
\par
10 Petals 2·5-4 mm
\par
11 Bark aromatic; leaves with at least 15 pairs of 
\par
   inconspicuous lateral veins;fruit purplish-black ......................... {\b 18. serotina}
\par
11 Bark not aromatic; leaves with 8-11 pairs of very
\par
   distinct lateral veins; fruit dark red ......................................... {\b 19. virginiana}
\par
6 Flowers solitary, or in clusters or umbels
\par
12 Pedicel at least twice as long as ripe fruit
\par
13 Shrub seldom more than 1 m; petals 5-7 mm .......................... {\b 13. fruticosa}
\par
13 Tree or large shrub; petals 9-15 mm
\par
14 Tree with well defined trunk; leaves dull above;
\par
   hypanthium urceolate .................................................................... {\b 14. avium}
\par
14 Shrub, or small tree without well-defined trunk;
\par
   leaves glossy above; hypanthium broadly campanulate .............. {\b 15. cerasus}
\par
12 Pedicel shorter than ripe fruit, or only slightly longer
\par
15 Petals pink
\par
16 Small tree; leaves 5-15 cm; hypanthium campanulate
\par
   to pelviform .................................................................................... {\b 1. persica}
\par
16 Low shrub; leaves 1-3 cm; hypanthium tubular ..................... {\b 12. prostrata}
\par
15 Petals white, rarely veined with red
\par
17 Leaves entirely glabrous
\par
18 Branches not spiny; fruit yellow ........................................... {\b 11. cocomilia}
\par
18 Branches spiny; fruit bluish-black
\par
19 Bark blackish; leaves dull; flowers mostly solitary .................... {\b 8. spinosa}
\par
19 Bark silvery-grey; leaves glossy above; flowers mostly
\par
   in clusters of 2-3 .......................................................................... {\b 9. ramburii}
\par
17 Leaves hairy, at least on the veins beneath
\par
20 Young twigs dull, usually hairy
\par
21 Bark blackish; fruit 10-15 mm, ± erect ....................................... {\b 8. spinosa}
\par
21 Bark brown; fruit 20 mm or more, pendent .......................... {\b 10. domestica}
\par

\par
77}
\par