{\rtf1\ansi \deff4\deflang1033{\fonttbl{\f4\froman\fcharset0\fprq2 Times New Roman;}}{\colortbl;\red0\green0\blue0;\red0\green0\blue255;\red0\green255\blue255;\red0\green255\blue0;\red255\green0\blue255;\red255\green0\blue0;
\red255\green255\blue0;\red255\green255\blue255;\red0\green0\blue128;\red0\green128\blue128;\red0\green128\blue0;\red128\green0\blue128;\red128\green0\blue0;\red128\green128\blue0;\red128\green128\blue128;\red192\green192\blue192;}{\stylesheet{\widctlpar 
\f4\fs20\lang2057 \snext0 Normal;}{\*\cs10 \additive Default Paragraph Font;}}{\info{\author dddd}{\operator dddd}{\creatim\yr1999\mo12\dy16\hr11\min46}{\revtim\yr1999\mo12\dy16\hr11\min47}{\version2}{\edmins1}{\nofpages4}{\nofwords1053}{\nofchars6005}
{\*\company  }{\vern57431}}\widowctrl\ftnbj\aenddoc\hyphcaps0 \fet0\sectd \linex0 {\*\pnseclvl1\pnucrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl2\pnucltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl3\pndec\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang
{\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl4\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl5\pndec\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl6\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl7
\pnlcrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl8\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl9\pnlcrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}\pard\plain \li200\nowidctlpar \f4\fs20\lang2057 {
\fs28 20 Young twigs glossy, glabrous
\par 22 Leaves boldly and irregularly serrate ...................................... }{\b\fs28 6. brigantina}{\fs28 
\par 22 Leaves regularly crenate, or serrate with
\par    inconspicuous teeth directed strongly towards apex .................. }{\b\fs28 7. cerasifera}{\fs28 
\par 
\par }\pard \nowidctlpar {\fs28  Subgen.}{\b\fs28  Amygdalus}{\fs28  (L.) Focke. Deciduous; leaves longitudinally folded in bud. Shoots with terminal bud. Flower
s subsessile, in clusters of 1-3, appearing before the leaves on shoots of the previous year's growth, each flower-bud flanked by 2 leaf-buds. Fruit usually pubescent or tomentose; endocarp sulcate or pitted.
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 1. P. persica}{\fs28  (L.) Batsch,}{\i\fs28  Beytr. Entw. Pragm. Gesch. Nat. Reiche}{\fs28  30 (1801) (}{\i\fs28 Persica vulgaris}{\fs28  Miller). Tree up to 6 m with straight, glabrous, reddish, angular twigs. Leaves 5-15 \'d7
 2-4 cm, oblong-lanceolate, acute to acuminate, serrulate, glabrescent. Flowers subsessile, mostly solitary; hypanthium 
about as wide as long; sepals tomentose; petals 10-20 mm, deep (rarely pale) pink. Fruit 40-80 mm, globose, velutinous (glabrous in var.}{\i\fs28  nucipersica }{\fs28 
(Borkh.) C. K. Schneider, the nectarine), yellow or pale green, tinged with red; mesocarp succulent, pale green or orange; endocarp deeply sulcate.}{\i\fs28 
 Extensively cultivated for its fruits (peaches) as a field crop in S. & S.C. Europe, and on a small scale in gardens further north; occasionally escaping and locally naturalized.}{\fs28  [Al Au Bl Bu Co Cr Cz Ga Ge Gr He Hs
 Hu It Ju Lu Rm Rs (W, K, E) Sa Si Tu.] (}{\i\fs28 China}{\fs28 .)
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 2. P. dulcis}{\fs28  (Miller) D. A. Webb,}{\i\fs28  Feddes Repert.}{\b\fs28  74}{\fs28 : 24 (1967) (}{\i\fs28 Amygdalus communis }{\fs28 L., }{\i\fs28 A. dulcis}{\fs28  Miller, }{\i\fs28 P. communis}{\fs28  (L.) Arcangeli, non Hudson,}{
\i\fs28  P. amygdalus}{\fs28  Batsch). Shrub or tree up to 8 m, in wild plants spiny and intricately branched, in cultivated plants with straight, spineless branches. Leaves 4-12 \'d7 1\'b7
2-3 cm, oblong-lanceolate, crenate-serrate, glabrous. Flowers mostly in pairs; hypanthium broadly campanulate; sepals tomentose at least on the marg
in; petals c. 20 mm, bright pink in bud,fading to pale pink or almost white. Fruit 35-60 mm, ovoid-oblong, compressed, tomentose, grey-green; mesocarp coriaceous, eventually splitting and separating away from the finely pitted, keeled endocarp.}{\i\fs28 
 Extensively cultivated for its edible seeds (almonds) as a field crop in S. & S.C. Europe, and in gardens for ornament further north; frequently naturalized in the Mediterranean region.}{\fs28 
 [Al Au Bl Bu Co Cr Cz Ga Ge Gr He Hu It Ju Lu Rm Rs (W, K, E) Sa Si Tu.] (}{\i\fs28 C. & S.W. Asia, N. Africa}{\fs28 .)
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 3. P. webbii}{\fs28  (Spach) Vierh.,}{\i\fs28  \'d6sterr. Bot. Zeitschr.}{\b\fs28  65}{\fs28 : 21 (1915). Like wild plants of }{\b\fs28 2}{\fs28  but branches strongly divaricate; leaves 3\'b75 \'d7 0\'b7
9 cm or less; petals c. 10 mm, deep pink; fruits 20-25 mm, less densely tomentose, scarcely compressed, with endocarp scarcely keeled and only slightly pitted. }{\i\fs28 S. part of Balkan peninsula; Kriti; S. Italy}{\fs28 . Al Bu Cr Gr It Ju.
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 4. P. tenella}{\fs28  Batsch,}{\i\fs28  Beytr. Entw. Pragm. Gesch. Nat.-Reiche}{\fs28  29 (1801) (}{\i\fs28 P. nana}{\fs28  (L.) Stokes, non Duroi,}{\i\fs28  Amygdalus nana}{\fs28  L.). Shrub up to 1\'b7
5 m,spreading by suckers, glabrous except for bud-scales and fruit; branches suberect, grey. Leaves up to 5 \'d7 2 cm, but often smaller, lanceolate to oblong-elliptical, serrate. Flowers mostly solitary; hypanthium tubular, about twice as 
long as wide; petals 10-15 mm, bright pink (rarely white). Fruit 12-20 mm, subglobose, densely villous with yellowish hairs; mesocarp coriaceous; endocarp with a reticulum of shallow furrows.}{\i\fs28  Dry grassland. E. & E.C. Europe, from S. Bulgaria to}
{\fs28  c. 55\'b0 }{\i\fs28 N. in C. Russia; cultivated for ornament elsewhere and occasionally naturalized.}{\fs28  Au Bu Cz Hu Ju Rm Rs (C, W, K, E) [Ga].
\par 
\par  Subgen. }{\b\fs28 Prunus.}{\fs28 
 Deciduous; leaves convolute in bud. Shoots without terminal bud. Flowers subsessile or shortly pedicellate, solitary or in small, axillary clusters; flower-bud without accompanying leaf-buds. Hypanthium broadly campanulate. Fruit usually glabrous, often 
pruinose; mesocarp succulent; endocarp smooth or somewhat rugose.
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 5. P. armeniaca}{\fs28  L., }{\i\fs28 Sp. Pl.}{\fs28  474 (1753) (}{\i\fs28 Armeniaca vulgaris}{\fs28  Lam.). Shrub or small tree 3-6(-10) m, glabrous except for the flower and fruit; young twigs and young leaves reddish. Leaves 5-10 \'d7
 5-8 cm, broadly ovate to suborbicular, acuminate to cuspidate, serrate, truncate or subcordate at the base; petiole 2-4 c
m. Flowers subsessile, solitary or in pairs, appearing before the leaves; hypanthium and calyx hairy; petals 10-15 mm, white or very pale pink. Fruit 4-8 cm, subglobose, velutinous, reddish or ange to yellow; mesocarp orange-yellow; endocarp lenticular,
 smooth,with 3 narrow ridges along one margin.}{\i\fs28  Cultivated for its fruits (apricots) as a field crop in S. & S.C. Europe, and in gardens further north; locally naturalized.}{\fs28 
 [Al Au Az Bl Bu Co Cr Cz Ga Ge Gr He Hs Hu It Ju Lu Rm Rs (W, K, E) Sa Si Tu.] (}{\i\fs28 C. Asia and China}{\fs28 .)
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 6. P. brigantina}{\fs28  Vill. in L., }{\i\fs28 Syst. Pl. Eur. }{\b\fs28 1}{\fs28 ,}{\i\fs28  Fl. Delph}{\fs28 .: 49 (1785) (}{\i\fs28 P. brigantiaca}{\fs28 
 Vill.). Shrub or small tree 2-6 m, with spreading branches; young twigs glabrous and glossy. Leaves 5-8 \'d7 2\'b75-5 cm, ovate to elliptical, acuminate, tr
uncate or subcordate at the base, boldly and irregularly serrate, glabrous and glossy above pubescent on the veins beneath; petiole 1-2 cm, pubescent. Flowers very shortly pedicellate, in clusters of 2-5, appearing before the leaves; petals c. 8 mm, white
. Fruit c. 25 mm, subglobose, slightly apiculate, glabrous, yellow; endocarp lenticular, smooth.}{\i\fs28  Dry, stony slopes, }{\fs28 1200-1800}{\i\fs28  m. S.W. Alps, northwards to}{\fs28  45\'b0}{\i\fs28  N}{\fs28 . Ga It.
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 7. P. cerasifera}{\fs28  Ehrh.,}{\i\fs28  Beitr. Naturk.}{\b\fs28 4}{\fs28  : 17 (1789) (incl. }{\i\fs28 P. divaricata}{\fs28  Ledeb. Shrub
 or tree up to 8 m, with numerous intricate, fine, sometimes spiny branches; young twigs glabrous and glossy. Leaves 4-7 \'d7 2-3\'b7
5 cm, oblong-obovate, cuneate at the base, regularly crenate or appressed-serrate, glabrous and glossy above, pubescent on the v
eins beneath. Flowers mostly solitary, appearing with or slightly before the leaves; pedicel c. 15 mm, glabrous; petals 8-10 mm, usually white. Fruit 20-30 mm, globose, glabrous, red or yellow; endocarp subglobose, keeled, smooth. }{\i\fs28 
Balkan peninsula; Krym; planted elsewhere for its fruit or for hedges and locally naturalized.}{\fs28  Al Bu Gr Ju Rs (K) Tu [Au Br Da Ga Ge Hu It Rm].
\par 
\par Var.}{\i\fs28  pissardii}{\fs28  (Carri\'e8re) L. H. Bailey, with dark red leaves and flowers tinged with reddish-pink, is often grown in gardens for ornament.
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 8. P. spinosa}{\fs28  L., }{\i\fs28 Sp. Pl.}{\fs28 
 475 (1753). Dense shrub up to 4 m, spreading by suckers and with numerous, divaricate, intricate, spiny branches; bark blackish; young twigs usually pubescent. Leaves 2-4 cm, obovate to oblanceolate, finely crenate or serrat
e, cuneate at the base, dull green and glabrous above, usually pubescent on the veins beneath. Flowers mostly solitary, appearing before the leaves, very numerous; pedicel c. 5 mm, glabrous; petals 5-8 mm, white. Fruit 10-15 mm, globose, erect, bluish-bla
ck, very pruinose, acid and astringent; endocarp subglobose, smooth or slightly rugose. 2n = 32.}{\i\fs28  Europe, except the northeast and extreme north.}{\fs28  All except Az Cr Fa Is Rs (N) Sb.
\par 
\par  Natural hybrids between }{\b\fs28 8}{\fs28  and }{\b\fs28 10b}{\fs28 , with 2n = 40, have been recorded, and at least some of the plants that have been named}{\b\fs28  P. fruticans}{\fs28  Weihe, }{\i\fs28 Flora}{\fs28  (}{\i\fs28 Regensb}{\fs28 .)}{
\b\fs28  9}{\fs28 : 748 (1826), are hybrids of this parentage; but as the two parents are variable and rather similar, the morphological delimitation of the hybrid is almost impossible.
\par 
\par 78}
\par }