{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 9. P. ramburii} Boiss., Elenchus 39 (1838). Like {\b 8} but completely glabrous; bark of older branches silvery-grey; leaves 1·5-2·5 cm, elliptical to linear-oblong, glossy; flowers mostly in clusters of 2-3,appearing with the leaves; fruit smaller.{\i  Dry, calcareous slopes. • S. Spain} ({\i Sierra Nevada, Sierra de Gador}). Hs.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 10. P. domestica} L.,{\i  Sp. Pl.} 475 (1753). Shrub or tree up to 10 m, in cultivated plants with straight, spineless branches, but in wild plants often somewhat spiny, often spreading by suckers; bark dull brown; young twigs dull, usually pubescent. Leaves 3-8 × 1·8-5 cm, obovate to elliptical, crenate-serrate, glabrous and dull green above, densely pubescent to subglabrous beneath. Flowers usually in clusters of 2-3, appearing with the leaves; pedicel 5-20 mm; petals 7-12 mm, white. Fruit 20-75 mm, globose to oblong, usually pendent, purple, red, yellow or green, sweet or acid, not astringent; endocarp somewhat rugose. {\i Cultivated for its fruits as a field crop in most of Europe except the north-east and extreme north, and widely naturalized.} Probably all except Az Cr Fa Is Rs (N) Sb. ({\i Caucasus}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Cultivated plants referable to this species are hexaploid, with 2n = 48; they are usually interpreted as allopolyploids derived from{\b  7} (diploid) and {\b 8} (tetraploid); triploid and hexaploid hybrids of this parentage have been found in the Caucasus.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  The numerous cultivars and the very variable naturalized plants are best arranged in 2 subspecies; ({\b a}) comprises the plums and ({\b b}) the damsons and greengages.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b domestica} (subsp.{\i  oeconomica} (Borkh.) C. K. Schneider): Tree, without spines. Young twigs and pedicels often sub-glabrous. Petals greenish-white. Fruit 40-75 mm, longer than wide, usually bluish-black, purple or red. Endocarp compressed, keeled, often separating from mesocarp. {\i Naturalized mainly near houses}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b insititia}(L.) C. K. Schneider,{\i  Ill. Handb. Laubholzk.}{\b  1}: 630(1906) ({\i P. insititia} L.; incl.{\i  P. domestica} subsp.{\i  italica} (Borkh.)Hegi): Shrub or tree, sometimes spiny. Young twigs and pedicels densely pubescent. Petals pure white. Fruit 20-50 mm, subglobose, purple, red, yellow or green. Endocarp subglobose, scarcely keeled, adherent to mesocarp. {\i Widely naturalized in hedges and woods}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 11. P. cocomilia} Ten.,{\i  Fl. Nap. }{\b 1}, Prodr.: 68 (1811) ({\i P. pseudarmeniaca }Heldr. & Sart. ex Boiss.). Small tree or shrub (at high altitudes dwarfed and procumbent), completely glabrous. Leaves 2·5-4 × 1·2-2·5 cm, elliptic-obovate, crenulate. Flowers in clusters of 2-4, appearing with the leaves; pedicel 2-4 mm. Petals c. 6 mm, white. Fruit 12-40 × 8-25 mm, oblong, subacute, yellow flushed with purple-red, glabrous.{\i  Mountains of S. part of Balkan peninsula, S. Italy and Sicilia}. Al Gr It Ju Si.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Subgen. {\b Cerasus} (Miller) Focke. Deciduous; leaves longitudinally folded in bud. Shoots with terminal bud. Flowers usually in umbels, sometimes in corymbs or solitary. Fruit glabrous, not pruinose; mesocarp succulent;endocarp subglobose, smooth or slightly sulcate.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 12. P. prostrata} Labill.,{\i  Icon. Pl. Syr.}{\b  1}: 15 (1791). Low, spreading shrub up to 1 m, with deflexed-arcuate branches. Young twigs puberulent. Leaves 9-12(-27) × 3-6(-9) mm, linear-oblong to broadly elliptical-ovate or -obovate, conspicuously incise-serrate at least in apical half, glabrous above, grey-tomentose to glabrous beneath. Flowers mostly solitary, sub-sessile, appearing before the leaves; hypanthium tubular; petals c. 7 mm, bright pink. Fruit c. 8 mm, broadly ovoid, red; endocarp slightly sulcate.{\i  Mountains of Mediterranean region; local.} Al Co Cr Gr Hs Ju Sa.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 13. P. fruticosa} Pallas,{\i  Fl. Ross. }{\b 1}({\b 1}): 19 (1784) ({\i Cerasus fruticosa }(Pallas) Woronow). Low, spreading shrub 0·3-1·5 m (rarely more), completely glabrous. Leaves of long shoots 3-5·5 × 1·5-2·7 cm, elliptic-oblanceolate, finely crenate-serrate, dark, shining green; those of short shoots 1·5-2·5 cm, obovate, otherwise similar. Flowers in subsessile umbels of 2-5, with leaf-like bud-scales at the base; pedicels 2-3 cm. Hypanthium campanulate; petals 5-7 mm, white. Fruit 7-10 mm, globose, dark red; endocarp, smooth.{\i  Thickets and dry grassland. E., S.E. & C. Europe, northwards to} c. 57°{\i  in E. Russia, southwards to Bulgaria and Crna Gora, and westwards to W. Germany. }Au Bu Cz Ge Hu It Po Rm Rs(C, W, E).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 The hybrid between this species and {\b 15} is locally common in C. Europe.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 14. P. avium} L., {\i Fl. Suec}. ed. 2, 165 (1755) ({\i Cerasus avium }(L.) Moench). Tree 10-20(-30) m, with well-defined trunk and horizontal branches; young twigs glabrous; bark reddish-brown, peeling off in paper-like strips. Leaves 8-15 × 4-7 cm, obovate-oblong, acuminate, crenate-serrate with deep but obtuse teeth, glabrous but dull above, usually with some persistent pubescence beneath, drooping when young; petiole 2-5 cm, with 2 conspicuous glands at the top. Flowers in sessile umbels of 2-6, with mainly scarious bud-scales at the base; pedicels 2-5 cm; hypanthium urceolate (constricted at mouth). Petals 9-15 mm, white. Fruit 9-12 mm, globose, dark red (also creamy-yellow, bright red or black in cultivars), sweet or bitter; endocarp subglobose, smooth. 2n = 16.{\i  Most of Europe, except the extreme north and east, but rare as a native in the Mediterranean region. Widely cultivated for its fruit, and often naturalized.} Al Au Be Br Bu ?Co Cz Da Ga Ge Gr Hb He Ho Hs Hu It Ju Lu No Po Rm Rs (C, W, K) Sa Su Tu [Bl].
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 From this species are derived most of the sweet cherries. There seems to be little evidence for the assertion made by many authors that this species is native only to W. Asia; its native status in N.W. & C. Europe is attested by archaeological and subfossil evidence.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 15. P. cerasus} L.,{\i  Sp. Pl.} 474 (1753) ({\i Cerasus vulgaris }Miller; incl. {\i C. austera }(L.) Borkh.,{\i  C. collina} Lej. & Court.). Like {\b 14} but usually a shrub (sometimes a small tree up to 8 m, but with ill-defined trunk and many suckers); leaves somewhat smaller, glossy above, glabrescent beneath, firmer and not drooping; petiole 1-3 cm, often without glands; many bud-scales at base of umbels with leaf-like tip; hypanthium broadly campanulate; fruit bright red, acid.{\i  Cultivated for its fruit, and sometimes for hedges, and widely naturalized.} [Al Au Br Bu Cz Da Fe Ga Ge Gr Hb He Ho Hs Hu It Ju Lu No Po Rm Rs (B, C, W, K) Su.] ({\i S.W. Asia.})
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Cultivars form the sour or Morello cherries used for preserving. Hybrids between {\b 14} and {\b 15} ({\i P.} × {\i gondouinii} (Poiteau & Turpin) Rehder) are cultivated in W. Europe as 'Duke' cherries.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 16. P. mahaleb} L.,{\i  Sp. Pl.} 474 (1753) ({\i Cerasus mahaleb} (L.) Miller). Shrub, or rarely small tree, up to 10 m; young twigs glandular-puberulent. Leaves 4-7 cm, broadly ovate, cuspidate, rounded to subcordate at the base, crenate-serrate with conspicuous marginal glands, glabrous, or slightly pubescent beneath. Flowers fragrant, in short, corymbose racemes of 3-10, which terminate short, lateral, leafy shoots; pedicels c. 10 mm; hypanthium campanulate. Petals 5-8 mm, white. Fruit 8-10 mm, ovoid,black; mesocarp thin, bitter; endocarp smooth.{\i  Dry hill}
\par

\par
79}
\par