{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 9 Inflorescence-axis glandular,with abundant acicles;   
\par
   leaves all ternate  .................................................................. {\b 8. sachalinensis}
\par
9 Inflorescence-axis eglandular, with sparse acicles; 
\par
   leaves usually pinnate ..................................................................... {\b 7. idaeus}
\par
6 Ripe fruit blackish, adhering to receptacle; leaves ternate,
\par
   digitate or pedate
\par
10 Stems pruinose; stipules lanceolate; leaflets 3; drupelets 2-20,
\par
   pruinose (Subsect.{\i  Caesii}) ....................................................... {\b 75. caesius} 
\par
10 Stems usually not pruinose; stipules linear-lanceolate to  filiform;  
\par
   leaflets 3-7; drupelets usually more than 20, rarely pruinose (vide   
\par
   also p. 25 {\i Corylifolii})
\par
11 Prickles nearly always very unequal, often scattered on the stem-faces; 
\par
   stem and inflorescence usually with stalked glands (Subsect. Appendiculati) 
\par
12 Stems with sparse glands; upper leaves usually covered 
\par
   with stellate hairs above; petals yellowish white .................... {\b 44. canescens}
\par
12 Stems usually with many glands; leaves without stellate
\par
    hairs above; petals never yellowish
\par
13 Stems weak and terete, often procumbent, pruinose; prickles weak, or
\par
   broad-based and curved; leaves normally with 3-5 leaflets; inflorescence
\par
   usually with weak prickles; sepals appressed to the young fruit; petals
\par
   often small; stamens usually equalling or exceeding styles
\par
   (Ser.{\i  Glandulosi})
\par
14 Prickles compressed at base
\par
15 Prickles on any one part of stem all similar; inflorescence with 
\par
   most glands shorter than the diameter of the axis; petals erect .... {\b 70. scaber}
\par
15 Prickles on stem distinctly unequal; inflorescence with most 
\par
   glands longer than the diameter of the axis; petals ± patent .. {\b 71. schleicheri} 
\par
14 Prickles scarcely compressed at base 
\par
16 Terminal leaflet rounded and ± entire at base, shortly 
\par
   acuminate .............................................................................. {\b 72. glandulosus}
\par
16 Terminal leaflet cordate or subcordate at base 
\par
17 Glands and acicles pale yellow .................................................. {\b 73. serpens} 
\par
17 Glands and acicles brown or purple ............................................. {\b 74. hirtus} 
\par
13 Plant not possessing this combination of characters 
\par
18 Inflorescence-glands often longer than the diameter of the axis; 
\par
   prickles very unequal and merging into numerous stalked glands, 
\par
   acicles, and pricklets of varying lengths
\par
19 Stems robust, pruinose, with numerous, long, often glandular 
\par
   hairs and acicles; prickles straight or falcate; leaves pedate with 
\par
   3-5 leaflets, grey-white tomentose beneath; inflorescence large, 
\par
   with long lower branches and pedicels ................................ {\b 69. incanescens} 
\par
19 Plant without this combination of characters (Ser.{\i  Histrices})  
\par
20 Flowers usually less than 2 cm in diameter 
\par
21 Stem-prickles short, not confluent, not hairy; sepals without 
\par
   prickles; petals 5-7(-11) ............................................................. {\b 66. rosaceus} 
\par
21 Stem-prickles large, confluent and hairy; sepals with prickles; 
\par
   petals 5 .................................................................................... {\b 64. pilocarpus} 
\par
20 Flowers usually more than 2 cm in diameter 
\par
22 Flowers white or pale pink ....................................................... {\b 68. koehleri} 
\par
22 Flowers bright or deep pink 
\par
23 Stems glabrous or glabrescent .................................................... {\b 67. histrix} 
\par
23 Stems sparsely or densely hairy 
\par
24 Stems densely hairy; terminal leaflet ovate to suborbicular, 
\par
   acute, cordate at base .................................................................. {\b 63. fuscater} 
\par
24 Stems sparsely hairy; terminal leaflet obovate, acuminate, 
\par
   subcuneate at base ....................................................................... {\b 65. lejeunei} 
\par
18 Inflorescence-glands shorter than the diameter of the axis; 
\par
   stem-prickles slightly or moderately unequal, but distinct
\par
   from the pricklets 
\par
25 Stem-prickles only slightly unequal, mainly on the angles of 
\par
   the stem, with a few tuberculate pricklets on the faces and
\par
   a few stalked glands (Ser. {\i Vestiti})
\par
26 Leaves green beneath
\par
27 Terminal leaflet orbicular or obovate, with a ± abrupt, short or
\par
   long point; sepals patent, green, with white margins ........ {\b 48. mucronulatus}
\par
27 Terminal leaflet ovate or ovate-oblong, gradually narrowed
\par
   to a long point; sepals deflexed, tomentose ................................. {\b 49. gremlii}
\par
26 At least the upper leaves white-tomentose beneath
\par
28 Petals suborbicular .................................................................... {\b 45. vestitus} 
\par
28 Petals ovate or elliptical, longer than wide
\par
29 Stems with sparse, tufted hairs and a few glands;
\par
   sepals patent to erect ................................................................. {\b 46. boreanus}
\par
29 Stems pubescent, with long and short hairs and sunken glands; 
\par
   sepals deflexed ............................................................................. {\b 7. adscitus} 
\par
25 Stem-prickles unequal, scattered over the stem surface making it rough 
\par
   and tuberculate, with many stalked glands
\par
30 Inflorescence-axis glandular, tomentose or glabrous (Ser.{\i  Rudes}) 
\par
31 Stems ± terete, becoming white-pruinose; leaflets usually 3
\par
   ............................................................................................... {\b 62. vallisparsus} 
\par
31 Stems angled, not white-pruinose; leaflets usually 5
\par
32 Cauline leaves cordate at base; inflorescence flexuous and lax
\par
   ............................................................................................. {\b 61. melanoxylon}
\par
32 Cauline leaves subcuneate at base; inflorescence short, 
\par
   subcorymbiform .............................................................................. {\b 60. rudis} 
\par
30 Inflorescence-axis glandular and hairy, the glands mainly not 
\par
   exceeding the hairs (Ser. {\i Radulae}) 
\par
33 At least the upper leaves white-tomentose beneath 
\par
34 Inflorescence with few, or weak, slender prickles; stamens 
\par
   about equalling styles .............................................................. {\b 52. apiculatus} 
\par
34 Inflorescence with numerous strong prickles; stamens exceeding styles 
\par
35 Sepals not appendiculate; carpels glabrous ................................. {\b 50. radula}
\par
35 Sepals appendiculate; carpels pubescent ................................ {\b 51. genevieri}
\par
33 Leaves all green beneath, though sometimes green tomentose 
\par
36 Sepals usually deflexed after anthesis, or variable in the same plant
\par
37 Stems densely hairy; inflorescence with many prickles; 
\par
   bracts long, linear-lanceolate ........................................................ {\b 53. fuscus}
\par
37 Stems sparsely hairy; inflorescence with very few or no 
\par
   prickles; bracts leaf-like .............................................................. {\b 54. foliosus}
\par
36 Sepals patent or becoming erect after anthesis  
\par
38 Stems with few or no hairs 
\par
39 Sepals green, with white margin, acute, without long apex; 
\par
   inflorescence short, few-flowered .............................................. {\b 55. infestus}
\par
39 Sepals grey-tomentose, without white margin, with long, linear 
\par
   apex; inflorescence usually long, dense and tapered    
\par
38 Stems hairy 
\par
40 Flowers deep pink ................................................................... {\b 58. obscurus}
\par
40 Flowers white or pale pink 
\par
41 Inflorescence with very few prickles ........................................ {\b 57. pallidus}
\par
41 Inflorescence with numerous prickles ....................................... {\b 59. menkei}
\par
11 Prickles ± equal, mainly on the stem-angles; stem and inflorescence ±
\par
   eglandular, or with sessile glands only
\par
42 Stems glabrous, often suckering from base, rarely rooting apically;
\par
   inflorescence a raceme or panicle (Subsect. {\i Suberecti})
\par
43 Stems high-arching; inflorescence a panicle
\par
44 Leaflets 5-7, those of upper leaves persistently pubescent or almost
\par
   tomentose beneath; receptacle densely pubescent ........................ {\b 15. affinis}
\par
44 Leaflets 5, often glabrous at maturity; receptacle glabrous . {\b 14. divaricatus}
\par
43 Stems ± erect ; inflorescence usually a raceme
\par
45 Leaflets 5 or 7; prickles weak or short; ripe fruit dark red 
\par
46 Stems up to 300 cm; prickles short, conical, often purplish-black;  
\par
   leaflets plane, glabrescent beneath ........................................... {\b 10. nessensis}
\par

\par
8}
\par