{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 {\i  sides, thickets and open woods. C. & S. Europe, extending to Ukraine and S. Belgium. }Al Au Be Bu Co Cz Ga Ge Gr He Hs Hu It Ju Lu Rm Rs (W, K) Si [No Su].
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Subgen. {\b Padus} (Miller) Focke. Like Subgen.{\i  Cerasus} but flowers numerous,in elongated racemes which terminate short, leafy shoots.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 17. P. padus} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 473 (1753) ({\i Cerasus padus} (L.) Delarbre). Tree or shrub with ascending branches; bark foetid. Leaves 6-10 cm, obovate to elliptic-oblong, acuminate, acutely and finely serrate, dull green above, paler beneath. Racemes with 15-35 flowers. Petals 6-9 mm, often  erose-denticulate. Fruit 6-8 mm, subglobose, shining black, bitter and astringent; endocarp sulcate. 2n = 32.{\i  Most of Europe except the Mediterranean region, Balkan peninsula and S.E. Russia.} Au Be Br Bu Cz Da Fe Ga Ge Hb He Ho Hs It Ju Lu No Po Rm Rs (N, B, C, W, K, E) Su.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b padus}: Tree up to 17 m; young shoots glabrescent; leaves glabrous beneath, or with hairs only in axils of veins; racemes more or less pendent; flowers with heavy scent.{\i  Throughout the range of the species}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b borealis} Cajander,{\i  Suomen Kasvio} 353 (1906) (subsp.{\i  petraea} (Tausch) Domin): Shrub, seldom more than 3 m; young shoots pubescent; leaves pubescent beneath, with prominent veins; racemes horizontal or ascending; flowers scarcely scented. 2n = 32.{\i  N. & W. Fennoscandia; mountains of C. Europe from the Vosges to the Carpathians and S.E. Alps}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 18. P. serotina} Ehrh., {\i Beitr. Naturk.}{\b  3}: 20 (1788). Tree up to 20 m; bark aromatic. Leaves obovate to elliptic-oblong, acuminate, finely serrate with flattened, forwardly directed teeth, dark, shining green above,paler and slightly pubescent beneath; lateral veins at least 15, not very conspicuous. Racemes 6-15 cm, with c. 30 flowers. Calyx persistent in fruit; petals 3-4, denticulate, creamy white. Fruit 8 mm, depressed-globose, purplish-black; endocarp smooth.{\i  Planted, mainly in C.Europe, for timber and elsewhere for ornament, and occasionally naturalized}. [Au Cz Da Ga Ge Ho Hu Ju Po Rm Rs Su.] ({\i E. North America.})
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 19. P. virginiana} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 473 (1753) ({\i Padus virginiana} (L.) M.J. Roemer). Like {\b 18} but not more than 5 m, and usually a shrub; bark not aromatic; leaves dull, with very acute and more patent teeth; lateral veins 8-11, conspicuous and distinct; calyx deciduous; fruit dark red. {\i Planted on a small scale and occasionally naturalized.} [Cz Ga Rs.] ({\i E.North America.})
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Subgen.{\b  Laurocerasus} (Duh.) Rehder. Leaves evergreen, coriaceous, glabrous and glossy, longitudinally folded in bud. Shoots with terminal bud. Flowers in elongated, axillary racemes with leafless peduncle. Fruit glabrous.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 20. P. lusitanica} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 473 (1753) ({\i Cerasus lusitanica }(L.)Loisel.). Shrub or tree, 3-8(-20) m; young twigs and petioles dark red, glabrous. Leaves 8-13 × 2·5-7 cm, elliptic-ovate to oblong lanceolate, acuminate, regularly crenate or dentate, without glands, very dark green above. Racemes, with peduncle, 10-28 cm, suberect. Petals 4-7 mm, dull white. Fruit 8-13 mm, ovoid to subglobose, somewhat acuminate, purplish-black. 2n = 64.{\i  Iberian peninsula, just extending to S.W. France; Açores. Often planted for ornament in W. Europe.} Az Ga Hs Lu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b lusitanica}: Up to 17 m; leaves 2·5-5 cm wide oblong-lanceolate. Racemes 15-28 cm, with 50-100 flowers Fruit about as long as its pedicel.{\i  Iberian peninsula and S.W France}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b azorica} (Mouillefert) Franco, {\i Bol. Soc. Port. Ci Nat.} ser. 2,{\b 10}: 82 (1964): Not more than 4 m; leaves 4·5-6·5 cm wide, ovate-elliptical. Racemes 10-17 cm, with 20-30 flowers Fruit much longer than its pedicel.{\i  Açores}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 21. P. laurocerasus} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 474 (1753) ({\i Cerasus laurocerasus} (L.)Loisel.,{\i  Laurocerasus officinalis} M. J. Roemer). Like {\b 20} but seldom more than 8 m; young twigs and petioles pale green; leaves lighter green, more rigid, sometimes subentire, usually with 1 or more sessile, circular glands on lower side near the petiole racemes 8-13 cm, scarcely exceeding the subtending leaf; fruit c. 12 mm.{\i  E. part of Balkan peninsula; extensively planted in parks and gardens in S. & W. Europe and locally naturalized.} Bu Ju Tu [Br Co Ga Hb Lu].
\par

\par  

\pard\f0\fs28\qc {\b 81.          LEGUMINOSAE}
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc Edit. V.H. Heywood & P.W. Ball.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Trees, shrubs or herbs. Leaves alternate, rarely opposite, simple to 2-pinnate, stipulate. Flowers usually hermaphrodite, usually 5-merous.Sepals usually united. Petals free or somewhat connate. Stamens usually 10, sometimes less than 10 or numerous. Ovary a single unilocular carpel; style 1. Fruit a dehiscent, 2-valved or indehiscent, occasionally lomentaceous legume. Seeds usually without endosperm.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  A large number of species, both native and introduced, are cultivated for food, for fodder and for ornament. Those most frequently utilized as food are to be found in {\i Apios, Arachis, Cicer, Glycine, Glycyrrhiza, Lens, Phaseolus, Pisum, Vicia} and {\i Vigna.} The edible part is usually the seed or legume, or both. Species of these genera and many others, particularly in {\i Anthyllis, Ceratonia, Coronilla, Galega, Lathyrus, Lotus, Lupinus, Medicago, Melilotus, Trifolium} and{\i  Trigonella} are cultivated for fodder on a large scale or are planted to improve pasture.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Cultivated ornamental plants are to be found in the majority of European genera. In addition to some of those mentioned above, the following are of particular importance in this respect: {\i Acacia, Amorpha, Caragana, Cercis, Colutea, Cytisus} and{\i  Genista} and related genera, {\i Laburnum, Robinia, Sophora, Spartium} and {\i Wisteria}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Stamens numerous, free, longer than the corolla ......................... {\b 4. Acacia}
\par
1 Stamens not more than 10, the filaments often partly
\par
  or completely united, usually shorter than the corolla
\par
2 Corolla absent; stamens 5, free .................................................. {\b 2. Ceratonia}
\par
2 Corolla present; stamens more than 5 or the filaments united
\par
3 At least some leaves 2-pinnate; corolla scarcely 
\par
  zygomorphic ................................................................................. {\b 3. Gleditsia}
\par
3 Leaves simple, 3-foliolate or 1-pinnate; corolla strongly zygomorphic  
\par
4 Flowers with 1 petal ................................................................. {\b 42. Amorpha}
\par
4 Flowers with 5 petals, 2 or more sometimes connate
\par
5 Leaves consisting of a tendril only (but with large
\par
  leaf-like stipules) ........................................................................ {\b 51. Lathyrus}
\par
5 Leaves not consisting of a tendril only
\par
6 At least some leaves paripinnate, imparipinnate or digitate; 
\par
  leaflets 2, 4 or more
\par
7 Leaves paripinnate; rhachis often ending in a spine or tendril
\par

\par
80}
\par