{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 8 Shrubs or small trees; rhachis often ending in a spine
\par
9 Pedicels 5 mm or more, articulated .......................................... {\b 36. Caragana}
\par
9 Pedicels usually less than 5 mm, not articulated
\par
10 Stipules forming spines ................................................ {\b 35. Halimodendron}
\par
10 Stipules not forming spines .................................................. {\b 38. Astragalus}
\par
8  Herbs; rhachis not ending in a spine
\par
11 Stipules adnate to the petiole; calyx bilabiate,
\par
   the upper lip with 4 teeth, the lower with 1 tooth ....................... {\b 74. Arachis}
\par
11 Stipules not adnate to the petiole; calyx actino-
\par
   morphic or if bilabiate, the upper lip with 2 teeth,
\par
   the lower with 3 teeth
\par
12 Stem and leaves glandular-pubescent .......................................... {\b 48. Cicer}
\par
12 Stem and leaves not glandular-pubescent
\par
13 Stem winged ............................................................................ {\b 51. Lathyrus}
\par
13 Stem not winged
\par
14 Leaflets parallel-veined ........................................................... {\b 51. Lathyrus}
\par
14 Leaflets pinnately veined
\par
15 Calyx-teeth all equal and at least twice as long as the tube ........... {\b 50. Lens}
\par
15 At least 2 calyx-teeth less than twice as long as the tube 
\par
16 Calyx-teeth ± leaf-like; stipules up to 10 cm .............................. {\b 52. Pisum} 
\par
16 Calyx-teeth not leaf-like; stipules not more than 2 cm
\par
17 Style pubescent all round or on the lower side, or glabrous ......... {\b 49. Vicia}
\par
17 Style pubescent on the upper side only ................................... {\b 51. Lathyrus}
\par
7  Leaves imparipinnate or digitate
\par
18 Principal lateral veins of the leaflets terminating 
\par
   at the margin, often in a tooth
\par
19 Glabrous or glabrescent, eglandular ...................................... {\b 57. Trifolium}
\par
19 Variously hairy and glandular, sometimes sparsely so
\par
20 Calyx gibbous at base; stipules free from petiole ......................... {\b 48. Cicer}
\par
20 Calyx not gibbous at base; stipules adnate to petiole ................ {\b 53. Ononis}
\par
18 Lateral veins of the leaflets anastomosing and not
\par
   reaching the margin
\par
21 At least some flowers in terminal or apparently
\par
   terminal inflorescences 
\par
22 Leaves digitate ......................................................................... {\b 28. Lupinus}
\par
22 Leaves imparipinnate
\par
23 Climbing shrubs; flowers in pendent racemes; legume velutinous
\par
   .................................................................................................... {\b 31. Wisteria}
\par
23 Not climbing; flowers in erect inflorescences;
\par
   legume not velutinous
\par
24 Trees; flowers in large panicles ................................................. {\b 5. Sophora}
\par
24 Herbs or small shrubs; flowers in heads or racemes
\par
25 Stamens free; flowers in racemes 5 cm or more ........................ {\b 5. Sophora}
\par
25 Stamens connate; flowers in heads ......................................... {\b 63. Anthyllis}
\par
21 All flowers axillary or in axillary inflorescences
\par
26 Plant glandular, at least in part
\par
27 Racemes pendent; legume 5-10 cm .......................................... {\b 30. Robinia}
\par
27 Racemes erect; legume not more than 3 cm
\par
28 Dwarf shrubs; corolla 20-25 mm .......................................... {\b 37. Calophaca}
\par
28 Herbs; corolla less than 20 mm .......................................... {\b 41. Glycyrrhiza}
\par
26 Plant eglandular
\par
29 Flowers in umbels or clusters, the pedicels arising 
\par
   ± from the same point
\par
30 Legume lomentaceous
\par
31 Keel obtuse; legume strongly reticulate-veined .................. {\b 64. Ornithopus}
\par
31 Keel acute; legume not or only faintly reticulate veined 
\par
32 Segments of the legume lunate or horseshoe-shaped to
\par
   rectangular with a semicircular to orbicular sinus 
\par
   which has a curved protuberance at its base ........................ {\b 66. Hippocrepis}
\par
32 Segments of the legume linear or oblong,straight or
\par
   slightly curved
\par
33 Stamens diadelphous; legume glabrous ................................. {\b 65. Coronilla}
\par
33 Stamens monadelphous; legume pubescent ............... {\b 67. Hammatolobium}
\par
30 Legume dehiscent or indehiscent, not lomentaceous
\par
34 Keel beaked
\par
35 Leaves with 4-7 pairs of leaflets .......................................... {\b 62. Securigera}
\par
35 Leaves with 2-3 pairs of leaflets or simple
\par
36 Lower leaves simple; upper leaves with 2-3 pairs of leaflets; 
\par
   legume spirally twisted and flattened so that it is 
\par
   circular in outline ............................................................ {\b 61. Hymenocarpus}
\par
36 All leaves with 2 pairs of leaflets; legume linear
\par
   or oblong, straight or curved .......................................................... {\b 59. Lotus}
\par
34 Keel not beaked
\par
37 Keel very dark red or black ................................................. {\b 58. Dorycnium}
\par
37 Keel not dark red or black
\par
38 Leaves imparipinnate
\par
9  Umbels without an involucre ................................................ {\b 38. Astragalus}
\par
39 Umbels with an involucre of scarious bracts ............................. {\b 72. Ebenus}
\par
38 Leaves digitate or apparently so
\par
40 Pedicels 15-20 mm; leaflets with a spinescent apex .............. {\b 36. Caragana}
\par
40 Pedicels not more than 5 mm; leaflets without a 
\par
   spinescent apex ........................................................................ {\b 27. Lotononis}
\par
29 Flowers in racemes or condensed panicles or solitary
\par
41 Leaflets distinctly parallel-veined ........................................... {\b 51. Lathyrus}
\par
41 Leaflets pinnately veined or the lateral veins obscure
\par
42 Leaflets with a spinescent apex .............................................. {\b 36. Caragana}
\par
42 Leaflets without a spinescent apex
\par
43 Spiny shrubs ..................................................................... {\b 69. Eversmannia}
\par
43 Unarmed herbs, shrubs or trees
\par
44 Legume lomentaceous
\par
45 Racemes (2-)4- to many-flowered ...................................... {\b 70. Hedysarum}
\par
45 Flowers solitary, axillary
\par
46 Corolla 4-7 mm; segments of the legume flat and rectangular 
\par
   with a suborbicular sinus ..................................................... {\b 66. Hippocrepis}
\par
46 Corolla 10-14 mm; segments of the legume ovoid-oblong,
\par
   terete ............................................................................. {\b 67. Hammatolobium}
\par
44 Legume not lomentaceous
\par
47 Legume indehiscent, usually toothed or spiny
\par
48 Legume oblong, dorsiventrally compressed, the valves
\par
   sinuate-dentate on the back; corolla blue, or yellow 
\par
   with a blue apex ........................................................................ {\b 40. Biserrula}
\par
48 Legume ± orbicular, the margin usually toothed, the 
\par
   sides reticulate-veined or foveolate and the veins 
\par
   often toothed; corolla white, pink or purple ......................... {\b 71. Onobrychis}
\par
47 Legume usually dehiscent, not toothed or spiny
\par
49 Racemes 10 cm or more, pendent; stipules usually 
\par
   forming spines; leaflets stipellate ............................................... {\b 30. Robinia}
\par
49 Racemes usually less than 10 cm, erect; stipules not
\par
   forming spines 
\par
50 Leaflets stipellate ......................................................................... {\b 44. Apios}
\par
50 Leaflets not stipellate
\par
51 Legume strongly inflated,membranous
\par
52 Shrubs up to 2 m or more ......................................................... {\b 33. Colutea} 
\par
52 Acaulescent herbs ................................................................. {\b 38. Astragalus} 
\par
51 Legume not or only slightly inflated, not membranous
\par

\par
81}
\par