{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 53 Keel beaked ................................................................................ {\b 59. Lotus}
\par
53 Keel not beaked but sometimes mucronate 
\par
54 Keel mucronate at apex
\par
55 Mucro on the adaxial side of the keel ................................... {\b 38. Astragalus}
\par
55 Mucro on the abaxial side of the keel .................................... {\b 39. Oxytropis}
\par
54 Keel not mucronate at apex
\par
56 Stamens monadelphous
\par
57 Rhachis very short so that the leaves are almost 
\par
   digitate; leaflets 1-2 pairs;corolla bright pink .............................. {\b 72. Ebenus}
\par
57 Rhachis long; leaflets 4-10 pairs; corolla yellow or
\par
   white to bluish-violet
\par
58 Corolla 10-15 mm; perennial ..................................................... {\b 32. Galega}
\par
58 Corolla c. 3 mm; annual ....................................................... {\b 38. Astragalus}
\par
56 Stamens diadelphous
\par
59 Style glabrous ....................................................................... {\b 38. Astragalus}
\par
59 Style pubescent on the lower side ................................................. {\b 49. Vicia}
\par
6  Leaves simple, 1-foliolate or 3-foliolate, sometimes very small
\par
60 Leaves 7-12 cm, simple, suborbicular, cordate; adaxial
\par
   petal innermost ................................................................................ {\b 1. Cercis}
\par
60 Leaves 3-foliolate, or simple, but never suborbicular
\par
   and cordate; adaxial petal outermost
\par
61 Principal lateral veins of the leaflets terminating at
\par
   the margin; leaflets often toothed
\par
62 Plant glandular-pubescent, at least above
\par
63 Stamens monadelphous; legume straight or very slightly curved
\par
   ...................................................................................................... {\b 53. Ononis}
\par
63 Stamens diadelphous; legume falcate to spirally coiled,
\par
   rarely almost straight .............................................................. {\b 56. Medicago}
\par
62 Plant not glandular-pubescent
\par
64 At least some petal-claws adnate to the staminal tube;
\par
   corolla usually persistent in fruit ............................................. {\b 57. Trifolium}
\par
64 Petal-claws free from the staminal tube; corolla deciduous 
\par
65 Filaments of at least 5 stamens dilated at the apex ................ {\b 57. Trifolium} 
\par
65 Filaments all filiform
\par
66 Legume coiled in 1 or more turns of a spiral ........................ {\b 56. Medicago}
\par
66 Legume straight or curved
\par
67 Perennial
\par
68 Legume obovate or ovate to subglobose ................................ {\b 54. Melilotus} 
\par
68 Legume oblong, oblong-falcate, oblong-reniform, reniform
\par
   or variously curved .................................................................. {\b 56. Medicago} 
\par
67 Annual or biennial 
\par
69 Corolla blue .......................................................................... {\b 55. Trigonella} 
\par
69 Corolla white or yellow
\par
70 Legume linear or oblong, at least 3 times as long as wide ... {\b 55. Trigonella}
\par
70 Legume ovate or obovate to subglobose or reniform,
\par
   less than 3 times as long as wide 
\par
71 Legume reniform ................................................................... {\b 56. Medicago} 
\par
71 Legume ovate or obovate to subglobose
\par
72 Legume without or with a very short beak and without a
\par
   membranous wing .................................................................... {\b 54. Melilotus}
\par
72 Legume with a long, curved beak or with a broad 
\par
   membranous wing on the margin ........................................... {\b 55. Trigonella}
\par
61 Principal lateral veins of the leaflets anastomosing and not 
\par
   reaching the margin,sometimes obscure; leaflets not toothed 
\par
   (leaves sometimes caducous or reduced to a spine-tipped phyllode)
\par
73 Plant spiny
\par
74 Corolla pink, red, purple or violet-blue
\par
75 Leaves c. 5 mm; calyx bilabiate .............................................. {\b 23. Erinacea}
\par
75 Leaves 10-20 mm; calyx actinomorphic .................................... {\b 73. Alhagi}
\par
74 Corolla yellow
\par
76 Leaves of adult plants reduced to persistent spine-tipped phyllodes
\par
77 Leaves and branches mostly alternate; legume scarcely
\par
   exserted from the calyx ................................................................... {\b 24. Ulex}
\par
77 Leaves and branches mostly opposite; legume 
\par
   conspicuously exserted from the calyx ............................. {\b 25. Stauracanthus}
\par
76 Leaves not spine-tipped, often caducous
\par
78 Calyx tubular, with 5 short teeth, the upper portion 
\par
   breaking away at anthesis to leave a cuplike remnant .......... {\b 10. Calicotome}
\par
78 Upper part of calyx not breaking away at anthesis
\par
79 Calyx with 5 ± equal teeth, not or only slightly bilabiate ...... {\b 63. Anthyllis}
\par
79 Calyx ± distinctly bilabiate 
\par
80 Upper lip of calyx with 2 short teeth; leaves 3-foliolate
\par
   .......................................................................................... {\b 13. Chamaecytisus}
\par
80 Upper lip of calyx deeply 2-fid; leaves often 1-foliolate
\par
81 Calyx not more than 7 mm ........................................................ {\b 16. Genista}
\par
81 Calyx 7 mm or more
\par
82 Leaves and branches mostly alternate; calyx not inflated ........ {\b 16. Genista}
\par
82 Leaves and branches mostly opposite; calyx somewhat 
\par
   inflated ............................................................................ {\b 18. Echinospartum}
\par
73 Plant not spiny
\par
83 Young stems broadly winged .................................... {\b 17. Chamaespartium}
\par
83 Young stems not broadly winged
\par
84 Leaflets stipellate; leaves 3-foliolate
\par
85 Corolla not more than 7 mm; plant with reddish-brown hairs . {\b 47. Glycine}
\par
85 Corolla 10 mm or more; plant glabrous or with whitish hairs
\par
86 Beak of the keel forming 1 1/3-2 turns of a spiral ................ {\b 45. Phaseolus}
\par
86 Beak of the keel recurved ............................................................ {\b 46. Vigna}
\par
84 Leaflets not stipellate; leaves simple or 3-foliolate
\par
87 Legume with prominent glandular tubercles .................... {\b 26. Adenocarpus}
\par
87 Legume without glandular tubercles (sometimes with 
\par
   glandular hairs)
\par
88 Leaves simple or 1-foliolate, sometimes very small
\par
89 Annual herbs
\par
90 Leaves linear, grass-like; legume dehiscent ............................ {\b 51. Lathyrus}
\par
90 Leaves obovate or elliptical, not grass-like; legume
\par
   indehiscent ............................................................................. {\b 68. Scorpiurus}
\par
89 Shrubs or perennial herbs, woody at base
\par
91 Corolla violet; leaves 1-3 mm, scarious .......................... {\b 34. Eremosparton}
\par
91 Corolla white or yellow; leaves usually larger,
\par
   herbaceous, sometimes caducous
\par
92 Calyx caducous after anthesis ..................................................... {\b 20. Lygos}
\par
92 Calyx not caducous 
\par
93 Calyx split to the base adaxially ............................................. {\b 21. Spartium}
\par
93 Calyx not split to the base 
\par
94 Calyx ± tubular; legume ± included in the persistent calyx .. {\b 63. Anthyllis}
\par
94 Calyx campanulate; legume exserted, or the calyx not persistent
\par
95 Upper lip of calyx with short teeth ........................................... {\b 12. Cytisus}
\par
95 Upper lip of calyx deeply 2-fid or deeply toothed
\par

\par
82}
\par