{\rtf1\ansi \deff4\deflang1033{\fonttbl{\f4\froman\fcharset0\fprq2 Times New Roman;}}{\colortbl;\red0\green0\blue0;\red0\green0\blue255;\red0\green255\blue255;\red0\green255\blue0;\red255\green0\blue255;\red255\green0\blue0;\red255\green255\blue0;\red255\green255\blue255;\red0\green0\blue128;\red0\green128\blue128;\red0\green128\blue0;\red128\green0\blue128;\red128\green0\blue0;\red128\green128\blue0;\red128\green128\blue128;\red192\green192\blue192;}{\stylesheet{\widctlpar \f4\fs20\lang2057 \snext0 Normal;}{\*\cs10 \additive Default Paragraph Font;}}{\info{\author dddd}{\operator dddd}{\creatim\yr1998\mo11\dy11\hr17\min4}{\revtim\yr1998\mo11\dy11\hr17\min5}{\version2}{\edmins1}{\nofpages4}{\nofwords862}{\nofchars4917}{\*\company  }{\vern57431}}\widowctrl\ftnbj\aenddoc\hyphcaps0 \fet0\sectd \linex0 {\*\pnseclvl1\pnucrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl2\pnucltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl3\pndec\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl4\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl5\pndec\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl6\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl7\pnlcrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl8\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl9\pnlcrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}
\pard\plain \li200\ \f4\fs20\lang2057 {\fs28 96 Legume ovoid, oblong or falcate, dehiscent, not inflated  .........}{\b\fs28 16. Genista}{\fs28 
\par 96 Legume globose-inflated, not or tardily dehiscent ...................... }{\b\fs28 20. Lygos}{\fs28  
\par 88 At least some leaves 3-foliolate
\par 97 Leaflets conspicuously glandular-punctate ............................. }{\b\fs28 43. Psoralea}{\fs28 
\par 97 Leaflets not or very minutely glandular-punctate
\par 98 Legume lomentaceous
\par 99 Annual; corolla 4-8 mm ......................................................... }{\b\fs28 65. Coronilla}{\fs28 
\par 99 Perennial; corolla 10-14 mm ...................................... }{\b\fs28 67. Hammatolobium}{\fs28 
\par 98 Legume not lomentaceous
\par 100 Calyx usually bilabiate, the upper lip with 4 teeth, the 
\par     lower with 1 tooth, somewhat shorter than the upper ............ }{\b\fs28 27. Lotononis}{\fs28 
\par 100 Calyx actinomorphic or bilabiate, but never with the
\par     upper lip with 4 teeth and the lower with 1 tooth
\par 101 Annual or perennial herbs, sometimes with a woody stock
\par 102 Stamens free; flowers in clusters of 3 arranged in
\par     a terminal leafy raceme ......................................................... }{\b\fs28 6. Thermopsis}{\fs28 
\par 102 Stamens connate; flowers not in clusters of 3 
\par     arranged in a terminal leafy raceme
\par 103 Calyx inflated, 4\'b75-6 mm wide in flower, up to 12 mm
\par     wide in fruit and enclosing the legume ................................... }{\b\fs28 63. Anthyllis}{\fs28 
\par 103 Calyx less than 4\'b75 mm wide, not inflated
\par 104 Keel very dark red or black ............................................... }{\b\fs28 58. Dorycnium}{\fs28 
\par 104 Keel not very dark red or black
\par 105 Stamens monadelphous; stipules completely free from
\par     the petiole ........................................................................ }{\b\fs28 29. Argyrolobium}{\fs28 
\par 105 Stamens diadelphous; stipules inserted on or adnate
\par     to the base of the petiole
\par 106 Stipules inserted at the base of the petiole;
\par     legume not longitudinally winged ................................................ }{\b\fs28 59. Lotus}{\fs28 
\par 106 Stipules inserted on the stem, and adnate to the base of 
\par     the petiole; legume with 2 or 4 longitudinal wings ...... }{\b\fs28 60. Tetragonolobus}{\fs28 
\par 101 Shrubs or trees
\par 107 Stamens free; stipules connate, conspicuous ......................... }{\b\fs28 7. Anagyris}{\fs28 
\par 107 Stamens variously connate; stipules free, often minute or absent
\par 108 Legume \'b1 included in the persistent calyx; calyx with 5 \'b1 equal teeth
\par 109 Flowers solitary or in clusters of 2-3; calyx-teeth
\par     shorter than tube; corolla yellow ............................................. }{\b\fs28 63. Anthyllis}{\fs28 
\par 109 Flowers in dense axillary racemes; calyx-teeth longer
\par     than tube; corolla bright pink ..................................................... }{\b\fs28 72. Ebenus}{\fs28 
\par 108 Legume exserted or the calyx deciduous; calyx bilabiate
\par 110 Flowers in pendent racemes ................................................. }{\b\fs28 8. Laburnum}{\fs28 
\par 110 Flowers in erect inflorescences
\par 111 Legume broadly winged .................................................... }{\b\fs28 9. Podocytisus}{\fs28 
\par 111 Legume not winged
\par 112 Upper lip of calyx deeply 2-fid
\par 113 Calyx-tube distinctly shorter than lips ......................... }{\b\fs28 29. Argyrolobium}{\fs28  
\par 113 Calyx-tube as long as or longer than lips
\par 114 Petiole 15-50 mm; legume 35-50 mm .................................... }{\b\fs28 22. Petteria}{\fs28 
\par 114 Petiole not more than 15 mm; legume not more than 25 mm
\par 115 Standard 4-5\'b75 mm; calyx campanulate .......................... }{\b\fs28 19. Gonocytisus}{\fs28 
\par 115 Standard 7-20 mm; calyx tubular-campanulate
\par 116 Pedicel 5-10 mm; legume glabrous ......................................... }{\b\fs28 12. Cytisus}{\fs28 
\par 116 Pedicel 1-3 mm; legume hairy
\par 117 Flowers in umbellate heads .................................................... }{\b\fs28 16. Genista}{\fs28 
\par 117 Flowers axillary or in axillary clusters.
\par 118 Standard distinctly shorter than keel; seeds estrophiolate ...... }{\b\fs28 16. Genista}{\fs28 
\par 118 Standard longer than keel; seeds strophiolate .......................... }{\b\fs28 15. Teline}{\fs28  
\par 112 Upper lip of calyx with 2 short teeth 
\par 119 Calyx tubular .............................................................. }{\b\fs28 13. Chamaecytisus}{\fs28 
\par 119 Calyx campanulate
\par 120 Flowers axillary, arranged in leafy racemes ........................... }{\b\fs28 12. Cytisus}{\fs28 
\par 120 Flowers in leafless, terminal heads or racemes
\par 121 Flowers in usually 2- or 4- flowered heads .................... }{\b\fs28 14. Chronanthus}{\fs28 
\par 121 Flowers in long racemes
\par 122 Twigs hairy ..................................................................... }{\b\fs28 11. Lembotropis}{\fs28 
\par 122 Twigs glabrous ........................................................................ }{\b\fs28 12. Cytisus}{\fs28 
\par 
\par }
\pard \qc\ {\fs28  Subfam.    }{\b\fs28  Caesalpinioideae}{\fs28 
\par }
\pard \ {\fs28 
\par Flowers more or less zygomorphic. Sepals and petals imbricate; the adaxial petals innermost and so overlapped by the lateral petals. Stamens usually not more than 10, free (in European spp.).
\par 
\par }
\pard \qc\ {\b\fs28 1.               Cercis}{\fs28                  L.
\par }{\fs24 By P.W. Ball.
\par 
\par }
\pard \ {\fs28 Deciduous trees or shrubs.Leaves simple, digitately veined; stipules small, caducous. Flowers fasciculate (in European sp.), hermaphrodite. Calyx campanulate, with 5 equal teeth; corolla strongly zygomorphic, the 3 upper petals much smaller than the lower 2; stamens 10. Legume linear-oblong, compressed, narrowly winged on the ventral suture, more or less dehiscent. Seeds usually numerous.
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 1. C. siliquastrum}{\fs28  L., }{\i\fs28 Sp. Pl.}{\fs28 373 (1753). Trees up to 10 m, cauliflorous. Leaves 7-12 cm cordate, glabrous, long-petiolate. Corolla 15-20 mm, pinkish-purple. Legume 6-10 \'d7 1\'b75-2 cm, brown, glabrous.}{\i\fs28  Mediterranean region, extending to E. Bulgaria; cultivated elsewhere for ornament and sometimes naturalized.}{\fs28  Al Bu Cr Ga Gr It Ju Si Tu [Hs Lu Rs (K)].
\par 
\par }
\pard \qc\ {\b\fs28 2.                  Ceratonia}{\fs28                 L.
\par }{\fs24 By P.W. Ball.
\par 
\par }
\pard \ {\fs28 Polygamous or dioecious. Evergreen trees or shrubs. Leaves paripinnate; stipules minute, caducous. Flowers in short axillary racemes. Calyx with 5 short, caducous teeth; petals 0; stamens 5. Legume linear-oblong, compressed, indehiscent, with a sugary pulp between the seeds. Seeds numerous.
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 1. C. siliqua}{\fs28  L.,}{\i\fs28  Sp. Pl. }{\fs28 1026 (1753). Tree or shrub up to 10 m. Leaflets 2-5 pairs, 30-50 \'d7 30-40 mm, elliptical or obovate to suborbicular, coriaceous, dark green and shining above, pale
\par 
\par 83}
\par }