{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 green beneath. Flowers green. Legume 10-20 × 1·5-2 cm, brownish-violet, pendent.{\i  Native to the Mediterranean region, but also extensively cultivated there} ({\i and in Portugal}) {\i for fodder and widely naturalized, so that the limits as a native are hard to determine.} Al Bl Cr Ga Gr Hs It Ju Sa Si [Co Lu].
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc {\b 3.                Gleditsia}                   L.
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc By P.W. Ball.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Polygamous. Deciduous trees, usually with stout, simple or branched spines on the trunk and branches. Leaves paripinnate and 2-pinnate; stipules minute. Flowers usually in axillary racemes. Calyx 3- to 5-lobed; corolla scarcely zygomorphic, with 3-5 petals; stamens 6-10. Legume compressed, indehiscent or tardily dehiscent. Seeds numerous (in European sp.).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. G. triacanthos} L.,{\i  Sp. Pl.} 1056 (1753). Tree up to 45 m. Pinnate leaves with 10-15 pairs of leaflets; 2-pinnate with 8-14 pinnae; leaflets 20-35 × 7-12 mm (pinnate leaves) or 8-20 × 3-8 mm (2-pinnate leaves), oblong-lanceolate, remotely crenate-serrate. Flowers 2·5-3 mm, greenish-white. Legume 30-45 × 2-3 cm, falcate and often twisted. {\i Planted for ornament and in hedges in C. & S. Europe; occasionally naturalized.} [Au Bu Cz Ga Ge Hs It Lu Rm.] ({\i C. & E. North America}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc Subfam.   {\b  Mimosoideae}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Flowers actinomorphic. Sepals and petals valvate. Stamens numerous, free.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc {\b  4.                Acacia }             Miller
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc By J. do Amaral Franco.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Trees or shrubs. Leaves 2-pinnate and dorsiventral in the juvenile state and remaining so in the adult state or soon reduced to simple phyllodes; stipules rudimentary or becoming large spines. Flowers small, yellow to white, in cylindrical spikes or in globose capitula arranged in racemes or panicles; calyx and corolla 4- to 5-merous; stamens numerous, free, long and conspicuous. Legume usually dehiscent. Seeds with a filiform funicle ending in a cupuliform strophiole.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Leaves all 2-pinnate
\par
2 Leaves deciduous, with 2-8 pairs of pinnae; stipules spinescent
\par
3 Leaflets 3-5 mm; stipular spines 25 mm on older branches;
\par
  legume cylindrical-fusiform, inflated ........................................ {\b 1. farnesiana}
\par
3 Leaflets 6-10 mm; stipular spines up to 100 mm on older
\par
  branches; legume linear-falcate, flattened ......................................... {\b 2. karoo}
\par
2 Leaves evergreen, with 8-20 pairs of pinnae; stipules rudimentary
\par
4 Twigs and young leaves whitish-tomentose; leaflets 3-4 mm;
\par
  legume 10-12 mm wide, not or scarcely constricted between
\par
  the seeds ........................................................................................ {\b 3. dealbata}
\par
4 Twigs and young leaves yellowish-villous; leaflets 2 mm;
\par
  legume 5-7 mm wide, distinctly constricted between the 
\par
  seeds ............................................................................................. {\b 4. mearnsii}
\par
1 Adult leaves reduced to flattened phyllodes, occasionally
\par
  mixed with some 2-pinnate leaves
\par
5 Flowers in axillary spikes; legume terete .................................. {\b 5. longifolia}
\par
5 Flowers in capitula usually arranged in racemes;
\par
  legume compressed
\par
6 Phyllodes with 2-6 longitudinal veins; legume twisted
\par
  or annular
\par
7 Procumbent shrub; phyllodes 3-8 cm; flowers bright yellow ....... {\b 6. cyclops}
\par
7 Tree; phyllodes 6-13 cm; flowers creamy-white .................. {\b 7. melanoxylon}
\par
6 Phyllodes with a single longitudinal vein; legume 
\par
  almost straight
\par
8 Phyllodes strongly falcate, oblong-lanceolate to obovate;
\par
  10-20 capitula in each raceme ................................................... {\b 8. pycnantha}
\par
8 Phyllodes not or scarcely falcate, linear to lanceolate
\par
  or oblanceolate; 2-10 capitula in each raceme
\par
9 Capitula 10-15 mm in diameter; legume distinctly 
\par
  constricted between seeds; funicle short, whitish .................. {\b 9. cyanophylla}
\par
9 Capitula 4-6 mm in diameter; legume not or scarcely 
\par
  constricted between seeds; funicle encircling the seed,
\par
  scarlet ........................................................................................ {\b 10. retinodes}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. A. farnesiana} (L.) Willd., {\i Sp. Pl.}{\b  4}: 1083 (1806). Shrub up to 4 m. Leaves deciduous, 2-pinnate, bright green, glabrous, with 3-8 pairs of pinnae; leaflets 10-25 pairs, 3-5 × 1-1·5 mm, linear-oblong; stipular spines on older branches 25 mm, straight. Capitula 10-12 mm in diameter, 2-3 together in axils of older leaves, rarely solitary; peduncles 1-2 cm, pubescent. Flowers bright yellow, fragrant. Legume 50-90 × 10-15 mm, cylindrical-fusiform, thick, dark brown. {\i Cultivated in S.W. Europe for ornament and for perfumery.} [Ga Hs It Si.] ({\i Dominican Republic.})
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. A. karoo} Hayne, {\i Darst. Beschr. Arzn. Gewächse}{\b  10} : t. 33 (1827) ({\i A. horrida} auct., non Willd.). Like {\b 1} but leaves with 2-7 pairs of pinnae; leaflets 5-14 pairs, 6-10 × 2-4 mm, oblong; stipular spines on older branches 50-100 mm; capitula in fascicles of 4-6 in the axils of the upper leaves; peduncles up to 2·5 cm, glabrous; flowers slightly fragrant; legume 80-130 × 6-8 mm, linear-falcate, flattened, slightly constricted between the seeds, greyish-brown when mature.{\i  Cultivated in S.W. Europe for ornament and for hedges, and locally naturalized}. [Co Hs Lu Si.] ({\i South Africa}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 3. A. dealbata} Link,{\i  Enum. Hort. Berol. Alt. }{\b 2}: 445 (1822). Tree up to 30 m; bark smooth, grey. Twigs and young leaves whitish-tomentose. Leaves 2-pinnate, glaucous-green, with 8-20 pairs of pinnae; leaflets 30-50 pairs, 3-4 mm, linear; leaf-rhachis with glands only at the insertion of the pinnae. Capitula 5-6 mm in diameter, in profuse panicles which are longer than leaves. Flowers pale yellow. Legume 40-100 × 10-12 mm, compressed, not or scarcely constricted between the seeds, brown, pruinose. {\i Planted for ornament, for timber and for soil-stabilization; widely naturalized in S. Europe}. [Az Ga Hs Lu It Ju Rm Sa.] ({\i S.E. Australia, Tasmania}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 4. A. mearnsii} De Wild.,{\i  Pl. Bequaert.}{\b  3}: 61 (1925) ({\i A. mollissima} auct.). Like {\b 3} but not more than 15 m; softly yellow-villous; leaves dark green with 8-14 pairs of pinnae; leaflets 25-40 pairs, 2 mm; rhachis with glands between the pinnae; legume 5-7 mm wide, distinctly constricted between the seeds, blackish-brown.{\i  Planted for ornament and for tanning in the Iberian peninsula and Italy; locally naturalized}. [Co Hs Lu It.] ({\i S.E. Australia, Tasmania.})
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 5. A. longifolia} (Andrews) Willd., {\i Sp. Pl.}{\b  4}: 1052 (1806). Shrub or small tree up to 8 m; bark smooth, grey. Twigs stiff, glabrous. Phyllodes 7-15 × 0·8-3 cm, oblong to oblong-lanceolate, straight subobtuse, light green, 2- to 4-veined. Spikes 25-50 × 7-9 mm axillary, cylindrical, subsessile. Flowers bright yellow, strong-smelling. Legume 70-150 × 4-5 mm, linear, terete, almost straight, rostrate, constricted between the seeds, brown when mature. Funicle very short, whitish. {\i Widely planted in S.W. Europe for ornament and for stabilizing coastal dunes}. [ ?Ga Hs It Lu.] ({\i New South Wales.})
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 6. A. cyclops} A. Cunn. ex G. Don fil., {\i Gen. Syst. }{\b 2}: 404 (1832). Procumbent, caespitose shrub up to 3 m; bark brownish, fissured. Twigs glabrous. Phyllodes 3-8 × 0·4-1·8 cm, oblong-linear to oblanceolate, obtuse and mucronate, 3- to 6-veined. Capitula 4-6 mm in diameter, solitary or in groups of 2-3, shortly pedun-
\par

\par
84}
\par