{\rtf1\ansi \deff4\deflang1033{\fonttbl{\f4\froman\fcharset0\fprq2 Times New Roman;}}{\colortbl;\red0\green0\blue0;\red0\green0\blue255;\red0\green255\blue255;\red0\green255\blue0;\red255\green0\blue255;\red255\green0\blue0;\red255\green255\blue0;\red255\green255\blue255;\red0\green0\blue128;\red0\green128\blue128;\red0\green128\blue0;\red128\green0\blue128;\red128\green0\blue0;\red128\green128\blue0;\red128\green128\blue128;\red192\green192\blue192;}{\stylesheet{\widctlpar \f4\fs20\lang2057 \snext0 Normal;}{\*\cs10 \additive Default Paragraph Font;}}{\info{\author dddd}{\operator dddd}{\creatim\yr1998\mo11\dy11\hr17\min5}{\revtim\yr1998\mo11\dy11\hr17\min6}{\version2}{\edmins1}{\nofpages4}{\nofwords982}{\nofchars5603}{\*\company  }{\vern57431}}\widowctrl\ftnbj\aenddoc\hyphcaps0 \fet0\sectd \linex0 {\*\pnseclvl1\pnucrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl2\pnucltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl3\pndec\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl4\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl5\pndec\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl6\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl7\pnlcrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl8\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl9\pnlcrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}
\pard\plain \ \f4\fs20\lang2057 {\fs28 culate. Flowers yellow. Legume 40-80 \'d7 10-13 mm, compressed, undulate or twisted, scarcely constricted between the seeds, reddish-brown. Funicle encircling the seed in a double fold, scarlet.}{\i\fs28  Naturalized on maritime cliffs in C. Portugal.}{\fs28  [Lu.] ( }{\i\fs28 Western Australia}{\fs28 .)
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 7. A. melanoxylon}{\fs28  R. Br. in Aiton,}{\i\fs28  Hort. Kew.}{\fs28  ed. 2, }{\b\fs28 5}{\fs28 : 462 (1813). Tree up to 40 m; stem straight, erect; bark dark brown, deeply furrowed. Young twigs hirsute. Phyllodes 6-13 \'d7 0\'b77-2 cm (larger on suckers), lanceolate to oblanceolate, slightly falcate, obtuse to acute, dull, dark green, 3- to 5-veined; 2-pinnate and transitional leaves often occurring here and there on young trees, the pinnae with 14-20 oblong leaflets 5-7 mm. Capitula 10 mm in diameter. Flowers creamy white. Legume 70-120 \'d7 8-10 mm, compressed, twisted, reddish-brown. Funicle encircling the seed in a double fold, scarlet. }{\i\fs28 Planted for timber in S.W. Europe and locally naturalized}{\fs28 . [Az Br Ga Hs It Lu.] (}{\i\fs28 S.E. Australia, Tasmania.}{\fs28 )
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 8. A. pycnantha}{\fs28  Bentham, }{\i\fs28 London Jour. Bot.}{\fs28  (}{\i\fs28 Hooker}{\fs28 ) }{\b\fs28 1}{\fs28 : 351 (1842). Tree up to 12 m; branches curved upwards; bark smooth, grey. Twigs glaucous. Phyllodes 8-20 \'d7 1-3\'b75 cm (up to 10 cm wide on suckers and then oblique, obovate), falcate, acute, bright green, 1-veined. Capitula 8-10 mm in diameter, in long racemes of 10-20. Flowers deep yellow. Legume 80-130 \'d7 5-6 mm, almost straight, compressed, dark brown or almost black. Funicle short, whitish.}{\i\fs28  Planted for tanning, and sometimes for ornament; locally naturalized in S. Portugal and C. & S. Italy.}{\fs28  [It Lu Sa.] (}{\i\fs28 South Australia, Victoria}{\fs28 .)
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 9. A. cyanophylla}{\fs28  Lindley, }{\i\fs28 Bot. Reg.}{\b\fs28  25}{\fs28  (Misc.): 45 (1839) (}{\i\fs28 A. saligna}{\fs28  auct., non (Labill.) Wendl. fil.). Tree up to 10 m; bark smooth, grey, later greyish-brown and fissured. Twigs glaucous, pendent. Phyllodes 10-20(-35) \'d7 0\'b76-2(-3) cm (up to 8 cm wide, ovate, undulate, on suckers), linear to lanceolate, not or scarcely falcate, subacute, more or less glaucous, 1-veined. Capitula 10-15 mm in diameter, in short racemes of 2-6. Flowers bright yellow. Legume 60-120 \'d7 4-8 mm, compressed, distinctly constricted between the seeds, glaucous when young, later brownish. Funicle short, whitish.}{\i\fs28  Planted for stabilizing coastal dunes, and also for ornament; naturalized in S. Europe}{\fs28 . [Co Ga Gr Hs It Lu Sa Si.] (}{\i\fs28 Western Australia.}{\fs28 )
\par 
\par Commonly mistaken for }{\i\fs28 A. saligna}{\fs28  (Labill.) H. L. Wendl., which has smaller capitula.
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 10. A. retinodes}{\fs28  Schlecht., }{\i\fs28 Linnaea}{\b\fs28  20}{\fs28 : 664 (1847) (}{\i\fs28 A. floribunda}{\fs28  auct., non Willd.). Like }{\b\fs28 9}{\fs28  but twigs usually brown, not pendent; phyllodes 6-15 \'d7 0\'b74-1\'b78 cm, acute to obtuse, light green; capitula 4-6 mm in diameter, in racemes of 5-10; racemes sometimes paniculate; flowers pale yellow; legume not or very slightly constricted between the seeds; funicle encircling seed and bent back upon itself in a double fold, scarlet.}{\i\fs28  Widely planted for ornament in S. Europe and locally naturalized.}{\fs28  [Az Br Ga Hs It ?Ju Lu Rm.] (}{\i\fs28 South Australia}{\fs28 .)
\par 
\par }
\pard \qc\ {\fs28 Subfam.  }{\b\fs28   Lotoideae}{\fs28 
\par }
\pard \ {\fs28 
\par Flowers zygomorphic. Sepals and petals imbricate; the adaxial petal (standard) outermost, the 2 lateral petals (wings) free, the 2 lower petals innermost and usually partially adhering to each other by means of interlocking hairs on the margin to form the keel. Stamens 10, rarely 5, free, or more usually all or 9 of the filaments united.
\par 
\par }
\pard \qc\ {\b\fs28 5.                Sophora}{\fs28              L.
\par (Incl.}{\i\fs28  Goebelia}{\fs28  Bunge ex Boiss.)
\par }{\fs24 By P.W. Ball.
\par 
\par }
\pard \ {\fs28 Deciduous or evergreen trees or shrubs, or stout perennial herbs. Leaves imparipinnate; stipules small, usually linear, scarious. Flowers in terminal racemes or panicles. Calyx tubular or tubular-campanulate, slightly bilabiate; stamens free. Legume stipitate, constricted between the seeds and often moniliform, indehiscent or tardily dehiscent. Seeds few or many, rarely 1.
\par 
\par }
\pard \li200\ {\fs28 1 Trees; flowers in panicles ............................................................ }{\b\fs28 1. japonica}{\fs28 
\par 1 Herbs; flowers in racemes
\par 2 Leaflets densely pubescent or villous above; corolla white
\par   ............................................................................................... }{\b\fs28 2. alopecuroides}{\fs28 
\par 2 Leaflets glabrous or sparsely pubescent above; corolla
\par   pale yellow .................................................................................... }{\b\fs28 3. jaubertii}{\fs28 
\par 
\par }
\pard \ {\fs28    }{\b\fs28 1. S. japonica}{\fs28  L., }{\i\fs28 Mantissa}{\fs28  68 (1767). Tree up to 25 m. Leaflets 3-8 pairs, 25-50 \'d7 12-20 mm, ovate or ovate-lanceolate, dark green and shining above, glaucous or pubescent beneath. Flowers in large terminal panicles. Corolla 10-15 mm, creamy white or pale pink. Legume 50-80 mm, glabrous.}{\i\fs28  Frequently planted for ornament and locally naturalized.}{\fs28  [Cz Ga Rm.] (}{\i\fs28 E. Asia.}{\fs28 )
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 2. S. alopecuroides}{\fs28  L., }{\i\fs28 Sp. Pl.}{\fs28  373 (1753) (}{\i\fs28 Goebelia alopecuroides}{\fs28  (L.) Bunge ex Boiss.). Erect perennial 40-100 cm. Leaflets 5-13 pairs, 15-40 \'d7 5-15 mm, oblong, elliptical or lanceolate, very densely grey- or white-tomentose or -villous. Flowers in terminal racemes 5-15 cm. Corolla 17-22 mm, white, usually sparsely pubescent at the base of the standard. Legume 5-12 cm, pubescent.}{\i\fs28  S.E. Russia}{\fs28  (}{\i\fs28 just north of the Terek river}{\fs28 ); }{\i\fs28 Krym.}{\fs28  Rs (K, E). (}{\i\fs28 W. Asia.}{\fs28 )
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 3. S. jaubertii}{\fs28  Spach in Jaub. & Spach, }{\i\fs28 Ill. Pl. Or. }{\b\fs28 4}{\fs28 : 45 (1851) (}{\i\fs28 S. alopecuroides}{\fs28  sensu Hayek, non L., }{\i\fs28 S. reticulata }{\fs28 var.}{\i\fs28  buxbaumii}{\fs28  (Aznav.) Hayek, }{\i\fs28 S. prodanii}{\fs28  E. Anderson, }{\i\fs28 Goebelia prodanii }{\fs28 (E. Anderson) Grossh.). Like }{\b\fs28 2}{\fs28  but leaflets glabrous or sparsely pubescent; racemes 12-26 cm; corolla pale yellow. }{\i\fs28 Turkey-in-Europe; E. Romania; Krym.}{\fs28  Rm Rs (K) Tu. (}{\i\fs28 Anatolia, W. Caucasus}{\fs28 .)
\par 
\par }
\pard \qc\ {\b\fs28  6.               Thermopsis}{\fs28                R.Br.
\par }{\fs24 By P.W. Ball.
\par 
\par }
\pard \ {\fs28 Stout perennial herbs. Leaves digitately 3-foliolate; stipules herbaceous, free. Flowers in leafy terminal racemes. Calyx campanulate with 5 subequal teeth (in European sp.); stamens free. Legume oblong, compressed, dehiscent. Seeds usually numerous.
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 1. T. lanceolata}{\fs28  R. Br. in Aiton, }{\i\fs28 Hort. Kew.}{\fs28  ed. 2, }{\b\fs28 3}{\fs28 : 3 (1811). Stems 10-30(-40) cm, pubescent. Leaflets 30-60(-70) \'d7 5-12 mm, oblong-elliptical, glabrous or sparsely pubescent above, densely pubescent beneath; stipules 15-20 \'d7 3-5 mm, lanceolate or ovate-lanceolate. Flowers in fascicles of 3 in the axil of each bract. Corolla 25-28 mm, yellow. Legume 50-60 \'d7 8-10 mm, oblong. Seeds 12-18.}{\i\fs28  S.E. Russia, W. Kazakhstan.}{\fs28  Rs (E). (}{\i\fs28 Temperate Asia}{\fs28 .)
\par 
\par }
\pard \qc\ {\b\fs28 7.               Anagyris}{\fs28                 L.
\par }{\fs24 By P.W. Ball.
\par 
\par }
\pard \ {\fs28 Shrubs. Leaves 3-foliolate; stipules connate, leaf-opposed. Flowers in short axillary racemes. Calyx campanulate, sub-bilabiate; stamens free. Legume stipitate, constricted and septate between the seeds, compressed, dehiscent. Seeds few.
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 1. A. foetida}{\fs28  L., }{\i\fs28 Sp. Pl.}{\fs28  374 (1753). Foetid shrub up to 4 m. Leaflets 30-70 \'d7 10-30 mm, elliptical or lanceolate-elliptical, subobtuse, mucronulate; stipules c. 5 mm. Corolla 18-25 mm, yellow, the standard much shorter than the wings and keel, often with a
\par 
\par 85}
\par }