{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 black spot. Legume 100-200 × 15-20 mm. Seeds violet or yellow.{\i  Mediterranean region and S. Portugal.} Al Bl Co Cr Ga Gr Hs It Ju Lu Sa Si Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc {\b  8.             Laburnum }              Fabr.   
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc By D.G. Frodin & V.H. Heywood.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Trees or shrubs. Leaves 3-foliolate. Flowers in simple, axillary or pseudoterminal, leafless racemes, pendent at anthesis. Calyx campanulate, slightly bilabiate, the lips undivided or shortly toothed; corolla yellow; stamens monadelphous. Legume slightly constricted between the seeds, dehiscent. Seeds numerous, estrophiolate, compressed.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 Twigs appressed-pubescent, greyish-green; legume appressed-
\par
    pubescent, later ± glabrous ................................................... {\b 1. anagyroides}
\par
Twigs glabrescent, green; legume glabrous .................................... {\b 2. alpinum}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. L. anagyroides} Medicus, {\i Vorl. Churpf. Phys.-Ökon. Ges.}{\b  2}: 363 (1787) ({\i L. vulgare} J. Presl,{\i  Cytisus laburnum} L.). Shrub or small tree up to 7 m. Twigs greyish-green, appressed-pubescent. Leaflets 3-8 cm, elliptical to elliptic-obovate, usually obtuse and shortly mucronate, greyish-green, appressed-pubescent beneath when young. Racemes 10-30 cm, lax. Corolla c. 2 cm, golden-yellow. Legume 4-6 cm, appressed-pubescent when young, sub-glabrous at maturity; upper suture unwinged. Seeds black. {\i Woods and scrub. Mountains of S.C. Europe and Italy, extending to E. France and W. Jugoslavia. Frequently cultivated for ornament and sometimes naturalized.} Au Cz Ga Ge He Hu It Ju Rm [Br Co Hb]
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Often divided on the basis of small differences in the calyx,corolla and inflorescence into geographical variants treated as subspecies, but many transitions occur between them.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. L. alpinum} (Miller) Berchtold & J. Presl,{\i  Rostlinár}{\b  3}: 99 (1835) ({\i Cytisus alpinus} Miller). Shrub or tree up to 5 m (up to 10 m in cultivation). Twigs glabrous (sometimes hairy when young), green. Leaflets 3-8 cm, light green beneath. Racemes 15-40 cm, rather dense. Corolla 1·5(-2) cm, yellow. Legume 4-5 cm, glabrous; upper suture with wing 1-2 mm wide. Seeds brown.{\i  Mountains of S.C. Europe, Italy and W. part of Balkan peninsula.} Al Au Cz Ga He It Ju.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc {\b 9.               Podocytisus}            Boiss. & Heldr.
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc By D.G. Frodin & V.H. Heywood.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Unarmed shrubs. Leaves 3-foliolate. Flowers in terminal, erect racemes. Calyx shortly campanulate, bilabiate, the teeth equal; corolla yellow; stamens monadelphous. Style involute; stigma capitate. Legume compressed, not or tardily dehiscent, broadly winged. Seeds 3-6, estrophiolate.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. P. caramanicus} Boiss. & Heldr. in Boiss., {\i Diagn. Pl. Or. Nov.}{\b  2}({\b 9}): 7 (1849). Erect, up to 2 m. Branches virgate, glaucous, terete when young. Leaflets 5-15 mm, obovate, mucronulate; petioles 3-10 mm. Racemes 5-15 cm, often pyramidal. Pedicels 5-8 mm, with bracteoles at the middle. Standard c. 15 mm, orbicular; keel as long as standard. Legume 5-7 cm, ovate to oblong, stipitate; the valves thin, papery; upper suture broadly winged.{\i  Balkan peninsula, southwards from }42°{\b  N.} Al Gr Ju.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc {\b 10.            Calicotome }                Link
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc By P.E. Gibbs.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Spiny shrubs; branches alternate. Leaves 3-foliolate, petiolate. Flowers axillary, solitary or in umbellate fascicles or ebracteate racemes. Calyx tubular, with 5 short teeth, but with the apical portion breaking away as the flower expands, leaving a cup-like remnant. Corolla yellow. Legume narrowly oblong, the sutures usually somewhat thickened. Seeds several, estrophiolate.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Literature: W. Rothmaler,{\i  Bot. Jahrb. }{\b 74}: 276-287 (1949).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 Flowers mostly solitary; legume ± glabrous .................................... {\b 1. spinosa}
\par
Flowers mostly in fascicles of 2-15, or ill ebracteate racemes;
\par
   legumes villous or sericeous, sometimes sparsely so ..................... {\b 2. villosa}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. C. spinosa} (L.) Link,{\i  Enum. Hort. Berol. Alt.}{\b  2}: 225 (1822).Erect shrub up to 3 m; branches with stout lateral spines; young twigs sparsely sericeous. Leaves 3-foliolate; leaflets 5-15 mm, obovate, with sericeous hairs beneath, glabrous above. Flowers mostly solitary, but occasionally in fascicles; pedicels 4-8 mm; bracteoles entire or somewhat 3-fid, sparsely pubescent, borne just below the calyx. Calyx sparsely pubescent. Corolla 12-18 mm, glabrous. Legume c. 30 mm, narrowly oblong, glabrous (occasionally with sparse hairs), the sutures not or scarcely thickened.{\i  Evergreen scrub and dry rocky ground. W. Mediterranean region}. Bl Co Ga Hs It Sa ?Si.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Plants from N.W. Italy with distinctly 3-fid bracteoles have been distinguished as subsp.{\b  ligustica} Burnat,{\i  Fl. Alp. Marit.}{\b  2}: 57 (1896). There are many intermediates, however, and it is doubtful if it merits even varietal status.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. C. villosa} (Poiret) Link in Schrader, {\i Neues Jour. Bot. }{\b 2}({\b 2}): 51 (1808) (incl. {\i C. infesta} (C. Presl) Guss.). Like {\b 1} but with slender spines; young twigs, lower surface of the leaves, bracteoles and calyx densely sericeous or villous; flowers mostly in umbellate fascicles of 2-15 or ebracteate racemes; legume usually densely sericeous or villous and with the sutures distinctly thickened. 2n = 48.{\i  Evergreen scrub and dry rocky ground. Mediterranean region and S. Portugal.} Al Co Cr Gr Hs It Ju Lu Sa Si Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc {\b 11.                  Lembotropis}             Griseb.  
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc By V.H. Heywood.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Unarmed shrubs. Leaves 3-foliolate. Flowers in terminal, leafless racemes. Calyx campanulate, bilabiate; upper lip with 2 teeth, lower with 3 teeth; corolla yellow, becoming black when dry; stamens monadelphous; stigma capitate. Legume dehiscent. Seeds with rudimentary strophiole.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. L. nigricans} (L.) Griseb., {\i Spicil. Fl. Rumel. }{\b 1}: 10 (1843) ({\i Cytisus nigricans} L.). Erect, up to 1(-1·5) m; twigs up to 45 cm or more, 1-2 mm in diameter, terete, hairy, flowering in first year. Leaflets (6-)10-30 × (2-)5-10(-16) mm, obovate to elliptical or linear, dark green above, lighter green beneath, appressed-hairy on both surfaces when young, the upper glabrescent. Pedicels 4-8 mm, appressed-hairy, with 1 linear, long-persistent bract. Standard 7-10 × 6 mm; wings shorter than the rostrate keel. Legume 20-35 × 5-6 (-7) mm, linear-oblong, appressed-pubescent.{\i  C. & S.E. Europe, extending north-eastwards to C. Russia. }Al Au Bu Cz Ge Gr He Hu It Ju Po Rm Rs (C, W) Sa.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b nigricans}: Twigs appressed-pubescent or sericeous; inflorescence elongate, many-flowered.{\i  Throughout the range of the species}.
\par  

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b australis} (Freyn ex Wohlf.) J. Holub, {\i Preslia }{\b 36}: 253 (1964) ({\i Cytisus nigricans }var. {\i australis} (Freyn ex Wohlf.) Hayek): Twigs more or less densely covered with white, patent hairs; inflorescence short, few-flowered. {\i Italy, W. part of Balkan peninsula; ?C. Romania}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc {\b 12.               Cytisus}              L.
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc By D.G. Frodin & V.H. Heywood.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Unarmed shrubs. Leaves 1- or 3-foliolate, alternate, sometimes crowded on older branches. Flowers axillary, forming leafy,
\par

\par
86}
\par