{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 terminal racemes. Calyx bilabiate, upper lip with 2 teeth, lower with 3 teeth, the teeth usually much shorter than the lips; corolla yellow to white; stamens monadelphous; stigma capitate or introrse. Legume linear or oblong, dehiscent. Seeds usually numerous, usually strophiolate.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Literature: J. Briquet,{\i  Études sur les Cytises des Alpes Maritimes}. Genève & Bale. 1894. W. Rothmaler,{\i  Feddes Repert.}{\b  53}: 137-150 (1944). A. Skalicka,{\i  Preslia }{\b 39}: 10-29 (1967). C. vicioso, {\i Genisteas Españolas}{\b  2}: 179-223. ({\i Bol. Inst. For. Inv. Exper.} No. 72). Madrid. 1955.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Flowers in leafless racemes .................................................... {\b 1. sessilifolius}
\par
1 Flowers in leafy racemes
\par
2 Twigs 5- to 10-angled, the angles winglike, ± T-shaped in
\par
  transverse section
\par
3 Leaves all 1-foliolate
\par
4 Twigs and leaves densely lanate; standard 8-10 mm ............... {\b 11. agnipilus}
\par
4 Twigs and leaves villous, standard 12-15 mm ....................... {\b 9. procumbens}
\par
3 Leaves at least on the lower branches 3-foliolate
\par
5 Corolla white; pedicels 10 mm ................................................ {\b 6. multiflorus}
\par
5 Corolla yellow; pedicels 4-7 mm
\par
6 Twigs 2-3 mm in diameter; upper leaves 1-foliolate, caducous ... {\b 5. purgans}
\par
6 Twigs 1 mm in diameter; all leaves 3-foliolate, ± 
\par
  persistent during growing season .................................................... {\b 7. ardoini}
\par
2 Twigs terete or angled but the angles not T-shaped in
\par
  transverse section
\par
7 Style convolute after anthesis
\par
8 Leaves 1-foliolate, except sometimes on new growth
\par
9 Branches incurved to form a rounded bush; calyx glabrous; 
\par
  legume glabrous ..................................................................... {\b 21. reverchonii}
\par
9 Branches erect, not incurved; calyx sericeous; legume
\par
  hirsute ................................................................................... {\b 13. commutatus}
\par
8 Leaves mostly 3-foliolate except on new growth
\par
10 All leaves petiolate keel straight on the upper side,
\par
   not beaked; style glabrous
\par
11 Branches and twigs ± terete, slightly striate; legume
\par
   sparsely pubescent or glabrescent ........................................ {\b 15. malacitanus}
\par
11 Branches and twigs 7- to 8-angled; legume densely
\par
   villous or lanate .......................................................................... {\b 16. baeticus}
\par
10 All leaves or at least the 1-foliolate leaves sessile;  keel 
\par
  strongly curved on the upper side, ± beaked; style ciliate below
\par
 12 Legume ± inflated, the valves densely hirsute; twigs
\par
   usually 8- to 10-angled ................................................................ {\b 17. striatus}
\par
12 Legume strongly compressed, the valves glabrous or
\par
   with appressed hairs; twigs usually 5-angled
\par
13 All leaves sessile, those on young twigs 1-foliolate ...........{\b 18. grandiflorus}
\par
13 1-foliolate leaves sessile; 3-foliolate leaves petiolate
\par
14 Twigs 5- to 8-angled, the angles somewhat rounded; legume
\par
   densely hairy ......................................................................... {\b 19. cantabricus}
\par
14 Twigs almost always 5-angled, the angles flattened
\par
   and ridge-like, sometimes slightly winged laterally;
\par
   legume glabrous ....................................................................... {\b 20. scoparius}
\par
7  Style straight or arcuate after anthesis
\par
15 Leaves mainly 1-foliolate
\par
16 Erect, up to 200 cm; standard 20-23 × 20 mm
\par
17 Leaflets 10-15 mm; corolla greenish-yellow ..................... {\b 13. commutatus}
\par
17 Leaflets 20-30 mm; standard cream; wings and keel yellow ...{\b 14. ingramii}
\par
16 Procumbent or ascending, 10-40 cm; standard 10-14 mm
\par
18 Twigs patent-villous; calyx hirsute or sparsely pubescent . {\b 10. decumbens}
\par
18 Twigs appressed-pubescent or glabrous; calyx glabrous
\par
   .................................................................................. {\b 12. pseudoprocumbens}
\par
15 Leaves mainly 3-foliolate
\par
19 Mature legume at least 9 mm wide; standard 18-22 mm .......... {\b 2. aeolicus}
\par
19 Mature legume less than 9 mm wide; standard 8-18 mm
\par
20 Leaves subsessile or very shortly petiolate; bracteoles ovate
\par
   .......................................................................................... {\b 23. tribracteolatus}
\par
20 Leaves distinctly petiolate; bracteoles narrowly elliptical 
\par
   or linear, often caducous
\par
21 Plant 100-250 cm; standard 15-20 mm
\par
22 Leaflets obovate, sparsely pubescent beneath; legume
\par
   12-15 mm, glabrous ...................................................................... {\b 22. patens}
\par
22 Leaflets oblong to elliptical, villous beneath; legume
\par
   hirsute or villous, glabrescent ....................................................... {\b 3. villosus}
\par
21 Plant 20-60(-100) cm; standard 8-12 mm
\par
23 Petiole 10-25 mm; legume glabrous ..................................... {\b 4. emeriflorus}
\par
23 Petiole less than 10 mm; legume villous, at least on
\par
   the margins ................................................................................ {\b 8. sauzeanus}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Subgen. {\b Cytisus.} Leaves 3-foliolate. Flowers in leafless racemes.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. C. sessilifolius} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 739 (1753). Erect, up to 200 cm, glabrous; branches terete. Leaves petiolate on flowering branches, more or less sessile on non-flowering branches; leaflets 8-20 mm, obovate to broadly elliptical. Flowers 3-12, pedicellate, with bracts and bracteoles persistent at anthesis. Corolla yellow; standard 11 mm, suborbicular; keel incurved at apex, beaked. Legume 25-40 × 10 mm, oblong to linear.{\i  Scrub and mountain woods. • E. Spain, S. France, Italy.} Ga Hs It.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    Subgen. {\b Sarothamnus.} Leaves 1- or 3-foliolate. Flowers in leafy racemes.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    Sect. TRIANTHOCYTISUS Griseb. Twigs terete or angular. Calyx-lips  with straight margins. Leaves 3-foliolate, petiolate. Style straight or arcuate. Strophiole small or absent.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. C. aeolicus} Guss. ex Lindley,{\i  Bot. Reg.}{\b  22}: t. 1902 (1836). Erect, 100-200 cm; branches rigid, terete, appressed-tomentose or glabrous. Petioles 10-20 mm; leaflets 20-50 × 7-20 mm elliptical or lanceolate, subcoriaceous, glabrous above, sericeous beneath. Flowers in groups of 3; pedicels 6-12 mm, subtomentose. Corolla yellow; standard 18-22 mm, broadly obovate. Legume 40-50 × 9-12 mm, oblong to linear, more or less curved at maturity, glabrous. •{\i  Isole Eólie}. Si.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 3. C. villosus} Pourret,{\i  Mém. Acad. Toulouse }{\b 3}: 317 (1788) ({\i C. triflorus} L'Hér.). Erect, 100-200 cm; branches ascending, rigid, 5-angled, pubescent towards the apex. Petioles 2-8(-10) mm; leaflets (10-)15-30 × 5-15 mm, oblong to elliptical, the central longer than the lateral, glabrescent above, villous beneath. Flowers solitary or in groups of 2-3; pedicels 5-10 mm, subtomentose. Corolla yellow; standard 15-18 mm, dark-red-striate at the base. Legume 20-45 × 4-7 mm, hirsute or villous, glabrescent. {\i Woods and scrub; somewhat calcifuge. S. Europe.} Al Co Ga Gr Hs It Ju Sa Si.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 4. C. emeriflorus} Reichenb.,{\i  Fl. Germ. Excurs.} 524 (1832) ({\i Genista glabrescens} Briq.). Procumbent to erect, 30-60(-100) cm; branches rigid, angular; young twigs appressed-villous. Petioles 10-25 mm; leaflets 10-20 mm, obovate to lanceolate, glabrescent above, sericeous-pubescent beneath. Racemes terminal, densely leafy; flowers in clusters of 1-4; pedicels 12 mm, sparsely hairy. Corolla yellow; standard 10-12 mm. Legume 25-35 × 6-7 mm, glabrous. •{\i  S. Alps} ({\i around Como and Lugano}). He It.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    Sect. ALBURNOIDES DC. Twigs usually with wing-like angles which are T-shaped in transverse section. Leaves 1- or 3-foliolate. Calyx-lips with convex margins. Style curved. Stigma capitate. Strophiole large.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 5. C. purgans} (L.) Boiss., {\i Voy. Bot. Midi Esp.}{\b  2}: 134 (1839) ({\i Sarothamnus purgans} (L.) Godron,{\i  Genista purgans} (L.) DC.).
\par

\par
87}
\par