{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 Erect or ascending, (20-)30-100 cm, much-branched, fastigiate; branches rigid, striate, terete; twigs virgate, almost leafless, erect, pubescent or sericeous when young, later glabrous. Leaves 1-foliolate on flowering twigs, 3-foliolate on lower branches, sessile, caducous; leaflets 6-12 mm, oblanceolate, subspathulate to linear-lanceolate, sericeous-pubescent beneath, subglabrous above. Flowers at ends of twigs, solitary or paired, smelling of vanilla; pedicels 5 mm, with 2 small bracteoles at apex, pubescent. Calyx pubescent. Corolla deep yellow; standard 10-12 mm. Legume (12-)15-30 × 5-7(-8) mm, oblong, straight or slightly incurved, appressed-villous, black when mature.{\i  Dry stony slopes; calcifuge. S.W. Europe.} Ga Hs Lu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 6. C. multiflorus} (L'Hér.) Sweet, {\i Hort. Brit. }112 (1826) ({\i Cytisus albus} (Lam.) Link, non Hacq.,{\i  C. lusitanicus} Willk., {\i Genista alba} Lam.). Erect, much-branched, 100-300 cm; branches flexible, 5-angled; twigs striate, sericeous when young, glabrescent at maturity. Leaves 3-foliolate on lower branches, 1-foliolate on upper branches; sessile or very shortly petiolate. Leaflets up to 10 mm, linear-lanceolate or oblong, silvery-sericeous. Flowers in profuse fascicles of 1-3; pedicels 10 mm. Calyx 5 mm, sericeo-puberulent. Corolla white; standard 9-12 mm. Legume 15-25 × 5-9 mm, oblong, strongly compressed, appressed-pubescent or hirsute. {\i Woods, heaths and river-banks; calcifuge. • N.W. & C. Spain, N. & C. Portugal.} Hs Lu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 7. C. ardoini} E. Fourn.,{\i  Bull. Soc. Bot. Fr.}{\b  13}: 389 (1866). Low growing, 20-60 cm; young twigs villous, strongly ridged, with 8-10 wings. Leaves 3-foliolate; petioles c. 6 mm; leaflets 4-10 × 1-3 mm, narrowly oblong to obovate, appressed-pubescent above, sparsely so beneath. Flowers 1-3 on short axillary twigs; pedicels 4-7 mm. Calyx sparsely villous. Corolla yellow; standard 8-12 mm, suborbicular. Legume 20-25 mm, villous or hirsute.{\i  Calcareous rocks. • S.W. Alps }({\i Alpes Maritimes}). Ga.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 8. C. sauzeanus} Burnat & Briq. in Briq.,{\i  Cytises Alp. Marit.} 157 (1894). Like {\b 7} but young twigs 5-angled, without wings; leaflets wider; legume with long hairs on margins, sometimes glabrous on the sides. •{\i  Dry slopes and screes. S.E. France} ({\i mountains between Grenoble and Sisteron}). Ga.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Possibly the result of hybridization between {\b 7} and {\b 3}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Sect. COROTHAMNUS (Koch) Nyman. Twigs simply angular, or with wing-like angles T-shaped in transverse section. Leaves 1-foliolate. Style curved. Stigma introrse. Strophiole large.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 9. C. procumbens} (Waldst. & Kit. ex Willd.) Sprengel, {\i Syst. Veg.}{\b  3}: 224 (1826) ({\i Genista procumbens }Waldst. & Kit. ex Willd., {\i G. pedunculata} subsp.{\i  procumbens} (Waldst. & Kit. ex Willd.) Gams). Decumbent or ascending, 20-40(-80) cm; branches terete, leafy, appressed-villous; young twigs strongly ridged, with 8-10 wings which are T-shaped in transverse section. Leaves in fascicles of 3-6 on lower twigs; leaflets 15-20 × 4 mm, oblong-lanceolate, acute, glabrous above, appressed-villous beneath. Flowers solitary or in groups of 2-3; pedicels 1½-2 times as long as calyx. Calyx 5 mm, subglabrous or sparsely appressed-villous. Corolla golden-yellow; standard 12-15 mm, ovate. Legume 30-32 × 5 mm, compressed, appressed-villous.{\i  Dry grassland and open woods. • E.C. Europe and Balkan peninsula}. ?Al Au Bu Cz Gr Hu Ju Rm Rs (W).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 10. C. decumbens} (Durande) Spach, {\i Ann. Sci. Nat.} ser. 3 ({\i Bot.}), {\b 3}: 156 (1845) ({\i Genista prostrata} Lam., {\i G. pedunculata} subsp.{\i  decumbens} (Durande) Gams, {\i Spartium decumbens} Durande). Procumbent or ascending, 10-30 cm; branches leafy; twigs with 5 unwinged angles, patent-villous. Leaves shortly petiolate in fascicles on lower branches; leaflets 8-20 mm, obovate, oblong or lanceolate, pubescent beneath, slightly so or glabrous above, the margins hairy. Flowers in fascicles of 1-3; pedicels 2-3(-4) times as long as calyx, slender, hirsute. Calyx 5 mm, hirsute (rarely sparsely pubescent). Corolla yellow; standard 10-14 mm, obovate. Legume 20-32 × 6 mm, patent-pubescent (rarely glabrous), becoming black at maturity. •{\i  From C. France southwards to S. Italy and Albania.} Al Ga He It Ju.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Variable in the indumentum of the leaves, calyx and legume.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 11. C. agnipilus} Velen., {\i Fl. Bulg}. 643 (1891). Like {\b 10} but erect; branches densely crispate-lanate, with 5 wing-like angles; leaflets oblong-lanceolate, with yellowish crispate hairs on both surfaces; pedicels not more than twice as long as calyx; calyx with crispate hairs; standard 8-10 mm; legume villous. •{\i  Albania; S. & E. Bulgaria.} Al Bu ?Gr.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 12. C. pseudoprocumbens} Markgraf,{\i  Ber. Deutsch. Bot. Ges. }{\b 44}: 213 (1926) ({\i C. diffusus }Vis. pro parte,{\i  Genista diffusa} auct., non Willd.,{\i  G. pedunculata} subsp.{\i  diffusa} Gams pro parte). Procumbent or ascending, 20-40 cm; branches leafy, 5-angled, glabrous at maturity, the angles unwinged. Leaves 1-foliolate; leaflets 10-50 mm, oblong-lanceolate, sparsely ciliate when young. Flowers solitary or in groups of 2-3; pedicels 1½-3(-4) times as long as calyx. Calyx glabrous. Corolla golden-yellow, glabrous; standard 10-12 mm, about as long as keel. Legume 15 mm, usually glabrous, black.{\i  Dry, rocky places. • N.W. part of Balkan peninsula, N. Italy.} Al It Ju.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Sect. SAROTHAMNUS (Wimmer) Bentham. Leaves 1- or 3-foliolate. Style usually convolute after anthesis. Stigma capitate. Strophiole large.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 13. C. commutatus} (Willk.) Briq.,{\i  Cytises Alp. Marit.} 151 (1894) ({\i Sarothamnus commutatus} Willk.). Erect, up to 100 cm branches strongly 5-angled, shallowly grooved between the angles; young twigs sericeous-villous. Leaves 1-foliolate, sessile; leaflets on young twigs solitary, lanceolate, acute to obtuse; those on older branches in clusters, oblanceolate, spathulate or obovate, mucronulate. Flowers solitary, usually in the centre of leaf clusters; pedicels about as long as calyx, villous, with 2 bracteoles. Calyx sericeous. Corolla greenish-yellow; standard c. 20 × 20 mm. Style more or less convolute. Legume 30-50 × 10 mm, arcuate, patent, hirsute, becoming black at maturity.{\i  Mountain scrub. • N. Spain }({\i Cordillera Cantabrica}). Hs.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 14. C. ingramii} Blakelock, {\i Bot. Mag.}{\b  169}: t. 211 (1953). Erect, up to 200 cm; branches angular when young, sparsely hairy. Leaves 1-foliolate, sessile (some leaves on lower branches and new growth 3-foliolate); leaflets 20-30 × 12-20 mm, glabrous above, silvery-appressed-hairy beneath. Flowers solitary; pedicels longer than the calyx, appressed-hairy, with 3 bracteoles. Calyx densely appressed-sericeous. Standard 22-23 × 20 mm cream; wings and keel yellow. Style arcuate. Legume 30-35 × 8-9 mm, straight, covered with long hairs. •{\i  N.W. Spain.} Hs.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 15. C. malacitanus} Boiss., {\i Elenchus }32 (1838) ({\i Sarothamnus malacitanus} (Boiss.) Boiss.; incl.{\i  Sarothamnus rotundatus} Pau). Erect, much-branched, 100-500 cm. Branches and twigs terete, slender, slightly striate, attenuate and recurved at the apex; young twigs pubescent. Leaves all 3-foliolate or those on the upper branches and young branchlets 1-foliolate; all leaves petiolate, the petiole longer than the leaflets; leaflets oblong-linear to ovate-elliptical, glabrous, or pubescent and later glab-
\par

\par
88}
\par