{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 rous above, sericeous beneath. Flowers solitary or in clusters of 2-3; pedicels longer than calyx, sericeous or pubescent, with 2 or 3 bracteoles. Calyx sericeous to glabrous. Corolla yellow; standard 14-16 mm. Legume 25-40 mm, ovate-oblong to linear, compressed, straight or arcuate, laxly sericeous or with sparse, long, white hairs when young, often glabrescent.{\i  Spain, S. France, S. Portugal.} Ga Hs Lu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b malacitanus}: Leaves on upper branches and young branchlets 1-foliolate; leaflets oblong-linear; pedicels with 2 bracteoles. {\i Dry hillsides. S. Spain, S. Portugal}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b catalaunicus} (Webb) Heywood, {\i Feddes Repert.}{\b  79}: 22 (1968) ({\i Sarothamnus catalaunicus} Webb): All leaves 3-foliolate; leaflets ovate-elliptical to oblong-obovate; pedicels with 3 bracteoles.{\i  N.E. Spain, S. France}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 16. C. baeticus} (Webb) Steudel,{\i  Nomencl. Bot.} ed. 2,{\b  1}: 477 (1840) ({\i Sarothamnus baeticus} Webb). Erect shrub, sometimes arborescent, 200-700 cm. Branches 7- to 8-angled, nodular, striate; young twigs more or less puberulent, becoming glabrous. Leaves 3-foliolate, petiolate (the upper often subsessile); leaflets obovate, very obtuse, glabrous above, sparsely sericeous beneath. Flowers solitary or in fascicles of 2-7; pedicels 3-4 times as long as calyx, pubescent, with 3 bracteoles. Calyx pubescent or glabrous. Corolla yellow; standard 15-20 mm. Legume 20-40 × 5-8 mm, straight, not or only slightly constricted between seeds, densely lanate-villous, with patent hairs.{\i  S.W. Spain, S. Portugal.} Hs Lu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Sometimes regarded along with {\b 15}({\b a}) and ({\b b}) as subspecies of{\i  C. arboreus} (Desf.) DC. from N.W. Africa.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 17. C. striatus} (Hill) Rothm.,{\i  Feddes Repert.}{\b  53}: 149 (1944) ({\i C. pendulinus} L. fil., {\i Genista striata} Hill,{\i  Sarothamnus patens }Webb, quoad descr.; incl.{\i  Sarothamnus eriocarpus} Boiss. & Reuter, {\i S. welwitschii} Boiss. & Reuter). Erect, much-branched, 100-300 cm. Branches and twigs cylindrical, striate, usually 8- to 10-angled when young, often drying black; young branches sericeous or villous, later glabrescent and becoming leafless. Leaves solitary or sometimes fasciculate, those on lower branches 3-foliolate, petiolate, those on the middle and upper branches 3- or 1-foliolate, sessile; leaflets 4-16 × 1-6 mm, ovate, elliptical to linear-lanceolate, glabrous and glaucous above, sericeous or villous beneath. Flowers solitary or in pairs, rarely in clusters of 3; pedicels as long as or up to twice as long as calyx. Calyx sericeous. Corolla yellow; standard 10-25 mm. Legume 18-35(-40) × 8-12 mm, straight or slightly curved, oblong-ovate to -elliptical, more or less inflated, densely hirsute, erect or semi-patent.{\i  Woods, hedges and scrub. • Portugal, W. & C. Spain.} Hs Lu [Ga].
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Extremely variable in dimensions of leaves and flowers, habit and indumentum.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 18. C. grandiflorus} DC.,{\i  Prodr.}{\b  2}: 154 (1825) ({\i Sarothamnus grandiflorus} (DC.) Webb, {\i S. virgatus} Webb). Erect or ascending, 200-300 cm. Older branches terete, striate; twigs virgate, 5-angled, glabrous. Leaves 1-foliolate on young twigs, 3-foliolate on older twigs, all sessile, glabrous, caducous; leaflets obovate to elliptic-lanceolate, obtuse or acute. Inflorescence leafy; flowers solitary or in pairs; pedicels slightly longer than calyx, with 3 minute bracteoles. Calyx glabrous. Corolla golden-yellow; standard 18-25 mm. Legume 20-45 × 8-12 mm, strongly compressed, straight or slightly curved, densely clothed with long white hairs, becoming black at maturity.{\i  Scrub. S. Spain, C. & S. Portugal.} Hs Lu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 19. C. cantabricus} (Willk.) Reichenb. fil. in Reichenb. & Reichenb. fil.,{\i  Icon. Fl. Germ.}{\b  22}: 15 (?1869) ({\i Sarothamnus cantabricus} Willk.). Erect, 100-200 cm. Branches and twigs 5- to 8-angled and furrowed, glabrous. Leaves 1-foliolate, and sessile on young twigs; 3-foliolate and petiolate on older twigs. Leaflets obovate to lanceolate, the lateral shorter than the central, sparsely sericeous-villous or glabrous above, densely so beneath. Flowers solitary pedicel twice as long as calyx. Calyx glabrous. Corolla yellow, standard 15-18 mm. Legume 30-50 × 6-8 mm, arcuate, compressed, covered with long white hairs, becoming black at maturity.{\i  Scrub and woods. • N. Spain, just extending to S.W. France.} Ga Hs.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 20. C. scoparius} (L.) Link, {\i Enum. Hort. Berol. Alt.}{\b  2}: 241 (1822) ({\i Sarothamnus scoparius} (L.) Wimmer ex Koch). Much branched shrub, up to 200(-250) cm; branches erect, ascending or procumbent, green, usually leafy, 5-angled, glabrous, or sericeous when young. Leaves usually 3-foliolate, petiolate to subsessile, but 1-foliolate and sessile on young twigs; leaflets 6-20 × 1·5-9 mm, elliptic-oblong to obovate, with appressed hairs or glabrous. Flowers axillary, solitary or in pairs; pedicels twice as long as calyx. Calyx glabrous. Corolla golden-yellow; standard 16-18(-20) mm. Legume 25-40(-70) × 8-10(-13) mm, oblong, strongly compressed, with brown or white hairs on the margin, otherwise glabrous, black at maturity. {\i W., S. & C. Europe, extending northwards to S. Sweden and eastwards to W.C. Ukraine}. Au Be Br Co Cz Da Ga Ge Hb He Ho Hs Hu It Ju Lu No Po Rm Rs (B, C, W) Sa Si Su [Az].
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b scoparius}: Branches erect or ascending, 150-200(-250) cm; leaves and young twigs glabrous or sparsely sericeous. 2n = 46. {\i Woods, heaths, dunes and mountain slopes; usually calcifuge. Throughout the range of the species}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28    ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b maritimus} (Rouy) Heywood,{\i  Proc. Bot. Soc. Brit. Is.}{\b  3}: 176 (1959) ({\i Genista scoparia} var. {\i maritima} Rouy): Branches procumbent with occasional erect or ascending branches from the centre of the plant up to 40 cm; leaves and young twigs densely sericeous. 2n = 46.{\i  Maritime cliffs. Coasts of N.W. Europe}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    Plants of this subspecies from Britain, Ireland and the Channel Islands retain their characteristics in cultivation. Records from W. France, Germany and Corse require confirmation.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    A distinctive variant occurs in Denmark (Jylland) with ascending branches 50-60 cm, and sericeous, 1-foliolate leaves on young twigs. It remains constant in cultivation and may deserve recognition as a further subspecies. Intermediates between it and subsp.{\i  scoparius} occur in Jylland due to hybridization following the introduction of the latter subspecies.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 21. C. reverchonii} (Degen & Hervier) Bean,{\i  Kew Bull.}{\b  1934}: 224 (1934) ({\i Sarothamnus reverchonii} Degen & Hervier). Like {\b 20} but branches incurved to form a rounded bush; leaves 1-foliolate except initially on new growth; flowers more shortly pedicellate. 2n = 48.{\i  Mountain woods. • S.E. Spain.} Hs.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 22. C. patens} L., {\i Syst. Veg.} ed. 13, 555 (1774) ({\i Genista patens} DC.). Stems 100-250 cm, erect. Leaves 3-foliolate, petiolate; leaflets 10-15 mm, obovate, shortly mucronate, sparsely puberulent beneath; petioles 4-15 mm. Flowers in axillary clusters; pedicel 5-10 mm, with 3 linear bracteoles. Calyx c. 10 mm, sericeous. Standard 15-20 mm, broadly ovate, sericeous; keel and wing glabrous. Legume 12-15 mm, glabrous. Seeds 2-3 mm.{\i  Scrub; calcicole. • E. Spain.} Hs.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 23. C. tribracteolatus} Webb, {\i Iter Hisp.} 51 (1838) ({\i Genista tribracteolata} (Webb) Pau). Stems decumbent or ascending, branches rather flexible, 5-angled. Leaves 3-foliolate, subsessile or very shortly petiolate; leaflets 8-10 × 3-9 mm, ovate to obovate, sericeous, especially beneath. Flowers in axillary clusters. Pedicels
\par

\par
89}
\par