{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 46 Stems not more than 150 cm; prickles slender, subulate,   
\par
   yellowish; leaflets plicate, pubescent beneath ............................. {\b 11. scissus}
\par
45 Leaflets usually 5; prickles strong; fruit black
\par
47 Stems with rather few, mainly patent, strong prickles;
\par
   terminal leaflet rather long-acuminate, evenly serrate ............... {\b 13. sulcatus} 
\par
47 Stems with numerous, falcate or deflexed prickles;
\par
   terminal leaflet shortly acuminate, unevenly serrate ................. {\b 12. plicatus}
\par
42 Stems often hairy, usually rooting apically, not suckering;  
\par
   inflorescence a panicle
\par
48 All leaves grey-white tomentose beneath; sepals grey-white 
\par
   tomentose externally, deflexed in fruit (Subsect.{\i  Discolores})    
\par
49 Stems pruinose
\par
50 Leaves coriaceous, dark green above, white-tomentose beneath;      
\par
   stamens scarcely exceeding the styles .................................... {\b 38. ulmifolius}
\par
50 Leaves not coriaceous or dark green, tomentose and pubescent
\par
   beneath; stamens greatly exceeding the styles ........................... {\b 39. godronii} 
\par
49 Stems not or scarcely pruinose
\par
51 Basal leaflets subsessile; inflorescence often with few
\par
   prickles above; peduncles elongated ....................................... {\b 43. candicans}
\par
51 Basal leaflets shortly stalked; inflorescence with many
\par
   prickles; peduncles not distinctly elongated 
\par
52 Inflorescence-prickles patent, mostly straight ........................... {\b 40. bifrons}
\par
52 Inflorescence-prickles falcate
\par
53 Stems glabrescent, angled but not sulcate ................................ {\b 41. discolor}
\par
53 Stems hairy and sulcate ...................................................... {\b 42. chloocladus}
\par
48 Leaves green, or only the upper grey-white tomentose beneath;
\par
   sepals green or grey-tomentose externally, their posture in
\par
   fruit variable (Subsect.{\i  Silvatici})
\par
54 Leaves laciniate ...................................................................... {\b 27. lacinatus} 
\par
54 Leaves not lacinate
\par
55 At least some of the lower leaves grey- or white-tomentose beneath 
\par
56 Petals 3 cm or more (Açores) ..................................... {\b 36. hochstetterorum} 
\par
56 Petals less than 3 cm
\par
57 Upper leaves white-tomentose beneath ............................ {\b 35. rhamnifolius}
\par
57 Upper leaves grey-tomentose beneath, or not tomentose
\par
58 Panicle narrow, long; rhachis-prickles falcate; sepals
\par
   white-tomentose ..................................................................... {\b 37. lindebergii}
\par
58 Panicle not long and narrow; rhachis-prickles deflexed;
\par
   sepals grey-white tomentose 
\par
59 Leaflets of cauline leaves sometimes 7, becoming distinctly convex;
\par
   terminal leaflet cuspidate; sepals not long-pointed ........... {\b 34. polyanthemus} 
\par
59 Leaflets of cauline leaves always 5, not distinctly convex;
\par
   terminal leaflet acuminate; sepals usually long-pointed ......... {\b 33. villicaulis}
\par
55 At least the lower leaves green beneath
\par
60 Petals fimbriate ................................................................... {\b 18. pedatifolius}
\par
60 Petals not fimbriate
\par
61 Sepals erect or patent
\par
62 Stems angled; leaflets usually 5; sepals never appendiculate;
\par
   stamens usually exceeding styles
\par
63 Inflorescence with stalked glands
\par
64 Stem-prickles few, long-subulate ..................................... {\b 21. hypomalacus} 
\par
64 Stem-prickles numerous, some of them strong, broad-based,
\par
   falcate ................................................................................ {\b 20. chaerophyllus} 
\par
63 Inflorescence with subsessile glands, or ± eglandular
\par
65 Inflorescence nearly unarmed or with weak prickles .................. {\b 19. gratus}
\par
65 Inflorescence with numerous strong prickles
\par
66 Terminal leaflet elliptical or obovate, rounded or subcordate
\par
   at base, coarsely serrate; inflorescence-prickles falcate ............ {\b 17. vulgaris}
\par
66 Terminal leaflet broadly ovate to elliptical, subcordate
\par
   at base, finely serrate; inflorescence-prickles usually
\par
   straight ................................................................................. {\b 16. lentiginosus} 
\par
62 Stems usually terete; leaflets usually 3; sepals usually
\par
   appendiculate; stamens shorter than, or just equalling the styles
\par
67 Stems angled, at least above; leaflets 5 ........................... {\b 25. chlorothyrsos}
\par
67 Stems terete or weakly angled; leaflets usually 3
\par
68 Sepals green, with white margins .............................................. {\b 22. arrhenii}
\par
68 Sepals grey-tomentose, without white margins
\par
69 Stems and inflorescence-axis hairy; petals bright pink ......... {\b 23. sprengelii}
\par
69 Stems and inflorescence-axis ± glabrous; petals white ............ {\b 24. myricae}
\par
61 Sepals deflexed in fruit
\par
70 Stems ± weak
\par
71 Stems hairy; leaflets 5 ............................................................ {\b 31. silvaticus}
\par
71 Stems ± glabrous; leaflets usually 3 ........................................ {\b 32. egregius}
\par
70 Stems strong, angled; leaflets usually 5
\par
72 Leaves glabrescent beneath; petals emarginate ....................... {\b 26. questieri}
\par
72 Leaves pubescent or tomentose beneath; petals entire
\par
73 Stems angled, with plane faces; terminal leaflet usually
\par
   subcordate ............................................................................. {\b 29. pyramidalis}
\par
73 Stems angled, with sulcate faces; terminal leaflet usually
\par
   rounded or cuneate at base
\par
74 Leaves green and pubescent, or slightly grey-tomentose
\par
   beneath ............................................................................... {\b 30. macrophyllus}
\par
74 Leaves white-tomentose beneath ...................................... {\b 28. rhombifolius}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Subgen. {\b Chamaemorus} (Hill) Focke. Dioecious. Stems annual, unarmed. Leaves simple. Fruit yellow to orange; receptacle convex.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. R. chamaemorus} L., {\i Sp. Pl. }494 (1753). Stems 5-20 cm, arising from a creeping rhizome, those on male plants all flowering, glandular. Leaves reniform, rugose, with 5 obtuse, crenate serrate lobes. Flowers solitary, terminal; pedicel and calyx shortly glandular. Sepals erecto-patent, ovate, acuminate; petals 5 or more, white, hairy, larger than the sepals. Drupelets about 20, large, edible. 2n = 56. {\i Mountain moors and bogs. N. Europe, extending southwards to N.W. Czechoslovakia.} Br Cz Da Fe Ge Hb No Po Rs (N, C) Sb Su.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Subgen. {\b Cyclactis} (Rafin.) Focke. Stems annual, armed or unarmed. Leaves simple or ternate. Flowers hermaphrodite. Fruit red to purplish, scarcely coherent; receptacle flat or convex.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   {\b 2. R. humulifolius} C. A. Meyer,{\i  Beitr. Pfl. Russ. Reich.}{\b  5}: 57 (1848). Stems 10-30 cm, erect or ascending, setose, pubescent or glabrous. Leaves 3- to 5-lobed, cordate, often wider than long, coarsely serrate or biserrate, pubescent above, glabrescent beneath except on the veins; stipules filiform, but often abortive in the upper leaves. Inflorescence of 1(-3) flowers. Sepals erectopatent, lanceolate, puberulent; petals linear-lanceolate, acuminate, white, sometimes fugacious; stamens short, the outer filaments dilated, the  inner filiform; carpels 5, glabrous; styles long. Drupelets 5-6 × 3 mm, often solitary, purplish-red, acid.{\i  N. Russia}. Fe Rs (N, C).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 3. R. arcticus} L., {\i Sp.Pl}. 494(1753). Stems 10-30 cm, all flowering and unarmed. Leaves 3-lobed, or with 3(-5) ovate, unevenly serrate leaflets. Inflorescence of 1-3 long-pedicellate flowers 1·5-2·5 cm in diameter. Sepals and petals 5-7(-10); sepals glabrous; petals ovate, often toothed, pink; stamens purple, erect, incurved at apex, as long as the styles; carpels pubescent. Drupelets
\par

\par
9}
\par