{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 with 3 ovate bracteoles. Calyx 5-6 mm, sericeous. Corolla yellow; standard 8-12 mm, broadly ovate, glabrous. Legume 15-30 × 5-8 mm, oblong, sericeous when immature, finally glabrous.{\i  Dry hillsides. • S.W. Spain} ({\i prov. Cádiz}) Hs.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc {\b 13.            Chamaecytisus}             Link     
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc By V.H. Heywood & D.G. Frodin.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Unarmed shrubs or the branches sometimes spinose. Leaves 3-foliolate. Flowers in leafy racemes or in terminal heads subtended by a leafy involucre. Calyx tubular, bilabiate; upper lip with 2 teeth, lower with 3 teeth, the teeth much smaller than the lips; corolla yellow, rarely white or purple; stigma capitate or extrorse. Legume dehiscent, somewhat compressed, black. Seeds strophiolate.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   A taxonomically difficult genus in which interspecific hybridization appears to be of frequent occurrence.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Literature: as for {\i Cytisus} and the following: A. Holubová-Klásková, {\i Acta Univ. Carol.} ({\i Biol}.) {\b 1964} (Suppl. {\b 2}): 1-24 (1964).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Flowers in leafy racemes
\par
2 Older branches becoming spinose
\par
3 Legume pubescent only along the sutures; standard 25-35 mm; 
\par
  leaflets appressed-pubescent above ........................................... {\b 3. spinescens}
\par
3 Legume pubescent all round; standard 12-25 mm; leaflets
\par
  glabrous or subglabrous above
\par
4 Young branches glabrous; legume white-villous .......................... {\b 1. creticus}
\par
4 Young branches appressed-pubescent; legume appressed-
\par
  grey-tomentose ........................................................................... {\b 2. subidaeus}
\par
2 Older branches not becoming spinose
\par
5 Corolla purple, white or pinkish-white
\par
6 Corolla purple ............................................................................ {\b 4. purpureus}
\par
6 Corolla white or pinkish-white
\par
7 Leaflets glabrous above legume glabrous ............................... {\b 17. graniticus}
\par
7 Leaflets appressed-pubescent on both surfaces; legume
\par
  appressed-pubescent ......................................................... {\b 18. skrobiszewskii}
\par
5 Corolla yellow
\par
8 Legume glabrous, ciliate or sparsely hairy ................ ({\b 5-10}). {\b hirsutus} group
\par
8 Legume uniformly pubescent
\par
9 Standard pubescent outside
\par
10 Standard with spots near the base
\par
11 Leaves appressed-hairy above; calyx appressed-hairy .... {\b 11. borysthenicus}
\par
11 Leaves glabrous above; calyx patent-hairy ............. ({\b 5-10}). {\b hirsutus} group
\par
10 Standard without spots
\par
12 Branches patent-pubescent or -hirsute; calyx patent-
\par
   pubescent or -hirsute ................................................  ({\b 5-10}). {\b hirsutus} group
\par
12 Branches glabrous below, densely ±appressed-pubescent 
\par
   above; calyx densely villous-tomentose ............................... {\b 12. lindemannii}
\par
9  Standard glabrous outside
\par
13 Standard without spots at the base
\par
14 Branches appressed-villous; leaflets sparsely
\par
   appressed-pubescent above .................................................... {\b 16. ruthenicus}
\par
14 Branches patent-pubescent or -hirsute; leaflets densely
\par
   pubescent above ........................................................ ({\b 5-10}). {\b hirsutus} group
\par
13 Standard with spots at the base
\par
15 Standard with orange-red spots; inflorescence 1-sided,
\par
   some branches procumbent; leaves glabrous when mature
\par
   ............................................................................................. {\b 13. ratisbonensis}
\par
15 Standard with violet or brown spots; inflorescence not
\par
   1-sided; branches all erect or ascending; leaves 
\par
   remaining pubescent at least beneath
\par
16 Flowers 1-2 in a fascicle; spots violet ........................................ {\b 14. zingeri}
\par
16 Flowers 2-5 in a fascicle; spots brown
\par
17 Indumentum golden; leaves glabrous above .......................... {\b 15. paczoskii}
\par
17 Indumentum white; leaves pubescent on both surfaces ....... {\b 16. ruthenicus}
\par
1  Flowers in heads, subtended by a leafy involucre
\par
18 Corolla white
\par
19 Plant procumbent; indumentum of crispate and straight hairs
\par
   .................................................................................................. {\b 34. kovacevii}
\par
19 Plant erect; indumentum of straight hairs
\par
20 3 upper teeth of calyx triangular-lanceolate; stem with
\par
   both appressed and patent hairs ...................................................... {\b 30. albus}
\par
20 3 upper teeth of calyx linear-subulate; stem with all
\par
   hairs semi-patent ........................................................................ {\b 35. nejceffii}
\par
18 Corolla yellow or pale yellow
\par
21 Branches with at least some patent or semi-patent hairs
\par
22 Leaflets linear, green on both surfaces ............................. {\b 27. dorycnioides}
\par
22 Leaflets elliptical to lanceolate, greyish or whitish 
\par
   at least beneath
\par
23 Legume appressed-hairy
\par
24 Calyx patent-hairy
\par
25 Leaflets 7-10 mm wide, sparsely patent-hairy beneath ........... {\b 3. podolicus}
\par
25 Leaflets 3-6 mm wide, densely whitish-sericeous 
\par
   beneath .................................................................................... {\b 21. austriacus}
\par
24 Calyx appressed-hairy
\par
26 Hairs on branches mainly appressed; flowers in heads of 5-8
\par
   .................................................................................................. {\b 31. banaticus}
\par
26 Hairs on branches all patent; flowers in heads of 12-18 ........... {\b 32. rochelii}
\par
23 Legume patent-hairy
\par
27 Leaflets (10-)15-35 mm, sparsely pubescent to subglabrous  
\par
   above ........................................................................................... {\b 19. supinus}
\par
27 Leaflets 10-17 mm, densely appressed-sericeous on both
\par
   surfaces ................................................................................... {\b 20. eriocarpus}
\par
21 Branches appressed-hairy
\par
28 Leaflets glabrous or sparsely pubescent above
\par
29 Calyx appressed-hairy
\par
30 Leaflets 5-8 mm; some branches procumbent ....................... {\b 24. pygmaeus}
\par
30 Leaflets 12-30 mm; branches erect or ascending
\par
31 Corolla pale yellow; legume 30-40 mm, shortly
\par
   appressed-hairy ......................................................................... {\b 31. banaticus}
\par
31 Corolla deep yellow; legume 25-28 mm, densely sericeous  ....{\b 23. heuffelii}
\par
29 Calyx patent-hairy
\par
32 Leaflets 15-20 mm, green on both surfaces
\par
33 Leaflets obovate; legume villous ......................................... {\b 22. tommasinii}
\par
33 Leaflets linear; legume lanate ........................................... {\b 27. dorycnioides}
\par
32 Leaflets 20-35 mm, greyish-hairy beneath
\par
34 Branches erect, with appressed hairs only; flowers
\par
   in heads of 6-8 ......................................................................... {\b 28. litwinowii}
\par
34 Branches ascending, with both patent and appressed hairs; 
\par
   flowers in heads of 10-12 ........................................................ {\b 32. podolicus}
\par
28 Leaflets densely appressed-hairy on both surfaces
\par
35 Calyx appressed-hairy
\par
36 Leaflets 10 × 2-2·5 mm, linear to linear-spathulate ................... {\b 25. jankae}
\par
36 Leaflets 12-30 × 4-8 mm, lanceolate to oblong-obovate
\par
37 Branches with appressed hairs only; leaflets 12-22 × 4-8 mm
\par
   ................................................................................................. {\b 29. blockianus}
\par
37 Branches with both patent and appressed hairs; leaflets 
\par
   20-30 × 5-6 mm ........................................................................ {\b 31. banaticus}
\par
35 Calyx patent-hairy
\par
38 Legume sericeous .................................................................. {\b 21. austriacus}
\par
38 Legume lanate
\par
39 Leaflets elliptical, lanceolate or obovate; branches
\par
   with long patent hairs .............................................................. {\b 20. eriocarpus}
\par
39 Leaflets linear; branches sericeous ....................................... {\b 26. danubialis}
\par

\par
(i) Inflorescence racemose.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. C. creticus} (Boiss. & Heldr.) Rothm., {\i Feddes Repert.}{\b  53}: 143 (1944) ({\i Cytisus creticus} Boiss. & Heldr.). Up to 30 cm, much branched; branches spreading, glabrous, with short internodes, later becoming spinose. Leaflets 3-7 × 1·5-2 mm, obovate, acute, apiculate or obtuse, subglabrous above, appressed-pubescent beneath. Flowers solitary. Calyx appressed-pubescent. Corolla
\par

\par
90}
\par