{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 yellow; standard 10-12 mm. Legume white-villous.{\i   Dry, rocky places. • Kriti.} Cr.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. C. subidaeus} (Gand.) Rothm.,{\i   loc. cit.} (1944) ({\i  Cytisus subidaeus} Gand.). Up to 150 cm, much-branched; branches appressed-pubescent when young, later becoming spinose. Leaflets cuneate-ovate, glabrous above, grey-pubescent beneath. Flowers solitary. Calyx appressed-pubescent. Corolla yellow; standard 12-23 mm. Legume appressed-tomentose. {\i  Rocky scrub. • Kriti}. Cr.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 3. C. spinescens} (C. Presl) Rothm., {\i  loc. cit.} (1944) ({\i  Cytisus spinescens} C. Presl,{\i   C. subspinescens} Briq.). Up to 20 cm, much branched; branches appressed-white-pubescent when young, later becoming spinose. Leaflets 3-11 × 1-3 mm, obovate-cuneate, obtuse or acute, appressed-pubescent above, sericeous beneath. Flowers 1 or 2 in a fascicle. Calyx appressed-pubescent. Corolla pale yellow; standard 23-33 mm. Legume pubescent along the sutures only. •{\i   C. & S. Italy; W. Jugoslavia.} ?Gr It Ju.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Plants with leaves silvery-pubescent on both surfaces and the legume wholly sericeous occur in various parts of the range.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 4. C. purpureus} (Scop.) Link,{\i   Handb. }{\b 2}: 154 (1831) ({\i  Cytisus purpureus }Scop.). Up to 30 cm; branches subglabrous, unarmed. Leaflets obovate, mucronate, subglaucous, glabrous. Flowers in fascicles of 2-3 forming a leafy raceme. Calyx with sparse, patent hairs. Corolla lilac-pink to purplish, the standard 15-25 mm, with a darker patch in the centre. Legume 15-25 × 4-5 mm, glabrous.{\i   Bushy and rocky places; calcicole. • S. & S.E. Alps, N. Albania, N. Jugoslavia.} Al Au It Ju [Ge].
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    ({\i  5-10}). {\i  C. hirsutus} group. 30-200 cm; branches hairy, at least when young. Leaflets glabrous to hirsute above, hairy beneath at least when young. Flowers in fascicles of 1-4. Calyx glabrous or hairy. Corolla yellow or pale yellow; standard 20-25 mm. Legume glabrous, ciliate or villous.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 The vernal state of {\b 19}, {\i  C. supinus}, closely resembles {\b 6}, {\i  C. polytrichus}, but can be distinguished from it by its smaller flowers.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Leaflets glabrous on both surfaces at maturity; calyx 
\par
  glabrous or sparsely appressed-pubescent ................................ {\b 10. leiocarpus}
\par
1 Leaflets pubescent beneath at maturity; calyx with 
\par
  patent hairs or with both patent and appressed hairs
\par
2 Calyx with both patent and appressed hairs ..................................... {\b 9. glaber}
\par
2 Calyx with only patent hairs
\par
3 Hairs of branches and leaves appressed ........................................... {\b 7. wulfii}
\par
3 Hairs of branches and leaves patent
\par
4 Branches procumbent; legume villous ..................................... {\b 6. polytrichus}
\par
4 Branches usually erect or ascending; legume sparsely 
\par
  to densely hairy
\par
5 Leaflets (4-)6-20(-30) × (2-)4-10(-18) mm ................................... {\b 5. hirsutus}
\par
5 Leaflets(10-)20-30 × (6-)10-15 mm ............................................... {\b 8. ciliatus}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 5. C. hirsutus} (L.) Link,{\i   Handb.}{\b  2}: 155 (1831) ({\i  Cytisus hirsutus} L., {\i  C. pumilus} De Not., {\i  C. leucotrichus} Schur, {\i  C. hirsutus }subsp.{\i   leucotrichus} (Schur) Ascherson & Graebner). 20-100(-200) cm; branches erect or ascending, rarely procumbent, patent-pubescent or hirsute. Leaflets (4-)6-20(-30) × (2-)4-10(-18) mm, obovate to elliptical, glabrous to hirsute above, pubescent to hirsute beneath. Calyx patent-pubescent or hirsute. Corolla yellow or pinkish-yellow; standard with or without brown spots. Legume 25-40 × 5-8 mm, linear, hirsute all round or only at margins.{\i   Somewhat calcifuge. C. & E. Europe.} Al Au Bu Cz Ga Gr He Hu It Ju ?Po Rm Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Extremely variable in habit and indumentum. Numerous variants have been described at subspecific or specific rank but are not clearly distinguishable.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 6. C. polytrichus} (Bieb.) Rothm.,{\i   Feddes Repert. }{\b 53}: 144 (1944) ({\i  Cytisus hirsutus} subsp.{\i   polytrichus }(Bieb.) Hayek,{\i   C. polytrichus} Bieb.). 10-25 cm, branches procumbent, with long patent hairs when young. Leaflets (5-)10-15 × (1-)4-6 mm, elliptical, patent-hirsute on both surfaces, rarely glabrous above. Calyx patent-hirsute. Corolla yellow; standard with brown spots; wings rounded, entire. Legume 20-35 × 5-6 mm, villous. •{\i   Mountains of S. Europe, from the Maritime Alps to Krym, and extending northwards to C. Romania.} Bu Ga Gr It Ju Rm Rs (K).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 7. C. wulfii} (V. Krecz.) A. Klaskova,{\i   Preslia}{\b  30}: 214 (1958) ({\i  Cytisus wulfii} V. Krecz.). Like {\b 6} but branches and leaves appressed-pubescent; corolla with emarginate wings; legume 30 × 7 mm, with long, silvery, appressed hairs.{\i   Krym}. Rs (K).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 8. C. ciliatus} (Wahlenb.) Rothm.,{\i   Feddes Repert.}{\b  53}: 144 (1944) ({\i  Cytisus hirsutus} subsp. {\i  ciliatus} (Wahlenb.) Ascherson & Graebner). Up to 100 cm; branches erect, ascending or rarely procumbent, patent-pubescent or -villous. Leaflets (10-)20-30 × (6-)10-15 mm, obovate to elliptical, glabrous to pubescent above, patent-pubescent beneath. Calyx patent-pubescent or -villous. Corolla yellow; standard with or without brown spots. Legume 20-40 mm, ciliate or hirsute at the sutures, otherwise glabrous or rarely sparsely to densely pubescent. •{\i   E.C. Europe and Balkan peninsula.} Al Au Bu Cz Gr Hu Ju Rm.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 9. C. glaber} (L. fil.) Rothm.,{\i   Feddes Repert.}{\b  53}: 143 (1944) ({\i  Cytisus elongatus} Waldst. & Kit.). Up to 150 cm; branches erect or arching, densely appressed-pubescent when young, later glabrous. Leaflets 20-25(-30) × 8-12 mm, obovate or oblong, appressed-pubescent on both surfaces, becoming glabrous above, ciliate. Calyx densely or sparsely pubescent with both appressed and patent hairs. Corolla yellow; standard with brown spots. Legume 20-25 mm, densely appressed-sericeous.{\i   Calcicole. • W. & C. Romania, N.E. part of Balkan peninsula}. Bu Ju Rm.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 10. C. leiocarpus} (A. Kerner) Rothm., {\i  op. cit.} 144 (1944). Up to 30 cm; branches procumbent, sericeous when young, later glabrous. Leaflets 25-40 × 10-20 mm, sparsely pubescent beneath, glabrous when mature. Calyx glabrous or sparsely appressed-pubescent. Corolla yellow; standard with brown spots. Legume 30-35 × 6-8 mm, glabrous or sparsely hairy at the sutures and on the faces. •{\i   W. & C. Romania, N. part of Balkan peninsula.} Al Bu Ju Rm.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 11. C. borysthenicus} (Gruner) A. Klásková,{\i   Preslia }{\b 30}: 214 (1958) ({\i  Cytisus borysthenicus} Gruner). Up to 120 cm; branches erect, densely sericeous. Leaflets 25-35(-60) × 4-6 mm, obovate, densely sericeous above. Calyx shortly appressed-pubescent. Corolla yellow; standard (20-)25-30 mm, pubescent outside, with orange spots. Legume 20-25 × 7-8 mm, broadly linear, densely silvery-pubescent.{\i   Sand-flats, river-banks and dunes. S. Russia, Ukraine, W. Kazakhstan.} Rs (C, W, E).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 12. C. lindemannii} (V. Krecz.) A. Klaskova,{\i   loc. cit.} (1958) ({\i  Cytisus lindemannii} V. Krecz.). Like {\b 11} but branches ascending, glabrous in the lower parts, densely pubescent in the upper parts, the hairs greenish, somewhat appressed; calyx densely villous-tomentose; standard without orange spots; legume 30 × 6 mm, linear, densely villous-tomentose.{\i   Woods and scrub. Ukraine and S. Russia}. Rs (W, E).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 13. C. ratisbonensis} (Schaeffer) Rothm.,{\i   Feddes Repert.}{\b  53}: 144 (1944) ({\i  Cytisus ratisbonensis} Schaeffer, {\i  C. biflorus} L'Hér.). (10-)30-45 cm; branches procumbent or ascending, sericeous glabrous later. Leaflets 10-15 × 4-6 mm, obovate to obovate-lanceolate, glabrous above, sericeous beneath, glabrous when
\par

\par
91}
\par