{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 mature. Inflorescence unilateral, with flowers in fascicles of 1-2(-3). Calyx appressed-sericeous, becoming yellow. Corolla yellow; standard 16-22 mm, with orange-red spots. Legume 20-30 × 4-5 mm, appressed-pubescent all round. •{\i   C. Europe, extending locally eastwards to S.E. Ukraine.} Au Bu Cz Ge Hu Po Rm Rs (W, C).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Plants from S.E. Ukraine, with stems 20-50 cm, inflorescence not unilateral and calyx grey-villous, have been described as {\b Cytisus kreczetoviczii} Wissjul. in Fomin,{\i   Fl. RSS Ucr.}{\b  6}: 588 (1954), but their status is not yet clear.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 14. C. zingeri} (Nenukow ex Litv.) A. Klásková,{\i   Preslia}{\b  30}: 214 (1958) ({\i  Cytisus zingeri} (Nenukow ex Litv.) V. Krecz.). 40-120(-150) cm; vegetative branches shortly appressed-pubescent, the hairs yellow; flowering branches glabrous. Leaflets (15-)20-25(-30) × (8-)10-12(-15) mm, obovate. Flowers solitary or in pairs. Corolla yellow; standard 16-23 mm, usually with violet spots. Legume 25-30 × 2-5 mm.{\i   U.S.S.R., from} c. 50° {\i  N. to }c. 60° {\i  N}. Rs (N, C, W, E).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 15. C. paczoskii} (V. Krecz.) A. Klásková,{\i   loc. cit.} (1958) ({\i  Cytisus paczoskii} V. Krecz.). 50-60 cm; branches ascending, villous, the hairs silvery or golden. Leaflets 15-20 × 5-6 mm, elliptical or narrowly obovate, glabrous above, appressed-villous beneath. Flowers in fascicles of 2-4. Corolla yellow; standard 18-25 mm, with brown spots; keel pubescent. Legume 30 mm, villous-tomentose. •{\i   W. Ukraine}. Rs (W).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 16. C. ruthenicus} (Fischer ex Woloszczak) A. Klásková,{\i   Preslia }{\b 30}: 214 (1958) ({\i  Cytisus ruthenicus} Fischer ex Woloszczak). 25-150(-200) cm; branches erect or arcuate, grey-white-appressed-villous. Leaflets 10-17 × 4-8 mm, elliptical or lanceolate, sparsely appressed-pubescent above, densely so beneath. Flowers in fascicles of (2-)3-5. Calyx densely appressed-pubescent. Corolla yellow; standard (20-)25-30 mm, with or without spots; keel crispate-hairy. Legume 30-35 × 6-8 mm, densely appressed-villous. {\i  U.S.S.R. southwards from} c. 59°{\i   N., E. Poland.} Po Rs (C, W, K, E).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 17. C. graniticus} (Rehmann) Rothm.,{\i   Feddes Repert.}{\b  53}: 144 (1944) ({\i  Cytisus graniticus} Rehmann). Up to 30 cm; branches ascending, sericeous. Leaflets 10-15 × 3-5·5 mm, obovate-elliptical, glabrous or subglabrous above, sericeous beneath. Flowers in pairs. Calyx sericeous. Corolla white; standard c. 20 mm. Immature legume glabrous.{\i   Granite cliffs. • Krym.} Rs (K)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 18. C. skrobiszewskii} (Pacz.) A.Klásková,{\i   Preslia}{\b  30}: 214(1958) ({\i  Cytisus skrobiszewskii} Pacz.). 15-30 cm; branches ascending, shortly appressed-pubescent. Leaflets 10-18 × 5-6 mm, elliptical or obovate, appressed-pubescent on both surfaces. Flowers in fascicles of 2-4. Calyx sparsely appressed-pubescent. Corolla white, rarely pale pink; standard 18-22 mm. Legume 30-45 × 5-6 mm, densely appressed-pubescent. •{\i   S.W. Ukraine}. Rs (W).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 (ii) Inflorescence capitate.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 19. C. supinus} (L.) Link, {\i  Handb.}{\b  2}: 155 (1831) ({\i  Cytisus supinus} L.). 20-60(-120) cm; branches erect or ascending, rarely procumbent, patent-pubescent to villous or hirsute. Leaflets (10-)15-35 × (5-)7-14 mm, elliptical, oblong or obovate, sparsely patent-pubescent to subglabrous above, patent-pubescent beneath. Flowers in heads of 2-8(-10) (occasionally in racemes, in the vernal state, and then closely resembling members of the {\i  C. hirsutus} group). Calyx patent-pubescent to hirsute. Corolla yellow; standard 20-25 mm, (17-21 mm in vernal state) usually brown-spotted. Legume 20-35 × 5-6 mm, oblong, patent-villous or lanate.{\i   C. & S. Europe, extending northwards to C. France, S. Germany and W. Ukraine.} Al Au Bu Cz Ga Ge Gr He Hs Hu It Ju Po Rm Rs (W) Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Plants from Ukraine, Romania, Bulgaria, Hungary and Poland have been distinguished as{\b  Cytisus aggregatus} Schur,{\i   Enum. Pl. Transs. }149 (1866), differing in their many-flowered capitula and in other floral features, but similar variants occur occasionally throughout the range of the species and a separation does not seem possible.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 20. C. eriocarpus} (Boiss.) Rothm.,{\i   Feddes Repert.}{\b  53}: 144 (1944) ({\i  Cytisus eriocarpus} Boiss.; incl. {\i  C. absinthoides} Janka). 40-80 cm; branches erect, with long, patent and, sometimes, short, appressed hairs. Leaflets 10-17 mm, elliptical, lanceolate or obovate, densely sericeous, appressed-villous, or lanate on both surfaces. Calyx with patent hairs, rarely mixed with some appressed hairs. Corolla yellow. Legume densely patent-lanate. •{\i   Balkan peninsula.} Bu Gr Ju.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 21. C. austriacus} (L.) Link,{\i   Handb.}{\b  2}: 155 (1831) ({\i  Cytisus austriacus }L., {\i  C. smyrnaeus }auct., non Boiss.; incl. {\i  C. pindicola} Hálácsy). 15-70 cm; branches erect or procumbent, more or less densely appressed-hairy. Leaflets (10-)15-25 × 3-6 mm, oblong, obovate or lanceolate, more or less densely appressed hairy above, densely whitish-sericeous beneath, sometimes whitish-sericeous on both surfaces. Flowers in heads, usually numerous. Calyx with patent hairs, rarely mixed with some appressed hairs. Corolla deep yellow; standard 15-22 mm, sericeous outside. Legume 20-30 × 5 mm, sericeous.{\i   E.C. & S.E. Europe, extending to S.C. Russia.} Al Bu Cz Gr Hu Ju Rm Rs (W, K, E) ?Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Variable in habit, leaf-shape, size and indumentum. Several variants with restricted distribution have been recognized as separate species, but they are linked by numerous intermediates and do not form a satisfactory subspecies pattern.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 22. C. tommasinii} (Vis.) Rothm., {\i  Feddes Repert.}{\b  53}: 144 (1944) ({\i  Cytisus tommasinii} Vis.). Like {\b 21} but branches with short, appressed hairs; leaflets up to 20 mm, glabrous above, sparsely appressed-hairy beneath, green on both surfaces; legume patent-villous. •{\i   Mountains of W. Jugoslavia and N. Albania}. Al Ju.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Variable in number of flowers per head and in corolla-size, and not always clearly separable from {\b 21} and {\b 23}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 This species has also been recorded from N.W. Greece, probably in error for relatively sparsely hairy variants of {\b 23}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 23. C. heuffelii} (Wierzb.) Rothm., {\i  loc. cit. }(1944) ({\i  Cytisus heuffelii }Wierzb.). 20-50 cm; branches erect, appressed-hairy. Leaflets 12-30 × 2-9 mm, oblong, obovate or lanceolate, glabrous or sparsely appressed-hairy above, usually densely so beneath. Flowers in heads of 2-5(-8). Calyx appressed-hairy. Corolla yellow; standard 15-25 mm, sparsely hairy outside. Legume 25-28 × 4-5 mm, densely silvery-sericeous. •{\i   Balkan peninsula, Romania and Hungary}. Al Bu Gr Hu Ju Rm.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 24. C. pygmaeus} (Willd.) Rothm.,{\i   loc. cit. }(1944) ({\i  Cytisus pygmaeus} Willd.). Dwarf shrub 5-15 cm; branches procumbent and ascending, sparsely appressed-sericeous. Leaflets 5-8 × 3-4 mm, obovate, elliptical or linear, subglabrous or sericeous along the midrib and at the margins. Flowers in heads of 1-5. Calyx appressed-hairy. Corolla yellow; keel glabrous. Legume 15-20 × 6 mm, appressed-hairy. {\i  E. part of Balkan peninsula. }Bu Ju Tu.
\par

\par
92}
\par