{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 25. C. jankae} (Velen.) Rothm., {\i  loc. cit. }(1944) ({\i  Cytisus jankae} Velen.). Dwarf shrub; branches procumbent, appressed-sericeous; stems 8-10 cm, erect, slender. Leaflets 10 × 2-2·5 mm, linear to linear-spathulate, densely silvery-sericeous. Flowers in heads of 2-4. Calyx sericeous. Corolla pale yellow; standard c. 15 mm; keel densely sericeous outside. Legume 15 × 5 mm, sericeous. •{\i   Balkan peninsula.} Al Bu Ju.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 26. C. danubialis} (Velen.) Rothm.,{\i   loc. cit.} (1944) ({\i  Cytisus danubialis} Velen.). 40-70 cm, much-branched; branches appressed silvery-sericeous. Leaflets 20 × 2-3 mm, linear, silvery sericeous on both surfaces. Flowers in heads of 3-7. Calyx patent-villous. Corolla pale yellow; standard c. 20 mm, minutely hairy outside. Legume 20 × 4 mm, densely lanate. •{\i   Bulgaria, Romania.} Bu Rm.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 27. C. dorycnioides} (Davidov) Frodin & Heywood,{\i   Feddes Repert. }{\b 79}: 21 (1968) ({\i  Cytisus dorycnioides} Davidov). Like {\b 26} but branches appressed- or patent-hirsute; leaflets 15-20 × 3-5 mm, sparsely appressed-hairy and green on both surfaces; flowers in heads of 5-12. •{\i   N.E. Greece} ({\i  near Xanthi}). Gr.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 28. C. litwinowii} (V. Krecz.) A. Klásková,{\i   Preslia}{\b  30}: 214 (1958) ({\i  Cytisus litwinowii }V. Krecz.). 20-50 cm; branches erect appressed-pubescent. Leaflets 20-35 × 4-8 mm, subglabrous above, appressed-hairy beneath. Flowers in heads of 6-8. Corolla golden-yellow; standard 17-20 mm.{\i   Legume not known. • S.C. Russia; Ukraine.} Rs (C).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 29. C. blockianus} (Pawl.) A. Klásková, {\i  loc. cit. }(1958) ({\i  Cytisus blockianus} Pawl., {\i  C. blockii }V. Krecz.). 20-50 cm, branches ascending, sparsely appressed-hairy. Leaflets 12-22 × 4-8 mm, oblong-obovate to lanceolate, appressed-hairy on both surfaces. Flowers in heads of (2-)5-10. Calyx sparsely appressed-hairy. Corolla pale yellow; standard 18-25 mm. Legume 20-30 × 4-5 mm, densely villous. •{\i   Moldavia, W. Ukraine.} Rs (W).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 30. C. albus} (Hacq.) Rothm.,{\i   Feddes Repert.}{\b  53}: 144 (1944) ({\i  Cytisus albus} Hacq., {\i  C. leucanthus} Waldst. & Kit., {\i  C. leucanthus} subsp.{\i   albus} (Hacq.) Hayek). 30-80 cm; branches erect or ascending, with both patent and appressed hairs. Leaflets (10-)20-30 × 7-12 mm, oblong-obovate, appressed-hairy on both surfaces or only beneath. Flowers in heads of (2-)5-8. Calyx with semipatent whitish hairs, the 3 upper teeth triangular-lanceolate. Corolla white; standard 16-20 mm. Legume 20-30 × 5-6 mm appressed-villous. •{\i   C. & S.E. Europe, northwards to S. Poland}. Al Bu Cz Gr Hu Ju Po Rm Rs (W) Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 31. C. banaticus} (Griseb. & Schenk) Rothm.,{\i   loc. cit.} (1944) ({\i  Cytisus leucanthus} subsp. {\i  pallidus }(Schrader) Hayek). Like {\b 30} but hairs on branches mainly appressed; leaflets 20-30 × 5-6 mm, obovate to lanceolate, always appressed-hairy on both surfaces; calyx appressed-hairy; corolla pale yellow; legume 30-40 mm, appressed-hairy. •{\i   E.C. Europe and N.E. part of Balkan peninsula.} Bu Cz Ju Hu Rm.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 32. C. rochelii} (Wierzb.) Rothm., {\i  loc. cit.} (1944) ({\i  Cytisus rochelii} Wierzb., {\i  C. leucanthus} subsp. {\i  obscurus} (Rochel) Hayek). 50-100 cm; branches erect, with patent or semi-patent hairs. Leaflets 20-25 × 6-8 mm, densely appressed-hairy. Flowers in heads of 12-18. Calyx appressed-hairy. Corolla pale yellow; standard 18-20 mm. Legume c. 30 mm, appressed-villous. •{\i   From Bulgaria and E. Jugoslavia to W. Ukraine.} Bu Ju Rm Rs (W).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 33. C. podolicus }(Blocki) A.Klásková,{\i   Preslia}{\b  30}: 214 (1958) ({\i  Cytisus podolicus} Blocki). 30-50 cm; branches ascending, densely covered with both patent and appressed hairs when young. Leaflets 25-30 × 7-10 mm, elliptical to lanceolate, subglabrous above, with sparse, long, patent hairs beneath. Flowers in heads of 10-12. Calyx densely patent-hairy. Corolla pale yellow; standard 23-25 mm. Legume 25-30 mm, densely appressed-villous. •{\i   Moldavia, W. Ukraine.} Rs (W).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 34. C. kovacevii} (Velen.) Rothm., {\i  Feddes Repert.}{\b  53}: 144 (1944) ({\i  Cytisus kovacevii} Velen.). Small shrub; branches slender, with both patent and crispate hairs. Leaflets elliptical, densely sericeous on both surfaces. Calyx crispate-hairy. Corolla white; standard c. 10 mm. Legume not known. •{\i   N. Bulgaria}. Bu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 35. C. nejceffii} (Urum.) Rothm., {\i  loc. cit.} (1944) ({\i  Cytisus nejceffii} Urum.). 30-40 cm; branches erect, with dense semipatent hairs. Leaflets (10-)20-25(-30) × 3-5 mm, linear-elliptical long-acuminate, sparsely appressed-hairy above, densely so beneath. Flowers in heads of (3-)5-8(-10). Calyx with the 3 upper teeth linear-subulate, with numerous semi-patent hairs. Corolla white; standard 15-22 mm. Legume not known. •{\i   N. Bulgaria}. Bu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc {\b  14.              Chronanthus}          (DC.) C.Koch 
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc By D.G. Frodin & V.H. Heywood.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Unarmed shrubs. Leaves 3-foliolate. Flowers in small heads, rarely solitary. Calyx campanulate, bilabiate; upper lip with 2 teeth, not divided to the base, lower with 3 teeth; corolla yellow, persistent and enclosing the legume; stamens monadelphous; stigma introrse. Legume compressed, dehiscent. Seeds 2-3, or 1 by abortion, with a small strophiole.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. C. biflorus} (Desf.) Frodin & Heywood,{\i   Feddes Repert. }{\b 79}: 21 (1968) ({\i  Spartium biflorum} Desf., {\i  Cytisus fontanesii} Spach ex Ball). Erect or ascending shrub 20-50 cm. Branches 5- to 10-angled, glabrous, flowering in first year. Leaflets 4-9 × 0·5-1 mm, linear to lanceolate, with short, appressed hairs. Flowers in groups of 2 or 4 (rarely 1, 3 or 5). Standard 8-12 mm, cordate; keel nearly as long as standard, with rounded beak. Legume 10-15 mm, the valves translucent, glabrous.{\i   Scrub and woods. E. & S. Spain; Islas Baleares}. Bl Hs.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc {\b 15.                Teline}                 Medicus
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc By P.E. Gibbs.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Unarmed shrubs. Leaves 3-foliolate. Flowers in axillary or terminal racemes. Calyx tubular-campanulate, bilabiate; upper lip deeply 2-fid, the lower with 3 distinct teeth; corolla yellow; standard broadly ovate, somewhat exceeding the wings and keel. Legume narrowly oblong, compressed, dehiscent. Seeds 2-6, strophiolate.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Literature: C. Vicioso, {\i  Genísteas Españolas}{\b  1}: 125-135 ({\i  Bol. Inst. For. Inv. Exper. Madrid} No. 67 ). Madrid. 1953. (sub{\i   Genista} L.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 Standard glabrous; leaves petiolate; leaflets obovate ........... {\b 1. monspessulana}
\par
Standard sericeous; leaves subsessile; leaflets linear oblanceolate
\par
   ........................................................................................................ {\b 2. linifolia}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. T. monspessulana} (L.) C. Koch, {\i  Dendrologie }{\b 1}: 30 (1869)({\i  Cytisus monspessulanus }L., {\i  C. candicans} (L.) DC., {\i  Genista candicans} L.). Stems 100-300 cm, erect. Leaves 8-20 mm, petiolate; leaflets obovate, with sparse to dense patent hairs on both surfaces, especially the lower, emarginate to shortly mucronate.
\par

\par
93}
\par