{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 Flowers in axillary clusters. Pedicel 1-2 mm, with 3 linear bracteoles. Calyx 5-6 mm, densely sericeous or with patent hairs, the lower lip longer than the upper. Standard 10-12 mm, broadly ovate, glabrous; keel sparsely sericeous; wings glabrous. Legume c. 20 mm, narrowly oblong, densely sericeous or with patent hairs. Seeds 3-6.{\i   Scrub and open woodland. Mediterranean region, Portugal, Açores.} Az Co Ga Gr Hs It Ju Lu Sa Si ?Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. T. linifolia} (L.) Webb & Berth.,{\i   Phyt. Canar.}{\b  2}: 41 (1842) ({\i  Genista linifolia} L., {\i  Cytisus linifolius} (L.) Lam.). Stems 50-150 cm, erect. Leaves subsessile; leaflets 10-15 mm, linear-oblanceolate, glabrescent above, appressed-sericeous beneath. Flowers in congested terminal racemes. Pedicels 2-3 mm, with three linear bracteoles. Calyx 7-8 mm, sericeous. Standard 10-18 mm, broadly ovate, sericeous; keel sericeous; wings glabrous. Legume 15-20 mm, narrowly oblong, densely pubescent. Seeds 2-3.{\i   Woodland and scrub; calcifuge. W. Mediterranean region}. Bl Ga Hs.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc {\b 16.                 Genista}             L.
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc By P.E. Gibbs.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Spiny or unarmed shrubs. Leaves 1- or 3-foliolate, often caducous; stipules absent or small, often represented by a subglobose swelling (pulvinus). Flowers in heads or racemes or in axillary clusters, rarely solitary. Calyx bilabiate; upper lip deeply 2-fid, lower 3-toothed; corolla yellow; stamens monadelphous. Legume dehiscent or indehiscent, ovoid to linear-oblong. Seeds 1-many, estrophiolate.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Literature: P. E. Gibbs,{\i   Notes Roy. Bot. Gard. Edinb.}{\b  27}: 11-99 (1966). C. Vicioso, {\i  Genísteas Españolas}{\b  1} ({\i  Bol. Inst. For. Inv. Exper. Madrid} No. 67). Madrid. 1953.
\par

\par
 Most species grow on dry heaths or stony hillsides, or in scrub or dry woodland.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Plant ± spiny
\par
2 Legume narrowly oblong and compressed; seeds 2-12; standard
\par
  broadly ovate, as long as the wings and keel
\par
3 Plant with weak spines; bracteoles absent ................................ {\b 14. pulchella}
\par
3 Plant with stout spines; bracteoles present
\par
4 Spines axillary and recurved; standard glabrous
\par
5 Leaves 3-foliolate ......................................................................... {\b 27. morisii}
\par
5 Leaves simple
\par
6 Pedicels c. 1 mm; stems and branches somewhat winged;
\par
  legume sericeous ....................................................................... {\b 26. carpetana}
\par
6 Pedicels 2-5 mm; stems and branches terete; legume glabrous
\par
7 Flowering branches subtending the axillary spines;
\par
  lips of the calyx as long as the tube ............................................... {\b 25. corsica}
\par
7 Flowering branches or flowers borne directly on the 
\par
  axillary spines; lips of the calyx shorter than the tube ................ {\b 24. scorpius}
\par
4 Spines terminating the main branches, not axillary; standard
\par
  sericeous
\par
8 Most leaves 3-foliolate ....................................................... {\b 23. aspalathoides}
\par
8 All leaves simple
\par
9 Most flowers borne singly in the axil of each bract
\par
  ...................................................................................... ({\b 17-19}). {\b lobelii} group
\par
9 Most flowers in pairs or dusters in the axil of each bract
\par
10 Calyx 2·5-5 mm, the lips as long as or shorter than the tube;
\par
   flowers in long racemes 
\par
11 Standard glabrous to sparsely sericeous ..................................... {\b 21. hystrix}
\par
11 Standard densely sericeous .................................................. {\b 22. polyanthos}
\par
10 Calyx 4-7 mm, the lips longer than the tube;
\par
   flowers in short clusters 
\par
12 No pulvini with spinose stipules; standard uniformly 
\par
   sericeous ................................................................................. {\b 20. salzmannii}
\par
12 Some pulvini with spinose stipules; standard with a
\par
   median ridge of sericeous hairs .................................................... {\b 21. hystrix}
\par
2  Legume ovoid-acuminate, usually 1-seeded, or rhomboid-falcate 
\par
   and inflated, 2- to 12-seeded; standard triangular or ovate with 
\par
   a rounded or acute apex, usually shorter than the keel
\par
13 Plant with spiny branches; axillary spines absent
\par
14 Branches alternate; leaves simple .................................................. {\b 7. lobelii}
\par
14 Branches opposite; leaves 3-foliolate ................................ {\b 54. acanthoclada}
\par
13 Plant with recurved axillary spines
\par
15 Flowers or flowering branches borne directly on the
\par
   axillary spines ............................................................................ {\b 55. fasselata}
\par
15 Flowers or flowering branches not borne directly on
\par
   the axillary spines
\par
16 Most leaves 3-foliolate
\par
17 Calyx and leaves with sparse, patent hairs; flowering
\par
   branches sometimes terminated by a spine .................................. {\b 43. cupanii}
\par
17 Calyx and leaves subglabrous; flowering branches never
\par
   terminated by a spine
\par
18 Leaves without spinose stipules ........................................... {\b 41. triacanthos}
\par
18 Leaves with spinose stipules ...................................................... {\b 42. tridens}
\par
16 All leaves simple
\par
19 Leaves with spinose stipules
\par
20 Young stems and calyx with patent hairs; legume 5-15 mm,
\par
   more or less falcate, 4- to 6-seeded ........................................ {\b 30. berberidea} 
\par
20 Young stems and calyx with appressed hairs or glabrous; 
\par
   legume 6-7 mm, ovoid-acuminate, 1- to 2-seeded
\par
21 Standard c. 10 mm, cordate at the base ........................................ {\b 39. lucida}
\par
21 Standard c. 6 mm, truncate at the base ....................................... {\b 42. tridens}
\par
19 Leaves without spinose stipules 
\par
22 Bracts, at least of the lowermost flowers, 1 mm or 
\par
   less, or absent; bracteoles minute
\par
23 Calyx glabrous or very sparsely sericeous; legume 
\par
   falcate; seeds 2-12 ......................................................................... {\b 29. falcata}
\par
23 Calyx densely hairy; legume ovoid-acuminate; seeds 1-2
\par
24 Flowers congested in heads; standard about as long as 
\par
   the keel ..................................................................................... {\b 35. hispanica}
\par
24 Flowers in lax racemes; standard 1/2-2/3 as long as the
\par
   keel .......................................................................................... {\b 36. germanica} 
\par
22 Bracts, at least of the lowermost flowers, more than 1 mm;
\par
   bracteoles usually conspicuous
\par
25 Leaves glabrous; legume falcate; seeds 2-12
\par
26 Calyx 3-4 mm, glabrous; legume glabrous ................................ {\b 28. anglica}
\par
26 Calyx 5-6 mm, patent-pubescent; sutures of the legume 
\par
   with patent hairs ...................................................................... {\b 30. berberidea}
\par
25 Leaves pubescent beneath; legume ovoid-acuminate; seeds 1-2
\par
27 Flowering branches terminated by a spine .............................. {\b 40. anatolica}
\par
27 Flowering branches not terminated by a spine
\par
28 Plant decumbent, less than 30 cm; inflorescence lax
\par
29 Base of the standard truncate to cuneate, the claw 2 mm
\par
   or less ....................................................................................... {\b 33. sylvestris}
\par
29 Base of the standard subcordate, the claw more than 2 mm ..... {\b 34. aristata}
\par
28 Plant erect, usually more than 30 cm; inflorescence congested
\par
30 Apex of the standard emarginate; upper teeth of the calyx
\par
   c. ½ as long as the lower teeth ............................................... {\b 38. tournefortii}
\par
30 Apex of the standard acute; upper teeth of the calyx 
\par
   about as long as the lower teeth .................................................... {\b 37. hirsuta}
\par
1  Plant not spiny
\par
31 Leaves simple
\par
32 Flowers in heads
\par
33 All branches alternate; upper surface of the leaves glabrous
\par
   ................................................................................................ {\b 13. subcapitata}
\par

\par
94}
\par