{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 33 Some branches opposite; upper surface of the leaves
\par
   sericeous .................................................................................. {\b 56. umbellata}
\par
32 Flowers in racemes or axillary clusters
\par
34 Legume ovoid-acuminate; seeds 1-2; standard triangular
\par
   or rhombic, usually shorter than the keel
\par
35 All branches alternate; standard 4·5-8 mm, triangular
\par
36 Calyx with sericeous hairs ...................................................... {\b 33. sylvestris}
\par
36 Calyx glabrous
\par
37 Leaves narrowly elliptical; keel exceeding the standard by 
\par
   c. 1 mm .................................................................................... {\b 31. micrantha}
\par
37 Leaves linear-oblong; keel exceeding the standard by
\par
   c. 2 mm ...................................................................................... {\b 32. carinalis}
\par
35 At least some branches opposite; standard 7-12 mm, ovate  or rhombic
\par
38 Calyx subglabrous; upper teeth obtuse, c. 1/3 as long as
\par
   the lip ......................................................................................... {\b 51. aetnensis}
\par
38 Calyx sericeous; upper teeth acute, at least as long as the lip
\par
39 Standard 7-9 mm, longer than wide; claw less than 1 mm wide
\par
   ................................................................................................. {\b 52. spartioides}
\par
39 Standard 10-12 mm, as long as wide; claw more than 
\par
   1 mm wide ............................................................................... {\b 53. haenseleri}
\par
34 Legume narrowly oblong; seeds 2 or more; standard
\par
   broadly ovate, as long as the keel
\par
40 Keel and standard glabrous
\par
41 Stems usually 3-winged; leaves with a narrow, hyaline
\par
   obscurely denticulate margin ...................................................... {\b 2. januensis}
\par
41 Stems terete; leaves without a hyaline, denticulate margin
\par
42 Leaves on the main stem (9-)12-50 mm, ovate, lanceolate,
\par
   elliptical, oblong or oblanceolate, pubescent or 
\par
   glabrous and ciliate on the margin and midrib beneath ............... {\b 1. tinctoria}
\par
42 Leaves on the main stem 3-10 mm, linear-oblanceolate,
\par
   subglabrous ........................................................................................ {\b 3. lydia}
\par
40 Keel, and usually the standard, sericeous
\par
43 Standard subglabrous, or with a narrow, median ridge of
\par
   sericeous hairs
\par
44 Most flowers in pairs in the axil of each bract; bracts
\par
   fasciculate ...................................................................................... {\b 5. cinerea}
\par
44 All flowers borne singly in the axil of each bract;
\par
   bracts not fasciculate
\par
45 Leaves usually more than 8 mm, shortly petiolate ....................... {\b 6. florida}
\par
45 Leaves usually less than 6 mm, sessile ..................................... {\b 7. valentina}
\par
43 Standard uniformly sericeous, often densely so
\par
46 Plant erect, sparingly branched, with long, flexuous branches
\par
47 Bracts solitary; most flowers borne in fascicles on short
\par
   lateral branches 5-15 mm ....................................................... {\b 4. ramosissima}
\par
47 Bracts fasciculate; most flowers paired, borne directly
\par
   on the main branches ..................................................................... {\b 5. cinerea}
\par
46 Plant decumbent, much-branched
\par
48 Upper surface of the leaves glabrous or subglabrous
\par
49 Bracteoles present (often small)
\par
50 Flowers in lax racemes; leaves usually less than 10 × 3 mm
\par
   ................................................................................................ {\b 9. pseudopilosa}
\par
50 Flowers in dense, terminal racemes; leaves usually more
\par
   than 10 × 3 mm ............................................................................. {\b 12. sericea}
\par
49 Bracteoles absent
\par
51 Standard 12-14 mm; flowers 1-2, subterminal .................... {\b 8. obtusiramea}
\par
51 Standard not more than 12 mm; flowers axillary or in racemes
\par
52 Flowers in clusters near the apices of the main branches;
\par
   leaves sessile .................................................................................. {\b 15. albida}
\par
52 Flowers usually in long racemes on ascending branches;
\par
   leaves shortly petiolate or subsessile ............................................. {\b 16. pilosa}
\par
48 Upper surface of the leaves pubescent
\par
53 Bracteoles borne just below the calyx
\par
54 Bracteoles less than 1 mm ..................................................... {\b 10. teretifolia}
\par
54 Bracteoles 2-3 mm ............................................................ {\b 11. sakellariadis}
\par
53 Bracteoles halfway along the pedicel or absent
\par
55 Flowers borne singly in the axil of each bract; pedicels
\par
   2-5 mm; calyx c. 4 mm; standard 7-10 mm .............................. {\b 14. pulchella}
\par
55 Flowers sometimes in pairs in the axil of each bract;
\par
   pedicels 1-3 mm; calyx 5-7 mm; standard 9-12 mm ..................... {\b 15. albida}
\par
31 Leaves 3-foliolate
\par
56 Calyx 3 mm or less; lower teeth c. 0·5 mm (Ibiza) ............ {\b 47. dorycnifolia}
\par
56 Calyx at least 3 mm; lower teeth 1 mm or more
\par
57 Flowers in 2- to 12-flowered terminal heads; standard
\par
   slightly shorter to slightly longer than the keel
\par
58 Lowest bracts simple; standard glabrous or with sparse hairs .... {\b 44. radiata}
\par
58 Lowest bracts 3-foliolate; standard with dense sericeous hairs
\par
59 Bracteoles 2-3 mm, as long as the calyx-tube ....................... {\b 45. holopetala}
\par
59 Bracteoles 1 mm or less, shorter than the calyx-tube .......... {\b 46. hassertiana}
\par
57 Flowers in often long and lax racemes; standard ½-¾ as
\par
   long as the keel
\par
60 Stem, leaves and calyx with dense, long, patent hairs;
\par
   leaflets of the main cauline leaves 2-6 mm wide ......................... {\b 49. nissana}
\par
60 Stem, leaves and calyx with appressed hairs; leaflets
\par
   1-2 mm wide
\par
61 Most bracts 3-foliolate, persistent; standard deltate
\par
   or triangular ............................................................................ {\b 48. sessilifolia}
\par
61 Bracts (except the lowermost) simple, fugacious or absent;
\par
   standard broadly ovate or rhombic ....................................... {\b 50. ephedroides}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    Sect. GENISTA. Unarmed, with simple leaves. Corolla glabrous, the calyx and leaves usually so. Standard broadly ovate, equalling the wings and keel. Legume narrowly oblong. Seeds 3-10.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. G. tinctoria} L.,{\i   Sp. Pl.} 710 (1753) (incl. {\i  G. depressa }Bieb.,{\i   G. hungarica }A. Kerner, {\i  G. marginata} Besser, {\i  G. mayeri} Janka, {\i  G. ovata} Waldst. & Kit.,{\i   G. tanaitica} Smirnov, {\i  G. tetragona} Besser, {\i  G. patula} Bieb.). Procumbent to erect shrub, 10-200 cm. Leaves 9-50 × 2·5-15 mm, simple, very variable in shape; leaves, calyx and legume glabrous to densely sericeous. Flowers borne singly in the axil of each bract in short racemes towards ends of branches, or in long, simple or compound racemes. Bracts foliaceous; bracteoles c. 1 mm; pedicel 1-2 mm. Calyx 3-7 mm; corolla glabrous; standard 8-15 mm, broadly ovate. 2n = 48.{\i   Most of Europe from S. Scotland and Estonia southwards, but absent from many of the islands.} Al Au Be Br Bu Cz Da Ga Ge Gr He Ho Hs Hu It Ju No Po Rm Rs (B, C, W, K, E) Su Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    Very variable in habit, leaf-shape and degree of hairiness. Populations occur showing different combinations of these characters and these have been variously referred to as distinct species or subspecies. Much of the variation is continuous and there is little correlation between the different characters. It is not at present possible to give a comprehensive account of the variation in this species, but the taxa that are generally recognized can be arranged in the following 4 groups:
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    (i) ({\i  G. anxantica} Ten., {\i  G. campestris} Janka, {\i  G. elata} Wenderoth, {\i  G. tenuifolia} Loisel., {\i  G. tinctoria} L. sensu stricto,{\i   G. virgata} Willd.): Plant 20-200 cm, erect or ascending; leaves (10-)15-35 × 2·5-6(-9) mm, oblong or lanceolate, glabrous with ciliate margins and midrib and conspicuous lateral veins; flowers numerous, in simple or branched racemes; calyx and legume usually glabrous.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    (ii) ({\i  G. alpestris} Bertol., {\i  G. tinctoria} subsp. {\i  littoralis} (Corb.) Rothm.): Plant not more than 20 cm, procumbent; leaves 9-12 x
\par

\par
95}
\par