{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 3-4 mm, ovate-elliptical to elliptic-oblong, glabrous with ciliate margins and midrib, usually with conspicuous lateral veins; flowers few; calyx and legume usually glabrous.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   (iii) ({\i  G. hungarica} A. Kerner,{\i   G. lasiocarpa} Spach, {\i  G. mantica} Pollini, {\i  G. mayeri} Janka, {\i  G. ovata} Waldst. & Kit., {\i  G. perreymondii} Loisel.): Plant 20-200 cm, erect or ascending; leaves 20-50 × 6-15 mm, ovate or elliptical, usually pubescent, with conspicuous lateral veins; flowers numerous, in simple or branched racemes; calyx and legume usually pubescent.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   (iv) ({\i  G. csikii} Kümmerle & Jáv., {\i  G. depressa }Bieb.,{\i   G. friwaldskyi} Boiss.,{\i   G. tetragona} Besser): Plant usually not more than 20 cm, procumbent; leaves 10-20 × 3-5 mm, lanceolate, elliptical, oblong or oblanceolate, usually pubescent, without conspicuous lateral veins; flowers few; calyx and legume glabrous or pubescent.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   The precise distribution of these variants is not clear; (i) and (ii) probably occur almost throughout the range of the species, (iii) in C. & S. Europe and possibly in E. Europe, (iv) in S.E. Europe.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   {\b 2. G. januensis} Viv., {\i  Elench. Pl. Horti Bot. }19 (1802) ({\i  G. triangularis} Willd.,{\i   G. lydia }var. {\i  spathulata }(Spach) Hayek). Procumbent to erect shrub 10-50 cm; stems and branches usually 3-winged. Leaves of the flowering-branches 5-12 × 2-4 mm, elliptical to obovate; leaves of the non-flowering branches 5-40 × 3-7 mm, elliptical to lanceolate; all leaves glabrous, with a narrow, hyaline, obscurely denticulate margin. Flowers in short racemes on ascending lateral branches. Calyx 3·5-4 mm, subglabrous, the lips shorter than the tube. Standard 9-10 mm, broadly ovate.{\i   Calcicole. Balkan peninsula and Italy, extending northwards to Slovenija and W. Romania}. Al Bu Gr It Ju Rm.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 3. G. lydia} Boiss., {\i  Diagn. Pl. Or. Nov.}{\b  1}({\b 2}): 8 (1843) ({\i  G. rumelica} Velen., {\i  G. rhodopea} Velen.). Procumbent or erect shrub up to 100 cm; stems not winged. Leaves 3-10 × 1-3 mm, linear-oblanceolate or linear-oblong, subglabrous, entire and without a hyaline margin. Flowers in short racemes on lateral branches. Calyx 3·5-5 mm, glabrous, the lips almost as long as the tube. Standard 10-12 mm, broadly ovate.{\i   E. part of Balkan peninsula.} Bu Gr Ju Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Sect. SPARTIOIDES Spach. Unarmed, with simple leaves. Standard broadly ovate, equalling the wings and keel, usually sericeous. Keel and legume sericeous. Legume narrowly oblong with appressed to semi-patent hairs. Seeds 2 or more.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 4. G. ramosissima} (Desf.) Poiret in Lam.,{\i   Encycl. Méth. Bot., Suppl.}{\b  2}: 715 (1812). Erect shrub with lax, flexuous branches. Leaves 5-10 × 2-3 mm, elliptical to obovate, sericeous beneath, glabrous above, sessile. Inflorescence an irregular raceme, the flowers solitary, or in fascicles of 2-5, on main branches or on short lateral branches. Bracts solitary. Calyx 5-7 mm. Standard 10-12 mm, ovate, with dense, semi-patent hairs.{\i   S.E. Spain.} Hs.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   {\b 5. G. cinerea} (Vill.) DC. in Lam. & DC., {\i  Fl. Fr.} ed. 3, {\b 4}: 494 (1805). Like {\b 4} but flowers mostly paired and borne directly on the main branches; bracts fasciculate; standard glabrous or with a median ridge of hairs (rarely uniformly sericeous). {\i  S.W. Europe.} Bl Ga Hs It Lu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b cinerea}: Branches sericeous; adult leaves usually more than 5 × 2 mm. {\i  Throughout the range of the species except Mallorca}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28    ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b leptoclada} (Willk.) O. Bolòs & Molinier,{\i   Collect. Bot. }({\i  Barcelona}){\b  5}: 807 (1958): Branches with dense, white, pseudo-farinose, appressed hairs; mature leaves usually less than 5 × 2 mm.{\i   S.E. Spain} ({\i  Prov. Murcia}),{\i   Mallorca}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 6. G. florida} L.,{\i   Syst. Nat}. ed. 10, {\b 2}: 1157 (1759) ({\i  G. polygaliphylla} Brot., {\i  G. leptoclada} Gay ex Spach). Like {\b 4} but leaves 5-25 × 2-5 mm, oblanceolate, sometimes sparsely hairy above, shortly petiolate to subsessile; flowers borne singly in the axil of each bract in long, lax racemes; lowermost bracts leaf-like, simple, the upper ones reduced in size; calyx 4-6 mm; standard broadly ovate, subglabrous. {\i  Spain, N. Portugal.} Hs Lu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 7. G. valentina} (Willd. ex Sprengel) Steudel,{\i   Nomencl. Bot.} ed. 2, {\b 1}: 671 (1840) ({\i  G. oretana} Webb ex Willk.). Erect shrub, with lax, flexuous branches. Leaves 2·5-5 × 0·8-1·5 mm, simple, narrowly elliptical to obovate, sericeous beneath, glabrous above, sessile. Flowers borne singly in the axil of each bract in lax, elongate racemes. Bracts leaf-like, simple. Calyx 2·5-5 mm, sparsely sericeous. Standard 8-12 mm, ovate, with short appressed hairs.{\i   Mountains of E. & S.E. Spain.} Hs.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 8. G. obtusiramea} Gay ex Spach, {\i  Ann. Sci. Nat.} ser. 3 ({\i  Bot.}),{\b  2}: 116 (1845). Procumbent to erect, much branched shrub; branches with internodes 5-10 mm and prominent pulvini. Leaves 2-8 × 1-3 mm, elliptical to obovate, pubescent beneath, glabrous above, sessile. Flowers solitary or paired, borne near the apex of each branch. Calyx 5-6 mm. Standard 12-14 mm, broadly ovate, densely sericeous.{\i   Mountain heaths. • N.W. Spain, C. Portugal.} Hs Lu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 9. G. pseudopilosa} Cosson, {\i  Not. Pl. Crit. }102 (1851). Decumbent shrub, with flexuous, ascending branches. Leaves 4-12 × 1-4 mm, elliptical to oblanceolate, appressed-sericeous beneath, glabrous above, sessile, involute. Flowers borne singly in the axil of each bract in lax terminal racemes. Bracts almost leaf-like; bracteoles less than 1 mm, borne at about the middle of the pedicel; pedicels 1-3 mm. Calyx 5-6 mm. Standard 8-12 mm, broadly ovate, appressed-sericeous, the base usually truncate.{\i   S. & S.E. Spain.} Hs.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 10. G. teretifolia} Willk.,{\i   Flora} ({\i  Regensb}.) {\b 34}: 617 (1851). Like {\b 9} but leaves sericeous on both surfaces; bracteoles borne near the apex of the pedicel.{\i   Dry pastures. • N. Spain} ({\i  near Pamplona}). Hs.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 11. G. sakellariadis} Boiss. & Orph. in Boiss.,{\i   Diagn. Pl. Or. Nov. }{\b 3}({\i  6}): 42 (1859). Like {\b 9} but leaves sericeous on both surfaces; bracteoles 2-3 mm, borne near the apex of the pedicel; pedicels 3-5 mm. •{\i   C. Greece} ({\i  Olimbos}). Gr.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   {\b 12. G. sericea} Wulfen in Jacq., {\i  Collect. Bot. }{\b 2}: 167 (1789). Much-branched shrub. Leaves 5-25 × 2-5 mm, subsessile, narrowly elliptical, oblanceolate or obovate, shortly mucronate, sericeous beneath, glabrous or subglabrous above, the margins involute. Flowers borne singly in the axil of each bract, in terminal clusters of 2-5; flowering branches often slender and flexuous. Bracteoles c. 1 mm, borne at the middle of the pedicel; pedicels 2-3 mm. Standard 10-14 mm, broadly ovate, sericeous, base cuneate. •{\i   Mountains of W. part of Balkan peninsula and N.E. Italy}. Al ?Gr It Ju.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   {\b 13. G. subcapitata} Pancic,{\i   Fl. Princ. Serb.} 224 (1874) ({\i  G. involucrata} auct. pro parte, non Spach). Like {\b 12} but flowers sessile in heads with an involucre of leaf-like bracts; bracteoles 2-3 mm, sub-foliaceous. •{\i   C.part of Balkan peninsula.} Al Bu Ju.
\par

\par
96}
\par