{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 14. G. pulchella} Vis.,{\i   Flora} ({\i  Regensb.}) {\b 13}: 51 (1830) ({\i  G. villarsii} G. C. Clementi). Spreading, unarmed or sometimes weakly spiny shrub. Young branches and both surfaces of the leaves with dense, long, sericeous appressed or patent hairs. Leaves 2-9 × 1·5-3 mm, sessile, narrowly elliptical. Flowers borne singly in the axil of each bract in congested racemes. Bracteoles absent; pedicels 2-5 mm. Calyx c. 4 mm. Standard 7-10 mm, ovate, with dense sericeous hairs.{\i   Mountains of S.E. France, W. Jugoslavia and Albania.} Al Ga Ju.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 15. G. albida} Willd.,{\i   Sp. Pl. }{\b 3}: 942 (1802) ({\i  G. scythica} Pacz., {\i  G. involucrata} auct. pro parte, non Spach). Like {\b 14} but never spinose; young branches and leaves with short hairs; leaves 3-10 × 1·5-4 mm, elliptical to obovate, sometimes glabrous above; flowers borne singly or in pairs in the axil of each bract; bracteoles sometimes present; pedicels 1-3 mm; calyx 5-7 mm; standard 9-12 mm.{\i   E. part of Balkan peninsula, S. Ukraine.} Bu Gr ?Ju Rm Rs (W, K).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   {\b G. halacsyi} Heldr., {\i  Sched. Herb. Graec. Norm.} no. 1526 (1899), from S. Greece, and {\b G. millii} Heldr. ex Boiss., {\i  Fl. Or., Suppl.} 160 (1888), from S.E. Greece, are perhaps conspecific with {\b 15}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 16. G. pilosa} L.,{\i   Sp. Pl.} 710 (1753). Procumbent to suberect shrub up to 150 cm. Leaves 5-12 mm, usually oblanceolate, shortly petiolate to subsessile, appressed-sericeous beneath, glabrous above. Flowers borne singly or in pairs in the axil of each bract, in lax racemes on ascending branches. Bracteoles absent. Calyx 4-5 mm. Standard 8-10 mm, broadly ovate with sparse, appressed-sericeous hairs. {\i  W. & C. Europe, extending to S. Sweden, C. Italy and Macedonia.} Al Au Be Br Bu Cz Da Ga Ge He Hs Ho Hu It Ju Po Rm ?Rs (W).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Sect. ERINACOIDES Spach. Branches spiny. Leaves usually simple. Standard broadly ovate, equalling keel; standard and keel usually sericeous. Legume narrowly oblong, sericeous. Seeds 1 to many.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b 17-19}). {\b G. lobelii} group. Spreading, much-branched, spiny shrubs. Leaves simple. Most flowers borne singly in the axil of each bract.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   The species of this group show an overall similarity but the differential characters appear to be constant even where the taxa are sympatric, e.g. {\b 17} and {\b 18} in the Sierra de Segura.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Some pulvini with spinose stipules .............................................. {\b 19. baetica}
\par
1 No pulvini with spinose stipules
\par
2 Most pedicels 4-9 mm, slender; flowers usually only 1 or 2 on
\par
   each branch ................................................................................... {\b 17. lobelii}
\par
2 Most pedicels 3-4 mm, stout; flowers usually in short racemes ...{\b 18. pumila}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 17. G. lobelii} DC. in Lam. & DC.,{\i   Fl. Fr.} ed. 3,{\b  4}: 499 (1805). Branches sometimes flexuous. Leaves 2-5 × 0·5-2 mm, elliptical to obovate, sericeous beneath, subglabrous above, caducous. Flowers borne singly in the axil of each bract, usually only one or two on each branch. Bracteoles less than 1 mm, borne at the middle of the pedicel. Pedicels 4-9(-11) mm, slender. Calyx 4-6 mm, with short appressed hairs. Standard 8-12 mm, ovate, densely sericeous.{\i   Calcicole. • Mountains of S.E. France, S. & S.E. Spain.} Ga Hs.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Sometimes divided into two subspecies: subsp. {\b lobelii}, from S.E. France, with the pulvini not bidentate and the legume 13-15 mm, lanceolate-oblong, 3- to 4-seeded; and subsp.{\b  longipes }(Pau) Heywood, {\i  Collect. Bot.} ({\i  Barcelona}) {\b 5}: 519 (1957), from S. & S.E. Spain, with the pulvini bidentate and the legume 9-10 mm, ovate-oblong, 1- to 2-seeded. The pulvinus is not a reliable character and recent collections from at least one locality in Spain have the longer, 3- to 4-seeded legume of subsp.{\i   lobelii}. Occasional plants from France also have a short 1- to 2-seeded legume.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 18. G. pumila} (Debeaux & Reverchon ex Hervier) Vierh.,{\i   Verh. Zool.-Bot. Ges. Wien}{\b  69}: 181 (1919). Like {\b 17} but branches stout, rigid; pedicels (1-)3-4(-5) mm, stout; flowers usually in short racemes.{\i   Calcicole. • Mountains of S., S.E. & E.C. Spain. }Hs.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 19. G. baetica} Spach,{\i   Ann. Sci. Nat}. ser. 3 (Bot.), {\b 2}: 113 (1845). Like {\b 17} but branches stout; some pulvini with spinose stipules; pedicels 2-4 mm; standard 11-13 mm.{\i   Calcicole. • S. Spain} ({\i  Sierra Nevada}). Hs.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 20. G. salzmannii} DC.,{\i   Prodr. }{\b 2}: 147 (1825). Much-branched, spiny shrub. Leaves 3-8 × 1-3 mm, simple, the lower surface sericeous, the upper glabrous or with sparse sericeous hairs; pulvini without spinose stipules. Bracteoles 1 mm or less, borne at the middle of the pedicels. Pedicels 1-4 mm. Flowers usually in pairs in the axils of each bract. Standard c. 10 mm, broadly ovate, sparsely to densely hairy. •{\i   N. Italy, Elba, Sardegna, Corse.} Co It Sa.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   {\b G. parnassica} Halácsy, {\i  Magyar Bot. Lapok}{\b  11}: 136 (1912), from S.C. Greece (Parnassos), and possibly also Samothraki, is perhaps conspecific with {\b 20}. It has the leaves silvery-sericeous on both surfaces and the standard 9-13 mm, densely sericeous.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 21. G. hystrix} Lange,{\i   Descr. Icon. Ill.} 2 (1864). Spiny shrub. Leaves 3-5 × 1-3 mm, simple, appressed-hairy beneath, glabrescent above. Flowers mostly 2 or more in the axil of each bract, in lax racemes 4 cm or more. Bracteoles 1 mm or less, borne at the middle of the pedicel. Pedicels 2-5 mm. Calyx 2·5-7 mm. Standard c. 10 mm, glabrous or with a median ridge of sericeous hairs or sparsely sericeous. •{\i   N. Spain, N. Portugal.} Hs Lu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b hystrix}: Erect, up to 150 cm; pulvini without spinose stipules. Lips of calyx as long as or shorter than tube.{\i   N.W. Spain, N. Portugal.}

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b legionensis} (Pau) P. Gibbs,{\i   Notes Roy. Bot. Gard. Edinb.}{\b  27}: 57 (1966): Spreading, up to 30 cm; pulvini with spinose stipules. Lips of calyx longer than tube. {\i  N. Spain} ({\i  Picos de Europa}).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Flowering from late May to July.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 22. G. polyanthos} R. de Roemer ex Willk.,{\i   Linnaea }{\b 25}: 20 (1852). Like {\b 21}(a) but up to 200 cm; pulvini with spinose stipules; standard always uniformly, densely sericeous. •{\i   S.W. Spain, S. & E.C. Portugal}. Hs Lu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Flowering from March to early May.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   The distinction between {\b 21} and {\b 22} is not always clear and it might perhaps be better to regard {\b 21} as a subspecies of {\b 22}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 23. G. aspalathoides} Lam.,{\i   Encycl. Méth. Bot.}{\b  2}: 620 (1788). Erect, spiny shrub. Leaves mostly 3-foliolate; leaflets 3-12 × 1-3 mm, narrowly oblanceolate, with involute margins and short grey hairs on both surfaces. Flowers 1 or more in the axil of each bract, in lax racemes; bracteoles c. 2 mm, usually 2-3, the final pair just below the calyx; pedicels 2-4 mm. Calyx 5-6 mm, sericeous, the lips longer than the tube. Standard 10-12 mm, sparsely to densely sericeous. {\i  Sicilia}. Si.
\par

\par
97}
\par