{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28  Sect. SCORPIOIDES Spach. Shrubs with axillary spines and alternate branching. Leaves simple or 3-foliolate. Corolla usually glabrous; standard equal to the wings and keel. Legume oblong. Seeds 2-8.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 24. G. scorpius} (L.) DC. in Lam. & DC., {\i  Fl. Fr.} ed. 3,{\b  4}: 498 (1805). Erect, rarely spreading, intricately branched shrub, with stout axillary spines. Leaves 3-11 × 1·5-2 mm, simple, sparsely hairy beneath, subglabrous above. Flowers borne on short branches arising from the spines, or directly on the spines. Pedicels 2-5 mm. Calyx 3-5 mm, glabrous or nearly so, the lips shorter than the tube. Standard 7-12 mm. Legume 15-40 mm, glabrous. 2n = 40, 48.{\i   Spain and S. France.} Ga Hs.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   {\b G. melia} Boiss., {\i  Diagn. Pl. Or. Nov.}{\b  2}({\b 9}): 2 (1849), described from the Aegean region (Milos), has been collected once only. It is said to differ from {\b 24} in the appressed (not crispate) hairs; the flowers in many-flowered clusters; and the lower lip of the calyx with a long median tooth.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 25. G. corsica} (Loisel.) DC. in Lam. & DC.,{\i   Fl. Fr.} ed. 3, {\b 5}: 548 (1815). Like {\b 24} but the flowers or flowering branches never borne directly on the spines; lips of the calyx as long as the tube; legume 12-20 mm. •{\i   Corse and Sardegna.} Co Sa.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 26. G. carpetana} Leresche ex Lange, {\i  Vid. Meddel. Dansk Naturh. Foren. Kjobenhavn}{\b  1877-78}: 237 (1878). Spreading shrub, the branches somewhat winged and with axillary spines. Leaves 4-6 × 2 mm, simple, sericeous; stipules weakly spinose. Flowers borne singly or in clusters on the branches or spines; pedicels c. 1 mm. Calyx c. 4 mm, sparsely sericeous or with subpatent hairs. Standard 8-11 mm. Legume 12-15 mm, sericeous.{\i   N. & W.C. Spain.} Hs.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 27. G. morisii} Colla,{\i   Herb. Pedem.}{\b  2}: 65 (1834). Spreading shrub with slender, weak, axillary spines. Leaves 3-foliolate; leaflets 3-9 × 2 mm, both surfaces with sparse, long, subpatent hairs. Bracteoles linear-lanceolate, equalling or exceeding the calyx-tube; pedicels 1-2 mm. Calyx 5-8 mm, with sparse, subpatent hairs. Standard c. 10 mm. Legume c. 20 mm, with dense patent hairs. •{\i   Sardegna.} Sa.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Sect. PHYLLOSPARTIUM Willk. Shrubs with axillary spines and simple leaves. Standard usually glabrous, ovate with an acute apex, usually shorter than the keel. Legume falcate, inflated. Seeds 4-12.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 28. G. anglica} L.,{\i   Sp. Pl.} 710 (1753). Decumbent to erect shrub with glabrous or hairy branches and axillary spines. Leaves 4-10 × 2-3 mm, lanceolate or elliptical, glabrous. Stipules not spinose. Flowers in short racemes. Bracts leaf-like, fasciculate; bracteoles less than 1 mm. Calyx 3-4 mm, glabrous, the lips longer than the tube. Standard 6-8 mm. Legume glabrous. 2n = 42.{\i   W. Europe, extending eastwards to S. Sweden, N. Germany and S.W. Italy.} Be Br Da Ga Ge Ho Hs It Lu Su.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 29. G. falcata} Brot.,{\i   Phyt. Lusit.} 52 (1800). Like {\b 28} but young branches and lower surface of leaves sparsely sericeous; leave ovate to oblong-lanceolate, obtuse or acute; bracts and bracteoles minute or absent; calyx c. 5 mm, glabrous to sparsely pubescent, the lips as long as the tube; standard c. 9 mm.{\i   Calcifuge. • W. half of the Iberian peninsula.} Hs Lu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 30. G. berberidea} Lange, {\i  Descr. Icon. Ill. }{\b 1} (1864). Like {\b 28} but young branches with dense patent hairs; stipules somewhat spinose; bracteoles c. 1 mm; calyx 5-6 mm, with dense patent hairs, the lips twice as long as the tube; standard 8-10 mm; legume with sparse patent hairs along the sutures.{\i   Damp meadows and bogs. • N.W. Spain, N. Portugal.} Hs Lu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    Sect. VOGLERA (P. Gaertner, B. Meyer & Scherb.) Spach. Leaves simple or 3-foliolate. Standard usually triangular, or ovate with an acute apex, usually shorter than the keel. Legume ovoid-acuminate. Seeds 1-2.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 31. G. micrantha} Ortega,{\i   Hort. Matrit. Descr.} 68 (1798). Unarmed, spreading shrub. Leaves c. 12 × 2 mm, simple, narrowly elliptical, glabrous. Flowers in terminal racemes. Bracts narrowly elliptical; bracteoles c. 2 mm, borne just below the calyx; pedicels c. 1 mm. Calyx 2·5-5 mm, glabrous. Standard 5-7 mm, triangular, glabrous; base truncate to obtuse; keel with sparse sericeous hairs, c. 1 mm longer than the standard. •{\i   N. & E. Spain, N. Portugal.} Hs Lu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 32. G. carinalis} Griseb., {\i  Spicil. Fl. Rumel.}{\b  1}: 3 (1843). Like {\b 31} but leaves linear-oblong; base of the standard cordate-truncate; keel c. 2 mm longer than the standard.{\i   E. part of Balkan peninsula.} Bu Gr Ju Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 33. G. sylvestris} Scop., {\i  Fl. Carn.} ed. 2,{\b  2}: 53 (1772). Decumbent shrub with weak axillary spines; young branches with sericeous hairs. Leaves 10-20 × 1-3 mm, simple, narrowly oblong or elliptical, the lower surface with sparse hairs. Flowers in long, lax terminal racemes. Calyx 5-7 mm, with sparse sericeous hairs, the upper lip about as long as the lower, the lower teeth equal. Standard 7-8 mm, triangular, the base subcordate, the claw less than 2 mm. •{\i   Albania and Jugoslavia; C. & S. Italy.} Al It Ju.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 34. G. aristata} C. Presl in J. & C. Presl,{\i   Del. Prag. }34 (1822). Like {\b 33} but branches with stouter spines; leaves and calyx with patent hairs; calyx c. 5 mm, the upper lip c. ½ as long as the lower, the median lower tooth usually exceeding the lateral by 1 mm or more; standard 6-8 mm, triangular, the base truncate, the claw 2 mm or more. •{\i   Sicilia.} Si.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 35. G. hispanica} L.,{\i   Sp. Pl.} 711 (1753). Decumbent to erect shrub 10-50 cm, with axillary spines. Leaves 6-10 × 3-5 mm, simple, sessile, lanceolate to oblanceolate, the lower surface with dense appressed or patent hairs. Flowers in dense, terminal, subcapitate racemes. Bracts c. 1 mm; bracteoles absent. Standard glabrous, broadly ovate, slightly emarginate, about equalling the wings and keel. •{\i   N. Spain and S. France.} Ga Hs.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b hispanica}: Branches and leaves with patent hairs; standard 6-8 mm.{\i   S. France, westwards to E. Pyrenees, and E. Spain}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28    ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b occidentalis} Rouy,{\i   Fl. Fr. }{\b 4}: 226 (1897) ({\i  G. occidentalis} (Rouy) Coste): Branches and leaves with appressed hairs; standard 8-11 mm.{\i   W. Pyrenees and N. Spain}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 36. G. germanica} L.,{\i   Sp. Pl. }710 (1753). Erect shrub, with axillary spines, rarely unarmed. Leaves 8-20 × 4-5 mm, simple, elliptical or lanceolate, the lower surface with long, subpatent hairs. Flowers in lax racemes. Bracts c. 1 mm; bracteoles absent. Calyx c. 5 mm, sericeous. Standard c. 8 mm, ovate with an acute apex, about 2/3 as long as keel. 2n = c. 46. •{\i   From S.W. France to C. Russia and from S. Sweden to C. Italy and Bulgaria.} Au Be Bu Co Cz Da Ga Ge He Ho Hu It Ju Po Rm Rs (B, C, W) Su.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 37. G. hirsuta} Vahl,{\i   Symb. Bot. }{\b 1}: 51 (1790). Erect shrub with stout axillary usually unbranched spines. Leaves 6-15 × 3-5 mm, simple, lanceolate, the lower surface and margins with sparse, long, subpatent hairs, the upper glabrous. Flowers in congested terminal racemes. Bracts leaf-like, borne just below the bracteoles; bracteoles 3-5 mm, borne just below the calyx. Calyx 9-12 mm,
\par

\par
98}
\par