{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 the lower lip longer than the upper. Standard ovate, acute, glabrous to uniformly sericeous. •{\i   W. Spain, S. Portugal, Islas Baleares}. Bl Hs Lu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28     {\b 38. G. tournefortii} Spach, {\i  Ann. Sci. Nat.} ser. 3 (Bot.), {\b 2}: 269 (1844). Like {\b 37} but spines much-branched; bracts borne at the base of the pedicel; upper lip of the calyx ½ as long as the lower lip; standard emarginate, and always sparsely sericeous.{\i   S. & C. Spain, Portugal.} Hs Lu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28     {\b 39. G. lucida} Camb.,{\i   Mem. Mus. Hist. Nat.} ({\i  Paris}) {\b 14}: 231 (1827). Erect shrub with stout axillary spines. Leaves 3-8 × 3 mm, simple, narrowly elliptical, the lower surface sericeous; stipules spinose. Flowers in terminal racemes. Bracts leaf-like; bracteoles minute, at the middle of the pedicel. Calyx c. 5 mm, sericeous. Standard c. 10 mm, ovate, subacute, glabrous, shorter than the keel. •{\i   Islas Baleares} ({\i  Mallorca}). Bl.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28      {\b 40. G. anatolica} Boiss.,{\i   Diagn. Pl. Or. Nov.}{\b  1}({\b 2}): 8 (1843). Spreading or erect shrub, the young branches patent-pubescent. Leaves 5-10 × 1-2·5 mm, simple, narrowly elliptical, the lower surface sericeous or pubescent; without spinose stipules. Flowers in short terminal racemes terminated by a spine. Bracts 2-3 mm, leaf-like; bracteoles c. 7 mm, borne at the apex of the pedicel. Calyx c. 6 mm, sericeous or pubescent. Standard c. 8 mm, broadly ovate, emarginate, glabrous, shorter than keel.{\i   S. Bulgaria, Turkey-in-Europe}. Bu Tu. ({\i  W. Anatolia}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28      {\b 41. G. triacanthos} Brot., {\i  Phyt. Lusit.} 54 (1800). Erect shrub, with axillary spines. Leaves 3-foliolate; leaflets 3-8 × 1-2 mm, oblanceolate, subglabrous; without spinose stipules. Flowers in lax terminal or sometimes intercalary racemes. Lowest bracts c. 2 mm, simple, the uppermost much reduced. Calyx 2·5-4 mm, glabrous. Standard c. 6 mm, triangular, glabrous, shorter than the keel.{\i   W. part of Iberian peninsula.} Hs Lu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28     {\b 42. G. tridens} (Cav.) DC.,{\i   Prodr.}{\b  2}: 148 (1825) ({\i  G. gibraltarica} DC.). Like {\b 41} but some leaves simple and the stipules spinose.{\i   S.W. Spain.} Hs.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28     {\b 43. G. cupanii} Guss., {\i  Cat. Pl. Boccad. }77 (1821). Spreading shrub with axillary spines; young branches with dense patent hairs. Leaves 3-foliolate; leaflets 4-10 × 0·8-1·5 mm, narrowly elliptical, with sparse patent hairs. Flowers in lax terminal racemes, the flowering branches sometimes terminated by a spine. Bracts c. 2 mm, linear. Calyx 4-5 mm, with sparse hairs. standard c. 8 mm, triangular, glabrous, shorter than the keel. •{\i   Sicilia }({\i  Madonie}). Si.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    Sect. ASTEROSPARTUM Spach. Unarmed shrubs with simple or 3-foliolate leaves. Branches and leaves usually opposite or subopposite. Standard broadly or angular-ovate, equalling or shorter than the keel. Legume ovoid-acuminate to falcate. Seeds 1-2.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   {\b 44. G. radiata} (L.) Scop.,{\i   Fl. Carn.} ed. 2, {\b 2}: 51 (1772) ({\i  Cytisanthus radiatus} (L.) O.F. Lang). Erect shrub with opposite branches at almost every node. Leaves 3-foliolate, opposite; leaflets 5-20 × 2-4 mm, oblanceolate, sericeous beneath, subglabrous above. Flowers subopposite and subsessile in terminal clusters of 4-12. Lowermost flowers with simple, usually shortly 3-fid, scarious bracts much shorter than the flowers; bracteoles 1-3 mm. Calyx 4-6 mm, the lips about as long as the tube. Standard 8-14 mm, broadly ovate, as long as or slightly shorter than the keel, glabrous or with a median ridge of sericeous hairs.{\i   Calcicole. • S. Alps extending to E. Switzerland, C. Italy and W. Jugoslavia, and very locally to S.W. Romania and C. Greece.} Al Au Ga Gr He It Ju Rm.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 45. G. holopetala} (Fleischm. ex Koch) Bald.,{\i   Mem. Accad. Ist. Bologna} ser. 5, {\b 9}: 238 (1902). Like {\b 44} but with 2-4 flowers on each branch, the lowermost pair with leaf-like, 3-foliolate bracts; upper flowers (if any) with rudimentary bracts; bracteoles 2-3 mm; standard 8-10 mm, with dense sericeous hairs. {\i   • N.W. Jugoslavia.} Ju.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 46. G. hassertiana} (Bald.) Bald. ex Buchegger,{\i   Österr. Bot. Zeitschr.}{\b  62}: 416 (1912). Like {\b 44} but leaflets 4-10 × 1-2 mm, markedly inrolled and sub-linear; flowers in terminal clusters of 2-4; lowermost bracts leaf-like, 3-foliolate; bracteoles 1 mm or less; standard c. 8 mm, with dense sericeous hairs. •{\i   Albania.} Al.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 47. G. dorycnifolia} Font Quer, {\i  Butll. Inst. Catalana Hist. Nat.}{\b  20}: 46 (1920). Like {\b 44} but some branches and leaves alternate; bracteoles 0·5 mm; calyx 2·5-3 mm, the lips 1/3 as long as the tube; standard c. 8 mm, slightly shorter than the keel. 2n = 48. •{\i   Islas Baleares} ({\i  Ibiza}). Bl.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 48. G. sessilifolia} DC..{\i   Prodr.}{\b  2}: 146 (1825) ({\i  G. trifoliolata} Janka). Erect shrub with few subopposite, flexuous branches, mainly from near the base. Leaves 3-foliolate, sessile or shortly petiolate; leaflets 5-25 × 1-2 mm, linear, often inrolled, sericeous beneath, glabrous above. Flowers alternate or subopposite, in long lax racemes. Bracts leaf-like, 3-foliolate, at least the lowest equalling or exceeding the flowers. Calyx 4-5 mm, with short, appressed, sericeous hairs; lips and upper teeth as long as the tube. Standard 7-10 mm, deltate or triangular, 1/2-1/3 as long as the keel, sericeous.{\i   Calcicole. S. Jugoslavia, S. & E. Bulgaria.} Bu Ju.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 49. G. nissana} Petrovic,{\i   Add. Fl. Agri Nyss.} 51 (1885). Like {\b 48} but branches, both surfaces of the leaves, calyx and standard with dense, long, patent hairs; leaflets of the main cauline leaves 2-6 mm wide, linear-oblanceolate to elliptical, not inrolled. •{\i   S. Jugoslavia.} Ju.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 50. G. ephedroides} DC.,{\i   Mém. Lég.} t. 36 (1825). Shrub 50-100 cm. Leaves 3-foliolate, caducous; leaflets 4-15 × 2-3 mm, sericeous on both surfaces. Flowers alternate or subopposite in lax racemes. Lowermost bracts 3-foliolate, uppermost simple. Calyx 3-6 mm, sericeous; lips and upper teeth about as long as the tube. Standard 7-10 mm, broadly ovate or rhombic, c. 2/3 as long as the keel, sparsely sericeous.{\i   Sardegna, Sicilia, S. Italy} ({\i  Ponza}). ?Co It Sa Si
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 51. G. aetnensis} (Biv.) DC.,{\i   Prodr.}{\b  2}: 150 (1825). Like {\b 50} but up to 500 cm; leaves simple, fugacious; bracts leaf-like, fugacious; calyx c. 3 mm, subglabrous; upper teeth obtuse and c. 1/3 as long as the tube; lower teeth minute; standard subglabrous. •{\i   Sardegna, Sicilia.} Sa Si.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 52. G. spartioides} Spach, {\i  Ann. Sci. Nat.} ser. 3 (Bot.), {\b 2}: 243 (1844) ({\i  G. retamoides} Spach ex Cosson). Erect shrub 30-100 cm, with alternate and opposite branches. Leaves 3-8 × 2-3 mm, simple, elliptical, sericeous on the lower surface. Flowers usually clustered in interrupted racemes. Calyx 2·5-4 mm, sericeous, the lips about as long as the tube. Standard 7-9 mm, rhombic, glabrous or sparsely sericeous.{\i   S. Spain.} Hs. ({\i  N.W. Africa}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 53. G. haenseleri} Boiss.,{\i   Elenchus} 31 (1838). Like {\b 52} but 100-200 cm; flowers solitary or in clusters; calyx c. 6 mm, somewhat inflated; standard 10-12 mm, with a median sericeous band. •{\i   S. Spain}. Hs.
\par

\par
99}
\par