{\rtf1\ansi \deff4\deflang1033{\fonttbl{\f4\froman\fcharset0\fprq2 Times New Roman;}}{\colortbl;\red0\green0\blue0;\red0\green0\blue255;\red0\green255\blue255;\red0\green255\blue0;\red255\green0\blue255;\red255\green0\blue0;\red255\green255\blue0;\red255\green255\blue255;\red0\green0\blue128;\red0\green128\blue128;\red0\green128\blue0;\red128\green0\blue128;\red128\green0\blue0;\red128\green128\blue0;\red128\green128\blue128;\red192\green192\blue192;}{\stylesheet{\widctlpar \f4\fs20\lang2057 \snext0 Normal;}{\*\cs10 \additive Default Paragraph Font;}}{\info{\author dddd}{\operator dddd}{\creatim\yr1998\mo11\dy11\hr17\min31}{\revtim\yr1998\mo11\dy11\hr17\min31}{\version2}{\edmins0}{\nofpages3}{\nofwords1046}{\nofchars5963}{\*\company  }{\vern57431}}\widowctrl\ftnbj\aenddoc\hyphcaps0 \fet0\sectd \linex0 {\*\pnseclvl1\pnucrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl2\pnucltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl3\pndec\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl4\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl5\pndec\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl6\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl7\pnlcrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl8\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl9\pnlcrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}
\pard\plain \ \f4\fs20\lang2057 {\fs28    }{\b\fs28 11. A. azurea}{\fs28  Miller,}{\i\fs28  Gard. Dict.}{\fs28  ed. 8, no. 9 (1768) (}{\i\fs28 A. italica }{\fs28 Retz.). Perennial, hispid with dense, patent, rigid or soft, often tubercle-based hairs; stems 20-150 cm, erect. Leaves (50-)100-300 \'d7 (10-)15-50 mm. Cymes many; pedicels 1-3 mm, up to 10(-15) mm in fruit; bracts shorter than calyx. Calyx 6-8 (-10) mm, up to 18 mm in fruit, divided almost to the base into linear, acute lobes. Corolla violet or deep blue; tube 6-10 mm, slightly exceeding or shorter than calyx; limb (8-)10-15 mm in diameter; stamens inserted at top of tube, overlapping scales. Nutlets (6-)7-10 \'d7 2-3 mm, oblong or oblong-obovoid, erect. }{\i\fs28 S. & S.C. Europe; naturalized further north}{\fs28 . Al Bl Bu Co Cr Ga Gr Hs Hu It Ju Lu Rm Rs (W, K, E) Sa Si Tu [Au Cz Ge He].
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 12. A. aggregata}{\fs28  Lehm.,}{\i\fs28  Pl. Asperif.}{\fs28  395 (1818) (}{\i\fs28 Hormuzakia aggregata}{\fs28  (Lehm.) Gusuleac). Annual, densely hispid with long, white, mostly tubercle-based setae; stems (5-)10-50 cm, ascending, branched. Leaves (50-)70-150 \'d7 (4-)7-15 mm, linear-lanceolate, entire. Cymes more or less capitate, with subsessile flowers, oblong and dense in fruit; at least the lower bracts greatly exceeding calyx. Calyx c. 5 mm in flower, c. 8 mm in fruit, divided almost to the base into linear, obtuse lobes. Corolla blue; tube 6-8 mm; limb c. 5 mm in diameter; stamens inserted at top of tube, overlapping scales. Nutlets c. 3 \'d7 4 mm, hemispherical.}{\i\fs28  Maritime sands. S. Sicilia. }{\fs28 \'86Gr Si. (}{\i\fs28 N. Africa, Asia.}{\fs28 )
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 13. A. thessala}{\fs28  Boiss. & Spruner in Boiss., }{\i\fs28 Diagn. Pl. Or. Nov.}{\b\fs28  2}{\fs28 (}{\b\fs28 11}{\fs28 ): 99 (1849). Annual, hispid with short, strongly tubercle-based hairs; stems 10-40 cm, erect. Leaves 20-50 \'d7 5-10 mm, lanceolate to oblong, entire. Cymes paired, short; pedicels very short; bracts about equalling calyx. Calyx 5-6 mm, divided almost to the base into linear, acute lobes. Corolla pale violet to whitish; tube c. 6 mm, equalling or up to 1\'bd times as long as calyx; limb 5-7 mm in diameter; scales with acute papillae; stamens inserted near top of tube and overlapping scales; style c. 1\'bd times as long as calyx. Nutlets c. 4 \'d7 1-1\'b75 mm, oblong-obovoid, erect. 2n = 24.}{\i\fs28  S.E. Europe, from E.C. Greece to Krym.}{\fs28  Bu Gr Rm Rs (K) Tu.
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 14. A. pusilla}{\fs28  Gusuleac, }{\i\fs28 Bul. Fac. Sti. Cernauti}{\b\fs28  1}{\fs28 : 109 (1927). Like }{\b\fs28 13}{\fs28  but leaves spathulate-oblanceolate, weakly dentate; calyx c. 7 mm; scales with long hairs; nutlets c. 3 \'d7 4 mm, obliquely ovoid.}{\i\fs28  E. Krym.}{\fs28  Rs (K). (}{\i\fs28 Caucasus}{\fs28 .)
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 15. A. macrosyrinx}{\fs28  Rech. fil.,}{\i\fs28  \'d6sterr. Bot. Zeitschr.}{\b\fs28  107}{\fs28 : 471 (1960). Like }{\b\fs28 13}{\fs28  but leaves linear-lanceolate, weakly repand-dentate; calyx 6-7 mm; corolla blue; tube 12-15 mm, twice as long as calyx; nutlets c. 3 \'d7 4 mm, obliquely ovoid. \bullet }{\i\fs28  S. Greece}{\fs28  (}{\i\fs28 Attiki}{\fs28 ). Gr.
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 16. A. macedonica}{\fs28  Degen & Dorfler,}{\i\fs28  Denkschr. Akad. Wiss. Math.-Nat. Kl.}{\fs28  (}{\i\fs28 Wien}{\fs28 )}{\b\fs28  64}{\fs28 : 730 (1897). Annual or biennial, hirsute with tubercle-based hairs; stems up to 20 cm, ascending. Leaves 50-120 \'d7 7-12 mm, linear-oblong or -lanceolate. Cymes solitary, short; pedicels 5-10 mm; bracts exceeding calyx. Calyx c. 5 mm, divided almost to the base into linear, subacute lobes. Corolla blue; tube 1-2 mm, much shorter than limb; limb 5-7 mm in diameter. Nutlets c. 2 \'d7 4 mm, obliquely ovoid. \bullet }{\i\fs28  Macedonia.}{\fs28  Gr Ju.
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 17. A. stylosa}{\fs28  Bieb.,}{\i\fs28  Fl. Taur.-Cauc.}{\b\fs28  1}{\fs28 : 123 (1808). Annual, with sparse, stoutish, short, tubercle-based hairs; stems 10-40 cm, erect. Leaves 20-50(-100) \'d7 4-15(-20) mm, oblong or oblong-lanceolate, often denticulate. Cymes paired, short; pedicels very short, up to 5(-10) mm in fruit; bracts shorter than calyx. Calyx c. 5 mm, up to 9 mm in fruit, divided almost to the base into linear-lanceolate, subobtuse lobes. Corolla violet-blue; tube 8-10 mm, 1\'bd-3 times as long as calyx; limb 7-10 mm in diameter; scales with subglobose papillae; style 2-3 times as long as calyx after anthesis. Nutlets c. 3 \'d7 2 mm, obliquely ovoid. }{\i\fs28 S.E. Europe, from N. Greece and Albania to Krym.}{\fs28  Al Bu Gr Rm Rs (W, K) Tu.
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 18. A. spruneri}{\fs28  Boiss., }{\i\fs28 Diagn. Pl. Or. Nov.}{\b\fs28  2}{\fs28 (}{\b\fs28 11}{\fs28 ): 98 (1849). Like }{\b\fs28 17}{\fs28  but pedicels c. 5 mm, equalling or exceeding calyx at anthesis; corolla-tube shorter or up to 1\'bc as long as calyx; scales with elongate, cylindrical papillae; style not more than 1\'bd times as long as calyx. \bullet }{\i\fs28  N.W. part of Aegean region.}{\fs28  Gr.
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 19. A. barrelieri}{\fs28  (All.) Vitman,}{\i\fs28  Summa Pl.}{\fs28  }{\b\fs28 1}{\fs28 : 388 (1789). Perennial, hispid with stout or slender, patent or appressed, often slightly tubercle-based hairs; stems (20-)50-80 cm, erect. Leaves 30-70(-120) \'d7 (5-)10-15(-30) mm, oblong-spathulate to oblong-lanceolate or almost linear, subentire. Cymes many, in a paniculate inflorescence; pedicels 2-5(-7) mm; bracts mostly shorter than calyx. Calyx 2-3 mm, up to 6 mm in fruit, divided to \'bd or almost to the base into lingulate, very obtuse or subspathulate lobes. Corolla blue or bluish-violet; tube 1-1\'b75 mm, much shorter than limb; limb 7-10 mm in diameter; style very short; scales with short, cylindrical papillae. Nutlets 2-4 mm, ovoid, erect. }{\i\fs28 From Italy eastwards to C. Ukraine. }{\fs28 Al Bu Hu It Ju Rm Rs (W, ?K) [ ?Cz].
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 20. A. serpentinicola}{\fs28  Rech. fil.,}{\i\fs28  \'d6sterr. Bot. Zeitschr.}{\b\fs28  107}{\fs28 : 472 (1960). Like }{\b\fs28 19}{\fs28  but caespitose; stems up to 25 cm; leaves up to 7 mm wide; corolla-limb c. 5 mm in diameter. }{\i\fs28 On basic rocks. \bullet  Macedonia.}{\fs28  Gr Ju.
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 21. A. aegyptiaca}{\fs28  (L.) DC.,}{\i\fs28  Prodr.}{\b\fs28  10}{\fs28 : 48 (1846). Annual, hispid with stout, tubercle-based hairs; stems 5-30 cm, procumbent or ascending. Leaves 25-40 \'d7 10-15 mm, oblong-ovate to -lanceolate, denticulate to sinuate-dentate. Cymes very lax, leafy; pedicels 2-3 mm, elongating and recurved in fruit; bracts leaf-like, exceeding calyx. Calyx c. 5 mm, divided almost to the base into linear-lanceolate, obtuse lobes. Corolla pale yellow; tube c. 4 mm, straight, slightly shorter than calyx; limb 3-5 mm in diameter, with 5 slightly unequal lobes; stamens inserted at about the middle of the tube, 2 higher than the other 3. Nutlets 4-5 \'d7 2-3 mm, ovoid, erect. }{\i\fs28 S. part of Aegean region.}{\fs28  Cr Gr ?Si.
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 22. A. arvensis}{\fs28  (L.) Bieb., }{\i\fs28 Fl. Taur.-Cauc.}{\b\fs28  1}{\fs28 : 123 (1808) (}{\i\fs28 Lycopsis arvensis}{\fs28  L.). Annual, hispid with mostly tubercle based hairs; stems 10-60 cm, ascending. Leaves (15-)30-100(-150) \'d7 (3-)5-20(-25) mm, linear-lanceolate to broadly lanceolate, undulate, more or less dentate. Cymes several, short, bracteate throughout; pedicels very short, up to 10 mm in fruit; bracts longer or shorter than calyx. Calyx 4-5 mm, up to 10(-15) mm in fruit, divided almost to the base into linear-lanceolate, acute lobes. Corolla blue, rarely whitish; tube 4-7 mm, about equalling calyx, curved; limb 4-6 mm in diameter, with 5 unequal lobes; stamens inserted at or below middle of tube. Nutlets 1\'b75-2 \'d7 3-4 mm, obliquely ovoid. 2n = 48. }{\i\fs28 Most of Europe.}{\fs28  Al Au Be Bl Br Bu Co Cz Da Fe Ga Ge Gr *Hb He Ho Hs Hu It Ju Lu No Po Rm Rs (N, B, C, W, K, E) *Sa Si Su [Fa].
\par 
\par  (}{\b\fs28 a}{\fs28 ) Subsp. }{\b\fs28 arvensis}{\fs28 (}{\i\fs28 Lycopsis arvensis}{\fs28  subsp. }{\i\fs28 occidentalis}{\fs28  Kusn.): Leaves linear-lanceolate or lanceolate, strongly undulate, dentate. Cymes remaining dense. Corolla-tube 5-7 mm, curved at about the middle. Nutlets sparsely tuberculate. 2n = 48. }{\i\fs28 Throughout the range of the species except for most of S.E. Europe}{\fs28 .
\par  (}{\b\fs28 b}{\fs28 ) Subsp. }{\b\fs28 orientalis}{\fs28 (L.) Nordh.,}{\i\fs28  Norsk Fl.}{\fs28  526 (1940) (}{\i\fs28 A. orientalis}{\fs28  (L.) Reichenb. fil., non L., }{\i\fs28 Lycopsis orientalis}{\fs28  L.): Leaves broadly lanceolate, scarcely undulate, subentire. Cymes
\par 
\par 108}
\par }