{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 4 × 3 mm. 2n = 14.{\i  From Belgium, E.C. Sweden and N. Russia southwards to S.E. France, Bulgaria and Krym.} Au Be Bu Cz Da Fe Ga Ge He Hu Ju Po Rm Rs (N, B, C, W, K, E) Su [Br].
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. P. officinalis} L.,{\i  Sp. Pl.} 135 (1753) ({\i P. officinalis} subsp.{\i  maculosa} (Hayne) Gams). Like {\b 1} but lamina of summer leaves up to 16 × 10 cm, with distinct white spots and with uniform setae; petiole up to 15 cm × 4 mm; glandular hairs on the inflorescence longer and denser. 2n = (14), 16. •{\i  From the Netherlands and S. Sweden southwards to N. Italy and Bulgaria.} Al Au Be Bu Cz Da Ga Ge He Ho Hu It Ju Po Rm Rs ( ?B, C, W) Su [Br].
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b 1} and {\b 2} have often been treated as subspecies of one species; the sterility of the hybrids makes treatment as separate species more appropriate.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Populations at the S. margin of the Alps differ from {\b 2} in their larger leaves and flowers and in being more glandular; they have the same chromosome number. They have been described as{\b  P. tridentina }Evers,{\i  Verh. Zool.-Bot. Ges. Wien}{\b  46}: 74 (1896) and may deserve subspecific status.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 3. P. rubra} Schott,{\i  Bot. Zeit. }{\b 9}: 395 (1851). Lamina of summer leaves up to 15 × 7 cm, contracted abruptly into petiole, unspotted or rarely somewhat spotted; upper surface rough with long setae; short setae and glandular hairs also present; petiole up to 13 cm. Cauline leaves decurrent for up to 0·5 cm, the lowermost distinctly smaller than the summer-leaves. Inflorescence with long, glandular hairs and short setae. Corolla remaining red; tube hairy inside below the ring of hairs. Nutlets up to 4·5 × 3 mm. 2n = 14.•{\i  Carpathians and mountains of Balkan peninsula.} Al Bu Ju Rm Rs (W).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 4. P. filarszkyana} Jáv.,{\i  Bot. Közl.}{\b  15}: 51 (1916). Like {\b 3} but lamina longer, narrowed gradually into petiole, always unspotted, with shorter and softer hairs; petiole shorter; leaf as a whole up to 30 × 6 cm; cauline leaves decurrent for 1-2 cm, the lowermost not much smaller than the summer leaves. 2n = 14.{\i  E. Carpathians.} Rm Rs (W).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 5. P. stiriaca} A. Kerner,{\i  Monogr. Pulm.} 36 (1878). Lamina of summer leaves up to 22 × 8 cm, narrowed gradually into petiole, almost always white-spotted; upper surface rough, with unequal setae and glandular hairs; petiole up to 12 cm. Inflorescence with shorter setae and long glandular hairs. Corolla bright blue; tube obscurely hairy inside below the ring of hairs. Nutlets 3 × 2 mm. 2n = 18. •{\i  E. Alps.} Au ?Ju.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 6. P. mollis} Wulfen ex Hornem.,{\i  Hort. Hafn.}{\b  1}: 179 (1813) (incl. {\i P. montana} subsp.{\i  mollis} Gams). Summer leaves up to 60 × 12 cm, narrowed gradually into petiole, unspotted; the upper surface distinctly soft, with dense, slender, short hairs and usually scattered slender, unequal setae and glandular hairs; petiole shorter than or as long as lamina. Inflorescence densely glandular-viscid, often also with scattered setae. Corolla violet to blue-violet; tube densely hairy inside below the ring of hairs. Nutlets 5 × 4 mm. 2n = 18. {\i C. & S.E. Europe.} Al Au Bu Cz ?Ga Ge Gr He Hu ?It Ju Po Rm Rs (C, W, E).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  The taxonomy, nomenclature and distribution of this widely distributed complex are not yet clear; the characters of the many taxa that have been described are difficult to define. The very softly hairy{\b  P. mollissima} A. Kerner,{\i  Monogr. Pulm.} 47 (1878) ({\i P. mollis} subsp. {\i mollissima }(A. Kerner) Nyman, {\i P. media} Host pro parte), which occurs mainly in E.C. & E. Europe, as well as{\b  P. auriculata} (Boiss.) Halácsy, {\i Consp. Fl. Graec.}{\b  2}: 331 (1902), from a few isolated localities in Greece, are not clearly distinguishable from the type from S. Germany. In the mountains of E. & C. Europe, more hispid and less softly hairy plants are found ({\i P. montana} auct., non Lej.); the most characteristic of these, from the N. Alps, also have 2n = 18. The position of the plants from E. Europe with blue flowers or narrow leaves or both is also obscure; these have been described as{\b  P. montana} subsp. {\b porciusii} Gusuleac in Savul.,{\i  Fl. Rep. Pop. Romane}{\b  7}: 643 (1960) ({\i P. dacica} Simonkai pro parte) and var.{\i  pseudoangustifolia} Gusuleac. A chromosome number of 2n = 14 has been reported for similar plants from the U.S.S.R., and of 2n = 28 for a plant from Romania.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 7. P. vallarsae} A. Kerner,{\i  Monogr. Pulm.} 33 (1878). Lamina of summer leaves up to 20 × 10 cm, usually undulate, rather abruptly narrowed into petiole, often with distinct bright green or whitish, often confluent spots, rarely almost unspotted; surface very soft, with very dense, short, fine hairs, with a few long setae and glandular hairs. Petiole up to 18 cm, broadly winged above. Inflorescence densely glandular-hairy, viscid, with setae and also short hairs. Corolla violet; tube hairy inside below the ring of hairs. Nutlets 4·5 × 3·5 mm. 2n = 22. •{\i  Italy.} It.
\par

\par
    {\b 8. P. affinis} Jordan in F. W. Schultz,{\i  Arch. Fl. Fr. Allem. }321 (1854). Lamina of summer leaves up to 18 × 9 cm, abruptly narrowed into petiole, with white spots, very rough, with very short broad-based setae, also with scattered longer setae and glandular hairs. Petiole up to 18 cm, narrowly winged. Inflorescence with long glandular hairs and unequal setae. Corolla violet to blue-violet; tube glabrous inside below the ring of hairs. Nutlets up to 4 × 2·5 mm. 2n = 22. •{\i  C. & W. France, N. Spain.} Ga Hs.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b  P. alpestris} Lamotte, {\i Prodr. Fl. Centr. Fr.} 535 (1881) from S.C. France has 2n = 22 but differs from {\b 8} in its more or less unspotted summer leaves and red-violet corolla; its status awaits investigation.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 9. P. saccharata} Miller, {\i Gard. Dict.} ed. 8, no. 3 (1768) ({\i P. tuberosa} prol. confusa Rouy,{\i  P. picta} Rouy). Lamina of the summer leaves up to 27 × 10 cm, narrowing rather gradually into the petiole, usually with conspicuous and confluent white spots, with more or less dense, unequal and rather fine short hairs, as well as long, rather slender setae and glandular hairs. Corolla red-violet to dark violet; tube hairy inside below the ring of hairs. Nutlets 4 × 3 mm. 2n = 22. •{\i  S.E. France, N. & C. Appennini}. Ga It [Be].
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   This species appears to be connected by transitional forms with {\b 7} and {\b 8} in the zones of overlap. It differs from {\b 7} and{\b  8 }especially in the indumentum and in the size of the leaves. As the three species have the same chromosome number, introgression is a possibility, but this has not been demonstrated experimentally.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 10. P. montana} Lej., {\i Fl. Spa}{\b  1}: 98 (1811) ({\i P. tuberosa} auct., non Schrank,{\i  P. vulgaris} Mérat pro parte,{\i  P. angustifolia} subsp.{\i  tuberosa }Gams pro parte). Summer leaves up to 50 × 12·5 cm, elongate-lanceolate, gradually narrowing to the base, unspotted or rarely with indistinct green spots; the upper surface with unequal setae and scattered glandular hairs. Cauline leaves cordate, ovate, acute. Inflorescence with many setae and long glandular hairs. Corolla blue; tube hairy inside below the ring of hairs. Nutlets 4·5 × 3·5 mm. 2n = 22. •{\i  W.& W.C.Europe.} Be Ga Ge He †Ho.
\par

\par
101}
\par