{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 the uppermost ovate to broadly lanceolate, sessile. Leaves and stems with rigid setae arising from more or less prominent white tubercles. Inflorescence rather lax. Calyx 6-8 mm at anthesis, scarcely accrescent. Corolla 11-20 mm, blue to bluish-violet, with 3-4 exserted stamens.{\i  Coastal regions of S. Spain and S. Portugal.} Hs Lu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 16. E. rosulatum} Lange, {\i Ind. Sem. Horto Haun.}{\b  1857}: 22 (1857). Erect, hispid perennial 30-70 cm, with 1 to several flowering stems. Leaves 20-80 × 5-25 mm, ovate to lanceolate, sessile, with more or less short, appressed to patent setae. Inflorescence very laxly paniculate with prominent leaf-like bracts. Calyx 6-9 mm at anthesis, 10-14 mm in fruit. Corolla 11-25 mm, usually with a narrow tube, shortly oblique to almost regular, pinkish-violet, with 3-4 exserted stamens. •{\i  Portugal, N.W. Spain.} Hs Lu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 17. E. parviflorum} Moench,{\i  Meth.} 423 (1794) ({\i E. calycinum} Viv.). Hispid annual or biennial 10-40 cm, with several to many ascending or erect flowering stems. Leaves with sparse to dense appressed setae; the basal 55-120 × 5-25 mm, spathulate to oblanceolate, long-petiolate; the cauline obovate or oblong, the uppermost sessile. Calyx 6-8 mm at anthesis, up to 15 mm with wide lobes in fruit. Corolla 10-13 mm, pale or dark blue, with all the stamens included. 2n = 16.{\i  Mediterranean region}. Al Bl Co Cr Ga Gr Hs It Ju ?Lu Sa Si.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 18. E. arenarium} Guss., {\i Ind. Sem. Horto Boccad.} 5 (1826). Hispid biennial 10-25 cm, with several to many ascending flowering stems. Leaves with whitish, short appressed setae; the basal 30-60 × 5-14 mm, spathulate, long-petiolate; the cauline spathulate, elliptical or oblong, the uppermost sessile. Calyx 5-7 mm at anthesis, up to 10 mm in fruit, with the lobes remaining narrow. Corolla 6-11 mm, dark blue, with all the stamens included.{\i  Dunes and sandy fields near the sea. Mediterranean region.} Bl Cr Gr It ?Lu Sa Si [Ga].
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc {\b 15.           Pulmonaria}             L.
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc By H. Merxmüller & W. Sauer.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Perennial herbs with creeping rhizome and simple stems. Flowers heterostylous, in terminal, bracteate cymes. Calyx lobed to c. 1/3, 5-angled. Corolla red, blue or violet, infundibuliform, without scales or invaginations but with 5 tufts of hairs in the throat meeting to form a ring. Stamens included, inserted in the throat or in the middle of the tube. Style included; stigma capitate or somewhat bifid. Nutlets ovoid, erect, smooth, hairy, sometimes glabrescent, contracted at the base above a distinct collar-like ring.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  In most modern Floras, the variability in the genus is attributed to hybridization between 3 or 4 "basic species", but this is unlikely for two reasons. First, it does not agree with the chromosome counts which have been made; and secondly, in this genus, true hybrids between species with different chromosome numbers are always sterile.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Important considerations in determining the species are the rosette leaves which develop during flowering and fruiting (summer leaves), the extent to which the leaves are spotted (which may vary even in a single population), the effect of dimorphic heterostyly on flower-size and stamen-insertion, and the interior of the corolla-tube, which may be glabrous or hairy below the tufts of hairs.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  All species are found in deep, humus-rich soil, usually in shade, but some ({\b 12}, {\b 13}, {\b 14}) also occur in sunny places.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Literature: B. J. C. Dumortier,{\i  Bull. Soc. Bot. Belg.}{\b  7}: 6-36 (1868). A. Kerner,{\i  Monographia Pulmonariarum.} Oeniponte. 1878. I.T. Tarnavschi,{\i  Bul. Fac. Sti. Cernauti}{\b  9}: 47-122 (1935). B. Pawlowski, {\i Acta Soc. Bot. Polon. }{\b 31}: 229-238 (1962). H. Merxmüller & J. Grau,{\i  Rev. Roum. Biol. }({\i Sér. Bot.}){\b  14}: 57-63 (1969).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Summer leaves cordate or truncate, long-petiolate, very
\par
  rough, with dense, small aculeoli
\par
2 Summer leaves unspotted or with faint green spots;
\par
  lamina shorter than petiole .............................................................. {\b 1. obscura}
\par
2 Summer leaves white-spotted; lamina longer than petiole ......... {\b 2. officinalis}
\par
1 Summer leaves not cordate, narrowing abruptly or ± 
\par
  gradually into petiole
\par
3 Flowers red at maturity
\par
4 Leaves 1½-3 times as long as wide; lamina abruptly
\par
  contracted into petiole, roughly hairy ................................................. {\b 3. rubra}
\par
4 Leaves 2½-5 times as long as wide; lamina narrowing 
\par
  gradually into petiole, softly hairy ........................................... {\b 4. filarszkyana}
\par
3 Flowers violet or blue at maturity
\par
5 Summer leaves soft, with dense indumentum of very short, slender
\par
  hairs; setae scattered; inflorescence glandular viscid
\par
6 Summer leaves usually conspicuously spotted; lamina 
\par
  undulate, rather abruptly contracted into petiole;
\par
  the short hairs c. 0·1 mm ............................................................... {\b 7. vallarsae}
\par
6 Summer leaves unspotted; lamina not undulate,
\par
  gradually narrowed into petiole; the short hairs c. 0·3 mm ............... {\b 6. mollis}
\par
5 Summer leaves rough, setose, without dense indumentum
\par
  of very short, slender hairs; inflorescence not viscid
\par
7 Summer leaves with stiff, uniform setae and without 
\par
  long glandular hairs
\par
8 Summer leaves 6-9 times as long as wide, unspotted;
\par
  inflorescence with many setae and few glandular hairs ........ {\b 12. angustifolia}
\par
8 Summer leaves 3-6 times as long as wide, usually spotted;
\par
  inflorescence with equal numbers of setae and long,
\par
  glandular hairs ................................................................................ {\b 14. kerneri}
\par
7 Summer leaves with both long and short setae and with
\par
  scattered glandular hairs
\par
9 Summer leaves 6-9 times as long as wide, usually spotted;
\par
  inflorescence remaining dense ................................................... {\b 11. longifolia}
\par
9 Summer leaves 2-6 times as long as wide; inflorescence lax 
\par
  after flowering 10 Summer leaves usually distinctly spotted
\par
11 Flowers bright blue at maturity ..................................................... {\b 5. stiriaca}
\par
11 Flowers reddish-violet or bluish-violet at maturity
\par
12 Lamina of summer leaves abruptly contracted into petiole; 
\par
   the short setae uniform, thickened at the base, erect ........................ {\b 8. affinis}
\par
12 Lamina of summer leaves ± gradually contracted into petiole;
\par
   the shorter setae unequal, slender, erecto-patent ....................... {\b 9. saccharata}
\par
10 Summer leaves not, or rarely, faintly spotted; flowers
\par
   blue at maturity
\par
13 Upper cauline leaves ovate, with wide, almost cordate base;
\par
   corolla-tube hairy inside below the ring of hairs ........................ {\b 10. montana}
\par
13 Upper cauline leaves lanceolate, usually with a 
\par
   contracted base; corolla-tube glabrous inside below 
\par
   the ring of hairs ............................................................................. {\b 13. visianii}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. P. obscura} Dumort.,{\i  Bull. Soc. Bot. Belg.}{\b  4}: 341 (1865) ({\i P. officinalis} subsp. {\i obscura} (Dumort.) Murb.). Lamina of summer leaves up to 16 × 8 cm, cordate, unspotted or with faint, green spots; upper surface very rough, with scattered, unequal setae, occasional glandular hairs, and dense, small aculeoli; petiole up to 25 cm × 3 mm. Inflorescence with setae, glandular hairs and short hairs. Corolla reddish- to bluish-violet; corolla tube glabrous inside below the ring of hairs. Nutlets up to
\par

\par
100}
\par