{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28  A misunderstood species whose area is not yet clear because of confusion with {\b 6}, {\b 9}, {\b 11} and {\b 13}. Especially uncertain is the status of plants from S. Germany (whence {\i P. tuberosa} was described) which have been found to have 2n = 18; similar plants seem to occur in E. France and C. Germany.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 11. P. longifolia} (Bast.) Boreau, {\i Fl. Centre Fr}. ed. 3, {\b 2}: 460 (1857) ({\i P. vulgaris} Mérat pro parte, {\i P. angustifolia }auct., non L.). Summer leaves up to 50 × 6 cm, narrowly lanceolate, very gradually narrowed to the base, usually with white spots, rarely (especially in the far west) unspotted or with faint green spots; the upper surface with more or less equal setae and few glands, the lower surface with unequal setae and more glandular. Inflorescence remaining dense throughout the flowering period, with long setae and a few long glandular hairs. Corolla violet to blue-violet (often almost blue in the far west); tube glabrous inside below the ring of hairs. Nutlets 4 × 3 mm. 2n = 14. •{\i  W. Europe, northwards to England.} Br Ga Hs Lu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  In W. & C. France, unspotted blue-flowered plants with 2n = 14 are found; they have usually been confused with {\b 12}. Special taxonomic treatment may be necessary.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 12. P. angustifolia} L., {\i Sp. Pl}. 135 (1753) ({\i P. azurea} Besser, {\i P. angustifolia} subsp.{\i  azurea} (Besser) Gams). Summer leaves up to 40 × 5 cm, narrowly lanceolate, very gradually narrowed to the base, unspotted, with equal setae, more or less eglandular. Cauline leaves narrowly lanceolate, sessile, with narrow base. Inflorescence with setae and scattered glands. Calyx in fruit very slender and short. Corolla bright blue; tube glabrous inside below the ring of hairs. Nutlets 4·5 × 3·5 mm. 2n = 14.{\i  N.E., E. & E.C. Europe; isolated stations in W.C. Europe and the S.W. Alps.} Au ?Bu Cz Da Ga Ge Hu It ?Ju Po Rs (B, C, W, E) Su.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Many records of this species from S.E. Europe are of narrow leaved variants of{\b  6}; records from the E. Alps and neighbouring territory to the south-east are referable to {\b 13}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 13. P. visianii} Degen & Lengyel in Degen,{\i  Fl. Veleb. }{\b 2}: 569 (1937) ({\i P. media} Host pro parte,{\i  P. angustifolia} auct., non L.). Like {\b 12} but summer leaves up to 30 × 6 cm, unspotted or rarely with indistinct green spots, with unequal setae and scattered glands; inflorescence hispid and glandular; fruiting calyx stout; corolla deep blue-violet to blue; nutlets 3·5 × 3 mm. 2n = 20. •{\i  C. & E. Alps, mountains of N.W. Jugoslavia.} Au ?Ga He It Ju.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 14. P. kerneri} Wettst.,{\i  Yerh. Zool.-Bot. Ges. Wien} {\b 38}: 559 (1888). Summer leaves up to 60 × 10 cm, lanceolate, very gradually narrowed to the base, thick, coriaceous, usually with distinct white spots, rarely more or less unspotted, with stiff setae and scattered short glands. Cauline leaves lanceolate, sessile, with broad base. Corolla bright blue, tube glabrous inside below the ring of hairs. Nutlets 5 × 3 mm. 2n = 26.{\i  N.E. Alps.} Au.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc {\b 16.            Nonea}           Medicus
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc By A.O. Chater.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Annual or perennial, hispid herbs. Flowers in bracteate, terminal cymes. Calyx lobed to 1/4-2/3, accrescent. Corolla yellow, purple, brown or white, with cylindrical tube and infundibuliform limb, with 5 hairy or laciniate scales, or 5 tufts of hairs, or a ring of hairs in the throat. Stamens included in corolla-tube, inserted at about or above the middle of the tube. Style included; stigma entire to bifid. Nutlets ovoid to reniform, erect or oblique, smooth or ribbed, with a thickened collar-like ring at the base.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 All are plants of dry, often waste places.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Nutlets longer than wide
\par
2 Corolla yellow; nutlets rugose and reticulately ribbed ....................... {\b 1. lutea}
\par
2 Corolla blue, brown or purplish; nutlets smooth or 
\par
  weakly longitudinally ribbed ...................................................... {\b 2. obtusifolia}
\par
1 Nutlets wider than long
\par
3 Calyx-teeth at least ¾ as long as tube
\par
4 Flowers brownish-purple; nutlets constricted just above the base {\b 9. vesicaria}
\par
4 Flowers pale purplish, yellowish or white; nutlets not
\par
  constricted above the base
\par
5 Corolla purplish; leaves mostly less than 1 cm wide ..................... {\b 5. caspica}
\par
5 Corolla yellowish or white; leaves mostly more than 
\par
  1 cm wide ........................................................................................ {\b 4. pallens}
\par
3 Calyx-teeth c. 1/3 as long as tube
\par
6 Nutlets ± symmetrical, reniform ................................................ {\b 7. ventricosa}
\par
6 Nutlets asymmetrical, obliquely ovoid
\par
7 Limb of corolla more than 9 mm in diameter ............................ {\b 6. versicolor}
\par
7 Limb of corolla less than 9 mm in diameter
\par
8 Corolla (9-)10-14 mm, usually dark reddish- or blackish
\par
  purple; nutlets 2·5-3 × 3·5-5 mm ........................................................ {\b 3. pulla}
\par
8 Corolla 7-8 mm, pale blue or yellowish; nutlets 
\par
  c. 1·5 × 3 mm .............................................................................. {\b 8. micrantha}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. N. lutea} (Desr.) DC. in Lam. & DC.,{\i  Fl. Fr.} ed. 3, {\b 3}: 626 (1805). Setose-hispid and glandular-pubescent annual; stems 10-60 cm, erect or ascending, branched. Leaves 2-7 × 0·5-2 cm, obtuse or acute, entire or dentate. Calyx 6-10 mm at anthesis, 10-20 mm in fruit; teeth ½ as long to almost as long as tube. Corolla 7-12 mm; limb 5-15 mm in diameter, pale yellow, divided to c. ½ into ovate-orbicular lobes. Nutlets 3·5-6 mm, oblong-ellipsoid, rugose, ribbed; collar-like basal ring smooth. 2n = 14. {\i Ukraine and S.E. Russia; a frequent casual in parts of C. & S.E. Europe and locally naturalized.} Rs (W, E) [Hu Ju Rm].
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. N. obtusifolia} (Willd.) DC., {\i loc. cit.} (1805). Shortly setose-hispid, eglandular annual; stems 5-15 cm, ascending, usually simple. Leaves 3-5 × c. 1 cm, oblong to ovate-oblong, subentire, subobtuse. Calyx c. 5 mm at anthesis, 8-10 mm in fruit; teeth c. ½ as long as tube. Corolla e. 8 mm; limb 3-6 mm in diameter, blue, divided to c. ½ into ovate-orbicular lobes. Nutlets c. 3 mm, oblong-ovoid, erect, smooth, shiny, blackish; collar-like basal ring smooth.{\i  Aegean region and S.E. Bulgaria; naturalized in C. Italy}. Bu Gr [It].
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b  N. rosea} (Bieb.) Link,{\i  Enum. Hort. Berol. Alt.}{\b  1}: 167 (1821), from the Caucasus, with purplish or brownish corolla 15-18 mm long and often slightly ribbed nutlets, is a frequent casual in parts of W. & C. Europe.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 3. N. pulla} (L.) DC. in Lam. & DC., {\i Fl. Fr.} ed. 3, {\b 3}: 626 (1805). Grey-setose and more or less glandular-pubescent annual to perennial; stems 25-50 cm, erect, usually branched above. Leaves 3-12 × 0·7-2 mm, lanceolate to linear-lanceolate, acute, entire. Calyx 6-8 mm at anthesis, 9-12 mm in fruit; teeth c. 1 as long as tube. Corolla (9-)10-14 mm; limb 5-8 mm in diameter, dark reddish- or blackish-purple (rarely yellowish-white), divided to c. ¼ into broadly ovate lobes. Nutlets 2·5-3 × 3·5-5 mm, obliquely ovoid, ribbed; collar-like basal ring ribbed. 2n = 18, 20. {\i E. & E.C. Europe; locally naturalized further west and progressively extending its area westwards.} Au Bu Cz Ge Gr Hu *Ju Po Rm Rs (*N, *B, C, W, K, E) [Fe Ga He].
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Annual or biennial plants with long hairs on the pedicels, linear-lanceolate (not triangular-lanceolate) calyx-teeth, eglandular leaves and small nutlets have been called{\b  N. atra} Griseb., {\i Spicil. Fl. Rumel.}{\b  2}: 94 (1844), but there is poor correlation of these characters; such plants do not seem to merit formal taxonomic status.
\par

\par
102}
\par