{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. P. insularis} Pawl., {\i Fragm. Fl. Geobot.}{\b  17}: 45 (1971). Like {\b 1} but calyx-lobes usually obtuse; corolla-lobes 2-3 times as long as tube; corolla-scales in their lower part with long, slender papillae, at least 3 times as long as wide; base of filaments surrounded by a cup-shaped, lobed, rather long-ciliate scale. 2n = 28. •{\i  Islands of Aegean region.} Cr Gr.
\par

\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 3. P. circinalis} (Runemark) Pawl.,{\i  loc. cit}. 48 (1971) ({\i Symphytum circinale} Runemark). Like {\b 1} but corolla white; tube 4·5-6 mm; lobes 1½-2 times as long as tube, erecto-patent below, deflexed and spirally contorted above; lower marginal papillae of the corolla-scales 2-4 times as long as wide, the upper short and wide, deflexed. Stamens (9·5-)10-12(-13) mm, with 1 unilateral, lobed, rather long-ciliate scale or 2 opposite, laterally connected scales at the base; anthers 2-3·5 mm. 2n = 28.{\i  Greece} ({\i Evvoia; not recently collected}). Gr. ({\i Islands of E. Aegean}.)
\par

\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc {\b 20.               Brunnera}                 Steven
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc By A.O. Chater.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Perennial herbs. Flowers in ebracteate cymes in terminal panicles. Calyx lobed almost to the base, accrescent. Corolla blue or purple, very small, rotate, with campanulate tube, ovate-orbicular lobes and 5 ciliate scales wider than long closing the throat. Stamens included, inserted at the middle of the tube. Style included; stigma capitate. Nutlets oblong-obovoid, erect, rugose or ribbed, with a thickened collar-like ring at the base.
\par

\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Literature: M. Gusuleac,{\i  Bul. Fac. Sti. Cernauti}{\b  2}: 412-418 (1928);{\i  Feddes Repert.}{\b  29}: 44-46 (1931).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. B. macrophylla} (Adams) I. M. Johnston, {\i Contr. Gray Herb.} nov. ser., {\b 73}: 54 (1924). Appressed-pubescent throughout, and sparsely setose-hispid on stems and leaves; stems 20-50 cm erect, branched only in inflorescence. Basal leaves 5-20 cm cordate, long-petiolate; cauline leaves ovate, sessile. Pedicels 2-5 mm, up to 8 mm in fruit. Calyx c. 1 mm at anthesis, c. 2 mm in fruit; teeth linear-lanceolate, subacute. Corolla 3-4 mm; tube c. 1 mm; limb 3-4 mm in diameter, blue. Nutlets 2·5-4 mm, oblong-obovoid, slightly asymmetrical, rugose and somewhat longitudinally ribbed; collar-like basal ring ribbed.{\i  Cultivated for ornament and perhaps locally naturalized.} [ ?Br ?Cz. ({\i Caucasus.})
\par

\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc {\b 21.              Anchusa}             L.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc (incl.{\i  Lycopsis} L.)
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc By A.O. Chater.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Annual, biennial or perennial herbs, rarely woody at the base. Flowers in axillary and terminal cymes, bracteate usually throughout. Calyx lobed from 1/3 to almost to the base. Corolla purple, blue, yellow or white, with cylindrical, straight or curved tube and rotate to campanulate limb divided into equal or unequal lobes, with 5 ovate or oblong, papillose or hairy scales in throat. Stamens included or slightly exserted, variously inserted. Style included; stigma capitate. Nutlets ovoid to reniform or hemispherical, erect or oblique, reticulate or rugose, usually more or less tuberculate, with a thickened collar-like ring at the base.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Literature: M. Gusuleac, {\i Bul. Fac. Sti. Cernauti}{\b  1}: 72-123 (1927); {\i Feddes Repert.}{\b  26}: 286-322 (1929). W. Greuter,{\i  Candollea}{\b  20}: 192-210 (1965).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Corolla yellow
\par
2 Bracts exceeding flowers; nutlets 4-5 × 2-3 mm, erect .......... {\b 21. aegyptiaca}
\par
2 Bracts shorter than flowers; nutlets c. 2 × 4 mm, oblique
\par
3 Leaves mostly more than 10 mm wide .................................... {\b 10. officinalis}
\par
3 Leaves mostly less than 10 mm wide ....................................... {\b 3. ochroleuca}
\par
1 Corolla blue, violet, purplish or whitish
\par
4 Corolla zygomorphic, the tube curved, the limb oblique,
\par
  with 5 unequal lobes
\par
5 Filaments inserted at or below middle of corolla-tube;
\par
  cymes bracteate throughout ......................................................... {\b 22. arvensis}
\par
5 Filaments inserted above middle of corolla-tube; cymes
\par
  bracteate only at base
\par
6 Nutlets densely rugulose between the primary reticu-
\par
  lations; lobes of style obliquely truncate ........................................ {\b 23. cretica}
\par
6 Nutlets smooth between the primary reticulations; lobes
\par
  of style ± acute ........................................................................... {\b 24. variegata}
\par
4 Corolla actinomorphic
\par
7 Corolla-tube much shorter than limb
\par
8 Annual, inflorescence simple or once branched ................... {\b 16. macedonica}
\par
8 Perennial; inflorescence paniculate 
\par
9 Caespitose; leaves up to 7 mm wide ................................. {\b 20. serpentinicola}
\par
9 Not caespitose; most leaves at least 10 mm wide ..................... {\b 19. barrelieri}
\par
7 Corolla-tube equalling or longer than limb
\par
10 Calyx divided more or less to the base 
\par
11 Nutlets longer than wide
\par
12 Nutlets c. 4 mm; corolla-limb 5-7 mm in diameter ................... {\b 13. thessala}
\par
12 Nutlets at least 6 mm; corolla-limb (8-)10-15 mm in diameter .. {\b 11. azurea}
\par
11 Nutlets wider than long, or hemispherical
\par
13 Caespitose perennial with stems not more than 10 cm ............. {\b 4. cespitosa}
\par
13 Annual, biennial or perennial, not caespitose, with 
\par
   stems more than 10 cm
\par
14 Style 2-3 times as long as calyx; corolla-scales with 
\par
   subglobose papillae ....................................................................... {\b 17. stylosa}
\par
14 Style less than twice as long as calyx; corolla-scales
\par
   hairy or with cylindrical papillae
\par
15 Corolla-tube 12-15 mm, about twice as long as calyx ....... {\b 15. macrosyrinx}
\par
15 Corolla-tube less than 10 mm, not more than 1½ 
\par
   times as long as calyx
\par
16 Pedicels equalling or exceeding calyx at anthesis .................... {\b 18. spruneri}
\par
16 Pedicels shorter than calyx at anthesis
\par
17 Cymes capitate, with lower bracts much exceeding calyx-
\par
   nutlets ± hemispherical ............................................................ {\b 12. aggregata}
\par
17 Cymes ± elongate, with bracts not exceeding calyx;
\par
   nutlets obliquely ovoid
\par
18 Annual; cymes with c. 5 flowers ................................................. {\b 14. pusilla}
\par
18 Usually perennial; cymes with more than 5 flowers ............. {\b 10. officinalis}
\par
10 Calyx lobed to not more than 2/3.
\par
20 Most hairs on leaves tubercle-based ...................................... {\b 7. granatensis}
\par
20 Most hairs on leaves not tubercle-based ................................ {\b 10. officinalis}
\par
19 Calyx-teeth obtuse
\par
21 Bracts equalling or exceeding calyx .............................................. {\b 9. crispa}
\par
21 Bracts shorter than calyx
\par
22 Stamens inserted at top of corolla-tube and 
\par
   overlapping scales
\par
23 Plant with strongly tubercle-based setae .................................... {\b 8. calcarea}
\par
23 Plant pubescent and with setae which are mostly not
\par
   tubercle-based .............................................................................. {\b 5. undulata}
\par
22 Stamens inserted below top of tube and not or only
\par
   slightly overlapping scales
\par
24 Plant subglabrous or with setae less than 1 mm;
\par
   nutlets subreniform ....................................................................... {\b 2. gmelinii}
\par
24 Plant with hairs or setae more than 1 mm; nutlets
\par
   obliquely ovoid
\par
25 Plant with dense, stout, patent, white, mostly 
\par
   tubercle-based setae ........................................................................ {\b 6. sartorii}
\par
25 Plant pubescent and with setae which are mostly not 
\par
   conspicuously white or tubercle-based
\par
26 Stamens inserted at middle of tube and not nearly 
\par
  reaching scales ............................................................................... {\b 5. undulata}
\par
26 Stamens inserted above middle of tube and reaching 
\par
   base of scales ........................................................................... {\b 1. leptophylla}
\par

\par
106}
\par