{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 4. N. pallens} Petrovic,{\i  Add. Fl. Agri Nyss.} 129 (1885). Sparsely setose and glandular-pubescent annual; stems 10-40 cm, erect, branched. Leaves 4-9 × 1-2 cm, linear-lanceolate to elliptical, acute, entire. Cymes long. Calyx 5-8 mm at anthesis, 10-15 mm in fruit; teeth c. 1½ times as long as tube. Corolla c. 8 mm; limb 4-5 mm in diameter, pale yellow or white, divided to 1/3-1/4 into obovate lobes. Nutlets c. 2·5 × 4 mm, obliquely ovoid, rugose, ribbed; collar-like basal ring strongly ribbed. •{\i  S.E. Europe, from Albania to S. Ukraine.} Al Bu Ju Rm Rs (W).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 5. N. caspica} (Willd.) G. Don fil.,{\i  Gen. Syst.}{\b  4}: 336 (1837). Weakly setose and shortly glandular-pubescent annual; stems 5-30 cm, usually erect, branched. Leaves 2-10 × 0·5-1 cm, lanceolate to linear-lanceolate, acute, weakly dentate below, usually entire above. Calyx 6-8 mm at anthesis, 7-12 mm in fruit; teeth as long as tube. Corolla 8-12 mm; limb 4-5 mm in diameter, purplish, divided to c. 1/5 into lobes which are much wider than long. Nutlets c. 2 × 3-4 mm, obliquely ovoid, ribbed; collar-like basal ring ribbed.{\i  S.E. Russia, W. Kazakhstan.} Rs (E).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 6. N. versicolor} (Steven) Sweet, {\i Hort. Brit.} 292 (1827). Hispid annual or perennial, glandular-pubescent above; stems 20-40 cm, simple or branched above. Leaves 3-8 × 1-2·5 cm, lanceolate to linear-lanceolate, acute, usually entire. Calyx 6-8 mm at anthesis, 7-17 mm in fruit; teeth c. 1/3 as long as tube. Corolla 12-17 mm; limb 10-15 mm in diameter, purplish or violet, divided to c. 1/3 into lobes which are wider than long. Nutlets c. 3 × 4 mm, obliquely ovoid, ribbed; collar-like basal ring slightly ribbed.{\i  Naturalized in S. Fennoscandia.} [Da No Su.] ({\i Caucasus and E. Anatolia}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 7. N. ventricosa} (Sibth. & Sm.) Griseb., {\i Spicil. Fl. Rumel.}{\b  2}: 93 (1844) (incl. {\i N. alba} DC.). Hispid, eglandular-annual; stems 10-40 cm, ascending, little-branched. Leaves 2-7 × 0·5-1 cm, lanceolate to oblong-lanceolate, acute to subobtuse. Calyx c. 5 mm at anthesis, 8-12 mm and often very strongly inflated in fruit; teeth c. 1/3 as long as tube, often connivent in fruit. Corolla 7-8 mm; limb 4-5 mm in diameter, pale yellowish or white, divided to c. 1/3 into lobes which are wider than long. Nutlets 1·5-2 × 2·5-3·5 mm, reniform, symmetrical, rugose, ribbed, not constricted above the ribbed collar-like basal ring. {\i S. Europe}. Bu Ga Gr Hs It Ju Rs (K) Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 8. N. micrantha} Boiss. & Reuter, {\i Diagn. Pl. Nov. Hisp.} 21 (1842). Like {\b 7} but corolla-limb pale blue or yellowish, more deeply divided; nutlets c. 1·5 × 3 mm, obliquely ovoid, asymmetrical, strongly ribbed.{\i  E., C. & S. Spain.} Hs.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 9. N. vesicaria} (L.) Reichenb., {\i Fl. Germ. Excurs.} 338 (1831) ({\i N. nigricans} (Desf.) DC.). Setose-hispid and shortly glandular-pubescent annual or biennial; stems 15-50 cm, ascending, little-branched. Leaves 3-20 × 0·5-2·5 cm, lanceolate to linear-lanceolate, subacute, sometimes dentate below. Calyx 5-7 mm at anthesis, 10-15 mm in fruit; teeth as long as tube. Corolla 8-12 mm; limb 3-5 mm in diameter, brownish-purple, divided to c. ½ into lobes which are wider than long. Nutlets 2·5-3·5 × 3·5-4·5 mm, obliquely ovoid, strongly ribbed, constricted just above the strongly ribbed collar-like basal ring.{\i  S.W. Europe, Sicilia.} Bl Hs Lu Si.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc {\b 17.              Elizaldia}              Willk
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc By A.O. Chater.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Like{\i  Nonea} but corolla with a flange-like ring in the throat, without scales; stamens exserted from tube and reaching apex of corolla, inserted at apex of tube.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. E. calycina} (Roemer & Schultes) Maire,{\i  Bull. Soc. Hist. Nat. Afr. Nord}{\b  20}: 192 (1929) ({\i E. nonneoides} Willk.). Densely setose-hispid annual; stems c. 30 cm, ascending, branched at the base. Leaves 3-7 × 0·5-1·5 cm, linear-oblong or -lanceolate, acute, subentire. Flowers in dense, leafy cymes; pedicels 1·5-3 mm. Calyx c. 8 mm in flower, 12-16 mm and violet in fruit; teeth linear-lanceolate, 1½-2 times as long as tube. Corolla 10-12 mm; limb c. 5 mm in diameter, violet, with semicircular lobes. Nutlets c. 3 × 5 mm, obliquely ovoid, longitudinally and transversely ribbed, keeled, deeply excavate at base with a peglike attachment; collar-like basal ring strongly ribbed.{\i  Under bushes on maritime sands. S.W. Spain} ({\i near Cádiz}). Hs. ({\i N.W. Africa.})
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Not found recently, and perhaps extinct in Europe; the European plant is subsp.{\b  multicolor} (G. Kunze) Chater, {\i Bot. Jour. Linn. Soc.}{\b  64}: 69 (1971) ({\i Nonea multicolor} G. Kunze) which also occurs, with the typical subspecies, in N.W. Africa.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc {\b 18.             Symphytum}             L.
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc By B. Pawlowski.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Perennial, usually hispid herbs. Flowers in short ebracteate terminal cymes. Calyx lobed to ¼ or almost to the base, accrescent. Corolla variously coloured, with cylindrical tube and tubular-campanulate limb, with triangular to semicircular lobes much shorter than the rest of the corolla; throat with 5 long scales, usually with marginal papillae. Stamens included, inserted at about the middle of the tube; filaments not more than 1½ times as long as anthers. Style exserted; stigma very small, entire. Nutlets ovoid, erect, sometimes curved, usually verruculose and often rugose, concave at the base with a thickened collar-like ring.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  The number of the cauline leaves given in the descriptions does not include the pairs of leaves on the inflorescence-branches. The length of the filaments refers only to the part not concealed by the anther.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Literature: C. Bucknall, {\i Jour. Linn. Soc. London} ({\i Bot.}){\b  41}: 491-556 (1913). B. Pawlowski, {\i Fragm. Fl. Geobot.} {\b 7}: 327-356 (1961);{\i  op. cit.} {\b 17}: 17-37 (1971). G. E. Wickens,{\i  Notes Roy. Bot. Gard. Edinb.}{\b  29}: 157-180 (1969).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Nutlets smooth, shining; connective projecting beyond 
\par
  thecae; filament about as wide as anther ...................................... {\b 1. officinale}
\par
1 Nutlets minutely verrucose and ± reticulate-rugose;
\par
  connective usually not projecting beyond thecae;
\par
  filament narrower than anther
\par
2 Scales of corolla exserted
\par
3 Rhizome creeping, with tubers; corolla (excluding scales) 
\par
  (7-)8-11(-12) mm ....................................................................... {\b 13. bulbosum}
\par
3 Stock fusiform; corolla (excluding scales) 5-7 mm ............... {\b 14. ottomanum}
\par
2 Scales of corolla included
\par
4 Plant aculeolate at least on stems and on mid-vein of 
\par
  the leaves beneath
\par
5 Leaves all petiolate, or the upper subsessile but not
\par
  amplexicaul or decurrent ............................................................... {\b 2. asperum}
\par
5 Upper leaves sessile and shortly decurrent or at least
\par
  amplexicaul ........................................................................... {\b 3.} × {\b uplandicum}
\par
4 Plant pubescent to rigidly hispid, but not aculeolate
\par
6 Scales of corolla lingulate, not or slightly widened in
\par
  the lower part, rounded or ± emarginate at apex, the 
\par
  marginal papillae dense above, sparse below
\par
7 Rhizome creeping, slender, producing ascending or pro-
\par
  cumbent non-flowering and flowering stems ................................ {\b 8. ibiricum}
\par
7 Rhizome not creeping, or stock fusiform; non-flowering 
\par
  stems absent 
\par
8 Calyx lobed to 1/4-2/5 ................................................................ {\b 12. orientale}
\par
8 Calyx lobed to at least 3/5
\par

\par
103}
\par