{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 2·5-5 times as long as wide; midrib usually concealed by tomentum on lower surface; stamens (5-)8(-14).{\i  Naturalized locally in Britain and Germany.} ({\i North America, W. Greenland}.)
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28\qc {\b 7.       Rhodothamnus}         Reichenb.
\par 

\pard\f0\fs24\qc By D.A. Webb.
\par 

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Evergreen dwarf shrubs; leaves alternate, subsessile. Flowers 5-merous, on long pedicels in the axils of foliage-leaves. Sepals connate at the base. Corolla rotate, with short tube and deeply lobed limb. Stamens 10; anthers without appendages. Fruit a septicidal capsule; seeds with close-fitting testa.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. R. chamaecistus} (L.) Reichenb. in Moessler,{\i  Handb.} ed. 2, {\b 1}: 688 (1827). Dwarf shrub up to 40 cm, with numerous ascending branches. Leaves 5-10 × 2-4 mm, elliptic-oblanceolate, entire or obscurely crenulate, usually glabrous except for stiff, white, marginal cilia. Flowers in subterminal groups of 1-3; pedicels glandular-pubescent. Calyx-lobes 5-6 mm, oblong-lanceolate; corolla 20-30 mm in diameter, pale pink; stamens c. 12 mm; style 15-20 mm. 2n = 24.{\i  Dry, stony slopes and screes, mostly} 1000-2000 {\i m; calcicole. • E. Alps.} Au Ge It Ju.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28\qc {\b 8.        Kalmia }         L.
\par 
 
\pard\f0\fs24\qc By D.A. Webb.
\par 

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Evergreen shrubs; leaves alternate to whorled. Flowers 5-merous, in small, umbel-like corymbs; bracts small, herbaceous, persistent. Sepals connate at the base. Corolla with a short tube and cup-shaped limb, only slightly lobed, plicate towards the base so as to form 10 pouches in which the anthers lie before dehiscence. Stamens 10, shorter than corolla; anthers without appendages. Fruit a septicidal capsule; seeds with loose-fitting testa.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 Corymbs axillary; leaves ± flat, green or ferruginous 
\par 
 beneath ...................................................................................... {\b 1. angustifolia}
\par 
Corymbs terminal; leaves with revolute margins, glaucous
\par 
 or whitish beneath .......................................................................... {\b 2. polifolia}
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. K. angustifolia} L.,{\i  Sp. Pl.} 391 (1753). Stems up to 150 cm but often much less, erect or ascending; young twigs terete, glabrous. Leaves 20-60 × 8-18 mm, opposite or in whorls of 3, elliptical to oblong, petiolate, entire, sparsely puberulent, ferruginous beneath when young; margin flat or slightly revolute. Corymbs axillary, on upper part of previous year's growth; pedicels glandular-puberulent. Sepals herbaceous, acute; corolla 7-12 mm in diameter, bright reddish-pink.{\i  Cultivated for ornament and naturalized in Germany and N.W. England.} [Br Ge.] ({\i E. North America.})
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. K. polifolia} Wangenh.,{\i  Schr. Ges. Naturf. Freunde Berlin }{\b 8}({\b 2}): 130 (1788). Stems up to 70 cm, ascending or erect, slender; young twigs with 2 angular ridges, pubescent. Leaves 10-30 × 2-8 mm, mostly opposite, linear- to elliptic-oblong, subsessile, entire, glabrous, glaucous or whitish beneath; margin usually strongly revolute. Corymbs terminal; pedicels glabrous. Sepals scarious, obtuse; corolla 10-20 mm in diameter, purplish-pink.{\i  Cultivated for ornament, and naturalized in a bog in S.E. England}. [Br.] ({\i North America.})
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28\qc {\b 9.               Loiseleuria}    Desv.
\par 

\pard\f0\fs24\qc By D.A. Webb.
\par 

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Evergreen dwarf shrubs; leaves opposite, very shortly petiolate. Flowers 5-merous, solitary or in small, terminal umbels. Bracts coriaceous, persistent in fruit. Sepals almost free. Corolla broadly campanulate to cup-shaped, moderately deeply lobed, deciduous. Stamens 5, alternating with corolla-lobes; anthers without appendages, opening by slits along their whole length, not by pores. Fruit a septicidal (sometimes also partly loculicidal) capsule.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. L. procumbens} (L.) Desv., {\i Jour. Bot. Appl.}{\b  1}: 35 (1813) ({\i Azalea procumbens} L.). Glabrous; stems procumbent, rooting, freely branched, forming extensive mats. Leaves 4-7 × 2 mm, oblong, obtuse; margins revolute; midrib prominent beneath. Bracts like the leaves but smaller and subacute; pedicels 2-8 mm. Sepals lanceolate, red. Corolla c. 4 × 6 mm, pink. Stamens shorter than corolla. Capsule 3-4 mm, red. 2n = 24.{\i  Dry, stony or peaty places, mainly on mountains, often in very exposed situations; calcifuge. N. Europe, southwards to} c. 56°{\i  N. in Scotland; mountains of France, Pyrenees, Alps, Carpathians.} Au Br Fa Fe Ga Ge He Hs Is It Ju No Rm Rs (N, W) Su.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28\qc {\b 10.             Phyllodoce}             Salisb.      
\par 

\pard\f0\fs24\qc By D.A. Webb.
\par 

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Evergreen dwarf shrubs; leaves alternate, subsessile. Flowers 5-merous, in short, subterminal racemes; bracts similar to foliage-leaves; bracteoles absent. Sepals almost free. Corolla urceolate, with short lobes, deciduous. Stamens 10; anthers without appendages. Fruit a septicidal capsule.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. P. caerulea} (L.) Bab., {\i Man. Brit. Bot.} 194 (1843). Stems 10-35 cm, erect or ascending from a rooting base, freely branched. Leaves 6-12 mm, linear- to linear-oblong, obtuse, coriaceous, crowded; margins strongly revolute; apparent margins denticulate. Flowers pendent, on long, slender, glandular pubescent pedicels. Sepals 4 mm, lanceolate, glandular-pubescent. Corolla 7-12 mm, lilac to pinkish-purple; lobes short, patent to erect. Stamens included. Capsule 4 mm, glandular-pubescent. 2n = 24.{\i  Heathy ground, on mountains except in the extreme north. N. Europe, southwards to S. Norway; isolated stations in Scotland and the Pyrenees. }Br Fe Ga Is No Rs (N) Su.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28\qc {\b 11.          Daboecia}            D. Don
\par 
 
\pard\f0\fs24\qc By D.A. Webb.
\par 

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Evergreen dwarf shrubs; leaves alternate, petiolate. Flowers 4-merous, in bracteate racemes terminal on the current year's growth; bracteoles absent. Sepals free almost to base. Corolla urceolate, with short lobes, deciduous. Stamens 8; anthers without appendages. Ovary hairy; fruit a septicidal capsule.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 Larger leaves at least 9 mm; corolla 9-14 mm, more or less
\par 
 glandular-hairy ............................................................................ {\b 1. cantabrica}
\par 
Leaves not more than 8 mm; corolla not more than 8 mm,
\par 
 glabrous ............................................................................................ {\b 2. azorica}
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. D. cantabrica} (Hudson) C. Koch,{\i  Dendrologie}{\b  2} ({\b 1}): 132 (1872) ({\i D. polifolia} D. Don). Stems decumbent to ascending, rather weak and straggling, up to 70 cm if supported by other shrubs, but not more than 35 cm if isolated. Leaves variable in size, the largest (9-)11-14 × 3-5(-7) mm, narrowly lanceolate to ovate-elliptical, dark green and glandular-hirsute above; margins revolute, but leaving most of the white-tomentose lower surface visible. Racemes lax, with 3-9(-12) pendent flowers. Corolla 9-14 × 5-8 mm, more or less glandular-hairy, reddish-purple; lobes patent. 2n = 24.{\i  Heaths, open woods and rocky ground; calcifuge. • W. Europe, from N. Portugal to W. Ireland.} Ga Hb Hs Lu.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. D. azorica} Tutin & E. F. Warburg, {\i Jour. Bot.} ({\i London}) {\b 70}: 12 (1932). Like {\b 1} but not more than 15(-20) cm, with procum
\par 

\par 
10}
\par