{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 9 Leaves shallowly cordate, rounded or truncate at base;
\par
  corolla pale yellow; plant asperous ............................................. {\b 11. tauricum}
\par
9 Leaves mostly ± narrowed at base; corolla white 
\par
  or white tinged with pink; plant ± softly hispid
\par
10 Corolla (17-)18-22 mm; scales 5-6 mm ........................................ {\b 9. davisii}
\par
10 Corolla 13-16·5 mm; scales 1·6-4 mm ................................. {\b 10. cycladense}
\par
6 Scales of corolla lanceolate, gradually narrowed from 
\par
  the dilated base to the ± acute apex, the marginal 
\par
  papillae dense throughout
\par
11 Corolla violet, or pink turning blue .................................... {\b 3}. × {\b uplandicum}
\par
11 Corolla pale yellow or white
\par
12 Corolla white; stock fusiform ..................................................... {\b 7. naxicola}
\par
12 Corolla pale yellow; rhizome creeping
\par
13 Lower leaves cordate; rhizome of ± even thickness 
\par
   throughout ................................................................................... {\b 6. cordatum}
\par
13 Leaves not cordate; rhizome with alternate thick 
\par
   tuberous and thin portions
\par
14 Connective not projecting beyond thecae ............................... {\b 4. tuberosum}
\par
14 Connective projecting slightly beyond thecae ........................... {\b 5. gussonei}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. S. officinale} L.,{\i  Sp. Pl.} 136 (1753). Stock stout, vertical, branched. Stem (30-)50-120 cm, stout, erect, often branched. Leaves large, ovate-lanceolate to lanceolate, acuminate; the middle and upper sessile, often decurrent. Cymes many-flowered. Calyx lobed to 3/4-4/5, with lanceolate lobes. Corolla 12-18 mm, purple-violet or dirty pink or white, with deflexed lobes. Scales broadly triangular-lanceolate, the lower marginal papillae shortly cylindric-conical, the upper much smaller and shorter, all dense. Stamens with connective projecting beyond thecae; filaments as wide as anther. Nutlets 5-6 mm, black, very smooth, shining. 2n = 24, 24+4B, 26, c. 36, 40, 48, 54.{\i  River-banks and damp grassland. Much of Europe, but rare in the extreme south and only as a naturalized alien in much of the north}. Au Be Br Bu Cz Ga Ge He Ho Hs Hu It Ju ?Lu Po Rm Rs (C, W,K,E)Sa Si Tu [Da Fe Hb No Rs (N,B) Su].
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp.{\b  officinale}: Middle and upper leaves deeply and broadly decurrent, and the stem distinctly winged. Stem, leaves, pedicels and calyces more or less densely hairy and setose. {\i Throughout the range of the species}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b uliginosum}(A. Kerner) Nyman,{\i  Consp.} 509 (1881): Leaves, even the uppermost, not or shortly and narrowly decurrent. Stem and leaves only sparsely covered with very short, stiff setae and densely verrucose-hispid. Sepals with stiff, apical setae, otherwise more or less glabrous. •{\i  E.C. Europe}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b  S. floribundum} R. J. Shuttlew. ex Buckn.,{\i  Jour. Linn. Soc. London} ({\i Bot}.){\b  41}: 531 (1913) ({\i S. mediterraneum} F. W. Schultz, non Koch), an asperous-hispid plant with the calyx lobed to ¼-½, dirty white corolla with the lobes not recurved, scales with all the marginal papillae similar, about 1½ times as long as wide, the connective not projecting beyond the thecae and abortive pollen, is probably a hybrid of {\b 1} and some other species; it was known from S. France (Var), but has not been found for 75 years.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. S. asperum} Lepechin, {\i Nova Acta Acad. Sci. Petrop.}{\b  14}: 442 (1805). Stock vertical. Stem up to 180 cm, branched, aculeolate and with scattered hairs. Leaves ovate to oblong, cuneate to rounded or subcordate at base, petiolate or the uppermost sessile, not decurrent and not amplexicaul, densely setose and aculeolate at least on the mid-vein beneath. Calyx 3-5 mm, lobed to c. 2/3-3/4, the lobes rounded. Corolla 11-17 mm, pink at first, turning blue. Scales lingulate, slightly widened at the base; marginal papillae dense, narrowly cylindric-conical. Stamens with connective not projecting beyond thecae; filament narrower than and about as long as anther. Nutlets reticulate-rugose and finely verrucose.{\i  Formerly cultivated for fodder, and naturalized in several parts of Europe.} [Au Be Br Da Fe Ga He No Rs (B, C, W) Su.] (S.W. Asia.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    3. {\b S.} × {\b uplandicum} Nyman, {\i Syll.} 80 (1854) ({\i S. asperum} × {\i officinale}). Intermediate between the parents. Stem up to 2 m. Leaves never cordate, the upper sessile, shortly decurrent or more or less amplexicaul. Calyx 5-7 mm; lobes usually acute. Corolla 12-18 mm, pink at first, turning blue, or persistently violet. Scales as in {\b 1} but less wide at the base. 2n = 36.{\i  Formerly cultivated for fodder, and naturalized; also of spontaneous local origin.} [Au Be Br Da Fe Ga Hb Ho No Su.]
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 4. S. tuberosum} L.,{\i  Sp. Pl.} 136 (1753). Rhizome creeping, with alternate thick tuberous and thin portions. Stem (10-)15-40(-60) cm, simple or little-branched; stem and leaves more or less densely hairy; hairs up to 1·5 mm. Basal leaves (which disappear at flowering time) long-petiolate; the lower cauline leaves elliptical to lanceolate, the upper sessile, shortly and narrowly decurrent. Calyx 5-8 mm, lobed to 1/3-9/10. Corolla 13-19 mm, pale yellow; lobes with deflexed apex. Scales triangular-lanceolate; marginal papillae dense, the lower not more than 1½ times as long as wide, the upper very small. Anthers 3-4·5(-5) mm; connective not projecting beyond thecae. {\i Woods and other damp or shady places. W., C. & S. Europe, northwards to England, C. Germany and N. Ukraine.} Al Au Bl Br Bu Co Cz Ga Ge ?Gr He Hs Hu It Ju Po Rm Rs (C, W) Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b a}) Subsp.{\b  tuberosum}: Rhizome stout, up to 12 mm in diameter, the tuberous portions of irregular shape and close together. Cauline leaves usually 6-12. Inflorescence with 8-16(-40) flowers. Corolla-scales 5·5-7·5 mm, not more than 2 mm wide. Stamens with filament 1/3-1/2 as long as anther. Nutlets up to 4 mm. 2n = 144. •{\i  W. Europe}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b nodosum}(Schur) Soó, {\i Acta Geobot. Hung.}{\b  4}: 192 (1941): Rhizome slender, the tuberous portions irregular-oblong and separated. Cauline leaves usually 3-7. Inflorescence mostly with 1-9(-20) flowers. Corolla-scales 4·5-6(-6·5) mm, up to 2·5 mm wide. Stamens with filament.1/4-1/3(-1/2) as long as anther. Nutlets 2·5-3·5 mm. 2n = 18, 72, 96, 100.{\i  C. & S.E. Europe}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 5. S. gussonei} F. W. Schultz,{\i  Arch. Fl. Eur.} 58 (1874). Like {\b 4} but rhizome very slender, the tuberous portions more or less globose and very distant; stem slender; cauline leaves 3-8; inflorescence with 4-10(-20) flowers; corolla 16-22 mm; scales 6-8·5 mm, up to 2 mm wide; stamens with filament 1/5-1/3 as long as anther; anthers (3·5-)4-5(-6) mm; connective projecting slightly beyond thecae. •{\i  Sicilia.} Si.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 6. S. cordatum} Waldst. & Kit. ex Willd.,{\i  Ges. Naturf. Freunde Berlin Neue Schr.}{\b  2}: 121 (1799). Rhizome creeping, uniformly stout. Stem 15-35(-50) cm, simple, sparsely hairy; hairs up to 1·1 mm. Cauline leaves 2-4(-5), the lower large, cordate, long-petiolate, the upper rounded at the base, shortly petiolate or sessile. Inflorescence with up to 20 flowers. Calyx deeply lobed. Corolla 13-18 mm, pale yellow, 1½-2 times as long as calyx. Scales triangular-lanceolate, the lower marginal papillae 2½-3½ times as long as wide, the upper smaller but distinctly longer than wide. Stamens with filament 4/7-3/4 as long as anther. 2n = 18. {\i Deciduous woods. • Carpathians, C. Romania, W. Ukraine.} Cz Po Rm Rs (W).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 7. S. naxicola} Pawl., {\i Fragm. Fl. Geobot.}{\b  17}: 21 (1971). Stock fusiform. Plant often more or less sericeous-villous, with rather soft hairs up to 4 mm and shorter straight and hooked hairs and setae. Stem 12-45 cm, unwinged. Lower leaves rather long-petiolate, the upper sessile, not or scarcely decurrent. Calyx
\par

\par
104}
\par