{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 becoming more or less lax at start of anthesis. Corolla-tube 4-5 mm, curved below the middle. Nutlets densely and strongly tuberculate. {\i S.E. Europe; naturalized in Spain and Portugal}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 23. A. cretica} Miller, {\i Gard. Dict}. ed. 8, no. 7 (1768) ({\i Lycopsis variegata} auct., non L.). Annual, hispid with slightly tubercle based hairs; stems 10-50 cm, ascending or erect. Leaves 30-100 × 5-20 mm, linear-lanceolate, subentire or repand-dentate. Cymes solitary, rarely paired, bracteate only at base; pedicels very short, up to 7 mm in fruit; bracts equalling or shorter than calyx. Calyx 4-5 mm, up to 10 mm in fruit, divided almost to the base into linear-lanceolate, acute lobes. Corolla purplish, becoming blue with white lines, rarely entirely white; tube 4-7 mm, about equalling calyx, curved; limb 6-9 mm in diameter, with 5 unequal lobes; stamens inserted above middle of tube; style with obliquely truncate lobes. Nutlets 1·5-2 × 3-4 mm, obliquely ovoid, ovate in dorsal view, densely rugulose between the primary reticulations. 2n = 16. •{\i  Italy, Sicilia; S. & W. parts of Balkan peninsula.} Al Gr It Ju Si.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 24. A. variegata} (L.) Lehm., {\i Pl. Asperif.} 223 (1818) ({\i Lycopsis variegata} L.). Like {\b 23} but stems procumbent; cymes remaining more dense in fruit; corolla white or pale purplish, becoming pale blue with reddish markings; style with more or less acute lobes; nutlets suborbicular in dorsal view, smooth between the primary reticulations. 2n = 16. {\i S. Aegean region.} Cr Gr.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc {\b 22.               Pentaglottis}             Tausch
\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc ({\i Caryolopha} Fischer & Trautv.)
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc By A.O.Chater.

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Perennial, hispid herbs. Flowers in axillary and terminal, bracteate cymes. Calyx lobed almost to the base, accrescent. Corolla blue, with short, infundibuliform or cylindrical tube and rotate limb, with 5 broadly ovate, hairy scales closing mouth of tube. Stamens included, inserted in upper part of tube. Style included; stigma capitate. Nutlets ovoid, erect, concave and with a slightly thickened collar-like ring and an eccentric stalked attachment at the base.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. P. sempervirens} (L.) Tausch ex L. H. Bailey,{\i  Man. Cult. Pl.} ed. 2, 837 (1949) ({\i Anchusa sempervirens} L., {\i Caryolopha sempervirens} (L.) Fischer & Trautv.). Hispid throughout; stems 30-100 cm, ascending or erect, branched. Basal leaves 10-40 cm, ovate-oblong or ovate, acute, narrowed into a long petiole; cauline sessile, acuminate. Cymes dense, with 5-15 flowers; each branch of the inflorescence subtended by a large bract. Calyx 2·5-5 mm at anthesis, c. 8 mm in fruit; lobes linear-lanceolate. Corolla-tube 4-6 mm; limb 8-10 mm in diameter, bright blue. Nutlets 1·5-2 mm, asymmetrically ovoid, rugose-reticulate, blackish. {\i Damp or shady places. S.W. Europe, from C. Portugal to S.W. France; widely cultivated, and naturalized in N.W. Europe and N. Italy.} Ga Hs Lu [Be Br Hb It].
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc {\b 23.              Borago}             L.
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc By A.O. Chater.

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Annual or perennial herbs. Flowers in branched, lax, usually bracteate cymes. Calyx lobed almost to the base, accrescent. Corolla blue, pink or white, rotate to campanulate, the tube short or absent, with short, glabrous, emarginate, exserted scales. Stamens exserted, inserted near base of corolla; anthers connivent, mucronate; filaments with a long, narrow appendage at apex. Style included; stigma capitate. Nutlets obovoid, erect, rugose, concave and with a thickened collar-like ring at the base.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 Erect, robust annual; calyx more than ½ as long as corolla ........ {\b 1. officinalis}
\par
Decumbent, slender perennial; calyx less than ½ as 
\par
 long as corolla ................................................................................ {\b 2. pygmaea}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. B. officinalis} L.,{\i  Sp. Pl.} 137 (1753). Hispid annual; stems 15-70 cm, erect, robust, often branched. Basal leaves 5-20 cm, ovate to lanceolate, petiolate; upper cauline leaves sessile, amplexicaul. Pedicels 5-30 mm, stout, patent or deflexed after anthesis. Calyx 8-15 mm at anthesis, up to 20 mm in fruit; lobes linear-lanceolate, acute, connivent in fruit. Corolla rotate, bright blue, rarely white; tube very short or almost absent; lobes 8-15 mm, lanceolate, acute. Nutlets 7-10 mm, oblong-obovoid. 2n = 16.{\i  Dry, often waste places. S. Europe; widely cultivated for ornament and as a pot-herb and for bees, naturalized in the warmer parts of C., E. & W. Europe and an occasional casual or short-lived escape further north.} *Az Bl Co Cr Ga Gr Hs It Ju Lu Sa Si Tu [Au Br Cz Ge He Ho Hu Po Rm Rs (C, W, K, E)]
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. B. pygmaea} (DC.) Chater & W. Greuter, {\i Bot. Jour. Linn.Soc.}{\b  65}: 261 (1972) ({\i Campanula pygmaea} DC., {\i Borago laxiflora} Poiret). Hispid perennial; stems 15-60 cm, decumbent, slender, branched. Lower leaves 5-20 cm, oblong to obovate, petiolate; upper leaves sessile, amplexicaul. Pedicels 10-40 mm, filiform, deflexed after anthesis. Calyx 4-6 mm at anthesis, up to 8 mm in fruit; lobes lanceolate, acute, not connivent in fruit. Corolla campanulate, clear blue; tube short; lobes 5-8 mm, ovate, acute. Nutlets 3-4 mm, obovoid. 2n = 32. {\i Damp places. • Corse, Sardegna, Capraia. }Co It Sa.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc {\b 24.              Trachystemon}             D.Don
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc By A.O. Chater.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Perennial herbs. Flowers in dense, bracteate cymes in a lax panicle. Calyx lobed to c. ½, accrescent. Corolla bluish-violet, with infundibuliform tube exceeding the calyx and limb divided to the base into revolute lobes; scales very short, villous, in 2 series of 5, the lower at about the middle, the upper at the apex of the tube. Stamens long-exserted, inserted between the 2 series of scales. Style included; stigma entire. Nutlets obliquely ovoid, carinate, rugose-reticulate, more or less flat and with a thickened collar-like ring at the base.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Literature: M. Gusuleac,{\i  Bul. Fac. Sti. Cernauti}{\b  2}: 431-434 (1928); {\i Feddes Repert.}{\b  29}: 117-118 (1931).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. T. orientalis} (L.) G. Don fil., {\i Gen. Syst.}{\b  4}: 309 (1837). Rhizomatous, pubescent and usually also sparsely hispid; stems 20-60 cm, erect, branched. Basal leaves 15-50 cm, ovate, subacute to acuminate, cordate at base, long-petiolate; cauline leaves ovate to lanceolate, sessile. Cymes with 5-15 flowers; pedicels long. Calyx 3-6 mm at anthesis, 6-9 mm in fruit; lobes ovate, obtuse. Corolla-tube 5-7 mm; limb 9-12 mm, bluish-violet. Nutlets c. 2 × 4 mm, rugose, reticulate; collar-like basal ring slightly ribbed. 2n = 56.{\i  Shady places. E. Bulgaria, Turkey-in-Europe.} Bu Tu [Br]. ({\i N. Anatolia, W. Caucasus.})
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc {\b 25.                Mertensia}               Rorh
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc By J.W. Franks.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Perennial, usually glabrous herbs. Flowers in terminal cymes. Calyx lobed to the base, not accrescent. Corolla blue, pink or white, cylindrical or with campanulate limb, without scales but often with 5 invaginations in the throat. Stamens included or slightly exserted, inserted in upper part of tube. Style included or exserted; stigma very small, entire. Nutlets flattened-trigonous, fleshy, strongly angled.
\par

\par
109}
\par