{\rtf1\ansi \deff4\deflang1033{\fonttbl{\f4\froman\fcharset0\fprq2 Times New Roman;}}{\colortbl;\red0\green0\blue0;\red0\green0\blue255;\red0\green255\blue255;\red0\green255\blue0;\red255\green0\blue255;\red255\green0\blue0;
\red255\green255\blue0;\red255\green255\blue255;\red0\green0\blue128;\red0\green128\blue128;\red0\green128\blue0;\red128\green0\blue128;\red128\green0\blue0;\red128\green128\blue0;\red128\green128\blue128;\red192\green192\blue192;}{\stylesheet{\widctlpar 
\f4\fs20\lang2057 \snext0 Normal;}{\*\cs10 \additive Default Paragraph Font;}}{\info{\author dddd}{\operator dddd}{\creatim\yr2001\mo1\dy13\hr12\min11}{\revtim\yr2001\mo1\dy13\hr12\min14}{\version2}{\edmins3}{\nofpages4}{\nofwords1035}{\nofchars5904}
{\*\company  }{\vern57431}}\widowctrl\ftnbj\aenddoc\hyphcaps0 \fet0\sectd \linex0 {\*\pnseclvl1\pnucrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl2\pnucltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl3\pndec\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang
{\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl4\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl5\pndec\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl6\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl7
\pnlcrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl8\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl9\pnlcrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}\pard\plain \nowidctlpar \f4\fs20\lang2057 {\fs28 7
\'b75-12 mm, lobed to 3/4-7/8. Corolla (14-)15-17(-18) mm, white. Scales (3)3\'b75-4\'b75(5) mm, triangular-lanceolate, gradually narrowed to the apex, the margin densely papillose throughout, the papillae not more than 1\'bd
 times as long as wide. Stamens 4-5 mm; anthers 2\'b75-4 mm; filament mostly shorter than anther. 2n = 30. \bullet }{\i\fs28  S. Aegean region}{\fs28  (}{\i\fs28 Naxos}{\fs28 ). Gr.
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 8. S. ibiricum}{\fs28  Steven,}{\i\fs28  Bull. Soc. Nat. Moscow}{\b\fs28  24}{\fs28  (}{\b\fs28 1}{\fs28 
): 579 (1851). Rhizome creeping, rather slender, funiculiform, producing more or less ascending non-flowering and flowering stems 12-40 cm. Stems and leaves with very short hairs and setae up to 3 mm. Leaves ovate or elliptical, slightly cordate or rounde
d at base, the lower long-, the upper short-petiolate. Calyx 4-7 mm, lobed to 2/3-5/6 Corolla (14)15-18(-19) mm, pale yellow. Scales lingulate, rounded or sometimes emarginate at apex, the marginal papillae about as long as wide, the lower scattered, the 
upper dense. Stamens with filament 2/3 as long as the anther or more.}{\i\fs28  Naturalized in hedges and grassland in S. & E. England.}{\fs28  [Br.] (}{\i\fs28 Caucasian region}{\fs28 .)
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 9. S. davisii}{\fs28  Wickens,}{\i\fs28  Notes Roy. Bot. Gard. Edinb.}{\b\fs28  29}{\fs28 
: 168 (1969). Stock fusiform. Plant covered with rather soft hairs up to 4 mm and short setiform straight and hooked hairs, often more or less sericeous-villous. Stem 10-30 cm, unwinged. Lower leaves rather long-petiolate, the upper sessile, not decurrent
. Calyx 9-13 mm, lobed to 2/3-7/8. Corolla (17-)18-22 mm, white or white tinged with pink. Scales 5-6(-6\'b75) mm, lingulate, the marginal papillae not more than 1\'bd times as long as wide, the lower scattered. Stamens 5-6(-6\'b75) mm; anthers (3-)3\'b7
5-4\'b72 mm, filament \'bd as long as or equalling anther.}{\i\fs28  Shady rocks. S. Aegean region }{\fs28 (}{\i\fs28 Amorgos}{\fs28 ). Gr.
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 10. S. cycladense}{\fs28  Pawl.,}{\i\fs28  Fragm. Fl. Geobot.}{\b\fs28  17}{\fs28 : 25 (1971). Plant with numerous basal leaves in a rosette, den
sely and rather softly villous-pubescent, with setae and hooked hairs. Stem 5-20 cm, simple or scarcely branched. Lower leaves ovate to ovate-oblong, shortly petiolate, greyish beneath. Calyx 7(-10) mm, lobed to 2/3-7/8. Corolla 13-16\'b7
5 mm, ?white. Scales 1\'b76-4 mm, lingulate, marginal papillae not more than 1\'bd times as long as wide, the lower more or less scattered. Stamens 2\'b76-4\'b73 mm; anthers 2-3 mm, 4-6 times as long as wide; filament 1/3-1/2 as long as anther. 2n = 30. 
\bullet }{\i\fs28  S. Aegean region}{\fs28  (}{\i\fs28 Sikinos}{\fs28 ). Gr.
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 11. S. tauricum}{\fs28  Willd.,}{\i\fs28  Ges. Naturf. Freunde Berlin Neue Schr.}{\b\fs28  2}{\fs28 
: 120 (1799). Stock fusiform. Stem 20-60 cm, rather stout, much-branched, densely hairy with very short hooked hairs and setae up to 2(-3) mm. All cauline leaves except the uppermost petiolate, slightly cordate to truncate or rounded at the base, not decu
rrent, rather densely hairy on both surfaces, asperous. Calyx 4-7 mm, lobed to 3/5-5/6. Corolla (8-)9-12 (-15) mm, pale yellow; lobes not recurved. Scales lingulate, rounded or sometimes ema
rginate at the apex, the marginal papillae up to twice as long as wide, scattered towards the base. Stamens with filament mostly shorter than anther; anthers 2-3 mm, 2\'bd-4(-5) times as long as wide. 2n = 18.}{\i\fs28  Woods. S.E. Europe.}{\fs28 
 Bu Rm Rs (C, W, K, E).
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 12. S. orientale}{\fs28  L., }{\i\fs28 Sp. Pl.}{\fs28  136 (1753) (}{\i\fs28 S. tauricum}{\fs28 
 sensu Coste, non Willd.). Stock fusiform. Stem up to 70 cm or more, much-branched. Leaves ovate, subcordate or rounded or truncate at base, densely hairy on both surfaces, rather softly hispid, often subto
mentose beneath; the lower long-, the upper short-petiolate, the uppermost sessile, not decurrent. Calyx 6-9(-12) mm, lobed to 1/4-2/5. Corolla (13-)14-18(-19) mm, white; lobes not recurved. Scales lingulate, the marginal papillae up to 2\'bd
 times as long as wide. Stamens with filament c. 3/5 as long as anther; anthers 2\'b75-3\'b75(-4) mm, (2\'bd)3-5(-5\'bd) times as long as wide.}{\i\fs28  Damp, shady places. Around Istanbul; S.W. Ukra.; locally naturalized elsewhere.}{\fs28 
 Rs (W) Tu [Br Ga ?He It]. (}{\i\fs28 N.W. Anatolia}{\fs28 .)
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 13. S. bulbosum}{\fs28  C. Schimper, }{\i\fs28 Flora}{\fs28  (}{\i\fs28 Regensb}{\fs28 .) }{\b\fs28 8}{\fs28 : 17 (1825) (incl.}{\i\fs28  S. zeyheri}{\fs28 
 C. Schimper). Rhizome slender, creeping, producing subglobose tubers. Stems 15-50 cm, simple or little-branched; stem and leaves with dense, very small hooked hairs and scattered setae up to 1\'b7
5(-2) mm. Lower leaves ovate to elliptic-lanceolate, graduall
y attenuate or abruptly contracted into a long petiole, the uppermost sessile, slightly decurrent. Calyx lobed to 1/3-6/7. Corolla (excluding scales) (7-)8-11(-12) mm, pale yellow, with erect lobes which are 1/6-1/3 as long as the tube. Scales (5-)5\'b7
5-9(-10) mm, exserted for 1-4(-5) mm, acute, lanceolate-subulate, rarely triangular-lanceolate; marginal papillae dense, about as long as wide. Stamens with filament 1/5-1/2 as long as anther; anthers 2\'b75-4 mm, minutely apiculate.}{\i\fs28 
 S. Europe eastwards from Corse.}{\fs28  Al Bu Co Ga Gr He It Ju Sa Si [Ge].
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 14. S. ottomanum}{\fs28  Friv.,}{\i\fs28  Flora}{\fs28  (}{\i\fs28 Regensb}{\fs28 .) }{\b\fs28 19}{\fs28 : 439 (1936). Stock fusiform. Stem 30-80 cm, branched. Leaves ovate or ovate-lanceolate, more or less rounded-c
uneate at base, the lower long-petiolate, the upper sessile and slightly decurrent. Flowers small. Calyx 3-5 mm, lobed to 3/5-4/5. Corolla (excluding scales) 5-7 mm, pale yellow; lobes c. 1/3 as long as tube, more or less erect. Scales 5-9\'b7
5 mm, exserted for 2-5\'b75 mm, linear-lanceolate, more or less acute; marginal papillae dense, about as long as wide. Stamens with filament 1/3-3/5 as long as anther; anthers 2-2\'b75 mm, minutely apiculate. 2n = 20. }{\i\fs28 Woods.\bullet 
. Balkan peninsula, Romania.}{\fs28  Al Bu Gr Ju Rm Tu.
\par 
\par }\pard \qc\nowidctlpar {\b\fs28 19.              Procopiania}{\fs28               Gusuleac
\par }{\fs24 By B. Pawlowski.
\par 
\par }\pard \nowidctlpar {\fs28 Like}{\i\fs28  Symphytum}{\fs28  but corolla-tube constricted at base and apex; lobes longer than the rest of the corolla; stamens long-exserted; filaments more than 1\'bd times as long as anthers.
\par 
\par  Literature: M. Gusuleac, }{\i\fs28 Bul. Fac. Sti. Cernauti}{\b\fs28  2}{\fs28 : 434-438 (1928). H. Runemark,}{\i\fs28  Bot. Not. }{\b\fs28 120}{\fs28 : 84-94 (1967) (sub Symphytum). B. Pawlowski, }{\i\fs28 Fragm. Fl. Geobot.}{\b\fs28  17}{\fs28 
: 39-58 (1971).
\par 
\par }\pard \li200\nowidctlpar {\fs28 1 Corolla-tube 4\'b75-6 mm; lobes spirally contorted above .............. }{\b\fs28 3. circinalis}{\fs28 
\par 1 Corolla-tube 2-4\'b75 mm; lobes not contorted
\par 2 Marginal papillae of corolla-scales not more than 1\'bd
\par   times as long as wide ........................................................................ }{\b\fs28 1. cretica}{\fs28 
\par 2 Lower marginal papillae of corolla-scales slender, at
\par   least 3 times as long as wide .......................................................... }{\b\fs28 2. insularis}{\fs28 
\par 
\par }\pard \nowidctlpar {\fs28    }{\b\fs28 1. P. cretica}{\fs28  (Willd.) Gusuleac,}{\i\fs28  Bul. Fac. Sti Cernauti}{\b\fs28  2}{\fs28 : 435 (1928) (}{\i\fs28 Trachystemon creticus}{\fs28 
 (Willd.) G. Don fil.). Perennial, more or less branched herb (5-)10-50 cm, hispid, with short and long, hooked and straight hairs. Leaves ovate, often subcordate, petiolate; the upper sessile, decurrent. Cymes many-flowered. Calyx 4\'b7
5-7(-8) mm, lobed to 1/2-4/5; lobes acute. Corolla blue-violet, rarely white; tube (2-)2\'b75-4(-4\'b75) mm; lobes 2 1/3\'99
 4 1/2 times as long as tube, patent, not contorted, only slightly recurved in the uppermost part. Scales narrowly lanceolate-subulate; marginal papillae not more than 1\'bd
 times as long as wide. Stamens 9-11(-14) mm, glabrous or with minute lateral hairs at the base, without basal scale or rarely with a minute, unilateral, very shortly ciliate scale; anthers 1\'b75-3(-3\'b75) mm. \bullet }{\i\fs28 
 S. Greece and S. Aegean region.}{\fs28  Cr Gr.
\par 
\par 
\par 105}
\par }