{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. A. leptophylla} Roemer & Schultes,{\i  Syst. Veg.}{\b  4}: 90 (1819). Perennial, rarely biennial, more or less greyish with dense, short, soft, appressed, not tubercle-based hairs; stems 40-70 cm, erect. Leaves 50-100(-200) × 6-13 mm. Cymes short, usually several, crowded; pedicels up to 2 mm in fruit; bracts shorter than calyx. Calyx 5-7 mm, divided to 1/3-1/2 into oblong, obtuse lobes. Corolla purple, becoming blue; tube 6-8 mm, 1¼-1½ times as long as calyx; limb 6-8 mm in diameter, with oblong lobes; scales oblong, obtuse, densely and shortly hairy. Stamens inserted in upper half of tube and not or scarcely overlapping scales. Nutlets c. 2·5 × 3·5 mm, obliquely ovoid.{\i  S.E. Europe, from E. Bulgaria to Krym.} Bu Rm Rs (W, K).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. A. gmelinii} Ledeb., {\i Beitr. Naturk.} ({\i Dorpat}){\b  1}: 62 (1820). Perennial, rarely biennial, subglabrous or scabrid with sparse, stout, short, tubercle-based setae; stems 30-80 cm, erect. Leaves 50-150 × 3-8 mm. Cymes short, few or solitary; pedicels up to 3 mm in fruit; bracts shorter than calyx. Calyx 4-5 mm, up to 11 mm in fruit, divided to 1/3-1/2 into oblong-lanceolate, obtuse lobes. Corolla violet or pale blue; tube 6-8 mm, 1¼-2 times as long as calyx; limb 7-10 mm in diameter, with ovate lobes; scales oblong, obtuse, densely and shortly hairy; stamens inserted at about middle of tube and not or scarcely overlapping scales. Nutlets c. 2 × 4 mm, subreniform.{\i  S. part of U.S.S.R., extending to E. Romania; Turkey-in-Europe.} Rm Rs (C, W, E) Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 3. A. ochroleuca} Bieb.,{\i  Fl. Taur.-Cauc.}{\b  1}: 125, 421 (1808) (incl.{\i  A. pseudochroleuca} Schost.). Perennial, rarely biennial, with dense, short, soft, appressed, usually not tubercle-based hairs and sometimes with some longer, stout hairs; stems 30-80 cm, erect. Leaves 40-80(-200) × 3-10(-25) mm. Cymes short, several, crowded; pedicels very short; bracts mostly shorter than calyx. Calyx 4-6(-8·5) mm, up to 9(-15) mm in fruit, divided to 1/3-1/2 into linear-oblong, obtuse to acute lobes. Corolla pale yellow; tube 5-10 mm, 1¼-1½ times as long as calyx; limb 7-10(-15) mm in diameter. Nutlets c. 2 × 3·5 mm, obliquely ovoid.{\i  S.E. & E.C. Europe.} Bu Hu Rm Rs (W, ?K, E) [Ho It].
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 4. A. cespitosa} Lam., Encycl. Méth. Bot. 1: 504 (1785). Caespitose perennial, scabrid-hispid throughout, with many of the hairs minutely tubercle-based; stems 1-10 cm. Leaves 20-50(-75) × 2·5-4 mm, rosulate. Cymes often subsessile, dense, with 3-5 flowers; pedicels very short. Calyx 4-6 mm, divided almost to the base into linear, obtuse lobes. Corolla deep blue; tube 6-7 mm, c. 1½ times as long as calyx; limb 10-12 mm in diameter; scales oblong, ciliate; stamens inserted in upper half of tube and slightly overlapping scales. Nutlets c. 2·5 × 3·5 mm, obliquely ovoid. •{\i  Mountains of Kriti.} Cr.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 5. A. undulata} L.,{\i  Sp. Pl.} 133 (1753). Biennial or perennial, pubescent and hispid with both short and long hairs or setae which are usually mostly not tubercle-based; stems 10-50 cm, erect or ascending. Leaves 50-150 × 3-10(-25) mm, often sinuate-dentate and undulate. Cymes several, dense; pedicels very short; bracts shorter than calyx. Calyx 5-10 mm, up to 15(-20) mm in fruit, divided to c. ½ into oblong-lanceolate, obtuse lobes. Corolla blue, violet or purple; tube 7-13 mm, 1½-2 times as long as calyx; limb 3-8 mm in diameter. Nutlets c. 2 × 3-4 mm, obliquely ovoid. •{\i  Mediterranean region, Portugal.} Al Bu Co Cr Ga Gr Hs It Lu Sa Si Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp.{\b  undulata}: Bracts lanceolate or ovate-lanceolate. Corolla-tube 8-13 mm; limb 6-8 mm in diameter; stamens inserted at top of tube and overlapping scales.{\i  Iberian peninsula}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b hybrida}(Ten.) Coutinho,{\i  Fl. Port. }495 (1913) ({\i A. hybrida} Ten.): Bracts ovate-lanceolate, cordate at base.Corolla-tube 5-8 mm; limb 3-5 mm in diameter; stamens inserted about middle of tube and not reaching scales.{\i  Throughout the range of the species except the Iberian peninsula}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b  A. subglabra} A. Caballero,{\i  Anal. Inst. Bot. Cavanilles }{\b 5}: 509 (1945), is like{\b  5}({\b a}) but is glabrous or subglabrous, has bracts equalling the calyx and corolla-tube equalling or shorter than the calyx; it was described from W.C. Spain (near Hervás) and requires further investigation.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 6. A. sartorii} Heldr. ex Gusuleac,{\i  Bul. Fac. Sti. Cernauti}{\b  1}: 96 (1927). Like {\b 5}({\b b}) but covered with dense, white, patent mostly tubercle-based setae without shorter hairs; stems procumbent.{\i  Maritime sands. • S. Aegean region.} Gr.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 7. A. granatensis} Boiss.,{\i  Voy. Bot. Midi Esp.}{\b  2}: 430 (1841). Like {\b 5}({\b a}) but with few or no short hairs and numerous weakly tubercle-based setae; calyx-lobes acute; corolla-tube c. 6 mm, equalling or only just exceeding calyx. •{\i  C. & S. Portugal; mountains of S. Spain.} Hs Lu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Plants from Portugal approach {\b 5} in their indumentum.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 8. A. calcarea} Boiss., {\i op. cit.} 431 (1841). Like {\b 5}({\b a}) but usually perennial, with very strongly white-tubercle-based setae throughout; calyx up to 8 mm in fruit, divided to only c. 1/3; corolla-tube 6·5-8 mm and slightly exceeding calyx.{\i  Maritime sands. • S. & W. parts of Iberian peninsula.} Hs Lu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 9. A. crispa} Viv., {\i Fl. Cors., App}{\b . 1}: 1 (1825). Annual or biennial, pubescent and hispid with both short and long hairs or setae; stems 10-35 cm, procumbent or ascending. Leaves 50-170 × 5-10 mm. Cymes several, long, lax; pedicels very short, up to 2 mm in fruit; bracts equalling or exceeding calyx. Calyx c. 5 mm, up to 8 mm in fruit, divided to 1/3-1/2 into lanceolate, obtuse lobes. Corolla blue; tube 4-5 mm, equalling or shorter than calyx; limb c. 5 mm in diameter; stamens inserted at top of tube and overlapping scales. Nutlets c. 2 × 3 mm, obliquely ovoid. 2n = 16.{\i  Maritime sands. • Corse, Sardegna.} Co Sa.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 10. A. officinalis} L., {\i Sp. Pl. }133 (1753) (incl. {\i A. procera} Besser ex Link). Perennial, rarely biennial, hispid with uniform hairs or setae; stems 20-80(-170) cm, erect. Leaves 50-120 × 10-20 mm. Cymes several, dense; pedicels very short, up to 5 mm in fruit; bracts equalling or shorter than calyx. Calyx 5-7 mm, up to 10 mm in fruit, divided to ½ way or almost to the base into lanceolate, acute lobes. Corolla violet or reddish, rarely white or yellow; tube 5-7 mm, equalling or up to 1½ times as long as calyx; limb 7-15 mm in diameter; stamens inserted in upper half of tube and reaching or partly overlapping scales. Nutlets c. 2 × 4 mm, obliquely ovoid. 2n = 16 ± 0-2B.{\i  Much of Europe, but absent from the extreme north, much of the west, and parts of the Mediterranean region.} Al Au Bl Bu Co Cz Da Ga Ge Gr He Ho Hu It Ju *No Po Rm Rs (*N, B, C, W, E) Su Tu [*Be *Fe].
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b  A. davidovii} Stoj.,{\i  Bull. Inst. Roy. Hist. Nat.} ({\i Sofia}){\b  6}: 210 (1933), from S.W. Bulgaria (Rila Planina), is a dwarf variant of {\b 10} with smaller, pale blue flowers and corolla-tube shorter than the calyx.  

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b A. velenovskyi} (Gusuleac) Stoj.,{\i  op. cit.} 211 (1933), from the coasts of Romania and Bulgaria, has the calyx 3-5 mm, with obtuse teeth and large pale blue or purplish flowers; it requires further investigation.
\par

\par
107}
\par