{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 3-6 mm in diameter, campanulate, pale blue or white. Nutlets 3-5 mm, flattened-trigonous, smooth or minutely granulate and often hairy on upper surface; margin with 1 row of glochidia which are dilated and flattened towards the base. 2n = 24.{\i  U.S.S.R. and Fennoscandia; mountains of C. Europe; E. Pyrenees.} Au Cz Fe Ga Ge He Hs It No Rm Rs (N, B, C, W, K, E) Su.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. L. spinocarpos} (Forskal) Ascherson ex O. Kuntze, {\i Acta Horti Petrop.}{\b  10}: 215 (1887) ({\i Sclerocaryopsis spinocarpos} (Forskal) Brand). Annual, densely appressed-grey-hairy. Stem 5-25 cm, decumbent or erect, branched. Leaves 20-40 × 1-3 mm, linear. Pedicels c. 1 mm, erect. Calyx 3-4 mm in flower, 6-8 mm in fruit. Corolla 3-4 mm; limb infundibuliform, blue. Nutlets 2·5-3 mm, ovoid-trigonous, convex on the upper surface; margin and upper surface with large, irregular, conical spines.{\i  Dry clay soils. S.E. Russia} ({\i Volga delta}). Rs (E).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 3. L. echinophora} (Pallas) O. Kuntze, {\i op. cit.} 214 (1887) ({\i Heterocaryum echinophorum} (Pallas) Brand). Annual, hispid with erecto-patent hairs often arising from small tubercles. Stem 5-50 cm, erect, often branched. Leaves 15-50 × 1-10 mm, linear to linear-lanceolate, the lower petiolate, the upper sessile. Pedicels up to 5 mm, erect. Calyx c. 2 mm in flower, c. 5 mm in fruit. Corolla 2-2·5 mm; limb infundibuliform, pale blue or whitish. Nutlets unequal in size, the larger 5-7 mm, the smaller 4-5 mm, oblong, attached to the receptacle by their whole length; upper surface flat, sometimes with a row of glochidia down the centre; margin raised, with 1 row of glochidia. {\i Stony places and steppes. • S.E. Russia, W. Kazakhstan.} Rs (E).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 4. L. marginata} (Bieb.) Gürke in Engler & Prantl,{\i  Natürl. Pflanzenfam.}{\b  4}({\b 3a}): 107 (1895) (incl.{\i  L. patula} (Lehm.) Menyh.,{\i  L. semiglabra} (Ledeb.) Gürke,{\i  L. stricta} (Ledeb.) Gürke, {\i L. tenuis} (Ledeb.) Gürke, {\i Echinospermum patulum} Lehm.). Annual, grey with dense, erecto-patent hairs. Stem 5-70 cm, erect, simple or branched at base. Leaves 20-100 × 2-8 mm, oblong to linear, the lower petiolate, the upper sessile. Pedicels up to 1·5 mm, erect. Calyx 2-3 mm in flower, 3-4 mm in fruit. Corolla 3-4 mm; limb infundibuliform, blue, rarely white. Nutlets 2-4 mm, flattened-trigonous; upper surface smooth or tuberculate; margin with 1 row of glochidia which are dilated, flattened and united at the base.{\i  Dry places. From Hungary and N. Greece to W. Kazakhstan; S.E. Spain; an occasional casual elsewhere.} Bu Gr Hs Hu Rm Rs (W, K, E) *Si.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 5. L. squarrosa} (Retz.) Dumort., {\i Fl. Belg.} 40 (1827). Annual or biennial, with sparse to dense, patent or erecto-patent as well as appressed hairs. Stem 10-70 cm, erect, often branched. Leaves 20-70 × 3-10 mm, oblong to linear-lanceolate, sessile or the lower shortly petiolate. Pedicels up to 4 mm, erect. Calyx 1·5-3 mm in flower, 4-5 mm in fruit. Corolla c. 4 mm; limb 2-4 mm in diameter, almost rotate, pale blue. Nutlets 2·5-4 mm, flattened-ovoid-trigonous; upper surface minutely tuberculate; margin with 2-3 rows of glochidia which are usually dilated and flattened at the base. 2n = 48.{\i  Most of Europe except the extreme north and west, but probably only naturalized in the north.} Al Au ?Bl Bu Cz Ga Gr He Hs Hu It Ju Rm Rs (C, W, K, E) Su Tu [Da Fe *Ge Ho No Po Rs (N, B)].
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b squarrosa}({\i L. echinata} Fritsch,{\i  L. myosotis} Moench, {\i Echinospermum lappula} (L.) Lehm.; incl.{\i  Lappula consanguinea} (Fischer & C. A. Meyer) Gürke): Glochidia on nutlets 1-1·5 mm, all of subequal length, those of the inner row not confluent at base.{\i  Cultivated fields and other dry disturbed habitats. Throughout the range of the species}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b heteracantha}(Ledeb.) Chater, {\i Bot. Jour. Linn. Soc.}{\b  64}: 380 (1971) ({\i Echinospermum heteracanthum} Ledeb., {\i Lappula heteracantha} (Ledeb.) Gürke; incl.{\i  L. semicincta }(Steven) M. Popov): Glochidia of the outer row very short, those of the inner row 2-3 mm, confluent at the base.{\i  Scrub, grassland and dry, rocky places. S.C. Europe and S. part of U.S.S.R.}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 6. L. barbata} (Bieb.) Gürke in Engler & Prantl,{\i  Natürl. Pflanzenfam.}{\b  4}({\b 3a}): 107 (1895) ({\i Echinophorum barbatum} (Bieb.) Lehm.). Annual or biennial, grey with dense, appressed hairs. Stem 10-70 cm, erect, often branched. Leaves 30-70 × 5-8 mm, linear to lanceolate, the lower petiolate, the upper sessile. Pedicels up to 5 mm, erect. Calyx 2-3 mm in flower, c. 4 mm in fruit. Corolla 3-5 mm; limb (3-)5-8 mm in diameter, almost rotate, white or blue. Nutlets 3-4 mm, flattened-trigonous; upper surface minutely tuberculate; margin with 2-3 rows of glochidia which are usually neither dilated nor flattened at the base.{\i  Dry places. S.E. Europe, from S. Albania to E. Ukraine; E. Spain.} Al Bu Hs Rm Rs (W, K, E).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc {\b 32.               Trigonotis}            Steven
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc By A.O. Chater.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Annual or perennial herbs. Flowers in terminal, ebracteate cymes. Calyx lobed to below the middle, accrescent. Corolla blue, infundibuliform to campanulate or rotate with short tube and with papillose or hairy scales in the throat. Stamens included, inserted about middle of tube. Style included; stigma capitate. Nutlets trigonous, erect, smooth, with a small attachment area, often stipitate.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. T. peduncularis} (Trev.) Bentham ex Baker & S. Moore,{\i  Jour. Linn. Soc. London} ({\i Bot}.) {\b 17}: 384 (1879). Annual; stems 5-20 cm, erect or ascending, branched, scabrid-pubescent. Leaves 7-20 × 5-8 cm, spathulate to oblong or lanceolate, greyish with appressed hairs. Cymes secund, very lax in fruit; pedicels 3-6 mm in fruit and patent and thickened at the apex. Calyx c. 1 mm in flower, 2-2·5 mm in fruit, greyish with appressed hairs; lobes ovate-oblong, acute. Corolla c. 1·5 mm; limb 2-3 mm in diameter, bright blue, lobed to c. ¾ ; lobes ovate, obtuse. Nutlets c. 1 mm, minutely hairy on upper surface or glabrous. {\i S.E. Russia} ({\i near Astrakhan'}). Rs(E). ({\i C. & E. Asia}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc {\b 33.                 Omphalodes}              Miller
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc By L.F. Ferguson.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Annual, biennial or perennial herbs. Flowers solitary and axillary or in mostly terminal, bracteate or ebracteate cymes. Calyx lobed to the base, accrescent. Corolla blue or white, subrotate or almost campanulate, with short tube and 5 prominent, saccate invaginations in the throat. Stamens included, inserted at about middle of tube. Style included; stigma capitate. Nutlets depressed-globose, smooth, sometimes hairy, winged, with the wing erect or incurved to form an umbilicus, attached to the receptacle for almost their whole length.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Literature: A. Brand in Engler, {\i Pflanzenreich}{\b  78}({\b IV. 252}): 96-112 (1921).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Flowers solitary, axillary; corolla 3-4 mm ............................... {\b 1. scorpioides}
\par
1 Flowers in mostly terminal cymes; corolla 5-10 mm
\par
2 Perennial; flowers blue
\par
3 Basal leaves lanceolate ...................................................................... {\b 2. nitida}
\par
3 Basal leaves ovate
\par
4 Leaves acute; calyx with appressed hairs .......................................... {\b 3. verna}
\par
4 Leaves obtuse; calyx glabrous ........................................................ {\b 4. luciliae}
\par
2 Annual; flowers white, rarely blue
\par
5 Wing of nutlets strongly incurved, crenate or dentate
\par
6 Inflorescence ebracteate ................................................................. {\b 5. linifolia}
\par
6 Inflorescence bracteate ......................................................... {\b 6. kuzinskyanae}
\par

\par
118}
\par