{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. M. maritima} (L.) S. F. Gray,{\i  Nat. Arr. Brit. Pl.}{\b  2}: 354 (1821). Glabrous, glaucous; stems up to 60 cm, leafy, purple, pruinose, erect or decumbent, sometimes cushion-forming. Leaves 0·5-6 cm, spathulate, obovate or lanceolate, obtuse or apiculate, the lower petiolate, the upper sessile; upper surface papillose. Racemes often branched, with leaf-like bracts. Pedicels 2-10 mm, often recurved in fruit. Calyx-lobes c. 6 mm, ovate. Corolla c. 6 mm in diameter, pink, becoming blue and pink, with invaginations in the throat; limb campanulate, divided to c. 1/3 into ovate-triangular lobes. Nutlets c. 6 mm, flattened; outer coat fleshy, becoming papery. 2n = 24. {\i Maritime sands and shingle. Coasts of N. Europe, southwards to} 54° ({\i formerly} 52° 30'{\i  N}.){\i  in Britain and Ireland, but not in the Baltic region.} Br Da Fa Hb Is No Rs (N) Sb Su.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc {\b 26.                Amsinckia}                Lehm.
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc By A.O. Chater.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Annuals. Flowers in usually ebracteate, terminal cymes. Calyx lobed almost to the base, accrescent, sometimes with some of the lobes connate. Corolla yellow or orange, with cylindrical tube and infundibuliform or campanulate limb, without scales. Stamens included, inserted in upper part of tube. Style included; stigma capitate. Nutlets ovoid-trigonous, granulate, rugose or smooth, attached to receptacle for only part of their length. Native of America; the identity of the plants found in Europe is in some cases uncertain.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Literature: A. Brand in Engler,{\i  Pflanzenreich}{\b  97} ({\b IV. 252}): 204-217 (1931). P. M. Ray & H. F. Chisaki,{\i  Amer. Jour. Bot.}{\b  44}: 529-554 (1957).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 Corolla-tube hairy inside at throat .............................................. {\b 1. lycopsoides}
\par
Corolla-tube glabrous inside at throat .............................................. {\b 2. calycina}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. A. lycopsoides} (Lehm.) Lehm., {\i Del. Sem. Horto Hamburg.}{\b  1831}: 3 (1831). Stem 20-50 cm, erect or ascending, often branched, with patent, stout hairs. Leaves 30-80 × 5-15 mm, linear to oblanceolate, with erecto-patent hairs on both surfaces. Inflorescence ebracteate or with one bract at base; flowers subsessile. Calyx 3-5 mm in flower, 6-11 mm in fruit. Corolla 5-8 mm, deep yellow, hairy inside at the throat; limb c. 2 mm. Nutlets 2-3 mm, slightly flattened, strongly muricate, not rugose or only weakly so near apex.{\i  Waste places. Naturalized in N.E. England} ({\i Farne Islands});{\i  a frequent casual in France and Fennoscandia}. [Br.] ({\i E. North America.})
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. A. calycina} (Moris) Chater,{\i  Bot. Jour. Linn. Soc.}{\b  64}: 380 (1971) ({\i Lithospermum calycinum} Moris, {\i A. hispida} I. M. Johnston, nom. illegit.,{\i  A. angustifolia} Lehm.). Stem 15-50 cm, erect, often branched, with long, patent and short, crispate hairs. Leaves 50-150 × 4-10 mm, linear-lanceolate, with erectopatent hairs on both surfaces. Inflorescence bracteate at base; pedicels up to 3 mm. Calyx 3-4 mm in flower, 4-5 mm in fruit. Corolla 4-8 mm, yellow, glabrous inside; limb 1-2 mm. Nutlets c. 2·5 mm, strongly muricate and weakly transversely rugose.{\i  Waste places. A frequent casual in N. & W. Europe, and probably locally naturalized in France.} [Ga.] ({\i South America and S. North America.})
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  The following species are frequent casuals in W. & N.W. Europe, and are perhaps becoming naturalized; all have the corolla-tube glabrous inside and can be distinguished from each other and from {\b 2} thus:
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 Corolla 10-15 mm ......................................................................{\b  A. douglasiana}
\par
Corolla less than 10 mm
\par
2 Nutlets muricate and strongly transversely rugose ................... {\b A. intermedia}
\par
2 Nutlets muricate but not or weakly rugose
\par
3 Nutlets setulose; inflorescence ebracteate .................................. {\b A. menziesii}
\par
3 Nutlets glabrous; inflorescence bracteate at base ......................... {\b A. calycina}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   {\b A. douglasiana} A. DC. in DC.,{\i  Prodr.}{\b  10}: 118 (1846) has leaves 15-40 × 2-5 mm, ebracteate racemes, sessile, orange flowers and weakly muricate nutlets which are not rugose.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b A. intermedia} Fischer & C. A. Meyer,{\i  Ind. Sem. Hort. Petrop.} {\b 2}: 26 (1836) has leaves 10-40 × 5-15 mm, usually ebracteate racemes and sessile, orange-yellow flowers.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b  A. menziesii} (Lehm.) A. Nelson & Macbride,{\i  Bot. Gaz.} {\b 61}: 36 (1916) has leaves 30-80 × 5-15 mm, usually ebracteate racemes and sessile, pale yellow flowers.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc {\b 27.                 Asperugo}                L.
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc By A. Hansen.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Annuals. Flowers solitary and axillary, or in axillary pairs. Calyx lobed almost to the base, the lobes leaf-like, dentate, accrescent and deltate in fruit to form a 2-lipped covering round the nutlets. Corolla purple or violet, infundibuliform, with 5 short scales in the throat. Stamens included, inserted in middle of tube. Style included; stigma capitate. Nutlets ovate, laterally compressed, attached to receptacle for only a part of their length at the margin.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. A. procumbens} L.,{\i  Sp. Pl.} 138 (1753). Hispid; stems up to 70 cm, procumbent or climbing, branched, with stiff, deflexed hairs. Leaves 20-75 mm, lanceolate, subacute to obtuse, entire or slightly dentate, the lower subopposite or verticillate, petiolate, the upper sessile. Corolla 2-3 mm, purplish, becoming dark violet; scales white. Nutlets c. 3 mm, densely and finely tuberculate. 2n = 48. {\i Cultivated fields, waste places and farmyards; nitrophile. N., E. & E.C. Europe; introduced or casual elsewhere.} Al Au Bu Cz Da Fe *Ge Gr *He Hu It Ju No Po Rm Rs(N,B, C, W, K, E) Su Tu [*Ga Ho Hs Sa].
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc {\b 28.              Rochelia}                 Reichenb.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc ({\i Cervia} Rodr. ex Lag.)
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc By L.F. Ferguson.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Annual or perennial herbs. Flowers in bracteate cymes forming lax, terminal panicles. Calyx lobed to the base, accrescent. Corolla usually blue, with cylindrical tube and infundibuliform limb, usually with 5 scales or invaginations in the throat. Stamens included, inserted at about middle of tube. Style included; stigma capitate. Ovary 2-locular. Nutlets 2, subpyriform, usually glochidiate, attached to receptacle for most of their length.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. R. disperma} (L. fil.) C. Koch, {\i Linnaea}{\b  22}: 649 (1849 ({\i Cervia disperma} (L. fil.) Hayek). Annual; stem 5-20(-35) cm. Leaves 2-5 × 10-30 mm, elliptical to oblong, strigose. Bracts like the leaves but smaller; pedicels deflexed in fruit. Calyx 2-4 mm, with hooked or curved hairs; lobes linear, becoming patent then incurved in fruit. Corolla 2-4 mm, blue, with or without saccate invaginations in the throat; lobes ovate. Nutlets c. 3 mm, glochidiate. {\i Dry, stony ground. E. Romania, Greece and S. part of U.S.S.R.; C. & S. Spain.} Gr Hs Rm Rs (C, W, K, E).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp.{\b  disperma}: Calyx with hooked hairs; corolla without saccate invaginations in the throat. Romania, Greece.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b retorta}(Pallas) E. Kotejowa in Pawl., {\i Fl. Polska}{\b  10}: 217 (1963) ({\i R. retorta} (Pallas) Lipsky): Calyx with curved hairs; corolla with distinct saccate invaginations in the throat. Spain; S. part of U.S.S.R.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Intermediates occur in S.W. & S.C. Asia.
\par

\par
110}
\par