{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 bent leafy stems and erect flowering shoots; leaves 5-8 × (1-)2·5-3·5 mm, broadly elliptical; racemes with 3-7 more or less patent flowers; corolla 7-8 × 5-7 mm, glabrous, pink to crimson, with revolute lobes.{\i  Moorland and stony slopes above }500{\i  m; calcifuge. • Açores}. Az.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28\qc {\b 12.            Arbutus}               L.
\par 

\pard\f0\fs24\qc By D.A. Webb.
\par 

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Evergreen shrubs or trees; leaves alternate, petiolate. Flowers 5-merous, in terminal, bracteate panicles; bracteoles absent. Sepals connate at base. Corolla urceolate, with short, revolute lobes, deciduous. Stamens 10, with villous filaments; anthers with subulate, apical appendages. Fruit a globose berry.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 Young twigs glandular-setose, at least in part; flowers 
\par 
 produced in autumn; berry covered with conical papillae ................. {\b 1. unedo}
\par 
Young twigs glabrous; flowers produced in spring; berry
\par 
 reticulate sulcate, but without papillae ....................................... {\b 2. andrachne}
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. A. unedo} L.,{\i  Sp. Pl.} 395 (1753). Usually a bushy shrub 1·5-3 m, occasionally a small tree up to 12 m. Bark fissured, peeling off in small flakes, mostly dull brown; young twigs glandular-setose, at least in part. Leaves 4-11 × 1·5-4 cm, oblong-lanceolate, usually 2-3 times as long as wide, serrate to subentire, glabrous except at extreme base; petiole 10 mm or less. Panicle 4-5 cm, drooping, appearing in autumn. Calyx 1·5 mm, with suborbicular lobes; corolla c. 9 × 7 mm, white, often tinged with green or pink. Berry c. 20 mm, covered with conical papillae, ripening through yellow and scarlet to deep crimson. 2n = 26.{\i  Evergreen scrub, wood-margins and rocky slopes. Mediterranean region and S. W. Europe, extending northwards locally to N.W. Ireland}. Al Bl Co Cr Ga Gr Hb Hs It Ju Lu Sa Si Tu.
\par 

\par                

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. A. andrachne} L.,{\i  Syst. Nat.} ed. 10,{\b  2}: 1024 (1759). Like {\b 1} but bark smooth, peeling off in papery sheets, orange-red; young twigs glabrous; leaves 3-6 cm wide, less than twice as long as wide, often entire; petiole 15-30 mm; panicle erect, appearing in spring; calyx 2·5 mm, with ovate-rhombic, acute lobes; berry 8-12 mm, reticulate-sulcate, orange.{\i  Evergreen scrub and rocky slopes. S. Albania, Greece, Aegean region; S. Krym.} Al Cr Gr Rs (K) Tu.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b  A.} × {\b andrachnoides} Link, {\i Enum. Hort. Berol. Alt.}{\b  1}: 395 (1821), the hybrid between {\b 1} and {\b 2}, is frequent wherever the parent species grow together; it is fertile, and introgression appears to take place. It usually has the brightly-coloured bark of {\b 2}, but at least some glandular-hairs on the young twigs.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28\qc {\b 13.           Arctostaphylos}           Adanson
\par 

\pard\f0\fs28\qc (incl. {\i Arctous} (A. Gray) Niedenzu)
\par 

\pard\f0\fs24\qc By D.A. Webb.
\par 

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Dwarf shrubs; leaves alternate, shortly petiolate. Flowers 5-merous, in small, terminal racemes or clusters; bracteoles 2, at base of pedicel. Sepals small, connate for much of their length. Corolla urceolate, with short lobes. Stamens 10; anthers with apical appendages, opening by pores or short slits. Fruit a small, berry-like drupe with 5-10 pyrenes.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 Leaves entire, evergreen; ripe fruit red ........................................... {\b 1. uva-ursi}
\par 
Leaves serrate, withering in autumn; ripe fruit black ....................... {\b 2. alpinus}
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. A. uva-ursi} (L.) Sprengel,{\i  Syst. Veg.}{\b  2}: 287 (1825) ({\i Arbutus uva-ursi} L.). Stems up to 150 cm long, procumbent, freely branched, forming large, dense mats. Leaves 12-30 × 4-12 mm, obovate to oblanceolate-cuneate, obtuse to emarginate, entire, coriaceous, evergreen, usually pubescent on midrib and margins, dark and shining above, paler beneath, conspicuously reticulate veined. Bracts similar but smaller. Calyx-lobes suborbicular. Corolla 5-6 mm, greenish-white to pink; lobes revolute. Stamens included; appendages about as long as anthers. Fruit 10 mm, globose, bright red; fresh rather dry; pyrenes 5-7(-10). 2n = 52.{\i  Heaths, rocky ground and open woods. Most of Europe except the extreme south.} Al Au Br Bu Cz Da Fe Ga Ge Gr Hb He Ho Hs Is It Ju No Po Rm Rs (N, B, C, W) Su.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. A. alpinus} (L.) Sprengel,{\i  loc. cit.} (1825) ({\i Arbutus alpina }L., {\i Arctous alpinus} (L.) Niedenzu). Like {\b 1} but stems not more than 60 cm; leaves up to 50 mm, subacute, serrate, not coriaceous withering in autumn but not falling till spring, ciliate in basal half; bracts whitish, truncate, densely ciliate-fimbriate at apex; appendages much shorter than anthers; ripe fruit black, succulent; pyrenes 5. 2n = 26.{\i  Heaths and stony slopes, on mountains except in the extreme north. N. Russia, N. & C. Fennoscandia, Scotland; mountains of C. & S. Europe southwards to the Pyrenees, C. Appennini and N. Albania.} Al Au Br Cz †Da Fe Ga Ge He Hs It Ju No Rs (N, W) Su.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28\qc {\b 14.              Gaultheria}               L.
\par 

\pard\f0\fs24\qc By D.A. Webb.
\par 

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Evergreen shrubs; leaves alternate, shortly petiolate. Flowers 5-merous, in lax, axillary, bracteate racemes; bracteoles 2, at base of pedicel. Sepals connate at base. Corolla urceolate, with revolute lobes, deciduous. Stamens 10; anthers with 2-fid apical appendages. Fruit a septicidal capsule, enclosed by the accrescent calyx.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. G. shallon} Pursh, {\i Fl. Amer. Sept. }283 (1814). Stems 50-175 cm, erect, multiplying freely by underground rhizomes to form a dense thicket; twigs and leaves glandular-hirsute when young, glabrescent. Leaves 6-9 × 3-7 cm, shortly cuspidate, serrulate, coriaceous. Racemes subterminal on the previous year's growth. Calyx and corolla pinkish-white, glandular-hairy; corolla 8-10 mm. Capsule closely invested by the succulent, accrescent calyx, which forms a subglobose, dark purple, berry-like pseudocarp.{\i  Cultivated for ornament and as cover for game, and naturalized in N.W. Europe.} [Br Ga.] ({\i W. North America.})
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28\qc {\b 15.       Pernettya}             Gaud.-Beaupre 
\par 

\pard\f0\fs24\qc By D.A. Webb.
\par 

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Small evergreen shrubs; leaves alternate, subsessile. Flowers 5-merous, axillary or in small terminal corymbs; bracteoles 2-4. Sepals connate at base. Corolla urceolate, with acute, revolute lobes, deciduous. Stamens 10; anthers with short apical appendages. Fruit a globose berry.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  There is some evidence to suggest that this genus, defined primarily by the succulent fruit, is polyphyletic, succulence of fruit having apparently arisen independently in different sections of{\i  Gaultheria}. Until a full monographic study of {\i Gaultheria} has been made it seems best to maintain {\i Pernettya} as a separate genus.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. P. mucronata} (L. fil.) Gaud.-Beaupré ex Sprengel, {\i Syst. Veg.}{\b  4}({\b 2}): 158 (1827). Stems 30-100 cm, erect or spreading, much-branched; young twigs glabrescent. Leaves 8-20 mm, elliptic-lanceolate, serrate to subentire, spine-tipped, glabrous, coriaceous. Flowers drooping; pedicel shorter than the subtending leaf. Corolla 5-6 mm, white. Berry c. 12 mm in diameter, purple, pink or white.{\i  Cultivated for ornament and locally naturalized in Britain and Ireland}. [Br Hb.] ({\i S. Chile}.)
\par 

\par 

\par 
11}
\par