{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 31 Nutlets with a rim; corolla-tube lengthening after anthesis ..... {\b 10. congesta}
\par
31 Nutlets without a rim; corolla-tube not lengthening
\par
   after anthesis
\par
32 Flowers irregularly spaced, often close together but sometimes 
\par
  wide apart; stem often sharply bent several times ................. {\b 8. ruscinonensis}
\par
32 Stem straight, with regularly spaced flowers ........................ {\b 7. ramosissima}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. M. incrassata} Guss.,{\i  Fl. Sic. Syn.}{\b  1}: 214 (1843) ({\i M. cretica} Boiss. & Heldr., {\i M. idaea} Boiss. & Heldr.). Annual, covered with straight, setiform hairs, patent at the base of the stem, pointing forwards on the leaves, otherwise appressed. Stem 5-20 cm, ascending to erect, often much-branched at the base. Basal leaves 4 × 1 cm, the cauline smaller, ovate-lanceolate. Inflorescence with numerous flowers; pedicels clavate in fruit, thickened towards apex. Calyces in fruit in 2 regular rows, usually pointing upwards, rarely appressed, often deciduous. Limb of corolla up to 3 mm in diameter, saucer-shaped, blue, rarely white; tube shorter than calyx. Nutlets up to 1·2 mm, brown, without rim; attachment-area with 2 marginal grooves. 2n = 24. {\i Dry, open habitats. S. Europe, from Sicilia eastwards.} Al Bu Cr Gr It Ju Rs (K) Si Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. M. cadmea} Boiss., {\i Diagn. Pl. Or. Nov.}{\b  2}({\b 11}): 122 (1849). Like {\b 1} but up to 25 cm, erect; hairs on stems patent: leaves up to 7 × 1·5 cm, oblanceolate; calyx patent in fruit, the pedicels not thickened; limb of corolla up to 6 mm in diameter, flat. 2n = 24. {\i E. & C. parts of Balkan peninsula.} Gr Ju Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 3. M. ucrainica} Czern., {\i Bull. Soc. Nat. Moscou}{\b  18}({\b 2}): 133 (1845). Like {\b 1} but up to 30 cm, erect, not branched at the base; pedicels in fruit up to 10 mm, patent, not thickened; limb of corolla c. 1·5 mm in diameter.{\i  Forest-margins and river-banks. Ukraine and S.C. Russia.} Rs (C, W).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 4. M. pusilla} Loisel. in Desv., {\i Jour. Bot. Rédigé}{\b  2}: 260 (1809). Annual. Stem 2-7 cm, procumbent, often much-branched and forming a cushion. Leaves narrowly lingulate, dark grey-green, thickly covered with straight hairs. Inflorescence usually bracteate throughout; pedicels 2·5 mm in fruit, uniformly thickened. Calyx c. 3·5 mm in fruit, patent or appressed, longer than the pedicels. Limb of corolla up to 2 mm in diameter, saucer-shaped, pale blue to white. Nutlets as in 1. 2n = 24. {\i Sandy places near the sea. S. France, Corse, Sardegna}. Co Ga Sa.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 5. M. litoralis} Steven ex Bieb.,{\i  Fl. Taur.-Cauc.}{\b  3}: 118 (1819). Like {\b 4} but ebracteate; pedicels somewhat clavate at maturity. Calyces very crowded in fruit, appressed to stem and pointing upwards.{\i  Sandy places or rocks near the sea. Aegean region; Turkey-in-Europe; Krym.} Gr Rs (K) Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 6. M. arvensis} (L.) Hill, {\i Veg. Syst.} {\b 7}: 55 (1764) ({\i M. intermedia} Link). Biennial. Stem up to 60 cm, robust, often much-branched at the base. Basal leaves up to 8 × 1·5 cm, oblanceolate, not distinctly petiolate. Leafy part of stem with patent hairs, the leafless part with appressed, straight hairs. Inflorescence ebracteate; pedicels directed upwards in fruit, the lowest up to 1 cm, becoming shorter above. Calyx up to 7 mm in fruit, closed, with many patent, hooked hairs especially at its base, deciduous. Limb of corolla c. 3 mm in diameter, saucer-shaped, bright blue. Nutlets up to 2·5 × 1·2 mm, greenish-black to black, pointed, with a rim; attachment-area small.{\i  Dry places, and as a ruderal. Throughout Europe.} All except Az Cr Sb.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Very variable, the habit depending greatly on the environment.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp.{\b  arvensis}: Calyx not more than 5 mm in fruit; hooked hairs not more than 0·4 mm. Nutlets not more than 2 mm. 2n = 52.{\i  Throughout the range of the species}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b umbrata}(Rouy) O. Schwarz,{\i  Mitt. Thür. Bot. Ges.}{\b  1}({\b 1}): 112 (1949): Calyx up to 7 mm in fruit; hooked hairs up to 0·6 mm. Nutlets up to 2·5 mm. 2n = 66. W. Europe.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 7. M. ramosissima} Rochel in Schultes, {\i Österreichs Fl.} ed. 2, {\b 1}: 366 (1814) ({\i M. collina} auct. plur., non Hoffm., {\i M. gracillima} Loscos & Pardo, {\i M. hispida} Schlecht.). Annual. Stem up to 40 cm. Rosette-leaves up to 4 × 1 cm, lanceolate, obtuse; leaves with soft, patent straight hairs. Stem soft, at base with patent, above with appressed, straight hairs. Inflorescence lax, ebracteate; pedicels in fruit scarcely longer than calyx, patent, more or less straight. Calyx up to 4 mm in fruit, divided to ½, half-open, with many, often deflexed hooked hairs at the base, deciduous. Limb of corolla up to 3 mm in diameter, saucer-shaped, bright blue. Nutlets 1·2 × 0·7 mm, brown, without rim; attachment-area usually filled with spongy tissue.{\i  Dry places. Most of Europe except the extreme north.} All except ?Az Fa ?Is Rs (N) Sb.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b ramosissima}: Flowers only on the upper part of the stem. Calyx up to 4 mm in fruit, elongated, segments narrowly triangular. Corolla scarcely exceeding calyx. Nutlets smooth. 2n = 48.{\i  Throughout the range of the species}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b globularis}(Samp.) Grau,{\i  Mitt. Bot. Staatssamm.} ({\i München}) {\b 7}: 58 (1968) ({\i M. globularis} Samp.): Flowers extending almost to the base of the stem. Calyx scarcely more than 2 mm in fruit, almost spherical, segments broadly triangular. Corolla distinctly exceeding calyx. Nutlets with an indistinct rim at the apex.{\i  Sandy places, especially near the sea. • W. Europe, from N. Portugal to S. England}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Intermediates between ({\b a}) and ({\b b}) have been described as subsp. {\i lebelii} (Godron) Blaise.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 8. M. ruscinonensis} Rouy, {\i Bull. Soc. Bot. Fr.}{\b  38}: 377 (1891). Like {\b 7} but low-growing; cymes patent; flowers usually irregularly arranged on the axis, often fused together; axis of inflorescence often sharply bent; pedicels up to 3 times as long as the calyces in fruit. Flowers white to bright blue, often bracteate. 2n = ?36, 48.{\i  Sandy places by the sea. S. France.} Ga.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 9. M. discolor} Pers., {\i Syst. Veg.} ed. 15, 190 (1797) ({\i M. collina} Hoffm., {\i M. versicolor} Sm.). Annual; stem up to 30 cm, slender, often branched at the base. Basal leaves up to 4 cm, lanceolate, obtuse; cauline leaves ovate-lanceolate, the upper acute. Hairs on the stem patent below, appressed above; those on the pedicels often patent. Inflorescence not leafy at the base, many-flowered, lax below, dense above, pedicels shorter than calyx in fruit. Calyx up to 4·5 mm in fruit, rarely deciduous, with soft deflexed, hooked hairs. Corolla up to 4 mm; limb c. 1·3 mm in diameter, saucer-shaped, pale yellow or cream at first, becoming pink, violet or even blue; tube pale blue to dark violet. Nutlets c. 1·2 × 0·8 mm, dark brown, with a wide rim. {\i Dry places; sometimes in wet meadows. Europe, eastwards to Latvia, N. Ukraine & C. Jugoslavia, and northwards to Iceland and S. Fennoscandia.} ?Al Au Az Be Br Co Cz Da Fa Ga Ge Hb He Ho Hu Is It Ju Lu No Po Rm Rs (B, C, W) Sa Su.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp.{\b  discolor}: Flowers cream or yellow at first; corolla up to 4 mm; with at least one pair of opposite cauline leaves. 2n = 72, ?64. {\i Throughout the range of the species}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b dubia}(Arrondeau) Blaise, {\i Bot. Jour. Linn. Soc.}{\b  65}: 261 (1972) ({\i M. dubia }Arrondeau): Flowers cream at first; corolla not more than 2 mm; with no opposite leaves. 2n = 24. •{\i  W. Europe}.
\par

\par
112}
\par