{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28  Subsp. {\i canariensis} (Pitard) Grau, from Madeira and Islas Canarias, has been recorded from N.W. Europe but probably in error. It has shorter flowers and more condensed inflorescences than{\b  9}({\b b}).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 10. M. congesta} R. J. Shuttlew. ex Albert & Reyn., {\i Coup d'Oeil Fl. Toulon Hyères} 16 (1891). Like {\b 9} but not more than 25 cm, usually smaller and more slender; flowers always blue; calyx 3 mm in fruit, deciduous; corolla not more than 2 mm, limb 1 mm in diameter; nutlets 1 × 0·5 mm, dark brown. 2n = 24, ?32, 48. {\i Mediterranean region; very local.} Co Cr Ga Gr.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Often confused with {\b 7}({\b a}); further investigation is needed.
\par
 
\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 11. M. balbisiana} Jordan,{\i  Pug. Pl. Nov.} 128 (1852). Like {\b 9} but smaller (up to 20 cm) and more delicate; calyx not more than 3 mm in fruit, the hooked hairs few, short; corolla c. 2 mm; limb scarcely more than 1 mm in diameter, pale yellow. •{\i  S. France, N. Spain.} Ga Hs.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 12. M. persoonii} Rouy,{\i  Fl. Fr.}{\b  6}: 327 (1900) ({\i M. lutea} (Cav.) Pers., non Lam.). Like {\b 9} but low-growing, compact, scarcely more than 10 cm; inflorescence dense, the lowermost flowers with bracts; calyx 3 mm in fruit, enlarging only slightly, the hooked hairs numerous, stiff; corolla c. 4 mm, limb 2 mm in diameter when flat, bright yellow. 2n = 48. •{\i  N. & C. Spain, Portugal.} Hs Lu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 13. M. stricta} Link ex Roemer & Schultes, {\i Syst. Veg.}{\b  4}: 104 (1819) ({\i M. micrantha} auct., non Pallas ex Lehm., {\i M. vestita} Velen.). Annual; stems up to 30 cm but often less, erect, usually much-branched at the base, leafy up to the inflorescence, with hooked hairs at the base. Basal leaves up to 2·5 × 0·5 cm, lanceolate; hairs on lower surface of leaves, especially the midrib, hooked, the others straight. Axis of inflorescence with patent and upwardly pointing to subappressed hairs; flowers crowded towards the apex; pedicels up to 1·5 mm, but usually shorter. Calyx with deflexed hooked hairs and appressed, straight hairs at the base, c. 4 mm in fruit, divided to ½, closed, not deciduous. Corolla scarcely exceeding the calyx; limb scarcely more than 1 mm in diameter, saucer-shaped, bright to pale blue. Nutlets 1·5 × 1 mm, brown, with a distinct rim, keeled at the apex. 2n = 36, 48.{\i  Dry, sandy places. Most of Europe.} All except ?Az Bl Br Co Fa Hb Sa Sb Si.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 14. M. minutiflora} Boiss. & Reuter,{\i  Pugillus} 80 (1852) ({\i M. rhodopea} Velen.). Annual; stem not more than 15 cm, delicate, branched at the base, with widely spaced leaves up to the lowest flowers, with a dense, patent indumentum above but also with hooked hairs below. Basal leaves up to 2 × 0·4 cm, oblanceolate, sessile, with hooked hairs beneath. Flowers very crowded, especially towards the apex of the inflorescence. Pedicels in lower part of inflorescence up to 3 mm in fruit, often bent and deflexed, in upper part 1 mm, patent or pointing upwards. Calyx up to 3·5 mm in fruit, divided to more than ½, open, deciduous, with deflexed, hooked hairs and appressed, straight hairs at the base. Corolla scarcely exceeding the calyx; limb scarcely 1 mm in diameter, saucer-shaped, pale blue. Nutlets 1·5 × 1 mm, brown, broadly ovate, with distinct rim and obliquely triangular attachment-area on the inner side of the keel which runs from apex to base. 2n = 48.{\i  Mountains of S. Spain, N.E. Greece and S. Bulgaria.} Bu Gr Hs. ({\i S.W. Asia}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 15. M. speluncicola} (Boiss.) Rouy,{\i  Naturaliste} ({\i Paris}){\b  1}: 501 (1881). Like {\b 14} but with broadly lanceolate to ovate leaves; basal leaves distinctly petiolate, often smaller than cauline; flowers less crowded, often bracteate; calyces in fruit without straight hairs at base, hooked hairs mainly restricted to the veins; limb of corolla 2 mm in diameter, shallowly saucer-shaped to flat, white. 2n = 24. {\i Mountain caves. S.E. France; C. Appennini, S. Jugoslavia.} Ga It Ju. ({\i S. Anatolia}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 16. M. refracta} Boiss., {\i Voy. Bot. Midi Esp.}{\b  2}: 433 (1841). Annual; stem up to 25 cm, often shorter, usually rigidly erect, leafy up to the lowest flowers, with patent, lanate indumentum above and hooked hairs below. Leaves 4 × 1 cm, narrowly to broadly lanceolate, rarely ovate, the lower surface with hooked hairs. Flowers lax below, crowded above. Pedicels scarcely more than 1 mm in fruit, almost always deflexed at maturity. Calyx up to 4·5 mm in fruit, divided to c. 1/3, open, deciduous, with strongly deflexed, hooked hairs and short, delicate straight hairs at the base. Limb of corolla up to 1·5 mm in diameter, flat, or rather smaller and saucer-shaped, pale to bright blue. Nutlets 2 × 1 mm, ellipsoid or narrowly obovate, brown, with a small, lateral attachment-area, distinct rim and, on the inner side, a furrow running from apex to base.{\i  Mountains of S. Spain, E. Mediterranean region and Krym.} Cr Gr Hs Ju Rs (K).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Only the lowermost pedicels deflexed in fruit; leaves 
\par
  broadly lanceolate to ovate ..................................... ({\b c}) subsp. {\b aegagrophila}
\par
1 All pedicels deflexed in fruit; leaves narrowly to 
\par
  rather broadly lanceolate
\par
2 Calyx-tube ± evenly covered with hooked hairs; calyces
\par
  not appressed in fruit ...................................................... ({\b a}) subsp. {\b refracta}
\par
2 Calyx-tube without hooked hairs in lower 1/3; calyces
\par
  closely appressed in fruit .......................................... ({\b b}) subsp. {\b paucipilosa}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp.{\b  refracta}: Rigidly erect. Leaves narrowly to rather broadly lanceolate. Calyx-tube more or less evenly covered with deflexed hooked hairs; calyx usually not appressed when deflexed in fruit. Nutlets broadest at or below the middle, with furrow in the middle. 2n = 44. {\i Throughout the range of the species}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b paucipilosa} Grau,{\i  Mitt. Bot. Staatssamm.} ({\i München}){\b  7}: 90 (1968): Rigidly erect. Leaves narrowly to rather broadly lanceolate. Calyx-tube without hooked hairs in lower 1/3; calyces closely appressed when deflexed in fruit. Nutlets widest above the middle, furrow lateral and coinciding with rim. 2n = 20. {\i S. Greece, Kriti}.
\par
 ({\b c}) Subsp. {\b aegagrophila} W. Greuter & Grau, {\i Candollea }{\b 25}: 8 (1970): Delicate, flexuous. Leaves broadly lanceolate to ovate. Calyx-tube more or less evenly covered with hooked hairs; only the lowermost calyces deflexed in fruit. Nutlets as in subsp. ({\b a}). • {\i Kriti}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 17. M. sylvatica} Hoffm.,{\i  Deutschl. Fl.} 61 (1791). Biennial to perennial; stem up to 50 cm, often much-branched, very leafy, with appressed hairs in inflorescence, otherwise with setiform hairs. Leaves c. 8 × 3 cm, broadly to narrowly ovate, or elliptical, the basal usually not distinctly petiolate. Pedicels up to 7(-15) mm, directed upwards. Calyx up to 5 mm in fruit, with short hooked hairs up to 0·2 mm, with linear to narrowly triangular teeth and rounded base, open, deciduous. Limb of corolla up to 8 mm in diameter but often smaller, flat, bright blue. Nutlets 1·7 × 1·2 mm, ovoid, acute, with rim; attachment area very small.{\i  Much of Europe, but absent from the south-west and much of the north.} Al Au Be Br Bu Cz Da Ga Ge Gr He Ho Hu It Ju *No Po Rm Rs (B, C, W) Su Tu [Fe].
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Calyx with sparse hooked hairs almost disappearing at maturity;
\par
  nutlets ovoid ..................................................................... ({\b a}) subsp. {\b sylvatica}
\par
1 Calyx with numerous hooked hairs; nutlets narrowly ovoid 
\par
2 Corolla-limb not more than 4 mm in diameter ........... ({\b b}) subsp. {\b subarvensis}
\par
2 Corolla-limb more than 4 mm in diameter
\par
3 Pedicels not more than 7 mm ............................................. ({\b c}) subsp. {\b cyanea}
\par
3 Lowest pedicels at least 10 mm ....................................... ({\b d}) subsp. {\b elongata}
\par

\par
113}
\par