{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28  Very variable, with many local forms. Small mat-forming plants with straight, appressed calyx-hairs from S. Jugoslavia have been described as {\b M. mrkvickana }Velen.,{\i  Rel. Mrkvick.} 22 (1922).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 22. M. gallica} Vestergren, {\i Ark. Bot.}{\b  29A}({\b 8}): 27 (1938). Like {\b 21} but up to 20 cm; flowers bright blue; calyx always with hooked bristles at the base; nutlets up to 1·8 mm with distinct rim, much elongated at upper end. 2n = 24. •{\i  S.E. France}. Ga.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 23. M. ambigens} (Béguinot) Grau,{\i  Mitt. Bot. Staatssamm}. ({\i München}) 8: 127 (1970). Like {\b 21} but not more than 12 cm; calyx with straight, very dense hairs, especially on the margins of the segments, and very few hooked bristles, swollen at the base in fruit; flowers whitish to bright blue. 2n = 24. •{\i  C. Appennini}. It.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 24. M. stenophylla} Knaf in Berchtold & Opiz, {\i Ökon.-Techn. Fl. Böhm.}{\b  2}: 126 (1839). Stems 5-35 cm, branched at base. Basal leaves 6 × 0·5 cm, narrowly ovate, acute, with a distinct, slender petiole; cauline numerous, lanceolate, acute. Pedicels directed upwards in fruit, not longer than calyx. Calyx up to 7 mm and often much enlarged in fruit, with appressed or bent hairs and no hooked hairs. Corolla-limb up to 8 mm in diameter, bright or deep blue. Nutlets up to 2·5 mm, ovoid to ellipsoid, obtuse, without rim; attachment-area wide, elliptical elongated laterally into 2 grooves often extending towards the base. 2n = 48.{\i  E. & E.C. Europe.} Au Cz Hu Po Rm Rs (C, W, K, E)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 25. M. asiatica} (Vestergren) Schischkin & Serg. in Krylov, {\i Fl. Zap. Sibir.}{\b  9}: 2272 (1937). Like {\b 24} but low-growing, not more than 10 cm; leaves and often also the stem almost glabrous.{\i  Arctic and subarctic Russia.} Rs (N).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 26. M. alpina} Lapeyr., {\i Hist. Abr. Pyr.} 85 (1813) ({\i M. pyrenaica} Pourret). Stems not more than 12 cm, forming a dense mat. Basal leaves almost always sessile, glabrous beneath; cauline variable. Pedicels up to 2 mm, directed upwards in fruit. Calyx up to 7 mm, with numerous hooked bristles at the base which extend to the very short pedicels, crowded and often very accrescent in fruit. Corolla-limb up to 8 mm in diameter, bright or deep blue. Nutlets 2 × 1·2 mm, narrowly ovoid, with rim only at apex; attachment-area wide, elliptical, elongated laterally into 2 grooves, often extending towards the base. 2n = 24.{\i  Rocks, screes and mountain pastures. • Pyrenees.} Ga Hs.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 27. M. corsicana} (Fiori) Grau,{\i  Mitt. Bot. Staatssamm.} ({\i München}){\b  8}: 128 (1970). Stems up to 25 cm, almost glabrous. Basal leaves 3 × 1·5 cm, elliptical, often crenate towards apex, glabrous beneath, with a few bristles above; petiole up to 9 cm, distinct; cauline leaves ovate to lanceolate, glabrescent beneath. Pedicels up to 4 mm in fruit. Calyx, especially towards base, with dense, deflexed hooked bristles, which extend to the upper part of the pedicels, up to 5 mm in fruit. Limb of corolla up to 6 mm in diameter. Nutlets 2 × 1 mm, narrowly ovoid, with elliptical attachment-area and almost complete rim. 2n = 24.{\i  Alpine habitats. • Corse}. Co.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 28. M. suaveolens} Waldst. & Kit. ex Willd.,{\i  Enum. Pl. Hort. Berol.} 176 (1809). Stems up to 40 cm, often bushy and much-branched. Basal leaves petiolate; cauline ovate to lanceolate. Calyx densely hairy, with hooked bristles, much enlarged in fruit up to 7 mm, and especially the lower on long pedicels. Corolla usually deep blue. Nutlets c. 2 mm, usually ellipsoid, with complete rim and wide, elliptical attachment-area which often extends towards the base. 2n = 24, 48.{\i  Alpine habitats. • Balkan peninsula.} Al Bu Gr Ju.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 29. M. lithospermifolia} (Willd.) Hornem.,{\i  Hort. Hafn.}{\b  1}: 173 (1813). Stems up to 40 cm, often much-branched at the base, densely hairy, grey-green. Basal leaves up to 5 × 1 cm, obovate to narrowly elliptical, obtuse, gradually narrowed into a long petiole; cauline up to 4 × 0·5 cm, numerous, linear, obtuse. Inflorescence with numerous flowers; pedicels up to 5 mm, directed upwards. Calyx, especially at the base, with numerous patent or deflexed hooked bristles. Nutlets up to 2·2 × 1·2 mm, narrowly ovoid.{\i  Mountain meadows. Krym.} Rs (K). ({\i Caucasus, N. Anatolia}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 30. M. secunda} A. Murray,{\i  North. Fl.}{\b  1}: 115 (1836). Annual to biennial; stems 20-40 cm, usually slender, with rooting stolons emerging from the axils of the lowermost leaves, and with patent to upwardly pointing hairs in the leafy parts. Leaves 4 × 1·5 cm, elliptical. Inflorescence often much-branched, lax, with appressed or upwardly pointing hairs. Calyx divided to rather more than ½, open, saucer-shaped and up to 5 mm in diameter in fruit, easily deciduous, deflexed. Limb of corolla up to 8 mm in diameter, bright blue. Nutlets 1·8 × 1·2 mm, black, ovoid, acute, with rim, rhombic attachment-area and spongy appendage. 2n = 24, 48. {\i Wet places; in mountains in the southern part of its range. W. Europe.} Az Br Fa Ga Hb Hs Lu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 31. M. welwitschii} Boiss. & Reuter in Boiss., {\i Diagn. Pl. Or. Nov.}{\b  3}({\b 3}): 138 (1856). Like {\b 30} but stems up to 60 cm, robust, never with rooting stolons but producing lateral flowering branches at the base; hairs at base of stem somewhat deflexed; leaves 7 × 1·5 cm; calyx up to 6 mm in fruit, campanulate; limb of corolla up to 10 mm in diameter. 2n = 24.{\i  Wet places, usually near the coast. Portugal.} Lu. ({\i Morocco.})
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Plants slightly hairy or almost glabrous at the base of the stem are known from two localities in Portugal and have been described as{\b  M. lusitanica} Schuster, {\i Feddes Repert.}{\b  74}: 85 (1967). They also resemble{\b  34}, and further investigation is needed.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 32. M. stolonifera} (DC.) Gay ex Leresche & Levier,{\i  Deux Excurs. Bot.} 83 (1880). Like {\b 30} but smaller; hairs at base of stem appressed; stolons numerous in lower part of plant, often much-branched; leaves up to 2 × 1 cm; calyx up to 3 mm in fruit; limb of corolla 4-5 mm in diameter; nutlets 1·2 × 0·7 mm, ovoid, the rim only weakly developed. 2n = 24.{\i  Wet places; in mountains in the southern part of its range. W. Europe.} Br Hs Lu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 33. M. sicula} Guss., {\i Fl. Sic. Syn.}{\b  1}: 214 (1843). Annual or biennial, stems either short and little-branched, or up to 50 cm and much-branched, erect to ascending; hairs on stems and leaves straight, appressed and pointing upwards. Basal leaves 6 × 0·8 cm, broadly linear, usually withering at maturity; cauline ovate-oblong. Inflorescence with flowers in two distinct rows; only the lowermost pedicels longer than the calyx at maturity. Calyx up to 6 mm in fruit; tube twice as long as the scarcely divergent teeth. Limb of corolla up to 3 mm in diameter, saucer-shaped, bright blue. Nutlets 1 mm, ovoid or ellipsoid, dark to medium brown, with appendage on the attachment-area. 2n = 46, 46+2.{\i  Wet places. S. & W. Europe, northwards to N.W. France.} Bu Co Ga Gr Hs It Ju Sa Si Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 34. M. debilis} Pomel, {\i Nouv. Mat. Fl. Atl.} 298 (1875). Like {\b 33} but basal leaves narrowly ovate; pedicels in lower and middle part of inflorescence longer than calyx at maturity; calyx divided to c. ½ in fruit, campanulate, with patent teeth, branches of the 5
\par

\par
115}
\par