{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28\qc {\b 29.            Myosotis}             L.
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc By J. Grau & H. Merxmuller.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Annual or perennial herbs. Flowers in usually paired cymes which are usually ebracteate or sometimes bracteate below. Calyx more or less accrescent in fruit, regularly 5-lobed to halfway to base or more. Corolla rotate; tube usually short; limb regularly 5-lobed, flat or slightly concave, usually blue (sometimes white, yellow or yellow and blue); scales 5, usually included, papillose, white or yellow. Stamens usually included, with a terminal lingulate appendage; filaments inserted about the middle of the tube. Style included; stigma capitate. Nutlets 4, ovoid, erect, more or less compressed, smooth and shiny, brown to black, often with a distinct rim; area of attachment usually small, sometimes with a spongy or lingulate appendage.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Literature: J. Grau,{\i  Österr. Bot. Zeitschr.}{\b  111}: 561-617 (1964); {\i Mitt. Bot. Staatssamm.} ({\i München}){\b  5}: 675-688 (1965);{\b  6}: 517-530 (1967);{\b  7}: 17-100 (1968). R. Schuster,{\i  Feddes Repert.} {\b 74}: 39-98 (1967). T.Vestergren, {\i Svensk Bot. Tidskr}.{\b  24}: 449-467 (1930); {\i Ark. Bot.} {\b 29 A }({\b 8}): 1-39 (1938).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Calyx with equal and uniform, straight, appressed setae,
\par
  pointing towards the apex
\par
2 Upper cauline leaves with erecto-patent hairs on upper surface;
\par
  attachment of the nutlets not spongy; annuals of dry habitats
\par
3 Corolla c. 5 mm in diameter; stem up to the highest 
\par
  leaf with patent hairs ....................................................................... {\b 2. cadmea}
\par
3 Corolla not more than 3 mm in diameter; lower part of
\par
  stem with patent hairs
\par
4 Pedicels not thickened in fruit, usually patent; stems erect ..........{\b 3. ucrainica}
\par
4 Pedicels thickened towards the apex in fruit; stems 
\par
  erect, ascending or procumbent
\par
5 Inflorescence bracteate .................................................................... {\b 4. pusilla}
\par
5 Inflorescence ebracteate, or only the lowermost flowers
\par
  in the axils of bracts
\par
6 Calyces up to 3 mm in fruit, crowded and appressed to 
\par
  the stem ............................................................................................ {\b 5. litoralis}
\par
6 Calyces in fruit rarely appressed, less than 3 mm and 
\par
  not crowded .................................................................................. {\b 1. incrassata}
\par
2 Upper cauline leaves with short appressed hairs on 
\par
  upper surface; attachment of the nutlets spongy;
\par
  annuals or perennials of wet habitats
\par
7 Calyx persistent in fruit, divided at anthesis to less
\par
  than ½ way; teeth broadly triangular
\par
8 Annual or biennial, without stolons; limb of corolla
\par
  saucershaped; nutlets up to 1 mm, ellipsoid, brown ......................... {\b 33. sicula}
\par
8 Biennial or perennial, often with subterranean stolons;
\par
  limb of corolla flat; nutlets more than 1·5 mm, ovoid,
\par
  usually black ........................................................ ({\b 36-39}). {\b scorpioides} group
\par
7 Calyx often caducous at maturity, divided at anthesis
\par
  to at least ½ way; teeth narrowly triangular
\par
9 Stems with patent hairs at least at the base
\par
10 Stolons absent ...................................................................... {\b 31. welwitschii}
\par
10 Stolons present ........................................................................... {\b 30. secunda}
\par
9  Stems with appressed hairs or glabrous at the base
\par
11 Stolons present ...................................................................... {\b 32. stolonifera}
\par
11 Stolons absent
\par
12 Pedicels (except in the single central flower) not 
\par
   longer than calyx in fruit ................................................................. {\b 33. sicula}
\par
12 Pedicels (especially those of the lower flowers) 
\par
   longer than calyx in fruit 
\par
13 Nutlets up to 1·2 mm, brown; main veins of calyx 
\par
   branched at about the middle of the calyx-tube;
\par
   calyx-tube up to 3 mm at maturity ................................................. {\b 34. debilis}
\par
13 Nutlets up to 2 mm, dark brown to black; main veins of
\par
   calyx branched at base; calyx-tube up to 6 mm at maturity .............. {\b 35. laxa}
\par
1  Calyx with hooked hairs or with hairs of 2 kinds; some
\par
   setiform, usually hooked and ± patent; some shorter,
\par
   slender, straight or curved
\par
14 Perennial or biennial
\par
15 Calyx-teeth lanceolate, obtuse; hairs on calyx 
\par
   straight, those of the teeth pointing forwards, those
\par
   of the tube backwards .................................................................... {\b 40. azorica}
\par
15 Calyx-teeth linear to broadly triangular; hairs on calyx
\par
   all pointing forwards, or with hooked hairs at the base 
\par
16 Nutlets obtuse; attachment-area large, elliptical to
\par
   orbicular, often slightly but regularly reniform, with
\par
   lateral folds; calyx narrowed at the base in fruit,
\par
   never deciduous ...................................................... ({\b 21-29}). {\b alpestris} group
\par
16 Nutlets ± acute; attachment-area small, irregularly 
\par
   reniform, without lateral folds; calyx rounded at the
\par
   base in fruit, usually deciduous 
\par
17 Calyx closed in fruit; limb of corolla saucer-shaped ................... {\b 6. arvensis}
\par
17 Calyx open in fruit; limb of corolla flat
\par
18 Nutlets 2-3 mm; calyx shorter than corolla-tube;
\par
   hooked hairs of the calyx 0·4 mm, stiff
\par
19 Limb of corolla not more than 4 mm in diameter,
\par
   yellowish-white to pale blue ....................................................... {\b 18. soleirolii}
\par
19 Limb of corolla up to 8 mm in diameter, usually bright blue 
\par
20 Nutlets c. 2 mm; stem not woody at base ............................. {\b 19. decumbens}
\par
20 Nutlets c. 3 mm; stem woody at base ......................................... {\b 20. latifolia}
\par
18 Nutlets not more than 1·8 mm; calyx equalling or longer 
\par
   than corolla-tube; hooked hairs of the calyx 0·2 mm, soft
\par
21 Pedicels not more than 2·5 mm in fruit; flowers 
\par
   yellowish-white to pale blue ....................................................... {\b 18. soleirolii}
\par
21 Pedicels at least 5 mm in fruit; flowers bright to 
\par
   deep blue ..................................................................................... {\b 17. sylvatica}
\par
14 Annual
\par
22 Lower surface of leaves, especially on the veins, and
\par
   base of stem with hooked hairs; inflorescence-axis 
\par
   with some upwardly projecting or patent hairs
\par
23 Calyx divided to 1/3 in fruit, almost all deflexed towards 
\par
   the base of the stem; nutlets narrowly ellipsoid ........................... {\b 16. refracta}
\par
23 Calyx divided to ½ in fruit, all but the oldest
\par
   patent or pointing towards the apex of the stem;
\par
   nutlets ovoid
\par
24 Hairs on stem pointing upwards, many appressed; calyx
\par
   not deciduous in fruit; nutlets without a longitudinal furrow ......... {\b 13. stricta}
\par
24 Hairs on stem all patent; calyx deciduous in fruit;
\par
   nutlets with a ± well-marked longitudinal furrow
\par
25 Leaves broadly ovate, the lower petiolate; calyx with
\par
   hooked hairs only .................................................................. {\b 15. speluncicola}
\par
25 Leaves lanceolate, sessile; calyx with both hooked 
\par
   hairs and soft, straight, deflexed hairs .................................... {\b 14. minutiflora}
\par
22 Lower surface of leaves and base of stem without hooked 
\par
   hairs; hairs of the inflorescence always appressed
\par
26 Flowers yellow, at least in bud; corolla-tube often 
\par
   lengthening after anthesis; nutlets always with a rim
\par
27 Flowers changing from yellow or cream to blue ......................... {\b 9. discolor}
\par
27 Flowers remaining yellow
\par
28 Stems rarely more than 10 cm; calyx with many stiff 
\par
   hooked hairs; corolla c. 4 mm .................................................... {\b 12. persoonii}
\par
28 Stems up to 20 cm; calyx with few, short hooked hairs;
\par
   corolla c. 2 mm ......................................................................... {\b 11. balbisiana}
\par
26 Flowers blue, rarely white; corolla-tube rarely 
\par
   lengthening after anthesis
\par
29 Pedicels of the lowest flowers much elongated and 
\par
   deflexed in fruit; nutlets with a distinct basal appendage ....... {\b 41. sparsiflora}
\par
29 Pedicels rarely more than twice as long as calyx and
\par
   not deflexed in fruit; nutlets without a distinct appendage
\par
30 Calyx closed in fruit; the lowermost pedicels longer than 
\par
   the calyx, usually directed upwards; nutlets black ........................ {\b 6. arvensis}
\par
30 Calyx open or half-open in fruit; the lowermost pedicels 
\par
   rarely longer than the calyx, usually patent, nutlets brown
\par

\par
111}
\par