{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 hairs above. Inflorescence very lax, especially at the base, with numerous leaves; pedicels, especially the lowermost, much elongated and up to 2 cm in fruit. Limb of corolla up to 2 mm in diameter, saucer-shaped, bright blue. Calyx strongly accrescent, up to 7 mm in fruit, divided to ½, with narrowly triangular teeth; tube with patent, hooked hairs. Nutlets 2 × 1·5 mm, brown, with an indistinct rim; attachment-area broadly reniform, with a lingulate, white appendage. 2n = 18.{\i  Moist, shady places. E., S.E. & E.C. Europe.} Al Au Bu Cz Ge Gr Hu Ju Po Rm Rs (N, B, C, W, K, E) [Fe No Su].
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc {\b 30.            Eritrichium}             Schrader ex Gaudin
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc By A.O. Chater.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Caespitose perennials, sometimes woody at the base. Flowers in terminal, usually mostly ebracteate cymes. Calyx lobed almost to the base, accrescent or not. Corolla violet, blue or whitish, rotate with short tube, with 5 scales in the throat. Stamens included, inserted at about middle of tube, without appendages. Style included; stigma capitate. Nutlets ovoid-trigonous or turbinate, smooth or tuberculate, usually with a dentate-pectinate wing, attached to receptacle by only part of their length.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Literature: A. Brand in Engler,{\i  Pflanzenreich}{\b  97} ({\b IV. 252}): 187-201 (1931). L. Lechner-Pock, {\i Phyton }({\i Austria}){\b  6}: 98-206 (1956).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Pedicels 10-20 mm in fruit ....................................................... {\b 1. pectinatum}
\par
1 Pedicels not more than 5 mm in fruit
\par
2 Sides of nutlets making an obtuse angle at point of 
\par
  attachment; corolla 5-7 mm ............................................................. {\b 2. nanum}
\par
2 Sides of nutlets making an acute angle at point of 
\par
  attachment; corolla 1·5-5·5 mm
\par
3 Leaves 4-8 mm wide; nutlets hairy above ................................... {\b 3. villosum}
\par
3 Leaves 1-3 mm wide; nutlets glabrous ....................................... {\b 4. aretioides}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. E. pectinatum} (Pallas) DC., {\i Prodr.}{\b  10}: 127 (1846). Laxly caespitose, grey with dense, stout, appressed hairs. Stems 15-30 cm, erect, simple, from a branched, woody stock. Leaves 10-20 × 3-4 mm, linear-lanceolate to -oblong. Inflorescence usually branched, with 5-25 flowers; pedicels 2-5 mm in flower, 10-20 mm in fruit. Calyx c. 2 mm, scarcely accrescent. Corolla c. 5 mm; limb 6-8 mm in diameter, bright blue. Nutlets c. 1 × 1·5-2 mm, turbinate; upper surface smooth; margin with a dentate-pectinate wing; sides making an acute angle at the point of attachment of the nutlet.{\i  Mountain rocks. On the border of Europe in C. Ural.} Rs (C). ({\i Siberia}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. E. nanum} (L.) Schrader ex Gaudin,{\i  Fl. Helv.}{\b  2}: 57 (1828). Densely caespitose, villous. Stems 1-7·5 cm, simple, from a branched, woody stock. Leaves 4-10 × 1·5-4·5 mm, linear-oblong to -spathulate. Inflorescence simple or branched, with 3-7(-10) flowers; pedicels 1-3 mm. Calyx 2-3 mm, scarcely accrescent. Corolla 5-7 mm; limb 7-9 mm in diameter, pinkish-purple at first, becoming bright blue or rarely whitish. Nutlets 1-2 × c. 2·5 mm, ovoid-trigonous; upper surface smooth, glabrous; margin with a narrow, dentate wing; sides making an obtuse angle at the point of attachment of the nutlet.{\i  Rocks and open, stony ground, usually above} 2500{\i  m. C. & S. Alps; E. & S. Carpathians.} Au Ga He It Ju Rm ?Rs (W).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp.{\b  nanum}: Villous; stems 1-5 cm; leaves 1·5-3 mm wide. 2n = 46.{\i  Throughout the range of the species}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b jankae}(Simonkai) Jáv. in Jáv. & Csapody,{\i  Icon. Fl. Hung.} 409 (1932): More densely white-villous, with longer hairs than in subsp. ({\b a}); stems (2·5-)5-7·5 cm; leaves 3-4·5 mm wide. {\i E. & S. Carpathians.}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 3. E. villosum} (Ledeb.) Bunge, {\i Mém. Sav. Étr. Pétersb.}{\b  2}: 531 (1835). Densely caespitose, grey with appressed, often sparse hairs. Stems 1-15 cm, simple, from a branched, woody stock. Leaves 10-20 × 4-8 mm, oblong to oblanceolate. Inflorescence usually simple, with 3-6 flowers; pedicels 1-3 mm. Calyx 2-3 mm, scarcely accrescent. Corolla 1·5-5 mm; limb (3-)5-8 mm in diameter, violet, becoming bright blue. Nutlets 1-1·3 × c. 2 mm, obovoid-turbinate; upper surface smooth or minutely tuberculate, shortly hairy; margin with a narrow, denticulate wing; sides making an acute angle at the point of attachment of the nutlet.{\i  Gravelly places, rocks and sandy seashores. Arctic Russia.} Rs (N). ({\i N. Asia}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 4. E. aretioides} (Cham.) DC.,{\i  Prodr.}{\b  10}: 125 (1846). Forming large cushions or mats up to 25 cm in diameter, densely grey- or whitish-villous. Stems 1-8(-10) cm, erect, simple. Leaves 3-12 × 1-3 mm, elliptical to oblanceolate. Inflorescence simple, with 1-6 flowers; pedicels 1-3 mm. Calyx c. 2 mm in flower, c. 3 mm in fruit. Corolla 4-5·5 mm; limb 4-7·5 mm in diameter violet, becoming bright blue. Nutlets c. 1·5 × 2 mm, obovoid-turbinate; upper surface smooth, glabrous; margin with a narrow, denticulate wing; sides making an acute angle at point of attachment of the nutlet. {\i Gravelly places and sandy seashores. Arctic Russia }({\i Vajgac, N. Ural}). Rs (N). ({\i Arctic Siberia, Alaska.})
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc {\b 31.                  Lappula}                   Gilib.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc ({\i Echinospermum} Swartz ex Lehm.; incl. {\i Hackelia} Opiz {\i Heterocaryum} A. DC.)
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc By A.O.Chater.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Usually annual or biennial herbs. Flowers in bracteate, terminal often branched cymes. Calyx lobed almost to the base, accrescent. Corolla blue or white, with short tube and infundibuliform to almost rotate limb, with 5 short scales in the throat. Stamens included, variously inserted. Style included; stigma capitate. Nutlets ovoid-trigonous to oblong and flattened, with 1-3 rows of cylindrical, conical or flattened spines or glochidia on the sides, sometimes also on the back, attached to receptacle for usually only part of their length on the margin.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Literature: A. Brand in Engler,{\i  Pflanzenreich}{\b  97}({\b IV. 252}): 95-155 (1931).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Pedicels deflexed in fruit ................................................................ {\b 1. deflexa}
\par
1 Pedicels erect or erecto-patent in fruit
\par
2 Nutlets convex on upper surface, with unbarbed spines ......... {\b 2. spinocarpos}
\par
2 Nutlets flat on upper surface, with glochidia
\par
3 Nutlets oblong, attached to receptacle by their whole length  {\b 3. echinophora}
\par
3 Nutlets ovoid-trigonous, attached to receptacle by only
\par
  part of their length
\par
4 Nutlets with 1 row of glochidia .................................................. {\b 4. marginata}
\par
4 Nutlets with 2-3 rows of glochidia for at least part 
\par
  of their length
\par
5 Plant usually green, with sparse, erecto-patent or patent as
\par
  well as appressed hairs; limb of corolla 2-4 mm in diameter ...... {\b 5. squarrosa}
\par
5 Plant grey, with dense, appressed hairs; limb of 
\par
  corolla (3-)5-8 mm in diameter ....................................................... {\b 6. barbata}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. L. deflexa} (Wahlenb.) Garcke, {\i Fl. Nord-Mittel-Deutschl}. ed. 6, 275 (1863) ({\i Echinospermum deflexum} (Wahlenb.) Lehm., {\i Hackelia deflexa} (Wahlenb.) Opiz). Annual or biennial, with sparse to dense, soft, erecto-patent hairs. Stem 20-90 cm, ascending or erect, branched. Leaves 20-80 × 3-15 mm, linear- to oblong-lanceolate, the lower petiolate, the upper sessile. Pedicels 2-5 mm, patent in flower, strongly deflexed in fruit. Calyx c. 1·5 mm in flower, 2-3 mm in fruit. Corolla c. 3 mm; limb
\par

\par
117}
\par