{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 5 Wing of nutlets erect, entire
\par
7 Nutlets hirsute ............................................................................... {\b 7. littoralis}
\par
7 Nutlets glabrous ...................................................................... {\b 8. brassicifolia}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. O. scorpioides} (Haenke) Schrank,{\i  Denkschr. Akad. Wiss. München}{\b  3}: 222 (1812). Biennial; stems 12-40 cm, decumbent to ascending, branched, glabrous to sparsely hirsute. Leaves (10-)15-40 × 5-15 mm, lanceolate to spathulate, setose, the lower opposite, attenuate, petiolate, the upper alternate, sessile. Flowers axillary. Pedicels 7-13 mm, elongating in fruit. Calyx 2-3 mm, up to 5 mm in fruit. Corolla 3-4 mm, blue. Nutlets 2-3 mm, hirsute; wing entire, forming an umbilicus. 2n = 24.{\i  Damp, shady places. C. & E. Europe, from} c. 46°{\i  to} 57° {\i N}. Au Cz Ge Hu Po Rm Rs (C, W, E).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. O. nitida} Hoffmanns. & Link,{\i  Fl. Port.}{\b  1}: 194 (1810) ({\i O. lusitanica }auct.). Perennial; stems 20-65 cm, erect, branched, sparsely setose. Basal leaves (7-)10-20(-30) × 1-3·5 cm, lanceolate, acute to acuminate, glabrous above, sparsely strigose beneath, ciliolate, long-petiolate; the cauline smaller, shortly petiolate to sessile. Inflorescence terminal, lax, bracteate at base. Pedicels 5-15(-55) mm. Calyx-lobes 2-4 mm, up to 7 mm in fruit, oblong to lanceolate, becoming ovate. Corolla 5-9 mm, blue, folds yellow. Nutlets 2·3 mm; wing long-dentate, forming an umbilicus. 2n = 24.{\i  Damp, shady places. • N. Portugal, N.W. Spain.} Hs Lu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 3. O. verna} Moench, {\i Meth.} 420 (1794). Perennial, stoloniferous; stems 5-20(-40) cm. Basal leaves 5-20(-35) × 2-6 cm, ovate to cordate, mucronate to acuminate, acute, sparsely hirsute, long-petiolate; the cauline smaller, ovate to elliptical, shortly petiolate to sessile. Inflorescence terminal, lax, bracteate at base. Pedicels 8-12 mm, up to 30 mm in fruit. Calyx 4 mm; lobes elliptical, hairy. Corolla 8-10 mm; lobes blue; folds yellow. Nutlets c. 2 mm, hirsute; wing ciliate, forming an umbilicus. 2n = 48.{\i  Damp, mountain woods. •  From the S.E. Alps southwards to the N. Appennini and C. Romania; cultivated for ornament and widely naturalized.} Au *Gr It Ju Rm [Be Br Cz Ga Ge He Ho Hu Po Rs (W)].
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 4. O. luciliae} Boiss., {\i Diagn. Pl. Or. Nov. }{\b 1}({\b 4}): 41 (1844). Like {\b 3} but caespitose; leaves not distinctly mucronate or acuminate, usually obtuse; inflorescence more bracteate; calyx glabrous; corolla 7 mm; wing of nutlets narrow, not ciliate.{\i  Rock-crevices. Mountains of S. & C. Greece.} Gr. ({\i Anatolia.})
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 5. O. linifolia} (L.) Moench, {\i Meth.} 419 (1794). Glaucous annual; stems 5-40 cm, erect, simple or branched from the base. Basal leaves 1-5(-10) × 0·1-1·5(-2) cm, spathulate to cuneiform, petiolate, sparsely strigose-ciliate; the cauline smaller, lanceolate to linear, sessile. Inflorescence terminal, 5- to 15-flowered, lax, ebracteate. Pedicels 1-5 mm, up to 20 mm in fruit. Calyx-lobes 1·5-3 mm, up to 7 mm in fruit, lanceolate, becoming ovate. Corolla 5-10 mm, white or bluish. Nutlets 4 mm, glabrous or hirsute; wing lobed, dentate or crenate, forming an umbilicus. 2n = 28. {\i Dry, open habitats; somewhat calcicole. S.W. Europe.} Ga Hs Lu [ ?Rm Rs (W, K)].
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 6. O. kuzinskyanae} Willk.,{\i  Österr. Bot. Zeitschr.}{\b  39}: 318 (1889). Like {\b 5} but stems 5-15 cm; cauline leaves elliptical to ovate; inflorescence bracteate, at least in part; corolla blue, rarely white; nutlets with rigid, hooked hairs. 2n = 28.{\i  Maritime rocks and sands. • N.W. Spain, C. Portugal}. Hs Lu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 7. O. littoralis} Lehm.,{\i  Ges. Naturf. Freunde Berlin Mag.}{\b  8}: 98 (1818). Annual; stems 4-15 cm. Basal leaves 1-2(-3) × 0·3-1·1 cm, spathulate, long-petiolate, more or less persistent; cauline smaller, lanceolate, sessile. Inflorescence lax few-flowered, bracteate. Pedicels 1-4 mm, up to 10 mm in fruit. Calyx-lobes 3-4 mm, up to 6 mm in fruit, elliptical, becoming ovate. Corolla 6 mm, white. Nutlets hirsute; wing entire, ciliate, erect and narrow.{\i  Maritime sands. • W. coast of France.} Ga.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 8. O. brassicifolia} (Lag.) Sweet,{\i  Hort. Brit.} 293 (1827) ({\i O. amplexicaulis} Lehm.). Like {\b 7} but stems 10-15 cm; leaves up to 1-2(-3·5) cm, amplexicaul; inflorescence ebracteate; corolla 8 mm; nutlets glabrous, with very narrow wing.{\i  Mountains of S. Spain}. Hs. ({\i N. Africa}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  The record of {\i O. pavoniana} Boiss. from Spain is probably erroneous.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc {\b 34.                 Cynoglossum}              L.
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc By M. Kovanda.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Biennial, perennial or rarely annual herbs. Flowers in usually ebracteate cymes. Calyx 5-lobed almost to the base, accrescent. Corolla with short, cylindrical to infundibuliform tube and rotate limb, with 5 scales closing the throat. Stamens included, inserted at or above the middle of the tube. Style included; stigma small, subcapitate. Nutlets ovoid to subglobose, glochidiate, the external surface convex, flat or slightly concave, sometimes with a distinct border and disc.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Literature: A. Brand in Engler,{\i  Pflanzenreich}{\b  78} ({\b IV. 252}): 114-153 (1921). H. Riedl,{\i  Österr. Bot. Zeitschr.}{\b  109}: 385-394 (1962).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b  C. glochidiatum} Wall. ex Bentham in Royle,{\i  Ill. Bot. Himal. Mount. }306 (1836), a native of C. Asia and India, is cultivated for ornament and occurs occasionally as a garden escape in N. Europe.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Corolla-lobes villous ........................................................... {\b 11. clandestinum}
\par
1 Corolla-lobes glabrous
\par
2 Mature nutlets flat or slightly concave outside, with a
\par
  thickened border
\par
3 Cymes bracteate
\par
4 Biennial; calyx-lobes ovate; nutlets 5-8 mm .......................... {\b 9. cheirifolium}
\par
4 Perennial; calyx-lobes linear-lanceolate; nutlets 7-9 mm ...... {\b 10. magellense}
\par
3 Cymes ebracteate (rarely bracteate at base)
\par
5 Annual; nutlets 7-10 mm in diameter ........................................ {\b 3. columnae}
\par
5 Biennial; nutlets 5-8 mm in diameter
\par
6 Cauline leaves oblong to lanceolate; corolla dull 
\par
  purple; stamens inserted in upper part of corolla-tube ................ {\b 1. officinale}
\par
6 Cauline leaves linear-lanceolate; corolla deep blue;
\par
  stamens inserted in middle of corolla-tube ............................... {\b 2. dioscoridis}
\par
2 Mature nutlets convex outside, without a thickened border
\par
7 Leaves ± glabrous above ........................................................ {\b 4. germanicum}
\par
7 Leaves densely hairy to tomentose on both surfaces
\par
8 Corolla 7-9 mm, with distinct reticulate venation ....................... {\b 5. creticum}
\par
8 Corolla 4-6 mm, without reticulate venation
\par
9 Perennial; corolla-scales crescent-shaped ............................ {\b 6. sphacioticum}
\par
9 Biennial; corolla-scales ± square to trapeziform
\par
10 Scales reaching beyond the base of the corolla-lobes;
\par
   pedicels in fruit shorter than calyx .......................................... {\b 8. nebrodense}
\par
10 Scales about reaching the base of the corolla-lobes;
\par
   pedicels in fruit longer than calyx .......................................... {\b 7. hungaricum}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. C. officinale} L.,{\i  Sp. Pl.} 134 (1753). Biennial. Stems (20-)30-60(-90) cm, hirsute. Cauline leaves oblong to lanceolate, the lower shortly petiolate, the middle (10-)16-25(-30) mm wide, sessile to amplexicaul, shortly and softly hairy on both surfaces. Cymes ebracteate (rarely bracteate at base). Calyx-lobes up to
\par

\par
119}
\par