{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}
\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b sylvatica}: Calyx green, with sparse hairs and few hooked bristles. Corolla-tube as long as the calyx. Nutlets ovoid. 2n = 18(20). {\i Throughout the range of the species except the south}.
\par
\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b subarvensis} Grau, {\i Österr. Bot. Zeitschr.}{\b  111}: 571 (1964): Plant much-branched. Flowers small. Calyx with numerous hooked hairs. Corolla-tube equalling calyx. Nutlets narrowly ovoid. 2n = 18. •{\i  Italy, Jugoslavia}.
\par
\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b c}) Subsp. {\b cyanea} (Boiss. & Heldr.) Vestergren, {\i Ark. Bot.}{\b  29A}({\b 8}): 10 (1938): Pedicels not more than 7 mm. Calyx silvery, with numerous hooked hairs. Corolla-tube often shorter than calyx. Nutlets narrowly ovoid. 2n = 18, 20.{\i  S. Italy, Balkan peninsula}.
\par
\pard\f0\fs28  Plants transitional to subsp. ({\b d}) occur in Italy.
\par
\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b d}) Subsp. {\b elongata} (Strobl) Grau,{\i  Österr. Bot. Zeitschr.}{\b  111}: 574 (1964): Like ({\b c}) but stems often rather tall; pedicels up to 15 mm; calyx not so readily deciduous in fruit. 2n = 20, 22. •{\i  S. Italy, Sicilia}.
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 18. M. soleirolii} Gren. & Godron,{\i  Fl. Fr.}{\b  2}: 534 (1853). Like {\b 17} but pedicels up to 2·5 mm; calyx with dense hooked hairs, often shorter than the corolla-tube; corolla white to pale blue, limb not more than 4 mm in diameter. 2n = 18. •{\i  Corse. Co}.
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 19. M. decumbens} Host, {\i Fl. Austr.}{\b  1}: 228 (1827). Like {\b 17} but always perennial, often with creeping rhizome; calyx-teeth narrowly to broadly triangular, divided to half-way at anthesis with numerous hooked hairs up to 0·4.mm; limb of corolla up to 8 mm in diameter; corolla-tube usually longer than calyx, anthers sometimes exserted; nutlets c. 2 × 1·5 mm; attachment area broadly reniform.{\i  N., C. & S.W. Europe, mainly in the mountains.} Au Br Cz Fe Ga Ge He Hs It Ju No Po Rm ?Rs (N) Su.
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Corolla-tube twice as long as calyx; style longer than corolla-tube
\par 2 Anthers exserted .............................................................. ({\b c}) subsp. {\b variabilis}
\par 2 Anthers not exserted ............................................................ ({\b d}) subsp. {\b kerneri}
\par 1 Corolla-tube only slightly longer than calyx; style not
\par  longer than corolla-tube
\par 3 Nutlets 2 × 1·1 mm, narrowly ovoid ............................... ({\b b}) subsp. {\b teresiana}
\par 3 Nutlets 2 × 1·5 mm, broadly ovoid
\par 4 Calyx often more than 7 mm in fruit; calyx-teeth 
\par  narrowly triangular .......................................................... ({\b e}) subsp. {\b florentina}
\par 4 Calyx rarely more than 6 mm in fruit; calyx-teeth
\par  narrowly to broadly triangular ...................................... ({\b a}) subsp. {\b decumbens}
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp.{\b  decumbens}: Corolla-tube twice as long as calyx; anthers included; style not exserted. Calyx up to 6 mm in fruit. Nutlets broadly ovoid. 2n = 32. •{\i  N. Europe; C. & S. Alps.}
\par
\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b teresiana}(Sennen) Grau,{\i  Österr. Bot. Zeitschr.}{\b  111}: 578 (1964): Corolla-tube less than twice as long as calyx; anthers included; style exserted. Calyx up to 5 mm in fruit. Nutlets narrowly ovoid. 2n = 32, 34. •{\i  Mountains of S.W. Europe}.
\par
\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b c}) Subsp. {\b variabilis}(M. Angelis) Grau, {\i op. cit. }580 (1964) ({\i M. sylvatica} subsp.{\i  variabilis} (M. Angelis) Nyman): Corolla-tube about twice as long as calyx; anthers and style exserted. Calyx-teeth and nutlets as in subsp. ({\b b}). 2n = 32. •{\i  S.E. Austria, Romania, Poland}.
\par
\pard\f0\fs28  Plants from Romania like subsp. ({\b c}) but without hooked hairs or bristles have been described as {\b M. transsylvanica} Porc., {\i Magyar Nov. Lapok}{\b  9}: 130 (1885).
\par
\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b d}) Subsp. {\b kerneri}(Dalla Torre & Sarnth.) Grau,{\i  Österr. Bot. Zeitschr.}{\b  111}: 580 (1964): Like subsp. ({\b c}) but anthers not exserted. 2n = 32. {\i E.C. Europe}.
\par
\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b e}) Subsp. {\b florentina} Grau,{\i  Mitt. Bot. Staatssamm.} ({\i München}) {\b 8}: 130 (1970): Like ({\b a}) but fruiting calyx often much larger and more than 7 mm, with more numerous hooked hairs; basal leaves often much larger. 2n = 28. •{\i  Appennini}.
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 20. M. latifolia} Poiret in Lam.,{\i  Encycl. Méth. Bot.}{\b  12}: 45 (1816). Like {\b 19} but stems up to 70 cm, woody at base, often with large basal leaves; calyx more than 7 mm in fruit, with numerous hooked hairs up to 0·6 mm; corolla-tube twice as long as calyx, limb more than 10 mm in diameter, anthers included; style not exserted; nutlets up to 3 × 2 mm.{\i  Acores.} Az. ({\i N.W. Africa, Islas Canarias}.)
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28    ({\b 21-29}).{\b  M. alpestris} group. Perennial with short rhizome and numerous, often long and somewhat fleshy roots. Stems usually roughly hairy below, rarely glabrous; inflorescence with appressed hairs. Calyx densely hairy, more or less acute at the base in fruit, closed or slightly open, never deciduous. Corolla-tube shorter than calyx; limb flat. Nutlets often more than 2 mm, ovoid to ellipsoid, obtuse, black, shining; attachment-area wide, elliptical to reniform, usually extended laterally into two grooves.
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28  A group of closely related species, many of which occur in the montane and alpine zones of the European mountains.
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Calyx with few or no hooked bristles
\par 2 Basal leaves narrowly ovate, acute, with slender petioles; 
\par  cauline leaves lanceolate to linear; hairs on calyx appressed
\par 3 Basal leaves glabrescent only beneath or not at all ............... {\b 24. stenophylla}
\par 3 Basal leaves glabrescent on both surfaces .................................... {\b 25. asiatica}
\par 2 Basal leaves elliptical to oblong-lanceolate, sessile 
\par  or stalked; cauline leaves ovate to lanceolate; hairs 
\par  on calyx patent
\par 4 Calyx with dense, straight, white hairs, more or less 
\par  swollen at base in fruit ............................................................... {\b 23. ambigens}
\par 4 Calyx rarely with dense, white hairs, not swollen at 
\par  base in fruit .................................................................................. {\b 21. alpestris}
\par 1 Calyx with ± numerous hooked bristles
\par 5 Hooked bristles on pedicels as well as calyx; nutlets
\par  narrowly ovoid; basal leaves glabrescent beneath
\par 6 Basal leaves petiolate, rounded; plant up to 25 cm .................. {\b 27. corsicana}
\par 6 Basal leaves not petiolate, lingulate; plant up to 12 cm,
\par  forming a mat .................................................................................. {\b 26. alpina}
\par 5 Hooked bristles not present on pedicels; basal leaves 
\par  hairy beneath, rarely glabrescent
\par 7 Cauline leaves uniform, narrowly linear, obtuse;
\par  nutlets narrowly ovoid ..................................................... {\b 29. lithospermifolia}
\par 7 Cauline leaves variable, broadly ovate to linear;
\par  nutlets ovoid to ellipsoid
\par 8 Nutlets up to 1·8 mm; rim much elongated at upper end .............. {\b 22. gallica}
\par 8 Nutlets usually more than 1·8 mm; rim not much elongated 
\par 9 Nutlets with complete rim; calyx with numerous hooked hairs;
\par  flowers deep blue ..................................................................... {\b 28. suaveolens}
\par 9 Only upper part of nutlet with rim; calyx with fewer 
\par  hooked hairs; flowers bright blue ................................................ {\b 21. alpestris}
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 21. M. alpestris} F. W. Schmidt,{\i  Fl. Boëm.}{\b  3}: 26 (1794) ({\i M. sylvatica} subsp. {\i alpestris} (F. W. Schmidt) Gams). Stems 5-35 cm. Basal leaves petiolate or sessile; cauline very variable, ovate, elliptical, spathulate or linear. Pedicels directed upwards in fruit, not longer than calyx. Calyx up to 7 mm and often much enlarged in fruit, densely hairy, with or without hooked bristles. Corolla-limb up to 9 mm in diameter, bright or deep blue. Nutlets up to 2·5 mm, ovoid to ellipsoid, blunt, with rim only in the distal half; attachment-area wide, elliptical, elongated laterally into 2 grooves, often extending towards the base. 2n = 24, 48, 72 (70).{\i  Mountains of Europe, from Scotland and the Carpathians to N. Spain and Bulgaria}. Au Br Bu Cz Ga Ge He Hs It Ju Po Rm Rs (W).
\par
\par 114}
\par