{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 main veins arising at about the middle of the tube (not at the base); limb of corolla 4 mm in diameter; nutlets ovoid. 2n = 48.{\i  Wet places. Iberian peninsula.} Hs Lu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 35. M. laxa} Lehm., {\i Pl. Asperif.} 83 (1818) ({\i M. lingulata} Lehm.). Annual or biennial; stems 20-50 cm, branched from the base, with straight, forwardly-directed, appressed hairs. Leaves up to 8 × 1·5 cm, lanceolate, extending up to the first flowers. Pedicels at the base of the inflorescence often elongated in fruit, up to 2·5 cm, and deflexed. Calyx divided to ½ or less, up to 8 mm in fruit, often deciduous; teeth narrowly triangular; branches of the main veins arising at the base of the tube. Limb of corolla up to 5 mm in diameter, bright blue, more or less flat. Nutlets up to 2 × 1·4 mm, dark brown, ovoid, obtuse, usually truncate at the base, with a spongy appendage on the attachment-area. {\i Wet places. Most of Europe, but rarer in the south}. All except Az Bl Cr Is Sa Sb Si.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b caespitosa}(C. F. Schultz) Hyl. ex Nordh.,{\i  Norsk Fl.} 529 (1940) ({\i M. caespitosa} C. F. Schultz, {\i M. scorpioides} subsp. {\i caespitosa} (C. F. Schultz) F. Hermann): Erect. Pedicels not more than 1 cm. Calyx not more than 5 mm. Nutlets not more than 1·5 × 1 mm. {\i Throughout the range of the species}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b baltica}(Sam.) Hyl. ex Nordh.,{\i  loc. cit.} (1940) ({\i M. baltica} Sam.,{\i  M. scorpioides} subsp.{\i  laxa} sensu Hegi): Ascending. Pedicels in lower part of inflorescence up to 2·5 cm. Calyx up to 8 mm. Nutlets up to 2 × 1·4 mm. 2n = ?84, 88. •{\i  Fennoscandia, Estonia, Latvia}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Subsp. {\i laxa} occurs in North America and may possibly occur in Europe; further investigation is needed.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    ({\b 36-39}).{\b  M. scorpioides} group. Biennial or perennial, often with rhizome and stolons. Stems often with decurrent leaf-bases and angled; indumentum in lower part of stem variable, inflorescence-axis with upwardly-pointing appressed hairs. Calyx with short, straight, appressed bristles, divided to ½ or less, open in fruit, not deciduous; teeth broadly triangular. Limb of corolla flat; tube usually as long as the calyx. Nutlets ovoid-ellipsoid; rim absent or indistinct; attachment-area roundish with a spongy appendage.
\par

\par
 
\pard\f0\fs28 Very variable, especially in C. Europe.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Stems not more than 10 cm in fruit, mat-forming ................... {\b 37. rehsteineri}
\par
1 Stems more than 10 cm in fruit, not mat-forming
\par
2 All or some of the hairs at the base of the stem deflexed
\par
3 Stem with deflexed hairs only at the base; usually 
\par
  without subterranean stolons ..................................................... {\b 38. nemorosa}
\par
3 Stem with deflexed, appressed hairs as far up as the
\par
  upper leaves, rough; subterranean stolons present ................... {\b 39. lamottiana}
\par
2 Stems glabrous at the base or with patent or upwardly-
\par
  pointing hairs
\par
4 Limb of corolla not more than c. 5 mm in diameter;
\par
  biennial, usually without stolons ............................................... {\b 38. nemorosa}
\par
4 Limb of corolla more than 5 mm in diameter; perennial,
\par
  with subterranean stolons
\par
5 Lower leaves hairy beneath, the hairs long, somewhat 
\par
  patent and pointing towards the base of the leaf ........................ {\b 38. nemorosa}
\par
5 Lower leaves glabrous beneath, or the hairs short, setiform
\par
  and usually pointing towards the apex of the leaf ................... {\b 36. scorpioides}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 36. M. scorpioides} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 131 (1753) ({\i M. palustris} (L.) Hill, {\i M. scorpioides} subsp.{\i  palustris }(L.) F. Hermann). Perennial; with creeping rhizome and runners; stems up to 100 cm, ascending to erect; base of stem glabrous or with patent hairs. Leaves up to 10 × 2 cm, oblong to oblong-lanceolate, usually with appressed forwardly-pointing hairs, rarely the lowermost with deflexed bristles beneath, often glabrescent. Pedicels up to 10 mm in fruit. Calyx up to 6 mm in fruit, with a wide base. Limb of corolla up to 8 mm in diameter; style often protruding. Nutlets up to 1·8 × 1·2 mm, ovoid, with a faint rim above. 2n = 66, ?64.{\i  Wet places; often in water. C. & N. Europe. }Au ?Be Br Cz Da Fa Fe Ga Ge Hb He Ho Hu Is It Ju No Po Rm Rs (N, B, C, W, K, E) Sa Su.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 37. M. rehsteineri} Wartm.,{\i  Ber. Tät. St. Gall. Naturw. Ges.}{\b  1884}: 276 (1884) ({\i M. scorpioides} subsp.{\i  caespititia} (DC.) E. Baumann). Like {\b 36} but smaller, mat-forming; stems not more than 10 cm, with appressed, upwardly-directed hairs; leaves smaller, not more than 2·5 × 1 cm; calyx not more than 5 mm in fruit, crowded; pedicels not more than 7 mm in fruit; corolla-limb not more than 10 mm, pink to bright blue. 2n = 22.{\i  Lake margins. • Alps. }Au Ge He It.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 38. M. nemorosa} Besser,{\i  Enum. Pl. Volhyn.} 52 (1822). Like {\b 36} but biennial (rarely perennial), usually without stolons; stems up to 50 cm, shining, the base glabrous or with deflexed, patent or upwardly pointing, hairs; lowermost leaves usually with deflexed, not appressed hairs beneath; calyx not more than 5 mm in fruit; corolla-limb not more than 6 mm in diameter; nutlets not more than 1·8 × 0·8 mm, narrowly ovoid. 2n = 22, 44.{\i  Wet meadows and woods. C. & E. Europe, rare in S. Europe.} All except Az Bl Cr Fa Fe Hs Is Lu Sb Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   More hairy, often more robust plants with long, subterranean stolons from S. & S.E. Europe have been distinguished as subsp. {\b orbelica} (Velen.) Schuster,{\i  Feddes Repert.}{\b  74}: 74 (1967). They have 2n = 22, 44 and are perhaps related to{\b  39}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 39. M. lamottiana} (Br.-Bl. ex Chassagne) Grau,{\i  Mitt. Bot. Staatssamm.} ({\i München}){\b  8}: 133 (1970). Perennial with subterranean stolons; stems up to 70 cm, erect, roughly hairy with appressed, deflexed hairs up to the uppermost leaves, shining, little-branched. Cauline leaves up to 11 × 2 cm, elliptical, acute, with appressed forwardly-pointing hairs above and patent, more or less backwardly-pointing hairs beneath. Pedicels up to 7 mm in fruit, slender, patent. Calyx up to 5 mm in fruit. Limb of corolla up to 6 mm in diameter. Nutlets 2 × 1 mm narrowly ovoid. 2n = 44. {\i Wet mountain meadows. • Mountains of S. W. Europe, from S.C. France to N. W. Spain.} Ga Hs.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 40. M. azorica} H. C. Watson,{\i  Bot. Mag.}{\b  70}: t. 4122 (1844). Perennial; stems up to 60 cm, much-branched, the leafy parts densely hairy with deflexed hairs. Leaves up to 10 × 2 cm, narrowly obovate, with patent, backwardly-pointing hairs beneath and almost appressed, forwardly-pointing bristles above. Inflorescence dense, with upwardly-pointing, somewhat appressed hairs; pedicels not longer than calyx at maturity. Calyx up to 5 m in fruit; teeth narrowly linear, twice as long as tube; hairs straight, deflexed at the base, apically directed above. Corolla-limb up to 6 mm in diameter, blue. Nutlets 1·5 × 1 mm, ovoid, obtuse, blackish-brown, with rim; attachment-area ovate, with apex directed towards the apex of the nutlet. {\i Wet rocks. • Acores.} Az.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b M. maritima} Hochst. in Seub., {\i Fl. Azor. }37 (1844), which occurs in the Acores, is said to differ in having larger flowers; further investigation is needed.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 41. M. sparsiflora} Mikan ex Pohl,{\i  Bot. Taschenb.}{\b  1807}: 74 (1807). Annual; stems up to 40 cm, slender, ascending to erect, often much-branched; leafy part of stems with deflexed bristles. Leaves up to 8 × 2·5 cm, ovate to elliptical, with scattered somewhat deflexed hairs beneath and appressed, forwardly-pointing
\par

\par
116}
\par