{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}
\pard\f0\fs28 peltate hairs are present on the stems; their shape and the number of cells in the disc are of diagnostic importance. All species except {\b 1-3} can occur in the terrestrial form on mud; the habitat given is for the aquatic form. The plants are usually annual, but the life-cycle depends on climatic factors, and most of the species can be perennial in some part of their range.
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28   Literature: H. D. Schotsman in P. Jovet,{\i  Flore de France }{\b 1}. Paris. 1967.
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Terrestrial
\par 2 Fruit c. 0·6 mm, wider than long
\par 3 Mericarps thicker at base than apex .......................................... {\b 12. peploides}
\par 3 Mericarps of equal thickness throughout ................................... {\b 13. terrestris}
\par 2 Fruit 0·8 mm or more, suborbicular or longer than wide
\par 4 Mericarps not winged (sometimes weakly keeled)
\par 5 Fruit 1·5 mm, elliptical; mericarps with rounded,
\par  scarcely distinct margin; pollen-grains oblong-
\par  ellipsoid or slightly reniform .................................................... {\b 6. obtusangula}
\par 5 Fruit 0·8-1·2 mm, suborbicular or slightly oblong;
\par  mericarps with distinct but obtuse margin; pollen-grains
\par  shortly ellipsoid or subglobose ................................................. {\b 7. cophocarpa}
\par 4 Mericarps winged
\par 6 Mericarps winged only at apex; fruit obovate (rarely
\par  elliptical) ........................................................................................ {\b 9. palustris}
\par 6 Mericarps winged from base to apex; fruit suborbicular
\par  or slightly longer than wide
\par 7 Persistent styles deflexed and appressed to sides of fruit 
\par 8 Fruit subsessile or very rarely shortly stalked ........................... {\b 10. hamulata}
\par 8 Fruit with long stalk up to 13 mm .................................................. {\b 11. brutia}
\par 7 Persistent styles erect or recurved, not appressed to
\par  sides of fruit
\par 9 Styles recurved, leaves pale green, broadly elliptical
\par  or suborbicular; fruit pale brownish, with broadly
\par  winged mericarps .......................................................................... {\b 5. stagnalis}
\par 9 Styles erect or patent; leaves dark green, elliptical;
\par  fruit brown, usually with narrowly winged mericarps ............... {\b 8. platycarpa}
\par 1 Aquatic
\par 10 All leaves submerged
\par 11 Leaves not transparent; wing of mericarp with 1 row of
\par   cells; persistent styles appressed to sides of fruit
\par 12 Leaves expanded at apex, with deep, crescentic
\par   emargination .............................................................................. {\b 10. hamulata}
\par 12 Leaves not widened at apex, often with asymmetrical
\par   emargination ................................................................................... {\b 11. brutia}
\par 11 Leaves transparent; wing of mericarp, if present,
\par   with at least 2 rows of cells; styles deciduous
\par 13 Fruit suborbicular ........................................................... {\b 1. hermaphroditica}
\par 13 Fruit wider than long
\par 14 Wing of mericarp narrow or absent; fruit c.1·5 mm wide ........... {\b 2. truncata}
\par 14 Wing of mericarp wide; fruit 1·8-2·2 mm wide
\par 15 Mericarps broadly reniform, with large seed; stellate
\par   thickenings present in cells of wall enclosing seed ........................ {\b 3. pulchra}
\par 15 Mericarps almost semicircular, with small seed;
\par   stellate thickenings not present in cells of wall
\par   enclosing seed ............................................................................. {\b 4. lusitanica}
\par 10 Upper leaves spathulate, forming a floating or aerial rosette
\par 16 Rosette aerial, raised above surface of water;
\par   submerged linear leaves and basal part of rosette-
\par   leaves transparent; fruit wider than long ..................................... {\b 4. lusitanica}
\par 16 Rosette floating; submerged leaves and basal part of 
\par   rosette leaves not transparent; fruit suborbicular or
\par   longer than wide
\par 17 Flowers submerged; pollen-grains colourless;
\par   persistent styles appressed to sides of fruit
\par 18 Usually robust; fruit c. 1·4 mm wide, suborbicular;
\par   mericarps narrowly winged ....................................................... {\b 10. hamulata}
\par 18 Slender; fruit 1-1·2 mm wide, usually longer than wide;
\par   mericarps often broadly winged ..................................................... {\b 11. brutia}
\par 17 Flowers aerial; pollen-grains yellow; persistent
\par   styles not appressed to side of fruit
\par 19 Mericarps unwinged, sometimes weakly keeled
\par 20 Fruit 1·5 mm, elliptical; mericarps with rounded,
\par   scarcely distinct margin; pollen-grains oblong-
\par   ellipsoid or slightly reniform .................................................. {\b 6. obtusangula}
\par 20 Fruit 0·8-1·2 mm, suborbicular or slightly oblong,
\par   mericarps with distinct but obtuse margin, pollen-
\par   grains shortly ellipsoid or subglobose ..................................... {\b 7. cophocarpa}
\par 19 Mericarps winged
\par 21 Mericarps winged only at apex; fruit 1(-1·5) mm, obovate
\par   (rarely elliptical), blackish ............................................................ {\b 9. palustris}
\par 21 Mericarps winged from base to apex; fruit 1·4-1·75 mm,
\par   suborbicular, brownish
\par 22 Leaves pale green, narrowly elliptical when submerged;
\par   mericarps broadly winged ............................................................ {\b 5. stagnalis}
\par 22 Leaves usually dark green, linear when submerged;
\par   mericarps narrowly winged ....................................................... {\b 8. platycarpa}
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28  (a) Always submerged. Leaves more or less linear, transparent. Cauline hairs absent. Flowers solitary. Bracteoles absent. Stamen erect before and after dehiscence, scarcely elongating; anther-wall with thin-walled cells; pollen-grains colourless, without exine. Wing of mericarp, if present, composed of one or more rows of polygonal cells. Basic chromosome number 3, 4.
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. C. hermaphroditica} L., {\i Cent. Pl.}{\b  1}: 31 (1755) ({\i C. autumnalis} L.). Leaves widest at base, tapering towards emarginate apex. Styles patent or deflexed, deciduous. Fruit 1-3·3 mm, suborbicular, sessile or subsessile; mericarps usually broadly winged at least towards apex. 2n = 6.{\i  Lakes, canals and rivers. N. & E. Europe, southwards to} c. 48°{\i  N. in U.S.S.R}. Br Da Fa Fe Ge Hb Ho Is No Po Rm Rs (N, B, C, W, E) Su.
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28  Variants can be recognized, differing mainly in fruit size.
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. C. truncata} Guss.,{\i  Pl. Rar.} 4 (1826). Leaves widest at base and tapering towards apex, or more or less elliptical, shallowly emarginate or truncate. Styles patent or deflexed, deciduous. Fruit 1-1·2 × 1·3-1·6 mm, wider than long, subsessile or stalked; mericarps not or only narrowly winged. •{\i  S. & W. Europe, northwards to England; S.E. Russia.} Be Br ?Co Ga Gr Hs It Ju Lu Rs(E) Sa Si.
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28 1 Mericarps semicircular, unwinged; fruit subsessile;
\par  leaves often slightly elliptical ....................................... ({\b c}) subsp. {\b occidentalis} 
\par 1 Mericarps reniform, narrowly winged; fruit stalked;
\par  leaves tapering from base to apex
\par 2 Wing of mericarp composed of 1-3 rows of polygonal cells
\par  ............................................................................................. ({\b a}) subsp. {\b truncata}
\par 2 Wing of mericarp consisting of a whitish, ciliate 
\par  border, formed by the radial walls of the cells ................. ({\b b}) subsp. {\b fimbriata}
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp.{\b  truncata}: Fruit 1-1·2 × 1·3-1·4 mm, stalked.{\i  Shallow pools. C. & E. Mediterranean region}.
\par
\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b fimbriata} Schotsman in Jovet,{\i  Fl. Fr.}{\b  1}: 39 (1967): Fruit 1·2 × 1·5 mm, shortly stalked.{\i  S.E. Russia}.
\par
\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b c}) Subsp. {\b occidentalis}(Rouy) Schotsman, {\i op. cit.} 36 (1967) ({\i C. truncata} race {\i occidentalis} Rouy): Fruit 1-1·2 × 1·4-1·6 mm, subsessile; sometimes 1-2 mericarps abortive. 2n = 6.{\i  Fresh or slightly brackish water. W. Europe, northwards to England}.
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 3. C. pulchra} Schotsman, {\i op. cit}. 40 (1967). Leaves almost linear, slightly wider at base, emarginate. Styles with basal part recurved, upper part erect. Fruit 1·5-1·8 × 2-2·2 mm, stalked, often with only 2 mericarps; mericarps broadly reniform, with large seed and wide wing, the cells of the wall enclosing the seed with stellate thickenings. 2n = 8.{\i  Pools on calcareous soils. Gavdhos}. Cr. ({\i Libya}.)
\par
\par 124}
\par