{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 25 Corolla 17-20 mm; nutlets drupaceous ....................................... {\b 4. Prasium}
\par
25 Corolla c. 8 mm; nutlets dry ..................................................... {\b 25. Satureja}
\par
23 Calyx not 2-lipped, the teeth equal or subequal
\par
26 Nutlets hairy at apex ............................................................... {\b 13. Leonurus}
\par
26 Nutlets not hairy at apex
\par
27 Verticillasters in secund spikes; corolla 3-4 mm ................... {\b 41. Elsholtzia}
\par
27 Verticillasters not in secund spikes; corolla (4-)6-25 mm
\par
28 Corolla bright yellow and brown; upper lip (8-)10-12 mm  {\b 12. Lamiastrum}
\par
28 Corolla pale yellow, white, pink or purple; upper lip
\par
   not more than 8 mm
\par
29 Mostly dwarf shrubs with ascending stems; corolla 
\par
   usually not more than 11 mm; calyx usually less than
\par
   7 mm; stamens divergent ............................................................ {\b 25. Satureja}
\par
29 Mostly herbs with erect stems; corolla usually more than
\par
   11 mm; calyx usually more than 7 mm; stamens parallel
\par
30 Calyx-tube expanded above middle; corollatube with a
\par
   ring of hairs inside ........................................................................ {\b 15. Ballota}
\par
30 Calyx-tube not or scarcely expanded above middle;
\par
   corolla with or without a ring of hairs ......................................... {\b 16. Stachys}
\par
7 Upper lip of corolla ± flat or convex, usually shorter than
\par
  the lower lip, or corolla actinomorphic; calyx often 2-lipped
\par
31 Upper tooth of calyx with a cordate to obovate apical
\par
   appendage ............................................................................... {\b 38. Lavandula}
\par
31 Upper tooth of calyx without appendage
\par
32 Verticillasters aggregated into spicules ................................. {\b 32. Origanum}
\par
32 Verticillasters not aggregated into spicules
\par
33 Corolla nearly actinomorphic, with 4 or 5 subequal lobes 
\par
34 Calyx zygomorphic
\par
35 Calyx strongly 2-lipped, the throat glabrous inside .................. {\b 33. Thymus}
\par
35 Calyx weakly 2-lipped, the throat hairy inside .......................... {\b 35. Mentha}
\par
34 Calyx ± actinomorphic
\par
36 Flowers in pairs in a secund raceme; annual ............................... {\b 36. Perilla}
\par
36 Flowers in verticillasters; usually perennial
\par
37 Inflorescence plumose .............................................................. {\b 33. Thymus}
\par
37 Inflorescence not plumose ......................................................... {\b 35. Mentha}
\par
33 Corolla 2-lipped
\par
38 Flowers with corolla 25-40 mm and calyx 2-lipped,
\par
   with the upper teeth much exceeding the lower
\par
39 Calyx not more than 11 mm; bracteoles present ................... {\b 19. Glechoma}
\par
39 Calyx more than 11 mm; bracteoles absent ................................. {\b 7. Melittis}
\par
38 Flowers either with corolla less than 25 mm, or with calyx
\par
   not 2-lipped with upper teeth much exceeding the lower
\par
40 Bracts pectinate-pinnatifid; style 4-fid ...................................... {\b 22. Cleonia}  
\par
40 Bracts not pectinate-pinnatifid; style 2-fid
\par
41 Calyx with 5-10 veins
\par
42 Corolla more than 11 mm
\par
43 Calyx ± 2-lipped, the teeth unequal .......................................... {\b 33. Thymus}
\par
43 Calyx not 2-lipped, the teeth ± equal
\par
44 Flowers violet-blue; style not gynobasic ........................................ {\b 1. Ajuga}
\par
44 Flowers rarely violet-blue; style gynobasic
\par
45 Stamens included in corolla-tube; corolla-tube
\par
   included in calyx; upper lip of corolla often oblong
\par
   to linear and 2-fid
\par
46 Bracteoles usually present; calyx 5- to 10-toothed;
\par
   nutlets rounded at apex ............................................................ {\b 5. Marrubium}
\par
46 Bracteoles absent; calyx 10-toothed; nutlets truncate 
\par
   at apex ........................................................................................... {\b 6. Sideritis} 
\par
45 Stamens usually not included in corolla-tube; corolla-
\par
   tube usually exserted from calyx; upper lip of corolla
\par
   usually ± ovate, entire or emarginate, rarely 2-fid
\par
47 Calyx-tube hypocrateriform ....................................................... {\b 15. Ballota}
\par
47 Calyx-tube not hypocrateriform
\par
48 Corolla 12(-14) mm; often dwarf shrubs with ascending
\par
   stems; stamens divergent ............................................................ {\b 25. Satureja}
\par
48 Corolla 12-25 mm; usually herbs with erect stems;
\par
   stamens parallel ........................................................................... {\b 16. Stachys}
\par
42 Corolla not more than 11 mm
\par
49 Calyx 2-lipped
\par
50 Annual; stamens not exserted from corolla-tube, parallel .......... {\b 6. Sideritis}
\par
50 Perennial; stamens exserted from corolla-tube, divergent
\par
51 Fruiting calyx gibbous at base (S.C. Bulgaria) ......................... {\b 25. Satureja}
\par
51 Fruiting calyx not gibbous at base ............................................ {\b 33. Thymus}
\par
49 Calyx not 2-lipped
\par
52 Annual, without non-flowering shoots at flowering time
\par
53 Corolla 3-4 mm; verticillasters 2-flowered; in crowded,
\par
   secund spikes ........................................................................... {\b 41. Elsholtzia}
\par
53 Corolla (-4)5-20 mm; verticillasters not in crowded,
\par
   secund spikes 
\par
54 Calyx 3-4 mm; stamens divergent ............................................ {\b 25. Satureja} 
\par
54 Calyx 5-8 mm; stamens parallel
\par
55 Corolla deep yellow or yellow and black ................................... {\b 6. Sideritis}
\par
55 Corolla pale yellow, white, pink, reddish or purple .................. {\b 16. Stachys}
\par
52 Perennial, woody at base, with non-flowering shoots at
\par
   flowering time
\par
56 Bracteoles present
\par
57 Calyx 7-12 mm; stamens parallel .............................................. {\b 16. Stachys}
\par
57 Calyx 2·5-7(-9) mm; stamens divergent ................................... {\b 25. Satureja}
\par
56 Bracteoles absent
\par
58 Stamens included in corolla-tube, parallel .................................. {\b 6. Sideritis}
\par
58 Stamens ± exserted from corolla-tube; divergent ..................... {\b 25. Satureja} 
\par
41 Calyx with 11-15(-22) veins
\par
59 Calyx-tube dorsally flattened, with 13 or 20-22 veins
\par
60 Calyx with 20-22 veins ............................................................. {\b 33. Thymus}
\par
60 Calyx with 13 veins ................................................................. {\b 30. Thymbra}
\par
59 Calyx-tube not dorsally flattened, with 11-15 veins
\par
61 Leaves 3(4)-foliolate ............................................................ {\b 17. Cedronella}
\par
61 Leaves not 3(4)-foliolate
\par
62 Anther-cells at right angles to each other, those of
\par
   the paired stamens arranged in the form of a cross;
\par
   filaments parallel
\par
63 Plant stoloniferous; anther-cells each opening by a 
\par
   separate slit .............................................................................. {\b 19. Glechoma}
\par
63 Plant not stoloniferous; anther-cells opening by a
\par
   common slit .................................................................................. {\b 18. Nepeta}
\par
62 Anther-cells rarely at right angles to each other;
\par
   filaments usually divergent
\par
64 Style not gynobasic; corolla violet-blue ......................................... {\b 1. Ajuga}
\par
64 Style gynobasic; corolla various
\par
65 Calyx with 15 veins
\par
66 Leaves mostly 2-pinnatisect .................................................. {\b 38. Lavandula}
\par
66 Leaves not 2-pinnatisect
\par
67 Upper tooth of calyx wider than other 4 teeth .............. {\b 20. Dracocephalum}
\par
67 Upper tooth of calyx not wider than other 4 teeth
\par
68 Middle lobe of lower lip of corolla usually concave,
\par
   crenate; lateral lobes indistinct; stamens parallel ......................... {\b 18. Nepeta}
\par
68 Middle lobe of lower lip of corolla ± plane, usually
\par
   entire or emarginate; lateral lobes distinct; stamens
\par
   divergent or connivent 
\par
69 Verticillasters in secund spikes .............................................. {\b 31. Hyssopus} 
\par
69 Verticillasters not in secund spikes ..................................... {\b 29. Micromeria}
\par

\par
127}
\par