{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 Corolla usually purple, cylindrical to infundibuliform, sometimes with 5 saccate invaginations in the throat. Stamens included or equalling corolla, inserted at or above middle of corolla. Style usually exserted; stigma small, capitate. Nutlets ovate to suborbicular, flattened, smooth, with a broad wing, attached to the receptacle for their whole length and adnate to style.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Literature: A. Brand in Engler,{\i  Pflanzenreich}{\b  78}({\b IV. 252}): 66-76 (1921).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Inflorescence paniculate; corolla lobed to c. ½;
\par
  invaginations in corolla-tube indistinct .......................................... {\b 1. tetraspis}
\par
1 Inflorescence umbellate; corolla lobed to c. 1/3;
\par
  invaginations in corolla-tube distinct
\par
2 Leaves green; stem 25-70 cm, leafy above ................................ {\b 2. umbellata}
\par
2 Leaves grey-lanate; stem 6-25 cm, not leafy above ........................ {\b 3. graeca}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. R. tetraspis} Pallas,{\i  Reise}{\b  1}: 486 (1771). Stems 18-50 cm, glabrous. Basal leaves (7-)12-18(-22) × (1-)2-3·5 cm, lanceolate to narrowly ovate, glabrous; cauline leaves smaller, the upper cuneate to cordate, sessile, with sub-lanate apices. Inflorescence paniculate. Pedicels 5-10 mm, elongating in fruit. Calyx 5-7 mm, villous. Corolla 12-14 mm, subconical, lobed to ½ ; lobes linear-oblong, purple; tube yellowish; invaginations small, at middle of corolla. Stamens included; anthers ½ as long as corolla-lobes. Nutlets 16 mm.{\i  Stony slopes. S. part of U.S.S.R}. Rs (C, W, K, E).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. R. umbellata} (Waldst. & Kit.) Bunge,{\i  Beitr. Kenntn. Fl. Russl.} 239 (1852). Stems 25-70 cm, hirsute. Basal leaves (7-)12-25 × 0·7-2 cm, linear-lanceolate to oblong-elliptical, sparsely sericeous; cauline leaves smaller, lanceolate, the upper narrowly ovate to oblanceolate. Inflorescence subumbellate. Pedicels 3-5 mm, elongating in fruit. Calyx 11-15 mm, sericeous. Corolla 11-15 mm, subconical, lobed to 1/3; lobes broadly oblong, yellow; invaginations above middle of corolla. Stamens equalling corolla. Nutlets 14 mm.{\i  Dry,open habitats. • From E. Jugoslavia to S.W. Ukraine.} Bu Ju Rm Rs (W).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 3. R. graeca} (A. DC.) Boiss. & Heldr. in Boiss., {\i Diagn. Pl. Or. Nov.}{\b  1}({\b 7}): 30 (1846). Caespitose, with appressed, sericeous hairs. Stems 6-25 cm, floccose. Basal leaves 3-12 × 0·2-0·9 cm, linear to oblanceolate, grey-lanate; cauline leaves smaller, narrowly linear, the upper rudimentary. Inflorescence subumbellate. Pedicels 0-4 mm, elongating up to 2-5 cm in fruit. Calyx 4-8 mm, sericeous. Corolla 10-12 mm, subcylindrical, lobed to 1/3; lobes oblong; invaginations above middle of corolla. Stamens equalling corolla. Nutlets 11-14 mm.{\i  Mountain rocks. • Greece.} Gr.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc {\b 149.          VERBENACEAE}
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc Edit. †T.G. Tutin.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Herbs or shrubs with opposite or verticillate leaves. Flowers 4- to 5-merous, weakly zygomorphic. Calyx usually small. Corolla rotate. Ovary superior, initially 1-locular but becoming 2- to 4-locular by the development of septa; style terminal; ovules usually 1 in each loculus. Fruit usually a drupe, rarely a capsule or dividing into 2 or 4 1-seeded nutlets.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Herbs
\par
2 Calyx with 5 nearly equal teeth- fruit of 4 nutlets ....................... {\b 3. Verbena}
\par
2 Calyx 2-lipped; fruit of 2 nutlets .....................................................{\b  4. Lippia}
\par
1 Shrubs
\par
3 Leaves digitate .................................................................................. {\b 1. Vitex}
\par
3 Leaves simple
\par
4 Leaves opposite; flowers yellow to red ......................................... {\b 2. Lantana}
\par
4 Most leaves in whorls of 3; flowers lilac or white .......................... {\b 4. Lippia}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc {\b 1.               Vitex}            L.
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc By †T.G. Tutin.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Shrubs with digitate leaves. Flowers in cymes forming a terminal, paniculate or spike-like inflorescence. Corolla 2-lipped, the upper lip with 2, the lower with 3 lobes. Stamens exserted. Fruit a small drupe.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. V. agnus-castus} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 638 (1753). 1-6 m, fragrant. Young twigs with 4 obtuse angles, grey-puberulent. Leaves petiolate, with 5-7 stipitate leaflets; leaflets 1·5-10 cm, linear-lanceolate, acuminate, entire, whitish-tomentose beneath, glabrous above. Calyx and outside of corolla tomentose. Corolla 8-10 mm, blue or pink. Drupe globose, reddish-black, slightly longer than calyx.{\i  S. Europe.} Al Bl Bu Co Cr Ga Gr Hs It Ju Rs (K) Sa Si Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc {\b 2.             Lantana}              L.
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc By †T.G. Tutin.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Shrubs with simple leaves. Flowers in corymbs. Corolla weakly 2-lipped. Stamens included. Fruit a small drupe.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. L. camara} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 627 (1753). Up to 1·5 m, with a strong, unpleasant smell. Young twigs 4-angled, sometimes prickly, pubescent. Leaves 5-8 cm, ovate, serrate, rugose, more or less hairy, petiolate. Inflorescences axillary; peduncles about equalling the subtending leaves. Corolla yellow or orange, usually changing to red; tube 7-8 mm; limb 4-5 mm in diameter. Drupe globose, black, distinctly longer than calyx.{\i  Naturalized in Acores, and perhaps in parts of the Mediterranean region, where it is frequently cultivated for ornament.} [Az ?Hs Si.] ({\i Tropical and warm-temperate America; widely naturalized in the tropics and subtropics.})
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc {\b 3.                   Verbena}                  L.
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc By J. do Amaral Franco.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Annual or perennial herbs or small shrubs. Leaves opposite or rarely in whorls of 3. Flowers in bracteate spikes, usually arranged in panicles or corymbs. Calyx tubular, 5-ribbed and unequally 5-dentate. Corolla hypocrateriform, weakly 2-lipped, with obtuse or emarginate lobes. Stamens inserted at about the middle of the corolla-tube, included. Stigma unequally 2-lobed. Fruit separating at maturity into 4 nutlets.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Several American species, as well as their hybrids, are grown in European gardens and sometimes escape. Among them,{\b  V. canadensis} (L.) Britton,{\i  Mem. Torrey Bot. Club}{\b  5}: 276 (1894) ({\i V. aubletia} Jacq.), from E. North America, and{\b  V. perunana} (L.) Druce,{\i  Rep. Bot. Exch. Club Brit. Is. }{\b 3}: 425 (1914) ({\i V. chamaedryfolia} Juss.), from South America, are locally naturalized in Germany and the latter also in E. France (near Strasbourg). {\i V. canadensis} has pinnatipartite to 3-fid leaves and shortly pedunculate spikes elongating in fruit, with crowded, large and showy flowers in shades of blue, purple or white. {\i V. peruviana} has crenate to incise-dentate leaves and long-pedunculate spikes with crowded, large and showy, bright scarlet to pink flowers; both are perennial herbs.
\par

\par
122}
\par