{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28\qc {\b 16.         Andromeda}          L.
\par 

\pard\f0\fs24\qc By D.A. Webb.
\par 

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Evergreen dwarf shrubs; leaves alternate, subsessile. Flowers 5-merous, in very short, umbel-like, terminal racemes; bracteoles 2, at extreme base of pedicel, concealed by bract. Sepals connate at base. Corolla urceolate; lobes short. Stamens 10; anthers with apical appendages. Fruit an erect, loculicidal capsule.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. A. polifolia} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 393 (1753). Flowering stems 15-35 cm, decumbent to erect, sparingly branched, arising from a creeping, woody rhizome. Leaves 10-40 × 2-8 mm, linear to oblong, acute to apiculate, entire, dark green above, silvery-glaucous beneath; margins usually revolute. Flowers inclined or pendent, in racemes of 2-7(-12). Pedicels 7-15 mm, slender. Calyx-lobes 1·5 mm, triangular, reddish. Corolla 5-8 mm, urceolate, bright pink at first, fading almost to white; lobes revolute. Appendages as long as anthers, slightly curved. Capsule 4-5 mm, depressed-globose. 2n = c. 48. Sphagnum-{\i bogs and other wet, acid habitats. N. & N.C. Europe, extending locally southwards to the S. Alps, E. Carpathians and S.C. Russia.} Au Be Br Cz Da Fe Ga Ge Hb He Ho It Ju No Po Rm Rs (N, B, C, W, E) Su.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28\qc {\b 17.          Chamaedaphne}               Moench
\par 

\pard\f0\fs28\qc ({\i Cassandra} D. Don)
\par 

\pard\f0\fs24\qc By D.A. Webb.
\par 

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Evergreen shrubs; leaves alternate, very shortly petiolate. Flowers 5-merous, solitary in the axils of leaf-like bracts, forming terminal, secund racemes; bracteoles 2, inserted immediately below the calyx and overlapping it. Sepals connate at base. Corolla cylindrical, lobed for 1/4-1/3 of its length. Stamens 10; anthers without appendages but with the lobes prolonged apically into a tube with terminal pore. Fruit a pendent, loculicidal capsule.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. C. calyculata} (L.) Moench, {\i Meth. }457 (1794) ({\i Cassandra calyculata} (L.) D. Don). Stems 20-50 cm, erect; young twigs puberulent. Leaves 10-40(-50) × 4-10(-15) mm, elliptic-oblong, entire to obscurely serrate, covered with brownish scales beneath. Bracts similar, but progressively smaller upwards. Racemes inclined or horizontal, with 5-20 pendent flowers. Bracteoles and calyx c. 2 mm. Corolla 5-6 mm, white. Capsule 2-2·5 mm, depressed-globose. 2n = 22.{\i  Bogs, marshes and wet woods. N.E. Europe, extending southwards to N. Poland and to} c. 52°{\i  N. in S.C. Russia.} Fe Po Rs (N, B, C, W, E) Su.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28\qc {\b 18.         Vaccinium}            L.
\par 

\pard\f0\fs24\qc By T.N. Popova.
\par 

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Deciduous or evergreen dwarf shrubs, shrubs or small trees; leaves alternate, subsessile or very shortly petiolate. Flowers 4- or 5-merous, in axillary or terminal, usually bracteate racemes, sometimes reduced to a single flower. Sepals largely, often almost completely connate. Corolla rotate to globose. Stamens 8 or 10; anthers with or without appendages, each lobe prolonged apically into a tube with a pore at the apex. Ovary inferior; fruit a berry.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28 All European species are more or less calcifuge.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  Literature: W. Gleisberg, {\i Bot. Arch.} ({\i Berlin}) {\b 2}: 1-34 (1922). H. Sleumer,{\i  Bot. Jahrb. }{\b 71}: 375-510 (1941). W. H. Camp, {\i Bull. Torrey Bot. Club}{\b  71}: 426-437 (1944).
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b V. corymbosum} L., {\i Sp. Pl. }350 (1753), the blueberry, from E. North America, is cultivated locally in W. & C. Europe for its edible fruits. It is a deciduous shrub with elliptical leaves c. 40 × 15 mm, white, cylindrical corolla c. 8 mm, and blue berries 7-10 mm.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Corolla divided almost to the base; leafy stems 
\par 
  procumbent; pedicels filiform, ± erect (Subgen.{\i  Oxycoccus})
\par 
2 Bracteoles 1-1·5 mm wide, ovate-elliptical; inflorescence
\par 
  usually intercalary .................................................................. {\b 3. macrocarpon}
\par 
2 Bracteoles not more than 0·5 mm wide, linear-oblong;
\par 
  inflorescence terminal
\par 
3 Pedicels puberulent; larger leaves 3-6 mm wide ...................... {\b 1. oxycoccos}
\par 
3 Pedicels glabrous; leaves not more than 2·5 mm wide ........ {\b 2. microcarpum}
\par 
1 Corolla not divided more than half-way to the base;
\par 
  leafy stems usually erect; pedicels relatively short
\par 
  and stout, patent or deflexed (Subgen.{\i  Vaccinium})
\par 
4 Leaves entire; margin ± revolute
\par 
5 Leaves evergreen, not glaucous; filaments hairy; 
\par 
  berry red ..................................................................................... {\b 4. vitis-idaea}
\par 
5 Leaves deciduous, glaucous; filaments glabrous;g
\par 
  berry bluish-black ..................................................................... {\b 5. uliginosum}
\par 
4 Leaves serrulate, flat
\par 
6 Small shrub with angular twigs; calyx not or scarcely 
\par 
  lobed; filaments glabrous ............................................................. {\b 6. myrtillus}
\par 
6 Large shrub or small tree with terete twigs; calyx 
\par 
  distinctly 5-lobed; filaments hairy
\par 
7 Corolla 5-7 mm, broadly campanulate; racemes bracteate  {\b 7. arctostaphylos}
\par 
7 Corolla 8-12 mm, cylindrical to narrowly campanulate;
\par 
  racemes ebracteate ................................................................ {\b 8. cylindraceum}
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  Subgen. {\b Oxycoccus} (Hill) A. Gray. Evergreen; aerial stems slender, procumbent or decumbent, with short, erect or ascending flowering branches. Flowers 4-merous, in terminal or intercalary racemes of (1-)2-5; bracts scale-like. Pedicels filiform, more or less erect, with 2 bracteoles. Corolla rotate, divided almost to the base; lobes revolute at full anthesis. Anthers without appendages.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. V. oxycoccos} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 351 (1753) ({\i Oxycoccus quadripetalus} Br.-Bl.,{\i  O. palustris} Pers.). Stems up to 80 cm, procumbent. Leaves 6-10(-15) × 2·5-5(-6) mm, ovate to oblong, subglabrous, dark shining green above, whitish beneath; margin revolute. Racemes terminal; pedicels puberulent; bracteoles c. 1·5 × 0·4 mm, linear-oblong. Calyx-lobes deltate to semicircular, ciliate. Corolla pinkish-red; lobes 5-6 mm, ovate-oblong. Filaments puberulent, much shorter than anthers. Berry (6-)8-10(-15) mm, globose to pyriform, red, sometimes speckled with white or brown. 2n = 48.{\i  Peat-bogs, usually in the wetter parts. N. & C. Europe, extending locally southwards to S.C. France, N. Italy and S.E. Russia. }Au Be Br Cz Da Fe Ga Ge Hb He Ho Hu It Ju No Po Rm Rs(N,B,C,W,E)Su.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  Plants like {\b 1} but more robust, with larger leaves and fruit, and with 2n = 72, are known from Scandinavia. They have been interpreted as hybrids between {\b 1} and {\b 2}, which have not achieved fertility in spite of doubling of the chromosome number. Fertile plants intermediate between {\b 1} and {\b 2} have been reported from Sweden and Finland; their chromosome number is not known and their status is obscure.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. V. microcarpum} (Turcz. ex Rupr.) Schmalh., {\i Trudy Imp. S. Peterb. Obsc. Estestv.}{\b  2}: 149 (1871) ({\i Oxycoccus microcarpus} Turcz. ex Rupr.). Like {\b 1} but stems not more than 30 cm; leaves 3-8 × 1-2·5 mm, triangular-ovate; pedicels, and sometimes calyx, glabrous; corolla smaller; berry 5-8 mm wide, pyriform to ellipsoid. 2n = 24. {\i Peat-bogs, sometimes in rather drier parts than }{\b 1}.{\i  N. & N. C. Europe, extending southwards to N.W. Ukraine; Alps; Carpathians.} Au Br Cz Fe Ge He Is It Ju No Po Rm Rs (N, B, C, W, ?E) Su.
\par 

\par 
12}
\par