{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28  (b) Two fruiting forms: completely submerged, with linear, transparent leaves; or upper part of stem aerial, forming a rosette with spathulate leaves raised above the surface of the water, the basal part of the spathulate leaves transparent. Cauline hairs absent. Flowers solitary, submerged or aerial. Bracteoles absent. Stamens of submerged flowers (in the European species) erect before and after dehiscence, those of aerial flowers recurved and elongating after dehiscence; anther-wall with thickened cells; pollen-grains pale yellowish, with thin exine. Wing of mericarp (in the European species) composed of several rows of large, transparent polygonal cells. Basic chromosome number 4.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28     {\b 4. C. lusitanica} Schotsman,{\i  Bol. Soc. Brot.} ser 2,{\b  35}: 112 (1961). Submerged leaves tapering slightly towards emarginate apex. Styles patent. Fruit 1·2-1·4 × 1·8-2 mm, subsessile; mericarps almost semicircular, with small seed and wide wing, the cells of the wall enclosing the seed without stellate thickenings. 2n = 8. {\i River-beds and small pools. • E. Portugal, W. & S. Spain.} Hs Lu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  (c) Three forms: submerged and sterile; aquatic with floating rosette; and terrestrial. Submerged leaves not transparent. Disc of cauline hairs of 8-15 cells. Flowers solitary, or 1 male and 1 female flower in the same leaf-axil. Bracteoles 2. Stamen recurved and elongating after dehiscence; anther-wall with thickened cells; pollen-grains yellow, with exine. Wing of mericarp, if present, composed of a single row of radially elongated cells. Basic chromosome number 5.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 5. C. stagnalis} Scop., {\i Fl. Carn.} ed. 2, {\b 2}: 251 (1772). Submerged leaves narrowly elliptical; floating rosettes with c. 6 broadly elliptical or suborbicular, pale green leaves. In terrestrial form, leaves small, broadly elliptical or suborbicular, pale green. Disc of cauline hairs orbicular, of 8-10(-12) cells. Flowers solitary, or 1 male and 1 female flower in the same leaf-axil. Pollen-grains subglobose. Styles in aquatic form erect or patent, in terrestial form arcuate-recurved. Fruit 1·75 × 1·6-1·8 mm, suborbicular, pale brownish, deeply grooved between the divergent mericarps; mericarps broadly winged, radial thickening of cells of wing often weakly developed. 2n = 10.{\i  Springs and still or slow-moving water. Most of Europe westwards from Estonia, W. Ukraine and Greece.} All except Cr Fe Rm Rs (N, K, E) Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 6. C. obtusangula} Le Gall,{\i  Fl. Morbihan} 202 (1852). Floating rosettes with 12-20 often fleshy, rhombic (rarely obovate) leaves; in terrestrial form, leaves narrowly rhombic or elliptical, fleshy, often yellowish-green. Disc of cauline hairs orbicular or elliptical, of 8-10 cells. Flowers solitary. Pollen-grains oblong-ellipsoid or slightly reniform. Styles erect or patent. Fruit 1·5 × 1·2 mm, elliptical, brown, shallowly grooved between the parallel mericarps; mericarps with rounded, scarcely distinct margin. 2n = 10. {\i Fresh or brackish, usually slow-moving water. S., W. & W.C. Europe, northwards to} c. 54° {\i N.} Au Be Br Co Ga Ge Gr Hb He Ho Hs It Ju Lu Sa Si.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 7. C. cophocarpa} Sendtner,{\i  Veg. Südbayerns} 773 (1854) ({\i C. polymorpha} Lönnr.). Floating rosettes with 10-18 slightly rhombic or elliptical leaves; in terrestrial form, leaves elliptical. Disc of cauline hairs orbicular, of 8-12(-15) cells. Flowers solitary. Pollen-grains shortly ellipsoid or subglobose. Styles erect, often persistent. Fruit 0·8-1·2 × 0·9-1·1 mm, suborbicular or slightly oblong, brown, moderately deeply grooved between the parallel mericarps; mericarps unwinged, sometimes weakly keeled, with distinct but obtuse margin. 2n = 10. {\i Slow-moving water. Most of Europe, except the south-west and most of the islands.} Al Au Be Br Bu Cz Da Fa Fe Ga Ge He Ho Hu It Ju No Po Rm Rs (N, B, C, W, K, E) Su.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 8. C. platycarpa} Kütz. in Reichenb.,{\i  Pl. Crit.}{\b  9}: 38 (1831). Submerged leaves linear; floating rosettes with elliptical, often dark green leaves; in terrestrial form, leaves elliptical, dark green. Disc of cauline hairs often asymmetrical, of 8-10 cells. Flowers solitary. Pollen-grains variously shaped (globose, ovoid, triangular etc.). Styles erect or patent. Fruit c. 1·5 mm, suborbicular, brown, sometimes with 1 or 2 mericarps abortive; mericarps narrowly winged, the cells of the wing thickened on radial walls and tapered at both ends. 2n = 20.{\i  Fresh }({\i rarely brackish}){\i  flowing or still, often base-rich water. ?• N.W. & C. Europe; one locality in N. Spain.} Au Be Br Cz Da Fa Ga Ge Hb He Ho Hs Hu No Po ?Rm Su.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  The distribution in S. & E. Europe is uncertain.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 9. C. palustris} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 969 (1753) ({\i C. verna} L., {\i C. vernalis} Koch). Submerged leaves very narrowly linear; floating rosettes with elliptical or suborbicular leaves; in terrestrial form, leaves small, elliptical. Disc of cauline hairs orbicular, of 12-15 cells. Usually 1 male and 1 female flower in the same leaf-axil. Pollen grains subglobose. Styles erect, caducous. Fruit 1(-1·5) mm, obovate, rarely elliptical, blackish; mericarps winged only at apex, the cells of the wing thickened on radial walls, not tapering. 2n = 20.{\i  Shallow, still water. Europe, southwards to the Pyrenees, Corse and the lower Volga, mainly in the mountains except in Fennoscandia & Russia.} Au †Be Br Bu Co Cz Da Fe Ga Ge He Ho ?Hs Hu Is It No Po Rm Rs (N, B, C, W, ?K, E) Su.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  In the terrestrial form, the male flowers and styles are reduced or absent.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Variants with almost elliptical fruits and scarcely winged mericarps occur in the Pyrenees, with fruits up to 1·5 mm in E. Switzerland, and with broadly winged mericarps in E. Europe. Their status is uncertain.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  (d) Three fruiting forms: submerged; aquatic with floating rosettes; and terrestrial. Submerged leaves not transparent. Disc of cauline hairs of (8-)12-20 cells. Flowers solitary. Bracteoles 2, deciduous, or absent. Stamen recurved towards one of the deflexed styles; anther-wall with thin-walled cells; pollen-grains colourless, without exine. Wing of mericarp composed of a single row of short cells with thickening on the radial and proximal walls. Basic chromosome number ?7.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 10. C. hamulata} Kütz. ex Koch, {\i Syn. Fl. Germ.} 246 (1835). Usually robust. Submerged leaves linear, with expanded, deeply emarginate apex; floating rosettes with elliptical or slightly obovate leaves; in terrestrial form, leaves elliptical, dark green. Disc of cauline hairs orbicular, of 10-15 cells. Pollen-grains globose. Styles deflexed, appressed to sides of fruit. Fruit 1·2-1·5 × 1·4 mm, suborbicular, subsessile or sometimes (in terrestrial form) very shortly stalked; mericarps narrowly winged. 2n = 38,?40.{\i  Base-poor, cool, flowing water and lakes. ?•  N.W. & C. Europe, extending eastwards to Finland and Latvia and southwards to Italy.} Au Be Br Bu Cz Da Fa Fe Ga Ge Hb He Ho Is It No Po Rm Rs (B) Su.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 11. C. brutia} Petagna,{\i  Inst. Bot.}{\b  2}: 10 (1787) ({\i C. pedunculata} DC.). Usually slender. Submerged leaves linear, not widened at apex, often irregularly emarginate; floating rosettes with elliptical or slightly obovate leaves; in terrestrial form, leaves elliptical, dark green. Disc of cauline hairs elliptical, often somewhat irregular in outline, of 8-16 cells. Pollen-grains
\par

\par
125}
\par