{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Leaves dentate to incise-serrate, sessile, amplexicaul;
\par
  spikes very dense
\par
2 Bracts distinctly longer than calyx; spikes pedunculate,
\par
  not crowded ....................................................................................... {\b 1. rigida}
\par
2 Bracts equalling or shorter than calyx; spikes mostly 
\par
  sessile and crowded .................................................................. {\b 2. bonariensis}
\par
1 At least the lower leaves deeply incised to 1- to 2-
\par
  pinnatisect, petiolate; spikes slender, becoming lax 
\par
3 Stem scabrid on the angles, usually erect; fruiting 
\par
  spikes 10-25 cm .......................................................................... {\b 3. officinalis}
\par
3 Stem strigulose, usually procumbent; fruiting spikes up
\par
  to 8 cm .............................................................................................. {\b 4. supina}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. V. rigida} Sprengel, {\i Syst. Veg.}{\b  4}({\b 2}): 230 (1827) ({\i V. venosa }Gillies & Hooker). Scabrid-pubescent perennial with stiff, erect or ascending, little-branched stems up to 60 cm. Leaves 4-8 × 1-2 cm, oblong, acute, irregularly dentate, rigid, sessile, amplexicaul. Inflorescence a lax terminal corymb, with long branches each ending in a dense spike 2-5 cm in fruit; bracts longer than calyx, lanceolate-subulate, scabrid and ciliate; corolla reddish purple, 2-3 times as long as calyx.{\i  Roadsides and waste places. Naturalized in Acores.} [Az ?Ga.] ({\i Argentina and Brazil}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. V. bonariensis} L.,{\i  Sp. Pl.} 20 (1753). Perennial with stiff, erect, little-branched stems up to 200 cm, scabrid on the angles. Leaves 7-13 × 1-2·5 cm, oblong-lanceolate, regularly incise-serrate, rugose, scabrid and more or less villous, tomentose beneath, sessile, amplexicaul. Panicle terminal, composed of several long-pedunculate cymes, each cyme of dense, subcylindrical, sessile spikes up to 2 cm in fruit; bracts equalling or shorter than calyx, concave, lanceolate-acuminate, usually dark blue; corolla blue, twice as long as calyx.{\i  Roadsides and gravelly waste places. Naturalized in W. Europe.} [Az ?Be ?Ga Lu.] ({\i Argentina and S. Brazil}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 3. V. officinalis} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 20 (1753). Perennial; stems 30-60(100) cm, erect, quadrangular, longitudinally ribbed, scabrid on the angles and diffusely branched. Leaves more or less rhombic, strigulose, the lower 4-6 × 2-4 cm, petiolate, deeply incised, lyrate to 1- to 2-pinnatifid, the upper smaller, sessile and subentire or entire. Spikes 10-25 cm in fruit, terminal, long pedunculate, solitary or in a very lax panicle; bracts ovate-acuminate, ciliate, up to half as long as calyx; corolla pale pink, twice as long as the calyx. Nutlets 1·5-2 mm, reddish-brown, with 4 to 5 longitudinal ribs on the back. 2n = 14.{\i  Europe, northwards to} c. 54° {\i N.; naturalized or casual further north.} All except Fa Fe Is No Rs (N, B) Sb Su; doubtfully native in Da.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 4. V. supina} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 21 (1753). Annual; stems 10-40 cm, usually procumbent, much-branched from the base, strigulose, quadrangular with rounded angles separated by narrow grooves. Leaves 2-4 × 1·5-2·5 cm, triangular, petiolate, 1- to 2-pinnatipartite or -pinnatisect, densely strigulose. Spikes up to 8 cm in fruit, terminal, shortly pedunculate, solitary, or sometimes paniculate, not very lax; bracts lanceolate, strigulose, usually half as long as the calyx; corolla lilac, about as long as calyx. Nutlets 2-2·5 mm, light brown, with one obtuse longitudinal rib on the back.{\i  Waste places and damp or sandy ground. S. Europe, extending northwards to S. Hungary and S.C. Russia.} Bu Cr Gr Hs Hu It Ju Lu Rm Rs (W, K, E) Sa Si Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc {\b 4.                Lippia}              L.
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc By †T.G. Tutin.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Shrubs or herbs with simple leaves. Flowers in spikes. Corolla weakly 2-lipped. Stamens included. Fruit of 2 1-seeded nutlets.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Shrub 3-6 m; inflorescence a panicle of slender spikes ............... {\b 3. triphylla} 
\par
1 Herbs 15-30 cm, sometimes woody at base; inflorescence 
\par
  a short, stout spike
\par
2 Flowers white; calyx lobed almost to base .................................. {\b 1. nodiflora}
\par
2 Flowers lilac; calyx lobed to not more than halfway ................. {\b 2. canescens}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. L. nodiflora} (L.) Michx,{\i  Fl. Bor. Amer.}{\b  2}: 15 (1803). Perennial herb with procumbent, non-flowering stems rooting at the nodes, and ascending flowering stems 15-30 cm. Leaves 1-2·5 cm, obovate to oblanceolate, with a long-cuneate base, remotely serrate in the distal half. Flowers in short, stout axillary spikes 5-7 mm in diameter; peduncles much exceeding the subtending leaves. Calyx lobed almost to the base. Corolla 2 mm wide, sparsely pubescent without, white; lobes subequal.{\i  Wet, grassy places, usually near the sea. Mediterranean region.} Al Bl Co Cr Hs It ?Sa Si Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. L. canescens} Kunth in Humb.,{\i  Bonpl. & Kunth, Nov. Gen. Sp.}{\b  2}: 263 (1818). Like {\b 1} but stems somewhat woody at base; spikes 9-12 mm in diameter; calyx lobed to not more than halfway; corolla 3 mm wide, densely pubescent without, lilac; lobes very unequal.{\i  Locally naturalized in S.W. Europe; limits uncertain owing to confusion with}{\b  1}. [Bl Co Ga Hs It Lu Sa.] ({\i South America}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 3. L. triphylla} (L'Hér.) O. Kuntze, {\i Rev. Gen. Pl.}{\b  3}({\b 2}): 253 (1898). Deciduous shrub 3-6 m. Leaves 7-10 cm, lanceolate, acuminate, cuneate at base, usually in whorls of 3, lemon-scented when crushed. Inflorescence terminal, paniculate. Flowers in long, slender spikes. Corolla lilac. {\i Commonly cultivated for ornament and locally naturalized in the Mediterranean region.} [Al Ga Hs ?Ju.] (Chile.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc {\b 150.           CALLITRICHACEAE}        
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc Edit. S.M. Walters.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Monoecious herbs with opposite leaves. Flowers axillary. Perianth absent. Stamen 1. Ovary 4-locular, with 1 anatropous, pendent ovule in each loculus. Styles 2, filiform. Fruit separating into (2-)4 mericarps. Seeds with fleshy endosperm.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc {\b 1.             Callitriche}                 L.
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc By J. do Amaral Franco.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Submerged, amphibious or terrestrial herbs, with axillary glandular scales, and sometimes with peltate cauline hairs, otherwise glabrous. Leaves simple. Flowers solitary, or 1 male and 1 female flower in the same leaf-axil. Bracteoles 0 or 2 (in European species), membranous. Anthers reniform. Mericarps with rounded, keeled or winged margin.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    5 well-defined groups of species can be recognized in Europe, and hybridization between species of different groups is unknown. The amphibious species are very variable, and identification is made difficult because of the vegetative similarity of different species when growing in similar habitats.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Ripe fruits are essential for identification; the anatomical details of the mericarps can easily be observed (in European species) after stripping off the outer layer of cells. In {\b 5-13}
\par

\par
123}
\par