{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 65 Calyx with (11-)13 veins
\par
70 Style-branches distinctly unequal
\par
71 Verticillasters of 2-6(8) equally pedicellate flowers;
\par
   calyx usually gibbous at base, the tube constricted ...................... {\b 26. Acinos}
\par
71 Verticillasters many-flowered or of pedunculate cymes;
\par
   calyx not gibbous or constricted
\par
72 Calyx-tube curved; inflorescence of many-flowered verti-
\par
   cillasters .............................................................................. {\b 28. Clinopodium}
\par
72 Calyx-tube straight; inflorescence of pedunculate cymes ... {\b 27. Calamintha}
\par
70 Style-branches equal or subequal
\par
73 Upper teeth of calyx similar to lower
\par
74 Inflorescence plumose .............................................................. {\b 33. Thymus}
\par
74 Inflorescence not plumose
\par
75 Stamens divergent ..................................................................... {\b 25. Satureja}
\par
75 Stamens with anthers ± connate under upperlip of corolla   {\b 29. Micromeria}
\par
73 Upper teeth of calyx distinct from lower
\par
76 Corolla-tube straight; leaves usually less than 2 cm
\par
77 Stamens connivent, curved; calyx-tube usually curved ...... {\b 29. Micromeria}
\par
77 Stamens divergent, straight; calyx-tube straight ...................... {\b 33. Thymus}
\par
76 Corolla-tube distinctly curved; leaves at least 2 cm
\par
78 Corolla 8-15 mm, pale yellow, becoming white or pinkish ...... {\b 23. Melissa}
\par
78 Corolla 17-21 mm, dark bluish-violet .................................. {\b 39. Horminum}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc {\b 1.              Ajuga}                 L.
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc By P.W. Ball.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Annual or perennial herbs. Calyx more or less actinomorphic, with 10 or more veins. Upper lip of the corolla usually very short; lower lip 3-lobed; tube with a ring of hairs inside. Stamens didynamous, all usually exserted. Style not gynobasic. Nutlets reticulate-veined or transversely rugose.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   {\b 2}, {\b 3} and {\b 4} are interfertile, and hybrids have been recorded from most areas where any two of these species grow together.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Leaves 3-partite with linear, sometimes 3-fid segments ...... {\b 10. chamaepitys}
\par
1 Leaves entire, toothed or shallowly lobed
\par
2 Leaves 3-6(-8) mm wide, linear to linear-oblong ................................. {\b 9. iva}
\par
2 Leaves 8-40(-50) mm wide, oblong to obovate-orbicular
\par
3 Stamens included in the corolla-tube; upper lip of 
\par
  corolla with 2 conspicuous lobes ................................................. {\b 1. orientalis}
\par
3 Stamens ± exserted from the corolla-tube- upper lip of
\par
  corolla entire or with 2 short teeth or lobes
\par
4 Acaulescent, or with stems not more than 5 cm .............................. {\b 5. tenorii}  
\par
4 Caulescent, with stems more than 5 cm
\par
5 Flowers solitary in the axil of each bract
\par
6 Cauline leaves sessile, semiamplexicaul; corolla-tube 
\par
  shorter than the calyx .................................................................. {\b 7. laxmannii}
\par
6 Cauline leaves very shortly petiolate, not semiamplexicaul; 
\par
  corolla-tube exceeding the calyx
\par
7 Calyx 6-10(-11) mm; lower leaves 10-22 mm wide, entire
\par
  or dentate .................................................................................... {\b 6. salicifolia}
\par
7 Calyx 11-15 mm; lower leaves 25-45 mm wide, coarsely 
\par
  and remotely serrate-dentate ............................................................. {\b 8. piskoi}
\par
5 Flowers 4 or more in a whorl at each node
\par
8 Middle and upper part of stem pubescent on opposite 
\par
  faces, alternating at each node ......................................................... {\b 4. reptans}
\par
8 Middle and upper part of stem ± evenly hairy on all faces
\par
9 Stamens conspicuously exserted from the corolla-tube, the
\par
  filaments hairy; upper bracts often shorter than the flowers ..... {\b 2. genevensis}
\par
9 Stamens only slightly exserted from the corolla-tube, the
\par
  filaments glabrous; upper bracts exceeding the flowers .......... {\b 3. pyramidalis}
\par
  
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. A. orientalis} L.,{\i  Sp. Pl.} 561 (1753). Rhizomatous perennial; stems 10-60 cm, sparsely to densely lanate-villous. Lower leaves 30-90(-120) × 15-40(-50) mm, ovate to oblong, sinuate-crenate or crenate-dentate, sometimes shallowly lobed. Bracts ovate, usually shallowly lobed, tinged with blue, the upper shorter than the flowers. Verticillasters distant, usually 4- to 6-flowered. Calyx 5-8 mm, the teeth about as long as the tube. Corolla 12-16(-18) mm, violet-blue; tube exceeding the calyx; upper lip conspicuously 2-lobed. Stamens included in the corolla-tube. 2n = 32.{\i  S. Europe, from Sicilia to Krym.} Al Gr It Rs (W, K) Si.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. A. genevensis} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 561 (1753). Rhizomatous perennial; stems 10-40 cm, subglabrous to densely lanate-villous. Lower leaves 30-120 × 8-50 mm, obovate to oblong-obovate, crenate-dentate or shallowly lobed, the basal usually dead at anthesis. Bracts obovate, usually lobed and tinged with blue or violet, the upper often shorter than the flowers. Verticillasters distant or somewhat crowded, 6- to many-flowered. Calyx 4-6(-7) mm, the teeth about as long as the tube. Corolla 12-20 mm, bright blue, rarely pink or white; tube exceeding the calyx; upper lip with 2 teeth. Stamens exserted; filaments hairy. 2n = 32.{\i  Europe except the south-west, the islands and most of the north; sometimes casual elsewhere.} Al Au Be Bu Cz Ga Ge Gr He Ho Hu It Ju Po Rm Rs (B, C, W, K, E) †Su ?Tu [Fe].
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 3. A. pyramidalis} L.,{\i  Sp. Pl.} 561 (1753). Rhizomatous perennial without stolons; stems 5-30 cm, subglabrous or lanate-villous. Lower leaves 40-110 × 15-45 mm, obovate, entire or crenate-dentate, the basal usually persistent. Bracts ovate or obovate-orbicular, sometimes lobed, usually tinged with blue or violet, all exceeding the flowers. Verticillasters usually crowded, 4- to 8-flowered. Calyx 5-8 mm, the teeth as long as the tube. Corolla 10-18 mm, pale violet-blue, rarely pink or white; tube exceeding calyx; upper lip entire. Stamens slightly exserted; filaments glabrous. 2n = 32.{\i  Europe, southwards to N. Portugal, N. Italy and Bulgaria, but absent from most of the U.S.S.R.} Al Au Be Br Bu ?Co Cz Da Fe Ga Ge Hb He Hs Is It Ju Lu No Po Rm Rs (B, C) Su.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    Plants from Portugal have sometimes been treated as subsp.{\b  meonantha} (Hoffmanns. & Link) R. Fernandes,{\i  Bol. Soc. Brot.} ser. 2, {\b 34}: 131 (1960), or as a distinct species, {\b A. occidentalis} Br.Bl., {\i Agron. Lusit. }{\b 18}: 89 (1956). They are densely villous with thick leaves, and the calyx has a narrow tube and narrow, acute teeth. These differences do not, however, seem to merit recognition at more than varietal rank.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   {\b  A. rotundifolia} Willk. & Cutanda, {\i Linnaea }{\b 30}: 120 (1859), from mountain slopes of C. Spain, has stolons, spathulate lower leaves and lanceolate, acuminate calyx-lobes. It has sometimes been treated as a subspecies of {\b 3} but its status is not clear.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 4. A. reptans} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 561 (1753). Rhizomatous perennial with long stolons; stems 10-40 cm, pubescent on opposite faces, alternating at each node, sometimes glabrous at the base. Lower leaves 25-90 × 10-40 mm, ovate, entire or crenate. Bracts ovate, often tinged with blue, the upper shorter than the flowers. Verticillasters crowded, usually 6-flowered. Calyx 4-6 mm, the teeth about as long as the tube. Corolla 14-17 mm, blue, rarely pink or white; tube exceeding calyx; upper lip entire. Stamens exserted; filaments hairy. 2n = 32.{\i  Most of Europe northwards to} c. 61°{\i  N.} Al Au Be Br Bu Cz Da Ga Ge Gr Hb He Ho Hs Hu It Ju Lu No Po Rm Rs (N, B, C, W, K, E) Si Su Tu [Fe].
\par

\par
128}
\par