{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 5. A. tenorii} C. Presl in J. & C. Presl,{\i  Del. Prag.} 79 (1822). Rhizomatous perennial, acaulescent or with stem up to 5 cm; glabrous or sparsely hairy. Leaves 18-50 × 10-20 mm, oblong-obovate or spathulate, crenate-dentate. Bracts lanceolate, at least the upper shorter than the flowers. Calyx 5-6 mm, the teeth slightly longer than the tube. Corolla 16-25 mm, bright blue; tube exceeding calyx; upper lip entire or with 2 short teeth. Stamens exserted; filaments usually hairy. •{\i  Mountains of C. & S. Italy and Sicilia.} It Si.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 6. A. salicifolia} (L.) Schreber,{\i  Pl. Vert. Unilab.} 26 (1773). Perennial; stem 20-30 cm, woody at base, lanate-villous. Lower leaves 25-60 × 10-22 mm, oblong-elliptical or lanceolate, entire or dentate; cauline leaves cuneate at base. Bracts similar to the leaves, exceeding the flowers. Flowers 2 at each node. Calyx 6-10(-11) mm, the teeth shorter than the tube. Corolla 18-25(-28) mm, yellow; tube slightly exceeding calyx; upper lip with 2 short lobes. Stamens exserted; filaments hairy.{\i  S.E. Europe, from Turkey-in-Europe to Krym.} Bu Rm Rs (K) Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp.{\b  salicifolia}: Cauline hairs 0·2-1 mm, appressed to semipatent. Calyx (7-)8-11 mm. {\i Krym}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b bassarabica}(Savul. & Zahar.) P. W. Ball, {\i Bot. Jour. Linn. Soc.}{\b  65}: 258 (1972) ({\i A. oblongata} Bieb. subsp.{\i  bassarabica} Savul. & Zahar.): Cauline hairs dimorphic, some c. 0·2 mm, crispate, the rest 1-1·5 mm, straight, patent. Calyx 6-10 mm. {\i From E. Romania to Turkey-in-Europe}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 7. A. laxmannii} (L.) Bentham, {\i Lab. Gen. Sp.} 697 (1835). Perennial; stem 20-50 cm, with long, more or less patent hairs. Middle cauline leaves 35-100 × 10-35 mm, ovate- to oblong-elliptical, entire to coarsely crenate-serrate; cauline leaves rounded at base, semiamplexicaul. Bracts similar to the leaves, exceeding the flowers. Flowers 2 at each node. Calyx (7-)9-15 mm, the teeth slightly shorter than the tube. Corolla (20-)25-35 mm, yellow or cream with purplish-brown veins; tube shorter than calyx; upper lip entire. Stamens exserted; filaments hairy. 2n = 62. {\i E. & E. C. Europe, northwards to N.W. Hungary and} 51° {\i N. in S.C. Russia.} Bu Gr Hu Ju Rm Rs (C, W, K, E) Tu.
\par

\par
 
\pard\f0\fs28   {\b 8. A. piskoi} Degen & Bald., Egy Új Ajuga Fajról 1 (1896). Perennial; stem 30-50 cm, hispid, the hairs mostly on the angles. Lower leaves 60-85 × 25-45 mm, ovate, coarsely and remotely serrate-dentate; cauline leaves cuneate at base. Bracts similar to the leaves, exceeding the flowers. Flowers 2 at each node. Calyx 11-15 mm, the teeth almost twice as long as the tube. Corolla 25-35 mm, pink with purple veins; tube slightly exceeding calyx; upper lip with 2 short teeth. Stamens exserted; filaments hairy. • {\i S. Albania }({\i Nemercke, S.W. of Leskovik}). Al.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 9. A. iva} (L.) Schreber, {\i Pl. Vert. Unilab.} 25 (1773). Caespitose perennial; stem 5-20 cm, woody at base, usually much-branched, villous or lanate-villous. Leaves 14-35 × 3-6(-8) mm, linear or linear-oblong, entire or with 2-6 short lobes. Bracts similar to the leaves, exceeding the flowers. Flowers 2-4 at each node. Calyx 3·5-4·5 mm, the teeth as long as or shorter than the tube. Corolla 12-20 mm, purple, pink or yellow; tube exceeding calyx; upper lip entire. Stamens exserted; filaments hairy. 2n = c. 86.{\i  S. Europe.} Bl Co Cr Ga Gr Hs It Ju Lu Sa Si.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 10. A. chamaepitys} (L.) Schreber, {\i op. cit.} 24 (1773). Annual or short-lived perennial; stem 5-30 cm, usually much branched, glabrous to densely lanate-villous. Leaves 3-partite with linear segments 0·5-3(-4) mm wide, the segments sometimes 3-fid. Bracts similar to the leaves. Flowers 2-4 at each node. Calyx 4-6 mm, the teeth as long as or shorter than the tube. Corolla yellow with red or purple markings, rarely entirely purple; tube about equalling calyx; upper lip entire. Stamens exserted; filaments hairy.{\i  Most of Europe except the north.} Al Au Be Bl Br Bu Cr Cz Ga Ge Gr He Ho Hs Hu It Ju Lu Po Rm Rs (C, W, K, E) Sa Si Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp.{\b  chamaepitys}: Annual. Leaf-segments 0·5-2 mm wide. Corolla (5-)7-15 mm. Nutlets 2·5-3 mm, reticulately veined. 2n = 28.{\i  W. & C. Europe, Italy and Sicilia}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b chia}(Schreber) Arcangeli,{\i  Comp. Fl. Ital.} 560 (1882) ({\i A. chia} Schreber): Short-lived perennial. Leaf-segments 1·5-3(-4) mm wide. Corolla 18-25 mm. Nutlets 3-4 mm, transversely rugose. 2n = 30.{\i  S.E. & E.C. Europe, extending northwards to} c. 53°{\i  N. in E.C. Russia}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  These two subspecies are often treated as distinct species, but a wide range of intermediates can be found in much of C. & E. Europe, Italy and S. Spain.{\b  A. suffrutescens} Lange,{\i  Kong. Danske Vid. Selsk. Forhand.}{\b  1893}: 196 (1893), from S. Spain, has the leaf-segments, corolla-size, and nutlet-size of subsp. chamaepitys, but the duration and nutlet-pattern of subsp.{\i  chia. A. chamaepitys} var. {\i grandiflora }Vis. and {\b A. pseudochia} Schost., {\i Not. Syst.} ({\i Leningrad}) {\b 8}: 147 (1940), are names given to plants like subsp.{\i  chamaepitys} but with the corolla 12-20 mm and the nutlets 2·5-3·5 mm, sometimes more or less transversely rugose. These occur throughout much of E. & E.C. Europe, the Balkan peninsula, S. Italy and Sicilia. Plants showing various other combinations of characters are common in the Balkan peninsula.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc {\b 2.              Teucrium}                L.
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc By †T.G. Tutin & D. Wood.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Herbs or shrubs. Calyx tubular or campanulate, 2-lipped or actinomorphic, 5-toothed, the teeth equal or the upper the largest. Corolla with one 5-lobed lip; tube without a ring of hairs inside, often included in the calyx. Nutlets smooth or reticulate.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 All leaves 1- to 2-pinnatifid or pinnatisect, the linear
\par
  or oblong lobes extending almost or quite to the  midrib
\par
2 Annual; calyx gibbous at base, the teeth shorter than the tube ...... {\b 18. botrys}
\par
2 Perennial; calyx not gibbous at base, the teeth as long
\par
  as or longer than the tube
\par
3 Corolla c. 5 mm, not much longer than calyx .................... {\b 5. campanulatum}
\par
3 Corolla 10-15 mm, about twice as long as calyx ........ {\b 4. pseudochamaepitys}
\par
1 Leaves entire, crenate or serrate, rarely some deeply lobed
\par
4 Branches ending in spines which are leafless or with very small leaves
\par
5 Annual herb; stems glandular and pubescent or villous ........... {\b 16. spinosum}
\par
5 Small shrub; stems grey- or white-tomentose, eglandular .. {\b 29. subspinosum}
\par
4 Not spinose
\par
6 Calyx 2-lipped
\par
7 Verticillasters crowded in a dense, not or scarcely 
\par
  secund, spike-like inflorescence 
\par
8 Corolla whitish
\par
9 Leaves cuneate to rounded at base; corolla 1½ times
\par
  as long as calyx; stamens exserted ................................................... {\b 6. arduini}
\par
9 Leaves cordate to truncate at base; corolla scarcely
\par
  longer than calyx; stamens included ......................................... {\b 7. lamifolium} 
\par
8 Corolla pink, violet or purple
\par
10 Calyx (6-)7-8 mm; middle tooth of upper lip nearly 
\par
   twice as long as the lateral tooth .................................... {\b 9. francisci-werneri} 
\par
10 Calyx not more than 5·5 mm; middle tooth of upper lip
\par
   not or scarcely longer than the lateral teeth
\par

\par
129}
\par