{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 4 mm, ovate, hirsute. Corolla 5-6 mm, dull purple; tube cylindrical; limb shorter than tube. Stamens inserted in upper part of tube. Nutlets 5-8 mm in diameter, ovoid, with a distinct border; external face densely glochidiate. 2n = 24, 48.{\i  Dry open habitats. Most of Europe except the extreme north and the extreme south.} Al Au Be Br Bu Co Cz Da Fe Ga Ge Gr Hb He Ho Hs Hu It Ju No Po Rm Rs (B, C, W, K, E) Sa Su.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Plants with bright reddish corolla 12-15 mm in diameter and with very short tube, occurring in W. Bulgaria, have been called {\b C. rotatum }Velen., {\i Sitz.-Ber. Böhm. Ges. Wiss.} ({\i Math.-Nat. Kl.}) {\b 1893}({\b 37}): 48 (1894); their taxonomic status is uncertain.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. C. dioscoridis} Vill.,{\i  Prosp. Pl. Dauph. }21 (1779) ({\i C. loreyi} Jordan ex Lange). Biennial. Stems (15-)20-40(-50) cm, hirsute. Cauline leaves linear-lanceolate, the middle (5-)7-9(-12) mm wide, more or less amplexicaul, hairy on both surfaces. Cymes ebracteate. Calyx-lobes c. 3 mm, elliptical to oblong, hirsute. Corolla c. 5 mm, deep blue, campanulate; limb about as long as tube. Stamens inserted in middle of tube. Nutlets 5-6 mm in diameter, with a distinct border; external face densely glochidiate. {\i Wood-margins and rocky hillsides; calcicole. • S. & E. France, N.E. Spain.} Ga Hs ?It.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 3. C. columnae} Ten., {\i Fl. Nap.}{\b  1}, {\i Prodr.}: 14 (1811). Annual. Stems (15-)25-45(-60) cm, hirsute. Cauline leaves oblong to lanceolate, sessile to amplexicaul, more or less tomentose on both surfaces. Cymes ebracteate. Calyx-lobes c. 5 mm, ovate, hirsute. Corolla 5-6 mm, deep blue; tube broadly cylindrical. Stamens inserted in upper part of tube. Nutlets 7-10 mm in diameter, with a distinct border; glochidia on disc shorter than those on margin.{\i  Dry open habitats. • C. & E. Mediterranean region.} Al Cr Gr It Ju Si.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 4. C. germanicum} Jacq.,{\i  Obs. Bot.}{\b  2}: 31 (1767) ({\i C. montanum} auct., non L.). Biennial. Stems (20-)30-50(-60) cm, hirsute. Cauline leaves lanceolate, subsessile to amplexicaul, hairy beneath, more or less glabrous and shining above. Cymes ebracteate. Calyx-lobes 4-5 mm, narrowly ovate, sparsely hirsute. Corolla 5-6 mm, reddish-violet; tube broadly cylindrical to infundibuliform; limb shorter than tube, with glabrous lobes. Stamens inserted in middle of tube. Nutlets 6-8 mm in diameter, ovoid, without a distinct border; external face convex, densely glochidiate. 2n = 24. {\i Woods; somewhat calcicole. W. & C. Europe, northwards to C. England and extending locally to S. Italy, Bulgaria and Ukraine.} Al Au Be Br Bu Cz Ga Ge ?Hs It Ju Po Rm Rs (C, W, K) Sa.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 5. C. creticum} Miller, {\i Gard. Dict.} ed. 8, no. 3 (1768) ({\i C. pictum} Aiton). Biennial. Stems (20-)30-60 cm, hirsute to tomentose. Cauline leaves oblong to lanceolate, shortly petiolate to amplexicaul, densely hairy on both surfaces. Cymes ebracteate. Calyx-lobes 6-8 mm, oblong, hirsute. Corolla 7-9 mm, deep blue, with distinct reticulate venation; tube broadly infundibuliform; limb about as long as tube, divided to c. ½ , the lobes glabrous. Stamens inserted in lower part of tube. Nutlets 5-7 mm in diameter, ovoid, without a distinct border; external face convex, densely and unequally glochidiate. 2n = 24.{\i  Open, usually dry habitats. S. Europe, extending northwards to N.C. France.} Al Az Bl Bu Co Cr Ga Gr Hs It Ju Lu ?Rm Rs (K) Sa Si Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 6. C. sphacioticum} Boiss. & Heldr. in Boiss.,{\i  Diagn. Pl. Or. Nov.}{\b  2}({\b 11}): 125 (1849). Perennial. Stems 10-18 cm, hirsute. Cauline leaves linear-lanceolate, sessile, hairy on both surfaces. Cymes ebracteate. Calyx-lobes c. 3 mm, oblong, hirsute. Corolla c. 4 mm, deep blue to violet; tube broadly infundibuliform; limb as long as tube or somewhat longer, divided to 3, the lobes glabrous; scales crescent-shaped. Stamens inserted in middle of tube. Nutlets 5-6 mm in diameter, ovoid, without a distinct border; external face convex, densely glochidiate.{\i  Mountain screes. • Kriti.} Cr.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 7. C. hungaricum} Simonkai, {\i Term. Füz.}{\b  2}: 151 (1878). Biennial. Stems (15-)20-40(-50) cm, hirsute. Cauline leaves lanceolate, sessile to semi-amplexicaul, hairy on both surfaces. Cymes ebracteate; pedicels in fruit longer than calyx. Calyx-lobes 4-5 mm, lanceolate, hirsute. Corolla 4-6 mm, dull red; tube broadly cylindrical; limb longer than tube, divided to 1, the lobes glabrous; scales more or less square to trapeziform. Stamens inserted in middle of tube. Nutlets 4-6 mm in diameter, without a distinct border; external face convex, densely glochidiate. 2n = 24.{\i  Dry open habitats. S.E. & E.C. Europe.} Al Au Bu Cz Gr Hu Ju Rm Rs (W, K).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Extremely variable, particularly in indumentum and floral and fruit characters, and local variants have been given specific, subspecific or varietal rank. Variants transitional to {\b 8} appear to be frequent in the Balkan peninsula and further work is required to understand the structure of this complex. The name {\i C. hungaricum} Simonkai was originally applied to plants from the northern edge of the range, where there is a tendency for the indumentum to be rather sparse.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 8. C. nebrodense} Guss., {\i Fl. Sic. Prodr.}{\b  1}: 216 (1827). Biennial. Stems (15-)20-40 cm, hirsute to tomentose. Cauline leaves lanceolate to narrowly lanceolate, shortly petiolate to semiamplexicaul, more or less hairy or scabrid on both surfaces. Cymes ebracteate; pedicels in fruit shorter than calyx. Calyx-lobes  c. 4 mm, lanceolate, hirsute. Corolla 4-6 mm, reddish-violet; tube broadly cylindrical; limb about as long as tube, divided to ½, the lobes glabrous; scales more or less square to trapeziform. Stamens inserted in middle of tube. Nutlets 4-5 mm in diameter, ovoid, without a distinct border; external face convex, densely glochidiate.{\i  Mountain woods. • Mediterranean region.} Gr Hs It ?Ju Si.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 9. C. cheirifolium} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 134 (1753) (incl. {\i C. arundanum} Cosson, {\i C. heterocarpum} (G. Kunze) Willk.). Biennial. Stems (15-)25-40 cm, hirsute to tomentose. Cauline leaves lanceolate, sessile, whitish-tomentose on both surfaces. Cymes bracteate. Calyx-lobes 5-7 mm, ovate, hirsute. Corolla c. 8 mm, at first pale purplish, becoming purple, violet or deep blue; limb shorter than tube, the lobes glabrous. Stamens inserted at middle of tube. Nutlets 5-8 mm in diameter, with a distinct border; external face flat or concave, densely glochidiate to nearly smooth.{\i  Dry open habitats. W. Mediterranean region, Portugal.} Bl Ga Hs It Lu Sa Si.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 10. C. magellense} Ten., {\i Fl. Nap.}{\b  1},{\i  Prodr}.: 66 (1811). Perennial. Stems (15-)20-35 cm, hirsute. Cauline leaves linear-lanceolate, sessile, densely hairy on both surfaces. Cymes bracteate, capitate at anthesis. Calyx-lobes c. 7 mm, linear-lanceolate, hirsute. Corolla c. 8 mm, reddish; tube broadly cylindrical; limb shorter than tube, the lobes glabrous. Stamens inserted in upper part of tube. Nutlets 7-9 mm in diameter, with a distinct border; external face flat or concave, sparsely glochidiate to smooth.{\i  Mountain pastures. • C. & S. Appennini.} It.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   {\b 11. C. clandestinum} Desf.,{\i  Fl. Atl.}{\b  1}: 159 (1798). Biennial. Stems (20-)30-50(-60) cm, hirsute. Cauline leaves lanceolate
\par

\par
120}
\par