{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 to linear-lanceolate, shortly petiolate to amplexicaul, hairy on both surfaces. Cymes usually bracteate. Calyx-lobes 6-7 mm, ovate, hirsute. Corolla c. 6 mm, violet; tube broadly cylindrical; limb shorter than tube, the lobes villous. Stamens inserted in upper part of tube. Nutlets 5-7 mm in diameter, without a distinct border; external face more or less flat or concave, densely glochidiate.{\i  Dry open habitats. S. part of Iberian peninsula, Sardegna, Sicilia.} Hs Lu Sa Si.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc {\b 35.             Solenanthus}              Ledeb.
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc By L.F. Ferguson.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Biennial or short-lived perennial herbs. Flowers in mostly ebracteate cymes, forming a panicle. Calyx lobed to the base, lobes usually accrescent. Corolla purple or reddish-purple, cylindrical to infundibuliform, with 5 saccate invaginations in the throat. Stamens exserted or equalling corolla, inserted at about middle of corolla. Style exserted; stigma small. Nutlets depressed-ovoid to globose, glochidiate, with margins sometimes winged, attached to receptacle for most of their length.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Literature: A. Brand in Engler,{\i  Pflanzenreich}{\b  78}({\b IV. 252}): 153-160 (1921). W. B. Turrill, {\i Hook. Ic.}{\b  33}: sub t. 3278 (1935).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Basal and cauline leaves linear to linear-lanceolate ................. {\b 1. reverchonii}
\par
1 Basal and cauline leaves not linear or linear-lanceolate
\par
2 Upper cauline leaves ovate-rhombic ........................................... {\b 6. albanicus}
\par
2 Upper cauline leaves not ovate-rhombic
\par
3 Stamens equalling or scarcely exceeding corolla ...................... {\b 3. apenninus}
\par
3 Stamens exceeding corolla by at least 2 mm
\par
4 Pedicels 0-4 mm in flower, scarcely elongating in fruit;
\par
  corolla-lobes acute ...................................................................... {\b 5. stamineus}
\par
4 Pedicels 4 mm or more, elongating in fruit; corolla-lobes obtuse
\par
5 Plant 30-60 cm; corolla (3-)5-6 mm ....................................... {\b 2. biebersteinii}
\par
5 Plant 50-100 cm; corolla 7 mm ................................................... {\b 4. scardicus}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. S. reverchonii} Degen,{\i  Magyar Bot. Lapok}{\b  2}: 311 (1903). Biennial or perennial 30-70 cm. Stems simple. Basal leaves 20-30 × 1-2 cm, linear to linear-lanceolate, with 3(-5) longitudinal veins; cauline leaves smaller. Pedicels 0-2 mm, elongating in fruit. Calyx 4-6 mm; lobes accrescent, lanceolate to linear. Corolla 6-8·5 mm, with invaginations above the middle; lobes very small, lanceolate. Stamens exserted; filaments 7·5-9·5 mm. Nutlets 7-9 mm; external face sparsely glochidiate; margins with several rows of flattened glochidia. •{\i   S. Spain}. Hs.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. S. biebersteinii} DC., {\i Prodr.}{\b  10}: 165 (1846). Perennial 30-60 cm. Basal leaves 30-45 × 12-20 cm, elliptical to ovate, with 6-11 lateral veins; cauline leaves smaller; the lower broadly elliptical, the upper narrowly lanceolate. Pedicels c. 4 mm, elongating in fruit. Calyx 3-4 mm; lobes accrescent, linear-oblong. Corolla (3-)5-6 mm, with invaginations at or above the middle; lobes orbicular to obovate, obtuse. Stamens exserted; filaments 9-10 mm. Nutlets 5-6 mm; margins slightly winged; external face with few glochidia, other faces densely glochidiate.{\i  Mountain woods. Krym.} Rs (K). ({\i Caucasus.})
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 3. S. apenninus} (L.) Fischer & C. A. Meyer, {\i Bull. Soc. Nat. Moscou}{\b  11}: 306 (1838). Biennial 60-120 cm. Basal leaves 30-50 × 5-9(-12) cm, elliptical to broadly lanceolate, with 3-6 lateral veins; cauline leaves smaller, the lower ovate-elliptical to elliptical, the upper narrowly obovate to attenuate, cuneate to amplexicaul-auriculate at base. Pedicels 8 mm, elongating in fruit. Calyx 8-10 mm; lobes accrescent, lanceolate. Corolla 7-9 mm, with invaginations at or below the middle; lobes obovate, obtuse. Stamens equalling or scarcely exceeding corolla; filaments 8-10 mm. Nutlets 6-8 mm, sparsely glochidiate.{\i  Mountain woods and pastures. • C. & S. Italy, Sicilia.} .Al ?Gr It Si.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 4. S. scardicus} Bornm.,{\i  Feddes Repert.}{\b  17}: 276 (1921). Perennial or biennial 50-100 cm. Stems branched. Basal leaves 25-35 × 7·5-11 cm, ovate to broadly lanceolate, with 3-5 lateral veins; cauline leaves smaller, narrowly elliptical to lanceolate, the upper sessile, sometimes amplexicaul. Pedicels 5-8 mm, elongating in fruit. Calyx 5-9 mm; lobes narrowly lanceolate to oblong-lanceolate, accrescent and becoming elliptic-lanceolate. Corolla 7 mm, with invaginations at or above the middle; lobes broadly elliptical to triangular, obtuse. Stamens exserted; filaments 7-9 mm. Nutlets 9 mm, densely glochidiate; margin winged. Fagus-{\i woods. • E. Albania and W. Makedonija.} Al Ju.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 5. S. stamineus} (Desf.) Wettst.,{\i  Denkschr. Akad. Wiss. Math.-Nat. Kl.} ({\i Wien}) {\b 50}({\b 2}): 88 (1885). Perennial (10-)20-60(-100) cm. Stems simple. Basal leaves 15-30(-50) × 24(-7) cm, lanceolate, with (1-)3-5 longitudinal veins; cauline leaves smaller. Pedicels 0-4 mm. Calyx 3-5 mm; lobes oblong-lanceolate. Corolla 6-7 mm, with invaginations below the middle; lobes ovate, acute. Stamens exserted; filaments 12-14 mm. Nutlets 6-8 mm; margins with rows of flattened glochidia; external face sparsely, the other faces densely and shortly glochidiate.{\i  Mountain rocks. S. Greece} ({\i Aroania Oros}). Gr. ({\i S.W. Asia}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 6. S. albanicus} (Degen & Bald.) Degen & Bald.,{\i  Magyar Bot. Lapok}{\b  2}: 315 (1903). Biennial 40-90 cm. Cauline leaves (3-)6-12 × (1·5-)3-3·5 cm, ovate-lanceolate to ovate-rhombic, sessile. Pedicels 0-4 mm. Calyx 4-6 mm; lobes lanceolate. Corolla (6-)7(-8) mm, with invaginations at or below the middle; lobes narrowly ovate, acute. Stamens exserted; filaments 10-11 mm. Nutlets 7 mm; glochidia large, interspersed with smaller ones.{\i  Mountain rocks. • N.W. Greece, S. Albania.} Al Gr.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc {\b 36.               Mattiastrum}            (Boiss.) Brand 
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc By L.F. Ferguson.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Perennial herbs. Flowers in terminal or axillary, ebracteate cymes. Calyx lobed almost to the base. Corolla blue, violet or purple, campanulate or infundibuliform; tube usually long, with 5 scales in the throat. Stamens included, inserted at top of tube. Style included or exserted; stigma small, capitate. Nutlets suborbicular to ovate, sometimes glochidiate, with a broad, flat wing on the margin, attached to the receptacle for their whole length.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Literature: A. Brand in Engler,{\i  Pflanzenreich}{\b  78}({\b IV. 252}): 54-66 (1921).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. M. lithospermifolium} (Lam.) Brand,{\i  Feddes Repert.}{\b  14}: 155 (1915). Caespitose perennial; stems (2-)7-35(-50) cm, hispid to villous-pubescent. Basal leaves 3-5 × 0·5-1 cm, lanceolate to spathulate, petiolate; the cauline smaller, sessile. Inflorescence 1·5-3 cm, terminal, dense, elongating up to 6-10(-30) cm in fruit; pedicels 0-4 mm, elongating in fruit. Calyx 2-4 mm; lobes linear-oblong. Corolla 3-5 mm, campanulate, blueviolet. Style included. Nutlets 7-8 mm, suborbicular, sparsely glochidiate; wing spinulose-dentate.{\i  Kriti.} Cr.({\i W. Asia}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc {\b 37.             Rindera}             Pallas
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc By L.F. Ferguson.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Perennial herbs. Flowers in terminal ebracteate cymes, forming panicles or umbels. Calyx lobed to the base, accrescent or not.
\par

\par
121}
\par