{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 subglobose. Styles deflexed, appressed to sides of fruit. Fruit 1-1·4 × 1-1·2 mm, suborbicular or slightly longer than wide, subsessile in aquatic form, with stalk up to 13 mm in terrestrial form; mericarps mostly broadly winged. 2n = 28.{\i  Still, often shallow water. • W. & S. Europe, eastwards to Italy; one station in S. Sweden.} Be Bl Br Da Fa Ga Hb Hs Is It Lu No Sa Si Su.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Small aquatic forms of {\b 10} and {\b 11} are difficult to separate. {\b C. naftolskyi} Warburg & Eig,{\i  Feddes Repert.}{\b  26}: 84 (1929), from Israel, is doubtfully recorded from Sardegna; it has fruits with very long stalks and ripening in the soil, broadly winged mericarps with a complex wing-structure, and the disc of the cauline hairs composed of 12-19 cells.
\par

\par
 (e) Always terrestrial. Leaves elliptical or spathulate. Disc of cauline hairs of 4-8 cells. 1 male and 1 female flower in the same leaf-axil. Bracteoles absent. Wing of mericarp composed of a single row of short cells with thickening on the radial and proximal walls. Basic chromosome number probably 5.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 12. C. peploides} Nutt., {\i Trans. Amer. Philos. Soc}. nov. ser., {\b 5}: 141 (1835). Leaves elliptical or spathulate. Fruit 0·6 × 0·8 mm, subsessile; mericarps thicker and less rounded at base than at apex, very narrowly winged. {\i Naturalized in N. France} ({\i Seine-et Oise}). [Ga.] ({\i North America.})
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   {\b 13. C. terrestris} Rafin.,{\i  Med. Reposit.} ({\i New York}){\b  5}: 358 (1808). Leaves elliptical. Fruit 0·6 × 0·8-0·9 mm; mericarps of equal thickness throughout and equally rounded at base and apex, narrowly winged.{\i  Naturalized in S.W. France} ({\i Hautes-Pyrénées}). [Ga.] ({\i North America.})
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc {\b 151.           LABIATAE}
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc Edit. V.H. Heywood & I.B.K. Richardson.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Herbs or shrubs, often glandular and aromatic. Leaves usually simple, exstipulate, opposite. Flowers zygomorphic, usually in contracted and modified cymes in the axils of opposite bracts or floral leaves, forming pseudowhorls called {\i verticillasters}, which in turn are arranged in simple or compound spike-like, cymose, corymbose, paniculate or capitate inflorescences; rarely in true cymes. Bracts leaf-like, or much reduced or modified (usually called {\i floral leaves} when conspicuous). Bracteoles usually small, sometimes absent. Calyx usually 4- or 5-lobed, often 2-lipped with the upper lip 3-toothed and the lower 2-toothed. Corolla sympetalous; limb usually 5-lobed, often 2-lipped with the upper lip 2-lobed and the lower lip 3-lobed, rarely all 5 lobes forming the lower lip. Stamens usually 4, didynamous, rarely 2. Ovary superior, 2-carpellate but appearing equally 4-lobed when mature due to further partition; style single, usually branched above and gynobasic. Fruit of four 1-seeded nutlets.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Sexual dimorphism occurs in several genera, with female flowers, which are normally smaller, occurring in addition to the usual hermaphrodite flowers on the same or on different plants.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  The calyx may be entire or shallowly to deeply lobed or toothed, and in the key, the calyx-tube is regarded as extending from the base of the calyx up to the lowermost sinus. The number of veins refers to the lower part of the tube.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Corolla ± 1-lipped, the upper lip much reduced or absent
\par
2 Upper lip of corolla absent; corolla-tube glabrous inside .......... {\b 2. Teucrium}
\par
2 Upper lip of corolla present, entire or consisting of
\par
  2 small teeth; corolla-tube with a ring of hairs inside ....................... {\b 1. Ajuga}
\par
1 Corolla ± actinomorphic, or 2-lipped with a distinct upper lip
\par
3 Fertile stamens 2
\par
4 Upper lip of corolla distinctly hooded (concave);
\par
  stamens with 1 fertile cell ............................................................... {\b 40. Salvia}
\par
4 Upper lip of corolla flat or convex; stamens with 
\par
  2 fertile cells
\par
5 Lower leaves pinnatifid .............................................................. {\b 34. Lycopus}
\par
5 Lower leaves entire
\par
6 Annual; upper lip of corolla entire or emarginate ................... {\b 24. Ziziphora}
\par
6 Shrub; upper lip of corolla 2-fid ........................................... {\b 37. Rosmarinus}
\par
3 Fertile stamens 4
\par
7 Upper lip of corolla distinctly hooded (concave), ± 
\par
  equalling to much exceeding the lower lip; calyx 
\par
  usually actinomorphic
\par
8 Calyx with an erect, dorsal projection ...................................... {\b 3. Scutellaria}
\par
8 Calyx without a dorsal projection
\par
9 Calyx-tube ± hypocrateriform
\par
10 Calyx zygomorphic, curved ................................................. {\b 14. Moluccella}
\par
10 Calyx ± actinomorphic, straight
\par
11 Corolla 10-18 mm; bracteoles present ....................................... {\b 15. Ballota}
\par
11 Corolla 32-40 mm; bracteoles absent ................................ {\b 8. Eremostachys}
\par
9 Calyx-tube subglobose, campanulate, infundibuliform or tubular
\par
12 Style-branches distinctly unequal
\par
13 Calyx-teeth equal; tube with 5-10 veins ...................................... {\b 9. Phlomis}
\par
13 Calyx 2-lipped, the lower teeth longer than the upper;
\par
   tube with 13 veins
\par
14 Verticillasters of 2-6(8) equally pedicellate flowers;
\par
   calyx gibbous at base, the tube constricted ................................... {\b 26. Acinos}
\par
14 Verticillasters many-flowered, or of pedunculate cymes;
\par
   calyx not gibbous or constricted
\par
15 Calyx-tube straight; inflorescence of pedunculate cymes ... {\b 27. Calamintha}
\par
15 Calyx-tube curved; inflorescence of many-flowered
\par
   verticillasters ....................................................................... {\b 28. Clinopodium}
\par
12 Style-branches equal or subequal
\par
16 Calyx with 11-15 veins
\par
17 Calyx with 11-13 veins
\par
18 Stamens with anthers ± connate under upper lip of corolla;
\par
   calyx with 13 veins ............................................................... {\b 29. Micromeria}
\par
18 Stamens divergent; calyx with 11-13 veins .............................. {\b 25. Satureja}
\par
17 Calyx with 15 veins
\par
19 Upper tooth of calyx wider than other 4 teeth .............. {\b 20. Dracocephalum}
\par
19 Upper tooth of calyx not wider than other 4 teeth .............. {\b 29. Micromeria}
\par
16 Calyx with 5-10 veins
\par
20 Lateral lobes of lower lip of corolla absent, or
\par
   inconspicuous, sometimes reduced to small, acute teeth ........... {\b 11. Lamium}
\par
20 Lateral lobes of lower lip of corolla distinct, ± obtuse
\par
21 Bracteoles pungent
\par
22 Annual; lower lip of corolla with 2 conical projections
\par
   at base of lateral lobes .............................................................. {\b 10. Galeopsis}
\par
22 Shrub; lower lip of corolla without conical projections ............. {\b 15. Ballota}
\par
21 Bracteoles not pungent, sometimes absent
\par
23 Calyx distinctly 2-lipped
\par
24 Calyx with throat closed in fruit when dry; filaments
\par
   with a subulate appendage below the apex ................................ {\b 21. Prunella}
\par
24 Calyx with throat always open; filaments without an appendage
\par

\par
126}
\par