{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 36. T. alpestre} Sibth. & Sm., {\i loc. cit.} (1809). Dwarf, densely branched, hairy shrub up to 20 cm. Stem with patent hairs. Leaves 4-10 mm, obovate to linear, with 3-5 crenations, flat or with revolute margins, cuneate at the base, subsessile. Flowers in a terminal head, with occasional solitary, axillary flowers. Calyx campanulate, evenly hairy with dense short hairs; veins obscure. Corolla creamy yellow; proximal lobes spathulate. •{\i  Kriti and Karpathos.} Cr.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b alpestre}: Young stems and leaves with patent hairs; leaves flat or slightly revolute. 2n = 78.{\i  Mountain rocks. Kriti.}
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b gracile}(W. Barbey & Major) D. Wood, {\i Bot. Jour. Linn. Soc.}{\b  65}: 261 (1972) ({\i T. gracile} W. Barbey & Major): Stems and leaves with appressed hairs; leaves strongly revolute.{\i  Calcareous cliffs. Karpathos}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 37. T. montanum} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 565 (1753) (incl.{\i  T. helianthemoides} Adamovic, {\i T. jailae} Juz., {\i T. praemontanum} Klokov, {\i T. pannonicum} A. Kerner). Dwarf shrub. Stems 10-25 cm, decumbent, with white, appressed, simple hairs. Leaves 13-30 mm, narrowly elliptical, entire, sessile, often glabrous above, hairy to densely hairy with prominent midrib beneath. Flowers in a terminal head. Bracts leaf-like. Calyx up to 10 mm, hairy or glabrous, often with setaceous teeth. Corolla cream; proximal lobes spathulate, constricted at the base. 2n = 16, 26, 30, 60.{\i  Dry, rocky or stony ground; calcicole. S. & C. Europe, extending to the Netherlands and W. Ukraine.} Al Au Be Bu Cz Ga Ge Gr He Ho Hs Hu It Ju Po Rm Rs (W, K) Sa Si.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 38. T. thymifolium} Schreber, {\i Pl. Vert. Unilab.} 50 (1773). Dwarf shrub with appressed white hairs. Stems 5-10 cm, often decumbent. Leaves 5-9 mm, narrowly ovate to linear, entire, sessile, revolute, hairy on both surfaces; margins revolute. Flowers in a terminal head. Bracts leaf-like, equalling or shorter than the calyx. Calyx 7-9 mm, green or purple, evenly crispate hairy; teeth acute; veins conspicuous. Corolla cream or red; proximal lobes spathulate. •{\i  S.E. Spain}. Hs.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 39. T. cossonii} D. Wood,{\i  Bot. Jour. Linn. Soc.}{\b  65}: 261 (1972) ({\i T. pulverulentum} (Barc.) Rouy, non (Jordan & Fourr.) F. W. Schultz & F. Winter). Dwarf shrub up to 30 cm. Stock very woody. Stem and leaves evenly covered with branched hairs. Leaves 15-30 mm, narrowly oblanceolate, slightly revolute, entire or shallowly crenate, subsessile. Flowers in terminal and lateral heads. Bracts leaf-like, the lower longer than, the upper equalling the calyx. Calyx 5-6 mm, evenly hairy. Corolla red; proximal lobes short, triangular.{\i  Calcareous rocks. • Mallorca.} Bl.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 40. T. libanitis} Schreber, {\i Pl. Vert. Unilab.} 48 (1773) ({\i T. verticillatum} Cav.). Dwarf shrub. Stems 15-25 cm, densely hairy. Leaves 10-15 mm, linear, entire, very densely hairy beneath, sessile, in whorls of 4; margins revolute. Flowers in a terminal subconical head. Bracts entire, spathulate. Calyx 4-5 mm; teeth very short, obtuse. Corolla yellowish; proximal lateral lobes triangular.{\i  Dry hill sides ; calcicole. • S.E. Spain.} Hs.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 41. T. carthaginense} Lange, {\i Vid. Meddel. Dansk Naturh. Foren. Kjøbenhavn}{\b  1881}: 97 (1882). Dwarf shrub. Stems 15-25 cm, hairy. Leaves 10-13 mm, spathulate, with 3-5 crenations, in small fascicles; margins revolute. Flowers in a terminal subcylindrical to globose head. Bracts entire, linear-lanceolate. Calyx 6-8 mm, strongly ribbed. Corolla white; proximal lobes narrowly triangular. {\i Rocky hillsides; calcicole. •  S.E. Spain.} Hs.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 42. T. aragonense} Loscos & Pardo, {\i Ser. Pl. Arag. }85 (1863). Dwarf shrub. Stems 10-40 cm, hairy; flowering stems slender, straight. Leaves 15-20 mm, linear to spathulate, entire, green above, white-hairy beneath, sessile. Flowers in a simple or compound terminal head. Bracts leaf-like. Calyx 4-5 mm, subglabrous, with sericeous teeth. Corolla white or purple; proximal lobes triangular. •{\i  E. Spain.} Hs.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 43. T. pumilum} L., {\i Cent. Pl.}{\b  1}: 15 (1755). Dwarf shrub. Stems 15-40 cm, densely hairy. Leaves 6-20 mm, linear, entire, glabrous or subglabrous above, sessile, ascending, rarely in fascicles; margins revolute. Flowers in a terminal, conical, simple head. Bracts longer than calyx, leaf-like. Calyx 4-5 mm, glabrous or hairy only at the base, glandular, with short obtuse or setaceous teeth. Corolla cream or purple; proximal lobes shortly spathulate.{\i  Calcareous or gypsaceous soils. • C. & S.E. Spain.} Hs.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b pumilum}: Stems 15-30 cm; bracts shorter than the flowers; calyx slightly hairy; teeth setaceous.{\i  Throughout the range of the species}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b carolipaui}(C. Vicioso ex Pau) D. Wood,{\i  Bot. Jour. Linn. Soc.}{\b  65}: 261 (1972) ({\i T. carolipaui} C. Vicioso ex Pau): Stems 25-40 cm; bracts much longer than the flowers; calyx glabrous; teeth obtuse.{\i  S.E. Spain.}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 44. T. turredanum} Losa & Rivas Goday,{\i  Anal. Inst. Bot. Cavanilles}{\b  25}: 204 (1969). Like {\b 43} but flowers always in compound heads; calyx densely hairy. {\i Calcicole. • S.E. Spain} ({\i N.E. of Almeria}). Hs.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 45. T. polium} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 566 (1753). Dwarf shrub. Stems 6-45 cm, covered with white, greenish or golden branched hairs, often densely so. Leaves 7-27 mm, narrowly oblong to narrowly obovate, flat or with revolute margins, with 2-5(-9) crenations, often in fascicles. Flowers in a simple or compound head. Bracts leaf-like to entire. Calyx (2·5-)3-5 mm, densely and evenly hairy. Corolla white or red; proximal lobes rounded or triangular. 2n = 26, 52, 78.{\i  Dry places. S. Europe, extending northwards to} c. 51°{\i  N. in S.C. Russia.} Al Bl Bu Co Cr Ga Gr Hs It Ju Lu Rm Rs (C, W, K, E) Sa Si Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Flowers in a simple head; lateral corolla-lobes always hairy
\par
2 Stem with golden hairs ..................................................... ({\b b}) subsp. {\b aureum}
\par
2 Stem with white or grey hairs ............................................ ({\b a}) subsp. {\b polium} 
\par
1 Flowers in a compound head; lateral corolla-lobes 
\par
  glabrous or hairy
\par
3 Calyx less than 3 mm; lateral corolla-lobes always 
\par
  glabrous ............................................................................ ({\b d}) subsp. {\b pii-fontii}
\par
3 Calyx 3·5-7 mm; lateral corolla-lobes glabrous or hairy
\par
4 Flowering stems 10-25 cm; leaves less than 15 mm ....... ({\b c}) subsp. {\b capitatum}
\par
4 Flowering stems 26-45 cm; leaves more than 16 mm . ({\b e}) subsp. {\b vincentinum}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp.{\b  polium}: Stems 6-17(-20) cm; hairs grey; margins of leaves more or less revolute; flower-heads simple; proximal corolla-lobes ciliate. •{\i  S., C. & E. Spain, S. France}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b aureum}(Schreber) Arcangeli,{\i  Comp. Fl. Ital.} 559 (1882) ({\i T. aureum} Schreber): Stems 15-30 cm; hairs golden; leaves flat or with revolute margins; flower-heads simple; proximal corolla-lobes ciliate. •{\i  Mountains of W. Mediterranean region}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b c}) Subsp. {\b capitatum}(L.) Arcangeli,{\i  loc. cit. }(1882) ({\i T. capitatum} L.): Stems 10-25 cm, grey-hairy; leaves fasciculate, the margins more or less revolute; flower-heads compound; proximal corolla-lobes glabrous or hairy.{\i  Almost throughout the range of the species}.
\par

\par
134}
\par