{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 3. S. columnae} All. , {\i Fl. Pedem.}{\b  1}: 40 (1785). Stems 30-100 cm, erect, simple or branched. Leaves 4-8 × 2-5 cm, ovate, crenate-serrate, cordate at base, acute, subglabrous to densely pubescent. Flowers secund. Bracts 5-16 mm, shorter than the flowers, ovate to ovate-lanceolate, entire, acute, green. Corolla (18-)20-22(-28) mm, strongly curved, purplish; lower lip whitish; tube pubescent outside. 2n = 34.{\i  Woods. Balkan peninsula, extending northwards to Hungary; Italy and Sicilia.} Al Bu Co Gr Hu It Ju Rm Si [Ga Ho].
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b columnae}: Leaves subglabrous to sparsely pubescent. Bracts 5-8 mm.{\i  Throughout the range of the species}.
\par
\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b gussonii}(Ten.) Rech. fil.,{\i  Bot. Arch.} ({\i Berlin}){\b  43}: 56 (1941): Leaves densely pubescent. Bracts 12-16 mm. {\i S. Italy, Sicilia.}
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 4. S. altissima} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 600 (1753). Stems up to 100 cm, erect, simple or branched. Leaves 5-15 × 2-5 cm, ovate, serrate, glabrous or hairy beneath on the veins. Internodes of inflorescence 10-12 mm. Bracts 6-10 mm, shorter than the flowers, ovate to ovate-lanceolate, entire, acute, green. Calyx without or with only a few long, white, eglandular hairs. Corolla 12-16(-18) mm, bluish; lower lip whitish; tube subglabrous to pubescent outside.{\i  Woods. E.C. & S.E. Europe; C. & S. Italy.} Al Bu Cz Gr Hu It Ju Rm Rs (C, W, K) [Au Be Br Ga Ge].
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 5. S. rubicunda} Hornem.,{\i  Hort. Hafn.}{\b  2}: 968 (1815) ({\i S. peregrina} L., nom. ambig.). Stems 5-40(-60) cm, procumbent to erect, usually branched. Leaves 1-3 cm, ovate-triangular to deltate, serrate to crenate, subcordate at base, acute to obtuse, glabrous to velutinous. Internodes of inflorescence (8-)9-11 mm. Bracts (3-)5-9(-10) mm, shorter than the flowers, ovate to ovate-lanceolate, entire. Calyx usually with numerous long, white, eglandular hairs. Corolla (9-)12-15 mm, usually purplish to bluish, the lower lip often whitish, rarely all white. {\i S. part of Balkan peninsula; C. & S. Italy and Sicilia. }Al Gr It Si.
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Leaves ± glabrous, acute, ± serrate ................................ ({\b a}) subsp. {\b linnaeana}
\par 1 Leaves pubescent to velutinous, ± obtuse, crenate
\par 2 Upper lip of corolla white ............................................. ({\b d}) subsp. {\b geraniana}
\par 2 Upper lip of corolla bluish
\par 3 Flowering stems 15-30(-40) cm, ± erect; leaves 2-3 cm ({\b b}) subsp. {\b rubicunda}
\par 3 Flowering stems 5-10(-15) cm, ± procumbent; leaves
\par  1-1·5(-2) cm ...................................................................... ({\b c}) subsp. {\b rupestris}
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b linnaeana}(Caruel) Rech. fil.,{\i  Bot. Arch.} ({\i Berlin}){\b  43}: 22 (1941): Stems 25-40(-60) cm. Leaves 1·5-2(-3) cm, ovate-triangular, serrate to crenate-serrate, acute, more or less glabrous. Bracts (3-)5-8(-10) mm. {\i Rocky places. S. Italy, Sicilia}.
\par
\pard\f0\fs28  Large shade-forms resemble variants of {\b 4}, but can be distinguished by the relatively dense pubescence of the corolla-tube. Plants intermediate between {\b 5}({\b a}) and{\b  5}({\b b}) occur in Greece.
\par
\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp.{\b  rubicunda}: Flowering stems 15-30(-40) cm, more or less erect. Leaves 2-3 cm, triangular to deltate, crenate, more or less obtuse, pubescent to velutinous. Bracts (5-)7-9(-10) mm. 2n = 34.{\i  Rocky places. Albania, Greece}.
\par
\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b c}) Subsp. {\b rupestris}(Boiss. & Heldr.) I. B. K. Richardson,{\i  Bot. Jour. Linn. Soc.}{\b  65}: 262 (1972) ({\i S. rupestris} Boiss. & Heldr.): Flowering stems 5-10(-15) cm, more or less procumbent. Leaves 1-1·5(-2) cm, deltate, crenate, obtuse, pubescent. Bracts 6-7 mm. •{\i  Mountains of S. Greece}.
\par
\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b d}) Subsp. {\b geraniana}(Tuntas ex Halácsy) I. B. K. Richardson, {\i loc. cit.} (1972) ({\i S. sibthorpii} var. {\i geraniana} Tuntas ex Halacsy, {\i S. peregrina} var.{\i  geraniana} (Tuntas ex Halácsy) Hayek): Stems 15-30 cm. Leaves 2-3 cm, triangular to deltate, subobtuse, crenate, velutinous. Bracts c. 6 mm. Corolla white.{\i  Mountains. • S.E. Greece and Aegean Islands}.
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28  This taxon and the following two species are difficult to separate, and many subordinate taxa, mostly of restricted distribution and based mainly on stem indumentum and bract characters, may be variously assigned to them.
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 6. S. albida} L., {\i Mantissa Alt.} 248 (1771) (incl.{\i  S. pallida }Bieb.,{\i  S. woronowii} Juz.). Stems 15-30(-40) cm, more or less erect, usually branched, with short appressed eglandular hairs. Leaves 2-3 cm, triangular to deltate, crenate, more or less obtuse, pubescent to velutinous. Internodes of inflorescence c. 10 mm. Bracts 10-12 mm, shorter than flowers, ovate to ovate-lanceolate, entire, green. Corolla (10-)12-16 mm, white.{\i  Rocky places. S.E. Europe.} Bu Gr It Ju Rm Rs (K) Tu [Ga].
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28 {\b  S. vacillans} Rech. fil.,{\i  Bot. Arch.} ({\i Berlin}){\b  43}: 12 (1941), from Greece and the Aegean region, is like {\b 6} but has the corolla often violet or bluish, and may be related to {\b 5}. Further investigation is required.
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 7. S. velenovskyi} Rech. fil., Bot. Arch. (Berlin) 43: 9 (1941) (S. pichleri Velen.). Like {\b 6} but stems 20-40(-60) cm, with both short and long patent eglandular hairs; leaves 4-6(-8) cm, ovate-triangular, pubescent; bracts 15-20 mm, equalling or exceeding the flowers, subobtuse. Mountain pastures. C. part of Balkan peninsula, S.W. Romania. Bu Ju Rm. (S.W. Asia.)
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28  Subsp. {\b goulimyi} (Rech. fil.) Rech. fil.,{\i  Bot. Jahrb.}{\b  80}: 388 (1961), from S.E. Greece (Evvoia), has the indumentum of{\b  7} but is otherwise perhaps nearer to{\b  6}.
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28 {\b  S. naxensis} Bothmer, {\i Bot. Not. }{\b 122}: 46 (1969), described from the S. Aegean region (Naxos), has stems with long and short eglandular hairs, and large bracts. It is perhaps referable to {\b 7}, and has 2n = 34.
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 8. S. sieberi} Bentham in DC.,{\i  Prodr. }{\b 12}: 420 (1848). Velutinous-tomentose. Stems 30-60 cm, more or less erect, branched, woody at base. Leaves 2-4(-5·5) cm, ovate-triangular, petiolate, crenate or crenate-serrate, truncate to subcordate at base, subacute. Internodes of inflorescence c. 5 mm. Bracts 7-9 mm, exceeding the calyx, ovate, entire, green. Corolla 10-14 mm, cream; upper lip reddish.{\i  Rocky places. • Kriti.} Cr.
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 9. S. hirta} Sibth. & Sm., {\i Fl. Graec. Prodr.}{\b  1}: 425 (1809). Densely pubescent. Stems 3-10(-20) cm, ascending, branched from a woody base. Leaves 1-2 cm, ovate to deltate, petiolate, crenate, more or less truncate at base, obtuse. Inflorescence few-flowered; internodes c. 5 mm. Bracts c. 5 mm, shorter than or equalling the calyx, entire, green. Corolla 9-10(-12) mm, cream; upper lip reddish.{\i  Mountain screes. • Kriti.} Cr.
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28   {\b 10. S. balearica} Barc.,{\i  Anal. Soc. Esp. Hist. Nat.}{\b  6}: 399 (1877). Stems up to 8 cm, slender, decumbent, sometimes branched at base. Leaves 1(-1·5) cm, ovate to deltate, crenate, truncate to cordate at base, pubescent, often purplish beneath. Petiole mostly 1-2 times as long as lamina. Flowers few, in remote axillary pairs. Bracts like the leaves but smaller. Corolla c. 6 mm, purple. {\i Shady rocks. • Islas Baleares} ({\i Mallorca}). Bl.
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 11. S. galericulata} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 599 (1753). Stems 7-70 cm, more or less erect, simple or branched. Leaves 1-5(-7) × 0*3-2 cm, ovate-elliptical to oblong-lanceolate, weakly crenate-serrate, more or less cordate at base, acute, glabrous to pubescent. Petiole up to 1/4 as long as lamina. Flowers in remote
\par
\par 136}
\par