{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 axillary pairs. Bracts like the leaves, usually exceeding the flowers, though smaller above. Calyx glabrous or eglandular-pubescent. Corolla 10-18 mm, violet-blue, rarely pink, whitish towards base of tube; tube curved through c. 45°. 2n = 31, 32.{\i  Damp places. Almost throughout Europe, except for some islands.} All except Az Bl Cr Fa Is Rs (K) Sb Si.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 12. S. hastifolia} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 599 (1753) (incl.{\i  S. dubia} Taliev & Sirj.). Stems (5-)15-40(-50) cm, more or less erect, simple or branched, subglabrous to sparsely pubescent. Leaves (8-)15-25(-40) × (4-)5-12(-20) mm, lanceolate to ovate, entire at least in the distal half, sometimes with 1-3 small crenations proximally, more or less hastate, rarely subcordate, obtuse, more or less glabrous. Petioles up to ¼ as long as lamina. Flowers in remote or close axillary pairs. Bracts like the leaves but subsessile, shorter than the flowers, the upper truncate at base. Calyx 3-4 mm, glandular-pubescent. Corolla (10-)15-20 (-23) mm, violet-blue; tube curved through c. 70°.{\i  Damp grassland. Much of Europe, but absent from the south-west, the extreme north and the islands.} Au Bu Cz Da Fe Ga Ge ?Gr Hu It Ju Po Rm Rs (B, C, W, E) Su Tu [ ?Be Br].
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 13. S. minor} Hudson,{\i  Fl. Angl.} 232 (1762). Like {\b 12} but less robust, with stems 10-20(-50) cm; leaves 8-20(-40) × 4-10 (-20) mm, entire or with 2, rarely more, small crenations proximally, usually rounded to cordate at base; calyx 2-3 mm, eglandular-pubescent; corolla 4-10 mm, pink; tube almost straight, patent.{\i  Damp places. • W. Europe, extending eastwards to E. Germany and W. Italy; one station in S. W. Sweden.} Az Be Br Ga Ge Hb Ho Hs It Lu Su [Au].
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\i  S.} × {\i hybrida} Strail ({\b 11} ×{\b  13}) occurs with the parents.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc {\b 4.                Prasium}                  L.
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc By R. Fernandes.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Shrubs. Verticillasters reduced to a single flower (rarely 2), forming terminal racemes. Calyx campanulate, 2-lipped, 10-veined; upper lip 3-lobed; lower lip deeply 2-fid; all the lobes leaf-like. Corolla 2-lipped; tube with a ring of scale-like hairs inside; upper lip entire, hooded; lower lip 3-lobed. Stamens didynamous, parallel; anther-cells divergent. Style-branches subequal, subulate. Nutlets drupe-like.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. P. majus} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 601 (1753). Stems up to 1 m, erect, divaricately branched, glabrous or glabrescent, rarely hirsute. Leaves 2-5 × 0.8-2 cm, ovate to ovate-lanceolate, acute, crenate or crenate-serrate, the lower cordate and the upper truncate at the base, usually glabrous; petiole 10-18 mm. Floral leaves like the cauline but smaller, or the upper entire. Calyx accrescent, up to 25 mm in fruit, glandular-puberulent or glabrous; lobes ovate to ovate-lanceolate, aristate. Corolla 17-20 mm, white or lilac; upper lip oblong, obtuse; lower lip with the middle lobe largest. Nutlets 3-4  mm, ovoid-trigonous, black. 2n = 34.{\i  Dry places, mainly near the sea. Mediterranean region, C. & S. Portugal.} Al Bl Co Cr Gr Hs It Ju Lu Sa Si.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc {\b 5.                Marrubium}                L.
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc By J. Cullen.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Perennial herbs. Bracteoles usually present, ascending from a deflexed base. Calyx narrowly obconical, usually 10-veined, with 5-10 teeth; tube densely hairy inside at the mouth. Corolla 2-lipped; upper lip straight, 2-fid; lower lip 3-lobed; tube included in calyx, with an uneven ring of hairs or glabrous inside. Stamens parallel, the outer pair the longer, all included in the corolla-tube; anther-cells diverging. Nutlets truncate at apex.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Calyx with 8-10 equal or unequal teeth
\par
2 Calyx-teeth straight; leaves oblong-ovate ............................. {\b 11. pestalozzae}
\par
2 Calyx-teeth hamate; leaves broadly ovate to orbicular
\par
3 Calyx-teeth 10, equal; petioles of lower leaves usually
\par
  shorter than lamina ....................................................................... {\b 10. vulgare}
\par
3 Calyx-teeth 10, 5 longer alternating with 5 shorter;
\par
  petioles of lower leaves usually longer than lamina ............... {\b 12. alternidens} 
\par
1 Calyx with 5 ± equal teeth
\par
4 Calyx exceeding corolla, with teeth usually at least as 
\par
  long as tube
\par
5 Calyx-teeth 1-1·5 mm wide at base, lanceolate, rigid in fruit;
\par
  verticillasters with not more than 12 flowers; corolla purple ......... {\b 8. alysson}
\par
5 Calyx-teeth less than 1 mm wide at base, subulate, not rigid
\par
  in fruit; verticillasters many-flowered; corolla yellow
\par
6 Calyx-tube 4-5·5(-6) mm; leaves orbicular, regularly and
\par
  lightly crenate, densely white-lanate beneath ............................ {\b 5. velutinum}
\par
6 Calyx-tube 6-8 mm; leaves oblong-ovate to elliptical,
\par
  irregularly and rather deeply crenate, densely greyish
\par
  hairy beneath .................................................................... {\b 6. friwaldskyanum} 
\par
4 Calyx not exceeding corolla, with teeth shorter than tube
\par
7 Lower leaves reniform to reniform-orbicular, cordate at
\par
  base, the petiole longer than lamina; corolla pink to lilac
\par
8 Leaves densely white-lanate on both surfaces;
\par
  bracteoles conspicuous, plumose .................................................. {\b 4. supinum}
\par
8 Leaves appressed-hairy above, more densely so beneath;
\par
  bracteoles inconspicuous, not plumose ................................... {\b 7. leonuroides}
\par
7 Leaves oblong to ovate to suborbicular, cuneate at base,
\par
  the petiole shorter than lamina; corolla white to yellow
\par
9 Stems with most branches patent; verticillasters with 
\par
  not more than 10 flowers .......................................................... {\b 9. peregrinum}
\par
9 Stems unbranched or the few branches erect;
\par
  verticillasters with more than 10 flowers
\par
10 Corolla-tube narrowing gradually to base; lateral 
\par
   lobes of lower lip almost equalling the middle lobe .................... {\b 3. incanum}
\par
10 Corolla-tube abruptly contracted below middle; lateral
\par
   lobes of lower lip much smaller than the middle lobe
\par
11 Cauline leaves broadly ovate to suborbicular; corolla
\par
   yellowish ................................................................................... {\b 2. cylleneum}
\par
11 Cauline leaves oblong to ovate-oblong; corolla white ............ {\b 1. thessalum}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. M. thessalum} Boiss. & Heldr. in Boiss.,{\i  Diagn. Pl. Or. Nov.}{\b  3}({\b 4}): 51 (1859). Stems up to 50 cm, lanate-tomentose, simple or with few, short, erect non-flowering branches. Leaves oblong to ovate-oblong or obovate, cuneate at base, crenate, tomentose above, white lanate-tomentose beneath; petiole shorter than lamina. Verticillasters many-flowered, globose. Bracteoles subulate, shorter than the calyx. Calyx-tube 4·5-5·5 mm, 10-ribbed, stellate-tomentose, especially on the ribs; teeth 5, 2·5-3 mm, shorter than corolla, equal, straight, erect, subulate, villous. Corolla up to 12 mm, white, pubescent outside; tube abruptly contracted below the middle; upper lip oblong, divided to 1/3-1/2 into 2 spathulate lobes; lower lip with lateral lobes much smaller than the middle.{\i  Mountain pastures. • E. Greece} ({\i Thessalia}). Gr.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. M. cylleneum} Boiss. & Heldr.,{\i  loc. cit.} (1859). Like {\b 1} but leaves broadly obovate to suborbicular; indumentum yellowish; calyx-tube 5-6·5 mm, the teeth less densely villous; corolla yellowish.{\i  Mountain rocks. • S. Albania; S. Greece.} Al Gr.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Some specimens from Albania have 10 calyx-teeth; they may be hybrids between {\b 2} and {\b 10}, but their nature and status are obscure.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 3. M. incanum} Desr. in Lam.,{\i  Encycl. Méth. Bot.}{\b  3}: 716 (1792) ({\i M. candidissimum} auct., non L.). Stems up to 50 cm, densely white-tomentose, usually with many short, erect, vegetative branches. Leaves of the main stems oblong-ovate, cuneate
\par

\par
137}
\par