{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 at base, crenate-dentate, densely tomentose, grey-green above, whitish beneath; petiole shorter than lamina. Verticillasters many-flowered, globose. Bracteoles subulate, the longest almost equalling the calyx. Calyx-tube 6·5-7 mm, 10-ribbed, stellate-tomentose; teeth 5, 3-4 mm, shorter than corolla, equal, becoming patent, subulate, sparsely stellate-pubescent. Corolla white, pubescent outside; tube narrowing gradually to base; upper lip ovate, divided to 1/3 into 2 lanceolate or narrowly triangular lobes, lower lip with lateral lobes almost equalling the middle.{\i  Rocky places. Italy and Sicilia; W. part of Balkan peninsula.} Al ?Hs It Ju Si.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 4. M. supinum} L., {\i Sp. Pl. }583 (1753). Stems up to 45 cm, densely white-lanate below, lanate-tomentose above, usually simple. Leaves reniform or reniform-orbicular, cordate at base, deeply crenate, densely white-lanate on both surfaces; petiole longer than lamina. Verticillasters many-flowered, globose. Bracteoles conspicuous, subulate, villous-plumose. Calyx-tube 5-7 mm, weakly 10-ribbed, villous; teeth 5, shorter than corolla and calyx-tube, straight, erect or becoming patent, villous-plumose. Corolla pink to lilac, pubescent outside; upper lip divided to nearly ½ into 2 spathulate lobes; lower lip with lateral lobes much smaller than the middle.{\i  Mountains of C. & S. Spain.} Hs.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 5. M. velutinum} Sibth. & Sm.,{\i  Fl. Graec. Prodr.}{\b  1}: 412 (1809). Stems up to 40 cm, yellowish-tomentose, simple or with short non-flowering branches. Leaves broadly ovate to orbicular, regularly and shallowly crenate-serrate, yellowish-appressed-tomentose above, white-tomentose beneath, shortly petiolate. Verticillasters many-flowered, globose. Bracteoles about as long as calyx-tube, subulate, more or less villous. Calyx-tube 4-5·5(-6) mm, 10-ribbed, yellowish-pubescent to -tomentose; teeth 5, 5-5·5 mm, exceeding the corolla, less than 1 mm wide at the base, subulate, not becoming rigid in fruit. Corolla yellow, pubescent outside.{\i  Mountain rocks. N. & C. Greece. }Gr.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 6. M. friwaldskyanum} Boiss.,{\i  Diagn. Pl. Or. Nov.}{\b  2}({\b 12}): 74 (1853) ({\i M. velutinum} var.{\i  friwaldskyanum }(Boiss.) Halácsy,. Like {\b 5} but stems usually longer; leaves oblong-ovate to -elliptical, irregularly and deeply crenate, densely hairy and greyish beneath, appressed-hairy and dark green above; calyx-tube 6-8 mm. {\i Stony ground. Bulgaria.} Bu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 7. M. leonuroides} Desr. in Lam.,{\i  Encycl. Méth. Bot.}{\b  3}: 715 (1792). Stems up to 45 cm, green, tomentulose. Leaves reniform, cordate at base, deeply and obtusely incise-dentate, appressed-hairy above, more densely hairy beneath; petiole longer than lamina. Verticillasters many-flowered. Bracteoles inconspicuous, subulate, villous, more or less glabrous at apex. Calyx-tube white-lanate; teeth 5, somewhat shorter than corolla and calyx-tube, less than 1 mm wide at the base, subulate, not becoming rigid in fruit. Corolla pink to lilac.{\i  Dry, stony ground. E. Krym.} Rs (K). ({\i Caucasus.})
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 8. M. alysson} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 582 (1753). Stems up to 40 cm, densely white-lanate-tomentose, simple or with ascending to erect flowering branches. Leaves flabellate, long-cuneate, subsessile, deeply crenate distally, densely white-lanate, often glabrescent above. Verticillasters up to 12-flowered. Bracteoles absent or very small. Calyx-tube 4·5-5·5 mm, obscurely ribbed, densely lanate-tomentose; teeth 5, c. 3 mm, exceeding the corolla, 1-1·5 mm wide at the base, lanceolate, becoming rigid in fruit. Corolla purple, pubescent outside.{\i  Dry, stony ground. Spain, Sardegna, S.E. Italy}. Hs It Sa.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 9. M. peregrinum} L., {\i Sp. Pl}. 582 (1753). Stems up to 60 cm, shortly whitish or yellowish appressed-tomentose, with patent branches from most axils. Leaves oblong or obovate, cuneate at base, crenate-serrate, whitish-tomentose above, more densely so beneath; petiole shorter than lamina. Verticillasters up to 10-flowered, distant, or the uppermost on the lateral branches rather crowded. Bracteoles short, subulate, or minute. Calyx-tube  3·5-5 mm, 10-ribbed, appressed-tomentose; teeth 5, 1·5-3 mm, lanceolate-subulate, erect or becoming patent. Corolla exceeding the calyx-teeth, white. 2n = 34.{\i  Dry, open habitats. S.E. & E.C. Europe, northwards to} c. 48° 30'{\i  N.; naturalized or casual elsewhere}. Al Au Bu Cz Gr Hu Ju Rm Rs (W, K, E) Tu [Ga Ge It Po].
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b M}. ×{\b  paniculatum} Desr. in Lam.,{\i Encycl. Méth. Bot.}{\b  3}: 716 (1792) ({\i M. remotum} Kit.) is {\b 9} × {\b 10}. It is like {\b 9} but has less regular branching, wider elliptical leaves, (5-)8-10 unequal, often slightly hamate calyx-teeth and, frequently, more flowers in the verticillasters. It has been recorded from stony and waste places in C. Europe and the Balkan peninsula.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 10. M. vulgare} L.,{\i  Sp. Pl.} 583 (1753). Stems up to 45 cm, white-lanate at least below, with many short non-flowering branches. Leaves orbicular to broadly ovate, subcordate or rounded at base, deeply and irregularly crenate, sparsely tomentose to subglabrous above, more densely tomentose beneath; petioles of lower leaves shorter than lamina. Verticillasters globose, many-flowered, distant. Bracteoles subulate, villous-plumose. Calyx-tube 3-4 mm, obscurely 10-striate, villous-pubescent, teeth 10, shorter than corolla, equal, patent, hamate, villous beneath, glabrous above. Corolla exceeding calyx-teeth, white. 2n = 34. {\i Waste places. Europe, from England, S. Sweden and C. Russia southwards}. All except Fa Fe Is No Rs (N) Sb; only as an alien in Hb.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  In Spain intermediates (possibly hybrids) between {\b 10} and {\b 4} are found; these resemble {\b 4}, but have 10 calyx-teeth, 5 longer alternating with 5 shorter. They lack the plumose bracteoles of {\b 4}, and the calyx-teeth are sometimes slightly hamate. They have been called {\b M}. × {\b willkommii} Magnus ex Pau,{\i  Bol. Soc. Iber. Ci. Nat.} {\b 25}: 76 (1926).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 11. M. pestalozzae} Boiss.,{\i  Diagn. Pl. Or. Nov}.{\b  3}({\b 4}): 53 (1859) ({\i M. praecox} Janka). Like {\b 10} but leaves oblong-ovate; calyx stellate-tomentose; teeth 8-10, straight, somewhat unequal. {\i Dry waste places. S.E. Europe, extending northwards to} c. 53°{\i  N. in S.C. Russia}. Bu Gr Rm Rs (C, W, K, E).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Sometimes confused with {\i M}. × {\i paniculatum}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 12. M. alternidens} Rech. fil., {\i Österr. Bot. Zeitschr.}{\b  99}: 37 (1952). Like {\b 10} but less densely hairy; lower leaves broadly cuneate, with petiole as long as or longer than lamina; calyx densely lanate-tomentose; teeth unequal, 5 longer alternating with 5 shorter, all hamate. Corolla pinkish or white.{\i  C. Albania} ({\i near Kruj});{\i  N.E. Greece} ({\i Thraki}). Al Gr. ({\i S.W. Asia}.)
\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Few collections have been made and further study is required.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc {\b 6.               Sideritis}               L. 
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc By V.H. Heywood, based mainly on information supplied by P. W.Ball.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Annual or perennial herbs, or small shrubs. Verticillasters 2- to many-flowered; bracteoles absent. Calyx campanulate, 10- veined, 5-toothed; teeth equal, or the upper larger than the 4 lower. Corolla usually yellow; tube not exceeding calyx; upper lip patent, more or less flat, entire to 2-fid; lower lip 3-lobed. Stamens included in corolla-tube. Nutlets rounded at apex.
\par

\par
138}
\par