{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 3. V. macrocarpon} Aiton,{\i  Hort. Kew.}{\b  2}: 13 (1789). Like {\b 1} but more robust and taller; leaves 8-18 × 3·5-5 mm, oblong, with margins only slightly revolute; axis continued beyond raceme as leafy shoot of current year, so that raceme is intercalary; bracteoles c. 5 × 1-1·5 mm, ovate-elliptical; corolla-lobes 6-10 mm; berry 10-20 mm wide.{\i  Cultivated in parts of N. & C. Europe for its edible fruit }({\i cranberries}){\i  and locally naturalized.} [Br Ge He Ho.] ({\i E. North America}.)
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  Subgen. {\b Vaccinium}. Evergreen or deciduous; aerial stems relatively stout, usually more or less erect. Flowers 4- or 5 merous, in axillary (rarely terminal) racemes; bracts leaf-like. Pedicels patent or deflexed, not filiform, with or without bracteoles. Corolla campanulate to globose, divided not more than halfway to the base. Anthers often with appendages.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 4. V. vitis-idaea} L.,{\i  Sp. Pl.} 351 (1753). Evergreen. Stems up to 30 cm but often much less, erect, arching or decumbent, arising from a creeping rhizome; twigs terete, puberulent when young. Leaves elliptical to oblong or obovate, entire, obtuse, glabrous, coriaceous, dark green above, paler and dotted with dark glands beneath; margin revolute. Flowers 4- or 5-merous, in short, crowded, terminal racemes. Bracteoles reddish. Calyx-lobes deltate. Corolla 5-8 mm, campanulate, white or pink; lobes about half as long as tube. Filaments hairy; anthers without appendages. Berry 5-10 mm, globose, red, acid. 2n = 24.{\i  Moors, heaths, coniferous woods, subalpine pastures and tundra. N. & C. Europe, extending southwards in the mountains to the N. Appennini, Albania and Bulgaria.} Al Au Be Br Bu Cz Da Fa Fe Ga Ge Hb He Ho Hu Is It Ju No Po Rm Rs (N, B, C, W, E) Su.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b vitis-idaea}: Stems 8-30 cm; leaves 10-25 × 6-15 mm, with conspicuous lateral veins; racemes with 3-8(-15) flowers; corolla white or pale pink; style long-exserted; berry 8-10 mm.{\i  Throughout the range of the species.}
\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b minus} (Loddiges) Hultén, {\i Fl. Aleut. Isl. }268 (1937): Stems 3-8 cm; leaves 4-8 × 2·5-5 mm, with inconspicuous lateral veins; racemes with 2-5 flowers; corolla bright pink; style scarcely exserted; berry 5-8 mm.{\i  Arctic Russia.} ({\i N. Asia, North America}.)
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 5. V. uliginosum} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 350 (1753). Deciduous. Stems up to 75(-100) cm, erect, freely branched, arising from a creeping rhizome; twigs terete, usually glabrous, brownish. Leaves 6-25(-35) × 4-12(-20) mm, obovate, entire, obtuse to subacute, glabrous, glaucous; margin slightly revolute. Flowers 4- or 5-merous, in racemes of 1-3 which terminate short branches bearing only scale-leaves. Bracteoles absent. Calyx-lobes rounded, scarious, reddish. Corolla 4-6 mm, urceolate, white, usually tinged with pink; lobes short, revolute. Filaments glabrous; anthers with small, subulate appendages. Style included. Berry 7-10 mm, globose to ellipsoid, bluish-black, sweetish.{\i  Moors, heaths, coniferous woods, subalpine pastures and tundra. N. & C. Europe, extending southwards in the mountains to the Sierra Nevada, N. Appennini, Albania and Bulgaria.} Al Au Be Br Bu Cz Da Fa Fe Ga Ge He Ho Hs Is It Ju No Po Rm Rs (N, B, C, W) Sb Su.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b uliginosum}: Stems up to 75(-100) cm, erect; leaves 10-25(-35) mm; pedicel as long as corolla; lobes of corolla revolute. 2n = 48. {\i Almost throughout the range of the species}.
\par 

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b microphyllum} Lange,{\i  Meddel. Grønl. }{\b 3}: 91 (1880): Stems not more than 15 cm, procumbent to decumbent; leaves 6-15 mm; pedicel 1-3 mm, much shorter than corolla; lobes of corolla scarcely revolute. 2n = 24.{\i  Arctic and subarctic Europe}.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 6. V. myrtillus} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 349 (1753). Deciduous. Stems 15-35(-60) cm, erect, freely branched, arising from a creeping rhizome; twigs acutely 3-angled, glabrous, green. Leaves 10-30 × 6-18 mm, ovate, acute, serrulate, glabrous, bright green, flat. Flowers 4- or 5-merous, in axillary racemes, which are reduced to 1(-2) flowers; pedicel arising from between 2 scale-like bracts; bracteoles absent. Calyx scarcely lobed, with sinuate or subentire margin. Corolla 4-6 mm, depressed-globose, pale green tinged with pink; lobes short, revolute. Filaments glabrous, very short; anthers with subulate appendages. Style usually included. Berry 6-10 mm, globose, bluish-black, sweet. 2n = 24.{\i  Heaths, moors and woods. Most of Europe, but only on mountains in the south.} All except Az Bl Cr Gr Rs (K) Sa Sb Si Tu.
\par 

\par 
 
\pard\f0\fs28  Hybrids with {\b 4} ({\i V}. ×{\i  intermedium} Ruthe) are found locally with the parents.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 7. V. arctostaphylos} L.,{\i  Sp. Pl}. 351 (1753). Deciduous shrub or small tree 2-3(-5) m. Leaves 40-60(-100) mm, oblong, acuminate, serrulate. Flowers 5-merous, in pendent axillary racemes of 5-8, each in the axil of a somewhat leaf-like bract; pedicel with 1-2 small bracteoles at the base. Sepals deltate. Corolla 5-7 mm, broadly campanulate, greenish-white tinged with pink; lobes short, slightly revolute. Anthers with small, subulate appendages. Berry 6-8 mm, globose, purplish-black.{\i  Wooded ravines. Turkey-in-Europe and S.E. Bulgaria} ({\i Istrancadaglari}). Bu Tu. ({\i N. Anatolia, Caucasus.})
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 8. V. cylindraceum} Sm. in Rees, {\i Cyclop.}{\b  36}: no. 23 (1817). Like {\b 7} but leaves 20-50 mm; racemes ebracteate, with 10-20 flowers; bracteoles deciduous; corolla 8-12 mm, cylindrical to narrowly campanulate, with erect lobes; anthers without appendages; berry 8-10 mm, ovoid.{\i  Woods. • Açores.} Az.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28\qc {\b  133.          EMPETRACEAE} 
\par 

\pard\f0\fs24\qc Edit. D.A. Webb.
\par 

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Small, evergreen shrubs of ericoid habit. Leaves mostly in somewhat irregular whorls of 3-4 but often alternate on some of the stronger shoots; margins strongly revolute; petiole adnate to stem, at least in part. Flowers small, actinomorphic, often unisexual, (2-) 3-merous, in small terminal heads, or in short axillary racemes which are often reduced to a single flower. Sepals, petals and stamens (2-)3, free. Ovary superior, 6- to 9-locular, with one ovule in each loculus; fruit a small, berry-like drupe with 2-9 pyrenes.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 Stems erect; young twigs conspicuously pubescent; flowers
\par 
 in terminal heads; fruit white or pink .............................................. {\b 1. Corema}
\par 
Stems procumbent to ascending; young twigs glabrous or 
\par 
 minutely glandular-puberulent; flowers in axillary 
\par 
 racemes of 1-3, fruit black .......................................................... {\b 2. Empetrum}
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28\qc {\b 1.            Corema}               D. Don
\par 

\pard\f0\fs24\qc By D.A.Webb.
\par 

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Dioecious. Flowers in capitate, bracteate racemes, terminal at anthesis, but in the female intercalary in fruit from continued growth of the main axis.
\par 

\par 
13}
\par