{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 11 Calyx 3·5-4·5 mm; teeth all nearly equal in length ......{\b 10. heliotropifolium}
\par
11 Calyx (4-)5-5·5 mm; teeth of lower lip much longer
\par
   than those of upper lip .......................................................... {\b 8. halacsyanum}
\par
7 Verticillasters forming a lax, secund inflorescence
\par
12 Leaves gradually narrowed at base ......................................... {\b 14. asiaticum}
\par
12 Leaves rounded to cordate or truncate at base
\par
13 Corolla usually greenish-yellow .......................................... {\b 11. scorodonia}
\par
13 Corolla pink or purplish
\par
14 Fruiting calyx obscurely reticulate-veined .......................... {\b 12. massiliense} 
\par
14 Fruiting calyx strongly reticulate-veined ............................ {\b 13. salviastrum}  
\par
6 Calyx not 2-lipped
\par
15 Inflorescence not capitate, longer than wide
\par
16 Leaves entire
\par
17 Calyx gibbous at base
\par
18 Leaves linear-lanceolate to rhombic, ± acute; in
\par
   florescence dense .......................................................................... {\b 28. marum}
\par
18 Leaves suborbicular, rounded at apex; inflorescence
\par
   lax ................................................................................... {\b 10. heliotropifolium}
\par
17 Calyx not gibbous at base
\par
19 Leaves not densely tomentose above, often glabrescent ........... {\b 1. fruticans}
\par
19 Leaves persistently grey-tomentose above
\par
20 Twigs green or brown; leaves oblong to linear ..................... {\b 2. brevifolium}
\par
20 Twigs white-tomentose; leaves obovate to ovate-oblong ......... {\b 3. aroanium}
\par
16 Leaves crenate, toothed or lobed
\par
21 Herb, not woody at base
\par
22 Perennial; corolla purplish ...................................................... {\b 15. scordium}
\par
22 Annual; corolla yellowish .................................................. {\b 17. resupinatum}
\par
21 Dwarf shrub
\par
23 Leaves at least 3 times as long as wide ............................... {\b 20. webbianum}  
\par
23 Leaves at most twice as long as wide
\par
24 Stems glabrous .......................................................................... {\b 22. lucidum}
\par
24 Stems more or less pubescent or villous
\par
25 Stems and leaves densely villous
\par
26 Leaves truncate at base .................................................... {\b 32. rotundifolium}
\par
26 Leaves cuneate at base
\par
27 Inflorescence dense, spike-like; bracts (except the lowest)  
\par
   entire ...................................................................................... {\b 30. compactum}
\par
27 Inflorescence lax; bracts (except sometimes the 
\par
   uppermost) leaf-like, crenate or serrate
\par
28 Verticillasters usually 4-flowered ............................................... {\b 26. fragile}
\par
28 Verticillasters usually 2-flowered ......................................... {\b 25. intricatum}
\par
25 Stems and leaves variously hairy to subglabrous, but
\par
   not densely villous
\par
29 Rhizomatous; stems woody at base only
\par
30 Leaves subglabrous to moderately hairy with patent or
\par
   irregularly arranged hairs ...................................................... {\b 19. chamaedrys}
\par
30 Leaves velutinous beneath ..................................................... {\b 21. krymense}
\par
29 Not rhizomatous; stems woody, except for ultimate branches 
\par
31 Leaves c. 5 mm ............................................................... {\b 27. microphyllum}
\par
31 Most leaves 10 mm or more
\par
32 Corolla yellow; petiole as long as the width of the lamina ........ {\b 24. flavum}
\par
32 Corolla pink or purple; petiole shorter than the width
\par
   of the lamina ......................................................................... {\b 23. divaricatum}
\par
15 Inflorescence capitate, the heads usually wider than long
\par
33 Leaves entire or with fewer than 3 crenations on each side
\par
34 Leaves in whorls of 4 ................................................................ {\b 40. libanitis}
\par
34 Leaves opposite
\par
35 Leaves less than 10 mm
\par
36 Leaves hairy on both surfaces ............................................ {\b 38. thymifolium}
\par
36 Leaves glabrous above
\par
37 Flowers in compound heads ................................................ {\b 44. turredanum}
\par
31 Flowers in simple heads .......................................................... {\b 43. pumilum}
\par
35 Leaves more than 12 mm
\par
38 Calyx with patent hairs at the base ...................................... {\b 42. aragonense}
\par
38 Calyx glabrous, or uniformly hairy with appressed hairs
\par
39 Flowers in compound heads
\par
40 Leaves densely hairy above ...................................................... {\b 39. cossonii}
\par
40 Leaves glabrous or subglabrous above ................................ {\b 44. turredanum}
\par
39 Flowers in simple heads
\par
41 Calyx 7-10 mm ..................................................................... {\b 37. montanum}
\par
41 Calyx 4-5 mm .......................................................................... {\b 43. pumilum}
\par
33 Leaves with at least 3 crenations on each side
\par
42 Leaves ovate, obovate or orbicular
\par
43 Stems with patent hairs
\par
44 Leaves up to 25 mm; calyx 10-12 mm ............................... {\b 31. pyrenaicum}
\par
44 Leaves up to 15 mm; calyx less than 10 mm
\par
45 Principal veins of calyx conspicuous .............................. {\b 32. rotundifolium}
\par
45 Principal veins of calyx obscured by indumentum ................... {\b 36. alpestre}
\par
43 Stems with appressed hairs
\par
46 Leaves at least 8 mm wide; indumentum very dense,
\par
   greenish ................................................................................ {\b 35. cuneifolium}
\par
46 Leaves less than 8 mm wide; indumentum grey
\par
47 Leaves more densely hairy beneath than above .................. {\b 33. buxifolium}
\par
47 Leaves equally hairy on both surfaces ........................................ {\b 34. freynii}
\par
42 Leaves narrowly ovate to narrowly oblong or spathulate
\par
48 Leaves in whorls of 3 or 4
\par
49 Stems sparsely hairy with patent hairs .................................. {\b 48. haenseleri}
\par
49 Stems densely hairy with appressed hairs .................................. {\b 45. polium} 
\par
48 Leaves opposite
\par
50 Calyx 6-8 mm .................................................................. {\b 41. carthaginense}
\par
50 Calyx 2·5-5 mm
\par
51 Hairs at leaf-apex predominantly glandular .......................... {\b 49. charidemi}
\par
51 Hairs at leaf-apex predominantly eglandular
\par
52 Corolla creamy-yellow, the proximal lobes spathulate,
\par
   widening slightly towards apex ................................................... {\b 36. alpestre}
\par
52 Corolla white or red, the proximal lobes rounded or 
\par
   triangular, narrowing towards apex
\par
53 Terminal flower-heads with more than 20 flowers
\par
54 Leaves shortly petiolate; inflorescence narrowly
\par
   oblong to subglobose .................................................................... {\b 45. polium}
\par
54 Leaves sessile; inflorescence subglobose ........................ {\b 47. eriocephalum}
\par
53 Terminal flower-heads with 3-20 flowers
\par
55 Calyx evenly hairy; leaves with 2-5(-9) crenations .................... {\b 45. polium}
\par
55 Calyx with hairs denser towards base; leaves with
\par
   5-9 crenations ....................................................................... {\b 46. gnaphalodes}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Sect. TEUCRIUM (Sect.{\i  Teucris} Bentham). Shrubs or perennial herbs. Inflorescence not or rarely weakly secund. Calyx campanulate; tube straight, not gibbous at base; teeth equal or nearly so.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    1. T. fruticans L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 563 (1753). Evergreen shrub up to 250 cm. Twigs 4-angled, white-tomentose. Leaves lanceolate to ovate, entire, flat, shortly petiolate, white- or reddish-tomentose beneath, thinly tomentose, often becoming glabrous and shining above. Verticillasters 2-flowered; bracts leaf-like. Calyx shortly campanulate, white-tomentose outside, glabrous within. Corolla 15-25 mm, blue or lilac; stamens long-exserted.{\i  Dry, sunny places. W. Mediterranean region, extending to Portugal and the Adriatic islands.} Co Ga Hs It Ju Lu Sa Si.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b  T. creticum} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 563 (1753) ({\i T. rosmarinifolium} Lam.), which is like {\b 1} but has linear leaves, has been recorded from Lampedusa; its occurrence there as a native is doubtful and it has not been seen for many years. It is a native of the E. Mediterranean region, but not its European part.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. T. brevifolium} Schreber, {\i Pl. Vert. Unilab.} 27 (1773). Like {\b 1} but up to 60 cm; twigs puberulent, green or brown; leaves oblong or linear, revolute, grey-tomentose on both surfaces; corolla c. 10 mm. 2n = 30. {\i Dry, rocky places near the sea. S. Aegean region.} Cr Gr.
\par

\par
130}
\par