{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 3. T. aroanium} Orph. ex Boiss.,{\i  Diagn. Pl. Or. Nov.}{\b  3}({\b 4}): 55 (1859) ({\i T. arvanicum} auct.). Like {\b 1} but stems procumbent, rooting, much-branched; leaves obovate to ovate-oblong, sparsely tomentose above, densely tomentose beneath; calyx densely glandular; corolla 15-20 mm.{\i  Mountain rocks. • S. Greece} ({\i Khelmo, Akhaia}). Gr.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 4. T. pseudochamaepitys} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 562 (1753). Villous, rarely glabrous perennial up to 40 cm, somewhat woody at the base. Lower leaves 1- to 2-pinnatisect, the upper usually 3-fid; all with linear, entire lobes. Inflorescence unbranched; verticillasters 2-flowered; bracts equalling or exceeding the pedicels. Calyx campanulate, glandular-pubescent; teeth longer than tube, triangular, acuminate. Corolla 10-15 mm, whitish or reddish; stamens long-exserted.{\i  Dry places. S.W. Europe}. Ga Hs Lu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 5. T. campanulatum} L.,{\i  Sp. Pl.} 562 (1753). Subglabrous perennial herb. Stems 10-30 cm, decumbent and rooting at the base, somewhat hairy above. Leaves 3-partite, the segments pinnatifid; lobes linear or linear-spathulate, sometimes dentate. Verticillasters 2- to 4-flowered; bracts leaf-like, longer than the flowers. Calyx campanulate, almost glabrous; teeth about as long to twice as long as the tube, acute or acuminate with a spinose point. Corolla c. 5 mm, whitish, only the lower lip exceeding the calyx; stamens shortly exserted.{\i  Open habitats. Mediterranean region, from S.W. Spain to S.E. Italy.} Bl Hs It Si.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   {\b T. aristatum} Perez Lara, {\i Anal. Soc. Esp. Hist. Nat.}{\b  18}: 90 (1889), described from S.W. Spain, is a variant of {\b 5} with spinose calyx-teeth twice as long as tube. Plants intermediate between this and the typical ones occur in Italy and Sicilia.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Sect. STACHYOBOTRYS Bentham. Dwarf shrubs. Inflorescence not or weakly secund. Calyx campanulate; tube curved, gibbous at base; the upper tooth usually wider than the others.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 6. T. arduini} L.,{\i  Mantissa} 81 (1767). Stems c. 30 cm, erect or ascending, shortly villous. Leaves ovate, crenate-serrate, rounded or cuneate at base, puberulent and glandular beneath, petiolate. Inflorescence up to 16 cm in fruit, very dense, simple; bracts linear-lanceolate, equalling or longer than the calyx. Calyx villous and with short glandular hairs; teeth c. 1/3 as long as tube. Corolla 8-9 mm, glandular and villous, whitish; stamens long-exserted.{\i  Rocky places. • W. Jugoslavia, N. Albania.} Al Ju.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 7. T. lamifolium} D'Urv., {\i Mém. Soc. Linn. Paris }{\b 1}: 320 (1822) (incl.{\i  T. cordifolium} Celak.). Like {\b 6} but leaves coarsely crenate, cordate or truncate at base, shortly villous beneath; bracts subulate; corolla 6-7 mm; stamens included.{\i  Scrub. Turkey-in-Europe, just extending into S.E. Bulgaria.} Bu Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Sect. ISOTRIODON Boiss. Perennial herbs or dwarf shrubs. Inflorescence secund. Calyx tubular, curved, gibbous at base.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 8. T. halacsyanum} Heldr.,{\i  Österr. Bot. Zeitschr.}{\b  29}: 241 (1879). Dwarf shrub up to 15(-50) cm. Stems lanate-villous, much-branched. Leaves broadly ovate to suborbicular, crenate, lanate-villous, rounded to cuneate at base, petiolate. Inflorescence dense. Bracts linear to lanceolate. Calyx (4-)5-5·5 mm, distinctly 2-lipped; upper lip with wide, acute, shallow teeth, the middle slightly but distinctly longer than the lateral; lower lip deeply bidentate, with ovate teeth. Corolla c. 7 mm, pubescent, violet; stamens long-exserted. 2n = 32.{\i  Rocky places. • W. Greece.} Gr.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 9. T. francisci-werneri} Rech. fil.,{\i  Phyton} ({\i Austria}) {\b 1}: 207 (1949). Like {\b 8} but calyx (6-)7-8 mm; middle tooth of upper lip nearly twice as long as the lateral, acuminate; lower lip deeply bidentate, with narrowly lanceolate teeth. •{\i  S. Greece.} Gr.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 10. T. heliotropifolium} W. Barbey,{\i  Bull. Soc. Vaud. Sci. Nat.} ser. 3, {\b 21}: 223 (1886). Like {\b 8} but leaves sometimes entire ; inflorescence usually lax; calyx 3·5-4·5 mm; teeth all nearly equal in length; teeth of upper lip ovate, the middle widest, rounded or shortly cuspidate; lower lip with triangular or ovate, acute teeth.{\i  Rocky places. • Karpathos.} Cr.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Perhaps conspecific with {\b T. montbretii} Bentham, {\i Ann. Sci. Nat.} Ser. 2,{\b  6}: 56 (1836), from S. Anatolia and Syria.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Sect. SCORODONIA (Hill) Schreber. Perennial herbs or dwarf shrubs. Inflorescence secund, raceme-like. Calyx campanulate, 2-lipped; tube curved, gibbous at base; the upper tooth usually wider than the others.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 11. T. scorodonia} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 564 (1753). Pubescent rhizomatous dwarf shrub. Stems 15-50(-100) cm, erect, branched. Leaves triangular-ovate, crenate, rugose, cordate at base, petiolate. Inflorescence up to 15 cm, simple or branched, rather lax; bracts ovate to lanceolate, much shorter than the calyx. Calyx villous and more or less glandular, strongly veined in fruit. Corolla 9 mm, villous, pale greenish-yellow, rarely white or reddish; stamens long-exserted. •{\i  S., W. & C. Europe, northwards to S. Norway and eastwards to W. Poland and N.W. Jugoslavia.} Au Be Br Co Cz Ga Ge Hb He Ho Hs Hu It Ju Lu No Po Sa Si [Da Su].
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Corolla-tube scarcely exceeding calyx ........................... ({\b c}) subsp. {\b baeticum} 
\par
1 Corolla-tube about twice as long as calyx
\par
2 Inflorescence-axis and calyx with short hairs and few 
\par
  or no glands; calyx 4·5-5·5 mm .................................... ({\b a}) subsp. {\b scorodonia}
\par
2 Inflorescence-axis and calyx with long hairs, usually 
\par
  rather densely glandular; calyx 7-8 mm ........................ ({\b b}) subsp. {\b euganeum}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b scorodonia}: Stems, petioles and leaves more or less appressed-pubescent. Leaves acute. Inflorescence-axis and calyx with short hairs and few or no glands. Calyx 4·5-5·5 mm. Corolla-tube about twice as long as calyx. 2n = 32, ?34.{\i  Almost throughout the range of the species.}
\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b euganeum}(Vis.) Arcangeli,{\i  Comp. Fl. Ital.} 558 (1882): Like subsp. ({\b a}) but inflorescence-axis and calyx with long hairs, usually rather densely glandular; calyx 7-8 mm.{\i  Italy and Sicilia}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b c}) Subsp. {\b baeticum}(Boiss. & Reuter) Tutin,{\i  Bot. Jour. Linn. Soc.}{\b  65}: 262 (1972) ({\i T. baeticum} Boiss. & Reuter): Stems, petioles and leaves with patent and somewhat crispate hairs. Leaves rounded at apex. Inflorescence-axis and calyx with abundant short, glandular hairs. Calyx 6-7 mm. Corolla-tube scarcely exceeding calyx.{\i  S.W. Spain}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   {\b 12. T. massiliense} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} ed. 2, 789 (1763). Like {\b 11} but plant greyish-tomentose; leaves truncate or rounded at base; calyx glandular-pubescent, not strongly veined; corolla pink; tube included in the calyx. 2n = 32.  •{\i W. Mediterranean region; Kriti.} Co Cr Ga Hs Sa.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 13. T. salviastrum} Schreber,{\i  Pl. Vert. Unilab.} 38 (1773). Dwarf shrub. Stems up to 30 cm. Leaves up to 15 mm, ovate-oblong, obtuse, rounded at base, crenate, puberulent above, grey-tomentose beneath, strongly rugose, petiolate. Inflorescence lax; bracts exceeding the pedicels. Calyx glandular and villous, strongly veined; teeth about half as long as tube, often with 1-2 lateral teeth, triangular with spinescent apex. Corolla c. 10 mm, purplish. •{\i  Mountains of C. Portugal.} Lu.
\par

\par
131}
\par