{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}
\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Calyx glabrous .......................................................... ({\b d}) subsp. {\b gymnocalyx} 
\par 1 Calyx ± hairy
\par 2 Calyx c. 7 mm; teeth nearly as long as tube ................. ({\b c}) subsp. {\b hellenicum} 
\par 2 Calyx (8-)9-10 mm; teeth c. 1/2 as long as tube
\par 3 Leaves c. 20 mm, velutinous beneath ................................. ({\b a}) subsp. {\b flavum}
\par 3 Leaves c. 10 mm, glaucous beneath ................................. ({\b b}) subsp. {\b glaucum}
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp.{\b  flavum}: Plant usually velutinous; larger leaves usually 20-40 mm; calyx 8-10 mm; teeth c. 1/2 as long as tube.{\i  From S.E. France to the W. part of the Balkan peninsula}.
\par
\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b glaucum}(Jordan & Fourr.) Ronniger,{\i  Verh. Zool. Bot. Ges. Wien}{\b  68}: (234) (1918): Stems with short,deflexed hairs. Leaves c. 10 mm, nearly glabrous, glaucous beneath. Calyx 9-10 mm; teeth c. 1/2 as long as tube.{\i  From Islas Baleares to Greece}.
\par
\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b c}) Subsp. {\b hellenicum} Rech. fil.,{\i  Bot. Arch.} ({\i Berlin}) {\b 42}: 397 (1941): Stems slender, velutinous. Leaves 10-15 mm, velutinous beneath, glabrescent. Calyx c. 7 mm; teeth nearly as long as tube.{\i  Greece}.
\par
\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b d}) Subsp. {\b gymnocalyx} Rech. fil., {\i loc. cit.} (1941): Stems slender, often glabrescent. Leaves 10-20 mm, glabrous, glaucous beneath. Calyx c. 7 mm; teeth nearly as long as tube. •{\i  S.E. Greece.}
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 25. T. intricatum} Lange, {\i Vid. Meddel. Dansk Naturh. Foren. Kjøbenhavn}{\b  1863}: 21 (1863). Much-branched, spreading, greyish-pubescent dwarf shrub c. 20 cm. Leaves up to 8 mm, oblong or ovate, crenate to almost pinnatifid, obtuse, rather thick; margin recurved. Inflorescence lax; verticillasters usually 4-flowered. Bracts leaf-like. Calyx c. 7 mm, villous, gibbous at base; teeth 1/2 as long as tube, triangular. Corolla 15-18 mm, pubescent, pink.{\i  Rocky places. • S.E. Spain} ({\i Sierra de Gador}). Hs.
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 26. T. fragile} Boiss., {\i Elenchus }77 (1838). Caespitose, softly and densely villous dwarf shrub. Stems up to 20 cm, but usually much less, slender. Leaves up to 6 mm, oblong to flabelliform, deeply serrate to pinnatifid, thin. Inflorescence rather lax; verticillasters usually 2-flowered. Bracts leaf-like. Calyx c. 7 mm, villous, not gibbous at base; teeth 1/2-1/3 as long as tube, triangular. Corolla 10-12 mm, pubescent, purple.{\i  Mountain rocks and screes; calcicole. S. Spain.} Hs.
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 27. T. microphyllum} Desf.,{\i  Ann. Mus. Hist. Nat.} ({\i Paris}) {\b 10}: 300 (1807). Dwarf shrub 5-40 cm. Stems slender, appressed grey- or white-tomentose when young. Leaves c. 5 mm, oblanceolate to ovate, crenate-serrate, acute, white-tomentose beneath. Inflorescence rather lax; verticillasters 2-flowered. Lower bracts leaf-like, the upper small and entire. Calyx 6-7 mm, pubescent and glandular; teeth 1/2-3/4 as long as tube, triangular, acute. Corolla 10-12 mm, villous, pink.{\i  Rocky places. S. Aegean region.} Cr Gr.
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 28. T. marum} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 564 (1753). Small shrub up to 50 cm. Stems slender, white-tomentose. Leaves up to 10 mm, linear-lanceolate to rhombic, entire, rarely dentate, grey-tomentose beneath; margins often recurved. Inflorescence cylindrical, rather dense. Flowers 1-2 in the axils of leaf-like bracts. Calyx 6-7 mm, villous; teeth 1/3 as long as tube, triangular. Corolla 10-12 mm, villous, purplish. •{\i  Islands of W. Mediterranean region; also on one island} ({\i Murter}) {\i off N.W. Jugoslavia.} Bl Co Ga It Ju Sa.
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28  Records from the mainland of Spain and Italy appear to be errors or to refer to naturalized plants.
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 29. T. subspinosum} Pourret ex Willd.,{\i  Enum. Pl. Hort. Berol.} 596 (1809). Like {\b 28} but main branches stout; lateral branches numerous, forming slender leafless spines; leaves 1-6 mm, very narrow, almost triangular; inflorescence lax, few-flowered; calyx 2-3 mm, puberulent; teeth c. 1/2 as long as tube, broadly triangular; corolla c. 8 mm, puberulent. •{\i  Mallorca.} Bl ?Sa.
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 30. T. compactum} Clemente ex Lag., {\i Gen. Sp. Nov.} 17 (1816). Procumbent or ascending, villous dwarf shrub 10-30 cm. Leaves ovate, crenate, crenate-serrate or shallowly lobed, except for the cuneate base, sessile or subsessile. Inflorescence dense, spike-like. Flowers solitary or in pairs, sessile. Bracts lanceolate or linear-lanceolate, entire, about as long as the calyx. Calyx inflated, villous and glandular, strongly veined; teeth c. 1/3 as long as tube, triangular-acuminate. Corolla c.12 mm, yellowish-white; tube included in the calyx.{\i  Rocky places on mountains. S. Spain} ({\i Sierra Nevada}). Hs. ({\i N.W. Africa.})
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28   Sect. POLIUM (Miller) Schreber. Dwarf shrubs or herbs, often with branched hairs. Inflorescence simple or compoundly capitate. Calyx campanulate or tubular, actinomorphic.
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 31. T. pyrenaicum} L.,{\i  Sp. Pl.} 566 (1753). Procumbent to ascending, villous herb 10-30 cm. Stem with patent hairs. Leaves up to 25 mm, suborbicular, crenate, with a cuneate base, shortly petiolate. Flowers in a terminal head. Bracts slightly shorter than the calyx; lower bracts leaf-like, upper bracts narrowly spathulate, entire. Calyx 10-12 mm, campanulate, sparsely hairy; teeth triangular, acuminate, ciliate; veins conspicuous. Corolla white, or white with purple, spathulate, proximal lobes. 2n = 26.{\i  Rocks, screes and mountain pastures; somewhat calcicole. • N. Spain, S.W. France.} Ga Hs.
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 32. T. rotundifolium} Schreber, {\i Pl. Vert. Unilab}. 42 (1773) (incl. {\i T. cinereum} Boiss., {\i T. granatense} (Boiss.) Boiss. & Reuter). Like {\b 31} but more extensively branched, smaller in all its parts; leaves up to 15 mm, truncate at base; petiole almost equalling to longer than the lamina; calyx less than 10 mm; corolla purple or white. 2n = 26.{\i  Rock-crevices and screes; calcicole. Mountains of Spain.} Hs.
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 33. T. buxifolium} Schreber, {\i loc. cit.} (1773). Much-branched dwarf shrub. Stems 7-25 cm, with dense, appressed white hairs. Leaves 5-12 mm, narrowly ovate to ovate, with 3-4 crenations, more densely hairy beneath than above; margins revolute. Flowers in a terminal head. Calyx 6-8 mm, campanulate, more or less hairy, often purple; veins distinct. Corolla pink; proximal lobes spathulate.{\i  Sunny calcareous rocks. • S.E. Spain.} Hs.
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28  {\b  T. amplexicaule} Bentham,{\i  Lab. Gen. Sp.} 687 (1835) is a variant of {\b 33} with glandular hairs on the calyx.
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 34. T. freynii} Reverchon ex Willk., {\i Suppl. Prodr. Fl. Hisp.} 159 (1893). Dwarf shrub with persistent wiry branches. Stems up to 20 cm, with appressed white hairs. Leaves 2-4 mm wide, obovate, with 4-5 crenations, cuneate at the base, shortly petiolate, equally hairy on both surfaces. Flowers in a terminal head. Lower bracts leaf-like, upper spathulate. Calyx tubular, with a uniform indumentum of short crispate hairs; veins obscure. Corolla pink to brownish-cream; proximal lobes spathulate. •{\i  S.E. Spain} ({\i prov. Almeria}). Hs.
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 35. T. cuneifolium} Sibth. & Sm.,{\i  Fl. Graec. Prodr.}{\b  1}: 395 (1809). Dwarf shrub. Stems 10-25 cm, densely green- to white-tomentose. Leaves 9-13 mm, at least 8 mm wide, ovate to orbicular, with 3-4 crenations, cuneate at the base, shortly petiolate, densely green- to white-tomentose. Flowers in terminal or axillary heads. Lower bracts leaf-like, upper entire, spathulate. Calyx 5-7 mm, hairy; veins obscure. Corolla cream; proximal lobes spathulate.{\i  Calcareous rocks.• Kriti.} Cr.
\par
\par 133}
\par