{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28  A taxonomically difficult genus, requiring an extensive experimental investigation. Specific limits in Sect.{\i  Sideritis,} and to a lesser extent in Sect.{\i  Empedoclia}, are often obscure. Interspecific hybrids within Sect.{\i  Sideritis} have been recorded from many localities in Spain and it seems probable that much of the taxonomic difficulty is due to the occurrence of these hybrids and possibly hybrid swarms.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Literature: P. Font Quer, {\i Trab. Mus. Ci. Nat. Barcelona}{\b  5}({\b 4}) (1924).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Calyx ± 2-lipped, the upper tooth longer and wider than 
\par
  the 4 lower teeth; annual
\par
2 Stem with short glandular hairs; upper calyx-tooth 
\par
  narrowly lanceolate; corolla yellow with black lips ........................ {\b 26. lanata}
\par
2 Stem without glandular hairs; upper calyx-tooth ovate;
\par
  corolla yellow, purple or white
\par
3 Calyx with prominent veins, not saccate at base; teeth
\par
  patent in fruit ................................................................................. {\b 27. romana}
\par
3 Calyx without prominent veins, saccate at base; teeth 
\par
  curved in fruit ............................................................................ {\b 28. curvidens}
\par
1 Calyx ± actinomorphic, the teeth all equal
\par
4 Annual
\par
5 Leaves 2-8 mm wide, oblong-lanceolate .................................... {\b 25. montana}
\par
5 Leaves 8-15 mm wide, ovate .......................................................... {\b 26. lanata}
\par
4 Shrub, or perennial herb woody at base
\par
6 Bracts entire
\par
7 Middle and lower leaves rounded or cordate at base,
\par
  semiamplexicaul and often perfoliate ........................................ {\b 24. perfoliata}
\par
7 Middle and lower leaves attenuate at base, not semi-
\par
  amplexicaul and never perfoliate
\par
8 Bracts narrowly ovate to triangular-cordate, not conspicuously
\par
   acuminate or cuspidate; calyx 4-8 mm; corolla 8-10 mm
\par
9 Verticillasters distant; calyx without a ring of hairs inside ........... {\b 19. incana}
\par
9 Verticillasters crowded; calyx with a ring of hairs inside
\par
10 Leaves narrowly lanceolate, glabrescent to villous;
\par
   corolla yellow, sometimes tinged with purple ....................... {\b 8. hyssopifolia}
\par
10 Leaves oblong- to obovate-spathulate, densely white
\par
   tomentose-lanate or sericeous-lanate; corolla purple ......... {\b 18. stachydioides}
\par
8 Most bracts broadly ovate to suborbicular with a 
\par
  distinct acumen or cusp; calyx 7-12 mm; corolla (9-)10-15 mm
\par
11 Middle bracts usually equalling or shorter than 
\par
   flowers and often shorter than calyx; verticillasters
\par
   usually distant ............................................................................... {\b 21. syriaca}
\par
11 Middle bracts exceeding flowers; verticillasters 
\par
   usually crowded to form a dense spike
\par
12 Middle bracts with acumen 4-10 mm ...................... {\b 22. clandestina}
\par
12 Middle bracts with acumen 2-4 mm .......................... {\b 23. scardica}
\par
6  Bracts coarsely toothed and often spiny
\par
13 Most leaves spinose-dentate with pungent lateral teeth
\par
14 Plant with dense, short glandular papillae, at least 
\par
   on the upper part of the stem; verticillasters distant . {\b 16. ilicifolia}
\par
14 Plant glabrescent to villous-tomentose, sometimes also
\par
   glandular, hairy; verticillasters crowded into dense spikes 
\par
15 Middle cauline leaves with 2-6, usually very coarse,
\par
   divaricate lateral spines ............................................................. {\b 14. spinulosa}
\par
15 Middle cauline leaves with at least 20 appressed lateral spines .. {\b 15. serrata}
\par
13 Leaves entire or toothed but the lateral teeth not pungent
\par
16 Calyx without a ring of long hairs inside
\par
17 All leaves entire, or rarely with few small teeth;
\par
   bracts with up to 11 teeth .............................................................. {\b 19. incana}
\par
17 Lower leaves crenate-dentate; bracts incise-dentate,
\par
   usually with more than 11 teeth ................................................... {\b 20. lacaitae}
\par
16 Calyx with a ring of long hairs inside
\par
18 Corolla white, sometimes with reddish markings on the lips 
\par
19 Erect shrub up to 100 cm; most verticillasters crowded
\par
   into a dense spike; corolla c. 6 mm, not or scarcely
\par
   exceeding calyx .............................................................................. {\b 2. foetens}
\par
19 Herb or dwarf shrub up to 30 cm; most verticillasters
\par
   distant; corolla 7-10 mm, distinctly exceeding calyx ............... {\b 17. leucantha}
\par
20 Stem with at least some long, straight, patent hairs;
\par
   lower bracts 8-20 mm wide ............................................................ {\b 4. hirsuta}
\par
20 Stem with short, crispate hairs; lower bracts 6-8 mm wide ... {\b 17. leucantha}
\par
18 Corolla yellow, pink or purple, sometimes with a white upper lip
\par
21 Calyx 12-17 mm; corolla 14-20 mm
\par
22 Leaves 45-90 mm; corolla pale yellow inside ....................... {\b 1. grandiflora}
\par
22 Leaves not more than 35 mm; corolla tinged with dark 
\par
   brown or purple inside ................................................................. {\b 5. endressii}
\par
21 Calyx usually not more than 12 mm; corolla usually not
\par
   more than 13 mm
\par
23 Bracts shorter than calyx
\par
24 Leaves coarsely incise-dentate or -crenate
\par
25 Stem tomentose with crispate and appressed hairs ................ {\b 6. scordioides}
\par
25 Stem hirsute with numerous ± straight hairs ................................. {\b 4. hirsuta}
\par
24 Leaves entire or with few small teeth
\par
26 Stem not more than 15 cm; verticillasters 1-3, usually
\par
   distant ........................................................................................... {\b 7. glacialis}
\par
26 Stem up to 30 cm; verticillasters 5-15, mostly crowded ...... {\b 8. hyssopifolia}
\par
23 Bracts equalling or exceeding calyx
\par
27 Verticillasters crowded into a dense spike (sometimes 
\par
   the lowest 1-2 distant)
\par
28 Stem and leaves densely white tomentose-lanate or 
\par
   sericeous-lanate; corolla purple .......................................... {\b 18. stachydioides}
\par
28 Stem and leaves green or grey-green, glabrous to tomentose  
\par
   or villous; corolla yellow, sometimes tinged with purple
\par
29 Lower leaves cordate or rounded at base, crenate-serrate; 
\par
   petiole as long as or almost as long as lamina .................................. {\b 9. ovata}
\par
29 Lower leaves attenuate at base, entire or with few 
\par
   remote teeth or coarsely incise-dentate or -crenate;
\par
   petiole absent or short
\par 
30 Shrub up to 2 m ..................................................................... {\b 3. arborescens} 
\par
30 Perennial herb with woody base, not more than 80 cm
\par
31 Leaves 1-4 mm wide
\par
32 Verticillasters (2-)3-5; corolla dark brown inside ......... {\b 12. javalambrensis}
\par
32 Verticillasters 4-15; corolla yellow or purplish inside 
\par
33 Bracts with few aristate teeth ............................................... {\b 8. hyssopifolia} 
\par
33 Bracts coarsely spinose-dentate with numerous teeth .......... {\b 10. linearifolia}
\par
31 Leaves more than 4 mm wide
\par
34 Calyx 6-8 mm; leaves glabrescent to villous ........................ {\b 8. hyssopifolia}
\par
34 Calyx 9-10 mm; leaves densely villous-tomentose ..................... {\b 15. serrata}
\par
27 Verticillasters ± distant, all except the uppermost
\par
   with stem visible between each verticillaster
\par
35 Leaves linear or linear-lanceolate, mostly at least 
\par
   5 times as long as wide
\par
36 Stem glabrous or sparsely hairy; calyx 7-9 mm ................... {\b 3. arborescens}
\par
36 Stem tomentose; calyx 5-7 mm .......................................... {\b 11. angustifolia}
\par
35 Leaves less than 5 times as long as wide
\par
37 Shrub up to 200 cm ............................................................... {\b 3. arborescens}
\par
37 Perennial herb with woody base, not more than 60 cm 
\par
38 Stem tomentose with crispate and appressed hairs
\par
39 Verticillasters very numerous, many-flowered; leaves
\par
   oblong-lanceolate; bracts broadly reniform ........................... {\b 12. reverchonii}
\par

\par
139}
\par