{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 14. T. asiaticum} L.,{\i  Mantissa} 80 (1767). Dwarf shrub with annual flowering stems c. 40 cm. Leaves up to 30 mm, narrowly oblong, dentate, gradually attenuate at base, acute, glandular and sparsely puberulent, shortly petiolate. Inflorescence very lax; lower bracts leaf-like and much longer than the flowers; upper bracts short. Calyx glandular but almost glabrous; teeth c. ½ as long as tube, broadly ovate, aristate. Corolla 10-13 mm, pink to purple.{\i  Shady rocks. • Islas Baleares.} Bl.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Sect. SCORDIUM (Miller) Bentham. Usually herbs. Inflorescence not secund. Calyx tubular, curved, gibbous at base; teeth subequal or the upper wider.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 15. T. scordium} L.,{\i  Sp. Pl.} 565 (1753). Softly hairy to subglabrous, stoloniferous perennial, smelling of garlic when crushed. Stems 10-60 cm, often freely branched. Leaves ovate to oblong, coarsely dentate, or crenate-dentate, sessile or subsessile. Flowers in the axils of leaf-like bracts which are usually longer than the flowers. Calyx villous, obscurely veined; teeth c. 1/3 as long as tube, triangular, acuminate. Corolla 7-10 mm, villous, purplish; tube slightly exceeding calyx.{\i  Wet places. Europe, northwards to Ireland, Sweden and Estonia}. All except Az Fa Fe Is No Rs (N) Sb.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b scordium}({\i T. scordium} subsp. {\i palustre} P. Fourn.): Stolons usually with normal foliage-leaves. Leaves of the main stem narrowed to the base; leaves of lateral branches cuneate at base and toothed in the upper part.{\i  From N. Spain, N. Italy and Bulgaria northwards.}
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b scordioides}(Schreber) Maire & Petitmengin,{\i  Bull. Soc. Sci. Nancy} ser. 3,{\b  9}: 411 (1908) ({\i T. scordioides} Schreber, {\i T. petkovii} Urum.): Stolons usually densely clothed with scale-leaves. Leaves of the main stem cordate, semiamplexicaul; leaves of lateral branches rounded at base, toothed all round. 2n = 32.{\i  S. Europe}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 16. T. spinosum} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 566 (1753). Pubescent or villous, glandular annual. Stems 30-50 cm, much branched, the branches spinose and more or less leafless at flowering time. Lower leaves oblong, narrowed at base, incise-serrate above; upper leaves small, entire. Flowers solitary or 4-6 together in the axils of the distant upper leaves. Calyx 6-7 mm, weakly veined; upper tooth broadly ovate, the others 2-2·5 mm, narrowly triangular to subulate, all spinescent. Corolla 6-8 mm, white, resupinate; tube included in the calyx. {\i Cultivated fields and sandy or gravelly ground. W. Mediterranean region, S. Portugal.} Hs It Lu Sa Si.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 17. T. resupinatum} Desf.,{\i  Fl. Atl.} {\b 2}: 4 (1798). Like {\b 16} but not spinose; all leaves, except those at the top of the inflorescence, crenate-serrate; upper calyx-tooth scarcely wider than the others, all 2·5-3 mm, broadly triangular or ovate-triangular, long-acuminate; corolla yellowish, with purple lateral lobes.{\i  Cultivated, sandy ground. S.W. Spain}. Hs. ({\i N.W. Africa}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 18. T. botrys} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 562 (1753). Villous annual up to 30 cm. Stems usually branched. Leaves petiolate, 1- to 2-pinnatisect; lobes oblong, usually entire. Inflorescence lax, usually occupying more than half the stem. Calyx villous and glandular, strongly gibbous, reticulate-veined; teeth c. ½ as long as tube, triangular, acuminate. Corolla 15-20 mm, purplish-pink, villous; tube included in the calyx. 2n = 32.{\i  Dry, stony places; somewhat calcicole. S., W. & C. Europe, northwards to S. England and S. Poland and eastwards to Romania.} Au Be Bl Br ?Bu Cz Ga Ge He Ho Hs Hu It Ju Po Rm ?Rs (W).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Sect. CHAMAEDRYS (Miller) Schreber. Dwarf shrubs. Inflorescence more or less secund, usually rather lax. Calyx tubular campanulate, curved, oblique at base; teeth usually subequal.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 19. T. chamaedrys} L.,{\i  Sp. Pl.} 565 (1753) (incl.{\i  T. pulchrius} Juz.). Rhizomatous dwarf shrub with annual flowering stems 5-50 cm, hairy. Leaves up to 2 × 1 cm, not more than twice as long as wide, oblong or oblong-obovate, entire to incise-serrate with obtuse teeth, or crenate-dentate, usually pubescent beneath. Inflorescence lax to dense, but always longer than wide. Calyx 5-8 mm, villous and glandular to glabrous; teeth c. 2/3 as long as tube, subequal, usually somewhat longer than wide, triangular, acuminate. Corolla 9-16 mm, pale to deep purple, rarely white, hairy. 2n = 60.{\i  Europe, northwards to the Netherlands, S. Poland and S.C. Russia.} Al Au Be Bl Bu Co Cz Ga Ge Gr He Ho Hs Hu It Ju Lu Po Rm Rs (C, W, K, E) Sa Si Tu [Br].
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Very variable. Numerous subspecies have been recognized. For a detailed treatment of these see K. H. Rechinger,{\i  Bot. Arch.} ({\i Berlin}){\b  42}: 344-389 (1941).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 20. T. webbianum} Boiss.,{\i  Elenchus} 78 (1838). Like {\b 19} but always thinly grey-tomentose; leaves 4-6 times as long as wide, linear to oblong; calyx-teeth somewhat unequal, scarcely longer than wide. •{\i  Mountains of S.E. Spain.} Hs.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 21. T. krymense} Juz., {\i Not. Syst.} ({\i Leningrad}){\b  14}: 19 (1951) (incl. {\i T. fischeri} Juz.). Like {\b 19} but leaves velutinous beneath, finely and deeply crenate-serrate; calyx-teeth 1½-2 times as long as wide.{\i  Grassy mountain slopes. • Krym.} Rs (K).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 22. T. lucidum} L., {\i Syst. Nat.} ed. 10, {\b 2}: 1095 (1759). Like {\b 19} but usually larger and almost glabrous; stems up to 60 cm, glabrous; leaves up to 4 × 3 cm, ovate-oblong, deeply toothed or shallowly lobed, teeth or lobes obtuse; inflorescence very lax; calyx-teeth c. 1/3 as long as tube, ciliolate on the margins; corolla 14-17 mm.{\i  Dry, rocky hillsides. • S.W. Alps.} Ga It.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 23. T. divaricatum} Sieber ex Boiss., {\i Fl. Or}.{\b  4}: 816 (1879). Small, stout shrub 10-30(-50) cm. Leaves (6-)10-25 × (4-)8-15 mm, coriaceous, ovate, rather shallowly crenate; petiole shorter than the width of the lamina. Inflorescence usually lax. Calyx c. 8 mm, ciliolate. Corolla pink or purple. 2n = 62, 64.{\i  Aegean region.} Cr Gr.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Leaves nearly or quite glabrous; stems subglabrous to 
\par
  shortly crispate-hairy
\par
2 Stems 30-50 cm; calyx with short, eglandular hairs only. ({\b d}) subsp. {\b athoum}
\par
2 Stems 15-30 cm; calyx with some long, glandular hairs  ({\b c}) subsp. {\b graecum}
\par
1 Whole plant ± villous
\par
3 Stems with short, crispate, usually deflexed hairs ..... ({\b a}) subsp. {\b divaricatum} 
\par
3 Stems with long, patent hairs .......................................... ({\b b}) subsp. {\b villosum}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b divaricatum}: {\i E. Greece, Kriti}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b villosum}(Celak.) Rech. fil., {\i Bot. Arch.} ({\i Berlin}){\b  42}: 391 (1941):{\i  Islands of S. Aegean region.}
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b c}) Subsp. {\b graecum}(Celak.) Bornm., {\i Mitt. Thür. Bot. Ver.} nov. ser., {\b 38}: 57 (1929):{\b  E.C. Greece}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b d}) Subsp. {\b athoum}(Hausskn.) Bornm.,{\i  loc. cit.} (1929):{\i  N.E. Greece }({\b Athos}).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 24. T. flavum} L., {\i Sp. Pl. }565 (1753). Like {\b 23} but stems up to 50 cm, usually velutinous; leaves 10-40 × 10-25 mm; petiole as long as the width of the lamina; calyx 7-10 mm; corolla yellow.{\i  Rocks and stony slopes. Mediterranean region.} Al Bl Co Cr Ga Gr ?Hs It Ju Sa Si Tu.
\par

\par
132}
\par