{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b d}) Subsp.{\b  pii-fontii} Palau,{\i  Anal. Inst. Bot. Cavanilles }{\b 11}({\b 2}): 487 (1953): Stems 15-35 cm; flowering stems straight, slender; leaves less than 10 mm, with axillary fascicles; flower-heads compound. •{\i  Spain, Islas Baleares}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b e}) Subsp. {\b vincentinum}(Rouy) D. Wood,{\i  Bot. Jour. Linn. Soc.}{\b  65}: 261 (1972) ({\i T. vincentinum} Rouy): Stems 25-45 cm, stout, with dense golden or grey hairs; leaves up to 28 mm; flower-heads compound; proximal corolla-lobes glabrous.{\i  Maritime rocks and sands. S.W. Europe}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 46. T. gnaphalodes} L'Hér., Stirp. Nov. 84 (1788). Dwarf shrub. Stems 15-30 cm, decumbent, with a dense woolly indumentum of branched hairs. Leaves 4-13 mm, oblong, with 5-9 crenations, sessile, in fascicles, often with golden hairs; margins strongly revolute. Flowers in terminal and axillary, 3- to 12-flowered, elongate heads. Calyx 4-5 mm, very hairy with hairs denser towards the base. Corolla white or red; proximal corolla-lobes triangular.{\i  Dry places. C., S. & E. Spain}. Hs.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 47. T. eriocephalum} Willk.,{\i  Linnaea}{\b  25}: 58 (1852). Dwarf shrub. Stems 13-30 cm, with a sparse to dense indumentum of branched hairs; flowering stems slender, straight, usually red. Leaves 7-11 mm, in fascicles, linear to oblong, with 4-6 crenations; margins revolute. Flowers in subglobose, compact, terminal and lateral, sessile or pedunculate heads. Bracts shorter than the calyx. Calyx densely or sparsely hairy; teeth acute. Corolla white or red; proximal lobes triangular.{\i  Dry stony slopes near the coast. • S. Spain.} Hs.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 48. T. haenseleri} Boiss., {\i Elenchus} 79 (1838) (incl.{\i  T. reverchonii }Willk.). Dwarf shrub. Stems 10-35 cm, red or green, sparsely hirsute. Leaves 20-30 mm, narrowly oblong, with 3-12 crenations, often deflexed, in whorls of 3 or 4 and in axillary fascicles; margins revolute. Flowers in 3-10 subcylindrical to ovoid heads on each stem. Corolla whitish; proximal lobes triangular. •{\i  S. Spain, S. Portugal.} Hs Lu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 49. T. charidemi} Sandwith, {\i Cavanillesia }{\b 3}: 38 (1930). Dwarf shrub. Stems 8-30 cm, contorted, stems and leaves densely white-lanate. Leaves 5-19 mm, narrowly triangular, with 6-8 crenations, sessile; margins revolute. Flowers in terminal and lateral globose heads. Calyx 4 mm, evenly hairy. Corolla white; proximal lobes triangular. •{\i  S.E. Spain} ({\i Cabo de Gata}). Hs.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc {\b 3.             Scutellaria}             L.
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc By I.B.K. Richardson.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Rhizomatous perennials. Flowers in pairs, remote or in a dense oblong raceme. Calyx 2-lipped, the tube campanulate, with an erect dorsal scale; lips entire, closed in fruit. Corolla 2-lipped; tube long and more or less curved upwards from the base, glabrous inside. Stamens parallel.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Literature: R. von Bothmer,{\i  Bot. Not.}{\b  122}: 38-56 (1969). K. H. Rechinger fil., {\i Bot. Arch.} ({\i Berlin}) {\b 43}: 1-70 (1941).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Measurements relating to inflorescences, bracts and flowers should be taken on parts that are at anthesis.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Bracts mostly leaf-like, though smaller towards the apex
\par
2 Petioles mostly 1-2 times as long as the lamina ........................ {\b 10. balearica}
\par
2 Petioles not more than ½ as long as the lamina
\par
3 Corolla 6-10 mm, almost straight, patent, pink .............................. {\b 13. minor}
\par
3 Corolla 10-23 mm, curved 45° or more, violet-blue, rarely pink
\par
4 Calyx glandular-pubescent; leaves usually ± hastate ................ {\b 12. hastifolia}
\par
4 Calyx glabrous or eglandular-pubescent; leaves not hastate . {\b 11. galericulata}
\par
1 Bracts mostly distinct from the leaves
\par
5 Upper lip of corolla yellow or pink
\par
6 Leaves grey-tomentose beneath, deeply crenate to pinnatifid .... {\b 1. orientalis}
\par
6 Leaves green, glabrous to pubescent, serrate-crenate ...................... {\b 2. alpina}
\par
5 Upper lip of corolla purple, blue, reddish or white
\par
7 Corolla 18 mm or more
\par
8 Inflorescence ± 4-angled; leaves not more than 3·5 cm,
\par
  usually obtuse .................................................................................... {\b 2. alpina}
\par
8 Inflorescence not 4-angled; leaves up to 8 cm, acute ................. {\b 3. columnae}
\par
7 Corolla less than 18 mm
\par
9 Internodes of inflorescence c. 5 mm
\par
10 Leaves 2-4(-5·5) cm; bracts exceeding calyx ............................... {\b 8. sieberi}
\par
10 Leaves 1-2 cm; bracts not exceeding calyx ..................................... {\b 9. hirta}
\par
9  Internodes of inflorescence (8-)9-12 mm
\par
11 Bracts 15-20 mm .................................................................. {\b 7. velenovskyi}
\par
11 Bracts 3-12 mm
\par
12 Flowers usually white; bracts usually more than 10 mm ............... {\b 6. albida}
\par
12 Flowers usually bluish; bracts usually less than 10 mm
\par
13 Larger leaves at least 5 cm; calyx without or with 
\par
   only a few long, white, eglandular hairs ..................................... {\b 4. altissima}
\par
13 Leaves not more than 4 cm; calyx usually with
\par
   numerous long, white, eglandular hairs ..................................... {\b 5. rubicunda}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. S. orientalis} L.,{\i  Sp. Pl.} 598 (1753). Stems up to 30 cm, decumbent, woody, sparsely tomentose. Leaves (0·5-)1-1·5(-3) × 0·5-2 cm, ovate-oblong to broadly ovate, deeply crenate-dentate to pinnatisect with linear-lanceolate or linear lobes, truncate at base, dark green and pubescent above, grey-tomentose beneath, petiolate; margins usually recurved. Inflorescence dense, oblong, usually 4-angled. Bracts 5-12 mm, usually exceeding the calyx, imbricate, ovate or rarely more or less lanceolate, entire, acute, somewhat scarious, purplish or yellow-green, glabrous to pubescent. Corolla 15-30(-35) mm, yellow, rarely pink; lower lip often reddish.{\i  Dry, usually calcareous, rocky places. S.E. Europe, from Albania to Krym; mountains of S.E. Spain.} Al Bu Gr Hs Ju Rm Rs (K) Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  A variable species, especially in degree of leaf-dissection and in size and shape of the bracts. Many subordinate taxa have been described but they are not well enough defined to merit subspecific rank.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. S. alpina} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 599 (1753). Stems (5-)25-35(-50) cm, ascending, simple or branched, more or less pubescent. Leaves 1·5-3 cm, ovate, rarely lanceolate, crenate-serrate, rarely subentire, usually obtuse, glabrous to pubescent; lower leaves petiolate, the upper more or less sessile; margins not recurved. Inflorescence dense, oblong, more or less 4-angled. Bracts 8-15 mm, exceeding the calyx, imbricate, sessile, ovate to ovate-lanceolate, entire, acute, somewhat scarious, purplish, rarely green. Corolla 20-25(-30) mm, the tube more or less pubescent outside.{\i  Mountains of S. & S.C. Europe, and lowlands of Ukraine and S.C. Russia.} Al Bu Ga Ge Gr He Hs It Ju Rm Rs (C, W, E).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp.{\b  alpina}: Leaves and bracts more or less pubescent. Corolla purplish; lower lip often whitish. 2n = 22.{\i  Calcareous rocks, screes and grassy slopes. From Spain to Greece and Romania.}
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Dwarf variants occur relatively frequently in E. Spain, and have been called {\b S. javalambrensis} Pau,{\i  Not. Bot. Fl. Esp.}{\b  2}: 35 (1888).
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b supina}(L.) I. B. K. Richardson,{\i  Bot. Jour. Linn. Soc.}{\b  65}: 262 (1972) ({\i S. supina} L.): Leaves and bracts more or less glabrous. Corolla yellow.{\i  Meadows and steppes. U.S.S.R}.
\par

\par
135}
\par