{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 39 Verticillasters 3-12(-14),2- to 6-flowered; leaves 
\par
   linear-oblong to obovate; bracts lanceolate- or ovate-
\par
   cordate to suborbicular
\par
40 Lower bracts 6-15 × 10-20 mm, similar to the upper;
\par
   leaves incise-dentate or crenate ............................................... {\b 6. scordioides}
\par
40 Lower bracts 4-10 × 6-8 mm, distinct from the upper;
\par
   leaves entire to coarsely toothed or shallowly lobed ................ {\b 17. leucantha}
\par
38 Stem glabrescent or with at least some ± straight long hairs
\par
41 Calyx 9-13 mm; corolla tinged with dark brown or purple
\par
   inside ............................................................................................ {\b 5. endressii}
\par
41 Calyx 5-8(-9) mm; corolla not dark-tinged inside ........................ {\b 4. hirsuta}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Sect. SIDERITIS. Shrubs or perennial herbs with woody base. Bracts usually coarsely toothed and somewhat spinulose or spinose, not leaf-like.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. S. grandiflora} Salzm. ex Bentham, {\i Lab. Gen. Sp. }577 (1834) ({\i S. baetica} Lange). Shrub with herbaceous, villous-tomentose flowering stems up to 50 cm. Leaves 45-90 × 12-25 mm, oblong-elliptical or lanceolate, crenate-serrate. Verticillasters 3-5, distant, many-flowered. Lower bracts 25-45 × 25-35 mm, broadly ovate-cordate, acuminate, coarsely spinose-serrate at base, remotely serrate or crenate-serrate at apex. Calyx 12-15 mm. Corolla 14-17 mm, pale yellow.{\i  Dry grassland. S.W. Spain} ({\i near Cádiz}). Hs.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. S. foetens} Clemente ex Lag.,{\i  Gen. Sp. Nov.} 18 (1816) ({\i S. lasiantha} auct., vix Pers.). Fetid shrub up to 100 cm with erect, herbaceous, glabrescent flowering stems up to 100 cm. Leaves up to 20 × 1·5 mm, few, linear, entire. Verticillasters 10-25, c. 6- flowered, mostly crowded into long, dense spikes. Lower bracts 6-8 × 6-10 mm, about equalling calyx, broadly ovate-cordate, incise-dentate. Calyx c. 6 mm, with a ring of hairs inside. Corolla c. 6 mm, white with red lines on the lips.{\i  Dry, saline soils. • S.E. Spain} ({\i near Almeria}). Hs.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 3. S. arborescens} Salzm. ex Bentham, {\i Lab. Gen. Sp.} 579 (1834). Shrub up to 100(-200) cm, with erect, herbaceous flowering stems up to 50 cm. Leaves 15-35 × 1-10 mm, oblong lanceolate to elliptical, rarely linear, often remotely dentate. Verticillasters 4-20, usually distant, 6- to 10-flowered. Lower bracts 8-15 × 8-20 mm, about equalling calyx, cordate-ovate, incise-dentate, glandular. Calyx 7-9 mm, glandular, with a ring of hairs inside. Corolla 8-13 mm, yellow or pale pink.{\i  Rocky and bushy places. S. Spain.} Hs.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  A variable species which cannot always be clearly separated from {\b 11}, {\b 13} and large-flowered variants of {\b 4}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Leaves 1-2 mm wide, linear, entire or with few obscure teeth; 
\par
  corolla pale pink ................................................................. ({\b b}) subsp. {\b luteola}
\par
1 Leaves 2-10 mm wide, linear-lanceolate to oblong-
\par
  lanceolate or elliptical, entire to serrulate or with 
\par
  few, short lobes; corolla usually yellow
\par
2 Stem glabrous or sparsely hairy; leaves entire, crenate-
\par
  dentate or serrulate; calyx 7-8 mm .............................. ({\b a}) subsp. {\b arborescens} 
\par
2 Stem hairy, usually glandular; leaves with few coarse 
\par
  teeth or shallow lobes; calyx c. 9 mm ................................... ({\b c}) subsp. {\b paulii}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp.{\b  arborescens}: {\i S. W. Spain} ({\i provs. Cádiz and Málaga}).
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b luteola}(Font Quer) P. W. Ball ex Heywood, {\i Bot. Jour. Linn. Soc.}{\b   65}: 355 (1972) ({\i S. luteola} Font Quer): {\i S. Spain }({\i prov. Granada}).
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b c}) Subsp. {\b paulii}(Pau) P. W. Ball ex Heywood,{\i  op. cit.} (1972) ({\i S. paulii} Pau).•{\i  S.W. Spain }({\i prov. Cordoba and Sevilla}).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Subsp. ({\b c}) is also recorded from a number of other areas in S. & S.C. Spain but the identity of these plants needs confirmation.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 4. S. hirsuta} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 575 (1753) (incl. {\i S. hirtula} Brot.). Moderately to densely hairy perennial up to 50 cm, with at least some long, more or less straight, patent hairs on the stem. Leaves 10-20 × 4-10 mm, mostly obovate-oblong, incise-dentate or -crenate, green or grey-green. Verticillasters 4-15, usually c. 6-flowered, usually distant. Lower bracts 6-15 × 8-20 mm, about equalling or shorter than calyx, ovate-cordate, incisedentate. Calyx 5-8(-9) mm, usually eglandular, with a ring of hairs inside. Corolla 8-10 mm, with white or pale yellow upper lip and pale or bright yellow lower lip, rarely entirely white.{\i  Dry, open habitats. • S.W. Europe.} Ga Hs It Lu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Very variable in S. Spain, where many populations occur whose taxonomic status and position are uncertain.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b S. bubanii} Font Quer,{\i  Butll. Inst. Catalana Hist. Nat.}{\b  20}: 141 (1920), from N.E. Spain (prov. Lérida), is like some variants of {\b 4} but is tomentose, with many-flowered verticillasters, bracts equalling or longer than calyx, with subspinescent teeth, and corolla with the upper lip shorter than the lower (not longer as in {\b 4}). It also shows affinities with {\b 6} and {\b 8} and its status is not clear.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 5. S. endressii} Willk.,{\i  Bot. Zeit.}{\b  17}: 276 (1859) (incl.{\i  S. ruscinonensis} Timb.-Lagr., {\i S. angustinii} Sennen,{\i  S. catalaunica} Sennen). Glabrescent to villous, green perennial up to 30 cm. Leaves 10-35 × 5-20 mm, elliptical to obovate or oblanceolate, subentire to crenate or crenate-dentate, sessile or shortly petiolate. Verticillasters 5-10(-15), 6-flowered, laxly crowded or more or less distant. Lower bracts 8-9 mm, ovate-cordate or -elliptical, prominently toothed, sometimes with only a few teeth. Calyx 9-17 mm, with a ring of hairs inside. Corolla 9-20 mm, yellow, usually dark brown or purplish-tinged inside. •{\i  S. France, E. Spain}. Ga Hs.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b endressii}: Leaves 10-25 × 5-15 mm. Bracts 8-9 mm. Calyx 9-12 mm. Corolla 9-13 mm.{\i  Throughout the range of the species except S.E. Spain}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b laxespicata}(Degen & Debeaux) Heywood,{\i  Bot. Jour. Linn. Soc.}{\b  65}: 355 (1972) ({\i S. endressii} f.{\i  laxespicata} Degen & Debeaux): Leaves up to 35 × 20 mm. Bracts up to 20 × 35 mm. Calyx 13-17 mm. Corolla 18-20 mm.{\i  S.E. Spain} ({\i provs. Jaén and Albacete}).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Other variants from N.E. & S. Spain have usually distant verticillasters, larger and wider bracts, and variable indumentum (often densely hirsute or greenish and sparsely hairy); some of them are low-growing and coastal and may represent a further subspecies.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 6. S. scordioides} L., {\i Syst. Nat.} ed. 10,{\b  2}: 1098 (1759). Tomentose perennial up to 30 cm. Leaves 7-30 × 3-10 mm, linear-oblong to obovate, incise-dentate or -crenate. Verticillasters 3-10, c. 6-flowered, usually distant. Lower bracts 6-15 × 10-20 mm, usually about equalling calyx, ovate-cordate, incise-dentate. Calyx 6-9 mm, with a ring of hairs inside. Corolla 8-10 mm, yellow, sometimes with purplish markings.{\i  Dry calcareous slopes. • S. France, C. & E. Spain.} Ga Hs.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b scordioides}: Leaves usually sparsely tomentose, shallowly incise-dentate. {\i S. France, .?N.E. Spain}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b cavanillesii}(Lag.) P. W. Ball ex Heywood,{\i  Bot. Jour. Linn. Soc.}{\b  65}: 355 (1972) ({\i S. cavanillesii} Lag.; incl. {\i S. hirsuta} var. {\i chamaedryfolia} (Cav.) Willk.): Leaves densely grey-tomentose, deeply incise-dentate.{\i  C. & E. Spain}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 7. S. glacialis} Boiss.,{\i  Biblioth. Univ. Genève} ser. 2, {\b 13}: 410 (1838). Like {\b 6} but not more than 15 cm, sparsely to densely tomentose; leaves 5-10 × c. 2 mm, lanceolate to obovate-spathulate, entire or with few rounded teeth at apex; verticillasters 1-3, more or less crowded; bracts 5-6 × 5-6 mm, shorter than
\par

\par
140}
\par