{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 to obovate, entire to coarsely toothed or shallowly lobed. Verticillasters 3-12(-14), 2- to 6-flowered, distant. Lower bracts 4-10 × 6-8 mm, about equalling the calyx, cordate-lanceolate to suborbicular, incise-dentate. Calyx 4-9 mm, with a ring of hairs inside; teeth green, pubescent to villous. Corolla 7-10 mm, white, very rarely pale or deep yellow, sometimes with dark brown or purplish markings inside. {\i Dry places; calcicole. • S.E. Spain, extending locally westwards to Málaga.} Hs.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  A variable species which has been divided into a series of variants from S. Spain (mainly in the coastal provinces) and from which {\b S. pusilla} (Lange) Pau, {\i Bull. Acad. Int. Geogr. Bot.} ({\i Le Mans}) {\b 16} ({\i Mém}.): 77 (1906), from S. Spain (provs. Almería, Granada, Málaga) has been segregated. The latter differs mainly in having purplish calyx-teeth which are completely covered by villous hairs. Much further study of this complex is required.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 18. S. stachydioides} Willk.,{\i  Bot. Zeit.}{\b  8}: 78 (1850). White tomentose-lanate or sericeous-lanate perennial up to 20 cm. Lower leaves 10-15 × 4-8 mm, oblong- to obovate-spathulate, entire. Verticillasters 5-10, c. 6-flowered, mostly crowded into a dense spike. Lower bracts 8-15 × 4-5 mm, exceeding calyx, ovate-oblong to cordate-triangular, subentire or with 4-6 teeth near the base. Calyx 7-8 mm, with a ring of hairs inside. Corolla 8-10 mm, purple.{\i  Crevices of calcareous rocks. • S.E. Spain} ({\i near Vélez Rubio}). Hs.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 19. S. incana} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} ed. 2, 802 (1763). Glabrous to white tomentose perennial up to 60 cm. Leaves up to 15-40 × 1·5-4(-7·5) mm, linear to ovate-lanceolate or spathulate, entire or with few small teeth. Verticillasters (1-)2-10, c. 6-flowered, distant. Lower bracts 3-10 × 2-8 mm, shorter than calyx, ovate to cordate-ovate, entire or with up to 11 teeth. Calyx 4-8 mm, without a ring of hairs inside. Corolla 8-10 mm, yellow or pink.{\i  Dry places. C., E. & S. Spain.} Hs.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Plant glabrous or sparsely tomentose
\par
2 Corolla yellow; lower bracts 4-10 mm, toothed .................. ({\b a}) subsp. {\b incana}
\par
2 Corolla pink; lower bracts 3-4 mm, entire or feebly 
\par
  toothed .................................................................................. ({\b d}) subsp. {\b glauca}
\par
1 Plant densely white-tomentose
\par
3 Corolla yellow ..................................................................... ({\b b}) subsp. {\b virgata}
\par
3 Corolla pink ......................................................................... ({\b c}) subsp. {\b sericea}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b incana} : Plant densely tomentose when young, becoming sparsely tomentose. Verticillasters 2-5. Lower bracts 4-10 × 6-8 mm, toothed. Calyx 5-6 mm. Corolla yellow. •{\i  C. Spain}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b virgata}  (Desf.) Malagarriga, {\i Collect. Bot.} ({\i Barcelona}){\b  7}: 681 (1968) ({\i S. virgata} Desf.): Like subsp. ({\b a}) but plant persistently densely white-tomentose; verticillasters up to 10; calyx 5-8 mm. {\i S. & S.E. Spain}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b c}) Subsp. {\b sericea}  (Pers.) P. W. Ball ex Heywood,{\i  Bot. Jour. Linn. Soc.}{\b  65}: 355 (1972) (S. sericea Pers.): Like subsp. ({\b a}) but plant persistently densely white-tomentose; corolla pink.•{\i  S.E. Spain }({\i Quesa, S.W. of Valencia}).
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b d}) Subsp. {\b glauca}  (Cav.) Malagarriga, {\i Collect. Bot.} ({\i Barcelona}){\b  7}: 681 (1968) ({\i S. glauca} Cav.): Glabrous. Verticillasters 2-10. Lower bracts 3-4 × 2-2·5 mm, entire or feebly toothed. Calyx 4-5 mm. Corolla pink. •{\i  S.E. Spain} ({\i near Orihuela, N.E. of Murcia}).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Var.{\i  edetana }Pau, from S.E. Spain (Sierra de Chiva, W. of Valencia), is intermediate between subspp. ({\b a}) and ({\b d}). It is glabrescent, with toothed bracts and a pink corolla.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 20. S. lacaitae} Font Quer,{\i  Bol. Soc. Esp. Hist. Nat.}{\b  24}: 208 (1924). More or less tomentose perennial 30-70 cm. Lower leaves 20-50 × 2-5 mm, narrowly oblanceolate, more or less crenate-dentate; upper leaves narrower, entire. Verticillasters 4-14, c. 6-flowered, usually distant. Lower bracts 6-7 × 8-10 mm, shorter than or about equalling calyx, suborbicular-cordate, incise-dentate, usually with more than 11 teeth. Calyx 6-7 mm, without a ring of hairs inside. Corolla c. 8 mm, pale yellow. •{\i  S.C. Spain }({\i E. part of Sierra Morena}). Hs.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Similar plants from S.E. Spain (La Sagra), with stems 20-30 cm, leaves 10-20 × 1·5-2 mm, verticillasters 2-4; sometimes crowded, and calyx sometimes with a few hairs inside, may be referable to{\b  7}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Sect. EMPEDOCLIA (Rafin.) Bentham. Perennial herbs with a woody base. Bracts entire, usually not leaf-like.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 21. S. syriaca} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 574 (1753) (incl. {\i S. cretica }Boiss., non L., {\i S. raeseri} Boiss. & Heldr., {\i S. sicula} Ucria,{\i  S. taurica} Stephan ex Willd.). Grey- or white-lanate perennial 10-50 cm. Lower leaves 10-60 × (5-)6-20 mm, oblong to narrowly obovate, entire, crenulate or denticulate; middle and upper leaves up to 80 × 18 mm, linear-lanceolate or oblong, entire. Verticillasters 5-20, 6- to 10-flowered, mostly distant, rarely all crowded. Middle bracts 6-12 mm (including acumen), usually shorter than or equalling flowers, suborbicular; acumen 2-3 mm. Calyx 7-12 mm; teeth 2·5-5 mm, half as long to almost as long as tube. Corolla 9-15 mm, yellow. 2n = 24. {\i Mountain rocks. S. Europe, from Sicilia to Krym}. Al Bu Cr Gr It Ju Rs (K) Si.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  A variable species, usually divided into several species and subordinate taxa. Within a restricted part of its range it is often possible to distinguish many of the local populations from each other, but when the whole range of variation is taken into consideration no satisfactory subdivision seems possible.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 22. S. clandestina} (Bory & Chaub.) Hayek, {\i Prodr. Fl. Penins. Balcan. }{\b 2}: 257 (1929). Yellowish- or grey-lanate perennial 15-40 cm. Lower leaves 25-50 × 8-20 mm, oblong-spathulate to obovate, entire or crenulate; middle and upper leaves 30-70 × 6-12 mm, linear to oblong-elliptical, entire. Verticillasters 4-20, many-flowered, crowded or the lower 1-3 distant. Middle bracts 15-25 mm (including acumen), exceeding the flowers, broadly ovate to suborbicular; acumen 4-10 mm, sparsely or densely lanate. Calyx 9-11 mm; teeth 3·5-4·5 mm, slightly shorter than tube. Corolla 10-15 mm, yellow.{\i  Mountain rocks. • S. Greece} ({\i Peloponnisos}). Gr.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Plants from Taïyetos (var. {\i clandestina}) have a grey indumentum, linear to linear-oblong middle and upper leaves, 10-20 verticillasters with the uppermost crowded, and densely lanate bracts with acumen 6-10 mm. Those from Killini (var.{\i  cyllenea} (Heldr. ex Boiss.) Hayek) have a yellowish indumentum, oblong-elliptical middle and upper leaves, 4-10 distant verticillasters and sparsely lanate bracts with acumen 4-6 mm. The latter are more or less intermediate between var.{\i  clandestina} and {\b 23}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 23. S. scardica} Griseb.,{\i  Spicil. Fl. Rumel.}{\b  2}: 144 (1844). Like {\b 22} but usually densely white-lanate; lower leaves 40-80 × 6-20 mm, oblong-lanceolate; verticillasters crowded into a dense spike; middle bracts 12-20 mm, suborbicular-cordate, sparsely lanate, abruptly acuminate with acumen 2-4 mm; calyx 9-12 mm; calyx-teeth 3-4(-6) mm, usually about half as long as tube. 2n = 32.{\i  Mountain rocks. • C. part of Balkan peninsula.} Al Bu Gr Ju.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 24. S. perfoliata} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 575 (1753). Sparsely hirsute or lanate and densely puberulent perennial 30-45 cm. Leaves 35-70 × 20-30 mm, lanceolate, entire or with few teeth, rounded
\par

\par
142}
\par