{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 calyx; corolla yellow with dark brown or purplish markings inside. 2n = 34.{\i  Rocks and screes. Mountains of S. Spain.} Hs.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Considered by some authors to be only a dwarf variant of {\b 6}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 8. S. hyssopifolia} L.,{\i  Sp. Pl.} 575 (1753). Glabrescent to villous perennial up to 40(-80) cm. Leaves 5-35 × 2-10 mm, linear to ovate or obovate, oblanceolate to obspathulate, entire or shallowly toothed or crenate, sessile or shortly petiolate. Verticillasters 5-15, c. 6-flowered, mostly crowded into a dense spike. Calyx 6-8 mm, with a ring of hairs inside. Corolla c. 10 mm, yellow sometimes tinged with purple. 2n = 30, 32 ± 6B, 34. {\i Rocky places, woods and pastures. • S.W. Europe, mainly in the mountains, extending north-eastwards to the Swiss Jura.} Ga He Hs It Lu [Ge].
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Extremely variable and often divided into a number of subspecies or varieties, of which the following are the most distinct, although in the Pyrenees intermediates between them occur with narrow leaves, shorter than the internodes but with the bracts of subsp. ({\b a}) and often with 2-3 verticillasters only.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b hyssopifolia} : Leaves mostly 4-10 mm wide, oblong-lanceolate or elliptical; lower bracts 9-12 × 9-16 mm, equalling or exceeding calyx, ovate to ovate-cordate, incise-dentate.{\i  Throughout the range of the species except Portugal}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b guillonii}  (Timb.-Lagr.) Rouy,{\i  Fl. Fr. }{\b 11}: 261 (1909) ({\i S. guillonii} Timb.-Lagr.): Middle and upper leaves 2-4 mm wide, narrowly lanceolate; lower bracts 5-8 × 3-4(-6) mm, usually shorter than calyx, linear to ovate, entire or with 1-3 teeth.{\i  S.W. France, Pyrenees, C. Portugal}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 9. S. ovata} Cav.,{\i  Icon. Descr. }{\b 1}: 36 (1791). Stoloniferous, glabrous or sparsely hairy perennial 10-30 cm. Lower leaves 15-30 × 12-18 mm, oblong- or ovate-elliptical, crenate-serrate, cordate or rounded at base, long-petiolate. Verticillasters 4-8, c. 6-flowered, mostly crowded into a short dense spike. Lower bracts 8-15 × 6-10 mm, triangular-ovate to ovate-cordate, incisedentate. Calyx 6-9 mm, with a ring of hairs inside. Corolla 8-10 mm, pale yellow. •{\i  N. Spain }({\i Cordillera Cantábrica}). Hs.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b  S. lurida} Gay in Durieu,{\i  Pl. Astur. Exsicc.} no. 248 (1836), from the mountains of N. & W.C. Spain, is stoloniferous, with leaves 20-25 × 3-4 mm, subentire to shallowly dentate or serrate, bracts c. 7 mm, broadly ovate, dentate and verticillasters densely crowded; it has been variously placed but is probably nearest to {\b 9} (which is also stoloniferous) and may be specifically separable from it.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 10. S. linearifolia} Lam.,{\i  Encycl. Méth. Bot.}{\b  2}: 168 (1786) ({\i S. pungens} Bentham). Glabrescent perennial up to 60 cm. Stem green, 4-angled, glabrescent, the hairs short, often restricted to 2 opposite sides, curved forwards. Leaves 15-40 × 1·5-3·5 mm, linear or lanceolate, entire, spiny-tipped. Verticillasters 4-12, c. 6-flowered, usually crowded. Lower bracts 8-14 × 9-16 mm, cordate-ovate, equalling or exceeding calyx, very coarsely spinose-dentate with numerous teeth and a distinct, elongate, more or less entire terminal tooth. Calyx 5-7 mm, with a ring of hairs inside. Corolla 7-10 mm, yellow, often tinged with purple.{\i  Scrub, cultivated fields and waste places. N., C. & E. Spain, S. Portugal.} Hs Lu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Extremely variable in N. Spain. Dwarf, broader leaved variants are sometimes recognized as a separate variety, subspecies or species and some of them resemble {\b 8}({\b b}). Plants from S. Portugal sometimes referred to this species, or to {\b 12} or {\b 3}, have greenish stems with forwardly curved hairs mainly on 2 opposite sides, leaves 20-30 mm, verticillasters crowded, and lowermost bracts with a distinct long terminal tooth.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b S. giennensis} [Pau ex] Font Quer, {\i Cavanillesia }{\b 1}: 40 (1928) from S.E. Spain (Sierras de Cazorla, Cabrilla and del Cuarto) is somewhat intermediate between {\b 8-10} and{\b  5}. It has leaves 15-25 × 2·5 mm, linear-lanceolate or -spathulate; verticillasters 2-6, usually crowded; bracts with a large, distinct, entire central tooth; calyx c. 8 mm, about equalling the bracts; corolla 9-10 mm, yellow, darker inside. It may represent a distinct species but further material needs to be studied.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 11. S. angustifolia} Lag.,{\i  Gen. Sp. Nov.} 18 (1816) ({\i S. lagascana} Willk.). Like {\b 10} but stem tomentose; leaves 10-18(-30) mm; verticillasters distant; lower, bracts 5-10 × 4-14 mm; spinose-dentate, without a distinct, elongate, terminal tooth.{\i  E. & S. Spain.} Hs.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Plants from E. Spain often have more or less crowded verticillasters, longer leaves, smaller bracts (often with a distinct terminal tooth) and sometimes smaller flowers. They are somewhat intermediate between {\b 10} and {\b 11} and may correspond to{\b  S. tragoriganum} Lag., {\i Gen. Sp. Nov.} 18 (1816) and {\b S. funkiana} Willk., {\i Bot. Zeit.}{\b  17}: 282 (1859). Their status is not clear.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 12. S. reverchonii} Willk., {\i Suppl. Prodr. Fl. Hisp.} 156 (1893). Like {\b 10} but stem tomentose; leaves 15-30 × 5-7 mm, oblong-lanceolate; verticillasters very numerous, usually many-flowered; lower bracts 6-12 × 10-15 mm, reniform, acuminate.{\i  Calcareous sands. • S.W. Spain} ({\i near Ronda}). Hs.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 13. S. javalambrensis} Pau,{\i  Not. Bot. Fl. Esp.}{\b  1}: 26 (1887). Stem up to 20 cm, greenish, more or less densely hairy with forwardly curved and semi-patent hairs. Leaves (8-)10-14(-20) × 1-2 mm, linear to linear-lanceolate or -spathulate, entire or remotely toothed, more or less densely hairy with appressed forwardly directed hairs, often densely glandular-punctate. Verticillasters (2-)3-5, densely crowded. Lowermost bracts (6-)10-11 × 8-10(-12) mm, more or less equalling the calyx, usually with a distinct terminal tooth. Corolla yellow, dark brown inside. •{\i  E. Spain} ({\i Sierra de Javalambre}). Hs.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 14. S. spinulosa} Barnades ex Asso,{\i  Enum. Stirp. Arag.} no. 113 (1784) ({\i S. spinosa} Lam.). Glabrescent to villous-tomentose perennial 10-30 cm. Leaves 10-20 × 7-8 mm, linear or lanceolate with 2-6 divaricate lateral spines. Verticillasters 5-12, c. 6-flowered, mostly crowded. Lower bracts 7-15 × 12-20 mm, exceeding the calyx, broadly ovate or cordate-ovate, very coarsely incise-dentate and spiny. Calyx 8-9 mm, with a ring of hairs inside. Corolla 8-9 mm, pale yellow, not exceeding calyx. 2n = 22, 28, 30. •{\i  E. & C. Spain.} Hs.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 15. S. serrata} Cav. ex Lag., {\i Gen. Sp. Nov.} 18 (1816). Like {\b 14} but more robust with stout woody stems; stem and leaves densely villous-tomentose and glandular; leaves 25-40 × 5-8 mm, entire or spinose-serrate with at least 20 lateral spines, the teeth at c. 45° to the margin; calyx 9-10 mm; corolla c. 10 mm. •{\i  S.E. Spain} ({\i Tobarra, S. of Albacete}). Hs.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 16. S. ilicifolia} Willd.,{\i  Enum. Pl. Hort. Berol.} 606 (1809). Glabrous or very sparsely hairy perennial 20-40 cm, with dense short glandular papillae at least on upper part of stem. Leaves 15-45 × c. 8 mm, linear or lanceolate, with 6-10 divaricate lateral spines. Verticillasters 3-6, many-flowered, more or less distant. Lower bracts 10-15 × 12-16 mm, about equalling calyx, ovate to cordate-ovate, coarsely incise-dentate and spiny. Calyx 5-8 mm, with a ring of hairs inside. Corolla 8-9 mm, pale yellow, exceeding calyx. {\i Dry, rocky or gravelly soils. • E. Spain.} Hs.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 17. S. leucantha} Cav.,{\i  Icon. Descr.}{\b  4}: 2 (1797). Grey- or white-tomentose perennial up to 30 cm. Leaves 7-15 × 2-6 mm, linear
\par

\par
141}
\par