{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 15-60 cm. Leaves 3-8 × 2-6 cm, ovate to ovate-orbicular, coarsely toothed, rarely crenate, truncate to slightly cordate at base. Bracts similar to the leaves, the uppermost usually narrower and with fewer teeth. Calyx 7-10 mm, the teeth c. ¼ as long as the tube. Corolla 14-25 mm, bright yellow with brownish markings; tube straight, with a ring of hairs inside.{\i  Woods and shady places. Most of Europe, but rare in the Mediterranean region and the north.} Al Au Be Br Bu Cz Da Ga Ge Gr Hb He Ho Hs Hu It Ju Po Rm Rs (N, B, C, W, E) Su Tu [Fe No].
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Corolla 14-17 mm; lowest bracts usually more than twice
\par
  as long as internode; not stoloniferous ............................. ({\b c}) subsp. {\b flavidum} 
\par
1 Corolla 17-25 mm; lowest bracts usually less than twice
\par
  as long as internode; usually stoloniferous
\par
2 Verticillasters usually not more than 8-flowered;
\par
  uppermost bracts 1-2 times as long as wide, crenate or
\par
  with more or less obtuse teeth ..................................... ({\b a}) subsp. {\b galeobdolon}
\par
2 Verticillasters 9- to 15-flowered; uppermost bracts
\par
  1½-3½ times as long as wide, with acute or 
\par
  subobtuse teeth ............................................................... ({\b b}) subsp. {\b montanum}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b galeobdolon}  ({\i Lamium galeobdolon} subsp.{\i  vulgare} (Pers.) Hayek): Usually stoloniferous. Lowest bracts shorter than or as long as internode; uppermost bracts 1-2 times as long as wide, crenate or with more or less obtuse teeth. Verticillasters up to 8(-10)-flowered. Corolla 17-21 mm. 2n = 18.{\i  Almost throughout the range of the species, but less frequent in the south}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b montanum}  (Pers.) Ehrend. & Polatschek,{\i  op. cit.} 109 (1966) ({\i Lamium galeobdolon }subsp.{\i  montanum} (Pers.) Hayek): Like subsp. ({\b a}) but lowest bracts usually as long as or up to twice as long as internode; uppermost bracts 1½-3½ times as long as wide, with acute or subobtuse teeth; verticillasters (8-)10- to 15-flowered; corolla 18-25 mm. 2n = 36. {\i Almost throughout the range of the species, but less frequent in the north}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b c}) Subsp. {\b flavidum}  (F. Hermann) Ehrend. & Polatschek, {\i op. cit.} 110 (1966): Not stoloniferous. Lowest bracts at least twice as long as internode; uppermost bracts 1½-4 times as long as wide, with acute patent teeth. Verticillasters 10- to 14-flowered. Corolla 14-17 mm. 2n = 18. •{\i  Alps, Appennini, N.W. Jugoslavia}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc {\b 13.              Leonurus }               L.
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc By P.W. Ball.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Biennial or perennial herbs. Verticillasters many-flowered, crowded or more or less distant. Calyx campanulate, 5- or 10-veined, with 5 subequal spinose teeth. Corolla 2-lipped; tube shorter than calyx, not dilated at throat; upper lip hooded; lower lip 3-lobed. Nutlets trigonous, truncate and hairy at apex.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Literature: J. Holub,{\i  Nov. Bot. Horti Bot. Univ. Carol. Prag.}{\b  2}: 24-25 (1961). E. Topa,{\i  Studii Cerc. Sti. Cluj }{\b 3-4}: 1-10 (1951).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 Leaves digitately 3- to 7-lobed; corolla 8-12 mm,
\par
 distinctly exceeding calyx ............................................................... {\b 1. cardiaca}
\par
Leaves entire, coarsely and irregularly crenate or toothed;
\par
 corolla 5-7 mm, not or scarcely exceeding calyx ................. {\b 2. marrubiastrum}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. L. cardiaca} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 584 (1753) (incl. {\i L. glaucescens} Ledeb., {\i L. quinquelobatus} Usteri, {\i L. tataricus} L.,{\i  L. villosus} Desf. ex Sprengel). Glabrous to villous perennial 30-200 cm. Leaves 3-12 × 2-4 cm, the lower digitately 5- to 7-lobed, the lobes toothed or shallowly lobed, the upper shallowly to deeply 3-fid. Calyx 3·5-8 mm, the tube very prominently 5-veined; teeth almost as long as tube, the lower deflexed. Corolla 8-12 mm, distinctly exceeding calyx, white or pale pink, sometimes with purple spots; upper lip densely villous on back; tube with a ring of hairs inside. Nutlets hispid at apex. 2n = 18.{\i  Most of Europe, but absent from the extreme north, the islands, and much of the Mediterranean region.} Al Au Be Bu Cz Da Fe Ga Ge Gr He Ho Hs Hu It Ju No Po Rm Rs (N, B, C, W, K, E) Su Tu [Br].
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Plants in the eastern part of the range usually have densely hairy stems with patent hairs 1-2 mm, leaves and bracts deeply divided and calyx 4·5-5(-8) mm, and are often regarded as a separate species or subspecies (subsp. {\b villosus} (Desf. ex Sprengel) Hyl.,{\i  Uppsala Univ. Årsskr. }{\b 1945}({\b 7}): 273 (1945)); those in the central and western part usually have glabrous or sparsely hairy stems with recurved hairs 0·5 mm, leaves and bracts shallowly lobed and calyx 3·5-4(-5) mm. Sparsely hairy variants, however, are sometimes found in E. Europe and occasionally plants with a mixture of patent and recurved hairs occur.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. L. marrubiastrum} L.,{\i  Sp. Pl.} 584 (1753) ({\i Chaiturus leonuroides} Willd.,{\i  C. marrubiastrum} (L.) Ehrh. ex Spenner). Grey-pubescent biennial up to 125 cm. Leaves 2-6 × 1-3 cm, the lower ovate to suborbicular, coarsely and irregularly toothed or crenate, the middle and upper lanceolate to ovate, coarsely toothed. Calyx 5-7 mm, the tube with 10 indistinct veins; teeth shorter than tube, more or less patent. Corolla 5-7 mm, not or scarcely exceeding calyx, pale pink; upper lip pubescent on back; tube without a ring of hairs inside. Nutlets puberulent at apex. 2n = 24.{\i  C. & E. Europe, northwards to Czechoslovakia and C. Russia, and extending westwards to N.W. Italy; casual further north.} Au Bu Cz Ge Gr Hu It Ju Po Rm Rs (C, W, K, E) [Ga He]
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc {\b 14.           Moluccella}                L.
\par
 
\pard\f0\fs24\qc By P.W. Ball.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Annual or possibly short-lived perennial herbs. Verticillasters 6- to 10-flowered, distant; bracteoles subulate, spinose, deflexed. Calyx infundibuliform, more or less 2-lipped with greatly enlarged, reticulate-veined, membranous lips. Corolla 2-lipped; upper lip hooded; lower lip 3-lobed. Nutlets trigonous, truncate at apex.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. M. spinosa} L.,{\i  Sp. Pl.} 587 (1753). Glabrous annual or possibly short-lived perennial 30-100 cm. Leaves 2-6 × 2-6 cm, ovate to orbicular-ovate, coarsely serrate or incised. Calyx-tube c. 10 mm, with papilliform glands; lips 15-20 mm, the upper triangular, erect, with a single stout spine, the lower with 7-10 spines 5-10 mm long. Corolla 25-40 mm, white or pale pink, villous. {\i Mediterranean region; rare and apparently decreasing.} Gr Hs It Si [Bl].
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc {\b 15.            Ballota }                L.
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc By A. Patzak.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Perennial herbs or small shrubs. Verticillasters few- to many-flowered. Bracteoles present. Calyx 10-veined; limb undulate, or with 5-16 crenations or teeth, the lobes more or less mucronate or gradually narrowed into an awn, rarely entire. Corolla-tube shorter than or equalling calyx, with a ring of hairs inside. Stamens parallel, the outer pair the longer; anther-cells diverging. Style-branches subequal. Nutlets oblong, rounded at apex.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Measurements relating to the calyx do not include awns or mucros.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Literature: A. Patzak,{\i  Ann. Naturh. Mus.} ({\i Wien}){\b  62}: 57-86 (1958);{\b  63}: 33-81 
\par
(1959);{\b  64}: 42-56 (1961).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Small shrub; bracteoles pungent ................................................ {\b 1. frutescens} 
\par
1 Herb; bracteoles not pungent
\par
2 Verticillasters 6- to 12-flowered; calyx-limb undulate
\par
  or irregularly crenate, smooth or mucronulate
\par
3 Calyx-limb (12-)15-20 mm in diameter .................................. {\b 2. acetabulosa}
\par
3 Calyx-limb 7-8 mm in diameter ..................................... {\b 3. pseudodictamnus}
\par

\par
149}
\par