{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Literature: J. Briquet,{\i  Mém. Cour. Acad. Roy. Sci. Belg}. {\b 52}({\b 9}): 1-323 (1893). O. M. Gritsenko et al., {\i Ukr. Bot. Zur.}{\b  27}: 241-248 (1970). J. T. Henrard, {\i Nederl. Kruidk. Arch.}{\b  1918}: 158-188 (1919). A. Müntzing,{\i  Hereditas }{\b 10}: 241-260 (1928);{\b  13}: 185-341 (1930); {\b 16}: 73-154 (1932). C. C. Townsend,{\i  Watsonia}{\b  5}: 143-149 (1962). Z. Slaviková,{\i  Act. Univ. Carol.} ({\i Biol}.) {\b 1963}: 255-263 (1963);{\i  Nov. Bot. Horti Bot. Reg. Univ. Carol. Prag.}{\b  1963}: 39-43 (1963).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Plant with rigid, often yellowish, hairs; stem swollen 
\par
  at the nodes when fresh
\par
2 Stem with ± dense appressed hairs on all 4 sides; calyx
\par
  with setae confined to the teeth and sinuses ...............................{\b  7. pubescens}
\par
2 Stem without appressed hairs or with hairs only on 
\par
  opposite sides; calyx-tube with setae at least on the ribs
\par
3 Corolla (22-)27-34 mm, pale yellow, usually with large 
\par
  purple blotch on the lower lip ........................................................ {\b 6. speciosa}
\par
3 Corolla 15-20(-28) mm, pink (rarely white or pale 
\par
  yellow) with darker markings
\par
4 Corolla with the middle lobe of the lower lip broad 
\par
  and flat, entire ................................................................................... {\b 8. tetrahit}
\par
4 Corolla with the middle lobe of the lower lip narrower,
\par
  convex with the margins ± deflexed, distinctly emarginate .............. {\b 9. bifida}
\par
1 Plant lacking rigid hairs; stem not swollen at the nodes
\par
5 Leaves and calyx densely and softly sericeous; bracteoles 
\par
  of the lower verticillasters usually shorter than the calyx-tube
\par
6 Corolla usually pale yellow, rarely pink with purple
\par
  blotches; leaves lanceolate to lanceolate-ovate,
\par
  attenuate into the petiole, subacute to acute ................................... {\b 1. segetum}
\par
6 Corolla purple; leaves broadly ovate, truncate to 
\par
  subcordate at the base, obtuse ...................................................... {\b 2. pyrenaica}
\par
5 Leaves and calyx pubescent to subglabrous, never sericeous;
\par
   outer bracteoles of the lower verticillasters usually exceeding
\par
    the calyx-tube
\par
7 Stem subterete, pruinose, especially near the nodes,
\par
  usually glabrous below the middle .................................................... {\b 5. reuteri}
\par
7 Stem quadrangular, not pruinose, hairy almost to the base
\par
8 Calyx green, with patent, translucent, smooth or finely
\par
  punctate hairs; leaves broadly ovate to ovate-lanceolate .............. {\b 3. ladanum}
\par
8 Calyx whitish, with closely appressed, opaque and ± 
\par
  densely papillose hairs and sometimes also with patent
\par
  hairs; leaves linear to lanceolate (rarely ovate) ........................ {\b 4. angustifolia} 
\par
                                          

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Subgen. {\b Ladanum} Reichenb. Vegetative parts, bracteoles and calyx with soft, crispate or patent hairs, and frequently also with glandular hairs, but without rigid yellowish hairs; stem 4-angled or terete, not swollen at the nodes.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. G. segetum} Necker, {\i Hist. Comment. Acad. Elect. Theod-. Palat.}{\b  2}: 474 (1770) ({\i G. dubia} Leers). Stem up to 50 cm, 4-angled, with crispate hairs and glandular hairs. Leaves lanceolate to ovate, dentate, cuneate at the base, subacute. Calyx 7-10 mm, green, densely and softly patent-hairy with smooth hairs, glandular. Corolla (20-)25-30(-35) mm, pale yellow, rarely lilac, with purple blotches. 2n = 16.{\i  Calcifuge. •  From Wales and N.E. Spain eastwards to Denmark and N.E. Italy}. Be Br Da Ga Ge He Ho Hs It [Au Cz Hu Ju Rm].
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   {\b  2. G. pyrenaica} Bartl., {\i Ind. Sem. Horti Goetting.}{\b  1848}: 4 (1848). Stems up to 40 cm, sometimes very dwarf, 4-angled, with soft crispate hairs and glandular hairs. Leaves ovate to deltate-ovate, dentate, truncate or subcordate at base; apex very obtuse. Calyx 8-10 mm, green, with dense, smooth, soft, patent hairs. Corolla 17-25 mm, pinkish-purple, usually with darker blotches. 2n = 16.{\i  Sandy or gravelly ground by mountain streams; calcifuge. • E. Pyrenees.} Ga Hs.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   {\b  3. G. ladanum} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 579 (1753) ({\i G. intermedia} Vill.). Stem up to 40 cm, with crispate hairs and patent, glandular hairs. Leaves ovate-lanceolate to broadly ovate, dentate, cuneate to subtruncate (rarely attenuate) at the base. Calyx 8-12 mm, green, with smooth or finely punctate, patent, translucent hairs. Corolla 15-28 mm, deep pink with yellow blotches. 2n = 16.{\i  Somewhat calcifuge. Most of Europe except the islands and the extreme south.} Al Au Be Bu Co Cz Da Fe Ga Ge He Ho Hs Hu It Ju  No Po Rm Rs (N, B, C, W, K, E) Su.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   {\b  4. G. angustifolia} Ehrh. ex Hoffm.,{\i  Deutschl. Fl.} ed. 2, {\b 2}: 8 (1804) ({\i G. ladanum} subsp.{\i  angustifolia} Gaudin, G. ladanum sensu Coste, non L.). Stem up to 40 cm, with crispate hairs, with or without glandular hairs. Leaves narrowly linear to lanceolate-ovate or rarely ovate, entire or dentate, rarely glabrous, cuneate at base. Calyx 8-13 mm; tube canescent to villous with strongly papillose, opaque hairs. Corolla 14-24 mm, deep reddish-pink with yellow blotches (rarely white). 2n = 16. {\i W., C. & S. Europe, eastwards to Poland and Bulgaria.} Au Be Br Bu Cz *Da Ga Ge He Ho Hs Hu It Ju Po Rm [Hb Su].
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   {\b  5. G. reuteri} Reichenb. fil., {\i Icon. Fl. Germ.}{\b  18}: 17 (1856). Stem up to c. 80 cm, wiry, glabrous or with very short, appressed hairs, especially above. Leaves lanceolate to almost linear, dentate, subacute, attenuate at base. Calyx 9-15 mm, appressed-hairy and sometimes shortly glandular. Corolla 10-20 mm, deep pink (rarely white), with yellow blotches.{\i  Dry screes and rocks.• Maritime Alps.} Ga It.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Perhaps only a subspecies of {\b 4}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Subgen.{\b  Galeopsis}. Vegetative parts and usually also bracteoles and calyx with rigid, yellowish hairs and glandular hairs, sometimes with appressed hairs; stem 4-angled, more or less swollen at the nodes.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   {\b  6. G. speciosa} Miller, {\i Gard. Dict}. ed. 8, no. 3 (1768). Stem up to 100 cm, the angles setose; opposite sides, at least above, with appressed hairs. Leaves dentate, ovate to ovate-lanceolate, acuminate. Bracteoles setose, without soft hairs. Calyx 12-17 mm, with teeth, sinuses and ribs setose, otherwise subglabrous or with scattered smaller setae. Corolla (22-)27-34 mm, yellow, usually with a large purple blotch on lower lip. 2n = 16. {\i Europe, except most of the islands and much of the south}. Al Au Be Br Bu Cz Da Fe Ga Ge He Ho Hu It Ju No Po Rm Rs (N, B, C, W, E) Su [Hb].
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   {\b  7. G. pubescens} Besser,{\i  Prim. Fl. Galic.}{\b  2}: 27 (1809). Stem up to 50 cm, with dense, appressed, whitish hairs on all 4 sides, the angles usually sparsely setose. Leaves ovate, acuminate, dentate. Bracteoles softly hairy, with weak setae at the margins. Calyx 7-11 mm. Corolla 20-25 mm, bright pinkish-red, usually with yellow blotches; central lobe of lower lip broad, rounded. 2n = 16. •{\i  C. Europe, extending to S.C. France, C. Italy, Albania and C. Ukraine.} Al Au ?Bu Cz Ga Ge He Hu It Ju Po Rm Rs (C, W) [Be Ho].
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 8. G. tetrahit} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 579 (1753). Stems up to 50 cm, the angles setose; opposite sides with appressed hairs. Leaves lanceolate to broadly ovate, acuminate, dentate. Bracteoles setose, with few or no soft hairs. Calyx 12-14 mm. Corolla 15-20(-28) mm, pink (rarely white or pale yellow), with darker markings; middle lobe of lower lip broad, entire, flat. 2n = 32. {\i Most of Europe, but rare in the south-east.} All except Az Bl Cr Gr Rs (K, E) Sa Sb Si Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Plants from the French Alps with terete, glaucous stems have been called subsp.{\b  glaucocerata} P. Fourn.,{\i  Quatre Fl. Fr.} 825 (1937); further information about them is required.
\par

\par
146}
\par
