{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 6. L. maculatum} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} ed. 2, 809 (1763). Sparsely to densely hairy perennial 15-80 cm. Leaves 10-80 × 10-70 mm, triangular-ovate, coarsely and irregularly crenate-serrate. Calyx 8-15 mm, the teeth shorter to longer than tube. Corolla 20-35 mm, pinkish-purple, rarely white or brownish-purple; tube 10-18 mm, curved, equalling or longer than calyx; upper lip 7-14 mm, entire; lateral lobes subulate; lower lip 4-6 mm, obcordate. Anthers hairy. 2n = 18.{\i  Europe northwards to} c. 54° {\i N. in Germany and} c. 59°{\i  N. in N.C. Russia, but absent from most of the islands.} Al Au Be Bu Cz Ga Ge Gr He Ho Hs Hu It Ju Lu Po Rm Rs (N, B, C, W, K, E) Sa Tu [Br Su].
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   A very variable species, especially in the shape and toothing of the leaves, length of the calyx-teeth and corolla-colour. It does not at the moment seem possible to recognize subspecies, as although there seems to be a good correlation of characters in some areas this is not maintained elsewhere.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 7. L. album} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 579 (1753) (incl. {\i L. dumeticola} Klokov). Sparsely to densely hairy perennial 20-80 cm. Leaves 25-120 × 10-50 mm, ovate or ovate-oblong, coarsely serrate or crenate-serrate. Calyx 9-13(-15) mm, the teeth about as long as tube. Corolla (18-)20-25 mm, white; tube 9-14 mm, about as long as or slightly longer than calyx; upper lip 7-12 mm, entire or crenulate; lateral lobes with 2-3 small teeth; lower lip c. 5 mm, obcordate. Anthers hairy. 2n = 18.{\i  Most of Europe, but rare in the south and absent from many islands.} Au Be Br Bu Cz Da Fe Ga Ge Gr He Ho Hs Hu It Ju No Po Rm Rs (N, B, C, W, K, E) Su [Hb Is].
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 8. L. moschatum} Miller,{\i  Gard. Dict}. ed. 8, no. 4 (1768). Sparsely hairy annual 10-30 cm. Leaves 15-70 × 12-50 mm, ovate-orbicular to triangular-ovate, crenate to coarsely crenate-serrate. Calyx 7-14 mm, the teeth slightly longer than tube. Corolla (12-)16-25 mm, white; tube 6-12 mm, shorter than calyx; upper lip 10-12 mm, crenulate; lateral lobes triangular; lower lip 6-8 mm, obovate-orbicular. Anthers hairy. 2n = 18. {\i E. part of Balkan peninsula, Aegean region.} ?Bu Cr Gr Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 9. L. bifidum} Cyr.,{\i  Pl. Rar. Neap.}{\b  1}: 22 (1788). Glabrous or pubescent annual 10-40 cm. Leaves 10-40 × 8-25 mm, triangular-ovate, crenate or crenate-serrate, mostly irregularly incised. Calyx 8-10 mm, the teeth shorter than tube. Corolla 12-25 mm; tube 12-14 mm, longer than calyx; upper lip 6-8 mm, 2-fid; lateral lobes linear; lower lip c. 5 mm, obovate. Anthers hairy.{\i  Open habitats. S. Europe, from Bulgaria westwards.} Bu Co Cr Gr It Ju Lu Rm Sa Si.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Corolla white ..................................................................... ({\b a}) subsp. {\b bifidum}
\par
1 Corolla pink or purple
\par
2 Corolla 20-25 mm, purple; lower leaves rounded at base
\par
  ....................................................................................... ({\b b}) subsp. {\b balcanicum}
\par
2 Corolla 12-15 mm, pink; lower leaves cordate at base
\par
  ................................................................................... ({\b c}) subsp. {\b albimontanum}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b bifidum} : Lower leaves incised, cordate to almost truncate at base. Calyx-teeth distinctly shorter than tube. Corolla 20-25 mm, white. {\i Mediterranean region from Corse and Sardegna eastwards; C. Portugal}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b balcanicum}  Velen., {\i Sitz.-Ber. Böhm. Ges. Wiss.} ({\i Math.-Nat. Kl.}) {\b 1893}({\b 37}): 54 (1893): Lower leaves incised, rounded at base. Calyx-teeth slightly shorter than tube. Corolla 20-25 mm, purple. •{\i  Bulgaria, E. Jugoslavia, S. Romania.}
\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b c}) Subsp. {\b albimontanum}  Rech. fil., {\i Denkschr. Akad. Wiss. Math.-Nat. Kl. }({\i Wien}) {\b 105}({\b 2, 1}): 120 (1943): Lower leaves not incised, cordate at base. Calyx-teeth slightly shorter than tube. Corolla 12-15 mm, pink. •{\i  Kriti}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 10. L. purpureum} L.,{\i  Sp. Pl.} 579 (1753). Pubescent annual up to 40(-70) cm. Leaves 10-50 × 10-30 mm, ovate or ovate-orbicular, crenate or crenate-serrate. Lower bracts longer than wide, petiolate. Calyx 5-7 mm, the teeth about as long as tube. Corolla 10-18(-23) mm, pinkish-purple; tube 7-12 mm, straight, exceeding the calyx; upper lip 4-6 mm, entire; lateral lobes minute, linear; lower lip c. 2 mm, obcordate. Anthers hairy. 2n = 18. {\i Cultivated ground. Most of Europe.} All except Bl Cr Sb Si, but only naturalized in Is.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 11. L. hybridum} Vill.,{\i  Hist. Pl. Dauph.}{\b  1}: 251 (1786) ({\i L. hybridum }subsp.{\i  dissectum} (With.) Gams). Like {\b 10} but leaves and bracts irregularly incised, the upper leaves often somewhat decurrent along the petiole; corolla 10-15 mm; upper lip 3-4 mm. 2n = 36. {\i Cultivated ground. Most of Europe except the southeast.} Au Be Br Co Da Fa Fe Ga Ge Hb He Ho Hs It Ju Lu No Po Rm Rs (N, B, C, W) Sa Su.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   This appears to be an allopolyploid derived from {\b 10} and probably{\b  8} (Bernström, 1955).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 12. L. moluccellifolium} Fries,{\i  Nov. Fl. Suec.} 72 (1819) ({\i L. hybridum} subsp.{\i  intermedium} Gams). Pubescent annual up to 40 cm. Leaves 10-50 × 10-60 mm, ovate-orbicular, crenate or crenate-dentate. Lower bracts about as long as wide, distinctly petiolate. Calyx 8-12 mm, the teeth slightly longer than tube. Corolla 14-20 mm, pinkish-purple; tube 10-15 mm, straight, slightly exceeding the calyx; upper lip 4-5·5 mm, entire; lateral lobes minute, linear; lower lip c. 4 mm, obcordate. Anthers hairy. 2n = 36.{\i  Cultivated ground. N. Europe to} c. 67° {\i N. in Fennoscandia, and extending southwards to} c. 52° 30'{\i  in Germany.} Br Da Fa Fe Ge Hb No Rs (N, B) Su [Is Lu].
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   This appears to be an allopolyploid derived from {\b 10} and {\b 13} (Bernström, 1955).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28     {\b 13. L. amplexicaule} L.,{\i  Sp. Pl.} 579 (1753). Sparsely to densely pubescent annual up to 30(-40) cm. Leaves 7-25 × 7-25 mm, orbicular or ovate-orbicular, crenate or lobed with obtuse lobes. Bracts up to 30 × 40 mm, usually wider than long, shallowly lobed, sessile or subsessile, cordate and somewhat amplexicaul. Calyx 5-7 mm, the teeth shorter or longer than tube. Corolla 10-20(-25) mm, pinkish-purple; tube 10-14 mm, straight, distinctly exceeding calyx; upper lip 3-5 mm, entire; lateral lobes minute or absent; lower lip 1·5-2·5 mm, obcordate. Anthers hairy.{\i  Cultivated ground. Almost throughout Europe.} All except Fa Sb, but only naturalized in Is.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b amplexicaule}  (incl.{\i  L. rumelicum} Velen.): Sparsely to densely appressed-pubescent; leaves and bracts not divided or divided to less than ½ way. 2n = 18. {\i Throughout the range of the species}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b orientale}  Pacz., {\i Florogr. Fitogeogr. Issled. Kalm. Step.} 103 (1892) ({\i L. paczoskianum }Vorosch.): Densely patent-pubescent; leaves and bracts divided to more than ½-way. {\i E. Ukraine, S.E. Russia.}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc {\b 12.             Lamiastrum }                Heister ex Fabr.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc ({\i Galeobdolon}  Adanson)
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc By P.W. Ball.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Like{\i  Lamium} but corolla yellow; lower lip of the corolla with 3 more or less equal lobes, the middle lobe more or less triangular, acute.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Literature: S. Wegmuller,{\i  Watsonia}{\b  8}: 277-288 (1971).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. L. galeobdolon} (L.) Ehrend. & Polatschek,{\i  Österr. Bot. Zeitschr.}{\b  113}: 108 (1966) ({\i Galeobdolon luteum} Hudson, {\i Lamium galeobdolon} (L.) L.). Sparsely to densely hairy, erect perennial
\par

\par
148}
\par