{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 9. G. bifida} Boenn., {\i Prodr. Fl. Monast. }178 (1824). Like {\b 8} but corolla rarely more than 15 mm; middle lobe of lower lip narrower, distinctly emarginate, the sides more or less deflexed so that the surface appears convex. 2n = 32.{\i  Most of Europe, but absent from many of the islands and the south-west.} Au Be Br Bu Cz Da Fe Ga Ge Hb He Ho Hu It Ju No Po Rm Rs (N, B, C, W, K, E) Su.
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28\qc {\b 11.            Lamium }            L.
\par
\pard\f0\fs24\qc By P.W. Ball.
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28 Annual or perennial herbs. Verticillasters crowded. Calyx tubular or campanulate, 5-veined, with 5 equal or subequal teeth. Corolla white, pink or purple, 2-lipped; upper lip hooded; lower lip obcordate or broadly obovate with or without small lateral lobes. Anther-cells divaricate. Nutlets trigonous, truncate at apex.
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28  Literature: P. Bernstrom,{\i  Hereditas}{\b  41}: 1-122 (1955) (Species{\b  9-13} only).
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28 {\b  Wiedemannia orientalis} Fischer & Meyer,{\i  Ind. Sem. Horti Petrop.}{\b  4}: 51 (1838), native to S.W. Asia, has been recorded once from near Istanbul, but probably only as a casual. It is a purple-flowered annual, differing from species of {\i Lamium} mainly in the distinctly 2-lipped calyx.
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Upper lip of corolla 2-fid
\par 2 Annual; corolla 12-25 mm; leaves mostly irregularly incised ...... {\b 9. bifidum}
\par 2 Perennial; corolla (22-)25-40 mm
\par 3 Lower leaves crenate or variously toothed .............................. {\b 2. garganicum}
\par 3 Lower leaves deeply divided into (3-)5 segments which 
\par  are themselves lobed .............................................................. {\b 4. glaberrimum}
\par 1 Upper lip of corolla entire, minutely toothed or emarginate
\par 4 Anthers glabrous
\par 5 Calyx 12-20 mm; corolla-tube straight, much longer than calyx .... {\b 1. orvala}
\par 5 Calyx 7-12 mm; corolla-tube curved at base, shorter 
\par  than or about as long as calyx .................................................... {\b 5. flexuosum}
\par 4 Anthers hairy
\par 6 Corolla-tube curved at base
\par 7 Annual; corolla with conspicuous, triangular lateral lobes ..... {\b 8. moschatum}
\par 7 Perennial; corolla with minute, linear or narrowly 
\par  subulate lateral lobes
\par 8 Lateral lobes of the corolla composed of 1 tooth;
\par  corolla pink, purple or brownish-purple, rarely white ............... {\b 6. maculatum}
\par 8 Lateral lobes of the corolla composed of 2-3 teeth;
\par  corolla white ...................................................................................... {\b 7. album}
\par 6 Corolla-tube straight
\par 9 Corolla 25-40 mm; perennial .................................................. {\b 2. garganicum}
\par 9 Corolla not more than 20(-25) mm
\par 10 Perennial; calyx-teeth c. 1/2 as long as tube ................................ {\b 3. corsicum}
\par 10 Annual; calyx-teeth about as long as or longer than tube
\par 11 Calyx 8-12 mm, the teeth longer than the tube; lower 
\par   lip of corolla c. 4 mm .................................................... {\b 12. moluccellifolium}
\par 11 Calyx 5-7 mm, the teeth not longer than the tube;
\par   lower lip of corolla 1·5-2·5 mm
\par 12 Bracts ± amplexicaul, usually wider than long ................. {\b 13. amplexicaule}
\par 12 Bracts not amplexicaul, longer than wide
\par 13 Leaves and bracts crenate or crenate-serrate, not
\par   decurrent along petiole ........................................................... {\b 10. purpureum}
\par 13 Leaves and bracts incise-dentate, the upper ± decurrent
\par   along petiole ............................................................................. {\b 11. hybridum}
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. L. orvala} L., {\i Syst. Nat}. ed. 10,{\b  2}: 1099 (1759). Glabrous or sparsely hairy perennial 40-100 cm. Leaves 40-150 × 30-90(-120) mm, triangular-ovate, coarsely and irregularly toothed. Calyx 12-20 mm, the teeth shorter than to longer than tube. Corolla 25-45 mm, pink to dark purple, rarely white; tube 15-20 mm, straight, longer than calyx; upper lip 15-20 mm irregularly toothed, the lateral lobes short, triangular; lower lip 15-20 mm, irregularly toothed. Anthers glabrous. •{\i  From N. Italy and W. Austria to W. Jugoslavia and S. Hungary}. Au Hu It Ju ?Rs (W).
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. L. garganicum} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} ed. 2, 808 (1763). Perennial up to 50 cm. Leaves up to 70 × 40 mm, cordate-ovate to reniform, crenate to crenate-serrate. Calyx 7·5-18 mm, the teeth shorter than or rarely about as long as tube. Corolla 25-40 mm, pink to purple, rarely white; tube 15-25 mm, straight, much longer than calyx; upper lip 10-15 mm, 2-fid or irregularly toothed; lateral lobes short, triangular; lower lip 10-15 mm, obcordate. Anthers hairy. 2n = 18.{\i  Mountain rocks. S. Europe, from Corse and S. France to the Aegean region.} Al Bu Co Cr Ga Gr It Ju Rm Tu.
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Stem not more than 10 cm; leaves reniform or cordate-
\par  orbicular ............................................................................... ({\b c}) subsp. {\b pictum} 
\par 1 Stem usually more than 10 cm; leaves cordate-ovate
\par 2 Stem, leaves and calyx densely hairy .......................... ({\b a}) subsp. {\b garganicum}
\par 2 Stem, leaves and calyx sparsely hairy to subglabrous . ({\b b}) subsp. {\b laevigatum}
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b garganicum}  (incl.{\i  L. garganicum} subsp. {\i striatum} (Sibth. & Sm.) Hayek): Stem up to 50 cm, densely hairy; leaves 15-70 × 10-40 mm, cordate-ovate, densely hairy; upper lip of corolla often 2-fid.{\i  S. Italy; C. & S. parts of Balkan peninsula; Aegean region}.
\par
\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b laevigatum}  Arcangeli, {\i Comp. Fl. Ital.} 555 (1882) (incl. {\i L. garganicum} subsp.{\i  glabratum} (Griseb.) Briq.,{\i  L. longiflorum} Ten.): Like subsp. ({\b a}) but sparsely hairy to subglabrous; upper lip of the corolla usually shallowly toothed, not 2-fid. {\i N. part of the range of the species}.
\par
\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b c}) Subsp. {\b pictum}  (Boiss. & Heldr.) P. W. Ball, {\i Bot. Jour. Linn. Soc.}{\b  65}: 350 (1972) ({\i L. pictum} Boiss. & Heldr.): Stem not more than 10 cm, usually glabrous; leaves 7-15 × 8-20 mm, reniform or cordate-orbicular, glabrous or sparsely hairy; upper lip of corolla 2-fid. {\i Mountains of C. & S. Greece}.
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 3. L. corsicum} Gren. & Godron, {\i Fl. Fr.}{\b  2}: 679 (1853). Like {\b 2}(a) but stem glabrescent; leaves not more than 40 × 30 mm, triangular-ovate, crenate; calyx c. 10 mm, the teeth about 1/2 as long as tube; corolla 15-20 mm. 2n = 18.{\i  Mountain rocks and screes. • Corse, Sardegna.} Co Sa.
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28  This species may be better considered as another subspecies of {\b 2}.
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 4. L. glaberrimum} Taliev, {\i Bull. Jard. Bot. Pétersb.}{\b  2}: 136 (1902). Glabrous perennial 20-30 cm. Leaves 5-10(-16) × 10-20 mm, ovate to reniform, deeply divided into (3-)5 segments which are themselves lobed. Calyx 11-15 mm, the teeth shorter than tube. Corolla (22-)30-35 mm, pink; tube 17-25 mm, straight, much longer than calyx; upper lip c. 10 mm, 2-fid; lateral lobes subulate; lower lip obcordate. Anthers hairy. {\i Rocky hillsides and forest-margins. • Krym.} Rs (K).
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 5. L. flexuosum} Ten., {\i Fl. Nap.}{\b  1},{\i  Prodr}.: 34 (1811). Sparsely to densely hairy perennial 15-60 cm. Leaves 30-60 × 20-40 mm, cordate-ovate to lanceolate, crenate to serrate. Calyx 7-12 mm, the teeth about as long as tube. Corolla 15-20(-25) mm, white or pink; tube c. 10 mm, curved, equalling or shorter than calyx; upper lip 8-10 mm, entire; lateral lobes linear; lower lip c. 5 mm, obcordate. Anthers glabrous.{\i  W. Mediterranean region.} Ga Hs It Si.
\par
\par 147}
\par