{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 or cordate at base, semiamplexicaul and often perfoliate. Verticillasters 10 or more, 6- to 15-flowered, distant. Middle bracts c. 25 × 15 mm, exceeding flowers, ovate, acuminate. Calyx 10-11 mm; teeth c. 5 mm, almost as long as tube. Corolla c. 14 mm, yellow.{\i  Mountain rocks. N. Greece.} Gr. ({\i Anatolia}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Sect. HESIODIA Bentham. Annuals. Bracts more or less entire, leaf-like.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 25. S. montana} L.,{\i  Sp. Pl.} 575 (1753). Sparsely to densely villous-lanate annual up to 35 cm. Leaves 5-30 × 2-8 mm, oblong-lanceolate, dentate. Verticillasters c. 6-flowered, distant or more or less crowded. Calyx 6-8 mm; teeth 3-4 mm, ovate, aristate, the arista 1-2 mm. Corolla shorter than to about equalling calyx, yellow, or black with yellow lower lip.{\i  S. & S.C. Europe; S. part of U.S.S.R}. Al Au Bu Cz Ga Gr Hs Hu It Ju Rm Rs (C, W, K, E) Tu [Ge].
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Middle lobe of lower lip of corolla less than 1 mm ...... ({\b c}) subsp. {\b ebracteata}
\par
1 Middle lobe of lower lip of corolla 1-2 mm
\par
2 Plant sparsely to moderately villous-lanate; corolla
\par
  black or brownish-black, usually with yellow lower lip .... ({\b a}) subsp. {\b montana}
\par
2 Plant densely villous-lanate; corolla yellow ........................ ({\b b}) subsp. {\b remota}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b montana}  (incl.{\i  S. comosa} (Rochel) Stankov): Sparsely to moderately densely villous-lanate. Corolla black or brownish-black, usually with a yellow lower lip; middle lobe of lower lip 1-2 mm; tube pubescent to villous. 2n = 16.{\i  Almost throughout the range of the species except Spain}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b remota}  (D'Urv.) Heywood,{\i  Bot. Jour. Linn. Soc.}{\b  65}: 355 (1972) ({\i S. remota} D'Urv.): Like subsp. ({\b a}) but densely villous-lanate; corolla yellow.{\i  Aegean region}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b c}) Subsp. {\b ebracteata}  (Asso) Murb.,{\i  Lunds Univ. Årsskr.}{\b  34}({\b 7}): 35 (1898): Sparsely villous-lanate. Corolla yellow; middle lobe of lower lip c. 0·8 mm; tube puberulent.{\i  Spain}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 26. S. lanata} L.,{\i  Fl. Palaest.} 22 (1756). Villous or hirsute annual 10-30 cm. Stem with short glandular hairs. Leaves 15-35 × 8-15 mm, ovate, crenate or crenate-dentate. Verticillasters c. 6-flowered, distant. Calyx 5-7 mm, more or less 2-lipped; upper tooth 2·5-4 mm, lower 1·5-3 mm, usually shorter than upper, rarely subequal, all lanceolate, mucronate. Corolla about as long as calyx, yellow with black lips.{\i  Cultivated fields and waste places. Aegean region and S. part of Balkan peninsula.} Bu Gr Ju.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 27. S. romana} L.,{\i  Sp. Pl.} 575 (1753). Villous-lanate annual up to 30 cm. Stem eglandular. Leaves 10-25 × 5-12 mm, oblong-ovate, dentate or crenate-dentate. Verticillasters c. 6-flowered, distant. Calyx 6-10 mm, 2-lipped; upper tooth broadly ovate, lower lanceolate, all with a straight, pungent apex. Corolla 7-10 mm, yellow, white or purple, equalling or slightly exceeding calyx.{\i  Dry places. W. & C. Mediterranean region, Portugal.} Al Bl Co Ga Gr Hs It Ju Lu Sa Si.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b romana} : Sparsely villous-lanate. Corolla yellow or white; upper lip 2-3 × 0·8-1 mm. 2n = 28.{\i  From N.W. Jugoslavia and Sicilia westwards}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b purpurea}  (Talbot ex Bentham) Heywood, {\i Bot. Jour. Linn. Soc.}{\b  65}: 355 (1972) ({\i S. purpurea} Talbot ex Bentham): Densely villous-lanate. Corolla purple or white; upper lip 4-5 × 1-2 mm. •{\i  W. part of Balkan peninsula}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Plants intermediate between subspp. ({\b a}) and ({\b b}) occur in W. Jugoslavia.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 28. S. curvidens} Stapf,{\i  Denkschr. Akad. Wiss. Math.-Nat. Kl. }({\i Wien}) {\b 50}({\b 2}): 100 (1885) ({\i S. romana }subsp.{\i  curvidens} (Stapf) Holmboe). Like {\b 27}, but calyx strongly saccate at base, veins weak; teeth curved, acute, not pungent, usually ending in a recurved awn. 2n = 28.{\i  S. part of Balkan peninsula and Aegean region}. Cr Gr Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc {\b  7.                Melittis}                L.
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc By P.W. Ball.  
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Perennial herbs. Verticillasters 2- to 6-flowered, distant. Calyx 2-lipped; upper lip irregularly toothed or entire; lower lip usually 2-lobed, shorter than the upper. Corolla 2-lipped; upper lip weakly hooded; lower lip 3-lobed.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Literature: M. V. Klokov,{\i  Not. Syst. }({\i Leningrad}){\b  18}: 183-217 (1957).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. M. melissophyllum} L.,{\i  Sp. Pl.} 597 (1753). Stems 20-70 cm, erect. Leaves 2-15 × 1-8 cm, oblong to ovate, cordate to truncate at base, coarsely crenate or dentate. Pedicels 4- 10 mm. Calyx 12-25 mm. Corolla 25-40 mm, white, pink or purple or sometimes variegated; tube much exceeding the calyx. 2n = 30. {\i Shady places. • W., C. & S. Europe, extending eastwards to Lithuania and N. C. Ukraine.} Al Au Be Br Bu Co Cz Ga Ge Gr He Hs Hu It Ju Lu Po Rm Rs (B, C, W) Si.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  A variable species. The following subspecific treatment is provisional.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Stem densely covered with small, stipitate glands ............... ({\b c}) subsp. {\b albida}
\par
1 Stem eglandular or sparsely glandular
\par
2 Largest leaves 5-7(-9) cm, with not more than 20(-22)
\par
  large teeth on each side .......................................... ({\b a}) subsp. {\b melissophyllum}
\par
2 Largest leaves (6-)7-15 cm, with 20-32 large teeth on 
\par
  each side ............................................................................ ({\b b}) subsp. {\b carpatica}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b melissophyllum} : Stem eglandular or sparsely glandular. Largest leaves 5-7(-9) cm, with 10-20(-22) large teeth on each side. Corolla white, pink, purple or variegated.{\i  W. & C. Europe}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Plants with a purple corolla are most frequent in W. Europe, whilst those with a white corolla are most frequent in C. Europe.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b carpatica}  (Klokov) P. W. Ball,{\i  Bot. Jour. Linn. Soc.}{\b  64}: 71 (1971) ({\i M. carpatica }Klokov): Like subsp. 
\pard\f0\fs28 ({\b a}) but largest leaves (6-)7-15 cm, with 20-32 large teeth on each side; corolla usually white, sometimes with pink or purple markings on the lower lip.{\i  E.C. Europe, extending eastwards to W. Ukraine and S.W. White Russia}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b c}) Subsp. {\b albida}  (Guss.) P. W. Ball,{\i  loc. cit.} (1971) ({\i M. albida} Guss.): Stem densely covered with small, stipitate glands. Largest leaves 6-15 cm, with 20-30 large teeth on each side. Corolla white, often with pink or purple markings on the lower lip, rarely purple.{\i  S. Italy, Sicilia, Balkan peninsula.}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc {\b 8.           Eremostachys}               Bunge
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc By R.A. DeFilipps & I.B.K. Richardson.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Perennial herbs. Verticillasters (2)4- to 6-flowered. Calyx 5-to 10-veined; tube infundibuliform; limb subentire, with 5 rigid teeth. Corolla 2-lipped; upper lip hooded; lower lip 3-lobed. Stamens didynamous, parallel; filaments of upper stamens with an appendage at the base; anther-cells divergent. Style-branches unequal. Nutlets subobtuse, hairy at apex.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. E. tuberosa} (Pallas) Bunge in Ledeb.,{\i  Fl. Altaica}{\b  2}: 416 (1830). Perennial with a tuberous root. Stems 15-40 cm, branched. Leaves 6-14 × 6-9 cm, orbicular to ovate, serrate, hirsute. Bracteoles absent. Corolla 32-40 mm, whitish-pink; upper lip densely hairy inside; lower lip deflexed.{\i  Dry steppes. S.E. Russia, W. Kazakhstan.} Rs (E). ({\i W.C. Asia}.)
\par

\par
143}
\par