{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. C. album} (L.) D. Don in Sweet,{\i  Hort. Brit.} ed. 2, 460 (1830). Erect shrub; stems 30-75 cm, with numerous branches; young twigs pubescent; older twigs rough with persistent petioles. Leaves 6-10 × 1 mm, linear, obtuse, covered when young with minute, subsessile glands, glabrous at maturity, patent, with a deep, narrow groove on the apparent abaxial surface. Heads with 5-9 subsessile flowers. Sepals 2 mm, suborbicular, pubescent. Petals in male flowers 3-4 mm, obovate, pinkish; in female flowers reduced or absent. Stamens 5-6 mm; anthers red. Style present; stigma red, with 3 linear-oblong lobes. Drupe (5-)6-8 mm in diameter, white (rarely pink). 2n = 26.{\i  Maritime} ({\i or rarely inland}){\i  sands. • W. half of Iberian peninsula; Açores.} Az Hs Lu [Ga].
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  Male plants have straight, erect branches and a strict habit; in female plants the branches are shorter, more patent and somewhat tortuous, so that the habit is more diffuse.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28\qc {\b 2.            Empetrum}              L.
\par 

\pard\f0\fs24\qc By D.A. Webb.
\par 

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Dioecious or hermaphrodite. Flowers in short lateral racemes which bear 3 bracts, of which 1 (rarely 2-3) bears in its axil a sessile flower.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. E. nigrum} L.,{\i  Sp. Pl.} 1022 (1753). Stems procumbent to ascending; young twigs minutely glandular-puberulent, soon glabrous. Leaves 3-7 × 1-2 mm, linear-oblong to narrowly elliptical, glandular when young, glabrous later; margins closely approximated but not or only slightly involute, whitish, so that the apparent abaxial surface of the leaf bears a pale stripe or shallow groove. Sepals and petals c. 1·5 mm, oblong, greenish pink to reddish-purple. Stamens up to 5 mm, long-exserted. Stigma sessile, with 6-9 rays. Drupe 5 mm in diameter, black.{\i  Heaths, moors, coniferous forests and stony mountain-slopes. N. Europe, and on mountains southwards to the Pyrenees, C. Italy, Bulgaria and S. Ural.} Al Au Be Br Bu Cz Da Fa Fe Ga Ge Hb He Ho Hs Is It Ju No Po Rm Rs (N, B, C, W) Sb Su.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  The genus consists of a number of closely related taxa (for the most part American) which are variously treated as species, subspecies or varieties. The two European taxa, here treated as subspecies, are often regarded as separate species, largely because of their difference in chromosome number; but the correlation between chromosome number and reproductive pattern, though good, is not perfect (the latter being possibly susceptible to environmental influences), and the differences in vegetative characters show some overlap.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b nigrum}: Normally dioecious. Stems up to 120 cm, procumbent, sparingly branched, usually rooting; leaves mostly linear-oblong, 2½-5 times as long as wide, usually not grooved beneath. 2n = 26.{\i  Throughout most of the range of the species, but rare in the extreme north and absent from most of the Alps}.
\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b hermaphroditum} (Hagerup) Böcher,{\i  Meddel. Grønl.} 147(9): 81 (1952) ({\i E. hermaphroditum} Hagerup,{\i  E. eamesii} subsp.{\i  hermaphroditum} (Hagerup) D. Löve): Flowers normally hermaphrodite, with stamens usually persistent in fruit. Stems seldom more than 50 cm, freely branched, decumbent to ascending, not rooting; leaves mostly elliptical to elliptic-oblong, 2-4 times as long as wide, often with a shallow groove beneath. 2n = 52.{\i  N. Europe, southwards to} c. 60°{\i  N., and on some of the higher mountains further south.}
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs36\qc PRIMULALES
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28\qc {\b  134.           MYRSINACEAE}
\par 

\pard\f0\fs24\qc Edit. †T.G. Tutin.
\par 

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Shrubs or trees. Leaves alternate, simple, exstipulate. Flowers actinomorphic. Calyx 4- to 6-fid. Corolla usually sympetalous; lobes 4-6. Stamens equal in number to the corolla-lobes and opposite to them, epipetalous. Ovary superior, 1-locular. Fruit an indehiscent, dry or fleshy drupe.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28\qc {\b 1.             Myrsine}              L.
\par 

\pard\f0\fs24\qc By †T.G. Tutin.
\par 

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Usually dioecious. Flowers in axillary fascicles. Calyx small, persistent. Corolla-lobes imbricate; tube usually very short. Fruit 1-seeded.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. M. africana} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 196 (1753). Evergreen shrub usually 1-2 m; young twigs and petioles puberulent. Leaves 0·5-1·5 cm, obovate to suborbicular, serrulate, obtuse, emarginate or subacute, cuneate to rounded at base, coriaceous, gland-dotted. Inflorescence of 3-8 sub-sessile flowers. Corolla c. 1·5 mm in diameter, pale brown, rotate. Fruit 4-5 mm, globose, bluish-purple.{\i  Evergreen scrub, }300-900 {\i m. Açores.} Az. ({\i C. & S. Africa; Afghanistan to Nepal}.)
\par 

\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28\qc {\b  135.         PRIMULACEAE}
\par 

\pard\f0\fs24\qc Edit. †D.H. Valentine.
\par 

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Herbs, rarely dwarf shrubs. Leaves exstipulate, usually simple. Flowers 5(to 7)-merous, actinomorphic (rarely zygomorphic), sympetalous. Stamens epipetalous, opposite the corolla-lobes; staminodes sometimes present. Ovary 1-locular, superior (rarely semi-inferior), with 1-numerous ovules and basal, free-central placenta; style simple. Fruit a capsule.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Aquatic; leaves pinnate ...............................................................{\b  6. Hottonia}
\par 
1 Terrestrial; leaves simple
\par 
2 Corolla-lobes sharply deflexed; stock tuberous ........................{\b  7. Cyclamen}
\par 
2 Corolla-lobes not sharply deflexed; stock not tuberous
\par 
3 Flowers zygomorphic; calyx spiny .................................................{\b  14. Coris}
\par 
3 Flowers actinomorphic; calyx not spiny
\par 
4 Leaves basal, often in a rosette; flowers solitary or 
\par 
  on a leafless scape
\par 
5 Corolla-lobes laciniate ..............................................................{\b  5. Soldanella}
\par 
5 Corolla-lobes not laciniate
\par 
6 Filaments with dilated base, connate; leaves lobed ...................... {\b 4. Cortusa}
\par 
6 Filaments without dilated base, not connate; leaves not lobed
\par 

\par 
14}
\par