{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 4. P. purpurea} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 585 (1753). Shrub up to 200 cm. Roots without tubers. Stem eglandular. Lower leaves 3·5-9 × 1·7-4 cm, lanceolate or oblong-lanceolate, cordate or truncate at base, crenate or crenulate, coriaceous, stellate-puberulent above, white-stellate-lanate beneath; petiole up to 2 cm. Floral leaves petiolate, lanceolate, acute. Verticillasters 10- to 12-flowered. Bracteoles 12-20 × 2-4(-5) mm, lanceolate, elliptical or oblong, acuminate, stellate-lanate. Calyx 15-20 mm, stellate-tomentose; teeth 3-5 mm, subulate. Corolla 23-26 mm, purple or pink, rarely white, stellate-tomentose, upper lip galeate, not ciliate. Nutlets glabrous. {\i S., C. & E. Spain, S. Portugal.} Hs Lu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Plants from S.E. Spain (prov. Almeria), with the wide bracts of {\b 4}, narrow leaves (7-19 mm wide) and calyx-teeth 1-3 mm, are intermediate between{\b  4} and{\b  5} and referable to {\b P. purpurea} var. {\b almeriensis} Pau,{\i  Mem. Mus. Ci. Nat. Barcelona} ({\i Bot.}) {\b 1}({\b 3}): 29 (1925).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 5. P. italica} L., {\i Syst. Nat.} ed. 10, {\b 2}: 1102 (1759). Like {\b 4} but leaves stellate-lanate above; bracteoles ½ as long as to equalling calyx, up to 2 mm wide; calyx-teeth 1-2 mm, broadly triangular; corolla c. 20 mm, stellate-lanate. •{\i   Islas Baleares.} Bl.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 6. P. floccosa} D. Don,{\i  Bot. Reg. }{\b 15}: t. 1300 (1830). Dwarf shrub up to 35 cm. Stem eglandular. Lower leaves 3-5 cm, oblong-ovate or ovate-lanceolate, cordate or subcordate at base, crenate, coriaceous, stellate-lanate on both surfaces; petiole up to 3 cm. Floral leaves shortly petiolate, lanceolate, acute or acuminate. Verticillasters 4- to 8-flowered. Bracteoles 15-18 mm, linear, uncinate, stellate-lanate, ciliate with hairs 2-3 mm. Calyx 15-19 mm, stellate-lanate, ciliate; teeth 1-5 mm, subulate uncinate. Corolla 25-32 mm, yellow. Nutlets glabrous.{\i  Karpathos.} Cr. ({\i N. Africa}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 7. P. cretica} C. Presl in J. & C. Presl,{\i  Del. Prag.} 84 (1822). Dwarf shrub up to 45 cm. Stem stellate-lanate with glandular or clavate hairs. Lower leaves 3-8 cm, lanceolate, oblong to oblong-lanceolate, cuneate, truncate or rounded at base, crenulate, coriaceous, stellate-tomentose above, white-stellate-lanate beneath; petiole up to 4 cm. Floral leaves petiolate, lanceolate acute or acuminate. Verticillasters 14- to 30-flowered. Bracteoles 12-19 mm, linear to narrowly lanceolate, straight at apex, stellate-tomentose and ciliate. Calyx 13-19 mm, stellate-lanate with glandular hairs; teeth 1-5 mm, subulate, straight at apex. Corolla 25-27 mm, yellow. Nutlets glabrous.{\i  Greece, Kriti.} Cr Gr.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b  P. viscosa} Poiret in Lam., {\i Encycl. Méth. Bot. }{\b 5}: 271 (1804), from S.W. Asia, which differs from {\b 7} in its membranous leaves stellate-puberulent beneath, is widely cultivated and is perhaps naturalized in a few localities in S. France.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 8. P. ferruginea} Ten., {\i Fl. Nap.}{\b  1},{\i  Prodr}.: 35 (1811). Like {\b 7} but hairs of stem and calyx not glandular or clavate; calyx stellate-puberulent. •{\i  S. Italy.} It.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 9. P. lychnitis} L.,{\i  Sp. Pl.} 585 (1753). Shrub up to 65 cm. Stem eglandular. Lower leaves 5-11 cm, linear, narrowly elliptical or spathulate, entire or with a few crenulations at apex, coriaceous, gradually tapering into an indistinct petiole, stellate-puberulent above, stellate-lanate beneath. Floral leaves sessile, broadly ovate or rhombic, cuspidate. Verticillasters 4- to 10-flowered. Bracteoles 12-20 mm, linear, straight at apex, stellate-villous. Calyx 15-20 mm, stellate-villous; teeth 2-4 mm, linear lanceolate, straight at apex. Corolla 20-30 mm, yellow. Nutlets glabrous. 2n = 20. •{\i  S.W. Europe.} Ga Hs Lu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  In Spain, hybrid swarms with leaf-shapes transitional between {\b 9} and {\b 10} frequently occur; they have been discussed by C. Pau,{\i  Mem. Mus. Ci. Nat. Barcelona} ({\i Bot.}) {\b 1}({\b 1}): 64, pl. 7, 8 (1922).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 10. P. crinita} Cav.,{\i  Icon. Descr. }{\b 3}: 25 (1795). Shrub up to 70 cm. Stem eglandular. Lower leaves 4-11·5 cm, ovate to lanceolate, cordate or rounded at base, entire, coriaceous stellate-lanate on both surfaces, abruptly contracted into a distinct petiole up to 7 cm. Floral leaves sessile, ovate, gradually tapering into an acute or acuminate apex. Verticillasters 6- to 10-flowered. Bracteoles 13-15 mm, linear, straight at apex, stellate-villous. Calyx 13-17 mm, stellate-villous; teeth 2-5 mm, linear-lanceolate, straight at apex. Corolla 20-25 mm, brownish-yellow or yellow. Nutlets glabrous.{\i  S. & E. Spain.} Hs.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 11. P. lanata} Willd., {\i Enum. Pl. Hort. Berol., Suppl.} 41 (1814). Shrub up to 55 cm. Stem eglandular. Lower leaves 1·5-2·8 cm, broadly elliptical, oblong, obovate or suborbicular, cuneate to rounded at base, crenulate, coriaceous, stellate-lanate on both surfaces; petiole up to 1 cm. Floral leaves subsessile, suborbicular, obtuse. Verticillasters 2- to 10-flowered. Bracteoles 6-10 × 3-5·5 mm, broadly elliptical, oblanceolate or obovate, mucronate, straight at apex, stellate-lanate. Calyx 10-12 mm, stellate-tomentose; teeth 0·5-1 mm, subulate. Corolla 20-23 mm yellow. Nutlets pubescent. 2n = 20. •{\i   Kriti.} Cr.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 12. P. fruticosa} L., {\i Sp. Pl}. 584 (1753). Shrub up to 130 cm. Stem eglandular. Lower leaves 3-9 cm, elliptical, lanceolate or lanceolate-ovate, truncate or cuneate at base, entire or crenulate, coriaceous, shortly stellate-tomentose above, white-stellate-tomentose beneath; petiole up to 4 cm. Floral leaves sessile or petiolate, mostly lanceolate, obtuse. Verticillasters (6-)14- to 36-flowered. Bracteoles 10-20 × (2-)3-7 mm, obovate, ovate-lanceolate, oblanceolate or elliptical, acuminate, straight at apex, stellate-tomentose, ciliate or not, with hairs 2-3 mm. Calyx 10-19 mm, stellate-lanate, not ciliate; teeth 1-3·5(-4) mm, subulate. Corolla 23-35 mm, yellow. Nutlets glabrous or pubescent. 2n = 20.{\i  Mediterranean region, westwards to Sardegna.} Al Cr Gr It Ju Sa Si [Az Br Ga Rs (K)].
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Cultivated specimens often produce bracteoles which are ovate and wider than those of natural populations. Variants in which the bracteoles are not ciliate occur on Karpathos and Kasos and have been distinguished as{\b  P. pichleri} Vierh., {\i Österr. Bot. Zeitschr.}{\b  65}: 232 (1915).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc {\b 10.                 Galeopsis}                 L.
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc By C.C. Townsend.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Annuals. Verticillasters dense, the uppermost crowded, the lower distant; bracteoles subulate, pungent. Calyx tubular-campanulate, 5-toothed, the teeth spinose. Corolla distinctly 2-lipped; upper lip hooded; lower lip 3-lobed, with two bluntly conical protuberances at the base; tube about equalling to much exceeding the calyx, with a ring of hairs inside. Anther-cells fimbriate. Nutlets bluntly trigonous, rounded at apex.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  A. Müntzing has studied the genetics of the genus intensively; natural hybrids have been reported between spp. {\b 6-9}, and artificial hybrids have been produced between most species in the genus.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  All species grow in open habitats such as cultivated fields, roadsides, seashores, river-gravels, clearings in woodland, etc. 
\par

\par
145}
\par