{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28\qc {\b  9.               Phlomis}                 L.
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc By R.A. DeFilipps.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Herbs or shrubs. Verticillasters few- to many-flowered, crowded or distant. Calyx tubular, 5- to 10-veined, 5-toothed. Corolla 2-lipped; upper lip hooded, emarginate; lower lip patent, 3-lobed. Stamens included or exserted; anther cells divergent. Style-branches unequal. Nutlets trigonous, glabrous or pubescent.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Most species occur on dry, rocky ground.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Literature: F. Vierhapper, {\i Österr. Bot. Zeitschr.}{\b  65}: 205-236, 252-257 
\par
(1915).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Corolla purple or pink, rarely white
\par
2 Roots bearing tubers; upper lip of corolla straight, the inner
\par
   margin ciliate with hairs 1 mm; nutlets pubescent at apex ........... {\b 1. tuberosa}
\par
2 Roots without tubers; upper lip of corolla curved, the
\par
  margin not ciliate or with hairs not more than 0·5 mm;
\par
  nutlets glabrous at apex
\par
3 Stem and bracteoles with glandular hairs; calyx 18-25 mm .............. {\b 2. samia}
\par
3 Stem and bracteoles eglandular; calyx 8-20 mm
\par
4 Herb not more than 70 cm; bracteoles subulate; leaves
\par
  stellate-tomentose or sparsely stellate-pubescent beneath ......... {\b 3. herba-venti}
\par
4 Shrub up to 200 cm; bracteoles lanceolate, elliptical
\par
  or oblong; leaves stellate-lanate beneath
\par
5 Corolla 23-26 mm, stellate-tomentose; calyx-teeth 
\par
  3-5 mm, subulate; bracteoles 2-5 mm wide .................................. {\b 4. purpurea}
\par
5 Corolla c. 20 mm, stellate-lanate; calyx-teeth 1-2 mm,
\par
  broadly triangular; bracteoles not more than 2 mm wide .................. {\b 5. italica}
\par
1 Corolla yellow or brownish-yellow
\par
6 Bracteoles and calyx-teeth uncinate .............................................. {\b 6. floccosa}
\par
6 Bracteoles and calyx-teeth straight at apex
\par
7 Bracteoles elliptic-lanceolate, oblanceolate, obovate or ovate 
\par
8 Shrub up to 55 cm; lower leaves 1·5-2·8 cm, broadly elliptical,  
\par
  oblong, obovate or suborbicular; calyx-teeth 0·5-1 mm .................. {\b 11. lanata}
\par
8 Shrub up to 130 cm; lower leaves 3-9 cm, lanceolate or
\par
  lanceolate-ovate; calyx-teeth 1-4 mm ......................................... {\b 12. fruticosa}
\par
7 Bracteoles subulate, linear or narrowly lanceolate
\par
9 Stem with glandular or clavate hairs ............................................... {\b 7. cretica}
\par
9 Stem eglandular
\par
10 Calyx stellate-puberulent or stellate-lanate
\par
11 Calyx stellate-puberulent; dwarf shrub up to 45 cm ................ {\b 8. ferruginea}
\par
11 Calyx stellate-lanate; shrub up to 130 cm ................................ {\b 12. fruticosa}
\par
10 Calyx stellate-villous
\par
12 Leaves linear, narrowly elliptical or spathulate,
\par
   gradually tapering into an indistinct petiole ................................. {\b 9. lychnitis}
\par
12 Leaves ovate or lanceolate, abruptly contracted into a
\par
   distinct petiole ................................................................................ {\b 10. crinita}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. P. tuberosa} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 586 (1753). Herb up to 150 cm. Roots bearing small tubers. Stem eglandular or glandular. Basal leaves 5-25 cm, lanceolate-ovate to deltate, cordate or sagittate at base, crenate or dentate, membranous, sparsely to densely pubescent on both surfaces, the hairs simple above, stellate beneath, eglandular or glandular; petiole up to 30 cm. Floral leaves sessile or subsessile, lanceolate-ovate to deltate, obtuse to acuminate. Verticillasters 14- to 40-flowered. Bracteoles 8-13 mm, subulate, glabrous to densely hairy, ciliate. Calyx 8-13 mm, glabrous to hispid; calyx-teeth 2·5-3·5 mm, setaceous. Corolla 15-20 mm, purple or pink; upper lip porrect, ciliate with hairs 1 mm. Nutlets pubescent. 2n = 22.{\i  C. & S.E. Europe, westwards to E. Germany, and extending northwards to }c. 55°{\i  N. in C. Russia.} Au Bu Cz Ge Gr Hu Ju Rm Rs (C, W, K, E).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  A highly variable species, particularly in Russia, whence numerous taxa have been described based on minor differences in leaf-shape and -size, indumentum of leaves, bracts and calyx, and corolla-length. {\b P. glandulifera} Klokov in Kotov,{\i  Fl. RSS Ucr.}{\b  9}: 643 (1960), from S. Ukraine, appears to differ mainly in having glandular hairs on stems, leaves and floral leaves.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. P. samia} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 585 (1753). Herb up to 100 cm. Roots without tubers. Stem glandular. Basal leaves 8-18 cm, lanceolate-ovate, cordate or sagittate at base, crenate or serrate, subcoriaceous, eglandular-stellate-tomentose above, whitish-stellate-tomentose with glandular hairs beneath; petiole up to 18 cm. Floral leaves shortly petiolate, ovate or lanceolate, acuminate. Verticillasters (6-)12- to 20-flowered. Bracteoles 20-26 mm, subulate, stellate-glandular-tomentose. Calyx 18-25 mm, stellate-glandular-tomentose; teeth 6-12 mm, subulate. Corolla (26-)30-35 mm, purple; upper lip galeate, not ciliate. Nutlets glabrous.{\i  Greece, just extending to S. Jugoslavia.} Gr Ju.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 3. P. herba-venti} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 586 (1753). Herb up to 70 cm. Roots without tubers. Stems greenish, stellate-hirsute with hairs 2-4 mm or whitish, stellate-tomentose with hairs up to 0·1 mm, sometimes with a secondary indumentum of hairs up to 1 mm, eglandular, rarely glabrous. Cauline leaves 7-17·5 cm, lanceolate or ovate, truncate, cuneate, rounded or cordate at base, entire, remotely denticulate, crenate or serrate, membranous, glabrous to hirsute or stellate-puberulent above, sparsely stellate-pubescent or whitish-stellate-tomentose beneath; petiole up to 8 cm. Floral leaves sessile to shortly petiolate, lanceolate or oblong, acute or acuminate. Verticillasters 2- to 14-flowered. Bracteoles 11-15 mm, subulate, appressed stellate-tomentose and with some longer hairs. Calyx 8-15 mm, appressed stellate-tomentose or stellate-hirsute; teeth 2-7 mm, subulate. Corolla 15-20(-25) mm, purple or pink; upper lip galeate, not ciliate. Nutlets glabrous.{\i  S. & E. Europe.} Bu Ga Gr Hs It Ju Lu Rm Rs (C, W, K, E) Si Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b herba-venti}: Stem greenish, stellate-hirsute with hairs 2-4 mm. Cauline leaves 9-17·5 cm, ovate or lanceolate, truncate, rounded or cordate at base, crenate or serrate, glabrous, subglabrous or shortly hirsute above. Verticillasters (6-)10- to 14-flowered. •{\i  Mediterranean region, Portugal}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b pungens}  (Willd.) Maire ex DeFilipps, {\i Bot. Jour. Linn. Soc.}{\b  64}: 233 (1971) ({\i P. pungens} Willd.): Stem whitish, stellate tomentose, the hairs up to 0·1 mm, sometimes with a secondary indumentum of hairs up to 1 mm, rarely glabrous. Cauline leaves 7-13 cm, lanceolate, cuneate at base, entire, remotely denticulate or serrate, stellate-puberulent or stellate-hispidulous above. Verticillasters 2- to 6-(10-)flowered.{\i  S.E. Europe, extending locally westwards to Spain and northwards to} c. 53°{\i  N. in C. Russia}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Plants with a mixture of stellate-hirsute and whitish-stellate-tomentose indumentum on the stem, cauline leaves truncate to subcordate at the base, and corolla 21-25 mm, occur frequently in Krym, and have been described as{\b  P. taurica} Hartwiss ex Bunge,{\i  Mém. Acad. Sci. Pétersb.} ser. 7, {\b 21}({\b 1}): 77 (1873).They seem to represent variants of {\b 3}({\b b}).
\par

\par
144}
\par