{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28\qc {\b 18.            Nepeta}                L.
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc By C. Turner.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Perennial, rarely annual herbs. Flowers hermaphrodite or unisexual; verticillasters in spike-like inflorescences or in lax or dense, sometimes pedunculate cymes. Calyx cylindrical to ovoid, straight or curved, 15-veined, accrescent; teeth 5, subequal, the upper sometimes exceeding the lower. Corolla cylindrical-campanulate or infundibuliform, 2-lipped; tube slender, long, glabrous inside; upper lip patent, flat, 2-fid; lower lip 3-lobed. Stamens didynamous, parallel; anther-cells divergent, opening by a common slit. Nutlets smooth, tuberculate or rugose.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Measurements and shapes of leaves refer to cauline leaves.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Several species are cultivated in gardens for ornament and are occasionally naturalized. These include{\b  N. mussinii} Sprengel ex Henckel, {\i Adumbr. Pl. Horti Hal.} 15 (1806), with decumbent stems, small, ovate-cordate, grey-green leaves and lax terminal racemes of blue flowers, native to the Caucasus and Caspian region; and more commonly the sterile hybrid of horticultural origin,{\b  N.} × {\b faassenii} Bergmans ex Stearn,{\i  Jour. Roy. Hort. Soc. }{\b 75}: 403 (1950) (supposedly{\i  N. mussinii} ×{\i  nepetella}) with narrower, lanceolate to oblong-ovate, truncate leaves.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   All species usually grow in dry habitats, on rocky, hilly or disturbed ground.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Literature. J. Briquet, {\i Les Labiées des Alpes Maritimes} 359-373. Genève & Bale. 1893. G. P. De Wolf, {\i Baileya}{\b  3}: 99-107 (1955).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Flowers unisexual, in diffusely branched, patent inflorescences
\par
2 Stems subglabrous or glabrescent
\par
3 Flowers in lax cymes; calyx 7-9 mm .......................................... {\b 21. ucranica}
\par
3 Flowers in dense cymes; calyx 4-6 mm ...................................... {\b 24. beltranii}
\par
2 Stems pubescent to lanate
\par
4 Leaves serrate, the lowest cordate at the base; corolla
\par
  blue, shorter than calyx ............................................................. {\b 22. parviflora}
\par
4 Leaves crenate-serrate, the lowest rounded or rarely
\par
  subcordate at base; corolla pink or white, exceeding 
\par
  calyx ........................................................................................... {\b 23. hispanica} 
\par
1 Flowers hermaphrodite, in spike-like or branched, erect
\par
   inflorescences
\par
5 Outermost bracteoles equalling or exceeding the calyx
\par
6 Bracts at least 5 mm wide, broadly ovate
\par
7 Bracts membranous ...................................................................... {\b 2. tuberosa}
\par
7 Bracts herbaceous ........................................................................ {\b 4. scordotis}
\par
6 Bracts less than 5 mm wide, ovate-lanceolate to linear-
\par
  lanceolate, rarely ovate
\par
8 Leaves 0·5-3(-4) cm, all petiolate
\par
9 Calyx-tube straight, the upper teeth not exceeding the lower
\par
  ................................................................................... ({\b 6-11}).{\b  sibthorpii} group
\par
9 Calyx-tube slightly curved, the upper teeth slightly 
\par
  exceeding the lower ........................................................................ {\b 12. italica}
\par
8 Leaves 3-8(-10) cm, the upper sessile
\par
10 Calyx-teeth at least as long as the tube; inner bracts
\par
   1-4 mm wide ................................................................................... {\b 3. apuleii}
\par
10 Calyx-teeth shorter than the tube
\par
11 Corolla 10-12 mm; bracteoles 0·5-1·5 mm wide, linear ... {\b 1. multibracteata}
\par
11 Corolla 16-17 mm; bracteoles 1·5-3 mm wide, linear-lanceolate
\par
   ................................................................................................... {\b 5. granatensis}
\par
5  Bracteoles usually shorter than the calyx
\par
12 Calyx-tube straight, the upper teeth not exceeding the lower
\par
13 Cauline leaves 1-3 cm, mostly petiolate ................ ({\b 6-11}). {\b sibthorpii} group
\par
13 Cauline leaves 2-7(-8) cm, mostly sessile or subsessile
\par
14 Stem, densely pubescent; calyx 7-9 mm; corolla 8-11 mm ....... {\b 19. latifolia}
\par
14 Stems glabrous or puberulent; calyx 4-6 mm; corolla 6-8(-10) mm {\b 20. nuda}
\par
12 Calyx-tube usually ± curved, the upper teeth usually 
\par
   exceeding the lower
\par
15 Inflorescence leafy throughout .................................................... {\b 16. foliosa}
\par
15 Inflorescence not leafy, at least in upper part
\par
16 Calyx 8-11 mm; corolla 12-17 mm
\par
17 Stems glabrous or puberulent; leaves crenulate ................... {\b 17. grandiflora}
\par
17 Stems pubescent to villous; leaves coarsely crenate ........... {\b 18. melissifolia} 
\par
16 Calyx 5-8 mm; corolla 7-12 mm
\par
18 Leaves ovate-cordate, with petioles up to 40 mm;
\par
   corolla 7-10 mm, scarcely exserted from calyx ............................ {\b 13. cataria}
\par
18 Leaves lanceolate to oblong-lanceolate, rarely ovate,
\par
   with petioles not more than 15 mm; corolla 10-12 mm,
\par
   distinctly exserted from calyx
\par
19 Leaves pubescent to velutinous or lanate; corolla
\par
   cylindrical-campanulate ............................................................ {\b 14. nepetella}
\par
19 Leaves glabrous or subglabrous; corolla infundibuliform ......... {\b 15. agrestis}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    Sect. PYCNONEPETA Bentham. At least the lowest leaves petiolate. Inflorescence spike-like, rarely branched; verticillasters many-flowered. Outer bracts usually equalling or exceeding the calyx, often rigid or scarious. Flowers hermaphrodite. Calyx tubular, straight or curved; upper teeth exceeding the lower. Nutlets tuberculate or rugose.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. N. multibracteata} Desf.,{\i  Fl. Atl.}{\b  2}: 11 (1798). Stems 60-120 cm, erect, simple, pubescent. Leaves 3-6 cm, ovate to oblong-ovate, cordate at base, the upper sessile. Inflorescence spike-like, simple or branched; verticillasters somewhat interrupted below. Bracts 9-11 × 2-3(-5) mm, linear; bracteoles 5-10 × 0·5-1·5 mm. Calyx 7-10 mm; teeth narrowly lanceolate, c. ½ as long as the tube. Corolla 10-12 mm, bluish-violet.{\i  S. Portugal.} Lu. ({\i N. Africa}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. N. tuberosa} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 571 (1753). Rhizome tuberous. Stems 25-80 cm, simple, pubescent to lanate, sometimes viscid. Leaves 3-8 cm, ovate-lanceolate to oblong, cordate at base, subglabrous to villous, often sublanate beneath, the lowest petiolate. Inflorescence spike-like, simple. Bracts and bracteoles 8-16 × 3-8 mm, ovate to lanceolate, membranous, greenish-white, pink or reddish-purple. Calyx 8-11 mm, slightly curved, glandular; teeth 2·5-3 mm, the upper slightly exceeding the lower. Corolla 9-12 mm, purple or violet. {\i Spain and Portugal; Sicilia.} Hs Lu Si.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Bracts lanceolate, suberect, overlapping; calyx-teeth
\par
  0·5 mm wide at base, sublinear ......................................... ({\b a}) subsp. {\b tuberosa}
\par
1 Bracts ovate-lanceolate to ovate, patent, not over-lapping; 
\par
  calyx-teeth 1 mm wide at base, lanceolate
\par
2 Cauline leaves much exceeding the internodes; bracts entire
\par
  ......................................................................................... ({\b b}) subsp. {\b reticulata}
\par
2 Cauline leaves shorter or scarcely longer than the 
\par
  internodes; most bracts somewhat toothed ...................... ({\b c}) subsp. {\b gienensis} 
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b tuberosa} : Cauline leaves usually exceeding the internodes. Inflorescence with most verticillasters densely crowded. Bracts 10-12 mm, lanceolate, entire, reddish-purple, suberect. Calyx-teeth 2·5-3 × 0.5 mm, sublinear. Corolla 12-13 mm, violet-blue. {\i Throughout the range of the species.}
\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b reticulata}  (Desf.) Maire in Jahandiez & Maire,{\i  Cat. Pl. Maroc}{\b  3}: 632 (1934): Cauline leaves much exceeding the internodes, often acuminate. Inflorescence with verticillasters less crowded than in ({\b a}). Bracts 10-13 mm, ovate-lanceolate, usually entire, greenish-white, often pink-tinged at the margins. Calyx-teeth 2·5-3 × 1 mm, lanceolate. Corolla 11-12 mm, purplish. {\i S. Spain.} ({\i N. Africa.})
\par

\par
158}
\par