{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b d}) Subsp. {\b velutina}  (Pospichal) Patzak, {\i Ann. Naturh. Mus.} ({\i Wien}){\b  62}: 67 (1958) ({\i B. velutina} Pospichal): Greyish-tomentulose-velutinous, with numerous sessile, shining glands. Stems up to 30 cm, little-branched. Petioles 30-50(-80) mm. Calyx 7-8(-9) mm; lobes (1·5-)2-2·5(-2·8) mm, recurved, ovate-lanceolate, mucronate; mucro 0·5-0·8(-1) mm. Corolla c. 14 mm, lilac. {\i W. Jugoslavia}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b e}) Subsp. {\b uncinata}  (Fiori & Béguinot) Patzak, {\i op. cit.} 64 (1958): Pubescent to subglabrous, rarely sericeous-tomentulose, without sessile glands. Stems up to 80 cm, much-branched. Petiole short. Calyx 9-11 mm; lobes 1-2 mm, recurved, ovate or triangular-ovate, mucronate; mucro 0·2-0·8 mm. Corolla 12-14 mm, lilac.{\i  S. Europe.}
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b f}) Subsp. {\b anatolica}  P. H. Davis,{\i  Notes Roy. Bot. Gard. Edinb.}{\b  21}: 61 (1952): Hirsute, with a few sessile glands. Stems up to 70 cm, shortly branched above. Petiole up to 40(-50) mm. Calyx 7-8 mm; lobes 2-2·5 mm, recurved, triangular-lanceolate, mucronate; mucro 1-1·5 mm. Corolla 9-12 mm, pink.{\i  Turkey-in-Europe}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc {\b 16.           Stachys }          L.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc (incl. {\i Betonica}  L.)
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc By P.W. Ball.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Annual or perennial herbs or small shrubs. Verticillasters 2- to many-flowered (rarely reduced to a solitary flower), in dense or lax spike-like, rarely capituliform, inflorescences. Bracteoles present or absent. Calyx tubular or campanulate, rarely weakly 2-lipped, with 5 equal teeth, 5- to 10-veined. Corolla 2-lipped; upper lip flat or hooded, entire to 2-fid; lower lip 3-lobed. Stamens didynamous, included or slightly exserted; anther-cells parallel or divergent. Style-branches subequal. Nutlets obovoid or oblong, rounded at apex.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Bracteoles as long as or longer than calyx-tube
\par
2 Annual; verticillasters in a dense capitulum, sometimes
\par
  with 1 verticillaster distant ............................................................. {\b 58. serbica}
\par
2 Perennial; verticillasters in an elongate spike or all distant
\par
3 Upper part of stem and lower surface of leaves stellate-
\par
  pubescent ....................................................................................... {\b 5. scardica}
\par
3 Plant without stellate hairs
\par
4 Stock with persistent rosettes of leaves; flowering 
\par
  branches axillary, subscapose with 1-4(-5) pairs of leaves
\par
5 Upper lip of corolla 2-fid or emarginate; corolla pale yellow .. {\b 1. alopecuros}
\par
5 Upper lip of corolla entire or crenulate; corolla white,
\par
  pink or purple
\par
6 Calyx distinctly reticulate-veined; corolla 20-24 mm ................... {\b 2. monieri}
\par
6 Calyx not reticulate-veined; corolla 12-18 mm
\par
7 Corolla purple, rarely pink or white; calyx-teeth 
\par
  ¼-¾ as long as tube ..................................................................... {\b 3. officinalis}
\par
7 Corolla white; calyx-teeth about as long as tube ........................ {\b 4. balcanica}
\par
4 Stock without persistent rosettes of leaves; flowering
\par
  stems terminal, usually not subscapose
\par
8 Verticillasters 2- to 4-flowered
\par
9 Lower branches not becoming spinose; leaves crenate, lanate {\b 35. mucronata}
\par
9 Lower branches persistent, becoming spinose; leaves 
\par
  entire, glabrescent but with sessile glands .................................. {\b 41. glutinosa}
\par
8 Verticillasters 6- to many-flowered
\par
10 Upper lip of corolla 2-fid ........................................................ {\b 17. acutifolia}
\par
10 Upper lip of corolla entire or emarginate
\par
11 Corolla pale yellow; verticillasters 2- to 12-flowered
\par
12 Corolla c. 15 mm; leaves oblong-lanceolate .............................. {\b 18. obliqua}
\par
12 Corolla c. 20 mm; leaves cordate-ovate .............................. {\b 19. decumbens}
\par
11 Corolla white, pink or purple
\par
13 Verticillasters c. 6-flowered ...................................................... {\b 39. euboica}
\par
13 Verticillasters 10- to many-flowered
\par
14 Pedicels 1-2 mm in flower ......................................................... {\b 6. balansae}
\par
14 Flowers sessile or subsessile  ...............................({\b 7-16}).{\b  germainica} group
\par
1 Bracteoles absent, or not more than ½ as long as calyx-tube
\par
15 Annual
\par
16 Calyx-teeth 1/3-1/2 as long as tube
\par
17 Calyx with dense eglandular hairs and sessile glands .................. {\b 53. annua}
\par
17 Calyx with glandular hairs but without sessile glands
\par
18 Stem ± scabrid on the angles; lower leaves cordate at base ... {\b 54. spinulosa}
\par
18 Stem smooth; lower leaves rounded or attenuate at base ........... {\b 55. milanii}
\par
16 Calyx-teeth as long as or slightly shorter than tube
\par
19 Corolla 6-12 mm, scarcely exceeding calyx
\par
20 Calyx 5-7(-8) mm in flower; upper lip of corolla entire ........... {\b 56. arvensis}
\par
20 Calyx 7-10 mm in flower; upper lip of corolla emarginate .{\b 57. brachyclada}
\par
19 Corolla 12-20 mm, distinctly exceeding calyx
\par
21 Upper lip of corolla 2-fid; corolla yellow or white with a  
\par
   yellow lower lip ................................................................... {\b 51. ocymastrum}
\par
21 Upper lip of corolla entire; corolla pink ........................... {\b 52. marrubiifolia}
\par
15 Perennial herb or small shrub
\par
22 Most verticillasters 2-flowered, or flowers solitary
\par
23 Lower and middle leaves pinnatipartite with narrowly 
\par
   linear lobes; pedicels 2-5 mm ............................................... {\b 32. angustifolia}
\par
23 Lower and middle leaves entire, linear to suborbicular;
\par
   pedicels 0-2 mm
\par
24 Leaves suborbicular to ovate-orbicular, not more than
\par
   1½ times as long as wide .............................................................. {\b 50. corsica}
\par
24 Leaves linear to ovate, at least twice as long as wide
\par
25 Leaves ovate, cordate at base .................................................. {\b 24. sylvatica}
\par
25 Leaves linear to lanceolate or oblong-spathulate, 
\par
   cuneate or rounded at base
\par
26 Calyx with sessile or shortly stipitate glands
\par
27 Plant with persistent, softly spinose branches; leaves
\par
   entire, obtuse ............................................................................. {\b 41. glutinosa}
\par
27 Plant without persistent, softly spinose branches;
\par
   leaves crenate or crenate-dentate, acute ......................................... {\b 53. annua}
\par
26 Calyx eglandular
\par
28 Calyx densely sericeous; stem appressed-hairy .......................... {\b 31. virgata}
\par
28 Calyx sparsely hairy; stem glabrous or with sparse 
\par
   patent hairs ................................................................................ {\b 33. tetragona}
\par
22 Most verticillasters 3- to 16-flowered
\par
29 Small shrub with spinose branches ............................................ {\b 42. spinosa}
\par
29 Herb or unarmed small shrub
\par
30 Corolla yellow, sometimes with white or purple markings
\par
31 Calyx eglandular
\par
32 Stem glabrous or with straight hairs
\par
33 Calyx-teeth less than 1 mm wide, linear-subulate,
\par
   about as long as tube ............................................................. {\b 29. atherocalyx}
\par
33 Calyx-teeth more than 1 mm wide at base, triangular or
\par
   triangular-lanceolate, shorter than tube
\par
34 Stems herbaceous at base; verticillasters 6- to 16-flowered,
\par
   at least the upper crowded ................................................................ {\b 26. recta}
\par
34 Stems woody and much-branched at base; verticillasters
\par
   2- to 6-flowered, distant ............................................................ {\b 33. tetragona}
\par
32 Stem ± tomentose or lanate
\par
35 Stem and leaves green to grey-green, tomentose-hirsute;
\par
   corolla 12-14 mm ....................................................................... {\b 47. maritima}
\par
35 Stem and leaves white, densely tomentose or lanate-tomentose
\par
36 Corolla 15-20 mm; leaves linear-lanceolate to obovate-
\par
   elliptical ............................................................................................... {\b 43. iva}
\par
36 Corolla 12-14 mm; leaves suborbicular to ovate orbicular .. {\b 44. chrysantha}
\par
31 Calyx glandular
\par
37 Stock with persistent rosettes of leaves ................................. {\b 48. pubescens}
\par
37 Stock without persistent rosettes of leaves
\par
38 Stem and leaves with crispate hairs
\par
39 Lower leaves cuneate at base ................................................... {\b 23. plumosa}
\par
39 Lower leaves cordate or truncate at base
\par

\par
151}
\par