{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b c}) Subsp. {\b gienensis}  (Degen & Hervier) Heywood,{\i  Bot. Jour. Linn. Soc.}{\b  65}: 262 (1972) ({\i N. gienensis }Degen & Hervier): Cauline leaves usually shorter than the internodes, not acuminate. Inflorescence with verticillasters less crowded than in ({\b a}). Bracts ovate, cuspidate and slightly toothed, patent, greenish-white, often pink-tinged. Calyx-teeth 2·5-3 × 1 mm, lanceolate. Corolla 9-11 mm, pale blue.{\i  • S. Spain}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 3. N. apuleii} Ucria,{\i  Nuovo Racc. Opusc. Aut. Sic.}{\b  6}: 252 (1793). Stems 30-80 cm, simple, puberulent. Leaves 3-6 cm, ovate to ovate-lanceolate, cordate at base, sparsely pubescent, the upper sessile. Inflorescence spike-like, sometimes branched, many-flowered. Bracts 9-12 × 3-5 mm, ovate to ovate-lanceolate, acute, rigid, reddish-purple; bracteoles 7-12 × 1-4 mm. Calyx 8-10 mm, deeply toothed; teeth lanceolate, as long as or longer than the tube. Corolla 12-14 mm, pink, exserted.{\i  S. Spain; Sicilia.} Hs Si. ({\i N. Africa}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 4. N. scordotis} L.,{\i  Cent. Pl.}{\b  2}: 20 (1756). Stems 25-60 cm, ascending, simple, villous or lanate. Leaves 3-6 cm, ovate-cordate, rugose, villous-lanate, mostly petiolate. Inflorescence spike-like, verticillasters interrupted below. Bracts 10-13 × 7-13 mm, broadly ovate, acute, villous; bracteoles smaller, ovate-lanceolate. Calyx 8-9·5 mm, straight; teeth 3-3·5 mm, lanceolate-subulate, the upper not exceeding the lower. Corolla 13-16 mm, blue, distinctly exserted. •{\i  S. Aegean region.} Cr Gr.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 5. N. granatensis} Boiss.,{\i  Elenchus} 76 (1838). Stems 80-160 cm, erect, viscid-villous. Leaves 4-8(-10) cm, ovate-cordate, acute, coarsely serrate or crenate, viscid-pubescent, the upper sessile. Inflorescence spike-like, rarely branched; verticillasters mostly distant. Bracts 12-18 × 3-4 mm, reddish-purple at the apex, lanceolate, acuminate; bracteoles 9-12 × 1·5-3 mm, linear-lanceolate. Calyx 10-13 mm, slightly curved; teeth 4-5 mm, the upper not exceeding the lower. Corolla 16-17 mm, white, distinctly exserted.{\i  S. Spain.} Hs.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b 6-11}). {\b N. sibthorpii} group. Stems 30-70 cm, erect or decumbent and ascending, branched. Leaves 0·5-3(-4) cm, ovate to oblong, cordate at base, rugose, grey-green, all shortly petiolate. Bracts and bracteoles rarely exceeding the calyx, green, with more or less scarious margins. Calyx 5-8 mm, tubular-campanulate, straight; upper teeth not exceeding the lower. Corolla 9-13 mm, white, slightly exserted.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   A group of closely related species, taxonomically difficult and much in need of revision, occurring in the southern part of the Balkan peninsula and in Anatolia.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Outermost bracteoles at least 1 mm wide, with distinctly 
\par
  scarious margins
\par
2 Indumentum of the stem appressed, at least above .................... {\b 6. sibthorpii} 
\par
2 Indumentum of the stem patent ................................................. {\b 7. parnassica}
\par
1 Outermost bracteoles less than 1 mm wide, with very narrow 
\par
  scarious margins
\par
3 All verticillasters distant
\par
4 Indumentum of the stem and leaves patent, viscid ............... {\b 10. camphorata}
\par
4 Indumentum of the stem and leaves appressed, not viscid ..... {\b 11. heldreichii}
\par
3 At least the upper verticillasters crowded
\par
5 Indumentum of the stem tomentose to lanate, patent;
\par
  calyx teeth c. ½ as long as tube ...................................................... {\b 9. dirphya}
\par
5 Indumentum of the stem velutinous, appressed; calyx-teeth about 
\par
  as long as tube ................................................................................ {\b 8. spruneri}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 6. N. sibthorpii} Bentham, {\i Lab. Gen. Sp.} 474 (1834). Stems finely grey-tomentose, the hairs appressed at least above. Inflorescence spike-like, the lower verticillasters distant. Bracteoles 6-8 × 1-1·5 mm, oblong-lanceolate, with distinct scarious margins. Calyx-teeth as long as the tube.{\i • S. Greece.} Gr.
\par
 
\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 7. N. parnassica} Heldr. & Sart. in Boiss.,{\i  Diagn. Pl. Or. Nov. }{\b 3}({\b 4}): 22 (1859) (incl.{\i  N. orphanidea }Boiss.). Stems tomentose to lanate, the hairs patent, often viscid. Inflorescence spike-like, the lower verticillasters distant. Bracteoles 5-10 × 0·5-1·5 mm, lanceolate, with distinct scarious margins. Calyx-teeth about as long as the tube. •{\i  S. Albania, Greece. }Al Gr.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b   N. sphaciotica} P. H. Davis,{\i  Notes Roy. Bot. Gard. Edinb.}{\b  21}: 136 (1953) is like {\b 7} but differs in its dwarf habit (possibly environmentally determined) with stems 12-18 cm, very short spike, and broader, greener leaves with fewer, coarser crenations. It occurs in a single locality in W. Kriti (Levka Ori) and may be a sub species of {\b 7}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 8. N. spruneri} Boiss.,{\i  Diagn. Pl. Or. Nov.}{\b  3}({\b 4}): 23 (1859). Stems grey-tomentose, the hairs appressed. Leaves grey-green, somewhat tomentose. Inflorescence spike-like, only the lower verticillasters distant. Bracteoles 3·5-6 × 0·25-0·5 mm, linear-lanceolate, with very narrow scarious margins. Calyx-teeth about as long as the tube. •{\i  Albania, N.W. & C. Greece.} Al Gr.
\par

\par
 
\pard\f0\fs28   {\b 9. N. dirphya} (Boiss.) Heldr. ex Halácsy, {\i Consp. Fl. Graec.}{\b  2}: 538 (1902). Like {\b 8} but stems tomentose to lanate, the hairs patent; leaves grey; calyx-teeth c. ½ as long as the tube; corolla white with purple spots. {\i E. Greece} ({\i Evvoia}). Gr.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 10. N. camphorata} Boiss. & Heldr. in Boiss.,{\i  Diagn. Pl. Or. Nov. }{\b 1}({\b 7}): 49 (1846). Stems crispate-villous, the hairs patent, viscid. Leaves lanate-villous, the hairs patent, viscid. Inflorescence with distant verticillasters. Bracteoles 2·5-4 × 0·25-0·5 mm, linear, with very narrow scarious margins, ½ as long as calyx. Calyx grey; teeth much shorter than the tube. Corolla white with purple spots.{\i  S. Greece} ({\i Taïyetos}). Gr.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 11. N. heldreichii} Halácsy,{\i  Consp. Fl. Graec.}{\b  2}: 539 (1902). Like {\b 10} but indumentum of stems and leaves appressed, not viscid; stems white-tomentose; leaves white-tomentose; bracts as long as calyx. • {\i S. Greece} ({\i Taïyetos}). Gr.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 12. N. italica} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 571 (1753). Stems grey-pubescent to villous. Leaves 0·5-3(-4) cm, ovate to oblong, cordate at base, shortly petiolate. Inflorescence spike-like, the lower verticillasters distant. Bracts and bracteoles 8-10(-12) × 0·5-1·5 mm, linear to linear-lanceolate, with narrow scarious margins, rigid, equalling or exceeding the calyx. Calyx 7-8 mm, slightly curved; teeth 3-3·5 mm, the upper slightly exceeding the lower. Corolla 11-13 mm, creamy white, exserted.{\i  E.C. Italy; Turkey-in-Europe}. It Tu. ({\i S.W. Asia}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Sect. NEPETA. Most leaves petiolate. Inflorescence spike-like or branched, sometimes leafy below; verticillasters many-flowered. Bracteoles subulate, not rigid, usually much shorter than the calyx. Flowers hermaphrodite. Calyx usually cylindrical or ovoid, often curved; upper teeth usually exceeding the lower. Corolla-tube curved, dilated at the throat. Nutlets smooth or tuberculate.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 13. N. cataria} L.,{\i  Sp. Pl.} 570 (1753). Stems 40-100 cm, erect, branched, grey-pubescent to tomentose. Leaves 2-8 cm, ovate, acute, cordate at base, crenate or serrate, grey-tomentose beneath; petiole 0·5-4 cm. Inflorescence spike-like, the lower verticillasters distant. Bracts 1·5-3 mm, linear-subulate. Calyx 5-6·5 mm, ovoid; teeth 1·5-2·5 mm, linear-lanceolate, patent.
\par

\par
159}
\par