{\rtf1\ansi \deff4\deflang1033{\fonttbl{\f4\froman\fcharset0\fprq2 Times New Roman;}}{\colortbl;\red0\green0\blue0;\red0\green0\blue255;\red0\green255\blue255;\red0\green255\blue0;\red255\green0\blue255;\red255\green0\blue0;\red255\green255\blue0;\red255\green255\blue255;\red0\green0\blue128;\red0\green128\blue128;\red0\green128\blue0;\red128\green0\blue128;\red128\green0\blue0;\red128\green128\blue0;\red128\green128\blue128;\red192\green192\blue192;}{\stylesheet{\widctlpar \f4\fs20\lang2057 \snext0 Normal;}{\*\cs10 \additive Default Paragraph Font;}}{\info{\author dddd}{\operator dddd}{\creatim\yr1998\mo11\dy11\hr17\min32}{\revtim\yr1998\mo11\dy11\hr17\min32}{\version2}{\edmins0}{\nofpages4}{\nofwords1058}{\nofchars6034}{\*\company  }{\vern57431}}\widowctrl\ftnbj\aenddoc\hyphcaps0 \fet0\sectd \linex0 {\*\pnseclvl1\pnucrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl2\pnucltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl3\pndec\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl4\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl5\pndec\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl6\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl7\pnlcrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl8\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl9\pnlcrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}
\pard\plain \ \f4\fs20\lang2057 {\fs24 
\par }
\pard \li200\ {\fs28 2 Verticillasters usually more than 12-flowered; calyx-limb dentate
\par 4 Calyx-lobes 5, regular ........................................................................ }{\b\fs28 7. nigra}{\fs28 
\par 4 Calyx-lobes 6-many, \'b1 irregular
\par 5 Calyx-limb 8-10 mm in diameter; lobes mucronulate .................... }{\b\fs28 4. hirsuta}{\fs28 
\par 5 Calyx-limb 4-6 mm in diameter; lobes awned
\par 6 Calyx 8-10 mm; lobes triangular-lanceolate ................................ }{\b\fs28 5. rupestris}{\fs28  
\par 6 Calyx 7-8 mm; lobes broadly triangular ................................. }{\b\fs28 6. macedonica}{\fs28 
\par 
\par }
\pard \ {\fs28    }{\b\fs28 1. B. frutescens}{\fs28  (L.) J. Woods, }{\i\fs28 Tourist's Fl.}{\fs28  295 (1850). Shrub up to 60 cm. Stems numerous, divaricate, crispate-puberulent. Lower leaves 1\'b75-2\'b75 x 1-2 cm, ovate to ovate-oblong, obtuse, entire or crenate-denticulate; petiole 5-6 mm. Bracteoles 7-10 mm, 4 at each node, patent, pungent, glabrous. Verticillasters (2-)5- to 6-flowered. Calyx 12-15 mm, campanulate; limb 10-12 mm in diameter, irregularly dentate; lobes 5-10, 1\'b75-3 mm, broadly triangular, awned; awn c. 2\'b75 mm. Corolla 12-15 mm, white or lilac.}{\i\fs28  Rocky places. \bullet  S.W. Alps. }{\fs28 Ga It.
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 2. B. acetabulosa}{\fs28  (L.) Bentham,}{\i\fs28  Lab. Gen. Sp.}{\fs28  595 (1834). Perennial up to 60(-80) cm, woody at base. Stems greyish-tomentose, with simple and stellate hairs, papillae and glands. Middle and upper cauline leaves 3-5 x 3-4 cm, broadly cordate at base, suborbicular, crenate-dentate; petiole 5-15 mm. Bracteoles 4-8 mm, linear to spathulate, membranous. Verticillasters 6- to 12-flowered. Calyx 12-15 mm, hypocrateriform; limb (12-)15-20 mm in diameter, the margin undulate, smooth or mucronulate. Corolla 15-18 mm, purple and white. 2n = 28.}{\i\fs28  S. & E. Greece and Aegean region. }{\fs28 Cr Gr ?Tu.
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 3. B. pseudodictamnus}{\fs28  (L.) Bentham, }{\i\fs28 op. cit.}{\fs28  594 (1834). Like}{\b\fs28  2}{\fs28  but plant 30-50 cm; stems yellowish-tomentose; middle cauline leaves 2-3 \'d7 1\'b75-2 cm, subcordate at base, broadly ovate to suborbicular; petiole 2-4 mm; calyx 8-10 mm, infundibuliform; the limb 7-8 mm in diameter, irregularly crenate; lobes 5-10, the larger up to 2 mm, broadly triangular-acuminate, more or less mucronulate; corolla 14-15 mm.}{\i\fs28  S. Aegean region.}{\fs28  Cr Gr [It Si].
\par 
\par   }{\b\fs28  4. B. hirsuta}{\fs28  Bentham, }{\i\fs28 op. cit.}{\fs28  595 (1834) (}{\i\fs28 B. mollissima }{\fs28 Bentham, }{\i\fs28 B. hispanica}{\fs28  auct., non (L.) Bentham). Perennial 60-80 cm, woody at base. Stems hirsute, with glandular and eglandular simple and stellate hairs, papillae and glands. Lower and middle cauline leaves 3-6 \'d7 3-5 cm, cordate or truncate at base, ovate or suborbicular, crenate; petiole of lower leaves 5-40 mm. Bracteoles 3-8 mm, linear-subulate (the outer oblanceolate), membranous. Verticillasters many-flowered. Calyx 10-12 mm, campanulate; limb 8-10 mm in diameter, irregularly dentate; lobes 10 or more, up to 2 mm, triangular-acuminate, sometimes dentate, mucronulate. Corolla 14-16 mm, purple or white.}{\i\fs28  Roadsides, walls and waste places. C. & S. Portugal, C., S. & E. Spain, Islas Baleares.}{\fs28  Bl Hs Lu.
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 5. B. rupestris}{\fs28  (Biv.) Vis.,}{\i\fs28  Fl. Dalm.}{\b\fs28  2}{\fs28 : 216 (1847) (}{\i\fs28 B. acuta}{\fs28  Briq.). Perennial up to 70 cm, woody at base. Stems pubescent with glandular and eglandular simple and medifixed hairs. Lower and middle cauline leaves 4-6 \'d7 4-5 cm, cordate at base, ovate or ovate-lanceolate, obtuse or subacute, and coarsely and irregularly crenate-dentate; petioles 10-25 mm. Bracteoles 5-8 mm, linear-subulate, membranous. Verticillasters many-flowered. Calyx 8-10 mm, subcylindrical; limb c. 6 mm in diameter, irregularly dentate; lobes 6-10, c. 2 mm, patent, triangular-lanceolate, awned; awn c. 1 mm. Corolla 12-14 mm, purple and white. }{\i\fs28 Rocky places. C. & S. Italy, Sicilia; W. Jugoslavia, N. Albania.}{\fs28  Al It Ju Si.
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 6. B. macedonica}{\fs28  Vandas,}{\i\fs28  Magyar Bot. Lapok}{\fs28  }{\b\fs28 4}{\fs28 : 112 (1905) (}{\i\fs28 B. acuta}{\fs28  subsp.}{\i\fs28  macedonica }{\fs28 (Vandas) Hayek). Like }{\b\fs28 5}{\fs28  but middle cauline leaves 3-5\'b75 \'d7 2-5 cm, cordate or truncate at base, ovate or triangular-ovate, acute; petiole 10(-15) mm; calyx 7-8 mm, the limb 4-5 mm in diameter; lobes 0\'b75-1 mm, broadly triangular; corolla 11-15 mm.}{\i\fs28  Rocky slopes, among scrub. \bullet W. part of Balkan peninsula from}{\fs28  39\'b0 30'}{\i\fs28  to}{\fs28  42\'b0}{\i\fs28  N}{\fs28 . Al Gr Ju.
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 7. B. nigra}{\fs28  L., }{\i\fs28 Sp. Pl}{\fs28 . 582 (1753). Perennial up to 130 cm. Stems pubescent to subglabrous. Lower cauline leaves 3-8 \'d7 2-6 cm, cordate to cuneate at base, ovate or ovate-oblong; petiole usually short, rarely up to 80 mm. Bracteoles 3-9 mm, subulate or filiform, membranous. Verticillasters many-flowered. Calyx 7-13 mm; limb regularly dentate; lobes 5, awned or mucronate. Corolla 9-15 mm, pink, lilac or white. 2n = 22.}{\i\fs28  Europe, from England, S. Sweden and C. Russia southwards as a native or naturalized alien; casual or imperfectly naturalized further north.}{\fs28  All except Fa Fe Is No Rs (N, B) Sb.
\par 
\par   Doubtfully native in much of N.W. & N.C. Europe; the limits of native distribution cannot be precisely ascertained.
\par 
\par   A polymorphic species with 6 subspecies in Europe.
\par 
\par }
\pard \li200\ {\fs28 1 Calyx-lobes (3-)4-6\'b75 mm, triangular- to subulate-
\par   lanceolate, awned; awn 1\'b75-3 mm .......................................... (}{\b\fs28 a}{\fs28 ) subsp. }{\b\fs28 nigra}{\fs28 
\par 1 Calyx-lobes 1-3 mm, ovate to triangular-ovate,
\par   acuminate, mucronate; mucro 0\'b72-0\'b78(-1\'b77) mm
\par 2 Calyx-lobes erect or erecto-patent
\par 3 Calyx scarcely widened above; plant sericeous-tomentose,
\par   with shining, sessile glands .................................................. (}{\b\fs28 b}{\fs28 ) subsp. }{\b\fs28 sericea}{\fs28 
\par 3 Calyx infundibuliform above; plant subglabrous or
\par   pubescent, with papillae and non-shining, sessile glands .... (}{\b\fs28 c}{\fs28 ) subsp. }{\b\fs28 foetida}{\fs28 
\par 2 Calyx-lobes curved and patent
\par 4 Plant greyish-tomentulose-velutinous, with numerous sessile
\par   glands; stems not more than 30 cm, little-branched .......... (}{\b\fs28 d}{\fs28 ) subsp. }{\b\fs28 velutina}{\fs28 
\par 4 Plant pubescent to subglabrous, rarely sericeous-
\par   tomentulose, without sessile glands; stems up to 80 cm,
\par   much branched
\par 5 Calyx 9-11 mm, the lobes with mucro 0\'b72-0\'b78 mm;
\par   corolla lilac ........................................................................ (}{\b\fs28 e}{\fs28 ) subsp. }{\b\fs28 uncinata}{\fs28 
\par 5 Calyx 7-8 mm, the lobes with mucro 1-1.5 mm; 
\par   corolla pink ....................................................................... (}{\b\fs28 f}{\fs28 ) subsp. }{\b\fs28 anatolica}{\fs28 
\par 
\par }
\pard \ {\fs28  (}{\b\fs28 a}{\fs28 ) Subsp. }{\b\fs28 nigra}{\fs28  (}{\i\fs28 B. nigra}{\fs28  subsp. }{\i\fs28 ruderalis}{\fs28  (Swartz) Briq.): Pubescent to subglabrous, with papillae and non-shining glands. Stems up to 120 cm; lower internodes up to 10 cm, the upper shorter. Petiole up to 50 mm. Calyx 9-13 mm; lobes (3-)4-6\'b75 mm, erect, triangular- to subulate-lanceolate, awned; awn 1\'b75-3 mm. Corolla 12-14 mm, lilac.}{\i\fs28  Europe from Sweden, Germany and Albania eastwards; naturalized in N.W. Europe}{\fs28 .
\par  (}{\b\fs28 b}{\fs28 ) Subsp. }{\b\fs28 sericea}{\fs28  (Vandas) Patzak, }{\i\fs28 Ann. Naturh. Mus.}{\fs28  (}{\i\fs28 Wien}{\fs28 )}{\b\fs28  62}{\fs28 : 70 (1958): Sericeous, with numerous sessile, shining glands. Stems up to 70 cm, little-branched; lowermost internodes 3-4 cm, the upper shorter. Petiole very short. Calyx 8(-10) mm, scarcely widened above; lobes 1-1\'b75(-2) mm, broadly triangular, mucronate, patent ; mucro 0\'b74-0\'b78 mm. Corolla 11-12 mm, lilac.}{\i\fs28  Albania, Macedonia}{\fs28 .
\par  (}{\b\fs28 c}{\fs28 ) Subsp. }{\b\fs28 foetida }{\fs28 Hayek,}{\i\fs28  Prodr. Fl. Penins. Balcan.}{\b\fs28  2}{\fs28 : 278 (1929) (}{\i\fs28 B. borealis}{\fs28  Schweigger): Pubescent to subglabrous, with papillae and non-shining glands. Stems up to 100 cm; lower internodes up to 10 cm, the upper shorter. Petiole up to 40 mm. Calyx 7-12 mm, infundibuliform above; lobes (1\'b75-)2\'b75(-3) mm, erecto-patent, triangular-ovate, mucronate; mucro 0\'b72-0\'b75(-1\'b77) mm. Corolla 12-15 mm, lilac, rarely white. }{\i\fs28 Europe from Germany, Italy, and Albania westwards; naturalized in S. Scandinavia, Latvia and W. Estonia}{\fs28 .
\par 
\par 150}
\par }