{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b salviifolia}  (Ten.) Rech. fil., {\i Ann. Naturh. Mus. }({\i Wien}) {\b 48}: 170 (1937) ({\i S. germanica} subsp.{\i  salviifolia} (Ten.) Gams): Stems densely tomentose or lanate-tomentose. Leaves usually less than 2-3 times as long as wide, the lowest often rounded or subcordate at base. Verticillasters crowded, or the lower distant. Calyx-teeth with arista not more than 1 mm.{\i  C. Mediterranean region}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b c}) Subsp. {\b bulgarica}  Rech. fil.,{\i  op. cit.} 171 (1937) (?{\i S. thracica} Davidov): Stems shortly tomentose. Leaves 3(-4) times as long as wide, attenuate at base, rarely the lowest subcordate. Verticillasters usually crowded. Calyx-teeth with arista 1-2 mm.{\i  E. part of Balkan peninsula}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 15. S. byzantina} C. Koch, {\i Linnaea}{\b  21}: 686 (1849) ({\i S. lanata} Jacq., non Crantz, {\i S. olympica }auct., vix Poiret). Stems 15-80 cm, densely white-lanate-tomentose. Leaves (6-)30-100 × (3-)15-40 mm, the lower oblong-spathulate, the upper elliptical, all attenuate at base and very densely white-sericeous-lanate. Calyx 8-12 mm; teeth c. 1/3 as long as tube. Corolla 15-25 mm.{\i  Turkey-in-Europe} ({\i N. of Istanbul});{\i  widely cultivated for ornament and locally naturalized.} Tu [Ga]. ({\i S.W. Asia.})
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 16. S. heraclea} All.,{\i  Fl. Pedem.}{\b  1}: 31 (1785). Stems 20-60 cm, rather sparsely hirsute or lanate-hirsute, eglandular. Leaves 30-90 × 10-30 mm, oblong or lanceolate, subcordate or truncate, green and sparsely villous or lanate-villous above, more densely lanate-villous beneath. Calyx 9-14 mm; teeth unequal, c. ½ as long as tube, glandular. Corolla 15-20 mm. {\i Dry hillsides. •W. Mediterranean region.} Co Ga Hs It Si.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   {\b 17. S. acutifolia} Bory & Chaub. in Bory,{\i  Expéd. Sci. Morée}{\b  3}({\b 2}): 168 (1832). Erect, lanate-hirsute perennial 15-70 cm. Leaves 20-60 × 10-25 mm, ovate-oblong, rounded or slightly cordate at base, crenate-dentate, usually green above and grey-green beneath. Verticillasters many-flowered, distant. Calyx 9-12 mm; teeth slightly unequal, c. ½ as long as tube, sometimes glandular. Corolla 18-25 mm, pink, densely white-hirsute; upper lip 2-fid; lower lip white with pink markings.{\i  C. & S. Greece.} Gr ?It.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 18. S. obliqua} Waldst. & Kit.,{\i  Pl. Rar. Hung.}{\b  2}: 142 (1803-1804). Erect, lanate-hirsute perennial 20-50 cm. Leaves 40-60 × 15-25 mm, oblong-lanceolate, rounded or slightly cordate at base, crenate, green above, green or grey-green beneath. Verticillasters 6- to 10-flowered, crowded or the lower distant. Calyx c. 10 mm; teeth c. 2/3 as long as tube. Corolla c. 15 mm, pale yellow, densely hairy; upper lip c. 6 mm; lower lip c. 8 mm. {\i Balkan peninsula. }Al Bu Gr Ju Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Sect. STACHYS. Perennial herbs or small shrubs; stock without persistent terminal rosettes of leaves; flowering stems terminal. Verticillasters usually not more than 12-flowered; bracteoles usually absent or minute.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 19. S. decumbens} Pers.,{\i  Syn. Pl.}{\b  2}: 123 (1806). Decumbent perennial up to 40 cm, branched and woody at base; flowering stems lanate-hirsute, glandular. Leaves 25-35 × 20-25 mm, cordate-ovate, crenate-serrate, grey. Verticillasters 2- to 12-flowered, crowded into a dense, ovoid spike; bracteoles about as long as calyx-tube. Calyx 11-15 mm; teeth c. ½ as long as tube. Corolla c. 20 mm, pale yellow, densely hairy; upper lip c. 4 mm; lower lip c. 10 mm. Cliffs. •{\i  N.W. Greece, S. Albania.} Al Gr.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 20. S. canescens} Bory & Chaub. in Bory,{\i  Expéd. Sci. Morée} {\b 3}({\b 2}): 167 (1832) ({\i S. messeniaca} Boiss.). More or less erect, hirsute or lanate-hirsute perennial 10-30 cm, woody at base. Leaves 15-50 × 8-30 mm, elliptical to orbicular-ovate, cordate at base, crenate, hirsute. Verticillasters 4- to 6-flowered, in a dense spike. Calyx 7-12 mm, glandular-hairy; teeth c. ½ as long as tube, slightly unequal. Corolla 15-20 mm, pale yellow, pubescent; upper lip 5-6 mm; lower lip 8-10 mm. {\i Cliffs. • S. Greece}. Gr.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 21. S. anisochila} Vis. & Pancic,{\i  Mem. Ist. Veneto}{\b  15}: 13 (1870). Erect, densely deflexed-hirsute perennial c. 50 cm. Leaves 20-40 × 10-20 mm, oblong-ovate or ovate, cordate or truncate at base, crenate-serrate, pubescent. Verticillasters 4- to 10-flowered. Calyx c. 10 mm, with sessile glands; lower 2 teeth c. 5 mm, about as long as tube; upper 3 teeth 2-3 mm and connate at base. Corolla 15-20 mm, pale yellow, pubescent; upper lip 4-5 mm; lower lip 7-10 mm.{\i  Rocky places. • S. & E. Bulgaria; W. Jugoslavia and Albania}. Al Bu Ju.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 22. S. menthifolia} Vis.,{\i  Flora} ({\i Regensb}.) {\b 12} (Erganz. 1): 14 (1829) ({\i S. grandiflora} Host). Erect, sparsely hairy and densely glandular-puberulent perennial 30-50 cm. Leaves 40-80 × 18-40 mm, lanceolate or ovate, rounded or cuneate at base, crenate-serrate, glandular-puberulent and sparsely pubescent. Verticillasters 6- to 10-flowered, crowded. Calyx 10-12 mm, glandular-puberulent and sparsely pubescent; lower 2 teeth 4-5 mm, c. 2/3  as long as tube; upper 3 teeth 2-3 mm, connate at base. Corolla 18-20 mm, pale yellow, pubescent; upper lip 5-6 mm; lower lip c. 10 mm.{\i  Rocky places. • W. part of Balkan peninsula.} Al Gr Ju.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 23. S. plumosa} Griseb.,{\i  Spicil. Fl. Rumel.}{\b  2}: 139 (1844) (incl. {\i S. freynii} Hausskn.,{\i  S. viridis} Boiss. & Heldr.). Erect, glandular-pubescent and sparsely to densely hirsute perennial 30-80 cm. Leaves 25-100 × 8-50 mm, ovate or oblong-ovate, acute, cuneate or rounded at base, crenate to serrate, glandular-puberulent and sparsely hirsute. Verticillasters 6- to 16-flowered, the upper crowded, the lower distant. Calyx 9-15 mm, sparsely to densely hairy and glandular-puberulent; teeth equal, about as long as tube. Corolla 14-20 mm, white or pale pink or reddish-brown with pink or purple markings, possibly also pale yellow with purple markings, pubescent; upper lip 4-5 mm; lower lip 7-10(-12) mm. {\i Dry pastures and mountain rocks. • S. Jugoslavia, W. Bulgaria, N. & C. Greece.} Bu Gr Ju.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 24. S. sylvatica} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 580 (1753). Erect, hirsute and glandular-pubescent perennial 30-120 cm. Leaves 40-140 × 20-80 mm, cordate-ovate, acute, crenate-serrate, sparsely hirsute, all petiolate. Verticillasters (2-)6(-8)-flowered, more or less crowded. Calyx 6-8 mm, glandular-pubescent; teeth equal, as long as or slightly shorter than tube. Corolla 13-18 mm, dull reddish-purple with white markings, rarely white or pale pink, puberulent; upper lip 4-5 mm; lower lip 6-7 mm. 2n = 66. {\i Shady places. Most of Europe, but rare in the Mediterranean region.} All except Az Bl Cr Fa Is Sa Sb.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 25. S. palustris} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 580 (1753) (incl. {\i S. maeotica} Postr., {\i S. wolgensis }Wilensky). Erect, sparsely to densely hairy, usually eglandular perennial 30-120 cm. Leaves 30-120 × 7-35 mm, oblong or oblong-lanceolate, acute, cordate at base, crenate, appressed-pubescent, the lower shortly petiolate, the upper sessile. Verticillasters usually 4- to 10-flowered, the upper crowded, the lower distant. Calyx 6-8 mm, usually eglandular; teeth equal, as long as or slightly shorter than tube. Corolla (11-)12-15 mm, purple, puberulent; upper lip 3-4 mm; lower lip 5-7 mm. 2n = 64, 102.{\i  Damp places, and as a weed in cultivated fields. Most of Europe, but rare in the Mediterranean region.} All except Az Bl Cr Fa Is Sa Sb Si.
\par

\par
154}
\par