{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 7 Throat of corolla constricted; plants not heterostylous ............ {\b 3. Androsace}
\par 
7 Throat of corolla not or scarcely constricted; plants 
\par 
  often heterostylous
\par 
8 Seeds numerous; flowers usually in umbels, rarely
\par 
  solitary ............................................................................................ {\b 1. Primula}
\par 
8 Seeds 2-5; flowers solitary ..........................................................{\b  2. Vitaliana}
\par 
4 Stems leafy, bearing flowers
\par 
9 Flowers with petaloid calyx and no corolla ................................... {\b 11. Glaux}
\par 
9 Flowers with calyx and corolla
\par 
10 Flowers perigynous to epigynous ............................................ {\b 13. Samolus}
\par 
10 Flowers hypogynous
\par 
11 Corolla shorter than calyx
\par 
12 Leaves opposite; capsule opening by valves ...................... {\b 10. Asterolinon}
\par 
12 Leaves alternate; capsule circumscissile ................................ {\b 12. Anagallis}
\par 
11 Corolla equalling or longer than calyx
\par 
13 Flowers 7-merous
\par 
14 Flowers white, solitary ............................................................. {\b 9. Trientalis}
\par 
14 Flowers yellow, in racemes .................................................. {\b 8. Lysimachia}
\par 
13 Flowers 5-merous
\par 
15 Capsule circumscissile ...........................................................{\b  12. Anagallis}
\par 
15 Capsule opening by valve
\par 
16 Heterostylous; corolla-tube longer than calyx ......................... {\b 2. Vitaliana}
\par 
16 Homostylous; corolla-tube equalling or shorter than calyx
\par 
17 Throat of corolla constricted .................................................. {\b 3. Androsace}
\par 
17 Throat of corolla open, not constricted ................................{\b  8. Lysimachia}
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28\qc {\b 1.           Primula}           L.       
\par 

\pard\f0\fs24\qc By D.A. Valentine & A. Kress.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28 Perennial scapigerous herbs with a basal rosette of leaves. Flowers 5-merous, bracteate, in umbels or rarely solitary, usually heterostylous. Calyx campanulate or cylindrical, 5-toothed. Corolla-tube cylindrical, not constricted at throat; limb 5-lobed, infundibuliform or rotate. Stamens included. Stigma capitate. Capsule valvate; seeds numerous.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  Literature: W. Wright Smith & H. R. Fletcher,{\i  Trans. Roy. Soc. Edinb.}{\b  61}: 1-69 (1943), 631-686 (1948); {\i Trans. Proc. Bot. Soc. Edinb. }{\b 34}: 402-468 (1946).
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Leaves with revolute vernation, not fleshy, sometimes rugose;
\par 
  calyx angled
\par 
2 Leaves distinctly farinose
\par 
3 Corolla-tube 2-3 times as long as calyx .......................................... {\b 7. halleri}
\par 
3 Corolla-tube 1-1½ times as long as calyx 
\par 
4 Homostylous
\par 
5 Corolla 5-8(-10) mm in diameter; stigma ± 5-lobed ...................... {\b 8. scotica}
\par 
5 Corolla 9-12(-15) mm in diameter; stigma globose ............. {\b 9. scandinavica}
\par 
4 Heterostylous
\par 
6 Calyx campanulate; teeth acute ................................................... {\b 5. frondosa}
\par 
6 Calyx cylindrical or urceolate; teeth obtuse, rarely acute ............ {\b 4. farinosa}
\par 
2 Leaves efarinose
\par 
7 Corolla yellow
\par 
8 Flowers arising individually from the centre of the leaf-
\par 
  rosette ............................................................................................ {\b 1. vulgaris}
\par 
8 Flowers in an umbel at the apex of a scape
\par 
9 Calyx-lobes acuminate; mature capsule equalling or 
\par 
  exceeding calyx ................................................................................ {\b 2. elatior}
\par 
9 Calyx-lobes acute; mature capsule shorter than calyx ....................... {\b 3. veris}
\par 
7 Corolla lilac, pink, purple or violet
\par 
10 Flowers arising individually from the centre of the leaf-rosette  {\b 1. vulgaris}
\par 
10 Flowers in an umbel at the apex of a scape
\par 
11 Homostylous
\par 
12 Corolla 10-15 mm in diameter .................................................. {\b 5. frondosa}
\par 
12 Corolla 4-9 mm in diameter
\par 
13 Leaves spathulate; lamina tapering gradually into petiole .......... {\b 10. stricta}
\par 
13 Leaves oblong-ovate to elliptical; lamina ± abruptly
\par 
   contracted into petiole .......................................................... {\b 12. egaliksensis}
\par 
11 Heterostylous
\par 
14 Bracts distinctly auriculate at base .............................................. {\b 11. nutans}
\par 
14 Bracts not or only slightly auriculate at base
\par 
15 Scapes up to 30 cm, stout; corolla not more than 10 mm
\par 
   in diameter ................................................................................ {\b 6. longiscapa}
\par 
15 Scapes up to 20 cm, slender; corolla usually more 
\par 
   than 10 mm in diameter
\par 
16 Calyx campanulate; teeth acute ................................................. {\b 5. frondosa}
\par 
16 Calyx cylindrical or urceolate; teeth obtuse, rarely acute .......... {\b 4. farinosa}
\par 
1  Leaves with involute vernation, ± fleshy, not rugose;
\par 
   calyx rounded, not angled
\par 
17 Corolla yellow
\par 
18 Smaller bracts broadly ovate .................................................... {\b 28. auricula}
\par 
18 Smaller bracts lanceolate .......................................................... {\b 24. palinuri}
\par 
17 Corolla lilac, violet, pink or red
\par 
19 Leaves obtriangular; sides entire, apex deeply and
\par 
   narrowly dentate .......................................................................... {\b 19. minima}
\par 
19 Leaves not obtriangular; apex not sharply distinct from the sides
\par 
20 Leaf-margin and interior of calyx farinose ........................... {\b 26. marginata}
\par 
20 Leaf-margin and interior of calyx efarinose
\par 
21 Leaf-margin glabrous, or glands, if present, minute, subsessile 
\par 
22 Bracts enveloping the calyx .................................................... {\b 14. glutinosa}
\par 
22 Bracts not enveloping the calyx
\par 
23 Leaves with minute dots (sunken glands) above
\par 
24 Longer leaves lanceolate, not pressed to the ground ................. {\b 13. deorum}
\par 
24 Longer leaves rhombic-ovate, pressed to the ground ........... {\b 15. spectabilis}
\par 
23 Leaves without minute dots above
\par 
25 Corolla farinose at the throat ................................................. {\b 27. carniolica}
\par 
25 Corolla efarinose
\par 
26 Umbels mostly 3- to 5-flowered ........................................ {\b 16. glaucescens}
\par 
26 Umbels mostly 1- to 2-flowered .......................................... {\b 17. wulfeniana}
\par 
21 Leaf-margin puberulent (strong lens); some glands at 
\par 
   least with a distinct, short stalk 
\par 
27 Tips of hairs mostly blackish or brown
\par 
28 At most single hair-tips blackish; shrunken apical 
\par 
   cells ± apically depressed ............................................................. {\b 29. hirsuta}
\par 
28 Many hair-tips blackish; shrunken apical cells ± laterally depressed
\par 
29 Leaves mostly 6-12 mm wide; longest pedicels mostly 1-6 mm
\par 
   .................................................................................................. {\b 32. daonensis}
\par 
29 Leaves mostly 9-16 mm wide; longest pedicels mostly 4-15 mm
\par 
30 Longest hairs at least 0·3 mm ..................................................... {\b 33. villosa}
\par 
30 Longest hairs not more than 0·25 mm
\par 
31 Leaves usually subglabrous above .................................. {\b 30. pedemontana}
\par 
31 Leaves puberulent above ......................................................... {\b 31. apennina}
\par 
27 Tips of hairs colourless or pale
\par 
32 Scape usually not more than 5 mm ............................................ {\b 23. allionii}
\par 
32 Scape usually more than 5 mm
\par 
33 At least half the bracts ± ovate
\par 
34 Pedicels not more than 3 mm, much shorter than bracts ....... {\b 22. tyrolensis}
\par 
34 Pedicels up to 20 mm, usually longer than bracts
\par 
35 Corolla violet; umbels at anthesis ± unilateral .......................... {\b 25. latifolia}
\par 
35 Corolla lilac, pink or red; umbels erect ...................................... {\b 29. hirsuta}
\par 
33 More than half the bracts linear-lanceolate
\par 
36 Leaf-margins ciliate; cilia in some places sub-appressed
\par 
   or semi-patent ........................................................................ {\b 21. integrifolia}
\par 
36 Leaf-margins puberulent; hairs uniformly patent
\par 
37 Leaves suborbicular ............................................................... {\b 22. tyrolensis}
\par 
37 Leaves obovate to lanceolate
\par 

\par 
15}
\par