{\rtf1\ansi \deff4\deflang1033{\fonttbl{\f4\froman\fcharset0\fprq2 Times New Roman;}}{\colortbl;\red0\green0\blue0;\red0\green0\blue255;\red0\green255\blue255;\red0\green255\blue0;\red255\green0\blue255;\red255\green0\blue0;\red255\green255\blue0;\red255\green255\blue255;\red0\green0\blue128;\red0\green128\blue128;\red0\green128\blue0;\red128\green0\blue128;\red128\green0\blue0;\red128\green128\blue0;\red128\green128\blue128;\red192\green192\blue192;}{\stylesheet{\widctlpar \f4\fs20\lang2057 \snext0 Normal;}{\*\cs10 \additive Default Paragraph Font;}}{\info{\author dddd}{\operator dddd}{\creatim\yr1998\mo11\dy11\hr17\min33}{\revtim\yr1998\mo11\dy11\hr17\min33}{\version2}{\edmins0}{\nofpages4}{\nofwords1110}{\nofchars6330}{\*\company  }{\vern57431}}\widowctrl\ftnbj\aenddoc\hyphcaps0 \fet0\sectd \linex0 {\*\pnseclvl1\pnucrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl2\pnucltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl3\pndec\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl4\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl5\pndec\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl6\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl7\pnlcrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl8\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl9\pnlcrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}
\pard\plain \ \f4\fs20\lang2057 {\fs24 
\par }
\pard \li200\ {\fs28 40 Calyx 7-8 mm .......................................................................... }{\b\fs28 27. beckeana}{\fs28 
\par 40 Calyx c. 10 mm ..................................................................... }{\b\fs28 21. anisochila }{\fs28 
\par 38 Stem and leaves with \'b1 straight hairs
\par 41 Calyx-teeth about as long as tube, all \'b1 equal
\par 42 Calyx 10-15 mm; stem and leaves glandular ........................... }{\b\fs28 23. plumosa}{\fs28 
\par 42 Calyx 9-10 mm; stem and leaves eglandular ........................... }{\b\fs28 28. parolinii}{\fs28 
\par 41 At least the upper calyx-teeth shorter than tube
\par 43 Middle and lower leaves cordate at base ............................... }{\b\fs28 20. canescens}{\fs28 
\par 43 Middle and lower leaves cuneate to truncate at base
\par 44 Calyx 10-12 mm
\par 45 Stem and leaves densely glandular-puberulent; leaves
\par    18-40 mm wide ...................................................................... }{\b\fs28 22. menthifolia}{\fs28 
\par 45 Stem and leaves eglandular or sparsely glandular; 
\par    leaves not more than 20 mm wide ................................................... }{\b\fs28 26. recta}{\fs28 
\par 44 Calyx 5-10 mm
\par 46 Corolla 15-20 mm; verticillasters 6- to 16-flowered ...................... }{\b\fs28 26. recta}{\fs28 
\par 46 Corolla 10-16 mm; verticillasters 2- to 6-flowered ...................... }{\b\fs28 53. annua}{\fs28 
\par 30 Corolla white, pink or purple
\par 47 Leaves orbicular to ovate-orbicular, not more than
\par    1\'bd times as long as wide
\par 48 Stem and leaves densely hirsute, green or grey-green;
\par    leaves cordate at base ................................................................. }{\b\fs28 40. circinata}{\fs28 
\par 48 Stem and leaves densely tomentose to sericeous-lanate,
\par    white; leaves rounded at base 
\par 49 Calyx-teeth (2-)4 times as long as wide ....................................}{\b\fs28  45. candida}{\fs28 
\par 49 Calyx-teeth 1\'bd(-2) times as long as wide ...................... }{\b\fs28 46. spreitzenhoferi}{\fs28 
\par 47 Leaves linear-oblong to cordate-ovate, more than 
\par    1\'bd times as long as wide
\par 50 Calyx with eglandular hairs
\par 51 Leaves cordate at base .............................................................. }{\b\fs28 25. palustris}{\fs28 
\par 51 Leaves cuneate at base, rarely truncate
\par 52 Upper lip of corolla 2-fid .......................................................... }{\b\fs28 49. arenaria}{\fs28 
\par 52 Upper lip of corolla entire or crenulate
\par 53 Middle and upper leaves linear-lanceolate, acute, serrate ........ }{\b\fs28 36. spruneri}{\fs28 
\par 53 Middle and upper leaves elliptical or ovate, subobtuse
\par    or obtuse, denticulate ...................................................................... }{\b\fs28 38. ionica}{\fs28 
\par 50 Calyx with glandular hairs 
\par 54 Leaves cordate at base
\par 55 Leaves cordate-ovate, 2-3 times as long as wide, all 
\par    petiolate ..................................................................................... }{\b\fs28 24. sylvatica}{\fs28 
\par 55 Leaves oblong to oblong-lanceolate, usually at least 
\par    4 times as long as wide, the lower shortly petiolate,
\par    the upper sessile ......................................................................... }{\b\fs28 25. palustris}{\fs28 
\par 54 Leaves cuneate, rarely truncate at base
\par 56 Leaves obtuse
\par 57 Stem and leaves \'b1 lanate; pedicels 3-5 mm in flower;
\par    corolla scarcely exceeding calyx ............................................. }{\b\fs28 35. mucronata}{\fs28 
\par 57 Stem and leaves sericeous-pubescent or hirsute; flowers 
\par    sessile or subsessile; corolla 1\'bd-2 times as long as calyx 
\par 58 Upper leaves and bracts sessile, usually conspicuously
\par    net-veined ................................................................................ }{\b\fs28 37. swainsonii}{\fs28 
\par 58 Upper leaves and bracts shortly petiolate, not conspic-
\par    uously net-veined ........................................................................... }{\b\fs28 38. ionica}{\fs28 
\par 56 Leaves acute
\par 59 Calyx-teeth c. \'bd as long as tube ................................................... }{\b\fs28 53. annua}{\fs28 
\par 59 Calyx-teeth about as long as tube
\par 60 Most leaves more than 10 mm wide, oblong-lanceolate to
\par    ovate, less than 4 times as long as wide ..................................... }{\b\fs28 23. plumosa}{\fs28 
\par 60 Middle and upper leaves usually not more than 10 mm wide,  
\par    linear-lanceolate to lanceolate, at least 4 times as long as wide
\par 61 Stem with numerous sessile glands; leaves prominently
\par    veined beneath ............................................................................}{\b\fs28  36. spruneri}{\fs28 
\par 61 Stem eglandular; leaves not prominently veined
\par 62 Calyx with moderately dense, long, appressed hairs;
\par    corolla purple, the lower lip 5-6 mm ............................................. }{\b\fs28 30. iberica}{\fs28 
\par 62 Calyx glabrous or sparsely hirsute; corolla white or
\par    pale pink, the lower lip 8-9 mm ............................................}{\b\fs28  34. leucoglossa}{\fs28 
\par 
\par }
\pard \ {\fs28  Sect BETONICA (L.) Bentham. Perennial stock with persistent terminal rosettes of leaves; flowering stems lateral, usually subscapose. Verticillasters many-flowered; bracteoles as long as or longer than calyx-tube.
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 1. S. alopecuros}{\fs28  (L.) Bentham, }{\i\fs28 Lab. Gen. Sp.}{\fs28  531 (1834) (}{\i\fs28 S. jacquinii}{\fs28  Godron) Fritsch,}{\i\fs28  Betonica alopecuros }{\fs28 L., }{\i\fs28 B. jacquinii}{\fs28  Godron). Erect, hirsute perennial 20-60 cm. Leaves 30-100 \'d7 30-70 mm, triangular- or ovate-cordate, coarsely crenate or crenate-dentate. Verticillasters in a dense spike, the lower sometimes distant. Calyx 7-8 mm, reticulate-veined, the teeth 1/3-1/2 as long as tube. Corolla 15-20 mm, pale yellow; tube not exceeding calyx; upper lip bifid. Meadows, scrub and screes; calcicole. }{\i\fs28 Mountains of C. & S. Europe, eastwards to E. Austria, C. Jugoslavia and S.E. Greece.}{\fs28  Al Au Ga Ge Gr He Hs It Ju.
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 2. S. monieri}{\fs28  (Gouan) P. W. Ball, }{\i\fs28 Bot. Jour. Linn. Soc.}{\b\fs28  65}{\fs28 : 356 (1972) (}{\i\fs28 Betonica monieri}{\fs28  Gouan, }{\i\fs28 B. hirsuta}{\fs28  L., }{\i\fs28 S. densiflora}{\fs28  Bentham). Erect, hirsute perennial 10-40 cm. Leaves 20-80 \'d7 10-30 mm, oblong, cordate at base, crenate. Verticillasters in a dense spike. Calyx 10-15 mm, reticulate-veined; teeth 1/3-1/2 as long as tube. Corolla 20-24 mm, pink; tube exceeding calyx; upper lip entire. }{\i\fs28 Dry pastures. \bullet  Alps and Pyrenees.}{\fs28  Au Ga He Hs It Ju ?Rm.
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 3. S. officinalis}{\fs28  (L.) Trevisan, }{\i\fs28 Prosp. Fl. Euganea}{\fs28  26 (1842) (}{\i\fs28 S. betonica}{\fs28  Bentham,}{\i\fs28  Betonica officinalis}{\fs28  L.; incl. }{\i\fs28 S. bulgarica }{\fs28 (Degen & Nejc.) Hayek).Erect, subglabrous to densely hirsute perennial 15-100 cm. Leaves 30-120 x 15-50 mm, oblong to ovate-oblong, cordate at base, coarsely crenate or crenate dentate. Verticillasters in a dense spike, sometimes interrupted below. Calyx 5-9(-12) mm; teeth \'bc-\'be as long as tube. Corolla 12-18 mm, bright reddish-purple, rarely pink or white; tube exceeding calyx; upper lip entire. 2n = 16.}{\i\fs28  Most of Europe northwards to C. Scotland, S. Sweden and N.W. Russia.}{\fs28  Al Au Be Br Bu Cz Da Ga Ge Gr Hb He Ho Hs Hu It Ju Lu Po Rm Rs (N, B, C, W, K, E) Su Tu [Fe No].
\par  
\par    }{\b\fs28 4. S. balcanica}{\fs28  P. W. Ball, }{\i\fs28 Bot. Jour. Linn. Soc.}{\b\fs28  65}{\fs28 : 262 (1972) (}{\i\fs28 S. haussknechtii}{\fs28  Uechtr. ex Hausskn.) Hayek. non Vatke, }{\i\fs28 Betonica haussknechtii}{\fs28  Uechtr. ex Hausskn.). Like}{\b\fs28  3}{\fs28  but corolla white; calyx-teeth about as long as tube.}{\i\fs28  Woods. \bullet  C. Greece; S.E. Bulgaria.}{\fs28  Bu Gr.
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 5. S. scardica}{\fs28  (Griseb.)Hayek, }{\i\fs28 Prodr. Fl. Penins. Balcan.}{\b\fs28  2}{\fs28 : 280 (1929). Erect, hirsute perennial 30-60 cm. Leaves 40-90 \'d7 20-40 mm, the lower ovate-lanceolate, the middle and upper oblong-lanceolate, coarsely crenate-serrate or dentate, slightly cordate at base, densely grey-stellate-tomentose beneath. Verticillasters in a lax spike. Calyx 9-15 mm; teeth c. \'bd as long as tube. Corolla 15-18 mm, white, sometimes tinged with pink; tube about as long as calyx; upper lip entire. }{\i\fs28 Subalpine meadows and scrub. \bullet  Balkan peninsula.}{\fs28  Al Bu Gr Ju.
\par 
\par  Sect. ERIOSTOMUM (Hoffmanns. & Link) Dumort. Perennial; stock without persistent terminal rosettes of leaves; flowering stems terminal. Verticillasters usually as long as or longer than calyx-tube.
\par 
\par   }{\b\fs28  6. S. balansae}{\fs28  Boiss. & Kotschy  in Boiss., }{\i\fs28 Fl. Or.}{\b\fs28  4}{\fs28 : 722 (1879) (incl.}{\i\fs28  S. heterodonta}{\fs28  Zefirov). Erect, grey, patent- or crispate-hairy perennial 60-100 cm. Leaves 30-100 \'d7 15-50 mm,
\par 
\par 152}
\par }