{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28  Hybrids between {\b 24} and {\b 25} and hybrid swarms derived from these have been recorded from many parts of Europe.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 26. S. recta} L., {\i Mantissa }82 (1767) ({\i S. czernjajevii} Schost.). Erect or ascending, subglabrous to sparsely hirsute, usually eglandular perennial 15-100 cm. Leaves 10-80 × 1-20 mm, the lower oblong to ovate, rounded or cuneate at base, the upper linear to ovate-oblong, glabrous to hirsute, entire to crenate-serrate. Verticillasters 6- to 16-flowered, crowded or the lower distant. Calyx 5-9(-11) mm; teeth shorter than tube. Corolla 15-20 mm, pale yellow, pubescent; upper lip 4-7 mm; lower lip 5-12 mm.{\i  Dry places. Europe northwards to Belgium and C. Russia, but absent from the islands.} Al Au Be Bu Cz Ga Ge Gr He Hs Hu It Ju Po Rm Rs (C, W, K, E) Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  A very variable species containing a large number of subordinate taxa. The following subspecies appear to be the most widespread and distinct of these, but many local populations showing different combinations of characters also occur.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Calyx 5-7 mm; lower lip of corolla 5-7 mm .......................... ({\b a}) subsp. {\b recta}
\par
1 Calyx 7-9(-11) mm; lower lip of corolla 7-12 mm
\par
2 Middle and upper leaves 7-10 mm wide, oblong to obovate,
\par
  crenate or crenate-serrate ................................................... ({\b b}) subsp. {\b labiosa}
\par
2 Middle and upper leaves 1-6 mm wide, linear or linear
\par
  lanceolate, entire or weakly crenate .............................. ({\b c}) subsp. {\b subcrenata}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b recta} : Middle and upper leaves 20-80 × 5-20 mm, oblong to elliptical or oblanceolate, crenate or crenate-serrate. Calyx 5-7 mm, eglandular; teeth more or less equal. Lower lip of corolla 5-7 mm. 2n = 32, 34. {\i Throughout the range of the species}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b labiosa}  (Bertol.) Briq.,{\i  Lab. Alp. Marit.} 259 (1893): Middle and upper leaves 10-30 × 6-10 mm, oblong or elliptical to obovate, crenate or crenate-serrate. Calyx 7-10 mm, often glandular; teeth unequal. Lower lip of corolla 8-12 mm. 2n = 34. {\i Alps, Appennini and W. part of Balkan peninsula.}
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b c}) Subsp. {\b subcrenata}  (Vis.) Briq.,{\i  op. cit}. 257 (1893): Middle and upper leaves 10-60 × 1-6 mm, linear or linear-lanceolate, entire or weakly crenate. Calyx 7-9(-11) mm, often glandular; teeth unequal. Lower lip of corolla 7-12 mm.{\i  S.E. Europe.}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b S. albanica }Markgraf,{\i  Ber. Deutsch. Bot. Ges.}{\b  44}: 428 (1926), from C. Albania, may be a variant of {\b 26}, {\b 28} or {\b 29}. It has the calyx c. 10 mm, with equal teeth about as long as tube, and corolla c. 20 mm, white, the upper lip c. 7 mm, the lower lip c. 10 mm.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 27. S. beckeana} Dörfler & Hayek, {\i Denkschr. Akad. Wiss. Math.-Nat. Kl.} ({\i Wien}){\b  94}: 186 (1918). Like {\b 26} but stem and leaves sparsely lanate; leaves 15-25 × 6-12 mm, ovate, rounded or subcordate at base; calyx 7-8 mm, densely villous and with sessile glands; lower lip of corolla 8-10 mm. {\i Cliffs and screes. • S.W. Jugoslavia, N. Albania.} Al Ju.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Possibly not specifically distinct from {\b 26}.
\par
 
\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 28. S. parolinii} Vis.,{\i  Mem. Ist. Veneto }{\b 1}: 46 (1843). Like {\b 26} but the stem with strongly deflexed hairs; leaves 20-40 × 7-20 mm, lanceolate or elliptical; verticillasters 4- to 6-flowered; calyx 9-10 mm, hirsute and with short, glandular hairs; teeth slightly unequal, upper 2 about as long as tube; upper lip of corolla c. 4 mm, the lower lip 9-10 mm.{\i  Rocky places. • W. Greece.} Gr.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 29. S. atherocalyx} C. Koch,{\i  Linnaea}{\b  21}: 691 (1849). Like {\b 26} but leaves 50-60 × 7-10 mm, linear or lanceolate, crenate-serrate; calyx 10-13 mm, the teeth not more than 1 mm wide, linear-subulate, about as long as tube.{\i  Dry places. Balkan peninsula, S. Romania.} Al Bu Gr Ju Rm.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 30. S. iberica} Bieb.,{\i  Fl. Taur.-Cauc.}{\b  2}: 51 (1808). Erect, glabrous to sparsely appressed-pubescent perennial 25-60 cm. Leaves 25-30 × 6-10 mm, oblong to lanceolate, acute, cuneate at base, crenate, sparsely hairy. Verticillasters 6- to 10-flowered, mostly distant. Calyx 9-10 mm, densely appressed-hairy and with glandular hairs; teeth slightly shorter to slightly longer than tube. Corolla c. 15 mm, purple, hirsute; upper lip 4-5 mm; lower lip 5-6 mm. {\i Dry hillsides and mountain scrub. Krym.} ?Gr Rs (K). ({\i Caucasian region.})
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 31. S. virgata} Bory & Chaub. in Bory, {\i Expéd. Sci. Morée}{\b  3}({\b 2}): 166 (1832). Erect, appressed-hairy perennial 60-90 cm. Leaves c. 25 × c. 5 mm, linear, the lower obtuse, cuneate at base, the upper acute, entire, appressed sericeous-lanate. Verticillasters 2-flowered, distant. Calyx c. 10 mm, densely sericeous; teeth c. ¼ as long as tube. Corolla c. 10 mm, white, sericeous. {\i Dry, rocky places. S. Greece.} Gr.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  A little-known species requiring further investigation.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 32. S. angustifolia} Bieb.,{\i  Fl. Taur.-Cauc.}{\b  2}: 52 (1808). Erect, glabrous perennial 30-60 cm, woody at base. Lower and middle leaves pinnatipartite with linear or filiform lobes; upper leaves simple, narrowly linear. Verticillasters 2-flowered, distant; pedicels 2-5 mm. Calyx 6-8 mm, glabrous or sparsely hairy; teeth c. ½ as long as tube. Corolla 12-16 mm, yellow tinged with pink, pubescent; upper lip 3-4 mm; lower lip 5-8 mm.{\i  Dry places. • S.E. Europe.} Bu Gr Rm Rs (?C, W, K) Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 33. S. tetragona} Boiss. & Heldr. in Boiss.,{\i  Fl. Or.}{\b  4}: 736 (1879). Erect, glabrous or sparsely hairy perennial up to 35 cm, much branched and woody at base. Lower leaves 20-40 × 8-10 mm, oblong-spathulate, obtuse, crenate-dentate; upper leaves 15-25 × 2-3 mm, linear; all appressed-hairy. Verticillasters 2- to 6-flowered, distant. Calyx 6-9 mm, sparsely hairy; teeth c. 1/3 as long as tube. Corolla c. 15 mm, pale yellow with purple markings; upper lip c. 6 mm; lower lip c. 8 mm. {\i Cliffs. • E.C. Greece.} Gr.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 34. S. leucoglossa} Griseb., {\i Spicil. Fl. Rumel.}{\b  2}: 140 (1844) (incl. {\i S. patula }var. {\i samothracica} Degen). Erect, pubescent perennial (10-)30-50 cm. Lower leaves 15-30 × 5-12 mm, broadly elliptical; middle and upper leaves 15-50 × 2·5-6 mm, lanceolate, acute, cuneate at base; all pubescent, crenate-serrate to subentire. Verticillasters usually 6-flowered, in a lax spike or the lower distant. Calyx 6-9 mm, glandular, glabrous or sparsely pubescent; teeth about as long as tube. Corolla 16-18 mm, white or pale pink with purple markings, pubescent; upper lip c. 5 mm; lower lip 8-9 mm.{\i • C. part of Balkan peninsula.} Bu Gr Ju.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 35. S. mucronata} Sieber ex Sprengel,{\i  Syst. Veg.}{\b  2}: 733 (1825). Erect, sparsely lanate perennial 10-50 cm, branched and woody at base. Leaves 20-60 × 5-20 mm, oblong, obtuse, rounded at base, crenate, lanate. Verticillasters 2- to 4-flowered, distant or somewhat crowded; bracteoles about as long as calyx-tube; pedicels 3-8 mm. Calyx 9-12 mm, hairy and with sessile glands; teeth about as long as tube. Corolla 10-12 mm, pale pink, densely hairy; both lips c. 5 mm. 2n = 30.{\i  Cliffs and other dry, open habitats. • Kriti and Karpathos.} Cr.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 36. S. spruneri} Boiss. in DC.,{\i  Prodr.}{\b  12}: 488 (1848). Erect, sparsely hairy and densely glandular perennial 15-30 cm, woody at base. Lower leaves c. 30 × c. 10 mm, oblong-elliptical; middle and upper leaves 15-50 × 3-8 mm, linear-lanceolate, acute, cuneate at base, serrate, sparsely hispid. Verticillasters 4- to
\par

\par
155}
\par