{\rtf1\ansi \deff4\deflang1033{\fonttbl{\f4\froman\fcharset0\fprq2 Times New Roman;}}{\colortbl;\red0\green0\blue0;\red0\green0\blue255;\red0\green255\blue255;\red0\green255\blue0;\red255\green0\blue255;\red255\green0\blue0;\red255\green255\blue0;\red255\green255\blue255;\red0\green0\blue128;\red0\green128\blue128;\red0\green128\blue0;\red128\green0\blue128;\red128\green0\blue0;\red128\green128\blue0;\red128\green128\blue128;\red192\green192\blue192;}{\stylesheet{\widctlpar \f4\fs20\lang2057 \snext0 Normal;}{\*\cs10 \additive Default Paragraph Font;}}{\info{\author dddd}{\operator dddd}{\creatim\yr1998\mo11\dy11\hr17\min35}{\revtim\yr1998\mo11\dy11\hr17\min36}{\version2}{\edmins1}{\nofpages3}{\nofwords1011}{\nofchars5764}{\*\company  }{\vern57431}}\widowctrl\ftnbj\aenddoc\hyphcaps0 \fet0\sectd \linex0 {\*\pnseclvl1\pnucrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl2\pnucltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl3\pndec\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl4\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl5\pndec\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl6\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl7\pnlcrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl8\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl9\pnlcrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}
\pard\plain \ \f4\fs20\lang2057 {\fs28 linear-oblong to oblanceolate, obtuse, cuneate at base, crenate-dentate, sparsely villous-lanate. Verticillasters 6- to 10-flowered, distant. Calyx 8-12 mm, densely villous and with sessile glands; teeth as long as or slightly shorter than tube. Corolla 15-18 mm, reddish-purple, pubescent; upper lip 6-8 mm, 2-fid; lower lip 7-8 mm. }{\i\fs28 Sandy ground near the sea. Italy and Sicilia.}{\fs28  ?Hs It Si. (N. Africa.)
\par 
\par  Sect. OLISIA Dumort. Annuals, rarely short-lived perennials. Verticillasters not more than 6-flowered; bracteoles usually absent or minute.
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 50. S. corsica}{\fs28  Pers.,}{\i\fs28  Syn. Pl.}{\b\fs28  2}{\fs28 : 124 (1806). Procumbent, sparsely hairy short-lived perennial, with slender creeping stems often rooting at nodes. Leaves 5-10(-17) mm, suborbicular to orbicular-ovate, with 3-7(-10) broad crenations. Verticillasters 2-flowered or flowers solitary, remote. Calyx 5-6 mm, densely hairy; teeth about as long as tube, obtuse, aristate or mucronate. Corolla 12-18 mm, white to purple; upper lip 4-6 mm, emarginate or 2-fid; lower lip 6-10 mm. 2n = 16. }{\i\fs28 Damp places. \bullet  Mountains of Corse and Sardegna. }{\fs28 Co Sa.
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 51. S. ocymastrum}{\fs28  (L.) Briq., }{\i\fs28 Lab. Alp. Marit.}{\fs28  252 (1893) (}{\i\fs28 S. hirta}{\fs28  L.). Erect, hirsute annual 20-50 cm. Leaves 10-50 \'d7 7-40 mm, oblong-ovate to broadly ovate, obtuse, slightly cordate at base, crenate-serrate, hirsute. Verticillasters 4- to 6-flowered, remote or the upper crowded. Calyx 7-10 mm, hirsute; teeth equal, as long as or longer than tube. Corolla 12-15 mm, yellow or white with yellow lower lip; tube shorter than calyx; upper lip c. 6 mm, 2-fid; lower lip c. 7 mm. 2n = 18.}{\i\fs28  S.W. Europe, Italy; once recorded from Kriti.}{\fs28  Bl Co Cr Ga Hs It Lu Sa Si.
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 52. S. marrubiifolia}{\fs28  Viv.,}{\i\fs28  Fl. Cors., App.}{\b\fs28  1}{\fs28 : 2 (1825). Erect, hairy annual 10-50 cm. Leaves 20-60 \'d7 15-45 mm, ovate-orbicular to suborbicular, obtuse, cordate at base, crenate or crenate-dentate. Verticillasters 4- to 6-flowered, the upper crowded, the lower distant. Calyx 8-10 mm, densely hairy; 2 upper teeth 4-4\'b75 mm, about as long as tube; 3 lower teeth 3-3\'b75 mm. Corolla c. 15 mm, pink; tube shorter than calyx; upper lip c. 5 mm, entire; lower lip c. 7 mm. 2n = 16. }{\i\fs28 Maritime sands. W. Italy, Corse.}{\fs28  Co It. (}{\i\fs28 N.W. Africa}{\fs28 .)
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 53. S. annua}{\fs28  (L.) L., }{\i\fs28 Sp. Pl.}{\fs28  ed. 2, 813 (1763). Erect, pubescent and sometimes glandular annual, rarely short-lived perennial 10-40 cm. Leaves 10-60 \'d7 5-20(-30) mm, lanceolate, acute, rounded or cuneate at base, crenate or crenate-dentate, glabrous or pubescent. Verticillasters 2- to 6-flowered, the upper crowded, the lower distant. Calyx 5-8 mm, hirsute and with sessile glands; teeth equal, c. \'bd as long as tube. Corolla 10-16 mm, white or pale yellow, sometimes with red spots; tube exceeding calyx; upper lip 3-7 mm, entire; lower lip 4-7 mm. }{\i\fs28 Cultivated fields and other open habitats; somewhat calcicole. Most of Europe except the north, but doubtfully native in much of the centre and west.}{\fs28  Al Au Be Bu Cz Ga Ge Gr He Ho Hs Hu It Ju Po Rm Rs (B, C, W, K, E) Tu [Da No Su].
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 54. S. spinulosa}{\fs28  Sibth. & Sm.,}{\i\fs28  Fl. Graec. Prodr.}{\b\fs28  1}{\fs28 : 410 (1809). Erect, hispid and glandular-pubescent annual 10-60 cm; stem scabrid on the angles. Leaves 20-60 \'d7 10-40 mm, ovate, the lower cordate, the upper rounded at base, crenate, sparsely hairy. Verticillasters 4- to 6-flowered, the upper crowded, the lower distant. Calyx 9-11 mm, glandular-pubescent; teeth c. \'bd as long as tube. Corolla 20-22 mm, white or pale yellow with purple spots, glandular-pubescent; tube exceeding calyx; upper lip 5-8 mm, entire; lower lip 8-11 mm. }{\i\fs28 Balkan peninsula.}{\fs28  Al Cr Gr Ju.
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 55. S. milanii}{\fs28  Petrovic, Scrin. Fl. Select. (Magnier) 6: 117 (1887). Erect, glandular-pubescent annual 15-50 cm. Leaves 20-45 \'d7 10-25 mm, oblong to ovate, obtuse, rounded or cuneate at base, crenate-serrate, pubescent. Verticillasters 2- to 6-flowered, remote. Calyx 7-9 mm, densely glandular-pubescent; teeth c. 2/3 as long as tube. Corolla c.20 mm, pale yellow; tube about as long as calyx; upper lip 5-6 mm, entire; lower lip c. 12 mm. }{\i\fs28 Grassland. E. Jugoslavia, S. & E. Bulgaria}{\fs28 . Bu Ju.
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 56. S. arvensis}{\fs28  (L.) L., Sp. Pl. ed. 2, 814 (1763). Erect, hirsute annual 10-40 cm. Leaves 10-40 \'d7 8-30 mm, cordate-ovate, obtuse, crenate, hirsute. Verticillasters 4- to 6-flowered, usually 6-12, the upper crowded, the lower distant. Calyx 5-7(-8) mm, hirsute; teeth about as long as tube. Corolla 6-8 mm, white, pale pink or purple, scarcely exceeding calyx; upper lip c. 2 mm, entire; lower lip 2-3 mm. 2n = 10. }{\i\fs28 Cultivated fields and sandy ground; usually}{\fs28  }{\i\fs28 calcifuge. S., W. & C. Europe eastwards to W. Poland, W. Jugoslavia and Kriti and northwards to S. Sweden; an occasional casual further north and}{\fs28  }{\i\fs28 east}{\fs28 . Al Au Az Be Bl Br Co Cr Da Ga Ge Gr Hb He Ho Hs It Ju Lu Po Sa Si Su.
\par 
\par   A common weed almost throughout its range.
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 57. S. brachyclada}{\fs28  De No\'eb ex Cosson,}{\i\fs28  Ann. Sci. Nat}{\fs28 . ser. 4, }{\b\fs28 1}{\fs28 : 226 (1854). Ascending, densely hirsute annual 10-40 cm. Leaves 15-30 \'d7 12-20 mm, ovate-orbicular, cordate at base, crenate, hirsute. Verticillasters 2- to 6-flowered, usually more than 12, the upper crowded, the lower distant. Calyx 7-10 mm, densely hairy; teeth slightly unequal, the upper 2 about as long as tube. Corolla 7-12 mm, white or pale pink with purple markings, scarcely exceeding calyx; upper lip c. 2 mm, emarginate; lower lip c. 2 mm. \bullet }{\i\fs28  Coasts of W. Mediterranean region}{\fs28  (}{\i\fs28 very local}{\fs28 ). Bl Ga Hs. (}{\i\fs28 N. W. Africa.}{\fs28 )
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 58. S. serbica}{\fs28  Pancic, }{\i\fs28 Fl. Princ. Serb.}{\fs28  564 (1874). Erect, hirsute annual 10-25 cm. Leaves 10-40 \'d7 8-25 mm, oblong-ovate to broadly triangular-ovate, obtuse, cordate or rounded at base, crenate to crenate-serrate. Verticillasters 4- to 6-flowered, crowded into a capitulum, rarely with 1 verticillaster distant; bracteoles about as long as calyx. Calyx 7-14 mm, densely hirsute; teeth about as long as tube, recurved in fruit. Corolla 10-20 mm, reddish-purple; tube about as long as calyx; upper lip 4-5 mm, entire; lower lip 3\'b75-4 mm.}{\i\fs28  Grassland. Balkan peninsula.}{\fs28  Al Bu Gr Ju.
\par 
\par }
\pard \qc\ {\b\fs28 17.              Cedronella}{\fs28              Moench
\par }{\fs24 By D. Bramwell
\par 
\par }
\pard \ {\fs28 Perennial herbs, woody at the base. Leaves 3(4)-foliolate. Inflorescence dense, terminal, racemiform or capituliform, the lowest verticillaster often remote. Bracts simple. Calyx tubular campanulate, 13- to 15-veined, with 5 equal teeth. Corolla infundibuliform, 2-lipped; upper lip 2-lobed; lower lip 3-lobed, the middle lobe the longest. Stamens equalling or slightly exceeding the corolla, curved under the upper lip. Style-branches subequal.
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 1. C. canariensis}{\fs28  (L.) Webb & Berth.,}{\i\fs28  Phyt. Canar.}{\fs28  }{\b\fs28 3}{\fs28 : 87 (1845). Aromatic. Stems up to 150 cm, glabrous. Leaves 3(4)-foliolate; leaflets 6-13 \'d7 1\'b75-4\'b75 cm, lanceolate, acuminate, often asymmetrical at the base, petiolate, glabrous above, pubescent beneath, serrate, the central the longest. Bracts 5-6 mm, linear, ciliate. Calyx-tube 8-12 mm, puberulent; teeth 3\'b75-4 mm, acuminate. Corolla 16-20 mm, pinkish to lilac, rarely white, puberulent. Nutlets 1\'b75-2 mm, broadly ellipsoid, rounded at apex.}{\i\fs28  Acores.}{\fs28  [*Az.] (}{\i\fs28 Madeira, Canarias}{\fs28 .)
\par 
\par 157}
\par }