{\rtf1\ansi \deff4\deflang1033{\fonttbl{\f4\froman\fcharset0\fprq2 Times New Roman;}}{\colortbl;\red0\green0\blue0;\red0\green0\blue255;\red0\green255\blue255;\red0\green255\blue0;\red255\green0\blue255;\red255\green0\blue0;\red255\green255\blue0;\red255\green255\blue255;\red0\green0\blue128;\red0\green128\blue128;\red0\green128\blue0;\red128\green0\blue128;\red128\green0\blue0;\red128\green128\blue0;\red128\green128\blue128;\red192\green192\blue192;}{\stylesheet{\widctlpar \f4\fs20\lang2057 \snext0 Normal;}{\*\cs10 \additive Default Paragraph Font;}}{\info{\author dddd}{\operator dddd}{\creatim\yr1998\mo11\dy11\hr17\min34}{\revtim\yr1998\mo11\dy11\hr17\min35}{\version2}{\edmins1}{\nofpages4}{\nofwords1022}{\nofchars5828}{\*\company  }{\vern57431}}\widowctrl\ftnbj\aenddoc\hyphcaps0 \fet0\sectd \linex0 {\*\pnseclvl1\pnucrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl2\pnucltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl3\pndec\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl4\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl5\pndec\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl6\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl7\pnlcrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl8\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl9\pnlcrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}
\pard\plain \ \f4\fs20\lang2057 {\fs28   6-flowered, crowded into a dense, ovoid spike. Calyx 9-12 mm, hirsute, glandular; teeth about as long as tube. Corolla 16-18 mm, white; upper lip c. 5 mm; lower lip c. 10 mm.}{\i\fs28  Cliffs.\bullet  S.E. Greece.}{\fs28  Gr.
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 37. S. swainsonii}{\fs28  Bentham, }{\i\fs28 Lab. Gen. Sp.}{\fs28  535 (1834). Procumbent to erect, sericeous-pubescent to lanate-hirsute perennial 10-20 cm, branched and woody at base. Leaves 10-30 \'d7 5-18 mm, oblong or elliptical to obovate, obtuse, cuneate at base, usually conspicuously net-veined, crenate or denticulate; upper leaves and bracts sessile. Verticillasters 2- to 10-flowered, crowded. Calyx 6-10 mm, hirsute or lanate-hirsute and glandular-hairy; teeth as long as or slightly shorter than tube. Corolla 14-18 mm,  white or pale pink with pink markings; upper lip 2\'b75-5 mm;  lower lip 5-8 mm. }{\i\fs28 Rock-crevices. \bullet  S. & S.C. Greece.}{\fs28  Gr.
\par 
\par }
\pard \li200\ {\fs28 1 Lanate or lanate-hirsute; lower leaves not more than 15 mm
\par   ........................................................................................... (}{\b\fs28 c}{\fs28 ) subsp. }{\b\fs28 scyronica}{\fs28 
\par 1 Sericeous-pubescent or hirsute; lower leaves up to 30 mm
\par 2 Verticillasters 2- to 6-flowered; hairs on stem and 
\par   leaves \'b1 appressed .......................................................... (}{\b\fs28 a}{\fs28 ) subsp. }{\b\fs28 swainsonii}{\fs28 
\par 2 Verticillasters 4- to 10-flowered; hairs on stem and 
\par   leaves \'b1 patent .................................................................... (}{\b\fs28 b}{\fs28 ) subsp. }{\b\fs28 argolica}{\fs28 
\par 
\par }
\pard \ {\fs28  (}{\b\fs28 a}{\fs28 ) Subsp. }{\b\fs28 swainsonii}{\fs28  : Plant sericeous-pubescent or hirsute, the hairs more or less appressed. Lower leaves up to 30 mm. Verticillasters 2-to 6-flowered. 2n = 34.}{\i\fs28  S.C. Greece}{\fs28  (}{\i\fs28 Parnassos}{\fs28 ).
\par  (}{\b\fs28 b}{\fs28 ) Subsp. }{\b\fs28 argolica}{\fs28   (Boiss.) Phitos & Damboldt,}{\i\fs28  Ber. Deutsch. Bot. Ges. }{\b\fs28 82}{\fs28 : 600 (1969) (}{\i\fs28 S. argolica }{\fs28 Boiss.): Like subsp. (}{\b\fs28 a}{\fs28 ) but the hairs more or less patent. Verticillasters 4- to 10-flowered. 2n = 34.}{\i\fs28  S.E. Greece}{\fs28  (}{\i\fs28 Argolis}{\fs28 ).
\par  (}{\b\fs28 c}{\fs28 ) Subsp. }{\b\fs28 scyronica}{\fs28   (Boiss.) Phitos & Damboldt,}{\i\fs28  loc. cit.}{\fs28  (1969): Plant lanate-hirsute. Lower leaves not more than 15 mm.}{\i\fs28  S.E. Greece}{\fs28  (}{\i\fs28 near Megara}{\fs28 ).
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 38. S. ionica}{\fs28  Hal\'e1csy, }{\i\fs28 Consp. Fl. Graec., Suppl.}{\fs28  85 (1908). Like }{\b\fs28 37}{\fs28  but lanate or lanate-hirsute; leaves ovate or ovate-elliptical, truncate or rounded at base, not conspicuously net-veined; upper leaves and bracts petiolate; calyx with mostly sessile glands. }{\i\fs28 Cliffs, rocks. \bullet  W. Greece}{\fs28  (}{\i\fs28 Ionioi Nisoi}{\fs28 ). Gr.
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 39. S. euboica}{\fs28  Rech. fil., }{\i\fs28 Bot. Jahrb.}{\b\fs28  80}{\fs28 : 391 (1961). Ascending, hirsute and densely glandular perennial 15-20 cm, branched and woody at base. Lower leaves up to 30 \'d7 20 mm, obovate; middle and upper leaves 20-50 \'d7 10-25 mm, oblong or elliptic-lanceolate; all obtuse or subacute, cuneate at base, crenate to serrate. Verticillasters c. 6-flowered, crowded; bracteoles about as long as calyx-tube. Calyx 11-14 mm; teeth as long as or slightly longer than tube. Corolla white. 2n = 34.}{\i\fs28  Limestone cliffs. \bullet  S.E. Greece}{\fs28  (}{\i\fs28 S. Evvoia}{\fs28 ). Gr.
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 40. S. circinata}{\fs28  L'H\'e9r., }{\i\fs28 Stirp. Nov. }{\fs28 51 (1786). Erect, densely hirsute perennial 20-45 cm. Leaves 20-50 \'d7 15-50 mm, ovate-orbicular, obtuse, deeply cordate at base, crenate, densely hirsute.  Verticillasters c. 6-flowered, more or less distant. Calyx 8-10 mm,  villous and sparsely glandular; teeth c. 2/3 as long as tube. Corolla  15-20 mm, white to bright pinkish-purple, pubescent; upper lip  5-8 mm; lower lip 10-12 mm.}{\i\fs28  Cliffs and screes. S. Spain. }{\fs28 Hs.
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 41. S. glutinosa}{\fs28  L.,}{\i\fs28  Sp. Pl. }{\fs28 581 (1753). Small shrub 10-60 cm, the lower branches persistent and becoming softly spinose; stems with sparse, patent hairs and sessile glands. Leaves 15-35 \'d7 3-5 mm, oblong-spathulate to linear-lanceolate, obtuse, cuneate at base, entire, glabrescent but with dense, sessile glands. Verticillasters 2-flowered, or flowers solitary, remote. Calyx 7-11 mm, glabrescent but glandular; teeth c. \'be as long as tube. Corolla 10-13 mm, white or violet, pubescent; upper lip 2\'b75-4 mm; lower lip 4-6 mm. 2n = 32.}{\i\fs28  Dry places. \bullet  Corse, Sardegna, Capraia.}{\fs28  Co It Sa.
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 42. S. spinosa}{\fs28  L.,}{\i\fs28  Sp. Pl.}{\fs28  581 (1753). Tussock-forming perennial up to 30 cm; stems spinose, appressed-sericeous-lanate and often glandular. Leaves 10-35 \'d7 3-8 mm, caducous, linear-oblong, entire or crenate, densely sericeous-lanate. Verticillasters 4- to 6-flowered, usually 2-3 crowded together. Calyx 6-9 mm, hirsute and with sessile glands; teeth c. \'be as long as tube. Corolla c. 15 mm, pale pink, sericeous; upper lip c. 5 mm; lower lip 6-8 mm.}{\i\fs28  Dry, stony places and cliffs. \'bd S. Aegean region.}{\fs28  Cr Gr.
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 43. S. iva}{\fs28  Griseb.,}{\i\fs28  Spicil. Fl. Rumel.}{\b\fs28  2}{\fs28 : 143 (1844). Ascending, white-lanate perennial 15-40 cm, woody at base. Leaves 15-60 \'d7 4-15 mm, linear-lanceolate to obovate-elliptical, obtuse, cuneate at base, crenate, densely white-lanate. Verticillasters 4- to 6-flowered, crowded or the lower distant. Calyx 8-12 mm, white-tomentose; teeth slightly shorter to as long as tube. Corolla 15-20 mm, yellow, tomentose; upper lip 4-6 mm; lower lip 7-10 mm.}{\i\fs28  Stony slopes, rocks and cliffs; calcicole. \bullet  S. Jugoslavia, N. Greece.}{\fs28  Gr Ju.
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 44. S. chrysantha}{\fs28  Boiss. & Heldr. in Boiss., }{\i\fs28 Diagn. Pl. Or. Nov.}{\b\fs28  1}{\fs28 (}{\b\fs28 7}{\fs28 ): 56 (1846). Procumbent or ascending, white-tomentose perennial 10-20 cm, woody and branched at base. Leaves 10-25 \'d7 8-15 mm, suborbicular or ovate-orbicular, white-lanate-tomentose, slightly crenate. Verticillasters 4- to 6-flowered, more or less crowded. Calyx 6-9 mm, white-tomentose, eglandular; teeth \'bd as long to as long as tube, c. 3 times as long as wide. Corolla 12-14 mm, yellow, tomentose; upper lip 4-6 mm; lower lip 6-8 mm. }{\i\fs28 Cliffs and screes. \bullet  S. Greece}{\fs28  (}{\i\fs28 Lakonia}{\fs28 ). Gr.
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 45. S. candida}{\fs28  Bory & Chaub. in Bory, }{\i\fs28 Expéd. Sci. Morée}{\fs28  }{\b\fs28 3}{\fs28 (}{\b\fs28 2}{\fs28 ): 167 (1832). Like }{\b\fs28 44}{\fs28  but calyx-teeth (2-)4 times as long as wide; corolla 15-18 mm, white with purple spots. \bullet }{\i\fs28  S. Greece }{\fs28 (}{\i\fs28 Ta\'efyetos}{\fs28 ). Gr.
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 46. S. spreitzenhoferi}{\fs28  Heldr.,}{\i\fs28  \'d6sterr. Bot. Zeitschr.}{\b\fs28  30}{\fs28 : 344 (1880). Like }{\b\fs28 44}{\fs28  but calyx sometimes glandular-hairy, the teeth 1\'bd(-2) times as long as wide; corolla white with pink spots.}{\i\fs28  Cliffs. \bullet  S. Greece.}{\fs28  Gr.
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 47. S. maritima}{\fs28  Gouan, }{\i\fs28 Fl. Monsp.}{\fs28  91 (1764). Erect or ascending, tomentose-hirsute perennial 10-30 cm, with persistent rosettes of leaves. Leaves 10-30 \'d7 6-20 mm, oblong or elliptic-oblong to broadly ovate, obtuse, rounded or cuneate at base, crenate, villous-tomentose. Verticillasters 4- to 6-flowered, crowded. Calyx 5-10 mm, villous-tomentose; teeth c. \'bd as long as tube. Corolla 12-14 mm, pale yellow, tomentose; upper lip 4-5 mm; lower lip 5-6 mm. }{\i\fs28 Maritime sands. Coasts of the Mediterranean and Black Sea.}{\fs28  Al Bu Co Ga Hs It Ju Tu.
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 48. S. pubescens}{\fs28  Ten., }{\i\fs28 Fl. Nap.}{\b\fs28  1}{\fs28 ,}{\b\fs28  }{\i\fs28 Prodr}{\fs28 .: 34 (1811). Erect or ascending, appressed-pubescent perennial 20-40 cm, with persistent rosettes of leaves. Leaves c. 25 \'d7 4-5 mm, oblong to oblong-ovate, obtuse, rounded or cuneate at base, entire, pubescent. Verticillasters 4- to 6-flowered, more or less distant. Calyx 7-10 mm, villous and with sessile glands; teeth \'bd-\'be as long as tube. Corolla c. 12 mm, pale yellow, pubescent; upper lip 2-3 mm; lower lip c. 4 mm.}{\i\fs28  Maritime sands. S. & E. Italy; Jugoslavia; Krym.}{\fs28  It Ju Rs (K).
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 49. S. arenaria}{\fs28  Vahl, }{\i\fs28 Symb. Bot.}{\b\fs28  2}{\fs28 : 64 (1791). Procumbent, sparsely hispid perennial 20-80 cm. Leaves 25-60 \'d7 6-12 mm, 
\par 
\par 156}
\par }
