{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 oblong-ovate, truncate or more or less cordate at base, crenate-dentate, sparsely hairy above, tomentose beneath. Verticillasters many-flowered, mostly distant; pedicels 1-2 mm in flower. Calyx 8-9 mm; teeth unequal, the uppermost c. ½ as long as tube. Corolla c. 13 mm, pink, densely villous; upper lip entire. {\i Meadows and wood-margins. Krym.} Rs (K). ({\i Caucasian region.})
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    ({\b 7-16}).{\b  S. germanica} group. Erect, grey- or white-hairy perennials (10-)20-100(-120) cm. Leaves usually crenate or crenate-serrate. Verticillasters many-flowered, usually distant; flowers sessile or subsessile. Calyx 6-12 mm; teeth equal or unequal. Corolla 15-25 mm, usually pink or purple, densely hairy; upper lip entire or emarginate.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  A taxonomically difficult group in need of revision. Species {\b 8-15} are often difficult to distinguish from each other and some authors have considered them to be variants of a single species.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Stem with glandular hairs ................................................................ {\b 7. alpina}
\par
1 Stem without glandular hairs
\par
2 Most leaves ± cuneate at base
\par
3 Calyx-teeth recurved after flowering, usually glandular ............... {\b 12. thirkei}
\par
3 Calyx-teeth not recurved, eglandular
\par
4 Upper surface of leaves moderately densely hairy, the 
\par
  surface more or less visible beneath the indumentum .................... {\b 14. cretica}
\par
4 Upper surface of leaves densely sericeous-lanate, the 
\par
  surface completely obscured by the indumentum ..................... {\b 15. byzantina}
\par
2 Most leaves truncate or cordate at base
\par
5 Calyx-teeth 5-7 , with an arista 1·5-3 mm ...................................... {\b 13. cassia}
\par
5 Calyx-teeth 3-5 mm, with an arista less than 1·5(-2) mm
\par
6 Leaves green beneath ................................................................. {\b 16. heraclea}
\par
6 Leaves grey-green to white beneath
\par
7 Whole plant very densely white-tomentose or lanate-tomentose; 
\par
  calyx-teeth all equal
\par
8 Stem usually more than 30 cm; upper bracts shorter than
\par
  flowers; bracteoles lanceolate ................................................. {\b 10. tournefortii}
\par
8 Stem 15-30 cm; upper bracts exceeding flowers; bracteoles
\par
  subulate ................................................................................. {\b 11. sericophylla}
\par
7 At least the upper surface of the leaves grey-green and
\par
  only moderately densely tomentose; upper 2 calyx-teeth 
\par
  usually longer than the lower 3
\par
9 Calyx-teeth eglandular, not recurved in fruit ............................ {\b 8. germanica}
\par
9 Calyx-teeth glandular, usually ± recurved in fruit ..................... {\b 9. tymphaea}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 7. S. alpina} L.,{\i  Sp. Pl.} 581 (1753). Stems 30-100 cm, hirsute or hirsute-tomentose and with glandular hairs at least above. Leaves 50-180 × 30-90 mm, oblong-ovate or ovate, cordate at base, grey or grey-green. Calyx 6-12 mm, glandular; teeth unequal, the upper 2 c. ½ as long as tube. Corolla 15-22 mm, dull purple, rarely tinged with yellow.{\i  Shady places, mainly in the mountains. W., C. & S. Europe, northwards to Wales.} Al Au Be Br Bu Cz Ga Ge Hs Hu It Ju Po Rm Rs (W).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 8. S. germanica} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 581 (1753). Stems 30-100(-120) cm, tomentose or lanate-tomentose, eglandular. Leaves 30-120 × 10-50 mm, oblong to oblong-ovate, cordate, grey-tomentose beneath, green above. Calyx 6-12 mm, eglandular; teeth unequal, the upper 2 1/3-1/2 as long as tube. Corolla 15-20 mm. 2n = 30. {\i W., C. & S. Europe northwards to S. England, and extending eastwards to} c. 38° {\i E. in S.C. Russia}. Al Au Be Bl Br Bu Co Cz Ga Ge Gr He Hs Hu It Ju Lu Po Rm Rs (C, W, K) Sa Si Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Lowest bracts triangular-ovate, cordate, widest at the base
\par
  .......................................................................................... ({\b c}) subsp. {\b lusitanica}
\par
1 Lowest bracts cuneate at base, not cordate, widest 
\par
  above the base
\par
2 Calyx-teeth c. ½ as long as tube .................................... ({\b a}) subsp. {\b germanica}
\par
2 Calyx-teeth c. 1/3 as long as tube ................................. ({\b b}) subsp. {\b heldreichii}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b germanica} : Lowest bracts cuneate at base, widest above the base. Calyx-teeth c. ½ as long as tube. {\i Almost throughout the range of the species}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b heldreichii}  (Boiss.) Hayek,{\i  Prodr. Fl. Penins. Balcan.}{\b  2}: 285 (1929): Like subsp. ({\b a}) but calyx-teeth c. 1/3 as long as tube.{\i  S. part of Balkan peninsula}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b c}) Subsp. {\b lusitanica}  (Hoffmanns. & Link) Coutinho, {\i Fl. Port.} 520 (1913): Lowest bracts triangular-ovate, cordate, widest at the base. {\i S. part of Iberian peninsula}.
\par
 
\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 9. S. tymphaea} Hausskn.,{\i  Mitt. Thür. Bot. Ver. Ser.} 1,{\b  5}: 70 (1886) ({\i S. reinertii} Heldr. ex Halácsy). Like {\b 8} but stems 10-50 cm; leaves 30-60 × 10-35 mm, oblong-ovate or ovate; calyx-teeth glandular, usually recurved in fruit. •{\i  C. & S. Italy; W. part of Balkan peninsula.} Al Gr It Ju.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 10. S. tournefortii} Poiret in Lam.,{\i  Encycl. Méth. Bot.}{\b  13}: 227 (1817). Stems 30-100 cm, very densely white-lanate-tomentose, eglandular. Leaves 50-75 × 30-50 mm, ovate or ovate-oblong, cordate, densely white-tomentose. Upper bracts shorter than flowers; bracteoles lanceolate. Calyx 6-12 mm, eglandular; teeth equal, c. 1/3 as long as tube. Corolla 15-20 mm.{\i  Dry, rocky places. Kriti.} Cr. ({\i Libya}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 11. S. sericophylla} Halácsy, {\i Consp. Fl. Graec}.{\b  2}: 519 (1902). Like {\b 10} but stems not more than 30 cm; all bracts exceeding the flowers; bracteoles subulate.{\i  Mountain rocks. • S. Albania}. Al.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 12. S. thirkei} C. Koch, {\i Linnaea}{\b  21}: 685 (1849). Stems 30-100 cm, densely white-tomentose, eglandular. Leaves 30-60 × 10-20 mm, oblong-lanceolate, cuneate at base, densely white-tomentose or sometimes grey-green and only moderately densely tomentose above. Verticillasters sometimes crowded into a short, dense spike. Calyx c. 10 mm; teeth slightly unequal, glandular, recurved after flowering, the uppermost c. ½ as long as tube. Corolla c. 15 mm. {\i Dry, rocky places. Balkan peninsula; S. Italy}. Bu Gr It Ju Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 13. S. cassia} (Boiss.) Boiss., {\i Diagn. Pl. Or. Nov.}{\b  2}({\b 13}): 74 (1853). Stems 30-100 cm, tomentose or lanate-tomentose, eglandular. Leaves 30-120 × 15-60 mm, oblong-ovate to ovate, more or less cordate, green and sparsely pubescent or tomentose above, grey-green and moderately densely tomentose beneath. Calyx 10-12 mm; teeth eglandular, slightly unequal, almost as long as tube, with an arista 1·5-3 mm. Corolla 15-20 mm. {\i Dry, rocky places. C. part of Balkan peninsula.} Bu Gr Ju.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 14. S. cretica} L.,{\i  Sp. Pl.} 581 (1753) ({\i S. italica} Miller). Stems 20-80 cm, tomentose to lanate. Leaves 30-100 × 10-30 mm, oblong-ovate to ovate, cuneate at base, rarely the basal truncate or subcordate, tomentose and grey-green above, densely tomentose or lanate, grey or white beneath. Calyx 6-12 mm; teeth usually eglandular, slightly unequal, c. ½ as long as tube. Corolla 15-20 mm.{\i  S. Europe from S. France eastwards}. Al Bu Cr Ga Gr It Ju Rs (K) Si Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Calyx-teeth with arista 1-2 mm ...................................... ({\b c}) subsp. {\b bulgarica}
\par
1 Calyx-teeth with arista not more than 1 mm
\par
2 Lowest leaves at least 3 times as long as wide, cuneate
\par
  at base .................................................................................. ({\b a}) subsp. {\b cretica}
\par
2 Lowest leaves usually less than 3 times as long as wide,
\par
  often rounded or subcordate at base ............................... ({\b b}) subsp. {\b salviifolia} 
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b cretica} : Stems usually densely lanate or lanate-tomentose. Leaves at least 3 times as long as wide, cuneate at base. Verticillasters distant. Calyx-teeth with arista not more than 1 mm. {\i C. & S. Greece and Aegean region; Krym}.
\par

\par
153}
\par