{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 21 Leaves oblong-lanceolate, obtuse ........................................ {\b 9. acropolitana} 
\par
21 Leaves triangular-ovate to elliptical, acute
\par
22 Calyx 4-5 mm; plant densely patent-pubescent ......................... {\b 10. hispida}
\par
22 Calyx 2·5-3·5 mm; plant subglabrous to ± sparsely pubescent
\par
   ................................................................................................. {\b 8. microphylla} 
\par
19 At least some leaves more than 6 mm
\par
23 Calyx villous, with patent hairs more than 0·5 mm .................. {\b 13. nervosa}
\par
23 Calyx glabrous or pubescent, with hairs less than 0·5 mm
\par
24 Calyx c. 3 mm; corolla 5-9 mm .............................................. {\b 2. thymifolia} 
\par
24 Calyx 5-8 mm; corolla 10-16 mm
\par
25 Densely patent-pubescent; calyx with 15 veins ........................ {\b 12. croatica}
\par
25 Puberulent or sparsely pubescent; calyx with 13 veins ......... {\b 11. marginata}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. M. fruticosa} (L.) Druce,{\i  Rep. Bot. Exch. Club Brit. Is. }{\b 3}: 421 (1914) ({\i M. marifolia} (Cav.) Bentham). Dwarf shrub 30-60 cm, minutely whitish-velutinous; branches divaricate. Leaves 5-20 × 2-12 mm, lanceolate to ovate-orbicular, entire to weakly sinuate or dentate, flat. Verticillasters with 10-30(-50) flowers, lax, greatly exceeding subtending leaves. Calyx (1·5-)2·5-3·5 mm, obovoid-tubular to obconic, densely villous in throat; teeth c. ¼ as long as tube, triangular, equal. Corolla 5-10 mm, whitish. Nutlets obtuse.{\i  Usually calcicole. E. Spain; C. Italy; S.W. Jugoslavia; Krym.} ?Gr Hs It Ju Rs (K).
\par

\par
 ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b fruticosa} : Leaves strongly punctate beneath. Calyx and pedicels velutinous; calyx obovoid-tubular. •{\i  E. Spain; C. Italy}.
\par
 ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b serpyllifolia}  (Bieb.) P. H. Davis,{\i  Kew Bull.} [6]: 77 (1951) ({\i M. serpyllifolia }(Bieb.) Boiss.): Leaves not punctate beneath. Calyx and pedicels puberulent; calyx obconic.{\i  Krym; S.W. Jugoslavia.} ({\i S.W. Asia}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. M. thymifolia} (Scop.) Fritsch in A. Kerner, {\i Sched. Fl. Exsicc. Austro-Hung.}{\b  8}: 119 (1899) ({\i Satureja thymifolia} Scop.). Stems 20-50 cm, erect, mostly branched, glabrous or minutely deflexed-puberulent. Leaves 5-20 × 3-12 mm, elliptical to ovate, obtuse, remotely crenate-dentate or subentire, glabrous, punctate beneath. Verticillasters with (2-)10-30(-40) flowers, dense, shortly pedunculate, the lower shorter than subtending leaves. Calyx c. 3 mm, glabrous; teeth 1/6-1/4 as long as tube, triangular, equal or unequal. Corolla 5-9 mm, white and violet. Nutlets obtuse or subacute. •{\i  W. part of Balkan peninsula, extending to Hungary and N. Italy}. Al Hu It Ju.
\par

\par
 
\pard\f0\fs28   {\b 3. M. taygetea} P. H. Davis,{\i  Kew Bull.} [4]: 110 (1949). Stems 4-10 cm, erect, simple or branched, whitish-velutinous. Leaves up to 10 × 6 mm, broadly ovate, obtuse, entire, whitish-velutinous, somewhat punctate. Verticillasters with 2-10 flowers, dense, shortly pedunculate, the lower shorter than the subtending leaves. Calyx 2-3 mm, puberulent-velutinous, glabrous in throat; teeth c. 1/3 as long as tube, triangular, equal. Corolla c. 6 mm, purplish-violet. Nutlets obtuse.{\i  Calcicole. S. Greece} ({\i Taïyetos}). Gr.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 4. M. dalmatica} Bentham in DC.,{\i  Prodr. }{\b 12}: 225 (1848). Stems 20-50 cm, ascending or erect, simple or branched, deflexed-puberulent or pubescent. Leaves 10-20 × 3-15 mm, ovate, crenate-dentate, puberulent, densely punctate beneath. Verticillasters with (2-)10-60 flowers, dense, shortly pedunculate, longer than the subtending leaves or the lowest shorter. Calyx 2·5-3 mm, puberulent, glabrous or minutely hairy in throat; teeth c. 2/3 as long as tube, triangular-acuminate to lanceolate subulate, equal. Corolla 5-6 mm, whitish or pale lilac. Nutlets obtuse or acuminate. •{\i  Balkan peninsula, from C. Jugoslavia to N.E. Greece.} Bu Gr Ju.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b dalmatica} : Stems paniculately branched, puberulent. Leaves puberulent chiefly on the veins beneath.{\i  C. Jugoslavia.}
\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b bulgarica}  (Velen.) Guinea,{\i  Bot. Jour. Linn. Soc.}{\b  64}: 381 (1971) ({\i M. origanifolia} subsp.{\i  bulgarica} Velen., {\i M. bulgarica} (Velen.) Hayek): Stems simple, often pubescent. Leaves densely puberulent or pubescent.{\i  S. Bulgaria and N.E. Greece.}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 5. M. pulegium} (Rochel) Bentham,{\i  Lab. Gen. Sp.} 382 (1834). Stems 20-50(-90) cm, erect, straight, usually simple, deflexed-puberulent or -pubescent. Leaves 10-30 × 5-20 mm, ovate, obtuse to acute, more or less crenate-dentate, shortly appressed pubescent, densely punctate beneath. Verticillasters with 10-70 flowers, lax, the lowest shorter and the upper longer than the subtending leaves. Calyx 3·5-4 mm, shortly pubescent, sparsely hairy in throat; teeth 1/3-1/2 as long as tube, linear-lanceolate or setaceous, equal. Corolla 7-9 mm, white or lilac. Nutlets obtuse. •{\i  S.W. Romania.} Rm.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 6. M. frivaldszkyana} (Degen) Velen.,{\i  Österr. Bot. Zeitschr.}{\b  49}: 291 (1899). Like {\b 5} but stems not more than 30 cm, ascending, flexuous; leaves subglabrous; verticillasters with 6-14 flowers; calyx subglabrous, sometimes glabrous in throat; corolla 5-6 mm. •{\i  Mountains of C. & S. Bulgaria.} Bu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 7. M. filiformis} (Aiton) Bentham,{\i  Lab. Gen. Sp.} 378 (1834). Subglabrous or sparsely puberulent (rarely pubescent) dwarf shrub 5-20 cm with filiform, ascending, often branched stems. Leaves 2-4·5 × 1·5-4 mm, ovate to triangular, the lower cordate and the upper rounded at the base, subobtuse, entire, flat, subsessile. Verticillasters with 2-4 patent flowers; pedicels or peduncles ascending, usually equalling or exceeding subtending leaves. Calyx 3-4 mm, somewhat villous in throat; teeth c.2/3 as long as tube, subulate, unequal. Corolla 4·5-5·5 mm, white. 2n = 30.{\i • Islas Baleares, Corse, Sardegna}. Bl Co Sa.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 8. M. microphylla} (D'Urv.) Bentham,{\i  op. cit.} 377 (1834). Subglabrous to somewhat pubescent dwarf shrub 10-30 cm with more or less filiform, procumbent or ascending, often branched stems. Leaves 3-6 × 2-4 mm, triangular-ovate to elliptical, the upper sometimes narrowly elliptical, rounded or cuneate at base, acute, entire, flat, subsessile. Verticillasters with 1-6 usually erecto-patent flowers; peduncles or pedicels c. ½ as long as subtending leaves. Calyx 2·5-3·5 mm, patent-pubescent, villous in throat; teeth c. ½ as long as tube, lanceolate-acuminate to -subulate, unequal. Corolla 5-8 mm, purple. •{\i  S. Italy and Sicilia; Kriti and Karpathos.} ?Bl Cr It Si.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   The plants from Kriti and Karpathos have been described as {\b M. sphaciotica} Boiss. & Heldr. ex Bentham in DC.,{\i  Prodr.}{\b  12}: 220 (1848) ({\i M. carpatha} Rech. fil.); they have a distinctive habit, longer leaves (the upper often narrower) and calyx, fewer flowers, and calyx-teeth subulate from a lanceolate base, but there is some doubt about their taxonomic status.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 9. M. acropolitana} Halácsy, {\i Consp. Fl. Graec., Suppl.} 87 (1908). Like {\b 8} but stems erect; leaves c. 5 × 1-2 mm, oblong-lanceolate, obtuse ; verticillasters with up to 10 flowers; peduncles or pedicels as long as subtending leaves.{\i  • C. Greece. }Gr.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 10. M. hispida} Boiss. & Heldr. ex Bentham in DC.,{\i  Prodr.}{\b  12}: 215 (1848). Like {\b 8} but densely patent-pubescent throughout; calyx 4-5 mm; teeth c. 3 as long as tube.{\i  Kriti.} Cr.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 11. M. marginata} (Sm.) Chater,{\i  Bot. Jour. Linn. Soc.}{\b  64}: 381 (1971) ({\i M. piperella} (Bertol.) Bentham,{\i  Thymus marginatus}
\par

\par
168}
\par