{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b nomismophylla} Rech. fil.,{\i  Denkschr. Akad. Wiss. Math.-Nat. Kl. }({\i Wien}){\b  105}({\b 1}): 529 (1943), and subsp.{\b  elatior }(Griseb.) Rech. fil., {\i loc. cit.} (1943), both from N. Greece (Khalkidhiki). The latter is like subsp. ({\b a}) but has short hairs on the calyx. They may merit recognition but further study is required throughout the range of the species.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b c}) Subsp. {\b meridionalis}  (Nyman) P. W. Ball,{\i  Bot. Jour. Linn. Soc. }{\b 65}: 344 (1972) ({\i Calamintha alpina }subsp.{\i  meridionalis} Nyman, {\i C. granatensis} Boiss. & Reuter): Like subsp. ({\b a}) but calyx 5-7 mm, with short crispate hairs; upper lip with teeth 0·5-1 mm; corolla 10-14 mm. 2n = 18. {\i S. Europe}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 3. A. suaveolens} (Sibth. & Sm.) G. Don fil. in Loudon,{\i  Hort. Brit. }239 (1830) ({\i Calamintha suaveolens} (Sibth. & Sm.) Boiss.). Like {\b 2}({\b a}) but leaves 10-20 × 3·5-8 mm, lanceolate or elliptic-lanceolate, acuminate or narrowly acute, narrowly cuneate at base, remotely serrulate; lower lip of calyx 2·5-3·5 mm.{\i  Balkan peninsula, S. & W. Romania, C. & S. Italy.} ?Al Bu Gr It Ju Rm ?Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 4. A. arvensis} (Lam.) Dandy,{\i  Jour. Ecol.}{\b  33}: 326 (1946) ({\i A. thymoides} Moench,{\i  Calamintha acinos} (L.) Clairv.,{\i  Satureja acinos} (L.) Scheele). Pubescent annual, and perhaps rarely a short-lived perennial, up to 40 cm. Leaves 8-15 × 4-7 mm, lanceolate to ovate, obtuse or acute, entire or denticulate, conspicuously veined beneath, the veins not prominent. Verticillasters 3- to 8-flowered, the flowers usually not exceeding the bracts. Calyx 5-7 mm; lower lip 1·5-2·5 mm; upper lip with teeth 0·7-1·5 mm. Corolla 7-10(-12) mm, usually violet with white marks on the lower lip. 2n = 18.{\i  Most of Europe except the extreme north and parts of the south.} All except Az Cr Fa Is Lu Sb ?Si.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 5. A. rotundifolius} Pers., {\i Syn. Pl.}{\b  2}: 131 (1806) ({\i A. graveolens} (Bieb.) Link,{\i  A. fominii} Schost.,{\i  Calamintha rotundifolia} (Pers.) Bentham, {\i C. exigua} (Sibth. & Sm.) Hayek, {\i C. graveolens} (Bieb.) Bentham, {\i ?C. maritima} Bentham). Like {\b 4} but leaves 7-10 mm wide, obovate-orbicular to orbicular, acuminate or obtuse and mucronate at apex, prominently veined beneath; calyx 5-8 mm; lower lip 1·5-3 mm.{\i  S.E. Europe; C. Italy and Sicilia; C. & S. Spain.} Bu Cr Gr Hs It Ju Rm Rs (W, K, E) Si Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc {\b 27.             Calamintha}             Miller     
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc By P.W. Ball & F. Getliffe
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Perennial herbs, sometimes woody at the base. Flowers in opposite, axillary, usually pedunculate cymes. Calyx tubular, 13-veined, more or less 2-lipped; upper lip 3-toothed; lower lip 2-toothed and longer than the upper; tube straight, not gibbous, hairy in the mouth. Corolla 2-lipped; upper lip entire or emarginate; lower lip 3-lobed, the middle lobe the largest; tube straight. Stamens included, curved, convergent; anther-cells divergent. Style-branches unequal, the upper subulate, the lower longer and wider.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Measurements of the calyx refer to its length at anthesis; it is often considerably shorter in fruit.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Calyx (10-)12-16 mm; corolla 25-40 mm ................................ {\b 1. grandiflora}
\par
1 Calyx 3-10 mm; corolla not more than 22 mm 
\par
2 Calyx with dense, long, patent hairs; leaves densely 
\par
  grey-tomentose ................................................................................. {\b 4. cretica}
\par
2 Calyx with short, appressed or crispate hairs; or with 
\par
  sparse long, patent hairs
\par
3 Leaves densely grey-tomentose on both surfaces; upper 
\par
  calyx-teeth less than 0·5 mm ............................................................ {\b 5. incana}
\par
3 Leaves green and relatively sparsely hairy, at least on
\par
  the upper surface; upper calyx-teeth 0·5-2 mm
\par
4 Lower calyx-teeth 2-4 mm, usually densely long-ciliate;
\par
  hairs in mouth of calyx ± included ............................................... {\b 2. sylvatica}
\par
4 Lower calyx-teeth 1-2 mm, without or with very few long
\par
  cilia; hairs in mouth of calyx somewhat exserted ............................ {\b 3. nepeta}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. C. grandiflora} (L.) Moench, {\i Meth.} 408 (1794) ({\i Satureja grandiflora} (L.) Scheele). Sparsely hairy perennial 20-60 cm. Leaves 30-80 × 20-50 mm, ovate or ovate-oblong, acute, coarsely dentate or serrate, with 6 or more teeth on each side. Cymes 1- to 5-flowered. Calyx (10-)12-16 mm, subglabrous; upper teeth 2-3 mm; lower teeth 3·5-5 mm, long-ciliate. Corolla 25-40 mm, pink. 2n = 22.{\i  S. & S.C. Europe, from N.E. Spain eastwards.} Al Au Bu Co Ga Gr He Hs It Ju Rm Rs (K) Si Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. C. sylvatica} Bromf.,{\i  Phytologist }({\i Newman}) {\b 2}: 49 (1845). Pubescent, stoloniferous perennial 30-80 cm. Leaves (15-)20-70 × 10-45 mm, ovate or orbicular-ovate, subacute to obtuse, subentire, coarsely dentate or crenate-serrate, with 5-10 teeth on each side. Cymes 3- to 9-flowered; peduncle up to 15 mm; secondary branches 0-5 mm. Calyx 6-10 mm, subglabrous or pubescent, the hairs in the mouth included; upper teeth 1·5-2 mm; lower teeth 2-4 mm, long-ciliate. Corolla 10-22 mm, pink or lilac with white spots on the lower lip. {\i W., S. & S.C. Europe.} Al Au Az *Be Bl Br Bu Co Cz Ga Ge Hb He Ho Hs Hu It Ju Lu Po Rm Rs (W) Si ?Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b sylvatica}  ({\i Satureja calamintha} subsp.{\i  officinalis} sensu Gams). Plant 30-80 cm. Leaves 25-70 × 18-45 mm, the middle and upper ovate, coarsely dentate or crenate-serrate, with 6-10 teeth on each side, the lower suborbicular. Peduncle up to 15 mm. Lower calyx-teeth 3-4 mm. Corolla 15-22 mm. 2n = 24.{\i  From S. England and France eastwards to S.W. Ukraine.}
\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b ascendens}  (Jordan) P. W. Ball,{\i  Bot. Jour. Linn. Soc.}{\b  65}: 346 (1972) ({\i C. ascendens} Jordan,{\i  C. hirta} (Briq.) Hayek, {\i C. menthifolia} auct., non Host, {\i C. officinalis} auct. excl. Gams, non Moench,{\i  Satureja calamintha} subsp.{\i  ascendens} (Jordan) Briq. & subsp.{\i  menthifolia} sensu Gams). Plant 30-60 cm. Leaves (15-) 20-40(-50) × 10-35 mm, ovate or orbicular-ovate, subentire or shallowly crenate-serrate, with 5-8 teeth on each side. Peduncle 0·5(-10) mm. Lower calyx-teeth 2-3·5 mm. Corolla 10-16 mm. 2n = 48.{\i  Almost throughout the range of the species}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 3. C. nepeta} (L.) Savi,{\i  Fl. Pis. }{\b 2}: 63 (1798). Sparsely to densely pubescent perennial 30-80 cm. Leaves 10-35(-45) × 8-25(-30) mm, broadly ovate, obtuse, subentire or shallowly to deeply crenate-serrate with up to 9 teeth on each side. Cymes 5- to 20-flowered; peduncle absent or up to 22 mm; secondary branches absent or up to 10 mm. Calyx 3-7 × 1-1·5(-2) mm, sparsely to densely puberulent or pubescent, the hairs in the, mouth exserted; upper teeth 0·5-1·5 mm, narrowly or broadly triangular; lower teeth 1-2 mm, puberulent, rarely with a few long cilia. Corolla (9-)10-15 mm, white or lilac.{\i  S., W. & S.C. Europe, northwards to E. England.} Al Au Bl Br Bu Co Cr Ga Gr He Hs Hu It Ju Rs (W, K) Sa Si Tu [Ge].
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 Cymes (5-)10- to 20-flowered, the peduncle 8-22 mm, the secondary  
\par
  branches 5-10 mm; leaves 20-35(-45) mm, with 5-9 teeth on  
\par
  each side ............................................. ({\b a}) subsp. {\b nepeta}
\par

\par
166}
\par