{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 38 Leaves puberulent at margins and above ............................ {\b 20. kitaibeliana}
\par 
38 Leaves densely puberulent at margins, usually
\par 
   glabrous above ........................................................................... {\b 18. clusiana}
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  Subgen.{\b  Primula.} Heterostylous. Efarinose. Leaves hairy, with revolute vernation, rugose, neither fleshy nor coriaceous. Bracts not gibbous or saccate. Calyx angled.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  The 3 species in this subgenus all hybridize; the 2 most frequent and widely distributed hybrids are{\i  P}. × {\i digenea} A. Kerner ({\i P. elatior} × {\i vulgaris}) and {\i P}. ×{\i  tommasinii} Gren. & Godron ({\i P}. × {\i variabilis} Goupil, non Bast.,{\i  P. veris} ×{\i  vulgaris}).
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. P. vulgaris} Hudson,{\i  Fl. Angl.} 70 (1762) ({\i P. acaulis }(L.) Hill). Leaves 5-25 × 2-6 cm, in a lax rosette, oblanceolate to obovate, irregularly dentate to crenate, glabrous above. Scape absent. Bracts 1-1·5 cm, linear to linear-lanceolate. Pedicels 6-20 cm, ascending in flower, decumbent in fruit, with long hairs. Calyx 1-2 cm, tubular, lobes lanceolate, acuminate. Corolla 2-4 cm in diameter. Capsule ovoid, enclosed in calyx. Seeds viscid, with oily caruncle.{\i  Moist, shady places. W., S. & S.C. Europe, extending to E. Denmark and N. Ukraine}. All except Az Fe Is Po Rs (N, B, E) Sa Sb †Su
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Flowers white ............................................................. ({\b b}) subsp. {\b balearica}
\par 
1 Flowers yellow, red or purple
\par 
2 Leaves tapering gradually into petiole ......................... ({\b a}) subsp. {\b vulgaris}
\par 
2 Leaves cuneate, contracted ± abruptly into petiole ....({\b c}) subsp. {\b sibthorpii}
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b vulgaris}: Leaves tapering gradually into the short,winged petiole, hairy on the veins beneath. Flowers pale yellow, with 5 yellow-green to orange areas at throat, fragrant. 2n = 22.{\i  Almost throughout the range of the species}.
\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b balearica} (Willk.) W. W. Sm. & Forrest, {\i Notes Roy. Bot. Gard. Edinb.}{\b  16}: 42 (1928): Petiole longer than lamina, narrowly winged; lamina glabrescent beneath. Flowers white, very fragrant. •{\i  Mountains of Mallorca.}
\par 
 
\pard\f0\fs28 ({\b c}) Subsp. {\b sibthorpii} (Hoffmanns.) W. W. Sm. & Forrest, {\i loc. cit}. (1928) ({\i P. sibthorpii} Hoffmanns.): Lamina cuneate, contracted more or less abruptly into petiole, slightly pubescent beneath. Flowers usually red or purple.{\i  E. part of Balkan peninsula; Krym; locally naturalized in C. Europe}.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  White-flowered populations ({\i P. komarovii} Losinsk.,{\i  Bull. Acad. Sci. URSS} ser. 7, {\b 1933}({\b 2}): 301 (1933)), which may be related to ({\b b}) and ({\b c}), are known from parts of S.E. Europe.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. P. elatior} (L.) Hill, {\i Veg. Syst. }{\b 8}: 25 (1765). Leaves 5-20 × 2-7 cm, in a lax rosette, suborbicular to oblong or elliptical, usually widest at about the middle, abruptly contracted or gradually narrowed into the long, winged, hairy petiole but not cordate, crenate to denticulate to entire, pubescent or glabrescent above, grey-green and sparsely hairy or tomentose or glabrous beneath. Scape 10-30 cm, usually hairy. Umbel secund; bracts 3-11 mm, linear to ovate; pedicels 5-20 mm. Calyx 6-15 mm, lobes lanceolate or triangular, acuminate. Corolla 15-25 mm in diameter, yellow, sometimes orange at throat. Capsule cylindrical or tapering, usually exceeding calyx. Seeds dry, without caruncle.{\i  Meadows and woods. S., W. & C. Europe, extending northwards to N. Denmark and eastwards to C. Ukraine.} Al Au Be Br Bu Cz Da Ga Ge He Ho Hs Hu It Ju Po Rm Rs (C, W), Su [Fe No].
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28   5 subspecies, largely allopatric, may be distinguished.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Leaves glabrous ................................................................. ({\b e}) subsp.{\b  pallasii}
\par 
1 Leaves ± hairy
\par 
2 Leaves grey-tomentose beneath; calyx 6-8 mm ......... ({\b b}) subsp. {\b leucophylla}
\par 
2 Leaves ± pubescent beneath; calyx usually more than 8 mm
\par 
3 Leaves abruptly contracted into petiole; capsule 
\par 
  tapering slightly .................................................................... ({\b a}) subsp.{\b  elatior}
\par 
3 Leaves gradually narrowing into petiole; capsule 
\par 
  tapering markedly
\par 
4 Corolla pale yellow; leaves slightly rugose ..................... ({\b c}) subsp. {\b intricata}
\par 
4 Corolla yellow; leaves rugose ....................................... ({\b d}) subsp. {\b lofthousei}
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b elatior} (incl. subsp.{\i  carpatica} (Griseb. & Schenk) W. W. Sm. & Forrest,{\i  P. carpatica} (Griseb. & Schenk) Fuss, {\i P. poloninensis} (Domin) Fedorov): Leaves suborbicular or ovate, abruptly contracted into petiole, crenate to denticulate, sparsely hairy beneath, rugose. Inflorescence many-flowered. Calyx c. 10 mm, pubescent; lobes triangular. Corolla 20-25 mm in diameter; limb more or less flat, pale yellow. Capsule up to 15 mm, tapering only slightly, usually longer than calyx. 2n = 22. •{\i  Throughout most of the range of the species, but rarer in the south.}
\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b leucophylla} (Pax) H.-Harrison ex W. W. Sm. & Fletcher,{\i  Trans. Proc. Bot. Soc. Edinb. }{\b 34}: 422 (1946) ({\i P. leucophylla} Pax): Leaves oblong or elliptical, gradually narrowed into petiole, crenulate or entire, grey-tomentose beneath, rugose. Calyx 6-8(-11) mm, hairy; lobes short, lanceolate.{\i  Calcicole. • E. Carpathians.}
\par 
 ({\b c}) Subsp. {\b intricata} (Gren. & Godron) Ludi in Hegi,{\i  Ill. Fl. Mitteleur.}{\b  5}({\b 3}): 1748 (1927): Leaves oblong, gradually narrowed into petiole, entire when young, crenulate when mature, pubescent above and beneath, only slightly rugose. Inflorescence few-flowered. Calyx 10-12(-15) mm, puberulent; lobes triangular. Corolla up to 20 mm in diameter; limb more or less flat, pale yellow. Capsule up to 15 mm, tapering distinctly, equalling or slightly exceeding calyx.{\i  Moist grassland. • Mountains of S. and S.C. Europe.}
\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b d}) Subsp. {\b lofthousei} (H.-Harrison) W. W. Sm. & Fletcher, {\i Trans. Proc. Bot. Soc. Edinb.}{\b  34}: 423 (1946): Leaves oblong, gradually narrowed into petiole, crenulate, rugose, pubescent above and beneath. Inflorescence many-flowered. Calyx 12-17 mm in fruit, puberulent; lobes triangular. Corolla 14-18 mm in diameter; limb saucer-shaped, yellow. Capsule up to 15 mm, tapering, often exceeding calyx. 2n = 22. •{\i  S. Spain} ({\i Sierra Nevada}).
\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b e}) Subsp. {\b pallasii} (Lehm.) W. W. Sm. & Forrest,{\i  Notes Roy. Bot. Gard. Edinb.}{\b  16}: 42 (1928): Leaves obovate-oblong, gradually narrowed into petiole, dentate, glabrous. Inflorescence 3-to 6-flowered. Calyx 12 mm, glabrous; lobes triangular. Corolla 20-25 mm in diameter; limb more or less flat, pale yellow. Capsule up to 17 mm, tapering slightly, usually exceeding calyx.{\i  Alpine meadows. C. Ural.} ({\i C. & S.W. Asia.})
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 3. P. veris} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 142 (1753) ({\i P. officinalis} (L.) Hill). Leaves 5-20 × 2-6 cm in a lax rosette, enlarging in fruit; lamina ovate to ovate-oblong, sometimes cordate, obtuse, usually widest at or near the base, abruptly contracted or narrowed into the sometimes winged petiole, crenate, pubescent or glabrescent above, grey- or white-tomentose to glabrescent beneath. Scape 10-30 cm, hairy. Umbel secund; bracts 2-7 mm, linear-lanceolate; pedicels 3-20 mm. Calyx 8-20 mm, campanulate, lobes triangular, acute, sometimes mucronate. Corolla 8-28 mm in diameter, concave or almost flat, bright yellow, with orange spots at the base of the lobes. Capsule ovate, shorter than calyx. Seeds dry, without caruncle.{\i  Meadows and pastures. Most of Europe except the extreme north and much of the Mediterranean region.} Al Au Be Br Bu Cz Da Fe Ga Ge Gr Hb He Ho Hs Hu It Ju ?Lu No Po Rm Rs (N, B, C, W, K, E) Su.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  Variable; 4 subspecies may be distinguished but there are many transitional plants.
\par 

\par 
16}
\par