{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 Sm.). Dwarf shrub 10-20 cm, with ascending, mostly simple, puberulent stems. Leaves (3-)6-12 × 3-5 mm, broadly ovate entire, obtuse, rounded or subcordate at base, glabrous or sparsely hairy beneath. Verticillasters with 2-12 flowers, lax, pedunculate, exceeding the subtending leaves. Calyx 5-8 mm, pubescent, 13-veined, villous in throat; teeth c. ½ as long as tube, subulate, unequal. Corolla 12-16 mm, purplish or violet. •{\i  Maritime Alps.} Ga It.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 12. M. croatica} (Pers.) Schott,{\i  Österr. Bot. Zeitschr. }{\b 7}: 93 (1857). Like {\b 11} but most of plant densely patent-pubescent; leaves up to 8 mm wide, somewhat repand, subacute; calyx 15-veined; teeth c. 2/3 as long as tube; corolla 10-15 mm. •{\i  Jugoslavia}. Ju.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 13. M. nervosa} (Desf.) Bentham,{\i  Lab. Gen. Sp.} 376 (1834). Dwarf shrub 10-40(-50) cm; stems many, erect or ascending, more or less simple, deflexed-puberulent. Leaves 7-10 × 4-5 mm, ovate to ovate-lanceolate, acute, very shortly petiolate. Verticillasters with 4-20 flowers, fairly dense, shortly pedunculate, about equalling subtending leaves; pedicels less than ½ as long as calyx. Calyx 3-4 mm, with long, dense patent hairs, villous in throat; teeth c. 2/3 as long as tube, lanceolate-subulate, unequal. Corolla 4-6 mm, purplish. 2n = 30.{\i  Mediterranean region}. Bl Cr Gr ?Hs It Si.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b  M. tapeinantha} Rech. fil.,{\i  Denkschr. Akad. Wiss. Math.-Nat. Kl.} ({\i Wien}) {\b 105}({\b 2, 1}): 123 (1943), described from Kriti, requires further investigation; it sometimes has the densely hairy calyx of {\b 13}, but in other respects is close to {\b 20} and may perhaps be of hybrid origin.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 14. M. juliana} (L.) Bentham ex Reichenb., {\i Fl. Germ. Excurs.} 311 (1831). Dwarf shrub 10-40 cm, puberulent to pubescent throughout; stems many, erect, mostly simple. Leaves 3-8 × 1-2·5 mm, the lowest ovate, the upper linear-lanceolate or -oblong, obtuse, entire, with revolute margins. Verticillasters sessile or shortly pedunculate, with 4-20 strict, sessile flowers; bracts about equalling calyx. Calyx 2·5-3·5 mm, straight glabrous in throat; teeth ½ as long as tube, subulate, rigid slightly unequal. Corolla c. 5 mm, purplish. Nutlets acute. 2n = 30.{\i  Mediterranean region, westwards to S.E. France; C. Portugal.} Al Bu ?Co Cr Ga Gr It Ju Lu Si Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 15. M. myrtifolia} Boiss. & Hohen. in Boiss.,{\i  Diagn. Pl. Or. Nov.}{\b  1}({\b 5}): 19 (1844). Like {\b 14} but calyx villous in throat, the teeth c. ¼ as long as tube; nutlets obtuse. 2n = 30.{\i  Greece and Aegean region.} Cr Gr Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 16. M. cristata} (Hampe) Griseb.,{\i  Spicil. Fl. Rumel.}{\b  2}: 122 (1844). Stems 5-20 cm, many, erect, slender, simple, shortly and densely patent-pubescent. Leaves 5-7(-12) × 0·5-1·5(-3) mm, the lower oblong or elliptical, the rest linear, puberulent or appressed-pubescent, overlapping throughout most of the stem, with revolute margins. Verticillasters with (2-)6(-10) flowers, shortly pedunculate and pedicellate, slightly shorter than subtending leaves. Calyx 3-4 mm, pubescent, villous in throat; teeth ¼-½ as long as tube, lanceolate to linear-lanceolate, slightly unequal. Corolla 4-6 mm, purplish. Nutlets acuminate.{\i  N. & C. parts of Balkan peninsula.} Al Bu Gr Ju.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 17. M. cremnophila} Boiss. & Heldr. in Boiss., {\i Fl. Or.}{\b  4}: 570 (1879). Like {\b 16} but stems puberulent; leaves mostly not overlapping; verticillasters mostly longer than subtending leaves; calyx 2·5-3·5 mm; corolla 3·5 mm.{\i  C. & N.W. Greece, Albania.}Al Gr.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 18. M. kerneri} Murb.,{\i  Lunds Univ. Årsskr.}{\b  27}({\b 5}): 53 (1892). Stems 20-30 cm, many, erect, slender, patent-pubescent. Leaves 3-9 × 2-5 mm, shortly pubescent at least beneath, the lowest triangular-cordate, the middle ovate or ovate-lanceolate, obtuse, flat, the upper lanceolate or linear with revolute margin. Verticillasters with 6-10 flowers, shortly pedunculate, equalling or longer than subtending leaves; bracts c. ½ as long as calyx. Calyx c. 3 mm, sparsely hairy on veins and in throat; teeth c. ½ as long as tube, lanceolate-subulate, unequal. Corolla 3-4 mm, purplish. Nutlets obtuse. •{\i  W. Jugoslavia.} Ju.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 19. M. parviflora} (Vis.) Reichenb.,{\i  Fl. Germ. Excurs.} 859 (1832). Stems 5-25 cm, many, ascending, slender, often branched, deflexed-puberulent. Leaves 4-10 × 1-5 mm, glabrous or sparsely puberulent, the lowest cordate-orbicular to ovate, the upper oblong to linear with somewhat revolute margin. Verticillasters long-pedunculate, with 2-6 usually patent, long pedicellate flowers, much exceeding the subtending leaves; bracts less than 1/2 as long as calyx. Calyx 3·5-4 mm, glabrous or sparsely puberulent, shortly villous in throat; teeth 1/2-2/3 as long as tube, lanceolate, unequal. Corolla 5-7 mm, purplish. Nutlets obtuse. •{\i  S. Jugoslavia, Albania.} Al Ju.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 20. M. graeca} (L.) Bentham ex Reichenb., {\i op. cit. }311 (1831) ({\i Satureja graeca} L.). Sparsely pubescent to hirsute or hispid dwarf shrub 10-50 cm with many erect or ascending, usually simple stems. Leaves 5-12 × 2-7 mm, the lower ovate, acute, the upper lanceolate or linear-lanceolate with revolute margins. Verticillasters shortly pedunculate with (2-)6-18 usually erectopatent, shortly pedicellate flowers, usually about equalling the subtending leaves; bracts mostly not more than 1/2 as long as calyx. Calyx (2-)3-5 mm, villous in throat; teeth 1/3-3/4 as long as tube, lanceolate-subulate, unequal. Corolla 6-8(-13) mm, purplish. Nutlets obtuse or shortly apiculate. {\i Mediterranean region, C. & S. Portugal.} Bl Co Cr Ga Gr Hs It Ju Lu Sa Si Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Axillary fascicles of leaves present on stems; corolla-
\par
  tube 4-6 mm longer than calyx-tube ............................ ({\b g}) subsp. {\b fruticulosa} 
\par
1 Axillary fascicles of leaves absent
\par
2 Flowering in autumn; lower leaves ovate, fugacious, the rest linear; 
\par
  corolla-tube 5-6 mm longer than calyx-tube;minutely scabrid-
\par
  puberulent ...................................................................... ({\b f}) subsp. {\b consentina}
\par
2 Flowering usually in spring; lower leaves ovate-lanceolate, 
\par
  the rest linear or linear-lanceolate, or all except the  
\par
  floral leaves ovate
\par
3 Verticillasters rather strict, mostly with 2-4 sub-
\par
  sessile flowers; nutlets shortly apiculate ........................ ({\b e}) subsp. {\b tenuifolia} 
\par
3 Verticillasters ± divaricate, mostly with 4-18 shortly
\par
  pedicellate flowers; nutlets obtuse, not apiculate
\par
4 Pubescent; corolla-tube 2-4 mm longer than calyx-tube
\par
5 Middle and upper leaves ovate to linear-lanceolate;
\par
  stems stout ........................................................................... ({\b a}) subsp. {\b graeca}
\par
5 Middle and upper leaves linear; stems slender, filiform . ({\b b}) subsp. {\b imperica}
\par
4 Hispid or tomentose; corolla-tube 4-6 mm longer than calyx-tube 
\par
6 Tomentose; upper leaves linear; verticillasters lax,
\par
  the peduncles distinctly divergent ................................... ({\b c}) subsp. {\b garganica}
\par
6 Hispid; upper leaves linear-lanceolate; verticillasters
\par
  more dense, the peduncles suberect or erecto-patent ...... ({\b d}) subsp. {\b longiflora}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b graeca} : Plant pubescent; stems stout, without axillary fascicles of leaves. Lower leaves ovate-lanceolate, the rest ovate to linear-lanceolate. Verticillasters with 4-18 shortly pedicellate flowers; peduncles more or less divaricate. Corolla-tube 2-4 mm longer than calyx-tube. Flowering in spring. Nutlets obtuse. 2n = 20.{\i  Throughout the range of the species.}
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b imperica}  Chater, {\i Bot. Jour. Linn. Soc.}{\b  64}: 381
\par

\par
169}
\par