{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28\qc {\b 19.               Glechoma }               L.
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc By R. Fernandes.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Perennial herbs. Verticillasters 2- to 5-flowered, secund. Calyx tubular-campanulate, 2-lipped; upper lip with 3, the lower lip with 2 teeth. Corolla 2-lipped; tube straight, widening towards the apex; upper lip flat; lower lip 3-lobed. Anther-cells at right angles to each other, each opening by a separate slit. Nutlets smooth.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 Calyx 5-6·5 mm; teeth of upper lip of calyx 1/5-1/3(1/2) 
\par
    as long as tube, triangular-acuminate ........................................ {\b 1. hederacea}
\par
Calyx 7-11 mm; teeth of upper lip of calyx 1/2 as long,
\par
    to  about as long as tube, linear-lanceolate, acuminate .................. {\b 2. hirsuta}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. G. hederacea} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 578 (1753). Subglabrous or pubescent; flowering stems up to 50(-60) cm, ascending or erect; non-flowering stems creeping and rooting. Leaves 4-35(-80) × 6-40(-80) mm, reniform to suborbicular-cordate, obtuse or subacute, coarsely crenate. Bracteoles 1-1·5 mm, setaceous. Calyx 5-6·5 mm, shortly hispid or pubescent and sometimes with sessile, yellow glands; teeth of upper lip 1/5-1/3(-1/2) as long as tube, triangular-acuminate. Corolla (6-)15-22(-25) mm, pale violet with purple spots on lower lip, rarely white or pink. Nutlets c. 2 mm. 2n = 18, 36.{\i  Woods, grassland and waste places usually in damp soil. Almost throughout Europe.} All except Bl Cr Fa Is Sb Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b G. serbica} Halácsy & Wettst., {\i Verh. Zool.-Bot. Ges. Wien }{\b 38}: 71 (1888) ({\i G. hederacea} subsp. {\i serbica} (Halácsy & Wettst.) Soó), from Jugoslavia (Srbija), is, according to V. Blecic ({\i Bull. Inst. Jard. Bot. Univ. Beograd} nov. ser., {\b 3}: 221-225 (1968)) probably an ecological modification of {\b 1}. It is subglabrous, with calyx 4-6 mm, hirsute, the teeth almost as long as the tube and the corolla 20-27 mm, violet.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. G. hirsuta} Waldst. & Kit.,{\i  Pl. Rar. Hung.}{\b  2}: 124 (1802-1803). Like {\b 1} but usually with denser and longer hairs; leaves (15-)25-50 × (15-)25-60 mm, the upper broadly ovate-triangular, subacute, crenate-serrate; bracteoles 2-4 mm; calyx 7-11 mm, the teeth of upper lip ½ as long to nearly as long as tube, linear-lanceolate, acuminate; corolla 20-30 mm, pale blue with white spots on lower lip; nutlets 3-4 mm. 2n = 36. {\i Woods. E.C. & S.E. Europe, extending westwards to Sardegna and northwards to} c. 56°{\i  N. in E.C. Russia.} Al Au Bu Cz Gr Hu It Ju Po Rm Rs(C, W? Sa Si
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Intermediates, presumably hybrids, between {\b 1} and {\b 2} sometimes occur.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc {\b 20.             Dracocephalum}                L.
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc By V.H. Heywood.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Annual or perennial herbs or dwarf shrubs, rarely rhizomatous. Verticillasters in spikes. Calyx tubular or tubular-campanulate, 15-veined, more or less 2-lipped; upper lip 3-toothed, the middle tooth larger than the others. Corolla 2-lipped; upper lip 2-lobed, emarginate; lower lip 3-lobed with the middle lobe larger than the others, emarginate; tube narrow at the base, widening at the throat. Stamens equalling or rarely exceeding the corolla and curved under the upper lip. Style-branches equal.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  All European species grow mainly in dry, more or less open habitats, and tend to become naturalized as weeds or ruderals outside their native territory. Many of them are cultivated for ornament, as honey-plants or as medicinal plants.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b  Lallemantia iberica} (Bieb.) Fischer & C. A. Meyer,{\i  Ind. Sem. Horti. Petrop.}{\b  6}: 53 (1840), from the Caucasian region, is cultivated for ornament and may be locally naturalized in E. & E.C.Europe. It is characterized by 2 longitudinal folds within the upper lip of the corolla, in which the stamens are concealed.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Corolla not more than 15 mm, only slightly exserted 
\par
  from the calyx-tube ................................................................. {\b 2. thymiflorum}
\par
1 Corolla at least 17 mm, distinctly exserted from the calyx-tube
\par
2 Leaves pinnatipartite; corolla 35-50 mm ................................. {\b 4. austriacum}
\par
2 Leaves simple, entire or crenate; corolla 17-28 mm
\par
3 Leaves linear-lanceolate, entire; anthers hairy ......................... {\b 3. ruyschiana}
\par
3 Leaves ovate to oblong-lanceolate, crenate or serrate-
\par
  crenate; anthers glabrous
\par
4 Rhizomatous perennial; basal and lower cauline leaves
\par
  ovate, cordate at base ....................................................................... {\b 1. nutans}
\par
4 Annual; basal and lower cauline leaves oblong to lanceolate, 
\par
  cuneate at base ........................................................................... {\b 5. moldavica}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. D. nutans} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 596 (1753). Rhizomatous perennial; stems up to 70 cm, shortly hairy. Basal and lower cauline leaves 15-40 × 10-30 mm, ovate, cordate at base, coarsely crenate glabrous, the petiole longer than the lamina; upper cauline leaves up to 70 × 40 mm, oblong-ovate, cuneate, the petiole shorter than or equalling the lamina; uppermost cauline leaves subsessile, shortly pubescent. Verticillasters many-flowered, forming an elongate inflorescence. Bracts elliptical, acute, entire. Corolla 17-22 mm, lilac-blue, rarely white. Anthers glabrous.{\i  Naturalized in N. & E. Russia.} [Rs (N, C, E).] ({\i N. & C. Asia.})
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. D. thymiflorum} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 596 (1753). Annual; stems up to 60 cm, erect, sparsely pubescent. Basal and lower cauline leaves 10-35 × 7-20 mm, ovate to ovate-lanceolate, cordate at base, serrate-dentate or serrate, glabrous, the petiole longer than the lamina; upper cauline leaves ovate, cuneate at base, the petiole shorter than the lamina. Verticillasters 6- to 12-flowered, forming an interrupted spike. Bracts elliptical, acute, entire. Corolla 7-9 mm, lilac-blue. 2n = c. 14.{\i  S., W. & C. parts of U.S.S.R., extending to N.E. Bulgaria; naturalized or casual in parts of N. & E.C. Europe.} *Bu Rm Rs (B, C, W, E) [Da Fe Po Rs (N) Su].
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 3. D. ruyschiana} L.,{\i  Sp. Pl.} 595 (1753). Perennial; stems up to 60 cm, erect or ascending, glabrous or shortly hairy. Leaves 20-70 × 2-9 mm, linear-lanceolate, entire, obtuse, glabrous, the margins revolute; lower leaves shortly petiolate, the upper sessile. Verticillasters 2- to 6-flowered, forming a dense, terminal spike. Bracts ovate-lanceolate, entire. Corolla 20-28 mm, blue to violet, rarely pink or white. Anthers hairy. 2n = 14.{\i  U.S.S.R. and C. Europe, extending locally westwards to Norway and the Pyrenees.} Au Ga Ge He Hu It No Po Rm Rs (N, B, C, W, E) Su.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 4. D. austriacum} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 595 (1753). Perennial herb or dwarf shrub; stems up to 60 cm, erect or ascending, densely leafy, velutinous. Cauline leaves 3- to 5(-7)-pinnatipartite, the segments 20-30 × 1-2·5 mm, linear to linear-lanceolate, entire, more or less velutinous, the margins revolute. Verticillasters 2- to 4(-6)-flowered, forming a more or less dense, ovoid to oblong spike. Bracts 3-fid, aristate. Corolla 35-50 mm, blue-violet. 2n = 14. {\i  S.C. Europe, extending westwards to S.E. France and eastwards to W.C. Ukraine.} Au Cz Ga He Hu It Rm Rs (C, W).
\par

\par
 
\pard\f0\fs28   {\b 5. D. moldavica} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 595 (1753). Annual; stems up to 60 cm, erect, glabrous or sparsely hairy. Leaves 15-70 × 7-20 mm, oblong to lanceolate, serrate-crenate, obtuse, glabrous or subglabrous; lower leaves shortly petiolate. Verticillasters 6(-10)-flowered, in the axils of upper leaves, lax below, dense above. Bracts leaf-like. Corolla 20-25 mm, white or violet. Anthers glabrous. {\i Naturalized as a weed and ruderal in E. & E. C. Europe; an occasional, casual elsewhere.} [Po Rm Rs (B, C, W, E).] ({\i Siberia and C. Asia}.)
\par

\par
161}
\par