{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 upper lip of fruiting calyx conspicuous, broadly triangular.{\i  Widely cultivated, and naturalized throughout Europe except parts of the north}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Cultivated specimens have 2n = 32. The limits of the native range of this subspecies are uncertain, as the plants have been widely introduced.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b altissima}  (Sibth. & Sm.) Arcangeli, {\i Comp. Fl. Ital}. ed. 2, 427 (1894): Fetid, up to 150 cm; indumentum dense throughout. Leaves greyish- or whitish-tomentose beneath, at least the upper cauline and lower floral leaves truncate or subcordate at the base. Middle tooth of the upper lip of fruiting calyx inconspicuous, truncate or emarginate. 2n = 64.{\i  S. Europe}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   {\b M. bicornis} Klokov in Kotov,{\i  Fl. RSS Ucr.}{\b  9}: 659 (1960), described from Krym, has stems up to 150 cm; lower cauline leaves cordate-triangular, hirsute on both surfaces; upper lip of calyx abruptly deflexed, the teeth inconspicuous. It may not be distinct from {\b 1}({\b b}).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc {\b 24.                Ziziphora}                L.
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc By V.H. Heywood.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Annuals. Verticillasters few- to many-flowered, distant or crowded, in heads or spike-like inflorescences. Calyx long tubular, 13-veined, 2-lipped, the upper lip 3-toothed, the lower 2-toothed; tube hairy in the throat. Corolla weakly 2-lipped; upper lip porrect, entire or emarginate; lower patent, 3-lobed; tube scarcely exserted from the calyx. Lower 2 stamens fertile, ascending under the upper lip of corolla or shortly exserted; upper 2 stamens rudimentary or absent. Style-branches unequal, the lower subulate, the upper much reduced.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  All species grow in dry, usually open habitats.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b   Z. rigida} (Boiss.) H. Braun,{\i  Verh. Zool.-Bot. Ges. Wien}{\b  39}: 222 (1889), from S.W. Asia, has once been recorded from Bulgaria, probably erroneously. It is perennial, with stems glabrous, leaves lanceolate to ovate-lanceolate, glabrous, and verticillasters crowded into a terminal head.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Middle and upper leaves up to 10 mm, ovate to ovate-lanceolate,
\par
  or obovate
\par
2 Stems up to 10 cm; leaves ovate to ovate-lanceolate, entire ...... {\b 2. hispanica}
\par
2 Stems up to 25 cm; leaves obovate, denticulate towards the apex 
\par
   ...................................................................................................... {\b 3. acinoides}
\par
1 Middle and upper leaves up to 40 mm, linear to lanceolate
\par
3 Verticillasters in globose, bracteate heads ..................................... {\b 1. capitata}
\par
3 Verticillasters in ovoid to oblong, spike-like inflorescences
\par
4 Corolla 12-15 mm, twice as long as calyx ...................................... {\b 5. taurica}
\par
4 Corolla 8-10 mm, slightly longer than calyx
\par
5 All leaves linear to linear-lanceolate; calyx 5-7·5 mm ................... {\b 4. tenuior}
\par
5 Lowermost leaves ovate, the remainder lanceolate;
\par
   calyx 7-10 mm ................................................................................ {\b 6. persica}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. Z. capitata} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 21 (1753). Annual; stems up to 20 cm, simple or branched, scabrid. Leaves 3-35 × 1·5-7 mm, linear-lanceolate to lanceolate, acute, petiolate, entire, appressed hairy above, especially near the margins and on veins. Verticillasters few-flowered, in a terminal globose, bracteate head. Bracts broadly ovate to suborbicular, acuminate, ciliate. Calyx 6-11 mm, hispid. Corolla 10-15 mm, pink. Anthers not appendiculate.{\i  S.E. Europe.} Al Bu Gr ?Hs *It Ju Rm Rs (K, E) Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. Z. hispanica} L., {\i Cent. Pl.}{\b  1}: 3 (1755). Annual; stems up to 10 cm, sometimes branched, puberulent, with recurved hairs. Leaves 5-10 × 2-5 mm, ovate to ovate-lanceolate, obtuse, entire, petiolate, glabrous or scabrid-puberulent above, scabrid-puberulent beneath, ciliate. Verticillasters crowded in a dense, spike-like inflorescence. Bracts broadly obovate-orbicular, mucronate, ciliate. Flowers subsessile. Calyx 6-7 mm, hispid. Corolla 9-10 mm, pink. Anthers not appendiculate.{\i  C. & S.E. Spain.} Hs.
\par
 
\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 3. Z. acinoides} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 22 (1753). Like {\b 2} but stems up to 25 cm; leaves obovate, denticulate towards the apex; verticillasters distant; flowers pedicellate.{\i  • E.C. Spain.} Hs.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 4. Z. tenuior} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 21 (1753). Annual; stems 5-20 (-25) cm, simple or branched, with recurved, short hairs. Leaves on non-flowering shoots 7-25 × 1-6 mm, sparse, linear-lanceolate to lanceolate, acute or acuminate, shortly petiolate, glabrous, often ciliate. Verticillasters many-flowered, distant or crowded, in an oblong, spike-like inflorescence. Bracts like the cauline leaves, ciliate. Calyx 5-7·5 mm, narrowly cylindrical, patent hairy; teeth ovate-triangular, obtuse. Corolla 8-10 mm, the limb usually with a small clavate appendage near the base. Anthers appendiculate.{\i  S.E. Russia, E. Ukraine.} Rs (W, ?K, E). ({\i S.W. & C. Asia.})
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 5. Z. taurica} Bieb.,{\i  Fl. Taur.-Cauc.}{\b  1}: 414 (1808). Annual; stems up to 30 cm, simple or branched, with recurved hairs. Leaves linear-lanceolate, subacute, petiolate, subglabrous or shortly and sparsely hairy, sometimes ciliate. Verticillasters few-flowered, in a dense or lax, spike-like inflorescence. Bracts like the cauline leaves. Calyx 5-7 mm, narrowly cylindrical, patent-hairy; teeth ovate. Corolla 12-15 mm, the limb with a corniculate appendage near the base. Anthers appendiculate.{\i  Krym.} Rs (K).
\par

\par
 
\pard\f0\fs28   {\b 6. Z. persica} Bunge,{\i  Mém. Acad. Sci. Pétersb.} ser. 7,{\b  21}({\b 1}): 39 (1873). Annual; stems up to 30 cm, simple or branched, with deflexed hairs. Leaves 7-40 × 1-10 mm, sparse, the lowermost ovate, petiolate, the others lanceolate, subsessile, all acute or acuminate, glabrous, the uppermost sometimes ciliate. Verticillasters many-flowered, crowded, in a dense, ovoid to oblong, spike-like inflorescence. Bracts like the cauline leaves but widened at the base, the upper with a few distant teeth. Calyx 7-10 mm, narrowly cylindrical, patent-hairy; teeth narrowly triangular or lanceolate. Corolla 9 mm, the limb usually without appendage. Anthers appendiculate.{\i  Krym} ({\i near Simferopol'}). Rs (K). ({\i S.W. Asia.})
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc {\b 25.             Satureja}               L.    
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc By P.W. Ball & F. M. Getliffe.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Annual or perennial herbs or dwarf shrubs. Flowers in verticillasters or in lax cymes. Calyx tubular or campanulate, 10(-13)veined, with 5 more or less equal (rarely distinctly unequal) teeth; tube straight, rarely gibbous, more or less hairy in the mouth. Corolla 2-lipped, with straight tube. Stamens shorter than corolla, curved. Style-branches subequal, subulate.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  All species occur in dry, sunny habitats, particularly on cliffs.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Calyx-teeth very unequal, the upper 3 c. ½ as long as
\par
  the lower 2 .................................................................................... {\b 4. rumelica}
\par
1 Calyx-teeth equal or slightly unequal
\par
2 Annual; at least the lower calyx-teeth much longer than tube .. {\b 12. hortensis}
\par
2 Dwarf shrub, or perennial herb woody at base; calyx-teeth 
\par
  shorter than to slightly longer than tube 3 Calyx-teeth 
\par
  obtuse, though sometimes apiculate .......................................... {\b 2. salzmannii}
\par
3 Calyx-teeth acute or acuminate
\par

\par
163}
\par