{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 12(-20) cm; leaves 10-20 × 3-8 mm, oblong-oblanceolate to obovate, all acute or acuminate, usually sparsely hispid; calyx 4-5·5 mm, shortly hairy; teeth slightly shorter than the tube; corolla 8-12 mm. •{\i  Bulgaria.} Bu ?Ju.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 8. S. athoa} K. Malý, {\i Glasn. Muz. Bosni Herceg.}{\b  22}: 690 (1910). Like {\b 6} but leaves sparsely glandular; calyx-teeth ½ as long as tube. •{\i  N.E. Greece} ({\i Athos}). Gr.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 9. S. cuneifolia} Ten.,{\i  Fl. Nap.}{\b  1},{\i  Prodr}.: 33 (1811). Puberulent to almost hispid; flowering stems 10-50 cm. Leaves 5-16 × 1·5-4 mm, the lower obovate, the upper linear-spathulate and often with inrolled margins, acute or subobtuse. Verticillasters distant; bracts 3-10 mm, usually shorter than the verticillaster; bracteoles not more than ½ as long as calyx. Calyx 3-5(-6) mm, sparsely to densely puberulent, with few, minute glands; teeth ¼ as long to as long as the tube. Corolla 5-10 mm.{\i  Mediterranean region.} Al Hs It Ju.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Records for Bulgaria are referable to {\b 7}; records for Greece are referable to {\b 5}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 10. S. obovata} Lag.,{\i  Gen. Sp. Nov}. 18 (1816). Like {\b 9} but leaves up to 10 mm, spathulate to obovate, usually obtuse; calyx distinctly glandular-punctate; corolla 6-7 mm.{\i  • S. & E. Spain. }Hs.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Usually separable from {\b 9}, although plants apparently referable to {\b 10} have been found in Asiatic Turkey within the distributional range of {\b 9} and somewhat intermediate specimens have been seen from Spain, Italy and the Balkan peninsula.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b  S. intricata} Lange,{\i  Vid. Meddel. Dansk Naturh. Foren. Kjøbenhavn}{\b  1881}: 96 (1882), from the mountains of S.E. Spain, is similar to {\b 10} but has ciliate leaf-margins like {\b 5}; the plants are caespitose with flowering stems up to 10 cm and usually solitary flowers. They may be a high-altitude ecotype of {\b 10}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 11. S. coerulea} Janka in Velen., {\i Fl. Bulg.} 465 (1891). Puberulent; flowering stems 15-25 cm. Leaves 8-20 × 1·5-2(-3) mm, linear or linear-oblong, acute (the lower sometimes subobtuse), glabrous except for ciliate margin. Verticillasters 2- to 4-flowered, more or less distant; bracts up to 10 mm, shorter than or equalling verticillasters; bracteoles 1 as long to as long as calyx. Calyx 4-5 mm; tube hairy; teeth as long as tube, glabrous. Corolla 6-10 mm. •{\i  Bulgaria, E. Romania.} Bu Rm.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 12. S. hortensis} L.,{\i  Sp. Pl.} 568 (1753) (incl.{\i  S. laxiflora} C. Koch,{\i  S. pachyphylla} C. Koch). Puberulent annual 10-25 (-35) cm. Leaves 10-30(-40) × 1-4(-5) mm, linear or linear-lanceolate, obtuse. Verticillasters 2- to 5-flowered, crowded or lax, distant; bracts exceeding the verticillasters. Calyx 3-4 mm, puberulent; teeth slightly unequal, the upper about as long as tube, the lower distinctly longer than tube. Corolla 4-7 mm, white, pink or lilac.{\i  Mediterranean region.} Al Ga Gr Hs It Ju [Bu].
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Widely cultivated as a pot-herb.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc {\b 26.              Acinos }               Miller
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc By P.W. Ball & F. M. Getliffe
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Like{\i  Satureja} but flowers always in verticillasters; calyx tubular 13-veined, the tube usually curved, constricted near the middle and gibbous at the base, the limb 2-lipped with the lower teeth longer than the upper; style-branches unequal, the upper subulate, the lower longer and wider.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 All species occur in dry, sunny habitats.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Intermediates between {\b 2}, {\b 3}, {\b 4} and {\b 5}, presumably of hybrid origin, can be found in those areas where two or more of these species occur.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Leaves with obscure lateral veins and a translucent or 
\par
  whitish margin ............................................................................... {\b 1. corsicus} 
\par
1 Leaves with conspicuous lateral veins and without a
\par
  translucent or whitish margin
\par
2 Corolla (10-)12-20 mm; perennial
\par
3 Leaf-lamina mostly 1-2 times as long as wide, rounded 
\par
  or broadly cuneate at base, obtuse or acute ..................................... {\b 2. alpinus}
\par
3 Leaf-lamina mostly 2-3 times as long as wide, narrowly
\par
  cuneate at base, acuminate or narrowly acute ........................... {\b 3. suaveolens} 
\par
2 Corolla 7-12 mm 
\par
4 Leaf-lamina not more than 1½ times as long as wide,
\par
  very prominently veined beneath, abruptly acuminate or
\par
  mucronate ............................................................................... {\b 5. rotundifolius}
\par
4 Leaf-lamina usually at least 1½ times as long as wide,
\par
  not prominently veined, obtuse or acute
\par
5 Perennial with branched woody stock; corolla 10-12 mm,
\par
  usually distinctly exceeding the subtending bract ........................... {\b 2. alpinus}
\par
5 Annual or short-lived perennial; corolla 7-10(-12) mm,
\par
  not exceeding the subtending bract ................................................ {\b 4. arvensis}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. A. corsicus} (Pers.) Getliffe, {\i Bot. Jour. Linn. Soc. }{\b 65}: 263 (1972) ({\i Thymus corsicus} Pers.,{\i  Calamintha corsica} (Pers.) Bentham). Procumbent, sparsely to moderately densely pubescent perennial up to 10 cm. Leaves 4-10 × 3-5 mm, obovate-spathulate to suborbicular, obtuse, entire with a translucent or whitish margin, the lateral veins very obscure. Verticillasters 2- to 4-flowered. Calyx 6-7 mm, the tube only slightly contracted in the middle. Corolla 12-16 mm, violet.{\i  Mountain rocks and screes.• Corse.} Co.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. A. alpinus} (L.) Moench,{\i  Meth.} 407 (1794) ({\i Calamintha alpina} (L.) Lam.,{\i  Satureja alpina }(L.) Scheele). Sparsely to densely pubescent perennial up to 45 cm. Leaves 6-20 × 4-16 mm, elliptical to suborbicular, acute or obtuse, rounded or broadly cuneate at base, entire or denticulate towards the apex, the lateral veins conspicuous. Verticillasters 3- to 8-flowered, the flowers exceeding the bracts. Calyx 5-8 mm; lower lip 1·5-3 mm. Corolla 10-20 mm, violet with white markings on the lower lip.{\i  C. & S. Europe, mainly in the mountains.} Al Au Bu Cr Cz Ga Ge Gr He Hs It Ju Lu Po Rm Rs (W) Sa Si ?Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Upper lip of the calyx with teeth 0·5-1 mm; hairs on the
\par
  calyx crispate .............................................................. ({\b c}) subsp. {\b meridionalis}
\par
1 Upper lip of the calyx with teeth 1-2 mm
\par
2 Leaves without prominent veins beneath; hairs on the 
\par
  calyx usually straight .......................................................... ({\b a}) subsp. {\b alpinus}
\par
2 Leaves with prominent veins beneath, particularly near 
\par
  the margin; hairs on the calyx usually crispate ........({\b b}) subsp. {\b majoranifolius} 
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b alpinus} : Stem usually not more than 30 cm. Leaves up to 15 × 11 mm, without prominent veins beneath. Calyx 6-8 mm, with usually straight hairs; upper lip with teeth 1-2 mm. Corolla 12-20 mm. 2n = 18.{\i  C. Europe and parts of S. Europe.}
\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b majoranifolius}  (Miller) P. W. Ball,{\i  Bot. Jour. Linn. Soc.}{\b  65}: 344 (1972) ({\i Melissa majoranifolia} Miller,{\i  Calamintha alpina} subsp. {\i majoranifolia} (Miller) Hayek and incl. subsp.{\i  hungarica} (Simonkai) Hayek): Like subsp. ({\b a}) but stem up to 45 cm; leaves up to 20 × 16 mm, with prominent veins beneath, particularly near the margin; calyx usually with crispate hairs. S.E. Europe, usually at lower altitudes than subsp. ({\b a}).
\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Plants intermediate between subspp. ({\b a}) and ({\b b}) have been given subspecific status. Examples are{\b  Calamintha alpina} subsp.
\par

\par
165}
\par