{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28\qc {\b 21.              Prunella}                 L.
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc By A.R. Smith.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Perennial herbs. Verticillasters mostly 6-flowered, in dense, terminal, cylindrical spikes; bracts distinctly different from the leaves; bracteoles small or absent. Calyx tubular-campanulate, 2-lipped, closed in fruit; upper lip more or less 3-toothed; lower lip with 2 larger teeth. Corolla-tube exceeding calyx, straight, obconical, with a ring of hairs inside; upper lip distinctly hooded; lower lip denticulate. Filaments with a subulate appendage below the apex; anther-cells divergent. Nutlets oblong.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   All four species are interfertile, and consequently hybrids are common where two or more of them grow together. There is a complete range of intermediates between the extremes of the different species in respect of nearly every character, and all of this variation may be due to hybridization.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Corolla usually more than 18 mm; inflorescence not 
\par
  subtended by leaves ................................................................... {\b 2. grandiflora}
\par
1 Corolla not more than 17 mm; inflorescence usually 
\par
  subtended by leaves
\par
2 Corolla yellowish-white, rarely pink or purplish; at least 
\par
  the upper leaves pinnatifid or lobed; teeth of lower lip   
\par
  of calyx linear-lanceolate .............................................................. {\b 1. laciniata}
\par
2 Corolla violet, rarely white; leaves entire or crenulate; 
\par
  teeth of lower lip of calyx lanceolate
\par
3 Leaves ovate to rhombic-ovate, entire or crenulate, petiolate; 
\par
  middle tooth of upper lip of calyx wider than lateral teeth ............ {\b 3. vulgaris}
\par
3 Leaves linear-lanceolate to elliptic-lanceolate, entire,
\par
  sessile; teeth of upper lip of calyx subequal ............................ {\b 4. hyssopifolia}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. P. laciniata} (L.) L., {\i Sp. Pl.} ed. 2, 837 (1763) ({\i P. alba} Pallas ex Bieb.). Densely pubescent; stems up to 30 cm. Leaves 4-7 × 2-3 cm; at least the upper deeply pinnatifid or lobed; petiole 0-4 cm. Inflorescence subtended by leaves. Bracts 10 × 15 mm. Calyx 10 mm; upper lip more or less truncate, the teeth almost obsolete; teeth of lower lip 2-2·5 mm, linear-lanceolate, ciliate. Corolla 15-17 mm, yellowish-white, rarely rose-pink or purplish. 2n = 28, 32.{\i  S., W. & C. Europe, northwards to Belgium and C. Poland; locally naturalized further north.} Al Au Be Bl Bu Co Cr Cz Ga Ge Gr He Hs Hu It Ju Lu Po Rm Rs (W,K) Sa Si Tu [Br].
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. P. grandiflora} (L.) Scholler,{\i  Fl. Barb. }140 (1775). Sparsely pubescent; stems up to 60 cm. Leaves 5-9 × 3·5-4 cm, ovate to ovate-lanceolate, entire or crenulate; petiole (0-)4(-9) cm. Inflorescence not subtended by leaves. Bracts 15-20 × 15-20 mm. Calyx 15 mm, the teeth awned; teeth of upper lip subequal; teeth of lower lip 3-4 mm, broadly lanceolate, shortly ciliate. Corolla (18-)25-30 mm, the lips deep violet, the tube whitish. 2n = 28.{\i  Europe except for most of the north and the islands.} Al Au Be Bu Cz Da Ga Ge Gr He Hs Hu It Ju Lu Po Rm Rs (B, C, W, K, E) Su Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b grandiflora} : Leaves cuneate at base, not lobed; inflorescence not more than 5 cm. {\i Calcicole. Throughout the range of the species, except S. Portugal and S.W. Spain}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b pyrenaica}  (Gren. & Godron) A. & O. Bolós in A. Bolós, {\i Veg. Com. Barcelon.} 472 (1950) ({\i P. hastifolia} Brot.): Leaves hastate; inflorescence up to 8 cm.{\i  Calcifuge. S.W. Europe.}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 3. P. vulgaris} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 600 (1753). More or less pubescent; stems up to 50 cm. Leaves 4-5(-9) × 2(-4) cm, ovate to rhombic-ovate, entire or crenulate, cuneate; petiole 0·5-4 cm. Inflorescence usually subtended by leaves. Bracts 5-15 × 7-13 mm. Calyx 8-9 mm, the teeth mucronate; middle tooth of upper lip wider than lateral teeth; teeth of lower lip 1·5-2 mm, lanceolate, shortly ciliate. Corolla (10-)13-15 mm, deep violet-blue, rarely white. 2n = 28.{\i  Almost throughout Europe.} All except Bl Sb.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 4. P. hyssopifolia} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 600 (1753). Glabrous or sparsely pubescent; stems up to 40 cm. Leaves (1-)3-6(-8) × (0·3-)0·5-1·3(-1·8) cm, linear-lanceolate to elliptic-lanceolate, entire, sessile, rarely the lowest pair shortly petiolate. Inflorescence subtended by leaves. Bracts 10-12 × 10-13 mm. Calyx 8-9 mm, the teeth mucronate or awned; teeth of upper lip subequal; teeth of lower lip 3-3·5 mm, lanceolate, ciliate. Corolla 15-17 mm, violet, rarely whitish. •{\i  S.W. Europe. }Co Ga Hs It.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc {\b 22.               Cleonia }             L.
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc By R. Fernandes.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Annual. Verticillasters 6-flowered, in dense, subcapitate to oblong spikes; bracts pectinate-pinnatifid. Calyx 2-lipped, 10-veined; upper lip flat, subentire to 3-toothed; lower lip with 2 long, subulate, subspinescent teeth. Corolla-tube exceeding calyx, the limb dilated; upper lip erect, entire; lower lip 3-lobed. Stamens didynamous; filaments with a subulate appendage beneath the apex; anther-cells divergent. Style 4-fid. Nutlets ovoid-trigonous.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. C. lusitanica} (L.) L., {\i Sp. Pl.} ed. 2, 837 (1763). Hispid or appressed-pubescent; stems up to 40 cm, simple or branched from the base. Leaves 3-9 × 0·4-1·8 cm, sessile, oblong to linear, obtuse, usually coarsely crenate to deeply dentate or weakly pinnatifid, scabrid or shortly hispid. Bracts sessile, imbricate, pectinate-pinnatifid, white-ciliate, acuminate; segments long-aristate. Calyx 5-7 mm, glandular-hispid, the throat somewhat closed in fruit; teeth of the upper lip obsolete or more or less distinct, with an arista 0·5-3 mm. Corolla 2-3 cm, purplish-violet (rarely white), puberulent. Nutlets c. 2·5 mm, light brown.{\i  Dry, open habitats. C. & S. Spain, C. & S. Portugal}. Hs Lu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc {\b 23.             Melissa }                 L.
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc By R. Fernandes.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Perennial herbs. Verticillasters few- to many-flowered. Calyx campanulate, 2-lipped, 13-veined; upper lip flattened, 3-toothed lower lip 2-toothed. Corolla 2-lipped, the tube curved and dilated above the middle, without a ring of hairs inside; upper lip erect or deflexed, sometimes slightly hooded, emarginate lower lip 3-lobed. Stamens didynamous, included, convergent anther-cells divergent. Style-branches subequal.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. M. officinalis} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 592 (1753). Stems 20-150 cm, erect, branched, shortly glandular-puberulent, and with sparse or dense, long, patent, eglandular hairs, or glabrescent. Leaves 2-9 × 1·5-7 cm, broadly ovate to rhombic, obtuse or acute, more or less deeply crenate except at the base. Floral leaves crenate-serrate. Verticillasters 4- to 12-flowered. Bracteoles 2-5 mm, ovate to linear, entire. Calyx 7-9 mm, with long, patent, eglandular and short glandular hairs; teeth of lower lip lanceolate-triangular. Corolla 8-15 mm, pale yellow, becoming white or pinkish. Nutlets 1·5-2 mm.{\i  Scrub and other shady places. S. Europe; widely cultivated for its aromatic foliage and naturalized northwards to England, Sweden and C. Russia. }?.Al B . Bu Co Cr Ga Gr Hs It Ju Rm Sa Si [Au Az Be Br Cz Da Ge H L He Lu Po Rs (W, K, E) Su ?Tu].
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b officinalis} : Lemon-scented, up to 90 cm. Leave glabrescent, or sparsely hairy above, glandular-puberulent an more or less sparsely hairy beneath; at least the upper cauline and floral leaves more or less cuneate at the base. Middle tooth of the
\par

\par
162}
\par