{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 Corolla 7-10 mm, shortly exserted from calyx, white with small purple spots. 2n = 36.{\i  S., E., E.C. and perhaps W. Europe; formerly cultivated as a medicinal herb and widely naturalized in N. & W.C. Europe.} Al *Be Bl *Br Bu Co Ga Gr *Ho Hs Hu It Ju Rm Rs (C, W, K, E) Si [Au Cz Da Fe Ge Hb He Lu No Po Rs (B) Su].
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 14. N. nepetella} L.,{\i  Syst. Nat}. ed. 10,{\b  2}: 1096 (1759) (incl.{\i  N. amethystina} Poiret,{\i  N. aragonensis} Lam., {\i N. boissieri} Willk., {\i N. murcica} Guirão ex Willk.). Stems 30-80 cm, branched, pubescent to velutinous. Leaves 1-4 × 0·5-2 cm, lanceolate to oblong-lanceolate, truncate, rarely ovate and cordate at base, crenate to deeply dentate, grey-green to green, pubescent to velutinous or lanate, usually glandular; petiole up to 15 mm. Inflorescence usually branched. Bracts leaf-like below; bracteoles 2-4 mm, linear-lanceolate. Calyx 5-8 mm, pubescent to villous; teeth triangular, often tinged with pink or blue. Corolla 10-12 mm, cylindrical-campanulate, distinctly exserted from calyx, curved, white, pink or bluish-violet. 2n = 34. {\i S.W. Europe, extending eastwards to S. Italy}. Bl Ga Hs It.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  This species is exceedingly polymorphic, particularly in Spain, from where numerous variants have been accorded specific status in the past. Its variation requires further critical study but appears in part to be linked with habitat and altitudinal factors. The most extreme variants have very small, deeply dentate leaves and slender, few-flowered inflorescences ({\b N. boissieri} Willk.,{\i  Bot. Zeit. }{\b 15}: 219 (1857)) or are completely covered with a lanate indumentum ({\b N. mallophora} Webb & Heldr. ex Nyman,{\i  Consp.} 585 (1881)). Nevertheless these are linked by continuous variation with more normal plants. Plants with a bluish-violet corolla are restricted to the Iberian peninsula and North Africa and have been distinguished as{\b  N. nepetella }subsp.{\b  amethystina} (Poiret) Briq.,{\i  Lab. Alp. Marit.} 368 (1893). Plants with pink or white corolla are found throughout the range of the species in Europe.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 15. N. agrestis} Loisel.,{\i  Mém. Soc. Linn. Paris}{\b  6}: 417 (1827). Like {\b 14} but leaves green, glabrous or subglabrous; corolla infundibuliform. 2n = 18. •{\i  Corse.} Co.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 16. N. foliosa} Moris,{\i  Stirp. Sard.}{\b  3}: 10 (1829). Stems 30-80 cm, viscid-villous. Leaves 1·5-3 cm, oblong-lanceolate, cordate or cuneate at base, coarsely serrate-dentate, densely pubescent. Inflorescence spike-like, leafy. Bracteoles 3-4 mm, lanceolate to linear-lanceolate. Calyx 8-9 mm; teeth 2-3 mm, triangular-lanceolate. Corolla 10-13 mm, pale bluish-violet. •{\i  Sardegna} ({\i Monte Oliena}). Sa.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 17. N. grandiflora} Bieb., {\i Fl. Taur.-Cauc.}{\b  2}: 42 (1808). Stems 40-80 cm, erect, branched, glabrous or puberulent. Leaves 2-6(-10) cm, ovate, cordate at base, crenulate, glabrous. Inflorescence spike-like. Bracteoles 2-3 mm, linear-subulate. Calyx 9·5-11 mm, often blue; teeth 1·5-2 mm, lanceolate, acute. Corolla 14-17 mm, blue, distinctly exserted.{\i  A frequent casual in E. & E.C. Europe and locally naturalized.} [?Ge Rs (B, C, W, K).] ({\i Caucasus}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 18. N. melissifolia} Lam., {\i Encycl. Méth. Bot.}{\b  1}: 711 (1785). Stems 20-40 cm, ascending, little-branched, pubescent to villous. Leaves 1·5-3·5 cm, ovate, cordate at base, coarsely crenate, pubescent. Bracts 5-7 mm, lanceolate; bracteoles shorter, linear. Calyx 8-10 mm, curved; teeth 2-3·5 mm. Corolla 12-15 mm, blue with small red spots. 2n = 18. •{\i  S. Aegean region.} Cr Gr.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Sect. ORTHONEPETA Bentham. Most leaves sessile or subsessile. Inflorescence spike-like or branched; verticillasters many flowered. Flowers hermaphrodite. Bracts small, inconspicuous, much shorter than the calyx. Calyx straight, the upper teeth not exceeding the lower. Nutlets tuberculate.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 19. N. latifolia} DC. in Lam. & DC.,{\i  Fl. Fr.} ed. 3, {\b 3}: 528 (1805). Stems 50-120 cm, erect, simple or sparsely branched, densely pubescent, often bluish above. Leaves 3-7 cm, ovate to ovate-oblong, more or less cordate at base, crenate or serrate, puberulent, sessile or subsessile. Inflorescence spike-like. Bracteoles 3·5-5 mm, lanceolate. Calyx 7-9 mm; teeth 2-3 mm, lanceolate, often bluish. Corolla 8-11 mm, blue. •{\i  Pyrenees and Iberian peninsula.} Ga Hs Lu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 20. N. nuda} L.,{\i  Sp. Pl.} 570 (1753). Stems 50-120 cm, glabrous or puberulent. Leaves 2-5(-8) cm, ovate to ovate-oblong, more or less cordate at base, crenate, the lower sessile or shortly petiolate, the upper sessile. Inflorescence branched, rarely spike-like. Bracteoles 2-3 mm, linear to linear-lanceolate. Calyx 4-6 mm; teeth 1-2 mm. Corolla 6-8(-10) mm, pale violet or white. {\i  S., E. & E.C. Europe, northwards to C. Russia.} Al Au Bu Cz Ga Gr He Hs Hu It Ju Po Rm Rs (C, W, K, E) [Ge].
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b nuda}  (incl.{\i  N. nuda} subsp.{\i  pannonica} (L.) Gams, {\i N. pannonica} L.): Lower leaves distinctly petiolate. Inflorescence lax. Calyx-teeth linear-lanceolate, pale green or blue-tinged. Corolla pale violet. {\i Throughout the range of the species}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b albiflora}  Gams in Hegi,{\i  Ill. Fl. Mitteleur.}{\b  5}({\b 4}): 2372 (1927): Lower leaves sessile or subsessile. Inflorescence compact. Calyx-teeth lanceolate, white-tinged. Corolla white.{\i  S. Jugoslavia, N. Greece}. Gr Ju. ({\i S.W. Asia}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Sect. OXYNEPETA Bentham. Leaves petiolate. Cymes fewflowered, in diffusely branched, patent inflorescences. Bracts leaf-like; bracteoles shorter than the calyx. Calyx-tube cylindrical, straight, sparsely hairy within; upper teeth longer than the lower. Flowers unisexual; central flowers of each cyme female, the stamens represented by staminodes; outer flowers male, with a rudimentary pistil. Nutlets tuberculate.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 21. N. ucranica} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 570 (1753). Stems 15-50 cm, erect, much-branched, subglabrous or puberulent, glabrescent. Leaves (1-)2-4 cm, oblong-lanceolate, crenate-serrate, glabrous, the lower subcordate at base; petiole up to 15 mm. Cymes 3- to 5-flowered, lax, numerous. Bracteoles 6-7 mm, linear, acute. Calyx 7-9 mm, often bluish; teeth linear or linear-lanceolate, longer than the tube. Corolla 7-9 mm, bluish-violet, slightly exserted.{\i  Bulgaria and Romania; E.C. & S.E. Russia.} Bu Rm Rs (C, E).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 22. N. parviflora} Bieb.,{\i  Fl. Taur.-Cauc.}{\b  2}: 41 (1808) ({\i N. euxina} Velen.). Like {\b 21} but stems tomentose to lanate, at least below; leaves serrate with larger teeth, the lowest cordate at base, distinctly petiolate; cymes dense; calyx 6-7 mm; corolla 5-6 mm, blue, shorter than the calyx.{\i  S.E. Europe}. Bu Rm Rs (C, W, K, E).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 23. N. hispanica} Boiss. & Reuter in Boiss.,{\i  Diagn. Pl. Or. Nov.} {\b 3}({\b 4}): 26 (1859). Like {\b 21} but stems pubescent to tomentose; leaves lanceolate, puberulent, the lowest rounded or rarely subcordate at base; cymes dense; calyx 6-7 mm; corolla 5-7 mm, pink or white, equalling or exceeding the calyx.{\i  C. & S.E. Spain.} Hs.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 24. N. beltranii} Pau,{\i  Bol. Soc. Aragon. Ci. Nat. }{\b 11}: 40 (1912). Like {\b 21} but leaves lanceolate, subglabrous to puberulent, the lowest rounded or rarely subcordate at base; cymes dense; calyx 4-6 mm, the teeth shorter than or equalling the tube; corolla pink or white. •{\i  C. Spain} ({\i Vaciamadrid, near Madrid}). Hs.
\par

\par
160}
\par