{\rtf1\ansi \deff4\deflang1033{\fonttbl{\f4\froman\fcharset0\fprq2 Times New Roman;}}{\colortbl;\red0\green0\blue0;\red0\green0\blue255;\red0\green255\blue255;\red0\green255\blue0;\red255\green0\blue255;\red255\green0\blue0;\red255\green255\blue0;\red255\green255\blue255;\red0\green0\blue128;\red0\green128\blue128;\red0\green128\blue0;\red128\green0\blue128;\red128\green0\blue0;\red128\green128\blue0;\red128\green128\blue128;\red192\green192\blue192;}{\stylesheet{\widctlpar \f4\fs20\lang2057 \snext0 Normal;}{\*\cs10 \additive Default Paragraph Font;}}{\info{\author dddd}{\operator dddd}{\creatim\yr1998\mo11\dy11\hr17\min39}{\revtim\yr1998\mo11\dy11\hr17\min40}{\version2}{\edmins1}{\nofpages4}{\nofwords1106}{\nofchars6307}{\*\company  }{\vern57431}}\widowctrl\ftnbj\aenddoc\hyphcaps0 \fet0\sectd \linex0 {\*\pnseclvl1\pnucrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl2\pnucltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl3\pndec\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl4\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl5\pndec\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl6\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl7\pnlcrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl8\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl9\pnlcrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}
\pard\plain \li200\ \f4\fs20\lang2057 {\fs28 4 Bracteoles numerous, oblong or lanceolate, about as 
\par   long as calyx .................................................................................. }{\b\fs28 1. thymbra}{\fs28 
\par 4 Bracteoles absent or short, rarely a few almost as long
\par   as calyx
\par 5 Dwarf shrub, with \'b1 spiny branches .............................................. }{\b\fs28 3. spinosa}{\fs28 
\par 5 Perennial herb woody at base, without spiny branches ... }{\b\fs28 5-11. montana}{\fs28  group
\par 
\par }
\pard \ {\fs28    }{\b\fs28 1. S. thymbra}{\fs28  L.,}{\i\fs28  Sp. Pl.}{\fs28  567 (1753) (incl.}{\i\fs28  S. biroi}{\fs28  J\'e1v.). Much-branched, usually grey-puberulent dwarf shrub 20-35 cm. Leaves (5-)7-20 \'d7 (1-)2-9 mm, oblong to obovate, acute. Verticillasters usually many-flowered, globose, dense, distant; bracts equalling the verticillasters; bracteoles numerous, oblong or lanceolate, about equalling calyx. Calyx 4-7 mm, with long, patent, white hairs, the teeth slightly shorter than tube, acuminate. Corolla 8-12 mm, bright pink or reddish-purple.}{\i\fs28  S. Aegean  region; S. coast of Sardegna.}{\fs28  Cr Gr Sa.
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 2. S. salzmannii}{\fs28  P. W. Ball,}{\i\fs28  Bot. Jour. Linn. Soc.}{\b\fs28  65}{\fs28 : 356 (1972) (}{\i\fs28 S. inodora}{\fs28  Salzm. ex Bentham, non Host). Much-branched, puberulent dwarf shrub up to 30 cm. Leaves 5-8 \'d7 c. 1 mm, linear-spathulate, obtuse, glabrous except for ciliate margin. Verticillasters usually 2-flowered, few, crowded; bracts about equalling the verticillasters. Calyx 4-5 mm, glabrous, the teeth  slightly shorter than tube, oblong, obtuse, sometimes apiculate.  Corolla 6-8 mm, white.}{\i\fs28  S.W. Spain. }{\fs28 Hs.
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 3. S. spinosa}{\fs28  L., }{\i\fs28 Cent. Pl.}{\b\fs28  2}{\fs28 : 19 (1756). Much-branched, pulvinate, puberulent dwarf shrub up to 20 cm, the branches becoming spiny at apex. Leaves up to 10 \'d7 3 mm, narrowly obovate, acute, scabrid-puberulent. Verticillasters 2-flowered, few; bracts shorter than or about as long as the verticillasters. Calyx 2\'b75-4 mm, puberulent, the teeth slightly shorter than tube, acute. Corolla 5-8 mm, white or pale lilac. \bullet }{\i\fs28  Kriti. }{\fs28 Cr.
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 4. S. rumelica}{\fs28  Velen.,}{\i\fs28  Fl. Bulg.}{\fs28  466 (1891). Puberulent perennial with stout woody stock and flowering stems 10-20 cm. Leaves c. 15 \'d7 5 mm, spathulate, obtuse, sometimes mucronate, scabrid-puberulent. Verticillasters 6- to 10-flowered, crowded into a short raceme; bracts equalling or exceeding the verticillasters. Calyx 5-6 mm, puberulent, the lower 2 teeth setaceous, about as long as tube, the upper 3 teeth c. \'bd as long as the lower; fruiting calyx gibbous at base. Corolla c. 8 mm. \bullet }{\i\fs28  S.C. Bulgaria.}{\fs28  Bu.
\par 
\par    (}{\b\fs28 5-11}{\fs28 ).}{\b\fs28  S. montana}{\fs28  group. Perennials with stout woody stock. Leaves linear to obovate, usually acute. Verticillasters up to 14-flowered. Calyx 3-7(-9) mm, the teeth shorter than to longer than tube, acute. Corolla white to pale pink or bright purple.
\par 
\par  A variable group, in which specific limits are not very clear. It is possible that }{\b\fs28 6-10}{\fs28  should be treated as subspecies of}{\b\fs28  5}{\fs28 . 
\par 
\par }
\pard \li200\ {\fs28 1 Stem and leaves with numerous hairs at least 0\'b72 mm; 
\par   flowering stems usually less than 10 cm 
\par 2 Calyx-teeth \'bd as long as tube; leaves sparsely glandular ................. }{\b\fs28 8. athoa}{\fs28 
\par 2 Calyx-teeth at least \'be as long as tube; leaves densely glandular   
\par 3 Lower leaves obtuse; corolla 6-7 mm ...................................... }{\b\fs28 6. parnassica}{\fs28 
\par 3 Lower leaves acute or acuminate; corolla 8-12 mm ........................ }{\b\fs28 7. pilosa}{\fs28 
\par 1 Stem and leaves with no or very few hairs exceeding 0\'b72 mm;  
\par   flowering stems usually more than 10 cm  
\par 4 Lower bracts 10-20 mm, exceeding the verticillasters;
\par   verticillasters usually crowded .............................. }{\b\fs28 5. montana}{\fs28 
\par 4 Lower bracts 3-10 mm, shorter than or about equalling 
\par   the verticillasters; verticillasters usually distant  
\par 5 Calyx-teeth glabrous; bracteoles \'bd as long as to as long as calyx
\par ................................................................................ }{\b\fs28 11. coerulea}{\fs28 
\par 5 Calyx-teeth sparsely to densely puberulent; bracteoles
\par   not more than c. \'bd as long as calyx
\par 6 Calyx distinctly punctate-glandular; leaves spathulate
\par   to obovate, usually obtuse ............................................................ }{\b\fs28 10. obovata}{\fs28 
\par 6 Calyx with a few minute glands; leaves narrowly 
\par   elliptical to spathulate, acute ....................................................... }{\b\fs28 9. cuneifolia}{\fs28 
\par 
\par }
\pard \ {\fs28    }{\b\fs28 5. S. montana}{\fs28  L.,}{\i\fs28  Sp. Pl.}{\fs28  568 (1753). Flowering stems 10-40(-70) cm, glabrous or puberulent. Leaves 5-30 \'d7 1-5(-7) mm, linear to oblanceolate, glabrous except for ciliate margins. Verticillasters usually crowded; lower bracts 10-20 mm, exceeding the verticillasters. Corolla 6-12(-14) mm.}{\i\fs28  S. Europe.}{\fs28  Al Bu Ga ?Gr Hs It Ju Rm Rs (K) Tu.
\par 
\par }
\pard \li200\ {\fs28 1 Stem puberulent all round 
\par 2 Calyx 4-6 mm, tubular; verticillasters dense, with the 
\par    peduncles and pedicels less than 5 mm ....................... (}{\b\fs28 a}{\fs28 ) subsp. }{\b\fs28 montana}{\fs28 
\par 2 Calyx 2\'b75-4(-4\'b75) mm, tubular-campanulate; verticillasters 
\par   usually lax, with at least some peduncles and pedicels 
\par   more than 5 mm .............................................................. (}{\b\fs28 b}{\fs28 ) subsp. }{\b\fs28 variegata}{\fs28 
\par 1 Stem glabrous, or puberulent on 2 sides only 
\par 3 Leaves mostly 4-7 mm wide .......................................... (}{\b\fs28 d}{\fs28 ) Subsp. }{\b\fs28 kitaibelii}{\fs28  
\par 3 Leaves 2-4 mm wide 
\par 4 Calyx 3\'b75-4 mm; corolla c. 8 mm ....................................... (}{\b\fs28 e}{\fs28 ) subsp. }{\b\fs28 taurica}{\fs28 
\par 4 Calyx 5-9 mm; corolla 10-14 mm ...................................... (}{\b\fs28 f}{\fs28 ) subsp. }{\b\fs28 illyrica}{\fs28 
\par 
\par }
\pard \ {\fs28  (}{\b\fs28 a}{\fs28 ) Subsp. }{\b\fs28 montana}{\fs28  : stem puberulent all round. Leaves 5-30 \'d7 1-5 mm. Verticillasters dense, with the peduncles and pedicels less than 5 mm. Calyx 4-6 mm, tubular. Corolla 6-12 mm.}{\i\fs28  From Spain to S. Albania and N.W. Jugoslavia.}{\fs28 
\par  (}{\b\fs28 b}{\fs28 ) Subsp. }{\b\fs28 variegata}{\fs28   (Host) P. W. Ball,}{\i\fs28  Bot. Jour. Linn. Soc.}{\b\fs28  65}{\fs28 : 352 (1972) (}{\i\fs28 S. variegata}{\fs28  Host): Like subsp. (}{\b\fs28 a}{\fs28 ) but verticillasters lax, with at least some peduncles and pedicels more than 5 mm; calyx 2\'b75-4(-4\'b75) mm, tubular-campanulate; corolla 6-10 mm.}{\i\fs28  \bullet  N.E. Italy, W. Jugoslavia.}{\fs28 
\par  (}{\b\fs28 c}{\fs28 ) Subsp. }{\b\fs28 illyrica}{\fs28   Nyman,}{\i\fs28  Consp.}{\fs28  591 (1881) (}{\i\fs28 S. subspicata}{\fs28  Bartl. ex Vis.): stem glabrous, or puberulent on only 2 sides. Leaves 10-30 \'d7 2-3 mm. Verticillasters dense. Calyx 5-9 mm, tubular. Corolla 10-14 mm.}{\i\fs28  \bullet  W. Jugoslavia, Albania.}{\fs28    
\par  (}{\b\fs28 d}{\fs28 ) Subsp. }{\b\fs28 kitaibelii}{\fs28   (Wierzb.) P. W. Ball, }{\i\fs28 Bot. Jour. Linn. Soc.}{\b\fs28  65}{\fs28 : 352 (1972) (}{\i\fs28 S. kitaibelii}{\fs28  Wierzb.): Flowering stem 30-70 cm, glabrous, or puberulent on 2 sides only. Leaves 15-30 \'d7 4-7 mm. Verticillasters usually lax and distant. Calyx 4-6 mm, tubular-campanulate. Corolla 10-12 mm. 2n = 30.}{\i\fs28  \bullet  N. part of Balkan peninsula, S.W. Romania}{\fs28 . 
\par  (}{\b\fs28 e}{\fs28 ) Subsp. }{\b\fs28 taurica}{\fs28   (Velen.) P. W. Ball, }{\i\fs28 op. cit.}{\fs28  (1972) (}{\i\fs28 S. taurica}{\fs28  Velen.): stem glabrous, or puberulent on 2 sides only. Leaves 15-25 \'d7 2\'b75-4 mm. Verticillasters more or less distant. Calyx 3\'b75-4 mm, tubular-campanulate. Corolla c. 8 mm. \bullet }{\i\fs28  Krym}{\fs28 .
\par 
\par  }{\b\fs28 S. macedonica}{\fs28  Form., }{\i\fs28 Verh. Naturf. Ver. Brunn}{\b\fs28  37}{\fs28 : 186 (1899) (}{\i\fs28 S. montana }{\fs28 var. }{\i\fs28 pisidica }{\fs28 auct., non (Wettst.) Hal\'e1csy), was described to cover plants from N. Greece which had previously been confused with }{\i\fs28 S. pisidica}{\fs28  Wettst., a species that does not occur in Europe. It has stems glabrous or hairy on 2 sides only, leaves 10-15 \'d7 2-5 mm, verticillasters crowded, calyx 4-6 mm, the lips equalling or longer than the tube and corolla 8-10 mm. It may represent another subspecies of }{\b\fs28 5}{\fs28 .
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 6. S. parnassica}{\fs28  Heldr. & Sart. ex Boiss.,}{\i\fs28  Fl. Or.}{\b\fs28  4}{\fs28 : 563 (1879). Stock usually stout and woody; flowering stems up to 10 cm, more or less hispid with numerous hairs at least 0\'b72 mm. Leaves 5-10 \'d7 2\'b75-4 mm, the lower obovate, obtuse, the upper spathulate, acute, hispid, densely glandular. Verticillasters crowded; bracts equalling or exceeding the verticillaster. Calyx 3\'b75-4 mm, hispid; teeth as long as or slightly shorter than tube. Corolla 6-7 mm. \bullet }{\i\fs28  S. & S.C. Greece.}{\fs28  Gr.  
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 7. S. pilosa}{\fs28  Velen.,}{\i\fs28  Sitz.-Ber. B\'f6hm. Ges. Wiss.}{\fs28  (}{\i\fs28 Math.-Nat. Kl}{\fs28 .)}{\b\fs28  1899}{\fs28 (}{\b\fs28 40}{\fs28 ): 6 (1899). Like }{\b\fs28 6}{\fs28  but flowering stems up to
\par 
\par 164}
\par }