{\rtf1\ansi \deff4\deflang1033{\fonttbl{\f4\froman\fcharset0\fprq2 Times New Roman;}}{\colortbl;\red0\green0\blue0;\red0\green0\blue255;\red0\green255\blue255;\red0\green255\blue0;\red255\green0\blue255;\red255\green0\blue0;\red255\green255\blue0;\red255\green255\blue255;\red0\green0\blue128;\red0\green128\blue128;\red0\green128\blue0;\red128\green0\blue128;\red128\green0\blue0;\red128\green128\blue0;\red128\green128\blue128;\red192\green192\blue192;}{\stylesheet{\widctlpar \f4\fs20\lang2057 \snext0 Normal;}{\*\cs10 \additive Default Paragraph Font;}}{\info{\author dddd}{\operator dddd}{\creatim\yr1998\mo11\dy5\hr15\min28}{\revtim\yr1998\mo11\dy5\hr15\min29}{\version2}{\edmins1}{\nofpages4}{\nofwords1053}{\nofchars6004}{\*\company  }{\vern57431}}\widowctrl\ftnbj\aenddoc\hyphcaps0 \fet0\sectd \linex0 {\*\pnseclvl1\pnucrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl2\pnucltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl3\pndec\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl4\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl5\pndec\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl6\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl7\pnlcrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl8\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl9\pnlcrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}
\pard\plain \li200\ \f4\fs20\lang2057 {\fs28 Cymes 5- to 11(-15)-flowered, the peduncle 0-5(-10) mm, the 
\par   secondary branches 0-5 mm; leaves 10-20(-25) mm, subentire 
\par   or with up to 5 teeth on each side ................................. (}{\b\fs28 b}{\fs28 ) subsp. }{\b\fs28 glandulosa}{\fs28 
\par 
\par }
\pard \ {\fs28  (}{\b\fs28 a}{\fs28 ) Subsp. }{\b\fs28 nepeta}{\fs28   (}{\i\fs28 C. nepetoides}{\fs28  Jordan, }{\i\fs28 C. thessala}{\fs28  Hausskn.,}{\i\fs28  Satureja calamintha}{\fs28  subsp.}{\i\fs28  nepetoides}{\fs28  (Jordan) Br.-Bl.): Leaves 20-35(-45) \'d7 12-25(-30) mm, crenate-serrate with 5-9 teeth on each side. Cymes (5-)10- to 20-flowered; peduncle 8-22 mm; secondary branches 5-10 mm. Upper calyx-teeth 0\'b77-1\'b75 mm, narrowly triangular. 2n = 24.}{\i\fs28  Mountains of S. & S.C. Europe}{\fs28 .
\par  (}{\b\fs28 b}{\fs28 ) Subsp. }{\b\fs28 glandulosa}{\fs28   (Req.) P. W. Ball,}{\i\fs28  Bot. Jour. Linn. Soc.}{\b\fs28  65}{\fs28 : 347 (1972) (}{\i\fs28 Thymus glandulosus}{\fs28  Req., }{\i\fs28 C. glandulosa }{\fs28 (Req.) Bentham, }{\i\fs28 C. officinalis}{\fs28  Moench, }{\i\fs28 Satureja calamintha}{\fs28  subsp.}{\i\fs28  glandulosa }{\fs28 (Req.) Gams, subsp.}{\i\fs28  nepeta}{\fs28  sensu Briq. & subsp.}{\i\fs28  subnuda}{\fs28  (Waldst. & Kit.) Gams): Leaves 10-20(-25) \'d7 8-12 mm, subentire or shallowly crenate-serrate with up to 5 teeth on each side. Cymes 5- to 11(-15)-flowered; peduncle 0-5(-10) mm; secondary branches 0-5 mm. Upper calyx-teeth 0\'b75-1 mm, broadly triangular. 2n = 20, 24.}{\i\fs28  S. & W. Europe.}{\fs28 
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 4. C. cretica}{\fs28  (L.) Lam.,}{\i\fs28  Fl. Fr.}{\b\fs28  2}{\fs28 : 395 (1778). Densely grey pubescent perennial 10-30 cm, woody at base. Leaves 6-15 \'d7 6-10 mm, broadly ovate, obtuse, tomentose or villous-tomentose, subentire or shallowly crenate-serrate with up to 5 teeth on each side. Cymes 1- to 3(-6)-flowered; peduncle 0-4 mm, secondary branches usually absent. Calyx 4-5 mm, with dense, long, patent hairs, the hairs in the mouth exserted; upper teeth 0\'b77-1 mm; lower teeth c. 2 mm, densely patent-pubescent. Corolla c. 10 mm, white.}{\i\fs28  Stony places. \bullet  Kriti.}{\fs28  Cr.
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 5. C. incana}{\fs28  (Sibth. & Sm.) Boiss.,}{\i\fs28  Pl. Atticae Heldr.}{\b\fs28  1844}{\fs28  (1845). Densely grey-tomentose perennial 10-40 cm, woody at base. Leaves 5-12 \'d7 5-12 mm, suborbicular, subentire. Cymes 2- to 6-flowered; peduncle 0-5 mm, secondary branches absent. Calyx 3\'b75-5 mm, with dense, short, appressed or crispate hairs, the hairs in the mouth exserted; upper teeth 0\'b72-0\'b74 mm; lower teeth 1-1\'b75 mm, puberulent, or with a few long cilia. Corolla 8-11 mm, pale pink. }{\i\fs28 S. Greece and Aegean region.}{\fs28  ?Cr Gr.
\par 
\par }
\pard \qc\ {\b\fs28 28.            Clinopodium}{\fs28                   L.     
\par }{\fs24 By P.W. Ball  &  F. Getliffe. 
\par 
\par }
\pard \ {\fs28 Like}{\i\fs28  Calamintha}{\fs28  but verticillasters dense, many-flowered; calyx-tube curved.
\par 
\par Literature: R. von Bothmer,}{\i\fs28  Bot. Not. }{\b\fs28 120}{\fs28 : 202-208 (1967).
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 1. C. vulgare}{\fs28  L., }{\i\fs28 Sp. Pl.}{\fs28  587 (1753) (}{\i\fs28 Calamintha clinopodium}{\fs28  Bentham, }{\i\fs28 C. vulgaris}{\fs28  (L.) Hal\'e1csy, non Clairv.,}{\i\fs28  Satureja vulgaris}{\fs28  (L.) Fritsch). Pubescent to densely villous perennial herb 30-80 cm. Leaves 20-65 \'d7 10-30 mm, ovate-lanceolate or ovate, subobtuse, rounded or cuneate at base, shallowly and remotely crenate-serrate, petiolate. Verticillasters distant or sometimes the upper crowded; bracts linear, almost as long as the calyx, plumose. Corolla 12-22 mm, pinkish-purple.}{\i\fs28  Scrub and open woodland. Most of Europe, northwards to}{\fs28  c. 66\'b0 }{\i\fs28 N. in Norway.}{\fs28  All except Bl Fa Is Sb.
\par 
\par  (}{\b\fs28 a}{\fs28 ) Subsp. }{\b\fs28 vulgare}{\fs28  : Calyx 7-9\'b75 mm; lower teeth 2\'b75-4 mm; upper teeth up to 2\'b75 mm. 2n = 20.}{\i\fs28  Almost throughout the range of the species, but absent from parts of S. Europe}{\fs28 .
\par  (}{\b\fs28 b}{\fs28 ) Subsp. }{\b\fs28 arundanum}{\fs28   (Boiss.) Nyman,}{\i\fs28  Consp.}{\fs28  587 (1881): Calyx 9\'b75-12 mm; lower teeth 4-5\'b75 mm; upper teeth 2\'b75-4 mm. 2n = 20. }{\i\fs28 S. Europe}{\fs28 .
\par 
\par }
\pard \qc\ {\b\fs28 29.             Micromeria }{\fs28              Bentham
\par }{\fs24 By A.O. Chater & E. Guinea.
\par 
\par }
\pard \ {\fs28 Perennial herbs or dwarf shrubs. Calyx tubular, 13(15)-veined, sometimes actinomorphic and straight, sometimes zygomorphic and somewhat curved, scarcely gibbous and somewhat 2-lipped with rather unequal teeth, hairy or glabrous in the mouth. Corolla 2-lipped, with straight tube. Stamens shorter than corolla, curved, convergent. Style-branches subequal, subulate.
\par 
\par   All species, unless another habitat is specified, grow on rocks, or occasionally on walls and in other dry, open habitats.
\par 
\par 1 Calyx actinomorphic, straight, with \'b1 equal teeth;
\par   leaves often crenate or serrate
\par 2 Calyx-teeth triangular, about as long as wide, \'b1 obtuse
\par 3 Calyx villous in throat ................................................................. }{\b\fs28 1. fruticosa}{\fs28 
\par 3 Calyx glabrous in throat
\par 4 Stems 20-50 cm, glabrous or sparsely puberulent; leaves
\par   glabrous ...................................................................................... }{\b\fs28 2. thymifolia}{\fs28 
\par 4 Stems 4-10 cm, velutinous; leaves whitish-velutinous ................ }{\b\fs28 3. taygetea}{\fs28 
\par 2 Calyx-teeth lanceolate to subulate, much longer than wide, acute
\par 5 Middle and upper leaves linear, not more than 12 mm
\par 6 Flowers sessile; verticillasters often subsessile 
\par 7 Calyx glabrous in throat, the teeth c. \'bd as long as tube; 
\par   nutlets acute ................................................................................... }{\b\fs28 14. juliana}{\fs28 
\par 7 Calyx villous in throat, the teeth c. \'bc as long as tube;  
\par   nutlets obtuse ............................................................................ }{\b\fs28 15. myrtifolia}{\fs28 
\par 6 Flowers pedicellate; verticillasters pedunculate
\par 8 Leaves mostly overlapping .......................................................... }{\b\fs28 16. cristata}{\fs28 
\par 8 Leaves mostly not overlapping ............................................ }{\b\fs28 17. cremnophila}{\fs28 
\par 5 Middle and upper leaves ovate to ovate-lanceolate, the larger
\par   more than 12 mm  
\par 9 Calyx 2\'b75-3 mm; teeth c. 2/3 as long as tube ............................. }{\b\fs28 4. dalmatica}{\fs28  
\par 9 Calyx 3\'b75-4 mm; teeth 1/3-1/2 as long as tube
\par 10 Stems erect, straight; corolla 7-9 mm ....................................... }{\b\fs28 5. pulegium}{\fs28 
\par 10 Stems ascending; corolla 5-6 mm .................................... }{\b\fs28 6. frivaldszkyana}{\fs28 
\par 1 Calyx zygomorphic, often curved, with unequal teeth; leaves entire
\par 11 Ericoid dwarf shrub with acicular leaves 2-3 \'d7 c. 0\'b75 mm ....... }{\b\fs28 21. inodora}{\fs28 
\par 11 Not an ericoid dwarf shrub; leaves, at least the floral, 
\par    more than 3 mm
\par 12 The upper, or at least the floral, leaves linear-lanceolate 
\par    or linear
\par 13 Flowers sessile; verticillasters often subsessile .......................... }{\b\fs28 14. juliana}{\fs28 
\par 13 Flowers usually distinctly pedicellate; verticillasters
\par    pedunculate
\par 14 Nutlets acuminate
\par 15 Leaves mostly overlapping ........................................................ }{\b\fs28 16. cristata}{\fs28 
\par 15 Leaves mostly not overlapping .......................................... }{\b\fs28 17. cremnophila}{\fs28 
\par 14 Nutlets obtuse (rarely obtuse and apiculate)
\par 16 Calyx with long, dense, patent hairs, the rest of the
\par    plant sparsely or more shortly and always much less
\par    conspicuously hairy ..................................................................... }{\b\fs28 13. nervosa}{\fs28 
\par 16 Whole plant more or less uniformly hairy
\par 17 Corolla 3-4 mm .......................................................................... }{\b\fs28 18. kerneri}{\fs28 
\par 17 Corolla more than 4 mm
\par 18 Peduncles \'b1 patent, the verticillasters with 2-6 flowers  
\par    and greatly exceeding the subtending leaves ........................... }{\b\fs28 19. parviflora}{\fs28 
\par 18 Peduncles erect or erecto-patent, the verticillasters
\par    with (2-)6-18 flowers and usually not or only slightly
\par    exceeding the subtending leaves ................................................... }{\b\fs28 20. graeca}{\fs28 
\par 12 Upper leaves, including the floral, ovate or triangular
\par    (rarely oblong-lanceolate)
\par 19 Leaves 2-6 mm
\par 20 Lower leaves cordate at base ................................................... }{\b\fs28 7. filiformis}{\fs28 
\par 20 Lower leaves rounded or cuneate at base
\par 
\par 167}
\par }