{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 (1971) ({\i M. thymoides} De Not., non (Solander ex Lowe) Webb & Berth.): Like subsp. ({\b a}) but stems slender, filiform; middle and upper leaves linear. •{\i  N.W. Italy} ({\i prov. Imperia}).
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b c}) Subsp. {\b garganica}  (Briq.) Guinea, {\i loc. cit.} (1971) ({\i Satureja graeca} subsp. {\i garganica }Briq.): Plant tomentose; stems without axillary fascicles of leaves. Lower leaves ovate-lanceolate, the upper linear. Verticillasters lax, with more than 4 flowers; peduncles distinctly divaricate. Corolla-tube 4-6 mm longer than calyx-tube. Flowering in spring. Nutlets obtuse. •{\i  S.E. Italy}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b d}) Subsp. {\b longiflora}  (C. Presl) Nyman,{\i  Consp.} 590 (1881): Like subsp. ({\b c}) but hispid; upper leaves linear-lanceolate; verticillasters more dense, the peduncles suberect or erecto-patent. •{\i  C. & S. Italy, Sicilia}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b e}) Subsp. {\b tenuifolia}  (Ten.) Nyman,{\i  Consp.} 590 (1881): Plant shortly hirsute; stems without axillary fascicles of leaves. Lower leaves ovate-lanceolate, the rest linear or linear-lanceolate. Verticillasters mostly with 2-4 subsessile flowers; peduncles rather strict. Corolla-tube 2-3 mm longer than calyx-tube. Flowering in spring. Nutlets shortly apiculate. •{\i  Italy, Sardegna, Sicilia}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b f}) Subsp. {\b consentina}  (Ten.) Guinea,{\i  Bot. Jour. Linn. Soc.}{\b  64}: 381 (1971) ({\i Satureja consentina} Ten.): Plant minutely scabrid-puberulent; stems without axillary fascicles of leaves. Lower leaves ovate, fugacious, the rest linear. Verticillasters lax, with 2-6 flowers; peduncles erecto-patent. Corolla-tube 5-6 mm longer than calyx-tube. Flowering in autumn. Nutlets obtuse. {\i Usually calcifuge. S. Italy, Sicilia}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b g}) Subsp. {\b fruticulosa}  (Bertol.) Guinea,{\i  loc. cit.} (1971) ({\i Thymus fruticulosus} Bertol.): Plant pubescent to hirsute; stems with conspicuous axillary fascicles of leaves. Lower leaves ovate, the upper linear. Verticillasters with 1-4 flowers; peduncles divaricate. Corolla-tube 4-6 mm longer than calyx-tube. Flowering in spring. Nutlets obtuse.{\i  Calcicole. S. Italy, Sicilia}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 21. M. inodora} (Desf.) Bentham,{\i  Lab. Gen. Sp.} 375 (1834). Ericoid, much-branched, puberulent dwarf shrub 10-30 cm with crowded, erect branches. Leaves 2-3 × c. 0·5 mm, acicular, rigid, evergreen, very dense and fasciculate, with revolute margin. Verticillasters mostly with 2 flowers, crowded, the pedicellate flowers exceeding the subtending leaves. Calyx c. 4 mm, villous in throat; teeth c. ½ as long as tube, lanceolate-subulate, unequal. Corolla 8-10 mm, purplish. Flowering in winter. {\i Dry hillsides and waste ground. Islas Baleares, S. Spain.} Bl Hs. ({\i N.W. Africa}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc {\b 30.               Thymbra}                 L.     
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc By V.H. Heywood & R. A. DeFilipps. 
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Small shrubs. Floral leaves imbricate; inflorescence dense, narrow, spike-like. Bracteoles linear to lanceolate. Calyx dorsally flattened, 2-lipped, 13-veined; upper lip 3-toothed; lower lip 2-toothed. Corolla 2-lipped, the tube straight; upper lip porrect, emarginate; lower lip 3-lobed. Stamens included; anther-cells parallel.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Literature: K. H. Rechinger fil., {\i Kulturpfl., Beih.}{\b  3}: 64-69 (1962).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 Leaves glabrous or ciliate; calyx 5-8·5 mm, the throat 
\par
   hirsute inside; corolla 12-15 mm .................................................... {\b 1. spicata}
\par
Leaves tomentose; calyx c. 3 mm, the throat glabrous 
\par
   inside; corolla 5·5-6 mm ......................................................... {\b 2. calostachya}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. T. spicata} L.,{\i  Sp. Pl. }569 (1753). Stems up to 55 cm; branches erect, rigid, with hairs in two decussate lines, glabrescent. Leaves 15-23 × 2-3 mm, linear to linear-lanceolate, entire, glabrous or ciliate, sessile. Bracteoles 10 mm, lanceolate, purplish, white-ciliate. Calyx 5-8·5 mm, glandular-punctate, the teeth ciliate; throat hirsute inside. Corolla 12-15 mm, pink; upper lip much longer than the lower; tube twice as long as the calyx. {\i Dry, sunny hillsides. Turkey-in-Europe; a few isolated stations in Greece}. Gr Tu. ({\i Anatolia to Israel}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. T. calostachya} (Rech. fil.) Rech. fil.,{\i  Kulturpfl., Beih.}{\b  3}: 64 (1962). Stems up to 40 cm; branches erect or ascending, densely puberulent, glabrescent. Leaves 5-12 × 1·5-3 mm, oblong-lanceolate, entire, densely and shortly grey-tomentose, sessile. Bracteoles 2 mm, linear, greyish, velutinous-tomentose. Calyx c. 3 mm, glandular-punctate, shortly tomentose; throat glabrous inside. Corolla 5·5-6 mm, white; upper lip shorter than the lower; tube only slightly longer than the calyx.{\i  Calcareous rocks. • E. Kriti} ({\i near Sitia}). Cr.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc {\b 31.             Hyssopus}               L.
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc By R.A. DeFilipps.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Aromatic, perennial herbs or dwarf shrubs. Verticillasters 4- to 16-flowered, in terminal, secund, spike-like inflorescences. Calyx tubular, 15-veined, with 5 equal teeth. Corolla infundibuliform, 2-lipped; upper lip erect, emarginate; lower lip patent, 3-lobed, the middle lobe the largest, emarginate. Stamens exserted, spreading; anther-cells divergent. Style-branches equal.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Literature: J. Briquet,{\i  Les Labiées des Alpes Maritimes }380- 388. Genève & Bale. 1893.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. H. officinalis} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 569 (1753). Stems 20-60 cm, numerous, erect, rarely decumbent. Leaves 10-50 × 1-10 mm, linear, lanceolate or oblong, obtuse to acuminate, entire, glabrous to villous, sessile or subsessile. Bracts linear, acuminate, not aristate or with an arista 1-3 mm. Calyx glabrous or puberulent, the tube 3-5 mm, the teeth 1-3 mm, acuminate, aristate or not. Corolla 7-12 mm, blue or violet, rarely white. Nutlets c. 2 mm.{\i  Dry hills and rocky ground. S., S.C. & E. Europe; locally naturalized from gardens elsewhere.} Al Au Bu Cz Ga He Hs Hu It Ju Rs (B, C, W, K, E) [Be Ge Ho Po].
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  A polymorphic species, in which variants have been named at the specific, subspecific and varietal level, mainly on the basis of differences in indumentum, presence or absence of aristae on bracts and calyx-teeth, and length of calyx-teeth. Although their geographical range is sometimes discontinuous, the most distinctive variants are treated here as subspecies. Further research is needed to ascertain their proper status.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Plants greyish- or whitish-villous ................................. ({\b a}) subsp. {\b canescens}
\par
1 Plants glabrous or glabrescent
\par
2 Calyx-teeth 1 mm, triangular, not aristate; corolla 
\par
  exceeding calyx-teeth by 3 mm ..................................... ({\b b}) subsp. {\b montanus}
\par
2 Calyx-teeth 2-3 mm, lanceolate or ovate-lanceolate, with 
\par
  an arista 1-3 mm; corolla exceeding calyx-teeth by 4 mm
\par
3 Bracts aristate ................................................................. ({\b c}) subsp. {\b aristatus}
\par
3 Bracts not aristate ......................................................... ({\b d}) subsp. {\b officinalis}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b canescens}  (DC.) Briq.,{\i  Lab. Alp. Marit.} 387 (1893) ({\i H. officinalis }var.{\i  canescens} DC., {\i H. canescens} (DC.) Nyman,{\i  H. cinerascens} Jordan & Fourr.,{\i  H. cinereus} Pau): {\i France and Spain}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b montanus}  (Jordan & Fourr.) Briq., {\i op. cit.} 386 (1893) ({\i H. montanus} Jordan & Fourr., {\i H. officinalis} subsp.{\i  montanus} var.{\i  wolgensis} Briq.; incl.{\i  H. cretaceus} Dubjansky):{\i  France; S. part of U.S.S.R.; probably elsewhere}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b c}) Subsp. {\b aristatus}  (Godron) Briq.,{\i  op. cit.} 383 (1893) ({\i H. aristatus} Godron,{\i  H. officinalis} var.{\i  pilifer} Griseb. ex Pant.,
\par

\par
170}
\par