{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Lamina weakly hairy or glabrescent beneath; hairs usually straight,
\par 
  unbranched
\par 
2 Calyx 8-15 mm; corolla 9-12 mm in diameter ..................... ({\b a}) subsp.{\b  veris}
\par 
2 Calyx 15-20 mm; corolla 18-28 mm in diameter ...... ({\b d}) subsp.{\b  macrocalyx}
\par 
1 Lamina hairy beneath, hairs twisted, often branched
\par 
3 Lamina gradually decurrent, grey-tomentose beneath;
\par 
  petiole winged ............................................................... ({\b b}) subsp.{\b  canescens}
\par 
3 Lamina usually cordate, thickly white-hairy beneath;
\par 
  petiole not or slightly winged ........................................ ({\b c}) subsp.{\b  columnae}
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b veris}: Lamina usually abruptly contracted at base, weakly hairy to glabrescent; hairs 0·15-0·3 mm, stiff, unbranched; petiole winged. Calyx 8-15 mm, not widely divergent at apex. Corolla 9-12 mm in diameter; limb concave; tube usually longer than calyx. 2n = 22. •{\i  Throughout most of the range of the species, southwards to the Alps.}
\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b canescens} (Opiz) Hayek ex Lüdi in Hegi,{\i  Ill. Fl. Mitteleur.}{\b  5}({\b 3}): 1752 (1927): Lamina grey-tomentose beneath, gradually decurrent into winged petiole; hairs 0·5-0·15 mm, twisted, often branched or interwoven. Calyx 16-20 mm. Corolla 8-20 mm in diameter; limb slightly concave; tube usually equalling calyx.{\i  Lowlands of C. Europe, extending to S. France and N. Spain.}
\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b c}) Subsp. {\b columnae} (Ten.) Lüdi, {\i loc. cit. }(1927) ({\i P. suaveolens} Bertol.): Lamina ovate, usually cordate, thickly white-hairy beneath; hairs 1 mm, twisted, often branched and interwoven; petiole not or slightly winged. Calyx 16-20 mm, widened at apex, usually rather hairy. Corolla 10-22 mm in diameter; limb almost flat; tube longer than calyx.{\i  Mountains of S. Europe}.
\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b d}) Subsp. {\b macrocalyx} (Bunge) Lüdi, {\i op. cit.} 1753 (1927) ({\i P. macrocalyx} Bunge): Lamina narrowed to a long, winged petiole, somewhat hairy to glabrescent beneath, the hairs 0·3-0·5 mm, usually straight, unbranched. Calyx 15-20 mm, widened at apex, often hairy. Corolla 18-28 mm in diameter; tube longer than calyx.{\i  S.E. Russia, Krym.}
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  Subgen. {\b Aleuritia} (Duby) Wendelbo. Hetero- or homostylous. Usually farinose or with farina-producing hairs, otherwise glabrous. Leaves with revolute vernation, not fleshy, coriaceous or rugose. Bracts usually saccate or gibbous. Calyx angled.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 4. P. farinosa} L.,{\i  Sp. Pl.} 143 (1753). Farinose or efarinose; heterostylous. Leaves 1-10 × 0·3-2 cm, oblanceolate to elliptical, obtuse, entire or finely denticulate, green above, usually farinose beneath; petiole variable in length, winged. Scape 3-20 cm, 2-to many-flowered. Bracts 2-8 mm, linear-lanceolate to subulate, gibbous at the base. Pedicels up to twice as long as bracts, lengthening in fruit. Calyx 3-6 mm, often tinged with black or purple, cylindrical or urceolate; teeth obtuse, rarely acute. Corolla 8-16 mm in diameter, lilac-pink, rarely purple or white, yellow in the throat. Capsule 5-9 mm, equalling or up to twice as long as calyx.{\i  Marshes and damp meadows, usually on base-rich soils. From Scotland and C. Sweden southwards to C. Spain and Bulgaria, mainly in the mountains.} Au Br Bu Cz Da Fe Ga Ge He Hs Hu It Ju Po Rm Rs (N, B, C, W) Su.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b farinosa}: Usually a stout plant, with up to 20 flowers on short pedicels. Scape, bracts and calyx farinose; leaves usually densely farinose beneath, rarely efarinose (var. {\i denudata} Koch). 2n = 18, 36.{\i  Throughout the range of the species.}
\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b exigua} (Velen.) Hayek,{\i  Prodr. Fl. Penins. Balcan. }{\b 2}: 25 (1928): Usually a smaller and more slender plant than subsp. ({\b a}), with 2-6(-10) flowers on longer pedicels. Scape, bracts and calyx efarinose; leaves not or sparingly farinose. • {\i Mountains of Bulgaria.}
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 5. P. frondosa} Janka,{\i  Österr. Bot. Zeitschr.}{\b  23}: 204 (1873). Farinose or efarinose; heterostylous or homostylous. Leaves 3-9 × 1-2 cm, spathulate, oblong or obovate, denticulate or crenate, thickly farinose or sometimes efarinose. Scape 4-12 cm slightly farinose or glandular, 10- to 30-flowered. Bracts 4-5 mm, linear or linear-lanceolate, wider at the base, with or without farina. Pedicels 5-35 mm. Calyx 4-6 mm, sometimes farinose, campanulate; teeth acute. Corolla 10-15 mm in diameter, pinkish-lilac to reddish-purple. In homostylous flowers, stamens and stigma both at apex of corolla-tube. Capsule cylindrical, equalling or just exceeding calyx.{\i  Shady cliffs, near melting snow. • C. Bulgaria} ({\i C. Stara Planina}). Bu.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28     {\b 6. P. longiscapa} Ledeb.,{\i  Mém. Acad. Sci. Pétersb.}{\b  5}: 520 (1815). Heterostylous. Leaves 3-13 × 0·7-2 cm, oblong-obovate to lanceolate, usually rounded at apex, entire or crenulate glaucescent, efarinose. Scape 10-30 cm, stout, often farinose 10- to 100-flowered. Bracts 3-10 mm, linear-lanceolate, somewhat gibbous or slightly auriculate at base. Pedicels 3-10 mm. Calyx 3-5 mm; teeth sometimes slightly farinose. Corolla 6-10 mm in diameter, purple. Capsule 5-8 mm, oblong, nearly twice as long as calyx.{\i  Damp meadows. S.E. Russia. }Rs (C, E). ({\i C. Asia}.)
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 7. P. halleri} J. F. Gmelin,{\i  Onomat. Bot. Compl.}{\b  7}: 407 (1775) ({\i P. longiflora} All.). Farinose; homostylous. Leaves 2-8 × 0·5-3 cm, oblong-obovate to oblanceolate, subentire or minutely denticulate, densely covered beneath with yellow farina. Scape 8-18 cm, stout, farinose, 2- to 12-flowered. Bracts 5-10 mm, narrowly lanceolate, subsaccate or slightly auriculate at base, sparingly farinose. Pedicels 5-10 mm. Calyx 8-12 mm, farinose. Corolla 15-20 mm in diameter, lilac; tube 20-30 mm, 2-3 times as long as calyx. Stamens inserted at apex of tube; style exserted. Capsule cylindrical, equalling or exceeding calyx.{\i  Alpine meadows and rock-crevices; somewhat calcicole. • Alps, Carpathians, mountains of Balkan peninsula.} Al Au Bu Cz Ga He It Ju Po Rm Rs (W).
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 8. P. scotica} Hooker in Curtis,{\i  Fl. Lond.}{\b  4}: t.133 (1821). Farinose; homostylous. Leaves 1-5 × 0·4-1·5 cm, elliptical, oblong or spathulate, entire or remotely crenulate-denticulate, usually abundantly farinose beneath. Scapes 0·5-6(-9) cm, 1-2(-4) in number, farinose, 1- to 6-flowered. Bracts 2-5 mm lanceolate, subsaccate at base, farinose. Pedicels 1-5 mm. Calyx 4-6 mm; teeth obtuse, farinose. Corolla 5-8(-10) mm in diameter, dark purple with a yellow throat, rarely white; tube 1½ times as long as calyx. Stigma obscurely 5-lobed. Capsule equalling or exceeding calyx. 2n = 54.{\i  Moist pastures near the sea. • N. Scotland.} Br.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 9. P. scandinavica} Bruun,{\i  Svensk Bot. Tidskr.}{\b  32}: 249 (1938). Like {\b 8} but scapes 4-10(-15) cm, 2- to 8(-10)-flowered; bracts 5-8 mm; calyx 5-6 mm; corolla 9-12(-15) mm in diameter; stigma globose, not 5-lobed. 2n = 72.{\i  Mountain slopes; calcicole. • Norway, N.W. Sweden.} No Su.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 10. P. stricta} Hornem.,{\i  Fl. Dan.}{\b  8}({\b 24}): 3 (1810). Homostylous. Leaves 0·5-5 × 0·2-1·5 cm, narrowly obovate to oblanceolate, entire or denticulate, efarinose or sometimes sparingly farinose beneath. Scape 2-30 cm, efarinose except sometimes at apex, 1- to 15-flowered. Bracts 3-8 mm, lanceolate to subulate, saccate at the base. Pedicels 1-3 times as long as bracts. Calyx 4-6 mm, farinose between the ribs, and almost always farinose within; teeth often glandular-ciliolate. Corolla 4-9 mm in diameter, violet to lilac, lobes more or less oblong, emarginate; tube 1-1½ times as long as calyx. Capsule 5·5-8 mm, ovoid, a little longer than calyx. 2n = 126.{\i  Meadows and cliffs, up to }750{\i  m. Iceland and Fennoscandia, southwards to} 62° 30'{\i  N.} Fe Is No Rs (N) Su.
\par 

\par 
17}
\par