{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 subsp. {\i pilifer} (Griseb. ex Pant.) Murb.):{\i  France and Spain; Balkan peninsula}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b d}) Subsp. {\b officinalis}  ({\i H. angustifolius }Bieb.,{\i  H. decumbens} Jordan & Fourr.,{\i  H. officinalis} subsp. {\i angustifolius }(Bieb.) Arcangeli, var.{\i  decumbens} (Jordan & Fourr.) Briq.): {\i Throughout the range of the species}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc {\b 32.              Origanum}                 L.
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc By R. Fernandes & V.H. Heywood.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Dwarf shrubs or annual, biennial or perennial herbs. Verticillasters few- to many-flowered, aggregated into short, terminal or lateral spicules; spicules arranged in paniculate, cymose or corymbiform inflorescences. Bracts distinct from the leaves, imbricate, often conspicuous, coloured. Calyx campanulate or turbinate, 2-lipped and either actinomorphic with 5 equal teeth, or entire, obliquely truncate at apex, or 1-lipped and deeply slit on one side. Corolla 2-lipped, the upper lip entire or emarginate; lower lip 3-lobed. Stamens didynamous, exserted or included; anther-cells divergent. Style-branches equal.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  All species grow mainly in dry places, often on rocky slopes or in dwarf scrub.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Calyx 2-lipped
\par
2 Upper lip of calyx entire or subentire
\par
3 Stems densely leafy above; leaves lanate ................................. {\b 9. dictamnus}
\par
3 Stems ± naked above; leaves sparsely pubescent .................. {\b 10. tournefortii} 
\par
2 Upper lip of calyx 3-toothed
\par
4 Spicules erect, grouped in panicles at the ends of branches  .....{\b 8. majoricum}
\par
4 Spicules nutant, grouped in cymes
\par
5 Caespitose dwarf shrub; leaves less than 5 mm, densely hairy .... {\b 13. vetteri}
\par
5 Rhizomatous perennial; leaves more than 11 mm, glabrous
\par
  at least above
\par
6 Leaves cordate at base, glabrous or very sparsely 
\par
  scabrid beneath; bracts 7-8 mm wide, glabrous .......................... {\b 11. scabrum}
\par
6 Leaves rounded at base, sparsely pubescent beneath;
\par
  bracts 3 mm wide, hairy .................................................................. {\b 12. lirium}
\par
1 Calyx either with 5 equal teeth, or truncate and entire
\par
  at apex, or 1-lipped and with a deep slit on one side
\par
7 Calyx entire, truncate .......................................................... {\b 7. microphyllum}
\par
7 Calyx with 5 equal teeth or 1-lipped and deeply slit
\par
8 Calyx 1-lipped, with a deep slit on one side
\par
9 Stems papillose and hirsute; spicules in dense terminal
\par
  corymbs ............................................................................................. {\b 6. onites}
\par
9 Stems not papillose, glabrous to tomentose; spicules in
\par
  panicles ........................................................................................ {\b 5. majorana}
\par
8 Calyx with 5 equal teeth
\par
10 Stems usually unbranched; calyx densely covered with 
\par
   purple glands; corolla 8-10 mm .............................................. {\b 1. compactum}
\par
10 Stems branched at least above; calyx sparsely to 
\par
   densely covered with yellowish glands; corolla 4-7 mm
\par
11 Bracts twice as long as calyx, obovate to orbicular,
\par
   membranous ..................................................................................... {\b 4. virens}
\par
11 Bracts as long as to nearly twice as long as calyx,
\par
   ovate, herbaceous
\par
12 Bracts 2-3 mm, usually green, densely glandular on 
\par
   outer surface ........................................................................ {\b 2. heracleoticum}
\par
12 Bracts 4-5 mm, usually purple, eglandular or sparsely 
\par
   glandular on outer surface ............................................................. {\b 3. vulgare}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Sect. ORIGANUM. Calyx with 5 more or less equal teeth. Bracts 2-5 mm, green or purplish.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. O. compactum} Bentham,{\i  Lab. Gen. Sp.} 334 (1834). Dwarf shrub; stems up to 35 cm, usually unbranched, hirsute. Leaves 18-20 × 10-15 mm, ovate, entire, densely glandular-punctate on both surfaces, hairy on veins and at margins, petiolate. Spicules 10-23 mm, densely fasciculate, forming a long, interrupted panicle. Bracts 4-5 mm, twice as long as calyx, ovate-oblong, acute, purplish. Calyx purple-glandular-punctate. Corolla 8-10 mm, 4 times as long as calyx-tube, pink or white.{\i  S.W. Spain. }Hs. ({\i N. Africa}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   {\b 2. O. heracleoticum} L., {\i Sp. Pl. }589 (1753) ({\i O. hirtum} Link). Woody, rhizomatous perennial; stems up to 60 cm, branched above, hirsute. Leaves 15-22 × 6-15 mm, ovate to oblong, entire or remotely serrate, sparsely hairy, glandular-punctate, petiolate. Spicules 5-20 mm, ovoid to oblong, crowded or lax and interrupted, forming a panicle. Bracts 2-3 mm, as long as to nearly twice as long as calyx, ovate, densely glandular, green or rarely purplish, glabrous or hairy. Calyx glabrous or hairy, yellow-glandular-punctate. Corolla 4-5 mm, white, rarely pink. 2n = 30. {\i S.E. Europe, from Sardegna to the Aegean region.} ?Al Bu Cr Gr It Ju Sa Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Variable in colour and indumentum of bracts and calyx.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 3. O. vulgare} L., {\i Sp. Pl. }590 (1753) (incl. {\i O. dilatatum} Klokov,{\i  O. vulgare} subsp.{\i  viride} (Boiss.) Hayek). Woody, rhizomatous perennial; stems up to 90 cm or more, usually branched above, pubescent, hirsute or velutinous, rarely glabrous. Leaves 10-40(-50) × 4-25 mm, ovate, entire or shallowly crenate-serrate, glabrous or hairy, glandular-punctate, petiolate. Spicules 5-30 mm, ovoid, oblong, or prismatic, forming a corymb or panicle. Bracts 4-5 mm, as long as to nearly twice as long as calyx, ovate, not apiculate, hairy or glabrous, eglandular or sparsely glandular-punctate, herbaceous, violet-purple or greenish. Calyx yellow-glandular-punctate, hairy or glabrous. Corolla 4-7 mm, white or purplish-red. 2n = 30, ?32.{\i  Most of Europe.} All except Az Bl Cr Fa Is.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Extremely variable in colour and indumentum of bracts and calyx, shape and length of spicules, and colour of corolla. Many variants have been described as separate species or subspecies (cf. R. Soó & A. Borhidi,{\i  Ann. Univ. Sci. Budapest. Rolando Eötvös} ({\i Biol}.){\b  9-10}: 361-364 (1968)), but they do not form distinctly separable populations. Some variants with prismatic spicules 12-20 mm are frequently cultivated as a potherb.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 4. O. virens} Hoffmanns. & Link,{\i  Fl. Port. }{\b 1}: 119 (1809). Like {\b 3} but bracts twice as long as calyx, obovate to orbicular, apiculate, glandular-punctate, glabrous, membranous, pale green; calyx glabrous; corolla white. 2n = 30.{\i  S.W. Europe.} Az Bl Hs Lu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Sect. MAJORANA (Miller) T. Vogel. Calyx 1-lipped and deeply slit on one side, 2-lipped, or entire and truncate at apex. Bracts 3-4 mm, green.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 5. O. majorana} L.,{\i  Sp. Pl.} 590 (1753) ({\i Majorana hortensis }Moench). Annual, biennial or perennial herb; stems 20-60 cm, erect or ascending, glabrous to tomentose, not papillose. Leaves 5-20(-35) × 5-10(-15) mm, ovate to elliptic-spathulate, obtuse or acute, rounded or attenuate at base, entire, grey- or white-tomentose to sparsely pilose and green; veins somewhat raised; lower leaves with petiole up to 15 mm, the others subsessile. Spicules 5-12 mm, globose, ovoid or oblong, densely grouped at the end of short branches, forming a narrow, terminal panicle. Bracts c. 3-4 mm, orbicular, tomentose, glandular-punctate. Calyx c. 2·5 mm, 1-lipped, with a deep slit on one side, ciliate. Corolla c. 4 mm, white, pale lilac or pink. Nutlets 0·75-1 mm, light brown. {\i Cultivated as a pot-herb and locally naturalized in S. Europe.} [Co He Hs It Ju.] ({\i N. Africa, S.W. Asia}.)
\par

\par
171}
\par