{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 23. T. hirtus} Willd.,{\i  Enum. Pl. Hort. Berol}. 623 (1809) ({\i T. diffusus} Salzm. ex Bentham). Plant with long arcuate to procumbent woody branches and sometimes axillary leaf-clusters. Erect flowering stems up to 5 cm; axillary leaf-clusters absent or poorly developed. Leaves up to 6 × 2 mm, lanceolate to elliptic rhombic, petiolate, puberulent, sparsely glandular-punctate; margins revolute, ciliate at base; lateral veins indistinct. Inflorescence capituliform. Bracts up to 5 × 3 mm, similar to the leaves, with revolute margins at least distally. Calyx c. 3 mm, hirsute, the lips as long as or longer than tube, upper teeth as wide as long, ciliate. Corolla pink.{\i  Gibraltar.} Hs. ({\i N.W. Africa.})
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 24. T. loscosii} Willk. in Willk. & Lange, {\i Prodr. Fl. Hisp. }{\b 2}: 401 (1868). Like {\b 23} but flowering stems with well-developed axillary leaf-clusters except at the base; leaves (5-)7-10 × 1-2 mm, linear to narrowly lanceolate, densely glandular-punctate, subglabrous; margins revolute to almost flat; calyx 4-5 mm, upper teeth 1-1·5 mm, narrowly lanceolate; corolla up to 8 mm, whitish. •{\i  N.E. Spain}. Hs.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b loscosii} : Flowering stems puberulent. Leaves and bracts 0·5-1 mm wide, with more or less revolute margins. Inflorescence poorly differentiated, usually with 2-flowered verticillasters and pedicels up to 1 mm. Calyx subglabrous; upper teeth not ciliate.{\i  Almost throughout the range of the species}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b fontqueri}  Jalas, {\i Bot. Jour. Linn. Soc.}{\b  64}: 250 (1971) ({\i T. angustifolius} auct., non Pers.): More robust. Flowering stems hirsute. Leaves and bracts 1-2 mm wide, with weakly revolute to almost flat margins. Inflorescence capituliform, usually with 6-flowered verticillasters and pedicels c. 2 mm. Calyx hirsute; upper teeth ciliate. 2n = 56.{\i  Pobla de Segur} ({\i prov. Lérida}).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 25. T. serpylloides} Bory, {\i Ann. Gen. Sci. Phys.} ({\i Bruxelles}){\b  3}: 16 (1820). Plant with slender arcuate to procumbent woody stems bearing axillary clusters of small leaves. Flowering stems 1-8 cm, borne in rows, pubescent, with a basal cluster of small leaves; axillary clusters absent. Leaves 5-8 × 0·5-1 mm, linear-lanceolate, densely glandular-punctate, puberulent to glabrous; margins revolute to subrevolute, ciliate at base. Inflorescence subcapitate, lax, with 2- to 6-flowered verticillasters; pedicels up to 3 mm. Bracts 1·5-2 mm wide, green, similar to the leaves, almost flat. Calyx 3·5-4·5 mm, pubescent; upper teeth 0·5-0·7 mm, as long as wide. Corolla 5-6 mm.{\i  Mountains of S. Spain, mostly above} 2000 {\i m.} Hs.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b serpylloides} : Leaves sparsely pubescent to glabrous, green, with purple glands. Calyx purple; upper teeth not ciliate. Corolla purplish. •{\i  Sierra Nevada.}
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b gadorensis}  (Pau) Jalas, {\i Bot. Jour. Linn. Soc.}{\b  64}: 251 (1971) ({\i T. zygis} var. gadorensis Pau, {\i T. sylvestris} auct., non Hoffmanns. & Link): Leaves puberulent, pale greyish-green with yellowish glands. Calyx greenish; upper teeth ciliate. Corolla pale pink.{\i  Sierra de Gádor.} ({\i N.W. Africa}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  On some inland mountains of S. Spain (Sierra del Pinar, Serrania de Magina, Sierra de Alcaraz) plants occur which evidently are close to or conspecific with{\b  25}. They tend to be more robust than subspp. ({\b a}) and ({\b b}), with larger leaves and more elongate to interrupted inflorescences. Some may correspond to {\b T. orospedanus} H. del Villar, {\i Cavanillesia }{\b 6}: 118 (1934), while others may be hybrids of {\b 25} with{\b  20}, {\b 21} or {\b 22}. Further studies are needed.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Sect. HYPHODROMI (A. Kerner) Halácsy. Small shrubs. Stems hairy all round or on 2 opposite sides. Leaves coriaceous, often more or less fleshy with a prominent midrib and weak lateral veins disappearing towards the margin, rarely tomentose-velutinous; margins flat, ciliate at least at base. Bracts similar to leaves or not, rarely coloured. Corolla scarcely longer to distinctly longer than calyx.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 26. T. holosericeus} Celak., {\i Flora} ({\i Regensb.}){\b  66}: 167 (1883). Up to 10 cm, caespitose, woody at the base. Flowering stems 3-6 cm, with internodes distinctly shorter than leaves, velutinous. Leaves 10-15 × 1·5-2 mm, narrowly oblanceolate, acute, often denticulate, velutinous, the basal half ciliate. Inflorescence a dense, oblong capitulum. Bracts c. 9 × 4 mm, ovate, acute, bluish-grey-green. Calyx 4-5 mm, the tube more or less cylindrical, villous-velutinous; upper teeth c. 0·5 mm, narrowly lanceolate, ciliate. Corolla 7-9 mm, pinkish-purple. •{\i  W. Greece} ({\i Kefallinia}). Gr.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 27. T. laconicus} Jalas,{\i  Bot. Jour. Linn. Soc.}{\b  64}: 252 (1971) ({\i T. pastoralis} Turrill, non Iljin). Like {\b 26} but leaves up to 11 × 1·5 mm, narrowly spathulate, obtuse to subacute; bracts up to 12 × 8 mm, ovate-elliptical, subacute, somewhat purplish; calyx 6-8 mm, with lips longer than tube, and upper teeth up to 1·5 mm; corolla c. 11 mm. •{\i  S. Greece }({\i Akr. Malea}). Gr.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 28. T. bracteosus} Vis. ex Bentham,{\i  Lab. Gen. Sp.} 346 (1834). Plant with long, procumbent, woody stems. Flowering stems c. 10 cm, pubescent to villous. Leaves 10-17 × 2-3 mm, oblong-spathulate, obtuse, herbaceous, glabrous, the basal half ciliate. Inflorescence capituliform. Bracts up to 13 × 6 mm, ovate, long-ciliate, often partly purplish. Calyx (4-)5-6 mm, the tube subcylindrical, shorter than the lips, hirsute at least ventrally; upper teeth 1·5-2 mm, narrowly lanceolate, ciliate. Corolla 6-8 mm, purple. •{\i  W. Jugoslavia.} Ju.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 29. T. granatensis} Boiss.,{\i  Elenchus} 74 (1838). Like {\b 28} but leaves 7-10 × 1·5-2·5 mm, coriaceous; bracts 8-11 mm, usually purple; calyx 5-7 mm, the upper teeth 1-2 mm; corolla 8-12 mm, pink. •{\i  Mountains of S. Spain.} Hs.
\par

\par
 
\pard\f0\fs28 Variable, especially in the length of the corolla.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 30. T. aranjuezii} Jalas, {\i Bot. Jour. Linn. Soc.}{\b  64}: 252 (1971) ({\i T. granatensis} var.{\i  micranthus} Willk., {\i T. hirtus} auct., non Willd., {\i T. hispanicus} auct., non Poiret, {\i T. mastigophorus} auct., non Lacaita). Plant with short, woody, arcuate to procumbent branches bearing axillary clusters of small leaves. Flowering stems 3-10 cm, borne in rows, usually lacking axillary leaf-rosettes, pubescent to white-villous. Leaves 5-9 × 0·5-1 mm, narrowly spathulate, more or less fleshy, puberulent to glabrous, ciliate at base. Inflorescence a dense capitulum. Bracts (4-)6-9 × (2-)3-4 mm, ovate, narrowed above middle, obtuse, coriaceous, ciliate, usually not coloured. Calyx 3·5-5 mm, the tube about as long as lips; upper teeth 0·8-1·3 mm, ciliate. Corolla scarcely exceeding calyx, pink. 2n = 28. •{\i  C. & E. Spain}. Hs.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 31. T. bracteatus} Lange ex Cutanda,{\i  Fl. Comp. Madrid }538 (1861). Plant with long slender arcuate to procumbent, non-flowering branches bearing axillary clusters of small leaves. Flowering stems up to 12 cm, erect to ascending, pubescent; axillary clusters absent. Leaves 8-12 × (1·2-)1·5-2 mm, herbaceous, pale green, glabrous, ciliate at base, mostly petiolate. Inflorescence capitate to somewhat elongated with the lowest verticillasters distant. Bracts 2·5-4 mm wide, similar to the leaves, elliptical to narrowly ovate, mostly exceeding the verticillasters, pale green, ciliate. Calyx 4·5-6 mm, with campanulate to subcylindrical, pubescent tube distinctly shorter than lips;
\par

\par
177}
\par