{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 Klokov,{\i  Not. Syst.} ({\i Leningrad}){\b  16}: 293-318 (1954). M. Klokov & N. Schostenko, {\i Trav. Inst. Bot.} ({\i Charkov}) {\b 14}({\b 3}): 107-157 (1939). C. C. Lacaita,{\i  Cavanillesia }{\b 3}: 20 47 (1930). B. Pawlowski,{\i  Fragm. Fl. Geobot. }{\b 12}: 387-412 (1966). C. D. Pigott,{\i  New Phytol.}{\b  53}: 470 495 (1954). K. Ronniger,{\i  Feddes Repert.}{\b  31}: 129-157(1932);{\i  Deutsche Heilpfl.}{\b  10}({\b 5}): 1-24(1944). P. Schmidt,{\i  Hercynia}{\b  5}: 385-419 (1969). J. Velenovsky,{\i  Beih. Bot. Centr. }{\b 19}({\b 2}): 271-287 (1906).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  The flowering stems may be hairy on all sides, on two sides, or on the angles only. Leaf-measurements refer, unless otherwise stated, to leaves from the middle part of flowering stems; they include the petiole. At least the distal pairs of lateral veins of the leaves, when visible, may anastomose to form a marginal vein either at the apex of the leaf or along the whole length of the leaf. Leaf-venation is best seen in dried specimens. Gynodioecism is usual in the genus, pistillate flowers often having smaller calyx and corolla; measurements of calyx and corolla refer to hermaphrodite flowers.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Hybrids are frequently formed, even between members of different sections as well as between species at different levels of polyploidy.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Calyx-tube dorsally flattened, with 20-22 veins;
\par
  leaves subtriquetrous .................................................................... {\b 1. capitatus} 
\par
1 Calyx-tube dorsally convex, with 10-13 veins;
\par
  leaves not subtriquetrous
\par
2 Upper calyx-teeth like lower (Iberian peninsula)
\par
3 Bracts similar to the leaves; upper calyx-teeth 2-3 mm ........... {\b 2. mastichina}
\par
3 Bracts not similar to the leaves; upper calyx-teeth 1-1·5 mm.  {\b 3. tomentosus}
\par
2 Upper calyx-teeth conspicuously different from lower
\par
4 Lower calyx-teeth almost leaf-like, triangular ......................... {\b 4. caespititius}
\par
4 Lower calyx-teeth lanceolate-subulate
\par
5 Leaf-margins revolute
\par
6 Bracts not similar to leaves, at least twice as wide as leaves
\par
7 Leaves linear to narrowly lanceolate
\par
8 Creeping shoots absent
\par
9 Corolla 6-10 mm; bracts often sparsely dentate to
\par
  shallowly lobed .............................................................................. {\b 8. villosus}
\par
9 Corolla c. 15 mm; bracts entire
\par
10 Bracts membranous, whitish; corolla whitish ................ {\b 10. membranaceus}
\par
10 Bracts coriaceous, purplish; corolla purple
\par
11 Inflorescence up to 4 cm, oblong-conical; leaves 
\par
   tomentose and with a few longer hairs, ciliate at base ............. {\b 7. cephalotos}
\par
11 Inflorescence not more than 2·5 cm, subglobose; leaves
\par
   tomentose but without longer hairs, not or sparsely 
\par
   ciliate at base ............................................................................ {\b 9. longiflorus} 
\par
8  Creeping shoots present
\par
12 Leaves glabrous to subglabrous; bracts purplish ........... {\b 12. mastigophorus}
\par
12 Leaves ± velutinous; bracts greenish
\par
13 Leaves shortly petiolate .......................................................... {\b 13. dolopicus}
\par
13 Leaves sessile ...................................................................... {\b 15. parnassicus}
\par
7  Leaves ovate-lanceolate
\par
14 Leaves glabrous on upper surface ............................................ {\b 18. carnosus}
\par
14 Leaves tomentose on upper surface
\par
15 Inflorescence 6-8 mm in diameter; calyx 3-4 mm, the 
\par
   upper teeth rarely ciliate ........................................................ {\b 16. capitellatus}
\par
15 Inflorescence 10-18 mm in diameter; calyx 4-6 mm, the 
\par
   upper teeth usually ciliate .................................................... {\b 17. camphoratus} 
\par
6 Bracts ± similar to leaves
\par
16 Leaves more than 3 mm wide, ovate to rhombic; corolla
\par
   tube ± infundibuliform (Balkan peninsula) .............................. {\b 6. teucrioides}
\par
16 Leaves up to 2·5 mm wide, linear to elliptical;
\par
   corolla-tube cylindrical 
17 Leaves not ciliate ...................................................................... {\b 19. vulgaris} 
\par
17 Leaves ± ciliate, at least at base
\par
18 Long, arcuate, procumbent or creeping shoots absent
\par
19 Calyx 5-7 mm, the tube cylindrical; 
\par
   verticillasters 2-flowered ......................................................... {\b 11. antoninae}
\par
19 Calyx 3-4 mm, the tube campanulate; verticillasters
\par
   6- or more-flowered, or inflorescence capituliform
\par
20 Calyx shortly tomentose, the upper teeth not ciliate;
\par
   inflorescence elongate, interrupted ................................................. {\b 21. zygis}
\par
20 Calyx pubescent, the upper teeth ciliate; inflorescence 
\par
   usually capituliform
\par
21 Leaves 3-5 mm, petiolate; corolla pinkish-purple .................. {\b 20. hyemalis}
\par
21 Leaves (4-)5-8(-10) mm, sessile; corolla creamy white .......... {\b 22. baeticus}
\par
18 Long, arcuate, procumbent or creeping shoots present
\par
22 Calyx c. 3 mm .............................................................................. {\b 23. hirtus}
\par
22 Calyx 3·5-5·5 mm
\par
23 Upper calyx-teeth 0·5-0·7 mm ........................................... {\b 25. serpylloides}
\par
23 Upper calyx-teeth 1-2 mm
\par
24 Leaves subglabrous, sparsely ciliate at the base (Spain) .......... {\b 24. loscosii}
\par
24 Leaves puberulent to velutinous or glabrous, ciliate 
\par
   to above the middle (S.E. Europe)
\par
25 Leaves 1-1·5 mm wide, shortly petiolate ............................... {\b 13. dolopicus}
\par
25 Leaves 0·3-1 mm wide, sessile ......................................... {\b 14. cherlerioides}
\par
5  Leaf-margins not or only slightly revolute
\par
26 Stems with hairs on the angles only
\par
21 Leaves with marginal vein ................................................... {\b 60. bihoriensis}
\par
27 Leaves without marginal vein
\par
28 Leaves truncate to subcordate at base; upper calyx-teeth 
\par
   1/10-1/7 as long as calyx ........................................................ {\b 63. oehmianus}
\par
28 Leaves cuneate to subtruncate at base; upper calyx-teeth 
\par
   at least 1/6 as long as calyx
\par
29 Creeping, non-flowering, terminal shoots present ................... {\b 62. alpestris}
\par
29 Creeping, non-flowering, terminal shoots absent ............... {\b 61. pulegioides}
\par
26 Stems hairy all round or on 2 opposite sides
\par
30 Leaves not ciliate
\par
31 Branches erect ........................................................................... {\b 5. piperella}
\par
31 Branches procumbent, ascending
\par
32 Leaves oblong-elliptical ............................................................... {\b 47. nitens}
\par
32 Leaves ovate to ovate-elliptical
\par
33 Leaves 5-7 × 2-3 mm; flowers not in a distinct inflorescence
\par
   ............................................................................................... {\b 48. willkommii}
\par
33 Leaves 7-12 × 3-6 mm; flowers in capitate inflorescences ..... {\b 49. richardii}
\par
30 Leaves ciliate at least at base
\par
34 Bracts ovate, not similar to the leaves
\par
35 Upper calyx-teeth not more than 0·1 mm
\par
36 Leaves acute, often denticulate, velutinous ....................... {\b 26. holosericeus}
\par
36 Leaves obtuse, entire, glabrous
\par
31 Leaves c. 1 mm wide, fleshy; veins indistinct ....................... {\b 39. zygioides}
\par
37 Leaves 1·7-2 mm wide, not fleshy; veins distinct ................. {\b 37. aznavourii}
\par
35 Upper calyx-teeth 0·8 mm or more
\par
38 Leaves puberulent to velutinous
\par
39 Calyx 6-8 mm; leaves velutinous ........................................... {\b 27. laconicus}
\par
39 Calyx 3·5-5 mm; leaves puberulent ....................................... {\b 30. aranjuezii}
\par
38 Leaves glabrous, sometimes ciliate
\par
40 Largest bracts at least 5 mm wide
\par
41 Leaves 7-10 mm, coriaceous; corolla 8-12 mm .................. {\b 29. granatensis}
\par
41 Leaves 10-11 mm, herbaceous; corolla 6-8 mm ................... {\b 28. bracteosus}
\par
40 Largest bracts not more than 4 mm wide
\par
42 Leaves 1·5-2 mm wide, herbaceous; calyx-tube distinctly 
\par
   shorter than lips ....................................................................... {\b 31. bracteatus}
\par
42 Leaves not more than 1·2 mm wide, coriaceous or ± fleshy; 
\par
   calyx-tube about as long as lips
\par

\par
173}
\par