{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 13. T. dolopicus} Form.,{\i  Deutsche Bot. Monatsschr. }{\b 15}: 75 (1897). Plant with creeping woody primary branches bearing axillary leaf-clusters and erect to ascending flowering stems up to 10 cm. Leaves 6-10 × 1-1·5 mm, narrowly lanceolate-spathulate, shortly petiolate, velutinous, the basal half ciliate; margins subrevolute. Inflorescence capitate, ovoid to globose. Bracts 1·5-4 mm wide, similar to the leaves or oblong-ovate, greenish. Calyx 4·5-5·5 mm; upper teeth c. 1·5 mm, lanceolate, ciliate. Corolla pink-purple, the tube scarcely exceeding calyx. •{\i  Mountains of N. & C. Greece.} Gr.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b  T. leucotrichus} Halácsy,{\i  Consp. Fl. Graec.}{\b  2}: 561 (1902), a seldom-collected plant of the high mountains of C. & S. Greece, is like {\b 13} but with leaves linear-lanceolate, sessile, covered by long and short hairs, and purplish bracts. Its status is uncertain, as is also that of {\i T. teucotrichus} var. {\i creticus} (Bald.) Ronniger from Kriti. Similar, possibly conspecific, taxa occur in Anatolia.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 14. T. cherlerioides} Vis., {\i Ill. Pi. Grecia:} 8 (1842) ({\i T. boissieri} Halácsy,{\i  T. hirsutus} auct., non Bieb.; incl. {\i T. pseudohumillimus} Klokov & Schost.,{\i  T. tauricus} Klokov & Schost.). Caespitose, with long, creeping branches bearing axillary leaf-clusters and erect flowering stems 1-8 cm. Leaves 4-10(-15) × 0·3-1 mm, linear to linear-lanceolate, sessile, glabrous or puberulent to velutinous, usually herbaceous; veins indistinct; margins more or less revolute, ciliate at least in basal half. Bracts up to 2·5 mm wide, more or less similar to the leaves, sometimes purple. Calyx 3·5-5 mm, tubular-campanulate; upper teeth 1-2 mm, lanceolate, usually ciliate and purple. Corolla 5-7 mm, pink; tube cylindrical. 2n = 28. {\i Mountains of C. part of Balkan peninsula; Krym.} Al Bu Gr Ju Rs (K).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Variable in leaf- and bract-shape, and indumentum. Some local variants may deserve subspecific rank but a more thorough knowledge is needed of the variation pattern of the species in S.W. Asia.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Most plants from Krym differ from those from the Balkan peninsula in having almost flat leaf-margins. They have been treated as two different species on the basis of indumentum characters and of having ciliate ({\i T. pseudohumillimus}) or nonciliate ({\i T. tauricus}) upper calyx-teeth. The chromosome number cited refers to plants from Krym.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 15. T. parnassicus} Halácsy,{\i  Denkschr. Akad. Wiss. Math.Nat. Kl.} ({\i Wien}){\b  61}: 254 (1894). Like {\b 14} but leaves 6-12 × 0·5-1·5 mm, velutinous; bracts 6-12 × 2-4 mm, greenish; calyx greenish; corolla c. 7 mm.{\i  Mountains of S. part of Balkan peninsula, northwards to Makedonija}. ?Al Gr Ju.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Perhaps only a subspecies of {\b 14}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Sect. THYMUS (Sect.{\i  Vulgares} Velen., Sect.{\i  Zygis} Willk.). Small shrubs. Leaves with prominent mid-vein and usually revolute margins, usually tomentose at least beneath. Bracts similar to leaves or not, mostly greenish. Calyx more or less campanulate; upper teeth more or less as long as wide. Corolla scarcely longer to distinctly longer than calyx.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 16. T. capitellatus} Hoffmanns. & Link,{\i  Fl. Port. }{\b 1}: 125 (1809). 20-40 cm, with erect to patent woody branches bearing axillary leaf-clusters. Cauline leaves 3-5 × 1-1·5 mm, petiolate, narrowly ovate, tomentose; margins revolute, not ciliate. Inflorescence compound, of subglobose, often pedunculate cymes 6-8 mm in diameter. Bracts broadly ovate, greenish. Calyx 3-4 mm, campanulate; upper teeth about as long as wide, not ciliate. Corolla whitish. •{\i  S. Portugal.} Lu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 17. T. camphoratus} Hoffmanns. & Link,{\i  op. cit.} 131 (1809) ({\i T. algarbiensis} Lange). Like {\b 16} but inflorescence 10-18 mm in diameter, terminal; bracts often purplish; calyx 4-6 mm, the upper teeth triangular-subulate, usually ciliate. •{\i  S. Portugal.} Lu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 18. T. carnosus} Boiss.,{\i  Voy. Bot. Midi Esp.}{\b  2}: 490 (1841). Pulvinate, 20-40 cm, with erect to ascending woody branches bearing axillary leaf-clusters. Leaves 5-7 × 1-2 mm, petiolate, ovate-lanceolate, fleshy, glabrous above, tomentose beneath; margins revolute, ciliate at base. Inflorescence 1-3 cm. Bracts ovate, greenish. Calyx 3-4 mm, the tube campanulate; upper teeth as long as wide, not ciliate. Corolla whitish.{\i  Maritime sands. • S. Portugal.} Lu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 19. T. vulgaris} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 591 (1753) (incl.{\i  T. aestivus} Reuter ex Willk.,{\i  T. ilerdensis} F. González ex Costa, {\i T. valentinus} Rouy,{\i  T. webbianus} Rouy). 10-30(-50) cm, with erect to semipatent woody branches. Leaves 3-8 × 0·5-2·5 mm, linear to elliptical, scarcely exceeding the axillary leaf-clusters, petiolate, tomentose; margins revolute, not ciliate. Inflorescence capituliform or interrupted, many-flowered. Bracts similar to the leaves but somewhat wider and sometimes with almost flat margins, greyish-green. Calyx 3-4 mm, shortly hairy, the tube campanulate; upper teeth as long as wide, not ciliate. Corolla whitish to pale purple. 2n = 30. •{\i  W. Mediterranean region, extending to S.E. Italy.} ?Co Ga Hs It [Bl He].
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Very variable in shape of leaves, bracts and inflorescence. Widely cultivated as a pot-herb.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   {\b 20. T. hyemalis} Lange, {\i Vid. Meddel. Dansk Naturh. Foren. Kjøbenhavn }{\b 1863}: 173 (1864). Like {\b 19} but leaves 3-5 × 0·5-1 mm, puberulent to glabrescent, ciliate at base; calyx coloured, with longer patent hairs; upper teeth ciliate; corolla up to 7 mm, pink-purple.{\i  S.E. Spain.} Hs.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b   T. glandulosus} Lag. ex H. del Villar,{\i  Cavanillesia}{\b  6}: 105 (1934), non Req., from 2 or 3 localities in S.E. Spain (prov. Almeria), and also from N. Africa, seems not to be specifically different from {\b 20}. It has longer internodes, leaves 8-10 mm, and white to purplish-violet corolla. It is said to flower in spring (not in winter as {\b 20}).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 21. T. zygis} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 591 (1753) (incl.{\i  T. sabulicola} Cosson, {\i T. sylvestris} Hoffmanns. & Link). 10-30 cm, with ascending to erect, puberulent, woody stems. Leaves 6-10 × 1 mm, usually exceeding the axillary leaf-clusters, linear, subacute, sessile, tomentose; margins revolute, sparsely ciliate at base. Inflorescence up to 10 cm, usually interrupted. Bracts similar to the leaves, mostly exceeding the verticillasters. Calyx 3-4 mm, shortly tomentose, greyish-green, the tube campanulate; upper teeth as long as wide, usually not ciliate. Corolla whitish. 2n = 60.{\i  Spain and Portugal.} Hs Lu.
\par

\par
  {\b 22. T. baeticus} Boiss. ex Lacaita,{\i  Cavanillesia }{\b 3}: 44 (1930) ({\i T. hirtus} auct., non Willd.). Like {\b 21} but stems arcuate to erect, with somewhat longer and coarser indumentum; leaves (4-)5-8(-10) × 0·5-1(-1·5) mm, linear-lanceolate, subobtuse, puberulent, ciliate at base; bracts up to 3 mm wide; inflorescence usually many-flowered, capituliform, sometimes branched; calyx puberulent to hirsute, the lips about as long as tube; upper teeth up to 1 mm, usually lanceolate; corolla up to 6 mm, distinctly longer than calyx, creamy white. 2n = 60.{\i  Mountains of S. & S.E. Spain.} Hs.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Variable in development of indumentum, and in shape of bracts and inflorescence.
\par

\par
176}
\par