{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 43 Leaves 5-9 mm, narrowly spathulate, ± fleshy; veins 
\par
   indistinct, diverging ................................................................. {\b 30. aranjuezii}
\par
43 Leaves 8-20 mm, linear, ± coriaceous; veins distinct, parallel
\par
44 Calyx 5-7 mm; bracts straw-coloured ......................................... {\b 33. atticus}
\par
44 Calyx 3-5 mm
\par
45 Corolla pink, becoming yellow; bracts straw-coloured ............ {\b 34. plasonii}
\par
45 Corolla whitish, pink or purple; bracts usually purplish ............ {\b 35. striatus}
\par
34 At least the lowermost bracts ± similar to the leaves
\par
   (although sometimes wider and sometimes coloured)
\par
46 Marginal vein present along the whole length of the leaf 
\par
   (Carpathians)
\par
47 Creeping, non-flowering branches present ...................... {\b 58. pulcherrimus}
\par
47 Creeping, non-flowering branches absent ............................... {\b 59. comosus}
\par
46 Marginal vein absent or present in upper part of leaf only
\par
48 Flowering stems usually more than 10 cm; non-flowering
\par
   branches usually absent
\par
49 Stems with hairs on two sides ................................................. {\b 64. alternans}
\par
49 Stems usually with hairs all round
\par
50 Upper calyx-teeth ciliate
\par
51 Leaves elliptic-spathulate, petiolate, with two pairs of 
\par
   distinct lateral veins forming a marginal vein at the apex ... {\b 51. binervulatus}
\par
51 Leaves linear to lanceolate-elliptical, with lateral
\par
   veins indistinct or disappearing towards the margin
\par
52 Calyx 3·5-5 mm; upper teeth up to 1·5 mm
\par
53 Bracts with distinct veins; inflorescence interrupted ............... {\b 40. comptus}
\par
53 Bracts with indistinct veins; inflorescence capitate ............. {\b 36. spinulosus}
\par
52 Calyx 2·5-3·5(-4) mm; upper teeth c. 1 mm
\par
54 Inflorescence often branched; leaves coriaceous, with
\par
   distinct venation ........................................................................ {\b 41. sibthorpii}
\par
54 Inflorescence seldom branched; leaves herbaceous, with
\par
   weak venation ........................................................................ {\b 42. pannonicus}
\par
50 Upper calyx-teeth not ciliate
\par
55 Leaves linear to lanceolate, sessile
\par
56 Inflorescence interrupted; upper calyx-teeth up to 1·5 mm ...... {\b 40. comptus}
\par
56 Inflorescence capitate; upper calyx-teeth c.1 mm ................ {\b 45. pallasianus}
\par
55 Leaves elliptical to rhombic-ovate, petiolate
\par
57 Leaves acute, with indistinct veins ................................... {\b 46. herba-barona}
\par
57 Leaves subobtuse, with distinct veins .............................. {\b 50. guberlinensis}
\par
48 Flowering stems seldom more than 10 cm; long,creeping
\par
   non-flowering branches present
\par
58 Upper calyx-teeth 0·3-0·7 mm, not ciliate
\par
59 Leaves ± sessile; calyx 4-4·5 mm; 
\par
   both sparsely glandular-punctate ............................................ {\b 37. aznavourii}
\par
59 Leaves shortly petiolate; calyx 3-4 mm; both densely 
\par
   glandular-punctate ................................................................. {\b 38. kirgisorum}
\par
58 Upper calyx-teeth usually more than 0·7 mm, usually ciliate
\par
60 Leaves with indistinct lateral veins
\par
61 Leaves ± spathulate
\par
62 Upper calyx-teeth 1-1·5 mm, not ciliate ............................ {\b 32. leptophyllus}
\par
62 Upper calyx-teeth 0·3-0·7 mm, ciliate ................................... {\b 39. zygioides}
\par
61 Leaves linear to elliptical, rarely obovate
\par
63 Leaves less than 1 mm wide, ciliate at least in the
\par
   basal half ............................................................................. {\b 14. cherlerioides}
\par
63 Leaves at least 1 mm wide, ciliate only at base
\par
64 Flowering stems with a basal cluster of small leaves;
\par
   calyx 2·5-4(-5) mm
\par
65 Calyx-tube about as long as upper lip .................................... {\b 54. stojanovii}
\par
65 Calyx-tube shorter than upper lip ........................................ {\b 55. longicaulis}
\par
64 Flowering stems without a basal leaf-cluster; calyx 4-5 mm
\par
66 Creeping shoots usually with a terminal inflorescence ...... {\b 43. glabrescens}
\par
66 Creeping shoots without a terminal inflorescence .................... {\b 24. loscosii} 
\par
60 Leaves with distinct lateral veins
\par
67 Leaves with lateral veins curved along the margin and
\par
   anastomosing at apex .................................................................. {\b 56. praecox}
\par
67 Leaves with lateral veins disappearing towards the margin
\par
68 Calyx-tube clearly shorter than upper lip
\par
69 Flowering stems without a basal cluster of small leaves; 
\par
   calyx 5-6 mm .................................................................... {\b 44. longedentatus}
\par
69 Flowering stems with a basal cluster of small leaves
\par
70 Calyx 4-6 mm, purplish .......................................................... {\b 53. thracicus}
\par
70 Calyx 2·5-4 mm, greenish or purple
\par
71 Leaves coriaceous ....................................................................... {\b 52. ocheus}
\par
71 Leaves herbaceous ............................................................... {\b 55. longicaulis}
\par
68 Calyx-tube about as long as upper lip
\par
72 Leaves up to 1·5 mm wide; flowering stems hairy on 
\par
   2 opposite sides only ................................................................. {\b 57. nervosus}
\par
72 Leaves mostly more than 1·5 mm wide; flowering stems
\par
   usually hairy all round
\par
73 Leaves sessile or nearly so
\par
74 Upper calyx-teeth about as long as wide ............................... {\b 65. selpyllum}
\par
74 Upper calyx-teeth distinctly longer than wide
\par
75 Leaves coriaceous; creeping shoots without a terminal
\par
   inflorescence ................................................................................ {\b 35. striatus}
\par
75 Leaves herbaceous; creeping shoots ending in an 
\par
   inflorescence ......................................................................... {\b 43. glabrescens}
\par
73 Leaves distinctly petiolate
\par
76 Petiole often up to ½ of the total leaf-length .............................. {\b 66. talijeni}
\par
76 Petiole not more than 1/3 of the total leaf length .................. {\b 65. serpyllum}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Subgen. {\b Coridothymus} (Reichenb. fil.) Borbás. Leaves sub triquetrous, the margins flat. Calyx-tube dorsally flattened, with 20-22 veins.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. T. capitatus} (L.) Hoffmanns. & Link,{\i  Fl. Port. }{\b 1}: 123 (1809) ({\i Satureja capitata} L., {\i Coridothymus capitatus} (L.) Reichenb. fil.). Dwarf shrub 20-50(-150) cm, with ascending to erect woody branches bearing axillary leaf-clusters (often the only leaves during the dry season). Leaves of long shoots 6-10 × 1-1·2 mm, sessile, linear, acute, subglabrous, sparsely ciliate at  base; lateral veins not visible. Inflorescence oblong-conical; bracts c. 6 × 2 mm, imbricate, ovate to lanceolate, greenish, ciliate; bracteoles c. 6 mm, similar to the leaves. Calyx about 5 mm, the upper lip shorter than the lower, all the teeth ciliate. Corolla up to 10 mm, purplish-pink,the upper lip bifid. 2n = 30.{\i  Calcicole. Mediterranean region, Portugal.} Al Bl Co Cr Gr Hs It Ju Lu Sa Si Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Subgen. {\b Thymus.} Leaves not subtriquetrous, the margins flat or revolute. Calyx-tube dorsally convex, with 10-13 veins.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Sect MASTICHINA (Miller) Bentham. Erect dwarf shrubs. distinctly petiolate, flat. Calyx almost actinomorphic; tube short; all teeth similar, more or less subulate, yellowish, patent in fruit. Corolla scarcely longer than calyx.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. T. mastichina} L., {\i Sp. Pl}. ed. 2, 827 (1763). Stems 20-50 cm, erect, with axillary leaf-clusters.Leaves 8-10 × 2-3 mm,
\par

\par
174}
\par