{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b  O. dubium} Boiss., {\i Fl. Or.}{\b  4}: 553 (1879), from the E. Mediterranean region, differs from {\b 5} in its always perennial, suffruticose habit, white-tomentose leaves (at least when young) and corolla 6-7 mm, but is doubtfully a separate species. Its only European record from the Kikladhes (Naxos) has not been verified since Boissier's original citation.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 6. O. onites} L.,{\i  Sp. Pl.} 590 (1753). Dwarf shrub; stems up to 60 cm, erect, densely papillose and hirsute. Leaves 5-22 × 4-12(-17) mm, ovate to orbicular-ovate, rounded or cordate at base, acute or shortly acuminate, entire or remotely serrate, papillose and villous, glandular-punctate, with the veins somewhat raised on lower surface; lower leaves petiolate, the others sessile. Spicules 4-10 mm, ovoid, oblong or prismatic, very compact, forming a terminal, dense corymb 2-8(-10) cm in diameter. Bracts 3-3·5 mm, slightly exceeding the calyx, the lower ovate, acute, the upper orbicular-ovate, obtuse, puberulent. Calyx 2·75-3 mm, 1-lipped, with a deep slit on one side, ovate-spathulate, entire or minutely 3-dentate, subglabrous, glandular-punctate, ciliate. Corolla 4-5·5 mm, white. Nutlets c. 1 mm, oblong-ellipsoid. 2n = 30.{\i  Mediterranean region.} Cr Gr ?Hs Ju Si.
\par
 
\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 7. O. microphyllum} (Bentham) Boiss.,{\i  Fl. Or.}{\b  4}: 552 (1879). Dwarf shrub; stems 20-50 cm, numerous, usually branched; branches slender, distinctly 4-angled, purplish, retrorsely hispidulous, glabrescent. Leaves on main branches 4-8 × 3-6 mm, ovate to oblong, obtuse, rounded or subcordate at base, puberulent to whitish-tomentose, with indistinct veins; petiole 1-1·5 mm. Spicules 4-11 mm, subglobose or obconical to oblong, white-lanate, 1-3 at the end of lateral branches, forming lax, terminal panicles. Bracts 3-4 mm, broadly spathulate, rounded. Calyx 2-2·25 mm, obliquely truncate, entire at apex, glabrous, densely ciliate at the mouth. Corolla c. 5 mm, purple. •{\i  Kriti.} Cr.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b  O.} ×{\b  minoanum} P. H. Davis,{\i  Notes Roy. Bot. Gard. Edinb.}{\b  21}: 137 (1953) ({\i Majorana leptoclados} Rech. fil., non {\i Origanum leptocladum} Boiss.) ({\i O. heracleoticum} × {\i microphyllum}) occurs locally with the parents in Kriti.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 8. O. majoricum} Camb.,{\i  Mém. Mus. Hist. Nat.} ({\i Paris}) {\b 14}: 296 (1827). Dwarf shrub or perennial herb; stems up to 60 cm or more, pubescent. Leaves up to 25 × 18 mm, ovate-elliptical to ovate-lanceolate, obtuse or acute, shortly villous; lower leaves with petiole up to 10 mm, the upper sessile. Spicules up to 3·5 cm, ovoid to oblong-prismatic, grouped in panicles at the ends of branches. Bracts 3-4 mm, ovate or ovate-spathulate, acute, villous, ciliate, somewhat exceeding the calyx. Calyx 2·5-3·5 mm, 2-lipped; tube campanulate, subglabrous; upper lip deeply 3-toothed, the lower 2-partite, all teeth ciliate. Corolla pink, slightly exceeding to twice as long as the calyx-tube. Sterile? •{\i  S.W. Europe; very local.} Bl Hs *Lu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Possibly a hybrid between {\b 4} and {\b 5}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Sect. AMARACUS Bentham. Calyx 2-lipped. Bracts up to 11 mm, purplish.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 9. O. dictamnus} L.,{\i  Sp. Pl.} 589 (1753) ({\i Amaracus dictamnus} (L.) Bentham). White-lanate dwarf shrub; stems up to 20 cm. Leaves 13-25 × 12-25 mm, broadly ovate to orbicular, entire, lanate, the veins raised, conspicuous; lower leaves shortly petiolate. Spicules in groups of 3-10, dense, ovoid or oblong, arranged in opposite pedunculate pairs, in lax panicles. Bracts 7-10 mm, conspicuous, purple, longer than calyx. Upper lip of calyx subentire, the lower shallowly toothed. Corolla pink, the tube twice as long as the calyx-tube. •{\i  Kriti.} Cr.
\par

\par
 
\pard\f0\fs28   {\b 10. O. tournefortii} Aiton,{\i  Hort. Kew.}{\b  2}: 311 (1789) ({\i Amaracus tournefortii} (Aiton) Bentham). Lanate or glabrous dwarf shrub; stems up to 25 cm. Leaves 15-30 × 12-20 mm, broadly ovate to orbicular, entire, subsessile, glaucous, sparsely pubescent, ciliate, the veins not raised. Spicules in groups of 2-6, oblong, arranged in opposite pedunculate groups of 1-3, in lax panicles. Bracts 8-11 mm, conspicuous, purple, longer than the calyx. Upper lip of calyx entire, the lower 2-toothed. Corolla pink, the tube 3 times as long as the calyx-tube. 2n = 30. •{\i  Kikladhes, Kriti.} Cr Gr.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 11. O. scabrum} Boiss. & Heldr. in Boiss.,{\i  Diagn. Pl. Or. Nov. }{\b 1}({\b 7}): 48 (1846) ({\i Amaracus scaber} (Boiss. & Heldr.) Briq.). Rhizomatous perennial; stems up to 45 cm, erect, glabrous, branched above. Leaves 11-30 × 11-20 mm, ovate to suborbicular, cordate at the base, glabrous, or very sparsely scabrid on the veins beneath, sessile. Spicules ovoid, nodding, in lax panicles. Bracts 8-10 × 7-8 mm, conspicuous, ovate to ovate-elliptical, purplish, glabrous. Upper lip of calyx 3-toothed. Corolla pink, twice as long as the calyx-tube. •{\i  Mountains of S. Greece.} Gr.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b scabrum} : Leaf-margins scabrid. Bracts ovate. Upper lip of calyx divided to 1/3, 3 times as long as the lower. {\i Taïyetos}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b pulchrum}  (Boiss. & Heldr.) P. H. Davis,{\i  Kew Bull.} [4]: 405 (1949) ({\i Amaracus scaber} subsp.{\i  pulcher} (Boiss. & Heldr.) Hayek): Leaf-margins smooth. Bracts ovate-elliptical. Upper lip of calyx divided to ½, scarcely longer than the lower.{\i  Evvoia}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 12. O. lirium} Heldr. ex Halácsy,{\i  Verh. Zool.-Bot. Ges. Wien}{\b  49}: 192 (1899) ({\i Amaracus lirius} (Heldr. ex Halácsy) Hayek). Rhizomatous perennial; stems up to 40 cm, erect, branched above. Leaves 12-24 × 10-15 mm, ovate, rounded at base, glabrous above, sparsely puberulent on the veins beneath, sessile. Spicules ovoid, nodding, in lax panicles. Bracts c. 5 × 3 mm, ovate, purplish, hairy. Upper lip of calyx shallowly toothed, scarcely longer than the lower. Corolla pink, twice as long as the calyx-tube. •{\i  Mountains of S. Greece} ({\i Evvoia}). Gr.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Probably originated from hybridization between {\b 11}({\b a}) and {\b 2}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 13. O. vetteri} Briq. & W. Barbey in Stefani, Major & W. Barbey,{\i  Karpathos} 124 (1895) ({\i Amaracus vetteri} (Briq. & W. Barbey) Hayek). Caespitose dwarf shrub. Leaves less than 5 mm, broadly ovate-triangular, obtuse, cordate at base, densely hairy, shortly petiolate. Spicules few-flowered, nodding, in lax panicles. Bracts obovate, hairy. Upper lip of calyx 3-toothed, twice as long as the lower. Corolla pink, twice as long as the calyx-tube. •{\i  Karpathos.} Cr.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc {\b 33.             Thymus}               L.
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc By J. Jalas.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Small shrubs or perennial herbs, woody at least at base. Verticillasters 1- to many-flowered, often crowded into a terminal, capitate inflorescence. Calyx cylindrical to campanulate, usually 2-lipped with the 3 upper teeth different from the lower; tube straight, not gibbous, hairy in the throat. Corolla 2-lipped, with straight tube. Stamens usually exserted, straight, divergent.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Literature: V. Borbás,{\i  Math. Term. Közl.}{\b  24}: 37-116 (1890). E. Huguet del Villar,{\i  Cavanillesia}{\b  6}: 104 125 (1934). J. Jalas,{\i  Veroff. Geobot. Inst. Rubel} ({\i Zürich}) {\b 43}: 186-203 (1970). M.
\par

\par
172}
\par