{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 upper teeth 1·2-1·8 mm, narrowly lanceolate, ciliate. Corolla 7-8 mm, whitish. 2n = 56. •{\i  C. & E. Spain}. Hs.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 32. T. leptophyllus} Lange,{\i  Overs. Kong. Danske Vid. Selsk. Forh.}{\b  1893}: 198 (1893-1894) ({\i T. angustifolius} auct., non Pers.). Like {\b 31} but smaller in all parts; flowering stems 1·5-4 cm; leaves 5-8 × 1-1·5 mm, linear-oblanceolate to narrowly spathulate; bracts up to 2 mm wide; calyx 3·5-5 mm, the tube about as long as the lips, subglabrous, the upper teeth 1-1·5 mm, not ciliate except for short one-celled hairs. •{\i  C. & E. Spain. }Hs.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Although {\b 32} tends to occur in drier areas and mostly at somewhat lower altitudes than {\b 31}, intermediates between the two seem to occur in areas where they are sympatric. A specimen from prov. Murcia differs from {\b 32} in having elliptical, petiolate leaves 1·5-2 mm wide, in which it resembles {\b T. atlanticus }(Ball) Roussine, {\i Nat. Monsp.} ({\i Bot.}) {\b 16}: 165 (1965), from N. Africa.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 33. T. atticus} Celak.,{\i  Flora }({\i Regensb.}){\b  65}: 564 (1882). Plant with woody, procumbent or arcuate shoots bearing axillary leaf-clusters. Flowering stems up to 15 cm, with axillary leaf-clusters at least at the base, pubescent all round. Leaves 12-20 × 1 mm, linear, subobtuse, subcoriaceous, glabrous, ciliate at the base with veins rather indistinct, parallel. Bracts broadly ovate, narrowed from middle, obtuse, the lowermost usually 9 × 3 mm, coriaceous, straw-coloured, with distinct veins and shortly appressed-pubescent beneath, ciliate. Inflorescence a dense head. Calyx 5-7 mm, puberulent, with prominent veins; upper teeth 1-1·5 mm, lanceolate. Corolla whitish or pink.{\i  E. half of Balkan peninsula.} Bu Gr Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 34. T. plasonii} Adamovic,{\i  Österr. Bot. Zeitschr.}{\b  57}: 200 (1907). Like {\b 33} but smaller in all parts; stems patent-hirsute; leaves 8-12 × 0·7-1 mm, coriaceous, with more distinct veins, ciliate to above the middle; largest bracts c. 5 × 2 mm, glabrous; calyx 3·5-4 mm; corolla pink, becoming yellow. •{\i  N.E. Greece }({\i near Thessaloniki}). Gr.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 35. T. striatus} Vahl,{\i  Symb. Bot.}{\b  3}: 78 (1794) ({\i T. acicularis} Waldst. & Kit., {\i T. comptus} auct., non Friv.; incl.{\i  T. pseudoatticus} Ronniger). Like {\b 33} but usually less robust; stems sometimes hairy only on 2 opposite sides; bracts usually narrower and purplish, sometimes similar to leaves, glabrous or pubescent to villous; calyx 3-5 mm, purplish, the upper teeth lanceolate; corolla whitish, pink or purple. 2n = 26, 54. •{\i  Balkan peninsula; C. & S. Italy, Sicilia.} Al Bu Gr It Ju Si ?Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Variable in hairiness, leaf- and calyx-size, and development of bracts. Variants with leaves 1·5 mm or more wide tend to occupy a more southern part of the range than those with narrow (c. 1 mm wide) leaves. The two chromosome numbers refer to morphologically extreme variants and further information is needed about the pattern of cytological and morphological variation to decide if subspecies can be recognized.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 36. T. spinulosus} Ten.,{\i  Fl. Nap.}{\b  1}, {\i Prodr}.: 35 (1811) ({\i T. conspersus} Celak.). Stems ascending from woody base, hairy all round; creeping shoots absent or short and few. Leaves 9-12 × 1·5-2·5 mm, lanceolate, subacute, often sparsely hirsute above; mid-vein prominent, the lateral less distinct. Inflorescence capitate. Bracts with indistinct lateral veins, herbaceous, greenish; lowest similar to the leaves, the upper c. 7 × 3 mm, more or less ovate. Calyx 3·5-5 mm, greenish, densely reddish-glandular-punctate; upper teeth up to 1·2 mm, lanceolate, ciliate. Corolla whitish. •{\i  Mountains of S. Italy and Sicilia.} It Si.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  The plants from Sicilia described as{\b  T. paronychioides }Celak., {\i Flora} ({\i Regensb.}) {\b 65}: 564 (1882), do not appear to be specifically different, but further material is required.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 37. T. aznavourii} Velen., {\i Sitz.-Ber. Bohm. Ges. Wiss.} ({\i Math.Nat. Kl.}){\b  1903}({\b 28}): 17 (1904) ({\i T. sintenisii} auct., non Celak.). Flowering stems 3-5(-10) cm. Leaves 9-10 × 1·7-2 mm, coriaceous, more or less sessile, oblanceolate, obtuse, entire, glabrous, ciliate at base, sparsely glandular-punctate above at apex; midrib prominent, the lateral veins less distinct. Inner bracts c. 5-7 × 2-2·5 mm, ovate. Calyx 4-4·5 mm, sparsely yellowish-glandular-punctate; upper teeth not more than 0·5 mm, not ciliate.{\i  • Turkey-in-Europe} ({\i Safrakoy, near Istanbul}). Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 38. T. kirgisorum} Dubjanski in O. & B. Fedtsch.,{\i  Consp. Fl. Turkestan.}{\b  5}: 128 (1913) (incl.{\i  T. calcareus} Klokov & Schost.,{\i  T. cretaceus} Klokov & Schost., {\i T. graniticus} Klokov & Schost.,{\i  T. kaljmijussicus} Klokov & Schost.). Like {\b 37} but leaves (5-)713 × 0·8-1·5(-2) mm, linear-lanceolate to narrowly elliptical, shortly petiolate, densely glandular-punctate; bracts more or less similar to the leaves; calyx 3-4 mm, densely glandular-punctate.{\i  S. part of U.S.S.R}. Rs (C, W, E).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b   T. dubjanskii} Klokov & Schost.,{\i  Bull. Jard. Bot. URSS}{\b  30}: 545 (1932), from S.E. Russia (Chvalynsk, S.W. of Kujbysev), is a small, compact, woody plant with leaves 8-11 × 2-3 mm, and calyx 4-4·5 mm. The small amount of material seen is evidently heterogeneous, and one specimen from the type-locality closely resembles and may be identical with {\b T. rariflorus} C. Koch,{\i  Linnaea }{\b 21}: 666 (1848), from the Caucasus.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 39. T. zygioides} Griseb.,{\i  Spicil. Fl. Rumel.}{\b  2}: 118 (1844). Flowering stems 2-6(-8) cm, in rows on long, creeping, woody branches which bear axillary leaf-clusters distally. Leaves 5-10(-15) × c. 1 mm, spathulate, obtuse, entire, fleshy, ciliate to above middle, otherwise glabrous; veins indistinct. Bracts shorter and wider, ovate to elliptical, often pubescent beneath. Inflorescence usually densely capitate. Calyx 3·5-4·5 mm; upper teeth 0·3-0·7 mm, as long as or longer than wide, ciliate. Corolla pink.{\i  E. part of Balkan peninsula, extending to S.E. Romania}. Bu Gr Rm Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b   T. eupatoriensis} Klokov & Schost., {\i Acta Inst. Bot. Acad. Sci. URSS} (Ser. 1){\b  2} : 287 (1936), from Krym, differs, according to the description, by its larger leaves, and more leaf-like bracts, but material seen does not confirm this and suggests that it is conspecific with {\b 39}. Another related plant from Krym is{\b  T. liaculatus} Klokov in Kotov,{\i  Fl. RSS Ucr.}{\b  9}: 668 (1960).{\b  T. moldavicus }Klokov & Schost.,{\i  Bull. Jard. Bot. Kieff }{\b 16}: 17 (1932) may also belong here.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Sect. SERPYLLUM (Miller) Bentham. Small shrubs or perennial herbs. Stems usually herbaceous or woody at the base, hairy all round or on 2 opposite sides, rarely on the angles only. Leaves not tomentose or velutinous; margins usually more or less flat. Bracts more or less similar to the leaves. Calyx more or less campanulate.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 40. T. comptus} Friv.,{\i  Flora} ({\i Regensb.}) {\b 19}: 439 (1836) ({\i T. glaucus} Friv. ex Podp.). Flowering stems up to 15 cm, ascending, woody at the base; non-flowering branches short, procumbent. Stems hairy all round, densely and usually patent-villous. Leaves 9-15 × 0·5-2(-3) mm, linear to lanceolate, more or less acute, usually ciliate to above middle and sparsely hairy; veins distinct, midrib prominent, the lateral veins almost parallel.
\par

\par
178}
\par