{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 Inflorescence up to 10 cm, with remote, many-flowered verticillasters. Bracts somewhat similar to the leaves but shorter and wider, with distinct lateral veins. Calyx (3-)4-5 mm, the lips of equal length; upper teeth up to 1·5 mm, aristate, ciliate or with one-celled scabridities only.{\i  E. part of Balkan peninsula, mainly near the coast.} Bu Gr Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Contains several local variants, some of which may merit subspecific recognition.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 41. T. sibthorpii} Bentham, {\i Lab. Gen. Sp. }345 (1834) (incl.{\i  T. tosevii} Velen.,{\i  T. korthiaticus} Adamovic,{\i  T. macedonicus }(Degen & Urum.) Ronniger). Flowering stems usually 10-20(-30) cm, erect to ascending, often branched, shortly pubescent all round (rarely on 2 sides only), woody at base. Creeping, non-flowering stems absent. Leaves usually 10-15 × 3-5 mm, shortly petiolate, elliptic-lanceolate, acute, coriaceous, densely glandular-punctate; lateral veins distinct. Inflorescence often branched, long. Bracts similar to the leaves. Calyx 2·5-3·5(-4) mm, campanulate, usually greenish to straw-coloured; upper lip longer than tube; upper teeth c. 1 mm, triangular to lanceolate, ciliate. Corolla pale pink or red.{\i  C. part of Balkan peninsula.} ?Al Bu Gr Ju ?Rm Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  This species shows considerable variation, especially in robustness, leaf-size and indumentum.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b  T. degenii} H. Braun,{\i  Mitt. Naturw. Ver. Steierm.}{\b  54}: 262 (1918) ({\i T. tosevii} subsp.{\i  degenii} (H. Braun) Ronniger), which appears to be common in the mountains of S. Bulgaria and N.E. Greece (especially Rodopi) between 1000 and 2000 m, is less robust and more procumbent, with flowering stems usually less than 10 cm, smaller and less coriaceous leaves, and the inflorescence often globose and tinged with purple.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Another procumbent variant from Bulgaria and N. Greece was described as{\b  T. heterotrichus} subsp. {\b cinerascens }Velen.,{\i  Sitz.-Ber. Böhm. Ges. Wiss. }({\i Math.-Nat. Kl.}){\b  1903}({\b 28}): 15 (1904). It has minutely puberulent leaves with weak lateral veins and somewhat revolute margins.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b T. grisebachii} Ronniger, {\i Beih. Bot. Centr.}{\b  54B}: 663 (1936), described from the border of Greece and Jugoslavia (Kaimakcalan), has stems hairy on 2 sides only.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b  T. substriatus} Borbas, {\i Verh. Naturf. Ver. Brunn}{\b  38}: 210 (1900), from Macedonia and Bulgaria, is like {\b 41} but has flowering stems which are patent-villous, and somewhat longer calyx.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  T. heterotrichus Griseb.,{\i  Spicil. Fl. Rumel.}{\b  2}: 116 (1844), from N. Greece (Makedhonia), is like {\b 41} but has leaves 12-17 × 2-3 mm, somewhat rounded at apex, subsessile and sparsely glandular-punctate, inflorescence globose, calyx 4-5 mm with upper teeth short, not ciliate. Its relationship with {\b 41} is not clear.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 42. T. pannonicus} All., {\i Auct. Syn. Meth. Stirp. Hort. Taurin}.{\b  6} (1773) (incl. {\i T. dzevanovskyi }Klokov & Schost.,{\i  T. latifolius} (Besser) Andrz.,{\i  T. marschallianus} Willd.,{\i  T. serpyllum} subsp. auctus Lyka, subsp.{\i  brachyphyllus} Lyka & subsp.{\i  marschallianus} (Willd.) Nyman, {\i T. stepposus} Klokov & Schost.). Like {\b 41} but more herbaceous; leaves subsessile, herbaceous with indistinct veins and sparsely glandular-punctate; inflorescence rarely branched. 2n = 28.{\i  E.C. & E. Europe, northwards to} c. 57°{\i  N. in C. Russia.} Au Bu Cz Hu Ju Po Rm Rs (C, W, K, E) [Ge Rs (N)].
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b T. dimorphus} Klokov & Schost., {\i Jour. Agr. Bot.} ({\i Kharkov}){\b  1}({\b 3}): 122 (1927) (incl. {\i T. amictus} Klokov,{\i  T. litoralis} Klokov & Schost.), from S.E. Ukraine and S.E. Russia, is said to differ from{\b  42} in its distinctly petiolate middle and lower cauline leaves, long patent hairs especially below the nearly globose inflorescence, and calyx 3·5-5 mm. It combines characters of{\b  42} with those of {\b 43} and is of uncertain relationship. {\b T. pseudograniticus} Klokov & Schost., {\i op. cit.} 124 (1927) may be a hybrid between {\i T. dimorphus} and {\b 38}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b  T. bulgaricus} (Domin & Podp.) Ronniger in Hayek, {\i Prodr. Fl. Penins. Balcan.}{\b  2}: 352 (1930), from Bulgaria, is more robust than {\i T. dimorphus}, and has leaves with prominent midribs and usually shorter, recurved stem-pubescence. It may be more closely related to {\b 40} or {\b 41}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 43. T. glabrescens} Willd.,{\i  Berlin. Baumz}. ed. 2, 507 (1811). Creeping branches mostly ending in a terminal inflorescence. Flowering stems 5-15(-30) cm, more or less herbaceous, erect to ascending, usually hairy all round, usually without basal leaf-clusters. Leaves mostly more than 1·5 mm wide, elliptic-lanceolate to obovate, mostly rounded at apex, herbaceous, ciliate at the base, at least the lower petiolate. Inflorescence globose or interrupted, often the lowest verticillasters remote. Bracts similar to the leaves. Calyx (3·5-)4-5 mm; tube as long as upper lip; upper teeth usually longer than wide, ciliate.{\i  S.E. & E.C. Europe, extending locally westwards to S.E. France}. ?Al Au Bu Cz Ga He Hu It Ju Po Rm Rs (C, W, K, ?E) Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  This is a rather heterogeneous assemblage of plants probably of different allopolyploid origins. They are often difficult to separate from {\b 42} and {\b 55}. The following treatment covers the major part of the variation but is largely provisional.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Leaves on flowering stems larger above, usually more 
\par
  than 3 mm wide, and the veins weak ............................ ({\b a}) subsp. {\b glabrescens}
\par
1 Leaves on flowering stems mostly about equal, usually 
\par
  less than 3 mm wide, and with a prominent midrib
\par
2 Leaves 4-10(-15) × 1·5-3 mm, elliptical, shortly cuneate at  
\par
  base, obtuse at apex; upper calyx-teeth often ± pungent . ({\b b}) subsp. {\b decipiens}
\par
2 Leaves 7-13 × 1·2-2·5 mm, linear-lanceolate, long-cuneate 
\par
  at base, subacute at apex; upper calyx-teeth not pungent . ({\b c}) subsp. {\b urumovii}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b glabrescens}  ({\i T. serpyllum} subsp. {\i glabrescens} (Willd. Lyka, {\i T. austriacus} Bernh. ex Reichenb.,{\i  T. loevyanus }Opiz,{\i  T. tschernjajevii} Klokov & Schost.): 2n = 28, 32, 56, 58. {\i Throughout the range of the species, except the S. Alps.}
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b decipiens}  (H. Braun) Domin, {\i Pl. Cechosl. Enum. }197 (1935) ({\i T. oenipontanus} H. Braun,{\i  T. serpyllum} subsp.{\i  decipiens} (H. Braun) Lyka): 2n = 52. {\i Dry valleys of S. & E. Alps, mainly between} 900{\i  and} 1400{\i  m}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b c}) Subsp. {\b urumovii}  (Velen.) Jalas,{\i  Bot. Jour. Linn. Soc.}{\b  64}: 261 (1971) ({\i T. callieri} subsp.{\i  urumovii }Velen.; incl.{\i  T. callieri} Borbás ex Velen., {\i T. hirsutus }Bieb., nom. ambig., {\i T. jailae} (Klokov & Schost.) Stankov, {\i T. zelenetzkyi} Klokov & Schost.): 2n = 56. {\i S.E. Europe}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 44. T. longedentatus} (Degen & Urum.) Ronniger,{\i  Feddes Repert.}{\b  20}: 335 (1924). Primary stems woody, creeping and at least partly subterranean, bearing large compact leaf-rosettes and flowering stems up to 10 cm, without a basal cluster of small leaves, villous all round. Leaves 12-25 × 1·5-3 mm, linear-oblanceolate, petiolate, long-cuneate at base, subacute to subobtuse at apex; midrib rather prominent, the lateral veins subparallel. Inflorescence capitate, elongated, sometimes with the lowest verticillasters remote. Pedicels and calyces usually densely stipitate-glandular. Bracts similar to the leaves. Calyx 5-6 mm, the upper lip somewhat longer than the lower;
\par

\par
179}
\par