{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 narrowly ovate to elliptic-lanceolate, often more or less crenulate, tomentose to subglabrous, not ciliate at base. Inflorescence 10-20 mm in diameter, usually subglobose. Bracts similar to the leaves, greenish. Calyx 4-6 mm; upper teeth 2-3 mm; all teeth long-ciliate, giving the inflorescence a somewhat plumose appearance (resembling{\i  Trifolium arvense}). Corolla whitish; tube scarcely exceeding calyx. 2n = 56. •{\i  Spain and Portugal.} Hs Lu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 3. T. tomentosus} Willd.,{\i  Enum. Pl. Hort. Berol.} 626 (1809). Like {\b 2} but leaves c. 5 × 1·5 mm, entire, tomentose; inflorescence c. 7 mm in diameter, denser and more globose; bracts not similar to the leaves; calyx 3-4 mm, the upper teeth 1-2 mm. •{\i  S. Portugal, S.W. Spain.} Hs Lu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Sect. MICANTES Velen. Leaves fleshy, with almost obsolete nerves. Verticillasters pedunculate, with 2-20 pedicellate flowers. Calyx campanulate, with almost obsolete veins; lower teeth almost leaf-like. Corolla distinctly longer than calyx.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 4. T. caespititius} Brot.,{\i  Fl. Lusit.}{\b  1}: 176 (1804) ({\i T. micans} Solander ex Lowe). Caespitose, with woody, creeping shoots bearing erect flowering stems 2-7 cm and axillary clusters of small leaves. Leaves c. 8 × 1·7 mm, narrowly spathulate, glabrous, ciliate at base. Inflorescence lax, with 2-flowered verticillasters. Bracts similar to the leaves. Calyx 3-4 mm; upper teeth almost obsolete, not ciliate, the lower teeth flat, as long as wide. Corolla 6-14 mm, purplish-pink or whitish.{\i  Portugal, N.W. Spain, Acores}. Az Hs Lu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Sect. PIPERELLA Willk. Small shrubs. Leaves coriaceous, not ciliate, distinctly petiolate; margins flat. Flowers not forming a distinct inflorescence; at least lower cymes often pedunculate. Bracts similar to the leaves. Calyx-tube cylindrical; upper teeth as long as wide, not ciliate. Corolla distinctly longer than calyx, with narrow tube.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 5. T. piperella} L., Syst. Nat. ed. 12, 2: 400 (1767). Branches erect, tomentose, with axillary leaf-clusters. Leaves 5-6 × 3-4 mm, ovate, obtuse, glabrous. Inflorescence lax; verticillasters usually with 6-10 flowers. Calyx 4-6 mm. Corolla 7-10 mm, purple. •{\i  E. Spain.} Hs.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Sect. TEUCRIOIDES Jalas. Dwarf shrubs. Leaves herbaceous, distinctly petiolate; margins revolute. Flowers not forming a distinct inflorescence. Bracts similar to the leaves. Calyx-tube campanulate; upper teeth as long as wide. Corolla distinctly longer than calyx, with almost infundibuliform tube.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 6. T. teucrioides} Boiss. & Spruner in Boiss.,{\i  Diagn. Pl. Or. Nov. }{\b 1}({\b 5}): 15 (1844). Much-branched; branches erect, tomentose, with axillary clusters of small leaves. Leaves c. 10 × 4 mm, ovate to rhombic; margin subserrate. Verticillasters with 2-6 flowers. Calyx 4-6 mm. Corolla 9-12 mm, purple. {\i •  Mountains of Albania and Greece.} Al Gr.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Sect. PSEUDOTHYMBRA Bentham. Dwarf shrubs. Leaves tomentose at least beneath; margins usually revolute. Bracts usually not similar to the leaves, usually coloured and conspicuous. Calyx usually more than 5 mm, subcylindrical; upper teeth narrowly lanceolate. Corolla-tube narrow, distinctly longer than calyx.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 7. T. cephalotos} L., {\i Sp. Pl. }592 (1753). Plant 15-30 cm, with ascending to erect woody branches bearing axillary leaf-clusters. Cauline leaves 7-10 × 0·5-1 mm, linear to linear-oblanceolate,tomentose, ciliate; margins revolute. Inflorescence up to 4 cm, oblong-conical. Bracts up to 20 × 10 mm, ovate, entire, coriaceous, purplish. Calyx 5-7 mm, the tube cylindrical; upper teeth lanceolate. Corolla c. 15 mm, purple. •{\i   S.Portugal.} Lu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 8. T. villosus} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 592 (1753). Like {\b 7} but lower part of bracts often greenish, often sparsely dentate to shallowly lobed; calyx 4-6 mm; corolla 6-10 mm. •{\i  S.W. Spain, S. Portugal.} Hs Lu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Shows considerable variation in the length of corolla-tube and in the shape of bracts. Specimens with short corollas and more or less entire bracts have been called subsp.{\b  lusitanicus }(Boiss.) Coutinho, {\i Bol. Soc. Brot.}{\b  23}: 87 (1907) but there seems to be a continuous series of character-combinations connecting the extremes.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 9. T. longiflorus} Boiss., {\i Elenchus} 75 (1838) (incl. {\i T. funkii} Cosson,{\i  T. murcicus} Porta,{\i  T. moroderi }Martinez). 10-30 cm, much-branched, with ascending to erect stems. Leaves (6-)8-12(-15) × (0·5-)0·8-1 mm, linear, velutinous-tomentose, not or sparsely ciliate at base, sessile to shortly petiolate; margins revolute. Inflorescence up to 2·5 cm, subglobose. Bracts up to 13 × 8 mm, broadly ovate to elliptical, acuminate, entire, usually ciliate, coriaceous, purplish. Calyx 5-7 mm, the tube cylindrical; upper teeth narrowly lanceolate. Corolla c. 15 mm, purple. •{\i  S.E. Spain}. Hs.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Variable, especially in the size of leaves and inflorescence and shape of bracts.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 10. T. membranaceus} Boiss., {\i loc. cit.} (1838). Like {\b 9} but bracts membranous, whitish; corolla whitish. •{\i  S.E. Spain.} Hs.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Perhaps not specifically distinct from{\b  9}. Further investigation is needed.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 11. T. antoninae} Rouy & Coincy,{\i  Bull. Soc. Bot. Fr.}{\b  37}: 165 (1890) ({\i T. portae} Freyn). 10-15 cm, with ascending to erect woody branches. Leaves 5-8 × 0·5 mm, linear, tomentose, sparsely ciliate at base; margin revolute. Inflorescence not differentiated, the verticillasters with 2 flowers only. Bracts similar to the leaves. Calyx 5-7 mm, the tube cylindrical; upper teeth narrowly lanceolate. Corolla 8-12 mm, purple; tube cylindrical. •{\i  S.E. Spain} ({\i prov. Albacete}). Hs.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Sometimes considered to be a hybrid between {\b 9} and {\b 21} but the morphological evidence does not seem to support this view.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 12. T. mastigophorus} Lacaita,{\i  Cavanillesia}{\b  3}: 40 (1930) ({\i T. hirtus} auct., non Willd., {\i T. hispanicus} auct., non Poiret). Plant with woody, creeping primary branches bearing erect flowering stems 3-7 cm and axillary leaf-clusters. Cauline leaves 5-7 × 0·5-0·7 mm, linear, subacicular, somewhat fleshy, glabrous to subglabrous; margins revolute, ciliate. Inflorescence capitate. Bracts up to 8 × 3 mm, lanceolate-ovate, ciliate, purplish. Calyx 4-6 mm, subcylindrical; upper teeth narrowly lanceolate, ciliate. Corolla 6-7 mm, pink-purple. •{\i  N.C. Spain.} Hs.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Closely related to, and perhaps only a subspecies of the polymorphic{\b  T. munbyanus} Boiss. & Reuter,{\i  Pugillus} 96 (1852) ({\i T. ciliatus} (Desf.) Bentham, non Lam.) from N. Africa.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Similar plants from areas south of Madrid, usually referred to {\b 12}, belong to {\b 30}.
\par

\par
175}
\par