{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 2·5-3·5 mm wide, entire; corolla white.{\i  S.W. Spain, S. Portugal.} Hs Lu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 3. L. dentata} L.,{\i  Sp. Pl.} 572 (1753). Shrub up to 100 cm, grey-tomentose. Leaves 15-35 mm, oblong-linear or lanceolate, crenate-dentate to pectinate-pinnatifid with obtuse lobes, grey-tomentose beneath, grey-green above. Spike 2·5-5 cm; bracts 5-8 mm, rhombic-ovate to obovate-suborbicular, acuminate, sparsely tomentose; upper bracts 8-15 mm, ovate, purple, without flowers in their axils; verticillasters 6- to 10-flowered. Calyx 5-6 mm, 13-veined, the upper tooth with an obcordate appendage at the apex. Corolla c. 8 mm, dark purple. 2n = 44.{\i  S. & E. Spain, Islas Baleares.} Bl Hs [It Lu Si].
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 4. L. angustifolia} Miller,{\i  Gard. Dict.} ed. 8, no. 2 (1768) ({\i L. spica }L., nom. ambig.). Shrub up to 100(-200) cm, tomentose. Leaves 20-40(-50) mm, lanceolate, oblong or linear, entire, white-tomentose when young, becoming green. Spike 2-8 cm; bracts (1-)3-8 mm, usually broadly rhombic-obovate, acuminate; bracteoles absent or minute; verticillasters 6- to 10-flowered. Calyx 4·5-7 mm, 13-veined, the upper tooth with an obcordate appendage at the apex. Corolla 10-12 mm, purple.{\i  Mediterranean region; widely cultivated for ornament and for perfume. }Co Ga Gr Hs It Ju Sa Si [Bu Rs (K)].
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b angustifolia}  ({\i L. officinalis} Chaix, {\i L. vera }DC.): Bracts usually shorter than calyx; calyx 4·5-6 mm, the appendage on the upper tooth obscure.{\i  Throughout the range of the species}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b pyrenaica}  (DC.) Guinea,{\i  Bot. Jour. Linn. Soc.}{\b  65}: 263 (1972) ({\i L. pyrenaica} DC.): Bracts usually exceeding calyx; calyx 6-7 mm, the appendage on the upper tooth distinct. •{\i  E. Pyrenees and N.E. Spain}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 5. L. latifolia} Medicus,{\i  Bot. Beobacht.}{\b  1783}: 135 (1784) ({\i L. spica} auct., non L.). Like {\b 4}(a) but leaves grey-green and more densely tomentose; bracts linear or linear-lanceolate; bracteoles 2-3 mm, linear-subulate; corolla 8-10 mm.{\i  Mediterranean region, Portugal.} ?Bl Ga Hs It Ju Lu Si.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 6. L. lanata} Boiss.,{\i  Elenchus} 72 (1838). Like {\b 4}(a) but stem and leaves persistently white-lanate-tomentose; leaves 35-50 mm, oblong-lanceolate or linear-spathulate; spike 4-10 cm; bracts 4-8 mm, linear or lanceolate, usually equalling or exceeding calyx; bracteoles 2-5 mm, setaceous; calyx 8-veined; corolla 8-10 mm, lilac. 2n = 50.{\i  Dry, calcareous rocks and screes. • Mountains of S. Spain.} Hs.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 7. L. multifida} L.,{\i  Sp. Pl.} 572 (1753). Shrub up to 100 cm, grey-tomentose and sometimes also with long straight hairs. Leaves mostly 2-pinnatisect, green, sparsely puberulent. Spike 2-7 cm; bracts c. 5 mm, cordate-ovate, acuminate; verticillasters 2-flowered. Calyx c. 5 mm, 15-veined; upper tooth without an appendage. Corolla c. 12 mm, blue-violet.{\i  W. part of Mediterranean region, S. Portugal.} Hs It Lu Si.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc {\b 39.          Horminum}             L.
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc By V.H. Heywood.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Rhizomatous perennials. Verticillasters (2-)4- to 6-flowered, secund. Bracts distinct from the leaves. Calyx 2-lipped, 13-veined; tube campanulate, the throat glabrous; upper lip 3-toothed; lower lip 2-fid. Corolla 2-lipped; tube curved upwards; upper lip erect, emarginate; lower lip with 3 unequal lobes.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. H. pyrenaicum} L.,{\i  Sp. Pl.} 596 (1753). Rhizome usually horizontal, bearing erect, unbranched, pubescent flowering stems up to 45 cm. Leaves 3-7 × 2-5 cm, mostly basal, ovate to ovate-orbicular or elliptical, obtuse, crenate, ciliate, long-petiolate. Bracts 4-11 mm, ovate-acute or -acuminate, entire, membranous, ciliate. Corolla 17-21 mm, dark bluish-violet, twice as long as calyx. 2n = 12.{\i  Grassy places in mountains; calcicole. Pyrenees,} Alps. Au Ga Ge He Hs It Ju.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc {\b 40.          Salvia}               L.
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc By I.C. Hedge.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Herbs or shrubs. Flowers in axillary verticillasters (rarely cymes). Calyx 2-lipped, the teeth unequal; lower lip deeply 2-fid or -dentate; upper lip 3-dentate, rarely subentire. Corolla 2-lipped; upper lip straight or falcate; lower lip 3-lobed, the middle lobe the largest; tube straight or invaginated, with or without a ring of hairs inside. Stamens 2; connective usually articulating with the filament, one arm with a fertile cell, the other more or less sterile, often expanded and flattened distally (dolabriform).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Most species grow on stony slopes or roadsides, in dry grassland, cultivated ground or similar habitats, and if no ecological information is given in the text a habitat of this type is to be presumed.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Many non-European species are cultivated for ornament.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Staminal connective shorter than or equalling the filament; arms subequal
\par
2 Leaves lobed or pinnate
\par
3 Stems ± leafless above
\par
4 Cymes not or scarcely pedunculate ............................................... {\b 9. ringens}
\par
4 Cymes distinctly pedunculate
\par
5 Leaves with 1-3 pairs of segments ......................................... {\b 8. brachyodon}
\par
5 Leaves with 1 pair of segments ............................................. {\b 6. candelabrum}
\par
3 Stems leafy above
\par
6 Leaves with many pairs of linear or oblong lateral segments
\par 
   .............................................................................................. {\b 11. scabiosifolia}
\par
6 Leaves with 1-4 pairs of ovate or irregular lateral segments
\par
7 Leaves with both glandular and eglandular hairs; calyx
\par
  10-15 mm, urceolate, truncate ...................................................... {\b 10. pinnata}
\par
7 Leaves with only eglandular hairs; calyx 5-8 mm,
\par
  campanulate, toothed ........................................................................ {\b 5. triloba}
\par
2 Leaves simple, not lobed or pinnate
\par
8 Calyx enlarged in fruit; bracts exceeding the calyx .................. {\b 12. pomifera} 
\par
8 Calyx not enlarged in fruit; bracts shorter than calyx
\par
9 Stems ± leafless above
\par
10 Stems glabrous; pedicels 0-2 mm ............................................ {\b 7. blancoana}
\par
10 Stems hairy at least below; pedicels 5-10 mm
\par
11 Leaves oblong-elliptical; corolla 30-40 mm ....................... {\b 6. candelabrum} 
\par
11 Leaves oblong to oblong-linear; corolla 20-25 mm .......... {\b 2. lavandulifolia}
\par
9  Stem leafy above
\par
12 Calyx 5-8 mm; stems appressed-white-tomentose ........................ {\b 5. triloba}
\par
12 Calyx 10-15 mm; stems glabrous or with patent hairs
\par
13 Leaves ± cuneate at base ......................................................... {\b 1. officinalis}
\par
13 Leaves cordate or rounded at base
\par
14 Corolla not more than 35 mm; leaves not more than
\par
    6·5 cm wide ............................................................................. {\b 3. grandiflora}
\par
14 Corolla 40-50 mm; leaves up to 12(-15) cm wide ................... {\b 4. eichlerana}
\par
1  Staminal connective longer than filament; arms unequal
\par
15 Short arm of staminal connective subulate
\par
16 Upper lip of corolla narrowed at base; verticillasters
\par
   with (8-)15-30 flowers ............................................................ {\b 35. verticillata}
\par
16 Upper lip of corolla not narrowed at base; verticillasters 
\par
   with 6-12 flowers ....................................................................... {\b 36. napifolia}
\par
15 Short arm of staminal connective ± dolabriform or with 
\par
   a ± sterile cell
\par
17 Upper lip of calyx flat, not concave, in fruit; calyx
\par
   tubular or campanulate
\par

\par
188}
\par