{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 filiform, diffuse, usually procumbent, rooting at the nodes, mat-forming. Leaves and bracts 2-7 mm, petiolate, ovate-orbicular, entire or sinuate. Calyx 1-1·5(-2·5) mm; teeth triangular, subulate. Corolla scarcely exserted, pale lilac. Nutlets smooth, pale brown. 2n = 18. •{\i  Corse, Sardegna, Montecristo; cultivated elsewhere for ornament and locally naturalized in W. Europe.} Co It Sa [Br Hb Lu].
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Sect. PULEGIUM (Miller) DC. Bracts like the leaves. Verticillasters many-flowered. Calyx tubular, weakly 2-lipped; throat hairy within. Corolla-tube gibbous.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. M. pulegium} L.,{\i  Sp. Pl.} 577 (1753) ({\i Pulegium vulgare} Miller). Subglabrous to tomentose perennial 10-40 cm, with pungent scent; stems procumbent to ascending. Leaves 8-30 × 4-12 mm, narrowly elliptical, attenuate at base, rarely suborbicular, shortly petiolate, entire or with up to 6 teeth on each side, hairy at least beneath. Bracts like the leaves, but usually smaller. Calyx (2-)2·5-3 mm; teeth ciliate, the lower subulate, the upper shorter and wider. Corolla (4-)4·5-6 mm, lilac. Stamens exserted or included; fertile anthers 0·4 mm. Nutlets 0·75 mm, pale brown. 2n = 20.{\i  S., W. & C. Europe, northwards to Ireland and C. Poland, and extending to W. & S. Ukraine.} All except Da Fa Fe Is No Rs (N, B, C, E) Sb Su.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Very variable in habit, leaf-shape and indumentum; several varieties have been described.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 3. M. micrantha} (Bentham) Schost. in Schischkin,{\i  Fl. Yugo-Vostoka}{\b  6}: 181 (1936). Like {\b 2} but subglabrous annual with erect stems; leaves glabrous; calyx up to 2(?-2·5) mm; corolla up to 3·5 mm; fertile anthers 0·25 mm; nutlets 0·5 mm.{\i  Dry steppes. S.E. Russia, W. Kazakhstan.} Rs (E).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Sect. PRESLIA (Opiz) Harley. Bracts like the leaves; bracteoles digitately lobed. Verticillasters many-flowered. Calyx tubular, with 4 equal teeth; throat hairy within. Corolla-tube straight.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 4. M. cervina} L.,{\i  Sp. Pl.} 578 (1753) ({\i Preslia cervina} (L.) Fresen.). Subglabrous perennial 10-40 cm, with pungent scent as in 2; stems procumbent and rooting below, erect above. Leaves 10-25 × 1-4 mm, glabrous, sessile, linear-oblanceolate, attenuate at base, entire or obscurely toothed. Bracts like the leaves but wider. Calyx-teeth triangular, with a whitish apical spine. Corolla lilac or white.{\i  S.W. Europe.} Ga Hs Lu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Sect. MENTHA. Bracts variable. Verticillasters usually many-flowered. Calyx tubular or campanulate, with 5 more or less equal teeth; throat glabrous within. Corolla-tube straight.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 5. M. arvensis} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 577 (1753) (incl.{\i  M. lapponica} Wahlenb.). Hairy perennial or rarely annual up to 60 cm, with sickly scent; flowering stems ascending or erect. Leaves (15-)20-50(-70) × 10-30(-40) mm, elliptic-lanceolate to broadly ovate, usually elliptical with the base narrowing to a petiole, shallowly toothed. Flowers in remote sessile verticillasters, the inflorescence leafy at the apex. Bracts like the leaves, smaller above. Calyx 1·5-2·5 mm, broadly campanulate, hairy; teeth deltate or broadly triangular. Pedicels glabrous or hairy. Corolla lilac, white or rarely pink. Nutlets pale brown. 2n = 24, 72, 90.{\i  Most of Europe, but absent from many of the islands.} Au Be Br Bu Cz Da Fe Ga Ge Gr Hb He Ho Hs Hu It Ju Lu No Po Rm Rs (N, B, C, W, K, E) ?Si Su.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  The European plants form part of a widespread polymorphic complex. Many infraspecific taxa have been recognized, chiefly on the basis of vegetative characters, but none seems very satisfactory. Among these is subsp. {\b austriaca} (Jacq.) Briq.,{\i  Lab. Alpes Marit. }88 (1891) ({\i M. austriaca} Jacq.; incl. var.{\i  parietariifolia} J. Becker), with leaves elliptic-lanceolate, attenuate at the base. The very similar{\b  M. lapponica} Wahlenb.,{\i  Fl. Lapp.} 161 (1812), from N. Europe, has been recognized by a few authors. It differs from subsp.{\i  austriaca} only in being subglabrous, with few-flowered verticillasters.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b  M}. ×{\b  muellerana} F. W. Schultz, {\i Flora} ({\i Regensb.}) {\b 37}: 543 (1854) ({\i M. wohlwerthiana} F. W. Schultz, {\i M. carinthiaca} auct., vix Host, {\i M. malinvaldii} Camus,{\i  M. stachyoides auct.,} ? an Host) ({\i M. arvensis} × {\i suaveolens}) occurs occasionally in the vicinity of its parents, and is probably often confused with {\b 5}. It is sterile and has 2n = 60.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b  M}. × {\b dalmatica} Tausch, {\i Syll. Pl. Nov. Ratisbon.} ({\i Königl. Baier. Bot. Ges.}){\b  2}: 249 (1828) ({\i M. carinthiaca} sensu Petrak, ? an Host,{\i  M. haynaldiana} Borbás,{\i  M. iraziana} Borbás,{\i  M. cinerascens} H. Braun) ({\i M. arvensis} ×{\i  longifolia}), is a rare, sterile hybrid occasionally found in the vicinity of its parents. It is sometimes confused with hairy forms of {\b 7}, but can generally be distinguished by its more slender habit, narrow bracts, smaller calyx and different scent.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b    6. M.} × {\b verticillata} L.,{\i  Syst. Nat.} ed. 10,{\b  2}: 1099 (1759) ({\i M. sativa} L.) ({\i M. aquatica} ×{\i  arvensis}). Like {\b 5} but usually more robust and often hairier; calyx 2·5-3·5(-4) mm, tubular, the teeth more or less triangular, acute. 2n = 42, 78, 84, 90, 96, 120, 132.{\i  Most of Europe, but absent from many of the islands.} Au ?Az Be Br Bu Cz Da Fe Ga Ge ?Gr Hb He Ho Hs Hu It Ju No Po Rm Rs (B, C, W, ?K, ?E) Su.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Usually sterile; the occasional highly fertile plants are probably the result of back-crossing with the parents. Often confused with {\b 5} or hairy variants of {\b 7}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 7. M}. × {\b gentilis} L., {\i Sp. Pl}. 577 (1753) ({\i M. sativa} var.{\i  gentilis} (L.) Reichenb.) ({\i M. arvensis} ×{\i  spicata}). Perennial 30-90 cm, usually glabrous, often red-tinged, with sweet scent like {\b 14}. Leaves (15-)30-70(-90) × (8-)15-40(-45) mm, ovate-lanceolate, lanceolate or elliptic-oblong, acute, narrowing to a short petiole, in cultivars sparsely hairy but otherwise often more densely so. Flowers usually in remote, sessile verticillasters. Bracts like the leaves or decreasing distinctly in size upwards, the uppermost sometimes shorter than the flowers. Pedicels usually glabrous. Calyx 2-3·5 mm, campanulate, glabrous below; teeth 0·5-1 mm, more or less subulate or rarely triangular, often conspicuously ciliate. Stamens usually included. 2n = 54, 60, 84, 96, 108, 120.{\i  Frequently cultivated and often escaping.} *Be *Br *Co *It *Ga [Au Cz Da Fe Ge Hb He Ho Hs Hu Ju Lu No Po Rm Rs (C, W) Su].
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Usually sterile, but sometimes back-crossing with its parents.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 8. M}. × {\b smithiana} R.A. Graham,{\i  Watsonia}{\b  1}: 89 (1949) ({\i M. rubra} Sm., non Miller) ({\i M. aquatica} × {\i arvensis} × {\i spicata}). Robust perennial 50-150 cm, subglabrous and conspicuously red-tinged, with a sweet scent like {\b 14}. Leaves 30-70(-90) × 20-40 mm, ovate, rounded at base, petiolate, sparsely hairy to subglabrous. Flowers usually in remote verticillasters, sometimes crowded at apex of stem. Bracts decreasing upwards, usually longer than the flowers, the upper suborbicular, cuspidate at apex, usually serrate. Calyx 3·5-4 mm, tubular, glabrous or sparsely hairy above; teeth (0·75-)1-1·5 mm, weakly ciliate. Stamens usually exserted. 2n = 120.{\i  Spreading vegetatively and perhaps also arising spontaneously; rarely cultivated.} [Au Be Br Cz Ga Ge Hb He Ho Hu It Ju Po Rm.]
\par

\par
184}
\par