{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b  T. widderi }Ronniger ex Machule,{\i  Mitt. Thür. Bot. Ges.}{\b  1}({\b 4}): 89 (1957), from the E. Alps, differs from {\b 56}({\b c}) in having marginal veins in the leaf.

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b  T. doerfleri} Ronniger, {\i Denkschr. Akad. Wiss. Math.-Nat. Kl.} ({\i Wien}){\b  99}: 189 (1924) ({\i T. hirsutus} var.{\i  doerfleri} (Ronniger) Ronniger), from N.E. Albania (Koritnik), resembles{\b  56}({\b d}) but has stems hairy all round and leaves densely covered by long and short hairs. Its status is uncertain.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 57. T. nervosus} Gay ex Willk.,{\i  Suppl. Prodr. Fl. Hisp. }144 (1893). Like {\b 56}({\b d}) but leaves c. 6 × 1-1·5 mm, subcoriaceous, linear-spathulate, with distinct subparallel lateral veins and no marginal veins; calyx 3-4 mm, the tube about as long as upper lip. 2n = 28. •{\i  C. & E. Pyrenees; S.E. France} ({\i Mont Ventoux}). Ga Hs.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 58. T. pulcherrimus} Schur, {\i Verh. Mitt. Siebenb. Ver. Naturw.}{\b  10}: 140 (1859) (incl.{\i  T. carpathicus} Celak., {\i T. circumcinctus} Klokov,{\i  T. serpyllum }subsp.{\i  sudeticus} Lyka, non {\i T. sudeticus} Opiz ex Borbás). Plant with long, creeping, somewhat woody non-flowering branches. Flowering stems up to 10 cm, with a basal cluster of small leaves. Leaves larger above on the flowering stems, ovate to orbicular, petiolate, truncate to broadly cuneate at base, shallowly crenate, with distinct marginal vein from apex to base. Inflorescence globose to somewhat cylindrical. Bracts similar to the leaves. Calyx 3·5-5 mm; tube subcylindrical, about equalling lips; upper teeth up to 1·3 mm, longer than wide. Corolla up to 8(-9) mm. 2n = 56 (60). •{\i  Carpathians, extending to N.C. Czechoslovakia} ({\i Jeseniky}). Cz Po Rm Rs (W).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Variable in habit, stem-indumentum and calyx-teeth.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 59. T. comosus} Heuffel ex Griseb.,{\i  Arch. Naturgesch.} ({\i Berlin}) {\b 18}({\b 1}): 328 (1852). Branches suberect to procumbent, woody at base. Flowering stems 5-15 cm, sometimes branched, hairy all round. Leaves up to 17 × 9 mm, broadly ovate or rhombicovate to suborbicular, petiolate, with distinct marginal veins, glabrous to slightly hairy, ciliate at base. Inflorescence up to 7 cm, capituliform to cylindrical. Bracts similar to the leaves. Calyx 4-5·5 mm, subcylindrical; upper teeth up to 2 mm, narrowly lanceolate, ciliate. Corolla 8-9 mm, purple. 2n = 28. •{\i  Mountains of W. & C. Romania.} Rm.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 60. T. bihoriensis} Jalas,{\i  Bot. Jour. Linn. Soc.}{\b  64}: 268 (1971) ({\i T. marginatus} A. Kerner, non Sm.). Like {\b 59} but flowering stems 4-angled, with hairs on the angles only. • {\i Mountains of N. & C. Romania.} Rm.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 61. T. pulegioides} L.,{\i  Sp. Pl.} 592 (1753) ({\i T. alpestris} auct., non Tausch ex A. Kerner,{\i  T. chamaedrys} Fries, {\i T. enervius} Klokov, {\i T. froelichianus} Opiz,{\i  T. montanus} Waldst. & Kit., non Crantz, {\i T. serpyllum }subsp.{\i  carniolicus} (Borbás) Lyka, subsp.{\i  chamaedrys} (Fries) Vollmann, subsp.{\i  effusus} (Host) Lyka, subsp.{\i  montanus} Arcangeli & subsp.{\i  parviflorus} (Opiz ex H. Braun) Lyka, {\i T. ucrainicus} Klokov & Schost.). Plant suberect to procumbent, somewhat woody at base; long, creeping, non-flowering branches absent. Flowering stems up to 25(-40) cm, sometimes branched, 4-angled, hairy on the angles only. Leaves up to 18 × 10 mm, more or less equal, ovate or oblong-lanceolate, obtuse, usually cuneate and usually ciliate at base, petiolate; marginal vein absent. Inflorescence usually interrupted at least below. Bracts similar to the leaves. Calyx 3-4 mm, campanulate; upper teeth usually longer than wide, at least 1/6 as long as calyx, usually ciliate. Corolla c. 6 mm, pink-purple. 2n = 28, 30.{\i  Europe,except parts of the north and east and many of the islands.} Al Au Be Br Bu Cz Da Ga Ge Gr ?Hb He Ho Hs Hu It Ju Lu No Po Rm Rs (B, C, W) Si Su ?Tu [ ?Fa Fe ?Is ?Rs (N)].
\par       

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Very variable. Several of the character-combinations given the rank of species or subspecies possess a distinct geographical distribution. However the total variation has been found to be so continuous and reticulate that attempts to make subspecific divisions seem premature, if not impossible.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 62. T. alpestris} Tausch ex A. Kerner,{\i  Sched. Fl. Exsicc. Austro-Hung.}{\b  1}: 56 (1881) ({\i T. chamaedrys} auct., non Fries,{\i  T. serpyllum} subsp.{\i  alpestris} (Tausch ex A. Kerner) Lyka; incl. {\i T. subalpestris} Klokov). Like {\b 61} but creeping non-flowering branches present; leaves of flowering stems larger above; inflorescence capitate; calyx subglabrous; upper teeth not or sparsely ciliate. 2n = 28.{\i  Mostly above} 1000{\i  m. Mountains of E.C. Europe.} Au Cz ?Ga Po Rm Rs (W).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Intermediates between this and{\b  61} are frequent in areas where they grow together. A slight decrease in pollen fertility has been demonstrated for these putative hybrids. Most records of{\b  62} from the Alps and mountains of the Balkan peninsula seem to refer to variants of{\b  61} or {\b 56}({\b c}).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 63. T. oehmianus} Ronniger & Soska,{\i  Feddes Repert.} ({\i Beih}.){\b  100}: 171 (1938). Like {\b 61} but flowering stems glabrous at base; leaves 8-12 × 7-10 mm, broadly ovate, truncate to subcordate at base, not ciliate; calyx 4-4·5 mm, glabrous, the tube subcylindrical, the upper teeth 0·4-0·5 mm, triangular, not ciliate; corolla c. 8 mm, pink. •{\i  S. Jugoslavia }({\i gorge of river Treska, near Skopje}). Ju.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 64. T. alternans} Klokov, {\i Not. Syst.} ({\i Leningrad}){\b  16}: 293 (1954). Like {\b 61} but flowering stems hairy on 2 opposite sides; leaves mostly lanceolate-elliptical, with shorter petiole, ciliate at base.  •{\i  E. Carpathians.} ?Cz Rs (W).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  This plant has the appearance of a hybrid between {\b 42} and {\b 61} but its range is outside that of {\b 42}. Its status needs further investigation.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 65. T. serpyllum} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 590 (1753). Plant with long, slender, creeping, non-flowering branches, woody at base and rooting at nodes, sometimes with a terminal inflorescence. Flowering stems rarely more than 10 cm, hairy all round. Leaves linear to elliptical, subsessile, ciliate at base; lateral veins disappearing towards margin. Inflorescence usually capitate. Calyx 3-5 mm, campanulate; upper teeth about as long as wide, usually ciliate. Corolla purple. • {\i  Europe northwards from N.E. France, N. Austria, and N. Ukraine.} Au Be Br Cz Da Fe Ga Ge Ho Hu No Po ?Rm Rs (N, B, C, W) Su.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b serpyllum}  ({\i T. serpyllum} subsp.{\i  angustifolius} (Pers.) Arcangeli & subsp.{\i  rigidus} (Wimmer & Grab.) Lyka): Leaves 5-10 × (1-)2-3(-4) mm, more or less equal. Calyx 3-4 mm, the upper teeth mostly 0·5-0·8 mm. Corolla 6-7 mm. 2n = 24. {\i Throughout the range of the species}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b tanaensis}  (Hyl.) Jalas,{\i  Acta Bot. Fenn.}{\b  39}: 20 (1947) ({\i T. subarcticus} Klokov & Schost.): Leaves usually 7-13 × 3-5 mm, the upper larger. Calyx 4-5 mm; upper teeth up to 1·2 mm. Corolla 7-8 mm. 2n = 24.{\i  N.E. Fennoscandia, N. Russia}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 66. T. talijevii} Klokov & Schost.,{\i  Jour. Inst. Bot. Acad. Sci. Ukr.}{\b  9}: 195 (1936) (incl.{\i  T. hirticaulis }Klokov, {\i T. paucifolius} Klokov). Like {\b 65}({\b b}) but leaves more distinctly petiolate and more clearly increasing in size up the flowering stems. E. Russia. Rs (N, C).
\par

\par
182}
\par