{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 11. P. nutans} Georgi,{\i  Bemerk. Reise }{\b 1}: 200 (1775) ({\i P. sibirica} Jacq., {\i P. finmarchica} Jacq.). Efarinose; heterostylous. Leaves 1-12 × 0·5-1·5 cm, ovate, oblong or elliptic-orbicular, entire or obscurely denticulate, glabrous, somewhat fleshy; lamina not or scarcely decurrent, ½ as long to as long as petiole. Scape 2-30 cm, 1- to 10-flowered. Bracts 5-12 mm, oblong, saccate at base, with auricles up to 1·5 mm. Pedicels 5-45 mm. Calyx 4-8 mm, with 5 distinct ribs. Corolla 10-20 mm in diameter, lilac to pink, with a yellow centre; tube 1¼-2 times as long as calyx. Capsule 10-16 mm, usually 1½ times as long as calyx. 2n = 22.{\i  Damp meadows, usually near the sea. N. Russia, N.E. Fennoscandia.} Fe No Rs (N, C) Su.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 12. P. egaliksensis} Wormsk. in Hornem.,{\i  Fl. Dan.}{\b  9}({\b 26}): 4 (1816). Efarinose; homostylous. Leaves 0·5-5 × 0·2-1·5 cm, elliptical to oblong-ovate, entire or obscurely denticulate, glabrous; lamina more or less abruptly contracted into petiole. Scape 1-15 cm, 1- to 9-flowered. Bracts 3-7 mm, subulate, gibbous at the base. Pedicels 1-3 times as long as bracts. Calyx 4-6 mm; teeth often glandular-ciliolate. Corolla 5(-9) mm in diameter, white or lilac; tube slightly longer than calyx. Capsule 5-10 mm, narrowly cylindrical, 1½-2 times as long as calyx.{\i  Moist pastures near the sea. N. Iceland}. Is. ({\i Greenland, Canada, Alaska}.)
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  Subgen. {\b Auriculastrum} Schott. Heterostylous. Farinose or efarinose. Hairs glandular, sometimes minute. Leaves with involute vernation, fleshy or coriaceous, not rugose. Bracts not gibbous or saccate. Calyx rounded, not angled.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  Numerous hybrids are known; many are fertile and some are frequent, especially {\b 14} × {\b 19}, {\b 25} × {\b 29}, {\b 28} × {\b 29}. The last,{\i  P.} ×{\i  pubescens} Jacq., is occasionally found outside the area of {\b 29},{\i  P. hirsuta}.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 13. P. deorum} Velen., {\i Sitz.-Ber. Böhm. Ges. Wiss.} ({\i Math.-Nat. Kl}.){\b  1890}({\b 1}): 55 (1890). Longest leaves 2-15 × 0·4-2 cm, narrowly oblanceolate, erect or erecto-patent; lamina coriaceous, shining, with very short, pale, glandular hairs embedded in the upper surface; margin cartilaginous, entire. Scape 5-20 cm, fragrant and viscid, more or less dark violet towards the apex, 3- to 18-flowered. Bracts 3-10 mm, narrowly triangular-lanceolate. Pedicels 3-10 mm. Calyx 3-6 mm. Corolla deep reddish- to violet-purple. 2n =66.{\i  Wet alpine grassland. • S.W. Bulgaria} ({\i Rila Planina}). Bu.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 14. P. glutinosa} Wulfen in Jacq.,{\i  Fl. Austr.}{\b  5}: 41 (1778). Plant viscid, the secretion rarely drying to a white crust. Longest leaves 1·5-5 × 0·3-0·8 cm, more or less erect, narrowly oblanceolate, more or less rounded at the apex, coriaceous, with minute, pale glandular hairs embedded in the upper surface; margin somewhat cartilaginous, usually finely crenate or dentate towards the apex. Scape 1·5-8 cm, 2- to 8-flowered. Bracts 4-12 mm, broadly ovate to oblong, viscid. Pedicels up to 3 mm. Calyx 5-9 mm. Corolla deep violet (reddish-violet when dry). 2n = 66, 67.{\i  Wet, heavy soils; calcifuge. • E. Alps; C. Jugoslavia} ({\i Bosna}). Au He It Ju.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 15. P. spectabilis} Tratt., {\i Ausgem. Taf. Arch. Gewächsk.}{\b  4}: 34 (1814). Longest leaves 2-9 × 1-3 cm, pressed to the ground, rhombic-ovate, coriaceous, somewhat viscid, shining, with scattered, very short, pale glandular hairs embedded in the upper surface (darkish dots, if illuminated from the side); margin cartilaginous, minutely erose. Scape 2-15 cm, 2- to 5-flowered. Bracts 2-15 mm, triangular-lanceolate to linear. Pedicels 3-30 mm. Calyx 6-12 mm. Corolla pinkish-red to lilac. 2n = 66. {\i Rocks and stony slopes; calcicole. • S. Alps between }10° 15'{\i  and} 11° 50' {\i E}.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 16. P. glaucescens} Moretti,{\i  Gior. Fis.} ({\i Brugnat}.) ser. 2, {\b 5}: 249 (1822). Longest leaves 2-7 × 0·7-2 cm, broadly lanceolate to obovate, patent when mature, acute, coriaceous, stiff, shining, glabrous; margin cartilaginous, minutely doubly crenulate. Scape 3-12 cm, 2- to 6-flowered. Bracts 4-30 mm, triangular-lanceolate to linear. Pedicels 3-20 mm. Calyx 6-18 mm. Corolla pinkish-red to lilac. 2n = 66.{\i  Rocks and stony slopes; calcicole.• S. Alps between} 9° 15'{\i  and} 10° 45' {\i E}. It.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 17. P. wulfeniana} Schott,{\i  Wilde Blendl. Österr. Primeln} 17 (1852). Longest leaves 1·5-4 × 0·5-1·2 cm, oblanceolate to obovate, patent when mature, shining, coriaceous; margin entire, cartilaginous, densely covered with pale glandular hairs up to 0·1 mm, which are more or less concealed by non-farinose secretions; leaves otherwise glabrous. Scape 0·5-7 cm, 1- or 2-flowered. Bracts 3-15 mm, triangular-lanceolate to linear. Pedicels 2-8 mm. Calyx 6-12 mm. Corolla pinkish-red to lilac. 2n = 66.{\i  Rocks and stony slopes; calcicole. • S.E. Alps, westwards to} 12° 15'{\i  E.; S. Carpathians.} Au It Ju Rm.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  Plants from the S. Carpathians (subsp.{\b  baumgarteniana }(Degen & Moesz) Lüdi in Hegi, {\i Ill. Fl. Mitteleur. }{\b 5}({\b 3}): 1776 (1927)) are said to differ from those of the Alps in their wider, more obtuse leaves, but are doubtfully distinct.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 18. P. clusiana} Tausch,{\b  Flora }({\i Regensb}.){\b  4}: 364 (1821). Longest leaves 1·5-6 × 0·5-2·5 cm, lanceolate to obovate, patent when mature, shining, coriaceous; margins entire or nearly so, narrowly cartilaginous, densely covered with pale glandular hairs up to 0·25 mm, leaves otherwise glabrous. Scape 1-8 cm, 1- to 4-flowered. Bracts 3-15 mm, triangular-lanceolate to linear. Pedicels 2-12 mm. Calyx 8-15 mm. Corolla pinkish-red to lilac. 2n = c.198.{\i  Rocks and stony slopes; calcicole. • N.E. Alps, westwards to} c. 13° {\i E}. Au Ge.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 19. P. minima} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 143 (1753). Longest leaves 0·5-3 × 0·3-1 cm, cuneate, shining, coriaceous; the margins entire, the apex truncate or more or less rounded, deeply and densely dentate; teeth cartilaginous at apex; glandular hairs c. 0·05 mm, pale, scattered or very few. Scape 0·2-4 cm, 1- to 2-flowered. Bracts 3-8 mm, linear-lanceolate. Pedicels up to 3 mm. Calyx 5-9 mm. Corolla bright pink, with deeply divided, V-shaped lobes; throat with many-celled glandular hairs, the longer 0·4-0·8 mm. 2n = 66, 67, 68, 69, 70, 73. {\i Alpine pastures, snow patches; calcifuge. • E.C. & S.E. Europe, extending westwards to} c. 10° 30'{\i  E. in the Alps}. Al Au Bu Cz Ge It Ju Po Rm Rs (W).
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 20. P. kitaibeliana} Schott, {\i Österr. Bot. Wochenbl.}{\b  2}: 268 (1852). Plant viscid. Longest leaves 2-9 × 1-4 cm, not reaching full length until after anthesis, broadly lanceolate to obovate at maturity, mostly with shallow, distant teeth, sometimes entire, fleshy, more or less densely covered with pale 3- to 5-celled glandular hairs, the longest 0·1-0·5 mm. Scape 1·5-8 cm, 1- to 3-flowered. Bracts 2-11 mm, linear. Pedicels 2-12 mm. Calyx 7-13 mm. Corolla pink to lilac. 2n = 66.{\i  Rocks and stony soil; calcicole. • W.C. Jugoslavia.} Ju.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28     {\b 21. P. integrifolia} L., {\i Sp. Pl. }144 (1753). Slightly viscid, the secretion sometimes drying to a white crust. Longest leaves
\par 

\par 
18}
\par