{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 Celak.). Plants usually with long, creeping and woody non-flowering branches bearing axillary leaf-clusters; flowering stems up to 10 cm, each with a basal cluster of small leaves, hairy all round or on 2 opposite sides. Leaves up to 13 × 3-4 mm, elliptical to lanceolate, coriaceous; lateral veins distinct; marginal veins absent. Inflorescence globose to somewhat cylindrical. Bracts similar to the leaves. Calyx 3-4 mm, usually greenish, the upper lip longer than the tube; upper teeth c. 1 mm, pungent, usually ciliate. Corolla c. 6 mm, pale pink.{\i  Mountains of Greece and Macedonia.} ?Bu Gr Ju.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 53. T. thracicus} Velen.,{\i  Österr. Bot. Zeitschr.}{\b  42}: 16 (1892) (incl.{\i  T. alsarensis} Ronniger,{\i  T. longidens} (Velen.) Podp., ?{\i T. nikolovii} (Degen & Urum.) Stoj. & Stefanov). Like {\b 52} but leaves mostly 8-12 × (2-)3-4 mm, elliptic-spathulate, subobtuse; calyx 4-6 mm, tinged purple; upper lip somewhat longer than lower; corolla up to 8 mm, purple.{\i  C. part of Balkan peninsula and N. Aegean region.} Bu Gr Ju Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 54. T. stojanovii} Degen, {\i Magyar Bot. Lapok}{\b  23}: 72 (1925). Caespitose, with woody, creeping, non-flowering stems. Flowering stems 5(-7) cm, with a basal cluster of small leaves, usually hairy all round, and often with axillary leaf-clusters. Leaves 5-7 × 1-2 mm, lanceolate-elliptical, somewhat fleshy, subacute, mostly exceeding the internodes, often hairy, ciliate at the base; lateral veins indistinct. Inflorescence globose to somewhat cylindrical. Bracts similar to the leaves. Calyx 3-4(-5) mm, purplish; upper lip equalling or slightly longer than tube; upper teeth 0·5-1(-1·5) mm, ciliate, subspinescent. Corolla scarcely exceeding calyx, purple. •{\i  Mountains of C. part of Balkan peninsula.} ?Al Bu Gr Ju.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 55. T. longicaulis} C. Presl,{\i  Fl. Sic. }37 (1826) (incl.{\i  T. illyricus} Ronniger,{\i  T. kosaninii} Ronniger,{\i  T. lykae} Degen & Jáv., {\i T. malyi} Ronniger,{\i  T. moesiacus} Velen.,{\i  T. rohlenae} Velen., {\i T. serpyllum }subsp.{\i  dalmaticus }(Reichenb.) Nyman). Plant with long, somewhat woody, creeping branches, non-flowering or with a terminal inflorescence. Flowering stems borne in rows, each with a basal cluster of small leaves, slender, usually not more than 10 cm, hairy all round or on 2 opposite sides. Leaves at least 1 mm wide, linear-lanceolate to elliptical, herbaceous (sometimes fleshy), ciliate at the base; lateral veins more or less indistinct; marginal vein absent. Bracts similar to the leaves. Calyx 2·5-3·5 mm, with tube campanulate, usually shorter than upper lip; upper teeth longer than wide. Corolla purple. 2n = 30, more than 50, 58.{\i  S. Europe, westwards to S.E. France}. Al ?Au Bu Ga Gr ?He ?Hu It Ju Rm Si Tu [Ge].
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  The wide variation found within this species includes two different levels of polyploidy, but it is not yet known whether these are correlated with any morphological or geographical features. There seem to be no grounds so far for recognizing any of the variants at subspecific level. The species is connected by numerous, probably hybridogeneous, intermediates with {\b 35}, {\b 41}, {\b 43}, {\b 56} and {\b 61}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b  T. dolomiticus} Coste,{\i  Bull. Soc. Bot. Fr.}{\b  40}: 130 (1893), from S. France, should probably be included in {\b 55} as a subspecies. It is characterized by a diploid chromosome number (2n = 28), flowering stems hairy all round, leaves 5-7 × 1-1·5 mm, hairy, and calyx 3-4 mm, with tube shorter than lips.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  A tetraploid plant (2n = 54), which is more widespread in S. France, characterized by stems incompletely hairy on opposite sides, leaves c. 11 × 2·5 mm, glabrous, subcoriaceous, with slightly more prominent venation than in {\b 55}, and calyx 3·5-4·5 mm with almost cylindrical tube as long or slightly longer than lips, does not seem to differ significantly from{\b  T. embergeri} Roussine,{\i  Rec. Trav. Montpellier }({\i Sér. Bot.}) {\b 5}: 79 (1952), also from France, for which, however, the chromosome number 2n = 48 has been reported.
\par
 
\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b  T. sintenisii} Celak.,{\i  Flora }({\i Regensb}.){\b  67}: 537 (1884), from Turkey-in-Europe (Eceabat), may belong here. It has stems hairy all round; leaves 9-11 × 1·2-1·5 mm, shortly petiolate, linear-lanceolate, obtuse, with a weakly prominent midrib and almost invisible lateral veins; calyx c. 5 mm, with upper lip longer than tube and upper teeth 0·8-1 mm. The bracts and corolla are unknown.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b  T. adamovicii} Velen., {\i Beih. Bot. Centr.}{\b  19}({\b 2}): 282 (1906), from C. Jugoslavia (near Gornji Milanovac), also with stems hairy all round, has elliptical leaves up to 9 × 2·5 mm, with subrevolute margins and more prominent midrib, densely covered by very short and stiff, one-celled hairs, and the calyx c. 3 mm, broadly campanulate, with subulate, nearly herbaceous lower teeth and upper teeth c. 0·5 mm, as long as wide. It may also belong here.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 56. T. praecox} Opiz,{\i  Naturalientausch}{\b  6}: 40 (1824). Plant with long, somewhat woody, creeping branches, non-flowering or with a terminal inflorescence. Flowering stems borne in rows, each with a basal cluster of small leaves, slender, usually not more than 10 cm, hairy all round or on 2 opposite sides. Leaves mostly obovate, broadly spathulate to suborbicular, subcoriaceous, ciliate at the base; lateral veins prominent, marginal veins present in the upper part. Bracts similar to the leaves. Calyx 3-5 mm, with tube campanulate, about equalling upper lip; upper teeth longer than wide. Corolla purple. {\i  S., W. & C. Europe. }Al Au Be Br Bu Cz Fa Ga Ge Gr Hb He Ho Hs Hu Is It Ju No Po Rm ?Si ?Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Very variable in leaf-shape and indumentum. The following tentative treatment aims to summarize the main features of the geographical variation, although the subspecific boundaries are rather obscure in several places.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Stems hairy all round
\par
2 Basal leaves on flowering stems petiolate; 
\par
  corolla up to 6 mm ............................................................. ({\b a}) subsp. {\b praecox}
\par
2 Basal leaves on flowering stems sessile; 
\par
  corolla up to 8 mm ............................................................ ({\b b}) subsp. {\b skorpilii}
\par
1 Stems with hairs mostly on 2 sides only
\par
3 Cauline leaves larger above ......................................... ({\b c}) subsp. {\b polytrichus}
\par
3 Cauline leaves about equal
\par
4 Leaves 5-8 mm, mostly obovate, densely glandular punctate; 
\par
  calyx 3-4 mm ...................................................................... ({\b e}) subsp. {\b arcticus}
\par
4 Leaves 8-14 mm, linear-spathulate, very sparsely 
\par
  glandular punctate; calyx 4-5 mm ................................. ({\b d}) subsp. {\b zygiformis}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b praecox}  ({\i T. humifusus} Bernh., {\i T. serpyllum} subsp. {\i clivorum} Lyka, subsp. {\i hesperites} Lyka & subsp.{\i  praecox} (Opiz) Vollmann): 2n = c. 50, c. 54, 56, 58.  •{\i W. & C. Europe, mainly lowland}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b skorpilii}  (Velen.) Jalas,{\i  Bot. Jour. Linn. Soc.}{\b  64}: 266 (1971) ({\i T. skorpilii} Velen., {\i T. jankae} Celak., {\i T. eximius} Ronniger): {\i N. & C. parts of Balkan peninsula}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b c}) Subsp. {\b polytrichus}  (A. Kerner ex Borbás) Jalas, {\i Veröff. Geobot. Inst. Rübel} ({\i Zürich}) {\b 43}: 189 (1970) ({\i T. alpigenus}(A. Kerner ex H. Braun) Ronniger, {\i T. balcanus} Borbás, {\i T. kerneri} Borbás,{\i  T. polytrichus} A. Kerner ex Borbás,{\i  T. serpyllum} subsp. {\i polytrichus} (A. Kerner ex Borbás) Briq. & subsp.{\i  trachselianus }(Opiz) Lyka): 2n = 28, c. 50, 54, 55, 56.  •{\i Mountains of S. & S.C. Europe}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b d}) Subsp. {\b zygiformis}  (H. Braun) Jalas,{\i  Bot. Jour. Linn. Soc.}{\b  64}: 267 (1971) ({\i T. albanus} H. Braun,{\i  T. zygiformis} H. Braun):{\i  • W. part of Balkan peninsula; .?C. Appennini}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b e}) Subsp. {\b arcticus}  (E. Durand) Jalas, {\i Veröff. Geobot. Inst. Rübel} ({\i Zürich}){\b  43}: 190 (1970) ({\i T. drucei} Ronniger): 2n = c. 50, 51, 54. {\i W. Europe}.
\par

\par
181}
\par