{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 18 Bracts exceeding corolla
\par
19 Corolla 14-18 mm,the upper lip ± straight .................................. {\b 34. viridis}
\par
19 Corolla 20-30 mm, the upper lip strongly falcate ....................... {\b 14. sclarea}
\par
18 Bracts shorter than corolla
\par
20 Leaves pubescent or strigulose
\par
21 Annual or biennial; pedicels compressed, deflexed in fruit ........ {\b 34. viridis}
\par
21 Perennial; pedicels terete, erect in fruit
\par
22 Corolla yellow with reddish-brown markings; hood emarginate; 
\par
   calyx 12-17 mm ........................................................................ {\b 18. glutinosa}
\par
22 Corolla violet-blue with white or yellow markings; hood 2-fid; 
\par
   calyx 5-12 mm ....................................................................... {\b 19. forskaohlei}
\par
20 At least the basal leaves lanate or densely tomentose beneath
\par
23 Bracts equalling or exceeding calyx, greyish-white ............ {\b 13. phlomoides}
\par
23 Bracts shorter than calyx, green or violet-tinged
\par
24 Corolla 10-15 mm, the upper lip weakly falcate; stems
\par
   eglandular .................................................................................. {\b 16. aethiopis}
\par
24 Corolla 15-35 mm, the upper lip strongly falcate;
\par
   stems glandular above
\par
25 Bracts less than 1/3 as long as calyx ................................. {\b 17. candidissima}
\par
25 Bracts 1/3-2/3 as long as calyx ................................................. {\b 15. argentea}
\par
17 Upper lip of calyx concave-bisulcate in fruit; calyx campanulate 
\par
26 Stamens long-exserted; corolla yellow-white ......................... {\b 31. austriaca}
\par
26 Stamens included or slightly exserted; corolla usually 
\par
   violet-blue, never yellow-white
\par
27 Inflorescence nodding at apex before anthesis; stems leafless 
\par
   above ............................................................................................. {\b 30. nutans}
\par
27 Inflorescence erect before anthesis; stems ± leafy above
\par
28 Leaves pinnate, with 4-6 pairs of narrow linear segments ........ {\b 32. jurisicii}
\par
28 Leaves simple, or pinnatifid with wide lobes
\par
29 Pedicels 8-10 mm; lower lip of corolla white, the 
\par
   hood coloured ............................................................................... {\b 20. bicolor}
\par
29 Pedicels less than 5 mm; lower lip and hood of corolla
\par
   coloured, or corolla all white
\par
30 Bracts usually violet or purplish, imbricate in bud; leaves oblong 
\par
31 Stems glandular; bracts 1/2-3/4 as long as calyx .................... {\b 27. valentina}
\par
31 Stems eglandular; bracts as long as or longer than calyx
\par
32 Stems densely villous; verticillasters with 6-8 flowers  .. {\b 26. amplexicaulis}
\par
32 Stems pubescent; verticillasters with 2-6 flowers .................. {\b 25. nemorosa}
\par
30 Bracts green, not imbricate in bud; leaves ovate to oblong
\par
33 Stems glandular below ......................................................... {\b 28. sclareoides}
\par
33 Stems eglandular below
\par
34 Leaves ± pinnatifid; corolla 6-10(-15) mm ........................... {\b 29. verbenaca}
\par
34 Leaves simple; corolla 10-30 mm 
\par
35 Leaves densely white-appressed-hairy beneath .............. {\b 24. transsylvanica}
\par
35 Leaves patent-hairy or subglabrous beneath
\par
36 Inflorescence dense; cauline leaves few; plant 20-40 cm ............. {\b 23. teddii}
\par
36 Inflorescence usually ± lax; cauline leaves few or many; 
\par
   plant up to 100 cm
\par
37 Inflorescence with elongated, erecto-patent branches,
\par
   rarely simple; corolla 11-20 mm .................................................. {\b 33. virgata}
\par
37 Inflorescence ± shortly branched; corolla (10-)20-30 mm
\par
38 Leaves ovate to ovate-oblong; corolla of hermaphrodite
\par
   flowers (15-)20-30 mm .............................................................. {\b 21. pratensis}
\par
38 Leaves narrowly oblong; corolla of hermaphrodite 
\par
   flowers 10-20 mm ................................................................. {\b 22. dumetorum}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Sect. SALVIA (Sect.{\i  Eusphace} Bentham). Shrubs or perennial herbs. Calyx not or scarcely accrescent. Upper lip of corolla more or less straight; tube with a ring of hairs inside. Staminal connective shorter than or equalling the filament; arms subequal, one with a more or less sterile cell.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. S. officinalis} L.,{\i  Sp. Pl.} 23 (1753). Shrub up to 60 cm. Stems erect, with numerous patent-tomentose branches. Leaves simple, petiolate, oblong, more or less narrowed at base, rugose, white-pubescent beneath, greenish above, densely pubescent when young. Verticillasters with 5-10 flowers. Calyx 10-14 mm, pubescent, glandular-punctate. Corolla up to 35 mm, violet-blue, pink or white. •{\i  N. & C. Spain, S. France; W. part of Balkan peninsula. Widely cultivated as a pot-herb, and naturalized in parts of S. & S.C. Europe.} Al Ga ?Gr Hs Ju [Bl Bu *Co Cz He It Lu Rm Sa Si].
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. S. lavandulifolia} Vahl,{\i  Enum. Pl.}{\b 1}: 222 (1804). Small shrub or herb up to 50 cm. Stems erect or ascending, pubescent. Leaves Up to 50 mm, simple, petiolate, narrowly oblong or oblong-linear, crenulate, tomentose. Verticillasters with 6-8 flowers. Pedicels c. 5 mm. Calyx 8-12 mm, often reddish-purple, pubescent, glandular-punctate. Corolla 20-25 mm, blue or violet blue. •{\i  C., S. & E. Spain, just extending into S. France.} Ga Hs.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 3. S. grandiflora} Etlinger,{\i  De Salvia }17 (1777) (incl.{\i  S. brachystemon} Klokov). Small shrub or herb up to 100 cm. Stems erect or ascending, patent-hairy. Leaves up to 6·5 cm wide simple, long-petiolate, ovate or oblong, rounded or cordate at base, rugose, more or less eglandular-pubescent. Verticillasters with 4-10 flowers. Pedicels c. 10 mm, rarely 20 mm. Calyx 10-15 mm, often reddish-purple, glandular-viscid. Corolla up to 35 mm, lilac, pink or violet-blue, rarely white. 2n = 16.{\i  C.& S.parts of Balkan peninsula; Krym.} Al Bu Gr Ju Rs (K) Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 4. S. eichlerana} Heldr ex Halácsy, {\i Verh. Zool.-Bot. Ges. Wien }{\b 49}: 191 (1899). Like {\b 3} but up to 180 cm; leaves up to 12(-15) cm wide; corolla 40-50 mm. •{\i  N. & C. Greece}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 5. S. triloba} L. fil.,{\i  Suppl.} 88 (1781) ({\i S. lobryana }Aznav.). Shrub up to 120 cm. Stems appressed white-tomentose. Leaves simple, or pinnate with 1-2 pairs of ovate lateral segments and a large oblong-elliptical terminal segment, petiolate, rugose eglandular, greyish-white beneath, greenish above. Verticillasters with 2-6 flowers. Calyx 5-8 mm, campanulate, toothed, often purple, glandular or eglandular-pubescent. Corolla 16-25 mm, lilac or pink, rarely white.{\i  C. & E. Mediterranean region, from Sicilia to Kriti.} Al Cr Gr It Si [Lu].
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Polymorphic, especially in density of indumentum, as well as in height, shape of leaf, and length of spike. Some variants have been recognized in Portugal as subspecies (see A. R. Pinto da Silva,{\i  Agron. Lusit. }{\b 20}: 237-238 (1959)), but similar plants occur throughout the range of the species.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 6. S. candelabrum} Boiss.,{\i  Elenchus }72 (1838). Herb up to 80 cm, woody at base. Stems erect, with few branches, hairy below, glabrous and leafless above. Leaves up to 90 mm, simple or with one pair of small lateral segments at base, petiolate, oblong-elliptical, rugose. Inflorescence lax, with 3- to 5-flowered pedunculate cymes. Pedicels c. 10 mm. Calyx 10-13 mm, glandular-viscid. Corolla 30-40 mm; upper lip white with violet markings; lower lip violet-blue. •{\i  S. Spain.} Hs.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b  S.} ×{\b  hegelmaieri} Porta & Rigo,{\i  Atti Accad. Agiati}{\b  9} :56 (1891) from S.E. Spain, is a hybrid between{\b  6} and {\b 2}.
\par

\par
189}
\par