{\rtf1\ansi \deff4\deflang1033{\fonttbl{\f4\froman\fcharset0\fprq2 Times New Roman;}}{\colortbl;\red0\green0\blue0;\red0\green0\blue255;\red0\green255\blue255;\red0\green255\blue0;\red255\green0\blue255;\red255\green0\blue0;\red255\green255\blue0;\red255\green255\blue255;\red0\green0\blue128;\red0\green128\blue128;\red0\green128\blue0;\red128\green0\blue128;\red128\green0\blue0;\red128\green128\blue0;\red128\green128\blue128;\red192\green192\blue192;}{\stylesheet{\widctlpar \f4\fs20\lang2057 \snext0 Normal;}{\*\cs10 \additive Default Paragraph Font;}}{\info{\author dddd}{\operator dddd}{\creatim\yr1998\mo11\dy11\hr17\min41}{\revtim\yr1998\mo11\dy11\hr17\min41}{\version2}{\edmins0}{\nofpages4}{\nofwords1012}{\nofchars5772}{\*\company  }{\vern57431}}\widowctrl\ftnbj\aenddoc\hyphcaps0 \fet0\sectd \linex0 {\*\pnseclvl1\pnucrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl2\pnucltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl3\pndec\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl4\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl5\pndec\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl6\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl7\pnlcrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl8\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl9\pnlcrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}
\pard\plain \ \f4\fs20\lang2057 {\fs28 3-3\'b75 mm, gibbous at base, glabrous inside. Corolla 3\'b75-4 mm, white, with a ring of hairs inside. }{\i\fs28 Cultivated in S.E. Europe for ornament and for its}{\fs28  }{\i\fs28 aromatic oil, and locally naturalized in E. Ukraine}{\fs28 . [Rs (W, ?E).] (}{\i\fs28 Himalayan region}{\fs28 .)
\par 
\par }
\pard \qc\ {\b\fs28 37.              Rosmarinus}{\fs28               L.
\par }{\fs24 By J. do Amaral Franco & M.L. da Rocha Afonso. 
\par 
\par }
\pard \ {\fs28 Evergreen shrubs. Verticillasters few-flowered, in short axillary racemes. Calyx campanulate, 2-lipped; upper lip entire; lower lip 2-lobed. Corolla 2-lipped, exserted; upper lip strongly concave and 2-fid; lower lip 3-fid with a cochleariform middle lobe. Stamens 2, distinctly exserted, parallel, the filaments with a small, lateral, recurved tooth near the base; anthers 1-locular. Style long, incurved, unbranched.
\par 
\par }
\pard \li200\ {\fs28 Leaves 15-40 mm; inflorescence with stellate hairs only;
\par     branches brown ......................................................................... }{\b\fs28 1. officinalis}{\fs28 
\par Leaves 5-15 mm; inflorescence with both stellate and 
\par     long, glandular hairs; branches grey ........................................... }{\b\fs28 2. eriocalix}{\fs28 
\par 
\par }
\pard \ {\fs28    }{\b\fs28 1. R. officinalis}{\fs28  L., }{\i\fs28 Sp. Pl.}{\fs28  23 (1753). Up to 2 m, with erect, ascending or rarely procumbent, brown branches; aromatic. Leaves 15-40 \'d7 1\'b72-3\'b75 mm, linear, coriaceous, with revolute margins, bright green and rugulose above, white-tomentose beneath, sessile. Peduncle and pedicels stellate-tomentose; calyx 3-4 mm, green or purplish and sparsely tomentose when young, later 5-7 mm subglabrous and distinctly veined. Corolla 10-12 mm, pale blue (rarely pink or white). Nutlets brown.  2n = 24. }{\i\fs28  Dry scrub. Mediterranean region, extending to Portugal and N.W. Spain; cultivated elsewhere for ornament or for its aromatic oil.}{\fs28 . Bl Co *Cr Ga Gr Hs It Ju Lu Sa Si [Al Az Su He Rs (K)].
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 2. R. eriocalix}{\fs28  Jordan & Fourr.,}{\i\fs28  Brev. Pl. Nov.}{\b\fs28  1}{\fs28 : 44 (1866) (}{\i\fs28 R. tournefortii}{\fs28  De No\'eb ex Turrill; incl. }{\i\fs28 R. tomentosus}{\fs28  Huber Morath & Maire). Like }{\b\fs28 1}{\fs28  but usually procumbent; branches grey; leaves 5-15 \'d7 1-2 mm, glabrous and green or greyish-tomentose; indumentum on peduncle, pedicels and calyx with both stellate and long, simple, glandular hairs. }{\i\fs28 Calcareous rocks. S. Spain.}{\fs28  Hs. (}{\i\fs28 N. Africa}{\fs28 .)
\par 
\par  Variable in leaf-indumentum. Coastal plants tend to be densely stellate-tomentose while mountain plants are glabrous.
\par 
\par }
\pard \qc\ {\b\fs28 38.             Lavandula}{\fs28              L.
\par }{\fs24 By E. Guinea.
\par 
\par }
\pard \ {\fs28 Small shrubs. Verticillasters in lax or crowded spikes; bracts differing distinctly from the leaves. Calyx (8-)13(-15)-veined, the teeth small, subequal; uppermost tooth usually with a cordate to obovate appendage at the apex. Corolla 2-lipped, usually pale purple to blue-violet; upper lip 2-lobed; lower lip 3-lobed, the lobes equal.
\par 
\par All species occur in dry, usually sunny habitats.
\par 
\par  Literature: D. A. Chaytor,}{\i\fs28  Jour. Linn. Soc. London }{\fs28 (}{\i\fs28 Bot.}{\fs28 )}{\b\fs28  51}{\fs28 : 153-204 (1937). A. Rozeira,}{\i\fs28  Broteria}{\fs28  (}{\i\fs28 Ser. Ci. Nat.}{\fs28 ) }{\b\fs28 18}{\fs28 : 5-84 (1949).
\par 
\par }
\pard \li200\ {\fs28 1 Leaves toothed to 2-pinnatisect
\par 2 Leaves crenate-dentate to pectinate-pinnatifid; flowers
\par   6-10 in each verticillaster ................................................................ }{\b\fs28 3. dentata}{\fs28 
\par 2 Leaves mostly 2-pinnatisect; flowers 2 in each verticillaster ..... }{\b\fs28 7. multifida}{\fs28 
\par 1 Leaves entire
\par 3 Upper bracts oblong-obovate, much longer than the flowers  
\par   and the other bracts, and without flowers in their axils
\par 4 Upper bracts white or purple; leaves tomentose .......................... }{\b\fs28 1. stoechas}{\fs28 
\par 4 Upper bracts green; leaves shortly hirsute ....................................... }{\b\fs28 2. viridis}{\fs28 
\par 3 All bracts similar, not longer than the flowers and all
\par   with flowers in their axils
\par 5 Bracts ovate-rhombic, cuspidate or acuminate,
\par   bracteoles minute or absent ...................................................... }{\b\fs28 4. angustifolia}{\fs28 
\par 5 Bracts linear or lanceolate; bracteoles 2-5 mm, linear 
\par   or setaceous
\par 6 Leaves very shortly and densely white-tomentose when young,
\par   grey-green and less densely tomentose when mature;
\par   calyx 13-veined .............................................................................. }{\b\fs28 5. latifolia}{\fs28 
\par 6 Leaves densely and persistently white-lanate-tomentose;
\par   calyx 8-veined ................................................................................... }{\b\fs28 6. lanata}{\fs28 
\par 
\par }
\pard \ {\fs28    }{\b\fs28 1. L. stoechas}{\fs28  L., }{\i\fs28 Sp. Pl.}{\fs28  573 (1753). Shrub up to 100 cm, tomentose. Leaves 10-40 mm, linear to oblong-lanceolate, entire, usually grey-tomentose. Spike usually 2-3 cm; fertile bracts 4-8 mm, rhombic-cordate, tomentose; upper bracts 10-50 mm, oblong-obovate, usually purple, without flowers in their axils; verticillasters 6- to 10-flowered. Calyx 4-6 mm, 13-veined, the upper tooth with an obcordate appendage at the apex 1-1\'b75 mm wide. Corolla 6-8 mm, usually dark purple. 2n = 30.}{\i\fs28  Mediterranean region, Portugal.}{\fs28  Bl Co Cr Ga Gr Hs It Lu Sa Si Tu.
\par 
\par }
\pard \li200\ {\fs28 1 Peduncle shorter than spike ............................................. (}{\b\fs28 a}{\fs28 ) subsp. }{\b\fs28 stoechas}{\fs28  
\par 1 Peduncle longer than spike
\par 2 Calyx-appendage lobed ................................................... (}{\b\fs28 f}{\fs28 ) subsp. }{\b\fs28 cariensis}{\fs28 
\par 2 Calyx-appendage entire or nearly so
\par 3 Lower bracts exceeding the calyx, contiguous .......... (}{\b\fs28 b}{\fs28 ) subsp. }{\b\fs28 pedunculata}{\fs28 
\par 3 Lower bracts not exceeding the calyx, not contiguous
\par 4 Spike not more than twice as long as wide .................... (}{\b\fs28 c}{\fs28 ) subsp. }{\b\fs28 lusitanica}{\fs28 
\par 4 Spike more than twice as long as wide
\par 5 Lower bracts shorter than calyx, \'b1 acute ............................ (}{\b\fs28 d}{\fs28 ) subsp. }{\b\fs28 luisieri}{\fs28 
\par 5 Lower bracts \'b1 equalling the calyx, acute or obtuse,
\par   linear-elliptical ............................................................... (}{\b\fs28 e}{\fs28 ) subsp. }{\b\fs28 sampaiana}{\fs28 
\par 
\par }
\pard \ {\fs28   (}{\b\fs28 a}{\fs28 ) Subsp. }{\b\fs28 stoechas}{\fs28  : Peduncle shorter than spike; lower bracts acute.}{\i\fs28  From N.E. Spain eastwards to Greece}{\fs28 .
\par   (}{\b\fs28 b}{\fs28 ) Subsp. }{\b\fs28 pedunculata}{\fs28   (Miller) Samp. ex Rozeira,}{\i\fs28  Broteria}{\fs28  (}{\i\fs28 Ser. Ci. Nat.}{\fs28 )}{\b\fs28  18}{\fs28 : 72 (1949): Peduncle longer than spike; lower bracts exceeding the calyx, contiguous; calyx-appendage entire or nearly so. \bullet }{\i\fs28  C. Spain; mountains of N.E. Portugal}{\fs28 .
\par   (}{\b\fs28 c}{\fs28 ) Subsp. }{\b\fs28 lusitanica}{\fs28   (Chaytor) Rozeira, }{\i\fs28 Agron. Lusit.}{\b\fs28  24}{\fs28 : 173 (1964): Peduncle longer than spike; spike not more than twice as long as wide; lower bracts not exceeding calyx, not contiguous; calyx-appendage entire or nearly so.}{\i\fs28  Sandy soils. \bullet  C. & S. Portugal}{\fs28 .
\par   (}{\b\fs28 d}{\fs28 ) Subsp. }{\b\fs28 luisieri}{\fs28   (Rozeira) Rozeira,}{\i\fs28  loc. cit.}{\fs28  173 (1964): Peduncle longer than spike; spike more than twice as long as wide; lower bracts shorter than the calyx, more or less deltate, acute, not contiguous; calyx-appendage entire or nearly so.}{\i\fs28  On schistose, loamy soils. \bullet  C. & S. Portugal}{\fs28 .
\par   (}{\b\fs28 e}{\fs28 ) Subsp. }{\b\fs28 sampaiana}{\fs28   Rozeira,}{\i\fs28  Brot\'e9ria}{\fs28  (}{\i\fs28 Ser. Ci. Nat.}{\fs28 ) }{\b\fs28 18}{\fs28 : 70 (1949): Like subsp. (}{\b\fs28 d}{\fs28 ) but lower bracts about equalling the calyx, linear-elliptical, sometimes obtuse.}{\i\fs28  Mainly on granite soils. \bullet  W. Spain, N. & C. Portugal}{\fs28 .
\par   (}{\b\fs28 f}{\fs28 ) Subsp. }{\b\fs28 cariensis}{\fs28   (Boiss.) Rozeira, }{\i\fs28 loc. cit.}{\fs28  (1949) (}{\i\fs28 L. cariensis}{\fs28  Boiss.): Peduncle longer than spike; calyx-appendage lobed.}{\i\fs28  Turkey-in-Europe}{\fs28  (}{\i\fs28 N. of Istanbul}{\fs28 ). (}{\i\fs28 W. Anatolia}{\fs28 .)
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 2. L. viridis}{\fs28  L'H\'e9r.,}{\i\fs28  Sert. Angl.}{\fs28  19 (1789). Like }{\b\fs28 1}{\fs28  but stem and leaves shortly hirsute; peduncle as long as or longer than spike; upper bracts 8-20 mm, light green; calyx-appendage
\par 
\par 187}
\par }