{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28  Usually sterile, but occasionally producing a few viable seeds which give rise to segregating progeny. Frequently confused with{\b  7}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 9. M. aquatica} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 576 (1753) ({\i M. hirsuta }Hudson). Subglabrous to tomentose, often purplish perennial (10-)20-90 cm, with strong scent. Leaves (15-)30-90 × (10-)15-40 mm, ovate to ovate-lanceolate, usually truncate at base, petiolate, serrate. Inflorescence of 2-3 congested verticillasters with inconspicuous bracts, forming a terminal head up to 2 cm in diameter, sometimes with 1-3 distant verticillasters below, in the axils of leaf-like bracts. Calyx (2·5-)3-4 mm, tubular, the veins distinct; teeth subulate or narrowly triangular. Pedicels hairy. Corolla lilac. Nutlets pale brown. 2n = 96.{\i  Europe except the extreme north.} All except Rs (N) Sb but only as a naturalized alien in Is.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Very variable in habit, leaf-shape and indumentum. Many infraspecific taxa have been recognized, at least some of which retain their characters in cultivation.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 10. M}. × {\b piperita} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 576 (1753) ({\i M. nigricans} Miller) ({\i M. aquatica} × {\i spicata}). Perennial 30-90 cm, with a pungent scent, usually subglabrous but occasionally hairy to grey-tomentose, often purple-tinged. Leaves 40-80(-90) × 15-40 mm, ovate-lanceolate or lanceolate, rarely ovate, cuneate to subcordate and long-petiolate, usually serrate. Inflorescence usually of numerous congested verticillasters with inconspicuous bracts forming a terminal, oblong spike (30-)50-80 × 12-18 mm, often interrupted below, rarely a narrow elongate spike or subglobose head. Calyx 3-4 mm, tubular, the tube usually glabrous; teeth ciliate. Pedicels usually glabrous. Corolla lilac-pink. Sterile. 2n = 66, 72. {\i Widespread as a garden escape and also spontaneous.} [Au Az Be Bl Br Bu Cz Da Ga Ge Gr Hb He Ho Hs Hu It Ju Lu Po Rm Rs (C, W, E) Si.]
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  The subglabrous plants were formerly widely cultivated and have escaped to become well naturalized in many areas. They are usually easy to recognize. Hairy plants may have arisen spontaneously where both parents occur. They are much more variable in shape of leaf and inflorescence, and in scent, and are readily confused with{\i  M.} ×{\i  dumetorum} (see below). Without field information and further cytological study the limits of the two are uncertain.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b  M}. × {\b piperita} nm. {\b citrata} (Ehrh.) Boivin, {\i Naturaliste Canad.}{\b  93}: 1061 (1966) ({\i M. odorata} Sole,{\i  M. adspersa} Moench), a sterile cultivar with 2n = 84, 120, is widely cultivated and occasionally naturalized. It has a strong scent resembling Eau de Cologne, glabrous or subglabrous ovate, subcordate leaves, and an inflorescence like that of {\b 9}, but smaller.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b  M}. × {\b maximilianea} F. W. Schultz,{\i  Pollichia}{\b  12}: 34 (1854) ({\i M. rodriguezii} Malinv.,{\i  M. suavis} Guss.,{\i  M. schultzii }Bout.) ({\i M. aquatica} × {\i suaveolens}), with 2n = 60, 72-78, 120, occurs occasionally in the vicinity of both parents, and is intermediate between them and usually sterile, although fertile back-crosses are reported. It has been confused with {\i M}. × {\i dumetorum} and {\b 10}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b  M}. × {\b tutinii} P. Silva in Palhinha, {\i Cat. Pl. Vasc. Acores} 103 (1966), from the Acores, which reputedly is {\b 10} × {\b 11}, appears to be a narrow-leaved variant of {\b 9} × {\b 11}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b  M}. × {\b dumetorum} Schultes, {\i Obs. Bot. }108 (1809) ({\i M. pubescens} auct., ? an Willd., {\i M. nepetoides} Lej., {\i M. ayassei} Malinv.,{\i  M. hirta} Willd.) ({\i M. aquatica} × {\i longifolia}), occurs in many places in the vicinity of its parents, but, owing to confusion with hairy variants of {\b 10}, its distribution and frequency are uncertain.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b  M}. ×{\b  pyramidalis} Ten.,{\i  Fl. Nap}{\b . 1},{\i  Prodr}.: 34 (1811) ({\i M. reverchonii} Briq.) ({\i M. aquatica} ×{\i  microphylla}), with 2n = c. 72, occurs in S. Italy and Kriti.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b 11-14}). {\b M. spicata }group. Leaves sessile or the lower very shortly petiolate. Flowers in slender spikes 5-15 mm in diameter. Nutlets red-brown to black, reticulate (except in glabrous variants of {\b 14}).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  In the key no attempt has been made to include the vast array of cultivated and wild hybrid variants; those involving{\i  M. spicata} are usually recognizable by their sterility. Among the most valuable characters are the indumentum on the lower surface of the leaves and the length of the fertile anthers and nutlets. Glabrous plants or those with the sweet scent of {\b 14} can unhesitatingly be referred to this species or one of its hybrids, although the absence of these characters is no positive indication to the contrary.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Stems and leaves glabrous or sparsely hairy ................................. {\b 14. spicata}
\par
1 Stem and leaves hairy
\par
2 Leaves not more than 45 mm, with numerous branched hairs beneath
\par
3 Leaves 20-40 mm wide, ovate-oblong to suborbicular,
\par
  obtuse, sometimes minutely apiculate, rarely subacute;
\par
  verticillasters crowded, except at base .................................... {\b 11. suaveolens}
\par
3 Leaves 5-20 mm wide, ovate to ovate-lanceolate, usually
\par
  acute; verticillasters distant ................................................... {\b 13. microphylla}
\par
2 Leaves (30-)50-90(-110) mm, branched hairs absent, or
\par
  if present usually few beneath
\par
4 Hairs all simple; leaves widest near the middle;
\par
  fertile anthers 0·28-0·38 mm ..................................................... {\b 12. longifolia}
\par
4 Some branched hairs usually present on the leaves beneath;  
\par
  leaves widest near the base; fertile anthers 0·38-0·52 mm ............ {\b 14. spicata}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 11. M. suaveolens} Ehrh., {\i Beitr. Naturk.}{\b  7}: 149 (1792) ({\i M. rotundifolia} auct., non (L.) Hudson,{\i  M. macrostachya} Ten., {\i M. insularis} Req.). Perennial 40-100 cm, with sickly sweet scent. Stem sparsely hairy to densely white-tomentose. Leaves (15-)30-45 × (10-)20-40 mm, sessile or very shortly petiolate, strongly rugose, ovate-oblong to suborbicular, obtuse, cuspidate or rarely acute, widest near the base, serrate, with 10-20 teeth, often apparently crenate due to the teeth being bent down towards the underside of the leaf, hairy above, usually grey- or white-tomentose to -lanate beneath, the hairs on the lower surface branched, with the basal cell 43-57 µm in diameter. Verticillasters many, usually congested, forming a terminal spike 40-90 × 5-10 mm, often interrupted below and usually branched. Calyx 1-2 mm, campanulate, hairy; teeth subequal. Pedicels hairy. Corolla whitish or pink. Fertile anthers 0·28-0·38 mm. Nutlets 0·57-0·75 mm. 2n = 24.{\i  S. & W. Europe, northwards to the Netherlands; cultivated as a pot-herb, and naturalized in N.& C.Europe.} *Al Az Be Bl Br Co Cr Ga Ge Gr He Ho Hs It Lu Sa Si *Tu [Au Cz Da Hb Ju Po Rm Su].
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Plants from mountains on some islands of the western part of the Mediterranean region have been described as {\b M. insularis} Req.,{\i  Gior. Bot. Ital.}{\b  2}: 111, 115 (1846). They are sparsely hairy, with ovate-oblong to ovate-lanceolate, shortly petiolate or sessile, often acute leaves with an undulate margin. These characters however occur sporadically in other populations, so that the plants seem insufficiently distinct to merit subspecific status. They have 2n = 24.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b  M}. × {\b rotundifolia} (L.) Hudson,{\i  Fl. Angl.} 221 (1762) ({\i M. niliaca} Juss. ex Jacq., {\i M. amaurophylla }Timb.-Lagr., {\i M. nouletiana} Timb.-Lagr., {\i M. timbalii} Rouy, {\i M. villosa} auct., non Hudson)
\par

\par
185}
\par