{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 upper teeth 1·5-2 mm, aristate, ciliate.{\i  E. part of Balkan peninsula.} Bu ?Gr Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b  T. conspersus} var.{\b  lycaonicus} Celak., {\i Flora} ({\i Regensb}.){\b  66}: 156 (1883) ({\i T. zygioides} var.{\i  lycaonicus} (Celak.) Ronniger), from the E. Aegean region, may represent a subspecies of {\b 44}. It differs in having leaves usually 10-12 × 1-1·5 mm, sparsely hairy, and calyx 3·5-4·5 mm, with upper teeth up to 1·2 mm. It has been recorded from Turkey-in-Europe (near Gelibolu), and intermediates are found in Bulgaria.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 45. T. pallasianus} H. Braun, {\i Österr. Bot. Zeitschr.}{\b  42}: 337 (1892). Stems erect to arcuate or procumbent, woody; creeping, non-flowering branches absent. Flowering stems up to 15 cm, with axillary leaf-clusters and shortly hairy all round. Leaves 9-20 mm, linear to lanceolate, sessile, glabrous, usually finely scabrid; midrib prominent. Inflorescence capitate. Bracts similar to the leaves, the inner sometimes ovate-lanceolate. Calyx 3·5-4·5 mm; tube campanulate to subcylindrical, hirsute; upper teeth c. 1 mm, usually not ciliate. Corolla pale pink.{\i  Sandy or clayey steppes. S. part of U.S.S.R.} Rs (C, W, E).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b pallasianus} : Leaves c. 1 mm wide, linear to narrowly spathulate, ciliate in lower half. Calyx purplish; upper teeth often with hyaline margins, the median up to 1 mm and usually exceeding the others.{\i  Throughout the range of the species.}
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b brachyodon}  (Borbas) Jalas, {\i Bot. Jour. Linn. Soc.}{\b  64}: 262 (1971) ({\i T. brachyodon} Borbás, {\i T. eltonicus} Klokov & Schost.; incl. {\i T. lanulosus} Klokov & Schost.): Leaves 2-3(-6) mm wide, lanceolate to elliptic-lanceolate, ciliate at base. Calyx greenish; upper teeth up to 0·7 mm, equal, as long as wide, the margins not hyaline.{\i  S.E. Russia and N.W. Kazakhstan}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b T. borysthenicus} Klokov & Schost., {\i Jour. Agr. Bot.} ({\i Kharkov}){\b  1}({\b 3}): 134 (1927), from sandy ground by the lower Dnepr in S. Ukraine, with a straggling habit, leaves c. 9 × 0·5 mm sometimes with recurved margins, and upper calyx-teeth not hyaline, may deserve recognition as a subspecies of {\b 45}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b T. ciliatissimus} Klokov in Kotov,{\i  Fl. RSS Ucr. }{\b 9}: 669 (1960), from similar habitats in S.W. Ukraine, has linear leaves ciliate to near the apex, and ciliate upper calyx-teeth. Its status is uncertain.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 46. T. herba-barona} Loisel.,{\i  Fl. Gall.} 360 (1807). Branches procumbent to ascending, woody; long, creeping, non-flowering branches absent. Flowering stems 5-10 cm, hairy all round. Leaves usually 6-9 × 2-4 mm, elliptical to rhombic-ovate, petiolate, acute, herbaceous, with flat to subrevolute margins, glabrous or puberulent, ciliate at base; veins indistinct. Inflorescence subcapitate, lax, sometimes with the lower verticillasters remote. Bracts similar to the leaves. Calyx 3-5 mm; upper teeth up to 1·5 mm, somewhat longer than wide, scabrid, not ciliate. Corolla up to 9 mm, pale purple. 2n = 56. •{\i  Corse, Sardegna.} Co Sa.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Variable in dimensions of leaf and calyx, and in indumentum.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 47. T. nitens} Lamotte,{\i  Prodr. Fl. Centr. Fr.}{\b  2}: 595 (1881). Like {\b 46} but leaves up to 12 mm, oblong-elliptical, not ciliate at base; inflorescence up to 10 cm, more lax. 2n = 28. •{\i  S. France. }Ga
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 48. T. willkommii} Ronniger, {\i Feddes Repert.}{\b  28}: 147 (1930). Woody at base, with long, slender, woody, arcuate to procumbent or creeping branches. Flowering stems 2-5 cm, pubescent all round. Leaves 5-7 × 2-3 mm, ovate to ovate-elliptical, glabrous, not ciliate at base; lateral veins somewhat indistinct. Flowers not forming a distinct inflorescence. Verticillasters 2- to 6-flowered, the cymes sometimes pedunculate; pedicels 1-2 mm. Bracts similar to the leaves. Calyx 4-5 mm; tube subcylindrical, about as long as lips, sparsely hairy; lips of about equal length; upper teeth c. 1 mm, lanceolate, not ciliate. Corolla 6-7 mm. •{\i  N.E. Spain.} Hs.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 49. T. richardii} Pers., {\i Syn. Pl.}{\b  2}: 130 (1806). Like {\b 48} but more robust; flowering stems 4-12 cm; leaves 7-12 × 3-6 mm, the lateral veins more distinct; inflorescence capitate; cymes 3 to many-flowered, pedunculate; calyx 4·5-6 mm; tube cylindrical, often longer than lips, the upper lip longer than the lower; upper teeth up to 1·5 mm; corolla 7-9 mm, purple. •{\i  Islas Baleares, Sicilia, W. Jugoslavia.} Bl Ju Si.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Calyx sparsely pubescent to subglabrous; margins of 
\par
  upper teeth without multicellular hairs .............................. ({\b a}) subsp. {\b richardii}
\par
1 Calyx hirsute; margins of upper teeth with multi-
\par
  cellular hairs
\par
2 Leaves more than twice as long as wide; calyx densely
\par
  stipitate-glandular ................................................................ ({\b b}) subsp. {\b nitidus}
\par
2 Leaves less than twice as long as wide; calyx not 
\par
  stipitate-glandular .......................................................... ({\b c}) subsp. {\b ebusitanus}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b richardii}  ({\i T. aureopunctatus} (G. Beck) K. Malý): 2n = 28.{\i  Islas Baleares} ({\i Mallorca}), {\i W. Jugoslavia} ({\i near Konjic}).
\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b nitidus}  (Guss.) Jalas,{\i  Bot. Jour. Linn. Soc.}{\b  64}: 264 (1971) ({\i T. nitidus} Guss.):{\i  W. Sicilia} ({\i Isola Marettimo}).
\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b c}) Subsp. {\b ebusitanus}  (Font Quer) Jalas,{\i  loc. cit.} (1971) ({\i T. richardii }var.{\i  ebusitanus }Font Quer):{\i  Islas Baleares} ({\i Ibiza}).
\par
 
\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 50. T. guberlinensis} Iljin, {\i Not. Syst.} ({\i Leningrad}) {\b 1}({\b 5}): 1 (1920) ({\i T. zheguliensis} Klokov & Schost.). Stems ascending to arcuate, woody; long, creeping, non-flowering branches absent. Flowering stems up to 15 cm, shortly hairy all round. Leaves mostly 8-12 × 2·5-3·5 mm, ovate-spathulate to elliptical, subobtuse, petiolate, sparsely glandular-punctate; veins distinct. Inflorescence densely capitate. Bracts similar to the leaves. Calyx 3·5-4·5 mm, the tube campanulate; upper teeth not ciliate. Corolla pale violet.{\i  S.E. Russia.} Rs ( ?C, E).
\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b   T. mugodzharicus} Klokov & Schost., {\i Bull. Jard. Bot. URSS}{\b  30}: 537 (1932), from E. Russia and W. Kazakhstan, with flowering stems 5-10 cm, and leaves 6-10 × 1·5-3 mm, elliptical to elliptic-lanceolate, subpetiolate, often with a recurved margin, is probably not specifically distinct from {\b 50}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b   T. bashkiriensis} Klokov & Schost.,{\i  op. cit. }533 (1932), from E. Russia (Baskirskaja A.S.S.R.), a smaller plant with flowering stems 3-6 cm, leaves 6-8 × 1·5-1·75 mm, oblanceolate to linear-spathulate, ciliate to about middle, and calyx 3·5 mm, with upper teeth up to 1 mm and lanceolate, is of uncertain status.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   The plant recorded from a single locality in Turkey-in-Europe (Büyükdere, N. of Istanbul) as{\i  T. punctatus} var.{\i  subisophyllus} (Borbás) Ronniger probably belongs to {\i T. sipyleus} Boiss., from Asia Minor.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 51. T. binervulatus} Klokov & Schost., {\i Zur. Inst. Bot. URSR}{\b  9}: 195 (1936). Plant with woody, slender, creeping stems with terminal inflorescences; flowering stems up to 8 cm, hirsute all round. Leaves 8-9 × 3-4 mm, elliptic-spathulate, sub-coriaceous, with a distinct, ciliate petiole and two pairs of distinct lateral veins, fusing in the upper part to form a marginal vein. Inflorescence capitate. Bracts similar to the leaves. Calyx 3·5-4 mm, greenish; upper teeth up to 1 mm, lanceolate, sparsely ciliate. Corolla pale lilac. •{\i  Foothills of S. Ural} ({\i E. of Ufa}). Rs (C).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 52. T. ocheus} Heldr. & Sart. ex Boiss., {\i Diagn. Pl. Or. Nov.}{\b  2}({\b 4}): 6 (1859) ({\i T. chaubardii} (Boiss. & Heldr. ex Reichenb. fil.)
\par

\par
180}
\par