{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28\qc {\b 34.              Lycopus}               L.
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc By P.W. Ball.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Perennial, odourless herbs with creeping rhizome. Verticillasters many-flowered, dense, distant. Calyx campanulate, 13-veined, with 5 equal teeth. Corolla-tube shorter than calyx, with 4 subequal lobes, the uppermost usually wider than others. Stamens 2, exceeding corolla; staminodes 0 or 2.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 Leaves pinnatifid or pinnatisect at base, toothed or shallowly  
\par
   lobed at apex; bracts 3-5 mm; calyx-teeth c. 2 mm, spiny;  
\par
   staminodes minute or absent ...................................................... {\b 1. europaeus}
\par
Leaves pinnatifid or pinnatisect to the apex; bracts 6-9 mm; 
\par
   calyx-teeth c. 1·5 mm, not spiny; staminodes conspicuous, 
\par
   capitate ......................................................................................... {\b 2. exaltatus}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. L. europaeus} L.,{\i  Sp. Pl.} 21 (1753) (incl. L.{\i  mollis} A. Kerner). Stems 20-120 cm, sparsely to densely hairy. Leaves 3-10(-15) × 1-5 cm, ovate-lanceolate or elliptical, pinnatifid or pinnatisect at base, shallowly lobed or coarsely toothed at apex; upper leaves and bracts sometimes undivided but coarsely toothed. Bracts 3-5 mm. Calyx 3·5-4·5 mm; teeth (1·6-)2·1(-2·5) mm, about twice as long as tube, spiny. Corolla c. 4 mm, white with a few small purple spots; staminodes minute or absent. 2n = 22.{\i  Wet places. Europe, northwards to} 63° 30' {\i N. in Fennoscandia. }All except Bl Cr Fa Is Sb.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  A variable species, in which subordinate taxa based on leaf shape and indumentum have been recognized. Plants with leaves usually lanceolate, lobed, usually 3½ times as long as wide, often glabrous or sparsely hairy (subsp. {\i europaeus}), occur throughout much of Europe. Plants from C. Europe often have leaves ovate, lobed, usually 2½ times as long as wide, grey-tomentose, and have been treated as subsp.{\b  mollis} (A. Kerner) Rothm. ex Skalický,{\i  Acta Mus. Nat. Pragae}{\b  24B}: 203 (1968), while those from the E. Mediterranean region and Balkan peninsula, often with leaves broadly ovate, crenate or crenate-lobed, as long as to twice as long as wide, more or less tomentose, have been recognized as subsp.{\b  menthifolius }(Mabille) Skalický, {\i op. cit.} 206 (1968).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. L. exaltatus} L. fil., {\i Suppl.} 87 (1781). Like {\b 1} but more robust, with stems 90-160 cm; leaves pinnatifid or pinnatisect to the apex; bracts 6-9 mm; calyx-teeth (1·3-)1·5(-2·0) mm, not spiny; staminodes conspicuous, capitate. {\i Wet places. C. & E. Europe, Italy.} Al Au Bu Cz Ge Gr Hu It Ju Po Rm Rs (C, W, K, E).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc {\b 35.              Mentha}               L.
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc By R.M. Harley.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Perennial (rarely annual) herbs with creeping rhizomes and scented foliage. Flowers hermaphrodite or female, on the same or different plants, usually in dense, many-flowered verticillasters, sometimes forming a long spike-like inflorescence or a terminal head. Calyx actinomorphic or weakly 2-lipped, tubular or campanulate, 10- to 13-veined, with 5(4) subequal or rarely unequal teeth. Corolla weakly 2-lipped, with 4 subequal lobes, the upper lobe wider and usually emarginate; tube shorter than the calyx. Stamens about equal, divergent or ascending under the upper lip of corolla, exserted (except in{\i  M. pulegium}, some hybrids and female flowers). Style-branches subequal. Nutlets smooth, reticulate or tuberculate.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  A taxonomically complex genus. In Sect.{\i  Mentha} identification is frequently difficult, since, in addition to much phenotypic plasticity and genetic variability, most of the species are capable of hybridization with each other. Hybrids are frequent in nature but can usually be recognized by their intermediate appearance and sterility, although fertile hybrid swarms occasionally occur. Several nothomorphs (nm., hybrid forms) in Sect.{\i  Mentha} are given taxonomic recognition in the account.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Species delimitation in the{\i  M. spicata} group is confused due to hybridization and chromosome doubling, with introgression occurring between some species in certain areas. The text includes most of the common variants, but the hybrids are too variable to be fully covered in a key.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  In the following account, measurements of leaves refer to those from the middle of the main stem, and of the calyx, to its size at anthesis.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  All species except {\b 3} occur in damp or wet habitats.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Literature: J. Briquet, {\i Les Labiées des Alpes Maritimes} 18-97. Genève & Bale. 1891. J. Fraser, {\i Rep. Bot. Exch. Club Brit. Is.}{\b  8}: 213-247 (1927). F. Petrak in K. H. Rechinger fil.,{\i  Flora Aegaea, in Denkschr. Akad. Wiss. Math.-Nat. Kl.}({\i Wien}){\b  105}({\b 1}): 541-548 (1943). N. Hylander,{\i  Bot. Not.}{\b  118}: 225-242 (1965).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Calyx-teeth 4; bracteoles digitately lobed ...................................... {\b 4. cervina}
\par
1 Calyx-teeth 5; bracteoles simple
\par
2 Calyx hairy in throat, with distinctly unequal teeth
\par
3 Stems filiform, procumbent and mat-forming; leaves 2-7 mm ... {\b 1. requienii}
\par
3 Stems not mat-forming, though sometimes procumbent;
\par
  leaves 8-30 mm
\par
4 Perennial; leaves hairy at least beneath; corolla 4-6 mm ........... {\b 2. pulegium}
\par
4 Annual; leaves glabrous; corolla not more than 3·5 mm ........... {\b 3. micrantha}
\par
2 Calyx glabrous in throat, with ± equal teeth
\par
5 Bracts like the leaves; inflorescence terminated by 
\par
  leaves, or by very small upper verticillasters
\par
6 Plant hairy, green, usually fertile; calyx 1·5-2·5 mm, broadly 
\par
  campanulate, the teeth deltate or broadly triangular ..................... {\b 5. arvensis}
\par
6 Plant glabrous or hairy, often tinged with red, usually
\par
  sterile; calyx 2-4 mm, narrowly campanulate or tubular,
\par
  the teeth narrowly triangular to subulate
\par
7 Calyx 2-3·5 mm, campanulate, the teeth rarely more than
\par
  1 mm; plant usually glabrous ...................................................... {\b 7}. × {\b gentilis}
\par
7 Calyx 3·5-4 mm, tubular, or, if shorter, the teeth 
\par
  usually 1-1·5 mm and plant distinctly hairy
\par
8 Plant subglabrous, with a sweet scent; upper bracts 
\par
  usually suborbicular, cuspidate ...............................................{\b  8}. ×{\b  smithiana}
\par
8 Plant distinctly hairy, with a sickly scent; upper
\par
  bracts ovate to ovate-lanceolate, not cuspidate ...................... {\b 6}. × {\b verticillata} 
\par
5 Bracts mostly small and inconspicuous, unlike the leaves;  
\par
  flowers in terminal spikes or heads
\par
9 Leaves sessile (the lower rarely shortly petiolate);
\par
  flowers in a spike 5-15 mm in diameter ...................... ({\b 11-14}). {\b spicata }group 
\par
9 Leaves distinctly petiolate; flowers in a head or 
\par
  oblong spike 12-20 mm in diameter
\par
10 Flowers in an oblong spike; leaves usually lanceolate;
\par
   plant sterile ............................................................................... {\b 10.} × {\b piperita}
\par
10 Flowers in a head, sometimes with one to three verti-
\par
   cillasters below; leaves usually ovate
\par
11 Leaves and calyx-tube hairy; plant fertile ...................................... {\b 9. aquatica}
\par
11 Leaves and calyx-tube glabrous or subglabrous; plant
\par
   sterile ........................................................................................ {\b 10}. × {\b piperita}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Sect. AUDIBERTIA (Bentham) Briq. Bracts like the leaves. Verticillasters 2- to 6-flowered. Calyx turbinate-campanulate, weakly 2-lipped; throat hairy within. Corolla-tube straight.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. M. requienii} Bentham,{\i  Lab. Gen. Sp.} 182 (1833). Glabrous or sparsely hairy perennial 3-12 cm, with pungent scent; stems
\par

\par
183}
\par