{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\i M. longifolia} × {\i suaveolens}), with 2n = 24, is extremely variable, showing a wide range of characters intermediate between the parents. It is a frequent and highly fertile hybrid which can form introgressive swarms where its parents grow together. It is very rarely found in cultivation but often persists in the absence of the parents. It is frequently confused with{\i  M.} × {\i villosa}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b  M.} × {\b villosa} Hudson, {\i Fl. Angl.} ed. 2, 250 (1778) ({\i M. cordifolia} auct., ? an Opiz, {\i M. gratissima} Weber,{\i  M. lamyi} Malinv., {\i M. mosoniensis} H. Braun,{\i  M. nemorosa} Willd.,{\i  M. niliaca} auct., non Juss. ex Jacq.,{\i  M. scotica} R. A. Graham) ({\i M. spicata} ×{\i  suaveolens}), a highly sterile hybrid with 2n = 36, is widely naturalized and also probably often arises spontaneously. It is morphologically extremely diverse, both hairy and glabrous plants being frequent, these ranging from plants almost indistinguishable from {\b 14} to others very similar to {\b 11}. Many of these have been given taxonomic recognition and some have spread clonally to become locally common.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b  M}. × {\b villosa} Hudson nm. alopecuroides (Hull) ({\i M. alopecuroides} Hull, {\i M. velutina} Lej.), with 2n = 36, is often confused with {\b 11}, but it is more robust, 60-140 cm, and has a sweet scent like {\b 14}; middle cauline leaves 40-80 × 30-60 mm, broadly ovate or orbicular, softly hairy, the margin with patent teeth; verticillasters forming a robust spike 10-12 mm wide; calyx 2 mm; corolla pink. It was formerly much cultivated and is widely naturalized in W. Europe.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 12. M. longifolia} (L.) Hudson, {\i Fl. Angl.} 221 (1762) ({\i M. sylvestris} L.,{\i  M. incana }Willd.). Perennial 40-120 cm, with a musty scent. Stem white- or grey-villous, sometimes sparsely hairy. Leaves (40-)50-90(-110) × (10-)20-40 mm, sessile or very shortly petiolate, smooth or slightly rugose near the base, usually oblong-elliptical, acute, serrate with usually irregular, patent teeth, green to grey-tomentose above, grey- or white-villous beneath; hairs simple, with the basal cell 18-33 µm in diameter. Verticillasters many, usually congested, forming a terminal, usually branched spike 40-100 × (9-)10-15 mm. Calyx (1-)1·5-3 mm, narrowly campanulate, hairy; teeth subequal. Pedicels hairy. Corolla lilac or white. Fertile anthers 0·28-0·38 mm. Nutlets 0·54-0·79 mm. 2n = 24.{\i  Most of Europe, from S. Sweden and N.C. Russia southwards.} Al Au Be Bu Cr Cz Ga Ge Gr He Hs Hu It Ju Lu Po Rm Rs (B, C, W, K, E) Si Su Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Extremely variable in height, leaf-size and -shape, indumentum and inflorescence, and complicated by the occurrence of hybrids. There is clinal variation from west to east with reduction in size of leaves and calyx. Plants from Austria and eastwards with narrow leaves, narrow interrupted spikes and smaller calyx have been described as{\b  M. longifolia} subsp. {\b grisella} (Briq.) Briq. in Engler & Prantl,{\i  Natürl. Pflanzenfam.}{\b  4}({\b 3a}): 322 (1897). These, however, grade imperceptibly into {\b 13}, with which there appears to have been very extensive hybridization. As a result, many populations, especially from Hungary, and to a lesser extent from the Balkan peninsula and S. Italy, are extremely complex.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 The distribution in W. Europe is partly obscured owing to confusion with hairy plants of {\b 14}, to which all records of {\b 12} from N.W. Europe appear to be referable.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 13. M. microphylla} C. Koch,{\i  Linnaea}{\b  21}: 648 (1849) ({\i M. sieberi} auct., ? an C. Koch). Like {\b 12} but with leaves 10-45 × 5-20(-25) mm, broadly ovate to lanceolate, widest below the middle, strongly rugose, tomentose and grey or grey-green on both surfaces, serrate with usually few salient teeth, undulate, the hairs on the lower surface both simple and branched with the basal cell 44-63 µm in diameter; verticillasters usually remote, forming a little-branched spike 60-120 × 5-10 mm; calyx 1-2 mm; fertile anthers 0·30-0·44 mm; nutlets 0·6-0·83 mm. 2n = 48.{\i  S. Italy, Sicilia; Balkan peninsula and Aegean region.} Al Bu Cr Gr It Ju ?Sa Si Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Apparently an allotetraploid originally derived from {\b 11} and {\b 12}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 14. M. spicata} L.,{\i  Sp. Pl. }576 (1753) ({\i M. viridis} (L.) L., {\i M. crispa} L., {\i M. crispata} Schrader,{\i  M. longifolia} auct., non (L.) Hudson, {\i M. sylvestris} auct., non L., {\i M. niliaca} auct., non Juss. ex Jacq.,{\i  M. cordifolia} auct., non Opiz). Perennial 30-100 cm, with strong, sweet scent, less frequently with pungent scent (as in {\b 10}) or musty. Leaves (30-)50-90 × (7-)15-30 mm, lanceolate or lanceolate-ovate, smooth or rugose (rarely 40-60 × 25-40 mm, ovate or ovate-oblong, strongly rugose), widest near the base, serrate with regular teeth (rarely the whole leaf strongly crispate), glabrous to densely hairy, the hairs on the lower surface both simple and branched, the basal cell 30-47 µm in diameter. Inflorescence variable. Calyx 1-3 mm, campanulate, glabrous or hairy; teeth subequal. Corolla lilac, pink or white. Fertile anthers 0·38-0·52 mm. Nutlets 0·74-0·94 mm, reticulate in hairy plants, smooth in glabrous plants. 2n = 48. {\i Widely cultivated as a pot-herb and for its aromatic oils, and naturalized throughout a large part of Europe}. [Al Au Az Be Bl Br Bu Cr Cz Da Ga Ge Gr Hb He Ho Hs Hu It Ju Lu No Po Rm Rs (W, K) Su Tu.]
\par

\pard\f0\fs28   The origin of this species is unknown, but it probably arose in cultivation. It behaves as a segmental allopolyploid derived by hybridization and chromosome doubling from {\b 11} and {\b 12}. It is propagated vegetatively in cultivation but often tends to segregate parental characters when selfed. This makes separation from its hybrids with {\b 11} and {\b 12} very difficult except on fertility criteria. Plants with broad, rugose, glabrous leaves from S.W. England and probably elsewhere have been known as{\i  M. cordifolia} auct., ? non Opiz ({\i M. suaveolens} × {\i spicata}) but are fertile tetraploids and should be referred to {\b 14}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Many records of {\b 12}, especially from lowland areas of Europe, are referable to {\b 14} (or to its hybrids with {\b 11} or {\b 12}). These hairy plants are best distinguished from {\b 12} by anther, nutlet and hair characters. Variants with crispate leaves occur in cultivation and this character can also be found in many hybrids of which M. spicata is a parent. Glabrous plants from Kriti and Turkey-in-Europe, similar to {\b 14} but with small anthers, may be diploids; their taxonomic status is not clear.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28   {\i M}. × {\i villosonervata} auct., ? an Opiz ({\i M. longifolia} × {\i spicata}) is probably widespread as an escape, but is much confused with {\i M}. × {\i villosa}. It differs mainly in its narrower, usually patently toothed leaves with branched hairs few or absent. It is sterile and has 2n = 38.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc {\b 36.               Perilla }              L.
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc By I.B.K. Richardson.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Annual. Flowers in pairs in a secund raceme. Calyx campanulate, 10-veined, with 5 subequal teeth in flower, 2-lipped in fruit. Corolla nearly actinomorphic, with 5 small lobes; tube shorter than calyx. Stamens subequal; anther-cells parallel, becoming divergent.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. P. frutescens} (L.) Britton, {\i Mem. Torrey Bot. Club}{\b  5}: 277 (1894) ({\i P. ocymoides} L.). Up to 1 m, pubescent. Leaves 4·5-8(-12) × 3-6(-7) cm, broadly ovate, deeply serrate-crenate, acuminate, cuneate at base, petiolate. Inflorescence 3-10 cm; floral leaves somewhat smaller than the foliage leaves. Calyx
\par

\par
186}
\par