{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 obtuse, cordate at base, glabrous to very sparsely pubescent; petiole 0·5-2 cm. Flowers solitary, rarely in clusters of 2-3; pedicels 10-15 mm, nodding. Calyx c. 5 mm, sparsely pubescent, with triangular teeth; fruiting calyx 15-25 × 10-18 mm, campanulate, 5-ribbed, with long, recurved, acuminate-cuspidate teeth. Corolla 8-15 mm, deeply lobed, greenish-yellow. Anthers c. 3 mm, lanceolate. Berry 7-8 mm in diameter, green.{\i  Roadsides and waste places. S. & E. Spain, Islas Baleares.} Bl Hs.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc {\b 7.             Physalis}              L.
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc By J.G. Hawkes.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Annual or perennial herbs. Leaves alternate, opposite or in whorls of 3, simple. Flowers solitary, axillary. Calyx campanulate, 5-dentate, accrescent. Corolla 5-lobed, rotate or broadly campanulate. Stamens 5, exserted, inserted near top of the short corolla-tube. Stigma capitate. Fruit a globose berry, surrounded and usually much exceeded by the inflated calyx; seeds suborbicular to reniform.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Literature: R. B. Fernandes,{\i  Bol. Soc. Brot.}{\b  44}: 343-366 (1970). S. J. Van Ooststroom & T. J. Reichgelt,{\i  Gorteria}{\b  1}: 65-71 (1962). U. T. Waterfall,{\i  Rhodora}{\b  60}: 107-114, 128-142, 152-173 (1958); {\b 69}: 82-120, 203-239, 319-329 (1967).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Corolla dirty white, rotate, the limb distinctly 
\par
  5-lobed; fruiting calyx orange or red .......................................... {\b 1. alkekengi}
\par
1 Corolla yellow, usually with greyish, purple or brownish marks
\par
  at throat, broadly campanulate, the limb subentire; fruiting  
\par
  calyx green or yellowish-green
\par
2 Plant subglabrous or with a few short hairs on younger
\par
  parts only ............................................................................... {\b 4. philadelphica}
\par
2 Plant with dense indumentum
\par
3 Leaves acuminate; anthers 3·5-4 mm ........................................ {\b 2. peruviana}
\par
3 Leaves acute; anthers 1-2 mm ................................................... {\b 3. pubescens}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. P. alkekengi} L.,{\i  Sp. Pl.} 183 (1753). Perennial, with horizontal rhizome; stem 25-60(-100) cm, erect, simple or branched above. Leaves 4-15 × 2-8 cm, broadly ovate, slightly acuminate, truncate to broadly cuneate at base, entire to sinuate or with a few coarse teeth, sparsely pubescent; petiole 1·5-6 cm. Pedicels 5-15 mm. Calyx 5-18 mm, tomentose; teeth c. 1/3 total length, attenuate; fruiting calyx 25-50 mm, inflated, red to orange. Corolla 15-25 mm in diameter, rotate, distinctly 5-lobed, dirty white. Anthers 2 mm. Berry 12-17 mm, red to orange. 2n = 24.{\i  Europe, northwards to N. France and C. Russia, but doubtfully native in the northern and western parts of this range.} Al Au †Be Bu *Co Cz *Ga Ge Gr He *Hs Hu It Ju Po Rm Rs (C, W, K, E) Tu [Br Ho].
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. P. peruviana} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} ed. 2, 1670 (1763). Perennial, with dense indumentum; stem 30-100 cm, simple or branched above. Leaves (5-)7-11(-15) × 4-7(-9) cm, broadly ovate, acuminate, cordate at base, entire or slightly dentate; petiole 1-4 cm. Pedicels 7 mm. Calyx 8-9 mm; teeth ½ total length, acuminate; fruiting calyx 30-50 mm, green, pubescent. Corolla 15-25 mm in diameter, subentire, yellow with dark purple markings. Anthers 3·5-4 mm, purple; filaments purple. Berry 12-20 mm, yellow.{\i  Cultivated for its edible fruits and locally naturalized in C. & S. Europe.} [Au Az Cz Hs It.] ({\i South America.})
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 3. P. pubescens} L.,{\i  Sp. Pl.} 183 (1753). Annual, usually softly villous, sometimes glandular-viscid; stem 10-90 cm, erect, branched. Leaves (4-)7-11(-15) × (2-)4-7(-9) cm, broadly ovate, acute, truncate to cordate at base, usually dentate, the teeth acute, unequal; petiole 2-7 cm. Pedicels 3-5 mm. Calyx 4-10 mm; teeth c. ½ total length, narrowly lanceolate; fruiting calyx 20-30 mm, 5-angled, green, softly pubescent. Corolla 10-15 mm in diameter, subentire, yellow with dark purple markings at throat. Anthers 1-2 mm, purple; filaments 3-5 mm. Berry 10-15(-20) mm, yellow or green, sweet-scented.{\i  Cultivated for its edible fruits in Ukraine, and on a small scale elsewhere, and locally naturalized.} [?Al ?Hu It Rm Rs (C, W).] ({\i North and South America}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 4. P. philadelphica} Lam.,{\i  Encycl. Méth. Bot.}{\b  2}: 101 (1786). Annual, subglabrous but with a few short hairs on young shoots, leaves and calyces; stem 45-60 cm, erect, branched. Leaves 2-10 × 1-4 cm, ovate to ovate-lanceolate, somewhat acuminate, cuneate at base, entire or sinuate to somewhat dentate towards the base; petiole (1-)2-5 cm. Pedicels 5-10 mm. Calyx 4- 10 mm; teeth 1/3-1/2 total length, ovate; fruiting calyx 30-50 mm, green, often purple-veined. Corolla 5-30 mm in diameter, subentire, yellow, with brownish-purple markings at throat. Anthers c. 1·25-4 mm, purple, curved after dehiscence; filaments purple. Berry 13-40(-60) mm, green to purple, filling and sometimes splitting calyx. 2n = 24.{\i  Cultivated for its edible fruits in Ukraine, and locally naturalized there and elsewhere.} [ ?Cz Lu Rs (C, W).] ({\i North and South America}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  There is still some doubt as to whether the cultivated European and American plants, formerly called{\b  P. ixocarpa} Brot. ex Hornem., {\i Hort. Hafn., Suppl}. 26 (1819), are identical. In addition, Fernandes ({\i loc. cit.}) has distinguished the Portuguese plants with small flowers and fruits as{\i  P. ixocarpa} in contrast to the cultivated plants with large flowers and fruits.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b  P. angulata} L.,{\i  Sp. Pl.} 183 (1753), from Tropical America, which can be distinguished from {\b 4} by the shorter anthers (1·5-2 mm) which are not curved after dehiscence, and the smaller, yellowish-green berry 10-12 mm, is also cultivated locally for its edible fruits and is found as an occasional casual.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc {\b 8.             Salpichroa}              Miers
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc By J.G. Hawkes.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Scrambling, much-branched perennial herbs, with leaf-opposed branches. Leaves alternate or opposite, simple. Flowers solitary, axillary. Calyx 5-lobed. Corolla urceolate, with 5 deflexed lobes. Stamens 5, equal, somewhat exserted, inserted in corolla-tube; anthers dorsifixed. Ovary with nectary at base; style hairy below; stigma capitate. Fruit a berry; seeds strongly compressed.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. S. origanifolia} (Lam.) Baillon, {\i Hist. Pl.}{\b  9}: 288 (1888). Stems flexuous, angled, pubescent, woody below. Leaves 1·5-2·5(-5) × 1-2(-4) cm, ovate-rhombic to suborbicular, entire, sparsely pubescent, narrowed into petiole of equal length. Pedicels nodding. Calyx 3-4 mm, divided almost to base; lobes subulate. Corolla 6-10 mm, whitish, densely lanate below insertion of stamens. Berry 1-1·5 cm, ovoid, creamy-white, edible; seeds 1·5-2 mm, hairy.{\i  Locally naturalized in S. & S.W. Europe.} [Az Br Co Ga Hs It Lu.] ({\i E. temperate South America}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc {\b 9.             Capsicum}                L.
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc By J.G. Hawkes.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Annual or biennial herbs or shrubs. Leaves alternate, in pairs or groups of 3, simple. Flowers solitary, in pairs or in groups of 3, axillary, extra-axillary or leaf-opposed. Calyx campanulate or tubular, 5(-6)-dentate, fleshy, slightly accrescent. Corolla rotate, with stellate, 5(-6)-lobed limb. Stamens 5(-6), exserted, inserted at top of corolla-tube; anthers connivent. Ovary 2- to 3-locular; stigma capitate. Fruit a rather dry berry, inflated, incompletely 2- to 3-locular; seeds subreniform, compressed.
\par

\par
196}
\par