{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28  Literature: A. Terpó,{\i  Feddes Repert. }{\b 72}: 155-191 (1966). C. B. Heiser & B. Pickersgill, {\i Taxon}{\b  18}: 277-283 (1969). C. B. Heiser & P. G. Smith, {\i Econ. Bot.}{\b  7}: 214-227 (1953).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. C. annuum} L.,{\i  Sp. Pl.} 188 (1753). Annual or biennial herb 20-50(-100) cm. Leaves ovate to lanceolate, entire, glabrous; petiole 4-16 cm. Flowers solitary, rarely in pairs. Calyx campanulate. Corolla white, rarely purple, with whitish, green or violet blotches. Anthers ovate-lanceolate. Berry 5-15 cm, very variable in shape, usually red, often orange, yellow, green, brownish-purple or black. {\i Widely cultivated as a vegetable and condiment and occasionally occurring as a casual, especially in S., E.C. & E. Europe.} ({\i Tropical America}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b C. frutescens} L.,{\i  Sp. Pl.} 189 (1753), from Tropical America, is occasionally cultivated in S.W. Europe. It is a shrub 35-115 cm, which also differs from {\b 1} in having elliptical leaves, the flowers in pairs or groups of 3, a tubular calyx and greenish-white corolla.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b  C. baccatum} L. var. {\b pendulum} (Willd.) Eshbaugh,{\i  Taxon }{\b 17}: 52 (1968) is cultivated in parts of Germany, Italy and the U.S.S.R. It differs from {\b 1} by the yellow blotches at the base of the petals and the deeply bifurcate base of the anthers.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc {\b 10.           Solanum}              L.      
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc By J.G. Hawkes & J.M. Edmonds.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Herbs or shrubs, sometimes scrambling or climbing, usually hairy, often with prickles. Leaves alternate or in pairs, simple to pinnate. Inflorescence axillary, extra-axillary or leaf-opposed, of 1 or more helicoid cymes usually becoming scorpioid, sometimes of cymose umbels, rarely reduced to a single flower. Calyx campanulate, usually 5-fid. Corolla rotate; limb orbicular or pentagonal to stellate, often recurved. Stamens exserted, inserted in throat of corolla-tube; anthers usually connivent, in a cylindrical to ovoid or conical column, dehiscing by 2 terminal pores, later splitting introrsely. Stigma capitate. Fruit a succulent to dry berry, 2- to 4-locular; seeds small, ovoid, compressed.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Indumentum of stellate or branched hairs
\par
2 Stems and leaves with many conspicuous prickles
\par
3 Corolla yellow; lower stamen much longer than the others .... {\b 14. cornutum}
\par
3 Corolla purple, blue or white; stamens equal ........................ {\b 12. sodomeum}
\par
2 Stems and leaves with few, inconspicuous prickles, or 
\par
  prickles absent
\par
4 Petioles with prominent, auricular false stipules at base .... {\b 13. mauritianum}
\par
4 Petioles without false stipules
\par
5 Leaves linear- to oblong-lanceolate, densely stellate-hairy 
\par
  above ................................................................................. {\b 15. elaeagnifolium}
\par
5 Leaves ovate to lanceolate, sparsely stellate-pubescent above
\par
6 Corolla white or pale blue; berry not more than 10 mm,
\par
   yellow ..................................................................................... {\b 11. bonariense}
\par
6 Corolla purplish to violet; berry at least 50 mm, dark
\par
  purple to blackish-violet (rarely whitish or yellow) ................ {\b 10. melongena}
\par
1 Indumentum of simple, sometimes glandular hairs, or absent
\par
7 Plant glabrous or subglabrous
\par
8 Leaves (5-)10-15(-20) cm, often laciniate; corolla 
\par
  orbicular, purple, appearing 10-lobed ........................................ {\b 9. laciniatum}
\par
8 Leaves not more than 10 cm, entire; corolla stellate,
\par
  white, 5-lobed ................................................................... {\b 6. pseudocapsicum}
\par
7 Plant with simple, sometimes glandular hairs
\par
9 Leaves interruptedly imparipinnate; underground stolons
\par
  and tubers present ...................................................................... {\b 8. tuberosum}
\par
9 Leaves entire to deeply pinnatisect or imparipinnate;
\par
  stolons and tubers absent
\par
10 Scrambling perennial, woody at base; cymes much-branched, 
\par
   usually with at least 10 flowers; corolla usually dark purple .... {\b 7. dulcamara}
\par
10 Decumbent to erect annual or perennial, sometimes slightly woody; 
\par
   cymes usually unbranched, 2- to 10-flowered; corolla usually white
\par
11 Leaves deeply pinnatisect, with ± linear lobes ......................... {\b 5. triflorum}
\par
11 Leaves entire or sinuate-dentate
\par
12 Calyx strongly accrescent, enclosing at least lower 
\par
   half of berry; berry with stone-cells ...................................... {\b 4. sarrachoides}
\par
12 Calyx slightly accrescent, deflexed or adhering to 
\par
   base of berry; berry usually without stone-cells
\par
13 Cymes 3- to 5-flowered; peduncles (4-)7-13(-19) mm;
\par
   berry usually longer than wide, red, orange or yellow ................... {\b 3. luteum}
\par
13 Cymes (3-)5- to 10-flowered; peduncles (10-)14-30 mm;
\par
   berry globose or wider than long, purple, black or green
\par
14 Peduncle strongly deflexed in fruit; berry purple ................. {\b 2. sublobatum}
\par
14 Peduncle usually erecto-patent in fruit; berry black or green ...... {\b 1. nigrum}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. S. nigrum} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 186 (1753). Subglabrous to villous annual up to 70 cm, with simple hairs; stems decumbent to erect. Leaves 2·5-7 × 2-4·5(-6) cm, ovate-rhombic to lanceolate, entire to sinuate-dentate. Cymes (3-)5- to 10-flowered, lax, solitary; peduncles (10-)14-30 mm, usually erecto-patent in fruit, the pedicels usually much shorter, recurved in fruit. Calyx 1-2·5 mm, slightly accrescent, deflexed or adhering to base of berry; lobes usually ovate. Corolla (8-)10-14(-18) mm in diameter, usually 1½-3 times as long as calyx, white. Anthers 1·5-2·5 mm, yellow. Berry 6-10 mm wide, usually wider than long, dull black or green; seeds 1·7-2·4 mm.{\i  Disturbed and cultivated ground. Most of Europe, but doubtfully native in much of the north.} All except Fa Is Sb.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b nigrum}  ({\i S. dillenii} Schultes, {\i S. judaicum} Besser,{\i  S. suffruticosum} Schousboe ex Willd.): Plant subglabrous to pubescent, the hairs usually appressed, eglandular. 2n = 72.{\i  Throughout the range of the species}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b schultesii}  (Opiz) Wessely,{\i  Feddes Repert.}{\b  63}: 311 (1960) ({\i S. decipiens} Opiz): Plant villous, the hairs usually patent, glandular. 2n = 72.{\i  Drier parts of C., S. & E. Europe}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b  S. melanocerasum} All.,{\i  Auct. Syn. Stirp. Horti Taur.} 12 (1773), distinguished from {\b 1} by the prominently and dentately winged stems, brown anthers and berry 15-17 mm in diameter, occasionally escapes from cultivation and is a casual in Belgium, England, Germany and Sweden.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b  S. americanum} Miller,{\i  Gard. Dict.} ed. 8, no. 5 (1768) ({\i S. nodiflorum} Jacq.), distinguished from {\b 1} by its more or less umbellate cymes, corolla 5-9 mm in diameter, erect fruiting pedicels, globose, shiny black berry and seeds 1-1·5 mm, and with 2n = 24, is a rare casual in parts of W., C. & S. Europe.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. S. sublobatum} Willd. ex Roemer & Schultes, {\i Syst. Veg.}{\b  4}: 664 (1819) ({\i S. gracile} Dunal, non Sendtner). Like {\b 1} but often perennial; cymes umbellate; peduncle strongly deflexed in fruit; berry ovoid, dull purple. 2n = 24.{\i  Locally naturalized in S.W. Europe.} [Ga He Hs ?Lu.] ({\i S.E. South America}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 3. S. luteum} Miller, {\i Gard. Dict.} ed. 8, no. 3 (1768). Subglabrous to villous annual up to 50 cm, with simple hairs; stems decumbent to erect. Leaves 2-7 × 1·5-4 cm, rhombic to ovate-lanceolate, entire to sinuate-dentate. Cymes 3- to 5-flowered, lax, solitary; peduncles (4-)7-13(-19) mm, the pedicels often longer and deflexed in fruit. Calyx 1-2·5 mm, slightly accrescent,
\par

\par
197}
\par