{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 1-4 × 0·6-1·2 cm, often not reaching full length until after anthesis, lanceolate to obovate, entire or nearly so, fleshy to coriaceous, slightly viscid; glandular hairs many-celled, pale-tipped; leaves with scattered, inconspicuous hairs above; leaf-margin ciliate, the cilia variously deflexed, patent or more or less erecto-patent, the longest 0·2-1 mm. Scape 0·5-5 cm, 1- to 3-flowered. Bracts 2-10 mm, linear to lanceolate. Pedicels up to 3·5 mm at anthesis, up to 6 mm in fruit. Calyx 6-10 mm. Corolla reddish-purple or pinkish-lilac. 2n = 66, c. 68, c. 70.{\i  Snow-patches and stony alpine soils; calcifuge. • C. Alps; E. & C. Pyrenees. }Au Ga He Hs It.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 22. P. tyrolensis} Schott, {\i Sippen Österr. Primeln} 13 (1851). Plant viscid. Longest leaves 0·8-2·5 × 0·5-1·2 cm, suborbicular to broadly obovate, with fine cartilaginous teeth at margin, fleshy, densely puberulent; withered leaves persistent for some time; glandular hairs pale, 3-celled, those at apex up to 0·1 mm, those at base up to 0·4 mm. Scape 0·5-2 cm, 1- or 2-flowered. Bracts 2-8 mm, linear-lanceolate to obovate. Pedicels up to 2·5 mm. Calyx 5-8 mm. Corolla bright purplish-pink. 2n = 66. {\i Shady rock-crevices and screes. • Alpi dolomitiche}. It.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 23. P. allionii} Loisel. in Desv., {\i Jour. Bot. Rédigé}{\b  2}: 262 (1809). Plant viscid. Longest leaves 1·5-4·5 × 0·7-1·2 cm, oblanceolate to suborbicular, entire or crenulate or finely serrate, fleshy, very viscid, densely puberulent; withered leaves often persistent for some years; glandular hairs pale-tipped, 3- or 4-celled, the longest 0·15-0·4 mm. Scape very short, up to 8 mm in fruit, 1- to 5-flowered. Bracts 1-3 mm, broadly ovate. Pedicels 1-5 mm. Calyx 3-6 mm. Corolla pale pink to reddish-purple. 2n = 66.{\i  Shady cliffs. • Maritime Alps.} Ga It.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 24. P. palinuri} Petagna,{\i  Inst. Bot.}{\b  2}: 332 (1787). Leaves efarinose, the longest 4-16 × 2-7 cm, obovate, more or less dentate, fleshy, viscid, fragrant, densely puberulent or almost glabrous above and beneath, slightly cartilaginous at margin; glandular hairs colourless, the longest 0·1-0·25 mm. Scape 8-20 cm, 5- to 25-flowered. Bracts 5-25 mm, farinose, the outer broadly ovate, acute, the inner lanceolate. Pedicels 5-20 mm, farinose. Calyx 6-10 mm, densely farinose. Corolla deep yellow with a white farinose ring at the throat. 2n = 66.{\i  Rock-crevices by the sea. • S.W. Italy, from} 39° 45'{\i  to} 40° 5'{\i N}. It.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 25. P. latifolia} Lapeyr.,{\i  Hist. Abr. Pyr.} 97 (1813) ({\i P. viscosa} All., non Vill.). Leaves efarinose, the longest 3-15 × 1-4·5 cm, oblanceolate to obovate, rarely dentate, usually with wide teeth towards apex or sometimes entire, not cartilaginous at margin, fleshy, fragrant, viscid, covered with many pale glandular hairs, the longer 0·1-0·4 mm, with shrunken apical cells apically depressed. Scape 3-18 cm, 2- to 20-flowered; umbel secund. Bracts 2-9 mm, more or less scarious, ovate to transversely ovate. Pedicels 2-20 mm. Calyx 2-6 mm. Corolla purplish- or dark violet, more or less farinose at the throat. 2n = 64, 65, 66, 67.{\i  Rocks; calcifuge. • S. W. & C. Alps; E. Pyrenees.} Ga He Hs It.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 26. P. marginata} Curtis,{\i  Bot. Mag.}{\b  6}: t. 191 (1792). Longest leaves 2-9 × 1-3·5 cm, obovate to lanceolate, fleshy, serrate, the teeth more or less slender and obtuse; surface with short, more or less farinose hairs or glabrous; margin not cartilaginous, but usually densely glandular and strongly farinose; glandular hairs up to 0·15 mm, colourless, with shrunken apical cells laterally depressed. Scape 2-9 cm, 3- to 15-flowered. Bracts 2-9 mm, ovate to transversely ovate, more or less scarious. Pedicels 3-20 mm. Calyx 2-6 mm, farinose. Corolla bluish- (rarely pinkish-) lilac with a white farinose ring at the throat. 2n = 62,63, ?124, 126, 127, 128. {\i  Rock-crevices. • S.W. Alps}. Ga It.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  The tetraploids are restricted to the E. Maritime Alps and the Alpi Ligure, the diploids to the northern and western parts of the area of the species.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 27. P. carniolica} Jacq.,{\i  Fl. Austr.}{\b  5}: 28 (1778). Leaves efarinose, the longest 3-12 × 1-4 cm, obovate to lanceolate, almost entire or shallowly toothed towards the apex, fleshy, with a narrow cartilaginous margin, glabrous. Scape 5-20 cm, 2- to 15-flowered. Bracts 1-7 mm, ovate to transversely ovate, more or less scarious. Pedicels 2-20 mm. Calyx 3·5-7 mm. Corolla purplish-pink, white-farinose at the throat. 2n = 62, c. 68.{\i  Pastures; shady rocks in wet ravines. • Slovenija}. Ju.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 28. P. auricula} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 143 (1753). Longest leaves 1·5-12 × 1-6 cm, suborbicular to lanceolate, usually obovate, with or without farina on margins and surface, entire to dentate, fleshy, the surface glabrous or with scattered short glandular hairs; margin narrowly cartilaginous, puberulent, the hairs 0·05-0·5 mm, glandular, pale. Scape 1-16 cm, 2- to 30-flowered, often farinose. Bracts 1-8 mm, ovate to transversely ovate, more or less scarious. Pedicels 2-20 mm. Calyx 3-7·5 mm, usually farinose. Corolla deep yellow, white-farinose at the throat. 2n = 62, 63, 64, 65, 66.{\i  Rock-crevices or wet alpine grassland. • Alps, Carpathians, Appennini.} Au Cz Ga Ge He Hu It Ju Po Rm.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  Size, leaf-shape, indumentum, dentation, farina and odour vary, occasionally even within a single population; it is therefore difficult to delimit subspecies.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 29. P. hirsuta} All., {\i Auct. Syn. Stirp. Horti Taur.} 10 (1773 ({\i P. viscosa} Vill.). Efarinose. Longest leaves 1-9 × 0·8-3·5 cm, ovate, obovate or suborbicular, rather abruptly narrowed into the winged petiole, finely or coarsely dentate, fleshy, viscid, covered with glandular hairs which produce a pale or reddish-brown, rarely blackish secretion; longest hairs 0·1-0·5 mm, with shrunken apical cells depressed apically. Scape 1-7 cm, usually shorter than the leaves, even in fruit, 1- to 15-flowered. Bracts 1-8 mm, ovate to transversely ovate, more or less scarious. Pedicels 2-16 mm. Calyx 3·5-9 mm. Corolla pale lilac to deep purplish-red, usually with a white centre. Capsule ½ as long to as long as calyx. 2n = 62, 63, 64, 67.{\i  Rocks and stony alpine pastures, calcifuge. • Alps; C. Pyrenees}. Au Ga He Hs It.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 30. P. pedemontana} Thomas ex Gaudin,{\i  Fl. Helv.}{\b  2}: 91 (1828). Efarinose. Longest leaves 2-8 × 0·8-2·5 cm, broadly obovate to broadly lanceolate, entire or with shallow teeth towards the apex, fleshy, usually subglabrous above and beneath, with scattered glands towards the margin; margin densely puberulent; hairs producing a reddish-black or reddish-brown secretion, the longest 0·1-0·25 mm; shrunken apical cells depressed laterally. Scape 2·5-12 cm, usually longer than the leaves in fruit, 1- to 15-flowered. Bracts 1-6 mm, ovate to transversely ovate, more or less scarious. Pedicels 2-15 mm. Calyx 3-7·5 mm. Corolla purple or deep pink, usually with a white centre. Capsule somewhat shorter to slightly longer than calyx. 2n = 62.{\i  Rocks and stony alpine pastures; calcifuge. • S.W. Alps; Cordillera Cantábrica.} Ga Hs It.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  Subsp. {\b iberica} Losa & P. Monts.,{\i  Anal. Inst. Bot. Cavanilles}{\b  10}({\b 2}): 482 (1952), from Spain, is doubtfully distinct.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 31. P. apennina} Widmer,{\i  Eur. Arten Primula} 48, 140 (1891). Like {\b 3}0 but somewhat smaller; leaves 2·5-6·5 × 1-2 cm; scapes
\par 

\par 
19}
\par