{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 29. S. verbenaca} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 25 (1753) ({\i S. clandestina} L., {\i S. horminoides} Pourret, {\i S. controversa }sensu Willk., non Ten.). Stems 10-80 cm, erect, simple or branched, eglandular-pubescent below, and more or less glandular above. Leaves more or less pinnatifid with wide lobes, oblong to ovate. Inflorescence dense or lax; verticillasters with 6-10 flowers. Bracts shorter than calyx, green; pedicels 2-3 mm. Flowers hermaphrodite or female, sometimes cleistogamous. Calyx 6-8 mm, glandular or eglandular, enlarging slightly in fruit. Corolla 6-10(-15) mm, blue, lilac or violet. 2n = 42, 59, 60, 64. {\i  S. & W. Europe, northwards to Scotland.} Al Bl Br Bu Co Cr Ga Gr Hb Hs It Ju Lu Rs (K) Sa Si Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   A polymorphic species with numerous local variants.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 30. S. nutans} L.,{\i  Sp. Pl.} 27 (1753). Stems up to 170 cm, erect, simple, appressed-hairy, eglandular, leafless above. Leaves simple, long-petiolate, ovate to oblong, cordate at base, irregularly crenate or serrate. Inflorescence nodding at apex before anthesis; verticillasters with 4-6 flowers. Calyx 5-8 mm, shortly villous and punctate-glandular. Corolla 12-16 mm, violet; upper lip suberect. •{\i  From C. Hungary and S.W. Bulgaria eastwards to E.C. Russia.} Bu Hu ?Ju Rm Rs (C, W, K, E) Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b  S. cremenescensis} Besser,{\i  Enum. Pl. Volhyn.} 40 (1822), described from W. Ukraine, and {\b S. cernua} Czern. ex Schost., {\i Not. Syst.} ({\i Leningrad}){\b  8}: 154 (1940), widespread in E. Ukraine, are of hybrid origin, with {\b 30} as one parent.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 31. S. austriaca} Jacq.,{\i  Fl. Austr. }{\b 2}: 8 (1774). Stems up to 100 cm, erect, usually simple, glandular-hairy. Basal leaves simple, petiolate, irregularly toothed, pubescent beneath, glabrous above; cauline leaves few, sessile, or absent. Verticillasters with 4-9 flowers. Calyx 8-10 mm, glandular-pubescent. Corolla 12-17 mm, yellowish-white. Stamens long-exserted.{\i  From S. Czechoslovakia and N. Ukraine southwards to N.E. Bulgaria.} Au Bu Cz Hu Ju Rm Rs (W, K, E).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 32. S. jurisicii} Kosanin,{\i  Glas Srpske Kralj. Akad.}{\b  119}: 26 (1926). Stems up to 60 cm, diffusely branched, with dense, long, eglandular hairs, leafy. Leaves pinnate with 4-6 pairs of narrow linear segments. Inflorescence lax, much-branched; verticillasters with 4-6 flowers. Pedicels 2-5 mm. Calyx 3-5 mm, shortly villous and glandular-punctate. Corolla 9-12 mm, violet-blue, resupinate. Stamens included or slightly exserted. •{\i  S. Jugoslavia} ({\i Makedonija}). Ju.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 33. S. virgata} Jacq., {\i Hort. Vindob. }{\b 1}: 14 (1770) ({\i S. sibthorpii} Sibth. & Sm., {\i S. similata }Hausskn.). Stems up to 100 cm, simple or branched, pubescent to villous, eglandular. Basal leaves simple, ovate-oblong, cordate, serrate, subglabrous beneath; cauline leaves few or many. Inflorescence of elongated erecto-patent branches, rarely simple; verticillasters with 4-6 flowers. Bracts less than ½ as long as calyx, green; pedicels c. 2 mm. Flowers hermaphrodite or female. Calyx 7·5-10(-13) mm, villous. Corolla of hermaphrodite flowers 11-20 mm, violet-blue, rarely white. 2n = 18. •{\i  Italy; S. & E. parts of Balkan peninsula; Krym.} Al Bu Gr It Ju Rs (K) Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Sect. HORMINUM Dumort. Annuals. Calyx tubular, deflexed in fruit. Upper lip of corolla more or less straight; tube without a ring of hairs inside. Staminal connective longer than filament; arms unequal, the shorter more or less dolabriform.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 34. S. viridis} L.,{\i  Sp. Pl.} 24 (1753) ({\i S. horminum} L.). Stems up to 50 cm, erect, simple or branched, eglandular- or glandular-hairy. Leaves simple, petiolate, ovate or oblong, rounded or cordate at base, obtuse, regularly crenate, pubescent. Verticillasters with 4-8 flowers, with or without a coma of violet, green, pink or white sterile bracts. Pedicels c. 5 mm, compressed, deflexed in fruit. Calyx 7-10 mm, pubescent. Corolla 14-18 mm, pink or violet. 2n = 16.{\i  S. Europe; occasionally casual in C. Europe.} Al Bu Cr Gr Hs It Ju Lu Rs (K) Si Tu [?Au].
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Sect. HEMISPHACE Bentham. Perennial herbs. Calyx tubular or campanulate, deflexed in fruit. Upper lip of corolla more or less straight; tube with a ring of hairs inside. Staminal connective longer than and not articulating with filament; arms unequal, the shorter subulate.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 35. S. verticillata} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 26 (1753) ({\i S. peloponnesiaca} Boiss. & Heldr.). Stems up to 80 cm, erect, often simple, eglandular-hairy. Leaves simple, or lyrate with 1-2 pairs of small lateral segments, petiolate, ovate-triangular, cordate to truncate at base, acute. Verticillasters with (8-)15-30 flowers. Pedicels 4-6 mm. Calyx c. 6 mm, with eglandular hairs and sessile glands. Corolla 8-15 mm, lilac-blue; tube slightly exserted; upper lip narrowed at base. 2n = 16.{\i  S., E. & E.C. Europe; naturalized further north.} Al Au Bu Cz Ga Gr Hs Hu It Ju Po Rm Rs (C, W, K, E) Si Tu [Be Br Da Ge *He Ho No Rs (B) Su].
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 36. S. napifolia} Jacq.,{\i  Hort. Vindob.}{\b  2}: 71 (1772). Stems up to 100 cm, branched above, glandular-pubescent below, eglandular-villous above. Leaves simple, or lyrate with 1-2 pairs of small lateral segments, petiolate, ovate-triangular, glandular-viscid. Verticillasters with 6-12 flowers. Pedicels 3-5 mm. Calyx 6-8 mm, often violet, with eglandular hairs and sessile glands. Corolla 10-16 mm, violet-blue; tube exserted; upper lip not narrowed at base.{\i  Turkey-in-Europe} ({\i Istanbul region}). Tu. ({\i S.W. Asia.})
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc {\b  41.                 Elsholtzia}             Willd.
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc By P.W. Ball.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Annual. Verticillasters 2-flowered, in crowded, secund spikes; bracts differing distinctly from the leaves. Calyx campanulate, 5-veined, with 5 subequal teeth, accrescent. Corolla 2-lipped; tube straight; upper lip hooded; lower lip 3-lobed. Stamens divergent, slightly exceeding the upper lip of corolla. Nutlets smooth or verrucose-rugose.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. E. ciliata} (Thunb.) Hyl.,{\i  Bot. Not.}{\b  1941}: 129 (1941) ({\i E. cristata }Willd., {\i E. patrinii} (Lepechin) Garcke). Stems 30-70 cm, erect, subglabrous or puberulent. Leaves 2-10 × 1-4 cm, ovate-elliptical, acute, crenate-serrate. Bracts 4-5(-7) mm, obovate-orbicular, cuspidate, entire, slightly exceeding flowers. Calyx 1·5-2 mm, pubescent. Corolla 3-4 mm, lilac.{\i  Cultivated for ornament and naturalized in N., C. & E. Europe; casual elsewhere}.[Cz Da Ge Ju Po Rm Rs (N, C, W) Su Tu.] ({\i C. & E. Asia.})
\par

\par
192}
\par