{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 at base of corolla. Stigma capitate. Fruit a circumscissile capsule, surrounded by the calyx.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. S. carniolica} Jacq.,{\i  Obs. Bot.}{\b  1}: 32 (1764). Glabrous. Stems 20-60 cm, simple or branched above. Lower leaves scale-like, oblong-spathulate; upper leaves up to 20 × 8 cm, elliptical to ovate or obovate, somewhat acuminate, cuneate at base, entire, petiolate. Pedicels 2-4 cm, filiform, nodding. Calyx c. 1 cm. Corolla 1·5-2·5 cm, dark brownish-violet outside, yellowish to brownish-green within. Capsule c. 1 cm in diameter, globose. 2n = 48.{\i  C. & S.E. Europe, extending to Italy, C. Ukraine and Lithuania.} Au Cz Hu It Ju Po Rm Rs (B, W) [Da Ge].
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc {\b 5.            Hyoscyamus}                 L.
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc By J.G. Hawkes.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Annual, biennial or perennial herbs, often viscid. Leaves alternate, simple. Flowers axillary, in bracteate spikes or racemes. Calyx campanulate-tubular, 5-dentate, 10- or more veined, accrescent. Corolla usually broadly infundibuliform, with 5 obtuse lobes. Stamens usually slightly exserted, inserted at base of corolla. Stigma capitate. Fruit a capsule, included in the calyx, circumscissile; seeds reniform to orbicular.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Cauline leaves sessile
\par
2 Cauline leaves amplexicaul; corolla pale yellow,
\par
  usually with purple veins; fruiting calyx ventricose ........................... {\b 1. niger}
\par
2 Cauline leaves not amplexicaul; corolla purple with
\par
  darker reticulate veins; fruiting calyx tubular ............................ {\b 2. reticulatus} 
\par
1 Leaves all petiolate
\par
3 Corolla 1-1·5(-2) cm, usually slightly exceeding calyx ................ {\b 5. pusillus}
\par
3 Corolla at least 2·5 cm, much exceeding calyx
\par
4 Flowers sessile, except the lowest, in a dense spike;
\par
  corolla usually yellowish-white ......................................................... {\b 3. albus}
\par
4 Flowers all shortly pedicellate, in a lax, few-flowered
\par
  raceme; corolla golden yellow ......................................................... {\b 4. aureus}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. H. niger} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 179 (1753) (incl.{\i  H. bohemicus} F. W. Schmidt). Viscid, velutinous, fetid annual or biennial; stem (10-)30-80 cm, erect, simple or branched. Leaves (5-)15-20 cm, ovate to ovate-oblong, entire to angled, coarsely dentate or deeply incised, the basal forming a rosette, petiolate, the cauline amplexicaul, sessile. Flowers subsessile, in dense, unilateral spikes; bracts leaf-like. Calyx 1-1·5 cm; teeth triangular, acute; fruiting calyx ventricose towards base, with pungent teeth. Corolla 2-3 cm in diameter, slightly zygomorphic, pale yellow, usually with purple veins. 2n = 34.{\i  Almost throughout Europe, but only as a casual in the extreme north.} All except Az Bl Cr Fa Is Sb.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. H. reticulatus} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} ed. 2, 257 (1762). Fetid annual or biennial, with glandular, patent pubescence; stem 30-60 cm, stout, erect, branched. Leaves 12-15 cm, oblong to lanceolate, entire to sinuate, coarsely dentate or pinnatisect, sessile to subsessile. Flowers sessile, in unilateral spikes; bracts lanceolate, entire. Calyx 1·5 cm; fruiting calyx 2·5 × 1 cm, tubular, with recurved, lanceolate, cuspidate, pungent teeth about ½ as long as tube. Corolla 3-3·5 cm in diameter, almost actinomorphic, purple with darker reticulate veins.{\i  Turkey-in-Europe.} Tu. ({\i S.W. Asia, Egypt}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 3. H. albus} L.,{\i  Sp. Pl.} 180 (1753). Viscid annual, biennial or perennial; stem 30-90 cm, woody below when perennial, erect, branched, densely glandular-villous, the hairs patent. Leaves 4-10 × 3-8 cm, orbicular-ovate, obtuse, cuneate to cordate at base, incise-dentate with wide rounded teeth, sparsely glandular villous; petiole 2·5-5(-12) cm. Flowers sessile, except the lowest, in dense unilateral spikes; bracts leaf-like. Calyx 1-1·5 cm, densely glandular-villous; teeth c. 3 mm, broadly triangular; fruiting calyx 2-2·5 cm, ventricose below, hypocrateriform above, with short, triangular, pungent teeth. Corolla 3 cm, tubular-campanulate, somewhat zygomorphic, glandular-villous outside, usually yellowish-white, the throat greenish or purplish. Stamens included to slightly exserted. 2n = 68. {\i S. Europe.} Al Az Bl Bu Co Cr Ga Gr Hs It Ju Lu Rm Rs (W, K) Sa Si Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 4. H. aureus} L.,{\i  Sp. Pl.} 180 (1753). Viscid, glandular-villous biennial to perennial; stems decumbent or pendent, weak, brittle. Leaves up to 6 × 5 cm, ovate to suborbicular, broadly cuneate to cordate at base, irregularly lobed and dentate or doubly dentate, densely glandular-villous; petiole c. (0·5-)2-3 cm. Flowers in lax, few-flowered racemes; pedicels short; bracts leaf-like. Calyx 1·5-2 cm, densely villous below, less so above; teeth triangular, acute; fruiting calyx up to 3 cm, infundibuliform, with triangular, acuminate, pungent teeth and brownish indumentum. Corolla up to 4·5 cm, 2·5 cm in diameter, infundibuliform, strongly zygomorphic, golden yellow with purplish throat. Stamens and style long-exserted.{\i  Kriti; probably naturalized}. [*Cr.] ({\i S.W. Asia.})
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 5. H. pusillus} L.,{\i  Sp. Pl.} 180 (1753). Annual, with crispate, papilliform indumentum; stem 5-35 cm, procumbent to erect, branched at the base. Leaves 3-7·5 cm, oblong to lanceolate, acute, cuneate at base, gradually narrowing into a short petiole, sparsely pubescent, entire to sinuate, pinnatifid or pinnatisect with acute lobes. Flowers subsessile, in lax spikes. Calyx c. 1 cm; fruiting calyx 1·5-2 cm, patent or deflexed, with triangular, cuspidate, spine-tipped teeth. Corolla 1-1·5(-2) cm, usually slightly exceeding calyx, slightly zygomorphic, yellow with purple throat. Stamens included.{\i  S.E. Russia, W. Kazakhstan.} Rs (E). ({\i S. W. & C. Asia}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc {\b 6.            Withania}             Pauquy
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc By J.G. Hawkes.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Shrubs. Leaves alternate or opposite, simple, entire. Flowers solitary or in clusters, axillary. Calyx campanulate, 5-dentate, accrescent. Corolla campanulate, 5-lobed. Stamens 5, equal, included, inserted near base of corolla; anthers connivent. Ovary with nectary at base; stigma capitate. Fruit a globose berry, surrounded by inflated calyx; seeds subreniform.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 Leaves cuneate at base, stellate-tomentose beneath;
\par
  corolla c. 5 mm; fruiting calyx urceolate .................................... {\b 1. somnifera}
\par
Leaves cordate at base, glabrous to very sparsely pubescent; 
\par
  corolla 8-15 mm; fruiting calyx campanulate ........................... {\b 2. frutescens}
\par
                                           
\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. W. somnifera} (L.) Dunal in DC., {\i Prodr.}{\b  13}({\b 1}): 453 (1852). Stem 60-120 cm, erect, branched, woody below, greyish stellate-tomentose. Leaves 3-10 × 2-7 cm, ovate to obovate or oblong, acute to obtuse, cuneate at base, subglabrous above, stellate-tomentose beneath; petiole 1-2 cm. Flowers in clusters of 4-6; pedicels up to 5 mm, patent. Calyx c. 5 mm, densely stellate-tomentose, with triangular teeth; fruiting calyx 10-20 × 8-10 mm, urceolate, 10-ribbed, with short teeth. Corolla c. 5 mm, yellowish-green. Anthers c. 1 mm, ovate. Berry 5-8 mm in diameter, shining, red.{\i  Roadsides, scrub and waste places. Mediterranean region.} Bl Cr Gr Hs ?Lu Sa Si.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. W. frutescens} (L.) Pauquy,{\i  De la Belladone} 15 (1825). Stem 100-180 cm, erect, much-branched, woody, glabrous, with grey, corky bark; mature branches much twisted and entangled; younger branches slender, straight, whitish to pale brownish-yellow. Leaves 1-5 × 1-4·5 cm, broadly ovate to ovate-orbicular,
\par

\par
195}
\par