{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28\qc {\b  152.        SOLONACEAE}
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc Edit. D.M. Moore.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Herbs or shrubs. Leaves simple to pinnate, exstipulate. Flowers actinomorphic or zygomorphic, hermaphrodite. Calyx (3-)5(-6) lobed or -dentate. Corolla rotate to campanulate, infundibuliform or tubular, 5(6- or 10)-lobed, rarely subentire; lobes valvate or plicate in bud. Stamens 5(-8), adnate to the corolla-tube and alternating with the lobes; anthers usually with introrse longitudinal dehiscence. Ovary superior, with 2 (rarely more) loculi; style simple; stigma entire to 2-lobed. Fruit a capsule or berry usually 2-locular. Seeds usually numerous (rarely 2-11).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Many members cf this largely extra-European family are grown for their agricultural or horticultural value. On the information available it is often very difficult to distinguish between casual occurrence and true naturalization. Some species, therefore have been mentioned which are probably no more than casual but, in some cases, may be in process of naturalization.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Some species and hybrids of{\b  Petunia} Juss., from temperate South America, are widely cultivated for ornament. They are densely glandular-hairy herbs up to c. 50 cm, with the flowers solitary in the upper leaf-axils, a campanulate calyx, a white to pink or violet, infundibuliform corolla 2·5-7 cm, 5 included stamens and an ovoid, septicidal capsule 6-15 mm.{\b  P. integrifolia} (Hooker) Schinz & Thell.,{\i  Viert. Naturf. Ges. Zürich}{\b  60}: 361 (1915) ({\i P. violacea} Lindley), has been reported as locally naturalized in S. Europe but most modern cultivars are derived from hybrids between it and {\b P. axillaris} (Lam.) Britton, E.E. Sterns & Poggenb.,{\i  Prelim. Cat.} 38 (1888).
\par

\par
{\b  Salpiglossis sinuata} Ruiz & Pavón,{\i  Syst. Veg. Fl. Peruv.} 163 (1798), with an infundibuliform corolla and 4 unequal, included stamens, and {\b Schizanthus pinnatus} Ruiz & Pavon,{\i  Fl. Peruv. }{\b 1}: 13 (1798), with pinnate leaves, zygomorphic corolla, 2 long-exserted stamens and 2 staminodes, both viscid-pubescent annuals from Chile, are widely cultivated for ornament and may occasionally escape.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Anthers connivent
\par
2 Corolla campanulate .................................................................... {\b 6. Withania}
\par
2 Corolla rotate
\par
3 Anthers dehiscing by terminal pores ......................................... {\b 10. Solanum}
\par
3 Anthers dehiscing by longitudinal slits
\par
4 Leaves interruptedly imparipinnate; corolla yellow ........... {\b 11. Lycopersicon}
\par
4 Leaves entire; corolla whitish, greenish or purple ..................... {\b 9. Capsicum}
\par
1 Anthers not connivent
\par
5 Flowers in panicles or racemes
\par
6 Shrub; leaves glabrous
\par
7 Calyx not more than 7 mm; fruit a berry with not more 
\par
  than 11 seeds ............................................................................... {\b 15. Cestrum}
\par
7 Calyx at least 10 mm; fruit a capsule with at least 20 seeds .... {\b 16. Nicotiana}
\par
6 Herb; leaves pubescent, often viscid
\par
8 Inflorescence usually branched; corolla tubular or narrowly  
\par
  infundibuliform; capsule dehiscing by apical valves ................ {\b 16. Nicotiana}
\par
8 Inflorescence simple; corolla usually broadly infundibuliform; 
\par
  capsule circumscissile ............................................................ {\b 5. Hyoscyamus}
\par
5 Flowers solitary, or in pairs or small clusters,
\par
  sometimes grouped into spikes
\par
9 Shrub, usually spiny ...................................................................... {\b 2. Lycium}
\par
9 Herb, often woody at base
\par
10 Fruit a capsule
\par
11 Annual; calyx circumscissile, the base persistent;
\par
   capsule with longitudinal or irregular dehiscence,
\par
   usually spiny ................................................................................. {\b 14. Datura}
\par
11 Perennial; calyx entirely persistent; capsule with
\par
   circumscissile dehiscence, not spiny
\par
12 Plant glabrous; pedicels at least 2 cm ........................................ {\b 4. Scopolia}
\par
12 Plant pubescent to villous, often viscid; pedicels not
\par
   more than 1 cm ...................................................................... {\b 5. Hyoscyamus} 
\par
10 Fruit a berry 
\par
13 Flowers in axillary pairs; berry with 4-8 seeds ........................ {\b 13. Triguera} 
\par
13 Flowers solitary, axillary; berry with numerous seeds
\par
14 Calyx divided almost to base
\par
15 Glabrous annual; corolla purple to blue; berry brown .............. {\b 1. Nicandra}
\par
15 Pubescent, scrambling perennial; corolla white; berry
\par
   creamy-white ............................................................................ {\b 8. Salpichroa}
\par
14 Calyx divided to not more than ½-way
\par
16 Plant with stout, fleshy tap-root; leaves in a dense 
\par
   basal rosette .......................................................................... {\b 12. Mandragora}
\par
16 Stout tap-root absent; leaves not in a dense rosette
\par
17 Stamens inserted near apex of corolla-tube; calyx 
\par
   enclosing and usually much exceeding the berry ......................... {\b 7. Physalis}
\par
17 Stamens inserted near base of corolla-tube; calyx not
\par
   enclosing berry ............................................................................... {\b 3. Atropa}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc {\b 1.               Nicandra}             Adanson
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc By D.M. Moore.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Glabrous annuals. Leaves alternate, simple. Flowers actinomorphic, solitary, axillary. Calyx divided almost to base, strongly accrescent. Corolla campanulate. Stamens 5, included, inserted at base of corolla. Stigma capitate. Fruit a 3- to 5-locular, thin-walled, dry berry.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. N. physalodes} (L.) Gaertner,{\i  Fruct. Sem. Pl.}{\b  2}: 237 (1791). Stems 10-80(-200) cm. Leaves 4-15(-37) × 2-10(-30) cm, elliptic-lanceolate to ovate, obtuse to acute, cuneate at base, coarsely and irregularly sinuate-serrate or -dentate, sometimes somewhat lobed near base. Flowers 2-4 cm; pedicels 1·5-3 cm. Calyx 10-20 mm, up to 35 mm in fruit; teeth ovate, cuspidate-acuminate, green or scarious. Corolla 2-4 cm in diameter, lilac to blue. Berry c. 15 mm, globose, brown. {\i Widely cultivated for ornament and locally naturalized in C. & S.E. Europe, casual elsewhere.} [Au ?Az Bu He Hu ?It Ju ?Lu Rm Rs (K).] ({\i Peru}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc {\b 2.            Lycium}               L.
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc By W.T. Stearn.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Usually spiny shrubs. Leaves alternate or in clusters, simple, entire, shortly petiolate. Flowers solitary or in small clusters, axillary, pedicellate. Calyx cupuliform, regularly 5-dentate, or 2-lipped with 2-3 teeth connate. Corolla infundibuliform or subcylindrical. Stamens inserted in throat of corolla-tube. Stigma shallowly 2-lobed. Fruit a berry.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Literature: N. Feinbrun & W. T. Stearn,{\i  Israel Jour. Bot. }{\b 12}: 114-123 (1964). N. Feinbrun,{\i  Collect. Bot. }({\i Barcelona}){\b  7}: 359-379 (1968).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Leaves usually widest at or below the middle, the larger  
\par
  at least 10 mm wide; corolla-lobes about as long as or 
\par
  slightly longer than the tube
\par
2 Corolla-tube narrowly cylindrical at base for 
\par
  c. 2·5-3 mm; leaves usually widest at the middle ....................... {\b 4. barbarum} 
\par
2 Corolla-tube narrowly cylindrical at base for 
\par
  c. 1·5 mm; leaves usually widest below the middle ..................... {\b 5. chinense}
\par

\par
193}
\par