{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 18. S. glutinosa} L.,{\i  Sp. Pl.} 26 (1753). Stems 50-100 cm, erect, simple or branched, hairy below, glandular-viscid above. Leaves simple, petiolate, ovate, cordate or hastate at base, serrate or crenate, pubescent. Verticillasters with 2-6 flowers. Calyx 12-17 mm, tubular-campanulate. Corolla 30-40 mm, yellow with reddish-brown markings; lower lip straight; upper lip emarginate. 2n = 16.{\i  Woods, mainly in mountain districts. From C. France and C. Russia southwards to N. Spain, S. Italy and C. Greece}. Al Au Bu Co Cz Ga Ge Gr He Hs Hu It Ju Po Rm Rs (C, W, K, E) Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 19. S. forskaohlei} L.,{\i  Mantissa }26 (1767). Stems 25-100 cm, erect, simple or little-branched. Leaves simple or lyrate, ovate, cordate at base, serrate or crenate, glandular-strigulose. Verticillasters with 4-8 flowers. Calyx (5-)8-12 mm, with somewhat spinose teeth. Corolla 20-30 mm, violet-blue with white or yellow markings; lower lip deflexed; upper lip 2-fid. {\i S.E. part of Balkan peninsula.} Bu Gr Tu. ({\i N. Anatolia.})
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Sect. PLETHIOSPHACE Bentham. Perennial or rarely biennial herbs. Calyx campanulate; upper lip concave-bisulcate in fruit. Upper lip of corolla straight or falcate; tube without a ring of hairs. Staminal connective longer than filament; arms unequal, the shorter dolabriform.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Hybrids between species of this section are frequent. Gynodioecism and cleistogamy occur in several species.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 20. S. bicolor} Lam., {\i Tabl. Encycl. Méth. Bot. }{\b 1}: 69 (1791) (incl. {\i S. inamoena} Vahl). Sometimes biennial. Stems up to 100 cm, thick, erect, branched, pubescent below, glandular-viscid above, leafy. Leaves simple, broadly ovate, serrate, or pinnatifid with broad lobes, petiolate, cordate at base. Inflorescence branched, lax. Verticillasters with 4-6 flowers. Pedicels 8-10 mm. Calyx 8-10 mm, campanulate or infundibuliform, more or less deflexed in fruit. Corolla 20-30 mm; upper lip violet-blue, prominently falcate; lower lip white.{\i  S.W. Spain.} Hs. ({\i N.W. Africa}.)
\par

\par
 
\pard\f0\fs28   {\b 21. S. pratensis} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 25 (1753) ({\i S. tenorii} Sprengel, {\i S. bertolonii} Vis.). Stems up to 100 cm, erect, branched, eglandular-pubescent below, glandular above. Basal leaves simple, long-petiolate, ovate or ovate-oblong, cordate at base, crenate or serrate, patent-hairy or subglabrous beneath; cauline leaves smaller, few, sessile. Inflorescence more or less shortly branched, somewhat lax. Verticillasters with 4-6 flowers. Bracts less than ½ as long as calyx, green. Pedicels c. 2 mm. Flowers hermaphrodite or female. Calyx 7-11 mm, glandular-pubescent. Corolla of hermaphrodite flowers (15-)20-30 mm, violet-blue, rarely pink or white. 2n = 18.{\i  Most of Europe northwards to England, N. Germany and N.C. Russia.} Al Au Be Br Bu Co Cz Ga Ge Gr He Ho Hs Hu It Ju Po Rm Rs (C, W, K, E) Tu [*Rs (B) Su].
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Extremely variable, particularly in shape and size of the corolla.
\par

\par
 
\pard\f0\fs28   {\b 22. S. dumetorum} Andrz. ex Besser,{\i  Cat. Pl. Jard. Krzemien.} ed. 2, 288 (1811) ({\i S. stepposa} Schost.). Like {\b 21} but leaves narrower, oblong or ovate-oblong; corolla of hermaphrodite flowers 10-20 mm.{\i  Romania, S. part of U.S.S.R.} ?Po Rm Rs (C, W, E).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   The taxonomic status of this plant is uncertain. It may be better treated as a subspecies of {\b 21}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   {\b 23. S. teddii} Turrill,{\i  Kew. Bull. }{\b 1937}: 82 (1937). Stems 20-40 cm, erect, simple, usually eglandular-pubescent. Basal leaves simple, petiolate, ovate or oblong-ovate, serrate or crenate, bullate, patent-hairy beneath, glabrous above; cauline leaves small, few, sessile. Inflorescence dense; verticillasters with 4-6 flowers. Bracts less than ½ as long as calyx, green; pedicels 2-3 mm. Calyx 7·5-10 mm, glandular- or eglandular-pubescent. Corolla 12-15 mm, violet-blue. •{\i  N.E. Greece.} Gr.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 24. S. transsylvanica} (Schur ex Griseb.) Schur,{\i  Verh. Siebenb. Ver. Naturw.}{\b  4} App.: 57 (1853) ({\i S. baumgartenii} Heuffel). Stems 60-100 cm, usually simple, eglandular below, glandular-pubescent above. Leaves simple, long-petiolate, ovate or oblong-lanceolate, cordate at base, acute, more or less regularly crenate, densely white-appressed-hairy beneath. Inflorescence lax; verticillasters with 3-6 flowers. Bracts less than ½ as long as calyx, green; pedicels 2-3 mm. Calyx 8-9 mm. Corolla 16-21 mm, blue or violet-blue. •{\i  N. & C. Romania}. Rm.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 25. S. nemorosa} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} ed. 2, 35 (1762) ({\i S. sylvestris} auct., non L.). Stems 30-60 cm, many, more or less appressed- or patent-pubescent, eglandular. Basal leaves simple, petiolate, oblong, cordate or rounded at base, attenuate at apex, regularly crenate, more or less pubescent; cauline leaves more or less sessile. Inflorescence usually dense; verticillasters with 2-6 flowers. Bracts as long as or longer than calyx, ovate, rounded at base, violet, imbricate in bud; pedicels c. 2 mm. Calyx 6-7 mm. Corolla 8-12(-14) mm, violet-blue, rarely pink or white. 2n = 12.{\i  C., S.E. & E. Europe, northwards to C. Russia, and extending to C. Italy.} Al Au Bu Cz Ge He Hu It Ju Po Rm Rs (C, W, K, E) ?Tu [Br Ga No Su].
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b nemorosa} : Calyx with a very fine, closely appressed indumentum; corolla 8-12 mm.{\i  Throughout the range of the species except E. part of U.S.S.R}.
\par
  
\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b tesquicola}  (Klokov & Pobed.) Soó,{\i  Acta Bot. Acad. Sci. Hung.}{\b  11}: 249 (1965) ({\i S. tesquicola} Klokov & Pobed.): Calyx with long, patent indumentum; corolla up to 14 mm.{\i  E. Europe, from Bulgaria to E.C. Russia}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b  S.} ×{\b  sylvestris} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 24 (1753) is a hybrid between {\b 25} and {\b 21} and occurs frequently.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 26. S. amplexicaulis} Lam.,{\i  Tabl. Encycl. Méth. Bot.}{\b  1}: 68 (1791). Like {\b 25} but stems up to 80 cm, densely patent-villous; leaves shortly petiolate or sessile, densely eglandular-pubescent beneath, subglabrous above; verticillasters with 6-8 flowers; bracts almost as long as calyx, cordate at base; calyx 6-8·5 mm, patent-pubescent; corolla 8·5-12 mm, violet.{\i  Balkan peninsula.} Al Bu Gr Ju Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 27. S. valentina} Vahl,{\i  Enum. Pl.}{\b  1}: 268 (1804). Stems up to 30 cm, erect or ascending, branched, densely glandular-villous. Basal leaves simple, petiolate, oblong, cordate at base, acute to acuminate, serrate, gland-dotted; cauline leaves sessile. Inflorescence racemose; verticillasters with 4-6 flowers. Bracts ½-¾ as long as calyx, purplish, imbricate in bud; pedicels c. 3 mm. Calyx 7-9 mm, purple, with eglandular hairs and punctate glands. Corolla c. 8 mm, violet-blue. •{\i  E. Spain.} Hs.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 28. S. sclareoides} Brot.,{\i  Fl. Lusit.}{\b  1}: 17 (1804) ({\i S. bullata} Vahl, non Ortega). Stems 15-40 cm, erect, usually simple, glandular. Basal leaves simple, oblong-ovate, cordate at base, crenate or serrate, bullate; cauline leaves small, few, sessile. Inflorescence racemose; verticillasters with 3-6 flowers. Bracts shorter than calyx, green; pedicels 2-3 mm. Calyx 10-11 mm, glandular, pubescent. Corolla 15-20 mm, purplish or violet, rarely white. •{\i  Portugal, S.W. Spain.} Hs Lu.
\par

\par
191}
\par