{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 7. S. blancoana} Webb & Heldr., {\i Cat. Pl. Hisp. App.} (1850). Herb up to 100 cm, woody at base. Stems erect, simple, glabrous, more or less leafless above. Leaves up to 90 mm, simple, petiolate, oblong-elliptical, rugulose, appressed-pubescent. Verticillasters with 2-6 flowers. Pedicels 0-2 mm. Calyx 10-14 mm, glandular-viscid. Corolla up to 40 mm, violet-blue.{\i  S.E. Spain.} Hs. ({\i Morocco.})
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 8. S. brachyodon} Vandas,{\i  Österr. Bot. Zeitschr.}{\b  39}: 179 (1889). Herb up to 70 cm, woody at base. Stems erect, not or scarcely branched, hairy below, glabrous and leafless above. Leaves pinnatisect, with 1-3 pairs of small lateral segments and a large oblong-elliptical terminal segment, petiolate, white-lanate, becoming pubescent. Inflorescence with 2- to 5-flowered, distinctly pedunculate cymes. Bracts shorter than calyx. Calyx 8-10 mm, glandular-viscid. Corolla 35-40 mm, violet-blue. •{\i  S.W. Jugoslavia.} Ju.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 9. S. ringens} Sibth. & Sm.,{\i  Fl. Graec. Prodr. }{\b 1}: 14 (1806). Herb up to 60 cm, woody at base. Stems erect, scarcely branched, more or less leafless above. Leaves pinnatisect or pinnate with 3-6 pairs of small lateral segments and an ovate or elliptical terminal segment, petiolate, rugose, appressed-hairy. Verticillasters with 2-4 flowers, the cymes not or scarcely pedunculate. Calyx 10-17 mm, densely glandular-pubescent. Corolla up to 40 mm, violet-blue or blue.{\i  Dry places. S. & E. parts of Balkan peninsula, just extending to S.E. Romania.} Al Bu Gr Ju Rm.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 10. S. pinnata} L.,{\i  Sp. Pl.} 27 (1753). Herb 40-100 cm. Stems procumbent or ascending, glandular-viscid. Leaves pinnate or pinnatisect, petiolate, with 2-4 pairs of irregular lateral segments and an ovate terminal segment, with glandular and eglandular hairs. Verticillasters with 4-6 flowers. Pedicels up to 15 mm. Calyx 10-15 mm, urceolate, truncate, often purple, densely glandular, slightly accrescent. Corolla 25-35 mm, lilac to pink. {\i Turkey-in-Europe. }Tu. ({\i E. Mediterranean region}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 11. S. scabiosifolia} Lam.,{\i  Jour. Hist. Nat.} ({\i Paris}) {\b 2}: 44 (1792) (incl.{\i  S. adenostachya} Juz., {\i S. demetrii} Juz.). Herb 20-50 cm, woody at base. Stems much-branched, ascending, patent-villous, eglandular. Leaves pinnate or pinnatisect, petiolate, with many pairs of linear or oblong lateral segments and a larger terminal segment. Verticillasters with 6-10 flowers. Calyx 10-15 mm, accrescent. Corolla 25-30 mm, violet-blue or violet. •{\i  Krym; one station in N. Bulgaria.} Bu Rs (K).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b S. bracteata} Banks & Solander in A. Russell,{\i  Nat. Hist. Aleppo} ed. 2, {\b 2}: 242 (1794), which is widespread in Anatolia, has been recorded once in Turkey-in-Europe from a newly made road. It is probably only a casual introduction.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Sect. HYMENOSPHACE Bentham. Like Sect.{\i  Salvia} but shrubs; calyx strongly accrescent.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 12. S. pomifera} L.,{\i  Sp. Pl.} 24 (1753) ({\i S. calycina} Sibth. & Sm.). Shrub up to 100 cm, much-branched, canescent. Leaves simple, petiolate, ovate, rounded or cordate at base, rugose, densely canescent when young. Verticillasters with 2-4 flowers. Bracts large, exceeding the calyx, caducous. Calyx 10-12 mm, often reddish-purple, with eglandular hairs and sessile glands. Corolla c. 35 mm, violet-blue, the lower lip paler. 2n = 14.{\i  S. Greece and S. Aegean region.} Cr Gr.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Sect. AETHIOPIS Bentham. Biennial or perennial herbs. Calyx tubular or campanulate; upper lip straight in fruit. Upper lip of corolla more or less falcate; tube without a ring of hairs. Staminal connective longer than filament; arms unequal, the shorter more or less dolabriform.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 13. S. phlomoides} Asso,{\i  Intr. Oryctogr. Arag.} 158 (1779). Perennial 15-50 cm. Stems erect, usually simple, arachnoid-tomentose below, glandular-hairy and more or less leafless above. Leaves simple or irregularly lobed, shortly petiolate, oblong or oblong-linear, lanate beneath, appressed-arachnoid above. Verticillasters with 6-10 flowers. Bracts as long as or longer than calyx, white-canescent. Calyx 15-19 mm, glandular-villous. Corolla 25-32 mm, white or pinkish to purplish.{\i  C., S. & E. Spain.} Hs.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 14. S. sclarea} L.,{\i  Sp. Pl.} 27 (1753). Biennial or perennial up to 100 cm. Stems erect, much branched, glandular above. Leaves simple, petiolate, broadly ovate, cordate, pubescent. Verticillasters with 4-6 flowers. Bracts exceeding corolla, lilac or white. Calyx c. 10 mm, with spinose teeth, pubescent and glandular-punctate. Corolla 20-30 mm, lilac or pale blue; upper lip strongly falcate. 2n = 22. {\i S. Europe.} Al Bl Bu Co Ga Gr Hs It Ju Lu Rm Rs (W, K) Sa Tu [Au Cz He].
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 15. S. argentea} L.,{\i  Sp. Pl.} ed. 2, 31 (1762) ({\i S. verbascifolia} sensu Hayek, non Bieb.). Perennial 30-100 cm. Stems erect, much branched, eglandular-villous below, glandular and more or less leafless above. Leaves simple, ovate or oblong, irregularly lobed or toothed, lanate when young. Verticillasters with 4-8 flowers. Bracts 1/3-2/3 as long as calyx, green. Calyx 8-10 mm, glandular-viscid, with somewhat spinose teeth. Corolla 15-35 mm, white, tinged with pink or yellow; upper lip strongly falcate. 2n = 20.{\i  S. Europe, eastwards to Bulgaria.} Al Bu Gr Hs It Ju Lu Si.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Plants from the Iberian peninsula have been treated as subsp.{\b  patula} (Desf.) Maire in Jahandiez & Maire, {\i Cat. Pl. Maroc}{\b  3}: 642 (1934). They have the leaves usually cordate at the base (rarely rounded), and the calyx more zygomorphic. Similar plants occur elsewhere in the range, and they are not worth subspecific rank.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 16. S. aethiopis} L.,{\i  Sp. Pl.} 27 (1753). Biennial or perennial 30-100 cm. Stems robust, erect, white-lanate, eglandular, more or less leafless above. Leaves simple, petiolate, more or less ovate, acuminate, deeply and irregularly serrate, lanate when young. Verticillasters with 6-10 flowers. Bracts slightly shorter than calyx, green or violet-tinged. Calyx 5-8 mm, lanate. Corolla 10-15 mm, white; upper lip weakly falcate. 2n = 24.{\i  S. & S.E. Europe, extending northwards to S. Czechoslovakia and to} c. 51°{\i  N. in S.C. Russia.} Au Bu Cz Ga Gr Hs Hu It Ju Lu Rm Rs (W, K) Tu [Ge Po].
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 17. S. candidissima} Vahl,{\i  Enum. Pl.}{\b  1}: 278 (1804). Perennial up to 60 cm. Stems simple or little-branched, glandular above. Leaves simple, petiolate, ovate, cordate at base, acute, pannose. Verticillasters with 2-6 flowers. Bracts less than 1/3 as long as calyx, green; pedicels c. 2 mm. Calyx c. 10 mm, densely glandular-pubescent. Corolla 20-30 mm, white with a few purple spots on lower palate; upper lip strongly falcate.{\i  S. Albania, W. Greece.} Al Gr. ({\i S.W. Asia}.)
\par
 
\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b  S. sonklarii} Pant., {\i Magyar Növ. Lapok }{\b 5}: 151 (1881), with 2-flowered verticillasters and spiny calyx-teeth, has been described from C. Jugoslavia. Its status is uncertain.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Sect. DRYMOSPHACE Bentham. Like Sect.{\i  Aethiopis} but perennial herbs; upper lip of corolla strongly falcate; shorter arm of staminal connective with a sterile cell.
\par

\par
190}
\par