{\rtf1\ansi \deff4\deflang1033{\fonttbl{\f4\froman\fcharset0\fprq2 Times New Roman;}}{\colortbl;\red0\green0\blue0;\red0\green0\blue255;\red0\green255\blue255;\red0\green255\blue0;\red255\green0\blue255;\red255\green0\blue0;\red255\green255\blue0;\red255\green255\blue255;\red0\green0\blue128;\red0\green128\blue128;\red0\green128\blue0;\red128\green0\blue128;\red128\green0\blue0;\red128\green128\blue0;\red128\green128\blue128;\red192\green192\blue192;}{\stylesheet{\widctlpar \f4\fs20\lang2057 \snext0 Normal;}{\*\cs10 \additive Default Paragraph Font;}}{\info{\author dddd}{\operator dddd}{\creatim\yr1998\mo11\dy5\hr15\min29}{\revtim\yr1998\mo11\dy5\hr15\min30}{\version2}{\edmins1}{\nofpages4}{\nofwords1041}{\nofchars5937}{\*\company  }{\vern57431}}\widowctrl\ftnbj\aenddoc\hyphcaps0 \fet0\sectd \linex0 {\*\pnseclvl1\pnucrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl2\pnucltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl3\pndec\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl4\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl5\pndec\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl6\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl7\pnlcrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl8\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl9\pnlcrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}
\pard\plain \ \f4\fs20\lang2057 {\fs28 stellate-pubescent above, more densely so beneath; petiole 3-7 mm, densely stellate-tomentose, sometimes with few fine prickles. Cymes 1(-3)-flowered, solitary, extra-axillary, rarely leaf-opposed, sessile; pedicels deflexed, strongly accrescent in hermaphrodite flowers. Calyx 15-20 mm, 5- to 9-lobed, accrescent; lobes up to 12 mm, sometimes unequal, lanceolate, long-acuminate. Corolla 25-30(-50) mm in diameter, orbicular-pentagonal, 5- to 7(-8)-lobed, purplish to violet. Stamens 5-7(-8); anthers 6-8 mm. Berry 50-200(-300) \'d7 50-100(-150) mm, oblong to ovoid or long-pyriform, rarely globose, blackish-violet, dark purple, yellow or whitish.}{\i\fs28  Widely cultivated for its edible fruits}{\fs28  (}{\i\fs28 aubergines}{\fs28 )}{\i\fs28  in S., E.C. & E. Europe.}{\fs28  (}{\i\fs28 India.}{\fs28 )
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 11. S. bonariense}{\fs28  L.,}{\i\fs28  Sp. Pl. }{\fs28 185 (1753). Shrub; stem up to 200 cm, erect, stout, subglabrous to sparsely stellate-tomentose, usually with a few prickles when young, unarmed later; branches flexuous. Leaves 6-15 \'d7 3\'b75-13 cm, ovate-oblong to -lanceolate or lanceolate, acute to acuminate, cuneate to auriculate at base shallowly sinuate to entire, rarely with 1-9 obtuse lobes 2-3 \'d7 3-4 cm, stellate-hairy; petiole 1\'b75-4 cm. Cymes few-flowered, 2-4 on terminal to lateral, extra-axillary peduncles branched c. 30-50 mm above base. Calyx c. 4-7 mm; teeth ovate, abruptly acuminate. Corolla 25-35 mm in diameter, orbicular-pentagonal, white or pale blue. Anthers 6-7 mm. Berry 7-10 mm, globose, yellow.}{\i\fs28  Locally naturalized in S. Europe.}{\fs28  [Bl Hs ?It.] (}{\i\fs28 Temperate South America.}{\fs28 )
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 12. S. sodomeum}{\fs28  L.,}{\i\fs28  Sp. Pl.}{\fs28  187 (1753). Shrubby perennial; stem 50-300 cm or more, stout, erect, much-branched, sparsely stellate-pubescent, with many straight, wide-based pale yellow prickles up to 1\'b75 cm. Leaves 5-13(-18) \'d7 4-9(-15) cm, more or less ovate, pinnatisect almost to midrib, with many prickles sparsely stellate-hairy above, more densely so beneath; lobes rounded, sinuate; petioles 1-3(-5) cm. Cymes few-flowered, solitary, extra-axillary, sessile; pedicels c. 10 mm, elongating and recurving in fruit; upper flowers smaller, male. Calyx 5-7 mm, accrescent and with dense prickles in hermaphrodite flowers; lobes lanceolate. Corolla 25-30 mm in diameter, orbicular-pentagonal, pale violet. Anthers 5-6 mm, equal. Berry 20-30 mm in diameter, globose, yellow to brown, shining.}{\i\fs28  Maritime sands, roadsides and waste places, especially near the sea. Naturalized in S. Europe; an occasional casual elsewhere.}{\fs28  [Al Az Bl Bu Co Gr Hs It Ju Lu Sa Si.] (}{\i\fs28 Africa}{\fs28 .)
\par 
\par }{\b\fs28  S. sisymbrifolium}{\fs28  Lam., }{\i\fs28 Tabl. Encycl. M\'e9th. Bot.}{\b\fs28  2}{\fs28 : 25 (1794) from temperate South America, distinguished from }{\b\fs28 12}{\fs28  by its corolla 30-35 mm in diameter and red berry partly enclosed by the accrescent calyx, is occasionally found as a casual in C. Europe.
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 13. S. mauritianum}{\fs28  Scop.,}{\i\fs28  Delic. Fl. Insubr.}{\b\fs28  3}{\fs28 : 16 (1788). Fetid, densely stellate-tomentose shrub; stem up to 450 cm. Leaves 20-30(-40) \'d7 6-11 (-20) cm, ovate-elliptical, long-acuminate, cuneate at base; petiole (2-)4-5 cm, with prominent auricular false stipules at base. Cymes many-flowered, numerous; peduncles extra-axillary, terminal, becoming lateral, much branched, undivided up to 120 mm above base. Calyx up to 7 mm, deeply divided; lobes oblong-elliptical. Corolla c. 20 mm in diameter, stellate to pentagonal, violet; lobes c. 7 \'d7 6 mm, ovate-triangular. Anthers up to 3 mm, pale yellow. Berry c. 15 mm in diameter, globose, dull yellow.}{\i\fs28  Naturalized in Acores.}{\fs28  [Az.] (}{\i\fs28 Central America}{\fs28 .)
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 14. S. cornutum}{\fs28  Lam., }{\i\fs28 Tabl. Encycl. M\'e9th. Bot.}{\b\fs28  2}{\fs28 : 25 (1794). Annual with dense tomentum of stipitate stellate and simple hairs intermixed with patent to recurved yellow prickles up to 1 cm; stem 30-60 cm, much-branched, sometimes woody at base. Leaves 6-12 \'d7 4-8 cm, deeply pinnately lobed; lobes obovate to orbicular, sinuate; petiole 1-5 cm. Cymes 3- to 10-flowered, solitary, extra-axillary; peduncles 30-60 mm. Calyx 10 mm; lobes c. 5 mm, unequal, lanceolate, accrescent; tube with dense prickles, accrescent to enclose berry. Corolla 20-40 mm in diameter, somewhat zygomorphic, appearing 10-lobed by expansion of interpetalar membranes, yellow. Upper 4 anthers c. 4-6 mm, equal, yellow, the other c. 8-12 mm, purplish distally. Berry c. 10 mm in diameter, globose, dry.}{\i\fs28  Cultivated ground and waste places. Locally naturalized, mainly in E.C. & E. Europe.}{\fs28  [Bu Ga Ge Gr Hu Rs (C, W, K, E).] (}{\i\fs28 Mexico, S.W. United States}{\fs28 .)
\par 
\par }{\b\fs28  S. heterodoxum}{\fs28  Dunal, }{\i\fs28 Hist. Solanum}{\fs28  235 (1813), and}{\b\fs28  S. citrullifolium}{\fs28  A. Braun, }{\i\fs28 Ann. Sci. Nat.}{\fs28  ser. 3 (}{\i\fs28 Bot.}{\fs28 ),}{\b\fs28  12}{\fs28 : 356 (1849), from Mexico, which can be distinguished from }{\b\fs28 14}{\fs28  by their purple corolla, are perhaps naturalized in parts of S. Europe.
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 15. S. elaeagnifolium}{\fs28  Cav.,}{\i\fs28  Icon. Descr.}{\b\fs28  3}{\fs28 : 22 (1795). Perennial herb or dwarf shrub with dense, whitish, stellate tomentum, usually with scattered, inconspicuous, usually reddish prickles on stem, mature leaves and calyx; stem 30-50 cm or more, erect, sparingly branched. Leaves 4-10(-16) \'d7 1-2\'b75(-4) cm, linear- to oblong-lanceolate, obtuse to acute, rounded or truncate at base, entire to shallowly sinuate; petiole 5-20 mm. Cyme 1- to 5-flowered, solitary, extra-axillary; peduncle 5-20 mm. Calyx 5-7 mm, slightly accrescent, patent in fruit; lobes 2-4 mm, linear. Corolla 25-35(-40) mm in diameter, orbicular, purplish. Anthers 7-9 mm, yellow. Berry 10-13 mm in diameter, globose, dry, yellow.}{\i\fs28  Locally naturalized in Greece.}{\fs28  [Gr.] (}{\i\fs28 Temperate South America}{\fs28 .)
\par 
\par }
\pard \qc\ {\b\fs28 11.              Lycopersicon}{\fs28                Miller
\par  }{\fs24 By J.G. Hawkes.
\par 
\par }
\pard \ {\fs28 Erect to decumbent, branched annuals with glandular, aromatic, indumentum. Leaves alternate, interruptedly imparipinnate. Flowers in one or more extra-axillary, often leaf-opposed, monochasial cymes. Calyx 5-lobed almost to base, accrescent, deflexed in fruit. Corolla rotate; limb 5(-6)-lobed. Stamens inserted in throat of corolla; filaments very short; anthers connivent with connective prolonged into a prominent sterile beak. Stigma capitate. Fruit a berry, with 2-3 or more loculi; seeds elliptical, compressed, enclosed in mucilage}{\fs24 .
\par }
\pard \qc\ {\fs24 
\par }
\pard \ {\fs28    }{\b\fs28 1. L. esculentum}{\fs28  Miller,}{\i\fs28  Gard. Dict.}{\fs28  ed. 8, no. 2 (1768). Plant villous. Leaves at least 20 cm; leaflets ovate to ovate-lanceolate, irregularly incised-serrate to pinnatisect, somewhat glaucous beneath. Cymes 3- to 20-flowered; peduncles simple or dichotomously branched; pedicels articulated near the middle, deflexed in fruit. Corolla up to 2\'b75 cm in diameter, yellow. Berry 2-10 cm in diameter, globose, ovoid or pyriform, often depressed or irregularly lobed and ridged, densely glandular-villous when young, glabrescent, red to pink or yellowish. 2n = 24.}{\i\fs28  Cultivated for the edible fruits}{\fs28  (}{\i\fs28 tomatoes}{\fs28 )}{\i\fs28  on a field scale throughout S. and parts of C. & E. Europe; a frequent casual, but nowhere truly naturalized}{\fs28 . (}{\i\fs28 South and Central America; Mexico.}{\fs28 )
\par 
\par  Variants with globose berries 1\'b75-2(-3) cm in diameter are sometimes cultivated, and have been called subsp.}{\b\fs28  galeni}{\fs28  (Miller) Luckwill,}{\i\fs28  Gen. Lycopers.}{\fs28  23 (1943), or var.}{\i\fs28  cerasiforme}{\fs28  (Dunal) Alef.
\par 
\par }
\pard \qc\ {\b\fs28 12.               Mandragora}{\fs28                    L.
\par }{\fs24 By J.G. Hawkes.
\par 
\par }
\pard \ {\fs28 Perennial herbs with stout, erect, often bifid, occasionally anthropomorphic, fleshy tap-root; acaulescent or with very short stem. Leaves in a dense basal rosette, simple. Flowers
\par 
\par 199}
\par }