{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Leaves 0·5-10 mm wide, usually widest above the middle;
\par
  corolla-lobes not more than 1/3 as long as the tube
\par
3 Calyx 5-7 mm; corolla 20-22 mm .................................................... {\b 6. afrum}
\par
3 Calyx 1·5-4 mm; corolla 8-18 mm
\par
4 Stamens included
\par
5 Leaves 20-50 mm; calyx 2-3 mm; corolla 11-13 mm ............. {\b 1. europaeum}
\par
5 Leaves 3-15 mm; calyx 1·5-2 mm; corolla 13-18 mm .............. {\b 2. intricatum}
\par
4 Stamens exserted
\par
6 Leaves 0·5-1·5 mm wide; filaments puberulent at base; 
\par
  fruit black ................................................................................. {\b 3. ruthenicum}
\par
6 Leaves 3-10 mm wide; filaments glabrous; 
\par
  fruit reddish ............................................................................... {\b 1. europaeum}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. L. europaeum} L.,{\i  Sp. Pl.} 192 (1753). Plant 1-4 m; branches rigid, very spiny; spines stout. Leaves 20-50 × 3-10 mm, usually oblanceolate. Flowers solitary or in clusters of 2(-3). Calyx 2-3 mm, 5-dentate or 2-lipped. Corolla 11-13 mm, narrowly infundibuliform, pink or white; lobes 3-4 mm. Stamens usually exserted; filaments glabrous, somewhat unequal. Fruit reddish.{\i  Mediterranean region and Portugal; doubtfully native over much of its range.} Al Bl ?Co ?Cr Ga Gr Hs It Ju Lu Sa Si Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   There is one doubtful record from W. Kazakhstan of{\b  L. depressum} Stocks, {\i Jour. Bot. Kew Gard. Misc.}{\b  4}: 179 (1852) ({\i L. turcomanicum} Turcz. ex Miers), a native of W. & C. Asia, which differs from {\b 1} in having the flowers in clusters of 2-4 and with the corolla 8-10 mm.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. L. intricatum} Boiss.,{\i  Elenchus} 66 (1838). Plant 0·3-2 m, much-branched, very spiny; spines stout, rigid. Leaves 3-15 × 1-6 mm, oblanceolate. Flowers solitary or in clusters of 2-3. Calyx 1·5-2 mm, shallowly 5-dentate. Corolla 13-18 mm, narrowly infundibuliform, blue-violet, purple, lilac, pink or white; lobes 2-3 mm. Stamens included; filaments glabrous. Fruit orange-red or black. 2n = 24. {\i S. Europe, from Kriti to Portugal; very local.} Cr Gr Hs Lu Si. ({\i N. Africa, S.W. Asia}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   The plants with orange-red fruits from Portugal and Spain ({\i L. intricatum} sensu stricto) are connected with those with black fruits from Sicilia and the Aegean region, which have been called{\b  L. schweinfurthii} Dammer,{\i  Bot. Jahrb.}{\b  48}: 224 (1912), by a series of populations extending along the coast of N. Africa into W. Asia. The relationships between these populations have yet to be clarified, particularly since the eastern plants have been considered a variety of {\b L. persicum} Miers, {\i Ann. Nat. Hist.} ser. 2, {\b 14}: 12 (1854).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 3. L. ruthenicum} Murray, Comment. Gotting. 2, Cl. Phys.: 9 (1780). Plant 0·5-2 m; spines slender. Leaves 7-30 × 0·5-1·5 mm, very narrowly oblanceolate, somewhat fleshy. Calyx 3-4 mm, 2-lipped. Corolla 8-10 mm, narrowly infundibuliform, purplish above, whitish below; lobes 2-3 mm. Stamens exserted; filaments puberulent at base. Fruit black. W. Kazakhstan. Rs (E). (C. & S. W. Asia.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 4. L. barbarum} L.,{\i  Sp. Pl.} 192 (1753) ({\i L. halimifolium} Miller, {\i L. vulgare} Dunal). Plant up to 2·5 m; stems arcuate; spines slender, few. Leaves 20-100 × 6-30 mm, very narrowly elliptical to narrowly lanceolate, usually widest at the middle. Calyx c. 4 mm, 2-lipped. Corolla c. 9 mm, infundibuliform, the tube narrowly cylindrical at base for 2·5-3 mm, purple, becoming brownish; lobes c. 4 mm. Stamens long-exserted; filaments with dense tuft of hairs at base. Fruit red. 2n = 24.{\i  Cultivated for hedges and naturalized in a large part of Europe.} [Au Be Br Bu Co Cr Cz Da Ga Ge Hb He Ho Hs Hu It Ju Lu No Po Rm Rs (C, W, K, E) Su Tu.] ({\i China}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 5. L. chinense} Miller, {\i Gard. Dict.} ed. 8, no. 5 (1768) ({\i L. rhombifolium} (Moench) Dippel). Like {\b 4} but leaves 10-140 × 5-60 mm, the lower much larger than the upper, lanceolate to ovate, usually widest below the middle; calyx 3 mm; corolla 10-15 mm, broadly infundibuliform, the tube narrowly cylindrical at base for c. 1·5 mm, the lobes 5-8 mm.{\i  Occasionally cultivated for hedges and locally naturalized in W., C. & S. Europe.} [Br Cz Ga Ge Hb He Ho Hu It ?Ju Lu Rm Su.] ({\i China.})
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 6. L. afrum} L.,{\i  Sp. Pl.} 191 (1753). Plant 1-2 m; branches rigid, very spiny; spines stout. Leaves 10-23 × 1-2 mm, very narrowly oblanceolate. Calyx 5-7 mm, deeply 5-dentate. Corolla 20-22 mm, subcylindrical, purplish-brown; lobes c. 2 mm. Stamens included; filaments with dense tuft of hairs at base. Fruit purplish. {\i Cultivated and locally naturalized in W. part of Mediterranean region}. [Ga Hs It.] ({\i South Africa}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc {\b 3.        Atropa}             L.
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc By J.G. Hawkes.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Erect perennial herbs. Leaves alternate or opposite, simple, entire. Flowers solitary, axillary. Calyx campanulate, 5-lobed, somewhat accrescent. Corolla tubular-campanulate; limb short, 5-lobed. Stamens subequal, inserted at base of corolla; filaments tomentose at base. Ovary with annular receptacular disc at base; stigma peltate. Fruit a berry.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 Corolla campanulate; lobes not more than 1/3 as long as 
\par
  tube; stamens and style included or slightly exserted .............. {\b 1. bella-donna} 
\par
Corolla infundibuliform; lobes about as long as tube;
\par
  stamens and style long-exserted ...................................................... {\b 2. baetica}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. A. bella-donna} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 181 (1753). Plant green, glabrous to glandular-pubescent; stems 50-150(-200) cm, much-branched. Leaves up to 20 cm, not crowded, ovate, acuminate, cuneate at base; petiole short. Pedicels nodding. Calyx campanulate, with acuminate lobes, becoming stellate. Corolla 2·5-3 cm, campanulate, not more than 2½ times as long as the calyx, brownish-violet or greenish; lobes up to 1/3 as long as tube. Stamens and style included or slightly exserted; anthers ellipsoid, whitish. Berry 15-20 mm in diameter, globose, shining, black, rarely yellowish-green, the flesh usually reddish-purple, very poisonous.{\i  Damp or shady places, mainly in the mountains. S., W. & C. Europe, northwards to N. England, and extending to W. Ukraine; long cultivated for its medicinal properties and naturalized elsewhere.} Al Au Be Br Bu Co Cz Ga Ge Gr He Ho Hs Hu It Ju Lu Po Rm Rs (W, K) Sa Si Tu [Da Hb Rs (B, C) Su].
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. A. baetica} Willk.,{\i  Linnaea}{\b  25}: 50 (1852). Plant yellowish-green, glabrous; stems 30-45 cm, simple or branched above, fleshy. Leaves densely crowded, ovate, shortly acuminate, cuneate at base, subcoriaceous; petiole long. Pedicels erect. Calyx-lobes apiculate. Corolla infundibuliform, twice as long as the calyx, green to yellow; lobes about as long as tube. Stamens exserted; anthers ovoid, pale yellow. Style long-exserted. Berry c. 10 mm in diameter, globose.{\i  Shady, calcareous rocks and screes. S. Spain}. Hs. ({\i Morocco}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc {\b 4.            Scopolia}                 Jacq.
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc By J.G. Hawkes.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Perennial herbs with a fleshy, horizontal rhizome. Leaves alternate, simple. Flowers solitary in leaf-axils. Calyx campanulate, shallowly 5-lobed, accrescent. Corolla cylindrical to campanulate, shallowly 5-lobed. Stamens 5, included, inserted
\par

\par
194}
\par