{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 deflexed or adhering to base of berry; lobes triangular. Corolla 8-16 mm in diameter, 3-5 times as long as calyx, white. Anthers 1·5-2·5 mm, yellow. Berry 6-10 mm in diameter, usually longer than wide, red, orange or yellow; seeds 1·6-2 mm. {\i Waste places and disturbed ground. Europe northwards to N. France and C. Russia; introduced further north.} Al Au Az Bl Br Bu Co Cr Cz Ga Ge Gr He Hs Hu It Ju Lu Po Rm Rs (C, W, K) Sa Si Tu [Be Da Ho ?No ?Rs (B) Su].
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b luteum}  ({\i S. villosum} Miller): Plant villous, the hairs usually patent, glandular; stems rounded, with smooth ridges. 2n = 48. {\i Throughout the range of the species, but most frequent in warm, dry areas}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b alatum}  (Moench) Dostál,{\i  Kvetena CSR }1270 (1949) ({\i S. miniatum }Bernh. ex Willd.,{\i  S. zelenetzkii} Pojark.): Plant subglabrous to pubescent, the hairs usually appressed, eglandular; stems angled, with dentate ridges. 2n = 48.{\i  Throughout the range of the species}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 4. S. sarrachoides} Sendtner in C.F.P. Mart.,{\i  Fl. Brasil. }{\b 10}: 18 (1846). Annual up to 40 cm; stems decumbent to ascending, with dense, patent, glandular hairs. Leaves 2-5 × 1·5-3·5 cm, rhombic to ovate-lanceolate, sinuate-dentate, rarely subentire, glandular-pubescent. Cymes 3- to 8(-10)-flowered, solitary; peduncles 6-15 mm. Calyx (2·5-)3-4·5 mm, strongly accrescent and enclosing at least lower half of berry. Corolla 9-14 mm in diameter, 1½-3 times as long as calyx, white. Anthers 1-2(-2·5) mm, yellow. Berry 6-10 mm in diameter, green or black, with stone cells; seeds 1·8-2·2 mm. 2n = 24.{\i  Locally naturalized as a weed or ruderal. }[Br Ga Ge.] ({\i Brazil.})
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   The degree of leaf-indentation and accrescence of the calyx appear to be correlated with differences in habitat.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 5. S. triflorum} Nutt.,{\i  Gen. N. Amer. Pl. }{\b 1}: 128 (1818). Fetid annual with simple hairs; stem 15-100 cm, procumbent, branched, subglabrous. Leaves 2-3 cm, ovate to elliptical, deeply pinnatisect, decurrent on the short petiole; lobes more or less linear, obtuse, entire to dentate or lobed, subglabrous. Cymes usually 2- to 3-flowered, contracted, subumbellate, solitary. Calyx 4-5 mm; teeth triangular-ovate. Corolla c. 10 mm in diameter, slightly exceeding calyx, stellate, white. Berry 10 mm in diameter, more or less globose, marbled whitish and green.{\i  Locally naturalized in N.W. Europe.} [Be Br.] ({\i W. North America}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Var.{\i  ponticum} (Prodan) Borza, with subentire leaves, is recorded from Britain, the Netherlands and Romania.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 6. S. pseudocapsicum} L.,{\i  Sp. Pl.} 184 (1753). Glabrous annual or perennial; stem 30-120 cm, erect, branched. Leaves 1·5-10 × 0·5-2 cm, oblong- to linear-lanceolate, acuminate, cuneate at base, entire to somewhat sinuate, alternate or in unequal pairs; petiole 0·2-2 cm. Cymes 1- to 3-flowered, solitary, extra-axillary to leaf-opposed, sessile. Calyx c. 5 mm, deeply incised; teeth linear-lanceolate. Corolla 10-15 mm in diameter, stellate, white. Anthers 3 mm, orange. Berry 10-15 mm in diameter, globose, red, shining, solitary.{\i  Widely cultivated for ornament and locally naturalized in S.W. Europe.} [Az Ga Lu.] ({\i E. South America.})
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b   S. capsicastrum} Link ex Schauer, {\i Allgem. Gartenz.}{\b  1}: 228 (1833), from temperate E. South America, is widely cultivated for ornament and occasionally found as a casual. It has frequently been confused with{\b  6}, from which it is distinguished by the branched hairs on stem and leaves, the shorter stem, narrower leaves and the berry c. 20 mm in diameter.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 7. S. dulcamara} L.,{\i  Sp. Pl.} 185 (1753) (incl. {\i S. littorale} Raab). Scrambling, glabrous to pubescent or densely villous-tomentose perennial, with simple hairs; stems 30-200 cm, woody below. Leaves (3-)5-9 × (1·5-)2·5-5(-9) cm, ovate, acute to acuminate, truncate, cordate or hastate at base, entire or with 1-4 lobes or small, stipitate pinnae at base; petiole up to 3 cm. Cymes usually with 10-25 or more flowers, lax, terminal, becoming lateral, several on extra-axillary peduncles usually much-branched 10-40 mm above base. Calyx c. 3 mm; teeth 0·5-1 mm, rounded. Corolla 10-15(-20) mm in diameter, stellate, dark purple (rarely white); lobes 7-10 mm, recurved, each with 2 greenish spots at base. Anthers 5-7 mm, pale yellow. Berry 10-15 × 7·5-10 mm, ovoid, red, shining. 2n = 24. {\i Damp woods, hedges, river-banks and sea-shores. Most of Europe except the extreme north.} All except Az Cr Fa Is Sb; only casual in Rs (N).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   A procumbent variant with fleshy leaves ({\i S. marinum} (Bab.) Pojark. in Schischkin & Bobrov, {\i Fl. URSS}{\b  22}: 16 (1955)) occurs on maritime sand and shingle.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b  S. persicum} Willd. in Roemer & Schultes, {\i Syst. Veg.}{\b  4}: 662 (1819), from S.E. Russia (and W. Asia), is probably no more than a minor variant of {\b 7}, from which it is said to differ by its tomentose stem, ovate-lanceolate, grey-tomentose leaves and subglobose berries.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 8. S. tuberosum} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 185 (1753). Sparsely pubescent annual with simple, appressed hairs, with underground stolons bearing terminal tubers; stems 30-80(-150) cm, erect, branched, succulent, winged. Leaves interruptedly imparipinnate, with 3-5(-7) pairs of ovate, acuminate leaflets between which are smaller, unequal, ovate to orbicular leaflets; petiole with auricular or semi-lunate false stipules at base. Cymes many-flowered, 2-4 on axillary to extra-axillary branched peduncles 50-100 mm; pedicels 20-35 mm, usually articulated in middle 1/3. Calyx 5-10 mm; teeth lanceolate, acuminate. Corolla 25-35(-40) mm in diameter, orbicular to pentagonal, white, purple or blue to violet or pinkish. Anthers 6-7 mm, yellow to orange. Berry 20-40 mm in diameter, more or less globose, succulent, greenish to purplish. 2n = 48.{\i  Cultivated for its edible tubers} ({\i potatoes}) {\i almost throughout Europe.} ({\i South America}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   The European cultivars belong to subsp.{\i  tuberosum}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 9. S. laciniatum} Aiton,{\i  Hort. Kew. }{\b 1}: 247 (1789). Glabrous or subglabrous shrub; stem 100-150 cm, branched, purplish. Leaves entire or laciniate often on same plant; entire leaves (5-)10-15(-20) × 1·5-4·5 cm, narrow- to linear-lanceolate, long-acuminate, narrowly cuneate at base, decurrent on the short petiole; laciniate leaves with 1-3 pairs of narrowly triangular to linear-lanceolate, long-acuminate lobes. Cymes 3- to 12-flowered, solitary or rarely in pairs, axillary to extra-axillary, sessile, the axis elongating in fruit to c. 20 cm. Calyx 5-7 mm; teeth short, mucronulate. Corolla (30-)40-50(-60) mm in diameter, orbicular, purple; lobes appearing 10 by extension of interpetalar membranes for 3-5 mm on each side of lobe-apex. Anthers 3-5 mm, yellow. Berry c. 20 × 10 mm, ovoid, yellow to orange-yellow.{\i  Cultivated in E. Europe and locally in C. & W. Europe for the foliage which is a source of steroid precursors.} ({\i Australia, New Zealand}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 European material has long been confused with{\i  S. aviculare} G. Forster from Australia and New Zealand.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 10. S. melongena} L.,{\i  Sp. Pl.} 186 (1753). Perennial or annual; stems 30-70(-120) cm, often somewhat woody, erect, branched, stellate-tomentose, sometimes with scattered prickles. Leaves 7-15 × 3-10 cm, ovate, entire to shallowly sinuate, sparsely
\par

\par
198}
\par