{\rtf1\ansi \deff4\deflang1033{\fonttbl{\f4\froman\fcharset0\fprq2 Times New Roman;}}{\colortbl;\red0\green0\blue0;\red0\green0\blue255;\red0\green255\blue255;\red0\green255\blue0;\red255\green0\blue255;\red255\green0\blue0;\red255\green255\blue0;\red255\green255\blue255;\red0\green0\blue128;\red0\green128\blue128;\red0\green128\blue0;\red128\green0\blue128;\red128\green0\blue0;\red128\green128\blue0;\red128\green128\blue128;\red192\green192\blue192;}{\stylesheet{\widctlpar \f4\fs20\lang2057 \snext0 Normal;}{\*\cs10 \additive Default Paragraph Font;}}{\info{\author dddd}{\operator dddd}{\creatim\yr1998\mo11\dy11\hr17\min43}{\revtim\yr1998\mo11\dy11\hr17\min44}{\version2}{\edmins1}{\nofpages4}{\nofwords1037}{\nofchars5916}{\*\company  }{\vern57431}}\widowctrl\ftnbj\aenddoc\hyphcaps0 \fet0\sectd \linex0 {\*\pnseclvl1\pnucrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl2\pnucltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl3\pndec\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl4\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl5\pndec\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl6\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl7\pnlcrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl8\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl9\pnlcrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}
\pard\plain \ \f4\fs20\lang2057 {\fs28 solitary, axillary. Calyx campanulate, 5-lobed, accrescent. Corolla campanulate, 5-lobed, plicate between the lobes, persistent. Stamens 5, subexserted, inserted in lower half of corolla tube; filaments villous below; anthers dorsifixed. Ovary surrounded at base by glandular disc; stigma capitate. Fruit a berry, becoming unilocular by obliteration of septum.
\par 
\par Literature: J. G. Hawkes,}{\i\fs28  Bot. Jour. Linn. Soc.}{\b\fs28  65}{\fs28 : 356 (1972).
\par 
\par }
\pard \li200\ {\fs28 Corolla not more than 2\'b75 cm, greenish-white, with 
\par     narrowly triangular lobes; berry globose ............................... }{\b\fs28 1. officinarum}{\fs28 
\par Corolla (2\'b75-)3-4 cm, violet, with wide triangular lobes;
\par     berry ellipsoid .......................................................................... }{\b\fs28 2. autumnalis}{\fs28 
\par 
\par }
\pard \ {\fs28    }{\b\fs28 1. M. officinarum}{\fs28  L., }{\i\fs28 Sp. Pl.}{\fs28  181 (1753) (}{\i\fs28 M. acaulis}{\fs28  Gaertner,}{\i\fs28  M. vernalis}{\fs28  Bertol.). Leaves petiolate, ovate to ovate-lanceolate, entire, undulate, sparsely villous on veins at least when young. Pedicels usually shorter than leaves. Calyx slightly accrescent, much shorter than berry. Corolla not more than 2\'b75 cm, greenish-white, with narrowly triangular lobes. Berry globose, yellow. \bullet }{\i\fs28  N. Italy and W. Jugoslavia}{\fs28 . It Ju.
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 2. M. autumnalis}{\fs28  Bertol.,}{\i\fs28  Elench. Pl. Hort. Bot. Bon.}{\fs28  6 (1820 (}{\i\fs28 M. officinarum}{\fs28  L. pro parte). Like }{\b\fs28 1}{\fs28  but leaves subglabrous; calyx strongly accrescent, usually as long as or longer than berry; corolla (2\'b75-)3-4 cm, violet, with wide, triangular lobes; berry ellipsoid, yellow to orange. 2n = 84.}{\i\fs28  Mediterranean region, C. & S. Portugal.}{\fs28  Cr Gr Hs It Lu Sa Si [ ?Bl].
\par 
\par }
\pard \qc\ {\b\fs28 13.             Triguera}{\fs28                 Cav.
\par }{\fs24 By J.G. Hawkes.
\par 
\par }
\pard \ {\fs28 Erect or ascending, annual or perennial herbs. Leaves alternate, simple. Flowers slightly zygomorphic, in extra-axillary pairs the pairs distant or in a dense terminal spike. Calyx campanulate deeply and unequally 5-fid, accrescent. Corolla infundibuliform; tube short, globose; lobes short, unequal. Stamens subequal, included, inserted at top of corolla-tube; anthers connivent; filaments connate at base, forming an urceolate nectary. Stigma capitate. Fruit a dry, indehiscent, globose berry, with evanescent septum; seeds 4-8, reniform, compressed.
\par 
\par }
\pard \li200\ {\fs28 Flower-pairs in a dense terminal spike; calyx and pedicels glabrous;  
\par    corolla yellowish-green, each lobe with two purple lines ............ }{\b\fs28 2. osbeckii}{\fs28 
\par Flower-pair 3  distant; calyx and pedicels densely tomentose; 
\par    corolla violet with blackish throat, the lobes without purple  
\par    lines .......................................................................................... }{\b\fs28 1. ambrosiaca}{\fs28 
\par 
\par }
\pard \ {\fs28    }{\b\fs28 1. T. ambrosiaca}{\fs28  Cav.,}{\i\fs28  Monad. Class. Diss. Dec.}{\b\fs28  2}{\fs28 ,}{\i\fs28  App}{\fs28 .: 2 (1786). Annual, smelling of musk. Stems 15-45 cm, subsulcate, glabrous. Leaves ovate to obovate, entire to deeply sinuate-dentate, glabrous or sparsely villous, the lower petiolate, the upper sessile and slightly decurrent. Flower-pairs distant; pedicels 10-15 mm, nodding, arising from small cupuliform glands on a short common peduncle, tomentose. Calyx c. 1 cm, densely tomentose. Corolla 1\'b75-2\'b75 cm, violet with blackish throat; lobes rounded, mucronate. Ovary glabrous, half enclosed by nectary. Berry c. 1 cm in diameter, surrounded by the accrescent calyx; seeds 5 mm, brownish-black.}{\i\fs28  Roadsides and waste places. S. Spain.}{\fs28  Hs. (}{\i\fs28 N. Africa}{\fs28 .)
\par 
\par   }{\b\fs28 T. inodora}{\fs28  Cav., }{\i\fs28 op. cit. }{\fs28 3 (1786), from S. Spain (near C\'f3rdoba), appears to have been collected only once. It is like }{\b\fs28 1}{\fs28  but is scentless, has entire, lanceolate, glabrous, sessile leaves, glabrous pedicels and calyx, the corolla has a pale violet throat and muticous lobes with 5 yellowish-white lines, and the ovary is completely enclosed by the nectary.
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 2. T. osbeckii}{\fs28  (L.) Willk. in Willk. & Lange,}{\i\fs28  Prodr. Fl. Hisp.}{\b\fs28  2}{\fs28 : 524 (1870). Like }{\b\fs28 1}{\fs28  but perennial, scentless, with a stout, fleshy, branched rhizome; stems pubescent; leaves ovate-elliptical to oblong, pubescent, the lower bullate-undulate; flower-pairs in a dense, terminal spike; pedicels c. 5 mm, glabrous; calyx glabrous; corolla c. 3\'b75 cm, subrotate, greenish at base, yellowish at margin, the lobes with two purple lines; ovary villous.}{\i\fs28  S. Spain}{\fs28  (}{\i\fs28 near C\'e1diz}{\fs28 ). Hs. (}{\i\fs28 N. Africa.}{\fs28 )
\par 
\par }
\pard \qc\ {\b\fs28 14.              Datura}{\fs28               L.
\par }{\fs24 By D.M. Moore.
\par 
\par }
\pard \ {\fs28 Erect annuals. Leaves alternate, simple, shortly petiolate. Flowers actinomorphic, solitary, axillary. Calyx tubular, often 5-angled, 5-dentate, circumscissile after flowering, the lower part persistent. Corolla tubular or infundibuliform; limb 5(10)-lobed. Stamens 5, equal, included or exserted, inserted near base of corolla. Stigma 2-lobed. Ovary 2-locular, sometimes 4-locular at base. Fruit a capsule, dehiscing regularly by 4 valves or irregularly.
\par 
\par   Literature: A. G. Avery, S. Satina & J. Rietsema,}{\i\fs28  Blakeslee: The Genus Datura.}{\fs28  New York. 1959. W. E. Safford,}{\i\fs28  Jour. Washington Acad. Sci.}{\b\fs28  11}{\fs28 : 173-189 (1921).
\par 
\par }
\pard \li200\ {\fs28 1 Corolla at least 11 cm; capsule nodding, dehiscing irregularly
\par    ............................................................................................. }{\b\fs28 3. innoxia}{\fs28 
\par 1 Corolla not more than 10 cm; capsule erect, dehiscing regularly
\par 2 Calyx-teeth usually 5-10 mm, unequal; capsule with rather slender, 
\par   \'b1 equal spines not more than 15 mm, rarely smooth ............... }{\b\fs28 1. stramonium}{\fs28 
\par 2 Calyx-teeth 3-5 mm, subequal; capsule with stout, conical, 
\par   unequal spines 10-30 mm, the upper longer than the lower ..... }{\b\fs28 2. ferox}{\fs28 
\par 
\par }
\pard \ {\fs28    }{\b\fs28 1. D. stramonium}{\fs28  L.,}{\i\fs28  Sp. Pl.}{\fs28  179 (1753) (}{\i\fs28 D. tatula}{\fs28  L.). Plant 50-200 cm, glabrous to puberulent. Leaves 5-18(-21) \'d7 4-15 cm, ovate to elliptical, acute, cuneate to subcordate at base, sinuate-dentate to -lobed. Calyx 30-50 mm, angled; teeth (3-)5-10 mm, unequal. Corolla 5-10 cm, infundibuliform, white or purple. Capsule (2\'b75-)3\'b75-7 \'d7 (2-)3\'b75 cm, ovoid, erect, dehiscing regularly, densely covered with more or less equal, rather slender spines up to 15 mm, rarely smooth. 2n = 24.}{\i\fs28  Cultivated ground, waste places and other open habitats. Naturalized in most of Europe except the extreme north, but in some regions very irregular in its appearances.}{\fs28  [All except Bl Fa Fe Hb Is Rs (N) Sb.] (}{\i\fs28 America.}{\fs28 )
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 2. D. ferox}{\fs28  L.,}{\i\fs28  Demonstr. Pl.}{\fs28  6 (1753). Plant 50-150 cm, usually glabrous. Leaves 5-14 \'d7 4-13 cm, broadly ovate, coarsely sinuate-dentate. Calyx 25-40 mm, angled; teeth 3-5 mm, subequal. Corolla 4-6 cm, infundibuliform, white. Capsule 5-8 \'d7 4-6 cm, ovoid, erect, dehiscing regularly, with stout, conical spines 10-30 mm, the upper longer than the lower.}{\i\fs28  Cultivated for ornament and locally naturalized in the Mediterranean region.}{\fs28  [Ga Hs It Si.] (}{\i\fs28 E. Asia.}{\fs28 )
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 3. D. innoxia}{\fs28  Miller,}{\i\fs28  Gard. Dict.}{\fs28  ed. 8, no. 5 (1768). Plant 30-200 cm, pubescent. Leaves 5-16 \'d7 3\'b75-11 cm, ovate, unequally truncate to cuneate at base, entire or sinuate. Calyx 60-95 mm; teeth 11-25 mm, unequal, linear-triangular, acute. Corolla 11-19 cm, tubular, white, sometimes with a violet tint. Capsule 5\'b75-6\'b75 cm in diameter, ovoid, nodding, dehiscing irregularly, with long, slender spines.}{\i\fs28  Locally naturalized in the Mediterranean region.}{\fs28  [Ga Hs It Lu Sa Si.] (}{\i\fs28 Central America.}{\fs28 )
\par 
\par  }{\b\fs28  D. metel}{\fs28  L., }{\i\fs28 Sp. Pl.}{\fs28  179 (1753), which is like }{\b\fs28 3}{\fs28  but has glabrous or subglabrous stem, leaves and calyx, a 10-lobed corolla and very short spines or tubercles on the capsule, is frequently culti-
\par 
\par 200}
\par }