{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 erect, 2-lobed, the lower larger, patent, 3-lobed. Stamens 4, or 2 fertile with 2 staminodes, included; anther-lobes divergent. Stigma 2-lobed. Capsule septicidal; seeds numerous.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 Fertile stamens 4; pedicels usually exceeding subtending leaf; 
\par
  flowers mostly cleistogamous, with corolla not exceeding calyx
\par
  .................................................................................................. {\b 1. procumbens}
\par
Fertile stamens 2, staminodes 2; pedicels usually shorter
\par
  than subtending leaf; flowers mostly chasmogamous, with
\par
  corolla distinctly exceeding calyx ...................................................... {\b 2. dubia}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. L. procumbens} (Krocker) Philcox, {\i Taxon}{\b  14}: 30 (1965) ({\i L. pyxidaria} L. pro parte, {\i L. gratioloides} sensu Hayek, non Lloyd). Stems 5-18 cm, procumbent to ascending. Leaves up to 20 × 10 mm, elliptical to oblong, obtuse, entire or obscurely crenate-serrate. Pedicels 8-20 mm, slender, usually exceeding subtending leaf. Flowers usually cleistogamous, with corolla 2·5-4 mm, closed at the mouth and persistent in fruit, rarely chasmogamous with corolla 5-6 mm, open at the mouth and deciduous. Calyx 3-4 mm; lobes linear-oblong. Corolla pale pink. Stamens 4, all fertile, included. Capsule 3-5 mm, ellipsoid.{\i  Wet, muddy or sandy places. C. & S.E. Europe, extending locally to N. W. Portugal, N. Italy and S.C. Russia. }Au Bu Cz Ga Ge He Hs Hu It Ju Lu Po Rm Rs (C, W, E).
\par
 
\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. L. dubia} (L.) Pennell, {\i Scroph. E. Temp. N. Amer. }141 (1935) ({\i L. gratioloides} Lloyd). Like {\b 1} but stems often more or less erect; leaves up to 30 mm, ovate-oblong, often more distinctly crenate-serrate; pedicels 6-15 mm, usually stouter, usually shorter than subtending leaf; flowers mostly chasmogamous (a few of the later sometimes cleistogamous); calyx 5 mm; corolla 7-8 mm, lilac; fertile stamens 2; staminodes 2, spurred at the base.{\i  Muddy or sandy river-banks, and in rice-fields. Naturalized in S.W. Europe, extending to N.W. France and N. Italy.} [Ga Hs It Lu.] ({\i E. North America}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc {\b 3.                Bacopa}                  Aublet
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc By D. Philcox.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Glabrous perennial herbs; leaves opposite. Flowers solitary in the leaf-axils. Calyx deeply 5-lobed; lobes unequal in width. Corolla campanulate, more or less equally 5-lobed. Stamens 4, equal; anther-lobes parallel, contiguous. stigma subentire. Capsule 4-valved (loculicidal and septicidal); seeds numerous.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. B. monnieri} (L.) Pennell,{\i  Proc. Acad. Nat. Sci. Philad.}{\b  98}: 94 (1946). Stems up to 60 cm, procumbent and rooting at the nodes. Leaves 7-20 mm, rather succulent, sessile, spathulate to cuneate-obcordate, obtuse, entire or obscurely crenate. Pedicels up to 15 mm, with 2 linear-lanceolate bracteoles c. 2 mm long just below the flower. Calyx 5-6 mm. Corolla 8-10 mm, pale lilac-pink. Capsule 5-8 mm.{\i  River-banks and other wet places near the sea. Locally naturalized in N. Portugal and N.W. Spain.} [Hs Lu.] ({\i Widespread in tropics and subtropics}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc {\b 4.               Limosella}                L.
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc By D.A. Webb.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Small, glabrous, annual or perennial herbs, usually stoloniferous; leaves simple, all basal, subtending 1-flowered scapes. Calyx campanulate, shortly and equally (4)5-lobed. Corolla campanulate, (4)5-lobed. Stamens 4, equal. Ovary with septum incomplete at top; stigma entire. Capsule septicidal; seeds numerous.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Larger leaves with elliptic-spathulate lamina ............................... {\b 1. aquatica}
\par
1 Leaves all reduced to linear-subulate phyllodes
\par
2 Corolla-tube shorter than calyx; seeds narrowly 
\par
  ellipsoid,2-2½ times as long as wide ............................................... {\b 2. tenella}
\par
2 Corolla-tube longer than calyx; seeds broadly 
\par
  ellipsoid, c. 1½ times as long as wide ........................................... {\b 3. australis}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. L. aquatica} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 631 (1753). Annual, sometimes perennating by stolons. Summer leaves with linear-oblong to elliptic-spathulate lamina 8-20 × 2-6(-10) mm and petiole 20-120 mm, usually preceded by spring leaves with very narrow lamina or reduced to linear-subulate phyllodes. Pedicels 3-20(-30) mm, erect in flower, usually deflexed in fruit. Corolla 3 × 2 mm, white, the lobes variably tinged or striped with pinkish-purple; tube about equalling lobes and shorter than calyx. Seeds narrowly ellipsoid (2-2½ times as long as wide). 2n = 40. {\i Ditches, lake-shores and places subject to periodical flooding. Most of Europe except the Mediterranean region, but rare and local in many districts.} Au Be Br Cz Da Fe Ga Ge Hb He Ho Hs Hu Is It Ju Lu No Po Rm Rs (N, B, C, W, E) Su.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. L. tenella} Quézel & Contandr.,{\i  Candollea}{\b  20}: 73 (1965). Like {\b 1} but all leaves reduced to linear-subulate phyllodes, the largest c. 20 × 1 mm; pedicels erect, nearly equalling the leaves; flowers usually 4-merous; corolla c. 1·5 mm. 2n = 40. {\i Muddy lake-shores. N.W. Greece} ({\i Timfi Oros}). Gr.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 3. L. australis} R. Br., {\i Prodr. Fl. Nov. Holl.} 443 (1810). Like {\b 1} but with all leaves reduced to linear-subulate phyllodes, the largest 30-40 × 1·5 mm; corolla 3·5-4 × 3 mm, with white lobes and orange tube exceeding the calyx; seeds broadly ellipsoid (c. 1½ times as long as wide). 2n = 20. {\i Places subject to periodical flooding. Britain }({\i  Wales}). Br. ({\i America, Africa, Australia}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   A hybrid between {\b 1} and {\b 3} has been recorded from the European habitat of {\b 3}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc {\b 5.             Mimulus}                L.
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc By D.A. Webb.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Perennial herbs; leaves opposite. Flowers solitary in the leaf-axils or in lax, leafy, terminal racemes. Calyx campanulate, shortly 5-toothed; tube keeled and plicate. Corolla with cylindrical-campanulate tube and 2-lipped limb; upper lip flat, erect, 2-lobed; lower lip 3-lobed. Stamens 4, didynamous, included; anther-lobes transverse. Stigma shortly 2-lobed. Capsule loculicidal; seeds numerous.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Literature: A. L. Grant, {\i Ann. Missouri Bot. Gard.}{\b  11}: 99-388 (1924).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Calyx-teeth ± equal; corolla c. 2 × 1 cm; seeds tuberculate ..... {\b 3. moschatus}
\par
1 Calyx-teeth conspicuously unequal; corolla c. 4 × 3 cm;
\par
  seeds finely striate
\par
2 Inflorescence glandular-pubescent; pedicels 12-25 mm ............... {\b 1. guttatus}
\par
2 Inflorescence glabrous; pedicels 25-70 mm ..................................... {\b 2. luteus}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. M. guttatus} DC.,{\i  Cat. Pl. Horti Monsp.} 127 (1813) ({\i M. luteus} auct., non L.). Glabrous except for glandular-pubescent inflorescence. Stems up to 50 cm, hollow, stout, ascending to erect. Leaves broadly ovate, acute to obtuse, irregularly dentate, the lowest petiolate, the others sessile. Racemes 3- to 7-flowered; pedicels 12-25 mm. Calyx 15-20 mm, the upper tooth longer and wider than the others. Corolla c. 4 × 3 cm, bright yellow, usually spotted with red near the throat; mouth of tube nearly closed by 2 hairy ridges on lower lip. Seeds finely striate. 2n = 48.{\i  Cultivated for ornament and naturalized, chiefly by streams, over a large part of Europe}. [Au Be Br Bu Cz Da Fe Ga Ge Hb He Ho Ju No Po Rm Rs (B, C) Su.] ({\i W. North America}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. M. luteus} L.,{\i  Sp. Pl.} ed. 2, 884 (1763) ({\i M. smithii} auct., vix Paxton). Like {\b 1} but entirely glabrous; stems often decumbent; leaves narrower, more acuminate, more regularly dentate; pedicels 25-70 mm; corolla usually with large red patches on the limb and with the mouth of the tube open.{\i  Naturalized locally}
\par
 
\par
204}
\par