{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28  A. Flowers solitary in the axil of each bract (except sometimes in {\b 7}).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. V. spinosum} L., {\i Cent. Pl.}{\b  2}: 10 (1756). Freely-branched shrub up to 50 cm; branches ending in a spine; young shoots tomentose. Leaves 1·5-5 × 0·3-1 cm, oblong-lanceolate, irregularly toothed or lobed, whitish-grey-tomentose. Bracts minute, ovate; pedicels 3-10 mm. Calyx 2 mm; lobes oblong to oblong-lanceolate. Corolla 10-18 mm in diameter. Stamens 5; anthers all reniform; filament hairs short, lilac. Capsule 3-4 mm, ovoid.{\i  Mountains and stony hillsides. • Kriti.} Cr.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. V. ovalifolium} Donn ex sims, {\i Bot. Mag. }{\b 26}: t. 1037 (1807). Biennial; stem up to 100 cm. Basal leaves 5-30 × 2-10 cm, ovate to oblong-lanceolate, crenate, shortly petiolate, glabrous or sparsely hairy above, densely tomentose beneath. Bracts 10-14 mm, ovate-lanceolate to suborbicular, acuminate to cuspidate; bracteoles present; flowers sessile. Calyx 7-12 mm; lobes lanceolate, acuminate. Corolla 20-40(-50) mm in diameter, with pellucid glands. Stamens 5, the lower with decurrent anthers; filament-hairs yellow. Capsule 5-7 mm, globose to ovoid.{\i  S.E. Europe, from Turkey to S. Russia.} Bu Gr Rm Rs (W, K, E) Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b ovalifolium}  ({\i V. crenatifolium} Boiss.,{\i  V. pulchrum} Velen.): Indumentum yellowish. Cauline leaves broadly ovate-cordate, cuspidate. Inflorescence simple or slightly branched, usually dense; bracts suborbicular, cuspidate. Filaments of lower stamens more or less glabrous.{\i  Throughout the range of the species}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b thracicum}  (Velen.) Murb.,{\i  Lunds Univ. Årsskr.} nov. ser., {\b 29}({\b 2}): 496 (1933) ({\i V. thracicum} Velen.): Indumentum grey. Cauline leaves ovate to oblong-lanceolate, acuminate. Inflorescence branched, usually lax; bracts ovate to ovate-lanceolate, acuminate. Filaments of lower stamens usually villous near the middle. •{\i  Bulgaria}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b V. formosum} Fischer ex Schrank,{\i  Pl. Rar. Hort. Monac. }22 (1819), from the Caucasus, has once been recorded from Krym. It has suborbicular basal leaves, a deep violet patch in the centre of the corolla, and violet filaments connate in their basal part to form a tube.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 3. V. purpureum} (Janka) Huber-Morath,{\i  Neue Denkschr. Schweiz. Naturf. Ges.}{\b  87}: 125 (1971) ({\i V. glanduligerum} Velen.). Biennial; stem up to 100 cm, appressed-pubescent. Basal leaves 10-25 × 2-7 cm, oblong-lanceolate, incise-dentate to pinnatisect with linear-oblong lobes, petiolate, glabrescent above, arachnoid-tomentose beneath. Inflorescence branched, lax. Bracts 10-15 mm, lanceolate; bracteoles present; pedicels 1-3 mm. Calyx 4-6 mm; lobes lanceolate, acute. Corolla 20-30 mm in diameter. Stamens 5; anthers all reniform; filament-hairs pale yellow. Capsule 4-5 mm, ovoid-ellipsoid. •{\i  E. Bulgaria, extending to S.E. Romania and Turkey-in-Europe.} Bu Rm Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 4. V. adrianopolitanum} Podp., {\i Verh. Zool.-Bot. Ges. Wien }{\b 52}: 665 (1902) ( {\i V. adenotrichum} sensu Hayek pro parte, non Halácsy). Like {\b 3} but stem glandular-hirsute; basal leaves 5-10 × 1·5-2 cm, oblong-obovate, lanate when young, crenate but not lobed; filament-hairs violet. •{\i  S.E. Bulgaria.} Bu ?Gr ?Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 5. V. blattaria} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 178 (1753) (incl.{\i  V. rhinanthifolium} Davidov, {\i V. carduifolium }Murb. ex Hayek). Biennial (or sometimes annual), glabrous below, with stalked or sessile glands above; stem 30-120 cm. Basal leaves (4-)8-25 × (1-)2·5-4 cm, oblong to lanceolate, sessile or shortly petiolate, crenate-sinuate to pinnatifid, glabrous. Inflorescence usually simple, lax. Bracts 7-8(-22) mm, ovate, acuminate; bracteoles absent; pedicels 5-25 mm. Calyx (4-)5-8 mm. Corolla 20-30 mm in diameter, yellow, rarely white. Stamens 5, the lower with decurrent anthers; filament-hairs of the 2 lower stamens purple, of the 3 upper white and purple. Style c. 10 mm. Capsule 5-8 mm, globose.{\i  Usually in rather damp places. Europe, northwards to the Netherlands and C. Russia.} Al Au ?Az Be Bu Co Cz Ga Ge Gr He Ho Hs Hu It Ju Po Rm Rs (C, W, K, E) Sa Si Tu [Br].
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 6. V. siculum} Tod. ex Lojac.,{\i  Fl. Sic.}{\b  2}({\b 2}): 116 (1907). Like {\b 5} but basal leaves 12-35 × 3-10 cm, obovate-elliptical, densely pubescent beneath with tomentose midrib; inflorescence branched; pedicels, bracts and calyx 3-5 mm; corolla 15-18 mm in diameter. •{\i  N.W. Sicilia, S.W. Italy.} It Si.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 7. V. virgatum} Stokes in With., {\i Arr. Brit. Pl.} ed. 2,{\b  1}: 227 (1787). Like {\b 5} but usually glandular-pubescent throughout; basal leaves (10-)15-33 × 4·5-9 cm; flowers in lower part of inflorescence often in fascicles of 2-5; bracts 8-20 mm, serrate-dentate; bracteoles usually present; pedicels 2-5(-7) mm; corolla 30-40 mm in diameter; lower stamens with obliquely inserted or shortly decurrent anthers. •{\i  W. Europe, northwards to S.W. England.} Az Bl Br Co Ga Hs *It Lu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    ({\b 8-11}). {\b V. daenzeri} group. Basal leaves 9-22 × 1·5-5 cm, oblong- to obovate-oblanceolate, lyrate to pinnatisect, with 4-10 pairs of coarsely and irregularly incise-dentate lobes. Inflorescence lax; pedicels 5-35 mm. Calyx 3-4 mm. Fertile stamens 4, with or without a staminode, the lower with shortly decurrent anthers; filament-hairs violet. Style 5-10 mm.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Bracts dentate; lamina of basal leaves ± hairy beneath
\par
2 Leaf-lobes acute; pedicels 15-30 mm; corolla 25-35 mm in 
  diameter ......................................................................................... {\b 8. daenzeri}
\par
2 Leaf-lobes obtuse; pedicels 5-10(-15) mm, corolla 
\par
  15-20 mm in diameter ................................................................... {\b 9. rupestre} 
\par
1 Bracts entire; lamina of basal leaves glabrous
\par
3 Stem sparsely glandular-pubescent above, glabrous below;
\par
  capsule ellipsoid-globose, obtuse .......................................... {\b 10. roripifolium}
\par
3 Stem minutely puberulent throughout; capsule oblong-
\par
  ovoid or ovoid, acute ................................................................... {\b 11. boissieri}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 8. V. daenzeri} (Fauché & Chaub.) O. Kuntze,{\i  Rev. Gen. Pl.}{\b  2}: 469 (1891) ({\i Celsia daenzeri} Fauché & Chaub.). Biennial; stem 50-150 cm. Leaves somewhat hairy beneath, irregularly pinnatisect or lyrate; lobes oblong to lanceolate, acute. Inflorescence sparsely glandular-pubescent, usually simple. Bracts triangular-ovate, acuminate, dentate; pedicels 15-30 mm. Corolla 25-35 mm in diameter. Staminode present. Capsule subglobose, obtuse. •{\i  S. Greece.} Gr.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b V. friedrichsthalianum} O. Kuntze, {\i op. cit.} 468 (1891) ({\i Celsia speciosa} Fenzl), from S. Greece, with numerous stems up to 60 cm, smaller corolla, and calyx-lobes of lower flowers large and leaf-like, is probably a variant of {\b 8}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 9. V. rupestre} (Davidov) I. K. Ferguson, {\i Bot. Jour. Linn. Soc.}{\b  64}: 230 (1971) ({\i Celsia rupestris} Davidov). Perennial; stems 20-60 cm. Leaves glandular-villous; lobes ovate, obtuse. Inflorescence densely glandular-pubescent, simple or branched. Bracts ovate, acute, the lower dentate; pedicels 5-10(-15) mm. Corolla 15-20 mm in diameter. Staminode absent. Capsule ovoid-globose, obtuse. •{\i  Mountains of S. Bulgaria and N.E. Greece.} Bu Gr.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 10. V. roripifolium} (Halácsy) I. K. Ferguson,{\i  loc. cit.} (1971) ({\i Celsia roripifolia} Halácsy). Biennial; stems 50-150 cm. Leaves
\par

\par
208}
\par