{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 {\i by streams in Scotland, and perhaps elsewhere in N.W. Europe.} [Br.] ({\i Chile}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Hybrids between {\b 1} and {\b 2}, and other more complex hybrids involving {\i M. cupreus} Regel, are cultivated and are locally naturalized in N.W. Europe. Many of the records for {\b 2} are, in fact, referable to such hybrids; they may be distinguished from {\b 2} by the very short but dense glandular-puberulence of the inflorescence.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 3. M. moschatus} Douglas ex Lindley,{\i  Bot. Reg.}{\b  13}: t. 1118 (1828). Whole plant viscid-pubescent. Stems up to 35 cm, decumbent to ascending. Leaves ovate, denticulate to subentire, shortly petiolate. Flowers in most of the leaf-axils; pedicels 10-15 mm. Calyx 8-10 mm, with subequal teeth. Corolla c. 2 × 1 cm, rather pale yellow, sometimes striped with red at the throat; mouth of tube open. Seeds tuberculate.{\i  Cultivated for ornament, and formerly for its scent; locally naturalized in damp or shady places in N., C. & W. Europe.} [Az Be Br Cz Ga Ge Ho It Lu Rm Rs (B, C).] ({\i W. North America}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc {\b 6.              Dodartia}                   L.
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc By D.A. Webb.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Perennial herbs; leaves opposite below, alternate above. Flowers in terminal racemes. Calyx equally 5-lobed. Corolla with cylindrical tube and 2-lipped limb; upper lip erect, flat, emarginate; lower lip 3-lobed. Stamens 4, didynamous, slightly exserted. Stigma 2-lobed. Capsule loculicidal; seeds numerous.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. D. orientalis} L.,{\i  Sp. Pl.} 633 (1753). Glabrous. Stems 15-50 cm, freely branched from the base; branches usually suberect, terete, junciform. Leaves up to 4 cm but mostly much smaller, oblong-lanceolate to linear, acute, sessile, entire or remotely dentate, the lower ones caducous. Racemes lax, with 3-8 flowers; pedicels very short. Calyx 4-5 mm, campanulate; teeth deltate, acute. Corolla 15-20(-25) mm, dark violet-purple; lower lip much longer than upper. Capsule globose, about equalling calyx. Seeds smooth.{\i  Dry steppes and saline soils; also as a ruderal. S.E. Russia, W. Kazakhstan.} Rs (E) [Rs (W)]. ({\i S.W. & C. Asia}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc {\b 7.           Verbascum}             L.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc (incl.{\i  Celsia} L.)
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc By I.K. Ferguson.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Herbs, very rarely small shrubs. Leaves simple, alternate (very rarely opposite), the basal forming a rosette. Flowers in terminal racemes, spikes or panicles. Calyx equally 5-lobed. Corolla usually yellow, with a very short tube and a rotate, nearly equally 5-lobed limb. Stamens 4 or 5 (sometimes 4 fertile and 1 staminode); filaments usually villous. Capsule septicidal; seeds numerous.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Two types of anther are found in the genus. Those of the 2 or 3 posterior (upper) stamens are always reniform and transversely medifixed; those of the 2 anterior (lower) stamens may be similar, or may be elongate, longitudinally inserted, and decurrent on the filament. These two types are referred to below as{\i  reniform} and {\i decurrent} respectively. In a few species an intermediate condition is found, in which the anther is obliquely inserted.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Hybrids are very often found where two or more species grow together. They are intermediate between their parents in most morphological features, and appear to be always sterile. The species to which hybrid offspring have been most frequently attributed are {\b 5}, {\b 27}, {\b 34}, {\b 58}, {\b 72}, {\b 82} and {\b 85}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Most of the species grow in dry, sunny, semi-open habitats such as roadsides, stony slopes, dry grassland, forest-clearings, etc., and this type of habitat may be assumed unless another is stated.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Literature: S. Murbeck,{\i  Lunds Univ. Årsskr.} nov. ser., {\b 22}({\b 1}): 1-239 (1925); {\b 29}({\b 2}): 1-630 (1933); {\b 32}({\b 1}): 1-46 (1936); {\b 35}({\b 1}): 1-71 (1939). A. Huber-Morath & K. H. Rechinger, Mitt. Thür. Bot. Ges. {\b 2}({\b 1}): 42-55 (1960).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Spiny shrub ................................................................................. {\b 1. spinosum}
\par
1 Unarmed herb
\par
2 Plant ± acaulescent (stems not more than 3 cm);
\par 
   pedicels 25-90 mm. ........................................................................ {\b 23. acaule}
\par
2 Plant caulescent, with stems at least 10 cm; pedicels 2-25 mm
\par
3 Each bract with a single flower in its axil
\par
4 Flowers subtended by bracteoles as well as by a bract
\par
5 Anthers all reniform
\par
6 Basal leaves coarsely incise-dentate to pinnatisect;
\par
  filament-hairs white .................................................................. {\b 3. purpureum}
\par
6 Basal leaves crenate; filament-hairs violet .................... {\b 4. adrianopolitanum}
\par
5 Anthers of lower stamens decurrent or obliquely inserted
\par
7 Plant glandular-pubescent above ................................................ {\b 7. virgatum}
\par
7 Plant eglandular ....................................................................... {\b 2. ovalifolium}
\par
4 Bracteoles absent
\par
8 Anthers all reniform
\par
9 Pedicels shorter than the subtending bract
\par
10 Annual; leaves mostly pinnatisect ........................................... {\b 26. orientale}
\par
10 Perennial; leaves crenate to somewhat pinnatifid ............ {\b 24. pyramidatum}
\par
9 Pedicels longer than the subtending bract
\par
11 Pedicels 2-5 mm ..................................................................... {\b 25. zuccarinii}
\par
11 Pedicels at least 7 mm
\par
12 Stems not more than 25 cm; largest basal leaves not
\par
   more than 2·5 cm wide; stamens 4 .......................................... {\b 22. cylleneum}
\par
12 Stems 30-100 cm; largest basal leaves at least 2·5 cm
\par
   wide; stamens usually 5
\par
13 Basal leaves deeply crenate or weakly pinnatifid,
\par
   crispate-villous .......................................................... {\b 21. xanthophoeniceum}
\par
13 Basal leaves entire or slightly sinuate or weakly 
\par
   crenate, glabrous or sparsely pubescent ............................... {\b 20. phoeniceum}
\par
8 Anthers of lower stamens decurrent or obliquely inserted
\par
14 Pedicels 2-10 mm
\par
15 Calyx 8-15 mm, with serrate lobes; capsule 9-15 mm ............ {\b 14. creticum}
\par
15 Calyx 3-9 mm, with entire lobes; capsule 5-9 mm
\par
16 Axis of inflorescence glabrous; bracts 2-3 mm ........................ {\b 19. hervieri}
\par
16 Axis of inflorescence pubescent; bracts usually more than 3 mm
\par
17 Stamens 4
\par
18 Basal leaves entire or crenate ........................................... {\b 17. bugulifolium}
\par
18 Basal leaves lyrate to pinnatisect
\par
19 Calyx 6-9 mm; style 22-30 mm ............................................. {\b 13. laciniatum}
\par
19 Calyx 3-4 mm; style 5-10 mm ................................. ({\b 8-11}).{\b  daenzeri} group
\par
17 Stamens 5
\par
20 Basal leaves ovate to ovate-oblong; petiole at least 
\par
   1/3 as long as lamina ................................................................ {\b 18. spectabile}
\par
20 Basal leaves oblong to lanceolate; petiole short or absent 
\par
21 Corolla 15-18 mm in diameter; bracts 3-5 mm ........................... {\b 6. siculum}
\par
21 Corolla 20-40 mm in diameter; bracts 7-22 mm
\par
22 Plant glabrous below, ± glandular-pubescent above;
\par
   pedicel usually longer than calyx ................................................. {\b 5. blattaria}
\par
22 Plant usually glandular-pubescent throughout; pedicel
\par
   shorter than calyx ........................................................................ {\b 7. virgatum}
\par
14 Pedicels at least 12 mm
\par
23 Style more than 15 mm
\par

\par
205}
\par