{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 3-8 cm; leaf-surfaces not subglabrous, the glandular hairs 0·25 mm, less dark. 2n = 62.{\i  Sandstone cliff-ledges. • N. Appennini} ({\i Monte Orsaro}). It.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 32. P. daonensis} (Leybold) Leybold,{\i  Flora}({\i Regensb.}){\b  38}: 345 (1855) ({\i P. oenensis} Thomas ex Gremli). Efarinose. Longest leaves 1·5-7 × 0·6-2 cm, narrowly cuneate-obovate, more rarely ovate, dentate towards the apex, fleshy, viscid, covered with glandular hairs; hairs producing a reddish-black or brown secretion, the longest usually 0·15-0·5 mm; shrunken apical cells depressed laterally. Scape 1·5-9 cm, usually longer than the leaves in fruit, 2- to 8-flowered. Bracts 1-6 mm, ovate to transversely ovate, more or less scarious. Pedicels 1-9 mm. Calyx 2·5-6 mm. Corolla pink to lilac, usually white at the throat. Capsule about as long as calyx. 2n = 62, 63, 64.{\i  Rocks and stony alpine pastures; calcifuge. • E. Alps from} 9° 45' {\i to} 11° {\i E.} Au He It.
\par 
  
\par 

\pard\f0\fs28   {\b 33. P. villosa} Wulfen in Jacq.,{\i  Fl. Austr.}{\b  5}: 41 (1778). Efarinose. Longest leaves 2-15 × 1-3·5 cm, broadly to narrowly obovate or ovate, dentate towards the apex or sometimes entire, fleshy, viscid, covered with glandular hairs; hairs producing a reddish-black or brown secretion, the longest 0·3-1 mm; shrunken apical cells depressed laterally. Scape 2-15 cm, usually longer than the leaves in fruit, 2- to 5-flowered. Bracts 1-5 mm, ovate to transversely ovate, more or less scarious. Pedicels 2-15 mm. Calyx 3-6·5 mm. Corolla pink to lilac with a white centre. Capsule as long as or a little longer than calyx. 2n = 62, 63, 64. {\i Rocks and stony alpine pastures; calcifuge. • E. Alps west wards to} 13° 30' {\i E.; very locally in S.W. Alps.} Au Ga It Ju.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28\qc {\b 2.           Vitaliana}            Sesler
\par 

\pard\f0\fs24\qc By I.K. Ferguson.
\par 

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Trailing or caespitose perennial herbs. Leaves basal, entire. Flowers 5-merous, solitary; heterostylous. Calyx obconical with linear-lanceolate lobes. Corolla yellow; tube at least 1½ times as long as calyx, cylindrical, scarcely constricted at the throat. Filaments short, without dilated base, not connate. Capsule dehiscing by valves to the middle; seeds 2-4(-5).
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  Literature: A. Chiarugi,{\i  Nuovo Gior. Bot. Ital}. nov. ser., {\b 37}: 319-368 (1930). O. Schwarz,{\i  Feddes Repert.}{\b  67}: 16-41 (1963). A. Kress,{\i  Androsace} in Hegi,{\i  Ill. Fl. Mitteleur.}{\b  5}({\b 3}),{\i  Nachtr}.: 2248c-2249b (1968).
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. V. primuliflora} Bertol.,{\i  Fl. Ital.}{\b  2}: 368 (1835) ({\i Androsace vitaliana} (L.) Lapeyr., {\i Gregoria vitaliana} (L.) Duby). Stems more or less creeping and forming mats or cushions. Leaves 4-12 × 1-2 mm, linear to oblong-lanceolate, acute, acuminate or rounded. Calyx 4-10 mm, glabrous or pubescent. Corolla 6-22 mm. •{\i  Screes, rocks and stony pastures, usually above} 2000{\i  m. Mountains of S. & W.C. Europe, eastwards to S.E. Alps and C. Appennini.} Au Ga He Hs It.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Leaves oblong to oblong-lanceolate, rounded and 
\par 
  distinctly tomentose at apex .......................................... ({\b e}) subsp. {\b praetutiana}
\par 
1 Leaves linear to linear-lanceolate, acute to obtuse,
\par 
  not tomentose at apex
\par 
2 Corolla 6-9(-12) mm; leaves usually distinctly keeled 
\par 
  towards apex ...................................................................... ({\b d}) subsp. {\b assoana}
\par 
2 Corolla 10-22 mm; leaves usually flat
\par 
3 Leaves densely stellate-puberulent above ......................... ({\b c}) subsp. {\b cinerea}
\par 
3 Leaves glabrous or sparsely pubescent above
\par 
4 Calyx and leaves glabrous or ciliate .......................... ({\b a}) subsp.{\b  primuliflora}
\par 
4 Calyx and lower surface of leaves pubescent ............... ({\b b}) subsp. {\b canescens}
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b primuliflora}: stems trailing or laxly caespitose; leaves flat, acuminate, glabrous or sometimes ciliate; calyx glabrous or ciliate; corolla 10-16 mm.{\i  S.E. Alps}.
\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b canescens} O. Schwarz, {\i Feddes Repert.}{\b  67}: 24 (1963): stems trailing or laxly caespitose; leaves flat, acute to obtuse, pubescent or more or less tomentose beneath, usually glabrous above; calyx pubescent; corolla 12-18 mm.{\i  S.W. Alps; Pyrenees.}
\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b c}) Subsp. {\b cinerea} (Sünd.) I.K. Ferguson,{\i  Taxon }{\b 18}: 303 (1969) ({\i Gregoria vitaliana} var. {\i cinerea} Sund.): Stems trailing to densely caespitose; leaves flat, acuminate, densely pubescent to grey-tomentose; calyx pubescent; corolla 12-22 mm. 2n = 40.{\i  C. & S. W. Alps; E. Pyrenees.}
\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b d}) Subsp. {\b assoana} Laínz,{\i  Bol. Inst. Estud. Astur.} ({\i Supl. Ci.}) {\b 10}: 199 (1964) ({\i V. congesta} O. Schwarz, {\i V. intermedia} O. Schwarz): Densely caespitose; leaves acuminate, usually keeled, pubescent to grey-tomentose; calyx 4-6 mm, tomentose; corolla 6-12 mm.{\i  Mountains of S. & E. Spain.}
\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    ({\b e}) Subsp. {\b praetutiana} (Buser ex Sünd.) I. K. Ferguson, {\i Taxon}{\b  18}: 303 (1969) (Gregoria vitaliana var. praetutiana Buser ex Sund.): Stems trailing or laxly caespitose; leaves flat, oblong to oblong-oblanceolate, obtuse or rounded at apex, densely tomentose on the lower surface and at the apex above; calyx pubescent; corolla 8-12 mm. {\i C. Appennini.}
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28\qc {\b 3.           Androsace}          L.
\par 

\pard\f0\fs24\qc By I.K. Ferguson.
\par 

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Annual or perennial herbs; when perennial, often caespitose. Leaves usually basal. Flowers bracteate, borne singly or in umbels; homostylous. Calyx campanulate or subglobose; lobes triangular. Corolla-tube somewhat inflated, usually shorter than calyx; throat constricted, closed by a ring of scales. Filaments very short, without dilated base, not connate. Capsule spherical, dehiscing almost to the base; seeds 2-many.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28   Literature: F. Pax & R. Knuth in Engler,{\i  Pflanzenreich}{\b  22}({\b IV. 237}): 172-220 (1905). A. Kress in Hegi,{\i  Ill. Fl. Mitteleur.}{\b  5}({\b 3}), {\i Nachtr}.: 2248 c-2249 b (1968).
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Annual, without non-flowering rosettes
\par 
2 Involucral bracts large, leaf-like, equalling or longer
\par 
  than pedicels at anthesis ................................................................ {\b 1. maxima}
\par 
2 Involucral bracts small, much shorter than pedicels
\par 
3 Corolla and capsule shorter than calyx ....................................... {\b 5. elongata}
\par 
3 Corolla and capsule equalling or longer than calyx
\par 
4 Leaves ovate or elliptical, distinctly petiolate ............................ {\b 4. filiformis}
\par 
4 Leaves oblong-lanceolate, sessile or very shortly petiolate
\par 
5 Inflorescence 5- to 8(-10)-flowered; corolla 5-7 mm; seeds 3-5 .....{\b 3. chaixii}
\par 
5 Inflorescence 5- to 30-flowered; corolla 4-6 mm; seeds
\par 
  numerous ............................................................................. {\b 2. septentrionalis}
\par 
1 Perennial, usually caespitose, with non-flowering rosettes
\par 
6 Flowers bracteate, usually in umbels or pairs
\par 
7 Leaves ± densely villous or ciliate with long, simple hairs
\par 
8 Young leaves densely villous, at least near the apex .................... {\b 12. villosa}
\par 
8 Young leaves ± glabrous but distinctly ciliate ................... {\b 11. chamaejasme}
\par 
7 Leaves glabrous or shortly pubescent with short,
\par 
  stellate or hooked hairs
\par 
9 Leaves persistent for many years, forming columnar 
\par 
  shoots after withering ................................................................ {\b 10. pyrenaica}
\par 
9 Leaves not persistent after withering
\par 
10 Leaves widest above the middle
\par 
11 Calyx glabrous ..................................................................... {\b 8. hedraeantha}
\par 
11 Calyx pubescent ..................................................................... {\b 7. obtusifolia}
\par 
10 Leaves linear or linear-lanceolate, parallel-sided or
\par 
   widest at the base
\par 
12 Scapes glabrous ............................................................................. {\b 6. lactea}
\par 
12 Scapes pubescent or puberulent .................................................... {\b 9. carnea}
\par 
6 Flowers usually ebracteate, solitary
\par 
13 Pedicels usually 20 mm or more, glabrous .................................... {\b 6. lactea}
\par 
13 Pedicels usually less than 20 mm, pubescent
\par 

\par 
20}
\par