{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 glabrous; lobes oblong to lanceolate or triangular, acute. Inflorescence sparsely glandular-pubescent, usually branched. Bracts lanceolate to linear-lanceolate, entire; pedicels 15-35 mm. Staminode usually absent. Capsule ellipsoid-globose, obtuse. •{\i  S. Bulgaria and N.E. Greece.} Bu Gr.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 11. V. boissieri} (Heldr. & Sart. ex Boiss.) O. Kuntze,{\i  Rev. Gen. Pl.}{\b  2}: 469 (1891) ({\i Celsia boissieri} Heldr. & Sart. ex Boiss.). Perennial; stems several, 40-60 cm. Leaves glabrous, except for pubescent petiole; lobes incise-dentate with triangular, acuminate teeth. Inflorescence minutely glandular-puberulent, usually simple. Bracts ovate-lanceolate, entire; pedicels 10-25 mm. Corolla 22-25 mm in diameter. Staminode present. Capsule oblong-ovoid or ovoid, acute. •{\i  E. Greece. }Gr.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 12. V. barnadesii} Vahl, {\i Symb. Bot.}{\b  2}: 39 (1791) ({\i Celsia barnadesii} (Vahl) G. Don fil.). Biennial, glandular-puberulent throughout; stem 50-90 cm. Basal leaves 7-13 × 1·5-2·5(-4) cm, narrowly lanceolate, pinnatifid to pinnatisect with 7-18 pairs of triangular-lanceolate, dentate, acute segments, shortly petiolate. Inflorescence usually simple, lax. Bracts 3-7 mm, triangular, acute; pedicels 12-20 mm. Calyx c. 4 mm; lobes obovate, somewhat unequal. Corolla 30-35 mm in diameter. Stamens 4, without staminode, the lower with decurrent anthers 5-7 mm long; filaments of upper with yellow and violet hairs, of lower glabrous. Style 17-23 mm. Capsule 6-9 mm, subglobose. •{\i  C. & S.W. Spain, C. & S. Portugal.} Hs Lu.
\par

\par
 
\pard\f0\fs28   {\b 13. V. laciniatum} (Poiret) O. Kuntze,{\i  Rev. Gen. Pl.}{\b  2}: 469 (1891) ({\i Celsia barnadesii }var.{\i  baetica} Willk.). Like {\b 12} but stem 70-180 cm; basal leaves oblong-ovate, with fewer, wider lobes and longer petiole; pedicels 8-16 mm; calyx 6-9 mm; corolla 35-50 mm in diameter; anthers of lower stamens 7-9 mm; style 22-30 mm; capsule 8-11 mm. •{\i  S.W. Spain. }Hs.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b  Celsia commixta }Murb.,{\i  Lunds Univ. Årsskr. }nov. ser., {\b 22}: 222 (1925) ({\i C. betonicifolia} sensu Willk., non Desf.), a species from N. Africa, like {\b 13} but with lax inflorescence, pedicels 12-25 mm, bracts c. 7 mm, calyx 5-7 mm, corolla 30-35 mm in diameter and lower stamens with anthers curved at apex, has been recorded from S.W. Spain (near Cádiz), but perhaps only as a casual.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 14. V. creticum} (L.) Cav.,{\i  Elench. Pl. Horti Matrit.} 39 (1803) ({\i Celsia cretica} L.; incl. {\i C. sinuata} Cav.). Biennial, glandular pubescent and also with somewhat longer eglandular hairs; stems 40-150 cm. Basal leaves 15-25 × 4-7 cm, oblong, crenate-dentate to somewhat pinnatifid. Inflorescence simple. Bracts 12-25 mm, ovate, acuminate, serrate; pedicels 3-6 mm. Calyx 8-15 mm; lobes serrate. Corolla 40-50 mm in diameter. Stamens 4, without staminode, unequal, the lower with decurrent anthers 5-6 mm long. Style 20-25 mm. Capsule 9-15 mm, ellipsoid-globose.{\i  W. Mediterranean region.} Bl ?Co ?Ga Hs It Sa Si.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 15. V. arcturus} L.,{\i  Sp. Pl.} 178 (1753) ({\i Celsia arcturus} (L.) Jacq.). Perennial with woody stock; stems 30-70 cm, numerous. Basal leaves 8-15 × 2-5 cm, lyrate, with an ovate-oblong or oblong terminal lobe and 2-4 much smaller lateral ones, whitish-lanate beneath, green and sparsely lanate above, crenate. Cauline leaves alternate, few, much smaller. Inflorescence densely glandular-pubescent. Bracts 5-8(-11) mm, the lower ones entire; pedicels 15-20(-30) mm. Calyx 3-5 mm. Corolla 25-30 mm in diameter. Fertile stamens 4, with or without a staminode, the lower with shortly decurrent anthers; filament-hairs violet. Style 9-14 mm. Capsule 5-7 mm, subglobose.{\i  Crevices in calcareous rocks. • Kriti.} Cr.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 16. V. levanticum} I. K. Ferguson, {\i Bot. Jour. Linn. Soc.}{\b  64}: 230 (1971) ({\i Celsia horizontalis} auct., non Moench). Like {\b 15} but usually without a woody stock and often biennial or annual; leaves 8-25 × 5-11 cm, lyrate, with a broadly ovate or ovate-oblong terminal lobe and 3-7 ovate lateral lobes, more or less pubescent and glandular, villous on the veins beneath, acutely and often doubly dentate; cauline leaves opposite; lower bracts dentate.{\i  Naturalized in C. Portugal.} [Lu.] ({\i S.W. Asia}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 17. V. bugulifolium} Lam.,{\i  Encycl. Méth. Bot.}{\b  4}: 226 (1797) ({\i Celsia bugulifolia} (Lam.) Jaub. & Spach). Usually perennial; stem 20-75 cm, glandular-pubescent. Basal leaves 4-8(-12) × 1·5-3(-6) cm, triangular-ovate, subentire to crenate, subglabrous, but usually puberulent on the veins beneath, long-petiolate. Inflorescence simple. Bracts 7-14 mm, oblong-lanceolate, entire; pedicels 2-3 mm. Calyx 6-8 mm. Corolla 25-35 mm in diameter, yellowish- to bluish-green, the upper lobes with purple lines. Stamens 4, without staminode, the lower with decurrent anthers c. 5 mm long; filament-hairs violet. Style 6-10 mm. Capsule 5-8 mm, broadly ellipsoid.{\i  Turkey-in-Europe, S.E.Bulgaria.} Bu Tu. ({\i N.W. Anatolia}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 An isolated record from E. Jugoslavia (Zajecar) requires confirmation.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 18. V. spectabile} Bieb.,{\i  Fl. Taur.-Cauc. }{\b 3}: 158 (1819). Biennial; stem 50-120 cm, lanate below, glandular-hirsute above. Basal leaves 8-20 × 5-8 cm, oblong-ovate, crenate-dentate, hairy on the veins beneath, elsewhere glabrous to sparsely pubescent, long-petiolate. Inflorescence simple. Bracts 6-15 mm, lanceolate to linear, long-acuminate; pedicels 5-10 mm. Calyx 5-7 mm. Corolla 35-40 mm in diameter, yellow, with purplish spots at base of upper lobes, glandular-pubescent outside. Stamens 5, the lower with decurrent anthers; upper filaments with violet hairs, the lower glabrous. Capsule 7-9 mm, ellipsoid. Fagus-{\i  woods. Mountains of Krym.} Rs (K). ({\i Caucasus, N. Anatolia}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 19. V. hervieri} Degen, {\i Magyar Bot. Lapok}{\b  5}: 5 (1906). Biennial; stem 150-300 cm, floccose-tomentose below. Basal leaves 25-50 × 7-18(-25) cm, obovate-oblong, crenate-dentate, silvery-sericeous-tomentose, shortly petiolate. Inflorescence simple, lax, glabrous. Bracts 2-3 mm, acuminate,entire; pedicels 3-10 mm. Calyx 3-4 mm. Corolla 20-25 mm in diameter, glabrous. Stamens 5, the lower with decurrent anthers-filament hairs white. Capsule 5-6 mm, globose. •{\i  S.E. Spain.} Hs.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 20. V. phoeniceum} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 178 (1753) (incl. {\i Celsia rechingeri} Murb.). Usually perennial; stem 30-100 cm, crispate-villous below, glandular-pubescent above. Basal leaves 4-17 × 2·5-9 cm, ovate, entire, sinuate to weakly crenate, sparsely pubescent or glabrous, petiolate; cauline leaves few, small. Inflorescence lax, usually simple. Bracts lanceolate, usually shorter than pedicels; pedicels 10-25 mm. Calyx 4-8 mm; lobes lanceolate to obovate-elliptical. Corolla 20-30(-35) mm in diameter, violet (rarely yellow). Stamens 4 or 5; anthers all reniform; filament-hairs violet. Style 5-8 mm. Capsule 6-8 mm, ovoid. 2n = 32, 36.{\i  S.E. & E.C. Europe, extending northwards to C. Russia and westwards to C. Germany; cultivated for ornament, and an occasional casual elsewhere.} Al Au Bu Cz Ge Gr Hu It Ju Po Rm Rs (*B, C, W, K,E) Tu [Ho].
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Yellow-flowered plants from Macedonia have been distinguished as subsp. {\b flavidum} (Boiss.) Bornm.,{\i  Bot. Jahrb.}{\b  61}, Beibl. {\b 4}: 48 (1928), but differ from {\b 20} only in this character.
\par

\par
 
\pard\f0\fs28 They have been confused with {\b 21}.
\par

\par
209}
\par