{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 24 Calyx c. 4 mm; corolla 30-35 mm in diameter ..................... {\b 12. barnadesii}
\par
24 Calyx 6-9 mm; corolla 35-50 mm in diameter ..................... {\b 13. laciniatum}
\par
23 Style less than 15 mm
\par
25 Leaves tomentose or densely villous, at least beneath ............. {\b 15. arcturus}
\par
25 Leaves glabrous, pubescent or sparsely villous
\par
26 Calyx 4-8 mm; fertile stamens 5 ................................................ {\b 5. blattaria}
\par
26 Calyx 3-5 mm; fertile stamens 4
\par
27 Basal leaves 5-11 cm wide; cauline leaves opposite ........... {\b 16. levanticum}
\par
27 Basal leaves 1·5-5 cm wide; cauline leaves alternate
\par
   .................................................................................... ({\b 8-11}). {\b daenzeri} group
\par
3  At least the lower bracts each with a cluster of several
\par
   flowers in its axil
\par
28 Anthers of lower stamens decurrent or obliquely inserted
\par
29 Axis of inflorescence conspicuously glandular
\par
30 Hairs of the inflorescence and cauline leaves simple
\par
31 Bracts less than 7 mm, equalling the longer pedicels ...... {\b 43. anisophyllum}
\par
31 Bracts more than 7 mm, exceeding the longer pedicels ............ {\b 7. virgatum}
\par
30 Hairs of the inflorescence and cauline leaves branched
\par
32 Upper cauline leaves broadly ovate to orbicular,
\par
   usually crowded ; inflorescence ± floccose with coarse
\par
   white hairs interspersed with sessile glands
\par
33 Inflorescence densely white-floccose; lower filaments
\par
   1½-2 times as long as the upper ............................................ {\b 44. eriophorum}
\par
33 Inflorescence densely glandular but rather sparsely
\par
   floccose; lower filaments equal in length to the upper .............. {\b 45. baldaccii}
\par
32 Upper cauline leaves triangular, lanceolate or ovate-
\par
   lanceolate, few and small; inflorescence pubescent or 
\par
   tomentose with fine, short, often yellow hairs, later 
\par
   glabrescent
\par
34 Upper cauline leaves deltate-cordate .......................................... {\b 48. pelium}
\par
34 Upper cauline leaves lanceolate to ovate-oblong, not
\par
   cordate ................................................................................ {\b 46. epixanthinum}
\par
29 Axis of inflorescence ± eglandular
\par
35 Upper cauline leaves distinctly decurrent
\par
36 Stigma capitate
\par
37 Upper filaments hairy ................................................................ {\b 34. thapsus}
\par
37 Filaments all glabrous ........................................................... {\b 35. litigiosum}
\par
36 Stigma spathulate, decurrent on style
\par
38 Bracts glabrous and scarious in fruit ........................................ {\b 31. vandasii}
\par
38 Bracts persistently tomentose, not scarious in fruit
\par
39 Indumentum very dense, hard and rough .............................. {\b 33. macrurum}
\par
39 Indumentum ± sparse, often somewhat floccose, soft and smooth 
\par
40 Hairs on inflorescence yellowish, crispate ......................... {\b 28. densiflorum}
\par
40 Hairs on inflorescence white, sericeous ..................................... {\b 32. niveum}
\par
35 Upper cauline leaves not or scarcely decurrent
\par
41 Lower filaments glabrous
\par
42 Longer pedicels at least 10 mm
\par
43 Bracts ovate-lanceolate ....................................................... {\b 27. phlomoides}
\par
43 Bracts linear to linear-lanceolate ........................................ {\b 36. longifolium}
\par
42 Longer pedicels not more than 9 mm
\par
44 Filament-hairs white or yellow ........................................... {\b 27. phlomoides}
\par
44 Filament-hairs violet
\par
45 Petiole of basal leaves 2-5 cm; longer pedicels 1-4 mm; 
\par
   capsule 5-6 mm ........................................................................ {\b 47. euboicum}
\par
45 Petiole of basal leaves 5-12 cm; longer pedicels 4-9 mm;  
\par
   capsule 6-10 mm ..................................................................... {\b 39. nevadense}
\par
41 Lower filaments villous, at least in part
\par
46 Bracts suborbicular-deltate, glabrescent, membranous ... {\b 49. dieckianum}
\par
46 Bracts linear to ovate, usually with persistent tomentum, 
\par
   herbaceous
\par
47 Mature leaves whitish-tomentose above; indumentum of 
\par
   inflorescence distinctly floccose
\par
48 Longer pedicels 1-5 mm
\par
49 Filament-hairs violet ................................................................ {\b 37. boerhavii}
\par
49 Filament-hairs white ................................................................... {\b 40. lagurus}
\par
48 Longer pedicels 5-16 mm
\par
50 Inflorescence simple or with a few short branches ............. {\b 36. longifolium}
\par
50 Inflorescence a pyramidal panicle with numerous branches . {\b 38. argenteum}
\par
47 Mature leaves ±green above; indumentum of inflorescence 
\par
   ± persistent
\par
51 Bracts linear-lanceolate
\par
52 Leaves entire or obscurely crenate; longer pedicels
\par
   10-16 mm .............................................................................. {\b 36. longifolium}
\par
52 Leaves distinctly crenate; longer pedicels 2-9 mm
\par
53 Corolla with pellucid glands; anthers of lower stamens
\par
   1·5-2·5 mm, shortly decurrent or obliquely inserted ..................... {\b 42. nicolai}
\par
53 Corolla without pellucid glands; anthers of lower 
\par
   stamens 3·5-4 mm, decurrent ................................................. {\b 41. georgicum}
\par
51 Bracts ovate to ovate-lanceolate
\par
54 Inflorescence branched ....................................................... {\b 29. samniticum}
\par
54 Inflorescence simple
\par
55 Indumentum of calyx and bracts persistent, yellowish-grey, 
\par
   harshly tomentose; anthers of lower stamens 2-2·3 mm, 
\par
   shortly decurrent ..................................................................... {\b 30. guicciardii}
\par
55 Indumentum of calyx and bracts ± floccose, white,
\par
   softly tomentose; anthers of lower stamens 3·5-4 mm,
\par
   long-decurrent .......................................................................... {\b 41. georgicum} 
\par
28 Anthers all reniform
\par
56 Basal leaves distinctly lobed
\par
57 Basal leaves lobed for c. 85% of distance to midrib
\par
58 Inflorescence usually simple; lobes of basal leaves 
\par
   entire or dentate ................................................................... {\b 59. halacsyanum}
\par
58 Inflorescence branched; lobes of basal leaves 
\par
   pinnately lobed .................................................................... {\b 60. pinnatifidum}
\par
57 Basal leaves lobed for not more than 60% of distance to midrib
\par
59 Bracts 1-2 mm; axis of inflorescence glabrous
\par
60 Bracteoles present ........................................................................ {\b 66. nobile}
\par
60 Bracteoles absent
\par
61 Leaves 5-8 cm wide; capsule subglobose ......................... {\b 63. pseudonobile}
\par
61 Leaves 1·5-4 cm wide; capsule cylindrical .................. {\b 62. cylindrocarpum}
\par
59 Bracts 3-15 mm; axis of inflorescence ± hairy
\par
62 Calyx 6-12 mm ..................................................................... {\b 56. undulatum}
\par
62 Calyx 2-6 mm
\par
63 Indumentum usually hard, yellowish-grey; filament 
\par
   hairs violet ................................................................................. {\b 58. sinuatum}
\par
63 Leaves glabrescent to softly tomentose; filament hairs 
\par
   white or yellow
\par
64 Leaves more or less glabrescent above, ± persistently 
\par
   and softly yellowish-grey-tomentose beneath ......................... {\b 81. banaticum}
\par
64 Leaves softly whitish-grey-tomentose on both surfaces .. {\b 61. leucophyllum}
\par
56 Basal leaves not lobed
\par
65 Inflorescence, bracts and calyx glandular-pubescent
\par
66 Filament-hairs violet
\par
67 Basal leaves 15-30 cm, oblong-lanceolate to ovate-elliptical, 
\par
   subentire ............................................................................. {\b 46. epixanthinum}
\par
67 Basal leaves 4-15 cm, ovate, crenate ................................ {\b 77. durmitoreum}
\par
66 Filament-hairs white or yellow
\par
68 Glands on inflorescence black; corolla without 
\par
   pellucid glands ......................................................................... {\b 75. davidoffii}
\par
68 Glands on inflorescence pale; corolla with pellucid glands 
\par
69 Glandular hairs on inflorescence partly long, partly short; 
\par
   calyx-lobes oblong to oblong-lanceolate; capsule 4-6 mm . {\b 74. glandulosum}
\par
69 Glandular hairs on inflorescence all very short;
\par
   calyx-lobes linear to linear-oblong; capsule 5-8 mm ........... {\b 76. jankaeanum}
\par

\par
206}
\par