{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 vated for ornament, often as , {\i flore pleno} with a white, yellow or purple corolla. It may be locally naturalized in the Mediterranean region but most reports of this species appear to refer to {\b 3}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc {\b 15.            Cestrum}              L.
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc By D.M. Moore.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Fetid shrubs. Leaves alternate, simple. Flowers actinomorphic,in axillary or terminal leafy racemes. Calyx tubular, 5-dentate, persistent. Corolla tubular-infundibuliform. Stamens 5, included, inserted near base of corolla. Stigma 2-lobed. Fruit a 2-locular berry; seeds 2-11.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. C. parqui} L'Hér., {\i Stirp. Nov.} 73 (1788). Stems 100-300 cm, branched. Leaves 3-14 × 1-4 cm, linear- to elliptic-lanceolate, acute, cuneate at base, entire, glabrous, shortly petiolate. Inflorescence 6-13 cm; flowers sessile or very shortly pedicellate. Calyx 4-7 mm; teeth 1-1·5 mm, pubescent distally. Corolla 18-25 mm, greenish-yellow to yellow; lobes 3-6 mm, ovate to ovate-lanceolate, usually acute, pubescent towards margins. Berry 7-10 mm, ovoid, blackish; seeds reddish-brown.{\i  Locally naturalized in the Mediterranean region.} [Gr Hs It Si.] ({\i Warm-temperate South America}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc {\b 16.             Nicotiana}                L.
\par
 
\pard\f0\fs24\qc By D.M. Moore.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Annual to perennial herbs, rarely shrubs. Leaves alternate, simple. Flowers actinomorphic or zygomorphic, pedicellate, in a terminal panicle or false raceme. Calyx subglobose to tubular, sometimes campanulate or cupuliform, 5-dentate, persistent, often somewhat inflated in fruit. Corolla tubular or infundibuliform; limb 5-lobed (rarely subentire). Stamens 5, subequal or 1 shorter, included (rarely slightly exserted). Stigma capitate. Fruit a capsule, dehiscing by 2 or 4 distal valves.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Literature: T. H. Goodspeed, {\i The Genus} Nicotiana. Waltham, Mass. 1954.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Shrub; leaves glabrous, glaucous ..................................................... {\b 1. glauca}
\par
1 Herb; leaves viscid-pubescent, not glaucous
\par
2 Petiole not winged ........................................................................... {\b 2. rustica}
\par
2 Petiole winged or absent
\par
3 Inflorescence a panicle; stamens inserted in basal 
\par
  half of corolla-tube ........................................................................ {\b 3. tabacum}
\par
3 Inflorescence a false raceme; stamens inserted in 
\par
  distal half of corolla-tube .................................................................... {\b 4. alata}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. N. glauca} R.C. Graham,{\i  Edinb. New Philos. Jour.}{\b  5}: 175 (1828). Glabrous shrub (1-)2-6(-10) m. Leaves 5-25 cm, elliptical to lanceolate or ovate, acute, glaucous; petiole not winged. Flowers numerous in a lax panicle. Calyx 10-15 mm, tubular; teeth triangular, acute, equal. Corolla (25-)30-40 (-45) mm, tubular, yellow; limb 2-4 mm, with short lobes. Stamens subequal, inserted in basal ¼ of corolla-tube.{\i  Capsule 7-10 mm, ellipsoid. Cultivated for ornament and widely naturalized on rocks, walls and roadsides in the Mediterranean region and Portugal.} [ ?Bl Co Cr Ga Gr Hs It Lu Sa Si.] ({\i Argentina, Bolivia.})
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. N. rustica} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 180 (1753). Annual; stem 0·5-1·5 m, viscid-pubescent. Leaves 10-15(-30) cm, ovate to elliptical or rarely suborbicular, acute, puberulent; petiole not winged. Flowers numerous in a compact to lax panicle. Calyx 8-15 mm, tubular to cupuliform; teeth triangular, acute, unequal. Corolla 12-17 mm, tubular-infundibuliform, greenish-yellow; limb 3-6 mm, with short, obtuse, apiculate lobes. Stamens unequal, inserted in basal ¼ of corolla-tube. Capsule 7-16 mm, ellipsoid-ovoid to subglobose.{\i  Formerly widely cultivated for tobacco and locally naturalized; now largely replaced by }{\b 3}. [Al Au Be ?Bl Bu Co ?Cr Cz ?Da Ga Ge Gr He Ho Hs Hu It Ju Rm Rs (C, W, K, E) ?Sa ?Si ?Tu.] ({\i North America}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 3. N. tabacum} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 180 (1753) ({\i N. latissima} Miller). Viscid annual or short-lived perennial 1-3 m. Leaves up to 50 cm or more, ovate to elliptical or lanceolate, acuminate, decurrent, sessile or with a short, winged petiole. Flowers numerous in a much-branched panicle. Calyx 12-20(-25) mm, tubular to tubular-campanulate; teeth triangular, acuminate, unequal. Corolla (30-)35-55 mm, infundibuliform, pale greenish-cream, often pinkish distally; limb 10-15 mm, with acuminate lobes, sometimes subentire. Stamens unequal, 4 sometimes slightly exserted, inserted in basal 1/4-1/3 of corolla-tube. Capsule 15-20 mm, ellipsoid to globose.{\i  Cultivated for tobacco throughout most of Europe except the north, and often naturalized.} [Al Au Az Be ?Bl Bu Co Cr Cz Da Ga Ge Gr He Ho Hs Hu It Ju Lu Rm Rs (C, W, K, E) ?Sa ?Si Tu.] ({\i ? N.E. Argentina, Bolivia}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    A very polymorphic species containing a multitude of cultivated forms used in most modern tobaccos. No satisfactory formal infraspecific classification can be applied here.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 4. N. alata} Link & Otto,{\i  Icon. Pl. Rar. Horti Bot. Berol.} 63 (1830). Viscid, short-lived perennial 0·6-1·5 m. Lower leaves 20-25 cm, in a sparse rosette, spathulate to elliptical, obtuse to subacute, somewhat amplexicaul, sessile or with short, winged petiole; cauline leaves decurrent, ovate to elliptic-ovate, sessile, auriculate. Flowers few in a lax false raceme. Calyx 15-25 mm, cupuliform to campanulate; teeth subulate-acicular, equal or unequal. Corolla 50-100 mm, tubular to somewhat infundibuliform, pale greenish; limb 15-25 mm, with 2 long and 3 shorter acute lobes. Stamens unequal, inserted in distal 1/4-1/3 of corolla tube. Capsule 12-17 mm, ovoid.{\i  Cultivated for ornament and locally naturalized in C. Europe.} [Au Cz Rm.] ({\i N.E. Argentina to S.E. Brazil}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc {\b 153.          BUDDLEJACEAE}
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc Edit. †T.G. Tutin.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Trees, shrubs or rarely herbs with small, sessile or stipitate glands and usually stellate hairs. Leaves opposite, very rarely alternate, simple. Flowers actinomorphic or weakly zygomorphic, usually 4-merous. Disk small or absent. Stamens epipetalous, alternating with the corolla-lobes. Ovary superior or rarely semi-inferior, 2-locular; ovules numerous; placentation axile. Style 1. Fruit a capsule.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  In addition to the species described below,{\b  Buddleja alternifolia} Maxim.,{\i  Bull. Acad. Imp. Sci. Pétersb.}{\b  26}: 494 (1880), and{\b  B. globosa} J. Hope, {\i Verh. Holland. Maatsch. Wetensch. Haarlem}{\b  20}({\b 2}): 417 (1782), are commonly cultivated and may become naturalized. The former, from China, has alternate leaves and lilac flowers in sessile axillary clusters borne on the previous year's wood. The latter, from Chile and Peru, has opposite leaves and orange flowers in long-pedunculate globose heads.
\par

\par
201}
\par