{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 21 Corolla-tube with a broad pouch at the base 
\par
22 Annual; calyx unequally lobed, longer than corolla tube ...... {\b 12. Misopates}
\par
22 Perennial; calyx ± equally lobed, shorter than corolla tube
\par
23 Leaves palmately veined; loculi of capsule equal ..................... {\b 11. Asarina}
\par
23 Leaves not palmately veined; loculi of capsule unequal .... {\b 10. Antirrhinum}
\par
16 Corolla-tube symmetrical at the base, without spur,
\par
   pouch or gibbosity
\par
24 Parasitic, without chlorophyll; leaves reduced to fleshy, 
\par
   whitish or brownish scales ......................................................... {\b 39. Lathraea}
\par
24 Holophytic or hemiparasitic; chlorophyll present 
\par
   (rarely masked by anthocyanin); leaves not markedly fleshy 
\par
25 Capsule septicidal
\par
26 Plant eglandular; flowers solitary in leaf-axils ......................... {\b 2. Lindernia}
\par
26 Plant glandular, at least on pedicels or corolla;
\par
   flowers usually in spikes, cymes or panicles
\par
27 Corolla-tube cylindrical; flowers in spikes ............................ {\b 25. Lafuentea}
\par
27 Corolla-tube subglobose; flowers pedicellate, usually 
\par
   in cymes ................................................................................. {\b 8. Scrophularia}
\par
25 Capsule loculicidal or fruit indehiscent
\par
28 Pedicel bearing 2 bracteoles
\par
29 Flowers in terminal racemes; calyx 2-lipped; corolla
\par
   purple ................................................................................. {\b 37. Siphonostegia}
\par
29 Flowers in axils of lower leaves; calyx equally 5-lobed ; 
\par
  corolla pale yellow .................................................................... {\b 38. Cymbaria}
\par
28 Pedicel without bracteoles
\par
30 Anthers with one lobe pendent, the other medifixed
\par
   (N. & E. Russia) ........................................................................ {\b 26. Castilleja}
\par
30 Anthers with lobes ± parallel
\par
31 Calyx 5-toothed or 2-lipped or obscurely lobed, not regularly 4-lobed
\par
32 Upper leaves alternate
\par
33 Leaves entire or remotely dentate; upper lip of corolla flat ...... {\b 6. Dodartia}
\par
33 Leaves pinnatifid or pinnatisect (rarely crenate-serrate); 
\par
   upper lip of corolla galeate, laterally compressed ................. {\b 34. Pedicularis}
\par
32 Upper leaves opposite or whorled
\par
34 Leaves pinnatisect ................................................................ {\b 34. Pedicularis}
\par
34 Leaves entire to incise-dentate
\par
35 Fruit 1-seeded ............................................................................. {\b 28. Tozzia}
\par
35 Fruit a capsule with numerous seeds
\par
36 Calyx-tube keeled; upper lip of corolla flat .............................. {\b 5. Mimulus}
\par
36 Calyx-tube not keeled; upper lip of corolla galeate or cucullate
\par
37 Plant glandular-pubescent; flowers sessile; upper lip
\par
   of corolla not rostrate ................................................................ {\b 33. Bellardia}
\par
37 Plant subglabrous; flowers distinctly pedicellate;
\par
   upper lip of corolla conspicuously rostrate ....................... {\b 36. Rhynchocorys}
\par
31 Calyx distinctly and ± regularly 4-lobed 
\par
38 Capsule with 1-4 seeds
\par
39 Annual; upper lip of corolla cucullate; capsule 4-seeded, 
\par
   longer than wide, usually mucronate or acuminate ........... {\b 27. Melampyrum}
\par
39 Rhizomatous perennial; upper lip of corolla flat;
\par
   capsule 1-seeded, globose ............................................................. {\b 28. Tozzia}
\par
38 Capsule with more than 4 seeds
\par
40 Calyx-tube subglobose, inflated, especially in fruit;
\par
   anther-lobes not mucronate; seeds discoid, with 
\par
   marginal wing ........................................................................ {\b 35. Rhinanthus}
\par
40 Calyx-tube usually cylindrical or campanulate, scarcely 
\par
   inflated; anther-lobes mucronate; seeds not discoid
\par
41 Lobes of upper lip of corolla recurved; lobes of lower
\par
   lip conspicuously emarginate; one anther-lobe with a 
\par
   longer mucro than the other ..................................................... {\b 29. Euphrasia}
\par
41 Upper lip of corolla entire, or with flat lobes;
\par
   lobes of lower lip entire or very slightly emarginate;
\par
   anther-lobes equally mucronate
\par
42 Seeds c. 0·5 mm, smooth or finely reticulate, not winged  {\b 32. Parentucellia}
\par
42 Seeds 1-2 mm, winged or longitudinally ridged or striate 
\par
43 Rhizomatous perennial herb; seeds with 1 or more 
\par
   membranous, longitudinal wings ................................................. {\b 31. Bartsia}
\par
43 Annual herb or dwarf shrub; seeds with longitudinal 
\par
   striae or low ridges
\par
44 Inflorescence secund; leaves usually entire or subentire ....... {\b 30. Odontites}
\par
44 Inflorescence not secund; leaves coarsely serrate ................... {\b 33. Bellardia}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc {\b 1.            Gratiola}                  L.
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc By D.A. Webb.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Perennial herbs; leaves opposite. Flowers solitary in the leafaxils; pedicel bearing 2 bracteoles just below the calyx. Calyx deeply and unequally 5-lobed. Corolla with wide tube and somewhat 2-lipped limb; upper lip flat, 2-lobed, the lower slightly larger, 3-lobed. Stamens included, the 2 upper lateral fertile, the other 3 reduced to staminodes. Anther-lobes transverse, surrounded by a membranous expansion of the connective. Stigma 2-lobed. Capsule 4-valved (septicidal and loculicidal); seeds numerous.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Plant glabrous; pedicels shorter than subtending leaves ............ {\b 1. officinalis}
\par
1 Plant glandular-puberulent at least above; pedicels as 
\par
    long as subtending leaves
\par
2 Leaves linear; corolla 12-18 mm; lower staminodes conspicuous  {\b 2. linifolia}
\par
2 Leaves lanceolate; corolla 8-12 mm; lower staminodes minute .. {\b 3. neglecta}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. G. officinalis} L.,{\i  Sp. Pl.} 17 (1753). Glabrous. Stems 10-50(-80) cm, hollow, 4-angled above, erect from a creeping and rooting base. Leaves 20-50 mm, linear to lanceolate, serrate to subentire, semiamplexicaul, glandular-punctate. Pedicels shorter than subtending leaves. Corolla 10-18 mm, white, usually veined and tinged with purplish-red. Upper staminode minute, the 2 lower long and slender.  2n = 32. {\i  Ditches, river-banks and wet meadows. Europe, northwards to the Netherlands, Estonia and S. Ural.} Al Au Be Bu Cz Ga Ge Gr He Ho Hs Hu It Ju Lu Po Rm Rs (B, C, W, K, E) Sa Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. G. linifolia} Vahl,{\i  Enum. Pl.}{\b  1}: 89 (1804). Like {\b 1} but glandular-puberulent at least above; stems terete; leaves linear, more or less entire; pedicels at least as long as subtending leaves.{\i  Ditches, river-banks and marshes. • Portugal, S.W. Spain.} Hs Lu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Plants intermediate between {\b 1} and {\b 2} occur in Portugal and N. Spain. They have been named {\b G. officinalis} subsp.{\b  broteri} Nyman,{\i  Consp. }536 (1881), but are probably better regarded as hybrids.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 3. G. neglecta} Torrey, {\i Cat. Pl. New York} 89 (1819). Like {\b 1} but glandular-puberulent above; stems 5-30 cm, not creeping at base; leaves lanceolate; pedicels at least as long as subtending leaves; corolla 8-12 mm; all staminodes minute.{\i  Naturalized in flooded gravel-pits in E. France} ({\i Haut-Rhin}). [Ga.] ({\i E. North America}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc {\b 2.              Lindernia}                All.
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc By D.A. Webb & D. Philcox.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Glabrous annuals; leaves opposite. Flowers solitary in the leaf-axils. Calyx equally and deeply 5-lobed. Corolla with narrowly campanulate tube and 2-lipped limb; upper lip small, flat,
\par

\par
203}
\par