{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28\qc {\b 1.                Buddleja}                    L.
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc By †T.G. Tutin.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Shrubs or small trees with interpetiolar stipules often reduced to a ridge. Hairs stellate. Inflorescence cymose, capitate or a long panicle. Calyx campanulate. Corolla with a nearly cylindrical tube and patent limb. Stamens included or very shortly exserted. Capsule septicidal.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Leaves densely tomentose beneath; corolla-tube straight
\par
2 Corolla-tube 4-5 times as long as calyx; stamens
\par
  inserted about the middle of the tube ............................................... {\b 1. davidii}
\par
2 Corolla-tube 2-3 times as long as calyx; stamens 
\par
  inserted near the top of the tube .................................................... {\b 2. albiflora} 
\par
1 Leaves sparsely pubescent beneath; corolla-tube curved
\par
3 Racemes erect; calyx-teeth as wide as long .............................. {\b 4. lindleyana}
\par
3 Racemes pendent; calyx-teeth distinctly longer than wide .......... {\b 3. japonica}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. B. davidii} Franchet,{\i  Nouv. Arch. Mus. Hist. Nat. Paris} ser. 2, {\b 10}: 65 (1887). Deciduous shrub 1-5 m. Twigs bluntly angled or almost terete, tomentose. Leaves 10-25 cm, ovate-lanceolate to lanceolate, acuminate, serrate, thinly pubescent to almost glabrous above, tomentose beneath, shortly petiolate. Flowers in dense many-flowered cymes, forming a terminal panicle. Young twigs, peduncles, pedicels and calyx tomentose. Corolla pale lilac to deep violet with an orange ring at the mouth, stellate-pubescent and glandular outside; tube 4-5 times as long as calyx, straight; stamens inserted about the middle of the tube.{\i  Cultivated for ornament and commonly naturalized in parts of W. & C. Europe.} [Au Be Br Ga Ge Hb He Ho Hs It.] ({\i China}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. B. albiflora} Hemsley, {\i Jour. Linn. Soc. London} ({\i Bot.}) {\b 26}: 118 (1889). Like {\b 1} but up to 10 m; twigs glabrescent; corolla pale lilac, the tube 2-3 times as long as calyx; stamens inserted near the top of the tube.{\i  Sometimes cultivated for ornament and occasionally naturalized in France.}[ Ga.] ({\i W. China}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 3. B. japonica} Hemsley,{\i  op. cit.} 119 (1889). Deciduous shrub up to 1·5 m. Twigs sharply 4-angled, with winged angles, stellate-pubescent. Leaves 8-20 cm, ovate-lanceolate, acuminate, remotely toothed or entire, sparsely pubescent or almost glabrous beneath. Flowers in narrow, pendent panicles up to 25 cm. Calyx-teeth longer than wide. Corolla lilac, the tube curved and densely pubescent outside.{\i  Sometimes cultivated for ornament and occasionally naturalized in France}. [Ga.] ({\i Japan}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 4. B. lindleyana} Fortune ex Lindley,{\i  Bot. Reg. }{\b 30} ({\i Misc}.): 25 (1844). Like {\b 3} but twigs not or narrowly winged; flowers in erect panicles; calyx-teeth as wide as long; corolla purple, the tube floccose outside.{\i  Sometimes cultivated for ornament and occasionally naturalized in France.} [Ga.] ({\i China.})
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc {\b 154.            SCROPHULARIACEAE}
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc Edit. D.A. Webb.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Herbs, rarely shrubs. Leaves simple (though sometimes deeply lobed), exstipulate, alternate or opposite (rarely all basal, or the uppermost whorled). Flowers zygomorphic (though sometimes only very slightly), usually in bracteate spikes or racemes, less often solitary in the leaf-axils or in cymes. Calyx usually 4- or 5-lobed, sometimes 2-lipped. Corolla (4)5(8)-lobed or 2-lipped. Stamens usually 2 or 4, rarely 3, 5 or 6-8; staminodes sometimes present. Ovary superior, 2-locular (sometimes 1-locular in upper part and rarely throughout); style single; stigma usually capitate. Fruit a capsule (rarely indehiscent); seeds usually numerous.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Fertile stamens 2 (staminodes sometimes present as well)
\par
2 Corolla not 2-lipped
\par
3 Herb, sometimes woody at the base; capsule loculicidal
\par
  (sometimes also septicidal), ± compressed at right 
\par
  angles to the septum ................................................................... {\b 21. Veronica}
\par
3 Shrub; capsule septicidal only, compressed parallel to
\par
  the septum ......................................................................................... {\b 22. Hebe}
\par
2 Corolla ± distinctly 2-lipped, with upper lip entire or 2-lobed  
\par
  and lower lip 3-lobed
\par
4 Flowers solitary in leaf-axils
\par
5 Bracteoles present; calyx-lobes unequal; capsule loculicidal 
\par
  and septicidal ................................................................................. {\b 1. Gratiola}
\par
5 Bracteoles absent; calyx-lobes equal; capsule septicidal only ... {\b 2. Lindernia}
\par
4 Flowers in terminal spikes or racemes
\par
6 Calyx membranous, obscurely toothed, usually split on
\par
  lower side; capsule with 1-2 seeds ................................................ {\b 19. Lagotis}
\par
6 Calyx herbaceous, distinctly 5-lobed, not split on 
\par
  lower side; capsule with numerous seeds
\par
7 Leaves alternate or basal ........................................................... {\b 20. Wulfenia}
\par
7 Leaves opposite ........................................................................ {\b 23. Paederota}
\par
1 Fertile stamens (3)4-5(-8)
\par
8 Corolla not 2-lipped
\par
9 Leaves opposite
\par
10 Stems procumbent; corolla lilac-pink .......................................... {\b 3. Bacopa}
\par
10 Stems erect; corolla yellow
\par
11 Leaves lyrate-pinnatifid; filaments with violet hairs ............. {\b 7. Verbascum}
\par
11 Leaves biserrate; filaments glabrous or with colourless 
\par
   hairs ....................................................................................... {\b 8. Scrophularia}
\par
9 Leaves alternate or basal
\par
12 Leaves all basal ........................................................................ {\b 4. Limosella}
\par
12 Cauline leaves present
\par
13 Flowers in axils of foliage-leaves .......................................... {\b 24. Sibthorpia}
\par
13 Flowers in terminal spikes, racemes or panicles
\par
14 Corolla-tube very short; stamens exserted ............................. {\b 7. Verbascum}
\par
14 Corolla-tube at least half as long as diameter of limb;
\par
   stamens included
\par
15 Flowers in elongate racemes; corolla 9-15 mm, with ±
\par
   porrect lobes; anther-lobes distinct ............................................ {\b 17. Digitalis}
\par
15 Flowers in subcorymbose racemes; corolla 6-9 mm, with 
\par
   patent lobes; anther-lobes confluent .............................................. {\b 18. Erinus}
\par
8 Corolla ± distinctly 2-lipped, with upper lip entire 
\par
  or 2-lobed and lower lip 3-lobed
\par
16 Corolla-tube with a spur, pouch or gibbosity at the 
\par
   base on the abaxial side
\par
17 Capsule dehiscing by longitudinal slits
\par
18 Leaves palmately veined, reniform to suborbicular,
\par
   petiolate ................................................................................. {\b 15. Cymbalaria}
\par
18 Leaves not palmately veined, usually narrow, ± sessile ............ {\b 14. Linaria}
\par
17 Capsule dehiscing by 2-3 apical pores
\par
19 Mouth of corolla-tube not closed by a palate
\par
20 Basal leaves alternate, forming a rosette; anther-lobes
\par
   confluent; seeds without longitudinal ribs ............................. {\b 9. Anarrhinum} 
\par
20 Lower leaves usually opposite, not forming a definite rosette; 
\par
   anther-lobes distinct; seeds with longitudinal ribs ........... {\b 13. Chaenorhinum}
\par
19 Mouth of corolla-tube ± closed by a raised palate at 
\par
   base of lower lip
\par
21 Corolla-tube with a narrow spur at the base .............................. {\b 16. Kickxia}
\par

\par
202}
\par