{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 65 Inflorescence, bracts and calyx eglandular
\par
70 Basal and lower cauline leaves cordate, truncate or
\par
   very shortly cuneate at base
\par
71 Bracts and calyx ± glabrous
\par
72 Inflorescence branched .......................................................... {\b 87. glabratum}
\par
72 Inflorescence simple ................................................................. {\b 86. lanatum}
\par
71 Bracts and calyx ± densely hairy
\par
73 Calyx 5-8 mm; capsule 7-10 mm .................................... {\b 78. rotundifolium}
\par
73 Calyx 2·5-5 mm; capsule 2·5-6 mm
\par
74 Filament-hairs white or yellow
\par
75 Leaves ovate, crenate to subentire, rounded to cordate
\par
   at base; stem ± white-tomentose ............................................. {\b 80. delphicum}
\par
75 Leaves oblong-obovate, deeply and irregularly crenate
\par
   or lobed, shortly cuneate at base; stem ± glabrescent ............. {\b 81. banaticum}
\par
74 Filament-hairs violet
\par
76 Basal leaves truncate or very shortly cuneate at base;
\par
   pedicels about as long as calyx ..................................................... {\b 83. chaixii}
\par
76 Basal leaves cordate; pedicels 2-3 times as long as calyx ......... {\b 85. nigrum}
\par
70 Basal and lower cauline leaves tapered gradually to the petiole 
\par
77 Leaves densely and persistently whitish- or greyish-
\par
   tomentose on both surfaces
\par
78 Stem and inflorescence-axis densely and persistently tomentose
\par
79 Pedicels longer than calyx
\par
80 Bracts linear; inflorescence simple or sparingly branched . {\b 36. longifolium}
\par
80 Bracts ovate-lanceolate or lanceolate; inflorescence
\par
   freely branched
\par
81 Filament-hairs violet ................................................................... {\b 54. adeliae}
\par
81 Filament-hairs white or yellow ............................................. {\b 53. speciosum}
\par
79 Pedicels not longer than calyx
\par
82 Flowers sessile
\par
83 Inflorescence dense, cylindrical; pedicels adnate to
\par
   axis of inflorescence
\par
84 Calyx 5-7 mm; lobes broadly ovate and shortly cuspidate ..{\b 51. botuliforme}
\par
84 Calyx 9-11 mm; lobes linear-lanceolate .......................... {\b 50. macedonicum}
\par
83 Inflorescence lax, with dense but widely spaced clusters of 
\par
   flowers; pedicels absent or very short, not adnate to axis
\par
85 Calyx 3-5 mm .................................................................... {\b 71. mucronatum}
\par
85 Calyx 6-12 mm ..................................................................... {\b 56. undulatum}
\par
82 Pedicels 2-8 mm
\par
86 Filament-hairs violet
\par
87 Bracts 5-7 mm, ovate to deltate; capsule 5-6 mm ............... {\b 52. dentifolium}
\par
87 Bracts 8-15 mm, lanceolate, acuminate; capsule 7-10 mm
\par
   ............................................................................................ {\b 78. rotundifolium}
\par
86 Filament-hairs white or yellow
\par
88 Bracts broadly ovate, ovate-deltate to ovate-cordate
\par
89 Calyx-lobes triangular-ovate ................................................ {\b 55. lasianthum}
\par
89 Calyx-lobes oblong-lanceolate to lanceolate
\par
90 Indumentum floccose; inflorescence ± dense ..................... {\b 49. dieckianum}
\par
90 Indumentum ± persistent; inflorescence lax ......................... {\b 56. undulatum}
\par
88 Bracts ovate-lanceolate, lanceolate to linear
\par
91 Bracts linear .................................................................... {\b 72. pulverulentum}
\par
91 Bracts ovate-lanceolate to lanceolate
\par
92 Inflorescence lax, with flower-clusters widely spaced ...... {\b 71. mucronatum}
\par
92 Inflorescence dense, with flower-clusters contiguous 
\par
   or overlapping
\par
93 Calyx-lobes linear; corolla 15-20 mm in diameter ...................... {\b 79. reiseri}
\par
93 Calyx-lobes ovate-lanceolate; corolla 25-40 mm in diameter
\par
   .................................................................................................. {\b 30. guicciardii}
\par
78 Stem and inflorescence-axis ± glabrous when mature
\par
   (sometimes floccose when young) 
\par
94 Calyx 5-12 mm
\par
95 Filament-hairs violet ........................................................ {\b 78. rotundifolium}
\par
95 Filament-hairs white or yellow
\par
96 Bracts ovate-lanceolate to linear; calyx-lobes linear ................... {\b 79. reiseri}
\par
96 Bracts suborbicular-deltate, cordate or ovate-deltate;
\par
   calyx-lobes oblong-lanceolate to lanceolate
\par
97 Plant floccose, later glabrescent; inflorescence ± dense ..... {\b 49. dieckianum}
\par
97 Plant ± persistently tomentose; inflorescence lax ................ {\b 56. undulatum}
\par
94 Calyx 2-5 mm
\par
98 Bracts and calyx-lobes ovate to ovate-orbicular ...................... {\b 68. herzogii}
\par
98 Bracts and calyx-lobes ovate-lanceolate to linear-oblong
\par
99 Leaves distinctly crenate, the cauline at least shortly decurrent
\par
100 Basal leaves 25-65 × 7-20(-25) cm; connectives of all
\par
    anthers papillose ................................................................. {\b 71. mucronatum}
\par
100 Basal leaves 7-15 × 3-8 cm; connectives of two lower
\par
    anthers smooth .......................................................................... {\b 70. decorum}
\par
99  Leaves entire or obscurely crenate, the cauline not decurrent
\par
101 Filament-hairs violet ...................................................... {\b 69. mallophorum}
\par
101 Filament-hairs white or yellow
\par
102 Inflorescence lax; capsule cylindrical, twice as long
\par
    as wide; indumentum of leaves ± persistent ............................ {\b 67. graecum}
\par
102 Inflorescence dense; capsule ovoid-globose, only 
\par
    slightly longer than wide; indumentum of leaves 
\par
    floccose ............................................................................ {\b 72. pulverulentum}
\par
77  Mature leaves sparsely tomentose to ± glabrous, green
\par
    at least above
\par
103 Upper bracts conspicuous, suborbicular-deltate, ± glabrescent
    ............................................................................................... {\b 49. dieckianum}
\par
103 Upper bracts inconspicuous, ovate-lanceolate to linear, 
\par
    usually with persistent tomentum
\par
104 Calyx 9-12 mm ..................................................................{\b  57. pentelicum}
\par
104 Calyx 2-8 mm
\par
105 Basal leaves not more than 5 cm wide
\par
106 Inflorescence simple ................................................................. {\b 42. nicolai}
\par
106 Inflorescence branched
\par
107 Leaves coarsely crenate-dentate; bracts 6-10 mm .................... {\b 64. humile}
\par
107 Leaves entire or finely crenate; bracts 2-4 mm ................ {\b 65. adenanthum}
\par
105 Basal leaves more than 5 cm wide
\par
108 Filament-hairs violet
\par
109 Basal leaves orbicular to ovate-elliptical, petiolate; 
\par
    capsule 7-10 mm ............................................................... {\b 78. rotundifolium}
\par
109 Basal leaves obovate-oblong, sessile; capsule 3-6 mm ..... {\b 84. bithynicum}
\par
108 Filament-hairs white
\par
110 Inflorescence simple
\par
111 Basal leaves 15-50 × 6-15 cm, elliptic- to obovate-oblong; 
\par
    bracts ovate to ovate-lanceolate, acuminate-cuspidate ....... {\b 73. gnaphalodes}
\par
111 Basal leaves 5-25 × 2-7 cm, oblong-ovate to -lanceolate; 
\par
    bracts linear to linear-lanceolate .................................................. {\b 42. nicolai}
\par
110 Inflorescence branched
\par
112 Capsule oblong-cylindrical .................................................... {\b 67. graecum}
\par
112 Capsule ovoid-globose or ovoid-ellipsoid
\par
113 Indumentum floccose; pedicels 2-5(-7) mm ................ {\b 72. pulverulentum}
\par
113 Indumentum persistent; pedicels 6-11 mm ............................ {\b 82. lychnitis}
\par

\par
207}
\par