{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 14 Leaves persistent for many years after withering, forming
\par 
   columnar shoots; plants forming deep, dense cushions
\par 
15 Flowers with 2-3 bracts below the calyx ............................... {\b 10. pyrenaica}
\par 
15 Flowers ebracteate
\par 
16 Leaves densely white-tomentose ............................................. {\b 14. vandellii}
\par 
16 Leaves pubescent, not white-tomentose
\par 
17 Pedicels 6-20 mm .................................................................. {\b 15. cylindrica}
\par 
17 Pedicels less than 6 mm .......................................................... {\b 13. helvetica}
\par 
14 Leaves not persistent for long after withering, forming short
\par 
   rosettes at the end of the branches; plants forming shallow cushions
\par 
18 Leaves pubescent, hairs c. 1 mm, simple or forked .............. {\b 17. pubescens}
\par 
18 Leaves glabrous or hairy; hairs c. 0·25 mm, usually stellate
\par 
19 Leaves ovate-spathulate or oblong-ovate, shortly ciliate; 
\par 
   leaf-surfaces glabrous or sparsely puberulent ............................... {\b 18. ciliata}
\par 
19 Leaves linear, linear-lanceolate, oblong-lanceolate 
\par 
   or spathulate, rarely ciliate
\par 
20 Leaves glabrous, or shortly ciliate when young .................... {\b 16. mathildae}
\par 
20 Leaves puberulent or pubescent
\par 
21 Branches shortly capitate, not forming a cushion;
\par 
   corolla 4-5 mm in diameter .................................................. {\b 19. hausmannii}
\par 
21 Branches many-headed, forming a cushion; corolla
\par 
   7-12 mm in diameter
\par 
22 Leaves ± keeled, acute; calyx not divided to middle;
\par 
   corolla 10-12 mm in diameter ............................................... {\b 21. wulfeniana}
\par 
22 Leaves flat, obtuse or subacute; calyx divided at
\par 
   least to middle; corolla 7-9 mm in diameter 
\par 
23 Leaves spathulate-lanceolate, with forked hairs;
\par 
   pedicels 2-3(-4) times as long as leaves ........................................ {\b 22. brevis}
\par 
23 Leaves oblong-lanceolate, with stellate hairs;
\par 
   pedicels 1-2 times as long as leaves .............................................. {\b 20. alpina}
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. A. maxima} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 141 (1753) ({\i A. turczaninowii} Freyn). Annual. Leaves 6-30 × 3-11 mm, ovate, obovate or oblong-lanceolate, sessile or very shortly petiolate, dentate, glabrous or sparsely hairy. Scapes 1-several, 3-15 cm, with short, glandular and eglandular patent hairs. Inflorescence many-flowered; involucral bracts 6-12 × 2-7 mm, ovate, obovate or oblong-lanceolate, connate at the base. Pedicels equal to or shorter than bracts, elongating in fruit. Calyx 8-10 mm, more or less densely hairy, accrescent. Corolla c. 6 mm, white or pink, shorter than the calyx. {\i Dry open habitats; somewhat calcicole. Europe, northwards to} c. 50° {\i N. in W. Germany and to} c. 55° {\i N. in E. Russia.} Au Bu Cz Ga Ge Gr He Hs Hu It Ju ?Po Rm Rs (C, W, K, E) Tu..
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. A. septentrionalis} L.,{\i  Sp. Pl.} 142 (1753). Annual, somewhat pubescent below with simple, forked and stellate hairs. Leaves 9-35 × 3-10 mm, oblong-lanceolate or elliptical, dentate, sessile or very shortly petiolate. Scapes 8-30 cm, 1-several. Inflorescence 5- to 30-flowered; involucral bracts 2-4 mm, oblong or lanceolate. Pedicels at least 3 times as long as bracts. Calyx 2·5-3·5 mm, divided to about the middle. Corolla 4-5(-6) mm, white or pink. Seeds 0·5-1 mm, numerous.{\i  Dry places. N. & C. Europe, extending southwards to the S.W. Alps and S. Russia.} Au Cz Da Fe Ga Ge He It No Po Rm Rs (N, B, C, W, E) Su.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 3. A. chaixii} Gren. & Godron,{\i  Fl. Fr. }{\b 2}: 458 (1853) ({\i A. lactiflora} sensu Coste, non Pallas). Like {\b 2} but inflorescence lax; flowers 5-8(-10); bracts ovate or ovate-lanceolate; corolla 5-7 mm; seeds c. 3 mm, 3-5. 2n = 34.{\i  Woods, rocks and pastures. • Mountains of S.E. France}. Ga.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 4. A. filiformis} Retz., {\i Obs. Bot.}{\b  2}: 10 (1781). Annual, glabrous below. Leaves 25-40 × 3-7 mm; lamina ovate to elliptical,dentate, distinctly petiolate. Scapes 10-15 cm, usually several, glabrous or sparsely glandular-pubescent above. Inflorescence many-flowered, lax; involucral bracts 1·5-3 mm, lanceolate. Pedicels 15-50 mm, at least 10 times as long as bracts, glandular-pubescent. Calyx 1·5-2·5 mm, glabrous. Corolla 2-3 mm, white. Seeds c. 0·5 mm, numerous.{\i  Damp places. U.S.S.R., northwards from} c. 53°{\i  N}. Rs (N, B, C, W, E).
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 5. A. elongata} L., {\i Sp. Pl}. ed. 2, 1668 (1763). Annual. Leaves 6-14 × 1·5-5 mm, lanceolate or oblanceolate, entire or dentate, finely ciliate. Scapes 4-10 cm, usually numerous, densely pubescent with forked hairs. Inflorescence many-flowered, lax; involucral bracts 3-8 mm, lanceolate to ovate-lanceolate. Pedicels 2-8 times as long as bracts, glabrous. Calyx 3·5-5 mm, glandular-pubescent. Corolla c. 3 mm, white, shorter than the calyx-lobes. Seeds c. 1 mm, c. 5. {\i Dry open habitats. From C. Germany eastwards to E.C. Russia and Bulgaria; Sicilia; Pyrenees.} Au Bu Cz Ga Ge Hs Hu Ju Po Rm Rs (C, W, K, E) Si [?No].
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 6. A. lactea} L.,{\i  Sp. Pl.} 142 (1753). Perennial, laxly caespitose or rosettes solitary, shortly stoloniferous; stolons up to 3 cm. Leaves 8-20(-30) × 0·5-2 mm, linear, sessile, glabrous or very sparsely hairy usually on the margins. Scapes 1-4, (2-)3-15 cm, glabrous. Inflorescence 1- to 4(-6)-flowered, often arising from axils of basal leaves only; involucral bracts 2·5-4 mm, linear-lanceolate, glabrous or sparsely hairy. Pedicels 2-10 times as long as bracts, glabrous. Calyx 3-5 mm, glabrous. Corolla up to 12 mm in diameter, white. Seeds 2-3 mm, 4-5. 2n = 76.{\i  Rocks and screes; calcicole. • Mountains of C. Europe, extending to the French Jura and C. Jugoslavia}. Au Cz Ga Ge He It Ju Po Rm.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 7. A. obtusifolia} All.,{\i  Fl. Pedem. }{\b 1}: 90 (1785). Perennial, laxly caespitose or rosettes solitary. Leaves 6-20 × 1·5-4 mm, lanceolate or oblong-lanceolate, tapered to the base, scarcely petiolate, more or less sparsely hairy and ciliate. Scapes 1-several, 2-12 cm, more or less densely tomentose with stellate or forked hairs. Inflorescence 1- to 7-flowered; involucral bracts 2-3·5 mm, linear-lanceolate, puberulent. Pedicels 1-4(-7) times as long as bracts, densely hairy with stellate hairs. Calyx 3-4 mm, densely pubescent. Corolla 6-9 mm in diameter, white or pink. 2n = 36, 38.{\i  Rocks and screes; calcifuge. • Mountains of C. Europe, extending southwards to the S.W. Alps and N. Appennini; mountains of Balkan peninsula southwards to Macedonia.} Au Bu Cz Ga Ge He It Ju Po Rm.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 8. A. hedraeantha} Griseb., {\i Spicil. Fl. Rumel. }{\b 2}: 3 (1844). Like {\b 7} but inflorescence subcapitate, with (2-)5-10 flowers; scapes often short, 1-2(-12) cm; pedicels shorter than to 1-2 times as long as bracts; calyx and bracts glabrous.{\i  Schistose rocks. • Mountains of C. part of Balkan peninsula}. Al Bu Ju.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 9. A. carnea} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 142 (1753). Perennial, laxly caespitose. Leaves 4-20(-35) × 1-2 mm, linear, sometimes fleshy and keeled, pubescent or glabrous on the surfaces, ciliate. Scapes 1-4, 1-6 cm, more or less densely pubescent with stellate or forked hairs. Inflorescence 2- to many-flowered; involucral bracts 2-5 mm, linear-lanceolate, ciliate or glabrous. Pedicels 1-2 times as long as bracts, densely hairy with stellate hairs. Calyx 2·5-6 mm, sparsely hairy. Corolla 5-8 mm, white or pink.{\i  Rocks and screes; calcifuge. • Mountains of W. Europe from the C. Pyrenees to the Vosges and eastwards to} 8° 10' {\i E. in the W.C. Alps.} Ga He Hs Tt.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28   A very variable species in which the following subspecies can be recognized.
\par 

\par 
21}
\par