{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 elliptic- to obovate-oblong, obscurely crenate, greyish-green above, white-tomentose beneath; petiole 5-10 cm. Inflorescence simple, dense, stout. Bracts 6-10 mm, ovate to ovate-lanceolate, acuminate-cuspidate; longer pedicels 5-10(-12) mm. Calyx 4-7 mm; lobes narrowly oblong-lanceolate. Corolla 15-30 mm in diameter. Stamens 5; anthers all reniform; filament-hairs white. Capsule 5-6 mm, ovoid-ellipsoid.{\i  Krym}. Rs (K). ({\i Caucasian region}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 74. V. glandulosum} Delile,{\i  Ann. Sci. Nat.} ser. 3 ({\i Bot}.), {\b 12}: 367 (1849) ({\i V. gloeotrichum} Hausskn. & Heldr., {\i V. meteoricum} Hausskn.). Biennial; stems c. 100 cm, densely glandular-hairy with long and short hairs. Basal leaves 15-22 × 5-11 cm, ovate to oblanceolate-oblong, crenate, gradually tapered to the winged petiole, grey-tomentose on both surfaces and glandular-pubescent above, but partly glabrescent. Inflorescence freely branched, rather lax, glandular-hairy. Bracts 5-15 mm, ovate-lanceolate; longer pedicels 3-8 mm. Calyx 3-7 mm; lobes oblong-lanceolate. Corolla 20-35 mm in diameter, with pellucid glands. Stamens 5; anthers all reniform; filament-hairs white. Capsule 4-6 mm, ovoid-ellipsoid. •{\i  N. & E. Greece, S. Jugoslavia.} Gr Ju.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 75. V. davidoffii} Murb.,{\i  Lunds Univ. Årsskr.} nov. ser.,{\b  29}({\b 2}): 302 (1933). Like {\b 74} but glandular hairs on stem and inflorescence all short and with black glands; basal leaves 5-15 × 3-7 cm, subentire, less gradually tapered to petiole; calyx-lobes linear; corolla without pellucid glands; capsule (5-)6-9 mm, subglobose. •{\i  S.W. Bulgaria }({\i Pirin Planina}). Bu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 76. V. jankaeanum} Pancic,{\i  Nov. Elem. Fl. Bulg.} 32 (1886). Like {\b 74} but glandular hairs all short and confined to inflorescence; basal leaves 30-40 × 9-11 cm, more completely glabrescent above, subentire; longer pedicels 6-13 mm; capsule 5-8 mm.•{\i  Mountains of W. Bulgaria}. Bu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 77. V. durmitoreum} Rohlena,{\i  Feddes Repert.}{\b  3}: 149 (1906). Sparsely yellowish-tomentose and glandular-pubescent biennial or perennial; stems 30-50 cm. Basal leaves 4-15 × 3-8 cm, ovate, crenate, acute, rounded to subcordate at base; petiole 2-7 cm. Inflorescence usually simple. Bracts 7-10 mm, linear to linear-lanceolate; longer pedicels 5-10 mm. Calyx 5-9 mm; lobes linear-oblong. Corolla 25-30 mm in diameter, yellow. Stamens 5; anthers all reniform; filament-hairs violet. Capsule 6-7 mm, ovoid-ellipsoid. •{\i  S. W. Jugoslavia} ({\i mountains of Crna Gora and Hercegovina}). Ju.
\par
 
\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 78. V. rotundifolium} Ten.,{\i  Fl. Nap.}{\b  1,}{\i Prodr}.: 66 (1811). White-tomentose biennial, more or less floccose above; stem 50-150 cm. Basal leaves 15-25 × 6-17 cm, ovate-elliptical to suborbicular, somewhat crenate or entire; petiole 7-15 cm. Inflorescence simple or sometimes branched. Bracts 8-15 mm, lanceolate, acuminate; longer pedicels 3-6 mm. Calyx 5-8 mm; lobes linear-lanceolate. Corolla 15-40 mm in diameter. Stamens 5, the lower 2 with filaments much longer than the others; anthers all reniform, or the 2 lower sometimes somewhat oblique; filament-hairs violet. Capsule 7-11 mm, ovoid to conical. {\i W. Mediterranean region.} Co Hs It Sa Si.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Leaves with ± persistent, rough tomentum; capsule conical
\par
  ...................................................................................... ({\b c}) subsp. {\b conocarpum}
\par
1 Leaves with ± floccose, soft tomentum; capsule ellipsoid to ovoid 
\par
2 Basal leaves ovate to orbicular, obtuse ..................... ({\b a}) subsp. {\b rotundifolium} 
\par
2 Basal leaves ovate-elliptical, ± acute .............................. ({\b b}) subsp. {\b haenseleri}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b rotundifolium}: Basal leaves ovate to orbicular, obtuse; leaves ± floccose with soft tomentum. Capsule ellipsoid to ovoid.{\i  S. Italy, Sicilia}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b haenseleri} (Boiss.) Murb.,{\i  Lunds Univ. Årsskr}. nov. ser.,{\b  29}({\b 2}): 401 (1933) ({\i V. haenseleri} Boiss.): Basal leaves ovate-elliptical, subacute; leaves with floccose, soft, tomentum. Capsule ellipsoid to ovoid.{\i  C., S. & S.E. Spain}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b c}) Subsp. {\b conocarpum} (Moris) I.K. Ferguson,{\i  Bot. Jour. Linn. Soc.}{\b  65}: 269 (1972) ({\i V. conocarpum} Moris,{\i  V. boerhavii} subsp. {\i conocarpum }(Moris) Nyman): Basal leaves ovate to ovate-elliptical, subacute; indumentum more or less persistent, rough. Capsule conical.{\i • Corse and Sardegna}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   A single plant from S. Jugoslavia, resembling {\b 78} in vegetative characters but {\b 77} in its inflorescence, has been named {\i V. chrysanthum} Murb.,{\i  Lunds Univ. Årsskr.} nov. ser.,{\b  29}({\b 2}): 384 (1933).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 79. V. reiseri} Halácsy,{\i  Verh. Zool.-Bot. Ges. Wien}{\b  48}: 132 (1898). Densely white-tomentose biennial, only slightly floccose; stems 20-25 cm. Basal leaves 4-9 × 2·5-5 cm, obovate- to oblong-elliptical, obscurely crenate; petiole 2-6 cm. Inflorescence usually somewhat branched, dense. Bracts c. 10 mm, the lower ovate-lanceolate, the upper linear; longer pedicels 3-8 mm. Calyx 5-8 mm; lobes linear. Corolla 15-20 mm in diameter. Stamens 5; anthers all reniform; filament-hairs yellow. Capsule 6-8 mm, ovoid. •{\i  S.C. Greece} ({\i Vardhousia Ori}). Gr.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 80. V. delphicum} Boiss. & Heldr. in Boiss.,{\i  Diagn. Pl. Or. Nov.}{\b  3}({\b 3}): 146 (1856). Biennial; stem 50-150 cm, more or less white-tomentose. Basal leaves 6-30 × 4-15 cm, ovate, crenate to subentire, rounded to cordate at base, sparsely hairy or subglabrous above, densely whitish-tomentose beneath; petiole 5-15 cm. Inflorescence simple or branched, fairly dense. Bracts 4-10 mm, ovate-lanceolate to lanceolate; longer pedicels 4-7 mm. Calyx 3-5 mm; lobes linear-lanceolate. Corolla 15-20 mm in diameter. Stamens 5; anthers all reniform; filament-hairs white. Capsule 3-5 mm, ovoid-ellipsoid. •{\i  E. Greece.} Gr.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 81. V. banaticum} Schrader,{\i  Monogr. Verbasci}{\b  2}: 28 (1823). Biennial; stems 50-100 cm, sparsely tomentose, more or less glabrescent. Basal leaves 10-30 × 3-12 cm, oblong-obovate, deeply and irregularly crenate and usually pinnately lobed towards the shortly cuneate base, persistently tomentose beneath, more or less glabrescent above; petiole 4-10 cm. Inflorescence freely branched, lax; fascicles with 1-6 flowers. Bracts 3-10 mm, the lower ovate-cordate, the upper lanceolate; longer pedicels 3-10 mm. Calyx 2·5-4 mm; lobes linear-lanceolate. Corolla 15-22 mm in diameter. Stamens 5; anthers all reniform; filament-hairs white or yellow. Capsule 3-4 mm, ellipsoid-subglobose. •{\i  S.E. Europe, eastwards to S.W. Ukraine.} Al Bu Gr Ju Rm Rs (W) Tu.
\par
 
\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 82. V. lychnitis} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 177 (1753). Sparsely grey-tomentose biennial; stems 50-150 cm. Basal leaves 15-30 × 6-15 cm, ovate to oblanceolate-oblong, coarsely crenate to subentire, cuneate at base, green above, whitish-tomentose beneath; petiole 0·5-5 cm. Inflorescence usually freely branched. Bracts 8-15 mm, linear to lanceolate; longer pedicels 6-11 mm. Calyx (1·5-)2·5-4 mm; lobes lanceolate. Corolla 12-20 mm in diameter, yellow or white. Stamens 5; anthers all reniform; filament-hairs yellow or white. Capsule 4-5 mm, ovoid-ellipsoid.{\i  Europe, southwards from England and from} c. 56°{\i  N. in C. Russia, but rare in the Mediterranean region.} Al Au Be Br Bu Co Cz Da Ga Ge He Ho Hs Hu It Ju Po Rm Rs (C, W, K, E) [Fe ?No Rs (B) Su].
\par

\par
215}
\par