{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Bracts not more than 12 mm, not exceeding the unopened flowers
\par
  ....................................................................................... ({\b c}) subsp. {\b garganicum} 
\par
1 Bracts usually more than 12 mm, exceeding the unopened flowers
\par
2 Basal leaves entire or finely crenate-dentate; inflorescence 
\par
  usually branched .......................................................... ({\b b}) subsp. {\b visianianum}
\par
2 Basal leaves coarsely and acutely dentate; inflorescence 
\par
  simple ................................................................................... ({\b a}) subsp. {\b niveum}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b niveum}: stem 35-150 cm. Basal leaves 8-36 × 2-8 cm, coarsely and acutely dentate, sparsely grey-tomentose. Inflorescence simple. Bracts 10-22 mm, lanceolate. Calyx 8-12 mm. Corolla 30-50 mm in diameter.{\i  S. Italy}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b visianianum} (Reichenb.) Murb.,{\i  Lunds Univ. Årsskr.} nov ser., {\b 29}({\b 2}): 101 (1933) ({\i V. macrurum} sensu Hayek pro parte, non Ten.): stem 50-150 cm. Basal leaves 10-20 × 6-10 cm, entire to finely crenate-dentate, rather densely grey-tomentose. Inflorescence usually branched. Bracts 12-18 mm. Calyx 8-10 mm. Corolla 30-40 mm in diameter.{\i  W. Jugoslavia, Albania}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b c}) Subsp. {\b garganicum} (Ten.) Murb.,{\i  op. cit.} 99 (1933): stem 30-50 cm. Basal leaves 6-20 × 3-7 cm, entire or finely dentate, rather densely grey-tomentose. Inflorescence usually simple. Bracts 7-10(-12) mm. Calyx 7-9 mm. Corolla 25-30 mm in diameter.{\i  C. Italy}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 33. V. macrurum} Ten.,{\i  Fl. Neap. Prodr. App. Quinta} 9 (1826). Like {\b 32} but indumentum dense, harsh, grey or yellowish; basal leaves oblong-oblanceolate, sessile; all cauline leaves decurrent. Basal leaves 20-50 × 5-13 cm. Inflorescence usually simple. Bracts (7-)10-14 mm, ovate-lanceolate. Calyx 7-12 mm; lobes ovate, somewhat acuminate. •{\i  S. Italy, Sicilia; S. Greece, Kriti}. Cr Gr It Si ?Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 34. V. thapsus} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 177 (1753) (incl.{\i  V. simplex} Hoffmanns. & Link). Biennial, more or less densely greyish- or whitish-tomentose; stem 30-200 cm. Basal leaves 8-50 × 2·5-14 cm, elliptic- to obovate-oblong, obtuse, entire or finely crenate; upper cauline leaves decurrent. Inflorescence usually simple. Bracts 12-18 mm, ovate to lanceolate, acuminate; pedicels partly adnate to stem. Calyx (5-)8-12 mm; lobes lanceolate. Corolla 12-35 mm in diameter. Stamens 5, the upper with villous filaments, the lower with glabrous to villous filaments and decurrent anthers; filament-hairs white. Stigma capitate. Capsule 7-10 mm, elliptic-ovoid. 2n = 32, 36.{\i  Most of Europe except the extreme north and much of the Balkan peninsula.} Au Az Be Bl Br Co Cz Da Fe Ga Ge Hb He Ho Hs Hu It Ju Lu No Po Rm Rs (N, B, C, W, K, E) Sa Si Su.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Filaments of lower stamens glabrous or sparsely hairy ..... ({\b a}) subsp. {\b thapsus}
\par
1 Filaments of lower stamens densely villous
\par
2 Plant variably tomentose, but not white; lower cauline
\par
  leaves scarcely decurrent ............................................. ({\b b}) subsp. {\b crassifolium}
\par
2 Plant densely white-tomentose; lower cauline leaves 
\par
  long decurrent ................................................................. ({\b c}) subsp. {\b giganteum}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b thapsus}: Basal leaves shortly petiolate; lower cauline leaves long-decurrent. Corolla-lobes ovate. Filaments of lower stamens glabrous or sparsely hairy.{\i  Throughout the range of the species.}
\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b crassifolium} (Lam.) Murb., {\i Lunds Univ. Årsskr.} nov. ser., {\b 29}({\b 2}): 126 (1933) ({\i V. crassifolium} Lam.): Basal leaves petiolate; lower cauline leaves scarcely decurrent. Corolla lobes oblong. Filaments of lower stamens densely villous.•{\i  Mountains of S. & C. Europe, from Portugal to the E. Alps}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b c}) Subsp. {\b giganteum} (Willk.) Nyman, {\i Consp.} 527 (1881): Basal leaves subsessile; lower cauline leaves long-decurrent. Corolla-lobes ovate. Filaments of lower stamens densely villous.•{\i  Mountains of S. & S.E. Spain}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Plants from S.E. Spain (Sierra de Cazorla) differ from subsp. ({\b c}) in their denser, harsher indumentum and sometimes branched inflorescence. They may warrant recognition as a distinct taxon when further information is available.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 35. V. litigiosum} Samp.,{\i  Lista Esp. Herb. Port. }108 (1913). Like {\b 34} but stem 20-100 cm; bracts 8-10 mm; filaments of all the stamens glabrous. Upper and middle cauline leaves decurrent.{\i  Sandy places near the sea. • C. Portugal.} Lu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 36. V. longifolium} Ten.,{\i  Fl. Nap.}{\b  1}, {\i Prodr}.: 16 (1811) (incl. {\i V. pachyurum} Bornm., {\i V. samaritanii} Heldr. ex Boiss.,{\i  V. epirotum} Halácsy). Biennial or perennial, more or less densely whitish- or yellowish-tomentose, floccose above; stem 50-150 cm. Basal leaves 20-50 × 5-15 cm, elliptic-oblong to ovate-lanceolate, acute to acuminate, entire or slightly crenate; petiole 2-7 cm. Inflorescence usually simple. Bracts 12-20(-40) mm, linear; longer pedicels 10-16 mm. Calyx 5-8 mm; lobes linear-lanceolate or lanceolate. Corolla 25-35 mm in diameter. Stamens 5, the upper with densely villous filaments, the lower with glabrous to villous filaments and obliquely inserted or shortly decurrent anthers; filament-hairs white, yellow or pale violet. Stigma clavate to subspathulate, shortly decurrent. Capsule 5-8 mm, ellipsoid. •{\i  Balkan peninsula, C. & S. Italy.} Al Bu Gr It Ju.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Plants from Italy usually have a relatively lax, slender inflorescence and at least some of the filament-hairs violet; most, but not all plants from the Balkan peninsula have a stouter and denser inflorescence and white or yellow filament-hairs. There are, however, too many exceptions to allow subspecies to be effectively delimited.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  A single plant from S.E. Jugoslavia (near the Bulgarian border, S.E. of Nis), with leaves green, not tomentose, pedicels c. 5 mm,. filament-hairs violet, anthers of lower stamens long-decurrent and stigma long-decurrent, has been named{\b  V. viridissimum} Stoj. & Stefanov,{\i  Österr. Bot. Zeitschr.}{\b  73}: 281 (1924). Its status is obscure, but it seems to be most closely related to {\b 36}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 37. V. boerhavii} L.,{\i  Mantissa} 45 (1767). Biennial, white-tomentose all over, floccose at least above; stem 30-120 cm. Basal leaves 10-30 × 4-12 cm, ovate-elliptical, obtuse or subacute, crenate-dentate, sometimes slightly lobed at base; petiole 4-8 cm. Inflorescence usually simple. Bracts 10-25 mm, oblong to linear, acute; longer pedicels 1-4 mm. Calyx 6-9 mm; lobes oblong to linear. Corolla 22-32 mm in diameter. Stamens 5, the lower with shortly decurrent anthers; all filaments with violet hairs. Capsule 6-10 mm, ovoid. {\i W. Mediterranean region. }Bl Co Ga Hs It.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 38. V. argenteum} Ten.,{\i  Fl. Nap. }{\b 3}: 220 (1824-1829). Like {\b 37} but basal leaves c. 40 × 12 cm, oblong to ovate-lanceolate, more or less entire; inflorescence freely branched, forming an ovoid-pyramidal panicle; pedicels 5-10 mm; corolla 18-25 mm in diameter.•{\i  S. Appennini} ({\i Monti del Matese}). It.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 39. V. nevadense} Boiss., {\i Voy. Bot. Midi Esp.}{\b  2}: 443 (1841). Usually perennial, more or less densely greyish-floccose-tomentose; stems 70-100 cm. Basal leaves 12-25 × 4-12 cm, oblong-ovate to -lanceolate, acute to acuminate, entire; petiole 5-12 cm. Inflorescence lax, simple. Bracts 6-15(-25) mm, linear; pedicels 4-9 mm. Calyx 4-8(-10) mm; lobes linear- to oblong-lanceolate. Corolla 30-40 mm in diameter. Stamens 5, the
\par

\par
211}
\par