{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 rarely absent. Capsule septicidal. Seeds numerous, ovoid, rugose.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Literature: H. Stiefelhagen,{\i  Bot. Jahrb.}{\b  44}: 406-496 (1910). A. Vaarama & H. Hiirsalmi,{\i  Hereditas }{\b 58}: 333-358 (1967).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Most of the leaves pinnatisect, 3-sect or deeply pinnatifid 
\par
2 Corolla 3-5(-8) mm; staminode linear to lanceolate, or absent
\par
  ...................................................................................... ({\b 25-28}).{\b  canina} group
\par
2 Corolla (4-)6-20 mm; staminode orbicular to reniform
\par
3 Most of the pedicels shorter than or equalling calyx
\par
4 Perennial, usually with several stems
\par
5 Corolla 12-20 mm ............................................. ({\b 10-13}).{\b  sambucifolia }group
\par
5 Corolla 4-9 mm .................................................................... {\b 23. heterophylla}
\par
4 Biennial, usually with a single stem
\par
6 Leaf-lobes ovate to oblong; mucro of capsule c. 1 mm ................. {\b 21. lucida}
\par
6 Leaf-lobes ± linear; mucro of capsule 2-3 mm .................... {\b 22. myriophylla} 
\par
3 Most of the pedicels longer than calyx
\par
7 Leaves densely glandular-pubescent ........................................ {\b 9. grandiflora}
\par
7 Leaves ± glabrous
\par
8 Corolla at least 10 mm ..................................... ({\b 10-13}).{\b  sambucifolia} group
\par
8 Corolla not more than 9 mm
\par
9 Stems winged on the angles; leaves usually with 1 pair of 
\par
  basal lobes .............................................................................. .. {\b 19. auriculata}
\par
9 Stems not or scarcely winged; leaves usually with more 
\par
  than one pair of basal lobes
\par
10 Most of the pedicels less than twice as long as calyx;
\par
   capsule 3-6 mm; leaves often glaucous ............................... {\b 23. heterophylla}
\par
10 Most of the pedicels at least twice as long as calyx;
\par
   capsule 5-8 mm; leaves not glaucous ............... ({\b 10-13}).{\b  sambucifolia} group
\par
1  Most of the leaves entire to incise-dentate or 
\par
   shallowly pinnatifid
\par
11 Corolla not 2-lipped, with ± equal lobes ..................................... {\b 1. vernalis}
\par
11 Corolla 2-lipped
\par
12 Stems winged on the angles
\par
13 Rhizome nodular; scarious margin of calyx-lobes less 
\par
   than 0·5 mm wide ......................................................................... {\b 18. nodosa}
\par
13 Rhizome not nodular; scarious margin of calyx-lobes 
\par
   more than 0·5 mm wide
\par
14 Staminode suborbicular, ± entire; leaves often cordate at base{\b 19. auriculata}
\par
14 Staminode wider than long, ± 2-lobed; leaves not 
\par
   cordate at base ............................................................................ {\b 20. umbrosa}
\par
12 Stems not winged
\par
15 Leaves glabrous or subglabrous
\par
16 Annual
\par
17 Capsule subglobose; calyx-lobes acute, without scarious  
\par
   margin ......................................................................................... {\b 5. peregrina}
\par
17 Capsule conical; calyx-lobes obtuse, with a narrow scarious 
\par
   margin ............................................................................................... {\b 6. arguta}
\par
16 Usually perennial; leaves sometimes divided
\par
18 Most of the pedicels shorter than or equalling calyx
\par
19 Staminode orbicular to reniform ........................................ {\b 23. heterophylla}
\par
19 Staminode linear to ovate, or absent ........................ ({\b 25-28}). {\b canina} group 
\par
18 Most of the pedicels longer than calyx
\par
20 Bracts mostly leaf-like ................................... ({\b 10-13}). {\b sambucifolia} group
\par
20 Bracts mostly not leaf-like
\par
21 Leaves pubescent, at least on the veins
\par
22 Leaves mostly less than 9 cm, doubly dentate; cymes with not 
\par
   more than 7 flowers ..................................................................... {\b 15. scopolii}
\par
22 Leaves up to 15 cm, simply dentate; cymes with up to
\par
   30 flowers ................................................................................... {\b 16. alpestris}
\par
21 Leaves glabrous
\par
23 Rhizome nodular; scarious margin of calyx-lobes less
\par
   than 0·5 mm wide ......................................................................... {\b 18. nodosa}
\par
23 Rhizome not nodular; scarious margin of calyx-lobes
\par
   more than 0·5 mm wide ............................................................. {\b 14. laevigata}
\par
15 Leaves ± densely (though sometimes very shortly)
\par
   puberulent to pubescent or lanate
\par
24 Leaves not more than 1·5 cm wide, minutely but densely
\par
   glandular-puberulent; corolla 3-6(-10) mm (S. part of U.S.S.R.)
\par
25 Leaves 0.2-0·7 cm wide, ± linear-oblong ................................  {\b 29. cretacea}
\par
25 Leaves 0·6-1(-1·5) cm wide, oblong-lanceolate to ovate-
\par
   elliptical ...................................................................................... {\b 30. rupestris}
\par
24 Larger leaves more than 1·5 cm wide, puberulent to 
\par
   lanate; corolla 7-18 mm
\par
26 Bracts mostly not leaf-like
\par
27 Most of the pedicels longer than calyx
\par
28 Scarious margin of calyx-lobes more than 0·5 mm wide;
\par
   capsule narrowed abruptly to a mucro or beak ........................... {\b 15. scopolii}
\par
28 Scarious margin of calyx-lobes less than 0·5 mm wide;
\par
   capsule acuminate ...................................................................... {\b 17. herminii}
\par
27 Most of the pedicels shorter than or equalling calyx
\par
29 Leaves minutely glandular-puberulent .............................. {\b 23. heterophylla}
\par
29 Leaves pubescent ...................................................................... {\b 24. taygetea}
\par
26 Bracts mostly leaf-like
\par
30 Scarious margin of calyx-lobes more than 0·5 mm wide
\par
31 Stems lanate; leaves ± orbicular ............................................... {\b 7. pyrenaica}
\par
31 Stems pubescent; leaves ovate to lanceolate
\par
32 Calyx-lobes c. 4 mm, with scarious margins less than 1 mm wide; 
\par
   capsule 5-8 mm ......................................................................... {\b 8. scorodonia}
\par
32 Calyx-lobes 5-6 mm, with scarious margin more than
\par
   1 mm wide; capsule 7-10 mm .................................................. {\b 9. grandiflora}
\par
30 Scarious margin of calyx-lobes less than 0·5 mm wide
\par
33 Calyx hirsute in fruit ................................................................. {\b 3. aestivalis}
\par
33 Calyx glabrous in fruit
\par
34 Calyx-lobes pubescent in flower; pedicels glandular pubescent {\b 2. bosniaca}
\par
34 Calyx-lobes glabrous in flower; pedicels glandular lanate ...... {\b 4. divaricata}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. S. vernalis} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 620 (1753). Biennial or perennial; stems up to 100 cm, glandular-pubescent. Leaves 3-7(-15) cm, broadly ovate, acute to subobtuse, cordate to subtruncate at base,deeply doubly serrate, more or less pubescent. Bracts mostly leaf-like. Calyx-lobes oblong-lanceolate, obtuse to subacute,glandular-pubescent; margin not scarious. Corolla 6-8 mm, yellow, not 2-lipped, and with subequal lobes. Staminode absent.Capsule 8-10 mm, ovoid-conical, acuminate. 2n = 40.{\i  Mountain woods; also as an alien in damp waste places. From S.C. Germany and C. Russia southwards locally to the Pyrenees, Sicilia and C. Jugoslavia}. Au Cz Ga Ge ?Hs Hu It Ju ?Po Rm Rs (C, W, E)Si [Be Br Da ?He Ho Su].
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. S. bosniaca} G. Beck,{\i  Ann. Naturh. Mus.} ({\i Wien}){\b  2}: 135 (1887). Perennial; stems 50-80 cm, more or less glandular-pubescent. Leaves up to 10 × 6 cm, ovate, rounded to subcordate at base, doubly dentate, puberulent. Cymes usually 6- to 9-flowered; bracts mostly leaf-like; pedicels (1-)3-5 times as long as the calyx, glandular-puberulent. Calyx-lobes ovate, obtuse, more or less pubescent in flower, glabrous in fruit; margin not or very narrowly scarious. Corolla c. 9 mm, brownish-green. Staminode suborbicular. Capsule 8-10 mm, ovoid, acuminate.{\i  Mountain woods. • S.W. Jugoslavia, N. Albania.} Al Ju.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 3. S. aestivalis} Griseb.,{\i  Spicil. Fl. Rumel.}{\b  2}: 36 (1844). Like {\b 2} but stems glandular-villous; leaves irregularly dentate, lanate to villous; cymes mostly 3- to 6-flowered; pedicels 2-3(-4) times as long as the calyx; calyx-lobes oblong, obtuse to subacute, hirsute in fruit; corolla c. 8 mm, pinkish- or greenish-yellow; capsule ovoid to subglobose, acuminate. 2n = 44.{\i  Shady places on mountains. • C. part of Balkan peninsula.} Al Bu Gr Ju.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 4. S. divaricata} Ledeb., {\i Icon. Pl. Fl. Ross.}{\b  2}: 10 (1830). Like {\b 2} but sometimes biennial; leaves truncate at base, pubescent; cymes 5- to many-flowered; pedicels glandular-lanate; calyx-lobes ovate to lanceolate, subacute, glabrous; staminode reniform; capsule c. 6 mm, subglobose, acuminate.{\i  Calcareous hillsides. S.C. Russia} ({\i near Bogucar}). Rs (E). ({\i Caucasus}.)
\par

\par
217}
\par