{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 upper with densely violet-villous filaments, the lower with decurrent anthers and glabrous filaments. Capsule 6-10 mm, pyramidal-ovoid. •{\i  Mountains of S. & S.E. Spain. }Hs.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   {\b V. charidemi} Murb., {\i Lunds Univ. Årsskr.} nov. ser.,{\b  29}({\b 2}): 161 (1933), described from a single plant from S.E. Spain (Cabo de Gata), with persistent white indumentum, triangular-lanceolate bracts, and corolla 18-20 mm in diameter, is doubtfully distinct from{\b  39}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 40. V. lagurus} Fischer & C. A. Meyer,{\i  Ind. Sem. Hort. Petrop. }{\b 5}: 42 (1839) (incl.{\i  V. ponticum} Stefanov). Greyish-floccose-tomentose biennial; stems 60-120 cm. Basal leaves 6-25 × 2·5-10 cm, oblong-elliptical, more or less entire, petiolate. Inflorescence usually simple. Bracts 5-8 mm, lanceolate, acuminate; pedicels 3-5 mm. Calyx 4-7 mm; lobes lanceolate. Corolla 20-30 mm in diameter. Stamens 5, the lower with shortly decurrent anthers; filament-hairs white. Capsule 5-6 mm, ovoid. {\i Turkey-in-Europe, just extending to S.E. Bulgaria.} Bu Tu. ({\i N.W. Anatolia.})
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 41. V. georgicum} Bentham in DC.,{\i  Prodr. }{\b 10}: 228 (1846). Biennial; stems up to 150 cm. Basal leaves 10-35 × 3-12 cm, obovate-oblong to oblong-lanceolate, more or less crenulate, glabrous or sparsely hairy above, more or less floccose-tomentose beneath; petiole 2-4·5 cm. Inflorescence simple; pedicels 2-5 mm. Bracts 10-14 mm, the lower ovate, long-acuminate, the upper linear-lanceolate to linear, more or less floccose, softly white-tomentose. Corolla 20-25 mm, without pellucid glands. Stamens 5, the lower with decurrent anthers 3·5-4 mm; filament-hairs yellowish-white. Capsule 5-7 mm, globose.{\i  Turkey-in-Europe} ({\i N.E. of Çatalca }). Tu. ({\i Anatolia, Caucasus.})
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 42. V. nicolai} Rohlena, {\i Feddes Repert.}{\b  3}: 148 (1906). Whitish-tomentose biennial or perennial, more or less glabrescent above; stems 30-80 cm. Basal leaves 5-25 × 2-7 cm, oblong-ovate to -lanceolate, more or less crenate, greenish above when mature; petiole 1-5 cm. Inflorescence simple; pedicels 4-9 mm. Bracts 8-11 mm, linear to linear-lanceolate. Calyx 5-8 mm; lobes ovate or oblong-lanceolate. Corolla 20-35 mm, with pellucid glands. Stamens 5, the lower with shortly decurrent anthers 1·5-2·5 mm; filament-hairs white. Capsule 5-8 mm, broadly ellipsoid. •{\i  S. Jugoslavia, N. Albania.} Al Ju.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   {\b V. scardicola} Bornm. , {\i Feddes Repert.}{\b  18} :1 36 (1922), from S.W. Jugoslavia (Sar Planina), is very like {\b 42} except that the tomentum is yellow and more persistent, but according to some authors all the anthers are reniform. This point requires further investigation.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 43. V. anisophyllum} Murb.,{\i  Lunds Univ. Årsskr.} nov. ser., {\b 29}({\b 2}):177 (1933) ({\i V. heterophyllum} Velen., non J. Miller). Biennial; stem 40-100 cm. Basal leaves 5-10 × 2·5-4 cm, oblong-lanceolate to ovate-elliptical, crenate, densely greyish-yellow-tomentose; petiole 2-5 cm. Inflorescence lax, branched, glandular-pubescent. Bracts 3-6 mm, ovate-lanceolate, acuminate; longer pedicels 3-6 mm. Calyx 5-7 mm; lobes oblong- to linear-lanceolate. Corolla c. 30 mm in diameter. Stamens 5, the lower with shortly decurrent anthers; filament-hairs violet. Capsule 5-8 mm, ovoid-ellipsoid. •{\i  W. Bulgaria} ({\i Konjavska Planina, S.W. of Sofija}). Bu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 44. V. eriophorum} Godron, {\i Mém. Acad. Montp., Sect. Méd. }{\b 1}: 440 (1853) ({\i V. heteropogon} Pancic,{\i  V. malacotrichum} Boiss. & Heldr.). Biennial, white-floccose-tomentose, often glabrescent; stems 100 250 cm. Basal leaves 25-45 × 9-15 cm, ovate-oblong, entire or crenate; petiole short or absent. Inflorescence simple or branched, lax; axis densely floccose-tomentose with coarse white hairs, and also bearing sessile glands. Bracts 8-18 mm, linear-lanceolate; longer pedicels 3-5 mm. Calyx 7-9 mm; lobes oblong-lanceolate, acute. Corolla 30-40 mm in diameter. Stamens 5, the lower with long-decurrent anthers and with densely hairy filaments 1½-2 times as long as those of the upper; filament-hairs violet. Capsule 5-10 mm, ovoid. •{\i  C. part of Balkan peninsula.} Bu Gr Ju.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 45. V. baldaccii} Degen,{\i  Österr. Bot. Zeitschr.}{\b  46}: 416 (1896). Like {\b 44} but axis of inflorescence densely glandular and only sparsely white-floccose; basal leaves smaller, crenate to coarsely dentate; filaments of lower stamens sparsely hairy and about equal in length to those of the upper. •{\i  S.W. Jugoslavia, Albania, N. W. Greece.} Al Gr Ju.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 46. V. epixanthinum} Boiss. & Heldr. in Boiss.,{\i  Diagn. Pl. Or. Nov.}{\b  1}({\b 7}): 39 (1846) (incl.{\i  V. tymphaeum} Freyn & sint.,{\i  V. parnassicum} Halácsy,{\i  V. adenotrichum} Halácsy, {\i V. agrimonioides} Degen & Borbás). Biennial or perennial, densely to sparsely whitish- or yellowish-tomentose; stems 25-150 m. Basal leaves 15-30 × 4-8(-10) cm, oblong-lanceolate to ovate-elliptical, entire or weakly crenate, more or less acute, petiolate; upper cauline leaves ovate-oblong to lanceolate, sessile. Inflorescence usually simple; axis densely glandular-pubescent and sparsely tomentose-floccose. Bracts 8-18 mm, linear; longer pedicels 5-10 mm. Calyx 5-10 mm; lobes usually linear-lanceolate. Corolla 25-35 mm in diameter. Stamens 5, the lower with obliquely inserted or shortly decurrent anthers 2-3 mm; filament-hairs violet. Capsule 5-8 mm, ovoid to ellipsoid. •{\i  Mountains of Greece.} Gr.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Very variable, especially in the density, colour and persistence of the tomentum.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b  V. foetidum} Boiss. & Heldr. in Boiss., {\i Diagn. Pl. Or. Nov. }{\b 3}({\b 3}): 141 (1856), from C. Greece (Parnassos), is like {\b 46} but more robust, with oblong- to ovate-elliptical basal leaves up to 40 × 15 cm and anthers of lower stamens 3·5-4 mm.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 47. V. euboicum} Murb. & Rech. fil.,{\i  Lunds Univ. Årsskr.} nov. ser., {\b 32}({\b 1}): 15 (1936). Like {\b 46} but covered with dense, white tomentum, floccose above; inflorescence without glandular hairs; pedicels 1-4 mm, lower stamens with glabrous or subglabrous filaments; anthers 3-4 mm.•{\i  E. Greece} ({\i Evvoia}). Gr.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 48. V. pelium} Halácsy, {\i Verh. Zool.-Bot. Ges. Wien}{\b  48}: 131 (1898). Like {\b 46} but basal leaves 8-25 × 5-15 cm, broadly elliptic-ovate, truncate or subcordate at base, glandular-pubescent above but green and not tomentose; upper cauline leaves deltate-cordate. •{\i  E. Greece} ({\i Pilion}). Gr.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 49. V. dieckianum} Borbás & Degen, {\i Magyar Bot. Lapok }{\b 4}: 82 (1905) ({\i V. luteoviride} Turrill). Biennial, white-tomentose-floccose at first, more or less glabrescent; stem 50-200 cm. Basal leaves 10-35 × 3-8(-12) cm, oblong-elliptical, crenate, sessile or with a short, winged petiole; upper cauline leaves ovate-cordate. Inflorescence freely branched. Bracts 8-10 mm, suborbicular-deltate, cordate, shortly cuspidate, yellowish-green, subglabrous and membranous when mature; longer pedicels 2-3(-7) mm. Calyx 5-8(-12) mm; lobes oblong-lanceolate. Corolla 20-30 mm in diameter. Stamens 5, the lower with reniform or obliquely inserted anthers; filament-hairs white. Capsule c. 5 mm, ellipsoid to subglobose. •{\i  Macedonia, N. Bulgaria.} Bu Gr Ju.
\par

\par
212}
\par