{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 50. V. macedonicum} Kosanin & Murb.,{\i  Bull. Inst. Jard. Bot. Univ. Beograd }{\b 1}: 220 (1930). Densely and persistently white-tomentose biennial; stem 100-150 cm. Basal leaves 8-20 × 4-8 cm, elliptical, crenate; petiole 4-9 cm. Cauline leaves decurrent. Inflorescence usually simple. Bracts c. 8 mm, linear-lanceolate, persistently tomentose at least beneath; pedicels almost completely adnate to axis of inflorescence. Calyx 9-11 mm; lobes linear-lanceolate. Corolla c. 25 mm in diameter. Stamens 5; anthers all reniform; filament-hairs white. {\i Calcareous rocks in a river-gorge. Makedonija} ({\i near Poloski Monaskir}). Ju.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 51. V. botuliforme} Murb., {\i Lunds Univ. Årsskr.} nov. ser., {\b 29}({\b 2}): 288 (1933). Like {\b 50} but larger, with compact, less densely tomentose inflorescence; bracts broadly ovate, cuspidate; calyx 5-7 mm; lobes broadly ovate, shortly cuspidate.{\i • N. Greece.} Gr.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 52. V. dentifolium} Delile,{\i  Sem. Hort. Bot. Monsp. }28 (1837) ({\i V. granatense} Boiss.). Persistently greyish-tomentose biennial; stem 100-160 cm. Basal leaves 22-45 × 6-12 cm, oblong-oblanceolate, entire, crenate or dentate, petiolate. Inflorescence freely branched. Bracts 5-7 mm, ovate to deltate, cuspidate; longer pedicels 3-5 mm. Calyx 4-6 mm; lobes ovate-lanceolate. Corolla 22-28 mm in diameter. Stamens 5; anthers all reniform; filament-hairs violet, at least in part. Capsule 5-6 mm, subglobose.{\i  S. Spain} ({\i Sierra Nevada and adjoining region}). Hs. ({\i N.W. Africa.})
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 53. V. speciosum} Schrader, {\i Hort. Gotting.} 22 (1809). Persistently tomentose biennial; stem 50-200 cm. Basal leaves 12-40 × 3-14 cm, oblong-oblanceolate to obovate, entire, shortly petiolate. Inflorescence freely branched. Bracts (5-)8-15 (-20) mm, the lower ovate-lanceolate, the upper lanceolate; longer pedicels (3-)5-12 mm. Calyx 3-6 mm; lobes narrowly lanceolate. Corolla 18-30 mm in diameter. Stamens 5; anthers all reniform; filament-hairs white. Capsule 3-7 mm, ovoid-oblong.{\i  S.E. & E.C. Europe, northwards to S.C. Czechoslovakia and westwards to Slovenija.} Al Au Bu Cz Gr Hu Ju ?Po Rm Rs (W) Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b speciosum}: Tomentum of leaves greyish, rather harsh. Capsule 3-6 mm. {\i Throughout the range of the species except C. & S. Greece}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b megaphlomos} (Boiss. & Heldr.) Nyman,{\i  Consp.} 529 (1881): Tomentum of leaves white or yellowish, soft, thick. Capsule 5-7 mm.{\i • Mountains of C. & S. Greece}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 54. V. adeliae} Heldr. ex Boiss.,{\i  Diagn. Pl. Or. Nov.}{\b  3}({\b 3}): 145 (1856). Like {\b 53}(b) but basal leaves obovate-oblong to ovate-elliptical with petiole 2-8 cm; bracts broadly ovate to orbicular, apiculate; calyx 2·5-4 mm; filament-hairs violet; capsule 3-4·5 mm. •{\i  Kikladhes} ({\i Naxos, Amorgos}). Gr.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 55. V. lasianthum} Boiss. ex Bentham in DC., {\i Prodr.}{\b  10}: 234 (1846) ({\i  V. pycnostachyum }var.{\i  samothracicum} Degen). Like {\b 53}(a) but basal leaves sometimes crenate; bracts broadly ovate to cordate-deltate; pedicels not more than 3 mm; calyx-lobes triangular-ovate.{\i  Islands of Aegean region.} Gr. ({\i Anatolia}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   A single plant from S. Greece (Lakonia), apparently intermediate between {\b 53}({\b b}) and {\b 55}, but with nearly simple inflorescence, has been described as {\b V. orphanideum }Murb., {\i Lunds Univ. Årsskr.} nov. ser., {\b 29}({\b 2}): 312 (1933).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 56. V. undulatum} Lam., {\i Encycl. Méth. Bot.}{\b  4}: 221 (1797). White-, grey- or yellow-tomentose biennial or perennial; stems 30-120 cm, usually several. Basal leaves 8-18 × 5-8 cm, oblong, more or less entire, sinuate to pinnately lobed, undulate; petiole 3-7 cm. Inflorescence simple or sparingly branched, very lax, eglandular. Bracts 6-12 mm, ovate-deltate; longer pedicels 1-3 mm. Calyx 6-12 mm; lobes lanceolate. Corolla 25-50 mm in diameter, without or with few pellucid glands. Stamens 5; anthers all reniform; filament-hairs white. Capsule 4-6 mm, broadly ellipsoid. •{\i  S. & W. parts of Balkan peninsula.} Al Gr Ju.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Variable in colour and density of tomentum and in extent of lobing of leaves.
\par
 
\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 57. V. pentelicum} Murb.,{\i  Lunds Univ. Årsskr.} nov. ser.,{\b  29}({\b 2}): 216 (1933). Like {\b 56} but basal leaves plane, finely crenate-dentate, greenish and scarcely tomentose above; bracts and calyx glandular-hairy; corolla with numerous pellucid glands. •{\i  S. Greece} ({\i Pendelikon Oros}). Gr.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 58. V. sinuatum} L.,{\i  Sp. Pl.} 178 (1753). Biennial, shortly but densely grey- to yellow-tomentose, sometimes floccose, glandular in inflorescence; stems 50-100 cm. Basal leaves 15-35 × 6-15 cm, oblong-spathulate, sinuate-pinnatifid, often somewhat undulate, sessile or very shortly petiolate. Inflorescence freely branched, lax. Bracts 3-8 mm, cordate-deltate, shortly cuspidate; longer pedicels 2-5 mm. Calyx 2-4 mm; lobes lanceolate. Corolla 15-30 mm in diameter. Stamens 5; anthers all reniform; filament-hairs violet. Capsule 2·5-4 mm, subglobose. 2n = 30.{\i  S. Europe}. Al Bl Bu Co Cr Ga Gr Hs It Ju Lu Rs (W, K) Sa Si Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 59. V. halacsyanum} sint. & Bornm. ex Halácsy,{\i  Österr. Bot. Zeitschr.}{\b  42}: 374 (1892). Biennial; stems 60-120 cm. Basal leaves 8-20 × 2·5-4 cm, narrowly oblong-oblanceolate, pinnatifid to pinnatisect, greyish-white-tomentose; segments entire to crenate-dentate but not lobed. Inflorescence simple or with a few short branches; axis more or less glabrescent; cymes persistently tomentose. Bracts 7-12(-15) mm; flowers sessile or subsessile. Calyx 7-11 mm; lobes lanceolate. Corolla 30-45 mm in diameter. Stamens 5; anthers all reniform; filament hairs yellow. •{\i  N.E. Greece} ({\i near Kavalla}). Gr.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 60. V. pinnatifidum} Vahl, {\i Symb. Bot. }{\b 2}: 39 (1791). Biennial, tomentose when young but usually more or less glabrescent; stems 30-50 cm, several, branched from near the base into numerous slender, simple, lax racemes. Basal leaves 6-17 × 2·5-6 cm, oblong, incise-dentate to deeply pinnatisect, the lobes entire, dentate or pinnatifid. Bracts 9-15 mm, triangular-ovate; flowers sessile. Calyx 5-7 mm; lobes linear-lanceolate. Corolla 25-30 mm in diameter. Stamens 5; anthers all reniform; filament-hairs white or yellow. Capsule 4-5 mm, ovoid-ellipsoid.{\i  Aegean region; Krym.} Gr Rs (K) Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 61. V. leucophyllum} Griseb.,{\i  Spicil. Fl. Rumel.}{\b  2}: 46 (1844). Biennial; stems 20-70 cm. Basal leaves 4-15 × 2-5 cm, oblong-lanceolate, sinuate to pinnatifid (sometimes pinnatisect towards the base), more or less undulate, silvery-tomentose; petiole 2-5 cm. Inflorescence freely branched, lax, sparsely tomentose, eglandular. Bracts 3-7 mm, lanceolate; longer pedicels 2-5 mm. Calyx 4-6 mm; lobes linear-oblong. Corolla 20-30 mm in diameter; outer surface tomentose. Stamens 5; anthers all reniform; filament-hairs white. Capsule 5-6 mm, ellipsoid. •{\i  S. & S.W. parts of Balkan peninsula.} Al Gr Ju.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 62. V. cylindrocarpum} Griseb.,{\i  loc. cit.} (1844). Biennial; stems 30-80 cm. Basal leaves 8-25 × 1·5-4 cm, oblong-lanceolate,
\par

\par
213}
\par