{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 5. S. peregrina} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 621 (1753). Glabrous or subglabrous annual; stems 15-90 cm. Leaves up to 10 × 6 cm, ovate, irregularly serrate, acute to subobtuse, cordate, truncate, or rarely rounded at base. Bracts mostly leaf-like; pedicels 2-3 times as long as the calyx, glandular. Calyx-lobes triangular- to ovate-lanceolate, acute; margin not scarious. Corolla 6-9 mm, dark red to purplish-brown. Staminode obovate-orbicular, obtuse. Capsule c. 6 mm, subglobose, subacute. 2n = 36.{\i  Scrub, cultivated ground and waste places. Mediterranean region, Portugal; an occasional casual further north.} Al Bl Co Cr Ga Gr Hs It Ju Lu Sa Si.
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 6. S. arguta} Aiton, {\i Hort. Kew. }{\b 2}: 342 (1789). Like {\b 5} but stems more or less pubescent; leaves not more than 4 × 3 cm, doubly dentate, acute to subobtuse; pedicels 1-2 times as long as the calyx; calyx-lobes obtuse, with narrow, scarious margin; capsule 6-8 mm, conical.{\i  Rocky places. S.E. Spain} ({\i Sierra de Gádor}). Hs. ({\i N. Africa, Islas Canarias.})
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 7. S. pyrenaica} Bentham in DC.,{\i  Prodr. }{\b 10}: 306 (1846). Perennial; stems 10-80 cm, glandular-lanate. Leaves up to 10 × 10 cm, more or less orbicular, cordate to truncate at base, doubly dentate, densely glandular-pubescent. Bracts mostly leaf-like; pedicels 2-4 times as long as the calyx, glandular pubescent. Calyx-lobes orbicular to ovate, obtuse; margin broadly scarious. Corolla 8-11 mm, yellowish, with reddish-brown upper lip. Staminode more or less reniform. Capsule c. 4 mm, ovoid-globose, acuminate. 2n = 58.{\i  Mountain rocks. Pyrenees.} Ga Hs.
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 8. S. scorodonia} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 620 (1753). More or less pubescent perennial; stems 25-100(-150) cm. Leaves up to 10 × 5 cm, ovate to lanceolate, obtuse to acute, cordate at base, doubly crenate-serrate. Bracts mostly leaf-like; pedicels. 3-4 times as long as the calyx, glandular-pubescent. Calyx-lobes c. 4 mm, orbicular, more or less puberulent; margin broadly scarious. Corolla 8-12 mm, dull purple. Staminode suborbicular. Capsule 5-8 mm, ovoid-globose, subobtuse. 2n = 58, 60.{\i  Hedges, riversides and meadows. W. Europe, northwards to S. England.} Az Br Ga Hs Lu.
\par 
\par
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 9. S. grandiflora} DC.,{\i  Cat. Pl. Horti Monsp. }143 (1813). Glandular-pubescent perennial; stems 30-80(-150) cm. Leaves up to 25 × 20 cm, ovate, the lower sometimes lyrate, truncate to cordate at base, more or less obtuse, doubly dentate. Bracts mostly leaf-like; pedicels 1-2 times as long as the calyx, densely glandular-pubescent. Calyx-lobes 5-6 mm, ovate-orbicular, sparsely pubescent; margin sinuate, undulate, broadly scarious. Corolla yellowish-green, with orange to purplish upper lip. Staminode more or less orbicular. Capsule 7-10 mm, ovoid, acuminate. •{\i  W.C. Spain, N.C. Portugal.} Hs Lu.
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b grandiflora}: Densely glandular-pubescent. Lower leaves lyrate. Corolla 12-18 mm. 2n = 60. {\i Woods, walls, and roadsides. C. Portugal}.
\par
\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b reuteri} (Daveau) I. B. K. Richardson, {\i Bot. Jour. Linn. Soc.}{\b  65}: 266 (1972) ({\i S. reuteri} Daveau,{\i  S. herminii }sensu Lange, non Hoffmanns. & Link): More or less glandular-pubescent. Lower leaves usually undivided. Corolla 9-12(-14) mm. 2n = 58.{\i  Damp, rocky places. Mountains of W.C. Spain}.
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28    ({\b 10-13}). {\b S. sambucifolia }group. Glabrous perennials. Leaves pinnatifid to 2-pinnatisect or 3-sect, the uppermost sometimes undivided. Pedicels 1-3 times as long as the calyx. Calyx-lobes orbicular to ovate, with usually wide scarious margin. Corolla 6-20 mm. Staminode obovate to reniform. Capsule 5-10 mm, globose to ovoid or conical.
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Most of the bracts leaf-like; corolla 12-20 mm
\par 2 Pedicels glandular; staminode obovate; capsule shortly
\par  acuminate .............................................................................. {\b 10. sambucifolia}
\par 2 Pedicels usually eglandular, staminode reniform;
\par  capsule long-acuminate ............................................................... {\b 11. trifoliata}
\par 1 Most of the bracts small, not leaf-like;
\par  corolla 6-14(-20) mm
\par 3 Leaves bipinnatisect ................................................................... {\b 12. sciophila}
\par 3 Leaves pinnatifid to pinnatisect, usually lyrate
\par 4 Calyx-lobes undulate; corolla 12-20 mm ............................ {\b 10. sambucifolia}
\par 4 Calyx-lobes plane; corolla 6-10 mm ......................................... {\b 13. sublyrata}
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 10. S. sambucifolia} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 620 (1753). Stems 50-80(-150) cm, robust. Leaves 6-15(-20) cm, pinnatisect (the uppermost rarely undivided); lobes ovate to lanceolate, singly or doubly crenate or serrate. Bracts very variable in size; pedicels glandular. Calyx-lobes undulate. Corolla 12-20 mm, eglandular outside, greenish with brownish-red upper lip. Staminode obovate, entire or emarginate. Capsule 10-12 mm, ovoid-globose, shortly acuminate. 2n = 58.{\i  Wet places. C. & S. Portugal, S. Spain. }Hs Lu.
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 11. S. trifoliata} L.,{\i  Syst. Nat.} ed. 10, {\b 2}: 1114 (1759). Like {\b 10} but stems up to 200 cm; leaves mostly lyrate-pinnatisect or 3-sect, with usually doubly serrate lobes; most of the bracts leaf-like; pedicels usually eglandular; calyx-lobes plane; corolla often glandular outside, purplish; staminode reniform; capsule ovoid-conical, long-acuminate. 2n = c. 84. {\i Stream sides and other damp, shady places. • Islands of W.C. Mediterranean region.} Co It Sa.
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 12. S. sciophila} Willk., {\i Bot. Zeit.}{\b  8}: 77 (1850) ({\i S. grenieri} Reuter ex Lange). Stems 25-60 cm. Leaves up to 9 cm, bipinnatisect. Bracts not leaf-like; pedicels more or less glandular. Calyx-lobes plane. Corolla 8-14 mm, yellowish-green, with reddish-purple upper lip. Staminode ovate to orbicular. Capsule 5-7 mm, subglobose to ovoid-acuminate. 2n = 58.{\i  Damp, rocky places, mainly in the mountains. • S.E. Spain.} Hs.
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 13. S. sublyrata} Brot.,{\i  Phyt. Lusit.} ed. 3,{\b  2}: 156 (1827) ({\i S. ebulifolia} Hoffmanns. & Link, non Bieb.). Stems up to 80 cm. Leaves 2·5-10 cm, lyrate-pinnatifid (rarely 2-pinnatifid), with elliptical, irregularly serrate lobes; uppermost leaves sometimes entire. Bracts usually not leaf-like; pedicels glandular. Calyx-lobes plane. Corolla 6-10 mm, greenish-yellow with a purplish brown upper lip. Staminode reniform. Capsule 6-8 mm, conical, acute. {\i Sandy or rocky places. • N. & N.C. Portugal, W.C. Spain.} Hs Lu.
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28   Plants with entire upper leaves and leaf-like bracts, which are sometimes annual, have been called{\b  S. schousboei} Lange in Willk. & Lange, {\i Prodr. Fl. Hisp.}{\b  2}: 553 (1870). They have 2n = 60. They may be variants of {\b 13}, but are close to many plants from North Africa which are usually referred to {\b 14}.
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 14. S. laevigata} Vahl, {\i Symb. Bot. }{\b 2}: 67 (1791) ({\i S. laxiflora }Lange; incl.{\i  S. valentina} Rouy). Glabrous perennial; rhizome not nodular. Stems up to 70 cm, 4-angled. Leaves up to 5 × 2 cm, entire, ovate to ovate-lanceolate, subacute, doubly dentate. Cymes 2- to 5-flowered; bracts mostly not leaf-like; pedicels 2-3 times as long as calyx, glandular. Calyx-lobes ovate-orbicular, entire; margin broadly scarious. Corolla c. 8 mm, green, the upper lip purple. Staminode orbicular. Capsule 6-8 mm, globose.{\i  S. & S.E. Spain.} Hs ?Lu.
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 15. S. scopolii} Hoppe in Pers.,{\i  Syn. Pl.}{\b  2}: 160 (1806). More or less pubescent perennial; stems up to 100 cm. Leaves up to 9 cm, ovate to oblong-lanceolate, doubly dentate, acute to
\par
\par 218}
\par