{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 obtuse, cordate to rounded at base. Bracts mostly not leaf-like; peduncles 10-20 mm; pedicels mostly 2-3 times as long as calyx, usually glandular-pubescent. Cymes 4- to 7-flowered. Calyx-lobes ovate-orbicular, glabrous; margin broadly scarious. Corolla 7-12 mm, greenish, with purplish-brown upper lip. Staminode more or less reniform. Capsule 5-7 mm, ovoid-globose, mucronate. 2n = 26. {\i Woods and damp places, mainly in the mountains. S.E. & E.C. Europe, extending to Italy and Sicilia; one isolated station in E. Russia; occasionally casual elsewhere.} Al Au Bu Cz Gr Hu It Ju Po Rm Rs (C, W, K) Si Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 16. S. alpestris} Gay ex Bentham in DC.,{\i  Prodr. }{\b 10}: 307 (1846). Like {\b 15} but leaves often up to 15 cm, simply dentate; cymes 3- to 30-flowered; peduncles 10-50 mm; pedicels 2-5(-7) times as long as calyx. 2n = 68, 72.{\i  Damp woods and by streams. • Mountains of N. Spain and S. France}. Ga Hs.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 17. S. herminii} Hoffmanns. & Link,{\i  Fl. Port. }{\b 1}: 266 (1813-1820) ({\i S. bourgaeana }Lange). Glandular-pubescent perennial. Stems 30-90 cm, not winged. Leaves up to 15 × 10 cm, ovate to lanceolate, truncate to cordate at base, serrate, the lower more or less obtuse, the upper acute. Cymes 3- to 6-flowered; bracts mostly not leaf-like; pedicels 3-4 times as long as calyx, glandular-hirsute. Calyx-lobes ovate-orbicular, entire; margin narrowly scarious. Corolla 8-9 mm, yellowish-green, with purplish upper lip. Staminode orbicular to reniform. Capsule c. 6 mm, globose to conical, acuminate. 2n = c. 52. {\i  Mountain rocks.  • N. & C. Portugal; W.C. Spain}. Hs Lu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 18. S. nodosa} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 619 (1753). Glabrous perennial with a nodular rhizome; stems 30-80(-150) cm, 4-angled, sometimes narrowly winged. Leaves up to 12 × 7 cm, ovate to ovate-lanceolate, doubly (rarely singly) serrate, more or less acute, cordate to truncate at base. Cymes usually 5- to 7-flowered; bracts usually not leaf-like; pedicels 2-3 times as long as calyx, glandular. Calyx-lobes broadly ovate, entire; margin narrowly scarious. Corolla 7-10 mm, green, with purplish-brown upper lip. Staminode obovate, truncate or emarginate. Capsule c. 5 mm, broadly ovoid, shortly acuminate. 2n = 36.{\i  Usually in damp or shady places. Most of Europe.} Al Au Be Br Bu Cz Da Fe Ga Ge Gr Hb He Ho Hs Hu It Ju No Po Rm Rs (N, B, C, W, K, E) Su ?Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 19. S. auriculata} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 620 (1753) ({\i S. aquatica} auct., non L., {\i S. cretica} Boiss. & Heldr.). Glabrous, rarely somewhat pubescent perennial; rhizome not nodular; stem 50-100 cm, 4-angled, the angles produced into wings c. 1 mm wide. Leaves 5-12(-25) cm, simple or with one (rarely more) pair of small lobes at the base, ovate to elliptical, crenate, the lower obtuse, the upper subacute, truncate to subcordate at base. Bracts mostly linear, not leaf-like; pedicels up to twice as long as calyx, glandular. Calyx-lobes ovate-orbicular, serrate, glabrous; margin broadly scarious. Corolla (5-)7-9 mm, greenish, with purplish-brown upper lip. Staminode more or less orbicular, scarcely emarginate. Capsule 4-6 mm, subglobose, obtuse, mucronate. 2n = 78, 80, 84, 86. {\i Riversides and other damp places. W. Europe, northwards to the Netherlands; Italy and Sicilia; Kriti.} Az Be Bl Br Co Cr Ga Ge Hb He Ho Hs It Lu Sa Si.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   {\b S. lyrata} Willd.,{\i  Hort. Berol.} t. 55 (1805), from Spain and Portugal, is like {\b 19} but has leaves with 2-4 pairs of lobes at the base and ovate bracts. It has 2n = 58. Similar plants from Sardegna, with short peduncles and pedicels, have been described as {\b S. subverticillata} Moris,{\i  Stirp. Sard. Elench.}{\b  2}: 8 (1827). The status of these taxa is obscure.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 20. S. umbrosa} Dumort.,{\i  Fl. Belg.} 37 (1827) ({\i S. alata} auct., {\i S. aquatica} L., nom. ambig.,{\i  S. neesii} Wirtgen, {\i S. samaritanii} Boiss. & Heldr. ex Halácsy). Like {\b 19} but stem often more broadly winged; leaves without basal lobes, serrate or crenate-serrate, acute to subobtuse, more or less cuneate at base; bracts sometimes leaf-like; calyx-margin more or less dentate; staminode much wider than long, more or less 2-lobed. 2n = 26, 52.{\i  Damp, shady places. Europe, from Scotland, Denmark and Latvia southwards, but absent from much of the west.} Al Au Be Br Bu ?Co Cz Da Ga Ge Gr Hb He Ho Hu It Ju Po Rm Rs (B, C, W, K, E) Sa Si Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 21. S. lucida} L.,{\i  Syst. Nat.} ed. 10,{\b  2}: 1114 (1759). Glabrous biennial; stem 10-100 cm, usually solitary. Leaves up to 9 × 5 cm pinnatisect or bipinnatisect, rarely undivided; lobes ovate to oblong, more or less serrate or crenate. Bracts not leaf-like pedicels c. ½ as long as calyx, glandular. Calyx-lobes more or less orbicular, entire or serrate; margin broadly scarious. Corolla 4-9 mm, greenish-brown. Staminode broadly orbicular. Capsule c. 5 mm, globose, with mucro c. 1 mm. 2n = 24, 26.{\i  Shady rocks. Greece and Aegean region; S.E. Italy; S.E. France.} Cr Ga Gr It.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 22. S. myriophylla} Boiss. & Heldr. in Boiss., {\i Diagn. Pl. Or. Nov.}{\b  2}({\b 12}): 39 (1853) ({\i S. laxa} Boiss. & Heldr.). Like {\b 21} but stems up to 60 cm, often numerous; leaves up to 4 × 2 cm, all bipinnatisect, with very small, more or less linear, acute lobes; margins of calyx more or less dentate; capsule with mucro 2-3 mm.{\i  Mountain rocks. S. Greece.} Gr.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 23. S. heterophylla} Willd.,{\i  Sp. Pl. }{\b 3}: 274 (1800). Glabrous or glandular, rarely puberulent, often glaucous perennial. Stems 10-70 cm, usually several. Leaves up to 5 × 3 cm, incise-dentate to bipinnatisect. Bracts not leaf-like; pedicels up to 1(-3) times as long as calyx, glandular. Calyx-lobes ovate to orbicular, entire to serrate; margin scarious. Corolla (4-)6-9 mm, reddish-purple to greenish. Staminode reniform to orbicular. Capsule 3-6 mm, globose.{\i  Rocky places. Aegean region and Balkan peninsula, extending northwards to Romania and Krym.} Al Bu Cr Gr Ju Rm Rs (K).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b heterophylla}: Leaves often more or less fleshy, simple and crenate, or more or less pinnatifid with obtuse lobes. 2n = 24.{\i  Mainly in S. Greece and Aegean region}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b laciniata} (Waldst. & Kit.) Maire & Petitmengin,{\i  Bull. Soc. Sci. Nancy} ser. 3,{\b  8}: 178 (1907) ({\i S. laciniata} Waldst. & Kit., {\i S. variegata }auct. pro parte, non Bieb.; incl.{\i  S. exilis} Popl.): Leaves thin, simple and serrate, or pinnatisect with more or less acute lobes.{\i  Throughout the range of the species except the extreme south}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b  S. olympica} Boiss.,{\i  Diagn. Pl. Or. Nov.}{\b  1}({\b 4}): 69 (1844), from Anatolia and the Caucasus, has once been recorded from Krym, but requires confirmation. It is closely related to {\b 23} and perhaps conspecific.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 24. S. taygetea} Boiss.,{\i  Diagn. Pl. Or. Nov. }{\b 1}({\b 4}): 68 (1844). Slender glandular-pubescent perennial; stems up to 40 cm. Leaves up to 4 × 2 cm, ovate, cuneate to truncate at base, more or less obtuse, simply or doubly serrate, sometimes pinnatifid towards base. Bracts sometimes leaf-like; pedicels about equalling the calyx, glandular. Calyx-lobes orbicular, more or less entire; margin scarious. Corolla 6-9 mm, greenish-yellow. Staminode reniform. Capsule c. 5 mm, globose, mucronate.{\i  Rock-crevices. S. Greece} ({\i Taïyetos}). Gr.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b 25-28}). {\b S. canina} group. Glabrous perennial herbs or small shrubs. Leaves 1-8 cm, entire to bipinnatisect. Cymes 1- to
\par

\par
219}
\par