{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 sinuate-pinnatifid with more or less crenate lobes, more or less densely grey-tomentose; petiole 1-4 cm. Inflorescence branched, lax, glabrous. Bracts 1-2 mm, ovate-lanceolate; usually two bracteoles in each fascicle of flowers; pedicels 2-5 mm. Calyx 2-3 mm; lobes oblong to lanceolate. Corolla 12-15 mm in diameter, glabrous. Stamens 5; anthers all reniform; filament-hairs white. Style c. 5 mm. Capsule 4-5 mm, cylindrical. •{\i  N. Aegean region }({\i Thasos}). Gr.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 63. V. pseudonobile} Stoj. & Stefanov,{\i  Jahrb.} 20 {\i Univ. Sofia Agron. Fak.}{\b  2}: 69 (1924). Like {\b 62} but basal leaves 5-8 cm wide, sometimes sparsely tomentose; style 6-7 mm; capsule 3·5-4 mm, subglobose. •{\i  S.W. Bulgaria, N.E. Greece.} Bu Gr.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 64. V. humile} Janka,{\i  Österr. Bot. Zeitschr.}{\b  23}: 241 (1873). Biennial or perennial, arachnoid-tomentose on younger parts but more or less glabrescent; stems 20-80 cm. Basal leaves (3-)10-20(-30) × 1-5 cm, lanceolate to narrowly elliptical, crenate, sometimes slightly lobed towards the base; petiole 1-10 cm. Inflorescence branched, lax. Bracts 6-10 mm, linear; longer pedicels 3-5 mm. Calyx 2-5 mm; lobes linear. Corolla 15-25 mm in diameter; outer surface tomentose. Stamens 5; anthers all reniform; filament-hairs white or pale violet. Capsule 3-5 mm, ellipsoid. •{\i  S.E. part of Balkan peninsula.} Bu Gr Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 65. V. adenanthum} Bornm., {\i Feddes Repert. }{\b 18}: 137 (1922). Grey-green perennial, rather sparsely tomentose and often glabrescent above, densely tomentose below; stem 60-80 cm. Basal leaves 4-9 × 1-2·5 cm, oblong to elliptical, crenate to subentire; petiole 1-4 cm. Inflorescence freely branched, lax. Bracts 2-4 mm, linear-lanceolate; longer pedicels 4-8 mm. Calyx 2-3·5 mm; lobes linear-lanceolate to -oblong. Corolla 20-30 mm in diameter; outer surface sparsely tomentose. Stamens 5; anthers all reniform; filament-hairs white. Capsule 5-8 mm, cylindrical-ellipsoid. •{\i  Macedonia.} Bu Gr Ju.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 66. V. nobile} Velen.,{\i  Fl. Bulg., Suppl.} 209 (1898) (incl.{\i  V. nikolovii} Stoj.). Stems 60-140 cm. Basal leaves 5-27 × 1-7·5 cm, oblong-oblanceolate, sinuate to pinnatifid or pinnatisect, with obtuse or subacute, remotely dentate segments, grey- or yellowish-tomentose at least beneath, distinctly petiolate. Inflorescence branched, lax, glabrous; fascicles with 1-3 flowers. Bracts 1-2 mm, ovate-lanceolate; bracteoles absent; longer pedicels 3-5 mm. Calyx 2-3(-4) mm; lobes oblong-linear to oblong-lanceolate. Corolla 20-35 mm in diameter, glabrous. Stamens 5; anthers all reniform; filament-hairs yellowish. Capsule c. 3 mm, globose. •{\i  S. & E. Bulgaria, N.E. Greece.} Bu Gr.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Smaller plants from N. Greece, with leaves deeply pinnatisect with pinnatifid to incise-dentate segments and corolla 15-20 mm in diameter, have been described as {\b V. dingleri} Mattf. & Stefanov,{\i  Bull. Soc. Bot. Bulg. }{\b 1} : 101 (1926) ({\i V. parviflorum} auct. balcan., non Lam.).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 67. V. graecum} Heldr. & Sart. ex Boiss.,{\i  Diagn. Pl. Or. Nov.}{\b  3}({\b 3}): 148 (1856). Biennial, densely white-tomentose below, more or less floccose and often glabrescent above; stem 40-150 cm. Basal leaves 5-30 × 3-10 cm, ovate to lanceolate, entire or crenulate; petiole 1·5-10 cm. Inflorescence branched, lax. Bracts 2-4(-10) mm, linear to linear-lanceolate; longer pedicels 2-5(-15) mm. Calyx 2-5 mm; lobes linear-oblong. Corolla 15-30 mm in diameter. Stamens 5; anthers all reniform; filament-hairs white. Capsule 4-7 mm, oblong-cylindrical. •{\i  S. part of Balkan peninsula.} ?Al Gr Ju Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b  V. haussknechtii} Heldr. ex Hausskn.,{\i  Mitt. Geogr. Ges. Thür. Jena }{\b 5} ({\i Bot. Ver}.): 71 (1887) ({\i V. degenii }Halácsy), from E. & N.E. Greece, and {\i V. dimoniei} Velen.,{\i  Sitz.-Ber Böhm. Ges. Wiss.} ({\i Math.-Nat. Kl.}) {\b 1910}({\b 8}): 10 (1910), from N. Greece, closely resemble {\b 67}; the former has more or less glabrescent leaves, the latter has densely glandular bracts and calyx-lobes. Both are best, perhaps, treated as varieties.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 68. V. herzogii} Bornm.,{\i  Feddes Repert. }{\b 19}: 97 (1923). Like {\b 67} but inflorescence simple or sparingly branched; leaves distinctly crenate; bracts deltate-orbicular; calyx-lobes ovate. •{\i  N.W. Macedonia.} Ju.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 69. V. mallophorum} Boiss. & Heldr. in Boiss.,{\i  Diagn. Pl. Or. Nov.}{\b  1}({\b 7}): 39 (1846). Biennial, persistently white-tomentose below, floccose and more or less glabrescent above. Basal leaves 15-45 × 5-15 cm, obovate-oblong, entire; petiole short or absent. Cauline leaves not decurrent. Inflorescence freely branched, moderately dense. Bracts 4-7 mm, linear; longer pedicels 3-7 mm. Calyx 2·5-4 mm; lobes linear, acute. Corolla 15-30 mm in diameter. Stamens 5; anthers all reniform; filament-hairs violet. Capsule 4-6 mm, cylindrical. •{\i  C. & S. Italy; C. & S. Greece, S. Albania.} Al Gr It.
\par
 
\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 70. V. decorum} Velen.,{\i  Sitz.-Ber. Böhm. Ges. Wiss.} ({\i Math. Nat. Kl}.) {\b 1890}({\b 1}): 56 (1890). More or less densely white-floccose biennial; stems 50-120 cm. Basal leaves 7-15 × 3-8 cm, ovate to obovate-oblong, crenate, often slightly lobed at the cuneate base; petiole 2-6 cm, winged. Cauline leaves numerous, the upper shortly decurrent. Inflorescence sparingly branched rather lax. Bracts (4-)8-11(-15) mm, lanceolate to linear-lanceolate; longer pedicels up to 5 mm, but flowers sometimes subsessile. Calyx 2-4 mm; lobes oblong to linear-lanceolate. Corolla 20-30 mm in diameter. Stamens 5; anthers all reniform; connectives of two lower stamens smooth; filament-hairs pale yellow. Capsule 5-8 mm, pyramidal-ovoid.{\i  Crevices of limestone rocks. • Mountains of S. Bulgaria} ({\i C. Rodopi}). Bu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 71. V. mucronatum} Lam.,{\i  Encycl. Méth. Bot.}{\b  4}: 218 (1797). Densely white-tomentose; stems up to 200 cm. Basal leaves 25-65 × 7-20(-25) cm, ovate or obovate to oblong-lanceolate, coarsely crenate to subundulate; petiole 2-8 cm. Cauline leaves ovate to ovate-lanceolate, sessile, long-decurrent. Inflorescence freely branched, rather lax; pedicels 0-3 mm. Bracts 5-7 mm, lanceolate or ovate-lanceolate, acuminate. Calyx 3-5 mm; lobes lanceolate. Corolla 20-32 mm in diameter. Stamens 5; anthers all reniform; connectives all papillose; filament-hairs white or yellow. Capsule 3-4 mm, globose. {\i Turkey-in-Europe}.?Cr Tu. ({\i Anatolia and E. Aegean region.})
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 72. V. pulverulentum} Vill.,{\i  Prosp. Pl. Dauph.} 22 (1779) (incl. {\i V. acutifolium} Halácsy, {\i V. floccosum} Waldst. & Kit.). Densely white-floccose biennial, the older parts more or less glabrescent; stems 50-120 cm. Basal leaves 12-40 × 6-15 cm, obovate-oblong to oblanceolate, crenate to subentire, subsessile or shortly petiolate; cauline leaves usually not decurrent. Inflorescence branched, fairly dense. Bracts 3-5 mm, linear; longer pedicels 2-5(-7) mm. Calyx 2-3·5 mm; lobes linear-lanceolate. Corolla 18-25 mm in diameter. Stamens 5- anthers all reniform; filament-hairs white. Capsule 3-5(-8) mm, ellipsoid-globose.{\i  W., S. & S.C. Europe, northwards to England.} Al Be Br Bu Co Ga Ge Gr He Hs Hu It Ju Lu Rm Sa Si [Au].
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 73. V. gnaphalodes} Bieb.,{\i  Fl. Taur.-Cauc.}{\b  3}: 152 (1819). Densely white-floccose biennial, the older parts more or less glabrescent; stems 100-150 cm. Basal leaves 15-50 × 6-15 cm,
\par

\par
214}
\par