{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 83. V. chaixii} Vill.,{\i  Prosp. Pl. Dauph.} 22 (1779). Perennial, more or less greyish-tomentose to -pubescent; stems 50-100 cm. Basal leaves 10-30 × 4-12 cm, ovate-oblong, crenate and sometimes slightly lobed towards the truncate to cuneate base; petiole 5-25 cm. Inflorescence usually branched. Bracts 2-5 mm linear to linear-lanceolate; longer pedicels 3-6 mm. Calyx 3-5 mm; lobes linear to lanceolate. Stamens 5; anthers all reniform; filament-hairs violet. Capsule 3-6 mm, ellipsoid. {\i  S., C. & E. Europe, westwards to N.E. Spain and northwards to S. Poland and C. Russia.} Au Bu Cz Ga Gr He Hs Hu It Ju Po Rm Rs (C, W, K, E) Si.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Filaments of lower stamens hairy throughout;
\par
  corolla 20-25(-30) mm in diameter ................................... ({\b c}) subsp. {\b orientale}
\par
1 Filaments of lower stamens glabrous for a short 
\par
  distance below the anther; corolla 15-22 mm in diameter
\par
2 Basal leaves usually slightly lobed towards the base, greyish
\par
   tomentose beneath; upper cauline leaves emotely dentate . ({\b a}) subsp. {\b chaixii}
\par
2 Basal leaves not lobed, green beneath; upper cauline 
\par
  leaves finely crenulate-serrate ....................................... ({\b b}) subsp. {\b austriacum}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b chaixii}: Basal leaves usually slightly lobed towards the base, greyish-tomentose beneath; upper cauline leaves remotely dentate. Filaments of lower stamens glabrous for a short distance below the anther. Corolla 15-22 mm in diameter. •{\i  S. Europe, from Spain to Jugoslavia}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b austriacum} (Schott ex Roemer & Schultes) Hayek,{\i  Prodr. Fl. Penins. Balcan.}{\b  2}: 127 (1929) ({\i V. austriacum} Schott ex Roemer & Schultes): Basal leaves not lobed, green beneath; upper cauline leaves finely crenulate-serrate. Filaments of lower stamens glabrous for a short distance below the anther. Corolla 15-22 mm in diameter.{\i  E.C. Europe and N. part of Balkan peninsula.}
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b c}) Subsp. {\b orientale} Hayek, {\i loc. cit.} (1929) ({\i V. orientale} Bieb., non (L.) All.): Basal leaves crenate, densely tomentose beneath. Filaments of lower stamens hairy right up to anther. Corolla 20-25(-30) mm in diameter. {\i  S. & C. parts of U.S.S.R.; S. Romania}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 84. V. bithynicum} Boiss., {\i Diagn. Pl. Or. Nov.}{\b  1}({\b 4}): 63 (1844). Like {\b 83}(c) but basal leaves up to 15 cm wide, obovate-oblong, cuneate at the base, sessile or subsessile; longer pedicels 5-10 mm; corolla 10-17 mm in diameter. {\i Turkey-in-Europe} ({\i near Istanbul}). Tu. ({\i N.W. Anatolia.})
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 85. V. nigrum} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 178 (1753). Rather sparsely pubescent, rarely tomentose perennial; stems 50-100 cm. Basal leaves 15-40 × 5-25 cm, ovate to oblong, cordate, crenate. Bracts 4-7(-15) mm, linear; longer pedicels 5-12(-15) mm. Calyx 2·5-4·5 mm; lobes linear. Corolla 18-25 mm in diameter, yellow (rarely white). Stamens 5; anthers all reniform; filament-hairs violet. Capsule 4-5 mm, ovoid-ellipsoid.{\i  From England, C. Fennoscandia and N. Russia southwards to N. Spain, N. Italy, N. Greece and S. Ukraine.} Al Au Be Bl Br Bu Cz Da Fe Ga Ge Gr He Ho Hs Hu It Ju No Po Rm Rs (N, B, C, W, E) Su.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b nigrum}: Basal leaves 15-30 × 5-15 cm, with petiole 5-15 cm. Inflorescence simple or rarely with a few erect branches. {\i Throughout the range of the species except S. part of Balkan peninsula.}
\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b abietinum} (Borbás) I. K. Ferguson,{\i  Bot. Jour. Linn. Soc.}{\b  64}: 232 (1971) ({\i V. abietinum} Borbás, {\i V. bornmuelleri }Velen.): Basal leaves 20-40 × 10-25 cm, with petiole 10-30 cm. Inflorescence branched with suberect or ascending branches.{\i  Balkan peninsula, W. & C. Romania}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   {\b V. hypoleucum} Boiss. & Heldr. in Boiss.,{\i  Diagn. Pl. Or. Nov.}{\b  3}({\b 3}): 147 (1856) ({\i V. nigrum} subsp.{\i  hypoleucum} (Boiss. & Heldr.) Nyman) was described from 2 plants from S. Greece (Killini Oros). They are like {\b 85}({\b b}) but with smaller leaves (as in {\b 85}({\b a})) which are sinuately lobed with 4-9 deltate, subentire lobes on each side and are somewhat floccose-tomentose. Until more material is forthcoming their taxonomic status must remain doubtful.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 86. V. lanatum} Schrader, {\i Mongr. Verbasci}{\b  2}: 28 (1823). Perennial; stems 50-120 cm. Basal leaves 8-22(-35) × 5-13(-22) cm, broadly ovate to oblong, cordate or rarely truncate at base, singly or doubly crenate to incise-dentate, sparsely hairy and green above, more or less grey-tomentose beneath; petiole 5-13(-25) cm. Inflorescence simple. Bracts 6-15 mm, linear; longer pedicels 5-12 mm. Calyx 3-5 mm; lobes linear to lanceolate, acute, glabrous. Corolla 16-28 mm in diameter. Stamens 5 anthers all reniform; filament-hairs violet. Capsule 4-5 mm ellipsoid.{\i  Chiefly in mountain woods. E.C. Europe, N. Italy, N. Bulgaria.} Au Bu It Ju Rm Rs (W).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 87. V. glabratum} Friv., {\i Flora} ({\i Regensb.}) {\b 19}: 440 (1836). Perennial; stems 40-120 cm. Basal leaves 17-25(-32) × 7-12(-18) cm, broadly ovate to oblong, sparsely hairy above, more or less densely white-tomentose beneath, at least on the veins; petiole 15-22 cm, often densely white-tomentose or lanate. Inflorescence branched. Bracts 6-15 mm, linear; longer pedicels 5-18 mm. Calyx 3·5-4 mm; lobes lanceolate, glabrous. Corolla 10-22 mm in diameter. Stamens 5; anthers all reniform; filament-hairs violet. Capsule 4-5 mm, oblong- or subglobose-ellipsoid. •{\i  Balkan peninsula, Romania, E. Carpathians.} Al Bu Gr Ju Rm Rs (W).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Basal leaves coarsely crenate or lobed ........................... ({\b c}) subsp. {\b bosnense} 
\par
1 Basal leaves coarsely dentate or serrate
\par
2 Fascicles 2- to 7-flowered; pedicels of primary flowers 6-7 mm
\par
  .......................................................................................... ({\b a}) subsp. {\b glabratum}
\par
2 Fascicles (1-)2- to 3-flowered; pedicels of primary 
\par
  flowers (6-)8-18 mm ......................................................... ({\b b}) subsp. {\b brandzae}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b glabratum}: Basal leaves broadly ovate-cordate, coarsely and doubly dentate or serrate, incise-dentate towards the base. Cauline leaves ovate-cordate. Fascicles 2- to 7-flowered. Pedicels of primary flowers 6-7 mm.{\i  From C. Greece to the Ukrainian Carpathians and C. Jugoslavia}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b brandzae} (Franchet ex Brandza) Murb., {\i Lunds Univ. Årsskr.} nov. ser., {\b 29}({\b 2}): 445 (1933) ({\i V. rohlenae} K. Malý): Basal leaves ovate-oblong, coarsely incise-dentate, truncate or shortly cuneate at base. Cauline leaves elliptical to triangular-ovate. Fascicles (1-)2- to 3-flowered. Pedicels of primary flowers (6-)8-18 mm.{\i  From Albania to S.W. Romania}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b c}) Subsp. {\b bosnense} (K. Malý) Murb.,{\i  op. cit. }447 (1933) ({\i V. bosnense} K. Malý). Basal leaves oblong-elliptical, coarsely crenate or lobed, especially towards the base. Cauline leaves oblong to oblong-lanceolate, crenate or lobed. Fascicles 2- to 7-flowered. Pedicels of primary flowers 7-15 mm.{\i  From C. Jugoslavia to Albania and N. Greece}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc {\b 8.             Scrophularia}            L.
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc By I.B.K. Richardson.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Herbs or small shrubs; stems erect or ascending. Leaves usually opposite, entire to 2-pinnatisect. Flowers in cymes (rarely reduced to a single flower) in the axils of leaf-like or reduced bracts, forming more or less distinct terminal panicles or racemes. Calyx equally 5-lobed. Corolla with a short, more or less globose tube and usually 2-lipped limb. Fertile stamens 4; the fifth (adaxial) stamen usually represented by a scale-like staminode,
\par

\par
216}
\par