{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 21. V. xanthophoeniceum} Griseb.,{\i  Spicil. Fl. Rumel.}{\b  2}: 42 (1844). Like {\b 20} but with deeply crenate or weakly pinnatifid, crispate-villous basal leaves; cauline leaves very small or absent; corolla yellow.{\i  S.E. part of Balkan peninsula.} Bu Gr Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 22. V. cylleneum} (Boiss. & Heldr.) O. Kuntze,{\i  Rev. Gen. Pl.}{\b  2}: 469 (1891) ({\i Celsia cyllenea} Boiss. & Heldr.). Perennial; stems 10-25 cm, several, glandular-puberulent throughout. Basal leaves 2-5·5 × 0·5-2·5 cm, ovate-oblong, coarsely dentate, glandular-puberulent at least beneath, with petiole 2-7·5 cm; cauline leaves very few, small. Inflorescence lax, simple. Bracts 3-5 mm, ovate to lanceolate, acute; pedicels 7-15 mm. Calyx 4-6 mm. Corolla 16-22 mm in diameter. Stamens 4, without staminode, the lower 2 much longer than the upper; anthers all reniform; filament-hairs violet. Style 6-8 mm. Capsule 5-6 mm, ovoid. {\i Shady mountain rocks. S. Greece} ({\i Killini Oros}). Gr.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 23. V. acaule} (Bory & Chaub.) O. Kuntze,{\i  loc. cit.} (1891) ({\i Celsia acaulis }Bory & Chaub.). Like {\b 22} but acaulescent or with stems not more than 3 cm; inflorescences shorter and denser, corymbose; bracts c. 10 mm, oblong-linear, subacute; pedicels 25-90 mm; lower stamens only slightly longer than the upper. •{\i  Higher mountains of S. Greece} ({\i Peloponnisos}). Gr.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 24. V. pyramidatum} Bieb.,{\i  Fl. Taur.-Cauc. }{\b 1}: 161 (1808). Perennial, appressed-pubescent throughout and glandular-pubescent on upper surface of leaves; stem 60-150 cm. Basal leaves 12-30(-40) × 5-10(-15) cm, obovate-oblong, crenate-dentate to weakly pinnatifid. Inflorescence rather lax, with numerous arcuate-ascending branches, forming a narrowly pyramidal panicle. Bracts 6-10 mm, lanceolate, acuminate; pedicels 3-5(-8) mm. Calyx 3-5 mm. Corolla 20-30 mm in diameter. Stamens usually 5, but sometimes 4 in some flowers; anthers all reniform; filament-hairs violet. Capsule 4-5 mm, elliptic-ovoid.{\i  Extreme S. part of U.S.S.R.} Rs (K, E). ({\i Caucasian region.})
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 25. V. zuccarinii} (Boiss.) I. K. Ferguson,{\i  Bot. Jour. Linn. Soc.}{\b  64}: 230 (1971) ({\i V. graecum} var.{\i  zuccarinii} Boiss.,{\i  Celsia tomentosa} Zucc.). Biennial or perennial, floccose or lanate with white hairs below, glabrous in inflorescence. Basal leaves 2-8 × 1-5 cm, densely lanate, obovate-spathulate, subentire, long-petiolate. Inflorescence lax, freely branched. Bracts c. 1·5 mm, ovate; pedicels 2-5 mm. Calyx 3-4 mm. Corolla c. 20 mm in diameter. Stamens 4, without staminode; anthers all reniform; filament-hairs violet. •{\i  E. Greece} ({\i Evvoia}). Gr.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 26. V. orientale} (L.) All.,{\i  Fl. Pedem.}{\b  1}: 106 (1785) ({\i Celsia orientalis} L.). Annual, puberulent to glabrescent below, glandular-puberulent above; stem 15-70 cm. Basal leaves obovate-oblong, petiolate, coarsely crenate to pinnatifid, often withered at time of flowering; cauline leaves usually bipinnatisect with linear to oblong segments, sessile. Inflorescence lax, simple. Bracts 6-17 mm, the lowest pinnatisect, the upper linear, entire; pedicels 1·5-5 mm. Calyx 5-7 mm. Corolla 14-20 mm in diameter, yellow with a few brownish spots. Stamens 4, without staminode; anthers all reniform; filament-hairs yellow. Style c. 5 mm. Capsule 4-7 mm, ellipsoid. {\i Balkan peninsula; Krym.} Bu Gr Ju Rs (K) Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   B. Flowers in fascicles in the axils of most of the bracts.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 27. V. phlomoides} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 1194 (1753) (incl.{\i  V. belasitzae} Stoj. & Stefanov). Grey-, white- or yellow-tomentose biennial; stem 30-120 cm. Basal leaves 5-30(-45) × 3-12 cm, oblong-elliptical, entire or crenate; upper cauline leaves ovate to lanceolate, acuminate, denticulate or crenulate, not or only very shortly decurrent. Inflorescence usually simple. Bracts 9-15 mm; longer pedicels 3-15 mm. Calyx 5-12 mm. Corolla 20-55 mm in diameter, tomentose outside. Stamens 5, the lower with decurrent anthers; upper filaments with white or yellow hairs, the lower glabrous. Style 6-15 mm, With spathulate, decurrent stigma. Capsule 5-8 mm, elliptic-ovoid.{\i  Most of Europe except the north.} Al Au Bu Co Cz Ga Ge Gr He Hs Hu It Ju *Lu Po Rm Rs (C, W, K, E) Sa Si Tu [ ?Be Br ?Ho].
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 28. V. densiflorum} Bertol.,{\i  Rar. Lig. Pl.}{\b  3}: 52 (1810) ({\i V. thapsiforme} Schrader; incl.{\i  V. macrantherum} Halácsy, {\i V. velenovskyi} Horák). Like {\b 27} but cauline leaves long-decurrent; bracts 15-40 mm, usually long-acuminate, decurrent.{\i  Most of Europe northwards to the Netherlands, S.E. Sweden and C. Russia, but rather local in the west.} Al Au Be Bu Cz Da Ga Ge Gr He Ho Hs Hu It Ju Po Rm Rs (*B, C, W, K, E) Si Su Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 29. V. samniticum} Ten., {\i Fl. Nap.}{\b  3}: 219 (1824-1829) ({\i V. phlomoides} subsp.{\i  sartorii} (Boiss. & Heldr.) Nyman). Biennial; stem 60-150 cm, sparsely tomentose, usually more or less glabrescent. Basal leaves 15-30 × 4-10 cm, obovate-oblong, greenish above, grey-tomentose beneath, rugose, crenate or slightly lobed, subsessile or shortly petiolate. Inflorescence lax, with a few suberect branches, forming a narrow panicle. Bracts 10-12 mm, ovate to ovate-lanceolate, persistently and harshly yellowish-grey-tomentose; longer pedicels 4-6(-8) mm. Calyx 6-9 mm, persistently tomentose. Corolla 25-40 mm in diameter. Stamens 5, the lower with decurrent anthers; filament-hairs white. Capsule 5-6 mm, ovoid-globose. •{\i  W. part of Balkan peninsula; C. Italy}. Al Gr It Ju.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 30. V. guicciardii} Heldr. ex Boiss.,{\i  Diagn. Pl. Or. Nov.}{\b  3}({\b 6}): 127 (1859). Like {\b 29} but basal leaves sometimes wider and shorter, remotely crenate or subentire, and always with petioles 4-7 cm; inflorescence usually simple; longer pedicels 2-4 mm; calyx 4-7 mm; lower stamens with obliquely inserted or shortly decurrent anthers. •{\i  Greece and Albania.} Al Gr.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 31. V. vandasii} (Rohlena) Rohlena,{\i  Acta Bot. Bohem.}{\b  3}: 44 (1924) ({\i V. pannosum} auct., non Vis.). Biennial, with dense, greyish-white tomentum, persistent below, more or less floccose above; stem 60-200 cm. Basal leaves 15-30 × 5-11 cm, ovate-oblong, obscurely crenate, rugose beneath; cauline leaves decurrent. Inflorescence simple or branched. Bracts 8-20 mm, floccose-tomentose when young, later glabrescent and scarious; pedicels partly adnate to stem, the free part 1-5 mm. Calyx 5-8 mm; indumentum like that of the bracts. Corolla 25-40 mm. Stamens 5, the lower with decurrent anthers; filament-hairs white. Capsule 5-9 mm, elliptic-ovoid. •{\i  C. & S. Jugoslavia, just extending to S.W. Romania and N.E. Albania.} Al Ju Rm.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 32. V. niveum} Ten.,{\i  Fl. Nap.}{\b  1},{\i  Prodr}.: 16 (1811). Biennial; stem 30-150 cm, sparsely to densely white-tomentose to -sericeous. Basal leaves ovate to oblong-lanceolate, entire to dentate, petiolate. Upper cauline leaves decurrent. Bracts acuminate, persistently tomentose; pedicels almost completely adnate to stem. Corolla 25-50 mm in diameter. Stamens 5, the lower with decurrent anthers; filament-hairs white. Stigma decurrent. Capsule 4-8 mm, ovoid to subglobose.•{\i  W. Jugoslavia and Albania; C. & S. Italy.} Al It Ju.
\par

\par
210}
\par