{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Stem (excluding inflorescence) glabrous or glandular-hairy
\par
8 Leaves glabrous (except sometimes for a few hairs on the petiole) 
\par
9 Corolla 17-30 mm
\par
10 Corolla pink, except for yellow palate .................................... {\b 13. barrelieri}
\par
10 Corolla yellow
\par
11 Leaves 8-30 mm wide, ovate to elliptical ......................... {\b 10. meonanthum}
\par
11 Leaves not more than 6 mm wide, linear to linear-oblong ....... {\b 12. siculum}
\par
9  Corolla 30-48 mm
\par
12 Bracts linear-lanceolate, exceeding flower-buds; 
\par
   calyx-lobes acute ........................................................... {\b 11. braun-blanquetii}
\par
12 Bracts ovate to ovate-lanceolate, not exceeding 
\par
   flowerbuds; calyx-lobes obtuse
\par
13 Leaves more than 3 times as long as wide ................................... {\b 17. majus}
\par
13 Leaves 1½-3 times as long as wide
\par
14 Leaves obtuse, ± truncate at base; corolla pale yellow; 
\par
   capsule 13-17 mm .................................................................... {\b 16. latifolium}
\par
14 Leaves subacute, ± cuneate at base; corolla purplish pink; 
\par
   capsule 10-14 mm .......................................................................... {\b 17. majus}
\par
8  Leaves glandular-hairy (sometimes only sparsely)
\par
15 Corolla white, purple or pink, except for yellow palate 
\par
16 Upper leaves often opposite or whorled; corolla 35-45 mm ..... {\b 15. australe}
\par
16 Upper leaves alternate; corolla 20-32 mm
\par
17 Stems ascending or decumbent; corolla 20-25 mm .............. {\b 9. hispanicum}
\par
17 Stems usually ± erect;corolla 25-32 mm .............................. {\b 14. graniticum}
\par
15 Corolla yellow
\par
18 Capsule 7-10 mm
\par
19 Stems decumbent; corolla 30-35 mm ............................................. {\b 8. grosii}
\par
19 Stems erect; corolla 18-25 mm ......................................... {\b 10. meonanthum}
\par
18 Capsule 13-17 mm
\par
20 Leaves linear-oblong to elliptical; calyx-lobes ovate-
\par
   lanceolate, acute; bracts exceeding flower-buds ........... {\b 11. braun-blanquetii}
\par
20 Leaves broadly ovate; calyx-lobes broadly ovate, 
\par
   obtuse; bracts not exceeding flower-buds ................................ {\b 16. latifolium}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. A. valentinum} Font Quer,{\i  Ill. Fl. Occ.} 5 (1926). Eglandular puberulent dwarf shrub; stems 20-30 cm, decumbent, intricately branched. Leaves 5-15 × 4-12 mm, elliptical to suborbicular, obtuse to slightly emarginate, mostly opposite; petiole 1-5 mm. Bracts similar to foliage-leaves. Pedicel 7-20 mm. Calyx-lobes 4-5 mm, oblong-lanceolate, subacute. Corolla 12-15 mm, white, with yellow palate and upper lip veined with pink; lips diverging at right angles to tube almost from their base. Capsule 7 mm, globose, usually glabrous.{\i  Shady calcareous rocks. S.E. Spain} ({\i hills S. of Valencia}). Hs.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. A. sempervirens} Lapeyr., {\i Fig. Fl. Pyr.}{\b  1}: 7 (1795). Eglandular-puberulent to -villous dwarf shrub (sometimes also with glandular hairs in inflorescence). Stems up to 25 cm, procumbent. Leaves 12-30 × 5-17 mm, oblong to elliptical, mostly opposite; petiole 3-7 mm. Bracts similar to foliage-leaves. Pedicel 5-10 mm. Calyx-lobes 5-6 mm, lanceolate, acuminate. Corolla 20-25 mm, white or cream, often veined with purple and with a violet patch on upper lip; palate yellow or white. Capsule c. 6 mm, subglobose, glandular-pubescent.{\i  Mountain rocks. • C. Pyrenees and E.C. Spain.} Ga Hs.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 3. A. pulverulentum} Láz.Ibiza, {\i Anal. Soc. Esp. Hist. Nat.}{\b  29}: 164 (1901) ({\i A. sempervirens} var.{\i  densiflorum} Lange ex Willk.). Like {\b 2} but hairs rather longer; upper leaves alternate; corolla pale yellow; capsule eglandular-pubescent. {\i Calcareous rocks,} 1000-2000 {\i m. E. Spain }({\i prov. Jaén to prov. Teruel}). Hs.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 4. A. pertegasii} Rothm.,{\i  Feddes Repert.} ({\i Beih.}) {\b 136}: 61 (1956). Like {\b 2} but stems ascending to erect; leaves obovate to oblanceolate, coriaceous, those subtending the flowers alternate; calyx-lobes 4-5 mm; corolla 17-20 mm.{\i  Calcareous rocks}, c. 1000{\i  m. E. Spain} ({\i near Tortosa}). Hs.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 5. A. microphyllum} Rothm.,{\i  loc. cit.} (1956). Like {\b 2} but leaves 3-10 × 2-5 mm, ovate to orbicular; petiole 1-2 mm; pedicel 10-20 mm; calyx-lobes 3-5 mm, subacute; capsule oblong. Calcareous rocks. E.C. Spain (near Sacedon, prov. Guadalajara). Hs.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 6. A. charidemi} Lange, {\i Vid. Meddel. Dansk Naturh. Foren. Kjøbenhavn }{\b 1881}: 99 (1882). Dwarf shrub; stems up to 35 cm, procumbent to ascending, intricately branched. Stems, leaves and pedicels eglandular-puberulent; calyx, corolla and capsule glandular-pubescent. Leaves 8-28 × 4-9 mm, elliptical to oblong-lanceolate, obtuse, mostly alternate; petiole 1-3 mm. Bracts similar to smaller foliage-leaves. Pedicel 3-12 mm. Calyx-lobes 4-5 mm, oblong, subacute. Corolla 18-25 mm, pink with red veins, rarely white; palate yellow. Capsule 8-9 mm, subglobose. {\i Schistose rocks. • S.E. Spain} ({\i Cabo de Gata}). Hs.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 7. A. molle} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 118 (1753). Dwarf shrub; stems up to 40 cm, procumbent to ascending. Stems, leaves and pedicels eglandular-pubescent to -lanate; calyx, corolla and capsule glandular-pubescent. Leaves 8-22 × 5-20 mm, broadly ovate to elliptical, opposite below, alternate above; petiole 2-6 mm. Bracts similar to foliage-leaves. Pedicels 3-20 mm. Calyx-lobes 5-8 mm, lanceolate, acute. Corolla 25-35 mm, white or pale pink; palate yellow. Capsule 7-8 mm, subglobose.{\i  Calcareous rocks and walls,} 500-1800{\i  m. •  E. & C. Pyrenees and adjoining mountains of N.E. Spain; N.E. Portugal.} Hs Lu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   The plants from Portugal have been distinguished as {\b A. lopesianum} Rothm., {\i Feddes Repert.} ({\i Beih.}){\b  136}: 65 (1956), mainly on account of the longer hairs on their stems and leaves.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 8. A. grosii} Font Quer,{\i  Bol. Soc. Esp. Hist. Nat.}{\b  25}: 268 (1925). Glandular-pubescent dwarf shrub; stems 12-40 cm, decumbent. Leaves 20-30 × 12-22 mm, ovate, obtuse, opposite below, alternate above; petiole 2-3 mm. Lower bracts similar to foliage leaves, the upper smaller and narrower. Pedicels 3-6 mm, shorter than bracts. Calyx-segments 7 mm, ovate-lanceolate, acute. Corolla 30-35 mm, pale yellow. Capsule 9-10 mm, subglobose, glandular-pubescent.{\i  Mountain rocks. • W.C. Spain }({\i Sierra de Gredos}). Hs.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 9. A. hispanicum} Chav.,{\i  Monogr. Antirrh.} 83 (1833). Glandular-pubescent to -villous dwarf shrub; stems 20-60 cm, procumbent to ascending, freely branched. Leaves 5-35 × 2-20 mm, lanceolate to orbicular, opposite below, alternate above, or nearly all alternate. Bracts similar to foliage-leaves or much smaller. Pedicels 2-20 mm. Calyx-lobes 6-8 mm, ovate-lanceolate, subacute to subobtuse. Corolla 20-25 mm, white or pink; palate sometimes yellow. Capsule 6-9 mm, oblong to subglobose, glandular-pubescent.{\i  Rocks and walls. S.E. Spain} ({\i Granada and Almeria prov}.). Hs.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b hispanicum} ({\i A. glutinosum} Boiss. & Reuter, non Brot.): Leaves lanceolate to broadly ovate. Hairs on stem and leaves usually not more than 0·5 mm. {\i Mainly in the W. half the range of the species}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Very variable, especially in leaf-shape. The plants with widest leaves, which tend also to have longer hairs, and are therefore in some degree transitional to subsp. ({\b b}), have been distinguished as {\b A. rupestre} Boiss. & Reuter, {\i Pugillus} 82 (1852), but intermediates are so common that a separation even at subspecific level does not appear to be practicable.
\par

\par
222}
\par