{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 51 Disc of seed smooth or with low tubercles
\par
53 Racemes sessile, overlapped at base by cauline leaves;
\par
   bracts more than 10 mm, at least as long as cauline leaves ....... {\b 63. glacialis}
\par
53 Racemes pedunculate, not overlapped by cauline leaves;
\par
   bracts usually less than 10 mm, smaller than cauline leaves
\par
54 Stems ± erect; leaves often more than 3·5 mm wide
\par
55 Corolla deep violet with yellow palate; racemes lax in flower {\b 62. faucicola}
\par
55 Corolla lilac-grey with bluish-violet palate, or dark
\par
   purple ± tinged with yellow, but without yellow palate;
\par
   racemes dense in flower
\par
56 Corolla lilac-grey with bluish-violet palate; leaves
\par
   elliptical to linear, flat ................................................................ {\b 43. anticaria}
\par
56 Corolla dark purple, ± tinged with yellow; leaves linear
\par
   ...................................................................................... ({\b 47-50}).{\b  tristis} group
\par
54 Stems decumbent to ascending; leaves not more than 3-5 mm wide
\par
57 Seeds 0·9-1·7 mm, strongly concavo-convex; racemes lax
\par
   ................................................................................... ({\b 57-59}). {\b diffusa} group
\par
57 Seeds 1·5-3·3 mm, usually flat or weakly concavo-convex;
\par
   racemes usually dense
\par
58 Racemes ± glandular-pubescent; corolla with dark bluish-violet
\par
   or  purple palate
\par
59 Corolla greyish-lilac with bluish-violet veins;
\par
   racemes sparsely hairy ............................................................... {\b 43. anticaria}
\par
59 Corolla dark purple, ± tinged with yellow; racemes 
\par
   densely hairy ............................................................... ({\b 47-50}).{\b  tristis} group
\par
58 Racemes usually glabrous; corolla with yellow or orange palate
\par
60 Most leaves alternate ............................................... ({\b 51-53}). {\b supina} group
\par
60 Most leaves verticillate
\par
61 Spur 8-10 mm .............................................................................. {\b 61. alpina}
\par
61 Spur 10-15 mm ........................................................ ({\b 51-53}).{\b  supina} group
\par
42 Corolla mainly yellow (though sometimes with violet spur  
\par
   or partly tinged or veined with violet, purple or brown)
\par
62 Corolla not more than 9 mm
\par
63 Plant densely glandular-pubescent throughout ......................... {\b 67. arenaria}
\par
63 Plant glabrous, or glandular-pubescent only in inflorescence
\par
64 Stems erect ............................................................ ({\b 68-70}). {\b arvensis} group
\par
64 Stems procumbent to ascending ............................... ({\b 54-56}). {\b glauca} group
\par
62 Corolla at least 10 mm
\par
65 Plant entirely glabrous
\par
66 Leaves less than 2½ times as long as wide
\par
67 Spur 16-17 mm; leaves mostly alternate .................... ({\b 47-50}). {\b tristis} group
\par
67 Spur 7-12 mm; leaves mostly verticillate
\par
68 Calyx 4-5 mm; pedicels less than 2 mm ............................... {\b 46. thymifolia}
\par
68 Calyx 7-11 mm; pedicels at least 2 mm ................................ {\b 42. platycalyx}
\par
66 Leaves at least 3 times as long as wide
\par
69 Wing of seed thickened, papillose ....................................... {\b 65. amethystea}
\par
69 Wing of seed not thickened, smooth
\par
70 Many of the leaves alternate (the lowest often verti cillate)
\par
71 Stems ± erect; corolla without purple or brownish markings
\par
   .................................................................................. ({\b 34-40}). {\b vulgaris} group
\par
71 Stems procumbent to ascending; corolla often tinged 
\par
   with purple or brown
\par
72 Spur not more than 9 mm ........................................ ({\b 54-56}). {\b glauca} group
\par
72 Spur 10-15 mm ......................................................... ({\b 51-53}). {\b supina} group
\par
70 Leaves mostly verticillate or opposite (the uppermost
\par
   usually alternate)
\par
73 Corolla 30-35 mm ..................................................................... {\b 41. latifolia}
\par
73 Corolla 7-26 mm
\par
74 Leaves oblong to elliptical ....................................................... {\b 43. anticaria}
\par
74 Leaves usually linear
\par
75 Spur not more than 9 mm .......................................... ({\b 54-56}).{\b glauca} group
\par
75 Spur 10-15 mm
\par
76 Seeds 0·9-1·2 mm ...................................................................... {\b 9. oligantha}
\par
76 Seeds 1·5-2·8 mm ...................................................... ({\b 51-53}).{\b supina} group
\par
65 Plant pubescent or puberulent, at least in part
\par
77 Wing of seed swollen .......................................................... {\b 65. amethystea} 
\par
77 Wing of seed not swollen
\par
78 Corolla tinged with violet, purple or brown
\par
79 Racemes sessile, overlapped at base by cauline leaves;
\par
   bracts more than 10 mm, at least as long as cauline leaves .........{\b 63. glacialis}
\par
79 Racemes pedunculate, not overlapped by cauline leaves;
\par
   bracts usually less than 10 mm, smaller than cauline leaves
\par
80 Lower lip of corolla with long lobes ........................ ({\b 51-53}). {\b supina} group
\par
80 Lower lip of corolla with short lobes
\par
81 Leaves linear to oblong-oblanceolate, mostly alternate,
\par
   sometimes with revolute margins ................................ ({\b 47-50}).{\b  tristis} group
\par
81 Leaves oblong to elliptical, mostly verticillate, flat ............. {\b 45. verticillata}
\par
78 Corolla entirely yellow or orange
\par
82 Seeds 0·7-1·7 mm, with narrow wing
\par
83 Glabrous annual; leaves linear, sparse ..................... ({\b 54-56}). {\b glauca} group
\par
83 Subglabrous to hairy, usually perennial; leaves linear
\par
   to oblong-elliptical, crowded ..................................................... {\b 66. saxatilis}
\par
82 Seeds at least 1·5 mm, with broad wing
\par
84 Leaves mostly verticillate (the uppermost usually alternate)
\par
85 Pedicels up to 17 mm in fruit, exceeding bracts ................... {\b 42. platycalyx}
\par
85 Pedicels not more than 6 mm in fruit, usually not 
\par
   exceeding bracts
\par
86 Plant glandular-pubescent below .......................................... {\b 45. verticillata}
\par
86 Plant glabrous below
\par
87 Leaves usually linear; seeds usually concavo convex 
\par
   ..................................................................................... ({\b 51-53}). {\b supina} group 
\par
87 Leaves oblong to elliptical; seeds flat ...................................... {\b 43. anticaria}
\par
84 Many of the leaves alternate (the lowest often verticillate)
\par
88 More or less erect perennial ................................... ({\b 34-40}).{\b  vulgaris} group
\par
88 Decumbent or ascending perennial or annual
\par
89 Pedicels usually longer than bracts; corolla 9-14 mm;
\par
   wing of seed brown or black ...................................... ({\b 54-56}).{\b  glauca} group
\par
89 Pedicels shorter than bracts; corolla 13-27 mm; wing of seed white
\par
90 Lower lip of corolla with short lobes; leaves with
\par
   revolute margins .......................................................... ({\b 47-50}).{\b  tristis} group
\par
90 Lower lip of corolla with long lobes; leaves flat ..... ({\b 51-53}). {\b supina} group
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   A. Seeds ovoid, reniform, trigonous or tetrahedral, sometimes somewhat compressed but never discoid, usually not winged (rarely with very narrow wings on the angles).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. L. reflexa} (L.) Desf.,{\i  Fl. Atl.} {\b 2}: 42 (1798). Glabrous, slightly glaucous annual; stems 5-45 cm, procumbent, simple or sparingly branched. Leaves 6-25 × 2-10 mm, elliptic-oblanceolate to broadly elliptical, more or less acute, mostly alternate, the lowest verticillate. Racemes very lax, leafy; pedicels (7-)12-20 mm, scarcely elongating but strongly recurved in fruit, exceeding bracts. Calyx (2-)3-5 mm at anthesis, up to 7 mm in fruit; lobes lanceolate, acuminate, equal. Corolla (15-)20-30 mm, pale yellow, lilac or white; spur (8-)12-16 mm. Capsule 3·5-5 mm. Seeds 1-1·6 mm, oblong-reniform, strongly ruminate, grey-brown.{\i  Dry, open habitats. C. Mediterranean region, mainly in the islands.} ?Al *Co *Ga ?Gr It Sa Si.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. L. pedunculata} (L.) Chaz., {\i Dict. Jard., Suppl.}{\b  2}: 41 (1790). More or less glaucous annual (perhaps sometimes perennial), glabrous except sometimes for calyx; stems 10-30 cm, decumbent to erect, stoutish, branched above. Leaves 5-12 × 2-5 mm, oblong-lanceolate to elliptic-ovate, subacute, fleshy, mostly
\par

\par
228}
\par