{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 11(-25)-flowered; pedicels usually shorter than or equalling calyx, usually with sessile or subsessile glands, rarely glandular-pubescent. Calyx glabrous; lobes with wide scarious margin. Corolla 3-5(-8) mm, dark purplish-red. Staminode linear to lanceolate, or absent. Capsule 3-6 mm, more or less globose, mucronate to cuspidate.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   A difficult group of taxa of uncertain status, sharing a distinctive facies but covering between them a wide range of variation. It might be possible, after a fuller study of the pattern of variation, to reduce the group to a single species with 5 or 6 subspecies, but it has been thought best, in the present state of our knowledge, to recognize the more distinct variants as independent species.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Cymes 1- to 2-(3-)flowered; pedicels spinescent
\par
2 All leaves incise-dentate to pinnatifid, the lowest opposite . {\b 26. ramosissima}
\par
2 Lower leaves 3-sect or pinnatisect, alternate ....................... {\b 27. spinulescens}
\par
1 Cymes 3- to 11(-25)-flowered; pedicels usually not spinescent 
\par
3 Leaves entire to serrate; lower bracts often leaf-like .............. {\b 25. frutescens}
\par
3 At least the lower leaves pinnatifid to 2-pinnatisect;
\par
  bracts not leaf-like .......................................................................... {\b 28. canina}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 25. S. frutescens} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 621 (1753). Stems up to 60 cm, woody, sparingly branched. Leaves 1·5-4 × 0·6-2·5 cm, oblong-lanceolate to orbicular, entire to serrate or crenate, mostly opposite, coriaceous. Cymes 5- to 13-flowered; pedicels with subsessile glands; lower bracts often leaf-like. Corolla 4 mm. Capsule 5-6 mm. 2n = 26.{\i  Maritime sands. W. half of Iberian peninsula.} Hs Lu ?Si.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 26. S. ramosissima} Loisel., {\i Fl. Gall.} 381 (1807). Stems 25-50 cm, with numerous erecto-patent, rigid branches. Leaves 1-2 × 0·2-0·4 cm, linear-oblong to oblanceolate, incise-dentate to pinnatifid, caducous. Cymes 1- to 2-(3-)flowered, forming long, narrow terminal panicles; bracts minute, not leaf-like; pedicels sparsely glandular, persistent, woody, spinescent. Corolla c. 4 mm. Capsule c. 4 mm.{\i  Maritime sands and other dry places. W. Mediterranean region.} ?Bl Co Ga Sa ?Si.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Plants from Islas Baleares referred to this species are in many features transitional to{\b  28}({\b a}) and require further study.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 27. S. spinulescens} Degen & Hausskn.,{\i  Mitt. Thür. Bot. Ver.} nov. ser., {\b 10}: 60 (1897). Stems up to 40 cm, somewhat woody, with numerous short, divaricate, somewhat spiny branches. Leaves 0·6-2 × 0·1-0·8 cm, all alternate, caducous, the lower pinnatisect, the upper dentate. Cymes 1-flowered, forming a lax, narrow raceme-like inflorescence; pedicels sparsely glandular, more or less spinescent. Corolla 3-4 mm; lobes with whitish margin. Capsule 3-3·5 mm.{\i  Rocky slopes,} c. 1000{\i  m.  N. Aegean region} ({\i Samothraki}). Gr.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 28. S. canina} L.,{\i  Sp. Pl.} 621 (1753). Stems 20-60 cm, usually sparingly branched. Leaves 1-8 cm, the lower pinnatifid to 2-pinnatisect, with linear to oblong, usually dentate lobes, the upper sometimes elliptic-oblong, undivided; at least the lowest opposite. Cymes (3-)5- to 11(-25)-flowered, forming a cylindrical panicle; bracts small, not leaf-like; pedicels with sessile glands or glandular-pubescent, seldom spinescent. Corolla 4-5(-8) mm. Capsule 4-5 mm.{\i  S. & S.C. Europe, extending to C. France}. Al Au Bl Bu Co ?Cz Ga Ge Gr He Hs It Ju Lu Rs (K) Sa Si Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Upper lip of corolla more than ½ as long as tube;
\par
  pedicels usually glandular-pubescent ................................... ({\b c}) subsp. {\b hoppii}
\par
1 Upper lip of corolla c. 1/3 as long as tube; pedicels
\par
  with sessile or subsessile glands
\par
2 Corolla concolorous ............................................................. ({\b a}) subsp. {\b canina}
\par
2 Corolla-lobes with conspicuous whitish margin ................. ({\b b}) subsp. {\b bicolor}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b canina}: Leaves pinnatifid to 2-pinnatisect. Pedicels with sessile or subsessile glands. Upper lip of corolla c. 1/3 as long as tube; lobes without pale margin. 2n = 24, 26.  {\i Waste places and stony ground. Throughout the range of the species.}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b  S. crithmifolia} Boiss., {\i Voy. Bot. Midi Esp.}{\b  2}: 447 (1841), from the mountains of S. & E. Spain, is like {\b 28}(a) but usually more robust, with pinnatisect leaves up to 10 cm, corolla 6-8 mm, and no staminode. It has 2n = 24, and is perhaps more closely related to{\b  23}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b bicolor} (Sibth. & Sm.) W. Greuter, {\i Boissiera}{\b  13}: 109 (1967) ({\i S. bicolor} Sibth. & Sm.): Leaves pinnatisect, with incisedentate lobes. Pedicels with a few subsessile glands. Upper lip of corolla c. 1/3 as long as tube; lobes with conspicuous whitish margin. {\i Stony ground and waste places. S.E. Europe}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b  S. pindicola} Hausskn.,{\i  Mitt. Thür. Bot. Ver.} nov. ser., {\b 10}: 59 (1897), from mountain rocks in C. Greece, has a yellow margin to the corolla-lobes, numerous, intricate branches, and cymes mostly 3-flowered.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b c}) Subsp. {\b hoppii} (Koch) P. Fourn.,{\i  Quatre Fl. Fr.} 770 (1937) ({\i S. hoppii} Koch,{\i  S. juratensis} Schleicher): Leaves mostly 2-pinnatisect. Pedicels usually glandular-pubescent. Upper lip of corolla 1/2-2/3 as long as tube; lobes without pale margin. 2n = 24, 26. •{\i  Jura, S. Alps, Appennini.}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Plants showing some approach to subsp. ({\b c}) are recorded from the Pyrenees and the mountains of Jugoslavia, but are probably best assigned to subsp. ({\b a}).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 29. S. cretacea} Fischer ex Sprengel, {\i Syst. Veg.}{\b  2}: 783 (1825). Usually whitish-glaucous perennial, densely but minutely glandular-puberulent throughout. Stems up to 50 cm, numerous, simple. Leaves 1·5-3 × 0·2-0·7 cm, linear-oblong to elliptic-oblanceolate, serrate or dentate. Cymes mostly 3-flowered, forming a narrow panicle; bracts not leaf-like; pedicels longer or shorter than calyx. Calyx-lobes with narrow scarious margin. Corolla 4-5 mm,dark brownish-red. Staminode oblong. Capsule 3-5 mm, globose, mucronate.{\i  Chalky hillsides. S.E. Russia, E. Ukraine.} Rs (E).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 30. S. rupestris} Bieb. ex Willd., {\i Sp. Pl. }{\b 3}: 274 (1800) (incl. {\i S. goldeana} Juz.). Like {\b 29} but less glaucous; leaves 0·6-1(-1·5) cm wide, oblong-lanceolate to ovate-elliptical; cymes often 5-flowered; pedicels mostly shorter than calyx; calyx-lobes with somewhat wider scarious margin; corolla 4·5-6(-10) mm, sometimes yellowish towards the base; staminode cordate to ovate-oblong.{\i  Dry, rocky or stony places. S.E. Russia, Krym.} Rs (K, E)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b  S. donetzica} Kotov,{\i  Ukr. Bot. Zur. }{\b 1}({\b 2}): 298 (1940) and {\i S. sareptana} Kleopow in Majevski, {\i Fl. Sred. Ross.} ed. 7, 642 (1940), both from S.E. Russia, resemble {\b 30} but have somewhat larger, dentate to pinnatifid leaves, cymes mostly 2- to 3-flowered, and smaller corolla and capsule.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc {\b 9.               Anarrhinum}              Desf.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc ({\i Simbuleta} Forskål)
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc By R. Fernandes.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Erect, biennial or perennial herbs. Leaves alternate, the basal undivided, forming a rosette, the cauline usually palmatisect. Flowers small, zygomorphic, in terminal, bracteate racemes or panicles. Calyx deeply and more or less equally 5-lobed. Corolla glabrous; tube cylindrical, usually with a conical spur at the base, sharply reflexed along the lower side of the tube (rarely reduced to an inconspicuous gibbosity); limb 2-lipped, the upper lip
\par

\par
220}
\par