{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 verticillate below, alternate above. Racemes lax, leafy; pedicels 10-15 mm at anthesis, up to 25 mm in fruit, erecto-patent. Calyx c. 4 mm, sometimes slightly glandular-hairy; lobes oblong, obtuse, equal. Corolla 11-16 mm, cream, usually with violet veins; spur 6-7 mm, deep violet. Capsule 4-5 mm. Seeds 0·5-0·7 mm, ovoid to subreniform, slightly flattened, smooth, black.{\i  Maritime sands. S. Portugal, S.W. Spain.} Hs Lu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 3. L. flava} (Poiret) Desf.,{\i  Fl. Atl.}{\b  2}: 42 (1798). Glabrous annual; stems 5-22 cm, ascending, simple. Leaves 3-15 × 1-7 mm, elliptical to narrowly oblanceolate, subacute, verticillate below, alternate above. Racemes capitate, with 1-5 flowers; pedicels c. 1 mm. Calyx 3-4·5 mm; lobes narrowly oblong, subacute, unequal. Corolla 10-14 mm, yellow; spur 5-7 mm, straight; lobes of upper lip parallel. Capsule 3·5-5 mm. Seeds 0·6-0·9 mm, ovoid to subreniform, slightly flattened, rugulose, black.{\i  Maritime sands. Corse, Sardegna.} Co Sa.
\par

\par
 
\pard\f0\fs28   {\b 4. L. pseudolaxiflora} Lojac.,{\i  Fl. Sic.}{\b  2}({\b 2}): 132 (1907). Like {\b 3} but stems decumbent; leaves not more than 10 × 4 mm; pedicels c. 6 mm, much longer than bracts; corolla 15-17 mm, mainly blue; spur 7-8 mm; seeds strongly ruminate.{\i  Gozo, Linosa, Lampedusa, Malta.} Si.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b  L. laxiflora} Desf.,{\i  Fl. Atl.}{\b  2}: 45 (1798), from N.W. Africa, differs in having the corolla 18-23 mm, usually deep violet, the spur 10-14 mm, the lobes of the upper lip somewhat divergent, and pale brown seeds; it has been doubtfully recorded from Sicilia.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 5. L. cretacea} Fischer ex Sprengel,{\i  Syst. Veg.}{\b  2}: 791 (1825) (incl. {\i L. creticola} Kuprian.). Glabrous, glaucous perennial; stems 10-35 cm, procumbent to ascending, freely branched with usually strongly patent branches, leafy up to inflorescence. Leaves 7-13 × 5-9 mm, ovate to elliptical, acute, some verticillate, some alternate. Racemes up to 4(-5) cm, rather lax; pedicels 1-4 mm, usually about equalling bracts. Calyx 1·7-3 mm; lobes oblong to lanceolate, subacute, subequal. Corolla 11-14 mm, yellow; spur 4-6 mm. Capsule 2·5-3 mm. Seeds 1·2-1·5 mm, oblong-reniform, rugulose, black, without distinct angles or flanges.{\i  Open habitats; calcicole. • S.C. & S.E. Russia, E. Ukraine.} Rs (C, E).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 6. L. sabulosa} Czern. ex Klokov, {\i Bot. Zur. }{\b 34}: 69 (1949). Like {\b 5} but leaves sometimes narrower, mostly alternate; racemes 4-8 cm; corolla 13-17 mm; capsule c. 4 mm. {\i Maritime sands. • W. coast of Krym.} Rs (K).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 7. L. tonzigii} Lona,{\i  Natura }({\i Milano}) {\b 40}: 66 (1949). Glaucous perennial, glabrous except in inflorescence; stems 5-12(-20) cm, decumbent to ascending, usually simple. Leaves 8-22 × 5-8 mm, oblong-elliptical, more or less obtuse, mostly verticillate, more rarely opposite or alternate. Racemes capitate, villous; pedicels up to 3 mm, usually very short and shorter than bracts. Calyx 6-7 mm; lobes oblong-spathulate, obtuse, more or less unequal. Corolla 20-27 mm, pale yellow; spur 8-12 mm. Capsule 6-7 mm. Seeds 1·4-2 mm, angular, compressed, deeply foveolate-reticulate, blackish.{\i  Dolomite screes,} 2000-2500 {\i m. • Alpi Bergamasche.} It.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 8. L. cavanillesii} Chav.,{\i  Monogr. Antirrh.} 117 (1833). Glandular-hairy perennial; stems 15-40 cm, decumbent or ascending, simple or branched above. Leaves 15-22 × 9-14 mm, ovate to ellipticovate, acute, mostly verticillate or opposite, sometimes alternate above. Racemes dense; pedicels 1-4 mm, shorter than bracts. Calyx 6-9 mm; lobes linear-spathulate, obtuse, very unequal. Corolla 23-30 mm, yellow; spur 9-13 mm. Capsule c. 5 mm. Seeds c. 1·2 mm, angular, compressed, densely rugulose-tuberculate, brownish-black.{\i  Shady rock-crevices. • S. & E. Spain.} Hs.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   {\b 9. L. oligantha} Lange, {\i Vid. Meddel. Dansk Naturh. Foren. Kjøbenhavn}{\b  1881}: 100 (1882). Glabrous annual; stems 5-25 cm, decumbent or ascending, sparingly branched. Leaves 8-15 × 0·5-1 mm, linear, obtuse, opposite below, verticillate above, rarely alternate. Racemes lax, with 2-7 flowers; pedicels 0·5-1·5(-3) mm, shorter than bracts. Calyx c. 4 mm; lobes oblong-lanceolate, acute, subequal. Corolla 18-25 mm, yellow; spur 11-14 mm. Stigma entire. Capsule 4-5 mm. Seeds 0·9-1·2 mm, angular, compressed, blackish-brown, tuberculate, with smooth, acute angles which are sometimes almost wing-like. •{\i  S.E. Spain.} Hs.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 10. L. huteri} Lange,{\i  op. cit.} 99 (1882). Glandular-puberulent annual; stems 5-12 cm, decumbent or ascending, simple or somewhat branched. Leaves 10-15 × 1-2 mm, linear to linear-lanceolate, acute, verticillate below, alternate above. Racemes short, dense; pedicels 1-3 mm, shorter than bracts. Calyx c. 4·5 mm; lobes linear-oblong, acute, unequal. Corolla 13-20 mm, yellow; spur 6-7 mm, usually pinkish-purple. Capsule c. 4 mm. Seeds 0·6-0·7 mm, reniform, minutely and densely tuberculate, blackish.{\i  Rocks and stony places; calcicole. • S. Spain.} Hs.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 11. L. bipunctata} (L.) Dum.-Courset,{\i  Bot. Cult.}{\b  2}: 93 (1802) ({\i L. filifolia} Lag.). Annual, glandular-puberulent at least above; stems 15-30 cm, diffuse or ascending to erect, usually much-branched. Leaves 6-20 × 0·5-1 mm, linear, obtuse, verticillate below, alternate above. Racemes short, rather dense at anthesis, lax in fruit; pedicels 1-3 mm. Calyx 2·5-3 mm; lobes oblong, subobtuse, unequal. Corolla 11-14 mm, yellow; spur 4-6 mm, often reddish. Capsule c. 3·5 mm. Seeds c. 0·6 mm, flattened-trigonous to reniform, obscurely and sparsely rugose or minutely tuberculate, with rounded angles.{\i  Cultivated ground, waste places and maritime sands. • Portugal, W. & C. Spain.} Hs Lu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    Plants from S.C. Spain (sierra Morena) with slightly wider leaves, corolla 9-10 mm, perhaps sometimes pale lilac with yellow palate, and reniform, tuberculate seeds very narrowly winged on the margins have been called{\b  L. intricata} Coincy,{\i  Jour. Bot.} ({\i Paris}){\b  14}: 109 (1900) ({\i L. amoris} Pau,{\i  L. diffusa} sensu Lange, non Hoffmanns. & Link); they are probably not specifically distinct from {\b 11}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 12. L. ficalhoana} Rouy,{\i  Naturaliste }({\i Paris}){\b  5}: 285 (1883). Densely glandular-pubescent annual or biennial; stems 3-15 cm, decumbent to erect, simple or branched above. Leaves 7-18 × 1-2·5 mm, linear-oblong to oblanceolate, obtuse, crowded, verticillate below, alternate above. Racemes short; pedicels 0·5-1·5 mm, much shorter than bracts. Calyx 3-4 mm; lobes elliptical to oblong-lanceolate, subobtuse, slightly unequal. Corolla 14-18 mm, yellow; spur 8-10 mm, reddish. Stigma clavate, entire. Capsule c. 4 mm. Seeds c. 0·6 mm, tetrahedral, finely rugulose.{\i  Maritime sands. • S.W. Portugal.} Lu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 13. L. hirta} (L.) Moench,{\i  Meth., Suppl.} 170 (1802). Annual, densely glandular-pubescent at least above; stems 15-80 cm, erect, usually simple, rather stout. Leaves 25-50 × 4-15 mm, oblong-lanceolate, acute to subobtuse, semiamplexicaul, mostly alternate, the lowest opposite. Racemes rather dense, elongating in fruit; flowers subsessile. Calyx 7-8 mm; lobes oblong-elliptical, obtuse, very unequal. Corolla 18-30(-40) mm, pale yellow; spur 10-16 mm. Capsule 5-6 mm. Seeds c. 1·2 mm, tetrahedral, strongly ruminate-alveolate, greyish-brown, with 
\par

\par
229}
\par