{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b mollissimum} (Rothm.) D. A. Webb,{\i  Bot. Jour. Linn. Soc.}{\b  64}: 273 (1971) ({\i A. mollissimum} Rothm.,{\i  A. molle} auct., non L.): Leaves broadly ovate to orbicular. Hairs on stem and leaves up to 2 mm. {\i E. half of the range of the species}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 10. A. meonanthum} Hoffmanns. & Link,{\i  Fl. Port.}{\b  1}: 261 (1813-1820) (incl. {\i A. ambiguum} Lange). Perennial herb, glandular-hairy at least in inflorescence and sometimes throughout. Stems up to 120 cm, erect, sparingly branched. Leaves 25-70 × 8-30 mm, lanceolate to ovate, acute or mucronate, glabrous or glandular-pubescent, opposite below, alternate above. Racemes 20-35 cm, with 30-60(-100) flowers. Bracts mostly 5-10 mm, linear-lanceolate, but the lowest transitional to foliage-leaves. Pedicels 1-4 mm. Calyx-lobes 5-8 mm, ovate-lanceolate, acute. Corolla 18-25 mm, pale yellow. Capsule 7-10 mm, oblong, glandular-hairy. •{\i  C. & N.W. Spain, N. Portugal.} Hs Lu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 11. A. braun-blanquetii} Rothm., {\i Feddes Repert.}{\b  56}: 280 (1954) ({\i A. meonanthum} auct., non Hoffmanns. & Link). Perennial herb, usually glabrous except for glandular-pubescent inflorescence. Stems up to 120 cm, erect, branched above. Leaves 25-60 × 4-15 mm, linear-oblong to elliptical, acute, opposite below, alternate above. Racemes 5-20 cm, with 5-30 flowers. Lower bracts similar to foliage-leaves, the upper smaller (6-12 mm), but exceeding the buds. Pedicels 3-6(-12) mm. Calyx-lobes 7-10 mm, ovate-lanceolate, acute. Corolla 30-40 mm, yellow. Capsule c. 15 mm, oblong, glandular-hairy.{\i  Rocks and walls; calcicole. • N.W. Spain, N.E. Portugal.} Hs Lu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Plants with the leaves and lower part of stem glandular-pubescent have been distinguished as var.{\i  oreophilum} Rothm. They may be hybrids with {\b 10} or {\b 14}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 12. A. siculum} Miller,{\i  Gard. Dict.} ed. 8, no. 6 (1768). Perennial herb, glabrous except for glandular-pubescent inflorescence. Stems 20-60 cm, erect, freely branched, often with many of the branches represented by short, axillary tufts of leaves. Leaves 20-60 × 2-6 mm, linear to narrowly elliptical, opposite below, alternate above. Lower bracts transitional to foliage-leaves, the upper c. 5 mm, about equalling pedicels. Calyx-lobes 5 mm, ovate-lanceolate, subacute. Corolla 17-25 mm, pale yellow, rarely veined with red. Capsule 10-12 mm, ovoid, glandular-pubescent.{\i  Rocks and walls. • Sicilia, Malta, .?S.W. Italy; cultivated for ornament and naturalized elsewhere in Mediterranean region.} *It Si [?Cr Ga Hs].
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 13. A. barrelieri} Boreau, {\i Graines Recolt. Jard. Bot. Angers }1854 [2] (1855). Perennial herb, usually glabrous except for glandular-pubescent inflorescence, but lower part of stem sometimes eglandular-villous. Stems 50-120 cm, erect; branches slender, numerous, often twining. Leaves 7-60 × 1-3(-9) mm, linear to linear-lanceolate, opposite below, alternate above. Bracts 2-10 mm, linear to broadly lanceolate. Pedicel 1-4 mm. Calyx-lobes 3-6 mm, lanceolate to ovate, acute to subobtuse. Corolla 20-30 mm, pink with yellow palate. Capsule 10-12 mm, ovoid-oblong, glandular-pubescent. {\i Hedges and rocky places. S. & E. Spain, S. Portugal.} Hs Lu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Some plants in the northern part of the range (N.E. Spain) show evidence of introgression by {\b 17}({\b a}); they correspond to {\b A. majus} subsp. {\b litigiosum} (Pau) Rothm.,{\i  Feddes Repert.} ({\i Beih.}) {\b 136}: 99 (1956).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 14. A. graniticum} Rothm., {\i Bol. Soc. Brot.} ser. 2, {\b 13}: 279 (1939) ({\i A. hispanicum }auct., non Chav.). Perennial herb, usually densely glandular-pubescent throughout. Stems up to 120 cm, ascending to erect; branches sometimes twining. Leaves 15-50 × 3-12(-20) mm, ovate to oblong-lanceolate, opposite below, alternate above. Bracts 3-10 mm. Pedicels 3-15 mm, usually exceeding bracts. Calyx-lobes (5-)7-10 mm, ovate, subacute. Corolla (22-)25-32 mm, pink or whitish, with yellow palate. Capsule 8-10 mm, oblong, glandular-pubescent.{\i  Rocks, walls and stony hillsides; calcifuge. • C. & S. Spain, N. & C. Portugal.} Hs Lu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   In most characters intermediate between{\b  9}({\b a}) and {\b 17}, and perhaps of hybrid origin; it is, however, only in the southernmost part of its range that it is sympatric with either of these taxa, and over a considerable area of C. Spain and E. Portugal it is the only native representative of the genus. In S. Spain it tends to have less erect stems, longer bracts and more acute calyx-lobes; such plants (which approach more closely to {\b 9}({\b a})) have been named{\b  A. boissieri} Rothm.,{\i  Feddes Repert.} ({\i Beih.}) {\b 136}: 88 (1956), but the correlation and constancy of these characters is poor.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 15. A. australe} Rothm.,{\i  Feddes Repert.} ({\i Beih}.) {\b 136}: 91 (1956). Like {\b 14} but stems erect, stout, sparingly branched; leaves ovate, mostly opposite or in whorls of 3 (the uppermost sometimes alternate); flowers often opposite or in whorls of 3; pedicels 1-5 mm, usually shorter than bracts; calyx-lobes broadly ovate, obtuse; corolla (35-)40-45 mm, bright pinkish-purple; capsule 11-14 mm.{\i  Calcareous rocks and walls. • S. & S.E. Spain.} Hs.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 16. A. latifolium} Miller, {\i Gard. Dict.} ed. 8, no. 4 (1768). Perennial herb, usually glandular-pubescent throughout, but sometimes only in inflorescence. Stems 60-100 cm, erect, sparingly branched. Leaves 20-70 × 8-32 mm, 1½-2½ times as long as wide, ovate, obtuse, more or less truncate at base, opposite below, alternate above. Bracts 5-12 mm, ovate. Pedicels 3-8(-15) mm. Calyx-lobes 7-9 mm, broadly ovate, obtuse. Corolla 33-48 mm, pale yellow. Capsule 13-17 mm, ovoid-oblong, glandular-pubescent. 2n = 16.{\i  Rocks and stony slopes. • C. Italy to N.E. Spain.} Ga Hs It.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 17. A. majus} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 617 (1753). Perennial herb, glabrous below, glabrous or glandular-pubescent in inflorescence. Stems up to 150(-200) cm, erect or straggling. Leaves 10-70 × 1-25 mm, linear to ovate, (1½-)2-12 times as long as wide, distinctly cuneate at base. Bracts 2-10 mm, ovate. Pedicels 2-10(-15) mm. Calyx-lobes 6-8 mm, ovate-oblong to suborbicular, obtuse. Corolla (27-)30-45 mm, usually pink or purple. Capsule 10-14 mm, oblong, glandular-pubescent or glabrous.{\i  S.W. Europe, extending eastwards to Sicilia; widely cultivated for ornament and naturalized elsewhere.} Bl Ga Hs Lu Si [Al Au Be Br Cr Cz Ge Gr Hb He Ho *It Ju Rm Sa Tu].
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   The native plants may be divided into 4 subspecies, although there is a considerable overlap in most characters. Plants escaped from cultivation are mostly referable to subsp. ({\b d}) in the Mediterranean region and to subsp. ({\b a}) elsewhere, but some of them cannot be referred to any subspecies, and are perhaps of hybrid origin.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Leaves (6-)9-12 times as long as wide, the upper ones 
\par
  often  opposite; inflorescence glabrous ........................... ({\b d}) subsp. {\b tortuosum} 
\par
1 Leaves 1½-9 times as long as wide, the upper ones alternate; 
\par
  inflorescence glandular-pubescent
\par
2 Leaves 1½-3 times as long as wide; lower pedicels
\par
  longer than calyx ............................................................ ({\b b}) subsp. {\b linkianum} 
\par
2 Leaves 4-9 times as long as wide; lower pedicels 
\par
  shorter than or equalling calyx
\par

\par
223}
\par