{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Leaves more or less glabrous on the surfaces, usually ciliate
\par 
2 Leaves 10-25 mm, flat or recurved ..................................... ({\b c}) subsp. {\b rosea}
\par 
2 Leaves 4-6(-10) mm, canaliculate .................................... ({\b b}) subsp. {\b laggeri}
\par 
1 Leaves densely pubescent or puberulent, at least beneath
\par 
3 Leaves entire ..................................................................... ({\b a}) subsp. {\b carnea}
\par 
3 Leaves ± dentate ........................................................ ({\b d}) subsp. {\b brigantiaca}
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b carnea}: More or less caespitose. Leaves 6-12(-20) × 1-2 mm, entire, more or less flat or recurved, more or less densely pubescent. Corolla 5-6 mm in diameter, pink or white. 2n = 38.{\i  C. & W. Alps; E. Pyrenees}.
\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b laggeri} (Huet) Nyman,{\i  Consp.} 607 (1881): Rather small, usually densely caespitose, with rather numerous small rosettes. Leaves 4-6(-10) × c.1 mm, entire, canaliculate and somewhat fleshy, glabrous on the surfaces, shortly ciliate. Corolla 6-8 mm in diameter, usually pink. 2n = 38.{\i  C. Pyrenees.}
\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b c}) Subsp. {\b rosea} (Jordan & Fourr.) Rouy,{\i  Fl. Fr.}{\b  10}: 211 (1908): Rather robust, often with few rather large rosettes. Leaves 10-25 × 1-2 mm, entire, flat, glabrous on the surfaces or sparsely puberulent towards the apex above, shortly ciliate, somewhat deflexed. Corolla 6-8(-9) mm in diameter, pink. 2n = 38.{\i  Mountains of E. & S.C. France, E. Pyrenees.}
\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b d}) Subsp. {\b brigantiaca} (Jordan & Fourr.) I. K. Ferguson,{\i  Bot. Jour. Linn. Soc. }{\b 64}: 376(1971): Rather robust with few rather large rosettes. Leaves 10-30 × 1-2·5 mm, flat, puberulent, at least some dentate. Corolla 5-8 mm in diameter, white. 2n = 78.{\i  S.W. Alps.}
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 10. A. pyrenaica} Lam., {\i Tabl. Encycl. Méth. Bot.}{\b  1}: 432 (1792). Densely caespitose perennial; stems regularly branched forming deep, dense, more or less hemispherical cushions. Leaves 3-7(-9) mm, linear-oblong, pubescent and ciliate, densely imbricate, persistent after withering and forming columnar shoots. Peduncles 2-22 mm, usually longer than leaves. Flowers solitary but subtended by 2-3 ovate-lanceolate, glabrous involucral bracts. Calyx 2-3·5 mm, subglabrous. Corolla 4-5 mm in diameter. Seeds 1-1·5 mm. 2n = 38.{\i  Rocks and screes. • E. & C. Pyrenees.} Ga Hs.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 11. A. chamaejasme} Wulfen in Jacq.,{\i  Collect. Bot. }{\b 1}: 194 (1787) (incl. {\i A. bungeana} Schischkin & Bobrov). Laxly caespitose perennial, shortly stoloniferous; stolons 1-3 cm. Leaves 5-16 × 2-3 mm, oblong-lanceolate, in flattened rosettes, entire, ciliate with long silky hairs on the margins and sometimes on the mid-veins. Scapes 1-7 cm, densely villous and also interspersed with short glandular hairs. Inflorescence 3- to 7-flowered; involucral bracts c. 4 mm, lanceolate or ovate-lanceolate, densely villous. Pedicels as long as or a little longer than bracts. Calyx 2-3 mm, villous. Corolla 5-7 mm, white or pink. 2n = 20.{\i  Alps, Carpathians; one station in C. Pyrenees; Arctic Russia, N. & C. Ural.} Au Cz Ga Ge He It Ju Po Rm Rs (N, C).
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 12. A. villosa} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 142 (1753) (incl. {\i A. taurica} Ovcz., {\i A. koso-poljanskii} Ovcz.). Like {\b 11} but usually more densely caespitose, with numerous cushion-forming rosettes; leaves in hemispherical rosettes, more or less densely villous, at least near the apex. 2n = 20.{\i  Rocks and screes; calcicole. Mountains of S. & C. Europe, from the Swiss Jura and E. Carpathians to N.W. Spain, C. Italy, C. Greece, Krym; also at low altitude in S.E. Russia and E. Ukraine.} Al Au Bu Ga Gr He Hs It Ju Rm Rs (C, K, E).
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28   Plants from S.E. Europe and Italy are usually more densely villous and tend to have shorter scapes; they have been described as{\b  A. arachnoidea} Schott, Nyman & Kotschy, {\i Analect. Bot.}17 (1854) but probably only deserve varietal status.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 13. A. helvetica} (L.) All.,{\i  Fl. Pedem. }{\b 1}: 91 (1785) ({\i A. imbricata} Lam.). Densely caespitose perennial; stems regularly branched, forming deep, dense, more or less hemispherical cushions. Leaves 2-6(-7·5) × 0·5-1·5 mm, lanceolate, oblong or spathulate, more or less densely pubescent with simple hairs, densely imbricate, persistent after withering and forming columnar shoots. Flowers solitary. Pedicels very short or absent; involucral bracts absent. Calyx 2-3·5 mm, pubescent. Corolla 4-6 mm in diameter, white with a yellow throat. Seeds 1-1·5 mm. 2n = 40.{\i  Mountain rocks; calcicole. • Alps; ?Pyrenees.} Au Ga Ge He It.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 14. A. vandellii} (Turra) Chiov.,{\i  Nuovo Gior. Bot. Ital.} nov. ser.,{\b  26}: 27 (1919). ({\i A. imbricata} auct., non Lam., {\i A. multiflora} (Vandelli) Moretti, non Lam.). Like {\b 13} but leaves linear-lanceolate, densely whitish-tomentose with stellate hairs; pedicels 1-8(-12) mm. 2n = 40.{\i  Mountain rocks; calcifuge. •  Alps, Pyrenees, Sierra Nevada.} Au Ga He Hs It.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 15. A. cylindrica} DC. in Lam. & DC.,{\i  Fl. Fr.} ed. 3, {\b 3}: 439 (1805). Densely caespitose perennial; stems somewhat irregularly branched, forming cushions. Leaves (4-)5-8(-10) × (1-)1·5-2·5 mm, oblong-lanceolate, pubescent with simple or forked hairs, densely imbricate, persistent after withering and forming columnar shoots. Flowers solitary. Pedicels 6-20 mm, densely pubescent; involucral bracts absent. Calyx 3-5 mm, pubescent. Corolla 7-9 mm in diameter, pink with a yellow throat. Seeds 2-3 mm. 2n = 40. •{\i  C. Pyrenees.} Ga Hs.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28   Plants from the same area forming more even hemispherical cushions, with leaves 1-1·5 mm wide and shorter pedicels, and with 2n = 40, have been called{\b  A. hirtella} Dufour, {\i Actes Soc. Linn. Bordeaux }{\b 8}: 100 (1856) and need further investigation.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 16. A. mathildae} Levier,{\i  Nuovo Gior. Bot. Ital.}{\b  9}: 43 (1877). Caespitose perennial. Leaves 10-15 × 1-2·5 mm, linear, glabrous, or sometimes shortly ciliate when young, imbricate. Flowers solitary. Pedicels 1-1½ times as long as the leaves, pubescent with stellate hairs, sometimes glabrous. Calyx 3-4 mm, more or less pubescent. Corolla c. 5 mm in diameter, white or pink. 2n = 40.{\i  Mountain rocks,} c. 2500{\i  m. C. Appennini.} It.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 17. A. pubescens} DC. in Lam. & DC.,{\i  Fl. Fr.} ed. 3,{\b  3}: 438 (1805). Caespitose perennial forming more or less lax cushions. Leaves 4-10 × 1-2·5 mm, spathulate or oblong-lanceolate with short, simple or forked hairs c. 1 mm, somewhat imbricate in rosettes at the ends of the shoots, not usually persistent after withering. Flowers solitary. Pedicels c. 5 mm, pubescent. Calyx 2-5 mm, pubescent. Corolla 4-6 mm in diameter, white or pink with a yellow throat. Seeds 1-2 mm. 2n = 40.{\i  Rocks and screes above} 2000{\i  m; somewhat calcicole. C. & S.W. Alps, Pyrenees.} Ga He Hs It.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 18. A. ciliata} DC. in Lam. & DC., {\i op. cit.}: 441 (1805). Like {\b 17} but leaves 6-15 × 2-4 mm, ovate-spathulate or oblong-ovate, ciliate, more or less pubescent; pedicels 5-15 mm; corolla 5-8 mm in diameter, pink or violet with an orange or yellow throat. 2n = c. 80.{\i  Screes at high altitude. • C. Pyrenees.} Ga Hs.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 19. A. hausmannii} Leybold, {\i Flora} ({\i Regensb}.) {\b 35}: 401 (1852). Caespitose perennial; branches shortly capitate, rosettes few, not forming a cushion. Leaves 5-10 × 1-1·5 mm, linear-lanceolate, densely pubescent with stellate or forked hairs, not persistent after withering. Flowers solitary. Pedicels 1-12 mm, pubescent. Calyx 3-4 mm, pubescent. Corolla 4-5 mm in diameter, pink with a yellow throat. Seeds 1-1·5 mm. 2n = 40.{\i  Rocks and screes above} 1900{\i  m; calcicole. • E. Alps, westwards to} 10° 50'{\i  E.} Au Ge It Ju.
\par 

\par 
22}
\par