{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}
\pard\f0\fs28 2-lobed, the lower 3-lobed, more or less flat and without definite palate, leaving the mouth of the tube open. Stamens 4, didynamous, included; anther-lobes confluent. Capsule subglobose, with equal loculi, each dehiscing by an apical pore. Seeds numerous, tuberculate or papillose.
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28  Measurements of leaf-length include the petiole, as it is not clearly defined from the lamina.
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Plant glandular-hairy; corolla pale yellow or cream-coloured {\b 4. duriminium} 
\par 1 Plant glabrous, though sometimes papillose; corolla 
\par  lilac or bluish-violet, rarely white
\par 2 Pedicels 5-11 mm in flower, exceeding the bracts; plant
\par  conspicuously papillose, at least in upper part .............. {\b 3. longipedicellatum}
\par 2 Pedicels not more than 3 mm in flower, equalling or 
\par  shorter than the bracts; plant not or sparsely papillose 
\par 3 Corolla-tube gibbous at the base, but not spurred; seeds with low,
\par  rounded tubercles; most of the cauline leaves entire ................... {\b 5. corsicum}
\par 3 Corolla-tube spurred at the base; seeds with acute, conical papillae;
\par   most of the cauline leaves divided into 3-7 linear lobes
\par 4 Cauline leaves sparse; racemes lax; calyx-lobes oblong
\par  to elliptical, obtuse, apiculate or shortly acute ........................... {\b 2. laxiflorum}
\par 4 Cauline leaves crowded; racemes dense; calyx-lobes 
\par  narrowly triangular-lanceolate, tapered to a long,
\par  slender point .......................................................................... {\b 1. bellidifolium}
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. A. bellidifolium} (L.) Willd.,{\i  Sp. Pl.}{\b  3}: 260 (1800). Glabrous biennial or perennial, sometimes sparsely papillose above; stems up to 80 cm. Basal leaves up to 8 × 3 cm, obovate-spathulate to elliptic-oblanceolate, irregularly dentate, obtuse, tapered to a petiole. Cauline leaves numerous, crowded, palmatisect with 3-5 linear to lanceolate, acute segments, the central 1-5 mm wide. Inflorescence simple or branched, dense; pedicels c. 1 mm, shorter than the bracts. Calyx-lobes 1-2 mm, narrowly triangular-lanceolate, tapered to a slender point. Corolla 4-5 mm, pale lilac to blue; spur 1·5-1·75 mm. Seeds covered with acute, conical papillae. 2n = 18.{\i  Calcifuge. • S.W. Europe, extending locally to N.C. France, S.C. Germany and N. Italy.} Ga Ge Hs It Lu [He].
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. A. laxiflorum} Boiss., {\i Elenchus} 71 (1838). Like {\b 1} but basal leaves narrower; cauline leaves distant, with central segment not more than 2 mm wide; inflorescence lax, simple or with a few short branches; calyx-lobes 1·25-1·5 mm, oblong to elliptical, obtuse, apiculate or shortly acute; corolla 6-7 mm, pale blue to white.{\i  Mountains of S. Spain.} Hs.
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28   Some plants from S. Spain combine some characters of {\b 1} with others of{\b  2}. They may be hybrids, but require further investigation.
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 3. A. longipedicellatum} R. Fernandes,{\i  Bol. Soc. Brot.} ser. 2, {\b 33}: 14(1959). Biennial,tinged with violet, especially in upper part, glabrous but densely papillose; stems up to 90 cm. Basal leaves 2-11 × 0·6-2·2 cm, obovate to oblanceolate-spathulate, crenate to doubly serrate, petiolate. Cauline leaves numerous, crowded, palmatisect with 3-7 lanceolate, acute segments. Inflorescence simple or branched, dense; pedicels 5-11 mm, very slender, exceeding the bracts. Calyx-lobes 2-3 mm, linear-lanceolate, acute. Corolla 5·5-6 mm, deep violet-blue; spur 1·5 mm; lower lip with two swellings at base, forming a low palate. Seeds covered with acute, conical papillae. •{\i  C. Portugal.} Lu.
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 4. A. duriminium} (Brot.) Pers.,{\i  Syn. Pl.}{\b  2}: 159 (1806) ({\i A. hirsutum} Hoffmanns. & Link). Glandular-pubescent to -hirsute biennial or perennial; stems 15-90 cm. Basal leaves up to 17 × 4·5 cm, obovate-spathulate, crenate to doubly serrate, obtuse. Cauline leaves mostly 3-fid, with the central segment up to 17 mm wide, lanceolate to suborbicular, mucronate, the 2 lateral much smaller and linear-lanceolate. Inflorescence simple or branched, dense; pedicels c. 1·5 mm, shorter than the bracts. Calyx-lobes 2·5 mm, linear-lanceolate with subulate apex. Corolla c. 6 mm, pale yellow or cream-coloured. Seeds covered with acute, conical papillae. •{\i  N.W. part of Iberian peninsula.} Hs Lu.
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 5. A. corsicum} Jordan & Fourr., {\i Brev. Pl. Nov. }{\b 1}: 41 (1866). Glabrous perennial; stems 20-50 cm, slender. Basal leaves up to 5 × 3 cm, oblong-spathulate, entire or weakly and distantly dentate. Cauline leaves distant, mostly linear to oblanceolate, entire, a few sometimes toothed or lobed. Inflorescence simple or branched, lax; pedicels c. 2 mm in flower, up to 5 mm in fruit, shorter than the bracts. Calyx-lobes 1·5-2 mm, lanceolate, acute. Corolla c. 4 mm, dull blue or violet; tube gibbous at the base but not spurred. Seeds covered with low, rounded tubercles. 2n = 18.{\i  Dry places. • Corse.} Co.
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28\qc {\b 10.              Antirrhinum}                  L.
\par
\pard\f0\fs24\qc By D.A. Webb.
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28 Dwarf shrubs, or perennial herbs somewhat woody at the base; leaves simple, entire, pinnately veined, usually opposite below and alternate above. Flowers zygomorphic, in terminal, bracteate racemes, or solitary in the leaf-axils. Calyx deeply and more or less equally 5-lobed, shorter than corolla-tube. Corolla glandular-pubescent outside; tube cylindrical, wide, produced abaxially at the base into a short pouch; limb 2-lipped, the upper lip 2-lobed, the lower 3-lobed, with at its base a prominent palate which closes the mouth of the tube. Stamens 4, didynamous, included. Stigma capitate. Capsule with 2 unequal loculi, the adaxial longer, narrower above, and opening by a single apical pore, the abaxial shorter, wider above, and with 2 apical pores. Seeds numerous, reticulate-rugose.
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28   The taxonomic difficulties of this genus are due, at least in part, to the fact that hybrids are very easily formed. An original pattern of narrow endemism in the Iberian peninsula has thus become complicated by hybridization with and introgression by a few wider-ranging species, some of them dispersed outside their original range by cultivation for ornament and subsequent naturalization.
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28   Measurements of leaves refer to those near the middle of the stem, and of flowers to the largest on the plant.
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28   Literature: W. Rothmaler,{\i  Feddes Repert.} ({\i Beih.}) {\b 136}: 1-124 (1956).
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Stem (excluding inflorescence) ± densely covered with
\par  eglandular hairs (rarely with a few glandular hairs as well) 
\par 2 Ovary and capsule glabrous (except sometimes for a few
\par  hairs at apex); lips of corolla widely divergent ........................ {\b 1. valentinum}
\par 2 Ovary and capsule hairy all over; lips of corolla parallel  
\par  for most of their length, divergent only in apical part 
\par 3 Nearly all the leaves opposite .............................................. {\b 2. sempervirens}
\par 3 Most of the upper leaves alternate
\par 4 Hairs on calyx and capsule mostly glandular
\par 5 Calyx-lobes 4-5 mm; corolla 18-25 mm ................................... {\b 6. charidemi}
\par 5 Calyx-lobes 5-8 mm; corolla 25-35 mm  .......................................... {\b 7. molle}
\par 4 Hairs on calyx and capsule mostly eglandular
\par 6 Pedicel usually exceeding subtending leaf; leaves not
\par  more than 10 mm; petiole 1-2 mm ....................................... {\b 5. microphyllum}
\par 6 Pedicel usually shorter than subtending leaf; most of
\par  the leaves more than 10 mm; petiole 2-6 mm
\par 7 Leaves soft, rounded at apex; corolla 20-25 mm ............... {\b 3. pulverulentum}
\par 7 Leaves coriaceous, truncate or slightly emarginate at apex; 
\par  corolla 17-20 mm ........................................................................ {\b 4. pertegasii}
\par
\par 221}
\par