{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 branched. Calyx-lobes up to 1 mm wide, oblong-elliptical. Corolla 13-17 mm, with the tube somewhat expanded above.{\i  Calcareous sandstone rocks by the sea. S.W. Portugal}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 7. C. robustum} Loscos, {\i Trat. Pl. Arag.}{\b  1}: 14 (1876). Like {\b 6}({\b a}) but usually more robust; calyx 5·5-7 mm, with lobes up to 2 mm wide; corolla 13-19 mm, the lips bright blue, the upper with violet lines, the palate, tube and spur yellowish.{\i  Stony or sandy soils. • E. Spain.} Hs.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 8. C. grandiflorum} (Cosson) Willk.,{\i  Suppl. Prodr. Fl. Hisp.} 178 (1893). Annual; stems 5-20(-30) cm, erect or ascending, puberulent to glandular-pubescent, rarely glabrous. Leaves up to 25 × 12 mm, broadly ovate to lanceolate, obtuse to subacute, the basal forming a rosette. Racemes lax. Calyx 3-6 mm; lobes oblong to linear-spathulate, ciliate. Corolla 12-17 mm, bluish-violet; lips strongly divergent; spur 5-7 mm, conical-subulate, at least as long as tube and making an obtuse angle with it. Capsule c. 2·5 mm. Seeds c. 0·4 mm, conical, with minutely denticulate ribs. •{\i  S.E. Spain.} Hs.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 9. C. rubrifolium} (Robill. & Cast. ex DC.) Fourr., {\i Ann. Soc. Linn. Lyon} nov. ser., {\b 17}: 127 (1869) ({\i Linaria rubrifolia} Robill. & Cast. ex DC.). Annual; stems up to 20(-40) cm. Leaves up to 20(-40) × 9(-15) mm, ovate to obovate, the lowest red beneath and usually forming a basal rosette, the upper smaller and green on both surfaces. Pedicels up to 16(-25) mm in fruit, erectopatent. Calyx 4-7 mm; lobes linear-spathulate, 1-1·5 mm wide. Lips of corolla more or less approximated; spur conical, acute, usually shorter than tube. Seeds 0·4-0·5 mm. {\i Dry places. Mediterranean region, mainly in the west.} Bl Ga Gr Hs It Sa Si.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Corolla (13-)15-20 mm, yellow, tinged with violet on the tube;  
\par
  capsule 4-6 mm .................................................................... ({\b c}) subsp. {\b raveyi}
\par
1 Corolla usually less than 15 mm, blue, violet or lilac,
\par
  with yellow palate; capsule 2·5-4·5 mm
\par
2 Corolla usually less than 13 mm; seeds with rather 
\par
  prominent ribs ............................................................. ({\b a}) subsp. {\b rubrifolium}
\par
2 Corolla at least 13 mm; seeds with low ribs ............. ({\b b}) subsp. {\b formenterae} 
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b rubrifolium}: Corolla-tube cylindrical, nearly closed at the mouth; spur 1-3·5(-4·5) mm, forming an obtuse angle with the tube; seeds with rather prominent, usually more or less tuberculate or spinulose ribs.{\i  Throughout the range of the species}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b formenterae} (Gand.) R. Fernandes,{\i  Bot. Jour. Linn. Soc.}{\b  64}: 227 (1971) ({\i C. formenterae} Gand.): Corolla-tube somewhat expanded towards the open mouth; spur 3-5 mm, usually continuing the line of the corolla-tube. Seeds with smooth, low ribs. •{\i  Islas Baleares} ({\i Ibiza, Formentera}).
\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b c}) Subsp. {\b raveyi} (Boiss.) R. Fernandes,{\i  loc. cit.} (1971) ({\i Linaria raveyi} Boiss.): Corolla-tube expanded towards the mouth; spur 4-6·5 mm, continuing the line of the tube. Seeds with prominent, tuberculate-spinulose ribs.{\i  Damp, sandy places. S. Spain} ({\i mountains between Granada and Málaga}). ({\i N. Africa}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 10. C. minus} (L.) Lange in Willk. & Lange,{\i  Prodr. Fl. Hisp.}{\b  2}: 577 (1870) ({\i Linaria minor} (L.) Desf.). Annual, usually glandular-pubescent; stems up to 40 cm. Leaves 5-35 × 1-5(-8) mm, linear to oblong-lanceolate, obtuse. Pedicels 3-20 mm in fruit, erect or ascending. Calyx 2-5 mm; lobes linear-spathulate, obtuse. Corolla 5-9 mm; spur 1·5-2·5 mm, more or less cylindrical, obtuse. Capsule 3-6 mm. Seeds 0·5-1 mm, with smooth or minutely denticulate ribs. {\i Most of Europe, but doubtfully native in much of the north}. All except Az Bl ?Co Fa Is Sa ?Si Sb.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Calyx 2-2·5 mm; corolla 5 mm, pale yellow ..................... ({\b c}) subsp. {\b idaeum} 
\par
1 Calyx 3-5 mm; corolla 6-9 mm, lilac with yellow palate
\par
2 Pedicels 3-9 mm in fruit; capsule subglobose, usually 
\par
  shorter than calyx; seeds c. 1 mm ....................................... ({\b b}) subsp. {\b litorale}
\par
2 Pedicels (5-)8-20 mm in fruit; capsule oblong-ovoid,
\par
  about equalling calyx; seed 0·5-0·8 mm ............................... ({\b a}) subsp. {\b minus}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b minus} ({\i C. viscidum} (Moench) Simonkai; incl.{\i  C. klokovii} Kotov): Pedicels (5-)8-20 mm in fruit. Calyx 3-5 mm; corolla 6-9 mm, lilac with yellow palate. Capsule oblong-ovoid, about equalling the calyx; seeds 0·5-0·8 mm.{\i  Cultivated fields, waste places and railway-lines. Throughout the range of the species}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b litorale} (Willd.) Hayek,{\i  Prodr. Fl. Penins. Balcan.}{\b  2}: 146 (1929): Like subsp. ({\b a}) but pedicels 3-9 mm in fruit; capsule subglobose, shorter than the calyx; seeds c. 1 mm. 2n = 14. •{\i  Shores of the Adriatic sea}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b c}) Subsp. {\b idaeum} (Rech. fil.) R. Fernandes, {\i Bot. Jour. Linn. Soc.}{\b  64}: 229 (1971) ({\i C. idaeum} Rech. fil.): Not more than 5 cm with divaricate branches. Calyx 2-2·5 mm; corolla 5 mm, pale yellow. Capsule subglobose, shorter than the calyx. •{\i  Kriti.}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc {\b 14.          Linaria}            Miller
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc By A.O. Chater, B.Valdés & D. A. Webb.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Annual to perennial herbs; leaves simple, entire, sessile, usually narrow, usually verticillate below and alternate above. Flowers in terminal, bracteate racemes or spikes, rarely solitary in the axils of foliage-leaves. Calyx deeply, often unequally 5-lobed, the adaxial lobe usually the longest, very rarely the shortest. Corolla usually glabrous except for the palate; tube cylindrical, produced at the base into a conical or cylindrical spur; limb 2-lipped, the upper lip 2-lobed, the lower 3-lobed, with at its base a more or less prominent, usually pubescent palate which usually closes the mouth of the tube. Stamens 4, didynamous, included. Capsule more or less globose, with equal loculi, dehiscing by several meridional fissures in the apical half. Seeds numerous.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   A difficult genus, still requiring study. The four closely related groups comprising species {\b 47-59} present particular difficulties with a strongly reticulate pattern in the variation of those characters most commonly relied on for taxonomic differentiation. The species as here defined cannot be keyed or diagnosed as effectively as elsewhere in the genus, but they represent recurrent and recognizable morphological units, to which at least the majority of specimens can be referred. The only alternative treatment on the information at present available - the reduction of the whole complex to a small number of exceedingly variable species with probably ill-defined boundaries - would seem to be less useful.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28   The sections into which the genus has been traditionally divided are unsatisfactory; we have chosen to make only one division, based on seed-character.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Most species bear at their base short non-flowering shoots; in the annual species these may be hairy when the rest of the plant is glabrous, and bear verticillate leaves which are often wider than those of the flowering stems; descriptions of leaves refer to the largest of those on the flowering stems, unless the contrary is stated. Measurements of the calyx are taken to the apex of the longest lobe; those of the corolla from the apex of the spur to the apex of the upper lip; those of the spur from its apex to the insertion of the corolla in the receptacle; those of the capsule are taken before dehiscence; and those of the pedicel refer to the fruiting condition unless the contrary is stated.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Literature: B. Valdés, {\i Revisión de las Especies europeas de} Linaria{\i  con Semillas aladas} ({\i Publ. Univ. Sevilla, Ser. Ci.} No. 7).{\i  Sevilla.} 1970.
\par

\par
226}
\par