{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Seeds not discoid, without wing, or with angles very narrowly winged
\par
2 Racemes glandular-puberulent to villous
\par
3 Corolla mainly violet, purple or white (though often with yellow palate)
\par
4 Corolla 9-17 mm; spur not more than 7 mm
\par
5 Corolla 9-10 mm ..................................................................... {\b 11. bipunctata}
\par
5 Corolla 11-17 mm
\par
6 Pedicels at least 15 mm in fruit .............................................. {\b 2. pedunculata}
\par
6 Pedicels not more than 4 mm in fruit
\par
7 Leaves c. 1 mm wide; corolla violet; stigma bifid ................... {\b 24. clementei}
\par
7 Leaves 4-7 mm wide; corolla white or pale lilac;
\par
  stigma clavate, ± entire .................................................................... {\b 29. nivea}
\par
4 Corolla 16-30 mm; spur at least 8 mm
\par
8 Stigma clavate, ± entire
\par
9 Stems at least 20 cm, erect; racemes usually with at 
\par
  least 10 flowers ............................................................................. {\b 22. elegans}
\par
9 Stems less than 20 cm, flexuous-ascending; racemes with
\par
  3-8 flowers ................................................................................. {\b 23. nigricans}
\par
8 Stigma deeply bifid
\par
10 Racemes usually with more than 10 flowers; lips of 
\par
   corolla widely divergent ........................................................... {\b 19. incarnata}
\par
10 Racemes usually with not more than 10 flowers; lips 
\par
   of corolla ± approximated
\par
11 Stems procumbent to ascending ........................................... {\b 21. algarviana}
\par
11 Stems erect
\par
12 Racemes lax, at least in fruit; pedicels up to 15 mm,
\par
   erecto-patent ................................................................................. {\b 17. spartea}
\par
12 Racemes rather dense, even in fruit; pedicels not more
\par
   than 8 mm, erect ........................................................................... {\b 18. viscosa}
\par
3  Corolla mainly yellow (though sometimes with violet spur)
\par
13 Leaves at least 4 mm wide
\par
14 Pedicels and calyx eglandular-villous; stems glabrous ............... {\b 7. tonzigii}
\par
14 Pedicels and calyx glandular-pubescent; stems glandular 
\par
   pubescent, at least immediately below the racemes
\par
15 Stems erect; leaves oblong-lanceolate, 3-4 times as 
\par
   long as wide, mostly alternate .......................................................... {\b 13. hirta}
\par
15 Stems decumbent to ascending; leaves ovate, about twice as  
\par
   long as wide, many of them opposite or verticillate ............... {\b 8. cavanillesii}
\par
13 Leaves not more than 3 mm wide
\par
16 Pedicels mostly more than 3 mm in fruit
\par
17 Racemes rather dense, even in fruit; capsules mostly 
\par
   overlapping .................................................................................. {\b 18. viscosa}
\par
17 Racemes very lax in fruit; capsules not overlapping
\par
18 Corolla 15-30 mm; spur 9-18 mm .............................................. {\b 17. spartea}
\par
18 Corolla 13-15 mm; spur 6-7 mm ............................................. {\b 20. hellenica}
\par
16 Pedicels mostly less than 3 mm in fruit
\par
19 Perennial; stems 25-70 cm; leaves 25-60 mm .............. {\b 16. peloponnesiaca}
\par
19 Annual or biennial; stems 5-30 cm; leaves not more than 22 mm
\par
20 Spur 8-10 mm ....................................................................... {\b 12. ficalhoana}
\par
20 Spur 4-7 mm
\par
21 Stems 5-12 cm, decumbent to ascending; calyx c. 4·5 mm ......... {\b 10. huteri}
\par
21 Stems 15-30 cm, usually ± erect; calyx 2·5-3 mm ................ {\b 11. bipunctata}
\par
2  Racemes glabrous
\par
22 Pedicels strongly recurved in fruit ................................................ {\b 1. reflexa}
\par
22 Pedicels not recurved in fruit
\par
23 Corolla mainly violet, purple or white (though often with yellow palate)
\par
24 Leaves 10-25 mm wide ............................................................ {\b 14. triphylla}
\par
24 Leaves not more than 8 mm wide
\par
25 At least the longest pedicels 10-15 mm in flower ................ {\b 2. pedunculata}
\par
25 Pedicels less than 10 mm in flower
\par
26 Spur 7-18 mm
\par
27 Perennial; leaves up to 60 mm, crowded .................................. {\b 28. capraria}
\par
27 Annual; leaves not more than 35 mm, distant
\par
28 Stigma deeply bifid .................................................................... {\b 17. spartea}
\par
28 Stigma clavate, ± entire
\par
29 Spur curved; seeds 1-1·2 mm; corolla white ....................... {\b 25. chalepensis}
\par
29 Spur straight; seeds 0·4-0·9 mm; corolla violet or bluish 
\par
30 Spur 7-8 mm; seeds 0·6-0·9 mm, strongly ruminate; 
\par
   leaves up to 4 mm wide .................................................... {\b 4. pseudolaxiflora}
\par
30 Spur 9-12 mm; seeds c. 0·4 mm, minutely rugulose-
\par
   tuberculate; leaves 1-2 mm wide .............................................. {\b 23. nigricans}
\par
26 Spur 2-6 mm
\par
31 Seeds less than 1 mm
\par
32 Annual; corolla 10-15 mm; pedicels fruit 2-6 mm in ........... {\b 26. canadensis}
\par
32 Perennial; corolla 7-9 mm; pedicels not more than 2 mm
\par
   in fruit ................................................................................... {\b 31. microsepala}
\par
31 Seeds at least 1 mm
\par
33 Corolla white with lilac veins; spur straight, about
\par
   half as long as remainder of corolla .............................................. {\b 30. repens}
\par
33 Corolla purplish-violet; spur curved, about as long as
\par
   remainder of corolla .................................................................. {\b 27. purpurea}
\par
23 Corolla mainly yellow (though sometimes with violet spur)
\par
34 Annual; seeds 0·4-0·9 mm
\par
35 Pedicels mostly less than 3 mm
\par
36 Corolla 18-25 mm; racemes lax ................................................ {\b 9. oligantha}
\par
36 Corolla 10-14 mm; racemes capitate ............................................... {\b 3. flava}
\par
35 Pedicels all at least 3 mm
\par
37 Spur 6-7 mm ......................................................................... {\b 2. pedunculata}
\par
37 Spur 9-18 mm ............................................................................. {\b 17. spartea}
\par
34 Perennial; seeds 1-1·5 mm
\par
38 Corolla pale yellow with violet spur ........................................ {\b 14. triphylla}
\par
38 Corolla bright yellow throughout
\par
39 Stems ± leafless for some distance below raceme;
\par
   leaves not more than 3 mm wide .................................... {\b 16. peloponnesiaca}
\par
39 Stems leafy up to base of raceme; leaves often more 
\par
   than 3 mm wide
\par
40 Stems erect; leaves linear to ovate-lanceolate ..................... {\b 15. genistifolia}
\par
40 Stems procumbent to ascending; leaves ovate to elliptical
\par
41 Racemes mostly not more than 4 cm; capsule 2·5-3 mm ........... {\b 5. cretacea}
\par
41 Racemes mostly more than 4 cm; capsule c. 4 mm ................... {\b 6. sabulosa}
\par
1  Seeds discoid, with a marginal wing
\par
42 Corolla mainly violet, purple, reddish or white 
\par
   (though often with yellow palate)
\par
43 Corolla 35-55 mm ......................................................... {\b 32. triornithophora}
\par
43 Corolla less than 35 mm
\par
44 Wing of seed lacerate or fimbriate
\par
45 Corolla 15-20 mm; pedicels at least 3 mm in flower;
\par
   wing of seed deeply fimbriate ............................................... {\b 33. pelisseriana}
\par
45 Corolla 9-12 mm; pedicels not more than 2·5 mm in flower; 
\par
   wing of seed lacerate ................................................................... {\b 64. ricardoi}
\par
44 Wing of seed entire
\par
46 Corolla not more than 7 mm; spur shorter than 
\par
   remainder of corolla ................................................ ({\b 68-70}). {\b arvensis} group
\par
46 Corolla at least 8 mm; spur at least as long as 
\par
   remainder of corolla
\par
47 Wing of seed swollen .......................................................... {\b 65. amethystea}
\par
47 Wing of seed not swollen.
\par
48 Lower part of plant glandular or hairy
\par
49 Corolla 8-15 mm; annual or biennial ...................... ({\b 57-59}). {\b diffusa} group
\par
49 Corolla 15-27 mm; perennial
\par
50 Corolla greyish-lilac with bluish-violet veins ........................... {\b 44. lilacina}
\par
50 Corolla violet, purplish-brown or whitish-cream ....... ({\b 47-50}).{\b  tristis} group
\par
48 Lower part of plant eglandular and glabrous
\par
51 Disc of seed with long papillae
\par
52 Annual; leaves 5-15 mm; racemes with not more than
\par
   4 flowers ............................................................................... {\b 60. depauperata}
\par
52 Perennial; leaves 13-27 mm; racemes usually with more
\par
   than 4 flowers .............................................................. ({\b 47-50}). {\b tristis }group
\par

\par
227}
\par