{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 3 Cauline leaves 30-70 × 5-20 mm; stems erect, sparingly
\par
  branched ................................................................................ ({\b a}) subsp. {\b majus}
\par
3 Cauline leaves 20-40 × 4-8 mm; stems diffuse, freely
\par
  branched ....................................................................... ({\b c}) subsp. {\b cirrhigerum}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b majus}: stems up to 120 cm, erect, sparingly branched. Leaves 30-70 × 5-20 mm, elliptic-lanceolate to linear-oblong, widest near the middle, the upper ones alternate. Inflorescence glandular-pubescent. Corolla 33-45 mm, purplish-pink with yellow palate, rarely (var.{\i  striatum} (DC.) Rothm.) pale yellow veined with red. •{\i  E. Pyrenees, and mountains of S.C. France, N.E. Spain and Mallorca; widely naturalized elsewhere}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b linkianum} (Boiss. & Reuter) Rothm.,{\i  Feddes Repert.}{\b  54}: 19 (1944): stems up to 80 cm, erect or ascending, sparingly branched. Leaves 20-55 × 8-20 mm, ovate to ovate-lanceolate, widest near the base, the upper ones alternate. Inflorescence glandular-pubescent. Corolla (27-)30-40 mm, purplish-pink with yellow palate. 2n = 16.{\i  Rocks and walls. • W.C. Portugal.}
\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b c}) Subsp. {\b cirrhigerum} (Ficalho) Franco,{\i  Bot. Jour. Linn. Soc. }{\b 64}: 275 (1971) ({\i A. latifolium} var.{\i  cirrhigerum} Ficalho): stems up to 200 cm, diffuse, freely branched, with branches often twining. Leaves 20-40 × 4-8 mm, linear-lanceolate, widest near the middle. Corolla 30-40 mm, purplish-pink with yellow palate.{\i  Sandy ground near the sea. C. & S. Portugal, S.W. Spain}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b d}) Subsp. {\b tortuosum} (Bosc) Rouy,{\i  Fl. Fr. }{\b 11}: 59 (1909) ({\i A. tortuosum} Bosc): stems erect or straggling, the branches sometimes twining. Leaves 10-60 × 1-5(-10) mm, linear to linear-oblong, the uppermost often opposite. Inflorescence glabrous or glandular-pubescent. Corolla 30-37 mm, purplish-pink, with white or yellow palate.{\i  S. Spain, Sicilia; widely naturalized elsewhere in Mediterranean region}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc {\b 11.            Asarina}             Miller
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc By D.A. Webb.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Like{\i  Antirrhinum} but leaves crenate-dentate or lobed, palmately veined; corolla glabrous except for palate; capsule with 2 equal loculi, each dehiscing by a single pore.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. A. procumbens} Miller,{\i  Gard. Dict.} ed. 8, no. 1 (1768) ({\i A. lobelii} Lange,{\i  Antirrhinum asarina} L.). Glandular-pubescent perennial; stems procumbent, woody at the base. Leaves up to 5 × 6 cm, ovate-cordate to reniform, crenate-dentate, sometimes slightly palmatifid; petiole about as long as lamina. Flowers solitary in leaf-axils; pedicel 12-20 mm. Calyx 10-13 mm, divided almost to the base; lobes lanceolate, acute, slightly unequal. Corolla 30-35 mm; tube whitish, slightly veined with purple; lips pale yellow; palate deep yellow. Capsule subglobose, glabrous, shorter than calyx. {\i Shady rocks, mostly in the mountains; calcifuge. • S. France, N.E. Spain.} Ga Hs.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc {\b 12.           Misopates}             Rafin. 
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc By D. A. Webb.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28     Like{\i  Antirrhinum} but annual; calyx-lobes conspicuously unequal, all longer than the corolla-tube; seeds somewhat flattened, with one face smooth, keeled, and produced into a narrow wing, the other finely tuberculate and with a wide, raised, sinuate, papillose border.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 Corolla 10-17 mm, not exceeding the calyx, usually pink ............ {\b 1. orontium} 
\par
Corolla 18-22 mm, exceeding the calyx, white ........................... {\b 2. calycinum}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. M. orontium} (L.) Rafin., {\i Autikon Bot. }158 (1840) ({\i Antirrhinum orontium} L.). Stem (5-)20-50 cm, erect, sparingly branched, glabrous to sparsely hirsute below, glandular-pubescent above. Leaves 20-50 × 2-7 mm, linear to oblong-elliptical, subacute, shortly petiolate, opposite below, often alternate above. Flowers in a lax, terminal raceme; bracts similar to leaves but decreasing in size upwards; pedicels very short in flower, up to 4 mm in fruit. Calyx 10-17 mm; lobes linear, the longest about 1½ times as long as the shortest. Corolla 10-15 mm, equalling or shorter than the calyx, pink (rarely white). Capsule 8-10 mm, ovoid, gibbous, glandular-hairy. 2n = 16. {\i Cultivated ground; occasionally in other open habitats; somewhat calcifuge. S., W. & C. Europe, but doubtfully native in much of the centre and north- west; locally naturalized as a weed further north and east.} Al *Au Az *Be Bl *Br Bu Co Cr Ga Gr *Hb He Ho Hs *Hu It Ju Lu Rm Rs (W, K) Sa Si Tu [Cz Da Ge Po Rs (C) Su].
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. M. calycinum} Rothm., {\i Feddes Repert.} ({\i Beih.}){\b  136}: 112 (1956). Like {\b 1} but stem up to 80 cm, usually glabrous; raceme dense in flower, elongating in fruit; calyx 15-20 mm; corolla 18-22(-27) mm, exceeding the calyx, white; capsule 6-8 mm, sometimes glabrous.{\i  Cultivated fields and other open habitats; usually calcicole. W. Mediterranean region, extending to Portugal and S.E. Italy. }Ga Hs It Lu Sa Si
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc {\b 13.              Chaenorhinum}          (DC.)Reichenb. 
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc By R. Fernandes.
\par
 
\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Annual or perennial herbs. Leaves entire, shortly petiolate and usually opposite below, sessile and opposite or alternate above, those subtending flowers always alternate. Flowers in terminal, bracteate racemes or solitary in the leaf-axils. Calyx deeply and somewhat unequally 5-lobed. Corolla with more or less cylindrical tube, produced at the base into a straight spur; limb 2- lipped, the upper lip 2-lobed, the lower 3-lobed and with a low palate which does not close the mouth of the tube. Stamens 4, didynamous, included. Capsule obliquely ovoid to subglobose, with unequal loculi opening by pores. Seeds numerous, oblong-ellipsoid to truncate-conical, with smooth or variously ornamented, longitudinal ribs.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Literature: T. M. Losa España, {\i Anal. Inst. Bot. Cavanilles}{\b  21}:545-566 (1963). 
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Perennial
\par
2 Non-flowering stolons, bearing only scale-leaves,
\par
  present at base of plant ............................................................... {\b 2. glareosum}
\par
2 Stolons absent
\par
3 Corolla 6-8 mm, white ................................................................. {\b 4. tenellum}
\par
3 Corolla at least 9 mm, blue, lilac, pink or yellow
\par
4 Capsule ovoid, with loculi very unequal in length;
\par
  spur of corolla 5·5-8 mm ....................................................... {\b 5. macropodum}
\par
4 Capsule subglobose, with loculi not very unequal in 
\par
  length; spur of corolla 2-5(-6) mm
\par
5 Stems densely glandular-villous throughout, with translucent, 
\par
  yellowish hairs; pedicels recurved in fruit .................................... {\b 3. villosum}
\par
5 Stems glabrous below (rarely with short, white, eglandular  
\par
  hairs); pedicels usually erecto-patent in fruit ....................... {\b 1. origanifolium}
\par
1 Annual
\par
6 Basal leaves usually in a rosette; spur of corolla
\par
  acute, evenly tapered from the base
\par
7 Spur at least as long as corolla-tube; lips of corolla
\par
  widely divergent .................................................................... {\b 8. grandiflorum}
\par
7 Spur usually shorter than corolla-tube; lips of corolla
\par
  not widely divergent ................................................................ {\b 9. rubrifolium}
\par
6 Basal leaves usually not in a rosette; spur of corolla
\par
  obtuse to subacute, ± cylindrical or inflated in the middle
\par
8 Corolla not more than 9 mm; spur 1·5-2·5 mm, ± cylindrical ....... {\b 10. minus}
\par
8 Corolla at least 9 mm; spur 3-5 mm, somewhat inflated 
\par
  in the middle
\par

\par
224}
\par