{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 9 Calyx-lobes not more than 1 mm wide; corolla 9-17 mm,
\par
  lilac with darker veins .......................................................... {\b 6. serpyllifolium}
\par
9 Calyx-lobes 1-2 mm wide; corolla 13-19 mm, with blue 
\par
  lips and yellowish palate, spur and tube ...................................... {\b 7. robustum}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. C. origanifolium} (L.) Fourr., {\i Ann. Soc. Linn. Lyon} nov. ser.,{\b  17}: 127 (1869) ({\i Linaria origanifolia} (L.) Cav.). Perennial; stems up to 35(-50) cm, numerous, ascending to erect, simple or branched. Leaves lanceolate to suborbicular, acute to obtuse. Racemes lax, at least in fruit; bracts linear to lanceolate; pedicels usually erecto-patent in fruit. Calyx-lobes linear-spathulate to oblanceolate. Corolla 9-20 mm; spur 2-5(-6) mm. Capsule subglobose; loculi only slightly unequal. 2n = 14.{\i  Calcareous rocks and walls. S.W. Europe.} Bl Ga Hs It Lu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Very variable; it seems probable that further subspecies, in addition to those described below, should be recognized.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Stems, petioles and pedicels covered with short, white,
\par
  patent or deflexed, eglandular hairs .............................. ({\b d}) subsp. {\b segoviense}
\par
1 Plant glabrous below, more or less glandular-pubescent above
\par
2 Leaves up to 10(-13) mm wide, ovate to suborbicular (rarely 
\par
  lanceolate); calyx 5-8 mm; capsule usually more than 3 mm
\par
  ................................................................................... ({\b a}) subsp. {\b origanifolium}
\par
2 Leaves not more than 5 mm wide, narrowly elliptical to
\par
  lanceolate; calyx 3-6 mm; capsule not more than 3 mm 
\par
3 Leaves usually thin; stems slender, flexuous or pendent
\par
  ......................................................................................... ({\b b}) subsp. {\b cadevallii}
\par
3 Leaves thick and rigid; stems rigid ............................ ({\b c}) subsp. {\b crassifolium}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b origanifolium}: Glabrous at least at the base. Leaves up to 22(-28) × 10(-13) mm, suborbicular to lanceolate. Lower pedicels up to 18(-30) mm in fruit. Calyx 5-8 mm. Corolla 10-20 mm, bluish-lilac with violet lines and pale yellow palate; spur 2-5(-6) mm, cylindrical or somewhat inflated. Capsule (2·5-)3-5 mm. Seeds 0·5-0·9 mm; ribs low or prominent, smooth or denticulate.{\i  Throughout the range of the species except for parts of C. & S. Spain}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b cadevallii} (O. Bolós & vigo) Laínz, {\i Aportac. Fl. Gallega }{\b 6}: 27 (1968): Glabrous except in inflorescence; stems long, slender, flexuous or pendent. Leaves not more than 17 × 5 mm, elliptical, usually thin and rather sparse. Lower pedicels 10-17 mm in fruit. Calyx 3-5 mm. Corolla 9-14 mm, lilac; spur 2-3·5 mm, contracted at both ends. Capsule c. 2 mm. Seeds 0·5-0·6 mm; ribs low, smooth. •{\i  N.E. Spain}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b c}) Subsp. {\b crassifolium} (Cav.) Rivas Goday & Borja,{\i  Anal. Inst. Bot. Cavanilles}{\b  19}: 451 (1961): stems slender, rigid, papillose but otherwise glabrous, except in inflorescence. Leaves 4-17 × 2-5 mm, oblanceolate to spathulate, rarely ovate, thick and rigid, usually crowded; margin inflexed. Lower pedicels 5-10(-17) mm in fruit. Calyx 3-6 mm. Corolla 10-15 mm, pale pink or lilac tinged with yellow; spur 2-3(-4·5) mm, obtuse, usually somewhat inflated. Capsule 2-3 mm. Seeds as in subsp. ({\b b}). {\i S. & E. Spain, Islas Baleares}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b d}) Subsp. {\b segoviense} (Willk.) R. Fernandes,{\i  Bot. Jour. Linn. Soc.}{\b  64}: 220 (1971) ({\i C. segoviense} Willk.): Densely pubescent throughout with white, patent or deflexed, eglandular hairs, and with glandular hairs also in inflorescence; stems long, slender, decumbent. Leaves 5-17 × 2-5 mm, elliptical, thin, rather sparse. Racemes very lax; pedicels slender, up to 15(-30) mm in flower. Calyx c. 5 mm. Corolla 11-13 mm, pink with darker lines; spur 2·5-4 mm, slightly constricted at base, obtuse. Seeds as in subsp.({\b b}). {\i Walls. • C. Spain} ({\i Segovia}).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   {\b 2. C. glareosum} (Boiss.) Willk.,{\i  Ill. Fl. Hisp.}{\b  2}: 29 (1886). Perennial; stems up to 30 cm, numerous, ascending, the non-flowering ones forming slender stolons with minute scale-leaves.Leaves up to 12 × 7 mm, ovate to ovate-orbicular, obtuse, light green, glabrous. Racemes few-flowered, subcorymbose; pedicels up to 15 mm in fruit. Calyx 6·5-10 mm; lobes linear-spathulate, obtuse. Corolla 17-24 mm; lips violet to lilac; palate yellow; tube violet tinged with pink or yellow; spur 4-6 mm, constricted at the base, yellowish. Seeds c. 0·6 mm, with prominent, smooth ribs. 2n = 14. {\i Schistose rocks and screes at} c. 3000{\i  m. S. Spain }({\i Sierra Nevada}). Hs.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 3. C. villosum} (L.) Lange in Willk. & Lange,{\i  Prodr. Fl. Hisp.}{\b  2}: 580 (1870). Perennial; densely viscid-villous throughout with yellowish, translucent hairs; stems up to 35 cm, diffuse, pendent or ascending. Leaves up to 25 × 13 mm, suborbicular to obovate or rhombic, usually obtuse, rather thick. Pedicels up to 22 mm recurved in fruit. Calyx 5-8(-9·5) mm; lobes 1-4 mm wide linear-spathulate to obovate. Corolla 10-18 mm; lips lilac or pale yellow with violet lines; palate yellow; spur 2-4 mm, obtuse. Capsule about half as long as calyx; loculi only slightly unequal. Seeds c. 0·5 mm, with low, smooth ribs.{\i  Walls and rocks. S. Spain, S.W. France.} Ga Hs.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 4. C. tenellum} (Cav.) Lange, {\i op. cit.} 581 (1870). Perennial villous with long white hairs. Stems up to 50 cm, numerous slender, procumbent. Leaves broadly ovate to orbicular, truncate or cordate at base, usually sparse; lamina 3-14 × 3-14 mm, thin; petiole 1-7 mm, slender. Pedicels up to 25 mm in fruit, very slender. Calyx 3-5 mm; lobes linear-lanceolate to oblanceolate, nearly equal. Corolla 6-8 mm, white; spur 2-3 mm, obtuse. Seeds c. 0·6 mm, with low, smooth ribs.{\i  Shady mountain rocks. • E. Spain} ({\i near Ayora}). Hs.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 5. C. macropodum} (Boiss. & Reuter) Lange, {\i op. cit.} 579 (1870). Perennial; stems 10-35 cm, erect or ascending, robust, glandular-villous. Leaves up to 30 × 10 mm, the lowest lanceolate to elliptical, obtuse, subglabrous, the upper smaller, narrower and villous. Pedicels up to 25(-35) mm in flower, more or less erect. Calyx 7-9 mm, densely glandular-villous. Corolla 17-26 mm, lilac with violet stripes, sometimes with yellow or white palate; spur 5·5-8 mm, subacute. Capsule 5-6·5 mm, subacute, with loculi very unequal in length. Seeds with denticulate or spinulose ribs. {\i Mountain rocks and stony slopes. • S. Spain.} Hs.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b macropodum}: Racemes lax throughout; pedicels relatively stout. Calyx-lobes 2-3 mm wide, narrowly elliptical. Seeds c. 1 mm. {\i Provinces of Córdoba and Granada.}
\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b degenii} (Hervier) R. Fernandes, {\i Bot. Jour. Linn. Soc.}{\b  64}: 222 (1971) ({\i C. robustum} f. degenii Hervier): Racemes dense above; pedicels slender. Calyx-lobes 1-1·5 mm wide, spathulate. Seeds 0·5-0·7 mm. {\i Provinces of Jaén, Granada and Málaga}.
\par
 
\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 6. C. serpyllifolium} (Lange) Lange in Willk. & Lange,{\i  Prodr. Fl. Hisp.}{\b  2}: 578 (1870). Annual, glandular-villous, especially above. Leaves up to 17 × 8 mm, the lower obovate to oblanceolate, obtuse to subacute, subglabrous, the floral oblong, pubescent or villous. Pedicels up to 20(-25) mm in fruit, erect. Calyx 3·5-6 mm; lobes not more than 1 mm wide, linear-spathulate, glandular-villous, and also with long, white, eglandular hairs. Corolla lilac with darker lines; spur 3-5 mm, somewhat inflated. Capsule about equalling the calyx. Seeds 0·5-0·6 mm, with low, wide, smooth ribs. •{\i  C. Spain; S.W. Portugal.} Hs Lu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b serpyllifolium}: stems 5-25(-40) cm, branched from the base; branches ascending to erect. Calyx lobes c. 0·5 mm wide, linear-spathulate. Corolla 9-15 mm, with more or less cylindrical tube.{\i  Cultivated ground and waste places. C. Spain.}
\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b lusitanicum} R. Fernandes,{\i  Bot. Jour. Linn. Soc.}{\b  64}: 223 (1971): stems not more than 5 cm, erect, simple or sparingly
\par

\par
225}
\par