{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 {\i Shady rocks and walls; calcicole. • C. & S. Italy, Sardegna}. It Sa.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Much confused with {\b 1}({\b b}) and {\b 1}({\b c}), but distinct in its very short spur and pubescent capsule.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 8. C. microcalyx} (Boiss.) Wettst. in Engler & Prantl,{\i  Naturl. Pflanzenfam.}{\b  4}({\b 3b}): 58 (1891) ({\i Linaria microcalyx} Boiss.). Stems and leaves villous. Stems up to c. 25 cm; middle and upper internodes about equal. Leaves up to 10 × 15 mm, mostly alternate, reniform to semicircular, entire or 3(-5)-lobed; lobes usually low and rounded. Calyx 1-2 mm, sparsely hairy to subglabrous. Corolla 9-13 mm, violet with yellow palate. Capsule pubescent to lanate, considerably exceeding calyx.{\i  S. & W. parts of Balkan peninsula, S. Aegean region.} Al Cr Gr Ju.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Seeds c. 1 mm, ± equal, subglobose, regularly alveolate
\par
2 Spur 1·5-2 mm, scarcely longer than calyx; capsule pubescent
\par
  ............................................................................................... ({\b b}) subsp. {\b minor}
\par
2 Spur 2-3 mm, much longer than calyx; capsule lanate
\par
  ...................................................................................... ({\b c}) subsp. {\b dodekanesi}
\par
1 Seeds often unequal, at least some of them 2 mm or more,  
\par
  furnished with ridges, wings or crests
\par
3 Spur 1-2 mm; seeds triangular-ovate, with longitudinal ridges
\par
  ................................................................................................ ({\b a}) subsp. {\b ebelii}
\par
3 Spur 2-3 mm; seeds irregularly shaped, with sinuous,
\par
  anastomosing crests and wings ..................................... ({\b d}) subsp. {\b microcalyx}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b ebelii} (Cuf.) Cuf., {\i Bot. Not.}{\b  1947}: 151 (1947): Spur 1-2 mm, usually longer than calyx; seeds 2-2·5 × 1 mm, triangular-ovate, with narrow, mostly longitudinal ridges. •{\i  S.W. Jugoslavia, N. Albania}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b minor} (Cuf.) W. Greuter, {\i Boissiera }{\b 13}: 107 (1967): Spur 1·5-2 mm, scarcely longer than calyx; capsule pubescent; seeds c. 1 mm, subglobose, regularly alveolate. 2n = 28. •{\i  W. Greece}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b c}) Subsp. {\b dodekanesi} W. Greuter, {\i op. cit.} 108 (1967): Like ({\b b}) but spur 2-3 mm, about twice as long as calyx; ripe capsule densely lanate.{\i  S. Aegean area}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b d}) Subsp. {\b microcalyx}: Spur 2-3 mm; seeds 1·5-3 mm, unequal, irregularly shaped, with prominent, sinuous, anastomosing crests and wings. •{\i  S. Greece}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc {\b 16.            Kickxia}              Dumort.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc ({\i Elatinoides} (Chav.) Wettst.)
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc By R. Fernandes.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Annual or perennial herbs; stems usually procumbent or climbing. Leaves alternate (the lowest sometimes opposite), ovate, hastate or sagittate. Flowers solitary in the leaf-axils (rarely aggregated into spike-like racemes on lateral branches). Calyx with 5 subequal lobes. Corolla and stamens as in{\i  Linaria}. Capsule more or less globose, with 2 equal loculi, each opening by a single large pore with detachable lid. Seeds alveolate or tuberculate.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 All leaves rounded or cordate at the base, without lobes or auricles
\par
2 Calyx-lobes 4·5-8 × 2-4 mm in fruit, ± ovate-cordate; 
\par
  corolla 10-15 mm ............................................................................. {\b 4. spuria}
\par
2 Calyx-lobes c. 3 × 1 mm in fruit, linear-lanceolate;
\par
  corolla 8-11 mm ............................................................................ {\b 5. lanigera}
\par
1 At least some leaves hastate or sagittate
\par
3 Corolla 4-6 mm; capsule 1·5-2 mm ............................................. {\b 1. cirrhosa}
\par
3 Corolla 7-15 mm; capsule at least 2·5 mm
\par
4 Seeds tuberculate; wall of capsule rather thick and rigid; 
\par
  spur strongly curved ................................................................. {\b 2. commutata}
\par
4 Seeds alveolate; wall of capsule thin, not rigid; spur
\par
  ± straight .......................................................................................... {\b 3. elatine}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. K. cirrhosa} (L.) Fritsch,{\i  Excursionsfl. Österr.} 492 (1897) ({\i Linaria cirrhosa} (L.) Cav.). Annual; stems up to 90 cm, trailing or climbing, very slender, pubescent to villous. Leaves glabrous or subglabrous, the lowest up to 3(-4·5) × 0·7(-1·4) cm, entire or with 1-2 teeth at the base, he middle and upper smaller, lanceolate-hastate to narrowly lanceolate-sagittate, acute; petiole equalling the lamina or shorter, somewhat twisted. Pedicels up to 3·5 cm in flower, 2-5 times as long as the subtending leaf, filiform, glabrous, patent. Calyx-lobes linear-lanceolate, acute. Corolla 4-6 mm, whitish, tinged and striped with violet. Capsule 1·5-2 mm, globose, thin-walled. Seeds c. 0·75 mm, tuberculate.{\i  Damp or shady places, especially on sandy soil, usually near the sea. W. Mediterranean region and S.W. Europe.} Az Bl Co Ga Hs It ?Ju Lu Sa Si.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. K. commutata} (Bernh. ex Reichenb.) Fritsch, {\i loc. cit.} (1897) ({\i Linaria commutata }Bernh. ex Reichenb.). Perennial; stems 20-70 cm, numerous, procumbent, rooting, glandular-villous. Leaves villous, the lower broadly ovate, the middle and upper ovate-hastate to lanceolate-sagittate; petiole not more than half as long as lamina. Pedicels up to 3 cm in flower, filiform, glabrous, patent. Calyx 4-5 mm; lobes linear-lanceolate, very acute, hispid. Corolla 11-15 mm, whitish, with bluish-violet upper lip, yellow lower lip and purple-spotted palate; spur strongly curved. Capsule 2·5-4 mm, globose; wall rather thick and rigid. Seeds 0·75-1 mm, tuberculate.{\i  Mediterranean region, extending to S.E. Bulgaria and W. France.} Al Bl Bu Co Cr Ga Gr Hs It Ju Sa Si Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b commutata}: Middle leaves broadly ovate-hastate, obtuse, the upper somewhat narrower. Pedicels rarely more than twice as long as subtending leaf.{\i  Throughout most of the range of the species, but rarer in the south-east}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28    ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b graeca} (Bory & Chaub.) R. Fernandes, {\i Bot. Jour. Linn. Soc. }{\b 64}: 74 (1971) ({\i Antirrhinum graecum} Bory & Chaub.): Branches longer and slenderer than in subsp. ({\b a}). Leaves acute, rather narrow, the uppermost and those of the branches lanceolate-sagittate, very small. Pedicels 2-6 times as long as subtending leaf.{\i  S. part of Balkan peninsula, Aegean region}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 3. K. elatine} (L.) Dumort.,{\i  Fl. Belg. }35 (1827) ({\i Linaria elatine} (L.) Miller). Glandular-pubescent to -hirsute annual; stems branched from the base. Leaves ovate, sagittate or hastate; petiole not more than half as long as lamina. Calyx-lobes lanceolate, acuminate. Corolla 7-15 mm, yellowish or bluish, with violet upper lip. Capsule 4-4·5 mm, subglobose, thin-walled. Seeds alveolate.{\i  Cultivated fields and other open habitats. S., W. & C. Europe, northwards to England and extending eastwards to Moldavia and Krym; naturalized or casual in some other regions.} All except Fa Fe Is No Rs (N, B, C, E), but not native in Da Hb Su.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b elatine}: Main branches decumbent, weak, often rather sparsely hairy; secondary branches few or none. Leaves acute to mucronate, mostly hastate, but the uppermost sagittate. Pedicels glabrous except just below the flower, 3-6 times as long as the calyx in flower, up to 3 cm in fruit. Corolla 7-10 mm. 2n = 36.{\i  Throughout the range of the species except Portugal and parts of the Mediterranean region}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28    ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b crinita} (Mabille) W. Greuter,{\i  Boissiera }{\b 13}: 108 (1967) ({\i K elatine }subsp.{\i  sieberi} (Reichenb.) Hayek, {\i Linaria sieberi} Reichenb.,{\i  L. crinita }Mabille): Main branches ascending, relatively stout, densely hairy, usually with several short, patent, flowering secondary branches. Leaves more or less obtuse, the lower ovate to indistinctly hastate, the middle and upper usually hastate. Pedicels hairy throughout, 2½-3 times as long as the calyx in flower, not more than 2 cm in fruit. Corolla up to 15 mm.{\i  S. Europe}.
\par

\par
238}
\par