{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 acute, slightly winged angles.{\i  Cultivated ground. • C., S. & E.  Spain, Portugal. }Hs Lu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 14. L. triphylla} (L.) Miller, {\i Gard. Dict.} ed. 8, no. 2 (1768). Glabrous, somewhat glaucous annual; stems 10-45(-65) cm, usually single, erect, simple or branched above, stout. Leaves 15-35 × 10-25 mm, elliptical or obovate, truncate or semiamplexicaul at base, mostly verticillate but some opposite or alternate. Racemes rather dense, greatly elongating in fruit; flowers subsessile. Calyx 9-12 mm; lobes ovate to lanceolate, obtuse to acute, unequal. Corolla 20-30 mm, white (rarely pale yellow or violet) with orange palate and violet spur; spur 8-11 mm. Capsule c. 8 mm. Seeds c. 1·5 mm, tetrahedral, strongly ruminate-alveolate, greyish-brown, with acute angles.{\i  Cultivated  ground. Mediterranean region.} Bl Co Cr Ga Gr Hs It Ju Sa Si.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 15. L. genistifolia} (L.) Miller, {\i op. cit.} no. 14 (1768). Glabrous perennial; stems (20-)30-100 cm, erect, branched, especially above, leafy up to inflorescence. Leaves 20-60 × 2-40 mm, linear to ovate, acute, more or less amplexicaul, alternate. Racemes (3-)10-20 cm, lax or dense; pedicels 1-13 mm, usually more or less equalling bracts. Calyx 2-12 mm; lobes linear-lanceolate to triangular-ovate or oblong-lanceolate, acute or acuminate, usually subequal. Corolla 13-50 mm, yellow; spur 4-25 mm. Capsule 3-7 mm. Seeds c. 1·2 mm, compressed-tetrahedral, rugulose, black, with a narrow, often whitish flange on the angles. 2n = 12.{\i  S.E. & E.C. Europe, extending westwards to Italy and northwards to} 54°{\i  N. in E.C. Russia.} Al Au Bu Cz Gr Hu It  Ju Po Rm Rs (C, W, K, E) Tu [?Ge].
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Corolla 20-50 mm; leaves mostly less than 4 times as 
\par
  long as wide .................................................................... ({\b c}) subsp. {\b dalmatica}
\par
1 Corolla 13-22 mm; leaves mostly at least 4 times as 
\par
  long as wide
\par
2 Leaves suberect, rigid ................................................. ({\b a}) subsp. {\b genistifolia}
\par
2 Leaves patent, flaccid ........................................................ ({\b b}) subsp. {\b sofiana}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b genistifolia} (incl.{\i  L. euxina }Velen., {\i L. pontica} Kuprian.,{\i  L. syspirensis} C. Koch): Leaves 3-15 mm wide, ovate- to linear-lanceolate, (3·5-)6-12 times as long as wide, suberect, rigid. Corolla 13-22 mm. 2n = 12.{\i  Throughout the range of the species.}
\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b sofiana} (Velen.) Chater & D. A. Webb, {\i Bot. Jour. Linn. Soc.}{\b  65}: 264 (1972) ({\i L. sofiana }Velen., {\i L. concolor} auct., ?an Griseb.): Leaves 2-6 mm wide, linear to oblong-lanceolate or oblanceolate, 5-15 times as long as wide, patent, flaccid. Corolla 13-20 mm.{\i  E. Jugoslavia, W. Bulgaria.} 
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  The identity of{\b  L. concolor } Griseb.,{\i  Spicil. Fl. Rumel. }{\b 2}: 21 (1844), from N.E. Greece, is uncertain; it is said to have more or less simple stems, rather obtuse calyx-lobes and the spur shorter than the rest of the corolla.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b c}) Subsp. {\b dalmatica} (L.) Maire & Petitmengin,{\i  Bull. Soc. Sci. Nancy} ser. 3,{\b  9}: 403 (1908) ({\i L. dalmatica} (L.) Miller, {\i Antirrhinum dalmaticum} L.): Leaves up to 40 mm wide, ovate to lanceolate, 2-4(-5) times as long as wide, suberect, rigid. Corolla 20-50 mm.{\i  Balkan peninsula, Romania; S. Italy; locally naturalized in C. Europe}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 16. L. peloponnesiaca} Boiss. & Heldr. in Boiss.,{\i  Diagn. Pl. Or. Nov.}{\b  3}({\b 3}): 163 (1856) ({\i L. sibthorpiana} Boiss. & Heldr.). Perennial, glabrous except for usually glandular-pubescent inflorescence. Stems 25-70(-120) cm, erect, sparingly branched above, usually leafless for some distance below inflorescence. Leaves 25-60 × 1·5-3 mm, linear, acute, alternate. Racemes 3-10 cm, very dense; pedicels 0·5-1(-1·5) mm, shorter than bracts. Calyx  1·5-4 mm; lobes ovate to oblong, obtuse to subacute, subequal. Corolla 13-20 mm, pale yellow; spur 7-8 mm. Capsule c. 4 mm. Seeds 1-1·2 mm, compressed-tetrahedral, rugose-papillose, black, with a narrow flange on the margins. •{\i  S. & W. parts of Balkan peninsula.} Al Gr Ju ?Si. 
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 17. L. spartea} (L.) Willd.,{\i  Enum. Pl. Hort. Berol.} 640 (1809). Annual, glabrous below except for stems of non-flowering shoots, glabrous or glandular-pubescent in inflorescence; stems 15-60 cm, erect. Leaves 7-40 × 0·5-1 mm, linear, obtuse, rather remote, mostly alternate but the lowest opposite or verticillate. Racemes rather short and lax in flower, very lax in fruit; pedicels 3-15 mm, erecto-patent, greatly exceeding bracts. Calyx c. 4 mm; lobes oblong-lanceolate, obtuse to subacute, subequal, with wide scarious margins. Corolla (15-)18-30 mm, bright yellow (very rarely violet); lips closely approximated; spur 9-18 mm. Stigma deeply bifid. Capsule c. 4 mm. Seeds 0·6-0·7 mm, tetrahedral, coarsely rugose, black.{\i  Dry, open habitats, especially on sandy soil. S.W. Europe, northwards to} c. 46°{\i  N. in W. France.} Ga Hs Lu [Ge].  
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 18. L. viscosa} (L.) Dum.-Courset,{\i  Bot. Cult.}{\b  2}: 94 (1802). Like {\b 17} but stems sometimes hairy at base; inflorescence always rather densely glandular-pubescent; leaves more crowded, especially below; racemes rather dense, even in fruit; calyx up to 6 mm, often with acuminate segments; pedicels not more than 8 mm, erect. 2n = 12.{\i  Waste places and sandy fields. S. Italy and Sicilia; S. Spain, S. Portugal.} Hs It Lu Si.  
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    The plants from Italy and Sicilia have been distinguished as{\b  L. heterophylla} Desf.,{\i  Fl. Atl.}{\b  2}: 48 (1798) ({\i L. stricta }(Sibth. & Sm.) Guss., non Hornem.), and differ from plants from the Iberian peninsula in more robust habit, leaves of non-flowering shoots in whorls of 6 (not 4) and fruiting pedicels shorter than calyx; they are best included in {\b 18}. 
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Plants from S. Spain with decumbent to ascending stems and usually violet corolla have been described as{\b  L. salzmannii} Boiss.,{\i  Voy. Bot. Midi Esp.}{\b  2}: 456 (1841); they are probably not specifically distinct from {\b 18}. 
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 19. L. incarnata} (Vent.) Sprengel,{\i  Syst. Veg.}{\b  2}: 796 (1825) ({\i L. bipartita }auct. eur., non (Vent.) Willd.). Like {\b 17} but leaves up to 4 mm wide, all alternate; racemes usually with more than 10 flowers; calyx-lobes acuminate; corolla up to 22 mm, violet to reddish-purple, with lips widely gaping and lobes of the upper lip divergent; spur up to 11 mm.{\i  Cultivated fields and dry grassland. Portugal, W. Spain; a frequent casual in parts of C. & N.W. Europe and perhaps locally naturalized.} Hs Lu. ({\i N.W. Africa.}) 
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 20. L. hellenica} Turrill,{\i  Kew Bull.} [{\b 10}]: 356 (1955). Annual, glabrous below, glandular-pubescent in inflorescence; stems c. 50 cm, erect, branched. Leaves 15-35 × 1-2·5 mm, linear to linear-oblong, obtuse, mostly alternate. Racemes with 10-20 flowers, very lax in fruit; pedicels up to 15 mm, erect. Calyx 4·5-5 mm; lobes oblong, subequal. Corolla 13-15 mm, yellow; spur 6-7 mm. Capsule c. 5 mm. Seeds c. 0·7 mm, reniform, strongly rugose, black. •{\i  S. Greece} ({\i S.E. Lakonia}). Gr.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Only once collected; it seems to be most closely related to {\b 18}, but further material is required. 
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 21. L. algarviana} Chav.,{\i  Monogr. Antirrh.} 142 (1833). Annual, glabrous below, glandular-pubescent above; stems 10-30 cm, procumbent to ascending, simple. Leaves 4-8 × 0·6-3 mm, few, linear-oblong, subacute, alternate. Racemes lax, with 1-8 flowers; pedicels 5-12 mm, much exceeding bracts. Calyx 3-4·5 mm; lobes oblong-lanceolate, acuminate, slightly unequal, with white or violet scarious margin. Corolla 20-25 mm, violet, spotted with
\par

\par
230}
\par