{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 56. L. glauca} (L.) Chaz., {\i Dict. Jard., Suppl}.{\b  2}: 39 (1790). Annual or perennial, glabrous or glandular-puberulent in inflorescence; stems 5-25 cm, usually several, procumbent to ascending-erect. Leaves 5-15 × 0·3-1 mm, linear, verticillate below, alternate above. Racemes with 3-7 flowers, rather lax, glabrous or glandular-pubescent; pedicels 1-4 mm, shorter or longer than bracts. Corolla 7-14 mm, yellow, rarely with bluish veins; spur 3-8 mm, stout. Capsule 3·5-5 mm, globose. Seeds 1·2-2·5 mm; disc black. •{\i  C. & E. Spain.} Hs.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1.Seeds not more than 1·5 mm, with black wing 0·2-0·4 mm wide
\par
2 Annual; seeds with wing c. 0·2 mm wide ........................... ({\b a}) subsp. {\b glauca}
\par
2 Perennial; seeds with wing 0·3-0·4 mm wide ................. ({\b b}) subsp. {\b olcadium}
\par
1 Seeds 1·5-2·5 mm, with wing 0·4-0·6 mm wide
\par
3 Seeds with black wing; pedicels shorter than bracts .......... ({\b d}) subsp. {\b bubanii}
\par
3 Seeds with white wing; pedicels usually longer than bracts
\par
  ..................................................................................... ({\b c}) subsp. {\b aragonensis}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b glauca}: Glabrous annual. Pedicels shorter than bracts. Seeds 1·2-1·5 mm; disc smooth or very slightly tuberculate; wing c. 0·2 mm wide, black. {\i C. Spain}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b olcadium} Valdés & D. A. Webb,{\i  Bot. Jour. Linn. Soc.}{\b  65}: 265 (1972): Glabrous-perennial. Pedicels shorter than bracts. Seeds c. 1·5 mm; disc slightly tuberculate; wing 0·3-0·4 mm wide, black.{\i  S.E. Spain} ({\i near Albacete}).
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b c}) Subsp. {\b aragonensis} (Lange) Valdés, {\i Rev. Esp. Eur. Linaria }177 (1970) ({\i L. diffusa} var.{\i  aragonensis} Lange, {\i L. aragonensis} (Lange) Loscos): Annual, usually glandular-puberulent in inflorescence. Pedicels usually longer than bracts. Seeds 1·5-2·2 mm; disc smooth or with white tubercles; wing 0·4-0·6 mm wide, white.{\i  E. Spain}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b d}) Subsp. {\b bubanii} (Font Quer) Valdés,{\i  op. cit.} 178 (1970) ({\i L. bubanii} Font Quer): Glabrous annual or perennial. Pedicels shorter than bracts. Corolla with bluish veins. Seeds 1·5-2·5 mm; disc with dark tubercles; wing 0·4-0·6 mm wide, black.{\i  N.E. Spain}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    ({\b 57-59}). {\b L. diffusa }group. More or less glaucous annuals or biennials; stems procumbent to ascending. Calyx 3-4 mm; lobes linear or linear-lanceolate, subobtuse, slightly unequal. Corolla 8-15 mm, lilac; tube narrow; lobes of lower lip fairly long. Seeds 0·6-2 mm, suborbicular.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Plant glandular-pubescent at least in inflorescence .............. {\b 59. satureioides} 
\par
1 Plant glabrous, but with sparse sessile glands throughout
\par
2 Spur 6-10 mm; seeds 1·3-2 mm ................................................... {\b 57. diffusa}
\par
2 Spur c. 5 mm; seeds 0·6-0·8 mm .............................................. {\b 58. coutinhoi}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 57. L. diffusa} Hoffmanns. & Link,{\i  Fl. Port. }{\b 1}: 257 (1813). Sparsely glandular; stems 10-40 cm, branched. Leaves 5-12 × 0·5-2 mm, linear to narrowly elliptical, verticillate below, alternate above. Racemes with few flowers, dense in flower, lax in fruit; pedicels 1·5-7·5(-18) mm, usually longer than bracts. Corolla 9-15 mm, bluish-lilac; spur 6-10 mm. Capsule 3-4 mm, oblong. Seeds 1·3-2 mm, black, flat; disc tuberculate; wing broad. •{\i  N. & C. Portugal, W. Spain.} Hs Lu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 58. L. coutinhoi} Valdés,{\i  Rev. Esp. Eur. Linaria} 183 (1970) ({\i L. multicaulis} sensu Coutinho, non (L.) Miller). Like {\b 57} but corolla 8-9 mm; spur c. 5 mm; seeds 0·6-0·8 mm, with very narrow wing. •{\i  N. Portugal.} Lu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 59. L. satureioides} Boiss.,{\i  Voy. Bot. Midi Esp.}{\b  2}: 463 (1841). Glandular-pubescent at least in inflorescence; stems 5-25 cm, branched. Leaves 5-15(-25) × 0·5-1·2 mm, linear, verticillate below, alternate above. Racemes with 4-10 flowers, lax; pedicels 2·5-7 mm, longer than bracts. Corolla 8-14 mm, lilac with violet veins; spur 4-7 mm. Capsule 2-4 mm, globose. Seeds 1-1·7 mm, strongly concavo-convex; disc blackish, smooth; wing broad or narrow, white.{\i  Stony or sandy ground; calcicole. • S. Spain, S. Portugal.} Hs Lu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 60. L. depauperata} Leresche ex Lange in Willk. & Lange,{\i  Prodr. Fl. Hisp. }{\b 2}: 569 (1870). Annual, glabrous except for glandular-pubescent inflorescence; stems 5-15 cm, ascending, simple or sparingly branched. Leaves 5-15 × 0·7-1·3 mm, linear, subacute, mostly alternate, glaucous. Racemes subcapitate, with (1-)2-4 flowers; bracts 3-7 mm; pedicels 1-2 mm. Calyx 4·5-5·5 mm; lobes linear-oblong, obtuse, somewhat unequal. Corolla 16-27 mm, violet to orange-red, with pale yellow spur and yellow palate; spur 8-12 mm, rather stout. Capsule 4·5-7·5 mm. Seeds 2·2-2·7 mm, orbicular-reniform, flat; disc densely covered with long, white papillae; wing broad, whitish towards the edge, darker near the disc.{\i  Rocky places; calcicole. • S.E. Spain.} Hs.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 61. L. alpina} (L.) Miller,{\i  Gard. Dict.} ed. 8, no. 4 (1768) (incl.{\i  L. petraea} Jordan). Glaucous annual, biennial or perennial, glabrous, or rarely glandular-hairy in inflorescence; stems 5-25 cm, decumbent or ascending, sometimes branched. Leaves 5-15 × 0·7-1·5(-2·5) mm, linear- to oblong-lanceolate, mostly verticillate. Racemes usually dense, with 3-15 flowers; pedicels 2-5 mm in flower, up to 13 mm in fruit. Calyx 3-5 mm; lobes oblong- to linear-oblanceolate, subobtuse, unequal. Corolla 13-22 mm, violet, usually with a yellow palate (rarely entirely yellow, whitish or pink); spur 8-10 mm. Capsule 3-5 mm. Seeds 1·7-2·5 mm, suborbicular, flat, black; disc smooth or tuberculate; wing broad. 2n = 12.{\i  Screes, rocky slopes and river gravels. • Mountains of C. & S. Europe from the Jura and Carpathians to C. Spain, C. Italy and C. Greece.} Al Au Cz Ga Ge Gr.He.Hs.It.Ju.Rm.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Plants from N.W. Spain with lax, few-flowered inflorescences and pedicels short in fruit have been called{\b  L. filicaulis} Boiss. ex Leresche & Levier,{\i  Jour. Bot.} ({\i London}){\b  17}: 200 (1879); they represent an extreme variant of a very variable species and may merit subspecific status.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 62. L. faucicola} Leresche & Levier,{\i  Jour. Bot.} ({\i London}){\b  17}: 200 (1879). Glabrous annual or short-lived perennial; stems 10-27 cm, ascending, branched, slender. Leaves 7-20 × 1·5-5 mm, linear-oblong to oblanceolate, mostly in whorls of 4. Racemes with 2-4(-9) flowers, rather lax; pedicels 1·5-5(-7) mm, usually shorter than bracts. Calyx 4·5-6 mm; segments oblong, the adaxial the longest. Corolla (16-)22-27 mm, violet; spur 10-13 mm. Capsule 5 mm. Seeds 2-2·5 mm, suborbicular, flat, black; disc smooth or finely tuberculate; wing rather narrow.{\i  Limestone rocks and screes. • N.W. Spain} ({\i Picos de Europa}). Hs.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 63. L. glacialis} Boiss.,{\i  Elenchus} 70 (1838). Annual to perennial, glaucous, glabrous except for glandular-pubescent inflorescence; stems 5-15 cm, ascending, usually simple, leafless below, densely leafy above up to inflorescence. Leaves 10-15 × 2-6 mm, elliptical to linear-oblanceolate, mostly in whorls of 4. Racemes capitate, with 3-8 flowers; bracts 12-20 mm; pedicels 3-4 mm. Calyx 8-17 mm; segments linear to linear-oblanceolate. Corolla 20-27 mm, dull violet suffused with yellow; spur 8-15 mm, yellow with violet veins. Capsule 7-10 mm. Seeds 2·5-3 mm, suborbicular, flat; disc tuberculate or smooth, greyish-brown; wing paler brown. 2n = 12. {\i Rocks and screes above} 2700{\i  m. • S. Spain} ({\i Sierra Nevada}). Hs.
\par

\par
235}
\par