{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b 34}: 71 (1949); plants from the lower Volga have calyx 3-4 mm and corolla 17-21 mm and have been called{\b  L. dolichoceras} Kuprian.,{\i  Acta Inst. Bot. Acad. Sci. URSS }(Ser. 1) {\b 1}({\b 2}): 298 (1936); plants from S. Ural with corolla 14-20 mm and globose capsules 4-5 mm have been called{\b  L. uralensis} Kotov, {\i Ukr. Bot. Zur.}{\b  3}({\b 3-4}): 26 (1946). These are probably all conspecific with {\b 39}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 40. L. loeselii} Schweigger,{\i  Königsb. Arch. Naturw.}{\b  1}: 228 (1812). Like {\b 39} but leaves 30-60 × 2-4 mm; pedicels 5-7 mm in flower, up to 12 mm in fruit; corolla 11-16 mm; spur 4·5-6 mm, usually curved; seeds 3-4 mm.{\i  Maritime sands. • Baltic coasts of Germany, Poland and U.S.S.R.} Ge Po Rs (B).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 41. L. latifolia} Desf.,{\i  Fl. Atl.}{\b  2}: 40 (1798). Glabrous annual; stems 35-50 cm, erect, simple, stout. Leaves up to 65 × 15 mm, oblong-lanceolate, acute, mostly in whorls of 3 but the uppermost alternate. Racemes 7-15 cm, dense; flowers subsessile; bracts 10-20 mm, linear-lanceolate, patent. Calyx 7-10 mm; segments linear-lanceolate, somewhat unequal. Corolla 30-35 mm, yellow with greenish veins; spur 12-15 mm. Capsule c. 5 mm. Seeds c. 2 mm, reniform; disc smooth or tuberculate, black; wing whitish. {\i Cultivated ground. S.W. Spain.} Hs. ({\i N.W. Africa}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 42. L. platycalyx} Boiss.,{\i  Voy. Bot. Midi Esp.}{\b  2}: 459 (1841). Annual or perennial, glabrous except for minutely ciliate bracts and calyx, somewhat glaucous; stems 10-40 cm, procumbent to erect, simple or branched above, rather stout. Leaves 3-35 × 2-20 mm, broadly elliptical to ovate, usually mucronate, mostly in whorls of 3, remote on the flowering stems. Racemes with 1-3 terminal flowers and often up to 3 others some distance below. Pedicels 2-10 mm in flower, up to 17 mm in fruit, exceeding the bracts. Calyx 7-11 mm; segments ovate, somewhat unequal. Corolla 20-27 mm, yellow; spur 9-12 mm. Capsule 4-8 mm. Seeds 2·3-3 mm, reniform-orbicular, flat; disc smooth or finely tuberculate, dark grey; wing pale yellow.{\i  Shady limestone rocks. • S.W. Spain}. Hs.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 43. L. anticaria} Boiss. & Reuter,{\i  Pugillus} 86 (1852). Perennial, glabrous except sometimes for glandular-pubescent inflorescence, somewhat glaucous; stems 7-45 cm, procumbent to ascending. Leaves 7-35 × 1·5-10 mm, oblong to elliptical, acute, mostly in whorls of 4-6(-8) but the uppermost sometimes alternate. Racemes dense in flower, rather lax in fruit; bracts 2·5-10 mm; pedicels 1-2 mm. Calyx 4-7 mm; segments oblong-obovate, unequal. Corolla 18-26 mm, greyish-lilac with bluish-violet veins (very rarely entirely yellow); palate deep bluish-violet, sometimes with a yellow spot; spur 5-12 mm, usually slightly longer than rest of corolla. Capsule 3·5-7 mm. Seeds 1·7-3 mm, suborbicular, flat; disc tuberculate or smooth, blackish-brown; wing broad, paler. 2n = 12.{\i  Shady limestone rocks. • S. Spain.} Hs.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   {\b  L. rossmaessleri} Willk.,{\i  Linnaea}{\b  30}: 118 (1859), from the Sierra de Almijara, with narrower leaves, which are often mostly alternate, and yellowish corolla-tube, is somewhat intermediate between {\b 43} and {\b 48}, but is best regarded as a variety of the former.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 44. L. lilacina} Lange, {\i Ind. Sem. Horto Haun.}{\b  1854}: 24 (1854). Like {\b 43} but glandular-pubescent throughout; corolla 17-27 mm, with orange palate; spur 8-12 mm, shorter than remainder of corolla, yellowish; seeds 1·5-2·6 mm, with acute, pale tubercles on disc. {\i Shady limestone rocks. • S.E. Spain} ({\i prov. Jaén}). Hs.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 45. L. verticillata} Boiss., {\i Voy. Bot. Midi Esp.}{\b  2}: 462 (1841). Perennial, glandular-pubescent below and usually also above; stems 5-35 cm, ascending to erect, simple or sparingly branched above. Leaves (4-)6-25 × 1·5-6(-8) mm, oblong to elliptical, acute, in whorls of 3-5 below, usually alternate above. Racemes few-flowered, dense; bracts 3-10 mm; pedicels 0-4 mm. Calyx 3-6 mm; segments oblong to oblanceolate, obtuse, unequal. Corolla 15-35 mm, yellow, sometimes with violet or greenish stripes; spur 9-17 mm. Capsule 3·5-4·5 mm. Seeds 1·6-3·2 mm, suborbicular, concavo-convex; disc blackish-brown, smooth or minutely tuberculate; wing paler brown.{\i  Mountain rocks. • S. Spain} ({\i Sierra Nevada and adjacent ranges}). Hs.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 46. L. thymifolia} (Vahl) DC. in Lam. & DC.,{\i  Fl. Fr.} ed. 3, {\b 3}: 587 (1805). Glaucous, glabrous annual, biennial or perennial; stems 6-30 cm, procumbent to suberect, numerous, usually freely branched. Leaves 3-15 × 1·5-10 mm, suborbicular-obovate to oblong, obtuse, somewhat fleshy, mostly in whorls of 3. Racemes subcapitate, with few, subsessile flowers. Calyx 4-5 mm; lobes broadly oblanceolate to oblong, unequal. Corolla 17-24 mm, yellow; tube with closed mouth; spur 7-11 mm. Capsule 5-6 mm, globose. Seeds 2·4-3·3 mm, suborbicular, concavo-convex; disc black, smooth; wing broad, black.{\i  Maritime sands. • W. coast of France, northwards to} 46° {\i N.} Ga.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    ({\b 47-50}).{\b  L. tristis} group. Glaucous perennials, glabrous or glandular-puberulent below, usually glandular-pubescent in inflorescence; stems decumbent to ascending. Calyx-lobes unequal. Corolla 15-30 mm, usually yellow, variously tinged with purple or brown; tube rather wide; lobes of lower lip very short. Seeds reniform-orbicular, more or less concavo-convex, with broad wing.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Disc of seeds densely covered with papillae ................................... {\b 50. amoi}
\par
1 Disc of seeds smooth or with low tubercles
\par
2 Leaves with revolute margins .................................................. {\b 49. aeruginea}
\par
2 Leaves flat
\par
3 Spur 16-17 mm; calyx-lobes oblong-spathulate ....................... {\b 47. lamarckii}
\par
3 Spur 11-13 mm; calyx-lobes linear-oblanceolate ........................... {\b 48. tristis}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 47. L. lamarckii} Rouy,{\i  Naturaliste} ({\i Paris}) {\b 5}: 351 (1883). Glabrous, or sometimes glandular-pubescent in inflorescence; stems 20-40 cm, usually simple, leafless for c. 2 cm below inflorescence. Leaves (5-)7-15 × 3-6 mm, oblong-spathulate to obovate, flat, obtuse, somewhat fleshy, mostly alternate, sometimes verticillate at base. Racemes with up to 12 flowers, oblong, dense; pedicels 1-2 mm in flower, usually c. 3 mm in fruit, shorter than bracts. Calyx 6-7 mm; lobes oblong-spathulate. Corolla 25-31 mm, deep yellow; spur 16-17 mm, striped with orange-brown. Capsule 7-8 mm, ovoid. Seeds c. 3 mm; disc smooth, blackish; wing greyish-white.{\i  Maritime sands. • S. Portugal.} Lu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 48. L. tristis} (L.) Miller, {\i Gard. Dict.} ed. 8, no. 8 (1768). Glabrous or glandular-puberulent below, more or less densely glandular-pubescent in inflorescence; stems 10-90 cm, usually simple, leafless for 1-8 cm below inflorescence. Leaves 8-40 × 0·5-4·5 mm, linear to oblong-lanceolate, flat, obtuse to subacute, alternate, often irregularly verticillate at base. Racemes with 2-15 flowers, dense or lax; pedicels 0·5-5 mm, shorter than bracts. Calyx 7-9 mm; lobes linear-oblanceolate, subobtuse. Corolla (18-)21-28 mm, yellow, variably tinged with purplish-brown; spur 11-13 mm, stout. Capsule 3·5-8 mm, globose. Seeds 1·7-3·2 mm; disc smooth or tuberculate, blackish; wing grey. 2n = 12.{\i  Usually on limestone rocks. • S. Spain; S. Portugal. }Hs Lu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 49. L. aeruginea} (Gouan) Cav., {\i Elench. Pl. Horti Matrit.} 21 (1803) ({\i L. melanantha} Boiss. & Reuter). Perennial (rarely annual), glabrous or glandular-puberulent below, glandular-pubescent in inflorescence; stem 3-40(-70) cm, decumbent or ascending,
\par

\par
233}
\par