{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}
\pard\f0\fs28 white or yellow on palate; spur 11-12 mm. Stigma deeply bifid. Capsule 3·5-4 mm. Seeds 0·6-0·8 mm, irregularly tetrahedral, strongly rugose, black. {\i Dry, sandy places. • S.W. Portugal} ({\i  W. Algarve}). Lu.
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 22. L. elegans} Cav., {\i Descr. Pl. }338 (1802) ({\i L. delphinoides} Gay ex Knowles & Westcott). Annual, glabrous below, glandular-pubescent above; stems 20-70 cm, erect, simple or branched. Leaves 7-35 × 0·5-4 mm, filiform to linear-lanceolate, obtuse, alternate. Racemes long, lax; pedicels 4-8 mm, much exceeding bracts, more or less erect. Calyx 3-5 mm; lobes lanceolate, acuminate, equal, with white or violet scarious margin. Corolla 17-25 mm, lilac to violet; spur 10-14 mm, longer than remainder of corolla, strongly curved; palate whitish; mouth of tube more or less open. Stigma clavate, entire to emarginate. Capsule 3-4 mm. Seeds c. 0·6 mm, tetrahedral, finely tuberculate, dark grey.{\i  Dry, open habitats. • N. & C. Spain, N. Portugal.} Hs Lu.
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 23. L. nigricans} Lange in Willk. & Lange,{\i  Prodr. Fl. Hisp.}{\b  2}: 565 (1870) ({\i L. fragrans} Porta & Rigo). Annual, glabrous, or minutely glandular-puberulent in inflorescence; stems up to 17 cm, flexuous-ascending, simple or freely branched. Leaves 5-12 × 1-2 mm, linear-oblong to broadly elliptical, obtuse, blackening on drying, mostly alternate, the lowest verticillate. Racemes lax, with 3-8 flowers; pedicels 4-10 mm, patent to ascending, exceeding bracts. Calyx 3-4 mm; lobes oblong, subacute, equal. Corolla 16-20 mm, violet or lilac; spur 9-12 mm, straight. Capsule 3·5-4 mm. Seeds c. 0·4 mm, crescentic-trigonous, minutely rugulose-tuberculate, black. {\i Sandy places. • S.E. Spain} ({\i Prov. Almeria}). Hs.
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 24. L. clementei} Haenseler ex Boiss.,{\i  Elenchus} 69 (1838). Glaucous perennial, glabrous except for glandular-pubescent inflorescence; stems 80-150 cm, erect, simple or branched above. Leaves 12-20(-30) × 1 mm, linear, subterete, obtuse, very sparse above, verticillate below, alternate above. Racemes subcapitate, laxer in fruit; pedicels 2-4 mm, slightly exceeding bracts. Calyx 2·5-3 mm; lobes lanceolate, acute, subequal. Corolla 13-17 mm, violet; spur c. 3·5 mm, straight. Stigma bifid. Capsule c. 3 mm. Seeds c. 0·6 mm, trigonous-reniform, strongly rugose, black.{\i  Dry, sandy or calcareous places. • S. Spain} ({\i Prov. Málaga}). Hs.
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28 {\b  L. reverchonii} Wittrock, {\i Acta Horti Berg.}{\b  1}({\b 4}): 11 (1891), from the Sierra de Mijas, differs in its stems 40-110 cm, brownish and white-margined palate, filaments hairy above (not below) and capsule opening by 4 short teeth (not by 6 teeth to c. 1/2 way); its status is uncertain.
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 25. L. chalepensis} (L.) Miller, {\i Gard. Dict.} ed. 8, no. 12 (1768). Glabrous annual; stems (10-)20-40 cm, usually single, simple or sparingly branched. Leaves 18-35 × 1-2 mm, linear, subobtuse, alternate. Racemes very lax; pedicels 1-2 mm at anthesis, up to 4 mm in fruit, mostly shorter than bracts. Calyx 7-10 mm; lobes linear, acute, unequal (the adaxial the shortest). Corolla 12-16 mm, white; spur 8-11 mm, curved; mouth of tube open. Capsule 4-5 mm. Seeds 1-1·2 mm, tetrahedral, strongly ruminate.{\i  Dry places. Mediterranean region, from Islas Baleares eastwards.} Al Bl Bu Co Cr Ga Gr It Ju Sa Si Tu.
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 26. L. canadensis} (L.) Dum.-Courset,{\i  Bot. Cult.}{\b  2}: 96 (1802). Glabrous, somewhat glaucous annual or biennial; stems (10-)25-80 cm, erect, usually simple. Leaves 15-30 × 1-2·5 mm, linear to linear-oblanceolate, obtuse, verticillate below, alternate above. Racemes rather dense at anthesis, lax in fruit; pedicels 1·5-3 mm at anthesis, up to 6 mm in fruit, exceeding bracts. Calyx c. 3 mm; lobes linear-lanceolate, acute, equal. Corolla 10-15 mm, lilac to whitish; spur 4-6 mm, very slender, curved; palate rudimentary; lower lip very large. Capsule c. 3 mm. Seeds c. 0·5 mm, irregularly tetrahedral, with smooth, concave faces.{\i  Cultivated for ornament and naturalized near Moskva.} [Rs (C).] ({\i North and South America}.)
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 27. L. purpurea} (L.) Miller, {\i Gard. Dict.} ed. 8, no. 5 (1768). Glabrous, glaucous perennial; stems 20-60(-90) cm, ascending to erect, often branched above. Leaves 20-60 × 1-4(-8) mm, linear, subacute, verticillate below, alternate above. Racemes long, slender, rather dense; pedicels 1·5-4 mm, about equalling bracts. Calyx c. 3 mm; lobes linear-lanceolate, acute, equal. Corolla 9-12 mm, purplish-violet; spur c. 5 mm, curved. Capsule c. 3 mm. Seeds 1-1·3 mm, trigonous, rugose-ruminate, blackish. 2n = 12.  •{\i C. & S. Italy, Sicilia; frequently cultivated for ornament and locally naturalized elsewhere.} It Si [Br ?Cz Hb].
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 28. L. capraria} Moris & De Not.,{\i  Fl. Caprariae }98 (1839). Like {\b 27} but stems decumbent; racemes shorter, with fewer flowers; calyx c. 4·5 mm; corolla 15-17 mm; spur c. 8 mm; capsule c. 5 mm. •{\i  C. Italy }({\i Arcipelago Toscana}). It.
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 29. L. nivea} Boiss. & Reuter,{\i  Diagn. Pl. Nov. Hisp.} 22 (1842). Like {\b 27} but leaves 4-7 mm wide, linear-oblong to lanceolate; stems freely branched above; inflorescence glandular-pubescent; pedicels usually shorter than bracts; corolla 12-14 mm, white or pale lilac; spur 4-5 mm; capsule 4-5 mm. •{\i  Mountains of C. Spain.} Hs.
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 30. L. repens} (L.) Miller, {\i Gard. Dict.} ed. 8, no. 6 (1768) ({\i L. striata} DC.; incl. {\i L. blanca} Pau,{\i  L. monspessulana }(L.) Miller). Glabrous perennial; stems 30-120 cm, erect from a creeping rhizome, usually branched above. Leaves 15-40 × 1-2·5 mm, linear to linear-oblanceolate, acute, verticillate, sometimes alternate above. Racemes usually long and dense at anthesis, lax in fruit; pedicels 2-3 mm at anthesis, up to 4·5 mm in fruit; usually equalling bracts. Calyx 2-3 mm; lobes narrowly lanceolate, acute, subequal. Corolla 8-15 mm, white to pale lilac, with violet veins; spur 3-5 mm, conical, straight. Stigma capitate. Capsule 3-4 mm. Seeds 1·2-1·7 mm, ovoid-trigonous, strongly rugose, dark grey, with acute, almost winged angles. •{\i  From N. Spain and N.W. Italy to N.W. Germany; widely naturalized in N.W. & C. Europe}. Be ?Bl Ga Ge Hs It [Au Br Cz Da Fe Hb He Ho No Po Rs (B) Su].
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b L.}×{\b  sepium} Allman,{\i  Proc. Roy. Irish Acad.}{\b  2}: 405 (1843), ({\b 30} × {\b 34}) is the commonest hybrid in the genus. It is intermediate between the parents in most characters but, being partly fertile, is rather variable.
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 31. L. microsepala} A. Kerner, {\i  Sched. Fl. Exsicc. Austro-Hung.}{\b  1}: 50 (1881). Like {\b 30} but racemes denser in fruit; pedicels 0·5-1 mm at anthesis, c. 1·5 mm in fruit; calyx 1·5-2 mm, with oblong, obtuse lobes; corolla 7-9 mm; spur 2-3 mm; seeds c. 0·8 mm, coarsely tuberculate, black, with rounded angles.{\i  Sandy and rocky places. • Dalmatia.} Ju.
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28    B. Seeds discoid, orbicular to reniform, surrounded by a conspicuous (rarely very narrow) marginal wing.
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 32. L. triornithophora} (L.) Willd.,{\i  Enum. Pl. Hort. Berol.} 639 (1809). Glabrous, somewhat glaucous perennial; stems 50-130 cm, erect or diffuse, simple or branched above. Leaves 25-75 × 5-30 mm, lanceolate to ovate-lanceolate, acute, in remote whorls of 3(-5). Inflorescence up to 10 cm, lax, with 3-15 flowers, mostly in whorls; pedicels 10-30 mm, erect. Calyx 6-9 mm; lobes ovate
\par
\par 231}
\par