{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 usually simple. Leaves 4-18(-32) × 0·3-1·7 mm, linear, with revolute margins, verticillate below, alternate above. Calyx 3-6 mm; lobes linear-lanceolate, subacute. Corolla 15-27 mm, usually yellow, variably tinged with purplish-brown, sometimes almost completely purplish-brown, violet, yellowish or whitish cream; spur 5-11 mm. Capsule 4-6 mm, globose. Seeds 1·5-2·5(-3·5) mm; disc brown or blackish; wing pale brown or grey. 2n = 12. •{\i  Portugal,S. & E. Spain, Islas Baleares.} Bl Hs Lu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b aeruginea}: Racemes with 2-35 flowers, dense; pedicels 0·5-3 mm, shorter than bracts; seeds tuberculate or smooth.{\i  Portugal, S. & E. Spain}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Plants from the Sierra Nevada at high altitudes have been named {\b L. nevadensis} (Boiss.) Boiss. & Reuter,{\i  Pugillus} 87 (1852) ({\i L. supina} subsp.{\i  nevadensis} (Boiss.) Nyman); they are consistently smaller in all their parts and have always a yellow corolla, but they do not merit more than varietal status.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b pruinosa} (Sennen & Pau) Chater & Valdés,{\i  Bot. Jour. Linn. Soc.}{\b  65}: 264 (1972) ({\i L. supina} var.{\i  pruinosa} Sennen & Pau): Racemes with 1-6 flowers, lax; pedicels 2-10 mm, usually longer than bracts; seeds smooth.{\i  Islas Baleares}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 50. L. amoi} Campo ex Amo,{\i  Revista Progr. Ci. Exact. Fis. Nat.}{\b  5}: 56 (1855). Perennial, glabrous below, glandular-pubescent in inflorescence. Stems up to 30 cm, decumbent. Leaves 13-27 × 0·8-2·9 mm, linear, with revolute margins, verticillate below, alternate above, crowded. Racemes with 2-20 flowers, dense; pedicels 1-3 mm, shorter than bracts. Calyx 5-9 mm; lobes linear-oblanceolate, subacute. Corolla 20-28 mm, reddish-purple; spur 10-14 mm. Capsule 5-9 mm, globose. Seeds 2·2-3·2 mm; disc yellowish-black, densely covered with very prominent tubercles; wing yellowish-brown. 2n = 12.{\i  Rocks and sandy places on dolomite. • S. Spain} ({\i Sierra Tejeda, Sierra de Almijara}). Hs.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    ({\b 51-53}). {\b L. supina} group. Glaucous annuals, biennials or perennials, glabrous below, usually glandular-pubescent in inflorescence; stems procumbent to erect. Calyx 3-7 mm; lobes oblanceolate to linear-lanceolate or -oblong, subacute to obtuse usually unequal. Corolla yellow, sometimes tinged with violet or red; tube narrow or wide; lobes of lower lip long. Seeds 1·5-2·8 mm, suborbicular, with broad wing.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Corolla yellow with reddish-brown stripes; seeds metallic-shiny ..{\b 51. caesia}
\par
1 Corolla without reddish-brown stripes, but sometimes violet tinged; 
\par
  seeds not metallic-shiny
\par
2 Seed with grey or blackish wing; spur 10-15 mm ......................... {\b 52. supina}
\par
2 Seed with whitish wing; spur (4-)7-11 mm ......................... {\b 53. oblongifolia}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 51. L. caesia} (Pers.) DC. ex Chav., {\i Monogr. Antirrh.} 174 (1833). Annual, biennial or perennial, glabrous or sparsely glandular-hairy in inflorescence; stems 10-40 cm, usually simple. Leaves 5-30 × 0·5-2(-5) mm, linear-subulate to linear-oblong, alternate or the lower verticillate. Racemes with up to 15 flowers, dense in flower, lax in fruit; pedicels 1-2 mm, shorter than bracts. Corolla 19-25 mm, yellow with reddish-brown stripes; spur 9-12 mm. Capsule c. 5 mm, globose. Seeds 2-2·5 mm, flat to slightly concavo-convex; disc grey or blackish, metallic-shiny, smooth; wing pale brown or grey. 2n = 12. {\i W. half of Iberian peninsula. }Hs Lu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Plants from the coast of N.W. Spain and C. & S. Portugal (var.{\i  decumbens} Lange) differ from those of C. Spain in having glabrous inflorescences, wider leaves and wider and more obtuse calyx-lobes.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 52. L. supina} (L.) Chaz., {\i Dict. Jard., Suppl.}{\b  2}: 39 (1790). Annual, biennial or perennial, usually glandular-pubescent in inflorescence; stems 5-30 cm, simple. Leaves 5-20(-30) × 0·5-1 (-3·5) mm, linear to linear-oblanceolate, verticillate at least below, usually alternate above. Racemes with 2-5(-20) flowers, lax or dense; pedicels 1-2 mm in flower, up to 6 mm in fruit, shorter than bracts. Corolla 13-20(-27) mm, pale yellow, sometimes tinged with violet; spur 10-15 mm. Capsule 3-7 mm, globose. Seeds 1·7-2·8 mm, suborbicular, flat or somewhat concavo-convex; disc black, smooth or tuberculate; wing broad, grey or blackish. 2n = 12.{\i  S.W. Europe, extending eastwards to} c. 10° 30'{\i  E. in N. Italy.} Ga Hs It Lu [*Br *Su].
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Small plants from S.E. France (Var) referred to this species may be almost indistinguishable from {\b 53}({\b b}).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 53. L. oblongifolia} (Boiss.) Boiss. & Reuter, {\i Pugillus} 86 (1852). Annual, glabrous to pubescent, usually glandular in inflorescence; stems 5-20 cm, simple. Leaves 3-17 mm, usually verticillate below, verticillate or alternate above. Racemes with 1-10 flowers, dense at anthesis, lax in fruit; pedicels up to 6 mm, longer or shorter than bracts. Corolla (12-)15-22 mm, yellow; spur (4-)7-11 mm, sometimes tinged with violet. Capsule 3·5-5 mm, globose. Seeds 1·5-2·2 mm, strongly concavo-convex; disc black, smooth or tuberculate; wing whitish, rarely blackish-brown. 2n = 12.•{\i  Mountains of S.Spain and Portugal.} Hs Lu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b oblongifolia}: Leaves (1-)2-5 mm wide, oblong lanceolate to ovate-elliptical. Corolla 15-22 mm. Pedicels shorter than bracts.{\i  Mountains of S. Spain.}
\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b haenseleri} (Boiss. & Reuter) Valdés,{\i  Rev. Esp. Eur. Linaria }127 (1970) ({\i L. haenseleri} Boiss. & Reuter): Leaves 0·5-2 mm wide, linear to linear-oblong. Corolla 12-17 mm. Pedicels usually longer than bracts. {\i Throughout the range of the species}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    ({\b 54-56}).{\b  L. glauca} group. Glaucous annuals or perennials, glabrous below, sometimes glandular-puberulent in inflorescence; stems procumbent to nearly erect. Calyx 2·5-7 mm; lobes linear to linear-oblong or -spathulate, subequal or unequal. Corolla 7-20 mm, yellow, sometimes with purplish or bluish veins; tube narrow; lobes of lower lip long; spur usually wide. Seeds 1·2-3 mm, suborbicular, more or less flat.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Pedicels longer than bracts
\par
2 Corolla yellow; leaves 0·3-1 mm wide .......................................... {\b 56. glauca}
\par
2 Corolla yellow with bluish or purplish veins; leaves
\par
  1-3·5 mm wide .......................................................................... {\b 55. propinqua}
\par
1 Pedicels shorter than bracts
\par
3 Racemes ± lax, often glandular-puberulent; corolla 7-12 mm ...... {\b 56. glauca}
\par
3 Racemes dense, glabrous; corolla 10-20 mm ............................... {\b 54. badalii}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 54. L. badalii} Willk.,{\i  Ill. Fl. Hisp.}{\b  2}: 33 (1887). Glabrous annual; stems 10-20 cm, several. Leaves 5-19 × 0·5-1·5 mm, linear, often with revolute margins, verticillate below, alternate above. Racemes dense, glabrous; pedicels 1-3 mm, shorter than bracts. Corolla 10-20 mm, yellow with purplish or bluish veins; spur 5-7·5 mm, shorter than lower lip. Capsule 3-5 mm, globose. Seeds (1·5-)2-3 × 1·5-2·7 mm, black; disc minutely tuberculate.{\i  Calcareous and gypsaceous soils. • N. Spain, extending southwards to Teruel}. Hs.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 55. L. propinqua} Boiss. & Reuter, {\i Pugillus }88 (1852). Like {\b 54} but leaves 1-3·5 mm wide, sometimes oblanceolate; racemes lax; pedicels longer than bracts; spur 7-9 mm, longer than lower lip; disc of seeds smooth to tuberculate.{\i  Rocky or stony places; calcicole. N. Spain.} Hs.
\par

\par
234}
\par