{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 20. A. alpina} (L.) Lam.,{\i  Fl. Fr. }{\b 3}: 642 (1778) (incl. {\i A. tiroliensis} F. Wettst.). Laxly caespitose perennial; branches many-headed forming flat, lax cushions. Leaves 5-10 × 1-2 mm, in rosettes at the ends of the branches, laxly imbricate, oblong or oblanceolate pubescent with short, stellate hairs, not persistent after withering. Flowers solitary. Pedicels 5-10 mm, more or less pubescent. Calyx 3-4 mm, pubescent, divided to middle or beyond. Corolla 7-9 mm in diameter, white or pink with a yellow throat. 2n = 40. {\i Rocks and screes, usually above} 2000{\i  m; calcifuge. • Alps}. Au Ga He It.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 21. A. wulfeniana} Sieber ex Koch,{\i  Syn. Fl. Germ}. ed. 2, 670 (1844). Like {\b 20} but cushions usually more dense; leaves 3-5 mm lanceolate, acute, somewhat fleshy and keeled, sparsely pubescent, pedicels 4-12 mm; calyx 4-5 mm, not divided to middle; corolla 10-12 mm in diameter, deep pink with a yellow throat. 2n = 40.{\i  Rocks and screes above} 2000{\i  m; calcifuge. • E. Alps.} Au It.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 22. A. brevis} (Hegetschw.) Cesati,{\i  Sagg. Geogr. Bot. Fl. Lomb.} 58 (1844). Like {\b 20} but more densely caespitose and cushions smaller; leaves 3-5(-6) mm, spathulate, more imbricate and forming denser rosettes; pedicels 4-23 mm. 2n = 40. {\i Mountain rocks,} 1700-2600{\i  m; calcifuge. •  S. Alps} ({\i mountains around Lago di Como}). He It.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28\qc {\b 4.            Cortusa}             L.
\par 

\pard\f0\fs24\qc By L.F. Ferguson.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Perennial herbs. Leaves basal, long-petiolate. Inflorescence scapose, umbellate, bracteate. Corolla much longer than calyx, divided to 1/3; limb infundibuliform, divided to 1/2 or more. Filaments with dilated base, connate to form a ring. Capsule ovoid to subcylindrical; valves 5. Seeds numerous.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. C. matthioli} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 144 (1753). Plant 20-40 cm, pubescent and with ferruginous hairs throughout. Leaves 10-25 cm; petiole up to 17 cm. Lamina reniform to suborbicular, cordate at base, up to 12 cm wide, lobed to ¼ of radius; lobes coarsely and irregularly dentate. Scape 15-35 cm. Bracts 5-15 mm, laciniate. Flowers 5-20. Calyx divided to ½-way, lobes acute to acuminate. Corolla c. 1 cm, 1½-2 times as long as calyx divided to 1/3, purple-violet. Stamens included, apiculate. Style exserted. Capsule (4-)5-7(-9) mm. Seeds c. 40, polyhedral, with narrow wings on the angles. 2n = 24.{\i  Mountain woods and other damp places; calcicole. C. & E. Russia; mountains of S.E. & S.C. Europe from Bulgaria and E. Carpathians to S.W. Alps.} Au Bu Cz Ga Ge He It Ju Po Rm Rs (N, C, W, E).
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  Small plants from Ural, subglabrous and lacking ferruginous hairs, with dentate bracts, deeply lobed leaves and few-flowered umbels have been called{\b  C. altaica} Losinsk., {\i Acta Inst. Bot. Acad. Sci. URSS} ({\i Ser.} 1) {\b 3}: 243 (1936), but they merge into and are not clearly separated from {\b 1}.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28\qc {\b 5.           Soldanella}            L.
\par 

\pard\f0\fs24\qc By S. Pawlowska.
\par 

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Perennial herbs. Leaves in a basal rosette,entire, coriaceous, evergreen, long-petiolate. Inflorescence scapose. Flowers nodding. Corolla much longer than calyx, infundibuliform to campanulate, with 5 wide,more or less incised lobes alternating with 5 linear segments (laciniae); throat naked, or with scales which alternate with the stamens. Capsule with a deciduous operculum and 5-10 teeth. Seeds small.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  Literature: F. Vierhapper,{\i  Pflanzenareale}{\b  1}({\b 1}): Karte 7-8 (1926). G. Cristofolini & S. Pignatti,{\i  Webbia }{\b 16}: 443-475 (1962). S. Pawlowska,{\i  Fragm. Fl. Geobot.}{\b  9}: 3-30 (1963).
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Corolla divided to not more than 1/3 of its length; throat usually naked
\par 
2 Petioles, scape and pedicels with sessile glands ............................. {\b 1. pusilla}
\par 
2 Petioles (when young), scape and pedicels with glandular hairs
\par 
3 Glandular hairs 0·15-0·2 mm, the stalk longer than the head ....... {\b 2. minima}
\par 
3 Glandular hairs 0·05-0·1 mm, the stalk equalling or 
\par 
  shorter than the head .................................................................... {\b 3. austriaca}
\par 
1 Corolla divided usually to ½ or more of its length;
\par 
  throat with scales which are usually 2-dentate
\par 
4 Petioles with sessile glands, most of which do not persist to maturity
\par 
5 Leaves bluish-green beneath, pruinose ...................................... {\b 6. pindicola}
\par 
5 Leaves green or violet beneath, not pruinose
\par 
6 Scape and pedicels with sessile glands ............................................ {\b 4. alpina}
\par 
6 Scape and pedicels with shortly stalked glands .......................... {\b 5. carpatica}
\par 
4 Petioles with glandular hairs, most of which persist to maturity
\par 
7 Glandular hairs of the petiole 0·1-0·4 mm, the stalk up to 5 
\par 
  times as long as the head; cells of the stalk short and wide
\par 
8 Leaves green or violet beneath, not pruinose ............................ {\b 7. hungarica}
\par 
8 Leaves bluish-grey beneath, pruinose ......................................... {\b 8. dimoniei}
\par 
7 Glandular hairs of the petiole 0·4-1·6 mm, the stalk more 
\par 
  than 5 times as long as the head; cells of the stalk elongated
\par 
9 Hairs of the petiole 0·4 0·8 mm; sepals 1-veined ........................ {\b 9. montana}
\par 
9 Hairs of the petiole 0·8-1·6 mm; sepals 3-veined ......................... {\b 10. villosa}
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28   Sect. TUBIFLORES Borbás. Corolla campanulate or narrowly infundibuliform, usually naked at the throat. Staminal appendages small or absent. Style shorter than corolla.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. S. pusilla} Baumg.,{\i  Enum. Stirp. Transs.}{\b  1}: 138 (1816). Petioles, scape and pedicels with sessile glands, most of which do not persist to maturity. Lamina (4-)10(-20) mm wide, somewhat coriaceous, orbicular to orbicular-reniform, with a wide basal sinus, with prominent veins above and small glandular pits beneath. Scape 2-10 cm, 1- (to 2-) flowered. Corolla 8-15 mm, narrowly campanulate, divided to 1/4-1/5 of its length, reddish-violet. Anthers hastate at the base. 2n = 40.{\i  Wet, alpine soils, }1800-3100 {\i m; calcifuge.  C. & E. Alps; S. Carpathians; isolated stations in N. Appennini and mountains of S.W. Bulgaria.} Au Bu Ge He It Ju Rm.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. S. minima} Hoppe in Sturm,{\i  Deutschl. Fl.} Abt. 1, Band 5, Heft 20 (1806). Petioles and scape densely covered with glandular hairs 0·15-0·2 mm, most of which do not persist to maturity, their stalks 2- to 4- or more-celled, longer than the head. Lamina usually less than 10 mm wide, often longer than wide, suborbicular, usually without a basal sinus, veins not prominent above, with rather large glandular pits beneath; stomata only on the lower surface of the leaf. Scape 2-10 cm, usually 1-flowered. Corolla 8-15 mm, campanulate, divided to 1/4 or 1/5 of its length, pale violet to almost white; lobes not deeply cut. Anthers rounded at the base.{\i  Wet, calcareous soils. • E.Alps; C. Appennini.} Au Ge It Ju.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b minima}: Corolla divided to c. ¼ of its length, broadly campanulate. 2n = 40.{\i  E. Alps.}
\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b samnitica} Cristofolini & Pignatti, {\i Webbia}{\b  16}: 464 (1962): Corolla divided to c. 1/5 of its length, narrowly campanulate.{\i  C. Appennini} ({\i Monte Majella}).
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28   {\b 3. S. austriaca} Vierh. in Urban & Graebner,{\i  Festschr. Ascherson} 503 (1904). Like {\b 2} but petioles, scape and pedicels with glandular hairs 0·05-0·1 mm, their stalk 1- to 2-celled, the head larger and wider than the stalk; lamina often with a slight basal sinus; stomata on both surfaces of the leaf; corolla less deeply divided.{\i  Wet, calcareous soils. • Austrian Alps, from} 13° 30' {\i E. eastwards.} Au.
\par 

\par 
23}
\par