{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 2 Corolla 15-30 mm; middle internodes usually much longer
\par
  than upper
\par
4 Spur 6-9 mm, about twice as long as calyx .................................... {\b 5. pallida}
\par
4 Spur 4-5 mm, about as long as, calyx .................................... {\b 6. hepaticifolia}
\par
1 Stem and leaves with persistent hairs
\par
5 Corolla 15-30 mm; stem puberulent to pubescent .......................... {\b 5. pallida}
\par
5 Corolla not more than 15 mm; stem ± villous
\par
6 Capsule hairy
\par
7 Most of the leaves 7- to 9-lobed; calyx ± densely villous ..... {\b 7. pilosa}
\par
7 Most of the leaves 3- to 5-lobed; calyx glabrous to sparsely hairy
\par
  ................................................................................................... {\b 8. microcalyx}
\par
6 Capsule glabrous
\par
8 Stem and leaves puberulent; seeds covered with large,
\par
  hemispherical tubercles ................................................................. {\b 1. muelleri}
\par
8 Stem and leaves pubescent to villous; seeds rugose or alveolate
\par
9 Most of the leaves 5- to 9-lobed .................................................... {\b 1. muralis}
\par
9 Most of the leaves entire or 3-lobed, the larger 
\par
  sometimes 5-lobed ................................................................... {\b 3. aequitriloba}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. C. muralis} P. Gaertner, B. Meyer & Scherb.,{\i  Fl. Wetter. }{\b 2}: 397 (1800) ({\i Linaria cymbalaria} (L.) Miller). Glabrous to villous . Stems up to 60 cm; middle and upper internodes about equal. Leaves up to 55 × 65 mm, but more usually c. 12 × 15 mm, alternate, reniform to semicircular, rarely suborbicular, with 5-9 rounded to deltate, often mucronate lobes. Calyx 2-2·5 mm. Corolla 9-15 mm, lilac to violet with yellow palate, rarely white; spur 1·5-3 mm, about as long as calyx. Capsule glabrous, usually exceeding calyx. Seeds c. 1 mm, broadly ellipsoid to globose, black, ornamented with high, acute ridges and usually a few tubercles.{\i  Shady rocks and woods; somewhat calcicole. • Native in S. Alps, W. Jugoslavia, C. & S. Italy and Sicilia; cultivated for ornament and naturalized on walls} ({\i more rarely on stony ground or shingle}) {\i throughout most of S., W. & C. Europe}. He It Ju Si [Al Au Az Be Bl Br Bu Co Cr Cz Da Ga Ge Gr Hb Ho Hs Hu Lu No Po Rm Rs ( ?B, W, ?K) Su].
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Plant glabrous at maturity ............................................. ({\b a}) subsp. {\b muralis}
\par
1 Plant persistently villous
\par
2 Pedicel at anthesis about equalling subtending petiole;
\par
  capsule c. 4 mm .............................................................. ({\b b}) subsp. {\b visianii}
\par
2 Pedicel at anthesis much longer than subtending petiole;
\par
  capsule c. 3 mm ......................................................... ({\b c}) subsp. {\b pubescens}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b muralis}: Glabrous except sometimes for a few hairs on young leaves and stems. Pedicel at anthesis about equalling subtending petiole. Corolla violet. Capsule c. 4 mm, considerably exceeding calyx. Seeds coarsely rugose. {\i Throughout the range of the species except parts of Sicilia.}
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b visianii} D. A. Webb,{\i  Bot Jour. Linn. Soc.}{\b  65}: 265 (1972) ({\i Linaria cymbalaria} var.{\i  pilosa} Vis.,{\i  L. pilosa} auct., non (Jacq.) DC.): Like ({\b a}) but villous throughout; corolla lilac.{\i  C. & S. Italy; W. Jugoslavia; rarely naturalized elsewhere}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b c}) Subsp. {\b pubescens} (C. Presl) D. A. Webb,{\i  loc. cit.} (1972) ({\i Linaria pubescens} C. Presl): Villous throughout. Pedicel at anthesis much longer than subtending petiole. Corolla lilac. Capsule c. 3 mm, equalling or slightly exceeding calyx. Seeds finely rugose.{\i  N. & E. Sicilia.}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. C. longipes} (Boiss. & Heldr.) A. Cheval.,{\i  Bull. Soc. Bot. Fr.}{\b  83}: 641 (1937) ({\i Linaria cymbalaria} subsp.{\i  longipes} (Boiss. & Heldr.) Hayek). Like {\b 1}(a) but leaves not more than 15 × 20 mm; spur of corolla 4-5 mm, much longer than calyx; capsule 3-4 mm, minutely glandular-puberulent; seeds of each loculus concrescent when ripe, forming a coarsely alveolate and irregularly winged mass c. 3 × 2 mm.{\i  Rocky or stony places by the sea. S. Aegean region.} Cr Gr. ({\i E. Mediterranean region.})
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 3. C. aequitriloba} (Viv.) A. Cheval., {\i op. cit.} 646 (1937) ({\i Linaria aequitriloba} (Viv.) Sprengel). Pubescent to villous. Stems up to 40 cm; middle and upper internodes usually about equal. Leaves up to 28 × 35 mm, but often very much smaller, mostly alternate but sometimes a few opposite, orbicular to reniform, entire to 3(-5)-lobed; lobes usually low and rounded, the central not much larger than the adjacent ones. Pedicel at anthesis longer than the subtending petiole. Calyx c. 2·5 mm. Corolla 8-13 mm; spur 2-3 mm. Capsule glabrous, slightly exceeding calyx. Seeds globose, alveolate. {\i Damp or shady places. • Islands of W. Mediterranean, eastwards to Giglio.} Bl Co It Sa.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b aequitriloba}: Stems slender, not fragile; leaves not fleshy; calyx hairy to subglabrous; corolla violet; seeds 0·9-1·2 mm, rather coarsely alveolate. 2n = 56.{\i  Throughout the range of the species}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28    ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b fragilis} (Rodr.) D. A. Webb,{\i  Bot. Jour. Linn. Soc.}{\b  65}: 265 (1912) ({\i Linaria fragilis} Rodr.): stems relatively stout, fragile; leaves rather fleshy; calyx hairy; corolla pale blue to whitish; seeds 0·8-1 mm, finely alveolate.{\i  Menorca} ({\i Barrancos de Algedar, S. of Ferrerias}).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 4. C. muelleri} (Moris) A. Cheval., {\i Bull. Soc. Bot. Fr.}{\b  83}: 645 (1937). Stems and leaves densely puberulent; stems c. 5 cm, crowded, caespitose. Leaves up to 15 × 18 mm, orbicular to reniform, entire or obscurely 3-lobed with rounded, subequal lobes. Pedicel c. 8 mm at anthesis, up to 30 mm in fruit. Calyx c. 2·5 mm. Corolla c. 10 mm, dull violet with reddish palate; spur 2 mm. Capsule glabrous, considerably exceeding calyx. Seeds 1-1·3 mm, black, globose, covered with large, hemispherical tubercles.{\i  Rocks and walls. • C. Sardegna} ({\i near Laconi}). ?Co Sa.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Very distinct in its condensed, caespitose habit (which is retained in cultivation) and the ornamentation of its seeds. Plants from two localities in Corse have been referred to this species, but until they have been rediscovered in the field and the structure of their seeds ascertained it is probably best to regard them as abnormal variants of {\b 3}({\b a}).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 5. C. pallida} (Ten.) Wettst. in Engler & Prantl,{\i  Natürl. Pflanzenfam.}{\b  4}({\b 3b}): 58 (1891). Stems and leaves usually puberulent to pubescent; more rarely (var. {\i beguinotii} (Cuf.) Cuf.) glabrous. Stems up to 20 cm; middle internodes very long, the upper much shorter, so that the long-petiolate leaves overtop the stem-apex. Leaves up to 25 × 30 mm, mostly opposite, suborbicular to semicircular-deltate, entire to 5-lobed with low and rounded to subacute, deltate lobes, the central usually much the largest. Calyx 3-4 mm, densely puberulent. Corolla 15-25(-30) mm, pale lilac-blue; spur 6-9 mm. Capsule glabrous, slightly exceeding calyx. Seeds c. 1 mm, ovoid, with acute, longitudinal ridges.{\i  Rocks and screes. • Mountains of C. Italy.} It [Br Cz].
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 6. C. hepaticifolia} (Poiret) Wettst.,{\i  loc. cit.} (1891) ({\i Linaria hepaticifolia }(Poiret) Steudel). Like {\b 5} but glabrous (except sometimes for sparsely hairy calyx); some of the leaves usually alternate; calyx 4-5 mm; corolla 15-18 mm, with spur 4-5 mm; capsule slightly shorter than calyx. 2n = 56.{\i  Shady places and on rocks by streams. • Corse. }Co.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 7. C. pilosa} (Jacq.) L. H. Bailey,{\i  Gentes Herb.}{\b  1}: 136 (1923). Stems and leaves villous. Stems up to 35 cm; middle and upper internodes about equal. Leaves usually c. 10 × 12 mm, alternate reniform, with (5-)7(-11) rounded or mucronate, subequal lobes. Pedicel at anthesis about equalling subtending petiole, elongating considerably in fruit. Calyx c. 2 mm, villous. Corolla 10-12 mm, pale lilac to white; spur c. 1 mm. Capsule pubescent, exceeding calyx. Seeds 0·6-0·8 mm, brown, subglobose, rather finely rugose.
\par

\par
237}
\par