{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}
\pard\f0\fs28   Some plants from Spain and Portugal, in other characters referable to subsp. ({\b b}), have long, subglabrous pedicels, as in subsp. ({\b a}).
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28 {\b   K. caucasica} (Mussin ex Sprengel) Kuprian. in Schischkin & Bobrov,{\i  Fl. URSS}{\b  22}: 178 (1955), which occurs in S. Ukraine, should probably be regarded as an extreme variant of ({\b b}) in which even the middle leaves are scarcely hastate.
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 4. K. spuria} (L.) Dumort.,{\i  Fl. Belg.} 35 (1827) ({\i Linaria spuria} (L.) Miller). Glandular-pubescent to -villous annual; stems 20-50 cm, decumbent. Leaves up to 7·5 cm, entire, or the lowest remotely denticulate, the lower broadly ovate, truncate or rounded at base, obtuse, the middle and upper ovate-lanceolate to suborbicular-cordate, mucronate; petiole very short. Pedicels 1-2 cm in flower, villous. Calyx-lobes accrescent, acute, more or less cordate at base in fruit. Corolla 10-15 mm, yellow, with deep purple upper lip; spur curved. Capsule depressed-globose. Seeds oblong-ellipsoid, alveolate.{\i  Cultivated fields and other open habitats. S., W. & C. Europe, northwards to England, the Netherlands and S.W. Poland; naturalized or casual further north.} Al Au Az Be Bl Br Bu Co Cr Cz Ga Ge Gr He Ho Hs Hu It Ju Lu Po Rm Rs (K) Sa Si Tu [Da].
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b spuria}: Sparsely to moderately hairy. Stems usually simple. Calyx-lobes 4-5 × 2-3 mm in flower, 5-8 × 2-4 mm in fruit, ovate-oblong, slightly cordate. Capsule 5 mm wide. Seeds 1-1·25 mm. {\i Throughout most of the range of the species, but rare in the Mediterranean region}.
\par
\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b integrifolia} (Brot.) R. Fernandes,{\i  Bot. Jour. Linn. Soc.}{\b  64}: 74 (1971) ({\i Antirrhinum spurium} var.{\i  integrifolium} Brot.): Densely hairy throughout. Stems with slender, flexuous, small leaved, lateral flowering branches. Calyx-lobes 3-4 × 1·5-2·5 mm in flower, 4·5-6 × 2-3 mm in fruit, ovate, distinctly cordate. Capsule 3-4 mm wide. Seeds 0·75-1 mm. {\i S. Europe.}
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 5. K. lanigera} (Desf.) Hand.-Mazz., {\i Ann. Naturh. Mus.} ({\i Wien}){\b  27}: 403 (1913) ({\i Linaria lanigera} Desf.,{\i  L. racemigera} sensu Rouy, non{\i  L. spuria} var. {\i racemigera} Lange). Procumbent, densely glandular-villous annual; stems up to 90 cm, whitish, rigid. Leaves broadly ovate, the middle and upper often cordate, shortly acuminate (the lowest sometimes obtuse), entire to dentate. Flowers axillary, distant, long-pedicellate, or subsessile on short, bracteate, lateral branches. Calyx 2·5-3·5 mm; lobes linear-lanceolate, acute, not accrescent. Corolla 8-11 mm, whitish, with violet upper lip and blue-spotted palate; spur curved. Capsule c. 2·5 mm, depressed-globose, slightly emarginate. Seeds c. 0·75 mm, ovoid, alveolate. {\i Cultivated fields and waste places. S.W. Europe; Turkey-in-Europe.} Bl ?Ga Hs Lu ?Si Tu.
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28   The distribution is not as disjunct as might appear, as the species is widespread in N. Africa and S.W. Asia.
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28\qc {\b 17.             Digitalis}                 L.
\par 
\pard\f0\fs24\qc By V.H. Heywood.
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28 Biennial or perennial herbs, rarely small shrubs. Leaves simple, alternate, sometimes mostly basal. Flowers in terminal, bracteate, often secund racemes. Calyx equally 5-lobed, shorter than the corolla-tube. Corolla with cylindrical to inflated-globose tube, often constricted at the base; limb more or less 2-lipped; lips erecto-patent, the upper shorter than the lower. Stamens 4. Capsule ovoid to conical, septicidal. Seeds numerous.
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28   Literature: L. I. Ivanina, {\i Acta Inst. Bot. Acad. Sci. URSS} ({\i Ser. 1}) {\b 11}: 198-302 (1955). K. Werner,{\i  Bot. Jahrb.}{\b  79}: 218-254 (1960);{\i  Wiss. Zeitschr. Univ. Halle} ({\i Math.-Nat. Kl}.) {\b 13}: 453-486 (1964).
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Middle lobe of lower lip of corolla projecting far beyond the others 
\par 2 Shrub; corolla-tube campanulate .................................................. {\b 1. obscura}
\par 2 Herb, sometimes woody at the base; corolla-tube inflated globose 
\par 3 Axis of inflorescence glandular-villous or -velutinous;
\par  corolla whitish with brown or violet veins
\par 4 Bracts lanceolate; corolla 20-30 mm ............................................. {\b 11. lanata}
\par 4 Bracts linear; corolla 10-20 mm ............................................ {\b 12. leucophaea}
\par 3 Axis of inflorescence glabrous and eglandular; corolla
\par  yellow to brown
\par 5 Calyx-lobes obtuse, with a wide scarious margin ................... {\b 10. ferruginea}
\par 5 Calyx-lobes acute or acuminate, with scarious margin 
\par  very narrow or absent ................................................................... {\b 9. laevigata}
\par 1 Middle lobe of lower lip of corolla only slightly 
\par  exceeding the others
\par 6 Corolla-tube slender, cylindrical or cylindrical-urceolate
\par 7 Calyx-lobes ovate, obtuse .......................................................... {\b 8. parviflora}
\par 7 Calyx-lobes linear to lanceolate, acute
\par 8 Plant pubescent or puberulent; corolla dull greenish-yellow, 
\par  conspicuously veined ................................................................. {\b 7. viridiflora}
\par 8 Plant ± glabrous (except in inflorescence); corolla 
\par  pale yellow to whitish, not conspicuously veined .............................. {\b 6. lutea}
\par 6 Corolla-tube stout, campanulate or campanulate-]ventricose
\par 9 Corolla yellow; leaves ± smooth, usually glabrous above ...... {\b 5. grandiflora}
\par 9 Corolla purple, pink or white; leaves ± rugose, usually
\par  hairy above
\par 10 Whole plant covered with a yellowish, glutinous 
\par   indumentum of glandular hairs ........................................................ {\b 3. thapsi}
\par 10 Plant greenish to whitish, not or only slightly glutinous,  
\par   with an indumentum of glandular and eglandular hairs 
\par   (rarely with eglandular hairs only or glabrous) 
\par 11 Corolla glabrous outside ............................................................ {\b 2. purpurea}
\par 11 Corolla hairy outside 
\par 12 Lower leaves crenate to serrate, long-petiolate ......................... {\b 2. purpurea}
\par 12 Lower leaves entire or shallowly dentate, shortly petiolate ........... {\b 4. dubia}
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28   Sect. FRUTESCENTES Bentham. Shrubs. Corolla orange-yellow or brown, with campanulate tube.
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. D. obscura} L.,{\i  Sp. Pl.} ed. 2, 867 (1763). Glabrous shrub, 30-120 cm; stems leafless below, densely leafy above, decumbent to erect. Leaves linear-oblong to lanceolate, entire or serrate, coriaceous, shiny. Racemes elongate, somewhat secund. Corolla 20-30 mm, orange-yellow to brown, reticulate or spotted. Capsule conical, acute, exceeding the calyx. 2n = 56.{\i  Bushy and rocky places. E., C. & S. Spain.} Hs.
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b obscura}: Leaves usually entire; sepals ovate-lanceolate.{\i  E., C. & S.E. Spain}.
\par
\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b laciniata} (Lindley) Maire in Jahandiez & Maire,{\i  Cat. Pl. Maroc}{\b  3}: 688 (1934) ({\i D. laciniata} Lindley): Leaves usually deeply serrate (rarely entire); sepals lanceolate.{\i  S. Spain}.
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28   Sect. DIGITALIS. Herbs. Leaves more or less rugose. Corolla purple or white, with campanulate tube.
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. D. purpurea} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 621 (1753). Biennial or perennial, sometimes flowering in the first year, (25-)60-180 cm, pubescent to lanate, rarely subglabrous. Basal leaves ovate to lanceolate long-petiolate, with an indumentum of multicellular eglandular hairs mixed with shorter glandular hairs in varying proportions, rarely eglandular only. Raceme simple or slightly branched, usually many-flowered. Bracts variable, sometimes minute. Pedicels shorter than, equalling or longer than the bracts and calyx. Calyx-lobes ovate-lanceolate to elliptical. Corolla 40-55 mm, purple, pale pink or white, usually spotted inside,
\par
\par 239}
\par