{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 64. L. ricardoi} Coutinho,{\i  Bol. Soc. Brot.}{\b  22}: 131 (1906). Glabrous annual; stems 15-30 cm, decumbent to erect, slender, usually simple. Leaves 10-30 × 0·5 mm, linear, obtuse, mostly in whorls of 4. Inflorescence with 5-17 flowers, lax; pedicels 0·5-2·5 mm. Calyx 3·5-4·5 mm; segments oblanceolate, acute, slightly unequal. Corolla 9-12 mm, violet with yellow palate; spur 4-5 mm. Capsule 3-4·5 mm. Seeds 1-1·5 mm, reniform; disc black, with low, white papillae; wing lacerate, whitish.{\i  Cornfields. • S. Portugal.} Lu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 65. L. amethystea} (Lam.) Hoffmanns. & Link,{\i  Fl. Port.}{\b  1}: 253 (1813). Annual, glabrous to glandular-puberulent below, usually pubescent (often with violet hairs) in inflorescence; stems 5-35 cm, ascending, usually simple. Leaves 4-20 × 0·3-2·5 mm, linear to oblanceolate, verticillate below, alternate above. Racemes with 2-5(-10) flowers, usually lax, often interrupted; pedicels 1-3 mm, usually shorter than bracts. Calyx 3-4 mm; lobes linear-oblong, somewhat unequal. Corolla 10-27 mm, bluish-violet, bright yellow or cream, variably spotted with purple; spur 4-15 mm, slender. Capsule 3-4·5 mm. Seeds 0·8-1·8 mm, suborbicular, flat, dark brown; disc tuberculate; wing finely papillose, thickened.{\i  Cultivated ground and other open habitats. Spain and Portugal.} Hs Lu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b amethystea} (incl. {\i L. broussonetii} (Poiret) Chav.): Corolla 10-22 mm, bluish-violet, rarely white or yellow with violet spur; spur 4-11 mm; racemes lax in fruit.{\i  Throughout the range of the species}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b multipunctata} (Brot.) Chater & D. A. Webb, {\i Bot. Jour. Linn. Soc.}{\b  65}: 264 (1972) ({\i L. multipunctata} (Brot.) Hoffmanns. & Link, {\i Antirrhinum multipunctatum} Brot.): Corolla 19-27 mm, yellow, often with violet spur; spur 10-15 mm; racemes dense in fruit. •{\i  C. Portugal, S.W. Spain}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Plants from S.W. Spain and S. Portugal (and N.W. Africa), similar to subsp. ({\b a}) but with calyx 4-5 mm, yellow corolla 8-13 mm, spur 4-6 mm and seeds with the wing thin or only slightly thickened and the disc sometimes smooth, have been called{\b  L. munbyana }Boiss. & Reuter, {\i Pugillus }89 (1852) ({\i L. pygmaea} Samp.). They resemble {\b 69} in many characters, though not in the short spur. Their status is uncertain.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 66. L. saxatilis} (L.) Chaz., {\i Dict. Jard., Suppl.}{\b  2}: 39 (1790) ({\i L. tournefortii} (Poiret) Steudel). Subglabrous to densely glandular-pubescent perennial (rarely annual); stems 7-50 cm, ascending to erect, simple or branched above. Leaves 4-20 × 1-5(-7) mm, linear to oblong-elliptical, mostly alternate, the lowest verticillate. Racemes with up to 10(-25) flowers; pedicels 0·5-3 mm, shorter than bracts. Calyx 3-4·5 mm; lobes linear-oblong,slightly unequal. Corolla 9-17 mm, yellow; spur 5-8 mm, slender. Capsule 2·5-4·5 mm. Seeds 0·6-1·7 mm, suborbicular, concavo-convex or flat, dark brown; disc tuberculate; wing thin, narrow. 2n = 12.{\i  Dry, sandy or rocky places. • N. & C. Spain, N. & C. Portugal.} Hs Lu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Very variable in habit, indumentum, width of leaf and width of wing of seed.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 67. L. arenaria} DC., {\i Icon. Pl. Gall. Rar.} 5 (1808). Bushy annual, sometimes perennating by root-buds, densely glandular-puberulent throughout; stems 5-15 cm, ascending to erect, branched from the base. Leaves 5-14 × 1·5-2·5 mm, oblanceolate-elliptical, verticillate below, alternate above. Racemes short; pedicels 1-1·5 mm, much shorter than bracts. Calyx 4-5 mm; lobes oblanceolate, subequal. Corolla 4-7 mm, yellowish; spur 2-3 mm, sometimes violet. Capsule 3-5 mm. Seeds 1-1·5 mm, reniform-orbicular, flat, black; disc smooth; wing rather narrow.{\i  Maritime sands. • W. & N.W. France, from }45° {\i to }c. 49° 30'{\i  N.; N.W. Spain.} Ga Hs [Br].
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    ({\b 68-70}). {\b L. arvensis} group. Glaucous annuals, glabrous except in inflorescence; stems 10-50 cm, erect. Leaves linear to oblong-lanceolate, verticillate below, alternate above. Racemes glandular-pubescent, dense in flower, variably elongating in fruit; bracts linear-oblong to ovate-elliptical; pedicels 1-2 mm. Calyx 3-4 mm; lobes linear-oblong, subequal. Corolla 2·5-9 mm; spur shorter than or equalling rest of corolla. Capsule 4-6 mm. Seeds suborbicular to reniform, dark brownish-grey; wing broad.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Spur strongly curved ................................................................. {\b 68. arvensis} 
\par
1 Spur straight or slightly curved
\par
2 Corolla 5-9 mm, yellow, often with violet veins; spur 2-3·5 mm {\b 69. simplex}
\par
2 Corolla 2·5-5 mm, lilac-blue, spur c. 1 mm ............................. {\b 70. micrantha} 
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 68. L. arvensis} (L.) Desf.,{\i  Fl. Atl.}{\b  2}: 45 (1798). Leaves 7-20 (-30) × 0·5-2 mm, linear. Racemes lax in fruit. Corolla 4-7 mm, pale lilac-blue; spur 1·5-3 mm, strongly curved. Seeds 1-1·5 mm; disc smooth or minutely tuberculate. {\i Cultivated ground and other open habitats. S., W. & C. Europe, northwards to N. France and Poland.} Al Au †Be Bl Bu Co Cz Ga Ge Gr Hs Hu It Ju Po ?Rm Sa Si [He].
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 69. L. simplex} (Willd.) DC. in Lam. & DC.,{\i  Fl. Fr.} ed. 3, {\b 3}: 588 (1805) ({\i L. parviflora }(Jacq.) Halácsy, non Desf.). Leaves 12-30 × 1-2·5 mm, linear to linear-lanceolate. Racemes lax in fruit. Corolla 5-9 mm, pale yellow, often with violet veins; spur 2-3·5 mm, straight. Seeds 1·5-2·3 mm; disc smooth or tuberculate. {\i Dry, open habitats. S. Europe.} Al Bl Bu Co Cr Ga Gr Hs It Ju Lu Rs (K) Sa Si Tu [He].
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 70. L. micrantha} (Cav.) Hoffmanns. & Link, {\i Fl. Port. }{\b 1}: 258 (1813). Leaves 15-30 × 2-10 mm, linear to oblong-lanceolate. Racemes fairly dense in fruit. Corolla 2·5-5 mm, lilac-blue; spur not more than 1 mm, straight or slightly curved. Seeds 1·3-1·8 mm; disc tuberculate.{\i  Cultivated ground and waste places. Mediterranean region, S. Portugal.} Co Cr Ga Gr Hs It Ju Lu Sa.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc {\b 15.              Cymbalaria}               Hill
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc By D.A. Webb.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Herbs, usually short-lived perennials but sometimes behaving as annuals; stems procumbent to decumbent. Leaves reniform to suborbicular, petiolate, palmately veined, entire to palmately lobed. Flowers solitary in the leaf-axils. Calyx deeply 5-lobed; segments somewhat unequal. Corolla, stamens and capsule as in Linaria. Seeds usually fairly numerous, variously tuberculate, ridged or alveolate.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Predominantly chasmophytes, confined as natives to the Mediterranean region and the S. Alps.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Literature: G. Cufodontis,{\i  Arch. Bot.} ({\i Forli}) {\b 12}: 54-81, 135-158, 233-254 (1936); {\i Pflanzenareale}{\b  4}: 69-71 (1938);{\i  Bot. Not.}{\b  1947}: 135-156 (1947). A. Chevalier,{\i  Bull. Soc. Bot. Fr.}{\b  83}: 638-653 (1937).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Stem and leaves glabrous at maturity
\par
2 Corolla not more than 15 mm; middle and upper internodes 
\par
  usually about equal
\par
3 Spur 1·5-3 mm, about as long as calyx; capsule glabrous;
\par
  seeds remaining separate ................................................................ {\b 1. muralis}
\par
3 Spur 4-5 mm, much longer than calyx; capsule glandular-puberulent; 
\par
  seeds of each loculus concrescent to a single mass ...................... {\b 2. longipes}
\par
 
\par
236}
\par