{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 lanceolate, long-acuminate, equal. Corolla 35-55 mm, purple with yellow palate; spur 16-25 mm. Capsule 3-6 mm. Seeds 2-2·3 mm, suborbicular, dark brown; disc smooth or finely granular; wing rather narrow.{\i  Hedges and thickets. • N.W. & W.C. Spain, N. & C. Portugal.} Hs Lu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 33. L. pelisseriana} (L.) Miller,{\i  Gard. Dict.} ed. 8, no. 11 (1768). Glaucous, glabrous annual; stems 15-50 cm, erect, few, usually simple. Leaves 12-40 × c. 1 mm, linear, more or less erect, alternate or the lowest verticillate. Racemes dense, up to 5 cm in fruit; pedicels 3-6·5 mm, about equalling bracts. Calyx 4-5 mm; lobes linear-lanceolate, subequal. Corolla 15-20 mm, purplish-violet with whitish palate; upper lip very long, with parallel lobes; throat more or less closed; spur 7-9 mm. Capsule 2·5-3 mm. Seeds 1-1·2 mm, suborbicular, flat; disc smooth, black; wing deeply fimbriate, pale. 2n = 24.{\i  Cultivated ground and waste places. Mediterranean region and W. Europe, northwards to the Channel Islands.} Al Bl Bu Co Cr Ga Gr Hs It Ju Sa Si Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    ({\b 34-40}).{\b  L. vulgaris} group. Perennials; stems 15-90 cm, erect or ascending. Leaves linear-filiform to narrowly elliptical, acute to subacute, mostly alternate. Racemes dense in flower, usually lax in fruit; flowers pedicellate. Calyx-lobes equal, or slightly unequal with the adaxial the longest. Corolla yellow; tube cylindrical, with closed mouth; spur as long as or shorter than rest of corolla. Capsule glabrous. Seeds 1·5-4 mm, orbicular to subreniform, flat; disc dark brown to black.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  The main area of diversity is in S. Russia; it is probable that here at least hybridization occurs between various species of this group.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Part of the variation of the group has been interpreted as a result of hybridization with {\b 15}, but no clear demonstration of this has yet been given.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Stems much-branched, the main axis usually not distinct;
\par
  leaves usually distant; disc of seeds smooth
\par
2 Seeds 2-3·5 mm; pedicels 1-5 mm in flower, not more 
\par
  than 6 mm in fruit ............................................................................ {\b 39. odora}
\par
2 Seeds 3-4 mm; pedicels 5-7 mm in flower, up to 12 mm in fruit  {\b 40. loeselii}
\par
1 Stems simple or branched, but the main axis always distinct;
\par
   leaves crowded
\par
3 Disc of seeds smooth
\par
4 Capsule 9-14 mm, ovoid to oblong; calyx 5-8 mm .................. {\b 37. macroura}
\par
4 Capsule 5-6 mm, globose; calyx 4-5 mm ..................................... {\b 38. debilis}
\par
3 Disc of seeds tuberculate
\par
5 Spur at least as long as lower lip of corolla;
\par
  corolla 13-20 mm ................................................................. {\b 35. angustissima}
\par
5 Spur shorter than lower lip of corolla; corolla 19-33 mm
\par
6 Corolla 20-25(-28) mm; stems often hairy in lower half ..... {\b 36. biebersteinii}
\par
6 Corolla (19-)25-33 mm; stems glabrous in lower half ............... {\b 34. vulgaris}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 34. L. vulgaris} Miller, {\i Gard. Dict.} ed. 8, no. 1 (1768) (incl.{\i  L. acutiloba} Fischer ex Reichenb.). Stems erect, simple, or branched only at base or in inflorescence, glabrous, or glandular-hairy above. Leaves 20-60 × 1-5(-15) mm, linear to narrowly elliptical or linear-oblanceolate, 1(3)-veined, crowded. Racemes with 5-30 flowers; pedicels 2-8 mm, often glandular-puberulent; bracts equalling or exceeding pedicels. Calyx 3-6 mm, often glandular-puberulent; lobes ovate to oblanceolate, subacute. Corolla (19-)25-33 mm, pale or bright yellow; spur 10-13 mm, stout, wider and shorter than lower lip. Capsule 5-11 × 5-7 mm, ovoid- or oblong-globose. Seeds 2-3 mm; disc tuberculate. 2n = 12. {\i Most of Europe except the extreme north and much of the Mediterranean region.} All except Az Bl Cr Fa Is Lu Sa Sb Si.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 35. L. angustissima} (Loisel.) Borbás,{\i  Balaton Növényföldr.} 376 (1900) ({\i L. italica} Trev.). Like {\b 34} but always glabrous; leaves 1-2(-5) mm wide; calyx-lobes linear-lanceolate, acuminate; corolla (13-)15-20 mm, pale yellow; spur (5-)7-10 mm, narrower than and at least as long as lower lip; capsule 4-6(-7·5) mm, ovoid. {\i S. & E. C. Europe, but absent from much of the Mediterranean region.} Al Au Bu Cz Ga ?Gr He Hs Hu It Ju Rm ?Rs (W).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b  L. bessarabica} Kotov,{\i  Ukr. Bot. Zur.}{\b  11}({\b 4}): 67 (1954), from S. Ukraine, has been equated with {\b 35} by some Russian authors, but it has linear-oblong, very obtuse calyx-lobes and corolla up to 23 mm; it has been seldom collected and is perhaps of hybrid origin.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 36. L. biebersteinii} Besser,{\i  Enum. Pl. Volhyn.} 25 (1822). Stems erect, simple or branched above, sparsely hairy. Leaves 25-55 × 1·5-7 mm, linear-lanceolate, 1- to 3-veined, acute, crowded. Racemes with (2-)5-30 flowers, rather short and dense; pedicels 1·5-7 mm, usually glandular-puberulent or -pubescent; bracts equalling or exceeding pedicels. Calyx 2·5-5 mm, often pubescent; lobes lanceolate, acute. Corolla 20-25(-28) mm, bright yellow; spur 5-10(-12) mm, stout, wider and shorter than lower lip of corolla. Capsule 6-9 mm, ovoid-oblong or -globose. Seeds 1·7-2·5 mm; disc tuberculate.{\i  Steppes. • S. part of U.S.S.R}. Rs (C, W, K, E).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Plants similar to {\b 36} but entirely glabrous and with leaves 3-10 mm wide occur throughout its range, and also in Romania and Hungary. They have been called {\b L.} × {\b kocianovicii} Ascherson, {\i Österr. Bot. Zeitschr.}{\b  15}: 367 (1865) ({\i L. angustissima} subsp. {\i kocianovicii} (Ascherson) Soó), and interpreted as hybrids between {\b 15} and {\b 34}; but they have also been interpreted as variants of {\b 34} or {\b 35}, or as an independent species ({\i L. ruthenica} Blonski, {\i L. rudis} Janka).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 37. L. macroura} (Bieb.) Bieb.,{\i  Cent. Pl. }{\b 1}: t. 27 (1810). Like {\b 36} but glabrous, or sparsely glandular-pubescent only in inflorescence; leaves not more than 2 mm wide; calyx 5-8 mm, with ovate-oblong, very obtuse lobes; corolla (22-)28-33 mm, often with bluish veins; spur (10-)12-16 mm; capsule 9-14 mm, ovoid to oblong; seeds with smooth disc.{\i  Steppes. • S. Ukraine.} Rs (W, K, E).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b  L. incompleta} Kuprian., {\i Sovetsk. Bot.}{\b  4}: 114 (1936), from S.E. Russia, is intermediate between {\b 37} and {\b 34} in most respects, but has most of its flowers abortive; it is perhaps of hybrid origin.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 38. L. debilis} Kuprian.,{\i  op. cit.}{\b  4}: 115 (1936). Like {\b 36} but glandular-pubescent only in inflorescence; leaves c. 1 mm wide; bracts shorter than pedicels; calyx 4-5 mm; lobes ovate-oblong, subacute; corolla 24-29 mm; spur 12-16 mm; capsule 5-6 mm, globose; seeds with smooth disc.{\i  S Ural.} Rs (C, E).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 39. L. odora} (Bieb.) Fischer, {\i Cat. Jard. Gorenki} ed. 2, 25 (1812) (incl.{\i  L. dolichocarpa} Klokov). Glabrous (except sometimes for calyx); stems ascending, much-branched, without a distinct main axis. Leaves 15-40(-60) × 1-1·5(-2·5) mm, linear to filiform, arising 1-3 cm apart and not crowded. Racemes with 7-12 flowers, terminating most branches; pedicels 1-5 mm in flower, up to 6 mm in fruit; bracts 1-3(-5) mm. Calyx 1·5-5 mm; lobes lanceolate to oblong-obovate, acute to subobtuse. Corolla 12-21 mm, pale yellow; spur 5-10 mm, slender, straight. Capsule 3-8 × 3-5 mm, subglobose to oblong-ellipsoid. Seeds 2-3·5 mm; disc smooth.{\i  Sandy and stony places. S. part of U.S.S.R.; Turkey-in-Europe. }Rs (C, W, ?K, E) Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Plants from Ukraine and the Don valley have subglobose capsules 3-5 mm and have been called{\b  L. dulcis} Klokov,{\i  Bot. Zur}.
\par

\par
232}
\par