{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 36 Seeds slightly convex on one face, and flat or slightly 
\par
   concave on the other
\par
39 Bracts not exceeding pedicels
\par
40 Leaves entire or obscurely crenate ......................................... {\b 41. acinifolia}
\par
40 Leaves pinnatifid or laciniate ................................................ {\b 45. aznavourii}
\par
39 Bracts exceeding pedicels
\par
41 Glabrous .................................................................................. {\b 49. peregrina}
\par
41 Pubescent
\par
42 Corolla white (sometimes with blue veins)
\par
43 Bracts mostly entire, linear; corolla exceeding calyx .......... {\b 51. grisebachii}
\par
43 Bracts mostly laciniate or digitate; corolla not exceeding 
\par
   calyx ............................................................................ {\b 50. chamaepithyoides}
\par
42 Corolla blue
\par
44 Upper cauline leaves not pinnatifid .......................................... {\b 46. arvensis}
\par
44 Upper cauline leaves pinnatifid
\par
45 Style c. 0·5 mm ............................................................................. {\b 47. verna}
\par
45 Style c. 1·5 mm ........................................................................... {\b 48. dillenii}
\par
29 Perennial
\par
46 Flowers solitary in axils of foliage-leaves .............................. {\b 56. filiformis}
\par
46 Flowers in ± distinct racemes
\par
47 Corolla-tube longer than wide; racemes long and dense
\par
   (Sect.{\i  Pseudolysimachium})
\par
48 Pedicels longer than subtending bracts ................................. {\b 60. paniculata}
\par
48 Pedicels shorter than subtending bracts
\par
49 Leaves crenate, crenate-serrate, or subentire ............................. {\b 62. spicata}
\par
49 Leaves biserrate
\par
50 Leaves linear-lanceolate to lanceolate, with cuneate 
\par
   to truncate base; calyx-segments triangular-ovate ................... {\b 59. longifolia}
\par
50 Leaves triangular-ovate, with ± cordate base; calyx 
\par
   segments linear-lanceolate ...................................................... {\b 61. bachofenii}
\par
47 Corolla-tube much wider than long; racemes usually 
\par
   short or relatively lax (Sect. {\i Veronicastrum})
\par
51 Basal leaves larger than cauline, forming a ± distinct rosette
\par
52 Racemes 6-30 cm; pedicels 8-20 mm; corolla white or 
\par
   pale blue with dark blue veins ............................................... {\b 1. gentianoides}
\par
52 Racemes 1-4 cm; pedicels 2-6 mm; corolla violet-blue 
\par
   or lilac, without conspicuous veins ......................................... {\b 2. bellidioides}
\par
51 Basal leaves not larger than cauline and not forming a rosette 
\par
53 Stems procumbent or decumbent; leaves usually not more
\par
   than 8 mm (rarely up to 15 mm)
\par
54 Leaves conspicuously crenate-serrate (S. Greece) .................. {\b 10. erinoides}
\par
54 Leaves ± entire
\par
55 Lower pedicels at least 4 mm in fruit; racemes corymbose 
\par
   or ± elongate in fruit
\par
56 Corolla blue; capsule 4-5 mm .............................................. {\b 3. serpyllifolia}
\par
56 Corolla pink; capsule 2-2·5 mm .................................................... {\b 4. repens}
\par
55 Pedicels not more than 2 mm in fruit; racemes ± capitate
\par
57 Bracts similar in shape to foliage-leaves; calyx segments 4,
\par
   ciliate ...................................................................................... {\b 8. nummularia}
\par
57 Bracts much narrower than foliage-leaves; calyx
\par
   segments usually 5, villous ..................................................... {\b 9. saturejoides}
\par
53 stems ascending or erect; larger leaves more than 8 mm
\par
58 Capsule wider than long, not exceeding calyx ..................... {\b 3. serpyllifolia}
\par
58 Capsule usually longer than wide, exceeding calyx
\par
59 Leaves conspicuously serrate; racemes up to 15 cm
\par
60 Calyx 3·5-4 mm; fruiting pedicels arcuate-ascending to
\par
   suberect .......................................................................................... {\b 11. ponae}
\par
60 Calyx 2 mm; fruiting pedicels patent, but turned 
\par
   upwards sharply just below capsule ......................................... {\b 12. urticifolia}
\par
59 Leaves ± entire; racemes not more than 6 cm
\par
61 Stems herbaceous; pedicels usually less than 5 mm;
\par
   style less than 1/3 as long as capsule ............................................... {\b 5. alpina}
\par
61 Stems woody at base; pedicels usually more than 5 mm;
\par
   style at least ½ as long as capsule 
\par
62 Corolla deep blue with reddish centre; hairs on inflorescence 
\par
   all eglandular and appressed or crispate ...................................... {\b 6. fruticans}
\par
62 Corolla pink (rarely deep blue); some hairs on inflorescence 
\par
   glandular and patent .................................................................. {\b 7. fruticulosa}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Sect VERONICASTRUM Koch. Perennial. Leaves entire to,crenate-serrate, sessile or shortly Petiolate. Racemes terminal, (rarely with 1 or 2 axillary racemes as well); at least the upper bracts markedly different from the foliage-leaves. Calyx-segments 4 or 5. Corolla-tube wider than long. Capsule dehiscing loculicidally, usually only at apex. Seeds strongly compressed, smooth or slightly tuberculate or rugose, with central chalaza.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. V. gentianoides} Vahl,{\i  Symb. Bot. }{\b 1}: 1 (1790). Stems 25-80 cm, erect, pubescent above. Leaves very variable in size but usually 20-60 × 4-15 mm, entire or obscurely crenate, glabrous or puberulent, the basal linear-oblanceolate to broadly obovate, shortly petiolate, forming a rosette, the cauline ovate to oblong-lanceolate, sessile, alternate or opposite. Racemes 6-30 cm; lower bracts similar to cauline leaves; pedicels 8-20 mm, usually exceeding the bracts. Calyx 4-5 mm; segments 4, triangular, pubescent, somewhat unequal. Corolla 10 mm in diameter, white or pale blue with dark blue veins. Capsule 5-6 × 4-5 mm, obovate, emarginate, glandular-hairy; style c. 5 mm.{\i  Mountain grassland. Krym.} Rs (K) [Rs (C)]. ({\i S.W. Asia}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. V. bellidioides} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 11 (1753). Pubescent throughout; stems 5-20 cm, a short basal part procumbent and rooting, densely leafy, the remainder erect, with 1-3 pairs of opposite leaves. Leaves 12-40 × 7-15 mm, oblong-obovate, crenate-serrate or subentire, subsessile. Racemes capitate to corymbose in flower, usually elongating to 2-5 cm in fruit; pedicels 2-6 mm; bracts c. 4 mm. Calyx 4-5 mm; segments 4, oblanceolate. Corolla 9-10 mm in diameter, lilac to violet-blue. Capsule 6-8 × 4·5-6 mm, elliptical to ovate, pubescent; style c. 4 mm. {\i Dry alpine pastures; somewhat calcifuge. • Pyrenees and mountains of C. Europe and Balkan peninsula, southwards to Bulgaria.} Au Bu Cz Ga Ge He Hs It Ju Po Rm Rs (W).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b bellidioides}: Leaves subentire to obscurely crenate. Corolla deep violet-blue. Capsule only slightly longer than wide. 2n = 36. {\i Throughout the range of the species}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28    ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b lilacina} (Townsend) Nyman, {\i Consp., Suppl.}{\b  2}({\b 2}):237 (1890) ({\i V. lilacina} Townsend): Leaves distinctly crenate-serrate in apical half. Corolla lilac with white centre. Capsule at least 1½ times as long as wide. 2n = 18.{\i  Pyrenees, S.W. Alps.}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 3. V. serpyllifolia} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 12 (1753). Stems 5-20(-30) cm, ascending. Leaves up to 25 × 12 mm, ovate, shortly petiolate, entire or obscurely crenate, glabrous or puberulent. Racemes sparsely to densely pubescent; pedicels 3-8 mm; bracts usually exceeding pedicels, the lower similar to the foliage-leaves. Calyx 4-6 mm; segments 4, oblong, slightly unequal. Corolla 6-10 mm in diameter. Capsule 4-5 mm, slightly wider than long, emarginate, pubescent; style c. 2 mm.{\i  Almost throughout Europe.} All except Bl Cr Sb.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b serpyllifolia}: stems procumbent for only a short distance at base, the greater part erect. Racemes elongate, with 20-40 flowers, subglabrous to eglandular-pubescent; pedicels about as long as calyx. Corolla 6-8 mm, white or pale blue with dark blue veins. 2n = 14.{\i  Throughout the range of the species, but mainly in the lowlands}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b humifusa} (Dickson) Syme in Sowerby, {\i Engl. Bot.} ed. 3,{\b  6}: 158 (1866) ({\i V. humifusa }Dickson; incl.{\i  V. apennina }Tausch, {\i V. balcanica} Velen.): stems often procumbent for a large part of their length. Racemes usually short, with 8-15 flowers, glandular-pubescent; pedicels considerably longer than calyx. Corolla 7-10 mm, bright blue. 2n = 14.{\i  Mountains, throughout the greater part of Europe}.
\par

\par
243}
\par