{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 Racemes 1-2, short, corymbose, with 2-6 flowers, arising near the stem-apex and sometimes pseudoterminal; peduncle 3-6 cm, erect, leafless; pedicels up to 10 mm, usually exceeding the bracts. Calyx 3 mm; segments 4, oblong, obtuse, subequal. Corolla 6-8 mm in diameter, deep blue (rarely pink). Capsule 7 × 5 mm, obovate, usually emarginate, purplish, pubescent. 2n = 18.{\i  Mountain rocks and stony alpine pastures. • C. & S. Europe, from the Jura and the Carpathians southwards to the Pyrenees, S. Italy and C. Greece.} Al Au Cz Ga Ge Gr He Hs It Ju Po Rm Rs (W).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 26. V. baumgartenii} Roemer & Schultes,{\i  Syst. Veg. }{\b 1}: 100 (1817). Stems 4-12 cm, ascending, pubescent above. Leaves 8-18 × 3-8 mm, serrate to subentire, glabrous, subsessile, the lower ovate, the upper elliptic-oblong. Racemes 1-4, opposite, short, corymbose; pedicels up to 15 mm, pubescent, greatly exceeding the bracts. Calyx 2·5-3 mm; segments 4, ellipticoblong, subequal. Corolla c. 9 mm in diameter, blue. Capsule 5 × 3 mm, elliptical, deeply emarginate, glabrous.{\i  Mountain rocks and alpine pastures. • E. & S. Carpathians; mountains of E. Jugoslavia and N. Bulgaria.} Bu Ju Rm Rs (W).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 27. V. officinalis} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 11 (1753). Stems 10-50 cm, procumbent to ascending, hirsute to villous. Leaves 15-50 × 8-30 mm, ovate to elliptical, serrate, softly hairy; petiole 2-6 mm. Racemes 3-6(-10) cm, erect, opposite, dense, glandular-hairy; pedicels 1-3 mm; bracts 3-5 mm. Calyx 2·5-3 mm; segments 4, oblong, subequal. Corolla c. 8 mm in diameter, dull lilac-blue. Capsule c. 4 × 4 mm, obdeltate to slightly obcordate, pubescent. 2n = 18, 36.{\i  Woods and heaths. Almost throughout Europe}. All except Bl Cr Sb.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Variants with small, glabrous leaves, villous peduncles, deeply obcordate capsules, and sometimes with deep blue corolla are recorded from a few localities in N.W. & N.C. Europe. They are in some features transitional between {\b 27} and {\b 28}, and their status is not clear.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 28. V. allionii} Vill.,{\i  Prosp. Pl. Dauph.} 20 (1779). Like {\b 27} but more or less glabrous except for crispate-puberulent inflorescence; stems 5-15 cm, woody at the base; leaves 8-20 × 5-13 mm, entire or minutely crenate; racemes shorter, usually solitary; calyx 2 mm; corolla deep blue; capsule 3 mm, obovate. 2n = 18.{\i  Alpine pastures. • S.W. Alps. }Ga It.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 29. V. dabneyi} Hochst. in Seub.,{\i  Fl. Azor. }39 (1844). Like {\b 27} but glabrous except for pubescent inflorescence; leaves oblong, dark green, coriaceous; racemes up to 12 cm; pedicels 4-5 mm; corolla 10-12 mm in diameter, pale pink with deeper veins; capsule glabrous. •{\i  Açores.} Az.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 30. V. chamaedrys} L., {\i Sp. Pl. }13 (1753). Stems 7-25 cm, ascending, sparsely to densely hairy. Leaves 10-40 × 6-30 mm, oblong-lanceolate to ovate-deltate, crenate-serrate to deeply and irregularly pinnatifid with linear-oblong lobes, sparsely hairy to subglabrous, sessile or shortly petiolate. Racemes 4-12(-16) cm, usually opposite but the lowest often unpaired; pedicels (2-)4-8 mm; bracts 3-7 mm. Calyx 4-6 mm; segments 4, lanceolate to linear-oblong, pubescent, somewhat unequal. Corolla c. 10 mm in diameter. Capsule 3-4 × 4-5 mm, obdeltate to obcordate, ciliate, shorter than calyx.{\i  Grassland, thickets and hedges. Throughout Europe except for some islands and much of the Arctic.} All except Az Bl Co Cr Fa Sa Sb Si; only naturalized in Is.
\par

\par
 ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b chamaedrys}: Leaves dark green, crenate-serrate. Stem often more or less hairy all round, at least above. Calyx sparsely pubescent. Corolla bright blue. 2n = 32.{\i  Throughout the range of the species.}
\par
 ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b vindobonensis} M. Fischer,{\i  Österr. Bot. Zeitschr.}{\b  118}: 207 (1970): Leaves yellowish-green, incise-crenate to pinnatifid. Stem with hairs confined to 2 opposite lines throughout. Calyx densely glandular-puberulent. Corolla pale blue, rarely pink or white. 2n = 16.{\i  Dry grassland. E.C. & S.E. Europe}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 31. V. melissifolia} Poiret in Lam.,{\i  Encycl. Méth. Bot.}{\b  8}: 526 (1808). Like {\b 30} but stems up to 50 cm; leaves 30-60 × 20-35 mm, triangular-ovate; pedicels 2-3 mm; corolla 5-8 mm in diameter, pale blue or whitish; capsule 4·5 × 5 mm, obcordate.{\i  On the borders of Europe in S.E. Russia} ({\i near Krasnodar}). Rs (E). ({\i Anatolia, Caucasus.})
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 32. V. micrantha} Hoffmanns. & Link,{\i  Fl. Port. }{\b 1}: 286 (1813-1820). Like {\b 30} but stems uniformly hairy all round; pedicels 1-2 mm; corolla c. 7 mm in diameter, white with a pink centre; capsule longer than wide.{\i  Damp or shady places. N. Portugal.} Lu.
\par
 
\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 33. V. peduncularis} Bieb., {\i Beschr. Länd. Terek Casp.} 126 (1800) (incl.{\i  V. umbrosa} Bieb.). Sparsely pubescent throughout; stems 10-30 cm, ascending, diffuse. Leaves 7-25 × 3-15 mm, lanceolate to broadly ovate, serrate to pinnatifid; petiole 2-7 mm. Racemes 1-4, 5-10 cm, usually opposite, lax; pedicels 8-15 mm, greatly exceeding the bracts, recurved in fruit. Calyx 4-7 mm; segments 4, lanceolate, subequal. Corolla 10-12 mm in diameter, blue, pink or whitish. Capsule 2·5-4·5 × 3·5-5 mm, broadly obcordate, shorter than or very slightly exceeding calyx, pubescent.{\i  Woods, thickets and stony slopes. S. & S.E. Ukraine, S.E. Russia.} Rs (K, E).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   A single record for Romania requires confirmation.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 34. V. montana} L., {\i Cent. Pl.}{\b  1}: 3 (1755). Softly hairy; stems 12-50 cm, decumbent. Leaves 20-35 × 15-30 mm, broadly ovate, coarsely crenate-serrate; petiole 7-15 mm. Racemes up to 10 cm, usually alternate, lax, flexuous; pedicels c. 8 mm, greatly exceeding the bracts. Calyx 4-5 mm; segments 4, elliptical, obtuse, subequal. Corolla 8-10 mm in diameter, pale lilac-blue. Capsule 6 × 8 mm, transversely elliptical to reniform, longer and wider than calyx, glandular-ciliate. 2n = 18.{\i  Woods. W., C. & S. Europe, northwards to N. Denmark, and extending eastwards to Latvia and W. Ukraine}. Al Au Be Br Bu Co Cz Da Ga Ge Gr Hb He Ho Hs Hu It Ju Lu Po Rm Rs (B, C, W) Si Su ?Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   A record from the borders of Europe in S. Ural is probably erroneous.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 35. V. scutellata} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 12 (1753). Usually glabrous, rarely pubescent. Stems up to 60 cm, ascending, weak. Leaves 15-50 × 3-7 mm, linear-oblong, entire or obscurely serrate, sessile, often reddish-brown. Racemes up to 7 cm, alternate, lax; peduncles very slender; pedicels 7-10 mm, filiform, greatly exceeding the bracts. Calyx 2 mm; segments 4, elliptical, subequal. Corolla 5-6 mm in diameter, pale pink or lilac. Capsule 4 × 5 mm, reniform. 2n = 18.{\i  Marshes and other wet places. Most of Europe, but rare in the Mediterranean region.} All except Az Bl Cr Fa Sa Sb Si.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Sect. BECCABUNGA (Hill) Dumort. Annuals or perennials of wet habitats, usually fleshy and glabrous. Flowers in opposite, axillary racemes. Calyx-segments 4. Corolla-tube wider than long. Capsule septicidal and loculicidal, dehiscing into 4 valves. Seeds not more than 0·75 mm, relatively thick, smooth, with convex back, flat chalazal face and excentric chalaza.
\par

\par
247}
\par