{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 base, sparsely pubescent below, more densely above. Leaves 10-20 × 2-4 mm, linear-oblong to oblanceolate, entire to irregularly pinnatisect. Racemes 1-4, up to 8 cm; pedicels 5-9 mm, exceeding the bracts. Calyx 4-6 mm; segments usually 4, unequal. Corolla 10-12 mm in diameter, blue (rarely pink). Capsule 4 × 5 mm, broadly obcordate, glabrous or glandular pubescent. {\i Rocky hillsides. Krym}. ?Rm Rs (K). ({\i S.W. Asia.})
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 16. V. tenuifolia} Asso, {\i Syn. Stirp. Arag}. 2 (1779) ({\i V. assoana} (Boiss.) Willk.; incl.{\i  V. commutata} Willk., non Seidl). Crispate pubescent throughout. Stems 10-15 cm, decumbent to ascending, slender, woody at the base. Leaves 6-15(-20) mm, crowded, 1- to 2-pinnatisect with linear-oblong segments. Racemes 1-4, 0·5-2 cm in flower, up to 5(-7) cm in fruit; pedicels 4-5 mm; bracts 3 mm. Calyx 3·5 mm; segments 4 or 5, unequal. Corolla c. 10 mm in diameter, bright blue. Capsule 5 × 4-5 mm, obcordate, puberulent.{\i  Dry grassland. • N.E. Spain.} Hs.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Very similar to some variants of {\b 13}({\b d}), but usually distinct in the much shorter internodes, especially in the upper part of the stem.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 17. V. prostrata} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} ed. 2, 17 (1762). Flowering stems up to 25(-40) cm, ascending; non-flowering stems short, procumbent. Leaves 8-25 × 2-12 mm, linear-oblong to ovate, very shortly petiolate, cuneate to truncate at the base, crenate-serrate to subentire; margin often revolute. Racemes usually 3-6 cm in fruit; pedicels 1-3 mm. Calyx 2-4 mm, glabrous; segments (4)5, linear-oblong, unequal. Corolla 6-11(-14) mm in diameter. Capsule 3·5-5 mm, suborbicular to obovate, usually slightly longer than wide, glabrous.{\i  From the Netherlands and N.C. Russia southwards to N. Spain, C. Italy and Macedonia.} Al Au Be Bu Cz Ga Ge Gr He Ho Hs Hu It Ju Po Rm Rs (N, B, C, W, K, E) Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b prostrata}: Leaves rather densely pubescent, ovate to oblong-lanceolate. Corolla 6-8(-11) mm in diameter, pale blue. 2n = 16.{\i  From C. Germany, S.E. France and Italy eastwards}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b scheereri} J. P. Brandt,{\i  Bull. Soc. Neuchatel. Sci. Nat. }{\b 84}: 80 (1961): Leaves sparsely puberulent, lanceolate to linear-oblong. Corolla 8-11(-14) mm in diameter, deep blue. 2n = 32.{\i  W. & W.C. Europe}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 18. V. turrilliana} Stoj. & Stefanov,{\i  Jour. Bot.} ({\i London}){\b  61}: 219 (1923). Stems up to 40 cm, decumbent, woody at the base, pubescent, usually with the hairs in 2 opposite lines. Leaves 12-20 × 6-10 mm, elliptical, obtuse, very shortly petiolate, crenate, coriaceous, glabrous. Racemes 2-8, 4-8 cm, opposite, rather lax; pedicels 2-3 mm. Calyx 2-2·5 mm; segments (4)5, oblong, obtuse, glabrous, the fifth, if present, very small, the others subequal. Corolla 8-10 mm in diameter, deep blue. Capsule 4-5 mm, suborbicular, glabrous.{\i  Calcareous rocks. • E. part of Balkan peninsula} ({\i Istrancadaglari}). Bu Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 19. V. rhodopaea} (Velen.) Degen ex Stoj. & Stefanov,{\i  Fl. Balg.} 1010 (1925). Stems c. 5 cm, procumbent, pubescent, with the hairs usually in 2 opposite lines. Leaves 8-13 × 2-5 mm, elliptic- to linear-oblong, sessile, entire or minutely crenate, glabrous or minutely ciliate; margin revolute. Racemes 1-4, dense and subcapitate in flower, 3-5 cm in fruit, alternate. Calyx 3-4 mm; segments 4, ciliate, acute, unequal. Corolla 9 mm in diameter, deep blue. Capsule subglabrous. •{\i  Mountains of S. Bulgaria.} Bu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Plants from W. Macedonia (on the borders of Greece and Jugoslavia) and from E. Albania have also been referred to this species, but their relationships are not clear.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 20. V. pectinata} L.,{\i  Mantissa} 24 (1767). Puberulent throughout. Stems 20-50 cm, decumbent. Leaves 10-25 × 4-15 mm, broadly elliptical to oblong, shortly petiolate, incise-serrate. Racemes up to 20 cm, glandular, often longer than the leafy stems, rather dense even in fruit, often with a few small leaves below the lowest flowers; lower bracts often pinnatifid; pedicels 2-5 mm. Calyx 4-5 mm; segments 4, linear, villous, subequal. Corolla 10-12 mm in diameter, blue. Capsule 5-6 × 4- 5·5 mm, obcordate, pubescent.{\i  E. part of Balkan peninsula.} Bu Tu. ({\i Anatolia}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Not recently recorded from Europe.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 21. V. rosea} Desf.,{\i  Fl. Atl.}{\b  1}: 13 (1798). Crispate-pubescent throughout, but more sparsely in inflorescence; stems 10-20 cm, ascending, stout, woody at the base. Leaves 8-12 mm, oblanceolate, dentate to deeply pinnatifid distally. Racemes usually 2, up to 6(-10) cm in fruit, opposite, rather dense; pedicels 3-4 mm, equalling or slightly exceeding the bracts. Calyx 3·5 mm; segments 4(5). Corolla 10-12 mm in diameter, pale pink. Capsule 4 × 4·5 mm, broadly obcordate.{\i  Dry, rocky ground. S. Spain }({\i near Antequera}). Hs. ({\i N.W. Africa.})
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 22. V. aragonensis} Stroh,{\i  Beih. Bot. Centr.}{\b  61B}: 398 (1942). Stems 10-25 cm, ascending or decumbent, weak and flexuous, crispate-pubescent. Leaves 7-10 × 2-4 mm, oblong to elliptical, entire or crenate, glabrous or pubescent. Racemes 1-2, 2-6 cm, rather lax, sometimes pseudo-terminal; pedicels 2-4 mm; bracts 3-5 mm. Calyx 5-6 mm; segments 4, oblong-elliptical, obtuse, glandular-pubescent, somewhat unequal. Corolla 8-10 mm in diameter, pale blue. Capsule 5 mm, about as wide as long, pubescent, emarginate.{\i  Calcareous rocks and screes. • C. Pyrenees.} Hs.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   A little-known species requiring further study. It has been treated by some authors as related to{\i  V. serpyllifolia,} but the structure of the seed as well as the position of the raceme justify its assignment to Sect.{\i  Veronica}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 23. V. thymifolia} Sibth. & Sm., {\i Fl. Graec. Prodr. }{\b 1}: 6 (1806). Densely crispate-pubescent throughout; stems decumbent, matted, woody at the base. Leaves 4-6 × 1-2·5 mm, narrowly oblong to oblanceolate-spathulate, entire, with revolute margins. Racemes 1-2, very short and few-flowered; pedicels c. 2 mm, shorter than the bracts. Calyx 3 mm; segments 4, oblong, obtuse. Corolla 7-8 mm in diameter, blue, lilac or pink. Capsule 4 × 4 mm, obcordate, pubescent.{\i  Mountain rocks. • S. Greece and Kriti.} Cr Gr.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 24. V. thessalica} Bentham in DC.,{\i  Prodr. }{\b 10}: 480 (1846) Stems 10-20 cm, procumbent, woody, glabrous. Leaves 5-8 × 2·5-4 mm, elliptical, entire or serrulate, glabrous except for ciliate petiole, crowded at stem-apex. Racemes usually 2, opposite capitate, arising near the stem-apex and often approximated, so as to be mistaken for a single terminal raceme; axis villous pedicels 2-3 mm; bracts 3-4 mm, linear-oblong, long-ciliate Calyx 3 mm; segments 4-5, ciliate. Corolla 5 mm long, usually not opening widely. Capsule 2·5 × 3 mm, obcordate, glabrous 2n = 16.{\i  Mountain rocks and screes. • E. Greece; N. Albania} Al Gr.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Until recently included in Sect. {\i Veronicastrum}; in well-grow plants, however, the axillary position of the racemes is clear.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 25. V. aphylla} L.,{\i  Sp. Pl.} 11 (1753). Pubescent throughout; stems 1-4 cm, procumbent. Leaves 10-15 × 5-10 mm, elliptic oblong to broadly obovate-spathulate, obscurely crenate, tapered to a short petiole, crowded near the stem-apex into a lax rosette
\par

\par
246}
\par