{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 44. V. glauca} Sibth. & Sm., {\i Fl. Graec. Prodr.}{\b  1}: 9 (1806) (incl.{\i  V. chaubardii} Boiss. & Reuter, {\i V. peloponnesiaca} Boiss. & Orph.).Stem 3-20(-35) cm, erect, simple or with decumbent to ascending branches near the base, usually crispate-pubescent and sometimes also with long, straight hairs, especially in inflorescence. Leaves 3-10(-18) mm, shortly petiolate, triangular-ovate, shallowly lobed to crenate-serrate, more or less pubescent. Flowers in racemes; pedicels very slender, more or less patent (sometimes recurved), much longer than bracts and at least 4 times as long as calyx. Calyx-segments 3-6(-7) mm, lanceolate, often unequal; corolla (7-)10-15 mm in diameter, deep blue. Capsule 3-4 × 4-5 mm, obovoid to subglobose, more or less inflated, emarginate to shallowly 2-lobed, usually glabrous; style 3-4 mm. Seeds 1·5-2 × 1-1·5 mm, suborbicular or broadly elliptical, cup-shaped. {\i Cultivated ground and dry grassland. • S. part of Balkan peninsula.} Al ?Cr Gr.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Variable in hairiness, capsule-shape and angle of pedicels. {\i V. chaubardii} was described as having the capsule 2-lobed almost to the middle, but in type-material it is only shallowly 2-lobed.
\par
 
\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 45. V. aznavourii} Dörfler,{\i  Herb. Norm.}{\b  48}: 244 (1907) ({\i V. pontica} Velen., non (Rupr. ex Boiss.) Wettst.,{\i  V. pumila} E. D. Clarke, non Ail.). Glandular-pubescent. Stem 5-15 cm, with suberect branches from the base. Leaves 3-12 mm, petiolate, the middle cauline deeply pinnatifid, with cuneate, distally toothed segments, the upper cauline and lower bracts more or less pinnatifid. Flowers in racemes; pedicels 1½-3 times as long as bracts, ascending. Calyx-segments 3-5 mm, ovate-lanceolate. Corolla 7-10 mm in diameter, blue. Capsule c. 4 × 5 mm, obcordate reniform, deeply 2-lobed, glandular-hairy; style 3-4 mm, exceeding the sinus. Seeds 1·2-1·5 × 1-1·2 mm, broadly ovate, very shallowly cup-shaped or almost flat.{\i  Dry grassland. • E. part of Balkan peninsula.} Bu Gr Tu.
\par

\par
 
\pard\f0\fs28   {\b 46. V. arvensis} L.,{\i  Sp. Pl. }13 (1753). Stem (2-)5-40 cm, simple and erect to much-branched and procumbent, pubescent, and often slightly glandular above. Leaves 2-15 mm, triangular-ovate with truncate or weakly cordate base, crenate-serrate, pubescent or subglabrous, the lower shortly petiolate, the upper sessile. Flowers in racemes; bracts longer than pedicels, the upper lanceolate, the lower ovate. Calyx-segments lanceolate; corolla 2-3 mm in diameter, blue. Capsule c. 3 × 3 mm, obcordate, flat, usually subglabrous except for marginal cilia; style c. 1 mm, scarcely exceeding the sinus. Seeds c. 1 × 0·75 mm, elliptical, flat. 2n = ?14, 16.{\i  Cultivated ground, walls and other dry, open habitats. Almost throughout Europe.} All except Fa Sb; introduced in Is.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b V. sartoriana} Boiss. & Heldr. in Boiss.,{\i  Diagn. Pl. Or. Nov.}{\b  3}({\b 3}): 171 (1856), is a dwarf plant (c. 5 cm), densely glandular hairy, with longer pedicels, capsule c. 4 mm, and seeds c. 1·2 × 1·0 mm, broadly elliptical and slightly concave on one face. Such plants occur on mountains in Greece and Kriti, but do not seem sufficiently distinct from the very variable{\i  V. arvensis} to merit specific rank.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 47. V. verna} L.,{\i  Sp. Pl.} 14 (1753) ({\i V. brevistyla} Moris). Stem 5-15 cm, erect, simple or branched from the base, pubescent in lower half, glandular above. Leaves 4-12 mm, more or less glandular-pubescent, the lower shortly petiolate, ovate to lanceolate, coarsely crenate, the upper sessile, pinnatifid with narrow lobes. Flowers in racemes; bracts exceeding pedicels, the upper lanceolate, the lower pinnatisect. Calyx-segments lanceolate; corolla c. 3 mm in diameter, blue. Capsule c. 3 × 4 mm, reniform, flat, glandular-hairy; style c. 0·5 mm. Seeds c. 1 × 0·75 mm, broadly elliptical, flat. 2n = 16.{\i  Cultivated fields and other dry places. Much of Europe, but absent from the extreme north and parts of the west and of the Mediterranean region.} Au Be Br Bu Co Cz Da Fe Ga Ge Gr He Ho Hs Hu It Ju No Po Rm Rs (N, B, C, W, K, E) Sa Si Su.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 48. V. dillenii} Crantz,{\i  Stirp. Austr.} ed. 2,{\b  2}: 352 (1769). Like {\b 47} but up to 20 cm and more robust; corolla 4-5 mm in diameter, deep blue; style c. 1·5 mm; seeds c. 1·25 × 1 mm. 2n = 16.{\i  Dry places. E. & E.C. Europe, northwards to the Baltic region, and extending locally westwards to N.E. Spain.} Au Cz Ga Ge Gr He Hs Hu It Ju Po Rm Rs (?B, C, W, K, E).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 The distribution of this species is uncertain, as many authors do not separate it from {\b 47}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 49. V. peregrina} L.,{\i  Sp. Pl.} 14 (1753). Glabrous. Stem 5-25 cm, erect, simple or branched from the base. Leaves 5-20 mm, oblong to oblanceolate or spathulate, entire or obscurely serrate, the lower narrowed at base into a short petiole, the upper sessile. Flowers in racemes; bracts lanceolate, exceeding the subsessile flowers and capsules. Calyx-segments lanceolate; corolla 2-3 mm in diameter, whitish. Capsule c. 3 × 4 mm, obovate, shallowly emarginate; style less than 0·5 mm. Seeds c. 0·75 × 0·4 mm, narrowly elliptical, flat.{\i  Cultivated ground, damp waste places and streamsides. Widely naturalized, mainly in W. & C. Europe.} [Au Az Be Br Cz Ga Ge Hb He Ho Hs Hu It Lu No Po Rm Rs (B) Su.] (North and South America.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Rather variable in its persistence, and perhaps only casual in some of the territories listed.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 50. V. chamaepithyoides} Lam.,{\i  Tabl. Encycl. Méth. Bot. }{\b 1}: 47 (1791) ({\i V. digitata} Vahl, non Lam.). Stem 5-15 cm, erect or suberect, often with procumbent to ascending branches from the base, pubescent and somewhat glandular. Leaves 3-8 mm, sparsely pubescent, petiolate, the lowest ovate, shallowly lobed, the others more or less deeply 3- to 5-lobed. Flowers in dense, narrow racemes, occupying most of stem; lower bracts like upper leaves, middle and upper bracts more or less pinnatifid with linear-subulate terminal lobe, much exceeding flower and fruit. Flowers subsessile; calyx-segments unequal, linear or linear-subulate; corolla c. 2 mm in diameter, white. Capsule c. 4 × 3 mm, narrowly obdeltate, with prominent veins, scarcely emarginate, sparsely hairy; style less than 1 mm. Seeds c. 1 × 0·5 mm, narrowly elliptical, flat or slightly concave on one face.{\i  Cultivated ground. • C. Spain}. Hs.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 51. V. grisebachii} Walters,{\i  Bot. Jour. Linn. Soc.}{\b  65}: 268 (1972) ({\i  V. chamaepitys} Griseb., non Pers.). Like {\b 50} but middle and upper bracts linear-subulate, entire; corolla c. 10 mm in diameter, with blue veins; style 2-3 mm.{\i  S.E. part of Balkan peninsula.} Bu ?Gr Tu. ({\i Anatolia}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 52. V. agrestis} L.,{\i  Sp. Pl.} 13 (1753). Pubescent annual. Stems 5-30 cm, procumbent or decumbent. Leaves 5-15 mm, longer than wide, shortly petiolate, ovate with more or less truncate base, crenate or crenate-serrate, mostly alternate but the lowest opposite. Flowers solitary in leaf-axils; pedicels 5-15 mm, usually recurved in fruit. Calyx-segments 3-6 mm, ovate to ovate-lanceolate, subobtuse, not overlapping at base; corolla 3-6 mm in diameter, usually whitish with blue or pink upper lobe. Capsule 3-4 × 4-6 mm, 2-lobed with parallel lobes and deep, narrow sinus, not or slightly keeled, sparsely glandular hirsute; style c. 1 mm, not exceeding the sinus. Seeds c. 1·5 × 1·25 mm, broadly elliptical, concave on one face. 2n = 28.{\i  Cultivated ground; somewhat calcifuge. Most of Europe except the extreme north and parts of the south-east.} All except Bl Fa Is Rs (N, K) Sb Tu.
\par

\par
249}
\par