{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 36. V. beccabunga} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 12 (1753). Glabrous perennial. Stems decumbent, rooting at the nodes. Leaves 10-40 mm, thick, orbicular, ovate or oblong, obtuse, petiolate, subentire or shallowly crenate-serrate. Racemes up to 3 times as long as subtending leaves; bracts from half as long to twice as long as pedicels. Calyx-segments more or less deflexed in fruit; corolla 5-7 mm in diameter, pale to dark blue (rarely pinkish). Capsule 2-3 × 2-4 mm, subglobose, scarcely emarginate; style c. 2 mm. 2n = 18, 36.{\i  Ditches, streams and marshes. Europe, southwards from} c. 65° {\i N.} All except Az Bl Cr ?Is Sb.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 37. V. scardica} Griseb., {\i Spicil. Fl. Rumel.}{\b  2}: 31 (1844). Annual or perennial. Stem up to 20(-40) cm, erect or ascending from a procumbent, rooting base, glabrous or sparsely glandular-pubescent. Leaves 15-30 mm, thin, with distinct, usually reddish veins, serrate in distal half; the lower ovate, shortly petiolate; the upper ovate-rhombic, usually subsessile and semi-amplexicaul. Racemes glabrous, up to 6 times as long as subtending leaves; bracts 2-5 mm; pedicels 5-10 mm, slender, patent. Calyx segments closely appressed to mature capsule; corolla c. 4 mm, pale blue, or pinkish with blue veins. Capsule 2-3 × 2-3 mm, suborbicular, elliptical or obovate, compressed in upper half; style 1-1·5 mm. 2n = 18.{\i  Wet places. E.C. & S.E. Europe.} Al Au Bu Cz Gr Hu Ju Rm Rs (?C, W, ?K).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 38. V. anagalloides} Guss.,{\i  Pl. Rar.} 5 (1826) (incl.{\i  V. poljensis} Murb.). Annual. Stem (5-)20-30 cm, erect, simple or with long branches from the base, usually glabrous. Leaves 15-40 mm, linear-lanceolate or lanceolate, sessile, subentire or serrate, glabrous. Racemes glabrous or glandular-pubescent, up to 6 times as long as subtending leaves; pedicels 3-7 mm, erecto patent. Calyx-segments erect in fruit; corolla 3-5 mm in diameter, lilac or whitish. Capsule 2·5-3·5 × 2-2·5 mm, elliptical, not emarginate; style c. 1·5 mm. 2n = 18 ± 0-2 B.{\i  Ditches, streamsides and wet mud. S., C. & E. Europe, northwards to Czechoslovakia and S.C. Russia.} Al Au Bl Bu Co Cz Ga Ge Gr Hs Hu It Ju ?Lu Rm Rs (C, W, K, E) Sa Si
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 39. V. anagallis-aquatica} L.,{\i  Sp. Pl.} 12 (1753) (incl. {\i V. lysimachioides} Boiss.). Perennial (rarely annual). Stem (5-)30-60(-100) cm, erect, simple or much-branched at the base, glabrous or glandular-pubescent. Leaves 20-100 mm, light green, glabrous, the lower ovate, often petiolate, subentire, the upper ovate-lanceolate, more or less amplexicaul, irregularly serrate near the apex. Racemes glabrous or glandular-pubescent, up to 3 times as long as subtending leaves; pedicels 4-7 mm, erect, erecto-patent, or arcuate-ascending, usually at least as long as the linear bracts. Calyx-segments erect in fruit, but not closely appressed to capsule; corolla 5-10 mm in diameter, blue with violet veins. Capsule 2·5-4 × 2·5-3·5 mm, orbicular, ovate or elliptical; style 1·5-2 mm. 2n = 36.{\i  Streams, river-banks, and other wet places. Europe except the extreme north.} All except Fa Sb.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Plants with lax, usually glandular-pubescent racemes and arcuate-ascending pedicels have been distinguished as subsp.{\b  divaricata} Krosche, {\i Allgem. Bot. Zeitschr.}{\b  18}: 83 (1912). Such variants occur throughout the range of the species, and do not therefore merit subspecific distinction.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 40. V. catenata} Pennell,{\i  Rhodora}{\b  23}: 37 (1921) ({\i V. aquatica} Bernh., non S. F. Gray,{\i  V. anagalloides} auct., non Guss). Like {\b 39} but leaves dark green, linear to linear-lanceolate, all sessile; pedicels straight, patent, usually shorter than lanceolate bracts; calyx-segments usually patent or deflexed in fruit; corolla 3-5 mm in diameter, usually pink with reddish veins; capsule 2-3 × 2·5-3·5 mm, wider than long. 2n = 36.{\i  In or beside still or slow-moving water. Most of Europe from} c. 58°{\i  N. southwards. }Al Au Az Be Br Bu Cz Da Ga Ge Gr Hb He Ho Hs Hu It Ju Lu Po Rm Rs (B, C, W, ?K, ?E) Su.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    The vigorous hybrid between {\b 39} and {\b 40}, with 2n = 36 (35), occurs throughout much of Europe, sometimes forming large clones in streams. Such plants have long, many-flowered racemes, but form very few 1- to 5-seeded capsules, and are most easily recognized by their sterility.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    Sect. POCILLA Dumort. (Sect.{\i  Alsinebe} Griseb.). Annual (except {\i V. filiformis}). Flowers solitary in leaf-axils, or in terminal racemes. Calyx-segments 4. Corolla-tube wider than long. Capsule dehiscing loculicidally and to a variable degree also septicidally. Seeds more or less compressed; chalazal face flat or excavate.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 41. V. acinifolia} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} ed. 2, 19 (1762) (incl. {\i V. perpusilla} Boiss.). Stem 5-15 cm, erect, simple or branched from the base, more or less glandular-pubescent throughout. Leaves 4-10 mm shortly petiolate, ovate, entire or obscurely crenate, subglabrous to sparsely pubescent. Flowers in racemes; bracts shorter than or equalling pedicels, the upper oblanceolate. Calyx-segments ovate; corolla 2-3 mm in diameter, blue. Capsule c. 2 × 3 mm, broadly reniform with deep sinus, flat, glandular-hairy; style c. 1·5 mm, not or scarcely exceeding the sinus. Seeds c. 0·75 × 0·5 mm, broadly elliptical, flat. 2n = 14, 16.{\i  Cultivated ground and damp grassland. S., S.C. & W. Europe, northwards to N.C. France} Al †Be Bu Co Cr Cz Ga Ge Gr He Hs Hu It Ju Lu Rm Rs (K) Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 42. V. praecox} All.,{\i  Auct. Fl. Pedem. }5 (1789). Glandular-pubescent. Stem 5-20 cm, erect, simple or branched from the base. Leaves 4-12 mm, shortly petiolate, ovate, deeply crenate-serrate. Flowers in narrow racemes, usually occupying most of stem; bracts shorter or longer than the arcuate-ascending pedicels, the lower similar to the leaves, the upper oblong-lanceolate. Calyx-segments oblong-ovate; corolla c. 3 mm in diameter, blue. Capsule c. 4 × 3-4 mm, obovate, with very shallow sinus, flat, glandular-hairy; style c. 2 mm, much exceeding the sinus. Seeds c. 1 × 0·75 mm, broadly elliptical, cup-shaped. 2n = 18.{\i  Dry, sandy or stony ground. S., C. & W. Europe, extending northwards locally to S.E. Sweden.} Al Au Be ?Bl Bu ?Co Cr Cz Da Ga Ge Gr He Ho Hs Hu It Ju Po Rm Rs (W, K, E) Si Su [Br].
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b V. kavusica} Rech. fil., {\i Denkschr. Akad. Wiss. Math.-Nat. Kl.} ({\i Wien}) {\b 105}({\b 2, 1}): 112 (1943), described from Kriti, differs in its glabrous, truncate or scarcely emarginate capsule, and seeds 1·5-2 mm. Some plants from Kriti, however, with large seeds and a more or less truncate capsule, have glandular hairs on the capsule as in {\b 42}, and the specific distinction from the latter is not clear.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 43. V. triphyllos} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 14 (1753). Glandular-pubescent. Stem 5-20 cm, suberect, simple or with decumbent to ascending branches from the base. Leaves 4-12 mm, mostly digitately lobed, with 3-7 spathulate or oblong lobes, but the lowest usually ovate, crenate. Flowers in lax racemes; uppermost bracts usually oblanceolate and not exceeding pedicels, the others usually lobed and often much larger. Calyx-segments ovate; corolla 3-4 mm in diameter, deep blue. Capsule 4·5-6 × 5-7 mm, reniform, glandular-hairy; style c. 1·5 mm, exceeding the sinus. Seeds c. 1·5 × 1·25 mm, broadly elliptical, cup-shaped. 2n = 14.{\i  Dry grassland, cultivated ground and waste places. From England, S. Sweden and Latvia southwards, but rather rare in the Mediterranean region.} Al Au Be Br Bu ?Co Cz Da Ga Ge Gr He Ho Hs Hu It Ju Lu Po Rm Rs (B, C, W, K E) ?Si Su.
\par

\par
248}
\par