{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 raceme present as well. Bracts usually very different from foliage-leaves. Calyx-segments 4 or 5. Corolla-tube wider than long. Capsule dehiscing loculicidally, usually only at apex. Seeds strongly compressed, smooth or rugose, with central chalaza.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 12. V. urticifolia} Jacq.,{\i  Fl. Austr.}{\b  1}: 37 (1773) ( {\i V. maxima} auct., non Miller,{\i  V. latifolia} auct., non L.). Sparsely hairy; stem 25-70 cm, erect. Leaves 40-80 × 20-40 mm, triangular-ovate, inciseserrate, sessile. Racemes 5-10 cm, opposite, lax, in the axils of the terminal 1-5 pairs of leaves, a terminal raceme sometimes also present; pedicels 6-8 mm, exceeding the bracts, glandular-pubescent, patent in fruit but turned sharply upwards just below the capsule. Calyx 2 mm; segments 4, elliptic-oblong, subequal. Corolla c. 7 mm in diameter, lilac. Capsule 3·5-4 × 4-5 mm, suborbicular but slightly wider than long, emarginate, ciliate. 2n = 18. {\i Shady places; somewhat calcicole. • S. & C. Europe, from the Jura and Carpathians southwards to N.E. Spain, C. Italy and S. Greece, mainly in mountain districts but below} 2000{\i  m; also in C. & S. Ural.} Al Au Bu ?Cz Ga Ge Gr He Hs It Ju Po Rm Rs (C, W).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    ({\b 13-17}). {\b V. austriaca} group. Stems procumbent to erect, more or less hairy. Leaves entire to 2-pinnatisect, puberulent or pubescent. Racemes usually opposite. Calyx-segments (4)5, narrow, usually very unequal. Corolla 5-13(-17) mm in diameter, blue.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  In this group have been included such species as have been confused with V. austriaca or have been included in it by some authors. Other species, such as {\b 18}, {\b 19} and {\b 20}, which are not included in the group, may be as closely related, but are in practice more easily distinguished.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  In most Floras the number of calyx-segments for plants of this group is given as 5, and they are usually keyed out on this character. The small  fifth segment may, however, be absent not merely from individual flowers, but from whole plants or even whole populations or varieties.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b V. kindlii} Adamovic, {\i Denkschr. Akad. Wiss. Math.-Nat. Kl.} ({\i Wien}){\b  74}: 138 (1904), from the borders of Greece and Jugoslavia, should probably be placed in this group, but further material and information are required before its relationships can be determined.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Leaves pinnatisect
\par
2 Capsule wider than long ........................................................... {\b 14. multifida}
\par
2 Capsule suborbicular or longer than wide
\par
3 Stems decumbent to ascending; leaves 6-15(-20) mm; internodes 
\par
  usually less than 15 mm; racemes 0·5-2 cm in flower, not more  
\par
  than 5(-7) cm in fruit ................................................................. {\b 16. tenuifolia}
\par
3 Stems ± erect; leaves (12-)15-30 mm; internodes usually more 
\par
  than 15 mm; racemes 1·5-5 cm in flower, 4-12 cm in fruit ........ {\b 13. austriaca}
\par
1 Leaves entire to pinnatifid
\par
4 Pedicels 5-9 mm; capsule wider than long ............................... {\b 15. orientalis}
\par
4 Pedicels 1-5 mm; capsule suborbicular or longer than wide
\par
5 Calyx and capsule hairy ............................................................ {\b 13. austriaca}
\par
5 Calyx and capsule glabrous
\par
6 Stems procumbent to ascending ................................................ {\b 17. prostrata}
\par
6 Stems ± erect ............................................................................. {\b 13. austriaca}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 13. V. austriaca} L., {\i Syst. Nat. }ed. 10, {\b 2}: 849 (1759) ({\i V. latifolia} L., nom. ambig.,{\i  V. maxima} Miller). Stems up to 100 cm, usually erect, sometimes procumbent to ascending. Leaves very variable in shape, broadly ovate to narrowly oblong-lanceolate in outline, entire to deeply 2-pinnatisect. Racemes dense to moderately lax; pedicels 2-5 mm, usually equalling or shorter than bracts. Calyx (3-)4-6(-8) mm, glabrous or hairy. Corolla (8-)10-13(-17) mm in diameter, bright blue. Capsule 4-6 × 3-5 mm, suborbicular-cordate to broadly elliptical, usually longer than wide, glabrous or pubescent.{\i  Most of Europe except Fennoscandia, the islands and parts of the extreme south.} Al Au Be Bu Cz Ga Ge Gr He Ho Hs Hu It Ju Po Rm Rs (N, B, C W, K, E) Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 At least the middle cauline leaves pinnatisect or deeply 
\par
  pinnatifid ......................................................................... ({\b d}) subsp. {\b austriaca}
\par
1 Leaves all entire to incise-dentate, rarely somewhat pinnatifid
\par
2 Stems not more than 30 cm, procumbent to ascending;
\par
  leaves usually 15-30 mm ...................................................... ({\b b}) subsp. {\b vahlii}
\par
2 Stems up to 100 cm, usually erect; leaves often up 50 mm
\par
3 Leaves ± amplexicaul, with truncate or subcordate base,
\par
  all ± crenate or serrate ...................................................... ({\b a}) subsp. {\b teucrium}
\par
3 Leaves not amplexicaul, with truncate to cuneate base,
\par
  at least the uppermost ± entire ............................................ ({\b c}) subsp. {\b dentata}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b teucrium} (L.) D. A. Webb,{\i  Bot. Jour. Linn. Soc.}{\b  65}: 267 (1972) ({\i V. teucrium} L.; incl. subsp.{\i  crinita }(Kit.) Velen.): Stems 30-100 cm, erect to ascending. Leaves 20-70 × 6-45 mm, ovate to oblong, sessile, truncate or subcordate at base, crenate to incise-serrate. Racemes long. Calyx and capsule hairy or glabrous. 2n = 64.{\i  Throughout the range of the species except parts of W. Europe}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b vahlii} (Gaudin) D. A. Webb,{\i  loc. cit.} (1972) ({\i V. teucrium} subsp.{\i  vahlii} Gaudin; incl. subsp. {\i orsiniana} (Ten.) Watzl): stems 15-30 cm, procumbent to ascending. Leaves (10-)15-30 × 5-12 mm, lanceolate to ovate-oblong, rounded or cuneate at the base, sometimes very shortly petiolate, crenate to incise-serrate. Racemes short. Calyx and capsule hairy. 2n = 16. •{\i  S. & W. Europe, northwards to Belgium and eastwards to Jugoslavia}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b c}) Subsp. {\b dentata} (F. W. Schmidt) Watzl, Abh. Zool.-Bot. Ges. Wien 5(5): 53 (1910) ( V. dentata F. W. Schmidt): stems 20-50 cm usually erect. Leaves 20-50(-75) × 3-15 mm, ovate-oblong to linear-lanceolate, truncate to cuneate at the base, sometimes very shortly petiolate, the lower usually crenate-serrate, the uppermost usually subentire. Racemes fairly long. Calyx and capsule hairy or glabrous. 2n = 48, 64. C. Europe, Balkan peninsula, Ukraine and S.C. Russia.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b d}) Subsp. {\b austriaca} (subsp.{\i  jacquinii} (Baumg.) J. Maly; incl. subsp.{\i  orbiculata} (A. Kerner) K. Malý): stems 25-50 cm, erect or ascending. Leaves usually blackening on drying, linear-lanceolate to suborbicular or deltate in outline, usually 1- or 2-pinnatisect with linear segments, but the uppermost and lowermost sometimes dentate to pinnatifid. Racemes usually long. Calyx and capsule hairy or glabrous. 2n = 48.{\i  E., E.C. & S.E. Europe, extending westwards to N. Italy}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 14. V. multifida} L.,{\i  Sp. Pl. }13 (1753). Like {\b 13}({\b d}) but smaller and more delicate; stems numerous, decumbent to ascending, not more than 30 cm; leaves c. 10 mm, mostly 2-pinnatisect, not blackening on drying; racemes not more than 5 cm in fruit; capsule wider than long.{\i  S. Ukraine, S.E. Russia.} Rs (K, E). ({\i S.W. & C. Asia.})
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Much confused with {\b 13}({\b d}), but probably more closely related to {\b 15}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b  V. caucasica} Bieb.,{\i  Fl. Taur.-Cauc.}{\b  1}: 13 (1808), usually regarded as endemic to the Caucasus, which is similar to {\b 14} but with white flowers and longer pedicels, has been reported from Jugoslavia, but probably in error.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 15. V. orientalis} Miller, {\i Gard. Dict.} ed. 8, no. 10 (1768) (incl. {\i V. taurica} Willd.). Stems 10-25 cm, ascending, woody at the
\par

\par
245}
\par