{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 4. V. repens} Clarion ex DC. in Lam. & DC.,{\i  Fl. Fr.} ed. 3, {\b 3}: 727 (1805). Glabrous below, pubescent in inflorescence; stems 5-10 cm, procumbent, rooting, branched, usually forming a dense mat from which arise ascending flowering branches. Leaves 4-8 mm, ovate or elliptical to suborbicular, shortly petiolate, entire or slightly crenate-serrate. Racemes short, often corymbose, with 3-6 flowers; pedicels 4-7 mm, usually longer than bracts. Calyx 3 mm; segments 4, elliptical, subequal. Corolla 10 mm in diameter, pink. Capsule 2-2·5 mm, wider than long, scarcely emarginate, glabrous; style c. 4 mm. 2n = 14.{\i  Damp places. • Mountains of Corse and of S. & S.E. Spain. }Co Hs.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Some plants from the Sierra Nevada agree well with plants from Corse, but the majority of the former which are referred to{\i  V. repens} appear to have blue flowers and to be transitional in varying degree to {\b 3}({\b b}). It seems probable that at least some of them are hybrids.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 5. V. alpina} L.,{\i  Sp. Pl.} 11 (1753). Stems 5-15(-25) cm, ascending, herbaceous, glabrous or pubescent. Leaves 10-25 × 4-12 mm, ovate to elliptical, entire or weakly crenate-dentate, glabrous or subglabrous, sessile. Racemes subcapitate, elongating to c. 2 cm in fruit; pedicels 2-4(-6) mm, shorter than bracts. Calyx 3-4 mm; segments 4, elliptic-oblong, hairy at least on margins, subequal. Corolla c. 7 mm in diameter, deep blue. Capsule 6-7 × 4-5 mm, elliptical, rounded at apex, glabrous; style 1·5-2 mm. 2n = 18, 36.{\i  Arctic Europe; mountains of Europe southwards to S. Spain, S. Italy and S. Bulgaria.} Al Au Br Bu Co Cz Fa Fe Ga Ge He Hs Is It Ju No Po Rm Rs (N, W) Sb Su.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 6. V. fruticans} Jacq.,{\i  Enum. Stirp. Vindob.} 2, 200 (1762) ({\i V. saxatilis} Scop.). Stems 5-15 cm, simple, woody at the base, ascending from a procumbent, branched, woody stock. Leaves 8-20 × 2-7 mm, obovate to narrowly oblong, entire or slightly crenate-serrate, subsessile, glabrous or puberulent. Racemes short, sometimes more or less capitate in flower, with 4-10 flowers, elongating to 3-6 cm in fruit; pedicels c. 5 mm in flower, up to 20 mm in fruit; lower bracts similar to cauline leaves. Pedicels, calyx and capsule densely crispate- to appressed-pubescent, without glandular hairs. Calyx 5 mm; segments 4, elliptic-oblong. Corolla 11-15 mm in diameter, deep blue with reddish centre. Capsule 6-8 × 4-5 mm, ovate, with a narrow, scarcely emarginate apex; style 4 mm. 2n = 16.{\i  Rocks and stony grassland. N.W. Europe, extending very locally eastwards to N.W. Russia; mountains of C. & S. Europe southwards to N. Spain, Corse and C. Jugoslavia.} Au Br Co Cz Fa Fe Ga Ge He Hs Is It Ju No Po Rm Rs (N, W) Su.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 7. V. fruticulosa} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} ed. 2, 15 (1762). Like {\b 6} but some of the hairs on pedicels, calyx and capsule patent and glandular; corolla 9-12 mm in diameter, pink (rarely deep blue); capsule 5-6·5 mm, suborbicular, with broader and distinctly emarginate apex.{\i  Mountain rocks; calcicole. • Higher mountains of W. & S.C. Europe, from the Vosges and Sierra Nevada eastwards to N.W. Jugoslavia.} Au Ga Ge He Hs It Ju.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   The record from the Ukrainian Carpathians is erroneous.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   In the eastern part of their joint range {\b 6} and{\b  7} are quite distinct, but in the Pyrenees and N. Spain, and to a smaller extent in the S.W. Alps, plants are found in which the distinctive characters of the species are combined in various different ways. Until the whole complex has been surveyed throughout its range it is difficult to provide a taxonomic scheme for these variants. The most distinct appears to be{\b  V. mampodrensis} Losa & P. Monts.,{\i  Anal. Inst. Bot. Cavanilles} {\b 11}({\b 2}): 442 (1953), from the Cordillera Cantabrica. This resembles{\b  6} in having eglandular hairs in the inflorescence and a capsule about 8 mm long; but the hairs are patent, as in {\b 7}, which it also resembles in the shape of its capsule (very broadly elliptical, with wide, emarginate apex). The corolla is intermediate in colour (violet to purplish-pink). It has 2n = 16.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 8. V. nummularia} Gouan, {\i Obs. Bot.} 1 (1773) ({\i V. nummulariifolia} auct.). Stems 5-15 cm, procumbent, matted, woody and leafless below, with short, ascending, crispate-pubescent flowering branches. Leaves 4-5 × 3-4 mm, broadly elliptical to ovate-orbicular, entire, ciliate towards the base, shortly petiolate. Racemes capitate, with 5-10 flowers, elongating to 1·5 cm in fruit; pedicels c. 1 mm; bracts similar to foliage-leaves but smaller. Calyx 3·5 mm; segments 4, oblong, ciliate. Corolla 6 mm in diameter, blue or pink; lobes narrow, suberect. Capsule 3·5-4 mm, suborbicular, slightly emarginate, ciliate style 3·5 mm. 2n = 16.{\i  Damp rocks and screes above }1800 {\i m. • Pyrenees, Cordillera Cantábrica.} Ga Hs.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 9. V. saturejoides} Vis., {\i Fl. Dalm.}{\b  2}: 168 (1847). Stems 10-30 cm, procumbent to decumbent, woody and leafless below, pubescent above. Leaves 6-9(-15) mm, suborbicular to oblanceolate, entire, rather fleshy, crowded, more or less hairy on the margins. Racemes capitate in flower, up to 3 cm in fruit, with 6-12 flowers, eglandular-villous; pedicels 1 mm; bracts 3 mm, oblanceolate. Calyx 2·5-3 mm; segments (4-)5, oblong, the fifth very small. Corolla c. 7 mm in diameter, bright blue. Stamens exserted. Capsule 3·5-4 mm, obcordate, hairy; style 5-6 mm.{\i  Mountain rocks and screes. • Balkan peninsula, from N. Albania to S.W. Bulgaria.} Al Bu Ju.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 10. V. erinoides} Boiss. & Spruner in Boiss.,{\i  Diagn. Pl. Or. Nov. }{\b 1}({\b 4}): 78 (1844) ({\i  V. thessalica} auct., non Bentham). Stems 10-25 cm, decumbent, appressed-pubescent, woody below. Leaves 4-8 × 2-4 mm, lanceolate, crenate-serrate, glabrous above, pubescent beneath. Racemes capitate, with 3-5 flowers, glandular-pubescent; pedicels c. 1 mm; bracts c. 1·5 mm. Calyx 4 mm; segments (4-)5, linear-oblong, the fifth very small. Corolla 7-9 mm in diameter, lilac. Stamens included. Capsule c. 7·5 × 6 mm, obcordate, glandular-pubescent; style 2·5 mm. 2n = 16.{\i  Screes and stony slopes. • Mountains of S. Greece.} Gr.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    A plant once collected in S. Greece (Killini Oros), like {\b 10} but with 5-merous flowers, larger corolla, capsule glabrous except for apical cilia and 2n = 32, has been described as {\b V. contandriopouli }Quézel, {\i Taxon}{\b  16}: 240 (1967). Until further material is available and the constancy of the 5-merous flowers is established its taxonomic status must remain obscure.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 11. V. ponae} Gouan, {\i Obs. Bot.} 1 (1773). Sparsely pubescent throughout. Stems 10-50 cm, erect or ascending from a creeping stock. Leaves 15-60 × 6-30 mm, oblong-lanceolate to broadly ovate, subsessile, serrate. Racemes up to 15 cm, lax, usually solitary and terminal but rarely also with 1-2 axillary racemes; pedicels 8-20 mm, arcuate-ascending to suberect, exceeding the bracts. Calyx 3·5-4 mm; segments 4, somewhat unequal. Corolla c. 10 mm in diameter, bluish-lilac. Capsule 5-6 mm, suborbicular, slightly emarginate, pubescent; style 5-6 mm.{\i  Damp or shady places in the mountains. • Spain, Pyrenees.} Ga Hs.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    Specimens with axillary racemes can be mistaken for {\b 12}; this differs, however, in its shorter sepals, capsule and style, and in the sharply geniculate fruiting pedicels.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    Sect. VERONICA (Sect.{\i  Chamaedrys} Griseb.). Perennial. Leaves entire to 2-pinnatisect, sessile or petiolate. Racemes axillary (sometimes pseudoterminal), very rarely with a small terminal
\par

\par
244}
\par