{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28   Sect. SOLDANELLA (Sect.{\i  Crateriflores} Borbás). Corolla broadly infundibuliform, with 2-dentate scales at the throat. Staminal appendages long, at least 1/3 as long as the anther. Style longer than corolla.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 4. S. alpina} L.,{\i  Sp. Pl.} 144 (1753). Petioles when young with sessile glands, becoming almost glabrous at maturity. Lamina up to 40 mm wide, orbicular-reniform, dark green on both sides, not concentrically rugose when dry; basal sinus wide and shallow, or lacking. Scape 5-15 cm, up to 30 cm in fruit, (1-)2- to 4-flowered; pedicels with sessile glands. Corolla 8-13(-15) mm, divided to or more of its length, violet or blue-violet; lobes divided into 4-5(-6) linear lobules which are almost as long as the laciniae, so that the whole corolla appears to be uniformly incised. Filaments glabrous; staminal appendages ½ or less the length of the anther. Capsule-teeth rounded at apex. 2n = 40.{\i  Wet pastures and rocks, }450-3000{\i  m. • Mountains of Europe, from the C. Pyrenees to Crna Gora, northwards to S.W. Germany }({\i Schwarzwald}) {\i and southwards to Calabria.} Al Au Ga Ge He Hs It Ju.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 5. S. carpatica} Vierh. in Urban & Graebner,{\i  Festschr. Ascherson} 504 (1904). Petioles when young with rather sparse, sessile glands, most of which do not persist to maturity. Lamina 8-50 mm wide, suborbicular, dark green, usually violet beneath, concentrically rugose above when dry, veins not visible; basal sinus narrow, shallow. Scape (3-)5-15(-20) cm, (1-)2- to 5-flowered; pedicels with glandular hairs, the stalk equalling or up to 3 times as long as the head. Corolla 8-15 mm, divided to 2/3-3/4 of its length, violet; lobes 3- to 4(5)-partite or 3-dentate, more or less distinctly longer than the laciniae. Filaments glabrous, shorter than or almost equalling the anthers; staminal appendages 2/3-3/4 the length of the anther. Capsule-teeth rounded at apex. Seeds acutely angled, often with a narrow wing along one side. 2n = 40. •{\i  W. Carpathians.} Cz Po.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 6. S. pindicola} Hausskn., {\i Mitt. Thür. Bot. Ver. }{\b 5}: 61 (1886). Like {\b 5} but glands on the scape and pedicels sessile or almost sessile; lamina with a wide basal sinus and blue-grey, pruinose beneath.{\i  By mountain springs. • N.W. Greece} ({\i Zygos, near Metsovon}). Gr.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28   Details of the floral characters are not available and further study is needed. This species was thought by Markgraf,{\i  Notizbl. Bot. Gart. Berlin }{\b 11}: 219-223 (1931), to be related to{\b  8}.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 7. S. hungarica} Simonkai,{\i  Enum. Fl. Transs. }461 (1887). Petioles more or less densely covered with rather stout, persistent, glandular hairs 0·2-0·4(0·5) mm; stalks of the hairs 2-5 times as long as the head; cells of the stalks 1-3 times as long as wide. Lamina orbicular-reniform with a narrow basal sinus, often violet beneath. Glandular hairs on the scape and pedicels 0·15-0·25 mm, the stalk 2-3 times as long as the head. Corolla violet. Filaments glandular. Capsule-teeth truncate. •{\i  Mountains of E.C. Europe and of the Balkan peninsula; two outlying stations in Calabria.} Al Au Bu Cz It Ju Po Rm Rs (W).
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b hungarica}: Scape 3-10 cm, (1-)2- to 4-flowered. Lamina 10-20 mm wide, thick, entire, irregularly rugose. Corolla 8-10(-12) mm, divided to 1/3-1/2 of its length; lobes digitately divided into 3-4.short lobules. Staminal appendages 1/3-2/5 the length of the anthers. Capsule less than 10 mm.{\i  Alpine meadows. E. & S. Carpathians; Balkan peninsula}.
\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b major} (Neilr.) S. Pawl., {\i Fragm. Fl. Geobot. }{\b 9}: 11 (1963): Scape up to 20-25 cm, 2- to 8(-10)-flowered. Lamina 20-50(-60) mm wide, rather thin, occasionally remotely crenulate, not rugose. Corolla (8-)10-15 mm, divided to 1/2-3/5 of its length; lobes divided to up to ½ of their length into 3 or 4 lobules. Staminal appendages about ½ the length of the anthers. Capsule 10-15 mm. 2n = 40.{\i  Woodland and scrub. Throughout the range of the species except Macedonia.}
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 8. S. dimoniei} Vierh.,{\i  Österr. Bot. Zeitschr.}{\b  59}: 148 (1909). Like {\b 7} but lamina blue-grey and pruinose beneath, densely covered with glandular pits; scape 3-9 cm, 2- to 3-flowered; corolla divided to more than ½ its length, violet; lobes of corolla crenately divided into 3 lobules, the apical up to 0·5 mm. •{\i  Mountains of Macedonia, E. Albania and Bulgaria.} Al Bu Ju.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 9. S. montana} Willd.,{\i  Enum. Pl. Hort. Berol.} 192 (1809). Petioles more or less densely covered with slender, persistent glandular hairs 0·4-0·8(-1) mm; stalks of the hairs 8-10 times longer than the head; cells of the stalk 3-6 times as long as wide. Lamina 2-6(-7) cm wide, rather thin, orbicular or orbicular-reniform, sometimes shallowly dentate or crenate, not rugose when dry, bright green, often violet beneath; basal sinus deep, narrow or closed. Scape 5-25(-30) cm, 6-(8-) flowered. Sepals 1-veined. Corolla 10-15(-18) mm, divided to 3/5-3/4 of its length; lobes usually divided to more than ½ their length into 3-4 narrow lobules. Filaments more or less densely glandular-hairy; staminal appendages up to 4/5 of the length of the anthers. Capsule-teeth truncate. 2n = 40. {\i Woods and meadows,} 700-1600{\i  m; calcifuge. • C. Europe, westwards to} c. 9° 45'{\i  E. in the Italian Alps; mountains of Bulgaria}. Au Bu Cz Ge It Po Rm Rs (W) [Fe].
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 10. S. villosa} Darracq,{\i  Actes Soc. Linn. Bordeaux} {\b 16}, Mélanges: 2 (1850). Rhizome long and stolon-like. Petioles densely covered with slender, persistent glandular hairs 0·8-1·6 mm; stalks of the hairs 10-15 times longer than the head; cells of the stalk 3-6 times as long as wide. Lamina up to 7 cm wide, rather thin, orbicular or orbicular-reniform, more or less entire, pale green, not violet beneath; basal sinus narrow. Scape 10-30 cm, usually 3- to 4-flowered, densely hairy; hairs 0·4-1 mm. Sepals ovate-lanceolate, up to 2·5 mm wide, 3-veined. Corolla 10-16 (-18) mm, violet, divided to 2/3-4/5 of its length; lobes divided to more than ½ their length into 3-5 lobules. Filaments more or less densely glandular-hairy; staminal appendages up to 2/3 the length of the anthers.{\i  Damp, shady places in the foothills on siliceous, base-rich soils. • W. Pyrenees.} Ga Hs.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28\qc {\b 6.          Hottonia}              L.      
\par 

\pard\f0\fs24\qc By L.F. Ferguson.
\par 

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Aquatic perennial herbs. Leaves pinnate. Flowers aerial, heterostylous. Corolla-tube equalling calyx; limb rotate. Stamens 5, included. Capsule globose; valves 5, remaining coherent at apex. Seeds numerous.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. H. palustris} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 145 (1753). Subglabrous, with creeping stolons and erect leafy stems 30-90 cm. Leaves 2-13 cm, alternate or verticillate, submerged and floating, 1- to 2-pinnate; lobes linear. Inflorescence (15-)30-40(-60) cm, bracteate, with 3-9 whorls of flowers; pedicels 12-30 mm, glandular-pubescent, deflexed in fruit. Calyx 4-6 mm, equalling corolla-tube, lobed nearly to base; lobes linear. Corolla 20-25 mm in diameter, violet; throat yellow. Capsule 3-6 mm; seeds brown, polyhedral, coarsely reticulate. 2n = 20.{\i  Shallow fresh water. From C. Sweden southwards to C. Italy and Romania.} Au Be Br †BU Cz Da Ga Ge He Ho Hu It Ju Po Rm Rs (B, C, W, E) Su [Hb].
\par 

\par 
24}
\par