{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 glabrous to pubescent or villous outside, ciliate. Capsule ovoid, obtuse, equalling or exceeding the calyx.{\i  Usually calcifuge. W., S.W. & W.C. Europe; cultivated for ornament and as a medicinal plant and widely naturalized or casual further east.} *Az Be Br Co Cz Ga Ge Hb Hs Lu No Sa Su [*Au Da Ho Hu Po].
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   A complex polytypic species centred in the W. Mediterranean region, divisible into at least three subspecies, with several local variants.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Leaves greenish, glabrous or pubescent above ........... ({\b a}) subsp. {\b purpurea} 
\par
1 Leaves whitish, tomentose or lanate
\par
2 Corolla white (rarely pale pink or pale yellow); whole 
\par
  plant densely lanate ................................................... ({\b c}) subsp. {\b heywoodii}
\par
2 Corolla purplish; leaves and sometimes the whole plant tomentose
\par
3 Lower leaves broadly ovate, ± abruptly contracted at base;  
\par
  pedicel longer than calyx .............................................. ({\b b}) subsp. {\b mariana}
\par
3 Lower leaves lanceolate to ovate-lanceolate, gradually tapered 
\par
  to the petiole; pedicel as long as or shorter than calyx  ({\b a}) subsp. {\b purpurea}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b purpurea}: Lower leaves lanceolate to ovate, gradually tapered to the petiole, glabrous to tomentose (var. tomentosa (Hoffmanns. & Link) Brot.), greenish to whitish. Pedicels usually equalling or shorter than calyx. Corolla purple (rarely pink or white), glabrous or pubescent outside. 2n = 56.{\i  Almost throughout the range of the species}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Extremely variable in height, indumentum, size and shape of leaves and bracts, pedicels, calyx, colour and spotting of the corolla. Some local populations show characteristic combinations of these variable characters, but the pattern of variation is too complex and fluctuating to enable them to be treated as subspecies. Dwarf alpine ecotypes also occur. Superimposed on this local variation there is a regional differentiation between the populations of the Iberian peninsula and of the rest of Europe in habit, details of indumentum, branching of inflorescence and seed-colour.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b mariana} (Boiss.) Rivas Goday,{\i  Farmacognosia} ({\i Madrid}){\b  5}: 144 (1946) ({\i D. mariana} Boiss.): Lower leaves broadly ovate, abruptly contracted at base, white-tomentose. Pedicels longer than calyx. Corolla purple, glabrous outside.{\i  Rocky slopes and rock-crevices. • S.C. Spain; N.E. Portugal}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b c}) Subsp. {\b heywoodii} P. & M. Silva,{\i  Agron. Lusit.}{\b  20}: 239 (1959): While plant densely white-lanate. Lower leaves ovate-lanceolate to lanceolate, tapered into the petiole or contracted at base. Pedicels equalling or longer than calyx. Corolla white, sometimes partly pale pink or pale yellowish, sparsely hairy outside. 2n = 56.{\i  Granite rocks. • S. Portugal} ({\i around Reguengos de Monsaraz}).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 3. D. thapsi} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} ed. 2, 867 (1763). Like {\b 2}(a) but whole plant covered with a yellowish indumentum of glandular hairs; inflorescence lax, usually branched at the base; pedicels about twice as long as calyx. Calyx-lobes ovate-lanceolate, acute. Corolla 25-50 mm, pubescent outside. n = 56. Rocky slopes and uncultivated fields; calcifuge. E. Portugal, C. & W. Spain. Hs Lu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 4. D. dubia} Rodr., Anal. Soc. Esp. Hist. Nat. 3: 45 (1874). Like {\b 2}({\b a}) but not more than 50 cm; indumentum of very long, multicellular, eglandular hairs (30 cells or more) mixed with a few short glandular hairs; lower leaves entire or shallowly dentate, shortly petiolate; capsule shorter than calyx. Perennial; leaves mostly basal. Corolla 35-40 mm, pubescent outside.{\i  Rocky slopes, woods and scrub; calcicole. • Islas Baleares.} Bl.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    Sect. MACRANTHAE Heywood. Herbaceous. Leaves more or less smooth. Corolla yellow, with campanulate-ventricose tube.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 5. D. grandiflora} Miller,{\i  Gard. Dict.} ed. 8, no. 4, Corr. (1768) ({\i D. ambigua} Murray). Biennial to perennial (30-)60-100 cm. Leaves 70-250 × 20-60 mm, ovate-lanceolate, finely serrate, usually glabrous and shining green above, sparsely pubescent beneath. Calyx-lobes lanceolate, acute. Corolla 40-50 mm, yellow. 2n = 56.{\i  Woods. E. & C. Europe, northwards to Estonia and southwards to N. Greece, and extending westwards to Belgium and S.C. France.} Al Au Be Bu Cz Ga Ge Gr He Hu It Ju Po Rm Rs (B, C, W, E) Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Records for the Pyrenees and N. Spain appear to be erroneous.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Sect. TUBIFLORAE Bentham. Herbs. Corolla-tube cylindrical or cylindrical-urceolate.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 6. D. lutea} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 622 (1753). Glabrous or slightly pubescent perennial 60-100 cm. Leaves oblong-oblanceolate, serrate to subentire. Racemes more or less dense, many-flowered. Calyx-lobes linear-lanceolate, acute, glandular-ciliate. Corolla 9-25 mm, pale yellow to whitish; lateral lobes of lower lip ovate; middle lobe 5-6 mm, ovate or elliptical.{\i  W. & W.C. Europe, extending southwards to S. Italy.} Au Be Co Ga Ge He ?Ho Hs It [Cz ?Da Po].
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b lutea}: Corolla 15-22(-25) mm; lateral lobes recurved. Racemes secund. 2n = 56.{\i  • Throughout the range of the species except S. Italy and Corse}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b australis} (Ten.) Arcangeli,{\i  Comp. Fl. Ital.} 512 (1882) ({\i D. micrantha} Roth): Corolla 9-13(-15) mm; lateral lobes not recurved. Racemes not secund. 2n = 56. •{\i  C. & S. Italy, Corse}.
\par

\par
 
\pard\f0\fs28 {\i  D}. ×{\i  purpurascens} Roth ({\i D. lutea} × {\i purpurea}) occurs occasion ally with the parents.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 7. D. viridiflora} Lindley,{\i  Digitalium Monogr.} 21 (1821). Puberulent to pubescent perennial 50-80 cm. Leaves oblong-lanceolate to -elliptical, denticulate. Racemes dense, many-flowered. Calyx-lobes lanceolate, acute. Corolla 11-20 mm, dull greenish-yellow, conspicuously veined; lower lip scarcely exceeding the upper. 2n = 56.{\i  Woods. Balkan peninsula, from }39° 30' {\i to} 43° 30' {\i N}. Al Bu Gr Ju Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 8. D. parviflora} Jacq.,{\i  Hort. Vindob.}{\b  1}: 6 (1770). Perennial 30-60 cm. Stems very leafy, sparsely pubescent to glabrous below, more or less tomentose above when young. Leaves oblong-oblanceolate or -lanceolate, acute or more or less obtuse, entire or slightly dentate, coriaceous. Racemes long, dense, many-flowered, white-tomentose. Calyx-lobes ovate, obtuse. Corolla c. 12 mm, urceolate-tubular; tube reddish-brown with violet veins; limb white-ciliate, with middle lobe of lower lip 1/4-1/3 as long as the tube, purple-brown. 2n = 56.{\i  • Mountains  of N. Spain.} Hs.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Sect. GLOBIFLORAE Bentham. Herbs, sometimes woody at the  base. Corolla-tube inflated-globose.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 9. D. laevigata} Waldst. & Kit., {\i Pl. Rar. Hung.}{\b  2}: 171 (1803-1804). Glabrous perennial 60-100 cm. Leaves oblong-lanceolate to lanceolate, entire or denticulate. Racemes long, rather lax. Calyx-lobes ovate, acute or acuminate, without, or with a very narrow scarious margin. Corolla 15-35 mm, yellowish with purple-brown veins or markings; lobes of lower lip obtuse, the 
\par

\par
240}
\par