{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 middle one 5-15 mm. 2n = 56.{\i  Scrub and woods. • W. & C. parts of Balkan peninsula, extending northwards to Slovenija.} Al Bu Gr Ju.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b laevigata}: Corolla 25-35 mm; middle lobe of lower lip 9-15 mm.{\i  From} c. 40° 30' {\i N. northwards}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b graeca} (Ivanina) Werner,{\i  Bot. Jahrb.}{\b  79}: 236 (1960): Corolla 15-25 mm; middle lobe of lower lip 5-10 mm.{\i  From} c. 40° 30' {\i N. southwards}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b   D. macedonica} Heywood,{\i  Kew Bull.} [6]: 149 (1951), described from N.W. Greece ({\i Smolikas Oros}), resembles {\b 9}({\b b}) in habit and flower-colour but differs in its lanceolate to oblong-lanceolate calyx-lobes and scarcely ventricose corolla with acute lobes; in  these features it agrees with {\b 6}, which it also resembles vegetatively. It is regarded by Werner as a hybrid between{\b 7} and {\b 9}({\b b}) but its status is not clear.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 10. D. ferruginea} L.,{\i  Sp. Pl}. 622 (1753). Perennial or biennial 30-120 cm; stem glabrous. Leaves oblong-lanceolate to lanceolate, glabrous or slightly pubescent beneath. Raceme usually long, dense and many-flowered; axis glabrous. Calyx-lobes ovate- or oblong-elliptical, obtuse, glabrous or pubescent, with a wide scarious margin. Corolla 15-35 mm, yellowish- or reddish-brown, with a reticulum of darker veins; middle lobe of lower lip 2 times as long as the lateral lobes. 2n = 56. {\i Woods and scrub. S. Europe, from Italy eastwards, and extending northwards to} c. 46{\i  in Hungary and Romania.} Al Bu Gr Hu It Ju Rm Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 11. D. lanata} Ehrh., {\i Beitr. Naturk.}{\b  7}: 152 (1792) ({\i D. orientalis} auct. balcan., non Lam.). Perennial or biennial 30-100 cm; stem usually solitary, often reddish-purple, glabrous or subglabrous. Leaves oblong-lanceolate to lanceolate, glabrous or sometimes ciliate. Racemes usually very dense; axis glandular-villous or -velutinous. Bracts lanceolate. Calyx-lobes lanceolate, acute, glandular-villous, without scarious margins. Corolla 20-30 mm, white or yellowish-white with brown or violet veins; middle lobe of lower lip 8-13 mm, oblong or ovate, whitish. 2n = 56.{\i  Woods and scrub. • Balkan peninsula, S. Hungary, S. & W. Romania}. Al Bu Gr Hu Ju Rm Tu [Au].
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 12. D. leucophaea} Sibth. & Sm., {\i Fl. Graec. Prodr.}{\b  1}: 439 (1809). Like {\b 11} but bracts linear; corolla 10-16(-20) mm, the middle lobe of lower lip 4-7 mm, suborbicular, whitish with purple veins.{\i  Woods and dry grassland. • N.E. Greece} ({\i Ayion Oros, Thasos}). Gr.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc {\b 18.             Erinus}           L.
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc By D.A. Webb.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Perennial herbs; leaves alternate, undivided. Flowers in terminal, bracteate racemes. Calyx equally 5-lobed. Corolla with cylindrical tube and 5 subequal, patent lobes. Stamens 4, didynamous, included. Stigma capitate, but with 2 lateral lobes. Capsule 4-valved (septicidal and loculicidal); seeds numerous.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. E. alpinus} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 630 (1753). Usually more or less villous and somewhat viscid. Stems 5-20(-30) cm, simple, ascending to erect, forming a lax cushion. Leaves 5-20 mm, oblanceolate-cuneate, usually crenate-serrate at least towards the apex, the lower ones petiolate. Racemes subcorymbose in flower, elongating in fruit. Calyx lobed almost to base; lobes linear-oblong. Corolla 6-9 mm in diameter, bright purple (rarely white); lobes emarginate to truncate, the 2 upper narrower than the 3 lower. Seeds smooth. 2n = 14.{\i  Rocks, screes and stony grassland; calcicole. • Mountains of S. & S.C. Europe, from N. & E. Spain  to C. Italy and W. Austria.} Au Bl Ga He Hs It Sa [Br Hb].  
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc {\b 19.           Lagotis               Gaertner}
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc By D.A. Webb.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Perennial herbs; leaves undivided, alternate or opposite. Flowers zygomorphic, in dense, terminal, bracteate spikes. Calyx membranous, obscurely toothed, usually split along the lower side. Corolla with cylindrical tube, abruptly curved near the middle, and 2-lipped limb; upper lip erect, entire to emarginate; lower lip patent, 2(3)-lobed. Stamens 2, more or less exserted. Stigma capitate. Capsule usually indehiscent; ovules 1 in each loculus; seeds 1-2.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 Filaments 2-4 mm, about equalling upper lip of corolla;
\par
   cauline leaves alternate ..................................................................... {\b 1. minor}
\par
Filaments not more than 1 mm, much shorter than upper lip
\par
   of corolla; cauline leaves opposite .............................................. {\b 2. uralensis}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. L. minor} (Willd.) Standley,{\i  Publ. Field Mus. Bot.} ({\i Chicago}){\b  8}: 325 (1931). Stem 10-30 cm, simple, erect. Basal leaves 2-4, elliptic to lanceolate, acute, dentate to subentire, with petiole about equalling lamina; cauline leaves smaller, sessile, alternate, passing gradually into bracts. Spike 1-8 cm. Calyx 4-6 mm. Corolla 8-10 mm, dull blue or whitish; upper lip about as long as wide, entire or slightly emarginate. Filaments 2-4 mm, about equalling upper lip of corolla. Capsule 6 × 2·5 mm.{\i  Tundra. Arctic Russia.} Rs (N). ({\i N. & N.E. Asia.})
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. L. uralensis} Schischkin,{\i  Not. Syst. }({\i Leningrad}){\b  17}: 381 (1955). Like {\b 1} but up to 40 cm; basal leaves ovate, obtuse, usually crenate; cauline leaves opposite; upper lip of corolla longer than wide, distinctly emarginate; filaments 0·5-1 mm, much shorter than upper lip of corolla.{\i  C. & S. Ural.} Rs (C).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc {\b 20.              Wulfenia}              Jacq.
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc By D.A. Webb.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Perennial herbs; leaves alternate or basal, undivided. Flowers in terminal, bracteate, spike-like racemes. Calyx equally 5-lobed. Corolla with obconical tube and short, obscurely 2-lipped limb; upper lip entire or emarginate; lower lip shortly 3-lobed. Stamens 2, inserted at apex of corolla-tube; filaments very short. Stigma capitate, emarginate. Capsule 4-valved (septicidal and loculicidal); seeds numerous.  
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 Plant glabrous except for petioles and midribs;
\par
    stem 20-40(-50) cm ................................................................. {\b 1. carinthiaca}
\par
Leaves hairy; flowers glandular-pubescent;
\par
    stem not more than 20 cm .......................................................... {\b 2. baldaccii}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. W. carinthiaca} Jacq.,{\i  Misc. Austr. Bot.}{\b  2}: 60 (1781). Glabrous except for petioles and midribs of leaves. Stem 20-40(-50) cm, single, erect, arising from a horizontal rhizome, scapose, but with a few very small, alternate, scale-like leaves. Basal leaves 8-17 cm, oblanceolate to obovate, crenate, tapered to a short petiole. Raceme 6-10 cm in flower, dense, secund, elongating in fruit; pedicels very short. Calyx c. 8 mm, divided almost to the base; lobes linear-oblong. Corolla 12-15 mm, dark violet-blue. Capsule slightly shorter than calyx; seeds finely reticulate. 2n = 18.{\i  Damp grassland,} 1500-2000{\i  m; calcifuge. • S.E. Alps; E. Crna Gora.} ?Al Au It Ju. 
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. W. baldaccii} Degen, {\i Österr. Bot. Zeitschr.}{\b  47}: 408 (1897). Like {\b 1} but not more than 20 cm; leaves hairy; racemes fairly lax; calyx, corolla and capsule glandular-pubescent; corolla bright blue.{\i  Shady mountain rocks. • N. Albania.} Al.
\par
 
\par
241}
\par