{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28\qc {\b 21.                Veronica}                L.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc (incl.{\i  Pseudolysimachium} (Koch) Opiz)  
\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc spp. 36-40 based on data provided by N.G. Marchant.
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc By S.M. Walters & D.A. Webb
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Herbs, sometimes with a procumbent, woody stock. Leaves opposite below, the floral usually alternate. Flowers in terminal or axillary racemes, or solitary in the leaf-axils. Calyx deeply divided into 4(5) often unequal segments. Corolla rotate to campanulate; limb longer than tube, with 4 somewhat unequal lobes. Stamens 2, exserted. Fruit a loculicidal and sometimes also septicidal capsule, more or less flattened at right angles to the septum. Seeds usually numerous.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Measurements of pedicels refer to the fruiting condition unless the contrary is stated.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b  V. crista-galli} Steven, {\i Trans. Linn. Soc. London}{\b  11}: 408 (1815), an annual species from the Caucasian region, distinguished by its large calyx in which the segments are united in pairs almost to the apex, was naturalized for nearly 80 years in one station in S. England (Sussex), but is probably extinct there now.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Literature: W. Kulpa,{\i  Roczn. Nauk Roln. }{\b 126 D}: 1-108 (1968) (morphology of seeds). H. Römpp,{\i  Feddes Repert.} ({\i Beih.}){\b  50}: 1-172 (1928). G. Stroh,{\i  Beih. Bot. Centr.}{\b  61B}: 384-451 (1942).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Flowers in axillary racemes (which, if single and near 
\par
  the stem-apex, may appear terminal)
\par
2 Capsule both septicidal and loculicidal, dehiscing into
\par
  four valves; seeds scarcely compressed, with excentric 
\par
  chalaza; plants of wet places, usually glabrous (Sect.Beccabunga)
\par
3 Flowering stems procumbent or ascending; leaves all petiolate
\par
4 Leaves thick; capsule scarcely compressed .......................... {\b 36. beccabunga}
\par
4 Leaves thin; capsule compressed in upper half ........................... {\b 37. scardica} 
\par
3 Flowering stems ± erect; at least the upper leaves 
\par
  usually sessile
\par
5 Capsule elliptical; annual ..................................................... {\b 38. anagalloides}
\par
5 Capsule ovate to orbicular; often perennial
\par
6 Upper leaves ovate-rhombic, subsessile to shortly petiolate ...... {\b 37. scardica}
\par
6 Upper leaves ovate-lanceolate to linear, sessile
\par
7 Pedicels patent; capsule usually wider than long ....................... {\b 40. catenata}
\par
7 Pedicels ± erect, at least in distal half; capsule not
\par
  wider than long .......................................................... {\b 39. anagallis - aquatica}
\par
2 Capsule loculicidal only; seeds compressed, with ±
\par
  central chalaza; plants seldom of wet places, and 
\par
  usually hairy (Sect. Veronica)
\par
8 Leaves 1- to 2-pinnatisect, with linear segments ... ({\b 13-17}).{\b  austriaca} group
\par
8 Leaves entire to pinnatifid
\par
9 Racemes not more than 2 cm in fruit, 2- to 6
\par
  (8)-flowered, corymbose or capitate in flower
\par
10 Racemes capitate, with pedicels not more than 3 mm;
\par
   stems woody below; capsule at least as wide as long
\par
11 Leaves and capsule pubescent .............................................. {\b 23. thymifolia}
\par
11 Leaves and capsule glabrous .................................................. {\b 24. thessalica}
\par
10 Racemes corymbose, with pedicels at least 5 mm in fruit; 
\par
   stems herbaceous; capsule longer than wide
\par
12 Leafy stems procumbent; leaves pubescent; capsule 7 × 5 mm  {\b 25. aphylla}
\par
12 Leafy stems ascending; leaves glabrous; capsule 5 × 3 mm
\par
   ............................................................................................. {\b 26. baumgartenii}
\par
9  Racemes more than 2 cm in fruit, usually with more than
\par
   6 flowers, scarcely capitate or corymbose
\par
13 Petioles 7-15 mm; capsule c. 8 mm wide ................................ {\b 34. montana}
\par
13 Petioles not more than 7 mm; capsule not more than 6 mm wide
\par
14 Racemes usually longer than leafy stems, usually with
\par
   lower bracts lobed or with a few leaves below the
\par
   flowers (Bulgaria and Turkey) .................................................. {\b 20. pectinata}
\par
14 Racemes usually shorter than leafy stems, with entire 
\par
   bracts and bearing no leaves below the flowers
\par
15 Calyx at least 4 mm
\par
16 Pedicels 8-15 mm, recurved in fruit (S. part of U.S.S.R.) . {\b 33. peduncularis}
\par
16 Pedicels not more than 9 mm, erect or erecto-patent in fruit
\par
17 Capsule distinctly wider than long
\par
18 Leaves 10-40 mm; corolla c. 10 mm in diameter, bright
\par
   blue ....................................................................................... {\b 30. chamaedrys}
\par
18 Leaves 30-60 mm; corolla 5-8 mm in diameter, pale blue
\par
   or whitish .............................................................................. {\b 31. melissifolia}
\par
17 Capsule longer than wide, or about as long as wide
\par
19 Corolla white with pink centre .............................................. {\b 32. micrantha}
\par
19 Corolla blue
\par
20 Stems flexuous; calyx-segments elliptic-oblong,obtuse ..... {\b 22. aragonensis}
\par
20 Stems not flexuous ; calyx-segments lanceolate to
\par
   linear-oblong, acute ................................................ ({\b 13-17}).{\b  austriaca} group
\par
15 Calyx less than 4 mm
\par
21 Pedicels at least 6 mm in fruit
\par
22 Leaves linear-oblong, ± entire; racemes alternate ................. {\b 35. scutellata}
\par
22 Leaves triangular-ovate, incise-serrate; racemes opposite .... {\b 12. urticifolia}
\par
21 Pedicels less than 6 mm in fruit
\par
23 Corolla pink
\par
24 Leaves c. 30 × 15 mm, glabrous ................................................ {\b 29. dabneyi}
\par
24 Leaves c. 10 × 3 mm, crispate-pubescent ...................................... {\b 21. rosea}
\par
23 Corolla blue or lilac
\par
25 Leaves pubescent or puberulent
\par
26 Leaves distinctly petiolate; calyx-segments 4, subequal ....... {\b 27. officinalis}
\par
26 Leaves sessile or subsessile; calyx-segments usually 5,
\par
   conspicuously unequal ........................................... ({\b 13-17}). {\b austriaca} group
\par
25 Leaves glabrous or sparsely ciliate
\par
27 Sepals ciliate; leaves 2-5 mm wide ....................................... {\b 19. rhodopaea}
\par
27 Sepals glabrous; leaves 5-13 mm wide
\par
28 Racemes more than 4 cm; capsule glabrous .......................... {\b 18. turrilliana}
\par
28 Racemes less than 4 cm; capsule pubescent ............................... {\b 28. allionii}
\par
1  Flowers in terminal racemes (sometimes also in axillary
\par
   racemes below the terminal) or solitary in leaf-axils 
\par
29 Annual
\par
30 Flowers solitary in leaf-axils; stems ± procumbent
\par
31 Leaves 3- to 9-lobed; seeds at least 2 mm
\par
32 Calyx-segments cordate-ovate, acute; capsule glabrous ...... {\b 57. hederifolia}
\par
32 Calyx-segments obovate, obtuse; capsule ciliate ................. {\b 58. cymbalaria}
\par
31 Leaves crenate or serrate; seeds less than 2 mm
\par
33 Capsule keeled, with divergent lobes; corolla 8-12 mm
\par
   in diameter .................................................................................... {\b 55. persica}
\par
33 Capsule not or only slightly keeled, with sub-parallel or 
\par
   slightly divergent lobes; corolla less than 8 mm in diameter
\par
34 Capsule with sparse, long glandular hairs only;
\par
   corolla usually whitish ................................................................ {\b 52. agrestis}
\par
34 Capsule with long glandular and shorter eglandular hairs;  
\par
   corolla blue
\par
35 Calyx-lobes oblong-lanceolate to oblanceolate, not overlapping
\par
   near base ......................................................................................... {\b 54. opaca}
\par
35 Calyx-lobes broadly ovate, often overlapping near base .............. {\b 53. polita}
\par
30 Flowers in racemes; stems usually ± erect
\par
36 Seeds ± cup-shaped (with one convex and one deeply concave face) 
\par
37 Fruiting pedicels at least 4 times as long as calyx ....................... {\b 44. glauca}
\par
37 Fruiting pedicels less than 4 times as long as calyx
\par
38 Lower bracts and upper cauline leaves ± digitately lobed ......{\b 43. triphyllos}
\par
38 Bracts and leaves deeply crenate-serrate, but not lobed ........... {\b 42. praecox}
\par

\par
242}
\par