{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 3 Lower lip of corolla with upturned margins; throat of 
\par
  corolla-tube closed
\par
4 Calyx-tube glabrous except for strigulose veins; calyx-teeth 
\par
  conspicuously ciliate ....................................................................... {\b 2. ciliatum}
\par
4 Calyx-tube uniformly strigulose; calyx-teeth not conspicuously 
\par
  ciliate ............................................................................................... {\b 3. arvense}
\par
3 Lower lip of corolla with deflexed margins; throat of 
\par
  corolla-tube open
\par
5 Calyx densely villous ................................................................... {\b 4. barbatum}
\par
5 Calyx glabrous or puberulent
\par
6 Teeth of bracts bearing long, rigid hairs; calyx-teeth about 
\par
  equalling the tube; corolla with white tube and pink lips .......... {\b 5. variegatum}
\par
6 Teeth of bracts pubescent; calyx-teeth 1½-2 times as
\par
  long as the tube; corolla pink to violet, with white or
\par
  yellow lower lip ......................................................................... {\b 6. fimbriatum}
\par
1 Inflorescence ± lax, secund; bracts scarcely imbricate,
\par
  not concealing the axis (Sect. {\i Melampyrum})
\par
7 Bracts pectinate, with teeth ending in a flexuous 
\par
  arista 8-10 mm ..................................................................... {\b 20. heracleoticum}
\par
7 Bracts entire to fimbriate, without long-aristate teeth
\par
8 Calyx with some hairs more than 0·5 mm, at least on the veins
\par
9 Calyx-tube with some long hairs between the veins, as 
\par
  well as on them
\par
10 Hairs uniformly oriented on all parts of calyx ....................... {\b 7. nemorosum}
\par
10 Hairs on distal part of calyx directed towards the apex, 
\par
   those on proximal part deflexed ............................ ({\b 9-12}). {\b velebiticum} group
\par
9  Calyx-tube with long hairs confined to the veins;
\par
   remainder of surface puberulent or glabrous
\par
11 Calyx-teeth not more than 1½ times as long as tube ............ {\b 14. subalpinum}
\par
11 Calyx-teeth 2-3 times as long as tube
\par
12 Corolla 10-12(-17) mm, with tube distinctly curved or inflected
\par
   ................................................................................................... {\b 18. scardicum}
\par
12 Corolla (12-)16-24 mm; tube ± straight .............. ({\b 15-17}).{\b  bihariense} group
\par
8 Calyx glabrous or puberulent, with hairs not more than 0·25 mm
\par
13 At least the upper bracts violet-blue
\par
14 Hairs on calyx patent ............................................................... {\b 8. polonicum}
\par
14 Hairs on distal part of calyx directed towards the 
\par
   apex, those on proximal part deflexed .................. ({\b 9-12}).{\b  velebiticum} group
\par
13 Bracts green (rarely whitish)
\par
15 Calyx-teeth 11-14 mm .................................................. {\b 19. trichocalycinum}
\par
15 Calyx-teeth not more than 5 mm
\par
16 Throat of corolla usually ± closed; capsule dehiscing
\par
   along one margin only ................................................................. {\b 24. pratense}
\par
16 Throat of corolla open; capsule dehiscing along both margins
\par
17 Lips of corolla shorter than tube, the lower lip porrect ........ {\b 13. bohemicum}
\par
17 Lips of corolla equalling tube, the lower lip deflexed
\par
   ............................................................................... ({\b 21-23}).{\b  sylvaticum} group
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Sect. SPICATA Wettst. Flowers in dense spikes, which are not secund; bracts densely imbricate, concealing the spike-axis. Leaves sessile.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. M. cristatum} L., {\i Sp. Pl. }605 (1753). Stem 15-50 cm. Leaves 3-15 mm wide, linear-lanceolate to lanceolate, entire or toothed. Spike 4-angled; bracts folded along midrib, with ovate-cordate, pectinate base and long, entire, deflexed apex, yellowish-green, the basal part variably tinged with purplish-red. Calyx 5-8 mm; tube glabrous except for 2 hirsute veins; teeth 1·5-4 mm, unequal. Corolla 12-16 mm, pale yellow, tinged at least on lower lip with purple; palate deeper yellow; throat closed. Capsule dehiscing along one margin only. 2n = 18.{\i  Much of Europe, but absent from parts of the north and south.} Al Au Be Br Bu Co Cz Da Fe Ga Ge He Hs Hu It Ju No Po Rm Rs (N, B, C, W, E) Su.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\i Ecotypic variants}:
\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Autumnal: type of the species.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Aestival: {\b M. solstitialis} Ronniger in Dörfler, {\i Herb. Norm}.{\b  48}: 247(1907).
\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Montane: {\b M. cristatum }var. {\i majus} Baumg.,{\i  Enum. Stirp. Transs}. {\b 2}:197 
\par
(1816).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. M. ciliatum} Boiss. & Heldr. in Boiss., {\i Diagn. Pl. Or. Nov}. {\b 3}({\b 3}): 176 (1856). Stem up to 40 cm, branched. Leaves 2-5 mm wide, linear to linear-lanceolate, entire. Spike cylindrical; bracts green, ovate-lanceolate, laciniate, with lanceolate, acuminate,strongly ciliate segments. Calyx c. 8 mm; tube glabrous except for strigulose veins; teeth 4-5 mm, setaceous, ciliate. Corolla 20-25 mm, yellow, sometimes tinged with purple, the lower lip spotted with orange; lower lip with upturned margins; throat closed.{\i  Evergreen scrub. • E.C. Greece} ({\i Olimbos}). Gr.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 3. M. arvense} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 605 (1753) (incl.{\i  M. argyrocomum} Fischer ex Steudel). Stem 15-50 cm. Leaves 2-15 mm wide, lanceolate, entire or toothed. Spike cylindrical; bracts green, whitish or reddish-pink, ovate-lanceolate, erect, pinnatifid, not folded. Calyx 15-18 mm; tube uniformly and densely strigulose; teeth 9-12 mm, equal. Corolla 20-25 mm, purplish-pink, marked with yellow at the throat and sometimes on the lower lip; lower lip with upturned margins; throat closed. 2n = 18.{\i  Europe, from England and S.W. Finland southwards to N. Spain, C. Italy and Turkey.} Al Au Be Br Bu Co Cz Da Fe Ga Ge He Ho Hs Hu It Ju Po Rm Rs (B, C, W, E) Su Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\i Ecotypic variants}:
\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Autumnal: {\b M. pseudobarbatum} Schur, {\i Verh. Mitt. Siebenb. Ver.Naturw.}{\b  4}: 56 (1853).
\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Aestival: {\b M. semleri} Ronniger & Poeverlein,{\i  Allgem. Bot. Zeitschr.}{\b 13}: 179 (1907).
\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Montane:{\b  M. arvense} subsp.{\b  schinzii} Ronniger in Schinz & R. Keller, {\i Fl. Schweiz} ed. 3, {\b 1}: 580 (1909).
\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Segetal: type of the species.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 4. M. barbatum} Waldst. & Kit. ex Willd., {\i Sp. Pl.}{\b  3}: 198 (1800). Stem 15-40 cm. Leaves 3-15 mm wide, lanceolate, entire or toothed. Spike cylindrical; bracts green, whitish or reddish-purple, ovate-lanceolate, with long, narrow teeth towards the base and entire, acuminate apex. Calyx 8-12 mm; tube densely villous; teeth aristate. Corolla 20-30 mm; lower lip with deflexed margins; throat open.{\i  • E.C. Europe, N. part of Balkan peninsula, Italy.} Al Au Cz ?Gr Hu It Ju Rm [Po].
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b barbatum}: Calyx-teeth about equalling the tube, with arista 2-3 mm. Bracts usually whitish. Corolla 20-25 mm, pale yellow to white.{\i  From E. Austria to E. Romania and N.E. Jugoslavia.}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\i  Ecotypic variants}: Autumnal: subsp.{\b  filarszkyanum} (Soó) Soó,{\i  Feddes Repert.}{\b  24}: 138(1927).
\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Aestival: subsp. {\b kitaibelii} (Soó) Soó, op. cit. 139 (1927).
\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Segetal: type of the species.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b carstiense} : Ronniger,{\i  Mitt. Naturw. Ver. Steierm.}{\b  54}: 292 (1918): Calyx-teeth twice as long as the tube, with arista 3-4 mm. Bracts green or purplish. Corolla 27-30 mm, pale yellow or purplish.{\i  N. part of Balkan peninsula, extending to S.Austria; E. Italy}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 5. M. variegatum} Huter, Porta & Rigo,{\i  Österr. Bot. Zeitschr.}{\b  57}: 246 (1907). Stem 20-40 cm, with arcuate branches. Leaves 5-10 mm wide, lanceolate. Spike cylindrical; bracts with long, setiform teeth. Calyx-tube glabrous, except for hairy veins; teeth aristate, as long as the tube. Corolla 20-25 mm, with whitish tube and pink lips; lower lip with deflexed margins; throat open. •{\i  C. & S. Italy.} It.
\par

\par
254}
\par