{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 Most of the possible hybrids in this section have been artificially produced, and those from parents with the same chromosome number are highly fertile.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 59. V. longifolia} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 10 (1753) ({\i Pseudolysimachium longifolium} (L.) Opiz; incl. {\i Veronica maritima} L.). Stem 40-120 cm, robust, erect, usually simple below, glabrous or puberulent. Leaves 30-120 × 5-20 mm, lanceolate to linear-lanceolate,acuminate, truncate to cuneate at base, acutely biserrate, glabrous or sparsely hairy, opposite or in whorls of 3 or 4; petiole usually less than 10 mm. Inflorescence up to 25 cm, very dense, usually with one or more small lateral branches; pedicels 1-2 mm,shorter than the linear-filiform bracts. Calyx-segments 2-3 mm, triangular-ovate, acute, unequal; corolla 6-8 mm in diameter, lilac or pale blue. Capsule c. 3 × 3 mm, broadly ovoid to subglobose, emarginate, glabrous; style 4-10 mm. 2n = 34, 68. {\i Riverbanks, woods, and other damp places. N., E. & C. Europe, extending westwards to Belgium and southwards to Bulgaria}. Au Be Bu Cz Da Fe Ga Ge Ho Hu It Ju No Po Rm Rs (N, B, C, W, E) Su.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Very variable, especially in size and leaf-shape.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 60. V. paniculata} L., {\i Syst. Nat.} ed. 10, {\b 2}: 849 (1759) ({\i V. spuria} auct., non L.,{\i  Pseudolysimachium paniculatum} (L.) Hartl). Like {\b 59} but more freely branched; leaves cuneate at base; inflorescence less dense, with several subequal branches; pedicels (2-)3-5 mm,longer than bracts; calyx-segments lanceolate, subequal; corolla 7-14 mm in diameter, blue; capsule 3-4 × 2-3 mm, broadly ovoid.2n = 34. {\i Grassy and rocky places. C., E. & S.E. Europe.} Au Bu Cz †Ge Hu ?It Ju Po Rm Rs (N, B, C, W, E).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 61. V. bachofenii} Heuffel,{\i  Flora} ({\i Regensb.}) {\b 18}: 253 (1835) ({\i V. grandis} auct., vix Fischer). Like {\b 59} but leaves triangular-ovate,cordate or subcordate at base, all opposite; inflorescence less dense; calyx-segments linear-lanceolate, subequal; capsule broadly obcordate. {\i Rocky woods. E. Carpathians and mountains of N. part of Balkan peninsula.} Bu Ju Rm Rs (W).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 62. V. spicata} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 10 (1753) ({\i Pseudolysimachium spicatum} (L.) Opiz). Stems 5-60 cm, erect or ascending from a more or less extensive rhizome, usually hairy and glandular. Leaves 20-80 × 3-30 mm, usually shortly petiolate, linear- to ovate-lanceolate, cuneate at base, subentire to crenate, more or less hairy, opposite. Inflorescence up to 30 cm; pedicels usually less than 1 mm, much shorter than bracts. Calyx-segments usually ovate-elliptical, obtuse; corolla 4-8 mm in diameter, blue. Capsule 2-4 × 2-4 mm, emarginate, glabrous; style 4-10 mm.{\i  Dry grassland and rocky slopes. Much of Europe, but rare in the west and absent from most of the islands}. Al Au Br Bu Cz Da Fe Ga Ge He Hs Hu It Ju No Po Rm Rs (N, B, C, W, K, E) Su Tu [Ho]. 
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Plant densely greyish-white-tomentose ............................. ({\b b}) subsp. {\b incana} 
\par
1 Plant green, sparsely or moderately hairy 
\par
2 Lower lobes of corolla linear, twisted .............................. ({\b d}) subsp. {\b orchidea}
\par
2 Lower lobes of corolla ovate-lanceolate, flat
\par
3 Petioles of lower leaves 10-20 mm; leaves glabrous or
\par
  sparsely ciliate near the base ........................................... ({\b e}) subsp. {\b crassifolia}
\par
3 Petioles of lower leaves rarely more than 10 mm; leaves
\par
  usually more or less hairy 
\par
4 Calyx glabrous except for stiff marginal cilia .................. ({\b c}) subsp. {\b barrelieri}
\par
4 Calyx more or less hairy, usually glandular ......................... ({\b a}) subsp. {\b spicata} 
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b spicata} (incl.{\i  V. hybrida} L.): stem more or less densely pubescent, usually glandular (rarely glabrous or sub-glabrous). Leaves linear-lanceolate to ovate, subsessile or the lower with petioles not more than 10 mm. Calyx more or less hairy, usually glandular; corolla clear blue, with ovate-lanceolate, flat lower lobes. 2n = 34, 68.{\i  Throughout the range of the species.}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   All plants from N. & N.W. Europe hitherto investigated are tetraploid, but diploid plants are known from C. & S.E. Europe. {\i V. euxina} Turrill,{\i  Jour. Bot.} ({\i London}){\b  63}: 161 (1925), described from Bulgaria, is one of these diploids; it is densely glandular-hairy, with ovate-elliptical, subsessile lower leaves. It is not yet possible to distinguish the diploid taxa satisfactorily from the widespread and variable tetraploids.  
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Natural hybrids between {\b 62}({\b a}) and {\b 59} are found occasionally in districts where both parents grow; they are particularly well-known in the Baltic area. 
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b incana} (L.) Walters,{\i  Bot. Jour. Linn. Soc.}{\b  65}: 269 (1972) ({\i V. incana} L.): Like subsp. ({\b a}) but whole plant densely greyish-white tomentose and eglandular. 2n = 68. {\i E. & E.C. Europe.} 
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b c}) Subsp. {\b barrelieri} (Schott ex Roemer & Schultes) Murb.,{\i  Lunds Univ. Årsskr.}{\b  27}({\b 5}): 73 (1892) ({\i V. barrelieri} Schott ex Roemer & Schultes; incl. {\i V. hololeuca} Juz., {\i V. andrasovszkyi }Jáv.): Like subsp. ({\b a}) but stem and leaves with long, stiff, whitish, eglandular hairs only (rarely glabrous); petiole of lower leaves up to 10 mm; calyx ciliate but otherwise glabrous. 2n = 34. S.E. {\i Europe, extending westwards to N. Italy.} 
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b d}) Subsp. {\b orchidea} (Crantz) Hayek in Hegi,{\i  Ill. Fl. Mitteleur.} {\b 6}({\b 1}): 46 (1913) ({\i V. orchidea} Crantz, {\i Pseudolysimachium spicatum} subsp.{\i  orchideum }(Crantz) Hartl): stem subglabrous below, more or less glandular-hirsute above. Leaves thick and rather shiny, subglabrous or sparsely hairy, the lower ovate to ovate-lanceolate, with petiole c. 1 mm. Calyx glandular-hairy; corolla pale blue, with lower lobes linear, twisted. 2n = 34.{\i  S.E. Europe, extending westwards to N. Italy and C. Czechoslovakia}. 
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b e}) Subsp. {\b crassifolia} (Nyman) Hayek,{\i  Prodr. Fl. Penins. Balcan.} {\b 2}: 157 (1929): Like subsp. ({\b d}) but stem often glabrous except in inflorescence; leaves glabrous, the lower with petiole up to 20 mm; calyx ciliate but otherwise glabrous; corolla bright blue with ovate-lanceolate, flat lobes.{\i  • S. Carpathians and mountains of N. part of Balkan peninsula.} 
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b V. urumovii} Velen., {\i Österr. Bot. Zeitschr. }{\b 51}: 31 (1901), from Bulgaria, is eglandular, with ovate-elliptical, setulose leaves, and calyx ciliate but otherwise glabrous. It seems to be most closely related to subsp. ({\b e}) but requires further investigation.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc {\b 22.                    Hebe}             Commerson
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc By D.A. Webb.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Like{\i  Veronica} but erect shrubs; leaves opposite, entire or subentire; flowers in opposite axillary racemes; capsule septicidal, compressed parallel to the septum. Terminal buds large, without scale-leaves.  A large genus, almost confined to New Zealand; several species are cultivated in the milder parts of Europe. Some species not represented in Europe differ from the above description in several characters, and the genus is kept distinct from Veronica mainly on account of its characteristic habit.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Leaves narrowly lanceolate, 5-8 times as long as wide .............. {\b 1. salicifolia} 
\par
1 Leaves elliptical to obovate-oblong, 2-4 times as long as wide
\par
2 Young shoots and mature leaves glabrous; racemes dense,
\par
  many-flowered ................................................................................ {\b 2. speciosa}
\par
2 Young shoots pubescent; mature leaves ciliate; racemes 
\par
  lax, with c. 10 flowers ......................................................................{\b 3. elliptica}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. H. salicifolia} (G. Forster) Pennell,{\i  Rhodora}{\b  23}: 39 (1921). Up to 250 cm, of rather straggling habit. Young twigs glabrous. Leaves 5-15 × 1-2·5 cm, narrowly lanceolate, herbaceous, puberulent on midrib and petiole. Racemes 10-20 cm, slender, rather
\par

\par
251}
\par