{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}
\pard\f0\fs28\qc {\b 7.             Cyclamen}            L.     
\par 
\pard\f0\fs24\qc By R.D. Meikle & N.H. Sinnott.
\par 
\par 
\pard\f0\fs28 Perennial tuberous herbs. Leaves simple, cordate, long-petiolate, glabrous, rather fleshy, usually blotched or marbled above and purple beneath. Flowers axillary, solitary, nodding; pedicel long, usually coiling spirally in fruit. Calyx campanulate, deeply 5-lobed. Corolla with a short, hemispherical basal tube and 5 lobes, the lobes at first contorted, later strongly deflexed. Anthers large, connivent and forming a cone. Capsule globose or broadly ovoid, splitting either irregularly or into 5 teeth. Seeds large, sticky.
\par 
\par 
\pard\f0\fs28  All the species occur in woods and thickets or on shaded, rocky hillsides, usually on limestone.
\par 
\par 
\pard\f0\fs28  Literature: R. Knuth in Engler,{\i  Pflanzenreich}{\b  22} ({\b IV. 237}): 246-256 (1905). O. Schwarz,{\i  Feddes Repert.}{\b  58}: 234-283 (1955); 69: 73-103 (1964). D. E. Saunders, {\i Bull. Alp. Gard. Soc.}{\b  27}: 18-76 (1959).
\par 
\par 
\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Corolla-lobes auriculate at base; flowers appearing in
\par   late summer or autumn, usually before the leaves
\par 2 Tuber usually rooting from upper surface, without thick
\par   retractile roots; fruiting pedicel coiling from apex;
\par   leaves often distinctly angled or lobed .................................. {\b 1. hederifolium}
\par 2 Tuber rooting only from base, with thick retractile 
\par   roots; fruiting pedicel coiling from middle or base;
\par   leaves seldom angled or lobed ...................................................... {\b 2. graecum}
\par 1 Corolla-lobes not auriculate at base; flowers appearing
\par   in winter, spring or summer when leaves are fully developed
\par 3 Flowers appearing in summer and early autumn, very 
\par   fragrant; leaves persistent, broadly cordate or reniform,
\par   subentire or obscurely denticulate; tuber irregular,
\par   often with corky protuberances ............................................. {\b 3. purpurascens}
\par 3 Flowers appearing in winter or spring; leaves not 
\par   persistent; tubers subglobose or depressed-globose
\par 4 Corolla white or veined pale pink, without a darker zone at the 
\par   base of the lobes; leaves usually speckled with white above
\par 5 Corolla veined pale pink; corolla-lobes 10-18 mm; leaf margins
\par   obtusely toothed or undulate, sometimes almost entire ........... {\b 6. balearicum}
\par 5 Corolla white; corolla-lobes 16-25 mm; leaf-margins
\par   rather acutely dentate or sometimes lobed, rarely 
\par   undulate or subentire ................................................................... {\b 5. creticum}
\par 4 Corolla pink or purple, or occasionally white with a
\par   darker zone or blotch at base of lobes; leaves sometimes
\par   marbled above but rarely speckled with white
\par 6 Corolla-lobes 7-15 mm, with a prominent, dark violet, pale
\par   centred blotch at base; leaves reniform or sub-orbicular with
\par   entire or obscurely undulate-denticulate margins .............................. {\b 7. coum}
\par 6 Corolla-lobes 15-45 mm, with a darker zone at base but
\par   without distinct blotches; leaves cordate, sometimes angular
\par 7 Leaves coarsely dentate or shallowly lobed, often angled;
\par   corolla-lobes 15-30 mm; fruiting pedicel coiled ........................ {\b 4. repandum}
\par 7 Leaves closely and obtusely denticulate, rarely angled 
\par   or lobed; corolla-lobes 25-45 mm; fruiting pedicel 
\par   arcuate but not coiled ................................................................... {\b 8. persicum}
\par 
\par 
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. C. hederifolium} Aiton,{\i  Hort. Kew.}{\b  1}: 196 (1789) ({\i C. neapolitanum} Ten.). Tuber 3-15 cm or more in diameter, subglobose or depressed-globose, corky, rooting mainly from the upper surface. Leaves 3-14 × 2-10 cm, appearing in autumn after anthesis, cordate, acute or obtuse; margins obscurely and obtusely denticulate, often distinctly angled or lobed. Corolla pale pink or white with dark purple bifurcate blotches at the throat; lobes c. 20 mm, auriculate at base. Style scarcely exserted Fruiting pedicel coiling from the apex. Flowering from August to November. 2n = 24.{\i  S. Europe, from France to Bulgaria. }Al B Co Ga Gr He It Ju Sa Si ?Tu [Br].
\par 
\par 
\pard\f0\fs28 Records for Kriti appear to be erroneous.
\par 
\par 
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. C. graecum} Link, {\i Linnaea}{\b  9}: 573 (1835) (incl. {\i C. mindleri }Heldr.). Tuber 3-10 cm in diameter, globose or depressed globose, corky, rooting only from the base, with retractile roots. Leaves 3-7(-10) × 2·5-6(-8) cm, appearing in autumn or winter after anthesis, cordate, acute or obtuse; margins minutely an obtusely denticulate, rarely angled. Corolla white or pale pin with dark purple bifurcate or trifurcate blotches at the throat lobes c. 20 mm, auriculate at base. Style included or slightly exserted. Fruiting pedicel coiling from the middle or base Flowering from September to December. 2n = 78-80. {\i Greece an Aegean region.} Cr Gr.
\par 
\par 
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 3. C. purpurascens} Miller,{\i  Gard. Dict.} ed. 8, no. 2 (1768) ({\i C. europaeum} auct.). Tuber 2-3 cm in diameter, irregularly globose or depressed-globose, often with corky protuberances, rooting all over. Leaves 2·5-8 × 2-6 cm, persistent, broadly cordate or reniform, rounded or subacute; margins subentire or obscurely and obtusely denticulate, not angled. Flowers very fragrant. Corolla without auricles, reddish-pink or purplish with a darker blotch at the throat; lobes 15-20 mm. Style exserted for c. 1 mm. Fruiting pedicel coiling from the apex. Flowering from June to October. 2n = 34.{\i  From S.E. France to the W. Carpathians and C. Jugoslavia.} Au Cz Ga Ge He Hu It Ju 
\par Po [Rm Rs(W)].
\par 
\par 
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 4. C. repandum} Sibth. & Sm.,{\i  Fl. Graec. Prodr. }{\b 1}: 128 (1806) ({\i C. vernale} sensu O. Schwarz, non Miller). Tuber 1·5-3·5(-6) cm in diameter, subglobose or depressed-globose, pubescent, rooting from the base. Leaves 4-13 × 3-13 cm, with or without marbling, broadly cordate, acute or subacute; margins deeply dentate or shallowly lobed. Corolla without auricles, uniformly purplish-pink, occasionally white or pale pink with a darker zone around the throat; lobes 15-30 mm. Style exserted for 1·5-3 mm. Fruiting pedicel coiling from the apex. Flowering from March to May.{\i  C. & E. Mediterranean region. }Co Ga Gr It Ju Sa Si
\par 
\par 
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 5. C. creticum} Hildebr., {\i Beih. Bot. Centr.}{\b  19}({\b 2}): 367 (1906). Tuber 1·5-3 cm, depressed-globose, pubescent, rooting from the base. Leaves 3·5-9(-12) × 3-7(-11) cm, white-marbled above, broadly ovate, usually acute; margins rather sharply dentate, rarely undulate or subentire. Corolla without auricles, uniformly white; lobes 16-25 mm. Style included in the corolla tube or very shortly exserted. Fruiting pedicel coiling from the apex. Flowering from March to May. 2n = 24. •{\i  Kriti.} Cr.
\par 
\par 
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 6. C. balearicum} Willk., {\i Österr. Bot. Zeitschr.}{\b  25}: 111 (1875). Tuber 1·5-2·5 cm in diameter, depressed-globose, pubescent, rooting from base. Leaves 2-9 × (1·3-)2-5·5(-9) cm, white marbled above, broadly ovate, obtuse or subacute; margins obtusely toothed or undulate, sometimes almost entire. Corolla without auricles, white, veined pale pink; lobes 10-18 mm. Style included in corolla-tube. Fruiting pedicel coiling from the apex. Flowering from February to April. 2n = 18, 20. •{\i  S. France; Islas Baleares.} Bl Ga.
\par 
\par 
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 7. C. coum} Miller, {\i Gard. Dict.} ed. 8, no. 6 (1768) (incl.{\i  C. durostoricum} Pantu & Solac.). Tuber 2-3·5 cm in diameter, subglobose or depressed-globose, pubescent, rooting from base. Leaves (1·2-)3-7 × (1·3-)3-7 cm, with or without marbling,
\par 
\par 25}
\par