{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 dense. Calyx 2 mm. Corolla white, sometimes tinged with lilac; lobes 3-4 mm, ovate-lanceolate, acute, suberect. Capsule 3·5 × 2·5 mm.{\i  Cultivated for ornament and locally naturalized on walls and sea-cliffs in W. Europe.} [Az Br Hb.] ({\i New Zealand, Chile}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. H. speciosa} (R. Cunn. ex A. Cunn.) Andersen,{\i  Trans. Proc. N.Z. Inst.}{\b  56}: 693 (1926). Up to 150 cm, of compact habit. Young twigs glabrous. Leaves 5-10 × 2·5-5 cm, obovate-oblong coriaceous to fleshy, glabrous. Racemes 7-10 cm, stout, very dense. Calyx 2 mm. Corolla violet to reddish-purple; lobes c. 4 mm, broadly ovate, obtuse, erecto-patent. Capsule 5-6 × 3-4 mm.{\i  Cultivated for ornament, and for hedges near the sea; locally naturalized on sea-cliffs in Ireland.} [?Br Hb.] ({\i New Zealand.})
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Numerous cultivars exist, some of them probably of hybrid origin.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 3. H. elliptica} (G. Forster) Pennell,{\i  Rhodora}{\b  23}: 39 (1921) ({\i Veronica elliptica} G. Forster). Up to 80 cm, of compact habit. Young twigs pubescent. Leaves 1-3 × 0·5-1·5 cm, elliptical, coriaceous to fleshy, ciliate, pale greyish-green. Racemes 3-5 cm, lax, with c. 10 flowers. Calyx 2·5-4 mm. Corolla white with purple veins; lobes c. 5 mm, elliptical, subacute, more or less patent. Capsule 6-8 × 4-5 mm.{\i  Naturalized on rocks in N.W. France} ({\i islands off Finistère}). [Ga.] ({\i New Zealand to Falkland Islands}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b  H. lewisii} (Armstrong,) Cockayne & Allan, {\i Trans. Proc. N.Z. Inst.}{\b  57}: 21 (1927), which is perhaps naturalized in England, is probably a hybrid between {\b 1} and {\b 3}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc {\b 23.                 Paederota}                   L.
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc By D.A. Webb.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Perennial herbs; leaves opposite, undivided. Flowers in terminal, bracteate, spike-like racemes. Calyx somewhat unequally 5-lobed. Corolla with cylindrical tube and 2-lipped limb, usually somewhat shorter than the tube; upper lip entire (rarely 2-lobed), erect; lower lip 3-lobed, more or less patent. Stamens 2, exserted from corolla-tube, but sometimes shorter than limb. Stigma capitate. Capsule loculicidal, not laterally compressed; seeds numerous.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 Flowers blue; leaves with not more than 9 teeth on each side ......... {\b 1. bonarota}
\par
Flowers yellow; larger leaves with at least 10 teeth on each side ...........{\b 2. lutea}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. P. bonarota} (L.) L., {\i Sp. Pl.} ed. 2, 20 (1762) ({\i Veronica bonarota} L.). Stems 7-20 cm, numerous, simple, crispate-pubescent. Leaves 15-30 × 7-20 mm, subsessile or shortly petiolate, hirsute to subglabrous, with 3-6(-9), usually subobtuse teeth on each side, the lower broadly ovate to rhombic or suborbicular, the upper ovate to oblong-lanceolate. Racemes 2-4 cm in flower, dense, lengthening somewhat in fruit and usually glabrescent. Corolla 10-13 mm, violet-blue (rarely pink); tube slightly exceeding limb. Stamens equalling or slightly exceeding corolla. 2n = 36. {\i Crevices of limestone rocks. E. Alps, westwards to} 10° 15'{\i  E.} Au It Ju.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. P. lutea} Scop.,{\i  Annus Hist.-Nat.}{\b  2}: 41 (1769) ({\i Veronica lutea }(Scop.) Wettst.). Like {\b 1} but usually less hairy; stems sometimes longer; leaves narrowly ovate to lanceolate, rarely broadly ovate; teeth at least 10 on each side on larger leaves, usually more acute; corolla yellow, with tube distinctly longer than limb; stamens usually shorter than corolla (but sometimes longer). 2n = 36, c. 54.{\i  Crevices of limestone rocks. • E. Alps, westwards to} 11° 30' {\i E.; mountains of W. Jugoslavia.} Au It Ju.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc {\b 24.               Sibthorpia}                  L.
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc By D.A. Webb.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Perennial herbs; stems procumbent, rooting at the nodes. Leaves alternate, petiolate, more or less orbicular. Flowers axillary, pedicellate, 4- to 8-merous. Corolla rotate, with short tube and entire, subequal lobes. Stamens equal in number to, or 1 or 2 less than the corolla-lobes. Capsule loculicidal. Seeds oblong-ovoid, reticulate or smooth.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Literature: O. Hedberg,{\i  Bot. Not. }{\b 108}:161-183 (1955).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Pedicel more than 35 mm; flowers usually several in 
\par
  each leaf-axil; corolla at least 9 mm in diameter .......................... {\b 3. peregrina} 
\par
1 Pedicel not more than 35 mm; flowers solitary in leaf-
\par
  axils; corolla not more than 7 mm in diameter
\par
2 Pedicel shorter than subtending petiole; corolla less 
\par
  than 3 mm in diameter, white, cream or pinkish ........................... {\b 1. europaea}
\par
2 Pedicel usually longer than subtending petiole; corolla
\par
  more than 3 mm in diameter, yellow .............................................. {\b 2. africana}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. S. europaea} L.,{\i  Sp. Pl.} 631 (1753) ({\i S. africana} auct., non L.). Stems up to 40 cm, slender, usually rather sparingly branched and far-creeping. Leaves 8-25 mm wide, reniform to orbicular crenate, with 7-13 usually truncate crenations, more or less pubescent with hairs less than 1 mm; petiole (3-)5-40(-120) mm. Flowers solitary in leaf-axils; pedicel 1-5(-12) mm, straight. Corolla and calyx (4-)5-lobed; corolla 1·5-2·5 mm in diameter, white or cream, more or less tinged with pink, especially on lower lobes; lobes slightly unequal. Stamens (3-)4-5, the number variable on a single plant. Seeds 0·5 mm. 2n = 18.{\i  Damp, shady places. W. Europe, northwards to} 52°{\i  N. in Britain; mountains of Greece and Kriti.} Az Br Cr Ga Gr Hb Hs Lu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. S. africana} L.,{\i  loc. cit.} (1753). Like {\b 1} but stems usually more freely branched, so that the plant often forms a dense mat; leaves not more than 15 mm wide, with obtuse to subacute crenations; leaves and calyx grey-hirsute with hairs more than 1 mm; petiole 5-25(-50) mm; pedicel 8-20(-35) mm, usually coiled in fruit; corolla 4-7 mm in diameter, yellow; seeds 0·8 mm.{\i  Shady walls and damp rock-crevices. • Islas Baleares.} Bl.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    The epithet {\i africana} was based on false information; the species which grows on the high mountains of tropical Africa is {\i S. europaea}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 3. S. peregrina} L., {\i loc. cit.} (1753). Stems up to 80 cm, far-creeping. Leaves 15-50 mm wide, reniform to orbicular, with 17-35 usually subacute crenations, shortly hirsute with hairs more than 1 mm; petiole 15-65 mm. Flowers 1-3(-6) in each axil; pedicel 35-70 mm, usually somewhat coiled or curved in fruit. Calyx and corolla 5- to 8-lobed; corolla 9-13 mm in diameter, yellow; lobes more or less equal. Stamens equal in number to corolla-lobes. Seeds c. 1·2 mm.{\i  Naturalized in Portugal} ({\i Sintra}). [Lu.] ({\i Madeira}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc {\b 25.             Lafuentea}             Lag.
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc By D.A. Webb.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Perennial herbs; stem woody at the base; leaves opposite, simple. Flowers zygomorphic, in long, terminal, bracteate spikes. Calyx 5-lobed; corolla with long, cylindrical tube and 5-lobed, somewhat 2-lipped limb; upper lip 2-lobed, the lower 3-lobed. Stamens 4, didynamous, exserted. Capsule septicidal; seeds numerous.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   {\b 1. L. rotundifolia} Lag.,{\i  Gen. Sp. Nov. }19 (1816). Plant densely greyish-pubescent to -hirsute, glandular, aromatic. Flowering stems erect, from a procumbent, woody stock. Leaves up to 3 × 3 cm, reniform to orbicular-deltate, irregularly crenate-dentate. Spikes up to 18 cm, with very numerous flowers; bracts
\par

\par
252}
\par