{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 15. M. bihariense} A. Kerner, {\i  Sched. Fl. Exsicc. Austro-Hung. }{\b 1}: 35 (1881). Stem 5-50 cm. Calyx-teeth 6-8(-10) mm; sinuses more or less obtuse; calyx-tube without basal tuft of hairs. Corolla 18-24 mm, without hairs at insertion of filaments. •{\i  Romania, extending to N.E. Hungary, C. Jugoslavia and C. Bulgaria.} Bu Hu Ju Rm.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\i Ecotypic variants}:
\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Autumnal: f.{\b  roemeri} Ronniger, {\i Denkschr. Akad. Wiss. Math.-Nat. Kl.} ({\i Wien}){\b  94}: 181 (1918).
\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Aestival: subsp.{\b  kuemmerlei} (Soó) Soó,{\i  Feddes Repert.}{\b  24}: 159 (1927).
\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Montane: type of the species.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b  M. ambiguum} Soó, {\i Feddes Repert.}{\b  24}: 150 (1927), from Romania, resembles {\b 15} in the size and form of its calyx, but resembles {\b 7} in its indumentum.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 16. M. hoermannianum} K. Malý, {\i Glasn. Muz. Bosni Herceg. }{\b 11}: 141 (1899). Calyx-teeth (6-)8-10 mm; sinuses more or less acute; calyx-tube with tuft of hairs on upper side near the base. Corolla 16-22 mm, with tufts of short hairs inside between insertion of longer and shorter filaments. •{\i  N.W. part of Balkan peninsula.} Ju.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\i Ecotypic variants}:
\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Autumnal: {\b M. bosniacum }Rormiger, {\i Mitt. Naturw. Ver. Steierm.}{\b  54}: 294 (1918).
\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Aestival: type of the species.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Montane:{\b  M. hoermannianum} subsp. {\b  beckianum} K. Malý,{\i  Glasn. Muz. Bosni Herceg.}{\b  31}: 77 (1919).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 17. M. doerfleri} Ronniger,{\i  Denkschr. Akad. Wiss. Math.-Nat. Kl.} ({\i Wien}) {\b 94}: 180 (1918). Like {\b 16} but corolla 12-18 mm, with, in addition to the tufts of hairs between insertions of filaments, two longer tufts at insertion of longer filaments. •{\i  Crna Gora and N. Albania.} Al Ju.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Ecotypic variants:
\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Autumnal: subsp.{\b  montenegrinum} Janchen, {\i Österr. Bot. Zeitschr.}{\b  68}: 271 (1919).
\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Montane: type of the species.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   {\b 18. M. scardicum} Wettst., {\i Biblioth. Bot.} ({\i Stuttgart}) {\b 26}: 81 (1892). Stem 10-40 cm. Leaves 5-15 mm wide, ovate-lanceolate. Bracts lanceolate, acutely toothed, violet-blue. Calyx c. 8 mm, puberulent, with longer hairs on the veins; teeth about 3 times as long as tube, curved upwards. Corolla 10-12(-17) mm, yellow; tube curved downwards; throat closed. •{\i  C. & S. Jugoslavia, W. & S Bulgaria.} ?Al Bu Ju.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Ecotypic variants:
\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Autumnal: subsp.{\b  serbicum} Rormiger, {\i Viert. Naturf. Ges. Zürich}{\b  55}: 315 (1910).
\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Aestival: subsp.{\b  wettsteinii} Rormiger,{\i  loc. cit.} (1910).
\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Montane: type of the species.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 19. M. trichocalycinum} Vandas, {\i Sitz.-Ber. Böhm. Ges. Wiss. }({\i Math.-Nat. Kl}.) {\b 1890}({\b 1}): 275 (1890). Stem 20-50 cm, freely branched. Leaves 2-5 mm wide, linear to linear-lanceolate. Bracts linear, entire or with 1-2 teeth, green. Calyx 13-18 mm, glabrous except for hairy veins; teeth 11-14 mm, filiform. Corolla c. 16 mm, yellow; throat closed. •{\i  Bosna.} Ju.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 20. M. heracleoticum} Boiss. & Orph. in Boiss.,{\i  Fl. Or.}{\b  4}: 482 (1879). Stem 25-50 cm, freely branched. Leaves 3-10 mm wide, linear to narrowly lanceolate. Bracts green, pectinate in proximal part, the teeth ending in a flexuous filiform arista 8-10 mm. Calyx 12-14(-18) mm, glabrous or puberulent, with long hairs on the veins; teeth 8-10 mm, filiform. Corolla 16-18 mm, yellow; throat closed. •{\i  Albania and S. Jugoslavia}. Al Ju.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    ({\b 21-23}). {\b M. sylvaticum} group. Leaves 2-12 mm wide, lanceolate to elliptic-lanceolate. Bracts green, entire or with 1 or 2 teeth at the base. Calyx 6-7 mm, puberulent, without longer hairs on the veins; teeth c. 2·5 mm, lanceolate. Corolla 6-14 mm, white to yellow, often variegated with purple; throat open.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Anthers 1·5-2·2 mm .............................................................. {\b 21. sylvaticum}
\par
1 Anthers 2·5-4 mm
\par
2 Bracts not more than 25 × 4 mm; corolla mainly pale yellow ... {\b 22. herbichii}
\par
2 Bracts up to 40 × 7 mm; corolla mainly white ........................... {\b 23. saxosum}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 21. M. sylvaticum} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 605 (1753). Stem 10-40 cm. Bracts 20-60 × 3-7 mm. Corolla (6-)8-10(-11) mm, usually deep golden-yellow (rarely pale yellow or whitish), the lower lip often spotted with purple. Anthers 1·5-2·2 mm. 2n = 18. •{\i  N. Europe, extending southwards in the mountains to the Pyrenees, C. Italy and S. Bulgaria.} Au Br Bu Cz Da Fe Ga Ge Hb He Hs Hu Is It Ju No Po Rm Rs (N, B, C, W) Su.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Ecotypic variants: Autumnal: type of the species.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Aestival:{\b  M. aestivale} Ronniger & Schinz in Schinz & R. Keller,{\i  Fl. Schweiz }ed. 3, {\b 1}: 489 (1909).
\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Montane:{\b  M. intermedium} Ronniger & Schinz, {\i loc. cit.} (1909).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   A number of variants from the higher mountains of C. Europe, representing more extreme forms of the montane ecotype, have also been described.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 22. M. herbichii} Woloszczak, {\i Spraw. Kom. Fizyogr. Krakow.}{\b  21}: 133 (1887). Stem 12-30 cm. Bracts 10-25 × 1·5-4 mm. Corolla (7-)9-11(-14) mm, clear, pale yellow, the lower lip often spotted with purple. Anthers 2·5-4 mm. •{\i  E. & S. Carpathians.} Po Rm Rs (W).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Ecotypic variants: Autumnal:{\b  M. sylvaticum} f. {\b csatoi} Soó,{\i  Feddes Repert.}{\b  24}: 174 (1927).
\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Aestival:{\b  M. sylvaticum} subsp.{\b  moeszianum} Soó,{\i  op. cit.} 190 (1927).
\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Montane: type of the species.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 23. M. saxosum} Baumg.,{\i  Enum. Stirp. Transs.}{\b  2}: 199 (1816). Stem 10-40 cm. Bracts 25-40 × 5-7 mm. Corolla 8-13 mm. white, the lower lip marked with purple and sometimes with orange. Anthers 2·5-4 mm. •{\i  E. Carpathians and Transylvania.} ?Cz Po Rm Rs (W).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Ecotypic variants:
\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Autumnal: type of the species.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Aestival: subsp.{\b  javorkae} (Soó) Soó,{\i  Feddes Repert.}{\b  24}: 176 (1927).
\par 
   Montane: subsp.{\b  baumgartenii} (Soó) Soó,{\i  loc. cit}. (1927).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 24. M. pratense} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 605 (1753) (incl.{\i  M. laciniatum} Koshewn. & V. Zinger). Stem 5-60 cm. Leaves 1-35 mm wide, linear to ovate. Bracts green, ovate- to linear-lanceolate, entire or hastate-dentate. Calyx 7-8 mm, glabrous except for strigulose veins; teeth 4-5 mm, linear. Corolla 10-18 mm, whitish to bright yellow, rarely with tube and upper lip tinged with purple; throat usually closed. Anthers 1·5-3·2 mm. 2n = 18. •{\i  Most of Europe.} Au Be Br Bu Cz Da Fe Ga Ge Hb He Ho Hs Hu It Ju Lu No Po Rm Rs (N, B, C, W, K, E) Su.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   An extremely variable species, which has been treated differently by every author who has studied it closely. Several variants have been recognized as subspecies on the strength of differences in the colour of the corolla and of the degree of closure of its throat (e.g. subsp.{\b  purpureum} (Hartman) Soó, {\i Feddes Repert.}{\b  24}: 183 (1927), and subsp.{\b  hians} (Druce) Beauverd in Schinz & R. Keller,{\i  Fl. Schweiz} ed. 3, {\b 2}: 309 (1914)). It has been shown, however, that at least in some parts of Europe these distinctive
\par

\par
256}
\par