{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 35 Cauline internodes mostly not more than twice as long
\par
   as leaves
\par
47 Basal teeth of lower floral leaves apically directed
\par
48 Teeth of lower floral leaves not much longer than wide
\par
   ............................................................................... ({\b 28-32}). {\b ostenfeldii} group
\par
48 Teeth of lower floral leaves much longer than wide
\par
49 Stem and branches flexuous ...................................................... {\b 16. confusa}
\par
49 Stem and branches ± straight and erect
\par
50 Floral leaves with not more than 3 teeth on each side ................ {\b 40. taurica}
\par
50 Some floral leaves with more than 3 teeth on each side
\par
   ...................................................................................... ({\b 17-20}).{\b  stricta} group
\par
47 Basal teeth of lower floral leaves patent
\par
51 Lowest flower at node 10 or higher
\par
52 Stem erect, stout, with stout, ascending branches;
\par
   lower floral leaves mostly opposite .......................................... {\b 13. nemorosa}
\par
52 Stem and branches slender and flexuous; lower floral
\par
   leaves mostly alternate ................................................................. {\b 16. confusa}
\par
51 Lowest flower at node 9 or lower
\par
53 Leaves with numerous eglandular hairs ............. ({\b 28-32}). {\b ostenfeldii} group
\par
53 Leaves with few eglandular hairs
\par
54 Stem branched from near the base; branches ascending,
\par
   curved at base, terminating in long, dense spikes 
\par
   similar to that on main stem ................................................... {\b 12. tetraquetra}
\par
54 Stem not branched much below the middle; branches 
\par
   straight, erecto-patent, not terminating in long, dense spikes ....... {\b 11. arctica} 
\par
34 Lowest flower at node 5(-6) or lower
\par
55 Cauline internodes mostly at least 2½ times as long as the leaves
\par
56 Capsule broadly elliptical to obovate-elliptical
\par
57 Cauline internodes up to 9 times as long as the leaves; lower
\par
    floral leaves ovate to rhombic, with teeth all apically directed . {\b 36. saamica}
\par
57 Cauline internodes rarely more than 4 times as long as
\par
   the leaves; lower floral leaves ± broadly ovate to
\par
   suborbicular, with basal pair of teeth ± patent
\par
58 Teeth of lower floral leaves mostly subacute and not 
\par
   longer than broad; corolla 4·5-7 mm; lowest flower at
\par
   node 2-4(-5) ................................................................................... {\b 25. frigida}
\par
58 Teeth of lower floral leaves usually acute or 
\par
   acuminate and longer than broad; corolla at least
\par
   6·5 mm; lowest flower usually at node 4 or higher ....................... {\b 11. arctica}
\par
56 Capsule oblong to narrowly elliptical
\par
59 Lower floral leaves deeply serrate to pectinate; basal
\par
   teeth apically directed .................................................. ({\b 17-20}). {\b stricta} group
\par
59 Lower floral leaves crenate or shallowly serrate;
\par
   basal teeth usually patent
\par
60 Upper cauline leaves elliptic-ovate to narrowly obovate
\par
61 Leaves usually light green above and purplish beneath;
\par
   branches long; capsule usually more than twice as long
\par
   as wide ......................................................................................... {\b 34. scottica}
\par
61 Leaves ± concolorous; branches short; capsule not more
\par
   than twice as long as wide .......................................................... {\b 14. coerulea}
\par
60 Upper cauline leaves suborbicular to broadly ovate or
\par
   broadly obovate
\par
62 Lowest flower at node 4 or lower; lower floral leaves
\par
   often considerably larger than the upper cauline
\par
63 Stem straight, erect; cauline leaves distinctly
\par
   petiolate, with distal teeth incurved; corolla rarely
\par
   more than 5·5 mm, the lower lip usually yellow .......................... {\b 24. minima}
\par
63 Stem often flexuous; cauline leaves obscurely 
\par
   petiolate, with distal teeth not incurved; corolla up
\par
   to 7(-8) mm, the lower lip white or purple .................................... {\b 25. frigida}
\par
62 Lowest flower at node 4 or higher; lower floral leaves
\par
   scarcely larger than the upper cauline
\par
64 Leaves densely hairy, without distinct petiole ... ({\b 28-32}). {\b ostenfeldii} group
\par
64 Leaves usually sparsely hairy to subglabrous, with 
\par
   short but distinct petiole ............................................................... {\b 24. minima}
\par
55 Cauline internodes mostly less than 2½ times as 
\par
   long as the leaves
\par
65 Corolla at least 6 mm
\par
66 Teeth of lower floral leaves usually very acute, all apically directed
\par
67 Stem and branches slender, flexuous; lower floral 
\par
   leaves mostly alternate ................................................................. {\b 16. confusa}
\par
67 Stem and branches usually stout, rigid; lower floral 
\par
   leaves mostly opposite ................................................. ({\b 17-20}). {\b stricta} group
\par
66 Teeth of lower floral leaves subacute to acute, the 
\par
   basal pair patent
\par
68 Capsule at least as long as the calyx, usually emarginate ............{\b 25. frigida}
\par
68 Capsule shorter than the calyx, truncate or slightly 
\par
   emarginate ............................................................................... {\b 12. tetraquetra}
\par
65 Corolla not more than 6 mm
\par
69 Lower floral leaves ovate to rhombic, with acute to 
\par
   aristate teeth, the basal pair apically directed
\par
70 Leaves with very short glandular hairs; floral leaves
\par
   with not more than 3 teeth on each side; capsule 
\par
   apiculate (Krym) ............................................................................ {\b 40. taurica}
\par
70 Leaves usually eglandular; floral leaves often with more 
\par
   than 3 teeth on each side; capsule scarcely apiculate
\par
71 Corolla deep purple (Færöer) ............................................. {\b 37. atropurpurea}
\par
71 Corolla white to lilac
\par
72 Stem and branches flexuous ...................................................... {\b 16. confusa}
\par
72 Stem and branches straight, erect
\par
73 Lowest flower at node 4 or lower ........................................ {\b 39. willkommii}
\par
73 Lowest flower at node 5 or higher ............................ ({\b 17-20}). {\b stricta} group
\par
69 Lower floral leaves broadly ovate or deltate to suborbicular, 
\par
   with obtuse to subacute teeth, the basal pair patent
\par
74 Leaves with numerous eglandular hairs and without glandular hairs
\par
75 Lower floral leaves scarcely larger than the upper cauline
\par
   .............................................................................. ({\b 28-32}).{\b  ostenfeldii} group
\par
75 Lower floral leaves considerably larger than the upper cauline
\par
76 Stem straight, erect, usually with 1-3 pairs of  branches;
\par
    cauline leaves distinctly petiolate, with distal teeth incurved .... {\b 24. minima}
\par
76 Stem often flexuous, with not more than 2 pairs of 
\par
   branches and often simple; cauline leaves obscurely 
\par
   petiolate, with distal teeth not incurved ........................................ {\b 25. frigida}
\par
74 Leaves with few eglandular hairs, sometimes with short
\par
   glandular hairs
\par
77 Capsule elliptical to obovate, emarginate; corolla not
\par
   more than 5·5 mm, with very small lower lip ............................ {\b 27. cambrica}
\par
77 Capsule oblong to elliptic-oblong, usually truncate;
\par
   corolla up to 7 mm, with conspicuous lower lip
\par
78 Distal teeth of lower floral leaves usually incurved;
\par
   capsule usually exceeding calyx .............................................. {\b 26. foulaensis}
\par
78 Distal teeth of lower floral leaves not incurved;
\par
   capsule usually shorter than calyx .......................................... {\b 12. tetraquetra}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    Sect. ATLANTICAE Pugsley. Perennial. Leaves all more or less Corolla 13-17 mm; tube infundibuliform.
\par
           
\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. E. grandiflora} Hochst. in Seub.,{\i  Fl. Azor.}39 (1844). Stem up to 40 cm, erect or ascending. Leaves usually blackening on drying, mostly suborbicular, with up to 12 pairs of usually obtuse to subacute teeth, usually glabrous above, scabrid or hairy on the
\par

\par
259}
\par