{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 9 Floral leaves usually entire except for a pair of teeth situated
\par
   near the apex, not more than 1·5 mm long, and shorter
\par
   than the width of the remainder of the leaf (S.E. Alps) ........ {\b 46. tricuspidata}
\par
9 Some floral leaves with at least 2 teeth on each side,
\par
  which are either more than 1·5 mm long or longer than 
\par
  the width of the remainder of the leaf
\par
10 Lower floral leaves with 1-2(-3) teeth on each side
\par
11 Corolla at least 8 mm .............................................................. {\b 45. cuspidata}
\par
11 Corolla not more than 7·5 mm
\par
12 Lower floral leaves with linear terminal lobe and long,
\par
   narrowly falcate, acute but not aristate teeth ............................... {\b 44. dinarica}
\par
12 Lower floral leaves with lanceolate terminal lobe and 
\par
   long, narrow, aristate (rarely deltate, acute) teeth ...............{\b 41. salisburgensis}
\par
10 Lower floral leaves with (3-)4 or more teeth on each side
\par
13 Corolla 8-9 mm ............................................................................ {\b 42. portae}
\par
13 Corolla not more than 7·5 mm
\par
14 Teeth of lower floral leaves much longer than width of
\par
   remainder of leaf; corolla purplish ............................................... {\b 43. illyrica}
\par
14 Teeth of lower floral leaves not much longer than 
\par
   width of remainder of leaf; corolla white .......................... {\b 41. salisburgensis}
\par
8  Capsule ciliate with long, fairly numerous hairs; all 
\par
   leaf-teeth usually contiguous
\par
15 Corolla more than 7·5 mm
\par
16 Lowest flower at node 1-3
\par
17 Cauline and lower floral leaves narrowly obovate to 
\par
   trullate or ovate, usually crenate-serrate ..................... ({\b 17-20}). {\b stricta} group
\par
17 Cauline and lower floral leaves elliptical to sub-orbicular, 
\par
   usually crenate .................................................................................... {\b 9. picta}
\par
16 First flower at node 4 or higher
\par
18 Basal teeth of lower floral leaves apically directed
\par
19 Capsule not more than 2½ times as long as wide
\par
20 Corolla less than 9 mm .............................................................. {\b 16. confusa}
\par
20 Corolla 9-11 mm 
\par
21 Cauline leaves ovate to oblong-ovate; lower floral 
\par
   leaves usually with more than 3 pairs of teeth ................................... {\b 9. picta} 
\par
21 Cauline leaves linear-oblanceolate to narrowly trullate;
\par
    lower floral leaves usually with 2-3 pairs of teeth .............. {\b 10. marchesettii}
\par
19 Capsule more than 2½ times as long as wide
\par
22 Stem and branches flexuous ...................................................... {\b 16. confusa}
\par
22 Stem erect, with straight or regularly curved branches
\par
23 Corolla not more than 10 mm; branches ± erect ....... ({\b 17-20}). {\b stricta} group
\par
23 Corolla at least 10 mm; branches ± patent
\par
24 Lowest flower at node 9 or lower; stem with not more 
\par
   than 4 pairs of branches; capsule usually not more 
\par
   than 3 times as long as wide ........................................................... {\b 21. alpina}
\par
24 Lowest flower at node 10 or higher; stem with up to 
\par
   13 pairs of branches; capsule at least 3½ times as
\par
   long as wide ............................................................................... {\b 23. cisalpina}
\par
18 Basal teeth of lower floral leaves patent
\par
25 Lowest flower at node 8 or lower; capsule usually 
\par
   elliptical to obovate
\par
26 Capsule at least twice as long as wide; leaves often 
\par
   with short glandular hairs .............................................................. {\b 11. arctica}
\par
26 Capsule less than twice as long as wide; leaves without 
\par
   glandular hairs 
\par
27 Capsule not more than 5·5 mm ......................................................... {\b 9. picta}
\par
27 Capsule at least 6 mm .................................................................. {\b 11. arctica}
\par
25 Lowest flower at node 9 or higher; capsule oblong to elliptic-oblong
\par
28 Stem and branches usually flexuous; leaves near base 
\par
   of branches usually very small 
\par
29 Corolla less than 9 mm .............................................................. {\b 16. confusa} 
\par
29 Corolla at least 9 mm ........................................................................ {\b 9. picta}
\par
28 Stem and branches usually not flexuous; leaves near 
\par
   base of branches not much smaller than the others
\par
30 Teeth of floral leaves acute to acuminate; capsule 
\par
   usually slightly shorter than calyx; stem and branches
\par
   relatively stout .......................................................................... {\b 13. nemorosa}
\par
30 Teeth of floral leaves mostly aristate; capsule much 
\par
   shorter than calyx; stem and branches relatively slender
\par
31 Capsule usually not more than twice as long as wide;
\par
   corolla at least 9 mm .......................................................................... {\b 9. picta}
\par
31 Capsule usually about 2½ times as long as wide;
\par
   corolla not more than 9 mm .............................................. {\b 15. pseudokerneri} 
\par
15 Corolla not more than 7·5 mm
\par
32 Calyx-tube whitish and membranous, with prominent green veins
\par
33 Capsule not more than twice as long as wide; leaves thin ........... {\b 35. calida}
\par
33 Capsule more than twice as long as wide; leaves thick
\par
   ............................................................................... ({\b 28-32}). {\b ostenfeldii} group
\par
32 Calyx-tube green and herbaceous
\par
34 Lowest flower at node 6 or higher
\par
35 Cauline internodes mostly 2-6 times as long as the leaves
\par
36 Basal teeth of lower floral leaves apically directed
\par
37 Teeth of lower floral leaves obtuse to acute, fairly 
\par
   short; corolla not more than 6·5 mm
\par
38 Leaves strongly tinged with purple, not darker beneath
\par
   than above; corolla usually lilac to purple; capsule 
\par
   shorter than calyx ..................................................................... {\b 33. micrantha}
\par
38 Leaves weakly or moderately tinged with purple, often 
\par
   darker beneath than above; corolla usually white;
\par
   capsule at least as long as calyx ................................................... {\b 34. scottica}
\par
37 Teeth of lower floral leaves acute to aristate, long;
\par
   corolla usually at least 7 mm
\par
39 Basal teeth of lower leaves strongly apically directed ({\b 17-20}).{\b  stricta} group
\par
39 Basal teeth of lower floral leaves only slightly 
\par
   apically directed
\par
40 Capsule not more than 3 times as long as wide ........................... {\b 11. arctica}
\par
40 Capsule at least 3 times as long as wide .................... ({\b 17-20}). {\b stricta} group
\par
36 Basal teeth of lower floral leaves patent
\par
41 Corolla at least 6·5 mm
\par
42 Lowest flower at node 9 or higher; leaves usually 
\par
   without glandular hairs; lower floral leaves smaller 
\par
   than upper cauline ..................................................................... {\b 13. nemorosa}
\par
42 Lowest flower at node 8 or lower; leaves usually with glandular
\par
    hairs; lower floral leaves larger than upper cauline ..................... {\b 11. arctica}
\par
41 Corolla not more than 6·5 mm
\par
43 Leaves densely hairy
\par
44 Lowest flower at node 8 or lower; stem not more than 
\par
   15 cm; lower floral leaves about as wide as long  ({\b 28-32}). {\b ostenfeldii} group
\par
44 Lowest flower at node 9 or higher; stem up to 40 cm;
\par
   lower floral leaves often longer than wide ............................... {\b 13. nemorosa}
\par
43 Leaves sparsely hairy to subglabrous
\par
45 Stem and branches very slender, blackish; leaves 
\par
   strongly tinged with purple, not darker beneath than 
\par
   above; corolla usually lilac to purple ....................................... {\b 33. micrantha}
\par
45 Stem and branches either stout or lightly pigmented;
\par
   leaves weakly or moderately tinged with purple;
\par
   corolla usually white
\par
46 Lowest flower at node 7 or lower; stem slender; leaves
\par
   usually light green above and purplish beneath;
\par
   capsule usually longer than calyx ................................................ {\b 34. scottica}
\par
46 Lowest flower at node 8 or higher; stem robust; leaves not 
\par
   darker beneath than above; capsule usually shorter than calyx {\b 13. nemorosa}
\par

\par
258}
\par