{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 6. M. fimbriatum} Vandas,{\i  Österr. Bot. Zeitschr. }{\b 39}: 53 (1889). Stem 30-50 cm, with arcuate branches. Leaves 5-8 mm wide, narrowly lanceolate. Spike cylindrical; bracts fimbriate, green with pubescent teeth. Calyx-tube puberulent; teeth 1½-2 times as long as the tube. Corolla 20-30 mm; tube pink; upper lip often purplish; lower lip white or pale yellow, with deflexed margins; throat open. •{\i  W. Jugoslavia, Albania.} Al ?Gr ?It Ju.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Sect. MELAMPYRUM. Flowers in lax, more or less secund spikes or racemes; bracts not concealing the inflorescence-axis. Leaves often shortly petiolate.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 7. M. nemorosum} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 605 (1753). Stem 15-50 cm. Leaves 8-40 mm wide, narrowly lanceolate to ovate-cordate, usually entire. Bracts usually violet-blue, at least towards apex, but sometimes green, purple or whitish, deeply toothed, hairy at the base. Calyx 8-10 mm; tube usually densely and uniformly villous; teeth 4-5 × 1 mm, patent, triangular-lanceolate, separated by acute sinuses. Corolla 15-20 mm, bright yellow; throat closed.{\i  N. & C. Europe, westwards to Denmark and Switzerland and extending south-eastwards to S. Russia}. Au Cz Da Fe Ge He Hu It Ju Po Rm Rs (N, B, C, W, ?E) Su.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b nemorosum}: Leaves usually at least 15 mm wide. Bracts ovate-cordate to ovate-lanceolate, usually violet-blue. 2n = 18.{\i  Throughout the range of the species}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\i Ecotypic variants}:
\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Autumnal: type of the species.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Aestival: {\b M. moravicum} H. Braun, {\i Österr. Bot. Zeitschr.}{\b  34}: 422 (1884).
\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Montane:{\b  M. nemorosum} subsp.{\b  silesiacum} Rormiger, {\i Viert. Naturf. Ges. Zürich }{\b 55}: 314 (1910).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b debreceniense} (Rapaics) Soó, {\i Feddes Repert.}{\b  24}: 148 (1927): Leaves 8-12 mm wide. Bracts narrowly lanceolate, green. {\i Sandy soils. • Hungary, W. Romania}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 8. M. polonicum} (Beauverd) Soó,{\i  Feddes Repert. }{\b 24}: 156 (1927). Like {\b 7} but calyx-tube puberulent or subglabrous, except sometimes for long hairs on veins and margin; calyx-teeth longer and narrower; bracts lanceolate, violet-blue. •{\i  Poland and W. part of U.S.S.R.} ?Ge Po Rs (B, C, W).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\i Ecotypic variants}:
\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Autumnal: type of the species.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Aestival: subsp. {\b hayekii} Soó, {\i loc. cit.} (1927).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    ({\b 9-12}).{\b  M. velebiticum} group. Leaves linear-lanceolate to lanceolate. Bracts violet-blue. Calyx puberulent to hirsute, with hairs between the veins as well as on them, those on the distal part of the calyx directed towards the apex, those on the proximal part deflexed (rarely subglabrous except for hairy veins).Corolla 14-22 mm, yellow.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Calyx-teeth 4-6 mm, patent; corolla 16-22 mm
\par
2 Calyx puberulent; bracts mostly entire .................................... {\b 9. velebiticum}
\par
2 Calyx hirsute; bracts toothed ..................................................... {\b 10. vaudense}
\par
1 Calyx-teeth 6-9 mm, porrect; corolla 14-16 mm
\par
3 Calyx hirsute ....................................................................... {\b 11. catalaunicum}
\par
3 Calyx puberulent ......................................................................... {\b 12. italicum}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 9. M. velebiticum} Borbás,{\i  Magyar Ind. Akad. Értesito }{\b 1882}: 9 (1882). Stem 25-50 cm, branched. Leaves 5-25 mm wide, lanceolate, entire. Bracts mostly entire, only the uppermost toothed. Calyx 7-8 mm, puberulent (rarely subglabrous except for veins); teeth 4-5 mm, triangular-lanceolate, patent. Corolla c. 20 mm; throat open. 2n = 18. •{\i  S. & S.W. Alps; mountains of E. & S. France and of N.W. Jugoslavia.} Ga He It Ju.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\i Ecotypic variants}:
\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Autumnal: var.{\b  meridionale} J. Murr,{\i  Deutsche Bot. Monatsschr.}{\b  17}: 100 (1899).
\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Aestival: type of the species.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b M. degenianum} Soó in Jáv., {\i Magyar Fl.} 1008 (1925), from N.W. Jugoslavia, differs in having the lower bracts hastate-dentate and the upper entire.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 10. M. vaudense} (Ronniger) Soó, {\i Feddes Repert.}{\b  24}: 153 (1927). Stem 20-50 cm, branched. Leaves 12-30 mm wide, lanceolate. Bracts deeply toothed. Calyx 8-10 mm, hirsute; teeth 4-6 mm, triangular-lanceolate, patent. Corolla 16-20 mm; throat closed. •{\i  S.W. Alps, Jura.} Ga He.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 11. M. catalaunicum} Freyn,{\i  Flora} ({\i Regensb}.) {\b 67}: 680 (1884). Stem 20-40 cm, branched. Leaves 6-10 mm wide, linear-lanceolate. Bracts ovate-lanceolate, toothed. Calyx 10-13 mm, hirsute; teeth 6-9 mm, linear-lanceolate, porrect. Corolla 14-16 mm; throat closed. •{\i  N.E. Spain.} Hs.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 12. M. italicum} Soó, {\i Feddes Repert.}{\b  24}: 152 (1927). Stem 20-50 cm, simple or branched. Leaves 5-25 mm wide, lanceolate. Bracts ovate to lanceolate, hastate-dentate. Calyx 7-10 mm, puberulent; teeth 6-9 mm, linear, porrect. Corolla 14-16 mm; throat closed. •{\i  Mountains of Italy.} It.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Ecotypic variants:
\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Autumnal: type of the species.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Aestival: subsp. {\b markgrafianum} Soó, {\i op. cit.} 153 (1927).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 13. M. bohemicum} A. Kerner,{\i  Sched. Fl. Exsicc. Austro-Hung.}{\b  1}: 35 (1881). Stem 20-25 cm, freely branched. Leaves 2 mm wide, linear. Bracts 1·5-3 mm wide, green, the lower entire, the upper hastate-dentate. Calyx c. 8 mm, subglabrous; teeth 4 mm, linear, more or less patent. Corolla c. 15 mm, yellow; lips shorter than the tube, the lower lip porrect; throat open. •{\i  Czechoslovakia and Austria.} Au Cz.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 14. M. subalpinum} (Juratzka) A. Kerner,{\i  op. cit. }{\b 1}: 32 (1881) (incl.{\i  M. angustissimum} G. Beck). Stem 20-40 cm, simple or branched. Leaves (2-)14-18 mm wide, linear to ovate-lanceolate. Bracts ovate-lanceolate, deeply toothed, violet-blue. Calyx 8-10 mm, glabrous or puberulent, but with longer hairs on veins and on margin; teeth 4-6 mm, linear, porrect. Corolla 18-20 mm, yellow; throat open. •{\i  E. Alps.} Au ?Cz ?Ge.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Ecotypic variants:
\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Aestival:{\b  M. grandiflorum} A. Kerner, {\i op. cit.}{\b  2}: 114 (1882).
\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Montane: type of the species.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    ({\b 15-17}). {\b M. bihariense} group. Leaves 6-30 mm wide, lanceolate to ovate-lanceolate. Bracts ovate-cordate, toothed, usually violet-blue, rarely green. Calyx 9-13 mm, glabrous or puberulent but with longer hairs on veins and on margin; teeth 6-10 mm, narrowly lanceolate, porrect. Corolla 12-24 mm, yellow; throat half-closed.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Calyx-teeth usually not more than 8 mm, separated by ± obtuse  
\par
  sinuses; calyx-tube without tuft of hairs; corolla 18-24 mm ..... {\b 15. bihariense}
\par
1 Calyx-teeth usually at least 8 mm, separated by ± acute sinuses; 
\par
  calyx-tube with tuft of hairs on upper side near the base
\par
2 Corolla 16-22 mm, with a tuft of short hairs inside between the  
\par
  insertion of the two filaments on either side, but otherwise 
\par
  glabrous ........................................................................... {\b 16. hoermannianum}
\par
2 Corolla 12-18 mm, with tufts of short hairs as above, but also 
\par
  with a tuft of longer hairs on each side at the insertion of 
\par
  longer filaments ........................................................................... {\b 17. doerfleri}
\par

\par
255}
\par