{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 characters are distributed sporadically through populations which are otherwise typical, and show no certain correlation with other characters. Other variants recognized as subspecies (e.g. subsp.{\b  commutatum} (Tausch ex A. Kerner) C. E. Britton,{\i  Trans. Proc. Bot. Soc. Edinb. }{\b 33}: 371 (1943), and subsp.{\b  alpestre} Ronniger, {\i Viert. Naturf: Ges. Zürich}{\b  55}: 322 (1910)), although they may show a fairly well-defined geographical range, are distinguished mainly or entirely by characters which are used to define the ecotypic variants, so that a very confusing taxonomic situation results. It is also apparent that a large part of the infraspecific variation is clinal (usually from north to south), without any appreciable discontinuities. It seems best, therefore, in the present state of our knowledge not to give formal recognition to any infraspecific taxa, but to refer the reader to the literature cited.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc {\b 28.            Tozzia}               L.
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc By D.A. Webb.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Perennial, hemiparasitic herbs with scaly rhizome; leaves opposite, undivided. Flowers in bracteate, axillary and terminal racemes. Calyx unequally 3- to 5-toothed. Corolla-tube obconical; limb 5-lobed, somewhat 2-lipped. Stamens 4, didynamous, shortly exserted. Stigma capitate, small. Capsule loculicidal or indehiscent; ovules 4; seed 1.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. T. alpina} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 607 (1753). Rhizome covered by fleshy, whitish, ovate, imbricate scales. Stems up to 50 cm, erect, branched, 4-angled, usually hairy on the angles. Leaves 10-25 mm, ovate, sessile, rather fleshy, usually coarsely serrate or crenate near the base. Racemes numerous, short; pedicels short, filiform, elongating in fruit. Calyx 1·5-3 mm, campanulate; teeth short and broad, often obscure. Corolla 4-10 mm, yellow, spotted with purple inside; upper lip erect, lower patent. Anthers apiculate at base. {\i Damp places, among coarse herbs, mostly from} 1000{\i  to} 2250{\i  m; somewhat calcicole. • Mountains of Europe, from the Jura and the Carpathians southwards to the Pyrenees, N. Appennini and Bulgaria.} Au Bu Cz Ga Ge He Hs It Ju Po Rm Rs (W).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b alpina}: Corolla 6-10 mm, bright golden-yellow; anthers 1-1·6 mm. 2n = 20.{\i  From the Pyrenees to Austria and W. Jugoslavia.}
\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b carpathica} (Woloszczak) Dostál,{\i  Kvetena CSR} 1318 (1949) ({\i T. carpathica} Woloszczak): Corolla 4-7 mm, pale yellow; anthers 0·6-1 mm.{\i  Carpathians; E. part of Balkan peninsula}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc {\b 29.             Euphrasia}             L. 
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc By P.F. Yeo.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Annual (rarely perennial) hemiparasitic herbs. Leaves opposite, crenate to incise-dentate. Flowers zygomorphic, in bracteate, terminal, spike-like racemes. Bracts ({\i floral leaves}) large and leaflike; bracteoles absent. Calyx tubular or campanulate, 4-lobed. Corolla white to purple, marked with deep violet lines, and with yellow spots on lower lip and throat; limb 2-lipped, the upper lip galeate, the lower longer, flat, patent, 3-lobed with emarginate lobes. Stamens 4, didynamous; loculi parallel, spurred, one loculus with a much longer spur than the other. Stigma capitate. Capsule loculicidal; seeds numerous.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Most of the species are very variable and weakly differentiated, and they hybridize readily; the taxonomy of the genus is, therefore, difficult. Populations frequently occur in which one character falls outside the normal range of variation and hybrids sometimes occur independently of the parents, as well as commonly with them. The most frequent hybrids are mentioned below.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Although with sufficient experience it is possible to assign the great majority of populations to a species, it is extremely difficult to provide rigidly diagnostic descriptions and consequently to construct a key. The keys given here are designed to be used with population-samples, not with individual plants. It is therefore necessary to have a representative sample of a population taken from a small area, and to ignore extreme states of each character.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28   The keys make no allowance for extreme and relatively rare variants or for hybrids; otherwise it would have been necessary to prefix ' usually ' to almost every phrase. Determinations should, therefore, be checked by reference to a good herbarium.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28   The most important taxonomic characters are length of internodes; node at which the lowest flower is situated; number of branches; shape, size and indumentum of leaves; size of corolla; size, shape and indumentum of capsule. In this account the presence or absence of eglandular or short glandular hairs is not regarded as very important; the presence or absence of long glandular hairs is, however, an important character.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28   The nodes are counted from the base, excluding the cotyledonary node; measurements of leaves and internodes refer to those on the main stem; 'lower floral leaves' indicates those of the lowest four flowering nodes. The length of the corolla is measured from the base of the tube to the apex of the upper lip in its normal condition {\i in vivo},{\i  i.e.} with the lobes erect or recurved. Measurement of dried specimens in which the lobes of the upper lip have become fully extended in pressing adds 0·5-1 to the length. 
\pard\f0\fs28   The name{\i  E. officinalis} L. is variously used by modern authors as a 'collective species' to comprise many (or even nearly all) of the species described below. The type of{\i  E. officinalis} is a mixture of {\b 3} and {\b 17}. P. D. Sell and P. F. Yeo,{\i  Bot. Jour. Linn. Soc.}{\b  63}: 201 (1970) have selected the specimen of 3 as lectotype, but reject the name {\i E. officinalis} as a nomen ambiguum.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Literature: R. von Wettstein,{\i  Monographie der Gattung} Euphrasia. Leipzig. 1896. A. Chabert,{\i  Bull. Herb. Boiss.} ser. 2, {\b 2}: 121-152, 265-280, 497-520 (1902). E. Joergensen,{\i  Bergens Mus. Aarb. }{\b 1916-1917},{\i  Naturvid. Roekke}{\b  5}: 1-337 (1919). H. W. Pugsley,{\i  Jour. Linn. Soc. London} ({\i Bot}.) {\b 48}: 467-544 (1930);{\i  Jour. Bot.} ({\i London}){\b  74}: 273-288 (1936). M. Smejkal,{\i  Biol. Práce Slovensk. Akad. Vied} ({\i Bratislava}) {\b  9}({\b 9}): 1-83 (1963).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Perennial; leaves all ± similar, with up to 12 teeth on
\par
  each side (Açores)
\par
2 Cauline leaves suborbicular; calyx not more than 7·5 mm;
\par
  capsule obcordate ...................................................................... {\b 1. grandiflora}
\par
2 Cauline leaves deltate; calyx c. 9·5 mm; capsule acuminate .......... {\b 2. azorica}
\par
1 Annual; lower leaves markedly different in shape from 
\par
  upper, none with more than 9 teeth on each side
\par
3 Middle and upper leaves bearing glandular hairs with
\par
  multicellular stalk c. 10-12 times as long as the gland
\par
4 Capsule more than twice as long as wide ...................................... {\b 11. arctica}
\par
4 Capsule not more than twice as long as wide ......... ({\b 3-8}). {\b rostkoviana} group
\par
3 Middle and upper leaves without glandular hairs, or 
\par
  glandular hairs with stalk of 1-2 cells, not more than
\par
  6 times as long as the gland
\par
5 Anthers light yellowish-brown
\par
6 Corolla 7-11 mm ........................................................................... {\b 22. christii}
\par
6 Corolla not more than 6 mm
\par
7 Corolla 3-3·5 mm; lower floral leaves with obtuse teeth ............ {\b 38. bottnica}
\par
7 Corolla 4·5-6 mm; lower floral leaves with acute teeth ................ {\b 40. taurica}
\par
5 Anthers dark brown or purplish
\par
8 Capsule glabrous, or with a few small cilia; at least some 
\par
  leaf-teeth distant
\par

\par
257}
\par