{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 linear-oblong, shorter than flowers. Calyx 4-6 mm, divided almost to the base, with linear-lanceolate lobes. Corolla 7-8 mm, white, striped with purple. Capsule 5 mm, ellipsoid, pubescent above; style persistent, equalling capsule.{\i  Rock-crevices and under overhanging rocks. • Lowlands of S. Spain, from Malaga to Orihuela.} Hs.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc {\b 26.            Castilleja}            Mutis ex L. fil. 
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc By A.O. Chater & D.A. Webb.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Perennial herbs, probably hemiparasitic, with alternate, simple, sessile leaves. Flowers zygomorphic, in dense, terminal, bracteate, spike-like racemes; bracts large, coloured. Calyx tubular, laterally compressed, 2- to 4-lobed. Corolla with a long tube and 2-lipped limb; lips subparallel, the upper laterally compressed, entire, the lower shorter, 3-lobed. Stamens 4, didynamous, included under upper lip of corolla; anthers with one lobe medifixed, the other pendent. Stigma capitate. Capsule loculicidal; seeds numerous.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Literature: O. V. Rebristaja,{\i  Nov. Syst. Pl. Vasc.} ({\i Leningrad}){\b  1964}: 283-311 (1964).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Corolla 20-22 mm, the lower lip nearly as long as the upper; 
\par
  capsule 8-10 mm ........................................................................... {\b 2. schrenkii}
\par
1 Corolla 22-30 mm, the lower lip c. 2/3 as long as the upper; 
\par
  capsule 10-15 mm
\par
2 Densely grey-pubescent; stems 30-50 cm; bracts ovate-lanceolate, 
\par
  the lower usually ± entire .................................................................. {\b 1. pallida}
\par
2 Sparsely hairy, not grey; stems 10-30 cm; bracts ovate,
\par
  all ± pinnatifid .............................................................................. {\b 3. lapponica}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. C. pallida} (L.) Sprengel,{\i  Syst. Veg. }{\b 2}: 774 (1825). Densely greyish-pubescent. Stems 30-50 cm, simple, erect. Leaves 30-70 × 2-7 mm, linear to lanceolate, acute, entire. Racemes 4-6 cm in flower, elongating to 9-12 cm in fruit; bracts up to 25 × 10 mm, ovate-lanceolate, pale yellow, the lower entire, the upper pinnatifid. Calyx 14-18 mm. Corolla 23-30 mm, pale yellow; lower lip much shorter than the upper. Style scarcely exserted. Capsule 12-15 mm, oblong-ovoid, acute, glabrous.{\i  Meadows and forest margins. S. Ural.} Rs (C). ({\i Siberia, N.E. Asia}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. C. schrenkii} Rebr., {\i Nov. Syst. Pl. Vasc.} ({\i Leningrad}){\b  1964}: 293 (1964). Like {\b 1} but rather sparsely pubescent and not greyish; stems 20-30 cm; racemes 2·5-3 cm in flower, c. 5 cm in fruit; corolla 20-22 mm, with lower lip only slightly shorter than the upper; capsule 8-10 mm.{\i  Tundra. • N.W. Russia} ({\i near Lovozero, Arkangel'sk. Obl}.). Rs (N).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Perhaps only subspecifically distinct from {\b 1}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 3. C. lapponica} (Gand.) Rebr., {\i op. cit.} 291 (1964) ({\i C. arctica} auct. eur., non Krylov & Serg.). Sparsely hairy. Stems 10-30 cm, simple, ascending or erect. Leaves 30-50 × 4-15 mm, linear-lanceolate to ovate, entire or pinnatifid. Racemes 4-8 cm in flower, elongating to c. 12 cm in fruit; bracts 20-30 × 8-20 mm, ovate, pale yellow, all more or less pinnatifid. Calyx 15-17 mm, hirsute. Corolla 22-25 mm, pale yellow. Style distinctly exserted. Capsule 10-15 mm. 2n = 48.{\i  Tundra, river-banks and stony slopes. Arctic Russia}. Rs (N).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc {\b 27.              Melampyrum}                  L.
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc By R. de Soó & D.A. Webb.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Hemiparasitic annuals. Leaves opposite, undivided, usually entire. Flowers in terminal, bracteate spikes or racemes. Calyx tubular, not inflated, with 4 acute, entire teeth. Corolla 2-lipped; tube cylindrical to obconical; upper lip cucullate, usually with margins more or less recurved; lower lip with 3 short, entire lobes. Stamens 4, didynamous, included under upper lip of corolla; anther-lobes equally mucronate. Capsule loculicidal, compressed at right angles to the septum; seeds 1-4, smooth.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   In this and related genera the leaves on the main stem which lie between the uppermost branches and the lowest flowers of the terminal inflorescence are known as{\i  intercalary} leaves.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   The species of this genus, as of some other genera of hemiparasitic Scrophulariaceae, exhibit a characteristic type of variation, which, since it is to some extent correlated with variation in the season of germination and flowering, was originally described as seasonal dimorphism; but as many species have more than two variants, and since habitat-factors unconnected with seasonal variation have been shown to be relevant, it is now sometimes referred to as 'pseudoseasonal polymorphism'. The variation appears to be mainly eoctypic in nature; its seasonal aspect arises largely from the selection of early flowering varieties in meadows which are cut for hay in midsummer. These variants have been very differently treated by different authors, being regarded sometimes as species, sometimes as subspecies, varieties or forms; and in many cases the information available is insufficient to distinguish between true ecotypic variation and purely phenotypic modification. The noncommittal term ' ecotypic variant' is therefore used. since these variants cut across the normal pattern of geographical speciation and subspeciation it is not possible- at least until more experimental work has been done- to accommodate them satisfactorily in any taxonomic categories; on the other hand the constant nature of the intraspecific variation throughout the genus demands some recognition. The principal recurrent variants are, therefore, designated and described below for the genus as a whole, and under each species or subspecies are listed such of these variants as have been recognized within it, together with the basionym (at whatever rank this may happen to be) under which each was first validly described. Such citation does not imply approval of the appropriateness of the rank in question.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   In {\i Melampyrum} the recurrent ecotypic variants are as follows:
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   (1) {\i Autumnal}. Branches numerous, patent or arcuate; internodes numerous, short; intercalary leaves numerous. Late flowering. Mainly in woods and scrub.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28   (2) {\i Aestival.} Branches 0-2 pairs, short, non-flowering, erect; internodes few, long; intercalary leaves absent; cotyledons often present at anthesis; flowers often larger than in (1). Early-flowering. Mainly in meadows.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28   (3) {\i Montane}. Branches 1-2 pairs, suberect, flowering; internodes numerous, fairly long; intercalary leaves 0-2 pairs. Leaves often fleshy. Mid-season-flowering. Mainly in mountain pastures.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28   (4) {\i Segetal}. Like ({\b 3}) but with shorter internodes and not more than 1 pair of intercalary leaves. Mid-season-flowering. In cornfields.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Species which do not exhibit ecotypic variation usually conform in their morphology to that of the autumnal variant.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Literature: G. Beauverd,{\i  Mem. Soc. Phys. Hist. Nat. Genève} {\b 38}: 291-657 (1916). C. E. Britton,{\i  Trans. Proc. Bot. Soc. Edinb.}{\b  33}: 357-379 (1943). J. Jalas,{\i  Ann. Bot. Fenn.}{\b  4}: 486-526 (1967). A. J. E. Smith, {\i Watsonia }{\b 5}: 336-367 (1963). R. de Soó,{\i  Feddes Repert.}{\b  23}: 159-176, 383-397;{\b  24}: 127-193 (1926-1927).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Inflorescence dense, not secund; bracts densely imbricate,
\par
   concealing the axis (Sect.{\i  Spicata})
\par
2 Bracts cordate, folded along the midrib and with apex 
\par
  deflexed; inflorescence distinctly 4-angled .................................. {\b 1. cristatum}
\par
2 Bracts not cordate, ± flat, with apex seldom deflexed;
\par
  inflorescence cylindrical or obscurely 4-angled
\par

\par
253}
\par