{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 53. V. polita} Fries,{\i  Nov. Fl. Suec.} 63 (1819) ({\i V. didyma} auct., vix Ten.). Like {\b 52} but leaves more regularly crenate-serrate, the lower often wider than long; calyx-segments broadly ovate, often overlapping near base; corolla blue; capsule with long glandular hairs and short, crispate eglandular hairs; style c. 1·5 mm, distinctly exceeding the wide sinus. 2n = 14, 18.{\i  Cultivated ground. Most of Europe except the Arctic, but probably not native in the northeast.} All except Az Fa Is Sb.
\par

\par
 
\pard\f0\fs28   {\b 54. V. opaca} Fries,{\i  op. cit.} 64 (1819). Like {\b 52} but leaves very shallowly crenate, the lower often wider than long; calyx-segments oblong-lanceolate to oblanceolate; corolla deep blue; capsule with long glandular hairs and short, crispate eglandular hairs; style 1-1·5 mm, usually more or less equalling the wide sinus.{\i  Cultivated ground and waste places; somewhat calcicole. C. Europe, extending to E. France, C. Fennoscandia, C. Russia and Bulgaria.} Au Be Bu Cz Da Fe Ga Ge He Ho Hu It Ju No Po Rm Rs (B, C, W) Su.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 55. V. persica} Poiret in Lam., {\i Encycl. Méth. Bot.}{\b  8}: 542 (1808) ({\i V. tournefortii} C.C. Gmelin pro parte, non Vill.). Pubescent. Stems (5)10-60 cm, procumbent. Leaves 5-25 mm, shortly petiolate, broadly ovate with more or less truncate base, mostly alternate but the lowest opposite. Flowers solitary in leaf-axils; pedicels 5-30 mm, recurved in fruit and much exceeding the subtending leaf. Calyx-segments (4-)6-7 mm, ovate-lanceolate, not or only slightly overlapping at base; corolla 8-12 mm in diameter, blue. Capsule 4-5 × 7-10 mm, 2-lobed, with very divergent lobes and wide, shallow sinus, strongly keeled, with eglandular hairs on sides and long glandular hairs on keel; style 2·5-3 mm, much exceeding the sinus. Seeds c. 1·75 × 1·25 mm, broadly elliptical, concave on one face. 2n = 28.{\i  Cultivated ground. Naturalized almost throughout Europe.} [All except Fa Rs (N) Sb.] (S.W. Asia.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   First recorded in Europe c. 1800; now in many regions the most abundant annual weed in the genus.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 56. V. filiformis} Sm.,{\i  Trans. Linn. Soc. London }{\b 1}: 195 (1791). Procumbent, pubescent perennial, with slender stems up to 50 cm, freely rooting at the nodes, often mat-forming. Leaves 5-10 mm, petiolate, reniform, crenate, mostly opposite on non-flowering stems but alternate on flowering stems. Flowers solitary in leaf-axils; pedicels up to 40 mm, often deflexed after flowering. Calyx-segments 3-5 mm, oblanceolate to elliptical, obtuse; corolla 10-15 mm in diameter, pale lilac-blue. Capsule (rarely produced) c. 3 × 4 mm, 2-lobed, with subparallel lobes and rather wide sinus, subglabrous except for long hairs on keel; style c. 3 mm, much exceeding the sinus. Seeds c. 1·5 × 1 mm, elliptical, shallowly concave on one face. 2n = 14.{\i  Damp grassland. Originally cultivated for ornament; now widespread as a weed in gardens and lawns, and naturalized among native vegetation in several regions, mainly in N.W. and C. Europe.} [Au Be Br Cz Da Ga Ge Hb He Ho Po Rs (K) Su.] ({\i Caucasus and N. Anatolia.})
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   The frequent sterility of this species is apparently associated with strong self-incompatibility and vigorous growth of single clones.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 57. V. hederifolia} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 13 (1753). Pubescent. Stems 10-60 cm, procumbent. Leaves 5-15 mm, petiolate, suborbicular in outline, 3- to 7-lobed with large terminal lobe, mostly alternate, but the lowest opposite. Flowers solitary in leaf-axils; pedicels not or scarcely exceeding leaves. Calyx-segments 4-5 mm, cordate-ovate, acute, strongly ciliate, erect or suberect in fruit. Corolla 4-9 mm in diameter, blue or lilac. Capsule c. 4 × 4 mm, subglobose, shallowly 4-lobed, glabrous; style 0·3-1·1 mm. Seeds c. 2·5 × 2·25 mm, suborbicular, cup-shaped.{\i  Most Europe except the Arctic, but doubtfully native in much of the north and north-east.} All except Az ?Cr Fa Is Rs (N) Sb.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Pedicels not more than 2½ times as long as calyx in fruit
\par
2 Middle lobe of leaf wider than long; pedicels usually 
\par
  glabrous except for an adaxial row of hairs ..................... ({\b a}) subsp. {\b triloba}
\par
2 Middle lobe of leaf longer than wide; pedicels equally 
\par
  hairy all round ....................................................... ({\b b}) subsp. {\b sibthorpioides} 
\par
1 Pedicels (2-)3-7 times as long as calyx in fruit
\par
3 Middle lobe of leaf wider than long; 
\par
  style 0·7-1 mm .......................................................... ({\b d}) subsp. {\b hederifolia}
\par
3 Middle lobe of leaf longer than wide; 
\par
  style less than 0·5 mm ................................................... ({\b c}) subsp. {\b lucorum}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b triloba} (Opiz) Celak.,{\i  Prodr. Fl. Böhm.} 333 (1871) Leaves thick, deeply 3(5)-lobed; middle lobe much wider than long. Pedicels not more than 2½ times as long as calyx, usually glabrous except for an adaxial row of short hairs. Calyx pubescent, shortly ciliate. Corolla 4-6 mm in diameter, dark blue Style c. 1 mm. 2n = 18.{\i  Cultivated fields and other dry, open habitats. S. & S.C. Europe}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b sibthorpioides} (Debeaux, Degen & Hervier) Walters{\i  Bot. Jour.Linn. Soc.}{\b  65}: 269 (1972) ({\i V. sibthorpioides} Debeaux, Degen & Hervier): Like subsp. ({\b a}) but middle lobe of leaves longer than wide; pedicels equally hairy on all sides; corolla 2·5-3·5 mm in diameter; style 0·3-0·6 mm.{\i  Shady, calcareous mountain rocks. S.E. Spain.} ({\i N. Africa}.)
\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b c}) Subsp. {\b lucorum} (Klett & Richter) Hartl in Hegi,{\i  Ill. Fl. Mitteleur.} ed. 2, {\b 6}({\b 1}): 203 (1968): Leaves thin, very shallowly 5 to 7-lobed; middle lobe longer than wide. Pedicels 3½-7 times as long as calyx, with an adaxial row of short hairs and usually some patent hairs, especially in distal half. Calyx shortly ciliate, otherwise glabrous or sparsely pubescent. Corolla 4-6 mm in diameter, pale lilac. Style 0·3-0·5 mm. 2n = 36.{\i  Woods and hedges; also as a weed in cultivated ground. N., N.W. & C. Europe, from Britain and S.W. Finland southwards, and extending to N. part of Balkan peninsula}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b d}) Subsp. {\b hederifolia}: Leaves rather thick, 3- to 5-lobed; middle lobe wider than long. Pedicels (2)3-4 times as long as calyx, usually glabrous except for an adaxial row of rather long hairs. Calyx long-ciliate, otherwise glabrous. Corolla 6-9 mm in diameter, pale blue with white centre. Style 0·7-1 mm. 2n = 54.{\i  Cultivated ground. Throughout the range of the species.}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Subsp. ({\b d}) seems to have arisen as an allopolyploid hybrid between subspp. ({\b a}) and ({\b c}), and has now achieved, as a weed of cultivation, the widest distribution of all the subspecies.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 58. V. cymbalaria} Bodard,{\i  Mém. Vér. Cymb.} 3 (1798). Like {\b 57} but leaves 5- to 9-lobed with subequal lobes; pedicels much exceeding leaves; calyx-segments 3-4 mm, obovate, obtuse, patent in fruit; corolla 6-10 mm, white; capsule shallowly 2-lobed, ciliate; style c. 1·5 mm; seeds c. 2 × 2 mm. 2n = 18, 36, 54. {\i Cultivated ground and other dry, open habitats. S. Europe.} Al Bl Bu Co Cr Ga Gr Hs It Ju Lu Rs (K) Sa Si.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b   V. panormitana} Tineo ex Guss.,{\i  Fl. Sic. Prodr., Suppl.} 4 (1832), described from Sicilia, differs in its smaller fruit and flower, its shorter style and its subglabrous capsule. It may represent a distinct subspecies, but plants with some of these characters occur elsewhere in the Mediterranean region.
\par

\par
 
\pard\f0\fs28  Sect. PSEUDOLYSIMACHIUM Koch. Perennial. Flowers in dense, many-flowered terminal racemes, spikes or panicles. Corolla-tube longer than wide. Capsule ovoid to suborbicular, only slightly compressed, scarcely emarginate, dehiscing loculicidally only at apex. Seeds c. 1 mm, relatively thick, smooth, with convex back, flat chalazal face, and excentric chalaza.
\par

\par
250}
\par