{\rtf1\ansi \deff4\deflang1033{\fonttbl{\f4\froman\fcharset0\fprq2 Times New Roman;}}{\colortbl;\red0\green0\blue0;\red0\green0\blue255;\red0\green255\blue255;\red0\green255\blue0;\red255\green0\blue255;\red255\green0\blue0;\red255\green255\blue0;\red255\green255\blue255;\red0\green0\blue128;\red0\green128\blue128;\red0\green128\blue0;\red128\green0\blue128;\red128\green0\blue0;\red128\green128\blue0;\red128\green128\blue128;\red192\green192\blue192;}{\stylesheet{\widctlpar \f4\fs20\lang2057 \snext0 Normal;}{\*\cs10 \additive Default Paragraph Font;}}{\info{\author dddd}{\operator dddd}{\creatim\yr1999\mo1\dy20\hr11\min23}{\revtim\yr1999\mo1\dy20\hr11\min24}{\version2}{\edmins1}{\nofpages4}{\nofwords1087}{\nofchars6199}{\*\company  }{\vern57431}}\widowctrl\ftnbj\aenddoc\hyphcaps0 \fet0\sectd \linex0 {\*\pnseclvl1\pnucrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl2\pnucltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl3\pndec\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl4\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl5\pndec\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl6\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl7\pnlcrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl8\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl9\pnlcrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}
\pard\plain \ \f4\fs20\lang2057 {\fs28 veins beneath; lower leaves hairier than upper. Calyx 5-7 mm, glabrous, or villous in the sinuses. Corolla 13-16 mm; lilac. Capsule 6-7\'b75 mm, obcordate.}{\i\fs28  Shallow soils near lava-flows on mountains. \bullet  A\'e7ores }{\fs28 (}{\i\fs28 central group}{\fs28 ). Az.
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 2. E. azorica}{\fs28  H. C. Watson,}{\i\fs28  London Jour. Bot.}{\fs28  (}{\i\fs28 Hooker}{\fs28 ) }{\b\fs28 3}{\fs28 : 598 (1844). Like }{\b\fs28 1}{\fs28  but stem usually shorter; leaves not blackening on drying, mostly deltate, with subacute to acute teeth, hispid beneath, strigulose-scabrid above; upper leaves usually hairier than lower; calyx 9\'b75 mm; corolla 15-17 mm, white; capsule 10 mm, cuspidate, twisted at maturity.}{\i\fs28  Mountains. \bullet  A\'e7ores}{\fs28  (}{\i\fs28 western group}{\fs28 ). Az.
\par 
\par   Sect. EUPHRASIA. Annual. Leaves rapidly changing in shape from below upwards. Corolla not more than 13\'b75 mm; tube cylindrical.
\par 
\par   Subsect.}{\i\fs28  Ciliatae}{\fs28  Joerg. Capsule densely ciliate with long, fine hairs.
\par 
\par    (}{\b\fs28 3-8}{\fs28 ).}{\b\fs28  E. rostkoviana}{\fs28  group. Leaves with multicellular glandular hairs having the stalk about 10 times as long as the gland. Teeth of middle leaves usually with both edges convex. Capsule not more than twice as long as wide, usually shorter than the calyx, truncate or more or less emarginate.
\par 
\par }
\pard \li200\ {\fs28 1 Corolla not more than 7 mm
\par 2 Lowest flower at node 5-8; branches usually 1-4 pairs .................. }{\b\fs28 5. anglica}{\fs28 
\par 2 Lowest flower at node 2-6(-7); branches usually 0-2 pairs
\par 3 Corolla not more than 6 mm
\par 4 Cauline leaves usually 4-9 mm, broadly ovate to 
\par   elliptical, with rounded to cordate (rarely cuneate) 
\par   base; glandular hairs usually numerous ........................................... }{\b\fs28 7. hirtella}{\fs28 
\par 4 Cauline leaves usually 2\'b75-8 mm, elliptical to elliptic-
\par   obovate, with cuneate base; glandular hairs often sparse .......... }{\b\fs28 8. drosocalyx}{\fs28 
\par 3 Corolla more than 6 mm
\par 5 Plant not more than 10(-15) cm; lower floral leaves 
\par   3-6(-7) mm, shorter than the flowers ............................................. }{\b\fs28 4. rivularis}{\fs28 
\par 5 Plant up to 20 cm; lower floral leaves 4-12 mm, usually
\par   at least as long as the flowers .......................................................... }{\b\fs28 7. hirtella}{\fs28 
\par 1 Corolla more than 7 mm
\par 6 Lowest flower at node 2-5(-6)
\par 7 Corolla 9-12\'b75 mm; lower floral leaves 5-12(-20) mm ........... }{\b\fs28 3. rostkoviana}{\fs28 
\par 7 Corolla not more than 9 mm; lower floral leaves not 
\par   more than 6(-7) mm ....................................................................... }{\b\fs28 4. rivularis}{\fs28 
\par 6 Lowest flower at node 5 or above
\par 8 Leaves dull greyish-green, \'b1 strongly flushed and 
\par   punctate with dull violet or black; corolla usually 
\par   lilac to deep reddish-purple ............................................................. }{\b\fs28 6. vigursii}{\fs28 
\par 8 Leaves light or dark green, usually without much purple
\par   pigment; corolla usually with at least the lower lip white
\par 9 Stem usually erect, with erect or divergent branches; lower floral
\par    internodes mostly 1\'bd-3 times as long as the leaves; 
\par    corolla 8-12 mm ........................................................................ }{\b\fs28 3. rostkonana}{\fs28 
\par 9 Stem usually flexuous, with flexuous or arcuate branches;
\par    lower floral internodes mostly less than 1\'bd times as long
\par    as the leaves; corolla 8 mm or less ................................................. }{\b\fs28 5. anglica}{\fs28 
\par 
\par }
\pard \ {\fs28    }{\b\fs28 3. E. rostkoviana}{\fs28  Hayne,}{\i\fs28  Darst. Beschr. Arzn. Gew\'e4chse}{\b\fs28  9}{\fs28 : t. 7 (1825). Stem up to 35(-50) cm, erect, with up to 8(-12) pairs of erect or divergent branches. Cauline internodes mostly much longer than the leaves. Corolla 8-12\'b75 mm; lower lip white, the upper frequently lilac.}{\i\fs28  Throughout a large part of Europe, but absent from parts of the south and east and many of the islands.}{\fs28  Al Au Be Br Bu Cz Da Fe Ga Ge Hb He Ho ?Hs Hu It Ju Po Rm Rs (N, B, C, W) Su.
\par 
\par   In C. Europe intergradation with }{\b\fs28 9}{\fs28  takes place, giving large populations of plants some with and some without long glandular hairs, but similar in other characters.
\par 
\par }
\pard \li200\ {\fs28 1 Lowest flower at node 2-6; cauline internodes 2-6(-10)
\par   times as long as the leaves ............................................... (}{\b\fs28 a}{\fs28 ) subsp. }{\b\fs28 montana}{\fs28 
\par 1 Lowest flower usually at node 6 or higher; cauline internodes  
\par   mostly not more than 3 times as long as the leaves
\par 2 Lowest flower usually at node 6-10; lower floral leaves
\par   up to 15 mm ................................................................ (}{\b\fs28 b}{\fs28 ) subsp. }{\b\fs28 rostkoviana}{\fs28 
\par 2 Lowest flower usually at node 9-16; lower floral leaves
\par   usually not more than 9 mm .......................................... (}{\b\fs28 c}{\fs28 ) subsp. }{\b\fs28 campestris}{\fs28 
\par 
\par }
\pard \ {\fs28   (}{\b\fs28 a}{\fs28 ) Subsp. }{\b\fs28 montana}{\fs28  (Jordan) Wettst., }{\i\fs28 Denkschr. Akad. Wiss. Math.-Nat. Kl.}{\fs28  (}{\i\fs28 Wien}{\fs28 ) }{\b\fs28 70}{\fs28 : 319 (1901) (}{\i\fs28 E. montana}{\fs28  Jordan): Stem with 0-3(-4) pairs of branches. Cauline internodes 2-6(-10) times as long as the leaves. Lowest flower at node 2-6. Lower floral leaves up to 12(-20) mm, orbicular to broadly deltate. Corolla 9-12\'b75 mm. Capsule 4\'b75-5 mm, often longer than the calyx, sometimes emarginate. 2n = 22.}{\i\fs28  Meadows and pastures, mainly in the mountains. \bullet  Throughout most of the range of the species.}{\fs28 
\par   (}{\b\fs28 b}{\fs28 ) Subsp. }{\b\fs28 rostkoviana}{\fs28 : stem with up to 5(-12) pairs of branches. Cauline internodes mostly not more than 3 times as long as the leaves. Lowest flower at node (3-)6-10(-14). Lower floral leaves up to 15 mm, deltate to oblong-ovate. Corolla (6\'b75-)8-12 mm. Capsule 4-5 mm, not longer than the calyx. 2n = 22. }{\i\fs28 Meadows and pastures. Throughout the range of the species}{\fs28 .
\par 
\par   Plants from Finland and N. Russia which have rather small, oblong, closely-toothed leaves and often fewer branches and smaller corolla (6\'b75-9 mm) than plants from C. Europe, have been distinguished as }{\b\fs28 E. fennica}{\fs28  Kihlman,}{\i\fs28  Meddel. Soc. Fauna Fl. Fenn.}{\b\fs28  24}{\fs28 : 92 (1901). Early-flowering variants from the same area, also with small corollas, have been further separated as}{\b\fs28  E. onegensis}{\fs28  Cajander,}{\i\fs28  Meddel. Soc. Fauna Fl. Fenn.}{\b\fs28  27}{\fs28 : 101 (1901). There is continuous gradation between these plants and more normal representatives of subsp.}{\i\fs28  rostkoviana}{\fs28 .
\par 
\par   (}{\b\fs28 c}{\fs28 ) Subsp. }{\b\fs28 campestris}{\fs28  (Jordan) P. Fourn.,}{\i\fs28  Quatre Fl. Fr}{\fs28 . 785 (1937): stem with 3-8 pairs of branches. Cauline internodes not more than 2\'bd times as long as the leaves. Lowest flower at node 9-16. Lower floral leaves usually not more than 9 mm, broadly ovate to trullate. Corolla 8-11 mm. Capsule 4-5 mm, not longer than the calyx.}{\i\fs28  Dry grassland. From Belgium to Italy}{\fs28 .
\par 
\par   Probably of hybrid origin between }{\b\fs28 3}{\fs28 (}{\b\fs28 b}{\fs28 ) and }{\b\fs28 17}{\fs28 .
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 4. E. rivularis}{\fs28  Pugsley,}{\i\fs28  Jour. Bot.}{\fs28  (}{\i\fs28 London}{\fs28 ) }{\b\fs28 67}{\fs28 : 225 (1929). Stems up to 10(-15) cm, slender, with 0-2 pairs of short branches. Cauline internodes shorter than or up to c. 4 times as long as leaves. Lowest flower at node (2-)3-5(-6). Leaves 2-6(-7) mm, orbicular to elliptical, often with few glandular hairs, the cauline with 1-4 pairs of very obtuse teeth; lower floral leaves with 3-5(-6) pairs of obtuse to acute teeth. Corolla 6\'b75-9 mm; upper lip lilac; lower lip white or pale lilac. Capsule 3\'b75-5 mm, usually much less than twice as long as wide. 2n = 22.}{\i\fs28  Damp mountain pastures. \bullet  Wales and N.W. England}{\fs28 . Br.
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 5. E. anglica}{\fs28  Pugsley, }{\i\fs28 loc. cit.}{\fs28  (1929). Stem up to 20 cm, usually flexuous, with (0-)1-4(-6) pairs of arcuate or flexuous branches, the lowest less than 2(-3) cm above the cotyledons. Cauline internodes up to 2\'bd times, lower floral up to 1\'bd times as long as the leaves. Lowest flower at node 5-8. Lower floral leaves 5-12 mm, suborbicular or deltate to oblong-ovate, with 4-7 pairs of obtuse to acute teeth. Corolla 6\'b75-8 mm, white or pale lilac. Capsule 4-5\'b75 mm, up to twice as long as wide. 2n = 22.}{\i\fs28  Pastures and heaths. \bullet  Britain and Ireland; ?N.W. France}{\fs28 . Br ?Ga Hb.
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 6. E. vigursii}{\fs28  Davey,}{\i\fs28  Jour. Bot.}{\fs28  (}{\i\fs28 London}{\fs28 )}{\b\fs28  45}{\fs28 : 219 (1907). Like }{\b\fs28 5}{\fs28  but stem and branches erect, dark purplish; lowest branches
\par 
\par 260}
\par }