{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 intermediate in most respects between {\b 8} and {\b 9}, but have some glandular hairs in the inflorescence. They require further investigation.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Plants from Sicilia generally similar to {\b 9} but with linear bracts and yellowish-pink corolla c. 10 mm have been called {\b O. verna} subsp.{\b  sicula} (Guss.) P. D. Sell, {\i Watsonia}{\b  6}: 303 (1967). They appear to be intermediate between{\b  9} and {\b 15} and require further investigation.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 10. O. jaubertiana} (Boreau) D. Dietr. ex Walpers,{\i  Repert. Bot. Syst. }{\b 3}: 401 (1844). Appressed- or crispate-pubescent annual. Stem 20-50 cm, erect, rather sparingly branched. Leaves 5-18 × 1-3 mm, linear to linear-lanceolate. Inflorescences 2-6 cm, rather lax; bracts 6-12 mm, linear-lanceolate; flowers subsessile. Calyx 4-5 mm; teeth triangular to deltate, subacute. Corolla 7-9 mm, cream or yellow, sometimes tinged with pink, puberulent; lower lip more or less porrect. Anthers more or less included, glabrous or slightly hairy. Capsule 3·5-4 mm, elliptical, pubescent.{\i  Calcicole. • W., C. & S. France}. Ga.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Stem and leaves glandular-pubescent; anthers purplish 
\par
  ..................................................................................... ({\b c}) subsp. {\b cebennensis}
\par
1 Stem and leaves eglandular-puberulent; anthers yellow
\par
2 Corolla cream or pale yellow, tinged with red; leaves 
\par
  and bracts entire ........................................................... ({\b a}) subsp. {\b jaubertiana}
\par
2 Corolla bright yellow; leaves and lower bracts usually
\par
  with 1-2 pairs of teeth ................................................... ({\b b}) subsp. {\b chrysantha}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b jaubertiana}: Eglandular. Branches patent to ascending, flexuous. Leaves and bracts linear, entire. Calyx-teeth shorter than tube. Corolla cream or pale yellow, tinged with red. Anthers yellow.{\i  Almost throughout the range of the species}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b chrysantha} (Boreau) P. Fourn., {\i Quatre Fl. Fr.} 787 (1937) ({\i O. chrysantha} Boreau): Eglandular. Branches ascending to suberect, more or less rigid, usually short. Leaves and bracts linear-lanceolate, usually with 1-2 teeth on each side. Calyx-teeth equalling tube. Corolla bright yellow. Anthers yellow.{\i  Pastures and woodland-margins. N.C. France}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b c}) Subsp. {\b cebennensis} (Coste & Soulié) P. Fourn.,{\i  loc. cit.} (1937): Like ({\b b}) but stem and leaves glandular-pubescent; anthers purplish.{\i  Rocky slopes. S. France} ({\i Causse Noir, near Millau}).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Plants from N.E. Spain described as {\i O. cebennensis} var.{\i  roseiflora} Sennen appear to be transitional between subspp. ({\b a}) and ({\b c}).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 11. O. kaliformis} (Pourret) Pau,{\i  Bol. Soc. Aragon. Ci. Nat.}{\b  6}: 28 (1907) ({\i O. purpurea} sensu Lange pro parte, non (Desf.) G. Don fil.). Densely eglandular-appressed-puberulent annual. Stem 20-40 cm, erect, with short, ascending to suberect branches. Leaves 8-20 mm, linear, obtuse. Inflorescences 1-5 cm, fairly dense; bracts 3-5 mm, linear-oblong to ovate-lanceolate; pedicels 0·5-1 mm. Calyx 3 mm; teeth ovate-lanceolate, obtuse, about equalling the tube. Corolla c. 6 mm, purplish-pink, puberulent. Anthers glabrous, exserted. Capsule 2·5-3 mm, puberulent.{\i  Dry places; calcicole. • S. & E. Spain.} Hs.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 12. O. bocconei} (Guss.) Walpers,{\i  Repert. Bot. Syst.}{\b  3}: 400 (1844). Glabrous dwarf shrub. Stems branched from the base; branches 30-90 cm, up to 6 mm in diameter, pendent to erect; short, non-flowering shoots present. Leaves up to 45 × 7 mm, linear-oblong, acute. Inflorescences 3-8 cm, dense, aggregated to form fairly compact panicles; bracts up to 22 mm, leaf-like, at least the lowest greatly exceeding the flowers, usually recurved at apex; pedicels c. 1 mm. Calyx 6 mm; teeth triangular-lanceolate, acute. Corolla 8-10 mm, bright yellow; tube 5-6 mm. Anthers sparsely hairy at apex, more or less included. Capsule 7 mm, oblong-obovate, hairy at apex when young.{\i  Calcareous rocks. • Sicilia.} Si.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28     {\b 13. O. linkii} Heldr. & Sart. ex Boiss.,{\i  Diagn. Pl. Or. Nov.}{\b  3}({\b 3}): 177 (1856) (incl. {\i O. frutescens} Halácsy). Like {\b 12} but sometimes sparsely pubescent; stems not more than 50 cm; leaves not more than 4 mm wide, linear; inflorescences rather lax, not aggregated into panicles; bracts 4-7 mm, not recurved at apex and scarcely exceeding the flowers; corolla 7 mm with tube 4·5 mm; anthers sometimes glabrous; capsule 5-6 mm, glabrous.{\i  Mountain rocks. • C. & S. Greece, S. Aegean region.} Cr Gr.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 14. O. corsica} (Loisel.) G. Don fil., {\i Gen. Syst.}{\b  4}: 611 (1838). Scabrid-strigulose annual. Stems 8-15(-25) cm, procumbent, branched from the base. Leaves 6-10 mm, linear-oblong, obtuse. Inflorescences 1-2 cm, fairly dense; bracts 4-7 mm, linear-lanceolate; pedicels 1-2 mm. Calyx 4-5 mm; teeth triangular, obtuse. Corolla 5-6 mm, yellow (rarely white), pubescent; lower lip more or less porrect. Anthers glabrous, included. Capsule 4-5 mm, obovate, pubescent.{\i  Rocky mountain pastures.• Corse, Sardegna.} Co Sa.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 15. O. verna} (Bellardi) Dumort.,{\i  Fl. Belg.} 32 (1827) ({\i O. rubra} Besser). Appressed-pubescent to strigulose annual. Stem 10-50 cm, erect or ascending, somewhat 4-angled, simple or branched. Leaves 12-40 × 3-8 mm, lanceolate, crenate to serrate, rarely subentire. Inflorescences 3-10 cm, rather lax; flowers subsessile. Calyx 5-8 mm; teeth triangular, obtuse. Corolla 8-10 mm, pubescent, reddish-pink (rarely white); tube 5-6 mm; lower lip somewhat deflexed. Anthers glabrous, more or less exserted. Capsule 6-8 mm, oblong, pubescent. {\i Meadows, pastures, roadsides, cultivated fields and other disturbed habitats. Most of Europe, but absent from some of the islands.} All except Az Bl Cr Fa Is Sa Sb.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Very variable; the variation is, however, difficult to express adequately in infraspecific categories. There are local populations of distinct facies, and also some fairly well-marked ecotypes; apart from this the species is often cited as an illustration of seasonal dimorphism. The three best-known and most widespread variants are here treated as subspecies, but intermediate plants are fairly common, especially in N.C. Europe. Studies of cultivated plants and chromosome counts from different regions are required before the complex can be properly understood.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Bracts not exceeding flowers; branches usually long and
\par
  ± patent .............................................................................. ({\b c}) subsp. {\b serotina}
\par
1 Bracts exceeding flowers; branches (if present) usually
\par
  short and suberect
\par
2 Stem usually simple; lower internodes longer than leaves ({\b b}) subsp. {\b litoralis}
\par
2 Stem usually with several suberect branches; lower 
\par
  internodes shorter than or equalling leaves ........................... ({\b a}) subsp. {\b verna}
\par
                                        
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b verna}: stem 10-30 cm; lower internodes shorter than or equalling leaves. Branches fairly short, straight, suberect, the uppermost not more than 2 nodes below the terminal inflorescence. Leaves crenate to serrate, widest at the base. Bracts 10-15(-20) mm. Early-flowering. 2n = 40. {\i  • N. & C. Europe, eastwards to N.W. Russia, and extending southwards in. the mountains to N. Portugal, C. Italy and N. Greece}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Small plants from coastal regions of N.W. Europe, similar to ({\b a}) but late-flowering and with very short lower internodes, and thus transitional to ({\b c}), have been distinguished as subsp.{\b  pumila} (Nordstedt) A. Pedersen,{\i  Bot. Tidsskr. }{\b 58}: 291 (1963).
\par

\par
268}
\par