{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 (2-)3-7 cm above the cotyledons; corolla 7-8·5 mm, usually lilac to deep reddish-purple. 2n = 22. {\i Heaths. • S.W. England.} Br.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 7. E. hirtella} Jordan ex Reuter,{\i  Compt. Rend. Soc. Hallér.}{\b  4}: 120 (1856). Stem up to c. 20 cm, erect, with 0-2 pairs of erect, often short branches. Cauline internodes (1-)2-5 times, the lower floral (1-)1½-3½ times as long as the leaves. Lowest flower at node 2-6(-7). Upper cauline and lower floral leaves up to 12(-13·5) mm, suborbicular to ovate, cordate, rounded or broadly cuneate at base, with 3-6(-7) pairs of obtuse to acute or cuspidate teeth about as long as wide. Corolla 5·5-7 mm, white, or sometimes with lilac upper lip. Capsule 4-5·5 mm, often as long as or longer than the calyx. 2n = 22.{\i  Grassland, mainly in the mountains; somewhat calcifuge. From N.W. France and Austria southwards to N. Portugal, S. Bulgaria and S. Russia.} Al Au Bu Ga Ge He Hs It Ju Lu Rm Rs (?N, C, E).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 8. E. drosocalyx} Freyn, {\i Soc. Helv. Éch. Pl. }{\b 16}: 9 (1885). Like {\b 7} but stem usually not more than 10 cm; lowest flower at node 2-4; leaves often with few glandular hairs; upper cauline leaves with not more than 4 pairs of obtuse, more or less incurved teeth; lower floral leaves 4-11 mm, oblong-ovate to broadly ovate or trullate, with 2-5 pairs of teeth; corolla 4·5-6 mm.{\i  Mountain pastures. • Alps; S.W. Bulgaria.} ?Al Au Bu Ga Ge He Ju.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 9. E. picta} Wimmer,{\i  Fl. Schles.} ed. 3, 407 (1857) (incl.{\i  E. versicolor} A. Kerner). Stem up to 35 cm, erect or flexuous. Cauline internodes shorter than or up to 5(-8) times as long as leaves. Cauline leaves up to 13 mm, with 1-5 pairs of teeth; lower floral leaves 3-10(-12) mm, suborbicular to deltate or oblong-ovate, cuneate to rounded. Capsule usually shorter than calyx, 1¼-2½(-3) times as long as wide, truncate or emarginate.{\i  • Mountain districts of C. & S.E. Europe, from Switzerland to the E. Carpathians and Bulgaria}. Au Bu Cz ?Ga Ge He Hu It Ju Po Rm Rs (W).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b picta}: stem with 0-3(-5) pairs of erect branches. Lowest flower at node 2-6(-7). Lower leaves often shortly petiolate, shortly hirsute above, the upper glabrous to setulose; lower floral leaves usually wide, with 2-4(-5) pairs of teeth. Corolla (6·5-)7·5-10(-11) mm, white with lilac upper lip, or entirely lilac, strongly violet-veined. 2n = 22. {\i  Alpine meadows and pastures. Mountains of C. Europe from the C. Alps to the E. Carpathians.}
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b kerneri} (Wettst.) Yeo, {\i Bot. Jour. Linn. Soc.}{\b  64}: 354 (1971) ({\i E. kerneri} Wettst.): stem with (1-)7-12 pairs of ascending branches, which are often again branched. Lowest flower at node (6-)8-12(-17). Leaves minutely scabrid, occasionally with short glandular hairs; lower floral leaves usually rather narrow, with 3-5(-9) pairs of teeth. Corolla 9-11 mm, white, sometimes with lilac upper lip.{\i  Limestone grassland, usually below} 1500{\i  m. Mountain districts of C. & S.E. Europe}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Though the two subspecies are usually distinct, intermediate plants occur in some places.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b E. pulchella} A. Kerner, {\i Sched. Fl. Exsicc. Austro-Hung.}{\b  1}: 48 (1881), from the S. & E. Alps, believed to be of hybrid origin between {\b 9} and {\b 24}, differs in its corolla only 7-8·5 mm and capsule 4·5-6·5 mm, 2-3 times as long as wide.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b  E. exaristata} Smejkal, {\i Biol. Práce Slovensk. Akad. Vied} ({\i Bratislava}) {\b 9}({\b 9}): 47 (1963), from the W. Carpathians (High Tatra), is like variants of{\b  9}({\b a}) with long internodes, but the leaves are even more distinctly petiolate, the lowest flower is at node 3-8, the corolla only 6·5-8 mm, and the capsule narrowly emarginate.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   {\b E. simonkaiana} Degen & Lengyel ex Jáv.,{\i  Magyar Fl. }1014 (1925) from N. Jugoslavia, is apparently also related to{\b  9}. It has the lowest flower at node 4-6, branches short, erect, up to 4 pairs, lowest floral leaves with acute teeth, and corolla up to about 7·5 mm.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 10. E. marchesettii} Wettst. ex Marchesetti,{\i  Fl. Trieste} 411 (1897). Like {\b 9}({\b b}) but cauline leaves linear-oblanceolate, narrowly oblong or narrowly trullate, with 1-3 pairs of usually shallow, obtuse to acuminate teeth; lower floral leaves lanceolate, narrowly oblong, trullate or rhombic, cuneate; teeth 2-3(-4) pairs. •{\i  Coastal regions of N.E. Italy}. It ?Ju.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Evidently of hybrid origin, the parents being {\b 9}({\b b}) and a species of Subsect. {\i Angustifoliae.}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 11. E. arctica} Lange ex Rostrup, {\i Bot. Tidsskr.} {\b 1}({\b 4}): 47 (1870-1871). Stem up to 25(-35) cm. Lowest flower at node 3-9(-10). Leaves usually light green, the cauline with 1-6 pairs of obtuse to acute (rarely aristate) teeth, the upper ones usually broadly ovate; lower floral leaves usually with basal teeth patent. Corolla 6-11(-13) mm, deep lilac to white. Capsule 4-8 mm, usually 2-3 times as long as wide, truncate to emarginate. {\i Meadows, pastures and roadsides. N. Europe, extending southwards to the E. Carpathians.} Br Cz Da Fa Fe ?Ga Hb Is No Po ?Rm Rs (N, B, C, W) Su.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Capsule 4-5·5 mm, oblong; cauline internodes not more
\par
  than 2(-3½) times as long as the leaves
\par
2 Leaves without glandular hairs, the lower ones deflexed;
\par
  branches short, arcuate-ascending ........................................ ({\b c}) subsp. {\b minor}
\par
2 Leaves usually with glandular hairs, not deflexed;
\par
  branches long, ascending or erect ...................................... ({\b d}) subsp. {\b borealis}
\par
1 Capsule usually 5·5 mm or more, elliptical or elliptic-oblong; 
\par
  cauline internodes usually up to 4(-9) times as long as the leaves
\par
3 Stem usually flexuous, with 0-2(-5) pairs of long, often flexuous
\par
   branches; lower floral leaves sub-orbicular or broadly ovate, with
\par
   the teeth not much longer than wide; leaves without 
\par
   glandular hairs;corolla 7-11(-13) mm ................................ ({\b b}) subsp. {\b arctica}
\par
3 Stem usually straight, with 0-5(-6) pairs of often 
\par
  short, usually straight, branches; lower floral leaves
\par
  deltate or broadly to narrowly ovate; teeth sometimes
\par
  much longer than wide; leaves usually with glandular 
\par
  hairs; corolla not more than 10 mm
\par
4 Lowest flower at node 3-6(-9); corolla (6·5-)8-10 mm; cauline
\par
   internodes mostly 2½-6 times as long as the leaves ............ ({\b a}) subsp. {\b tenuis}
\par
4 Lowest flower at node (3-)4-9(-10); corolla 6-9(-10) mm;
\par
  cauline internodes mostly 2-4 times as long as the leaves
\par
5 Branches frequently more than 3 pairs; lower floral 
\par
  leaves usually truncate or subcordate;
\par
  capsule (4-)4·5-6·5(-7) mm ............................................... ({\b d}) subsp. {\b borealis}
\par
5 Branches rarely more than 3 pairs; lower floral leaves
\par
  usually broadly cuneate; capsule 4·5-7(-8) mm ................. ({\b e}) subsp. {\b slovaca}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b tenuis} (Brenner) Yeo, {\i Bot. Jour. Linn. Soc.}{\b  64}: 357 (1971) ({\i E. officinalis} var.{\i  tenuis} Brenner, {\i E. tenuis }(Brenner) Wettst. 1896, non Wettst. 1893): Stem with 0-3(-4) pairs of usually rather short branches. Cauline internodes (1½)2½-6(-9) times as long as leaves. Lowest flower at node 3-6(-9). Leaves often with glandular hairs, the cauline 3-14(-16) mm, mostly broadly ovate, trullate or oblong; lower floral leaves 5-12(-16) mm, broadly ovate to oblong-ovate, rounded to subcordate at base, with 3-6 pairs of subacute to aristate teeth. Corolla (6·5-)8-10 mm. Capsule 5-8 mm, at least as long as calyx, at least twice as long as wide, elliptic-oblong to obovate. 2n = 44.{\i  From Iceland to C. Russia}.
\par

\par
261}
\par