{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 10 Leaves 4-10 mm wide, lanceolate, usually crenate-serrate ..... {\b 9. lanceolata}
\par
10 Leaves 1-4 mm wide, linear to narrowly oblong, entire,
\par
   or rarely with 1-2 pairs of teeth 
\par
11 Corolla 9-25 mm
\par
12 Corolla-tube 5-7 mm, shorter than calyx; inflorescence
\par
   very dense; capsule glabrous except for apical cilia .................. {\b 1. tenuifolia}
\par
12 Corolla-tube 9-21 mm, considerably exceeding calyx;
\par
   inflorescences lax, at least in fruit; capsule hairy
\par
13 Corolla 17-25 mm, with tube at least twice as long as
\par
   calyx; bracts linear ..................................................................... {\b 2. longiflora}
\par
13 Corolla 12-15 mm, with tube not more than 1½ times
\par
   as long as calyx; bracts lanceolate .............................................. {\b 3. glutinosa} 
\par
11 Corolla 5-9 mm
\par
14 Hairs on stem patent and usually glandular at least in part .......... {\b 4. viscosa}
\par
14 Hairs on stem crispate or appressed, eglandular
\par
15 Bracts c. 5 mm; corolla glabrous; capsule 5-7 mm,
\par
   narrowly oblong, with not more than 4 seeds ............................ {\b 7. rigidifolia}
\par
15 Bracts 6-12 mm; corolla usually pubescent; capsule
\par
   3-5 mm, elliptical, with more than 4 seeds
\par
16 Anthers widely exserted ................................................................... {\b 8. lutea}
\par
16 Anthers ± included under upper lip of corolla ..................... {\b 10. jaubertiana}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. O. tenuifolia} (Pers.) G. Don fil.,{\i  Gen. Syst.}{\b  4}: 611 (1838). Densely appressed-pubescent annual. Stem 10-40 cm, erect; branches ascending. Leaves up to 10 × 1·5 mm, linear, entire, few. Inflorescences c. 2 cm, very dense; flowers subsessile; bracts linear, shorter than calyx. Calyx 6-10 mm; teeth lanceolate, acute. Corolla 9-12 mm, yellow, glabrous; tube 5-7 mm. Anthers hirsute, somewhat exserted. Capsule shorter than calyx, glabrous except for apical cilia.{\i  Heaths, pinewoods and maritime sands. • Spain and Portugal.} Hs Lu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. O. longiflora} (Vahl) Webb, {\i Iter Hisp.} 24 (1838). Glandular-puberulent annual. Stem 12-30 cm, erect, usually with erecto-patent branches. Leaves linear, entire, few, the lower up to 20 mm, but the upper usually c. 5 mm. Inflorescences lax, few-flowered, often interrupted; bracts 7-10 mm, linear; flowers subsessile. Calyx 6-8 mm; teeth linear, obtuse. Corolla 17-25 mm, yellow, puberulent; tube 14-21 mm, very slender; lower lip deflexed. Anthers with apical tuft of hairs, included. Capsule oblong, equalling the calyx, hairy. {\i Dry places in the mountains. Spain.} Hs.
\par

\par
 
\pard\f0\fs28   {\b 3. O. glutinosa} (Bieb.) Bentham in DC.,{\i  Prodr.}{\b  10}: 549 (1846). Glandular-puberulent annual. Stem 12-30 cm, erect, simple or with a few suberect branches. Leaves 10-20 mm, linear, entire. Inflorescences up to 8 cm in fruit, dense at first, lax later; bracts 5-9 mm, lanceolate; pedicels 1-2 mm. Calyx 6-8 mm; teeth linear-lanceolate. Corolla 12-15 mm, yellow, sometimes tinged with brownish-purple, puberulent; tube 9-12 mm. Anthers with apical tuft of hairs, included. Capsule slightly exceeding calyx, hairy.{\i  Stony mountain slopes. Balkan peninsula; Krym.} Al Bu Gr Ju Rs (K) [Ga].
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   {\b O. pilatiana} Ronniger ex Rohlena,{\i  Mitt. Thür. Bot. Ver.} nov. ser.,{\b  51}: 353 (1944), differs only in being glabrous except in the inflorescence. It was described from a single collection on the borders of Albania and Jugoslavia (Kovat), and is best regarded as a mutant of {\b 3}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 4. O. viscosa} (L.) Clairv., {\i Man. Herb. Suisse} 207 (1811). Annual; more or less glandular-puberulent to -pubescent; sometimes also eglandular-hirsute. Stem 20-60 cm, erect; branches numerous, patent to erecto-patent. Leaves 15-40 × 1-4 mm, linear to oblong, entire or with 1-2 pairs of teeth. Inflorescences up to 6 cm, lax to moderately dense; pedicels 1-2 mm. Calyx 3 mm; teeth ovate-lanceolate, acute to obtuse. Corolla 5-6 mm, yellow, glabrous to pubescent; tube c. 3 mm. Anthers with apical tuft of hairs, more or less included. Capsule obovate, equalling the calyx, glabrous except for apical cilia.{\i  Woods and dry hillsides. S.W. Europe, eastwards to S.W. Switzerland and N.W. Italy.} Ga He Hs It Lu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b viscosa}: Bracts 5-7 mm, linear, not or scarcely ciliate. Stem and leaves densely glandular-pubescent.{\i  Throughout the range of the species}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b hispanica} (Boiss. & Reuter) Rothm., {\i Mitt. Thür. Bot. Ver.} nov. ser.,{\b  50}: 279 (1943) ({\i O. hispanica} Boiss. & Reuter): Bracts 3-4 mm, lanceolate, conspicuously white-ciliate. Stem and leaves rather sparsely glandular-pubescent and usually eglandular-hirsute. •{\i  Spain}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 5. O. granatensis} Boiss.,{\i  Elenchus} 71 (1838). Glandular-puberulent to -villous annual. Stem 8-20 cm, erect; branches flexuous, ascending. Leaves 10-25 mm, linear-lanceolate, entire. Inflorescences up to 3 cm, with 4-9 flowers, rather lax; bracts 4-8 mm, linear-lanceolate; pedicels 1 mm. Calyx 4-5 mm; teeth triangular-oblong, subacute. Corolla 6-7 mm, dull purple, glabrous; tube 4 mm. Anthers hairy at apex, slightly exserted. Capsule 4 mm, obovate, ciliate.{\i  Mountain scrub. • N. & S. Spain} ({\i Cordillera Cantábrica, Sierra Nevada}). Hs.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 6. O. purpurea} (Desf.) G. Don fil.,{\i  Gen. Syst.}{\b  4}: 611 (1838). Like {\b 5} but sparsely eglandular-appressed-puberulent; stem up to 40 cm, with few, short branches; calyx 3-4 mm; anthers glabrous, included.{\i  S. Spain.} Hs.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Many records of this species in Spain are errors for {\b 11}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 7. O. rigidifolia} (Biv.) Bentham in DC., {\i Prodr. }{\b 10}: 550 (1846). Sparsely appressed-puberulent annual. Stem 15-40 cm, erect; branches long, ascending, few. Leaves 4-8(-20) mm, suberect, linear-oblanceolate, entire. Inflorescences up to 6 cm in fruit, moderately dense; bracts 5 mm, linear, flowers sessile. Calyx 5-7 mm; teeth lanceolate, acute. Corolla 7-9 mm, yellow tinged with red, glabrous. Anthers glabrous, included. Capsule 5-7 mm, narrowly oblong, sparsely puberulent.{\i  Dry, open habitats. Sicilia.} Si.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 8. O. lutea} (L.) Clairv., {\i Man. Herb. Suisse} 207 (1811) ({\i Orthantha lutea} (L.) A. Kerner ex Wettst.). Appressed- or crispate-pubescent annual. Stem 10-40 cm, erect; branches ascending, numerous. Leaves 5-25 × 1-2 mm, linear, obtuse, entire or remotely and shortly toothed. Inflorescences 3-8(-12) cm, rather lax; bracts 6-8 mm, linear-lanceolate; pedicels c. 1 mm. Calyx 3-4 mm; teeth deltate to triangular, subacute. Corolla 5-8 mm, bright yellow, more or less pubescent; lower lip deflexed. Anthers glabrous, conspicuously exserted. Capsule 3-4 mm, elliptical, pubescent. 2n = 20.{\i  Dry grassland and scrub. S. & C. Europe, extending to N.C. France and to S.C. Russia.} ?Al Au Bu Co Cz Ga Ge He Hs Hu It Ju Po Rm Rs (C, W, K, E) Sa Si.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 9. O. lanceolata} (Gaudin) Reichenb.,{\i  Fl. Germ. Excurs.} 862 (1832). Like {\b 8} but leaves 15-45 × 4-10 mm, lanceolate, crenate-serrate (rarely subentire); bracts 10-30 mm, lanceolate, resembling the leaves and greatly exceeding the flowers; calyx-teeth narrowly triangular; corolla 8-9 mm.{\i  Meadows. • E. Pyrenees, S.W. & S.C. Alps.} Ga Hs It.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Plants from the C. Pyrenees, which appear to correspond to{\b  O. pyrenaea} (Bubani) Rothm.,{\i  Cavanillesia}{\b  7}: 120 (1935), are
\par

\par
267}
\par