{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28    ({\b 17-20}). {\b E. stricta} group. Stem and branches usually rigid and erect. Leaves glabrous to densely hairy, frequently also with short glandular hairs, usually narrowly ovate or elliptical to oblong-lanceolate; floral leaves usually appressed to the flower, with long, very acute to aristate teeth, the basal teeth apically directed. Capsule usually much shorter than calyx, (1½-)2½-5 times as long as wide, oblong to elliptic-oblong.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Corolla 4·5-6·5 mm .................................................................... {\b 20. liburnica}
\par
1 Corolla (6-)7-11 mm
\par
2 Lowest flower usually at node 3 or lower; 
\par
  capsule emarginate .................................................................. {\b 18. hyperborea}
\par
2 Lowest flower usually at node 4 or higher; capsule 
\par
  truncate or slightly emarginate
\par
3 Capsule usually 4-5·5 mm, 2½-3½ times as long as wide; 
\par
  branches usually 2-6 pairs or more; lowest flower at node 
\par
  (3-)7-14(-18); plant usually strongly tinged with purple ................ {\b 17. stricta}
\par
3 Capsule usually 5-7 mm, 3-5 times as long as wide;
\par
  branches 0-3(-6) pairs; lowest flower at node (4-)5-8 
\par
  (-9); plant not or slightly tinged with purple .............................. {\b 19. pectinata}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 17. E. stricta} D. Wolff ex J. F. Lehm.,{\i  Prim. Fl. Herbip.} 43 (1809) ({\i E. brevipila }Burnat & Gremli,{\i  E. condensata} Jordan, {\i E. tatarica} auct., non Fischer ex Sprengel). Plant usually strongly tinged with purple. Stem up to 35 cm, with (0-)2-6(-13) pairs of branches. Cauline internodes up to 4 times, the lower floral up to 2(-3) times as long as leaves. Lowest flower at node (3-)7-14 (-18). Leaves glossy, the cauline 2-12(-16) mm, narrowly ovate to ovate-lanceolate, with 1-6 pairs of teeth, the lower floral 5-14 mm, ovate to trullate, rounded to cuneate at base, serrate or pectinate with 4-6 pairs of subacute to aristate teeth. Corolla (6-)7·5-10(-11) mm, lilac or white. Capsule 4-5·5(-7) mm, 2½-3½ times as long as wide, truncate, or rarely emarginate. 2n = 44.{\i  Meadows, dry grassland and scrub. • Most of Europe, but absent from the extreme north and much of the west and south.} Al Au Be Bu Cz Da Fe Ga Ge Gr He Ho Hs Hu It Ju No Po Rm Rs (N, B, C, W, E) Su [Br].
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  In Fennoscandia, the Baltic region and the mountains of S. Europe glandular variants are frequent; in these areas, also, variants occur which are very like {\b 11}({\b a}), but differ in their acutely toothed cauline leaves and sometimes in their capsules. Strongly branched variants with all the internodes shorter than the leaves occur in Denmark and Sweden, and at high altitudes in the Pyrenees. Strongly hairy variants occur in S.W. Europe.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Hybridizes with {\b 11}, {\b 13}, {\b 21}, {\b 33} and {\b 41}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 18. E. hyperborea} Joerg.,{\i  Bergens Mus. Aarb.}{\b  1916-1917},{\i  Naturvid. Roekke}{\b  5}: 255 (1919). Like {\b 17} but not more than 25 cm; stems often flexuous, with 0-2(-3) pairs of branches; lowest flower at node (1-)2-3(-4); leaves rather large, strigose above, setose beneath, mainly on the veins, the cauline with 1-4 pairs of short, obtuse teeth; lower floral leaves with subacute to acute teeth; capsule 4-7 mm, 1½ times to more than twice as long as wide, emarginate. {\i Damp meadows and} Betula{\i -groves. • Arctic Europe.} No Rs (N).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 19. E. pectinata} Ten.,{\i  Fl. Nap.}{\b  1}, {\i Prodr}.: 36 (1811) ({\i E. tatarica} Fischer ex Sprengel). Plant with little purple pigment. Stem up to 35 cm, with 0-3(-6) pairs of branches. Lowest flower at node (4-)5-8(-9), the dense upper parts of the spikes often long. Cauline leaves 3-13 mm, ovate, elliptical, trullate, oblong or oblong-lanceolate, with 1-4(-6) pairs of subacute to acute teeth; lower floral leaves 5-13 mm, ovate, trullate or oblong-ovate, sometimes very wide, cuneate at base with 2-6(-7) pairs of acute to aristate teeth, often pectinate towards apex. Corolla 6·5-9(-10) mm, usually white, sometimes lilac. Capsule 5-7 mm, 3-5 times as long as wide, truncate or slightly emarginate. 2n = 44. {\i Grassland, scrub and open woodland. S., S.C. & S.E. Europe.} Al Au Bu Co Cz Ga Gr He Hs Hu It Ju ?Lu Rm Rs (C, W, K, E).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 20. E. liburnica} Wettst.,{\i  Österr. Bot. Zeitschr.}{\b  44}: 172 (1894) (?{\i  E. irenae} Juz.). Like {\b 19} but stem not more than 15(-25) cm; leaves sometimes purplish, narrower, the lower floral with 2-5 pairs of deltate or incurved, rarely aristate teeth; corolla 4·5-6·5 mm, usually lilac; capsule 4·5-6·5 mm, 2½-3½ times as long as wide, usually shorter than or about as long as calyx.{\i  Grassy places and open woods. • Balkan peninsula and E. Carpathians.} Al Bu Gr ?It Ju Rm ?Rs (K).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 21. E. alpina} Lam.,{\i  Encycl. Méth. Bot. }{\b 2}: 400 (1786). Plant usually strongly tinged with purple. Stem up to 20 cm, erect, with 0-4 pairs of patent branches. Cauline internodes up to 2½ times as long as the leaves. Lowest flower at node (3-)5-8(10). Leaves hirsute, puberulent or glabrous, the cauline obovate to ovate-lanceolate, with obtuse to aristate teeth, the lower floral 5-13 mm, ovate, ovate-lanceolate, trullate or rhombic, cuneate at base, with 3-6 pairs of subacute to aristate teeth mostly much longer than wide, the upper floral with aristate teeth, of which the distal sometimes exceed the aristate terminal lobe. Corolla 8-13·5 mm, usually deep lilac. Capsule 4·5-7·5 mm, usually much shorter than calyx, 2½-3(-4) times as long as wide. 2n = 22.{\i  Alpine meadows and pastures,} c. 1500-2500{\i  m.; calcifuge. • Pyrenees, Alps, N. & C. Appennini.} Ga He Hs It.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 22. E. christii} Favrat in Gremli,{\i  Neue Beitr. Fl. Schweiz }{\b 4}: 27 (1887). Like {\b 21} but with less purple pigment; stem not more than 8(-14) cm, with 0-1(-4) pairs of branches; cauline leaves with obtuse to acute teeth, the floral with shortly aristate teeth; corolla (7-)9-11 mm, yellow; anthers pale brown. •{\i  S. Switzerland, N. Italy}. He It.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Probably originated by hybridization between {\b 21} and {\b 24}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 23. E. cisalpina} Pugsley,{\i  Jour. Bot.} ({\i London}) {\b 70}: 262 (1932). Like {\b 21} but stem up to 40 cm, with up to 13 pairs of branches; cauline internodes not more than 1½ times as long as the leaves; lowest flower at node (8-)11-20; lower cauline leaves oblanceolate, the floral all with long-aristate teeth; capsule 4-5·5 mm, 3½-4 times as long as wide.{\i  Margins of} Castanea{\i -woods. • N.W. Italy, S. Switzerland.} He It.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 24. E. minima} Jacq. ex DC. in Lam. & DC.,{\i  Fl. Fr.} ed. 3,{\b  3}: 473 (1805). Stem erect, with 0-3(-5) pairs of long, erect branches. Cauline internodes 1-4(-6) times, the lower floral 1-3½(-4½) times as long as leaves. Lowest flower at node (1-)2-6. Leaves subglabrous to hairy, with some of the hairs sometimes glandular, the cauline 2-11(-13) mm, suborbicular to broadly elliptical or rhombic, shortly petiolate, with 1-4(-6) pairs of obtuse to subacute teeth, the lower floral 3-12(-15) mm, suborbicular to ovate, with 2-5(-6) pairs of obtuse to acute teeth not longer than wide. Corolla 4-6 mm; lower lip yellow, white or lilac, the upper usually lilac. Capsule 3·5-7 mm, elliptic-oblong, truncate to narrowly emarginate.{\i  Grassy and stony places in high mountains. • S. & C. Europe, from S.C. France and the Carpathians southwards to the Pyrenees, Appennini and Bulgaria.} Al Au Bu ?Co Cz Ga Ge Gr He Hs It Ju Po Rm Rs (W).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b minima}: Not more than 12(-20) cm. Lowest flower usually at node 2-5. Cauline leaves with the distal teeth incurved, the lower floral rounded to cuneate at base. Capsule about twice as long as wide. 2n = 44. {\i Almost throughout the range of the species}.
\par

\par
263}
\par