{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28  Plants approaching {\b 11}({\b b}) occur in Norway but have glandular hairs. In the Baltic region plants intermediate between {\b 11}({\b a}) and {\b 17} are found.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b arctica} ({\i E. borealis} auct.): stem flexuous, with 0-2(-5) pairs of long, often flexuous branches. Cauline internodes not more than 4(-5) times as long as leaves. Lowest flower at node (3-)4-6(-7). Leaves eglandular, the cauline 4-11(-16) mm, orbicular to oblong, the lower floral 5-10(-14) mm, suborbicular to broadly ovate, with 3-5(-6) pairs of obtuse to acuminate teeth not much longer than wide. Corolla 7-11(-13) mm, usually white with lilac upper lip. Capsule 5·5-8 mm, about as long as the calyx, sometimes less than twice as long as wide, elliptical to obovate. {\i Færöer, Zetland, Orkney}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b c}) Subsp. {\b minor} Yeo, {\i loc. cit.} (1971) ({\i E. borealis} auct. dan., non (Townsend) Wettst.): stem with (0-)1-3(-6) pairs of short, stout, arcuate-ascending branches. Cauline internodes not more than 2(-3½) times as long as leaves. Lowest flower at node 5-9. Leaves not more than 10 mm, eglandular, the cauline deflexed, caducous, narrowly ovate to elliptical, the lower floral ovate to deltate, with 3-4(-5) pairs of subacute to acute teeth not much longer than wide. Corolla 6·5-8·5 mm. Capsule 4-5·5 mm, not exceeding calyx, more than twice as long as wide, oblong.{\i  Denmark} ({\i around Skagen, N. Jylland}).
\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b d}) Subsp. {\b borealis} (Townsend) Yeo, {\i op. cit.} 358 (1971) ({\i E. rostkoviana} f.{\i  borealis} Townsend, {\i E. brevipila} auct., non Burnat & Gremli): Stem with 0-5(-6) pairs of usually long, erect or ascending branches. Cauline internodes 2-4(-7) times as long as leaves. Lowest flower at node 4-8(-10). Leaves often with short, and occasionally with long glandular hairs, the cauline 3-14 mm, ovate to oblong, the lower floral (4-)6-12(-14) mm, ovate to deltate, rounded to subcordate at base, with (3-)4-6(-7) pairs of subacute to acuminate teeth usually much longer than wide. Corolla 6-9(-10) mm. Capsule 4-7 mm, usually not exceeding calyx, at least twice as long as wide, elliptical to oblong. 2n = 44.{\i  Britain and Ireland; W. Norway}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Plants resembling {\b 11}({\b d}) found in N.E. Europe are probably hybrids between {\b 11}({\b a}) and {\b 17}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b e}) Subsp. {\b slovaca} Yeo, {\i loc. cit.} (1971) ({\i E. brevipila} auct., non Burnat & Gremli,{\i  E. vernalis} auct., ? an List): Stem with 0-3(-6) pairs of usually erect branches. Cauline internodes 1½-5 times as long as leaves. Lowest flower at node (3-)4-9. Leaves usually with glandular hairs, the cauline 2-12(-16) mm, elliptical to broadly ovate, with obtuse to acuminate teeth, the lower floral 5-11(-14) mm, usually broadly ovate to trullate, broadly cuneate at base, with 3-6 pairs of subacute to aristate teeth about as long as wide or longer. Corolla 6·5-8·5(-9·5) mm. Capsule 4·5-7(-8) mm, not exceeding calyx, 2-3 times as long as wide, elliptical to oblong.{\i  Carpathians, south-eastwards to} c. 48° {\i N}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 12. E. tetraquetra} (Bréb.) Arrondeau, {\i Bull. Soc. Polymath. Morbihan}{\b  1862}: 96 (1863). Stem up to 15(-20) cm, erect, stout, with 0-5(-8) pairs of erect or ascending branches; all internodes often shorter than the leaves and very rarely more than 1½ times as long. Lowest flower at node (3-)5-7(-9). Leaves fleshy, glabrous to setose, frequently also with short glandular hairs, the cauline 2-9(-11) mm, obovate to suborbicular, with 1-3(-4) pairs of obtuse to subacute teeth; floral leaves usually forming a dense, sometimes 4-angled spike, the lower 5-10(-14) mm, usually ovate to deltate, truncate at base, with 3-5(-6) pairs of subacute to acuminate teeth at least as long as wide. Corolla (4-)5-7(-8) mm, white to lilac. Capsule 4·5-5·5(-6) mm, usually shorter than calyx, at least twice as long as wide, oblong to elliptic-oblong, truncate or slightly emarginate. 2n = 44.{\i  Maritime sands and short grassland on sea-cliffs; rarely inland on calcareous pastures. • Britain, Ireland, N.W. France.} Br Ga Hb.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Hybrids with {\b 16} are frequent in Britain.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 13. E. nemorosa} (Pers.) Wallr.,{\i  Annus Bot.} 82 (1815) (incl.{\i  E. curta} (Fries) Wettst.). Stem erect, up to 35(-40) cm, with (0-)1-9 pairs of ascending branches, often bearing secondary branches. Cauline internodes up to 4(-7) times, the lower floral up to 2(-3) times as long as the leaves. Lowest flower at node (5-)10-14. Leaves usually with deeply impressed veins, subglabrous to densely hairy, rarely with short glandular hairs, the cauline 2-12 mm, elliptical or oblong to ovate or deltate, with 1-5(-7) pairs of obtuse to acute teeth; lower floral leaves 4-9(-11) mm, ovate to deltate, usually rounded or truncate at base, with (3-)4-6(-9) pairs of subacute to aristate teeth usually slightly longer than wide, the basal teeth patent. Corolla 5-7·5(-8·5) mm, white to lilac. Capsule 4-5·5(-6) mm, usually slightly shorter than calyx, more than twice as long as wide, oblong to elliptic-oblong, truncate or slightly emarginate. 2n = 44. {\i Grassy places. • N.& C. Europe, extending southwards to N.E. Spain.} Au Be Br Cz Da Fe Ga Ge Hb He Ho Hs No Po Rs (N, B, C) Su.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Strongly hairy variants ({\i E. curta} (Fries) Wettst.) are increasingly common towards the north-eastern part of the range.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Hybrids with {\b 16} and {\b 17} are frequent.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 14. E. coerulea} Hoppe & Furnrohr, {\i Flora }({\i Regensb.}) {\b 17}: 445 (1834) ({\i E. uechtritziana} Junger & Engler). Like {\b 13} but stem not more than 15 cm, with 0-1(-3) pairs of short branches; lowest flower at node 3-6; leaves not more than 8 mm, the cauline with not more than 4 pairs of teeth; lower floral leaves with up to 5 pairs of teeth; corolla purple to white with lilac upper lip; capsule not more than twice as long as wide.{\i  Mountain grassland. • Mountains of E.C. Europe.} Cz ?Ge Po Rm Rs (W).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 15. E. pseudokerneri} Pugsley, {\i Jour. Bot.} ({\i London}){\b  67}: 224 (1929). Like {\b 13} but stem not more than 20(-30) cm, with patent or ascending branches; cauline internodes not more than 2½(-3) times, the lower floral not more than 1½(-2) times as long as the leaves; leaves subglabrous, the lower cauline oblong-ovate, with obtuse to subacute teeth, the upper cauline ovate with acute or acuminate teeth; lower floral leaves rounded to broadly cuneate at base; corolla (6-)7-9(-11) mm; capsule 3·5-5(-6) mm, much shorter than calyx, about 2½ times as long as wide. 2n = 44. {\i Calcareous grassland. • England; W. Ireland.} Br Hb.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 16. E. confusa} Pugsley, {\i Jour. Bot.} ({\i London}){\b  57}: 172 (1919). Stem up to 20(-45) cm, flexuous, with (0-)2-8(-10) pairs of usually long, slender, flexuous branches, usually bearing numerous secondary branches. Cauline internodes up to 2½ times, the lower floral up to 2(-3) times as long as leaves. Lowest flower at node (2-)5-12(-14). Leaves up to 10 mm, subglabrous to sparsely setose, sometimes also with short glandular hairs, the cauline ovate to ovate-lanceolate, with 1-5 pairs of obtuse to acute teeth, the lower floral 3·5-9(-10) mm, often alternate and with flowers only in alternate axils, usually ovate to trullate, cuneate, rounded, or occasionally truncate at base, with 2-6 pairs of subacute to acute teeth at least as long as wide. Corolla 5-9 mm, white to purple. Capsule 3·5-5·5(-6·5) mm, usually about as long as calyx, 2-3 times as long as wide, oblong to elliptic-oblong, truncate or emarginate. 2n = 44. {\i Heathy pastures and sand-dunes. • Ireland, England, Færöer; probably introduced in W. Norway.} Br Fa Hb [*No].
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  The characteristic profuse branching of this species is reduced in mountain habitats or by early starvation, and is generally less in N. Scotland and the Færöer. In S. England there is fairly frequent intergradation with {\b 13}. Hybrids with {\b 11}, {\b 33} and {\b 34} are also frequent.
\par

\par
262}
\par