{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 reniform or suborbicular, rarely broadly ovate, rounded or obtuse, rarely subacute; margins entire or obscurely undulate-denticulate. Corolla without auricles, magenta with a prominent, dark violet, pale-centred blotch at the base of each corolla-lobe; lobes 7-15 mm. Style very shortly exserted. Fruiting pedicel coiling from the apex. Flowering from January to April.{\i  S.E. Europe}. Bu Rs (K) Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 8. C. persicum} Miller, {\i op. cit.} no. 3 (1768). Tuber 4-15 cm or more in diameter, subglobose or depressed-globose, corky, rooting from base. Leaves 3-14 × 3-14 cm, cordate, acute or obtuse; margins somewhat thickened, closely and obtusely denticulate, but rarely angled or lobed. Corolla without auricles, white or pink with a darker purple zone around the throat; lobes 25-45 mm. Styles exserted for 1-2 mm. Fruiting pedicel arcuate but not coiling. Flowering from January to May. {\i Aegean region} ({\i Athos, Karpathos}). Gr. ({\i S.W. Asia}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Records for Kriti appear to be erroneous.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc {\b 8.             Lysimachia}            L.
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc By L.F. Ferguson.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Erect or procumbent herbs, rarely dwarf shrubs. Leaves opposite, whorled or rarely alternate, entire or crenate. Flowers 5(7)-merous, axillary, solitary or clustered, or in terminal bracteate panicles or racemes. Corolla rotate; lobes entire or dentate, often glandular within. Capsule more or less globose, with 5(-7) valves. Seeds rugose, numerous.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Literature: F. Pax & R. Knuth in Engler, {\i Pflanzenreich }{\b 22}({\b IV. 237}): 256-313 (1905). H. Handel-Mazzetti,{\i  Notes Roy. Bot. Gard. Edinb.}{\b  16:} 51-122 (1928). J. D. Ray,{\i  Illinois Biol. Monogr}.{\b  24}({\b 3-4}): 1-160 (1956).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Stems procumbent
\par
2 Leaves gland-dotted; calyx-lobes ovate, overlapping;
\par
  corolla 8-18 mm ....................................................................... {\b 6. nummularia}
\par
2 Leaves not gland-dotted; calyx-lobes subulate, not overlapping;
\par
  corolla 6-8·5 mm
\par
3 Leaves 5-30 mm wide, petiolate; pedicels ± equalling the
\par
  subtending leaf .............................................................................. {\b 1. nemorum}
\par
3 Leaves 3-8 mm wide, subsessile; pedicels at least twice
\par
  as long as the subtending leaf ................................................... {\b 2. serpyllifolia}
\par
1 Stems erect
\par
4 Flowers 7-merous, in dense axillary racemes .......................... {\b 13. thyrsiflora}
\par
4 Flowers 5-merous, not in dense axillary racemes
\par
5 At least the lower flowers subtended by ordinary leaves;
\par
  corolla completely or partly yellow
\par
6 Corolla 4-5·5 mm, pink at base, yellowish at apices of
\par
  lobes ......................................................................................... {\b 8. minoricensis}
\par
6 Corolla more than 5·5 mm, yellow, sometimes streaked or
\par
  dotted with red or black 
\par
7 Flowers terminal
\par
8 Flowers in a panicle; corolla without streaks or dots;
\par
  axillary bulbils never present .......................................................... {\b 3. vulgaris}
\par
8 Flowers in a raceme; corolla streaked and dotted with 
\par
  red and black; axillary bulbils usually present ............................... {\b 4. terrestris}
\par
7 Flowers axillary
\par
9 Flowers solitary, rarely paired; corolla with red basal
\par
  blotches; leaf-surfaces glabrous ......................................................... {\b 5. ciliata}
\par
9 Flowers usually in clusters of 2 or more; corolla 
\par
  without blotches; leaf-surfaces puberulent ..................................... {\b 7. punctata}
\par
5 Flowers subtended by minute bracts; corolla never yellow
\par
10 Corolla white
\par
11 Leaves linear-lanceolate, opposite ......................................... {\b 9. ephemerum}
\par
11 Leaves broadly lanceolate to ovate, alternate ....................... {\b 10. clethroides}
\par
10 Corolla pink or purple
\par
12 Corolla purple; flowers sessile; style indurate in fruit
\par
   ............................................................................................... {\b 11. atropurpurea}
\par
12 Corolla pink; flowers pedicellate; style filiform in fruit ................ {\b 12. dubia}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. L. nemorum} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 148 (1753). Evergreen, glabrous. Stems 10-45 cm, procumbent. Leaves (10-)15-30(-50) × (5-)10-20(-30) mm, opposite, ovate to ovate-lanceolate, acute, shortly petiolate. Flowers solitary in the axils of the middle leaves; pedicels filiform, slightly shorter than to 1½ (rarely 3, in young plants) times as long as the subtending leaf. Calyx 3·5-6 mm; lobes linear-lanceolate or subulate. Corolla 6-8·5 mm, yellow. Capsule c. 3 mm, globose; style deciduous. 2n = 16, 18, 28. {\i Damp or shady places. W. & C. Europe, extending locally to S. Sweden, C. Jugoslavia and Sicilia}. Au Az Be Br Cz Da Fa Ga Ge Hb He Ho Hs It Ju Lu No Po Rm Rs (W) Si Su.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Specimens from the Açores have been recognized as subsp.{\b  azorica} (Hooker) Palhinha,{\i  Bol. Soc. Brot.} ser. 2, {\b 30:} 77 (1956); the characters used are those of first-year flowering material in cultivation, and mature specimens, apart from having revolute leaf-margins and narrower corolla-lobes, are not clearly separable from {\b 1}. The taxon does not warrant more than varietal status.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. L. serpyllifolia} Schreber, {\i Nova Acta Acad. Leop.-Carol.}{\b  4:} 144 (1770). Like {\b 1} but dwarf shrub with a short stock; leaves 6-11 × 3-6(-8) mm, subsessile, ovate, obtuse; pedicels at least twice as long as subtending leaves.{\i  Stony ground. • Mountains of C. & S. Greece and Kriti.} Cr Gr.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 3. L. vulgaris} L.{\i  Sp. Pl. }146 (1753). Pubescent, stoloniferous perennial. Stems 50-160 cm, erect. Leaves 5·5-9(-12) × 2-3·5(-5) cm, opposite or in whorls of 3-4, ovate to lanceolate, acuminate, dotted with black or orange glands; petiole 2-10 mm. Inflorescence a terminal panicle, leafy below; upper bracts linear, subulate. Calyx ½-¾ as long as corolla; lobes triangular-lanceolate; margins red, minutely ciliate. Corolla 8-11(-13) mm, yellow. Capsule 3·5-5·5(-6) mm, subglobose; style deciduous. 2n = 56, 84. {\i Fens, wet woods, lake-shores and river-banks. Almost throughout Europe.} All except Az Bl Cr Fa Is Sa Sb.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 4. L. terrestris} (L.) Britton, E. E. Sterns & Poggenb., {\i Prelim. Cat. }34 (1888) ({\i L. stricta} Aiton). Glabrous perennial. Stems 30-80 cm, erect. Leaves up to 9 × 1·5 cm, lanceolate, opposite, acute, dotted with black glands, subsessile; usually with moniliform bulbils in the axils. Inflorescence a terminal raceme, rarely produced; pedicels up to 15 mm. Calyx 2-4 mm. Corolla 5·5-7 mm; lobes lanceolate, yellow, streaked and dotted with red or black. Capsule globose; style persistent.{\i  Naturalized on lake-margins. N.W. England} ({\i Windermere}). [Br.] ({\i North America}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 5. L. ciliata} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 147 (1753). Rhizomatous. Stems 50-130 cm, erect, glabrous. Leaves 7-14 × 2·5-6·5 cm, opposite or in whorls of 4, ovate to lanceolate, glabrous except for ciliate margins; petiole c. 1 cm. Flowers solitary or in pairs, in the axils of the upper leaves; pedicels up to 9 times as long as the calyx. Calyx 3·5-8 mm; lobes lanceolate. Corolla 9-13 mm; lobes obovate, yellow with red basal blotches. Capsule 4-5·5 mm, ovoid or globose; style c. 4 mm, persistent, filiform.{\i  Cultivated for ornament and locally naturalized in N.W. Europe}. [Be Br.] ({\i North America.})
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 6. L. nummularia} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 148 (1753). Evergreen, glabrous. Stems 10-50(-60) cm, creeping. Leaves 12-20(-30) × 11-17(-28) mm, opposite, shortly petiolate, broadly ovate to suborbicular, obtuse, rounded to almost cordate at base, dotted
\par

\par
26}
\par