{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 half, sparse to rather dense, the cauline obovate to elliptical, with not more than 3 pairs of teeth, the lower floral ovate, rounded or cuneate at base, shortly petiolate, with 2-5(-6) pairs of obtuse to acute teeth. Corolla 5·5-7 mm. Capsule 4·5-7·5 mm, shorter than calyx, more than twice as long as wide, more or less emarginate. {\i Heathy grassland near the sea. • N.W. Scotland} ({\i Isle of Lewis}); ?{\i Zetland.} Br.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Possibly of hybrid origin, between {\b 29} and {\b 33} or {\b 34}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 33. E. micrantha} Reichenb.,{\i  Fl. Germ. Excurs.} 358 (1831)({\i E. gracilis} (Fries) Drejer). Plant usually strongly tinged with purple. Stem up to 25 cm, erect, slender, with (0-)2-7(-10) pairs of slender, erect branches. Cauline internodes usually 2 times, the lower floral 1½-2½(-3) times as long as the leaves. Lowest flower at node (4-)6-14(-16). Leaves glabrous or minutely scabrid, not darker beneath, the cauline 2-8(-11) mm, narrowly ovate to obovate, with 1-6 pairs of usually subacute to acute teeth, the lower floral 3·5-7(-8) mm, ovate to rhombic, truncate or cuneate at base, with 3-6 pairs of acute to acuminate teeth. Corolla 4·5-6·5 mm, usually lilac to purple. Capsule 3-5(-6) mm, usually shorter than the calyx, more than twice as long as wide, oblong to elliptic-oblong, rounded to slightly emarginate. 2n = 44. {\i Heaths, usually associated with} Calluna vulgaris. •{\i  N. & C. Europe, extending southwards to N. Spain}. Au Be Br ?Co Cz Da Fa Fe Ga Ge Hb Ho Hs It No Po Rm Rs(B) Su.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Hybrids with {\b 11}({\b d}), {\b 12}, {\b 16}, and {\b 17} are common.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Plants derived from the hybrid {\b 33} × {\b 17} have been described as {\b E. gratiosa }Wiinst., {\i Bot. Tidsskr.}{\b  48}: 103 (1946).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Hairy plants from W. Scotland (island of Rhum), similar to {\b 33} but with very small leaves and corolla and more or less emarginate capsule, have been described as {\b E. rhumica} Pugsley, {\i Naturalist }({\i Leeds}) {\b 1945}: 41 (1945); they are possibly of hybrid origin.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 34. E. scottica} Wettst., {\i Monogr. Gatt. Euphrasia} 170 (1896).Stem up to 25 cm, erect, with 0-4 pairs of long, arcuate-erect branches. Cauline internodes 2-5 times, the lower floral 1½-3(-5) times as long as the leaves. Lowest flower at node (2-)3-6(-8). Leaves light green, often purple beneath, glabrous to moderately hairy, rarely with some glandular hairs. Cauline leaves ovate-elliptical to obovate, with up to 5(-6) pairs of shallow, obtuse or subacute teeth; lower floral leaves 4-10(-17) mm, often alternate, ovate, oblong or rhombic, with 3-5(-6) pairs of subacute to acute teeth. Corolla (3·5-)4·5-6·5 mm; lower lip small, white; upper white or lilac. Capsule 4-5·5(-9) mm, as long as or longer than the calyx, more than twice as long as wide, oblong to elliptic-oblong, more or less emarginate. 2n = 44.{\i  Wet moorland, fens and flushes. • N. Europe.} Br Fa Fe Hb Is No ?Rs (C) Su.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Populations probably referable to the hybrid {\b 16} × {\b 34} are rather frequent in Britain, sometimes occurring independently of the presumed parents; these plants have more flexuous stems, more acutely toothed leaves and sometimes slightly larger flowers than {\b 34}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Specimens from Iceland often approach {\b 28} in their hairy, broader leaves.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b  E. heslop-harrisonii} Pugsley,{\i  Naturalist }({\i Leeds}){\b  1945}: 43 (1945), from N. Scotland, is like {\b 34} but has usually flexuous stems, cauline internodes not more than 2(-3) times as long as the leaves,leaves not purple beneath, the cauline with not more than 4 pairs of teeth, the lower floral broadly ovate to trullate, and the capsules (4·5-)5·5-7 mm.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 35. E. calida} Yeo, {\i Bot. Jour. Linn. Soc.}{\b  64}: 359 (1971). Like {\b 34} but with cauline internodes not more than 3 times and lower floral internodes not more than 2½ times as long as the leaves; leaves thin, not purple beneath, the lower floral broadly ovate or broadly rhombic; calyx whitish and membranous except for the teeth and prominent veins; capsule 3·5-5(-6) mm, usually much shorter than the calyx and not more than twice as long as wide, broadly obovate to oblong.{\i  Apparently associated with warm springs. • Iceland.} Is.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 36. E. saamica} Juz.,{\i  Not. Syst.} ({\i Leningrad}) {\b 17}: 365 (1955).Like {\b 34} but with 0-1 pairs of branches; cauline internodes 2½-9 times, the lower floral 1½-5 times as long as the leaves; lowest flower at node 2-4; purple colouring of leaves not stronger beneath than above; cauline leaves with not more than 3 pairs of teeth, the lower floral with subacute to aristate teeth; corolla 5·5-7·5(-8) mm; capsule 5-7 mm, elliptical to obovate. •{\i  Arctic Fennoscandia.} ?Fe No Rs (N) Su.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 37. E. atropurpurea} (Rostrup) Ostenf. in Warming et al.,{\i  Bot. Faeroes}{\b  1}: 55 (1901). Stem up to 17 cm, flexuous, with 0-3 pairs of arcuate-erect branches. Cauline internodes (1-)1½-3 times as long as the leaves. Lowest flower at node 3-6. Leaves up to 11 mm, green, often tinged with purple, the lower floral obovate-lanceolate to rhombic or ovate, with 2-4(-6) pairs of subacute to acute teeth. Corolla 5-6·5 mm, deep purple, at least in part. Capsule 4·5-6·5 mm, 1½-2½ times as long as wide, oblong or elliptic-oblong, truncate or emarginate.{\i  • Færöer.} Fa.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 38. E. bottnica} Kihlman, {\i Acta Soc. Fauna Fl. Fenn. }{\b 13}({\b 5}): 20 (1896). Stem up to 20 cm, erect, with 0-3(-5) pairs of erect branches. Cauline internodes 2-4 times as long as the leaves. Lowest flower at node 2-5(-7). Leaves up to 11(-14) mm, more or less setulose, the lower floral with obtuse to subacute teeth. Corolla 3-3·5 mm. Anthers pale brown. Capsule 3-5 mm, not more than twice as long as wide, emarginate.{\i  Sea-cliffs and saltmarshes. • Around the Gulf of Bothnia.} Fe Su.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 39. E. willkommii} Freyn, {\i Flora }({\i Regensb.}){\b  67}: 681 (1884). Stem up to 8 cm, with 0-2 pairs of erect or appressed branches; cauline internodes up to 2½(-3) times as long as the leaves. Lowest flower at node 2-4. Leaves up to 9 mm, subglabrous or with short glandular hairs, the cauline narrowly oblong to cuneate obovate, with 1-3 pairs of obtuse teeth, the lower floral with (1-) 2-5 pairs of linear and obtuse to deltate and acute teeth, the upper usually with aristate teeth, often nearly as long as the terminal lobe. Corolla 4·5-5·5 mm, yellowish with purplish upper lip. Capsule 3·5-5·5 mm, usually shorter than the calyx, 2-3 times as long as wide, elliptic-oblong, truncate or emarginate.{\i  Grassy places, }1900-3000{\i  m. • S. Spain} ({\i Sierra Nevada}). Hs.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Plants from the Pyrenees referred to this species appear to resemble {\b 20} more closely than {\b 39}; their status is obscure.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 40. E. taurica} Ganeschin in Popl., {\i Spisok Rast. Sobr. Krymsk. Gos. Zapo} 87 (1931). Stem up to 8 cm, erect, with short glandular and eglandular hairs, with (0-)1-3 pairs of erect branches. Cauline internodes 1½-2½ times as long as the leaves, the lower floral usually shorter than the leaves. Lowest flower at node (3-)4-7(-8). Leaves up to 8 mm, sparsely setulose and more or less densely covered with very short glandular hairs, usually trullate or rhombic, cuneate at base, with 2-3 pairs of narrowly triangular, subacute to aristate teeth. Corolla 4·5-6 mm, white. Capsule (4·5-)5-6 mm, shorter than or as long as the calyx, 2½-3 times as long as wide, elliptic-oblong, rounded or subtruncate, apiculate to cuspidate. {\i Rocky and grassy places. • Mountains of Krym.} Rs (K).
\par

\par
265}
\par