{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28  Subsect. {\i Angustifoliae }(Wettst.) Joerg. Capsule glabrous, or with a few small hairs on the margin.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 41. E. salisburgensis} Funck, {\i Bot. Taschenb. }{\b 1794}: 190 (1794). Stem up to 20(-25) cm, with 0-7 pairs of slender, erect or patent branches. Cauline internodes up to 3(-4) times as long as the leaves. Lowest flower at node 2-13(-16). Leaves 3-13(-17) mm, usually strongly tinged with purple, glabrous or minutely scabrid, with the teeth distant from the leaf-base and at least the two distal pairs distant from each other; cauline leaves up to 5 mm wide (excluding teeth), cuneate-obovate, to narrowly oblong-ovate, with 1-4 pairs of subacute to aristate teeth; lower floral leaves up to 6·5 mm wide (excluding teeth), broadly obovate to narrowly ovate or trullate, with 1-5(-6) pairs of acute to aristate teeth. Corolla 5-7·5(-8·5) mm, white (rarely purple); lower lip usually rather small. Capsule 4-6·5 mm, 2-3½ times as long as wide, oblong to elliptical, truncate to emarginate. 2n = 44. {\i Stony grassland, screes and scrub, usually on basic soils. Mountains of C. and S. Europe; Fennoscandia; W. Ireland.} Al Au ?Br Bu Co Cr Cz Fe Ga Ge Gr Hb He Hs It Ju No Po Rm Rs (W, K) Su.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Plants from high altitudes or high latitudes are sparsely branched, with a low node of flowering and large, emarginate capsules; in C. & S.E. Europe such plants often have purplish corollas. Plants which also have relatively wide leaves with shallow, obtuse teeth are usually referred in Fennoscandia to {\b E. lapponica} T. C. E. Fries, {\i Ark. Bot.}{\b  17}({\b 6}): 12 (1922) and in C. & S. Europe to{\b  E. nivalis} G. Beck, {\i Verh. Zool.-Bot. Ges. Wien}{\b  33}: 225 (1883).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Plants from S.E. Sweden (Gotland) approach {\b 43} in leaf-shape, but the central portion of the leaf is wider and the teeth shorter.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 42. E. portae} Wettst., {\i Österr. Bot. Zeitschr.}{\b  43}: 196 (1893). Like {\b 41} but with 0-3(-5) pairs of branches; cauline internodes 1-2 times as long as the leaves; leaves usually green, the lower floral not more than 4·5 mm wide (excluding teeth), trullate to linear-lanceolate, with 2-4 pairs of teeth; corolla 7·5-9 mm, lower lip relatively large, usually white, upper lilac; capsule 2¾-4 times as long as wide. {\i Pastures and screes,} 600-2300{\i  m. • S. Alps }({\i Alpi Tridentine, Alpi dell' Ortles}). It.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Probably of hybrid origin, between {\b 21} and {\b 41}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Dwarf, sparingly branched plants with a low node of flowering, from the C. Appennini, have been referred to a distinct species,{\b  E. italica} Wettst.,{\i  Monogr. Gatt.} Euphrasia 242 (1896). Their status requires clarification.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 43. E. illyrica} Wettst., {\i Österr. Bot. Zeitschr.}{\b  43}: 131 (1893). Like {\b 41} but with lowest flower at node 9-15; lower floral leaves not more than 2 mm wide (excluding teeth), with 2-4 pairs of narrowly falcate, aristate teeth, the distal pair often short and embraced by the middle pairs; calyx minutely scabrid; corolla 6·5-8·5 mm, lilac to purple; capsule 2½-4 times as long as wide, elliptic-obovate, rounded, cuspidate or truncate.{\i  Rocky places and stony grassland. • N.W. Jugoslavia, N.E. Italy.} It Ju.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Records from Bulgaria require confirmation.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 44. E. dinarica} (G. Beck) Murb.,{\i  Lunds Univ. Årsskr.}{\b  27}({\b 5}): 72 (1892). Stem up to 14 cm, erect, with 1-5(-8) pairs of erect branches. Cauline internodes up to 1½ times as long as the leaves. Leaves 3-18 mm, up to 1·5 mm wide (excluding teeth), with up to 3 pairs of distant teeth, those of the cauline leaves deltate to linear, with subobtuse, cartilaginous apex, those of the lower floral leaves falcate, acute, several times as long as wide, overlapping so as to produce a latticed effect, the distal pair short, greatly exceeded by the linear terminal lobe. Corolla 5·5-6·5 mm, lilac or purplish. Capsule 4·5-6(-7·5) mm, 3-5 times as long as wide, elliptic-obovate.{\i  Dry, stony grassland in mountains. • W. Jugoslavia; S. Italy.} It Ju.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 45. E. cuspidata} Host, {\i Fl. Austr.}{\b  2}: 186 (1831) (incl.{\i  E. stiriaca} Wettst.). Stem up to 20(-25) cm, with 3-9(-12) pairs of branches. Cauline internodes not more than twice as long as the leaves. Lowest flower at node 6-13(-20). Leaves green or brown-tinged, up to 2·5(-3) mm wide (excluding teeth), obovate-lanceolate to linear-lanceolate; teeth not more than 2(-3) pairs, distant from the leaf-base and from each other, those of the lower floral leaves deltate to linear or falcate and aristate. Corolla 8-9·5(-10·5) mm, white or with upper lip lilac. Capsule 4·5-6(-6·5) mm, usually much shorter than the calyx, 2½-4 times as long as wide, elliptic-obovate, often asymmetrical.{\i  Stony and rocky places; calcicole. • S. & E. Alps and adjacent foothills.} Au Ge It Ju.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 46. E. tricuspidata} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 604 (1753). Like {\b 45} but with the leaves linear, not more than 2(-3·5) mm wide (including teeth); teeth shorter than the width of the remainder of the leaf, those of the lower floral leaves not more than 1(-2) pairs; corolla 9-12 (-13) mm, sometimes lilac.{\i  Stony places and wood-margins. • S.E. Alps.} It.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc {\b 30.            Odontites}              Ludwig
\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc (incl.{\i  Dispermotheca }Beauverd,
\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc {\i Macrosyringion} Rothm. and {\i Odontitella} Rothm.)
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc By D.A. Webb &  J.M. Camarasa.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Annual, hemiparasitic herbs or dwarf shrubs. Leaves opposite, sessile, usually narrow, entire or obscurely (rarely conspicuously) toothed. Flowers zygomorphic, in terminal, bracteate, spike-like, secund racemes. Calyx tubular-campanulate, 4-toothed. Corolla with a cylindrical tube and 2-lipped limb; upper lip entire to shortly 2-lobed, the lobes not recurved; lower lip 3-lobed, with entire or slightly emarginate lobes. Stamens 4, didynamous; anthers glabrous or hairy, equally mucronate at base. Stigma capitate. Capsule loculicidal; seeds 1-2 mm, rather few, with longitudinal striae or low ridges.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Corolla pink, purple or white, without any yellow tint
\par
2 Corolla glabrous
\par
3 Stem and leaves glandular-puberulent to villous, with
\par
  ± patent hairs ............................................................................. {\b 5. granatensis}
\par
3 Stem and leaves appressed-eglandular-puberulent ...................... {\b 6. purpurea}
\par
2 Corolla hairy
\par
4 Stems procumbent ........................................................................ {\b 14. corsica}
\par
4 Stems erect
\par
5 Leaves lanceolate, serrate to crenate ............................................... {\b 15. verna}
\par
5 Leaves linear, entire
\par
6 Bracts 6-12 mm, the lower often exceeding the flowers;
\par
  calyx  4-5 mm; corolla cream, tinged with pink ..................... {\b 10. jaubertiana}
\par
6 Bracts not more than 5 mm, not exceeding the flowers;
\par
  calyx 3 mm; corolla purplish-pink throughout ......................... {\b 11. kaliformis} 
\par
1 Corolla yellow, sometimes tinged with red or pink
\par
7 Shrub, with non-flowering shoots at the base
\par
8 Inflorescences 3-8 cm, dense, aggregated into ± compact
\par
  panicles; lower bracts greatly exceeding flowers;
\par
  immature capsule hairy at apex .................................................. {\b 12. bocconei}
\par
8 Inflorescences 2-4 cm, ± lax, not aggregated into panicles; 
\par
  bracts not or only slightly exceeding flowers; capsule glabrous ...... {\b 13. linkii}
\par
7 Annual, often with woody stem, but without non-flowering 
\par
  shoots at the base
\par
9 Stems procumbent ........................................................................ {\b 14. corsica}
\par
9 Stems erect
\par

\par
266}
\par