{\rtf1\ansi \deff4\deflang1033{\fonttbl{\f4\froman\fcharset0\fprq2 Times New Roman;}}{\colortbl;\red0\green0\blue0;\red0\green0\blue255;\red0\green255\blue255;\red0\green255\blue0;\red255\green0\blue255;\red255\green0\blue0;\red255\green255\blue0;\red255\green255\blue255;\red0\green0\blue128;\red0\green128\blue128;\red0\green128\blue0;\red128\green0\blue128;\red128\green0\blue0;\red128\green128\blue0;\red128\green128\blue128;\red192\green192\blue192;}{\stylesheet{\widctlpar \f4\fs20\lang2057 \snext0 Normal;}{\*\cs10 \additive Default Paragraph Font;}}{\info{\author dddd}{\operator dddd}{\creatim\yr1998\mo11\dy5\hr15\min30}{\revtim\yr1998\mo11\dy5\hr15\min31}{\version2}{\edmins1}{\nofpages4}{\nofwords1023}{\nofchars5832}{\*\company  }{\vern57431}}\widowctrl\ftnbj\aenddoc\hyphcaps0 \fet0\sectd \linex0 {\*\pnseclvl1\pnucrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl2\pnucltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl3\pndec\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl4\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl5\pndec\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl6\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl7\pnlcrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl8\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl9\pnlcrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}
\pard\plain \ \f4\fs20\lang2057 {\fs28  (}{\b\fs28 b}{\fs28 ) Subsp. }{\b\fs28 litoralis}{\fs28  (Fries) Nyman,}{\i\fs28  Consp.}{\fs28  551 (1881) (}{\i\fs28 O. litoralis}{\fs28  Fries): stem 10-35 cm, usually simple, rarely with 1-2 pairs of short, suberect branches immediately below the inflorescence; lower internodes longer than the leaves. Leaves crenate to serrate, widest at or near the base. Bracts 8-20 mm. Early-flowering. 2n = 20.}{\i\fs28  Meadows by the sea. \bullet  Baltic region, extending to S. Norway and the Netherlands}{\fs28 .
\par  (}{\b\fs28 c}{\fs28 ) Subsp. }{\b\fs28 serotina}{\fs28  (Dumort.) Corb., }{\i\fs28 Nouv. Fl. Normand.}{\fs28  437 (1894) (}{\i\fs28 O. serotina}{\fs28  Dumort.; incl. }{\i\fs28 O. salina}{\fs28  (Kotov) Kotov,}{\i\fs28  O. virgata}{\fs28  Lange): stem 20-50 cm; lower internodes usually shorter than leaves. Branches long, more or less patent, often ascending near the apex, the uppermost usually 2-4 nodes below the terminal inflorescence. Leaves rather obscurely crenate to subentire, widest some distance above the base. Bracts 7-10 mm. Late-flowering. 2n = 20.}{\i\fs28  Almost throughout the range of the species, but rare in parts of the north}{\fs28 .
\par 
\par }
\pard \qc\ {\b\fs28 31.             Bartsia}{\fs28                L.
\par }{\fs24 By  †T.G. Tutin.
\par 
\par }
\pard \ {\fs28 Perennial, hemiparasitic herbs with a short, rhizomatous, subterranean stock. Leaves opposite, sessile, toothed. Flowers in terminal, bracteate, spike-like racemes, which are not secund. Calyx tubular-campanulate, 4-toothed. Corolla with a cylindrical tube and 2-lipped limb; upper lip entire or emarginate, longer than the lower; lower lip 3-lobed. Stamens 4, didynamous; anthers hairy, equally mucronate at the base. stigma capitate. Capsule loculicidal; seeds c. 2 mm, rather few, with 1 or more longitudinal, membranous wings; hilum lateral.
\par 
\par }
\pard \li200\ {\fs28 1 All bracts ovate, crenate-serrate, exceeding the calyx ..................... }{\b\fs28 1. alpina}{\fs28 
\par 1 At least the middle and upper bracts linear-lanceolate,
\par   entire, not exceeding the calyx
\par 2 Lowest bracts ovate, serrate ............................................................ }{\b\fs28 2. spicata}{\fs28 
\par 2 Lowest bracts linear-lanceolate, entire ............................................ }{\b\fs28 3. aspera}{\fs28 
\par 
\par }
\pard \ {\fs28    }{\b\fs28 1. B. alpina}{\fs28  L.,}{\i\fs28  Sp. Pl}{\fs28 . 602 (1753). Glandular-hairy; stems 8-30(-40) cm, erect or ascending, simple. Leaves 10-25 \'d7 6-15 mm, ovate, obtuse to subacute, crenate-serrate. Bracts like the leaves but decreasing in size upwards, dull purple, exceeding the calyx. Calyx 6-8 mm; teeth as long as tube or shorter, narrowly triangular, obtuse. Corolla 15-20 mm, dull, dark purple. Capsule distinctly longer than calyx. 2n = 12, 24, 36.}{\i\fs28  Damp places; usually on base-rich soils. N. Europe, and southwards in the mountains to the Pyrenees, S Alps and S.W. Bulgaria.}{\fs28  ?Al Au Br Bu Cz Fa Fe Ga Ge He Hs Is It Ju No Po Rm Rs (N, W) Su.
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 2. B. spicata}{\fs28  Ramond,}{\i\fs28  Bull. Soc. Philom. Paris}{\b\fs28  2}{\fs28 : 141 (1800). Like }{\b\fs28 1}{\fs28  but stems somewhat branched; middle and upper bracts linear-lanceolate, entire, not exceeding the calyx; calyx-teeth acute; capsule not or scarcely longer than calyx. Mountain rocks; calcicole. \bullet }{\i\fs28  C. Pyrenees, Cordillera Cant\'e1brica. }{\fs28 Ga Hs.
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 3. B. aspera}{\fs28  (Brot.) Lange in Willk. & Lange,}{\i\fs28  Prodr. Fl. Hisp.}{\b\fs28  2}{\fs28 : 614 (1870). Like }{\b\fs28 1}{\fs28  but appressed-hispid and scabrid; stems branched; all bracts linear-lanceolate, entire, shorter than the calyx; calyx-teeth acute; corolla yellow, changing to reddish-brown; capsule shorter than calyx.}{\i\fs28  Dry scrub. \bullet  C. & S. Portugal; one station in S.W. Spain.}{\fs28  Hs Lu.
\par 
\par }
\pard \qc\ {\b\fs28 32.            Parentucellia}{\fs28             Viv.
\par  }{\fs24 By  †T.G. Tutin.
\par 
\par }
\pard \ {\fs28 Like}{\i\fs28  Bartsia}{\fs28  but annual; corolla with the lower lip longer than the upper; seeds c. 0\'b75 mm, numerous, smooth or finely reticulate; hilum basal.
\par 
\par }
\pard \li200\ {\fs28 Calyx-teeth nearly as long as tube; corolla yellow or white, 
\par   caducous .......................................................................................... }{\b\fs28 1. viscosa}{\fs28  
\par Calyx-teeth about half as long as tube; corolla reddish-purple 
\par  (rarely white), persistent .................................................................. }{\b\fs28 2. latifolia}{\fs28 
\par 
\par }
\pard \ {\fs28    }{\b\fs28 1. P. viscosa}{\fs28  (L.) Caruel in Parl.,}{\i\fs28  Fl. Ital.}{\b\fs28  6}{\fs28 : 482 (1885) (}{\i\fs28 Bartsia viscosa}{\fs28  L.). Glandular-hairy; stem 10-50(-70) cm, erect, usually simple. Leaves 10-45 \'d7 3-15 mm, oblong to lanceolate, acute to subacute, coarsely serrate. Bracts like the leaves, but decreasing in size upwards. Calyx 10-16 mm; teeth linear-lanceolate, nearly as long as tube. Corolla 16-24 mm, yellow (less often white), caducous. Capsule 7-9 mm, oblong, pubescent. Seeds c. 0\'b75 mm. 2n = 48.}{\i\fs28  Damp, grassy or sandy places. S. & W. Europe, northwards to S.W. Scotland; naturalized or casual further north.}{\fs28  Al Az Bl Br Co Cr Ga Gr Hb Hs It Ju Lu Sa Si Tu [Be Da Ho].
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 2. P. latifolia}{\fs28  (L.) Caruel in Parl.,}{\i\fs28  op. cit.}{\fs28  480 (1885) (}{\i\fs28 Bartsia latifolia}{\fs28  (L.) Sibth. & Sm.). Like }{\b\fs28 1}{\fs28  but stem 5-30 cm; leaves 4-12 \'d7 3-5 mm, triangular-lanceolate, very deeply toothed; calyx 6-10 mm, with teeth about half as long as tube; corolla 8-10 mm, reddish-purple (rarely white), persistent; capsule glabrous. }{\i\fs28 Sandy and stony places. S. Europe, extending northwards to N.W. France.}{\fs28  Al Bl Bu Co Cr Ga Gr Hs It Ju Lu Sa Si Tu.
\par 
\par }
\pard \qc\ {\b\fs28 33.              Bellardia}{\fs28              All.
\par }{\fs24 By  †T.G. Tutin.
\par 
\par }
\pard \ {\fs28 Like}{\i\fs28  Bartsia}{\fs28  but annual; calyx ventricose-campanulate, rather deeply cleft above and below into 2 shortly bidentate segments; lower lip of corolla longer than the upper; stigma clavate; seeds c. 1 mm, numerous, with several longitudinal ridges and fine transverse striations, not winged; hilum basal.
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 1. B. trixago}{\fs28  (L.) All., }{\i\fs28 Fl. Pedem.}{\b\fs28  1}{\fs28 : 61 (1785) (}{\i\fs28 Bartsia trixago}{\fs28  L.). Glandular-pubescent; stems 15-70 cm, usually simple, erect. Leaves 15-90 \'d7 1-15 mm, linear to linear-lanceolate, obtuse to subacute, coarsely and obtusely serrate. Bracts like the leaves, but decreasing in size upwards, the upper ovate, cordate, entire. Calyx 8-10 mm; teeth triangular, less than \'bc as long as tube. Corolla 20-25 mm, purple and white or yellow, more rarely entirely white. Capsule subglobose; seeds c. 0\'b77 mm, oblong to reniform. 2n = 24.}{\i\fs28  Stony or grassy places. S. Europe.}{\fs28  Al Az Bl Bu Co Cr Ga Gr Hs It Ju Lu Sa Si Tu.
\par 
\par }
\pard \qc\ {\b\fs28 34.               Pedicularis}{\fs28              L.
\par }{\fs24 By E. Mayer.
\par 
\par }
\pard \ {\fs28 Perennial (rarely annual or biennial), hemiparasitic herbs. Leaves usually alternate (rarely opposite or whorled), usually pinnatisect, the lower usually long-petiolate, the upper often subsessile. Flowers in terminal, bracteate spikes or racemes. Calyx tubular to campanulate, 5-toothed, often more or less 2-lipped. Corolla with cylindrical to obconical tube; limb 2-lipped, the upper lip galeate, laterally compressed, the lower 3-lobed, usually patent. Stamens 4, didynamous; anthers glabrous, the lobes equally mucronate at the base. stigma capitate. Capsule not or moderately compressed, loculicidal; seeds numerous.
\par 
\par  The descriptions of the leaves apply to those of the basal rosette; in most species the cauline leaves are smaller, less deeply divided, and with petiole shorter or absent.
\par 
\par  Within the genus all intermediate states exist between virtually sessile flowers and those in which the pedicel is longer than the calyx. In this account }{\i\fs28 spike}{\fs28  is used to denote an inflorescence in which most of the pedicels are less than 2 mm.
\par 
\par   Literature: G. Bonati, }{\i\fs28 Le genre}{\fs28  Pedicularis. Nancy. 1918. I. Kl\'e1stersk\'fd,}{\i\fs28  Bull. Int. Acad. Tch\'e8que Sci.}{\b\fs28  29}{\fs28 : 202-230 (1928).
\par 
\par 269}
\par }