{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b tatrae} (Wettst.) Hayek in Hegi,{\i  Ill. Fl. Mitteleur.}{\b  6}({\b 1}): 91 (1913) ({\i E. tatrae} Wettst.): Up to 25(-30) cm. Lowest flower often at node 6. Cauline leaves with the distal teeth seldom incurved, the lower floral subcordate to rounded at base. Capsule up to 3 times as long as wide.{\i  E.C. Europe} ({\i Carpathians, Sudeten Mts}.).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b  E. mendoncae} Samp., {\i Anais Fac. Ci. Porto}{\b  22}: 50 (1937), known from one locality in N.E. Portugal, may represent a third subspecies. It has stems with up to 4 pairs of branches and cauline internodes 4-8 times as long as the leaves, the lowest flower at node 5-8 and the corolla 5·5-6·5 mm, yellow.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 25. E. frigida} Pugsley,{\i  Jour. Linn. Soc. London }({\i Bot}.){\b  48}: 490 (1930) ({\i E. minima} auct. scand., non DC.). Stem up to 20(-30) cm, flexuous or erect, with 0-2(-3) pairs of erect branches. Cauline internodes 1-5(-10) times, the lower floral 1-4(-5) times as long as the leaves. Lowest flower at node 2-4(-5). Cauline leaves 3-11(-13) mm, more or less setose, sometimes also with short glandular hairs, oblong to suborbicular, broadly cuneate or shortly petiolate at base, with 1-4(-5) pairs of obtuse to subacute teeth; lower floral leaves (3-)5-12(-18) mm, elliptical to deltate or suborbicular, cuneate to truncate at base, with 2-5(-8) pairs of obtuse to subacute teeth usually not longer than wide. Corolla 4-7(-8) mm, white to lilac, rarely purple. Capsule (4-)5-7 mm, about as long as or longer than the calyx, about twice as long as wide, obovate to broadly oblong, emarginate, or rarely truncate. 2n = 44. {\i Grassy places or rock-ledges, mostly on mountains except in the extreme north. N. Europe.} Br ?Cz Fa Fe Hb Is No Rs (N, C) Sb Su.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Plants from Iceland referred to this species have usually densely hairy leaves and very small corolla, and may be difficult to distinguish from {\b 28} or {\b 34}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 26. E. foulaensis} Townsend ex Wettst.,{\i  Monogr. Gatt.} Euphrasia 139, 299 (1896). Like {\b 25} but more compact, with up to 3(-4) pairs of branches and lowest flower at node (2-)4-6; leaves small, dark green, becoming black on drying, not densely hairy, the lower floral with obtuse to acute teeth; corolla 4-6 mm; capsule 4·5-5·5(-7) mm, usually exceeding calyx, oblong to elliptic-oblong. 2n = 44.{\i  Cliff-tops and edges of salt-marshes. • N. Scotland, Færöer.} Br Fa.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Strongly hairy plants referred to this species are probably hybrids with {\b 28}, {\b 29} or {\b 30}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 27. E. cambrica} Pugsley, {\i Jour. Bot.} ({\i London}){\b  67}: 224 (1929). Stem up to 8 cm, flexuous, with 0-2 pairs of flexuous branches. Internodes shorter than the leaves or up to 1½(-2) times as long. Lowest flower at node 2-4. Lower floral leaves 3·5-9 mm, broadly ovate to suborbicular or deltate, with 2-4 pairs of obtuse to subacute teeth and obtuse terminal lobe. Corolla 4-5·5 mm; lower lip very small, white or yellowish-white; upper white or lilac. Capsule (4-)5-7 mm, longer than the calyx, not more than twice as long as wide, elliptical or obovate, emarginate.{\i  Mountain grassland. • N. Wales}. Br.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    ({\b 28-32}). {\b E. ostenfeldii} group. Stem not more than 12(-15) cm. Lowest flower at node 9 or below. Leaves up to 11(-14) mm, rather densely eglandular-hairy, the lower floral with the teeth about as long as wide or less. Corolla 4-6(-7) mm. Capsule elliptic-oblong or oblong.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Leaves hairy mainly towards the apex- the cauline 
\par
  obovate to narrowly ovate or elliptical .................................. {\b 32. campbelliae}
\par
1 Leaves more or less uniformly hairy, usually suborbicular,
\par
  ovate, or ovate-oblong
\par
2 Leaves with glandular hairs ....................................................... {\b 31. dunensis}
\par
2 Leaves without glandular hairs
\par
3 Teeth of lower floral leaves mostly wider than long;
\par
  branches not more than 3 pairs ............................................... {\b 30. rotundifolia}
\par
3 Teeth of lower floral leaves mostly as long as wide;
\par
  branches up to 5 pairs
\par
4 Corolla 5·5-7 mm; capsule usually more than twice as
\par
  long as wide .............................................................................. {\b 29. marshallii}
\par
4 Corolla 3·5-6 mm; capsule not more than twice as long 
\par
  as wide ..................................................................................... {\b 28. ostenfeldii}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 28. E. ostenfeldii} (Pugsley) Yeo, {\i Bot. Jour. Linn. Soc.}{\b  64}: 359 (1971) ({\i E. curta} var.{\i  ostenfeldii} Pugsley,{\i  E. curta} auct., non (Fries) Wettst.). Stem erect or flexuous, with 0-4(-6) pairs of branches. Cauline internodes up to 3(-5) times as long as the leaves. Lowest flower at node (2-)3-7. Cauline leaves suborbicular to oblong-obovate, with not more than 4 pairs of teeth, the lower floral little larger than the upper cauline, suborbicular to oblong-ovate, with not more than 5 pairs of symmetrical, subacute to acute teeth. Corolla (3·5-)4·5-6 mm. Capsule 4-6 mm, as long as or longer than the calyx, not more than twice as long as wide, emarginate. {\i Grassy, stony or sandy places, often near the sea. N.W. Europe, from N. Wales to Iceland.} Br Fa Is.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b  E. davidssonii} Pugsley, {\i Jour. Bot.} ({\i London}){\b  71}: 308 (1933), described from Iceland, with hairy, deeply toothed leaves, is probably related to {\b 28}, but is insufficiently known.{\b  E. eurycarpa} Pugsley,{\i  Naturalist} ({\i Leeds}){\b  1945}: 42 (1945), described from W. Scotland (island of Rhum), is like {\b 28} but has longer internodes and very wide, deeply emarginate capsule. It is perhaps of hybrid origin.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 29. E. marshallii} Pugsley,{\i  Jour. Bot.} ({\i London}){\b  67}: 224 (1929). Stem erect, with 1-5 pairs of rather long, erect branches. Cauline internodes up to 2½(-3) times as long as the leaves; upper floral internodes very short. Lowest flower at node (5-)7-9. Cauline leaves ovate, oblong-ovate or elliptical, with up to 5 pairs of teeth, the lower floral ovate or rhombic, with up to 5 pairs of teeth, the basal teeth patent or apically directed. Corolla 5·5-7 mm. Capsule 4·5-5·5(-6·5) mm, about as long as or shorter than the calyx, usually more than twice as long as wide, truncate. 2n = 44.{\i  Maritime grassland. N. Scotland.} Br.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 30. E. rotundifolia} Pugsley,{\i  loc. cit.} (1929). Like {\b 29} but with 0-3 pairs of short branches; cauline internodes 1-2(-2½) times as long as the leaves; cauline leaves orbicular to oblong-ovate, with obtuse teeth; lower floral leaves suborbicular to broadly ovate, rounded at base, with obtuse or subacute teeth usually wider than long; capsule 5·5-6 mm, slightly exceeding calyx, not more than twice as long as wide.{\i  Maritime grassland. N. Scotland.} Br.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 31. E. dunensis} Wiinst., {\i Bot. Tidsskr.}{\b  43}: 233 (1935). Like {\b 29} but with 0-3 pairs of short erect branches; cauline internodes up to 1½(-3) times as long as the leaves; leaves with scattered short or long glandular hairs among the eglandular, the cauline caducous, with not more than 4 pairs of teeth; lower floral leaves broadly ovate or oblong-ovate.{\i  Calcareous maritime grassland. • N.W. Jylland} ({\i Bulbjerg}). Da.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Records from elsewhere in Denmark are erroneous. Hybrids with {\b 17} are known.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 32. E. campbelliae} Pugsley,{\i  Jour. Bot.} ({\i London}) {\b 78}: 91 (1940). Stem up to 10 cm, erect, with 0-2 pairs of short erect branches. Cauline internodes 1-2½(-4) times as long as the leaves. Lowest flower at node 2-7. Leaves not more than 8 mm, sometimes purplish beneath and green above, the hairs mostly on the distal
\par

\par
264}
\par