{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 yellow; lower lip glabrous, with serrulate lobes and 2 tubercles near the base. Capsule ovoid, apiculate, somewhat exceeding calyx. {\i Mountain pastures and screes. • N.& C.parts of Balkan peninsula.} Al Bu Gr Ju.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Stem 40-60 cm
\par
2 Stem hairy; bracts densely villous, the lower 2-pinnatisect, 
\par
  the upper 3-fid or undivided ...................................... ({\b a}) subsp. {\b brachyodonta}
\par
2 Stem glabrescent; bracts pubescent, the lower oblong,
\par
  leaf-like, the upper palmatifid ......................................... ({\b b}) subsp. {\b moesiaca}
\par
1 Stem not more than 30 cm
\par
3 Calyx-tube hairy all over; calyx-teeth subequal; spike
\par
  elongate; bracts pinnatifid to 3-lobed ................................... ({\b c}) subsp. {\b malyi}
\par
3 Calyx-tube hairy only on the veins; calyx-teeth unequal;
\par
  spike capitate; bracts 3-lobed or undivided .................. ({\b d}) subsp. {\b grisebachii}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b brachyodonta}: Stem 40-60 cm, hairy. Spikes dense, cylindrical. Bracts villous, the lower 2-pinnatisect, the upper 3-fid or undivided.{\i  W. Jugoslavia and N. Albania.}
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b moesiaca} (Stadlm.) Hayek,{\i  Prodr. Fl.Penins. Balcan.}{\b  2}: 193 (1929): Like subsp. ({\b a}) but stem glabrescent; bracts pubescent, the lower oblong, the upper palmatifid.{\i  Macedonia and Bulgaria.}
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b c}) Subsp. {\b montenegrina} (Janka ex Nyman) D. A. Webb,{\i  Bot. Jour. Linn. Soc.}{\b  65}: 357 (1912) ({\i P. friderici-augusti} subsp.{\i  montenegrina} Janka ex Nyman). Stem not more than 30 cm, hairy. Bracts pinnatisect to 3-lobed. Calyx hairy all over; teeth subequal.{\i  W.C. Jugoslavia and N. Albania}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b d}) Subsp. {\b grisebachii} (Wettst.) Hayek,{\i  Prodr. Fl. Penins. Balcan.}{\b  2}: 193 (1929): Like subsp. ({\b c}) but bracts undivided to 3-lobed; calyx with tube hairy only on the veins and teeth unequal. {\i Albania to Bulgaria.}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 29. P. heterodonta} Pancic,{\i  Fl. Princ. Serb., Addit.} 196 (1884). Perennial. Stem 12-30 cm, erect or ascending, hairy. Leaves subglabrous, lanceolate, 2-pinnatisect with lanceolate, toothed segments. Flowers in a spike dense in flower, elongating in fruit; bracts sparsely pubescent, triangular, pinnatifid to 3-lobed, equalling the calyx. Calyx with glabrous, membranous tube, deeply split along the lower side; teeth deltate, entire, ciliate, the upper one distinct, the two lateral on each side more or less united. Corolla 15-19 mm, yellowish-white; lower lip sparsely ciliate. Capsule ovoid, acuminate, somewhat exceeding calyx.{\i  Meadows and stony hillsides. • Mountains of C. & E. Jugoslavia.} Ju.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 30. P. leucodon} Griseb.,{\i  Spicil. Fl. Rumel.}{\b  2}: 17 (1844). Perennial. Stem 12-20(-30) cm, erect. Leaves more or less glabrous above, hairy beneath, oblong-lanceolate, 2-pinnatisect with lanceolate, toothed segments. Flowers in a lax spike, often interrupted below; bracts hairy, equalling or exceeding the calyx. Calyx sparsely hairy; teeth about as long as tube, linear-spathulate, toothed at apex, ciliate. Corolla 18-25 mm, yellowish-white; lower lip glabrous. Capsule ovoid, apiculate, nearly twice as long as calyx. {\i Alpine grassland and screes. • C. part of Balkan peninsula.} Al Bu Ju.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b leucodon}: stem leafless below, leafy above. Lower bracts leaf-like, the upper linear, entire or toothed. Calyx equally 5-toothed. {\i E. Albania, S.E. Jugoslavia}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b occulta} (Janka) E. Mayer,{\i  Österr. Bot. Zeitschr.}{\b  119}: 324 (1971) ({\i P. occulta} Janka): stem equally leafy throughout. Bracts deltate, palmatisect, exceeding the calyx. Calyx usually unequally 4-toothed.{\i  Bulgaria}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 31. P. physocalyx} Bunge, {\i Bull. Sci. Acad. Imp. Sci. Pétersb. }{\b 8}: 252 (1841). Perennial. Stem 10-20 cm, ascending, arachnoid-lanate. Leaves subglabrous except for the villous petiole, lanceolate, 2-pinnatisect, with oblong, acute, toothed segments. Flowers in a raceme dense in flower, elongating in fruit; bracts lanate, the lower leaf-like, the upper 3-lobed. Calyx lanate; teeth half as long as tube, lanceolate, acuminate, serrulate to subentire. Corolla 26-35 mm, yellow; lower lip glabrous. Capsule ovoid, mucronate, shorter than calyx.{\i  Steppes. E. Russia.} Rs (C, E). ({\i W.C. Asia}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 32. P. dasystachys} Schrenk,{\i  Bull. Phys.-Math. Acad. Pétersb.}{\b  2}: 195 (1844). Perennial. Stems 10-30 cm, erect, subglabrous below, hairy above. Leaves glabrous, oblong-lanceolate, pinnatisect, with ovate-lanceolate, obtuse, pinnatifid segments. Flowers in a capitate, whitish-lanate spike; bracts linear, entire, exceeding the calyx. Calyx lanate; teeth unequal, lanceolate, entire, half as long as tube. Corolla 22-25 mm, bright pinkish-red; lower lip glabrous, with denticulate lobes. Capsule ovoid, mucronate, shorter than calyx.{\i  Saline or seasonally-flooded meadows. S.E. Russia, E. Ukraine, W. Kazakhstan.} Rs (C, W, E).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 33. P. graeca} Bunge,{\i  op. cit.} 1: 376 (1843). Perennial. Stem 10-20 cm, erect, arachnoid-lanate. Leaves glabrous except for villous petiole, ovate-lanceolate, 2-pinnatisect with lanceolate, acuminate, toothed segments. Flowers in a raceme, capitate in flower, elongating in fruit. Bracts hairy, exceeding the calyx, the lower leaf-like, the upper linear-lanceolate, crenate or serrate. Calyx glandular-villous; teeth unequal, ovate-lanceolate, subentire. Corolla up to 25(-30) mm, pale yellow; lower lip glabrous, with denticulate lobes. Capsule ovoid, acuminate, equalling or slightly exceeding calyx.{\i  Pastures and stony slopes. • Mountains of Albania and Greece.} Al Gr.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 34. P. friderici-augusti} Tommasini,{\i  Linnaea}{\b  13}: 74 (1839). Like {\b 33} but stem glabrous or subglabrous below; petioles sparsely hairy; raceme eglandular-villous; upper bracts linear, entire, shorter than calyx.{\i  Mountain grassland. •  Jugoslavia, N.E. Italy, N. Albania.} Al It Ju.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 35. P. petiolaris} Ten.,{\i  Fl. Nap.}{\b  5},{\i  Syll. App.}{\b  4}: 11 (1835). Perennial. Stem 7-25 cm, erect, pubescent to villous. Leaves glabrous except for villous petiole, 2-pinnatisect with ovate to lanceolate, apiculate, serrate segments. Flowers in a whitish-lanate, capitate spike; bracts villous, exceeding the calyx, the lower leaf-like, the upper pinnatifid to serrate. Calyx lanate; teeth lanceolate, acute. Corolla up to 22 mm, deep pinkish-red; lower lip glabrous. Capsule narrowly ovoid, acuminate, some what exceeding calyx.{\i  Mountain meadows and stony hillsides. • C. part of Balkan peninsula; C. & S. Appennini.} Al Bu ?Gr It Ju.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 36. P. ferdinandi} Bornm.,{\i  Notizbl. Bot. Gart. Berlin}{\b  8}: 213 (1922). Like {\b 35} but stem 2-5(-8) cm; petioles glabrous or subglabrous; raceme very short, with 4-6(-8) flowers; bracts glabrous; calyx sometimes glabrescent; corolla 22-25 mm, pale pink.{\i  Screes and stony slopes. • S. Jugoslavia} ({\i Jakupica, S. of Skopje}). Ju.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Sect. RHYNCHOLOPHAE Maxim. Perennial. Upper lip of corolla more or less falcate, terminating in a distinct, usually long beak, without teeth.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 37. P. compacta} Stephan ex Willd., {\i Sp. Pl. }{\b 3}: 219 (1800). Stems (12-)25-50 cm, erect or ascending, glabrous or somewhat pubescent above. Leaves glabrous, lanceolate, pinnatisect with lanceolate, pinnatifid, apiculate segments. Flowers in a dense spike; bracts oblong-lanceolate, leaf-like, glabrous or hairy, the uppermost entire and shorter than the calyx. Calyx membranous, glabrous or pubescent; teeth unequal, broad, obtuse, entire.
\par

\par
274}
\par