{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 {\i Mountain grassland and screes. Pyrenees, Cordillera Cantábrica.} Ga Hs.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 49. P. cenisia} Gaudin,{\i  Fl. Helv.}{\b  4}: 132 (1829). Like {\b 47} but stem, bracts and calyx whitish-lanate; calyx-teeth all foliose; corolla pink with deep crimson upper lip.{\i  Alpine pastures and screes. • S.W. Alps, N. Appennini, Alpi Apuane.} Ga It.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 50. P. gyroflexa} Vill.,{\i  Hist. Pl. Dauph.}{\b  2}: 426 (1787). Stem 10-35 cm, ascending to erect, lanate; cauline leaves few. Leaves 2-pinnatisect with lanceolate, incise-dentate segments. Flowers in a spike, dense in flower, becoming lax in fruit; bracts lanate, 3-lobed, exceeding the calyx. Calyx densely lanate; teeth lanceolate, foliose, pinnatifid, as long as tube or longer. Corolla up to 25 mm, pinkish-red; tube twice as long as calyx; beak short; lower lip ciliate. Capsule ovoid, slightly exceeding calyx.{\i  Alpine pastures and screes; calcicole. • S.W. & S. Alps; C. & S. Appennini; one station in E. Pyrenees.} Ga He It.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b gyroflexa}: Leaves puberulent, with crowded, acuminate segments. 2n = 16.{\i  Alps, Pyrenees}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b praetutiana} (Levier ex steininger) H. Kunz & E. Mayer,{\i  Österr. Bot. Zeitschr.}{\b  119}: 324 (1971) ({\i P. gyroflexa }var.{\i  praetutiana} Levier ex Steininger): Leaves glabrous (except sometimes for petiole), with distant, obtuse segments.{\i  Appennini.}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 51. P. elegans} Ten., {\i Fl. Nap. }{\b 5}, {\i Syll. App.}{\b  4}: 11 (1835). Stems 1-12 cm, decumbent, usually hairy, with 0-2 cauline leaves. Leaves glabrous, except sometimes for slightly pubescent rhachis, lanceolate, pinnatisect with oblong, pinnatifid, toothed segments. Flowers few, in a capitate raceme; bracts 2-pinnatifid, hairy, about equalling the calyx. Calyx strongly accrescent, sparsely pubescent; teeth lanceolate, foliose, nearly as long as tube. Corolla up to 21 mm, pinkish-red; tube distinctly exceeding calyx; beak short, conical; lower lip glabrous. Capsule ovoid, shortly apiculate, nearly twice as long as calyx.{\i  Alpine pastures and screes. • C. & S. Appennini.} It.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 52. P. portenschlagii} Sauter ex Reichenb., {\i Pl. Crit.}{\b  5}: 1 (1827). Stem 2-10 cm, erect, glabrous except for 1 or 2 lines of hairs. Leaves glabrous, oblong-lanceolate, pinnatifid with ovate-lanceolate, dentate segments. Flowers 1-3(-5) in a capitate raceme; bracts pinnatifid, equalling or shorter than the calyx. Calyx glabrous or sparsely pubescent; teeth lanceolate, foliose, pinnatifid, recurved at apex, about half as long as tube. Corolla up to 25(-30) mm, pinkish- or purplish-red; tube nearly twice as long as calyx; beak short, truncate; lower lip glabrous. Capsule narrowly oblong, apiculate, exceeding calyx.{\i  Alpine pastures and screes. • N.E. Alps.} Au.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 53. P. asplenifolia} Floerke ex Willd., {\i Sp. Pl.}{\b  3}: 208 (1800). Stem 2-8 cm, ascending to erect, glabrous below, lanate above with reddish hairs. Leaves glabrous, narrowly lanceolate, pinnatisect with ovate-lanceolate, crenate to pinnatifid segments. Flowers 2-5(-8) in a dense, capitate raceme; bracts pinnatifid, reddish-lanate, about as long as calyx. Calyx villous-lanate with reddish hairs; teeth short, foliose, pinnatifid. Corolla up to 17 mm, pinkish-red; tube equalling calyx; lower lip glabrous. Capsule oblong-ovoid, rostrate, exceeding calyx. 2n = 16.{\i  Alpine pastures and screes; calcifuge. • E. Alps.} Au He It.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 54. P. resupinata} L.,{\i  Sp. Pl.} 608 (1753). Stems 30-60 cm, erect, subglabrous; cauline leaves numerous. Leaves hairy beneath, oblong-lanceolate, subcordate at base, crenate-serrate, not lobed; petiole short. Flowers in a spike, lax and interrupted below, dense above; bracts pubescent, ovate, acuminate, crenate. Calyx pubescent, strongly 2-lipped; lips acute, entire. Corolla 20-25 mm, purplish-red; tube twice as long as calyx; beak short and broad; lower lip ciliate. Capsule oblong-ovoid, apiculate, 1½ times as long as calyx.{\i  Meadows and open woods. S. Ural.} Rs (C). ({\i Siberia, E. Asia.})
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc {\b 35.            Rhinanthus}              L. 
\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc ({\i Alectorolophus} Zinn)
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc By R.de Soó and D.A. Webb.
\par
 
\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Annual, hemiparasitic herbs. Leaves opposite, sessile, entire to dentate. Flowers in terminal, bracteate, spike-like racemes. Calyx laterally compressed, ovate to suborbicular, shortly 4-toothed, accrescent. Corolla mainly yellow, with a long tube and 2-lipped limb; upper lip galeate, laterally compressed, with 2 teeth slightly below the apex; lower lip slightly shorter than upper, 3-lobed. Stamens 4, didynamous, included under upper lip of corolla; anther-lobes hairy, not mucronate. Capsule loculicidal; seeds few, more or less discoid, usually with a marginal wing.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   In this and related genera the leaves on the main stem which lie between the uppermost branches and the lowest flowers of the terminal spike are known as{\i  intercalary leaves}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   'Glabrous', when used of the calyx in this genus, refers to the main surfaces; the margin may be scabrid or slightly puberulent.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   The species of {\i Rhinanthus} show a recurrent pattern of variation similar to the ' pseudoseasonal polymorphism ' described for {\i Melampyrum} (p. 253). since, however, the principal habitat of most species of{\i  Rhinanthus} is meadows cut for hay the seasonal aspect is less marked, and for this and other reasons the ecotypic variants are less easily distinguished than in{\i  Melampyrum}. Nevertheless, the general pattern of this variation is so conspicuous and so constant in its general outline that it has been thought best to list, as for{\i  Melampyrum}, the recurrent 'ecotypic variants' for those species in which they have been recognized, each being listed under the name by which it was first validly described, at whatever rank. Such citation does not imply approval of the appropriateness of the rank in question, and is designed primarily to lead the reader to a more detailed description.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Apart from this supposedly ecotypic variation, the pattern of variation of other characters in the genus is so reticulate and complex that there is great lack of agreement on the limits of species. The critical tradition of Central Europe has led to the recognition of a larger number of narrowly-defined species; in Northern Europe most recent authors have defined the species much more widely. This account attempts a compromise between the two traditions.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   In{\i  Rhinanthus} the recurrent ecotypic variants are as follows:
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   (1) {\i Autumnal}. Branches numerous, patent or arcuate; internodes numerous, short; intercalary leaves several. Late-flowering.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28   (2){\i  Aestival}. Branches usually 2-4 pairs, usually flowering; internodes numerous, usually short; intercalary leaves 0-2 pairs. Mid-season-flowering.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28   (3) {\i Vernal}. Branches few or absent, short, non-flowering; internodes few, long; intercalary leaves absent. Early-flowering.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28   (4) {\i Montane}. Rather dwarf; branches few or absent; internodes short, fairly numerous; intercalary leaves variable in number. Mid-season-flowering.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28   (5) {\i Alpine}. Dwarf; internodes numerous, short; intercalary leaves several. Mid-season- to late-flowering.
\par

\par
276}
\par