{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28   Literature: A. Chabert, {\i Bull. Herb. Boiss.}{\b  7}: 497-517 (1899). D. J. Hambler,{\i  Watsonia }{\b 4}: 101-116 (1958). R. von Soó, {\i Feddes Repert.}{\b  26}: 179-219 (1929);{\i  Acta Bot. Acad. Sci. Hung.}{\b  16}: 193-206 (1970). J. von Sterneck,{\i  Abh. Zool.-Bot. Ges. Wien}{\b  1}({\b 2}): 1-150 (1901).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Teeth of upper lip of corolla less than 1 mm, rounded;
\par
  corolla-tube straight (Sect. {\i Rhinanthus})
\par
2 Leaves and bracts deeply patent-dentate ............................. {\b 1. groenlandicus}
\par
2 Most of the leaves and bracts crenate-serrate, with 
\par
  apically directed teeth ....................................................................... {\b 2. minor}
\par
1 Teeth of upper lip of corolla at least 1 mm; corolla-tube 
\par
  usually ± curved
\par
3 Teeth of upper lip of corolla c. 1 mm long and wide, ± square 
\par
  (Sect.{\i  Brevirostres})
\par
4 Bracts densely glandular-hairy
\par
5 Leaves remotely patent-dentate; bracts much exceeding
\par
  calyx, their upper teeth patent .................................................... {\b 4. wettsteinii}
\par
5 Leaves crenate-serrate; bracts scarcely exceeding calyx,
\par
  their upper teeth appressed ......................................................... {\b 5. pubescens}
\par
4 Bracts glabrous or subglabrous
\par
6 Throat of corolla open ................................................................ {\b 3. asperulus}
\par
6 Throat of corolla ± closed
\par
7 Corolla c. 18 mm .......................................................................... {\b 6. pindicus}
\par
7 Corolla c. 15 mm .......................................................................... {\b 7. antiquus}
\par
3 Teeth of upper lip of corolla 1·5-2·5 × 0·5-1 mm
\par
8 Corolla with straight tube and convex margins to upper lip ....... {\b 8. dinaricus}
\par
8 Corolla with usually curved tube and concave margins to
\par
  upper lip
\par
9 Corolla with open throat and ± porrect teeth on upper lip
\par
10 Teeth of bracts aristate, abruptly diminishing in 
\par
   length towards apex
\par
11 Bracts and calyx glabrous ........................................................... {\b 9. aristatus}
\par
11 Calyx and margin of bracts glandular-pubescent ................. {\b 10. pampaninii}
\par
10 Teeth of bracts not aristate, gradually diminishing in
\par
   length towards apex
\par
12 Bracts and calyx glabrous .......................................................... {\b 11. alpinus}
\par
12 Bracts and calyx glandular-hairy ........................................ {\b 12. carinthiacus}
\par
9  Corolla with closed throat and patent teeth on upper lip
\par
13 Calyx villous, though partly glabrescent in fruit ............ {\b 25. alectorolophus}
\par
13 Calyx glabrous, puberulent or pubescent
\par
14 Calyx distinctly and ± densely glandular-hairy, at 
\par
   least on the margin
\par
15 Teeth at base of bracts longer and more crowded than those 
\par
   near apex ..................................................................................... {\b 13. burnatii}
\par
15 Teeth of bracts subequal and equally spaced
\par
16 Stem and upper bracts glandular-pubescent; surface of
\par
   calyx glandular-pubescent even in fruit ................................... {\b 14. rumelicus}
\par
16 Stem and upper bracts subglabrous; surface of calyx 
\par
   glabrous in fruit ........................................................................... {\b 15. wagneri}
\par
14 Calyx without glandular hairs, or rarely with a few on the margin
\par
17 Bracts and calyx eglandular-puberulent
\par
18 Teeth of bracts abruptly diminishing in length towards apex
\par
   .......................................................................................... {\b 17. melampyroides}
\par
18 Teeth of bracts subequal, or gradually diminishing in 
\par
   length towards apex
\par
19 Stem with black streaks; teeth of bracts gradually but
\par
   conspicuously diminishing in length towards apex .......... {\b 16. mediterraneus}
\par
19 Stem without black streaks; teeth of bracts subequal
\par
   in length ......................................................................................... {\b 24. freynii}
\par
17 Bracts and calyx glabrous or scabrid (rarely sparsely 
\par
   glandular-puberulent on margin)
\par
20 Teeth of bracts abruptly diminishing in length towards apex, 
\par
   the basal c. 8 mm
\par
21 Bracts narrowly triangular, acuminate, much exceeding calyx
   ................................................................................................... {\b 18. songeonii}
\par
21 Bracts triangular-ovate, acute, scarcely exceeding calyx ........ {\b 19. ovifugus}
\par
20 Teeth of bracts gradually diminishing in length
\par
   towards apex, the basal c. 5 mm
\par
22 Leaves acutely serrate or dentate
\par
23 Bracts about equalling calyx ................................................... {\b 20. subulatus}
\par
23 Bracts much exceeding calyx ................................................... {\b 21. borbasii}
\par
22 Leaves crenate-serrate
\par
24 Corolla 20-24 mm, golden-yellow;tube 5-7 mm wide .......... {\b 22. halophilus}
\par
24 Corolla 10-20 mm, pale yellow; tube 2-3 mm wide ......... {\b 23. angustifolius}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Sect. RHINANTHUS. Teeth of upper lip of corolla short, rounded.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. R. groenlandicus} (Ostenf.) Chab., {\i Bull. Herb. Boiss.}{\b  7}: 511 (1899). Stem up to 30 cm, simple or slightly branched, stout, hairy on 2 opposite sides. Leaves rather fleshy, coarsely dentate, with patent, acute teeth, bright yellowish-green. Bracts exceeding the calyx, triangular, with long, patent teeth, glabrous or puberulent. Calyx glabrous or puberulent. Corolla c. 15 mm; tube straight; throat open. 2n = 22. {\i  N. Europe, southwards to} c. 60°{\i  N. in the mountains of Norway.} Fa Fe Is No Rs (N) Su.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. R. minor} L.,{\i  Amoen. Acad.}{\b  3}: 54 (1756) ({\i Alectorolophus minor} (L.) Wimmer & Grab.; incl. {\i R. borealis} (Sterneck) Druce, {\i R. rusticulus }(Chab.) Druce,{\i  R. nigricans} Meinsh.). Stem 5-50 cm, sometimes with black streaks. Leaves (2-)5-15 mm wide, ovate-oblong to linear-lanceolate, crenate-serrate (the uppermost sometimes dentate), rather dark green. Bracts longer than to slightly shorter than calyx, triangular, glabrous or somewhat scabrid. Calyx glabrous or puberulent. Corolla 13-15 mm; tube straight; throat more or less open. 2n = 22.{\i  Most of Europe, but rare in the Mediterranean region.} All except Az Bl Co Cr Sa Sb Si Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\i Ecotypic variants}:
\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Autumnal: var.{\b  stenophyllus} Schur, {\i Enum. Pl. Transs.} 511 (1866).
\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Aestival: var.{\b  elatior} Schur,{\i  loc. cit.} (1866).
\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Vernal: type of the species.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Montane:{\b  R. crista-galli} var.{\b  drummond-hayi} Buchanan-White,{\i  Scott. Naturalist}{\b  8}: 324 (1886).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  In addition to the usual ecotypic variation this species shows much variation in other characters. Plants with puberulent calyx are commonest in northern areas or at high altitudes, and are sometimes separated as {\b R. borealis} (Sterneck) Druce,{\i  Ann. Scott. Nat. Hist.}{\b  1901}: 178 (1901). This character, however, shows little correlation with others, and as mixed populations of plants, some with pubescent and some with glabrous calyx, are common (as are, in some regions, plants with calyx puberulent when young but later glabrescent), taxonomic separation does not seem to be possible.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b  R. personatus} (Behrendsen) Béguinot, {\i Sched. Fl. Ital. Exsicc}. ser. 3, {\b 12}: 67 (1914), appears to differ from{\b  2} only in having the throat of the corolla more or less closed.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Sect. BREVIROSTRES (Sterneck) Soó. Teeth of upper lip of corolla c. 1 × 1 mm, more or less square.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 3. R. asperulus} (Murb.) Soó,{\i  Feddes Repert.}{\b  26}: 206 (1929) ({\i Alectorolophus asperulus} Murb.). Stem up to 20 cm, simple or branched, without black streaks. Leaves oblong-lanceolate, acute, remotely dentate. Bracts equalling calyx, triangular-ovate, somewhat scabrid, with teeth somewhat diminishing in length towards apex. Calyx glabrous or puberulent. Corolla c. 15 mm; tube slightly curved; throat open.{\i  W. Jugoslavia.} ?Gr Ju.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   The plants with glabrous calyx have been separated as{\b  R. illyricus} (G. Beck & Sterneck) Soó,{\i  Izv. Bot. Inst.} ({\i Sofia}){\b  6}: 367 (1958).
\par

\par
277}
\par