{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 with glands. Flowers solitary (rarely in pairs) in the axils of the middle leaves; pedicels stout, somewhat shorter than to twice as long as the subtending leaf. Calyx 7-11 mm; lobes ovate,overlapping, acuminate. Corolla 8-18 mm, yellow; lobes obovate, dotted with black glands and minutely glandular-puberulent. Capsule c. 3 mm, globose, rarely produced in N. and C.Europe. 2n = 32, 36, 43, 45.{\i  Ditches, lake-shores and wet grassland. Most of Europe, northwards to c. 62° N. in Fennoscandia and Russia; cultivated for ornament and perhaps only naturalized in the northernmost part of its range}. Al Au Be Br Bu Cz Da Ga Ge Gr Hb He Ho Hs Hu It Ju No Po Rm Rs (N, B, C, W, K, E) Su Tu [ ?Co Fe].
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 7. L. punctata} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 147 (1753) (incl.{\i  L. verticillaris} Sprengel). Puberulent, with a few thin rhizomes. Stems 35-90(-130) cm, erect. Leaves 4·5-7·5(-11) × 2-3·5(-4) cm, opposite or in whorls of 3-4, petiolate, lanceolate to elliptical, acute, rounded at the base, ciliate, puberulent, dotted with glands beneath. Flowers in axillary clusters of (1-)2(-4); pedicels c. 3 times as long as calyx. Calyx 5-8 mm; lobes narrowly lanceolate, ciliate. Corolla 12-16(-18) mm, yellow; lobes ovate to lanceolate, glandular-puberulent. Capsule c. 4 mm, subglobose; style c. 3 mm, persistent, filiform. {\i Marshes, river-banks and other wet places. S.E. & E.C. Europe, extending to W. Austria and N. Italy; cultivated for ornament and widely naturalized elsewhere.} Al Au Bu Cz Gr Hu It Ju *Po Rm Rs (W, K, E) Tu [Be Br Da Fe Ga Ge He Ho No Rs (B) Su].
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 8. L. minoricensis} Rodr.,{\i  Bull. Soc. Bot. Fr.}{\b  25:} 240 (1878).Glabrous, rhizomatous. Stems 30-60 cm, erect, rarely branched from the base. Leaves 4-8·5 × 1·5-2·5 cm, alternate to subopposite, sessile, lanceolate to ovate, entire. Flowers solitary in the axils of the upper leaves, subsessile or the lower with pedicels up to 6 mm. Calyx 3·5-4·5 mm; lobes linear-lanceolate. Corolla 4-5·5 mm, subcampanulate, pinkish at the base and greenish-yellow at the apices of the lobes. Capsule 4·5-5·5 mm, globose; style less than 2 mm, persistent.{\i  Wooded gorge on limestone. Menorca} ({\i Sa Vall}). †Bl.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 9. L. ephemerum} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 146 (1753). Glabrous, rhizomatous. Stems 40-110 cm, erect, simple. Leaves 9·5-14·5(-17) × 1-2·5(-3) cm, opposite, linear-lanceolate to linear-spathulate, amplexicaul, entire, sometimes glaucous. Flowers in a terminal raceme, rarely with smaller axillary racemes at the base; pedicels as long as the flowers. Calyx 3-5 mm; lobes ovate, obtuse, with white margins. Corolla 8-11 mm, white; lobes oblanceolate to spathulate, obtuse. Stamens more or less equalling the corolla.Capsule 4-5 mm, globose; style 3 mm, eventually 7 mm, persistent, filiform.{\i  Damp grassland, especially around springs. Iberian peninsula and S.W. France.} Ga Hs Lu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 10. L. clethroides} Duby in DC.,{\i  Prodr.}{\b  8:} 61 (1844). Perennial. Stems up to 100 cm, erect, simple. Leaves 7-13 × 2-4·5 cm, alternate, ovate-lanceolate, subsessile, sparsely pubescent, dotted with black glands. Flowers in a terminal raceme; pedicels 1 ½-3 times as long as the flowers. Calyx 2-3 mm; lobes ovate, obtuse, with white margins. Corolla 5-7·5 mm, white; lobes lanceolate to spathulate, obtuse. Stamens half as long as the corolla. Capsule c. 2 mm, subglobose; style stout, persistent.{\i  Naturalized in shady places in the Netherlands}. [Ho.] ({\i E. Asia.})
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 11. L. atropurpurea} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 147 (1753). Puberulent, rhizomatous. Stems 20-65 cm, erect, with a few branches at the base. Leaves 3·5-8(-10) × 0·5-1(-1·5) cm, alternate, the upper sessile, the lower with short petioles, linear-lanceolate to spathulate, irregularly crenate and undulate, glaucous. Flowers in a terminal spike. Calyx c. 4 mm. Corolla 6-7 mm, dark purple; lobes oblong, spathulate. Stamens longer than the corolla. Capsule 3-5 mm; style 4-5 mm, persistent, strongly indurated. {\i Waste ground and damp, sandy places. Balkan peninsula.} Al Bu Gr Ju Tu. 
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 12. L. dubia} Aiton,{\i  Hort. Kew.}{\b  1:} 199 (1789). Annual or biennial, glabrous. Stems 30-65 cm, erect. Leaves 4-8·5 × 0·5-1·5 cm, alternate or more or less opposite, subsessile, linear-lanceolate, entire, margins subundulate. Flowers pedicellate in a loosely branched, terminal, spike-like raceme. Calyx 3·5-5 mm; lobes oblong with white, ciliate margins. Corolla 4·5-6 mm, pink; lobes cuneate to spathulate. Stamens equalling or shorter than corolla. Capsule 3-4 mm; style persistent, filiform.{\i  Ditches and other damp places. S. & E. parts of the Balkan peninsula}. Al Bu Gr Ju ?Rs (K) Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 13. L. thyrsiflora} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 147 (1753) ({\i Naumburgia thyrsiflora} (L.) Reichenb.). Rhizomatous, usually glabrous, but pubescent under dry conditions. Stems 30-70 cm, erect. Leaves 7-9·5(-12) × 0·5-2(-3) cm, sessile, lanceolate, with numerous black glands. Flowers 7-merous, in dense axillary racemes; bracts c. 6 mm, linear-lanceolate; pedicels shorter than bracts. Calyx 3-4 mm; lobes linear-oblong. Corolla 4-6 mm; lobes linear-lanceolate, yellow; stamens longer than the corolla. Capsule 1·5-2·5 mm; style c. 8 mm, persistent, filiform. 2n = 54.{\i  Bogs and marshes. Most of Europe northwards from C. France, N. Jugoslavia, C. Romania and S.E. Russia; one isolated station in N.C. Bulgaria}. Au Be Br Bu Cz Da Fe Ga Ge He Ho Hu Ju No Po Rm Rs (N, B, C, W, E) Su.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc {\b 9.             Trientalis}             L.
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc By L.F.Ferguson.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Perennial herbs with slender rhizomes. Leaves in a whorl at the top of the stem; occasionally a few alternate leaves below. Flowers (5-)7(-9)-merous, axillary, solitary on capillary pedicels, ebracteate. Corolla rotate. Capsule globose; valves 5(-7), deciduous. Seeds few, reticulate.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. T. europaea} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 344 (1753). Glabrous. Stem 5-30 cm, usually unbranched. Leaves 10-90 × 5-15 mm, obovate to lanceolate, subsessile, entire to minutely dentate at apex. Pedicel 1-7 cm. Calyx 4-7 mm, teeth linear. Corolla 11-19 mm in diameter, white or tinged with pink; segments ovate, acuminate or acute. Stamens included; filaments adnate to top of tube. Seeds 7-11, black, dull, minutely reticulate. 2n = c. 160.{\i  Damp grassy places and coniferous woods. N. Europe, extending south-wards, mainly in the mountains, to the S. Alps and N. Romania.} Au Be Br Cz Da Fe Ga Ge He Ho Is It No Po Rm Rs (N, B, C, W, ?E) Su.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc {\b 10.           Asterolinon}      Hoffmanns.& Link
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc By L.F. Ferguson
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Annual. Leaves opposite. Flowers 5-merous, solitary in the axils of the upper leaves. Corolla shorter than calyx. Capsule with 5 valves.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. A. linum-stellatum} (L.) Duby in DC., {\i Prodr.}{\b  8:} 68 (1844) ({\i A. stellatum} Hoffmanns. & Link). Glabrous. Stems 3-12(-18) cm, erect, freely branched. Leaves 3-7 × 0·5-2 mm, lanceolate, sessile, acute, entire, equalling or longer than the internodes. Pedicels 2-4 mm. Calyx 3-6 mm; lobes lanceolate to linear-lanceolate, acute to acuminate. Corolla 0·2-2 mm, white, rotate; segments ovate, imbricate; filaments adnate to corolla, anthers
\par

\par
27}
\par