{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 10. P. orthantha} Griseb.,{\i  Spicil. Fl. Rumel.}{\b  2}: 15 (1844). Stems 8-12 cm, erect or ascending, glabrous or sparsely crispate-hairy, blackish, leafy mainly in upper half. Leaves about as long as stem, ovate-lanceolate, 2-pinnatisect, with lanceolate, incise-dentate, obtuse segments, glabrous except for some hairs on petiole. Flowers in a capitate raceme; bracts crispate-hairy, exceeding the calyx, at least the lower pinnatifid. Calyx white-lanate, membranous; teeth about half as long as tube, lanceolate, obtuse, serrate. Corolla 10-12(-15) mm, purplish-red, glabrous; tube about twice as long as calyx; upper lip straight below, falcate at apex. Stigma slightly exserted. Capsule oblong-ovoid, obliquely acuminate, 1½ times as long as calyx.{\i  Stony alpine pastures. • Mountains of Bulgaria and S. Jugoslavia.} Bu Ju.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 11. P. dasyantha} Hadac,{\i  Studia Bot. Cechica}{\b  5}: 4 (1942). Stem 2-7 cm, erect, lanate, leafy. Leaves about as long as stem, glabrous except for lanate petiole, lanceolate, pinnatisect, with linear, pinnatifid segments. Flowers in a spike at first capitate, later cylindrical; bracts as long as flowers or shorter, the lower like the cauline leaves, the upper less divided and subglabrous. Calyx densely lanate; teeth narrowly triangular, acute, entire, half as long as tube. Corolla 17-20 mm, purplish-pink, hairy; upper lip straight except for curved and obscurely bidentate apex; lower lip ciliate. Capsule obliquely ovoid, curved towards apex, 1½ times as long as calyx. {\i Stony tundra. Arctic Europe}. Rs (N) Sb.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 12. P. hirsuta} L.,{\i  Sp. Pl.} 609 (1753). Stem 2-10(-15) cm, erect, subglabrous below, lanate above, leafy throughout. Leaves shorter than stem, linear to lanceolate, pinnatifid, with serrate segments. Flowers in a subcapitate, lanate raceme; bracts similar to cauline leaves, exceeding the calyx. Calyx lanate; teeth subequal, serrate or incise-dentate. Corolla 10-13(-15) mm, bright pink, glabrous; upper lip nearly straight, very obtuse, not toothed; lower lip nearly as long as upper. Capsule obliquely ovoid, apiculate, 1½ times as long as calyx. 2n = 16.{\i  Damp, stony tundra, sea-shores and river-banks; calcicole. Arctic Europe.} Fe No Rs (N) Sb Su.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 13. P. oederi} Vahl in Hornem.,{\i  Dansk Oekon. Plantel.} ed. 2, 580 (1806). Stem 4-15(-20) cm, erect, usually glabrous below, hairy above, with few or no cauline leaves. Leaves shorter than stem, lanceolate, pinnatisect, with ovate to oblong, deeply crenate-dentate segments, glabrous. Flowers in a spike-like raceme dense at first, lax later; bracts lanceolate, hairy, deeply crenate-dentate, shorter than the flowers. Calyx hirsute to lanate; teeth unequal, lanceolate, ciliate. Corolla 12-20 mm, yellow, with crimson apex to upper lip, glabrous; tube exceeding calyx; upper lip straight except for falcate, obtuse apex. Capsule narrowly ovoid, obliquely rostrate, about 1½ times, as long as calyx. 2n = 16.{\i  Damp grassland or tundra. Arctic Russia; mountains of Europe from C. Fennoscandia and N. Ural to S.W. Alps and S.W. Bulgaria.} Au Bu Cz Ga Ge He It Ju No Po Rm Rs (N, C, W) Su.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 14. P. flammea} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 608 (1753). Stem 2-10 cm, erect, glabrous, leafy. Basal leaves lanceolate, pinnatisect, with broadly ovate, acuminately dentate segments, glabrous, shorter than stem. Flowers in a lax, glabrous or subglabrous spike. Bracts linear-lanceolate, more or less toothed, sparsely ciliate, exceeding the calyx. Calyx glabrous, often red-spotted; teeth lanceolate, acute, serrate, unequal. Corolla 10-12 mm, yellow but with most of the upper lip dark red, glabrous; upper lip straight except for curved apex; lobes of lower lip acute. Capsule narrowly ovoid, obliquely rostrate, at least twice as long as calyx. 2n = 16.{\i  Damp places; usually calcicole. Iceland; mountains of N. Fennoscandia.} Is No Su. ({\i Arctic and subarctic America.})
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 15. P. verticillata} L.,{\i  Sp. Pl.} 608 (1753). Stems 5-20(-30) cm, erect, glabrous to crispate-hairy. Basal leaves lanceolate, pinnatifid, with ovate, crenate segments; cauline leaves in whorls of (2-)3-4, similar to the basal but with shorter petioles. Flowers in whorls in a dense spike. Bracts lanceolate, often purplish, hirsute, the lower pinnatifid, the upper crenate. Calyx often purplish, hairy only on the veins; teeth short, entire. Corolla 12-18(-20) mm, purplish-red (rarely pink or white), glabrous; tube twice as long as calyx; upper lip almost straight; lobes of lower lip rounded, not ciliate. Capsule narrowly ovoid, apiculate, almost twice as long as calyx. 2n = 12.{\i  Damp mountain grassland or tundra. Arctic and subarctic Russia; mountains of C. & S. Europe.} Al Au Bu Cz Ga Ge ?Gr He Hs It Ju Po Rm Rs (N, C, w).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 16. P. amoena} Adams ex Steven,{\i  Mém. Soc. Nat. Moscou}{\b  6}: 25 (1823). Stems 5-10(-20) cm, erect, usually crispate-hairy. Basal leaves linear-lanceolate, pinnatisect with linear, acutely toothed segments, glabrous or crispate-hairy; cauline leaves in whorls of (2-)3-4. Flowers in whorls in a raceme usually interrupted below. Bracts lanceolate, 3-fid with lobes toothed at the apex, crispate-hairy. Calyx glabrous; teeth unequal, the two larger half as long as the tube, more or less serrate. Corolla 15-20 mm, purple (rarely violet or white), glabrous; tube sharply inflected at the base; upper lip straight except for falcate apex; lower lip longer than the upper, with very broad lobes. Capsule obliquely ovoid, shortly apiculate, somewhat exceeding calyx.{\i  Stony lichen-tundra. Arctic Russia.} Rs (N).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 17. P. arguteserrata} Vved. in Schischkin & Bobrov, {\i Fl. URSS}{\b  22}: 809 (1955). Like {\b 16} but stems up to 30 cm; leaves pinnatifid, with segments toothed or entire; bracts villous; calyx villous, usually tinged with violet; corolla pinkish-lilac, with lower lip shorter than or equalling the upper; capsule broadly oblong.{\i  Open woods. C. Ural}. Rs (C). ({\i Siberia, Mongolia}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Sect. PEDICULARIS. Annual to perennial. Upper lip of corolla falcate, shortly and sometimes inconspicuously rostrate, terminating in 2 linear to subulate teeth.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 18. P. palustris} L.,{\i  Sp. Pl.} 607 (1753). Biennial, sometimes annual. Stem 5-70 cm, usually branched, glabrous or sparsely hairy. Leaves subglabrous, triangular-lanceolate to linear, pinnatisect, with oblong, crenate to pinnatifid segments; cauline leaves usually alternate, rarely opposite or whorled. Flowers in lax racemes, often interrupted below; bracts mostly leaf-like, the uppermost 3-lobed. Calyx ovate, inflated in fruit, strongly 2-lipped, without distinct teeth; lobes crenate. Corolla 15-25 mm, reddish-pink (rarely pale yellow or white); tube nearly twice as long as calyx; margin of upper lip with a tooth on each side some distance below the apex; lower lip ciliate. Capsule ovoid, obliquely apiculate, somewhat exceeding calyx. 2n = 16. {\i Damp meadows, fens and marshes. Europe, southwards to the Pyrenees, N. Italy, S. Bulgaria and S. Ural.} Au Be Br Bu Cz Da Fa Fe Ga Ge Hb He Ho Hu It Ju No Po Rm Rs (N, B, C, W) Su.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Corolla 18-25 mm ........................................................... ({\b a}) subsp. {\b palustris} 
\par
1 Corolla 14-18 mm
\par
2 Stem freely branched, the branches longer than the main axis; 
\par
  leaf-segments pinnatifid .................................................. ({\b b}) subsp. {\b opsiantha}
\par
2 Stem simple, or with a few short branches; leaf-segments 
\par
  crenate ................................................................................ ({\b c}) subsp. {\b borealis}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b palustris}: Stem freely branched, with lower branches considerably longer than upper, giving a pyramidal outline to plant. Leaf-segments pinnatifid; rhachis of leaf c. 2 mm wide, flat. Corolla 18-25 mm.{\i  Throughout the range of the species except parts of the north.}
\par

\par
272}
\par