{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b opsiantha} (E. L. Ekman) Almquist,{\i  Acta Phytogeogr. Suec.}{\b  1}: 592 (1929) (incl.{\i  P. karoi} Freyn): stem freely branched, with all branches subequal in length, giving a cylindrical outline to plant. Leaf-segments pinnatifid; rhachis of leaf less than 1 mm wide, canaliculate. Corolla c. 15 mm.{\i  N. & E. Europe}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b c}) Subsp. {\b borealis} (J. W. Zett.) Hyl.,{\i  Uppsala Univ. Årsskr.}{\b  1945}({\b 7}): 293 (1945): stem simple or with a few short branches. Leaves narrower than in other subspecies, often more or less linear. Leaf-segments crenate,scarcely lobed. Corolla 14-18 mm.{\i  N. Russia, N. & C. Fennoscandia, Færöer}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 19. P. labradorica} Wirsing,{\i  Eclog. Bot.} t. 10 (1778). Biennial. Stem 10-15(-30) cm, usually with suberect branches from the base, crispate-pubescent. Leaves alternate, the lower and middle linear-lanceolate, pubescent beneath, pinnatisect with acutely toothed segments, the upper linear, villous, more or less entire. Flowers in racemes lax below, subcapitate above; bracts small, linear. Calyx coriaceous, glabrous or pubescent, 2-lipped. Corolla 17-19 mm, yellow, with upper lip usually tinged with red or purple; lower lip ciliate, shorter than the upper. Capsule linear-oblong, acuminate, 1½ times as long as calyx. {\i Tundra. E. arctic Russia.} Rs (N). ({\i Siberia; arctic and subarctic America}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 20. P. sylvatica} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 607 (1753). Perennial or biennial. Stems 5-25 cm, the central one erect, simple, the others usually longer, procumbent to ascending, simple or branched. Leaves lanceolate, 2-pinnatisect, glabrous or somewhat hairy. Flowers in short, rather lax racemes; bracts similar to leaves but smaller. Calyx membranous, inflated in fruit, scarcely 2-lipped; teeth distinct, unequal, foliose, lobed. Corolla 15-25 mm, pink or red (rarely white); tube twice as long as calyx; lower lip glabrous, equalling the upper. Capsule ovoid, shortly acuminate, shorter than calyx.{\i  Bogs, heaths, moors and woods on peaty soil. W. & C. Europe, extending northwards to C. Sweden and eastwards to Lithuania and W. Ukraine.} Au Be Br Cz Da Ga Ge Hb He Ho Hs It Lu No Po Rm Rs (C, W) Su.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Calyx glabrous ............................................................... ({\b a}) subsp. {\b sylvatica}
\par
1 Calyx hairy, at least on the angles 
\par
2 Calyx hairy on the angles only; central stem up to 25 cm
\par 
   ......................................................................................... ({\b b}) subsp. {\b lusitanica} 
\par
2 Calyx hairy all over; central stem not more than 10 cm
\par
  .......................................................................................... ({\b c}) subsp. {\b hibernica}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b sylvatica}: stems glabrous or with 2 lines of hairs, the central one up to 15 cm. Calyx and pedicels glabrous. 2n = 16.  •{\i Throughout the range of the species except Portugal}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b lusitanica} (Hoffmanns. & Link) Coutinho, {\i Fl. Port.} 565 (1913) ({\i P. lusitanica} Hoffmanns. & Link): stems more or less pubescent, the central one up to 25 cm. Pedicels glabrous or subglabrous; calyx hairy on the angles.{\i  Portugal and S.W. Spain.}
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b c}) Subsp. {\b hibernica} D. A. Webb, {\i Watsonia }{\b 3}: 239 (1956): stems pubescent, the central one not more than 10 cm. Calyx and pedicels villous.{\i  Moors and bogs. • N.W. Europe, from Ireland to Norway}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 21. P. sudetica} Willd., {\i Sp. Pl. }{\b 3}: 209 (1800). Perennial. Stems 10-25 cm, ascending to erect, glabrous below, pubescent above. Leaves 3-8 cm, mostly basal, ovate-lanceolate, pinnatisect with pinnatifid segments. Flowers in a dense raceme; lower bracts leaf-like, the upper entire or serrate. Calyx lanate; teeth lanceolate, toothed or crenate. Corolla up to 20 mm, pink to purplish-red; tube nearly twice as long as calyx; lower lip glabrous, with sinuate-dentate lobes. Capsule ovoid, long-acuminate, twice as long as calyx. 2n = 16.{\i  Bogs, flushes and mossy tundra. Arctic Russia, N. & C. Ural; borders of Poland and Czechoslovakia} ({\i Sudeten Mts.}). Cz Po Rs (N, C). ({\i Arctic and subarctic Asia and America}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 22. P. comosa} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 609 (1753). Perennial. Stem (10-) 20-85 cm, erect. Leaves up to 15 cm, pubescent, lanceolate, 2-pinnatisect with linear-lanceolate, toothed segments; cauline leaves usually numerous. Flowers in a spike, dense in flower, elongating in fruit; lower bracts leaf-like, exceeding the flowers, the upper linear-lanceolate, or 3-lobed, about equalling the calyx. Calyx membranous; teeth wider than long, more or less obtuse, ciliate. Corolla up to 25 mm, pale yellow; tube twice as long as calyx. Capsule ovoid, acuminate, nearly twice as long as calyx. {\i Alpine meadows and stony hillsides. • Mountains of S. & S.C. Europe, from S.C. France, S.C. Czechoslovakia and E. Carpathians southwards to S. Spain, S. Italy and S. Bulgaria.} Al Bu Cz Ga Hs It Ju Rm.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b comosa}: stem not more than 50 cm, crispate-pubescent. Calyx pubescent on the angles. Lower lip of corolla ciliate.{\i  Almost throughout the range of the species.}
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b campestris} (Griseb.) Soó,{\i  Szek. Fl. Elomunk. }113 (1940) ({\i P. campestris} Griseb. & Schenk): stem up to 85 cm, subglabrous. Calyx and lower lip of corolla glabrous.{\i  Balkan peninsula and Romania}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 23. P. kaufmannii} Pinzger,{\i  Progr. Sald. Realsch. Brandenb.}{\b  1868}: 17 (1868).,Like {\b 22} but stem and leaves lanate; leaf-segments ovate-oblong; all bracts leaf-like and exceeding the flowers; calyx usually hairy; corolla 25-30 mm, with glabrous lower lip; capsule slightly shorter.{\i  Meadows, steppes and thickets. S., C. & W. parts of U.S.S.R., just extending to S.W. Poland.} Po Rs (B, C, W, E).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 24. P. sibthorpii} Boiss.,{\i  Diagn. Pl. Or. Nov.}{\b  1}({\b 4}): 83 (1844). Perennial. Stem 20-30 cm, erect, lanate. Leaves glabrous above, villous beneath, lanceolate, 2-pinnatisect with ovate-oblong, coarsely serrate segments. Flowers in a dense to lax spike; bracts lanate, the lower leaf-like, the upper usually 3-lobed, exceeding the calyx. Calyx coriaceous, villous; teeth wider than long, acute to acuminate, entire. Corolla 25-28 mm, yellow; lower lip large, glabrous or sparsely ciliate. Capsule 16-18 mm, ovoid-oblong, obtuse, c. 1½ times as long as calyx.{\i  Open woods and grassy hillsides. Krym}. Rs (K). ({\i Caucasus, N. Anatolia}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 25. P. uralensis} Vved. in Schischkin & Bobrov,{\i  Flora URSS} {\b 22}: 816 (1955). Like {\b 24} but stem 30-80 cm; lower lip of corolla distinctly ciliate; capsule 9-12 mm, apiculate, about as long as calyx.{\i  Meadows and open woods. E. & E.C. Russia.} Rs (N, C).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 26. P. asparagoides} Lapeyr.,{\i  Hist. Abr. Pyr.} 349 (1813). Perennial. Stem 20-50 cm, erect, pubescent. Leaves pubescent to subglabrous, lanceolate, 2-pinnatisect with linear-lanceolate, toothed segments. Flowers in a lax raceme; lower bracts leaf-like, the upper linear-lanceolate, serrate, scarcely exceeding the calyx. Calyx membranous with subglabrous tube; teeth wider than long, obtuse, entire, ciliate. Corolla up to 25 mm, purplish-red; lower lip glabrous. Capsule ovoid, acuminate, somewhat exceeding calyx.{\i  Meadows and rocky hillsides. • E. Pyrenees and adjoining ranges.} Ga Hs.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 27. P. schizocalyx} (Lange) Steininger,{\i  Bot. Centr. }{\b 29}: 249 (1887). Like {\b 26} but flowers in a dense spike, elongating in fruit; calyx villous, with crenate teeth; corolla yellow, with ciliate lower lip.{\i  Rocky hillsides. • Mountains of W. Spain.} Hs.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 28. P. brachyodonta} Schlosser & Vuk.,{\i  Syll. Fl. Croat.} 89 (1857). Perennial. Stem erect or ascending. Leaves pubescent, lanceolate, 2-pinnatisect with linear-oblong, apiculate, serrate segments. Bracts more or less hairy. Calyx with more or less hairy tube; teeth deltate, entire, ciliate. Corolla 20-25 mm, pale
\par

\par
273}
\par