{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 {\i Ecotypic variants}:
\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Aestival:{\b  Alectorolophus asperulus} subsp.{\b  rohlenae} Sterneck,{\i  Glasn. Muz. Bosni Herceg. }{\b 31}: 64 (1919).
\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Montane: type of the species.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 4. R. wettsteinii} (Sterneck) Soó, {\i Feddes Repert}.{\b  26}: 182 (1929).Stem 10-20 cm, simple or branched, densely glandular-pubescent, without black streaks. Leaves lanceolate, with remote, acute teeth. Bracts exceeding calyx, triangular, densely glandular-pubescent; teeth patent, the proximal nearly twice as long as the distal. Calyx densely glandular-pubescent. Corolla c. 18 mm; throat more or less closed. •{\i  C. & S. Appennini.} It.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 5. R. pubescens} (Sterneck) Boiss. & Heldr. ex Soó,{\i  op. cit.} 206 (1929) ({\i Alectorolophus pubescens} Sterneck). Like {\b 4} but stem up to 40 cm; leaves oblong, crenate-serrate; bracts scarcely exceeding calyx. with appressed teeth. •{\i  Mountains of Greece}. Gr.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 6. R. pindicus} (Sterneck) Soó,{\i  Izv. Bot. Inst.} ({\i Sofia}){\b  6}: 367 (1958) ({\i Alectorolophus pindicus} Sterneck). Like {\b 4} but bracts and calyx glabrous, except for scabrid margin and teeth. •{\i  N.C. Greece.} Gr.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b R. sintenisii} (Sterneck) Soó,{\i  loc. cit.} (1958) ({\i Alectorolophus sintenisii} Sterneck) from N.C. Greece (near Malakasi) is also like {\b 4} but with bracts and calyx subglabrous except for densely glandular margins and teeth; but it has conical teeth on the upper lip of the corolla c. 2 mm long and its systematic position must, therefore, be considered doubtful.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 7. R. antiquus} (Sterneck) Schinz & Thell. in Schinz & R.Keller,{\i  Fl. Schweiz} ed. 3,{\b  2}: 315 (1914) ({\i Alectorolophus antiquus} Sterneck). Stem 5-15 cm, usually simple, without black streaks. Leaves ovate to lanceolate, acutely serrate. Bracts glabrous, triangular-ovate, acuminate; teeth abruptly diminishing in length towards apex, the basal up to 6 mm, acute but not aristate. Calyx glabrous. Corolla c. 15 mm; tube somewhat curved; throat more or less closed. •{\i  S. Alps}. He It.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Sect. ANOMALI (Sterneck) Soó. Upper lip of corolla with convex margins and with teeth 1·5-2·5 mm, 2-3 times as long as wide; throat open.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 8. R. dinaricus} Murb.,{\i  Lunds Univ. Årsskr.}{\b  27}({\b 5}): 69 (1892) ({\i Alectorolophus dinaricus} (Murb.) Sterneck; incl.{\i  R. praesignis} (G. Beck & Sterneck) Soó). Stem up to 30 cm, branched, without black streaks. Leaves lanceolate, remotely serrate. Bracts slightly exceeding calyx, glabrous, triangular-ovate; teeth acute, not aristate, gradually diminishing in length towards apex. Calyx glabrous or puberulent. Corolla c. 20 mm; tube straight. •{\i  W.C. Jugoslavia} ({\i Bosna, Hercegovina}). Ju.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Sect. ANOECTOLEMI Chab. Upper lip of corolla with concave margins and with teeth 1·5-2·5 mm, 2-3 times as long as wide; throat open.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 9. R. aristatus} Celak.,{\i  Österr. Bot. Zeitschr. }{\b 20}: 132 (1870) ({\i R. angustifolius} auct., non C. C. Gmelin,{\i  Alectorolophus angustifolius} auct., non (C.C. Gmelin) Heynh.; incl.{\i  R. lanceolatus} (Kováts ex Neilr.) Chab.). Stem 5-50 cm, simple or branched, glabrous or subglabrous, with black streaks. Leaves linear to lanceolate, crenate-serrate. Bracts slightly exceeding calyx, glabrous, narrowly triangular, the basal 3-4 teeth subulate, aristate, the others much shorter, shortly aristate. Calyx glabrous. Corolla 15-18 mm; tube abruptly curved. 2n = 22. •{\i  S.C. Europe, extending to S.E. France and S. W. Jugoslavia.} Au Cz Ga Ge He It Ju.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\i Ecotypic variants}:
\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Autumnal: type of the species.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Aestival:{\b  Alectorolophus lanceolatus} var.{\b  subalpinus} Sterneck,{\i  Österr. Bot. Zeitschr.}{\b  45}: 274 (1895).
\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Vernal: {\b Alectorolophus simplex} Sterneck, {\i Abh. Zool.-Bot. Ges. Wien }{\b 1}({\b 2}): 89 (1901).
\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Montane:{\b  R. alpinus} var.{\b  lanceolatus} Kováts ex Neilr., {\i Nachtr. Fl.Wien }213 (1851).
\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Alpine:{\b  R. lanceolatus} var.{\b  gracilis} Chab.,{\i  Bull. Herb. Boiss. }{\b 7}: 509 (1899).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b  R. javorkae} Soó, {\i Feddes Repert.}{\b  26}: 207 (1929), from S.W.Bulgaria (Pirin Pl.), is intermediate between {\b 17} and the alpine variant of {\b 9}. It differs from {\b 17} in its corolla not more than 18 mm, with abruptly curved tube and open throat, and from {\b 9} in its puberulent bracts and calyx.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 10. R. pampaninii} Chab.,{\i  Nuovo Gior. Bot. Ital.} nov. ser., {\b 12}:199 (1905). Like {\b 9} but stem 20-80 cm, glandular-pubescent; calyx and margin of bracts glandular-pubescent. •{\i  S. Alps.} It.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 11. R. alpinus} Baumg., {\i Enum. Stirp. Transs.}{\b  2}: 194 (1816)({\i Alectorolophus alpinus} (Baumg.) Sterneck). Stem up to 50 cm, simple or branched, with black streaks. Leaves narrowly lanceolate to oblong-lanceolate, crenate-serrate. Bracts equalling the calyx, pale green, glabrous, triangular-acuminate; teeth narrow but not aristate, gradually diminishing in length towards apex. Calyx glabrous. Corolla c. 15 mm, pale yellow, often tinged with purple; tube strongly and abruptly curved; throat widely open. •{\i  Mountains of E.C. & S.E. Europe, from W. Czechoslovakia to S.W. Bulgaria.} Au Bu Cz Po Rm Rs (W).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\i Ecotypic variants}:
\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Autumnal: {\b Alectorolophus alpinus} var.{\b  erectus} Sterneck,{\i  Österr. Bot. Zeitschr.} {\b 45}: 229 (1895).
\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Aestival: {\b Alectorolophus pulcher} var. {\b elatus} Sterneck,{\i  op. cit.} 226(1895).
\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Vernal:{\b  R. pulcher } Sprengel,{\i  Syst. Veg.}{\b  2}: 712 (1825).
\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Montane: type of the species.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b R. gracilis} Schur,{\i  Verh. Mitt. Siebenb. Ver. Naturw.}{\b  10}: 176(1859), from Romania and Bulgaria, differs from {\b 11} only in its corolla up to 18 mm, with less abruptly curved tube and less widely open throat. It may be considered as intermediate between {\b 11} and {\b 23}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   {\b 12. R. carinthiacus} Widder,{\i  Carinthia II}{\b  67}({\b 147}): 105 (1957).Like {\b 11} but with bracts, calyx and upper part of stem densely glandular-hairy. •{\i  S.E. Austria} ({\i Karnten}). Au.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Sect. CLEISTOLEMUS Chab. Upper lip of corolla with concave margins and with teeth 1·5-2·5 mm, 2-3 times as long as wide; throat closed.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 13. R. burnatii} (Chab.) Soó,{\i  Feddes Repert.}{\b  26}: 206 (1929)({\i Alectorolophus burnatii} (Chab.) Sterneck). Stem 20-40 cm, branched, without black streaks. Leaves oblong-lanceolate, crenate-serrate. Bracts exceeding calyx, triangular-ovate, puberulent, glandular-hairy on margin; teeth long, shortly aristate, gradually diminishing in length towards apex. Calyx puberulent with long glandular hairs on margin. Corolla c. 20 mm. 2n = 22.  •{\i  S. Alps and mountains of N.W. Jugoslavia}. Ga It Ju.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 14. R. rumelicus} Velen., {\i Sitz.-Ber. Böhm. Ges. Wiss.} ({\i Math.Nat. Kl}.) {\b 1887}: 455 (1887) ({\i Alectorolophus rumelicus} (Velen.)Borbás). Stem up to 60 cm, simple or branched, often with
\par

\par
278}
\par