{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 Corolla 17-20 mm, yellow; lower lip as long as the upper, glabrous, with broad, denticulate lobes. Capsule ovoid, equalling calyx.{\i  Meadows and wet tundra. N.E. Russia.} Rs (N, C). ({\i N. Asia.})
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 38. P. lapponica} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 609 (1753). Stems (5-)10-25 cm, glabrous or somewhat pubescent above. Leaves glabrous, linear-lanceolate, pinnatifid, with wide rhachis and oblong, incise-dentate segments. Flowers few, fragrant, in a capitate, spike-like raceme; bracts leaf-like, equalling or exceeding the calyx. Calyx membranous, glabrous, split nearly halfway to base on lower side; teeth deltate, entire. Corolla 14-16 mm, very pale yellow; beak rather short; lower lip somewhat shorter than the upper, glabrous or sparsely ciliate. Capsule ovoid, curved, acuminate, 1½ times as long as calyx, dehiscing along upper side only. 2n = 16.{\i  Heaths and dry tundra. Arctic Europe and mountains of Fennoscandia.} Fe No Rs (N) Su. ({\i Arctic and subarctic Asia and America}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 39. P. tuberosa} L.,{\i  Sp. Pl.} 610 (1753). Stock somewhat tuberous. Stem 10-25 cm, ascending to erect, hairy, especially below. Petiole and sometimes rhachis hairy; leaves otherwise glabrous, pinnatisect, with pinnatifid segments. Flowers in a spike capitate at first, elongating in fruit; bracts pinnatifid, pubescent, slightly exceeding the calyx. Calyx pubescent to villous; teeth foliose, toothed, glabrous on inner surface, nearly as long as tube. Corolla up to 20 mm, pale yellow; tube exceeding calyx; beak long; lower lip glabrous. Capsule ovoid, apiculate, somewhat exceeding calyx. 2n = 16.{\i  Open woods, alpine pastures and screes; calcifuge. • Alps, N. & C. Appennini, Alpi Apuane; Pyrenees.} Au Ga He Hs It.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 40. P. elongata} A. Kerner,{\i  Nov. Pl. Sp. }{\b 1}: 14 (1 870). Stem 15-35 cm, ascending to erect, glabrous except for 2 lines of hairs. Petiole and sometimes rhachis pubescent; leaves otherwise glabrous, oblong-lanceolate, 2-pinnatisect with lanceolate, subentire segments. Flowers in a spike rather dense at first, very lax in fruit; bracts glabrous, the lower pinnatisect, the upper pinnatifid to dentate. Calyx-tube glabrous; teeth foliose, toothed, ciliate, pubescent on inner surface, nearly as long as the tube. Corolla up to 16 mm, pale yellow; tube exceeding calyx; beak long; lower lip glabrous. Capsule ovoid, apiculate, slightly exceeding calyx. 2n = 16.{\i  Dry pastures and screes; calcicole. • S.E. Alps.} Au It Ju.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 41. P. julica} E. Mayer, {\i Phyton} ({\i Austria}){\b  9}: 301 (1961). Like {\b 40} but leaf-segments toothed; bracts densely villous, the upper ones 3-lobed; calyx villous; corolla up to 18 mm; capsule equalling calyx.{\i  Dry pastures and screes; calcicole. • S.E. Alps. }Au It Ju.
\par

\par
 
\pard\f0\fs28   {\b 42. P. ascendens} Schleicher ex Gaudin in Murith, {\i Guide Bot. Valais} 83 (1810) ({\i P. barrelieri} Reichenb.). Stem 15-30 cm, erect, glabrous or with 1-2 lines of hairs. Leaves glabrous or slightly pubescent on rhachis, oblong-lanceolate, pinnatisect, with pinnatifid, toothed segments. Flowers in a spike, dense at first, becoming lax in fruit; bracts ovate-lanceolate, the lower pinnatisect, the upper 3- to 5-fid, with entire segments. Calyx-tube glabrous; teeth lanceolate, acuminate, entire or weakly toothed, usually ciliate, glabrous on inner surface, as long as the tube. Corolla up to 16 mm, dull yellow; tube exceeding calyx; lower lip glabrous. Capsule ovoid, shortly apiculate, twice as long as calyx. 2n = 16.{\i  Mountain grassland; calcicole. • S.W. & W.C. Alps.} Ga He It.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 43. P. baumgartenii} Simonkai,{\i  Term. Füz.}{\b  10}: 182 (1886). Like {\b 42} but segments of bracts toothed, hairy; calyx villous, with deltate teeth 1/3 as long as tube; corolla up to 20 mm; capsule only slightly exceeding calyx.{\i  Dry, stony alpine pastures. • S. Carpathians}. Rm.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 44. P. rostratospicata} Crantz,{\i  Stirp. Austr.} ed. 2,{\b  2}: 317 (1769) ({\i P. incarnata} Jacq., non L.). Stem 15-45 cm, ascending to erect, glabrous below, densely pubescent above. Leaves glabrous, lanceolate, pinnatisect with pinnatifid segments. Flowers in a rather lax spike; bracts hairy, with 3 linear-lanceolate lobes. Calyx hairy; teeth lanceolate, acute, entire or toothed. Corolla up to 13 mm, pink to purplish-red; tube about as long as calyx; beak long; lower lip glabrous. Capsule ovoid, apiculate, exceeding calyx. 2n = 16.{\i  Alpine pastures. • Alps; one station in E. Pyrenees.} Au Ga Ge He It Ju.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b rostratospicata}: Plant slender. Bracts and calyx arachnoid-tomentose. Calyx-teeth all entire.{\i  E. Alps}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b helvetica} (Steininger) O. Schwarz,{\i  Mitt. Thür. Bot. Ges. }{\b 1}({\b 1}): 114 (1949): Plant robust. Bracts and calyx villous. Calyx-teeth of lower flowers distinctly toothed.{\i  C. & W. Alps; Pyrenees}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 45. P. rostratocapitata} Crantz, {\i Stirp. Austr.} ed. 2, {\b 2}: 320 (1769) ({\i P. rostrata} L. pro parte). Stem 5-20 cm, ascending, glabrous except for 1 or 2 lines of hairs. Leaves glabrous, often tinged with purple, oblong-lanceolate, 2-pinnatisect with oblong, entire or serrulate segments. Flowers in a capitate raceme; bracts similar to cauline leaves. Calyx glabrous or slightly pubescent on the veins; teeth foliose, lanceolate, crenate, recurved at apex. Corolla up to 25 mm, pink to purplish-red; tube slightly exceeding calyx; lower lip ciliate, at least at anthesis. Filaments of longer stamens sparsely pubescent to subglabrous. Capsule ovoid-oblong, apiculate, exceeding calyx. 2n = 16.{\i  Alpine pastures and screes; usually calcicole. • E. Alps, mountains of N.W. Jugoslavia.} Au Ge He It Ju.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    Records for Romania appear to be erroneous.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b rostratocapitata}: Lower lip of corolla densely ciliate, at least at anthesis.{\i  Throughout the range of the species.}
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b glabra} H. Kunz,{\i  Phyton} ({\i Austria}){\b  8}: 289 (1959): Lower lip of corolla glabrous.{\i  Alpi Bergamasche}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 46. P. kerneri} Dalla Torre, {\i Anleit. Beob. Bestimm. Alpenpfl.} 176 (1882) ({\i P. rhaetica} A. Kerner,{\i  P. rostrata} L. pro parte). Like {\b 45} but stem decumbent to ascending, sometimes pubescent; calyx glabrous or uniformly pubescent; corolla not more than 20 mm, with glabrous lower lip; filaments of longer stamens densely pubescent. 2n = 16.{\i  Alpine pastures and screes; usually calcifuge. • Alps, Pyrenees.} Au Ga He Hs It.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 47. P. pyrenaica} Gay, {\i Ann. Sci. Nat.}{\b  26}: 210 (1832). Stem 10-25 cm, ascending to erect, glabrous except for 2 lines of hairs; cauline leaves few. Leaves glabrous, except sometimes for hairy petiole, 2-pinnatisect with ovate-lanceolate, toothed segments. Flowers in a short, subcapitate spike; bracts similar to leaves, ciliate, exceeding the calyx. Calyx glabrous; teeth nearly as long as tube, some foliose and lobed, some membranous, lanceolate, entire. Corolla up to 20 mm, dull pinkish-red; tube slightly exceeding calyx; beak long; lower lip glabrous. Capsule ovoid, slightly exceeding calyx. 2n = 16.{\i  Alpine pastures and screes. • Pyrenees}. Ga Hs.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 48. P. mixta} Gren. in Gren. & Godron,{\i  Fl. Fr.}{\b  2}: 617 (1853). Like {\b 47} but stems ascending from a procumbent base; cauline leaves more numerous; spike lax; bracts and calyx lanate; corolla not more than 18 mm, pink with deep crimson upper lip.
\par

\par
275}
\par