{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 W. Limpricht,{\i  Feddes Repert.}{\b  20}: 161-265 (1924). H. steininger, {\i Bot. Centr.}{\b  28} (1886); {\b 29} (1887); {\b 30} (1887).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Corolla with obconical-campanulate tube and connivent lips, 
\par
  the lower yellow, bordered with red; capsule globose .{\b 2. sceptrum-carolinum}
\par
1 Corolla with ± cylindrical tube and patent, ± concolorous 
\par
  lower lip; capsule ± ovoid, somewhat compressed laterally
\par
2 Upper lip of corolla truncate or rounded, neither beaked nor
\par
 toothed (rarely with 2 very small teeth directed upwards)
\par
3 Acaulescent; flowers arising directly from the leaf-rosette; 
\par
  pedicels 10-30 mm ........................................................................... {\b 1. acaulis}
\par
3 Caulescent; flowers in spikes or racemes; pedicels less
\par
  than 10 mm
\par
4 Upper cauline leaves and bracts in whorls of 3-4
\par
5 Calyx-teeth entire; calyx-tube glabrous except for long
\par
  hairs on the veins ..................................................................... {\b 15. verticillata}
\par
5 Calyx-teeth serrate
\par
6 Calyx glabrous; lower lip of corolla longer than the upper ........ {\b 16. amoena}
\par
6 Calyx villous; lower lip of corolla shorter than or 
\par
  equalling the upper ............................................................... {\b 17. arguteserrata}
\par
4 Cauline leaves and bracts alternate
\par
7 Corolla entirely yellow
\par
8 Calyx split to half-way on lower side; teeth very short
\par
9 Calyx pubescent to villous; corolla-tube hairy inside;
\par
  bracts hairy beneath ...................................................................... {\b 5. hacquetii}
\par
9 Calyx glabrous, or with a few hairs on the veins;
\par
  corolla-tube glabrous inside; bracts glabrous ................................. {\b 6. exaltata}
\par
8 Calyx not split on lower side; teeth conspicuous
\par
10 Upper lip of corolla arachnoid-villous; capsule 
\par
   slightly exceeding the calyx ............................................................ {\b 3. foliosa}
\par
10 Upper lip of corolla glabrous or pubescent; capsule 
\par
   nearly twice as long as calyx
\par
11 Bracts exceeding the flowers; corolla up to 25 mm .......... {\b 4. hoermanniana}
\par
11 Bracts shorter than the flowers; corolla not more than 15 mm .... {\b 7. recutita}
\par
7 Corolla red or pink, at least in part
\par
12 Corolla mainly yellow,but with upper lip tinged with red
\par
13 Stem usually more than 20 cm; leaves 25-30 mm wide .............. {\b 7. recutita}
\par
13 Stem usually less than 20 cm; leaves 8-12 mm wide
\par
14 Corolla 12-20 mm; calyx hairy; capsule c. 1½ times
\par
   as long as calyx .............................................................................. {\b 13. oederi}
\par
14 Corolla 10-12 mm; calyx glabrous; capsule at least
\par
   twice as long as calyx ................................................................ {\b 14. flammea}
\par
12 Corolla entirely red or pink
\par
15 Calyx ± glabrous; pedicels thickened distally ........................ {\b 8. limnogena}
\par
15 Calyx hairy; pedicels not thickened distally
\par
16 Leaves deeply pinnatisect, with narrow rhachis
\par
17 Leaves pinnatifid, with acute segments; calyx-teeth entire ............ {\b 9. rosea}
\par
17 Leaves 2-pinnatisect, with obtuse segments; 
\par
   calyx-teeth serrate ..................................................................... {\b 10. orthantha}
\par
16 Leaves pinnatifid or pectinate, with wide rhachis
\par
18 Corolla 17-20 mm, hairy; calyx-teeth entire .......................... {\b 11. dasyantha}
\par
18 Corolla 10-15 mm, glabrous; calyx-teeth serrate to 
\par
   incise-dentate ................................................................................ {\b 12. hirsuta}
\par
2  Upper lip of corolla terminating in a beak, or in 2 teeth
\par
   directed forwards or downwards
\par
19 Beak of corolla very short, sometimes ± obsolete, bidentate at apex
\par
20 Lateral flowering branches present; plant usually annual or biennial
\par
21 Corolla yellow, the upper lip becoming tinged with violet 
\par
   after anthesis .......................................................................... {\b 19. labradorica}
\par
21 Corolla pink or red
\par
22 Calyx not 2-lipped; lateral margins of upper lip of 
\par
   corolla entire .............................................................................. {\b 20. sylvatica}
\par
22 Calyx 2-lipped; upper lip of corolla with a small 
\par
   tooth on each side some distance below the apex ...................... {\b 18. palustris}
\par
20 Lateral flowering branches absent; plant perennial
\par
23 Corolla pink, red or purple
\par
24 Calyx-teeth wider than long, obtuse ................................. {\b 26. asparagoides}
\par
24 Calyx-teeth longer than wide, acute
\par
25 Calyx-teeth toothed or crenate .................................................. {\b 21. sudetica}
\par
25 Calyx-teeth entire
\par
26 Stem 2-5(-8) cm; bracts glabrous .......................................... {\b 36. ferdinandi}
\par
26 Stem 7-30 cm; bracts whitish-lanate
\par
27 Leaf-segments obtuse; bracts entire; filaments glabrous .....{\b 32. dasystachys}
\par
27 Leaf-segments apiculate; bracts serrate to pinnatisect;
\par
   filaments ± hairy ....................................................................... {\b 35. petiolaris}
\par
23 Corolla yellowish
\par
28 Calyx split on lower side, the two lateral teeth on 
\par
   each side united ..................................................................... {\b 29. heterodonta}
\par
28 Calyx with (4-)5 distinct teeth, not split on lower side
\par
29 Calyx-teeth wider than long, usually obtuse
\par
30 Calyx-teeth crenate ............................................................. {\b 27. schizocalyx}
\par
30 Calyx-teeth entire
\par
31 All bracts pinnatisect, similar to the leaves ......................... {\b 23. kaufmannii}
\par
31 Upper bracts 3-fid or dentate, not pinnatisect 
\par
32 Inflorescence ± glabrous ............................................................ {\b 22. comosa}
\par
32 Inflorescence densely hairy
\par
33 Capsule 16-18 mm, ± obtuse; lower lip of corolla usually 
\par
   glabrous .................................................................................... {\b 24. sibthorpii}
\par
33 Capsule 9-12 mm, apiculate; lower lip of corolla ciliate ........ {\b 25. uralensis}
\par
29 Calyx-teeth at least as long as wide, acute
\par
34 Calyx-teeth about as long as wide ................................... {\b 28. brachyodonta}
\par
34 Calyx-teeth 2-3 times as long as wide
\par
35 Inflorescence sparsely hirsute; calyx-teeth linear-spathulate, 
\par
   toothed near the apex only ......................................................... {\b 30. leucodon}
\par
35 Inflorescence lanate or villous; calyx-teeth lanceolate, 
\par
   with margin uniformly serrate, crenate or entire 
\par
36 Calyx glandular-villous ............................................................... {\b 33. graeca}
\par
36 Calyx eglandular-hairy
\par
37 Stem arachnoid-lanate; upper bracts 3-lobed ....................... {\b 31. physocalyx}
\par
37 Stem subglabrous below; upper bracts entire ............... {\b 34. friderici-augusti}
\par
19 Beak of corolla conspicuous, not bidentate at apex
\par
38 Corolla yellow or cream-coloured
\par
39 Calyx-teeth foliose, toothed or lobed
\par
40 Stem uniformly lanate; calyx-teeth glabrous on margin
\par
   and inner surface ......................................................................... {\b 39. tuberosa}
\par
40 Stem with 2 rows of hairs; calyx-teeth pubescent on 
\par
   margin and inner surface
\par
41 Bracts ciliate but otherwise glabrous; calyx-tube glabrous .......{\b 40. elongata}
\par
41 Bracts and calyx-tube densely villous .......................................... {\b 41. julica}
\par
39 Calyx-teeth entire or obscurely serrate, not foliose
\par
42 Calyx deeply split on lower side; leaves pinnatifid ............... {\b 38. lapponica}
\par
42 Calyx not split on lower side; leaves pinnatisect
\par
43 Calyx-teeth wider than long, obtuse ....................................... {\b 37. compacta}
\par
43 Calyx-teeth at least as long as wide, acute
\par
44 Bracts ± glabrous, with entire segments; calyx-tube glabrous .{\b 42. ascendens}
\par
44 Bracts hairy, with serrate segments; calyx-tube villous ... {\b 43. baumgartenii}
\par
38 Corolla red, pink or purple
\par
45 Corolla-tube at least 1½ times as long as calyx
\par
46 Leaves crenate-serrate, not lobed; calyx strongly 2-lipped .. {\b 54. resupinata}
\par
46 Leaves pinnatifid or pinnatisect; calyx ± regularly 
\par
   toothed, not 2-lipped
\par
47 Flowers subsessile; calyx densely lanate ............................... {\b 50. gyroflexa}
\par
47 Flowers distinctly pedicellate; calyx glabrous or slightly 
\par
   pubescent
\par
48 Stem decumbent; calyx-teeth nearly as long as tube corolla 
\par
   not more than 21 mm .................................................................. {\b 51. elegans}
\par

\par
270}
\par