{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 48 Stem erect; calyx-teeth about half as long as tube;
\par
   corolla up to 25(-30) mm ................................................... {\b 52. portenschlagii} 
\par
45 Corolla-tube equalling or slightly exceeding calyx
\par
49 Flowers distinctly pedicellate
\par
50 Lower lip of corolla ciliate, at least at anthesis ............. {\b 45. rostratocapitata}
\par
50 Lower lip of corolla glabrous
\par
51 Stems procumbent to ascending; calyx glabrous or pubescent ...{\b 46. kerneri} 
\par
51 Stems erect; calyx villous-lanate with reddish hairs ........... {\b 53. asplenifolia}
\par
49 Flowers subsessile
\par
52 Calyx glabrous; inflorescence capitate ................................... {\b 47. pyrenaica}
\par
52 Calyx hairy; inflorescence ± elongate
\par
53 Petioles of basal leaves villous; cauline leaves 0-2 .................... {\b 49. cenisia}
\par
53 All petioles glabrous; cauline leaves usually 3 or more
\par
54 Bracts 3-lobed; calyx-teeth not foliose; corolla not
\par
   more than 13 mm ............................................................. {\b 44. rostratospicata}
\par
54 Bracts pinnatifid; some of the calyx-teeth foliose;
\par
   corolla up to 18 mm ........................................................................ {\b 48. mixta}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Sect. ANODONTAE (Bunge) Maxim. Perennial. Upper lip of corolla rounded at apex, neither rostrate nor toothed.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. P. acaulis} Scop.,{\i  Fl. Carn.} ed. 2, {\b 1}: 439 (1771). Acaulescent; leaves and flowers arising from a cylindrical stock. Leaves ovate, pinnatisect with pinnatifid segments; petiole and rhachis pubescent; segments glabrous. Pedicels 10-30 mm, pubescent. Calyx hairy, with 5 lanceolate, foliose, serrate teeth about equalling the tube. Corolla up to 35 mm, white tinged with red; tube about equalling calyx; upper lip falcate; both lips ciliate. Capsule compressed-globose, obliquely apiculate, somewhat exceeding calyx.{\i  Damp or shady grassland. • Foothills of S. Alps and of mountains of N.W. Jugoslavia}. It Ju.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. P. sceptrum-carolinum} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 608 (1753). Stem 15-80 (-100) cm, erect, glabrous, often reddish. Basal leaves 12-20(-30) cm, forming a rosette, lanceolate, pinnatifid, glabrous or somewhat pubescent beneath; segments ovate, obtuse, crenate. Cauline leaves few. Flowers alternate or in whorls of 3, in a long, lax spike; bracts ovate. Calyx glabrous; teeth irregularly serrate. Corolla up to 32 mm, suberect, pale yellow with red margin to lower lip; tube obconical-campanulate; lips connivent, the upper falcate, ciliate, the lower with glabrous margin, but with 2 hairy ridges. Capsule globose, shortly mucronate, somewhat exceeding calyx. 2n = 32.{\i  Fens, wet woods and river-banks. Fennoscandia and N. & C. parts of U.S.S.R., extending very locally in C. Europe to S. Germany and C. Romania.} †Au Cz Da Fe Ge No Po Rm Rs (N, B, C, W) Su.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 3. P. foliosa} L., {\i Mantissa} 86 (1767). Stem 20-50 cm, erect, pubescent, leafy mainly in upper half. Leaves broadly lanceolate, 2- to 3-pinnatisect, dull green, glabrous above, pubescent beneath. Flowers in a dense spike; bracts exceeding the flowers, the lower leaf-like, the upper less divided. Calyx membranous, hairy on the veins and margin; teeth unequal, broadly triangular, entire. Corolla up to 25 mm, pale yellow; tube exceeding the calyx; upper lip villous, nearly straight, obtuse. Capsule ovoid, shortly apiculate, somewhat exceeding calyx. 2n = 16.{\i  Meadows, streamsides and scrub. • Mountains of S. & S.C. Europe from the Vosges to N. Spain and S. Italy.} Au Ga Ge He Hs It.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 4. P. hoermanniana} K. Malý, {\i Glasn. Muz. Bosni Herceg.}{\b  11}: 145 (1899) ({\i P. foliosa} auct. balcan., non L.). Like {\b 3} but stem 50-100 cm; calyx coriaceous; upper lip of corolla shortly pubescent; capsule obtuse, almost twice as long as calyx.{\i  Meadows and open scrub. • Balkan peninsula, southwards to S.W. Bulgaria, and extending northwards to Slovenija.} ?Al Bu Ju.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 5. P. hacquetii} Graf,{\i  Flora} ({\i Regensb}.) {\b 17}: 40 (1834). Stem 30-120 cm, erect, glabrous or pubescent, leafy mainly in upper half. Leaves lanceolate, 3-pinnatisect, glabrous above, somewhat hairy beneath. Flowers in a rather dense spike; bracts exceeding the flowers, the lower leaf-like, the upper smaller, incise-dentate. Calyx coriaceous, pubescent to villous, split to half-way on lower side; teeth short but distinct, deltate, obtuse. Corolla up to 25 mm, pale yellow; tube nearly twice as long as calyx, hairy inside; upper lip straight, glabrous or sparsely ciliate. Capsule obliquely ovoid, shortly apiculate, somewhat exceeding calyx.{\i  Mountain meadows. • S.E. Alps, Carpathians, C. Appennini.} Au Cz It Ju Po Rm Rs (W).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 6. P. exaltata} Besser,{\i  Flora} ({\i Regensb.}) {\b 15} ({\i Beibl}. 2): 19 (1832). Like {\b 5} but stem 100-150(-200) cm, leafy throughout; spike lax; bracts glabrous; calyx subglabrous, with very short, sometimes obsolescent teeth; corolla-tube glabrous inside.{\i  Open woodland and scrub. • Carpathians and adjacent hill-country, extending to W. White Russia and W. Ukraine.} Cz Po Rm Rs (C, W).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 7. P. recutita} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 608 (1753). Glabrous except for calyx-teeth. Stem 20-60 cm, erect. Leaves lanceolate, pinnatisect, with lanceolate, incise-dentate segments, the lower leaves long petiolate. Flowers in a raceme, dense at first, elongating later; bracts shorter than flowers, the lower pinnatisect, the upper 3-lobed or undivided. Calyx-teeth almost as long as tube, unequal, lanceolate, entire, ciliate. Corolla up to 15 mm, glabrous, greenish-yellow, usually tinged with dull crimson; upper lip almost straight, much longer than the lower. Capsule ovoid, apiculate, almost twice as long as calyx. 2n = 16.{\i  Mountain meadows and damp or shady places. • Alps.} Au Ga Ge He It Ju.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 8. P. limnogena} A. Kerner,{\i  Österr. Bot. Zeitschr. }{\b 13}: 362 (1863). Stem 8-20 cm,, erect or ascending, glabrous except for calyx-teeth. Basal leaves numerous, lanceolate, pinnatisect with ovate-oblong, obtuse, pinnatifid segments; cauline leaves 2-4. Flowers in an elongate raceme; bracts oblong, toothed, shorter than flowers; pedicels thickened distally. Calyx membranous; teeth shortly triangular, acute, entire, sparsely ciliate. Corolla up to 12(-15) mm, purplish-red; upper lip almost straight, longer than the lower. Capsule ovoid-conical, with curved, obtuse apex, twice as long as calyx.{\i  Stream-sides, springs and wet grassland. • Mountains of Transsylvania and Makedonija.} Ju Rm.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 9. P. rosea} Wulfen in Jacq., {\i Misc. Austr. Bot.}{\b  2}: 57 (1781). Stem 2-15 cm, erect, glabrous below, hairy and purple-tinted above. Leaves 5-8(-12) cm, including petiole, oblong-lanceolate, pinnatifid with more or less dentate, acute segments, glabrous. Flowers in a more or less capitate spike; bracts villous, longer than the flowers. Calyx lanate-villous; teeth unequal, nearly as long as tube, lanceolate, acute, entire. Corolla 12-18 mm, pink to lilac, glabrous; tube exceeding the calyx; upper lip nearly straight. Stigma clearly exserted. Capsule obliquely ovoid, apiculate, lightly exceeding calyx. 2n = 16.{\i  Screes and stony grassland; calcicole. S.W., S. & E. Alps; two stations in the Pyrenees.} Au Ga It Ju.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b rosea}: Leaf-segments triangular, closely incise-dentate. Lower bracts dentate to somewhat laciniate, the upper entire. Filaments densely pubescent. {\i S. & E. Alps}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b allionii} (Reichenb. fil.) E. Mayer,{\i  Österr. Bot. Zeitschr.}{\b  119}: 324 (1971) ({\i P. allionii} Reichenb. fil.): Leaf segments lanceolate, obscurely and remotely dentate. Lower bracts deeply laciniate, the upper mostly bifid. Filaments sparsely pubescent to subglabrous.{\i  S.W. Alps; Pyrenees}.
\par

\par
271}
\par