{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28\qc {\b 1.          Haberlea}           Friv.
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc By E.M. Rix & D.A. Webb.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Scape with 2 linear-lanceolate bracts at base of pedicels. Calyx with 5 lobes about equalling the tube; corolla with more or less cylindrical tube and 5-lobed, unequally 2-lipped limb, the tube longer than at least the upper lip. Stamens 4, included; filaments curved; anthers much shorter than filaments, connate in pairs. Staminode 1, small. Stigma 2-lobed. Capsule about equalling calyx.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. H. rhodopensis} Friv., {\i Magyar Tudós Társaság Évkónyvei} ({\i Budapest}) {\b 2}: 249 (1835). Leaves 3-8 × 2-4 cm, obovate- to ovate-oblong, obtuse, coarsely crenate, softly hirsute, tapered to a short, broad petiole. Scapes 6-10 cm, with 1-5 flowers. Corolla 15-25 mm, pale bluish-violet, hairy within. 2n = 38, 48.{\i  Rock-crevices. Mountains of C. & S. Bulgaria and N.E. Greece}. Bu Gr.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b  H. ferdinandi-coburgii} Urum.,{\i  Period. Spis. Balg. Kniz. Druz.}{\b  63}: 2 (1902), known only from one locality in C. Bulgaria, has leaves which are almost glabrous above; other supposed differences seem to be less constant. It should probably be regarded as a variety of {\b 1}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc {\b 2.          Ramonda}            L.C.M. Richard
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc By E.M. Rix & D.A. Webb.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Leaves rugose, hirsute above with short, white hairs, villous beneath and on petiole with long, brown hairs. Scape without bracts. Flowers usually 5-merous, but with some inconstancy in the number of parts. Calyx-lobes equal, longer than the tube; corolla more or less rotate, nearly actinomorphic. Stamens as many as corolla-lobes, exserted, all fertile; anthers about as long as filaments, free. Stigma capitate, entire. Capsule much exceeding calyx.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Style 5-7 mm; anthers 3-4 mm, mucronate .................................... {\b 1. myconi}
\par
1 Style c. 3 mm; anthers 2·5-3 mm, obtuse
\par
2 Leaves truncate at base; corolla rotate, with patent lobes; 
\par
  anthers yellow ............................................................................... {\b 2. nathaliae}
\par
2 Leaves cuneate at base; corolla cup-shaped, with erecto-
\par
  patent lobes; anthers dark violet-blue .............................................. {\b 3. serbica}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. R. myconi} (L.) Reichenb.,{\i  Fl. Germ. Excurs.} 388 (1831) ({\i R. pyrenaica} Pers.). Leaves 2-6 × 1-5 cm, rhombic-orbicular to ovate, obtuse, crenate-dentate, tapered to a short petiole. Scapes 6-12 cm, glandular-pubescent, with 1-6 flowers. Flowers usually 5-merous; corolla 3-4 cm in diameter, rotate, deep violet with a yellow centre. Anthers 3-4 mm, shortly mucronate, yellow. Style 5-7 mm; capsule c. 15 mm. 2n = 48. {\i Shady crevices in limestone rocks. • C. & E. Pyrenees and adjoining mountains of N.E. Spain.} Ga Hs.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. R. nathaliae} Pancic & Petrovic in Petrovic,{\i  Fl. Agri Nyss.} 574 (1882). Leaves 3-5 × 1-3 cm, ovate to suborbicular, more or less truncate at the base, entire or obscurely crenate; petiole 1-4 cm. Scapes 6-8 cm, glandular-pubescent, with 1-3 flowers. Calyx-lobes 4-6; corolla 3-3·5 cm in diameter, rotate, with 4(-5) patent lobes, lilac to violet, with an orange-yellow centre. Anthers 2·5-3 mm, obtuse, yellow (sometimes slightly tinged with blue). Style c. 3 mm; capsule c. 9 mm. 2n = 48.{\i  Shady rock-crevices. • S. Jugoslavia and N. Greece.} Gr Ju.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 3. R. serbica} Pancic,{\i  Fl. Princ. Serb.} 498 (1874). Like{\b  2} but leaves narrowly obovate, cuneate at base, irregularly and sometimes deeply crenate or dentate; petiole usually shorter; flowers usually 5-merous; corolla 2·5-3 cm in diameter, cup-shaped, with erecto-patent lobes; anthers dark violet-blue. 2n = c. 96. {\i  Shady crevices in limestone rocks. • Albania, S. Jugoslavia, N.W. Bulgaria, N.W. Greece.} Al Bu Gr Ju.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc {\b 3.           Jankaea}            Boiss.
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc By E.M. Rix & D.A. Webb.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Like{\i  Ramonda} but leaves densely white-villous above; corolla usually 4-lobed, broadly campanulate, with tube about as long as lobes. Stamens 4, included.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. J. heldreichii} (Boiss.) Boiss., {\i Diagn. Pl. Or. Nov.}{\b  1}: 5 (1875). Leaves 2-4 cm, obovate, obtuse, entire. Scapes c. 4 cm, with 1-2 flowers. Calyx 5-lobed; corolla 4(5)-lobed, pale lilac. Anthers yellow. Capsule c. 7 mm. 2n = 56. {\i  Shady crevices in limestone rocks, }1000-2000{\i  m. • C. Greece} ({\i Olimbos}). Gr.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc {\b 160.             OROBANCHACEAE.}
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc Edit. D.A. Webb.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Perennial (rarely annual) herbs without chlorophyll, parasitic on the roots of other phanerogamic plants (usually herbaceous dicotyledons). Stems erect, usually simple. Leaves alternate, scale-like, often succulent at first. Flowers in a terminal spike or raceme, rarely in a panicle or solitary. Calyx tubular, cup-shaped or 2-lipped. Corolla 5-lobed, 2-lipped or almost regular. Stamens 4, didynamous. Ovary superior, 1-locular, with 2-4 parietal, often deeply lobed placentae; style single; stigma more or less 2-lobed. Fruit a loculicidal capsule; seeds small, numerous.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  It is impossible to delimit this family satisfactorily from the Scrophulariaceae, and it would seem that nothing but tradition maintains its separate status.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Literature: G. Beck von Mannagetta in Engler,{\i  Pflanzenreich }{\b 96} ({\b IV. 261}): 1-348 (1930).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Flowers solitary .......................................................................... {\b 4. Phelypaea}
\par
1 Flowers in racemes, spikes or panicles
\par
2 Corolla ± regular, 5-lobed .......................................................... {\b 1. Cistanche}
\par
2 Corolla distinctly 2-lipped
\par
3 Upper lip of corolla much longer than the lower; stamens exserted
\par
  .................................................................................................. {\b 3. Boschniakia}
\par
3 Upper lip of corolla equalling or shorter than the lower; 
\par
  stamens included ....................................................................... {\b 2. Orobanche}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc {\b 1.            Cistanche}             Hoffmanns. & Link
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc By E.M. Rix & D.A. Webb.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Stems stout, simple. Leaves numerous. Flowers numerous, in dense spikes. Bracteoles 2, adnate to calyx. Calyx campanulate, with 5 equal, obtuse lobes. Corolla scarcely 2-lipped and nearly regular, with campanulate or obconical tube and 5 subequal, patent lobes. Stamens included. Placentae 4, not deeply lobed.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 Bracts and bracteoles glabrous; the whole corolla bright yellow . {\b 1. phelypaea}
\par
Bracts and bracteoles with villous margins; corolla with 
\par
   pale yellow tube and usually violet limb ............................................ {\b 2. salsa}
\par

\par
285}
\par