{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 bracteoles linear-lanceolate, slightly shorter than calyx; most of the flowers shortly pedicellate. Calyx 8-12 mm; teeth 2-3 times as long as tube, linear-lanceolate with subulate apex. Corolla 16-21 mm, glandular-hairy, erecto-patent, tubular to narrowly campanulate, nearly straight, white at base, blue to violet distally; lobes of lower lip elliptical, acute to acuminate. Filaments glabrous or subglabrous, inserted 4-5 mm above base of corolla; anthers hairy. Stigma white. Capsule 7-8 mm.{\i  On various herbs, most commonly Umbelliferae. Mediterranean region.} ?Cr Hs Sa si.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b  O. rechingeri} Gilli,{\i  Österr. Bot. Zeitschr.}{\b  113}: 214 (1966), described from a single locality in C. Greece, differs in its stems not more than 10 cm, inflorescence whitish-villous as in 7, calyx-teeth 3-6 times as long as tube, and corolla and stigma pale yellow. It requires further investigation.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 7. O. caesia} Reichenb.,{\i  Pl. Crit.}{\b  7}: 48 (1829). Stems 10-35 × 0·3-0·5 cm, scarcely swollen at base, simple, glandular-pubescent. Leaves 8-17 mm, ovate to lanceolate, numerous. Inflorescence 5-20 × 2·5-4 cm, usually dense, arachnoid-villous with white hairs; bracts 8-14 mm, ovate-lanceolate; bracteoles linear-lanceolate, shorter than calyx; flowers sessile or subsessile. Calyx 9-14 mm; teeth lanceolate, almost equalling or longer than tube. Corolla 20-25 mm, glandular-pubescent, suberect at base, campanulate and more or less patent distally, lilac to bluish-violet; lobes of lower lip oblong to ovate, obtuse to acuminate. Filaments glabrous, or slightly hairy at base, inserted 6-8 mm above base of corolla; anthers glabrous. Stigma white. Capsule 7-9 mm. {\i On} Artemisia {\i spp. E.C. Europe, Romania, S. & E. parts of U.S.S.R.} Au Cz Hu Rm Rs (C, W, K, E).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   {\b O. nowackiana} Markgraf,{\i  Ber. Deutsch. Bot. Ges.}{\b  44}: 429 (1926), recorded from two localities in C. Albania, has been included in {\b 7}, which it resembles in its simple stem, arachnoid-villous inflorescence and subglabrous stamens. It appears, however, to differ from all other species of the section in its very dwarf stature, subequally 5-toothed calyx, predominantly yellow corolla and purple stigma. Its systematic position must remain doubtful until more material is available.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 8. O. arenaria} Borkh.,{\i  Neues Mag. Bot.} ({\i Roemer}) {\b 1}: 6 (1794) ({\i Phelypaea arenaria} (Borkh.) Walpers). Stems 15-60 × 0·3-0·6 cm, slightly swollen at base, usually simple, glandular-hairy with long, appressed hairs. Leaves up to 20(-25) mm, lanceolate, numerous. Inflorescence 5-15(-25) cm, dense, glandular-pubescent; bracts 15-20 mm, lanceolate; bracteoles linear, somewhat shorter than calyx; lower flowers shortly pedicellate. Calyx 12-18 mm; teeth lanceolate-acuminate, equalling or slightly longer than tube. Corolla 25-35 mm, glandular-pubescent, erecto-patent, campanulate, more or less straight, bluish-violet lobes of lower lip broadly ovate, obtuse. Filaments glabrous or subglabrous, inserted 6-7 mm above base of corolla; anthers hairy. Stigma white. Capsule 8-10 mm.{\i  On }Artemisia{\i  spp. and perhaps on other herbs. From N.E. France and C. Russia southwards to S. Spain, C. Italy and S. Bulgaria}. Au Bu Cz Ga Ge He Hs Hu It Ju Lu Po Rm Rs (C, W, K, E).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b  O. bungeana} G. Beck,{\i  Biblioth. Bot. }({\i Stuttgart}) {\b 19}: 119 (1890), from S.W. Asia, has once been recorded from C. Greece, but requires confirmation. It appears to differ from {\b 8} only in its shorter bracts and usually subcapitate inflorescence.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 9. O. purpurea} Jacq.,{\i  Enum. Stirp. Vindob.} 108, 252 (1762) ({\i Phelypaea caerulea} (Vill.) C. A. Meyer). Stems 15-60 × 0·3-0·8 cm, slightly swollen at base, usually simple; whole plant minutely glandular-puberulent, often with a greyish tinge. Leaves 7-20 mm, narrowly lanceolate, usually sparse above. Inflorescence 5-20 cm, rather dense; bracts 8-15 mm, lanceolate; bracteoles linear, shorter than calyx; lower flowers usually subsessile, rarely with pedicels up to 15 mm. Calyx 8-15 mm; teeth lanceolate, about equalling the tube. Corolla 18-25(-30) mm, erecto-patent, or inflected and more or less patent distally, narrowly campanulate, white below, bluish-violet distally with deep violet veins; lobes of lower lip ovate-elliptical, rounded to apiculate. Filaments glabrous or subglabrous, inserted c. 7 mm above base of corolla; anthers glabrous or subglabrous. Stigma white or pale blue. Capsule 8-9 mm. 2n = 24. {\i On} Achillea{\i  spp. and other Compositae. Europe, northwards to C. England, S.E. Sweden and S.C. Russia.} Au Be ?Bl Br Bu Co ?Cr Cz Da Ga Ge Gr He Ho Hs Hu It Ju ?Lu Po Rm Rs (C, W, K, E) Su Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   {\b O. uralensis} G. Beck, {\i Biblioth. Bot}. ({\i Stuttgart}) {\b 19}: 132 (1890), from E. Russia, differs only in having slightly longer hairs throughout and the corolla without deep violet veins. It grows on{\i  Artemisia} spp.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Sect. OROBANCHE (Sect.{\i  Osproleon} Wallr.). Stems simple. Flowers sessile, without bracteoles. Calyx split above and below almost or completely to the base, and thus divided into 2 lateral segments, which may be entire or equally or unequally bifid. Corolla variously shaped, usually tinged with yellow, brown or red; upper lip 2-lobed to entire.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 10. O. coerulescens} Stephan in Willd.,{\i  Sp. Pl.}{\b  3}: 349 (1800) (incl. {\i O. korshinskyi} Novopokr.). Stems 10-40 cm, somewhat swollen at the base, arachnoid-villous above, usually glabrescent below, yellowish. Leaves 10-17(-25) mm, lanceolate. Spike up to 10(-18) × 2·5-3·5 cm, dense, arachnoid-villous; bracts about equalling corolla, lanceolate-acuminate. Calyx 8-13 mm; segments free, more or less bidentate. Corolla (10-)14-23 mm, arachnoid-villous, pale violet-blue, suberect and somewhat inflated at base, constricted and inflected near middle, the distal part patent; lobes of lower lip subequal, not ciliate. Filaments almost glabrous, inserted 6-7 mm above base of corolla; anthers usually glabrous. Stigma pale yellow.{\i  On} Artemisia{\i  spp. E. & C. Europe, from C. Germany, N. Ukraine and S. Ural southwards to W. Kazakhstan.} Au ?Bu Cz Ge Hu ?It Po Rm Rs (C, W, K, E).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 11. O. cernua} Loefl., {\i Iter. Hisp.} 152 (1758) (incl.{\i  O. cumana} Wallr.). Stems up to 40 cm, only slightly swollen at base, more or less glandular-pubescent, yellowish. Leaves 5-10 mm, ovate-lanceolate. Spike up to 25 × 2·5-4 cm, usually dense, glandular-puberulent, brown, variably tinged with blue; bracts 7-12 mm, ovate to lanceolate. Calyx 7-12 mm; segments free, more or less bidentate. Corolla 12-20 mm, sparsely glandular-puberulent, suberect, conspicuously inflated and whitish-scarious at base, constricted and inflected near middle, the distal part patent or somewhat deflexed, violet-blue, sparsely pubescent; lobes of lower lip subequal, not ciliate. Filaments glabrous or subglabrous, inserted 4-6 mm above base of corolla; anthers glabrous. Stigma whitish. Capsule 8-10 mm. 2n = 24. {\i On} Artemisia{\i  spp. and} Helianthus annuus,{\i  rarely on other herbs. S. Europe, extending northwards to S. Czechoslovakia and to c. 54° N. in E. Russia} Br Co Cr Cz Ga Gr Hs Hu It Ju Rm Rs (C, W, K, E) Si Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 12. O. amoena} C. A. Meyer in Ledeb.,{\i  Fl. Altaica }{\b 2}: 457 (1830). Stems 15-40 mm, slightly swollen at base, sparsely glandular-pubescent, yellow or purplish. Leaves c. 10 mm, ovate-lanceolate. Spike 6-15 × c. 4 cm, sparsely glandular-pubescent; bracts 7-18 mm, oblong-lanceolate. Calyx 7-15 mm; segments free, more or less bidentate, pale yellow. Corolla 20-40 mm,
\par

\par
289}
\par