{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. C. phelypaea} (L.) Coutinho,{\i  Fl. Port.} 571 (1913) ({\i C. tinctoria} (Forskål) G. Beck, {\i Phelypaea lutea} Desf., {\i P. tinctoria} (Forskål) Brot.). Glabrous. Stems 20-100 cm. Leaves c. 2 cm, ovate-lanceolate, obtuse, brown, with scarious, more or less denticulate margin. Spike 10-20 cm. Bracts 15-20 mm, irregularly crenulate; bracteoles oblong-lanceolate, slightly shorter than calyx. Calyx 13-18 mm, with short, ovate-orbicular, crenulate lobes. Corolla 30-40(-60) × 20-30 mm, bright shining yellow; tube usually curved; lobes ovate-orbicular, erecto-patent. Anthers and filament-bases hairy. Capsule c. 12 mm, ovoid. 2n = 40.{\i  On woody Chenopodiaceae. S. Spain, S. Portugal; Kriti; one record from N.W. Spain.} Cr Hs Lu. ({\i N. Africa, Arabia}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. C. salsa} (C. A. Meyer) G. Beck in Engler & Prantl,{\i  Natürl. Pflanzenfam.}{\b  4}({\b 3b}): 129 (1893). Like {\b 1} but stems 10-40 cm, usually tomentose; bracts, bracteoles and sometimes calyx with villous margins; corolla 25-35 mm, with pale yellow tube and usually violet limb.{\i  On woody Chenopodiaceae }(Atriplex, Anabasis, Kalidium).{\i  S.E. Russia, W. Kazakhstan.} Rs (E). ({\i C. & S.W. Asia.})
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc {\b 2.          Orobanche}           L.
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc By A.O. Chater & D.A. Webb.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Perennial, biennial or annual. Stems stout or slender, simple or branched. Leaves numerous. Flowers in usually dense spikes or racemes. Bracteoles, if present, adnate to calyx. Calyx with cylindrical to campanulate tube and 4(-5) teeth, or divided, usually deeply, into 2 lateral segments, which may be entire or bifid. Corolla strongly 2-lipped; lower lip 3-lobed, at least as long as the upper. Stamens included. Placentae 4, variably lobed.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   For most species there is no reliable information as to annual or perennial habit.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   The intrinsic taxonomic difficulties of this genus are greatly increased by the fact that important differential characters can be observed only with difficulty, or not at all, on dried specimens. This applies especially to the colour of the corolla and, to a lesser extent, of other parts. All Floras lay great stress on the shape of the corolla, especially the nature of the curvature of its 'dorsal line'. The shape of the corolla, however, can vary widely between flowers on the same spike, and it is often distorted by pressing; we have not used it, therefore, except in a few species where it is constant and distinctive.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Many species are becoming rarer, especially in N. Europe. A few, however, especially those which parasitize crop-plants, are extending their range.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   There is much unconfirmed and probably erroneous information in the literature on the range of hosts of many species; if the parasite is growing in closed vegetation it may require very careful dissection of root-systems for the identity of the host to be revealed. We have tried to mention only those host-plants for which there is a good weight of concordant evidence.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   It has often been suggested that the variation in some species is dependent, at least in part, on the species of host, but there appears to be no reliable experimental evidence on this point.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   To facilitate identification a table is appended of the species of{\i  Orobanche} most frequently associated with certain hosts. The list must not, however, be regarded as exhaustive, as some species show a very wide range of hosts, and for others our information on this subject is incomplete.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Individual host genera:
\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Berberis {\b 39}; cistus {\b 30}, {\b 42}; Digitalis {\b 21}({\b b}); Euphorbia {\b 23}; Hedera {\b 29}, 
\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Helleborus {\b 16}; Rubus ?{\b  39}, Thalictrum {\b 34}
 Host families:
\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Compositae:
\par
   {\i Achillea} ............................ {\b 9}
\par
   {\i Anthemis}.......................... {\b 7}
\par
   {\i Artemisia} ......................... {\b 7,8,10,11,12,18,26}; see also{\b  9}
\par
   {\i Carduus}............................ {\b 15}
\par
   {\i Centaurea}.........................  {\b 34}
\par
   {\i Cirsium}............................ {\b  15}
\par
   {\i Petasites, Tussilago, Adenostyles} .  {\b 38}
\par
   {\i Picris} ................................  {\b 26}
\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Other genera ....................  {\b 9,11,19,20,21,22,24,,26,34}
\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Dipsacaceae .....................  {\b 15,17}
\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Labiatae:
\par
  {\i  Ballota }.............................  {\b 21}( {\b a})
\par
  {\i  Rosmarinus }.....................  {\b 30}; see also  {\b 3}
\par
  {\i  Salvia} ..............................  {\b 40}
\par
  {\i  Teucrium }.........................  {\b 32}
\par
  {\i  Thymus} ...........................  {\b 14}
\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Other genera ....................  {\b 14}
\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Leguminosae:
\par
  {\i  Lotus} ................................  {\b 45}
\par
  {\i  Medicago }.........................  {\b 33}
\par
  {\i  Psoralea }...........................  {\b 3}
\par
  {\i  Trifolium }.........................  {\b 27,33}
\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Other genera ....................  {\b 13,20,25,41,42,43,44}
\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Rubiaceae ..........................  {\b 28,31}
\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Umbelliferae:
\par
   {\i Daucus} .............................  {\b 21}( {\b a}), {\b 26}
\par
   {\i Eryngium} .........................  {\b 21}( {\b a})
\par
   {\i Laserpitium} ......................  {\b 37}
\par
   {\i Opoponax} .........................  {\b 36}
\par
   {\i Orlaya} ...............................  {\b 26}
\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Other genera .....................  {\b 6,19,35}
\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Cultivated plants ...............  {\b 1,2,11,13}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Each flower subtended by 2 bracteoles ( ± adnate to calyx), 
\par
  as well as by a bract
\par
2 Anthers glabrous, or sparsely hairy at the base
\par
3 Stem usually branched; corolla 10-20(-22) mm
\par
4 Lobes of lower lip of corolla acute to acuminate .......................... {\b 5. oxyloba}
\par
4 Lobes of lower lip of corolla rounded to subacute ......................... {\b 1. ramosa}
\par
3 Stem usually simple; corolla (18-)20-25(-30) mm
\par
5 Inflorescence arachnoid-villous ........................................................ {\b 7. caesia}
\par
5 Inflorescence minutely puberulent ............................................... {\b 9. purpurea}
\par
2 Anthers ± densely hairy
\par
6 Corolla (20-)22-35 mm
\par
7 Stem usually branched; bracts shorter than calyx ..................... {\b 2. aegyptiaca}
\par
7 Stem usually simple; bracts equalling or exceeding calyx ............ {\b 8. arenaria}
\par
6 Corolla 16-22 mm
\par
8 Calyx-teeth not more than 1¼ times as long as tube ............. {\b 3. lavandulacea}
\par
8 Calyx-teeth 2-3 times as long as tube
\par
9 Leaves c. 20 mm; bracteoles filiform; lobes of lower 
\par
  lip of corolla rounded ................................................................ {\b 4. trichocalyx}
\par
9 Leaves 5-10 mm; bracteoles linear-lanceolate; lobes of 
\par
  lower lip of corolla acute to acuminate ......................................... {\b 6. schultzii}
\par
1 Bracteoles absent
\par
10 Stigma purple, orange or dark red at anthesis
\par
11 Lower lip of corolla glandular-ciliate
\par
12 Stamens inserted not more than 3 mm above base of corolla
\par
13 Many of the hairs on the corolla dark at least at base or apex; 
\par
   on Labiatae ......................................................................................... {\b 14. alba}
\par
13 Hairs on corolla colourless or pale yellow
\par
14 Corolla 20-32 mm, pink or yellow, tinged with purple;
\par
   on Rubiaceae .................................................................... {\b 31. caryophyllacea}
\par
14 Corolla 15-22 mm, yellow tinged with red; on{\i  Berberis} .......... {\b 39. lucorum}
\par
12 Stamens inserted at least 3 mm above base of corolla
\par

\par
286}
\par