{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 15 Upper lip of corolla deeply 2-lobed; bracts 20-30 mm;
\par
   on{\i  Helleborus} ........................................................................... {\b 16. haenseleri}
\par
15 Upper lip of corolla entire or emarginate
\par
16 Calyx 10-17 mm, the segments usually entire; bracts 17-25 mm; 
\par
   on Rubiaceae ................................................................... {\b 31. caryophyllacea}
\par
16 Calyx not more than 12 mm, the segments bifid; bracts
\par
   12-20 mm; on {\i Teucrium} ................................................................. {\b 32. teucrii}
\par
11 Lower lip of corolla not ciliate
\par
17 Corolla shining dark red inside, mostly dark red or purple outside
\par
18 Filaments inserted 3-7 mm above base of corolla;
\par
   corolla glandular-pubescent outside .............................................. {\b 44. foetida}
\par
18 Filaments inserted 1·5-2 mm above base of corolla;
\par
   corolla glabrous or subglabrous outside ................................... {\b 45. sanguinea}
\par
17 Corolla not shining dark red inside, usually white or 
\par
   pale yellow outside at least towards the base
\par
19 Calyx-segments connate for c. ½ their length, with 
\par
   broadly triangular teeth ............................................................. {\b 28. clausonis}
\par
19 Calyx-segments free or slightly connate at base, with
\par
   linear-lanceolate to filiform teeth
\par
20 Corolla villous (S.E. Europe and Sicilia) ............................... {\b 19. pubescens}
\par
20 Corolla glabrous to pubescent
\par
21 Corolla 22-30 mm; on{\i  Helleborus} ......................................... {\b 16. haenseleri}
\par
21 Corolla 10-23 mm
\par
22 Corolla broadly cylindrical-campanulate; filaments glabrous 
\par
   or subglabrous at base, usually glandular-puberulent near 
\par
   apex ........................................................................................... {\b 15. reticulata}
\par
22 Corolla tubular or narrowly campanulate; filaments 
\par
   hairy below (sometimes sparsely), subglabrous above
\par
   ....................................................................................... ({\b 21-27}).{\b  minor }group
\par
10 Stigma yellow or white (rarely pink) at anthesis
\par
23 Corolla shining dark red inside, usually dark purplish-red 
\par
   or bright yellow outside
\par
24 Lower lip of corolla with middle lobe twice as big as
\par
   the others .................................................................................... {\b 43. variegata}
\par
24 Lower lip of corolla with subequal lobes
\par
25 Filaments inserted not more than 2 mm above base of 
\par
   corolla; lower lip of corolla ciliate; flowers fragrant .................... {\b 42. gracilis}
\par
25 Filaments inserted 3-7 mm above base of corolla; lower
\par
   lip of corolla not ciliate; flowers fetid ........................................... {\b 44. foetida}
\par
23 Corolla not shining dark red inside, usually pale yellow, 
\par
   white or bluish outside, at least towards the base
\par
26 Corolla-tube narrowed to the mouth; on{\i  Hedera} ....................... {\b 29. hederae}
\par
26 Corolla-tube cylindrical or campanulate, or constricted 
\par
   some distance below the mouth
\par
27 Hairs on corolla dark purplish-brown
\par
28 Stems usually 35-50 cm; lower lip of corolla with 
\par
   middle lobe the largest; usually on Dipsacaceae ......................... {\b 17. pancicii}
\par
28 Stems not more than 15 cm; lower lip of corolla with
\par
   equal lobes; on{\i  Artemisia alba} ..................................................... {\b 18. serbica}
\par
27 Hairs on corolla colourless or pale yellow
\par
29 Corolla predominantly white, cream, bluish or violet 
\par
30 Lower lip of corolla glandular-ciliate
\par
31 Filaments inserted 5-7 mm above base of corolla; corolla 
\par
   mainly brownish-violet; on {\i Laserpitium siler} ................. {\b 37. laserpitii-sileris}
\par
31 Filaments inserted 3-4 mm above base of corolla;
\par
   corolla cream or pale yellow, tinged with pink; on
\par
   {\i Opoponax chironium} .................................................................... {\b 36. chironii} 
\par
30 Lower lip of corolla not ciliate
\par
32 Bracts, calyx and corolla arachnoid-villous ....................... {\b 10. coerulescens}
\par
32 Bracts, calyx and corolla subglabrous to glandular-pubescent
\par
33 Corolla becoming conspicuously inflated, scarious and
\par
   shining at base ................................................................................ {\b 11. cernua}
\par
33 Corolla not conspicuously inflated, scarious and shining at base 
\par
34 Corolla constricted below middle, the upper part infun-
\par
   dibuliform; filaments inserted 6-18 mm above base of corolla ... {\b 12. amoena}
\par
34 Corolla tubular to campanulate, not constricted below middle; 
\par
   filaments inserted 2-6 mm above base of corolla
\par
35 Corolla 20-30 mm with large, strongly divergent lips;
\par
   bracts villous ................................................................................ {\b 13. crenata}
\par
35 Corolla 10-23 mm with small lips, the upper usually 
\par
   porrect; bracts glandular-pubescent ............................ ({\b 21-27}).{\b  minor} group 
\par
29 Corolla predominantly yellow or reddish 
\par
36 Lower lip of corolla glandular-ciliate
\par
37 Stems not or scarcely swollen at base; on Compositae,
\par
  {\i  Berberis} or{\i  Salvia}
\par
38 Upper lip of corolla porrect; stamens inserted 2-3 mm 
\par
   above base of corolla ................................................................... {\b 39. lucorum}
\par
38 Upper lip of corolla erect or recurved at maturity;
\par
   stamens inserted 4-6 mm above base of corolla
\par
39 Upper lip of corolla 2-lobed; style glabrous, becoming
\par
   exserted and convolute ..................................................................... {\b 38. flava}
\par
39 Upper lip of corolla entire or emarginate; style 
\par
   densely glandular-pubescent, not exserted or convolute ............... {\b 40. salviae}
\par
37 Stems distinctly swollen at base; on Leguminosae or
\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Umbelliferae
\par
40 Filaments inserted not more than 2 mm above base of corolla 
\par
41 Corolla tubular, scarcely campanulate; on Umbelliferae ........... {\b 35. alsatica}
\par
41 Corolla campanulate; on Leguminosae ......................... {\b 41. rapum-genistae}
\par
40 Filaments inserted more than 2 mm above base of corolla
\par
42 Upper lip of corolla deeply 2-lobed; corolla broadly
\par
   campanulate ..................................................................... {\b 37. laserpitii-sileris}
\par
42 Upper lip of corolla emarginate or shallowly 2-lobed;
\par
   corolla narrowly campanulate
\par
43 Corolla cream or pale yellow, tinged with pink ........................ {\b 36. chironii}
\par
43 Corolla bright yellow, tinged with purple or brown
\par
44 Calyx 10-17 mm; on Leguminosae ................................................. {\b 33. lutea}
\par
44 Calyx 6-11 mm; on Umbelliferae ............................................... {\b 35. alsatica} 
\par
36 Lower lip of corolla not ciliate
\par
45 Stamens inserted 7-15 mm above base of corolla;
\par
   anthers villous; bracts ± glabrous ............................................ {\b 30. latisquama}
\par
45 Stamens inserted not more than 6 mm above base of 
\par
   corolla; anthers glabrous; bracts glandular-pubescent
\par
46 Calyx-segments connate for c. ½ their length, with 
\par
   broadly triangular teeth .............................................................. {\b 28. clausonis}
\par
46 Calyx-segments free or slightly connate at base, with 
\par
   linear-lanceolate to filiform teeth
\par
47 Corolla at least 20 mm
\par
48 Stamens inserted not more than 2 mm above base of corolla
\par
   ........................................................................................... {\b 41. rapum-genistae}
\par
48 Stamens inserted at least 3 mm above base of corolla
\par
49 Leaves 20-30 mm; calyx 10-17 mm; on Leguminosae ................... {\b 33. lutea}
\par
49 Leaves 10-20 mm; calyx 6-11 mm; on Compositae ..................... {\b 34. elatior}
\par
47 Corolla usually not more than 20 mm
\par
50 Filaments with wide, ± deltate base; spike not more 
\par
   than 3 times as long as wide ..................................................... {\b 20. densiflora}
\par
50 Filaments gradually and only slightly widened towards
\par
   base; spike (2-)4-8 times as long as wide
\par
51 Calyx-segments connate at base .................................................. {\b 34. elatior}
\par
51 Calyx-segments free
\par
52 Stems conspicuously whitish-villous .......................... ({\b 21-27}).{\b  minor} group
\par
52 Stems ± glandular-pubescent
\par
53 Bracts 10-12 mm; on {\i Euphorbia esula} ......................... ({\b 21-27}).{\b  minor} group 
\par
53 Bracts 13-20 mm; on Compositae or{\i  Salvia}
\par

\par
287}
\par