{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 54 Style becoming exserted and strongly convolute; upper
\par
   lip of corolla 2-lobed ........................................................................ {\b 38. flava}
\par
54 Style neither exserted nor convolute; upper lip of 
\par
   corolla entire or emarginate ........................................................... {\b 40. salviae}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Sect. TRIONYCHON Wallr. Stems simple or branched. Flowers pedicellate or sessile, with 2 bracteoles adnate to calyx. Calyx with cylindrical to campanulate tube and 4 subequal teeth, rarely with a fifth, much smaller tooth. Corolla white, cream, blue or violet, constricted below the middle near the insertion of the filaments; upper lip 2-lobed.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. O. ramosa} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 633 (1753) ({\i Phelypaea ramosa} (L.) C. A. Meyer). Stems 5-30(-40) × 0·15-0·4(-0·6) cm, swollen at the base, simple or branched, glandular-pubescent. Leaves 3-8(-10) mm, ovate to ovate-lanceolate, acute. Inflorescence 2-25 cm, lax or dense, glandular-pubescent; bracts 6-8(-10) mm, ovate-lanceolate; bracteoles linear-lanceolate, about equalling calyx; pedicels 0-5(-8) mm. Calyx 6-8 mm. Corolla 10-22 mm, glandular-pubescent, suberect and inflated at base, erecto-patent and tubular-infundibuliform distally, whitish at base, cream, blue or violet distally (rarely white throughout); lower lip somewhat deflexed with suborbicular to elliptical, entire or denticulate lobes. Filaments glabrous, or hairy at the base, inserted 3-6 mm above base of corolla; anthers glabrous, or sparsely hairy at the base. Stigma white, cream or pale blue. Capsule 6-7(-10) mm. 2n = 24. {\i On a wide variety of hosts. S. & S.C. Europe; naturalized further north.} Al *Au Bl Bu Co Cr Ga Gr He Hs *Hu It Ju Lu Rm Rs (*C, W, K, E) Sa Si Tu [Be Br Cz Ge Ho Po].
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Very variable; within the limits of the species as here defined more than 20 variants have been described under binomials. Analysis of the literature, however, shows that (apart from a few extreme variants only once collected) there is no discontinuity in variation of the characters relied on for the discrimination of species; nor are they always constant within a gathering. Although differentiation seems to have proceeded along ecological rather than geographical lines, it seems best to recognize 3 rather ill-defined subspecies.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Corolla (15-)18-22 mm ....................................................... ({\b c}) subsp.{\b  mutelii} 
\par
1 Corolla 10-15(-17) mm
\par
2 Calyx-teeth acuminate, usually shorter than tube; lobes
\par
  of lower lip of corolla obtuse ............................................... ({\b a}) subsp.{\b  ramosa}
\par
2 Calyx-teeth filiform-subulate at apex, usually as long 
\par
  as tube; lobes of lower lip of corolla acute ............................. ({\b b}) subsp.{\b  nana}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   (a) Subsp.{\b  ramosa}: Stem usually branched. Flowers numerous. Calyx-teeth acuminate, usually shorter than tube. Corolla 10-13(-17) mm, whitish to pale blue or lilac; lobes of lower lip obtuse.{\i  Usually on cultivated plants, especially} Cannabis sativa, Nicotiana tabacum{\i  and} Solanum{\i  spp. S. & S.C. Europe; introduced further north}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28   (b) Subsp.{\b  nana} (Reuter) Coutinho, {\i Fl. Port.} 566 (1913) (O. nana (Reuter) Noë ex G. Beck,{\i  Phelypaea nana} (Reuter) Reichenb. fil.): Stem usually simple. Flowers few. Calyx-teeth triangular, with filiform-subulate apex, about equalling the tube. Corolla 11-15(-17) mm, usually bright blue or violet; lobes of lower lip acute.{\i  S. Europe}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28   (c) Subsp.{\b  mutelii} (F. W. Schultz) Coutinho, {\i loc. cit.} (1913) ({\i O. mutelii} F. W. Schultz, {\i Phelypaea mutelii} (F. W. Schultz) Reuter): Stem usually branched. Flowers numerous. Calyx-teeth acuminate, about equalling the tube. Corolla (15-)18-22 mm, pale to bright blue or violet; lobes of lower lip obtuse. {\i S. Europe.}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. O. aegyptiaca} Pers., {\i Syn. Pl.}{\b  2}: 181 (1806) ({\i Phelypaea aegyptiaca} (Pers.) Walpers). Like{\b  1} but stems 15-50 × 0·4-0·6 cm, usually branched; leaves 5-12 mm; lower pedicels usually 10-20 mm; corolla 20-35 mm, straight or slightly curved, conspicuously infundibuliform in distal part; filaments usually hairy at base and sometimes above; anthers villous. 2n = 24. {\i On} Gossypium{\i  spp.,} Solanum{\i  spp. and other cultivated plants. S.E. Europe; once recorded from Sicilia.} Bu Rs (K, E) ?Si Tu. ({\i C. & S.W. Asia, Egypt}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   {\b  O. coelestis} (Reuter) Boiss. & Reuter ex G. Beck,{\i  Biblioth. Bot.} ({\i Stuttgart}) {\b 19}: 114 (1890) is doubtfully distinct from {\b 2} ; it appears to differ only in its stout, usually simple stem, corolla not more than 26 mm, and anthers sometimes glabrous. It occurs in S.W. Asia and N. Africa, and has once been recorded from the S. Aegean region (Kasos, near Karpathos).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 3. O. lavandulacea} Reichenb., {\i Pl. Crit.}{\b  7}: 48 (1829) ({\i Phelypaea lavandulacea} (Reichenb.) Reuter). Stems 15-60 × 0·4-0·7 cm, swollen at base, simple or branched, glandular-pubescent. Leaves 7-12 mm, ovate-lanceolate, acuminate. Inflorescence (6-)12-30 cm, lax or dense, glandular-hairy; bracts 7-10(-12) mm, ovate-lanceolate; bracteoles linear-lanceolate, slightly shorter than calyx. Calyx 6-8 mm, usually blue; teeth equalling or slightly longer than tube, triangular with subulate apex. Corolla 16-22 mm, glandular-hairy, suberect at base, patent and narrowly campanulate distally with strongly divergent lips, white at base, bright blue distally; lobes of lower lip suborbicular, denticulate. Filaments glabrous or sparsely hairy, inserted c. 6 mm above base of corolla; anthers hairy. Stigma white or yellowish. Capsule 6-7 mm. {\i On a variety of herbs, most commonly} Psoralea bituminosa.{\i  Mediterranean region.} Bl Co Ga Gr Hs It Ju Sa Si.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   {\b  O. rosmarina} G. Beck,{\i  Österr. Bot. Zeitschr.}{\b  70}: 243 (1921), resembles {\b 3} in its deep violet-blue inflorescence and its sharply inflected corolla, but in its subglabrous anthers and shorter stem it comes near to {\b 1}({\b c}). It has been recorded as parasitic on{\i  Rosmarinus} from the C. Mediterranean region and Portugal.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 4. O. trichocalyx} (Webb & Berth.) G. Beck,{\i  Biblioth. Bot.} ({\i Stuttgart}) {\b 19}: 107 (1890) ({\i Phelypaea trichocalyx} Webb & Berth.). Like{\b  3} but stems not more than 40 × 0·5 cm; leaves c. 20 mm; bracteoles filiform; calyx-teeth linear-subulate, 2-3 times as long as tube; corolla lilac distally. ?{\i  On} Pteridium aquilinum.{\i  S. Portugal, S.W. Spain.} Hs Lu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 5. O. oxyloba} (Reuter) G. Beck in L. Koch,{\i  Entw.-Gesch. Orob.} 209 (1887) (incl. {\i O. dalmatica} (G. Beck) Tzvelev). Stems 12-30 × 0·2-0·5 cm, scarcely swollen at base, simple or branched, glandular-pubescent. Leaves 5-15 mm, ovate-lanceolate. Inflorescence 10-15 × c. 3 cm, lax or dense, glandular-hairy; bracts 6-9 mm, ovate-lanceolate; bracteoles linear-subulate, shorter than calyx; lower flowers shortly pedicellate. Calyx 7-9 mm; teeth triangular-subulate, about equalling tube. Corolla 15-20 mm, glandular-puberulent, suberect at base, erecto-patent to patent and narrowly campanulate above, white at base, lilac distally; lobes of lower lip ovate, acute, crenate to subentire. Filaments glabrous, or somewhat hairy above, inserted c. 6 mm above base of corolla; anthers glabrous, or hairy at the base. Stigma white or pale blue. Capsule c. 7 mm. {\i On} Anthemis chia{\i  and other herbs. S.E. Europe}. Bu Cr Gr Ju Rs (K) Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 6. O. schultzii} Mutel,{\i  Fl. Fr.}{\b  2}: 429 (1835) ({\i Phelypaea schultzii} (Mutel) Walpers). Stems 10-60 × 0·4-0·8 cm, swollen at base, simple or branched, glandular-pubescent. Leaves 5-10 mm, numerous, ovate to lanceolate. Inflorescence 7 × 3-4 cm, dense above, lax below, glandular-hairy; bracts 8-12 mm, lanceolate;
\par

\par
288}
\par