{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 teeth on each side, with abundant calcareous secretions when mature, petiolate; lateral veins not or scarcely visible above; cauline leaves lanceolate, sessile, the upper ciliate. Capitula 2-2·5 cm in diameter; involucral bracts numerous, lanceolate, acuminate. Calyx-teeth about as long as tube, triangular, acuminate. •{\i  S.E. Spain.} Hs.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 8. G. alypum} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 95 (1753). Shrub up to c. 100 cm. Young twigs and leaves with abundant calcareous secretions. Leaves oblanceolate to obovate, mucronate or 3-dentate, very coriaceous, shortly petiolate, uniformly distributed on the main stems, fasciculate on short, non-flowering lateral branches. Capitula 1-2·5 cm in diameter, terminal, sometimes with sessile axillary capitula below them; involucral bracts broadly ovate, obtuse, sometimes mucronate, ciliate, densely imbricate. Calyx-teeth about twice as long as tube, setaceous, long-ciliate. 2n = 16. {\i Mediterranean region.} Al Bl Co Cr Ga Gr Hs It Ju ?Lu Sa Si Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 9. G. cordifolia} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 96 (1753). Dwarf shrub with creeping woody stems rooting at the nodes. Flowering stems 1-10 cm, leafless or with 1-3 small leaves. Rosette-leaves up to c. 25 × 8 mm, spathulate, usually emarginate, sometimes mucronate or 3-dentate, with the lateral teeth longer than the central one, flat, petiolate. Capitula 1-2 cm in diameter; involucral bracts numerous, ovate-lanceolate to ovate, acuminate, gradually narrowing upwards. Calyx 2-lipped; teeth lanceolate, acuminate. 2n = 32. •{\i  Mountains of C. & S. Europe, from the Carpathians to N.E. Spain and S. Bulgaria}. Al Au Bu Cz Ga Ge He Hs Hu It Ju.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 10. G. meridionalis} (Podp.) O. Schwarz, {\i Bot. Jahrb.}{\b  69}: 345 (1938) ({\i G. cordifolia} subsp. {\i bellidifolia} (Ten.) Hayek & subsp.{\i  meridionalis} Podp.). Like{\b  9} but more robust; leaves 20-90 × 2-5 mm, lanceolate to oblanceolate, acute, very rarely slightly emarginate; involucral bracts ovate, almost cuspidate; calyx-teeth linear-lanceolate. 2n = 16. •{\i  S.E. Alps; mountains of Balkan peninsula; C. & S. Appennini.} Al Au Bu Gr It Ju.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 11. G. repens} Lam., {\i Fl. Fr.}{\b  2}: 325 (1778) ({\i G. nana} Lam.). Like{\b  9} but smaller; leaves 10-20(-25) × c. 1 mm, acute, folded; capitula usually subsessile; involucral bracts lanceolate, shortly acuminate; calyx-teeth lanceolate, acuminate. 2n = 16. •{\i  Mountains of S.W. Europe}. Ga Hs It.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 12. G. neapolitana} O. Schwarz, {\i Bot. Jahrb.}{\b  69}: 348 (1938). Like {\b 9} but with partly subterranean stolons; leaves suborbicular, mucronate, very rarely slightly emarginate; capitula c. 1·5 cm; involucral bracts abruptly contracted into an awn. •{\i  S. Italy (around Napoli)}. It.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 13. G. stygia} Orph. ex Boiss., {\i Diagn. Pl. Or. Nov.}{\b  3}({\b 4}): 60 (1859). Dwarf shrub with slender, creeping woody stems rooting at the nodes, and with subterranean stolons. Rosette-leaves suborbicular, obtuse, rarely weakly emarginate, petiolate. Capitula subsessile; involucral bracts numerous, oblong-lanceolate, acuminate. Calyx almost actinomorphic; teeth narrowly lanceolate, subulate at apex. •{\i  Mountains of N. Peloponnisos.} Gr.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 14. G. nudicaulis} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 97 (1753). Caespitose herb, without stolons. Stems up to 30 cm. Leaves 6-12 cm, more or less erect, crowded at base of stem, oblanceolate to obovate, obtuse, gradually narrowed into the petiole. Scape without or rarely with up to 3 small bracts. Capitula 1·5-3 cm in diameter; involucral bracts numerous, lanceolate to ovate, acuminate. Calyx-teeth shorter than tube, acute. 2n = 16, 24.{\i  Alps, Pyrenees, mountains of N. Spain.} Au Ga Ge He Hs It Ju.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b G.} × {\b fuxeensis} Giraud., {\i Bull. Soc. Étud. Sci. Angers}{\b  17}: 53 (1889) ({\i G. nudicaulis }×{\i  repens}) occurs locally with the parents. It is intermediate between them and is reported to be fertile, with 2n = 16.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 15. G. gracilis} Rouy & J. Richter in Rouy,{\i  Ill. Pl. Eur. Rar.}{\b  10}: 81 (1898). Like {\b 14} but smaller and shortly stoloniferous; leaves 4-7 cm; capitula usually less than 1·5 cm in diameter; calyx-teeth about equalling tube, acuminate. •{\i  Pyrenees}. Ga Hs.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc {\b  156.          ACANTHACEAE}
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc Edit. V.H. Heywood.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Herbs or shrubs. Leaves simple, opposite, exstipulate. Flowers zygomorphic, in spike-like inflorescences. Bracts often conspicuous, coloured. Calyx 4-lobed, 2-lipped, or campanulate, 5-fid. Corolla sympetalous, zygomorphic, with a short tube; limb 2-lipped with the upper lip subentire and the lower 3-fid, or 1-lipped with the upper lip absent. Stamens 2 or 4. Ovary superior, 2-locular, with axile placentae; style single, unequally 2-lobed. Fruit a loculicidal capsule with indurated funicles (jaculators) which eject the seeds.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 Basal leaves pinnatifid to pinnatisect, corolla 1-lipped .................. {\b 1. Acanthus}
\par
Basal leaves entire; corolla 2-lipped .................................................. {\b 2. Justicia}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc {\b 1.                Acanthus}                L.
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc By V.H. Heywood & I.B.K. Richardson.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Robust perennial herbs or small shrubs. Stems simple, terete, erect. Leaves mostly basal, pinnatifid to pinnatisect. Flowers in dense, terminal, cylindrical spikes. Bracts large, spinose-dentate; bracteoles entire, lanceolate to linear. Calyx 4-lobed; upper and lower lobes large, the lateral small. Corolla 1-lipped (upper lip absent), 3-lobed; tube short. Stamens 4, included; anthers 1-celled, connate in pairs. Fruit a capsule.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Basal leaves spinose-dentate ......................................................... {\b 3. spinosus} 
\par
1 Basal leaves not spinose-dentate
\par
2 Leaf-lobes not narrowed at base; lower lip of calyx 
\par
  glabrous at apex ................................................................................. {\b 1. mollis}
\par
2 Leaf-lobes narrowed at base; lower lip of calyx pubescent 
\par
  at apex ......................................................................................... {\b 2. balcanicus}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. A. mollis} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 639 (1753). Stems 25-100(-200) cm. Leaves glabrous to puberulent; basal leaves with the lamina 20-60 × 5-15 cm, ovate, pinnatifid, the lobes not narrowed at the base, incise-dentate, long-petiolate; upper cauline leaves 1-3 cm, more or less ovate, spinose-dentate, more or less sessile. Bracts c. 4 cm, ovate, usually glabrous. Calyx 4-5 cm, glabrous. Corolla 3·5-5 cm, whitish with purple veins. 2n = 56. {\i Shady places and roadsides. W. & C. Mediterranean region, Portugal.} Co Ga Hs It Ju Lu Sa Si [Az Bl].
\par

\par
283}
\par