{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. R. elephas} (L.) Griseb., {\i Spicil. Fl. Rumel.} {\b 2}: 12 (1844). Stems up to 50 cm, erect or ascending, more or less branched subglabrous. Leaves 10-30 × 5-15 mm, obovate to elliptical shallowly crenate-serrate, obtuse, rounded to subcordate at base, glabrous; petioles 4-8 mm. Lower bracts like the leaves, the upper smaller, ovate, sessile; pedicels 4-8 mm. Corolla 10-15 mm, yellow; beak 6-10 mm, straight. Capsule suborbicular.{\i  Mountain grassland. S. Italy, Sicilia; Balkan peninsula from C. Greece to C. Bulgaria}. Bu Gr It Si.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc {\b 37.             Siphonostegia}             Bentham
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc By †T.G. Tutin.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Perennial, hemiparasitic herbs. Leaves opposite below, alternate above, subsessile. Flowers in a terminal, bracteate raceme. Calyx tubular, 2-lipped; upper lip 3-lobed, the lower 2-lobed. Corolla with a long tube and 2-lipped limb; upper lip truncate or emarginate, the lower shortly 3-lobed. Stamens 4, subequal; anthers not mucronate. Stigma subentire. Capsule loculicidal; seeds very small, numerous, with a loose, reticulate-rugose testa.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. S. syriaca} (Boiss. & Reuter) Boiss., {\i Fl. Or.}{\b  4}: 471 (1879). Glandular-pubescent throughout; stems c. 60 cm, erect, rigid, simple or sparingly branched, densely leafy. Lower leaves 20-50 × 4-12 mm, oblong-lanceolate, entire. Bracts narrowly elliptical, equalling or exceeding the calyx. Calyx 17-20 mm; lips divided to their base into oblong-linear, subequal teeth. Corolla c. 30 mm, purple. Capsule included in the calyx.{\i  Scrub. Mountains of E. Greece} ({\i Thessalia}). Gr. ({\i S. Anatolia}).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc {\b 38.                  Cymbaria}                L.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc (incl. {\i Cymbochasma} (Endl.) Klokov & Zoz)
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc By D.A. Webb.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Perennial herbs, somewhat woody at the base, with undivided, opposite leaves. Flowers solitary, axillary, bracteolate. Calyx equally 5-lobed. Corolla with obconical tube and 2-lipped limb; lips subparallel, the upper entire, cucullate, the lower 3-lobed. Stamens 4, didynamous, somewhat exserted from upper lip of corolla. Stigma capitate. Capsule loculicidal; placentae large, 2-lobed; ovules numerous; seeds few.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. C. borysthenica} Pallas ex Schlecht. in Nees,{\i  Horae Phys. Berol.} 109 (1820) ({\i Cymbochasma borysthenicum} (Pallas ex Schlecht.) Klokov & Zoz). Whole plant silvery-sericeous to greyish-villous. Stems 3-15 cm, simple, erect from a branched, woody stock. Leaves 5-20 × 1-3 mm, linear-lanceolate, acute, entire. Flowers few, in axils of lower leaves; pedicel 1-2 mm; bracteoles overlapping the calyx-tube. Corolla 25-35 mm, pale yellow; tube longer than lips. Seeds elliptical, flat, winged. {\i Steppes and other dry places. • S. Ukraine, just extending to S. Russia}. Rs (W, E).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc {\b 39.               Lathraea}                L.
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc By D.A. Webb.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Perennial herbs, wholly parasitic and without chlorophyll; leaves fleshy, scale-like. Flowers zygomorphic, in terminal racemes or corymbs. Calyx campanulate, unequally or subequally 4-lobed. Corolla with cylindrical tube and 2-lipped limb; upper lip entire, convex; lower entire or shortly 3-lobed. Stamens 4, didynamous, included under upper lip of corolla or slightly exserted from it; anther-lobes hairy, mucronate. Ovary 1-locular, with 2 large, 2-lobed, parietal placentae. Capsule dehiscing along midribs of carpels.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Included by some authors in Orobanchaceae, but the resemblance seems to be superficial (arising from the completely parasitic habit, which is, however, also found in Scrophulariaceae), and in many morphological features {\i Lathraea} more closely resembles such members of the Scrophulariaceae as{\i  Bartsia} or {\i Rhinanthus}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  In all European species cleistogamous flowers may occur at the base of the inflorescence or underground. They have a corolla considerably shorter than that of normal flowers.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Literature: G. Beck von Mannagetta in Engler, {\i Pflanzenreich}{\b  96}({\b IV. 261}): 317-326 (1930). E. Heinricher,{\i  Monographie der Gattung} Lathraea. Jena. 1931.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Flowers arising from a mainly subterranean rhizome;
\par
  corolla 40-50 mm ....................................................................... {\b 3. clandestina}
\par
1 Flowers borne on an erect, aerial stem; corolla 10-20 mm
\par
2 Raceme secund; calyx c. 10 mm; corolla 14-17(-20) mm ......... {\b 1. squamaria}
\par
2 Raceme cylindrical, not secund; calyx 5-7 mm; corolla c. 10 mm
   ...................................................................................................... {\b 2. rhodopea}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. L. squamaria} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 606 (1753). Plant white or cream below; upper part more or less tinged with lilac-pink. Stems 15-30 cm, stout, erect, arising from a branched, subterranean rhizome. Scale-leaves alternate, suborbicular, cordate-amplexicaul, entire, crowded and more or less squarrose below, more distant and appressed above; bracts similar but thinner. Inflorescence a rather dense, secund, spike-like raceme; flowers patent or somewhat drooping; pedicels 3-6(-10) mm. Calyx c. 10 mm, glabrous to glandular-pubescent. Corolla 14-17(-20) mm; lips subequal, only slightly divergent; apex of upper lip not cucullate; lower lip flat. Capsule c. 10 mm, subglobose; seeds 1-2 mm, subglobose, reticulate, numerous. 2n = 36.{\i  Parasitic on the roots of various trees and shrubs, most frequently on species of} Alnus, Corylus{\i  and} Fagus.{\i  Much of Europe, but absent from parts of the north and south}. Au Be Br Bu Cz Da Fe Ga Ge Hb He †Ho Hs Hu It Ju No Po Rm Rs (B, C, W, K) Si Su Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. L. rhodopea} Dingler, {\i Bot. Zeit.}{\b  35}: 74 (1877). Like {\b 1} but up to 50 cm; whole plant yellowish-brown; raceme not secund, usually longer and denser than in {\b 1}; pedicels 1-2 mm; calyx 5-7 mm; corolla c. 10 mm, with upper lip slightly cucullate; seeds few.{\i  Parasitic on the roots of various trees. • S. Bulgaria, N.E. Greece.} Bu Gr.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 3. L. clandestina} L.,{\i  Sp. Pl.} 605 (1753). Stems almost or completely subterranean, freely branched so as to form large tufts, yellowish. Scale-leaves reniform, amplexicaul, alternate or opposite; bracts similar. Inflorescence a short, corymbose raceme with 4-8 flowers, the axis often largely subterranean; flowers erect; pedicels up to 30 mm. Calyx 18-20 mm, glabrous, pale lilac. Corolla 40-50 mm, violet, the lower lip reddish-purple; apex of upper lip somewhat cucullate; lower lip much shorter than upper, with margins deflexed. Capsule ovoid; seeds up to 5 mm, grey, reticulate-rugose, few. 2n = 42.{\i  Parasitic on the roots of species of} Salix, Populus{\i  and} Alnus,{\i  or rarely of other trees. • W. Europe, from Belgium to N. Spain, and extending eastwards to C. & S. Italy.} Be Ga Hs It [Br].
\par

\par
281}
\par