{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 exserted. Seeds 2-5, blackish, coarsely rugose. {\i Dry, open habitats. S. & W. Europe, northwards to N.W. France}. Al Bl Bu Co Cr Ga Gr Hs It Ju Lu Rs (K) Sa Si Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc {\b 11.             Glaux}            L.
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc By L.F. Ferguson.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Perennial herbs. Lower leaves opposite, upper alternate. Flowers 5-merous, subsessile, axillary. Calyx petaloid. Corolla absent. Capsule globose; valves 5. Seeds few.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. G. maritima} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 207 (1753). Fleshy herb. Stems 5-30 cm, erect or procumbent, rooting at nodes. Leaves on rhizomes broadly triangular, more or less membranous; leaves on erect shoots 4-15 × 1·5-6 mm, decussate, sessile, entire, elliptic-oblong to obovate, obtuse or acute. Flowers 3-6 mm in diameter. Calyx white to purple or pink; lobes obtuse, broadly hyaline. Style 2-5 mm, persistent. Capsule 2-5 mm. Seeds 3-11, trigonous, minutely reticulate. 2n = 30.{\i  Maritime habitats and on saline soils inland. Atlantic, Baltic and Arctic coasts of Europe, and very locally in the W. Mediterranean region; inland in C. & E. Europe and Spain.} Au Be ?Bl Br Cz Da Fe Ga Ge Hb Ho Hs Hu Is Lu No Po Rm Rs (N, B, C, W, K, E) Su [ ?It].
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc {\b 12.              Anagallis}            L.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc (incl. {\i Centunculus} L.)
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc By L.F. Ferguson.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Glabrous herbs. Leaves opposite or alternate. Flowers 5-merous, solitary, axillary, pedicellate or rarely subsessile. Corolla rotate or infundibuliform. Capsule globose, circumscissile. Seeds 6-45, papillose.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Literature: F. Kollmann & N. Feinbrun, {\i Notes Roy. Bot. Gard. Edinb. }{\b 28:} 173-186 (1968). P. Taylor,{\i  Kew Bull.} [{\b 10}]: 321-350 (1955).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Stems 1-4(-10) cm; calyx greatly exceeding corolla ...................... {\b 1. minima}
\par
1 Stems 5-50(-70) cm; calyx equalling or shorter than corolla
\par
2 Stems procumbent, rooting at the nodes; corolla infundi-
\par
  buliform, pink, white or cream
\par
3 Pedicels shorter than subtending leaves; corolla white
\par
  or cream ....................................................................................... {\b 2. crassifolia}
\par
3 Pedicels exceeding subtending leaves; corolla pink,
\par
  rarely white ....................................................................................... {\b 3. tenella}
\par
2 Stems decumbent, ascending or erect; corolla rotate,
\par
  usually blue or red
\par
4 Perennial; corolla 5-12 mm; stamens (when dry) 1-2 mm ............. {\b 6. monelli}
\par
4 Usually annual; corolla (2-)4-7(-10) mm;
    stamens (when dry) 0·2-1 mm
\par
5 Marginal hairs of petals numerous, always 3-celled ....................... {\b 4. arvensis} 
\par
5 Marginal hairs of petals absent or few, usually 4-celled ............... {\b 5. foemina}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. A. minima} (L.) E. H. L. Krause in Sturm,{\i  Deutschl. Fl.} ed. 2, {\b 9:} 251 (1901) ({\i Centunculus minimus} L.). Erect annual. Stems 1-4(-10) cm. Leaves 3-5 × 2-4 mm, alternate, ovate, entire, subsessile. Flowers subsessile in axils of upper leaves. Calyx 1·5-2·5 mm, divided to 3/4; lobes lanceolate. Corolla much shorter than calyx, white or pink. Capsule 1·5 mm. Seeds 5-13. 2n = 22.{\i  Damp, open habitats, especially on sandy soils. Most of Europe except the north-east and extreme north}. All except Bl Cr Fa Is Rs (N, K) Sb Si Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. A. crassifolia} Thore,{\i  Essai Chlor. Land.} 62 (1803). Procumbent perennial, rooting at the nodes. Stems 5-20 cm. Leaves 8-10 × 5-9 mm, alternate or subopposite, orbicular to shortly spathulate, entire, subsessile. Flowers in axils of middle leaves; pedicels 2-5 mm, always shorter than subtending leaf. Calyx 3-4 mm, divided to base, lobes linear-lanceolate, acute. Corolla 3-6 mm, white or cream, infundibuliform; tube short; lobes ovate. Capsule 1·5-2·5 mm; style 2-4 mm, filiform, persistent. Seeds 8-12. {\i Wet places. S.W. Europe.} Ga Hs Lu Sa.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 3. A. tenella} (L.) L., {\i Syst. Veg.} ed. 13, 165 (1774). Procumbent perennial, rooting freely at the nodes. Stems (3-)5-15 cm. Leaves 4-9 × 3-6 mm, opposite or rarely alternate, suborbicular to broadly elliptical, entire; petiole 0-2 mm. Flowers in axils of middle leaves; pedicels (5-)15-35 mm, capillary, always much exceeding subtending leaf. Calyx 3-4 mm, divided to base; lobes lanceolate, acuminate. Corolla 6-10 mm, pink, rarely white, infundibuliform; tube short; lobes lanceolate. Capsule 2·5-4 mm. Seeds 6-12. 2n = 22.{\i  Damp turf, bogs, ditches and lake-shores. W. Europe, northwards to Færöer; a few isolated stations in W.C. Europe, N. Italy, Greece and Kriti}. Au Az Be Bl Br Cr Fa Ga Ge Gr Hb He Ho Hs It Lu Sa.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 4. A. arvensis} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 148 (1753) ({\i A. phoenicea} Scop.,{\i  A. platyphylla} Baudo,{\i  A. parviflora} Hoffmanns. & Link). Annual or biennial, rarely short-lived perennial. Stems 6-50(-90) cm, quadrangular, diffuse, ascending to erect. Leaves 8-18(-25) × 4-10(-18) mm, opposite or rarely whorled, sessile, both surfaces dotted with glands; margins scarious; upper leaves narrower than lower, ovate to lanceolate. Flowers in axils of upper leaves; pedicels 3-35 mm, at anthesis usually exceeding subtending leaves, recurved in fruit. Calyx 3·5-5 mm, divided nearly to base; lobes narrowly lanceolate, apiculate, not concealing corolla in bud. Corolla (2-)4-7(-10) mm, blue, red or various paler colours; lobes ovate to elliptical, entire or dentate or crenate; marginal hairs usually numerous, always 3-celled, with a globose terminal cell. Stamens 0·5-1·5 mm, when dry 0·2-1 mm. Capsule 4-6 mm. Seeds 12-45. 2n = 40. {\i Cultivated ground, waste places and maritime sands. Almost throughout Europe.} All except Fa Is Sb.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    This is a species in which many variants have been described, for example{\i  A. parviflora }Hoffmanns. & Link, which is sporadic and seems to be little more than a small-flowered variety. Blue flowered plants predominate in the Mediterranean region; they become rarer northwards, being replaced by red-flowered plants. Plants with flowers of other colours occur throughout the range of the species.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 5. A. foemina} Miller,{\i  Gard. Dict.} ed. 8, no. 2 (1768) ({\i A. caerulea} Schreber, non L., {\i A. arvensis} subsp.{\i  caerulea} Hartman{\i  A. arvensis} subsp.{\i  foemina} (Miller) Schinz & Thell.). Like{\b  4} but upper leaves usually lanceolate; pedicels at anthesis usually shorter than subtending leaves; calyx concealing corolla in bud; corolla blue; lobes cuneate, crenate-dentate to denticulate marginal hairs absent or few, 4- or rarely 3-celled, terminal cell elongate. 2n = 40.{\i  Cultivated ground, waste places and maritime sands. S.,W. & C. Europe, but only casual or locally naturalized in most of the north.} All except Fa Hb Is Rs (N, B, C, E) ?Sa Sb ?Si.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 6. A. monelli} L.,{\i  Sp. Pl.} 148 (1753) ({\i A. collina }Schousboe {\i A. linifolia} L.). Perennial, erect or ascending. Stems 10-50(-70) cm, terete, freely branched. Leaves (8-)10-15(-20) × 2-6 mm, linear-lanceolate to lanceolate, or 6-10 × 3-6 mm, elliptical, opposite or verticillate, sessile; often with small axillary, sterile shoots. Flowers in axils of upper leaves; pedicels 20-50 mm, always exceeding subtending leaves. Calyx 4-6 mm; lobes narrowly lanceolate, subulate; margins scarious. Corolla 5-12 mm, blue or red, rarely of various paler colours; lobes
\par

\par
28}
\par