{\rtf1\ansi \deff4\deflang1033{\fonttbl{\f4\froman\fcharset0\fprq2 Times New Roman;}}{\colortbl;\red0\green0\blue0;\red0\green0\blue255;\red0\green255\blue255;\red0\green255\blue0;\red255\green0\blue255;\red255\green0\blue0;\red255\green255\blue0;\red255\green255\blue255;\red0\green0\blue128;\red0\green128\blue128;\red0\green128\blue0;\red128\green0\blue128;\red128\green0\blue0;\red128\green128\blue0;\red128\green128\blue128;\red192\green192\blue192;}{\stylesheet{\widctlpar \f4\fs20\lang2057 \snext0 Normal;}{\*\cs10 \additive Default Paragraph Font;}}{\info{\author dddd}{\operator dddd}{\creatim\yr1998\mo10\dy28\hr14\min55}{\revtim\yr1998\mo11\dy11\hr17\min46}{\version3}{\edmins2}{\nofpages4}{\nofwords959}{\nofchars5470}{\*\company  }{\vern57431}}\widowctrl\ftnbj\aenddoc\hyphcaps0 \fet0\sectd \linex0 {\*\pnseclvl1\pnucrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl2\pnucltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl3\pndec\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl4\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl5\pndec\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl6\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl7\pnlcrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl8\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl9\pnlcrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}
\pard\plain \ \f4\fs20\lang2057 {\fs28  (}{\b\fs28 b}{\fs28 ) Subsp. }{\b\fs28 songaricus}{\fs28  (Sterneck) So\'f3,}{\i\fs28  Acta Bot. Acad. Sci. Hung. }{\b\fs28 13}{\fs28 : 303 (1967) (}{\i\fs28 R. songaricus}{\fs28  (Sterneck) B. Fedtsch.): Leaves suberect. Corolla c. 17 mm.}{\i\fs28  S.E. Russia, E. Ukraine.}{\fs28 
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 22. R. halophilus}{\fs28  U. Schneider, }{\i\fs28 Wiss. Zeitschr. Univ. Greifswald}{\b\fs28  11}{\fs28 : 155 (1962). Stem up to 25 cm, simple or slightly branched, glabrous. Leaves ovate-oblong, obtuse, rather fleshy. Bracts exceeding calyx, broadly triangular, glabrous; teeth gradually diminishing in length towards apex, the basal c. 5 mm, shortly aristate, the upper short, triangular, appressed. Calyx glabrous. Corolla 20-24 mm; tube 5-7 mm wide.}{\i\fs28  Alkaline soils. \bullet  N. Germany}{\fs28  (}{\i\fs28 Mecklenburg}{\fs28 ). Ge.
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 23. R. angustifolius}{\fs28  C.C. Gmelin, }{\i\fs28 Fl. Bad.}{\b\fs28  2}{\fs28 : 669 (1806) (}{\i\fs28 R. major}{\fs28  auct., non L.,}{\i\fs28  Alectorolophus major}{\fs28  Reichenb.). Stem up to 60 cm, simple or branched, glabrous to moderately hairy, often with black streaks. Leaves linear- to ovate-lanceolate, crenate-serrate. Bracts exceeding calyx, glabrous; teeth gradually diminishing in length towards apex, the basal c. 5 mm, very shortly aristate, the upper short, triangular, appressed. Calyx glabrous. Corolla 16-20 mm; tube 2-3 mm wide, slightly curved. 2n = 22.}{\i\fs28  Most of Europe, but absent from the Mediterranean region, the south-west and most of the islands.}{\fs28  Au Be Br Bu Cz Da Fe Ga Ge He Ho Hu ?It Ju No Po Rm Rs (N, B, C, W, K, E) Su Tu.
\par 
\par   Very variable; by many authors the standard pattern of ecotypic variation has been combined with variation in other characters in the creation of infraspecific categories, so that the synonymy is somewhat confused. It seems best to recognize 3 subspecies, and, within two of them, a number of ecotypic variants.
\par 
\par }
\pard \li200\ {\fs28 1 Leaves 8-15 mm wide ............................................ (}{\b\fs28 c}{\fs28 ) subsp. }{\b\fs28 grandiflorus}{\fs28 
\par 1 Leaves 2-5(-8) mm wide
\par 2 Bracts narrowly triangular; seeds c. 4 mm ........... (}{\b\fs28 a}{\fs28 ) subsp. }{\b\fs28 angustifolius}{\fs28 
\par 2 Bracts ovate; seeds 2-2\'b75 mm ..................................... (}{\b\fs28 b}{\fs28 ) subsp. }{\b\fs28 cretaceus}{\fs28 
\par 
\par }
\pard \ {\fs28   (}{\b\fs28 a}{\fs28 ) Subsp. }{\b\fs28 angustifolius}{\fs28  (}{\i\fs28 R. montanus}{\fs28  Sauter, }{\i\fs28 Alectorolophus major}{\fs28  subsp. }{\i\fs28 montanus}{\fs28  (Sauter) Wettst.): Leaves 2-5(-8) mm wide, linear-lanceolate. Internodes and branches numerous. Bracts narrowly triangular. Capsule 6-7 mm. Seeds c. 4 mm. }{\i\fs28 Throughout much of the range of the species, but absent from parts of the north and the south-east}{\fs28 .
\par 
\par }{\i\fs28 Ecotypic variants}{\fs28 :
\par    Autumnal: type of the subspecies.
\par    Montane:}{\b\fs28  R. major}{\fs28  subsp.}{\b\fs28  lykae}{\fs28  So\'f3,}{\i\fs28  Feddes Repert.}{\b\fs28  26}{\fs28 : 201 (1929).
\par 
\par   (}{\b\fs28 b}{\fs28 ) Subsp. }{\b\fs28 cretaceus}{\fs28  (Vassilcz.) So\'f3, Acta Bot. Acad. Sci. Hung. 14: 151 (1968) (R. cretaceus Vassilcz.): Like subsp. (a) but bracts ovate; capsule 7-8 mm; seeds 2-2\'b75 mm. E. Ukraine and S.E. Russia (Donets basin).
\par   (}{\b\fs28 c}{\fs28 ) Subsp. }{\b\fs28 grandiflorus}{\fs28  (Wallr.) D. A. Webb, Bot. Jour. Linn. Soc. 65: 269 (1972) (Alectorolophus grandiflorus Wallr. incl. R. aestivalis (Zinger) Schischkin & Serg., R. vernalis (Zinger) Schischkin & Serg.): Leaves 8-15 mm wide, lanceolate to ovate-lanceolate. Internodes and branches numerous or few. Bracts ovate. Capsule 10-12 mm. Seeds 3-5(-6) mm. Throughout the range of the species.
\par 
\par }{\i\fs28 Ecotypic variants}{\fs28 :
\par Autumnal:}{\b\fs28  R. major }{\fs28 var.}{\b\fs28  polycladus}{\fs28  Chab.,}{\i\fs28  Mem. Herb. Boiss.}{\b\fs28  8}{\fs28 : 12 (1900).
\par Aestival: }{\b\fs28 Alectorolophus aestivalis}{\fs28  Zinger,}{\i\fs28  Trudy Tiflissk. Bot. Sada}{\b\fs28  12}{\fs28 : 184 (1913).
\par Vernal:}{\b\fs28  Alectorolophus vernalis}{\fs28  Zinger, }{\i\fs28 loc. cit.}{\fs28  (1913).
\par Montane:}{\b\fs28  Alectorolophus bosniacus}{\fs28  Behrendsen,}{\i\fs28  Verh. Bot. Ver. Brandenb.}{\b\fs28  45}{\fs28 : 210 (1904).
\par 
\par  A variant with unwinged seeds, distinguished as}{\i\fs28  R. major }{\fs28 var.}{\i\fs28  apterus}{\fs28  Fries (}{\i\fs28 R. apterus}{\fs28  (Fries) Ostenf.), occurs sporadically through the northern part of the range of this subspecies.
\par 
\par }{\b\fs28    R. bosnensis}{\fs28  (Behrendsen & Sterneck) So\'f3,}{\i\fs28  Omagiu Savulescu}{\fs28  739 (1959), is like }{\b\fs28 23}{\fs28 (}{\b\fs28 c}{\fs28 ) but the bracts have teeth subequal in length and the throat of the corolla is incompletely closed. It is recorded from the E. Carpathians and N. Jugoslavia.
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 24. R. freynii}{\fs28  (A. Kerner ex Sterneck) Fiori,}{\i\fs28  Nuovo Gior. Bot. Ital. }{\fs28 nov. ser., }{\b\fs28 19}{\fs28 : 576 (1912) (}{\i\fs28 Alectorolophus freynii}{\fs28  A. Kerner ex Sterneck). Stem up to 60 cm, simple or branched, hairy, without black streaks. Leaves ovate to oblong-lanceolate, crenate-serrate. Bracts rhombic-triangular, puberulent; basal teeth scarcely longer than the others. Calyx densely puberulent-velutinous with eglandular, unicellular hairs. Corolla c. 20 mm; tube slightly curved. }{\i\fs28 \bullet  N. Italy, N.W. Jugoslavia.}{\fs28  It Ju.
\par 
\par }{\i\fs28 Ecotypic variants}{\fs28 :
\par Autumnal:}{\b\fs28  Alectorolophus sterneckii}{\fs28  Wettst.,}{\i\fs28  \'d6sterr. Bot. Zeitschr.}{\b\fs28  47}{\fs28 : 357 (1897)
\par Aestival: }{\b\fs28 R. freynii }{\fs28 subsp.}{\b\fs28  croaticus }{\fs28 So\'f3, }{\i\fs28 Feddes Repert.}{\b\fs28  26}{\fs28 : 196(1929).
\par Vernal: type of the species.
\par Montane: }{\b\fs28 R. bellunensis}{\fs28  Chab.,}{\i\fs28  Allgem. Bot. Zeitschr.}{\b\fs28  14}{\fs28 : 37 (1908).
\par 
\par }{\b\fs28   R. helenae}{\fs28  Chab. ex Pamp.,}{\i\fs28  Nuovo Gior. Bot. Ital.}{\fs28  nov. ser., }{\b\fs28 14}{\fs28 : 606 (1907), from the S. Alps (around Trento), is like }{\b\fs28 24}{\fs28 , but with strongly and abruptly curved corolla-tube and throat of corolla more or less open. Its systematic position is doubtful.
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 25. R. alectorolophus}{\fs28  (Scop.) Pollich,}{\i\fs28  Hist. Pl. Palat.}{\b\fs28  2}{\fs28 : 177 (1777) (}{\i\fs28 R. major}{\fs28   L., nomen ambiguum,}{\i\fs28  Alectorolophus hirsutus}{\fs28  (Lam.) All.; incl.}{\i\fs28  R. patulus}{\fs28  (Sterneck) Schinz & Thell.). Stem up to 80 cm, simple or branched, without black streaks, hairy. Leaves lanceolate to ovate, crenate-serrate. Bracts rhombic-triangular, puberulent; basal teeth scarcely longer than the others. Calyx villous with long, white hairs, but partly glabrescent in fruit. Corolla c. 20 mm; tube slightly curved. 2n = 22. \bullet }{\i\fs28  From N. France, the Netherlands and W.C. Russia southwards to N. Italy and N. Jugoslavia; occasionally casual elsewhere}{\fs28 . Au Be Cz Ga He Ho It Ju Po Rs ( ?B, C, W).
\par 
\par   Variants with unwinged seeds are found throughout the range of the species, and show the same range of ecotypic variation as those with winged seeds.
\par 
\par }{\i\fs28 Ecotypic variants}{\fs28 :
\par Autumnal:}{\b\fs28  Alectorolophus patulus}{\fs28  Sterneck,}{\i\fs28  \'d6sterr. Bot. Zeitschr.}{\b\fs28  47}{\fs28 : 433 (1897).
\par Aestival:}{\b\fs28  R. buccalis}{\fs28  Wallr.,}{\i\fs28  Flora }{\fs28 (}{\i\fs28 Regensb}{\fs28 .)}{\b\fs28  25}{\fs28 : 504 (1842).
\par Vernal: type of the species.
\par Montane:}{\b\fs28  R. alectorolophus}{\fs28  var.}{\b\fs28  modestus}{\fs28  Chab.,}{\i\fs28  Bull. Herb. Boiss.}{\b\fs28  7}{\fs28 : 504 (1899).
\par 
\par  }{\b\fs28  R. facchinii}{\fs28  Chab.,}{\i\fs28  op. cit.}{\fs28  506 (1899), from the Alps, is like }{\b\fs28 25}{\fs28 , but with corolla-tube strongly and abruptly curved and throat of corolla open. It thus bears the same relation to }{\b\fs28 25}{\fs28  as does}{\i\fs28  R. helenae}{\fs28  to}{\b\fs28  24}{\fs28 .
\par 
\par }
\pard \qc\ {\b\fs28 36.               Rhynchocorys}{\fs28                Griseb. 
\par }{\fs24 By I.B.K. Richardson.
\par 
\par }
\pard \ {\fs28 Perennial, hemiparasitic herbs with opposite leaves. Flowers in lax, bracteate racemes; bracts leaf-like; bracteoles absent. Calyx laterally compressed; upper lip slightly emarginate; lower lip 2-lobed, exceeding the upper. Corolla-tube short, campanulate; upper lip galeate, rostrate; lower lip patent, 3-lobed. Stamens 4, didynamous; anthers oblique or transverse, glabrous, not mucronate. Capsule loculicidal; seeds striate.
\par 
\par 280}
\par }