{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Records from Macedonia and Thrace probably refer to {\b 2}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. A. balcanicus} Heywood & I. B. K. Richardson,{\i  Bot. Jour. Linn. Soc.}{\b  65}: 357 (1972) ({\i A. longifolius} Host, non Poiret). Like {\b 1} but basal leaves usually pinnatisect; leaf-lobes narrowed at base; upper cauline leaves more or less petiolate; lower lip of calyx pubescent at apex. {\i Woodland, scrub and stony hillsides}. •{\i  Balkan peninsula, extending to S.W. Romania and N.W. Jugoslavia}. Al Bu Gr Ju Rm ?Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 3. A. spinosus} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 639 (1753) (incl.{\i  A. spinosissimus} Pers.,{\i  A. caroli-alexandri} Hausskn.). Like {\b 1} but whole plant sometimes pubescent; stems 20-80 cm; basal leaves oblong, pinnatifid or pinnatisect, spinose-dentate. {\i Woodland and meadows. S.E. Italy; Balkan peninsula and Aegean region}. Al Bu Cr Gr It Ju.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc {\b 2.            Justicia}             L.
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc By †T.G. Tutin.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Shrubs with opposite, entire leaves. Inflorescences axillary pedunculate, dense and spike-like. Calyx campanulate, 5-fid. Corolla with a short tube and large, 2-lipped limb; upper lip subentire, lower 3-fid. Stamens 2, appressed to the upper lip; filaments adnate to the corolla-tube; anthers with the loculi attached at different levels, mucronate at base.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. J. adhatoda} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 15 (1753). Stems 1-3 m, puberulent when young, swollen at the nodes. Leaves elliptical, obtuse to acuminate, puberulent. Inflorescence 3-8 cm. Bracts 10-15 mm ovate to obovate. Corolla c. 30 mm, white; lower lip with transverse, pink bands. Capsule c. 25 mm.{\i  Naturalized in Sicilia} ({\i Messina)}. [Si.] ({\i Tropical Asia.})
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc {\b 157.           PEDALIACEAE}
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc Edit. †T.G. Tutin.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Herbs with mucilage-glands. Flowers solitary or in small axillary cymes. Calyx 5-fid. Corolla 5-lobed, weakly 2-lipped. Stamens 4, the 5th represented by a staminode. Ovary superior, 4-locular, with axile placentae. Fruit a loculicidal, 2-valved capsule.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc {\b 1.          Sesamum}              L.
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc By †T.G. Tutin.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Flowers solitary. Corolla campanulate, the lower lip longer than the upper. Stamens didynamous; anthers parallel, dorsifixed.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. S. indicum} L.,{\i  Sp. Pl}. 634 (1753). Erect, pubescent annual 30-60 cm, simple or with erecto-patent branches. Leaves c. 10 cm, petiolate, the lower usually lobed or 3-sect, opposite, the upper oblong to linear-lanceolate, entire, alternate. Flowers axillary; corolla c. 3 cm, whitish, often with purplish or yellow markings. Capsule c. 25 × 5 mm, oblong, erect, scabrid-velutinous. {\i Cultivated in S.E. Europe for the oil obtained from the seeds, and locally naturalized.} [Bu Gr Hs Ju Rs (W, K, E) ?Tu.] ({\i Probably native of S.E. Asia.})
\par

\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc {\b 158.        MARTYNIACEAE}
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc Edit. †T.G. Tutin.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Herbs. Inflorescence a terminal raceme. Calyx 5-fid. Corolla 5-lobed, weakly 2-lipped. Stamens 4, the 5th represented by a staminode. Ovary superior, 1-locular, with parietal placentae. Fruit a 2-valved capsule, terminating in a long, curved, horn-like process, splitting longitudinally when mature.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc {\b 1.          Proboscidea}     Schmidel
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc By †T.G. Tutin.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Calyx split to the base ventrally. Corolla-tube widening upwards; limb nearly rotate. Stamens didynamous; anther-loculi divaricate.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. P. louisianica} (Miller) Thell., {\i Mém. Soc. Nat. Sci. Cherbourg}{\b  38}: 480 (1912). Decumbent, viscid-pubescent annual 50-80 cm. Leaves 10-30 cm, suborbicular, obliquely cordate, entire or sinuate; petiole up to 20 cm. Corolla c. 5 cm, white or yellowish, spotted with purple. Capsule 6-10 cm, with horns 8-20 cm.{\i  Naturalized as a weed in Portugal and S.E. Russia.} [Lu Rs (E).] (S. North America.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc {\b 159.              GESNERIACEAE}
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc Edit. D.A. Webb.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Perennial, acaulescent herbs, with a basal rosette of simple, exstipulate leaves. Flowers solitary or in small umbels on axillary scapes, hermaphrodite, zygomorphic to almost actinomorphic. Corolla rotate to tubular, sometimes somewhat 2-lipped. Stamens equal in number to the corolla-lobes, or one of them reduced to a staminode or absent. Ovary superior, 1-locular, with 2 parietal placentae. Fruit a septicidal capsule.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  A large family, mainly tropical and subtropical. The European representatives are very isolated geographically, their nearest relatives being in S. & E. Asia; they are usually regarded as Tertiary relicts. The description for the family given above applies only to the European genera; in extra-European genera (among other differences) the stem is often developed, the leaves may be opposite, the ovary more or less inferior, and the fruit a berry.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Anthers connate in pairs, much shorter than the filaments; 
\par
  corolla 2-lipped, with tube longer than lobes...............................  {\b 1. Haberlea} 
\par
1 Anthers free, at least as long as the filaments;
\par
  corolla almost actinomorphic, with tube equalling or 
\par
  shorter than lobes
\par
2 Corolla-tube much shorter than lobes ......................................... {\b 2. Ramonda}
\par
2 Corolla-tube almost as long as lobes ............................................. {\b 3. Jankaea}
\par

\par
284}
\par