{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28\qc {\b 155.         GLOBULARIACEAE}
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc Edit. V.H. Heywood.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Perennial herbs or small shrubs. Leaves simple, alternate or in rosettes. Flowers 5-merous, zygomorphic, in dense capitula surrounded by an involucre. Corolla usually blue. Stamens 4, rarely 2. Ovary 1-locular; ovule 1, pendent. Fruit dry, enclosed in the persistent calyx.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Literature: O. Schwarz, {\i Bot. Jahrb.}{\b  69}: 318-373 (1938).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc {\b 1.            Globularia}                 L.
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc By †T.G. Tutin.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Usually evergreen. Flowers in capitula. Corolla 2-lipped; upper lip usually 2-lobed, often small; lower lip 3-lobed, longer than the upper. Stamens and style exserted; stigma 2-lobed.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   All species grow in dry places such as mountain rocks, grassland or stony slopes.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Shrub, with erect or procumbent woody branches
\par
2 Erect shrub; twigs leafy up to the inflorescence, never
\par
  rooting at the nodes .......................................................................... {\b 8. alypum}
\par
2 Procumbent shrub; twigs often rooting at the nodes;
\par
  inflorescences usually on leafless peduncles arising 
\par
  from a leaf rosette
\par
3 Leaves obovate to suborbicular, emarginate to rounded,
\par
  sometimes mucronate at apex
\par
4 Involucral bracts abruptly cuspidate ....................................... {\b 12. neapolitana}
\par
4 Involucral bracts gradually acuminate
\par
5 Subterranean stolons absent; calyx 2-lipped ............................... {\b 9. cordifolia}
\par
5 Subterranean stolons present; calyx almost actinomorphic ............ {\b 13. stygia}
\par
3 Leaves lanceolate to oblanceolate, acute, very rarely 
\par
  some slightly emarginate
\par
6 Leaves 10-20(-25) × c. 1 mm, folded ............................................ {\b 11. repens}
\par
6 Leaves 20-90 × 2-5 mm, flat ................................................ {\b 10. meridionalis}
\par
1 Herbs, often with a woody stock
\par
7 Leaves deciduous, not forming a well-marked rosette;
\par
  cauline leaves mostly petiolate ................................................. {\b 1. incanescens}
\par
7 Leaves evergreen, forming a well-marked rosette;
\par
  cauline leaves absent or all sessile
\par
8 Flowering stem without or rarely with up to 3 small bracts; 
\par
  leaves erect or erecto-patent
\par
9 Stolons absent; leaves 6-12 cm ................................................ {\b 14. nudicaulis}
\par
9 Stolons 1-5 cm; leaves 4-7 cm ...................................................... {\b 15. gracilis}
\par
8 Flowering stem with numerous small leaves; basal leaves
\par
  ± horizontal
\par
10 Rosette-leaves with lateral veins distinctly visible on 
\par
   upper surface ................................................................................. {\b 3. punctata}
\par
10 Rosette-leaves with lateral veins not or scarcely 
\par
   visible on upper surface
\par
11 Rosette-leaves with 2 or more long, patent, spinescent
\par
   teeth on each side ............................................................................ {\b 7. spinosa}
\par
11 Rosette-leaves entire, 3-dentate at apex or, rarely, with small, 
\par
   somewhat spinescent, forward-pointing teeth on the margin
\par
12 Stolons present; calyx-teeth 3-4 times as long as the tube ... {\b 2. trichosantha}
\par
12 Stolons absent; calyx-teeth not or little longer than 
\par
   the tube ........................................................................ ({\b 4-6}).{\b  vulgaris} group
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. G. incanescens} Viv.,{\i  Fl. Ital. Fragm.} 2 (1808). Stems 3-10 cm, with slender rhizomes. Leaves orbicular to lanceolate, obtuse or emarginate, often mucronulate, more or less erect, the lower long-petiolate, most of the cauline more shortly but distinctly petiolate, the uppermost subsessile, all grey-green owing to calcareous secretions, deciduous. Capitula c. 1·5 cm in diameter; involucral bracts usually 5, linear-lanceolate, ciliate. Calyx-teeth c. 3 times as long as tube, aristate. Upper lip of corolla usually unlobed. 2n = 16. • {\i N. Appennini and Alpi Apuane.} It.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. G. trichosantha} Fischer & C. A. Meyer,{\i  Ind. Sem. Hort. Petrop}.{\b  5}: 36 (1839). Stolons up to 30 cm; stems c. 20 cm. Lower leaves horizontal, forming a rosette, obovate, obtuse to emarginate, sometimes mucronate, petiolate; lateral veins not or scarcely visible above; cauline leaves elliptical, sessile. Capitula up to 2·5 cm in diameter; involucral bracts numerous, oblong-lanceolate, aristate. Calyx-teeth 3-4 times as long as tube.{\i  E. part of Balkan peninsula;} Krym. Bu Rs (K) Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 3. G. punctata} Lapeyr., {\i Hist. Abr. Pyr.} 57 (1813) ({\i G. aphyllanthes} auct., non Crantz,{\i  G. willkommii} Nyman). Stolons absent; stems up to 30 cm. Lower leaves forming a rosette, obovate to spathulate, rounded or weakly emarginate, petiolate; lateral veins clearly visible above; cauline leaves lanceolate to oblong, sessile. Capitula c. 1·5 cm in diameter; involucral bracts numerous, lanceolate, acuminate. Calyx-teeth about as long as tube, linear-lanceolate. 2n = 16. {\i From N. France and Czechoslovakia southwards to N. Spain, S. Italy and N.E. Greece; S.C. & E. Russia.} Au Be Bu Cz Ga Ge Gr He Hs Hu It Ju Rm Rs (C, E) Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    ({\b 4-6}).{\b  G. vulgaris group.} Stolons absent. Leaves acute or 3-dentate with the middle tooth at least as long as the lateral, rarely with several, forwardly directed, somewhat spinescent teeth on the sides; lateral veins not or scarcely visible above; cauline leaves lanceolate, sessile. Involucral bracts numerous. Calyx-teeth not or little longer than tube.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Leaves lanceolate to elliptical, 3-dentate ....................................... {\b 4. vulgaris}
\par
1 Leaves obovate, acute or 3-dentate, with the margin of 
\par
  at least some leaves toothed or undulate-crenulate
\par
2 Petiole usually longer than lamina; margin of leaf 
\par
  undulate crenulate ......................................................................... {\b 5. valentina}
\par
2 Petiole usually shorter than lamina; margin of leaf flat, 
\par
  usually toothed ...................................................................... {\b 6. cambessedesii}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 4. G. vulgaris} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 96 (1753). Leaves lanceolate to elliptical, 3-dentate; margin flat; petiole usually longer than lamina. Flowering stems up to 20 cm. Capitula c. 2·5 cm in diameter. Involucral bracts lanceolate, acuminate. Calyx-teeth about as long as tube. 2n = 32. • {\i Mountains of N.C. & E. Spain and S France; Sweden (Öland & Gotland)}. Ga Hs ?Rs (B) Su.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 5. G. valentina} Willk., {\i Rech. Glob.} 21 (1850). Like{\b  4} but leaves obovate, acute or shortly acuminate; margin undulate-crenulate and sometimes serrate; flowering stems usually 20-30 cm; involucral bracts ovate, long-cuspidate; calyx-teeth rather longer than tube. • {\i N.E. Spain.} Hs.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 6. G. cambessedesii} Willk., {\i Suppl. Prodr. Fl. Hisp.} 140 (1893). Like {\b 4} but leaves obovate, acute or shortly acuminate, usually toothed; petiole usually shorter than lamina; flowering stems usually 20-30 cm; capitula c. 3·5 cm in diameter; calyx-teeth rather longer than tube. 2n = 64. •{\i  Near the N. coast of Mallorca}. Bl.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 7. G. spinosa} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 96 (1753). Often with a very robust, woody stock. Stems up to 20 cm. Leaves ovate to spathulate, spinescent at apex and with 2 or more long, patent, spinescent
\par

\par
282}
\par