{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}
\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Lobes of upper lip of calyx linear, sometimes more than 3
\par  ................................................................................ ({\b c}) subsp. {\b reichenbachiana}
\par 1 Lobes of upper lip of calyx wider, never more than 3
\par 2 Corolla 30-46 mm ........................................................... ({\b a}) subsp. {\b longifolia}
\par 2 Corolla 22-35 mm .......................................................... ({\b b}) subsp.{\b  caussensis}
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28   (a) Subsp. {\b longifolia} : Lobes of the upper lip of the calyx elliptic-ligulate; lower lip divided for up to 1/2 its length. Corolla 30-46 mm. {\i C. Pyrenees}.
\par
\pard\f0\fs28   (b) Subsp.{\b  caussensis} Casper,{\i  Feddes Repert.}{\b  66}: 70 (1962): Lobes of the upper lip of the calyx ovate-lanceolate to linear, obtuse. Corolla 22-35 mm.{\i  Mountains of S.C. France}.
\par
\pard\f0\fs28   (c) Subsp.{\b  reichenbachiana} (Schindler) Casper,{\i  op. cit.} 71 (1962): Lobes of the upper lip of the calyx linear, acute or obtuse, often irregular, sometimes more than 3; lower lip divided nearly to the base. 2n = 32.{\i  Mountains of C. & N. W. Italy, just extending to S.E. France}.
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 11. P. grandiflora} Lam.,{\i  Encycl. Méth. Bot. }{\b 3}: 22 (1789). Overwintering as a bud. Leaves 5-8, 30-45(-65) mm, oblong to obovate-oblong. Pedicels 1-5, 60-150(-230) mm, glandular. Corolla 25-35(-40) mm. Lower lip of calyx divided for up to 1/3 its length; lobes obovate. Corolla-lips unequal, violet to pinkish or pale lilac, white at the throat; lobes of the upper lip suborbicular or obovate, those of the lower lip suborbicular, about as long as wide, somewhat undulate, overlapping. Spur 10-12(-14) mm, straight, sometimes slightly bifid. Capsule subglobose. 2n = 32. {\i Bogs and wet rocks. S.W. Ireland; mountains of S.W. Europe, from the Cordillera Cantabrica to the Swiss Jura.} Ga Hb He Hs [Br].
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b grandiflora} : Upper lip of calyx divided nearly to the base; lobes ligulate. Corolla violet to pinkish; spur rather stout. Throughout the range of the species.
\par
\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b b}) Subsp.{\b  rosea} (Mutel) Casper,{\i  Feddes Repert.}{\b  66}: 85 (1962): Like ({\b a}) but smaller in all its parts; lobes of the upper lip of the calyx short, elliptical, about as long as wide; corolla pinkish to pale lilac; spur subulate. {\i S.E. France} ({\i Savoie}).
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 12. P. vulgaris} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 17 (1753) (incl.{\i  P. norica} G. Beck). Overwintering as a bud. Leaves 5-11, 20-45(-90) × 14-20 (-26) mm, oblong to obovate-oblong; margin somewhat involute. Pedicels 1-6, 75-180(-270) mm, glandular. Corolla 15-22 (-30) mm. Calyx-lobes triangular to ovate or oblong, acuminate or obtuse, broadly based, the lower lip divided for up to 1/2 its length. Corolla-lips unequal, violet, usually white at the throat; lobes of the upper lip oblong, those of the lower lip oblong, much longer than wide, divergent, not overlapping. Spur 3-6(-10) mm, cylindric-subulate, straight. Capsule ovoid. 2n = 64.{\i  Bogs, wet heaths and wet rocks. N., W. & C. Europe, extending eastwards to W. Ukraine.} Au Be Br Cz Da Fa Fe Ga Ge Hb He Ho Hs Hu Is It Ju Lu No Po Rm Rs (N, B, C, W) Su.
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28   Hybridization between {\b 11} and {\b 12} almost certainly occurs and a hybrid between {\b 12} and {\b 3} has been reported.
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28\qc {\b 2.             Utricularia}              L.
\par
\pard\f0\fs24\qc By P. Taylor.
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28 Annual or perennial rootless herbs with horizontal stems and erect racemose inflorescences; terrestrial in damp places, with usually inconspicuous simple leaves, or aquatic with numerous conspicuous leaves which are divided into linear to filiform segments; leaves bearing small bladders which trap minute organisms. Calyx 2-lipped, divided almost to the base, usually accrescent; corolla 2-lipped, yellow; lower lip more or less spurred, with a gibbous palate; upper lip usually smaller. Capsule usually globose, circumscissile, indehiscent or dehiscing by pores or slits. Seeds usually many.
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28   The genus is predominantly tropical and most of the species native in Europe ({\b 3-6}) are atypical in the development of winter buds (turions). The vegetative parts are usually very variable and the identification of non-flowering material is often impossible; many of the published records are, therefore, open to doubt.
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Terrestrial; lower lip of corolla 3-lobed; bracts peltate; 
\par  leaves entire .................................................................................... {\b 1. subulata}
\par 1 ± Aquatic; lower lip of corolla entire; bracts not peltate; 
\par  leaves divided into linear to capillary segments
\par 2 Seeds with an irregular wing; upper lip of corolla 3-4 mm wide ....... {\b 2. gibba} 
\par 2 Seeds not winged; upper lip of corolla at least 6 mm wide
\par 3 Spur saccate or broadly conical, obtuse, not longer than wide;  
\par  leaf-segments without bristles ............................................................ {\b 3. minor}
\par 3 Spur with at least the apical part narrowly cylindrical or 
\par  subulate, usually ± acute, longer than wide; leaf-segments 
\par  with bristles
\par 4 Stems dimorphic, with either green ± palmately divided leaves 
\par  without bladders or much reduced colourless leaves with 
\par  bladders ....................................................................................... {\b 4. intermedia}
\par 4 Stems all with green, ± palmately divided leaves with
\par  bladders
\par 5 Lower lip of corolla with deflexed margin; pedicels 2-3 times as 
\par  long as bract; glands inside the apex of the spur on abaxial  
\par  surface only ..................................................................................... {\b 5. vulgaris}
\par 5 Lower lip of corolla ± flat, with undulate margin;
\par  pedicels 3-5 times as long as bract; glands inside the
\par  apex of the spur on both adaxial and abaxial surfaces ................... {\b 6. australis}
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. U. subulata} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 18 (1753). Terrestrial; stems capillary, subterranean; leaves 10-20 × 0·5 mm, often decayed at anthesis; bladders 0·2-0·5 mm. Inflorescence 3-20 cm; flowers 2-8; scape capillary; bracts c. 1 mm, peltate; pedicels 3-7 mm. Corolla 8-9 mm; upper lip 4 mm, broadly ovate; lower lip longer, with prominent 2-gibbous palate and 3-lobed limb, about as long as the subulate spur. Capsule globose; seeds ovoid, striate, unwinged. {\i Damp sand. Portugal} ({\i Beira Littoral}),{\i  perhaps native.} *Lu. ({\i North and South America, tropical Africa and Asia.})
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. U. gibba} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 18 (1753). Aquatic or subaquatic; stems radiating from the base of the scape; leaves unequally forked from the base, the segments capillary and again 1-3 times forked; bladders 1-1·5 mm. Inflorescence 2-8 cm; flowers 1-3(-4); scape filiform; bracts 1 mm, scarcely auriculate; pedicels 2-10 mm, erect in fruit. Corolla 5-7 mm; upper lip 3-4 mm wide, broadly ovate, obtuse, obscurely 3-crenate; lower lip with prominent 2-gibbous palate, entire, about as long as the narrowly conical spur. Capsule globose; seeds winged.{\i  Shallow water or liquid mud. W. Portugal, S.W. Spain}. Hs Lu. ({\i Africa, S. Asia, Australia}.)
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28   The above description refers to subsp.{\b  exoleta} (R. Br.) P. Taylor,{\i  Mitt. Bot. Staatssamm}. ({\i München}) 4: 101 (1961) ({\i U. exoleta} R. Br.). Subsp. {\b gibba}, from America and tropical Africa, has been recorded from Hungary as a casual (as{\i  U. biflora} Lam.).
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 3. U. minor} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 18 (1753). Aquatic, more or less anchored to substratum; stems up to 25 cm, slender, more or less dimorphic; bearing either green, orbicular, more or less palmately lobed leaves 3-10 mm long, with glabrous, entire,
\par
\par 296}
\par