{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 Spike 8-20(-25) × c. 3 cm, usually rather lax, glandular-pubescent; bracts 13-20 mm, oblong to lanceolate, acute to acuminate. Calyx 8-15 mm; segments free, entire or unequally bidentate. Corolla 15-22 mm, glandular-pubescent, yellow, slightly tinged with red, erecto-patent to patent, tubular, slightly inflated in the middle, uniformly curved; upper lip erect or recurved at maturity, 2-lobed; lower lip usually with middle lobe the largest, glabrous or minutely ciliate. Filaments hairy, inserted 5-6 mm above base of corolla; anthers glabrous. Stigma pale yellow; style becoming exserted and strongly convolute. Capsule 10-11 mm. 2n = 38. {\i On} Petasites, Tussilago{\i  and }Adenostyles{\i  spp. Mountains of C. Europe and of N. & C. Jugoslavia}. Au Cz Ga He Hu It Ju Po Rm Rs (W).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 39. O. lucorum} A. Braun in Röhling, {\i Deutschl. Fl.} ed. 3, {\b 4}: 456 (1833). Like {\b 38} but stems 15-50 cm; upper lip of corolla porrect, usually emarginate; lower lip with subequal lobes, conspicuously ciliate; filaments inserted 2-3 mm above base of corolla; stigma yellow at first, but reddish or purplish later; style neither exserted nor strongly convolute; capsule up to 15 mm.{\i  On} Berberis vulgaris. • {\i E. Alps}. Au Ge He It ?Rm.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Plants from S.E. France (Var) (var.{\i  rubi} (Duby) G. Beck), parasitic on {\i Rubus} spp., have been referred to this species. {\b O. denudata} Moris,{\i  Stirp. Sard., App.} [1] (1828), from Sardegna, also growing on{\i  Rubus} spp., is very like {\b 38} but has the lower lip of the corolla densely ciliate. Both require further investigation.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 40. O. salviae} F. W. Schultz ex Koch in Röhling, {\i Deutschl. Fl}. ed. 3, {\b 4}: 458 (1833). Like{\b  38} but stems 12-50 cm; leaves 10-20 mm; upper lip entire or emarginate; lower lip with subequal lobes, usually ciliate; filaments inserted 3-4(-5) mm above base of corolla; stigma yellow, but orange or brownish later; style neither exserted nor convolute.{\i  On} Salvia glutinosa {\i and }?S. pratensis.{\i  Alps, mountains of N. & C. Jugoslavia and S.W. Romania.} Au Ga Ge He It Ju Rm.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 41. O. rapum-genistae} Thuill.,{\i  Fl. Paris} ed. 2, 317 (1800) ({\i O. major} L. pro parte, {\i O. rapum} auct.). Stems 20-80 × 0·5-2 cm, strongly swollen at base, pale yellow, sometimes tinged with red. Leaves 15-25(-60) mm, ovate to linear-lanceolate, rather dense. Spike 15-35 × 3-4 cm, dense; bracts 15-50 mm, linear-lanceolate; flowers fetid. Calyx 8-15 mm; segments free or slightly connate at base, bidentate, usually entire. Corolla 20-25 mm, suberect to erecto-patent, campanulate, slightly curved; lower lip with middle lobe usually the larger, minutely to conspicuously ciliate. Filaments inserted not more than 2 mm above base of corolla; anthers glabrous. Stigma yellow. Capsule 10-11(-14) mm. 2n = 38. {\i On various leguminous shrubs. W. Europe, northwards to S. Scotland and extending eastwards to C. Germany and S. Italy}. Be Br Co Ga Ge Hb He Ho Hs It Lu Sa Si
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Bracts, corolla, style and filaments glabrous or subglabrous
\par
  ................................................................................................. ({\b c}) subsp.{\b  rigens}
\par
1 Bracts, corolla, style and upper part of filaments glandular-
\par
  pubescent
\par
2 Bracts at least 1½ times as long as corolla; upper 
\par
  lip of corolla distinctly 2-lobed, more or less erect ......... ({\b b}) subsp. {\b benthamii}
\par
2 Bracts shorter than to slightly exceeding corolla;
\par
  upper lip of corolla subentire, porrect ..................... ({\b a}) subsp.{\b  rapum-genistae}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  (a) Subsp.{\b  rapum-genistae}: Bracts shorter than to slightly exceeding corolla; bracts, corolla, style and upper part of filaments glandular-pubescent; corolla pale yellow to reddish, the upper lip subentire, porrect.{\i  Throughout the range of the species}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28   (b) Subsp.{\b  benthamii} (Timb.-Lagr.) P. Fourn., {\i Quatre Fl. Fr.} 796 (1937): Like subsp. ({\b a}) but bracts at least 1½ times as long as corolla; upper lip of corolla distinctly 2-lobed, more or less erect. {\i S.W. Europe and N. Italy}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28   (c) Subsp.{\b  rigens} (Loisel.) P. Fourn., {\i loc. cit.} (1937) ({\i O. rigens} Loisel.): Not more than 40 cm. Bracts shorter than to slightly exceeding corolla; bracts, corolla, style and filaments glabrous or subglabrous; corolla dark red, the upper lip shortly 2-lobed, more or less erect. {\i Corse, Sardegna, ?Sicilia}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 42. O. gracilis} Sm.,{\i  Trans. Linn. Soc. London}{\b  4}: 172 (1798) ({\i O. cruenta} Bertol.). Stems 15-60 × 0·2-0·7 cm, somewhat swollen at base, glandular-pubescent, yellow or reddish. Leaves 7-15(-20) mm, ovate-deltate to lanceolate. Spike 3-20 × 2·5-4 cm, glandular-pubescent, lax at least below; bracts 10-20 mm, triangular, acuminate; flowers fragrant. Calyx 8-15 mm; segments free or connate at base, usually unequally 2-lobed. Corolla 15-25 mm, glandular-pubescent, yellow outside, usually with red veins and reddish towards the lips, shining dark red inside, erecto-patent, broadly tubular, slightly constricted near the middle, slightly curved; upper lip emarginate; lobes of lower lip subequal, ciliate. Filaments hairy at least below, inserted not more than 2 mm above base of corolla; anthers glabrous. Stigma yellow. Capsule 12-15 mm. {\i On various Leguminosae, rarely on} Cistus{\i  spp. S., W. & C. Europe, northwards to c. 49° N. in N. W. France, C. Germany and E. Carpathians}. Al Au Bl Bu Co Cr Cz Ga Ge Gr He Hs Hu It Ju Lu Po Rm Rs (W) Sa Si
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 43. O. variegata} Wallr.,{\i  Orob. Gen.} 40 (1825). Like{\b  42} but stems 0·4-1 cm wide; leaves 15-30 mm, oblong-ovate to linear-lanceolate; spike 5-30 cm, usually denser; flowers fetid; bracts 15-25 mm; calyx 10-20 mm; corolla sometimes brownish-red outside, the lower lip with the middle lobe deflexed and twice as big as the others; filaments often hairy only above, inserted 2-4 mm above base of corolla. {\i On leguminous shrubs. W.C. part of Mediterranean region.} Co Ga ?Hs It Sa Si
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   A single record for S. Jugoslavia requires confirmation; it is probably an error for{\b  42}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 44. O. foetida} Poiret, {\i Voy. Barb.}{\b  2}: 195 (1789). Like{\b  42} but stems 0·4-1 cm wide; spike usually denser; flowers fetid; calyx-segments very long-acuminate; corolla 12-23 mm, dark purplish-red, narrower, nearly straight; upper lip 2-lobed with erect lobes; lower lip not ciliate; filaments inserted 3-7 mm above base of corolla; stigma sometimes purple. {\i On various Leguminosae, mostly herbaceous. Iberian peninsula, Islas Baleares.} Bl Hs Lu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 45. O. sanguinea} C. Presl in J. & C. Presl,{\i  Del. Prag.} 71 (1822) (incl. {\i O. crinita} Viv.). Stems 10-40 × 0·3-0·7 cm, swollen at base, glandular-pubescent, yellow or purplish-red. Leaves 12-35 mm, narrowly lanceolate to linear-oblong, dense especially below. Spike 5-15 × c. 2·5 cm, glandular-pubescent, dense; bracts 8-15 mm, triangular-lanceolate, acuminate; flowers scentless. Calyx 7-10.mm; segments shortly connate at base, unequally 2-lobed. Corolla 10-15(-17) mm, glabrous or subglabrous, dark red or purple, yellow at base (rarely entirely yellow) outside, shining dark red inside, more or less patent, tubular, curved or nearly straight; upper lip 2-lobed; lower lip small, not ciliate, with subequal lobes. Filaments glabrous above and usually also below, inserted 1·5-2 mm above base of corolla; anthers glabrous. Stigma purple. {\i On} Lotus{\i  spp. Mediterranean region.} Bl Co Cr Gr Hs It Ju ?Lu Sa Si.
\par

\par
293}
\par