{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 12 Lower lip of calyx divided nearly to base; lobes divergent
\par
   ...................................................................................................... {\b 6. leptoceras}
\par
12 Lower lip of calyx divided halfway to base; lobes
\par
   not divergent .................................................................................... {\b 5. corsica}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. P. lusitanica} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 17 (1753). Overwintering as a rosette. Leaves 5-12, 10-24(-29) × 3-8 mm, oblong-ovate, greyish; margin strongly involute. Pedicels 1-8, 60-150 (-250) mm, glandular-pubescent, very slender. Corolla 7-9(-11) mm. Calyx-lobes ovate. Corolla-lips subequal, pinkish to pale lilac, yellow at the throat; lobes suborbicular, emarginate. Tube cylindrical; palate entire. Spur 2-4 mm, subcylindrical, deflexed. Capsule subglobose. 2n = 12. {\i Bogs and wet heaths. W. Europe, eastwards to} 5° {\i E. in S. France.} Br Ga Hb Hs Lu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. P. hirtiflora} Ten.,{\i  Fl. Nap.}{\b  1},{\i  Prodr.}: 6 (1811) (incl. {\i P. louisii} Markgraf). Overwintering as a rosette. Leaves 6-9, 20-60(-80) × 10-25(-35) mm, elliptic-oblong to ovate-oblong, truncate or emarginate at apex; margin scarcely involute. Pedicels 1-3, 50-110(-140) mm, slender. Corolla 16-25(-32) mm. Upper lip of the calyx with spathulate lobes, those of the lower lip obovate, very short. Corolla-lips unequal, pink to pale blue, yellow at the throat; lobes of upper lip obovate, weakly emarginate; those of lower lip cuneate, emarginate. Tube infundibuliform; palate divided. Spur 6-10(-13) mm, subulate, straight or somewhat curved. Capsule subglobose. 2n = 16. {\i Wet rocks in the mountains. S. & W. parts of Balkan peninsula; C. & S. Italy}. Al Gr It Ju.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 3. P. alpina} L., {\i Sp. Pl. }17 (1753). Overwintering as a bud. Roots long and relatively thick, brownish. Leaves 5-8, (15-)25-45(-60) × 8-14 mm, elliptic-oblong to lanceolate-oblong, pale yellowish-green; margin involute. Pedicels 1-8, 50-110 (-130) mm, sparsely glandular. Corolla 10-16(-21) mm. Upper lip of the calyx with triangular lobes; lower lip lobed for 1/3 its length, the lobes obovate. Corolla-lips unequal, white with one or more yellow spots on the palate. Tube short, thick. Spur 2-3(-5) mm, curved, yellowish. Capsule ovoid-oblong. 2n = 32. {\i Bogs and wet places. Arctic and subarctic Europe; mountains of Fennoscandia; islands of Baltic sea; mountains and uplands of C. Europe; Pyrenees.} Au †Br Cz Fe Ga Ge He Hs Hu It Ju No Po Rm Rs (N, B,?C, W) Su.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 4. P. villosa} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 17 (1753). Overwintering as a bud. Leaves 1-5, 8-10(-13) × 4-6(-7) mm, elliptical to suborbicular; margins strongly involute, often touching each other. Pedicels usually solitary, 30-60(-95) mm, glandular-hairy with the stalk at least 10 times as long as the gland. Corolla 6-9(-11) mm. Calyx-lobes lanceolate, purple. Corolla-lips unequal, pale violet, with yellow stripes in the throat; lobes broadly cuneate. Spur 2-3(-5) mm, straight, cylindric-conical. Capsule obovoid, much longer than the persistent calyx. 2n = 16.{\i  Sphagnum-bogs. Fennoscandia, southwards to 61° N. in Sweden; N.W. Russia.} Fe No Rs (N) Su.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 5. P. corsica} Bernard & Gren. in Gren. & Godron,{\i  Fl. Fr.}{\b  2}: 443 (1853). Overwintering as a bud. Leaves 5-9, 25-35(-40) × 9-16 mm, ovate to obovate-oblong, petiolate. Pedicels 40-90(-150) mm, glandular. Corolla 16-25(-30) mm. Upper lip of the calyx with narrowly oblong-lanceolate lobes; lower lip lobed for at least ½ its length; lobes not divergent. Corolla-lips unequal, pale blue to pink; lobes obovate, rounded, overlapping. Tube infundibuliform, about as long as upper lip of the corolla. Spur 4-6(-9) mm, straight, cylindrical-subulate. Capsule subglobose. 2n = 16. {\i Wet places in the mountains.} • Corse. Co.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 6. P. leptoceras} Reichenb., {\i Pl. Crit.}{\b  1}: 69 (1823). Overwintering as a bud. Leaves 5-8, 25-40(-65) × 10-16(-22) mm, oblong to ovate-oblong; margin scarcely involute. Pedicels 1-6, 40-100(-130) mm, glandular. Corolla 16-25(-30) mm. Upper lip of the calyx with 3(-7) triangular-acuminate to oblong-obtuse lobes, the middle lobe often much larger than the lateral and irregularly dentate or truncate; lower lip divided nearly to the base, the lobes lanceolate and usually divergent. Corolla-lips unequal, blue; lobes of the upper lip obovate-obtuse, those of the lower lip broadly obovate to suborbicular, overlapping, white-spotted at the base. Tube infundibuliform, somewhat wider than long. Spur 4-6(-9) mm, straight, cylindrical. Capsule ovoid. 2n = 32.{\i  Wet places in the mountains. • Alps, Alpe Apuani, N. Appennini.} Au Ga He It.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 7. P. balcanica} Casper,{\i  Feddes Repert.}{\b  66}: 105 (1962) ({\i P. leptoceras} sensu Hayek, non Reichenb.). Overwintering as a bud. Spring leaves 20-30 × 15-20 mm, broadly ovate; summer leaves 20-50 × 10-20 mm, elliptic-oblong.  Pedicels 1-5, 40-80 (-100) mm, glandular. Corolla 14-19(-23) mm. Calyx-lobes broadly ovate, about as long as wide, rarely longer than wide; lower lip divided for up to 1/3 its length; lobes not divergent. Corolla-lips unequal, blue-lilac, the lobes of the upper lip broadly ligulate, those of the lower lip obovate-oblong, contiguous or overlapping, the middle lobe often larger, white-spotted at its base. Spur 3-5(-7) mm, straight, cylindrical. Capsule ovoid. 2n = 32. {\i Wet places in the mountains. Balkan peninsula}. Al Bu Gr Ju.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 8. P. nevadensis} (Lindb.) Casper, {\i op. cit.} 112 (1962). Overwintering as a bud. Leaves 5-8, 15-20 × 6-12 mm, little longer than wide. Pedicels 1-3, 40-55(-90) mm, glandular. Corolla 12-16 mm. Calyx-lobes linear, obtuse; lower lip divided for up to 1/3 its length; lobes usually not divergent. Corolla-lips lilac with white lobes; those of the upper lip ovate, obtuse, those of the lower lip obovate-oblong, overlapping, the two lips subequal. Tube infundibuliform, about as long as the lips. Spur 3-4(-5) mm, straight.{\i  Bogs and wet places in the mountains. S. Spain} ({\i Sierra Nevada, Sierra de Alfacar}). Hs.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 9. P. vallisneriifolia} Webb, {\i Otia Hisp.} ed. 2, 48 (1853). Overwintering as a bud. Spring leaves 30-40(-55) × 15-20 (-25) mm, sessile, elliptic-ovate, the margin not involute; summer leaves 100-200(-260) × 8-20(-30) mm, suberect, ligulate, undulate, acute, petiolate. Pedicels 1-8, 100-150(-175) mm, glandular. Corolla 25-35(-40) mm. Calyx-lobes ovate-oblong to obovate; lower lip divided for up to ½ its length. Corolla-lips unequal, violet, white-spotted at the throat; lobes obovate, overlapping. Tube c. 5 mm, broadly infundibuliform. Spur 10-14(-20) mm, cylindric-subulate, straight or curved. 2n = 32. {\i Shady, wet rocks. Mountains of S.E. & E.C. Spain}. Hs.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 10. P. longifolia} Ramond ex DC. in Lam. & DC., {\i Fl. Fr.} ed. 3,{\b  3}: 728 (1805). Overwintering as a bud. Leaves 5-11, 60-130(-175) × 10-20(-25) mm, the lowest elliptical, the others linear-lanceolate, suberect, slightly undulate, obtuse, petiolate. Pedicels 1-5, 70-130(-150) mm, glandular. Corolla 22-40(-46) mm. Calyx-lobes conspicuous, elliptic-ligulate to linear, obtuse, the lower divided for up to ½ its length or sometimes nearly to the base. Corolla-lips unequal, lilac to pale blue; lobes of the upper lip ovate, obtuse, those of the lower lip obovate-cuneate, much longer than wide, overlapping, white-spotted at the base. Tube short, broadly infundibuliform. Spur 10-16(-24) mm, cylindric-subulate, straight or curved. Capsule ovoid-subglobose.{\i  Wet rocks. Mountains of S. Europe, from S.C. France to the Pyrenees and C. Appennini.} Ga Hs It.
\par

\par
295}
\par