{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 4 Leaves ovate; corolla yellow tinged with red ........................... {\b 22. canescens} 
\par
4 Leaves linear-lanceolate to -oblong; corolla white or 
\par
  cream, usually tinged with violet, pink or brown .................... {\b 21. amethystea}
\par
1 Stigma red or purple
\par
5 Corolla tinged with pink, red or brown
\par
6 Calyx-segments 3- to 4-veined, not filiform distally .............. {\b 21. amethystea}
\par
6 Calyx-segments 1-veined, filiform distally .............................. {\b 24. calendulae}
\par
5 Corolla tinged with purple or violet
\par
7 Bracts 7-15 mm; stamens inserted 2-3 mm above base of corolla ...{\b 27. minor}
\par
7 Bracts 10-22 mm; stamens inserted 3-5 mm above base of corolla
\par
8 Corolla rather sharply inflected near the base, the 
\par
  upper lip deeply bifid ............................................................... {\b 21. amethystea}
\par
8 Corolla not inflected near the base, the upper lip 
\par
  emarginate or slightly bifid
\par
9 Corolla 12-15(-20) mm, glandular-pubescent on tube,
\par
  glabrous distally ........................................................................ {\b 25. grisebachii}
\par
9 Corolla 14-22 mm, subglabrous or glandular-puberulent
\par
  (rarely glandular-pubescent) throughout ........................................ {\b 26. loricata}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 21. O. amethystea} Thuill.,{\i  Fl. Paris} ed. 2, 317 (1800). Leaves linear-lanceolate to -oblong, acute. Bracts 12-22 mm. Calyx 9-15 mm; segments unequally bidentate or entire. Corolla 15-25 mm, sparsely glandular-pubescent, white or cream, usually tinged with violet, pink or brown distally; lobes of lower lip subequal. Filaments inserted 3-4 mm above base of corolla. Stigma purple or yellow.{\i  On various dicotyledonous herbs. S., W. & W.C. Europe northwards to S. England.} Al Br Bu Co Ga Ge Gr He Hs It Ju Lu Sa Si.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   (a) Subsp.{\b  amethystea} (incl. {\i O. attica} Reuter): Calyx-segments 1-veined, filiform above. Corolla often inflected near base, more or less straight above, usually tinged with violet; upper lip deeply 2-lobed. Stigma purple or yellow. {\i Usually on species of }Eryngium, Daucus, Ballota{\i  and Compositae. Throughout the range of the species}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28   (b) Subsp. castellana (Reuter) Rouy, {\i Fl. Fr.}{\b  11}: 185 (1909) ({\i O. castellana} Reuter): Calyx-segments 3- to 4-veined, not filiform. Corolla uniformly curved throughout, usually tinged with pink or brown; upper lip entire to 2-lobed. Stigma purple.{\i  Usually on} Digitalis{\i  spp. S.W. Europe}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 22. O. canescens} C. Presl in J. & C. Presl, {\i Del. Prag.} 72 (1822). Leaves ovate. Bracts 10-20 mm. Calyx 8-16 mm; segments usually unequally bifid. Corolla 12-18 mm, glandular-pubescent to subglabrous, yellow tinged with red; upper lip emarginate or 2-lobed; lower lip with subequal lobes. Filaments inserted 3-4·5 mm above base of corolla. Stigma yellow.{\i  On Compositae and perhaps other plants. C. & E. parts of Mediterranean region.} Co Cr Gr It Sa Si.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 23. O. esulae} Pancic,{\i  Fl. Princ. Serb. Addit.} 194 (1884). Bracts 10-12 mm. Calyx 7-9 mm; segments entire or variably bifid. Corolla (12-)15-18 mm, glandular-pubescent, yellow, tinged with brown or purple distally; upper lip 2-lobed; lower lip with the middle lobe the largest. Filaments inserted (4-)5-6 mm above base of corolla. Stigma yellow. {\i On} Euphorbia esula. •{\i  E. Jugoslavia, C. & S. Bulgaria.} Bu Ju.
\par
 
\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 24. O. calendulae} Pomel, {\i Nouv. Mat. Fl. Atl.} 110 (1874) ({\i O. mauretanica} G. Beck). Leaves oblong-lanceolate. Bracts 15-20 mm. Calyx 10-15 mm; segments equally bifid. Corolla 12-20 mm, glandular-pubescent, pale yellow, often veined and tinged with brownish-red; upper lip 2-lobed, rarely emarginate; lobes of the lower lip equal or the middle the largest. Filaments inserted 1·5-4·5 mm above base of corolla. Stigma purple or reddish. {\i On Compositae and various other plants. S. Portugal, S.W. Spain.} Hs Lu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 25. O. grisebachii} Reuter in DC.,{\i  Prodr.}{\b  11}: 28 (1847). Leaves ovate-lanceolate to lanceolate. Bracts 10-20 mm. Calyx 8-16 mm; segments entire or unequally bifid. Corolla 12-15(-20) mm, glandular-pubescent on tube, glabrous distally, whitish, tinged with violet above; upper lip entire or emarginate; lower lip with subequal lobes. Filaments inserted 3-4 mm above base of corolla. Stigma purple. {\i On Leguminosae and perhaps also Compositae. Greece and Aegean region}. Cr Gr.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 26. O. loricata} Reichenb.,{\i  Pl. Crit.}{\b  7}: 41 (1829) (incl.{\i  O. picridis} F. W. Schultz ex Koch). Leaves narrowly lanceolate. Bracts 12-20 mm. Calyx 10-15 mm; segments unequally bifid, rarely entire. Corolla 14-22 mm, glandular-pubescent or -puberulent or subglabrous, white or pale yellow, tinged and veined with violet; upper lip emarginate to bifid; lobes of the lower lip subequal or the middle the largest. Filaments inserted 3-5 mm above base of corolla. Stigma purple. 2n = c. 38.{\i  On species of} Artemisia, Picris{\i  and other Compositae; also on species of} Daucus{\i  and} Orlaya.{\i  S., W. & C. Europe, extending to Denmark}. Al Au Be Bl Br Bu Co Cr Cz Da Ga Ge Gr He Ho Hs Hu It Ju Lu Po Rm Rs (W) Sa Si.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   {\b  O. fuliginosa} Reuter ex Jordan, {\i Obs. Pl. Crit.}{\b  3}: 225 (1846) (incl.{\i  O. angelifixa} Peteaux & St-Lager), recorded from Greece and S.E. France, appears to differ from {\b 26} mainly in its yellow corolla tinged with brownish-red; it has been subsequently recorded from other localities in the C. & E. parts of the Mediterranean region, but there is little agreement among authors as to its differential characters, and some of the plants so named may be more closely related to {\b 19} or{\b  27}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 27. O. minor} Sm. in Sowerby, {\i Engl. Bot.}{\b  6}: t. 422 (1797). Leaves ovate to linear-lanceolate. Bracts 7-15 mm. Calyx 7-12 mm; segments equally or unequally bidentate or entire. Corolla 10-18 mm, glandular-pubescent or subglabrous, pale yellow, usually tinged with dull violet distally; upper lip emarginate to 2-lobed, lower lip with subequal lobes or the middle the largest. Filaments inserted 2-3 mm above base of corolla. Stigma purple, rarely yellow. 2n = 38.{\i  Most frequently on} Trifolium{\i  spp., but also on a wide variety of other plants. W., S. & S.C. Europe; introduced further north.} Al Au *Az Be *Br Bu Co Cz Ga Ge Gr He *Ho Hs Hu It Ju Lu Rm Rs (W, K) Sa Si Tu [Da Hb Po Su].
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   {\b  O. maritima} Pugsley, {\i Jour. Bot.} ({\i London}){\b  78}: 110 (1940) ({\i O. amethystea} auct., non Thuill.), with 2n = 38, recorded from S.W. England, W. France and S. Spain, is probably best regarded as a variety of {\b 27}, though in some characters it resembles {\b 26. O. ozanonis} F. W. Schultz ex G. Beck,{\i  Biblioth. Bot.} ({\i Stuttgart}) {\b 19}: 249 (1890) ({\i O. minor} subsp.{\i  ozanonis} (F. W. Schultz ex G. Beck) Rouy), once collected in S.E. France (Hautes-Alpes), was distinguished by its shorter calyx, more densely hairy corolla and stamens, and less distinctly lobed upper lip of corolla; it also is best included in {\b 27}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 28. O. clausonis} Pomel, {\i Nouv. Mat. Fl. Atl.} 107 (1874). Stems 15-40 × 0·3-0·8 cm, slightly swollen at base, glandular-pubescent, yellowish. Leaves 5-15 mm, ovate to lanceolate, acute. Spike dense, becoming more or less lax, glandular-pubescent; bracts 8-15 mm, ovate to lanceolate, acuminate. Calyx 5-8 mm; segments connate for about half their length, equally bifid with broadly triangular, acuminate teeth. Corolla (10-)15-17 mm, glandular-pubescent, yellow, erecto-patent, somewhat curved; upper lip more or less entire; lobes of the lower
\par

\par
291}
\par