{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 obovate to elliptical, always exceeding calyx; stamens 1·75-3·5 mm, when dry 1-2 mm, with numerous purple or yellow basal hairs. Capsule 5-7 mm. Seeds 20-45. 2n = 22.{\i  Dry, open habitats. S.W. Europe.} Hs Lu Sa Si
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Variable in several characters, including size of leaf and corolla; though subspecific taxa have been described, they intergrade, and it is difficult to recognize them over the whole range of the species. Further investigation is required.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc {\b 13.            Samolus}         L.
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc By L.F. Ferguson.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Perennial herbs with short stock and fibrous roots. Flowers bracteolate, 5-merous. Calyx campanulate. Corolla twice as long as calyx. Stamens alternating with clusters of 1-2(-3) staminodes. Ovary semi-inferior. Capsule globose; valves 5. Seeds numerous.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. S. valerandi} L.,{\i  Sp. Pl. }171 (1753). Glabrous, with a basal rosette; stems 5-60 cm, leafy, erect. Leaves 10-90 × 5-25 mm, obovate to spathulate, obtuse, entire. Inflorescence racemose, simple or branched; pedicels becoming geniculate after anthesis. Calyx-teeth obtuse. Corolla 2-3 mm in diameter. Capsule 2-3 mm. Seeds polyhedral, reddish-brown, minutely tuberculate. 2n = ?24, 26.{\i  Wet, usually saline or calcareous habitats. S., W. & C. Europe, extending northwards to S. Finland and eastwards to Krym.} All except Fa Is No Rs (N, ?C, E) Sb.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc {\b 14.                  Coris}                  L.
\par
 
\pard\f0\fs24\qc By L.F. Ferguson.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Perennial or biennial. Stems woody at the base. Leaves alternate, subsessile. Flowers zygomorphic, in a terminal spike-like raceme. Calyx campanulate, with 2 rows of teeth. Corolla-tube short; limb unequally 5-partite to c. 2/3; lobes unequally bifid. Stamens exserted. Capsule globose; valves 5. Seeds 4-6, papillose.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    Literature: F. Pax & R. Knuth in Engler,{\i  Pflanzenreich }{\b 22}({\b IV. 237}): 344 346 (1905). F. Masclans, {\i Collect. Bot. (Barcelona)}{\b  7} ({\b 2, n.42}): 749-758 (1968).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Up to 8 taxa have been recognized in Europe, mainly on the basis of indumentum and habit. Only the 2 following show consistent ecological and geographical separation.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 Flowers pink, purple or blue; outer calyx-teeth 6-21, unequal
\par
  ............................................................................................... {\b 1. monspeliensis}
\par
Flowers white or pale pink; outer calyx-teeth 0-4, equal ............... {\b 2. hispanica}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. C. monspeliensis} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 177 (1753). Stems 10-30 cm, ascending to erect. Leaves 2-20 × 1-3 mm, glabrous to densely puberulent, numerous, entire or sinuate; margin subrevolute or, particularly in upper leaves, spinose-dentate; often with two rows of black spots on either side of the midrib. Racemes dense. Calyx 5-7 mm, membranous, tinged purple; the outer teeth 6-21, spinose, unequal, prominent in bud; the inner 5 broadly triangular with central red or black patch, connivent in fruit. Corolla 9-12 mm, pink, purple or blue, drying darker. Capsule 0·5-2 mm. 2n = 18, 56. {\i Dry places, particularly near the coast. W. & C. Mediterranean region, extending to N.W. Spain.} Al Bl Ga Hs It Ju Sa Si.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. C. hispanica} Lange, {\i Vid. Meddel. Dansk Naturh. Foren. Kjøbenhavn} {\b 1863:} 53 (1863). Like {\b 1} but stem 12-35 cm, erect, more robust; leaves 4-12 × 1-3 mm, sinuate; margin revolute, rarely spinose-dentate; racemes lax; calyx green; outer teeth 0-4, developed dorsally only, subequal, not prominent in bud; inner row of teeth with 3(-5) dark patches; corolla white or pale pink; limb subequally 5-partite. {\i Clay soils and maritime rocks. S.E. Spain} ({\i S. of Vera, prov. Almeria}). Hs.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs36\qc PLUMBAGINALES
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc {\b 136.            PLUMBAGINACEAE}
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc Edit. D.M. Moore.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Herbs or shrubs. Leaves alternate or in basal rosettes, exstipulate. Inflorescence usually cymose, often contracted into a capitulum, rarely spike-like. Flowers actinomorphic, 5-merous, usually in bracteate spikelets. Calyx tubular below, dentate or lobed and at least slightly scarious and often plicate distally, persistent. Petals connate only at the base, or the corolla with a usually short tube. Stamens epipetalous. Styles 5, or 1 with 5 stigma-lobes. Ovary superior, 1-locular. Fruit dry, membranous, 1-seeded, surrounded by calyx, indehiscent or with circumscissile or irregular dehiscence.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Two tribes are traditionally recognized in the family, but most of the distinguishing characters are unsatisfactory. Heteromorphic incompatibility systems are known in both tribes. In the{\i  Plumbagineae} ({\i Plumbago, Ceratostigma}) heterostyly is associated with monomorphism of pollen and stigma. In the {\i Staticeae} heterostyly is known only in some species of {\i Limonium};{\i  Acantholimon} and {\i Goniolimon} have dimorphic pollen and monomorphic stigmas, while dimorphism of both pollen and stigma occurs in{\i  Armeria, Limonium} and{\i  Limoniastrum }(cf. H. G. Baker, {\i Evolution}{\b  20:} 349-368 (1966).)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Flowers in capitula; top of scape enclosed in a tubular
\par
  scarious sheath ................................................................................{\b  4. Armeria}
\par
1 Flowers in spikes or panicles; top of scape not enclosed
\par
  in a tubular sheath
\par
2 Leaves in a basal rosette or absent
\par
3 Spikes not secund, the terminal much the largest;
\par
  corollatube much longer than lobes ......................................{\b  8. Psylliostachys}
\par
3 Spikes secund, the terminal not distinctly larger; 
\par
  corolla-tube much shorter than lobes
\par
4 Stigmas filiform ......................................................................... {\b 5. Limonium}
\par
4 Stigmas capitate ......................................................................{\b  6. Goniolimon}
\par
2 Stems leafy
\par
5 Leaves pungent; stigmas capitate; fruit indehiscent ............ {\b 3. Acantholimon}
\par
5 Leaves not pungent; stigmas filiform or lobed; fruit dehiscent
\par
6 Calyx tubular; stamens free; style 1; fruit circum-scissile
\par
  near base, dehiscing upwards by 5 valves
\par
7 Leaves auriculate-amplexicaul; corolla with narrow tube
\par
  and rotate limb ............................................................................. {\b 1. Plumbago}
\par
7 Leaves cuneate at base; corolla infundibuliform ...................{\b  2. Ceratostigma}
\par
6 Calyx infundibuliform; stamens inserted in base of 
\par
  corolla; styles 5, free or connate in basal half; fruit
\par
  circumscissile towards apex or with irregular dehiscence
\par
8 Corolla-tube much shorter than lobes ........................................{\b  5. Limonium}
\par
8 Corolla-tube about as long as lobes ......................................{\b  7. Limoniastrum}
\par

\par
29}
\par