{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28\qc {\b 3.             Boschniakia}              C.A. Meyer 
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc By E.M. Rix & D.A. Webb.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Stems stout, simple. Flowers in dense, spike-like racemes; bracteoles absent. Calyx short, cupuliform, obscurely 3- to 5-lobed. Corolla 2-lipped; upper lip much longer than the lower. Stamens exserted. Placentae 2, deeply lobed.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. B. rossica} (Cham. & Schlecht.) B. Fedtsch. in B. Fedtsch. & Flerow,{\i  Fl. Evr. Ross}. 896 (1910). Glabrous, except for minutely ciliate bracts, calyx and corolla. Stems 15-40 cm, red or brown, usually in groups of 2-8. Leaves 5-10 mm, ovate to deltate. Raceme 15-20 cm, dense, narrow. Bracts c. 8 mm, ovate; pedicels very short in flower, elongating in fruit. Calyx 3-4 mm. Corolla 10-12 mm, red or brownish; tube subglobose; lower lip equally 3-lobed; upper lip subentire. Stamens inserted 2-3 mm above base of corolla-tube. Capsule 6-7 mm. {\i On species of }Alnus.{\i  N. Ural (Ilyc basin)}. Rs (N). ({\i N. Asia and coasts of Bering Sea.})
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc {\b 4.                 Phelypaea}               L.
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc By E.M. Rix & D.A. Webb.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Stems slender, simple. Leaves few, amplexicaul. Flowers solitary (very rarely 2), terminal; bracteoles absent. Calyx tubular, 5-lobed, more or less 2-lipped. Corolla more or less 2-lipped, with 5 large, patent lobes. Stamens included. Placentae 4, deeply lobed.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Literature: O. Stapf, {\i Kew Bull.}{\b  1915}: 285-295 (1915).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 Corolla-lobes obovate-orbicular, not overlapping; anthers
\par
  glabrous .......................................................................................... {\b 1. coccinea}
\par
Corolla-lobes orbicular, overlapping; anthers hairy ......................... {\b 2. boissieri}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. P. coccinea} Poiret in Lam.,{\i  Encycl. Méth. Bot.}{\b  5}: 268 (1804) (incl.{\i  P. helenae} Popl.). Stem 30-40 cm, reddish or orange, glandular-puberulent, at least above. Leaves c. 2 cm, ovate-oblong, obtuse, confined to lower half of stem. Calyx 15-30 mm, puberulent; lobes 5, longer than the tube. Corolla c. 30 × 40 mm, yellow outside, bright red or orange-yellow inside; lobes obovate-orbicular, not overlapping. Filaments and anthers glabrous. Stigma large, reniform. Capsule c. 15 mm, ovoid. {\i On} Psephellus{\i  spp. Krym.} Rs (K). ({\i Caucasus}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. P. boissieri} (Reuter) Stapf,{\i  Kew Bull.}{\b  1915}: 291 (1915). Like {\b 1} but stem shorter and stouter; corolla always red inside, with overlapping, orbicular lobes; anthers hairy.{\i  On various species of }Centaurea.{\i  S. Jugoslavia }({\i C. Makedonija, around Gradsko}). Ju. ({\i S. & E. Anatolia}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc {\b 161.       LENTIBULARIACEAE}
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc Edit †T.G. Tutin.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Small, carnivorous perennial herbs. Leaves alternate or in a basal rosette. Flowers solitary or in a short raceme. Corolla 2-lipped, spurred. Stamens 2, epipetalous. Ovary superior, 1-locular; placenta free-central. Fruit a capsule; seeds numerous.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Leaves entire, in a basal rosette ..................................................... {\b 1. Pinguicula}
\par
Leaves divided into filiform lobes, alternate ................................ {\b 2. Utricularia}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc {\b 1.           Pinguicula}              L.
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc By S.J. Casper.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Leaves in a basal rosette, entire, soft and fleshy, clothed with viscid glands above; margin usually more or less involute. Flowers solitary, on naked pedicels. Calyx persistent, 2-lipped; upper lip 3(-7)-, lower 2-lobed. Corolla 2-lipped, spurred, open at throat, with a hairy and often spotted palate; upper lip 2-, lower 3-lobed. Capsule opening by 2 valves. Seeds numerous, very small.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   In the descriptions the terms {\i spring} and {\i summer leaves} indicate that the rosettes of some species undergo a regular change of form during their development; this is often not evident in dried specimens. The measurements of the corolla and leaf include the spur and the petiole respectively.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Literature: S. J. Casper,{\i  Feddes Repert.}{\b  66}: 1-148 (1962);{\i  Biblioth. Bot.} ({\i Stuttgart}) {\b 127/128}: 1-209 (1966). A. Ernst, {\i Bot. Jahrb.}{\b  80}: 145-194 (1961). J. Schindler, {\i Österr. Bot. Zeitschr.}{\b  57}: 409-421, 458-469 (1907);{\b  58}: 13-18, 61-69 (1908).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Corolla white, with one or more yellow spots on the palate; 
\par
  roots stout ........................................................................................... {\b 3. alpina}
\par
1 Corolla violet, lilac, blue or pinkish; roots slender
\par
2 Lobes of the lower lip of the corolla emarginate; plant
\par
  overwintering as a rosette
\par
3 Corolla 7-11 mm; tube cylindrical; spur 2-4 mm ........................ {\b 1. lusitanica}
\par
3 Corolla 16-32 mm; tube infundibuliform; spur 6-13 mm ............. {\b 2. hirtiflora}
\par
2 Lobes of the lower lip of the corolla entire; plant 
\par
  over-wintering as a bud
\par
4 Pedicels with glandular hairs, the stalks at least 10 times 
\par
  as long as the gland; leaves elliptical to suborbicular,
\par
  strongly involute; corolla 6-11 mm ................................................... {\b 4. villosa}
\par
4 Pedicels glandular, the stalk not more than twice as 
\par
  long as the gland; leaves not or only slightly involute;
\par
  corolla at least 12 mm
\par
5 Corolla 25-40 mm; spur 9-24 mm, more than half as long
\par
  as the rest of the corolla
\par
6 Leaves oblong to obovate-oblong, horizontal; lobes of 
\par
  the lower lip of the corolla about as wide as long .................... {\b 11. grandiflora}
\par
6 Leaves elliptic-ovate to ligulate or linear-lanceolate, suberect; 
\par
  lobes of lower lip of corolla much longer than wide 
\par
7 Spring leaves sessile, elliptic-ovate- summer leaves
\par
  100-260 mm, ligulate, acute; lobes of upper lip of 
\par
  calyx ovate-oblong to ovate-suborbicular ............................ {\b 9. vallisneriifolia}
\par
7 Leaves 60-175 mm, the lowest elliptical, the others
\par
  lanceolate, obtuse; lobes of upper lip of calyx 
\par
  elliptic-ligulate to linear .............................................................. {\b 10. longifolia}
\par
5 Corolla 12-30 mm; spur 4-10 mm, usually less than half
\par
  as long as the rest of the corolla
\par
8 Leaves not much longer than wide
\par
9 Lobes of upper lip of calyx about as long as wide ....................... {\b 7. balcanica}
\par
9 Lobes of upper lip of calyx much longer than wide .................. {\b 8. nevadensis}
\par
8 Leaves distinctly longer than wide
\par
10 Lobes of lower lip of corolla oblong, divergent, not
\par
   overlapping or touching ................................................................ {\b 12. vulgaris}
\par
10 Lobes of lower lip of corolla suborbicular, overlapping 
\par
   or touching
\par
11 Lobes of upper lip of calyx about as long as wide ..................... {\b 7. balcanica}
\par
11 Lobes of upper lip of calyx distinctly longer than wide
\par

\par
294}
\par