{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 lip subequal, not ciliate. Filaments sparsely hairy below, glabrous above, inserted (1-)3 mm above base of corolla; anthers glabrous. Stigma orange to purple. {\i On Rubiaceae. Spain and Portugal; Malta.} Hs Lu Si.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 29. O. hederae} Duby,{\i  Bot. Gall.}{\b  1}: 350 (1828). Stems 15-60 × 0·3-0·8 cm, usually strongly swollen at base, glandular-pubescent, yellow to reddish-purple. Leaves 12-30 mm, oblong to lanceolate, acute. Spike 10-40 × 2·5-4 cm, lax, glandular-pubescent; bracts 12-22 mm, lanceolate, acuminate. Calyx 10-15 mm; segments free, entire or unequally bifid. Corolla 10-22 mm, subglabrous, rarely glandular-pubescent, dull cream tinged distally with reddish-purple, erecto-patent to more or less patent; tube somewhat inflated below, gradually narrowed to the mouth, nearly straight; lips patent, the upper entire to emarginate, the lower not ciliate, with middle lobe usually the largest. Filaments more or less glabrous, rarely somewhat hairy below, inserted 3-4 mm above base of corolla; anthers glabrous. Stigma yellow. Capsule 10-12 mm. 2n = 38.{\i  On} Hedera {\i spp. W., S. & S.C. Europe, northwards to Ireland. }Au Be Bl Br Co Ga Ge Gr Hb He Ho Hs Hu It Ju Lu Rs (K) Sa Si Tu [Po].
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 30. O. latisquama} (F. W. Schultz) Batt. in Batt. & Trabut,{\i  Fl. Algér., Dicot}. 659 (1890) ({\i O. macrolepis} G. Beck, non Turcz., {\i Boulardia latisquama} F. W. Schultz,{\i  Ceratocalyx macrolepis} Cosson; incl.{\i  C. fimbriatus} Lange). Stems 20-40 × 0·4-0·9 cm, slightly swollen at base, glabrous, usually deep reddish-purple. Leaves 20-30 mm, dense, ovate-oblong, the lower obtuse, the upper acute. Spike 6-20 × 3-4 cm, usually dense, glabrous or with subsessile glands; bracts 17-25 mm, oblong-ovate, acuminate, purplish. Calyx 11-16 mm; segments connate in proximal quarter, entire or bifid. Corolla 22-35 mm, glabrous but with subsessile glands, pale yellowish, veined or tinged with purple towards the lips, sometimes entirely purple, suberect, somewhat inflated at base, constricted at or below middle, campanulate above; upper lip subentire; lower lip equally 3-lobed, not ciliate. Filaments hairy, inserted 7-10(-15) mm above base of corolla; anthers villous. Stigma yellow. Capsule 10-12 mm.{\i  On }Rosmarinus officinalis, Cistus{\i  spp. and other shrubs. E. & S.E. Spain, Islas Baleares}. Bl Hs.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 31. O. caryophyllacea} Sm., {\i Trans. Linn. Soc. London}{\b  4}: 169 (1798) ({\i O. vulgaris} Poiret). Stems 15-50 × 0·4-0·8 cm, slightly swollen at base, glandular-hairy, yellowish or purplish. Leaves 15-30 mm, narrowly triangular-lanceolate, acute. Spike 6-20(-30) × 2·5-4·5 cm, usually lax, glandular-pubescent to villous; bracts 17-25 mm, lanceolate; flowers fragrant. Calyx 10-17 mm; segments free, or sometimes connate in lower half, entire to bifid. Corolla 20-32 mm, glandular-pubescent, pink or pale yellow, variously tinged with dull purple, erecto-patent, narrowly campanulate, uniformly curved; upper lip emarginate; lower lip with subequal, glandular-ciliate lobes. Filaments hairy, inserted 1-3(-5) mm above base of corolla; anthers glabrous. Stigma purple. Capsule 9-12 mm. 2n = 38. {\i On Rubiaceae. W., C.& S. Europe.} Al Au Be Br Bu Cz Ga Ge Gr He Ho Hs Hu It Ju No Po Rm Rs (C, W, K, E) Si.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 32. O. teucrii} Holandre, {\i Fl. Moselle} 322 (1829). Like {\b 31} but leaves not more than 15 mm; spikes not more than 10 cm; bracts 12-20 mm; calyx not more than 12 mm, with segments bifid; corolla curved at base and in upper lip, but more or less straight in the middle; filaments inserted 3-5 mm above base of corolla. {\i On} Teucrium{\i  spp. From Belgium and the Carpathians southwards to the Pyrenees, N. Italy and C. Jugoslavia.} Au Be Bu ?Cz Ga Ge He Hs Hu It Ju Rm Rs (W).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 33. O. lutea} Baumg., {\i Enum. Stirp. Transs.}{\b  2}: 215 (1816) ({\i O. rubens} Wallr.). Like {\b 31} but stems usually more strongly swollen at base; spike sometimes dense; corolla usually yellowish- or reddish-brown, with lower lip not or only sparsely ciliate; filaments inserted 3-6 mm above base of corolla; stigma yellow or whitish; capsule 10-14 mm. 2n = 38. {\i On species of} Medicago{\i  and }Trifolium{\i  and other Leguminosae. Europe northwards to the Netherlands and N. Poland, but rare in the Mediterranean region.} Al Au ?Be Bu Cz Ga Ge Gr He Ho Hs Hu It Ju Po Rm Rs (W, K, E) Sa Si
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 34. O. elatior} Sutton,{\i  Trans. Linn. Soc. London}{\b  4}: 178 (1798) ({\i O. major} L. pro parte; incl. {\i O. krylowii} G. Beck). Stems 20-70 × 0·3-0·9 cm, slightly swollen at base, usually glandular-pubescent. Leaves 10-20 mm, triangular-lanceolate. Spike 6-20(-30) × 2·5-4·5 cm, usually dense at least above, glandular-pubescent; bracts 15-25 mm, lanceolate. Calyx (6-)9-11 mm; segments connate at base, usually unequally bidentate. Corolla (12-)18-25 mm, glandular-pubescent, yellow, often tinged with pink, erecto-patent to patent, rarely suberect, narrowly campanulate, uniformly curved; upper lip entire to shallowly 2-lobed; lower lip with subequal lobes, not ciliate. Filaments hairy, inserted 3-6 mm above base of corolla; anthers glabrous. Stigma yellow. Capsule 8-10 mm. 2n = 38.{\i  On }Centaurea{\i  spp., other Compositae and} Thalictrum.{\i  From England and Estonia southwards to E. Spain, N. Italy, Bulgaria and Krym}. Al Au Br Bu Cz Da Ga Ge Gr Hs Hu It Ju Po Rm Rs (B, C, W, K, E) Su.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   {\b O. borbasiana} G. Beck, {\i Biblioth. Bot}. ({\i Stuttgart}) {\b 19}: 173 (1890), from N.W. Jugoslavia, is said to differ in its shorter stems, villous leaves and bracts and filaments glabrous above, but does not seem to be specifically distinct from {\b 34}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 35. O. alsatica} Kirschleger,{\i  Prodr. Fl. Alsace} 109 (1836) ({\i O. cervariae} Kirschleger ex Suard). Like {\b 34} but stems distinctly swollen at base; leaves up to 30 mm; bracts 10-20 mm; corolla often tinged with purple or brown, narrower and scarcely campanulate, with the lower lip ciliate and the middle lobe often the largest; filaments inserted 1-7 mm above base of corolla. {\i On Umbelliferae. C. Europe, extending to E. France and C. Jugoslavia; W., C. & S. parts of U.S.S.R}. Au ?Be Cz Ga Ge He Hu ?It Ju Po Rm Rs (B, C, W, K, E).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Plants from N.W. Italy (Liguria), described as {\b O. caudata} De Not.,{\i  Repert. Fl. Ligust. }306 (1844), appear to resemble{\b  35} but require further investigation.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 36. O. chironii} Lojac.,{\i  Contr. Fl. Sic.} 12 (1878). Like{\b  34} but stems not more than 45 cm, distinctly swollen at base; spike not more than 15 cm; calyx up to 15 mm, the segments free; corolla cream or pale yellow, tinged with pink, the lower lip ciliate; filaments inserted 3-4 mm above base of corolla. {\i On} Opoponax chironium. •{\i  Sicilia}. Si.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 37. O. laserpitii-sileris} Reuter ex Jordan,{\i  Obs. Pl. Crit.}{\b  3}: 223 (1846). Like {\b 34} but more robust; stems distinctly swollen at base; leaves up to 30 mm; calyx 11-15 mm; corolla 22-30 mm, mainly brownish-violet, yellowish towards base and on lower lip, more broadly campanulate; upper lip deeply 2-lobed; lower lip ciliate, the middle lobe often the largest; filaments inserted 5-7 mm above base of corolla. {\i On} Laserpitium siler.{\i  • Alps, Balkan peninsula; very local}. Au ?Bu Ga He Ju.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 38. O. flava} C.F.P. Mart. ex F.W. Schultz, {\i Beitr. Kenntn. Deutsch. Orob}. 9 (1829). Stems 20-65 × 0·5-0·9 cm, scarcely swollen at base, glandular-pubescent, yellowish or brownish. Leaves 15-25 mm, lanceolate, dense below, sparser above.
\par

\par
292}
\par