{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 narrowly linear-filiform segments with few or no bladders; or bearing colourless, much reduced leaves with bladders c. 2 mm. Turions 1·5-5 mm, globose, glabrous. Inflorescence 4-15 cm; flowers 2-6; bracts c. 1·5 mm, auriculate; pedicels more or less recurved in fruit. Corolla 6-8 mm, pale yellow; upper lip c. 6 mm wide; spur saccate or obtusely conical, not longer than wide. Capsule 1·5-2 mm. Seeds unwinged. 2n = c. 40.{\i  Shallow water and bogs. Most of Europe, but rare in the Mediterranean region.} Al Au Be Br Bu Cz Da Fe Ga Ge Gr Hb He Ho Hs Hu Is It Ju No Po Rm Rs (N, B, C, W, E) Su.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Plants, mainly from C. Europe, have been distinguished as {\b U. bremii} Heer in Koelliker, {\i Verz. Phan. Gew. Zürich }142 (1839). They differ from {\b 3} in being larger, with longer leaves and stouter, taller inflorescences bearing more, slightly larger, brighter yellow flowers, with more acute, longer spurs. They are probably best regarded as a variety of {\b 3} since intermediates occur.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 4. U. intermedia} Hayne in Schrader,{\i  Jour. für die Bot.}{\b  1800}({\b 1}): 18 (1800). Aquatic or subaquatic, more or less anchored to substratum; stems 10-25 cm, slender, strongly dimorphic; bearing either distichous green, orbicular, more or less palmately lobed, bladderless leaves 4-15 mm long, with linear denticulate segments bearing 1-2 bristles on each tooth; or bearing colourless, much reduced leaves with bladders 3-4 mm. Turions 5-15 mm, ovoid, densely bristly. Inflorescence 10-20 cm; flowers 2-4; bracts c. 2 mm, auriculate. Corolla 10-15 mm; spur longer than wide, subulate from a short conical base. Capsule rarely produced. {\i Shallow water and bogs. Europe southward to S.W. France, N. Italy and S.C. Russia}. Au Be Br Cz Da Fe Ga Ge Hb He Ho It Ju No Po Rm Rs (N, B, C, W, E) Su.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b  U. ochroleuca} R. Hartman,{\i  Bot. Not.}{\b  1857}: 30 (1857), is like{\b  4} but with narrower, more acute segments to the green leaves, which may also bear some bladders, and with smaller flowers with a shorter spur; it is perhaps a variant of{\b  4} or possibly 3 × 4. It has 2n = c. 40 and occurs in N. & C. Europe.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 5. U. vulgaris} L., {\i Sp. Pl}. 18 (1753). Aquatic, floating submerged; stems up to 100 cm, slender; internodes 3-10 mm; leaves up to 3 cm, 2-lobed from the base; lobes more or less broadly ovate in outline, pinnately divided; segments capillary, denticulate, bearing solitary or fasciculate bristles on each tooth; bladders up to 3 mm. Inflorescence 10-30 cm; scape erect in fruit; flowers 4-10; bracts 5 mm, more or less auriculate; pedicels 6-15 mm, 2-3 times as long as the bract, strongly recurved in fruit. Corolla 12-18 mm, deep yellow; upper lip about as long as the conspicuous gibbous palate; lower lip with deflexed margin; spur more or less broadly conical at base, rather abruptly narrowed to a short, narrowly cylindrical, more or less acute apex with internal glands on the abaxial surface only. Capsule 3-5 mm, globose, usually freely produced. 2n = c. 40.{\i  Still water. Most of Europe, but rare in the south.} Al Au Be Br Bu ?Cr Cz Da Fa Fe Ga Ge Gr Hb He Ho Hs Hu It Ju No Po Rm Rs (N, B, C, W, K, E) Si Su.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 6. U. australis} R. Br.,{\i  Prodr. Fl. Nov. Holl.} 430 (1810) ({\i U. neglecta} Lehm., {\i U. major} auct., {\i U. jankae} Velen.). Like {\b 5} but internodes 8-20 mm; scapes more slender, often longer, sinuous after anthesis; pedicels 10-25 mm, 3-5 times as long as the bract, erect or patent in fruit; corolla lemon-yellow; upper lip longer than palate; lower lip more or less flat, with undulate margin; spur narrowly conical, gradually tapering from base to an obtuse apex, with internal glands on both adaxial and abaxial surfaces; capsule apparently never produced. 2n = c. 40.{\i  Still water. Most of Europe except the extreme north and most of the U.S.S.R}. Au Be Br Bu ?Cr Cz Da Fe Ga Ge Hb He Ho Hs Hu It Ju Lu No Po Rm Rs (C) Su Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   {\b 5} and{\b  6} have often been confused and many records of both are therefore doubtful.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc {\b 162.               MYOPORACEAE}
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc Edit. †T.G. Tutin.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Shrubs or small trees. Leaves simple, exstipulate. Flowers 5-merous. Calyx deeply lobed. Corolla with a short tube and weakly zygomorphic limb. Stamens 4-5, inserted on the corollatube and alternating with the lobes. Ovary superior, 2- to 10 locular; style filiform; ovules usually 1 or 2 in each loculus. Fruit a drupe.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc {\b 1.              Myoporum}             Solander ex G. Forster
\par   

\pard\f0\fs24\qc By J. do Amaral Franco.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Evergreen trees or shrubs. Leaves alternate, rarely opposite, entire or serrate, with numerous pellucid glands. Flowers small, axillary, solitary or clustered in cymes. Calyx 5-lobed. Corolla campanulate-hypocrateriform with a short tube and 5 patent lobes, often bearded. Stigma obtuse. Fruit a scarcely fleshy drupe.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 Leaves lanceolate, usually entire; stamens 4 ............................... {\b 1. tenuifolium}
\par
Leaves obovate, serrate in distal half; stamens 5 ......................... {\b 2. tetrandrum}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. M. tenuifolium} G. Forster,{\i  Fl. Ins. Austral. Prodr.} 44 (1786) (incl. {\i M. acuminatum} R. Br.). Small round-topped tree up to 8 m; bark brownish-grey, minutely fissured. Leaves 4·5-10(-17) × 1·5-3(-5) cm, lanceolate, acuminate, cuneate at base, usually entire, bright glossy green above; petiole 5-10 mm. Flowers in dense (1-)5- to 9-flowered cymes; pedicels up to 12 mm, slender. Calyx 2-3 mm, divided to half-way into ovate-lanceolate, acute lobes. Corolla white, with small purple spots; tube 4-5 mm; limb 10-12 mm in diameter. Stamens 4. Fruit 7-9 mm, ovoid, blackish-purple when ripe.{\i  Planted for shelter in S.W. Europe and locally naturalized.} [Bl Hs Lu.] ({\i E. Australia}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. M. tetrandrum} (Labill.) Domin, {\i Mem. Soc. Sci. Boheme}{\b  1921-1922}({\b 2}): 109 (1923) ({\i M. serratum} R. Br.). Like {\b 1} but usually a shrub; leaves 2·5-5 × 1-2·5 cm, obovate, dark green above, obtuse and mucronate at apex, serrate in distal half; calyx-lobes lanceolate; stamens 5; fruit 4-6 mm, globose.{\i  Planted for shelter in Portugal, mainly near the coast, and locally naturalized}. [Lu.] ({\i Australia, Tasmania}.)
\par

\par
297}
\par