{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28  subglabrous, erecto-patent, slightly curved, constricted below the middle, the upper part infundibuliform, violet-blue except for whitish base; lobes of lower lip equal, not ciliate. Filaments hairy at least at apex and base, inserted 6-18 mm above base of corolla; anthers puberulent. Stigma whitish. Capsule 10-11 mm. {\i On} Artemisia {\i spp. S.E. Russia, W. Kazakhstan}. Rs (E).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 13. O. crenata} Forskål,{\i  Fl. Aegypt.}{\b  113} (1775) (incl. {\i O. speciosa} DC.). Stems up to 50(-80) × 1·2 cm, slightly swollen at the base, sparsely villous, usually yellowish. Leaves 12-25 mm, linear-lanceolate, dense below, sparse above. Spike up to 20(-50) × 4 cm, dense above, often lax below, villous; bracts 15-25 mm linear- to ovate-lanceolate, long-acuminate; flowers fragrant. Calyx 10-20 mm; segments free, more or less bidentate. Corolla 20-30 mm, subglabrous, white, the lips often with lilac veins, erecto-patent, straight or slightly curved, campanulate; lips divergent, the lower with large, suborbicular lobes, not ciliate. Filaments hairy, inserted 2-4 mm above base of corolla; anthers glabrous. Stigma white, yellow or pinkish. Capsule 10-12 mm. 2n = 38. {\i Usually on leguminous crop-plants, rarely on other herbs. S. Europe; a rare casual elsewhere.} ?Al Az Bl Bu Co Cr Ga Gr Hs It Ju Lu Rs (K) Sa Si Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 14. O. alba} Stephan ex Willd., {\i Sp. Pl.}{\b  3}: 350 (1800) ({\i O. epithymum} DC.). Stems up to 35(-70) × 1 cm, slightly swollen at the base, glandular-pubescent, usually purplish-red. Leaves 12-20 mm, lanceolate. Spike 5-10(-20) × 2-4 cm, lax to moderately dense, glandular-pubescent; bracts 12-25 mm, lanceolate, acuminate; flowers fragrant. Calyx 8-16 mm; segments free, usually entire, with 1-3 conspicuous veins. Corolla 15-25 mm, glandular-puberulent especially distally, purplish-red, yellow or whitish, erecto-patent, broadly cylindrical-campanulate, slightly curved; upper lip entire or 2-lobed; lower lip glandular-ciliate, the middle lobe usually much the largest. Filaments densely hairy at least at the base, inserted 1-3 mm above the base of corolla; anthers subglabrous. Stigma red or purple. Capsule 10-12 mm.{\i  On} Thymus{\i  and other Labiatae. Europe northwards to Scotland Belgium and C. Russia; isolated stations in the Baltic islands}. Al Au Be Br Bu Cr Cz Ga Ge Gr Hb He Hs Hu It Ju Po Rm Rs (C, W, K, E) Si Su Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 15. O. reticulata} Wallr.,{\i  Orob. Gen.} 42 (1825) (incl.{\i  O. pallidiflora} Wimmer & Grab.). Like {\b 14} but often taller and more robust; flowers scarcely fragrant; calyx 7-12 mm, with indistinct veins; lower lip of corolla with equal lobes, not ciliate; filaments glabrous or subglabrous at the base, inserted 2-4 mm above base of corolla. 2n = 38. {\i Usually on species of} Cirsium, Carduus, Knautia{\i  or related genera. Europe northwards to England and Estonia, but absent from most of the islands}. Al Au Br Bu Co Cz Da Ga Ge Gr He Ho Hs Hu It Ju Po Rm Rs (B, C, W, E) Su.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 16. O. haenseleri} Reuter in DC.,{\i  Prodr.}{\b  11}: 22 (1847). Like {\b 14} but stems 30-55 cm; spikes 10-35 cm; bracts 20-30 mm, linear-lanceolate; calyx-segments usually deeply bifid; corolla 22-30 mm, dull orange-red, the upper lip deeply 2-lobed, lower lip usually not ciliate; filaments inserted (1-)3-6 mm above base of corolla. {\i On} Helleborus foetidus ({\i  ? and on} Ononis{\i  spp.}). {\i S. Spain}. Hs.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 17. O. pancicii} G. Beck,{\i  Ann. Naturh. Mus.} ({\i Wien}){\b  2}: 148 (1887). Stems (15-)35-50 × 0·5-0·7 cm, somewhat swollen at the base, glandular-pubescent, yellowish, more rarely purple. Leaves up to 30 mm, lanceolate, dense below, sparse above. Spike 6-15 × 3-4 cm, usually dense, densely glandular-pubescent; bracts about as long as corolla, lanceolate; flowers fragrant. Calyx 9-14 mm; segments free or slightly connate, usually bidentate. Corolla 15-28 mm, glandular-pubescent, pale yellow or whitish, tinged with lilac distally, erecto-patent, broadly cylindrical campanulate, slightly curved; upper lip emarginate or shortly 2-lobed; lower lip more or less glandular-ciliate, the middle lobe the largest. Filaments usually hairy, inserted 2-3 mm above base of corolla; anthers subglabrous. Stigma yellow. Capsule 9-14 mm.{\i  Usually on Dipsacaceae. • Bulgaria, C. Jugoslavia, N. Albania.} Al Bu Ju.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 18. O. serbica} G. Beck & Petrovic in Petrovic,{\i  Add. Fl. Agri Nyss.} 146 (1885). Like {\b 17} but stems not more than 15 cm; calyx c. 8 mm; corolla not more than 20 mm, with upper lip subentire; lobes of lower lip equal, glandular-ciliate; filaments inserted 3-4 mm above base of corolla.{\i  On }Artemisia alba.{\i  W. Bulgaria, S. Jugoslavia.} Bu Ju.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 19. O. pubescens} D'Urv.,{\i  Enum.} 76 (1822) ({\i O. versicolor }F. W. Schultz). Stems 15-50 × 0·4-0·7 cm, variably swollen at base, glandular-pubescent, pale yellow, often tinged with pink. Leaves 10-25 mm, oblong to linear-lanceolate. Spike 7-22 × 2-4 cm, rather lax, glandular-pubescent to villous; bracts 10-20 mm, lanceolate, acuminate. Calyx 8-16 mm; segments free or almost free, usually equally bifid. Corolla 10-20 mm, villous, pale yellow, tinged with violet above, erecto-patent, tubular, more or less uniformly curved; upper lip more or less entire; lower lip not or sparsely ciliate, the middle lobe the largest. Filaments hairy below, usually glabrous above, inserted 3-4 mm above base of corolla; anthers glabrous. stigma violet. Capsule 8-10 mm.{\i  On Compositae and Umbelliferae, perhaps also on Leguminosae. S.E. Europe, extending locally westwards to S.E. France, but doubtfully native in the west}. Bu Cr *Ga Gr *It Ju Rs (K) Si Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 20. O. densiflora} Salzm. ex Reuter in DC., {\i Prodr.}{\b  11} :19 (1847). Stems 15-40 × 0·6-0·8 cm, more or less strongly swollen at base, glandular-pubescent but more or less glabrescent below, reddish Leaves 20-30 mm, oblong-lanceolate, acute. Spike 5-10 × 3-35 cm, dense, glandular-pubescent to more or less villous; bracts 15-20 mm, lanceolate, acuminate. Calyx 7-12 mm; segments free or shortly connate at base, unequally bifid. Corolla 10-18 mm, glandular-puberulent to subglabrous, yellowish, erecto-patent to patent, tubular, slightly curved; upper lip emarginate to 2-lobed; lobes of lower lip subequal, not ciliate. Filaments sparsely hairy below, more or less glabrous above, inserted 1·5-4 mm above base of corolla, with wide, more or less deltate base; anthers glabrous. Stigma yellow. Capsule 8-9 mm On Leguminosae; perhaps also on Compositae. {\i W.C. Portugal, S.W. Spain.} Hs Lu ?Sa ?Si.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    ({\b 21-27}). {\b O. minor} group. Stems 10-70(-100) × 0·3-1 cm, variably swollen at base, glandular-pubescent to villous, yellowish, more or less tinged with purple, red or brown. Leaves 10-25 mm. Spike 3-30 × 2-4 cm, usually lax below, more or less dense above, glandular-pubescent; bracts 7-22 mm, lanceolate, acuminate. Calyx 7-16 mm; segments free. Corolla 10-23 mm, erecto-patent to more or less patent, tubular or narrowly campanulate, curved or nearly straight; lower lip not ciliate. Filaments hairy below (sometimes only sparsely), subglabrous above, inserted 1·5-6 mm above base of corolla; anthers glabrous. Capsule 8-10 mm.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Stigma yellow
\par
2 Stamens inserted (4-)5-6 mm above base of corolla; on
\par
 {\i  Euphorbia esula} ................................................................................ {\b 23. esulae}
\par
2 Stamens inserted 2-4·5 mm above base of corolla
\par
3 Corolla pale yellow throughout ....................................................... {\b 27. minor}
\par
3 Corolla tinged with red, violet or brown
\par

\par
290}
\par