{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs36\qc DIAPENSIALES
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28\qc {\b 130.           DIAPENSIACEAE}
\par 

\pard\f0\fs24\qc Edit. †T.G. Tutin.
\par 

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Perennial herbs or dwarf shrubs. Leaves simple, exstipulate. Flowers actinomorphic, 5-merous. Petals connate towards the base. Stamens alternating with the petals; anthers opening by slits; pollen not in tetrads. Ovary superior, 3-locular; placentation axile; style 1. Fruit a loculicidal capsule.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28\qc {\b 1.              Diapensia}          L.
\par 

\pard\f0\fs24\qc By †T.G. Tutin.
\par 

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Flowers solitary, pedunculate, erect. Calyx deeply 5-lobed, coriaceous. Anthers broadly ovate, with divergent loculi. Ovary deeply 3-lobed; style slender; stigma 3-lobed. Seeds numerous, small.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. D. lapponica} L.,{\i  Sp. Pl.} 141 (1753). Evergreen, densely caespitose herb up to 6 cm. Leaves 5-10 mm, obovate-spathulate, rounded at apex, coriaceous, crowded. Peduncles 5-40 mm, each with usually 1 bract and 2 bracteoles, the latter close below the flower. Calyx-lobes c. 5 mm, obtuse. Petals up to 10 mm, obovate, white. Stamens with wide, flattened filaments. Capsule c. 4 mm, ovoid. 2n = 12.{\i  Rock-crevices and stony ground. Arctic Europe, extending southwards in the mountains to} c. 56° 40'{\i  N. in Scotland and} c. 60°{\i  N. in Norway}. Br Fe Is No Rs (N) Su.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs36\qc ERICALES
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28\qc {\b  131.          PYROLACEAE}
\par 

\pard\f0\fs24\qc Edit. D.A. Webb.
\par 

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Small perennial herbs (rarely dwarf shrubs). Leaves simple, alternate or opposite. Flowers hermaphrodite, actinomorphic, (4-)5-merous. Sepals free or united at base. Petals free. Stamens twice as many as petals, obdiplostemonous. Stigma (4-)5-lobed. Ovary superior, 4- to 5-locular, with parietal placentae; fruit a loculicidal capsule; seeds numerous, small, with the testa prolonged into two appendages.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  Literature: H. Andres,{\i  Verh. Bot. Ver. Brandenb}. {\b 56}: 1-76 (1914).
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28\li200  1 All leaves scale-like, without chlorophyll ................................{\b  5. Monotropa}
\par 
1 Green leaves present
\par 
2 Leaves mostly cauline; flowers in corymbs or umbels ........... {\b 4. Chimaphila}
\par 
2 Leaves mostly basal; flowers solitary or in racemes
\par 
3 Flowers solitary ...........................................................................{\b  3. Moneses}
\par 
3 Flowers in racemes
\par 
4 Racemes secund; pollen-grains free .............................................. {\b 2. Orthilia}
\par 
4 Racemes not secund; pollen-grains in tetrads ................................. {\b 1. Pyrola}
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28\qc {\b 1.         Pyrola}           L.
\par 

\pard\f0\fs24\qc By B. Krisa.
\par 

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Glabrous, rhizomatous herbs. Leaves green, somewhat coriaceous, alternate, in lax basal rosettes; cauline leaves reduced to small scales. Flowers in terminal racemes, not secund. Anthers opening by pores at the end of short tubes. Pollen-grains in tetrads.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  Literature: B. Krisa,{\i  Nov. Bot. Inst. Bot. Univ. Carol. Prag.}{\b  1965}: 31-35 (1965). G. Knaben & T. Engelskjon, {\i Årbok Univ. Bergen}{\b  1967}({\b 4}): 1-71 (1968).
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Style not expanded into a disc below the stigma
\par 
2 Style 1-2 mm, included .................................................................... {\b 1. minor}
\par 
2 Style at least 5 mm, exserted
\par 
3 Bracts lanceolate, equalling or shorter than pedicels ................. {\b 6. norvegica}
\par 
3 Bracts ovate-lanceolate, longer than pedicels ............................. {\b 7. carpatica}
\par 
1 Style expanded into a disc below the stigma
\par .
4 Style straight; petiole not longer than lamina .................................. {\b 2. media}
\par 
4 Style curved; petiole longer than lamina
\par 
5 Flowers 15-20 mm in diameter; leaves subentire .................... {\b 5. grandiflora}
\par 
5 Flowers 8-12 mm in diameter; leaves crenulate
\par 
6 Calyx-lobes 1·5-2 mm, deltate, acute; petals yellowish-green ..{\b 3. chlorantha}
\par 
6 Calyx-lobes 2-4·5 mm, lanceolate, acuminate; petals white .. {\b 4. rotundifolia}
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. P. minor} L., {\i Sp. Pl. }396 (1753). Stem 5-20(-30) cm. Leaves 2·5-6 × 1·5-5 cm, broadly elliptical, obtuse to subacute, crenulate-serrulate; petiole shorter than lamina. Bracts linear-lanceolate, at least as long as pedicels. Flowers 5-7 mm in diameter, globose. Calyx-lobes 1·5-2 mm, deltate, acute to subobtuse. Petals whitish to lilac-pink. Anthers 0·8-1·2 mm. Style 1-2 mm, not expanded below the stigma, straight, included. 2n = 46. {\i Woods, moors and other humus-rich soils; occasionally on sand-dunes. Most of Europe, but rare in the south.} All except Az Bl Cr Lu Sa Sb Si Tu.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. P. media} Swartz,{\i  Kungl. Svenska Vet.-Akad. Handl}. nov. ser.,{\b  25}: 257 (1804). Stem (5-)15-30 cm. Leaves 3-5 × 2-5 cm, ovate to orbicular, obtuse, crenulate; petiole shorter than or equalling lamina. Bracts ovate to lanceolate, acuminate, about equalling or longer than pedicels. Flowers 7-10 mm in diameter, globose. Calyx-lobes c. 2·5 mm, triangular-ovate, obtuse or subacute. Petals white or pink. Anthers c. 2·5 mm. Style 4-6 mm, expanded into a disc below the stigma, exserted, straight. 2n = 92. {\i Woods, moors and heaths. N. & C. Europe, extending southwards locally, and mainly in the mountains, to N. Italy, Macedonia, Krym and S. Ural.} Au Br Bu Cz Da Fe Ga Ge Hb He Hu It Ju No Po Rm Rs (N, B, C, W, K, E) Su.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 3. P. chlorantha} Swartz,{\i  op. cit.}{\b  31}: 190 (1810) ({\i P. virens} Koerte, {\i P. virescens} auct.). Stem 10-30 cm. Leaves 0·5-2(-3) × 0·5-2·5 cm, pale green above, darker beneath, oblong-obovate
\par 

\par 
3}
\par