{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28\qc {\b  1.             Plumbago}         L.
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc By D.A. Moore.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Shrubs or perennial herbs. Leaves alternate, simple. Inflorescence of (2-)3-bracteate, 1-flowered spikelets grouped into terminal spikes. Calyx tubular, 5-ribbed, scarious; limb deeply 5-dentate. Corolla with narrow tube and rotate limb. Stamens free. Style 1, with 5 stigma-lobes. Fruit circumscissile near base, dehiscing upwards into 5 valves.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. P. europaea} L.,{\i  Sp. Pl.} 151 (1753). Perennial herb; stems 30-100 cm, erect, much-branched. Leaves up to 5-8 × 3-4·5 cm, the lower long-petiolate, ovate to oblong, cordate,the upper sessile, oblanceolate to lanceolate or linear, acute, auriculate-amplexicaul, glandular-dentate, glabrous, farinose beneath, rarely densely stipitate-glandular. Calyx 5-7 mm, densely stipitate-glandular on ribs, the teeth triangular. Corolla-tube 1½ times as long as calyx, the lobes obovate, violet to lilac pink. Fruit 5-8 mm, oblong to oblong-ovoid. 2n = 12.{\i  Road sides, maritime sands and other dry, open habitats. S. Europe}.Al Bu Co Cr Ga Gr Hs It Ju Lu Rm Sa Si Tu [Cz].
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   {\b P. auriculata} Lam.,{\i  Encycl. Méth. Bot.}{\b  2:} 270 (1786) ({\i P. capensis} Thunb.), a shrub native to South Africa, distinguished from {\b 1} by its larger, pale blue corolla c. 25 mm in diameter, is frequently cultivated for ornament in the warmer parts of Europe and is occasionally found as an escape from gardens.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc {\b  2.             Ceratostigma }          Bunge
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc By D.M. Moore.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Perennial herbs. Leaves alternate, simple. Inflorescence of 3-bracteate, 1-flowered spikelets grouped into compact terminal and axillary clusters. Calyx tubular, 5-ribbed, slightly scarious and plicate distally. Corolla infundibuliform, with patent limb. Stamens free. Style 1, with 5 stigma-lobes. Fruit circumscissile near base, dehiscing upwards into 5 valves.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. C. plumbaginoides} Bunge,{\i  Enum. Pl. Chin. Bor.} 55 (1833). Stems 15-30 cm, ascending, much-branched, slightly hispid, reddish. Leaves 2-5 cm, obovate, acute to obtuse, rarely emarginate, cuneate at base, entire, appressed-ciliate, sessile. Calyx 10-12 mm, the teeth 1·5-2 mm, linear-triangular. Corolla violet-blue, the tube 15 mm, the limb 16-20 mm in diameter, with obcordate, emarginate, mucronate lobes.{\i  Locally naturalized in N.W. France and N.W. Italy.} [Ga It.] ({\i China.})
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc {\b 3.              Acantholimon }          Boiss.
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc By D.M. Moore.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Spiny, cushion-forming shrubs. Leaves alternate, simple. Inflorescence of 3-bracteate, 1-flowered spikelets grouped into a simple, spike-like panicle. Calyx infundibuliform; tube slender and 10-ribbed at base; limb scarious, plicate, shortly 5-dentate, with slightly excurrent ribs. Petals connate at base. Stamens free. Styles 5; stigmas capitate. Fruit indehiscent.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. A. androsaceum} (Jaub. & Spach) Boiss., {\i Diagn. Pl. Or. Nov.}{\b  1}({\b 7}): 73 (1846) ({\i A. echinus} auct., non (L.) Bunge). Leaves 10-20 × c. 1 mm, linear, subulate-triquetrous distally, pungent, glabrous or puberulent. Peduncle up to 4 cm, shorter than or somewhat exceeding the leaves, puberulent; inflorescence (1-)3- to 7-flowered. Calyx 14-16 mm, the tube about twice as long as the limb, puberulent towards base, white with purplish veins. Petals shorter than or exceeding the calyx by c. 3 mm, long-clawed, purple. Fruit narrowly cylindrical.{\i  Mountains of S. part of Balkan peninsula and Kriti}. Al Cr Gr Ju.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc {\b 4.            Armeria }             Willd.
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc By A.R. Pinta da Silva.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Caespitose perennial herbs or cushion-forming dwarf shrubs, with a branched woody stock. Leaves simple, in basal rosettes or on densely leafy branches. Inflorescence a capitulum, with an involucre of imbricate bracts and a tubular scarious sheath at the base enclosing the top of the scape. Flowers usually bracteolate, in usually bracteate, cymose spikelets. Calyx infundibuliform, inserted obliquely, with a basal spur; tube 5- or 10-ribbed; limb scarious; lobes usually awned. Corolla infundibuliform; petals connate at the extreme base, persistent. Stamens inserted at the base of corolla. Styles 5, connate at the base; stigmas plumose,. Fruit with circumscissile or irregular dehiscence.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Most species in temperate Europe show dimorphism of pollen and stigmas and are self-incompatible. In Europe only {\b 1}({\b b}) is known to be monomorphic and self compatible.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  The extent of hybridization in the genus is not clear, but the following hybrids seem worthy of mention:{\b  1 }× {\b 32}, {\b 18} × {\b 31}({\b a}),{\b  35} × {\b 37} and{\b  40} × {\b 38}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  This account follows Bernis (1953) in considering the calyx spur as the unveined basal extremity of the calyx, adnate to the pedicel at least before maturity, and including the insertion-scar; the tube is measured from the apex of the pedicel to the base of the limb. Measurements of tube and spur refer to the flower with the longest pedicel in the spikelet, i.e. the oldest one, which is opposite the bract.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Literature: F. A. Novák, {\i Mém. Soc. Sci. Bohême}{\b  1938:} 1-25 (1938);{\b  1939: }1-24 (1939). G. H. M. Lawrence, {\i Gentes Herb.}{\b  4:} 389-418 (1940). F. Bernis,{\i  Bol. Soc. Brot}. ser. 2, {\b 23:} 225-263 (1950);{\i  Anal. Inst. Bot. Cavanilles }{\b 11}({\b 2}): 5-287 (1953); {\b 12}({\b 2}): 77-252 (1954); {\b 14:} 259-432 (1956).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Calyx-tube not more than 2(-2½) times as long as spur;
\par
  insertion-scar of calyx narrowly elliptical to linear
\par
2 Dwarf shrub; stock with many long branches
\par
3 Outer involucral bracts at least as long as the inner,
\par
  acuminate, mucronate to cuspidate; spikelet-bract at 
\par
  least as long as calyx ............................................................... {\b 34. welwitschii}
\par
3 Outer involucral bracts shorter than the inner, obtuse,
\par
  muticous; spikelet-bract absent or rudimentary ........................... {\b 35. pungens}
\par
2 Herb; stock short
\par
4 Leaves obovate- to linear-lanceolate, usually at least 2 mm wide
\par
5 Leaves velutinous ........................................................................ {\b 39. velutina}
\par
5 Leaves glabrous or puberulent
\par
6 Leaves (10-)15-35 mm wide; outer involucral bracts at
\par
  least as long as the inner, acuminate to cuspidate ........................ {\b 40. gaditana}
\par
6 Leaves not more than 10 mm wide; outer involucral
\par
  bracts shorter than the inner, obtuse, rarely mucronate ..................... {\b 41. hirta}
\par
4 Leaves (at least the inner) filiform to linear, sometimes
\par
  linear lanceolate, usually not more than 1 mm wide
\par
7 Leaves not more than 30 mm .................................................. {\b 42. hispalensis}
\par
7 Leaves at least 40 mm
\par
8 Spikelet-bract present
\par
9 Spikelet-bract longer than calyx, coriaceous; leaves 
\par
  all similar; awns absent or not more than 0·4 mm ........................ {\b 37. rouyana}
\par
9 Spikelet-bract shorter than calyx, scarious; leaves 
\par
  dimorphic; awns 0·7-2 mm .......................................................... {\b 43. cariensis}
\par
8 Spikelet-bract absent (but bracteoles sometimes 
\par
  rudimentary, scarious)
\par
10 Involucral bracts puberulent, the outer ± cuspidate;
\par
   calyx-tube usually hirsute .......................................................... {\b 36. pinifolia}
\par

\par
30}
\par