{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 10 Involucral bracts glabrous, the outer mucronulate; calyx-
\par
   tube hirsute only on ribs ....................................................... {\b 38. macrophylla}
\par
1 Calyx-tube 2-8 times as long as spur; insertion-scar of
\par
  calyx orbicular to ovate-oblong
\par
11 Leaves at least 5 mm wide, lanceolate to obovate-lanceolate
\par
12 Leaves mostly mucronate; scapes 10-20 cm ....................... {\b 33. berlengensis}
\par
12 Leaves muticous; scapes 20-80 cm
\par
13 Dwarf shrub; stock large, stout; capitula 30-40 mm 
\par
   wide ..................................................................................... {\b 10. pseudarmeria}
\par
13 Herb; stock rather short, slender; capitula 10-30 mm wide
\par
14 Involucral bracts spinescent, the inner with narrow 
\par
   scarious margins; calyx-awns 1·5-3 mm ........................................ {\b 13. villosa}
\par
14 Involucral bracts not spinescent, the inner with wide
\par
   scarious margins; calyx-awns 0·3-1·5 mm
\par
15 Sheath 8-20 mm; spikelet-bract at least as long as calyx
\par
16 Calyx 7-8 mm, the awns (0·8-)1-1·5 mm; spikelets 
\par
   stipitate .......................................................................................... {\b 15. morisii}
\par
16 Calyx 6-6·5 mm, the awns 0·3-0·5 mm; spikelets sessile
\par
   or subsessile ................................................................................. {\b 16. colorata}
\par
15 Sheath 20-60 mm; spikelet-bract shorter than calyx
\par
17 Capitula 25-30 mm wide; calyx 8-10 mm; leaves (60-)100
\par
   -200 mm; involucral bracts greenish ...................................... {\b 17. macropoda}
\par
17 Capitula 8-20(-30) mm wide; calyx 5-9 mm; leaves 
\par
   13-130 mm; involucral bracts brownish or reddish
\par
18 Outer involucral bracts usually longer than the inner,
\par
   with narrow scarious margins; spikelet-bract almost as
\par
   long as calyx ................................................................................... {\b 8. alliacea}
\par
18 Outer involucral bracts shorter than the inner, with wide 
\par
   scarious margins; spikelet-bract shorter than calyx ........................ {\b 12. langei}
\par
11 At least the inner leaves not more than 4(-7) mm wide,
\par
   filiform or linear to linear-spathulate
\par
19 At least the inner leaves less than 0·7 mm wide,
\par
   filiform usually canaliculate, conduplicate or convolute
\par
20 Inner leaves muticous
\par
21 Capitula soft, not becoming hard in fruit; outer 
\par
   involucral bracts long-acuminate; corolla purple .......................... {\b 6. vandasii}
\par
21 Capitula compact, becoming hard in fruit; outer 
\par
   involucral bracts obtuse, mucronate to shortly 
\par
   cuspidate; corolla pinkish or white
\par
22 Calyx-awns 0·3-0·6 mm; leaves subobtuse; corolla white
\par
   or pale pinkish ............................................................................. {\b 20. littoralis}
\par
22 Calyx-awns at least 0·7 mm; leaves usually acute or
\par
   subacute; corolla pinkish, rarely white .......................................... {\b 21. duriaei}
\par
20 Inner leaves usually mucronate or mucronulate
\par
23 Sheath (10-)15-35 mm
\par
24 Calyx-awns not more than 1 mm; scapes erect or 
\par
   somewhat divergent; spikelet-bract puberulent, brown .................. {\b 12. langei}
\par
24 Calyx-awns 1·2-1·5 mm; scapes patent-ascending;
\par
   spikelet-bract glabrous, white-scarious .................................... {\b 24. eriophylla}
\par
23 Sheath 4-15 mm
\par
25 Calyx-awns (0·5-)1-1·5 mm
\par
26 Outer leaves mucronulate; bracteoles reduced ........................... {\b 25. humilis}
\par
26 Outer leaves muticous; bracteoles well-developed ............ {\b 19. trachyphylla}
\par
25 Calyx-awns 0·3-0·9 mm
\par
27 Scapes 18-32 cm, straight, erect; outer involucral
\par
   bracts much shorter than the inner .............................................. {\b 18. filicaulis}
\par
27 Scapes 4-15 cm, arcuate-ascending; outer involucral
\par
   bracts almost as long as the inner
\par
28 Spikelet-bract shorter than calyx, white-scarious;
\par
   scapes 10-15 cm ............................................................................ {\b 23. girardii}
\par
28 Spikelet-bract as long as calyx, dark brown, with 
\par
   scarious margin and fimbriate apex; scapes 4-5 cm ..................... {\b 22. arcuata}
\par
19 Leaves more than 0·7 mm wide, at least the inner 
\par
   linear to linear-spathulate, mostly flat
\par
29 At least the inner leaves mucronate or mucronulate
\par
30 Leaves pungently mucronate; scapes not more than 5 cm;
\par
   bracteoles absent or reduced ................................................. {\b 30. juniperifolia}
\par
30 Leaves not pungent; scapes more than 5 cm; bracteoles
\par
   ± well-developed
\par
31 Sheath not more than 15 mm
\par
32 Capitula (12-)20-25 mm wide; leaves uniform; spikelet-
\par
   stipe up to 2 mm; corolla usually white .............................. {\b 27. leucocephala}
\par
32 Capitula not more than 20 mm wide; leaves dimorphic;
\par
   spikelets sessile to shortly stipitate; corolla usually pinkish
\par
33 Calyx-awns 0·3-0·6 mm; scapes 18-32 cm; outer leaves
\par
   10-30 mm, subacute, mucronulate ............................................. {\b 18. filicaulis}
\par
33 Calyx-awns (0·5-)1-1·5 mm; scapes 4-20 cm; outer 
\par
   leaves 30-50 mm, subobtuse, muticous ............................... {\b 19. trachyphylla}
\par
31 Sheath 15-65 mm
\par
34 Calyx-awns not more than 1 mm
\par
35 Capitula 8-10(-13) mm wide, becoming hard in fruit;
\par
   outer involucral bracts with wide scarious margins ....................... {\b 12. langei}
\par
35 Capitula 10-20(-30) mm wide, not hard in fruit; outer
\par
   involucral bracts with narrow scarious margins ............................. {\b 8. alliacea}
\par
34 Calyx-awns 1-4 mm
\par
36 Calyx-awns 2-4 mm; outer involucral bracts ± contracted,
\par
   cuspidate-spinescent ............................................................ {\b 14. transmontana}
\par
36 Calyx-awns not more than 2 mm; outer involucral bracts
\par
   ± acuminate
\par
37 Spikelets usually subsessile; leaves usually more than
\par
   3 mm wide, lanceolate to linear-spathulate; capitula
\par
   10-20(-30) mm wide; bract almost as long as calyx ...................... {\b 8. alliacea}
\par
37 Spikelets stipitate; inner leaves 1·5-3 mm wide, linear;
\par
   capitula 20-35 mm wide; bract at least as long as calyx .............. {\b 4. rumelica} 
\par
29 At least the inner leaves muticous 
\par
38 Sheath not more than 15 mm
\par
39 Outer involucral bracts longer than the inner, acuminate-cuspidate
\par
40 Calyx-awns 1-1·5 mm ......................................................... {\b 9. ruscinonensis}
\par
40 Calyx-awns not more than 1 mm
\par
41 Capitula 15-25 mm; leaves all similar, entire ............................ {\b 1. maritima}
\par
41 Capitula 10-12 mm; leaves dimorphic, the outer ± 
\par
   undulate-denticulate .................................................................. {\b 7. denticulata}
\par
39 Outer involucral bracts shorter than or as long as the
\par
   inner, usually mucronate to muticous
\par
42 Herb; stock short, with short branches
\par
43 Leaves all similar, or somewhat unequal but not 
\par
   dimorphic, with at most very narrow scarious margins;
\par
   outer involucral bracts with narrow scarious margins
\par
44 Calyx-awns absent or not more than 1 mm; spikelet-bract
\par
   nearly as long as or longer than calyx; leaves not 
\par
   becoming coriaceous .................................................................... {\b 1. maritima}
\par
44 Calyx-awns 1-1·5 mm; spikelet-bract shorter than calyx-
\par
   leaves becoming coriaceous .................................................. {\b 9. ruscinonensis}
\par
43 Leaves dimorphic, at least the outer with wide scarious
\par
   margins; outer involucral bracts with wide scarious margins
\par
45 Outer involucral bracts acuminate-cuspidate; scapes up
\par
   to 50 cm; corolla usually white ..................................................... {\b 3. undulata}
\par
45 Outer involucral bracts ± acute, muticous or mucronate;
\par
   scapes not more than 20(-25) cm; corolla usually pink to 
\par
   purple .......................................................................................... {\b 2. canescens}
\par
42 Dwarf shrub; stock woody, stout, dense, much branched
\par
46 Scapes not more than 15 cm
\par
47 Calyx-awns 1-1·5 mm; outer involucral bracts as long 
\par
   as the inner ............................................................................ {\b 9. ruscinonensis}
\par
47 Calyx-awns not more than 1 mm; outer involucral bracts
\par
   shorter than the inner
\par
48 Plant usually velutinous; outer involucral bracts with
\par
   narrow, scarious margins, mucronate to ± cuspidate 
\par
  (coastal) ....................................................................................... {\b 32. pubigera}
\par

\par
31}
\par