{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 48 Plant glabrous or ± puberulent; outer involucral bracts
\par
   with wide scarious margins, muticous or mucronate (mountains)
\par
49 Spikelets usually sessile or subsessile; outer 
\par
   involucral bracts suborbicular to ovate-acuminate ................... {\b 31. splendens}
\par
49 Spikelets stipitate; outer involucral bracts ovate to 
\par
   lanceolate
\par
50 Calyx-awns not more than 0·5 mm, usually scarcely 
\par
   distinct from the lobe; leaves 0·7-1·5(-2) mm wide;
\par
   capitula 10-15(-18) mm wide .................................................... {\b 28. multiceps}
\par
50 Calyx-awns 0·5-1 mm; leaves 1·5-5 mm wide; capitula
\par
   (15-)18-30 mm wide .................................................................... {\b 1. maritima}
\par
46 Scapes more than 15 cm
\par
51 Outer involucral bracts muticous or mucronulate; calyx
\par
   5-6 mm; spikelets sessile or subsessile
\par
52 Leaves not papillose, the inner 1-1·2 mm wide ............................ {\b 26. sardoa}
\par
52 Leaves papillose, the inner c. 2 mm wide ................................ {\b 29. soleirolii}
\par
51 Outer involucral bracts acuminate-cuspidate or 
\par
   mucronate; calyx 6-8 mm; spikelets ± stipitate
\par
53 Calyx-awns 1-1·5 mm ......................................................... {\b 9. ruscinonensis}
\par
53 Calyx-awns not more than 1 mm
\par
54 Plant usually velutinous ........................................................... {\b 32. pubigera}
\par
54 Plant glabrous or puberulent ...................................................... {\b 1. maritima}
\par
38 Sheath at least 15 mm
\par
55 Outer involucral bracts longer than the inner
\par
56 Involucral bracts and leaves velutinous ....................................... {\b 11. vestita}
\par
56 Involucral bracts glabrous; leaves glabrous, ciliate 
\par
   or puberulent
\par
57 Outer involucral bracts obtuse, with wide scarious margins;
\par
   capitula becoming hard in fruit; calyx-tube with secondary
\par
   ribs glabrous or less hirsute than primary ribs ............................ {\b 20. littoralis}
\par
57 Outer involucral bracts acuminate, with narrow scarious
\par
   margins; capitula not becoming hard in fruit; calyx-tube
\par
   pubescent, or hirsute on both primary and secondary ribs
\par
58 Leaves acute or subacute, usually few ......................................... {\b 8. alliacea}
\par
58 Leaves obtuse or subobtuse, numerous
\par
59 Calyx-awns absent or not more than 1 mm; scapes
\par
   straight or arcuate only at base ..................................................... {\b 1. maritima}
\par
59 Calyx-awns 1-1·5 mm; scapes arcuate or flexuous ............. {\b 9. ruscinonensis}
\par
55 Outer involucral bracts not longer than the inner
\par
60 Calyx-awns at least 1 mm
\par
61 Capitula not more than 14 mm wide, becoming hard in fruit; 
\par
   calyx 4·5-6·5 mm; outer involucral bracts with wide 
\par
   scarious margins ............................................................................ {\b 21. duriaei}
\par
61 Capitula usually more than 14 mm wide, not becoming
\par
   hard in fruit; calyx 6-12 mm; outer involucral bracts
\par
   with narrow scarious margins
\par
62 Scapes not more than 20 cm; outer involucral bracts at least as
\par
   long as the inner; usually a dwarf shrub with the stock often
\par
   long-branched; leaves becoming coriaceous ........................ {\b 9. ruscinonensis}
\par
62 Scapes at least 25 cm; outer involucral bracts not longer
\par
   than the inner; herb with shortly branched stock;
\par
   leaves not becoming coriaceous
\par
63 Inner leaves 1-2 mm wide, linear, subobtuse; outer involucral
\par
   bracts usually acuminate-cuspidate, the inner mucronulate or
\par
   muticous, with wide scarious margins ....................................... {\b 2. canescens}
\par
63 Leaves at least 3 mm wide, lanceolate to linear-spathulate,
\par
   subacute; outer involucral bracts ± contracted at apex,
\par
   cuspidate-spinescent, the inner subacute to emarginate,
\par
   mucronate-spinescent, with narrow scarious margins ................... {\b 13. villosa}
\par
60 Calyx-awns not more than 1 mm
\par
64 Capitula at least 15 mm wide
\par
65 Dwarf shrub, usually velutinous ............................................... {\b 32. pubigera}
\par
65 Herb, glabrous, ciliate or puberulent
\par
66 Calyx-tube hirsute only on primary ribs; leaves 
\par
   dimorphic, the outer 3-10 mm wide; outer involucral
\par
   bracts much shorter than the inner .................................................... {\b 5. sancta}
\par
66 Calyx-tube pubescent throughout, or hirsute only on ribs;
\par
   leaves all similar or slightly dimorphic; outer involucral
\par
   bracts slightly shorter than to as long as the inner
\par
67 Leaves usually not more than 4 mm wide, usually obtuse,
\par
   linear to linear-spathulate; outer involucral bracts 
\par
   with narrow scarious margins ...................................................... {\b 1. maritima}
\par
67 Leaves (3-)4-14 mm wide, acute, the outer lanceolate-spathulate;
\par
   outer involucral bracts with wide scarious margins ....................... {\b 8. alliacea} 
\par
64 Capitula not more than 15 mm wide
\par
68 Capitula not becoming hard in fruit; outer involucral
\par
   bracts with narrow scarious margins ........................................... {\b 1. maritima}
\par
68 Capitula becoming hard in fruit; outer involucral 
\par
   bracts with wide scarious margins
\par
69 Sheath 40-60 mm, lax (on serpentine and dolomite) ................... {\b 12. langei}
\par
69 Sheath not more than 30 mm, appressed (on schist and granite)
\par
70 Calyx-awns 0·3-0·6 mm; leaves subobtuse; corolla white
\par
   or pale pinkish ............................................................................. {\b 20. littoralis}
\par
70 Calyx-awns at least 0·7 mm; leaves usually acute or
\par
   subacute; corolla pink, rarely white .............................................. {\b 21. duriaei}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Sect. ARMERIA. Calyx-tube 2-8 times as long as spur; insertion-scar of calyx orbicular to ovate-oblong. 
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. A. maritima} (Miller) Willd.,{\i  Enum. Pl. Hort. Berol. }333 (1809). Herb, or sometimes a dwarf shrub; stock shortly branched. Leaves linear to linear-spathulate, obtuse, muticous, with very narrow scarious margins, flat. Scapes straight or arcuate only at base. Sheath 10-20(-30) mm. Capitula 10-30 mm wide; outer involucral bracts more or less acuminate-subulate, mucronate or shortly cuspidate, usually with narrow scarious margins; inner scarious or almost so. Spikelet-bract almost as long as or longer than calyx. Calyx 5-10 mm; tube pubescent, or hirsute only on ribs; awns absent or up to 1 mm.{\i  Most of Europe, but absent from much of the south-east and many of the islands}. Al Au Be Br Bu Cz Da Fa Fe Ga Ge Hb He Hs Hu Is It Ju Lu No Po Rm Rs (N, B, C) Su.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   {\i A. maritima,} even in the present restricted sense, is the most polymorphic species of the genus. The following eight subspecies can usually be readily distinguished.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Capitula not more than 15(-17) mm wide
\par
2 Leaves 0·7-1·8 mm wide; scapes not more than 30 cm ....... ({\b e}) subsp.{\b  halleri}
\par
2 Leaves 2-3(-4) mm wide; scapes 40-60 cm .................... ({\b h}) subsp. {\b barcensis}
\par
1 Capitula more than 15 mm wide
\par
3 Outer involucral bracts usually at least as long as the inner, 
\par
  long-acuminate-subulate or shortly cuspidate to acute
\par
4 Leaves linear, usually ciliate ............................................ ({\b d}) subsp. {\b elongata}
\par
4 Leaves linear-spathulate, not or sparsely ciliate ............... ({\b c}) subsp.{\b  miscella}
\par
3 Outer involucral bracts shorter than the inner, mucronate
\par
5 Leaves mostly at least 2 mm wide ....................................... ({\b g}) subsp. {\b alpina}
\par
5 Leaves not more than 2 mm wide
\par
6 Corolla purplish ................................................................ ({\b f}) subsp.{\b  purpurea}
\par
6 Corolla pinkish or white
\par
7 Leaves 40-120(-180) × 0·8-1·2 mm, ± linear .................. ({\b a}) subsp.{\b  maritima}
\par
7 Leaves 30-50(-80) × 1·5-2 mm, linear-spathulate ............. ({\b b}) subsp.{\b  sibirica}
\par

\par
 (a) Subsp.{\b  maritima }({\i A. vulgaris} Willd.,{\i  Statice armeria} L.): Leaves 
\par
40-120(-180) × 0·8-1·2 mm, more or less linear. Scapes
\par

\par
32}
\par