{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 up to 20 cm, usually pubescent. Capitula (15-)17-25 mm wide; outer involucral bracts shorter than the inner, mucronate. Corolla pink, red or white. 2n = 18. {\i Coastal marshes, cliffs and pastures. • N. Europe, eastwards to N.W. Russia}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b sibirica} (Turcz. ex Boiss.) Nyman, {\i Consp.} 616 (1881) (incl. {\i A. arctica} sensu Sternb., non (Cham.) Wallr.): Leaves 30-50(-80) × 1·5-2 mm, linear-spathulate. Scapes up to 20 cm. Capitula 16-20 mm wide; outer involucral bracts shorter than the inner, mucronate. Spikelets stiptate. Corolla pale pink. {\i Dry stony places, heaths and alpine meadows. N. Fennoscandia. }({\i Sibirica and arctic America.})
\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b c}) Subsp. {\b miscella} (Merino) Malagarriga, {\i Acta Phytotax. Barcinon. }{\b 1}: 23 (1969): Leaves 1·5-3 mm wide, linear-spathulate, glabrous or sparcely ciliate. Scapes 25 cm or more. Capitula (15-)17-25 mm wide; outer involucral bracts as long as the inner, acute to shortly cuspidate. Corolla pink to pinkish-purple. {\i  Estuarine meadows. • S.W. France, N. Spain, N.W. Portugal}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b d}) Subsp.{\b  elongata} (Hoffm.) Bonnier, {\i Fl. Compl. Fr.}{\b  9:} 54 (1927): Leaves 50-150 × 1·1-2·5 mm, linear, usually ciliate. Scapes mostly more than 25 cm, glabrous. Capitula (15-)18-25 mm wide; outer involucral bracts up to 25 mm, as long as or longer than the inner, long-acuminate-subulate. Corolla pale pink. 2n = 18.{\i  Sandy heaths and grassy open places. • N.& C. Europe.}
\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Intermediates between this subspecies and {\b 1}({\b a}{\b ), which occur where their ranges overlap, mainly in the Baltic region, have been described as A. vulgaris} subsp.{\b  intermedia} (Marsson) Nordh.,{\i  Norsk Fl.} 498 (1940), and {\b A. ambifaria} Focke,{\i  Abh. Naturw. Ver. Bremen}{\b  17:} 445 (1903).
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b  A. pocutica} Pawl., {\i Fragm. Fl. Geobot.}{\b  8:} 399 (1962), from Topicz (N.E. Carpathians), is said to differ from {\b 1}({\b d}) mainly by the outer leaves being wider than the inner, but this is also sometimes observed in plants of 1(d) from N. & C. Europe.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b e}) Subsp.{\b  halleri} (Wallr.) Rothm.,{\i  Feddes Repert.}{\b  67:} 9 (1963) ({\i A. halleri} Wallr.): Leaves 30-100 × 0·7-1·8 mm, linear, ciliate. Scapes up to 30 cm. Capitula 10-15(-17) mm wide; outer involucral bracts not longer than the inner. Corolla bright pink to red. 2n = 18.{\i  Dry pastures and gravelly soils rich in heavy metals or over serpentine. • Scattered through W. & C. Europe, from the Pyrenees and the Netherlands to Poland.}
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b f}) Subsp.{\b  purpurea} (Koch) Á. & D. Löve, {\i Bot. Not.}{\b  114:} 54 (1961): Leaves up to 80 × c. 2 mm, linear, ciliate. Scapes 20-35 cm, glabrous. Capitula 20-25 mm wide; outer involucral bracts shorter than the inner, mucronate. Corolla purplish. 2n = 18. {\i Marshy meadows by lakes. • S. Germany and formerly in Switzerland}; ? N. Italy.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b g}) Subsp.{\b  alpina }(Willd.) P. Silva, {\i Bot. Jour. Linn. Soc. }{\b 64:} 376 (1971) ({\i A. alpina} Willd., {\i A. cantabrica} Boiss. & Reuter ex Willk., {\i A. pubinervis} Boiss., {\i Statice montana} Miller): Leaves 30-80 × (1·5-)2-4(-5) mm, linear to linear-lanceolate, usually glabrous. Scapes up to 25(-30) cm, usually glabrous. Capitula (15-)18-30 mm wide; outer involucral bracts not longer than the inner, mucronate. Corolla deep pink, purplish or red, rarely white. 2n = 18, 36. •{\i  High mountains, from N. Spain to W. Carpathians and Balkan peninsula}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b h}) Subsp.{\b  barcensis} (Simonkai) P. Silva, {\i loc. cit.} (1971) ({\i A. barcensis} Simonkai): Leaves up to 150 × 2-3(-4) mm, linear, ciliate. Scapes 40-60 cm. Capitula 10-15 mm wide; outer involucral bracts shorter than the inner, brown at the apex. Corolla pink to purplish. • {\i C. Romania} ({\i near Brasov}).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. A. canescens} (Host) Boiss. in DC.,{\i  Prodr.}{\b  12:} 686 (1848) (incl.{\i  A. dalmatica} G. Beck). Herb; stock shortly branched. Leaves muticous, dimorphic; outer up to 2-3(-6) mm wide, linear-subspathulate, flat; inner 1-2 mm wide, linear or linear-lanceolate, flat or revolute. Scapes erect or arcuate-ascending. Sheath 7-30 mm. Capitula (10-)15-25 mm wide; outer involucral bracts shorter than or as long as the inner; inner obtuse. mucronulate or muticous, with wide scarious margins. Spikelets sessile or subsessile; bract as long as calyx. Calyx 6-10 mm; tube usually hirsute only on ribs; awns (0·3-)1-2 mm. Corolla usually pinkish to reddish-purple. {\i C. & E. Mediterranean region}. Al Gr It Ju Si.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 A very polymorphic species (cf. Novák (1938)).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b canescens}: Leaves with narrow scarious margins, glabrous, usually subobtuse. Scapes 25-70 cm. Sheath 18-30 mm. Outer involucral bracts with very narrow scarious margins, usually acuminate-cuspidate. 2n = 18. {\i Mountain grassland; calcicole. • Almost throughout the range of the species}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b b}) Subsp.{\b  nebrodensis} (Guss.) P. Silva,{\i  Bot. Jour. Linn. Soc. }{\b 64:} 376 (1971) ({\i A. majellensis} Boiss.,{\i  Statice nebrodensis} Guss.): At least the outer leaves usually with wide scarious margins, sometimes ciliate and puberulent on veins, obtuse. Scapes 7-20(-25) cm. Sheath 7-13 mm. Outer involucral bracts with wide scarious margins, mostly subacute, muticous or mucronate. 2n = 18. {\i Sunny mountain rocks. • Throughout the range of the species}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 3. A. undulata} (Bory) Boiss. in DC., {\i Prodr. }{\b 12:} 685 (1848). Like {\b 2} but leaves all subobtuse, the outer with wide scarious margins; scapes 10-50 cm; sheath 8-15 mm; outer involucral bracts more or less acuminate-cuspidate, with wide scarious margins; calyx-awns 0·8-1·2 mm; corolla usually white.{\i  Mountain pastures. Greece.} Gr. ({\i Lebanon}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 4. A. rumelica} Boiss.,{\i  op. cit.} 677 (1848). Like {\b 2} but leaves all linear, subacute, the outer acuminate, the inner 1·5-3 mm wide, mucronulate; sheath 15-45 mm; capitula 20-35 mm wide; outer involucral bracts with narrow scarious margins; spikelets stipitate; bract as long as or longer than calyx. 2n = 18.{\i  Mountain grassland. • C. & S.E. parts of Balkan peninsula.} Bu Gr Ju Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   {\b 3} and {\b }4 are close to{\b  2}, but there is insufficient evidence to justify their inclusion in it.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 5. A. sancta} Janka, {\i Term. Füz. }{\b 6:} 165 (1882). Like{\b  2}({\b a}) but outer leaves 70-150 × 3-10 mm, acuminate; outer involucral bracts much shorter than the inner, usually shortly acuminate; calyx hirsute only on primary ribs; awns 0·4-0·7 mm.{\i  Pastures and calcareous rocks up to 1200 m. N. Greece} ({\i Makedhonia}). Gr.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 6. A. vandasii} Hayek,{\i  Feddes Repert.}{\b  21:} 257 (1925). Herb. Leaves 30-60 × 0·4-0·5 mm, filiform, acute, muticous, flat, glabrous. Scapes 10-15 cm, glabrous. Sheath 10-20 mm. Capitula 10-16 mm wide; outer involucral bracts shorter than the inner, long-acuminate; inner obtuse, mucronulate, with scarious margins. Spikelets sessile. Calyx 5-6 mm, pubescent at least on ribs; awns 0·5-0·8 mm. Corolla purple. {\i Mountain rocks. • S. Jugoslavia} ({\i near Prilep}). Ju.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   A little-known species needing further investigation. Perhaps related to {\b 2}, despite its uniform leaves.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 7. A. denticulata} (Bertol.) DC.,{\i  Cat. Pl. Horti Monsp.} 7 (1813). Herb; stock shortly branched. Leaves linear, acuminate,
\par

\par
33}
\par