{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 subobtuse, muticous, with narrow scarious margins, dimorphic; outer 15-40 × 1·2-1·5(-2) mm, undulate-denticulate, otherwise flat; inner 30-70(-130) × 0·7-1 mm, usually flat. Scapes 25-35 cm, straight or slightly arcuate, glabrous. Sheath 10-15 mm. Capitula 10-12 mm wide; involucral bracts with wide scarious margins; outer longer than the inner, long-acuminate-cuspidate; inner obtuse, mucronate or muticous. Spikelets subsessile;  bract shorter than calyx. Calyx 4·5-6·5 mm; tube hirsute on ribs; awns 0·5-0·8 mm, dark purplish. Corolla white.{\i  Serpentine rocks. • C. Italy} ({\i Toscana}). It.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 8. A. alliacea} (Cav.) Hoffmanns. & Link, {\i Fl. Port. }{\b 1:} 441 (1813-1820) ({\i A. allioides} Boiss., {\i A. bupleuroides} Gren. & Godron, {\i A. castellana} Boiss. & Reuter ex Leresche,{\i  A. plantaginea} Willd.,{\i  ?Statice plantaginea} All.). Herb; stock with few branches. Leaves 50-130(-200) × (1-)3-14 mm, usually few, sometimes unequal, lanceolate to linear-spathulate, acute or subacute, usually muticous, usually with narrow scarious margins. Scapes 20-50(-70) cm. Sheath 20-60 mm. Capitula 10-20(-30) mm wide; involucral bracts brownish or reddish; outer usually longer than the inner, acuminate, cuspidate or rarely mucronate, with narrow scarious margins; inner emarginate, with wide scarious margins. Spikelets usually subsessile; bract slightly shorter than calyx. Calyx 5-9 mm; tube usually hirsute only on ribs; awns 0·7-1·5(-2) mm. Corolla purplish to white. 2n = 18.  {\i Dry grassland, mainly in the mountains. • W. Europe, extending to S.W. Germany and N. Italy}. Ga Ge He Hs It Lu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 A polymorphic species within which many populations have been given specific, subspecific or varietal status. They do not seem consistently separable and further investigation is required. 
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Plants from C. Spain described as{\b  A. alliacea} subsp.{\b  matritensis} (Pau) Borja, Rivas Goday & Rivas Martinez,{\i  Anal. Inst. Bot. Cavanilles}{\b  25:} 154 (1969), sometimes have shorter leaves (20 mm or more) and sheath (17 mm or more) and the outer involucral bracts are shorter than the inner, are usually mucronate, and have wide scarious margins.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 9. A. ruscinonensis} Girard,{\i  Ann. Sci. Nat.} ser. 3,{\b  2:} 323 (1844) ({\i A. majellensis} auct. gall. et hisp., non Boiss.). Dwarf shrub, with a usually long-branched, rather stout stock, sometimes a herb with a shortly branched stock. Leaves 40-90(-170) × 2-4(-6) mm, numerous, linear or linear-spathulate, flat or some canaliculate or more or less convolute, subobtuse, muticous, with narrow scarious margins, becoming coriaceous. Scapes (7-)10-20(-40) cm, arcuate or flexuous. Sheath 10-24(-30) mm. Capitula 15-20 mm wide; outer involucral bracts as long as or longer than the inner, usually acuminate-cuspidate, with narrow scarious margins. Spikelets more or less stipitate; bract shorter than calyx. Calyx 6-8 mm; tube hirsute on ribs; awns 1-1·5 mm. Corolla pinkish or white. 2n = 18.{\i  Maritime cliffs and mountains near the sea, up to 1300 m; calcifuge. • S. France, N.E. Spain}.Ga Hs.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Although intermediates are found between {\b 8} and {\b 9}, the species are usually distinct.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 10. A. pseudarmeria} (Murray) Mansfeld, {\i Feddes Repert.}{\b  47:} 140 (1939) ({\i A. latifolia} Willd.). Compact dwarf shrub; stock much-branched, stout. Leaves 100-230 × 14-22 mm, obovate-lanceolate to lanceolate-spathulate, subacute, muticous, with distinct scarious margins, flat, glabrous. Scapes 25-50(-70) cm, glabrous, straight or arcuate, erect. Sheath 50-60(-100) mm, lax. Capitula 30-40 mm wide; involucral bracts with wide scarious margins; outer not longer than the inner, shortly cuspidate or mucronate; inner mucronate. Spikelets sessile to stipitate; bract not longer than calyx. Calyx 10-11 mm; tube hirsute on ribs; awns 1·2-1·7 mm. Corolla usually white. 2n = 18.{\i  Pastures and scrub on granite. • W.C. Portuga.} (Cabo da Roca). Lu [Br].
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 11. A. vestita} Willk. in Willk. & Lange, {\i Prodr. Fl. Hisp.}{\b  2:} 366 (1868). Herb; stock somewhat lax with few branches. Leaves acuminate, subacute, muticous, with narrow scarious margins, velutinous, erect, dimorphic; outer 50-70 × 4-7 mm, lanceolate; inner 80-100 × 1·5-3 mm, linear-spathulate. Scapes 37-45 cm, stout, puberulent mainly at base. Sheath 35-45 mm. Capitula c. 17 mm wide; involucral bracts velutinous; outer longer than the inner, acuminate, long-cuspidate-spinescent, with very narrow scarious margins; inner mucronate to muticous, with wide scarious margins. Spikelets subsessile; bract nearly as long as calyx, velutinous. Calyx 6·5-7 mm; tube hirsute on ribs; awns 1-1·3 mm. Corolla pink.{\i  Mountain pastures. • W.C. Spain}. Hs.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 12. A. langei} Boiss. ex Lange, {\i Vid. Meddel. Dansk Naturh. Foren. Kjøbenhavn }{\b 1861:} 59 (1861). Herb; stock short, with few, short branches. Leaves 13-130 × 0·3-8(-13) mm, more or less unequal, lanceolate or linear-spathulate to filiform, acute, glaucous-violet to glaucescent. Scapes 15-50(-80) cm, often tinged with violet near the base. Capitula becoming hard in fruit; involucral bracts light yellowish-brown to purplish, with wide scarious margins; outer shorter than the inner, mucronate to cuspidate; inner mucronate to muticous. Spikelets sessile or subsessile; bract coriaceous, broadly scarious at the apex, puberulent. Calyx 5-6 mm; tube pubescent or hirsute on 5 or 10 ribs; awns 0·5-1 mm. Corolla white to pink. Stony places and rock-crevices, usually on serpentine or dolomite.{\i  N.W. Spain, N.E. Portugal}. Hs Lu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b langei} : Leaves 13-80 × 0·3-3 mm, numerous, mucronate, canaliculate or more or less convolute, 1(-3)-veined. Scapes 15-40 cm, 4-6 times as long as leaves, numerous, slender, erect or somewhat divergent. Sheath 15-35 mm, appressed. Capitula 8-10(-13) mm wide. Bract equalling calyx.{\i  Throughout the range of the species}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b b}) Subsp.{\b  daveaui} (Coutinho) P. Silva,{\i  Agron. Lusit.}{\b  30} : 219 (1970) ({\i A. villosa} sensu Coutinho, non Girard): Leaves 30-130 × (2-)4-8(-13) mm, few, muticous, flat, 3- or 5-veined. Scapes 30-50(-80) cm, 5-11 times as long as leaves, few, stout, erect. Sheath usually 40-60 mm, rather lax. Capitula 10-15 mm wide. Bract shorter than calyx.{\i  N. León, N.E. Trás-os-Montes.}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Both subspecies occur in the serpentine areas of N.E. Portugal, but they are vicarious and never sympatric there.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 13. A. villosa} Girard, {\i Ann. Sci. Nat.} ser. 3, {\b 2}: 323 (1844). Herb; stock short, with few, short branches. Leaves 50-120 × 3-12 mm, lanceolate to linear-spathulate, subacute, muticous, with narrow scarious margins, flat. Scapes 25-45(-60) cm. Sheath 15-27 mm. Capitula 20-28 mm wide; outer involucral bracts not longer than the inner, more or less contracted, cuspidate-spinescent, with narrow scarious margins; inner usually mucronate-spinescent, with narrow scarious margins. Spikelets subsessile or stipitate; bract not longer than calyx. Calyx 7-12 mm; tube hirsute on ribs; awns 1·5-3 mm. Corolla white or pink. 2n = 18.{\i  Gravelly soils in mountains. • S. Spain}. Hs.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Populations intermediate between this species and{\b  8} are found in the northern and western parts of its range.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 14. A. transmontana} (Samp.) Lawrence,{\i  Agron. Lusit.}{\b  12}: 303, 380 (1950). Like {\b 13} but leaves 1-6(-9) mm wide, acute,
\par

\par
34}
\par