{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 mucronate, flat, more or less canaliculate or convolute, 1- or 3-veined; sheath (25-)40-65 mm; capitula 15-25 mm wide; inner involucral bracts obtuse, shortly mucronate or muticous, with wide scarious margins; spikelets usually sessile; calyx-awns 2-4 mm. {\i Mountain pastures and rock-crevices. W.C. & N.W. Spain, N. & C. Portugal}. Hs Lu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Plants intermediate between this species and 8 occur near its southern limit in Portugal, where the species are sympatric.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 15. A. morisii} Boiss. in DC.,{\i  Prodr}{\b . 12}: 687 (1848) (incl.{\i  A. gussonei} Boiss.). Herb; stock short, with long branches. Leaves 20-50(-100) × 5-12 mm, lanceolate-spathulate, subacute, muticous, with narrow scarious margins, flat, 3-veined, puberulent or glabrous, subcoriaceous. Scapes 20-40 cm, erect or somewhat arcuate, more or less verrucose, glabrous. Sheath 8-20 mm. Capitula 20-25 mm wide; involucral bracts with wide scarious margins; outer shorter than the inner, obtuse or acute, mucronulate; inner muticous. Spikelets stipitate; bract at least as long as calyx. Calyx 7-8 mm; tube hirsute on ribs; awns (0·8-)1-1·5 mm. Corolla pale pink.{\i  Mountain rocks; calcicole. Sardegna, Sicilia.} Sa Si
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 16. A. colorata} Pau, {\i Mem. Mus. Ci. Nat. Barcelona} ({\i Bot.}) {\b 1}({\b 1}): 66 (1922). Like {\b 15} but at least some leaves obovate-lanceolate, somewhat rigid, often undulate on margins; scapes straight; spikelets sessile or subsessile; calyx 6-6·5 mm; awns 0·3-0·5 mm. {\i Mountains, on base-rich rocks. • S.W. Spain} ({\i Sierra Bermeja}). Hs.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 17. A. macropoda} Boiss. in DC.,{\i  Prodr.}{\b  12:} 688 (1848). Like {\b 15} but leaves (60-)100-200 × 8-12 mm, lanceolate, acute, 3- or 5-veined; scapes (30-)40-60 cm; sheath 20-50 mm; capitula 25-30 mm wide; involucral bracts bright greenish; spikelet-bract somewhat shorter than calyx; calyx 8-10 mm.{\i  Mountains; somewhat calcicole. C. & S. Italy.} It.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 18. A. filicaulis} (Boiss.) Boiss., {\i Voy. Bot. Midi Esp.}{\b  2:} 527 (1841). Herb; stock short, often with long branches. Leaves subacute, mucronulate, dimorphic; outer 10-30 × 0·7-2 mm, linear or linear-lanceolate, with narrow scarious margins, flat; inner (7-)15-60(-90) × 0·4-0·8 mm, linear to filiform, canaliculate-triquetrous. Scapes 18-32 cm, straight, erect. Sheath 4-15 mm. Capitula 8-12(-16) mm; involucral bracts muticous or mucronulate, with wide scarious margins; outer much shorter than the inner, obtuse or subacute. Spikelets subsessile or shortly stipitate; bract nearly equalling calyx, exserted. Calyx 4-7 mm; tube pubescent or sometimes hirsute on ribs; awns 0·3-0·6 mm. Corolla pink or white. 2n = 18. {\i Mountain pastures and scrub; usually calcicole. • S.E. Spain, S.E. France.} Ga Hs.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b  A. quichiotis} (González-Albo) Lawrence, {\i Gentes Herb.}{\b  4:} 412 (1940), described from S.E. Spain (sierra de Alcaraz), where {\b 18} is also found, can be separated by its wider, glaucous-violet leaves, the outer up to 3·5 mm wide, the inner up to 1·1 mm wide, its arcuate-ascending scapes, capitula 14-18(-20) mm wide, bract exceeding calyx, and calyx-lobes truncate or slightly acuminate.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  {\i A. maritima }var.{\i  profilicaulis} Bernis ({\i A. belgenciensis} Donadille), from S.E. France (Var), differs from {\b 18} in having glabrous leaves, the inner being 80-140 × 0·8-1 mm and linear, and occurs on dolomite.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 19. A. trachyphylla} Lange, {\i Overs. Kong. Danske Vid. Selsk. Forh. }{\b 1893:} 199 (1893) (incl.{\i  A. duriaei} auct. hisp., non Boiss.). Like {\b 18} but outer leaves 30-50 × 0·8-2·5(-4) mm, subobtuse, muticous, sometimes withering early, the inner mucronate; scapes 4-20 cm, usually arcuate-ascending, often verrucose; capitula 10-15(-20) mm wide; outer involucral bracts not longer than the inner, acute, shortly cuspidate or mucronate, sometimes nearly muticous; inner shortly cuspidate or muticous; spikelets sessile or subsessile; calyx-awns (0·5-)1-1·5 mm. {\i Dry, stony pastures; calcicole. Mountains of E. & S.E. Spain.} Hs.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Polymorphic, even within a single population; further investigation is required.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 20. A. littoralis} Willd.,{\i  Enum. Pl. Hort. Berol.} 333 (1809) ({\i A. duriaei} auct., non Boiss.). Herb; stock stout, with short branches having swollen nodes. Leaves 20-120 × 0·3-1·5 mm, uniform or obscurely dimorphic, linear-spathulate to filiform, subobtuse, usually muticous, with narrow scarious margins. Scapes 9-40 cm, arcuate or flexuous, often verrucose. Sheath usually 15-25 mm. Capitula 8-15 mm wide, becoming hard in fruit; involucral bracts with wide scarious margins, glabrous; outer shorter than to slightly exceeding the inner, obtuse, mucronate to shortly cuspidate; inner mucronulate. Spikelets sessile or subsessile; bract not longer than calyx. Calyx 4·5-6·5 mm; tube hirsute at least on primary ribs; awns 0·3-0·6 mm. Corolla white or pinkish. 2n = 18. {\i Dry, stony slopes on schist; lowland. • S.W. Spain, S. Portugal}. Hs Lu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Closely related to {\b 18}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 21. A. duriaei} Boiss. in DC.,{\i  Prodr.}{\b  12:} 684 (1848). Like {\b 20} but stock with few branches; leaves usually acute or subacute, usually dimorphic; outer 20-30 × 2-4 mm, linear-lanceolate, flat; inner 60-80(-160) × 0·3-1·5(-2) mm, filiform to linear-lanceolate, acuminate, more or less canaliculate-convolute; scapes straight; inner involucral bracts mucronulate or muticous; spikelet-bract as long as calyx, exserted, scarious distally; calyx-tube hirsute on ribs or more or less pubescent in the upper part; awns 0·7-1·2(-1·7) mm; corolla pinkish, rarely white.{\i  Calcifuge. • Mountains of N.W. Spain and N. & C. Portugal.} Hs Lu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 22. A. arcuata} Welw. ex Boiss. & Reuter,{\i  Pugillus} 101 (1852). Like {\b 20} but stock very reduced and unbranched; leaves 24-30 × 0·2-0·7 mm, filiform, subacute, mostly mucronulate, canaliculate; scapes 4-5 cm, decumbent-arcuate; sheath c. 8 mm; outer involucral bracts mucronate, the inner obtuse, muticous; spikelet-bract as long as calyx, dark brown, with wide scarious margins, fimbriate-scarious at apex; calyx-awns 0·8-0·9 mm. {\i Moist pastures. • Formerly in S.W. Portugal} ({\i Vila Nova de Milfontes}). †Lu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 23. A. girardii} (Bernis) Litard. in Briq., {\i Prodr. Fl. Corse}{\b  3}({\b 2}): 4 (1955) ({\i A. juncea} Girard, non Wallr.). Herb; stock short, with short branches. Leaves usually glabrous, dimorphic; outer 12-17 × 1-1·2 mm, linear or linear-triangular, subacute, muticous, with narrow scarious margins, withering early; inner 15-40 × 0·3-0·7 mm, filiform, acute, white-pungent-mucronate, arcuate or flexuous. Scapes 10-15 cm, arcuate-ascending, glabrous. Sheath 6-10 mm. Capitula 10-15 mm; involucral bracts with wide scarious margins; outer shorter than the inner, subobtuse, shortly cuspidate; inner muticous. Spikelets subsessile; bract shorter than calyx, glabrous, white-scarious. Calyx 5-6 mm; tube densely hirsute throughout or only on ribs; awns 0·4-0·7 mm. Corolla pink. 2n = 18. {\i Rock-crevices and stony slopes on dolomite. • S.C. France}. Ga.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 24. A. eriophylla} Willk., {\i Bol. Soc. Brot. }{\b 2:} 145 (1884). Like{\b  23} but outer leaves 10-35 × 1·5-2 mm, linear-spathulate, subobtuse, flat; inner often ciliate, puberulent or hispidulous at
\par

\par
35}
\par