{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 least beneath; scapes decumbent to ascending; sheath (10-)15-28 mm; outer involucral bracts usually at least as long as the inner, acute, more or less long-cuspidate; inner mucronate calyx-tube hirsute on ribs; awns 1·2-1·5 mm; corolla pink or white. {\i Dry pastures and rock-crevices on serpentine. • N.E. Portugal, ?N.W. Spain.} ?Hs Lu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 25. A. humilis} (Link) Schultes in Roemer & Schultes,{\i  Syst. Veg.}{\b  6:} 772 (1820). Dwarf shrub; stock usually much-branched. Leaves mucronulate, with narrow scarious margins, mostly ciliate, somewhat rigid, dimorphic; outer 20-30 × 0·8-2 mm linear or linear-lanceolate, subacute or obtuse, flat- inner 10-30(-50) × 0·2-0·7 mm, filiform, subacute, becoming more or less canaliculate. Scapes 3-12 cm, ascending or flexuous. Capitula 13-16(-20) mm wide. Spikelets subsessile; bract as long as calyx, scarious; bracteoles very small. Calyx 5-7·5 mm; tube hirsute on ribs; awns (0·8-)1-1·5 mm. Corolla pale pink or white.{\i  Pastures and rock-crevices on granite. • Mountains of N.W. Portugal}. Lu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp.{\b  humilis}: Outer leaves (1-)2 mm wide, the inner 0·3-0·7 mm wide. Sheath 5-7(-10) mm. Outer involucral bracts shorter than the inner, mucronate to cuspidate, with narrow scarious margins; inner mucronulate or muticous. Calyx 6·5-7·5 mm; awns (0·8-)1-1·2 mm. 2n = 18.{\i  Serra Amarela, Serra do Gerês}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b odorata} (Samp.) P. Silva, {\i Bot. Jour. Linn. Soc. }{\b 64:} 377 (1971) ({\i Statice humilis} var.{\i  odorata }Samp.): Outer leaves 0·8-1·2 mm wide, the inner 0·2-0·4 mm wide. Sheath 8-12 mm. Involucral bracts acuminate-cuspidate, the outer equalling or longer than the inner, with wide scarious margins. Calyx 5(-7·5) mm; awns 1·3-1·5 mm. {\i Serra de Arga, Serra Amarela.}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 26. A. sardoa} Sprengel, {\i Syst. Veg.}{\b  4}({\b 2}): 127 (1827). Dwarf shrub. Leaves acute or subacute, glabrous or puberulent, dimorphic; outer 25-30 × 2-4 mm, wider than scapes, linear to linear-lanceolate, flat; inner up to 40 × 1-1·2 mm, linear, some what convolute or canaliculate. Scapes 15-30 cm. Sheath shorter than capitulum. Capitula up to 15 mm wide, becoming hard in fruit; involucral bracts mucronulate or muticous- outer half as long as the inner, acuminate, subobtuse or acute, with narrow scarious margins; inner subobtuse, with wide scarious margins. Spikelets sessile or subsessile- bract as long as calyx. Calyx 5-6 mm; tube hirsute on ribs; awns 0·3-0·8 mm. Corolla pale pinkish to purple. 2n = 18.{\i  Mountain pastures and rocks. • Sardegna.} Sa.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 27. A. leucocephala} Salzm. ex Koch,{\i  Flora (Regensb.)}{\b  6:} 712(1823). Dwarf shrub; stock stout, with short branches. Leaves 30-60(-120) × 1-2·5(-4) mm, linear or linear-lanceolate, sub-acute, mucronate, with narrow scarious margins, flat or somewhat canaliculate. Scapes 15-25(-40) cm, straight, sometimes verrucose. Sheath 10-15 mm. Capitula (12-)20-25 mm wide involucral bracts few, with wide scarious margins; outer shorter than the inner, subacute, mucronate or shortly cuspidate; inner obtuse, muticous. Spikelet-stipe up to 2 mm; bract as long as calyx. Calyx (5-)6-8 mm; tube hirsute on ribs; awns (0·5-)0·8-2 mm. Corolla usually white. 2n = 18.{\i  Mountain pastures and rocks; calcifuge. • Corse}. Co.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 28. A. multiceps} Wallr.,{\i  Beitr. Bot. }{\b 1:} 196 (1844). Like {\b 27} but leaves 10-25(-60) × 0·7-1·5(-2) mm, linear, muticous; scapes 2-9(-15) cm, arcuate or flexuous- sheath 5-8 mm; capitula 10-15(-18) mm wide; outer involucral bracts ovate, obtuse, muticous or sometimes mucronulate; inner obtuse or emarginate; spikelets more shortly stipitate; calyx 5-6 mm; awns 0·3-0·5 mm; corolla usually pink. 2n = 18.{\i  Mountain pastures and rock-crevices. • Corse.} Co.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 27} and {\b 28} are recorded from many of the same localities and intermediates occur.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 29. A. soleirolii} (Duby) Godron in Gren. & Godron,{\i  Fl. Fr.}{\b  2:} 737 (1853). Dwarf shrub; stock with long branches. Leaves acute, muticous, the margins not scarious, dimorphic, papillose; outer 40-50 × 2-4 mm, linear-spathulate, flat or canaliculate, glabrous; inner 70-80 × c. 2 mm, linear or linear-lanceolate, canaliculate, glabrous or puberulent. Scapes 20-40 cm, straight, glabrous or pubescent, somewhat verrucose. Sheath 9-12 mm. Capitula (10-)15-20 mm wide; involucral bracts with narrow scarious margins; outer shorter than the inner, obtuse, muticous or mucronulate; inner muticous. Spikelets usually subsessile; bract almost as long as calyx. Calyx c. 6 mm; tube hirsute on ribs; awns 0·5-1(-1·2) mm. Corolla pinkish or white. 2n = 18.{\i  Maritime rocks or sands. • Corse} ({\i near Calvi}). Co.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 30. A. juniperifolia} (Vahl) Hoffmanns. & Link,{\i  Fl. Port.}{\b  1:} 442 (1813-1820) ({\i A. cespitosa} (Cav.) Boiss.). Dwarf shrub; stock much-branched. Leaves 4-15(-20) × 0·7-1 mm, linear, acute, white-pungent-mucronate, ciliate, puberulent on midrib, flat above but triquetrous. Scapes 0·6-2·5(-5) cm. Sheath 3-9 mm. Capitula 10-14(-17) mm wide; outer involucral bracts shorter than the inner, acuminate, mucronate or cuspidate, with narrow scarious margins; inner mucronulate or muticous, with wide scarious margins. Spikelets sessile; bract as long as calyx; bracteoles absent or very small. Calyx 5-6·5 mm; tube hirsute on ribs; awns 1 mm. Corolla pale purplish or pink. 2n = 18.{\i  Mountain pastures and rock-crevices; calcifuge. •  C. Spain.} Hs.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 31. A. splendens} (Lag. & Rodr.) Webb, {\i Iter Hisp.} 18 (1838). Dwarf shrub; stock with many short branches. Leaves linear or linear-lanceolate, obtuse to acute, muticous, usually glabrous, with narrow scarious margins, flat. Sheath 3-11 mm. Involucral bracts with wide scarious margins; outer much shorter than the inner, ovate-acuminate or suborbicular, muticous or mucronulate; inner muticous or mucronulate. Spikelets usually sessile or subsessile; bract as long as calyx. Calyx-tube pubescent or hirsute on ribs only; awns 0·5-0·8 mm. Corolla bright purplish.{\i  Mountain pastures and rock-crevices; calcifuge. • N., W. & S. Spain.} Hs.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp.{\b  splendens}: Leaves 5-15(-25) × 0·7-1·3 mm. Scape 3-8 cm, sinuate. Capitula 8-12 mm wide. Calyx 4·5-5·5 mm. 2n = 18.{\i  S. Spain (Sierra Nevada)}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp.{\b  bigerrensis} (C. Vicioso & Beltrán) P. Silva,{\i  Bot. Jour Linn. Soc.}{\b  64:} 377 (1971) ({\i A. cespitosa} var.{\i  bigerrensis} C. Vicioso & Beltrán): Leaves 10-30 × 1-2 mm. Scape 4-15 cm, arcuate. Capitula 11-19 mm wide. Calyx 5-7·5 mm.{\i  N. & W. Spain}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 32. A. pubigera} (Desf.) Boiss. in DC.,{\i  Prodr. }{\b 12:} 678 (1848). Dwarf shrub, usually velutinous; stock woody, stout, much-branched. Leaves (5-)10-40(-80) × (0·7-)1·5-3(-7) mm, linear-spathulate, obtuse, muticous, flat or canaliculate. Scapes 4-15(-30) cm, erect or ascending. Sheath 6-20 mm. Capitula 15-20 mm wide; outer involucral bracts shorter than the inner obtuse or acuminate, mucronate to cuspidate, with narrow scarious margins; inner muticous or mucronate, with wide scarious margins. Spikelets usually stipitate; bract at least as long as calyx. Calyx 6-8 mm; tube villous, sometimes only on ribs; awns up to 0·8 mm. Corolla pink to white.{\i  Maritime rocks. • N.W. Spain, N.W. Portugal.} Hs Lu.
\par

\par
36}
\par