{\rtf1\ansi \deff4\deflang1033{\fonttbl{\f4\froman\fcharset0\fprq2 Times New Roman;}}{\colortbl;\red0\green0\blue0;\red0\green0\blue255;\red0\green255\blue255;\red0\green255\blue0;\red255\green0\blue255;\red255\green0\blue0;\red255\green255\blue0;\red255\green255\blue255;\red0\green0\blue128;\red0\green128\blue128;\red0\green128\blue0;\red128\green0\blue128;\red128\green0\blue0;\red128\green128\blue0;\red128\green128\blue128;\red192\green192\blue192;}{\stylesheet{\widctlpar \f4\fs20\lang2057 \snext0 Normal;}{\*\cs10 \additive Default Paragraph Font;}}{\info{\author dddd}{\operator dddd}{\creatim\yr1998\mo11\dy11\hr17\min25}{\revtim\yr1998\mo11\dy11\hr17\min25}{\version2}{\edmins0}{\nofpages3}{\nofwords987}{\nofchars5628}{\*\company  }{\vern57431}}\widowctrl\ftnbj\aenddoc\hyphcaps0 \fet0\sectd \linex0 {\*\pnseclvl1\pnucrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl2\pnucltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl3\pndec\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl4\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl5\pndec\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl6\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl7\pnlcrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl8\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl9\pnlcrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}
\pard\plain \ \f4\fs20\lang2057 {\fs28  A species showing great variation, even within small populations, in the pubescence of the leaves, scapes, sheath and bracts, and in the size of the leaves, scapes and capitula. It has been reported from S.W. France, Ireland and Scotland, but the records require confirmation.
\par 
\par  Intermediates between}{\b\fs28  32}{\fs28  and }{\b\fs28 1}{\fs28  occur in intermediate habitats when the species are sympatric.
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 33. A. berlengensis}{\fs28  Daveau,}{\i\fs28  Bol. Soc. Geogr. Lisboa}{\b\fs28  4}{\fs28 (}{\b\fs28 9}{\fs28 ): 426 (1884). Compact dwarf shrub, glabrous or velutinous. Leaves 50-60 \'d7 5-10(-13) mm, lanceolate to obovate-lanceolate, acute, mostly mucronate, with narrow scarious margins, flat. Scapes 10-20 cm. Sheath 20-30 mm. Capitula 20-30 mm wide; outer involucral bracts at least as long as the inner, acuminate, mucronate, with narrow scarious margins; inner mucronate, with wide scarious margins. Spikelets stipitate; bract at least as long as calyx. Calyx 8-9 mm; tube hirsute throughout or only on ribs; awns up to 0\'b76 mm. Corolla deep pink to white.}{\i\fs28  Maritime slopes; calcifuge. \bullet  W.C. Portugal}{\fs28  (}{\i\fs28 Berlengas Is}{\fs28 .). Lu.
\par 
\par   Sect. MACROCENTRON Boiss. Calyx-tube up to 2(-2\'bd) times as long as spur; insertion-scar of calyx narrowly elliptical to linear.
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 34. A. welwitschii}{\fs28  Boiss. in DC.,}{\i\fs28  Prodr.}{\b\fs28  12:}{\fs28  676 (1848). Compact dwarf shrub; stock with many long branches. Leaves 50-100(-150) \'d7 (1-)2-7 mm, linear-lanceolate to linear-spathulate, acute or subacute, usually muticous, flat or somewhat convolute. Scapes 13-25(-35) cm, straight, sometimes verrucose. Sheath 25-35(-55) mm. Capitula 20-30 mm wide; outer involucral bracts as long as to much longer than the inner, acuminate, mucronate to cuspidate; inner mucronulate. Spikelets subsessile; bract at least as long as calyx, glabrous; bracteoles more or less developed. Calyx 8-10 mm; tube hirsute on ribs; awns up to 0\'b75(-0\'b78) mm. Corolla pink to white. 2n = 18.}{\i\fs28  Maritime calcareous rocks and sands. \bullet  W.C. Portugal}{\fs28  (}{\i\fs28 from Cabo}{\b\fs28  }{\i\fs28 Mondego to Cascais}{\fs28 ). Lu.
\par 
\par  Polymorphic mainly in width of leaves, size of outer involucral bracts and pubescence. Velutinous forms described as}{\b\fs28  A. cinerea}{\fs28  Boiss. & Welw. in Boiss. & Reuter, }{\i\fs28 Pugillus}{\fs28  101 (1852), found only in the northern part of the range of the species (from Nazare to Cabo Carvoeiro), alone or with the glabrous form, may perhaps be worthy of subspecific rank.   Plants of }{\i\fs28 A. welwitschii }{\fs28 var.}{\i\fs28  platyphylla}{\fs28  Daveau, from the northern part of the range of the species, look like small plants of }{\b\fs28 33}{\fs28 .
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 35. A. pungens}{\fs28  (Link) Hoffmanns. & Link, }{\i\fs28 Fl. Port.}{\b\fs28  1:}{\fs28  439 (1813-1820) (}{\i\fs28 A. fasciculata}{\fs28  (Vent.) Willd.). Like}{\b\fs28  34}{\fs28  but involucral bracts usually muticous, the outer shorter than the inner, obtuse; spikelet-bract absent or rudimentary; calyx-tube usually hirsute throughout. 2n = 18.}{\i\fs28  Maritime sands. \bullet  S.Portugal and S.W. Spain; Corse and Sardegna.}{\fs28  Co Hs Lu Sa.
\par 
\par  Var. }{\i\fs28 velutina}{\fs28  Coutinho, with longer, narrower, more or less puberulent leaves and longer scapes, known from S.W. Portugal,could perhaps have originated by introgression with }{\b\fs28 36}{\fs28 .
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 36. A. pinifolia}{\fs28  (Brot.) Hoffmanns. & Link, }{\i\fs28 op. cit.}{\fs28  437 (1813-1820). Puberulent herb; stock short, rather stout. Leaves 90-160 \'d7 0\'b75-1 mm, filiform, canaliculate, acute, mucronate.Scapes 30-50 cm, straight. Sheath 30-40 mm. Capitula 20-25 mm wide; involucral bracts thin, with narrow scarious margins, puberulent; outer much shorter than the inner, more or less cuspidate; inner mucronate. Spikelets sessile; bract and bracteoles absent or rudimentary. Calyx 9-11 mm; tube usually hirsute throughout; awns 0\'b78-1 mm. Corolla white or pink. 2n = 18. }{\i\fs28 Scrub on sandy or gravelly soil; calcifuge. \bullet  C. & S.W. Portugal.}{\fs28  Lu.
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 37. A. rouyana}{\fs28  Daveau, }{\i\fs28 Bol. Soc. Brot.}{\b\fs28  6:}{\fs28  166 (1889). Like }{\b\fs28 36}{\fs28  but leaves sometimes up to 2\'b75 mm wide, linear-lanceolate; involucral bracts coriaceous, with wide scarious margins, the outer mucronate; spikelet-bract longer than calyx, coriaceous, broadly scarious at the apex; calyx 6\'b75-7\'b75(-8\'b75) mm; awns absent or up to 0\'b74 mm. 2n = 18.}{\i\fs28  Scrub on sandy soil; calcifuge. \bullet  S.W. Portugal}{\fs28 . Lu.
\par 
\par    Dwarf shrubs with a long-branched stock, linear-lanceolate leaves 40-70 \'d7 1\'b73-2\'b75 mm, scapes 20-35 cm, sheath 15-20 mm and calyx 8-8\'b75 mm, which are known only from maritime sands near sines, were described as forma}{\i\fs28  littorea}{\fs28  (Bernis) Bernis and perhaps originated by introgression with }{\b\fs28 35}{\fs28 .
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 38. A. macrophylla}{\fs28  Boiss. & Reuter,}{\i\fs28  Pugillus }{\fs28 100 (1852). Like}{\b\fs28  36}{\fs28  but leaves (80-)12-250 mm, filiform to sublinear; scapes glabrous, or puberulent at base; involucral bracts with wide scarious margins, glabrous, the outer obtuse or emarginate, mucronulate, the inner muticous; calyx-tube hirsute on ribs. 2n = 18.}{\i\fs28  Scrub on sandy or gravelly soil. \bullet  S. Portugal, S.W. Spain}{\fs28 . Hs Lu.
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 39. A. velutina}{\fs28  Welw. ex Boiss. & Reuter, }{\i\fs28 loc. cit.}{\fs28  (1852). Velutinous herb; stock short, stout, with few branches. Leaves 80-120 \'d7 2\'b75-8 mm, lanceolate-spathulate, acute, mucronate, flat. Scapes 30-50 cm, straight, velutinous or glabrous above, numerous. Sheath 18-30 mm. Capitula 20-30 mm wide; outer involucral bracts shorter than the inner, rather shortly cuspidate, with narrow scarious margins; inner mucronate or muticous, with wider scarious margins. Spikelets more or less stipitate; bract as long as calyx, with scarious margins; bracteoles 4-8 mm. Calyx 8-9\'b75 mm; tube pubescent; awns up to 0\'b72 mm. Corolla pink or white. }{\i\fs28 Scrub on dry acid sand. \bullet  S.E. Portugal, S.W. Spain.}{\fs28  Hs Lu.
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 40. A. gaditana}{\fs28  Boiss. in DC., }{\i\fs28 Prodr.}{\b\fs28  12:}{\fs28  675 (1848). Glabrous herb; stock short, stout. Leaves 100-250 \'d7 (10-)15-35 mm, lanceolate to obovate-spathulate, acute, with narrow scarious margins. Scapes 50-100 cm, straight. Sheath 40-80 mm. Capitula 30-40 mm wide; involucral bracts with wide scarious margins; outer at least as long as the inner, acuminate to long-cuspidate; inner mucronate. Spikelets sessile or subsessile; bract and bracteoles absent or rudimentary. Calyx 10-12 mm; tube hirsute on ribs; awns c. 1 mm. Corolla usually deep pink. }{\i\fs28 Estuarine meadows. \bullet  S. Portugal, S.W. Spain.}{\fs28  Hs Lu.
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 41. A. hirta}{\fs28  Willd.,}{\i\fs28  Enum. Pl. Hort. Berol.}{\fs28  333 (1809) (}{\i\fs28 A. boetica}{\fs28  Boiss.,}{\i\fs28  A. boissierana}{\fs28  Cosson). Herb; stock short. Leaves 50-130 \'d7 (1-)2-10 mm, lanceolate-spathulate to linear-lanceolate, obtuse, glabrous or puberulent. Scapes up to 65 cm, straight, glabrous, smooth or verrucose. Sheath 25-50 mm, glabrous. Capitula 20-30 mm wide; outer involucral bracts shorter than the inner, obtuse, rarely mucronate; inner with wide scarious margins, mucronulate. Spikelets sessile or sub-sessile; bract absent or rudimentary; bracteoles more or less developed. Calyx 10-11 mm; tube hirsutulous on the ribs; awns 0\'b78 mm. Corolla pink or white.}{\i\fs28  Sandy lowlands. \bullet  S. Spain}{\fs28 . Hs.
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 42. A. hispalensis}{\fs28  Pau,}{\i\fs28  Not. Bot. Fl. Esp. }{\b\fs28 6:}{\fs28  89 (1895). Like }{\b\fs28 41}{\fs28  but leaves c. 30 \'d7 0\'b77(-1\'b75) mm, filiform; scapes up to 25 cm, somewhat arcuate; sheath 13-18 mm; capitula c. 15 mm wide;
\par 
\par 37}
\par }