{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 involucral bracts not mucronate, paler, thinner; calyx-tube as long as spur, scarcely pubescent on ribs; awns 0·4 mm. Calcareous hills. •{\i  S.W. Spain} ({\i between Sevilla and Jerez de la Frontera}). Hs.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 43. A. cariensis} Boiss. in DC., {\i Prodr. }{\b 12:} 677 (1848). Herb; stock short. Leaves dimorphic, linear, acute, with very narrow scarious margins, glabrous; outer 50 × 3 mm, flat; inner 70 × 1 mm. Scapes 20-35 cm, straight, glabrous. Sheath c. 22 mm. Capitula c. 22 mm wide; outer involucral bracts shorter than the inner, acuminate, with narrow scarious margins; inner with wide scarious margins, mucronate or muticous. Spikelets long-stipitate; bract shorter than calyx, scarious; bracteoles well-developed. Calyx 10-12 mm; tube hirsute on primary ribs, rarely also on secondary ones; awns 0·7-2 mm. Corolla white or pinkish. •{\i  N.E. Greece} ({\i Thraki, between Arvas and Aisymi}). Gr. ({\i W. Anatolia}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc {\b  5.           Limonium}              Miller
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc By S. Pignatti.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Perennial, rarely annual, herbs or dwarf shrubs. Leaves simple, usually in a basal rosette, but densely leafy branches sometimes present; leaves often absent at anthesis. Inflorescence a corymbose panicle, with terminal, secund spikes, often with non-flowering branches, usually with a reddish scale at the base of each branch. Spikes of 3-bracteate, 1- to 5-flowered spikelets; inner and outer bracts external to the spikelet, the middle one internal and often inconspicuous. Calyx infundibuliform; limb scarious, usually coloured, sometimes shortly dentate between the lobes. Corolla with a short tube, or the petals connate only at the base. Stamens inserted at the base of the corolla. Styles 5, glabrous, free or connate at the base; stigmas filiform. Fruit with circumscissile or irregular dehiscence.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Measurements of scales refer to the largest, which subtends the lowest branch of the inflorescence. Descriptions give the average number of spikelets per cm, but generally spikes are described as dense if the spikelets are closely set and contiguous, and lax if the spikelets are more or less separated. The corolla colour is violet unless otherwise indicated.  The taxonomically important non-flowering branches, which are present in many species, completely lack flowers and have only a single, very reduced scale (usually 0·5-1 mm) at the apex. They should not be confused with the sterile branches, which occur in a few species at the end of the summer or under unfavourable conditions,  and which have abortive spikelets and bear numerous, imbricate, sterile floral bracts (usually 1-3 mm) at the apex.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Most species of{\i  Limonium} exhibit dimorphism in pollen and stigmas associated with self-incompatibility. From this system there has apparently been derived monomorphic self-compatibility, known in Europe for {\b 18} and{\b  87}, and monomorphic agamospermy, known for {\b 36}, {\b 51}, {\b 60}, {\b 61}, {\b 64-70} and{\b  77} (H.G. Baker, {\i Evolution}{\b  20}: 349-368 (1966)). Agamospermic plants have high pollen-sterility and some populations of {\b 66},{\b  70} and {\b 72} are completely male-sterile. The occurrence of agamospermy in parts of subgen. Limonium undoubtedly accounts for some of its taxonomic difficulty, particularly in view of the occurrence in disjunct coastal habitats of populations showing relatively small morphological differences.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Leaves sinuate or lobed; spikes usually subtended by 
\par
  leaf-like wings
\par
2 Calyx-limb yellow ...................................................................... {\b 2. bonduellei}
\par
2 Calyx-limb pale blue, violet or white
\par
3 Annual; stem angular or subcylindrical, not winged;
\par
  calyx-limb with acute lobes ............................................................. {\b 3. thouinii}
\par
3 Perennial; stem with wings up to 20 mm wide; calyx-limb
\par
  entire or crenate
\par
4 Inner bracts with 2-3 almost spiny apical mucros; wings
\par
  of the stem not more than 3 mm wide ........................................... {\b 1. sinuatum}
\par
4 Inner bracts acute, not mucronate; wings of the stem 
\par
  5-20 mm wide ....................................................................... {\b 4. brassicifolium}
\par
1 Leaves entire or absent; flowering branches not winged
\par
5 Corolla with short tube; leaves usually absent at anthesis
\par
6 Calyx completely enclosed by inner bract; stems green,
\par
  not more than 1·5 mm in diameter, flexible
\par
7 Basal scales of the flowering spikes 4-5 mm, with 
\par
  reddish limb and apical awn 1-2 mm ......................................... {\b 5. ferulaceum}
\par
7 Basal scales of the flowering spikes 1-2·5 mm, with 
\par
  scarious or silvery limb, muticous or mucronulate ........................ {\b 6. diffusum}
\par
6 Calyx-limb exceeding inner bract by 2-3 mm; stems 
\par
  farinose or white, 1·7-3 mm in diameter, rigid
\par
8 Corolla 7-8 mm, the limb 5-7 mm in diameter .............................. {\b 7. caesium}
\par
8 Corolla 10-14 mm, the limb 8-10 mm in diameter .......................... {\b 8. insigne}
\par
5 Petals connate at base only; at least dead leaves 
\par
  present at anthesis
\par
9 Annuals, entirely herbaceous
\par
10 Plant flowering in April-June; inner bract tuberculate
\par
   dorsally ....................................................................................... {\b 87. echioides}
\par
10 Plant flowering later; inner bract smooth ............................ {\b 59. duriusculum}
\par
9 Perennials with woody stock
\par
11 Leaves pinnately veined
\par
12 Stems, at least the upper part, and leaf-midribs hairy
\par
13 Lower branches of the inflorescence sterile;
\par
   spikes 1·8-2·5 cm, lax ............................................................. {\b 11. sareptanum}
\par
13 Inflorescence with few or no sterile branches; spikes
\par
   not more than 1·2(-2) cm, dense
\par
14 Leaves 250-600 × 80-150 mm; outer bract entirely
\par
   hyaline .......................................................................................... {\b 9. latifolium}
\par
14 Leaves 50-130(-250) × 10-40(-90) mm; outer bract with
\par
   narrow hyaline margin
\par
15 Leaves not more than 13 mm wide, the lamina 6-8 times 
\par
   as long as wide .................................................................... {\b 10. asterotrichum}
\par
15 Leaves 20-40(-90) mm wide, the lamina 2-5 times as 
\par
   long as wide ........................................................................... {\b 16. tomentellum}
\par
12 Stems and leaves glabrous
\par
16 Lower branches of the inflorescence sterile ................................. {\b 12. bungei}
\par
16 Inflorescence with few or no sterile branches
\par
17 Leaves 250-600 × 80-150 mm; outer bract hyaline ................... {\b 9. latifolium}
\par
17 Leaves 70-170(-300) × 13-60 mm; outer bract herbaceous,
\par
   at least on the midrib
\par
18 Calyx 3·6-6·5 mm; corolla 6-8 mm; inner bract 3-5 mm;
\par
   outer bract overlapping 1/6-1/5 of the inner 
\par
19 Spikes 1-2 cm, patent, with 6-8 spikelets per cm ........................ {\b 17. vulgare}
\par
 19 Spikes 3-5 cm, erect, with 2-3 spikelets per cm .......................... {\b 18. humile}
\par
18 Calyx 3-4·5 mm; corolla 5-5·5 mm; inner bract (1·5-)
\par
   2-3 mm; outer bract overlapping 1/4-2/5 of the inner 
\par
20 Spikes 0·6-1 cm ......................................................................... {\b 13. gmelinii}
\par
20 Spikes 1·5-3 cm
\par
21 Calyx densely hairy on the veins; scales 10-16 mm ............ {\b 15. hirsuticalyx}
\par
21 Calyx sparsely hairy on the veins or subglabrous;
\par
   scales 6-9 mm ................................................................................. {\b 14. meyeri}
\par
11 Leaves with single or parallel veins
\par
22 Inflorescence with non-flowering branches
\par
23 Outer bract hyaline, herbaceous only on the keel; inner bract
\par
   hyaline for at least (1/4-)1/3 of its length ............................. {\b 19. bellidifolium}
\par
23 Bracts herbaceous, with or without narrow (0·3-0·5 mm)
\par
   hyaline margin
\par
24 Segments of the inflorescence-branches strongly 
\par
   constricted at the nodes
\par

\par
38}
\par