{\rtf1\ansi \deff4\deflang1033{\fonttbl{\f4\froman\fcharset0\fprq2 Times New Roman;}}{\colortbl;\red0\green0\blue0;\red0\green0\blue255;\red0\green255\blue255;\red0\green255\blue0;\red255\green0\blue255;\red255\green0\blue0;\red255\green255\blue0;\red255\green255\blue255;\red0\green0\blue128;\red0\green128\blue128;\red0\green128\blue0;\red128\green0\blue128;\red128\green0\blue0;\red128\green128\blue0;\red128\green128\blue128;\red192\green192\blue192;}{\stylesheet{\widctlpar \f4\fs20\lang2057 \snext0 Normal;}{\*\cs10 \additive Default Paragraph Font;}}{\info{\author dddd}{\operator dddd}{\creatim\yr1998\mo11\dy11\hr17\min25}{\revtim\yr1998\mo11\dy11\hr17\min26}{\version2}{\edmins1}{\nofpages5}{\nofwords1090}{\nofchars6214}{\*\company  }{\vern57431}}\widowctrl\ftnbj\aenddoc\hyphcaps0 \fet0\sectd \linex0 {\*\pnseclvl1\pnucrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl2\pnucltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl3\pndec\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl4\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl5\pndec\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl6\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl7\pnlcrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl8\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl9\pnlcrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}
\pard\plain \li200\ \f4\fs20\lang2057 {\fs28 25 Inflorescence 5-15(-20) cm, the branches coarsely
\par    tuberculate; leaves mostly withered at anthesis ...................... }{\b\fs28 29. articulatum}{\fs28 
\par 25 Inflorescence 20-40 cm, the branches smooth; leaves
\par    green at anthesis ............................................................................ }{\b\fs28 41. melium}{\fs28 
\par 24 Segments of the inflorescence-branches not constricted
\par    at the nodes
\par 26 Stems, branches and bracts hairy
\par 27 Calyx c. 5\'b75 mm ......................................................................... }{\b\fs28 27. calcarae}{\fs28 
\par 27 Calyx 3\'b75-5 mm
\par 28 Leaves withered at anthesis
\par 29 Inner bract 2-2\'b75 mm; calyx 3\'b75-4(-4\'b75) mm ...................... }{\b\fs28 26. dichotomum}{\fs28 
\par 29 Inner bract 4-4\'b75 mm; calyx 4\'b75-5 mm
\par 30 Inflorescence hemispherical, with patent to deflexed
\par    branches; spikelets erecto-patent ........................................... }{\b\fs28 24. furfuraceum}{\fs28 
\par 30 Inflorescence corymbose, with patent branches;
\par    spikelets patent ........................................................................ }{\b\fs28 25. lucentinum}{\fs28 
\par 28 Leaves green at anthesis
\par 31 Inflorescence with reticulate branching, the branches
\par    mostly diverging at an angle of 90\'b0-180\'b0
\par 32 Leaves 5-20, 3-5(-8) mm wide, forming a lax rosette ......... }{\b\fs28 20. cancellatum}{\fs28 
\par 32 Leaves at least 20, 5-10 mm wide, forming a dense,
\par    cushion-like rosette ...................................................................... }{\b\fs28 21. vestitum}{\fs28 
\par 31 Inflorescence with acutely dichotomous branching
\par 33 Inflorescence 3-14 cm; leaves not more than 15 mm
\par 34 Inner bract acute; calyx 5-5\'b75 mm, exceeding the inner
\par    bract by c. 2 mm ......................................................................... }{\b\fs28 31. minutum}{\fs28 
\par 34 Inner bract truncate; calyx 3\'b75-5 mm, exceeding the
\par    inner bract by c. 1 mm ............................................................ }{\b\fs28 32. caprariense}{\fs28 
\par 33 Inflorescence 15-50 cm; leaves 15-60 mm
\par 35 Outer bract overlapping 1/3-1/2 of the inner;
\par    spikelets 3- to 4-flowered ............................................................ }{\b\fs28 66. dufourei}{\fs28 
\par 35 Outer bract overlapping 1/8-1/5 of the inner; spikelets 
\par    1- to 2-flowered    
\par 36 Inflorescence pyramidal; spikes rudimentary or 1-2 cm,
\par    with 2-4 spikelets per cm ............................................................ }{\b\fs28 22. johannis}{\fs28 
\par 36 Inflorescence corymbose; spikes not more than 1 cm,
\par    with 7 spikelets per cm ............................................................... }{\b\fs28 23. cordatum}{\fs28 
\par 26 Stems, branches and bracts glabrous, sometimes
\par    tuberculate 
\par 37 Calyx 3-3\'b75 mm
\par 38 Leaves acute, green at anthesis
\par 39 Leaves linear, 0\'b75-1 mm wide .................................................. }{\b\fs28 35}{\fs28  }{\b\fs28 aragonense}{\fs28 
\par 39 Leaves spathulate, 5-6 mm wide .........................}{\b\fs28  (75-79). delicatulum}{\fs28  group
\par 38 Leaves obtuse, green or withered at anthesis
\par 40 Leaves 1-7 mm wide, 1-veined
\par 41 Leaves 1-1\'b75(-4) mm wide; spikes not more than 4 cm ......... }{\b\fs28 45. hermaeum}{\fs28 
\par 41 Leaves 4-7 mm wide; spikes not more than 1 cm ................. }{\b\fs28 44. tenuiculum}{\fs28 
\par 40 Leaves 7-14 mm wide, 1- to 3-veined
\par 42 Inner bract c. 2 mm; inflorescence hemispherical;
\par    leaves usually withered at anthesis .............................................. }{\b\fs28 85. supinum}{\fs28 
\par 42 Inner bract c. 3 mm; inflorescence pyramidal; leaves
\par    green at anthesis ....................................................}{\b\fs28  (75-79). delicatulum}{\fs28  group
\par 37 Calyx (3\'b78-)4-7 mm
\par 43 Inflorescence 2-12 cm; spikes 0\'b75-1\'b78(-3) cm
\par 44 Leaves on densely leafy, woody basal branches 4-12 cm
\par 45 Leaves 2-3 mm wide, narrowly spathulate; inner bract
\par    cucullate .............................................. }{\b\fs28 33. parvifolium}{\fs28 
\par 45 Leaves c. 1 mm wide, linear; inner bract not cucullate ........ }{\b\fs28 34. acutifolium}{\fs28 
\par 44 Leaves in cushion-like rosettes on somewhat woody
\par    branches 1-2 cm long 
\par 46 Branches tuberculate, with segments diverging at 90\'b0;
\par    bracts tuberculate; calyx c. 4 mm ............................................. }{\b\fs28 30. japygicum}{\fs28 
\par 46 Branches smooth, with segments diverging at an acute 
\par    angle; bracts smooth; calyx 5-5\'b75 mm ........................................ }{\b\fs28 31. minutum}{\fs28 
\par 43 Inflorescence 10-60 cm; spikes, at least the terminal,
\par    (1-)2-9(-12) cm
\par 47 Inner bract with the midrib not or slightly excurrent,
\par    the margin reddish-brown, not or only narrowly hyaline
\par 48 Leaves 3-veined ............................................................... }{\b\fs28 60. ramosissimum}{\fs28 
\par 48 Leaves 1-veined
\par 49 Spikes 1-2 cm or \'b1 rudimentary, with 6-10 spikelets 
\par    per cm; inner bract truncate ...................................}{\b\fs28  (67-71). binervosum}{\fs28  group
\par 49 Spikes 2-5(-8) cm, with 1-4 spikelets per cm; inner 
\par    bract obtuse
\par 50 Spikes 3-5(-8) cm, with 1-3 spikelets per cm;
\par    spikelets straight, cylindrical; calyx narrowly 
\par    conical after pollination, with straight tube ................................  }{\b\fs28 55. graecum}{\fs28 
\par 50 Spikes 2-4 cm, with 4 spikelets per cm; spikelets 
\par    arcuate, compressed; calyx infundibuliform after
\par    pollination, with curved tube .................................................... }{\b\fs28 56. oleifolium}{\fs28 
\par 47 Inner bract with the midrib excurrent into a con-
\par    spicuous acute point, the margin hyaline
\par 51 Inner bract obtuse; leaves usually 3- to 5-veined
\par 52 Spikes 1-2 cm, with 4-5 spikelets per cm; calyx c.4\'b75 mm
\par    ........................................................................................ }{\b\fs28 63. parvibracteatum}{\fs28 
\par 52 Spikes 2-6(-12) cm, with 1-3 spikelets per cm;
\par    calyx 5-6 mm ....................................................................... }{\b\fs28 28. catalaunicum}{\fs28 
\par 51 Inner bract acute; leaves 1-veined
\par 53 Spikes 2-6(-10) cm, with 1-2 spikelets per cm;
\par    inner bract 3-3\'b75 mm ........................................................ }{\b\fs28 46. remotispiculum}{\fs28 
\par 53 Spikes 1-5 cm, with 3-7 spikelets per cm; inner bract
\par    3\'b75-4\'b75 mm
\par 54 Calyx 5\'b75 mm, exceeding the inner bract by 2-2\'b75 mm;
\par    plant tuberculate ....................................................................... }{\b\fs28 43. calaminare}{\fs28 
\par 54 Calyx 4-5 mm, exceeding the inner bract by 1\'b75 mm;
\par    plant not tuberculate
\par 55 Calyx-limb 1/3-2/3 as long as the tube; non-flowering
\par    branches numerous ................................................... }{\b\fs28 (36-40). cosyrense}{\fs28  group
\par 55 Calyx-limb as long as the tube; non-flowering branches few
\par 56 Spikelets 1-flowered; outer bract overlapping 1/5 of
\par    the inner; calyx-teeth acute, conspicuously veined ..................... }{\b\fs28 42. tremolsii}{\fs28 
\par 56 Spikelets 2-flowered; outer bract overlapping 1/3 of 
\par    the inner; calyx-teeth obtuse, indistinctly veined .................... }{\b\fs28 48. inarimense}{\fs28 
\par 22 Inflorescence without non-flowering branches,
\par    sometimes with a few basal sterile branches
\par 57 Leaves with 3-7(-9) parallel veins near base 
\par 58 Inner bract 2-3\'b75 mm; calyx 2\'b75-4 mm 
\par 59 Petiole 4-6 mm wide ............................................................. }{\b\fs28 74. ovalifolium}{\fs28 
\par 59 Petiole 1-4 mm wide  
\par 60 Plant 80-120 cm; leaves 80-125 mm, coriaceous ..................... }{\b\fs28 81. eugeniae}{\fs28 
\par 60 Plant 8-80 cm; leaves usually not more than 80 mm,
\par    usually herbaceous 
\par 61 Spikes not more than 1 cm ................................................. }{\b\fs28 84. cymuliferum}{\fs28 
\par 61 Spikes at least 1 cm
\par 62 Leaves whitish ............................................................................... }{\b\fs28 83. album}{\fs28 
\par 62 Leaves green or glaucous
\par 63 Spikes 2-3\'b72 cm, lax, with 3(-4) spikelets per cm;
\par    inner bract 2-2\'b72 mm ..................................................................... }{\b\fs28 82. coincyi}{\fs28 
\par 63 Spikes 1-2\'b75(-3) cm, dense, with 4-10 spikelets per 
\par    cm; inner bract 2\'b75-3\'b75 mm ...................................}{\b\fs28  (75-79). delicatulum}{\fs28  group
\par 58 Inner bract usually 4-7 mm; calyx (4-)4\'b75-8 mm
\par 
\par 39}
\par }