{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 to orbicular, crenulate; petiole longer than lamina. Bracts linear-lanceolate, equalling pedicels. Flowers 8-12 mm in diameter, broadly campanulate. Calyx-lobes 1·5-2 mm, deltate, acute. Petals yellowish-green. Anthers 2·3-2·7 mm. Style 6-7 mm, expanded into a disc below the stigma, exserted, curved. 2n = 46. {\i Mainly in coniferous woods. Most of Europe, but rare in the west and absent from most of the islands.} Au Be Bu Co Cz Da Fe Ga Ge Gr He Hs Hu It Ju No Po Rm Rs (N, B, C, W, K, E) Su.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 4. P. rotundifolia} L., {\i Sp. Pl. }396 (1753). Stem 20-30(-35) cm. Leaves 2-4·5(-6) × 1·5-5 cm, orbicular to ovate, crenulate; petiole longer than lamina. Cauline scales oblong-lanceolate. Bracts lanceolate to ovate-lanceolate, amplexicaul, equalling or up to twice as long as pedicels. Flowers 8-12 mm in diameter, campanulate. Calyx-lobes 2-4·5 mm, lanceolate, acuminate. Petals pure white. Style 4-10 mm, expanded into a disc below the stigma, exserted, curved.{\i  Europe southwards to N. Spain, N. Italy, Bulgaria and Krym.} Au Be Br Bu Cz Da Fe Ga Ge Hb He Ho Hs Hu It Ju No Po Rm Rs (N, B, C, W, K, E) Su.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b rotundifolia}: Leaves ovate, cuneate to rounded at base. Cauline scales 1-2. Pedicels 4-8 mm. Calyx-lobes 3·5-4·5 mm, linear-lanceolate, acuminate. Anthers 2·3-2·8 mm. Style 6-10 mm. 2n = 46.{\i  Woods,bogs and fens. Almost throughout the range of the species}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b maritima} (Kenyon) E. F. Warburg in Clapham, Tutin & E. F. Warburg,{\i  Fl. Brit. Is.} 789 (1952): Leaves orbicular, rounded to truncate at base. Cauline scales 2-5. Pedicels not more than 5 mm. Calyx-lobes 2-3 mm, ovate to ovate-lanceolate, obtuse. Anthers 1·9-2·4 mm. Style 4-6 mm. 2n = 46.{\i  Damp hollows in sand-dunes. • N.W. Europe.}
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 5. P. grandiflora} Radius,{\i  Diss.} 27 (1821). Stem 8-20 cm. Leaves 1·5-3 × 1-2 cm, shiny, suborbicular, almost entire, pale beneath; petiole longer than lamina. Cauline scales elliptical to ovate. Bracts ovate-lanceolate, longer than pedicels. Flowers 15-20 mm in diameter. Calyx-lobes 2·5-3·5 mm, elliptical to ovate-lanceolate, obtuse. Petals white, greenish-white or pink. Anthers 1·7-2·2 mm. Style 3·5-5·5 mm, expanded into a disc below the stigma, exserted, curved. 2n = 46.{\i  Tundra. Iceland; Arctic Russia.} Is Rs (N).
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 6. P. norvegica} Knaben,{\i  Bergens Mus. Årbok}{\b  1943}({\b 6}): 5 (1943). Stem 10-20(-23) cm. Leaves 1-3(-5) × 1-3 cm, orbicular-ovate to elliptical; petiole equalling or shorter than lamina. Cauline scales broadly ovate. Bracts lanceolate, equalling or shorter than pedicels, reddish to purple. Flowers 10-25 mm in diameter, broadly campanulate. Calyx-lobes 2-3 mm, ovate-lanceolate, acuminate. Petals white or lilac. Anthers 1-2·5 mm. Style 6·5-8·5 mm, not expanded below the stigma, exserted, curved. 2n = 46.{\i  Dry mountain slopes; calcicole. • W. & N. Fennoscandia.} Fe No Rs (N) Su.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 7. P. carpatica} J. Holub & Krísa, {\i Folia Geobot. Phytotax.} ({\i Praha}){\b  6}: 82 (1971). Stem (8-)12-20 cm, slightly winged in upper part. Leaves 2-3 × 1·5-3 cm, elliptical to suborbicular, obtuse cuneate at base; petiole shorter than lamina. Cauline scales ovate-lanceolate. Bracts broadly ovate-lanceolate, longer than pedicels. Flowers 10-15 mm in diameter, campanulate. Calyx-lobes 3-3·5 mm, oblong to linear-lanceolate, obtuse. Petals white (rarely pinkish). Anthers 2-2·5 mm. Style 5·5-7·5 mm, not expanded below the stigma, exserted, curved. 2n = 46.{\i  Usually calcicole. • Carpathians.} Cz Rm Rs (W).
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28\qc {\b 2.          Orthilia}      Rafin.     
\par 

\pard\f0\fs28\qc ({\i Ramischia} Opiz ex Garcke)
\par 

\pard\f0\fs24\qc By B. Krísa.
\par 

\pard\f0\fs28 Like {\i Pyrola} but racemes secund; anthers without tubes; pollen grains free.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  Literature: H. Andres, {\i Feddes Repert.}{\b  19}: 209-224 (1923).
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. O. secunda} (L.) House,{\i  Amer. Midl. Nat.}{\b  7}: 134 (1921) ({\i Pyrola secunda} L.,{\i  Ramischia secunda} (L.) Garcke). Stem 5-25 cm. Leaves 2-4 cm, ovate or ovate-elliptical to orbicular, crenulate to serrulate, light green. Petiole shorter than lamina. Cauline scales numerous, lanceolate. Bracts linear-lanceolate, about equalling pedicels. Flowers 5-6 mm in diameter. Calyx-lobes triangular-ovate, obtuse. Petals greenish-white, erect. Style somewhat thickened below the stigma, straight, exserted. Woods and moors.{\i  Most of Europe, but rare in the Mediterranean region.} Al Au Br Bu Cz Da Fe Ga Ge Gr Hb He †Ho Hs Hu Is It Ju No Po Rm Rs (N, B, C, W, K, E) Si Su [Be].
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b secunda}: Leaves 2-5 cm, ovate to ovate-elliptical, acute. Anthers c. 1·5 mm. Style 4·5-6 mm. 2n = 38.{\i  Almost throughout the range of the species}.
\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b obtusata} (Turcz.) Bocher,{\i  Bot. Tidsskr. }{\b 57}: 31 (1961) ({\i Ramischia obtusata} (Turcz.) Freyn): Leaves 1-2 cm, orbicular to orbicular-ovate, obtuse. Anthers c. 1 mm. Style 3-4·5 mm. {\i N. Russia, from }c. 62°{\i  to} c. 70°{\i  N}.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28\qc {\b 3.             Moneses}              Salisb.
\par 

\pard\f0\fs24\qc By B. Krisa.
\par 

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Like{\i  Pyrola} but leaves opposite; flowers solitary; anthers with longer tubes.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. M. uniflora} (L.) A. Gray,{\i  Man. Bot.} 273 (1848) ({\i Pyrola uniflora} L.). Stem 5-15 cm. Leaves 1-3 cm, orbicular to ovate-elliptical, crenulate to serrulate, light green; petiole shorter than lamina. Cauline scale 1. Flowers 13-20 mm in diameter. Calyx-lobes 1·5-3 mm, ovate, obtuse, erose-denticulate. Petals ovate-lanceolate, white. Anthers 2·5-3·2 mm. Style 5-7 mm, not expanded below the stigma, straight. 2n = 26.{\i  Woods, usually coniferous. Most of Europe, but absent from many of the islands and the extreme south.} Al Au Br Bu Co Cz Da Fe Ga Ge He Ho Hs Hu It Ju No Po Rm Rs
\par 
(N, B, C, W, K, E) Su [Be].
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28\qc {\b 4.           Chimaphila}              Pursh
\par 

\pard\f0\fs24\qc By B. Krisa.
\par 

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Glabrous, rhizomatous dwarf shrubs. Leaves green, coriaceous, alternate or pseudo-verticillate, mostly cauline. Flowers in terminal corymbs or umbels. Anthers opening by pores at the end of short tubes. Pollen-grains in tetrads.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 Leaves oblanceolate, without white veins; flowers 7-12 mm in
\par 
  diameter ...................................................................................... {\b 1. umbellata}
\par 
Leaves ovate-lanceolate, with white veins; flowers 20 mm in
\par 
  diameter ........................................................................................ {\b 2. maculata}
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. C. umbellata} (L.) W. Barton, {\i Veg. Mat. U.S.}{\b  1}: 17 (1817) ({\i Pyrola umbellata} L.). Stem 10-30 cm. Leaves 4-7 × 0·5-2·5 cm, oblanceolate, serrate; petiole 3-5 mm. Pedicels glandular. Flowers 7-12 mm in diameter. Calyx-lobes 1·5-2·5 mm, ovate, obtuse, erose-denticulate. Petals ovate-orbicular, pinkish. Anthers c. 2 mm. Style very short. 2n = 26.{\i  Coniferous woods. N., C. & E. Europe, westwards to Norway, E. France and Switzerland and southwards to C. Romania and Krym.} Au Cz Da Fe Ga Ge He Hu Ju No Po Rm Rs (N, B, C, W, K, E) Su.
\par 

\par 
4}
\par