{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 64 Spikes (2-)3-10 cm, lax, with 1-5 spikelets per cm
\par
65 Leaves linear-spathulate, 5-10 times as long as wide;
\par
   scale 6-7(-20) mm ................................................................ {\b 58. emarginatum}
\par
65 Leaves obovate-spathulate to cuneate, 1½-3 times as
\par
   long as wide; scale 2-3 mm ......................................... {\b (52-54). albidum} group 
\par
64 Spikes 0·7-3(-4) cm, dense, with 4-15 spikelets per cm
\par
66 Leaves 50-100 mm, 4-5 mm wide at base, often with 
\par
   resinous secretions .................................................... {\b 72. auriculae-ursifolium}
\par
66 Leaves 20-50(-100) mm, 1-2(-3) mm wide at base, without resin
\par
67 Outer bract not more than 2 mm, overlapping not more 
\par
   than 1/4 of the inner ........................................................... {\b 60. ramosissimum}
\par
67 Outer bract at least 2 mm, overlapping at least 1/3 of
\par
   the inner
\par
68 Leaves with revolute margin .................................................. {\b 73. majoricum}
\par
68 Leaves not revolute
\par
69 Calyx conical or slightly infundibuliform, the limb 
\par
   2/3 as long to as long as the tube ...........................{\b  (67-71). binervosum} group
\par
69 Calyx infundibuliform, the limb 1/3 as long as the tube
\par
70 Plant 8-20 cm; spikes 0·7-1·3 cm; inner bract as long 
\par
   as wide, the midrib excurrent for 0·2-0·4 mm ....................... {\b 64. girardianum}
\par
70 Plant 15-40 cm; spikes up to 2·5 cm; inner bract 1½
\par
   times as long as wide, the midrib excurrent for 0·8-1·6 mm . {\b 65. densiflorum}
\par
57 Leaves 1-veined near base
\par
71 Leaves enlarged at base into an auriculate sheath;
\par
   spikes sessile ....................................................................... {\b 86. suffruticosum}
\par
71 Leaf-sheath without auricles; spikes pedunculate
\par
72 Leaves acute
\par
73 Spikes 3-5 cm, with 2-3 spikelets per cm .................................. {\b 55. graecum}
\par
73 Spikes 0·6-2·5(-4) cm, with 4-15 spikelets per cm
\par
74 Inner bract not more than 3 mm; calyx not more than 3·5 mm
\par
75 Spikelets 2- to 3-flowered; leaves 5-6 mm wide, green
\par
   ................................................................................{\b  (75-79). delicatulum} group
\par
75 Spikelets 1-flowered; leaves c. 10 mm wide, glaucous .... {\b 80. sibthorpianum}
\par
74 Inner bract at least 3·5 mm; calyx at least 4 mm
\par
76 Leaves not more than 5 mm wide
\par
77 Spikes 0·6-0·8 cm, with 2-3 spikelets ..................{\b  (67-71). binervosum} group
\par
77 Spikes 1-1·5 cm, usually with 8-12 spikelets ............................... {\b 50. laetum}
\par
76 Leaves at least 8 mm wide
\par
78 Spikes with 4-8 spikelets per cm; outer bract 
\par
   overlapping not more than ¼ of the inner .......................... {\b 60. ramosissimum}
\par
78 Spikes with 10-15 spikelets per cm; outer bract over-
\par
   lapping 1/3-1/2 of the inner ................................................... {\b 64. girardianum}
\par
72 Leaves obtuse
\par
79 Leaves 1-2 mm wide, linear ................................................... {\b 57. carpathum}
\par
79 Leaves 3-20 mm wide, ± spathulate
\par
80 Leaves on woody basal branches 2-8 cm
\par
81 Spikes 0·9-1·3 cm, with 10-13 spikelets per cm ................... {\b 49. tenoreanum}
\par
81 Spikes 1-4 cm, with 4-6 spikelets per cm
\par
82 Calyx-limb 1½ times as long as the tube; inflorescence-
\par
   branches straight .................................................................. {\b 47. minutiflorum}
\par
82 Calyx-limb as long as the tube; inflorescence branches
\par
   arcuate ...................................................................................... {\b 48. inarimense}
\par
80 Leaves in basal rosettes
\par
83 Spikes 2-8 cm, with 2-5 spikelets per cm
\par
84 Leaves obovate-spathulate, 1½-3 times as long as wide; 
\par
   calyx-teeth not uncinate in fruit ..................................{\b  (52-54). albidum} group
\par
84 Leaves oblanceolate-spathulate, 4-6 times as long as wide; 
\par
   calyx-teeth becoming uncinate in fruit .................................. {\b 59. duriusculum}
\par
83 Spikes 1-4 cm, with 4-9 spikelets per cm
\par
85 Calyx 3·2-3·5 mm
\par
86 Leaves obovate-spathulate, 1½-2 times as long as wide; 
\par
   calyx-limb 2/3 as long as the tube ........................{\b  (75-79). delicatulum} group
\par
86 Leaves oblanceolate-spathulate, 3-5 times as long as wide; 
\par
   calyx-limb 1½ times as long as the tube
\par
87 Leaves green; spikes with 4 spikelets per cm ..................... {\b 61. ocymifolium}
\par
87 Leaves whitish-glaucous; spikes with 6-7 spikelets per cm
\par
   ............................................................................................... {\b 62. densissimum}
\par
85 Calyx at least 4 mm
\par
88 Inner bract c. 3 mm ....................................................... {\b 63. parvibracteatum}
\par
88 Inner bract at least 4 mm
\par
89 Calyx conical, gradually widening from the base; outer
\par
   bract overlapping 1/3-1/2 of the inner ...................{\b  (67-71). binervosum} group
\par
89 Calyx infundibuliform, abruptly widening in apical
\par
   1/4-1/3; outer bract overlapping 1/6-1/4 of the inner
\par
90 Plant 10-20 cm; leaves 3-9 mm wide ................................. {\b 51. gougetianum}
\par
90 Plant 20-50 cm; leaves 9-20 mm wide ............................ {\b 60. ramosissimum}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Subgen. {\b Pteroclados} (Boiss.) Pignatti. Annual or perennial herbs. Leaves sinuate or lobed  Ultimate branches of the.inflorescence usually expanded into a leaf-like wing subtending the spike. Fruit with distal circumscissile dehiscence.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. L. sinuatum} (L.) Miller,{\b  Gard. Dict.} ed. 8, no. 6 (1768) ({\i Statice sinuata} L.). Perennial 20-40 cm. Leaves 30-100 × c. 15 mm, with 4-7 rounded lobes on each side, hispid. Flowering stems with 3-4 wings; wings 1-3 mm wide, sometimes narrower. Inflorescence compact. Spikes dense; wing 15 × 4 mm, 3-dentate; spikelets 2-flowered. Inner bract 7 mm, with 2-3 pungent, apical spines. Calyx 10-12 mm; tube c. 7 mm, glabrous; limb c. 4 mm, entire, white or pale violet. Corolla yellowish or pink, purple when dry. {\i Dry, sandy places. Mediterranean region, S. Portugal.} Al Bl Co Cr Ga Gr Hs It Ju Lu Sa Si
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. L. bonduellei} (Lestib.) O. Kuntze, {\i Rev. Gen. Pl. }{\b 2:} 395 (1891). Like {\b 1} but annual 10-30 cm; basal leaves sparsely hairy; flowering stems subcylindrical, not winged or the wings less than 1 mm wide; calyx c. 5 mm, the tube hispid the limb 5-5·5 mm, yellow. {\i Dry places. N. Spain} ({\b prov. Burgos}). Hs [It]. ({\i N. Africa}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 3. L. thouinii} (Viv.) O. Kuntze, {\i op. cit. }396 (1891) ({\i Statice thouinii} Viv.). Annual 10-20 cm. Leaves 30-60 × 7-20 mm with 5-7 lobes on each side. Flowering stems angular or subcylindrical. Inflorescence compact. Spikes with a 3-dentate wing c. 20 × 5 mm; spikelets 2-flowered. Inner bract c. 6 mm. Calyx c. 10 mm; tube c. 5 mm, glabrous; limb c. 5 mm, c. 9 mm in diameter, with acute lobes, pale blue or whitish. Corolla yellow.{\i  Dry places near the sea. S. Spain.} Hs ?Lu [Ga]. ({\i N. Africa, S.W. Asia}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 4. L. brassicifolium} (Webb & Berth.) O. Kuntze, {\i op. cit.} 395(1891). Perennial 20-40 cm. Stems with 2 wings, at least above; wings 5-20 mm wide. Leaves 10-30 cm, with 3-4 lobes on each side; lateral lobes c. 1 cm, the terminal 5-15 × 4-11 cm, ovate. Spikelets 1-flowered. Inner bracts c. 4 mm, cylindrical, truncate. Calyx c. 10 mm; tube c. 4 mm, glabrous; limb c. 6 mm, crenate, pale bluish-violet. Corolla white.{\i  Cultivated for ornament and occasionally naturalized in S. W. Europe.} [ ?Ga Hs. ] ({\i Islas Canarias.})
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Subgen.{\b  Myriolepis} (Boiss.) Pignatti. Densely branched dwarf shrubs with many non-flowering branches. Leaves entire, usually absent at anthesis. Corolla with short tube. Fruit with irregular dehiscence.
\par

\par
40}
\par