{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 5. L. ferulaceum} (L.) O. Kuntze, {\i Rev. Gen. Pl.}{\b  2:} 395 (1891) ({\i Statice ferulacea} L.). Stems 10-40 cm, up to 1·5 mm in diameter, green, flexible, with reddish-brown scales at the base. Leaves absent at anthesis. Flowering branches regularly alternate, with flowers only towards apex; scales 4-5 mm, reddish, with apical awn 1-2 mm. Spikes clavate; spikelets 1-flowered. Inner bract 4-5 mm, truncate, surrounded by numerous shorter, aristate bracts. Calyx 3-3·5 mm, cylindrical, enclosed by inner bract. Corolla 5-6 mm, pink. {\i W. & C. Mediterranean region, C. & S. Portugal.} Bl Ga Hs Ju Lu Si.
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 6. L. diffusum} (Pourret) O. Kuntze,{\i  loc. cit.} (1891) ({\i Statice diffusa }Pourret). Like{\b  5} but with some leaves present at anthesis; flowering branches with flowers along their length; lower branches often entirely covered by regularly alternate scales, the scales scarious or silvery, muticous or mucronulate; spikes with more or less distant spikelets; inner bract c. 3·5 mm; outer bract c. 2 mm, acute, muticous; corolla pale violet.{\i  Maritime sands and salt-marshes. • S. Portugal, S.W. Spain; S. France.} Ga Hs Lu.
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 7. L. caesium} (Girard) O. Kuntze, {\i loc. cit.} (1891) ({\i Statice caesia }Girard). Leaves spathulate, 1(-3)-veined. Inflorescence 20-60 cm; non-flowering branches 5-15 cm, 2 mm in diameter, white, often farinose, rigid; scales 2-3 mm, the upper white. Spikes c. 1 cm; spikelets 1-flowered. Inner bract c. 2·5 mm; outer bract c. 0·5 mm. Calyx 4·5-5 mm, exceeding inner bract by 2-3 mm. Corolla 7-8 mm, pinkish; tube shorter than the calyx; limb 5-7 mm in diameter. 2n = 16.{\i  Dry places. S.E. Spain.} Hs.
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 8. L. insigne} (Cosson) O. Kuntze, {\i loc. cit.} (1891) ({\i Statice insignis} Cosson). Like{\b  7} but more robust, rigid and fragile; leaves 40-50 × 15 mm, 1(3-5)-veined, emarginate; scales brown; spikes up to 3 cm, linear; corolla 10-14 mm, purple, the tube exceeding the calyx by 1-3 mm, the limb 8-10 mm in diameter. 2n = 18.{\i  Dryplaces. S.E. Spain.} Hs.
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp.{\b  insigne} : Plant 20-40(-60) cm, greenish. Spikelets (1-)2-flowered. Calyx 6·5(-8) mm. Inner bract 4-5 mm.{\i  Provinces of Almeria and Granada}.
\par
\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b carthaginiense} Pignatti, {\i Collect. Bot}. ({\i Barcelona}){\b  6:} 295 (1962): Plant 20-60 cm, whitish. Spikelets 1(-2)-flowered. Calyx 5-6 mm. Inner bract c. 3 mm. {\i Near Cartagena}.
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28    Subgen. {\b Limonium.} Perennial herbs, rarely annuals or dwarf shrubs. Leaves entire, present at anthesis. Petals connate at base only. Fruit with irregular dehiscence.
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 9. L. latifolium} (Sm.) O. Kuntze,{\i  Rev. Gen. Pl.}{\b  2:} 395 (1891) ({\i Statice latifolia} Sm.). Plant 50-80(-100) cm, usually hairy. Leaves 250-600 × 80-150 mm, spathulate to elliptical, sparsely hairy, pinnately veined. Sterile branches few or absent; scales 5-6 mm. Spikes up to 1·5(-2) cm, dense; spikelets 1(-2)flowered. Inner bract 2 mm, with hyaline margin 0·7-1 mm wide; outer bract hyaline, overlapping 1/6 of the inner. Calyx 3-3·5 mm, with 5 short, rounded lobes. Corolla c. 6 mm, pale violet.{\i  Steppes and dry grassland. S.E. Europe, from E. Bulgaria to S.E. Russia.} Bu Rm Rs (C, W, K, E).
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 10. L. asterotrichum} (Salmon) Salmon,{\i  Jour. Bot.} ({\i London}) {\b 62:} 336 (1924) ({\i Statice asterotricha} Salmon). Plant 40-65 cm, densely pubescent. Leaves 100-180 × 10-13 mm, linear-spathulate, acute, mucronate, pinnately veined; petiole 2/3-3/4 as long as lamina, with stellate hairs. Sterile branches absent; scales 6-12 mm. Spikes up to 1·5 cm, dense; spikelets 1(-2)-flowered. Bracts with narrow hyaline margin; inner bract 2·2-2·8 mm, 2-fid. Calyx c. 4 mm, with 5 acute lobes and shorter intermediate ones. Corolla pale violet.{\i  Dry, saline grassland. • C. & S.E. Bulgaria.} Bu.
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 11. L. sareptanum} (A. Becker) Gams in Hegi,{\i  Ill. Fl. Mitteleur. }{\b 5}({\b 3}): 1880 (1927). Plant 20-60 cm, densely puberulent. Leaves 100-150 × 20-60 mm, obovate-spathulate, pinnately veined. Sterile branches usually present; scales 6-8 mm. Spikes 1·8-2·5 cm, lax; spikelets 1(-4)-flowered. Inner bract c. 2·5 mm, with hyaline margin c. 0·7 mm wide. Calyx c. 4·5 mm. Corolla reddish.{\i  Steppes. S. & E. Ukraine, S.E. & S.C. Russia, W. Kazakhstan.} Rs (C, W, K, E).
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 12. L. bungei} (Claus) Gamajun., {\i Izv. Kazakhsk. Fil. Akad. Nauk SSSR} ({\i Ser. Bot}.){\b  1:} 10 (1944). Like {\b 11} but glabrous; leaves 50-150 × 30-70 mm; spikes 0·8-1·8 cm, spikelets (1-)2- to 3-flowered. {\i Steppes. E. Ukraine, S.E Russia, W. Kazakhstan}. Rs (C, W, E).
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 13. L. gmelinii} (Willd.) O. Kuntze,{\i  Rev. Gen. Pl.}{\b  2: }395 (1891) ({\i Statice gmelinii }Willd.). Plant 20-60 cm, glabrous. Leaves 70-110(-300) × 20-30(-60) mm, spathulate, indistinctly tuberculate, pinnately veined. Sterile branches few or absent; scales up to 25 mm. Spikes 0·6-1 cm, dense; spikelets 1(-2)flowered. Bracts densely tuberculate; inner bracts c. 3 mm, emarginate; outer bract hyaline except on the midrib, overlapping 1/3-2/5 of the inner. Calyx c. 4 mm, sparsely pubescent. Corolla 5-5·5 mm, reddish. 2n = 18, 27, 36.{\i  Alkaline soils. E.C. & S.E. Europe}. Bu Cz ?Gr Hu Ju Rm Rs (C, W, K, E) Tu.
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28  {\b  L. hypanicum} Klokov in Kotov & Barbarich,{\i  Fl. RSS Ucr}.{\b  8:} 524 (1957), from S.W. Ukraine and Moldavia, with subsessile leaves and calyx-hairs up to 0·3 mm, and{\b  L. hungaricum} Klokov,{\i  op. cit.} 525 (1957), from Hungary and Romania, with subsessile leaves and calyx-hairs 0·3-0·6 mm, are here included in {\b 13}. They have been separated from the remaining populations of {\b 13}, which have a subglabrous calyx-tube and a petiole 1/5-1/3 as long as the lamina, but their status requires further examination.
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 14. L. meyeri} (Boiss.) O. Kuntze,{\i  Rev. Gen. Pl.}{\b  2:} 395 (1891). Like {\b 13} but scales 6-9 mm; spikes 2-3 cm; spikelets somewhat contiguous; inner bract c. 2 mm, rounded; outer bract with narrow hyaline margin; calyx c. 3·5 mm, with sparsely hairy veins or subglabrous.{\i  Alkaline soils. S. & E. Ukraine, S.E. Russia, W. Kazakhstan.} Rs (W, K, E).
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 15. L. hirsuticalyx} Pignatti,{\i  Bot. Jour. Linn. Soc.}{\b  64:} 361 (1971) ({\i Statice gmelinii} var. {\i limonioides} Wangerin, non {\i Statice limonioides} Biv.). Like {\b 13} but leaves densely tuberculate; scales 10-16 mm; spikes 1·5-3 cm; inner bract c. 2 mm, rounded, with hyaline margin c. 0·2 mm wide; outer bract almost entirely herbaceous, overlapping 1/4-1/3 of the inner; calyx c. 3 mm, with densely hairy veins. {\i Maritime salt-marshes. S.E. Greece, Kikladhes}. Gr.
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 16. L. tomentellum} (Boiss.) O. Kuntze,{\i  Rev. Gen. Pl. }{\b 2:} 396 (1891). Plant 20-30(-80) cm; stems densely tomentose to sparsely hairy in the upper half. Leaves 50-130(-250) × 20-40(-90) mm, hairy on midrib, tuberculate, pinnately veined. Sterile branches few or absent; scales 9-14 mm or more. Spikes up to 1·2 cm, dense; spikelets 1- to 3-flowered. Inner bract 2·5-3·3(-4·5) mm; outer bract 1-2 mm, with narrow hyaline margin, overlapping 1/6-1/5 of the inner. Calyx 3·5-5·5 mm, subglabrous. Corolla 5-6 mm, pinkish.{\i  Alkaline soils and salt-marshes. S. & E. Ukraine, S.E. Russia, W. Kazakhstan}. ?Rm Rs (W, K, E).
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28  {\b  L. czurjukiense} (Klokov) Lavrenko, in Lavrenko & Soczava,{\i  Descr. Veg. URSS}{\b  2:} 669 (1956),from the coast of Ukraine, having
\par
\par 41}
\par