{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 the petiole 1/3-1/2 as long as the lamina,{\b  L. alutaceum} (Steven) O. Kuntze,{\i  Rev. Gen. Pl.}{\b  2:} 395 (1891), from W. Ukraine, having subsessile leaves 2-3 times as long as wide, and {\b L. donetzicum} Klokov in Kotov & Barbarich,{\i  Fl. RSS Ucr.}{\b  8:} 523 (1957), from E. Ukraine and adjacent parts of Russia, having subsessile leaves 2½-5 times as long as wide, probably belong here but their status requires further examination.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 17. L. vulgare} Miller,{\i  Gard. Dict.} ed. 8, no. 1 (1768) ({\i Statice limonium} L.). Plant 15-70 cm, glabrous. Leaves 100-150 × 15-40 mm, oblanceolate-spathulate, usually mucronate, pinnately veined, usually erect, in a sparse basal rosette; petiole 2 mm wide, ½ as long to as long as lamina. Flowering stems cylindrical; non-flowering branches absent; sterile branches few or absent; scales 6-18 mm. Spikes 1-2 cm, patent, with 6-8 spikelets per cm; spikelets 2-flowered. Inner bract 2·7-5 mm; outer bract 0·9-2·7 mm, herbaceous, overlapping 1/6-1/5 of the inner. Calyx 3·6-6 mm. Corolla 6-8 mm, reddish.{\i  Maritime salt-marshes. S. & W. Europe, extending north-eastwards to S.W. Sweden.} Al Az Be Br Bu Co Cr Da Ga Ge Gr Ho Hs It Ju Lu Rm Sa Si Su Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b vulgare}: Plant 15-30(-40) cm. Flowering stems usually branched only in upper half; branches short, crowded. Inner bract 4-5 mm; outer bract 2-2·7 mm, subequalling middle bract. Calyx 4·7-6 mm, 5-lobed. 2n = 36. •{\i  W. & N. Europe}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b serotinum} (Reichenb.) Gams in Hegi,{\i  Ill. Fl. Mitteleur. }{\b 5}({\b 3}): 1882 (1927): Plant 30-70 cm. Flowering stems branched in the upper 1/2-2/3; branches long, patent, often recurved. Inner bract 2·7-4·1 mm; outer bract 0·9-2 mm, ½ as long as middle bract. Calyx 3·6-4·7 mm, 5-lobed, with smaller intermediate lobes. {\i S. Europe}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Populations in Portugal frequently appear to be intermediate between {\b 17}({\b a}) and {\b 17}({\b b}).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 18. L. humile} Miller,{\i  Gard. Dict.} ed. 8, no. 4 (1768) ({\i Statice bahusiensis} Fries). Like {\b 17} but plant 20-40 cm; leaves 80-150 × 10-20 mm; flowering stems branched in the upper half, compressed, subangular; branches long, erect or erecto-patent; spikes 3-5 cm, erect, with 2-3 spikelets per cm; inner bract c. 5 mm; outer bract c. 3 mm, about equalling middle bract; calyx c. 6·5 mm. 2n = 36. {\i Maritime salt-marshes. • N.W. Europe and W. part of Baltic region}. Br Da Ga Ge Hb No Su.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b 17} and {\b 18} show variation in size and in the extent of branching.(Cf. W. Wanger in,{\i  Zeitschr. Naturwiss.} ({\i Halle}){\b 82:} 401-443 (1911).)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 19. L. bellidifolium} (Gouan) Dumort.,{\i  Fl. Belg.} 27 (1827)({\i Statice bellidifolia} (Gouan) DC.). Plant 9-30(-40) cm. Leaves 14-40 × 3-6(-15) mm, spathulate, acute, (1-)3(-5)-veined, usually withered and often completely absent at anthesis. Inflorescence with tuberculate branches; non-flowering branches numerous. Spikes dense, patent; spikelets 1- to 3-flowered. Inner bract 1·6-3·9 mm, hyaline for at least (1/4-) 1/3 of its length; outer bract hyaline except on the keel, overlapping 1/4-1/2 of the inner. Calyx 2·6-4·3 mm; limb 1½ times as long as the tube. Corolla 4-5·5 mm, pale violet. 2n = 18.{\i  Maritime salt-marshes; inland on saline soils in U.S.S.R. Coasts of Mediterranean and Black Seas; S. part of U.S.S.R.; E. England.} Br ?Co Ga Gr Hs It Ju Rm Rs (W, K, E) Sa.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Procumbent plants with the calyx 3·6-4·1 mm and with bracts having a narrow hyaline margin are recorded from the coasts of W. France and England as {\b L. dubyi }(Gren. & Godron) O. Kuntze,{\i  Rev. Gen. Pl.}{\b  2:} 395 (1891); they may represent a distinct species. {\b L. danubiale} Klokov in Kotov & Barbarich,{\i  Fl. RSS Ucr.} {\b 8:} 526 (1957), from S.W. Ukraine, is a larger variant with leaves up to 120 mm and calyx 4-4·5 mm.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 20. L. cancellatum} (Bernh. ex Bertol.) O. Kuntze,{\i  Rev. Gen. Pl.}{\b  2:} 395 (1891) ({\i Statice cancellata} Bernh. ex Bertol.; incl. {\i S. cordata} sensu Hayek, non L.). Plant 10-18(-28) cm, densely pubescent. Leaves 5-20, 15-27 × 3-5(-8) mm, spathulate, obtuse or emarginate, forming a lax rosette. Inflorescence reticulate, the branches mostly diverging at an angle of 90°-180° ; non-flowering branches numerous. Spikes up to 2·5 cm, with 4-6 spikelets per cm; spikelets 1- to 2-flowered. Bracts with narrow hyaline margin; inner bract (3-)4 mm; outer bract overlapping 1/5 of the inner. Calyx c. 4·5 mm; limb ½ as long as the tube. Corolla 5·5 mm. {\i Rocks near the sea. • Coasts of the Adriatic sea and W. Greece}. Gr It Ju.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 21. L. vestitum} (Salmon) Salmon,{\i  Jour. Bot. (London) }{\b 62:} 336 (1924). Like {\b 20} but plant 4-8(-13) cm, puberulent; leaves at least 20, 5-10 mm wide, forming a dense, cushion-like rosette; spikelets 1-flowered; inner bract c. 3·5 mm; calyx 4·7-5 mm. {\i Maritime cliffs. • Adriatic islands of Jabuka} ({\i Pomo}) {\i and Kamik} ({\i W.S.W. of Split}). Ju.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 22. L. johannis} Pignatti,{\i  Bot. Jour. Linn. Soc.}{\b  64:} 362 (1971). Plant 15-25 cm. Leaves 20-50 × 6-9 mm. Inflorescence pyramidal, with numerous non-flowering and few flowering branches; branches pubescent, erect or erecto-patent, diverging at an acute angle. Spikes rudimentary or 1-2 cm, scorpioid, lax, with 2-4 spikelets per cm; spikelets (1-)2-flowered. Bracts with narrow hyaline margin; inner bract 3-3·5 mm; outer bract overlapping 1/8 of the inner. Calyx 4·5-5 mm; tube not longer than the limb. Corolla 5-6 mm.{\i  Volcanic maritime cliffs. • S.W. Italy, Sicilia.} It Si.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 23. L. cordatum} (L.) Miller, {\i Gard. Dict.} ed. 8, no. 10 (1768) ({\i Statice cordata }L.). Plant 15-30 cm, greyish-pubescent. Leaves 15-30 × 2-6 mm, linear-spathulate. Inflorescence corymbose, with erect to erecto-patent branches diverging at an acute angle; non-flowering branches numerous. Spikes up to 1 cm, dense, with 7 spikelets per cm; spikelets 1-flowered, in short clusters. Bracts with narrow hyaline margin; inner bract c. 3·5 mm, puberulent; outer bract overlapping 1/5 of the inner. Calyx c. 4·5 mm, exceeding bracts by c. 1·5 mm, with acute lobes; limb 2/3 as long as the tube.{\i  Calcareous maritime cliffs. • W. Italy and S.E. France}. Ga It.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 24. L. furfuraceum} (Lag.) O. Kuntze,{\i  Rev. Gen. Pl.}{\b  2:} 395 (1891) ({\i Statice furfuracea} Lag.). Plant 18-25 cm, whitish-pubescent. Leaves 20-26 × 4-6 mm, usually withered at anthesis. Inflorescence hemispherical, with patent to deflexed branches; non-flowering branches present. Spikes 2-3 cm, the terminal up to 4-5 cm, often scorpioid or divaricate, with 2-3 spikelets per cm; spikelets 2-flowered, erecto-patent. Bracts with narrow hyaline margin; inner bract c. 4·5 mm; outer bract overlapping 1/6 of the inner. Calyx c. 4·5 mm; limb ½ as long as the tube. Corolla 6-7 mm, pale violet. 2n = 18.{\i  Calcareous maritime cliffs. • S.E. Spain }({\b Alicante prov}.). Hs.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 25. L. lucentinum} Pignatti & Freitag,{\i  Bot. Jour. Linn. Soc}.{\b  64:} 363 (1971). Plant 15-33 cm, greyish-pubescent. Leaves 30-40 × 11-15 mm, withered at anthesis. Inflorescence corymbose, with patent branches; non-flowering branches present. Spikes 1-1·5 cm, sometimes forming irregular clusters; spikelets 1- to 2-flowered, patent. Bracts with narrow hyaline margin; inner bract 4-4·5 mm, forming a narrowly cylindrical envelope around
\par

\par
42}
\par