{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 the flowers. Calyx c. 5 mm; limb 2/3 as long as the tube. Corolla 5-6 mm, blue-violet.{\i  Maritime salt-marshes. • S.E. Spain} ({\i Alicante prov}.). Hs.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 26. L. dichotomum} (Cav.) O. Kuntze,{\i  Rev. Gen. Pl.}{\b  2:} 395 (1891) ({\i Statice dichotoma} Cav.). Plant (15-)30-50 cm; stems rugose, pubescent, glaucous. Leaves 30-40 × 8-9 mm, spathulate, withered at anthesis. Inflorescence usually hemispherical, with dense branches diverging at an obtuse angle; non-flowering branches present. Lateral spikes rudimentary, the terminal up to 3 cm; spikelets 1- to 2-flowered. Bracts with narrow hyaline margin; inner bract 2-2·5 mm; outer bract overlapping ¼ of the inner. Calyx 3·5-4(-4·5) mm; limb as long as the tube. Corolla c. 5 mm.{\i  Saline and gypsaceous soils. • C. Spain}. Hs.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 27. L. calcarae} (Tod. ex Janka) Pignatti, {\i Bot. Jour. Linn. Soc.}{\b  64:} 364 (1971) ({\i Statice calcarae} Tod. ex Janka). Plant 20-30 cm; stems rough, greyish-pubescent. Leaves c. 25 × c. 4 mm, linear-spathulate, acute, usually withered in summer; sheaths reddish-brown. Inflorescence with branches diverging at an angle of 90°-120°; non-flowering branches numerous. Lateral spikes rudimentary, the terminal 5-6 cm, with 3 spikelets per cm; spikelets 2- to 3-flowered. Bracts with narrow hyaline margin; inner bract 3·5-4 mm; outer bract overlapping 1/5 of the inner. Calyx c. 5·5 mm; limb as long as the tube.{\i  Gypsaceous soils. • C. Sicilia }({\i near Caltanissetta}). Si.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 28. L. catalaunicum} (Willk. & Costa) Pignatti, {\i Collect. Bot. }({\i Barcelona}){\b  6:} 300 (1962). Stems glabrous, smooth. Leaves 30-65 × 5-17 mm, oblanceolate-spathulate, usually withered or absent at anthesis. Inflorescence 20-60 cm, usually hemispherical, the branches with long, divaricate segments; non-flowering branches numerous. Spikes 2-6(-12) cm, very lax, with 1-3 spikelets per cm; spikelets 1- to 3-flowered. Bracts with narrow hyaline margin; inner bract 2·5-3(-4) mm, obtuse, the midrib excurrent into a conspicuous point; outer bract c. 0·3 mm. Calyx 5-6 mm, exceeding the inner bract by 2-3 mm; tube as long as the limb. Corolla c. 8·5 mm.{\i  Saline and gypsaceous soils. • N.E. Spain} ({\i Ebro basin}). Hs.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1.Spikelets 1(-2)-flowered ................................................ ({\b b}) subsp.{\b  procerum}
\par
1 Spikelets 2- to 3-flowered
\par
2 Inflorescence 20-40 cm; leaves not more than 40 × 5-8 mm
\par
  .................................................................................... ({\b a}) subsp.{\b  catalaunicum}
\par
2 Inflorescence 40-60 cm; leaves 50-65 × 14-17 mm .......... ({\b c}) subsp.{\b  viciosoi}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp.{\b  catalaunicum}: Leaves up to c. 40 × 5-8 mm, 1(-3)veined. Inflorescence 20-40 cm; spikelets 2- to 3-flowered.{\i  Near Logroño and Lerida}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp.{\b  procerum} (Willk.) Pignatti,{\i  loc. cit.} (1962): Leaves 30-40 × 8-11 mm, 1(-3)-veined. Inflorescence 20-40 cm; spikelets 1(-2)-flowered.{\i  From Lérida to Huesca}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b c}) Subsp.{\b  viciosoi} (Pau) Pignatti, {\i loc. cit.} (1962): Leaves 50-65 × 14-17 mm, 5-veined. Inflorescence 40-60 cm; spikelets 2- to 3-flowered. {\i Near Calatayud and Logroño}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 29. L. articulatum} (Loisel.) O. Kuntze,{\i  Rev. Gen. Pl.}{\b  2:} 395 (1891) ({\i Statice articulata} Loisel.). Plant 5-15(-20) cm. Leaves 30-35 × 4-5 mm, linear-spathulate, 1-veined, usually withered at anthesis. Flowering stems branched from near the base; branches coarsely tuberculate, often divaricate; segments 2-5 mm, strongly constricted at the nodes; non-flowering branches present. Spikes rudimentary, the terminal 1-2·5 cm, lax; spikelets 1- to 2-flowered. Bracts with narrow hyaline margin; inner bract 3·2-4 mm; outer bract 0·5-1 mm. Calyx c. 4·5 mm; limb 1/3 as long as the tube.{\i  Rocks near the sea. • Corse, N. Sardegna.} Co Sa.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 30. L. japygicum} (Groves) Pignatti,{\i  Bot. Jour. Linn. Soc.}{\b  64:}364 (1971) ({\i Statice cancellata }var.{\i  japygica} Groves). Plant 5-10(-20) cm, glabrous. Leaves 10-15 × c. 3 mm, linear-spathulate, bullate, in cushion-like rosettes on somewhat woody branches 1-2 cm. Inflorescence 4-12 cm; branches tuberculate, with segments diverging at 90° ; non-flowering branches numerous. Spikes 0·5-1·8(-3) cm, with 5-6 spikelets per cm; spikelets 2-flowered. Bracts with narrow hyaline margin; inner bract 3-3·5 mm, tuberculate; outer bract up to 2 mm, overlapping ¼ of the inner. Calyx c. 4 mm; limb ½ as long as the tube, the veins divaricate after anthesis. {\i Calcareous maritime cliffs. • S.E. Italy} ({\i Taranto to Otranto}). It.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 31. L. minutum} (L.) Fourr.,{\i  Ann. Soc. Linn. Lyon} nov. ser., {\b 17:} 141 (1869) ({\i Statice minuta} L.). Plant 3-14 cm, usually glabrous. Leaves 8-10 × 2-3 mm, spathulate, revolute, bullate, 1-veined, in cushion-like rosettes at apex of somewhat woody branches 1-2 cm. Inflorescence 2-12 cm; branches smooth, with straight, rigid segments diverging at an acute angle; non-flowering branches few to numerous; scales 3-5 mm. Lateral spikes 0·5-1 cm, irregularly subglobose, the apical 2-3 cm, with 6-7 spikelets per cm; spikelets 1- to 4-flowered. Bracts with narrow hyaline margin; inner bract 3·5-4 mm, acute; outer bract up to 2 mm, slightly overlapping the base of the inner. Calyx 5-5·5 mm; limb 2/3 as long as the tube. {\i Calcareous maritime cliffs. • S.E. France.} Ga.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    Densely pubescent plants recorded from Martigues possibly result from introgression with {\b 23}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 32. L. caprariense} (Font Quer & Marcos) Pignatti, {\i Arch. Bot.} ({\i Forli}) {\b 31:} 77 (1955) ({\i Statice minuta} auct. balear., non L.). Like{\b  31} but plant densely puberulent; leaves up to 7 mm wide, spathulate, obtuse, in a hemispherical, cushion-like basal rosette; non-flowering branches usually numerous; spikelets contiguous; outer bract overlapping 1/4-1/3 of the inner, the inner truncate; calyx 3·5-5 mm, the limb as long as the tube.{\i  Calcareous maritime cliffs. • Islas Baleares}. Bl.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp.{\b  caprariense}: Spikelets usually 1(-2)-flowered. Inner bract 4-4·5 mm. Calyx 4-5 mm. {\i Menorca, Mallorca and Cabrera}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28    ({\b b}) Subsp.{\b  multiflorum} Pignatti,{\i  op. cit.} 81 (1955): Spikelets usually 3- to 4-flowered. Inner bract 3-4 mm. Calyx 3·5-4·5 mm. {\i Throughout the range of the species.}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 33. L. parvifolium} (Tineo) Pignatti,{\i  Bot. Jour. Linn. Soc.}{\b  64:} 364 (1971) ({\i Statice parvifolia} Tineo). Plant 10-22 cm, glabrous, with densely leafy, somewhat woody, basal branches 4-12 cm. Leaves 10-16 × 2-3 mm, narrowly spathulate. Inflorescence 6-10 cm; non-flowering branches numerous, incurved. Spikes 0·5-2 cm, with 1-3 spikelets per cm; spikelets 1(-2)-flowered. Bracts with narrow hyaline margin; inner bract c. 3·5 mm, cucullate; outer bract c. 0·8 mm, overlapping 1/6 of the inner. Calyx 3·8-4·2 mm; limb as long as the tube.{\i  Rocky slopes up to 600 m. Pantelleria.} Si.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 34. L. acutifolium} (Reichenb.) Salmon, {\i Jour. Bot.} ({\i London}) {\b 62:} 336 (1924) ({\i Statice rupicola} Badaro ex Reichenb.). Like {\b 33} but leaves 10-18 × c. 1 mm, linear, acute; inflorescence 3-6 cm, with few non-flowering branches; spikelets 2-flowered; inner bract 4-4·5 mm, flat; calyx 4·5-5 mm.{\i  Rocky slopes near the sea. • S. Corse, N. Sardegna}. Co Sa.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    Plants intermediate between {\b 29} and{\b  34} occur in N. Sardegna.
\par

\par
43}
\par