{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 35. L. aragonense} (Debeaux) Pignatti, {\i Collect. Bot.} ({\i Barcelona}) {\b 6:} 301 (1962) ({\i Statice aragonensis} Debeaux). Like {\b 33} but leafy basal branches 1-3 cm; leaves 10 × 0·5-1 mm, linear, acute, 1-veined; non-flowering branches few or almost absent; spikes with 5-6 spikelets per cm; spikelets 2- to 3-flowered; inner bract c. 2·8 mm; calyx c. 3 mm, the limb 1/3-1/2 as long as the tube. {\i Gypsaceous soils. • E. Spain} ({\i prov. Teruel}). Hs.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   {\b (36-40). L. cosyrense} group. Plant (10-)15-50 cm, glabrous, usually smooth, often with woody basal branches. Leaves linear-spathulate, flat to convolute, 1-veined, in dense basal rosettes. Inflorescence with numerous non-flowering branches. Spikes 1-5 cm, with 3-5 spikelets per cm. Bracts with narrow hyaline margin; inner bract 3·5-4·3 mm, shorter than the calyx, acute, with midrib excurrent in conspicuous acute point. Corolla c. 8 mm.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b  37-38} are represented by many local variants scattered on small islands and rocky slopes along the W. coast of Italy.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Calyx-limb 2/3 as long to as long as the tube
\par
2 Calyx-lobes 0·6-0·8 mm, obtuse ............................................. {\b 38. multiforme}
\par
2 Calyx-lobes 1-2 mm, acute ................................. {\b 40. anfractum}
\par
1 Calyx-limb 1/3-1/2 as long as the tube
\par
3 Inflorescence-segments very fragile, dark when dry .................. {\b 39. bocconei}
\par
3 Inflorescence-segments not fragile, greenish.
\par
4 Leaves flat or with slightly revolute margin; calyx 
\par
  c. 4 mm, the lobes c. 0·8 mm ...................................................... {\b 36. cosyrense}
\par
4 Leaves with revolute margin or entirely convolute;
\par
  calyx 4-5 mm, the lobes 1-1·5 mm ............................................... {\b 37. pontium}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 36. L. cosyrense} (Guss.) O. Kuntze, {\i Rev. Gen. Pl.}{\b  2:} 395 (1891) ({\i Statice cosyrensis} Guss.). Plant 15-50 cm. Leaves 20-25 × 2·5-3 mm, flat or slightly revolute, obtuse, in rosettes on somewhat woody basal branches 1-3 cm. Inflorescence up to 25 cm; segments up to 2 cm, flexuous or rigid, diverging at an acute angle, greenish. Spikes 2-5 cm, lax, with 3-4 spikelets per cm; spikelets 1-flowered. Inner bract 3·5(-4) mm; outer bract c. 1 mm, overlapping 1/6-1/4 of the inner. Calyx c. 4 mm, exceeding the bract by c. 1·5 mm; limb campanulate, 1/3-1/2 as long as the tube; lobes c. 0·8 mm. {\i Rocky slopes. • Malta, Pantelleria.} Si
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 37. L. pontium} Pignatti, {\i Bot. Jour. Linn. Soc.}{\b  64:} 364 (1971). Like{\b  36} but inflorescence with the segments diverging at an angle of 60°-90°; leaves revolute or convolute; spikelets sometimes 3-to 4-flowered; calyx 4-5 mm, the lobes 1-1·5 mm.{\i  Calcareous maritime cliffs. • Isole Ponziane }({\i W. of Napoli}). It.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   A variant with long, slender segments resembles{\b  44}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   {\b 38. L. multiforme} (U. Martelli) Pignatti,{\i  loc. cit. }(1971) ({\i Statice minuta} var.{\i  multiformis} U. Martelli). Like {\b 36} but plant 20-40 cm, without woody basal branches; leaves usually revolute or convolute; spikelets 1- to 4-flowered; calyx-limb 2/3 as long to as long as the tube, the lobes 0·6-0·8 mm, obtuse. Calcareous maritime cliffs. •{\i  W.C. Italy} ({\i Gaeta to Livorno}),{\i  Arcipelago Toscano.} It.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   A polymorphic species with more than twenty local variants.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 39. L. bocconei} (Lojac.) Litard. in Briq.,{\i  Prodr. Fl. Corse}{\b  3}({\b 2}): 16 (1955) ({\i Statice cordata} sensu Guss., non L.). Plant (10-)20-40 cm. Leaves 20-50 × 5-10 mm, obtuse or emarginate. Inflorescence-segments up to 2 cm, rigid, usually arcuate and very fragile, smooth, dark when dry. Spikes 1·5-4 cm, lax, with 4 spikelets per cm; spikelets 1-flowered. Inner bract 3·5-4 mm; outer bract c. 1·5 mm. Calyx 4-5 mm; limb 1/3 as long as the tube. {\i Maritime cliffs. • N.W. Sicilia, Isole Egadi.} Si.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    Plants with larger spikelets, having the inner bract 4·5-5 mm and the calyx c. 6 mm, occur near Trapani and were described as {\b Statice ambigua} Lojac.,{\i  Fl. Sic.}{\b  2}({\b 2}): 26 (1907) ({\i S. ponzoi} Fiori), they may be intermediate between {\b 39} and{\b  55}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 40. L. anfractum} (Salmon) Salmon, {\i Jour. Bot.} ({\i London}) {\b 62}: 336 (1924) ({\i Statice anfracta} Salmon,{\b  S. cosyrensis} sensu Hayek, non Guss.). Plant 20-30 cm, slightly rough. Leaves 20-25 × 3-4 mm. Inflorescence-segments usually diverging at 90°-120°. Spikes 1-2 cm, with 4-5 spikelets per cm; spikelets 1- to 2-(-3) flowered. Inner bract 4-4·3 mm; outer bract overlapping ¼ of the inner. Calyx c. 5 mm; limb 2/3 as long as the tube; lobes 1-2 mm, acute. {\i Calcareous rocks. • Coasts of Albania and S. Jugoslavia}. Al Ju.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 41. L. melium} (Nyman) Pignatti, {\i Bot. Jour. Linn. Soc.}{\b  64:} 365 (1971) ({\i Statice cosyrensis} subsp. {\i melia} Nyman). Plant 20-40 cm, glabrous, smooth. Leaves 25-50 × 4-7 mm, linear-spathulate, revolute. Inflorescence branched from the base; segments constricted at the nodes; non-flowering branches few. Spikes up to 1·5 cm, with 3-5 spikelets per cm; spikelets 1-flowered. Bracts with narrow hyaline margin; inner bract c. 3 mm; outer bract overlapping ¼ of the inner one. Calyx 5-5·5 mm, exceeding bracts by c. 2 mm; limb as long as to 1-1½ times as long as the tube. Corolla c. 6 mm. {\i Calcareous cliffs near the sea. • S. Greece, Kikhlades}. Gr.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 42. L. tremolsii} (Rouy) P. Fourn.,{\i  Quatre Fl. Fr.} 721 (1937) ({\i Statice tremolsii} Rouy). Plant 10-25 cm, glabrous, slightly rough. Leaves 15-35 × 3-8 mm, linear-lanceolate, bullate, 1-veined, in rosettes on somewhat woody basal branches 2-3 cm. Flowering stems branched from the base; branches erect; segments arcuate, flexible; non-flowering branches few. Spikes up to 2 cm, with 4-5 spikelets per cm; spikelets 1-flowered. Bracts with narrow hyaline margin; inner bract c. 4 mm, acute, with midrib excurrent in conspicuous acute point; outer bract overlapping 1/5 of the inner. Calyx 4-4·5 mm, exceeding bracts by c. 1·5 mm; limb as long as the tube, the teeth acute and conspicuously veined. Corolla c. 6 mm, exceeding calyx by at least 1 mm. 2n = 18. {\i Calcareous cliffs near the sea. • N.E. Spain, Islas Baleares, S.E. France}. Bl Ga Hs.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 43. L. calaminare} Pignatti ex Pignatti,{\i  Bot. Jour. Linn. Soc.}{\b  65:} 353 (1972). Like {\b 42} but plant 20-40 cm, tuberculate; spikes with 3-5 spikelets per cm; spikelets 2(-3)-flowered; inner bract c. 3·5 mm, forming an open envelope around the flowers, usually completely open after anthesis; calyx c. 5·5 mm, exceeding inner bract by 2-2·5 mm, the limb 2/3 as long as the tube; corolla c. 5·5 mm, pale pink, slightly exceeding the calyx. 2n = 18.{\i  Zinc-rich soils. • S.E. Spain} ({\i near Cartagena}). Hs.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 44. L. tenuiculum} (Tineo ex Guss.) Pignatti,{\i  op. cit.}{\b  64:} 365 (1971) ({\i Statice tenuicula} Tineo ex Guss.). Plant 10-15 cm, slender, glabrous, smooth. Leaves 20-30 × 4-7 mm, linear-spathulate, obtuse, revolute, smooth, 1-veined, on somewhat woody basal branches 2-3 cm. Inflorescence-segments 2-2·5 cm, flexible, sometimes very slender, straight or arcuate, diverging at an angle of 15°-45°; non-flowering branches numerous. Spikes up to 1 cm, with 3 spikelets per cm; spikelets 1- to 2-flowered. Bracts with narrow hyaline margin; inner bract c. 2·5 mm; outer bract up to 2 mm, overlapping 1/10 of the inner. Calyx c. 3·5 mm; limb as long as the tube. Corolla c. 5 mm.{\i  Hillsides near the sea. • Isole Egadi} ({\i Marettimo}). Si.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 45. L. hermaeum} (Pignatti) Pignatti, {\i loc. cit.} (1971) ({\i L. tenuiculum} subsp. {\i hermaeum} Pignatti). Like {\b 44} but plant rough;
\par

\par
44}
\par