{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}
\pard\f0\fs28 leaves 10-20 × 1-1·5(-4) mm, linear-lanceolate, usually withered at anthesis, on woody basal branches 2-5 cm; spikes few, up to 4 cm, with 1(-2) spikelets per cm; spikelets 2-flowered; inner bract 3-3·5 mm, cucullate. {\i Calcareous hillsides. • N.E. Sardegna} ({\i island of Tavolara}). Sa.
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 46. L. remotispiculum} (Lacaita) Pignatti, {\i loc. cit. }(1971) ({\i Statice remotispicula} Lacaita). Plant 20-30 cm, glabrous, smooth. Leaves 30-40 × 4-5 mm, linear-spathulate, revolute, 1-veined, in rosettes on somewhat woody basal branches 1-2 cm. Inflorescence-segments up to 3 cm, flexible, straight or arcuate, diverging at an angle of 15°-45°; non-flowering branches numerous. Spikes 2-6(-10) cm, usually arcuate, with 1-2 spikelets per cm; spikelets 2- to 3(-4)-flowered. Bracts with narrow hyaline margin; inner bract 3-3·5 mm, acute, with midrib excurrent in conspicuous acute point; outer bract c. 1·2 mm, overlapping 1/4 of the inner. Calyx 4-4·5 mm; limb as long as the tube. Corolla 5-6 mm.{\i  Maritime cliffs. • S.W. Italy, from 39° 40' to 40° 40' N.} It.
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 47. L. minutiflorum} (Guss.) O. Kuntze, {\i Rev. Gen. Pl.}{\b  2:} 395 (1891). Plant 15-25(-35) cm, glabrous, often slightly rough. Leaves 20-25 × 5-9 mm, obovate-spathulate, obtuse, 1-veined, on somewhat woody basal branches 2-3 cm. Inflorescence pyramidal; non-flowering branches absent. Spikes usually lax, with 4-6 spikelets per cm; spikelets 1- to 2(-3)-flowered. Inner bract 4-4*5 mm; outer bract overlapping 1/4 of the inner. Calyx 4*5-5 mm, exceeding bracts by c. 1 mm; limb 11/2 times as long as the tube.{\i  Rocky slopes near the sea. • Islands of W. Mediterranean region.} Bl Si.
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp.{\b  minutiflorum}: Inflorescence-branches more or less rigid. Leaves flat or with somewhat revolute margin. Spikes 1·5-4 cm; spikelets (1-)2-flowered. {\i Sicilia}.
\par
\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp.{\b  balearicum} Pignatti,{\i  Arch. Bot.} ({\i Forli}) {\b 31}: 85 (1955): Inflorescence-branches slender and flexible. Leaves revolute. Spikes 1·2-1·5(-2) cm; spikelets (1-)2(-3)-flowered.{\i  Islas Baleares}.
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 48. L. inarimense} (Guss.) Pignatti, {\i op. cit.} 84 (1955). Plant 10-20 cm, glabrous, smooth. Leaves 30-40 × 4-10 mm, obtuse, 1-veined, on somewhat woody basal branches 2-3 cm. Inflorescence pyramidal; segments flexible, arcuate; non-flowering branches few or absent; scales 3-5 mm. Spikes 2-2·5 cm, with 5, rarely more, often contiguous spikelets per cm; spikelets 2-flowered. Bracts with narrow hyaline margin; inner bract c. 4·5 mm, acute, with midrib excurrent in conspicuous point; outer bract overlapping 1/3 of the inner. Calyx 4·5-5 mm; limb as long as the tube, the teeth obtuse and indistinctly veined.{\i  Maritime rocks and cliffs. • W. Mediterranean region.} Bl It.
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp.{\b  inarimense}: Leaves 4-5 mm wide, linear-lanceolate to linear. {\i S. W. Italy} ({\i Golfo di Napoli}).
\par
\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp.{\b  ebusitanum} (Font Quer) Pignatti,{\i  loc. cit.} (1955): Leaves 7-10 mm wide, lanceolate-spathulate.{\i  Islas Baleares}.
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28  In the Islas Baleares a hybrid swarm is known involving this species, {\b 32} and {\b 56}.
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 49. L. tenoreanum} (Guss.) Pignatti, {\i Bot. Jour. Linn. Soc.}{\b  64:} 365 (1971) ({\i Statice tenoreana} Guss.). Plant glabrous, smooth. Leaves 25-40 × 4-7 mm, lanceolate-spathulate, obtuse, revolute, 1-veined, on woody basal branches 4-8 cm. Inflorescence 10-15 cm, dense, sparingly branched only in the upper half; non-flowering branches absent; scales 1·5-2·5 mm. Spikes 0·9-1·3 cm, with 10-13 contiguous spikelets per cm; spikelets 2-flowered. Inner bract 3·5-4 mm; outer bract overlapping 1/3-1/2 of the inner. Calyx 5-5·5 mm; limb as long as the tube. Corolla c. 6·5 mm.{\i  Calcareous cliffs. • S.W. Italy} ({\i near Castellammare}). It.
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 50. L. laetum} (Nyman) Pignatti, {\i loc. cit.} (1971) ({\i Statice duriuscula }subsp.{\i  laeta} Nyman,{\i  S. laeta} Moris, non Salisb.). Plant 10-20 cm, glabrous, slightly rough. Leaves 20-25 × 2-3 mm, linear-spathulate, acute, 1-veined, on woody basal branches 3(-8) cm. Inflorescence dense, branched only in the upper half; non-flowering branches absent. Spikes 1-1·5 cm, with 8 contiguous spikelets per cm; spikelets 2-flowered. Inner bract c. 4·5 mm; outer bract overlapping 1/4-1/3 of the inner. Calyx c. 4 mm; limb 1/2 as long as the tube. Corolla c. 6 mm. • {\i  Coast of W. Sardegna.} Sa.
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 51. L. gougetianum} (Girard) O. Kuntze, {\i Rev. Gen. Pl. }{\b 2:} 395 (1891). Plant 10-20 cm, glabrous, slightly rough. Leaves 15-30 × 3-9 mm, obovate-spathulate, obtuse, 1-veined, in dense basal rosettes. Inflorescence with straight, rigid segments; non-flowering branches usually absent, rarely 1-4; basal branches sterile; scales 3-5 mm. Spikes 1·5-2 cm, with 7-9 contiguous spikelets per cm; spikelets 2-flowered. Inner bract c. 4 mm; outer bract overlapping 1/6-1/4 of the inner. Calyx 4*5-5 mm limb 11/2 times as long as the tube. Corolla 5-6 mm, pale violet. •{\i  Salt-marshes. Islas Baleares.} Bl. ({\i Algeria}.)
\par
\pard\f0\fs28    ({\b 52-54}).{\b  L. albidum} group. Plant 7-25 cm, glabrous. Leaves obovate-spathulate to cuneate, 1- to 7-veined, in hemispherical basal rosettes. Flowering stems branched only in the upper part; non-flowering branches absent, sometimes a few basal branches sterile. Spikes 2-8 cm, lax. Calyx 4·5-7 mm, about equalling or exceeding the bracts.
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Inner bract c. 7 mm; calyx about equalling bracts ...................... {\b 53. frederici} 
\par 1 Inner bract 3-4·5 mm; calyx exceeding bracts
\par 2 Inner bract c. 4·5 mm; calyx exceeding bracts by 
\par  c. 1 mm; spikelets 2- to 4-(-6)flowered ........................................ {\b 52. albidum}
\par 2 Inner bract 3-3·5 mm; calyx exceeding bracts by 2-2·5 mm;
\par  spikelets (1-)2-flowered ..................................................... {\b 54. panormitanum}
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 52. L. albidum} (Guss.) Pignatti, {\i Bot. Jour. Linn. Soc.}{\b  64:} 365 (1971) ({\i Statice albida} Guss.). Plant 7-25 cm, glabrous. Leaves 10-22 × 5-9(-13) mm, obovate-spathulate, obtuse or emarginate, revolute. Inflorescence-branches smooth; scales 2-3 mm. Spikes with 2-5 spikelets per cm; spikelets 2- to 4(-6)-flowered. Inner bract c. 4·5 mm; outer bract overlapping 1/6 of the inner. Calyx c. 5 mm, exceeding the bracts by c. 1 mm; limb as long as the tube.{\i  Rocky slopes near the sea. Isole Pelagie.} Si.
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28 Intermediates between this species and {\b 47}({\b a}) occur in S. Sicilia.
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 53. L. frederici} (W. Barbey) Rech. fil.,{\i  Denkschr. Akad. Wiss. Math.-Nat. Kl.} ({\i Wien}){\b  105}({\b 1}): 427 (1943) ({\i Statice frederici} W. Barbey). Like {\b 52} but leaves up to 18 mm wide, cuneate, canaliculate, on woody basal branches 7-12 cm; inflorescence branches sometimes rough; spikes with 1-2 spikelets per cm; spikelets 2-flowered; inner bract c. 7 mm; outer bract c. 3 mm, overlapping at least 1/3 of the inner; calyx c. 7 mm, about equalling the bracts, the limb 1/4 as long as the tube.{\i  Calcareous cliffs. S. Aegean region}. Cr Gr.
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 54. L. panormitanum} (Tod.) Pignatti,{\i  Bot. Jour. Linn. Soc.}{\b  64:} 365 (1971) ({\i Statice panormitana} Tod.). Like{\b  52} but leaves 25-45 × 9-17 mm, obtuse; spikelets (1-)2-flowered; inner bract 3-3·5 mm; outer bract overlapping 1/4 of the inner; calyx 4·5-5 mm, exceeding the bracts by 2-2·5 mm.{\i  Calcareous cliffs. • N.W. Sicilia} ({\i near Palermo}). Si.
\par
\par 45}
\par