{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28   {\b 55. L. graecum} (Poiret) Rech. fil., {\i Denkschr. Akad. Wiss. Math.-Nat. Kl.} ({\i Wien}) {\b 105}({\b 1}): 427 (1943). Plant 10-35 cm, glabrous, usually rough. Leaves 20-40 × 4-12 mm, linear-lanceolate to obovate-spathulate, 1-veined, usually on long woody basal branches. Inflorescence usually with numerous non-flowering branches; segments 1-2 cm, more than 0·7 mm in diameter; scales 3-4 mm. Spikes 3-5(-8) cm, with 1-3 spikelets per cm; spikelets 1- to 5-flowered, straight, cylindrical. Inner bract 5·5-6(-8) mm, obtuse, rounded dorsally, usually tuberculate, with reddish-brown margin, sometimes hyaline near apex, dark when dry, forming a wide, subpatent envelope around the flowers; outer bract 1·5-2·5(-3) mm, overlapping 1/6-1/3 of the inner. Calyx 6-7 mm, narrowly conical after pollination; tube straight; limb 2/3 as long as the tube. Corolla 7-8 mm.{\i  Maritime rocks and sands. Mediterranean region, mainly in the islands}. Bl Co Cr Gr Sa Si. ({\i W. Asia}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp.{\b  graecum} ({\i Statice graeca} Poiret, {\i S. sieberi} Boiss.,{\i  S. hyssopifolia} Girard): Inflorescence-branches mostly diverging at not more than 45°. Leaves green in summer; sometimes with clusters of reduced leaves on the lower branches.{\i  S. Greece, S. Aegean region}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28   A very variable subspecies, containing two widespread variants having linear-spathulate and obovate-spathulate leaves respectively, and differing in the arrangement of the leaves and the number of flowers per spikelet. Further study is required to clarify their status. Plants intermediate between {\b 55} and {\b 29}, {\b 53} and {\b 56} occur frequently.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b b}) Subsp.{\b  divaricatum} (Rouy) Pignatti,{\i  Bot. Jour. Linn. Soc.}{\b  64:} 366 (1971) ({\i Statice virgata }var.{\i  divaricata} Rouy): Inflorescence branches diverging at an angle of (45°-)60°-90°(-120°). Leaves usually withered in summer; cauline leaves absent.{\i  Islands of W. & C. Mediterranean region}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 56. L. oleifolium} Miller, {\i Gard. Dict}. ed. 8, no. 3 (1768) ({\i Statice oleifolia} (Miller) Scop.). Plant 5-50 cm, glabrous, smooth. Leaves 30-55 × 4-9 mm, linear-spathulate, 1-veined, on long basal branches. Inflorescence 10-40 cm; non-flowering branches numerous. Spikes up to 4 cm, with 4 spikelets per cm; spikelets 1- to 2(-5)-flowered, arcuate, compressed. Inner bract c. 4-5 mm, obtuse, smooth, with reddish-brown margin, sometimes hyaline near apex, keeled dorsally, incurved, dark when dry, forming a narrow envelope around the flowers; outer bract 0·8-2 mm, overlapping ¼ of the inner. Calyx infundibuliform after pollination; tube curved. Corolla c. 8 mm. {\i Coastal habitats. Mediterranean region, C. & S. Portugal.} Al Bl Co Cr Ga Gr Hs It Ju Lu Sa Si Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Inflorescence-branches regularly reticulate, diverging 
\par
  at an angle of (45°-)90°(-120°); segments usually 2-4 mm,
\par
  black when dry .................................................................. ({\b c}) subsp.{\b  sardoum}
\par
1 Inflorescence-branches not reticulate, diverging at an
\par
  angle of not more than 45°; segments 15-35 mm, the lower
\par
  longer than the upper, not black when dry
\par
2 Spikelets 1-flowered; inner bract c. 5 mm; calyx 6-7 mm,
\par
  the limb as long as the tube ....................................... ({\b b}) subsp. {\b dictyocladum}
\par
2 Spikelets 1- to 5-flowered; inner bract 4-4·5 mm;
\par
  calyx 4·5-5 mm, the limb ½ as long as the tube
\par
3 Stems and branches smooth; segments cylindrical ....... ({\b a}) subsp.{\b  oleifolium}
\par
3 Stems and branches rough; segments slightly constricted
\par
  at nodes .......................................................... ({\b d}) subsp.{\b  pseudodictyocladum}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b oleifolium }({\i Statice virgata} Willd.): Plant 15-45 cm. Leaves in basal rosettes. Inflorescence-branches 0·5-0·7 mm in diameter when dry, smooth, diverging at not more than 45°; segments 15-35 mm, cylindrical, the lower longer than the upper. Spikelets 1- to 5-flowered. Inner bract 4-4·5 mm, about equalling the calyx. Calyx 4·5-5 mm; limb ½ as long as the tube. {\i Throughout the range of the species}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   A highly polymorphic subspecies. Plants with 3- to 5-flowered spikelets (var. {\i majus} (Guss.) Pignatti) are frequent on calcareous cliffs in the southern part of the range and have been described as a distinct species ({\b Statice dubia} Andrews ex Guss.,{\i  Fl. Sic. Prodr., Suppl.} 89 (1832),{\i  S. smithii} Ten.). Intermediates between this subspecies and {\b 30}, {\b 31}, {\b 42}, {\b 47}, {\b 48}, {\b 51} and {\b 85} occur sporadically in areas of contact.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b b}) Subsp.{\b  dictyocladum} Arcangeli,{\i  Comp. Fl. Ital.} ed. 2, 459 (1894): Plant 15-45 cm. Leaves in basal rosettes. Inflorescence branches 0·5-0·7 mm in diameter when dry, diverging at not more than 45°; lower segments longer than the upper. Spikelets 1-flowered. Inner bract c. 5 mm. Calyx 6-7 mm; limb as long as the tube. •{\i  Corse, ?Sardegna}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b c}) Subsp.{\b  sardoum }(Pignatti) Pignatti, {\i Bot. Jour. Linn. Soc.}{\b  64:} 366 (1971) ({\i L. virgatum} subsp.{\i  sardoum} Pignatti): Plant 5-15(-35) cm. Leaves on somewhat woody basal branches. Inflorescence-branches regularly reticulate, diverging at an angle of (45°-)90°(-120°); segments usually 2-4 mm, subequal, black when dry. Spikelets 2- to 5-flowered. Inner bract up to 4 mm. Calyx c. 4·5 mm; limb as long to 1½ times as long as the tube. •{\i  S. Sardegna} ({\i near Cagliari}).
\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b d}) Subsp.{\b  pseudodictyocladum} (Pignatti) Pignatti,{\i  loc. cit.} (1971) ({\i L. virgatum} subsp.{\i  pseudodictyocladum} Pignatti): Plant 15-30 cm. Leaves in basal rosettes. Inflorescence-branches 0·5-0·7 mm in diameter when dry, rough, diverging at not more than 45°; segments slightly constricted at the nodes, the lower longer than the upper. Spikelets 2- to 3-flowered. Inner bract 4-4·5 mm. Calyx 4·5-5 mm; limb ½ as long as the tube. {\i Islas Baleares} ({\i S. Mallorca}).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 57. L. carpathum} (Rech. fil.) Rech. fil.,{\i  Denkschr. Akad. Wiss. Math.-Nat. Kl.} ({\i Wien}) {\b 105}({\b 1}): 427 (1943). Plant 20-40 cm, glabrous, rough. Leaves 40-90 × 1-2 mm, linear, fleshy, somewhat subcylindrical, obtuse, 1-veined. Inflorescence without non-flowering branches. Spikes 4-6 cm, with 2-4 spikelets per cm; spikelets (1-)2-flowered. Inner bract c. 5·5 mm; outer bract c. 1·5 mm, overlapping 1/5 of the inner. Calyx c. 5·5 mm. Corolla pale violet. {\i Calcareous cliffs. • Karpathos} ({\i near Vrondi}). Cr.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 58. L. emarginatum} (Willd.) O. Kuntze,{\i  Rev. Gen. Pl.}{\b  2: }395 (1891) ({\i Statice spathulata} var.{\i  emarginata} (Willd.) Boiss.). Plant 30-50 cm, glabrous. Leaves 40-60 × 7-15 mm, linear-spathulate, 1- to 5-veined, truncate to emarginate. Inflorescence cylindrical; non-flowering branches absent; scales 6-7 mm, sometimes the lowest up to 20 mm and leaf-like. Spikes 2-3 cm, lax, with 4 spikelets per cm; spikelets 1(-2)-flowered. Inner bract 5·5-7 mm; outer bract 2-2·5 mm, overlapping 1/5-1/4 of the inner. Calyx 7-8 mm; limb ½ as long as the tube. Corolla 11-12 mm. {\i Rocks near the sea. • Gibraltar.} Hs.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b  L. spathulatum} (Desf.) O. Kuntze, {\i op. cit.} 396 (1891) ({\i Statice spathulata} Desf.), from N. Africa, is like {\b 58} but has acute leaves c. 90 mm, 2- to 4-flowered spikelets, and calyx-limb 1/5 as long as the tube. It has frequently been recorded from S. Spain but probably in error for {\b 58}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 59. L. duriusculum} (Girard) Fourr., {\i Ann. Soc. Linn. Lyon} nov. ser., {\b 17:} 141 (1869) ({\i Statice duriuscula} Girard). Sometimes annual, 20-30 cm, glabrous, smooth. Leaves 30-40 × 5-9 mm, oblanceolate-spathulate, obtuse to truncate, 1(-3)-veined. Inflorescence with the lower 1-5 branches usually sterile; non-flowering branches absent; scales 2-4 mm. Spikes 2-3(-6) cm,
\par

\par
46}
\par