{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 with 2-3(-4) spikelets per cm; spikelets 1- to 3-flowered, incurved. Inner bract 4·5-5 mm, smooth; outer bract overlapping ¼ of the inner. Calyx (4·5-)5·5-6 mm; limb 1½ times as long as the tube; teeth becoming uncinate in fruit. Saline soils and maritime rocks. •{\i  W. Mediterranean region}. Bl Ga Hs ?It Sa ?Si.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   A very critical species, resembling {\b 56} in its incurved inner bract enclosing the calyx, but of similar habit to {\b 87}, which is smaller and always annual, and to {\b 28}, which is taller and always perennial.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 60. L. ramosissimum} (Poiret) Maire, {\i Bull. Soc. Hist. Nat. Afr. Nord}{\b  27:} 244 (1936) ({\i Statice globulariifolia} Desf.). Plant 20-50 cm. Leaves 30-100 × 7-20 mm, obovate- to oblanceolate-spathulate or subspathulate, 1- to 5-veined. Inflorescence 20-50 cm; scales 3-20 mm, often leaf-like. Spikes 1-4 cm, rather dense, with 4-8 spikelets per cm; spikelets 2- to 5-flowered. Inner bract 4-5·5 mm, with reddish-brown margin, sometimes hyaline near apex; outer bract overlapping up to ¼ of the inner. Calyx 4-6 mm; tube subcylindrical, often incurved; limb cupuliform. Corolla 5-7 mm, pale pink. {\i Salt-marshes. Mediterranean region.} Bl Co Ga Gr Hs It Sa Si
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Subsp.{\i  ramosissimum} occurs in Algeria.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Leaves rounded at apex; scales 11-20 mm, often leaf-like
\par
  ........................................................................................ ({\b a}) subsp. {\b confusum}
\par
1 Leaves acute or obtuse; scales 3-12 mm, never leaf-like
\par
2 Leaves obovate-spathulate to subspathulate, abruptly
\par
  contracted into the petiole ............................................... ({\b e}) subsp.{\b  doerfleri}
\par
2 Leaves oblanceolate-spathulate, gradually narrowed 
\par
  into the petiole
\par
3 Non-flowering branches absent; spikes up to 4 cm .. ({\b b}) subsp.{\b  provinciale}
\par
3 Non-flowering branches present; spikes up to 2 cm
\par
4 Non-flowering branches few; inner bract and calyx 
\par
  4-4·5 mm ...................................................................... ({\b c}) subsp. {\b tommasinii}
\par
4 Non-flowering branches numerous; inner bract and calyx
\par
  5-6 mm ............................................................................... ({\b d}) subsp.{\b  siculum}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b confusum} (Gren. & Godron) Pignatti,{\b  Bot. Jour. Linn. Soc.}{\b  64:} 366 (1971) ({\i Statice confusa} Gren. & Godron): Leaves up to 50 × 10 mm, oblanceolate-spathulate, rounded at apex. Inflorescence 20-30 cm; non-flowering branches absent; scales 11-20 mm, often leaf-like. Spikes up to 2 cm, with 6-8 spikelets per cm; spikelets 3- to 5-flowered, subpatent. Inner bract c. 4·5 mm. Calyx 5-5·5 mm; limb ½ as long as the tube. {\i W. Mediterranean region}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp.{\b  provinciale} (Pignatti) Pignatti,{\i  loc. cit.} (1971) ({\i L. globulariifolium} subsp.{\i  provinciale} Pignatti,{\i  Statice psiloclada} Boiss.): Leaves 80-100 × 15-20 mm, oblanceolate-spathulate, gradually narrowed into the petiole. Inflorescence 30-50 cm; non-flowering branches absent; scales 3-12 mm. Spikes up to 4 cm, with 4-6 spikelets per cm; spikelets 2- to 3-flowered, erectopatent. Inner bract c. 5 mm. Calyx c. 5 mm; limb 2/3 as long as the tube.{\i  S. France and islands of W. Mediterranean}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b c}) Subsp. {\b tommasinii }(Pignatti) Pignatti,{\i  loc. cit.} (1971) ({\i L. globulariifolium} subsp.{\i  tommasinii} Pignatti,{\i  Statice confusa} sensu Reichenb. fil., non Gren. & Godron): Leaves 30-40 × 7-12 mm, oblanceolate-spathulate, gradually narrowed into the petiole. Inflorescence 30-40 cm, with few non-flowering branches; scales 3-12 mm. Spikes with 5-6 spikelets per cm; spikelets 2(-3)flowered, erecto-patent. Inner bract 4-4·5 mm. Calyx 4-4·5 mm; limb 1/3 as long as the tube. •{\i  Coast of N.E. Italy}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b d}) Subsp.{\b  siculum} Pignatti,{\i  loc. cit}. (1971): Leaves up to 60 × 15 mm, oblanceolate-spathulate, gradually narrowed into the petiole. Inflorescence 30-50 cm, the lowest branches non-flowering; scales 3-12 mm. Spikes 1-1·5 cm; spikelets 2(-3)-flowered, incurved. Inner bract c. 5·5 mm. Calyx 5-6 mm; limb as long as the tube.•{\i  S. coast of Sicilia}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28   This subspecies is similar to {\b 56}, but the leaves are wider distinctly 3-veined, glaucous and persistent in summer, while the spikes are short and dense (3-7 spikelets per cm), with an incurved secund axis.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b e}) Subsp.{\b  doerfleri} (Halácsy) Pignatti,{\i  loc. cit. }(1971) ({\i Statice doerfleri} Halácsy): Leaves 30-50 × 9-15 mm, obovate-spathulate to subspathulate, abruptly contracted into the petiole; petiole c. 2 mm wide. Inflorescence 20-40 cm; scales 3-12 mm. Spikes up to 1·5 cm, with 5-6 spikelets per cm; spikelets 2- to 3-flowered, incurved. Inner bract 4-4·5 mm. Calyx (4·5-)5 mm; limb 2/3 as long as the tube. •{\i  Kikladhes}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 61. L. ocymifolium} (Poiret) O. Kuntze, {\i Rev. Gen. Pl. }{\b 2:} 396 (1891) ({\i L. corinthiacum} (Boiss. & Heldr.) O. Kuntze, {\i Statice ocymifolia} Poiret). Plant 20-30 cm, glabrous, smooth. Leaves 30-40 × 10 mm, oblanceolate-spathulate, obtuse, 1-veined or indistinctly 3-veined. Inflorescence without non-flowering branches. Spikes up to 2·5 cm, rather dense, with 4 spikelets per cm; spikelets 2-flowered. Inner bract c. 3·8 mm, truncate; outer bract overlapping ¼ of the inner. Calyx c. 3·5 mm, almost completely enclosed by the bract; limb 1½ times as long as the tube. •{\i  S. Greece.} Gr.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 62. L. densissimum} (Pignatti) Pignatti, {\i Bot. Jour. Linn. Soc.}{\b  64:} 367 (1971) ({\i L. confusum} subsp.{\i  densissimum} Pignatti). Like{\b  61} but leaves whitish-glaucous; spikes up to 1·5 cm, with 6-7 spikelets per cm; outer bract overlapping 1/5-1/4 of the inner. {\i Salt-marshes. N.E. Spain} ({\i mouth of R. Ebro}). Hs.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 63. L. parvibracteatum} Pignatti, {\i loc. cit.} (1971). Plant 40-90 cm, puberulent, rough; stems whitish. Leaves 40-60 × c. 20 mm, spathulate, mucronulate, (1-)3- to 5-veined. Inflorescence usually with non-flowering branches. Spikes 1-2 cm, with 4-5 spikelets per cm; spikelets 2-flowered. Bracts with narrow hyaline margin; inner bract c. 3 mm, obtuse, with midrib excurrent into conspicuous acute point; outer bract overlapping ¼ of the inner. Calyx c. 4·5 mm, exceeding bracts by almost ½ its length; limb 2/3 as long as the tube.{\i  Calcareous slopes near the sea. E. Spain }({\i near Calpe}). Hs.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 64. L. girardianum} (Guss.) Fourr.,{\i  Ann. Soc. Linn. Lyon} nov. ser., {\b 17}: 141 (1869) ({\i Statice girardiana} Guss.). Plant 8-20 cm, glabrous, smooth. Leaves 20-50 × 8-13 mm, obovate-spathulate, acute, 1- to 5-veined, glaucous, in short basal rosettes. Flowering stems branched in upper 1/3-1/2; non-flowering branches absent; a few sterile branches sometimes present. Spikes 0·7-1·3 cm, very dense, with 10-15 spikelets per cm; spikelets 3- to 4-flowered. Inner bract 3·5-4 mm, as long as wide, the midrib excurrent for 0·2-0·4 mm; outer bract overlapping 1/3-1/2 of the inner. Calyx c. 4 mm, infundibuliform; limb 1/3 as long as tube. Corolla c. 5 mm. 2n = 35.{\i  Salt-marshes. • Coasts of E. Spain and S. France.} ?Bl Ga Hs.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 65. L. densiflorum} (Guss.) O. Kuntze, {\i Rev. Gen. Pl. }{\b 2:} 395 (1891) ({\i Statice densiflora} Guss.). Plant 15-40 cm, glabrous, smooth. Leaves 50-70 × 13-15 mm, oblanceolate, spathulate, acute, 3(-5)-veined, glaucous, in basal rosettes. Flowering stems branched only in upper 1/3-1/2; non-flowering branches absent; sometimes a few sterile branches at the base. Spikes up to 2·5 cm, very dense, with 10 or more spikelets per cm; spikelets
\par

\par
47}
\par