{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 2- to 3-flowered. Inner bract 5-5·5 mm, 1½ times as long as wide, the midrib excurrent for 0·8-1·6 mm; outer bract c. 3 mm overlapping at least 1/3 of the inner. Calyx c. 5·5 mm; teeth 1½ times as long as wide. 2n = 26. {\i Salt-marshes. Islands of W. Mediterranean.} ?Co Sa Si
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Records from Spain and France are referable to {\b 64}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 66. L. dufourei} (Girard) O. Kuntze, {\i loc. cit. }(1891) ({\i Statice dufourei }Girard). Plant 30-50 cm, sparsely hairy on stems and bracts. Leaves 30-60 × c. 10 mm, obovate-spathulate, 1(-3)-veined. Inflorescence usually cylindrical, with erect branches diverging at an acute angle; non-flowering branches numerous.Spikes 1·2-1·6 cm, dense, with 10 or more spikelets per cm; spikelets 3- to 4-flowered. Bracts with narrow hyaline margin; inner bract c. 5 mm; outer bract overlapping 1/3-1/2 of the inner.Calyx c. 6 mm, subcylindrical.{\i  Saline soils near the sea. • E.Spain} ({\i near Valencia}). Hs.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    ({\b 67-71}).{\b  L. binervosum} group. Leaves 3-12 mm wide, 1- to 3-veined. Spikes 1-2 cm, or more or less rudimentary, dense,with 6-10 spikelets per cm. Inner bract truncate, with reddish-brown margin; outer bract 2-2·5 mm, overlapping 1/3-1/2 of the inner. Calyx conical or slightly infundibuliform; limb 2/3 as long as the tube, up to 2·7 mm in diameter.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Non-flowering branches numerous ............................................. {\b 71. salmonis}
\par
1 Non-flowering branches absent; rarely a few sterile
\par
  branches at base
\par
2 Spikes reduced to clusters of 2-3 spikelets ............................. {\b 70. paradoxum}
\par
2 Spikes (at least the terminal of major branches) 1-3 cm,
\par
  with 6-10 spikelets per cm
\par
3 Spikelets 6-8 per cm; outer  bracts of adjacent 
\par
  spikelets not overlapping ........................................................ {\b 67. binervosum}
\par
3 Spikelets 8-10 per cm, closely set so that their outer bracts
\par
  overlap those of the adjacent spikelets in the same row
\par
4 Leaves 4-8 mm wide, 3-veined at base ..................................... {\b 68. recurvum}
\par
4 Leaves 3-6 mm wide, 1-veined ........................................ {\b 69. transwallianum}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 67. L. binervosum} (G. E. Sm.) Salmon, {\i Jour. Bot. }({\i London}){\b  45:} 24 (1907) ({\i Statice occidentalis} Lloyd,{\i  S. dodartii} Girard). Plant 20-30 cm, glabrous, smooth. Leaves 40-55 × 8-12 mm, acute or obtuse, 1- to 3-veined. Inflorescence pyramidal; non-flowering branches absent, rarely the lower branches sterile; scales 7-10 mm. Spikes 2-2·5 cm, straight, erect, dense, with 6-8 spikelets per cm; spikelets 1- to 3-flowered. Inner bract 4·5-5 mm; outer bract c. 2·5 mm, overlapping 1/3-1/2 of the inner.Calyx 5-5·5 mm. Corolla c. 8 mm, violet-blue, with wide, imbricate petals. 2n = 34-36.{\i  Maritime cliffs and rocks. • W. Europe, northwards to S.W. Scotland.} Br Ga Hb Hs Lu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 A smaller plant, with acute, 1-veined leaves ({\i Statice legrandii} Gaut. & Timb.-Lagr.), from the Mediterranean coast of France, which has been referred here, seems closer to {\b 60}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 68. L. recurvum} Salmon,{\i  op. cit.}{\b  41:} 67 (1903). Like{\b  67} but leaves 4-8 mm wide, obtuse, 3-veined at base; spikes up to 3 cm, patent, often recurved; spikelets 8-10 per cm, closely set so that their outer bracts overlap those of adjacent spikelets in the same row. 2n = 27.{\i  Maritime cliffs. • S. England}. Br.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 69. L. transwallianum} (Pugsley) Pugsley, {\i op. cit.}{\b  62:} 277 (1924).Like{\b  67} but leaves 3-6 mm wide, obtuse, mucronulate, 1-veined; inflorescence pyramidal; spikes patent; spikelets 8-10 per cm, closely set so that their outer bracts overlap those of adjacent spikelets in the same row; petals narrow, not imbricate. 2n = 27,35.{\i  Maritime rocks. • S.W. Wales, W. Ireland.} Br Hb.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 70. L. paradoxum} Pugsley, {\i op. cit.}{\b  69:} 46 (1931). Like{\b  67} but leaves c. 15 × 5 mm, 1-veined; inflorescence 5-15 cm; spikes 0·6-0·8 cm, reduced to clusters of 2-3 spikelets. 2n = 33.{\i  Maritime cliffs. • S.W. Wales, N.W. Ireland}. Br Hb.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 71. L. salmonis} (Sennen & Elias) Pignatti, {\i Collect. Bot.} ({\i Barcelona}){\b  6:} 321 (1962). Plant 10-15(-40) cm, glabrous, smooth. Leaves 20-30 × 5-7 mm, acute, mucronate, 1-veined. Inflorescence with numerous non-flowering branches; scales 3-4(-8) mm. Spikes 1-2 cm, with 6-7 spikelets per cm; spikelets 1(-2)-flowered. Inner bract 4-4·5 mm; outer bract c. 2 mm, overlapping 1/3 of the inner. Calyx c. 5·5 mm. Corolla c. 7 mm, violet-blue.{\i  Maritime cliffs. • S.W. France, N.E. Spain}. Ga Hs.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 72. L. auriculae-ursifolium} (Pourret) Druce, {\i Brit. Pl. List} ed. 2, 77 (1928) ({\i Statice lychnidifolia} Girard). Plant 20-40 cm, glabrous, smooth. Leaves 25-100 × 9-20 mm, oblanceolate-spathulate, usually acute, mucronate, 3- to 7-veined, glaucous, often with resinous secretions at the base. Inflorescence pyramidal; non-flowering branches absent; scales up to 7 mm. Spikes 1-2·5 cm, with 5-12 spikelets per cm; spikelets 2- to 6-flowered. Inner bract c. 4·5 mm; outer bract 1·5-2·5 mm, overlapping ¼-½ of the inner. Calyx 5-5·5 mm, the teeth as long as wide. Corolla 7-8 mm, violet-blue. 2n = 25, 26.{\i  Maritime cliffs and salt-marshes. France, Iberian peninsula and Islas Baleares}. Bl Ga Hs Lu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Outer bract c. 1·5 mm; spikes with at least 10 
\par
  spikelets per cm .......................................... ({\b a}) subsp.{\b  auriculae-ursifolium}
\par
1 Outer bract 2-2·5 mm; spikes with 5-8 spikelets per cm
\par
2 Spikes with 5-6 spikelets per cm; spikelets 2-flowered
\par
  ................................................................................... ({\b b}) subsp.{\b  lusitanicum}
\par
2 Spikes with 8 spikelets per cm; spikelets 5- to 
\par
  6-flowered ................................................................ ({\b c}) subsp.{\b  multiflorum}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b a}) Subsp.{\b  auriculae-ursifolium} : Spikes dense, with at least 10 spikelets per cm; spikelets (2-)3-flowered, distichous. Outer bract c. 1·5 mm, overlapping ¼ of the inner. {\i Throughout the range of the species}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b b}) Subsp.{\b  lusitanicum} (Pignatti) Pignatti, {\i Bot. Jour. Linn. Soc.}{\b  64:} 367(1971) ({\i L. globulariifolium} subsp. {\i lusitanicum} Pignatti): Leaves 35-40 × 10-15 mm, with wide, scarious wings. Spikes with 5-6 spikelets per cm; spikelets 2-flowered, borne at a very acute angle to the axis on main branches. Outer bract 2-2·5 mm, overlapping 1/3-1/2 of the inner.{\i  C. Portugal} ({\i Trafaria to S. Martinho do Porto}).
\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Apparently intermediate between{\b  60} and{\b  70}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b c}) Subsp. {\b multiflorum} (Pignatti) Pignatti,{\i  loc. cit}. (1971) ({\i L. binervosum} subsp.{\i  multiflorum} Pignatti): Leaves 25-33 × 9-13 mm, acute. Spikes with 8 spikelets per cm; spikelets 5- to 6-flowered, more or less regularly distichous. Outer bract 2-2·5 mm, overlapping 1/3-1/2 of the inner.{\i  S.C. Portugal} ({\i Torres Vedras to Colares}).  Apparently intermediate between {\b 67} and{\b  70}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 73. L. majoricum} Pignatti,{\i  Arch. Bot.} ({\b Forli}){\b  31:} 89 (1955). Like {\b 72} but leaves 30-40 × 20 mm, obtuse or emarginate, revolute, 3-veined, dark green; inflorescence 20-30 cm, corymbose; spikes 1-1·5 cm; spikelets 2(-3)-flowered; inner bract c. 5 mm; outer bract 2-2·5 mm, overlapping 1/3 of the inner. {\i Calcareous cliffs. • Islas Baleares}. Bl.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 74. L. ovalifolium} (Poiret) O. Kuntze, {\i Rev. Gen. Pl.}{\b  2:} 396 (1891) ({\i Statice ovalifolia} Poiret). Plant glabrous, smooth.
\par

\par
48}
\par