{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 Leaves spathulate, acute, mucronate, 3- to 7-veined, glaucous; petiole 4-6 mm wide. Inflorescence branched only in upper half; non-flowering branches absent. Spikes c. 1 cm, very dense, with 10 or more spikelets per cm. Inner bract 2·8-3·1 mm; outer bract c. 1 mm, overlapping 1/5-1/4 of the inner. Calyx 3·5-4 mm, conical. Corolla pale pink. 2n = 16.{\i  Coasts of Portugal and W. France}. Ga ?Hs Lu.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Subsp. {\i ovalifolium} occurs in Morocco.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp.{\b  gallicum }Pignatti,{\i  Collect. Bot.} ({\i Barcelona}){\b  6:} 316 (1962): Leaves c. 60 × 20 mm. Inflorescence 10-25 cm; scales 4-6 mm. Spikelets 1- to 3(-4)-flowered.{\i  W. France.}
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b lusitanicum} Pignatti,{\i  op. cit.} 318 (1962): Leaves 100-150 × 20-30 mm. Inflorescence 30-50 cm; scales 10-25 mm, sometimes leaf-like. Spikelets 2- to 3-flowered.{\i  Portugal}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b 75-79}).{\b  L. delicatulum} group. Plant glabrous, usually smooth. Leaves sometimes on somewhat woody basal branches. Inflorescence with few or no non-flowering branches. Spikes with 4-10 spikelets per cm; spikelets 1- to 3-flowered. Bracts with narrow hyaline margin; outer bract overlapping ¼ of the inner.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   This group consists of a very polymorphic species ({\b 77}) with wide ecological amplitude, and four narrowly endemic species. {\b 75}, {\b 76} and {\b 78} occur only in coastal habitats,{\b  79} in the interior. {\b 77} hybridizes frequently with such closely related species as{\b  85} and perhaps{\b  83}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Leaves not more than 14 mm wide, with distinct central 
\par
  and 2, usually indistinct, lateral veins
\par
2 Leaves 7-14 mm wide, obtuse or emarginate; spikes with
\par
  6 spikelets per cm .......................................................................... {\b 78. gibertii}
\par
2 Leaves 5-6 mm wide, acute; spikes with 4-5 spikelets per cm ...... {\b 79. costae}
\par
1 Leaves 15-32 mm wide, distinctly 3- to 9-veined
\par
3 Petiole 3-4 mm wide; spikelets 1(-2)-flowered; inner 
\par
  bract 2·5-2·9 mm ......................................................................... {\b 75. biflorum}
\par
3 Petiole not more than 2·5 mm wide; spikelets 2- to 5-
\par
  flowered; inner bract 3-3·5 mm
\par
4 Leaves on somewhat woody basal branches 10-30 cm; 
\par
  petiole shorter than the lamina .................................................. {\b 76. lausianum}
\par
4 Leaves in basal rosettes; petiole as long as or longer
\par
  than the lamina ........................................................................ {\b 77. delicatulum}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 75. L. biflorum} (Pignatti) Pignatti,{\i  Bot. Jour. Linn. Soc.}{\b  64:} 368 (1971) ({\i L. ovalifolium} f.{\i  biflorum} Pignatti). Plant 40-60 cm. Leaves 60-80 × 25-27 mm, spathulate, 5- to 7-veined; petiole 3-4 mm wide, longer than the lamina. Inflorescence without non-flowering branches, sometimes with a few sterile branches at the base; scales 5-6 mm. Spikes 1-1·3 cm, with c. 8 spikelets per cm; spikelets 1(-2)-flowered. Inner bract 2·5-2·9 mm. Calyx 3·2-3·5 mm, subconical. Corolla c. 5·5 mm, pale violet.{\i  Maritime salt-marshes. • Islas Baleares} ({\b Mallorca}). Bl.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 76. L. lausianum} Pignatti, {\i op. cit.}: 369 (1971). Leaves 50-70 × 15-24 mm, oblanceolate-spathulate, 5- to 9-veined, subglaucous, on somewhat woody, basal branches 10-30 cm; petiole 2·5 mm wide, shorter than the lamina. Inflorescence 10-20 cm; sterile branches few or absent; scales 3-4 mm. Spikes 1 cm, dense, with 9 spikelets per cm; spikelets 3-flowered. Inner bract c. 3·5 mm. Calyx c. 3·5 mm, conical. Corolla c. 5·5 mm, bluish-violet. {\i Slopes near the sea. • W. Sardegna} ({\i near Oristano}). Sa.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 77. L. delicatulum} (Girard) O. Kuntze,{\i  Rev. Gen. Pl.}{\b  2:} 395 (1891) ({\i Statice delicatula} Girard). Plant 40-70 cm, slightly rough. Leaves 35-50 × 18-32 mm, oblanceolate to spathulate, (3-)5- to 7(-9)-veined; petiole as long as or longer than the lamina. Inflorescence corymbose; non-flowering branches absent, sometimes a few sterile branches at the base; scales 6-15 mm. Spikes 1-3 cm, with 5-10 spikelets per cm; spikelets 2- to 3-flowered. Inner bract c. 3 mm; outer bract c. 0·8 mm. Calyx c. 3·5 mm; limb 2/3 as long as the tube. Corolla c. 6 mm, pale pink. 2n = 27.{\i  Gypsaceous and saline soils. E. & S.E. Spain, Islas Baleares}. Bl Hs.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Scales 10-15 mm ...................................................... ({\b c}) subsp. {\b valentinum}
\par
1 Scales not more than 10 mm
\par
2 Scales 6-9 mm ......................................................... ({\b a}) subsp. {\b delicatulum}
\par
2 Scales 2-3 mm .......................................................... ({\b b}) subsp.{\b  tournefortii}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp.{\b  delicatulum} : Leaves 35-50 × 18-20 mm, oblanceolate, usually acute, gradually narrowed at base, 5- to 7-veined; petiole 1-2 mm wide. Scales 6-9 mm. Spikelets 2-flowered.{\i  Throughout the range of the species}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp.{\b  tournefortii} Pignatti,{\i  Collect. Bot.} ({\i Barcelona}){\b  6:} 305 (1962): Leaves 20 45 × 18-32 mm, spathulate, rounded, truncate or emarginate, abruptly narrowed at base, 3- to 7-veined; petiole c. 2 mm wide. Scales 2-3 mm. Spikelets 2- to 3-flowered. •{\i  E. Spain, Islas Baleares}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b c}) Subsp.{\b  valentinum} Pignatti,{\i  op. cit.} 306 (1962): Leaves 25-32 mm wide, oblanceolate-spathulate, (5-)7(-9)-veined. Scales 10-15 mm. Spikelets 2-flowered. •{\i  E. Spain} ({\i near Valencia}).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 78. L. gibertii} (Sennen) Sennen,{\i  Diagn. Pl. Esp. Maroc} 271 (1936). Plant 8-30 cm, glabrous, smooth. Leaves 15-22 × 7-14 mm, obtuse or emarginate, 1-veined or obscurely 3-veined. Inflorescence pyramidal; non-flowering branches few or absent; scales 3 mm. Spikes 1·5-2·5 cm, with 6 spikelets per cm; spikelets 1- to 3-flowered. Inner bract c. 3 mm; outer bract overlapping ¼ of the inner. Calyx c. 3·2 mm. Corolla pale pink. 2n = 25-27.{\i  Calcareous cliffs. • N.E. Spain} ({\i near Tarragona}). Hs.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 79. L. costae} (Willk.) Pignatti, {\i Collect. Bot.} ({\i Barcelona}){\b  6:} 302 (1962). Like {\b 78} but leaves 20-30 × 5-6 mm, acute, sometimes mucronate; spikes with 4-5 spikelets per cm; spikelets 2- to 3-flowered.{\i  Gypsaceous soils. • N.E. Spain} ({\i Teruel to Urgel}). Hs.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 80. L. sibthorpianum} (Guss.) O. Kuntze, {\i Rev. Gen. Pl.}{\b  2:} 396 (1891). Like {\b 78} but leaves 20-40 × 10 mm, acute, long-mucronate, glaucous; non-flowering branches absent; scales 6-7 mm; spikes 1-1·3 cm, with 5-6 spikelets per cm; spikelets 1-flowered. {\i Slopes near the sea. N.E. Sicilia}. Si. ({\i Libya}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 81. L. eugeniae} Sennen,{\i  Diagn. Pl. Esp. Maroc} 98 (1936). Plant 80-120 cm, glabrous, smooth, with woody stock bearing coriaceous, reddish-brown, triangular leaf-sheaths c. 10 × 12 mm. Leaves spathulate, coriaceous, glaucous; lamina c. 45 × 30 mm, acute, 7-veined; petiole 60-80 × 2 mm, with resin glands. Inflorescence narrow, little-branched; non-flowering branches absent; a few sterile branches sometimes present; scales c. 5 mm. Spikes c. 0·6 cm, at apices of short branches; spikelets 2- to 4-flowered, scarcely contiguous. Inner bract c. 2 mm; outer bract very small. Calyx c. 2·5 mm. Corolla white. 2n = 16.{\i  Dry grassland. • S.E. Spain} ({\i Cuevas de Almanzora, Almeria prov}.). Hs.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 82. L. coincyi} Sennen,{\i  op. cit.} 73 (1936). Like{\b  81} but plant 60-80 cm; leaves very glaucous; lamina 35-45 × 25-35 mm, 7- to 9-veined; petiole 30-40 mm; spikes up to 3·2 cm, with 3(-4) spikelets per cm; spikelets 1- to 2-flowered, not contiguous; inner bract 2-2·2 mm. 2n = 16.{\i  Dry grassland. • S.E. Spain} ({\i near Murcia}). Hs.
\par

\par
49}
\par