{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. C. maculata} (L.) Pursh, {\i Fl. Amer. Sept.} 300 (1814). Like {\b 1} but leaves ovate-lanceolate, with white veins; flowers 20 mm in diameter; petals white. Naturalized in woods near Paris (Fontainebleau). [Ga.] (E. North America.)
\par 
\par 
\pard\f0\fs28\qc {\b 5.            Monotropa}            L.
\par 
\pard\f0\fs24\qc By B. Krisa.
\par 
\par
\pard\f0\fs28 Wholly saprophytic herbs, without chlorophyll. Leaves scalelike, all cauline, alternate, sessile. Flowers in terminal racemes. Petals saccate at base. Anthers opening by longitudinal slits. Pollen-grains free.
\par 
\par 
\pard\f0\fs28  Literature: K. Domin,{\i  Sitz.-Ber. Böhm. Ges. Wiss.} ({\i Math.-Nat. Kl}.) {\b 1915}({\b 1}): 3-46 (1915).
\par 
\par 
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. M. hypopitys} L., {\i Sp. Pl. }387 (1753) ({\i Hypopitys monotropa} Crantz). Whole plant creamy-white to yellow, sometimes slightly tinged with brown or pink. Stem 5-25 cm. Cauline scales 5-13 mm, ovate-oblong, entire to fimbriate. Sepals obovate-spathulate. Petals 6-13 mm, oblong to oblong-spathulate, erect, usually recurved at apex. Stamens shorter than petals. Capsule subglobose. 2n = 16, 48.{\i  Damp woods, especially of conifers or Fagus. Most of Europe, but rare in the extreme south.} All except Az Cr Fa Is Sa Sb Tu.
\par 
\par 
\pard\f0\fs28  Some plants are wholly glabrous; others are pubescent especially in the inflorescence. The glabrous plants have been distinguished as var. {\i glabra} Roth, or as a separate species, {\b M. hypophegea }Wallr.,{\i  Sched. Crit. }191 (1822), which is said to be further distinguished by its short petals not recurved at the apex, its shorter capsule, and its occurrence mainly in{\i  Fagus}-woods. Recent work, however, suggests that there is little correlation between pubescence on the one hand and other morphological features, habitat or chromosome-number on the other.
\par 
\par 
\pard\f0\fs28\qc {\b  132.             ERICACEAE}
\par 
\pard\f0\fs24\qc Edit. D.A. Webb.
\par 
\par
\pard\f0\fs28 Dwarf shrubs to small trees; leaves simple, exstipulate, usually evergreen. Flowers actinomorphic (rarely slightly zygomorphic), in racemes or umbels, or solitary or in clusters in the leaf-axils. Petals usually connate. Stamens twice as many as petals (rarely fewer), inserted on the receptacle or disc, but sometimes adnate to the extreme base of the corolla and falling with it; anthers usually opening by pores; pollen grains usually in tetrads. Ovary superior (rarely inferior); placentation axile; style single. Fruit a capsule, berry or drupe.
\par 
\par 
\pard\f0\fs28  All European members of the family which have been investigated are mycorrhizal; the majority are calcifuge, and are especially characteristic of peaty soils.
\par 
\par 
\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Corolla persistent in fruit
\par 2 Calyx petaloid, larger than corolla; leaves opposite,
\par   closely imbricate on non-flowering shoots .................................... {\b 3. Calluna}
\par 2 Calyx smaller than corolla; leaves whorled, usually ± patent
\par 3 Sepals free; bracteoles present .......................................................... {\b 1. Erica} 
\par 3 Sepals connate, with calyx-tube about as long as lobes;
\par   bracteoles absent .................................................................. {\b 2. Bruckenthalia} 
\par 1 Corolla deciduous 
\par 4 Ovary inferior ......................................................................... {\b 18. Vaccinium} 
\par 4 Ovary superior 
\par 5 Fruit a berry or drupe, or a capsule enclosed in a succulent,
\par   accrescent calyx
\par 6 Leaves spine-tipped .................................................................. {\b 15. Pernettya}
\par 6 Leaves not spine-tipped
\par 7 Inflorescence glandular-hirsute; anther-appendages 2-fid ..... {\b 14. Gaultheria}
\par 7 Inflorescence glabrous or slightly puberulent; anther- 
\par   appendages simple
\par 8 Tree or erect shrub; fruit verrucose or sulcate ............................ {\b 12. Arbutus}
\par 8 Procumbent dwarf shrub; fruit smooth ........................... {\b 13. Arctostaphylos}
\par 5 Fruit a capsule; calyx not succulent 
\par 9 Anthers with appendages
\par 10 Leaves not more than 5 mm, crowded and ± imbricate ............ {\b 4. Cassiope}
\par 10 Larger leaves at least 10 mm, not very crowded
\par 11 Leaves whitish-glaucous beneath; flowers pink, in
\par    condensed, umbel-like clusters ............................................. {\b 16. Andromeda}
\par 11 Leaves brownish beneath; flowers white, in elongate,
\par    secund, leafy racemes ..................................................... {\b 17. Chamaedaphne}
\par 9  Anthers without appendages
\par 12 Corolla urceolate; tube at least 3 times as long as lobes
\par 13 Leaves oblong-lanceolate to elliptical, white-tomentose
\par    beneath; flowers 4-merous ....................................................... {\b 11. Daboecia}
\par 13 Leaves linear-oblong, not tomentose beneath; flowers
\par    5-merous ................................................................................ {\b 10. Phyllodoce}
\par 12 Corolla not urceolate; tube not more than 11/2 times
\par    as long as lobes
\par 14 Bracts scarious, deciduous at anthesis
\par 15 Petals free ..................................................................................... {\b 6. Ledum}
\par 15 Petals connate at base ...................................................... {\b 5. Rhododendron}
\par 14 Bracts leaf-like or coriaceous, persistent
\par 16 Stamens 5; corolla 4-5 mm in diameter ................................ {\b 9. Loiseleuria}
\par 16 Stamens 10; corolla at least 8 mm in diameter
\par 17 Corolla lobed almost to base; leaves ciliate .................... {\b 7. Rhodothamnus}
\par 17 Corolla lobed less than half-way to base; leaves not ciliate ........ {\b 8. Kalmia}
\par 
\par 
\pard\f0\fs28\qc {\b 1.             Erica}           L.    
\par 
\pard\f0\fs24\qc By D.A. Webb & E.M. Rix.
\par 
\par
\pard\f0\fs28 Dwarf to medium-sized evergreen shrubs; leaves whorled, often linear, or apparently linear on account of revolute margins; petiole short, appressed. Flowers 4-(5)-merous, in terminal umbels or racemes, or in axillary clusters or umbels more or less aggregated into terminal or intercalary panicles; pedicel with 2 or more bracteoles. Sepals free, green or pinkish, shorter than the corolla. Corolla cylindrical, campanulate or urceolate, with lobes shorter than or equalling the tube, persistent in fruit. Stamens 8(-10), inserted between the lobes of a nectariferous disc; anthers with or without appendages. Fruit a loculicidal capsule.
\par 
\par 
\pard\f0\fs28  A large genus, centred in South Africa, but with a secondary centre in S. & W. Europe.
\par 
\par 
\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Anthers with basal appendages
\par 2 Leaves with contiguous revolute margins, which entirely concealed
\par   the lower surface
\par 3 Bracteoles confined to basal half of pedicel, not over-lapping the
\par   sepals
\par 4 Some of the hairs on young twigs echinate; corolla 2·5-4 mm, pure
\par   white; stigma broadly capitate, white ............................................. {\b 9. arborea}
\par 4 All hairs smooth; corolla 4-5 mm, usually tinged with pink; 
\par   stigma obconical, red ................................................................ {\b 10. lusitanica}
\par 3 Some or all of the bracteoles on apical half of pedicel
\par   overlapping the sepals
\par 
\par 5}
\par