{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28   Sometimes regarded as a hybrid between {\b 83} and {\b 77}({\b b}) but the chromosome numbers suggest that this is unlikely.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 83. L. album} (Coincy) Sennen, {\i op. cit.} 72 (1936). Like{\b  81} but plant 30-50 cm; leaves whitish; lamina c. 15 × 20 mm, 5-veined; petiole c. 30 mm, canaliculate; spikes up to 1·8 cm, with 4 spikelets per cm; spikelets 1- to 2-flowered; inner bract c. 3 mm, truncate; calyx 3·2-3·8 mm; corolla c. 4·5 mm. 2n = 18. {\i Gypsaceous soils. • S.E. Spain }({\i near Lorca}). Hs.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 84. L. cymuliferum} (Boiss.) Sauvage & Vindt,{\i  Fl. Maroc}{\b  1:} 68 (1952) ({\i Statice gummifera }Durieu ex Boiss. & Reuter). Plant 20-40 cm, glabrous, smooth. Leaves 30-50 × 14-22 mm, spathulate, whitish; lamina suborbicular, emarginate, often mucronate; petiole 20-40 × 2-4 mm, widening below into a reddish sheath and often with conspicuous resin glands. Inflorescence without non-flowering branches; scales 6-12 mm. Spikes up to 1 cm; spikelets 1- to 6-flowered. Inner bract c. 2·5 mm. Calyx 2·8-3·2 mm. Corolla c. 4 mm, white. 2n = 16. {\i Maritime cliffs and salt-marshes, and saline soils inland. S. Spain.} Hs. ({\i N. Africa}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Variants with 1-flowered (var. {\i uniflorum} Pignatti), 2- to 3-flowered (var.{\i  cymuliferum}) and 4- to 6-flowered (var. {\i corymbulosum} Cosson, sensu stricto) spikelets occur throughout the range of the species and seem quite distinct, but their status needs further investigation.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 85. L. supinum} (Girard) Pignatti,{\i  Collect. Bot.} ({\i Barcelona}){\b  6:} 309 (1962) ({\i Statice salsuginosa} Boiss.). Plant glabrous, slightly rough. Leaves 35-50 × 11-14 mm, oblanceolate-spathulate, 3-veined, usually withered at anthesis. Inflorescence 20-30 cm hemispherical, much-branched; lower branches mostly non-flowering; scales 4-6 mm. Spikes 1-1·5 cm, with 6 spikelets per cm; spikelets 1(-2)-flowered. Bracts with narrow hyaline margin; inner bract c. 2 mm; outer bract c. 0·5 mm. Calyx c. 3 mm. Corolla c. 4 mm. 2n = 26-27.{\i  Gypsaceous soils, usually inland. • S.E. Spain} ({\i Almeria to Alicante}). Hs.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Coastal populations are sometimes intermediate between{\b  56} and {\b 85}, and have well-developed leaves at anthesis, large spikes and more incurved spikelets. Plants intermediate between {\b 77} and {\b 85} are very common. A rather distinct variant (var. {\i diegoi} (Sennen) Pignatti, {\i L. diegoi} Sennen) has 7- to 9-veined leaves and a larger inflorescence (up to 60 cm) and is perhaps a hybrid between {\b 85} and {\b 77}({\b b}).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 86. L. suffruticosum} (L.) O. Kuntze,{\i  Rev. Gen. Pl.}{\b  2:} 396 (1891). Dwarf shrub with leafy basal branches 2-5 cm. Leaves 15-25(-70) × 2-5 mm, linear-subspathulate, 1-veined, fleshy, glaucous, enlarged at base into an auriculate sheath. Inflorescence 10-20 cm, distichous, spicate, usually simple or little-branched; non-flowering branches absent. Spikes 0·7-1 cm subglobose, inserted on the main axis, sessile, very dense, spikelets 2- to 3-flowered. Inner bract c. 3 mm. Calyx 3-4·5 mm, conical. Corolla whitish. {\i Saline soils. S.E. part of U.S.S.R.} Rs (W, K, E).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 87. L. echioides} (L.) Miller,{\i  Gard. Dict.} ed. 8, no. 11 (1768) ({\i Statice echioides} L.). Annual 5-30(-40) cm. Leaves 20-40 × 10-14 mm, obovate to spathulate, obscurely pinnately veined, with tuberculate glands. Scales (3-)5-6 mm. Spikes 2-10 (-20) cm, with up to 2 spikelets per cm; spikelets 2-flowered, curved. Inner bract 4-5 mm, tuberculate dorsally; outer bract overlapping 1/6 of the inner. Calyx c. 5 mm; teeth becoming uncinate in fruit. Corolla pinkish, evanescent. 2n = 18. {\i Dry, saline soils. Mediterranean region, S. Portugal}. Bl Co Cr Ga Gr Hs It Lu Sa Si.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc {\b 6.               Goniolimon}              Boiss.   
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc By S. Pignatti.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Like{\i  Limonium} but always perennial herbs; stems usually compressed; leaves coriaceous, few, in a basal rosette; spikelets with mucronate bracts; stigma capitate.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  All species, except those for which another habitat is indicated, are found on steppes, dry grassland or stony hillsides.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Calyx-lobes wider than long, or obscure ................................... {\b 2. speciosum}
\par
1 Calyx-lobes longer than wide
\par
2 Inner bract of spikelet entire ............................................................ {\b 1. elatum}
\par
2 Inner bract of spikelet 2- to 3-fid
\par
3 Calyx-tube glabrous
\par
4 Leaves spathulate, 3-4 times as long as wide, abruptly
\par
  contracted into the petiole .............................................................. {\b 11. sartorii}
\par
4 Leaves linear-spathulate, 6-12 times as long as wide,
\par
  gradually narrowed into the petiole
\par
5 Spikes dense, globose; corolla whitish ......................................... {\b 9. collinum}
\par
5 Spikes lax, with 4-5 spikelets per cm; corolla reddish-
\par
  purple ...................................................................................... {\b 10. besseranum}
\par
3 Calyx-tube pubescent or hirsute
\par
6 Bracts puberulent ......................................................................... {\b 5. tataricum}
\par
6 Bracts glabrous
\par
7 Inner bract 3·5-4 mm ................................................................. {\b 3. heldreichii}
\par
7 Inner bract more than 4 mm
\par
8 Spikes lax, with 2-3 spikelets per cm; inner bract 7-10 mm
\par
9 Leaves 0·5-1 cm wide; inner and outer bracts subequal .............. {\b 7. rubellum}
\par
9 Leaves 0·1-0·5(-0·7) cm wide; outer bract 1/3-1/2 as 
\par
  long as the inner ................................................................... {\b 8. graminifolium}
\par
8 Spikes dense, with 5-8 spikelets per cm; inner bract 5-6 mm
\par
10 Inner bract with middle mucro much longer than the lateral; 
\par
   spikes with 8 spikelets per cm ................................................. {\b 4. dalmaticum}
\par
10 Inner bract with all mucros subequal; spikes with 5 spikelets per cm                              
\par
   ...................................................................................................... {\b 6. tauricum}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. G. elatum} (Fischer ex Sprengel) Boiss. in DC.,{\i  Prodr.}{\b  12:} 634 (1848). Plant 30-80 cm, sparsely pubescent. Leaves 6-15 × 2·5-4 cm, obovate to oblanceolate, obtuse or emarginate, mucronate. Spikes 1·5-2·5 cm; spikelets 2- to 3(4)-flowered, scarcely contiguous. Bracts c. 4 mm, entire, with wide, hyaline margin. Calyx 5-6·5 mm; tube hairy, twice as long as the limb. •{\i  S.E. Russia, W. Kazakhstan}. Rs (C, E).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. G. speciosum} (L.) Boiss.,{\i  loc. cit. }(1848). Stems 10-50 cm, stout, subangular. Leaves 3-8 × 1-3 cm, obovate to obcuneate, obtuse, mucronate. Scales 1-2 cm. Spikes 1-2 cm, globose dense; spikelets 3- to 4-flowered. Inner bract 2-fid, rarely entire, outer bract 7-8 mm, usually puberulent, with wide, hyaline margin. Calyx 7-8 mm; lobes wider than long, or obscure. Corolla reddish-purple.{\i  E. Russia, from c.} 51°{\i  to} 57°{\i  N}. Rs (C, E). ({\i N. & C. Asia}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 3. G. heldreichii} Halacsy, {\i Verh. Zool.-Bot. Ges. Wien }{\b 36:} 241 (1886). Plant 10-20 cm, glabrous; stems slender, cylindrical, flexuous, rough. Leaves 5-6 × c. 1·5 cm, spathulate, whitish-punctate. Scales c. 4 mm; mucro 2-3 mm. Spikes 2-3 cm, lax, with 3 spikelets per cm; spikelets usually 1-flowered. Bracts glabrous; inner bract 3·5-4 mm, 3-fid; outer bract c. 2 mm, acuminate. Calyx 6·5 mm; tube pubescent, 4 times as long as the limb; lobes longer than wide. Corolla whitish. •{\i  E. Greece} ({\i Thessalia}). Gr.
\par

\par
50}
\par