{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 4. G. dalmaticum} (C. Presl) Reichenb. fil., {\i Icon. Fl. Germ.}{\b  17:} 61 (1855). Plant 7-30 cm; Stems stout, angular to compressed. Leaves 5-8 × 1·2-1·6 cm, lanceolate-spathulate, acute, mucronate, sparsely whitish-punctate. Scales 5-6 mm; mucro 1-2 mm. Spikes 1·5-3 cm, dense, with 8 spikelets per cm. Bracts glabrous, sometimes with stipitate glands; inner bract 5-6 mm, 3-fid, with narrow, hyaline margin, the middle mucro much longer than the lateral; outer bract 5-7 mm. Calyx 7-8 mm; tube sparsely pubescent, 2-2½ times as long as the limb.{\i  Corolla reddish-purple. • Balkan peninsula}. Al Bu ?Gr Ju ?Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 5. G. tataricum} (L.) Boiss. in DC.,{\i  Prodr.}{\b  12:} 632 (1848). Stems 20-30 cm, 2-3 mm in diameter, subangular. Leaves 2·5-15(-30) × 0·5-3·5 cm, obovate to lanceolate-spathulate, mucronate, 3- to 5-veined, densely whitish-punctate above. Scales 9-12 mm. Spikes 10-13 mm, dense, with 8 spikelets per cm; spikelets 1- to 2-flowered. Bracts puberulent; inner bract 5·5 mm, 3-fid, with narrow, hyaline margin, the mucros subequal; outer bract 5 mm, acute. Calyx 7 mm, hirsute; tube 1½ times as long as the limb; lobes 1·5 mm, longer than wide. Corolla reddish-purple.{\i  S.E. Europe, from S  Jugoslavia to W. Kazakhstan, and extending northwards to} 51°{\i  N. in S.C. Russia.} Bu Gr Ju Rm Rs (C, W, E) [Hu].
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 6. G. tauricum} Klokov in Kotov & Barbarich,{\i  Fl. RSS Ucr.}{\b  8:} 521 (1957). Like{\b  5} but stems narrowly winged above; spikes with 5 spikelets per cm; bracts glabrous; calyx 7·5-8 mm. {\i S. Ukraine}. • Rs (W, K).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 7. G. rubellum} (S. G. Gmelin) Klokov & Grossh. in Grossh.,{\i  Opred. Rast. Kavk. }593 (1949). Like {\b 5} but stems less than 2 mm in diameter; leaves 3-6 × 0·5-1 cm, linear-spathulate, acute, 1-veined; spikes lax, with 2-3 spikelets per cm; spikelets 1- to 2-flowered; bracts 7-8 mm, glabrous, the inner with wide, hyaline margin, the mucros shortly emergent; calyx 7-8 mm.{\i  S. Ukraine, S.E. Russia, W. Kazakhstan.} Rs (W, K, E).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 8. G. graminifolium} (Aiton) Boiss. in DC.,{\i  Prodr. }{\b 12:} 633 (1848). Stems 20-50 cm, less than 2 mm in diameter. Leaves 6-12 × 0·1-0·5(-0·7) cm, linear-spathulate, acute, 1-veined. Spikes 1·5-3 cm, lax, with 2-3 spikelets per cm; spikelets 1- to 2-flowered. Bracts glabrous; inner bract 8-10 mm, 3-fid, with wide, hyaline margin; outer bract 1/3-1/2 as long as the inner. Calyx 8-9 mm, pubescent; tube about as long as the limb.{\i  Sandy ground by rivers. • S. Ukraine}. Rs (W).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 9. G. collinum} (Griseb.) Boiss., {\i loc. cit.} (1848). Stems 10-20 cm, subangular and narrowly winged towards base. Leaves 3-12 × 0·3-0·8 cm, linear-spathulate, gradually narrowed into the petiole. Inflorescence scorpioid-corymbose. Scales c. 8 mm, with hyaline margin. Spikes 1 cm, dense, globose; spikelets 1-flowered. Inner bract 3·5-4 mm, 3-fid, with narrow, hyaline margin, auriculate; outer bract 4·5 mm, rounded, acute. Calyx 7 mm, glabrous; lobes longer than wide. Corolla whitish.{\i  E. half of Balkan peninsula, E. Romania}. Bu Gr Rm Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 10. G. besseranum} (Schultes ex Reichenb.) Kusn. in Kusn. N. Busch & Fomin, {\i Fl. Cauc. Crit.}{\b  4}({\b 1}): 202 (1902). Like {\b 9} but leaves 3-8 × 0·3-1·5 cm, mucronate, sparsely whitish-glandular; inflorescence pyramidal; spikes 1-2 cm, lax, with 4-5 spikelets per cm; spikelets 1- to 2-flowered; bracts 3-4 mm; calyx 7-8 mm; corolla reddish-purple. 2n = 36.{\i  From N.E. Bulgaria to S. C. Ukraine.} Bu Rm Rs (W).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 11. G. sartorii} Boiss.,{\i  Diagn. Pl. Or. Nov}.{\b  3}({\b 4}): 67 (1859). Plant 10-20 cm, glabrous. Stems stout, arcuate, with whitish glands. Leaves 3-4 × 1 cm, spathulate, acute, densely whitish-glandular, 1-veined, abruptly contracted into the petiole. Scales 5-6 mm. Spikes 1-2 cm, dense; spikelets 1-flowered. Inner bract 5-5·5 mm, 3-fid, with wide, hyaline margin; outer bract 4·5 mm, auriculate, mucronate. Calyx 7-7·5 mm, glabrous lobes longer than wide. Corolla pale pink.{\i  Maritime rocks. • E. Greece, Kikladhes.} Gr.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc {\b 7.              Limoniastrum }           Heister ex Fabr.         
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc By S. Pignatti.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Like{\i  Limonium} but dwarf shrubs; corolla-tube about as long as the lobes; styles connate in basal half
\par
 
\par

\pard\f0\fs28   {\b 1. L. monopetalum} (L.) Boiss. in DC.,{\i  Prodr.}{\b  12:} 689 (1848). Stems 50-120 cm, branched, leafy. Leaves 2-3(-8) × 0·5 (-1·5) cm, oblanceolate to linear-spathulate, fleshy, glaucous, expanded below into a wide, amplexicaul sheath. Spikes 5-10 cm, with fragile rhachis. Spikelets 1(-2)-flowered, 5-10 mm apart, nearly parallel to the rhachis; outer bract 4 mm, truncate; inner bract 8 mm, forming an ellipsoid envelope around the flowers. Calyx 9 mm, enclosed by the bracts. Corolla 1-2 cm in diameter, pink, violet when dry.{\i  Maritime sands and salt-marshes.Mediterranean region, S. Portugal}. Cr Ga Hs It Lu Sa Si [Bl].
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc {\b 8.                Psylliostachys }           (Jaub. & Spach) Nevskig
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc By D.M. Moore.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Pubescent annual herbs. Leaves in a basal rosette, simple. Inflorescence of simple spikes; spikelets 2- to 4-flowered, bracteate. Calyx infundibuliform; tube 10-ribbed at base; limb scarious, the lobes with excurrent ribs. Corolla infundibuliform, with long tube and short, deflexed lobes. Stamens slightly connate. Styles 5; stigmas filiform. Fruit with irregular dehiscence.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. P. spicata} (Willd.) Nevski,{\i  Acta Inst. Bot. Acad. Sci. URSS} ({\i Ser.} 1) {\b 4:} 314 (1937). Plant 10-40(-60) cm. Leaves 5-15 × 1-3·5 cm, oblanceolate in outline, deeply lobed, shortly petiolate; lobes irregularly triangular, obtuse, usually deflexed. Inflorescence up to 30(-40) cm. Terminal spike 2-9 × c. 1 cm, the lateral shorter, sessile; bracts 2-3 mm, pubescent. Calyx 3-3·5 mm; limb about as long as the tube; lobes broadly triangular, acuminate. Corolla c. 4-4·5 mm, with ovate lobes, pale pink. Fruit oblong-obovoid. {\i Saline clays or sands. S.E. Russia} ({\i near W. coast of Caspian sea}). Rs ( ?K, E). ({\i Caucasus, C. Asia}.)
\par

\par
51}
\par