{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}
\pard\f0\fs36\qc EBENALES
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28\qc {\b  137.             EBENACEAE}
\par
\pard\f0\fs24\qc Edit. †T.G. Tutin.
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28 Trees or shrubs; usually dioecious. Leaves simple, exstipulate, usually alternate. Flowers actinomorphic, usually 4- to 5- merous. Calyx often accrescent in fruit. Corolla sympetalous, urceolate-campanulate; lobes contorted. Male flowers with 14-24 stamens; female flowers with 8 staminodes. Ovary superior, 4- to 12- locular, with axile placentae. Fruit a large berry.
\par 
\par
\pard\f0\fs28\qc {\b 1.             Diospyros}             L.
\par
\pard\f0\fs24\qc By †T.G. Tutin.
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28 Dioecious. Flowers in small, axillary cymes or sometimes solitary. Calyx accrescent and with recurved lobes in fruit. Styles 2-4. Seeds large, dorsally convex and laterally compressed.
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. D. lotus} L., {\i Sp. Pl. }1057 (1753). Tree up to 14 m, with furrowed bark. Young twigs pubescent. Leaves 6-12 × 2*5-5 cm, elliptical to oblong, rounded to broadly cuneate at base, acuminate, entire, pubescent when young but usually glabrescent above, shortly petiolate. Male flowers 2- 3 together, c. 5 mm; female flowers solitary, 8-10 mm. Calyx with 4 short, acute, ciliate lobes, villous within. Corolla reddish- or greenish-white, with recurved, rounded, ciliate lobes c. 1/2 as long as the tube. Fruit c. 15 mm in diameter, globose, yellow or blue-black.{\i  Cultivated locally for its edible fruits; widely naturalized in the Balkan peninsula and occasionally elsewhere in S. Europe.} [Al Bl Bu ?Ga Gr He Hs It Ju.] ({\i Asia}.)
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28 {\b  D. kaki} L. fil., {\i Suppl.} 439 (1781), from Japan and Korea, is sometimes cultivated in S. Europe for its edible fruits. It has male flowers c. 10 mm in diameter and the orange-yellow fruit is 35-70 mm in diameter. 
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28\qc {\b 138.   STYRACACEAE}
\par
\pard\f0\fs24\qc Edit. †T.G. Tutin.
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28 Shrubs or trees. Leaves alternate, simple, exstipulate. Flowers actinomorphic, hermaphrodite. Calyx more or less adnate to the ovary. Corolla usually sympetalous. Stamens usually twice as many as the corolla-lobes. Ovary superior to inferior, 3- to 5- locular, with axile placentae. Fruit a drupe or capsule.
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28\qc {\b   1.             Styrax }            L.
\par
\pard\f0\fs24\qc By †T.G. Tutin.
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28 Flowers in short, lax, terminal or axillary racemes. Calyx campanulate. Corolla-lobes imbricate; tube usually very short. Stamens 10(-12), adnate to the base of the corolla. Ovary 3- locular; ovules few in each loculus. Fruit a dry, usually 1-seeded drupe.
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. S. officinalis} L., {\i Sp.Pl.} 444(1753). Stellate-pubescent shrub or small tree 2-7 m. Leaves 3-7 cm, broadly ovate to ovate-oblong, entire, obtuse, rounded or shortly cuneate at base. Inflorescence usually 3- to 6-flowered. Pedicels 1-2 cm. Calyx nearly entire; corolla c. 2 cm, white, campanulate.{\i  E. Mediterranean region, extending westwards to W.C. Italy}. Al Cr Gr It Ju Tu [Ga].
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs36\qc OLEALES
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28\qc {\b  139.           OLEACEAE}
\par
\pard\f0\fs24\qc Edit †T.G. Tutin.
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28 Usually glabrous trees or shrubs. Leaves opposite, rarely alternate, exstipulate. Flowers hermaphrodite, rarely unisexual, 4- (5-) to 6-merous, actinomorphic. Calyx campanulate, often small. Corolla sympetalous or polypetalous, rarely absent. Stamens 2, often inserted on the corolla-tube. Ovary superior, 2-locular; style usually short or absent; ovules usually 2 in each loculus. Fruit a loculicidal capsule, a samara, a drupe or a berry; seeds 1-4.
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Petals free or almost so, or absent
\par 2 Style absent; fruit a drupe ............................................................. {\b 9. Picconia}
\par 2 Style distinct, though sometimes short; fruit a samara 
\par 3 Leaves usually pinnate; fruit with a terminal wing ...................... {\b 4. Fraxinus}
\par 3 Leaves simple; fruit with lateral wings ..................................... {\b 2. Fontanesia}
\par 1 Corolla with a distinct tube
\par 4 Leaves lepidote beneath ..................................................................... {\b 7. Olea}
\par 4 Leaves not lepidote beneath
\par 5 Twigs green, 4-angled; leaves pinnate or trifoliolate ................ {\b 1. Jasminum}
\par 5 Twigs brown or grey, terete; leaves simple 
\par 6 Corolla yellow .............................................................................{\b  3. Forsythia}
\par 6 Corolla white or lilac 
\par 7 Corolla c. 2 mm; tube very short ..................................................{\b  8. Phillyrea}
\par 7 Corolla at least 5 mm; tube about equal to, to twice as
\par  long as lobes.
\par 8 Flowers lilac, rarely white; corolla-tube twice as long
\par  as lobes;fruit a capsule ....................................................................{\b  5. Syringa} 
\par 8 Flowers white; corolla-tube about as long as lobes;
\par  fruit a berry .................................................................................{\b  6. Ligustrum}
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28\qc {\b  1.           Jasminum }          L.  
\par
\pard\f0\fs24\qc By J. do Amaral Franco & M.L. da Rocha Afonso.
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28 Deciduous or evergreen shrubs, sometimes climbing. Twigs usually angled. Leaves opposite or alternate, imparipinnate; leaflets entire. Flowers hermaphrodite, usually in terminal or axillary cymes. Calyx campanulate, with 4-9 lobes. Corolla hypocrateriform, with 4-9 lobes, convolute in bud. Stamens
\par
\par 52}
\par