{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 epipetalous; anthers large; filaments short. Fruit a black berry, usually didymous.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b  J. odoratissimum }L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 7 (1753), from Madeira, is cultivated in S.E. France for the perfume extracted from the flowers. It is like{\b  3} but has almost terete branches and somewhat larger flowers and fruit.
\par

\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Leaves opposite
\par
2 Flowers yellow, solitary ........................................................... {\b 1. nudiflorum}
\par
2 Flowers white, in terminal cymes ................................................ {\b 2. officinale}
\par
1 Leaves alternate
\par
3 Leaflets 0·7-2(-3) cm; calyx-lobes at least as long as tube ........... {\b 3. fruticans}
\par
3 Leaflets 2-6 cm; calyx-teeth minute ................................................ {\b 4. humile}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. J. nudiflorum} Lindley,{\i  Jour. Hort. Soc.} ({\i London}) {\b 1:} 153 (1846). Deciduous shrub up to 5 m, with recurved branches. Leaves opposite; leaflets 3, 1-3 cm, ovate to oblong-ovate. Flowers appearing in winter, yellow, solitary, on short peduncles covered with small imbricate bracts. Calyx-lobes linear, about as long as or longer than tube. Corolla-limb 15-30 mm in diameter; lobes usually 6, obovate and undulate, about half as long as tube. {\i Widely cultivated for ornament, and locally naturalized.} [Ga.] ({\i W. China.})
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. J. officinale} L.,{\i  Sp. Pl.} 7 (1753). Deciduous or half-evergreen climbing shrub up to 10 m. Leaves opposite; leaflets 5-7(-9), 1-6 cm, more or less ovate, the terminal larger and acuminate. Flowers white, or purplish outside (var.{\i  affine }(Royle ex Lindley) Dippel), fragrant, in terminal cymes of 2-10. Calyx-lobes 6-10 mm, subulate, longer than tube. Corolla-limb 20-25 mm in diameter; lobes 4-5, oblong, about as long as tube. {\i Cultivated for ornament, and widely naturalized in S. Europe.} [Ga ?He Hs It Ju Lu Rm Si.] ({\i S.W. Asia}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b  J. grandiflorum} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} ed. 2, 9 (1762), from the mountains of S.E. Asia, with calyx-lobes twice as long as tube, is cultivated in S.E. France for the perfume extracted from the flowers.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 3. J. fruticans} L.,{\i  Sp. Pl.} 7 (1753). Evergreen or half-evergreen shrub up to 3 m, with slender, erect or patent, 4-angled branches. Leaves alternate; leaflets 3, rarely 1, 0·7-2(-3) cm, oblong to obovate-oblong. Flowers yellow, in cymes of 1-5 on short lateral branches. Corolla-limb 12-15 mm in diameter; lobes 5, oblong, slightly shorter than tube. Berry 7-9 mm, globose.{\i  Scrub and margins of woods. S. Europe}. Al Bu Ga Gr Hs It Ju Lu Rm Rs (K) Tu [Be ?He Hu.]
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 4. J. humile} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 7 (1753). Evergreen shrub up to 1·5 m. Leaves alternate; leaflets 3, rarely 5 or 7, ovate to oblong. Flowers yellow, in axillary cymes of 2-6. Corolla-limb c. 10 mm in diameter; lobes half as long as tube. {\i Cultivated for ornament, and locally naturalized in S. Europe.} [Gr Ju Si.] ({\i W. China}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc {\b   2.            Fontanesia}            Labill.
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc By P.S. Green.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Deciduous shrubs. Leaves opposite, entire or minutely serrulate. Inflorescences shortly paniculate, axillary and terminal. Calyx and corolla 4-lobed. Fruit a samara, 1- or 2-seeded.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Literature: A. Lingelsheim in Engler,{\i  Pflanzenreich}{\b  72} ({\b IV. 243}): 7-9 (1920).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. F. philliraeoides} Labill.,{\i  Icon. Pl. Syr.}{\b  1:} 9 (1791). Densely branched shrub up to 3 m. Leaves 1·5-4 cm, elliptic-lanceolate. Calyx 0·5 mm. Corolla-lobes 1·5-2 mm, whitish. Filaments 2-2·5 mm; anthers 2-3 mm. Fruit 6-9 mm, ellipsoid, winged. {\i S.E. Sicilia} ({\i S. of Siracusa}). Si [It]. ({\i Anatolia and Syria.})
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc {\b  3.             Forsythia }            Vahl
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc By P.S. Green.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Deciduous shrubs. Leaves opposite, entire or serrate, simple (in most species). Inflorescences axillary. Flowers yellow, heterostylous, appearing before or with the leaves. Calyx and corolla 4-lobed. Ovary with several ovules. Fruit a capsule.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Literature: A. Lingelsheim in Engler,{\i  Pflanzenreich}{\b  72} ({\b IV. 243}): 109-113 (1920). F. Markgraf,{\i  Mitt. Deutsch. Dendrol. Ges.}{\b  42:} 1-12 (1930).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. F. europaea} Degen & Bald., {\i Österr. Bot. Zeitschr.}{\b  47:} 406 (1897). 2 m, with upright branches. Leaves (2·5-)4-5(-7) cm, ovate to ovate-lanceolate, more or less acuminate, entire or serrate. Calyx 3 mm. Corolla-tube 4 mm; lobes 12 × 4 mm, narrowly oblong. Capsule 1·2-1·5 cm, smooth, ovoid, beaked. {\i N. Albania and adjacent parts of Jugoslavia.} Al Ju.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc {\b   4.                Fraxinus }  L.                 
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc By J. do Amaral Franco & M.L. da Rocha Afonso.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Deciduous trees. Twigs flattened at the nodes. Leaves opposite or sometimes in whorls of 3, imparipinnate, rarely reduced to one leaflet. Flowers hermaphrodite or unisexual, small, in terminal or axillary panicles. Calyx campanulate and 4-lobed, or absent. Corolla usually absent; when present with 2-6 more or less free petals; stamens hypogynous; stigmas 2. Fruit a samara, winged distally.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   The leaves vary greatly from young to adult plants; in the juvenile stage they commonly bear a larger number of smaller, rounded and more coarsely toothed leaflets; the first leaves of the seedlings are simple.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Corolla present; panicles terminal or axillary on leafy twigs ............ {\b 1. ornus}
\par
1 Corolla absent; panicles axillary, appearing before the leaves
\par
2 Leaflets distinctly petiolulate; calyx present; body of
\par
  samara terete ......................................................................... {\b 2. pennsylvanica}
\par
2 Leaflets sessile or subsessile; calyx absent; body of 
\par
  samara flattened
\par
3 Buds black; leaflets with more serrations than lateral
\par
  veins .............................................................................................. {\b 3. excelsior}
\par
3 Buds brown; leaflets usually with as many serrations as
\par
  lateral veins
\par
4 Twigs and leaf-rhachis glabrous .............................................. {\b 4. angustifolia}
\par
4 Twigs and leaf-rhachis densely pubescent .................................... {\b 5. pallisiae}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. F. ornus} L.,{\i  Sp. Pl.} 1057 (1753) ({\i Ornus europaea }Pers.). Tree up to 20 m, with smooth, grey bark; twigs usually glabrous, yellowish-grey to grey; buds greyish or brownish, more or less pruinose. Leaflets 5-9, 30-80 × 18-45 mm, ovate to lanceolate, cuspidate, distinctly petiolulate, irregularly serrulate. Leaflets of juvenile trees 15-30 × 10-20 mm, subsessile and crenate-serrate. Calyx small, deeply lobed, persistent. Corolla white; petals 4, 5-6 mm, linear. Samara 20-25 × 4-6 mm, obovate-linear to oblong, acute to emarginate. {\i Mixed woods, thickets and rocky places. Mediterranean region and S.C. Europe, northwards to S. Czechoslovakia and N.E. Romania}. Al Au Bu Co Cz Gr He Hs Hu It Ju Rm Sa Si Tu [Ga].
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. F. pennsylvanica} Marshall,{\i  Arbust. Amer. }51 (1785) ({\i F. lanceolata} Borkh.). Tree up to 20 m, with brownish-red and slightly furrowed bark; twigs and petioles glabrous to densely pubescent, stout; buds brown. Leaflets 5-7(-9), 80-150 × 
\par

\par
53}
\par