{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 25-50 mm, ovate-lanceolate to oblong-lanceolate, acuminate, broadly cuneate, irregularly serrulate to entire, glabrous above, more or less pubescent beneath, at least along the midrib; petiolules 3-6 mm; rhachis glabrous to densely white-pubescent. Calyx persistent; corolla absent. Samara 30-60 × 4-6 mm, the wing lanceolate to oblong-obovate, acuminate to rounded or rarely emarginate, decurrent to below the middle of the slender terete body c. 2 mm in diameter.{\i  Cultivated for timber and for shelter in C. & S.E. Europe; sometimes naturalized}. [Au Bu Cz Ge Rm Rs (W, E).] ({\i E. North America}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b  F. americana} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 1057 (1753), also from E. North America, is planted on a small scale mainly in E. Europe, though the name is at times wrongly applied to {\i F. pennsylvanica}. It is like {\b 2} but the petiolules are 5-15 mm and the wing of the samara is not decurrent.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 3. F. excelsior} L.,{\i  Sp. Pl.} 1057 (1753). Tree up to 40 m, with grey bark, at first smooth but rough and finally fissured on old trunks; twigs and petioles glabrous to densely pubescent; buds black. Leaflets 7-13(-15) (rarely reduced to a large terminal one, var.{\i  diversifolia} Aiton), (30-)50-110 × 10-30(-40) mm, oblong-ovate to oblong-lanceolate, long-acuminate, tapering to a rounded base, sessile, usually crenate-serrulate (the serrations more numerous than the lateral veins), villous on the midrib and towards the base beneath; rhachis subglabrous to pubescent. Calyx and corolla absent; anthers dark purple. Samara (20-)25-50 × (5-)7-10 mm, the wing oblong-obcordate to lanceolate. 2n = 46.{\i  Most of Europe, except the northern, southern and eastern margins}. Au Be Br Bu Cz Da Ga Ge Hb He Ho Hs Hu It Ju No Po Rm Rs (B, C, W, K, E) Su ?Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b excelsior} : Twigs and petioles glabrous; leaf-rhachis glabrous or puberulent at the leaflet attachments only. 2n = 46. {\i Throughout the range of the species}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b coriariifolia} (Scheele) E. Murray in Rech. fil.,{\i  Fl. Iran.}{\b  52:} 6 (1968): Twigs, petioles and rhachis densely pubescent. {\i S.E. Europe}. Rm Rs (K). ({\i Iran.})
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 4. F. angustifolia} Vahl,{\i  Enum. Pl. }{\b 1: }52 (1804). Tree up to 25 m, with grey bark, soon finely and deeply reticulate-fissured; twigs and petioles glabrous; buds dark brown. Leaflets 5-13, 30-90(-100) × 8-25(-30) mm, oblong- to linear-lanceolate, acuminate, cuneate and entire at the base, sessile or nearly so, the serrations usually as many as the lateral veins; rhachis glabrous. Leaflets of juvenile trees 7-15, 8-30 × 5-17 mm, obovate to ovate, obtuse to acute at the apex. Calyx and corolla absent. Samara 20-45(-50) × 6-10 mm, glabrous, the wing oblong-obcordate to lanceolate.{\i  River-banks, flood-plains and deciduous woods. S. & E.C. Europe.} Al Au *Bl Bu Co Cz Ga Gr Hs Hu It Ju Lu Rm Rs (W, K) Sa Si Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp.{\b  angustifolia} : Leaflets always glabrous beneath.{\i  W. Mediterranean region and Portugal.}

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b oxycarpa} (Bieb. ex Willd.) Franco & Rocha Afonso,{\i  Bot. Jour. Linn. Soc.}{\b  64:} 377 (1971) ({\i F. oxycarpa} Bieb. ex Willd.,{\i  F. pojarkoviana} V. Vassil.,{\i  F. syriaca} sensu Hayek, non Boiss.): Leaflets pubescent along the proximal part of the midrib beneath.{\i  E.C. Europe, and S. Europe from N.E. Spain eastwards}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 5. F. pallisiae} Wilmott,{\i  Jour. Linn. Soc. London} ({\i Bot.}) {\b 43:} 284 (1916) ({\i F. holotricha }auct., ?an Koehne). Like {\b 4}({\b b}) but up to 30 m, with twigs, petioles and leaf-rhachis densely pubescent, and leaflets densely pubescent on both sides when young, becoming glabrescent above; samara pubescent.{\i  River-banks and flood-plains. • S.E. Europe, from Turkey-in-Europe to Moldavia}. Bu Rm Rs (W) Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc {\b 5.              Syringa }              L.
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc By P.S. Green. 
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Deciduous shrubs or small trees. Leaves opposite, entire or serrate, simple. Inflorescences terminal or axillary, paniculate; flowers appearing after the leaves. Calyx small, with 4 shallow lobes. Corolla more or less cylindrical with 4 valvate, more or less cucullate lobes. Fruit a capsule.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Literature: A. Lingelsheim in Engler,{\i  Pflanzenreich }{\b 72} ({\b IV. 243}): 74-95 (1920). S. D. McKelvey, {\i The Lilac, a Monograph}. New York. 1928.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 Leaves ovate, with subcordate to broadly Cuneate base; 
\par
 inflorescences usually paired from apical axillary buds 
\par
 (terminal bud abortive), usually without basal leaves ..................... {\b 1. vulgaris}
\par
Leaves elliptical to elliptic-lanceolate, with acute to 
\par
 broadly cuneate base; inflorescences usually solitary, 
\par
 terminal, leafy at the base ............................................................... {\b 2. josikaea}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. S. vulgaris} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 9 (1753). 3(-7) m. Leaves 4-8 (-12) cm, ovate; base subcordate to broadly cuneate. Inflorescences 10-20 cm, usually paired, from apical axillary buds (the terminal bud abortive), usually without basal leaves. Corolla lilac, rarely white; tube 8-12 mm, slender, cylindrical; lobes patent or slightly deflexed. Capsule 8-10(-14) mm, ovoid, acuminate.{\i  In scrub on rocky hill-slopes. • From N.C. Romania to C. Albania and N.E. Greece; widely cultivated for ornament, and naturalized in W. & C. Europe.} Al Bu Gr Ju Rm [Au Be Br Cz Ga Ge Hb He Hu It Rs (K)].
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. S. josikaea} Jacq. fil. ex Reichenb., {\i Pl. Crit.}{\b  8:} 32 (1830). 3-4 m. Leaves 6-12 cm, elliptical to elliptic-oblanceolate or elliptic-lanceolate, somewhat glaucous beneath; base acute to broadly cuneate. Inflorescences 10-16 cm, terminal, usually solitary, with basal leaves. Corolla purplish; tube 7-11 mm, slender, infundibuliform; lobes slightly patent. Capsule 9-14 mm, ellipsoid, obtuse, mucronulate. •{\i  Mountains of Transsylvania, and Ukrainian Carpathians}. Rm Rs (W) [Ge].
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc {\b   6.                  Ligustrum}                 L.
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc By J. do Amaral Franco.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Deciduous or evergreen shrubs or small trees. Twigs terete. Leaves opposite, simple and entire, shortly petiolate. Flowers hermaphrodite, small, mainly in erect terminal panicles. Calyx campanulate, sinuately 4-dentate. Corolla hypocrateriform, white, with 4 lobes. Stamens epipetalous; anthers small, included or exserted; filaments short or long. Fruit a berry, usually blackish.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. L. vulgare} L.,{\i  Sp. Pl. }7 (1753). Shrub 1-3(-5) m, with slender, patent branches and smooth grey bark. Young twigs puberulent, brownish. Leaves 3-6 × 1-2 cm, lanceolate, thin, deciduous or semi-evergreen. Panicles 3-6 cm, puberulent. Flowers fragrant; corolla-tube as long as limb; limb 4-6 mm in diameter; stamens with slightly exserted filaments and oblong anthers shorter than corolla-lobes. Berry 6-8 mm, subglobose or ovoid, lustrous black. 2n = 46.{\i  Wood-margins and scrub; somewhat calcicole. S., W. & C. Europe, northwards to c.} 59°{\i  N. and extending eastwards to C. Ukraine; also in a small region of S.E. Norway and S.W. Sweden.} Al Au Be Br Bu Cz Ga Ge Gr Hb He Ho Hs Hu It Ju Lu No Po Rm Rs (W, K) Si Su Tu [Az].
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 {\b  L. ovalifolium} Hassk.,{\i  Cat. Horto Bogor.} 119 (1844), from Japan, which differs from {\b 1} in its glabrous young twigs, broader,
\par

\par
54}
\par