{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 usually more evergreen leaves, larger, glabrous panicles, and corolla-tube 2-3 times as long as the limb, is widely planted for hedges (often as a golden-leaved cultivar) and may be locally naturalized.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   {\b L. lucidum} Aiton fil. in Aiton,{\i  Hort. Kew}. ed. 2,{\b  1:} 19 (1810) ({\i L. japonicum} auct. eur., non Thunb.), from China and Japan, is planted as a street-tree in S. Europe, and sometimes in hedges. It forms a small tree up to 10 m, with glabrous twigs, evergreen leaves 8-12 cm, panicles 12-20 cm, and a pruinose berry.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc {\b   7.                  Olea}                L.
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc By J. do Amaral Franco & M.L. da Rocha Afonso.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Evergreen trees or shrubs. Twigs terete or quadrangular, not flattened at the nodes. Leaves opposite, simple, lanceolate to obovate, entire, coriaceous. Flowers hermaphrodite or polygamous, arranged in many-flowered axillary or terminal racemes or panicles. Calyx small, with 4 teeth or shallow lobes. Corolla subrotate, 4-lobed, with the lobes slightly longer than wide. Stamens epipetalous; anthers large; filaments short. Fruit an oleaginous drupe.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. O. europaea} L.,{\i  Sp. Pl.} 8 (1753). Tree up to 15 m, with a broad crown and a thick trunk, sometimes a shrub; bark grey, finely fissured; twigs lepidote, grey; buds very small, lepidote-sericeous, greyish. Leaves (10-)20-80 × (3-)5-15(-20) mm, subsessile, mucronate, dark greyish-green and glabrous above, light grey and densely lepidote beneath. Panicles axillary. Corolla white. Drupe 10-35 × 6-20 mm, ellipsoid to subglobose, green when unripe, becoming black, brownish-green or rarely ivory white. 2n = 46. {\i Woods and scrub in dry rocky places; commonly cultivated for its fruit. Mediterranean region, Portugal, Krym}. Al Bl Co Cr Ga Gr Hs It Ju Lu Rs (K) Sa Si Tu [He].
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Var.{\i  europaea} is the cultivated olive. Many cultivars have been selected for their edible fruit, which is an important source of oil. Wild plants (var.{\i  sylvestris} Brot.) differ from the cultivars mainly in the spiny lower branches and small leaves and drupes.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc {\b  8.                 Phillyrea }                    L.  
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc By J. do Amaral Franco & M.L. da Rocha Afonso.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Evergreen trees or shrubs. Twigs terete. Leaves opposite, simple. Flowers hermaphrodite, in short axillary racemes. Calyx small, more or less 4-lobed. Corolla subrotate, greenish-white, 4-lobed, with the lobes longer than wide and imbricate in bud. Stamens epipetalous; anthers large, exserted; filaments short; stigma 2-lobed. Fruit a dry bluish-black drupe with a crustaceous endocarp.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Literature: C. Sebastian, {\i Trav. Inst. Sci. Chérif. Ser. Bot}., {\b 6:} 1-100 (1956). 
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 Leaves all similar, with 4-6 pairs of distant, nearly obsolete 
\par
 veins; calyx with short, rounded lobes; drupe apiculate ............ {\b 1. angustifolia}
\par
Leaves dimorphic, with 7-11 pairs of close, usually distinct
\par
 veins; calyx with triangular lobes; drupe muticous ......................... {\b 2. latifolia}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. P. angustifolia} L., {\i Sp. Pl. }7 (1753). Shrub up to 2·5 m with subfastigiate branches and grey, smooth bark; twigs, buds and petioles glabrous or puberulent. Leaves (20-)30-80(-100) × 3-15 mm, all similar, linear to lanceolate, entire or more rarely remotely serrulate; lateral veins 4-6 pairs, distant, nearly obsolete, making a small angle with the midrib, long, nearly straight, not or very slightly forked distally. Calyx thick, brownish, lobed to ¼ of its length; lobes rounded. stigma rounded, with obtuse lobes. Drupe 6-8 × 5-7 mm, ovoid while young, later subglobose; style more or less persistent.{\i  Evergreen scrub. W. & C. Mediterranean region, Portugal}. Al Bl Co Ga Hs It Ju Lu Sa Si [Rs (K)].
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. P. latifolia} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 8 (1753) (incl.{\i  P. media} L.). Shrub or small tree up to 15 m, with subfastigiate branches while young, later spreading; bark grey, smooth, becoming finely reticulate; twigs, buds and petioles puberulent-tomentose. Leaves dimorphic; juvenile leaves 20-70 × 10-40 mm, ovate-cordate to ovate-lanceolate, rarely lanceolate, more or less dentate or serrate; adult leaves 10-60 × 4-20 mm, lanceolate to elliptical, entire or finely serrulate; lateral veins 7-11 pairs, close, usually distinct, making a wide angle with the midrib, sinuous, clearly forked distally. Calyx thin, yellowish, lobed to 3/4 of its length; lobes triangular. stigma elongate, with acute lobes. Drupe 7-10 mm, globose; style caducous. 2n = 46.{\i  Evergreen woods. Mediterranean region, Portugal.} Al Bl Bu Co Cr Ga Gr Hs It Ju Lu Sa Si Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Specimens from dry calcareous places have small and thick leaves, but their taxonomic status is uncertain.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   P. media L., Syst. Nat. ed. 10, 2: 847 (1759) represents the adult leaf-stage of 2, and so cannot be accepted as a distinct taxon.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc {\b 9.              Picconia }              DC.
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc By J. do Amaral Franco.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Evergreen trees or shrubs, with smooth, whitish bark. Twigs terete. Leaves opposite, simple, entire or rarely serrulate, coriaceous, glabrous. Flowers hermaphrodite, small, in short axillary racemes. Calyx rotate-stellate, 4-lobed. Corolla rotate white, deeply divided into 4 patent, oblong lobes. Stamens epipetalous; anthers subsessile, exserted. Fruit a dry drupe with a crustaceous endocarp.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. P. azorica} (Tutin) Knobl.,{\i  Notizbl. Bot. Gart. Berlin}{\b  11:} 1028 (1934). Shrub or small tree. Twigs fulvous when young, becoming grey. Leaves 3-6(-10) × 1-3(-6) cm, lanceolate to obovate, acute to obtuse, with a prominent midrib and inconspicuous lateral veins beneath. Calyx-lobes c. 1 mm, ovate-mucronate, ciliate; anthers mucronate; stigma deeply emarginate. Drupe 10-13 mm, oblong-ovoid, black. Scrub, up to 700 m. •{\i  Açores}. Az.
\par

\par
55}
\par