{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs36\qc GENTIANALES
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc {\b  140.        GENTIANACEAE}
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc Edit. †T.G. Tutin.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Glabrous bitter-tasting herbs. Leaves opposite (very rarely some alternate), entire, exstipulate, usually sessile and often connate at the base. Flowers 4- to 5(to 12)-merous, actinomorphic. Calyx more or less deeply lobed. Corolla-lobes contorted in bud. Stamens inserted on the corolla-tube. Ovary superior, 1-locular, with 2 parietal placentae, rarely almost 2-locular owing to the intrusive placentae; ovules numerous. Fruit a septicidal capsule.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Flowers 6- to 12-merous ..........................................................{\b  3. Blackstonia}
\par
1 Flowers 4- to 5-merous
\par
2 Each corolla-lobe with a slender nectary-spur ...............................{\b  9. Halenia}
\par
2 Corolla-lobes without spurs
\par
3 Style slender, distinct, often caducous
\par
4 Flowers usually 5-merous; calyx-lobes keeled; anthers
\par
  twisting spirally after dehiscence ..............................................{\b  4. Centaurium}
\par
4 Flowers 4-merous; calyx-lobes not keeled; anthers not
\par
  twisting spirally after dehiscence
\par
5 Calyx with short, deltate lobes; corolla-tube ovoid ......................{\b  1. Cicendia}
\par
5 Calyx with long, linear lobes; corolla-tube cylindrical ..............{\b  2. Exaculum}
\par
3 Ovary narrowed into the stout, persistent style, or
\par
  stigmas sessile
\par
6 Each corolla-lobe with 2 fimbriate nectaries near the base 
\par
7 Perennial; flowers in terminal racemes .......................................... {\b 8. Swertia}
\par
7 Annual; flowers solitary .................................................... {\b 7. Lomatogonium}
\par
6 Corolla-lobes without nectaries
\par
8 Corolla with appendages between the lobes; throat and
\par
  lobes not ciliate ............................................................................. {\b 5. Gentiana}
\par
8 Corolla without appendages between the lobes; throat or
\par
  lobes usually ciliate ...................................................................{\b  6. Gentianella}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc {\b 1.                  Cicendia}             Adanson
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc By †T.G. Tutin.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Annual herbs. Calyx campanulate, with 4 short, deltate lobes. Corolla with ovoid tube and 4 short lobes. Anthers basifixed, cordate, not twisting spirally after dehiscence. stigma peltate.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. C. filiformis} (L.) Delarbre, {\i Fl. Auvergne} ed. 2, 29 (1800) ({\i Microcala filiformis} (L.) Hoffmanns. & Link). Slender annual 3-14(-20) cm. Stems simple or with few branches. Leaves 2-6(-10) mm, linear, few, soon withering. Flowers 3-6 mm, yellow. Capsule 4-5 mm, ovoid. 2n = 26. {\i Damp, sandy or peaty places. S. & W. Europe.} Az Be Bl Br Co †Da Ga Ge Gr Hb Ho Hs It Ju Lu Sa Si Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc {\b 2.                 Exaculum }              Caruel
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc By †T.G. Tutin.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Like {\i Cicendia} but calyx deeply divided into linear lobes; corolla-tube cylindrical; anthers ovate; stigma bifid.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. E. pusillum} (Lam.) Caruel in Parl., {\i Fl. Ital.}{\b  6:} 743 (1886) ({\i Cicendia pusilla} (Lam.) Griseb.). Slender, divaricately branched annual 1-12 cm. Leaves 2-12 mm, linear-lanceolate. Flowers 4-5 mm, pink or cream. Capsule 5-6 mm, fusiform. 2n = 20.{\i  Damp, sandy or grassy places. S.W. Europe}. Co Ga Hs It Lu Sa.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc {\b   3.            Blackstonia }               Hudson
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc By †T.G. Tutin.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Annual herbs. Calyx deeply divided into 6-12 lobes. Corolla rotate, yellow; tube short; lobes 6-12. Anthers basifixed, oblong to linear, not or scarcely twisting spirally after dehiscence. Style filiform, caducous; stigma 2-lobed.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. B. perfoliata} (L.) Hudson, {\i Fl. Angl.} 146 (1762) ({\i Chlora perfoliata} (L.) L.). Erect, glaucous annual 10-60 cm. Leaves 5-30 mm, ovate to triangular, the basal obtuse, not connate at base, the cauline acute, connate or rarely free at base. Flowers (6-)8-35 mm, yellow. Calyx-tube very short; lobes 6-12, linear to lanceolate. Lobes of the stigma erect at anthesis, becoming patent later. {\i W., S. & C. Europe.} Al Au Be Bl Br Bu Co Cr Cz Ga Ge Gr Hb He Ho Hs Hu It Ju Lu Rs (K) Sa Si Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Flowers 20-35 mm, 8- to 12-merous .......................... ({\b d}) subsp.{\b  grandiflora}
\par
1 Flowers (6-)8-15 mm, 6- to 8-merous
\par
2 Upper cauline leaves not or scarcely narrowed towards 
\par
  the base; calyx-lobes linear ............................................ ({\b a}) subsp.{\b  perfoliata}
\par
2 Upper cauline leaves narrowed towards the base;
\par
  calyx-lobes linear-lanceolate to lanceolate
\par
3 Calyx-lobes linear-lanceolate, 3-4 times as long as tube;
\par
  upper cauline leaves narrowly connate at base ................ ({\b b}) subsp.{\b  serotina}
\par
3 Calyx-lobes lanceolate, twice as long as tube; upper 
\par
  cauline leaves not or scarcely connate at base ........... ({\b c}) subsp.{\b  imperfoliata}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp.{\b  perfoliata} : Usually robust. Upper cauline leaves triangular, not or scarcely narrowed towards the base. Flowers 8-15 mm, 6- to 8-merous. Calyx-lobes linear, 1-veined. 2n = 40.{\i  Throughout most of the range of the species, but rare in the south}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp.{\b  serotina} (Koch ex Reichenb.) Vollmann,{\i  Fl. Bayern} 594 (1914) ({\i B. serotina} (Koch ex Reichenb.) G. Beck, {\i B. perfoliata} subsp.{\i  acuminata} (Koch & Ziz) Dostál,{\i  Chlora serotina} Koch ex Reichenb.): Usually slender. Upper cauline leaves distinctly narrowed towards the base. Flowers (6-)8-10 mm, 6- to 8-merous. Calyx-lobes linear-lanceolate, often 3-veined in lower part, 3-4 times as long as tube. 2n = 40.{\i  Usually inland. S. & C. Europe; Netherlands}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b c}) Subsp.{\b  imperfoliata} (L. fil.) Franco & Rocha Afonso, {\i Bot. Jour. Linn. Soc. }{\b 64:} 378 (1971) ({\i Chlora imperfoliata} L. fil.). Like ({\b b}) but upper cauline leaves not or scarcely connate at base; calyx-lobes lanceolate, distinctly 3-veined, twice as long as tube. 2n = 20.{\i  Damp places near the sea, rarely inland. S.W. Europe extending to S. Italy and Sicilia}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b d}) Subsp.{\b  grandiflora} (Viv.) Maire in Jahandiez & Maire, {\i Cat. Pl. Maroc}{\b  3:} 578 (1934) ({\i Chlora grandiflora} Viv.): Robust. Upper cauline leaves slightly narrowed towards the base. Flowers 20-35 mm, 8- to 12-merous. Calyx-lobes linear-lanceo late, 3-veined. {\i Sicilia and Sardegna; perhaps also in Corse, Islas Baleares and S.E. Spain.}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Plants with small, pale yellow flowers growing with normal {\i B. perfoliata} near Granada (S. Spain) were described as {\b Chlora citrina }Boiss. & Reuter,{\i  Pugillus} 77 (1852). This is probably a variant of subsp.{\i  serotina} and does not appear to have been collected again.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc {\b 4.                  Centaurium}                 Hill  
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc By A. Melderis.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Flowers in dichasial, corymbiform, capitate or spiciform cymes. Calyx deeply divided into (4)5, keeled, linear, acute lobes. Corolla pinkish-purple, rarely white or yellow, infundibuliform. Stamens usually inserted at apex of corolla-tube; anthers linear or oblong-linear, twisting spirally after dehiscence. Ovary with
\par

\par
56}
\par