{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 a short, filiform, persistent style with 2 caducous stigmas. Nectaries at the base of the ovary absent.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   A taxonomically difficult genus. Numerous taxa have been described, but there is no uniformity in their treatment by various authors. Most of the infraspecific taxa hybridize freely in natural habitats, the hybrids being more or less inter-fertile and producing swarms which obscure the limits between the taxa involved.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Parallel variations in type of inflorescence, size of flowers, the scabridity of vegetative organs and calyx, length of the calyx in relation to the corolla-tube and insertion of stamens in the corolla-tube are frequent in the groups of related species. Insertion of stamens lower down inside the corolla-tube is usually associated with dwarf plants, smaller flowers, a more or less capitate inflorescence and more crowded leaves.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   In this account the relative lengths of the calyx and corolla-tube refer to the flowers at anthesis.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Literature: K. Ronniger,{\i  Mitt. Naturw. Ver. Steierm.}{\b  52:} 312-321 (1916). A. Melderis, {\i Acta Horti Bot. Univ. Latv. }{\b 6:} 123-156 (1932). L. Zeltner,{\i  Bull. Soc. Neuchatel. Sci. Nat.}{\b  92: }1-164 (1970).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Perennial with decumbent non-flowering shoots; leaves 
\par
  of non-flowering shoots petiolate ................................................. {\b 1. scilloides}
\par
1 Annual or biennial without non-flowering shoots; leaves sessile
\par
2 Corolla yellow, rarely slightly tinged with purple .................. {\b 14. maritimum}
\par
2 Corolla not yellow
\par
3 Flowers in a spiciform cyme ...................................................... {\b 13. spicatum}
\par
3 Flowers in a corymbiform, capitate or dichasial cyme,
\par
  rarely solitary
\par
4 Cauline leaves usually lanceolate or wider, rarely 
\par
  linear-spathulate, never parallel-sided, usually 3-
\par
  veined; rosette leaves more than 5 mm wide, 3- to 7-veined
\par
5 Biennial with a distinct basal leaf-rosette; flowers 
\par
  usually in a corymbiform, rarely a capitate cyme; calyx
\par
  up to ¾ as long as the corolla-tube; corolla-lobes
\par
  usually more than 5 mm
\par
6 Calyx usually ½-¾ as long as the corolla-tube;
\par
  rosette-leaves oblong-obovate or obovate, distinctly 
\par
  attenuate towards the base ............................................................ {\b 2. erythraea}
\par
6 Calyx not more than 1/3 as long as the corolla-tube;
\par
  rosette-leaves oblong-spathulate, wide at base ..................... {\b 3. suffruticosum}
\par
5 Annual usually without, rarely with a weak basal leaf-
\par
  rosette; flowers in a dichasial cyme; calyx equalling 
\par
  or nearly equalling the corolla-tube; corolla-lobes 
\par
  usually 2-4 mm
\par
7 Stem usually dichotomously branched in the lower part, with
\par
  patent branches; cauline internodes usually 2-4; flowers
\par
  long-pedicellate, usually in a lax dichasial cyme  .................. {\b 11. pulchellum}
\par
7 Stem branched in the upper part, with strict branches;
\par
  cauline internodes usually 5-9; flowers shortly pedi-
\par
  cellate, usually in a dense dichasial cyme .............................. {\b 12. tenuiflorum}
\par
4 Cauline leaves narrow, often parallel-sided, 1-veined;
\par
  rosette-leaves not more than 5 mm wide, 1- to 3-veined
\par
8 Cauline leaves 5-7 times as long as wide, narrowly 
\par
  elliptical, narrowly obovate or narrowly oblong;
\par
  flowers usually sessile or subsessile
\par
9 Plant 3-10 cm, densely caespitose, with numerous stems
\par
  thickened towards the apex; rosette-leaves caducous;
\par
  cauline-leaves crowded; flowers solitary or in a few-
\par
  flowered cyme ............................................................................... {\b 4. chloodes}
\par
9 Plant 5-25 cm, not caespitose, with several stems,
\par
  branched in the upper part, not thickened towards the
\par
  apex; rosette-leaves persistent; cauline leaves more or
\par
  less distant; flowers solitary or in a more or less 
\par
  dense corymbiform cyme ................................................................ {\b 5. littorale}
\par
8 Cauline leaves 10-20 times as long as wide, linear-oblong,
\par
  linear-spathulate or linear; flowers usually pedicellate
\par
10 Calyx not more than 1/3 as long as the corolla-tube ............ {\b 10. microcalyx}
\par
10 Calyx at least ½ as long as the corolla-tube
\par
11 Plant tomentose-scabrid, greyish-green
\par
12 Rosette-leaves not attenuate towards the base; flowers
\par
   pedicellate; corolla-lobes usually 2-4 mm; capsule as
\par
   long as the calyx .......................................................................... {\b 6. favargeri}
\par
12 Rosette-leaves slightly attenuate towards the base;
\par
   flowers subsessile; corolla-lobes usually 5-8 mm;
\par
   capsule exceeding the calyx ...................................................... {\b 7. triphyllum}
\par
11 Plant smooth and glabrous, glaucous
\par
13 Annual without a basal leaf-rosette; calyx ½-¾ as
\par
   long as the corolla-tube; corolla-lobes 5-6 mm ............................... {\b 8. rigualii}
\par
13 Biennial with a dense leaf-rosette; calyx ¾ as long as or
\par
   nearly equalling the corolla-tube; corolla-lobes 10-12 mm ... {\b 9. linariifolium}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    Sect. CENTAURIUM. Flowers pink, rarely white. Cyme corymbiform, capitate or dichasial. stigmas broadly ovate, wider than long.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. C. scilloides} (L. fil.) Samp.,{\i  Lista Esp. Herb. Port. }106 (1913) ({\i Erythraea diffusa} J. Woods). Perennial, with numerous decumbent, non-flowering shoots and ascending flowering stems up to 30 cm. Leaves of non-flowering shoots and the lower ones of flowering stems up to 1 cm, suborbicular to rhombic, with a short petiole; upper leaves lanceolate, sessile. Flowers 15-20 mm, pedicellate, solitary or in few-flowered cymes. Calyx c. ¾ as long as the corolla-tube; corolla-lobes 8-9 mm. 2n = 20.{\i  Atlantic coasts of Europe from N. Portugal to Britain; Açores.} Az Br Ga Hs Lu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. C. erythraea} Rafn,{\i  Danm. Holst. Fl.}{\b  2:} 75 (1800). Biennial (3-)10-50 cm. Stem usually solitary, sometimes several, usually branched in the upper part. Rosette-leaves 1-5 × 0·8-2 cm, obovate to elliptical, usually obtuse, 3- to 7-veined; cauline leaves usually much smaller and narrower, often acute, 3-veined. Flowers of variable size, pink to pinkish-purple, rarely white, in a dense or lax corymbiform cyme. Calyx ½-¾ as long as, rarely nearly equalling the corolla-tube.{\i  Dry grassland, scrub and mountain slopes. Europe, northwards to c.} 61°{\i  N. in N.W. Russia.} All except Fa Fe Is No Sb.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Variable in branching of the stem, shape and size of the leaves, presence or absence of scabridity on the stem, leaves, bracts and on the calyx, density of the inflorescence, size of the flowers, length of the calyx in relation to the corolla-tube, length of the anthers, etc. Populations showing different combinations of these characters and occupying more or less restricted areas have been treated by different authors as species, subspecies or varieties. In many cases, however, these taxa are linked by transitional forms. The following subspecies appear to be reasonably distinct.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Stem branched usually from the base or middle; rosette-leaves
\par
  oblanceolate or narrowly elliptical, ± acute; flowers usually
\par
  pedicellate, in a lax corymbiform cyme; corolla-lobes usually
\par
  acute; calyx usually 2/3-3/4 as long as the corolla-tube;
\par
  capsule distinctly exceeding the calyx
\par
2 Upper part of stem, bracts and calyces scabrid; calyx sometimes 
\par
   ½ as long as the corolla-tube; corolla-lobes usually
\par
   5-7 mm, pink, more than ½ as long as the tube ............. ({\b e}) subsp. {\b rhodense}
\par
2 Stem, bracts and calyces smooth; calyx 2/3-3/4 as long
\par
  as the corolla-tube; corolla-lobes usually 8-10 mm,
\par
  usually equalling or longer than the tube, deep pink ............ ({\b f}) subsp.{\b  majus}
\par

\par
57}
\par