{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 1 Stem branched usually in the upper part; rosette-leaves obovate
\par
  or elliptical, usually obtuse; flowers sessile or subsessile,
\par
  fasciculate, in a ± dense corymbiform cyme; corolla-lobes
\par
  obtuse; calyx usually c. ½ as lobes as the corolla-tube;
\par
  capsule slightly exceeding the calyx 
\par
3 Corolla-lobes usually 6-8 mm, usually equalling the tube
\par
  ..................................................................................... ({\b d}) subsp.{\b  grandiflorum}
\par
3 Corolla-lobes usually less than 6 mm; usually c. ½ as
\par
  long as the tube
\par
4 Corolla-lobes usually 2·5-5 mm, middle cauline leaves ±
\par
  linear-oblong; inflorescence fairly lax ............................ ({\b c}) subsp.{\b  rumelicum}
\par
4 Corolla-lobes usually 5-6 mm; middle cauline leaves 
\par
  lanceolate, narrowly lanceolate or narrowly elliptical;
\par
  inflorescence dense
\par
5 Stem, margin of leaves, bracts and calyx smooth ........... ({\b a}) subsp. {\b erythraea}
\par
5 Stem, margin of leaves, bracts and calyx scabrid ............ ({\b b}) subsp.{\b  turcicum}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp.{\b  erythraea }({\i C. umbellatum} auct.,{\i  Erythraea centaurium} auct., non (L.) Pers., {\i E. capitata }Willd.): Middle cauline leaves usually narrowly lanceolate or narrowly elliptical; calyx usually c. ½ as long as the corolla-tube; stamens inserted at the apex or at the base (var.{\i  capitatum} (Willd.) Melderis) of the corolla-tube. 2n = 40.{\i  Almost throughout the range of the species}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Hybrids with {\b 5} (2n = 40, 40 48), with {\b 11} and with {\b 12} (2n = 40) occur.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Variants with the calyx 2/3 as long to almost as long as the corolla-tube, occur in C. and S.E. Europe.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp.{\b  turcicum} (Velen.) Melderis,{\i  Bot. Jour. Linn. Soc.}{\b  65:} 232 (1972) ({\i C. turcicum }(Velen.) Ronniger): Like{\b  2}({\b a}) but stem, margins of leaves, bracts and calyx scabrid; leaves narrower. Calyx more than ½ as long as the corolla-tube.{\i  C. & S.E. Europe}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b c}) Subsp.{\b  rumelicum} (Velen.) Melderis, {\i loc. cit.} (1972) ({\i Erythraea centaurium} subsp.{\i  rumelica} Velen.): stem slender, branched in the upper part. Middle cauline leaves linear-oblong, acute. Flowers deep pinkish-purple, in a lax, many-flowered cyme. Corolla-lobes usually 2·5-5 mm. Calyx c. ½ as long as the corolla-tube. 2n = 20.  {\i C. & E. parts of Mediterranean region.}
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b d}) Subsp. {\b grandiflorum} (Biv.) Melderis,{\i  op. cit.} 234 (1972) ({\i Erythraea grandiflora} Biv.): stem sometimes branched from the base. Cauline leaves elliptical, obtuse, not conspicuously decreasing upwards. Calyx c. ½ as long as the corolla-tube. Corolla-lobes usually 6-8 mm, usually equalling the tube.{\i  S.W. Europe}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28 The distribution and status of this subspecies is in need of further investigation.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b e}) Subsp.{\b  rhodense} (Boiss. & Reuter) Melderis,{\i  loc. cit.} (1972) ({\i Erythraea rhodensis} Boiss. & Reuter,{\i  Centaurium limoniiforme }W. Greuter): stem in the upper part and bracts scabrid. Cauline leaves narrowly elliptical, linear-oblong or linear-spathulate, acute, conspicuously decreasing upwards. Flowers pink, pedicellate (the central often sessile or subsessile), in a lax cyme. Calyx scabrid, (1/2-)2/3-3/4 as long as the corolla-tube. Corolla-lobes usually 5-7 mm, narrowly elliptical, acute. 2n = 40.{\i  C. & E. parts of the Mediterranean region; ?S.W. Germany}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b f}) Subsp.{\b  majus} (Hoffmanns. & Link) Melderis,{\i  op. cit.} 235 (1972) ({\i Erythraea major} Hoffmanns. & Link): stem as in {\b 2}({\b e}).Cauline leaves more or less lanceolate, acute, conspicuously decreasing upwards. Calyx 2/3-3/4 as long as the corolla-tube. Flowers deep pink, pedicellate, in a very lax inflorescence. Corolla-lobes usually 8-10 mm, usually equalling or longer than the tube, elliptical, more or less acute. 2n = 20.{\i  • Mountain regions of S.W. Europe}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   {\b C. latifolium} (Sm.) Druce,{\i  Ann. Scott. Nat. Hist.}{\b  1905:} 48 (1905) formerly occurred on sand-dunes in N.W. England. It is like{\b  2}({\b a}) but with broadly ovate, 5- to 7-veined leaves, the cauline being crowded. The flowers are 7-9 mm, sessile, in a dense capitate cyme and the corolla-lobes 3-4 mm. It is probably a mutant of {\b 2}({\b a}).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   {\b  C. enclusense}  O. Bolós, Molinier & P. Monts.,{\i  Acta Geobot. Barcinon.}{\b  5:} 60 (1970) ({\i Erythraea divaricata} Porta, non Schaffner ex Schlecht.), from Islas Baleares (Menorca), with a stem 30 cm, divaricately branched from the base, a large corolla, and calyx as long as the corolla-tube, seems to be related to{\b  2}({\b e}) but is in need of further study.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 3. C. suffruticosum} (Griseb.) Ronniger,{\i  Mitt. Naturw. Ver. Steierm.}{\b  52:} 321 (1916). Biennial 20-60 cm. Stem stout, branched above. Rosette-leaves 5-8 cm, spathulate-oblong, obtuse, 5-veined; cauline leaves gradually decreasing in size upwards, elliptic-oblong, subacute. Flowers c. 15 mm, in a dense corymbose cyme. Calyx 1/4-1/3 as long as the corolla-tube. Corolla-lobes 5-6 mm, c. 1/2 as long as the corolla-tube. 2n = 20.{\i  Mountain regions of S.W. Europe.} ? Ga Hs.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 4. C. chloodes} (Brot.) Samp.,{\i  Lista Esp. Herb. Port.} 106 (1913) ({\i Erythraea chloodes} (Brot.) Gren. & Godron). Annual or biennial 3-10 cm. Stems numerous, forming dense tufts. Rosette-leaves caducous; cauline leaves up to 1 cm, fleshy, crowded, 1-veined. Flowers usually 10 mm, 3-10, in a more or less lax corymbiform cyme. Calyx equalling the corolla-tube. Corolla-lobes 3-5 mm, obtuse. 2n = 40. {\i Sea-cliffs and maritime sands. • W. Europe from} 40° {\i to} 46°{\i  N.} Ga Hs Lu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   {\b 5. C. littorale} (D. Turner) Gilmour,{\i  Kew Bull.}{\b  1937:} 498 (1937) ({\i C. vulgare} Rafn). Biennial, usually 5-25 cm, with a basal leaf-rosette. Stem solitary or frequently several, branched above. Rosette-leaves 1-2 × 0·3-0·5 cm; cauline leaves shorter and narrower, all obtuse. Flowers sessile, in a more or less dense corymbiform cyme.{\i  From Ireland and C. Fennoscandia southwards to N.W. France, Austria and S.E. Russia.} Au Be Br Cz Da Fe Ga Ge Hb Ho Hu ?It No Po Rm Rs (B, C, W, E) Su.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Hybridizes with {\b 11} ({\i C.} ×{\i  aschersonianum} (Seemen) Hegi).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  This species shows a considerable amount of morphological variation, especially in size and shape of the leaves, size of the flowers and in presence or absence of scabridity on vegetative organs and calyx. Several taxa have been described from S. & C. Europe and given specific, subspecific or varietal rank, but intermediates are frequently met with. The following subspecies can be recognized.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp.{\b  littorale} ({\i Erythraea littoralis} (D. Turner) Fries): Stem, margins of leaves, bracts and calyx usually smooth; corolla-lobes 6-7 mm. Stamens inserted at apex or at the middle of corolla-tube (var.{\i  glomeratum} (Wittrock) Melderis). 2n = 38, 40, 42, c. 56.{\i  Maritime grassland and sandy places near the sea. N. Europe and W. part of U.S.S.R}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp.{\b  uliginosum} (Waldst. & Kit.) Melderis,{\i  Bot. Jour. Linn. Soc.}{\b  65:} 241 (1972) ({\i C. uliginosum} (Waldst. & Kit.) G. Beck ex Ronniger,{\i  Erythraea tenuifolia} Griseb. pro parte): Stem, margins of leaves, bracts and calyx conspicuously scabrid. Corolla-lobes usually 3-6 mm, shorter than the corolla-tube. 2n = 40. {\i Saline habitats, mainly inland. E.C. & E. Europe, northwards to N. Germany}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 6. C. favargeri} Zeltner,{\i  Bull. Soc. Neuchatel. Sci. Nat.}{\b  93:} 73 (1970) ({\i Erythraea tenuifolia} Griseb. pro parte). Biennial 10-20 cm, tomentose-scabrid, with a dense rosette of linear-oblong leaves, not attenuate at the base. Stem solitary to
\par

\par
58}
\par