{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 several, branched from the middle or below. Cauline leaves linear. Flowers small, pedicellate, in a contracted pyramidal or subfastigiate cyme. Calyx equalling the corolla-tube. Corolla-lobes usually 2-4 mm, ovate-lanceolate or oblong, obtuse. Capsule as long as the calyx. 2n = 20. •{\i  S.W. Europe}. Ga Hs Lu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 7. C. triphyllum} (W. L. E. Schmidt) Melderis,{\i  Bot. Jour. Linn. Soc.}{\b  65:} 243 (1972) ({\i Erythraea gypsicola} Boiss. & Reuter). Biennial 15-30 cm, tomentose-scabrid, with a dense rosette of linear-oblong leaves slightly attenuate at the base. Stem often branched from the lower part. Cauline leaves linear. Flowers large, subsessile in a usually more or less dense cyme. Calyx usually equalling the corolla-tube. Corolla-lobes 5-8 mm, elliptical, acute. 2n = 20.{\i  Gypsaceous soils. • C. Spain}. Hs.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 8. C. rigualii} Esteve,{\i  Anal. Inst. Bot. Cavanilles}{\b  23:} 182 (1965). Annual 40-50 cm, without a basal leaf-rosette. Stem branched from near the base. Cauline leaves linear, indistinctly 1- to 3-veined, the upper acute. Flowers long-pedicellate, in a very lax dichasial cyme. Calyx 1/2-3/5 as long as the corolla-tube. Corolla-lobes 5-6 mm, lanceolate, acute.{\i  Dry grassland. • S. Spain}. Hs.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 9. C. linariifolium} (Lam.) G. Beck,{\i  Fl. Nieder-Österr.}{\b  2:} 935 (1893) ({\i Erythraea barrelieri} Dufour). Biennial 20-40 cm, with a basal leaf-rosette. Stem solitary to several, branched from or above the middle.Rosette-leaves usually 1-5 × 0·3 cm, linear-spathulate, indistinctly 3-veined, obtuse; cauline leaves linear or linear-lanceolate, decreasing upwards. Flowers 20-30 mm, numerous, in a lax corymbiform cyme. Calyx ¾ as long as to nearly as long as the corolla-tube. Corolla-lobes 10-12 mm, oblong-elliptical. 2n = 20.{\i  Dry pastures and dry, open habitats; calcicole. S.E. Spain, ?Mallorca.} ?Bl Hs.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 10. C. microcalyx} (Boiss. & Reuter) Ronniger, {\i Mitt. Naturw. Ver. Steierm.}{\b  52:} 321 (1916). Biennial 10-30 cm, with a basal leaf-rosette. Stems usually several, usually branched in the upper part. Rosette-leaves c. 2 × 0·2-0·3 cm, linear, 3-veined; cauline leaves narrower and shorter, 1- to 3-veined. Flowers 10-15 mm, with short pedicels, in a lax, corymbiform cyme, with short bracts at the base. Calyx 1/4-1/3 as long as the corolla-tube. Corolla-lobes 4-6 mm, obtuse.{\i  Wet grassland. • S. Portugal, S.W. Spain}. Hs Lu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 11. C. pulchellum} (Swartz) Druce,{\i  Fl. Berks.} 342 (1898) ({\i Erythraea pulchella} (Swartz) Fries; incl.{\i  E. morierei} Corb., {\i C. meyeri} (Bunge) Druce). Annual 2-20 cm, without a basal leaf rosette. Stem with 2-4 internodes, usually dichotomously branched from below the middle; branches erecto-patent. Leaves 0·2-1·5 × 0·1-1 cm, ovate to ovate-lanceolate, acute, increasing in length upwards. Flowers 10-12 mm, pinkish-purple, rarely white, in a lax dichasial cyme or solitary (sometimes 4-merous in small, delicate, unbranched plants). Calyx nearly equalling the corolla-tube. Corolla-lobes 2-4 mm. Stamens inserted at the apex or in the upper 1/3 (var.{\i  morierei} (Corb.) Melderis) of the corolla-tube. 2n = 36.{\i  Open habitats and damp grassy places, especially near the sea. Most of Europe, northwards to c.} 61°{\i  N. in Finland.} All except Fa Is Rs (N) Sb.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 12. C. tenuiflorum} (Hoffmanns. & Link) Fritsch, {\i Mitt. Naturw. Ver. Wien}{\b  5:} 97 (1907) ({\i Erythraea latifolia} auct., non Sm.). Annual 15-25(-40) cm, without or with a weak basal leaf-rosette. Stem with 5-9 internodes, branched above; branches strict. Cauline leaves 1-2·5 × 0·8-1 cm, ovate to elliptical, obtuse to subacute, increasing in length upwards. Flowers 12-14 mm, in a more or less dense dichasial cyme; pedicels at least 2 mm. Calyx nearly equalling the corolla-tube. Corolla-lobes usually 3-4 mm.{\i  Damp grassy places, especially near the sea. S. & W. Europe northwards to S. England.} Bl Br Co Cr Ga Gr Hs It Ju Lu Rs (K) Sa Si Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp.{\b  tenuiflorum} : Plant with a weak basal leaf-rosette. Inflorescence of 2-90 flowers. Corolla-lobes deep pink, entire at the apex. Corolla-tube not constricted below the limb. 2n = 40.{\i  Almost throughout the range of the species}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp.{\b  acutiflorum} (Schott) Zeltner,{\i  Bull. Soc. Neuchâtel. Sci. Nat.}{\b  93:} 94 (1970) ({\i Erythraea acutiflora} Schott): Plant without a basal leaf-rosette. Inflorescence of 20-180 flowers. Corolla-lobes pale pink, notched at the apex. Corolla-tube constricted below the limb. 2n = 20.{\i  Mediterranean region}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Sect. SPICARIA (Griseb.) Ronniger. Flowers pinkish-purple, rarely white, sessile or subsessile in a spike-like cyme. Stigmas subcapitate, wider than long.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 13. C. spicatum} (L.) Fritsch, {\i Mitt. Naturw. Ver. Wien }{\b 5:} 97 (1907) ({\i Erythraea spicata} (L.) Pers.). Annual or biennial 10-55 cm, with a more or less caducous basal leaf-rosette. Stem usually branched from the base or middle. Rosette-leaves broadly ovate. Cauline leaves elliptic-oblong to lanceolate, 3- to indistinctly 5-veined. Flowers 12-14 mm. Calyx nearly equalling the corolla-tube. Corolla-lobes c. 4·5 mm. Stamens inserted at or below the apex of the corolla-tube. 2n = 22.{\i  Damp grassy or sandy places near the sea. S. Europe}. Al Bl Bu Co Cr Ga Gr Hs It Ju Lu Rm Rs (W, K, E) Sa Si Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Variants with scabridulous leaf-margins, bracts and calyx, occurring in Bulgaria, Kriti and Turkey, have been separated from {\b 13} as{\b  C. subspicatum} (Velen.) Ronniger,{\i  Mitt. Naturw. Ver. Steierm. }{\b 52:} 321 (1916). since many transitions occur between them, the status of this taxon is uncertain.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Sect. XANTHAEA (Reichenb. fil.) Ronniger. Flowers yellow, in a few-flowered, corymbiform cyme. stigmas oblong, longer than wide.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 14. C. maritimum} (L.) Fritsch, {\i Mitt. Naturw. Ver. Wien}{\b  5:} 97 (1907) ({\i Erythraea maritima} (L.) Pers.). Annual or biennial 10-20 cm, with a caducous basal leaf-rosette. Stem solitary, simple or branched above. Leaves 0·6-2 × 0·3-0·6 cm, elliptic-oblong, increasing in length upwards. Flowers 20-25 mm yellow, rarely tinged with purple, pedicellate. Calyx ¾ as long to nearly as long as the corolla-tube. Corolla-lobes elliptical, subacute. Stamens inserted at the apex or in the upper 1/3 (var.{\i  shuttleworthianum} (Rouy) Melderis) of the corolla-tube. 2n = 20.{\i  Sandy or grassy places, usually near the sea. S.& W. Europe, northwards to N. W. France}. Al Az Bl Bu Co Cr Ga Gr Hs It Ju Lu Sa Si Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc {\b 5.                  Gentiana }                 L.        
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc By †T.G. Tutin.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Glabrous herbs. Calyx (4-)5(-9)-toothed, the teeth partly joined by a membrane which forms the upper part of the tube. Corolla-tube campanulate, obconical or cylindrical; limb sometimes rotate, usually plicate between the lobes; throat naked; lobes usually 5, not fringed, with a usually small appendage in the sinus between each pair. Anthers basifixed. Ovary narrowed into the style, or style absent; stigmas 2, persistent. Nectaries at the base of the ovary.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Corolla-lobes much longer than the tube ............................................ {\b 1. lutea}
\par
1 Corolla-lobes not more than ½ as long as the tube
\par
2 Flowers crowded in a terminal head and sometimes also
\par
  in axillary clusters; leaves usually more than 10 cm
\par

\par
59}
\par