{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 5 Leaves in whorls of 3; sepals and ovary glabrous ....................... {\b 6. cinerea}
\par 
5 Leaves in whorls of 4; sepals and ovary pubescent ..................... {\b 7. australis}
\par 
2 Lower surface of leaf visible, at least towards the base
\par 
6 Sepals villous beneath .................................................................... {\b 4. tetralix}
\par 
6 Sepals glabrous to puberulent beneath (though sometimes
\par 
  with stout marginal cilia)
\par 
7 Stem 15-60 cm; leaves white beneath; ovary glabrous ............ {\b 3. mackaiana}
\par 
7 Stem 100-250 cm; leaves green beneath; ovary pubescent ....... {\b 5. terminalis}
\par 
1 Anthers without basal appendages 
\par 
8 Anthers included
\par 
9 Sepals c. 6 mm; flowers usually 5-merous ....................................... {\b 1. sicula}
\par 
9 Sepals not more than 2·5 mm; flowers 4-merous
\par 
10 Leaves ovate to oblong-lanceolate ............................................... {\b 2. ciliaris}
\par 
10 Leaves linear 
\par
11 Stems at least 100 cm; corolla not more than  
\par 
   mm, green, often tinged with red ............................................... {\b 16. scoparia}
\par 
11 stems not more than 80 cm; corolla more than 3 mm,
\par 
   bright pinkish-purple ................................................................. {\b 8. umbellata}
\par 
8 Anthers exserted, at least for part of their length
\par 
12 Pedicel about as long as sepals
\par 
13 Stems procumbent, ± glabrous; ridges decurrent from
\par 
   leaf-bases continuing throughout the internode without
\par 
   much change in width or height ................................................ {\b 14. herbacea}
\par 
13 Stems erect, puberulent when young; ridges decurrent
\par 
   from leaf-bases much lower and narrower in lower part
\par 
   of internode than in upper ............................................................ {\b 15. erigena}
\par 
12 Pedicel at least twice as long as sepals
\par 
14 Flowers in terminal umbels; pedicels pubescent ..................... {\b 8. umbellata}
\par 
14 Flowers in axillary clusters or lateral umbels, usually
\par 
   aggregated into panicles; pedicels glabrous .............. ({\b 11-13}). {\b vagans} group
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. E. sicula} Guss., {\i Cat. Pl. Boccad. }74 (1821) ({\i Pentapera sicula} (Guss.) Klotzsch). Compact, bushy dwarf shrub 20-50 cm; branches erect or ascending; young twigs densely pubescent. Leaves 6-9 mm, in whorls of 4(-5), linear, patent, densely pubescent when young; margins revolute, contiguous, concealing the lower surface. Flowers (4-)5-merous, in terminal umbels of 4-10; pedicels with 3 bracteoles near the middle. Sepals 6 mm, ovate-lanceolate, pubescent, pink; corolla 7-8 mm, white or very pale pink, urceolate, pubescent; anthers included, without appendages. Ovary pubescent; stigma capitate.{\i  Calcareous cliffs by the sea. W. Sicilia, Malta.} Si. ({\i Libya and E. Mediterranean region}.)
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. E. ciliaris} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 354 (1753). Dwarf shrub 30-80 cm; stems erect, usually from a decumbent base, with patent branches; young twigs pubescent. Leaves 2-4 mm, in whorls of 3(-4), ovate to oblong-lanceolate, patent, pubescent above at least when young, and with stout, usually gland-tipped cilia on the apparent margin; margins revolute, but not concealing more than 1/3 of the whitish lower surface. Flowers in terminal racemes; pedicels with 2-3 bracteoles above or near the middle. Sepals c. 2 mm, more or less pubescent, ciliate like the leaves; corolla 8-12 mm, bright reddish-pink, urceolate, somewhat curved or gibbous, with sub erect lobes; anthers included, without appendages. Ovary glabrous; stigma obconical. 2n = 24.{\i  Bogs, heaths, scrub and open woods; calcifuge. W. Europe, northwards to W. Ireland and eastwards to} c. 3° {\i E. in C. France.} Br Ga Hb Hs Lu.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 3. E. mackaiana} Bab. in Mackay,{\i  Fl. Hibern.} 181 (1836) ({\i E. mackaii} Hooker). Compact, bushy dwarf shrub 15-60 cm; stems decumbent to erect, with suberect branches; young twigs glandular-puberulent and often also hirsute. Leaves 2-4·5 mm, in whorls of 4, patent in all parts of the plant, oblong, glabrous except for long, stout, gland-tipped cilia on true and apparent margins; margins slightly revolute, leaving most of the white lower surface exposed. Internodes on flowering stems all about equal in length. Flowers in terminal umbels; pedicels with 1-2 bracteoles in apical half. Sepals 2-3 mm, glabrous except for long cilia; corolla 5-7 mm, bright purplish-pink, urceolate, with patent or revolute lobes; anthers included, with long, narrow basal appendages. Ovary glabrous; stigma capitate. 2n = 24.{\i  Calcifuge. • N.W. Spain; three stations in W. Ireland}. Hb Hs.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  Sometimes confused with{\i  E.} × {\i watsonii} Bentham ({\b 2} ×{\b  4}), which differs in having leaves, sepals and ovary pubescent, flowers in a condensed raceme, and anther-appendages much shorter.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 4. E. tetralix} L.,{\i  Sp. Pl.} 353 (1753). Straggling dwarf shrub 20-70 cm, with weak, ascending stems and rather few suberect branches; young twigs pubescent to villous. Leaves 3-6 mm, in whorls of 4, appressed below the inflorescence, patent elsewhere, linear-oblong to lanceolate, pubescent at least when young, usually with long, stout, often glandular cilia on true and apparent margins; margins variably revolute, but always leaving part of lower surface visible. Internodes immediately below inflorescence longer than those elsewhere on flowering stems. Flowers in terminal umbels; pedicels with 2-3 bracteoles near the top. Sepals 2-3 mm, villous, usually ciliate like the leaves; corolla 5-9 mm, pale pink, urceolate, with patent or revolute lobes; anthers included, with long, narrow basal appendages. Ovary pubescent; stigma capitate. 2n = 24.{\i  Bogs, wet heaths and pinewoods; calcifuge. • W. & N. Europe, eastwards to Latvia and C. Finland.} Be Br Da Fe Ga Ge Hb Ho Hs Lu No Po Rs (B) Su [Cz He].
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  Variable, especially in indumentum and leaf-shape. The hybrids{\b  E.} ×{\b  watsonii} Bentham in DC.,{\i  Prodr.}{\b  7}: 665 (1839) ({\b 2} × {\b 4}), and {\b E.} ×{\b  praegeri} Ostenf., {\i New Phytol.}{\b  11}: 120 (1912) ({\b 3} ×{\b  4}), are rather frequent where the parent species occur together. Both are intermediate between the parents in most characters and are sterile.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 5. E. terminalis} Salisb.,{\i  Prodr.} 296 (1796) ({\i E. stricta} Donn ex Willd.). Bushy shrub 1-2·5 m, with suberect branches; young twigs puberulent. Leaves 3-5·5 mm, in whorls of 4(-6), broadly linear, patent, puberulent at least when young; margins revolute, sometimes contiguous near apex, but leaving 1/3 of lower surface exposed near base. Flowers in terminal umbels of 3-8; pedicels with 3 narrow bracteoles, usually above the middle. Sepals 2-3 mm, ovate, puberulent; corolla 5-7 mm, bright pink, urceolate, with recurved lobes; anthers included, with triangular basal appendages. Ovary pubescent; stigma capitate.{\i  River-banks, wooded ravines and other damp, shady places. W. Mediterranean region, from Corse to S. W. Spain and S. Italy.} Co Hs It Sa [Hb].
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 6. E. cinerea} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 352 (1753). Dwarf shrub 15-75 cm, of rather lax habit; branches ascending; young twigs pubescent. Leaves 4-5(-7) mm, in whorls of 3, linear, erecto-patent, glabrous; margins strongly revolute, contiguous, completely concealing the lower surface; apparent margin denticulate. Flowers in terminal racemes or umbels; flowering stems with numerous short, leafy lateral shoots below the inflorescence; pedicels pubescent, with 3 small bracteoles appressed to sepals. Sepals 2-3 mm, lanceolate, glabrous, with scarious margin; corolla 4-7 mm, bright reddish-purple, urceolate, with erect to patent lobes; anthers included, with short, broad, dentate basal appendages. Ovary glabrous; stigma capitate. 2n = 24.{\i  Heaths, rocky ground, woods and dry moorland; calcifuge. W. Europe, northwards to} 63°{\i  N. in Norway and eastwards to N. Italy.} Be Br Fa 
\par 
Ga Ge Hb Ho Hs It Lu No.
\par 

\par 
6}
\par