{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 3 Corolla blue, unspotted
\par
4 Leaves linear-lanceolate; ovary stipitate ................................ {\b 11. decumbens}
\par
4 Leaves oblong-ovate; ovary sessile ............................................. {\b 10. cruciata}
\par
3 Corolla yellow or purple, usually with dark spots
\par
5 Calyx split down one side, otherwise entire, or with
\par
  short irregular teeth
\par
6 Corolla reddish-purple ................................................................. {\b 4. purpurea}
\par
6 Corolla yellow ................................................................................. {\b 5. burseri}
\par
5 Calyx not split down one side, with long teeth
\par
7 Calyx-teeth erect; corolla greenish-yellow with dark
\par
  purple spots .................................................................................... {\b 2. punctata}
\par
7 Calyx-teeth recurved; corolla bluish-purple with 
\par
  reddish black spots ...................................................................... {\b 3. pannonica}
\par
2 Flowers solitary or few, not crowded in a terminal head;
\par
  leaves less than 10 cm
\par
8 Appendage in the sinus between the corolla-lobes more than
\par
  ½ as long as the lobes, the corolla thus appearing 10-lobed
\par
9 Annual, without non-flowering shoots ....................................... {\b 12. prostrata}
\par
9 Perennial, with non-flowering shoots
\par
10 Leaves linear-lanceolate; corolla 20-30 mm .......................... {\b 13. pyrenaica}
\par
10 Leaves ovate to suborbicular; corolla 8-10 mm ............................ {\b 14. boryi}
\par
 8 Appendage in the sinus between the corolla-lobes much
\par
   shorter than the lobes
\par
11 Annual, without non-flowering shoots
\par
12 Calyx-tube 2-3 mm wide in flower, angled but not winged ....... {\b 28. nivalis}
\par
12 Calyx-tube (3-)4-7 mm wide in flower, with wings 2-3 mm
\par
   wide .......................................................................................... {\b 29. utriculosa}
\par
11 Perennial, with non-flowering shoots
\par
13 Lower leaves not forming a well-marked rosette
\par
14 Most leaves more than 1 cm; flowering stems usually
\par
   more than 10 cm
\par
15 Leaves distinctly 3- to 5-veined; flowers secund ................... {\b 6. asclepiadea}
\par
15 Leaves 1-veined; flowers erect ......................................... {\b 7. pneumonanthe}
\par
14 Most leaves less than 1 cm; flowering stems usually
\par
   less than 10 cm
\par
16 Leaves about 4 times as long as wide, linear to linear-
\par
   lanceolate; calyx-teeth c. 1/3 as long as tube ............................... {\b 26. rostanii}
\par
16 Leaves about twice as long as wide, ovate-lanceolate to 
\par
   obovate or spathulate; calyx-teeth (1/3-)1/2-2/3 as long as tube
\par
17 Leaves obovate to spathulate, not cartilaginous at apex; 
\par
   margin smooth; calyx-teeth c. 2/3 as long as tube ...................... {\b 25. bavarica}
\par
17 Leaves ovate-lanceolate, with a cartilaginous apex;
\par
   margin strongly papillose; calyx-teeth 1/3-1/2 as long
\par
   as tube ................................................................................... {\b 27. terglouensis}
\par
13 Lower leaves in a rosette; cauline leaves few
\par
18 Corolla yellowish-white with blue stripes and with
\par
   bluish spots in the throat .................................................................. {\b 8. frigida}
\par
18 Corolla blue, sometimes with white lines and greenish
\par
   spots in the throat
\par
19 Corolla (30-)50-70 mm; tube obconical; lobes erecto-patent
\par
20 Stigma-lobes oblong or linear, not fimbriate ............................ {\b 9. froelichii}
\par
20 Stigma-lobes rounded, fimbriate ............................ ({\b 15-21}).{\b  acaulis} group
\par
19 Corolla 15-25(-30) mm; tube almost cylindrical; lobes patent
\par
21 Longest rosette-leaves about twice as long as cauline leaves ....... {\b 22. verna}
\par
21 Longest rosette-leaves not or little longer than 
\par
   cauline leaves 
\par
22 Rosette-leaves linear-lanceolate .................................................. {\b 24. pumila}
\par
22 Rosette-leaves rhombic to suborbicular
\par
23 Rosette-leaves usually obtuse, with a flat apex;
\par
   uppermost leaves usually separated from calyx by a
\par
   distinct internode ................................................................. {\b 23. brachyphylla}
\par
23 Rosette-leaves usually acute, with an incurved apex;
\par
   uppermost leaves usually arising at base of calyx ................ {\b 27. terglouensis}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Sect. GENTIANA. Leaves up to 30 cm, crowded towards the base of the stem. Calyx more or less membranous, with small, irregular teeth, sometimes split to the base down one side. Corolla rotate or campanulate, 5- to 9-lobed.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. G. lutea} L.,{\i  Sp. Pl.} 227 (1753). Perennial 50-120 cm. Stem simple, stout, erect. Leaves lanceolate to elliptical or broadly ovate, acute or obtuse, more or less petiolate, glaucous, with 5-7 strong longitudinal veins. Flowers pedicellate, crowded in terminal and axillary cymes. Corolla yellow, very rarely brick-red; lobes patent. •{\i  Mountains of C. & S. Europe.} Al Au Bu Co Ga Ge Gr He Hs It Ju Lu Rm Rs (W) Sa [Cz.]
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp.{\b  lutea} : Anthers free; stigmas spirally coiled after anthesis. 2n = 40.{\i  Throughout the range of the species, except the Balkan peninsula}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b symphyandra} (Murb.) Hayek,{\i  Prodr. Fl. Penins. Balcan. }{\b 2:} 417 (1930): Anthers connate in a tube; stigmas erecto-patent after anthesis.{\i  Balkan peninsula and S.E. Alps}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Hybrids between {\b 1} and the other species of the section occur, though rather infrequently.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. G. punctata} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 227 (1753). Perennial 20-60 cm. Stems simple, stout, erect, with a metallic tinge above. Leaves lanceolate to broadly ovate, acute, petiolate, with 5-7 strong longitudinal veins. Flowers sessile, crowded in terminal and axillary clusters. Calyx with 5-8 green, erect teeth. Corolla 14-35 mm, pale greenish-yellow, usually with dark purple spots; lobes short, erect. Anthers connate at first, later free. 2n = 40. •{\i   Mountains of C. Europe, extending southwards to S. Bulgaria.} Al Au Bu Cz Ga Ge He It Ju Po Rm Rs (W).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 3. G. pannonica} Scop.,{\i  Fl. Carn.} ed. 2, {\b 1:} 182 (1771). Like {\b 2} but stems without metallic tinge; calyx with recurved teeth; corolla purple with reddish-black spots; anthers connate. 2n = 40.{\i  Mountains of C. Europe, from N.E. Switzerland and S.W. Czechoslovakia to N.W. Jugoslavia.} Au Cz Ge He It Ju.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 4. G. purpurea} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 227 (1753). Perennial 20-60 cm. Stems simple, erect. Leaves lanceolate to broadly ovate, acute, petiolate, with 5-7 strong longitudinal veins. Flowers sessile, in small, terminal clusters, sometimes also in few-flowered axillary whorls. Calyx membranous, split to the base down one side. Corolla 15-25 mm, reddish-purple with dark purple spots. Anthers connate. 2n = 40. •{\i  Mountains of C. Europe; S. Norway}. Au Ga Ge He It No.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 5. G. burseri} Lapeyr.,{\i  Hist. Abr. Pyr.} 132 (1813). Like{\b  4} but flowers usually in large clusters; corolla up to 40 mm, yellow, often with brown spots. • {\i Pyrenees, S.W. Alps.} Ga Hs It.
\par

\par
 ({\b a}) Subsp.{\b  burseri} : Corolla-lobes acute, the sinuses between them with an acute appendage. 2n = 40. {\i Pyrenees}.
\par
 ({\b b}) Subsp.{\b  villarsii} (Griseb.) Rouy,{\i  Fl. Fr.}{\b  10:} 256 (1908): Corolla-lobes obtuse or subacute, the sinuses between them with a truncate appendage. 2n = c. 40.{\i  S.W. Alps}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    Sect. PNEUMONANTHE (Gled.) Link. Leaves 1-10 cm, those at the base of the stem scale-like; stems with 1-several flowers. Calyx green, 5-lobed, sometimes split halfway to the base down one side. Corolla obconical, plicate, 5-lobed.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 6. G. asclepiadea} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 227 (1753). Perennial 15-60 (-100) cm. Stems simple, slender, erect. Leaves lanceolate to ovate, acuminate, sessile, with 3-5 strong, longitudinal veins. Flowers 1-3 in the leaf-axils, secund, sessile or subsessile. Calyx-teeth subulate, much shorter than the tube. Corolla
\par

\par
60}
\par