{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 35-50 mm, blue (rarely white), usually with reddish-purple spots within; appendage in the sinus small, obtuse. Anthers connate. Seeds winged. 2n = 36.{\i  Damp or shady places. • C. Europe, mainly in the mountains, extending locally southwards to C. Italy and C. Greece, and eastwards to N.W. Ukraine}. Al Au Bu Co Cz Ga Ge Gr He Hu It Ju Po Rm Rs (W) Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 7. G. pneumonanthe} L.,{\i  Sp. Pl.} 228 (1753). Perennial 5-40 cm. Stems usually simple, slender, erect or ascending. Leaves linear to oblong or ovate-lanceolate, obtuse or subacute, sessile, 1-veined. Stems with a terminal and sometimes 1-6 axillary flowers, which are pedicellate or subsessile. Calyx-teeth linear to linear-lanceolate, acute, about as long as the tube. Corolla 25-50 mm, blue with 5 greenish lines; appendage in the sinus small, acute. Anthers connate. Seeds not winged. 2n = 26.{\i  Wet places; calcifuge. Much of Europe, but absent from most of the islands, Fennoscandia north of c.} 60°{\i  N. and much of the south}. Al Au Be Br Bu Cz Da Ga Ge He Ho Hs Hu It Ju Lu No Po Rm Rs (N, B, C, W, E) Su.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Sect. FRIGIDA Kusn. Leaves 1-2 cm, crowded towards the base of the stem; stems with a terminal and sometimes 1-2 axillary flowers. Calyx herbaceous or membranous, 5-lobed. Corolla campanulate or obconical, plicate, 5-lobed.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 8. G. frigida} Haenke in Jacq.,{\i  Collect. Bot. }{\b 2:} 13 (1789). Perennial 5-10(-15) cm. Stems simple, erect. Leaves linear-lanceolate to ovate-lanceolate, obtuse, somewhat fleshy, 1-veined, the lower shortly petiolate, the upper sessile, shortly sheathing at base. Calyx-teeth obtuse, about as long as the tube. Corolla 20-35 mm, yellowish-white with blue stripes and with bluish spots in the throat; appendage in the sinus triangular, acute. Anthers free. Seeds covered with white, membranous lamellae. 2n = 24. •{\i  Stony places in the mountains; calcifuge. Carpathians, Alps of C. Austria; S. W. Bulgaria.} Au Bu Cz Po Rm ?Rs (W).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 9. G. froelichii} Jan ex Reichenb., {\i Fl. Germ. Excurs. }865 (1832). Perennial 5-10 cm. Stems simple, erect. Basal leaves linear-lanceolate to oblong-lanceolate, acute, somewhat fleshy, 3-veined, shortly sheathing at base; cauline leaves usually 1-2 pairs. Calyx surrounded by the uppermost pair of leaves; teeth lanceolate, acute, somewhat shorter than tube. Corolla 30-40 mm, clear blue, unspotted; appendage in the sinus triangular, acute. Anthers connate. Seeds covered with white, membranous lamellae. 2n = 42. •{\i  S.E. Alps}. Au It Ju.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Sect. CRUCIATA Gaudin. Leaves 5-10 cm, the basal forming a rosette, the cauline evenly spaced; stems with terminal and often axillary clusters of flowers. Calyx membranous, with irregular teeth or split down one side. Corolla nearly cylindrical, plicate, 4-lobed.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 10. G. cruciata} L.,{\i  Sp. Pl.} 231 (1753). Perennial 15-40 cm. Stems usually several from the basal rosette, stout, ascending, often purplish. Leaves oblong-ovate, obtuse, 3-veined, sheathing at base; cauline numerous. Corolla 20-25 mm, 4-lobed, bluish to greenish outside, clear blue inside; appendages in the sinus 1-several. Anthers free. Ovary sessile. Seeds not winged. 2n = 52.{\i  S., C. & E. Europe, extending north-westwards to the Netherlands; local.} Al Au Be Bu Cz Ga Ge Gr He Ho Hs Hu It Ju Po Rm Rs (N, B, C, W, K, E).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b cruciata} : Calyx-teeth broadly triangular, usually much shorter than the tube; corolla c. 3 times as long as calyx. {\i Throughout the range of the species}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28    ({\b b}) Subsp.{\b  phlogifolia} (Schott & Kotschy) Tutin,{\i  Bot. Jour. Linn. Soc.}{\b  64:} 378 (1971) ({\i G. phlogifolia} Schott & Kotschy): Calyx-teeth linear to linear-lanceolate, about as long as the tube; corolla c. twice as long as calyx.{\i  E. & S. Carpathians, at high altitudes}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 11. G. decumbens} L. fil., {\i Suppl.} 174 (1781). Like {\b 10} but stems 5-30 cm; basal leaves linear-lanceolate; cauline leaves 2(3) pairs, linear; corolla (22-)30-35(-40) mm; ovary stipitate.{\i  Dry grassland. E. Russia.} Rs (C, E). ({\i C. & N.E. Asia}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    Sect. CHONDROPHYLLAE Bunge. Leaves up to 1 cm, not crowded towards the base of the stem; stems with solitary, terminal flowers. Calyx herbaceous, with 5 teeth. Corolla obconical, plicate, 5-lobed, the appendage in the sinus almost as long as the corolla-lobes. Anthers free. Seeds unwinged.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 12. G. prostrata} Haenke in Jacq.,{\i  Collect. Bot. }{\b 2:} 66 (1789). Annual 2-5(-7) cm. Stem procumbent or ascending, simple or with a few basal branches. Leaves narrowly obovate to oblong, obtuse, shortly sheathing at base, rather fleshy; margin cartilaginous. Calyx-teeth broadly triangular, obtuse. Corolla 10-20 mm, narrowly obconical, steel-blue, greenish-white towards the base. 2n = c. 36.{\i  Damp, stony slopes,} 2200-2720{\i  m. E. Alps.} Au He It.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 13. G. pyrenaica} L.,{\i  Mantissa} 55 (1767) ({\i G. laciniata} Kit.). Perennial 3-10 cm. Stems simple, ascending. Leaves linear-lanceolate, acute or mucronate, shortly sheathing at base, rather coriaceous; margin cartilaginous. Calyx-teeth narrowly triangular, acuminate. Corolla 20-30 mm, obconical, purplish-blue, greenish towards the base. 2n = 26.{\i  E. Pyrenees; Carpathians; mountains of S.W. Bulgaria.} Bu Ga Hs Rs (W).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 14. G. boryi} Boiss., Biblioth. Univ. Genève ser. 2, 13: 410 (1838). Caespitose perennial 2-5 cm. Stems simple, ascending. Leaves ovate to suborbicular, obtuse, rather thick and coriaceous; margin cartilaginous. Calyx-teeth ovate, cuspidate. Corolla 8-10 mm, obconical, blue on the upper side of the lobes, dark bluish-green outside, with white plicae and a pale blue appendage in the sinus. Damp mountain pastures, 900-3000 m.  N., C. & S. Spain (Cordillera Cantabrica, Sierra de Gredos, Sierra Nevada). Hs.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b  G. septemfida} Pallas, {\i Fl. Ross. }{\b 1}({\b 2}): 101 (1788), from the Caucasian region, with a fimbriate appendage in the sinus of the corolla and usually several flowers on the stem, has been once recorded from Krym, probably erroneously. It is commonly cultivated for ornament.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    Sect. MEGALANTHE Gaudin (Sect. {\i Thylacites} Griseb.). Leaves (0·5-)2-8 cm, crowded towards the base of the stem; flowers solitary, terminal. Calyx herbaceous, with 5 teeth. Corolla obconical, plicate, 5-lobed, the appendage in the sinus small. Anthers connate. stigma 2-lobed. Seeds not winged.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    ({\b 15-21}).{\b  G. acaulis} group. Perennials. Leaves crowded towards the base of the stem; margin cartilaginous. Stem 1-8(-12) cm, elongating in fruit. Flowers solitary, terminal. Calyx green, with 5 teeth. Corolla 40-70 mm, obconical, plicate, 5-lobed, the appendage in the sinus small, dark blue, with or without green spots within. Anthers connate. Stigma 2-lobed, the lobes rounded, fimbriate. Seeds unwinged.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  A group of closely related taxa which have been variously regarded as species, varieties or, sometimes, subspecies. They are treated here as species, in accordance with most modern Floras, but the rank of subspecies might well be more appropriate. The diploid chromosome number, as far as is known, is universally
\par

\par
61}
\par