{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}
\pard\f0\fs28 36, but there appears to be no experimental evidence about the genetic relationships of the various taxa. Occasional specimens have morphological characters intermediate between two taxa, though on geographical and ecological grounds it seems unlikely that they are of hybrid origin.
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Mature rosette-leaves scarcely longer than wide ............................ {\b 19. alpina}
\par 1 Mature rosette-leaves at least 11/2 times as long as wide
\par 2 Mature rosette-leaves linear-oblanceolate to oblanceolate..... {\b 21. angustifolia}
\par 2 Mature rosette-leaves lanceolate, elliptical or obovate 
\par 3 Calyx-teeth triangular, widest at base, usually more 
\par  than 1/2 as long as the tube ................................................................. {\b 15. clusii}
\par 3 Calyx-teeth lanceolate to ovate, narrowed at base
\par 4 Corolla with green spots in the throat; calyx-teeth 
\par  usually less than 1/2 as long as the tube
\par 5 Calyx-teeth about 11/2 times as long as wide; corolla-
\par  lobes acute or cuspidate .................................................................. {\b 18. acaulis}
\par 5 Calyx-teeth little longer than wide; corolla-lobes 
\par  acuminate ..................................................................................... {\b 17. ligustica}
\par 4 Corolla nearly or quite without green spots in the throat; 
\par  calyx-teeth usually at least 1/2 as long as the tube
\par 6 Calyx-teeth usually more than 1/2 as long as the tube;
\par  corolla-lobes acute ................................................................. {\b 16. occidentalis}
\par 6 Calyx-teeth about 1/2 as long as the tube; corolla-lobes
\par  acuminate ..................................................................................... {\b 20. dinarica}
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 15. G. clusii} Perr. & Song., {\i Bull. Soc. Hist. Nat. Savoie}{\b  1853:} 185 (1855). Leaves elliptical to oblong-lanceolate. Calyx-teeth usually at least 1/2 as long as the tube, triangular, widest at the base. Corolla with few or no green spots in the throat; lobes obtuse, usually apiculate. 2n = 36 Calcicole. •{\i  Mountains of C. & S. Europe, from S.W. Germany and the Carpathians to S. France, N. Italy and N. Jugoslavia.} Au Cz Ga Ge He It Ju Po Rm.
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 16. G. occidentalis} Jakowatz, {\i Sitz.-Ber. Akad. Wiss. Wien}{\b  108}({\b 1}): 342 (1899). Leaves elliptical to oblong-lanceolate. Calyx-teeth usually more than 1/2 as long as the tube, ovate to lanceolate, narrowed at the base. Corolla with few or no green spots in the throat; lobes acute to acuminate.{\i  Calcicole. • W. Pyrenees, Cordillera Cantábrica}. Ga Hs.
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 17. G. ligustica} R. de Vilmorin & Chopinet, {\i Rapports Comm. VIII Congr. Internat. Bot., Sect.} 21-27, 166 (1956). Leaves oblong-obovate to broadly ovate, at most 3 times as long as wide. Calyx-teeth less than 1/2 as long as the tube, broadly ovate, narrowed at the base. Corolla with green spots in the throat; lobes acuminate or cuspidate.{\i  Calcicole. • Maritime Alps; C. Appennini.} Ga It.
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 18. G. acaulis} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 228 (1753) ({\i G. excisa} C. Presl, {\i G. kochiana} Perr. & Song.). Leaves lanceolate, elliptical or, less frequently, obovate. Calyx-teeth usually less than 1/2 as long as the tube, ovate, narrowed at the base. Corolla with green spots in the throat; lobes acute or cuspidate. 2n = 36.{\i  Calcifuge. • From the Alps and Carpathians southwards to N.E. Spain, C. Italy and C. Jugoslavia.} Au Bu Cz Ga Ge He Hs It Ju Rm Rs (W).
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 19. G. alpina} Vill.,{\i  Prosp. Pl. Dauph.} 22 (1779). Leaves usually c. 1 cm, suborbicular. Calyx-teeth usually about 1/2 as long as the tube, ovate, narrowed at the base. Corolla with green spots in the throat; lobes obtuse, usually rounded. 2n = 36.{\i  Calcifuge;} 2000-2600{\i  m. S.W. & W.C. Alps, C. Pyrenees, S. Spain} ({\i Sierra Nevada}). Ga He Hs It.
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 20. G. dinarica} G. Beck,{\i  Ann. Naturh. Mus. (Wien)}{\b  2:} 128 (1887). Leaves broadly elliptical. Calyx-teeth about 1/2 as long as the tube, narrowly lanceolate, narrowed at the base. Corolla unspotted in the throat; lobes acuminate.{\i  Calcicole. • Mountains of S.W. Jugoslavia and Albania; C. Italy} ({\i Abruzzesi}). Al It Ju.
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 21. G. angustifolia} Vill., {\i Hist. Pl. Dauph. }{\b 2}: 526 (1787). Leaves linear-lanceolate to oblanceolate. Calyx-teeth usually less than 1/2 as long as the tube, lanceolate, narrowed at the base. Corolla with green spots in the throat; lobes acute. 2n = 36.{\i  Calcicole. • S.W. Alps, Jura, Pyrenees.} Ga He It.
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28   Sect. CALATHIANAE Froelich. Leaves up to 2(-3) cm, sometimes crowded towards the base of the stem; stems with usually solitary, terminal flowers. Calyx herbaceous, with 5 teeth. Corolla-tube almost cylindrical, plicate, with 5 patent lobes, the appendage in the sinus small. Anthers free. Stigma-lobes contiguous, forming a circular, slightly concave disc. Seeds not winged.
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 22. G. verna} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 228 (1753). Perennial 2-20 cm. Stem from a rosette, erect, elongating after flowering. Leaves lanceolate, elliptical or broadly ovate; margin more or less papillose; cauline leaves 1-3 pairs. Calyx-teeth lanceolate, acuminate; calyx-tube (3-)4-7 mm wide, winged on the angles. Corolla 15-25 mm; lobes deep blue; tube greenish-blue outside, with a white line from each sinus. {\i C. Europe, extending westwards to C. France; mountains of S. Europe; Arctic Russia; N. England; W. Ireland}. Al Au Br Bu Cz Ga Ge Gr Hb He Hs It Ju Po Rm Rs (N, W).
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Wings of calyx 1-2 mm wide ............................................... ({\b a}) subsp.{\b  verna}
\par 1 Wings of calyx 2-4 mm wide
\par 2 Rosette-leaves broadly ovate, obtuse ............................... ({\b b}) subsp.{\b  pontica} 
\par 2 Rosette-leaves narrowly lanceolate, acumin.ate ........... ({\b c}) subsp.{\b  tergestina}
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp.{\b  verna} : Leaves usually lanceolate or elliptical, usually acute. wings of calyx 1-2 mm wide. Corolla-lobes obtuse. 2n = 28. {\i Throughout most of the range of the species}.
\par
\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp.{\b  pontica} (Soltok.) Hayek,{\i  Prodr. Fl. Penins. Balcan.}{\b  2:} 419 (1930): Rosette-leaves broadly ovate, obtuse, about twice as long as wide. wings of calyx 2-3 mm wide. Corolla-lobes obtuse.{\i  C. & E. parts of Balkan peninsula.}
\par
\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b c}) Subsp.{\b  tergestina} (G. Beck) Hayek, {\i op. cit.} 420 (1930): Rosette-leaves narrowly lanceolate, acuminate, c. 4 times as long as wide. wings of calyx c. 4 mm wide. Corolla-lobes acute.{\i  N. & W. parts of the Balkan peninsula, S.W. Bulgaria, Italy}.
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 23. G. brachyphylla} Vill., {\i Prosp. Pl. Dauph.} 23 (1779) (incl. {\i G. sierrae} Briq.). Perennial 3-6(-15) cm. Stem from a rosette, erect. Leaves rhombic to suborbicular, rarely more than twice as long as wide; margin cartilaginous; cauline leaves 0-1(-2) pairs. Calyx-teeth narrowly triangular, acute; calyx-tube 2-5 mm wide, angled but not or very narrowly winged on the angles. Corolla 15-30 mm; lobes deep blue; tube greenish-blue outside.{\i  Alps, Pyrenees, Carpathians, S. Spain} ({\i Sierra Nevada}). Au Ga Ge He Hs It Ju Rm.
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b brachyphylla} : Rosette-leaves rhombic, obtuse to subacute; calyx-tube not or very narrowly winged on the angles; corolla-lobes about twice as long as wide. 2n = 28.{\i  Usually calcifuge; }1800-4200{\i  m. Alps, Pyrenees, Sierra Nevada}.
\par ({\b b}) Subsp.{\b  favratii} (Rittener) Tutin, {\i Bot. Jour. Linn. Soc.}{\b  64:} 378 (1971) ({\i G. favratii} (Rittener) Favrat, {\i G. verna} var.{\i  favratii} Rittener): Rosette-leaves obovate to suborbicular, rounded; calyx-tube distinctly winged on the angles; corolla-lobes usually as wide or wider than long. 2n = 28, 30+2B, 32.{\i  Calcicole} 2000-2800{\i  m.} • {\i Alps, Carpathians.}
\par
\par 62}
\par