{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 24. G. pumila} Jacq.,{\i  Enum. Stirp. Vindob.} 41, 215 (1762). Like {\b 23} but rosette-leaves linear-lanceolate, acute; margin strongly papillose; cauline leaves 1-3 pairs; calyx-teeth linear-lanceolate, acute. 2n = 20.{\i  Calcicole. S.W. & E. Alps, E. Pyrenees.} Au Ga Hs It Ju.
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b a}) Subsp.{\b  pumila} : Calyx usually 11-14 mm; corolla-lobes acute.{\i  E. Alps}.
\par
\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b b}) Subsp.{\b  delphinensis} (Beauverd) P. Fourn.,{\i  Quatre Fl. Fr.} 857 (1938): Calyx usually 16-20 mm; corolla-lobes obtuse, sometimes apiculate. {\i S.W. Alps, E. Pyrenees}.
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 25. G. bavarica} L.,{\i  Sp. Pl.} 229 (1753). Perennial 4-20 cm. Stem ascending. Leaves not forming a rosette, about twice as long as wide, obovate to spathulate, obtuse; margin cartilaginous, smooth. Calyx-teeth lanceolate, acute; calyx-tube somewhat infundibuliform, angled, very narrowly winged on the angles. Corolla 20-30 mm; lobes deep blue; tube paler blue. 2n = 30.{\i  Damp places, usually between }1800{\i  and} 3600{\i  m. •  Alps.} Au Ga Ge He It Ju.
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 26. G. rostanii} Reuter ex Verlot, {\i Cat. Pl. Dauph.} 242 (1872). Like {\b 25} but lower leaves rather crowded, the upper distant, all about 4 times as long as wide, linear or linear-lanceolate; margin not cartilaginous; calyx-teeth c. 1/3 as long as the tube. 2n = 30.{\i  S.W. & S.C. Alps.} Ga It.
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 27. G. terglouensis} Hacq.,{\i  Pl. Carn.} 9 (1782). Like{\b  25} but 3-6 cm; leaves densely crowded, often imbricate, ovate-lanceolate, thick, with a cartilaginous apex; margin narrowly cartilaginous, strongly papillose; calyx-teeth 1/3-1/2 as long as the tube. 2n = 40. {\i Stony slopes,} 1900-2700{\i  m; usually calcicole. • S. & E.Alps}. Au Ga He It Ju.
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp.{\b  terglouensis} : Leaves at base of flowering stems more or less erect; calyx-teeth c. 1/2 as long as tube.{\i  S.E. Alps.}
\par
\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp.{\b  schleicheri} (Vacc.) Tutin,{\i  Bot. Jour. Linn. Soc.}{\b  64:} 378 (1971) ({\i G. verna} var.{\i  imbricata} f. {\i schleicheri} Vacc.): Leaves at base of flowering stems usually patent or erecto-patent, forming an apparent rosette; calyx-teeth c. 1/3 as long as tube.{\i  Maritime Alps to W. Switzerland}.
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 28. G. nivalis} L.,{\i  Sp. Pl.} 229 (1753). Annual 1-15(-30) cm. Stems simple or branched. Leaves ovate to elliptical, obtuse; margin weakly papillose. Calyx-teeth 1/2-2/3 as long as the tube, narrowly triangular, acute; calyx-tube 2-3 mm wide, angled but not winged on the angles. Corolla c. 15 mm, intense blue. 2n = 14.{\i  N. Europe, southwards to }56° 30'{\i  N. in Scotland; mountains of Europe southwards to the Pyrenees, S. Appennini and Bulgaria}. Au Br Bu Cz Fe Ga Ge He Hs Is It Ju No Po Rm Rs (N, W) Su.
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 29. G. utriculosa} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 229 (1753). Annual 6-25(-35) cm. Stems simple or branched. Leaves obovate to lanceolate, obtuse or acute; margin weakly papillose. Calyx-teeth 1/3-1/2 as long as the tube, lanceolate, acute; calyx-tube (3-)4-7 mm wide, angled, the angles with wings 2-3 mm wide. Corolla 15-20 mm, intense blue.{\i  C. Europe, mainly in the mountains; mountains of Italy and Balkan peninsula}. Au Bu Ga Ge He It Ju Rm Rs (W).
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28\qc {\b 6.            Gentianella }           Moench  
\par
\pard\f0\fs24\qc By N.M. Pritchard & †T.G. Tutin, 
\par
\pard\f0\fs24\qc partly from data supplied by H. Merxmuller.
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28 Biennials or annuals. Stems usually more or less branched from above the basal rosette. Calyx divided to at least 1/2-way; lobes 4-5, not joined by an inner membrane. Corolla cylindrical or obconical; lobes 4-5, more or less patent, without a small lobe in the sinus; corolla usually fimbriate in the throat. Anthers 4-5, versatile. Ovary gradually tapered to style, or style absent. Stigmas 2, persistent on the capsule. Nectaries at the base of the corolla.
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28   Some species of Sect.{\i  Gentianella} show variation which is to some extent correlated with time of germination and flowering and sometimes also with altitude. The non-commital term 'ecotypic variant' is used for these; they are listed under the appropriate species by names commonly found in Floras, where such are available, at whatever rank this may happen to be. Such citation does not imply approval of the appropriateness of the rank in question.
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28   Literature: R. von Wettstein,{\i  Denkschr. Akad. Wiss. Math.Nat. Kl.} ({\i Wien}) {\b 64}: 309-382 (1896).
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Corolla not fimbriate at base of lobes
\par 2 Corolla less than 12 mm, not fimbriate at throat or margin; 
\par  flowers numerous, closely subtended by uppermost leaves ............. {\b 22. aurea}
\par 2 Corolla more than 25 mm, fimbriate or ciliate at margin;
\par  flowers solitary, not closely subtended by uppermost leaves
\par 3 Calyx-lobes equal; corolla with cilia about as long as
\par  width of lobes ..................................................................................... {\b 3. ciliata}
\par 3 Two calyx-lobes longer and narrower than the others;
\par  corolla with cilia much shorter than width of lobes,
\par  occasionally absent
\par 4 Basal rosette withered at anthesis; stems simple or 
\par  branched only in upper part ............................................................. {\b 5. barbata}
\par 4 Basal rosette persistent at fruiting; stems branched 
\par  from the base ................................................................................... {\b 4. detonsa}
\par 1 Corolla fimbriate at base of lobes
\par 5 Calyx-lobes with strongly crispate, blackish margin ..................... {\b 6. crispata}
\par 5 Calyx-lobes with flat or recurved, but not crispate,
\par  green margin
\par 6 Flowers 4-merous; calyx-lobes very unequal, the 2 
\par  larger enclosing the 2 smaller ................................... ({\b 8-9}).{\b  campestris} group
\par 6 Flowers 4- or 5-merous; calyx-lobes equal or somewhat
\par  unequal, but the larger not enclosing the smaller
\par 7 Calyx divided almost to base, the lobes not appressed 
\par  to the corolla-tube
\par 8 Flowers usually 4-merous; pedicels several times as 
\par  long as flowers; corolla-lobes patent ................................................ {\b 1. tenella}
\par 8 Flowers usually 5-merous; pedicels not more than twice
\par  as long as flowers; corolla-lobes ± erect .............................................. {\b 2. nana}
\par 7 Calyx divided to 3/4 or less, the lobes usually 
\par  appressed to the corolla-tube
\par 9 Corolla more than 25 mm .................................... ({\b 13-21}).{\b  germanica }group
\par 9 Corolla less than 25 mm
\par 10 Corolla more than twice as long as calyx, obconical;
\par   plant with long branches from base ..................... ({\b 13-21}).{\b  germanica} group
\par 10 Corolla less than twice as long as calyx, cylindrical;
\par   plant usually without long branches from base
\par 11 Uppermost internode and terminal pedicel together forming at 
\par   least 1/2 height of plant; internodes usually 3 or fewer
\par   ................................................................................. ({\b 10-12}).{\b  amarella} group
\par 11 Uppermost internode and terminal pedicel together forming
\par   at most 1/6 height of plant; internodes usually more than
\par   3, all ± equal or the terminal one short 
\par 12 Lowland or subalpine plants up to 60 cm, with short 
\par   branches from base or middle upwards .................. ({\b 10-12}).{\b  amarella} group
\par 12 Alpine plants not more than 15 cm, with spreading 
\par   leafy flowering branches from base
\par 13 Flowers usually 5-merous; corolla white or yellow;
\par   calyx-sinus rounded ............................................. ({\b 13-21}).{\b  germanica} group
\par 13 Flowers usually 4-merous; corolla blue; calyx-sinus acute ...... {\b 7. columnae}
\par
\par 63}
\par