{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28   Sect. COMASTOMA (Wettst.) Pritchard. Calyx divided nearly to base; lobes 4-5, unequal. Corolla up to 12 mm, narrowly obconical, with a few scales forming a thin fringe at the base of the acute or subacute lobes. Style very short or absent; capsule sessile.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. G. tenella} (Rottb.) Börner,{\i  Fl. Deutsche Volk} 542 (1912) ({\i Gentiana tenella} Rottb.). Annual or biennial 2-10 cm, rarely more. Basal leaves spathulate; cauline 1-4 pairs, elliptical, more or less acute; all leaves 5-12(-18) mm. Pedicels several times as long as flowers. Calyx and corolla usually 4-merous, with 2 nectaries between each pair of stamens at the base. Corolla sky-blue or dirty violet, rarely white or yellowish; lobes 6-12 mm, more or less patent at anthesis. 2n = 10.{\i  Pastures, screes. and river-gravels, in mountains except in the extreme north; usually calcicole. Europe, southwards to the Sierra Nevada, S. Alps and S. Carpathians.} Au Cz Fe Ga Ge He Hs Is It No Po Rm Rs (N, W) Sb Su.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. G. nana} (Wulfen) Pritchard, {\i Bot. Jour. Linn. Soc.}{\b  65:} 260 (1972) ({\i Gentiana nana }Wulfen). Like {\b 1} but 2-3 cm; pedicels not more than twice as long as flowers; calyx and corolla usually 5-merous, with 1 nectary between each pair of stamens; corolla dark blue; lobes more or less erect at anthesis. 2n = 30.{\i  Damp screes and late snow-patches; calcifuge. • E. Alps}. Au It.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Sect. CROSSOPETALAE (Froelich) Pritchard. Calyx-lobes 4, equal or unequal, not overlapping. Corolla at least 25 mm, obconical, 4-lobed; lobes ovate to obovate, obtuse, usually more or less fringed or ciliate at margin, patent. Style distinct; capsule stipitate.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 3. G. ciliata} (L.) Borkh., {\i Arch. Bot.} ({\i Roemer}) {\b 1}({\b 1}): 29 (1796) ({\i Gentiana ciliata} L.). Biennial 5-30 cm. Lower leaves spathulate, obtuse; cauline 1-3 cm, lanceolate or linear-lanceolate, acute. Internodes usually 4-6, more or less equal and about equalling the terminal pedicel. Calyx-lobes equal, ½ as long as corolla. Corolla 25-50 mm, blue; lobes ovate, long-fimbriate at margin.{\i  Europe, except the north, the extreme west and most of the islands.} Al Au Be Bu ?Co Cz Ga Ge Gr He Ho Hs Hu It Ju Po Rm Rs (N, C, W, E).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp.{\b  ciliata} : 7-30 cm. Corolla blue, usually more than 35 mm long and more than 10 mm wide below the throat; lobes usually more than 17 mm, oblanceolate, apiculate. 2n = 44.{\i  Meadows and wood-margins. Throughout the range of the species eastward to Poland and C. Ukraine}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b doluchanovii} (Grossh.) Pritchard,{\i  Bot. Jour. Linn. Soc.}{\b  65:} 260 (1972) ({\i Gentiana doluchanovii} Grossh.): Like subsp. ({\b a}) but somewhat smaller in all its parts, rarely more than 20 cm. Corolla dark blue, usually less than 35 mm long and not more than 10 mm wide below the throat; lobes usually less than 17 mm, triangular, acute. {\i Wet places. E. Russia.} ({\i Siberia.})
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 4. G. detonsa} (Rottb.) G. Don fil., {\i Gen. Syst.}{\b  4: }179 (1837) ({\i Gentiana detonsa} Rottb.). Annual or biennial 5-25 cm. Basal leaves spathulate, obtuse, persistent at fruiting; cauline 1-3 pairs, up to 25 mm, linear-lanceolate, acute. Pedicels up to 12 cm, much longer than the internodes. Calyx-lobes unequal, the longer pair about equalling the corolla-tube. Corolla (25-)35-40 mm, dark blue; lobes 10-15 mm, often with a few short cilia on the margins, the apex usually serrulate. 2n = 44.{\i  Damp places, mainly by the sea. Arctic and subarctic Europe.} Is No Rs (N).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 5. G. barbata} (Froelich) Berchtold & J. Presl,{\i  Rostlinár }{\b 1:} 22 (1823) ({\i Gentiana barbata} Froelich). Like{\b  4} but up to 40(-60) cm; basal leaves withered at anthesis; cauline up to 40(-100) mm; pedicels usually not more than 6 cm; corolla-lobes with entire or slightly toothed apex.{\i  S. Ural.} Rs (C). ({\i N. & C. Asia}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Sect. GENTIANELLA. Calyx-lobes 4-5, equal, or unequal. Corolla usually more than 1·5 cm, obconical or cylindrical, fimbriate in throat, 4- or 5-lobed, lobes erect or patent. Style absent. Capsule stipitate or sessile.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    Throughout the section, variation in leaf-shape, number of internodes, density of branching, and ratio of leaf-length to internode-length show parallel variation. These characters are more or less correlated with flowering time, so that plants flowering before mid-August have in general obtuse middle cauline leaves, (0-)2-6 internodes, few branches, and internodes longer than the leaves; plants flowering after mid-August have acute middle cauline leaves, 6-12(-15) internodes, many branches and leaves longer than the internodes. Much of the confused nomenclature results from the intersection of these morphological gradients with other more definite characters; most of the morphological nodes thus formed have been given specific rank. Confusion has arisen also from the variable duration of the plants; most are overwintering annuals, germinating in late summer and autumn to form rosettes of 4-10 acute, lanceolate leaves. This rosette withers during winter in most species, leaving only a small bud. In spring, the secondary rosette formed from this bud has obtuse, oblanceolate or spathulate leaves. Sometimes spring or early summer germination is followed by flowering in the same year from the primary rosette, and these phenological differences may again transgress the usual taxonomic boundaries. Hybridization is apparently common and hybrid swarms occur in zones of overlap between species.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 6. G. crispata} (vis.) J. Holub, {\i Folia Geobot. Phytotax.} ({\i Praha}){\b  2:} 117 (1967) ({\i Gentiana crispata} vis.). Glabrous biennial; stem 2-20 cm, covered at base with brown remains of the previous year's leaves. Basal leaves obovate-spathulate, middle cauline elliptic-lanceolate, subobtuse, the upper ovate-lanceolate, acute. Inflorescence corymbose. Flowers 5-merous. Calyx-lobes subequal, about as long as the tube, with strongly crispate, blackish margin. Corolla 12-20 mm, violet or whitish; tube nearly twice as long as calyx. Capsule distinctly stipitate.{\i  Mountains. • C. part of Balkan peninsula; S. Italy}. Al Bu It Ju.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Ecotypic variation occurs, but further investigation of it is needed.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b  G. caucasea} (Loddiges ex sims) J. Holub, {\i loc. cit.} (1967) has been recorded, though not recently, from Turkey-in-Europe; it has 5-merous flowers, equal, narrowly linear, falcate calyx-lobes and the calyx-tube split down one side.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 7. G. columnae} (Ten.) J. Holub, {\i op. cit.} 119 (1967) ({\i Gentiana columnae} Ten.). Biennial 1-15 cm, branched from the base to give a caespitose cushion-like habit. Cauline leaves lanceolate. Flowers 4-merous. Calyx-lobes unequal in width, the two wider not enfolding the others; sinus acute. Corolla 10-20 mm, purple or whitish. Capsule distinctly stipitate. •{\i  C. Appennini}. It.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    ({\b 8-9}).{\b  G. campestris} group. Annual or biennial. Flowers 4-merous. Calyx-lobes very unequal, the two outer ovate to ovate-lanceolate, enfolding the two lanceolate inner ones. (One or both the inner lobes may be wanting, especially in white flowered plants). Corolla (12-)15-25(-40) mm.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 Calyx-lobes widest below the middle .......................................... {\b 8. campestris}
\par
Calyx-lobes widest above the middle ....................................... {\b 9. hypericifolia}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 8. G. campestris} (L.) Börner,{\i  Fl. Deutsche Volk }542 (1912) ({\i Gentiana campestris} L.). Stem 2-35 cm, simple or branched;
\par

\par
64}
\par