{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 branches erect, forming a racemose or subcorymbose inflorescence. Leaves 1-3·5 cm, glabrous, the cauline lingulate to ovate-lanceolate, obtuse or subacute. Calyx-lobes widest below the middle, with a flat, papillose to ciliate margin. Corolla (12-)15-30 mm, bluish-lilac or white; tube up to twice as long as calyx. Capsule sessile or stipitate.{\i  Grassland and heaths. • N. & C. Europe, eastwards to N. W. Russia and C. Austria, and extending southwards to E. Spain and C. Italy}. Au Be Br Cz Da Fa Fe Ga Ge Hb He Ho Hs Is It No Po Rs (N, B) Su.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp.{\b  campestris} : Biennial; base of stem covered with brown remains of the previous year's leaves; basal leaves spathulate; corolla-tube up to twice as long as calyx. 2n = 36. {\i Throughout most of the range of the species}.

\pard\f0\fs28  {\i  Ecotypic variants} :
\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Autumnal: Type of the species.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Aestival:{\b  Gentiana campestris} var.{\b  suecica} Froelich,{\i  Gent. Diss.} 92 (1796).
\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Montane:{\b  Gentiana islandica} (Murb.) Dörfler,{\i  Herb. Norm.}{\b  38:} 269 (1898) ({\i G. campestris} subsp.{\i  islandica} (Murb.) Vollmann).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp.{\b  baltica} (Murb.) Tutin, {\i Bot. Jour. Linn. Soc.}{\b  65:} 260 (1972) ({\i Gentiana baltica} Murb.): Annual; stem with cotyledons or few green leaves near base; basal leaves ovate or lanceolate; corolla-tube scarcely longer than calyx.{\i  From S. Sweden and N.W. France eastwards to Poland}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 9. G. hypericifolia} (Murb.) Pritchard,{\i  Bot. Jour. Linn. Soc.}{\b  65:} 260 (1972). Like {\b 8} but cauline leaves elliptical to broadly ovate; calyx-lobes widest above the middle; corolla c. 25 mm, often whitish. 2n = 36. {\i W. & C. Pyrenees}. Ga Hs.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b Gentiana laevicalyx} (Rohlena) Rohlena,{\i  Mem. Soc. Sci. Bohême }{\b 1933}({\b 8}): 7 (1934), from S.W. Jugoslavia, may belong to this group or be nearer to {\i G. columnae}. It requires further investigation.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b 10-12}).{\b  G. amarella} group. Annual or biennial. Flowers 4- or 5-merous. Calyx-lobes more or less unequal, the two wider ones not enfolding the others. Corolla 10-20(-23) mm.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Uppermost internode and terminal pedicel together 
\par
  forming at most 1/6 height of plant; internodes usually
\par
  more than 3 ................................................................................... {\b 10. amarella}
\par
1 Uppermost internode and terminal pedicel together forming at 
\par
  least ½ height of plant; internodes usually 3 or fewer
\par
2 Upper leaves ovate to ovate-lanceolate; calyx-lobes 
\par
  unequal, the largest up to 3 mm wide, patent .............................. {\b 11. uliginosa}
\par
2 Upper leaves lanceolate; calyx-lobes usually subequal,
\par
  up to 1·5 mm wide, appressed to corolla-tube ............................... {\b 12. anglica}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 10. G. amarella} (L.) Börner,{\i  Fl. Deutsche Volk} 542 (1912) ({\i Gentiana amarella} L.). Stems (3-)5-30(-50) cm, erect, simple or branched from above the base. Branches usually ascending, but the lower not reaching or overtopping the upper and not forming a corymbose inflorescence. Internodes (2-)4-9(-12), the terminal one and the terminal pedicel together forming not more than 1/6 the height of the plant. Cauline leaves 1-2(-3) cm, ovate to linear-lanceolate, acute or more or less obtuse. Calyx-lobes erect. Corolla less than twice as long as calyx. Capsule sessile or rarely shortly stipitate. 2n = 36.{\i  N. & C. Europe, extending south-eastwards to E. Ukraine}. Au Be Br Cz Da Fe Ga Ge Hb He Hu Is It No Po Rm Rs (N, B, C, W, K, E) Su.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b amarella} : Branched from the lowest nodes (very rarely simple). Internodes 4-9(-11). Corolla (14-)16-18 (-22) mm, usually 5-merous, dull purple, blue, pink or whitish; lobes erecto-patent at anthesis.{\i  Throughout the range of the species, except for Iceland and N. Scotland}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp.{\b  septentrionalis} (Druce) Pritchard,{\i  Watsonia}{\b  4:} 235 (1960): Simple or branched from the base. Internodes 2-7. Corolla 12-17 mm, 4- or 5-merous, creamy white within, reddish-purple outside. Lobes more or less erect at anthesis.{\i  • Iceland and N. Scotland}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   The taxa known as {\i Gentiana axillaris} (F. W. Schmidt) Reichenb.,{\i  G. lingulata} Agardh and {\i G. uliginosa} sensu Murb., non Willd. are respectively autumnal, aestival and non-over-wintering annual variants of {\b 10}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 11. G. uliginosa} (Willd.) Börner, {\i Fl. Deutsche Volk} 542 (1912) ({\i Gentiana uliginosa} Willd.). Stems 1-15 cm, when annual often with 1-2 flowers from a basal rosette, when biennial usually with long, ascending branches from the base. Internodes 0-2(-4), the terminal one and the terminal pedicel together forming at least half the height of the plant. Cauline leaves ovate to ovate-lanceolate. Calyx-lobes unequal, the largest up to 3 mm wide, patent. Corolla about as long as the longest calyx-lobe. Capsule sessile. 2n = c. 54.{\i  Dune-slacks and damp meadows. • N. & N.C. Europe}. Br Cz Da Fe ?Ga Ge Ho No Po Rs ( ?N, B, C) Su.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 12. G. anglica} (Pugsley) E. F. Warburg in Clapham, Tutin & E. F. Warburg,{\i  Fl. Brit. Is. }826 (1952). Biennial; stem 4-20 cm, usually with long branches from the base. Internodes 2-3(-5). Cauline leaves lanceolate to linear. Calyx-lobes more or less erect, not more than 1·5 mm wide. Corolla c. 1½ times as long as calyx, dull purple. Capsule sessile.{\i  Grassland and dune-slacks. • S. England.} Br.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp.{\b  anglica} : Uppermost internode c. 1½ times as long as the others, or rarely short and then the next long. Basal leaves narrow. Terminal pedicel forming about half the height of the plant. Calyx-lobes somewhat unequal. Corolla 13-16 mm.{\i  Devon to Lincolnshire.}
\par

\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b cornubiensis} Pritchard, {\i Watsonia }{\b 4:} 184 (1959): Uppermost internode not longer than the others. Basal leaves wide. Terminal pedicel less than 1/3 the height of the plant. Calyx-lobes subequal. Corolla (15-)17-20 mm.{\i  Cornwall}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    ({\b 13-21}).{\b  G. germanica }group. Annual or biennial. Stems simple or branched. Flowers nearly always 5-merous. Calyx-lobes more or less equal in length, equal or unequal in width. Corolla (10-)25-45 mm, usually more than twice as long as calyx, more or less obconical, with patent lobes. Capsule nearly always stipitate.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Calyx-sinus obtuse
\par
2 Corolla 10-20 mm; calyx-tube much shorter than the lobes
\par
3 Pedicels short ................................................................................ {\b 14. ramosa}
\par
3 Pedicels long .............................................................................. {\b 13. bulgarica}
\par
2 Corolla 18-45 mm; calyx-tube at least half as long as the lobes
\par
4 Calyx-lobes usually distinctly longer than the tube;
\par
  corolla 24-45 mm ........................................................................ {\b 20. austriaca}
\par
4 Calyx-lobes as long as or shorter than the tube;
\par
  corolla 18-25 mm ........................................................................ {\b 21. lutescens}
\par
1 Calyx-sinus acute
\par
5 Calyx-lobes not ciliate ............................................................. {\b 19. germanica}
\par
5 Calyx-lobes distinctly but very shortly ciliate
\par
6 Two calyx-lobes much wider than the others; margins
\par
  strongly revolute; midrib not ciliate
\par
7 Corolla less than 20 mm, dirty violet or white; capsule
\par
  nearly or quite sessile ........................................................... {\b 16. engadinensis}
\par
7 Corolla 21-30 mm, blue-violet (rarely white); capsule
\par
  distinctly stipitate ..................................................................... {\b 17. anisodonta}
\par
6 Two calyx-lobes only a little wider than the others;
\par
  margins ± flat; midrib ciliate
\par
8 Leaves narrowly lanceolate ............................................................ {\b 15. pilosa}
\par
8 Leaves ovate to ovate-lanceolate ................................................... {\b 18. aspera}
\par

\par
65}
\par