{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 13. G. bulgarica} (Velen.) J. Holub,{\i  Folia Geobot. Phytotax.} ({\i Praha}){\b  2:} 117 (1967) ({\i Gentiana germanica} subsp.{\i  bulgarica} (Velen.) Hayek, {\i G. bulgarica} Velen.). Stems 5-20 cm, with long, slender, procumbent or ascending branches from the base; internodes 4-8. Cauline leaves oblong-lanceolate, subobtuse. Pedicels longer than calyx-tube. Calyx-lobes subequal, linear, flat or slightly revolute, smooth or nearly so; sinus rounded. Corolla 12-20 mm, whitish or pale violet. Capsule stipitate. •{\i  C. part of Balkan peninsula, S. Carpathians.} Al Bu Ju Rm.
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 14. G. ramosa} (Hegetschw.) J. Holub,{\i  op. cit.} 118 (1967) ({\i Gentiana ramosa} Hegetschw.). Biennial 1-15 cm, usually branched from the base to give a caespitose cushion-like habit. Cauline leaves ovate to ovate-lanceolate, only the uppermost more or less acute. Pedicels shorter than calyx-tube. Calyx-lobes subequal, linear-lanceolate, flat, smooth; sinus rounded. Corolla 10-20 mm, pale violet or whitish. Capsule stipitate. •{\i  Calcicole. C. & S.W. Alps}. ?Ga He It.
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 15. G. pilosa} (Wettst.) J. Holub,{\i  loc. cit}. (1967) ({\i Gentiana pilosa} Wettst., {\i G. germanica }subsp.{\i  pilosa} (Wettst.) Hayek). Biennial 4-20 cm, simple or with short branches. Lower cauline leaves narrowly lanceolate, upper lanceolate, papillose-ciliate on the margin and midrib beneath. Calyx-lobes somewhat unequal, lanceolate, flat or slightly recurved, shortly hirsute on the margin and midrib beneath; sinus acute. Corolla 15-26 mm, little exceeding the calyx, violet. Capsule stipitate or subsessile. •{\i  S.E. Alps}. It Ju.
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 16. G. engadinensis} (Wettst.) J. Holub, {\i op. cit.} 117 (1967) ({\i Gentiana engadinensis} (Wettst.) Br.-Bl. & Samuelsson). Like {\b 15} but cauline leaves ovate-lanceolate; two calyx-lobes much wider than the others, revolute, with glabrous midrib; corolla not more than 20 mm, 11/2 times as long as calyx, vinous-violet or whitish; capsule nearly or quite sessile. 2n = 36. •{\i  C. & E. Alps, from }9° 30'{\i  to} 10° 45'{\i  E}. He It.
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b G. liburnica} E. Mayer & H. Kunz,{\i  Österr. Bot. Zeitschr.}{\b  116:} 397 (1969), from N.W. Jugoslavia, is like {\b 16} but has narrower, more acute cauline leaves, a narrower corolla and a stipitate capsule.
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 17. G. anisodonta} (Borbás) Á. & D. Löve,{\i  Bot. Not.}{\b  114:} 42 (1961) ({\i Gentiana anisodonta} Borbás,{\i  G. germanica} subsp.{\i  calycina} (Koch) Hayek,{\i  G. calycina} (Koch) Wettst.). Like {\b 15} but lower cauline leaves obovate to spathulate, the upper triangular-lanceolate, glabrous or sparsely ciliate; two calyx-lobes much wider than the others, revolute, strongly ciliate, with glabrous midrib; corolla 20-30(-33) mm, exceeding the calyx; capsule stipitate. 2n = 36.{\i  Calcicole. • S.C. & S.E. Alps; Appennini; N.W. Jugoslavia.} Au He It Ju.
\par
\par{\i Ecotypic variants} :
\pard\f0\fs28   Autumnal: Type of the species.
\par
\pard\f0\fs28   Aestival-montane: var.{\b  antecedens} (Wettst.) E. Mayer,{\i  Österr. Bot. Zeitschr.}{\b  116:} 394 (1969) ({\i Gentiana anisodonta} subsp.{\i  antecedens} (Pacher) Mansfeld).
\par
\pard\f0\fs28   Aestival-alpine: var.{\b  calycina} (Koch) E. Mayer,{\i  loc. cit.} (1969) ({\i Gentiana anisodonta} subsp.{\i  calycina }(Koch) Mansfeld).
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28   {\b G. insubrica} (H. Kunz) J. Holub,{\i  Folia Geobot. Phytotax.} ({\i Praha}){\b  2:} 117 (1967), from S. Switzerland, is like {\b 17} but has stout, rigid stems and slightly unequal, papillose, not hairy, calyx-lobes. It is also calcicole.
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28   {\b G. albanica} (Jav.) J. Holub, {\i op. cit. }116 (1967), from Albania, has a compact habit and revolute calyx-lobes. It requires further investigation.
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 18. G. aspera} (Hegetschw. & Heer) Dostál ex Skalický, Chrtek & Gill,{\i  Preslia }{\b 38:} 92 (1966) ({\i Gentiana aspera} Hegetschw. & Heer). Biennial 1-40 cm, usually branched from the base. Cauline leaves ovate to ovate-lanceolate or ovate-triangular, subobtuse, papillose-hirsute on the margin and often on the midrib. Calyx-lobes somewhat unequal, papillose-hirsute on the often recurved margin and on the midrib; sinus acute. Corolla 10-40 mm, distinctly exceeding the calyx, violet, pink or whitish. Capsule stipitate. •{\i  E. & C. Alps, mountains of S. Germany and W. Czechoslovakia}. Au Cz Ge He Ju.
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28 Ecotypic variants: Alpine: Type of the species
\par
\pard\f0\fs28    Aestival:{\b  Gentiana norica} A. & J. Kerner, {\i Sched. Fl. Exs. Austro-Hung.}{\b  6:} 56 (1893) ({\i G. aspera }subsp.{\i  norica} (A. & J. Kerner) Vollmann)
\par
\pard\f0\fs28    Autumnal: {\b Gentiana sturmiana} A. & J. Kerner,{\i  op. cit.}{\b  2:} 122 (1882) ({\i G. aspera} subsp.{\i  sturmiana} (A. & J. Kerner) Vollmann)
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 19. G. germanica} (Willd.) E. F. Warburg in Clapham, Tutin & E. F. Warburg, {\i Fl. Brit. Is.} 824 (1952) ({\i Gentiana germanica} Willd.). Like {\b 18} but leaves and calyx glabrous; calyx-lobes somewhat scabrid on the margin. 2n = 36. •{\i  W. & C. Europe, from S. England to the S. Alps and E. Carpathians}. Au Be Br Cz Ga Ge He Ho It Ju Rm.
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28 {\i Ecotypic variants} :
\pard\f0\fs28    Autumnal-montane: Type of the species.
\par
\pard\f0\fs28    Autumnal-alpine:{\b  Gentiana rhaetica} A. & J. Kerner,{\i  Sched. Fl. Austro-Hung.}{\b  2:} 124 (1882) ({\i G. germanica} subsp.{\i  semleri} Vollmann).
\par
\pard\f0\fs28    Aestival:{\b  Gentiana solstitialis} Wettst.,{\i  Denkschr. Akad. Wiss. Math.Nat. Kl.} ({\i Wien}){\b  64:} 337 (1896) ({\i G. germanica} subsp.{\i  solstitialis} (Wettst.) Vollmann).
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28   {\i  Gentiana rhaetica} subsp.{\i  kerneri} Wettst. is intermediate between the autumnal and aestival variants.
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 20. G. austriaca} (A. & J. Kerner) J. Holub,{\i  Preslia}{\b  37:} 102 (1965) ({\i Gentiana austriaca} A. & J. Kerner, {\i G. praecox} A. & J. Kerner). Biennial (1-)10-20(-40) cm, usually branched from the base, forming a corymbose inflorescence. Cauline leaves ovate-lanceolate to lanceolate, gradually narrowed from the base, acuminate, glabrous. Calyx-lobes nearly equal, longer than the tube, linear, glabrous; margin flat or revolute; sinus obtuse. Corolla 24-45 mm, purplish or whitish. Capsule stipitate. •{\i  E.C. Europe.} Au Cz Ge Hu Ju Po Rm.
\par
\par 
\pard\f0\fs28  {\i Ecotypic variants:}
\pard\f0\fs28    Autumnal: Type of the species.
\par
\pard\f0\fs28    Aestival:{\b  Gentiana germanica} subsp.{\b  austrica} var.{\b  neilreichii} (Dörfler & Wettst.) Hayek,{\i  Prodr. Fl. Penins. Balcan.}{\b  2:} 423 (1930) ({\i G. austriaca} subsp.{\i  neilreichii} (Dörfler & Wettst.) Wettst.
\par
\pard\f0\fs28     Aestival-montane: {\b Gentiana praecox} A. & J. Kerner, {\i Verh. Zool.-Bot. Ges. Wien} {\b 38}: 669 (1888), non sensu Wettst. et auct. pl.
\par
\pard\f0\fs28  {\b  G. bohemica} Skalický,{\i  Preslia}{\b  41:} 144 (1969) is intermediate between {\b 19} and{\b  20}. It occurs in S.E. Germany, Czechoslovakia  and N.E. Austria. There are two ecotypic variants, the type of the species, which is montane and {\b G. gabretae } Skalický, {\i op. cit.} 146 (1969), which is alpine.
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 21. G. lutescens} (Velen.) J. Holub,{\i  Folia Geobot. Phytotax.} ({\i Praha}) {\b 2:} 117 (1967) ({\i Gentiana praecox} sensu Wettst., non A. & J. Kerner,{\i  G. lutescens} Velen.). Biennial 3-40 cm, simple or branched above, forming a racemose inflorescence. Cauline leaves narrowly ovate, obtuse, except the uppermost which are acuminate, glabrous. Calyx-lobes shorter than to as long as the tube, 2 wider than the others, linear, glabrous; margin flat or revolute; sinus obtuse or subacute. Corolla 18-25 mm, purplish or yellowish.
\par
\par 66}
\par