{\rtf1\ansi \deff4\deflang1033{\fonttbl{\f4\froman\fcharset0\fprq2 Times New Roman;}}{\colortbl;\red0\green0\blue0;\red0\green0\blue255;\red0\green255\blue255;\red0\green255\blue0;\red255\green0\blue255;\red255\green0\blue0;\red255\green255\blue0;\red255\green255\blue255;\red0\green0\blue128;\red0\green128\blue128;\red0\green128\blue0;\red128\green0\blue128;\red128\green0\blue0;\red128\green128\blue0;\red128\green128\blue128;\red192\green192\blue192;}{\stylesheet{\widctlpar \f4\fs20\lang2057 \snext0 Normal;}{\*\cs10 \additive Default Paragraph Font;}}{\info{\author dddd}{\operator dddd}{\creatim\yr1998\mo11\dy5\hr15\min23}{\revtim\yr1998\mo11\dy5\hr15\min24}{\version2}{\edmins1}{\nofpages4}{\nofwords897}{\nofchars5115}{\*\company  }{\vern57431}}\widowctrl\ftnbj\aenddoc\hyphcaps0 \fet0\sectd \linex0 {\*\pnseclvl1\pnucrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl2\pnucltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl3\pndec\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl4\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl5\pndec\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl6\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl7\pnlcrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl8\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl9\pnlcrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}
\pard\plain \ \f4\fs20\lang2057 {\fs28  Capsule stipitate. 2n = 36. \bullet }{\i\fs28  E.C. Europe and N. half of Balkan peninsula, mainly in the mountains.}{\fs28  Au Bu Cz Ge Ju Po Rm Rs (W).
\par 
\par }{\i\fs28 Ecotypic variants}{\fs28  :  Aestival: Type of the species.
\par   Autumnal:}{\b\fs28  Gentianella lutescens}{\fs28  subsp.}{\b\fs28  carpatica}{\fs28  (Hayek) J. Holub, }{\i\fs28 op.cit.}{\fs28  119 (1967), non }{\i\fs28 Gentiana carpatica}{\fs28  Kit. (}{\i\fs28 G. carpaticola}{\fs28  Borb\'e1s, }{\i\fs28 G. praecox}{\fs28  subsp.}{\i\fs28  carpatica}{\fs28  Hayek).
\par 
\par   Sect. ARCTOPHILA (Griseb.) J. Holub. Stems simple or with a few long branches from the base. Flowers 4- to 5-merous, more or less numerous and crowded at the ends of the branches. Corolla cylindrical, not fringed in the throat or at the margins; lobes acuminate or mucronate. Style absent. Capsule sessile.
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 22. G. aurea}{\fs28  (L.) H. Sm.,}{\i\fs28  Uppsala Univ. \'c5rsskr.}{\b\fs28  1945}{\fs28 (}{\b\fs28 7}{\fs28 ): 259 (1945) (}{\i\fs28 Gentiana aurea}{\fs28  L.). Annual or biennial 5-15 cm, with long erect branches from base. Cauline leaves 2-3 times as long as wide, the lower obtuse, the upper more or less acute. Flowers 4- to 5-merous, small, crowded at the ends of the branches and closely subtended by the uppermost leaves. Calyx-teeth more or less equal; sinus rounded. Corolla 7-10 mm, pale yellow, rarely blue. 2n = 36.}{\i\fs28  Sea- and lake-shores. Arctic Europe.}{\fs28  ?Fe Is No Rs (N) Su.
\par 
\par }
\pard \qc\ {\b\fs28 7.              Lomatogonium}{\fs28               A. Braun
\par }{\fs24 By  †T.G. Tutin.
\par 
\par }
\pard \ {\fs28 Annual herbs. Calyx deeply divided into (4-)5 lobes. Corolla rotate, pale blue or white; tube short; lobes (4-)5, each with 2 fimbriate nectaries on the inner surface near the base. Anthers basifixed, linear, not twisting spirally after dehiscence. stigma sessile; lobes decurrent.
\par 
\par }
\pard \li200\ {\fs28 Calyx-lobes distinctly shorter than corolla, ovate .................... }{\b\fs28 1. carinthiacum}{\fs28 
\par Calyx-lobes equalling or longer than corolla, linear-
\par  lanceolate .......................................................................................... }{\b\fs28 2. rotatum}{\fs28 
\par 
\par }
\pard \ {\fs28    }{\b\fs28 1. L. carinthiacum}{\fs28  (Wulfen) Reichenb.,}{\i\fs28  Fl. Germ. Excurs}{\fs28 . 421 (1831). Glabrous. Stems 1-12 cm, 4-angled. Leaves ovate to oblong, papillose on the margin, the basal narrowed to a short petiole, the others sessile. Flowers solitary, on long, naked branches. Calyx-lobes shorter than the corolla, ovate. Corolla 12-16 mm in diameter; lobes papillose on the outside towards the apex. 2n = 40.}{\i\fs28  Dry grassland and open habitats. C. & E. Alps, S. Carpathians; very local.}{\fs28  Au Ge He It Rm. (}{\i\fs28 Mountains of Asia and North America.}{\fs28 )
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 2. L. rotatum}{\fs28  (L.) Fries ex Fernald, }{\i\fs28 Rhodora}{\b\fs28  21:}{\fs28  194 (1919). Like }{\b\fs28 1}{\fs28  but up to 25 cm; lower leaves spathulate, upper linear-lanceolate; calyx-lobes as long as or longer than corolla, linear-lanceolate. 2n = 10. }{\i\fs28 Wet places. Iceland; arctic Russia.}{\fs28  Is Rs (N). (}{\i\fs28 N. & C. Asia, North America}{\fs28 .)
\par 
\par }
\pard \qc\ {\b\fs28 8.              Swertia}{\fs28                  L.
\par }{\fs24 By  †T.G. Tutin.
\par 
\par }
\pard \ {\fs28 Glabrous perennial herbs. Calyx 4- to 5-lobed almost to base. Corolla rotate, 4- to 5-lobed almost to base, each lobe with 2 fimbriate nectaries near the base. Anthers basifixed, usually sagittate. Ovary unilocular, ovoid, narrowed to the sessile, 2-lobed stigma.
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 1. S. perennis}{\fs28  L., }{\i\fs28 Sp. Pl.}{\fs28  226 (1753). Stem (8-)15-60 cm, 4-angled, brownish-red or purplish. Lower leaves crowded, ovate to elliptical, obtuse, narrowed to a winged petiole; upper leaves remote, opposite or, less frequently, alternate, sessile, semi-amplexicaul. Calyx-lobes narrow, acuminate. Corolla-lobes 6-16 mm, blue or dirty violet, rarely yellowish-green or white, with darker dots or lines. Capsule 10-12 mm, 2-valved. 2n = 28.}{\i\fs28  Wet places, mainly in the mountains. From N.C. France and N.W. Russia southwards to N. Spain, Bulgaria and S. Ural}{\fs28 . Au Bu Cz Ga Ge He Hs It Ju Po Rm Rs (B,C,E).
\par 
\par    Very variable. Three other species are sometimes recognized, but the correlation of the supposedly distinguishing characters is poor and plants with one or more of these characters occur sporadically across Europe. The names applied to these variants are:}{\b\fs28  S. alpestris}{\fs28  Baumg. ex Fuss, }{\i\fs28 Mantissa}{\fs28  19 (1846), with alternate cauline leaves, dark violet flowers with acute corolla-lobes and the fimbriae of the nectary short;}{\b\fs28  S. obtusa}{\fs28  Ledeb.,}{\i\fs28  M\'e9m. Acad. Sci. P\'e9tersb.}{\b\fs28  5:}{\fs28  526 (1815), with alternate cauline leaves, dark violet flowers with obtuse corolla-lobes and the fimbriae of the nectary 3-4 times as long as the nectary; and}{\b\fs28  S. punctata}{\fs28  Baumg., }{\i\fs28 Enum. Stirp. Transs. }{\b\fs28 1:}{\fs28  190 (1816), which has opposite cauline leaves, greenish-yellow corolla, with acute lobes and the nectary with short fimbriae. None of these seems to merit even subspecific rank and the latter is probably no more than a colour variant of typical}{\i\fs28  S. perennis}{\fs28 .
\par 
\par }
\pard \qc\ {\b\fs28 9.                Halenia }{\fs28               Borkh.
\par }{\fs24 By  †T.G. Tutin.
\par 
\par }
\pard \ {\fs28 Glabrous annual herbs. Calyx deeply 4-lobed. Corolla campanulate, 4-lobed half-way to base, each lobe with a slender nectary-spur at its base. Anthers basifixed. Ovary unilocular, ovoid, narrowed to the sessile, 2-lobed stigma.
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 1. H. corniculata}{\fs28  (L.) Cornaz,}{\i\fs28  Bull. Soc. Sci. Nat. Neuchatel}{\b\fs28  25:}{\fs28  171 (1897). Stem 12-50 cm, 4-angled, erect, usually branched. Leaves opposite, the lower obovate-lanceolate, petiolate, the upper elliptic-oblong, sessile. Flowers in corymbose clusters; pedicels very unequal. Calyx 6-8 mm; lobes linear-subulate, 1/2-2/3 as long as corolla. Corolla 8-11 mm, pale greenish-yellow, persistent in fruit; lobes ovate to ovate-oblong, shortly acuminate; nectary-spur horizontal or ascending.}{\i\fs28  Woodland-margins. C. Ural}{\fs28  (}{\i\fs28 W. of Sverdlovsk}{\fs28 ). Rs (C). (}{\i\fs28 N. & C. Asia}{\fs28 .)
\par 
\par }
\pard \qc\ {\b\fs28  141.              MENYANTHACEAE.}{\fs28 
\par }{\fs24 Edit.  †T.G. Tutin.
\par 
\par }
\pard \ {\fs28 Aquatic or semi-aquatic perennial herbs. Leaves alternate, except sometimes on flowering stems. Flowers 5-merous, actinomorphic, heterostylous. Calyx deeply divided. Corolla deeply divided; lobes valvate in bud. Stamens inserted on the corolla-tube or in the sinuses between the lobes. Ovary superior to semiinferior, 1-locular; placentae parietal; ovules numerous. Fruit a capsule.
\par 
\par }
\pard \li200\ {\fs28 Leaves 3-foliolate; flowers pink or white ..................................}{\b\fs28  1. Menyanthes}{\fs28 
\par Leaves simple; flowers yellow .................................................. }{\b\fs28 2. Nymphoides}{\fs28 
\par 
\par }
\pard \qc\ {\b\fs28  1.                Menyanthes}{\fs28              L.
\par }{\fs24 By  †T.G.Tutin.
\par 
\par }
\pard \ {\fs28 Leaves 3-foliolate, all alternate. Capsule dehiscing by 2 valves.
\par 
\par }{\b\fs28 1. M. trifoliata}{\fs28  L.,}{\i\fs28  Sp. Pl.}{\fs28  145 (1753). Glabrous, with a stout, creeping rhizome; flowering stems 12-35 cm. Leaflets up to
\par 
\par 67}
\par }