{\rtf1\ansi \deff4\deflang1033{\fonttbl{\f4\froman\fcharset0\fprq2 Times New Roman;}}{\colortbl;\red0\green0\blue0;\red0\green0\blue255;\red0\green255\blue255;\red0\green255\blue0;\red255\green0\blue255;\red255\green0\blue0;\red255\green255\blue0;\red255\green255\blue255;\red0\green0\blue128;\red0\green128\blue128;\red0\green128\blue0;\red128\green0\blue128;\red128\green0\blue0;\red128\green128\blue0;\red128\green128\blue128;\red192\green192\blue192;}{\stylesheet{\widctlpar \f4\fs20\lang2057 \snext0 Normal;}{\*\cs10 \additive Default Paragraph Font;}}{\info{\author dddd}{\operator dddd}{\creatim\yr1998\mo11\dy5\hr15\min24}{\revtim\yr1998\mo11\dy5\hr15\min25}{\version2}{\edmins1}{\nofpages4}{\nofwords888}{\nofchars5067}{\*\company  }{\vern57431}}\widowctrl\ftnbj\aenddoc\hyphcaps0 \fet0\sectd \linex0 {\*\pnseclvl1\pnucrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl2\pnucltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl3\pndec\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl4\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl5\pndec\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl6\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl7\pnlcrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl8\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl9\pnlcrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}
\pard\plain \ \f4\fs20\lang2057 {\fs28 10 cm, obovate to rhombic, sinuate and sometimes remotely denticulate, rounded to subacute, shortly petiolulate; petioles 7-20 cm, sheathing below. Raceme 10- to 20-flowered; pedicels 5-10 mm, longer than the ovate bracts. Calyx-lobes ovate somewhat recurved. Corolla c. 15 mm in diameter, pink outside paler or white inside; lobes fimbriate. 2n = 54.}{\i\fs28  In shallow water or the wetter parts of bogs and fens. Most of Europe, but rare in the Mediterranean region.}{\fs28  ?.Al Au Be Br Bu Co Cz Da Fa Fe Ga Ge Hb He Ho Hs Hu Is It Ju Lu No Po Rm Rs (N, B, C, W, E) Su.
\par 
\par }
\pard \qc\ {\b\fs28 2.               Nymphoides}{\fs28              Seguier
\par }{\fs24 By  †T.G. Tutin.
\par 
\par }
\pard \ {\fs28 Leaves simple, those on the flowering stems opposite. Capsule dehiscing irregularly.
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 1. N. peltata}{\fs28  (S. G. Gmelin) O. Kuntze,}{\i\fs28  Rev. Gen. Pl.}{\b\fs28  2:}{\fs28  429 (1891) (}{\i\fs28 N. flava}{\fs28  Druce,}{\i\fs28  Limnanthemum peltatum}{\fs28  S. G. Gmelin). Glabrous; stems up to 160 cm, creeping and floating. Leaves 3-10 cm across, suborbicular, sinuate or entire, with a deep narrow sinus at base; petioles often sheathing below. Flowers in axillary fascicles of 2-5; pedicels 3-10 cm. Calyx-lobes oblong-lanceolate. Corolla 30-40 mm in diameter, yellow; lobes fimbriate-ciliate. 2n = 54.}{\i\fs28  In still water and slow-flowing rivers. Most of Europe, northwards to England, the Baltic and N.C. Russia.}{\fs28  Al Au Be Br Bu Cz Ga Ge Gr Ho Hs Hu It Ju Lu Po Rm Rs (N, B, C, W, E) Sa Tu [Da He Su].
\par 
\par }
\pard \qc\ {\b\fs28 142.          APOCYNACEAE}{\fs28  
\par }{\fs24 Edit. V.H. Heywood.
\par 
\par }
\pard \ {\fs28 Small trees, shrubs, or herbs, with poisonous latex. Leaves simple, exstipulate, with glands in or above the axils. Flowers solitary or in cymes, hermaphrodite, actinomorphic, 5-merous. Corolla with oblique lobes, contorted in bud. Stamens 5; anthers introrse, closely surrounding the stigma. Ovary superior; carpels 2, usually free, united by a single style above. Fruit of two fusiform follicles, usually opening by the ventral suture; rarely only one follicle developing.
\par 
\par Aestivation is described with reference to side-view of the bud.
\par 
\par }
\pard \li200\ {\fs28 1 Corolla infundibuliform or campanulate, the throat wide and
\par   open; anthers adhering to the stigma; seeds numerous, comose
\par 2 Leaves coriaceous, evergreen; flowers at least 2 cm ......................}{\b\fs28  1. Nerium}{\fs28 
\par 2 Leaves thin, deciduous; flowers less than 1 cm .................... }{\b\fs28 2. Trachomitum}{\fs28 
\par 1 Corolla hypocrateriform, the throat narrow and closed 
\par   by hairs; anthers not adhering to the stigma; seeds few,
\par   not comose
\par 3 Leaves alternate; flowers in terminal cymes ...................................}{\b\fs28  3. Rhazya}{\fs28 
\par 3 Leaves opposite; flowers solitary in leaf-axils ..................................}{\b\fs28  4. Vinca}{\fs28 
\par 
\par }
\pard \qc\ {\b\fs28 1.                Nerium }{\fs28              L.
\par }{\fs24 By F. Markgraf.
\par 
\par }
\pard \ {\fs28 Shrubs or small trees. Leaves opposite or in whorls of 3 or 4, evergreen. Inflorescence terminal, corymbose. Corolla cylindrical below, infundibuliform above, the throat wide and open, with 5 large, laciniate scales; lobes overlapping to the right in bud. Anthers adhering to the stigma, with appendage. Disc absent. Follicles united until just before dehiscence. Seeds numerous, tomentose, apically comose.
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 1. N. oleander}{\fs28  L.,}{\i\fs28  Sp. Pl.}{\fs28  209 (1753) (}{\i\fs28 N. kotschyi}{\fs28  auct. eur., non Boiss.). Stems up to 4 m. Leaves 6-12(-15) \'d7 1\'b72-2(-3) cm, linear-lanceolate, acute, coriaceous. Calyx densely glandular inside. Corolla (2-)3-4 cm in diameter, usually pink; tube 2 cm, the lobes 2 cm, obtuse, patent. Anther-appendages long, hairy, twisted. Follicles 8-16 \'d7 0\'b75-1 cm, erect, reddish-brown.}{\i\fs28  River-banks and river-gravels. Mediterranean region, S. Portugal; frequently planted for ornament, and perhaps only naturalized in some areas}{\fs28 . Al Bl Co Cr Ga Gr Hs It Ju Lu Sa Si Tu [Az].
\par 
\par }
\pard \qc\ {\b\fs28 2.              Trachomitum}{\fs28                Woodson
\par }{\fs24 By F. Markgraf.
\par 
\par }
\pard \ {\fs28 Rhizomatous perennials. Leaves opposite, deciduous. Inflorescence terminal, thyrsiform. Corolla campanulate, the throat wide and open; lobes overlapping to the right in bud, suberect at anthesis. Anthers auriculate, adhering to the stigma. Disc of 5 fleshy scales. Seeds numerous, apically comose, otherwise glabrous.
\par 
\par   Literature: R. E. Woodson, }{\i\fs28 Ann. Missouri Bot. Gard.}{\b\fs28  17:}{\fs28  156-164 (1930).
\par 
\par }
\pard \li200\ {\fs28 1 Calyx-lobes 1 mm, ovate, obtuse; corolla-lobes shorter
\par   than tube .................................................................................... }{\b\fs28 2. sarmatiense}{\fs28 
\par 1 Calyx-lobes 1\'b75-2 mm, \'b1 lanceolate, acute; corolla-lobes
\par   as long as tube
\par 2 Leaves obtuse, mucronate, closely denticulate; corolla 4-5 mm .. }{\b\fs28 1. venetum}{\fs28 
\par 2 Leaves acute, remotely denticulate; corolla 7 mm ....................... }{\b\fs28 3. tauricum}{\fs28 
\par 
\par }
\pard \ {\fs28    }{\b\fs28 1. T. venetum}{\fs28  (L.) Woodson,}{\i\fs28  Ann. Missouri Bot. Gard.}{\b\fs28  17:}{\fs28  158 (1930) (}{\i\fs28 Apocynum venetum}{\fs28  L.). Stems up to 50 cm. Leaves 20-40(-70) \'d7 5-8(-15) mm, narrowly oblong, closely denticulate, rounded or narrowed at base, obtuse, mucronate, thin, glabrous. Calyx-lobes 1\'b75-2 mm, lanceolate, rarely ovate-lanceolate, acute, the margins scarious. Corolla 4-5 mm, whitish, the throat c. 4 mm wide; lobes as long as the tube. Follicles c. 15 \'d7 0\'b75 cm, pendent.}{\i\fs28  Maritime sands. Coasts of the Adriatic Aegean and Black Seas; rare and local}{\fs28 . Bu It Ju ?Rm Tu.
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 2. T. sarmatiense}{\fs28  Woodson,}{\i\fs28  op. cit}{\fs28 . 162 (1930). Stems c. 100 cm. Leaves 20-40 \'d7 15-20 mm, ovate-oblong, acute, remotely denticulate, truncate at base, glabrous, glaucous beneath. Calyx-lobes 1 mm, ovate, obtuse. Corolla 3-4 mm, pinkish, the throat 3 mm wide; lobes shorter than the tube. Follicles c. 15 \'d7 0\'b74 cm.}{\i\fs28  Marshy meadows and salt-marshes. S. & S.E. parts of U.S.S.R}{\fs28 . Rs (C, W, K, E).
\par 
\par }{\b\fs28  T. russanovii}{\fs28  (Pobed.) Pobed. in Schischkin & Bobrov,}{\i\fs28  Fl. U.R.S.S.}{\b\fs28  18:}{\fs28  654 (1952) (}{\i\fs28 Apocynum russanovii}{\fs28  Pobed.), from the island of Dzarylgac, off the S. coast of Ukraine, seems to be a few-flowered variant of }{\b\fs28 2}{\fs28 .
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 3. T. tauricum}{\fs28  (Pobed.) Pobed.,}{\i\fs28  op. cit.}{\fs28  657 (1952). Like }{\b\fs28 2}{\fs28  but leaves 40-70 \'d7 8-15 mm, oblong-lanceolate, narrowed at base; calyx-lobes 2 mm, lanceolate, acute, the margins scarious; corolla 7 mm, yellowish-white, the throat 4 mm wide, the lobes as long as the tube. }{\i\fs28 Hillsides above the sea. \bullet  S.E. Krym}{\fs28  (}{\i\fs28 Feodosija}{\fs28 ). Rs (K).
\par 
\par }
\pard \qc\ {\b\fs28 3.               Rhazya}{\fs28              Decne
\par }{\fs24 By F. Markgraf.
\par 
\par }
\pard \ {\fs28 Erect, perennial herbs, woody at base. Leaves alternate, deciduous. Inflorescence terminal, corymbose. Calyx-lobes c. \'bc as 
\par 
\par 68}
\par }