{\rtf1\ansi \deff4\deflang1033{\fonttbl{\f4\froman\fcharset0\fprq2 Times New Roman;}}{\colortbl;\red0\green0\blue0;\red0\green0\blue255;\red0\green255\blue255;\red0\green255\blue0;\red255\green0\blue255;\red255\green0\blue0;\red255\green255\blue0;\red255\green255\blue255;\red0\green0\blue128;\red0\green128\blue128;\red0\green128\blue0;\red128\green0\blue128;\red128\green0\blue0;\red128\green128\blue0;\red128\green128\blue128;\red192\green192\blue192;}{\stylesheet{\widctlpar \f4\fs20\lang2057 \snext0 Normal;}{\*\cs10 \additive Default Paragraph Font;}}{\info{\author dddd}{\operator dddd}{\creatim\yr1998\mo11\dy5\hr15\min25}{\revtim\yr1998\mo11\dy5\hr15\min25}{\version2}{\edmins0}{\nofpages4}{\nofwords1006}{\nofchars5738}{\*\company  }{\vern57431}}\widowctrl\ftnbj\aenddoc\hyphcaps0 \fet0\sectd \linex0 {\*\pnseclvl1\pnucrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl2\pnucltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl3\pndec\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl4\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl5\pndec\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl6\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl7\pnlcrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl8\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl9\pnlcrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}
\pard\plain \ \f4\fs20\lang2057 {\fs28 long as the corolla-tube. Corolla hypocrateriform, the tube slender; throat narrow, hairy, without scales; lobes overlapping to the left in bud. Anthers acute, surrounding the stigma but not adhering to it. Carpels surrounded by a disc; ovules many. Seeds few, glabrous.
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 1. R. orientalis}{\fs28  (Decne) A.DC. in DC.,}{\i\fs28  Prodr.}{\b\fs28  8:}{\fs28  386 (1844). Stems up to 50 cm, numerous, simple. Leaves c. 4 \'d7 2 cm, lanceolate, rarely ovate, narrowed or rarely rounded at base, thin, ciliate. Calyx-lobes 2-3 mm, lanceolate, acute, ciliate. Corolla c. 1 cm in diameter, blue; tube 1-1\'b75 cm, the lobes c. 1/3 as long as the tube, narrowly ovate, subacute. Follicles c. 5-8 \'d7 0\'b75 cm, erect. }{\i\fs28 Wet places near the sea. Thrace.}{\fs28  Gr \'86Tu. (}{\i\fs28 N.W. Anatolia}{\fs28 .)
\par 
\par }
\pard \qc\ {\b\fs28 4.                  Vinca }{\fs28                L.
\par }{\fs24 By W.T.Stearn.
\par 
\par }
\pard \ {\fs28 Low, creeping dwarf shrubs or herbaceous perennials, usually with trailing vegetative shoots and ascending flowering stems. Leaves opposite. Flowers solitary in leaf-axils, long-pedicellate. Calyx-lobes more than \'bc as long as corolla-tube. Corolla hypocrateriform, usually blue (rarely reddish-purple, pink or white), the tube gradually widened, without conspicuous appendages but with a zone of hairs above the insertion of the stamens and a low ridge connecting the lobes at the mouth; lobes oblique, as long as the tube, overlapping to the left in bud. Stamens inserted half-way up the corolla-tube; filaments bent abruptly at base; anthers with the connective expanded above into a flap-like appendage. Carpels with 4-8 ovules, alternating with 2 discscales. Follicles patent. Seeds glabrous.
\par 
\par All species grow in woods, scrub, hedges or other shady places.
\par 
\par   Literature: M. Pichon,}{\i\fs28  Bull. Mus. Nat. Hist. Nat.}{\fs28  (}{\i\fs28 Paris}{\fs28 ) ser. 2,}{\b\fs28  23:}{\fs28  439-444 (1951).
\par 
\par }
\pard \li200\ {\fs28 1 Plant dying down completely in winter; veins of leaves
\par   diverging from midrib at 10\'b0-30\'b0 or scarcely perceptible ............. }{\b\fs28 2. herbacea}{\fs28 
\par 1 Plant evergreen, with previous year's leaves present at
\par   flowering time; veins of leaves diverging from midrib at 30\'b0-50\'b0
\par 2 Calyx-lobes 3-4(-5) mm, narrowly ovate to narrowly triangular,
\par   glabrous .............................................................................................. }{\b\fs28 1. minor}{\fs28 
\par 2 Calyx-lobes (4-)6-18 mm, very narrowly triangular or 
\par   almost linear
\par 3 Margin of leaves and calyx-lobes glabrous ................................. }{\b\fs28 3. difformis}{\fs28 
\par 3 Margin of leaves and calyx-lobes ciliate
\par 4 Leaves not more than 3\'b75 \'d7 2 cm; flowering stems 9-12 cm ...... }{\b\fs28 4. balcanica}{\fs28 
\par 4 Leaves up to 9 \'d7 6 cm; flowering stems up to 30 cm
\par 5 Hairs of calyx 0\'b75-1 mm .................................................................... }{\b\fs28 5. major}{\fs28 
\par 5 Hairs of calyx 0-2 mm or less ...................................................... }{\b\fs28 3. difformis}{\fs28 
\par 
\par }
\pard \ {\fs28    }{\b\fs28 1. V. minor}{\fs28  L., }{\i\fs28 Sp. Pl. }{\fs28 209 (1753). Stems procumbent or ascending, over-wintering. Leaves 1\'b75-4\'b75 \'d7 0\'b75-2\'b75 cm, mostly lanceolate or elliptical (but often ovate on trailing shoots), rounded or cuneate at base, evergreen, glabrous. Flowering stems up to 20 cm; pedicels often longer than the subtending leaves. Calyx-lobes 3-4(-5) mm, narrowly ovate to narrowly triangular, glabrous. Corolla-tube 9-11 mm; limb 25-30 mm in diameter, usually blue; lobes obliquely truncate. 2n = 46. }{\i\fs28 S., W. & C. Europe, extending eastwards to Lithuania and Krym.}{\fs28  Au Be Bu Co Cz Ga Ge ?Gr He Ho Hs Hu It Ju Lu Rm Rs (B, C, W, K) Po Si [Br Da Hb No Su ?Tu].
\par 
\par   This species has been cultivated for many centuries and occurs as a relict of cultivation or of deliberate naturalization so often that the limits of its natural distribution are rather uncertain.
\par 
\par There exist variants with white, pink, reddish-purple and violet flowers.
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 2. V. herbacea}{\fs28  Waldst. & Kit.,}{\i\fs28  Pl. Rar. Hung.}{\b\fs28  1:}{\fs28  8 (1799) (incl.}{\i\fs28  V. mixta}{\fs28  Velen.). Stems procumbent or ascending, dying back in winter. Leaves 1\'b75-4 \'d7 0\'b74-1\'b75 cm, very narrowly elliptical or narrowly lanceolate to broadly elliptical or the lowermost sometimes obovate, cuneate at base, with margins sometimes minutely ciliate. Flowers well spaced along the stems; pedicels shorter than to longer than the subtending leaves. Calyx-lobes 4-8 mm, very narrowly triangular, the margins smooth, ciliate or scabrid. Corolla-tube 10-15 mm; limb 20-35 mm in diameter, blue; lobes acute or very obliquely truncate.}{\i\fs28  E.C. & S.E. Europe, extending to c.}{\fs28  51\'b0}{\i\fs28  N. in S.C. Russia}{\fs28 . Au Bu Cz Gr Hu Ju Rm Rs (C, W, K, E) Tu.
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 3. V. difformis}{\fs28  Pourret,}{\i\fs28  M\'e9m. Acad. Sci. Toulouse}{\b\fs28  3:}{\fs28  337 (1788) (}{\i\fs28 V. media}{\fs28  Hoffmanns. & Link). Stems up to 200 cm, procumbent or ascending, overwintering. Leaves 2\'b75-7 \'d7 1\'b75-4\'b75 cm, ovate to lanceolate, mostly narrowly lanceolate, rounded at base then attenuate into the petiole, evergreen, glabrous or with minutely ciliate margin. Flowering stems up to 30 cm; pedicels shorter than the subtending leaves. Calyx-lobes 5-14 mm, very narrowly triangular, glabrous or the margin minutely ciliate with hairs up to 0\'b72 mm. Corolla-tube 12-18 mm; limb 30-70 mm in diameter, pale blue or almost white; lobes acute or obliquely truncate. 2n = c. 46.}{\i\fs28  S.W. Europe, extending eastwards to S.C. Italy}{\fs28 . Az Bl Co Ga Hs It Lu Sa.
\par 
\par    (}{\b\fs28 a}{\fs28 ) Subsp.}{\b\fs28  difformis}{\fs28  : Leaf-margins glabrous. Calyx-lobes glabrous or, very rarely, ciliate with a few sparse hairs. Corolla-limb 30-45 mm in diameter. }{\i\fs28 Almost throughout the range of the species}{\fs28 .
\par    (}{\b\fs28 b}{\fs28 ) Subsp.}{\b\fs28  sardoa}{\fs28  Stearn,}{\i\fs28  Bot. Jour. Linn. Soc.}{\b\fs28  65:}{\fs28  255 (1972): Leaf-margins scabrid, the hairs up to 0\'b72 mm. Calyx-lobes minutely ciliate. Corolla-limb 60-70 mm in diameter. \bullet }{\i\fs28  Sardegna}{\fs28 .
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 4. V. balcanica}{\fs28  Penzes,}{\i\fs28  Acta Bot. Acad. Sci. Hung.}{\b\fs28  8:}{\fs28  329 (1962). Stems procumbent or ascending, overwintering. Leaves 1\'b72-3\'b75 \'d7 0\'b75-2 cm, ovate, rounded at base, the margins ciliate with hairs 0\'b76-1 mm. Flowering stems 9-12 cm, the pedicels shorter or longer than the subtending leaves. Calyx-lobes 4-8 mm, subulate, the margins ciliate with hairs 0\'b74-1\'b72 mm. Corolla-tube 10-11 mm; limb 25-35 mm in diameter, blue; lobes obliquely truncate. \bullet }{\i\fs28  Balkan peninsula.}{\fs28  Al Bu Ju.
\par 
\par   A little-known species very close to }{\b\fs28 5}{\fs28 , requiring further study.
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 5. V. major}{\fs28  L., }{\i\fs28 Sp. Pl.}{\fs28  209 (1753). Stems up to 100 cm, ascending in the lower part, then arching or procumbent, overwintering. Leaves 2\'b75-9 \'d7 2-6 cm, mostly ovate or broadly ovate (rarely lanceolate), evergreen, the margins ciliate with hairs 0\'b71-1 mm. Flowering stems up to 30 cm; pedicels shorter than the subtending leaves. Calyx-lobes 7-17 mm, very narrowly triangular, the margins densely ciliate with hairs 0\'b75-1 mm. Corolla-tube 12-15 mm; limb 30-50 mm in diameter, usually bluish-purple; lobes obliquely truncate. 2n = 92.}{\i\fs28  W. & C. Mediterranean region; frequently naturalized elsewhere}{\fs28 . Ga Hs It Ju Si [Au Br Bu Co Cr Gr Hb He Lu Rs (W, K)].
\par 
\par   Cultivated for many centuries and widely naturalized.
\par 
\par    Records from Europe of subsp. }{\b\fs28 hirsuta}{\fs28  (Boiss.) Stearn, }{\i\fs28 Jour. Bot.}{\fs28  (}{\i\fs28 London}{\fs28 )}{\b\fs28  70:}{\fs28  27 (1932), a native of the Caucasus and Anatolia, are referable to variants of }{\b\fs28 5}{\fs28  with lanceolate leaves and narrower, more pointed, violet corolla-lobes.
\par 
\par 69}
\par }