{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 7. E. australis} L., {\i Diss. Erica} 9 (1770) (incl. {\i E. aragonensis} Willk.). Slender shrub up to 2 m, with suberect branches; young twigs puberulent. Leaves 3·5-6 mm, in whorls of 4, linear, erecto-patent, glabrous at maturity; margins revolute, contiguous, completely concealing the lower surface. Flowers in clusters of 4-8, terminating short lateral branches, often grouped into lax, terminal panicles; pedicels 2-3 mm, pubescent, largely concealed by bract, with 3 bracteoles resembling the sepals and overlapping them. Sepals 2 mm, ovate, keeled, pubescent at least on keel and margins; corolla 6-9 mm, reddish-pink, tubular to narrowly campanulate, with revolute lobes; anthers included or partly exserted, with triangular, often fimbriate basal appendages. Ovary pubescent; stigma capitate. {\i Heaths, scrub and open woods; calcifuge. Portugal, N., C. & W. Spain.} Hs Lu.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 8. E. umbellata} L., {\i Sp. Pl. }352 (1753). Dwarf shrub 20-80 cm; young twigs pubescent. Leaves 3-4 mm, in whorls of 3, linear, suberect, more or less pubescent or glandular-ciliate when young, later glabrous; margins revolute, contiguous, completely concealing the lower surface. Flowers in terminal umbels of 3-6; pedicels 2-4 mm, pubescent, with 2-3 bracteoles immediately below the sepals. Sepals 2 mm, ovate, shortly ciliate; corolla 3·5-5·5 mm, bright pinkish-purple, subglobose to broadly campanulate, with erect lobes; anthers usually exserted, without appendages. Ovary glabrous; stigma obconical.{\i  Heaths, scrub and open woods; calcifuge. W. half of Iberian peninsula.} Hs Lu.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28  Plants generally similar to {\b 8}, but with pedicels up to 7 mm, corolla 6-6·5 mm, and anthers abortive and included, occur here and there throughout its range. They may be hybrids, but the identity of the other parent is obscure.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 9. E. arborea} L., {\b Sp. Pl}. 353 (1753). Shrub or small tree 1-4(-7) m; young twigs densely pubescent with short, smooth hairs and longer, strongly echinate hairs. Leaves 3-5 mm, in whorls of (3-)4, linear, erecto-patent, glabrous, minutely denticulate, rather dark green; margins revolute, contiguous, completely concealing lower surface. Flowers in lateral racemes, usually aggregated to form a thyrsoid, terminal or intercalary panicle; pedicels glabrous, with 2-3 minute bracteoles below the middle. Sepals 1·5 mm, ovate, glabrous, saccate at base; corolla 2·5-4 mm, white, broadly campanulate, with erect lobes; anthers included, with flat, ciliate basal appendages. Ovary glabrous; style stout; stigma broadly capitate, white. {\i Woods, evergreen scrub and by streams. Mediterranean region and S.W. Europe.} Al Bl Bu Co Cr Ga Gr Hs It Ju Lu Sa Si Tu.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 10. E. lusitanica} Rudolphi in Schrader,{\i  Jour. für die Bot.}{\b  1799}({\b 2}): 286 (1800). Like {\b 9} but a shrub 1-3·5 m, with erect branches; all hairs smooth; leaves 5-7 mm, light green; sepals 1 mm, not saccate; corolla 4-5 mm, tinged with pink, especially in bud; style slender; stigma obconical, red. Damp heaths and wood-margins. •{\i  S.W. Europe,from S. Portugal to} 44° 30' {\i N. in S.W. France.} Ga Hs Lu [Br].
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b 11-13}).{\b  E. vagans} group. Shrubs 30-80(-250) cm, with decumbent to erect stems; young twigs glabrous or puberulent. Leaves in whorls of 3-5, linear to oblong, glabrous or slightly puberulent; margins revolute, contiguous, concealing the lower surface. Flowers in small axillary clusters, aggregated into terminal or axillary, raceme-like panicles; pedicels much longer than sepals, with 3 small bracteoles near the base. Sepals 1·5-2 mm, ovate to ovate-lanceolate, glabrous or finely ciliate, pinkish; corolla 3-7 mm, cylindrical to campanulate; anthers exserted, without appendages. Ovary glabrous; stigma scarcely wider than style.  The distinct geographical ranges of the three species constituting this group have helped to disguise their great morphological similarity. The distinctive characters of {\b 13}, however, though inconspicuous, appear to be constant; and although on purely morphological criteria {\b 12} might be reduced to a subspecies of {\b 11}, its different habitat, wide geographical separation, and usually rather distinct habit probably justify its retention as an independent species.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Anthers c. 1·5 mm; lobes 3-5 times as long as wide,
\par 
  usually parallel and contiguous ................................................ {\b 13. multiflora}
\par 
1 Anthers 0·5-1 mm; lobes 1½-2½ times as long as wide,
\par 
  widely separated and usually divergent apically
\par 
2 Leaves 6-11 mm, patent or somewhat deflexed on older
\par 
  shoots; anthers 0·5-0·8 mm ........................................................... {\b 11. vagans}
\par 
2 Leaves 4-8 mm, mostly erect or erecto-patent; anthers
\par 
  0·7-1 mm ............................................................................ {\b 12. manipuliflora}
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 11. E. vagans} L.,{\i  Diss. Erica} 10 (1770). Stems up to 60(-80) cm, decumbent to ascending, flexuous. Leaves 6-11 mm, in whorls of 4-5, mostly patent or somewhat deflexed. Inflorescences up to 10 cm, dense, terminal or intercalary. Sepals 1 mm; corolla 2·5-3·5 mm, lilac-pink or white, broadly campanulate, with erect lobes; anthers 0·5-0·8 mm, with widely separated, divergent lobes about twice as long as wide. 2n = 24. Heaths and woods; calcifuge. •{\i  W. Europe, from C. Spain to S.W. England }(? {\i and N.W. Ireland}), {\i and eastwards to} c. 6{\i  E. in France.} Br Ga *Hb Hs [He].
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 12. E. manipuliflora} Salisb.,{\i  Trans. Linn. Soc. London}{\b  6}: 344 (1802) ({\i E. verticillata} Forskål, non Bergius). Stems up to 50(-75) cm, decumbent to ascending, rarely erect, straight or somewhat flexuous. Leaves 4-8 mm, in whorls of 3-4, mostly erect or erecto-patent. Inflorescences not more than 6 cm, usually lax and intercalary or terminal and subcapitate. Sepals 1 mm; corolla 3-3·5 mm, pink, broadly campanulate, with erect lobes; anthers 0·7-1 mm, with widely separated, divergent lobes 2-2½ times as long as wide. {\i Evergreen scrub and dry, rocky places. E. & C. Mediterranean region.} Al ?Bu Cr Gr It Ju Si Tu.
\par 

\par 

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 13. E. multiflora} L.,{\i  Sp. Pl.} 355 (1753). Stems up to 80(-250) cm, usually more or less erect and rigid. Leaves 6-11(-14) mm, in whorls of 4-5. Inflorescences up to 5 cm but often much shorter, terminal or intercalary. Sepals 1·5-2 mm; corolla (3-)4-5(-7) mm, pink, cylindrical to narrowly campanulate, with erect to patent lobes; anthers c. 1·5 mm, with contiguous, usually parallel lobes 3-5 times as long as wide. {\i Rocky hillsides, dry woods and thickets; usually calcicole. Mediterranean region, eastwards to Jugoslavia} ?Al Bl Co Ga Hs It Ju Sa Si.
\par 
 
\par 

\pard\f0\fs28   {\b 14. E. herbacea} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 352 (1753) ({\i E. carnea} L.). Dwarf shrub with procumbent stems and ascending flowering branches not more than 25 cm high; young twigs almost glabrous, bearing conspicuous ridges running from the base of each leaf downwards throughout an internode with nearly constant height and width. Leaves 5-8 mm, in whorls of 4, linear, more or less patent, acute to apiculate, with apparent margin minutely denticulate; margins revolute, closely contiguous, completely concealing the lower surface. Flowers in short, leafy, terminal racemes; pedicels 2-4 mm, glabrous, with 3 small bracteoles near the middle; corolla 5-6 mm, cylindrical, with erect lobes; anthers without appendages, usually completely exserted. Ovary glabrous; stigma scarcely wider than style. 2n = 24.{\i  Coniferous woods and stony slopes, mainly in the mountains; usually calcicole. • Alps and S.C. Europe, northwards to E.C. Germany and eastwards to E. Austria, and extending locally southwards to C. Italy and Macedonia.} Al Au Cz Ga Ge He It Ju ?Rm.
\par 

\par 
7}
\par