{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28\qc {\b 143.          ASCLEPIADACEAE}
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc Edit. V.H. Heywood.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Shrubs or perennial herbs, sometimes with twining stems. Leaves usually opposite, simple, exstipulate, sometimes scale-like. Flowers in axillary or terminal cymes or umbels, actinomorphic, 5-merous. Corolla-lobes contorted or valvate in bud. Single or double corona, of 5 or 10 free or more or less connate segments, inserted at the base of the filaments. Anthers united in a ring and usually adnate to the stigma, forming a gynostegium. Pollen in pollinia or tetrads, becoming attached to translators (pollen-transfer devices) which consist either of a cochleariform body and an elongate portion ending in an adhesive disc, or of 2 arms and a claw. Ovary superior; carpels 2, free below, united at the stigma. Fruit a pair of follicles, though often only one developing. Seeds comose at apex.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Corolla-lobes deflexed at anthesis; follicles usually spiny
\par
2 Corolla white; leaves 2-10 cm ............................................ {\b 3. Gomphocarpus}
\par
2 Corolla pink or purple; leaves (10-)15-23 cm .............................{\b  4. Asclepias}
\par
1 Corolla-lobes patent or erect at anthesis; follicles not spiny
\par
3 Corona double, with 10 segments
\par
4 Stems strongly twining; leaves herbaceous .............................{\b  5. Cynanchum}
\par
4 Stems not twining; leaves scale-like .......................................... {\b 8. Caralluma}
\par
3 Corona single, with 5 segments
\par
5 Corona-segments awned; anthers opening by longitudinal slits ..{\b 1. Periploca}
\par
5 Corona-segments not awned; anthers opening by apical pores
\par
6 Corolla 15-20 mm in diameter .......................................................{\b  2. Araujia}
\par
6 Corolla 5-12 mm in diameter
\par
7 Corona-segments ± united by a membrane; inflorescences
\par
  few-flowered; pollinia pendent ............................................. {\b 6. Vincetoxicum}
\par
7 Corona-segments free; inflorescences many-flowered;
\par
  pollinia erect ....................................................................................{\b 7. Cionura}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc Subfam.  {\b  Periplocoideae}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Anthers adjacent to, but not adnate to the stigma, opening by longitudinal slits; pollen in tetrads. Translators consisting of a cochleariform body and an elongate portion ending in an adhesive disc.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc {\b 1.            Periploca}             L.
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc By F. Markgraf.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Shrubs, with erect or twining stems. Leaves opposite. Flowers in axillary cymes. Corolla contorted in bud; lobes more or less erect at anthesis. Corona single, with 5 free, abaxially awned segments. Follicles cylindrical, slightly sulcate, not spiny.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Literature: K. Browicz,{\i  Arboretum Kornickie }{\b 11:} 5-104 (1966). K. H. Rechinger fil.,{\i  Denkschr. Akad. Wiss. Math.-Nat. Kl.} ({\i Wien}) {\b 105}({\b 2,1}):131 (1943).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 Stems up to 12 m, twining; leaves 4-12 × 2-7 cm, membranous;
\par
   corolla c. 2 cm in diameter ............................................................... {\b 1. graeca}
\par
Stems 1·5-3 m, erect; leaves 1-3·5 × 0.2-0·6 cm, somewhat
\par
   coriaceous; corolla c. 1 cm in diameter ........................................ {\b 2. laevigata}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. P. graeca} L.,{\i  Sp. Pl.} 211 (1753). Stems up to 12 m, twining.Leaves 4-12 × 2-7 cm, petiolate, ovate, more or less obtuse, rounded to cuneate at the base, glabrous, rarely pubescent beneath, membranous. Petioles c. 1 cm. Cymes many-flowered. Corolla c. 2 cm in diameter; lobes oblong, obtuse, green outside, dark purple-brown inside; margins deflexed at anthesis. Awns of corona erect, purple-brown. Anthers spiny. Follicles 10-15 cm. Seeds c. 15 × 4 mm; coma c. 30 mm. 2n = 24.{\i  Woods, thickets and river-banks. Balkan peninsula, extending to S. Romania and locally westwards to Italy}. Al Bu ?Cr Gr It Ju Rm Tu [Ga Hs].
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. P. laevigata} Aiton,{\i  Hort. Kew. }{\b 1:} 301 (1789). Stems 1·5-3 m, erect, sometimes twining at apex. Leaves 1-3·5 × 0·2-0·6 cm, subsessile, linear, acute or obtuse, cuneate at base, glabrous, coriaceous. Cymes few-flowered. Corolla c. 1 cm in diameter; lobes oblong, obtuse, green outside, green, purple-brown and white inside; margins not deflexed at anthesis. Awns of corona deflexed, green. Anthers smooth. Follicles 5-8 (-10) cm. Seeds c. 7 × 3 mm; coma c. 40 mm. {\i Dry, rocky places. S.E. Spain; small islands of C. & E. Mediterranean}. Cr Hs Si. ({\i Islas Canarias, N. Africa, Syria}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   The European representatives belong to subsp.{\b  angustifolia} (Labill.) Markgraf,{\i  Bot. Jour. Linn. Soc.}{\b  64:} 375 (1971) ({\i P. angustifolia} Labill.). The type subspecies occurs in Islas Canarias.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc Subfam.{\b    Asclepiadoideae}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Anthers adnate to the stigma, opening apically; pollen in pollinia. Translators consisting of 2 arms and a claw.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc {\b 2.              Araujia }            Brot.
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc By F. Markgraf.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Shrubs with twining stems. Leaves opposite. Flowers in axillary cymes. Corolla slightly contorted in bud; lobes more or less erect at anthesis. Corona single; segments 5, free, without awns. Follicles ovoid, not spiny.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Literature: G. O. A. Malme,{\i  Ark. Bot. }{\b 8}({\b 1}): 1-30 (1909).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. A. sericifera} Brot., {\i Trans. Linn. Soc. London}{\b  12:} 62 (1818). Stems up to 10 m. Leaves 5-8 × 2-2·5 cm, ovate-oblong, acute, truncate at base, subglabrous above, white-tomentose beneath. Cymes few-flowered; peduncles long. Corolla 15-20 mm in diameter; lobes erecto-patent, ovate-acuminate, white with pink stripes. Follicles c. 10 × 6 cm, pruinose.{\i  Formerly cultivated for ornament; locally naturalized in S.W. Europe.} [Az Ga Hs Lu] ({\i S.E. South America.})
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc {\b  3.               Gomphocarpus }      R.Br.
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc By F. Markgraf.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Erect shrubs. Leaves usually opposite, sometimes in whorls of 3 or the upper alternate. Flowers in extra-axillary cymes. Corolla valvate in bud; lobes deflexed at anthesis. Corona single, with 5 free segments, each with 2 lateral auricles. Follicles ovoid, acute, spiny.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. G. fruticosus} (L.) Aiton fil. in Aiton,{\i  Hort. Kew.} ed. 2, {\b 2:} 80 (1811). Stems 1-2 m. Leaves 2-10 × 0·3-1 cm, linear-lanceolate, glabrous. Cymes many-flowered; peduncles short, pubescent. Corolla white; lobes ovate-oblong; margins ciliate. Corona-segments cucullate, fleshy. Follicles 4-6 × 2-3 cm. 2n = 16. {\i Naturalized in waste places. S. Europe}. [Al Az Bl Co Cr Ga Gr Hs It Ju Lu Sa Si.] ({\i S. Africa}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc {\b  4.              Asclepias }     L.
\par
 
\pard\f0\fs24\qc By F. Markgraf.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Erect herbs with many straight stems. Leaves opposite. Flowers in axillary and terminal umbels. Corolla valvate in bud; lobes deflexed at anthesis. Corona single, with 5 free segments, each with a central adaxial appendage curved over the anthers. Follicles ovoid, usually spiny.
\par

\par
70}
\par