{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Literature: R. E. Woodson, {\i Ann. Missouri Bot. Gard.}{\b  41}: 1-211 (1954).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. A. syriaca} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 214 (1753) ({\i A. cornuti} Decne). Glaucous perennial; stems 100-150 cm. Leaves 15-23 × 5-9 cm, ovate-oblong, rounded at base, white-pubescent beneath. Umbels many-flowered, subglobose; peduncles 5-10 cm; pedicels 3-6 cm. Corolla pink; lobes 8 × 3-4 mm, ovate-oblong, pubescent beneath. Corona 4 mm, pink. Follicles 8-11 × 2-3 cm, white-pubescent, sulcate, spiny.{\i  Formerly cultivated for fibre and as a food-plant for bees; naturalized in cultivated ground and dry grassland in various parts of Europe.} [Au Bu ?Co Cz Ga He Hu It Ju Po Rm Rs (W, K).] ({\i E. North America}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  {\b  A. curassavica} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 215 (1753), a native of tropical America, is perhaps locally naturalized in damp places in S. Spain (prov. Málaga). It differs from {\b 1} in its shorter stems (up to 50 cm), lanceolate leaves c. 10 × 2 cm, which are attenuate at base and subglabrous beneath, pedicels 1-2 cm, purple, glabrous corolla-lobes, orange corona and glabrous, smooth follicles.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc {\b 5.           Cynanchum}             L.
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc By F. Markgraf.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Woody climbers. Leaves opposite. Flowers in axillary and terminal umbels. Corolla contorted in bud; lobes patent at anthesis. Corona double, with 10 free segments. Follicles fusiform, smooth.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. C. acutum} L., {\i Sp. Pl.} 212 (1753). Glabrous. Stems up to 3 m, slender, twining. Leaves 2-15 × 1·5-10 cm, petiolate, sagittate, subacute; petioles 1-5 cm. Umbels few- to many-flowered; peduncles 1-6 cm. Corolla 8-12 mm in diameter, white or pink, glabrous; lobes c. 5 × 1 mm, linear, subacute. Corona-segments triangular. Follicles c. 8 × 1 cm. 2n = 18.{\i  Scrub and hedges, often near the sea. S. Europe, extending northwards to} 51°{\i  N. in S.E. Russia.} Al Bl Bu Cr Ga Gr Hs It Ju Lu Rm Rs (W, K, E) Si.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc {\b 6.               Vincetoxicum}             N.M. Wolf 
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc By F. Markgraf.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Rhizomatous herbs or small shrubs, often with more or less twining shoot-apices. Leaves opposite, shortly petiolate, the lower suborbicular, the upper lanceolate. Flowers in axillary, few-flowered cymes. Corolla contorted in bud; lobes patent at anthesis. Corona single, the segments not awned, connate at least at base by a more or less folded or toothed membrane; lobes 5, fleshy, flat. Pollinia pendent. Follicles usually fusiform, smooth.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   In the descriptions, leaf-characters refer to middle leaves, and peduncle-lengths to upper inflorescences.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28   Literature: A. Borhidi & S. Priszter,{\i  Acta Bot. Acad. Sci. Hung.}{\b  12}: 241-254 (1966). R. Ross,{\i  Acta Bot. Neerl.}{\b  15}: 161 (1966). H. P. Fuchs, {\i Verh. Naturf. Ges. Basel}{\b  72}: 343-349 (1961).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Leaves grey-tomentose; corona-lobes stipitate .......................... {\b 1. canescens}
\par
1 Leaves glabrous to velutinous; corona-lobes sessile
\par
2 Corolla-lobes with straight hairs on upper surface
\par
3 Corolla 10-12 mm in diameter, the lobes lanceolate ................ {\b 2. speciosum}
\par
3 Corolla 5-8 mm in diameter, the lobes ± ovate
\par
4 Corolla dark purple
\par
5 Peduncles 5-10 mm; leaves 5-7 × 2-3 cm ...................................... {\b 3. nigrum}
\par
5 Peduncles 10-50 mm; leaves 9-13 × 4-8 cm ............................... {\b 4. scandens}
\par
4 Corolla greenish-yellow
\par
6 Peduncles 5-10 mm .......................................................................... {\b 5. huteri}
\par
6 Peduncles 12-30 mm ............................................................... {\b 6. juzepczukii}
\par
2 Corolla-lobes glabrous or with curved hairs on upper surface
\par
7 Corolla white or yellow ........................................................ {\b 11. hirundinaria}
\par
7 Corolla dark purple or brownish
\par
8 Stems twining; corolla dark purple .............................................. {\b 7. rossicum}
\par
8 Stems not twining; corolla brownish
\par
9 Peduncles 10-20 mm; corolla 5-6 mm in diameter ........... {\b 8. schmalhausenii}
\par
9 Peduncles 0-5 mm; corolla 8-10 mm in diameter
\par
10 Corolla-lobes brown on both surfaces ...................................... {\b 9. fuscatum}
\par
10 Corolla-lobes greenish-brown above, yellow with brown
\par
   margins beneath ................................................................... {\b 10. pannonicum}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. V. canescens} (Willd.) Decne in DC., {\i Prodr.}{\b  8}: 523 (1844) ({\i Cynanchum canescens} (Willd.) K. Schum.). Stems 40-70 cm, more or less twining, tomentose. Leaves 6-8 × 3-6 cm, subsessile, broadly ovate, acute, grey-tomentose. Cymes 8- to 15-flowered, sessile. Calyx-lobes ovate. Corolla 7-8 mm in diameter, yellow; lobes triangular, hirsute above. Corona membrane c. 1/8 as long as the segments; lobes stipitate. Follicles 7-10 × 1·5-2 cm, ovoid, shortly acuminate, pubescent.{\i  Rocks and screes. Kriti}. Cr. ({\i S.W. Asia}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. V. speciosum} Boiss. & Spruner in Boiss., {\i Diagn. Pl. Or. Nov.}{\b  1}({\b 4}): 39 (1844) ({\i Cynanchum speciosum} (Boiss. & Spruner) Nyman). Stems 60-70 cm, erect, puberulent. Leaves 7-10 × 4-6 cm, subsessile, broadly ovate, obtuse or acute, velutinous. Cymes 5- to 15-flowered, subsessile. Calyx-lobes oblong. Corolla 10-12 mm in diameter, dark purple; lobes lanceolate, with straight hairs on upper surface. Corona-membrane c. 2/3 as long as the segments; lobes sessile. Follicles c. 7 × 0·8 cm, fusiform, tomentose.{\i  Mountain woods and meadows. S. & C. parts of Balkan peninsula.} Al Bu Gr Ju Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 3. V. nigrum} (L.) Moench, {\i Meth., Suppl.} 313 (1802) ({\i Cynanchum nigrum} (L.) Pers., non Cav.). Stems 40-80 cm, mostly twining, puberulent. Leaves 5-7 × 2-3 cm, ovate, long-acuminate; veins and margins pubescent. Petioles 10-15 mm. Cymes 5- to 7-flowered; peduncles 5-10 mm. Calyx-lobes ovate. Corolla 6-8 mm in diameter, dark purple; lobes ovate, with straight hairs on upper surface. Corona-membrane c. 2/3 as long as the segments, minutely toothed; lobes sessile. Follicles 5-7 × c. 0·8 cm, fusiform, glabrous. •{\i  S.W. Europe.} Bl Ga Hs It Lu [Ho].
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 4. V. scandens} Sommier & Levier, {\i Acta Horti Petrop.}{\b  12}: 158 (1892) ({\i Antitoxicum scandens} (Sommier & Levier) Pobed.). Stems up to 200 cm, twining, puberulent. Leaves 9-13 × 4-8 cm, ovate, acute to acuminate; veins and margins ciliate. Petioles 8-15 mm. Cymes 6- to 10-flowered; peduncles 10-50 mm. Calyx-lobes ovate. Corolla 8 mm in diameter, dark purple; lobes broadly ovate, with straight hairs on upper surface. Corona-membrane c. ½ as long as the segments; lobes sessile. Follicles 5-8 × c. 0·6 cm, fusiform, sparsely pubescent. {\i Woodland and scrub. S. & E. Ukraine, S. Russia.} Rs (C, W, K, E).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 5. V. huteri} Vis. & Ascherson, {\i Österr. Bot. Zeitschr.} {\b 19}: 67 (1869) ({\i Cynanchum huteri} (Vis. & Ascherson) K. Schum.). Stems (15-)50-150 cm, slightly twining, puberulent. Leaves 5-9 × 2-3 cm, ovate-lanceolate, long-acuminate; veins and margins ciliate. Petioles 5-10 mm. Cymes 6- to 10-flowered; peduncles 5-10 mm. Calyx-lobes oblong. Corolla 5-7 mm in diameter, greenish-yellow; lobes ovate-oblong, with straight hairs on upper surface. Corona-membrane c. ½ as long as the segments, minutely toothed; lobes sessile. Follicles c. 5·5 × 0·8 cm,
\par

\par
71}
\par