{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}
\pard\f0\fs28 fusiform, glabrous.{\i  Scrub. • N.W. part of Balkan peninsula.} Ju.
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 6. V. juzepczukii} (Pobed.) Privalova, {\i Trudy Gos. Nikitsk. Bot. Sada}{\b  26}: 140 (1956) ({\i Antitoxicum juzepczukii} Pobed.). Like {\b 5} but stems 40-60 cm; leaves 3-4 cm wide; petioles 3-6 mm; cymes 5-to 8-flowered; peduncles 12-30 mm. Fagus-{\i woodland. • Krym.} Rs (K).
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 7. V. rossicum} (Kleopow) Barbarich,{\i  Vyzn. Rosl. Ukr. }346 (1950) ({\i Antitoxicum rossicum} (Kleopow) Pobed.). Stems up to 150 cm, twining, puberulent. Leaves 9-12 × 5-6 cm, ovate, acute; veins and margins ciliate. Petioles 10 mm. Cymes 5- to 6-flowered; peduncles 15-30 mm. Calyx-lobes ovate-lanceolate. Corolla 7 mm in diameter, dark purple; lobes ovate-lanceolate, glabrous on upper surface. Corona-membrane c. 1/2 as long as the segments; lobes sessile. Follicles 4-6 × c. 0·5 cm, fusiform, glabrous.{\i  Scrub. • Ukraine, S.E. Russia.} Rs (C, W, E).
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 8. V. schmalhausennii} (Kusn.) Markgraf, {\i Bot. Jour. Linn. Soc.}{\b  65}: 358 (1972) ({\i Antitoxicum schmalhausenii} (Kusn.) Pobed., {\i Cynanchum schmalhausenii} Kusn.). Stems 35-80 cm; erect, not twining, puberulent. Leaves 7-8 × 3-3·5 cm, ovate, long-acuminate, the veins and margins pubescent. Petioles 50-100 mm. Cymes 10- to 12-flowered; peduncles 10-20 mm. Calyx-lobes broadly ovate. Corolla 5-6 mm in diameter, dark brown; lobes broadly ovate, glabrous on upper surface. Corona-membrane c. 2/3 as long as the segments, minutely toothed; lobes sessile. Follicles 5-6 × c. 0·5 cm, fusiform, glabrous.{\i  Limestone slopes. Krym}. Rs (K). ({\i Caucasus}.)
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 9. V. fuscatum} (Hornem.) Reichenb. fil.,{\i  Icon. Fl. Germ.}{\b  17}: 17 (1854) ({\i Cynanchum fuscatum} Link; incl.{\i  C. urumoffii} (Davidov) Hayek, {\i Vincetoxicum intermedium} Taliev, {\i Antitoxicum maeoticum} (Kleopow) Pobed.,{\i  A. minus} (C. Koch) Pobed., {\i A. intermedium} (Taliev) Pobed.). Stems 20-40 cm, erect, not twining, puberulent. Leaves 3-6·5 × 1·5-4 cm, more or less broadly ovate, acute; veins pubescent and margins ciliate. Petioles 3-8 mm. Cymes 5- to 6-flowered; peduncles up to 5 mm. Calyx-lobes lanceolate. Corolla 8-10 mm in diameter, brown on both surfaces; lobes oblong, glabrous or with curved hairs on upper surface. Corona-membrane c. 2/3 as long as the segments, more or less toothed; lobes sessile. Follicles 4-5 × c.0·7 cm, fusiform, glabrous.{\i  Dry stony places, scrub and steppes. S.E. Europe.} Al Bu Gr Ju Rs (W, K, E) Tu.
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 10. V. pannonicum} (Borhidi) J. Holub, {\i Folia Geobot. Phytotax. }({\i Praha}) {\b 5}: 439 (1970) ({\i Cynanchum pannonicum} Borhidi). Like {\b 9} but stems (10-)15-30(-40) cm; petioles 8-10 mm; calyx-lobes triangular-lanceolate; corolla greenish-brown above, yellow with brown margins beneath, the lobes triangular-ovate, glabrous on the upper surface; corona-membrane c. 1/2 as long as the segments. 2n = 44. {\i Dry grassland, and crevices in calcareous rocks. • Hungary.} Hu.
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 11. V. hirundinaria} Medicus, {\i Hist. Comment. Acad. Elect. Theod. Palat. Mannheim Phys.}{\b  6}: 404 (1790) ({\i V. officinale} Moench,{\i  Cynanchum vincetoxicum} (L.) Pers., {\i Antitoxicum officinale} Pobed.). Stems up to 120 cm, erect or slightly twining, puberulent or subglabrous. Leaves 6-10 × 2·5-5 cm, broadly ovate to ovate-lanceolate, acute, more or less pubescent, especially on the veins and margins. Petioles 5-10 mm. Cymes 6- to 8-flowered; peduncles 10-40 mm. Calyx-lobes linear. Corolla 3-10 mm in diameter, white or yellow, lobes ovate, glabrous or with curved hairs on upper surface. Corona-membrane up to 2/3 as long as the segments; lobes sessile. Follicles c. 6 × 0·8 cm, fusiform, glabrous. 2n = 22. {\i Wood-margins and open places. Most of Europe, northwards to} 60° 30' {\i N. in S.W. Finland, but absent from many of the islands.} Al Au Be Bl Bu Co Cz Da Fe Ga Ge Gr He Ho Hs Hu It Ju Lu No Po Rm Rs (B, C, W, K, E) Sa Su Tu.
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28    Very variable, even within populations. Many constituent taxa have been described, often as species. Yellow-flowered taxa occur mainly in the Mediterranean region and white flowered taxa further north.
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28\li200 1 Corolla yellow
\par 2 Corolla-lobes hairy on upper surface; leaves acuminate
\par 3 Stem subglabrous; corolla 3-4 mm in diameter; corona
\par  lobes obtuse ................................................................... ({\b a}) subsp. {\b lusitanicum}
\par 3 Stem pubescent; corolla 6-9 mm in diameter; corona-
\par  lobes acute ................................................................... ({\b b}) subsp. {\b intermedium}
\par 2 Corolla-lobes glabrous on upper surface; leaves acute
\par 4 Corolla 8-9 mm in diameter; corona folded or toothed ........ ({\b c}) subsp. {\b nivale}
\par 4 Corolla 7 mm in diameter; corona not folded or toothed
\par  ......................................................................................... ({\b d}) subsp. {\b adriaticum}
\par 1 Corolla whitish
\par 5 Corona-membrane c. 2/3 as long as the segments
\par 6 Corolla 10 mm in diameter; corona not toothed ........... ({\b e}) subsp. {\b stepposum}
\par 6 Corolla 8 mm in diameter; corona toothed .................... ({\b f}) subsp. {\b cretaceum}
\par 5 Corona-membrane not more than 1/2 as long as the segments
\par 7 Corona-membrane c. 1/8 as long as the segments ........ ({\b h}) subsp. {\b contiguum}
\par 7 Corona-membrane c. 1/2 as long as the segments
\par 8 Corona-margin sinuate ....................................................... ({\b g}) subsp. {\b jailicola}
\par 8 Corona-margin abruptly lobed ..................................... ({\b i}) subsp. {\b hirundinaria}
\par
\par
\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b a}) Subsp. {\b lusitanicum} Markgraf,{\i  Bot. Jour. Linn. Soc.}{\b  65}: 358 (1972) ({\i V. luteum} Hoffmanns. & Link pro parte): stems up to 50 cm, subglabrous. Leaves acuminate. Corolla 3-4 mm in diameter, yellow; lobes hairy on upper surface. Corona-lobes obtuse; membrane c. 1/2 as long as the segments. •{\i  N.W. Portugal, N. Spain}.
\par
\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b b}) Subsp. {\b intermedium}(Loret & Barrandon) Markgraf,{\i  Bot. Jour.Linn. Soc.}{\b  64}: 374 (1971)({\i V. officinale} var.{\i  intermedium} Loret & Barrandon): stems 50-60 cm, pubescent. Leaves 50-70 mm, acuminate. Corolla 6-9 mm in diameter, yellow; lobes hairy on upper surface. Corona-lobes acute; membrane c. 1/2 as long as the segments, sometimes toothed. •{\i  S. France, N.E. Spain.}
\par
\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b c}) Subsp. {\b nivale}(Boiss. & Heldr.) Markgraf,{\i  op. cit.} 375 (1971) ({\i Vincetoxicum nivale} Boiss. & Heldr.; incl.{\i  Cynanchum sulfureum} (Velen.) Hayek, {\i C. vincetoxicum} var.{\i  nivale} (Boiss. & Heldr.) Hayek): stems 20-30 cm, minutely pubescent. Leaves broadly ovate, acute. Corolla 8-9 mm in diameter, yellow; lobes glabrous on upper surface. Corona-membrane c. • as long as the segments, more or less folded or toothed. •{\i  Balkan peninsula}.
\par
\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b d}) Subsp. {\b adriaticum}(G. Beck) Markgraf,{\i  op. cit.} 374 (1971) ({\i V. adriaticum} G. Beck,{\i  Cynanchum adriaticum} (G. Beck) Fritsch): Up to 50 cm, minutely pubescent. Leaves acute. Corolla 7 mm in diameter, yellow; lobes glabrous on upper surface (rarely hairy). Corona-membrane c. 1/2 as long as the segments, not folded or toothed. •{\i  N.W. Jugoslavia.}
\par
\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b e}) Subsp. {\b stepposum}(Pobed.) Markgraf,{\i  op. cit.} 375 (1971) ({\i Antitoxicum stepposum} Pobed.): Stems up to 70 cm, subglabrous. Leaves ovate-lanceolate. Corolla 10 mm in diameter, whitish; lobes glabrous on upper surface. Corona-membrane c. 2/3 as long as the segments, not toothed.{\i  C. & S. Russia, Ukraine}.
\par
\pard\f0\fs28  ({\b f}) Subsp. {\b cretaceum}(Pobed.) Markgraf, {\i op. cit.} 374 (1971) ({\i Antitoxicum cretaceum} Pobed.): Stems up to 30 cm, subglabrous. Leaves ovate-lanceolate. Corolla 8 mm in diameter, whitish; lobes glabrous on upper surface. Corona-membrane
\par
\par 72}
\par