{\rtf1 \ansi \deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}}

\pard\f0\fs28 c. 2/3 as long as the segments, minutely toothed. {\i S.E. Russia, S. & E. Ukraine}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b g}) Subsp. {\b jailicola}(Juz.) Markgraf, {\i op. cit.} 375 (1971) ({\i V. jailicola} Juz.; incl. {\i Antitoxicum tauricum} (Pobed.) Pobed.): stems 20-70 cm, subglabrous. Leaves shortly acuminate. Corolla 7-8 mm in diameter, whitish; lobes hairy at the base on upper surface. Corona-membrane toothed, c. ½ as long as the segments; margin sinuate. •{\i  Krym}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b h}) Subsp. {\b contiguum}(Koch) Markgraf, {\i op. cit.} 374 (1971) ({\i V. contiguum} (Koch) Gren. & Godron,{\i  Cynanchum contiguum} Koch): stems c. 70 cm, subglabrous. Leaves broadly ovate, subglabrous. Corolla 7 mm in diameter, whitish; lobes glabrous on upper surface. Corona-membrane c. 1/8 as long as the segments; lobes contiguous. •{\i  W. Jugoslavia}.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28   ({\b i}) Subsp. hirundinaria: stems up to 120 cm, subglabrous or pubescent. Leaves ovate, shortly acuminate. Corolla 5-10 mm in diameter, white; lobes glabrous or hairy on upper surface. Corona-membrane more or less toothed, c. ½ as long as the segments; margin abruptly lobed. {\i Throughout the range of the species, except the Iberian peninsula}.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc {\b 7.             Cionura}                 Griseb.
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc By F. Markgraf.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Glabrous herbs, often with slightly twining shoot-apices. Leaves opposite, long-petiolate. Flowers in axillary, many-flowered cymes. Corolla contorted in bud; lobes patent at anthesis. Corona single; segments 5, free, without awns. Pollinia erect. Follicles narrowly ovoid, acuminate, smooth.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Literature: K. Browicz,{\i  Arboretum Kórnickie}{\b  12}: 5-32 (1967).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. C. erecta} (L.) Griseb.,{\i  Spicil. Fl. Rumel.}{\b  2}: 69 (1844) ({\i Cynanchum erectum} L.,{\i  Marsdenia erecta }(L.) R. Br.). Stems up to 100 cm, numerous. Leaves c. 7 × 5 cm, petiolate, ovate, acuminate, cordate at base; petioles c. 5 cm. Corolla c. 1 cm in diameter, white; lobes c. 7 × 2 mm, oblong, obtuse, glabrous. Follicles c. 8 × 1·5 cm.{\i  Rocky places, river-gravels and maritime sands. Aegean region and S. & E. parts of Balkan peninsula.} Al Bu Cr Gr Ju Tu.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc {\b 8.               Caralluma}               R.Br.
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc By F. Markgraf.
\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Succulent, caespitose herbs with subterranean stolons. Stems glabrous, glaucous, 4-angled, the angles with opposite, scale-like caducous leaves above and toothed leaf-scars below. Inflorescence umbellate, subterminal. Corolla valvate in bud; lobes patent at anthesis. Corona double, with 10 segments, the outer 5 connate, 2-fid. Follicles fusiform, smooth.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    Literature: A. White & B. L. Sloane, {\i The Stapelieae} 222-232. Pasadena, 1937.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 Stem-faces ± flat; corolla 13-17 mm in diameter, yellow 
\par
   with purple bands ......................................................................... {\b 1. europaea}
\par
Stem-faces sulcate; corolla 6-8 mm in diameter, brown .............. {\b 2. munbyana}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 1. C. europaea} (Guss.) N. E. Br.,{\i  Gard. Chron.} ser. 3, {\b 12}: 369 (1892) ({\i Apteranthes gussoneana} Mikan). Stolons long. Stems 10-15 cm, ascending or procumbent, the faces more or less flat; teeth of leaf-scars less than 1 cm apart. Leaves sessile orbicular, shortly acuminate. Inflorescences with 10 or more pedicellate flowers; pedicels 3-4 mm. Corolla 13-17 mm in diameter, rotate; lobes suborbicular, yellow with purple bands, more or less ciliate. Follicles c. 100 × 7 mm, slightly recurved, patent. {\i Dry, rocky places. S.E. Spain; Linosa, Lampedusa.} Hs Si. ({\i N. Africa.})
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Plants from Linosa and Lampedusa differ from those from Spain in their slightly smaller corolla and appendaged corona.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28    {\b 2. C. munbyana} (Decne) N. E. Br., {\i op. cit.} 370 (1892). Stolons short. Stems 5-15 cm, ascending, the faces sulcate; teeth of leaf-scars more than 1 cm apart. Leaves sessile, ovate, obtuse. Inflorescence with fewer than 10 sessile flowers. Corolla 8 mm in diameter, rotate-campanulate; lobes linear, brown, the margins deflexed, glabrous. Follicles 80-100 × 8 mm, straight, erect. {\i Dry, rocky places. S.E. Spain} ({\i Caravaca, prov. Murcia}). Hs. ({\i N. Africa}.)
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs29\qc {\b  144.                 RUBIACEAE}
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Herbs or dwarf shrubs. Leaves opposite or in whorls of 4-12, stipulate, the stipules sometimes leaf-like, simple, entire. Flowers in spikes, heads, cymes, corymbs or panicles, hermaphrodite or male. Calyx 4- or 5(-6)-toothed or absent. Corolla 3- to 5-lobed, actinomorphic, rotate, infundibuliform or hypocrateriform. Stamens 4-5, epipetalous on the corolla-tube and alternating with the lobes. Ovary inferior, usually 2-locular; ovules 1 to numerous per locule; style simple or 2-fid. Fruit fleshy or dry, dividing into 1-2 mericarps. Seeds endospermic.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 The text of this family will be published in Vol. 4.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs36\qc TUBIFLORAE
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\qc {\b 145.            POLEMONIACEAE}
\par

\pard\f0\fs24\qc Edit. †T.G. Tutin.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28 Herbs or rarely shrubs. Leaves usually alternate, entire to pinnate, exstipulate. Flowers actinomorphic, 5-merous. Calyx campanulate, more or less deeply lobed. Corolla infundibuliform, campanulate or rotate; lobes contorted. Stamens epipetalous, alternating with the corolla-lobes, often unequal; anthers versatile. Ovary superior, 3-locular, with axile placentae; ovules usually 2-12 in each loculus; style 1, shortly 3-fid at the apex. Fruit a loculicidal or septicidal capsule.
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28  Literature: A. Brand in Engler,{\i  Pflanzenreich}{\b  27}({\b IV. 250}) (1907). J. F. Davidson,{\i  Univ. Calif. Publ. Bot.}{\b  23}({\b 5}): 209-282 (1960).
\par

\par

\pard\f0\fs28\li200 Leaves pinnate; stamens exserted .............................................{\b  1. Polemonium}
\par
Leaves entire; stamens included ..................................................... {\b 2. Collomia}
\par

\par
73}
\par