{\rtf1\ansi \deff4\deflang1033{\fonttbl{\f4\froman\fcharset0\fprq2 Times New Roman;}}{\colortbl;\red0\green0\blue0;\red0\green0\blue255;\red0\green255\blue255;\red0\green255\blue0;\red255\green0\blue255;\red255\green0\blue0;\red255\green255\blue0;\red255\green255\blue255;\red0\green0\blue128;\red0\green128\blue128;\red0\green128\blue0;\red128\green0\blue128;\red128\green0\blue0;\red128\green128\blue0;\red128\green128\blue128;\red192\green192\blue192;}{\stylesheet{\widctlpar \f4\fs20\lang2057 \snext0 Normal;}{\*\cs10 \additive Default Paragraph Font;}}{\info{\author dddd}{\operator dddd}{\creatim\yr1998\mo11\dy5\hr15\min26}{\revtim\yr1998\mo11\dy5\hr15\min26}{\version2}{\edmins0}{\nofpages4}{\nofwords918}{\nofchars5236}{\*\company  }{\vern57431}}\widowctrl\ftnbj\aenddoc\hyphcaps0 \fet0\sectd \linex0 {\*\pnseclvl1\pnucrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl2\pnucltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl3\pndec\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl4\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl5\pndec\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl6\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl7\pnlcrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl8\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl9\pnlcrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}
\pard\plain \qc\ \f4\fs20\lang2057 {\b\fs28 1.             Polemonium}{\fs28                L.
\par }{\fs24 By \'86T.G. Tutin.
\par 
\par }
\pard \ {\fs28 Usually perennial. Leaves pinnate. Flowers in terminal corymbose inflorescences. Corolla blue, campanulate or with a rotate limb; stamens exserted, all inserted at the same height on the corolla, the downward-curved, hairy bases of the filaments almost closing its throat. Capsule subglobose; seeds 4-14 in each loculus.
\par 
\par }
\pard \li200\ {\fs28 1 Stem with 1(-2) leaves .................................................................... }{\b\fs28 3. boreale}{\fs28 
\par 1 Stem with several leaves
\par 2 Corolla-lobes ciliate ................................................................. }{\b\fs28 2. acutiflorum}{\fs28 
\par 2 Corolla-lobes not or sparsely ciliate .......................................... }{\b\fs28 1. caeruleum}{\fs28 
\par 
\par }
\pard \ {\fs28    }{\b\fs28 1. P. caeruleum}{\fs28  L.,}{\i\fs28  Sp. Pl. }{\fs28 162 (1753) (}{\i\fs28 P. caucasicum}{\fs28  auct. eur., non N. Busch). Stems 30-90 cm, simple, leafy, hairy above, glabrous below, sparsely to densely glandular. Leaves up to 40 cm, imparipinnate, the lower petiolate, with usually 10-12 pairs of leaflets, the upper smaller and subsessile. Flowers numerous, shortly pedicellate in terminal and axillary cymes. Calyx-lobes lanceolate, acute, shorter than to longer than the tube. Corolla 8-15 mm, rotate, 2-2\'bd times as long as the calyx, blue, rarely white; lobes ovate, rounded to subacute, sometimes sparsely ciliate. Stamens exserted. Capsule subglobose; seeds angled and rugose. 2n = 18.}{\i\fs28  Rocks and damp meadows, mostly in mountain regions. N. & C. Europe, extending southwards to the Pyrenees, C. Jugoslavia and S. Russia; cultivated for ornament and often naturalized}{\fs28 . Au Br Cz Fe Ga Ge He *Is ?It Ju No Po Rm Rs (N, B, C, W, E) Su [ Be Da Ho.]
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 2. P. acutiflorum}{\fs28  Willd. in Roemer & Schultes, }{\i\fs28 Syst. Veg.}{\b\fs28   4}{\fs28 : 792 (1819). Like }{\b\fs28 1}{\fs28  but lower leaves with usually not more than 8 pairs of leaflets; inflorescence few-flowered; corolla 18-22 mm, campanulate; lobes narrowed above, acute, ciliate. 2n = 18.}{\i\fs28  Damp thickets and river-banks. Arctic and subarctic Europe}{\fs28 . Fe No Rs (N) Su.
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 3. P. boreale}{\fs28  Adams,}{\i\fs28  M\'e9m. Soc. Nat. Moscou}{\b\fs28  5}{\fs28 : 92 (1817). Foetid when bruised. Stems 7-15 cm, erect or ascending, often curved, with 1(-2) leaves, glandular-pubescent. Leaves usually with 6-8 pairs of leaflets. Flowers 3-6 in a terminal cluster; pedicels shorter than the calyx. Calyx-lobes oblong-ovate, obtuse, longer than the tube. Corolla c. 15 mm, campanulate, blue; lobes rounded, not ciliate. 2n = 18.}{\i\fs28  Gravelly and sandy places. Arctic Europe, extending locally southwards to}{\fs28  62\'b0 }{\i\fs28  N. in N.W. Russia.}{\fs28  No Rs (N) Sb.
\par 
\par  }{\b\fs28 P. pulchellum}{\fs28  Ledeb., }{\i\fs28 Icon. Pl. Fl. Ross.}{\b\fs28  1}{\fs28 : 6 (1829) occurs in Ural, but probably not in Europe. It is like }{\b\fs28 3}{\fs28  but has the pedicels longer than the calyx.
\par 
\par }
\pard \qc\ {\b\fs28 2.              Collomia}{\fs28              Nutt.
\par }{\fs24 By \'86T.G.Tutin.
\par 
\par }
\pard \ {\fs28 Annual. Leaves entire. Flowers in dense heads. Calyx with a projecting fold below each sinus in fruit; corolla yellow or lilac, infundibuliform; stamens included, unequal. Capsule obovoid; seeds 1 in each loculus, mucilaginous when wet.
\par 
\par    }{\b\fs28 1. C. grandiflora}{\fs28  Douglas ex Lindley, }{\i\fs28 Bot. Reg.}{\b\fs28  14}{\fs28 : sub t. 1166 (1828) (}{\i\fs28 C. coccinea}{\fs28  auct., non Lehm.). Stems 20-100 cm, glabrous, puberulent or glandular, leafy throughout. Leaves 3-5 cm, linear to lanceolate, sessile. Bracts ovate, leaf-like. Flowers subsessile. Calyx 7-10 mm; lobes lanceolate. Corolla 15-30 mm, yellow, becoming reddish, narrowly tubular, with more or less patent, lanceolate lobes. Capsule c. 5 mm.}{\i\fs28  Cultivated for ornament and locally naturalized in damp places in W. & C. Europe.}{\fs28  [Cz Ga Ge.] (}{\i\fs28 California}{\fs28 .)
\par 
\par }{\b\fs28  C. linearis}{\fs28  Nutt.,}{\i\fs28  Gen. N. Amer. Pl.}{\fs28  }{\b\fs28 1}{\fs28 : 126 (1818), with corolla with lilac limb and scarcely exceeding the calyx, from North America, is a frequent casual in Fennoscandia and may be confused with}{\b\fs28  1}{\fs28 .
\par 
\par }
\pard \qc\ {\b\fs28  146.          CONVOLVULACEAE}{\fs28 
\par }{\fs24 Edit. D.H. Valentine.
\par 
\par }
\pard \ {\fs28 Herbs or shrubs. Stems often climbing. Leaves alternate, exstipulate. Flowers actinomorphic, in terminal or axillary inflorescences, sometimes solitary. Sepals 5, usually free. Corolla infundibuliform, tubular or campanulate, usually 5-lobed or -angled. Stamens 5, alternating with corolla-lobes. Ovary 1- to 4-locular, superior; ovules 1 or 2 in each loculus; style terminal. Fruit a capsule.
\par 
\par }
\pard \li200\ {\fs28 1 Plant a twining parasite with haustoria, not green,
\par   more or less glabrous ........................................ }{\b\fs28 1. Cuscuta}{\fs28 
\par 1 Plant free-living, green or covered with hairs
\par 2 Corolla up to 5 mm, divided to about halfway
\par 3 Leaves sessile, lanceolate to ovate ........................... }{\b\fs28 2. Cressa}{\fs28 
\par 3 Leaves with long petioles, reniform to orbicular ........... }{\b\fs28 3. Dichondra}{\fs28 
\par 2 Corolla more than 5 mm, scarcely lobed
\par 4 Bracteoles broad, leaf-like, partly obscuring the sepals .. }{\b\fs28 4. Calystegia}{\fs28 
\par 4 Bracteoles lanceolate to filiform, not or scarcely 
\par   obscuring the sepals
\par 5 Stigma with 1-3 globose lobes; pollen grains pantoporate,
\par   spinous ...................................................... }{\b\fs28 6. Ipomoea}{\fs28 
\par 5 Stigma with 2 filiform to cylindric-clavate lobes;
\par   pollen grains tricolpate, \'b1 smooth .......................}{\b\fs28  5. Convolvulus}{\fs28 
\par 
\par }
\pard \qc\ {\b\fs28 1.           Cuscuta}{\fs28                L.
\par }{\fs24 By N. Feinbrun.
\par 
\par }
\pard \ {\fs28 Herbaceous parasites, usually annual. Stems twining, with haustoria. Leaves reduced to minute scales. Inflorescences cymose, spike-like, umbellate or capitulate. Flowers (3-)4- to 5-merous, small, white, yellowish or reddish. Stamens inserted in throat of corolla-tube. Hypostaminal scales attached at base of corolla-tube opposite the stamens. Ovary 2-celled, each cell containing 2 anatropous ovules. Styles free or united. Stigmas capitate or elongate. Fruit a circumscissile capsule dehiscing by an irregular or regular line near base, or remaining closed. Seeds 4 or fewer. Embryo filiform, surrounded by a cartilaginous endosperm. Cotyledons rudimentary or absent.
\par 
\par Inflorescences with capitulate cymes are referred to as glomerules. Mature flowers are essential for identification.
\par 
\par    Literature: T. G. Yuncker,}{\i\fs28  Mem. Torrey Bot. Club}{\fs28  }{\b\fs28 18}{\fs28 : 113-331 (1932). N. Feinbrun, }{\i\fs28 Israel Jour. Bot.}{\b\fs28  19}{\fs28 : 16-29 (1970).
\par 
\par }
\pard \li200\ {\fs28 1 Style 1; mostly parasites of trees and shrubs
\par 2 Style in fruit about as long as stigma; calyx 2/3 as 
\par   long as to equalling corolla-tube ............................................... }{\b\fs28 17. monogyna}{\fs28 
\par 2 Style in fruit 2-3 times as long as stigma; 
\par   calyx 1/3-1/2 as long as corolla-tube ..................................... }{\b\fs28 16. lupuliformis}{\fs28 
\par 1 Styles and stigmas 2 (rarely more); parasites of trees,
\par   shrubs and herbs
\par 
\par 74}
\par }